The Great Bible (1539) (Myles Coverdale, 1539)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (1539-great-bible-the-byble-in-englyshe-that-is-to-saye-the-content-of-all-the-ho).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

tT eet names of all thebokes ofthe Byble/ T


and the content of alltbe setts Strate Done ue thendbre of ¢


leafe tobere the bookes begpnne. Chapters. Leale. a ES ey
Genefis. Chefprltboke of Holes L fnt. - Ba TENN }
Erodug ‘Cheleconde boke of oles rl prii. em NS
Leuiticugs. Che thpade boke pT pra i 4 q
Pumert. Che fourth boke of Gyotes rrrvi i, A ee sy:
Denterono. Che fpft bokeok Boles rrriiti lrir. eet |
The bookes of the feconde parte. Chapters Leafe. aos §
Jotua.  $Cheboke of Joiua rriitt it At ee Bi
Zudicunt. TWheboke of Judges trí eT See Re Al)
Ruth. hebobke of Rutl tit grit. City
i. Regum. Che fpr bokeo the Bpnges rt priii, e ee hi
ii. Reguni. Thelecondebokeofpbynges priid krErDÍÍ, ae
iii. Regum. Chethproeboke ofthekpnges rrit plait. ve |
iit. Regum. paki abate of tbe hinges rrp Hae | S y
t. Ae er ee ee eens the Chzonpeles pric irritt. Po
aralipo. T e [ccone ofthe Eponpeleg rrrvi intr a
í. Was. ‘Che tpt boke of Cfdzas k peir. Rees
ay The Ceconde boke Eag piii citt.
Ether. s pHa boke or eof Empet Fi Sa a ree
300 ‘The bookes of the t ope pate Chapters Arafe:
plalterium. The 1 i ana
Pouerbia. The: i ibalon: gree xrrviit.
Eccleliak. Che boke of the Preacher rti. rrrvtt. p
Canucopmi tica f Ballet of Wallettes piii rl. f
€fap. The peapbecp of Elape iryt rlté. 3 3%


erempe. bhepropbecp of Jerem lit Uh
pni. helamentacponsofjeremp V lerrvf. .
Ezechiel. CAhepzophecp of Ezechiel ribtis lerrbttt.
Danicl. Ahepzophecy of Daniel pii cvitt.
Dirag. The propbecp of Dieag riiti Dies | e
orl The prophecy of Joel kii ervité. t
mog The pzopheep o€ ag apne l ext “
Ab The prophecy of Abop err. y
ona epzopbecp of - onas, titi erxtt
Micheas a epzopbecp of icheas. :
abum pepo FMabumn ti crritit. a
Abacuc.  Chepopbecp of Abacuc T
Hophonp. Thepmophecp of Sopbhonp tf erroi. Be
Aqgeus eye ropper ot a eug ti m
zacharias. Thepzophecpofsacharp titi. errbii. ERE EE
Suer, ladie phecp of chp. tii KÉ we at RI
The bookes the fourth parte. Chapters Leafe. | A
iii.€fozas. Thetbpzdeboke oretan ir A A ae
iiti. cae Seren Eimas. rbi biit. £ |
Ton Toe boke of Tobtag Fitts rik. ` a f
Jud tb. The boke of Judith rot priti. te
ie Caviayne Cantera ct ete ai rroiii. Se
zi rrr. n
eel Ee eboke oe „A Errok |
: i |
| ps Ee fe be oplopen one : | Lo | if
Etoo E elgg: a Ivtit, |
Seth tbe Gpacbabers Ft ir. 4
a 0 , lir. $
3 F l Tie fecond toke ofthe Hachabees. poo lrrii: F?
3 a Cede bookes ofthe nerwe Eetament
Are conrepnea in the tytletber
Xe © SEA
a eat he
į Å i
s : a = y 3 : : pit ‘| 4
k a S T aii KN in 3 A ii


4S


jae The fyrtt bodke oe Motes called mthe Hehe Foi,
Herelchith/andinthelatyn |


ae j: a ` Genelig. - i |
pane © The fpr Chapter. thepmpabteulethe dapeand tbe niabte, andto |
| make a Difference bettoenc thelpabt and poarks


Tote Meaen and earth, the tpaht,the firmament, fine,
p wold the moone,the terres, and all beattes, fou uname? in the


nelle. And God fawe that it was good. Theeue |


LEENDE LT TT rer ofp, Snoboweman alto nine alfoand the mozning twas made the fourth ©
J i bape. And God fapde:*let the waters bepnere iieri»
AS AN R the begpn- foztbe moupnge creatures that batbelpfe,and ~ d


Pali  [
GINAN :
E FALrWIL A
p = ibs E
eels CF ia


foule that mape Ape vpon the earth inthe face of
thefpzmament of Panen. And God created
great whales and euerp lining and moning cre-
ature, Which p waters brought forth after tpeps
Epnde:€ cuetpfethered foule after thep2 kpnde.
And Gob fawe that it was good. And god blef-
fed them, fapinge : Gzoweand increale, and fpll
the waters of the fee,and lette Fethered foules be
multiplped tn the earth. Che euenpng alfo ethe
moonpnge was nade the fpftedape.

And Godfapde:let the earth bepnge fortplps
upnge cteature after bps kpnde : catell, tore,
and bealte of the earth after bis kpnde, and foit
cametopatte. AndGodmadethebeafteofthe  — — |
carth after bigkpnde æ catellafter thep2 kpnde, 4 1. f fx |
e PA L I paa dy ontheearthafa S74
tesbistpndc. And Godlawe thatit wagon. C **4o2d —


7 nng Good cre
ated Deaueng
erth. ‘Cheerth
thas Vopd and
emptp g darcek
nes was bpon
the face of the
depe, ¢ the fpi-
tpte of god mo
he | ued Dponpface
-MG Se of the waters.
7 And God fapde:let there be madelpaht.and
a, _ there teas lpabt made. And God faw ehelpabe
thatit was good. And God made a dtuifpon be
tivene the lpgbt andbdarcknes. And God called
tbe lpgbt dape:and the darknes called he,niqht


fa


Era F as
Si
| . ne
ha iE 3
i C= e
- i an i
-= | if i ] i
q h, my i
i i: 7 a
i K k
nf >
ra'o =


i rey pan
< Ls


LUS
"i
ne


"And the euenpnge and the moznpng was made
onedape. And God fapde:let there be a fpzma-
mente betwwene the haters, glet it make a diup:
Tion bet wene haters ¢ waters. And God made
thefirmament, and fet a dinilion betwene ý wa


| Mo. Bild And Cod fapde: xlet the waters winder Pea-
|


“Eh
4


And Godfapde,let vs make man in our pmage
after our lphenefle,and let them have rule of the
fpe of the lee : and foule of theapze and catell,


_ andall the erth and of euerp creppne thpng that D


trepeth bpon theerth. And fo Godcreatedman
indpsowne pmage, in thexpmage of Godcrea santos
ted be bpm ,+maleand female created bethem, Eerbi.a.
And God blefed them,¢ God fapde vito thent pyar.r.a.
Geoweand increale, andreplenpthe the earthe,

and fubdue it:and haue x dominpon of the fpihe Savt. tr.a,
ofthe fee, and Foule of theapze gof cucrp liupna °°
tbpngethatmoueth bpontbecarth. And God

fapde : beholde, ; paue geuenpou euerp pearbe

Cotwpnae fene, which isin the vpperface of all p


, earth: andeuerp tree inthe which isthe fruteo


tte, and that foweth fede, that thep map be meat
wnto pou. To enerp beat of the ecth alfo,andto


@ grenehearbe,whiche mapeengendzeteede: and etery bpzde of the avec and to cuerp uche thing:
By | Fatta ee, ylopnge ete ates bps hpne > agcrepeth upon tbe racine obet IAS n
f me ner eee ote An op di Aaii foule) J baue geuen all qreneneiie of herbe to be
P audit came to pare. #ndthecarthorougbt meate” Andit came loto pate. And Godlawe


euerp thpnge tbat be bad mabe, xand beholde: i ærrrrir,e:

wag erceadpng good. Che euening alfoandthe caar.viin

monyng was madetbe. vi.dape. LEa
E The.ii. Chapter.


tamas, tbetbpededaye. ODER POE ACETE ED ~ aa EEn E e e a

mois. bemade lpgbtes intbefpemament of ipeauen, ee ae e a Anae: be foure flo

LED and lettethem makea Dpference betwene the tree of knotwlenge is fozbphdenbpm:bowe Adam named al

i D ap e andtb enpabt and e! te them be onto [p= creatures. Tbe creacid of Cua, Spe mtitucað of mariage.
a ) 1 fe |


ib


Ai d


Co mIo aee ueris
F aa


[a 4 i j
Ethegree =


i : oN, =


ey
3 Caig ring te pas
aiimg rfet


+ 5
cae Seb.
r- Tr r
P , z
3 y F
a = 1


A Soi j = -E a 5 r y ee
3 i =| a ef a | k
‘a a : Ss, | ee — 1 i k i A ea y 3
n 5 = Se a ae Na i > A 2 } ae 4 Wrath
a; j : oa a 2 re CEA a il ry J “ye d
pE a aia a, far Net = ‘aaa T
7 i ie at „iy =e =i bt a a ‘
nii 1 - r z "a LOOT, | i i Y
7 =i iis $ 7 ==: 3 i ]


a


Peg | Englpibe of the largelt and grea: ||
VA f by the commaundementeo€ ouremoott
NG Apnge Wenrpe the. biti. cupreme heave

#€nglanbe:to befrequented and
Capd tealme,accordpnge to the
tumutions genen in

c that behalfe, 3

manndemët of the kpnges hyabnes,


Cuthbert bplihop of my » Gab
las biep oeiia


Alaku W]
Sr


‘ala
E AT


’ } ev)
p?
i , a
= 5 4 = ~- +f b ; z
r I | ee af


on ad
EN


4S


jae The fyrtt bodke oe Motes called mthe Hehe Foi,
Herelchith/andinthelatyn |


ae j: a ` Genelig. - i |
pane © The fpr Chapter. thepmpabteulethe dapeand tbe niabte, andto |
| make a Difference bettoenc thelpabt and poarks


Tote Meaen and earth, the tpaht,the firmament, fine,
p wold the moone,the terres, and all beattes, fou uname? in the


nelle. And God fawe that it was good. Theeue |


LEENDE LT TT rer ofp, Snoboweman alto nine alfoand the mozning twas made the fourth ©
J i bape. And God fapde:*let the waters bepnere iieri»
AS AN R the begpn- foztbe moupnge creatures that batbelpfe,and ~ d


Pali  [
GINAN :
E FALrWIL A
p = ibs E
eels CF ia


foule that mape Ape vpon the earth inthe face of
thefpzmament of Panen. And God created
great whales and euerp lining and moning cre-
ature, Which p waters brought forth after tpeps
Epnde:€ cuetpfethered foule after thep2 kpnde.
And Gob fawe that it was good. And god blef-
fed them, fapinge : Gzoweand increale, and fpll
the waters of the fee,and lette Fethered foules be
multiplped tn the earth. Che euenpng alfo ethe
moonpnge was nade the fpftedape.

And Godfapde:let the earth bepnge fortplps
upnge cteature after bps kpnde : catell, tore,
and bealte of the earth after bis kpnde, and foit
cametopatte. AndGodmadethebeafteofthe  — — |
carth after bigkpnde æ catellafter thep2 kpnde, 4 1. f fx |
e PA L I paa dy ontheearthafa S74
tesbistpndc. And Godlawe thatit wagon. C **4o2d —


7 nng Good cre
ated Deaueng
erth. ‘Cheerth
thas Vopd and
emptp g darcek
nes was bpon
the face of the
depe, ¢ the fpi-
tpte of god mo
he | ued Dponpface
-MG Se of the waters.
7 And God fapde:let there be madelpaht.and
a, _ there teas lpabt made. And God faw ehelpabe
thatit was good. And God made a dtuifpon be
tivene the lpgbt andbdarcknes. And God called
tbe lpgbt dape:and the darknes called he,niqht


fa


Era F as
Si
| . ne
ha iE 3
i C= e
- i an i
-= | if i ] i
q h, my i
i i: 7 a
i K k
nf >
ra'o =


i rey pan
< Ls


LUS
"i
ne


"And the euenpnge and the moznpng was made
onedape. And God fapde:let there be a fpzma-
mente betwwene the haters, glet it make a diup:
Tion bet wene haters ¢ waters. And God made
thefirmament, and fet a dinilion betwene ý wa


| Mo. Bild And Cod fapde: xlet the waters winder Pea-
|


“Eh
4


And Godfapde,let vs make man in our pmage
after our lphenefle,and let them have rule of the
fpe of the lee : and foule of theapze and catell,


_ andall the erth and of euerp creppne thpng that D


trepeth bpon theerth. And fo Godcreatedman
indpsowne pmage, in thexpmage of Godcrea santos
ted be bpm ,+maleand female created bethem, Eerbi.a.
And God blefed them,¢ God fapde vito thent pyar.r.a.
Geoweand increale, andreplenpthe the earthe,

and fubdue it:and haue x dominpon of the fpihe Savt. tr.a,
ofthe fee, and Foule of theapze gof cucrp liupna °°
tbpngethatmoueth bpontbecarth. And God

fapde : beholde, ; paue geuenpou euerp pearbe

Cotwpnae fene, which isin the vpperface of all p


, earth: andeuerp tree inthe which isthe fruteo


tte, and that foweth fede, that thep map be meat
wnto pou. To enerp beat of the ecth alfo,andto


@ grenehearbe,whiche mapeengendzeteede: and etery bpzde of the avec and to cuerp uche thing:
By | Fatta ee, ylopnge ete ates bps hpne > agcrepeth upon tbe racine obet IAS n
f me ner eee ote An op di Aaii foule) J baue geuen all qreneneiie of herbe to be
P audit came to pare. #ndthecarthorougbt meate” Andit came loto pate. And Godlawe


euerp thpnge tbat be bad mabe, xand beholde: i ærrrrir,e:

wag erceadpng good. Che euening alfoandthe caar.viin

monyng was madetbe. vi.dape. LEa
E The.ii. Chapter.


tamas, tbetbpededaye. ODER POE ACETE ED ~ aa EEn E e e a

mois. bemade lpgbtes intbefpemament of ipeauen, ee ae e a Anae: be foure flo

LED and lettethem makea Dpference betwene the tree of knotwlenge is fozbphdenbpm:bowe Adam named al

i D ap e andtb enpabt and e! te them be onto [p= creatures. Tbe creacid of Cua, Spe mtitucað of mariage.
a ) 1 fe |


ib


When the Lorde Godmade the earth the lra-
nens, and enerp plant of the felde,befoze tt was
intheearth :andeucryp berbe of the Felde,befoze
itarewe. 10} the Lorde God had not caufed it
tovapne vpon the erth, nether was there aman
totpll ý qrounde. And there went bpa mph frå
ofthe ertb,¢ watered p whole Face of ý grounde.
| % he Logde Godalfo xhopeman,cuecnduk
We. rbiti.d From of the qrounde,and + bzeathed tnto big no-
Sab pip erelles the breath of Ipfc and Adam wag made
Er rrrti.b alpupnge foule. And the Lowe Godplanteda
Ecore earpeneattwarde from Eden, and there he put
man whome be had made. <)ozeoner out of the
grounde made the Ode God to grower, cuerpe
treetbat was pleafaunte to the fpabt, and comt-
mon. tie mopypousfozimeate. The vtree of lpfeatioand
Apoca thb the tree of knowledge of good and of eupll was
inthempodesofthegarden.
nd onte of Eden there ent forthe a rpuer
to water the garden. And from thence it wag de
uideo and became into Courebeades. The name
€c,srtitt,c, OF one ts + pilon: Che amy isitebatcmpaficty
the whole lande of pautlab, where tbere is gold
And the golde ofthe Laue Fegan Src âl-
fo Wdelliam, and the Onir Fone. The name of
the feconde rpuer, is Gibon : tbefameigit that
compaficth the wholelande ofEthpopia. The
name of Che thp2dcrpuer is Hidebrell, and itga:
ethtowarde the Caltipde ofA Miria: Andee
_ Fourth rpueris Cuphzates. |
€ ECheLozde Godallotooke Jdam, and put
bpm into p garden of Coen, that be might dzefle
‘andkepett. And the Lode God commaunded
Adam {apinge : Catpng, chon tale eate of cues
tp tree of the garden. Butas touching the tre of
knowledge of good andcupl,thou palt not cate
of it. Elg, in wat dape focuer thou eatetl ther
of thou palt dpe the Death. ER
Andagapne, the Lorde God fapde: Ft ig not
qood tbat Jdam Wulde bealoone, J wpl make
bypman belpe, whichinape be ppetent with bin,
Andfo out cf the qrounbe Hope the Lozde God
euerp beafte of the felde, andeucrpe foule of the
ape, and bought ontoman: thatbe mpgbt
fe bowe he wolde callit. Pozlpbewpleas man
bpmfeife named maz lpupngethpnge, euen fo
was the wanie tbhereot. :

D WHanbpmlelfe therfore named the names bn
foall cattell, and fouleoftheap2e, and toecucrp
beaeofthetelbe. And forman founde henot
an belpe, that mpabt be pactent with bym. The
Lod Godalfocauted alombze total vpon A-
ba. And be lept. And be toke one of bisrpbbesg,
and clofed vp the felthe in ftedetherof. Andtbe
rpbbe whiche the Lorde God had taken fro mã-

sec. ro-a xmade bea woma,¢ brought ber nto mã. nd,
HONG na fapd: This ig now bone of mp boneg, Acth
of mp Heth. be Halbe called oman, bpcaute
the was take out of mã. Fo? thiscauletbalman |
~ leauebigfather ¢ bis mother. Hhalbe iopned w -
sgat.rip.a. DIS Wife t thepxihal becom one fleth,e they wee
marker.a botpnaked, pina t bis wife wer not apanıed.
RAAY = CTbeii. Chapter,
@ The ferpent becepucth the woman, Whe ferpentthe
Inoman,anv the man are curried anb bipuen out of pa
Fap Chea our onele fan pouris prompfen,


a an gl a |


avam © ` Gemelis! Aa,


Ig sp ‘euerpe bea
pa Bos Y Lode God made. And be fapd: vato
pe eda the woman:pea, bath the Lozde God
fapde: pe Mall not eate of euerp tree of the gar=
dens And the Woman fapd wnto theferpent:we
eate of the frute of the tree of the garden, but as
Eo: the frute of tbe tree Whicheis mtbemydded
of the garden, God hath lapde: pe Hall not cate
of it, nepther Hall pe toutche tt, leet bapplye pe


dpe. And * the ferpent fapd dnto the woman:pe fror ma


{hall not dye the Death , but God doeth knowe,
that the fame dape that pecate thereof, youre
epes Hall be opened, and pe thall be cuenag god:


Des, knowpnee good and eupll.And [othe xwo cect. rp.


mani feing that thelame tree was qood forate,
and luifp tothe epes, and that the fame tre wad
plealaunte to get wopldoine ) tooke of the frute
therof,and dpocatec,and gaue Ynto ber bulband
beinge with ber, whiche dpd catealfo. Ano the
epes of them both were opened, and thep knewe
that they werenabed:and thep fowed fpare lea
ies togptier,and made them felues ap2ong. -


And thep hearde the bopce of the Lorde God


tvalkpna inthe garden inthe coole of the dape.
Ad Mamiand big topfebpdthem felues from


the pzetence of the Lozde Godamonaethe trees -


ofthe garden. Andthe Lozd God called Adam
and fapde Dnto bpm: where arte thou ¢ whpche
Capd: J berde thp wopce inthe garden and wag

pa hee R twas naked, and bpd mp fel E.
Andbelapde: EUbotolde tbe, that thou watt
naked ball thou not caten of the fame tree cons
cernpnare the whiche F commaundedthe, that
thou fhouldeft not cate of it? And Adam farde:
be woman whom thou qauek to be ith me
(he gaue me of thetree,and J dpd eate.


Andthe Lode Hodlapd bnto the oman: €


why baltt pou done thig; And the woman fapd:
ponder ferpentbegpled me,and J dpd cate. and


the Loade Godlapde butothelerpent: bpcaule


thou batt doone this, thou artcurfedaboucall
cattell,anbaboue eucry beat of thefelde. pon
thp bellpe palt thou goo, and dufte alte thou
catealltheDapesotthp Ipfe. J tepil alfo put
enimitie bptioene the andthe woman, bitwene
thp feed and ber feed.


* Che lame mall treade Downe thp heed, Lollot. ie ;


and thou thalt treade bpon bis beele.

Eut onfo the woman belapd: Fn multiply =
{nge wpU F multiply thp tozowe, and thy con-
cepupng: sn foo W Walt thou bzitige forth chil-
dzen, and thp luit Hall pertapne to thp hulband


 amdbepallbauetberuleoffhe,


Taani RO


x atie ferpente was fub piler t cit a
ite of the felde Minibore 3


t


ee) ee
m =


E. gp apes vee ee a E a
Aram, Genelis. Folt,


the garden of en, todzelie the grounbde that


_ Hehas taken out of. And fobedzoue out man,

and at the cal {poe of the garden of Eden, be let

‘Chernbing, and the glpterpnge flame of a Wå-

kypngefinearde.tokepctbe wape of P tre of ite.

Cran Coben kpli ba B teas brother abet, bat

alio vpfpapzeth,andis curled. She gencracpon of noch,
ggathutaell,cubal,amech,Scth,emuos.

A eee Fes Dambnewe Reus big wpfe:tdibo


3j


A = Fhaueqottena man of the Lorde.
i Aopo procedpt furty, bzohehe
furtbpyg StI hate l, and pHa-


mer tt er of ipepe. Mut Cain was a tpl-
Ter of tbe qroutide. And in pzocetie oF apes tt


me to paffe, that Cain bought of the Erute of
CA Cinn or oblacpon Dito the see Habel
allo boucbt of f Epettipnges of bys ibepe and
ofthe fat therof. And the Lorde had refpecte wr
„ tox pabell and to bis oblacpon. Wut vito Ca:


Orr «snd tobis offerpng bebabnorelpect. soz the


Sapte
igo


whiche caule Cain waserccadpnge Woth, and


fa countenaunceabated. And the Lorde fapde
arabia aby act thou th2oth, and why ig
thy countenaunce abated: pEthoudo tell, Wall
therenot bea pzomocpot: And pf thou doit not


Well, lpethnct tp {pnneinthe doze g Unto the- nS


opertapneth the lut therof, and p palt baue
__bominpon ole it, and aint unto Habelb
az DiS brother, ow (let bs go furth.) - jae
25 Oend it api | See inthefelde
ia, Cainrole ypagapalte abel big bother, ¢ tue


im. And the Lorde fapde onto Catn-Wibere ig Seber
Ha belltby brothers Wi bpchelapde:F wote nol. Zube. 1,0,
Am {mp brothers keper! Andbhelapde: what
hak p doner The vopee of thp brothers bloude
crpeth vnto me out of p grounde: AndDnotoe art
thou curled from F erth, whbiche bath opened ber
mouth. toreceaucthy brothers bloude trom thp
bande. Dithoutpll the qrounde, the Hall not p20
ceade to pelde vito the ber Frenged.

Sugitpueanda vagabound thalt thou bein
theearth. And Cain fapde vntothe Lorde: Wp
* tniquptic ig moze, thenthat it mape be forge- z05,10,,
uen. Webholde, thou hate calte me out this dape
from the upper face of tbe carthe, and from thp
face pall 3 be bpd : ffugitpue alfo and a paga-
bounde (hall J be in thecarth.And tt Hall come
topafle : enerp one that fpnoeth me , Mall flape
me. And the Lozde lapde vntohpm: cit haunoe gs
be fo) pee, but who foeuer flapeth Capn,it Halbe
anenged feuenfolde. cape

AndtheLozdeletamarke bpon Capn: leek E
anpmanfpndpnge bpitt, Guldebpll bpm. And
Capn went out from the pact ence ofthe Lode,
and bivelte in thelande of Mode ellwarde from
€den. Cain allo knewe pis wpte which concea-
ued and bare Henoche: andbuployng acptie be
called the name of the lame cptie after the name
of bis fonne Henoch. Cinto p fame Henoch was
bone Frad. Jrad begat Behutaei,and Webu-
taclbcqat WetbufchacH. Bethulchacll begat
Lamech. And Lamech toke bnto ppm tivo wp-
ues: Chename of the one was Ada,and fname.
oftbeotherwagsilla. And Ada begat Jabel,
tohpehe was the father of fuche as Dwell in the
tentes and of fuche as baue catell. His beothers
name was Chuball, whiche was the father of
fuche as Danbdlebarpe and ogane. And silla al-
fo begat Cbubalcain, which wrought cunning
lp euctp crafte of bzatfe and of pron. Che tplter
of Chubalcain, was Naenta.

And Lamechlapde vnto his pues Ada and
silla:peare mp vopce pe wpues of Lamech, ber D
ken bnto mp {peche: 3 baue flapne aman tothe
fooundpng of mp felfe, qa ponge man tompne
owne punitbnient. PE Cain Halbe auenged teué
folde,truelp Lamech feuentpetpmes and lene
tpmes. Adam knewe hts pre agapne,and the
bare afonne and called bigname Set): Fo? god
(fapde (be) bathappopnted me another fede tn
teade of abel, whome Cain fiewe. And dnto
thelame Seth alto , there was bozne a lonne, g
be called pignane Enos. Then began thep to
make inuocacyon in the name of the Lozde.


-p.Chapter. Beet! |
calogp of adam, gof the other fathers buto Mov,


=


ic?) | 5 : ‘lo Adam. gntbedapethatGodcrea:
Rp Ne fed matt, inebelpbnette of Godmade |


hispmage andcalled ppg name Heth. All
bape of Adam (alter pe pao Orson. Sct


were epabt bundzeeth pereg and be begat Contes
and Dougbters. Andall the dapes that Adam lp
ued Werenpnedundzecth andthprtpe pereg, and
be dyed. Seth lpued an hundzed and fpue peres,
and begat nos. And Seth ipued after he be-
gat Enos) evante hundzeth peres andfeuen pe-
tcs,and begat lonnes anddoughters. Andall
the dayesot Seth were npne hundze¢ch and. rit,
peres. Ano be dped. ,
~ Enos ipucd npntpe peres and begat renam
and Enos lpucd(afterbebegate kenam , epabt
bundzeth, and fpftene peres, and begate fonnes
anddougbtcrs. And all the Daies of Enos were
npne bundzech andfpue pereg, And be dped.
2 kenam lpued feuentpe pereg, and begat Wa
jelacll. And Kenam lpued after be begat Ha-
brlartjepabe hundzet) peres and foztye peres, g
egat lonncs and Doughters. And all thedapes
of kena Were npne handzeth peres and ten pe
tes, andbedped. <Habelacllpuedlprepe pereg
and fpue pecesand begat Jared. Andagqapne,
4)abelael lpucd (after be begat Jared) epabte
Hundzeth and tppitpe peces, and begat fonnes g


boughters. Andall thedaies of Mabelaclwere f


epabte bundzethnpnetpandfpue peres. Andhe
dped. Jared lpuedanbundzethand (prtpe and
twoyeres and de begat Henoch. And Jared lp-
ued(after ie begat Henoch) epaht bundz2eth pre-
res, and begatefonnesanddougbters. Andall
tic Dayes ot Jared werenyne hundzeth and ipg
a Epe ins two nerra And meore: ia

ae apcnocie iyucdlprtpeand fpue peres,and be-
Debicpie Gat MWeebulelah; Bnd Honoche-+r toalked tith
God atter be begat Hetbulelab, thee bundzeth
peresand begat fonnes and doubters. Andall
the Daves of Denoche weve thee hundzethtprepe
Berga. andtpueperes. And Wenoche+ walken wrth
Sapitiii. GO, and he Was * nomoze (ene, foz God tobe
“aneia Homatape.. Hetbulelahallolyued an bun-
decth peres evabtpcandicuen bette and begat
Lamech. And agayne Dethulelabipued(atter
Hebegat Lamech, leuen bundzeth peres, epg
tpe and twoperes and begat lonnes anddaugh
tets. Andall thedapes of Hethulelahe were
npne bundzed peres, andCyrtpeand npne pereg.
D And bedped. Lamechipuedanbundzeth pereg
and cygotpe and two pereg,and begatea fome,
aiid called dis name Noah,laping: his fame
Wall confozte Ys a8 concernpng our Woke and
fozowe of ourbandes, trom of the carth, whiche
God curled. AndLamech lpucd(after beberat
F2oah)fypue hundzeth peres and nputpe and fpue
peres and segat fones and dow bterrs. Andal
tbe dapes of Lamech were feucn ndzeth pereg

and feuentpe and feuen pereg. And bedped.
Joa) Was Epue hundzeth pere olde, And Ro:

ab begat Dem, Ham,and Japeth. |

: C The. vi. Chapter,

-i e caule ofthe floube, nati He eae
E pagota Epea aeran EA sgt rN


isa ee be multiplped in p vpper Face o
NEGA and there were dougdrers bome vnto
poe Dens. T he fonnes of sod alfo faw the


Gentelis.


We eam oo ey tbatman beg an to
cs perth `


doughters of mett that thep wer fapze,and thep
toke them wpues from among al ¢ thep had cho
fen. And the Lorden yoray pzete Hall not al-
wape, triune in man, becaule he is fletbe,and bid
dapes Hhalbexan hundzed ¢ twenty pereg. Wut
there were giauntes in the earth inthole dapes :
pee,and after p the fonnes of god came nto the
Dou gotera ofmen,¢ thep bad gendzed vnto tbe,
tbe lame became mpgbtpe men of the world , €
mien of renotone, Wut god {awe f the malpee of
man was Creat ithe earth, and all the pmagp-
sl on of the thougbtes of bisbert was onelp
cupl euetp dape. end iterepented the Low, that
be Dad made man in p earth,and be wastouchen
with lozowein bis hert. Bnd the Lode lapde:¥
pll( ftom the vpper face of the earth) d ore
man, whome J baue created: both man, catel,
Wwozme and foule of the apze,foz it repenteth me
that 3 baue made them, .


;


Jat


AE e


Ge. bt T


tire.)


Fi š


Joab founde grace ithe epeg of the 25 |


Love. Cheleare the cencracpong of Road,
* f20ab was tulte and perfecte in big generacp-
ons and+ walked wpth God, Moab berat thze
onnes : Dent, Bam, and sae’, The car
alfo was cozrupt befoze Gov, and thefame ert
Was Eplled with ccucktye. And Eod loked bpon
tbecarthe, and beholde, it Was corupte: fo2 all
ficthebad corupte bis wape bpon earth.

And Godfapde vnto Moab: Che ende of all
ficthetscome befoze me, fo: the earth tg fplled $
cruelty from the face of them. And bebold 4 wpl
deitrope them with the carth. Dake thean ake
of ppnetrecs. Ba bitacpons palt # make inthe
arke, and ihalt priche it within and Without wd
preche. And of this falthpon palt thou makeit.


Eep


tomi


Che length ofthe #rke thalbc thee bundzetben €


bites : Che bedth of it. L.cubiteg, ibe path
ofit tbyztp cubptes. X wpndotve thalt ý make
tn the, Arke md ina cubite Walt thou fpnptheit
abour: but the doze of p Arke halt thou fet inp
fpde therof. With thze loftes one aboue another
(halt thou make it,


And bebolde, Y, euen F,bo -.


bepnge a Roude of waters Dpon the carthe, that


pt nore Deane: Snbeuy pe tat m
e Under Heauen; Andeuerp thpnge that isin
tbe eartbe fallop te ena th


Uird the alfo wyll J make mpxconchaunte Senet


and thou Halt come into the Acke thon andth
fonnes, thp wpfeand thy fonnes wpues with p:
And every liupng thing, and oF all Aetea pap-
erof enerp one Walt tbou bzpngeintotbhe Arke,
to kepe them apie withthe. Thep balbe male
andtentale. DE ferhercd foules allo after thepz
kpnòe,and ofall catell after thep2 Epnbde, of ene
ty wozine of the erth aftcr his kpnde: twa of ene
tp one thal come vntothe, that thou mapt kepe
them alpuc. Ynad fake thou-with the of allincate
tbat is eaten, and thou thalt lapet vp with the,
thatit mape be meate Fo? the and them . Noah
therfore bpd accozdpng vntoalltbat God com-
maunded bpm:enen fo dpd he.
€ The. bil. Chapter.
Cbe cntraunce of Moe, and of them that Wweretvith -


bpm, into the Arke. hevifpnge of the fouge wher
thozowe all thenges bpo perrie, s t d
l n


and. po


> — ik


tt. Bet.di.b.
Kent pla. WEES


4


|


-h ®% And Poa


H


|
|
|


ts Aca
vege LEM ee} |
1 re


apbe bnto Moab:


he a Fi ;


EATEN ious before meinthps a ncumatte


acco —_ all that Godcimaunded hpm.


; a aD
thefemale, as Godba
fo2tuned allo after fe


_ ofthe Asude were upon the cart


‘tn mae ofall fleme, as Godhadcomaundedhym


D onthe opper Face of the waters.


_


|
Í


And the


toule of the apse) tbep were euen Deftroped from
of the carthe. dad Moap onely remapnedalpue,


È
+


| Genetig.


andthep that were withbpmitthe rke. Wut
the waters peeuapled wpontpe earthe an pun-
bzetband fpttpe Bapes. |

: C Che.vii.chapter. >
Aiter (he Cenc pnge eat of the Rauen and (he Doac Moe
gorth forth of the Arke,and oferethfactifece, he nats
Fall coprupcpenofmans bartes `


QLD Godtemembied Noah , and


Sol. tj, |


a} { «q euerp beatte, E T


wy Leg 025 wrth bym inthe Arke. And
i RS : IN | Godmade a wpnde to palle vpon p
ela earth. andthe thaterscealicd. The
fountapnes allo of the Depeand thè wpndowes
of ipcanen Were opped,andtherapne from be:
nen Was relkrapnedD. Andthe waters fromthe


6 earth were sefurned,gopnge and commpnge a=


ie hie And after the nde of the bundzethand
tpeth dape, the haters were abated,

And inthe leuenth moneth : inthe leuententh
Bayeotthe oneth, the Arie celled wpon the
mountapnes of Armenta. AnD the waters trr-


lp Were Cophg anddeceealpng vntpllthe tenth


monet: ff 02 intbe tenth moneth, and in p Epatte
dape of the lame moneth, were the toppes of the
mountapnes fene. And after the ende of the foz-
tvetb bape, it happened that oah opened the
wyndowe of the Arke which be bad made. And
belent furtharauen, whpcbe went out qopnge
furth and returnpng agapne, vntpll the waters
were dped Dp Som theearth. And agapnebe
lent furtdadouet


tbe qrounde. And the doue founde no ref fo: the
Cole of ber Fote, g the returned ynto bpmacgapne
into the Arke: foz the Waters were inthe upper
face of the whole carth. And be whenbe bad put
furtb bpsbande, tokeber: and pulled ber inta


_ bpm intothe Arke.


And be abode pet other leuen dapes and p20
ceadpnige further be lente furth the doue out of
the Arke. And the doue came tobpmintbe euen
hier le, in ber mouthe was an Dipueleafe
that (he Dad plucte: wherbp Moab dpd kuowe,
that the waters were abated bponthe earthe .
And be abode pet other feuendapes, and fente
furthe the doue, which pzoceaded not to returne
nto bpmanp moe.


om bpm, that be mpatt lept ;
p the eaters were abated fromthe pres face oF =


And it came topatle inthe fprehundzet and ¢


onepere, inthefpzttemoneth, and inthe fpette
dape of the Honeth , the waters tere dped vp
fromtbeearth. And PMoabremoned the couca
rpuge of the Arke, andloked,and beholde, Y tp-
per face of theqrounde wag dped op. Andin
thefeconde moneth inthe feuen and twentp dap
of the moneth, was the earth dzped.

- And Sodlpak vito Noah laping:Gofurth
of the Arke, thou and thp wpie thp fonneg, and
thpfonnes wpucs withthe. Andbepugefurthe
withthe, eucep beat that is with the-of all icip
(both toule and catel and eucrp wozme that cre
petb bpontbeeartbe) thatthep mape gendze in
the carthe and bapnge furthe frupte, and en-


rit


mene. (.c.0


creace bponearthbe. And foPMoabcame furthe, ano.ir.a


and bistonnes, bis pte, and bis fonnes wyues


withbym. Eurrp beafte alfoqnd cuerp wozme, D


aut eucrp


EAIA
cuerpe fonle, and tobat fo euer crepeth bpon the
erth (after tbep2 kpudes) went out of the Arke.
And Moab buplded an alter onto the Lode,
and toke of euerpe x cleane beate, and of euerpe
cleane foule and offered facrifpces tn the altare.
Andthe LozdCmelted a fwete(oz qupet)fauone
And the Lozdelapde in bis bert: J wl not pro-
ceabe tocurle the grounde anp moze for mannes
Bene,di.a. abe, fo a pmacinacpon of mannes berte ig
cucll eucnfrom bis pouth. Nepeber wpll Jadde
tofmpte anp moze euerp thpnge liupnge,as 4
baue done, pet thetfoze pall not fowpnge tyme
and barueff,cold. and beate, Sommer and wpn
fer,dape enyabt ceafle, all the dapes of p earth.

@ Che.ir-Chapter.

@ God bleed Mocandbhisfonnes. Be forbpydeth to rate
the bloube of beattes,anbd to feb mans bloube, The tawwe oF
tbe (ieearde. 19¢maketd a couenaunt that be wpil benrope
the woz loe nowmoeze bp water, and geucth che rapnbowe fo:


atten and contirmacpon of thelame. ogis bzonken,
Bam bncowereth bpm, and getteth bis cure,


eee, Cena md Oodxbicied Noah and hislon

ee ina, REA Eines. And lapde onto them: Bapnge

n EASA Verve furthe frute, andmultiplpe, and

sara wereplenetbetheearth. Chefeare of

OES Vpouand the deede of pou albe Ypõ
euerp
thea


eul TiN,


cat oftbeearth, and vpon eucrp Foule of

pze in alllucheas the earth bypngeth Furth
and inallthefppeg of the fee. |

Ato pour bande are thep delpuered. Cuerp

thpnge that moueth it felfe and that lpucth thal

be meat foz pou: Cuen asthe qrenebearbe paue

Lent.vii.c. Joeuen pouall thpnges.Wutxtichhe tn the lyfe

aud-Foi.d. therofand in the bloude therof Hall pe not eate.

¢ lies pout bloude of pour lpues topil J cequypze

From the bande of encrp beafte wpll 3 requypze

it and from the bande of man: From the bande


agat.yroie LEMANS beother wpll J cequyze the Ipfe of man


apoca.rtiie CULO Lo x Hedeth mannes blonde, bp doers bol IE
OF God hy
dpd God make man. Wut bepng pouturcthfrute SE


bis bloude be (hedde: S€o2 inthe pma
and multiplpe: Gendze pe in the earthe, anden-

creacetberein.
03 Godfpake allo bnte Noah and to hisfonnes
geneti, Wpth bpm, fapinge : Debolde, J let Vpmp* co-
uenaunt wptp pou, and with pour fede after pou
and wptheucry lpupnge creature that ig wpth
you,bothm foule and tncatel,andineuerp beat
ofthe carthewbpcbe is wpth pou oF all tbat go
out of the Arke, accozdpnge Dato euccp liupnge
thynge of theearthe. Wut mp couenaunte wpll
Statitit.c, J make wptd pou, that from henceforth enerp
eie, be not rooted oute wpth the waters of a
floubde, neptherthal there be a fonde todeftrope

the eartheanp more.

And God fapde: Chps is the token of the co-
nenat whpcd F gene bettoenc me and pou, and
eucty lpupng creature that is with pou into per
petuall generacpong. 4 baue fet my bowe inthe
cloud, and it albe fo; a token betwene me and
thecarthe. Andit Hallcome topale that when
4 ny acloude upon the earthe,the bowe al-

C fotpallbefenetn thefame cloude. And F wpll
tbpnke vponmpconenaunte whiche is bet wene
meand pom and eucrp Mupng creature inal Aei


 Genetis:


andit Gallnomoze come to paffe, thatxwaters Ceruti. e
maketa foudeto defropeall fictihe. Wut tbe
bowe (halbe tn the fame cloude, and J wplloke
pponit, that Jmapethpnke pon the enerla-
ffpnge couenaunte betiwene God, andtuerplp=
upngecceature it all flethe thatis bponearthe.
And GodlapdebntoNoab. Thisisthe token
of the coucnaunt wbpcbe F bane made betwene
mie and all fleibe that is bpon earth.

The fonnes of Noah going Furth of the arke
Were: Hem, Ham, and Japheth. And Ham tru-
Ipis the father of Chanaan. Gheleare the thre
fons of Moab, and of them wastbhe wholecarth
oueripzed. Moab allo beqanne to be an bulband
man, andplantedaDpneparde. And he dpn-
kynge of the wpne, was Donkett, and wucones
red wpthin bps tente. — i

And Ham the father of Canaan fepnae the D
nakednes of bys father, tolde bis two bzetherne #
without. Bud Demand Japhet, thep ttoo,trs
kpugea garmente,lapode it ppon thep2 wulderg
and ren po back warde, coucred the naked
previties of thepzfather:ne.. Is their faces bea
puge turnedDawape,lechtiepe, Ireletbep2fa-
thers preuptpes.  — —

And Moab avolte from bis wpne and knew
what bis ponger forne bad dane bntobim. And
be fapde : Curled te Canaan,alernaunte of fere
uauntes pall be be nto bis bzetbzen. Ielapde
mozcouer: Wlied be the Lozde Godof Hem,
and Canaan albe bis (eruaunt, God Mallen-
large Japheth and be pall dwel in the tentes oF
Hem,and Canaan thalbe thep2 Ceruaunte.j20-
ablpucd after the floude thie bundreth and fpi-
tie peres. Andall the dapes of Moab were npr
Dundzeth and fpitp pereg. Andhedped.


€ ' ek Chapter. |
The sencalogp of Japheth, Sem,and Bam,
i Beie ave the gencracponsof the fet- a
negot Noah, Sem, bam, and Ja-
iphcth: And yuto them were chplszen
Zibozne atter the floude. Thechplozert . |


and Jauan,and Thubal, Delech,and Therag.
The chpldzen of Gomer: Atkenas,and Ripath
and Thogarma. Che chpldzen of Jauan-Elila
and Tharlis, Ritthim,and Donanim, DE thele
were the Jles of the Gentplesdeupded in thepz
landeg enerp man after bis tonge,andafter bis
kpnred in thepzenacpons. | |

‘Che chpldzen of Ham:Cufch,and Pésritm,
and Phut, and Chanaan. And the chpidzen of
Cuich: Seba and Hanilab, and Sabtbha,and
Rahma and Sabthecha. Che chplodzen of Rab
ma:Dcheba and Dedan. Cuichalfobeqatte ”
*& Miinvod. Chefamebegantobempghtpein wy
theearthe. Sfozbewasa mpahbtpe hunter be- i. Baraia
fogethe Lode. Cibcrfozeitislapde : Euenag
fumrod the mypghtpe bunter before the Lode.


Q be bequinpug of bis kypnadom wasxwabel, sene.rt.b.


and €rech, and Accad, and Calne, inthe lande

of Sinbar. Dut of that lande came Aiur, and

buplded x finiue, and the fretes of the cyric, =

Calab. Relenalfo bet wene Niniue and Talaj, 3008-1b.

anditisa greate Cprpe, 1
Miscaiim


F200:


2

a

= F
=.


0 eat net and Magog, NDG)adat, apania o -


© = * = i a
ee


fe ee:
Ty
Aea h
ra! .
t


Rw. D Genelis,


Hiram begat Ludim,and Enamim, and Le
þabim, and frepHthubim. Parthulim,alfo and
Caflubin, out of whome came Phili finn and
C Capthozin. Chanaanbegate sidon bps fprtte
boznefonne and Heth, and Jebult, and €mozt,
and Girgolt, Habiut alfo and Paarki and Dal-
lini and Haaruadt,and Hasmact, and Dabema
tht: And afterward were thekpnreds of the Ca
franptes {ped abzode. T he bozder of the Cana-
nites Was fromsidon, as thou commefito Ge-
rar Ditpll Gazan and as thou goet pnto Syo-
doma and Gomora and Adama,and scbotim,
cuen bute Lela. Chele are the chplozen of Dam
tuthep2 Bpneedes,inthep2 tenges,countres and

in thep2 nacpons.
Unto Sem allo the father of all the chpldzen
of Eber, (and eloer bzother of Japheth) tbere
werechpldzenbozne. Chechplarenof Sem:
Clom and Aiur, Arphachlad,and Lud and A=
tam. Che chpldzen of ram: U3 and Pul, Gt-
f Parada. therand Pas. x Arpachlad begat Selab,and
Helah begat Eber.cinto Ever alfo were borne
two fonnes :. “He tame of the one wag Peleg
fo inbis dac- ¢ thas the earth deupded. And dis
bzothersna.: ¢ thas Jaketan. Jaketanbegate
~ Almodadand Hale po azarae: be and Fe-
ret oe odan and Walland Dickla, Dbal
ao and Abimaell, and Scheba, and Dpbir, ¢
i auila,and Jobab. All thele twere the chplozen
of Jaketan. And thepzediwellpnge was from
Wela as a et ynto Sephar a mounte of
the Catte. Chele are the chpldzen of Sem after
_‘Abepe Kpncedes and tonges inthep2 landes and
nacpong: Andfothele are the kpnredes of the
chplozen of Noah, after thepze qeneracpons in
pz peoples, and of thefe there the nacpons de-

poed in the earth, after the fioude,


C The.ci.Chapter.


C Zhe buplopnge of Che towze of Babel. Zhe confutpen
of tungere. Ibe generacpgn of Semehe onne of oe, butyl
~ abzabam, which goeth with Lot bute Baran.


Derm, een oL the tobole carthe was of onelan-

PAA Vp guage and lpkelpeche. And tt hap-
a spenco wen thep went furthe om
PA ithe Cale, thep founde a plapne in
SEN theland of Sinbar, and theretheyp
be. Bnd theplapde euetp one to bis neyap-


Yh aoe -¢
Tere at, , = ġe D.
i new i = l | =


[heehee
ae


let us make bea name, leelEbappelp we be fea-
tred abzode into the Ypper face Hs P whole carth


Wut the Lozde came dawne, to fe the Cptie and —


tower which the chplozen of men buplded.


Andthe Lozdelapde : Weboldz,the people is


one and thep baue all one language, thisthep


begpi to do, neptier wpll it bereftrapned from:


tbem, what fo cuer thep bauepmacincd to do.

Come on,let vs qo Downe, and confounde they
lanquage:that euerp one perceaue not bis neigh
bourg {peche. And fo the Lode lcatred them feo
that place into the pper face of all tbe earthe.

And thep lefte of to buploethe cptie. And ther-
foze is the name of it called x Babel, becaule the
_o2dedpd there confounde the language of all


the cart). And from thence sid Lozne cater
ali tpe


them abzode Dpon tie face o earth.

Theke are the generacpongof Sem: Hem
Was an bundzeth pere olde and begat Arphach-
Cad two pere after the loude. And Sem Ipned
(after bebegat Arphachfad) fpue bundzeth pee
tes,and begat fotinesand dougbterg.

Arpbhachtad lpued fpucand thpetve pereg, €
begat Selah. And Arphachlad lpued (after ve
begat Selabh)Four bundzeth and thre peres.and
begat Connes and douchters,

Selahlpued tbpztpe peres andbegat Eber.
And Selah lpucd (after he begate Eber) foure
bundzed and thze peres t begat fonnegand dou-
gbters. Eber lpued foure and thpatie peres and
begat Beleg. And Eber lpred(afterbe beqate
Peleg foure hundzcth and thpzte pereg, and be=
gatclonnes ahd Doughters.

Peleg lpued thyztpe pereg g begat Ren. And
pPeleg(ipued after be begat Rew )rwohundzeeth
and npne pereg and begat fonnes edoughters.

« Reulpued twoandthpztpe pereg and berat
Derug. And Reulpued (after he begate Se-
tug )ewo hundzeth andfeuen peres, and berate
fonnes and Dougbters.

Derug lpued thpztve peres, g E y Raho.
And Serug lpued (after be begate Mahor)two
bundzeth pereg, and begat Connes ¢ doucbters.

And abor lyued npne andtwentpe pereg,
and begat Terah. And Nahozlpued (after he
begat Cerabh jan bundzeth and npnerene peres,
and begat fonnes and doughters .

Terah lpued feuente pereg and begat Abra-
bam, Nabez, and Haran.

Chele are the qeneracyons of * Terap: Te-
tab begate Abram, Rabo and Haran. Haran


stolit,


Meneé.t.b,
Confy=
ipon.


D


i Barad
Joffiiiia


begat Lot. And Paran dped intbe prefenceof `


Terah bis father in the lande of bys natiuptye,
euen in Cz of the Calders - mH ED and Nabor
toke them topues : Chename of Abrams wpfe


~ Was Sarai,and the name of Mabozs wife wag
_ Milca the Doughter of Haran: father of Wile m ese, pie;


ca, and the father of filca.28ut+Darat was ba
ren, and bad no i be eae

And Terab toke Ab
the fonne of Paran, bis fonnes fonne,and Sara
Disdoughter intawe, bys fonne Abzame topfe.


bep Andthep departed together from qiz of tp Cal


decs,that thep mpabt go into thelande of Cana
anand thep came wnto Charam, ¢ ni pos


ba bis löne and Lot 730i
i ) )


Abam.
And thedapes of Terah weretwo hundzerhe
fpueperes,and Terab dped in paran.
@ Ehe. rii. Chapter.


 fbgam is bieled of God , and gerth pth Let bnte
The lante of Canaan, wbpche God prompfed to gewe ba
fo bpinand bis (eve. Abram goeth into fgppte,and raw
eth Saral his topfeto call ber CclE bis Cpiter, for whois
Aa Pharao is plageo.


Actes. bia ESR Tawa Ndthe Logbefapdevnto Abram:


Beds. rie HE W: Gette the out of thp countre, and
egaa Ce out of thy nacpon, andfrom thp fa-

Sern thers boule yntoa lande that gwpl

| VRE» N bewe the. Aud J wpil make of the
Se.rbitie; agreate people, and wypll x bicile the, andmake


and. rtie. thp name creat, that thou map be cuena blei-
eg ihe “ppl alfo blefle them that bleffe the,
and curfe them tbat curle the, andinthe Mall all
kpnredes oftbecarthebebleitep.
And lo Abzam departed , cuen asthe same
ake vnto ese ot went withbyin. And
Ab2am wag leuentpe onae pereg oldc, when
25 he departed out of Haran. And Abram toke DA
raibts ae and Lot bis brothers tonne,and all
seria. thep2e x tubftaunce that thep bad tn poffefipon,
and. Fic and the foules that thep bad begottenin Haran
Andthep departed, that thep mpgptecomein<
tothe Lande of Chanaan : Andintothe lande
of Chanaan thep cane. Abram pafledthozrowe
tbelande wntotheplace of Spebem, and nto
the plapne of Hozetbhe: And the Cananpte wag
theninthelande. And the Logdeappearpynge
eesti, dito HLam,lapde-Cinto thpxtede wyl Farcue
oati thislande. Andtherebuyloedhe analtare vnto
ee Lode encen where be bab appered butobpm
as A nveemonpnge thence Dito a mountapne that
was cltwarde from Wethel, De pprched his tent
haupnge Wethell onche wetire, and Paion
thecatt. Andbhe buplopngeanaltare yxto the
Lo2be, bpdcallon thename ofthe ïo. And
Abam went eile le th geand Departprae to-
warde the fouth. Wut there wasa dertpinehat
land, and therfoze went A brain Downe into €-
gppte,that bempabtelogeourne there,foz there
wasa loze Dearth m the lande. nd it happened
wheube Was come nere te entre into appt, be
fapde duto Sarat big wyfe: wWebolde, 4 knowe
that thonart a faper woman toloke ppon.
‘Gherfore hallit come to pale, that when the
Capocpanste the, thep Pall lape: Sbeis bps
wpte. And thepthall byl ne, but thep thal fane
oe. rran. thealpuc. Sapez pap the that *tbouartm
D fptter, that 3 mapefave well fo: thy fake, and}
mp Conle mape lpucthozowe chp occalpon.
And fo it happened, when Avram wascome
into Egipt. the qipcpans bebelde the woman
foz (pe Was betpefapse. Che Wapnces allo of
Pbharaofaivc Her,and cOmended her before Pha
rao, ¢ the woman was takë into Pharos boute.
And pe truly tntrcated Abram Well foz her fake
and be bad thepe and oren and he affes, men fer-
uauntes and mapoeleruauntes,Healles,andca
melleg. And the Lode {mote Pharacand hpg
boule With greate plages, becaule of Sarai Ae
bzams wpe. Fund Pharac calling Abram, fapd
Ube balte thoudone thys vntomer gupp dp-


Genelis:


‘twhiche was a plenteous countre of ater enecp


A
d


Aba
DelEthounottellme,thatihewasthpwopfes y s © |
‘enue therfore bebolde , theareis thp wpe, $
take ber, and moo thp wape: nd Pharao gaue . »
the men commaundemente,concetnpngebpm: |
and thep conuaped bpm furthe and bpswpte,
and alltbatbebabde. i (2
C Tbe.riiit. Chapter. (es ae
C'am and Lot departe out of ¢gppte. And Abiem


Deupbed bis landeand catel with Lot his bzothers fonz
ne. Dere agapneis prompledto Abzamcthe lande ot Cha
naan.


FH Md {o Sbzam gat bym vpoutok E: y
EAA TP pt be and bis Wwpte,andxall a! o GEL
ETA q bad, and Lot wypthbpm, totbardet
EES fouth. And Abram was verp vpcbes |
incatell,in{pluer and golde. And be went furth
on bis tourney from the fouth towarde Wethel ,
to tie place wbere bps tente had bene at the bes
gpnunpnee, betwene Bethel and Hat: Cuen D=


a"
E


_ tothe place of tbe x altare tobpehe be bad mane Sea


there at the fpl, and there Abzam called onthe

name ofthe Lobe. Lotalfowbiche went with
Abram bad Mepe catel andtentes:and f lande  .
was notabletoreceancthemtbattbep mpgbte ` si


Diwell together, foz the* {ubHaunce of thepz P= we r
ee Was great and thep coulde not dwell toge= 95 Se
f er. Andtbere ela trpfe betiette the beromen


of Zbzamscatell, and the herdmenof Lotz cas
tell. Sd)ozcouer thexCananptes and the bere ayy,
fptesdwelledatthattpmeinetbelande. Ther
fapde Abzam bnto Lot: Let there beno ftrpfe( g

2ap the) betwenethe and me andDxbetienemp gcp
beront and thbpne,fozwe be bzetþpzren: Jsnot
all theswhole lande befoze the‘ peparte 4 pea ter
the frome. YEtbouwpletaketbplettepande, 3
tpl qotetherpabt:ozpsthoudeparttoprpgpt ae |
bande, Xwplgo tothe lefte. Jno fo Lotlpftpng - 4
Dp bpsepes, bedelde alltbecontrep of Jozdane, ca


ia


tobere,befozetbe Logdedeftropedodomeand ` ~
Gomora cuen as tbe garden off Lozd,likethbe
lande of Egppt as thou cumme wntosoar, — j

Then Lot chole alltheplapnecountre of Jo €
Dan andtoke bis tourney from theeate. Andlo
Departed the one beother from p other. Abzams
DivelledDinthelandeofCanaan:andZotabove Y}
intbecptics of the plapne, and tented wntpl So a
dome. Wutxthemen of Sodome were wyched wer
and ercedprge (pnners befoze the Zo2de. 3

Andthe Lozdefapde vnto Abzam,afterthat
Lot was departed frome bpm: Lpfte bp topne
epes nowe, atd loke from the place where thou
artenozibwarde ,fouthbivarde, cafwardr, and
weittwarde, fozallxthre lande wbhpch thou lret: aene
wpil Y eue vnto the and to tbpfledefozceuer., rotid |
And 3 wpll make thp (ede as the buite of the $r
earth :fo that pfa mancannomber the duff of ý
eatth,thentballthptedealfobenomb2ed.Arpie
and walke aboutern the lande, after the length
of it,and after the bzcoth therof,foz 3 wy! qeue
it ontothe. And epee takpnge doene pps if
tente.cameanddwelledDinpokegroucofan
te,nainelp in Ebon, and buploed there analtec
puto the Lorde.,


C The. riii Chapter,


=F "


kj


ret}


hetis taken prpfontr. whe bpctospeot Abrar of che brabe cod, polfeffo of Heauetand earth. And |
Sobomptre. Ot eo rae ar Aranart tptpegons — Dleled bethe ppe God tobyche bathe delpuctcdD `
to aaetchtevech. Abram holdeth notherge ot the bprg thpne cnnempeg intotbp bande. nd. Wam
pf podomes goobrs . Fs | gaue bpm tpthes of all. :
cece MVEtchaunced in the bayer of ¥mra-  Andtbekpngof Sodome apd onto Abzam
HVAT i ee anr of Sinbar, Arioch yng CSeneme thefoules, and take the goodes to thp
Aoki Ellafar. Hedozlaomo2 kyngeot felfe, And Abram anlwered the kpnae of So-
no Elam and Thideallpnge of thena- Dome: J hanelpft vpmp bande wnio the Lorde
cpans,and thep made warre wpth Werakpnge thebpe Good pofictfor of eaucnandearth,that
by Sa of Sodome, and wit WirlabpnageofGono2- Yropllnottake ofall thatisthpnefomucheas
raand with Sincab kyng of Adama, and with arhrede oz thoulachet, leet thou thuloctt lape,
Semeabar kpng ofsevoun, andwiththehpng Jhaue made Abzamepche. Sauconclp that
- piwela. Thelametssoar. IU thelewerctops yoppche the ponge menbauceaten and the par-
— nedtogetber inthe vale of Siddpm swwbere the tes of the men whpche wente wpthime, Aner,
falte geeis. Eo twelue pere Were they fubiect Eicholl and Mamre, wbicheMalltave repre
tokpnge Renolaomozandinthetbpztenepere partes.
rebelled. Wutin thefourtene pere came Redo- CThe.tv. Chapter.
ee ty the bpnges tnat raag aia . qrr ahaeat erant inni tener penen to abram, ag
{mote paun esin ro t an Be j pm tebe. ipi tieurtHa i 1 A ped. s
the Soutimsinbam,gtbeEmimsintheplapne rani outos be badee Pharao sanb ot tytpze beipusraunce
of kariathim, and the Horm in mounte Scie — fromthe fames
$ wntothe plapne of haran, whiche bordet) V-
4 ponthe wplderneffe. Andthep returnpng came
: _, to En Wilpat which is cades, andfimote all the
| countre ot the Amalechptes,andallothe Amos | \
: ryptcstbatdwelteinaseson Thamar. eae:
saa And there went out thebpnge of Hovomee And Abzailapde:Lorde God what tpit thou
i the kpnge of Gomozra andthekpnge of Ada- geue me when J gochpldlefie,and the chplde of
y ma, andthe kpnge of sebotim, and the bpnge of the ewardippppe of my honletsthis Eleazar
t. Bela whichtszoar.and thep (rote batel with of Damalco/ And Abzain fade: Se,tomerhou
them inthe vale of Siddpm, Pistofape, wyth pat geucn no fede: loa lad bogtcin mp beufers
Ziederlamoz tbebpnge of Clam and with Tht- mpnebepze. And beholde the worde of the L020
Deallbpnae of Macpons, and with Amrap ocll came vnto bpmfapinge: Hethallnot be thpne
&pnae of Sinbar.And with Sriab kpngo Els hepre,but one that (hatcome ont of fhyuc owne 5
ralar:foure bpngesagapnifpuc. andthe Vale bodpe fhalbe thpue bepze. And he bzougbt bpm ’
of €ptddim was full of Apme ppttes. out and fapde:loke bp vnto eaucn,and tell the |
> Andthe Rpngeof Dodomeand Gomozra warteg, pt thoubcableto nembe them. And Ie-rrrita
‘ fied, and fell there. Aundebepthatremapned, belapdevutoppm:sEuenlothalithplebebe.  tsx0 sitt.n.
eee Avd to the mountapne. And they takpugallthe And Abzamxbeleued the Lorde, and COUN wom.tiit.s
goodes of Hodome and Gomozraand alltbep2 tedbetobpin fozrpgbtiwelnelle. Andagapnege ras
‘ bpralieg wente thepzwape. Andtdep carped fapde onto bpm: Jam the Lozdethat baovgore
2 awap Lot alfo Abzams brothers foune and is theoute of Giz ofthe Chalvdecs, togeuetdc typs
Baca goodcfogbedwrtenat Sodome and departed. tande and that thou mpgdtell poffetfe it.
. Smergo And there came one that had efcaped , and tolde And befapde: Loe Gov, whereby halt 3


=


=


À C Abzamthe Hebsewe whiche dwelledinthe oke Enowethat all pollee itr He anfwered vn-
SE groucofx Hamre the Amozpte, bzotberof Ei- tobpm : Take an hepter of thre pere olde anda
; | Holland bzother of Aner, wpiche were confcde: the goate of thze pere olde, anda tige peare olde
: rate with Abram. Ulben Abram peard thathis Ramme , aturtpll dove alfoanda ponge ppe-


- bzotber was taken, be parneticd bis fretbe yong on. Hetoketherfore allthele vuto byui,anvoe- p
mon, bogneinbigowncboule, theebundeedand wpdedthein in the mpddes, and lapor ener pece
eightene,and folowed onthem wntpl Dan: And onc agapnlte another. But thefoules deupocd
be was let inarape bpon them bp npabt, be and enot. And whentbe bpades fellontbecarcates,
þig feruauntes,and {mote them and purfuedthé Abzamdgoue them awape. And wenthe funne
punto Poba:whtchlperb of che left pande ofa: was downe, there fella lomber vpon Abram.
mafcogandrecoucredalltbegoodesandalfo Andlo,adarkeand greatefeare fell opon bpn.
bought agapnebis bother Lot,andhis good: And heiapde onto Sbzam : knowc thys ofa
des the weinten alfoand the people. furetpe, that thy «fede Wall bea traunger tna gese wits,
i Afterthatbercturnedagapnefromtheflau: lande that pertapneth not vntothent. And Mall
abter of Zedozlaomez andofthe Hpngesthat feruetbem, anotbey (allentrcate thent euvell,
were wpth bpm, came the Ipnge of Sodome + foure bundzeth peares .- tero.tlicé,
Furtbetomete bpm intheplapne valep wbycbe rd Anes ele ethep Hall feruc, wyll Fu. v.o.
prir. biis ig the hpnges Dale. AndxeHelchiledech yng of udge. Andafter warde thal they come out with Oa<
Salem bought furth bzeadeand wpne. Hor be Eeo e, And thouthaltegovntethp `
_ Was the prealte of the mofte begbe Sod, and fathers in peace, and Halte be burped ina goon
pleted brm, fapinge: Bleed be beam pntop oldcage. ut in thefourthe saga’ a att


a oe


iil i i — eS


= Aham.. - ~~ Genelis, Abam —
- thal come bpther agapne, forthe topchednetle of bpm thatlpuetbandtecthme. Anditisbe- Re at
| ot tbe Amozptes is hot petfal twene Cades and Wared. And Hagar bare J-
And it came to pale that oben thefonne wente bzama fonne, and Jbzam called fons name 3
D dotone,there waga darkecloude: beholde, tbere wbiche Pagar bare bnto bpm Jlmael. And J-
wag almokpna furneffe, anda fpze brande go- bzam was. irre vi. pere olde, when Hagar bare :
pnge sph thi hal Sg ee pif tts bpm Alimaell. , | i
jnthatlame dape,the Lode made a s | : . | |
Be legen Sbzamlapinge : unto thp * fede EChe. cot. Chapter 3
Seriya Daue Jgeueu this lande, from prpuer of Eqppt  — abram ie casted Abrabam, ane Sarat is named Sara;


bere tbe fourth tpme prompied. “p :
eusen onto thegreatrpuertherpucrof Cupbaa = Eeinnnc ee fe bere futtpcubed.3tabacte prompin A pii > =!
tes the Lirnites,the itenizites,andtheCadmo- —_fampzapety tor qimatli. , Ee


nites, the Hethites, andthe Pberesites, and the


gpauntes,the Amozitesalfo,andp Cananites, CS seer Wram Was nputpe peare olde, and %
the Gergelptes,and the Jebulptes. TEBE) cS Rea’ re aran paperen = cod ge

, hat Nae eS andlapde Dnto bym: Jamthe al=
oe ber ane cait agare mane towrte PESTO and be thouperfecte. And J wpli


age eecommaunbuie to turar ganar enveeCDero EODD CDe cECCDPNGIP, BMD Abe Ean D TO Dat
he Aies aeea ia j ee multiplpetbecrcedpnglp. < 2am fellon
Sari katea Ro wate tla edont nt a pis fare. an Godtalked with bpm faving: 2e
FAA Arai Abzams topfe,barehpm nochyl Holde, Jam, anomp teftament is wpe the,and ite
ee aen. Bute badanbandmapde an thou halt be afatber ofmanpxnacpons. Rep- eerie
pte a) Cgiptpan. Pagar bpname.AndHaz ther (hall thp nameany moze be called Abzam, PP
sra fa pde vito Abzam : Beholde, the butthpname albe Abzabam: +foza father of es x
Lozdebhathretrapned me, that Jcannotbeare manp nacpong baue Jmade the. Jwpllmake p
Jprape the goin vnto mp mapde,peraduenture to groWwe erceadpnglp, and wpllmake nacpong a.
Aimapebeeditpedbp Yer. And’Abzamobeped of the:pea and &pnges tall (pzpnge out of the. 5 :
the vopceof Darai, And Sara? Abrams wpfe Mozcouer, Jwplmake mp bondexbetwwesrz me Act, bit, be
toke Dagar ber mapbethe egiptpon (after As andthe, and thpledeafter the, inthep2 genera: S
bam yad d welled ten pere in thelandeof Cana cpons, bp aneuerlatpna tet Deal toe Ana

Bt, piid;


an)and gaue ber toberbufbande Abzamto be be God into fhe and to thy fede after the. and
bis wpfe. Wibich oben be went in unto Agat, topll geuevntothe and to chp (cdc afterthe, x
theconceaued. And when MWe lawe that Hhehad Lande wberin thou arta fraunger:Euenall the :
conccaued, ber maltres was delppledinherepes Lande of Canaan, foraneuerla pug potlefipon 7
And Sarap fayde Ynto Abzam: Chou doeke andwpll betbepre Cod. ) '
me wonge: 3 baue geuen mp mapd into thp bo: And Gobdfapde agapne bnto Abzabam:Se
38 fome. Wi bichefepnae that the bathe conceaued ee alfo kepe mp Teltamente therfore, bothe
J amdelppled inderepes , the Lorde Judgebe= ti ouand thp {ede after the in thep2 genevaciong ki
twene the and me. ut Sbramfapdeto Sarat: Thigismp tetamente whpche pe pal kepe vea Oe
beholde, thp mapde ig inthp bande, do witpher tioenemeandpou,and thp feveatter the. Enec yi
agit pleafetbthe. — . tpe manchplde al ee e= Malbecircumepied, 4
, end when Sarat fared foule wptb ber, the De thal circumepletbe ficthe of poure foeett | ae
fledfromtbeface of bee. Andtheangelloftbe and itthall be a+token of the bonde bet wprte ttotiiib
Lode founde ber belpdea fountapneof water meandpou. Bnd euerpe man chplie of epabte |
inthe wplderneffc : euen bp the wellthatig inp dapes olde: fhallbe circumepfed amonge pon, sen. rro.b
Wape toSur. Aandvelapde: Pagar Sarais and lucheas beinpour Generacpons, andbozne Lute. ti.d


mapde whence cametthou, and whither wplte at home, and hetbatis bouabte wpth mo i co 8.
thou go! spbe iapde: F fice from the face of mp anp traunger whpche isnot of thp fede.ty¢ that ais
matice Sarat. Andthe ampell of the Lorde is boenetnthp boufe, and be alfothatis bought A
fapoe vnto ber: returnetothp maftrefle agapne wpthmonep, mufte nedes becpzeumepfed. Ind STA
g andiubmprthpleife under berhandes . . inp Tetamente all be in poure felge, fozan $


and agapne ri angell ofthe Lozdlapde bn cucrlattpngebonde. And the vnepzcumcepfep
tober: Jncncreatpnge 4 wpll encreale thp fede, manchploe, in whofe fleithethe fozefapnne ig
and tf hall not be nombzed foz multptude. And notcpacumepfed,that foule {hall perpe, frome om |
tie Lozdesangell [ap toper, fe,thouarte bpspeo Tip naa al pien mp Teta rt
with chploeand Malte beareafonne, andipalte ment. AndGodlapde wnto babam: Sarat : A
callbpaname $maclt: becaulethe Lozdebathe thp twpfe thalte thounot call Sarat: but Sara
bearde ra er otago e aa topllbeatoplde allpernamebe. And Fwpllblefe ber, and
- manan big bande wpil beagapntcuerp man, baue geuen the a fonne of ber,and wpl blete ber
and eucrp mans bande aga nffebpm. Andpe peoplealfo,peeand hinges of people pal tying
{hall dwell inthe pretence of all bisbzethzen.  ofber. But Abzabam fell vpon bys face, and
And tbe called the name of the Lozdethatfpake laughed,andfapdein bis berte : (hall achploe be
vuto ber: thou God loket on me, fortpefapde: bone bnto bpmthatts an bundzeth pere olde ?
Paue J not lene bere thebackepartesof ppmp And hall Sara that is npntpe pere olde beare?
icethmies Wberfozethemel was called,the wel And Abraham fapde vuto Gon: Dthat Ie
~ meel


moi W a.


Amaham.


maell mpabte lpue inthp (parbte. a5 5
nto whom Godlapn: Sara thp wpe hal
gervi d * beare thea fonne in dede , and thou alte call
bisname Jfabac. And F wpll make mp bonde


ela priiii,b ei bym, foz anxencrlaltpnge bonde and with
| biste


deafter bem. Andascoucernupnge Hima-
ellallo, J baue beardthe:fo2 F baue bleed bym
_andwpll make bym to encreale, and wp!l mul-
Serran tiplpe bpm excedpnglp. Cweluexpepnces hal
bebegette,and 3 wyil makea greate nacpon of
pm. Wut mp bonde wpll 3 make with Flabac,
wbpcbe Hara Hall beare wnto the : euch thps
tpmetweluemonethb. -
D Andbelefte of talking with bym,anddepar
` fed bp from Abzabam. Abraham toke Fimaecll
bis fonne and all fuch ag were bozneinbis boule
anvdall that was bought with money, as manp
as Were men chpldzen whiche were amonge th
mien of Abrahams boufe andcpacumepfend t
fietbe of thep2 Fozelapnne cuen intbat felfe fame
dape, as Godhadde fapde yntobpm. Abra-
bainaifo bymfeifewasnpnetpe pere olde and
npne, when the Aee of bis fozefkpnne was cit-
cumcpted. Flmael bis lonte thas.riti. pere olde
When be was circumcpled in the ficth of bis Fore
fhpiune. Chelelfe lame dape was Abraham cir-
` cuincifed and Fiinael big fonne. Andallthe men
of bis boule, borne in bps boule o bought wpth
monep( of traungers) were circcumepfeo w bun,


CThe.r ditt. Chapter.


d There apperen thre men bute Abrabam, Jrahacisproz

andr ob op agapanat which Srs laughed. The aree

ipu OOOMpCes is Declarep bnto Abraban. Fas
‘Sam prapeth fo2 them, z ii :


i a ce F |


Poca he lp ig
thre men tode bp bpm. And when be fatve them
beranne to mete them from the tente doze, and
fellto the ground and fapde:Lozd(FbelecHthe)

pF J bauefounde fauoure in thp ipabt:qonot( g

prape toitoi iDe feruaunt. Let alpcie Water

efet, and wale pour fete and refre pour fel-

Hari. riz.b nes wuder thetree. And F topll fet a xmogfell of
breade tocomfozte poure hartes withall. And

then (hall pe qo pore waypes , fo2 euen therfore

ave pecome to pourferuaunte. And they layde:

wo cucnfoasthoubaftelapde. And Abraham

went a pafe into bis tent bunto Sara, and fapde

make redy at once.tit.peces of fpne meale, kned
it,andimake cakes, And Abzabam rennpng yn

to his beattes.fettea calfe tender and good, and


Genelis,


SFol. be,
gawe it bntoa pong man and be halted tomake
fredpatonce. And be toke butter and myplke
and the calfe wbpehe be bad prepared, and fette
it befoze them , and ode bpm felfe bp them Yn-
bet the tree, «when thep Dpdeate. = piny,
And thep fapde unto bpm: Wibere is Dara ye"
thp wpterbe anlwered:bepold,the igin the tent
and befapde: Anreturnpnge, Jrwopll come az
gapne bnto the, accozdpnge tothe tyme of ipte.
And lo, +para thp topfe thall baue a foune.
That berde Sara, in the tent dore whiche as
bebpndebpm. Abraham and Sara were both
olde and well firpkeninage, and it ceafedto be
pth Sara, after the maner ag itis wpe we
men. Cherfore Hara laughed within ber felfe,
fapinge: Mowe Jam wared olde, Hall J gene
mip felfetoxlufte,and mp Logde olde alfor AND gce, prva
Godflapde bnto Abrabam-wherfore did Hara
laugh fapinge:(all J of aluretpe bearea chpld
wbpchbeam olde sis anp thpnge wonderfull co
God! Accozdpnge to the tpmexappopnted Wyl itt.re.titi.c
J returne wnto the cuen accozdpnere tothe tpme B°™- t-d.
of lpf,and Sara pall bane a fonne. Chen SDa-
ta Denped it faping : J laughed not, fo: the ws
afraid. And befapoe: Ft ig not fo,butthoulaug |
Heol. Andthe men andpnge vpfrom thence,
loked towarde Sodome. And Rbraham wente
with them to bzpnge them onthe wape. €
And the Lozde fapde: ball J ppodefrom Abza: ©
bamtbat thpnge whiche 3 doesfepng that Abra
bam Malbeaxgreatand ampabtpe people,and ae ei e
all tbe nacions of the earth thalbe bleed in him gerbia
Jknotwe this alfo tbat be wpllcommaunde his
chpldzen and bis boutbolde after bom, that thep
kepetbhe wape of the Lozde, anddo afterrpabt
andcontcpence, that the Lozdemape bepnge Y-
pon Sbzabam that be bathipoken onto bpm,
And the Lorde fapde:+ Che cepe o§Dodome peepore
and Gomorra is greate and theps (pnne is erce:
bynge greuous. 3 wpll godownenowe,andle
Tobhet her thep haue bone altogether accozdpnae
totbat crpe, obpcb iscome vito me o2not,that
3mape knowe. And themendevartedthence
and went to Sodnime warde. Wut Abrabam
Hode pet befozethe L0zde, and Abzabam Mewe
nereandlapde: Wiple thou alfo deltrope p rpot-
wes topth the wpcked ¢ peraduenture there be
fpftpe rpabtwes wpthin the Cptie wpite thou
deftrope, andnot{pare the place fo2 the fake of


Í iho. ipb


o fpitperpabtivestbhatare therin? That be farre


from the tpat thou thulbdett do after this faping,
and flepe the rpgbttes wyth the wpcked, and
that thberpabtwes thulde be as the wicked that
be farre frome the. |

Shall not the Judge of all the woglocdoac- D
cozbpngetorpabtes Andthe Lozdelapode: PEJ
fpndcin Sodomefpftpe cpgbtwes wpthin the
cptic, 3 pll (pare all the place fo2 thep2 fakes.
And Abzabam anfwerpnge,fapde : Beholde, ¥
bauc taken vponme tolpeake yntothe Lode,
*tobpyche am but butte andathes:prraduenture gene,
there väl lacke fpuc of fyftperpapteous:di pit
thou deftrope all the cptic for lacke of fpues
And be lapde :pf J Fpnde there fourtpe and fpue
FZ pilnocdettrope them, 3 :

ue n


ee tr i aI


Loth.
And he proceaded to fpeake bntobpm agapne,
and fapde: pecaduenture there (all be fourtpe
foundetbere. Ie anlwered J wpll not do tt for
foatpes lake. Helapde Duto bpm agapne:<D let
not mp Lowebeangepe that 3 lpake-peraduen
ture there hall ebpztpe befoundethere. Axo be
fapde : J wpll Donothpnge 4 YEpnde thpzrtpe
there. Melapdagapne: Ole J baue taken vpon
me to peake noie alfo Dito mp Lozde : pe rade
nenture theretbalbetwentpefounde there. Ie
anfwwered J tpl not Deltrop them foz twentpes
fake. And belapde: D let not mp Lozde bean-
arpe and 3 Wwpllfpeake pet but this once Perad
uenture there thal ten be founde there. e antwe
ted: J topll not Deftrope themfoztens fake. And
the Lozbde went bis wape as foone ag be bad left
comenpnge wpth Abzabam.gnd Ababam al-
foturned ünto bps place.

CTbe.rix.Chapter.
@ Lotreceaueth two angels into his hoate, rhe fpthp [az
Res ofthe Sovomptes. Lot is Delpucred and belpzeth to
divell intbecpticofzear. Lottes wpte ts turned into appz
lat offalt. Godometsdetropes. Lorie Bronken age Ip:


bi mpth bps Daughters, Wheche comeeaued ehpidzen op
pm,
| Mdthere came. ti. angels to Sodom


AATA at euen. And Lot fatat p gate of Do-
Wawa winome. And Lot lepng them role ppto


CSSR mete them,and be «bowed bpmfelfto
the ground with pis face. And be lapde:mp L02
des, turne in J pape pou into poureferuauntes
poufe and tarpe allnpgbt and wate pour fete ;
and pe thallrple bp carelp to ga tn pour wapes.
Wibich fapde:nap, but we topll bpde in the Ere-
va. roitit.¢ LES atL aye. And be inmaner dpd euenx com-
Ku reiii volethem wpolentiye. Andthep returnpnge
in bntobpm entred mto ops boule and pe made
thema feafte, and dpd bakelwrete bzcade, and
Kos pib Chep DPD *eate. | :
ue And before thep wente torete, tbe men of
the cptic (cuenthe men of Sodome) compaffed
the boule rounde about both oldcand ponge all
the people From all quarters. And thep callpnge
pnto Lof,fapd bnto bim: where ar ë men which
came into the this nygbt” bepng them out onto
ex Deand we Wpl know them. And Lot went out
atthe Doozes Dntotbem and hut thedoze after
bpm andfapde : nape fo? Godslake beethaendo
not fo wpckedlp. 2Scholde, J haue two dough-
_ ters Whiche baue knowne no man, them wel d
bzpng out now bnto pou:anddo w them ag it le
meth qood in pour eies. Dnlp Dntothelemendo
notbpneye , fog therfoze cametbep in vnder the

fhadow of mp rofe. And thep fapde:ftandbac
Andtheplapde: Hecameinas one to fogeozne,
roth. and wpll bebe nowe ax Judge We wpll furelp
ictes.biid peale Woozle with the then with them. And thep
peace foze pon theman, euctt Lot : ¢came to
becake bp the Doze, but themen put furtbe thepz
hand and pulled Lot into the boufe to them and
{buttothe doze. And the menthat were at the
q Doze of theboufe werefmote wpth bipndnette,
xbotb {mall and great: fo that thep fapnted and
coulde not fpnde the doze. And the men fapde vn
to Lot: PEtboubaue pet bere anp Conne tn late
o: fonnes ozdoughterso: whatlocuer thou batt


Sap. rir.c
TATALA: A


Genelis,


A È

i
f. A
* ri


in È cptie,bapne it out of this place:Foz we mul
de he fee ot pae. becaufe the crpeot themis
creat before the face of God:fo2 the L028 bath 5t
fent vs to deftrop tt. And Lot went out elpake |


ie me


M
i


=


Lot


: wt


pntobisfonnesinlaw whichmaried big dough


ters faping: tande wp get pou out of thts place
fo: the Lorde wll ouertheowe thigcptie. Wut
be femed asthough be bad mocked, onto bis fort
nes inlawe. Andwhenthe moznpng arole the
angels caufed Lot to {pede bpm fapmg: Stand D
ee thy wopfe æ thp two Doughters at band
left thou perp inthe ‘pnnne of the cptie. Andag
Ea a Oe aro beuabeers UP be bandes
is wpfe and bis two Doughters bpthe bandeg -

the Lozde bepng mercpfull onto bpunt, and tiep
beougbe bpm tarbana ta ntoptbont the cp=
tie, $tfoztuncd when thep bad bzougdte them
out be fapde : Sane thp lpte,¢ lobe not bebpnde
the nether tarp thou inall thig plapnecountre.
Saue thp felfe inthe mountapne, leet thou pe-
tpe. And Lot lapde onto them: Db nape Lorde
bebolde, thp feruaunte bath Founde grace mthp
pabt,and Phat magnifped thp mercpe tobiche
thoubaftetbewwed bntomeinfaupngemplpfe. =|

ebolde, 3 cannot befaued in the mountapne,
lcet fome mplfoztune fall Dpon me and Zope.
Webolde,bereiga Cptpebp, tofe vnto, euen
ponder lptle one, Db let me be laucd there: igit
notalptie one and mp foule Halllpues Andhe Æ
fapdetobpm: le, Jbauereccaued thp reguelfe, =
agconcernpngetbisthynge, that Jwpllnoto- `
uerthzowe this Cptie,foz the wbiche thou patte
fpoken. Halkethe,andbetauedthere,foz Jean
bo nothpng tpll thou become thpther. And ther- |
fore thenameof the Cptpe iscalled zoar. And
the fonne was nowe rpfen vpon the erth, when
Lot was entredinto soar. |

Chen the Lode rapaned bpon* Sodome g erer
Gomorra, bzpmitone, and jA len the Lede At |
ont of Meucn,and onerthzue thole cpties and all diti
theregpon, andalltbat dtvelleDintbhecptics,e `
that that qretoe ppontheearthbe . Wut Lottes
wp feloked bebpnde ber, and Was turned intoa
pplleroffalte. aatom eaae opea p, got 4
bpmto tbe place where be toode betoze the pre-
fence of Gob; and lokpnge towarde Sodome |
and Gomozra and toward all t landeofthat æ
contre, beloked :andbebolde, tbefmoke of the ~~


contrep arole astbelmoke of afoznate. And |:


it Lee ae that when Goddefkroped the Cp-
ticgoft poud
and fente Lot +t oute from tpempddes
uertbrotopnge, when be ouerthzewthe Cptieg Sarit
where Lotdwelled. Tee
- And Lotdeparted out of soar and divelled in Fure.
the mtountappes wpth bps twodoughterg , foz
be feared totatpe banger, but bwelledinacauc,

cand bis twodonghters. And theelderfapoe
puto the ponger: ourefatheris olde, and there


$i


bat regyon, be thought bpon pe oo |
t EDE A ET


isnot amanin theearth tocome in Dnto tsat- es


ter the maner ofall the wozlde. Come, we wpll
mabe oure father Dronten wpth wpne , and lye
wpth bpm, that we mapelauelede of oure fa-
ther. And fo toep made thep2 father dronben w
wpne that npgbt. And the elder Doughter wut
H


— Amahan
2 FT andlape wptbbee father. Andhe perccaued it
aa: -not neptber when the lape Downe, nether hen

‘be role vp. And on the mozow it bappened that
© theelderfapde vntothe ponger: bebolde,pefter=
npabtlape J with mp father.Let vs makebpm
dronke with wpne this npghtallo, and yo thou
and lpe with bim, that we mape raple vp (ede of
ourfather. Andthep made thep2 father donke
withwynepnvagbealfo. And the ponger arofe
and lape with bpm. And he perceancd it not:nes
thet when He lapedotone, neither when the role

| vp. Thus were both the doughters of Lot with
“4 chploe bp thep2 father. And tbe elder bare a lone
— andcalledbisnaime )oab.Cbe lame ts the fa-

| * thernfthe Qoabptes wntotpigdape. And the

| ponger bare a fonnealfogcalledbisname Ben

Ammi. The fame ts the father of the cpilozen of

: Ammon onto thpsdape.

| C Che.re. Chapter.

aT abraham Went as a Lraunger into thelarde of Errar.
Tbebpnee of erat taketh awape bis wpe. tt
era 2D Abrabam departed thence toward
thefouth countrep, ¢dwelled betwene

Wem Wid adcs and Sur, and oe in Ge:

k PaA Srar And Ababam lape of Dara big

pie wpfe:Wbe is mpxlpiter. And Abimelech kyna of

_ Frb Gerar fent andfet Sara awape:

Hut Godcameto Abinelechinabzeamein
thenpabt andfapde nto bp : Soe, thou alte
dpefoz the womans fake which thon ball taken
awape fo: the ig amans wpfe. ur Abimelech
bab not pet come npe ber,¢ be fapde: Lozd wyplt
thou flape LA eats peoplesfapdc not be tnta

/me,theismp {pfter:pce, and fap not the ber felt

bets mp bothers with a pure bert and tinocent

handes baue Jdonethis, And Godflapbe onto

bym by a dreame, ¥ wot it well that thoudydett

it inthe purenes ot thp bert. 3 kept the alfo that

thou hutdelk not {pine agapnftme,and therfoz

{uffred Jthenottotouchcher. Mowe therfore
delpucr theman his wptcagapne for bets apo

ete. And he hal prape Foz thetbatthboumaptt

| ae . WButand pithou delpuce der not agape,

befuretbat tbou palt dpe the death both thou,

and all that thou ba. Cherfoze Fbimelech rp-

{pnge vp bp tpmes inthe moznpng called ali bts

fcruauniesandtolocall thclelapingesinthep2

careg and the ment there fore afrapde. And Abi-

€ melech callcd Abrabam elapd vntobym:what

-þat thon done bnto bs,and what paue Foten-

pi? Ded the that thou Dall brought on meand onmp

- bpngdome lo great afpnnes thou hatte Done de-

-Deg Dnto methat ought wot to be done. And Abi

melech fapd dnto Abrabam: WU bat lawet thou

that thou bat done this thynge. 3

Abraham anfwered. Io2 4 lapde: turelp the
feare of God isnot in ths place, and tbep hall
flepe me foz mp wpueslake:pet in werp dede fhe
igmp piter, fo? the is thedoughter of my father
though the benot the doug ter of mp mother : t
the becamemp topfe. And after God cauled me
to teandze out of mp fathers boufe, F fapde Dn-
tober: Chiskpndenciie halt thou Mewe vito
yp me nall places where we come, that thoulape
of me.bersmpbzotber. Chen toke Abimelecb


Genelis:


Sol. vif,
thepe and ores, riten {ernauntes and wemenfer-
uauntes and gane them tunto braban g delp=
nered bym Sara bis ple agarne. And Abime
lechfapbde : beholde , mp landelpeth beFoze the,
Dwell where it Ae letb the bet. But pute Da-
rabe fapd: Sc, # bane qeuenthp beothera thou:
faiide peces of fplucr , bebolde : it pall be acos
ucrpnge of ona epes vnto all thatare withthe
and thus with all was he reproued.

Hund fo Abzaham prapde vnto God,and rod
brated Abimelech, and bys wpfeand bps map-
dens, and they bare chplozen.sfo2 the Lozdehad
clofed to all the matrpees of the boule of Abime
lech: becaule of Abzabams wpee.

@ Che.rxri. Chapter.
@ Flabacis boine. Agar is cate out with ber ponge fonne


imari. Dhe angel comfozteth Gear, The couenaunte bez
tiene Shimeleech and Abrabam, ý k


ESF e Lod bilyred Haraasbepadtapd A
ENA Page and DPO nto ber xaccozdpngeas De oe sori»
Ree epee bad pzrompied. Fo: Sara was wpth anv.rvii.c.
aise (HPLC , AND Dare dene afonne in pee
bis olde age, cuen the fame feafon which f Lon >“
bad appointed bim. And Ababa called bis fon-
nes name that was bozne vnto bym which Sd-
raxbare bpm, Jlabac: and Abzabamecivcumep gpath.t.a:
fed Flabac bys fonne when he was epabt dapes Hot-rriiiia
olde:as Godcomaunded bpm. And Abzabam 157A
Was an bundzed pere olde : when his fonne Ffa-
bac was bozne wnte bym. But Haralapd: Gor
bath made me alaughpnrae tocke : fo that all p
beate: wplllaughatme. Sbelapdealfa: who
wold paue fapde ynta Abrahani; p Hara hula
baue geuen chpldzen fuckerfory baue bogne bim
alonnetnbisoldeage: Thechbplde grewe:and.
was Wened:and Abraham made a qreat fealte:
thelamebdape that {labacmwaswened. Hara
tawe állo p fonne of Hagar p Erppeian wbich
fhe badbozne Punto Abrabam) tobe a mocker, 35
wbherfoze the fapde bnto Abeabam:+ putawap Salatid
tbig bondemapde and ber fonne: foz tbe fonne of
this bondwoman thal not be þepze with mp for
Blabac : andthistapinge was verp greuonsin
sos tg frie becaute of big Conte. And god
fapde onto Abraham : lette tt not be greuous in
thy {pabt,becaule of thelad æ of thp bondDmapde
All p Sara hathfayde vnto the, beare ber vopce
Foz+in $lahac thal thy tcde becalled. St)ozcouce trto.tr.b;
ofthe fonne of the bondwomanwpll J make a Sasi
nacpon:becaufehbeisthpxtede. — Ge, piid
ndfo Abrahamiarofe bpcarlpinthemoz-  "" "
npnge, and toke bzcade anda bottell of water,
and gane it pinto pagar. puttpnge it onber (pul
ders withthe ladallo, andfent ber awape, wha
Departpug, wanded Dp and downen the wpl-
beruceok Seer Seba. Andthe water wag
Cpente in thebottell, andthe cate thelad buder
abufive and toente and latte onthe other Ipe a
teate Wape, as it were a bowe Mote of : foz He
pde: J topll notfethe death of thechploe. And
the {pttpnae Downe onthe other (poe, lpfte wp
ber bopce and toepte. | |
And Godheardethe vopce of the chploe.
Andthe angel of god called Hagar out of betien
andfapoe puto per: what apicth the ae ¥
Heare


€


4ecare not,fo2 God bath bearde the bopce of the

chyldetoberebelpeth. Arpie andlpfte vp the

lad ,andtake bpm in thp bande, foz J wpl make
ofhymagreate people. And God opened per
epes:and the law a well of water. And the went
andfplled the bottell wpth water and gaue the
bope Dppnke. And God tas with the lad, and
begrewe anddwelte inthe wploerneffe,and be-
caineanarcher. Andbe dwelt inthe wyldecnes
of Pharan. Andbhpsmothergathym a wpte
out of the lande of Egypte. |

And ít chaunced the fame feafon that Abp-
melech and pbicol hts chefecaptapnelpake vn
to Abzabam fapinge: * Godis with thein all
that thou dot. And nowe therfore fweare ynto
me euen bere bp God, that thou wplt not burte
meno: mp chpld2zen, no: mp chyldzenschpldzen

Xut that thou Malt deale with me andthe cun

trep where thou balte benea ttraunger, acco:

dpure nto the kbpndnefe that J baue Mewe
the. Juo Abraham fapde: YJ wplifweare.

D And Abzabamrebuked Abimelech fo: a twel
of Water, ppche Abimelechs Ceruauntes bad
vpolentlp taken awape. And Abimelech fapte:
3 wotenotwhobath donethpsthpnge. _
Ailo thou toloct me not:neptbher bearde F of it,
but this dape.And Abzabam toke pepe and or-
en, and gauethem nto Abimelech. And thep


— Abrabam.


Be. FFOLF,


made both of them a bond together. And Abza- pi


bam fet feuen etoe lambes bp tbem felues. And
Abimelech fapde nto Abzabam : what meane
thefe feuen ewe lambes which thou batte fet bp
them felues:ipe anfiwered: Foz thele feuenlam=
bes (halt thou take of mp bande, that thepmap
bea wptuele buto me tbat Jbauedpaaedthis
Yel. Ciberfoze the place is called Weer Heda,
becaulethat there thepfweare both of them.
Thus made they a bonde together at Weer He
ba. and Abimelech ¢ Phicol his chefecaprapne
role Dp,and turned agapne ynto the landof the
Philp tines. And Abzabam planted a wood in
eet Seba, and called there onthe name of the
Lode, the eucrlaftpnge God : andfogouerned
in tbe Philp tines lande a longe feafon.
T The. rrii. Chapter.


@ The fapth of Abrabam is proven in offerpnge brs fonne |


Sifabac, £bpil our fau POUre Is piempfed,


: egen 3
Du OË Jacyo; 4b: abams bother. iiy


A Pea Wee Eter thele fapinges, it bappened p
gubia PEA “age Ood Opdxproue Abzabam efapde
Brdr ria ce > ca Dntobpm: Abzabam. Wlhichean-


15


Genelis,


ri 1 f
te
| i
fae
:
z
koa =
:
i
f


tntopou. And Abrabam toke the woode of the Be sits
facrptpce : and lapde tt Dpon Flabachysfonne, Che
but be bpm par hooped Kritiaan i
Anbdtbep went both of them together. .

hen lpake Flabac ynto Abzabam bys fa-
therand fapde : Wp Father? And be anfwered: y
beream Jmpfonne. He lapde: He bere is fpre
and woode, but where is the pepe fo2 facrifpces °
Abzabam anfwered : mp Lonne, God wpll po-
updebpm a thepe fo: lacrifpce, and fo tbep went re vig
both togetber . = ‘


And when thep came onto the place whiche
Sod had hewed bpm, Abzabam made anaul-
terthere,and defied the wood, and bounde Fla
bac bisfonne, tx lapde bpm on theaulter,aboue zaco, tia.
bpon the wood. And Abzabam frretching forth etie
bis bande, toke the knpfe to baue kplled big Sane
nd the angel of the Lozd called yntobim from
Soc apige Ababa Abzabam : Andbe !
apbe:beream J. Jnd belapd:lapenot thp band i
bponthechplde,nether do anp thyngre at all pn=
to bym, Foz nowe Jknow that thou fearet cod
and batt foz mp fate not {pared thpne onlp fone.
And Abraham lpftpnge vp bps epes, loked 1- + Tat 4
boute : and beholde, there twag a ram caught bp € "
PWebormestnathpckette. And be went and toke
theram and offred bpm bp foz a facrifpce in the
ead of bis fonne. And Abzabam called fname N
of the place,p Lozde wll fe. Agitisfapoe thig
dape:inthe mounte wpll the Lozbde be fene. =
And the angell ofthe Lozdecrped bnto Abia e ow
bampa panigi a= Fl hy fapbe : |
+ bp! u one the Lozd)be- s
CatAe thoes battedone this ena anb baite not Oeste
Cpared thp onelp fonne:that in bleflpnee 3 wyll
blefle the, and in multiplying J wpll multiplpe f
cop ee a8 the Rarres of beauen, and as p fande
wbiche is pon the lee ipoe; And thp fede tall
polele > gate of big enempes.:And in tbp iede D
allallthe nacpong of tbeearthebe bleed, be- Stae-rt«
caufe thou bate Heavdempbopce. Hoturned Gaia.id.d.
Abzabamagapne ynto big pong men, and thep
tole bp and wentetogetherto Weer Seba. And
Abzabam dwelt at Weer Seba. Andit chaun-
fed after thefe thinges, that one tolbeAbzaham i
fapinge: Beholde, Hilha, he bath alfo bozne
a bnto thy bzotber Nachoz: us hpsel-
delt fonne,and Mus bis bzotber, and Lemuel f
father of the Sirpans, and ceafed and Halo, €
Pudas and Fedlaph, and Bethuel. And wWeebu
el agat Rebecca. C hele. viii. did WHilcha beare
Machoz Abrahams bother. -And bps concu-
bpne called Rbuma: the bare alfo Tebab, and
Gaban, Thaas,and Waacha. !
The a


=


i Fis Š


Ea ee > N Ae Eiei oe
—  Genelts.: Sol. btif,
Lge * C The ' trili. Chapter: was fapihful ant broughte Mebecea, Whithe Jrabac toke
-Aara bpedant is burped in the Felos that abraham to bps were.
- Bought of Ephron the Bethite,


` Qipabean.


on bd


Ta so Tha
re |


HU
3 geue me apofiellyon toburyin witdpou,that 3 ters of Chanaan,amonge whiche F dwell. Wut


D r


-e re a).


N A


ng: DEithepourmpnde tpat 3 thailburp mp


a Sabet of mp Pabt, beareme:andfpeake For


meto Ephron thelonne of soar : phe mape geue
methe dubble caue wobpche be bath, and thatis
inthe ende of bps fele : but toz as muche money
-agitis worth, hall be qeueit me inthe pzefence
of pou fo2 a potleffpon to burpe m. Fo: Ephzen
DwWelled amongetbe chpldzen of Heth.
And Ephron the Hecbite auntivered XbA-
ham inthe audpence of the chyld2en of ipcth and


ofall that went iit at the gates of bis Cytie, fap-


pige: Motfomp Lozde,heareme. Chefelde
geue J the,and the caue that therin tg gene Z the
‘alfoc:and enentntbhe p2efence of the fonnes of mp

cople geue ¥ it the, burpe thp decade. And Abra
bagi bowed bim felf before the people of p lande.


and pale vnto Epheon mthe audpence of the”


care


people oibrean liam as pare the ea


me tt it pleale the: 3 tpll qeuc tpluer fo:
take it € J topll burpe mp deade there.
antioered Abzabam faping vntobpm: Sp lozd
berken Dito me. The lande is wozth fourebun-
d2cd (pcleg of fpluer: what is that betwprte tie
andme ‘burpe therfozetbp deade. And’ Aba-
ios barkened bnto Ephzon and toeped him the
pluct which bebad fapde,in the audpence of the
fonnes of Peth.. Enen foure hundzed fpluce
[peles of currant monep amonge marchauntes.
And the felve of Ephron withthe doubble caue


 sobicbe was before Mamre : cuen the felde and


the caue that was there, and all the trees that
_ wereinthe Felde, and that were inall pbogbers


D rounde aboute, wasmadefure nto Absabam


for apoftelip on, inthe fyabte of the chplozen of


peth before all that wenteinatthe gates ofthe


cptie. AEterthisdpd Abzaham burpe Sara big
wpe in f Double caue of the felde that lyeth be-
foe Hamre. Chelame is Hebzon inthe lande
of Canaan. And fo both thefelde and the caue
is therein, was made nto Abzabam a {ure pol-
ffion toburpe in, of the fonnes of Heth.
| CThe. crit. Chapter.
O C Abrabam maketh bps feuaunte to Notare, and tendeth
Lpmcofseke a wpis fo? graha. bps tonne, he leruaugte


phon:


from mp fathers boule, and from p lande where
Jwasbome: And which(pake vnto me, and
that fwedre puto me taping
J qeuethpslande,bethall iende his Aungel bes
fozetbe, and thou Malte take a wpfe ynto mp
fonne from thence. Neuerthelefie pt the omar
tpl not agre to folowe the,thanthaltethou be
without daunger of this my oth. |
nlp bepngenot imp Core thpther agapne. S
And the Ceruaunt put ae hand vnderthe thyab
of Abzabam bys matter, andfwaretobpm ag
concernpnge thatmatter. And the feruaunte
toketen Camelles of the cameliles of bis maer
and Departed, and bad of all maner of qoodes of
bpysmatter vopeh bpm, and Code vp : and twente
to Weflopotamia , Duro the Cptpeok Raio.
And made bis Camellesto ipe downe withoute
the Cpticbp a Wwelleg ipie of water, at cuensa=
boute the tpmethat wemencome out to Dawe
water. Andbe a ani |
Lode God of mp malfer Abzabant, fende
me coed (pebethis dape, and Mewe mercpe Dn-
tompmatter Sbzabam. Lo, J tande pere bp
the well of water, and the doughtergafthe men
of this Cptiecome out to ya water: Howe ë
damefell to whom F fape, troupe Downe thp ppt
cher 3 prape the, that Jmapedpnke. PEWe
fapealfo: pnie and 3 topll gene thy Camel-
les d2inke-the fame is the that thou hatte ordep=
ned a tbp {eruaunte 3flapac : pea, and therebp
{hall 3 Enotoè that thou bate thewed mercp on
mpimnater, Andit came topaffe per be pad left
fpeabing:beboldc, Rebecca came out,thedougd.
ter of Wethucl, Coune to Wilca the wpte of Ra-
hor Abzabams bzother, eher pptcber bpon her
Moulder: The Dameflell was werp fapze fo loke
ppon, and pet a mapde and bnknowenofman.
nd fhe wentdowneto the well, and fplled per
pptcber,andcame vp. Andehe feruaunte run-
npng wito ber, fapde: let melup alptle water of
bp pptcher. And He lapde:dopnke mp Lorde.
Aud the balked, letdowneber pptcher vpon €
ber arme, and gaue bpm deprke. And when the
bad gpuen ppm dapnbe, He tapp plo


‘ynta thp-xfede pl gene, ro.


j a
TEP Cpu ea aà


———


P A a n


Abraham.


water fo: thy camel¢ alfo, ontpl thep baune don
kenpnougbe. Andthepoured out her pp teher
into thetrough baftlp,and ran agapne vntothe
well tofet water , and Dzewe foz all big camels.
And p man waidzed at ber: Wut pelde his peace,
towtte Dbpther the L020 bad made pistournep
protperous 02 ot : Anditfoztuned, asthe ca-
melspadlefte dDapnkpng, the man toke a golden
earpnere of balfe a [pele epg ht, and tito brace-
lettes for ber bandeg , of tennelpcles wepght of
molde, andlapoe : whole dougbter art thourtell
me J pap p is there roume in thp fathers boule
Foz sto lodge in: Dbe anfweredhim: Jam the
dougbter of Wathuelthe fon of pica , whiche
the bare punto Rabo: andlapde mozeouer vnto
bpm: we bane lptter and pronondze pnoughe,
and alfo roume folodge in.


D Andthemabowedbhymlelf, and wozhipped


the Lozde , andfapde: bleffed be the Lorde God
of mp matter Abzabam , whichecealleth not to
deale mercpfullpe and trulpe With mpmatter,
and bath bzought me ý wap to mp matters bzo
thersboule. And the danilell ran and told them
nd mothers boufe thele thinges. And Rebec-
ca bad abzothercalled Laban. tp)
And be ran out onto the man, evento the wel
fo2 affoone as be bad fene thecarpnges , and the
bzacelettes in bis {pers bandes (and berde the
wozdes of Rebecca his lifter, faping:thusfapd
theman onto me ) he wente oute nto theman.
And loo : he toode with the camels by the well
{pde. Andbelapde: come in thon bletled of the
Lode. Hberfore tandet thou wptboute ¢ J
bauedzeffed the boule, andmade roume foz fca-
mels. Anothenthemancame into p Houte: and
bevnbzpdled the camels, and(Laban) brought
iptter and pronondz¢ fo2 the camels , and Water
to wathebps feet andtbemennes feet that were
with bim,and fet meatebefoze him to cate. ut
befapd J wpl not eate, vntpl 3 bauelapde mine
errande. Andbhe fapde:fape on. And befapde: FJ
am Abzabams leruaunte,and God bath bleed


mp mapfer oute of mealure, that be is become:
Great, and bath qpuenbpm thepe, andoren, fpl-


uerand golde, menleruauntes , and mape fers
nauntes, camelleg , andatles. . :
And * Sara mp maters wpfebare poma
fonne, when the was olde and dnto dim bath be
puenalthatbe bath. And mp maer made me
weare , faping : thon thalte not take a wpfeto
mp fonne amonge the dougbters ofthe Cana-
nptes in whole lande Jowell. . |
But thou Halte qoo punto mp fathers boule,
and to mp binted,¢ take a wpfe Dnto mp foune,
And F lapde dntomp matter : peraduenture the
wpfewpll not foloweme: And he anfwered me


© The Lode, before whome F walke, wpll fende


bis Angell with the, and prolper thp tournepe,
and thou thalte take a wyte fo2 mp fonne of mp
kpnredeandofmp fathers boule. Chen thalte
thou be qpltiefte of mp curfe, whentbou cimeft
to mpkpnrede. AndpEthep qpucthe not one,
thou palt be qpitlefle of mp curfe. le
Andfo F came this dape wnto the wel, ¢ fayd
D Lozbe,the Sod of mp matter Abraham, pri


a
s


Guretis. go ;


befo nowe that thou makefimpicarnep which D ToN
Ago prolperousbebnbe J Mandebpthigtvelt f: ae |
of water and when å tpzgpncommetbfoztbta ~ = is
Dawe twater and Flapetobher:qeueme(Jpap | *

the)a lptle water of thp pptcher to dynie, and |
fhe fap tome:dzpnkse thou, ¢ 3 wpll allo deawe ;
fo: thy camelles: that fame is the wpfe, whome PERIS
the Lo2de bathe prepared foz mp matters fonne. ° |

And befoze J bad madeanende of (peakpnge
inmpne herte:bebolde, Rebeccacametosth,anw® = s
ber pitcher on ber (houldze,and the went downe | A
DNto tothe well,anddzewe water. And F fapde + ~ y,
tntober : qpue medipnke Jprapetbe. Ande StS eb
made batte and toke Downe ber pptcher from o£ a ee,
ber and fapbe: dapnke,and Jwpll qpue typ Cas > |
melleg Depnke alfo. a

Andy danke and (he gaue the camels dzinis i i
alfo.and Jalked ber lapinge: wholedoughter æ ` j
artthou’ &beanfwered:thedougbter of Ba- o”
thuel Mabozs fonne * whome Wilca base NEG e.ri
bpm. And J puttheearpnge wponberface, and uws  —
thebzacelettes vponber bandes. And FJbowed  j. A
mp felfe and wor bppped the Lozde,and blefled SCHA
the Lode Sodof mp malter Abraham twobpehe ` 4
bad brought metherpabtwapeto take mp maz \e
fers brothers dougbter Dnfobistonne:. Powe 5
alfo, pf pe wpll deale mercpfullp andtrulp with pei.
mp maffer,tell me:and pEnot,tell me allo that: j
mape tourne metotberpabt panad 0: totbelert.

Chen anlwered Laban and Dathuel,faping
‘Thpsfaping is proceded eucn ont of the Lode:
we can not therfoze Lape Unto the, epther goot,
oz bador: Beholde, Rebecca is befoze the, take
ber and goo,that themap be thp mafters fonnes
wpfe.cuenas God hath fapde: And when Aba Be e
hams feruaunt beard thep2 wozdes, be worthy: ee
pedthe Logdeflat bpontheearth. And thefer= :
uaunt toke forthe tewels of fpluer and tewels of met:
es: and rapment and gaue them to Rebesca. |

ind Duto ber bzotber eto her mother, be gaue ae
apftes , and thep dpd cateanddz2ypnke, both bes x
the men that were w bpm, and tarpedallnpabt.
And when thep role vp in the mozning He tapd ut
lette me departe onto mp matter. dyer brother. poten y
and ber mother anfwered: let thedamefel abpde Page
topth bea whple, and tt be but enenten daped,
and then (all the go. Helapde Dntothem,bpn- g


dze menot: beholde, the Lozdehath profperedD = = T “A
mp tournepe. Sendemeawape therfore, that Loy
“‘Jmape gonto a mater. And thep fapde we Kf .
wpl call the Damefel, and enquypzeat ber mouth. mee LB


Andthep called forth Rebecca, andfapde tnta tiit
ber: wplte thou qoo wpthtbhps man! Ande =.
anfwered : FJwpll goo. |

Soother let Rebecca thepa (pier qo andhee
nurfe,andD Abrahams (eruaunte, and bis men.
Andthep bleficd Rebecca, andfapdevntoher: ` —
Thou art our lifter, growetntothoufandtheus= — -
fandes xand thp leede poflefic the gateofthepz Sen En


a


a * Pei My
-Ah aa aa
aas


cnempes. Aud Rebecca arole, and herdamlels, i
and fet tbem bp bpon the camelles , and wente
tee wap after the man. And the Ceruaunt toke
iRebecca,and went bis wape: è
and Fla Pe ronen rom the wape A a i
of the well of the æ lIpupnacand feinge me ah 2 Ga
cdh


=F
=
l
Ẹ=


t Drp
=> P
4 i] ne
ELT et
i 4 iF
Fi
a
N


F


Ababa.


©
í,


-


be Divelt inthe fouth couttirep, and Slabac was
gone out to pay in y feldat the cuentide. Andhe
Ipft wp bisepes and faw thecamelscummpng .
And Rebecca lpfte wp her epes,e when te faw
Slabac, Me lpgbted ot thecamel,andfapse ynto
theleruaunt what man is this thatcémeth teal
kpng agapnit ngin the fetder Bnd the feruaunt
faid it is mp mater. Cherfore He toke per cloke
and put it about ber. And the feruaunt told Fla
bacallebpngesthathebaddone. And Zlabac
bought her into bis mother Saraestent,ttoke
Rebecca and the becam bis wpfesg be laued ber
glo Jfabacreceaued conforte after bis mother.
C The.rry. Chapter. viag
Cãb:abam taketh tcthuca to bps twpfe, ghe getteth wanp
chpidjen.a@bzabam bpetd and geueth all bps goons to Fla:
ba-.— oe genealogpy of Rlmael. Ebe bpzth of Jacob Clau,
Fau Celleth bps bpithrpabe foz a mee of pottage.
Care Braham peocededfurtber and tok
amare bpm a topte called Rethura, which
eae a Sopa bare bpm Simrant,and jechtan,¢
faire bes medang Widian, and Felvack,¢


Knipe site) beer a fobel,¢ Wib-
ain, Wilma duma,and Bata eH


Hundzcd and. rrevit. pere, and be fellfpcke, and
dpedand was lapde nto bis people. And thep
Dioelled from Weutlah buto Sur, that ts by the
boder of Egppte, as thou goek towarde p Ji-
firiang. And he Dyed inthe pretence of all bis bze
therne. Andtbelearethe generacpons of Fia-
bac Abzabams fonne: Abzabam begat Flabac.


€ And Babhac was fogtpe pere olde when he toke


Rebecca to wyFe, the doughter of Wathuell the
Sirpan of B)elopotamia, and{piicrto Laban
the Sirien. And 3zlabac made intcrceflpon wnto
the Lode for bps wpe: becaule the was baren:


@®enelis,


Molter


and the Lorde Was intreated of hpn, and Rebee
ca bis wpe conccaued, and pchpldzen froucto-
gether within ber. Cherfore the fapd:pt it Yuld
goo foto palle; what helpetbit tbat Jam wth
chploes woberfoze the wente to alte che Lode.
And the Lozdelapde nto her:thereare toma
ner of people in thp wombe, andtwo nacpons
Mall be deupded oute of thp bowels and theone
nacpon albe mpgbtper then the other, andthe
t+elder Halbe fcruaunte vnto the ponger.
Tbherfoze when her tpme was come to be dee
lpuered:bebolde, there were two twpnes inher
wombe. And he that came out fick wag red,and
He twas all oucr agit were a rough ga tment and
tep called bis name Elau.Andaftcr him, came
bis bzotber out, and bps bande holopnge Efan
bp the*bele. And phisname was called Jacob. oreta;
And Jfabac was. rl. pere olde whenthep were
bozne: and the bopes rrewe, and Elau became
a cunnpgebunteranda tpller ofthbeearth. wut
Jacob was a perfecteman, anddwelled inthe
tentes. Alabactoucd Efan, becaule be dpd cate
Of his venpfon, but Aebecca loud Jacob.
_ _ sacoblod pottage and Elau,came fromthe
felde and was fapntp and Elau lapdeto Jacob
fede me % pzape the with that redde pottage,foz
Jam fapntp. dnd therfore was bisname called atts.
*€dom. And Jacob (apde-fell nethisdapethy 6
sbicthrpg bt. Clau lapde:Loo, Jam at p popnt sp op,r01,0.
to dpe, and what pzofpte Hall thpsbpethrpabe
Domes Jacobanlwered + fweare tomethenthis serma.s
dape. And belware tobpm,and folde his bpath=
rpgie wnto Jacob. Chen Jacob gane Efau bred
and potage oftple. Andbe dpdeateanddapnée
and rofe Yp and wente bis wape. Jnd Elauree
garded not bys byzthepabte.
@ The.rrvi.Chapter.
C Hhelouey of Hladactowarde Abimelech. The pzompre
Mate bnio Ftabac and bps fete. jlabacis rebuked of abps
melee foz callpng bps wpfe bps (piter. She chpopag ofthe
Hhepherdes for thetociies, Flabacis co néozted, Zhe attone
ment betwene Abimelech and yfabarc,
Paw ey MO there cameaderthinthelande, —
Cp Vee pallpnge the fp2ite berth tbat was 3
S Aw Inthe dapescol Abrabam. and Jia:


em


titola es


Theis mp wpfe let themen of the place pulde mip e?


b Zn


Plahac. Genelis, Slava


Andit zepoa afterbebadbenetherelonge other. And Flabac fentthematwape. And they 5
tpme,that Abimelech kpnge ofthe Bhilitpang Departed from bpm in peace. Andthatfamedap
loked outat a wpndowe, andlawe Jlfabacipo? it Dappened, that Jfabacs Ceruauntescame and
tpnge with Rebecca Dis twpfe: And Xbimelech tolde ppm ofa well wbhichtbep haddpgged:and
called Jlabac,efapbde ers ofa furetptbp wpfe fapde vnto bpm, we baue founde water. Andbe


and wbp lapdi thou thetsmpfpitersCowbhde called itx Heba. And the name of che cptieiScal anote. | ;


"| n
$
i


a


Slabac anfwered: 3 tbougbtthat ympgbtper led Weer Seba vntothis dape. Efan was.rl. beteri
abduéturebaue dicd foz ber lake. Abimelech lapad pereolde, andhe tokea wpfe called Judith, the ere.,


wp bat tbou done this Ynto vsroneofthepeo dDoughterof Werp an PA dakare arada
< ety Ss lpgbtelp bauelpnebpthp wpfe,efo dougbterof Elonan Petbpte allo biche were
foulbe ‘thou bauebzoughtfpnnevponvs.and dilobedpent unto Flabac and Rebecca.
fo Mbimelech charged all bis people, faping : be @ Che.rrvit. Chapter.
that toucpetb this man o? bis twpfe, pal dpethe C Facod tealeth che bieCpnge from € Cau bp bps mothers
Death. Jlabac lowed in that lande andfoundin council Ftabactsfav, efautsconfozted. he hatred of
that fame pere an bundzcd bubels:and f Lorde “84 Warde jacob,
biefled bpm, and the man waredmpgbtpe, and
went Fozthe and grewe, tpll be Maserceadpnge
great, fo: be bad pofteffion of thepe, of oxen,and
ampabtp boutboloe,t therfozethe Bhiliftpang
abenup at bpm: fo: the Dbrliffpnes topped æ `
plied bp With carth alithe wels whiche bis fas
thers (eruauntes dpgacd in bps father Abra- SVS
bams tyme. And Abunelechlapde vnto Flabac Sh) ee
get the from bs,fo2 thou artmpagbtper then we a SBR ett
D a great deale. Cbherfoze Jlabac departed thence È Oe = NS
lel he ea Toran at te oat een E7 $<
And Jlapacreturning opggedagapnethe wel Freshers Nod it came topafle that when Ifa.
les of Water whiche thep Dpaaed inthe dapes of vA p bat when g 4


PET ea eae
= ea] -e ae he i i ay "3 e


Abzabam big father, whiche p Pbillftpans had Syaa Van OP mime (fo that be couldenot fe.)

Hoppedattertbedeathe of Abzabam,anDgaue RYN Ya We called Elan bis eldett fone and

tbem tbe fame names which bistatbergaucthbe ESES S fapde onto bpm. Wp fonne,and be
fabacd fernauntes Dpggedinthe vallep, and bpm: beream J. Andbefapde: bes


founde a well of liupnge water. Andthebeard- Holde,¥J amnotve olde,and knowe not the Daye
men of Gerar dpd firpuc with Flabacsherdmé of mp deth:andnowe therfozetake thp wepens,
fapinge:the waterig oureg. Chencalledhethe thy qupuer andtbp bolweand aet theto the fel=
contencpa WellxCleck, becaulethep trouewithbym. des, that thon mapft take me fome venifon,and
And thep dpgged another well, e troue for makememeatefuchas Flouc,and bepngettane
gnumpter, thatalfo. AndbecalledthenameofitxSitena that¥mapeeate,and ab mp loule mape blete
And then bedeparted thence, anddpgged ano- the,beforethat Jdpe. Bu :
ther wel,fo2 the tohichtbep frouenet:therfoze Ffabacfpake to Elau bis fonne, And Elau wet
Largenes. called De ttxRebobot),lapinge:the Lozdebath into thetelde, to catche venpfon, and tobpnee
nowe made VS rowme , that wemape encreace it. fa And Rebecca lapde vnto Jacob herfonne
bponthe carth. Andhewent vpthence,toWe- fapinge:Webolde J baue bearde thp father tal-
er Seba. Andthe Lozdeappered vntobpmthe kpng with €fau tbp bother andlaping:bapug
fame npgbt elapde:JamethbeGodof Abzabam me venpfon andmake me meate,t ay
thy fatber,tcare not, fo: Jam Withtbe,andwpl cate and bleffe the befoze f Lo2d,afoxe mp death
biefietpeand multiply thp fede foz mpferuaunt Mowetherfore mp fonne hearemp voiceinthat ©
Abzahams lake. Yndheburldedanaultcrthere whiche Jcomaunde the: get the tothe floche, €
and called vpon the name of the Lorde, and ppt ~bapng me thence two good kpds,p Jmap make
chedbpstente. And there Jlabacs feruaunteg meateofthem foe thp father, (ucheas be loueth.
bpggeda tell. Chen came Abimelech tobpm And Koan bapiig ittothy fatber,p be map eat
from Gerar: and Ahulath bps frende and bi- andthathemapd
F col big chefecaptapne. And Jlabac fayde vnto Taid Jacob to Rebecca his mother:bebold, Elan
thbem:wberfozecome pe tome, fepngpebateme mp bzother ig arough man, Jam{moth. &)p
and haue putmeaWwape from pour Cibichean- father Hallperaduenture fele me, J Hall feme
wene.rrt.c Cwpered:infepnge welawethatthexLozde was wntobpmas though J wet about to beayle him
with the,and welapde:lettherebenoweanoth andfo thal bebzpng a curle vponme,¢ Hot a ble
betwyrte vs,cucnbetwprte bs andthe, andlee Cpng:and big mother lapde wnto bym:yponme
bsmakea bonde wopththe, that thouthouldeft bethp cure mp fonne, only heave mp vopce,¢ go
doo vs no Durte as wehanenottouchedthe,and andfetchmethe. Aud Jacob went g fet them,s
as we baue done vutothenothpng but god,and dbzoughtthétopis mother.Andbismothermade -
fentetheatbape in peace,foztbouartenowetbe meatefucheas the knewe bisfatberloued. And ©
bleficd ofthe Lozde. Andhemadvethemafealte Rebecca tet qoodlprayment of her eldeftfonne |
andthep dpd eateanddzpnke. Andtheprofevp € fau, whyche wasin the boule wpth ber, and
bp tpmes inthemognpnge, andflwareonetoan puttbem bpd Jacob ber pongeft fonne € the pu
e


Es
a Si i k
Ppa ed SEE


mam +s ee gpm
a


C ber lonne Jacob lbe


fVervkpnnes of gotes bpon bis handes and dpon
thefmooth of bis necke. And the put the meate €
b2eade wobpche the bad prepared inthe bande of
| be came to bis father, be
apbe,mp fathers And be antwered:bere am 3,
who art thoumpfonnes And Jacobfapde ynto
bysfather : 3J am Elauthp eloch fonne, Jbaue
Done accozdpnge as thou baddel— me: vp and{pt
andeate of mp venpfon, p thpfoulemape bleife
me, And Wabacflapde wnto his fonne:howe cont
meth it that thou bate founde tt fo quycklp mp
onne? ieanflwerered: The Lozde thp Good
bzougbt ittomp bande: Chen fapde Flabac Yn-
to Jacob,come nereand let mefele the mp fonne
whether thou be mp fonne Efau oznot. Then


went Jacob to Jlabac bps father, and be felte


fapde : the vopceis Jacobs vopce, but the t


Degarethebandes of Etau. Andbeknewe bpm fenta
not, becanle bis bandes were rough as big bzo- onto


ther Efaus bandes:and fo be bleled bpm.


Andhealfkeoppm:art thou mp fonne Efan?


And befapde,that Jam. Chenlapde he:bapng
meand let me eate of mp fonnes venplon , that
mp foule mapebleflethe. And be bzrougbt bym
andbe ate. Andbebzought bpm wpne alfo,and
bedanke. Andbhpsfatber Habaclapde nto
bypm:comenere,and hyieme mp fonne. Andhe
_. Went onto bpm andbpfled bym. And be felled


eur, vib the fauoure of bpsrapment,and*bletlcd hpm, g
Deberia fapde: gee, thelmell of mp lonne ts asthe finell


oratelbde a mobpche tbe Lozdebath bleed. God
genue the of the dewe of Meuen,and of thefatnes
of th¢earthb,and plenty of cone and wpne. Beo-
ple be thy feruauntes, andDnacpons bowe Ynto

— the. Welozdeouerthp beethzen,e thy mothers
chpldzen teupe wntothe.Curfed bebe that curs
feto the.and bleficd be be chat blefieth the.

- Jthappened that alloncas Slabac babmade
anende of vlefipnge,and Jacob was ferace gone
ont frome the pretence of Ffabachis father, thein
came Efau His bother from bps buntprge,and
Had made alfomeateandbzroughteit vntobpa
fatber,and fapde unto bys father: let mp Father
arpfcand cate of bps Connes venpfon, that thp
foule mape pr me. Then bisfatber Fflabac
fapde vnto lpm: whoart pi beanfwerd: Jam
tbp cloch fonne €fau, and Flabac was greatip
aftonped out of mefure,andfapde : Mbiche ts pe
and woperets be then that bath punted venpfon:
andbzoughte it me ¢ € Fhaueeaten of all before
thou camme t, and pane bleed bpm, and be pal
be bleffcd, Cben Efan beard the wozdeg of bis
fathers hecrped out greatly and bptterlp aboue
mealure, €lapde wnto bis Fatber: blefe mealfo
my father. Wibo anlwered, thp brother came w
fubtplte,¢ bath taken aware thp blelpng. And

__ pelapaeagapne: Hemape well be called Jacob
F foz be bath vndermpned me now.it.tpmes:fp2t
be tokeatbapemp bpztbryabt and fe: now bath
betaken awape mp diefipng allo. Andbelapde
batt thou keptnener a bleflpng fozmes
sabacanfwered andfapde wnto Elan : be-
holde, 3 haue made bpm thp lozde andall bys
mothers chpldzenhaue 3 made hts fecuauntes.


ale
=
$


t,


g '


Genelis,


Hozeoucr wip cone g wpne paue J Tablpted


bpm, ohatcan Ido wats me Hoke Mp Tonnes
And Chat eet vntobis father: bat thou but

that one blefipnae mp father r bleie me alfo mp
fatber:fo ipren vp €lau bis vopce and* i Debearii.#,
he Slabac his Father anfwered and fapde Yn

toby: bebolde,thp Dwellpnge place Halbe the

fatneffe of the carthe, and of the dewe of Deauen
Eromaboue. H And with thp lweard hale thou

lpue and Halt be thp bzotbers feruaunt. Andie

wll come to palle that whentbou thalt get the
mafrpe, thou tpalte loofe bys poke from of thp s
neche, And Elauxbated Jacob, becaule of tye TEN
ee that ig father blefed bym withal.

And Efu fapt inbig herte: Thedapes of mp G


@ The. rrviti.chapter.
« Faced ts Cent inte 3efopotamia to Laban toz a topfe,
iau marpeth an imacete. jacob ozempth a wreme Coe


is prompicd. zach maketh a bows,
PAM Adfo Alabac called Jacob ex bleflen A
RAL tos Dom andcharged bpm, efapde vnto Sarrbita
ai bpm: fe P rake nota wopfe of f doughs
Eo) ters of Chanaan, but arple and get p
to G)efopotamta to f boule of Wethuel chp mo=
thers father: ¢ tbere take thea wpfe of p Dough
ters of Laban thp mothers brother.And god al
mpabep bleffe the,¢ mabe the to encreale,¢ mul-
tiplp che ý tbou mapeft be a nombze of people, ¢
geuethe p biefilpng of Xbzabam : tothe eto tbp
ede w the, that ¢ mapit polele p land(woberin
i arta ftraunger) which God gaue vnto Xba-
am. Thus 3tabac fent forth Jacob. And De wee
to Helopotamia Ynto Låban:fonne of Wetu-
eltbe Spirien, € brother to Rebecca Jacob g E-
fausmother. Gben Efaufawe p glabachbad
bicfed Jacob, æ fent bpnito*<)clopotamia,to
fet binva wpre thence,andp as be bleficd bim be 2755F
gauc hima charg faping:p halt not take a wife
of thedoughters of Canaan andy Jacot had o-
beped bis father mother € has goneto Lelo-
potamia:¢ Efau fepngealfop the doughtcrs of
€ banad plefednot fabae bis father-then went
be into {linael,t tobe vuto the Wines which be
ad Sabala p doughter of Jfmaell Abrahams
onne,the (piter of 2a batoth to be bis wpe. za
cobdepartcd frå Weer Seba,tocome ynto Hå-


tan and came unto a place bp chaunce,€tarped


therealinpabte, becaule the tunne was Downe.
p pabte, on An


ni ee A


Jacob. Genelts,


And toke a Fone of the place and put it wnder
bisheade and lapde bpm downe in p fame place
to od And He dzeamed: and behold there tode
a ladder ppon the earth and the toppe of it rea-
ched bp to beuen. Andle.p angels of God went
bp and Downe bponit:pee,and God ode bpon
it,andlapde. Jamthe Lowe God of Abraham
C thpfatber,¢ the God of Flabac:the lande which
thou flepe ppon wpll d gene theand thp Cede.
And thp (cde thalbe as the dulk of the earth,and
thou thaltelpzede abzodeto thew. to theealk
tothe nozth andto thefouth. And chozowe the
and in thp feed (hall all the kpneends of the carth

be bleffed. And fe Jam With che, and toplbe th
keper tivall places Mobpther thou goet, and wy!
bapngethe agapne tntothislande: nether wpll
FJleauethe vutpll J bane made goodall that J
baue prany fedthe. tben Jacoh Mas awaken
Out of bis lepe, be fapde : furelp the Lorde is in
this place, and J was not aware. -And be thas
afrapde and fapde : bowe fearfull is thys place?
it ignone other but cuen the honfe of God g the
gate of Henen. And Jacob Kode vp earlp inthe
D monpng,andtoke thettone p he bad lapde Wn-
Ge. rrid. Der his Deade, and pptched it vp an ende xg pow
redople inthetop of it. Andbecalled thename
Phoule ofthe place + Bethell, but thename of thecptie
Of Sod. wascalled Lus before tyme. And Jacob vowed
a vowe,lapinge : PE God wpll be withme and
wpll kepe mein tbis fournep whiche F yos, and
wopll qeue me b2eade to cate, and clothes to put
on, fo thatZ comeagapn Ynto mp fathers boufe
infafetpe, then hall tbe Lozde be mp God, and
thys fone whiche J bauelet bp an ende, thalbe
Goddess boufe : and of allthat thou thalte qeue

me, Wpll geue the tenth onto the.
The. rric. Chapter.

Iacob chmeth to Lad g leructh. bii.pere for tabeLica


thas brought to bis bed in teade of Rabel. De marpeh them
both/¢ feructh pet. bil.pere moze for Mabel. Lea cdcivorts,


x f A (| Hen Jacob Ipfte bp his feteand came
nis} hess) (nto theeaftecountre. Andas belo-
Se ked aboute, beholde there was a well
: NG inthe Felde , and thre flockes of (pepe
lape therbp (fo2 at that wel were the fhlockes wa
tevedD and there wasa great fone vpon the wel
legmouthe. <Andthpther wereall the flockes
brought,and theptouled the Fone from the wel
les mouth,and Watered the hepe € put the fone
agapne biito the toel les mouth ynto bps place.
And Jacob fapde nto them* bzerh2en, whence
be per And theplapde:of Haranare we. Andhe
fapde-Dnto them : knotwe pe Laban tbe fonne of
abo: Thep lapd:-ive know bpm. And be fapd
wntothem,is bein good belth: And thep fapde,
be igin good helth,¢bebolde,his dourbter Ra-
bewometh with the hepe: Andbelaypde,lo,itig
pet but bpe dape nether isit tyme that the catel
thuldebe gathered together, tater pe the Hepe
15 and go q fede them. And thepfapdeAwe map not
ontplall the flockes be brought Sahat fe etpll
thep roll the fone from the welg mouth, æ fo we
water our Hepe. epee Depettalked w them,
Rabel came With ber fathers thepe,foz the kept


them: And allone ag Jacob fawe Rabel, p dou- - a Che.xrx. Chapter.


aa. bis mothers brother, tbe epr
of Laban bis mothers bzotber, be ent androu
led the fone from the wels mouth, and hatred
the flocke of Laban bps mothers brother. And
Jacob kpiled Rabel, and lpft vp bis vopceand
YWept:¢ Jacod tolde Rabel. ý be was ber fathers
brother and Rebeccastone. Cherfozeranne the
and tolde ber father. And it bappencd when La:
ban beard tell of Jacob his {pers fonne, be ran
tomete bpm:and embzaced bpm æ kpiled bpm, Æ
bzougbt bpm to bis boule. And be tolde Lavan
alltbematter. Cowbom Laban fapde: well p
art mp boneg mp fepe. And be abode with bim
the fpace ofa moneth.And Laban lan puto Ja
cole Though p bemp bother, thuldelf thoutber
fore lerue me foz nougbt:tell me, what thal tbp
wages ber Laban had two Dougbtees: Cyeel=
del called Lea and thepongeft Rabel. Lea was


tender eped, but Rabel was betotpful ewell fa: D


uord. And Jacob loucd Rabel,andlapd: 3 wpl
ferue the. vit.pere foz Rabel thp pongelt dough-
ter. Laba anlwered:it is better i J geue her tbe
then to another man:bpdew me. And Jacobfer
ued. bit. peres Foz Rabel and thep Cemed puto
bpm but a fewe dapes,fo2 the lone be bad to ber.
And Jacob lapde bnto Laba:gqeueme mp wife
that J mape lpe w ber. foz mp daes ar fulfplied
Chen Laban gathered together all the men of p
paot madea feat. And when euen was come

e toke Lea Dis dougbter Ebzought ber to Jpm:


and be wentxtn unto per. Jnd Laban gaue vn- Bertie.


to Dis dougqbter Lea, silpha pis mapde,to beber


feruaunte.c# (zo wh ome when Jacob came in accodpnge ga


to thecutome,) AND when themozninge thas come
bebolde it wag Lea. Tbhenfapde beto Laban,
therfore bat thou plapd thus x me? dpdnot F
Cerne the foz Rabel woberfoze then bat thou be-
gpledmeLaban anlwered:it is not p maner of
this place,to cp eg ponge befaze the eldeif.
Pale out this weke, then thall fis allo beme
uen the fo? the ferutce which p thaltierue me pet
bti.peres moze. And Jacob dpd even {o,¢ aled
out that weke, and ‘sd be yane bym Rabe bis
bongbter to wpfeallo. And Laban gaueto Ra
bel bis Ddughter, Bilba bis handinapd to be ber

tuatit.Sy0 lap be bp Wabel alfo,tloued Rabel


moze the Lea,x Elerued bimpet. vit.peresmoze. ee. rrri,t


tben the Lozdelawe that Lea was defup
fea: pe made herfrutefull. And Rabellremap-
ned baren. AndiLea conceaucd and barea fonne
and callcd Dys namie Ruben, foz the fayde: the
Lo2de þatbloked bpon mp trpbulacpan. Mowe
therfoze mp bulbande wpilloue me. Andie con
ceaticd agapneand bare afonne, andfapde : the
Lorde bath bearde that J am delppfen, and bath
therfore geucnmethpstonneal{o, andthe cal-


led big name + Simeon. And the conceaned pet, &Pavatin


“Hatov.


€


Sene riid


E


F


andbare a fonne,and fapde: nowe thig once wyl ©


myp bulbandekepe me companp,becaufe Ybane
bozne bym thre Lonnes: and therfore was bps
name called Leui. And heconceaued pet agapn
and bare afonne fapinge : nowe wpll F papte
the Lozde : therfoze the called bpsnanie Tuda,
and lefte bearpnge.


Rache!


~~ Mabel Leahepag both bareng ene Cheps mapoens bute
chep: buttrand , ecbep bate pra chplbzen. Jacob veceaneth
Zaban inthe conceaupage of ¢t
rewarbe fo; bps Cerupcre,. |
ee ee Abell when Helate that the bare
ie Te yy Jacob no chpld2en , (he enuped ber
Vora ted piter audlapd tnta Facob : Grue
EE WS Me chplozen,o2els Jam butdecd.
ESSAN And Jacob was woth wpth Ra-
` Hell fapinge: Am J in Goddes teade which ke-
_ petbFrome the tbe frute of thpwomber Then
{pefapde: bere is mp mapde Bilba, goo in vnto
ber, and'the pall beare pon mp lappe, that J
map be encrealed bp ber. And pe gauc hpm Wil
ba ber bandinapbeto wpfe. And Jacob went in
nto ber, and Hilha conccauedand bare Jacob
afonne. Then fapde Rabell. Godbath geuen
fenrence onmp fpde,¢ Dath alfo beard mp vopce
and bath geuen me afonne. Cherfoze called the.
ppm Dan. Jnd Bilba Rabels mapd conceaued
agapne, bare Jacob another (One. And Rabel
Capde with godlp wzeltlpnges bane J wzeltled
Fo with mp [piter g baue gotten the bpper bande.
"oS And the calledhis name, NepHtali. When Lea
A yg awe that the bad left bearpng Wwe toke Silpha
_* "per mapde,¢qaue ber Jacob to wpe. And Sil-
ba Leagmapde bare Jacoba fome. Thenfapd
eins lucke:and called higname Gad. And
Silpha Leas mapde bare Jacob another Conne
` Chen fapde Lea bape? ant ¥,fo2 the Doughters
Wplicall me bleficd. And called his name Afer.
b ~ And Ruben went out inthe dapes of f wheat
= parein foundemandzagozas in the feldcs æ
bought them nuto bis mother Lea. Chen fapd
Rabel toLea:geue me of thp fonnes mandzaqo
ras. To whom Lea aulivcred: Fit not pnough
J thattbou bafte taien awape mp bulbande but
woldeft take awapemp fines mand2agozas al-
| for Chen lapde Rabel: wel,let bpm lepe with f
$ thisnpght,fo2 thy Connes Handagozas, And
| Jacob camefrom thefeldes atcuen,¢ Lea tent
© oute tometebim, and fapde:come into me,fo2 F
baue bought the w mp fonnes mandzagozas.
And be flepte with herp npgbt. And God Heard
Leatl atthe conceaued and bare Dnto Jacob f
fpfte löne. Then fapde Lea Sod hathgeuenme
areward, becaule J gaue mp mapberito my pul
band, + (ecalledpym Fachar. And Leaconcea
ued pet agapne,ebare Jacob thelirt fonne.aAnd
Lea fapde:Godhath endued Rive a good dow-
f


¢ Depi and kpodes, Jacobs


rp. Rowe wpll mp hulbande dwel with me, be-

caule J baue bogne bpm {pre fonneg: and called

bis namesabulon. after that Me bare a dough-

gerrig, Ct AND Called beename x Dina. Jnd God remë-
_ Berrie. ben RabeLbe beard ber,gmadeberfruteful: fo
D thatthe conceaued and bare a fonne, andfapode:
OGodbathtaken awape mp rebuke. And He cal-

~ ledbigname Jofeph faping: The Lord geuc me
petanotberfonne. Andatloone as Rabell pad

boone Jofeph, Jacob fapdeto Laban : fendeine


awapetbat J mape go vntompneotone placc
contrep,qene me mp wpucs andmpcehildzenfor |


whome J bane ferued the, glet me go:Foz p kno-

a weft what erupce J baue done the. To whome

Laban anfwered,pt J baue found fauout in thp

sen, prir a PAVE Eo? Iluppote that the Lozd harhxblefico
* ie


a


meto: thy fake)appopnt what thp reward (hal
be,and 3 wpl gene tt the. But be fapd wnto him
thou knowelt what lerupee J bane done Pp, and
in what takpng thy catell bane bene pnder me:
Fozit was but lptle that thou babddeft before J
came, and Howe itis encreafed intoa multitude
and the Lode bath bleffed the for mp fake. Wut
nowe when Hall J make proupfpon foz mpne
owne boufe allor And be lapde: what thal J thé
genue ther And Jacob anliwered:thou Halt geue
menotbpnge at all, pEP toplt do this one top ng
fozime, and then wpll y turneagapneand fede
thy pepe, and keye them.

J Wypll go aboute all the pepe thig dape, and
feperate From themall the wepe that are {potted
and of bpuerie coloures, and all blacke Hepe a=
monge the lambes,and the partye,and the {pot-
tedamonge the kpddes: and the fame fhalbe mp
tetbarbe.Sn0 thal mp rpqbitelties anfwere foz
tne to mozotve , and tpallcomefoz mp rewarde
befoze thp face, and cuerp one that is not fpeck-
lede and partpe amonge the goates , andblacke
amonge the Mepe,the fame halberbeft with me

And Laban lapbe:Go to, wold Godit might
be inh od tothp fapinge. Cherfore pe toke
out thelame dape thebe qoates that were pat=
tpe and of Dpuers colour, and all the the qoates
that were lported and porge coloured, and all

AD wWhpte in thent,andall the blacke amonge

epe and put them inthe keppna of bis fonnes
and fet thze dapes iournep betiwprte bpm felfe €
Jacob, And fo Jacob kepte the rete of Labang
(bepe. Jacob tokeroddes of arene popular, haa
fell and of the chefte nut trees, and pylled tebpte
ttrabes intbem , and made the whpteapere inp
rovdcs.:# (sur thep that were whole, remapned grenezand
thus twas itmadea barpabiecoloure,) Jnd put theroos
whiche be had pplled, euenbefoze the thepe, in p
Gutters ¢€ Watering trougbes when p Hepe cam
came fo Dzinke:p tpep buld conceaue then thep
caine Co Oepnise. Bnd the thepe conceaued before
the rods,¢ bought furthlabes Fraked,fported,
and party. And Jacob parted f lambes and tura
nedthe faces of p hepe towarmtpottedthpnacs
and foward all maner of blacke, p was among
the hepe of Laban nawelp, puttynge bis one
flockes bp them felfe, not puttpnge them with
Labans epe. And it fortunedp wicuerp ram-
mpnge tyme ofthe ttronger pepe, Jacoblappe
the roddes before theepes of the hepe tn the qut
fers: namelp, that be mpgbt make thé conceaue
befozé the roddes. wut when p eve were feble,
be put them not in. And fo p febler were Labas,
andthe fronger Jacobs. And p man encrealed
exceadpnalp,and pada great flocke, mapdefer=


Hautes, and men feruauntes camels andalig,


The. reri. Chapter. ret
@ afthe cOmaundement of G00, Jared departcd from ty
ban, aud toke bps gootes wpth bpm. Racheli eatery hee
fath:rs pmages. daba foloweth 3a:0b. The cournaunt bez
itene Laban and jacob.


9 Aonnesfaping: Jacob bath takena-


WEA Ywareallp was our fathers, of our.


Ai ‘athers goods hath be gottenal chig
sud Jacob bepelde thecountenaunce
bii OfLas


€


ill


A?


Jacod,


%5


Gerrbitia
Se. Trriti.c,


ge, rrrbiil,


of Laban and bebolbde.it was not as pefkerdbape
and perpefterdap. And the 10d Wa hes nto ja-
cob, turne agapne into the lande of thp Fathers,
andtothbp kpnred, and J wpl be with the. Chev
fore Jacob lent andralied izabeland Lea tothe
fclde nto bys Locke , and{apde vnto them: 3 fe
poure fathers countenaunce pit ig not towarde
meas pelterdape ,andperpeiterBape. Wut the
God of mp father hathbenewpthme. And pe
knowe bowe that J baue ferucdpoure father w
allmp mpabt. wut pourfather path dilceaned
me and chaunged mp wages. r-tpmes: but god
fuffced byninot to burte me. ben be fapde, tbe
potted fhall bethy wages, then ail p hepe bare
{potted. And toben be fapde:the Kraked thall be
thp reward thenbare all the Depe traked:thus
hath God takenawape pour fathers Hepe and
geuen them me. But inrammpngetpme ithap=
pened,that Zlpfted bp mpneepegandfaweina
Deanie, AND bebolbe the rammes leaped bpon p
fhepe that were kraked, potted and party. And
the Angell of Godl{pake bnto meina dzeamne,
fapinge: Jacobs And Janlwered:heream J.
And he lapde :lpfte bp nowe thpne epes, andie
allthe rammes leappng bpon the pepe that are
raked, {potted and partpe : Foz Phauc fene all
that Laban doth butothe, Jam p God of xWe-
thell, wbere thou anopnted{t the Tone, ¢ where
thou bowed a bowe ynto me. Powe therfore
arpfeand get the * out of thps countre, andre-
turne butothelande where thou walk bome.
hen anlwered Rabel, and Lea, andlapde
brite bpm:ba ue Wea pozrponandinberptaunce
in outtathers boule? Doth not be count Ys euen
as fraungers: foz be bath fold Ys,and bath euë
eaten Dp our moncp. But alltherpches whiche
Godbhath taken from oure father, that ig onreg
and our chpldzens. And nowe whatloener God
bath fapde vntothe,thatdo. Chen Jacobrole
bp, andfet bps fonnesand pues bp bponca=
mels,and carpedDawape all brs flockes, andall
bis fubfaunce whpcbe be bad procured, bps rp-
ches and pofleffions which be bad gottenin We
fopotamia, fo? to qoto Flabachps father nto
thelande of Canaan. Wut Laban was gone to
x there bis thepe, and Rabell bad Collen ber fa-


Hi, We, piiie thers pouner. And Jacob tale awape thebart


of Laban the Sirpan, in that be tolde bpm not
tbatbe fed. So fled beand all thathe bad, and
made ym felfe redy, and pafled ouer the rpuer,
and fet bis face trepgbt towardethe mount Gt


D lead. Cipontbe rye de Dapeafter, wasit tolde


Laban that Jacob fed. Chenbe tokebps bze-
then wpth bpm, and folowed after bpm leuen
dapes tournep , and ouertoke bpm at the mount
Gilead. And GodcametoLabanthe Sirpan
ina Dpeamebp npagbt.andlapde Duto bpm:take
pede that thou {peake not to Jacob oughtefaue
good. And Laban ouertoke Jacob: and Jacob
bad pytcbhed bis tente inthe mount. Jnd Laban
with bis becthzen pptchen there tent alfo vpon
the mount Stlead. And Laban (apde to Jacob:
UWibp ball p this donc to fealeawape mp barte
and carpe atoape mp Doughters asthougbthep


pad bene taken captpue iwpth thelincardes


Genes,


 AGberfoze wentelk thou awape fecretelp $-
knotone tome, and dpdelk not tell me, that 3
mpabt baucbzought the on f wape with mirth
{png pnge.tpmrell and harpe, and batt not fuffe
ted Metokpile my Spld2en and mp Dougdters.


‘Thou watt+a foole now to do tt, foz en able ierit:
t


fodopoueuyl. Wut fGodofpour father fpake
tntome pelterdape, faping take bede that thou
{peake not to Jacob ought faue good. Andnow
thougbe thou wenteft thp wape, becaulep lon-
geft after tbp Fathers boule, pct wherfore bate
thou tollen mp goddes. Jacob anliwered g fapd
to Laban: becaule J was afrapde,and thought
that thou wolvet bauctakenawape thp dough
terg from me, uto» (whereas thou lapetthefte to mp
eparse) With whome loenet thou fpndelk thy gov
ded, let bpm dpe, bere before our brethren. Seke
that thpneisbp me, and take ttto the. Wut FJa-
cob woplt not that Rabel dad tollen them. Che
went Laban into Jacobs tente, and into Leas
tentes into the two mapdens tentes:but found
themnot. Chen went be out of Leas tente and
centred into Rabelstente.and Rabel bad taken
thepmages and puttbemin the camels trawe,
and fate dotone vponthem.- And Laban ferched
all the tente:butfounde themnot. Chen fapoe
theto ber father: mp Lo2d¢,benot angrp that J
cannotrple bp befoze the, fo: tbe cuftome of we
menis come Dpon me. Solearched he but found
not thofepdols.And Jacob was woth, echode
with Laban. Jacob alfo anf wered and {apceto
bpm: what haue J trelpaced 02 what baue Jof-
fended, that thou folowcdett (o after ner Chou
bali fearched allmy tufe, and what bate tbou
Found of al thp houthold ttutfer put it bere befoze
thp becthzen ¢mpne p thep map tudae bet wprt


ii Pa.rbic


E
ae


3 both. Webold: Thistwentp pere baucy bene 3


withthe, thy bepeandtbp qoates bauc not bene
baren,¢€ the rammes of thp locke Dauc y not cas
të. Ubat focuer was tozne of beftes, J bzought
itnot onto the, but madeit good mp felfe : of np
band did P require it,euenas it ý was ftollé bp
Daye oz nygbht. Wp dap the heate conlumed meg
ee eit flepe Departed Fro mpne
epes. Thus pauc 3 bene. re. pere in thy boule,
and {erued thex.xitit.peres foz tbp.ii.dougbters


andfpreperes fo? thy pepe, and thou bat chat: St-mir.t


ged mp rewarde ten tpmes. And ercept the yod
of mp father the od of Abrabam, and thefeare
of glabac bad bene with me, furelp thou badoet
nte me albapenowe all emptye. Wut God be-
belde mp trpbulacyon, ¢tbelaboure of mp ban-

des and rebuked the pelterdape. }
Laban antwercd g lapde vnto Jacob : thele
doughters are mp dDoughters.andthele chplozen
are mp chplozen , and thele (hepe are mp epe,
and alltbat thou fepft, is mpne. And what can
J do thpsdape yntothelemp doughters,o2 vn-

to thepze chpldzen whpche thep haue borne?
Rowe therfore come on and let bs make abond
Jand thou, whpch mape be a yptnefic betwene
theandme. Chentoke Jacoba ifone, andfette
it op ancnde, and Jacob fapde vutobhps bze-
thaen: gather tones. Andtheptoke ones,
andmade an Peape, and thep dpd cat there ee T
tpe


Jacob.


Genelis,


zebrane eheheape. AndLabancalledite Jegar Dabas — Andhe tarpcdthertdatlamenight, etokeok D


of wpties.
on


Tumulus
telpicans,
| ow
x A tote
- ppl,
©


dutha, but Facobcalled it Gilead. x ether of eh ens
accozopnge to the propertpe of bis owne language.

—— Shenlapde Laban:this heape isxwpenetle
bettwene the and me this dape: therFoze ts itcal-
led Gilead. oncebat is a berape of wptnefe and ¥ 43)63-
pab:fto2 be fapde. Che Lozde loke bet tocne me
and the toben toc ar departed one From another:
PEtbou palt vere mp doughters, oz Malte take


Other wpuesbelpde mp dougbters. Hereisno


se
J
a
& robbie
ārmpi
7 c$
E aa
9
p”
5
5
x
Strib.


mau with vs:bepold, God be toptnellc betwprt
gandme. And’ Labanlapde mozcouer to Fa-
cob : bebolde, this beape and this marke whiche
“SZ bauc let bere,betwprte me and the:this beape
be wptnelle and alfothismarke that F wyl not
come ouct this beape to the,andp thale noccome
ouet this beape ¢ this matke vntome: todo any
barme. The Godof Abzabam,p god of abor,
ann gop of toep? fathers be iudgebetwprt vs.
nd Jacob {ware by the fearcof bps father
Flaac. Chen Jacob dpd facrifpce bpon p mount
andcdlledbis bzethzentoeate beeade. Andthep
Dpd eate bread Etarpedallnpabt mthe byl. and
carip tntbemoznpng Laban rofe wp and kpffed
bis chplozen g big Dougbters, and blefled them g
Laban departpng, went onto bis placeagapne.
E The.rrrii. Chapter.
ar She bitponotthe Angels. Jacob Cendeth pretentes bonto
bis brother ciau. Howe be wiekled with che angel Wyiche
chaunged bis name and called bem Jirak
een dit Jacob went forth on bys iourney.
Xndtheangels of Godcame, andinet
fa Vibpm. And wher Jacob lawe them, de
-A (apne thisis Godoes bot: andcalled p
nance of p Came place * Mahanaim ~w( that ts en-ce,
mpe) Ano Jacob Cente neflengers before bpmto
fan bts bzotber, bnto tbhelandex of Heir e ede
felde of Edom. And pe comaunded them faping
Thug thal pefpeaketo mp Lorde Clan: thp icc
uaunt Jacob fapth thus: 3 baune fogeourned and
bene a ie with Laban ynto thpstpine F
bauc oren,afics and epe, men feruauntes, and
weinen {eruauntes, and bane fent tothetoit mp
Loz0e, 4 Jmapefpnde graceinthplfyabt. Bnd
the meflengers came agapneto Jacob fapinge:
we came onto thy brother Elan, and becometh
agapnt the and bath fourebundzeth men wopep
bym. Wut Jacob was qreatlp atrapd,and wp tt
not which wape toturne bpm felfe,anddeupoed
tie people that was with bpm and the Hepeand
orenand camels into.tt.companpes: andlapoe:


|
A
wE


PE fau come tothe one parte andlmpteit, the


otber pall Caucittelfe . at |
And Jacob fapde aqapne : D God of mp fa-

ther Jbzabã and God of mp father Flaac:lozde

Dhichfapoett wutome*returne Yuto thp coun-


€ treandtotby bpriced,¢ 3 wll do all well with


es andtrutbe whycbe thou balte hewed vnto

bp feruaunte. Eor wpth my tafe came Fouer
this Jozrdane,and now haue J gotten.tt.dzones
Delpuer me from p bandeg of mp bzother Efan
for gfeare bpm:lech be wpll come and finpte the
mother wpth the chplozen.€ hou fapdet: 3 wopl
furelp Dothe good, emake thplebeas the fand of

- Fhelee, which can not be nombzed fog multpruo.


the. J am not wo:thp of the leat ofall the mer-
€


that wbiche came to bande, a prelentefor Efau
dis brotper.it.bundged the qoates anbd.rr.pegoa
fes.tt.bundzed pepe and.rr.rãmeg:tbirtp mule)
camels witb thelr coltes.cl.kpne,¢.x-bulles. rr.
che affesand ten foles : and delpuered them inta
the band of bis {eruauntes,euctp dpouebp them
felueg and fapd wnto bis feruaŭtes : go fozth bes
fore me,and put afpace betwprt.drouc,¢ droue.
And be commaunded the formo fapinge.

PE Elau mp bzother mete the and are the fap
ing: whofe art thou,and whpther golt tbou:and
whotcare thele that goo betoze ther p palt lape
thep be thpleruaunt Jacobs, tit isa pectent fent g
puto mp Lozde Clan, and bebdolde, be bpm felfe ~
commieth after bs : And fo comaunded pe chele-
cond, and the rbp2de, ¢ all that folowed the dz0-
hes faping of this maner:fe that pou {peak nto
Efau when pe mete bim, and fape mozeoucr:tbp
fernaunt Jacob alfo cometh after vs,fo2 be fapd
J wpl peace is wath withtbepzeftent that go
eth befoze me, and afterwarde J wylfebpmmp
feife,if peraducnture be wpl receaue meto grace
So went the pefent before bun andhetarted al
that nightintbe companp, and rofe vp thefame
nygbht and toke bps two wpucs eis two maps
Deng, and big eleucn fonnes,¢ went ouer ý Foo2d
FJabos. And he toke chen e fent thé oucr p rpuer
and Cent ouer that be bad, tarped bebyndebpm-


felf alone. Andtherexwozetled a man weep Opnt oree.rii.v,


Diitothe beeakpng of p dape. And when Pelaw +
tbat be could not pzeuaile agapnit bim, be finote
bpm ynder the thpe, and the fpnowe of Jacobs


tbpe panke, as be wattled withbpm. Andbe


_fapd: let me goo fo? the oip bzeaketb. W3bicbe
anfwered: J wpll not let th


eqo,ercepte p blelfe
me. And belapde vntobpm: what isthp names
ic anfwered: Jacob. Pé (apde:tpou Walt be cal


led Jacob nomosre, buts Zlracl. 4E0243 apzynce Ge. erry.


bat thou WealtelcdD Mpth God: and wpthiman,
and baite preuapled.

And Jacob alked ppm fapinge: tellme thy
name. nd be fapd, toberfoze dok thou fo alke af


fer mpxiiame/and heblefled ppm ther. And Jaz 29H
cob calledthe name of the place x Wheniel, fo2 J Ehe race
baut ene God face toface,and mp Ipfe fs prefer: 0500,


ued. Andas he went ouer Phenicl, the onne role
bpon bim and be halted vponpisthpe. And ther
foze isit that the chpldzen of Fracl catenot of p
fpnow that Manke in that place of rhe thye, wn
totpis Dape:becaule that be touched the place of

Jacobs thyeinthe (cnowe that Honcke.

C7Tpe. recati Chapter.
> tse and Jacob areagy ree: ano gjacob rame (nto

ease a cob lpfipnge bp bpscyes, loket, ¢ ¥
za fenlbebolbe Efan came , Daupuge Wpri
* ro hpm foure bundled men. And pede-


arg ort dl
Sy


ol.xty.


Karab.

~ s. mdfdlon bpsneckeand kpiied bpm, and thep
wepte. And be lyfte vphps epes , and fate the
wertiet,and the childzen,and Capde:whenceball
ve thoutbeles ox (Ando ther belongehntothe: ) And
+3 beanfwered :thep are the chpldzen whiche God
bath aeuen tby feruaunt. Chan caine the map>
dens forth, their chpldzen, and dpd thepz obep=
faunce,Lea-allowith bercbpldgencame and dpt
thep2 obepfaunce. And laft of all came Jofeph t

Rabel,anddypod thepz obepfaunce. :
And he fapde: what ts allthedzone tohiche F
mette: He anlwered: that 3 mapefpnde qracein


the(pabt ofinp Lode. And€faulapde:Fbaue Gt


~ pnougbe mp bzotber, kepe that thou hatte nto
tbp felfe. @o whome Jacob anlwered, obnap,
but prd baue founde grace in thp {pabt,receane
mp pretent rghit cian E baue lene thp face
Det. rt.. xagthouah 3 had fene the
bafte bad a good Wpll fowardeme. Dh takemp
C pleffpnegethat ig beought the,foz God hath had
of mercp òn me-a (geapng me ant ehinges.) AND J Haue
— pnough. Andfo pe eamele bpm, and be toke
it. And hefapd:let vs fake oure iournep and yo,
J wpll go before the. Jacob anfwerede bym:mp


Lozde.’Chou knowell,that the chpldzen arete


Dre, andthe etoes gkpne with pong vuder mpne

bande, which pf men Hulde ouerdipue but euen

onedape all the Hepe Dopl dpe. Dblet mp Lorde
goo be ae bpsferuaunte,and 3 wpll dzpue fap-
erand[ottlpe, accozdpng astbecatell that goth

. before me and thecbpldzen,be ableto endure wn

tyll J cometo mp Lode vnto Scie.

D Andvelanflapde:let me pet leaue fome of mp
folke withthe. And beanlwered, whatnedeth
on Ef fo#( Zbps one thpnge onelp baue 3 nede ok) let me Fpnv

race inthe fygbt of mp Logde. So Efau went

ps wape agapne that fame dape vnto Hep2.

Ai Jacob coke bps tournep fowarde Soucorh,
andbuplte bym an boule, and made booties foz
bpscatcll. Andtherfoze is it, chatthe name of
hel fe is called x Syucoth. :

And Jacob came to Salem à citie of Sichem.
whpcbhe ism the lande of Canaan, after tbat be.
Was come fron: <)efopotamia, and pptched be-
fore the Cptie, and bought a parcell of grounde.
(where be pptched bps tente) of thecbplozen of
Hemo: Sichems father foz an hundzed peces of
monep. Bnd he made there an aulter,and called
Dponthe mpghepe God of Firael.

C Che. rrvitti.Chapter.

** C DheraupHpnge of DpnaZacobs deughtrr bp the men of
Sprem. And of Che great blonder Hedpnge dove bp the fon:
nesefyacob,

on cree, PS JNA the Doughter of Lea x tobpche the
aia ii i ER Vibare onto Jacob, wente outtofe the
t At A Daughters of the lande.tU bome whan
Sar Sichemtbhe fonne of Pemo: f Heute:
_ Wozde of that countrefaw,be toke ber, andlape
dg.recptit.c. DPED Der and Corceds* ber:and bps bart lape vn-
to Dina thedoughter of Jacob. Andbeloued
that damefell and (pake bpndelp Dnto per, and
Hichem (pake vnto pps father emoz:fapeng,
getimetbpsmapdenvntomprwpfe. -
And Jacob herd that be haddefpled Dina his
Doughter, bps tonnes bepnge wyth thep2 catell


Bothes.


6 GSenelis,


ace of God and thou
gene accozdpnge as pelape nto me, totbat pe


inthefelde, and be eibeppg pace. ontan |
werecome. And Hemor thefatber of Hichem +.
went out unto Jacob tocomen Wwitpbym. And-
toben the Connes of Jacob cõmpng out of p felde
beardeit, it greucd tbem, ethep wernot a lptell
woth becaufebhe bad wzoughtfolpe in Firaetl,

in that be badlpen w Jacobs vougbter, whiche
thpngeoughtnottobedone. And Hemo? com yg
moned wth them fapenge:the foule of mp fone ~
Sichem longeth foz poure doughter : geue bee
bpmto wpfe,andmake mariages with vs: and
gene pout boughters vnto vs, and take ourdou-
bters unto pou and pethalldwelwithys.and =. ,
the lande (hall be befoze pou, dwell and do pour
bufpneg and baue pourpoflettions therein. And
Syichemfapde vnto ber father and her brethzen
let me fpnde grace in poureepes ,andiwbattoes —
Deb fh sd dbo wd L3qeuc. Arcfre-
Ipeof me both the dowzp and apites,and J wpl


gpue methe damfcll to wpfe. .

Wut the Lonnes of Jacob aunlweredto Si-
chemand Hemo: bps by ot taltpuge amonge
them (elues deceptfuilp, becaule be had defpled
Dina thep2 {plter. And they fapd onto them, we
can not do thps thpnge that we Hulde geure our
{pfter to one that is wneteciicpled, fortbat were -
atbane dnto vs. Wut inthis wpll we confient
pito'pou. PEpe wplbe as we be and all the men ` `
chpldzen amonge pou be circumepfed, ther Dplt
we geue oure doughters topou, and take poure
Doughters tovs, and wplldwell withpou,and ¢
be one people. ut and pf pe wpl not harken vw -
to bs tobecitcumeplcd , then woplt toe take oure
donghter € Go ont Wapes. Thep: ri ny |
fed Hemoz:and Sichem ppsfonne. Andthe »
ponge man deferde not foz to dothetbpnge, b=
caule be bada lufte to Jacobs doughter:bewas |
alfo mof fette bp ofall that were iniips fathers l
bonte. Then Pemo: and Siche bis fonne werite
pnto the gate of thep2 cptie, andcomened wyth
thenien of thepe cptte,Capeng: thefe men arc wn-
faptied towarbde vs, and Divell nthelande and
bo thep2 occupacpon therein. Andinthelande ts
rotome pnougbe foz them , toe topll fake thepze
dougbters to wives,and geue them our dow g z
ters, onelp herein wyil thep content ynto vs foz
fodwell wpth vsandto be one people: pi all the
men chpldzen that are amonge vs be cpz-umtp-
fed asthep are. Spal not their goodes and their
fiibffaunce and all thep2 catell be oureg, onlp pf
Yeconfente pntotbem? SFozthep tpll dwell D
wpthvs. And wvnto Hemozand Sichembhys
fonne berkened all that wente out of thegate of
bpscptic. Andall the menchplozen were circi-
cpled what foruer wente out of theqatesof bps
cptie. And it happened the toyed dape when it
twag papnfull to them) tivo of the fonnes of Ja-
cob Simeon g Leut, Dinag bzethzen tokecetber
of themi bps xfwearde and wente intothe Cptie se.ritr.
boldclp, and fletoe.all that wasnrale, and flewe 2"!
allo Hemo2and Sichembysfonne wpth f edge


Tk ye


ofthe (wearde and toke Dina out of Dichems


Houle, and went thep2 wape. in
And the lonteg of Jacob commpna bpon e
Dea


opa .
S


Hatt,»


=
=
s


Ai
L
¥ £
TFE


i b p
a
+ i š
3


a s
- — a
a


fi Jacob. aren


=


Ci r


deade fpoiled the cptie, becaute thep had defpled -


thepzfpter:and toke thep2 Hepe orenand their
afies and wbatloeuer wag in the cptic, and allo
intbefeloes. Andallthepz yoodes andallthep?
chpldzen , and nad: wpues toke thep oy a
and made bauock of alltbat wasintheboute: .


- Wut Jacob fapde to Spmeon, and Leni: pe.


baue troubled me and made me tynk before the
inhabitours of thelande,befoze the Canaanite,
and the ~berelpte. And J bepnge fewe innom-
bze, thep fall gather them felues togpthet a=
gapnite me and faye me, and fo tall Jand mp
boule be deltroped. And thep anfwered:fpoulde
they deale with our fp ler as with an who:

^ " Cyacab gorth bp bnto iether, and burp eth bis pmaz

ges bnderanoke.Deboza bp eth.jiacobis ralieo 3i


| ragi. £ be lanbe of Canaan is pzampfep bim.imachacl


Pa Bs.


npech in Tabour tuben Lape with bis fathers concu-
bpne. Pde eath of lfayac


mopman fd God apd; onto Jacob, arpi,


Map ar ean and get the bp to Werbel, and dive
ery TARY bere. And make therean alter wh-
“bles D, Ehat appeared nto the,


crondes whiche thep bad inthep2 bande, andall

_ tbep2 cat A Sta were intbep2 cares and
Jacob hpd the |

ichem. Andtoben thep Departed.the feareot


peas


- them. And thep opdnot folotwe after the fonnes


_. . thelandeof Canaan. .
i = andall tbe people that was with bym. And
\ 6 Godot Wetbel:becaule that Godappered nto
qriiii.g pim there, wobé be fled fra theface of pis bzother.
x But Debopa Rebeccas nucle, dped, and
was burped beneth Bethel ouderan soke. And
thename of it wag called: theooke of lamenta-
cpon. And God ne puto Jacob agapue
after became out ol eh esa andbictfed
ra.e bpm and God fapde Dnto
“St cob. srorwithiandy qre,thou Malt be nomoze
called Jacob, but Ztrael
+ “pecatledbignameSttact. i
And God fapde vntohpm : Jam God al-
_ amparhtye, grote and multiptpe: people and 3
— multitude of people hallipzpngeo ‘the: pe,and
_ kpnges hallcome out oft lopnes. And the
lande wbich 3 gane Abrabam and Jfahac, wpl
r q gpue onto the,and wnto thy fecdatter the wil
Aqpucthatland allo. And fo God departed v
Mi hei intbe place where be had ta Red wit
ppm. And Jacob fette vp amarkeinthe place
gobere De tal Dwith bym:euéa marke of Fone
and poureddzpukeotirpnae theron and poured


pn
ta


. Jamin.


Dit
Goodell oponthecpties that wererounDabout -


oftacob. HocameJacobtoLuswhicheisin jpam
t The fame is Bethel, be ead
. PE


builped thereanalter and called the place: The | )


bpm:thpnameis Jas ©


fhalbethpname. And hig qgoodes, and at y |
ftaurice tobich be bad gotten inthe landeof Ca- se.riii.s


Glauieedom.
‘@faufathet of the Edomvecsinmounte


JEDLA Ui,


alfo ople thereon, and Jacob called the name of

the place where God (pake with bima2Dethel ave yeas
“And thep Depacteu trate Wethel, and when go”

be was buta felde bgeadth from Ephrath, Ra-

bel beganne to tranaple : andin trauaplpnge,

fhe was inparpll. Andithappenedasihe was

inpapnesof ber labour,the mpowpte fapde bn-

to per.feare not, fo2 thts fonne ig tbpreaito.

Thenasperfoule Mas a departpnge, that OE ag

xmutoye the called bis namie Wen Dupri The tg, HYD

ronne of mp Cozotve,) ut His Father called bim Wen `

Jamin. on (zbe ionne oftherpabe hande, ) And thus #3

Dyed Rabel, and was burped intbewmapetoe- —

phzatb which is Sctblebei. and Jacob {et vp


- å tone vponder grauc, whiche is called Wabels


graue {tone nto this Vape. And Zlrael wente
thence , andpptebed vp bps tente beponde the
xtotyze of Eder. Anditchaunced, as Flrack| mich siit.c
dDwclt inthe lande, that Ruben wente,andlape
with Wilba bis fathers concubine, And te cam Sen- rire


| -to Araclg ear. Chelonnes of Jacob were.rit.1n D
. nombze. The lonnes of Lea. Ruben Jacobs cle


deft fonne,and Simeon, Leui, Juda, Jlachar,t
sabulon. The fonnes of Rabel, Jofeph and 15i-
The Connes of Bilba Rabels mapde:


Dan and Mepbtali. The lonnes of Sit ba Le-


_ agmapde,Gad and Aller. Thete are p lines of
_ Jacob which were bogne binrin Pefopotania.


Aud fó Jacob came vuto Wlabac bps father
fodpamre wntoiypriath Arba which isin Hes
bzon: where Abzabant, and Jfabac forourned


agftraungers. Andthedapes of Fabat there
- anbundzed and.Iree.peres:and Zfabac Fel fpcke


and dped,and was put wnto bis people: bepnae
olde and fullofdaves. And is oneg Efan and
FJacobburpedhpm. = 5
E Coe.xrrvi. Chapter.
@ The wpuce of Slav. zarot and Crauare
rpche. abe wenralogpe of glau elau tiel..
«beth inthe bpll Sere. dhe tek |
sq bele are the gencracpons of lau. X

rey Chefame ig Edom. Elan toke bis
y= wopucs of the doughters of Canaan
K 2) Ada thedonghter of Elő an Pethite
aes El and Abalibama the doughtevol A= Serrvsits
na the Dougbter of stbeonan iycupte,and Wal-
math Wmacls xdoughter, g lp iter of Acbaioth
And Ada bare vnto Etau, Elpphas : and 15a-
famath bare Reguel.And Apalibama bare Fe-
ugand Jaclam andixozah. Chele are? (ones of
Efau Which were bomehinin p land of Canad
And E fau tobe his wpues and his fonnes,
and Dougbters, and all the Coules of bps Doule:
ig oodes, and all biscattell, and altpis fub-


naan, and went into a appa atvay froni the 15
face of bis bother Zacob:fo2 thep2 xrpches was


moche and thep coulde not dwell togyticr,and


the lane wherein thep tere Heaungecs, coulde

not recepue them , bpcante of they? pofleltpon.

Thus dwelt Efan in mounte Seir. The fame

Tbele ave the qeneracy pe a i,Dara.t.c,
eit,

and thefe are the names of Elaus fonnes*Clt-

paas ‘thefontie of Ada the Wwpfe of Eau, and
equel the fon of Salmat) Derry of sy


Saleph.


And the fonnes of Eliphas were Theman, D-
mar,3epho, Sactho and itenag, And Thimna
was concubpne to @lipbas Efausfonne , and
bare bnto Eliphas Amalech. And thelebethe
fonnesof Ada Claus opie. And theleare the
fonnes of Requel : Qabath, Serab, Samma,
and Hila: thele were p fonnes of Safinath Ẹ-
faus wpte. And thefe were thefonneg of Ahali-
bama the dDougbterof Ana dougbter of sebion,
€faus tpfe, and the bare nto Efau Fens, Fe-
alam and o2ab.


€ _ Tbhele were dukes of the fonnes of Elaun:
Lyrae Thechplozen of + Elipbas the fpzite fonne of


Clau, were thelc: duke Cheman,ouke Omar,
duke sephe, duke Renag, and duke kozah, duke
©actham,and duke Amalech. Cbhele are thedn
kes that caine of Eliphas inthe lande of Edom
andetbeleweretbefonnesof Ada. Chelealfo
arethechplozenof Requel Claus fonne :aube
ahath, duke Serab duke Hamma, duke Wi-
fa. Chetc are thedubes that came of Reguel in
the lande of Edom „and thele are the fonnes of
wWalinath Claus wopfe. Chele were the chplozé
of Abaltbama Clans wpe : duke Jeng, duke
Gaclam, duke tozad:thele dukes came of ba-
libama$ dougbter of Ana Efaus wpe. Chele
arethe cpildzen of Efan and ebele are the dukes
of thein: whicbe Elan is Edon. Theteare the
chpldzcn of Deir the Wozite, the inbabitoure of
hts pal me ae ae and Ana and
Dillon, Eler ¢ Dilan. The


Edi. And the chpldzé of Lotban were Hopi and
Hema. And Lothas liker wags called Chtmna.


D  Thecbpldn of Sobal were thele: Jinan,


S)anabath, and Ebal, Sepho,and Dram.
‘Chele are the ies a of 3tbeon. Bia and Ana,
thps was that Æna that founde ules inthe
lwp dernefic, as be fed bis father stbeons affes.
‘Che chpldzen of Ana were thele: Difon and X-
balibama the dougbter of Ana. Chefe arethe
cbplozen of Difon, em, Dan, and Elvan, Je-
thianand Cheran. Chechpldren of Eset are
thele: Bilban, Seauan, and Xaan. Chechpl-
Dac of wilan alloarethele: Gis, and Aran.
Tiele are the dukes that came of Hopi: duke
Lotban, Duke Soball,dubesibeon, duke ana,
duke Dilon, Duke Sser,ouke Dilan. Thele ve
the dukes that came of Pozi, after thep2 duke-
Domesinthelande of Heir. Chele are thekpn-
Kes thatrapgned in thelande of Edom, be O2€
there tapgued anpekpnge wpon the chpldzen of
Alraell : Wela the fonne of Xeo: rapened in
Edomea, aud the name of bis cptie was Dinba
ba. And when Wela dped, Jobab the fonneof
crab ont of 10324, rapgned in bps teade,
(ben Jobab allo was deed, Hulaim of $ landeg
of Chemanp rapgnedin bis fede. andafter
the deatbe of Bulam, badadthefonne of Wes
bad, whicbe cwe tbe Badianptes in the felde
of the SPoabptes,rapgnedinbis fteav e,andthe
name of bpsCptpemas Auth. ben Pas
bad Was deed, Samla of Balteka sapgneD ín
bis tede. ben Damla wasdeed, Saul of the
rpuce Meboborbrapgned inpis tede. Wiben


~Genelis,


{i ealfoare pdukegof pzp
the Hozites the chplozen of Heir inthe lande of DEU


Saul was deed, BaalBanan the fonne of Aeg-
boz tapgned inbis tede. And aftcethedeath of
Waal Hanan the fonne of ekg Hadad raps
aned inbis Eede, and the name of bis cptie wad
Pabu. Andhis wpues name abetabeel the
doughbter of Hatred, the dougbter of elaab.

hele are the names of the dukes thatcame
of Efau inthe twelue kyneedes, places and nas
mes : duke Chpmna, duke Alua,ouke Jerbeth,
duke Shalibama,oube Ela, duke Pynon,ouke
Benas duke Cheman,dube Pibsar,duke Qa:
dicel, duke Fram. Thele be the dukes of Edo=
mea, accozbpnge to thep2 babptacpons , inthe
lande of thee pofiefpons. Chis Elan is the fa-
ther of the Coomptes.

C Tbe.rrrvti. Chapter.

 Foleph a: culeth bis brethren. FJoteph dreame anb


b
te Dated of bis bicthzen, and Colùe to the Ata rs,
sect MOAI panna, pe atimaciates


- ii
ee


=e SCO


Dated bynt,and coulde got (peake peaceably bn


to bpm. ozcouer, when Foleph*had dreamed Se": Ful.b


adame, Ee Ae bzethzen, whiche hated
bpmpettbemoze. > And belapde ynto them:
beare, J prape pou, thtsdzeame wohbiche Fhaue
Dzeamed : Webolde, we were bpndpnee peues
in the felde: and lo,mp Mefe arofe, and tode vp
tPabt and pours ode rounde about, and made
obepfaunce to mp pefe. T9 whom bisbzethen
fapde-fhalt thou be our bpnge indede ¢ 02 tbalte
thou tndede baue Dompnion oner we Andthep
bated bpm pct the moze, bpcaute of pis bzewines
and of bis wozdeg.


Fofr


ph:


4


bowe tin the lande wherein bis x


And bedzeamedpet another dreame , and ©


tolde bis beethzen, fapinge:bepolde, ¥ bauc bad
Onc Dzeanie moze: me thought the unne and the

mooncand.ri. arres made obepfaunce tome.
And when be bad tolde it nto bis father and
bis baetbzen,bisfatber rebuked ppn and fapbe
onto bpm what is this dzeame wopicbtbou batt
dreamed ¢ all Jandthy mother, and ag de
eeit


= 7
a


PACPY.


thzen come to Fall on the qromitde before tbe?
-An bys brethzen hated bpm, but his father no
tedthelapinge. Iris brethzen allo went to kepe
thep2 fathers Wepein Sichem, and Ffrael fapa
wnto Jofeph : Doo not tbp bzethzen kepe in Si-
chem come, and 3 wpll fendetbeto them.
Heantwered x hercam J. And pelapde bn-
Reie tohpm : qoo and fe whether tt be well wpb thy
brethren , andthe Hepe : andbapnge me worde
. agapne. Andlohelente bpm out of the vale of


—~ © Pebzon,andhewentto HSichem.Andacertapn
; | man founde bpm,and behold he has wandayug
= > sutofhps wape tithe felde, and the man alked


bpm: topat feket thous Be anltwered: F fekemp
beethzen, tell me J pzap p where thep kepe epe
And the man apir, thep are Departed bence, fo:
Sheardeticm lape:letys go ynto Dothan.
Thugs went Joleph after his bzethzen, ¢ founde
them in Dothan. And when thep law hyma far
_ Of befoze He came at them, thep toke councell a-
D gaput bym,foz to flepe ppm. ozone fapde to
rip aotder: Weboldxthisdozeamercommeth:come
oie rie, NOWE therfore and let vs flepehpmandcatt him
Laberee intofome ppt, and we wyll fapea wpcked beak
bath Drucured bpm, and we (ball fe what wll
come of his bycames. Wiben Ruben bearde that
be rpò bpm out oftheyz bandes €fapde, we wpll
EN notisplibyni. Ant Ruben fapde:mozeouer Yne
‘ totbem,ibede not bisxbloude, but cat byminto
ge. pliid. this pyr thitisin the wploverneffe, and lapeno
_ bande ypon pitt. o#crhus berape Mamelp, that
o¥ Hhempaot rpode bpm out of thep2banbes and de
puerbpnitobisfatberagapne. F
Andit bappened that when Jofeph foas come
wnto bys bietüzen, thep irpptebpm out of pps
. ° €coate,bpsparty coloured cootetbat was vpon
bpm, and thep coke bpmand calte ppm into an
emptpepptte: Wibercinwas no water. And
4° thep fat them dotonetocate bread. And as thep
ipftc bp thep2 epes and lobed about, therecame
acompanye of Jlmaclptes from Gilead, ethete
camels laden with (ppcerp,baulme,and mpre,
nD Were Topnge downe tocarp itinto Egppe.
> G And Juda lapde onto bps bzethzen: what as
ict tapleti it pF we flape our bzother, andkepe bps
bloude fecvete, come on and let vs * fellbpm to
- aetevicy the J{lmaclptes, andlet rot ourbandes be vpon
Sepia Hpm:fo2 beis our bother and our Aeh. And bis
beter were content. Chet as the Wadianp-
tes Matciaunte men pafled bp , thep dewe and
y ipfte Jofeph out of thepptte and folde bpm wn-
X tothe Jlinaelpteg fo: twentpe peces of {pluer.
i And thepbroughthpminto€gppte. —
And when Ruben came agapn onto the ppt
and founde wot Joleph there, herent bis clothes
s and went agapne Ynto his bzethzen laping:the
| ladisnot pender and whether Hall J go! And
thep toke Jolephscoote and kplleda goate and
dppped the coote intbebloude. And they fente
that partpe coloured coote and bzougbt it puto
” thep2 father and lapde: This baue we founde:fe
tobitber it be thy fonnes cote ogno. And be bnew
3 it fapinge, it is mp lonnes coote,a wpcked bea
hath Deuoured Dym, Jofeph tg rent inpeces.


G


we. rit. And Jacob rent bis clothes, and put lacke cloth


Cones,


aboutebyslopnes and toroid foz bps fonnea
longe feafon. Wut all bis fonnes and ali bisdou

‘bters role Dptoconfozte bom. Aeuertheleffe,

e wolde not beconfozted, but fapde : Frwpll go
Downe into the graue unto mp fonne, mourning
And thus his father weptefo: bym.aAnd p Ba:
dianptes*folde ppm in Egypte vnto Putiphar
alozde of Pharaos,and his chefe ewarde.

| E The.rreviit. Chapter.


e T fostuned at thattime that Judas
wa ree Wentedowne from pis bacrhzen, and
wi eS gate bpm toamancalled Piraof D-
S a CA dollan, and there be fawe the vough-
beam Fey Of Aman called x Suaa Canaa-
nite. Bnd be toke berand went into ber. And we
conceaucd and bare afonne and called his name
Er. Aud the conceaucd agapn and bare a Tonne
anodcalled ppm Dnan. And the conceaucd aa
apie and barepetalonne, whome fhe called
Dela:and he was at Chelib when the bare pun.

And Judas gaue Er bis elet fonnea wpfe


whole name was Thamar. And Er Judas ele


delt fonne was wpckedinihe (yabt oftie L020,
andthe Lode flewe bpm. And judas lapde yn:
to Dnan:qointe thy brothers wpfe and marpe
ber:that thon mapi ftirre vp {ede vuto thy b20-
ther. And when Onan perceaucd that tye fede
uld not be pis therfore when be went into bis
brothers wyte,belpplied it on the qrounde,and
waue not fede unto bis brother. And the tbpnge
wbpche be dpd, oplpleated the Lorde, wherfore
He Newe bpmalfo. Chenlapde Judas to Tha-
nar his doughterin latwe, remapnea wprowe
at thy fathers boufe, tpl Sela mp foune berro-
wen, fo? belapae: Lett a eg Heapeaifo
as bys bzethzendpd. And Thamar wente and
dwelte inher fathers boule.
And in proces of tyme, the douqhter of Sua
pavas wpfe dped. Then Judas whende had
eftemournpng, went vuto ps (pepe therersto
Timnath be and his frende Hira of Ddollam.
And one tolde Chamarfapnge:bveholde, chp fa-
ther inlawe gocth vp to Chpmnath, toxtheare
bis Hepe. And the put ber wpdowes qavinentcs
of from Der and coucred ber wpthaclooke, and
Delgpled ber felfe:andfat ber Downe ina comon
place whicheis by the bpe wapes poeto Thym
nath, fozbecaufethelawe p Sela was growne
and ihe Was not geuen vnto bpm to Wwpfe.
tben Juda latwe berbe thoughtit hadbene
àn whoze, becaule the badcoucred per Face. {nd
He turned tober tnta the wape.and Capde:come
Sprape the,leé me lpe with tbe fo: be new not
that tt was bisdoughter inlawe. And Meann-
{wered: what wplt thou geuc me,fo2 to lpe with
mes Chen lapde be, J welifendetheakpd from
theflocke. Sbhelapde. Thengeuemea pleoge
tpllthoufende it. ie lapde, what pledge thall J
gencther She anlwered:thp pancet, thp brace-
lct,and thp faficthatisinthp bande. Andbe
gauce it berandlape bp ber,and the was w chplo
bpbpm. Andlhe gat bee vp and wente and pst
; / bee


SOLINI,


Het. Ctrir.a


fla ciii E


Sapi ii,


a


i,Para.ti a


¢


Ge.ttri.e
tie. piti.¢


a


EE E— << Ss —


als A
Jofeph.
ath Ghetoed harao what bets aboute todo.

be feuen good kpne are euen peres:and the le-

good cares are fenen pereg alfo,and itis but one

Dreame Lpkewple.the fenentbpnne andeuel fa

uoured kine that came out aftecthem,arefeucn

pereg: andthe feucn cimptpe, and blafted cares,

thallbefeuciperes ofbunger. Chis whiche F

bauclapde vnto harao,itis that god is about:

todo,and (oetort) it Ynto parao.
D  Æeboldetherecomeleuenpere of great plen-

teoufnes through outeallthe lande of Egppte .

And agapne, there pal arple after thë leuen pe-

res of hunger. Jno allo the plenteoulnes albe

forgotten tnthelande of Egypte. And the pun-
| ger iball confume the lande-nether thal the plen

tcoulnes be Bnowne in thelande, bp reafon of p

bunger that (hall come aftcr,fo2 it thalbeexcea

Dpuge great. And as concecnpnge ý tbe deame


was Doubled Yuto Pharao the lecond tyme; be= ©


bolde the thynge ig certapnly prepared of God,
and God wypll tho2tlp bzpng it to paffe.

ow therfore let harao proupdefoz aman
of pnderfandpng and wpldome,and fet bpm o=
nerthelande of Egypt. Andlet Pharaodochis
alfo that be make alec ouer j lande and take
wp the fpftb parte ofthe lande of Egypte inthe
{cuenplenteous peres,andlet them gather all p
foode of thele good peres that come, and lap bp
cone under the bande of Pharao, that theare
mape be foode inthe cpties and there lette them
kepeit: that there mapebe founde in toze in the
lande agapni the Kumpar of bunger whiche
fhallcoine inthe lande of Cqppt, that the lande
perpihe not thozowe buncer.

E, Wid thefapiige ae Pbaraoandallbys
fernauntes. Ehentlapde Pharao wnto bis ler:
uauntes : where hall wefpnde fucbea manas
thisis,in whom is the fpzete of Gods And Dba
raofapd bnto Joleph:fo2 asmuch as Goo hath
thewed che al tbis there is no man of wnderftan
Dpnge 02 of plhomelpke vntothe. Thou ther

sora citit.» CORC Walte bexouer mp poule and accozdpngeto
actes:biib TDP Woozde fhallatlm p people beculed, onelp in
te rr £thc hpnges leate wyll 3 be aboue the.and wha
Pant. + vag fapde agapne wnto Jofeph: bebolbde, Jhaue
{ct the ouct allthe lande of Egypt. And he toke

of bisepnge from pis bande and put it ppon Fo
fephsbande,and araped bpm in cloth ofrapnes,

and put a golden cheyne aboute bps necke, g let

bpm vpon the bet charet that be bad, faue one.

<b nd tbhep crped beFoze bpm: Bowe the knee,and


Pharao made bimruler overall thelandeofE= h


Gppte. And Pharaolapde nto Jofeph : Fam
Sbarao,woibout he thalt noma pte vp Ds
nde 02 foote nall thelande of Egypte.

P And be called Jolephs namesaphnath Pa-
ena. And be gauchpmtowpfe Afnatb the dou-
ghter of Putipharpreatte of On. Then wente
jofepbabzode inthelande of Egypte. And be
Was thpatie pere olde when he ode before Pha
rac kprge ot Egypte. And Jofeph departpnge
From the pzefence of Dharao went th O20We out
all the lande of Egypte. Andın the fevlenplente
ous pereg thep made Henes and gathered vp all
the foode of theleuen plenteous pereg Wwhprcpe


Genelis:


were in thelande of Eappte, amb larie vp tie -
fame intbecptics. The foode of the teldes that

rewerounde about enerp cptie,lapde be vp in p
ame. And Jofeph lapde bp coznein Fooze lyke
bnto the lande of p lee in multptude out of mea-
fure, ontpl be lefte ngmbzpng: Joz it was with
out nombze. And nto Joleph were bozne twa e
fonnes(befoze the pereg of hunger came) wbich
Atnath the Dougbter of Putiphar preat of Dn —
bare buto bpm. And Zoleph called the name of d
the fpr te fonnne* Ganafle,foz God (fapde be) we. pith s
ie forget allmplabourcandallmp — ~~
atbers boulcholde. @bhenameo€ the feconde
called be Ephraim, fo? God(fapde be bath caus
fed me to growe in the lanbde of mp trouble. z

And when the lenen pereg of plenteouines ý i
was in f lande of Egppte were ended tbencame Je
the feuen pereg of devth accozdpngeas Jofeph Steet,
badlapde. And the berth was in all indes:but i
inall toe lande of Eoppre was therepet foode. u
And toben p lande of Egppt allo begantobun- J
ger the peoplecrped to Pharao Foz bacabe.And
pbharaolapde vnto all the Egiptpans,qo vnto
-goleph,and what be fapth topou,tbatdo. And
the Derth Was thozowout alltbe lande. And Fo-
feph opened all that was in thecptpes.and folde
nto the Eaipepans. o: phunger waredfoze
inthelande of Egppte. And all countrees came
to Cappte to Joleph fo: to bpe cone: becaulep
the bungerwastofozeinalllandes, ~~
~ € The.xlit. Chapter.


=.


st Ea Yt | apoe vito bys fonnes:
y Ef Ya bp gape pe one bpd anothers And si
haia befapbe:bebolde, J haue beard that |
ez thereiscogne n€gppte xGetpou acteviin, ——*


cA Ae?


Dow 7


ne thprheranbd bp vs cozne from théce,that rite
we mape lpuc and tot dpe. Syo wente Jolephs
tenbzethrcn downe to bye cogne of the Egiptp= D.
ang. Wut Wen Jamen Jolephs brother wolde -gi
not Jacob fende with bys other bzetbzen,fo? be r
Capde : left fome mplfoztune Dappen pym. And i


tbe fonnes of Zlracli came to bpe cezne amonge
other that came,foz there was derthin the land
of Canaan. Xund Jofeph was gouerner wp land
and folde to all the people of thelande. Andbys
beethzencame, and fell lat onthe grounde be-
forebym. Wiben Jofeph rawe bys vaethzen,be
nete them :and made bpm felfe ftraunge vnto
them, and fpateroughip vnto tbem, fapinge:
Uibencecome per Thep ant wered:out of sland
of Canaan, tobpe vptaple. And Foleph knewe
bis bethzen,but they knewe not ppm., x3
_, eid Joleph remenbzed bisxdrcames whicb 2 srog í
be decamed of them and lapde vntothem: peat b. Tin
ippeg, and tofe where the land is weake is your [
commpnge. Ind thep fapde vutobpm:naye mp ;
1o20, but to bpe bitaple thy fernauntes arecome
tUe arr allone mans fonnes, and meanefruelp,
andtbp Ceruauntes areno lppeg. Andbhelapde
bnto themagapne, nape, but euen tofe where p AE S
Lande is weake,is pourecummpnge. as i ;


==] TAA


r

— ofeph,
s Cape: toe thp fecuauntegáretwelue bacthzen,
thefonnes of one man inthe lande of Chanaan.
H And bebolde,the ponge tis thig dape with oure
: C father, andone no man woteth where be is. And
Jofeph fapde vntothem, that ís itthat 3 (pake

nto pou,faping-pe are pegero petbalbe


| 2eucd. 2p the lpfc of jarao,ye hall not go
po bence, except pour pongell baother come bither.
ios Sende out one of pou whiche mape fet pout b20
z ther, and pe hall be icepteinp:plon, that poure


l wo2des mape be proued, whether there be anp
7 - trutbinpou:o2 els bp the lpfe of parao, pe are
F but fppes. ud be put thent in ward theedapes.
f And Jofeph fapde vnto them the thpzde dap
a @his do and lpue,fo2 J feare Sod. VE ye meane
Bas no burte, lette one of pour bzetbzen be bounde in
Re! tbe boule ofporr pz pfon,and goo pe and bypnge

theneceffarp foobde wnto poure houtbolves, but
bapng pour pongett brother vnto me: that pour


wode mapebctrped,anDthatpedpenot.aAnd K


H thep opt fo. nd one fapde toanother:we paue
“3 verelp fpnnedagapnite our bzother, tn that we
fawe the anquith of bis foule when be befought

mD bs, and twe woldenot beare bpm: and therfore
is thig trouble come vpon vs. Aud Rubenan-

—__ fweredtbem faping: fapde Fnot vntopouthat
_ d pe tyuloe notx{pnneagapnite the ladde and pe
LE wolde not beare. Andie his bloude ig requyp2ed.
Thep were not aware that Jofeph vndertode
tbem, fsz be pake Dutothem bp an interpreter.
And he turned from them, and wepte x and tur=
ned tofhem agapne and comenedD wpth them,
toke out Simeon from amonge them.¢ bounde
| ppnabefoze tbep2 epes, and Jofeph cOmaunded
 fofplltbep2lackes with cozne, and to put enerp


iiig,
] pa ay


| mang monep inbtslacke, and to geue them vps
| __.. tapleto fpende by thewape. And thus dpd he


in tntotbem. Andtbhep laded thep2 alles with the
cogeantbdepatted thence. And asg one of them
g opened bps lacke, foz to geue bps afle prouendze
a: in the 3nne,be {pied bis monep:foz it wasin bis


faskes mouth. And be fapde nto hisbzetbzen,
mp monep ts refFozed me agapne: o? le, it 18 e-


> = uecninmy lacke. Andthepzbertefapledthem,¢ -


why bath Gododealtethus with wg: Andthep
came bnto Jacob thep2 father vnto the lande af
Chanaan; 3.dtolde bpmatlthathad pean
them,faping: Che man,cuen the logde otp land
(pakerougblp to vs, and toke vafo (ppes of p
| countre.and we fapde duto bpm: we meanetra
l - lpeandarenofppeg. Webe twelue brethren, g
fonnes of our fatber one ts awape andthe pon:
ueit is this dape with ourefatherinthelande of
Chanaan. Andthelozde of the countre fapde a=
gapne vnto ve:berbp thal Jknowe pf pemeane
trulp:leaue one of pour bzetherne Dere with me,
and take fode neceffarp Fo: pour houtholdes and
4 get pouawape,and bzing pour pongeft brother

pnto me, that Amapeknowwe p peareno {ppes,
i —- butmeane trulp: So wpll Jdelpuerpou poure
e. bzotber-and pe thall occuppe inthe lande.
H
l


K r thep were aftonped, andlapde one to another:


© Anditfoztuncdasthep emptied thep2 lacks
beholde, cucrp mannes bundel of monep wasin
; bislacke. And Whenbotbthep andthep2 father


Genetig.


sfol.t bi, :


fate tpe bundels of money, thep were afrapoe.
And Jacob thepze father lapde pntothem : We
Paue perobbed of mp chpldzen: Jolephis awape
ant Simeonts awape,and petake Wen Famit
awape. All ¢bele thpnges are agapnit me. Ru-
benfapde vnto bis father: Slee mp tiwofonnes
pl J bapng bpm not tothe agapne. Delpucr him
to mp bande t ¥ wll bapne bpmtotheagapne
And befapde: mp fonne thal not go downe with
pou. Eo? big bzother tg decade, and be is lefte a-
lone. VE fome miffoztune bappen onto bpm bp Ý ie sirig
wape whiche pego, pe Hall * bapnge mp grape
peade with fozowe Ynto the qraue. .
C The. rlii. Chapter.

C When Ben amin was brought, thep zeturncd with gp

tes. Simeon te delpuereo owt of prpfon. zofeph goth alpoe
amd mepeth. Thep feat together. :
lande 4


ye Nd thedertbwasgreatein
Deas


PAER And it foztuned wben thep
Mmea ten bp p cogne wbich thep bought
Aaa ont ofthe lande of Egppt, thep: ta-
raae ther fapde vntothem:qoo agape,
and bye vs alpticfoode. Juda anfwered ppm, g
fapde :the mandpd teltpfpe nto vs, fapinac: |
xloke that pefenot mp face erceptpour bzotper O° FY.
be with pou. PEthou wplt fende our bzother w
b3, we wpll qo dotne, andbypethefoode. Wut
pFthou twplte not fende bpm, we Wwpll not goo
Downe : foz the manfapbe vnto vs: loke that pe
fe not mp face ercept pour bzother be with pou.
And Brack fapde: wherfoze delt pefoccuellp w %5
me, astotell the man tpat pebad pet abzotber?
Thep anltwered: Che manalked bs frraptlyp of
our kinred faping,is pour father pet alpuesbaue
penotpetanotberbzothers Andwetoldebpm
accozdpnae tothele o2des. Coulde we knoe
that be wolde lape: bapnge pour bother Detwne
with pour Chen fapbe Juda ynto Alrael his fa-
ther : Sende the ladde with me,p wemaperple
and go,and that we map lpue and not dpe : both
toc,and thou and allo ourchp!dzen. J wplbelus
retpefo2 bpm, of mp bandeg thalte thou requpze
bpm. DEF bzpng bym not totbe agapne,anod fet
bpm before thpne epes, «then lette mebeare tbe oe mira g
blame fozeuer. Trulp excepte we bad made this Bs
tarpinge: bp this , Wwe bad bene there twple and
comecagapne. And thep2 father Flrael fapde vn
totbem:Ptitmultnedes befonow:thendo thus ¢
@ake of the belt frutes of thelande in pour vel:
felles,and bzpnge the mana prefente,acurtelpe
of bavolinc, ¢ acurtelp of bonp, (ppces €mpare,
nuftesandalmondes. And take Double monep
inpour bande. And the money p was broughte
agapne tn pour fackes,take tt agapnewith pou
leit peraduenture it was fome ouer [pgbt.

ake alfo pour bzother with pou, and arple
and go agapne tothe man. And God almpgptp
geue pou mercpe inthe fpabt of theman, that be
mape deloucr pou poure other brother, and this
Wen Jamin, and Ylhalbe robbed of mp chploe,
as Jhauevene.Chus toke thep the prelent and —
twplefomuch moze money intbep2 bande with D
Wen Jamin. And role vp, wentdowne tocgipt
and (tode be‘o2e Jofeph, Wiben Joleph fawe
wWenZJaminwyth them, pefapde to therularo€
bis boule : bopnge thele menbome and oir eon


Jofeph;


€


makeredpe faz thele men (halldpne with me at
none. Andthemandpd as Jofeph badde, and
boughte them bnto Jolephshoute. Wibenthe
men Were bzougbt into Folephs houle,thep wee
afrapbe, and fapde : becaufe of themonep that
came inoure fackes mouthes at the fpzfe tyme
are the brought in, tbat be mape ppckea quarell
with vs,and tolapefome thpnae to our chara,
and to bepuge bg in bondage and our affes alfo.
‘Therforecamethep tothe man that was the cus
lart oner Zolephs boule, and cOmencd with dpm
at the Doze of the boule, andfapde.

‘Ob Spz, toe came Downe hitberat the fp:
tyme to bpe fode : and as we came toan Jnne,it
Dapperied that we opened our fachs, anù bebolv


Seriid. euerp mans money was in bps facke toyphfull


Serii t


weprbht. And we baue bzougbt it agapnein our


bande, and otber monep bauc webzougbte alfo


in oure bandes,to bpe foode,but we cannot tell
he put our money ti ourfackes. And be fapde
peace be nto pou, feare not: poure God andthe
God of poure father bathe genen pou that trea-
fure inpourfackes, Jhad pourmonep. Anv bhe
bzougbt Spmeon out to them, and the man led
them inte Jofephs boule, and qaue them water
to wath thep2 fete, and gaue thep2atics pronen
der. And thep made redp thep2 peelent agapntte
Jofeph came atnone, foz thep heardelape that
thep thoulbdecate beeade he . Wiben Joule
came bome,thep broughe F peelente intop boule
to bpm, Which) was in thep2 bandeg and fel flat
sẹ onthe groundebefozebym. And he welcomed
them curteoullp faping, ts pour father that olde
man Whiche pe tolde me of, ingqood belth:andis
be pet alpuesthep anfwered: tdp lernaunte oure
fatier isin good belth,¢ is petalpue. Andthep
botoed Downe thep2 bedes y made obeplaunce.
And helpttpng vp his epes, bebelde bis bzo-
ther Ben Jamindys mothers tonne, and fapde:
xis fas pout Pepe acotnes, et whom pe fapbe
pnto mes And belapde:Godbemercpfull onto


nite tbempfonne. And Jofeph made bafk(fo2 * bys
SnD. Flbys herte dpd melte vpon bps bzother) and foughte


+


where to wepe,andentredinto bischamber,and
weptethere. And be wathed his face and came
ont, and refrapned bpm felfe and fapd. fet bread
onthe table. And thep prepared fo: bymbp bym
elfe and foz them bp them felucs,¢ for the Egip
trans wbich dpd cate With him bp them felueg,
becaulethe Egipcpans mapenotcatebzeadew
© the Hebues, fo: that is anabbominacpon onto
the Caiptpans. And thep latte before bpm, the
eldeff accozDpnge Duto the age,and the ponet
accozDpnge vntobispouth. Aud the men mats
ueled amonge themnfelues. And thep broughte
rewardes puto them From before bpm:but wen
Samus part thas fpuetpmes fo much as anp of
tpicp2s. And thep dopnbing were dzonke w him.
E The. rliiii. Chapter.
C woleph accufeth bps brother of thette, Juda becommeth
furetpe fe? Hen zamin.

A gn NO be chmaunded the rular of his boule
Fane lay ing. Fpil the mens fackes w Foode,ag
pesos moch as thep can carp, put cuerpmang

monep inbis lacke mouth, put mp filuer cup in


Genelis.


A. cp Je
the fackes mouth of the ponge E bis come mo:
nicp alfo. And he dpd accozdpna to F worde that
Joleph hadlapde. And in the moning affone ag
it was lpgbt the men were let go.thep etheir al
Ces. And tobe thep tere out of the cptie € not pet
farre awape, Joleph fapde vnto the rular of big
houle:bp ¢folow afterthemen,andwhenpoot -
ouer take them, p Halte faye Ynto them: whers
foze baue pe rewarded euel foz goodristhatnot
the cup in the ces mp Lo2be d2iuketb,and fos 2
the tobicbe be propbecpeth + pe bauceuell bone p
pe bauedone. Bnd when he ouertoke them, be |
apbethelefame thozdes bntotbem. Andthep
anlaered bpm : toberfoze fapth mp Lozdefuche "J
wowess God forebpd that thy leruauntes uld he
do fo:bebolde,the monep which we found in our a
fackes mouths, we bought agapne to theout ee
of thc lande of Chanaan: bowe then houlde we


7"
i


iteale oute of thp Lozdes boule , epcher fplucr oz | 4 <


golde” with wbhonte focucvoftbp feruauntes pt
befounde, lette bpm dpe,and twe alfo wplbe mp
Lopdes bondmen. And be lapde: Rowe alfolet
it beaccozbpng nto pour wozdes: be w whont
it ig founde, Halbe mp Ceruaunt; and pe tall be g
barinclefle. Andat once eucrp mantoke done
bis lacke to the qrounde, andenery man opened
bistacke. And belcarched, andbeqannecat the
elbet and left at the ponget. Andthe cup was
founde in Den Zaminslacke. Chen they rente
*thepze clothes,and laded cuerp man bps atie, g
Wwentagapne vntothe Cptic Andjudaandhie
ee ae came to Jolephs boufe foz be wag pet
there,and he fell befoze bym on the grounde.
And Joleph ,
whichepe baue doner wote pe not $ fuche a man
as Jcanpzophecper Chenlapde Juda: what
thal we fap vnto mp lozd: what (pal we lpcake wy
o2 Whaterculecan wemakes God bath founde —
out the wpeckedneNe of thp leruauntes. Behold .
both De and we with whome the cuppe ix Found <5
arcmp Lozdesferuauntes. Andbeanlwered.

God fozbpd that J huldedolo, butte man
Wbome thecup is found, be albe mp lernaunt.
And qo pein peace onto pour father. |

Chen Juda went vnto bpm and fapd,oh mp
Lozbde, lette thp eruaunt peake a wozde mmp
Lozbes caves, be not woth with thp feruaunt
foz thou art eucnas Pbharao. Wy Lorde alked
bisicruaunt fapinge : baue pe a father oz a bzo-
ther. And Wwe anfwered mp Lordextwe hauea fa sepie,
tbertbatis olde, and a ponge lad twpicbe be be: &
Gat inbpsage :and the bother of the fapdelad
fs deade and be is all that islefte of that mother
And bis fatherloucth bpm. And chou fapott vn
tothp feruauntes: bepngebym wntome,that ¥
mapefetmpneepe bponbym. Bnd we anfiwe-
red imp Lozde,p the lad coulde not goo from his
father, foz pf be thulde leane bis father, be were
but deade. Chen fapolt thou onto thy feruaun-
tesxercept pour pong bzotbercome with pot gestig..
loke that pelempfacenomoze. And when we
caine vnto thp feruaunt oure father, we fhewed


proie


apde onto tbem:what dede te thig aaa


—_—


i
i a
E


, y


H
h


L-


a


ee what mp Lozde bad (apde: And our father yy


apde Dnfo Us: Tooagapne, and bye vsa lptle FF


foobde, And weanlwered We can nor goo dDoune.


jReucrrheleg


Jofeph,


Pcuertheleffe:pE onrepongelE brother ero wpth

bs, then wll we godowne, foz we mapenot le

the mannes face ercepte our pongeft brother be

with bs And thp leruaunt our father fapoe Vn-

to bs: pe knowe that mp wyte bare me two fon

nes. and the one went out from meand F fapte

ee-rrroy.s of a furetp Poparone in peces,and 3 lathe him

_,. motfence. And pe tabe this allo atwape fromme

BES “pe fome milfoztune happen sponbym,+pe wal

bapnge mp grape bead in Cozowe onto f graue.

-© owe therfore, when F come to thpleruaie

mp fatber, andthelad be not with vs fepnge p

bis pede inte the ladbes Ipfe) then pall it

cometo pafie, thataslooneas be leeti that the

_ ladisnotcome,be fopll dpe. ésthal we thp fer-

Smig yauntesPbepng the grap pede of thp Ceruaunt

. our father with fozotve vnto tbe graue. oy

Bete) OR feruaunte became furetpe Eog the lad befoze

eritib voy Father dud Lapde: xpe J bzpnge bpm not vn-

tothe agapue, J wpll beare the biame vnto mp

fatberallmplpfelonge. Nowe therfozeler me

thp fernaunt bpbe fps pp lad,anbd be mp log

: bes bondman:and let the lad go bp with bis bze

a  , thm. f€02 howe can J goo bpto mpfatber, pE

~ She lad be not with meronlele 3 wold fep wet
chedncsthatthallcomeonmp fathers —

. © Tbe.rly. Chapter.
$ fe Eno to br
r e reaa


peers D iephconlde no lengerrefrapne be-

A Ea Core all them that koode bp bpm.
‘ Bj Uibertore becrpeD: bzpngefurtball
j ea themen frome. Andthereremapned
E Eedi Oman with bpm whple Jofeph vt-
gener e teret ppm felfe onto bis brethzen. Jnd bexwept
sad pliiis alotode , fo that the Eapptyans, andthe boule
of Pbaraoheard it. And Jofeph fapde vnto hig


i Le


bzethzen:3 am Joleph.dotp inp fatberpetlpue?
res Andbis bretheen coulde not anlwere bpm, the
ia there fo abalihed at bis p2elence. And Jofeph


pr fapde Ynto bis bzetbzen:come nere to me,¢ thep
~  Sete.bii.b. Cqineneare. And belapde:¥ Zz am Jofeph pouce
© FeOH bo others Hbomepefoldcinto Eqppte. Powe
Z thertozebe not greved theretope), nepther letit
feme a cruell thpnge in poure cpes, that pe Celde
| Pooh si 4€02 Gon dpd lende me before pou to
` Semet. fane lyfe. « Foz thisis the feconde pere of berth
inthe lande, and fpue mo are bebpnde in whiche
there thall nether be earpng no? barueff.
tfiberfore God fente mebefoze pou to make
poutipon, that pempabt contpnune in the earth
and tofaue pour lpues bp a great Delpuerannce
So nowe it was not pou that lente me bptber,
but God: tobpche bath made mea father bnto
Pbarao:and Lorde of allbps boule, and rular
thozowe ontall the landeof Ear te.Balke pou
€ and goo vptomp father andtellbym. hrs
fapeth thpfonne Jofeph : God bathe made me
Lode of all Ggppte. Come towne therfore yn


tome,tarpenot. Andehou Halte dwell inthe


lande of Golan: and bpde by me, thou and tpp
chplozen, and thp chplbzens chpldzen : thp dhepe
andtbp beaftes,andalltbattbouballe. And


there wpll 3 make prouplpon foz the, foz there


Genelis,


remapne pet Fpue peredofderthe, lec thouand
thphoutpold and all that thou batte come topo
uettpe. And beboloe, poure eyes do le,and the


epes alfo of mp bzotber en Jamin, that mpne m


owne mouth (peakecdto pou. Cherfo2e tellmp
father of all mp bonoure in Ca ppte, andof all
that pe bane fene , and make bate, and bapnge
mpfatbecbptber. Andhefell onbys bzotbec
Hen Jamins necke an’ wepte and WenJamin
Wepte on dps necke.Qozconer be kpi all his
bietD2en and wepte bponthem. And afterthat
bps bzethzen talked wpthbpm. Anodthe tp-
dpnges came Onto Pharaog boule, fo thatthep
fapbe : Jolephs becthrenarecome, and it pitas
fed Pharao Welland all bis feruanntes.

And Pharao Cpake ynto Foleph : fap onto ©
thy brethren, thbps do pe: lade poure beattes and
get pou bence, Vnto the lande of Canaan. Cake
pour father and pour poutpoldes:and come vna
to me and 4 pli gene pou the good of the land
of Egppte,andpe ipall cate of the Fat of p laude
And thou alfo alte commaundethem. Thpg
DO pe: fake cbatettcs wpth rou ont of the lande
of Egppte,fozpoure chpldzen and foz pour Wps
ues:and bypnge pour father,andcome. Allores
garde not youre tufe, fo: the qoot ofall p land
of Egpptets poures.

And thechplozen of Plraclldpd euen fo. And
Jofeph gane them chacettes accozdpnge to the 4È
comimaundemente OF Barao, and gane them
pptaple alfo tofpende bp the wape.

Bnd he gaue onto eche of them chaunge of rap-
ment: Wut ynto Wen Jamin be gaue thre bun-
ded peces of (pluct, and Epue chaunge of raps
mente. And vnto bps father befente afterthe
fame maner ten afles laden With qood out of Es
gppte, and ten the aes laden with cogne, bead
anDimeate:foz bis father bp the wape. So fente
be bis brethrenawapeto departe. And belapoe
Dnto them: (etbat pe fall not out bp the wape.

Shep departed therfore from Egqppte, and G
cameintotbe land of Canaan vnto Zacobthepz
father, and toibebpmilapmge : Jofephispet a=
lyuc andis gouerner Ouer all the lande of Egipt
And Jacobs herte anered:fo2 be belened them
not. Andtheptolde bpm all the wozdes of Jo-
fepbh tobiche bebad fapde wnto them. And when
belawe tdecharettes, whiche Jofeph had lente
tocarpe bpm, thelprete of “Jacob thep zz father
teupued. And Frael fapde: Jhauc pnoughe
that Jofeph mp fonne is petalpuc : z wplll aog
and fe wader that Zope.

@Cbe.rlvi.chapter.
C zarob with all bis HouMolde gorth to Foteph (nto
ri aai geucalogpe of Jacob. z0lepy meteth bps -


rags Sraell tooke bps iournep wptball
ee fs thathebabbde, ahd caine unto weer
CAREN Seba and offered offerpnges ynta
PRE fe the God of bps fatber Wabac. And
ees Hod l(pake vnto Alracllina vilpyor
bp npabte, fainge : Jacob, Jacob. Andbdean-
fwered:beream J. Andbelapde, Jam God
the Godofthy father, feare notte goo bowne
into Egypte. Foz I pl there make of Pa great
people. J wp! goo dewe withthe irto warn
Ch


Sol. rhij,


Joleph.


and J wyll alfo bypnge the agapne,and Joleph
{ball put bys bande bpontbpne epes. And Ja-
cob rofe bp from weet Seba. And f fonneg of
Jfracl carped Jacob their father,and their chpl
Dzen and thep2 Wwiues in the charets which Pha
raobad fent tocarpebpm. And thep toke thepz


cateli and the coodes whichetbep bad qottenin $


` theland of Canaan,and came into Egtpt: both
Jacob and all his ede withbpm, bts lonnes and

25 bis fonnes Connes with bymbisdoughters and

big onnes dDougbters, and all bis fede bzoughte

be with bpminto Egypte. Chele are the names

of thechplozen of {rael which came into Egipt

erod.i.a. both Jacob g hisfonnes:xiRuben, Jacobs fick
a tc onne. Che chpldzen of Ruben: Panoch,¢ Bal


ii. Pab.a. Wu, Hesronand Charmi. Chechpldzen of Sime pra


on: Jemuell, Jamin, Dpad, Jachim, and sopar,
and Saul the fonne of a Cananitpth woman.


(patie, @hechplozen ofk Leut,Gerfon,Mabathe ee Pees


ia, 19.8 part. be chpldzen of + Juba: Er and Dnan,
Hela, and Pbhares,andselap : Wut Er,¢ Onan
 Dpedintbelanbeof Canaan. The cet of
Pbares allo were Hesron ig prio be chpl
Dien of (achar: Tola, Bhua, Job,and Simro.
Thechplozen ofzabulon: Sered, Elon,and Ja-
pelelcel. € befe be the chyldzen of Lea, which he
_ bare vnto Jacob, in &)elopotamia, webedough
€ ter of pina. Al tbe foules of hisfonnes g Dough
ters make thyaty æ thee. Che chplozen of Gad,
sippion, and Haggi, Sunt, and Ebon, Eri g
| Arodt,and Areli Che chplozen of Afer: Jem-
(Hadii-l na and Jefua, sclui,and Weta,and Syerabtheie
{yfter. Andtbhe chpldzen of Wzta: Heber g Hal-
chiel. Chele are the chpldzen of Silpha, wbome
Labangaue to Lea his doughter. and thele the
bare vnto Jacob evuen.rvt.toules. Che chpldzen
of Rabell Jacobs wypfe : Sorry. Wen Jamin,
> And vntoJofeph in p landof Egipt were bozne
Seria. SHanales t Cphaun, whichexAlnath, poouc
gbter of Putiphar pret of Dn bare vntobpm.
tpa viib ChechpldzenofxwWenJami, Dela, wWecber
Gnd.O19 a Abel, Gera, Pacmam,€ brand Ros, q@upim
pupim, g Ard. Chele are the chpldzenof Rabel
which He bare wnto Jacob. ritit.foules all toge
tier. Chechplozen of Dan, Hulim. The chplozé
of Mepthali: Jabesecl, Guni, Jeret Sillem.
hele are thefonnes of Wilba, which Laban
gauc Ynto Rabel bis doughter,¢ he bare thee
pnto Jacob, all together. wii. foules. And fo the
peute.r.v. Xfoules that came w Facobinto Egppte which
came onte of bps lopnes (befpde Jacobs fonnes
wpues) were altogether. rlvi. foules. And pion
nes of Jofeph, which were borne bpm in Eqppt
twere two foules:<y0 p al the foules of the boule
of Jacob Wwbichcame into pt,are.lrr. And
be fent Juda before bym vnto Joleph, to directe
is face bnto Golan, ¢tbepcame into the lande
of Golan. And Jofeph made redp his charet and
went Dp to mete Firal bis father ynta Golan,
and pzefented bpm felfe onto pem, @ Fellon bys
necke, and wepte bpon bis neckea good whple.
And Jlraclfapoe wnto Joleph:Aow am Fcon-
tent todpe,intomuch as 3 baue fene tbe and bes
cauletbon art pet alpue. And Jolephfapde tn-
tobis becth2en,¢ vnto bis fatbers ponfe: 3 pil


Genelis.


go bp and ewe Pharao, and tell bpne.


thzen and mp fathers boule, tobpche were ft fe |


lande of Canaan arecome onto me, and £bep ar
{hepebeardes (Foz they were men of catell) and
thep baue bzougbte thepz pepe andthep2uren,
andalltbattbepbaue. Andyplitchaunce that
baraocal pou, and afke pou, what pour occu
pacpon is, pe thal an{tere,thp feruauntes Pane


bene men occupped about catel, from ourchpioe


bode wnto this tyme we ¢ our father, $ pemape
Dwell inthe lande of Golan. soz everp thepe by
per igan abbominacpon onto the Eqiptpans. ,

Seer ans be one oer ay Dba


ef Girao andlaide:mp father andmp bze
Br hae then thepze epe and thep2 oren,

| FA all thattbep bauc,arecome out of p
ee [ande of Canaan, and bebolde : the
ave in tbe lande of Golan. And Jolepytoke
the bpninoft of bis brethzett:euen fpue men and
prefented thé onto Pharao. And Pparaolapoe
wnto bis bzethzen:wbat ig pour occupacpon?


And thep anlwered Pbarao-(hepherdes are thp


feruauntes,botb weand allo our father. Thep


fapde mozeoner Ynto pharao: foz toxfogeozne Sspr


in lande are we come, foz tbp feruauntes baue
no pafture foz ter? thepe, fo foze is the amip
mentin the lande of Canaan. Note therfoze let
thp {eruauntes diwell in thelande of Golan.


And Pharaolapde vnto Fole pl :tbp fares p's]


thp brethzen are come Dnto the. Tbe landof €=
gpptets befoze the: gn the bel place of theland
make both thp father and thp bzethzen dwel: ea
nen intbelande of Golan let them dwel. soze-
ouer, pE thou know anp man of actiupte among
them.make them rulers ouer mp catel. And Jos
fepbbzougbre te tacos Des tarber, and fet bens
before Pbarac. And Jacob bleed Bharao.

_ And Pharaolapde YntoJacob:bow olde art
ty patna arb noe
of nip pplarpmage are an edand thpatpe
peres. eweant euel baue thedapes of mp lpfe


bene, and bauenot attapned bnto the pereg of p


lpfe of mp fatberg,in the dapes of thep? pplgre=


mages. And Jacob dlefed Pharaoand went -


out from bpm. And Jofeph prepared owellpns
ges foz big father and bis barehan, ¢ gane them
poffefipons in thelanbde of Eappt in tbebetof
the lande:euen in the lande of Ramefes, ag bha
tao bad commaunded. And Jofeph made proui:
$5 fo? bis father, bis bzetbzen : and all bis fa«
thers boutbolbde with bzeade euen as pong chpl


denare fedde. Chere wasno becade inall the €


lande, foz iy dearth was ercedpng loze: fo that
tþelande of Egppte and the lande of Canaan,
were famiped bp the realon of the dearth. And
dotepbe beoughte togetber all themonep that
was tounde inthe lande of Eqppte, and of Cae
naan, foz the cozne wbhyche thep bought : and be
lapde Dp the monep in Pbharaos houle. iben
monp fapled in the land of Egypt, ¢ of Canaan
al tbe @xiptpans came vito band fapbe
Gene VE bzeade : wherfozefulleree thou ™ to

p ;


= Dieph came therfoze and told pha +


Jolet —


Jofeph:


dpe before the when our montp istpents Then
fapbe Jofeph : bzpnae poure catell, and J topll
menue pon Fo: pour catel, pE pe be without monep


D Andtbep broucbe thetrcatel winto Jofeph. And


Zolcph qaue them bzeade for bozles q Hepeand
Dren, galles and fed them w bead, for all thep2
catel that pere. urt when $ pere was cded,thep
came vnt ppm the nerte rere 4 lapbe vnto him
we wplinot bpe it frome mp Lorde howe that
our money is {peute, mp Lozde alle bad our ra-
tell arid beaftes, netheris there ougbt teft inthe
{pabt of inp Lozde, but enen oar bodies and our
landeg. Wberfoze lettek p ys dpe befoze thpne
epes,and the land fo goto nought bpe bs g our
landes fo2 bread : and both we gour landeg wpl


be boundg to Bharao. Onlp geue vs fede, p we


mape lpuc and not dpe , ethat theland qo notto
wait. And loJoleph bought all pland of Egypt
fo: B harag.sto2 p Egiptpans folde enerp man


Œ bislande becaufe the berth wag loze upon them


and fo tbe latide became WHataos. And Heap-
popnted the people vnto p cptieg from onefpde


of Egppt vnto the other: onclpthelande ofthe SP


Paces bought benot. oz the Petes had an


* p2dpnaunce o£ harao, that thep Houlde eate p


F mp Loze,


which was appopnted wnto them: which Pba-
rao bad geuen thé bherfore thep lolde not thep?
Jandes. Then Foleph lapde onto thefolke: be=
ee bane bougpt pou this dape æ pour lande
02 Barao. Cake there bread and fede and low
thelande. And oftpeencreafe,pe pall geur the
fpfte parte bnto Pharao, and foure partes Mal
De pour owne, fo? the fede of p Felde and foz pou,
and them of pour boufboldcs,andfo2 pour chpl:
dzen, tocate. And thep anfwered: Thou halk fa-
ueizourlpucs. Let ba fpnde grace inthe fpabt of
and we pl be paraos leruauntes
And Jofeph made íta lawe ouer thelande of È-
gppte vnto this dape: that Pparao fhulve baue
the fpfte parte, erceptètbe lante of the Prettes
onlp, tobiche was not Bharaos, |
Mud {fracldweltetn Cappe:enenin the cou
treof Golan. Andehep had cthepze poltefipons
therin, an? grete and multi ve ercedpraglp.
£Porconer, facodlpucd in the ande of Egppte
feucntene pereg, fo that the bole age of jacob
was anhundzed and. clit pere.Caiben the time
Dewe Upathat Fractl mult dpe , be lent foz big
fonne Jofend, andfapde Dutobym: PEF Dauc
found gracein chp {yabt, Db. put thpbandnow


E vnder mp thpgp, and dealemercpfullp truel


Gr.trh.D,


woth me,that p burpe menot in Egypte, but
wopllipe with mp fathers, ¢thou thalt carp me
out of Egypte, burp meinthep2 burpall. And
be anfwered: J wpl doas Phattelapde. And pe
faydex [were Dnto me, and De fware vnto bpm.
And Arael wozdpppedtowarde p bedsbeo.


rloitt. Chapter.


€94C0 Ipcth (pcke.edelpreth ephzaimand sjanatles
toz bis Connes and bieen


them,


Genelis


solto


bntothe. And Jirael toke his Frengeh onto pim
and fat bpon the bed ant Jacob fapde vnto Yo-
feph: God almpabep appered bntome atx Lug


Fi Meg ae


z ae T Re .
f. n F t
= - Fa-
a i, =)
726 : vs
# e) F
| Ss
=


hai am -i Pie =
oe A a z= - :
Ws are


apy fore” tametothemto Egipt ar mpne:
cuenas Rubenand Simconare apne. And ibe


phzat. And J buried ber there tn the wape to E-
phzat. Che fameis %ethlebem.And Fraeill bea
belde Zolephs fonnes andlapde tohatare theler
Joleph {apde vnto bys father, they are mp fon-
nes which Godbhath geuen me bere. And Delain
ob, bepna them tome,elct me bleflethem. And
the epes of Ffracll were dpm Foz age, fotbat be
coulde not well fe. And be bzought them to bpnt
and be kpiled them and embaaced them, And Ji-
racl fapde nto Jolcph: Fbadnotthoughte ta
baue lene thy face, andpet lo, Goù bath {pewed
it me,anbdallo thp fede,and Jofeph toke them a-
wap from bislap,¢ wozipped on the grounve
before bpm. Chentobe Joleph the borh:Eppza
imw big right bande toward (racis left bande
and anatics vd bis left bande, toward jlracls
tpabt bande, brought toem vntobpm. 2nd Ff
racl fretched out bps rygbtbande, tlapoe t on
Ephzaims hed, which was the ponger, ghis left
bande upon analies bed, quidprig bis dandeg
wptelp o; G)analles wag $ elder. And be blef-
fed Jofeph æ fapde: God befoze wh mp Fathers
Aba bam and FJbabac drd walke, Eod whiche
bath fede all mplpfelong Vrntothisdap, athe
angell whych bath Selpuered me from all enell,
bleffe the laddes,€ let mp name be named inthé,
and the name of mp fathers Abzabam ¢ Flabac
and ý thep map qrowinto amultitudein p mpd
desof theearth. ben Jofeph law yp bis farther
lapd bis rpg bt hand bpon phead of Ephraim,ie


Se, FEO. a


15


BEITI, E


vi a bim. And be lifted vp histathers hand D
0


toDaueremcued it fro phzaims hed yato Wa:
naties bed, Jolepylayd onto bis father:not fo
my father Foz tbis ts peldelt.jout thy rvabe bad
bpon bis hed. And pis father wold not, but fayd

cii Fbnow


*


Jofeph,
J knowe ít tell mp Tonne, J knotoe itwell. He
ibalbe allo a people and fhalbegreate. Wut bis
ponger bzother Halbe greater then be, and bps
fede thal be full of people. And pe blefled them $
dape and [apde: Fn the, let Zlrael biefle and {ape
God make tbeas Cphzatn before Ganafles .
And Flractl fayde wuto Foleph:beholde, J dpe.
And God albe with pou  bzpnge pou agapne
bnto p lande of pour fathers.<Hozeoner, J baue
geuen tntto the, aporcponof x lande abone thp
beethzen, whiche Jaat oute of the bande of the
Amozpte in mp Cwearde, andinmy botos.
C The.rlir.Chapter.
@ Facod bleleth all bps otwne fonaes and Heweth the
bat isto come, Pe appopnteth) where he wpibeburp:
£D,anb bpeth.
aoa $20 Jacob called foz bis fonnes and
aca ‘econ (apde : come together, that 3 mape
pa Catell pou what hallbappen pou in
e Citbe lafe dapes. Gather pou toge-
VELAN ther and beare pe fonnes of Jacob,
en bito Flracll pour father. Rubenxmpne
eldek fonne,thou art mp mpabteand the begin
npnae of mp ttrength the noblenefie of diqnpte,
and the noblenefie of power. Cinfable as wa-
ter. @houthaltuot be the chctelk, becaule thou
wenteft pptotbp fathers bed .Cuen then bidet
thou defplett, and it was nomozemp couche .
Thp brethren Simeonand Leni, cruel ins
ftrumentes intbep: Dabitacpong. nto thep? fe-
creteg come not mp foule, Yntotbep: congrega-
cpon bemp honourenot coupled :fozin thepze
se.rrriit.o xwath thep lewe aman, and in tbepz felfe wpl
thep opgged downe a wall. Curled bethepze
wath, fo2 it was hamelefle , and thep2 fearce-
nes, foz it was cruell. F wpll Denpde them in Ja-
cob, and fraterthemin Firaell.
7 Jada thou arte be, whomethp bzetþzen Hall
(.Para.v.a Praple. Thy bande thalbe in the*necke of thyne
erinempes, thy fathers chplbzenthall foupe be-
eih. v.e. Fozetbe. Judaisax Lpons helpe. rom etbp
Cpople mp fonne thou art come an bpe De lapde
bpm Downe andcouched bpm lelfeasaLpon,¢€
Seriy. agaxlponceile. Who wpl ferebim wp Che (cep
tre (hal not departe from Juda anda lawaener
From betwene bis fete, ontpll Silocome. And


Job .fiit.a.


Se. frit.€,


puto bpm thall the qatherpnge of the people be. Z ATN
He pallbpnde bps fole vntothe bpne, andabps Fey L wy
affescolte bnfothe bzaunche. Hewalpedbis |


garment tn wpne and bis mantell in the blonde
of fet is epes are redder then wpne, and
bis teth wbhpter then mplke.xsabulonthald wel
belpde the bauenof the fee, and npe the bauen of
a | iy Na Albe Dato Sidon.
¢ Séaar a tronge alle : couchypng bpm Bowne
betwene two burdens, and fawe that refte was
food, and the lanbde that it was pleafaunte,and
boived bps thoulder to beare, andbecame a ler-
gootcii» VONNE DUTO trpbute.*Dan thalliudge bis peo-
rutt.ry.cog Ple andthe trpbeg of Hraell, man hall be a fer-
rone.rbiit pent inthe wape,an adder inthe path, bptpuce
the bozie beles and bis rpder fell bak Warde: af-
ter tbp faluacponpaue Jloked D Logde. Gad,
an Dott of men tall oucrcome bpm, and be pall
gucrcome at thelat. OF Affer:bis bead thalbe


Sol.rriii.p


=æ
es,


Poleph. —
fat, andbethall genepleaturesfoxakpnae.> . |
f~rephtalin isa lwpfte bynde,geupnge good D |
ly wo2des. Chat florpihing chplde Joleph, that |
plenteous chpld bp the well fpde.chedougbters
ranne bpon the wal. Thep bane prouoked bpm, ` |
and thot bim through witb dartes. Che archers f
Daue Sad ltr bis bowe abode fat, and A
the armes of big bandeg were made ffronge, bp e |
the bandes of the mpghtpe Godof Jacob. Dut ' í
of bpm pall come an berdeman,a ftonein Fira- , J
ell: from thy fathers God whiche bath delped !
the,and with tbe almpabtp whicbebathbletied . as
the torch bleffpngesfromipeaucnaboue, wpth -~ «
bletipnaes ofp depe tbat Ipeth ynder,andDwpth =. .
blefipnaes of the bzet and of the wombe. Che |
blefipnges of thp father were ftronger then the 0
bleffpnges of mine elders, nto the btmolk of p ©
fra eoe world, and thep Hhalbe onthe head a
of Jofeph, and on the toppe of the brade of bpm i
that was feperatefrom bps betheen. Wenga- i
min (hall raupthe aga wolfe. Inthe monpnae |
be tall deuoure the peapye,and atnpabt be pall œ
Deupde te poper: All thele are the twelue trp-
beg of JiraelLand this tbepz fatber fpake unto
them and bleed them, euerp one of them bleed -
be witha feucrall blefipnge. And be charged thé sE
and fapde unto them: tben J albe gathered . p
unto mpæpeople, burpe me with mp fathers, ineen.pr.e®
the caue that ig intbe telde of Ephzon p Hethite i
in tbe donblerauetbatigin theteldebp thecoñ ae >
tre of WHWamrein the lande of Canaan. Wiviche f
Felde Hbzabam bought of ca the Hethpte
fo: a poficilyon to butp in, where as tere burps
ev Abzabam and Sara bis wife. And whereas
were buried Alabac and Rebecca bis wpe. Fnv
there J burped Lea. Che felde and thecaue that em
is tberin, was bought of the chplozen of Herh, f
And when Jacob Hadcommaunded all that sA
be wolde vnto big founes,be plucked vp bis rete 5


onto the bed and dped, and was * put yntobys £
people. Bnd Jofeph Fell bpon bis oe ith Atte. bie TnT


and E n ım, and pled bpm. ETE
C Jacob ts burped, Fofeph foz pan bis beethzeu thein: of


furp that thep opd Co bpm.and be bpech oi


ss E|


äg
eF


`
ao *


the Egiptpans bewapled bpm. lrr.dapes. And |
fapinge: PEJ 5 oe


* burpemeinmp graue, Serwis =


onelp


“only thep2chplozen, andtbep2 Hhepe,and thepre
tatelllettethep bebpnde inthe landeof Golat.

And there wente w bpm allo chaccts and hozfe-

Men:and it Was anexcedDpnge greate company.

And thep came to the cogne loze of Atad which

is beponde iy Sa babi toep made a greate

*<eprliib, and excedpng loze lamentacpon. And bexmour=
=- ned fo2 bis father feucn dapes. And when the in:
Dbabpters of the lande(euen Sn Cahanites fav

tie mournpngein the cone floze of Xtad, thep

he fapde: thisisa great mournpng vnto the Exp
> >  fpang: wberfoze tbe name of theplace iscalica
p . » the moznpnge of the Egpptpans, andit is bes
| menire, Ponde Jozdane: and bys tonnes dpd Vntobpm,
{n Acte.bu.b. accozdpnge as He had commaunded them. oz
fi € bisfonnes carped bpm * into tbelande of Canas


wobiche caue* A bzabam bought and the feive al:
1 fo; tobedplaceteburpe it, of Exvheonthe ies
thpte before Hamre. And Jofeph returned ins

to Egypte agapne,be and bps bact pen, and all


affoneas bebad burped bpm.


father Was dcade,thep lapot: Jofeph mprbte
foztune to bate bs and rewarde Dsagapne all
f theeucli wbich we dpd buto bpn. Jnd ig Ad ha
' Acommaundement bnto Jo epp laping:tbp a:

ther charged bs befoze bis death faping : Chis


Èr odtis;


Derrigo. anand burped ppm inthe doudlecaueofpfeclde -


that wente Dp wpth bpm to burpe bps father, ) is rN
sermi». And woen Jolepdsinetbrenfatvetbat there |p


The leconde booke of
Sma ea nee,
@ The fpe chante.


C Tbe chpt zenof Jacob arenombied. whence Whar
Oppe Ned chem. The acte ot the govipe eripi Pbarag


: = I E
aNu a
ip of + y È r E Fpi


Te, te j |
ae eg ia a r
T l Ee S iE i is F
rri ae way
| ted Bos 7
ia a Dih: FA
-i +
E e i yad a |


e Slacbar, and Wentamin, Dan
maa Pephtali,Sad,and Afar. JU

bat came out of thelupnes of Jacob
were.ler.ut Joleph was in Egypte alreadp.
And Jofeph dpedand all his baethzen, andalip


T -=


Eol rir)


yencracpon, and thexchplozcnof yiraellgretue deteee
encrealed , multipiped , and wared erceaopnge Pra ciuc
mpgbtpe:and the lande was full of them. |

Wut there role bpaneekpnge in Eappte, 28
whiche knetbe not Jofeph. Andhelapde onto


wplt pall pefape nto Jofeph:fozgeue(F prap
ebedtbe tretpace of thp baetbeen, an their tone

fo: thep rewarded the evel. And nowe( we pap
D the )forgeuc tbe trefpace of theferuatites o: tp
E fathers-5od. And Jofeph wepte, when thep


wg fp pnto bpm .
ett.Fib.b. PR |

gee Foz bps brethren came onto bpm, and fell
flatte bcfoze bis Facefapinge:beboloe, wete thp
feruauntcs. Towbome jofepy lapie x feare
not. Ain J Gods Vethought cuellagapuke me:

“but God turned it vnto good, to bzpuge to pafe
asitlsthis dape, and Co laue much peoplealpue

. . — fearenottherfoze. Powe J Se fhe pou,
=.-  andpourchpldzen, and becomfozted then, and
ma Topi». pake kpndelp vnto tbem.


of rrea v ouite,anb Jofeph linedan bundzedandten pere


' And Jofeph lawe x Ephzapms chypldzen, euen
$ nto tet ae vnto BHacbir
pr theloune of $Hanaffes were chpldzen vozne, on
| Acie pbs kners. and Jofeph pi rama bis bze-
, tizn: Jope. And God wpil turelp vpiet pon
| > and bypng pot out of thts lande, nto che lande
| aede p.a Voppche he fware vnto Abrabam , Flabac, and
} Eroria. Jacob. And Jofeph tokean oth of the chplozen
| EO DE Feral fapinge : Godwpil not faple but vp-
| : fet pou, and pe Mall carp mpxbones bence.
i — Andlo Zolephdyed, when he was an bun-
D2ed Eten pere olde. And thep embawmed bpm
with lppces,puttyng bpmina cheltin Eqppte.


Theende ofthe fyrte
- booke of G)ofes: called inthe debene,
Weretchyth,andintheha=
tpn, Genelis.


Jol ph dwelt in Egypte, beandbisfatbers D


bys folke : bebolde,the people of the chplozen oF
Sliael are greater andimpabtier then we. Come
on,let vs plape wplelp with them, let they mul
tiplpe,and lett it happen, that pf there chaunce
any warte) thep topne them Celues nto our ene
mics,andfpgbhtaqapnt ve,and fo get them out
ofthe lande. Therfozedpdthep let talkema-
fers ouer them, to kepe them onder wyty burs
dens. And toep buple vonto PBHaraotreature cp-
fics:PbitonandiwRameles. Wut tie mozethep
exed them, p moze thep multiplped and arewe
fo that thep avbozred the chplozenof Zfracil.
Andche Cgiptpans belde tye chpldzen of Fira-
elin bondage without mercye. Therfore was
thepee lpfebptrer vnto them in that crucil von-
Dage, Inclape and bapcke, ¢ail maner of wozke
intyefeldes, 02 allthep2 bondage whicbetbep
ferucd them, was full of tirannpe.
And the bynge of Egypte fapde vuto the mpd-
wWpues of the Hebzues women, of which p oneg
name thas Sephora and the other bua, whe
edo the offpce ofa midwypfe tothe woman of f
ebzues and leinp bprth tyme that itis a tope
petbal bpl if. But if it be a Doug bter,it Hatlpue
Motwithtanding the mpdwiues fearedGod,¢
dpd not asthe kpng of Ccipt cOmaunded them
butfauedthe men chpldzen. And the bpng of E- =p
gypt called foz the mpowyucs,elapde vito tie
ay Son pou delf on thig maner, paue fauci p
menchpldzen: And p mpd wines anfibered Bia
rao that he Hebgucs Wemen arenct asthe apf
Cut meno


“only thep2chplozen, andtbep2 Hhepe,and thepre
tatelllettethep bebpnde inthe landeof Golat.

And there wente w bpm allo chaccts and hozfe-

Men:and it Was anexcedDpnge greate company.

And thep came to the cogne loze of Atad which

is beponde iy Sa babi toep made a greate

*<eprliib, and excedpng loze lamentacpon. And bexmour=
=- ned fo2 bis father feucn dapes. And when the in:
Dbabpters of the lande(euen Sn Cahanites fav

tie mournpngein the cone floze of Xtad, thep

he fapde: thisisa great mournpng vnto the Exp
> >  fpang: wberfoze tbe name of theplace iscalica
p . » the moznpnge of the Egpptpans, andit is bes
| menire, Ponde Jozdane: and bys tonnes dpd Vntobpm,
{n Acte.bu.b. accozdpnge as He had commaunded them. oz
fi € bisfonnes carped bpm * into tbelande of Canas


wobiche caue* A bzabam bought and the feive al:
1 fo; tobedplaceteburpe it, of Exvheonthe ies
thpte before Hamre. And Jofeph returned ins

to Egypte agapne,be and bps bact pen, and all


affoneas bebad burped bpm.


father Was dcade,thep lapot: Jofeph mprbte
foztune to bate bs and rewarde Dsagapne all
f theeucli wbich we dpd buto bpn. Jnd ig Ad ha
' Acommaundement bnto Jo epp laping:tbp a:

ther charged bs befoze bis death faping : Chis


Èr odtis;


Derrigo. anand burped ppm inthe doudlecaueofpfeclde -


that wente Dp wpth bpm to burpe bps father, ) is rN
sermi». And woen Jolepdsinetbrenfatvetbat there |p


The leconde booke of
Sma ea nee,
@ The fpe chante.


C Tbe chpt zenof Jacob arenombied. whence Whar
Oppe Ned chem. The acte ot the govipe eripi Pbarag


: = I E
aNu a
ip of + y È r E Fpi


Te, te j |
ae eg ia a r
T l Ee S iE i is F
rri ae way
| ted Bos 7
ia a Dih: FA
-i +
E e i yad a |


e Slacbar, and Wentamin, Dan
maa Pephtali,Sad,and Afar. JU

bat came out of thelupnes of Jacob
were.ler.ut Joleph was in Egypte alreadp.
And Jofeph dpedand all his baethzen, andalip


T -=


Eol rir)


yencracpon, and thexchplozcnof yiraellgretue deteee
encrealed , multipiped , and wared erceaopnge Pra ciuc
mpgbtpe:and the lande was full of them. |

Wut there role bpaneekpnge in Eappte, 28
whiche knetbe not Jofeph. Andhelapde onto


wplt pall pefape nto Jofeph:fozgeue(F prap
ebedtbe tretpace of thp baetbeen, an their tone

fo: thep rewarded the evel. And nowe( we pap
D the )forgeuc tbe trefpace of theferuatites o: tp
E fathers-5od. And Jofeph wepte, when thep


wg fp pnto bpm .
ett.Fib.b. PR |

gee Foz bps brethren came onto bpm, and fell
flatte bcfoze bis Facefapinge:beboloe, wete thp
feruauntcs. Towbome jofepy lapie x feare
not. Ain J Gods Vethought cuellagapuke me:

“but God turned it vnto good, to bzpuge to pafe
asitlsthis dape, and Co laue much peoplealpue

. . — fearenottherfoze. Powe J Se fhe pou,
=.-  andpourchpldzen, and becomfozted then, and
ma Topi». pake kpndelp vnto tbem.


of rrea v ouite,anb Jofeph linedan bundzedandten pere


' And Jofeph lawe x Ephzapms chypldzen, euen
$ nto tet ae vnto BHacbir
pr theloune of $Hanaffes were chpldzen vozne, on
| Acie pbs kners. and Jofeph pi rama bis bze-
, tizn: Jope. And God wpil turelp vpiet pon
| > and bypng pot out of thts lande, nto che lande
| aede p.a Voppche he fware vnto Abrabam , Flabac, and
} Eroria. Jacob. And Jofeph tokean oth of the chplozen
| EO DE Feral fapinge : Godwpil not faple but vp-
| : fet pou, and pe Mall carp mpxbones bence.
i — Andlo Zolephdyed, when he was an bun-
D2ed Eten pere olde. And thep embawmed bpm
with lppces,puttyng bpmina cheltin Eqppte.


Theende ofthe fyrte
- booke of G)ofes: called inthe debene,
Weretchyth,andintheha=
tpn, Genelis.


Jol ph dwelt in Egypte, beandbisfatbers D


bys folke : bebolde,the people of the chplozen oF
Sliael are greater andimpabtier then we. Come
on,let vs plape wplelp with them, let they mul
tiplpe,and lett it happen, that pf there chaunce
any warte) thep topne them Celues nto our ene
mics,andfpgbhtaqapnt ve,and fo get them out
ofthe lande. Therfozedpdthep let talkema-
fers ouer them, to kepe them onder wyty burs
dens. And toep buple vonto PBHaraotreature cp-
fics:PbitonandiwRameles. Wut tie mozethep
exed them, p moze thep multiplped and arewe
fo that thep avbozred the chplozenof Zfracil.
Andche Cgiptpans belde tye chpldzen of Fira-
elin bondage without mercye. Therfore was
thepee lpfebptrer vnto them in that crucil von-
Dage, Inclape and bapcke, ¢ail maner of wozke
intyefeldes, 02 allthep2 bondage whicbetbep
ferucd them, was full of tirannpe.
And the bynge of Egypte fapde vuto the mpd-
wWpues of the Hebzues women, of which p oneg
name thas Sephora and the other bua, whe
edo the offpce ofa midwypfe tothe woman of f
ebzues and leinp bprth tyme that itis a tope
petbal bpl if. But if it be a Doug bter,it Hatlpue
Motwithtanding the mpdwiues fearedGod,¢
dpd not asthe kpng of Ccipt cOmaunded them
butfauedthe men chpldzen. And the bpng of E- =p
gypt called foz the mpowyucs,elapde vito tie
ay Son pou delf on thig maner, paue fauci p
menchpldzen: And p mpd wines anfibered Bia
rao that he Hebgucs Wemen arenct asthe apf
Cut meno


- A | eee, Tea
Soles. Exodus, Holes.
men of Eqppte:forthep are Eurdp wemen;and them, and watered th paepe: San ee thep `
ate Delpucredper ths mpdiopucscomeatthem. cameto Raquel tbep2 tather.befapde:bow bap
And Godtherforedelt welwithtbempdiwpues penethittbatpearc comefofoncto bape!
And the people multiplped g wared verp migh Andthep anfwered: amanot €gppt Delinered
tpe. And itfoztuned becaulethe mpdDwpucsfea ws from the handeof the a oso ER deo .
red God, bemadethemboules. And Pharao vs water,and watered the thepe. He lapde vn-
charged all bis people-faping. All themenchypl tobis dougbters. And where isherwoppbaucpe a
dzen that are boznecatintotberpuer,andfauc foleftthe manr Callbpmpbemapeatebzead.
the mapdechpldzenalpue. And Doles was content to dwel With the man
CThe.ii. Chapter. PE ing pe gane Soun phopa bps kgga D
aaa D a ee biche when (he bare a lonne, *calleD pem Ger er piring
Feet te aaae naea petty fon:fo2 belapde, abaue benea ftraunger ina
and marpeth a tapir, he Hlcaciptes crpe buco the Lozoe. Firausntre Lande.ow ano te bare pet anatper Conus, whom F) :
robd.bi.c, mane a No there toentamanofxtheboufe veces lieser, tapingr,the Gov of mp father is mpne helper
‘oe KON ot Leu. anotouca DougpeecofLe “=n chauncedinppocette of tpme, that the
Sea aul. Andthewpfeconceaucdgbate Kynge of Egppte dped and the chpldzen of Jira
gatonne.and when welawe thatit cil tpghenbe tbe realon of bondage, and crped.
a bas apzoperchplbe* Webyd bym Andthepe complapnt came vp onto od from
eg: And when the couldeno lenger the bondage: and Gob brarbe thepa mone. Jnd
DE UP HIU PE noha PE S thew odremembzed bps promple pth Abrabam,
bed it With pine and pptche,andlapde p chplde Daana Tan Aub OaD Lobe bpon K Dpi
therin, ¢ put it inthe flagges bp p rpuer beinke. Dzen of Ifrael and Sov pad refpect onto them.
j le A p rer.
Hot, biit come ofit. xAnd the Doughter of Pharao came a oi eae iniii but,
tinera Downes fo walhe ber felte intherpuer, and her and Cendeth bpm to thechplozen of Ffeacl!, and to Pharas
Dami.riitc napdeng walkedalongebptherpucrstppe. «Sat feaance.


=


D
6 5


pots AA


whome Pbaraosdoughterfapde. Cakethps E= a= EN
i E ff Ofes kepte the the
it vp.Cbhechplocarewe,andmhebgonghtit vn- f V Ñ


AR


»


owe tt cometh B:
Fen be Lod


nto


- A | eee, Tea
Soles. Exodus, Holes.
men of Eqppte:forthep are Eurdp wemen;and them, and watered th paepe: San ee thep `
ate Delpucredper ths mpdiopucscomeatthem. cameto Raquel tbep2 tather.befapde:bow bap
And Godtherforedelt welwithtbempdiwpues penethittbatpearc comefofoncto bape!
And the people multiplped g wared verp migh Andthep anfwered: amanot €gppt Delinered
tpe. And itfoztuned becaulethe mpdDwpucsfea ws from the handeof the a oso ER deo .
red God, bemadethemboules. And Pharao vs water,and watered the thepe. He lapde vn-
charged all bis people-faping. All themenchypl tobis dougbters. And where isherwoppbaucpe a
dzen that are boznecatintotberpuer,andfauc foleftthe manr Callbpmpbemapeatebzead.
the mapdechpldzenalpue. And Doles was content to dwel With the man
CThe.ii. Chapter. PE ing pe gane Soun phopa bps kgga D
aaa D a ee biche when (he bare a lonne, *calleD pem Ger er piring
Feet te aaae naea petty fon:fo2 belapde, abaue benea ftraunger ina
and marpeth a tapir, he Hlcaciptes crpe buco the Lozoe. Firausntre Lande.ow ano te bare pet anatper Conus, whom F) :
robd.bi.c, mane a No there toentamanofxtheboufe veces lieser, tapingr,the Gov of mp father is mpne helper
‘oe KON ot Leu. anotouca DougpeecofLe “=n chauncedinppocette of tpme, that the
Sea aul. Andthewpfeconceaucdgbate Kynge of Egppte dped and the chpldzen of Jira
gatonne.and when welawe thatit cil tpghenbe tbe realon of bondage, and crped.
a bas apzoperchplbe* Webyd bym Andthepe complapnt came vp onto od from
eg: And when the couldeno lenger the bondage: and Gob brarbe thepa mone. Jnd
DE UP HIU PE noha PE S thew odremembzed bps promple pth Abrabam,
bed it With pine and pptche,andlapde p chplde Daana Tan Aub OaD Lobe bpon K Dpi
therin, ¢ put it inthe flagges bp p rpuer beinke. Dzen of Ifrael and Sov pad refpect onto them.
j le A p rer.
Hot, biit come ofit. xAnd the Doughter of Pharao came a oi eae iniii but,
tinera Downes fo walhe ber felte intherpuer, and her and Cendeth bpm to thechplozen of Ffeacl!, and to Pharas
Dami.riitc napdeng walkedalongebptherpucrstppe. «Sat feaance.


=


D
6 5


pots AA


whome Pbaraosdoughterfapde. Cakethps E= a= EN
i E ff Ofes kepte the the
it vp.Cbhechplocarewe,andmhebgonghtit vn- f V Ñ


AR


»


owe tt cometh B:
Fen be Lod


nto


a ee
oles.


A es:
. =
7 8.


=


-E —_—° - = We = — E


' Suto the place of the Cananptes and Hetbites,,
and Anozites,and pbheresithes,anb Heuites,¢
ofthe Jebulites. Now therfore,thecomplapnet
of the chpldzen of Zfraclis come Ynfo meand J

€ Hane allo {ene the opprefpon wiherwith p Egy

tyang oppefle them. Come thou therfoze,and

` topll fende the bnto Pharao, that thou mapet
bzpnge mp people the chpldzen of Ffracli out of
Egppt. And Soles fapde vnto God: what am

"5 togo wnto Pharao,and to bepnge the chploze
yp OF Siraell out o Egypte’ And beantwoered: F
wpll be withthe. And this Halbe a token tnta
the, that 3J baue lente the : afterthat thou hatte
brought che people out of Egppte pe thallerue
Eod dpon this mountapne. And <Holeslapoe
= bnto God: bebolde, when FJ come bnto the chypl-
dzen of Firari J hal fave nto them:the Good of

pour fathers bath fent me vnto pou and pt thcp

pe onto me, what is bis name, what ant were

(hall J gene them: And Godantlwered Botes:

Jam that Jam: and belapde, thps Halte thou

Fapr onto the chpldzen of Flrael: 4 am bath tent

me pnto pou. And Goolpakefurther onto Go
pete. sie C68:thus îbalt thou fape nto tbe chplozen of gi
"ef taclxthe Lozde God of pour Eathers,the God of

’ Brabam,the God of Flabac.and the Good of ga

cob bath fent me vnto pou: tbps is mp name fo?

- euer and tbis ismpmemozpall into genera aA

and qeneracpon.Goand gather the elders of Fl
raclbtigetber, and thou thaltfape onto them:p
Lode Sod of pouretathers, the God of Abza-
pam, the Good of Jlabac, and the God of Jacob
appeared vnto me, and fapde: fn bilptpng baue
J vifpted pou, and knowe that whpcbets done
topouin€gppte. And Abhauclapde , Frwpll
bepnae pou out oftbetribulacponof Egypt yn
tothe land of the Cananptes, and Hetbites,and


Amozites, and Pdcresites, and Heutthes, and


Scbutlites:cnen nto a lande that howeth with
niplkeshonp. Aud iohentbhep Heare thp vwopce
then go:both thouand theclders of Blracl Mail
goo pits y Lipnae of Eappte, and fape dnto
bpm: The Lozde God of the Hebues hath met
With vs: g nowe wpll we go sik Aa
; loucnep into the wplderntetfe, and doo facritpe
~C Suto the Lozdeour God. And Fam fure, that p
kpnge of Egypte wpll not let pou qo: no not in
ampabevabande: and J wpll Eretch out mpne
bande and (nipte-Cappte with allmp wonders
which J wpll do in the mpddestherof. And af-
terthat be wpl let po goo, And A tpl get this
peoplefauoure int etpabt of the Ec prange
that wbhë pe go,pe Hal not goemptp:but a wife
Wall bozotve of ber epee CES OD of ber f fo-
geozneth in ber boutle,tetwels of fylucrand golde
and rapnient. And pe Hall put thé onpoure fons
and dDoughters, and fhall rob the Eppptpans.
@ Che.titi. chapter.


# g é FiA |


> : 7 7 = T)


DA ie
- hal at


Erondtts,


Lorbdelapde bunto pprt: whatis toar warch íg in
op Dne De anioe eN arodde. And be lapoe:
calbit on tbe ground. And becat it on p grount
and it became alerpent. And oles ico from
thefpapet of it. And the Lozdefapde ynto &)o-
fes:put Fuzth thpne bandeg take tt bp the taple.
and therfoze be put Furth bis bande and range
it and it becamea roddein bysbande. sfo2 tht
thpnge(fapeth be) thal thep beleue the, thatthe
Lode Godot they fathers, the Godof Abra-
bain,the God of f{abac, andthe God of Facob
batbappeared wnto tie. :

And the Loade fapbe furthermore onto bym W
thautke typne bande in tot p bofome. Andhe
thzùf bis bande into bis bolome. Andwhen be
toke it out aapne, bebolde:hisbandewaglppe
roug cuen as{nowe. Andpelapde : put thpne
bande into chp bofome agapne. And be put big
bande into bps bofome agapne , and plucked it
out of big bolome,and beholde, it was turned a-
gapneas bis otber fletbe. Cherfoze pf thep mpl
not beleucthe,netherbearetbe vopee of the firit
token, pet wpll thep beleue foz the bopee of the
feconde token. Wut and pf they wpllnot beleue
the twolpgnes, nepther berken vntotbp vopce,
thou Malte take of the ater of the rpuer, and:
powe tt bpon thedapelande. Andthe water
whpche thou takeft out of the rpucr, Hall tucne
fobloube bpon the dzpe lande.

Doles lapde vento the Lozde:oh mp Loze, F E
am not eloquente from pefterdap and per pelter-
bape, and namelp fence thou batte fpoken tnta
thp feruaunt:but Jam flo mouthed and flow
funged. Mud f Lozd fapde vnto bpm: Yoyo hath
made mans mouth, oz who hath made the dome
02 the deafe the fepnge o2 the blpndesbaue not3
the Lozder CherforexF wopl be with thp mouth atd rt
and tcache the tobat thou thaltfape. ETRE
obmp Lozde, fende F pzape tbe bp the bande of
bpm whome thou wpltelende. Andthe Lorde
was angrpe wptd oles, andlapde : doo not
J buow Aaron thp brother the Leupte, that be
canlpeaker $02 lo,becommeth fuctie to mete
the,and eben efeptb tbe, be wplbe gladinbps
barte. @herfoze thou thaltelpeake vntobpm, a
and put thele wo2zdes inbismouth, and 3 wyll ~
be hithtbp mouth and with bis mouth and wil
tarpe pou tobatpeoughttade. Jnd be thalbe
tbp tpobelman wnto the people: bealfo allbe
thp mouth andtbouthaltebebis God:andtbou
Malt take thisrod in thy bande, wherwith thou
(paltedo mpzacles. Cherfore Boles went and
returned to Jethro bps father inlawe agapne,
and fapde bnto bpm: J wyl qo nowe, and turne
agapue dito mp bzethzen Wbiche are in Egypt
and fe whether they be petalpue. And Fcthr0
fapdcto <toles,qooimpeace. Andthe Lozde

apbe nto y l in Sidian: goo and returne
agapne into Egypte, *fo? thep are deade which drattid;
wentabontetokpllthe. And MWHolestoke bys S
wpfe, and bps fonnes , and put them on an afie,
and wenteagapne fo Egypte , and Boles toke
therod of Godin bis Dande. And the Lozdefapd
unto oles : when thou arte entred and come
mto Egppteagapne , lefbat thou doo allebete
tiiti § wonderd


Sol.try


_


!


Holes.
wonders before harao , wobpcebe Jhaue put in
F thp bande: but J wpll bolde x bps berte, and de
errire. (hall not lettethbepeoplegoo. And thou Malte
faye bnto Pharao, thuslapethtbe Lozde: gi-
racligmpne eldef Conne, and 3 bane fapde buto
thethat thou Houldett let mp tonne qo, that de
maypelerucme. Andthou woldeli not let bpm

fro.riie, goo,bebold, J wpllx fe thpne eldet lenne,

And it chaunced bp the wap inthe Inne that
the Lorde met bpm,and wolde baue kplled bim.
Andsepho2a tokea Tone, andcut awap the fore
fapnne of ber fonne,and fell at bis fete,and fapd
abloudp bulbande art thou pntome. Then pe
letbypmgo. And the fapde a bloudp bufband,be:

© canfe of che circumnctfpon. Chen fapte the Lorde
vito Paron:go mete oles inthe wploernefle
And he wenfand met bym in themount of God
and&pied bpm. And Boles tolde Aaron all the
wozdes of the Lorde which had fent bpm andal
~ teens whiche be bad charged bpm withall.
&o wente Doles and Aaron, and gathered all
the elders ofthe chplbzen of Frael. And Aaron
tolde all the wozdes which the Lozd bad(poken
nto Boles, anddpodthe mpzacles inthe fpabe
of the people.and the people beleued. And when
thep bearde that the Lozde bad wilpted the chpl
dzen of ¥racl and bad loked bponthep2tribula
cpot,thep bowed thep2 bead, and wozthppped.

CTbe.v. Chapter.


Jp irtenda a eio fapthý Lode
Ài God of Jirael:Let mp people yo,tbat
S thep mape kepe bolp dape wnto me in
gob.rri.b the voplocenes. And Pbaraolapde:Wwhoxis the
Lode, that J hulde heare bis vopce, and let 3f-
racll gor J knowe not the Lozdc,nepther wplly
let Jirael go.And thep lapde:the Good of the He
bews bath met with vs: and therfoze wll toe
goo fhzedapestournep inthe delerte and facrp-
Fyce puto the Lode our God: lect there happen
nto bs, ether peltplence 02 fweard. Chen lapd
thekpnae of Eqppte onto them:wherfoze dope.
(Holes and Aaron) let the people from thepze
wozkeget pou ynto pour labour. And harao


Capde furtherimoze: bepolde,therersmuchepeo> (erga,
plenowe inthelande,andDpemakethem leane Gaye
thepz wezke. And Bharaocomaundedthefame A


dape vfito the talkemafters which were among
the people and Ynto the offpcers,fapina: pe pal
25 gence the people nomoze Kratve,to make bapcke
toifHall,(as pedpdintpme paled, let them goo
andgather them traw them lelucs,andthe nom
b2e of bzpcke whiche thep were wonteto make
intymne paffed lape ynto tpep2 charges alfo,and
minpipe noen getherof. E0? thep bepdell and
tberfoze cepe lapin
fyce unto our god. Thep muit Daue moze wozke
lapde Dpon them, that thep mapelaboure therin
andnotregarbe Dapnewordes. |
Then went the tafkemafkers of the peoples
the offpcers out:and tolde the people: Thus fap
eth Pbharao: J wpl gene pou nomoge trawe, go


Exodus,


pat: Theo


e: We wpllgoanddofacep: fr


ł


pone feluesand cather pou rawr wherepecan |
fpnde it pet Wall none of pour laboure be minp=
ped. And fo toere the people feratred abzode tho-
trote out alltbelande of Eqppte : Eo: to gather

ubble in teade of irawe. Andthe talkema- E

ers bated them fog tarde fapinge: fulfpll our ~
wo2ke dape bp dape, cuenas pf pe bad fratve. of.
Andthe offpcersokthechbpldzenof Flraclwpieh i |
Pbaraos talkemafters had (ct oner them, were Te
beaten. And thep faid wnto them:wberforrbaue «
penot fulfplled pour talke inmakpnge bapcke, ;
both pefterdap and to Dape,as Well as intpmes | he a

cers alfo ofthe chpldzen of Fira- =

ell,came and complapned bnto Pharao, faping. oe
woherfoze dDealeft thou thus wpth thp (ecuaun=
tes ‘there ig no frame geuen tothp (cruaun>
teg and thepfape bnto bs: makebzpcke. And |


thp {eruauntes are beaten, thp people ig Foule ‘am
intreated. De fapde,poell are pe,poellfand thers . : |
foze pe fape:@ie wpl go and Dolacrifpce ontop t


Lode. Goo therfore nowe and woke ardthere
fhall no rawe be geuen pou and pet hall pede
Ipuerthe whole tale of bzpeke. | - =)

And the offpcers of the chpldzen of Flracldpo
toith beupnefie loke on chem that fapde:pe pall
minpibe nothpneae of ge rebaplp makpnge of
bzpcke. Bnd thep met Boles and Aaron which
ode inthepz Mapeasthep came ont from Pha -
rao,and fapde bntothem: Che Lozdloke ppon
pouand tudge pou, which bath madethe fawour
of vs fpnckeinthepes of Bbarao and inthe ep
es of bis feruauntes : and Daue puta fiwweardcin
thepzbandetofie bs. A)olesreturned tntothe
%,020¢e,andfapde:Lozd, wherfoze balk thou delt ©
cruelly wpthtbhis ee twherfoze bafkethou
ferit mes Foz fence 4 came to Pbaraoto fpcakein
thp name, be bath feared foule with this folke,¢
pet thou bat not belpuered thp people atall.
‘Chen the Lozd fapde dnto oles: Powe halt
thou fe, tobat 3 topil doo Dato pharao, fozina Erori
pa Sa bande thal be let them go,¢xinampab
tpe bande Mall be dzpue them out of þig lande.

€ The.vt. Chapter.
A Bodprompleth the delpucraunce ofthe Flraclptes


anè thþelande of Chanaan, he Senealogp of nuben,
Spmeon/ end Leui.


soe? name Jebouab.was Jnot kuotwne serri
pinto thet. <o2zcouer+Z made anapvopntimet
with them to qeuetbem theland of Chanaan: p
lande of thepzepplaremace, wherein thep were
ftraungers. And F baucalfo beard the gronpng
of thecbplozen of Zfrael, whom the Egyptians
kepein bondage,and paue remembzed mp roue:
naunte.@iberfozefape onto the chplozen of Ji-
cacll: Jamthe Lode, J wpll bepnge you oure
om the burdens of the Eqpptpans, and topli
tpDd pou ont of thepz bondage, and wplldelpuer
pou ina fretched out armeandingreate iude: ©
mentes. And FJ wpl take pou foz mp people,and
wypllbe to poua God. Andpe hall knowe that
Zam the Lode poure God, Wwhiche bapnge pou
out from the burdens of the Egiptpans. Ant i
wp


B >

~ RONS.
f 'wpilbzpngepot bntotbelandeconcernpng the
th dpd pese vpmp bande to qeue itun-
to Abraham, Jlabac,and Jacob and wpll gene

it unto pou fo2 a polief{pon: euen inthe Lorde.
*% And Wolestolde the chilbzen of Jfrael eucn lo.
i Hutthep barkened not vnto Poleg, foz an-
Ene gup offpzete and foz cruel bondage. The lozd
| 1 pake onto oles rapinae Goo in, and ipeake


E. = nto Pparaokpng of Egppte, that belettethe


_, . lestpatie befoze the Lozde,fapinge:bebolde,the
z's. > Chpldzen of Flracil herken not buto me „Dowe
~= thenall Pharao peare me, whpche am of vn-

l circumcpledlpppess And the Lozdelpake vuto
. Poles and vnto Aaron, ¢ qaucthemacharge
<pntotbechpldzcn of Flracil: and ynto parao
kynge of Eqppte: to bapnaethechyldzen of 3i-

roy EACL oute of thelanbde of Egypte _‘Cheleve the
d1. 1.a. Deades of tHep2 fathers boules. Ebhe*xchpldzen
> =-Frbte of Ruben the eldek Conne of Flract ac thete: ba

| “* nob,andPailu, esron, and Charmi, i bep
boutboloes of Ruben. The childzen of Dime

Gemnel,and Jamin, Obad and Jachin, soar,

sar. dia Paul the fonne of a Cananiteth wpée: thele are

. rrna theapneedes of Simeon. Chelealloxare the na

~ arrorg MES ofthe chplozen of Leuiin thep2e genetacp-
=". ons:Gerfonand abath and )erart. Leutlp;
utdan hundzed and thpatpe and feuen pere. Thre
Comes of Gefon:Libniand Semetby thep2 bin
redes‘Ebhechylozen of Kabach: Amram and Je
| fear, DBebzonand Uilicll. Jnd Kkabhathlpucdan
i bundzed and thpztpe andthze pere: The chpl-
obi iia, DEN OF Merari:WHabeliand WHuli:theleare the
kpnecdes of Leut bp thep2 qeneracpons. * Am-

a, Uble ramtoke t Jocbebcd hs npce to wpe ¢ he bare
S€ hone Faron andeHoles-» ano caram. And Am

\ ram [pued an bundzed and thirty andleucn pere

. The chplozen nf Jesear, Horap, Nepheg, and
ae Sicha. The chplozen of wiliel, Wifacl, Eha-
Ory phanSand Sith. And Aarontoke Clizaba
Dougbter of Aminadab : and (piter of Mabaton
to wpfe: wbhiche bare bpm Nadab, and Avibu,
= Eleasarand Jtbamar.‘Che chpldzen of ozah:
si Afir, and Elcana, and Abiafiah: thele are the
kpnredes of the Zzozabptes. Cicalar Aarons
-fonnetoke bpm one of the Doughters of putucl
to wpfe be aber ppm pinacpas , and thefe
are the popacppall fathers of rhe Leuptes tho-
rowe out theprkpmrcedes. Tisis that Jaron
and Woles to wpome the Loz:delapde:carp the
cbpldzenof Jfracll out of the Lande of Egppte,


a accozdpng tothepgarmpes. Cbelcarethat sa th


fesand Aaron whiche Cpaketo jharao kyng of
€cypte, that thep mpgbt bayng the chpldzen of
Glracl out of Egppte.andinthedape when the
sone fpake vnto Holes in the lande of Cappt
be pake nto bpm., fapinge: Jamtbe Lode,
(peake thou bnto Pbarao the synge of Egppte
allthat 4 ape pntothe. Bnd Hotes fapde bes
trovt.bi.nfoze p Lode. Webolde, Jam ofxwncircumcpfed
Ipppes.¢ bow thal Pharaogeue me audience:
C The. vii. Chapter.
C che tokens to knoe God. Therod of myotes fs tomes


+ toa ferpent. The foreerare be cucu thelame, Hhe waters
are tugned inte bjoupe; - - - :


7


Erodus.


J chplodien of Stack go out of Dig lande. Jnd Ho of


Stol.cr l.
mene FS ND the Lozde fap de onto Morg: a
Oy Wie bebolde , J baue made the bdara-

See ROS God, € Aarontdp bother Hall
PAG betbp jezophet. Chou balt (peabe -


(tande
ppontherpuers soldi Yb y tme ane


ae ®etthe nto Pharaointhe vy See


Males.


wasintherpuer, turned infobloude. Andthe
PCirrbit. Fptye that has inthe rpucr Dped,xand the rpuer
FAUD.ED Fanke:andthe Caiptpans coulde not dyprike of
the aters of the wan And there was bloude
tbozowout allthe lande of Erppte. ¥ndtbhe ens
chaunters of Egypte dpd lpke wpfe with thep?
- Cozceryeg, and be bardencd Pbharaos bert : nep-
roii». ther dpd be barken vito themxas the Lorde had
andoian Cape, Mud Wbhatao turned bpm felfe, and went
agapn inte pis boule, g fet not bis bert thecunto
And the Egiptpans dpyged ronnde about prp=
ucc fo2 water to dapnke,to2 thep couldnot dyn
of the water of prpuer.Andit continued a webe
after that the Lozde had (mpten the rpuer.
| € Tbe. vin.Chapter.
@ Tbe plage o€ frogges, agofes pzapeth for Sharan. The
plage of the ipes..
ees He Lozde(pake bnto oles: Soo
TAEA to Pbaraoandtel bim,thasla
ee Waea eth the Lowe: x let mp poeta ro
epee thepmapclerueme. DE thou wplt
esos not let them go:bebolb, 7 wil {mite
all thy border with frogges. And the rpuer Hal


SrO. bil. Č:
OF bey Me


{crali with frogges, Whichalgobpandcome M


into tbpne boule : and into thp preupe chamber
tobere thou ficpell, and Dpon bp bed, and into
the boufe of tdp (cruauntes , and bponthp peo-
ple,and into thpne oueng and bpon thp meates
Andthe frogages thal come pon the and on thp
people, and me alltbp feruauntes.
prirrbiie And the Lozdelpake onto Doles:fape bn
25 to Aaron: tretche furth chpne bande wpth thp
rod ouer the freames, oner fherpuers,and ouer
the pondes,thattbou mapt bepnge bp frogges
ppon thelande of Egipte. and Aaron fFretched
bys bande ouer the waters of Egypte, andthe
froggescame bp,and conered lande of Egppt
And the fozcerers dpd lpkevople with thep2{o2<
terp,ano brought frogges bp vpon the lande of
Eqppte. ‘Then Pharao called foz olesand
ative riii b Aaron andlapde:*prapepe Vuto the Lob that
EOLIE. je mape take awape the frogees fromme : and
SERIN ae they mape do facrifpce vntotbe Lord. And 40
fes fapd vnto Pharo: reiopce thou ouer me and
appopnte when J al pzape foz the and fo: tbp
{eruauntes, andto: thp people, to bepne awape
the fromges fromtbe,and thy poules, andè thep
Niap reinapne butin therpuce onlp.igelapbe:to
mozowe. And be fapde,euenas thou hal fapde
that a mapeh uotve that thercis none ipke
 ‘pnto p ode our Gov. Andlothe frogges Hall
departe fromthe and from thp honles,from thy
feruauntes:and from thp people, and (hall re-
mapneintherpueronely. Goflesand Aaron
went out from parao, and Soles crped vnto
the Lode pon the appopntmente of frogaes,
Wwhiche be bad made vnto Pharao. And $ L020
Dpd accozdpngeto the fapinge of oles . And
the fe oggesbdped out of the boules,out of p cour
tesandfeldes. Andthep gathered them toge-
- ther vpon beapes, and the lande tanke of them.
wut when Pharao latve that be had relt ge-
ucnbpm,be berdencd bis herte and berkened not
Lnfotbem,agthe Lozdehadlapde. And p Lod


Eradus:


ommyp people,and 3 topllletthepeoplegoo,p the


—


fapde nfo Holes : {ape bnto Aaron, liretche

out thy rodandlimpte thedult oF the lande, that

it mape turne to lple thozowout alltpelande of

€gppte.Andthep dpa lo. Fo: Aaron retched E

oat hig bande,and with big rod befmote the du

of tbe earth which turned tolpleinmens beate

fotbat all the dufte of tbe lande turned tolpfe, i

La pe out all tbe lande of Egypte. | í
ndtheenchaunters allapde lpketople with

thep2 enchauntmentes to bernie furtblpfe, but `

tbey coulde not. Andthelpletwcreboth bpon . ,.,


menand beafkes. Then lapdetheenchaunters a


nto Pharao:it is the Finger of God. And ba ES.:
raògberteremapned obffpnate , and he barke-
ned not onto them,euenxasp Lowebadlapde. Erotis
Andthe Lordelapde vuto Boles : cpie bp
earlp in themoznpng, and and befoze Bharao
Foz be topli come furth vnto the water and thou
Walt fape onto bpm:thus faptb the Lorde: Let
mp people qo,that they mape lerueme, Ele, pF
thou wrlt not let mp people go: bebolde, 7w ll
fende all maner of Apes bothe bponthe ano tbp
feruauntes,and tbp people,and into the boules
nd the boules of the Cgyptpans thalbefullot
fpes and the qrounde woeron thep are. And
lande of x Golan where mp people are, wpll 4 Sere
caufe to be wonderful intbat dape:lo that there x
pal no Apes be there.Wiberbp thou thalt knot
that {aim the Lozdeinthempddesof the earth.
And J pil put a diupfponbetwcne mp people
and thpne. And cuen fo mozotwe Hall this mpra
cle be Done. And the Lozde dpd euen fo:and there
came noplome Apes into the boule of harao, ¢
into bisleruauntes boules and into all the land
of €gppt: and the lande was are ele
peg. Bnd barao called for oles and Faron
and fapde:Goand do lacrifpce vnto poure God


inthelande. And oles anlwered: it isnot À


mete that we do fo. ftaz then we mult offer vns


to the Lorde out God, that whpche ig anabbo- g:


minacpon onto the €giptpang. Wutand pf we

facratpce that whichis anabbominacpon onto
€ giptpans befoze thep2 epes, Huld they not

{fone DS: we wpll qo thee dapes turnep into the

delerte and facrifpce bnto the Lorde oure God,

¥ 48 be bath commanunded ve. Erti
And Pharao lapde:Fwplletpongothatpe g

mave facrifpce vntothe Lorde pout won in the |

wplderneffe : but go not farveaWape, prape fog

me. And Wofestapde: beholde J wpll go out

Erom tbe and pzape vito the Lozbde,that ; Apes


mape departe from Bbharao, andfrom bpster=


uauntes and from bis peopletomozowe. Wut
let Pbarao from bence Furth deceauenomoze , p
be top! not let the people go to lacrifpce nto the
Logbde. And )oles went out from Pharao and
prapbe dntothe Lozde. nd the Lozde dpd ac-
copbpnge to thelapinge of oles, andthe peg
departed from barao , and from bys feruauns
teg,and frome bps people, there remapned not
one. And Pharao hardened hishertecuen ther .
allo and Dpd not let the people go.
© The.ir.chapter.


a” he mozen of beattes.Whe plage of botches e (ores <The
bozrpdle papte,thunver, anbinghcenpnges €fozts .Dhe
The


Moles. .


fN


i
2
f


| Motes.
p:


™
|
—


Í >:
| P ‘ane


ù


ee:


a a:


ay DCL o2de fapde bntd oles:roo in
sy} Unto Pharao and thou thalttel bon
Hea tbus fapth the Lorde Good of the E-
Sip. Beg Daca: xtel mp pesple goo,that thep
ieee napelerue me. Pf thou wplt not let
them go,and.wwplt bole them "et ane ne
bande of the Lo2deis upon thp flocke whiche ts
in the Felde:fo? bpon Ho2les,affes,camels.oren,
apd ibepe, there halbea mpabep great mozapn
nd fhe Lozde (pall Do wounderfullp betwene p
beaties of Hracll and the beattes of Eqppte:fo
thatthere ipali notbpnge dpe of all that pertap=
neth cothechplozen of Jiracl. And the Logde ap
popnteda tpme, fapinge: tamozowe the Lorne
ll fpnitbe thys wozdeintbelande. And the


teg Fir


-Lode dpd it on the mozotwe, andall the catel of


65


€


pptedped:but of the catell of thechplozen of
racll Dpednot one. And Dbharaolent,and be-
old:there was not one of the catel of p Ffraeli-
tes deade. And the berte of Pharao was barve-
ned thafbe wolde not let thepeople go.
And the Losdelapde unto Boles and Ja-
ron: fake youre bandes full of afibes out of the


. fo2nace, and Soles thal fpapnkle it bp into the


—


apre, inthelpabte of Pharao,and it Hall turne
fo dull in all the lande of Cqppt:that there map
be {tellpnge foze8 with blapnes both onman €
bet thozothe out alithbelandeof Gappte. And
thep tok atbes ont ofthe fornace and Mode be:
foze Pharao, and Mofes lprpnkled it vpinto p
ape. And there were lozes with blapnes both
inmenand inbeattes : and the forcererg coulde


not tonde befoze oles becaule of the blapnes


the
a =,


fro, bill,


Wom. fr.e.
Dla flbiie


Foz there Were botches pponthe cnebaunters E
bpopallthe Eqiptpans. And the Lozde harde-
nedbe berte of baraco and he barkenet notin


, EPa? cothenxas the Lozde pad fapde buto Holes.


And the Lorde fayde vnto Mofes :rpfe vp
earelp tithe mo:npnge and tande befoge Pha-
rao. dnd thou thalte tell by m:tbugfapth p Lod
God of the Cbzews: +z ct mp people ga,p thep
mape ferue me:o2 elles 3 wpllat this tyme lend
allmp plages vpon thpne berte, andppon t
feruauntes and onthp people, that thou mapite
knot, tbat there is none ipkemeinall the earth
ffo2z nowe F topll fFretche out mpne bande, that


Crodus,


SFol.rtti.
his bealkes ittthe felde.Andthe Losdefapde vn -
to Holes: Kretche Furth thpne bande bito pea- E
ueit, that there mape bebapleinallthelandtof
€gipte:vpon man and pon beafteg, and spon
all the berbes of the felde,thozowout allp lande
of Egypte. And Woles ttretched out his rod yr
fobcauen:and the Lode thundzedand bapled,¢
thefpzeranà longe vpon the ground. AND EVE tirpi,
‘Logbdelo bapled inthe lande of Egypte, $ there cere
was Dapleandfp2e mpngled with the baple, fo
grevuous,andlucheas there was none thozowe-
outall the lande of Egypte, fence people inbabe
ted it. And the baple {mote thozowout all f iland
of Egypte, all that was inthe feldeboth mane
beatte. And the baple fmoteall the berbeg of the
felde,and bobe all tbe trees of the felde:onelp in E
the lande of Gosam, where the chpldzett of Jf-
tael were, wasnopbaple. And Dharaolent and
called Foz &)ofes and Aaron, fayde ynto them
J Danenowe {pnned : the Lorde isrpgbteous.¢
J and mp people are vngodly. *Bzape pe puto Sto biti.
the Lozde:fo2 it is muche p there hulde be thun-
derg of Godand haple. 3 wpil let pou go, and pe
pall tarp no longer. Holes fapde yntobpm:
affone as Jam ont of the Cptic, 3 topl ipzede a-
bzode mp bandes vnto the Lozbde, and the thun-
der pall ceale, nepther Hall there be anp moze
baple, that thou mayt knot powe that p earth
isthe Lozdes. Wut J knotoe pat thouandthp
feruanntes pet fearenot the face of p Lod gon.

And fo the flare and the barlp were {mptten
fo? the barlp was put vp,ethe are wag bonul- G
lcd: but the wheate and the rpe twere not fmyptté
fo? thep were late fowen. And oles went out
of the cptie from harao and {prede abzode his
bandes vnto the Lozde:and the thunder €paple
cealed, neptbher rapnedit vpon theearthbe. And
when Pbarao la that the rapne and the baple
and thunder were cealed, be fpnnedagapne:and
bardened bis berte, be andbis leruauntes. And
the bert of Pharao was nrg netber wold
be lette tbechpldzen of Jfraell go, ag the Lozde
pad fapde bp the bande of Poles .
Che.xr.Chapter.


pers. he thprke darcknes, egreop


map fmptetheandtbp people with peltplence PAREEN the Lozdelapde onto Horeg, -
ie ompaite perpibetroncbe earth. Andin | Eh goin onto Pharao:for Jbauchar groti.


terp dede, x forthys caule baue J kepte the, foz


tothetoethe mp power:andthatthepmpabtde- Wx


claremp name thozotvoute all the wozlde. —
Pet thou eraltct thy telfeagapnite mp peo:

ple, that thou wpite not let them go: beholde, to

mozowerhis tyme 3 pl f{ende Downe a mpap-


l oe greate baple: cuen luche a one as thas not in


gppte, lens it was grounded bnfo this tyme.
Sende therfore nowe, and gather thp bealtcs,
and all thatthou balte in the felde. Fo: vpon all
themenand the beaftes wbich are founde inthe
Feld, and not bzoughbt bome, Hall the daple fall
andthep (balldpe. Andasmanp as feared the
wozde of the Lozde amonge the feruauntes of
poate made toerit fernauntes and thep2 bra-

es flee into phoules but be thatreqarded not
the worde of the Lozde.leftebisleruauntes and


ened bis perte andthe berte of bis
feruauntes,thatz might put thefe


2
iio np pones antongell them, and p
thou tell in the audience afthp fonne,and of thp
fonnes Connie, what thynges ¥ baue done in E-
gppte, and the mpzacles whiche J baue done a-
monge them : that pe maye knowe botwethat g
amibe Lorde. And fo G)oles and Aaron came
unto Pharaoandfapde vntohbpm: Chuslapeh
the Lode Godof the Ebues, abe longe tat
it be o? thou wplte fubmpt thy telfe pnto me ¢
x Let my people go,that thep mape fertie me. Ad gira,
Mpelgowcpétboudo remand wplt not lef mp peo: ES
lego: bepolde, to mozoe yl! F bypnee gre-
oper intothp coattes, andthep thal couer the
face of the carth, that it can not be fene:and thep
aleate the refpouewbdichremiapneth puto bet
a


ro,
AD
F f: in


Se
a! “Thee


; Ws ales. |


15 and is elcaped from the baple:and thep hall eat
cuctp grene tree that beareth pou frute inp felve
and they thal fpll tby boufes-and all tbp fcruañ
tes houtes, and the boufes ofall the Egiptpang
after fuche a mancrasg nepthertbp fathers, no}
thy fathers fathers baue fene, fence P tpme thep
twere vpon the earth wnto this dape, änd be tur-

_ ned bpm felteabout,¢ went out from harao.
` And jdaraosferuauntes fapde nto bym,
Howe longe Wall he bea launder vuto vss Let


the men go, that thep mapeferucthe Lordtbeir God


Ood:knowelk thou not that Eqypteisdeltrop:
‘eb! And Boles € Faron were broughtarapne
nto barao,and belapde:then go, and {erue p
— Lode pour God. Who are they that Hall qoo?
and Doles antwered:we wpll goo wpth oure
pongeand with our olde: pee and with our fon-
neg and with our Doughters,and with our Wep
and with our oren toe mute go. oz we mufte

Polde a feale wnto the Lorde.

. Mndhelapd onto tbem:letitbe fo. Tbe lo
be with pou.Wiben 3 let pou go,and pour chp
D2enallo,take bede,
feructhe Lozde: fo2 that
thep thautte them out of baraogpzetence. Bnd
the Lozdelapde vnto moles: Stretch out thpne
bande ouer the lande of Egipte foz qretpoppers
that thep mape come bpon the lande of Egppte
andeate all the berbes of the lande, andali that
thcbapleleftebchpnde. Bnd eH oles fEretched
Furth bysrod ouer thelande of Egypte : and the
Lode brought aneakk wpnde Dponthelande al
that dape, mbdallthatnpabt. Andin tdem Ô?"
Pral, ev,e. NPNAe te calte opndexbzougbte the grethop-
er > pers andthe qretboppers wente Up ouerall the
~~" "sy Lande of Egypte: and remapnedin all quarters
~ of €gppte verp greuoufip. wWefore them were
tbere no fucie grethoppers, area after them
{halbe: foz they couccedall the Face of the earth,
fo that thelande was darke. And thep dpd eate
all tpe bearbes of thelande,andall the frutes of
the trees and whatfoeuer the haple hadde lefte:
tbere was no arene thynges left inthe treegand
berbes of the felde thozow all plande of Egipt.
Tbherfoze jharao called fo: Woles and Aa-
ronin pake ani fapde: 3 baue fpnnedagapnt f
Lorde poure Sod aud agapnite pou. And note
eron, tr.t. Teue me mp {prune onelp this once:andxp2 p
Ẹ Yntothe Lozdepeur God, that he màpetabea-
wayefrom me this deth onlp. And Moles went

ont from Bbarao,and pzapde vntothe Lode.
Ardthe Lozdeturneda migbtpe tronge welke
inpnoe, and it toke atvape tye gretboppers, and
calte them into the red fee,forbat there was not
one Trelhopper inall the cote of Eq pte.and ý
erosive, L020xhardened Pharaos berte, fo that he wold

hot let thechplozen of Jfraell roo,

`- And the Lozd fapde-pnto s oleg:Fretchont
thp bande bnto beauen tbat there map be vpon
JE tbe lande of Egipte darknes which mape be felt
And Boles Eretched furth big bande ynto bea:
Ss pots. Hen,and there thas a thpchexdarknefle bponall
fhe lande of ik tze Dapes longe, no man
fare another nether rote vp from f place where


Erodus.


0? pe baue fome mifchefe it’
de. f2ape,not fo: but go thep thataremene cree
Waspourdelpre. And ` ER


He thas bp the (pace of theedapes:-but alt Beh:


Dzen of Flraell hadlypaht where thep Divelled.


‘And Pharao called foz Holes and fapde: go
and Ceructhe Lozd,onlp let pour pepe and pour G
Oren abpde,and let pour chplozen qoo with pou A
And Holes lapde: thou mut geue vs alfo offe-
tpnges and burnt offtpnges foz to facrifpce yn
to theLozde our God: ourcatellalfothallqow
D8, and there Hall not one bofe be lefte behpnde
foz thereof multe wetake to lerne the Lozbe,our
Od. Meptbher Do we knowe what we tall of-


fre unto the Lode , vutpll we come thytber. A $


Wut the Lozde hardened Wharaogherte: and
De woldenot let them qo. And Pbaraofapd pn:
tobpm:get thetro me,and take bedto thy felfe,
andlempfacenomoze. Fo: when foeucr thou
commet in mp {pgbe,thou foaled re 2nd @)o2
{esfapde: Let itbeas thou battelapde, 3 wpll


fetbp faceno moze.
} € wig Fier sieeve to robbethe €gpptpans, whe


—— n in
F a 1


ral


J 7 $ i ! , i F
ee w


mponpgbt wopll 3 go out into the mpddes of Æ-
Tppte,and all the fpzlte boaneinthelande of E-
Sppte thal dpe, euen from thet pet bone of ha
tao thatlptteth on thisfeate, ynto Ptpetbozne
of the mapde feruaunte that is bebpnde the mpl
andall che fpf qendzed of the catell. And there
hall bea qreate crpethozo woutall the lande of
E appt luche a8 there was nenecnonelpke noz |
halbe. ut amonge thechplozen of Jiraci pai ©
notadog mone bps tunge no: pet man Oz beatt ...
thatpe mapeknowe howe that the Panprc>x vp $S
great mpzacte) putteth a bpian betbene the E-
giptpang and Jlrael. Andthele thp (ctuauntes
allallcomedowne untome. Bnd fall defoze
me, and fape : get tbe out Andall the people that
are nder the, and then wpll 3 departe. And be
wente out from ba tao With ananarp countes
nance. And the Lozde fapde vuto Soles: Pha
rao Hall not beare pou, tbat mp wonders mape
bemultiplped in the Lande of E Gipte.And Ho
feg and Bron dpi al thele Wonders, canvtotens ud
wbich sre wretten before WHarag. And the Lome
Datdetted Wharaos berte , fotbathe wolde not
lettbe chplozen of Jfraell go ont of biglande.
€ The.rii. Chapter.
(Phe paleouer is eaten. The Cmete breade. bey nite
Ceache Chepre chpiozen what the palfeoucr Cpguptpeth. The
beftrucepen ofthe fp: begotten in Capte.Dhe robberie ok
o eK gppcpans, The gopng out of the Hreacipces, and


Poles:


i e


|
T
a


7 T= J


.'


Wolesfapde:thuslapth the Lozde:* HE Tro.rtt.e.


Ezert,


U r A
F OF War ae
Pia hE E A, Er
om po .
ë i b i li
1 d i oD ad E]
2 a bY
es co ey ee


it be wuto pou. Sprake pe bntoall the congrea
la


=p
a
=
-i
e9
[=]
=n
ond
i=
Ss
Ss
H
=
i= J
co
Cc
S
=
"=
did
E
Tý
&
a=]
zi
=
=]
Ha


: ,, pour armpes oute of thelandeo
A bilt foze pe pall obferue this Dape,andall pour chpl


r fe
Sol. xriifa.,
there benolewencd beade founde in poure bou- “ae
fes. And who focuereatethleuened bzeade, that
foule Halbe roted out from the multprnde of Tf:
taell : whether be be a traunger o2 a inthe
tande- De all eate notbpnge leuened:butinall D
pour babitacpons Hall pe cate ltwete beade.
olescalled Foz the elders of Jiracl ¢lapoe
nto them:chofe out and take pou to euerp Dota-
bolde of pou a Hepe, and kpll it foz paffeouer.
And takea bunch of plope, dpp it in the blond
that isin the balon, and ftrpke the upper pote
andthe tivofpode pottes with the blonde thati¢
intbe balon, and none of pou go out at thedore
of his boule, pntpl the mognpnge. oz the Lod
wpll goaboute tofinpte the Egiptpans. And
when beleeth the bloud bpon p vpper doze pot
and onthe twolpde poftes:be wpl pale ouer the
doze, and Wpl not fuffer the veltroper to come in
topour boute fo plage pou. Chertoze thal pe ob
ferue this thpnge,that it be an ogdinaunce both
to e and tbp fonnes foz ener.

— And when pe becomeinto the lande whpche
the Lozde Wpll gene pou, accozdpngeasie pach
prompled,pe thal kepe this ferupce.x And wien
pourecbylozen alke pou what mance of ferupce
is this pe dope thal lape itis thelacrifpce of the
Lodes paficouer whiche paled oucr the boules
of the chpldzen of Flracl in Eqppte.as he (mote
the Ggiptpang and faued our boules. Andebe E
people bowed tbem felues,¢ tozrthppped: And ~
the chplbzcn of Zfracl went and dpa asp Lorde cron rt.be
badcommaunded oles g Aaron, Euenfo dpd Maddie
thep. Andatximponpagot,the Lozde finote all p 9%"
fp2ite bozne in the lande of Egipte,from p fprit
bozne of Pharao that fate on his (eate,wntothe
fpzitebozneof thecaptpucthatwasin peyton,
and all tbe fp2tt gcndzed of catell. And Pharaon wa rpi,


zotit


L rofevpinthenpabt, beand all big feruauntes g


all the Egiptpans:xand there was a great cep:
ingein Cgppte, foz there masno boule where -
there Wasnotonedeade. Andbecalledynto


- Boles and Aaron bp npght.fapinge: rple vy g


Get pou out from amonge mp people:bothe pe g
allo the chplozen of Firacl, and go andferue the


 Loadeaspebauclapde. And taie pour thepe g


pout dzoues with pou as pe baue fapde, and de- DeFa
pe odie ite. Jnothe Eqiptpans were

earce Dpon the people, that they mpabte fende
them out of the lands in batte: for thep lape we
ope all. And the people toke thep2 Dour before

it was low2cd,and thep2 vitaples boundeinclo e

thes upon their (hulders. Bnd p childzen offra roing,
eldpo repli tothelaping of Woles: And `

thep bozowed of f Eqiptiansxiewelsof (plucr
ie wels of qold grapment. And the Lozd qaue p


| Bir ey eet in the trade of the Eguptpans:
l


o that thep grauntedluche thpnges as they re-
guped. And thep robbed the Egiptpans. And f
* chpldgcn of Fitacil tokethep2iournep frome mi rerit
Rameles to Suchothelyre hundzed thoulande AUFL
men of fote, belpde chpldaen. Bnd muchecomen


Œ people wente out allo with them, and pepe and


oren, an cadens great flocke. And thep ba-
ked (ete cakes of p Dough which thep bzougbt
out ot Cappt foz it was nottowzed.jFo2 a

hep


The paleouer


thep twere thenfke oute bp the Egpptpans thep

coulde not tarp to prepare them iclues anp p20-
utfponofmeate. The dwellpng of the chplozent

of ¥lracl, whichetbep Dwelled in Egypte wag
mene.rd.c. Four Pund2ed and tbpatp peres : and when the
audit. b-b. Foure hundzed and thpetpe peres were erpp2ed,
Acte.vii.s, cuen the felfe fame dape Departed allthe po teg
of the Lode out of the lande of Egppt. Atisa

npgbdt tobe oblerned tothe xorde inthe which

He brought them out of plande of Egypt. Thig

ig tbat npabtoftbe Loze whichall the child?

of Hraclmukepe thozowout thepz gencracy=

ong. And the Lozde fayde vnto soles and Aa-

ron: This isthe law of the pafleouer:there thal

no fraunger eate therof. Wut euerpleruaunt ý

is bought fo2 money (after that thou hatte cp2-
cumfpted bim) thal eate therof. A wide ag and

an by2ea feruaunt all noteate therof. Jnone
—— poule thallit be eaten. Thou Halt carp none of
Hob.rit-s the Aee out at p houle.* Nether thal pe bpeake
sAuird. arbonetberor. All che multptude pall obleruc
it. Pfa ftraunger allo dwell amongeypou, and
vopll holde atlloucr Mnto the Lozd, let Hpi cir

cumcife all that be males:and then let bum come

and ovferue it and he (albe ag onethat igbo

inthe land.ffoz tbe vneireumepled perfone thal

not eat therof.Dne maner of lawe thal be unto

bpm tpatis borne in the lande: ¢ vuto the Frai

gee that dwelleth amonge pou. Andalithecbpl

den of 3lraeldpDasg the Logdecdimaunded H0

{eg and Jaron, Euenfodypdthep. And the felfe

fame Dape bpd the Lo2de bapnge the chpldzen of

FBlracl out of f lande of Cappt w thepz armies.

€ Che. riii. Chapter.
@ whe fprtte begotten mul be fanctifpen bnto the Korr.
Spe wemoZPall ofthep: telpucraunce. MOhp hep were ca?


tped (bozo themwpldcrnes. The bones of Kolep be ppl
Icrofthe coude. —
Era Gee Md p Logd{pake buto Moles fap-
a ESA ead (ng x Spanctifp nto me all the El
Wesabe Vee boc, that openallmanet matrps
pana “icceamsnae the chpld2cn of Fracl,
Vee oss S alivell of man ag of beatte: fo? it ig
mpne. Jnd Woles fapde vntop people:thynke
on thigday in which pe came out of Egypt, out
of the houfr of bondage:fo2 thozowe a mpagbtpe
bande the Lorde brought pou out from thence.
Lae There Hall noxleucned becade be caten. Chis
Dapecome pe out in the moneth when cogne be»
ero.rriti.e gynneth torppe.*Gi ben f Lobe barb boat
Frrit-5.200 theinto the lande ot the Cananptes , Metbptes,
menso Amorptes, Peuites,and Febulptes:+Lobhiche he
eyod,diic. (ware onto thp fathers, that be wolde geue the
a lande wheritt mpl&e and bony floweth,p thalt
hepethisterupee inthisfamemoneth. Seuer
dapestbhouthalte cate fwete bzcade : and inthe
Dente, b.b x fenenthdape, tf isthe fealte of the Love.

1% . Swetebecade halve catenfeuendapes,and
there thallnoleuened bacade be fene, no? pet le-
nen With thein allthp quarters. And thou Halt
ewe thp fonne in that dapelaping thisis done
becaute of that Mhichethe Lozde dpb yuto me,
when J came out of Egypte. Andittailbea
fyqne bute the bpon thpne bande, andfozare=
memb2annce betwene thpneepes,that the L03-


peert b Deglawemap bein thp mouth. fEogxina krong


Exodus


pande the Losdebzouaht the outof Egppte. >

inepe therfoze this ozbpnaunce in bisteaton fra

pere to pere. Andit wpll come to pale that the

Lorde Hall bapnge the into che lande of the Ca-
nanptes, whiche bexfware vnto theand tothp Emed
fathers:and pall gene it p. And then thou Mat
appopnte vito the Lozde all that opencth ý ma p
trpce. And euerp calte thyng that Ep ft doth opé €
the matrpce of a beafte which thou aft:pEthep +“.
be males, thep halbe f Logdes. And cucep fp2 ~
endzed of anaffe,thou thaltredeine wa lambe:
pEthouredemebym not, thou thaltebzeakebps
neche. Blithe fp2fte bozne armonge thy chplozet
alfo tpalt thou bpe out. and when tb fonne al-
ketb the to mozowe, laying what is ti Malt
fape onto pþppm:Witb a mpabtie bande p Lorde
bougbte vs out of Egypte , out of the boule of
bondage. And when Pharao was loth tolet vs
qo, the Lozde fletoe he bo2nzintbe land
of Cgppte:alwellt v e bozne of manag of
beate. Cherfoze J lacritpce Vnto the ode all
the males that open tbe mateyce: and all p fpr


boe ohnr deci Se This thalbea
token bpontbpnebande, anda remembzaunce . :
bet toene thpne epes, that the Lozde brought vs +]


out of Eqppte thozowea myghtp pande.
Jtcameto pafe that when Pharaobadlet ~ a
the peopie qo, Godcarped them not thozowe the |
wape and lande of the PHilpHines Whiche wag
the mozenpe wape. But Godlapde:letlep peo-
ple bapplp repent wben thep fe warre:¢ foturne
agapneto Eappte. Wut God led the people a-
boute thozowe the wap of the wplbernes of the
red fee. And the chpldzen of Ffraell went vp par
neffed ont of the lande of Eayyte. And Boles 3
toke the bones of Jofeph with bpm:foz be ntade
the chpldzen of S{tael (weare,faping:*+God wil Sene.
{urelp bpfet pou, and pe thalltake mp bones a= IHS >
wape hence with pou.s And theptoke they2 io tnu, rritid
nep from Spucoth : €abodein Etham inp edge a
of the wplbernes. And the Lorde went before sariga =
them bp dape inappller of a cloude to leade thë Ver. |
thewap:andbypnpgbhtinappller offizetogene =,
themlpgbt, that thep mpgbt go both by dapee y
bp npabt. xThe ppller of p cloude departed not sep, tr.v,
bp dape, no: the ppller of Fpze bp npabte, out of
thelpabte of the people. ? |
C The.riui. Chapter, Se=-
@ Pbaraos berte is harvencd aneio eth the Zltaciptes |
With all bps bolt and captapnes,and is dzowneo, Zhe Jira
Iptes grudge. Thep go thozowechered fee.

pema MD the Lordelpake unto Boles, X
[ea Ayeen fapinge : Speke to the eeh of


Pye | Slracll,that thep turne gren

cM FAY a Jiraci, that thep turne eremapne

by Sake Lefo PrHiroth betwene Migdol

ee ates and the ee ouer agay aale- gu.prpiiid ©


Jio? Pharao wpll fape ofthe chpldzen of Zfrael
thep are tangledin thelande, pipldernes Dath
(hut them in.And F wpll harden bharaos hert
that be al folowe after pon:and 3 wyll getme
eet puaran and bpon al bis hott: the
Egiptpans allo thallknowethat Zam ý Lo
And thep dpd cuen fo. And it wastolde the king 2
of Eapptetbatthepecople fied nd the z fe of
barão


and befoze that thali the prtcheb E p tee i
3


—_— Fa —


| theven tee.


tb


pritt.b * and


oe ~“intbewplderneffe. And
dar.rp.c peole eare penot Rand


Ined the
<< Iad pi mp a ania


\
By


t =r


€ andbe


Pharaoand of bis fernauntes turned agapnite
the people €thep > Seek whp baue wetbps done
that we baue let Firaell go out of our lerupces Æ
he made redp bis chatettes : and toke bis people


° withbpm and tokelpre bundzed chofen chaset-


tes,and all the charets of Cqppt and captapnes
Dponeuerp one of them. Andthe Lozde Harde-
te of harao Bong of Eqppt, andbe

n of fracil. Wuttbe


pcbplozett of Flrael went out witbxan bpe bande
I nthe


) €agiptpans folowed after them andall
the bozles and charets of Wharao and bis hozle-
menand bis boot ouertoke them abpopng bp p


C (ee, belpde Bt Piroth before Waalsephon. And


when Pharao drewenpe, thechpldzen of Flracl
ipite bp thep2 epes and beboldc,the Egiptpans
folowed after them,and thep were loze afrapoe

oe lozen of Jtraell crped out nto the
L020. 25ut thep fapd wnto Doles:becaule there
were no graues in Egypte, bate thou therfoze


: bzought 0s alvape foz to dpe in the wpldernes?


vobertozebatte thou ferued vs thus, fozto carp
wsoutof€gpptes Dpd not we tell the thpsin


‘€gppte,fapinge-let vsbeinret that we mape


ferue the haegri Soz it bad bene better foz

bg to bauclerued the €giptians then fo2to dpe

oles fapde nto the

land bepold,bow

the Lode (hall fane pou this dape. Soy petbat

paue lene the Egiptpans this dape, pall {ee thé

nomoze for ener. Che Lozde thall fpght fo: pou,
and pe thall bolde pour peace.

And the Lozde fapde Vnto Soles: toherFoze


eff thou bntomertpeake vntothechildzenof PSS
Jiragl that thep gofozwarde. Wutlpftetbou IE
ypthp rod, and itretcheouttbphandeonerpiee epee
and Deupoe it afunder,andlettbechpldzenof¥l |


raell qo on dzpe qrounde thozow the mpddeltot
thelee., And beholde, J wpll harden the berte of
the €qiptpyans that thep mape Folowe them.

And 4 pli get me Honoure pon harao and
wpon all bis boote, and Dponbis charettes and
wponbis hoslemen. Andthe Egiptpans pall
knotve that 3 am the Lozde when 4 baue gotté
me bonoure pon harao, bpon his charettes,
and vponbis bozfemen. And the angell of God
tobich wente befoze the poot of Flraclremoued
nuevo go beppnde them. And the clou-
den ppllerthat waswvefore the face of thembe-
ganne to tande bebpnde them,¢ came betwene
the boot of the Eqiptpans and the bool of Ji-
racll. Jt was alfoa Darkecloude,eqauelpgbte
bpnpgbt:andallthenpabtlonge the one came
not at the other. And Woleg fretched Eurth his
bande ouerthe lee: andthe Lozbde carped atbape
thefee, bpa verp fronge Cafe pnde all that
npabt.and made the fee dppelande, andthe wa-
ters were dDenpded. And the chplozen of Blraell


F tent out into thempo of the lee: bpon p d2pe


grounde. And the waters werea walle ynto
them on tberpgbt bande,and on thepz left band
Anbdtbe Egiptpans folomedand went in after
them to the mpoft of the fee, euenall Pbharaos
hozles. bis charettes and bis bozlemen. PF And
mthe mognpng watcbe, the Lozdextobed bnto


Cronies. |


Hol. critiy.
the boot of the Egiptpang out of thefp2peand
cloudp ppllet:and uts the boft of ‘he Enip-
tpans,andtoke of bis charet wheles and carped
them awape biolentlp.<po that the eqiptpans
fapde:Let bs fle from the face of Jfrael, foz the
Lod fyghteth fo: them agapntt the Egiptians
Aundthe Lordelapde vnto Doles : tretche out
thpne bande oner tbe fee, thatthe waters mape dy
come agapne bpontbe €gpptpang, bponbpsg
charettes and bpon bis po emen.


tEr0.Fb ey


ue, o en Soles and the cbpldgen of FL
acy cael fangethisfonge bntop L 02d
eyes and fapde: KxI wpllfpnge vnta |
bac , Wars the Lozde :fo2 be bath trpumphen Sart.
pF, R gloztoullp:the bozfe and bpm that
rode bpon bpm Hath be ouerthzowne in the fee:

¥ Che Lozde is mp Lrength and prayic.and pe

is become mp faluacpon. Peis mp God and F
wpll glozifpe bpm:mp fathers God, andy wyll
eraltebpm. The Lozdeisamanof warre. Tpe
Lozbe ig bis name. Wharaog charettes and hig
boot hath becaft intothetee. ipischofencap>
tapes alfo are Dzotonedin the redfee, thedepe
waters haue coueced them:thep foncke to p bos
tome asa fone. Chp rpght bande Lozbde,ts bes
come glozpous in potoze:thprpgbhthande 1020
bath allto Dathed theenempe. Andinthp great
glop + pe bat ouertbhzotwenthem that rolet
againt thbe:thboufentei furth thp wrath tbbich
confumed themenen as toble. Chozow p wind

of thp noftrels the tater gathered together,the
floudes tode fpll aganbeape,and the deve was
ter congeled together inthe berte of the fee.

Che enempe fapde:¥ top! fFolotwe on them: J
wpll ouertaketbem , J wpll deupde the fpople,
J eh fatiffpe mp lufte bpon them, 3J wpldzam
mp Cuoecarbde, m pne bande thall deltrope them.
‘Thou blewelt wpth thy wopnde,the fee conered
them, thep fanckeasleade inthe mpabtpe wa:
ters. Ulboislpke vntothe D Lozdc,amonge

odde whois lpke the fo qlozpousinbolpnes,
carfullin maples. bewpnaet wonders! Thou
ftretchede OUE EIE TENDE DNOC Foe nen aA


a


OL L=<<<_<——<— <<<


Marna ts fent
lomedthem. Chou tntbp mertpe hatte carped
this people tobiche thou delpueredeit :and balte
boughe them intdp Erength vnte thy bolp þa-
bitacpon. Chenacpons beard and Were atrapd
{orotwe cate bpon the PHtifpnes. Then the
Dukes of the Cdomptes were amaled, andthe
nipghtpeit of the Hoabptes, tremblpnge came

. bpon them:all the inbabpters of Canaan war-

= cdfapntbarted: Let frare and dzede fall bpon

them inthe qreatues of thine, let thembecas tpl

aga ffone,tpil tbe people patie thozow, D 1020

’  Lobplethps people patie thozotve whpche P bat

gotten. bou Malt bapngthemin, and plante

thbeminthemountapne of thpne enberptaunce,

tbe Nace Lozbe wobhiche ë balk made foz to dwell

in the fanctuarpe, D Lode, wbhpcbe thp bandeg

- pauepzepared. Che Lozde Hallrapne ewer and

` alwape. $€02 Pharaos boile Went in with bps

charettes and hozfemen into the lee, andp £020
brought the waters of the fee bpon them.

Wut the chpldzen of Flrael went on date land
inthe mpoff of the fee. And Hic Jam ayo bes
tyile, thelpfter of Aaron toke atpmbpell inher
bande and all p wemen came out after ber with
tpmbzels and daunces. And Dir gam lange be:


Eroa Fore them: * Sopnere pe wnto the Lode :fo2 be


pn 452 Hg loztouflp:the bozfe and bis rp
Der hath de ouerthz0wne in the iee. And fo Wo-
fes brought Frael from the red fee, thep went
out into the wpldctnes of Sur.Andthcp went
thre bapeslonge tntbe wploernef{e, and founde
Ho waters. And when thep came to Bara, thep


coulde not dapnkeof the waters of Gara: fog V


thep were bptter,therfoze the name of the place
of Shag called Gara, an(thac isto cape bptternes AND


fhe people murmured agapnil @)ofeg fapinge:


gardd. what (all he depnher xAndbesrped bntothe -


a. Lopbe:andthe Lorde hewed bpm a tree, which
foben be Dad cal into the water, f waters were
made lwete. There he made them an ogdpnaiice

anda laWe,and there be proupd bpm, andfapde
vebi DE Chou Wplt berken* wnto the vopce of p Lord
thp Sod. andwplt dotbat which is twat inbis

{ygbht, and toplt geueeare nto bis cdmaunde-

menteg and eean bis odpnaunceg:tbenwpl

aput egi t > ii ir es ater a moe k

wougyt opon rhe Catptpang:foz zam p Loz

thathcaletbtbe, y

vi. ha


are Ad pb foc petite re Aerapneth
guaples and eganna. Thep grubge, = = pn
A ful ce chyldzen of Ffrael came to Elim
SE Ee Where were fiwelue Welles Of water,
SY YS land.I rr. palme trees, and thep abode
o72 \Solthere bp the waters. Andthey toke
thepztopney from Ẹlim:andall the whole com=
pany of the chpldzen of Zlraelcame to the wpls
bernes of pn whichis bettene Elimand bi
nat: the fpftenedape of the feconde moneth af=
ter thep2 Departpngeout of the lande of Capote
4 mithe bole multptude of the chpldzenof zita-
oumris CU* murmured agapnite Poles and Aaron in
fhe wpidernes:and the chpldzen of Frael fapde
bitte them: Dolbe to Good the had died bp f hand
of the Lagdetnthelande of Egypt. when we lat


tei grrtib


Exodus


from heater.


thimplawe o2no. Chelprte dape ther thal pres ©
paretoz them (clues that wbich thep pL bapng


of Egp beets on mge,petballferbe


of ‘Jiracll, come forthe befoze the Lorde : forbe =
batp bearbe Pour geubgpnges. And as aaron
Cpake bnto the whole multptude of thechildzen
of Zlracll,thep loked towarde the wpldernes: of


be gumeplg .


d:en of Zlraclifaweit, thepfapbde cuerpe one to
bis tepabbour: Ft is Danna Fos thep wit not

les fapde bnrothbem:thig
cate. ChisisthewordewhbichetheLozdcebath ~


commaunded gather it euerp manfo: bpm felfe
toeate:a pomer full foz amanaccozdpng to the


nombze of pou g take euerp man Fo? thé wobiche ,
areinDistente. And the chpld;en of Pracllopo
euen fo and gathered, fome moze,fomelefle,and
Wopen thep Dpdmeate tt wa gomer, konto bpm fi.co.bttte
that Pad gathered muche, remapnco notppnge
OuCE


“Cherorke. Croats, wales


oun, € onto bpm that ad qatheredlptle, was . eue ds water to bopnke. Wolesfapde wnto
there no lacke : cucrp man gathered fuffpciente them: opp chpde pe wpthme: whertozcooo pe
foz bis eatpuge. And Mofes fapbe vntorpent. tetptethe Lorde! Cherethe people thapitco
E . Scthatno man let ought remapne ofittpl! Foz water, andthe pein murmured agapnite Aum. fha .
themòmpnge. Roiwithtandpnage thepbarkc- Soles andfapde: *C berfoze bate thoutbus -
nednot ynto Holes: but fome of them leftcof brought we outeot Egppte:tokpll vs and oure
it vutpll themoznpng, and it wared fullofwoz chplozenandcatell with thp ke.
meg and ftancke, and Soles Was angry wpth nd Boles crped ynto the Lorde, faptnge =
them. Andthep gathered itallmoznpnges.cuc= That Hal $00 pte this peoplerthep be almot
| rpmanfo bis eatpnae.Andaffone astbeDeate readptoftoncme. And tpe owde apde onto
ofthe funnecame,tt moulte.wndthetprtedape <Polcs:go befoze He peony: and take withthe
: thep gathered twptefomuche beeade tiwo go- of the elders of jliacil,andthproddetberioith —
tits fo2 ole man: and alitberulergoftbemul- thou (motet the tpuer, tase in thine bande, ang (corte
: tptudecameand tolde Soles. elapbe vnte qo: 25ebolde,* 3 tand before the belpde a rocke rnea e
them:tbisis thatwiicde the Lowebathfapde: that igin Pozeb:and thou tale finpre the rocke à
to mozoweisthereke ofthe bolp Sabboth yn- andthere iall come water out tyerof, that the sum. rr
tothe Lode: bake that w ich pe wpl bake, snd pont mape Daprke. x And Holes dopdeuento
feth that pe wpll feth, and that whpche remap- eforetbecpesoftheclders of Frac. Andbe Sah.
neth.lapeit»ptplltbemompnge. Andebep called thenatne of the place * Walla antt alae
lapdeit vp tpl the mognpnge , as Moleshad, ra > becaule of the chpdpiige of the cyplozen of
ope AUD AE ffanke not,nep ther bed there anp wone Bfracl,and becaule thep tempted the Lorde tap
therit: And Bofcs fapde:that cate thys bape: inge:ts the Lozde amonge vs oz not: bss
for itisthe Sabbotb wntothe Lod :todapepe Thencame Amalech and faugbte wrth Ji
fhall not pndettintbefelbe. Sypre dapes thall racllin Baphidim. And Wofesfapde vuto j0-
pe gather it andin thefeuentb dape Wwbhiche is p fua:chule vg out men, and go frgbt with Jma-
Habboth, there Hall benone. Potwythitan- lech, and to mozowe FJ wpll tane on the toppe
Sa Dpnge, there wente out fome of the people tn the of thebpl,and the rod of God albe in mp band
tenenti ape for togather,andtbhep foundnone olua dpd ag Gotes bade bym, efoughtwpth m ~.
And the Lozde fayde vnto Hofes: bowe longe Amalech. And Boles, and Jaron, and iur
refule petokepe my comaundementes, and mp went bp tothe toppe of the bpll. Andithappe- zubi, tige
lawes Se, the Lorde hath geom poua@ab- ned,thatwhen x ofeshelde by hisbande, jl- Deurroa.
both, therforcbegeuctbpouplprtcdapebzead tacll pad the better. And when delet bps bande
fortwodapes. pde Pbertone elerve majat Dboivne,Amatechhadtbebetter.
a 3 home and let no man go out of bps xeetpefes ° Wut Moles bandes werehcup, and therfore
n A nent) dape. Andtbepeoplerettedebe feuenth tbey tokea fone and put it pnder bynt, and be
1" gum. pi.b. bee e an the poule of Jlraell called it Hanna. fat dotonetheron. And Faron and pur taped
-f x Anvit waslpke wnto Coziandgcfede, whpte Wp bis handes, the one onthe onefpde,and the o-


|
t


i
|
|


{Ea and thetafkeot it twaslpke vntotWwafers made fcr on theother{poe. And bis bandes remap-
kh with bony. And cDotesin yn ee that which nedcadpe vntpli the goypnaedotone of the lur
AREE the Lazde comaundeth,fplagomerottt,wbich - nd Jofua bpiconfetes Amalech and bps peos
7 = mape be kepte fo; pour cbplozen after pou : that ple, with the cdge of the fiweacde. i
4 thep map Te thebzeadwhertoith Fbauecfedpou Bud the Lord fapde bnto Bpoles:wepte this


inwpldernefic, when F bron pte pou out of the fozarcmembraunceina boke andconunpttert marria

* To penedo landcof Eappte. And Go tsfpakevnto Ja- wntothecares of Jotua For 3 wpl wttertp put He Fe
ron:take a cenfe andput gat Seg fullofan- outtberemenrbautice of Amatech from pnver
natbdecitandlape te bp befog the Lozdetobe Heauett. And &) oles made an aulter and called
tente foz pour chplogen after pou, as the Lezde fhename ofit : Che Loeis bethat worketh
| - emiro Commannded Mofes. S0 Aurona dy tod nr mpzaclesfozme. Stor hefapde:the banders on
| -Butte.0 Fopetpe tenoun tabe kepte. ¥ And fhe chpl- thefeate of God,the Lorde wpli haue war with
FO preno€ Firacll pd cate Santa fotpepere pn- aitialech from generacpontogencracpon.

| tplithep came bntoalandeinbabpted. Jnalo | |

a. thep bpd cate Panna euch outplledepcame vit _ PL Recores Louniced ts receseies of emotes. F

| to tüebozersof thelandeofCanaan.Agomer P nap = Ethzothe Derat of Hadian o

ig thetenth parte ofan €pba. EA & Tes father tt lawe, heard ofall that


€ The rviu.chapter. o Wan e Sod hadde Done foz ofeg and foz
{The Wratiptes romeintp maphiim. Shep grange. Bes Q Frael bis people.and thatthe 100
MWDateris geucn them outoftherocke. sjoreshoiwech bp i hadbrougbe Sfracil out of Eqppte


A =—s hishandessandchep owercome the Amelechptes, nae + rE Pp inro ae g tteb. ti bs |
Src SERS iCal : herfore hetoke stphoza soles Wyr. Cee se rk
FEA he Ad all the company of the chplopen ferbebadien keber bache jano pee ite yo Fonnes, pes

\ Wee of Braclthoowoutthepzarmpes of whpcbe the one was calicd x Gerfon , for De roria


Sofa Wa went from the wplderneg of Din, lapac: 4 bauebencanalpant us a fraritig® © Oe


| mannii YEA Va aftecebe commanndemente of the -The name of he otber was Elichar: onthe gid


sets


PONS SZ onde, and pptched in* Raphidim pf mp father fayde he) was mpne bel e And C
tvbere was no water fo: the copleto bpne; Pae nictbom the CONAI ot poate yur
| And the people Hobe wyth oleg, audtapor, Bnd Jetha Moles father in ghee
p 4 ses s a lea E t


Hethzo: Erodus.
: Dis two fonnes, and bps wpfe bute Wofesinto God:truemen batpngeconetonfneg: andmake
the wpldernes:where beabode bp the mounto? thembedes ouer the peoplec tapng ouer thous `>
God. Andhelapde onto WMoles:Ftbpfatber landes ouer bundzedeg, ouer ftp, and ouer ten
inlatve Jethzo amcome tothe andtbp wpfeal:- And let them tudge the people at all feafong.
And doles Andeuerpex greate Aak pahoina a let Dey
SOLT them bzpng onto the, but leeibem iudge al final
: caules them felueg, and fo (hall it be ealper foz
thy felfe,andthep Hall bearewitbtbe. Ffthou. °
(halt do tbig thpng, (and God charge the with.
all thou palt be ableteendure, and petthepea, ~ -p -
CPA ple palicome to thepzplaceinpeace. © > J
q Whee | And fo {Holes obepedthe vopce of bps fae % a ae


a


ther inlatoe, and dpd all that be babfapde, and =s er
tas actpue men oute ofall Glracll,andmade . °.
themas beades ouerthepeople:namelpcaptap:

2 =e N | w ouer pose peters eiee: 9G ftp, l

TEEF ETRE IEE andouer ten. And thep iudgedtbepeople atz | |
went out to mete bis father inlat and dpd oep ceafons, but bzongbt tbe bard ¢ autre in to @o pi eae
faunce andkp Red bpm,andeacheatked other ot Ceg:andindged all (mall matters them felues 1 |
bis bealth.anbdtbepcameintotbetent- And Mo ann Moles let bps father nlatoe departe,, and
done Dnto Pharao and tothe eaqppepans Fog € The.rir. Chapter.

Atracis fake and allthetrauaple that ab bap: She ehpidzen of Herael come to the mount Sinap. The l
pened them bp the wape.and powe the Lozbde de people of 00 arebolp and a ropal prenh ode. e that touz

ipuered tbem. And Jethzoreiopled over all the chech the bpil Dpeth Gob appeareth bnto gofes bpon the _


È
ee i a
oe j 5 oe M]
= “aa
i F : Sa EN p kip
i; T i Re mi «Po m
' ms, i i,
m


i = j


=


goodnelle whichetbe Lozdebaddoneto Ziracl TOi DUNFEamDipobtempmgey ;

and becaule be bad Deltuered them out of p hand A Ta) <4 a
_ ofthe Egiptpang. And Jethro lapde:bleffed be PI - A (CS = |

the Lozde whiche bath delpucred pou ont of the

bande of the Egiptpans, and out of theband of

ponro ele ath alfo delpuercd bps people |

from the captpuitpe of the Egiptpans. 20w F

knowe that the Lorde ig greater thenall gods, Wie

fozinthethpnge wherebp thepdealtecruellpw = + Jil ;

them, arethep them feluesperplived. And Je- | SA

thao £)oles father inlate ofred burnt ofrpu- 0


gesandlacrifpces bute God. And Baronand SS LS
all the elders ofZiraclcametocatebzeade with pesg imma the thpzde moneth, whe
- Holes father in lawe before God. | ian) AE D2 en 0
Aud itchaunced onthe mozowe, that Bos Rey
 fesfatto Judgetbe people,andthe people tode A/A We
aboute Boles trommoznpnge vntoeuen.And KALS
when Holes father inlaw awe alltbatbedpd phidim,
nto the people, befapde:what isthistbatthou andbad ppt
dok vntothe peoples why fpttet thouthbplelfe And there
alone,and all the people tandeaboute tbefrom &o
moznpnge dntocuen.s And Spolesfapdebnto ledtobpm out of themo
bisfather inlatoe:becaulethepeoplecome nto tha :
metolekecouncellof Gob. UWjbentbepbanea thechp .
matter, thep Te epeek oe aap hs pri Kiek E TRI
eucrpy manando pis nepghboure and pelve them gles twpngeg , and baue bzouct
E A a a
-, wn si Olestatperiniatwelapde Dnto ppm: indede and kepempneanpopn
it isnot well tbat thou dok. Thou aaae mpne owne, aboue all NEOR,
eft thp Celfe,and this people that is with the:foz
Dente, ib, this thpnge (sofmoze wepgbt, thenxthouarte of « izealtes andan bolp peo
abletopertourmethplelfcalone. earenowe the wordes which thou thaltfape vnto thechpl:
therfore mp vopce,and J wpll cuethecouncel, Denof Ffraell. Soles came and called foz the
And God albe withthe. He thou vntothepea elders ofthe people, and lapde befoze thepze fae |
ple to Sodwarde, thatthoumapttebepngetbe ces all thele wozdes, whpcbe the Lorde com.
caules Unto God, andthouthaltteachetbemoz maundedbpm. Anodtbepeopleantweredall to. -
Dpnaunces,andlawes,andihewthemtbe wap ether, andlapde. x Allthat the Lozde bat e SFr į
_ wherinthey mult walke, andthe wozkep thep fapde, we wpll doo. And @otes beoughterbe hi >
D muft do. Hoze oner, thou {halt feke out amonge wo2des of the people vntothe Lode $ l
allthe people,men of actiupte,andtuchagfeare - Andthe Lozoe fayde ynto (Holes: Loo, J
come


| Mount Sinai.
| . chme vuto the inathpcBe cloude, thatthe peo
` -plemape beareme talbpnge wptp the, and be=


leuethefozener.  <Holestheiwedtpe wozdes ~


ee ofthe people bntotbe Lorde. =|
© %8 Andthe Lode lapdevnto oles: Go Dr
~ tothe people and fanctifpe them to dapeand to
niozotve,and let them wathe thep2 clothes: and
} beredi agqapntt the thpzde dape. ffo2 the thyad
| s" dapethe Lode Wpll comedowne in the (pate
ty. > bdf€allthepeople bpon mount Sinai. And thou
thalt fet markes rounde aboute the people and
os fape: beware that pe qonot dp into the mount,
Sh prtouchetbebozbdzeof tt. Wipo fouertoucherh
Brdz rite thexmounte,allfurelp dpe. ‘Chere all not
| an bande touche it: CIs be thalbe Eonecd 02 Mot
. thorotve:wbpther it be beato: man, it Hal not
- lpue:toben the trumpe blowetblonge,tbenmap
' thep come bp into the mountapne.
T And Boles went Downe frome the mounte
bnto the people, andfanctifpedthem, andtbep
wathedthepre clothes: Andbhelayde onto the
| people: be repe agapnife the thpzde dape, and
come Hot at pour wpues. And the thprde dapein
themoznpig there was thunder,andlpghtning
and a thicke cloude bpon the mount, the vopce
of the trumpe exrceadpnge Lotpde,fo that all the
se~ peopletbat wasin the botte was aftapde. And
—Woles broughte the people out of the tentesto
— - Bewditeds mete with God,and thep* ode vnder the bp.
Andanount Sinay was altogether on a moke
becaufe the L02de Defcended Dotone Ypon if in
fp2e. And the fnoke theroFatcended vp,as the
{moke of a kele and all the mounte was ercea-
E dpnge fearful. Andwhenthe vopce of p trumpe
i bletbe and Waredlowder and lowder: <poles
pke and God anfwered bpm by a vepce.
> D aa the Lod came Downe bpon mount Sí
nap, etienin thetoppe of the byll, and when the
Lode called oles vp into the toppe of p bpl,
Moles wentevp. And the Lozde lapde unto
<Holes:Go dotone:charge the people, that thep
preale not vp to fethe L020, anDlomany of thé
perpe. Andlet the pretes allo whtche come to
a" the Logdefancttipe them felucs, lefe the Lorde
E. derop them. And oles fapde puto the Lord
tbe people cannot come bpinto the mount Si-
nap. fo: thou chargedt orario : fet markes
aboutechabplland fanctifpe it. And the Lode
4 fapde DutOp.eamasape, and get the Downe:and
| thou balt come bp, thou and Xaron w the. Bue
j _ letnot p prettesethe people prefume fo: to come
lio bp bnto the Lozde:letbe Seiteope them. And fo
Hofes went dowone bnto p people told then.
C whe ten commaundementes ate geuen the altaret of erth.
=n 9d Hod fpakeall thefe twozwes,
and fapd: Jam the Lo2d thy Gob
e7 tobiche baue x bzougbt the ont of
(E the lande of Egipt out of f boufe
Q otbondage. Chouthalte baue
V «Wy e snone other goddesinmp Ipabte.
Leu srbi.s KEHON thalte make the no grauen pmage,nep-
sno poi ce bec antp tpmilptude that is in Heauen aboue,ey


mulia (aoe


Exodts,


ther intheearthe beneth, ozin the waters w- : Is


Sol. rrbt-


S2aum. ig
SF ett


Heut.rir.b,
EATI Dy


doo all that thou bate todoo : but the fenenth ecr,


Dapersthe Sabboth of the Loge thp God, init


yirt togat.
+ Thou thalte not beare falfe woptnelle a= yio, rite


F


bii, b


tath. de
tiu.rbite


B.D.


Deu.rhew e
Bebse.pie


For. viit,e4
imac tit.€


bal


Preceptes
e Shall aco ont free, rapingencthpnae. Vfbè

a atone, be all yoo oute alone. And fhe

came marped, bps wpe pall go out With bpm.

And pf bps maplter haue geuenbpma wpte,
and (hebaue bozne bpm fonnes oz Dougbters :
thentbe topfe an’ ber chpldzen Hall be bet maz
(ters, andhethallgooutalone. And pt the ler-
uaunte faye: 3 loue mp malter, mp topteand mp
chplozen, J toplinot qooout free. Hypa malter
thal bapnge bym wnto the Judgeg and fet pym
to the dooze 02 tothe dozepofte, and bpg malter
(hall boze bps eare thozowe wyth anawle, and
be palbe bps feruaunte Foz ener.

And pta man {ell bpsdoughterto bea lert-
naunt:tbe thal not goo out asthe men feruaun:
tes doo. PE the allo pleale not ber mater and be
geucth ber fo no man to wpfe then thall be lette
her qoo Frece : to fell ber vnto a fraunge nacpon
fhall be bauc no power, fepnge be defppied her.
pf be baue p2ompled ber buto ppsfon to wpe,
be pall deale wpth ber, as men Do wpth thepze
Doughters. Andpf he take bpm another wpfe,
pet her fode ber rapmente, and dutpe of marrp-
age:{ball be not minpthe. And pf be do not hele
thze onto ber, then pall he goo oute free, and

Teu rriiie PAYENO Monep. * be that fmptethamantbat
nu.rer.b. he dpe, (hallbeflepnefozit. D&amanlapenot
uoc a ante, but God delpuer bpminto bt s bande
then J wpll popnte the a place M)pther be tha
flee. PEamancome preluimpteoullp ppon bps
| nepabboure to Nepe bpm with qple,thou Malte
tiele. cake ppm frompne*aulter that hedpe. Betivat
{myptetbbps father o: bps mother lette ppm be
dew Friitib Lapnefoztt. * Pethat fealethamanandlels
letb bpm( pe if be pzoucd vug bim) malbe apne
zeni.rrp Otit. * And bethat curicth bps father oz mo-
Worec. ther, Hall beputtodeath forit. PEmen ftrpue
Sastro a together and one ûnpte another with a fone o2
” witbbpsfpte, and be bpenot, but lpeth in bed:
pfberpleagapne and walke without bponbps
ftaffe, then pall be that (mote bpm goo i :
fauc onelp be pall beare bps charges foz lelpn
big tyme, and thalpape fo: bis bealpng, And pt
aman {mpte bps feruaunt oz bps mapde witha
rodbe , and thep dpe wnder bps bande, tt hall
beauenged indede.

And pE they contpnueadape 02 tivo, it thall
not beauenged, foz theparebps monep. pf
men frpucand burtea woman withchplde, fo
that ber frute departe From ber,and pet no mpi-
fortune followe : then (hall be be merced accoz=
dpna as the womans hufbande wplllapeto pis
charge, andbethall pape asthe dapes men ap-

xe eric, Popatebym. * And pt any mplfoztunefolowe:
Deu.rir.o. then(hall be pape lpte for lpferepefozcpe,totbe
tegat b.t. Foz tothe bande Foz bande, fote foz fote burning


Eo: burnpnge, wounde foz wouhde, Arppe foz f


@rppe: Andpfamanf{impte bpsferuaunte oz
+ bps mapdeintheepe, andit perpihe, be tall let
them goo freefo2 theepesiate.

Alfo pf belinpreoutebys Ceruaunte o2 bps
mapodes tothe, be Hall lettethem oo oute free
fozthbetotbesfake. DPfanoxreqozeamanoa

Gene. fire woman: that t 1 dpe 3 then the * Dre ipall be
toned, and bys felipe tall not be caten, pnt


Erodus.


the owner of the Dre Hall goo qupte.

j Pf the ore were wonte toputbe intpmepal D
ànd it bath bene tolde bps matter : and be bathe
not kepte ppm, but that be bath bplleda man og
a woman: then the Dre thallbe Toned, andbps
ownertballdpeallo. DEtbere belettetobyma
fummie of monep, then be Hall geue foz the delp-
ucraunce of bps lpte what fo eucr is putte wnto
bpm. Andwhpther bebath gozda fonne, o2
butte adouahter, be talbe ferued after p fame
måner. Wut pfbebe aleruaunte oza mapde
thatthe Dre batb qozed, then be Hall geue Wn-
fotbepy2 maffertbhpatpe (pcles of fpluer, and the
Dre thallbe toned. YFamanopena well, og
dpage a pptte and couer tt not,and anoge 02 alt
atiefall therin, the owner of the ppt all make
it good, and geue monep Dntothep; maller,and
the deade beate pall be bps.

PE one mannes ore hurte another that be dpe
thentbhep Hall fell the lpue Dre, ani Beupde
moncp andthe deabde ore allo thep thall deupde.
D2 pF it be knowen that the ch so oe to
pu eintpmes paffe, and bps matter bathe not
epte bpm, be (hall pape Dre foz Dre, and the
deade (hall be bps owne.


C Che. rrii Chapter.


T Suche iphe lawesas arein the chapteraboue,


mas It a man Tealean Dreo: a epe, 4

bof A and ipl it 02 fell it, be pall rettoze °°"
Nasa” 6) (pie Drenfozan Dre, sand foure git se.7i

RESI AN tbepe foza epe. Jfa tbhefe be
ed FOUNDE mete se By and belinpts

ten that Pe dpe, there pall no bloude be Wed fog

bpm: but pf che [unne be bp when be is founde,

then there Halbe bloudethedfo2 bpm. |

A thefe thal make reftitucpon:pe bebauenot
wherwith,be talbelolve foz his thefte. Ifthe
thefte be founde inbysbhande alpue, (whpeber
it be ore, affe,o2 epe be Hall reltoze double.

Afa man do burtefelde oz bpneparde, and put
in bis beaft to Fede in another mans felde: of the
beit of bis owne felde, Æ of the belt of bps awne
bee gd song makereflitucpon.

At fpze bzeake oute andcatche athe thoes 25
and the fackes of cone, oz the fondpn Aes
op Ele be confamed tberwopeD, be tbat pnòled
t etp pali maberetptucpon. _

aman delpuerbps nepabbor-< monep og
(tutte to kepe, and it be tollen our of bps bonfe,
pfthethefebefonnd, letbympapedouble. And
pi tbe thefe benot founde, thentbe good man of
the poule all be bzought vnto the Judges.
o% (dud thal wearer tohp ther he haue put bis bande s,
bntobps nep gov oureg go où.

And nall manes of trefpace , tohetherit be’
t0? oren, alle, pepe; rapmente, oz anp maner of
loft thpnge twbpchanother chalengeth to be big
the caule of bothe partpes hall come before the
Judges. And whome the Judges condentpne:
let bpm pape Double yntobys nepabboure.

Jfa man belpuer onto bys nepghboure to
kepe, afle, Dre, epe, oz whatfo cuer beate it
be, and it dpe o2 be burte , oz taken awape (and
noman fe tt:) then pallan othe of the Lade be

ciwene


a


oe | i Lar i t d
Peieptesg. Exodus, Wol. rrbij:
Detwene them, thathe bath not {bys bande thalte elpe bpm tolyitebpm vp agayne,
banto bps nepabboureg good, ab the saves of hot alte not bynder the tyahte of the
C ithalltake the Othe, and p otber all not make HOOP, th bey. fute. Lepe the farce froma falle
ifqood. Andpfithe Tolen from pom, tarpe matet xand tbe innocent and tigbteous fe thou Sufan, p,
thall make re Ptucpon nto the owner therof. flepe not, foz J topll not Juttifpe the wptked.
i | Ett be tone with wplde beattes , then lethpnt «hou thaite take no gpttes,fo2 qpftes blpnde PE A
ePngle eccoede OF the tearpnae, andbethallnot thelepna,and Oucrte the wo2des of therparbte FIFA
) makeitgood. Andpfaman bozowe oughtof oug. Thou alt not opprefic a ftraunger, o2
A. s=} Disnepgpboure,and it be hurte o? elles dpe and pe Gnowe p berteofa fraunger, lepng pe were
eig i tbe owpuce therot be not bp, be thal makeit good fraungers in tbe lande of Egypte.
: “+ 25utpeé the oWiner therof be bye, he tall not * Spreperes thou ealt Lowe thp lande, and 5 3
» ae makr it good:hamelp, pf it beanppzedtbpnge, Gather in thefrutes therof:and the cuenth pere “OF o-8
vos andcamefozbpsbpre. x DE aman entylea thou thalt let ít refte andlpe Epil, that thepoore
BEFSH. a mapde that ts not vetrouthed, andiye with ber, oftbppcopte mape eate, and what thep leane,
etdall endote ber and take bertopps wpe, the beattes of the felde thal cate, 3ulpkemas
nd pf ber father cefule to Senedec vnto bem, nerehon alt do allo with tdp vpnepatde, and
-= þe all pape nonep accozdpnae tothe dowpe tbpneolpue trees, * Spredapesg tbou balt čo EFODLIT, D
teun, Of Upzgpnes. Chow thalte notlufre a x top Worke andinthefeucnth vapep thalerette ,
Froute, Wptchtolpue. Cibo foener lpeth mk beaft, that thpne ore and thpte affe mape reft, and the
{ Wall be flaynefoz it. We that ofere bntoa- fonne of thpmapdeand the fraunger map bere
i np goddeg auc Muto the Lozdeonelp, lette bpm frefibed. Jnall thpnges that Fhauclapde wne
l be vtterlp rooted oute., x Glerenotattraun- to POU , becprcumipecre, nd makena rehber-
To Amins ger, nepther oppzefe bpm : Foz pe were Erann- fall of the names of fraunge gonpes, x HEvEDEL cope. ¢:
| gersin the lande of Capote. * Vewaltrou. letitbe carde out of thy month.
o por bieno wpoowe, noz fatherleffe chpide. Vipe Threfeattes thou Walt bold onto me tna yere
= Hall trouble thepm., and thepcrpe unto me, 7 * Thou Galtekepe the eatte of focte breade, Erov.tH.c,
| -= Mpltfurelp beare thepzecrpe, and then wpll mp that Prate vnleuencd bzeadefeuen dapes longe &Frrit.c.
| 2) atb Ware bote, and A Wpll kpli peu with the ag FcOmaundedthe, in the tyme of the moneth
i e atiii : E ri ALLN ty =
arde andpour w ues ipalbe wpdotoeg and when corné begpn ictbtorppe, foz tntbat Do
z | et fei de fe. | neth pecanie out of Cyppte:xandfe that noma er.rrrittt.e
He ae thou lendemonep to any of my people appeare befoze meemptpe. And tbe feale of Deu rebig
beu.trndis ÉS Pooze bp the thon Male not beas a fpraunte dparuct When thou capelt the Fyattc ftuptes of €
| D Ynto ppm: nether balt thou opprefichpm bith t p labours, wbiche thou baite lowen in p Felbe,
Pear Diary. xD Ftpoutake tby nepgbbourg tapment And thefealt of ingatherpuce, whpche isin tbe
“> topledge, Ë halte delpuerst Ynto bpmagapne endeot thepere toben thou batt gathered m thp
p’ bp bat the funne go downe, Horthatispisco-: laboures out of thefeloe.
Herpnge onelp:cucnthe tapment fo: bistkpnne *Tietprmesina ere thal all thp men chple Denoi
swwpcren be licpeth. Gnd when be cepeth wntame, heel appeave before g eLozdeGod. hails
' ¥Jwvrill Pearce ppm, fo: Jam mercpfull. * Hou thaite not offer the bloude of my fa- EFTTA
a, h oy CDON baltnotraple upon the goddess ne- crptpce vponlencned beeade : neptber Hall the
ps Pataria ther dal phemethe ruler of thp people. @bhpfru: fatte of mp featte reMmapne Ditpll tbe monpne,
tes( whether thep Poet ee mop a le thou te t xt efpait of the Fpett frutes of thy lande EDON er.rrritit.g
| Sros, MOE DACKE. x Gpp Fpaite bogne fonnethon Malt thaltbzpna into FOr poule of tbe LoD tpp God, >4.Frb1.4,
Re Keue me, lpRewile aiio thalt thou do Withtbpne xthoutpaltalfo not etbakpdde in bismo thers brane
orenand with thpikepe. Seuendapes it tale mplke. Wedolbe, F fende an angell befozethe, ersrrug.o
be with thedamme,g the epabt dape thouthalt tokepethein the wape, andto bzpnge the into
geucit me. Ve Halbe pol People vntome, nep- thep ace wbpcbe 3 baue prepared. 2elbare of
ther (pall pe cate anp Acthe that ts tozne of beg- ppm and beare bps vopee, and cciptebpmnot:
Ges tT Sefde. Wut ball cat it to Dogges.


ome Due ane Che eee ite bean enempe ontotbyue enempes, and an ad-


4 Fe is) 204 thaltenct acceptea Dapnetale, gel x thallgobefoze the. and bepnge the in Vite ery rita,
Ny xz ep ther balte put thpne bande wpth to the Antozttes, and Dethpteg and heresttes, Ero riif.a,


y)


S Weide wpcked,tobean ynepgbteoug and Cananitcs, Henites,and Febulites, and J


|

DZA pinetle. Thoutbaltenotfolotoea pall dekropethen. Thon (halt not wo2tpp |

imultptude todoeuell:nepeberanfwere ina mat thepsxqodbdes,netherleruethem,neptber boa laeni

ter of piee that thou wolbelt (to folowe manp) fert woke sof thein : but oucrthzowe them, l

turnealpoe from the tructh, nepther alt thou and beake dolbue hc pmagesoftiem. And pe
Deora PAPNica pooremannescaule, x Pitboumete thall erue thew Lo2d¢ poure God, andhe Hall |

thpne enemypes ore o2 afle gopnae atfespe, thors bleie thy bzcad and thp Water, and F Wpl take Dea.dii-p,
xon.sitt.a Walt bapuge them to pem agapne. *Pithonfe alll, chncile awape from thempds ofthe,

tbpneennempes alle fpnie wider bps burthen, pere Halbeno woma chyldleffe 0? bnÊrute

thou Haltenet patie by and leg bpm alone: but fullintpy lande: the nombze of bp N

. ib Sul fp


Moles.
atulfpll. 3 ori lende mp feare before the, and
topli troubleall the people whpther thou alte
go. Andog wplmakeallthineenmies turne their
backes bute the, and F wpl fendehoznettes be-
force the, whiche Hall dppue out the Heuttes,the
Cananttes,anbd the betbites befoze the. Reuer-
theles,¥ wpll not cat them out in one pere, le
thelandegqrowe toa tpldernefle: andthe bea-
teg of the felbemultiplpeagapnit the. 2plp-
tleand lptle Jwpll drpue them out befoze the,
wntpll thou be increafed, and inberet thelande.
And J wpll make thp cotes from the red (ee vn
tothe fee of the Pbiltpnes, and from the delert
onto the rpuer.so2 J wopll delpuer the inbabp=
wai big Oe of Slandeinto thpne bande, and thou Dalt
er rinib DapuEtbem out befozethe. x Chou halt make
Hone appop ntmente with them, noz with thep2
godbdes. Aether let chen Dwell in thp Lande, lett
thep make thefpnagapntt me: fo2 pf tpou ferue

thep2 goddes, it wpll be thp decape.


C The. rrii. Chapter.


@ Motes afcendeth bp to Chemounte and wr pteth the
wore ot the Lowe - Whe bloubeolthe coucnaunte,
he cloers of Jiraci iutge the people, .


ee eo Fe

Dp, +=
| Spe Feat
I = aF Eia


p- i ma a E za
ee = oh
= ay H i Pi

tr —_


the people. Andthepfapde. Ali that the Lowe
batblapde, we wplldoandbeobedpent:; And
iwetia Holes toke thexbloud,and{papntlendit onthe
tBebz.(r-e people, and fapde: beholde, tthis is the blond of
the appopntinent, whiche the Lozdebath made

g With pou bpon all the wozbdes.

_ Chen went oles and Varon, Padab, and
btbu, and the.lrr.elders of Zlrael vp and faw
the Godof Zlrael, and there was onder dis fete
agit were a woke of a Saphir fone,and asit
toere the Deauen when it ts cleare, and bpon the
nobles of the chpldzen of Fraell he fet not bys
band. Bnb thep faw Godanddyd cat g Dpnke.

PE And the Lozdelapde bito ofes: come
bp tome into the bpll, andbetbere, and FJ wpll
genue the tables of Fone,and alawe and comaun

p. Menteg, which F baue tzptten p thou map
“teachetbem. And Wolesrole vp andbis minp-
Her Jchotua, and oleg went vp intotbe bpl


of God andfapbe onto the elders : tarpe peor
bntpll wecome agapne wuto pon. Wepolde here
ig Jaron and Hur with pou. PFanp manbaue
anp matter todo: lettedpmcometotpem. And
Moles went vp in tothe mounte , anda cloube.
coucred the bpll, and the glogpe ofthe Lorded
bode bpon the mounte Sinap,and the cloudeco
uered it (predapes. And the feuenth dape hecal
led Dnto Poles oute of the cloude, And the faf-
{pon of the glozp of the Lozde was lpke confn-
nipnge Epze on the toppe of the bpll inthefpgbt
of thechpldzen of Ffraell. And oles Went n=
to tbe Loe e and gothpm bp inte pmountapn
nd
anbdfoztpenpabtes. J
C'Che.rxv. Chapter. 4
Lr Phe lore | be fa
et TO Orbela


Se P Ale
he ae a eT |
— et el =. e i aes
of J t =
Fa
F


r]


SNA , that thep bzpngemean


= r he Mia

es p g :
Fai or s a a |
i ao | F


: Mamonge them.) And accozdpngeto
all that J coewe tbe hd eetations ‘the
: BOattertbetallponofallthbeoma: -

mentes thecof, cuen fo hal pe mate E T K

Hallmake an x arke of fethim wesa twocu: £

bytes andanbalfelonge,acubpteandanbalfe

b20B¢,anbacubpteandanbalfe bpe. And thou

palt ouerlape it with pure golde, wpthin and

without Halt thou ouertape tt, and thalt make

antbpe bpon tt acrowne of golde tounbdeabout.

And thou thalt catte foure ringes of cold foz it,

and put them in the foure corners thereof.ti.epn

ges thalbe in the one fpdeof it, æ. ii. in theother.
And thou halt make barres offethim wood wt

and couer them Myth golve, andput the barreg

tn tberpnges alonge bp thetpdes of thearke,to

beareit withal.. Andthebarres Hall bein the

rpnaes of the avke,and thallnoe be taken awap

from it. And thou alt put in the arke the wpt-

nefe which Jpalgeue p. And thon halt make

a merctleat of pure of gold,it.cubttes aanhalfe

are: longe


Ye
ofeg wasin thex mountefostpe Daves, ae p=


2
=j
E-
gi


i rr oe


— The tabernacle.
| - Jonge, andacubpte andabalfebzoade.

— Bnd thou Malt make two cherubing of gold:

€un of a whole wozke Halt thou make them

én the two endes of the mercy feate: and the one

cherub alt thou make on the one ende, and the

i other onthe other ende. Cuen of the lame mercp
- fate Qallpemake Cherubing inthe twoendes
thetof. Andthe Cherubing pall itretche thepz
SOpnges abzode over an dpe, couerpng the mer-
` Cpleate woith thep2 winges and thep2 faces Mal
Si loke one fo another:cuen to themercp feat ward
c. . halltbefaces ofthe Cherubpnsbe. BAndtbou

“em.a. Chale put thexmercpicate aboue dpon the arbe,
Beda snd intbearke thou (halt put the witnes which
AE 3 wll gene the. nd from thence ¥ wpll teti-

ies Ne Ynto the and wplcomon with tie from pps

i themercycleate: from berwene the two Cheru=
bing Lopich are Ypon the arke of topenefle, of all
thpnges which 3 wpll qeue the incommiaunde-
ment onto the chpldzen of Firaell.

* Thou Halte allo mate a table of Scthym
(00D of .1t.cubptes longe,and one cubpte brode
anda cubite and an balfe bye. And thou Malt co
uerit with puce gold, emake theretoa crowne
of golde tounde about. And make duto that an
whope of foure Fpngers bzode rounde aboute .

_ And makea golon crotoneallo tothe whope,
~founde aboute. And make fo2 it four rpneesot
golde, and put the eegen inthecormerg ar av
on tbhefoure fete therot : cucniouet agapnife the
wbope Halltberpuges be , te put in barres, to
bearethetable Withall, And thou ale matic pd
barreg of fetbim wood, and overlap them wrth
olde, that the table mape be bozne with them.
dthou Walt make bys dptipes, and {poncs,
flatpeces,and pettesto powe out withall: ©-

uen of Epne golde halt thouimake them, And p
> thalt let vponthe table, ewbzead before me al
errre wape. *And thou (halt make acandelfipcke of
poma euen of a whole wozie (hall the can:

iclipche bemade wptb bps thafte, baaunches,
bolles, knoppes and floures pzoceadpnee there
out:Spre bzaunches allo thall procede out of f
fpodes of it:thze beaunches iff candel tpcbe out
ofthe onefpde, andthze out of theother. Thre
cuppes lpke Dnfoalmonbdes with knoppes and
- flontesinone beaunche. And thee ppr Ipke
alinonzee-in the other bzaunche, pth bnoppes
and flources.“sx2 cuen fo thozowe out thelpre
bzauuches that procede ont of thecandel pete:
and inthe candelftpcte felfe Faure cuppes ipke
bnto almonds with thry? knoppes and oureg
_ andthere Halbe a Bnop vnder enerptwodzaun
ow cheg.cacinthzerownis) DE thelprethat procede

out of tbe candelftpcte. Andthe hnoppes and f

baaunches thaibe of tt. And tt Halbe one woke

eucit of pure golde. And thou Halt make thefes

nen lampes of it : andthe feuen lampes therof,
$ Walt thou put an bye thereon, togeuelpabt on
ie to the other [pbe that ig ouer agapnite tt.
Zi Tbhetonges and fnofergtherot Mall “ied
- olde. Df anbundzed pounde wepgbt of fpne
| | golde Halte thou make tt with all the apparel,
peb titta æ Lobe therfore that thou makietbemafter the

De Callpontbat was ewed thein themount.


?
i >.


r_e,


eF.FFF Rit D


m


»
a

i
je
ps
ris
(

1i

i =
i

|

t

į

rad "a


ee ee S
A FEREN Pp


va ge -


a be


Erodus, .


Sal. rrvtij,


Se hy citar often
| lot | Allg crpbet ie thares ert apn:
| ô the bolpe pare. ie ChpHgeS pert apnpuge


"e—a a -=m


ara gene, on e tabernacle haltethou make t g
ied Svcs t-curtapnes of whitetwined {plke
Buby pad pelotoe (plke, putplcand{harlet.
ee Andin them thou thatte make ppc


eer, Sra tures of bzopderde worke, The
lengty oar onecurtayne Dalbe epgbtand tween
tpecubpteg,and the bzedth of onecurtapne foug
cubptes, and eucrpe one of the courtapnesthall
hauc one meafure : Epue curtapnes (pall be cou-
pled together one to another:and fpuecurtapng
ipalbecoupicdtogetberonetoanotber,
And thou halt make lowpes of pelow fylke 1S

alonge bp the oge of the cne curtapne wobicbis

in the felucbare of the couplpnge curtapne. And
Iphewpfe Halte thou makein the edge of the vt
moffcurtapnethatis tobe coupled therwith on
the other ipoe: SFpftye lotwpes Halt thou mate

in the one curtapne and fpftpe lowpes talte
thoumabecinthe cdgcof thecurtapnethatt to
becoupled therwptt on the other fpde: thatthe
lotepesmapetakeboldconeofanothber. And
thou haltemate fpfiye buttons of golde, and
couplethe curtapnes together with tz buttong
aitdit (halve one baby tacpon. i i

xynd thou alte makea lenen cuctapnes oë Et-resbib

goates beare, tobe acoucryng bponthe taber:
nacle. @bhe length of a curtapne ipall be thpztp
cubptes, and the bacdthfoure, and thep Mall be

all leuen of oncinealure. And thou alte cons
plefpue curtapnes bp them frlues, andthelpre

bp them felues, and halt Double thelpreeinthe
foze fronte of the tabernacle. And thoy Malte
make fpftpe lowpes in the cdge of the vtmolte
curtapne on the one fpde :euenin the edge ok the


tcuplpnge curtapne: and fpttpe lowpes in the


cbge of the other curtapne that multe betopned
tntoit. Andthou Malt make fpftpe buttones
of bzafic,and put them on thelowpes: andcous
ple the coucrpng sh A fe it map be one,
Bnd the remnaunt that relteth tnthecurtap=
nes of the couerpnge: euen the balfe courtapne
that refteth , Gall be lefte on the backe (pocs of
the babptacpon: that acubpte onthe one {pde,
and acubpte onthe ofber [pdemape remaptce ur
thelength of the curtapnes of the couccpug.and
that it maperemapne of ecberfpde of the babita
çpon focouerit wyrball. Jnd wuonthe taber-
nacle thou tbaltemake acouerpuce of rammes
fkynnes Dpedredve: AnD pet accucepnge aboue
allof tarus {kpnneg.
- Andthou Halt makebo:des fo: the Dabita- D
cpon of fethim woot to Rande bprpahe: ten e=
bytes longe Hall enerpe bozde be, anda cnbpte
andanbalfe bgope. Two fete thall there be tit
one bozde: andthep Halbe {eperate one froman
other. and thug (palt thou make fozail the boz-
deg of thetabernacle. ~ Aud thou Walt make CEFIRE
twoentpe bodes fo? the babttacpon on tbe fouth
(pdoe; dnd thou paltemakelorkettegoffpluer,
Onder the twentpe bozdes : two fockettes Vit-
Derone bozde,foz bps twofete,and two focket=
tesonderanotherbozdeforbpstwotcic. —
diii | Fulpke


—— n


Leremonypes.


€


f


gulphemaner inthenozth fpde of ý babitacpon


there palbe.rr. bozdese.xl.Cockers of fplucr:ii.
fockets pnder one borde, ¢ two fockets bnder a
nother bogde. Andin the wek ende ofthe habt-
tacpott, Walte thou make fpre bozdes, and two
bordes palt thou make tnthecozners of the ba:
bitacponin themetpng together of the two fp-
des. And thep Malbe coupled together beneth,
andlpkewpleabouctoarpnge. And thus Wall
it be for the tio bordes that arcin thecozners.


Andthep halbeepaght bozdesbauingfockettes by
but the knoppes of the prices andthep2ewho= .


offplucr,euen {prtene fockettes:that there map
be twoofockettes winder one Vorde, and two foc-
kettes Dnder another Vorde -

And ie palt make barres of fethim wood
Fpue foz tbe bogbes of the tabernacle in one fpde
andFfpnebareeg foztbebozdes of the tabernacle
inthe other lyde, and Epuc barreg foz the bodes
of thetabetnaclein the wetende. And pmpdle
barre tall goo alonge thozowe the mpbbdes of
the bozbves frome theone ende nnto the other .
And thou tale couer the bordes with gold, and
make thep2 ringes of golde,toputp bartes tho-


rote, and thou alte couer the barres wpth


goldealfo. And thou thalt rere bp the babita-
cponaccosdpng to the Fafipon therof, asitwas
(hewedtbeinthemount. Andthou thaltmake
a vaple of pelowe fylke, of purple, {carlet, and


~ Spbhitetwpned a aictaiwmernvocn
t


petures palt thou makeit. And bange tt upon
oure pyllers of Sethim woode couercd wpth
golde. Wibole heades thalbe of golde,andpng
pponfoure fockettes of fpluer. And thou Walt


bange bp p vaple with ringes that thou mapt .


Bae magaet a the baple)thearke of wptnes
And the vaple Wall vnto pou deupde the Dolpe


—fromtbe moft bolp. And thou halt put the mer=


cpefeate Dpon the arte of toptnefle in the bolp-
eft place. And thon Malt put the table without
the vaple:and the candelfticke oucr agapnitt the
table onthe fouth [pde of p babitacion. And put
thetableonpnozthlpde. And thou Halt make
anbangyna to: the doze of the tabernacle ofpe-
low fplke,purple,{carlet,¢ whpte twpned {pike
wougbt wnedle woke. And f hale make foz
thebancing,fpue pillers of fethim toood Ecouet
them with golde, ¢ their inops thalbe of golbe,
and? thalecatt Fpue Lockets of bzalle Foz them.
| CChe.rcvit-Apapter. ki

@ Hheforme of che alter of the burnt ofrpng with his hoz

nes rpnges taurs, gredperats, ë other o;namentes.
ARE f2d thou Malt makeanx altar of fe
re Aed thin wood,fpue cubites longe and
ae sya true cubptes: 2obe. Sozit halbe
AN fourefquare, atid thze cubptes bpe.


Foure comers therof:and thou Halt putit pnder
the compaffle ofthe altare beneth, that the nette


etvile onthe noztbhipde


albe whoped with fpluer, and thee inappep
ile.


Voss Ne. Jaron, Nadab,and Abibu, Ee
eafar.and 3tbamar, J avons fonnes. And thou
(halt make bolp rapment foz Aaron thy brother
that thep mape be bnto glozp and bewtpe. And
thou palt (peake bnto all that are wpfe barted,
and whomeloeuer F baue fplled with he lpeete
of wpldome : that they make Aaronsrapmente
toconfecrate bpm wpth, that be mape minpfiter
nto me. Thele are the garinentes wbiche thep
thal make,a baett lap, €phod,a tunicle;a trapt
cote, ampter,andagpdell. Chelebolpe gar-


mentes hall thep make foz Baron thy baother: 5


and bysfonnes, that thep mape mpnpfter ynto
nic. Bud let them take qolde,pclowe iepure:
; ple


oe


|


s Mias


e


a a —


 evemonyes. Croous. STONE.

ES ple Tkarlet,and tobpte twined fplke. Ther mal. totbebolp placefoz a remembaunce befoze the

make the Ephod of golve,pelowelple,purple, 2#020¢ alwape. And thou palt put inthe bet-

fRarlet,and whptetwined (pl&e With bzopderd lap of iudgment kim ¢ Chunutr:and chep pal
woke. Chetwo (pdes Hall come togetber,and beencn vpon Aarons bert, when be goeth in be-

Declofed ppinthetwoedgestherof. Andthe Fore the Lozde:and Jaron thal beare the indge=

mpzdleof the Ephod halve of the fame wozkee ment of thechpldzen of Jlracl bpon bis bert be-

mantppp, and of the lame [tufe , euen of golde, fozethe Lozde altvap. And thou Halt make the $
celowe (placpurple,{harlet and whpte twined. tunpcle wuto the Ephod altogether of pelowe

< =- fpike. ind thou palt take two onir tones, and fplke. Andthere thalbe an Hole foz the prade n

oy grauem them thenames ofthechpldzenof Afra the npds of it haupng a bonde of wouen woke

—— ell: fprenames ofthem inthe one kone, and the rounde aboute the coller of it(asit were the col:

-~ yp other {pre inthe other fone: accozdpng toeh: lerofapartlet)thatitrent not. 2nd beneth Y=

“4. omwrontbepzrbpztb. Afterthe woke of a fone ponthe bent,thou thaltemake omgranates of

graner, and of pinthat graucthipgnets alt pelow [pike and of purple and lkarict round a=

thou graue e two tones wprb thenames of. boute thebem, and belleg of gold bet wene them

bar chpldzcn oF: cael.andtbalt make themtobelee roundeabout: and let there be euera golden bel

> in golde. And thou palt put thet tho tones pd anda pomgranate,a golden bel and a pomgra-

| __- thetwva thulders of the Epbhod, that they mape nate,rounde aboute pon the bem of the tunpele

be tones of cemembgaunce Dnto thechplozen ot x nd Jaron thal baue tt vponhym, wher be EC.FIdDd.

Alracl. an Haron Wall beare thep2 names be- minpftreth,and the founde Walbe bearde, when

fore the Lozde V onbis two toulbers foart: be cocth into the bolp place befoze the Lord ind

-membzaunce.- Aind thou alte make bokes of when becommeth out,and be all uot ape. and

qolde and twochepnes of fpne gold lpn worke thou Malt make a plate of pure gold, and graue

and twzethed and fatten che m2etbhed chepnesto theron,as fpgnettes are grauen. @ pe bolpneile

the bokes. Andthou alt mabe the be lapof ofthe Lozde,and put it ona pclowe iplisclace to

gudgment with beopozcd woke euenafterthe bev onthemptre, cuen bpon the fozefronte of

<>. wo2keof the Epbod halt: makeit :namelp of tt- nd it talbe vpo Aaronsforcheade:p Aas
~ -mbe pettntkeuetetiaet aM roe epinenot aan balom nab
pipike. halt p make it. {quaretttpalbe } EVE ( lOr, k he edd

ned iplae, alt p make it. Fourfquare it M bole cytes. Inbit yalor almayes pony 8G

bzod¢e. And thou halt fpl it wb four rowes ofito: fozcbead,foz the reconcilpng of them betoze tye

| f thalbea Spardios,a To- Lobe, Andthou (halt make a lpnnencote,and

neg. 31 thet pstt rowe balora Sparks a fh EEN e altenats EN del

Bae a nonde:in thetbppo Ligurio Of ncble Wwozke, ind rheu tpatte ma ne aE ig

pat and amatit: inp fourtd.a Turcas, rons fonnes alfocotes,apzdels,and bonets, gto

Dnix,anv Jalpis.ano thep talbe fet in golde rpous and bewtpfull, and thou Walte put them

in tbere inclofers. And the ftonestbalbe grauen VPN Aaron thp bzotber, and on bis fons wie)

oren of Firaell, euen Withrweluenames,cuery He and fanctifpe them, that thep mape minp-

pe phon taltmake vpontbe beflappe, beerded ta ea Lagat Erom p loynes
i$ twofatenpna chepnes of pure golde and We- nite the thyes thallehep reache. and they thal-

chen toorke. andthou alt mabelphewple b- De opa A cephata. 7 Woenther :

: pense ina h the x taber | neg, O21 Hep er. rrvit.s
pon the bzeftlap tio tpnges oF olde sue pita come weona to mp a ae ?

i pe to irm olomebe.ticpnges wbich FCP eare no ipune, and{o dpe. And it tpatvea
mozerben cherne ts LO rae ane pe ee lawe fog pe bnto Jaron tbis fede after bpm.
tMotuds-.nf thettoochepnes,thou Walt fatten OC Cbe.rrte. Chapter.

. & in two cloi pisand putt em ppon the hul- C Te confecracpon of Jaronaud of his tonnes.

' pergofthe Ephod onp fozeipde oit: Ann thas Hei e bel pide emg
th: + male ttoo es of cold, whit | Ja Ska E cmt bemp xeu bitib.
talt pet make ttoo rpnges os A en A PN preftes. Thou thale take a br

‘a the posers tperor,towarve the in pocofthe pee pong ore, ant worammes that av

Ephod pe N it.Andpettwootbherrpn: wrrhoutblempty,¢ yuleuencd bead and cakes

qes of golde thou (palt makeand put them onë offwetebzeadtempozd with ople,and Wafers

two fpdes of the cep) ob beneth ouer agapnitp offwetebzeade anopneed with ople (of wheter

pzeflap,alotwe where the fpdes are iopned toge ower palt thou make them and put them ma

ther bpon che bzopov'red GP dle of the Ephood. maunde,and bgpnge them inthe maunde ith p

hy Blapbp bis rpnges Se conan sages ee Fit

ntotberpnae ‘of evephod wit ja lace ol pe- ‘andppstonne lito the Doze ot tye raveriat

A we foie. iar eaapelpe lofe abone p bzoiderdD of opts, and watbe them with water,¢ take

|. qpadell of the Ephod,ani' thatp bzeltlap benot the yarmentes, and put Dpon Faron: trapte

lofed from tbe Ephod: mà Jaronpallboeareğ cote thetunpele ofthe a od, and the < Painan
namegof the chplozen of Jraellinthe bzeflay the beeftlap:and qpzde them to bim with p Drop
of Judgement pon bis pertrrobendegoctbin: Dered gp2dell tobiche isin the Ephod... a nd Bee


~~


=
=
o
=
=
_—
‘iy
=o
g
=
i J
=y
it a]
7
co
=
a
=
i
Li)
kaa
=
=
T
=
T3
=g
TFA
at
oy


e
[3
=
=
G
=
=
er
=
pas
=i
=
kiy
=,
=
2
=
2
S
Pt
o
g
par,
=
©


Ar E


Atremonyes. Crodtis;
z the mptre vpon big ad: put the bolp crowne rain of the De al Se atan and ox a :
Dpon the mptre. Chen talte thoutaketbean:, fonnes. and it balbe Jarong andbisfonnes p


befoze the Lozde, bp the ooze of the tabernacle of  confeccacpon,and feth his Rethe in anbolp `.,
of Wptucs, And take of tie bloude of the calfe g place. Jn Aaron ¢ big fong thal eatthe fl ep of
putte dpon the boznes of P aultarwith thy fpn: rhe ran, g thebzeab that isin the bafket. en bp F


thettwokpdneps and thefattbatis bponthem theni : but a fraunger pall Hot cate Aberof, be-
in burne. them vponthealtar, ut theflethe caule tbey ace bolp. And pF ought oft


eee pe


=


€ {pune offtpng. Choy {halt alfo tate oneram,« it ihallnot be eaten, becante it is holp. T herfoze
Aaronand bisfonneg {hall put the n bandes Y- Malte thou do unto Xaron and bis lones, euen

pon the bead of theram,and when bat flapne fo,accordpn toalithpnaes wbich 7 haue com: Sa

tie ramme, tbou Walt takebis blond and lpn maunded p,leven dapes (halt thou (their bare =

Ble it tounde about bpontbe altar, andcut the des,and offer cuctp dape acalfe foz afpnne ofe Tm

tamme in petes, and Wath theintwardes of him’ rpr yfo: to veconcple Witball: tbat thou mape


Kaa


E + Sian =
Le ES ae
: sa mi p


Eeid Fyd taketbe otherram.and Aaron and hig bolpe.ucrp one that toucheth the aultar,lette


and put it vpon the typo the tpgbt eave of Ya- here Oge vape bp dap contpnualty:the one thon i
ronandofbpgfonnes, and bpon toe thumbe of alt offre inthe mozning and tbe otber at euen
cpcp tpgbtbandes, and upon the greatetoo of And wpt fDcone lambea tenth deale of foure

Ð thep2 rpgbt fote and (p2pnkle the Bloude bpon mpngicd with the fourth parte of an bynof bes
tic altarrounde about. And thou alt takcof tenople,and the fourth part ofan bn of pne,


nopnting ople.andipzpnkleit bpon Batonand Walt offer atenen and thalte goo thereto acco
onnesandbpg opngetot emeate offerpnge and Depnise offe-
thep2 garmentes with bom. Andbe Malbebas cyngintbe moz Png,tobe an odoure ofa fwete
lowed and bis clothes and bis fonnes, and tbeir fauonreanda factifp.
Leu,dittc, Clothes with Opint.*And thon walt take thefae - this be a contpnual burnt ofring amonge pour


tbetwo &idneps, and the fat tbat is bponthem *mete Pou, to fpeakethere oniotie. Chere y .. ee
and the typgbt thulder: for the ra misa full offe- pore mete with the chplozen of Fra eL,and wpl ju, Hia
È bze e i fan-


bzeadtbatisbefoze the L020, and put all pon And Fx wyil fanctifpe alto both aronandbpg
tbe bandes of Aaron, and On the bandes of bps ? Prealkes. And A Wpll* dwell g- Lent. rory
i at | i lO2en OF Ffrael sang toplbe thepg tcezoi0, '
st rsa tach. pne if God. And thep hall bnowethatJamthe Lozd ae |
from of thep2 banbes,and burne it bponthe al- the ? God , that bought them out of the lande Tu
fauouroffwet- of Ègppte, for to Dope amongeamongethem;


ieu.vit.e. the Lorde.x And thou thalt take thebzett of the C Che.rre. Chapter, i ie
» ram of Barong confeccacpon,and Wane it fora © Cxdeatcerorincece


“= a Cubpte longe and a cubpte b ape: g
n fonre fquare palit be AND WO cy bpteg bpe
= the p


offerpnge,wobicbe ig waned andbeucd yp oraes


~ Ceremonyes.


Í tye boznegthereof Hall proceade out of it, and
k - thou Halt ouerlape it with fpne golde, both the
| tofe and the walles rounde aboute and bis boz
nes alfo,¢ Halt make vntoitacrowneof golde
rounde about,and two golden rpnges on either
{pde:euen onder thecrowne , that thep mapebe

ag places fo: the barres to beare tt withal. And
thou thalt make the barreg of fetbim wood, and
‘. couerthemwmpthgolde. Andthou halt put it
` before the aple tpat is bp the arke of wptnefle


A- _ befoze the mercpleate that is vpon the wptnefle
Aig x Where Awpllmetethe. And Aaron Hall burne
E theron wete incente euerp moznpnae, when be
ac dzefleth the lampes euen then hal beburne tt:¢
Hr ipkewile at euen, oben beletteth vp thelampes


be thall burne incente:and this tncenfpng thalbe

perpetuallp before the Lozbde thozowout poure

generacpons. De thall put noxtraunge incenfe
theron, bugnt Cacrifpce 02 meate offtpng nether

powe Sagi pda .

i And Aaron Wali reconcple wpon the boanes
of itonce in a pere: wpeh the bloude of the fpnne
offerpng of reconcilpnge : cuen once inthe peare

f pall bereconcplett thozotbe pour generatpong

“A at ismok bolp wntothbeLozde. Andthe Lorde

-pame f.a. meee Y Mofes: faping: *PE thou taket the
-  Msroha fume OF the childzen of Afrael afterthep2 nom
se, thep Hall geuceucry man areconcilpnge of
ee ka bis foule wnto the Lorde when tbou telle chem
en that there be no plage amonge them, when thou
$ tellethbem. Andrhusmuche Wall eucrp man
ou tebite Bee sand that goetbinto the nombge:balfealp=
soe > cle, after thefpele x of thefanctuarpe :afpcleis
Sse.slv.d. eypentp balfepence. An balfefpcle thatlbe the
7 beueofferpnge of theLozde. All that arenom-
b2cd from tiventyp pere oldand aboue, hal gene
anbeneofrpng bntothe Lorde. Che rpche thal


Ful. Fede


the horde that be mape Daue mercpe Dpon pour


nep of the chpldzen of Firacl,and Halt pnt it vn
to the bfe of the tabernacle of wptnefle, that it
mapebeameinozpal pnto the chplozen of gira-
ell befoze the Lozbe, that bemape baue mercpe

| € pron ponr foules. And p Lo2d {pake bnto G)o-
 gro.rio, fes.faping: xP halt makealauerofbzatle,and
5 bisfotealioofbzafleto wath withal g palt put
tt bet wene piabernacle of wptnes,and the aul:
ter,and put watertberin. Woz Aaron € his fons
thal wath thepzbanbdes g thep2 fetetherin:euen
when thep qaincothe tabernacle of wytnes, oz
when tbep goo ntotheaultertominpfter and
to burne the Lozdes offerpng , thep Hall wape
them felucs with water, leftethep dpe. And it
albe an ozdpnauuce onto them foz eucr,bothe
puto bpmand bis {ede thozotwont thep2 genera
cpons. Andthe Lode fpake onto Doles fap-
puge: Cake onto the pencppall (ppces : of the
moite pure mpre Fpue bundzcd{peles, of fwete
cpnamon balfe fo muche euen two bundzedand
frftpelpcles: offwete calamus,twobund2ed g
fpftpe, of caia, two bundzed andfpftpe, after
ten. vig.b tbe bolp{pele,and of ople olpfeanbpn. * And p
halt make of the opleanbolpe opntment , cuen


Erodtts.


not paffe and the pooze thall not gotnderbalte e.
afpcle. ut pe Hall qeueanheueofkerpug onto i,


foules.Andthouthalttaketpereconcilpngme ie


Fol.rrri,


anopntment compounde after the crafte of thi
apotecatpe. Aud thou (pale nopnte the taberna-
cle of wptne ffe therwithb.and the arke of witnes
and the table, andall bys apparell,andthecan- W
delftpcke,and all bis appareil: and the aulter of
encenfe,and the aulter of burnte facrifpce wpth
allbis veffetics.and the lauer and bis fote. And
thou palt fanctifp them, that thep mapbe molt
bolp:fo that no man touche them, but thep that
be balowed. And thou halt anopnt Aaron and
bis fonnes,and conflecrate them, that thep map
minpitre bntome. Andthon thalt{peake vara
the chplozen of Flracil,fapinge:this thall be an
bolp opntpng ople vito me thozowout pour ge
neracpons. Gipon mans Aee thal tt not be pow
reD:netbet thall pe make anp otber after the ma
i pnege of it fo? itis bolpe:and Dalbe bolpe wn-
to pou: Wholoeuct maketh lpke ibat, o? wholo-
euccputteth anp of tt bpon a fraunger, thal pe
ryfefromamonge bis people.

_ And the Lorde lape vnto Boles: take Vit
totbelivcte types : balme, Dnicha, (toete gal-
panum, thefetppees wpth pure franckpuccnie,
of cache lpke much, g make of them fete mel-
Ipnageincente, after the cratte of the apoticarp,
mprgled fogeneepureano bolp. And beate it
to pouder andput of it before the wptnes m the
tabernacle of wptnelfe, where ¥ wpll mete the.
Jt albe vnto pou motte bolp. Anodlethatpe
makenone after the makpnae of that. Jt halve
nto pou bolp fo: the Lorde. Cho loenerthall
make lpke nto that, tolmel therto,thal perpty
from armonae bps people.

Q bhe-rrri. Chapter.


AEA bp name, nes pom


And the Lode pake vuto Boles, fapinge: q `


The golden calfe.


Sro.ttd. Branp wpe fe thatpe kepemp x Habbotbes:
foz it is alpgne bettene me and pou in pour ye-
veracpong,foz to knowe that J the Lozdeampe
thatdothfanctifpepou. * Repe mp Sabboth.
therfoze:fozit isDolp unto pou. Hethatdefiletp
it patbe flapne. 0? wholoeucr wozketh ther-
in, the famefoule Halbe rofed ont from amonge
bis people. Spre dapes hall men wozke, And
intbefeucnth dape isthe Sabboth of the polpe
__ refteoftbe Lorde. Ubolocucrdothanp worse
D inthe Sabboth dape, pall dpe:Wwherfoze let tiye.
chplozen of Ffracllicpe the Sabbotiy,that they
obferuc it thozotvout thep2 generacotis,tpat tf
beattappopurmentfozeuce. Jeo: itisa tpque
betwene nie andthechpldzen of Jfraell Foz cuer
Benin * Fozin{predapesthe Lorde made beaucn and
carth:and intbefeuenth dape berete and was
refretbed. And oben the Lord bad made anent
of comenpng with oles vpanthemounte St
er.prriio. nabebe gave bpm two tables of wptnefle : euen
tables of (tone, wzptten with p Fynger of God.
CTbe.rrrit.Cpapter. ——
« The golven calfe poles prapeth fo: them. De breaketh
the tables fog anger.Bechpoct) aron. The poolatres are


flapar.
or Nd when the people fawe, that tt


( 7 (ay ee |
Pia oe was longe o? Woles came Downe
Sei out ofthe mountapne, thep athe-


gaum + td iD


dete, bile Ate lentes COR, AND fapde vntobpm: * Up,
” make vs gopdes to gobefoze ys:Fo2 of this Yo
fes(the felowe that brougbt vs out of thelande
of Eqppte)we wote not whatis become. Aud
qad. vitit Yaron tapde yuto them: + plutke of the golden
eatpnaes which are in the cares of pour wpucs,
potrfonnes,and of pour daughters: and bapng
them into me. Andall the people plucked of the


coldencarpngcs,wbtch tiep hadinthepz cares”


pral.cdi.c and brought them dnte Jaron. And pexrecca-
ued tdem of thepz bandes, and fallponcd it with
a qraucr,and made ofitacalfe of molten metal
And they Capde: x There be thp goddes, D Ji-
racll whiche brought the out of thelande of E-
= cppte. And when Jaron fate tbat, be made an
aultar befoze it. And Aaron ceped, fapimec : to
niozotwe is the bolp dape of the Lozbe. And thep
role Dpin the moznpnge:and offered burnt ote-
tpnges.and bought peace offepngesalfo. and
Leortr *tbepeople fat them dotone to cate aud dzpnke
and role bp agapne fo plape .

And > the Lozdelapde Wnto Qoles: * go,
Drut.(r.b. getthbedowne: thp popie wbich thou bzougbh-
tet ont of the lande of Egppte bauemarredall
thep are turneDat once out of the wape wbhich¥
commaundedthent: * foztbep baue made tens
Prachic a calfe of molten metall and pauc wo2thppedit
and hauc offeredtherto,fapinge: Thefcbetpp
yoddes, D Flracll which banc brought the out
€ of the laude of Eqppte.Andthe Lode fayde vn
éro.rrriy. to Doles: *F baut fene thts peeple:and behold
it isa tpffnecked people, and nowelufire me, Ò
imp Wat) Maye ware hote aqapnite them, and
confume them:and J wpll make ofthe ampygh-
tpe people. Ard Hofes befoughtthe Lozdebps

Gov, and faper: D Lode, wip Doth thp wat

ware betsagapnit tep people whiche thou ba


Cif, Mepit


rodus., ©


Saved tbemfelues together ynto Aas


bought out of thelandeok Egqppte.witharcar |
pote and witha migbtpe bander xi berfore Bu.r9.%
ipuldethe Eqiptpans(peake andlape: Fora
mplchefe bpd be bzpng them out euen Fog to flep- c
them inthe mountapnes, and toconfume them 1
fromthe face ofp earth: Turne fromehp Fearce
wWathe:and turne frone thys euell(acupled)a= ‘
gapnitthepeople. Remembee Abraham, Jaz ! /
bac, and Jlraell thp feruauntes to whome thon, fos
fwarelt by topne ovonelelfe:andlapbell puto = « ied
tjem, =J wpl multiplpe pourc fede asthe fare
regofbeauen and all thig lande that Jbauefpa ©
ken of top! ¥ geue vntopour lede and thep Hal
enberet it foz ener. Bnd the na agies Aaaa
felfe fromthe euell fa tobiche be fapde be wolde ae
Dovntobpspeople. Ano Mofes turned bpa . Wer
backe and went Dotone fromthe bpllethextwo epf .-
tables of woptnes were inbis hande : and flame l
tables were wzptten onboth the leaues,¢ were
the wozke of God, andthe waptpnge was the

iptpnge of God graueninthetables. And
hen Jolua hearde the nople of the people, ad. :
thep owted, befapde dnto Hofes: thertisa ae
nople of warreinthebot. Andbheanlwered: tt
isnotthe cepe of themnthatbhauc the matrp nog
of them that baue the woe: but 4 debeare the
nopfcot themtbatf{pnge. l

Andit fortuncd,affoneashecame npe Dnto
the bolte, befawe the calfeand the ated catiee

CADW


B 4


- = 2)


G)oles wrath wared hote and he calte f table
out of bps bandeg, and brake them beneth f bpl
x And be toke the calfe wopichethep bad mabe, è metie
burned it inthe fpze and tampte it vnto pow- Xi
der end rowed tt inthe water, and made cP as
been of Flraclldzpnke of if. And Bolestapde Fae
nto Faron: what dpdthis people unto p, that N
thon balt brought fo greateafpnne bpon themi
And Jaron anfwocred: let not p wath of mp
Lode ware fearce , thou knowelt Ppeople that
thep ar cné {ct onintichefe: #02 thep fapnewnte
me: make bs gods to Geo befoze tefo we wot
not what is become of oles, the Felcwe tbat
bzougbt bg out ofthbelandcof Egppte. nd J
fapde Ynto them: let geiak aoee golde plucke ai
it of,and bapnge tt meand J bpd ratit into the
fp2e:and therofcame out this calfe.
£P ofeg therfore faw that the people toerena

ked and that Aaron bad made them 74d on- f
to thep2 (hame amonace thepze encinpes) and be u
wente and tode inthe gate of f hote, andfapde
PEanp man pertapne Vnto the Lozde,lette hun
come wntome. And all thefonnes of Lent gathe à
red them felueg together and came dntobpin.
Andbelapde unto them. Thusfaptbthe Lod
Godot {lracll, put euerp manhpsfwearde bp
his{pde, and goo in and out, from gate togate:
thozowout the hoofke, and Nepe cuerp man, bpa
hzotber and euccp man biscompanpor.and cue:
rp man bis nepgbboure. And thechplozen of Les
utopaas oles bad lapie. Ind there fell of the

eoplethefame dape aboutethze thoufand men

ind @ofesfapde:fpl pour bandes unto p L020 :
this dape, enerp man dponhpsfonneand vpow |
his bzotber,and (Dat theremapebe genen pona € i
bleflpnge this bape, And onthe mozowe ~ na

une


a———————<<<_e. ss e


“CLeremonyes Erodws: olere
Lor VEEL $y ae a 3 i k KETC
tuned that Boles fapde vutop people: pebaue Lozde-Le,thoulaplt nto me: leade thps people
Cpnnedagreatefpnne. Andnowe Jwpligo vp furth,andthouball not Hewedme whom thou
Muto the Lode : pEparaduenture Jmape pur- Wpltclende withme. Andthou baft fapde moze
chafean attonementefozpourefpnne. Boles ouer: 9 knotae the bp name, and thou bafte allo
therfore went agapne wntotheLozde, efapde: founde qracein mplpgdte. Powe therfore pe
Pb. thyspeople banelpnnedagreatfpnneand Fhauefounde fauoure in thp [pabt.chen ewe
| | bauemadc them qondes of golde. Andnote J methp waye.that Jmape knowe the, andthat
St tring BRAVE the either fozqeuethemtbetr{pnne:o2(pf Amape fpnde gracc in thpfpahe. And confpoer
Palri E Bypvlt not) * wppe me out ofthp booke, which alfop thisnacpon,tsthp people. And he fapt:


i ae Weptten. AndtheLozdefapde onto mp pèefence foall go withthe, and J wopll gee
p ` Holes: J wpll puttebpmoutofmpbookethat therefte.ipe lapde vntobpm:JEthp pretence ga
E. hath{pnnedagaputteme. Andnowegothou, notwithme, carpe vs not bence : foz bowe Mall


z opita PEVNAE the people Duto the place wphicbe J eo it be knowen bere, chat Jand the people hauc
| nto the:bepolde,xmpneangell Mall go befoze foundefauoure in thy fygbt, but in that thou go
the. Neucrthelater inthedape when J vifet,] et with vs FE thou go With Yg, Mal noty and
pil vile thepatpnne vponthem.andp Lozde thy people hane preempnence befoze allthe pes-
plaged the people, becaufe thepmadc the calte pied ate bpon the face ofthe earth: Andthe
Iwhpche Aaron made. K |
© The reeit.chapter. thou Date fapde,foz thou bate founde grace iti
sade em noe patatie bis peopte.mbc Xoo MP fyabt,and F knowe the bp name,
Epner. O9 DNeS talketh with the Lozbe, Reenlistment Care vi Aele mi befeche tbhbe:pew me thp ala >
4 REN, Nd the Lordelapde bnto Boles, befozethe, and ¥ topll becalled tne bpsname of
es. FE departeandgobence:thouandthe the Lozde befoze thexand wpll ewe mercpe to Loma..
KE people, whiche thoubatkbzoughte wobomexZwyll (hetbe mercpe,¢ topli baue cont.
i out of the lande of Egypte, vntop paflpon on whome J tpllbauecompafipan. ™™**
N lande whiche {ware vnto Abza- And be fapa furthermoze:thou maptt notie mp
m, Jlabac, and Jacob, fapinge: * nto thy face for*theretalnomanteme,andlpuc. Bnd menig.,
rrit HeDeRopll 3 aeucits (and Fpl {endeanangel the Lozdefapde-bebolde.there iga place bp me, suver.ote
ad.  befozetbe:and wplicalt outtheCananites,the and thou palt tande dpon a rocke: and whple Beh
Amorites,and the herbites,cheWheresites,tbe mp glop goeth fucth, A wpll put the macieite” "°°
Heuites, and the Febutptes) a landep floweth
withbmplae g bony. Fo: 3 wpll not goamonge
wFrrtive. pou mp (clfe:* fog pe ara tpiinecked people:leit
‘Zconlume the inthe wape: And when the peo-
ple pearde this euel tpbinges, thep fozoted: and
noman put onbis bet rapment. And the ashe


i sia
m.fri.o pam


_foake onto soles:faye yntothe chpldzen ot =
Psi pe are a ffnecked people: 3 mute come
once lodeulp bpon pou, and make an end of pon
& hertoze now put thy goodlp rapinet from the
that J mape were hat todo vuto the. Andthe
ebylozen of Sracl lapdethep2 goodly rapment
from thent,cuen bp the mount of Hozeb.
B And Spice bbe the taber arlene See
” tt wptbout the boot a farre of from the botte, €
 callentt thetabernacleof wptnefie. And foit
came topafle that eucrp one which wolde prap
pnto the Lozos, wente out onto the tabernacle
of wptnes,whichewas without thepotte.AnDB _ _ —
it foztuncd,that when Boles wenteout onto p aera]
tabernacle,all the people cate bp:anditodecues Pepa sy Ley
rp manat bistent doze: andlobed after oles ER,
yntpllhewasgoncintothbetabernacle. Andas iaf
fone as Holes wasentredintothbetabernacles SETVA
thecloudy pyllerdelcended, and ffodeat POOLE case
of thetaberuacle, and be talked with Boles.  npnge, thattpoumaptcome vp earlp vito the
And all thepeoplefawep clowdppplier tande mounte of Smmat:and tande there withme in p
atthe tabernacledooze, andthep rofe wp, and topofthe mount. Zberethallnomancome vp
woz2thppped euerp man inbis tent doze. withthe, nether letanp man befene thozowout
Be *Mndthe Lowelpake vnto Hales: *faceto alithemounte,netberlet the Hepe no? orenfede
impe? faceaga man fpeaketh onto bpsfrende:andbe beforetbebpll. And Dolespewed twotableg
© turnedagayneinto the bolte.AndthechpldeFo of ftonclpketntothe tpette, androle vp rearlly
{na bistercuauntthefonne of Nun, Departednot inthemognpnee, and went vp vntò the mount


-- outofthe tabernacle. And Moles tapoe onto P of Hinai asthe LopdpabcSmaundedbpm:and


Kevemonyes. Erodus. es Rin,
tokeinbishandethetwotables of fone. And thy Godthpleinthepere. x Ehouthaltenot D> <
the Wace eo inthe cloud,and Lode with i the bloude of mp facrifpce ppon leuen nep: ero rrite
bym there:and pe calle’ pon thename ot plo ther Hall ougbte of rhe factifpce of the feafte of PP”
nD went Lode walked befozebpm,be cep. E NN lefteontothemognpnge. * THe erorrine

Sfalmus.| ¢D,Lowex Lorde God, mercptulandgracpoug Fp

corres Longe luferpnge,andaboundaunt ingoodnese wntothehoule ofthe LogdethpGod.Andthou

~~ truth, and keppna mercy in fozefoztpoufands (haltnotxfetbabpdinbismothersimplke. CPOE EGG A
Foxgeupnae topchednes,vngodlineffeand{pnne  AnvpLogdlapde vnto doles : w2pte thele asf
and notleaupng one innocent, DilptpnatheWwic tbozdes:fozafterthetenoureottbelewo2deg J =
kedneg ofthe fathers bponthechildzen and bpd baue madea couenaunte witbtheano with J=-
chylderschpldzen, euen vnto thethpzdg fourth racll. * And be was there with the Lorde four= EFEM ea
generacpon.Aud oles bowed bpm felftotbe tpedapesandfourtpenpgbtes anddpdnetbet , -r
eartbqupcklp and worthppped,andfapde:VEA cate byeade nozdzpnke water. * And he tote wie
bauefonnacgraceinthplyghte(D Lowde)then wponthetables the toozdes of thecouenaunt,e- "4
letmp Lod qo bith vs:fozitisafinbburnepeo uentenverics. Andit fortuncd when Doles
ole, and thou Walt bane mercpe vpon oure wpe- came done frommount Sinat, the two tables — \

5 Kednes and our fpnne, ¢ Halt take va fozthpne of toitnefle were in Holes hand, wher became

enberitaunce. And be oe nerd makean Ddounefromthe mount. And oles wpt not ë
appopntmente before fbe peanle,and I wpti the fkinne of bis face hone in maner of an bone
domeruaples:fucheasbaue not benedoneinall whbplebetalkedwothbypm. And Aaronand all
the wozlde,netherinallnactons.Andalithepea thechpldzen of Zlraellloken bpon Hofes : and
pleamonge which thou atte, thallfe the wozke bebolde, thefkpnneof bys face Hone, andtbhep
ofthe Lozde:fozit isa terepblethpnge that J wereatrapdetocomenpebpm. And when be
wplldo With the: kepetbolethynges that Jcõ- badcalledthem. Aaronandall the chefethat
maundethethisdape. Weholde, J cateoutbe- wereinthe company came ynto bpm, and@o= 3
Foze the, the dinozptes, Saranpera, Becpp ted, feg talked wyth them. And afterwarbde all the ‘

peut. viia Pbheresptes,yeuptes g Jebulptes.+ Cake bede chplbzenof Jiraci canrenpe, andbeconiaunded =

i, erie tothp telte,that thoumakenocompactewtthp themall thatthe Lode bad lapde vnto bymits
inbabpters of the lande whither thou goet, leit mount Sinai. And when Boles hadmadean |
pt becaule of rupne among pou. Wut onerthzoto ooe comeing wpth them, *be put A Coue gorse —
thepzaulters and breake they: pmagesandcut rpnge bp onbis fa = rE
Downe theps groues. Thou Halt worthpppeno Fes went in befoze the Lozdtofpeake witb bpm

rodi.pr.a dear hoe othe Lozdcis*calledgelous, xbetobethe couerpnge of wntpll be came out. itortye;
-becaule be iga gelous God:leltpf thou makea-
npagremente with the nbabpters of thelande,
and thep goa whorpng after thep2 yodveg, and
do facritpce buto thep2 gods, thep call the, and
thou cate ot thepz facrtfpce:¢ thou take of thepz
Doughters unto thy fonnes, ethepzedoughters V
qoa toporpnge atterthep2 gods, and make thp
tonnes goa whozpng after thep2 qoddes alfo.

€ Chouthalt make thenoqoddesof metall.
crov.rit.b Chex fealke of the lwetebeeadethalttboukepe FRESE
drt d syouendapes (halt thou cate pnleuened beabe ay
as J cOmaunded the inthetpine of themoneth, Es
whencome begpnnethtorppe. ffozintbemo- F
| neth when cone beqpnmethtorppe, thboucamt EC
ro rice, Out of Eappte. x All that beeaketh bp the ma-
fau.roitic trice is mpne:andall that beeaketh the matrice
amongethecatell, pfit be male: whpther tt be
oreno; Hepe. Wut the fpzt ofthe alle thou palt
bpe out witha lambe. And pf thou redeme bym
not, thouthalt byeakebpsnecke. All the fpzte
bozne of thp Fonnes Walt thou redeme. x And fe en of Zirael faping:xthisisebe thing ero. rroa
ro priit that nomanappere befoze me eimptye. :

Su ie, + Opre dapes thou thalte wozke, and inthe

¢ero.rr.b fenenth dape thou thalt ret, both from earphge

Ero.rriit e And reappng.x* Chou palt obferue the featke of
wekes with chep2 fp2tt frutes of whete baruelt,
and the Fealte of ingatherpnge at the peres ende
Thpir ina pu fhalallpourimen ciaren âp-
Piha de eLozbde Jeboua God of Fracll.

iben 3 caf out the nacpons before the,anden
largetbp coattcs, fo thatnoman taldelpze thy Dnirftones and tones to be let inthe Ephod,
land, thou halt qo bp to appeare befozep lozde andinthebgettelappe.andiet all them tbat are


wple-


3
; l
:


— hetabernacle.


-_-


s = “alibeuebUerpng ynto the Lode. Andall men


£


q


a


.


E


Avpie hartedamonge pon, come make alltbat


` the Lozde bath commaunded:the pabitacponsd


N


the tenttherof andbigcouerpnge, and bysepn-
ges, atid bys bo2zders 3 bps barreg, bps ppllers,
and bpslockettes, the arte, and the faues ther
of wth themcecpe (cate, and the vaple that
couereth it:the tableand bis barres,and all bps


„e betlels:anb the pean pi the candelftpcke of


ie. warht andbis apparel


. "A
“s a &


ndbis a ndbts lampes witb the

le fot thelpabt:the cenfe aultar and bps bar-
rfs Oe anno pntpnge ople and the fwete cente,
-TO ot a thedozeatt je entrpngein orp
tabernacle:p aultac of burnt facrifpce with bps
bealen qredpzen, bys anes and all bis veffels:
the lauer and big Fote,and the hanapnges of the


courte, with bis ppllers andtbhep2 fockettes,and


€


D fppnne witht
: woke both of pelowefplke, purple,


tbe bangpnge in the doze of thecourte: the ppn-
nes of the babitacton,¢ the 2 tpi the courte
with torp? cogdes :the minpitepnae garmentes
tominpiter itt the Delp place:and the holp belte-
mentes for Aaron the zeate and p veltpmen-
tes of bis fonnes:tbat thep mape minpfter in.
And dll the company of the Bg en of Jira-
ell Departed frome the pzefence of Boles. And
euerp one came (asimanp as thepz bertes coza-
ged them, and asmanp asthepze (pzetes made
them wpllpnge) andbzoughtea prelent fo: the
eee themakpnge of the tabernacle of tpt
nefe and fo: all bis vies, and Foz the bolp befte-
mentes. Andthep came botbemenand wemen
(euen as manpe as were wpllpnge berted) and
brought bzacelettes,and carpnges,tpnges.and
chapnes,wbiche tewels tere all of golde:and al
the men bzougbt a waune offerpng of gold‘pnto
the Lode. Andeuerp man wprh whome was
found pelow (plke,putple.fkarlet, wbptefplke
and goates beareand red lkpnnes oframmeg, g
tarusthpns,baought them. All that dpd beane
bp an oblacpon of gold and walle and brought


with whome was founde fethim woode foxanp
maner twoke of minpfracpon, bought it.
And all the wemen p were wpleherted :dpd
epz bandeg, EP e aet Pfpun
le-fkarlet and

Wwhptelplke. Andall the wemenwphomethepz
owne berte moned, fpanne qoates beare wpfelp
And the Lozdssþzougbt onir fEones,and Cones
to be fet inthe Ephods and inthe bzetlap, and


{ppce,and oplefoz lpabt,and fo? theanopntpng


ople and foz tbeftwete cenfe.And thechildzen of
Lozde both men ¢wemen, as many as had wpl
lpnge bertes to bepyna, Foz allmaner of workes
Which the Logde had commannded to bemade,
bp tbebandeg of @oles. —

And Boles fayde vnto the chplozen of Jira-


- Cli:bebolde,x«the Lorde bath called bp name We


saleelthelonne of ao of Hur of Ptepbe
of Juda ,andbhathfplled bpm with the lprete of
God,inwploomeand bnderfandpng,inknow
ledge, andin allmaner Wozke, to fpnde out cuz
rpous wozkes which are made in golde, {pluer,


Erodusg:


tleworke. Bndbhe hath putin bis barte thathe
mape teache : both heand Aboliab the fonne of
Abilamach of thetrpbe of Dan. Them ath he
fylled with wpldome of berte,to wozke all ma-
tet Of grauen, and fotle and ticdle Wozke tn pes
lowe fplke and purple, in (catlet,¢ wbpte (pike,
and in eupnge: And todo all maner of tbo2rke
andlotlefeates,
_, C Tbe.rrrbi. Chapter.
i CThr thenges Chat Sezalcellans gh aliob mabe. F,
a a RD Wesaleel wougbt and Aboli- `
A VE ab all wple barted men, to whom
SA Cee HE Lode gaue wpidome and pn-
Aa Derilandpnge , to knowe howe to
Sea Worke all maner wozke Fo. the fer-
of the ee andalltbat the Lozd ban
commaunded. And &)ofes called wWesaleel, Pho
liab and ali the wopte berted men and tuche as p
L070 Dad geuen wpldome yuto,andas many ag
tbeir bertes couraged to come onto that w oke
to wolke it. And thep receaucd of Hofes all the
| te Wogle of ee of Flrael bad bzougbt


02 the wozke of the ferupce of thefanctuary, to
makett. And belpde that thep brought apfteg
nto tf euerp dape in the moznpnge.

Andall the wple men that weoughee all the
Holp wozke , came euerp man frome bps woz:ke
Wwbiche thep made, and ipate nto Hofes, fap-
inge:the peop bzpnge to muche and moze then
pnougb,to? the lerupce ¢ wozke which the Lod
bath commaunded tobe made. And then 40-
fes gaue acommaundement, andthep caufedit
to be pzoclamed thozotwout the boot tapince:fe
that nepther man no? oman prepare anp moze
Wwozkefoz the pzelent of thefanctuarpe: and fof
people were Tr to bzpnge : foz the tutte
thep bad tas luftpctét Foz all p worke, to make


tt andto muche.* All the tople hated men ther: ero.rrote,


toze and thep that wrought for thebabitacpon, 16
made ten curtapnes of wobpte tivined ple, pe-
lowe fplke,purpleandfcarlet:with ppctures of
bzodzed wozkemadebetbem. She lengtheof
One curtapne Was.crbviit.cubptes, andp bzedth
Foure, and the curtapnes Were all of one ipie.

And be coupled fpue cuvtapnes bp them felues,
and otberfpuebp them lelweg. And be made low
pes of pelowlplkealonge bp tie edere of one cur
tapne, euenintbe ig hyd ahi 4 cur=
tapne. And Ipkewwople be made on om poe of the
couplpngecourtapne onthe other (poe. Epftpe
lowpes made bein the onecurtapn,and fptty in
the edge of the couplpnge curtapne on the other
fpde:and eed d- belde one curtapne to ano=
ther. And be made fpftpe rpnaes of golde, and
coupled the curtapnes one to another wpth the
rpnges:and fo thagit made one dwelling place.


* And be made aleuen curtapnes of qoates ero.rrrt.s


beare,to be atent ouer f tabernacle. Che length
of acurtapne,bad thyztpcubptes and was four
cubptes bzode,andthep alleleuenofonefpie. —
Andhe coupled fpue curtapnes bp them felueg,
andfprebp them iepa y made Fpftpe low
pesalonge bpthebozder ofp btmoft couplpng
curtapne,andfpftpe in the edge of the other cou


Folrrrii


and bzafle. Jn thecrafte of tones to fet them, g


incarupnge of woode to makeanpmaneroff plyng curtapne oa apat ther might De fopnedtogetber) a


Aud


Che tabernacle.
TY
€ Andhe made Epftperpnacsofbzaffe to couple p
tent together,that it might be one. Bnd he made
acouerpng bpon the tent of ramsfhpnnesred,
and pet another of carusf&pnnesabouc that.
xAnd he made Landpnge bordes (fo? theta-
bernaclejof Sethunivoode. CThelengthota
bozde has ten cubptes, the bzedth one cubpte &
anbalfe. Dnebozde bad two fete,wberbp thep
twere iopned one toanother. Andthus made pe
fozalltbe bo2des of p tabernacle, And he made
twentpe bodes fo the fouth {poe of the babita:
cpon,and forty fockets of {pluer tner the tween
tpe bodes , twolockettes ynder one bozde, fog
bys two fete, and twolockettes Dnder another
ow bozde foz hist too feteox where the rockets orebe fpoes
— amb incbecorners.) AND fo? the other fpde of p dwel
Ipnge tobiche is towarde p north, be made tweit
tpe bozdes, and thep2 fourty fockettes offplucr
two lockettes wnder onc bozde,and two facket=
vè tes binder the ofher.Andtowarde the wef ende
of the tabetnacle,on(sbet isto tape, at that enve of che
taternacte which encipucth towarde the fee) he made [pre
hordes, and two other bozdesmade hein thecoz
nevs of thebabitacpon,fozepther fpde,andthep
were iopned elole beneth aboue with aclampe
andtbusthep dpd te both thecozners. Andtbhere
wocre epabt bordes and {pretence fockettes of fpl-
uer: Dnder eucrp bode fio fockettes.
D Andbemadebarresot Hethim woode, fyue
foz the bozdes of the tabernacle inthe one {pode :
and fpucfoz the bogdes of thetabernacletntbeo
ox therlpae: and fpue barres foz the bozdes of the
nn se inthe welt ende.ce (Howarve thetee.)
ndbemade the mpide barre to (pote thozow
the bogdes:eucn fromebe one ende tothe other,
oucrlapDde the bozdes with qolde, and made rpn
ges of goldeto thzuftc the barres thozowe,and
coucted thebarres tstth qolde. And he made att
pangpnge of pele we lplke, purple, {karlet, and
Whpte copnedlplke, cuen Wyeth pyctures made
be it of brome wohe. And made theruntofour
ppllergof Scthim wood , andouerlapde them
with rolde. Ghcpz kuoppes were allo of molde,
and be cafte for them four forkets of fpluer.and
he made an banaynge fo: the Caberiracle doze:
of pelow (plée,purple,fkarlet, and toith whpte
tippned fylke of nedle wozke. Andthe fpae ppl-
lers of if ith cheprknoppes,and onerlapode the
knoppes of tbem andthe whopes with qole.
‘Chepzfpuelockettegalfowereotbyalle. <
 The.rervit.Chapter. i
C Thearke of wines. Tht mercpeteate. Ehetabir. She
x canbeipcke. E pelrahtes.Ehraltare € theincente,. G
* p (2D Wesaleel made px arke of He-
Ereda ETATS thim wood, tivo cubptes €anpalfe
EW RAX lonige,and acubpte tapalfebrode,
E44 carey anda cubtte anda balfebpe:and o-
Boissa netlapde if ith fpnegolde wpth=-
mand ck eh anhdmade a crotone of goldcto
itrounde about, andcalte forit Foure rpnges of
olde fo2zthe Foure comers of it tworpnges foz
the onefpbe, and two foe the otber, made bar-
res of Sethin wood, and couered them twpth
golde and put the barres inthe rrnges alonge
by the lpoe ofthe arke,to beare tt wihal


gpro prbis


ae ee


a


Erodts.


‘bpte anda alte the


thep2 faces were onetoanother:enentopmet= `


- Andhemadcthemercpleateoe cxvatistotape, ye ——— >
Sovdesantwerpnge place) of pure Kold:twacubptes — i
anda balfe was the lengthetherof, and one cus
byeadth:anbbemadetwo 8 0
Cherubpns of thpche qolde wpon the two m- we
deg of the mercpe feate. One Cher ubontheoue *
ende, and another Cherubon the other ende. ta
Eucn of the meccpeleatemade bethe Cher ( a
bpns:namelp, inthe endestherof.aAndthedhe ` *,


il |


rubpnefpzcd oute tbepz: wpngesaboucanbpra |
and couered the merepelcatetperewyth. and æ, `


e oF i


cpe feate warde, were thefaces ofthe Cheu- — `
bpng.* And hemade thetable of Hethimwod, sroprig
twocubiteswasthelengthtberof,andacubite =
the bredth, and a cubpte and abalfe the bepabt TA
ofit. Andbe ouerlapdeit with fyne golde.and ae? ae
made therte acrowne of golde rounde aboutt, :
andinade therto an whope of an Dande b2eave,
rounde about ginadebponthewhopeacrobne
cfgolderounde about, andcattefozitfouverpn i
ges of golde,and put therpnges in thefonecogzs = `
ners tbat were inthefourtetetherof.Cuenpard = i
bp the dope twere the rpnges, into the whiche

the barres were puf,to beare the table witball. g
And þe made the barreg of Sethimwood, wd ~
coucred them with gold tobearethetable with —
all,and made the veffells (foz the table )ofpure. i
golde:thedplthes.fpones,flatpeces,and potest
topowe witpall. x Andbemadethecandel= EArDd |
ftpcke of pure gold:cuen of one pece made bethe Br ee
candelfipcke. JEo? bis fote, bis Hhafte,bpsmp-
pes, pps kuopus , and bps fioures, wereofone


pire. Sprebraunches proceadpnege ont of the a.
{pbestherol , the oute of the one (poe, atthe De Se
out ofthe other. And tnone braunche threcup= 2


pelle pork ma eaaa Knoppes g eee F
outes:andinanotberbzaunchthzecupsmade = =8=© |
Ipkealmondes with knoppes and floured. | ie
And lothozowoute thefpre byatiies that- ry
pzoceded ont of thecandelftyche Andwponthe ~~ T
candelitpcbelelfe toerefourecuppesattertheta |
cpon of almonbdes , wpt Saa andfiouves: —
Dndereucrp two bzaunches a kuoppe. and the
knoppegand the bzaunches pzoceded outof it, €-
it wagall one pece of pure thpcke golde. And be
made bisleuenlampes with p tongesand{nok=
fers therof,of pure golde. Gucwot mrhundzed
Wwepgbteofpuregolde, nadebert wptbhalithe
weflelstherof. Andhe made the censaultar of D
Sortim paon: PE LengeD ofitwagacubpte,  .
andthe bpedthacubpte,fozitwasfourlquare,  . »
and twocubptes bpe, withbozuespeoccadpng ` i
out of it.ind be couercd it with pure gald,bot tee)”
thetoppeandthefpdestherofroundavout,and ==
the bozneg of it, and made vnto itacrowne of
golderound abonte, Andbemadetworpnges f
of goldefozit;cuen nde thecrownetherot in |


:
E paaa


thetivo cozners ofitandinthetwolydestherof
to put bargin fosto beac it withall: andmade
the barres of Sethim wood and onerlapdthent
wlth golde. And he made the bolp anopntpnge
ople and the fwete pure incens aftertie apote=
carpes cratic. ig
` C The rrr. Chapter. ai i
a The


P: af &


tabernacle
MC The asitar of burnt o€erpnaed. The brafen lawcr.wye


A f L pä
: fumwme of that the ptopleafered .


apes 20 be made the burnt offering aul
Prete i : | |
ero.rrbite MOARE tar xof Sctbim wod, fpue cubptes


M2 are apg asthe length therof,and fyne cu-
GAG bitcstbebzedth: cucn.tit.{quare €
_ Easit. cubptes bpe. And pe made nto
. ) tt bones tuthe fourco2ners of tt ppocedpng out
). _ dfitand be oucrlapd it w baffe. And be madeal
i the veflelg of the aultar:thecauldzons,thaucls,
balpns,fletbokes,andcole pannes. Ali the vel:
feig therof madebe of bzafle. Jnd bemade a bza
‘fen gredp2en of netwozke Ynto the altar, round
aboutea lowe beneth vntothempds of the aul-
tar, and caft foure rpnacs of bzaffe fo: thefoure
endes of the gredp2ento put barresin. And pe
. made tbe barres of Sethim wood, and cowered
them with b2afie and put the barresinto prpis
ges inthe foure cozners of the aultar,to beare it
Wwithal andinave the aultar holowe toith inthe
bozdcs. And be madethe lauer of bralic andthe
fote oftmalfo of bzaffe in thefpaht of them tbat
28 Dpi Watch at the doze of the tabernacle of topt-
nicfle-And he made thecourte on the fouth {pde,
andthe bangpynges of the courte were of tohpte
tywpned(plie, baupnge an bunded cubptes,

be ppllers were Sede and toee; bzafen
~  Foçkettegtwentp. Wut the knoppes of the ppl-
lers, and thep2 whopes were ofipluer. And on
tbeno:tbipde: the bangpnges tere an bundzed
cubptes. Thep: ppllers were twentp andthepz
Cockettes ofbzallettwentpe. Wut theknoppeg

and the whopes of the ppllers were of [pluer.
Dn the welklpde, were hangynges of fpttp e=
op bptes,ten ppliers and thep2 tenfockettese# cor
` bat) Wut tbe knoppes and the wbopes of the
Pilers were of fyluce. Andfowarde the cait-
poe, were bangpnes of Fpttp cubptes:theban
gyngs of the one {poe of the gate, were fpftene


~%


cubpteg longe, wpth thee pplierg, and thze foc: `


bettes. And of the other (pde of thecourte gate


“2e were Dangpngesalto of fpftenc cubpteslonge,


withthe ppllers and thzelockettes .
Allthe bangpnaes of pcourtcround about
€ were of tohpte tiopned [ple : but the locketteg
of the ppllers tere of bzaffe : and the Buoppes,
and tie pti p of the ppllers were of fpluer, €
P couering of thebcades was of fplucr,andall p.

pplicrsof the courte were whoped aboute wit
foluce. and tbe ban ng of the gate of the court
Was nedle wozke, ot pelowelpl Edrich
let and whptetwpnediplke. rr. cubpteglonge,
and fpucinthe bzedth, oueragapnite the ban-
qpngesofthecourte. And thep2 ppllers were
rourc, and thep e foure focketteg of bzaffe : and
the knoppeg of fpluer and the beadesoucrlapbe
with fplucr, and Wboped aboute topth fpluct, g
allobe ppnnies of the tabernacle and of thecourt
roundeaboute, were oF bzafle. Chis ts the fun
of thehbabitacpon of witnes,as it was counted
accozapng to the comaundemente of Moles foz
the offpce of the Leuites bp the pande of Atha-
mar fonne to Jaron bod atone Bnd besaleel f
Coune of 032i the Lonne of Bur of the trpbe of Ju
da madeall ý the Lord cOmaunded Gofes,and
with bim was Aboltab fonne of Abilamach of


rods.


the trpbe of Dana cunnpnge grauer anda woz
kerofnedle woke in pelotoefplke purple, {care
let and whpte twpned (ple. Bll the qoloetbat
was ocupped Foz all the wozke of theholp place D
was the golde of the Waucolterpnge, euen.rrir.
bund2ed wepabt.and feuen bund2ed and. rrr. fp
tles,accozdpnae to thefpcle of the Sanctuarp.
And the fummie of [plucr that came of the multé
tude, was fpuc froze bundzed wepgbt, a thou-
fande feuen buudzed and. lern. {pcles, after the
pele of the Sanctuarpe.

ffc2 cuerp man an alfe wepabt, cuenbalfe
afpele after the ipele ofthe Sanctuarpe, foz all
them that wenteto benomb2ed frome. rr. pere
oldeand aboue euen fo2fprebundzed thouland
and thze thoufand and tpue bundzed and. l.men.

And of thefpue core bundzed wepaht of fpl
uer were cat the fockets of the fanctuarpe,and
the fockets of the baple,an bundzcd fockets of p
Fpuclkoze bundzed wepa ht andundeed wepght
tocuerp locket. Aud ofthe tholandefeuenban-
dredand.lrr-{pcles,be mabe Hnoppes tothe ppl
lerg, and oucclapbe the beades and whoped thë
ox (with per.) Bnd the balle of the waucoflring ag
was.ltx.bundzed wepgbt,andtwothoufand,~ <
iti. bundzed {pcles. And therwith be made plor-
kettes tothe do2e of the tabernacie of wptnefic,
and the bgafen aultare and the bzaten geedpzen
fo2tt, wptball the veflelsof the aultar, and the
fockets of thecourt round about, and plockets
Foz the courte gate,andall the ppnnes ofp babi-
tacpon,¢ all tbe ppnsof p court round aboute.

— CEbe.rrcie Chapter. |
CPEbcappareli of Farer and big tonnes. FU Chat the Lore
commaunbed, was cfertd . i

WANA the pelotvefplke, purple, and
PAd (carict.thep mave che vettunentes of a
ava Wy ntnpitracp on to do ferupecin the po:
Eines) lp place, and made the bolp garmen
tes foz Aaron, ag the Lord chmaunded Holes.
And be made the Ephod of golve,pelowe [plke
purple, Charlet,and wobptetiopnediplie, Aud
they opb beate the qold into chpnne plates,and
cutitinte pers: to woke it inthe pelow {plke
purple fcarlet, and inthe hd he eD bz0p
Ded woke. Andthep made tio (pdes foit, ta
clofethem bp bp the two edges. And the brop=
depnare of the qpzdell that was Dpon tt, was of
the fame Muffe and after p fame wozke : of gold
celowe plke purple fcarict,and fiopned wppte
plbe,as the Lorde commaunded oles.
And thep wrought Dnir ones clofedtn ow:
ches of golde and grancdaslpanettcsare gra: yg
uen witb the names of the chplozen of Aliaell,e ~
put them on the thulders of $ Cphod, that the
ipulde be tanes foz arcmembzaunce of the chp
dren of Frael as the Lorde commaunded Ma-
(cs. And be made the bzeftlap of conning wozie
and Iphe the wozke of the Ephod:cnen of golde
elowelplke,purple,fcarlet and tiopned whyte
plke. Jt tas fourefquare ,andtbep made the
b2eftlappe Double, an bande bzacdth longe any
anhande baedrb bzoadec. ` | aa
And they fplled it wpth Foure rotes of Mos
nes. Che fpete rolwe.a Hardi0s,a Topas and C
=- €l Smaragdus


} ep =


Thetabernacle.


Olan cme
Taute


to; a car:
bunile .


* Smaragdus : the feconde roiwe, a + Rubpe, a
Saphir anda Dpamonde : in the thpzde rowe ,
Ligurios,an Achat,¢ an Amatitt:-in the fourth


roiv, a turcas,an Dnir anda Jalpis. Andthep —


were clofed tn ouches of golde in theps tnclofers
And the tieluc tones were qrauenaslpanets
with the names of thechplozen of Fra ell:euerp
{tone With bys name, accozdpnge to the twelue
trpbes. And thep made vpon the beeftlap,two
faflenpng chepnes of wethzen woz2be and puer
golde. And thep made two pokes of gold eand
two golderpngeg : and put the two tpngegin p
tivo corners of the bzeftlappe. And thep put the
tworchepnes of molde in the twworpnges, inthe
cozners of the beftlappe.


D And the twoendes of the twochepnes they


€ And inthe tunpcle thep madebemmes wpth the Arke of wptnefle, and put thebangpnde at
n. ;


fattened inthe two botes , and put an on the
Mulders of the Ephod vpon the foze fronte of it
And thep made two rpnges of golde, and putte
tbem on the tio cogners of the bgeftlappe vpon
the edge of it, whyche was onthe infpde bp the
Ephod. And thep madetwo golden rpuges,and
put them on the two (pdes of the Ep od, beneth
on the fozelpde of it andoncraga pe this felow
abouc bpon the bzopdzing of the Ephod,¢ they
itrapnebthebzettlappe bp bps rynges wnto the
tpnges ofthe Cphod, with alaceo


phod of wounen woke, altogether of elow fplé
and there was an bole in tbe mpdvett of the tu-
npcle,as the coler of apartlet, wa bonde rounde
aboute the coler,tbatit (hulde not rent.


poingranates, of pelowe fplke , purple fcarlet,
and Dobpte twpnedtplke. Andthep made Iptle
belleg of pure golde, and put themamonce the
pomgranates roundeabout bpon the edge of p
unpele: a bell anda pomgranate, abell anda
ponigranate rounde aboute the bemmes of the
tunpcle to minpier in, ag the Lozde commann-
ded Holes. And thep made cotes of Epne whyte
of tooucn wozke oz Aaron and his {onnes, and
amptre of fpne tobpte, andgooodlp bonettes of
Epne wh} te,and lpnen beeches of tropned whpt
and a gpzdellof twpned whpte, pelote fplke,
purple and fcarlet :euenof nedle wozke, ag ie
x O2be commatided Holes. Andthep made the
plate foz thebolp crotone of fpne golde,¢ wote
Dpon tt pty grauen wozke, tbe bolpnes of the
- Lozde: and tped bnto ità lace of pelowe fplke
to faten itanbye bpontbe mptre, ag tþe Lod
commaunded ofeg.

Thus was all the wozke of the babitacpon
and of the Tabernacle of wptnefic Fyn ped. .
And the chplozenof Jfrael dpd accozdyng to al
that tbe Lozde had commaunded Wo cS: euen
fo dpd tbep. And thep baourhe the babitacpon
bnta {olcs:the tenteandallbysa ppatel bute
tons, bozdes, barres,ppllers,andfoc ettes, the
couct png oframmes feynnesredde, and the coz
uerpnge of tarus fkpnnes, and the bangpn ge
Vaple, the arche of wptuetie and thebarres ther


i. toa laee pelot f fhe Bae
tbat ttinpgbtebe bpon tbe bzopderpnge of the PFA
€pbhod,and that the bzetlap Hulde notbelow> (e
fed ftomotthe Ephod:asthe Lozdecdmaunded VER
oles. Andbemade thetunpcle onto tbe €- 5


Eroous, iT


of andthe mercpe feate:thetable, ândallsbė
velellestberof, andthe thetwe bacade:the pure `,
candelfkicke, with the lampes therof:euen with

tbe lampes to be pzepared, and all the befielleg
therof,and the oplefozlpabt: the goldenaultae -
and theanopntpnge ople, and the [voete ceng,
and tbe bangpnge of the Tabernacle doze and @


the beaten aultar tpt bps gredpzen of beaffe ,


bis barres and all bps veflels, the lauer and ppg E


fote:thebangpngesof the courte twithbpgpple -


lerg and fockettes : the bangpnae tothe courte
gate, and bps ppnnes and coozdeg , and all (el e's
veffell of the ferupce of the babptacyon foz the a o>
‘Cabernacle of wptneffe : the minpftrpinge et»
fpmentes to ferue in the bolp place , and the bo-
lp veltementes foz Xaron the Pzeaffe, andhps
tonnes rapmenteg to mpnpfter in: accozdpnge
toalltbat the Lozde comnmannded W ofeg:enen
fo the chpldzen o Slraell made all the wozke.
And Mofes bepelde all the wozke, nd fe: thep
d done it euen ag the Lozdcommatnded:enen
fo bad thep done and {Poles bleed them.
CTbhe.rl.Chapter.
t tabernacie ig -Ehe glotpe ofthe to:

Deacech i a aae aana Pashe elozpe ofthe opbeap
Bennet, era ad the Lozde fpake vnto Moles, W

aka egealapinge. Fnthe Fpatte bape of the
= 'Pettemonetp, thaite thou fette vp
tic babitacion andthe Tabernacle
pee See Of Witnelle,and put therin the arke

twpenelie, and couer the arke wpth the baple,
and bapngein the table, and apparell it alcoz=
Dpnge totheozder thereof. And thou walte
bapnae inthe { eplon! as and lpabte big lam-
pes , and fette the cenfle aultare of olde befoze


the Doze of the babitacpon. “Ko
Andlette the burnte oferpnge aultare bea
foze thedooze of the babitacponand Taberna-
cle of wptneffe, and fette the lauer betwenethe
Tabernacle of witnelle andthe aultar ahd put
Water therein, and mate the courte rounde az
bounte, andbange vp the bangpng at the courte


gate. x Andi ou thalte take the anopntpnge EEO FEG, = A


ople, and anopnte thebabitacpou , andall that
t3 therin, and ballowe it wptball ie Veffelleg
therof, that it mape be bolp. ndthou palta-
nopnte the aultar of the burnt offerpnge and all
bis veflels,andfanctitpethe aultar-tha itmap
pe er rey iy bolp; ` 3

eno fou alte anopntealfothelaner and
bistote,and fanctifpeit. Bnd aay fhalt bepng
Aaron and bys Connes bnto the Doze of the Ta-


bernacle of wptnefte, and walhe them wpth 7,


water. And thou Walt put ypon Aaron the bos
lp veftpmentes, andano nteDpm andfanctpfp
bym that be mape minyfter onto me. Andthou
palt bzpnae bps fonnes, and clothe them wpth
Satmentes,and anopnte them ag thou dideft ais
hopute thepze father, that thep mape minpfter
Unto me. Fo? thep: anopntpnae thallbe an euer
latpnge pzeltbode tnta them thozowout tbhep2
Tenevacpons. *And oles dpd ACCORD PNA LO um nii¢
alltbat the Lod commaundep bpm:eucnfodpa q |
be. ‘Chus was the Cabernacie reared bp the

fp2tt


w.


"a
i


=e


— Levemonyes


fpatte bape iit the Fp2fE moneth in Pleconde pere.


' And Moles reared bpthe tabernacle and fale:


ned Dpsleckettes , andfet vp the bozdes therof,
and put in the barreg of t¢ anD reared bp bis ppl
Icrs,and{pzede abzode the tent ouer the babtta=
pon, and put the conerpnge of the tente an bye
aboue tt:as the Lozdecommaunbded Woles.
And be toke the tetimonp, and put it in the
Arke, and Cettetbe barres to the Arke, and put


` the mercifeate an bpe bpon the Arke,¢ brought


the arke tnto the babttacton,and banged bp the
/Waple, and coucred the Arke of wprnefie, as t


“Logdecommaunded Hofes.


nd be put chetable in the tabernacle of topt
nefieintbe Mozthlpde of the babitacpon, (but
Without the vaple) and Cette the bzeade tn o2der


" DpeFoze the Lorde, euenas the Lorde hadde coms


mauudedD Holes. Aud be put the candelpcke
futbe Tabernacle of wptnefle pie, = sit the
table totvardctbe fouth (pde of the babitacpon,
and [ette bp the lampes before the Lozbe-ag the
Lode commaunded Boles.


And be put the golden aultar inthe Tabrr-


nacleof woptneile before the baple, and bzente
{wete cenfe theron, asthe Lorde commannded
Soles. Andbebanged vp thebangpnge at
the doze of the babvitacpon, andlette the burnte
ofespnge aultac bptbeentrpnae tn of the babi-
tacpon ofthe Tabernacle of soptneffe, and offie-
ted burnt offerpnges andDincate offerpnges ther


tro. trr.r. OW, AS the Lorde commaunded Boles.


i
E .

r
R


==


D x*aAndbelette the laucebetivenc the Taber:


nacle of woptueffe and the aultare, and pow2ed
Ihater therin, to wape witball. And Noles,
Jaronandbps onnes, wallped thepze handes
andthep: fete thereat: wpen ik tent into the
‘Tabernacle of wptuciic, anbiwopen they wente
to theaultar: thep walhhed them felues , asthe
Lode commaundcd ofeg. Andbhereared vp
thecanrte rounde about thebabitacpon andthe
aultarand fette vp an bangpnee at thecourte


omtrc gate: and fo Holes fynithedthe wo2ke.


* And the cloude couered the Tabernacle of
bed fle, and the qlozpe ofthe Lozbefplled the
babitacpon. And Gofles coulde not entreinto
the tabernacle of toptneffe, becaule the cloude a=


o# bode theron, andthe qlozpe ofthe Lozde Fplicd


the ha bitacpors, se For tbe doude bad courred ait.

Aus when the cloude was taben vp from of
the babitacpon, $ chpldzen of Ffraell toke thep2
io2neps thozotve out thep2 arinpes . And when
the cloude wasnot taken vp, thep tozneped not
tpll it was taken Dp: foz thecloude of the Lo2de
was wpon the babitacpon bp dape , andfprebp
hpgbte: inthe fparbte of all the bonle of Yrach,
thoeowe out alltbep2 armpes.


(Zhe ende of the feconde booke of Wo-
fes called th theipebzne Gielleicpes
motbe,and in the Latpne,
ii


Leitis.:


A The thyrbe booke of


ofescalledin the Pebe Ciariab:and `
& inthe Lape, Leaics. an
© The Eprk Chapter.


@ Whe oper of the burnteoterpngess


lane fos MDP Low called Doles sipake A


wean ontobpm out ofthe Tabersacde
RANo the chpidzen of 4fracll, thou
Teo J4 palt fape onto thé. Ffa man of
ane) DU being a fcrifice buto Lode
petbal batng pour facrifpce from amore thefe
cateL euen from among the oren € the thepe. DE
bis facrifice be a bucntofferinge let bpm ofica
male of the oren without blempih, € being bpnt
(of bps otone bolnutarp fopl) vnto tbe doze ot
tabernacle of witnes befoze p Lord. And be tha
put bis band ppon the bead of tbe bzentfacrifpce
and tt albe accepted fo: bpm, tobe bisattone»
ment. Bnd be thal bpl thecalfe of pozoue before


the Lod. Bnd the peeattes Aarons tonnes, Mal yg


b:png tbe bloub, g thalfpzpnikle it round about
bpon the aultar,that ts bp the doze of the taver
nacle of witnetle. And then Mal be faye p burnt
dferpng and bewe ppm in peces. And the lon-
nes of Aaron the preat Mallputfpze pon the
anltat,and put food bpon tbe fpze. And p prea
{tes Jaronglonneg thal lapethe partes (euen p
cad and the fattc) ppon the wood that is on the
pacinthe aultar. Wut the inwardesand thele
gen theroft be thal vaie in water,and the pze
pall buttieall onthe aultare, tbat they map be
aburntfacrpfpce foz alte te odour vnto f Low
And pf bis CacrpFpce be of the fockes ( name


ip of the thepe or qootes let bem bapngeamaic €


without blempt fora burntoferpnge. And let
bpm bpllit onthe noztbipde of the altaze before
tbe Lobe. And the preftes Aaronsfonnes Hall
(pepnkle the bloude roundabout vpony aultar.

ndit tall be cutinpeccs: enen with bps bead
and bis fat, andthe pelt (ball put them upon f
wood that ipeth bpon p Fpze on the aultar. Wut
be thal wath the inwards, and plegs with wa-
ter:and the pzeaft hall bzpngeall together and
burnett bpon the aultare foz a butnt oferpnge
of a fwete fanoure onto the Lode. Pi the burne


offcrpnae Foz the facritpce of the Lorde be of the D


foules,be pall bapng pts facritpce of the turtpll
doucs 02 of the ponge ppgeons. Andthe Break
thall bapnge it nto the aultar,and wpnae the
neche a (under of it, and burne it on the ,
Wut the bloude therof all runne oute wpor
ett bptbhe


Sol. rerit,


WY ‘of woptnes,faping:opeake vit eraser


— Levemonyes


fpatte bape iit the Fp2fE moneth in Pleconde pere.


' And Moles reared bpthe tabernacle and fale:


ned Dpsleckettes , andfet vp the bozdes therof,
and put in the barreg of t¢ anD reared bp bis ppl
Icrs,and{pzede abzode the tent ouer the babtta=
pon, and put the conerpnge of the tente an bye
aboue tt:as the Lozdecommaunbded Woles.
And be toke the tetimonp, and put it in the
Arke, and Cettetbe barres to the Arke, and put


` the mercifeate an bpe bpon the Arke,¢ brought


the arke tnto the babttacton,and banged bp the
/Waple, and coucred the Arke of wprnefie, as t


“Logdecommaunded Hofes.


nd be put chetable in the tabernacle of topt
nefieintbe Mozthlpde of the babitacpon, (but
Without the vaple) and Cette the bzeade tn o2der


" DpeFoze the Lorde, euenas the Lorde hadde coms


mauudedD Holes. Aud be put the candelpcke
futbe Tabernacle of wptnefle pie, = sit the
table totvardctbe fouth (pde of the babitacpon,
and [ette bp the lampes before the Lozbe-ag the
Lode commaunded Boles.


And be put the golden aultar inthe Tabrr-


nacleof woptneile before the baple, and bzente
{wete cenfe theron, asthe Lorde commannded
Soles. Andbebanged vp thebangpnge at
the doze of the babvitacpon, andlette the burnte
ofespnge aultac bptbeentrpnae tn of the babi-
tacpon ofthe Tabernacle of soptneffe, and offie-
ted burnt offerpnges andDincate offerpnges ther


tro. trr.r. OW, AS the Lorde commaunded Boles.


i
E .

r
R


==


D x*aAndbelette the laucebetivenc the Taber:


nacle of woptueffe and the aultare, and pow2ed
Ihater therin, to wape witball. And Noles,
Jaronandbps onnes, wallped thepze handes
andthep: fete thereat: wpen ik tent into the
‘Tabernacle of wptuciic, anbiwopen they wente
to theaultar: thep walhhed them felues , asthe
Lode commaundcd ofeg. Andbhereared vp
thecanrte rounde about thebabitacpon andthe
aultarand fette vp an bangpnee at thecourte


omtrc gate: and fo Holes fynithedthe wo2ke.


* And the cloude couered the Tabernacle of
bed fle, and the qlozpe ofthe Lozbefplled the
babitacpon. And Gofles coulde not entreinto
the tabernacle of toptneffe, becaule the cloude a=


o# bode theron, andthe qlozpe ofthe Lozde Fplicd


the ha bitacpors, se For tbe doude bad courred ait.

Aus when the cloude was taben vp from of
the babitacpon, $ chpldzen of Ffraell toke thep2
io2neps thozotve out thep2 arinpes . And when
the cloude wasnot taken vp, thep tozneped not
tpll it was taken Dp: foz thecloude of the Lo2de
was wpon the babitacpon bp dape , andfprebp
hpgbte: inthe fparbte of all the bonle of Yrach,
thoeowe out alltbep2 armpes.


(Zhe ende of the feconde booke of Wo-
fes called th theipebzne Gielleicpes
motbe,and in the Latpne,
ii


Leitis.:


A The thyrbe booke of


ofescalledin the Pebe Ciariab:and `
& inthe Lape, Leaics. an
© The Eprk Chapter.


@ Whe oper of the burnteoterpngess


lane fos MDP Low called Doles sipake A


wean ontobpm out ofthe Tabersacde
RANo the chpidzen of 4fracll, thou
Teo J4 palt fape onto thé. Ffa man of
ane) DU being a fcrifice buto Lode
petbal batng pour facrifpce from amore thefe
cateL euen from among the oren € the thepe. DE
bis facrifice be a bucntofferinge let bpm ofica
male of the oren without blempih, € being bpnt
(of bps otone bolnutarp fopl) vnto tbe doze ot
tabernacle of witnes befoze p Lord. And be tha
put bis band ppon the bead of tbe bzentfacrifpce
and tt albe accepted fo: bpm, tobe bisattone»
ment. Bnd be thal bpl thecalfe of pozoue before


the Lod. Bnd the peeattes Aarons tonnes, Mal yg


b:png tbe bloub, g thalfpzpnikle it round about
bpon the aultar,that ts bp the doze of the taver
nacle of witnetle. And then Mal be faye p burnt
dferpng and bewe ppm in peces. And the lon-
nes of Aaron the preat Mallputfpze pon the
anltat,and put food bpon tbe fpze. And p prea
{tes Jaronglonneg thal lapethe partes (euen p
cad and the fattc) ppon the wood that is on the
pacinthe aultar. Wut the inwardesand thele
gen theroft be thal vaie in water,and the pze
pall buttieall onthe aultare, tbat they map be
aburntfacrpfpce foz alte te odour vnto f Low
And pf bis CacrpFpce be of the fockes ( name


ip of the thepe or qootes let bem bapngeamaic €


without blempt fora burntoferpnge. And let
bpm bpllit onthe noztbipde of the altaze before
tbe Lobe. And the preftes Aaronsfonnes Hall
(pepnkle the bloude roundabout vpony aultar.

ndit tall be cutinpeccs: enen with bps bead
and bis fat, andthe pelt (ball put them upon f
wood that ipeth bpon p Fpze on the aultar. Wut
be thal wath the inwards, and plegs with wa-
ter:and the pzeaft hall bzpngeall together and
burnett bpon the aultare foz a butnt oferpnge
of a fwete fanoure onto the Lode. Pi the burne


offcrpnae Foz the facritpce of the Lorde be of the D


foules,be pall bapng pts facritpce of the turtpll
doucs 02 of the ponge ppgeons. Andthe Break
thall bapnge it nto the aultar,and wpnae the
neche a (under of it, and burne it on the ,
Wut the bloude therof all runne oute wpor
ett bptbhe


Sol. rerit,


WY ‘of woptnes,faping:opeake vit eraser


bp the {poe of the aultar. Andbe tall plucke a=


Lewiticus.


am) #20 tf pistacrifpee be a peace offering %4


wape bis croppe with bis Fetbers,and cat them
belpde the aultar onthe calte parte in the place
ofathes. And be wall bacake the wpnges of it,
but plucke them not a funder. And the Pzeakt
(pal burne it pponthe aultar,euen vpon p wod
thatis wpon the 3 se it mape bea burnt fa
crifpce Foz a fwete fauoure vntothe 10:e.


a : |
12 J NG) poure ople, tpon tt, and put franken-
cens theon, and Wal bepna it bnto Aarons fon-
nes tbe pzeattes. And he Mall take therout bys
handefull of the foure, and of the ople wptb all
the frankencens,andthe preat thallburne it fo


amemozpallof bpm bpon paultar:tobeanol> f


02a {ivete fauour vnto the Lorde. And


pee thalbe Jars


the rennaunt of f meatoffetpn
and his fons,a thing moft holp o
the Lozde. fthoubzpng alfoa meatofferpnd È
Æ ishaken tn p ouen, let it bea fwetecake of fpne
flourempngled with ople,oz an Dnleucned wa-
fer anopntcd with ople. Jf thp meatofferpne be
baken in che frpinge pan, it Halbe of wete tou:


ex mpngicd withbople. Andthou Malt mpnee tt-


fmail, and pote ople theron, thatttmape bea
meatcofferpnge. And pe thp meate offerpnag be
atbpnae bzopled bpon the qredyzen, let it be of
floure mpngled with ople. And thou Malt bang
the meate ofterypng (thatigmade of thele thpit-
ges) vnto the Lozde, and Malte delpuer tt nto
thepzcatt that be mape offre it bpon the aultar,
and the preat thall take of the meate offerpnge
amemo2pall,and Hall burne tt bpon the aultar
that it mape be a burnt offerpng foga lWwete fa-
uoure onto the Lozde. And that which ts left of
€ the meate ofterpng Halbe Barong andbts fon-
nes. Jt isatbpugemott bolp of the offerpnges
ofthe Looe. Ali the meate offerpnges whiche
pe Hall bapnae vnto the Lozde, Gall be made
Witdoutleucn. Slozpe thall nether burne leven
92 bonp inanp offerpngeotthe Lorde.
Potwithtandpng pe pallbzpna the fpetk-
Ipngesof them wnto the gay roe thep al not
come bpon the aultarfoza wete fauoure, xA


eath.b.6. chemeat ofterpnaes allo that P leafonell wpth


£ falte: nether Malt thou fuffer the falte of the co-
uenaunt of thy god to be lacking fromtbhp meat
offerpng : but pon alltbpne offerpnges p alt
bapna falte.And pe thou ofera al prose oe
oft by fpetterppe Frutes onto the Lozde, p Walt
offer for themeatotiryna of thp Epzit frutes.ca-
res of cozne Dapedbp the fpze, and cone beaten


asmeale. And thou Halt putople vor it elape RIAR


frankenfence theron, that if mapebea meato
rpng. And the preat thal burue parte ofthe bea
‘fed coneand parte of that ople withall p fran-
kenfeng, foz aremembzaunce. Andit halbea
facrifpce bnto tbe Lobe.

CC The.tit. Chapter.


CApropderofpraccokeypages, —


placrifpces of


Atd and be take it from amonge p Dz0ues
TANG | (wobetber it be male oz female )be thal
Eee b pna fuchasis without blemifp,be=
foze the 1.020: put bts bande vpon thebeadeot
bis offering, and kpl tt at the doze of thetaberna
cle of wptnes. And Aarons long p pecates (hal
{p2pnckle the bloude npon the aulfar rounde a=
bout. And pe thal offer fomwihat of p peace offe-
rpng to be alacrifpce vnto the Lozde:euen p fat


that ig aboute the inwardes: and all the fat p ero.rrir.e


isaboute the inwardes , and the tho kponeps,
and the fat that is on them and vpon the lopnes


- andthe aboundance thatts on theliuer pall be


take awape wtbhekpdneps. And Aarons fons
thal burne them on the aultar ppon the burnt ta


crifpce whpchis ppon the wood $ ig on the fpze


tobea burnt facrifpce Foza fwete favour vntop
£020. PEbebzpng a peace offering wnto f Loz
tom of the flocke,let bpm offer ma'e o? Female:
but without blemith. and pf be offer a pepe Eog
bis lacrtfpce, be thal bepng it befoze the Lorde%
put bis bande vpon bis offeringes head, and kpl
it befoze the Doze of the tabernacie of wptnes, ¥
Aarons fons al fprpnkle f bloudtherofround
aboute the aultar. And of the peacentvene es
bpm bapng a faceifpce tato the Lozd:p fatther


and the rumpe altogether, wobpch chep hall €


take of bard bp thebacke bone: and thefat that
coucreth the inwardes,and all the fat pis Dpow
A hat ca esandthetwokponeps, andthe fat
thatts bpon them and vpon the lopnes, andthe
abundaunce that is bpon the lpuer hall betake
awap w the kpdneps, And Ged hic hal burne
them bpontbe aultar, to be the foode ofa facri-
fpce unto the Lozd. Jfbis offerpng be a gove.be
thal bepng it befoze the Lozde.and put big band
bpon the bead of it, € Rplli¢ befoze the taberna-
cle of the couenaunt,anb the fons of Aaron thal


tprpniile the bloudetherof bpon f aultar ound W


ont. BAndbe hall bepne therof his ofkerpng
euenafacrifpce nto the Lo.d:the fath conereth
theinwardes, and all the fat that is pponthein
wWarbes, and thetwokponeps, ¢ the fat that is
Dponthem and ypon the lopnes , and the abune
daunce vponthe lpuer Hall de take awap w the
fs! eg And the pret (hal burne them vpon p
Altar fo2 p foodot the faccifpce:p ali the facmap
bea fwete auour ontop Lozd.Let it bea perpe
tual tatute foz poure genetacpons, thozowout


Pe
r


farmi E A pecatnether fat nozxbloude sen elpt


e. tiit. Chapter.
CTbeokrrpngemade to: pnaes bone of pgnozaunce.
hear] ene Logdelpake unto Hofes,
i ean meee Wiens
+ Jlracl and faye: Ffa loule {pn tho.
4 Towe ignozatice,and batbdoneanp
uosiai] OF thole thinges which p Lozd hath
Forbidden in bis commaundementes tobe done.
As pEthe pre thatis anointed do lpinne(accoz-
de Io eoe rE ak eo ec sae bapng foz
bps ipn ontop Lam fpnned aponge ore wout


blempih bnto p L020 fozalpnofferpug. And

thallbzpnge the ponge ore onto the doze of t

tabernacle oftoptnes befoze the Lozde,and thal
put


» 2


and Fie |


—— |) OEF


bp the {poe of the aultar. Andbe tall plucke a=


Lewiticus.


am) #20 tf pistacrifpee be a peace offering %4


wape bis croppe with bis Fetbers,and cat them
belpde the aultar onthe calte parte in the place
ofathes. And be wall bacake the wpnges of it,
but plucke them not a funder. And the Pzeakt
(pal burne it pponthe aultar,euen vpon p wod
thatis wpon the 3 se it mape bea burnt fa
crifpce Foz a fwete fauoure vntothe 10:e.


a : |
12 J NG) poure ople, tpon tt, and put franken-
cens theon, and Wal bepna it bnto Aarons fon-
nes tbe pzeattes. And he Mall take therout bys
handefull of the foure, and of the ople wptb all
the frankencens,andthe preat thallburne it fo


amemozpallof bpm bpon paultar:tobeanol> f


02a {ivete fauour vnto the Lorde. And


pee thalbe Jars


the rennaunt of f meatoffetpn
and his fons,a thing moft holp o
the Lozde. fthoubzpng alfoa meatofferpnd È
Æ ishaken tn p ouen, let it bea fwetecake of fpne
flourempngled with ople,oz an Dnleucned wa-
fer anopntcd with ople. Jf thp meatofferpne be
baken in che frpinge pan, it Halbe of wete tou:


ex mpngicd withbople. Andthou Malt mpnee tt-


fmail, and pote ople theron, thatttmape bea
meatcofferpnge. And pe thp meate offerpnag be
atbpnae bzopled bpon the qredyzen, let it be of
floure mpngled with ople. And thou Malt bang
the meate ofterypng (thatigmade of thele thpit-
ges) vnto the Lozde, and Malte delpuer tt nto
thepzcatt that be mape offre it bpon the aultar,
and the preat thall take of the meate offerpnge
amemo2pall,and Hall burne tt bpon the aultar
that it mape be a burnt offerpng foga lWwete fa-
uoure onto the Lozde. And that which ts left of
€ the meate ofterpng Halbe Barong andbts fon-
nes. Jt isatbpugemott bolp of the offerpnges
ofthe Looe. Ali the meate offerpnges whiche
pe Hall bapnae vnto the Lozde, Gall be made
Witdoutleucn. Slozpe thall nether burne leven
92 bonp inanp offerpngeotthe Lorde.
Potwithtandpng pe pallbzpna the fpetk-
Ipngesof them wnto the gay roe thep al not
come bpon the aultarfoza wete fauoure, xA


eath.b.6. chemeat ofterpnaes allo that P leafonell wpth


£ falte: nether Malt thou fuffer the falte of the co-
uenaunt of thy god to be lacking fromtbhp meat
offerpng : but pon alltbpne offerpnges p alt
bapna falte.And pe thou ofera al prose oe
oft by fpetterppe Frutes onto the Lozde, p Walt
offer for themeatotiryna of thp Epzit frutes.ca-
res of cozne Dapedbp the fpze, and cone beaten


asmeale. And thou Halt putople vor it elape RIAR


frankenfence theron, that if mapebea meato
rpng. And the preat thal burue parte ofthe bea
‘fed coneand parte of that ople withall p fran-
kenfeng, foz aremembzaunce. Andit halbea
facrifpce bnto tbe Lobe.

CC The.tit. Chapter.


CApropderofpraccokeypages, —


placrifpces of


Atd and be take it from amonge p Dz0ues
TANG | (wobetber it be male oz female )be thal
Eee b pna fuchasis without blemifp,be=
foze the 1.020: put bts bande vpon thebeadeot
bis offering, and kpl tt at the doze of thetaberna
cle of wptnes. And Aarons long p pecates (hal
{p2pnckle the bloude npon the aulfar rounde a=
bout. And pe thal offer fomwihat of p peace offe-
rpng to be alacrifpce vnto the Lozde:euen p fat


that ig aboute the inwardes: and all the fat p ero.rrir.e


isaboute the inwardes , and the tho kponeps,
and the fat that is on them and vpon the lopnes


- andthe aboundance thatts on theliuer pall be


take awape wtbhekpdneps. And Aarons fons
thal burne them on the aultar ppon the burnt ta


crifpce whpchis ppon the wood $ ig on the fpze


tobea burnt facrifpce Foza fwete favour vntop
£020. PEbebzpng a peace offering wnto f Loz
tom of the flocke,let bpm offer ma'e o? Female:
but without blemith. and pf be offer a pepe Eog
bis lacrtfpce, be thal bepng it befoze the Lorde%
put bis bande vpon bis offeringes head, and kpl
it befoze the Doze of the tabernacie of wptnes, ¥
Aarons fons al fprpnkle f bloudtherofround
aboute the aultar. And of the peacentvene es
bpm bapng a faceifpce tato the Lozd:p fatther


and the rumpe altogether, wobpch chep hall €


take of bard bp thebacke bone: and thefat that
coucreth the inwardes,and all the fat pis Dpow
A hat ca esandthetwokponeps, andthe fat
thatts bpon them and vpon the lopnes, andthe
abundaunce that is bpon the lpuer hall betake
awap w the kpdneps, And Ged hic hal burne
them bpontbe aultar, to be the foode ofa facri-
fpce unto the Lozd. Jfbis offerpng be a gove.be
thal bepng it befoze the Lozde.and put big band
bpon the bead of it, € Rplli¢ befoze the taberna-
cle of the couenaunt,anb the fons of Aaron thal


tprpniile the bloudetherof bpon f aultar ound W


ont. BAndbe hall bepne therof his ofkerpng
euenafacrifpce nto the Lo.d:the fath conereth
theinwardes, and all the fat that is pponthein
wWarbes, and thetwokponeps, ¢ the fat that is
Dponthem and ypon the lopnes , and the abune
daunce vponthe lpuer Hall de take awap w the
fs! eg And the pret (hal burne them vpon p
Altar fo2 p foodot the faccifpce:p ali the facmap
bea fwete auour ontop Lozd.Let it bea perpe
tual tatute foz poure genetacpons, thozowout


Pe
r


farmi E A pecatnether fat nozxbloude sen elpt


e. tiit. Chapter.
CTbeokrrpngemade to: pnaes bone of pgnozaunce.
hear] ene Logdelpake unto Hofes,
i ean meee Wiens
+ Jlracl and faye: Ffa loule {pn tho.
4 Towe ignozatice,and batbdoneanp
uosiai] OF thole thinges which p Lozd hath
Forbidden in bis commaundementes tobe done.
As pEthe pre thatis anointed do lpinne(accoz-
de Io eoe rE ak eo ec sae bapng foz
bps ipn ontop Lam fpnned aponge ore wout


blempih bnto p L020 fozalpnofferpug. And

thallbzpnge the ponge ore onto the doze of t

tabernacle oftoptnes befoze the Lozde,and thal
put


» 2


and Fie |


—— |) OEF


Mevemonyes
uf bis Dande bpon the pongeore bead and kpli
2 peaa po eae ee cae


| Heats thatig appopnted x hall take of the ponge ore


i


|  theLome, wpontbe boznes ofp aultar of fwete
eens, whichis inthe tabernacle of wptnes and
Mall pow?2e all the bloude of the yonge ore Vn-
jo the botome of the anitarof burnt offerpnge,


La


bloude and bzpng it into the tabernacle of Lope
neffe, and the preat Gallodpppe his Fpnger inthe
blonde, and [prpnele therot teuen tpmes befoze
the Lozde euen before the hangpnae of the bolp
place. nd be thal put ome of the bloude befoze


wbhpcbe is at the boze of the tabernacle of tpt.
nele. ind be Hal take awape all the fatte of the
ore that is fo2 (pnne,the fatte that conereth the
intbards,and all the fatte that is aboute thein-


* Wards, andthe two kponeps,and the fattethat


ig Dpon them, and bpon the lopnes andthe abi:
daunce of thelpuce thall be take avwap witb the
kpdneps:asit was taken away inthe ore ofthe


© peace oferpuges,and let the Pzealt burne them


fkpnije of the potige ore, and all bps flew, with


EFO, pir. of ulfarofburnt offerpnae. +« 25ut the


—


bisbead and Dis legges, with dis inwards and
bis Dunge, Hall be beare out and carpethe pong
ore altogether out of the boofte yntoa cleane
place:cuct where ag the alpes areporszed out,
and burne bpm there on wood tn the fpze: euen
bp the place where the alpes arc catte out, tall
bebebzent. PEthe whole ongregacpon of Fi-
tacll [pune thozowe tqnozaunce,and the thpngre
be bpd from thepze epes, to that thep bane com-
mptted anp of thofe thpnges tobpche the Lobe
bath fozbpoden tobe done tnbps commaunde-
mentes,andbaueokended, Wibenthe {pune
wobicbetbep bane (pnnedin,iskuowen,the con:
gregacpon Hall bzpnge a ponge ore foz the (pn:
and b2ynge bpm beFoze the tabernacte ofp wyt:
nele, andthe elders of the multptude Hall put
thep2 bandes bpon the bead of the ponge ore be-
fore the'Lozde. And the ponge ore Halbe lapne
befoze the Lorde. And the preat that is anopn-
ted, fhall bzpnge of bis bloube intothe taberna-
cle of wptnes, and the preal thaldpppe bis fpn
ger inthe bloud, and Senate itfeuen tpmies be
foze the Lozbde,cuen betoze the baple,

And thall put the bloude bpon the hoznes of


» theaultar, whbiche gy the Lozbe tn the ta-


bernacie of wptnes, and tal potze all f bloud
bnto the bottome of the aultave of burnte offe-
iey whpche is befoze the doze of the taberna-
cle of wptneg, and tpall take all bps fatte from
bpm,and burne tt Dpou the aultar,and thall doo
with tops ponge ore, as bedpd with tbe ponge
oreto: fpnne:euen fo thall bedo twiththis. And
the Deaf hall make an attonement for them,
and it fhalbe fozgeuen them. And be Hal bopng
this ponge axe Without tpe bok, and burne bpi
asbeburnedthefpette. f€o2rttiganoblacpon
Foz the fpnne of the congregacpors.

Ubena lozde fpnneth, andDcommptteth tho
cowe pquozaunce anp of thelethpnges(wbyche
the Lozde dis God bath forbpbbento be done in
bpscommaundvementes) andbathoFended:
anv pe thps fpnne be ipewe onto bpm whpcbe


Hewiticus,


be bath done, be hall bopnee bis offerpne: cueit


anbe goate wopthoute blem)
bande bpon the beadof the be |
fas lace where the burnt offerpne is vied ta
CGP
ferpnge. Andlet the Pral take of the blonde


ofthe oferpng with bis Epnger,and putit upor


tbe hoznes of the burnte oferpnge aultare, and
potbze ppg bloud wnto the bottoime of the burnt
ofterpnge aultat, and burne all bps fatte vpon
the aultar,asthefatte of the peace offerpnaes.
And tde Preatte hall make an attonement for
bpm, agconcernpnge bysfpnne, and it all be
forqeucn bpm. DE one of the comen people of the
lande finne thozot iqnozaunce:and compt anp
of the thinges which the Lozde bath fozbydver
tn bis cOmaundementestoa be done & fo bath tref
paced. PE this tpnne which be bath fpnned,come
tobis knowledge : be thall baynae fp? bps offe=
rpng,a the goatefrom among the foches, with
out blemp pefo: bps (pune whiche pe bath ipn-
ned, andlape Dis bande vpon the bead of the ofa
Eerpnge, and {lee tt inthe place of burnt offerpn-
ges. * And the Peak ball take ok the bloud
therof wpe bps puger ad putteit pponthe
bornes of the burnt offerpnge aultar,and pouve
all the bloud bnto the botome of theaultar,and
(hall take awap all bps fatte,ag the fate of the
peace offerpngesis taken awape. And the pelt
{pail burneit ppon the aultar,thatit mapebea
fete fauoure onto the Lozde , andthe Peealte
(pallinabeanattonement fo2 bym, and tt pala
beforgeuenhpm, And pe he bapnge athepe for
afpnne offerpnge,be Hall bzpng afemale with
out biemphe and lape bishande vpon the head
i offerpng, and fice itto: alpnne oferpnge
in the place wiere thep kpll the burnt repays

, wid the Peate Hall take of the bloude of
the offcepnge with bps fpnger s and put tt bpor
the bozneg of the buruteofterpngeauttare, and
(hall poure the bloude thereot wnto the botome
of theaultar. «And he hall take atvapeall the
fatte therof,as the fatte of the thepe ofthe peace
offerpng ig wontetobetakenawape. Bud the
Peake all burne it bponthe aultare: thatit
mape bethe Lordeg burnt facrifpce,and peet
(pall mabe anattonement foz bps fpnne,that be
icin i says it Balbetozrenenbym.

€ be.v.cpa pter. ; S:
~ HF othea. The clenipnge of bpm that codcheth bnz
tleane chpnges. The purgacpen ofan othriand of ipo
bontbppsnozaunce,
easy Jt a fonlefynne and beare the wopr
Bt fy Of fwwearpng,andis a wptnes: whe
“ay Cber be bath lene oz knowen of it, pe
9 Ae De Daue not veterered it be Wall
Fea! beare bpsfpnne. Epthee pea foule
touch anp ancleane thyna: whither it bea carp
on of an Wucleane beal, oz of yucleanecatell,az
oncleane foopme,and is not ware oF (f : bebolD,
heiguncleaneandbath offended. Eyveber pf he
touche anp wuelencs of man(wbat focuer vuclé
negitbe that aman is wont tobe defpicd with
all) and (8 not ware of it ,and commeth to the
knowledge of tt, bebathtretpatten. Erber pt
aloulelweare and pzoncunceth pth bes ees
Ht pe


+


(be, and lape bps
oate,and Gpllit


dbefoze the Lozbe. sEo2ttis alpnne ofa


r


ETTIRA]


G


Leul. The


m


— Sacrifyees.


thata man bfeth topzonounce with an oth and
che thynee be bpd from bpm, and cometh to the
knowledge of it, and Dathe offended in one of
thele. Anditthatlcometo palle that when de

ath {pnned in one of thele thypnges, be Wal con=

efle that be bath {pnned in that thpnge. Ther-
forethall be bepnige bystrelpafic offerpng bute
the Lozde,fo2 Dis tpnne whiche be bath fpnned.
A female fromthe Aocke,a lambe 02 a fhe goate
fora fynne oferpng. And the preat all make
anattonement fo2 bpm, concernpnge bis fpnne


Levi. rid. x Bnd pf be be not ableto bapnge luche a Hepe,
Zed Hothall bapnae for bys trefpace wbhyche be bath


{puted , two turtpll Doues 07 two ponge ppge-
ong onto tbe Lord onefoz alpnne offerpng,and
the other foz abuvnte offerpnge. Andhe Mall
Dupnge them onto the preat, whiche hall offer
the (pune ofterpng Epatte,and wozpnge thenecke
afunider of tt, but plucke tt not cleaneof. And
He Chall fozpnkle of the bloude of the fpnneotfe-
rpnge Dponebe (poe of the aultar: and the rete
of the bloude hall he powe bp the botome of
aultar:fozitigalpnncofferpnge.
And be Mall otter tbe techie tore burnt of-
ferpnge as fhe maner tg:and fo thall ti preatte
makean attonement fo: bpm (fo: the tpn which
bebath fynned) tit halbefozgenen bpm. and
yf be be notable to bapnge two turtle doues, 0}
two ponge panne , thenbe that hath fpnned,
foall bapnge Foz bis offerpnge: the thent) parte
ofan pba of fpne flourefez alpnne otterpng,
but put none ople therto, Wepener ps anp fran-
Kenfence theron,fo2 itisafpnncotterpng. and
let thep2eattc offer it, and the zeal pall take
bps Dande full of it, foz a rememibeaunce therof,
and burneit bponthe Aultar, to ve a facrifpee
forthe Lozde, itis alpnne offerpnge. andthe
prealt hal makean attonement fo? bym aston
chpnae bys tpnnetbat be batbipnned in one of
thele andit halbe foggeuen. And tpe remnau nt


yp fhalbe the preattes.as a meate oferpug.


And the Loade ipate wnto Boles, fapinge:
Pf afouletrefpace and (pn thozowe ignozaunce
intbpnaesthat areconfeccated ontothe Lorde,
Ice bpm bzpnge for bps tretpace nto the Lode


ero.rrr.b. aram Without blempthe out of the Hockes, Va-


Petiticus.


pesto docuell, ozto do good(fobat fo ever tt be which be offred Dnito the Lome for Stretpafle; -


CTh e. bt. Chapter.
(The offerpnge fo: (panes which are bone willpnaip..
. Bhelaweot the burntotrprces. Bhefpremull abpoe
puermoze bpontheaultar, Bhe offerpuges of Maren,
and his fomnes,


= pme mp pe 2


A Wosalapinge: pi afoulefpnne and trels
oaa Vere pace agapnit the Logbe, and denpe
w aXe) vnto bys npghboue p whbiche was
Pene taken Dim to hepe,o2 that was put,
into bps bandeg , 02 Doeth polente robberpe oz
wong onto bis nepghbour,oz pEbebauc found
that which waslotte, and denpeth it,and{weas
reth fallelp, npon what foener thynge it bethat
aman doth, andfpnneth therin: PEbe baue fo


Cynned oz trefpaced,Detballrefozeagapnethat .


be toke biolentlp atbape, 02 the wonge whtche
be dpd o2 that which was delinered bin to Repe
02 fe loft thynge which be founde,and all that
about wbicbe be bath fwozne Falfeiy, be al re-
ffozeitagapne inthe whole fumme, ant (all ad
thefpft part moze therto,and goue it onti bpm
towbome itpertapneth, thelame dape that be
offereth fo2 bis tretpace,and let bymbzpnqetog
bis trefpace onto the Lozde a ram without ble=
myplbe out of tbenocke(thatis eftcmecd toozth a
trelpace Hebe ly os ego
and the p2eatt ba :
ppr, before the Lorde, anditthall be fozgenen
ym, what foeuer thynge it bethat be bath done
and trelpaced therin.And the Lo2delpake vnto
Holes faping:conunaunbe Jaron and histor


nes,laping:this is the lato of tbe burnt oera i
0 i


x The burnt offerpnae albe vpon the barth


the aultarall npgbt pnto the moznpng, ant the Erop g


Epze balbe kpndled on the aultar.and the pret


peer Md the Lorde fpakke wnto Holes, x


hallmakeanattonement for yz


’
|
È.
|


thal put on bisxlpnnen albe,and bis lpanen DIP ap cree <


ches bpon pts fepe and take awape thealibes
byon the which the fpzeconfumed the burnt fas
crifpce inthe aultar,and be Gal put them delide
the aultare,and put of bis rapmente, and put on
other, andcarp the apeg out without the poolt
bntoacleane place. @hefpze vpon the aultar
(hall burne fpl and neuer be put out. Wut the
peat thal lape wood ont enerp Dap inthemoz
nynge, and put the burnt facrifpce Dpox it, and


lucbinimonep at twolpeles after thex fpcle of eM all burne theron the fatte of the peace offe-


Canctuarp.tbat it map befoza trelpace offertn

And he (pall make amendes for the harme that
behath done inthe bolp ehynge,andlet bpm put
the fpfteparte moze therto,and gene tt ynto the


| pau tbepeatmwalmakean attonement
fO


2 bym with the ramme that ig foz the trefpace
and it Halbe fozgeuen bpm. |
Pfa foule fpnne and cOmpt anp of thefe thyn
ges whiche are of hehe bedone bp the com
maundementes of the Lozde: and topite it not,
andbath offended, be hall beare bps fpnne and
fall bzptige a ram without blempthe out ofthe
flocke that ts eftemed tobe wourty a trefpace of-
ferpng, nto the preat. And p preat hal make
anattonemét Foz bpm concerning bistanozatice
Wwperin he erred and was not ware, tit Hallbe
forrenenbym. Thpsig the trelpace offerpuge


cpnges. he fpze thall ence burne bpon che aul-


tar andneuer go out. xCbivisthelawe ofthe aun rte.
tncatte offerpng : wbicbe Aarons fonnes (pall po e


bapnge befozcthe Lorde, enenbeforetbeaultar be.


and one of then thal take bis bandful ofthe Aou
re of the meate offerpnge andof theepleandall
the frankencens wbhpcbis bpon the meate ofe-
rpnge,and (hall burne it nto a remembzaunce
ppon the aultarfo2 a fwoete fauoure, enen amea
mozpallof it vntotbe Lorde.

And ofthe rete therof, Hall Jaron andhys .


fonnes eate: nlenened Mall it be eateninthebo S


lype place:euen inthe courte of the tabernacle of
wptnefie thepthalleatett. Ft Hallnotbe ba-
ken withleuen: Fhane gevenit vuto them fo2
thep2 pozcpon of mp facctfpces. Stig mo bolp
asisthelpnne offerpng and rrefpag a be


| Cw eS OO TN Ws
| ~ reneracpons concerning the facet


Leat.rb.b


Tad JE
*

7

i


Jges of thps ob


Allehe males amonge the chpldzeu of Aaron
thai cat of it: Ft thalbe a Fatute Eor aoe par
pee of ý 10;
let euerp one that toucbecbit, be poly. no the
ALozdelpake buto Woles fapinge:thig is the of

erpnge of Aaron and of his fonnes whpch they
fhalloffre Dnto the Lozde in the daye whenbeis


> anopnted: the tenth parte of an @pba of floure,


for ameate offerpng perpetual: balfe in p mo-


.— ‘pngeand balfe at npabt : nthe feping pan it


ye pania te Y it it, and the baken offerpn-
acponmpnfed mall, Halte thou
Offer foz a fwete fanour nto the L020. And the
pi ft ofbisfons that te anopnted in bis teade

all offer it: Jets the Lozdes butpe fo2 euer tt
thall be burnte alto dd

Fozcuerp meatokerpng that ismade forthe
Peal balbe burnt altogetber,and thal not be
eaten. nb the 102d (pate bneo Soles, faping
ee bnto Aaron, and yntobpsfonnes ,.and
ape: Thys is the lawe of thefpnne offerpna. Fu
the place where the burnte offerpnee iskplled,
Wali the (pune ofterpng be kplled before p 1020


Bboudaiebyrngete ir And when it istrped,


Dleed For ittsmoft bolp. «Tbe peealt that offerctbit,
- fhalleateit: FJnthebolp place thall tt beraten:


eucn inthe courte of the tabernacle of toptuelle.
$20 man touche the Repe therof,faue bethat ig
balowed. And who lolpzpnkleth of the bloude
therof ppon any garment, thou halt wath it in
thedolp place, thereas tt ig [pzpnkled bpon.


* x Wut the earthen pot thatitis fodenin,thalbe


boten. Andpltt belodenina beaten potte.i¢
fpalbefcoured andrpnfedinthe tater. Ali the
malesamonge the j2calkes hall eate thereof ,
fozit ig mof bolp.and no {pune offrpna: whofe
blonde ts bzougbte tuto thetabernacle of wpt-
neffetoreconcple withallinthebolp place, pal-
be eaten: but halbe burnt in the fpze.
The. vii. Chapter.


q] Sry-pace oferpages. Spnne oferpnges and peace ofe
tenges. The fat and the bioudemape not beraten,


ae & VOSS SS A ae Se


inthe frpinge pan, (hall be the Pecafkes that of-
Fereth it. And cucrp meate offerpng that tsmpn
gled iw fd tobe that ig dape, fall pertapne


nto all the fonines of Xaron and one pal baue 1


as mucbeasanother.. Chisisthelatbe ofthe
ace of ee Went ig ofred butothe Lozd

DE He offer it to geue thankes ,bethall bapng on
tobis thatoffcing {uagte kabes mingled rò ople
and Cinete wafers andpnted wpthople, cakes
mypngled with ople of fpne floure frped.ipe pall
bet ne bis wpe ypon cakes of leucnedD baeade
Foz bis peace olferpngesto geve thankes:and of
all the facrifpce be (pall offer one fo2 an beneoffe
rpnge nto the Lozbde, and it thalibethe Prea-
cs that gape the bloude of the peace ofe-
tpnges. Andtheflethe ofthe thanke offerpnge
inbpg prace offerpnaes, Wall be catenthelame
dape that itisoffered, Andlet ppm lape bp no-
thpuge of tt pntpll theimozowe, Aut pF be of:
fer bps facrifpce bp reafon of a bowe, 02 of bps
owne Free wpll, it hall be cåten the fame dape
thatheoffretbbpsfacrifpce.
And pf ought remapne bntpll the mozotoe ,

ít mape be eaten: but as much of the offred fieth
astemapneth Yuto pthpzde dape, Halbe burne
with fpze. AndpEanp of the Aethe of his peace
offerpnaes be eaten inthe thpadedape,then thal
bethat offercth it obtapneno Fayoure, nepther
Halle berekened Ynto bpm, but pall bean ab=
hompnacpon. Eherfore the foulethat cateth
of itihalibcarehpstpnne. Andthefiethe that
roucbeth anp yucleane thpnge, all not beea-
ten, but burtite with fpze: and all that be cleane
{hall eatethe Lethe. Wut pEanp foule eate of the
fletbe of the peace offerpng that pertapneth yu:
tothe Lorde baupng bis wnclennefle bpon bpn
tbe fame toule fpall perpthe frome amonge bps
people. G)o2coucr, the fonle that doth touche
anp Dncleane thpnge, that is of the pnelennetie
of man,o2 of anp Ducleane bealte: o2 anp abbo-
ininacyon that is wucieane, andthen cate of the
flethe of the peace offerpnge whiche pertapneth
buto the L020, that foule thall perpe From bis
cople. And the Lozdelpake unto Woles:fap=
nge:{peake Dntothechpldzen of Firacll, and


€


lape. x Pethall eateno maner fatte of oren, of Leadis


epe. and of gosteg: nenertbelater the fatte of
the beafte that dpethalonc,and the Fatte of that
whiche is tome with wplde bealtes, hall be oc-
cuppa tnanp manerof fe, but pe Hall inno
wple cateofit. ozwbofocuereateththefat
of the bea fe of wbhiche men fe to bzpnge anot:
rprge putothe Lozde, that foule that cateth it


pw Pee | fe [eee


thal perpthe from bis people, H orcouc,pexthal Bene. irs
cate no maner of bloude whrtber it be of erie ri


02 of beafte.Wabhat Corner foule it be that eateth wea rinb.


apse itis mot bolp. As thelpnne offerpnge
g, fo ig the trefpace offerpnae, one late ferueth


And all the meateofferyng thatisbakeninthe
ouchand that ts dzcled bpon the qrebpzen, and


>: andfape:


anp maner of blonde, the fame foule alp erpii ERerig,e


from bis people. And the Lozd talked with Go
feg, Capinge: fpeake bnto the chplozen of Jiraci

ber at bepugeth bps peace oferpuge
tanto the Lorde, let bpm bpne bpenpite onto
the Loz A Ep ib let big owne bati=
desbapnagthe offrpnges of p Lowe: cuen thefat
with the bze tall pe bapnag:that the bre map
be waned foz a waue offering before ae

Patt ee


mMeremonypes.


And the pealt hal burne the fat pon the aul-
ter and the bzelt halbe Zarons andhig fonnes
And the ryabt bulder thall pe gene vito the
eat fozan Deue offerpng, of pour peace otte-
epnges.@ be fame that offreth the bloude of the
peace offrpnges and thefat,amonge the fonnes
of Aaron, Hallbaue therpabte Mulder foz bps
pu.rdiie parte, for the* wauebzelke andthe beue Hulder
Paue taken of the chpldzen of Ffracll, euen of
thep2 peace offerpnges, and baue genen it punto
Aaron and vntobpsfonnes : bp a Matute Eo? C-
ner of the chpldzen of Flraell.
This ts the anopntpnee of Aaron and thea-
nopntpnce of bis fonnes tn the facrifpces of the
Lob, inthedape when be ofred them to be pze-
fies Dntothe Lode. Andehele be thelacritpees
whpch the Lode cOmaunded fo be geuenthem,
(intbedape of thep? anopnting) of the chplozen
of Jfraell, bp a Matute fo2 ener tn thep2 genera-
cpons. Ehpsis thelawe of the burnt offerpng
and of the meatofferpng,and of the facrifpce fo
fpnitic and trefpaffe,fo2 confecracpon and Foz tbe
peace offerpnge-whpcb the Lozde commaunded
Woles tu the mounte of Sinap, when he com-
maunded p chpldzen oF Jlrael to offer their facri
fpces onto the Lozdin p wpldernes of Sinat.
€ The. viii. Chapter.
Zhe anopntpnge of Aaron and his Connes,
3 Bee, 7 F20 the Lozdelpake unto Doles,
erroa RAA wopalapinge:tale* 4 aronand bps fon-
D S= - e nes With bim, and the befures and
py eee tbe anopntpnge ople, anda ponge
Petena Sore foz{pnne, andtworammeg, €
a bafket w


SAART

LES
itpltoete bzeade:and gatherthou all
thecongregacpon together bnto the Doze of the
tabernacle of wptnes. And Wolesdpdastbe
Lode chmaunded bpm, and toepenpie were ga
thered together Ynto the Doze of the tabernacle
of weptnes. And Boles lapoe vntotbe congre-
gacpon:this is the thpng wbicbe the Logde com
mannded tobe Done. And Doles brought Aa-
ron andbis fonnes,and althedthem with wa
ter,and put bponbpm the albe,and gp2ded bim
wprh a gpzbdle, and put bpon bpm the tunpele,
ow (of pelowe fpike)and put p Ephod theron, which
` pegirded withthe beopderdD gpzdel that was in
the Cphod, and bounde it sntobpmtherwpth.
Andbe put the hz eg ds theron, and putintbe
„ bieftlappe Gztmand Thumim., And be put the
15 mpter Dpon pis beade, and put ppontbhe mpter,
(cuen bpontbe Fozefrunt of bis face)the golden
plate A laiga pean ¢ as the Lo:d commaun=
ded Holes. * And Woles toke theanopntypng
ople,andanopnted the Cabernacle and ail that
thas therin,and fanctifped them,and{p2pnkled
therof vpon theaultar teucntpmes,andanopu
tedthe aultatandall bps veffels,thelaner and
‘bis fote,tofanctifpe themox witht bespic.) And
o he potozed of theanopntpng ople bpon Aarous
head,and anopnted bym,to fanctifpe bpm. ano
{Holes brought Aarons fonnes , and put albes
ppon them, and gp2ded them with qprdels.and
q put bonettes Dpon thepzbeades : asthe Lode
€ro.prip.a commaunded oles. xAndhebzought f pong
oreteztpnne. And Aaronandbdygfonnes put


ErO.ITE, D


ALUS., ’ $


wasfozfpnne.and Holes lewe bp mand tob

of the blonde wbhpche be put pon the hoznes of ©

the aultar rounde abonte with bys Fpnaer,and

purifped it and poto2ed the blonde ynto the bo-

tome of the aultar, and fanctifpedit,and recon

cpledit. Bnd be toke all the fat that was bpon

theinwardes, andthe abundaunce of thelpuer,

and the tivoo kpDneps, and thep2 fat and a= oes

fesburneditbpontheaultat. Muttheponge

oreand bps bpode, bys Helthe and bps dunge, de

buunt with fpze without the boote as the 102d

commaunded oles. Andbe brought the ram =p

Eo the burnt offerpng, and Jaron and big fon-

nes put tbep: bandes vponthebead of theram,

whbpch Holes kplled, and {pzpnbled the blonde

ppon the aultarroundeabout, and oles cut

theram in peces and burnt the bead, the peces €

the Fat , and waled the inwardes and the leg-

gesin tater, and Doles burnte the ram euerp

whbpt bpon the altar, fo2 a burnt facrifpee that

itmpgbt be alwete fauoure, andanofrpng bn

tothe Lozde,as the Lozdecdmaunded Doles. ore. trie.

* And be bought the orberram,namelp the Tnte

ram of confecracpon ox (ofthe pzcates)and Baron gs |

and bps fonnes put thep2 bandes bponthe head ~ Y
of the ram:wbiche oles lewe andtoke of the ;

bloude of if, anDput it bpon the tpp of Jarong

rpgbt eare and wpon the thumbe of bpsrpabte

ange henge upon the greate tooof bps rpabte |
ote. And {Holes vzought Aarons lonneg and E |

put ofthe bloubde cx coftheram)on the tpppe of the gs

rpgbte care of them, and bpontbe tpunbeg of a |

tbep:rpabt bandeg, and vpontbe great toeg of |

ed p blonde


tbepzrpabt tete and Moles {pap
at te es arabe e ;

Dhetokethefatteandtherumpe,andal ero.cciccn `
the fat that was upon the inwardes, aa the a= pata
boundaunce of the lpuet, andthbetwo kpdnepg
with thep2 fat,and therpabt ulder. And out
of the balket of fwete bzead that wag.befoze p y
Lojbe.be tobe onefiwete cale of ople cadet e > |
one Water and put them onthe fat and vponthe Sef-
right Hulder: and put altogether vpon Marong
bandes, and bpon bps fong bandes, and tvaued -=i

|


thep2bandes bponthe bead of p ponge ore that


if a wane offetpng before the Lorde. And Wo-
(es toke tbem from of thep2 bandes and burnte
them bpon the aultar,euen bpon the burnt ofe:
tpnge aultar:fo2 it was thefacrifpce of confecra
cpon, foz a fwete fauourand facrifpce vito the
Lozbe. xAnd doles toke the beeatte andwa-
ued it fo2 a wane offerpnare befoze the Lode, fox ero.rrir.c
it was of the ram of the confecracyd,and it wag |
{Holes parte,as the Lode cOmaunded Boles. T
And Boles toke of the anopnting ople and H
of the bloude whbpche was bpon the aultar, and
{prpnkledit opon Aaron and vpon bys veftp=
menteg, bpon bis fonnes,and on his fonnes Vea
ftpmentes with bpm, and fanctifped Xaron, big
veffures,and bis Connes,and bpsfonnes beffu-
tes withbpm. And Mofes fapde nto Haron
and bis fones : bople the fleth inthe doze of the
tabernacle of wptnelle,andtherexeatett with p erore y
bzeade that isin the batket of confecraepon, as 6 a
conlauaunded, fapinge:Aaronandhts veal
pal


thall cate it :andtbat tobpche remapneth of the
bzeade, (pal pe bucne bith fpre. And pe thal not
departe from the doze of the tabernacle of wypt=
nefe leuen dapes, Dntpll thedapes of pour con:
fecracpon beatanende. Jio feuendapes thall
Defpll your bande ashe dpd thisdape: euenfop
Lozde bath comaunded to doo, toreconcple pou


à Soitball. Cherforethall peabpde inthe doze of


the Logde cOmaunded bp t


-7+


eu tfa.


s|


tbe tabernacle of wptnefle dape and nyabt fenë
dapes longe: and kepe the watche of the Lowe,
jand pe tpall not dpe:foz fo FJ amcommaunded
nd lo Aaron ¢ bis fons oe allthbpnges which
ye Dande of Hotes,
C Che.tr. Chapter.
ores . bg has oe bieHeth the prople
peee) MD it foztuned that inp epabt dap
CAA Woles called Baron and bps fon-


ander” ehe aultar and offer thp Cactifpce foz fpnne, and
makeanattonement fo? tbeand fo? the people: page
and thou thalt offer theofrpng ofthe people,to PP,


recontple them,as the Lozdecommaunded.


Aarou therfore wente wntotheaultar,anBe pa
fiewe the calfe which bebadfozlpnne. Andthe |


fonnes of Aaron brought the bloude vnto ppm,
and be dppte bis fpnger in the bloude,and put tt
pponp Pogues ofthe aultar,¢ potw2ed the bloud
pnto thebotome of the aultar. But the fat and
thetwo kpdneps andthe abundaunce of the lp-
ucr of tbe [pnne offerpng, be burnt ppon the aul
teras the Lozde comaunded Holes: Che flethe
and the bpdehe burnte topth fpze wpthoute the


eu, tp, Doe. And be fletoe the burnt oferpng, xg Xa-


rons (ons brought bntobpm the bloud, whpche
he fpzpnkled rounde aboute bpon the aultar.
And thep bought the burnt offering Dnto bpm
with the peces therof,and the bead:-and be burnt
it bpon ‘he aultar, and dpd walipe the tntvar-
des and the legs, burnt them bponthe burnte
offrpng ontbeaultar. And seni sra gbt tbe
peoples offerpna takpnage the goate that p peo:
ple bad foz the facrifpce of fpnnie , and flewe itg
offered it fozfpnne,asbedpdthetpette. And
brought the burnt offering and offered it as the
maner was, * andbsought the meateofirpnge,
and Fplled bis pandetherof,and burnt it bpon f


Peitius.,


aultar,belpde the burnt facrifpce of morning.

He flew allo the ore andthe ne a peace
offerpng, that the people bad foz themiciues: Æ
Aarons fonnes broughte vnto bpm the bloude,


whpche be (pzpnkled vponthe aultarroundeas © -


boute,and toke thefatte of the ore and of pram
therumpe, andthe fat that couereth the inware
des and the Bpdneps and the abundaunce of the


Ipuet: and tbep put the fat upon the bzetes and
cat on the aultate -but thebze= .


be burnte th
tesand therpabtthulders Aaron waned foz a
waue offerpnae befozethe Lozde, asthe Lorde
comaunded Boles. And Aaronlpfte vphps
bande ouer the people, and blefled them, € came
Downe from ofrpng ofthe fpnne offrpng, burnt
offrpnges and peace offringes. And Soles and
Aaton went intothe tabernacle of wytnesand
came out,and blefled the people, andthe qloepe
ofthe Lode appeared wntoall the people.


Mol.cerbit,


J
-E


fe, *Andtherecame a fpze out from before p Lorde tt.192. 00a


and confu un opoe the aultar p burnt offrpnge eacb


andfhefat. Wibiche when all the people fave,
thep Gane thankes, and fell on thep2 faces.
C The.xr. Chapter.


T stadab and Abibu are Capre. Hfeaclmourncth forth
Whe preattes are fozbphocn werner, Prochem


As EN


mR eR


nd there went a fpze oute from tbe 3.0:dc, and
confumed them, and thep dped befoze the Lorde
‘Then Boles Capde nto Aaron: thps ts it that
the Lorde fpake, fapinge : J wpll be fanctifped
in them that come pe me and befoze all the peo-
ple F wpllbeglozifped. And Varon belde bps
peace. And Woles called cH ifaell and Elfapba
tbe lonnes of Dsiel the vnele of Aaron, ¢ fapde
Dito them:come on, carpe pour brethzen from p
bolp place out of the bofte. And they went to the
and carped them intbhep2albes out of the bofte,
as @olesbadfapde. And Doles lapde ynto
Aaron and onto Eleasar and Jtbamar þig fon


nes*biicouer not pour beades nether rent pour Deuri :


swbitbe He cOmaunded them not Fo-FFF.be


clothes, left pe dpe,and let wath come upon al 3°


the people: Hut let pour bgethzen f bole boule of
Firaell bewepe the burnpng which p Lozd pat
kpndled. And go not ye out from the dooge of
tabernacle of wrtnefic.left pe dpe: foz the anoir
tpnge ople of Godisbpon pou. Andthep dpe


ag Mofes fapde, And the Lozde paise = aa


ron,


|
|
:
|


sf meates.


ron,lapinge: Thou Hale not depnke wypne and
ftronge dzpnke, thouandthpfonsthatar with
the: oben pe gainto the tabernacle of toptnellc,
left pe dpe. Let it be a lawe Foz ence thozoweut


v Pout Teneracpons,and that pe mapow auc know


€


tedgeto) put Difference betwene Holp and Lnbolp,
betwene cleane and Yncleane And that pe mape
teach the cbplozen of #fraclall ý fatutes which
the Loze bathe poken vnto then mb pande
of poles. And Boles fapde nto Faron and
bnto Eleasar and Jthamar bps fonnes p were
lefte : take the meate offerpnare that remapneth
of thefacrifpces of the Lo2de,andeatett Wout le
uen belpde the aultat:fo2 itis moft bolp: pe al


gate itintbe boly place, becaulettisthp outpe €


Benedita LEA E
Deu piia PAIR y A
ETENA S


tbplongdutp of thefacrifpces hk py to {oF


ai into tthoclawes,pet be chateeth not p cud.


| Lewitieus.


Thelethall peeate of all thatare inthe tha 15


ters : tobat foeuer bath fpnnes and fkales inthe
waters, fees and rpucrs, that pall pe eate. And
all tbat bauenot fpng and Chales in the fee, and
rpuers,of all that moue and lpue inthe waters,
let thentbeabbominacpon bnto pou: Petball
not cate of thep2 Aele , but abboze thepze cars
kales.Let ali tbat baue no fpnneg no? fkales in
the waters, beabbompnable bnto pou.


Tr


a


Eheleave they, whpche petal abbore qe“
monge the foules and that ougbtetiot tobe ea= g :


ten,forthepareanabbominacpon. Cheeagle


the gotbauke, and the copmozaunte, the bultur, *


andthe kpte after bis kpnde, andallrauens gf-
terthepz bpnde : the eftrpche, thenpghtecrowe,
the coockowe, and the otvle after bis kpnde,the
falcon,the torke the qreate owle,the backe,the


pereant tne Bes oe eron, the Jape after bps .


pnode,the lapwpnge andthelwalotoe. Let all
foules that crepe and goo pponall Foure, be an


be abbomtnacpon wnto pou.
Pet thele mape pecate, of enerp eee ee cn)


thpng that bath pngesand co bpon four fete
cuenthofe p baue knees aboue bponthep2 fete,
toleape withal 1 the earth,cuen thele of thë
pe map eatexthe

aan.after bis viel ly after bis 7
and thexdbagab after bis kpnde. All other fou-


mpnacpon bute pos. Jnfluche pe be onecleane,
and mbofoeuce toucheth pearkas of them, thal
be pncleane nto the eucn: and who loeuer beas
retd the carkafle of them, Mall hah bigclothbes
and be dneleane Dntpll euen.

and cuerp beatte that bathboofe and denp-


dethit not intotwoclaweg, no: chatvethcudde, €


fucbe are yncleane Dnto pou:enerp one that tou
cheth them, thalbe pneleane. And what focuer
oeth bpon bps Dandes amonge all maner bea-
Sthat go on all foure fete: luche are yncleane
Dnto pou:and who lo doth touche thetecackatle


xhalbe bnicleane ontpll theenen. And bethat rerom | 3
beaveth the carkafle of them, pall wathe his clo Tsseite


thes, and be pncleane ontpil the cuen, fo2 luche
are bucleatie bnto pou. And let thele allo be vu:
cleane fo pou amonge the thpnges that crepe t-
pon the earth.the ealel andthe moule andthe
toode, after thep2 bpnde, the bedgebog, the tel-


a


rbe after bis bynde: there Bidas,


— —


&carabrus
Locus.


les that mouc and baue foure fete, halbeabpo= 710s.


lio, the lacerte,tbe {naple,and the molle:thele ar.


pncleane fo pou amonge all that crepe: who fo-
ener Doth touche them when thep be deade, pal-
be wncleane Dntplitheeuen. And what focuce
anp of the Dead carkatles of them doth fal ypon
albe oncleane : Yobetperit be veflell of wood,
02 Fhior e thpnne,o2 bagae,o2 what Coeucr
veflell it be that anp wozke 1s wzougbt in. And
itimuft be plungedintbe water andit thalbe on
cleane bntpll be cuen, andfo Mall it be clenfed.

All maner of earthen Vellell wWherinto any of


them fallethb,thalbe bncleane, with all thattier IE


e


inig:andxit albe broken. All mane: meate al- reet. si.v,


{op ig fed to be eaten pf any fuche water come 80% Fob.


ppon,it halbe yncleane.And all mance Dipnke
that is bled to be Dronke inall manee Cuche vel=
felg pall be oncleane. And euerythpuge A

Pe


=


e


ta My 4 4 AA pe . 4% ) aa rn
Lerenionypes. Leutticus, Wal. rerbej.
theveccarcalefalleth bpon,allbebncleane. her, andthe Hall bepourired of the plue of ber
iiibether tt be ouen o} kettell, tetitbebzotien. . blonde. *Andthis isthe lawe fozher that path Lent-v.o,
) Foz thep ave bucleane,and Halbe vucleanevn= bornea maleozfemale. wut and pf ebenot
| topou: Meuerthelater,yet thefountapnesand. abletobzpng alambe, the (hall bapngxtwo tur Zubs.tta
) >  ‘woelleg andcollectponof Waters fhallbe cleane tplsoz tro pong pigron 8:the one foz p burnt of
\ fell. And oho lotoucheththepzcarkales,thals ferpng and the other foz ipn. And the pret hal
be vicleane. PEthedeadecarkale of anpiuche make anattonement foz ber,¢ the thalbecleane.
fall pon anp Fede bied to fowe, tt hall pet be © The.xtit. Chapter.
ry ree a Pe oll anea p kage ot Che prefkes mut indge who are Hepers, 3
{he Lede, ANDA DeAICCATHAUC TAU COCLON IE TDR! | mT 2d the Lozde {pake vnto Wofegand `
bewucleane vntopou. Vanpbeatteof whiche WWA Baron fayine: iy ERG patel 2
= ~ pemapeate,dpeandanpmantouch pdeadecar Pree eA ping: when there appeascth
~- .  ‘tafle thero€, be Halbe vncleane vntpll the euen io
be that catethof pdcadcarkalic of it, hal ath
© bisclothesand be wncleane bntpltheeuen. And he thalbebroug
Æ  bealfophatbearetb thecarkatleof ithal wat to one of bisfonnes theppeattes: and the picat
bis clothes and be pncleane pntplleuen pall loke on the toze in thefkpnne of bp sA ebe.
Letenerp ceeppngetheng thatcrepethbpon And wpenthebpeareintbe forcisturned unto
tbe earth be anabbominacpon andnotbeeaten whpte andthe fozealfofemetobe lower then p
What loeuer goeth bpon the bz Mand whatlo fkpynneof bis fethe tt topl be a plage of lepzofp
monge ailcreppna thpngestbatcrepe bponthe yncleane. Dé there bebut awhpteplecke inthe
y carth af thatie pe eate not,fostbepareabbomi fkpnneofbig fleth,andflemenot tobe lower the
nable‘Pethallnot make pour foulesabhomina thefkpnne, woz the beare therofisturned bute
>, blewpth nothpnge that crepeth, nepthermake whpte.the preat thall hut bpm vp feuen dapes
yourtelues bneleane wopth them: that pethulde Andthe preatt hall loke yponbpmagapne the
bedefpledtberbp. foz Jamthe Lordpour God feuenthdape. Andpfthe plagefemeto bymto
nent.rir.a. Welanctifped therfore,andpethalheholp,xfoz abpdeftpl, andtheplagegcowe not inthe lapn
iBeterdc Fambolpe: andpe tallnot defple pour foules the prea all hut bpm vp yet (euendapes mo
With anp manecotcreppngehpug.thatcrepeth Anovehbepeeatttalllokeonbymagapne thefes |
ppontheearth. Foz ZamtbeLodepheought uentbdape. Chen pf tbe plage be darker, and |
pou out of the lande of Egypte,tobepout God not gromenintbelapnne,the peat hall iudge
pe albe bolp therfoze.foz Jambolp. Chisis ppm cleane, foz ttis butafkpzfe. And beall
the lawe of beaftes and fouleg, andof euerplp- wape bis clothes,anbd becleane. Sut and pr tbe
upugecteature that moueth inthe waters, and fcabbeqroweinthelkpnneatter that be ts lene
of enerp creature thatcrepet) vponthecatth,p of thepzeatt,andindgedcleane,betalbelencof _
theremapebea differencevetwenethe vucleane the preattagapne. Dt the peeatt le thatthe lcab 2
and cleane, and betwene the bealtetbatmapebe be growenabzode inthe fapnne, the pratt hal
eaten, and thebeait thato ugbt nottobecaten. ma Ke bpm vneleane Fo? itigalep? ofp.


) , “Che. rit.chapter. i ben the plage of the lepzofpe is inaman,
pa 9 CAlawe howewemenhurvede purged atterthene He albe bzougbt yntothepzeatt, and the pret
a wp Sede tball fe bpm. And pf the rifpnge be whpte mtbe


= pert Loz pake unto Woles fai- Ckpnne,and have made the beare whpte,¢ there
oe Aaya pir: (peake wnto Aa Rach be rawe flefthe inthe fo2e it pl bean oldelepzo Zs
oy AY alraclandfape:pEawomanhathcon fpeinthelapnofbisfethe. Andthe preat thal zgr
Baaren ceaued and bornea manchplde, the maktypm Yncleane and a not (hut bpm bp:
oft, eee hall bevneleancfeuendapes:cuen fepngebeis ducleane. Pi .
Soria Mlpkemaneras tobentHeisputapartintpme abzode in thefkpune, andcoueralltbelepnune .
—«duketio.” of er natural Dileale.Andintheepghedaptbe frombisheadushis fote, whercfoeuce thepzett aS
5 flelthe ofthechploes x fogelkpnne thalbecuta: loketh, and the Realt loke bponbym. And pE
wape. And the thallthencontpnuetnthebloude thelepzolpebauecouered all bps hetthe, be tall
of ber purifpeng thee andthpetpedapes. Dbe iudgethe plage to becleanc, becauleitisalltuc
y fhalltouchenobalowed thpnge,nozgcomeinto nedtnto tobptneffe, andbethalbecleane. Wut.
| tbe fanctuarp, butpll thetpme of ber purifpeng and pftbere berawe lepe on bym when beis €
\ beont. Péthebeareamapde chploe, (hethalbe Cene, be thall be wncleane.
pncleane tivo wekeg as when Mebathbernatu Jnd the Wzealte hall fe theraweflethe. and
€ rallopfeate.And Hhethallcontpnuetuthebloud declare bpm tobe oncleane. Eo? the rawe flefpe
fal | or perper pe Shetek is Dncleane,fepugeitisalepzolpe. D2 pip raw
Buket — -LAnd when yp dapes other purifpengareout flelth departe agapneandchaunge wnto Whyte
tobether it befor a lonneozfoza Dougoter,the befall come to the preat, andthe preatte hall
{hall bapng alambe of one pere oldcfozaburnt fe bpmandbebolde:PE the fore be chaunged Yn-
offerpig, anda ponge ppgcon oraturtpll doue towhpte ox ann coucr the whoteman)the preat all xs
foz (pine ontothedoze ofthetabernacleofwpt iudge theplagecleaneand be thalbecleane.@ be
nesand vuto the preaft: whichihalloftertbem fletpe alfoin wholelkpnne thereigabpleandis —
ip befoze the Lorde, and make anattanemantefoz bealed,and inthe place of the bple there ptione
r a wipte


Lervemonyes.


a whptertifpnaether a pning wobpte and fom
what reddpthe, tt halbe fene of the Weal.
And pi when the peealt lepth bym,itappere
D lower then thefkpnne, and thebeare therofbe
channged wuto whpte, thepa thalindgebim
pncicane:fo2 tis a plage of lepzolp, baoken out
ofthe bple Wut and pethe peeatk lobe ontt and
there be no tobpte heaves therin, and pf it be not
lower then thefapnne,but be Darker, the preatt
ailh popem vp leuen dapes.
And pfit (prede abzodein the feme, the Prea
thallmakedym vncleane, fepnge tt is p plage.
Wutand pf the lpot Lande tpll,and growe not
itis che papnte of anboote bple,and therfoze the
preatt Mall declare bpm to becleane. Ff there be
anp felipe, in whole fkpnne thereig ahote but-
nyeng and the flelthe that burneth bauca wbpte
{zotte,fommbat reddpthe o: whpte, the Drea
tallloke upon tt. And pEthe bearcinp bapahe
fpot bechaunged to ibpte, and it appeare low-
er then the Cipnne.it is alepzofpe broken out of
the burnpng. Xud therfozetbhe preatt thaltudge
bpm vncleane, fepnac it ts the plage of lepzolp.
Wut pt p pea Floke on it and there be no whyte
beare tn the bepgbt (pot, and be nolower thenp
other di Siac oue be darker, the preatt thal but
bpm vpleuen dapes. Andeche Breall Mall loke
onhpmtheleucnthdape: And pf it be qrowen
abzobetntbelapune, the preat thallindae bpm
wricleane,lepng tt is the plage oflepzofpe. And
pi thefpot tande tpl init,andgqrowenot inthe
byrne, butis darke, itis arifpnge of the bur-
npng, andthe Peak Mall therfoze declare bpm
cleane,fepng itis the pepnt of the burnpna.
Pfa mano: woman hatha loge vpon p peal
02 the bearde, the prea thall leit. And pit ap-
 -peare lowerthen theikpnneandthere be init
e a pelow beare:€ thp» moze then twas wont to te)
the preat hall iuoge bpm vncleane, lepna that
the tamefretpnge iga token of lepzofpe pon p
beade oz beard. And pf the preak loke onthe foze
of the pzpnte and it leme not lotwer then p (apa,
and that the beareis not blacie the preat Wall
putte bp the frettpny loze fcucndapes. Rndin
thefeuenth dape the peealt Hallloke onthe Tozet
and pf the Tore be not qrowen, and there be init
no pelow peare,and thefoze feme not lower thé
the fapnne,be Halbe fhauen:but the place of the
fo2e hall be not auc, and the pealt thall put
bpthelozeleuendapesmo. nd in the feuenth
Dapethe peak (hall lobe onthe foze: And pi the
foze be not qtrowen in the fkpnne.noz feme low-
erebenthe other ikpnne the zeae pall clenfe
bemani be pall wape bis clothes,¢ ve rcleane.
ut pt the loze qrowe in the fleth after pig clen
frnge,the peat pall loke onbpm.
_ And pf thelore be qrotwen inthe fhyune, the
- F prett thall not {eke fo2 pelotwe heare fohe is vn
cleane. utpEbele the pzpnte Mande Epil, and
that tbere is blache Beare qrotone bp therin, the
fozets healed and be thalbe cleane, and the pactt
fhall declare Dim tobe cleane. Pf there be whpte
fpottes inthe f&pnne of the fethe of man oz toe
= man, thepacattthallloke pponit. Andp£ the
tpottcsin thelpnne of thep2 epe be fomibat


4


Lewiticts;


‘thallitbecleane. Chisis thelaweofthe plage


darke and whpte Withall,, ox che mare be rare, that if ae
is no lepore tt isa Frckellgrowpna inthe fietbe, `
Cherfore is be cleane. And the man whofe pead
is deltptute of beare, (Wwherbp he is made balde)
is cleane. Andbhe that hath bis heare out in bps
fozebead, tg fozebecd balde andcleanc. FE there J
be tn the bauld head o2 balde fogehead, awhbpte ,
reddpth loze fcabbe, there ig lepzolp fpzonge vp `
in bis baulde bead o? baulde fozebead ; ont
— Andthe Peat thallloke Ypon pand pi a5 :
tbe rilpng of the foze be whytereddplthe in bp
baulde bead o: baulde forehead after tbe manen “+ |
of lep2olp wbich ts in thefkpnneof thefletp, thë. o.
heisaleperousmanand ynclean.And the pze
(ball make bpm vncleane , fo? the plage thereot .
igtnbishead. he leper inwbhome the plageis \
Wall bauebpsclotbesrent,andbysbeadbare,eé
fhall put a couerpng bpon bis lpppe, and thalbe
called biicleane anddefpled. Andaglonge asp
opfealelatteth bpon bym, be Halbe defpled and
wucleane:be Hal owel alone, cuenxiol ee the
hoot thal bis babitacpon be. be clot that the egos
plage of lep2ofpeis tn, wobpther it be Ipiinenog
Molten, wHpther it be inthe warpe oz woofe of
Ipniticn o: of wollen:etherinalepnozany thing —
mabe of fRpnne, pf the dpleale be pale o2 fom-
what reddpihe in the cloth o2 fkpnne-whether it
be inthe warpe oz woofe, 02 any thpnge that ig
nade of (apn, thenit is aplage of lepzofpe and
thalbethewedbntothepeat.

Che prealk therfore Hall {ec the plage, and
fut tt Dp fenendapes,and loke onthe plage the
feucntb dap. Wipich pe it beencrealedin p cloth
(Whether it be in p warpe oz wofe, 02 inalapn)
ozin anp thyng that is mabe of f&pnne,it isthe
lepzolp of a fretpng foze:i¢ is Dncleane:and that
cloth thalbe burnt, ether warpe 02 woofe whe-


ther it be wollen oz lpnnen, 02 anpthpnge that

tg made of fkpnhe , Loberin the plage ts, fo2itig
afrettpng leprofp, tt halbe burnt in the fore.

At tbe pealt fetbat the plage isnot arowenit = -
the cloth:etber in the warpe 02 wofe,o2 in what
focucr thpnae of fapnneit be, the preat palei-
maund them to wath the thpng whertn f plage

ig and be hall put it ppleuendapesmo, And

the Peat pall loke on the plage agapne, after
thatitiswafthed. And pi the plage hanenot
changed bis coloure, and is {p2ed no further a=
bzode,it ts wncleane. Chou Halt burneif inthe

fpe foz tt is a frette inwwarde: in parte oz in all-
together. And pi the peak fe that the plagcis

darker after that itis tealibed, beall rente it

out of the cloth, 02 out oftbefkpn, 0: ont of the |
Warpe, o? ont ofthe woofe. Andpylitappeare r]
anp moze inthe cloth(etther tn the warpe o2 inp |
woofe , 02 nanp topnge made of fitpnne) itica
arpnge plage. Thou Halte burne the plage
that ts init.)ozcouer the cloth, ether warpe oz
woFe 02 what focuer thpng of f&pntt be whtche
thou baite wathed, pt plage be departed there
Ecom, it Hall be walped once agapne: and tben


i ES


of lepeolp ina cloth whether it be wollen o2 lpn:

nen:ctberinthe warpeoz wofe, 02 inanp thpng

of fipunes,to make it cleane oz pncleane. Tl
-


— Lepolye. Leuiticus. Wol.ceriz
«  €The.riiii. Chapter. and make an attonemente for bym tbat is tobe
s ue UE cients oftdeleper,annotthe bouletbatbersin, clenfep, foz bis vnclennefie. Andthen thallbe


Dae, eng RD the Lozde fpake puto Hofes, pli the burnt offerpng,and the peat thal offer
seein Be AA ep armare x this isthe lawe oftbeles the burnt offerpng and themeate ofrpng bpon
tube ae, koaa Gabe’ in thedape of hisclentprge: He the quitar:and the pealt hall make an attones
aun. ce, MAA Wetbalbebzougbebnrotvevect.and e Ea a aa aralt ba fb ;
anD,FL fe PA Doe oou Owe pew, ment foz bpm,.anbd be Målbe cleane. x FE be be Leui,d,ds

, Bae the peat Hall qo out without the poore,andcan not get fo muche,be thal take one
a - doolt, andloke bpon bpm. And pe the plage of lantbe fo? a tretpace offerpng to wane tt fo2 big


Icpzolp be healed in the leper,chentpall the pack clentpng , and a tenth deale of fpne floure mpna
comaunde that be mbicdistobeclented,bapnge glen with oplefozameat offerpna, andalogae
two liupnae bp2des and cleane and cedar ood of ople, and two turtpl doune 8 o2twopon qe pps
and purple ctoth,and plope. Bnd the peak hal eons, fuche ashe tg able toget, toberof the one
fe ‘commaunde that one of thebpzdesbe kplledin fhalbe foz fpnne, and the other fo2 a barnte offe-
anearthen belel and Dponrennpn Gewater. . tpage. And be Hall baypng them the epgbt tape
And be thalltate the liupug bpzde wpth the ce: foz bis clentpnge wnto the preatt before the doze
Dar wood, the purple and the plope,andthaloip ofthe tabernacic of woptnes befoze the Lozde.
themand theliupnge bp2deintbebloudeof the ann the pret all take the lambethatis for D
flapnebpgde, vpon therennpng water, g Cpzpn- the trefpag and p logge of ople, and tail waue
ble opon bpm( that muf be clenfed oF bislepzo= them before the Lozde. And he thall pl f lambe
{pe )feuen tpmes, andclenlebpm andfpalllette fozthetreipas, and the Pzeatt pall cake of the
the linpng bpade goo freinto the Felde. bloude of the trelpas offerpnge.and put it vpon
%  Andyethatisclented, Hallwathe bystlo- ehetpppe of hisrpabt caccthatisto beclen eb,
thes,and thaucotallbpsbeare,and watbebpm and pponthetbumbe of bps rpgbte bande, and
felfe in toater, that pemapebecleaue. Andal- yon tbe greattoo of bystpabtfote. Andthe
ter that thal he come into the boolt,and sae ta:  preaft hall powse ofp ople into his rigbt bande `
tp without bis tent lenen dapeg, but in F lenentbh and the pzeatt dall with bos fpnger pnie of
dape hethall thaucofallbisheare,namelp,bys the ople that is in bis lefte band, feuen tymes be
beabe, bps bearde,and bis b2o0tbes : euen all PS Foze the Lozde. Bnd the p2eatt thall put of p ople
beare balbe auenof. And be ball wale bis that is inbps bande upon the typpe of therpabt
clothes and bis fet in water.¢betbalbecteane eare of bpm tbat isto beclenfed, and Vpon the
An theepgbte dapebhetalltakerwolambes thumbc of bistygbt bande and vpon the greate
without blempipe,andanewelambe ofa peare too of bis right fote:euen inthe place where the
olde Without bemp pe, and thze tenth dealesof blonde of thetrefpasofferpngwasput. _.
inba, fone Kotre foz axmeåte offerpng mpngled with And the rel of the ople that isin the 38ed-
3 opie and a logge of ople. And the peeatttbatma (tes hande,be ball put vponthe beade of bpm p
Geth bpmicleane, Hall bepng the man wbicheis ig to be clenfed: that be mapemake an attone-
tobe made cleane and thole thpriges,befozethe ment foz bpm befoze the Lozde.And be Wall of:
1.0200, enen befoze the Doze of the tabernacle oF fer one of the turtpll doves : o2 of the ponge pp-
wytnes. And thepzealk thall take one lambe,¢ geons-idye aspe canget:tbe one fo2 a (ynine of
| offer hpm foz trefpace,and the eke ofople,aud ferpng, audtheothe2fo2 a burnt Offerpig pth
5 wauerbem before the Lozde.Andhetballletbe themeateoferpng. And the peat hall make
tambe in the place were thefpnne offering and anatronement foz bpm that ts tobe clenfed be-
the burnt oferpnae are ap i :eucninthe bolp fozep Lode. Thisis thelat ofbpm in wbome
place. Stozasthelpnneotterpnaeis.euenfots isthe plage of lepzofpe and whole bandeis not €
t the tretpace offerpugethe Bpeattes: fepngeitis able toget that whiche pertapneth tobps clen-
\ mott bolp. andthe peeathMalltake ofthc bloud fonge. Andthe Lorde pate vnto Moles aud
of the trefpace offerpng,and put it spon the tpp Aaron laping, wher pe be come wnto p lande of
of the rpabt careotbimtbatistobectented,and Canaan which ¥acuepouinpofleltpon.
bDpon tye thumbeof bps rpgbt bande ,and bpon And pl 4 put the plage of lepolye ina boule
the great too ofbigipabtioote . ofthe lande of pour pofteftpon, bethat oweth p
€  Chepeattthaltake of thelogge of ople,and boule pall come,and tel! the preatt, faping: me
- porozett into the palmeokhislettebande,zdpp thpnke that thereig ag it tere alepzotpe inthe
bis rpabte fpnger inthe opletbatisinbpstette boule. Andthepzeatt thal commaunde themto
panoe (pzynkle of theople wptbbisfpnger emptpetheboulebefoze tbe Beat gointo itto
cuentpmes betoze the Lozde. AndofthereltoF fethe plage :that all thatisintpe boufe be not
the ople tbat ig tnbis bande, Hall the preatt put made vncleane,and then mutt the peat roin-
pypon the teppe of the rpabt eare of bym teat is toletbebhoule. Dé the prealt alfole that p plage
Foz to be clented,¢ Dpon the thumbe of big rpave thi the walles of the boufe, andthat thercve .
bande and Dpon the greattoootbisepabefote, polowe ftrakes paleos red whichfeme tobe lo~
- cuen vpon the bloude of the trefpace offerpng. wertbentbe wailit {eife,tbe preat Mall co out
And theremnaunt of the ople that igintbepze- at thebouledoozes, and but up the boulefeuen
es bande, be Wallpotoze bponthebeadofbym dapes. And the prcat pallcomeagapne the fe-
that is foz to beclenfed:and p Peat hal make uenthdape,and pf hele that the plagebe tncrea:
anattonement foz: bpm befoze the Lozde . fedin the twalles of the boute,tbhe preat thal ca-
And thepeeak hal fer thelpnneoficryng maunde them totake away the tonesth wa


Leprofye.


the plagets,andlet them caffe them into a foule
plare without the cptte,and pe palcommaunde
the boule tobe (craped within rounde aboute ,¢
powe out the dufte (that tbep ferapr of) wpth=
outtbe cptieintoa foule place.

And thep Hall take otber ones , and putte
them in tbe places of thole toneg, ¢ other mog-
ter,toplafer the boule witball. Andpé f plage
come agapHeand breake out ti the boufe, after
that be bathe taken awape the fones and fera-
pedtbe walles of the boule, and after p be hath
plapftred the boule a newe:the preat thal come
and fe it. Jnd pf be perceaue that theplage bath
growen further inthe poule, itis a frettpng les

2ofp inthe boule. tis therfore vucleane. And
E (pall bzeake Downe the boule. Andthe kones
of it and the tpmber therof, and all ¢be moztar
of the Ponte , (pall be catpe ont of the cptie unto
afouleplace, <)ozcouer.be that gocthintothe


8


boufcali the whplethat itis Mut vp, Halbe dn- al


cleane yntpl tbe euen. He that heperhin f boufe
pal wathe pisclotheg:helpkerwpletbateateth
inthe boule, (hall wae bis clothes,
~ Andpfthe preaft Hall come and fe thatthe
© plage bath fpzed no further in the boule after ý
it is netoe plaftered che Brerat thalliudae that
boule cleane,becaute the plage is bealed. And let
bpn take toclente the boule withall: two bp-
bes,cedar hood, purple cloth and pope. And be
{pal bpll one of the bpzdes in ancarthen veflell ,
and bpon runnpnge Water: and take the cedar
wood, and the plope, and the purple with the li-
upng bpzde, and bpppe them in the bloude of the
apne bp2de,andin accep hn Waite q [pipu
kle the boule feucn tpines.¢ clenfe f boule wpth
the bloude of the bp2de and wpththe runnpnge
water, With the liupng bp2bde, ub the cedar wood
and the prope and the purple cloth. But be thal
let the lpuing bpzde fice out of thetotone intop
bzoùe feldes,andfomakean attonement fo: the
boufe andit Halbecleane. Chis isthe latwe foz
ailmaner plage of leprofpe and bzeakpnge out
anbdof the lepzolpe of cloth and boule:fo2 afwel
lpnge foz a fcabbe,and foz a hbpre blpicr. To
teach then it mut be made vucleane and cleane
This is the lawe of lepsolpe.
C The. rv. hapter.
C Zhe manner of purgpnge the bnclenne(le both of men and


wimini

mergers AD the Lordelpaketnto Mofes,
qand Aaron faping: Speake vnto p

nate Vert chplbien of 3 fraell, andfape bnto
prensa cent: Polocucr batbarunnpng
Rees ‘apiiue out of bps lelthe,is pncleane
br reatone piue. and tbps albe the token
of bys bnclennefle i bps pfluc: when pe is tn-
cleane. Pihis flefberunne, oz pE bis fiche cons
gele bp the reafon of bis plue, then igit unclen=
nefe. Enerp couche wheron be lpeth that bath
the piue, ts pncleane, and enerp thynge wheron
be {peteth,is vnelean: ii bo foeurr touchetp big
couche, Hall walhe bps clothes, andbath bpm
felfe in water and te dncleane bntplltbeeuen.
And be that {peteth on anp g: wero
be faethat bath the paue Q all wath pis clothes


Lenititts,


andbathe bymfelfein hater, and be ducleane.
ontpll ebe cucnpng. Hethat touchetbhthe fepe

of Dpin that bath the piue, hall wale bis clo:
thes,and bath ppm felfein water, ¢ be wneleane
wnto the euen. Jt be alfothathaththepine, pit = -
bpon bpm ehatiscleane.be hallwatbepigclo-
thes,and bath bpm feifein water, ebe pucleane
Yntpll euen. Bnd what bozle harnefle fo ener he 1
tpbeth spon that bath tbe pilue,albebnelean -~
And who fo euer toucheth anp thpng that was
pnder dpm, Halbe wncleane Onto the euen. And


bethat bearethanpfuchetbynges, Mall abe =


bis clothes, and bath bpm felfe in toater,and be
vncleane vnto the euen. And who fo ener pe tou
cheth that bath the pilue(¢ baue not fp2tte wal-
fhed his bandes tn water) Hall walhe bps clos
thes and bath bpmlelfe in water, tbe pucleane
wntothe cuen.+ The vellell of carth that be tow reur, br. az
cheth, obpcb bath the piue, halbe broken: and amrit,
l oefiels of wood albe rpnfedin ater.
When be alfo that bath anp piine » is clenfed of
bps flue , be Hallnomber feuendapeg sth
clenfpage and wape bps clothes, and bathipg
fiep tn runnpng water,and fo Gal bebe cleane.

And the epghte dape be thall take bnto bein
two turtpllDoues o: two ponge ppgeons,a
comme befoze the Lozde wnto the doze of the Ca=
bernacle of withes,and geur them nto p piei.
And the preat (hall offer them: the ene fozafpn
offerpnge,and the otber Foz burnt offerpng: and
the peate Hall make an attonement foz bpm
befoze the Lorde, agconcernpng bis pine. PE a»
np mans fede departe from bpm in bps fepe, be
(pall walbe bis iietbcin water, and be yucleane
pitpll cuen. Bnd all theclothes and all the Firs
res wberinistuche fede of lepe, halbe walipe
with water and be bneleane vnto the enen..
And pibe that bath fiche an plne of fede, dolpe
thith a fooman,thep hall beth wame them fel-
ues with Water and be vncleane wntpll een.


i =


Efa womang naturalicourfeof bloudedoo @ - |


E
a


tunne.toe albe put a partefeurndapes:wholo
euer toucheth ber, Halbe wnelcane wnto the ené.
Andall that the lpeth vpon, in the tpme of hee
naturall JA albe vneleanelpke as cuerp
thpngealto that be fptteth tpon, is bncleane.
Ui bo foeuer toucheth ber bed, Wall walthe bys
clotbes,and bath bpm felfe toptp water, and be
pitcleanewntotbeeuen: Andwbofoeuer toin-
cheth any thpnge that the fat vpon, tall watbe
pis clothes and bath bpm felfein water, andbe
unclean rto the euen: fo tbat toberber betauch
ber couch, ox anp veflell heron the bath l(ptten
be tbalbe wncleane vnto
ipe withber,and per wnclennes come bpon bpm
be Halbe unclean feuen dapeg and all tbe couch
wheron pe lyeth halbe yneleane.
xWiben a tomas bloud runneth longe time mathie,

nut of tpe time of ber natural courle:03 pf it cun D
beponde ber naturall coucle, let all the dapes of
the plue be judged wncleane, euctias the daped
of ber natural opirale. And the hall be vnclean
All ber couches wheron (he lyeth (aslonge ag

er pilue laftetp) thalbeas ber couche when the

ath Der natucall opleale. And what fceuer the


ipttety


euen. xAnd Pla MAN ree cwiie |


Lepolpe.
fptteth bpon, Halbe bucleane,agts ber Dnelen-
nefieroben Mets putaparts. And who loeuer
touchethaup of thele,thalbe bucleane, and thal
walipe bis clothes, and bath Bret felfe in water
and be wincleane pntoeuen.. Andafter that He
isclenfed of ber pfluc , the (hall counte ber feuer
~Dapes,and after that, the Halbecleane. Fn the
epg hte dape the thall take Duto ber two turtpls
: oz tio ponge ppgeons, andbzpngethbem unto
thepzeatte befoze the doze of the Tabernacle of
wptnes. And the pzeaft thall offer the one fora
. Fpnne offerpnge, and the otber fo2 a burnte offe-
tpnge : and make an attonemente Foz ber before
. « the dode, ag concernpnge the plluc of ber Wn-
ss clenneffe. Cherfoze hall be leperate the chpld2¢
of Jiraell from thep2 onclenneffe, that thep dpe
not in thep2 wnclenneffe: pE thep detple mp Da-
- bitacpontbatts amonge them. Cbisis thelaw
ofbpmtbat bath a runnpnge piue, and ofbpm
whole fede runneth From hininbis fepe g tse
frled therin,and of ber,that (foz ber natural dt
eale)igputapact.and of bofoenerbatparun

ning pilue:topetber tt be man oz woman, and.

bpm thatlpeth with ber whichis bncleane. ©

z ; € The. rot.cbhapter.
@ What Jaron mak do. The clen(page of the fancluarpe.
spethe feat ofthe clentpnge. Aaron conte Weth thefpanes
of thechplogen of yirach,


J seg S20 the Lozdelpake brit
at


y RAY of Aaron, when they offered befoze
(Het 05 the Lozde,anddped : And he fapde
aE] onto <)oles :(peake bnto Xaron
_ thp bzotber, that becomenotatalltpmics into
 theboly place wpthin the paplebefoze the mer=
cpfeate, whichis bpon the arke, that bedpenot.

| titre, bitt » i023 wpll appren thexcloud bpon the mer


cpieate. Sutwithtbystbpynge thall Varon
comeinto the bolp place: euen wptha bullocke
foz {pnae; and witha ram foz a burnt offerpng.
- Ie thal put the bolp lpnnenalbe bpon Hyman
(hall bane alpnnenbepcbe vpon bts ficlihe,and
balbe qpzded with alpnen gpzdell, and put the


mentes: therfoze pall be wae bis Aefbetn wa
ter toben be Dotbput them on. And be al take
of the multptude of the chpldzen of Firael, tivo
He qoates fo? Cynne, anda ram fog a burat offe-
i rpige. Bnd Maron (hall offer bps bullocke fog
_ websestr.d fpnne,* and make an attonementfo2 bpm, and
| ~ 9s £o2 bis boule. Andbhe {pall take the tivo gotes, €
prelent them befoze the Lozde at the Doze of the
j, Er abernadeof wptnefle. And Aaron thallcatt
lottes ouce the two gootes : one lotte thalbe fo2
the Logde,andthe other fozthetcapegoate.
And Aaron Hall bapnge the goate poe which
. the 102deg lot fel,and offer bpm foz: fpnne. ut
the coote on which thelotte fell totcape, Halbe


~ toletbpymgo (asa fcape gote) fre into the Wwpl-
pernefle. And Aaron thall bapnae his bullocke
Foz (pu, and reconcple foz bpm felfe, and foz pps
honie and tall kpllbis willocke oe be el


And he thalltakea cenfer full of burnpnge


€ cotes out of the aultar befoze the Lorde, ¢ alt


|


Heuwiticus.


oles,
ASen xafter the death of the two tonnes


lpnen mptre vpon bis head: Chele are bolp gar


fet eth before the Lozde, to reconcple wpth, €.


Jolt.
_fpllbishandful of fwete ceng beaten Tmall, and
/bapnge them within tbe baple,and put tbecens
tpontpefpzebefozetbe Lorde : thar the cloude
of thecens mape couer the mercpleate thatis v=
pon fhe tottnes,and that be dpe not, And be Hal
xtake of the bloude of the bullocke, and fpzpn-
klett with bis fpnaer pon the mercpfeate call
warbde:and befoze themercpleate Wall be [pzpn
ile of the blonde with bis fpnger (cuentpmes.
Then Wall he kplithe goote thatis the peoples
(pnneofferpng, and bzpng bis blond witbinthe
vaple,andbdo with that bloude, as He dp wprh
the bloude of the bullocke,{p2zpnulpnge it pon
the mercpfeate,and befozethemercpleate. and |
be fballreconcile the bolp place from the Daclen
neleg of the chpldzen of Flracll,andfromthepe
trefpacestnall tbey: fpnnes. And fo Wall be d0
Foz the tabernacle of toptneffe that ts fet among
tbem, cuen amonge thep2 onclenneffe. : ,
xAnD let there be no bodpe in the tabernacle ruget s,
of wptnefle, when begoethintomakeanatto- m
mentin the bolp place, pntpli be comecut. And
lette bpm make anattonemente foz bpmiclfe €
foz bis bouthold,and foz all the multptude of 3f
raell. And he (hall goo out vntotheaultar that
is before the Lo2b, andreconcple bponit,¢ hal
take of the bloud of the bullocke,and of p bloud
of the gote and put it bpon the Denes of ? aul-
tarerounde aboute, andlpzpnble of the blonde
bpon it withbis Epnger feuen tpines,andciente
it,and balow it from the wnclennefies of p cil.
oe of Frachk. Jnd when be bath made anende
of reconctlpnee the bolp place,and the taberna-
cle of toptnes,and theaultar, be thall bepng the
lpue qoote:and Maron thal put borh his handes.
pponthe beade of thelpue goote,t confefie oner
bpmall the mpfoedes of the chplozen of Ffracl, Œ
andall thep2 trefpaces,inall thep; (pnnes, put-
tinge them ppontbebcad ofthe goate andfend -
bpm atvape(bp the bande of a conucnient man)
into the wplodernefle. And the roate thall beare
pon bpm all tbep? mpfoedes onto the wploder-
neg and be thal let the goate cofreeinto p wpls
dernes. And Aaron (hall come tnto the taberng
cleof wptnefle,¢ put of thelprenclothes which
be put on( when be wente tn into the bolp place)
andleauethemtbhere. Andlet bpm walhe bys
fAictthe wpth water tn the bolp place, and put on
_bis owne raiment,and then come out, and offer
bis burnt offerpng and the burnt offerpny of the
people and make an attonement for bpm felfe,
and foz the prope , and the fat of the fpnne offe-
rpnage all be butne bpon the aultar.
And be that carped forth the goote to Asa- F
sell, pall wae pis clothes, and bath bis fepe
in Water,and thencomeinte theboot. And the
bullocke wbich ts fo2 (pune, and the qoofe that
isfo2fpnne, (wbole bloude was bzought tn, to
clenfe the bolp place (pall one carp out without
the bolt tobe burntin thefpze, with thep2 lpn-
nes, thep2 Aclibeandthepzounge. Andbhe that
purneth them pall wae bisclothes.and bath


®ebse.irb
and. Fra A


_ bvsfleibeitn water and then come mto the bot.


And this thalbe anozdypnañcee foz ener nto pou
that inthe tentpdape of tbe feuenth yas ot:
| | ‘ umble


Ceremonyes.


©


fa ite wbich
Das | aping: what
F man locuer of p boule of Flraclbplleth moron


Eee ae
M ai eet


fo make anattonemente foz poure Coules, fog
bicude Hhallmake an attoncment foz the foule.
And therfore J fapde vnto pepplozen of Frael
ictnofoule of pou catebloude. Pepther letanp
Mraunger plotourneth amonge pou, tat bioud,


Lewiticus;


W


And what fo ener mantt be of the chyl®sen D
of Alracll, 02 of the fraungerstbat fotourne as‘
monge pou, which buntett ¢catcheth anp beal
02 foule that mape be eaten, let bpm powze out
the bloudetherot,and couerit witbeartheforý 4
Ipfe of all flethe tg inthe bloude of it therfoze d j
fapde bnto the chpldzen of Flraelx pe pall eate gene.e.x;
the bloude of no maner of fletbefoz thelpte of al etita a.
ctor is rbe blaude tberof: who foeuenes catetD a
it-pall perpihe. Andenerp foule thateatethit m


tobicbe dped alone, o: that wbiche was tome vw
wplbde beatles, whether itbe one of pourielueg .° <
02 a raunger,be pall wate bisclothes,ebath * *
bpm Celte in water,andbe pucleane bntopeuen -
and then thal pe be cleane. Ve be wape thein not
AOF PAEDDA = gh ol te aad

j á 1 | | B


What degrees oF kpnred ma pe marpe togetber,


is “ss


A


Chou tale not dplcouer thefeceettes oFehp
e:


€


Loranatndementes Leuitiors, `


-Wde wucouer per fecretcs as lone as fhe lp=
zeut: ro:c. neth, x Chou Halt allonot go punto a woman
eer to Ducouer ber prenitpe,aslonge asthe ig puta
Zent. prb, partefo2 her vneclennetic. x 8)ezeouer,thou
àrea tpalt not lpe with thp nepabbours wpfe.to de-
fpleberwithbfede. Chou thalt alfonot geue of
zeatrrt. thp ledetoofer it ynto* Moloch:nepther Halt
thou defple the name of thp God. Jam f Lode
AN @ hou Malte not Ipe with mankpnde as wpth
oero Waman kpnde,foz if is abbominacyon. + Thou
D Malte lype wtth no maner of beaetodefplethp
felfe therwith,neyther pall anp woman tande
before a beal, to lpedowne therto, foz tt isab-
bominacpon. Pe thallnot dcfple ponr felneg in
Ap of tbefe thpnges, wherin alfo the nacpons
aredefpled which Fcalk out befoze pon: Gabere
thozoive the landers defpled , and Y wpll bpiet
Leut, rr», tHe Wpchednelle therof Dponit,pee andthe land
~~ ttfelfebath cakeout ber inbabiters. x Dethall
kepe therfoze mpne opdpnaunces,and mp iudge
mentes ant commpt none of thefe abbominacp:
ong: nepiber anp of pou noz anp &raunger that
fotournetl amonge pon(£o2 all thefe abbomina
Jers baue the men ofthe land done which were
there befoze pow and tbe lande is defiled.) Spal
not the lande (petve pou out allo(pe pe defple it)
as it fpucd out the people that were befo2e pou!
Fo: ho to euer hall compet any of thele abbo-
minacpongs,thelame foules io commpt then,
tball perpipe from amonge thep2 people. Ther-
foe all yc kepe mp Watche,that pe chmpet not
one of thele abominable cuffomes which were
piven eb befoze pou: and that pe defple not

ô pourlelucs therin. Jam the Lozdepour SoD.

= CThe.rir.Chapter.

@Arepeticpon of lawes pertapapnge to the ten commaun


bementes. acontpocracpor fez thëepooze: twptcbe crafte


retro OS


defpled the balowed thpna of p Lorde and that
foule fball perpihe fromeamonge bps people .
*U ben pe reape Downe the tppe cone of poure
lande, pe (ball notreape Downe p vemo bozder
of poure felde, nepther Malte thou gather that
whichis lefte behind in thp barucit. Chou wale
por sla inalltby bpnepardecleane, nepther
gather inthe grapes tbat atconertcaped. Wut
thou Halt leauethent for the pooze and Trauns
ger. Zamthe Lowzepoure God. Ja
rs * De thallnot tteale,nepthcr lpe,nepther Hebe:
deale falfelp one wpth another. + Vetpall wot taat. v.t
fiweare bp mp namein vapne: nether (halt thou ride cer


iLe. rriit.b.
Be. Freie


defplethe name of tdp Gov. JamtheLozoe.
Thou thalte not doo thy nepghbboure wonge,
neptherrobbe bym violently, xnepther Mall the me. rrwii.c
womans laboure abpde withthe bntpli the zotit.
mo:npng. Thou Halt not curfethe deaffe, xnep-
ther put a tumblpnge blocke befoze the blpnde: i
but alt feare thp God. Jam p Lord. Pe palya E
#0 unrpabteoulnes in iudgement. x Chou Malt
not fauoure the pooze:noz honour Pinpabty, LONE rute. ce
tmrpabteoulnette halt p tudge thp nepapbour . arv.rvi..2.
Chou Halte not gos bp and doune aga pze- BAP.
up acculer amongethp people, nepther alee
thou fandeaqapnufte the blonde of thp nepah-
boure. 3 am the Lorde. + Chou thalte vot hate
thy bzotber in thpnebacte,bat alt inany wile ; yr


* rebuke thp nepghboure: thatthou beare tot fates h


fyunefozbpslake. + Chouthaltenot avenge matoi y
thy felfe , no: be mpndefull of wonge agaputte KEETA
the chplozenof mp people: * but Halte loue thp ` =
nepabbouze cuenasebptelfe.Jamp Lord. K egarria:
Pe Hall kepempne ozdpnaunces. Chou GO ALLEN. cy
balte not lette cattell rendre pth acontrarpe aac,
kpnde,netberfote thy felde withmpnglead fede Faoite
neptber Malte thou put on any qatment of lpt-
nenand wollen. Wibofoeucelpethand med-
letb wptb a woman that is a bondemapde, ne-
ucctheletle appopntedtoabufbande, but notre €
bemicd, noz fredome geuen der, the (halbe fcour=
qed wpthalethzen ibpppe.andthep tall not
Dpe,becaute fhe was not tre. Andbe (hall bopng
pe bis trefpatte tntothe toue befoze the doze
of the tabernacle of thptnefle, aram foz atref=
palie aiterrige Anbdtbe Pzeate Hall makean
attonement foi bpm with the ramme thiche is
for tbe teefpalte befoze the Lozde ,concernpnae
bps fpnne whyche be hath doone, andthe {pune
eppche pebath oone , pall be fozgeuen bpm.
ben pe come totbelande,anod Date plan-
ted all maner of trees conuenpente tobe caten
of, pe all pune awape the fozelupnne of eue=
tp one optD thefrute therof: euen the pere thal
thep be wncircumcpfed ynto pou, and Hall not
beeaten of. Wut inthe fourth pere all the frute
ofthem all bebolp,and commendable tothe
Lobe. 3u the fptte pere pall pe cate of thefrute
of them, and pemape gather inthe tncrealeof —
them. Yam the Logdepour God, E
x Pe pall noteate ppon blondenepther hal rra
pe ble wptchecrafte, noz obferuetpntes. x Pe zurra:
iballnotrounde the lockes of pour beades, Nep- rerig.
ther fhalte thou marre thetuftes of thp bearde.
Be tpall not rentepoure flelhe fo. an A
fi fake,


A2eceptes.


fake, no: pynte anp markes bponpou. Jam
the Lode. Chon halt not make thp dDoughter
commen, that thou woldeft caule ber tobe an
wobhoze:lett the lande alfo fal totbozedome,¢ be
full of wpckednefle.Pe pall kepe my fabbothes
andfeare mpfanctuarpe: Jamtbe Lozde. Ve
{hal not regarde them that wo2ke with {paptes
xnepther feke after fothlapers tobe defpledbp
~ Hem: Jam the Lozde pour Gov.

seviia. Chou thaltrple vp befoze the bogebed,and
1,Zimb.a, CeuUerente the face of the olde man,and dzeade
thy God. JamtheLozde. Fla ftraunger fo-

fourne withthe in ponure lande,pe thallnot vere

ero.rrg.e, Dpm. * Wut the traunger that divelleth wpth
pensive ag one of pour felues, and thou palt

oucbpmas thy felfe, fog pe were ftraungers in

the lande of Egipte. FJ am the Lode pour God.

Pe Halldono vnrpghteoutnetle tntudgement ,
inimeteperde, inwepghte oz inmealure. Crue
balaunces , true wepabtes, atrue Ephaanda
truepnthallpebane, Fam the Lozde youre

500; whpcbe bzoughte pou onte of the lande of

Cgppte. Cherfoze hall pe obferue all mpne


ire.Frbiita


Orbphaunces: andall mp iudgementes and doo
thepin. Jamtde Loze.
@ The.xre. Chapter.


C Thep that geue of thepze Cede to th, alloy
MARI bep? egoloch , Hall tpe


ther goodlp lawes,


o Xen fhiike ell, that penn ofbpstede wnto * Moloch, let
apne:the people of thelande (hal {tone
fopll fet mp face aga pni that man


seve, man that lpethxwith bis fathers wpfe,and bn
oree conercth bis Eathere (erreere’ mi


' + F ewititus.


bpsdougbter inlatwe , lette thepm dpe bothe of
them:thep daue wzought abbomtnacpon,thep |
bloude be Dpon them. * Jfa manallolpe wit zeii
man kpnde :after the maner as twpth oman "®t
kpnòe thep baue both committed abbominacp=
on,let them dpe. Thep: bloude be vpon them.
And pf aman takea wpfe and her mother alfo,
itis wpckednelle. Thep Halbe burnt with pre
both be and the, that there be no wyckednefle aa
monge pou. And*pFa manlpe witha beat, let
bpm praa pe pall fice the breaftealfo.

3ta oman go bntoanp beat, elpe dotone
therto:thou palt kpll the oman andthe Lat
alfo,let them dpe, chep? bloude be bpon thein.
3famantake bistptter.bps fathers dougbter:
0? Dig mothers Doughter,and fe herfecretegand
fhe bis tecretes,itisa hamefull thynge. Thep
hall perpth in the {pat of thep2 people, be bath
bucouered bys (piters lecretes, be thall beare
bystpnne. x Jtamanlpe with awomanba yey rore
upnge bernaturall bpleale,and pncouce ber fe-~
cretes,and open ber fountapne, and the alfo opé
the fountapne of ber bloude, thep tall bath pez
tpthe ftom amonge thep2 people. x Chou Halt zeu.rvtiie
not vncouer the lecretes of thp mothers (pier, mat.rittia
* 1102 of tbp fathers tpfter , foz be that dotbe fo, eu sean
bath vucouered bis nerte kpnne:thep thal beare =?”
thep2mpldotnge. Ffamanlpe with bis vncles
tpfe and oncouer bis Dncles lecretes:thep thal
beare thep2 fpnne,and ball dpe chyldletfe.

3fa man take bps b2otbers Wyte, itis an D
bnclean thpng, be batb vncouered bis bzotberg
lecretes,thep thalbe chplolefle. * Pemall kepe
tberfozeall mpne ozdpnauncegandall Mp tud= Le. pbilid
gementes,and dothem:that thelande wbpther
J bapng pou todwell therin, ipewe pou not out
Ve thall not walke th themaners of thys nacp-
on tobiche F cafke out befoze pou:JFoz thep cont
mpttedall thefe thpnges, * and therfoze J ab-
Hogredthem. Wut {bauelapde ynto pan : pe Deut.tr.ad
ihallentope thep2 lande, and F wpU qenurit yn-
topou to poltetfe it, enena lande that fotveth
witbmplieandbonpe. Jam the Lorde poure
God, which baue feperated pou from otherna-
cpons,* and therfoze hall pe put dpffercnce be-


Lea. rbiwe


twene cleane brates and yucleane, bettwene yy Zeit


cleanefoules and cleane. Pe fbalnotdefplepour "
foules in beaftes and fouleg, ¢ inal! noe 4 cre-
prnge thpnges thatthe ground bayngety Zucth
whiche J baucleperated from pou as Yncleane.
Therfoze Hall pe bebolp ynto me, fo2 y pow


_ambolp,and baue fenered pou From otbernacp:


ons:that pe ulbdebe mpne.* FE there beaman... .....
oz woman that wozketh wpth.a{pepte, o2 that LEES


iga fotbiaper, lettethbemdpe. Ben Mall Fone Fois
them with tones, agi bloubebe opon them.
CThe.rrt.Cbapter.


aa ao he the peattes,
cares’ J 0tDe Lorde fapde ufo Moles,
yea (peate vntothe pzeaftes the fonnes &
AA Vy Of Xaron and fape ynto them. Let
aasa NOnebeodcfpled pponalouleamon
Sa Nps prople:but bponbishynfinanp
pe bnto bpm: bpon bis father, ¢ bis mother,
Dpon fon and doughtet, and bis beother,andon
. big


=


AT = ‘4 i ' < $
a a re rere $ tg iai t a i Tri
| Mevemonyes Hewtitictts, Sol lif, 3
i bistpHeramapode thatignpe bntobpm, bom who loeuer bebe ofall pourfedeamonee poure
* HO man bath knotven, vpon ber thal he be defp« on cransatees pou, that goeth bntothebo-
as led. Wutpe thallnot bedefpledvponbymehat ly topnges whiche thechplozenof Frael halowp
tenkrir t he cog age ainong hispeopletopolute bins ‘onto the Lozde; baupnee bis ynclenuefle t on
e e Celfe foz bpm. Let thom not makexbalones ypo bpm tbat onle tball perpe rome oute af mp
\. their bead,no2 paue of thelockes of theirbeard ipghte. Jamthe Lozde. es
nop makeany markes inthe Aetbe.Cpep Hal — «batman fo tuer of thelede of Xaronig 1ra
bebolp ontothep2 God, andnotpolute name aleaper:ozbathea tunnpnge piue; he thallnot
of tbepz God,forthelacrifpces of PLozdiwwbich eate of the bolytbpnges wnepli bebe cleane .
A are ag the bzeadofthep: God thep oo offer: thee And wholotouchethanpman thatis vncleane
~ imm, trb ope thep Halbe bolp. ¥ Let thénottakeatopfe ouer theloualeof the deade, 02a man twhofre fede
e e that ig an aduontrefle,ozpoluted.nozputfrom ecunnethfromeppm inbps fepe , 02 wba foeuce |
Her hulband:foz fucha oneisholy bntobiggod toncheth anp woeme, wherbp he mape be made |
‘Thou Malte lanctifpe hym thertoze foz he offe- ‘oncleane,oza man, of wbome bemave take vite
teth Dp tit becad of thy God:bethaltherforebe clennetle (what focuce wnelenneffe he bath) the
| bolp wnto the, for 3 the Lode wobiche fanctifpe Came foule that bath touched anp luche, thalbe
D pou am bolp. Jfa pzelkes doughter fall toplap Vncicane vntpll euen, and Mall not eate of the
i the whore, ibe poluteth berfatber:tberfozemutt bolp thpnges, vntpli be bauc waithed big flete
he beburnt with pe. Hetbhatis thebpepzea with water. And when the funne ig downe, be
amonge big bacthzen, bpon wbolebeadPanoin MWallbecleane, and fhallafterwarde cate of the
tynge opje Was potvzed,ethatcontecratedbps bolpthpnges : foz almucheas it ishpsfove.
Handeto put the veltpmentes,hallnot yncouce x Dea beatte thatdpeth alone, oz is tente Yopth rori
Kuhe.tr.e. Dis bead noz rent bisclotheg, xnethergotoanp Wwpldebealteg (whereby ie mape be defpied) be 8
C dead body, noz make bpm felfe bucleanconbpg thalluoteate. Jam the Lode. Let thembepe


=. =a
Ss


‘ - father orbis mother neptber hall qo out of the


J
Pa


faictuarp,noz polute the bolp place of big God
fo2 the crouncot tic anopntpne ople of bis od,


Ezre. 8 Dpon hpi: Jamethe Lode. ie (hall takea


mapde Duto his wpe: buta wpaow,adenozfed
wWornatt,oz anDarlot,thallbenotmarpe. ut
fballfake a mapbde of bps otone people to wpe.
either Hall bedefple hts fede amonge bis peo-
ple: foz Jam tbe Lozbe which lanctifpe bpm.
andthe Lo2belpake bnto Goes, fapinge:
[petke vito Jaron, andfape. Wibofocuer of
thy fede in thcp2 genecacpons bath anpdcio2mi
tie, let Dinnot pzeace foz to offer bzead nto big


, Enes. tb God, *fo2 Who locuer ath anp blempthe, halt


a i
a ial


D not come neve:ag pf be be blpnde 02 lame,og that


dathabzuted nofe, o: that bath anp mpfhapen
imemib2¢,02 is broken foted,o2 broken banded oz
Haue no heave on dis epe beowes, o2 paue a web
02 other blemplhe tn bpsepes, ò? bemaunge, og
fiauld,o2 bath bis Mones bzoken. oman that
bath a blempibe, andis ofthe fede of Aaronthe
Peate, hall come os to offer the ampo of
the Lozde. Aben be hath adefozmitpe, tet him
tot preace to offer the baeade of big God. Lette
bym eate the bead of his God:euen of the motte
bolp and of the bolp: Duelplette bpm not goin
pnfothe vaple, no: comenpe the aultar, when
bets deformed that be polute not mp fanctuarp,
fo} Jam the Logde that lanctifperbem. And
{holes tolde it vnto Aaron and to his tonnes, g
wntoalltbecbplozen of Firaell.
C Che. rrii. Chapter.
C Who ought to abhapne from tatpnge the thpuges that
tere ofred Bowe, what and when hep fhulde be oferii.


rama] (LD the Lozdelpake onto Wofes,


TiS og (aping: Speake unto Xaron ebrs
RAA onnes that thep be feperated from
ited the bolp thpnges of thecbpldzen of
suwas 4frael,and that thep polute nofmp
bolp name in thofethbpnges, which thep balowe
vntome: JamtheLode. Sapevntotbhem:


thertoze mpne ozdinaunce, let thep foz the fame
lade fpnne bpon them,and dpe foz it, pEtpep de=
Fplett. 3 tbe LogbdefancttEpe them.
_ Chere thalno raungce cate ofp bolp thing
itepeber agette of the Peatkes nepeper thall an
bpzed leruauntecateot thedolpthpnge. wus
plthe bape: bye anp foule bith monep,he hal
eate otit, lpheasbethatisboznein bps houte,
Hallthep eateofbpsbzeade. FEthe wWeeattes
doughtcr allo be marped wito a frraunger, he
mape hot cate ofthe balowed beue offerpnees.
fLotwithtandpuge pf the Dreaikes dougotee
be a wyDdow oz Deuogledand Pane no chplde,but
is retourned unto ber fathers boule agapne, the
{hall cate of ber fathers bacade as well asthe
dpd ín ber youth. Wutthere Hall no Craungee
cate therot. 3faman eate of theholp thynge
dnwpttpngip , be Wall put the fpfte parte thera
unto and genue tt Onto the Prealke with the pax
lowedtbpnge. And the 2caites ipali not de-
Eple the bolp topngcg of the chpldzen of Zfraell,
(wbichethep offer vnto tbe Lozde)tolade them
(elues withmploopng and trefpatfe wbyle thep
cate thepz bolp thypnges fo: J the Lo2d¢ do ha-
lowe them. Andthe
faping: fpeake buto Laronand his fonnes,and
vito all thechylozen of Ffraell, andfape wnto
them: wobat fo ener he be of the boule of Feacll,
0? {rraunger in Zfeael, that Wwyll offer bis facri-
Epce fo2 all bis botweg, andfo2 ali bis frewplof=
ferpnges which thep wpil offer untothe Lode
fo2 a burnt offcrynge,pe tall ofer(toreconcple
pourfelues a male without blempthe of the or-
en, of the thepe.o2 of the gotes. Sut whatlocuce
hatha Arai a that ipall pe not offre, for pe
fhallaernofanouretherwmpth. Andwho loe-
uct bzpneeth a peace offerpuge vntothe Lode
(accordpnge as bheis appopnted):02a Vote, oz
a fre wpll offerpna, is oreo? fhepe that is with:
oute Defozmptic, be Dalbe accepted. Chere Mal
bealfo noblempipe therein: blpnde o2 broken,
fil op iouns


Lode [pake buts Doles, €


_—— snamem o M o oo M o Ř—ōȘ—Ė—Ė—— ț‘ť” ma i E |


Leremonies.
And then thon Waltemake a trumpe blows:
fs the tenth dape of the feuenth moneth, euen in
the bape of attonement Hall pe make p trompe
blowe , thozotee out allpour lande. And thou
alt balowe that pere:euen the fpftpeth pere,
and pzoclapme lpbertpe thozowe out the lande:
pntoall the inbabpters thereof, fo2 it pall be a
pere of tubelpe vnto pou, and pe Hall retourne
exerp man dnto bis polletlpon, and ceuerpe man
tnta bis kpnred agapne. A pere of tubelpe Hall
that fpftpetb pere be nto pou. Pe thal not fow
neptberseape that whpcbe grotocth of itfclfe,

nepther gather the grapes that are lefte.
Korthat pereot Jubelpe hall bebolp bnto
pou: but pe thalleate of the encreafe therof oute
oftbefelde. Jn the pete of this tubelpe pe thall
returne euerp man vnto bis poflefipon agapne.
JE thou fellef ongbt nto thy nepghbboure, o2
peč of thy nepgbboures bande,pe thal not dil-
ceaue one another: but accozdpnge to the nom-
bze of peares after thetubelpe peare thou thalte
bye of thp nepabboure,and accozdpng wntotbhe
nomber of peares and of the frutes, be Hall fell
pntothe. Accozdpnge vuto the multptude of
€ peares,be thal encreale the papet therof, and ac-
cezdpnge to the fewnelle of peres, be hall mp-
npibe the prpce of it:fo2 the nombze of frutes do-
eth belell onto the. x mplceauc not petberfoze
cuerp manbis nepgbboure, but shou thalt feare
Telid thy God. o Zam the Logde pour God: ber-
foze pe hall Do after mpne ozdpnaunces : kepe
mp lawes and do them, and pe Mall dwell in the
landeinlafetpe. Andthe Lozdethall gene her
frute and pe (pal eate poure Fpl:and Dwell ther-
ininlafty. Ind pf pe hallape:wbat thal toe cat
the feuenth pere, for we Wall not lowe , no? ga-
therin ourenceealfe! Jropllfende mp bleffpng
bpon pouinthelprtepeare, and it tall bzpnae
foztbe frute Foz thze pereg :and pe (hall lowe the
epabt pere, and eate pet of olde corne Dntpll the
npnth pere:etien dntpll ber frutes come, pe pall
~ wp cateofolbdeftoze. he lande tall not be folde
pripre CObe walte : for the lande is mpne, and pe be
but fraungers and foionrners with me. si
Jnall thelanbde of pour poffeflpon, pe Hall
raunt aredempeponfoz tbelande. Fftbp bzo:
Ratha per be wared pooze, and bath folde awape of
AHP? hig poflellpon, and pe anp of bys kpnnecome to
redeme it lette bpm bp out that wbpch bis bzo-
therfolde. And pfhehauenomantoredemete,
let big hande get fomuche as mape be fuffpcient
to bpett out agapne,and lette bpm counte Dotve
Jonge it bath bene folde and Delpuer the tre tn-
to tpe manto whom befoloeit,thatbemapere=
eurne tobis pofleflpon agapne. Wutand pf bis
bande cannot get fuffpciente to telkoze tothe o-
ther agapne , thenthat tobpcbe is folde pall re-
mapne inthe bande of bpm that bath bought tt,
wntpll che peare of iubelpe: and inthe tubelpe it
Chall come out,and be (eal returne Ynto bis pof=
{effponagapne. And pfamantfella boule oza
Diwellpnge within the walles of a cttpe,bemap
i € bpe it ontagapne wpthina whole peare after it
íg folde : cuen anp dape of the peare Hall here-
Demeitagapne. utaw pf pebpe itnop oute


ii


- Deuiticus. D


aga habia ag pe pe plas be thetrthe
boule that is inthe walled Cptic,thalbe fablp-
ped and be bps owne that boughteit, and bps
fucceffoures afterbym, and tall not goo oute
inthe Jubelpe. Wuttbeboufes of vpllages,
whichebaucnowalles roundeaboutetpem, ae /
counted as the felde of the countre, and therfore
thep mape beboughte out agapne, and Mall re-
toune intheiubelpe. Notwithlandpnge, the
Cyrin OF tye Leiter nn toe boules or toe Se
ties of thep2e poflefipon , mape the Leuptesre- ;
deme atallceafons: Andpfaman purchale .° *


ought of the Leuptes.thebonfetbatwasfolbe « s a


and the Cptic of thep2 poflellpon tall goo oute
in the pear of Jubelpe:fozthe poules of the Ci-
tpegof the Leuiteg are thep2 pollefipon among
thechplbzen of 3lraell. wut the felde of thetub-
urbe that is befpde thepze Cpties,mapenotbe
folde: but igtbep2 perpetuall poflefipon.

DE thy bother be waren pooze.and fallen it
decape with the, thou haltreleuc bpm,botbtbe E
fraunger and foiourner, that bemaplpue with
the. * And thou alt takenone vfurp of bpm,

0 , bauntage,but thou tpalt feave thp God,that Sro FHD


S


to be pour God. «> VE thp brother that dwel: Tre. File


them as inberptauncefoz pourechpldzcn after
pou,to pollee them, thep Hallbe pour bonde
men foz cher. But oner pour beethzen the chpl-
bien of Frael, pe (hal not rapane one ouer anos
ther crucllp.3fa fotourner 02a fraunger ware
rpch bp the,andctbp brother p diwelleth bp ppm
ware poo2e, ard (ell bpm felfe puto the traun-
wer o2fogeourner bp tbe, o2 fo anp of the raun
gers pn, after that be isfolde, pe mape berede:
med agayne : one of bisbecthzenowevat wpiyep= #2
ther bis vicle, 0? bis wncles fon mape bpe bpm
oute :02 anpthatis nye ofkpn pnto bpm of bps
kpnred, mape redeme bpm : eptber of pps bande
can gette Co muche, be mape belofed. Andbe
Wall reken wpth bym that boughte bpm ar
the -


L


a!
i


4


Cevenonyes


S Andehbe Lorde lpake onto Hotes , favinee:
' (peake bonto the chplozen of Firael,and Cape:xp


nu.srete.b. Epeteneth dap of che fame Ceuenth moneth is the


agate, ea tte of tabernacles, feuen dapes Dnto f Lozde
"| Che Epatte dapeis an bolp conuocacpon:pe hal
bono labezpous wozie. Syeuendapes pe Hall
offer faczifpce unto the Lozde , and tn the epg bt
Bape Halbean ae cacion Vnto pou, and
pe pall offerlacrifpces bntothbe Lode. Ftig
thecotleccpon, ¢ pe thal danolabozpous thozke
thertn. Chete are the feaftes of the Lozde, which
` ~, pe fpall call bolpe conuocacpons, fo2 to offer [a=
ee crifpce buto the Lode, burntofferpngmeato€-
ferpug, peaceoffctpny, and dapnkoferpnges,e-
uctp Dapebps due Cacrifpcee belpde the abbo
thes af the Lozde, and belpde poure apftes, be=
pde pout vowes, and all pour frevpil ufferpu:

ges, Whiche pe geue nto the Lorde.

Gre Sozcouer, inthe fpeteneth Daye of he
feventh moneth, wbenpe baue gathered in the
frute of the lande, pe pall kepe bolpe dape onto
the Lozoe feuen dapes. Che fpzfedape ball be
asa Sabborb:lpkewple tn the epabt dape pals
be the rele ofthe Sab oy And pe pall take
pouin the fpette dape, the fruteg of goodly trecs

zaunches and Palme trees, andthe botweg of
thpcketrecs , and wpllowes of the brooke, and
thallrciopce befozethe Lozde poure God ienen
Dapes. Bndpethallkepe thpsfealke unto the
£02). vil.vapes inthe pere. at Halbe a late fog
euer in pour genctacions, that pe kepe it in f fe»
uenth moneth.Ve thal dwel inbothes.vii.daies
cuen all tbat are Zlraclites bozne, pall dwel m
boothes, ý par chplozen after map kuowe
bowe that J made pchpldzen of Fraell todtwoel
tn bothes, when F bzourhe them out of theland
ote ap te: Jam the Lozdepour God. fa And
{Hotes tpake bnto the chplozen of 4lracil, cons

cetnpnge the feattes of the Lorde.
+ @ebe.retiti. Chapter.


Zhe ople faz the ase ie that certeth mutt be tones,
He chat kpileth Halbe kplien,
Thpt : ai zj


SAANA Jiraci that thep bapng Dnto $, pu.
Easa Gerople olpue beaten fozlpgbtes, to


iithout the vaple of wptnelle : inthe taberna-
cle oftoptnetic thal Aaron decfle them botheué
and moznpng befo2e the Lorde alwapes. Let it
be alawe foz eucr inpour generacyons. He thal
Defe the lanipes bpon the pure candelftpcke be
fore the Logbeperpetuallp. Andthou thalte
takefpne foure, and bake twelue wafels ther-
of twotenth deales thall be in one waflell. And
thou malt fet them tn tivo rotwes (pre onarote
pon the puer table betoze the Lo2d,and put pu
et franbenlence bpon the rotves, that thep map
be beeade of remembzaunce,and an offerpnee to
the Lozde. Euerp Sabboth be thal pur themin
vowes befoze the 2 orde euermoze:of the chplo2é


> tazerria, OF Stal thal thep be offered foz an enerlattpng


"O


Tr.priiii. b CouChaLInE.+ And thep Halbe Aatons æ bis fon:
nes, wbich thal eate them in the holy place. oz
theparemoft bolp onto bpinof the offerings of


Lenitits. `


Sol rif,
re te dali i fatute, And thefor
D an 4{raelpti pe wpfe , wholefathes wasan
Cgiptian, went out amonge the chplozen of F<
vacl. And thisfonne of the Fraclitpthe opte,
anda manot 4frael troue together inthebotte,

And the Fraclptpihe womans fonne x blaf- erort.:
phemed the name ofthe Lozde ands curled, and tileat.b,a¢
thep brought bym onto Hofes. ps mothers
name Was Salomith, which was the dougdtce
of Dibi: of the trpbe of an: sthep* put opm sumrin
inward,tbat the mpnde of che Lozdempabte be
hetoed them. And the Logdelpake unto Motes
fapinge: bepngetbhe curled lpeaker without the
bofte,anb let ail tbat peardbpm, puttbepe ban-
des pon his bead, 4 let all themultptude tone
wie And thou Halt peake vntotbe chplozer

Alvacll,faping: Cibo foeucr curfeth his Gon
thallbearchistpnne. And bethat blatphemeth
tbe name of the Lozde,let bpm ve flapne,andall
the multptude pall tone bpm to dearbh, upe-
ther bebe bozneinthelandeo2a ftraunger, whe
be blafphemeth the name of the Loade, let bpm
be flayne.And*ethatkplletbanp man let hur... rei
bpethedeath. Ande that kplletha beafte, lee mT
bpm make bpm good, Coule Foz fonie. and pfa
man mapme big nepyhbour, ag be bath done, fo
{hall tt Ledonetobym: bzoke fo: b2okzc: epefo2 togat.»,£,
epcand toth fo: toth: euen ase bath inapmed a
man, fo thal be be mapmed agapne. And he that
kplicth a beaff, let bpm papefo2it: andhe that
kplleth a nan, let hpm dpe .Pe thal bane one ma D
ncr of Lawe-euen forthe traunger af well.as foz
one of pour feineg, foz J am the Lorde pour Gon
And Woles tolde the chplogenof Hraell,e tiep
bzongbt bym (that hadcurted ) out of the botte,
and ened bym with oneg. And P chpidzen of
Altacldpd asthe Loadecommaunded Doles.

a bavter

we,otbertwpre cabledede Epkepth piee ee l Te OF inde
Ferg MD the Lozdelpakke mto Dolesin A

Ayana ount Sinat,fayinge:{peake yn

7 pas) \ gi tO tbe chpldzen of Firaeil, and tape

(Vnto tbem : when pe become into p

sa lande tobicbe F geucpon, the lane
, And kepe Sabboth vntothe Lowe.


r!


pall reft


: *Spre peres thou palt lowe thp felde and (pre pF


perethou Walt cut the vpuepard, and gather in
the frute therof. ut the*leuenth pere aloa Deut pia
Habboth ofreke bntothelande. The Lowes
Sabbotb t Halbe: thou palt nepther Cowe thp
felde,no2 cut thp wineparde. Chat whiche qro=
weth of the omneaccozde thou alte not rea es
neptber gather the grapes that thou hatte lefte
bebpube,fo2 it ts a pere of relt pinto thelande.
And theret of the lande pall be meate fo2 pon:
euen fog the fo: thp fernaunt:and £o: thpmapde
fo? thp bpzed feruaunt and foz p fraunger that
fogeourneth with the:and foz chp catell,andfog
the beatkes that arc inthe lande (hall all theen»
creale thereof be meate .

And thou halt nombzefeuen Sabbothes of 5
peres unto the euen feuentpmeg leuen pere:and
the tpace of the lenen Spabbothes of pereg, wp il
be wuto thenpue and foztpe peare pre

w An


———_ M D


A Ei


serennies.


Deu, (itl è


6


wen fiii.e.


a


Andthep that arelefte of pou, thal pyre atoape
in they? burpabteoulnes.cuen in thep2 cremice
lanve,and in themploedes of thepz fathers fhal
they confume. And thep Hall contele thep2 mpl
Dedesandthe milocdes of thepz fathers fogtheir
trefpace, whpche thep baue trefpaced agapnue
ine,andfoz thatalfo that thep baur walt rdcon
trarp vntome. Gberfoze,F alfo topll walke
contrarp wnto then, and wpll bepnege them m
fotbelandeofthepaenenempes. Andthenat f
left wape thep2 vncircumcpfed beates thalbc ta:
med, and thep thallmake attonement foz thepz
mifoedes. And+ 9 opll remember mp couenaul
witb Jacob,and mp bond with Flabac, ¢mpne
appopntment wyth Sbzabam Wwpll F remem-
ber, aud wpll thpnke onthelande. The lande
(halbe lefte of them, and hall eniope ber Hab-
botbes bple the lpeth waite without them.
Anodthep all make anattonementefo2 thep2
mploedes,becaule they Detppled mp lawes, and
becaule thep2foulerefuled mpne ozdpnaunces :
And pet foz all that whenthep be in the lande of
thep2 enempes:* J wopll not cate them awape,
nether wpll abhooze them,to deftrope them bt-
terip, and fo bgeake mpne appopntmente wpth
tbhem:foz J am the Lorde thepz 60d. J wpi foz
thep2 fakes remebze the coucnaunte made wuto
thepa fathers whom J bought them out of the
land of Eqpptinthelpabt of thebetben, that
mipg bt be toep2 god: 9 amtbe Lozd. Chele at
popnañces and tudgementes, €latves : whiche
tie Lozde made bet ene bpm and Pchpldacn of
Firaciinmount Sinai, bp f band of &)olcs-
C The.rrvit.Chapter.
@ Ot bpuerle vowes and otipehes. ec.

Teepe Nd the Lozdelpake vnto Boles,
| cH \ slapinge: peake wutethe chplozen
Pye ee of Jiracll and lape bnto them: DE
Sey a =) anp man wpl geue a (pngyler bow
Tesda S puto the Lozbde, accordpnge tothe
Daluc of the foules, the value of the male frome


Humilis pentp pere olde buto {prtpe Halbe fpftypex fp-


2


cles of fpluer after the wepgbt of p fanctuarp.
And pF it be a female: the value albe thpztp fp
cles. Andfrom fpue perestotioentp, the male
halbe fet at twenty (prles, and the female at.r.
{ycles. Andfroma moneth onto fpue pere,t
male (balbe fet at fpue {pcles of {plner, and the
femaleatthze. Bnd be thatt sprte pere olde, g
aboue, fpal be balucdat fpftene fpeles, and the
woman at ten. Wut pf be beto pooze fo to be let
be all pzelente bym felfe befoze the preafl:and
tbe p2eaft (hall baluebpm accogdpng as p band
of bpm that vowed tsableto gette.cuenfo Hall
the Pzeatvaluehym. Zit bea beat of which
men bepnge anofferpng vnto the Lozd:all that
any man geueth of fuch bnto the Lode Hall be
counted bolp. Hemal not altarit noz chaungeit
agoodfo2a bad, 02a bad fo2a good. And pth


chaunge beat foz beatt, then both plame beat
and it alfo wherwith it was chatiged Halbe po:
Ip. Pf tt be anp mancer of vnclean beat of which
men doo not offer a facrifpce vnto tbe Lozde, be
pall fet the beat befo2e the preat, and the pack
{bal value it, Wobptper it be good 02 bad. Andas


Lewiticus.


the pzeatt fetteth it,fo pall it be. Wut pEbe whl
bpettagapnie, be (all gene the frfte parte moze


abouethat ttwas fetat. DEanpmandedpeate g


bis honfe to be bolp vnto the Lorde: the pzcatte
{hall {et it, berber it be good og bad,andas the


{te poran pada the balne be.aAnd be


etbatfanctifped tt wpl reveme bis boule: lette
bym geue the fpfte parte of the monep $ it was
judged at tberto and it Halbe his. z
Pí artan palos a prce fhig enpera ana
bito the Lozde:it hal efet accozdpng to iede
therof. PE ttbeare an bomer of berip it halbe fet
at fpfty peleg of fplucr. DEbebalowe dis Felde
immedpatlp from tbe pere of inbelpe, it pall be
woathaccozbpnge asit ig eftemed.
be balowe bis felde after the iubilpe, the Prea lE
ball reken the monep accozdpng tothe nomber
ofthe peresthatremapne bnto the peres of Fu-
belpe folowpna €tberafter it albe lower fet.
Ebethat confecrated the felde,topil redeme
it agapne ,lethpm put the fpfte parteat p pzpee
that it was wasg (ct attherunto , ¢ it hatibe dps
And pF he wpl not redeme the felde,but felleth p


feld to another man, Deor that vomen map TeDEM gy


it nomoze. ut when the felde goth out inf pere
ofiubelpe it albe bolp pntothe Lozd:cuenag
a felde that is vtterly put atoap, and it balbe p
oer offefipon.4fa man fancttEpe onto the
Lode a felve whiche be bath bought,and isnot
of bis enberptaunce, the preal halireken vnce
bpm tobat tt is worth ynto the pere of tubelie,€
De Hall gene the pepce that itis tet at, the fame
dape, as atbpngconfecrated vnto the Lozde.

And inthe pere of tubelpe, the feide hall returne
tnto bpm whole enberptatice of landit is. and


allfettpng (habe accozbpng tothe {pcle x oF the ero rere,


fanctuarp.Dnelpele contepneth twentp bat


pens. * Wut the fp: bozne of p bealtes that ts Deut. pbb” |


appopnted bnto the Lo:de, map noman fancti
Epe:tobetber it be oreco: pepe, foz itis pLozdes
alredp. Pf it bean onclean beaft, be thal redeme
it as itis let at, and geuethefpfte parte moze
therto: Dz pfit be not redeemed, it Halbe folde,
accozdyng tothe baluc. Motwithfandpnge.no
damned thpnge that aman putteth from byin ¥
dedteuteth ontothe Lozde ofall bis qood whe-
ther it be ma o2 bealt 02 land of bis cnbertratice)
map be folde 02 redemed:fo2 eucrp thpng fo put
atvap is moft holp ato the Lozd¢.Let nodam-
ned thpnge that amanfeperateth : beredemed ,
but Dpethe death. Eucrp tpth of the land which
is of the (ede of the land,o2 of the fruteof p trees
is the Lozdes:ano islanctifped onto tbe Lorde.
And pfa man el Sp redeme ought of bis tptbes:
let bpm edr tpactetherto. Andenerptpth
ofore and of fhepe and of cucry beat $ goth yn
det the rod, euen eucrp tenth Hal be bolp wnto p
Lobe. He thal not loke pfit be good arbatuncs


be chaungett.€lspfbe chaungett,bothit,and pit


thas channged witbal, hall be balowed vnto f
1020, and map not be redemed. Chele arep com
mahdementes whichp Lod cOmaundcd bp Ho
fes unto pchpldzen of Flrael mm unt Stuat.
@ The ende of the thpzd boke of B)oles,called
inp Hebzuc,Ciaiccra, inp latpn dee
Che


Wut and pe


j The nombre ofthe
~ armpe of Ziraell.


C The fourth booke of
oles, called inthe Hebzue, Clatedab=


bar,andin the Latpn Pumert.
\ € Chetpr Chapter.


ofeg
inp


a gros. a aha Ty vere
» “Da rrvie * take pe the Cumme ofall the multptude of the
y irere ehplozen of Zfraell, after theprbpuredes¢ bou-
; Mold of thep2 fathers witb the nombze of thep2z
flames all p are males,beade bp heade,from.rr.
percandabvouc:cuenall that goo fozthto p war
in Fracil, thou and Aaron thall nomber them,
thozotvoutthepzarmpes, and wrth pou thalbe
men of euerp trpbe wHerofeucep one is pead må
ofthe boule of pis fathers. And theleare thena-
nics.of the men that wall fandewpth pou: of
ow ow(tbe tepbe of Ruben Elur, the fonne of Dere-
ur:of Simeon, Selumiel the fon of Duri, Da-


y dái:of Juda, Rabelon, the fonne of Aminadab
of Bachar, Rathanael,t e fonne of suar:of 3a-
e x, buloi Eliab, the lonne of Melon. Amonge the


chplozen of Jofeph : of Ephzaim, Elfama, the
se of Amipud: of amate, Gameltel, fion
of edasur:of wWenFamin, Bbidanthefonne of
@edeont: of Dan, Abiezer the fonne of Amm
&adat: of Birt, pant onne of Dcran : of
Bad, Elitah the Lonne of Dequel:of Mephtpale
Abira thbefonne of Enan. — |
. AMBpele were of great fame in e congreqa=
® spon, oades ofthe trp bes of thep2 fathers, and
heades over thoufandes in Jirael. And Voles
and Aaron tokethele men(wbhtcheare exprefled
\ bp thep2 names) and gatheredall the congrega
\ cpon together, the fpztt bape of the feconde mo-
Í neth, and thep toere rekencdthozowe out thepz
i Rpnredesand boules of thep? fathers bp name
from tioentp pere and aboue, bead bp bead. As
the Lozde commaunded oles, euenfo he nom
bred them inthe wplderneg of Sinai. Andthe
chplozen of Ruben Hraelseloelfonnethozowe
| out thep2 generacpons,andthep2 Kpntedes and
Ea boules of thepz fathers mthe nombze of names
peade bp beade(all males from tiventp pere and
* about) ag many as opd qo forth tothe war : the
nomber of them that were of the trpbe of Ruve,
was. rivi, thonfande, and fpuc bundzcd.


Hummeri,


 trpbeof


Fol rib,

DF the chpldzen of Simeon tho2rotwout theie
generacyons and thepz kparedes, and poufeg of
thepzfatbe eas fume of them inthe nombee
sfnames,bead bp bead, all the males from twë
tpperes andabouc, whofocuer mpg bt go fost
to the warre : the lumme of them that were of
trpbe of Simcon. lir. thoufande : andthze bun-
Ded. DF the chyldzen of Gad thozowoutthep?: €
generacpons and thep2 kpnreds and boutpolds
oftbep2 Fathers, the nombec of the namesfrom
twentp pere and aboue,all that went forth top
watre:the nombze of them that were of f trpbe
of Gad, thas.xlv.thoufande, fprebundzcd and
Epftp. DE the cbplozen of Juda thozotwout theit
renteracpons,andthepz kpnredes and poutes of
Phep2 fai bers.thenomber of names from twe
tp pere and aboue,all that there able to gofozt
tothe warre: Che nomber of them that were o
the trpbe of Juda was.irrint, thoulande ¢f[pre
hundzebd. DE the chpldzen of flacharthozowout
thep2 genecracpons and thep2 bpnredes and pou-
feg of thep2fatbers : the nomber of names front
twenty pere and aboue hpch went all forth to
tharre, the nomber of them that were of P trpe yy
of Jlachar,was.liit.thoufand g.tii.hþundzed.

Mf the chplozen ofsabulon,thozowout thet
gencracpons andtbepe kpnredes, and houles oF
thep2 fathers, the nomber of names from t Wwena
tpe K re and aboue, which were abletogo fort
in thehoott: Lhe nomber of them that were of p
trybe of rabulon,was.lvit. thoufandeandfour
hund2ed. Dé the childzen of Joleph: Mamelp, ch
the chplozen of Ephzatimn thozowout tep? gene
racpons andthep2 &pnredes and boules of theie
fatpcrs, thenomber of names from twentp pea
res andabouc,all that went out tothe warre: p
nomber of them that were of p trpbe of Ephia-
im toas.rl.thoufande and fpue bund3ed.

HE the chplozen of Hanae thozowout their
aenieracpons,andthep2 hpnredes and boules of
thep2 fathers,the nomber of names from twins
tpe pere olde and aboue all that went out to the
watre: @henombet of chem that were of the
anafle was.rrrti.tboulande and...
bundzed. DE the chpldzé of Wen Jamin chozow
ont thep2 qeneracpons, andthep2 kpnredcs and
holes of thep2 fathers, the nomber ofnames fro
twenty pere arf aboue, all that went forth top
warre: Che nomber of them that wer of p trpbe
of Benjamin was.rrrv. thoulande ¢.itu.buv-=
Ded. Dltbechpldzcn of Man thorowoutthepe

eneracpons and kpnredes and boules of they2
atbers:the nomber of nanics from twentp pere
olaeand aboue all that went forth tothe warre I
Tbe nomber of them that were of the trpbe of
man as. Irit.thoufande and fener bund2cd.
OX the chplozen of Afar thozowoutthepz gene *
racpons and thep2 bpnredes and boules of tocte
fathers, the nomber of the names from twentp
peresand aboue, all that went outto watre-
The nomber of them that were ofthe trpbe of
Aler was.rli.thoufande andfpue Hundzev- OE
the chpldzen of Mephrali:tho20 wout thep2 qene
racpons anbtbepz kpnredes and boules oftheit
fatberstbenomber of namesfrom tthentye pes
fo regard


ie


j The nombre ofthe
~ armpe of Ziraell.


C The fourth booke of
oles, called inthe Hebzue, Clatedab=


bar,andin the Latpn Pumert.
\ € Chetpr Chapter.


ofeg
inp


a gros. a aha Ty vere
» “Da rrvie * take pe the Cumme ofall the multptude of the
y irere ehplozen of Zfraell, after theprbpuredes¢ bou-
; Mold of thep2 fathers witb the nombze of thep2z
flames all p are males,beade bp heade,from.rr.
percandabvouc:cuenall that goo fozthto p war
in Fracil, thou and Aaron thall nomber them,
thozotvoutthepzarmpes, and wrth pou thalbe
men of euerp trpbe wHerofeucep one is pead må
ofthe boule of pis fathers. And theleare thena-
nics.of the men that wall fandewpth pou: of
ow ow(tbe tepbe of Ruben Elur, the fonne of Dere-
ur:of Simeon, Selumiel the fon of Duri, Da-


y dái:of Juda, Rabelon, the fonne of Aminadab
of Bachar, Rathanael,t e fonne of suar:of 3a-
e x, buloi Eliab, the lonne of Melon. Amonge the


chplozen of Jofeph : of Ephzaim, Elfama, the
se of Amipud: of amate, Gameltel, fion
of edasur:of wWenFamin, Bbidanthefonne of
@edeont: of Dan, Abiezer the fonne of Amm
&adat: of Birt, pant onne of Dcran : of
Bad, Elitah the Lonne of Dequel:of Mephtpale
Abira thbefonne of Enan. — |
. AMBpele were of great fame in e congreqa=
® spon, oades ofthe trp bes of thep2 fathers, and
heades over thoufandes in Jirael. And Voles
and Aaron tokethele men(wbhtcheare exprefled
\ bp thep2 names) and gatheredall the congrega
\ cpon together, the fpztt bape of the feconde mo-
Í neth, and thep toere rekencdthozowe out thepz
i Rpnredesand boules of thep? fathers bp name
from tioentp pere and aboue, bead bp bead. As
the Lozde commaunded oles, euenfo he nom
bred them inthe wplderneg of Sinai. Andthe
chplozen of Ruben Hraelseloelfonnethozowe
| out thep2 generacpons,andthep2 Kpntedes and
Ea boules of thepz fathers mthe nombze of names
peade bp beade(all males from tiventp pere and
* about) ag many as opd qo forth tothe war : the
nomber of them that were of the trpbe of Ruve,
was. rivi, thonfande, and fpuc bundzcd.


Hummeri,


 trpbeof


Fol rib,

DF the chpldzen of Simeon tho2rotwout theie
generacyons and thepz kparedes, and poufeg of
thepzfatbe eas fume of them inthe nombee
sfnames,bead bp bead, all the males from twë
tpperes andabouc, whofocuer mpg bt go fost
to the warre : the lumme of them that were of
trpbe of Simcon. lir. thoufande : andthze bun-
Ded. DF the chyldzen of Gad thozowoutthep?: €
generacpons and thep2 kpnreds and boutpolds
oftbep2 Fathers, the nombec of the namesfrom
twentp pere and aboue,all that went forth top
watre:the nombze of them that were of f trpbe
of Gad, thas.xlv.thoufande, fprebundzcd and
Epftp. DE the cbplozen of Juda thozotwout theit
renteracpons,andthepz kpnredes and poutes of
Phep2 fai bers.thenomber of names from twe
tp pere and aboue,all that there able to gofozt
tothe warre: Che nomber of them that were o
the trpbe of Juda was.irrint, thoulande ¢f[pre
hundzebd. DE the chpldzen of flacharthozowout
thep2 genecracpons and thep2 bpnredes and pou-
feg of thep2fatbers : the nomber of names front
twenty pere and aboue hpch went all forth to
tharre, the nomber of them that were of P trpe yy
of Jlachar,was.liit.thoufand g.tii.hþundzed.

Mf the chplozen ofsabulon,thozowout thet
gencracpons andtbepe kpnredes, and houles oF
thep2 fathers, the nomber of names from t Wwena
tpe K re and aboue, which were abletogo fort
in thehoott: Lhe nomber of them that were of p
trybe of rabulon,was.lvit. thoufandeandfour
hund2ed. Dé the childzen of Joleph: Mamelp, ch
the chplozen of Ephzatimn thozowout tep? gene
racpons andthep2 &pnredes and boules of theie
fatpcrs, thenomber of names from twentp pea
res andabouc,all that went out tothe warre: p
nomber of them that were of p trpbe of Ephia-
im toas.rl.thoufande and fpue bund3ed.

HE the chplozen of Hanae thozowout their
aenieracpons,andthep2 hpnredes and boules of
thep2 fathers,the nomber of names from twins
tpe pere olde and aboue all that went out to the
watre: @henombet of chem that were of the
anafle was.rrrti.tboulande and...
bundzed. DE the chpldzé of Wen Jamin chozow
ont thep2 qeneracpons, andthep2 kpnredcs and
holes of thep2 fathers, the nomber ofnames fro
twenty pere arf aboue, all that went forth top
warre: Che nomber of them that wer of p trpbe
of Benjamin was.rrrv. thoulande ¢.itu.buv-=
Ded. Dltbechpldzcn of Man thorowoutthepe

eneracpons and kpnredes and boules of they2
atbers:the nomber of nanics from twentp pere
olaeand aboue all that went forth tothe warre I
Tbe nomber of them that were of the trpbe of
man as. Irit.thoufande and fener bund2cd.
OX the chplozen of Afar thozowoutthepz gene *
racpons and thep2 bpnredes and boules of tocte
fathers, the nomber of the names from twentp
peresand aboue, all that went outto watre-
The nomber of them that were ofthe trpbe of
Aler was.rli.thoufande andfpue Hundzev- OE
the chpldzen of Mephrali:tho20 wout thep2 qene
racpons anbtbepz kpnredes and boules oftheit
fatberstbenomber of namesfrom tthentye pes
fo regard


ie


eesgand abouc,all that mpabt qo fosth to p war


The ower.


The nonrber of themthat were of thetrpbe of
Mepthalt, was tizcand fpftpe thoufande and


© foure bundzed. Chele are the times which Bo:


Erod piit


Jumi Fit


pa


fesand Aaron nombzed andthe Wzypnces of 3i-
raell: thole tioelue men, wbpche were cuerp one
ouer the boule of thep2fatbers.And all tbe nom
bzes of the chpldzenof Flraeil , thozowe out the
poules of thep2 fathers, from twentpe pere and
aboue,all that went forth tothe warre in Fira-
ell,dzeWe all onto the fiumme of x (prehundzcd
and thee thoulanbde,fpue bundzed and fpftpe.
wut the Leuites after p trpbes of thep2 fathers
were not nombscdamong ther. And the 1030
[pake vuto Dofes.laping: Chou halt notni-
ber the tepbe of Leui, nether take the fumme of
them from amonge the chplozen of Afrael. wut
thou palt appopnt the Leuttes ouer the babita
cyon of wptnetie,and onerall the veflelstherof,
and oner althpnges that are init. Pee,thep thal
bearethetabvernacle and all the belielles therof,
and thep thall miny fer in itg hall dwell round
about the tabernacle. And when the tabernacle
orth forth, the Leuiteg (al take ttdowne:and
when the tabernacle is tobe pptched, thep pall
fet it vp:and pf anp Eraun ger come npe, pe pal
ope. And the chpldzen of Jirael thal pptch thepz
tentes, euerp manin big owne company, and e-
uctp man Dunder his owne Manderd thozowout
thep2 bolles. ut the Lenites all pptchround
about the tabernacle of witnes,thatthere be no
way pon the congreracpon of p chpldzen of
Jiracl andthe Leuttes thall kepe the hatche of
the tabernacleof wptnes. Andthe chyldzen of
Sttacll Dpdaccodpneg to all that the Lode com
maunded Boles, euenlodpdthep.
@ Coe.it. Chapter.


Doe ober of the tentes, Dhe beades of (he kpnredes of
Jfratil.


ON


a

at Le ta .

ith Py ae
at os T


umert,


ofthe terites. |

panhpes:and the captapne ouer thefounes of Rw |

ben, was Elisur the fonneef Sedeur. And bis |
ofe and thenontibze of them.xl vt. thoulande €

puc bundged. Andfaft bphpm thal the trpbe of

Spmeon pptche,andthe captapne ouer the fon:

nes of Spmeon, was Salumiel the fonne of su


i
ti Sadatand bis bote andthe nombze of thent |


lix.thoufandeandthzebundzed. Andthetrpbe n —* ™
of Sadalfo andtbhecaptapne oer thefonnesof ~~. |
Dad, Was Clialaph the lone of Dequell: And

bisholteandthenombzeoftbem.xly.tboufanb = « J


fpte Dundzed and fpftp. Allthat werenombxd -7 s e 7
With thetrpbe of Ruben:an bundzed thaufande ;
li.thonfand four bundzed and fpftp, thozotvout
thep2armpes,¢ thep Dal qo inthe fecond place.
and the tabernacle of wptnes hall gowtebthe
bofte of the Leuttes,tn the mpddes of the bottes
And as thep lye in thepe tentes,enen fo thal thep
procede inthe tournep, euerp man in bps deare,
and wnder thep: owne Tanderdes. o

The weltipde hall the anverd of the hoffe g
Ephraim kepe with thep2 armpes andthe cap-
tapne ouer the fonnes of Ephzainr, wag Elifa- |
ma thefonne of Amibud:His bofte andthe nons | |
bze of thent.xl.thoufand and fpne bundzed. And T
fait bp bom, Halbe the trpbe of Hanae, ethe —
captapne once thefonnes of Manafe was Gå-
maleel thefonne of Bedasur. His bolle andthe
nomb2e of them. rerit. thoulande and two buns
d2eB. End the tepbe of Aen Jamin allo: andthe
captapne ouer the fons of HenFZamin thas Abe
danthefon of Gedcont. is bofte and the nom-
bze of thein.xerv. thoufand andfoure hundzed.
Allebat were appopnted with p hofte of Frps
im Were an bþundzedthonlandeepgbt thouland
and anbundzed, thozowout thep2 armpes, and |
thep all gointbetbpzdeplace. he ttanderd
of te bole of man thallbkepe pnorth {poe with y
tbepz armpes:and tbe captapne ouerthechyldzé "i
of Man, Was Ahieser the Conne of Amni Sa- =:
dat.dpis bot and the nombze of them.trii. thou-
fande and freuen bundzed,

PPECE yo


> @


= =


And falt bp bpm thal the trpbe of Afer
andthe captapne ouer the fonnes of Afer, was
Pagel the fonneof Ocran. Wyshottcandthe
notmbee of them.rli.tboutand and fyue hundzed
End the trpbe of Mephtbali allo g the captapne

ee of Sapa : Was Apra the
ynn an. Dis boteard tbenombze of thé
liit.tboufandcand fourpundzed. All thep chat
were appopnted with ee feof Dan, wasan
bundzed Chonfande.lvit.thoufande and. vt.bun-
dred. Bnd thep tall goohpnmotte wpth tbey:
Ganderdes. hele arethefummes of the chpl-
denot Ffracll thozotwe outthe boules of thepze
fathers, euenallehenombzes that pptched tho-
rowe out thep2 booltes, {pre hundzed thonfande
thze thoutanbde fpue hundzed and fpftp. wut the
Lcuites Were not nombzed amonge the chploze
of $lracll asthe Lozdecommaunded ores.
And the chpldzen of Fltael bpd accozdpng toali
that the Lozde commaunded soles, fo2 fo thep
Abe bias th tbe, bs Aa Fl dfo thep iura
pet the out thep2 pnredes and thoro
outthe poupoldeg of thep2 fathers. a b
‘be


*
Fa
-a


an a
- wt g


| Cheoffyce ee:
| i The.tii. Chapter.


@ Tbe Leuptes go not to batell,but minptte; inthe Sanz
taarpzbep pptcbe thepz tentes nerteto the babitacpon.


p Delearethe generacpons of Aaron

pani Wane) and Hofes inthe bape that p 1020

hie aN pake wyth Mofes nmounte Si-
al NEU E nat, æ tbefe artbe names of the fon-
ae


AW
ype Abibu, Eleasar and Ithamar. * Chele are the


| a | + zin 3 Ove rie


=


before the Lozdeinthe ernie of Sinat, €
bad nochplozen. rle
minpftredin thefygbt of Aaron thep2 father.


A(racl. And thou Halt ots ee Yaronanbdbis
Aneto toapte on thep2 pre


oS
mn
=
2
T
g
=]
=
[=]
S
ded
3
&
5
=
(=J
=>
=}
=
ot
Ez
c
T%
La J
ai
=
&


Fal
=
oC
JE
Tt
tit
=
= ]
TE
Tẹ
Z
=
T
"Fa
Ta
r
o
=
"ha
z
bag]
=
Ca
o
T9
=
=
cr
T%
©
eh


igre: At i
{es of thep2
are males.f


thounombze. 2nd Polesnombzedthem,ac- 4)


tothecommaundement of the Lozde,


des: Libni and Demei, Che fonnes of Ca -
bat ia they? rears aeee ct aed pe-
IE bzonand Dziel. Andthefonnes of Merartin
E theprbynredes, Mabeliand Muli. Chete are


fumeri,


Fol.rlhi.


the kpnrebdes of the Leuttes , accozdpnge to the
boules of thep: fathers. DE Gerloncame papn
red ofthe Ltbnitesand the kpured of the Semet D
tes. Chelearethe kpnredes of the Gerlonptes.
And the fumme of them/(aftet thenomber of all
the males from a moneth olde and abouc) was
[cuen thoufande and fpue bundzed. Bnd the kpn
redes of the Gerfonptes wall pytch bebpnde the
habitacpon wettward. Checaptapne and moit
auncpente of the boufe of the Serlonites , was
Eliafaph the fonne of Lael. And nder the we=
ppnge of the chpldzen of Geelon inthe tavernas
cle of ioptnefle was the babitacpon and the tent
the couerpnge thereof, andthebangpnee of the
Dooze of the tabernacle of ptictle and the ban=
gpnges of the courte, and the curtapne of p doe
of the courte: whpcbe is roundeaboute the Taz
bernacle andthe aultar., and the codes of it Fog
all tbe ferupce therof. And of Cabathcame the
kpnred of the Amramites,and the hinted of the
Sesebarites:the kpnred of the Hebzonites,and
the bpnredof the Dstelites. Thefe are the kpn-
redes of the Cabatbites. Andthenombzeof all
the males fromea monet) olde and aboue, was
epabt thonfande andfpre bunvzed,¢ thefe halt
hepe the thinges that ave tobe iepte inthe bolp
place. andthe kpured of the chyldzcen of Canary
all pptcheantie fourblpde of the Tabernas
cle. Ehecaptapne and molt auncpent of p houle
of the pned of the Cabathites, was Cilaphaitr
the fonne of Dsiel, ¢ bndet thep2 keppnge was
the arke,thetable,the candelitpcke,and the aul:
ters, and all the veffels of planctuarp that thep,
minpiter in, andthe vaple, and tobat foeuer be=
longed tothe minpltracpon therof. And Elea-
sar the lonne of Ravonthe preat was captapn
ouct allthecaptapnes cf the Leuites,and bad p €
ouerfpabte of chem that wapted Dpon the fan-
ctuarpe. AnDof Beraricame the kpneed of the
Padclites,andthe kpneed of the ulites. —
‘Chele are the Bpnredes of erari. auodthe
fumme of them accozdpnee tothe nombre of all
tiemales,frome a moneth olde and aboue was
fprethoufand and twobund2ed. Checaptapne
and the moft auncpent of thep2 boule that were
of the &pnred of B)erari,was surielthe onne of
ABbibael: andthele Mal pytche onthe nozthtpve
ofthe tabernacle. And vnder thecultodp of the
fonnes of Herari albe the bodes of the dwel-
lpng and the barres,ptllers and fockettes ther-
of all the beel therof,andall that ferueti ther
to:andtbeppllers of thecourterounde aboute,
witb tbep2 fockets, thep2 pypnnes andthep2 coz-
des. Wut onthefozefrontofthebabitacponbee _
fore thetabernacle of wptnefiecalkwarde hall
oleg and Aaron and pps fonnes preche and
wapte to kepethefanctuarp,andto kepe p chpl-
dzen of Flracll. And the traunger that com-
nieth nye, Halbe flapne. And the wholelumme
of the Leuites wbpche Woles and Aaronnom-
b2ed, at the commaundemente of the Lorde tho-
rowout thepz kpnecdcs(eucnalltpemates trom yp
amonct) olde andDaboue)wasx .rrii.thouland
And the Lozdelapde vuto Holes: sombre earring
alitbe fpzite bognep are males amonge the bpl
Haii


The offpres


15


Den of Ffeaell(from amoneth olde and.abouc)
and tabe thenomber oftbepznames. Andtbou
halte appopnte the Leuttcs tome fog Jamtde
Lozde)toz all the fpz Ee bozne of the pang of
apr PARE ne of the Leuites, fog ali the

palte gendzed of the cattel of the chpldzen of 3i
racl.And choles nombzed as the Lozd comaun
ded hpm,all the Fpatt bozue of the chplozen of FC
racli. And all the fp2ft boznemales reperied bp
thepenames(from a monefh olde and abouc,ace
cozdpnare tothep: nombee)wer-rrit. thoulanve
¢wobundzedand.reitt. Andthe Lozde fpake
‘punto Boles. faping:take the Leuites fo allthe
fp2ft boone of the chpldzcn of Zlrael, and theca-
tellofthbe Leultesfoz2thep2cattell, and the Le-
nites thalbe mpne. Jam the Lorde. And fo? the
ecbempngye of the two hundzed g.lrriii. (wbpch
aremotbenthbe Leuites tu thefpett bogne of the
chplozen of Flracl)tak Epuelpcles of enerp bead


ero.rrri. After the Wwepabt of the Sanctuarpe * the ipele
ze. rroia contepningttwentp palfepeng. And qeue the mo
SNEHI? gep wherwith the odde nombre of them is rede-


mcd vnto Aaronandbpsfonnes. And oleg
toke the redDempcpon monep of p oucrplus that
wrremothen the Leuites: of the fprfte bogne of
the chpldzen of Flracll toke be this monep: cuen
atboulandetbze bund2eD and. coh sepa after
the {pcle of the fanctuarp. And Moles qaue the
monep of themthat twereredemed, nto Aaron
and bys fonues , accozdpngeto the toozde of the
Lo2de,cucnas the Lovecomaunded ote.
Che. irit. Chapter. |


C
The offpres of the Leuites.


theron aconerpn
pede vpon it aclotbe that is altogether of pe-
lowefplke, and putintbebarresthevof. And
Dpontbhe ewe table, thep Hall fpzede abzoabde
acloth of pelotoc{plke, and put theron the dpl-
ipes, pones, flatpeces, and pots topowe with
and therethalbe bzeade theron continuallp: and
thep pallfpzede bpon them a couetpnge of pur-
ple, and couer the vs ob et lA ah ela
usftkpnnesand putinthebarrestherof. And
tbep all take aclotbe of pelotve {plte, and co-
ner the canbdelftpcke of lpgbt, wth biglampes,
tonges, andfnofers, and all the ople vellelles:
whicbtbhep occuppe about it, andtbep pall put
botbit,and all the veflell therof wprbina coue:
sponge of tarusfkpnnes, and put it bpona bar.

nd bpon the goldenaultar thep thal fpzede
a cloth of pelowe {plke,andcoucr it ith acoue-
rpngeot tarusfkpnnes, and put inthe barres


Hummeri,


thereof. Andthep hall take all the ehynges,
(wich thep occuppe to minpiter within the po-
lp place) and putaclothe of pelowe {pike Dpow
them, andcouer them with acouerpnegeok taxa
us lRpnnes,andput them ona barre.

And thep hall take awape the althes from
theanltar and fp.ede à purplecloth theron:and
put bponitall the vellels therofthat thep mp=
np iter titball: cuen the cole pannes,the flethbo
hes, the (houcls,thebatens,anbd the other vefiels
of the aultar,and thep tall {prede bpon itaco=
uctpnge of tarus [kpnnes,an’ put inthe barreg
ofit. Andwbhen Faron and fs forines baue
made an ende of couerpnge the holpe thynaes,
andalltbhe veffelles of the lanctuarp (agapntte
that the boofte remoue)then the fons of Cabath
Wal come in foz to beare, but thep Hal not touch
anp bolp thynge,leaft thep dpe. And this ts the
charge of the lonnes of Cabath inthe tabecna=
cleo upee su to the offpce o£ Eleazar the
fone rp tao tn ail Seale e ople foz
thelpabe,the fwete cenle , thedaplp meate offe=
rpnge, andtheanopntpnge ople, and the oucr=


(papt of alltbe tabernacle, and ofall that ther- |


ints, bothin the fanctuary and inall the vetfels
therof. Andthe Logdelpake puto @)o
Aaronfapinge: Pethall notoeflrope the trpbe
ofthe bpurcd of the Cabathites, frome amonge
the Leuttes. Wut thugdo puto them, that thep
mapelpuc and not dpe, when thep goo yntothe
nol bolpthpnges: Let Faron and pps fonnes
goo inandtaketbemdowne, to euerp onc after
igfcrupce,andatterbigcbarge. Wut letthent
notgoin,tofewbenthe bolp thmaesar op
vp, left thep bye. and the Lozdelpake vnto Bo
pees ye atte alfotbe fumme of thechpl«
dzen of Gerfon,thozowe out the boules of tpepe
fathers, ¢ thozotvout thepakpnreds : from.rrr.
pere andaboue, dutpll fpftp alt thou nombze
them, all tbat are able to go fozth totbetarre
Foz to Do ferupceintbe tabernacle of wptneiic .
And thigis the lerupcee of the kpnred of the Ger
fonptes,tolerueandtobeate. Thep pall beare
the curtapnes of the dwellpna, and theronfeof
the tabernacle of toptneffe, bps coucrpnge, and
the coucrpng of tarusfkpnnes, tbat is an bpeas
boue Dpon it,and the banging of the doze hich
istntbe Tabernacle of toptneffe: and the pan-
gpnges of the courte, and she bangpnge that ig
the entrpng in ofthe qate of thecourte round
aboute thedwellpngeand the aultar, with f co
bes, andalledeinftrumentes that ferue vnto th
anDalltbatismadefoztoferuetbepm. Actbe
mouth of Xaron and bis fonnes,dhal all the lera
upce of the chplozen of the Gerfonites be done,
inall theps charges and in all thep2 ferupcejand
pe Hall nombze ynto themallthep2 burdensto
keppe. And this is the lerupce of the kpnred of
thechplozen of Gerfon inthe tabernacle of wopt:
nele, andthep2 watcbe Hall be pnder thebande
of Ftbamar thcfonne of Daronthe preat. Jnd
thou thalte nomber the fonnes of erari after
thep2 kpnredeg and after the boufcs of thep2 fas
thers:from thpatp peres andaboue vnto fpftpe
alte thon nombze thems, cucrp onc tbatisable


tono


ofth t Lenites s


ofegand ¢


=—


ee i


oe


f

l4

í
an
i


h)


3 E i ia _ =


|
|


> Ceremonyes.


tog'd forth to the warre, todothe ferupcee of the
Tabernacle of witnelle. And this ts the charge
that thep mufte wapte bpon, accordpngetoall
thep2ferupce in the tabernacle of wptnetfe. Che
lozdes of the dwellpnge, with the barres, ppl-
lerg and fockettcs therof, and the ppllers that
areroundeabousctbe courte, with thep2 locket:
teg ppnneg andcozdcs, and wpthall the intru-
nicntcs of 1t,fo2 all thepzferupce. And bp name
peibalireken thetbinges that they mult wapte
ppon to beare. Chisis cbelerupce of the & pnre-
des of thefons of Merari accozdpng toallthep2
ofpce in the Tabernacle of wptnelie vnder the
bande of Jthamar the fonne of Aaron the pret.
And G)olesand Aaron andthe Bennie of
the multprudenombzed the fonnes of the Caba
tiites,after thep2 kpneedes andboutes of thepz
fathers from thpatp pere and aboue unto Epfep,
all that tere able to go Fozth tothe warre,todo
ferupee inthe Tabernacle of wptuetle. And the
nombers aE themtbozowe ont thepsekpnredes
wrrettootboulande, feuen bundzed andfpftre.
& bis is the nombee of the bpnredes of Cadath:
namely, all that mpgbht do lerupce in the taber-
nacle of wptnefle, which oles and Aaron dpd
nombze accozdpng tothecomaundement of the
Lorde bp the bande of Noles. Cheleare p nom:
bees of the Connes of Gerfon thozowe out thep2
kynredes and boules of thep2 fathers, from thir
tpe pere vp bunto EpEtpeall that were able togo
fozth tothe warre,foz todo ferupce inthe taber
nacle of wptnefle. And thenombees of tbem tho
rowe out thep2 kpnredes, andboutes of thepze
fathers, were two thoulande {pre bundzed and
thyztve. Chis ts the nombze of the kpnredes of
the fonnes of Gerfonof alltbat bpd ferupee tn p
tabernacleof wptnefle, wbiche Woles and Va-
rondpd nombze accozbprge tothecomimaunde=
iment ofthe Lowe. And thelearethe nombres
of thckpnreds of the fonnes of Derarithozow-
out thepzkpnredes and boufes of thepztathrrs
from thpztp pere wp onto Epftpe: all that wente
foxth tothe warre, and {erued in the tabernacle
of wptnes. andthe nombzes ef them after their
Epneedes were thze thoufand and two bundzed.
@bhysistbhelamme of the kpueedes ot the fons
of <a)erartt, tobtche Mofes and Faron nombzed
accowernge to the or prea the Lorde, bp p hand
of Woles. Andfoa}lthenombees of the Lenis
tes, which oles, Aaron and the Lozbes of at-
racll nombzed,afterther2 kpnreds and boutpol-
des of thep2 fathers, from thpztpepere vp vnto
fifty euerp one thatcameto do bis offpce and fer
upceandtobeare bys burthenin the tabernacle
of wptnes:were( oben thep were nombzed) wit
thoufande fpuebundzedand.Irer. Accopdpnge
tothe wove of the Loydedyd( Aaron) nomb2e
them bp the banve of eles , euerpe one actol-
apne to thepzferupce and charge, taccozdpng
to thep2 olfpces:as Loine chmaunded Holes.
gic ve uge ei e. rbe clen(pngeof{pane.

the lawe nf the fpr frutes and of getoutpe.
sag (2d the Lode {pake bnto & ofeg, faping
JANE -ommaunde thechpnldzen of Jiracllthat


AN debepxput out of f bofte,cucrp leper cue:


$


fumeri.


led bpon a foule. Hoth male and female thall pe
put ont:cuen oute of the bofte Hall pe put them,
that tbep dcfple notthe tentes amonge which F
dwell. Andthe chyldzen of Flraelldpd lo, and
put them out of the boft,cuen as the Lozd fpake
pnto ofca, lo dpd the chpldzen of Flraell.
Andthe Lozde (pake unto Boles , fapinge:
[peake vnto the chpldzen of Flracll : whether it
bexman 02 woman. PE tbep paue cOmpttedan


{pnne that aman doth,¢ bauetrefpaced agatntt Ceti DiS


the Lo2d, that foule bathdone ampile: Cherfoze
tbep hall knowledge thep2efpnne Ai ip
haucdone,and let bpm rettoze agapne the hurte
that be path done inthe bole, and putte the fptte
parte of it moje thereto , and gene tt unto bpm
pom be bath trefpatlecd agapuite .


Wutand pl there benotamantoreLore the .


butte vnto,no2 a kpniman of bis, lette tie tref-


pace be made good nntothe Lozde,andit Halbe B


the preattes,belpde the ram of the attonement,
wherbp an attonement albe made fo: bpm.
And cuetp peucoffering that is made of thepelp
thpuges of thechplozen of Flracll whychethep
bzpng nto ppecit, thalbe bis, and euerp mans
balowed thpnaes tall be his:and what fo cuce
anp man qeuery the pret, it (halbe bis. And the
Lode ipate wnto G)oles,fapinge: Speake bus
tothe chplozen of Flraell, andfape wnto them.
Jfanp mang wpe goatpoe ¢trelpace agapntt
ppin,to that another man lpe with ber fletplp, t
it be bpd trom the epes of ber hulbande, ¢ isnot
come tolpagbt that peis defpled,andthere is ue
wptneile agaputt ber,neptber the taken with p
maner, and thelpzcte of qeloulpe commeti v-
pon ppm, fo that dets qeioule ouct bys wpfe,
Whiche isdefpled: oz prebe(pzete of gelouly coe
ppondbpm, lotbatheis qeloule ouer ips wyte,
Wpicheis pet wndcfpled: chen let the man bapng
bis wpfe onto the prcatt, and bypnge pth Der
anofferpng foz ber : the tenth parte of an Cpha
af barlpe micale,butiet bpm put none ople bpon
it, noz put frankencens theron :fo2 itis an ofie-
rpnge of geloulp an offering foz aremebzaunce
canfpnae thelpnnctobethough
the peat pall bzpnge ber, andlet per


before the Looe and let hpmxtahe bolp rates Antia


inan ertben deffell, ando e
floozc of the babitacpon, and put it intothewa
ter. And let the preatt (et the woman befoze the
Logde,and pncoucr the womans head, and put
thesmemozpal of p offerpng inber bandes which
is the qcloulp oferpng, andthe preat tal baue
bptter and curfed water tn hts bande, the pre
(hall charge ber, andfaye vnto the woman, VE
nomanbane lpen wptb the, neptber batte gone
alpde to vnclennefle toithout thp bufband, thers
hauec thou uo bare of thpsbprter ¢curled was
ters. Butand pf thou alte gone alpbebebpnde
thpne bulvande,and art defy led, and lome other
man Path lpen withthe befpde thpne bufcande,
(andthe peeatk hall chargethe woman w'th an
boarpblecurfe,and the preat Hal fape vuto the
Woman) the Lorde make thetobe anabbomina
cpon and a cfe amongethe people: ee e

Lobe


Fol. clbij.


cp one thathath anpfluc,and whofocuer ts defp Les. rigs


t bpon. £


3 Lorde dothe make thp.thperotte, and thp beilp
fwell: C befecurted waters gointothe bowels
of the. that thep mape make thp bellp hwel and
tbp thpe rotte and let the woman faye, Amen,
Amen. Andlet the preat weptethele curles:
And when thep be clented,let hym catte them in
to bptter waters and gene the woman thole bit
tecvandcutled waterstodzpnke, that thole cur-
fed.and bptter waters mape enter into ber. And
then the Pyeatt halltaketbe qcloulp offrynge
out oftde Womans band and waue tt before the
| L020¢,and bopng it buto theaultar and p pze
| {pall takean dandfull of tbe offerpng fozame=
| mopall and burnett pponthe aultar,and then

make the womandapnke the water: and wben

be bathe madethe woman dgpnkethe waters,

(pt the be defpled and bauctrelpafled agapntte

ber bulbande:) then tall the curled and bytter

Waters To theo ber,and ber bellp Hall fwel,and

ber tpe thall rot, and the woman Halbe a curfe

amongeherpeople. And pthe woman benot

Ocfpled butis clean, the (all baue no harme, but

allconceaucandbeare. Chysisthelatweot

gcloufpe, when a topfe goeth alpde bebpnde ber
butbande , and isdefpled, oz wben the {pacte of
gelovolpe cOmeth Dpona manandhebepna e=
lowe oucr bps vopfe, Doth bapna ber before the
Lorde. And the zeat Hall doaccordpnee vn:
foallebyslawe , and theman (yall be qpitleffe,
aud the woman pall beare bee fpnne. -
~ CTbe.wi. Chapter.
Tbe lawe of abapnence, The biedpng of the people.
4 Boo, wa) the Lorde pake vnto Hofes,

Bee dey HMapinge :-{peake pnto the chplozen
Masra © y Ol zlracll,and Tape pntothem:wbé
bey ears CDer man oz woman doth feperate
aS Ea them feluesto yotbea Dowe of an
abitepner,and appopne thëfelueg vnto F Lozde
be Wall feperate bym Felfe fromxwpneg trong
Depnke, and hall dipnie no tpreagre reyes
2 Of ftrongedzpuie,noz Halldgpnte what toc-
ueris preficd ont of grapes:¢ thal cate no fretbe
grapes nepthee pet dzped. Aslonge as bis abitp
nence cndureth, hallheeatenothpug ý is made
of the vpne tre, 02 of thecarnels, 02 of the pufke
of the grape. Andaglongeas be boweth and ig
feperared, there thallnorature come pon bys
beade:but ontpl his dapes be oute, inthe which
3 befeperaterh bpm felfe ynta the Lozde, be Mal-

be holp and Hallet p lockes of bis heare growe

Aslonge ashecontecrateth bymlclfevnto the

Lode be fhalcome at nodead odp: Hethal not

niake bpm felfe pneleane at the Death of bisfa-


D


qud, titi.a
Amog,ti,d.


bowe of theabftpnence of bis God is vpcn bps
beade. Dll thedapes of bis abftpnence he is holp
bntothe Lorde. And pf tt fo2tunethat anp man
bp chaunce dpe fodenlp befoze him, the beade of
bis abftpnence balbe defpled, and he thal thane
Ter rbi, d * Yis Dedde the dapes of bis clenfpnae:cnen the
fcuenth dape be pal thauett. And the epabtdap


ons to the paca, before the doze of theta berna-
cle of wptnefie. And the preatk thal offer the one
Foz fpnne, andthe otber 02a burntofecpnae,


umeri,


ther mother bzotber,o? iper: becauletbatthe |


Hethallbapngetwoturtelsorztiwovongeppae- D


Fig


"e M


makeanattoneinent foz bpm as concecupnge
befpnned bpona foule, ¢ wall balote bis bea
the fame dape, and be pall confecrate bpm felfe
onto the Lozbe(thetpme of bis abftpnence and
Mall bsyngealambe ofa pere olve ee hates
but the dapes that were befoze are lott, becaule |
bigabffinence was defpled. This isthelaweof € |
tne abifepnee. when the tpine ofbpsabitpnence
t3 out, be Halbe brought onto the doze of theta ee,
bernacle of woptneffe, and he hal bapnae pig of:
fetpnae bnto the Lozde: anbe lambeofa peare
olde without blempih Foza burnt offerpng,and.—
a the lambe of a pere olde wit out blempipe fox
fpnne,a ram without blempthe alfo fo? a peate-
offetpng, anda balket of fwete breade enen ca-
kes of fpnefloure mpnglep topth ople, and waz |
fers of fwetebzeade anopnted with ople , wyth :
thep2 MN ote dra

And the Deak tall bzpnge bpm be o2e the
Lode, and offer his {pnofferpng anp bis burnt-
offerpng and pallo ttberam fo: apeaceoffe-
tpnge onto the Lozde, with the balket of finete
bzeade, and the pzeaft ball offer alfo his meate-
olferpnge and bisdgpnkeofferpng. And be thal
{hauethe bead of the abftepner inthe dove of tbe
tabernacle of wptnefle: euen the bead o bis ab=
hence, and Call take the heare of his lover head i}
and put it in Ce fpze, Wbiche is under thepeates ~ |
offerpnge. And tbe Prea thalltakethefonen — ]
thulder of the ram,and one fivcte calse out of the
bathet, and one fwete wafer alfo, and put theni
bpon the bandes of the abftepner (after bebath
auen dis abltepnence of and the W2ealte Hall
om (Cake Chemofhpm,andywauethembefozep Lorde
And thelebolp thinges thalbe the preattcs with *
the thauchgettand beue fhulder and then pabitt
ftepner mape dapnke wpne. Chis is thelawe of
the abiiepner wbiche bath vowed bis opge q
pnto the Lozdefoz bis confecracpon: Ee pes
thole thypnges that pis bande canget accezdin
tothe bowe whiche be vowed, cuen fo he multe
do after thelatwe of hisabftpnence. And f 1.020
[pake onto Boles, faping:(peake puto aron
and bis fong fapinge : of this ple pe Hal bicfle |
thech an of Afrael and lape Dntothem.

Ehr 02de blefle the and kepe the,

T e korde mabe big face b he bpontheand
bemerepful vnto p. The Load lyfte yp hiscoit-
tenaunce Dpon the,andgeye Ppeace. Andthey
{hall putimy name vpontpecbplozen of Z{racl,
and 3 wpll bleffe them.

@ Che. vei. Chapter,
€ Zhe offerpnge of the Lozves ano heades of Ffrael. (
Rae, weave RD tt foztuned in that dape, toben g |
bre Jee cents * 2) OfC8 bad full fet bp the habita exo. irt;

ase Sapon and anopntcdand fanctifped
ep wy tf, and all the apparel therof, ý anl

Shite edie ad teralfoandallthe veflelles therok,

and bad anointed them and fanctifped them, tht

the pepnees of Siracll heades ouer thebhoutes of $
thep2 fathers which were the Logdes of the trp- '
es tanding th thep2 offpces, offered g brought `i
thepz facrifpce befoze the 1.020: {pre concred cha |
tettes and tiwelueorch:one charet fo: tiwo Loz
deg, and Fog one an oxe and thep beoughtetbem


befoze
X


kt


E


Offerpnges.


befc2e the habitacpon. Andthe Lorde {pake vn-
to Bolesfapinge: take it of them,p thep mape
be todo thelerupce of the tabernacle of wptnes
and thou Malte qeue them wntotbe Leuttes, to
cucrp man accozdpng unto bis offpce. And Go
les tokethe chatetsanbd theoren, and gaue thé
Wnto the Leuttes :twocharettes andtbhzeoren
be gaue vutothelonnes of Gerlon accozdpnge
bunto thep2 oftpce. And foure charetsand epabt
oxeu be qaue wnto the Lonnes of )erari(accoz=
dpnge wuto thepze offpces) vnder the bandeof


fum.titid Fthamar thefonne of Harontbe peeatt. «Wut


vinta p fonnes of Cabath be gaue none, becaule
thep bad bpon them the offpce of bolp thpnaes,


Wwhicbetbep opa beare npon thulvers.


3B .. Andthe pepnces offered fog the dedicatpng


foz the aultac(in p Dapetbatit tas anopnted )


JQunceri.


ofa pere olde fota burntofferpng.an begote foz
fpnne:and( foz a peaceofierpng two oren, fpue
rammes, tpue begotes, and fpuelambes, of one
petcolde. This was the offerpng of Elisur the
fonne of Sedeur. Che fyftedape, Selumictthe
fonne of suri Sadat, captapne of thechpldgenot
Simeon offered. Dis qpfte was alpluer char=
ger of an Dundzed ¢ thpztp {peles,afpluer boul
of fcuentp (pcles:atter the (ycle of the fanctuarp
and thep were botbe full of fpneflourempnaled
Wit) ople foz a meat offering: a golden (pone of
tentpcles full of ceng : a bullocke aram, alabe
of a pete olde foz a burntofleryng:an beote Foz
{pnne : and foz a peaceofferynge two oren,fpue


_ tames,tpue begotes.fpuclambes of apere olde.


This toas the oferpnge of Selumiek the fonne


Sol.rlbrij.


She otter
rpng of gė
lumuict.


am


ofsurt Dadat. Chelprtedape,Eliafaph f fon D


of Dequel captapne of the chpldzen of Gav, of- Torote:
fered. apts gpfte was a fpluer charger ofan bun tray"
died and tbpztp (peles,alpluccbouleofleuentp
{pcles aftce the fpcle of the fanctuarp, both full


aud bzought thepz tacrifpces befoze the aultar.
| And the Logdelapde vnto Holeg: Cheprpu-
| ces (ball bzpnge thep2e offerpnges, euerp dape

one p2price, to: the dedtcatpnge of theaultar.


xbeote: Andlo onthe fp2tdapedpd Nabeffon thefonne pe cone Douce MEELED wed ople foz & meatof-
ring of Ra of Aminadad of the tepbe of Judaofterbysta- ferpnge:agoldenf{pone of ten{peles fullof ceng
eens cettpce: AnDbis offerpngewasalpluercharger abullocke,a ramme,a lambe of apere olde,foz a


burntofterpngeanbegote foz(pnne. Andfora

peace offerpng tivo oren,fpuerammes,fpuehe=

gotes.fpuclambes of onepercolde. This teas

theotterpuge of Eliafapb thefonne of Deguel.
Ehelcuenth dape, Elifama thefon of Ami- Tbe ote


ofanbund2ed and thpatpelpcles: afpluce boule
of rr. Cycles after the wepabt of the Sanctua-
tp: andthep tere both full of fpne toheten fon-
, er, mpngled wyth ople Foza meate offerpnge: a
` fpone of ten fpcles of gold, ful ofceng,a bullocke
| aram,alambe of a pere old fo? a burntoferpng


1
l a
=


æ t


is


The ofe:
ting ofma
thanacl.


g olde. Chis wast


The coffe:


an be gote foz a {pnofferpng:anbd(fo2 a peaccot=
ferpnge)two oren,fpuerammes,fpuchegotes,
and fpne lambes o€ a pere olde: this was p gpft
of Pahelion thefonok Aminadab. Che feconde
dape Nathanael, che fonne of suar,captapne o-
uer Slachar dpd offer: And he offred Foz bis npr
a piyer charger of anbundzed and thpztye {p=
cleg:& fpluer boule cas aah atter the fp
cleofthefanctuarp:botbfuloffpne fl oure mpn:
gled vd ole Foz a meatoferpng : a golden fpone
of.x.fpcles,fullofcens:a bullocke,aram,alabe
of a pere olde forza poet Si andan berote
foz lpnne : and(foz a peaceotferpnge)two oren,
Epue rammes, fpuebegotes,fpuelambes of one
pere olde. Chis was the offerpne of Nathanael
thefonneof3uat. Thetbpzdedape, Eliab the
fonne of Belon captapne oft ae of sabu:-
lon Dpd offer. And his ypfte was:a {pluerchar-
get of ai bundzed 4 thy atp fpeles:alpluer boule
of fcuentp Cpclesatter at ha of thelanctuatp
and both were full of fpne flourempngled with
ople ee ameatofferpnge: a goldenfpone of ten
Cycles full of cens: a bullocke,aram,alambe of
a pere olde fo2 a burnte ofterpnge:an be qote foz
(pnne : and(fo2 a peacetterpnge two oren,fpue
zammies,fpue begotes, Epuclambes of one pere
ye offerpng of Eliab the fonne
bdape, Elisur the fonne of


of elon. Che fo


rpng of c- SDedeurcaptapne of thecbplozen o£ Ruben dpd


ud captapne of thechpldzen of Spbratin, ofred, He ig


And bis lacrifpce wasg a fpluer charger of anda
dzcdand thpatp (peles:a Cp luer boule of fenent

{pcles: after thefpele of the fanctuarp, both full
of fpne flourempugled with ople,fo2 ameatof=
ferpnge a golden {pone of ten {pcles, full of ceng
abullocke,aramme,alambe ofa pere olde foza
burntoficrpnge : an begote foz fpnne, and fora
peaccotierpng ttoo oren,fpuerammes, fpue pe-


goteg fpuelambegofapereolde. Chis was the
offerpng of Elifama,the fonne of Xmind. be A otez
epgbtdape, offered Gamaltel the fonne ofpe- Hrs otsa


dazur, the captapne of the chpldzen of Wanaf-
fe. Bnd his offerpng was:a {pluer charger of at
Dundzed and thpatpe [pcles: alpluce boule of fe=
uentp {pcles after the fpcle ofthe Sanctuarpe
both full of fpne flourempngled wtth ople foz a
meatoferpnae: a golden {pone of ten {pcles,tul
of cens:a bullocke,a ram, a lambe of a pereolde
fo2 a burnte offerynge:an begote foz fpnne: and
foza peace offerpnge two oxett, fpue rammes,
fpue begotes,fpue lambes of apere olde. Thig
was the offcrypnge of Gamaliel the Conne of Be


dazur. Chenpnthdape, Xbidanthelonne of xe otte-


Gedeonicaptapne of f chpldzen of WenFJamin rpng oft


offered. Andbis apfte waga lpluer charger of
an bundzed and EP HEP (pcles :afpluet boule of
Irr.f{pcles, after the {pele of the fanctuarpe both
full of fpne foure mingled with ople Foz ameat
ofterpng:a golden {pone of. x. fpcles,full of ceng


zur. offer. Andbisgpttewasalpluerchargerofan abullocke,a ramme,alambeof one pere old foz
bundzed andtbpetp (pcles:a fpluer boule offe- a burntofferpng: an be gote foz fpnne:andfo2a
i uentp{pcles, after the fpycleof pfanctuarp,and peaceoferpnge two oret, fpue rammes, fpue be


ebep were both ful of epne foure mpngled with


ople fora meatofferpnge : agolden {pone of ten


fycles full of ceng:a bullocke,a ramme,a lambe


t


*
a,


gotes,fpuelambes of onepere olde. This was


the offerpnge of AbidantbefonncofGedeon. =
The tenth tape: Ahteser the LonneofAm- ingot ade
i : mi Sava?


“ae


$


be offe-


Ceremonyes


ini Hadat, captapne of the chptdren of Danof-


fered. Andhtsofferpnae wasalpluercharger —
ofan bhundzed and thpatpetpeles: alpluerboule |
of feuentp fpelegafter the {pele of thefanctuarp
both fall of fyne floure mengled witb ople foz a
imcatoFerpnge: a golden (pone of tenfpeles full


of cens:a bullocke,aram, alambe ofa pere olde
fora burnte offerpnge: anbeqote Foz fpnne:and
for a peace offcrpnge two oren, Fyne ramines ,


fpue begotes,fpuelambes of apere vlde. Chis


was the offerpnge of Abteser the lonne of Jm-


= mt Sadai.Checleuenth dape, Dagiel the fonne
ring ofa OF Devan: captapne of the chplozen of Aler of-
ar OF fered. And bys ofterpnae was: a fyluer charger


the ofe
ring of abt


ta,


of aptae and tbpztp fpeles: afpluer boule
of feuentp tpcles after the ipele of tbe lanctuarp
both full of fpne floure mpngled with oplefoza
meatofferpnge:a goldenipone of tenfpileg,full
of cens a bullocke,aram, a lambe ofa peret olde
fo2 a burnte offcrpiige an pegote for fpnne : and
fo2 a peace offerpnge : two oren , fpucrammes,
Fyuc beqotes,fpue lambes of one pere old. Chis
was the offering of Dagiel tbe fonne of Deran,

Thetwelueth dape , Abirathefonne of Œ-
nan, captapne ofthechplozen of Rephebaliofe
fered. Andbis offerpnge was:a {plucr charger
of anhundz2ed and thpetpe peleg: alpluer boule
of. Ire {pcles after the {pele of pfanctuarp, both
fulloftpnefloure mpngled with ople fozameat
offerpng:a golden {pone of.r.{peles, full of cens
a bullocke, a ram, a lambe of one pere olde foz a
burnte offerpnge:an pegote fozfpnne: and fo2 a
peaccofterpnge two oren,fpueramines,fpuc be
gotes,fpuelambes of one pereolde. Chis was


the offerpng of Abtra,thefonne of nan.


This was the dedicacpon of theaultar inp
dape when it was anopnted : nto the whpche
was brought of thepapnces of Fracil, twelue
chargers of (pluer ttelue [plucr boules twelve
fpones of golde: euerp charger contapnpnae an
hund2cd and thpetp tpcles of fpluer,euerp boul,
ire. And all p [pluer veflel contapned two thou:
fande and foure buadzed (peles after the (pele of
thefanctuarp. And the qgoloenlpones were.rii.
full ofcens contapning.x-fpcles a pece after tbe
fpcle of thefanctuarp-fo that all the molde of the

ponies, has an bund2ed and twenty ipcles.

Allthe bullockes fo2 the burnte offerpnere :
Were tWwelue , erammestivelue, the lambes
ofa pere olde tiweluc, with themeatofterpnee:
andthe beqotes fozfpnnetwclue. Andall the
orenfoz the penceofferpng, torte rriiit.the ram:
mes {prtp, the beqotes. lr. thelambes of apere
oloclprtp. Chis was the dedicacpor of tbe aul-
tar after that tt was anopnted. Jnd when 40
{es was gone into the tabernacle of wptites » to
Cpealie With bpm, be bearde pvopce of one {pea:
kpnge punto bpmtrom of the mercye feate, that
Was bpon the arke of wpenes bet wene the two
chernbing,and betalkedwitbbpm .


@ The. viii. Chapter.


q. be ozder of chetampes, Fhe forme of Fred!
HE pecteuspugeand ogra ofthe Leiter ay canbeipcde,


umert,


. fr onte of the candelftpcke. 2nd Haron bpd cuen


poera 125 the Lozdelpake wnto Mofes, B
TARRA Capinge:(peake vnto Xaron tfape
JAY ontobpm : + tohen thon putte on Sro.sroa
ah thc lampes, tbe fame feuenlampeg
mad) pall gcuclpghte totvarde the fore-


Pus


—
dial A a == ma
— ee as el a .


fo,and lIpgbted the lampes totwarde p foze front

of thecandelitpche, as the Lozdecommaunded pe
Spoles and rie tone of thecandeltyckewag ~~. }
fàl =


omake tbem felueg cleane. — . i
Then lcttetbem takea bullocke with bys x5
meatofterpnge:euen fprefioure mpngled wpth ;


fpnne. Andiwbentho


befoze the tabernacle of wptneffe, thou palt aa


[=]
Te

7

>
=>
ra

pu
o

©
z%

è

2


PE
=
cr
[=]
kaa
ji
=
=
ei
7%
S
=
EF
ka
Tp
y
a
per
HF
Da
L=]
ET
E
jac
=
=
5


that ¥lnote etil ai rss bozncin the lande of |


that the Lozde cOmaunded oles concernpnae
f Lutes senen fonpbehe chplozenot Aral
| ynie


— Levemonyes


Lito them. And the Leuites were purifped and


- walthedthep; clothes. And Maron wauedthem


srum. iii e


M@ro.tli.a. [eee
nu.frotie (eas |
Diepoia Ea :


befozethe Lozde, anBmade an attonemente foz
thent,andclented them. After that went the Le-
mites in todo thep2 fecupce inthe Cabernacie of
wptnelte, before Aaron and bpsfonnes: asthe
Lozbde had commaunded <)ofes concerning the
Lcuttes,cuento they dpd wuto them.

_ And the Lorde fpake vnto rf posed tes SF
this ts tt that belongerh wuto the Lenites: *frd
EKV. pere Dptoarde thep Hall goin,tomapte v-


ponebetecupce of the tabernacle of titnes,and


rom the age of Epftpe pere, thep thalceafle wap
tynge ppon the fecupee therof, and al ferueno
moze : Dut Mall minp Eer onto thep2 bzetbzen in
the tabernacle of toptnes, to wapte, but Malda
no moze lerupee; hus therfore Mhaltethou doo
wutotbe Leuptes tntbepzewatche.


CChe.tr-Chapter.
Cove pateouer, ofthe ionin,
=m $30 the Lozd fpake bnto Gofes in
yond the serie of Hitiay,in p fir
AW Moneth of p feconde pere,aftertbep
3| ¥Were come out off land of gapt
eeil] (apne: lette thecbpldzen of Firael
otter pafleouer th bpstealon : enen the Fourtene
dape ofthis monet) at euen lette bpm kepe it in
bis fealon, accozdpnge toalltbeceremonpeg of
it, and accosbpngetoall pmanerstherof.aAnd
£bofes pake wntothe chplozen of Fracll, that
they hulde offer pafleouer,¢ thep offered pale-
ouct the fonrtene dape of the fpzite monet) at e-
ucn tin the wplbdernefic of Sinat, accozdpuge to
allthat the Lozdecommaundcd Holes, etena


3 Dpdthechpldzeno£ Zracll.


Andcertapnmen were defpled bpon p foule
of aman, that thep mpgbt not ofer paflcoucr p
faine bape. And they came before <t)ofes and


- Faronthelamedape. Andthemenlapde vnto


| deasa ipa DARE yA EPEAN EERE A A
o2e are we kepte backe that wemape not offer


- an shld he the Lozde inthe due feafon,


‘tro. fiig.
3, obn.rir.t


È


€


- caulebebgoughtnot the oferpnge


amonge pchpldzen of Zlraele And
pnto them:
the Lozde toll commaunde concernpnge pou.

And the Lorde (pake yuto Boles, eee


p:
[peake vnto the chpldzen of Firael and faye: DE


anp itiah amonge pou ozpourcbildzenafterpou


tape farre from you , and wpll offer pafleoner
vnto the Lozde:thefourtene dave of thefeconde
nionetp at euen let them oferit and cate tt with
fivete becad and lotbze Herbes:lette them leaut
none of it bnto the moznpnge * noz bzeake anp
bone oftt : But accozdpugeto all p opdpnaunce

of the paflcouer, let them offer it, |
wuttheinman tat is cleanc ¢is not ina four:
nep and yet wasneclpa cnt to offer Palleoucr:
tiefamefoule Hall perpe from bis people.bee
ofthe Lorde


be bncleane bp the realonofa ioe at the


` inbdtsduefeaton,that man mall beare bis fynne


4nd pla fraunger dwelamonge pou,and wpl
offer aflleouce bnto the Lorde, accozdpngeto
the o2dpnaunce of pafleoucr andmaner therof,


Aumtri.


be Hall oRer itthud Pe Halhaueonelawe both
foz the fraunger, andfozbpmthat was borme
at home inthe lande.


Ft the lame dape that the Cabernacle was erov.r1.c°
reared bp, axcloude couered the babitacpon, tid


which waga tabernacle of the wptnelle: andat
euen there wag Spon the þabitacion agit were
the Pullawee fpze vntpll the moznpnee.
ott wasalwape,thecloudz coueredit bp day
anDebe {pmilptude of fpze bpnpabt. And wher
thecloude wastaken Yp from of the tabernas
cle, then the chplozen of 3fraelliourneped: and
where the cloude abode, therethe chpldzen of 3f
tacll pptched tbey: tentes. At the mouth of the
Lode thechplozen of Jiraell tourneped, and at
tbe moutbe of the Lozdetheppptched. Andag
longeas the cloude abode vpon the babitacpon
thep lape ffpll: and whentbeclouve tarped {Epil
pe geh the Dabitacponlonge tyme, the chpldzeit
of 3fracll kepte the watcbe of the Lozde, ¢ iour
hepednot. Bnd tt chaunccdthat whenehecloude
abode a fewe dapes bponthe habitacpon,thep
abode inthepze tentes, accozdpnee tothe come
maundement of the Lozde:and thep turneped al
fo at the commaundement of the Lorde. D
Andit happened that when the cloude abode
Dpon the abitacpon frome cuen vuto the moz-
ning, twas taken bp inthe moaning, tien the
turneped. Cl bether it was bp day o? dp ngit
the cloud teas také yp thep inrneped. Dz pt the
cloude tarted tivo apes o2 amoneth,o2a longe
fealon bponthebabitacpon, andremapned ther
on the chplozen of 3fraclabode pll, and iurnep
cd not. A nd affone as the cloude wastaken vp,
thep turneped. At themoueh of che Lozde,thep
refiedinthetentes,and at the commaundement
at the n De thes cave Ð, heppa ge the watch
at THe comaundement of the Lod
bp the bande of <3) ofes. ae
CTThe.r. Chapter.:


raoe Lanog wPibeaetabae EANA


ARIN SI
ROS


i"


e


2


the. Wut pf pe trompe,the boites that ipe onthe
ceait pues (hal gofozwarde. And pf pe trompe
the feconde tymic, the Hotte thatlpeti) on Plouth
(pde thal take thepz toznep:fe2 they Baltremp
when thep takethepriomepes. Wut when the
congreqacpon isto be gathered together, thep
{pall blower onlp,and not trompe. And thefon-
negof Faron the Breat thall bloive tit) tiep
trompettes, and petallbauethepmasalawe
fo2 cuct in poure qeneracpong .


And pipe goto Warre mpourlandeagapnk 28


qt pour


Folli,


The lyluer


pourenempes that bere ponpe Hal blow with
the trompets,and pe Hall be remembzed betoze
the Lozbepour Godtobe lenin ag) Cope ents
mpeg. lio in the Dape of hoy gladneffe,and in


pout featt dapes, and inthe begpnnyng of pour


_ - monethes, pe (hall blotbe the trompettes once


pour burnt facrifpces and peaceofferinges,that
thep map bearemebzaunce foz pou betoze pour
od. Jamthe Lorde poure God. — l

And it came topalletbetwentpthdape ofp
feconve moneth in the fecond pere,that p cloude
was taken vp frome of the babitacpon of topt=
nefe. And the chpldzen of Flrael toke thep2 to2=
nep out of the deferte of Sinai,and p cloude re-
ited inthe topldernefie of Wharan. andthe fp2tt


toke thep2ioanep at the mouth of tbe Lode bp —


the bande of ofeg. Fn thefpz place went the
ftandarde of f bosit of Juda,accozdpng to their


armpes:wbotecaptapne was Nahaon plone prow ‘


of Aminadab. And ouer the book of the tribe of
the chpldgé of Flachar, was Nathanael pfonne
of suar. And ouerthe hoofk of the trpbe of the
chplozen ofsabulon,was Eliab the fonne of He
lon. And the babitacpon was taken Dovwne:and
tie fonnes of Gerfonand Werari wente forthe
bearprae the habitacpon.


¢ And p hook of Ruben went forth with they:


ffandarband armies, whole captapne was Eli:
surthefonne of Sedeur. And ouertbe hook of
the trpbe of thechpldzen of Simeon was Sala
mielthefonne of Suri HSaddai. And ouerthe
boot of the tribe of the chplozen of Gad was
€liafaph the foneof Dequel. Che Cahathites


alilo went forward ¢baretbefanctuarp,andthe a


otber bpd fet vp f habitació agapnft thepcame
Andthe tandard of the boot of the chplozen of
€ phan went forth accozding to thepz armies
foholecaptapne was Elifama p fone of Amiud
And ouer the hooft of thetrpbe of the fonnesot
)anafie, was Gamaliet the fonne of Bedasur.
And oucep boot of ptrpbe of the (anes of Wen
Jamin was Abidan the fonne of Gedcont.
And the andard of the poof of the chplozen
of Dancame forth (baupnge all the hoottes to-
gether ) thozotout thepz armypes: whofe rap-
tapne was Abiesertbefonne of Ammi Daddat
And oucr the hoott ofthetcpbe of the oran of
ar wes patel? fone of Ochzam. And ouer
theboolt of the trpbe of the chplozen of eph-
thalp,toas Abira p fonne of End. Chele are the
toznepes of the chpldzen of Ffrael thozowout
thep2armpes:and thus the booftes remoued.


D And Poles flapde yntohobabthelonne of


Raquel the Dadianite:which was Woles fa-
ther in lawe:wWwe go into the place: f wbpche the
Lozdelapde:F pl gene it pou. Come thou ther


`- foze With bg, we top! Bothe good:fo2 P Lorde


bath pzomifed good bnto Zlracl. And peantiwe
red pin: J wpll not qo:but tpl departeto mpne
pwwnelande tromp kpared.Welapde:Dbnaype,
leaue vs not:fozthouknowelt our manttons in
the Wwpldernefle:t thou batt beneto vs in Meade
of epes. And ifthou go with bs loke what good
neflethe Lorde thewetp vnto vs the fame wpll
Ye lpewoe pntothe .


FQumett.


And they departed from the mount of f Luzd,
thre dapes ioznep : ethe arke of p tetament of p
Lod went before them in the thze dapes toznep,
tofearche out areftpng place fo: them. And the
Lo1de made a (hadowe foz them thozowe the
cloude bp Day, wohé thep went out ot thetentes.

And it foztuned, that whan thearcke wente
forthe poles fapde : * Rprle vp Lozde, andlet
thpne encintes be (catered: and let them that
bate the, fipe befoze the. And When the arke re-

ed, befawe: Returne D Lozde Duto the manp
thoufandes of Ffracl, |
C'The.ri. Chapter.

C The people murmurcth. Thep delpre fiethe. Dheplothe

manna. Ehe twaurring fapth of Moles. Toe 107d beuibrth

the burden of motes to Ceuentp of $ aunciétes,etbep pzez

poelp. gt rapneth quapics.2 be tich raueners are punpihep
| erg 2d it Coztuned, that wobaxthe peds
Eai ple DpBWickedip, it wasa Difplea=
hike Vera iurcin the cares of the Lode. And
Petea Ve wpen the Lozde beard it, dis contte-
if" oes Snaunce was provoked to wath , g
the fpe of the L070 burnt amonge thé,and cols
med tomé were f vttermok of the poot. And
the people cried nto Hofes. And wha Doies
made interceflid Dnto p Lozd, the fpzc queéched.
And the nameofp place Wagcalled Chaberab,
becaule the fpze of the Lod burnt amonge thë.

Andtbe rafcal people p Was amonge them,
fellaluftpng, and turned thé felucs and wepte
(enenas dpdalfothe chpldzen of Flrael) fapd:
who Mall geue vs fletbe to cates we remembze
è tothe Which wedpdeatein Eappt for naught

ndthecucumbers and melons, lebes, onpons §
arleke. Mut nowe our foulets d2ped awape,
02 we can fenotbpng elg fane Banna.

The Wanna was asxcoziander [ede andto
fe to )ipke Wedellps. And f people went aboute
andqatbered it,¢ qroud it inmplles,o2 bet tt in
mozters, Ebakedit inpannes, ¢ made cubes ot
it. Bndthetatte of it was Ipke vntothe tate of
anople cake. And the the dewe fel Downe wpon
the boofin ehenp bt tbe Hanna fell vpor it.

And when oles bherde the people wepe tho
rotvont thep2 boufboldes,enerp man tn the doze
of bis tente,the face of the Lozde was prouoked
tnta weath erceadpnglp : and it qreued Boles
alfo. And Boles fapt vntothe Lozd:roherfoe
pat P dealt cruellp with thp leruañt And wher
fore bane 3 not found favour intpp fpght,fepng
that thou puttet the wepabt of allthps people
dpon merhaue FJ concepuedallfbps peoples D3
baue J begottenthem: that p huldett fap vnto
me:carp toem in thy bofome(asa nurfe beareth
thefuckpnechplde) unto the lande, whiche thou
fwarelt nto ther: fathers:tbhece Huld J bane
fletb,to geue pnto al this people, which wepe be
fozeme,| apeng:geue Ds efhe p we mapreate' g
am notable tot


care altbts people alone, fepng


pf, trois


7
E


x


70, fhia


=


tfe.rbi,g.


€


it ig to benp fot me. FFthou deal thus withme, `


kplme, 3 pzape the, if J baue founde fauoure in
tüp frabt, tbat Fie not my weetchednefle.

And p Lozdelape vito Woleg xgather Ynfo
me.lrr.men off elders of Ffrael, whpcbp bno-
woctt, t thep arep elderg of the people € ofpcers

ouer


D


erebilt.p.


=


= NR


— MiwtFJamislepous umeri


i


\


la trie
Lie


oner themand thon Malt bapnae them bntothe
‘Cabernacie of wptnefie, that thep mape tande
there withthe: Andy wpllcomedowne, and
talike with the there, andtake of p{pzete which
is bpon the,and putte bponthem, and thep thal
beare the burthen of the people with p, left thou
Dbeconffrepned to beareit alone.

And fape thou puto thexpeople be balowed


ifro.rbi.e
_  agapnite tomo20tec, and pe thall eate flethe:fo2


pour tobpnpngetsinthe cares ofthe Lorde, fe- gerner
puge pela} de: whoiballgeue bs flethetocate? ieee

SOA Wwe were Happpe in Egppte : therforethbe Lozde KRA
>>  Apllgenepou Nepe, andpetpalleate. Dethall |


not cate one Dayeno2 two, no: fpue Dapes,nep-

ther ten, no: twentpe dapes : but euena moneth

tonge bntpllit come out at the noftrels of pou :

and makepouto perbjake,becaule that pebaue

calte the Lozdealpde whicheis amonge pou: g

_ haue Wwepte before bpm,fapinge : whp came we

€ thugout of Cgppter And Doles lape: * fyre

ro. rii.€  bundzeg tioulandefotemenare there of the peo

ple,amonge tobichbe Jam. And thou bak fapde

A pli qeue them felipe, that thep mape eatea

Anoneth longe: Shall the Hepe andthe orenbe

- flapne fo2 thent,to fpnde them:etber thal all the

fythe of thetee be gatbercdtogetherfo2 than to

ecucthems And the Lozdelapde wnto oles:
pail xtde Loes hande be wared porte!

Thou halte le nowe whether mp worde Mall

come to patte puto the,o2 not.

And Holes went out and tolde the people

thefapinge of the Lozde, and gathered the. irr:

elbers of the people, and fet themrounde about


Eia. l.a.
anb. lipa


the tabernacle. And the Logbe came done ina `


cloude,and{pake puto bim, and toke ofp ipzete
that was bpon pim and gaue it vntothe.lrr.el
ders. Andit fogtuned, that whenthe (pzete re-
q Fed bpon them, theppzopbecped, and dpd not
ceafle. Wut there remapnedt wo of the menin p
bofte: the name of the one was Eldad, and the


nante of the other B)edad. And thelpacterefted:


bponthem, and thep were of them ý were wapt

ten, and Went not out Dnto the tabernacle, but
popbecped inthe bol. and there ranne a ponge
man,and tolde <Hofes and fapde: Eldad g ayes

bad do prophecp tnthe bolte. And Fotua the lor

of Qun che feruaunte of Boles one of bis pong

Luke.ip.g. Men anl tered andflapbde: matter ofeg, fo-
S bydthim. And soles fapde vnto bpm:enupett
gorlis thoutoz mp lakes * olde God thatall the Loz-
£9 HLS Hes people couloe propbeepe, and that the Lozde
wWolde put bps [prete tponthem. And sPoles

gat bpm into the bofte , beand theelders of Ff-

tacll. Andthere Went forthe a wpndefrom tie


peT pol. pe ap A aa quaples from the fee :and


cttbemfallabounte the boff,cuen a dapegiour=
nep rounde abonte on euerpfpde of the bot, and

ow 0 (ibep dpd fipe inthe apie) AS (t were two cubytes
 Hpeonertheearth. And the people tode Yp and
all that dave and all that npabt,and onthe ma:


sow thep gathered quaples. And dethat yatbe


red alptle,gathered ten bomers mll. Andthep
{p2ed them abzoderounde aboute thebotte .
pitrrviin X AND whple the fletbe was pet betwene thep2e


teth,and per it was chewed vp:bebold thecoun


| Sol,


in dede (poke onlpthozot oles: Hath he not
fpokenalio bp bes Bnd the Lozde heard it. Sut
poes was averpxmeke màn aboue all p men
of the earth. And the Lorde lpake at once puto <ccte.rba
Woles nto Aaron and to ir Jam, come out
pe thze yntoxthe tabernacle of wptnefic,achep {iors
came out allthze.And the Lode came dorone in
pakinaa thecloude,and tode in thetdoze OF ara rera
thetabernacle,and called Jaron and Wir Jam ter rrir.g

And thep went out both of tbem. And be fata
beare mp wozdes. FE there bea prophet of p Loz
desamonge por , 3 toploe knowenofppmina
vifpon:and wpll fpeake Dnto bpm in fleve. Dp
feruaunt Soles is not lo, which is faptpfullin
almpne boule.into bym wp! 3 (peakexmouth errr;
tomouthina bifpon: but intpdels and fimilp: C
tudesdoth not belethe Lode. Giberfore then
were pe not afrapde tolpeake agapnite mp ier»
uaunt Holes: And the LozdDewasmoued ynto
wath agapné tbem and be went bis wap:and
the cloude departed from the tabernacle. And ve
bolde Hir Jam was becomexlepzous,agit wee |
fnowe. And Aaron loked bpon Wir Jam g be- Errr
bolde, He wag lepzoug, and Xaron fapde nto
Moles: J beleche the mp Lozde, put not the tpn
bpon vg, which we baue Folpplp cūmptted and
finned. Db, let ber not beas one thatcometh ont
of bis mothers wombe,and whote halfe fic is
eatenawape. And Goles crped wntothe Lode
fapinge :Heale her D God, Zheleche the.

And the Lozdfapde vuto Doles: FF ber fa .


t ther bad ppt inber face, Cbulde the not be apa- D


med leven dapes ¢ let ber be {put out of the Dolte
feucn dapes, and after that let ber be recepuedin
agapne. And ir Jam was hut out of theholk
feuen dapes, and the people remoued not, tpl He
was brought tnagapne. x And afterwarde the
people remoued from Apaferoth, and pptchedin
the wplbderneffe of haran.

= @Che. rit. chapter.

q Certapne men are fenttofeatibe(helande of Canaan; _
mrar 32D the L026 fpake bnto Holes, faping: 3
y SYA x Onde men out tofearch the land of Ca Deute.t-a
zs rani vpi a gene onto p chpldzen of Ff-
racl:o€ euery trpbe of thep2 fathers thal pe lende
a man, and tet them all be lucheas arerulersa=
monge them. And Coles at the commaunde-=
ment of ë 102 fent fozth out of the wildernefie
of baran fuch men ag were all heades off cit
dzen of Zlrael : They: names are thele. Dfthe
tepbe of Ruben, Sammua thefonne ofsacne.

yii Dfthe


Arr


Thepeople


Othe trpbe of Simeon, Saphat the fonne of
Hort. DE thetrpbe of Juda, Caledthe fonne of
$Sephune. DE the trpbe of #lachar, Agealtheton
of Soren. Df the teybe of Ephzaim, Olea the
Conte of Pun. OF the trpbe of wen Jamin, pal
thithefonne of Rapbu. DOFthe trpbe of sabuc
lon,Gadicl the fonne of Hodi. Df the trpbe of
Jofeph, namely of the trpbe of Manafle, Gad-
Dithefonne of Souli. DE the trpbe of Dan, Amt
elthefonneofGemali. DFthetrpbe of Aier,
Spyethur thelonne of Wichael. Dfthe ie of
Mepbtali, Rabebithe fonne of Gaphli. DE the
trpbe of Gad, Guel thefonne of Sachi. Chele
are the names ofthe men, whicbe Poles fent to
Cppe out thelande. And Boles called the name
of Dfeathe fonne of Aun, Jolua.


% And oles lent them forth to fppe out the Hey mer
lande of Canaan and lapde vutotbem:getpou EEA a Ss,
tpthis wape louthwarde ,thatpemapegovp | Ja


into the bpe countrpe,and fethe lande what ma
nertbpnge itis andthe people p dwelleth thers
in: wbetber thep be ronge 02 weake, ether few
o} manp, and whatthelande is that thep Dwell
in, whether it be good oz bad: and what maner
of cities thep be, that thep dwel in, whither thep
Dwell intentes o? Malledtotones:and whatma
nice of lande tt ts : Mobetber it be fat o2 leane,and
whether there betrees therinoznot. Weofa

pod cozage,and bapuge ofthe frnte oF p lande.

indit as about thetpmethat qrapesarfp2k
tppce.Andlothep went bp, and fearcped out the
© lande from the wplberneife of sin bnto Wehob,
ag men come to Hemath, andthep afcended vn-


tothe fouth,and came nto Hebzon, where Abt


mat thas and Sefaiand Chalmam, thefonnes
of Enack. Debron was bupltfeuen pere before
z0anin Egppte. And thep came onto therpucr
of @fcol, and cut dotone there a bzaunche wpth
one clouftre of grapes and twapne bare it bpon
a ftaffe: and thep bgoughtealfo of the pomgra-
nates ando€ the fyages. And the place has cal-
led the rpuer Elcoll : becaule of theclouftre of
grapes wbiche the chpldzen of {iracl cut Downe
thence. Andthep tourned backeagapne frome
fearchpng of the lande after fourtp dapes. And
thep wente and came to oles an’ Aaron and
punto all the multpende of the chpldzen of Flrael
inthe toplocrneffe of haran: whichets Cades,
and bought them wode, andalfo unto alltbe
congregacpott,and thewedthem thefrute of the
lande. Andehep toldebpm,and Capde: we came
‘nto thelanbe whither thou fendet bs, and fu-
relp tthloweth wpth mplke and honpe:and bere
isofthefruteofit. Meuerbelefie, thepeople be
ftronge that dwel in thelande, andthecptics at
walled and erceadpug great:and mozcoucr, we
Cate the chplogen of Enack there. Che Amale-
chites dwell inthefouth countrep, and the ie-
thites, Jebulites, and the Amozttes Divel inthe
mountapnes, andthe Cananttes dwell bp the
Tee and bp the coffe of Jo2dan.

#  AndCalecb Eplled Pow murmur that wasrapred bp
Mf the people before oles faping:we wplgo
Dp, and conquerr it : foz He beable to ouercomie
it. Wutthe men that wente op with bpm, fapoe


fumeri.


idle benotableto go bp agapntt the people:foz
they ate ftronger then we. aAndthep bzoughthp


an enel tepoateof thelande which thep badlear —


ched, fapinge : punto the chpldzen of Ftraell: the
lande whicye we baue gonethozowe to fearche
it oute, is alandetbat eateth vp the nbabiters
therof:and the people that toe awe init armen
of a great ature. And there we awe allo gp-
auntes, the chplozen of Enack, wbhiche come of
thegpauntes. ndwe lemed in ourlpghtasit
were greh popes ani fo we dpd inthep:fpabt
EC TDe.riiti. Chapter.
E. QBbe people murmure agapnt God, and Wolde haura:


neo cated and Zalue. Tbelearchers of thelandeope.dme
lech Eplieth the Ffraciites,


SoS and Aaron, And the wholecongre=


lande. Jf the Lozd bath lui to wg, pe pl bapng
vs into pis lande and geuett ys, whicheisluch
alandeas floteeth with mplkeand bonps Wut
inanp topfe rebell not peagapnit the Lode.


* Peptbernedepetofcare thepeople ofthe land perra


fozthep are but bzeabefo2 bs. Chep2 Hadowe
is departedfrom then, and the Lodis with vs
featetbemnot therfo2e.


Wut all they whiche were in that mulepeud y


bad ftone them with tones. Andthe glozp of p
Lozde appeared inthe Tabernacle of wptuefie,
befozcall che chplozenof Alracil. Andtihe Lod
fapde vnto oles : Howe longedo this people
ne ei ab powrlonge wpllitbeperthep
eleue me:fozall tbe lpqnes whiche 3 haue Me-
wedamonge thems} wpll finpte them with the
peftplenceand deftrope them:and topll make of
theaqreater naporan mpabtper tbentbhep.
nd Mofeglapde bntothe Lorde: thenthe
Egpptpans thallhcare it, fozthou bzougbteÉ
this people intbpmpght fromamonge them.
Andit wpllbe tolvero the inbabpters of thps
lande alfo: fo2 thep baucheardclpketople, that
thou Lozbe arte amongetbis people:and $ thou
ove arte lene face toface, andthat thy cloude


ftanbdeth oucr them,andthatxtbougoell before ero. riii.c.


them bp dape tpmeita ppller of a cloude andin
a pplier of fprebpnpgbte. |
Stthou'


murmure.


g


-u


he


‘exe. ais outthelande,cucnfoztp dapes xene


The people murmere, Rumeri,


Pichon thalte kpllall thyg people as thep were
but oneman,then p nacpons which bane bearde
the fame ofthe, topl{ape: Che Lozdeis not able
tobzpnae in this people into the lande, wbhpche
befware butothem:but bath apne chemin the
wpldernefle. And nowe F belech the, let thepa-


D wer of mp Lorde be qreate,accozdpnee as thon


pat apani lis Sa Lozbe ig longe per be be
angrpe,and full of mercpe, and fuffereth intqui=
tpe,and{pn, and leaueth no maninnocente, and
wifpteth the vurpgbteoulnefie of the fathers v-
pon the chplozen,in the thp2de andfourth mene-
racpon:be mercpful 3 belech the wntothe fpnne
of this people, accozDpnge Dntothp greate mer=
cpc,as thou batte fozqeuenthis people from €=

rppte,enen Dntpll nowe. And the Lozbelapde:

baue Fozgeuenit, area to tbprequelf.

ISutastrulpeas J lpuc.all the carth albe fpl
led with theglozpofthe Lozbe. utall thofe
men wbpche baue fene mp qlozp and mp mp2a-
cles whiche J dpd in Egypte and inthe wploer-
nefleand baue tempted me nove this tentpymeg
and wpll not berken bnto my vopce, Hall not fe

he lande which Fliware bntothep; fathers:ne
ther eallanp of them that prouobed me fe tt.


For itd. Sut mp Ceruauntex Caleb: wpth whome there


thas another maner of (pacte : ¢ becaule de bath
folowed me butotbe bemofl, bpm wel FZ bgpng
into the lande wbich be bath walked in, anb bis
fede thall inperet it, andallothe Amalechites g
Tananites which dwellin the plapne countrep


‘Tomozow turne pou, and get pouintothewpl He


vernefic:cuen bp the wape of the red fee.
Andthe Lozdelpake vnto Doles and Xa:
roi,fapinge-botoe longe Both this enell multp=
tude murmure agapntt me: J paue beard pmur
murpngces of thechplogen of Flraell, wptb the
whicbe they murmur agapniteme: Cell them
therfore: Astrulp as 3 lpuc(lapeth the Lorde)
Jwypldoo yntopoucuen ag pedane (poken in


mpne cares. Pour carkalles pall lpein tbig topl fano


vernefle. Andallpou that were tolde thozot-
oute ous nomber rore eer EEES uc,
(which haue murmured agapnite me) pall not
come into p lande, ouct w tch a lpfteè vp mpne
bande, to make pou dwel therin, laue Calebthe
fonne of Fephune,and Jotua the foune of un.

Wyt pour chplozen, wobpebe pe lapde Mulde


z bea pape them 3 tapl bepnee in, and thep thal


know the lande which pe bauerefuled,and pour
carkafies thallpe inthis wplderneffe. And pour
chplozen all wander in thps wylderneffe,fo2=
tpe perces and fuer Foz pout whordome, dntpll
ponr carkafles be walted inthe twplicrnefe af
tor cpenombar of far vapea Anoo EERr aD
ape fog
aperetpall pe beare pour pnrpghtcoulneffe cuen
foztp pere and pe fall knowemyp dilpleafure.¥
the Lozde baue lapie tbat Jwpll do it unto all
thiscucllcongreqacpon that are gathered toge
theragapnit me. eb baking hr ial
fpalbeconfumed,and here they thall dpe.

olestent tofearche


2nd the men whicbe
thelande, and which wben thep came agapne)
mate all the people to murmure befoze Dun and


bought bpa ilander vpon$ land, enen thole
menthat dps being vp that (claiider bponit ag


though it bad bene eucll, bpedina qreat*plage ¢.c0;.r.2.


before the Logbde, Wut Jolua thefonne of Mun
and Caleb the Conne of Yephune whiche were of
the men that wente tofearche the lande, lpued
ipl. And {Holes tolde thele fapinges vntoall
thechpldzen of jfrael,ethe people teke great lo
rowe. And theprofe bp earlp in the momninage,¢

atte them vp into the toppe ef the mountapne, 1D
LAPINE: * lo, we be bere, and pliges yp wuto


the place of which the Lorde fapde nto ws, fog Deute. 1f,


twe baue fpnned. Bnd oles fapde : wherfore
Yopil pe go on this maner, beponde the worde of


‘the Lozdertt wpll not come well to paffe:gonot


wp therfore : (foz the Lorde is notamonge pou)
that pe be not flapne befoze pour enemypes. 102
the Amalecbites andthe Cananytes are there
befoze pou, and pe wpll fall Dponthe focare
becaule pe are tourned atbape fromethe 10200,
and the Lo2de tpl! not be wptp pou.

Hut hep prelumed obftpnatlp to go vp itt
tothebplitoppe. Qeuerthelater, the Arise of
thetetamente of the 1 ozdc, and Bales depar-
ted not out of the bolte. Chen the Pmalechites
and the Cananttes, whpche dtvelte tn that ppll
came Downe and (mote them, and bewed them,
cucnwnto Doma.

eStpakeroterpn : atti k

Tb: puntigmene opp ebat nnech of aryoguncy oi prie

me, wea RD tHe Lozde {pake bnto Moles,
pean (aa apinge :(peake vntothe chplozen 3
Erra Vee Ol Jtracll and fape vnto thepm:


erpnac, thou thalte
offer the thpzde parte of anlpnot wpne foz a
Cwetefanoure wnto the Lobe.

“And when p offerci a bullocke foz a burnt-
offerpna o2f02 a (pecpall powe o2 peaceoffcring y5
wnto the Lozve, ietbpmbpng witha bullocke
a meate offerpnge of thze teuth bealesg of foure
mpngled twithhalfeanpin of ople. Andthou
palt ipne fo2 a Dapnikofferpng: cuen dalfean
bin of topne, for an oferpnge of a fwwctefauours
wnto p Lorde. After this maner allit be Done
foz an ore,o2fo2a ram, o: foza lambeozakpd. |
Lobe what nombre thou maketin tbele, lucha
nombze Halte thou makein themalfe. |

AnD accowdpng to p nombze of fuch arr
= Git topon


Sol. tt. *


Theman toned —


thou thalte encreale the meatoferpnges and the
Depnkoferpnges. Alltbatare of pour felues
thalldo thele thpngres after this maner,to offer
an offerpnge of fwete fauonre pntothe Lorde.
And pfa fraunger fogeozne wtth pou,oz who-
foeuer be amonge pou tn ponr qeneracpons,and
wpll offer an offerpnge of a fwete fauoure Dnto
the Lozbde:cuen as pe do, fo pe pall do. Dne 022
dpnaunce albe both fo2 pou of the congreaa=
cpon, and alfo foz the ftraunger.3t (halbe ano:
Dpnaunce foz cucr inpour qeneracyons,both on
to pouand tothe raunger befo2e the Lorde.
Dne latwe and one maner fhall ferue, botbe foz
pou and Fo: the fraunger that fogeo2neth witb
ou. andthe Lorde fpake puto Boles, fapinge
. peake nto tie chpldzen of Ffraell,andfape vn
Deudiiic, tothem: x Wibenpebecometintothelandeto
the wphiche 7 bzpnge paw then when pe wpll eat
of the bzeade of the tande , pe all take bp an
Deue offerpnge bnto the Lode.
Dethall take bp a cake of the fpefke of poure
Leu.reti.b DOWWE foz an beucotterpnge, xaspe do the peue=
| port of the tarne, enenfope fhall beneit.
DE thefp2te of mi E all gene bnto p
Lode an beucofferpnge in pour gencracpons.
And pf pe ouerfe pour felues and obferue not al
thele coiumannd mentes, LOBED the Lozdebath
{poken onto Hofes euenallthat p Lorde bath
commaunded pou bp the bande of Hofes frome
the fy2tte dape that the LozbecOmaunded )o-~
fes, and bence fozard amonge pour gencracp-
ons, Ff tt bappen that ought ig commpetcd ig-
nozantlp of the conqregacpon.alltbemultptud
thal offer a bullocke fopa burntofferpnae,ts be
afuoetefauoure buto the Lobe, with the meat:
offerpnge and nls Spee tdi tas ibeni bpng
tothe maner,andanbeaotcfozfpune. Andthe
peat hall make an attorement foz all the mul:


tptude of pcbpldzen of Ffracl antt halbe fon- esas
geuen them:fo2 ttispqnozaunce.Andtbep thal Hae
bepnaethep2 eggs Acad se tpt the orci ie
LOzbe:and thep2fpnotterpnge befozetheLozbde fake SAN
es ee


Eo: thep2pquozaunce. Andall beforqencn
bite all thbemultptude of the chpldzen of Fira-
ell, and Dntothe Traunger p Dwelleth amonge
pou-:lepnge all the people were tn iqnozaunce.
Keur, ditit Æ Jfanp one foulefpnne thozowe iqnozatice
D he thal bppnge a the goate of a pere olde fo2{pn.
And the pacatt Hal make an attonement fort
fouletbat (pnned iqnozauntlp, with the fpnofte
rpnge befoze the Loge to reconcple bym:¢ that
itmape befozgeuenbpm. Andbothe thoutbat
arte bone of the chpldzen of Ffracl,a the traun
ger tbat dwelleth amonge pou, pall baue both
one la we, whe fo doth ipune thozot iqnozafice
wut the loulethat doth ought pzelumpruoully,
whptber be be an Zlraelpte oza ftraunger, the
fame Dlafpbemeth the Lorde.
SHalberoted out frome amonge bps people, be-
caule be hath defppled the teozde of the apt
and Dath bzoben his cOmmaundemente,p fonle
therfoze (hall pecpihe,and bis {pune Halbe vps
bpm. And i ag the chpldzen of Jfrael were in
the wplodernetle,thep founde aman that gathee
ero.rrri.c ECD fipckes Dponthe + Sabboth dape.


Sumert: ,


Andthatfoule p


fo death.
And thep that founde bpm gatherpne fpe-

tit op brm into Wofegand Jaron, and -

wnto all the congregacpon: x and thep put bpm ie, rriii.a
in warde, fepng it was not declared what huld
bedone vntobym. Andthe Lordelapde vnto
Mofes: Let the man dpe:and let all tbe mulep-
tude Lone bpm with tones without the bot.
And all the multptude bzougbte bym withoute
the bolte and tened bpm with Fones,and heap
edasthe Lozde commaunded Doles: And the
Lozbdelpake puto Woles, fapinge: fpeabe Yn-
to thecbpldzen of {{racl and bpd them that thep


xmabetbem gardes inthe quarters of their gar rrira ~


mentes thozotwout thep2 generacpons,and put
bpon the garde of the quarters arpbande of pes
lomefplke. And the garde Halbe vnto poute
loke Dponit, that pe mape remembzeallthe c-
maundementes of the Lorde and doo them-and
that pe feke not after pour ovone barte, ozpoure
owne epes:atter the wbiche pe vie ta goa whos
tpnge:but pe tall remembze rather and doo all
imp comMMaundementes, and be holp dnto pour


 GoOd:¥ amtbe Lozde pour God, which bought


pou oute of thelanbe of Eaqppte, foz tobe poure

God: FJ am the Lorde pour God. j |
CTi. rvi. Chapter.

(Tbe rebelipon of Cezath,Dacthanand Abitan


> kG h g

E fa = © ak P |
f 3 ke ie er aoe k Ca

; a T 1 seIs, i a i

5. i 4 5 pe


E
Stal EE Para

Ter pens
ia eed

——


——


ite,


be fonne of Fesebar,
DEL. aA


ae Ps
A n 5 apis Sarin,
x Coza


Andtheman whom theLozd doth chole, the ©
emake much to do,pechild,é

: olesfaid vnto Cozah:*heare pe

childzen of Leut: Zt isbutalmalebing onto poy 2%


= r- -e -m
#


r 1
Y. ; x i i i i z ae Lo dee r 4
Pathan e Abiram. Rumer. Soll
tljat the God of Firaclbathleperatedpoufrom lowethem bp hope all that they Hane: andthep |
themultptude of Firacll : and bzoughte pouto go downe quyc&e into bell: then pe Mall vnder=
bym felf, todo the lerupce ofthe diwellpng place Wande, that thefemen baue pzonoted p Loze. |
of the Lozde,and to and befoze the multptude And it foxtunedthatasfone ag be had made
and tominpiter vntobpm:bedathtakentheto anend of fpeakpna all thele wordeg, <p qround Deuter. |
bymand all ebp becthzen thefongof Lent wypth clouca funder that was yndertiem:and pearth Ea |
the,anbfeke pe the offpee ofthe patalo: Fo? opencdberinouth,andfwalowedthem Yp and Œ ` |
whiche caule both thou andallthpcompanpar tiepze boufes, andall the men that were wth |
gathered togetheragapnttp Lorde. Andwhat Corab, andalltbepzgoodes. Andthepandall
19 Jaron, that pemurmuragapniiebpin ¢ that thep bad, went Downe alyue puto bell and
And Mofes fente, andcalled Dathan, and theearthe clofed vpon them:and they perplthed
Abiram thefonnes of Cliab,whichelapde: tee fromamongethe congregacpon.Andallaratl
wyplinot come bp. Js ttalmalthpng thatthou that wereaboute them fledat the cepe of them.
bat beought be out of alandepflowety wpth Andthepfapde: lect the earth fwalowe vs vp
© mplheand bonpc, tokpllvstnthe toplocrneiic, alfo.anbd therecame outa fpze From the Lorde, |
andtorapgne ouer ngallfor Halkthoubzought andconlumed the twobhundzed and fpftpe men
? be Dnto alande that foeth wpthmpl&e and thatofferedcens. Andtbe Lordefpake ynto
bonp, and geuen vsinderptaunce of feldesand Holes fapinge:Hpeake ynto Eleasar,the fon
vpnepardes Ci plt thou pullout pepesotthele of Aaronthe Peak that he take vpete cenfers
mete wpllnotcome bp. And Woles wared outeoftheburnpngandlkater the fpee bere and
verpangrp,andfapde onto the Lozde, Turne there, fo? p centers of thele fynnersare halowed
not thou puto ther, offerpng. J bauenottaken tnthepzedeathes: and lettetbem make of them
fo mucheaganafie fromthem, nepther baue J thpnne seed Lae. for a couerpnare of the aul
burteanp of them. Bud oles fapdevuteCo= tar. ffo: thep otferedthem before the Lorde,and
ra: Wethouandallthpcompanpe befozethe therfore thep archalowed,¢ tbep halbe a fpgne
Lowwe:both thou,thep.and Aarontomozowe.  wutotbechploenof Frael. And Eleasar p prel
And take cuerp manhpscenter,andputcensin toketbe brafen centers whychethep that were
them,thatpemape offer befozetbe Lozde:enerp burntebad offered, and beate them thynne fora
man of the tivo bundzed and fpftpe take biscen couerpnge of theaultar, tobea remembzaunce |
fout,thoualfo Jaron thatcuerponemapebauc Vntothechpldzenof Firaell, that no ftraunges |
bis cenfer. And thep toke euerp manbiscenfer, Wobhpcie isnot of the {ede of Jaron come nere |
andputipzcinthem,andlapoecenstheron,and tooftercensbefoze the Lozd, that it bappennos ]
fodcinthedoze ofthe Tabernacle ofwptneile Muto bpm: lpkheas ynto Cozahand byscompa- |
with <Polesand Marou. And Cozab gathered nye, asthe Lorde fapde of bpm by the bande of
allthecongreqactonagapntt them wutopdoze oleg. Wutonthe mozowwe all the muleytude |
of the tabernacle of wptnelle. ss OE pebpldzen of Zfrael murmured agapnit SHO: se
Andthe qlozpe of the Lozbeappeared onto Tes and E arorbrepinge : pe bauc kplled the peo- |
allthecongreqacpon.andtheLozdipakevnto pleottheLozbdg. Andit fortuned that when the
Wolesand Aaron, faping-feperate pour felucs multptude was gathered agapnite oles ana
from amonge thisconaregacpon, that Jmape Aaron, thep lokedDtowardethe Tabernacle oF
J. confume them at once. And thep fell bpont e toptnefle. And beholde. ox cwyen eyep were eneredin
iu.rFbit.s. Faces annfapde. xD molmpgbtpe God ofthe toscrthe cloudecoucred it and theglozpe of the |
{peetes of allficth.pfonemanphath finned, ple odeappeated. And Bolesand Aaroncame eani
thoii bewzothwithallthemultptude; Anttbdbe befozetbe Tabernacle of wptuelie. Andehe l
Lozdefpake unto Hotes,fapinge:fpeakevnto Lozdelpate wnto Mofes, fapinge: Gettepos |
tbecongregacponatid fape: Get pou awape tro Frome ea core congregacpon that Jmape ,


=
tees |


Oe


aboute the Dwellpnge of Cozah, Dathan, and confume them quickly. And thep fel bpon thepa
tebe, And Volesrofebp, and went wnto Faces. Ano t oe apor oito Xaron: talea
D pathanand Abiram, andthe eldersof ¥lracll cenler,andputtpeetherin out oftheanitar and
folomrcd bpm. And pe fpake vntotbecongrega: poure oncens.and go qupeklp bnte thecongrea
cpon,fapinge: departe frome the tentes of thele qacpon, tbat thou mapie obtapne the fozgeue=
wpcked men and fouchenothpng oftbepzs:lef— neflefozthem. sfoztherets tozathe gone oute
pe perpiocinall thepztpnnes. Audlothepgate From the Lozde,andthereiga plage beconne. |
them from the divelling of Cozab, Dathanand And Jarontoke as Doles comaundedhyner
Abiramoneuctptpde, And Dathanand Abi- andranneinto thempddesof the congregacpon 6
ramcame out and {tode in thedozeoftHepzten- andbebold,the plage was beqonne amonaethe —
teg with tiep: wpues,thepefonucs, andthepze people, and be put oncens,andmadcanatrone-
lptlechplozen. And Ho T EEI ment Eoztbe people. Xud when be kode bettvene
{hall knowe thatthe Lozdebathfentemetodo thedeade and them that werealpuc, the plage
all thei wozkes,andthat Fhauenoetbonethem cealed. Thep that dped inthe plage were Four-
ofmpneowne mpnde. gf thelemendpethbecomé tenethoulande andleuen hundzed: belydr tbem
deat of allmen: oz pfthep be vitpted afterthe thatdpedaboute the bufpneiieof Cob. And
pupracpon of allmen, tbenthe Logdehathnot Baron went agapue unto Woles befoze f dove
fengeme. WutandpEtheLogdemakea newe of the tabernacte of wptnes,¢the plage cealen:
thyinge andthe earthe open ber mouth, and twa ea aaitey tt acoita
| uit ari


"T aid


Aarons Codde,


@ darons rod bupoeth,and beareth blooms.
ery wera Nd the UL ozdelpake wuto Moires,
nce) cok apinge : [peake yntothe chpldzen
eo, Oi Ves of Frael:and take of euctp pzpnce
SSA YS) of them a rodde, after the boutes of


whome J chule, pal bloffome.aAndz wpl make
reat epee the qrudgpnges of the chplozen
of Preaell wherbp they grudge agapnft pou.
And Woles tpake vnto the chpldzen of Fi-
tacll, and all f pepnces gaue bpm enerp prpnce
ouer thep2 fathers boules, a rodde,cuentwelue
roddes : and the rod of Maron was amonge the
roddes. And Boles put the roddes befoze the
ode, in the Tabernacle of wptnele. Andon
the mozowe, oles went tnto the Tabernacle


ebsc.lFe oF yoptnefic:and bepolde, * therod of Aaron for


the boule of Leni as budded, ebareblofioms
and almonbes. And Doles brought out all the
ropdesfrombefozethe Lode puto all thechpl-
dzen of zeael:anbd thep lobed bpon tbem, toke


p eucrpmanbigrob. Andthe Lozdelapde onto


Holes : bapage Aarons rodagapne before the
otmi to be kepte fora token of the childzens
rebellpon,and that they2 murmuring map ceafe
from me,anbd that they dpe not. And Boles did
as tbe ie eaegpeietenccoink dol cuen fo Dpd be.
And the chplozen of Flraell (pake unto Woles
fapinge: bebolde, Weare walked awape and con
fumed: we all come to nou got who fo etter com-
metbnpe the Diwellpnge of the Lorde, bpeth,
pall we oss Lepage awape’

je. ‘


 ThevkpceottheLeuites. Lhe tpewre and yytte frutes
mult be geuen tbem- Garons berptage,


aa) 20 the Lozbe fapbe Mito Aaron,
TAS 4 and thy feng and thp Fathers boute
EA iA Vi with tbe Wall beare p faute of that
ria ta wWhpchets Doncamplle in the polpe
poe place. And thou and thp fons with
(ball bearetbefaute of that tobpcbeis done


MEAD. ampile in pour prani * And thp brethren


of the trpbe of Leut and of thep2 fathers boule:
bolde thou Halte take wnto the, that thep mape
beiopned punto the and minpHer onto the: cuen
tnta the and thp fonnes wypth the before theta:
bernacle of wwptnefle. Thep hal wapte bpon the
and bpon all the tabernacle: snelp let them not
come npe the vetlels ofthe ee and the aul
tar,tbat they and pe allo dpe not. And they thal
bebp the, and wapte on the tabernaele of wpe:
nele fo2 all theferupce of the tabernacle,and let
no ffrautiqer come npe Dutopou. :

© herfoze tall pe kepe the bolp place and the
aultar, that there fall no moze wrath bpon the
chpldzen of Zlracll:bebolde, 3 banc taken pour
beethrenthe Leuites fromamongethechildzen
of Jlrael,whiche as a gpfte of pouresare geuen
write the Lozde,todo pierupee of thetabernacle
ofwytnefie. ‘Cherfore halt thou and thy fons
nies toith thetake Dede nto pour pecattes office


JQumert.


foz all thpnaes that pertapnetsnto the Aultar,


and fo2 alltbat ar within the baple.Andlethat -


pe ferue:foz ¥bhaue qeuen poure D2ealtes offpce


pntopou asa gpfte: and therfore the fraunger 25


that comerbnpe, mult be flapne.And the Lorde
(pake bute Zaron:bepold, J haue geuen the the
keppnge of mpne beue offerpnges, of all the ba=
lotved thpnges of thechplozen of Slrael. Euen
vito the, 3 baue geuen them fo? the anopntpng
andtotbp fonnes,fo2 a dutie foz euer. Chis thal
be tbhpne of molt bolp from the fp2c of the aultar


AU thep2laceifpces foz alltbepzmeateofferpn= -


ges, fpnofferpnges of trefpafleofterpngs, which
thep bapnge vrtome,aremoft bolp. Ftisthpne
andtbhyfonnes. Jn tbe moffe bolp place Malt
thou eate tt: andall that arcimales hall eate of
it,let tt be bolp onto the. And this alfois thpne


xtbe Deue pet of tbep2 gpttes, thozowe xen, viio,


out all the waueofterpnges of the chypldzen of JE
racl: J baue geuentbem vntotbeanathp fonnes
and tdp Dougbters with the.to bea dutpe Foz ea
ner andall that are cleane inthp bonfe.thal cate
oftt, alltbefat of the ople, and all thefat.of the
toptic and of the come, which thep {hall offer wn
tothe Lorde fo: fpr frutes, the fa

uen bato the. 3nd what fo ener is fpziterppe in
thepz lande whichethepbzpnge wmnto the Lorde
{halbethine,¢ all that arecleane in tbpne boufe


pall cate of if. XU dedicate thypnacsin Ziraell, ¢


fhalbetbpne. All chat breaketh the matepce in
all lepe that men bepnge nto the Lorde, whe:
ther it be of men o2 beattes,thalbe thpne. Rener
tielater the fpette bone of man thalt p redeme:
and thetpzite bozne of oncleane beafkes : Malte
thouredeme lpketople. Chole that are to be res
Demed, Halt thou redeme fromthe age of a mo-
neth, fo: the valuc of p moneth, namely fo2 fyue
fycles after the fpcle of thefanctuarpe. A fpcle
inaketh tiocutp balfpens. wut the fpzte bozne
of orent, hepe and goteg palt thou not redeme.

Ko: thep are bolp: therfozetbhou thalt tpepnble
thep2 bloude bpon theaultar, and thalte butne
tbepz fat bpon the lacrifpce foz afwete Cauour
vito the Lorde. And the flethe of them isthyne


xag the Wauebzelk and the ri tibulder. Thele x ent sin.


avcthpne. Ail the holy beueokerpuges whic

chplozett of Flraell offer vntothe Loide, shd
geuen the, and thpfonnes and thp dougbters w
the, to beadutpe fozeuer, letit be alaltedcoue-
naunt foz ener: befozetbe Lode, both vnto the
andtothpledempththe. Andtbhe Lozdelpatie


nto Aavon:xthou thalt baue none inberitaiice fis
íin thep2 p lag feag alt thou baue anp part Eeitug.


amonge them . Jam thp parte and thp enberps
faunce amonge thechpldzen of Blrael. wWeholde
J baue geucn che chplozen of Lens all the tenthe
in J{rael to inberpte, forthe Ceruyce which the
ferue th the tabernacle of witnefie. Aether mok
tbe chplozen of Jiraell henceforth comenpe the
tabernacle of wptneg, lett they beare fpnne, and
dpe. Wut the Lenites thall do thelerupce inthe
tabernacle of toptneffc and bearethep2 fpnne.


Jt albea lawe foz euer inpoure qeneracpons D


that amonge thechplozen of Jfracil , they pof-
fellenoncinberytaunce. Wut the tythes of the
chplozei


mebauc gge-


F


. Cheredkowwe.


des of Hracil , which thep pape as anheue
olterpnge Vntothe Lorde, J baue geuenthe Le-
uites toinberpte. And therfoze Jbauclapde dn
to then. Amonge the chpldzen of Jirael pe Hall
poficilenone enberptaunce. And the Lo20 {pake
wnto <)oles,fapinge: (peake vnto the Lenites:
andfape Duto them. when pe take of thecbplozé
of Ziracll the tythes whyche Jhanegeuen pou
af them Fog potre enberptaunce,pethalltake an
heucofterpnge of thatlame fog the Logde: euen
the tenth parte ofthetpth. Andthig pour Deue-
offring thalberekened ynto pou, enéas though
it were of thecozne ofthe barne , o2 owt of p ful-
nelle of the wpne preie. DEchis maner pe Wall
thecfoze (eperatean beneofferpng unto p Lord
of all pout tptbes Wwbhiche pe recepue of thechpl-
dzen of <lraell,and pe Wall gene therof unto the
Lode an beucofferpnge , whpehe Hall belonge
to Aaron the preat. DF all pour qpfteg, pe hal
tale out all the Lozdes beucofferinges,euentbe
fat oftlep2palomedthpnaes. @herfozetbou
(paltfape vntothem:when pe banetaken awap
the Fat of it from tt tt halbecounted nto p Le-
uites, as pfit were the encreafe of p cozne flore,
oz theencrealeof the wpnepzefle. And pe pall
eateitinall places, both pe and pour boufbolas
foz tt is pour rewarde fo2 pourferupceintheta-
bernacle of wptnefle. And pe all beare no lpn
bp the reafon of tt, oben pebauctaken frome it
the fat of tt: nepther Hall pe bnbalowe the bolp
thpnges of the chpldzen of Flraell, let pe dpe.
C The.rir. Chapter.
COfthe reo kowe. The taweofbpm that bepeth inthe Ta
bernacle, Gof ppm alfo that toucheth anp buctcanechpng.
eA 2d the Lodelpake wnto Moles,
+ oe 2 and Faronta inge-thye isthe oz
@eJeos Dpnautice of the lawe : pet Ar
MLIN aunded,fapinge
par Grea (peake pute the chpldzen of Sfrael
tha


affbes of the kowe, Hall wathe bis clothes and
re marae vadkete ynrtpll cuen, And this halbe


fzumeri.


tnta the chplozen of Zirael and onto the trañ-
get that dwellethamonge them , a ftatute foz
ener. *Hethattoucheth the dead boope of anp
man, albe viucleanefeuendapes. Andhe Mall
purifpe bpm felfe with this water pebpade Dap
and tie feuenth dape,and be thalbecleane.
wut pe be purifpenot bpm felfe the thpade
dape and the leuenth dape, De thall not becleane
tbo lo cuer toucheth the cozle of anypman that
is Deade,and[p2zpnkleth not ppm felte, defpleth


Tol. li.


UTTE
cert,
Mo ge,ii.c,


€


the dwellpng of the Lozde, andthatfoule thal-


be voted out of Flrael, becaule the {pzpnkipnee
Wafer was not fpzpnkled vpon bpm. He albe
therfoze wucleane, and bis pucictine fie mailre-
mapne bpon bpm. Chists the lawe of the man
that dpethina tente: all tbat come intothetent,
and all that ts inthe tent thall be yncleanefeuen
dpes. And all the velfelles that be open whiche
Hauenolpd nozcoucrypnge vpon them Halbe vn
cleane. And tholoeuer toucheth one that ig


apne witha fweard in tbe feldes, oz adeadper


fone oza bone ofa deade man, 02 a grane balbe
bncleane feuen Dapes. Cherfore,fo2 an viiclean
perre they Hall take of theburnteatpes of the
nofferpnae, andrunnpnge Water pall be put
thertotna veticll.And let acleane perfon xtake
Slope and dippe tt inthe water, and {papnkic it
wpontbhetent,and bponall the befelles and on
the foules that were there in,and bponbhinethat
touched a bone,oza flapne perfone, 02a dead bo
dpo Trane. And p cleane perlone Hall{ppnkle
pon p Duclean the thpzddap g thefeuenth dape
e the leuenth seta gratin bym felf,¢ wath
bis clothes, and bath bym felfe in water,¢ Mal-
be cleane at enen. Wut the man that is vncleane
and {pzpnbleth not bpnrfelfe,p Came foule thal
begedeares from amonge F congregacpon: be-
cani be path defpledthe bolp place of the Lozde
and the tpaynklpnge water bath not bene fpzpn
kled bpon bpm, therfoze thaliberemapne vna
cleane. And this Halbe a perpecualllawe pnto
them. And be that (papnbleth the fpepniipnee
Water, Hall wathe bis clothes. And bethat tou
cheth the ipepnblpnge water, all be bucleane
butpllenen. And pi fo euer the yicleane per:
fone toucbeth all be vncleane. And the foule
that toucbeth it palbe wncleane vntpl the cuen
CCbe.re. Chapter.

Cir Jam dpeth Whe propie murmer.oep hane water
cuen out oftherocke. bom denped the Jirelptes pallage
thozowe bps realme. Zhe death ef aaron iu whole rowme


Fo 2d thechpldzen of Fleracl came xd


- Eleazar Cuccedeth,


gv bzpng


D


Pra lii


a
tits, ELEN.


The water offtryfe.


bzpnae vs info this ongracpous place , whiche
igno place of fede no? of fpgges,noz vpnes, Hoe
of pongranates , nepther ts there anp waterto
sB Dopnke. And Boles and Faron went fromthe
congregacpon puto the doze of the Tabernacle


ow Of toptnelie,and fel pon thep2 faces.on anv tver
= reped nnte the £ozde and lapie, © Aore beare the crpe
_ of Chis peopic,anb openthem top trrafure,curnafountapne of
liupng water,that thep mape befatectped, and that ther: mur:


«murpagemape cealle.) And the qloap of the Lo020¢ ap
peared vntothem. And the Logdelpake vnts
Moles lapinge : take the rod, and gather thon
' and thp bother Maron the congregacpon toge-
ther,and[peake vnto the vocke betoze their ects
andit thal reune fo2th bis water. Andthou Hak
bzpnge them water out of the roctte,to gene the
eto, roge COMpany Depnke,and theps beaftesalfo. xAnd
Poles tobe the rodfrom befozetbe Lorde, a8
Decomaundedbpm.And Boles and Faron ga:
thered the congvegacpon together befoze p rock
and po Byte fxd tbem : beare pe revellps
ghia: nif fee fet pou waterout of this rocker

ps.irFbitd nn sHoflesipite bp bis bande, ¢ with hisxrod
befmote the rocke tivo tpies,ethe water came
out abundantly and the multptudedDzankeand
€ there beaftesalfo. And the Lozbdelpake puto
Woles and Jaron: becaule pebelened menot,
tofanctifpe me inthe epesofebechpldzgen of Fi-
raell,therfozepe hall not bepnge thiscongrega

cpon into the lande hhiche ¥ paue genen them.
This isthe teater of rpfe, becaute the chplozé
of Fora froue withthe Lozd, and be wastan
yang, ric tlipedinthem. rie And Bolesx Lent melherr-

~~" rors from Cades vutotbe kpnge of Edom,

Chuslapth thy brother Jlrael: Chou knowelk
ail the trauaple that bath bappened bg. Dur fa
thers wente dawne into Eqppte, and webaue
DWelée itt Eqppte a longe tpme, and the Eqpyp-
tiang bered bs andour fathers. And when we
crped bnto the Lorde, be bearde oure popece, and
Tent an aungel,and bath fet vg bp out of Egipt
And beholde We are in Cades euen tit the veter=

warts moft citpe of thp border. We pl qo now tho-

ree" rowe thp countre* but toe wpll not go thozowe

the Feldes of bpnyarbdes, nether wpl we dzpnke

of the water of the fountapnes:we wpll go bp p

kpnges bpe wape and neptbhertourne pntotpe

rpabt bande no? tothe lefte, pntpll webe patte
thypcountrpe. and Edomanlwhered bpm.

D Thou Halt not go bp me:left F come ont a=
gapntl thewopehtheltoearde. Thechpldzen ot
4{racll fapde Dnto bpm: we wpll go bp the bea:
ten wape:and pf Jand meae dpnicofthp
wafer, J Wplpape Foz it, ¥ top! but onlp(witp-
out atty Darme)gothozowe on my fete. Hean-
fwoered: Chou Male not gothozow. And Edom
came Outagaputt bym with moche people, and
with a mpabtpe pover. And thus Edom denp-
cd togene straell pallagethozowebis countrp
wherioze Flraell turned awape from eis
the chpldzen of Zfraell departed from Tadeg, €
came Dnto mount Ho. tout) all tbe conqreqact-
on. And the Lozdetpake wuto Boles and Va-
von inimount Doz, barde bp the cooft oftheland
of Edom, fapinge: Aaron malbe gathered vuto
bps people, toz pe Mall not come into tpclauve,


Hummeri,


tobpche Y baue reuen butothe chpldzen of Yi-
racl becautle pe difobeped mp mouthatthe wa-
ter of tepic. Cake Zaronand Eleasar pis lon
and bape tbem bp intomounte i)o2,andthou
Malt frpppe Aaronout of bis vettimentes and
put chem bpon Eleasar bps fonne, and Aaron
thall beqathered bnto bps people and thall dpe
there. And Doles dpd asthe Lorde comaunded
and thep went vpintomount Ho2 inthe fpgbte
ofall themuleptude. And oles tobe of Aa-
rons clothes,and putte them bpon Eleazar bys '


fon, Jarondpedthercinthetop ofthe molt. Deter, bi,
And Wolesand Eleazarcamedowne out of p FETS


mount. Wiben all the multptube fate that Xa-

ron as Dead, thep mourned foz Aaron thpztpe

pak acd oe boutboldes of Flracl.
be.cri.dbapter.


a Ffracl banquithech kpng Arad. The Epzp Cerpentes Apg
chem. Sbebpnges Sehon € Mg areouercomein battaples


Md when kpngex Brad the Cana: a


stop Mf? Anite which dwelt totvarde pfouth
iu- apa pearde tell that Zlracicame bp the
GAE Dave tbat the fpies bad founde out
Ei SENS befougbtagapntt frac and toke
fomeofthemp2ploners. And Ffraell votocda
Votbe Dito the Lode andfapde: Ffthou wplet
delpuct thig people into my bande, 3 tpl vtter
Ip deftropetber2cttpes. Andthe Lorde pearde
tbe vopce of Frael,and delpucred them tye Ca
fanites. And they deltroped them and thep2 ti-
ftpes.andcalled the name of the* places} ozma. |
* And thep departed from mounte Boz bpp Sere’
ware of the repfee:to compaffe the lande of È- + 5ung.i.0.
pom. And the foule ofthe people fapnted bp the Df"
wape. And the people fpate agapuite Godand
agapnit @oles* therfore bait thou bzougbte .. +
ps out of Eqppte, foztodpe inthe wploetiefic
foz bere isneptbher bzeade noz water, and oure
foule Lotbeth this Pave bzeade.*Tiberfoze the iens. r.a
Lorde fentfperpe lerpentes amonge the people Sapi.rvia
tobiche Honge them:and moche people of F{ra=
ellaped. ‘Gherfo2e the peoplecaine to Doles g
fapbe : webaue fpnned, fo2 we baue (poken a=


j- -n i


nen the Lozdcandagapni the, *makeinter Crobis ’


ponto the Lorde, that be takeatoape theler: Were rit?
entes from Ys. And Boles made interceflpon
ozthe people. Andthe Lozdelapde vnto Ho-
fes: make thea fp2pe lerpent, and let tt Dp Eo a
fpgne, that ag manp agare bptten, mape loke
pponit,andlpue.*And Holes made alerpent Foow Ait.
of bzatie,and {et tt yp fozatygne. And whenp Mi resu
ferpentes bad bitten anpman,Yebebeldethefer” ~~
pente of bzafic,and washealed.+ and thechple au, erriii.e
Den of Aracll departed thence, and pricey h
Dvot


A


= |


MOboth. And thep rene from Dboth,e ppt Aozet. Andthe Lozde lapde nto £3) ofeg,feare
chedat the beapes of Abarim: euen inepe wyls bpmnot,fo2 J bauedelpueredbpmin thp pande
Dernefle whichis bytheplapnesf Goabonthe and all hts people,and bis land. And thou palt
ealtipde. and thepremouedthence,and pitched DO to bypmasthou dpdelt vnto Hehonthe bing
pon f cpuer of zarad. And t ho de thenc ofthe Amozites whtch divelt at Hefvon, Thep
and pptched on the otberfpde of Arnon, whiche {mote bpm therfoze,and bys fonnes, and all bis


- TChebeatenterpent. Pumi, Folli,


isintbe twplderneile, andcdmeth out oftbeco= people, pntpll there Mas nothpnae lefte ppm.
q {tes of the Amozites fog Arnon isthebozderof Pinotbep conquered pis petri 3 br
Woab, betwene spen andthe Amoriteg. The. rrit. Chapter:
yp tüberfoze it is{potenin the boke of the warre C puge Balac fendeth fo: Salaam (whore name inthe


ofthe Lorde, What tbpngebe dpd intberedlee, cbur ts wpptten Bileam)wDalaams afe fpeaketh.
rm andintberpuerof Arnon. Andthepeadofthe ara Othe chplozen of Flraell depar: A


rpuer that gocthdowne to Powellpngeok At, ay Ars Pelaki ephyae bpm
and firctchetb pntotbebozderof Q)oab,frome frye ? RP ab ante orb nde feloegot 9
E: LP) ee


thence it turneth pnto Weer. Che ameis weer |
02 well wherof the Lozd fpake pntogpotes:qa Gated) thefonne ofsipbozfawe all that 3l
ther the people tometber,and J wpligeue them = racli pad jone tothe Amozites: andthe Soa-
| water. Chen Alracil lange this fonge. Acple bytes wereloze afrapde ot tbe people, becaule
n pp well, fpnge pe wntobpm. Che ppucesdpage thep were manp, and ftode infearcof the chpl~
i qed tops well, thecaptapnesoftbepeopledpg- d2enof Fracll. And Boablapde vntotdeel-


sted Req weragapnt Jericho. And alar sorib


ged it withthe teacher and Withtbep2aues. ders of Madian:nowre pal this company lpcke
Mid fromthe wplderneffe thep wentto Wa Wp all tbat are roundeabonte vg, as an orelpt=
© tana, and from<patanate Mabalicl,andfrom keth vptbe grafic ofthefelde. AndwWalac the
PabalicltoSamoth,audfrom Wamothtothe fonneot stphoz was kpnge of the oabites at
halep that is intbefelbeof<)oab, vntotbetop that tyme. pe lente metiengers therfore onto 93
of the bylt that apercth befoze Fettmon. nDGC . * Salaam thefonne of 2coz in Pethoz (wbpch veu. rrii.a
racll fent meflengers Dnto Sebon,kpnge ofthe isbptyerpuce ofthelande of the chyldzen of big Petite
aum.pre. DUIOLES, fapinge: * 4 wwpll gotpozowethy folke)tocalibpm, aping:bebolde,thercigapeo
Deut. itc. Land: we Wpllnot tournetto thefelbesoz bine plecomeoutot Egppte,and beholde,thep couer
ws pardes neptberdzpnbe ofthe waters of the wel the faceoftbecarth,and dtwclouct agapnit me.
but wewpllgo alonge bp the kpngesbpewap Come nowe therfoze, and curfethps people fog
wenrrip p Ditpll toc be paftetbpcountre. * Wut Seyon mp fake. ffo2 thep are to mpgbsye foz me pffo
wolde qeue Firaellnolpcenceto pafe thorowe peraduentureImpgbtebe adie tofimptetheme€
a. byscountre, but gathered allbpspeopletoge: tobdspue themouto tbe lande. Foz J wote that
| ther and tent out agapnit Hraclintothetppl: pewhome thou bleflett,ts blefled;and whome Ë
| Deenefle. And he came to Jabesa and foughta- curtcit,iscut (cd. And the elvers of Hoaband
genta, gapnt #lraell. And Weaell mote pm im che theclders of Qadtan departed, baupnge theres
og m ipay enge ofthe fweard, and conquered bis lande rò twarde ofthe fourblapinge inthep2 bande. Jud
FoF! E Arnon onto Jabok, and Dato fcbpiozenot Am thepcame vuto Balaam, and tolde bpm p wor=
Í- mon. Woz? the bozder ofthe chpidpewot J'nmon deg of Balac. pe anfwered chem:tarp bere tht
prut. iit wask tronge. and Jiraelltokealltherecityes, npgbt and J wpil bzpnge pou Wozbe,cuen as
anddweltinallthe citpes of p Amorteg:mi ef Lozbde tallfapevntome. Andehe Lozdes of
pon andin alitbetounes that longe therto. jtor SHoab abode with Walaam. l
pelvon wasthe Citpeok Debon the aaynige of And Godcaine onto Balaam :andfapde , T
the Amozites, wobich Fought before agapn the Wwbhatmenarethele withtber And Walaã fayd
kynge of the oabites, andtoke all bps lande pnto God : Walacthefonne of siphoz, kynge of
ont of big pande, tuen bnto Brno. Ciberfore Moabhath lent vutome, fapinge:bepold, there
thepfape inthe pzouerbe :cometo Hetbon, and iga people come out sf Egipte and coucreth the
let the citpe of Sehonbe bupltand repared: fo} faceofth earth: come nove therfoze,and curfe
ghere isa fpze gone out of petbon , and aflame themfozmypfake,pffoperaduenture Jmaye be
from the citpe of &epomand batb ean a Ar abletooncrcome theminbattell, and to dDzpue
in spoab,and the inberptours of the bye places thenvonte. And Godlapde wnto alaam. Go
in Arnon. Wo Betorhe S)0ab: epre not thou With them, nether curte the people, Eog
mog, peare Dudone,bebatbputbpsfonnesto they arc bleed. And Walaam rofe vp tn pmoz-

i fipabt,andbis dougbtersto ca fiuttebntoSe npnge,andfapbe onto the Lobes of Walac:get
bon the bpnge of Amozites. Thepzemppze ts ou vuto pour tande:foz the Lozve wpl not inf-
lofte from ipelbon wnto Dibon, and we made a ermeto go with pou. And the Lordes of Moab
yploerneffe euen onto opha, wich reachetp rofe bp,and went vito Balac andfapde: Wala-

& puto Aediba.and thus 4 racldiheltinp land am wolbdenotcome with vs .. And ADalaclente
of he Amozites. And Moleslent tofearche out agapneagreater company of Lozdes and moze
Jacser,and thep toke f totynes be'ongyn: ther ponozable thentbep : whiche came to Balaam,
fo,androtedout the Amozitesthatweretberin and tolde bpm: Chuslapth Balac the fonne of

mtia * nd ther turned and wente Y towarde a= siphoz:ob, lette netbpng let the,but come onto
and. Fife. fan. And Da thebpngeok Wafan came out a- me,fo2 J tpll greatly promote the vnto greate
gapnit thet, be andall bps people tofpabteat horton’, anid wpll Doo what focuer thoutapett


ay


\


Halaams alle umeri, {peaketh.
bnfome,come 3 pape the,curfe this people for f)oab, whitch is inthe boder of Brnon,euen in :

D mp fake. And Balaamanlwered anbtapbe bn- the vtmottcoft. And wWalaclapde wnte alas

Surri c to Ee Leruauntes of Balac: «Af Walacwolbe am:dpdJ not fend for the to call ther And wher
Scueme Dis boulefull of fpluer and golde, F can fore camel thounot ontomesbecauley am not
not go beponde the wode of the Lozdemp god, able to promote the onto honoure’ Ati Bala-
todoleeo2rmoze. Powetherforetarpe yp. dere ammade an{ ere onto Balac: Lo, Jamcome
thisnygbht: that Jmapewete, what the Lozde puto the. AndcanZ nowe lape anp thpnge at
wpll iape vntome moze. AndGodcame vnto alli The Wozde that Sodxputteth inmMPmoutD ga, rriri,c
Salaam bp npabt,andlapde vatehym: Ffthe that wall Jfpeake. And Balaamwent wptyh `
men come tocallthe, rple bpandgowithtbhem Walac,andthepcame vnto a citpe of trefeg.
butloke what 3 lape ynte the, that haltthou And Walac offered oren and epe and fente Tr"
do. And Balaam role vpearclp,andfadled his ee (remardes £02 Walaam and forthe Lordeg ates soo”
alfe,and went withthe Loes of Moab. Were With bpm. And on the moro Walac toke |
And the countenaunce of Godwas angrpe Walaam, and brought bym vp into f bpe place

becaulehewint. And Pass ofthe Lozde of Waal, that thence be mpghbee le the vttermoft
Row inthe wapeagapatbpm, as berode bpon parte of the cople.
bigatle,and bistwoferuaunteg were with hym G'Che.xriti.Chapter. X
Aud when the aflelatee the angell of the Lorde C Balsam bicMeth the peopie,
Rande im the wape,andbaupng afwearde Dza- meyere F.
entn bps bande, theafleturned atpde out of the Kas ONE
wape, and wente out intothe Felde. AndWa- fy Ba
laam {mote theae to turne ber into the wape. fN

€ Æuttheaungelofthe Lozdetodeinapath EONIA
betwenethe bpnepardes, and there was a wall
on theonelpdeandanotber ontheotper. And
whenthe alle tarec the aungell of the Lode, he
Wzenched onto the Wall, and thaufte Walaame
fote vito the tall, and be finote her agapue,
And the aungell ofthe Lorde went further and
fodc tna nacowe place, where was no ware to
turne,epther to A tygbt bande o2 totbelpfte.
And when tdealle lawe theangell of the Lorde,
the fell dovwne under Walaa: q Balaam tag
woth and {mote the afle witha ftafte. And che
Loree opened the mouth of the ale and the fapd %5
Dnto Salaam: What pauc J done onto the, that poc,* Ba: aurrg.s
thou battetinpttenmenowetheetpmess And
Walaam fayde vnte the ale: becaule thou baft p
mocked me: 3 wolde alfo there were alweardin
mpne bande , Foz cuennowe wolde J kpll the.
And p ale fapde vuto Walaam-amnot J thine
ake wbich thou pat rpdden dpon fence f watte
bozne vnto this baper Wag Fener wonttodog E
fo nto thes befapde:nape,

f  _Andthe Lozde openedthe eyes of wWalaam:
and be fatoethe aungell ofthe Lorde ttandpnge
inthe wape, baupngea fwearde eae tn pis-

ande. Hebowed ppm felfe therfore, andtell man dpe tbedcatheoftherpabteous, ard that
latonbystace. And the Aungell of the Lorde mp lait endemape belpke his. And Walac fapd e |
fapdebnto bpm: Wberfore hat thou (inptten puto @alaam: what ball thoudone yntome-s :
thpncatic thee tymes:bepolde, Fcamcontagan 3 fet thetocurlem nie eneisyes,¢ beboldc, thou |
abucrlarpe, becautc thou maket thp wape cone Dattebletted them.deantwerdenviore ees |
fratp Oufo me, and the afle fate nie, and wente A not kepetbat and fpeabe it, tppep the Lorde
backe frome thzetymes : 02 cles pf he badnot bath putinimp moutd: Bnd Balac lavde vnto
e& turned fro Meow (seupng placeto we p ove inthe wape) hpi: come 3 prape the wyth me pneto another y.
4 3 bad furelp lapne the , andfaucdber alpuc. — place wbencetbou mapik ie them aaa thou pal
alaam [apde onto the aungel of the Lode: F tebut tbe bimn parte of them, and alte not
bauctyrmed : for Jopi not that thouKodettin fethenvall:curte tem out of P place foz mp fake
the bapeagapnleme.Notve therfore pF it dpl=. Andbebroughthpm into a felde(where men -
pleate the 3 wll turne bome agapne. Che aur mpabte [e farre of) euento tbetoppeofan bpll,
gellfapde bnto Walaam.gowytbtbe men:but and uplefeuenaultars,andoffredan oreanda
what 3 iape vnto the,that thaltetbou (peake. ram oneuerpaultar. Indhe fapde nto Balac
Aid lo Salaam went withthe Lodes of Was fkande berebp thy facetfpce, whple 37 goponder C
lac. 4nd when Balac beard that Balaam wag lnd the L0zde met Salaant.andxput a twozde APN, Frit
comede wente out romete bpm bntoaCptieof inbigsmouthe,ayd fapbe: goagapne bnto “eC


lac:and


the wath of the Lozdes countenaunce mape be

turnedawape from fracll. And oles lapde

erorri E onto the Judges of Z{raell xcuerp oneflape bis

+ hen that were topned Dnto Maal Peo. |

And bebolde , one oftbechplozen of Flraell

came and breugbe bnto bis bzethzena Wadia-

nitplbe wpfein thelpabte of Boles, andinthe

fygbt of alltbe multptude ofthe chplozen of 3f-

racl. that ede befoze the doze of thetaberna=

(.cgaciic. cle of wptnefle.* And when Phinebes the fonne

of Eleasar the fonne of Aaron the Preat fatve

it, be rofe bp out of the mpddeg of the company,

~ and tokea weapon inbis bande,and went after

the man of Flracl into tpe tent, andthiut them

thozowe:both the man of Jiraeland alfo p wo-

man euen thozote the bellp of ber. And p plage

4209.68 coafled fromthe chpldzen of Ficael. x Andepere
dped inthe plage. rrttit. thoufande.

© And the Lozdefpake vnto oles, lapinge:

ertib. *kIOHinehes the fonne of Eleazar thefon of Ba

{S96 HE eon the prelt, bath turned mpneangerawap fro

the chplozen of Zfracl, whple be was gelousfoz


mpfakeamongethemtbat{badnotconfumed 3


the chylden of ffracllinmyp geloufpe, Wbere
Salata fore lipe :bebolde,*¥ gue puto bpm mp coue-

naunt of peace.and be (hall bauc it and bis fede
oy $y , cuen the coucnaunte of the 4 ign
offpcefoz cuer: becaule be was gelous foz bps
Goddes fake and madcanattonemente foz the
chplozen of Firael. Chename of the Feaelite,
wwbhiche Has flapne withthe Dadianitpth wpe
was3zamtithelonot Salu, aLozdeof an poule
andbynredofSimeon. Andthenameof the
<t)adtanttitpe wpfe that was apne was Coz:
bithe Doughter of zur, a beade onerthe people
ofantoule andkpnred of Wadian.

_ Andthe Lorde fpake vnto oles, fapinge:
SAFEN X tere the Madianptes, g fmpte them, foz thep
AE trouble pou with thep? toples, which paue begp

led pou bp dilceate tn the caule of e02,and in 5

caule of tiepztpiter Cosbi Pf Doughter of aloo

of the <2)adianptes, whiche wag llapne inp dap
ofthe plage foz eos fake.
_ . CChe.rrvi.Cbapter.. |
«THe chplozen of Afraclarenowbsed. — |
Gey Caer 20 it foztuned that after the place
Ve) eggek the Lode {pake bnto Boles g E-
ee San Yer Ieasat the fonne of Jaron the pet
amin PETEA S fayinge:rtake thenombge of al the
vee ens < miultptubde ofthe chpldzen of 3frael
| fp pere and aboue thozowe ont thep2
fathers houles , all that are able to go to warre

in Firal. And Doles and Eleazar the oe a

fpake tunto them in the feldes of Boab, bp Jo-

Dane oucragapntt Jericho from twenty pere

abour.as the Lozdccommaunded Doles and]

chplodzcn of yiracl, when thep were come out of
seniors COPPt. *RubentheeldcH fonne of Hrael. The
1,Bara,ve Chpldzei Of Ruben: Hanoch, of whome chmeth
the kpircd ofthe anochites,¢ Palu of home
commeth thekpnred ofthe Daluttes. sf ipef-
roncommeth the kpnred of the Helronptes . of

Carmi commeth the kpnred ofthe Carmites.

Thele are the kynredes of the Wubenptes. And

thep were tnnombze.xclint, thoufand feuenbun-


HQumeri,


ate nombeed.
Deedand thpt. And thefonnes of Palu:Eliab
and the fonnes of Eliab Nemuel : patbanand
Abiram. Chysisthat Datbanand Abiram, _
whiche were famous in the congregacpon, and 25
* ae a. ss bene de aati PU Pot Me
anp of Cozah, whentbhey froueagapnftetbe
kozbe. x And the cart) openedher month and 2%F**- ©
fwalowed then vp: Cozaballo wag inp death
ofthat multptude, what tpme pfpreconfumed <
tiwo Dundzed and fpftpe men and thep becamea
{ygne: Rotwitbtandpnge,thechpldzenof Cos ,
tabbdped not. Andthechpldzenofimeonaf: -
ter thep2 kinvedes were Memuecl,of whome cont
meth ebe&pnred of the Memuclptes : Jamin o€
Wehome commeththe kpneed of the Faminptes:
Sachin, of whome commeth the kpnred of p Ja-
chinptes:ofsareb,commeth the kpnred of the 3a
rebites. And of Saul,commeth the kinred ofthe
Paulptes. Chefe are thekpnredes of Simeon:
enen. rrii:tboufande and two bundzed.
_ Chechplozen of Gad afterthepre spnredes €
Were sephon,of whom cometh the kynrev of the
epbo utes: Haggi,of whome cometh the bpr-
redoft. e Daggttea:Zount of ome commeth
the kpnred of the Sunptes: OF Afeni,commeth
the kpneed of the Asenptes: and of Eri,cometh
the bpnred of the rites: DE Arod,commeth
kynved of the Arodites. DF Aricl,commeth the
i sg of the Brielptes. hele are the bynrede
of the chpldzen of Gad accozdpng to thep2 nont
bes foztp thoufande and fpue bundzed.
‘Chechpldzen of Juda, Erand Onan xXand ce.rrrviiia
Crand Mnan dpedin theland of Canaan. But
the chplozen of Juba after theyzhinrebes, were
Hela, of whome cometh the kinrede ofthe Se-
lanptes : Pbares, of whome cometh the kpnred
ofthe Pbarelptes , sareh, of whome cometh the
kpneed of the zavebites. And pchplozen of hae
res twere Helton , of whome cometh the kpnred
of the belronptes:amul,of whomcome ‘Dtbe
kpnred of the Hamulptes. Chele are the kpn».
redeg of Juda,after thepznombecs.lervt.thou:
pau yn ae acha i
‘ede CHptOzen of Flacharaftertbep:kpnré:
des were: Chola, of Mhomecdmeth Apher D
of the Tholaites: Obuua of whome cometh the
kpuredo tbe Natta ai gatub commieth the
Apnecd of the Jalubites, of ImroncOmet tbe
kpnred of the Spimronites. Chele are tijekpne
reds Erra nombzeg.lrui: thou:
fande and thze bundzed. Fe benef zabi
lon after thep2 kpnecdes were Sered,of whont
cometh the Bpared of the Syeredites: Elon, of
whom cometh the kpured of the Etonytes: Ja-
beliel of whome chmeth the Kpnred of the Jahe
lites. Ehele are the kpnredes
nD Ene DUNE ca eee: thee (core thoufande
and fpue bund2ed. The chpldzen o Jofeph thos
rowout thep2 bynredes were )anafle and E-
pham. Che childzen of Banatie:+BDachir,o€ gor, reine
whome cometh the&pnred of the Pachirites. `
And Macbir begat Gilead and of Gilead com:
meth the kpneed of the Gilcadites. And thee ar
thechplozen of Gilead: ieler,of whom cometh
the Bpnred of the Hieleeites : Pelech, mone
Cometh


of the sabulo= n e


|


\


Alawe of heritage.
comnneth thekpured of the Melechites: Alricl,
- of wbomcommeth thekpnred of the @trielttes:
and Sichem, of wbom cometh the bpneed of the
~ SHichemites : Himida, of whom commeth the
bpnred of the Siunidites:and Hepper of whom
Fol biia cometh tbe kynred of the wepherites. And * 3e-
lapbead the fonne of Pepher bad no fonnes but
daughters. And the names of thedaughters of
selapbead wer:@)abela, Moa, Pagla, spilcha g
Thira. Theleare p kpnredes of S4)analle, and
the nombze of thé.lij.choufande ¢ feucn bid2e0.
€- hele are the chilozé of Ephraim after theys
kpnredes. Suthelab, of whom cometh the bpn-
red of the Sutbelabites:Wecher of whom con:
metbtbekpnredof the Becherites: Taben, of
whom commetbthe kpnred of the Cabenites.
And thefe ave the chpldzen of Suthelab : Eran,
of Hhomcommeth thekpnred of the Eranites.
@beleare pkpnredes of the childzé of Ephzaim
aftce thep2 nombpes . reri. thoufande and fpue
pundzed. And thefe are thecbpldzen of Jofeph
after thep2 kpnredes. gy
=- QTpelearethechpldzenof Wen Jaminafter
_ thepzkpnredes: Wela of whom cometh the kpn
-~ revofthe Belattes:Afbel,of whom cometh the
kpnved of che Ylbelites:Abiram, of whom co-
meth thekinred of the Abiramites: Supham, of
hom cometh thekpnered of the Suphamites:
upbamt, of whom cometh thekpnred of f Hu-
phamites. And the chpldzen of Wela were, Ard
and Paaman , from whence commeth the kpn=
red of the Ardites, and of Naaman the kpnred
of the Qaamites. Thele are the childzen of Wen
‘Jamin afterthepz kyneedes,¢ after thepz nom=
b2e8.r1v.thoulande and fprehundzed.
Thele ave the chyldzen of Dan after thep2
kyneedes:ubam, of whom comimech the kpn-
7 ~~ gen oftbeSubamites. Chele are phoutpoldes
’ of Dan after thep2 kpnredes. Allthe kpnredes
of the Subamites were after thep2 nombres
fritit.tpoufande,andfourebundzed.
$ The chplozen of Afer atterthéprekpnredes,
ive


te erna OF hotie cdta ennta fz


the Jemnites. Jelni of whome cometh the kpn:
red of the Jefuites:25zia,0f whome commeth p
kpnred ofthe Wrttes. Chechplozenof ria


| were Weber, of whome cõmeth tyekpnred ofthe
| ~ Weberites:alebiel, cf wbomcame ren Hi
| of the WHalchielitegs. And the doughdter ot Aler

wascalled Sarad. Thefearethekpnredes of


Afer after thep2 nombzeg.liii.thoufande ¢ four
undzed. The aie ptali after thep2
prredes were Jabesiel,of whom came the kph

red of the Jabestelites, Guni, of whome came

kpnred of the Stmiteg: Jeler, of whome came
kpnred of the Jeserites : Helem, of whomcame
the kpnered of the Selemites. Thele are the kpn


| redeg of Mephtali accogdpnge to ebep2 boulhol-
| des, whole nombzc ts. rly. thonfande and foure

| bundzed. @ bele ave thenombzes of the chpldzen
| of {racl:fprebundzed thoufande,¢ a thouland


fcuenbundzed, and thpztpe. bet
. ha the Lozde fpake bnfo Boles, fapinge:
nto thele the lande thalbe deupded to enberet ,


_ weerrlts agcondpngeto tbe nomber of names. x Toma-


Humi


Wollbi,
ny thon falte gene the moze enberptaunce,and
tofewe thelefle:to cuecrp tepbe thall the enberp=
taunce be Cenenaccozdpnge to the nomber ther-
of, 2otwithtandpneae.the landethalbe deup=
Oecd bp Lor, and accozdpnge to the nanies of the
trpbes of thep2 fathers,thep thal enberet,accoz
dpnge to the lot (hailthe potleilpon therok be de:
upded befivene manp and fewer. E
xThelearetbenombzesof the Lenites,af= muig.,
tevthep2 kpneedes: Gerfon of whome camethe
ktpneed of p Gerfoniteg: C abath of tobom came
the kpneed of the Cabathites:a)crart,of whom
came the kpneed of the Heravites. Chele ar the
kpnredes of p Leuttes,the kinred of f Libnites
the kpnred ot the pebzonites : the kpared of the
abelites:thekpnred of the Gulites:the kpn=
red of the Htarabites. Cabathbeqat Amram, g
Amrams wpfe wascalledxZochebed a dough= erobra
ter of Leni, wbpche was bone bnto Leutin Œ=
gppte. And the bare onto Amram Aaron, 40-
sand <i Jam thep2 (pfer.And onto Aaron
were cy pt and Abihu, Eleazar ¢3tha-
mar. * And Nadab and Abibu dprd WHeNIDEP mu iti.a
offered frraungefp2e befozethe Lorde. Anvaf=
terthep2 nombzes, there were* thecand twen= >
tpetboufand,allmalegfroma monetbolde and #2 “
aboue. feo? they were not nombacd amonge the
chplozen of Zfracl,becaule there was no enbert
tatice qenen the amonge the chplozen of Ffrael.
hele are the nombzes, wien Holes and
Eleasar the P2eaft nombzed che chplozenof gf-
raclintbeplapne of oab,falt bp Jo2dan,ouer
agapntt Jertcho. Andamonce thele there was
notamanofthem, whome Doles and Aaron 1
nombzed, when thep tolde the chplozen of Flra-
cll inthe wpldernefie of Sinap. Eo? the Lorde
fapde of them:thep Malldpe in the wploernefie,
anbtbere was not leftea man of them:faue Ca=
leb tbe fon of Fephune, ¢ Folua the Con of Mun,
 €Che.rrvit.chapter.
Cbr lawe ofthe herptage cl the Donghters of selapheap


Thetanbe ofpyomes is Heed bute Gotes, in whole tead
ig appopnted gorua.


FD the Doughters ofxselephead the 4
ESTAA Yond Conne of Heber, thefonne Pilea Se tate
haat RA Wa (De Lonne of achir thelon of Ha- 2. Foia
e ha alle: ofthekpnred of Banaffethe
selee (OnE OF Jofeph whole names were
<Habela, Roba, Pagla, Welcha, and Thyra)
came, and tode befoze Mofes, and Eleasar the
prealt,and befoze the Lozdcs, and all themultp
tude bp the dooze of the tabernacle of wptnefie,
fapinge:our father dped inthe wplderneffe:and
* has notin thecompanpe of them that cathe- 3
redtbem feldestoget per agapnitthe Lozdeinp ®* FO"
congtemacpon of Cozah). wut oped in his otne
{pnne,andpadnofonnes. Uiberfoze thents the
nate of our father taken awapefcom amonge
bis kpnred, becaule be bath no fonne + 6
*Gene onto vs therfozea polleftpon amoige vr revis

the bzethzen of our father. Ana Doles broug ~
thepz caule before the Lord. And p Lorde {pake
nto Holes, fapinge: Chedoughters of scla-
poo fpake rpgbhte:thou Halt geuc them a pol-
feflponto enberet amoncetheirfathers i
anodtpaltturne the enberptaunce ieee +

nto


Mierpnaes.
wntothem. Bnd thou Halt (peabke Dnto the chpi
Den of sfrael faping:3JEa man dpe and haue no
fon, pe thalturne bisenberitatice puto bis dough
ter. JEhehauenodougdtcr, pe haligcuc bps
enberptaunce onto bis becthzen. JF be Daue allo
no bzethzen,pe thal gene bis enberptaunce unto
bisfathers brethzen. And pFbis father baueno
bethen, pe Hall gene bps enberptaunce puto
bpm thatis nerte Cobpm of bpskpnred, andbe
fpallpoffeficit. Andthis thalbe wuto the chpl-
Denolf Zlracl alatoc of tudgement, ag p Lozde
€ bath commaunded oles.

Deute.iio nd the Lode ar nto Holes: x get the
and. FINS sy into this mount Abarim, and beholde pland
whiche J bane geuen wnto the chpldzcn of Fira-
ell. And wen thou pake lene it thou thalt be ga
thered nto thp people allo, as Faron thp bzo-
ther was gathered. j€o2 pe were dplobedpente
puto mp mouth intbedelerte of Sin,in p ftrpfe
cro. rbg.c Oe econgregacpon. Pepther dpd pefanctifpe
Fo. FOG- mem the watersbefore thep2 epes. * Chat ig
the water of ftrpfein Cades in the wyldernefle
of Spn. And Boles fpake vnto the Lorde, fap-
puge: let the Lozde Govot the {pretes of al Aeth
feta man ouer the congreqacpon, Mobpche mape
gooutand inbefoze tbem and leade them out g
in:that the congregacion of the Lozde be not ag

D pepe whiche paue not a pepe pearde,

And the Lorde lapde Ynte Boles:take Fo:
fua the fonne of Hun,in whom isthe lprete,and
puttbpnebandes vpon ppm, andfet bpm befo2e
Eleazar the preatt,and befoze all the conqrega:
cyon:and geucbpmacharge inthetelpaht.and
putofthp papie bpon bpm, that all the compa-
np ofthe chpldzcn of Firacl mape be obedpent.
Bnd be Hall tandebefoze Eleasar the Pzrealte,

ergenig.e Miche Mall alke countel foz bpinxatter the ind
anid gement of Clim beforethe Lorde. Andacco2-
ppnge vito bis wode (hall they go outandin,
both be andall thechplozen of Ffracl with bpm
anballthecongeegacpon. 4nd Qolesdpdas
the Lorde cOmaunded bpm : and he toke Jolua,
| anldfet ppm before Eleazar the zeat andbe-
‘ades, bto Fozeall theconqregacpon:* andput bis banded
~- e pponbpm.and gaue bumacbarge,as tbe Lozde
conunaunded thozotoctbhe bande of Boles.
— . © The.xrvitt. Chapter.
Chat mut beokeredoneuerpteakedape, - - :
raid Nd the Lozdelpake ynto Boles,
jlapinge:Commaunde thechplozesw
H Of Brac, anoape onto them: <p
a Offerpng anDmp beeade foz mp fa-
| a7 crifyces Which ar made fo2 aftocte
> 7A fanoure,tpall pe obferne in thepz Due featon:
rors And chou thaltelape onto them: * Chisisthe
-offerpnge Wwhiche pe Hall offer buto the 10de,
twolambes of apere olde without [pot dape bp
dap, fo: a continualburntofferpng.Dnelambe


chalethou offerinthemoznpnge, andthe other Wall ba


"aum rba ateuen. x and therto the tenthpart of an pha
of Aoure fo2a meatofterpng mpngied with bea
ten ople citepnpng the fourth parte ofanpin: Ft
isa dapip arta REENE fuche as was oabep=
ned inthe mounte Sinatfor alwete fauoure, a
facrifpce vniotpe Lode. Ano let thedapnkotkee


rprige of the fame be thefourthe parte of anbits
foz cne iambe , and inthe bolp place halte thou


cõmaundethe wyne to be powzed wnto p Lode


And the other lambe thou Walt offer at tuen 45
afterthemanet ofthe meateofterpnge, andthe =
bopnkeotterpng of pmognpng:a facrifpce fhalt
thou offer fo2 aftoete fauoure nto the Lode.
and on the Sabboth dap two lambes of apere
olde a pece,and without [pot 4 twotenthdeales ”


of Rourefoza meatoerpng myngled with ople $


and thedzpnkeofterpngetherto.Cbheburntofe
rpngc ofthe Sabboth muk be Done tn the felfe


Sabboth, befpdesthedapylpbucnteofferynge, ` Y


and bis dzpnbeoferpug. Andin the begpnupng
of pour monethes.pe thal offer a burntoferpng
butothe Lozd:fwo ponge bullocks,andaram,
and feu_enlambes of a pere olde without {pot: ¢
thze tenth deales of flourefo2 ameate offerpnge
mpngicd vb ople foz one bullocke,and two tenth
Deales of Roure foz ameate offerpnee Spe
totth ople foz one ram. Anda tenth Deale of fio
er miprigled with ople fo: ameatofferpnge vite
pe eerie erpngcandalivete fae
noure, anda facrifpce nto the Lode. :
_ And thep2 Depnbofierynges halve halfean €
bin of wpne Ynto one bullocke , andthe thpzde
parte ofanbinof wpne wntoaram,thefourth
parte ofan Din bntoa lambe. This te theburnt
offespnge of the moneth in bis moneth,thozow-
out themonetbes of the pere: and one begore fo;
alpnofferpnge ntothe Lorde balbe offered,a
ter the pari butntofferpnere and Dis dDapnkoffe:


rpnge:x And thefourtenthdape ofthe fpett mos £t0-Fi'->


neth, isthe pafleoucr oftheLozbe. Andin the peu. rois


fpftenth dape of the fame monetbis p featt:and
feucn Dapes longe Hall bulevencd a pe be ca=
ten: Ju thexfp2tte vape fhalbe an bolp conuoca-
cyon,pe pall do no maner of fernile wozke ther Lra.rrtit.b
in. Wut pe (hall ofera facrifpce fFozaburntoke-
tynge bntotbe Lozde,two ponge builocks, one
ram,and fenen lambes of a pere olde, whichear
to pou without fpot,andiet thepz meatoftering
be aly ang Woptbople:theetenthodeas -
lesallo (hall pe offer fo2 a bullocke , g two tenth
Dealesfo2 aram-onetenth deale thaltthou offer
for euerplambe ofthe feucn lambes : and an pea
gote A tennen makeanattonement fo? pon. __
Pc thall offer thele,belpde the burntofferpng D
intpe moznpnge, whiche is acontprual burnt-
facrifpce. After thig maner pe thal offre thozom
gut the leuen dapes : the fove cf the faceifpce Foz
a fwete fauoure vnto the £ ode. And it thallbe
done belpde the daplyp burnte oferpnge and bps
bopukoferpnge.and inthe leucntbdaye pe Wal
baueanbolpconuocacpon;anod pe {pall do no ter
uile ozke. Eherfoze inthe daye of pour Epatte
Eruteg, when pebzpngeanewe micatofferpnge
antothe Lozde(accozdpugeto pour wo2kes pe
ue andolp conuocacpon, and pe pall do
noferuple wogke init:but offer aburntoffering
foz a fwete fauoure puto the ioe, twoyonge
bullockes, áram, x andfenenlambes of apere zou. tsi.
olbea pece, with thep2 nieatoiicrpnges of hour
mingled with ople,thzetenth deales onto a bul
locke, two tenth dcalestoa tam, and one etl
deale


»


~ Pfferpnges:


- Beale Dntoalambe thonowontethe tenen lam-
pea anann pe age ee 62 gh i
ou. Cbdpspethalldoo belpdes tbe contpnua

utnte oferpnge,and bys meate offerpnge:and
thep thalbe Duta pou withoute (pot, with thepz
Dppnke offerpnges..

HES C Che-rrir. Chapter. ;

| ¢ etenenthmomts. ee E se
ieee din ald Lae pane of a hie
Phy eens month ye (ball bauean bolp conus
ie sA cacpon:* yetballdo then no feruple
Ge Ace ey woke. forit iga dape of blowing
Bebe, a DLO pou. But pe thaloffter a burnt
offerpnge Foz alwete fauonre Duto the Lode :
one ponge bullocke, one ram, and fleuenlambes
ofapere olDeapece thatarepnte. Andehepze
meateofferpnge balbe made of Aourempngkd
witpople, thactenthdeales vntotbe bullocke,
and two Dato the ram: andone tenth deale t=
toonclane thozowout thefeucnlambes.
And an pegote for fpnnetomake an attonemét
foz pou, belpde the Daplp burnt offerpnae of the
montth and bis meate oferpna and belpde the
daply burnte offer


grand pis meate ofterpng
and the dzpnke offerpnaes of the lame, whyche
mute be done accozdynge Dnto the maner of
tbem foga fauonre of (xwetnefie of the facrpfpce


Heu.priit.€ Of the Lode, x Bnd pe Mall baue the tenth dape


25 of that fame fenenth moneys npaip rona cacp:

on:and pe (pall bumblepour foules and thalldo
nomaner workethereitn. Wut pe Mall ofera
Durnte offecpnge puto the Lode toza {wetcla-
uoure: one bulloc&e,aram, andfeucnlambes of
& pere oldca pece, whiche Halbe bnto pou with-
outefaute. @bhepzmeateoherpnee thall be of
foure mpngled wpth ople thze tenth deales toa
bullocke,and twotoaram,andatenth deale yn
toalambe, thozowout thefcuch lambes.

Æ be goote foz fpnne, befpde the {pune offe-
tpngeofattonementanddaplp burnte offering
andthe meate and dapnke offrpuges that longe


qze.rpiu.¢ tO tbe fame. And in the Epitenth dape of the le-


uen motiecth p (hall baue an bolp conuocacpon,
¢Dothennolerutle wozie, g pe pall kepea feat
bunto the Lozdeleuendapeslonge. And pe Hall
offer a burnte offering Foz a lacrifpce ofa fitvete
fatioure bnto the Lozbde thyztenebullockes,ttoo
ranig,and fourtene lambes of a pere olde,whte

malbe withoutblempihe. Andthep2 meate of-
ferpnge thalbe of foure mpngled with oplethze
tenth deales ynto enerp one of the thpztene bul-
lockes, two tenth dealestocther of the rams, ¢
one tenth deale Vnto cache of pfourtenelabes.


And one be gote foz fpn, befpoe the i Sig Be


offerpnge with bis meate and Depnbofterpuge.


€  Andthe fecondedape, pe Wall offer twelue PAE
ponge bullockeg.tworamsg, fourtencpearlpng FESS Vy


lambes wptbont ipot: andlet thep2meate offe=
rpnge and Depnkofterpnges Duto tie bullockes,
rams, and lambes be accogdpnaetotbenomber
of them anDaftertbemaner. Andanbegote fo?
Spune belvbe she Daply burute offerp ng and bis
meate and Depnke oiferpnges. And the thp2de
dape pe Hall offer elenen bullockestivo rams, g


FQumect,


fourtene perlpnalambes wont (pot: ¢ ict they:
Meate and Depnkoferinges wuto the bullockes
taims,anb lambes be after thenombje oftyeme
paar te to themaner. Hud there thalhe ofe-
ted an De gote for tpn, belpde the daplpc burnte
offerpnae andbisimeateand maps fferpnee.

Su tbe fourthdaye pe thal offer trnbullocks
CETL ODP anes perlinges and pis
er:let thepe meate anddepngofirpnges ynto the
bullockes rams, andl i eign be p
nomber of them and.after the mance. And anbe
gote foz fpnne,befpde thedaplp burntofferpnae
and bismeat and dapnkofferpnge. Fn thefpfth
bapepe (hall offernpue bullocks,tworams and
fourtenc lambes of one pere olde apecewithout
fpot. Bnd lcttbep2 meat anddzpnkokerpnaes
bnto the bullockes, ramg and lambes beatcozs
dpnge tothe nombee of them, andafter the mas
het. £0 an begote fozfpn,belpde podaplp burné -
offerpnge and is Meat and dDzpnkoterpnge.

nd in the prec bape pe thal offer epaot bul :
lockes,tworamg,and ourtene pearlpngelaim=
bes without ipot, And ict thep2 meate gdpnk-
offringes bute the bullockes,rams and lambe
beaccozdpug tothe nombze of tbem and after
maner. And an heqote fo; (pnne,belpde the dap:
tp burntotferpnge,and bis meate and Dapnio
crpnges. Inthe leuenth dape, pe thall offer fez
uch bullockes, tworams and fourtenelambes,
that arpearlpnges and purc.Xndlet their meat
anbddzinko LES A kak sigue
lambes beaccozdpnee tathey2 nomber andaf-
tct the maner.And an begote foz (pnne,belpde p
daplp buentofferpng,and his meate and dypnk:
oiterpnge. Jn the epabt dave,pe thallbaue acol-
leccpon ofthe feate wntopou,andye Galldono |
feruple wozie therin, Wutye hall offer abut
offerpnee,a Cacrifpce for afwetefanoure bnto
Lozve:one dullocke, oncram and ffeuen perlpng
lambes withoutf{pot. Act thep2 meate pnk
offerpnaes unto the bullocke, ramandlambes
be accoz0 pnge to the nomber, and accogdpner to
the maner. Andanhegotefoz fpnne,befpde the
daplp burntofierpnge and bis meateanddzpnk-
oiterpnges. Chele thpnaes pealldo vnto the
Lozde in pour feattes : befpdepoure votes and
free wpll offerpnges, in pourburntofferpnecs,
meate oferpnges.ozpnkoferpnges.and peace=
offetpnges. And Mofes tolde the chylozen of He
tael all that the Lode cOmaunded ppm,
E The.rrr. Chapter.


CHfbouestwhentyep Hhatbekepte,and whennot,


Boa, ena NAD Moles (pake wnto pbeades of
waka Netbetapbes of thechpldaen of Firacl J


Fol. vif,


The Madianyptes


foule, andbolde bps peace thereto: then aller
powes and bondes Whpche the hath made vpon


y8 berfoule,thall tandeinetecte. But and prper


DS


father forbpd ber the fame dape that be beareth
it nonce other Do wes no? bondes which the hath
made vponber foule Hall be of value. and the
Lorde pall forgeuc ber, becaule ber father for-
bade ber. PE the badan bulbande when the vow
cdo: pronounced ought out of ber lpppes, wher-
with the bofide ber loule, and ber hutband beard
it and Helde bps peace there at thefame dape be
heardeit, then ber powes and her bondes wher-
ith fhe bounde ber foule Hall Fande in efecte.
And pf ber bulbande Fozbad her the fame dape
that be bearde it:and made ber wowe whiche Me
hath bpon her of none effecte,and releated the o-
enpnge of bet lpppes, wherwith He bounde ber
foule,the Lozde Hall Fozgeue ber. Hebe
- But eucep vowe of a wydotve, and of Her
thatis Denozced (that tbey Daune bounde thepze
foule withall (hall tande m effecte with them.
FE the vowed in her bufbandes boule, 02 bounde
ber foule with an othe, andher bulbande Dearde
it,and belde bis peace, and fozbabd ber not, then
all ber vowes and bondes toperwith He bound
ber foule, hall tande. Wut pf ber bulbande dpl-
anulled tbem,tbe fame dape that be pearde them
then notbpuge that pzoceadetb oute of berlpp-
jes in DOES aNd bondes( wherwith He bound
ner foule hall tande tneffecte:Fo2 ber bufbande
hathelowledthepm. Andthe Lozde thall foz-
ceneber. All potes and othes that bynde to
bumble the loule mape ber bufbande ftablpthe
orbzeake Wut pFher hulbande bolde bis peace
frome one Dave punto another, thenbe ftablpf


fumeri.


tnta warre ard let them goo Dpon the Madia-
npteg and aucrige the Lorde of the MHadianpteg
Let ther be cholenathoutand out of cuerp a be
of Beracl,that out of all thetrpbes pe mape fend
fometo the warre, And there toere taken out of
the thoufands cif Jirael, tioelue thoufande pze-
pared ynto warre, of cuerp trpbeathoufande..

And ofless lente them to the warre,eucn a
thoufande of eucrpe trpbe,and toprh them, Bpi-
neas the fonne of Eleasar the zeat, and the Jo


lpe veficlles: and thextrompets to blotve were e


inbig bande. Aud thep warredagapnit the Ma
dianptes,as the Lozde comaunded Moles and
flucall themales. And thep flue oe spnacs of
4Hadian amon ge other that were latne:-Name
lp, Euiand Reikem, zur and urand Reba fine
kpnges of Habtan with Balaam, thefonne of
25¢02,whome t hep fluc with the {wearde: And
the chplozen of “Jfracl toke all p wemen of Wa-
dian pzploners.and thep2 Masha fpopled
all theit catel,aiid all thepz flockes, anid all their
goodes. Andth ep burnte all thepz citpes wher-
in thep dwelte and all thep2 cattels with fpe.


And thp toke allthelpopleandall that thep B


coulde catche buth of menandbeatkes. Andthep
bought the capitpues andthat whichetbep had
taken and the [pople vnto Holes and Eleasar
the p2eatt, and ‘onto the companp of the chpld.é
Of Zfracll, euer nto the Holte that were intbe


Feldes of) ab bp Jordan, suer again Jericho —


And Mofes anid Eleazar the preat, andall che
lozdeg of the congregacion went out of the bolt
pe bi them. And oles was angrype withp
offpcers of the Hofte, wpth the captapnes ouer
thoufandes and ouer bundzedes, whypcbe came


aveDdeftroyed. |


d


fy


fheth all ber vowes and bondes tobpche Me had
ppon ber, becaule bebeldpis peacethefamedap


from iN warre and battaple: and oleg fapde
that be bearde them. Wut pf pebzeake them.at=


wnto them:auc pe faued all the wemenalpues € |
bebolbde,xthele cauledthe chpldzen of Flraeltho aurre.a. a;
tectdai be bath bearde them, beall beareber towethecouncell of*2alaam,tocommpttret: acai, >
fpnnebpmlelfe. helearetheozdpnaunces patie Ap hd Logbde, inthe bufpnefieofe- ote
which the Lozdecommaunded GHoles,betwene 0%, and there folowed a plage amonge the con- ge
amanand his wpfe:andbetwenetbefatherand gqreqacpon of the Lorde. Mowe therfoze,xflape Irrt
bps dougheer, bepnge petadamelellin perfa- allebe men chilozen,and the wemen that baue lp

; en with men flethlp. Wut all the wemen chpldzë
that baucnotlten with men, kepe alpue foz pour
felues. Bnd pe Hall remapne without the bofte
feuendapes, all that baue kplled anp pertone :
xandall that baue touched anp deade bonp,and Sod
purifpeboth pour feluesand pour pzplonerg the MF `
thp2de dape and theleuenth. Andtpzpnisle all s
pour tapmentes and all that is made offkpnneg

and all worke of gooteg beareandall thpnges


thers boufe. i
ss CTbe.rrxt. Chapter.


The ajedianptes and alaam areflapne, Dhepzapeis
gqualip beupoed. d pretent geuen of FCrael.


pare Papen ee
And Cleasar the Pzeakk [apde wntothe men D
of foarre, whpche came from the Aer thps ?
ig the ozdpnaunce of the lawe whiche the L0zde ý

EALA TDA commaunded oles, Golde fpluer, bzafie end

|: ee NEAS eÀ pzon,tpnne, and leade and all that mape abpde

I i i ~ tbefpze, pe tall make it qootbozowe the fpze,

z Be aa Rdthe Logdefpake bnto Moles, andit pallbecleane: eunertheleffe, tt Hall be


epalapinge:*auenge the chpldzen of fpzpnkled wptbipzpnilpnae water. Andall

Era Ea d lrarllof the WMadianptes andaf- M neeh the fpe Pe (Dal ARE Koo tbo }

ay oom Welterward Malt thoubegatberedon rowethcwater. And walhe poureclotpes the |

CSLL to thppcople. And Woles pake fenenthdape,andpethallbecieane. =

onto thefolke,fapinge: Harneflefomeofpou Andalterivardecome intothe Polk. Andthe
| Lode


>


PQumert. `. SEol [iif


¥ Madiandeliroved.


© shou thaie tate one popcpon ot Ep


Lozdelpake wnto oles, lapinge: take p fun
of the pare that bas taken both of thewemen
and ofcatell,chou and Eleazar the peeatt, and ý
auncpent fathers of thecongregacion.and de-
upbdettinto two partes betwene them that toke
the warre bponthem,and went out tobattaple
andalltpeconqregacpon. Andtakea popon
puto the Lozbde of themen of har, which went
out tobattaple:one foule of fpue hundzed, both
of the wemen, and of the oxen, andoftheafles,
and of the hepe:and pe thall take tt of thep2 Dalf
and geue tt puto Eleasar the prea agan peue:
offeepnge of the Lozbde. |
nb of the halfeof the opn of eae
e, of the we
men, of the oren,of the affes, and of $ pepe, and
of all maner of beafFes -and gene them bntothe
Leuites, wbhiche wapte vponthe babitacpon of
the Lozbe. And Boles and Eleazar ag spel
bpd asthe ozdecommaunded Boles. And the
botpe , and the prape whpche the men of warre
bad caughte, was lpre pundzed thoufande, and
ixcb.thoulande Wepe:and.lrriithoufande oren
Iri.tpoufande alfes:and.crvit.choufandefoules
of wemen, that badlpenbp noman. Audtbhe
balfe wppche was the parte of them that twente
oute to arre Wasthze hundzedtboulande: and
feuenand thirty thouland ¢fpue bundzed thepe.
Andthe Lodes part ofthe thepe ag tpre bun-
Bredand.lerb. And the oven were.recvt.thou-
fandc,of wobiche the Lozdes parte wag. Irril.
And the alles were.cre.thoulande andfpue
pündzed, of eee the Lozdes parte wasg.lri.
And the foules of wenien were.cvi. (Voulande,
of wobiche the Lordes parte was.rrrit.Coules.
And G) ofes gane that umme whyche was the
Lordes beucokkerpnge, wnto Eleasar the pealt
asthe Lozdecommaunbded doles. And the o-
ther paife of the chpldozen of Slracl whiche B)o-
fesfeperated from the men of warre, (thatis to
wetetbe balfe that pertapned bnto the congre-
gacion) tas thre bundzed thoufand,and.xrx vii
thoufande andfpue bundzed a and. rrxvt.
thonfande oren : and .rrv.thoufande affes, and
fpue bundzed and. rot. thoufande foules of Wwe-
men. And oles toke of this balfe that pertap
ned wnto the chpldzen of 3fracll, one pogcpon of
fyftye, bothe of thewemen and of the catelland
cane tbem vntothe Leuites, mbiche wapted t-
pon the habitacpon of the Lozbe, asthe Lode
commiaunded TPC
fanbes of the botke,the captaines ouer thethou-
{andes andthe captapnes oner the bundzedes
came forthe, andfapbe vuto oles: THp fere
uauntes bauetaben thefum of fhe men of warre
tbiche are nder our auctozitpe,and there lacs
beth not one manof hs. |
tebane therfoze bzoughta prelente onts


S the Lorde what eucepe man founde of tewelles


of golde,chepnes,bzaccllettes,tpnges,carerpit
ges and {pangelles,to make an attonement fo
gure foules befoze the Lozde. And Poles and
Eleazar toke the golde of tbem , tewelles of all
manertatbpons. Andall the golde of the heue-
offerpnge that they bened Vp tothe Lozde, (of


ofeg. Andthe offpcers of thou:


thecaptapnes ouerthoufandes andbundedes) ~


wastprtene thoufande feuen bund2ed and Fyfe
Cycles, fo: the men of eee Laan,
manfo? bym felfe. nd &)ofes and Eleasar the
Prealte, toke the golde of thecaptapnes onee
the thoufandes, and of the captapnes ouer the
cre ee - Les ugbtettin K; the Caberna=
of wptuele , for amemozpall of thec ,
of Flracll befoze the Lode. ii pecieme


@ The.rerii. Chapter.
CT Ruben and Gadandto baite thetrpbeofagaz
ee, 2 = Spee thee the pomefpan beponde aA:


emes De chpldzen oF Ruben, and the chyl-
Gog Praag O2en of Cad had an erceading great
a wey, Multprube of catell. And tobenthep
OY gangs ate the lande oF Jaser,and plande
masas OF Iled, that tt was anapte place
foz catell, the chpldzenof Rubenand the cbpl-
den OF Gadcame and {pake bnto oles and E
leasar the zeate, and wnto the Lordes of the
congregacpon, fapinge: @belande of Ataroth
and Dibon Jaser and Memrab, Welbon and €
lealeb, Sabam and Meboand eon: whyche
coutitrep the Lod {mote befoze the Congrega-
cyon of Fleaell:ig a lande mete foz catell,and twe
thp feruauntes bauecatel-wherfoze(fapa they)
piwe bauefounde grace in thy (yghte, let tips
lande be geuen bntotby feruauntes to pofiefic,
and bapnge bs not ouer Jorda.
and <3) ofes fapde bnto the childzeno— Gad
andof Ruben:thall youre becthzen goto warre
and pe thall fptte bere? Gibevtoze dpfeoage pe
thebarteotthechplazen of Frac: thep Mulde
Hot TOO ouer into the lande, wohpciethe Loade


W eS
ees S di prt
1


bathgeuenthen! « Chusdpopoure fathers aurita s


when F fentetbem from Cades Warne to fethe
lande. oz when thep went vp euen dntothe
tpuet of Efcoil,and fawe the lande: they dpico-
bey ibealbe hat anon eee
| not gootntothelande, whycie
Lozde bathe qeuenthem., s WREE te
And the Lozde was wothe thefametpme


and {ieare,faping:<Mone of the men se pe piini


oute of Egypte frome tiwentpepereoldeand a-
boue, Hall fethe lande twhiche 3 ftvare unto 4.
babam, Jlabac, and Jacob, becaufe thep bauc
not tobhelpe folowed me:faue Caleb the foune of
Sephune the Henelpte, and Jofua the fonne of
J2un:£o2 thep baue Folowed the Lozde. Audthe
Lopbde wasangrpe with Fraclandmadethent
Wander in the wpldernetle Fogtpepere, wntplalt
the gcenesacpon that bad done cuell in theipghte
ofthe Lordewereconfymed. ae

And beholde, pearerpfen vp in pour fathers
teade as anenceeale of{pnful men,to augment
the fearce ozath ofthe Lorde, totoarde Frael.


for pipe turneawapfroatterbpm,betoplpct :


agapne leane thepeople in the wplocrnefic, and
pethall deftrope all this folke. Andthep wente
neve ppm and fapde : toe top ll buplae pepe fola
bes berefoz onr epe and fo ount catell, ¢oxcway
toeitpes foz ourchpldzen: Wut we ourefelued
Wwplgoreadp armed befoze thechplozenof Ffrå
el, butpl we baue brought the onto Ot pue

t Ahü


By tae
ed Pr


Thetowurnyes


of Andoure chpldzen ow (and what fo ever we mape hare)

(hall owel inthe fenced citpes, becaule of the in-

habptergof the lande.We wpll notreturne vit

to our boufes, wntpl che cbhpldzen of $fracl baue

enbereted, euerp man Dpsenberptaunce. Zep-

ther wpll we enberet with them on ponder fpde

‘02dan fozwarde, becaule our enberptaunce ig
Aliento vs on this fpde zordan callwarde.

D And Wofes fapde bnto them:pfpe wplldo

tbis tbpnge ,andgobarnefied befoze the Lozde

fo watre,and wpl go all of pou in barteffe oner


Jordan before tbe Loade, vutplbebane caite [ay


oute bigenempes befoze bpm:and ontpl f lande
bef{ubdued befoze the 020, then pe thal retucne
and be without fpnne before the Lorde, and be=
fore Fracl,and this lande aibe pour poffettp-
on before the Lorde. Wut and pfpewplinotdo
fo, bebolde, pebauefpnnedagapnt the Lode:
be fure pour [pnie py dost ae pou out.

PLoiwe therfore, buylde citpes foz pour hpl-
dzen, and foldes Foz poure hepe,and doo that pe
bauc poten. The chpld2en of Gad and the chpl-
Den of Ruben [pake yuto oles, fapinge: chp
fernauntes wpl dooag mp Lodecommaundeth
Murchpldzen, our wpueg our Hepe and our ca=
tell (all temapne bere in thecpties of Gilcad,

gotaiig,c Wut x tp peda be Ae gooall barnelicd fo
varre and vnto battaple before the Lode, as
mp Lozdelapth. Budforthepze lakes Soles
comaunded Eleasar the Peat, and Fofua the
fonne of Mun, andthe auncpente fathers of the
typbes of the chpldzcn of Zlrael: ¢ Boles fayde
pnto them: PFthechplozen of Gad andthe chpl-
dzen of Ruben Wpll go with pou ouer Jordan,
all prepared tofpgbt before the 1 020, then whe
the iandeis{ubbdued befoze pou , pe Wall gene
than the lande of Gilead to poffeffe : but and pf
they toplinot go oucr bith pou tn Darnefle,tpep
(hall baue thepze poffeilpons amonge pou inthe
lande of Canaan
- Andthe chpldzen of Gadand the chpldzen
of Ruben anlweredfaping : Asthe Lozoe bath
fapoe onto thp feruauntes, fo wpll wwe doo.
gor, prita * Wie wpll goo harneiied before the Lo2dc into
tic lande of Canaan: that the pofleflpon of our
enberptaunce mape be ontbhistpde Jordan.
And oles qaue vuto pchplodzenof Gad, and
totbecbpldzen of Ruben, ¢ vntobalfe the tribe
of Wanatle the fonne of Jofeph, the kpngdome
of Schon kpnge of the Amozites,and the kyng
bome of Da: pnge of Walan, the lande wpth
the citpestberof in thecoftes and Cttpes of the
countreproundeaboute. Andthechpldzen of
Gad buplt pibon,and Atarotp,and Aroer,and
Atroth, Hophan Jacler, and Jeqabea, Weth-
nimra,and Wetharan , fenfcd Citpes, and thep
buplt foleg forthe epe. |
©  Ansthechplozenof Ruben buplte Helbon,
€leale, Rirpatbaim, Nebo, Waal, Deon,and
turned thep2 names, and Sibaima allo: ¢ gaut
otbernames unto tie citpes wbpcbe thep dupl-
Ded. Andthe chpldzen of Hachtr: thelenne of
Panatie went to Sead. tobe tt and put oute
the Amozites thatdweltetherin, And’ oles
gaue Gilead nto Wachie the fonne of Danal


Pumi =


of Firal.
fe and be Diwelte therin . Jnd * Jabir the Lon of Deut. sib
anafle wenta tokethe (mall townes therof,
andcalled them Banoth Jair .And Pobah wet
and toke Henath,and the townes ligpng therto
and calledit Mobathb, after bpsowne name.

C The.rrriti. Chapter. '


@ She tournepes of Atracllarenombged. Whep are coms
matunbeD to kpl the Cansanites,


a et,


+ "ul
a: ry


fer,and.Ire.palme trees and they pptchedthere
| And tbep remoued from PAPALA pait
bp tbered fee. Andthepremoued fromethered
fee, and lape inthe xwpidernele of Din: And Corbis _ .
DEON thep? tourney out of the Wwpldernes of j
Hin, and fet Vp thepztentesin Daphka. And
thep Departed from Daphka and lape in Alus.
And thep remoucd from Alug, and lapeatia Erorvtis
phedim, where was no water Foz tbe people to
Depnke. Bnd thep departed frome Rappedim,
and pptchedinthextoploernefleof Hinai. —stro.rir,a
_ Andthep rvemoned frome thedeferteaf Hi- €
nat and pptched at thexqraues of lult.Andthep wume.rt.s
departed trom the fepulchzes of lut, and lape at
xipazerory.And thep Departedfrompaseroth, sume.si.g
and poco in Rithma. And departed frome
Ritdma , sndpptched at Rimon Pares. And
thep departed rom Rimon Pares, andpptched
in Libna. And thep remauedfrom Libna, and
pptched atiila. And thep fournepedfeom Ri-
a, anDpptched in Rebelatha. Andthep wente
frome %Kebelatha , and pptchedinmounte Da-
phar. And thep remoued from mount Sapber,
andlape in Parada. Andthepremoucd frome
Harada,andpptched in Dakebeloth.andthep
remoued from <Dakebeloth,andlap at Cabath
And thep departed frome Cabath, epptched at D
Charath. Ind they remouedfrom Charath,¢
pptcbedin ithca. Andthep went fro DPithea
and


| Thelourneys.


and pitched in båfimonad. Jnd iep departed fró

_ Halmona,¢lap at SHoleroth. And thep depar-

ted from eHofleroth and pptched at Bane Jakan

And thep remoucd from Wane Jakan, ¢lape at

Horadgad. Andthep went from Hozradqad g

ptchedDinJathbatba. And thepremouedfrom

athbatha,andlap at Abzona. And they pe

tedfrom Abzona,and lap at €3con gaber. And

~.. thepremoued frome Eseon gaber, and pptebed
suns. Fra tn phexwwploernetie of Sin, which ts Cade.

GE  AndthepremoucdfromMades,and pitched

in mount 1902, whicheis inthe edge of thelande


-um. rrd of Edom. x And Aaronthe Pzeafte wente


Deu-FFUS- Yp into mount #02 at the commaundemente of
the Lo2de,anddped there, cucn tn the fourtpeth
pere, after thechpldzcn of Zlracl were come out
of the lande of Eqyppte, and inthe fpattedape of
the fpftie moncth. And Aaron was an hundzed
and. rriii pere olde when be dped in mount Hoag.
Andkpnge Eradthe Canaantte, whiche dwelt
inthefouth dt rhe lande of Canaan, beard of the
commpnize of thechpldzenof Jirael.

And they Departed from mountexijo2, and
pitched inzalmona. And thep departed fromal
mona and pptcpedin Phunun. And thepdepats
ted from bunun, and pytchedin Dboth.

qf And thep departed frome Dboth, andpptched
pumppi e M Zebabarim, and towarde the bozder of S0-
ab. And thep departed from + Jebabarim, and
pptchedtn Dibon Gad. And thep remoued from
Dibon Gad, andlapein Ximon Diblathaim.
And thep remoued frome Vlmon Diblatbaim,
and pptcbcd inthe mountapnes of Abarim bea
fore abo. Andthep departed fromthe noun:
tapnes of Abarim , and pptched u the feloes of
PHoab falte bp Jordane: ouer agapiulte Feri-
cho. Andthep ppthedbp Jordan, frome Weth
autto.a. Watefmoth * vnto the plapne of Sittiminthe
sees cae Lonbe phie eA NAN
! the Lozde fpakke Duto oles tn the fel:
des of Moab, by Jordan oueragapntt Jericho
- Taping: (Speake Unto thechpldzen of Flrael,and
Dentdit,8 fave yntothem : x When peare come ouet Joz-
dan toentte into thelanbde of Canaan, pe Mall
dzpue outall thetnbabpters of the lande before
pow and deltrop all thep:ppetures, and bzeake
a lunder alltpepzpmanes of metall andplucke
downeall thepzaultars. Jnd poflfefe thelande
anddwWwel therin, foz 3 bane geuen pou the lande
tocniopert. And peall deupde the enberp-
taunce of thelande bp lot amonge poure kpnre-
des, xand gene to manp,the moze cuberptaunce
and to tbe fewertbelelleenberptaunce. Bnd
po ure enberpraunce balbe in the trpbes of pour
athers,cuctpe mans enberptauncein the place
taguan Dobere bys lot falleth.*2Butand pipe wpll not
anv, —_ Bepuc out tdeinpabpters of theland before pou
then thofe whiche petet remapne of them; fhal-
be pzpckes tn pour epes and Dartes in poure fp-


Jau Fpi b


SUS. EF DIE


des, and Hall vere pou inthelande whereinpe


Dwell. Wozeoucr,tt wyllcometopatie, that J
{pal do vito pou,as F thought todo unto the.
C The. rrriiii. Chapter.


CDhe coales anntozders ofthe lande of promefle. Cer:
‘tapne men atealpgued Co beupoe the tande, ;


Jaume


Follir,


L


bntopourcenderptaunce, thelande of Canaan
with Der coafkes.+ And pour fouthquarter Hal- gor.rb.g¢'
be from the wplderneffe of Hin: alonge bp the
cofteof Edom, forbat pour fouthquarter ceache
vpon the {pode of the lalteleccalwarbde: and fee
a compaffe from the Coutbe vp to Acrabim:and
rcacbefosinna. And qo outtromthe fouthe to
Tadeg Warne,and goo out alfo to Hasazr adar,
and co alonge to Asmon, andfet acompafle a=
gapne frome Asmon vnto therpuce of Egpprte, 3
and fall goo oute atthe fee. 7
And let poure wellquarter be the greate fee: W
letthe fame fee be pour wWetcofke. And this thal:
be pour nozthquartcr:pe thal compafle pour boa
det frome the greate fee Duto mount por. And
from mount i902, pe Halldelcrpbe pour border,
tyll itcome puto Hemath, and the endeo? the
colte (palbe at sedada, and thecolte thallreache
outetosiphon , and goo out at HasarEnan.
TRS jall bepoure nozthquarter .
nd pe thal compafle ponr caftquarter from
PHaserenatito aac And the coftethall qa
bownefrom Spephanto Ribla on thecat {poe
of Ain. And thetame bozder hall delcendeand
woo outat the [pde of the fee of Cenereth eate-
warde. Andthen godowne alonge bp Jordan,
andleane at thefaltefce. And this thalbe pouse
lande With thecoftes therofrounde aboute.
And Moles commaunded che chylozen of Ff C
rael, fapinge:¢bts ts the lande Whiche pe pallen
Deret bp lot, andiwbyche the Lozde commaun- ,
ded fogeue vntonpne trpbesandanbalfe:xfo2 Aurrei e
the ti ofthe cbpldzen of Ruben accozdpnge
tothe boutbolds of thep2 fathers, andtbetrpbe’
of the chpldzen of Gad, accozdpnye to thep2 fa-
thers houtpoldes, and dalfethe trpbe of a.
nalle paue recepucd thep2 enberttaunce:two trp
bes €anbal€ baue recepued thep2 enberptaunce
on the other T of Jordan, oner agapntt Jeri-
choectward. andthe Lo2zde [pake to Holes, fap
ing: thele ave thenames of p men, which thal de-
upe the land puto pou: Eleasar p prett g golua Denit d
the fon of un. And pe Hall takealloa Lozde Irria
of cuerp trpbe oben pe Deupde the land. Chena
nies of the men are thele:DFtbhe trpbe of Juda,
Calch the fonne sf Jephune. De the trpbe of the
chplozenof st ae be ey the fonne of Am:
iud. Dfthetrpbe of en Jamin, Elidad: the
fonne of Ciflon. Df thetrpbe of EEE of
Dan the Lozde Hucki,thefonneof Jagli.
Servo amonge the chyldzen of Jolcph fo2 the
trpbe ofthe chplozen of Qanafle the lozde Ha-
niel thefeune of Ephod.  Dfthetrpbeof the
chplozgenof phan, the Lorde Camuell, the
foune Sipbtan. Ofthe trpbeof the fonnes
ofsabulon, the Lode Elisaphan : the fonne of
Parnache. DEthetrpbe of the chplozen of Jfa-
char, the lozde Baltiel : the fonne of Alan.
ofthe trpbe of thefounes of Per, the lowe Ae
bibud the fonne of Salomi,
htt Dthe


Hancttarpes


Of thetrpbe of the chplozen of Mephtbalt,
the Lorde eda, Œl, the fonne of Ammihud.
Shele are thep whome the Lozde commaunded
to Drupbe the enberitaunce ynto thechplozen of
Jfraclinthe lande of Canaan.

CChe.rrrb.Cha pter.
qtinto theleuites are genen cepties aud (u burbes. Sbe epz


tiesofrefuge. Tbe lameotmanquellpnge. Foz one mans
pines pall no man be conbempnit


“i cer eas Pd the Lobe lpake pnto Dolesin
SoA Vegi the feldes of oab bp Jordan, ouer
peaa eaga pni Jcricho,faping:comaund
etra Othe chpldzcnof Jiraell, p thep geue
Ves sss Gontotbhe Leuptes of p enperptañce
FoLrri.a o€thep2poltellpon, *cttpestodwellin. And pe
fhall qeuealfo wnto the Citpes of the Leuttes,
fuburbes barde bp thep2 Cpties rounde aboute
them. Tbe citpes Wall thep baue todwel in,and
the fuburbes fo2 thepz catell, and foz thep2 go
(effpon and all mance of beattes of thepzs. And
the Cuburbes of the Citpes tobiche pe Hall eue
wnto the Lenites , Hall ceache from the wall of
the citpe ont warde,a thoufande cubites rounde
about. And pe pall mealure without the Citpe
of rbeea Bieter thoufande cubptes. And of
the fouth{pde,twortboufande cubptes. And of
thewett{pde twortbouland cubptes. and of the
nozth {pdetwo thoulandecubptes alto: and the
citpe hal be in the mpodes. And thele Halbe the
fuburbesoftbepzcitpes. ;
%3 And fromeamongetbe Cptpes whpche pe
FOta-FF.a Chall ecue vuto the Leuites, * there albe (pre
Witpes foz refuge, whpcbe pe hall appopnte to
that entente, that be wbpche kplleth, mape Ape
thpther. Andtothem pe hall adde. rlii. citpes
ango: fo that all thecitpes whpcbe pe Hall geue
the Leuttes, mape be. rl itt. wpth thep2 fubur-
beg. And thecitpes whiche pe hall qeuc,thalbe
out ofthe poffellpon ofthe chplozen of Zlraell.
Thep that baue manp, thal geue manp. Wut of
them that baue fewe,pe hall take fewe. Cucrp
one (hall geucof bis citpes pntotbe Leuites ac-
cozdpng to the pee 2 tena wbiche be enberp-
teth. And the Lorde {pake bute Moles, faping:
{peake Dnto thechplozenof Jfraeland fape Vn-
peat.rir.a to chem:xwben pe be come ouer Jozdane into p
Joe lande of Canaan,pe thallappopnte pou Citpes
to be Citpes of refuge, foz pou: that be whpche
fieeth a foule ynwares:mape Apethbptper. And
thecttpe halbeto fipe from p auenger of bloude
that bewhbicbe kplleth dpe not, wntpll be Rande
befozetbecongregacpen in tudgement .
And of theletpre fre Citpes Mohiche pe thall
- gcue,pe thal geucthze on thistpdeZozdane,and
tize mtbelandeof Canaan. Andthelelpre fre
cirpes thalbe arefuge botbe foz the chpldzenof
Flracl, andfo2 the ftraunger, andfozbpmtbat
owelleth amonge pou:that all thep whiche byl
anp perfonne Dutoares,mape fpe thptber.


* And pf anpman{mpte another wan inftrue Fg


Erd Menteof pron thathe dpe, thenisbea murthe-
rer,and hall dpefoz it. Viheimptebpm witha
thzowpng fonetbatamanmapedpe with and
pibe dpe, betpatfmote pym isamurtherer, let


umett.


foz refuce.
the famemurtherer be apne therfore. D2 pF he

fmpte bpm wpth a bande weapon of feoed that |
amandpe wpth thenptbedpe, beisamurthe-

ter, lette the murtherer beflapnetherfozs .

The Zullpce of bloude Hall flape the mur»
therer: when be meteth bpm, be mape lape bim.
mut pf bethzulte at bpm x of bate, oz bourleat Deute.rr.c
bpm with lapinge of wapte, p he dpe, o2 mpte
bpm wpth bps bande of enupe, that be dpe, be
that (mote brm, pall dpe,foz be iga murtheeer.

‘Che Jultpee of blonde (hall Nepe the murtherer
as fooneas be fpndeth bpm.

Wut andpfhe pu !
not of bate, ozcalte at bpm topth anp maner of
thpnge, and not of lapinge of hapte: oz cafte aa
np maner of foneathpm (that aman mapedpe
withjandlfawebpmnot. Andbecatte it vpon
bym and be dpe, and was not bps enempe, nep=
tber fougbte ppmanpbatme. Thenthe Con-
greqacpon (pall iudge betivene the eper and
the executer of bloude infuche cales? And the


: congteqacros fhall delpuer the fepe oute of


the bande of the aucnger of bloude andthe con:
‘egacpon thallreftoze bpm agapne onto the
ptie of bps refuge, whpctber be was fiende.


edbpmbpchaunce and — =;


and be Hall bpde there + dntothedeathe of zon. rro `


the bpe Healt, whiche was anopnted with po-
lpeople. Xut and pt the flepercome witboute
the bozders of bis pziupleged Citpe tobyther he
was ficdde pf the auenger of bloude fpnde bpm
without the bozders of his free towne and fepe
the murtherer , be Hall be qpltelefie, becaulebe
fhulde haue bpdden tn bis free towne, bntpll the
beatbe of the bpe Pzeafle, andafter the deathe
of thebpe Peake : toretourneagapne ynto the
lande of bps pofieiipon.

‘Chele Commaundementes hall bea lawe
bnto pou ,fo2 youre generacpons inall poure
Dwellpnges. Cibolo enertplleth a foule, the-
fame man flepermufte be flapne bpm felfe; thos -


rower wptnelles. Mepther Hall one toptnefle ears `> `


aunfWwereto puttea matitodeathe. Bozeouer anv.rir.v.
pe Hall take none amenbdes Foz the lpfe of f mur
theret , tobpche is ourtppeto dpe: Wut be Mall
be putte to Deathe. Rei

Alfo pe thalltakeno monep of bpm that is
fedde to a free € ptpe, that be houlde come a-
gapne, and dwell inthe lande, before thedeathe
of thebpe Prea. Andle that pe polute nos the
lande Dobiche pe wall dwell in: Foz bloude defp-
letb thelande. Andthelandecan none otber-
toile be clenfed of the bloude that is tweddether-
in, but bp the blonde of bpmetbat hedde blonde.
Detple not therfoze the lande whiche pe Walin-
babpte,for Jam inthempoddestherof: Euen J


the Lozdedwell amonge thechplozen of Zlrael. d


Í C Therret Chapter.
@ aAnolter fo: the marpage of the doughtrrs of telaphead,
Dne of the (tphes mapenot marpe with another,
hay wee, 320 Che auncpent fathers of the chil X
se Mead deen of Gileadthe fonne of Bachir
ate ee N the onne of anafle ofthe bpnred
a LOO) of the chplb2é of Jofeph came forth
Ee lemened ANC pake before Moles ¢ the pepn
ces and auncpentfatherg of pchpldzen of Ffrael
and


`
n


Py Deuteronomium:


Hurbil? andfapde: * The Lorde coiaunded mp Lorde,
- togene thelandeto enberpteby lotto thechpl-
Been oF Zfraeil. |
1 Goddes bebalfe, to gene theenberptaunce of

nu. proita xselanbrad oure bother vito bps dougbters.
wdibome pEanp of thefonnes of the otber trpbes
of Ffraell take toxpucs, then Hall theps enhe-
| taunce be taken frome the cnberptannce of oure
fathers, and Hall be put bntothe enberptaunce
oipe trpbe i tocp are recepued into: and
: thall be taken frome the lotte ot oure enberp =
;  taunce. Andwhenthe pere of Jubelye of the
ete chplozen of Ffraclicommeth , then Mall thepze
~ cnberptaunce be putte onto theenberptaunce of
thetrpbe therinto thep arrecepued: and fo thal
torp2 enberptaunce be takenawape from them
å berptaunce of tbetrpbe of oure fathers. |
6° And Holes commanded the chplozen of
E ant raccozdpnge tothe worde ofthe Lode,
ping:the sbplozen of the trpbe af Jofeph bauc
fapde weh. This therfore doeth the Loji e com:
maunde the Dougbtersof selapbead, fapinge :
Tobit x lette them be wpuesto whome thep them Telf
i thpnite beke, onclp tothbekpnred andtrpbe of


E
SOA


| thep2 father thalltbep marp,fo thall not the en= lise g |


i berptaunce of the chpldzen of Zlrael remoue frő
trpbe to trpbe, when the chpldzen of 3fracllaz
bpas mere nan in the enberptaunce of ptrpbe

-~ And euerp Doughter tbat pofleileth anp en-
€ berptaunce in mp tepbe.et thechplozcn of Jita-
ell, all be wpfe vAto one whtehers of the kpn-
red of the trpbe of ber father, that the chplbzen
of {fraell mape entope eucrpemanthe enberp:
faunce of bis father: Nepthcroughte tbe enbe-
fe rptaunce to goo from one trpbe to another : but
cuerpe one of the trpbes of the chpld2en of Ffra-
| ellmuftabpde inbps otone cnberptaunce.

wes Andasthe Lorde commaunded oles : t-

| uen fodpdde thedougbtersof sclaphead. And

me: D Mabcia, Thirsa, Pagla, Wilcha- ¢ Noa were
| marped vnto aerar fathers bzotbers Connes,
| whpche were of the kpnredde of thechpldzen of
spanafies:thefonne of Jofeph; andfotbhepz eu-
ating ada eal ARRS
offtpepretatper. . `

‘Thele arce the chinaundementes and latveg

wbpcbe the Logdecommaunbed bp the
"e bande of Soles, onto the pebaee
of Slraell inthe felbes of He-
ab: bp Jordane oner a=
gapni Jericho.


(553).


-r E — =


E The ende of the fourth boke of So-
Teg, called inthe Hebsue Vaig:
dabber:and inthe Latpn

Lumet


a7


— | a M <==


Andmp Lowdecommannded |


Tolir:
C Theipfth booke of


oleg called inthe Hebzue:Ellehad=
Debarim andin the Latpn, Dene
Chet Veoh:
cei sande of in before.


i = ‘Detnefle: th the plapne oueras
gapni pred fee, ber twene Pha:


zA f
feti opbel, Laban, ba


ofa ramand


maeme erot F DHabab, elenen dapes
iurnep fro oerh onto manet Darne Dp mone
Seir. And it foztuned the fpzte dapeofthe ele-


ucnthimonethin pfoztpeth pere, Holes fpake
butothechplozen of Firael accozdpnge vnto al
that the Lozd bad ginen bpm incõmaundement
nto them,atterthat he badlinptecnesycbonp on ect
kpngeof the Amozttes which dweltin Helbon, ” *
and Dg kpnge of Ealan whiche dwelt at Atta
roth ineebdzat. Dn the other (pde Jozdan in the
lande of Doab beganne oles to declare thps
lawe,faping:the Lorde our Oodlpake buto vs
in Here fapinge: pebauedibelt longe pnough
inthis mounte departe therfore and take poure
iournep-and goo Dnto the bpll of the Amoyzites,
and wntoall places npe therunto.both wnto the
lapne and bylles and dales:totbe fourth, to the
ceg fpe, to thelande of Canaanand vnto Li-
banon:cucn onto the greatrpuce Euphrates.
‘Mebolbde, Jhauelet that lande befoze pou:
fe eas efictbelandembycbe the Lode sene.rt.»
yare bute pour fathers Abrabam, Blabacand and.rvii.b
Jacob , to geue outothem and theypze fede after
them. And Plpake ynto pou the fame ceafon,
fapinge: Jam not ableto beare pou mp felfe a-
lone. Kor e Lozde pour God hath multiplped
pou:and beboloe, pe arethisdapeas the farres
of heueninnombze(the Lode God of poure fa-
thers make poua thoufandetpmes fo manp mo
as pear,and bilele pouagbebath pzomtfed pou
PHotve can +F mp Cel€ alone beare the cumbzatice fff OMe
charge and ftrpfe that isamonge pou s bzpnge
(fromamonge pou menofwplaome and of Vit-
der fandpnge,and experte,accozdpnge to poure
trpbes,and 4 wll maketbemrulers ouer pou.
And pe anfwered me andlapde: that whicbe
thou bafte fpokenis goodfo2 3 todoo. And{o
oute of pour trpbes J toke thecaptapnes,(men
of wpldome : and that were erperte) and made
them rulers ouer pou, captapnes oucr thoulan=
bit Degand


Py Deuteronomium:


Hurbil? andfapde: * The Lorde coiaunded mp Lorde,
- togene thelandeto enberpteby lotto thechpl-
Been oF Zfraeil. |
1 Goddes bebalfe, to gene theenberptaunce of

nu. proita xselanbrad oure bother vito bps dougbters.
wdibome pEanp of thefonnes of the otber trpbes
of Ffraell take toxpucs, then Hall theps enhe-
| taunce be taken frome the cnberptannce of oure
fathers, and Hall be put bntothe enberptaunce
oipe trpbe i tocp are recepued into: and
: thall be taken frome the lotte ot oure enberp =
;  taunce. Andwhenthe pere of Jubelye of the
ete chplozen of Ffraclicommeth , then Mall thepze
~ cnberptaunce be putte onto theenberptaunce of
thetrpbe therinto thep arrecepued: and fo thal
torp2 enberptaunce be takenawape from them
å berptaunce of tbetrpbe of oure fathers. |
6° And Holes commanded the chplozen of
E ant raccozdpnge tothe worde ofthe Lode,
ping:the sbplozen of the trpbe af Jofeph bauc
fapde weh. This therfore doeth the Loji e com:
maunde the Dougbtersof selapbead, fapinge :
Tobit x lette them be wpuesto whome thep them Telf
i thpnite beke, onclp tothbekpnred andtrpbe of


E
SOA


| thep2 father thalltbep marp,fo thall not the en= lise g |


i berptaunce of the chpldzen of Zlrael remoue frő
trpbe to trpbe, when the chpldzen of 3fracllaz
bpas mere nan in the enberptaunce of ptrpbe

-~ And euerp Doughter tbat pofleileth anp en-
€ berptaunce in mp tepbe.et thechplozcn of Jita-
ell, all be wpfe vAto one whtehers of the kpn-
red of the trpbe of ber father, that the chplbzen
of {fraell mape entope eucrpemanthe enberp:
faunce of bis father: Nepthcroughte tbe enbe-
fe rptaunce to goo from one trpbe to another : but
cuerpe one of the trpbes of the chpld2en of Ffra-
| ellmuftabpde inbps otone cnberptaunce.

wes Andasthe Lorde commaunded oles : t-

| uen fodpdde thedougbtersof sclaphead. And

me: D Mabcia, Thirsa, Pagla, Wilcha- ¢ Noa were
| marped vnto aerar fathers bzotbers Connes,
| whpche were of the kpnredde of thechpldzen of
spanafies:thefonne of Jofeph; andfotbhepz eu-
ating ada eal ARRS
offtpepretatper. . `

‘Thele arce the chinaundementes and latveg

wbpcbe the Logdecommaunbed bp the
"e bande of Soles, onto the pebaee
of Slraell inthe felbes of He-
ab: bp Jordane oner a=
gapni Jericho.


(553).


-r E — =


E The ende of the fourth boke of So-
Teg, called inthe Hebsue Vaig:
dabber:and inthe Latpn

Lumet


a7


— | a M <==


Andmp Lowdecommannded |


Tolir:
C Theipfth booke of


oleg called inthe Hebzue:Ellehad=
Debarim andin the Latpn, Dene
Chet Veoh:
cei sande of in before.


i = ‘Detnefle: th the plapne oueras
gapni pred fee, ber twene Pha:


zA f
feti opbel, Laban, ba


ofa ramand


maeme erot F DHabab, elenen dapes
iurnep fro oerh onto manet Darne Dp mone
Seir. And it foztuned the fpzte dapeofthe ele-


ucnthimonethin pfoztpeth pere, Holes fpake
butothechplozen of Firael accozdpnge vnto al
that the Lozd bad ginen bpm incõmaundement
nto them,atterthat he badlinptecnesycbonp on ect
kpngeof the Amozttes which dweltin Helbon, ” *
and Dg kpnge of Ealan whiche dwelt at Atta
roth ineebdzat. Dn the other (pde Jozdan in the
lande of Doab beganne oles to declare thps
lawe,faping:the Lorde our Oodlpake buto vs
in Here fapinge: pebauedibelt longe pnough
inthis mounte departe therfore and take poure
iournep-and goo Dnto the bpll of the Amoyzites,
and wntoall places npe therunto.both wnto the
lapne and bylles and dales:totbe fourth, to the
ceg fpe, to thelande of Canaanand vnto Li-
banon:cucn onto the greatrpuce Euphrates.
‘Mebolbde, Jhauelet that lande befoze pou:
fe eas efictbelandembycbe the Lode sene.rt.»
yare bute pour fathers Abrabam, Blabacand and.rvii.b
Jacob , to geue outothem and theypze fede after
them. And Plpake ynto pou the fame ceafon,
fapinge: Jam not ableto beare pou mp felfe a-
lone. Kor e Lozde pour God hath multiplped
pou:and beboloe, pe arethisdapeas the farres
of heueninnombze(the Lode God of poure fa-
thers make poua thoufandetpmes fo manp mo
as pear,and bilele pouagbebath pzomtfed pou
PHotve can +F mp Cel€ alone beare the cumbzatice fff OMe
charge and ftrpfe that isamonge pou s bzpnge
(fromamonge pou menofwplaome and of Vit-
der fandpnge,and experte,accozdpnge to poure
trpbes,and 4 wll maketbemrulers ouer pou.
And pe anfwered me andlapde: that whicbe
thou bafte fpokenis goodfo2 3 todoo. And{o
oute of pour trpbes J toke thecaptapnes,(men
of wpldome : and that were erperte) and made
them rulers ouer pou, captapnes oucr thoulan=
bit Degand


Sourneys,
des and once hundzedes oner Fpftp and ouer tet,
aud offpcers amonge pour trpbes.

C AndAchargedpour Judges that lametpm
fapiuge : beare the caufe of poure bzetbhzen, and

Fob. dio. Ajudgerpgbteoullp bettwene euerp manand big
brother, and the fraunger thatis with bpm.
&ye that pe knowe no faces intudgement:xbut

Beut-rir-¢- heave the fmallas wellastheqreate, and bea-

~~ frapde ofuo man,foz the ubgement is Govdes.

er. poio Andthe caule that is toxbarde Foz pou, bepnge

pntome,and J wpll heareit.And Fchmaunded

poutbe fame ceafon, all thetbpnges tobpcbe pe

thuldedo. And when We departed from doped,

fhe wente thozowe all that greate and terrpble

sopldernefle, as pe baue lene alonge be the wap

of the bpll of k Amozitég as p Lorde our God
commaunded dg, ánd came to Cades Warne.

D  AndJfapdebntopon:Pearetcome vnto the

bpl of the Amozites.wptche the Lozde our Gos

wpl qeue Dnto bs. wWebolve,the Lode thp God

hath let the lande befoze the: go bp and conquer


it,asthe Lozde ond of tbp atbersbath fapbe Weap
tbedifcozaged. ut:
Au. Filia, pe came Onto me enerp one and iape * toe Topi.


Heat.cr.a. Dito thexfeare nor, hethe
fende men befoze vs, tolearche bs out thelande


andto bapng bs wodecagapne, what wapewe


mugo vp bp, and bnto what Cpties we pall
come. Audtpetapinge pleafed me well, and F
toke fwelue men of pou, of euerpe trpbe one. _
WUbich departed, and went Dp into the bpe coi-
trep , andcame wnto the rpuer Efcol,¢learched
„itout; and toke of the frute of the lanbe: ox to ve:
o* care the plenteoutnette thereofin thepaehandes , and
brought it vnto vs, and bpoughte Ys wozde a=
gapne,andfapde: it is a qoodlande, whiche the
Lode our Goddotbe gene vs.
= € Rotwitandpngre, pewoldenot content to
go bp, but were difobedpent dnto the month of
the Lorde pour God,and murmured in pour ters
tes,andfapde:becaule the Lozde bateth s,ther
Eoze bathbebzoughte vs out of the lande of €-
gppte,todelpuce Ys intothe banbde of the Amo
rites and to Deftrope bs. Howe Hal we go bp!
Dur baethzen bauc dilcozaged oure bertes,fay-
Aum.ried inge:xthe | dt. and fallerthen we,
and Dane Citpe s create and walled euen bpto
Apeaucn, and mozeouet We Pane lene the fonnes
ofthe Enakims there. Andy pe te pou:
Dpebe not no2 beaftapd of them.
0d whiche qocth before pou,be Hall fpqbt for
pou, accozdpnge toall thet bedpd pnto pou in
E€aqypt before pour epes. Inthe erneffe al-
fo thou baftefene botove thatthe Logde thp God
bare the, eucnas a man doth beare bis fonnein
all the wape whiche pe baue gonebp , outpll pe
came bnto this place. And pet in this thyngepe
dpd not helene the Lode pour God. He went in
the wape befozepoutofearche pou outea place
Ero. FALD to pptchepout tentesin, xin fpse by npavt, $ pe
mpabt fe what wap to qo, gina cloude by day.
and the Lozbde bearde the peg of pourwoz
aurin e Degand was wzorh,and {oare,fapinge: x there
ano roi.g (al not one of thefe men and of this frotvard ce
neracponfethatgoodlande whpche Flwareto
geue vnto pour fathers,fane Caleb the fonneof


Dettteronomium,


De Lozdpour of


tepeted.


Aephune,be hall fe it*andto bpm wpll F gene Ior.riy.e
thelande that be bathtroden ppon, andto bps
cbhplodzen, becaulebebathefolomedthe Lorde: _
of (wonderful was the indignacié agapnthe people.fapingp) #9
* the Lode was angrp pth me, Ilpketopfe Eo? mum.rr.e.
poure fakes, fapinge: thonalfo haltenot qo in EFPL
thptber. 25ut Jolua the fonne of Aun whiche
ffandeth whi the,be Hall gointhpther. ol-
dén bym therfoze, foz be Hall caule Jfrael toin-
beret p lande.xG)ozeouer,pour chplozenwhich nom. pttit.¢
pe lape hulde bea pzape;g pour fonnes wbiche
intbat dape badno knowledge betwene goode
cuel,tep balgo intbptber,and vntotbenm wp 4
J Geuetl, andthep hallentopeit. Wut agfoz 3
pou,tutne pour faces, and take pour tourney in
tothe Mploderneffe:enen bp the waye of the red fe
Cbenpeanlwered g lapde vntome: Xie hae “Fs
{pnnedagapnitethe Lozde: he wpllqoppand -
fygbte, accozdpnge toalltbat the Lozde oure
vit her goon ccemand
wHen pe Dad gp2de on euctpeman pps.
ons Of Learve, bebolde, pe were redp to go?
Dp into the bpll. And theLozdelapde vnto me:
faye nto themtbat thep gonot vp, ¢ that thep |
fpabt not,fo2 9 am notamonge pou: left pefall
beloze pourenempes. F tolde pou therfoze, and
pe wolde not beare, but difobeped the mouth of
the L020, and went prelumpteoullp vp intothe
bpl-And the Amozites which dwelt in that bpl
came out agapnite pou,and chaled pou(as bees
vie todojand (mote pou tn Seir enen wnto Hop
ma. And pecameagapne,and wepte before the
Lo2de-but p Lozde woldenot beare pour vopce
no? geur pou audpence.xAnd {ope abodein€a anm, rcs
besa longe ceafon, accozdpnge ontotbetpmep “TTE
pe remapned in other places,
qxbat E that el hc
_ Sittebarae ato epe atel anaE ioe Oa Sites


poe Hen werturned ourface,and tobe our A =.
SY La (ournep intothewploernelie, euenbp Sumra `
FA EDAN the tape of thercd lee, asthe Lorde
Leia pake Vntome. And we compaficd
mount Seir alonge tyme. And the Lozde (pate
nto me,fapinge. Pebauecompaficd this moñ-
tapne longe pnough, turne pou nozthwarde.
And toarne thou the people,fapinge:pethall yo
pp cae a apie of pon bzetbzentbechylozen
fau wbiched well in Seirand thep tall be
afrapbe of pon: Cake pe good hede ynto poure
felues therfoze.De hall not prouoke them, foy
wpll not gene poof thep2 lande,no not fo much
aga Fote b2edtb, * becaute Jhane qeuen mount
Heit onto Elan to pollee pe thal bpe meate of lida


them fozmonep tocate,and petball procure wa


ter of them Foz monep te depnke. forthe Lorde
thp Godbath bleficd theinallp come of tp
bande. Heknetve thp entrpnge into this greate


‘wopldernefle this foztpe peres, and the eis thp


Godbath bene wpth p, fo that thoudatklacken

notbynge. And woben ie were departed frome %5

our bzetbzen ehechpldzen of Efau which dwelt

in Seir, the plapne wapefrom Elath andfrom

€5ton Gaber, we tucned and went by the wape

of the wpldernes of SHoab. And the mae
nto


Sourneys,
des and once hundzedes oner Fpftp and ouer tet,
aud offpcers amonge pour trpbes.

C AndAchargedpour Judges that lametpm
fapiuge : beare the caufe of poure bzetbhzen, and

Fob. dio. Ajudgerpgbteoullp bettwene euerp manand big
brother, and the fraunger thatis with bpm.
&ye that pe knowe no faces intudgement:xbut

Beut-rir-¢- heave the fmallas wellastheqreate, and bea-

~~ frapde ofuo man,foz the ubgement is Govdes.

er. poio Andthe caule that is toxbarde Foz pou, bepnge

pntome,and J wpll heareit.And Fchmaunded

poutbe fame ceafon, all thetbpnges tobpcbe pe

thuldedo. And when We departed from doped,

fhe wente thozowe all that greate and terrpble

sopldernefle, as pe baue lene alonge be the wap

of the bpll of k Amozitég as p Lorde our God
commaunded dg, ánd came to Cades Warne.

D  AndJfapdebntopon:Pearetcome vnto the

bpl of the Amozites.wptche the Lozde our Gos

wpl qeue Dnto bs. wWebolve,the Lode thp God

hath let the lande befoze the: go bp and conquer


it,asthe Lozde ond of tbp atbersbath fapbe Weap
tbedifcozaged. ut:
Au. Filia, pe came Onto me enerp one and iape * toe Topi.


Heat.cr.a. Dito thexfeare nor, hethe
fende men befoze vs, tolearche bs out thelande


andto bapng bs wodecagapne, what wapewe


mugo vp bp, and bnto what Cpties we pall
come. Audtpetapinge pleafed me well, and F
toke fwelue men of pou, of euerpe trpbe one. _
WUbich departed, and went Dp into the bpe coi-
trep , andcame wnto the rpuer Efcol,¢learched
„itout; and toke of the frute of the lanbe: ox to ve:
o* care the plenteoutnette thereofin thepaehandes , and
brought it vnto vs, and bpoughte Ys wozde a=
gapne,andfapde: it is a qoodlande, whiche the
Lode our Goddotbe gene vs.
= € Rotwitandpngre, pewoldenot content to
go bp, but were difobedpent dnto the month of
the Lorde pour God,and murmured in pour ters
tes,andfapde:becaule the Lozde bateth s,ther
Eoze bathbebzoughte vs out of the lande of €-
gppte,todelpuce Ys intothe banbde of the Amo
rites and to Deftrope bs. Howe Hal we go bp!
Dur baethzen bauc dilcozaged oure bertes,fay-
Aum.ried inge:xthe | dt. and fallerthen we,
and Dane Citpe s create and walled euen bpto
Apeaucn, and mozeouet We Pane lene the fonnes
ofthe Enakims there. Andy pe te pou:
Dpebe not no2 beaftapd of them.
0d whiche qocth before pou,be Hall fpqbt for
pou, accozdpnge toall thet bedpd pnto pou in
E€aqypt before pour epes. Inthe erneffe al-
fo thou baftefene botove thatthe Logde thp God
bare the, eucnas a man doth beare bis fonnein
all the wape whiche pe baue gonebp , outpll pe
came bnto this place. And pet in this thyngepe
dpd not helene the Lode pour God. He went in
the wape befozepoutofearche pou outea place
Ero. FALD to pptchepout tentesin, xin fpse by npavt, $ pe
mpabt fe what wap to qo, gina cloude by day.
and the Lozbde bearde the peg of pourwoz
aurin e Degand was wzorh,and {oare,fapinge: x there
ano roi.g (al not one of thefe men and of this frotvard ce
neracponfethatgoodlande whpche Flwareto
geue vnto pour fathers,fane Caleb the fonneof


Dettteronomium,


De Lozdpour of


tepeted.


Aephune,be hall fe it*andto bpm wpll F gene Ior.riy.e
thelande that be bathtroden ppon, andto bps
cbhplodzen, becaulebebathefolomedthe Lorde: _
of (wonderful was the indignacié agapnthe people.fapingp) #9
* the Lode was angrp pth me, Ilpketopfe Eo? mum.rr.e.
poure fakes, fapinge: thonalfo haltenot qo in EFPL
thptber. 25ut Jolua the fonne of Aun whiche
ffandeth whi the,be Hall gointhpther. ol-
dén bym therfoze, foz be Hall caule Jfrael toin-
beret p lande.xG)ozeouer,pour chplozenwhich nom. pttit.¢
pe lape hulde bea pzape;g pour fonnes wbiche
intbat dape badno knowledge betwene goode
cuel,tep balgo intbptber,and vntotbenm wp 4
J Geuetl, andthep hallentopeit. Wut agfoz 3
pou,tutne pour faces, and take pour tourney in
tothe Mploderneffe:enen bp the waye of the red fe
Cbenpeanlwered g lapde vntome: Xie hae “Fs
{pnnedagapnitethe Lozde: he wpllqoppand -
fygbte, accozdpnge toalltbat the Lozde oure
vit her goon ccemand
wHen pe Dad gp2de on euctpeman pps.
ons Of Learve, bebolde, pe were redp to go?
Dp into the bpll. And theLozdelapde vnto me:
faye nto themtbat thep gonot vp, ¢ that thep |
fpabt not,fo2 9 am notamonge pou: left pefall
beloze pourenempes. F tolde pou therfoze, and
pe wolde not beare, but difobeped the mouth of
the L020, and went prelumpteoullp vp intothe
bpl-And the Amozites which dwelt in that bpl
came out agapnite pou,and chaled pou(as bees
vie todojand (mote pou tn Seir enen wnto Hop
ma. And pecameagapne,and wepte before the
Lo2de-but p Lozde woldenot beare pour vopce
no? geur pou audpence.xAnd {ope abodein€a anm, rcs
besa longe ceafon, accozdpnge ontotbetpmep “TTE
pe remapned in other places,
qxbat E that el hc
_ Sittebarae ato epe atel anaE ioe Oa Sites


poe Hen werturned ourface,and tobe our A =.
SY La (ournep intothewploernelie, euenbp Sumra `
FA EDAN the tape of thercd lee, asthe Lorde
Leia pake Vntome. And we compaficd
mount Seir alonge tyme. And the Lozde (pate
nto me,fapinge. Pebauecompaficd this moñ-
tapne longe pnough, turne pou nozthwarde.
And toarne thou the people,fapinge:pethall yo
pp cae a apie of pon bzetbzentbechylozen
fau wbiched well in Seirand thep tall be
afrapbe of pon: Cake pe good hede ynto poure
felues therfoze.De hall not prouoke them, foy
wpll not gene poof thep2 lande,no not fo much
aga Fote b2edtb, * becaute Jhane qeuen mount
Heit onto Elan to pollee pe thal bpe meate of lida


them fozmonep tocate,and petball procure wa


ter of them Foz monep te depnke. forthe Lorde
thp Godbath bleficd theinallp come of tp
bande. Heknetve thp entrpnge into this greate


‘wopldernefle this foztpe peres, and the eis thp


Godbath bene wpth p, fo that thoudatklacken

notbynge. And woben ie were departed frome %5

our bzetbzen ehechpldzen of Efau which dwelt

in Seir, the plapne wapefrom Elath andfrom

€5ton Gaber, we tucned and went by the wape

of the wpldernes of SHoab. And the mae
nto


Fotteneys cepeted. Deuteronomium.


zuio Hntome: x Chou thaltnot fpghtagapuite the
_ Poabites,nepther prouokethem to batell, foz
J pl not geuc the of thepzlande to poffetle:be-
sectittts CW a bane geuen Ar intop chpiden of Loth
FN eopottette. .Cheterrpble people the x Emims
dwelt therinintpmes palt, a people greate, ma-
np and tall, as the Enakims wpycbe alfo twere
taken forgiauntes asthe Cnakimg:whom the
) oabites call Cmims. The Hozims dwelte
in Seir before tyme, whofe poflefipon the chpl-
enof Elab occupped ,and Deftrapedthem be-
foze them, and dibelfe intbep2 teade:as Blracll
dpd wnto the Lande of bys poftefipon , whpcbe
the Lozde gaue then. |
¢  RMorwerple vp lapdeF)andgetpou oucr the
rpucesared:and We Ment over therpuctzared.
@helpacc in which we came from Cades barne
putpll we were comeouer the rpuct sared ivag:
EEL vill. pereg, putpllall thegeneracpon "e
men of warre were walked out fromamong t
gu. ri.e hoft, asthe Lozde fwate vito them. * Forin
ano.prbiS Jepe the bande of the Lorde Was agayntt thems
to befeoy them from amonge the hotte, tpl tbep
tere confumed. And fo it came topatie, that all
the men of war were confumed and deade from
amonge thepeople; AndtheLozdelpake vnto
me,fapinge: Chou palt gothozowe


fege wnto them moz moue watreagapntl them,
>. 4£02 3 topll not geue the of the lande of tbe
chpldzen of Ammona pofle
nen it onto thechpldzen of Loth topole ile.
Chat alfoistaken fozalandeofgpauntes and
gpaunteg dWweltetherintn olde tyme whom the
Ammonites call sanzumuUnis. ` * Æ people that
was great,manp and tall, as the Enakims. .
Wut the Lorde Deftroped them befoze them, and
thepfuccededtbemin the inberptaunce ¢ dwelt
: énthep2 Eeade:asbedyo for pchpldzen of Efau
gc. rrrotb sefopiche Divelin Heir when he delkroped $10-
rime befozethem:thep conquered they potteltp
on,anddiwelte in thep2 teade unto this vape.
And the Auims which dweltein Hazarim euen
nto Asa , the Caphthozims which came outof
| Caphthoz deltroped then ¢ dwelt in thep2 ead
€  +Bple vp therfoze, and tabe pour tournep o=
aasrieg nerehe rpuct Arnon. Boe olde, * J hauegeuen
into Ebp bande Spebonp Amozite kpng o pel-
bon, and pig lande. Goto g eesis conguet,
and prouoke bpm tobatell. @bisdape wpll F
pegpnne tofend the feare and dzede of the, bpon
all nacpons that are pnderall the be ‘fo that
thep whiche bere (peake of the tha trembleand
nabe before p. And log Cent meflengers out of
t e wplderties of ixedemoth onto Hehonkpn
pum.rie of Helbon, wpth woes of peace, fapinge: x
DeLee. pil go thozowe thp lande 3 wpl goalonge bp
the bpe tape: J pl neptber turne vnto prpabt
pande no? tothelefte. Chou thalt fell me meate
for monep fos tocate,and geneme water for mo
nep foz codgpnise: Dnilp grauntme,that J map
go thozowwe on my fote(asthe chplozen of Glan
yobiche Dwel in Seir and the Aoabites which
DiwellinaAr opo DEO me) onepl A become ouert


sum rpl-F


rtbecott
of Poabthpsdape: and when thou cOmefinpe -
pnto the chpldzen of Ammon, thou Malt notlap -


fipon:but Shauege RE


WOL.


Jordane , into the lande tobpche the Lorde oure
Woageucth vs. Wut Sebonthespnge ot Hel-
bon wolde not let vs palle bp bpm,foz the L020
thy Godbardened histpeete, andmade bis hert
tourbe, vecaule be woldcdelpuce bpm intotbp
hande,as itis come to patie this dape.

Andthe Lozdelapde wntome:bebolde, JG
Hane begonne tolet Sehon and his land before
the: qo to and conquere,and polele bis lande.
*Then both ebon and al hts people came out saum.Frl.£
agapnit vs totpabt at Jaza. And the Lodelet Fee
ppmbefoze vs, and we fmote bpm and disfons
andallbispeople. Andwetoke all bis cptres
the fame ceafouand fewe the men, wemen, and
chplozen of all thecitpes,¢ let nothpng remapne
faue the cattel onlp we caught wnto ourfelues,
andthe (pople of the citpes which we toke from
Aroer whichis bp the bapnke oftherpuer ot at
Hon, and fromthe citye that isin therpuct,vKto
Gilead: there was not one citpe to trong foz vs
The Lorde our God delpuccedall vnto vs:on=
lp vnto the land of thechpldzen of Ammon thou
camftnot;noz Dntoeucrp placcof therpucr Ja-


. bok,noz bntothecitpes in themountapnes nog


wnto whatloeuer the Lozd our Godfozbad vs.
' CTbe. tii. Chapter.


T Thpnees thatchaunted from the bptto;p ofthe ctoo pa
ges Sthouand Ogvntathe infitucton of Jorue in eyes


a Den we turned and wet dp the way
a to Wala-KAnd Og thebung of Wa Su rrio
SIES fancame out agapnite bs, be and al Deu. prir b
(y E bis people tobattelat Edzai. And È

ASA L020 Tayde Ynfo nie:feare bpmnor,
for J wpll delpuer ppm, and all bts people, and
bis lande into thy bande, and thou Malt oo onto
bym,asthoudpodekt vnto Schoniipnge of the
Amozites,whichedwelt at efbon. And fotbe
Lozde our Goddelpucred into ourhandes, Dg
allo the &pnge of Hafan and all bis folke. And
we {mote bpm, bntpl none was lefte bpm alpue.
And be toke all biscitpes the fame ceafon(nep=
ther was there acitycwhiche wetoke not from
them) euenthze fcoze citpes thozowe outall the
seqponof Argob, the kpngdome of Dain 15a-
fan. Alithele Cityegallo were made tronge w
ppe walles gates and barreg; befpde vnwalled
rowiesa great many. And we véterlp dekrop=
enthem, agwedpd puto Sebon bynge of Pel-
bon,bapngpnactenoughtealltbecitpes, wptD
siett,wemen,andchpldzen.2But all the catel and
the be of the cityes,we caught foz our felues

~ Ano thus we tobe thefame ceafon, out ofthe 15
bande of tivo kpnges ofthe Amonzites,thelande
that was on theother{pde Jozdanfrom therp=
uer of Arnon Vnto mount Hermon which Ber=
monthe Sidons cal Sirion andthe Smogites
call it Senir)all the citpes chat lapem pplapne
andall Gileadand all alan ynto Halecha g
Edzai,citpes of the kpngdom of Dg in Waan. |
ffozonelp Og kpng of alan remapned of the
remnaunte of p gpauntes, whole bed wasa bed
of pron. Aud isit not peat Rabahamenge the
cbplozen of Ammon/.te.cubptes potbhe p length
therof contepne,andfoure cubptesthebzenth of

by tt after


—— eee


itafter pcubpte ofa man. And fo we conquered
this lande the fametpme, from Aroer wbhicheis
bp tbe cpucr of Arnon, wnto balfe mount Giles
Farts ad, xand thecitpes therof gaue ¥ nto the Ru:
peo.cryan, DenttesandGadvdites. And theretof Gilead
and all Hafan of the kpngdome of Da, gauc Y
vonto the balfctepbe of B)anaffe:euenall the re:
gpon of Argob with all Balan: which iscalled
the lande of qpauntes. Jair the fonne of Wanat-
{etoke alltheregponof Argob, bntothe coftes
of Geluri and aachatt,andcalledtpem after
bis ovone name: Balan Pauoth Jair yntotbhis
dape. And FJ gaue Gilead vnto Machir.
And puto the Rubenites g Gaddites J gane
Dalfe Gilead vnto the rpuer of Arnon, balfe the
nalep and bepond,euen ynto the rpuer Jabock,
whiche is the bozder of thechplogen of Ammon:
the plapne alfo -#cottbe wpioerneteyand Jordan
* ehecoft therof,from Ceneroth euen nto the fee
whicheis inthe pare, euen the falt fee pnder p
nu.rrroiio PePNges oF the bpl eatwarde. x And com-
maundedpou the fame tpmefapinge: the Low
poi God Path yeuenpoutbps lande to entope
it: pe re ot sl pa befozepour brethren the
chpldzen of Flraelall that are mete fo2 the war.
Pour pues onely, ponr chpld2en,and pour ca-
tell(fo2 J wote that ye bane muche catell) pall
abpde in pour cttpes, wbiche Jbaue geuen pou,
Dntpll the Lozde pauc euen reit vuto pour bze-
then as wellag tnta pou, and Dntpll thep alfo
bauecongquered the lande, which the Lozdc pour
God hath Feucnthem beponde Jozan: and thë
thall. Mgeni R ah y bar: cuerpe man bnto bps
sp Polleilpon whiche J baue qeuen pou.
naoga  * And J warned Jolua thelame tpme,fa s
ing: thpne epes haue fene all that the Lozd pour
od hath Done ynto thele two bpnees, cuenta
thal be Do unto all kpngdoms whptber thou go
eft. Ve thall not feare them,fo2 the Lozde poure
Godbe all fpahe for pou. And FJ belonahe the
Lobe the fame tyme.fapinge:<D Lode Gov,p
balte begonne to Mewe tüp feruaunt thy areat-
nefie and thy mpagbtp bande, fo2 elles where ig
tbere aG@od in beuenoz incarth, thatcan doaf-
tet thy wozkes, and after thp power ‘let mero
oner and [e the good lande that is beponde Fors
dan that goodly mountapne,and Libanon
mentett. — *2Butthe Lozde wasangrpe wpth mefoz
anoite pourlakes , and wolde not beareme. Andebe
Lozbfapde vnto me: be content. {peake nomoze
ontome of thismatter. x Get the vp tuto p top
of the pil, and lpftc vp thpne cpes welkwarde,
nogtbwarde,louth tarde, and caftewarbde, and
beholdit with thpneepes, foz thon thalt not go
ouer this Jovan. apecbaege olua: andeo-
tuu.prriti tage bpm,and bolden bpm. +302 he pall gobe:
= foze this people, anb pe (hall deupde nto them
thelanbe whiche thou Malt le. And lo we above
inthe vallep oncragapnit the boule of cop.
€ Che.uit.Chapter.
| ortacpoOn to geue pplpe ofp g im
Bta map HEEE MaDe LS MOARE EEI cence hee!
aren Ra note berken D ran ‘onto theozdp
eana nannces andiawes obpcbhe Fteache pou
ssf to Doo tbem, that fo pe mape lpue and


SAULT A A-
de Trpia


Meuteronomittn,


Plrael had;
Gott and conquerthelande, whpche the Lorde
© od of pour fathers geueth pou. «Pe thal put Deu. pia.
notbpnge unto the worde whiche J commaund ZF.»
pou, nepther do dugbt there from, that pe mape
Kepe the commaundementes of the Lozde poure
God whiche J cimaunde pou. Pour epes bane
fene topat the wee dpd Dnto Waal coset fO? murba.
all the men that folowed Waal Peo, tpe Lorde 4n>.1774.c.
pout God bath deroped fromamonge pou., :
Wut pethatcleaue dntothe Lod pour God, ar
alpue cuctp one of pou this dap. Sebold, yhauc
taught pou ozdpnaunces and latveg, fucbas the
Lorde mp Godcommaunded me, that pe Hulde
docuenlointhelande,whitherpegotopofielle  -
it. Liepe them therfore anddo them, fo? that is
pourwpfdome and pein dal KAk kad
of thenacpons: that thep map beare all thefe oz
Dpnaunces, andlape: Surelp tt isa wpfle and
Dnderfandpnee feasts Sie on.
Ho what other nacponisfo greate,p God-
deg comefonpe nto : a8 the Lode oure Godi¢g 5


Npe Dnto vs, nalltbpnges«as ofteas toe call praerion a,


bnto bpm: Peand what nacton is fo great, that
batb ozdpnaunces and latwesforpabtcous , ag
allthis lawe tobiche J eA sel this dape.
‘Cake bede tothp felfe therfoze,¢ tepe tbp foule
dilpgentlp,that p forgctnotthethenges which
thpne epes bauctene, and that thep departe not
out of thpne berte,allthe dapes ot thy Ipfe : but
*teache them thp fonnesanathp fonnesfonnes Deute.vis
Specpallp the bape that thou ovetk befoze the
Lozde thp God in Hozeb, when the Lode fapde
butome:gatber me the people together,¢ 3 topl
make them bearemp twozdes, that thep mape
learne to feare me ali the dapes p tbep pall lphe


bponthecarth*andthatthep mape teach thepe fphebia


chpldzen: pecames and fode allo pnder the ppl i
and the Dpl burnt with frze:euen dutothempa T:
deg OF beuen and there wag Darckneffe,cloudes.
anbinpil. And the Lozde fpake onto pouont of
the mpDdes of the fpze and pe bearde the vopce
of the wozdes*but fate no Image, faue heard ero rr.a
& opce onelp. And be declared onto pon hig cos tI. 1111.6
uenaunt robich becommaunded pon to do, euen
ten nerles wbicbe be wote bpon tivo tables vf
tone: And the Lorde comanndedme that lame
ceafon, that J thoulde teache pou oxdpnaunces
and lawes, whpcbe ye ougptetodo in thclande
wbpytber pe goto pofleffe it. Hoi
Cake therfore good pede vntoponrefelueg, €

ag pertapnpng dnto pour fonles. for petaweno
manet of pmage tn the dap that the rH
bnto pou tn Hozeb ont of the mpddes ofthe pre:
left pe marre pourfelues and mal epon agrané

mageand prcture of anp maneri fpqure: the
ipkenefie of mano2 woman,thelikenc cofanp
maner of bea a a onearthe.op the lpaenel
of anp maner fetpered foule that Apetbinp ape
02 the Iphenefie of anp maner wozme that cre=
p on the carth, 02 the lpkeneffe of anpmaner

pibe that is inthe waters beneth the earth.
*Peandlett thoulptte vprbpneepesvntopeas
Ucit,and when thouleek the fonne the mone and Des-totis


ftarreg with all the bofte of Heauen, thuldelt be ahipa ig €


decepucd and puldek wozMyp ¢lerue the thi s
ges,


%
J


4


ae
+
-g n =<
le. ee A
K a


| Thelawerepeted. Denteronomiuimn.


Senetd. eg wbhichethe Lozdethbp *God bathe made to
-. a ferueallnacpons bnderthe wholedcaucn. —

| wut the Loze hath taken pou and broughte

pou out of the pzon Foznace:eucn out of Egppte

tobe vnto bymva people and enberptaunce as pe

bethisdape. sFurtherinoze, the Lozde wasan-

cpe with me foz pour wozdes,, andfware that

{buldenot go ouer Jordane,and that F Hulde

not coin bnto that good lande, which the 1020

th Goedgeucth the tocuberpraunce. x Wut q

muftope tn this lande and all not go cuer 3o?

: dan. Gutpetpallgo ouer gconguere that good

poos lande. Take pede vnto pourfelues,that peio-

getnottheappopntment of the Lozd pour God

: which be made with pou, and that pe mate pon

J bertieg BO STAUCN pinage.no2 anp picture that the 1020

|, POHE thy Goo hath fozbpdoen the.+ čo? the L0 thy
Godis aconlumpng fp 2¢,andagelous God.

4f thou Dock beget chpldzenand chpldzens

chpldzen, and when pe baue Duvelt intbelande,

_ pedo toishedlp,and make anp maner of graucn

Fere. Foie kpmage and woke cucllinthelpght of p L020

tip God,to prouoke ppm toangre, Fcall Hea-

ienand eartp to recozde agayntt pou this bape,

that pe tall  oztelp perptbe from of thelande,

_ yobpther pe qo duer Jozdanto pollee it:pe Mpal

not polonge pour Dapes thertin, but thall vtter=-

ly bedeftroped. And the Lorde thall fcatter pou

¢ . amonge thenacpons,and pe thalbe lefte fewe in

nombre amonge the people, whptherthe Lowe

{hall bapngepou:and there pe thal ferue goddeg

Which care the wozke of mans hande,woodand

E one, whicheneptbher fe, noz heare,noz cate, no?

(Dears fmell. +And there thou Walt (elke the Lode thy

ve Sod:and altfpnd bym,pe thou feke bpm with

~ allebpne berte, and pty alithbpfoule. Caben

thou arte im tribulacpon, ¢ whenall thefe trpp-

:; ges (that be bere Cpoken cf) arccome vpon the

eucninthe later dapes, Ë Halt retourncagapne

tothe Lozdethp God,and be obcbpent wuto bis

popece: loz the Lozdethy God tga mercpfull

ceu.rppt.g LWV Mplinot foglake rhe, nether deftrope the

AULFFOLS y op Formetepcappopntementeot thp fathers,
wbiche be {ware vnto them. GGI

ftor afkeofthedayesthatare palt, whpche


be.rpriii b


man bpon theearth,and(alke) from p onefpde
of peguen Dnto the other, pfruer there caine to
afle fuche a greate thinge, 02 Dobether anp fuch
ipat tbpngebathbene bearde. Dpi cutta nacp-
onbeare the vopce of God {peakpnac out of the
impodes of a fp2e.as thou batt bearde,and pet lp
uedceptber whether God aflapedto goandtake
bpma people frome amonge nacpons thozotee
temptacions,{panes, wonders, warre,ampgh
tybande,axttretched out arnic,¢ thozow great
fpabtes,accozdpng Dntoall that the Lod pour
Goddpd vnto pou in Egypt befoze pour epes:
: Gintotheie was hewed. that thou miq tel
“rome, howe that the Lod pets God, and that
teroris eporeignone otbesbut be. + Dut of Beauenbe
| made fhe beare bis vopce, that bempabt nour-
toure the,and wponearth be the wed f bis great
fpe and thou beardelt bis vopce ont of the mpd


i” . & f
plerrebi.b


were befoze tbe lenterbe Daye that Godcreated ph


Deg of p fpze. And becaule heloucd thp fathers,


Tolley. ~)
be chole thepzfede after them, and broughte the
outinbislpabt, and with bps mpabtpe power
out of* Egppt:totheull out nacpons qreat and <ro.riG.t,
mygbeper then thou, befoze the,and to bepngep
in, and to qeue the thep2 lande toenberptaunce:
asitiscometo patiethpsdape. :

— Ghderlande therfore this dape,and tourne
it intothpuebarte, thatthe Lozde, bets God in
Heucnaboue,and vponthe earth beneth-neithee
is there anp other. Chou halt kepe therfore his
o2zbpnaunces, and His comaundementes wobiche
FJ commaund the this dape, that tmapego wel
with the and teith thp chplozen after the, andp
thon maiñ prolonge thp dapes dpon the cart,
whpchethe Lozdethp God qeueth the thp lpte
longe. * Cher a) oles leucred chee citpesonthe oye iy
otherfpde Jordan towarde thefonnerifpnge:p =
be thoulde fipe thpther, whpche bad beled bys
nepabboure Dniwares,t bated pym not in tome
pate and therfoze Huld fpe vntoone ofp lame
citpes,and tpue : Mamielp Weser inthe wpldrr-
nele: eucnintbeplapne countre of the trpbe of
Ruben: Ramoth in Gilead of the trpbeofGad
and Golan tn Balan of p trpbe of Aanafle .

And fo thisis the latwe which Mores let be- gs
forethechplozenof Firacl. Chele are the wpt-
néie fatutes, and ozdpnaunces, which Holes
folbetbechpld2en of Flracl after thep came out
of Eqppte,on the other [pde ozdan, tn the va-
Icp ouer agapnit the houle pf ieo02 ,intdelande
of Schon tynge of the Amozites whiche Diwelt
at ipclbon: whom Weles and tdechplozen of Fe
cael*fmote, after thep toere come out of Capet purine g
andconquered bys lande, and the lanve of Sg, i
kpnge of Walantwo kynaesofthe Amoziteg, `
whiche tere on the other lpde Jordan towarvbe
tbe onne rifpnge:frome Aroer hiche ts bp the
banke of therpuer Arnon, ynto Bount Ston:
Whicheis Hermon, andallepe plapne on the o=
ther (pde Zozdan eftwward:eucn dntop fee, which
ig inthe plapne wnder the fpapnaes of the byl.

ql The.v. Chapter. |
CThetcr commaundemintes,

2D Boles called all Zlracll,¢fapde g
evntotbem. Peare D Flracl the o2-
, "se opnaunces €lawes whiche J {peake
y F A ipone cares this dape, that pe map
MAS learne them, and fulfpll them tn dede
@ be Lorde oure Gob made anappopntment w
psinboreb. Che Lodemade not thisbonde
with oure fathers, but with vs: cuen wpth vs,
wbhicheare all berealpue thig dape. Che Lorde
talked sas’ ou face toface inthe mount, ont of
thempdsofthefpze. And F tode betwene the
Lozde and pou the lame tyme, and thewed pou p
w0o2de of the Lozde. Woz pe were aftapde atthe
fpabt of the fpze,t tent not bp tuto the mount,
and be fapde:* 3am the i ozdethp God, whiche cro.rr.a,
bought the out of thelande of Cappt f rom the
poule of bondage. Chou hale bauenone other
gobddesin imp pefence. |

x Thou (halt make theno grauen pmage of Heu.rroha
anp maner of Ipkeneffe that isin beuen aboue,¢ i
that igin the earth beneth,and that tg tn the wa
ters bencth the earth. Thou walt neptber ba


Moles repeteth


Leterlp defpe tte abbo? it.fo2 (tigadaned thing
@ Che. viti. Chapter.


T eies putteth the #fr aclptes intemembraunce what
God hath oone to them in the wploernefie,


H
l


a eand multipteand qoin,andpolietie
it = Vo piam


iaa b tbe to bunger and fed the with anna, wbiche


+H a. tiif.a
on


OCHEHE® app capmente Wared not olde bpot the:nep=


commaunde the this dape:* jenti
bafe eaten and fplicd thp felfe and batte buplte
goodly boules and dwelte therin, and wbenthp
bealtes,and tby hepeare waredDmanp,and thp
fyluet and gold is multiplped, andall thatthou
bafte fs encrealed, then beware leffe thyne barte
rpleand thou forget the Lode thp God, whpch
brouchte the out of tbe lande of Eqppte,¢from
the boule of bondage, and Which was thp muide
inthe greate andterrpble woplderneffe (toherin
were) fprpelerpentes, feozppong, and dzoutbe
Without anp water. But he brought out tater
foz the,cuen out of therocke of Apnte:befed the
inthe wpldernefig woth Manna, whiche thp fa-
thers knewe not, euen Eo? to bumble the,and to
prouc the, and thathempaht fo doo the mood at
| ap tbp latter ende. Left thon thuldeft Cape in thpne
iue.g.b bertexmp potvoer andthe mpabte ofmpne owne

bande bath prepared methis abundaunce: wut
vememb2e the Lozde thp God, botve thatitis he
wobicbe geucth the power to a the fubfaunce,
fo} tomate Good the prompte tobpcbe be {ware


Deuteronomium,


"r


bntotbp fathers asthis dape dothe wptnefe.

And pf thou forget the Lorde tbp Godand-
walke after fraungex goddes, and ferne then, Deut,iiits
and wosthipthe, 3 tefkifpe nto pou this dap p
pe bal furelp perpbe. As the nacpong wbich the
Lode deltropetb befoze pou,euenfope pall pe-


` tpipebecaule pe wolde not be obedpente banto p


bopee of the Lozde poure God.
C þe.ir.Cha ter. © a 3

Cher ave foz bpodento trute ia chep? ownt feengih,
Rae kom Care D Wraell, thoupallet ouet F .
a * : Na Jodan t is dape togo in,andcons .
da Ti," Rpt hand PONE FECALE IND MPIVEP:
Pa er tben thp felfe: Citpesgreateand ~
Ea Walled Dptoheuen,axpeopleqreat mum.piire
ienthechplozen of f Enakims, which
thou knotvett of, and of whom thou baf heard
fape, tobo wpll tande before thechplozen of E=
nacke:Ginderflande therfore this dape, that the
Lode thp God ig enen be whiche otp ouet tes
Foxe tbe as a-#ocuourpngeand)a confAminge fpze
be thall deltvope thent and be pall bepnee them ow
bowie before thp face. De (halcakthemoutand
tt ha spe naught qupckelp, ag the Lode
bath lapde onto the. Speake not thou inthpne
barte (afterthat the Lozdethp Godbathcatte
them out betoze the,tapinge:fozmp rpabteoul=
nehe the Lozde bath bzougbte mein, to poflefe
thpslande. . ape: butto: the wpckednefle of
thefe Ho Fa the Lorde hath caftethem out be-
Fo2e the. 3t isnot Fo: thy rpabteoulnes fake, oz
Eo? thy rypa pte Darte , that thou goet to poffefle
they: lande. «25ut foz the pckednelle of thele
nacpous,the Lozde thp God Dothcaft them out Err».
befoze the, evento perfourme the wozde whithe
the paneer God fware nto thp fathers, J-
bzabam, 3fabac, and Jacob.

Cinderffande therfore that itis not foz thp
rygbteoutnes fake, that the Lozde thp Gondox=
eth meuethe this good lande to poffette it, fepng
thouartea ftpfnecked people. sRemembze and
Eozget not, bowe thou prouokedit the 1.020 thp
God nthe woploeeneffe, fence the dape that thou
ppett departe out of the lande of appt butyl
pecain nto this place:pe baucrebelled againg
the Rozde.+Al(oin Hozeb peangred the Lorde, ERA
fo that the Lode wag wzoth with pou enento Treegii?
baue deltroped pon, when F was cone bpinto
the mounte, toreceauc the tables of fone,the ta
bles of appopntinente, whpche the Lozdemabe
Withpou. And Zabode inthe pli forty dapes
and forty npabtes, when nether dpd eat bread
nozdzanke mater. * And the Lopdedelpuercd
me fino fables of fone, teptten wypththefpn- ere.rret.o
ger of God, andinthem tas accozdpngetoall


fon" ©


al,eue


the wozdes tohicbe the Lozdelapde yntoyou in :


the mounte out of the mpodelk of thefpzeinthe
dape of the gatherpnae together.

And when thefoatp dapes and forty npgb-
tes were ended, the Lord gaue mef two tables
of fFone,the tables of the coucnaunt and p Lod
fapde Dutome.*Cip.and get the dotone qupcke
lpe from bence, Fo: thp people whiche thou batte er. rrrii.v
bzougbte out of Egypte, Dauemarecd all.
hep are tourned attonce out of f ssa ch

Jcom=


n ā


thelawe,


=
ee po e a
=


 ¥Beeceptes


J cOmaunded them, and baue made them a mols
— tenpmage.urthermoze, the Lozdelpake unto
“me faping: 3 bauefene this people, and bebolbe
it isa fifnecked people,let me
deftrope them,and put out the name of them fro
puder beauen, and J wypllmake of thea mpap-

C tpenacpon:and greater thenthep be.

MEN And J turned meand camedotone from the
Hpll(euen fromtbebpll that burnte with fpze)g
the two tables of theappopntment weremmp
bandes. And Floken, and bebolde: pe bad fpn-
ned agapnit the Lozde pour God, and bad made
pou amolten calfe, and bad turned attonce oute
of the wape whiche the Logdebadcommannded

er- priid pou.x and J tobe the twotables and cat tbem
i _ pute of mp two bandeg, and bzake them before
re pourepes. x And J fell Downe Ratte befoazetpe
' Lozde:ceuenasatthe fpsketpme,¢ foztp dapes,
and forty npgbtes Jopdnethereate bzeadeno?

bapnke water, becaule of all pour fpnnes, whic

pe lpnned:pfoopnge wpchedlp in the fpabte of

So beintbat pe p2ouoked bpm puto wathe.
4fo2 J was afrapd that fo2 the wzathandfeart-
nefle wherwpth the Lozde was moved agapnt
ou, be wolde baue defFroted pou. Dut the Lod

Cena meattbat tpmealto.

Thelo: thas very angrp with Aaron alfo
cuen tobaue dDeftroped bim, g made interceflp-
onfo2 Aaronalfotbefametpme. And FZtoke

ero.rrrite pourfpnne x the calfe tebpche pe bad made, and

burnt bim witb fp2e,and amped him € groude

bpm ngoab.enep vntofmalldute. And J cafe

«the bufte thereof into the bzoke , tbat defcended

Ampia. pute of the mounte. Alfo at the burnpngexat p

tentptacpon,and at thefepulchzes of lutte pean

gred the Lozde, lphetopfe when the Lozde fente

ses vite POU From CADES wWarne,faping: go vp, andcon

_ Metts bite guer the landewbtche 4 baue geuen pouxpe dil-

obeped the mouth of the Lozde poure God, and

neptis beleucd bym noz Darkenned onto bps

wopce. Pebane benedplobedpent ynto PL0We,
fence thedape that 3 Enewe pou.

And Jfelldowne flat befozethe Lorde foz-
tpedapesandfoztp npabtes which F lape there
foz the Lode fapde, that be wolde defrope pou
- Jmade interceflpon therfore butothe Lorde, €

er.rrpitii.a bapbe:* D Lopde God, defkrope not thp people
and tppne enberptaunce, SED tbou pate de-
lpucteu thozotwe tbp greatnefe and Which thou
bate brought out of Cgppte thozowe a mpgh-
tpe hand. Remember thp leruauntes Ab apam
Jfabac, and Jacob, andloke not to the ftobur-
nele of tbig people, noz tothep2 wpckednes and
fpnne:left the lande whence thou bzoughbtett thë
faye: The Lozde isnot ableto bapngethemin-
tothe lande whpcbebe pzompled them : and be-
caule be pated them, therfore bath be carped thé
oute,to iape them in the toplbernetle.ebolde,
thep are thp people, ¢ thpne enberitaunce which
thon bzougbtet oute inthp mpgbtp power and
inthp ftretched oute arme.


€ The. x. Chapter.


aZberenewpng of thetables. An erbostacpn Co geut bebe


tothe lawe,


Pruteronomitn.


netbat3ł map .


Wol. lr.


=a R the fameceafonthe Low lamen. I- T
Pa tome, xbewe-thetwe tables of fone F Ferina
AVi lpke wuto thefp2fte,and come wpun-

Fee . Gai to memto the mounte , andmabetbe
Sean arke of wood, and J wpl wpte in
thetables,the wozdes that were in the fpette ta

bles whicbe thou brakeft,and thon Malt put thé
inthearke.Andy made anarke of lethem wood |
and hewed twotables of fone xipbe nto the EEFE
Fp2ite,and went bp nto the mountapne, bauing

the two tables in mpne bande. sritan

And he wrote inthetablesxaccosdpngetop “"" *
Ep2ite witpna (the ten verles whpeche the Lord
(pake bnto pou intbe mounte oute of the mpos
oftbefpze, in tbedapeof the gatherpnge toge=
thet )and the Lozde qaue them nto me. And J
Departed, andcam Downefrom the bpl,and put
xthe tables in p arke which J bad made: g there Dee-reri.c .
they be, asthe Lorde commaunded me; .

xAndthe ehplozen of {racltoketbepztour 5 _
nep from Werothot p cbplozen of akan to Bo "F.
fera, WherexAaron dped and thas burped,and aum. pra
Eleazar bis fonne became preal tn bis Heade .
Strom thence thep Departed Dnto Gadgad : and
from Oadgadto Jathb ath alande whpch batb fs .iut
rpuers of water* Che lamecealon the Lozdele griit
peratedthe trpbe of Leut to beare the arke of p
appopntment ofthe Lorde, and to Pande before
the Lozde,andtominpiternntobpm,¢tobleiie — —
inbis name vnto this dape. «Wilberforce the Le- Droa
uites baue no parte no2 enberitaunce with their
bzetþerne. Wut the Lo2de is thep2 enberptaunce
as the Lozde thp God bath prompied them.

* And J tatpedin pmount,euenas at p fpi © i
tyme foztpe Dapes and foztpenpabtes, andthe >"
Lode berkencd unto me at that tyme allo, and
the 102De olde not R tbe. Jnd the L020
fapde Dito me: Vp, and qo tozthin the tourneps
before the people, that thep mape go inandcon=

uer the lande wbpche J(ware wnto thep2e fas
thers,to qeue bntothé. And nowe Frael, what |
Doth the Loadethp Godrequyze ot the x but to 24ra
fearethe Lozdethbp God,andto walke inall bis
wapes,toxlouebpm,and tolerue the Lozdethp ~ nut 01:
God With all thpne barte and with alltbploule sgat,rrits
amelp , that thou kepe the cOmaundementes IFD.
ofthe Lo2d¢,and bis ozdDpnaunces whiche Jri-
maunde the thts Dape,fo2 thp welth.

_ Webolde, beauen and the heauen of heauens
is the Lozdes thp God, and the earth withall $
therin is : Notwithtandpnge, the Lorde hada
lute ynto thp fathers tolouetbem, chole thepz
fede after them,cuen pou, aboue all nacpons,as
thou feptt tps dape.

.__% Cireumeple therfore the Foretpn of pour ee
perte and be no moze tptnecked: $02 the Lozve “7E.
pour God, is Godof goddes, and Lozde of loz:

Desa great Godampabtpe g aterrphlez WH) Baai
regardeth no mans perfonne noz taketh gptte. soma.it.p
He dothrpabt vntothefatherlefle and wpdotve Freha y
and loueth the fraunger, to qeuehpm fode and Epbr. vio
rayment.xioue pe therfore the Fraunger alfo: recut
for pe tecer fraungerspourcleluesinthe lande =
of Egppte. + Chon thaltefearethe Lopdethp Hen. br.e
Eod, and bpm(onelp) alte thou eee Zuke.ttit.b


Ts E
*


Sh a j


Wreceptes


fhaltethouclenc,and Cweare bp bis name : pe is
thp peaple and thp God, that Dathe done foz the
ticle great andterrpble thpnges, whiche thpne
eresbauelence. Thr tathers wente Downe into
Genpibi.c Eqpptexwith. rx. foules, and nowe the Lode
thp Godpathe made the and multiplpedthe,ag

SeREFEA the x (tarzes of Peauen.

@. The.ri.chapter.
@Anephoytacpon to regarbe lhe lame,

, amps Derfoze thou thaltelouethe Lode
a Kaa Bas) thy God andkepe big obferuaunces
PSS e wees bis ozdpnaunces.bis lawes,and bis


in tbe nee Bbes of Egppt.eticn Ynte Pharao t


fro. pitit.€


tonaught bntothts Sigg what be bpd r=
topou tn the Wploderneife, bntpil pecame onto
SrIMLFOLE thig place: and what be pd yntoxDathanand
Abiram the fonnes of Cliab the fon of Ruben,
bots the earth opened ber mouth,and fwalowed
them wptb thep2 pontepoines and thepz tentes,


andallthbepz{ubiauncetpat wasintdep2 pole f


{ellpon.tnthempodesotZiracll.
Doutlefle, pour epes bauclene all the great
© actes afthe Lozde whiche bedpd. TherÉoze thal
pebepeallebe commaundementes,whiche ¥ co-
maunde pou this dape, that pe mape be ftronqe:
and qo inand conquer the lande whether pe goo
topoffeffe it, and ppe may prolonge pour dapes
inthe lande whpcbe the Lozde fware nto pour
fathers, to iene vnto them and to thepze fede, a
lande that flotoeth | ape oe an ponpe, ab
Denbo * chelande whether thou goet to poffelte tt , te
not asthelande of Capptethat pe came out of
where thou ae ede: € Wateredtt itm
thp feteasa gardenof bearbes:but plande whe
ther pe qo ouer to poliefie itiga lande thathath
bpllesand valleys, anddzpnketb water of the
rapne of beauen. Chislande doth the Losbdethp
Gad carefoz,and the eyes of the Lorde thp God
arcalwayes bpon if, from the begpnnpnge of p

pere, onto the ende of thepere.

3f pe hall berken therfore pntomp Com-
maundementes, whiche J commanndepou this
Daye, that peloue the Lozde pour Godandferue
bonm: With alipouc bart, and with all pour foule
de.rroiit a * A alfo wpllgenerapne vnto pour landeindue
aoclo.f. coaton:the fpzterapneand the latter, that thou
amot? tapie catherinth copne,thp wpne and tbhpne
ople. And J wpll fende grafic inthp feldesfoz
tdp catel:that thou mapt eate and fpl tbp felfe
Wut beware that pour hartedeceaue pounot: g
pe turne afpde , and Cerne Eraunge goddes, and
| pone fe em,and thenthe Lode being woth
be, Frbli-¢ sqapnit pou, xut vp the beauen,that there be


ai1.te.rbila


pe ‘no raine, and tbat pour lande peldenot ber frute


Deuteronomium


_ntobpm. Chen


and lates;


and lefEepe perpithe quyckelp frome of the good Ame. titi,
lande, whpche the Logdegeucth pou. :
Thertoze thall pe putte vp thefe mp wordes €
inxpour arte and in pour foule, and bpd them Deat.d1.0,
foz afpgne bporypour bande, thatthep mape be P:
asa warnpnge befwene pour epes,andpetpall —
* teach them pourchplbdzcn that thep map talke went. 81.6
of chem, when thou fpttet inthine boutes When piaia
thou Walkeltbpthewaye :whenplyeltdotone, ~~
and when thou rpfetk pp: pee and P palt wepte
them bpon thedoze poftes ofthpnchoule,andn
ponthp gates that pour tapes mape be multp-
piped, and the dapes of poutchplozentnplanbe 7 °
tobpebe the Lozdel ware vnto poure fathersto ae.
gee thepm, as longe asthe Dapesof Heauen =
latte vpon the earth. foz re pEpekepe all thele
commaundementes, whiche Fcomaunde ponto
that pe p phais reg SA bes pe loue the 10d
pour God:and walkeinall bis wapesand cleue
ibpli the Lozbecafte oute all
thetenacpons befoze pou, and pe malbe the ep»
tes of great nacpons and of them that are migh
tyertbenpourfelues. «All theplaces whereon Fotae. ta,
the foleg of pour fete Hall treade, Halbe poures
euen from the wpldernefic and from Libanon,
from the cpuce Cuphzates,cucit wnto the beter:
mol tee pall pour cofte be. Chere thallnamat
be able to Lande befoze pou: forthe Lode pour
Godhallcatke the fave anddzed¢ of pou vpon
all the lande that pe hall tread vpon,asbebath
apoe bnto pou. Ja D
¥ Webolde, F let beFoze pon this dape ablel= Deut.rrr.e
fpuge anda curleza blefipnge:pf pe obepthe co: fde.rrbitia
maundementeg of the Lozde pour God whiche
J commaunded pou this dape. And a curfe:pt pe
wpil HOt obey the comaundementes of p Lode
pout Gob : butturne out of the wape, whiche J
cominaunde pou this dape,to co after fraunge
gobbes, pce pe haue not knotoen. chen the
Lore thy Godtherfo2e hath bzougbte theinto
tde lande, whether thou goef to pofeffert thou
{halt put the xbiefipnge pponmount Gartsim, de.rrbit.b,
and the curfe bpon mount Èball, wbiche(moü-
tapnes)are on the other {pbe Jordan on p backe
ipbe of the Wapetowarde the gopnge Bowne of
the fonne,tntbelanbde ofthe Cananites whpche
dwell in the plapne oueragapnt Gilgal belpde
the qrouc of oreh For pethal palle oner 3o02-
dan, to go in,and potete the lande, whpche the
10de pour Godgeueth pou ,¢ pethallconquer
ff,and Dwel therein. Cake bede therfoze that pe
doo all thecOmaundementes andlawes, wbiche
J lette betoze poutbpsdape.
em E okl Chapter.
Zbep mutt enip po har yeski wba Ae E ’
Ep dele are the o2dpnauncesand lawes, A
ay (2) WDiche pe Chall obferue anddooin the


and


}


4
:


+


=


 Beeceptes


and burne the qroues with Eper and bew Downe
_ the grauenpmages of the gods that thep baue,
and bopnae the names of them to naught out of
that place.Pe thalnot fodo wntothe Lozde pour
Wod, but pe thallebe the place, whitch the Lode
poute God (pall hauecholen out of all pour trp-

bes, toput bis name there, andthere todwell. ,
Cro.riittb And ¥ tbpther thou Malt come, and tbpther pe
oF Mall bapngepoure burntelacetEpces pour ofte-
ryphiges,poure tpthes¢ beue offerpnaes of poure
bande, poure votves, pour frewpll offerpnges,¢

the fpatte gendzed of pour oren ¢ of pour thepe.
‘=e And there pe thalleate befozethe Lozde youre
God, andpe Hall retopceinall that pe put pour
bande yuto both pe and pour Houtholdes, wher-

inthe Logde thp God hath bleffed the.

x5. Vethallnogdoatter all thefe thynges that
” the Do here thys dape, cuerpeman what femcetp
ppm goodinbps otoneepes. Woy pe are not pet
cometorett, € totheenberitaunce which p Lozd
pour Ggrageucth pou. But wpe pe xo ouer Joz
dan, and Dwell intheland which the Lozde pour
Godhothqenenpow to enberete,¢ when he bath
geuch poureft from allpourenempesreunde ar
pout,totbat pedwel in lafetp tben wnto p place
which Pp Logde pour God hath chofen,to put bis
name ther, pe Wal bzpng al that JcOmaund pou
Qamelp:your burnt tacrifices, as offerpnges
pour tptbes, the bene offering of pour band, and
al pout {pecpall poweswhpcd pe vow onto the
Lode. And pe thal rctopce betoze the L020 pout
god, peand pour fonnes e pour Doughters pour
(eruauntes and pour maidens , and the Leuite p
is wpthin pour gatesxfoz almuch as be bath no
parte noz enperpraunce wpthp ou. Take bede p
thou offernotthp burnt offcriges tn eucry place
that thou feet : but inthe place which the Lorde
{ball baue chofenin oncot thp tribes , therctbou
thalte offer thp burnt offeringes, and there thou
fhalfaoall ý Jcdmaundthe. Norwiehitanding
thoumaptt &pl € cate AeH in al tbp cttpes,robat
focner.tbp Coulelpiteth after, accozdpnge tothe


mele r.b
and.rbiii


bleffpng ofthe Logo thy God wbich batb geuen


Deut. ro.» tbexboth the wncleane g the cleane may eat ther
ER of ene ag the roo, 02 Pbhart:oulp pe fal noteat
the bloud, but poze if pon pearth as water.


Thou mapkiot eatewdinthygatesthetyth —


_€ of thp cozne, of thp wine of thy ople, the Eiri
gendzed of thine oxen, of thp (pepe, netberanp
of thp votes which ë powell, noz thy frewpli-
offerpnares 02 beue offerpnge of thpne bande:but
thoumuft eate them befoze the L020 thy god,in
the place whych the Lozdethp Godbath chofen
thou and thpfonne,¢ thpdougbter,thp fercuane
and thy mapode, ¢ the Leupte thatis wptbinthp

ates ‘thon thalte reiopcess (andberetvethes bes


è
=” Foxetbe Lozdetbp God, inallthatthou putteft


stbtin tbinebande to.* Beware,that thou fozlake not
the Leuite,as longe ag thou lpuelt npon p earth
FE(whenthe Lozde thp God path enlarged

thy bozder as de bath pzompledthe thou tape: J
wplleateflety , bpcaulethp foulelongeth to eat
ficth:thou mapt eat fcH whatfo ener thp foule

lufteth .PE tbe place Mbycbe the Lorde thp Goo

bath chofento put bis name thee, beto farfrom


=


Heutcronominm


pelone p Lord pour god


Volley


the, then thon thaltekpll of thy oren, and of thp


epe which the Loz bath geuen the, as Ibane


commaunded the , and thou balte cate in tbpne
ownecptpe, what foeuer typ foule lufteth. =.

* And asthe roo andthe barte is eaten, cuenfo Deure.:
thou Halt catetbem:both thecleane and the vn:

cleane pal eate ofthem. 25ut be ronge xth sa ire riid:
cate not the blonde. sfortheblond,thatisplpfe = ==
andthou mapt not eate thelpfe with the Aep:#

(halte not eate it but poweit ppontheeartbas

water. Hethoueatett not that it mape qo well

wptb the and wpthtbp chplozen after the : But

thou Malte dothat which isrpabt inthe fygbte

of the Lode. Wut thy bolp thpnges which thou g

baf, and thp vowes xthou Malt take, andcome veu.rit7.e
wnto the place which the Lorde bath chofen,and 2™-»-b.:


‘thou thalte offer thp burnt offerpnges both fleth


and bloude dpon the altar of the Lozdthp God
and the bloude of thpne offerpnges Halbe pow-
red Out Dpon tbe aultar of the Lorde thp God,t
thou palt eate the AeH. Cake hedeand Heare all
thefe modes which F cömaund the, that it map


go weil with theand w thy chploz€atterthe foz
Cuer, pi thoudoft that whiche is good andright
‘tntbefpabt ofthe Lozdetby Good.


When the Lord thy God bath delkroped the
nacpons befoze the, whpther thou goet to cone
quere them, and pfluccedeftiithep2 enberitaiice


“and Ovvelleft inthepzlande:WSeware, tbat thou —


be not taken tna farre after them, after > the
bedeftroped before the , and p thoualke not af-
ter thep2 goddes laping:Dow dpd thele nacions
{crue thepz goddess y wpll dofolpkewile. Pap —
¥thou palt not fodo vnto p Lozdethp God:fog vew.rbiits
all abbominacpons, and that whiche the Lorde
batet, p fame baue thep Done wnto thepze god=
Des. Wor hep butne pet) their fonnesandthep2
dougbters with fprebeforethepzgoddcs.Cher
foze what locucr F comaundpou, that take bede gs
POU DO-®)onty,vuto che Lose) EX put thou noughte zorue.t.b
therto,noz take ought there from. sar cuir &
Che. rut. Chapter. 1930. 6T. a
@ The falfe prophet mull be put to death. Wobpoweth oug |
apeh bp falfe mpractes.
capa! therearple amongponax prophete 4
leas Pew a.Dzemerofdgemes, Eqenethe a tigne Hatve
PA fle 02 wonder, g f ligne ogwonder tobicbe
isomer De hath {apd com to palle, thë fape:let
vs go after fraung gods, w ich? baft not kna
wen, glet velerue them:berkënot thon vnto p
wo:deg of f prophete oz Deemer of Dzemesx Eo vaii
the Lo:dthp God poneo to wite whether +s
w al pourbartand wal
pourfoule:Pe thalwalke after p Lozd pour god
anbdfeatebim Bepe bis cOmaundementes,¢ ber-
ken bunto bis voice,lerne bim,ecleauevntobim |,
«Bund p prophet oz deemer of emes thal ope Arun
becaufe he bath fpoken to turne pou atvap from zach.piina
the Lo2de pour god, (which bzough pou out of p 25
land of Egypt, € Delpuered pou out of the boule
bondage to thut p out of the wap, wbich p
Horde thp God comaunded the to walkein:and
therfoze thou thalt put tbe euelawap fromthe. -
PEthyp brother, the line of hp mother,o2 thpme
pwne fonne,oz ty Doughter, 02 sash ae R4


—
=-


sf meates.


Deu, rbidh


eth in tbp bofont, o2 thp frend wich isas thpne
owne foule onto the,entpce the fecretlp,faping,
let bs go and {crue traunge Gods, tobiche thou
Hatt not knowen,nog pet thy fathers. And thep
be of the Gods of the people whiche are rounde


abonte pou, whether thep be npe vnto theo: far


of from the,from the one ende of the carth puto
the otber. Chon thale not confent vnto hpm,tio2
berken pute bpm:thpne epe Wall not pitpe bym,
nepther (halt thou bane compaflion on bpm,noz
kepe bpm fecrete, + butcanle bpm tobe lapne.

Tbhpue hand {hal be fir pon bpm to kpll bpm,
and then the banbdes of all the people, And thou
ialt tone bpm with ones ipat e dpe, bpcaule
be bath goneaboute to theufte the awape from
the Lozde top God, wbhiche bzougbt the out of
the lande of €qppte,and from the boufe of bon-
Dage. Andall Firael pal beare € feare, and Hal
Do no mozeanp Cuche wyckednetle ag this ig a-


€ mo evou. at thou thalte beare Tape in one of
pate nish the Luder


thy cpties w bp God Path apuers
the tobwellin,that certepumen bepnge the chil-
Dzen of Weltal,are gone out From amonge pou
-andbate moned the inbabpters of thep2 cptye,
favinge:let vs go g ferue (Traunge Gods. which
pe baue not knowen. Then thou mut feke, and
make fearche and cnqupze Dplygentlp. And be-
bolde p£ it betrue,gtbetbpnge of a furetie,that
fuche abbominacpon ts wought amonge you:
then thon palt mpte the dwellers of that cptpe
inthe coge of the fwearde,and deftrope tt ytter-
lp, andall that is therin, and euen the werp catel


D therof with the edge of the wearde. And gather


` fpople therof euerp tobpt Eo: the Lozbthp God,


Diu bit.
Par-ril.f,


iro.fifa


all the fpople of it into the mpodes of the rete
therof,¢ burne with fp2e both the cptie gall the


Andit Hal be an beape Foz euer, and all not be
bupltagapy. «And there Hal cleaue naught of
the damned theng ir tbpne banve,that thp Lor


map turne From the fearcenes of bis wath, and
ewe the mercy,¢ bane compafiyon on the, and


multiply p,as be baph Cwozne vuto thy Fathers.
x Therfore halt yherken vnto the vopce of the
Lozde thy God,fo kepe al his comaundenrentes
wbich J comaunde the this dape,that thou doit
whicbe ts ryght inp epes of the Lorde thp God,
(whe mances of the Gentples mape not befetotwed, Yopal
beaftes are Cleane to be cacen and what aot.


ea E are the childzen of the LozD pour God.


4 | My £4 * Pe Mall not cut pour felues, no? make


22S pouanp baloncs bptwene ponr epes foz


Dew.bit.«. anp Deade man. * Fo? theu arte an se paan


Hei cia, ;


punto the Lod thy God, the Lozd hath chotew
the to beafenerall people onto bpm felfe,aboue
all the nacpens thatare ppon theearth.

x hou thalt * eate homaner of abominacion,
Thele are the beatkes whiche pe Halleate oren,
tepe,and gotes, berte,roo,¢ bugle, toplde gote,
‘upcogne,wplde ore,and Camelpou. And al the
bealtes that cleaue the bofe, and flptitin f tiwo
clawes, and chete the cud, them pe Hall cate.
DRIE E 4 all not eate of : them
that chetoe cud and of them that deupde g cleane-
the bofe :tpecamellthe bare,¢ the conp : wbiche


 *Petiteronomium, WHfmeates —


chewe cud, but deupde not the bofe: therfore are |
thep vnclean bnto pou:¢ allo theltopne,cbough —
be Deupde the hofe, pet be cherocth not cud, thers |
fore is be bncleane Ynto pou:pe (hall not eate of |


) me flefipe of luche no: touche the Dead carkas of


m. « Chefe ye alleate of all that are in the geass
waters: All that bane fpnnes and {cales pall pe

eat. And tohat foeuer bath no fpne fealg orp
pemapnoteate,butttigyncleanebntopou. © |.

PFE all cleane bp2des pe pall cate: but thele 35 :
are they of which pe pall not eate: the Eqle.the .
SoMawke andthe Tormeraunt, the zrionthe = = F
Wultur, the tipte after ber kpnde,¢all kpnde of |
Raueng, the Ellrpch.the nyghtcrowe, the iuc
kowe and the Sparotobawke.after per kpnde,
the lptle Dwle.the great Dwle,the Wacke,the :
Witture, the pethe Sotozke, the Heron, f Jap ;
in bis kpnde the lapwopng,the fwalow. And let eat!
al creppng foules be Dncleane bnto pou, enot be |
eaten of:but ofall cleane foules pe map cate.

_ Pepalleateof nothpnge that by eth alone: ¢

Wut chou Malt qpue tt untothe Craunger that

ig intbpcptre, tbat be cate itso? thou mapi fell

it butoanalpaunt. JEog thou art anbolp people ,
tnto the Lode tbp Good. Thou thalenotxtetbhe ero.rritie r
a kpd inbismotþersmplke. Thou Malte tpthe trrriiib .
ali the encreale of thp iede that pfelde bzpngeth
forth pere bp pere. Vno thou thalte cate Vefore p

10d thp God, (in thexplace which he bat cho meu.riin
fen,and where be bath put big name) the tpthe

of thy coane,of thp wpne and of thyne ople,and

the Ep:t yended of thpne oven and of thp (pepe,

that ý mapi learne to feare the Lorde thp God
alwape. * ithe wape be tolonge foz the: fo Deurina
that thou art not able tocarp it,and pf the place

be farre From the, which the 1020 thp God bath

chofen to fet his name tbere(and the Lozde thp |
Eod hath blefled the) then Halt P make tt inmo |
nep, and take themonepin thpne bande, and go D ey.
onto the place which p Lozde thy God hath be a
fen and beftowe the money for what foeuer thp 7
Comte lufteth after:foz oven,and hepe, wpne and ji
ftrongedzpnke,andfo2batfoewertbpfoulebe -~
fpreth,and cate there befoze the Loabe thy God,

and be merp : bothe thou ¢tbpne boutbolde,and

the Leupte thatis within thy gates, Halt thou — |
not forfake,*fo2 be bath nepeber | <a NO? INDE: mentee: |

4
|


rptatice withthe. + Ae the ende of thee pere thou ¢.rvi9.2.
Chait baying forth al the tpebes of thpne ecreafe 72e-FP%*
the fame pere and lape it bp within thyne owne
gates. And the Leutte wbich bathno parte nog
ipl Sep witb the, tballcome, ¢ the traun-
ger, the fatherleffe,and the wpdowe, whiche are
within thy gates, hall eate and be fplled : that
the Lorde thp God map blefle the in all the woz
kes of thpne bande whicbe thou doef,
-~ - CThe.xv. Chapter, J
C The fozgenenes of bettes inthe feuenthpere.

Baran the. vii.peareP Dalt make afredome. 3g
KE Kal kA nd thig is f maner of pfredome.Gipo z +
ees Cocuer lendeth ought w Dig hande vito ero rrii,
bis nepgbbour,map notalee agapn(p which be“
batb lent) o€ bis neighbour o2 of big bzot ber, bp:
cauleit iscalled p Lordes Ere pere:pet of a frau:
Ketva(eotanatcaunt)p mapi call tt bome agarne. o i

; EA ut -


Weceptes


Ecetia. WDutxhe thatis thp brother bym thall thpne
banderempe. Peucrthelefle there halbe no beg
 Geramongepou. soz the Lorde Mail blefle the

inthe lande, whpche the Lorde thy God geucrh

thean berptaunce to poffelic tt:fo that thou ber-

ken wut the Vopce of the Lozde thy Godto ob-
ferue and do all thefe cmaundementes, tebpche
FZ commaunde the thys Dape.ffo2 the Lorde thp


Gov hathe blefledtheasbebathe prompledthe, Le


deu,rrbiit AND ¥ thou Malte lende nto many nacpons, but

thou thp felfe halt not bozotve: And thou Malte

raiqne ouer manp nacios, €thep thal not raigne

of Fob.tit.¢ onerthe. DFone of thy byetberne amonge pou

- 5 be poore Wwytbin anp of thp gates intbp lande,

which the Lorde thp qod qeucth the:p alte not

barden thy barte no? put chpne bandefrom thp

pooze brother: But open thpne pande vnto bpm

and lende bpm fuffyctent fo? bys nede whiche be

batb. wWeware, that there be not a wicked potnt

intbpneberte,thatthouwoldeftfape..

Tbe feuenth pere, the pere of fredome igat

bande, andtbhefoze it qreucth the toloke on thy

poore brother, and geuct bpm nougbtc, and be

- thenctpe onto the Lozdeagapntte the and it be

fpnite vito the: Wut gete him, letit not qreue

thpne berte to gene vnto bpm. Wecaule that foz
thpstbpnge, the Logde th God Wall blefleth

inall thp woes andtnall that thou puttette

sgjat.rrbia thpne hande to." ripam pal neuer be wpth-

out poore: And therfore J cdmaunde the, faping


Thou Malte open th pne bande onto thp brother
tbat isnedpe and poore tnthplande.

x Pitby brotberan polar fell bpmfelfe to

eructbelpre peare, in


2


erenelfauozdnes p palt not offer it un-
| SLON thy God Bu balt catctt winthpne


Meuteronomium


` chofe:foztbe Lozdthp
- thpteutes, tinallthe wokes of thpnebandes,


foze the Lorde cmptp.but.euerp man accozdpng


Kollevt
otbne*qates,the vuclean ethe cleane tndifferée Dew rito
ipe,as there ethebert. Dnlp eate not thebloud
therof but power it ppon the ground as water.
@ Che.rvi. Chapter. Ch N

e Dicter, whptfontyoe,« thefeaks o€tabernacies what —

officers oughe te te osdepned, i
FF Dlerue thexmoneth ofnew core that X
T EPA \ithou matt otters pafleouer bntop lozd £. in
egy Aitbp God. $€o2 inp moneth when cone EFA
pees) begpnieth to tppe,the Lozdethp Good
brought p ought of Eappt bp night. Chou thal
therfore offer paffcouer Dntothe Lod ii God


bierne


(and epe and oren) tn theplace tobich p Lode
(halcholetoput his name there. Chou halt eat
no leuched bzead wpthit:but feuen dates palt p
cate Dnleuencd beead therwith : eucn the beeade
of tttbulacpon (Foz thoucamf€ ont of theland of
€qppteinbal ) i thou mapt remember § dape
when thou camel out of thelande of Eqppt,all
bapesotthbplpfe. And there halbettolenened
b2cad fene th all tbp coftesfeuendapesionge, ne
ther thaltbereremapne anp thbynge of the teme i
wbich thou offredé the fpzt dayeateuen, bntpl i
the moznpnge. Thoumaptnotofferpafeouer :
within any of thy gates, whitch p Lordthp God
geucth the : butxtn the place which pLozde thp , tiilf.e
Sod (hall chole,to ler bts name tn, there P Halte anv.rvt.b..
offer paffcouct atenen aboute the gopng Downe
of the funne, euen inthe feafon that thou camet
outof Egypte. And thou thalte {eth andeate it,
tn tbe place wbpch the Loze thy God bath chos
fen and Depart onthemozow, and get the onto
tbp tente. Spre dapesthalt # eate fwetebzcade
andtheleuenth dap isa Gathering togetherbes —
Fore the Lozde thy God: thouthaltao no Wozke
tberin. +ocuen wekes hale Pnombze wntothe geu-rriit, e
and begpntonombee the. vit. wekes, when? be
gpuitt to put thy {pckel to the cozne, xq =e the actes, tia,
Featte of wekes bnto the Lozdthp God, wafre
tpl oferpng of thpne bande, which P palt gene i
bntothe Lo2detbp God, accozdingasthe Lod
thp Gobhath bleiled the. And retopce befoze the
Lo2d:thp God, Pandtbp fon, chp dougbeer,tbp
{eruaunt,¢ thp mapbde,and the Leupte: ig with
intbp gates, ¢ tbe ttraunger,p fatherlefe, ¢ the
Wwpoow, pare amonge pon, inthe place which p
1020 thp god bath cholento oo big name there
And remember that # wak aferuaunt in Egipt
and p talt oblerueand do thefe ôzdpn de 5 C

- Thou palt alfoobfne thefeate of taber
cles. Vii. dDapeg, after that p bat gathereainthp
conc andtbhp wish And Palt refopce inf thy
featt:thou ¢ thp fon thp doug ber, thpferuaunt
and thp maybe, the Leutte,the fraunger, and p
fatherletle,¢ the wpdow, thatar topthinthp aa regbis
ter. *DcuchdDapes Walt Y kepe bolp dape ito
the Lo20 thp god, in te place which F Lovothat

od hall bleife the inalt


therfore Walt thou be glad. * Chee times tn the ro rrite
pere (halal the males apere before the Lozdthp
gop in the place which be thal chofe:inp feat of
fwete bread, tn the fealt of tockes,and in the fealk
oftabernacles. And thep thal not xappeare be= ero, rrit, ò


“tt tothe


“‘FGoolatrye


ta tbeapfte of big bande, and actozdpnige tothe
blefpnae of the Loze thy God, whicbe be bath
m apuca the. Fudges and ofiicers palt thou make
the in ail thp cptpes, whiche the Logde thp God
gpucth the thozotoout thp trpbes:and thep Hall
nerie inde the praple rpabteoutly. * ret not thou
the lawe, no: kiowe anp perfor, neptber take
sient! fita anp remarde:+ foz cpftes bipnde the wpfe, and
PeR weruerte the wozdes of therpabtuous. That
whiche ig iute and rpght : Malte thou folowe,
that thou mapt ipue and entope the land which

the Lode thp God gpuctp the.
Sou tyalte plante the no groue, of tobat fo
ever trees tt be,npe puto the aultar of the Lorde
- thp God, whicbe thou balte make the. Chou
pArA balte fet the vp no x ppller, whiche the Lozde

erod thy Good batet. ;
oy © The.rvti. Chapter.

ia atrre. . z
Eleye mmugsnsanpge om
sj on alte offer puto the Lorde thp
Eoursic egy Eres GOD noore no? thepextwberin is ble:
biuteod. Reta ssa mptibe oz anp Defogmitye : Foz that is
Poy «Weng Attabbominacion Dito the Lozd thy
iets (500, $f there be founde among pou
within anp of tbp gates, whiche the Lozde thy
(od ypueththe mano: woma ý path wzougpt
wickeones in the fpgbt of the Lozde thp God, fo
that they bane gone bepoude bis appopntiment,
and cone and ferued Arange Gods, and wor:
det. tlt, orpoen them, the Sounne 02 Soone, oz anp of
the boot of heaven. whbiche F paue not cõmaun=
bed, and it ts tolde the, and thou bafite bearde of
(t :then Malt thouenqupzediligentlp. And pfit
be trewe, and the thpnge of alucetpe that luche
abbominacpon is w2ougbe in Flracl,then tale
thou beynae forth that mano? p woman wbich


paue commpttcd that wpched tbpnge)ontorhe SY)
gates, Walt fone themsvith frones, tyll thep


marro. Dpe. * At the mouth of two o? thee wytnefies
15 fhall be that is woetbp of death, dpe: and at the
mouti of one wopines,let no man dpe. The pan-
bes of the wptneles Hall be fpi vpon dpm, ta
kpli bpm, and afterwarde the handeg ofall the
topie, and thou thalte put the wprked awape
romtbe. XE there rple a matter to barbe fo; the
intadgement bptivene bloude and bloude, bp-
tiene ple and ple. bptmenc plage and plage, and

- the matters come to ftcpfe within thp gates.
Then alte thou arpfe,and qettbe vp vnts
the place whicbe tbe Lorde thp God hath chofer
and come vuntothe preattes the Leuptes,ano bn
 fatheindge that hatbein thole Dapes,and alke
ep rilt xand tbep thal Hebe the, the fentence of tudge«
ment, EtDoumull do accozdpng to that, obiche
thep of that place (wbiche the Lowe bath cho-
fein) pete the,¢ thou Halt obferue to bo, accoz-
Dpng to all that thep enfourme the. Accozdpnge
tothe {entence ofp lawes which thep teache the,
> - and accozdpng fo the mbdgement which hep fell
rut.b.o. shetbalt thou do, and*bowe not fro that which
Hou | they thewe the, nepther tothe Fygbt bande,1oy

| ‘totheleft. anbthat man that top

tuonflp,¢ wopll not berken onto the preat (that
fFandeth befoze the Logbe thp GonrominpfEer)


ldo pzeiump.


soctiferonomint,


oz bnto the iudge.that man thal dpe y thou whale
opens eupll from Jlrael. and ali the people

ll beareand Feare, and all do no moze pres
fumptuonflp.Wibenthou art come vnto plande
ihpich the Lozbe thy God gpucth the, ¢ entopell
it,and Dwelleft therin: and pl thou Halte faye, ;
x FZ topll (eta bpnae ouer me : lpheas all the na- pre gies,
cpons that are aboute me, then thou Halt make
bpm kpnae ouce the, wpomethe Lowdethp Gov
{pall chole: euen one fFrentamonge thp bgetbzets
palt thou make tyne oner the,and p mapt not
fet a ffraunger over the, Wbich is not of thp bre-
thzen.*2S5ut be tall not multiply bogles to him iresi. a
felfc, noz bapnae the people agapne to Egypte
thootve the multitude of bozies,foz almocbe as
the Lode bath lapd vntopou:pe mall bentfo2th
Ono nI02¢ agapn that wap. Allo bexoughet not tiepe


` tomultiply wpues to bimlelf, lett bis bert turne D


atap, neptber thal be gather bypmafpluce € gold tit.ee.r. a
to moche. And when be is let ypon the {rate of Terob
bis kpngdome:be thall wapte brm eyt a copp of
this lawe tna booke befoze the preaites the iLe-
uptes. And it hall be With dyin,and pe ought to
reade therin x all Dapes of his Ipfe, that be may Zorni bs
jearne to fearethe Lozde Dis God, eto kepe all
the wo2des of this lawe and thele opdinaunces,
foztobdo them:and that bis bert arple aot aboue
bis bzethzen and that be turne not from the coi
maundement: to the rpgbt bande oz te the lefte,
but that be map prolonge bis dapes in Dis byng
dome: he and bis chpldzen in Firacil.
CThe.r vill. Chapter.

CTh: Leupies haino polledpons. 4oclotrpe mak be Zien.

The prophete Chris prompled. Whe fallepropyete mak

be aparan hotar be map ke Rio wen,

woes IC pCa ltes, the Leuptes,andall the x

So itribeof Leut*inufl baue no parteno? euroi, s
nberptaunce with ffracli: but Mall Hits a
jeate the offerpnacsot the Lozde and *
“ipis inberpraunce: Tberfoze tall thep
pane no inberptatice among thep2 becthzew- but
the Lozde be iz thep2 inberptaunce, as be bath
{apd butotbem, And thig ig p preattes dutpe of `
the people,and of them that otter lacrifpee, whe-
ther it be ore oz wepe: Thep mut grue Duto the
preall,the Moulder and the two chekes,and the
matoc,the fp2tt frutes alfo of thy come, wpne, g
ople and the fpi of the woll of thy pepe palie
thou apue bpm: + J£03 the Lozde thp God Dath srane.t.s
chofen bpm out of al thy tribes,to Lande and tO ano.rvig. e
minp Erein È name of the Lorde: be € his lonneg
fozeuce. Ifa Leupte come ont of any of thp cp- vs
tpes of all Alracil, wbeve be is afofourner, and
come witballthbelni of bis bette puto the place
whiche the Zo2de path chofen: be Hallininpitce
inthe name of the Lorde pis God, ag his other
baetheen the Leuptes do, whiche remapne there
befoze the Lozde. And ipep Hall hauclpbepo2=
cpons tecate,belpbe that which cometh to bpm
of pg cei onpe of biselders.

* Gben thou ast come into the lande whiche » on. seig.e
the Lode thp God gpucth the, te that p leavne anv.rr.n-
not to do after the abbominacpons of thole nas Prot
cpons. Let there not be founde amonge pow Any iu.re.ria
one thatimaketh bis fon opdoughbterto qotho> acce-ba.t
rowe Pipo) that wileth witchcraft,o2 a ehoite

ut .


i;
|
|


a Actes. i.d Cuffered theloto bo. The


= = A
% è
=
+
ù


Seuirte.b oute of dapes * o? that reqardeth the flpinge oF
foules,o2 afozcerer, 02 a charmar, ót that coun-
` celeth wprh (preted, oza Cothlayer, oz f albeth

ew c#(thetrathatthbemtbatbedeade. = -
€C Koralltbat dotuchethbpnges, are abpomi-
uacpon pnto the Lozde,and becaule of thele ab:
bominacpons the Lord thp Gad doth cal them
out befo2e the. Thou Malt be peefecte therfore:
-pæ ow Cand without diemphe in thelpgbe of p Lozde thp
Gad. Koz thele nacpons whiche thou (halt con-
quer, berken onto chofers out of dapes and wn-
tolozcerars: mut the ce pag © 0d hath not
Lorde God wplxtere
xa» ote ton onto the a Wzophet amonge pou:euen ot thy
pegat pona 2etD2en, lyke Dntome + Dntohpm pethallbec-
| ken,accozdpnge to all that thou delpecdett of p
Lo2d thp God tn Hozeb, in the bape of the qathe


ceofmp Lorde sabes e pe oz fe this

greatipreany moze, that Jopenot — -

D And theLozde lapde unto me:thep bane toel
fpoken, ¥ {opli raple them bp a zropbete from
amonge thep2 bzethzenlpBe wntothe,and wpll
put mp wo2bes in bis mouth and be hal (peake

nto themall that Fall comaunde bpm. And
whe foeuer wpllnot derken bntothe wordes
au.rht.a, ich be that peake in mp name, J wpl require

Deu. rita tt OC DPM. Wut the prophetewhiche thal pze-

me.srbiii d fume to fpeakea wozdeinmy name, whpebe J

"rerea panenot cõmaunded ppm totpealse, ort at fpe:

keth inthe name of Eraunge goddes , thefame
zophet Hal dpe. And pf thou tape inthpie bert
= ety {hall tbe knowe the wozde which p Lord
pr bath not fpoken? a zbis token Hale thou haur Cue
wobena prophet (peakethintbe name of p Logd
pEthetbpnae folowe not,no2 come to paife,that
is the Chypnae whiche thè Lorde bath not Cpoken
Sut the prophet bath fpokenit pzefumptuoullp

Thou halt not therfore be afrapde of bpm.

CC The.rir.Chapter.


an
Tp


s en the Lorde tdp God x hatheroted
AMVAA out thenacpons, whofe lande $ Lozd
RA VAVAA DP god acuetbthe andthouluccedell
MAGEN int tep? tnperitaunce and dtwellet in
thepzcitpes, and intbep: Doufes: thou palt ap-
opnte* thzetitpes foz the the mpddes ofthe


Mota, Fra. :
anveanbpchethe Lowethp Godgeueth the to


pofleiic it: thou Halt pacpatethe wape.andodes EF


upbe thecoaftes of thy lande, whichetbe Lorde


t
ro.rFl.d. that x who lo euer commptteth murther, mape
flecthpther. W0: this aule mut the flaper fpe
thytber,thatbe mape lpse. Wbofokplletp bis
nepgbtoureiguozauntlp and bated pym not in
 tpmepafled: And whenaman gorth onto the
© 10000 w bis nepgbboure to bewe Wood, #(thra:
kpnsenoharme, and as his bande fetchetha ftroke
with the are to cut Downe the tree, the bead flip
- petbfrom the belue, and finptech bis neighbour
that be dpeth: the fame Hall Ape wntooue of the
Tame citpes and lpne. Left the erecuter of bloud
Folowe after the gf bis bert is whote
and overtake bpm, Becaule the ware ts longe:


 Peuteronomeiun


EFOdLFF, E de together, when p fapdet: Let mepeare `
t


pe God geuethebeto enheret,tntothze partes, -


-~ Forbi..
and flapehpm, and pet there idno caute wozthp
of Beatbe in bpm, thasmocheas be bated bym
not tntpme paficd. Ciberfore 3 comaunde the,
faping:thou Walt appoint out thee citpesfo2 p.
nd ye the Lopdethp God enlarge thp coa-
fies (ashe bathe fwoene vntotbp fathers) and
geue theall the lande hpche be fapde be wolde


gene onto thp fathers, thou thalte kepe allthefe


commaundementes to do them, wobpche eom-

maunvde the thts dape, that thou loue the Lode |

thp God, and walken bys wapes euer andad

tize citpes mofoz the puto thole thze that inno-

cent bloud benot ed in thy land, which ë Lod

thp God geucth the to enberet,<¢ fo blonde come
Dponthe. x Wut andpfamanhatebisn Ht BUALEF Cs |


Doure and lape ape foz him and rpfearain


Him, and finpte bpm that he dpe,and then fipeth
vitoanp of thelccitpes: the elders of bpscitpe
hall lende and fetche ppm thence g delpuer bom
intotbebandes of the Jultpce of blonde, that be


mapedpe. Tbpne cpe hallnot {pare bym, but


thou Halt put awape innocent bloude from 3f=

racl that it imap qo wel with the. «Chon thalt Tob.rrriz
notremoue thpnepghbours marke, which cbep *

of olde tpme bauetet inthpne enberptatice,that

thou palt enbereetnthelande,Wwhiche the Lo

thy God geueth thetoentope it. .

___ x One wptnetie thal notrpieagaynt amatt au cry.
fo2 anpmaner trefpace,o2£o2 any manec{pnne, 3

02 foz anp maner faute, that be offendethin.

* Mutat the mouth of tio wptnelles 02 of the Deu.rvii.e
wptneties allthe matterbe tablpthen. + FE Matrouie
an birighteous wptnefle rple bpagapntta ma iico. rise
to accule bpm of trefpatte : then botbe the men Te
Wwhpebe Krpuc together, Hall itande before the Derere
Loade, before the P2ealtes and p indgeg, which tuig
thalbeinthofe dapes andthe indges hal make eae


Bupgent inquifpcion. And pf p wytnes befound


falle, and that be bathe geuen falle wyptnefle a-

gapni bts brother, chen that pedo vnto bym,as

be bad thought todo ynto bis bzether,and thou

{halt put cucll awape from the. And otber hall

heave, and fave: and Wall bence fost) compt no

moze anp fuche wyckednefleamonge pou. And

thpneepe ball haneno compafipon, but foule SEs

for foule. epefozepe, toth fox totysband fo band frost.

fote foz fote ETIEN Dan-riiig

© C Ther. Chapter. BH at.v.F,

@ Who ougheco ga te batel. Spelaweofarmes.2be-Laz


uaanites mun thep pil, : ae 0)

R hale thou goet ont to batell agapnit »

| \\ Jai thyne enempes , and fect bozies anù

AWAY va char ftes and peoplemo then thou,

wed befor xafrapbe of them, forthe Lorg DETI
fis With the, whiche bouche tie out of

be Line of Cappte. And when pearecome nye

ato the battell the Heat Hall comcforth to

peake Unto the prople.and thal faye tntothan -

eare, DAlrael, pe ar come onto batel agapan

pourenempesxtet not pour bertestapnce,neps oe aap

thet feare,no2 be amafednozadzratetthen,

Fo: fhexL02de poure God goeth wyth pou, to re.rrvsit,

fygbt fo2 pou again pourencmies,andtotate

pou. Xnbletthe offprersfpeake ynto p people, 25

faying:3fanp man baue buplt anew boufe, and

baue not dedicate tf tet ppm gog i z bs

litt Doule


Mf murther.
ieft be bye inthe bafell, and an other man Dedp=
cate it. Andif anp man baue planted a wynepard
and baue tot madeit comen os (and tamtu fo; suete

ox man toeate of let bpmmgoandreturne agapne Vnto
bis boule lefte be oe inthe battell, and anorber
pe prilis. mabkelt comen.* aud pany man be betrouthed
pitoa wpfe,andbanenot taken ber,let bpm go
andreturne agapne wnto bis poule.let hedpe in
the battell,and another man takeber.

® — Andlet the offpcers fpeake further onto the
zubia veonte.andlap:x Fe any man feare and be fapnt
herted,let bpm gog returne wnto bts houtle,lette
be make bis baothers bert fapnte as welas dis.
And when  offpcers baue madean ende oflpea
Kpnge onto the people, thep thall make captap «
Deut, ie, HES OFwarre onerthem. Chen thou come npe
"A sntoacitpe to fpgbt agapnitit* offer the peace
And péthep anlwer the agapnepealablp, and o
pen vnto the,then let althe people that ts found

therin be tribwtarpes vito the, and ferne the.

Andpfthep wplimake no peace wypth the, but

make warre re thc lee fhalte belege it.

And when the Lorde thp. Gov hath delpueredte


into thpnebandes,thouthalefmpreallp males t


therof with the edge of the fweard: Wut the Wwe-
Hote, oiiamenand the chplozen, x and the cattell, and all
that ig tn the citpe, and al the {potle thero€, alt
thou take Dntocbp felfe, and cate the fpople of
_ thpne enempes wobicbe the Lozde thp God bath
geuenthe. Thus thalte thou bo vntoall thect-
tpestebpebe are a greate wape of fromthe, and

not of thecitpes of thele nacpons. HiG
€ wut ofthe Cityes of thele nacpons,whiche
| the Lozdethp Gos Matl gene the to enberete,
| > thoutpaltefaue alpue notbpnge thatbzetbeth.
Dinbiiha x Wut thalt delrope them wWpthout redimpcy-
Aoibic® on,namelp thedpetbites, the Amozites, thela-
“EEE naanites, the Wberesites, the Henithes, andthe
Fevulptes.as the Lorde thy God hath comaun:
Ded the, that thep teache pou notto doe afterall
thep2 abbominacpons, which thcp baucdone bn
totbep2 qoddes, and fo pe hulde fynneagapntt
the Lozde pour God. When thou balt beleged a
citpe longe tpme and made warreagapnttit to
+ takeit, deftropenot thetreestherol, that thou
wolde thut anare vntotbem: Wut eat of the
and cut them not dowone, foz the trees of the fel-
~ Desare no men, tCocomeagapntt the, € to belege
the. Only thofetrees whiche thou knowe Lebat
va thepar not Eruteful, om but weide «fet fo other bits)
thote alt thou deftrop and cut Bowne, emake
bulworkes agapnit the Citpe that maketh war

withthe, vntpll thou fabdue it. ;

€ The.rri.Chapter.

E Jnquilpeponfoz marlber. PunpHmente fo; bplozen
that bprebep father-and mothere et
Es IE one be found flapne in ë land, which

| Pea the Lode thy God geueth p topoficie
Had RO it,¢ lpetbintbhe felde:and (tis not Bno:
ES wey tho hath flapn bpm: Chen thpne
elders and thp judges thal come fo2th,and mete
onto thecitpes that are roundeaboute the apn
And let the elders of that Citpe whpycbe ts nexte
vntothe apne man, take sute of the droue, an
bepfer that ts nor laboured with, to? bath dza-


soCuiferowoinitin. Elawesorarvines.


for in the poke, andlet the elders of that Citpe
bipnge the bepfer bntoa barde vallep , tobpcde
is necberearedD no: lowen and firpke of the hep: -
fersnecketbeareintbeballep. — 8

xAud the P2ealtes thefons of Leui(mpom Dr.rvii.b
the ee thp God bathcholento minpfler,and <ecte.rive
to blefic in the name of theLo2d) thal comefo2th
andatthep2 mouth Hallall trpfe and plage be
tryed: And allthe elders of the citpe that come
fezth to the apne man, pall walhe thep2ban-
des ouer che bepfer that is beheaded inthe wal-
lep and pall anfwer and fape:our bandes paue
not thedthis bloubde,nether paue our epesfene it
We mercpfull Lozde onto thp people Ffraell, Tis
wbiche thou balte delpuered, xand lape no inng Fess
cent blonde vnto thy people of Flracls charge: . |
andthe bloud thalbei opgeuen the. And fo thalt
thou put innocent bloude from the, when p thalt
‘baue Done that which is right tu thelpapt of the

ode. Ci ben thou roek to war agapnttbpne
encmpes, and the 1020 thp God bat delpuered
them intotbpne bandes,and thou bad taken the
et , and feet amonge thecaptpues a bew:
tpfull woman, and bafe adefpze vnto ber, that
thou wolde bane ber to thp wpfe. qs seit

Chou alt bzpnge ber bome to thpuedoute €

and let Der paue ber bead,¢ let bee naples grow
and put berraiment that pe wastatenin, front
ber, anDlet ber remapne in thpne boule, and be- :
wepe ber father and ber mother a monetblonge,
and after that thalt thou goin Duto her,andma
rp ber, and thetballbethp wpfe. Andpl thou
baue no fauoure bnto per, theitlet bec goo tobp=
ther the lufteth : and fell ber not fo, monep, nog —
make cheucfaunce of ber, becaule thou balt bum
bled ber.xZEaman bane evaxopues,onelosied hae ig
and an ofber bated, ¢tbep baue bone bpmecbpl= —
dzen, botb the loued and allo p hated: FE the firt
bone be the fonne of the bated: then when the
tyme commeth ý be dealeth bis qoodes amonge
bis cbplozen, De mapenot make the fonne of the
beloued fpr bozne,befoze the fonne of the hated
tviche isin Dede p fpr bome: ut be Mal know
thefonne of the bated Foz the fpzite borne, t qeue
bpm Double pozcpon ofall tbat be bath. Jeo? be


igtDe fpe of bps rengti and to bym belon-


getbtberpabtofthefprite bone. p
- X Pfanp man baue a lonne that is Coburne ero.sriyy
‘and dilobedpent that be wpll not berken nto p |
vopce of bis father,and votce of bis mother,and
they bauechaftencd bpm and be wolvdenot per-
ken dutotbem: Chen thall pysfather and bys
motber take bpm, and bzpnge bpem out wnto the
elders of that pitpe, and bnto the gate of that
fame place,andfape Dnto the elders of the citpe:
Thig oure fonneis Fubburne and dtfobedpente
and topl not berken Wnto Our boypce:he ts arpa
tour, anda dronkarde: Andall the men of that
citpe pall fone hpm with tones vntodeath .
And thou Malte put cuellawapefrom the, and


all Ffracl tall beare and feare.x 3f a man bane yor one


commptted atrefpafle worthy of deathe, and is an.r.e
ut fodcath fo? it and thon banget bym on tre
isbodpe Hall notremapneallnyght Dpontbhe

tree, but thou Malt burpe ppm tbe auut P


 *peteptes. -
_ Gak tige for thexcurle of God isonhpm that ts hanged
Wefple not thouthp lande, wbpcbe the Lorde
> thp Godgeucththetoenbheret. ,
C Che.rrtt. Chapter.

q What thououghtet todo When thou fpndetthp wepsh:
bours teat gopracatirape. Aman thal not were wemens
Clothpag,o2 a Woman mans clothpng. Do weare areir of
wolanb of flare ts allo fezbpane. Zhe punphment of pim
tbat accufeth aman bnrigteoulip,ofan abuotrep alin and

ofbpmtbat taupthith amapee.


Ta pou Malte not fe thy brothers ore oz
ira Buca epe qo aftrap, ¢ withozaw thp Cele
nVa Ne from them:25uttpalé bapng them a-
Pee EAM cape puto tbp bzotper. And pEtbp
<->  þotberbenotnie nto the,o2 pfthou know bim


F


€


E
F5
=
&
J
=
s
TY
&
m
a
kg
[=]
Th
Pr
S
g
=
=
=
&
—
=
L=]
=
=
Fj
Pt


geucthem puto tie father ofthe Damlel, becaule
he bath bzoughe bp aneupl name pon a mapd
of Flracl. And We albe his Mptc,andhe mare


SICUTECLOMONIINT.


Fo bpnepard wp th opuerle {edes:lelt the frute of p y


: generacpon be thal not entre into the congredas ierrii


- Tolisha:
not put ber awape all his dapes. Gut and pf the


thpng be of afuvetp.that the damfel be not fous
a birgpn,thep al bepng the Damfel to the doze


- ofberfathershoule,s the men of that citpe pall


fLoneber with tones to deathe,becaule the bath
wWzoughte follpe in Flraell, to plape the whoze
infevtathers boufe. |
Andio thou Malte pat euellatoap from the. xea,rs,b
+ Jfa man be founde lping witha woman that D
bath a wedded bufbande, thep thall dpe ether o-
ther of Chent: bothe the manthatlape wyth the
topfe , andallo the wpfe : and fo chou thalte pe
awap euell from Ffrae. Pta mape be pandfa>
Hed unto an pufband and thena man fpnde ber
tn the totone andl pe with ber, pe thal bpng thé.
bothout vnto the mates of thetame citpe,s thal °
ffone them with tones todeath: Che damfel,be
caule thecrped not, bepnge inthe cttpe. And the
inan:becaule be bath bumbled pis nepgbvoures
wpe, and p (halt put awap euel from the. Wut
pi amanfpnde a betrothed damicl inthe felde,g
O2ce ber and lpe w ber: Chen theman that lape
with ber pall dpe alone:but vnto the damfell F
Galt Dono barme:becaule thereis wthedamlel:
no caule of death. Foz astoben aman rpletha-
gapni bts nepabbour and flepeth bpm,cué fois
tbis matter. Foz be found ber in the feldeg ethe |
betroutied damiel crpcd:and there was noman Fo. Frit
to fuccour ber. x 3famanfpndea mapodetbatig
not betcrouthed,andtake bec, and Ipe with her, 4
tbep be founve: Chen the man that lap with ber
Wall gene unto tbe damfels father Fyftpelpeles
offpluer And the thall be bis wpfe, becanlebe
Bath bumbled ber:and pe map not put bee atwap Lewrostea
allDisdapes. x Noman hall take bisfachers
wpfe noz vnhcale bis fatberscouerpnae. i
sui CThe.rriti. Chapter.
at manet ofm tbt up
ofpollucpons tp at RAFE AE p: krge nabiy =
Ci] Due* that fe gelacd oz bath bis prep 20 tee
: f membees cut of,@alcometntotpecon s
ay i seegacpon of the LoD. Jud petbatıs


hee


psy Doane of a comen womã, painot come
into pcongregacton of p Low no not in p tenth


Cpon of the 10d. * Che Ammonites = the Ho
ablies thalnot come into the congregacpon of p
Lozbe,no, notin the tenth generacpon,noz thep
fhal nener come into thecongregacpon of p lozd
becaufe hep met pou not with beead and wat
in the wap, when pecame out sf Eqypt.and bet eee”
caufethep bpzedagapnttthe* Balaam the fon 2urrit.b.
of 2502, of Betho: of Pelopotamia, tocurle p
Meuertheletie,the Lod thp God wolde not per-
ken bnto alaam, but the Lorde tby God tut-
ned tiie curfetoa bleflprge nto the, becaulethe
Lorde thy God loved the. Thou Malte not leke
the profperpte oz welth of them all thy dates Foz wen. rrobe
ener.* Chou palt not abbozre an Edomite, Foz
be ts thp bzother.nether Halt p abbozan Egip-
tian, becanfe thou wata fraungerinthisland ~.
Thechpldzen p are begotten of them hal come
into the congreqacpon of the Lod,.in the thp2a
Teneracpon.cAibenthon goel out with the bok
agapnt thpnecnempes,kepep nomaium

THE RE


Weeceptes


35 nelle. Sf therebeamonge pou anp man p i Di-
cleane bp thereafon of pucléues that chaunteth
bym bp npabt, let bpm go out of the hotte, ¢not
come inagapne into bot, but at enenlet ppm
wathe bpm {elf with water, and then when the
fonis doione,let bim come into the boftagapne

Thou Malt hauea place alfo without the pofte,

oa tobither p thal refozt to, om for top natural necedpee)
~ and p thalt bauea uae porate ppon thp wea:
pon and when thon wylt eate chp {elfc,opg ther
with, andturne and couer p tobycheis departed
fromthe. Jeo the Lozdethp God alketh in the
mpoft of chyne bolt, torpdthe,¢ to fet thpue ene
mies befoue the. Cherfoze hal the place of thine
bofte be puer, that be fe no vnclean thpng tn the
andfoturne ppm felfe from the. Chou halt not

q Delpuer bnto his mater p (cruaunt which ts ef=
caped From bis matter vntothe.ipe thal dwel w
the,cucttamongepou tn tbat placebe bym felfe
Ivicth beft, in oneoftbpcitpes where it is good

foz bpm, and Pp palt not vere bim. Chere Halbe

no whore of the doughbters of Alracl,no2 whore:
keper of the fonnes of Zlrael. Chou halt nether
bapng the bp2c of an whoze.1102 p pepce of a dog
into the boule ofp Lozdethp Godinanp maner

of powe:foz cuen both of them ar abdomtnacpo
er. rrii», Vuta the Lozdetbp God. «Thou halt not burt

Lcu.rrv.£. thy bzother bp piurpe of monep,noz bp vlurp of

colne no? bp bfurp of anp thyng that de map be
burt Mithal. into a Frannger thou mapi lend
pon vfurp, but not puto thp bother ý the lozd
thp God map blefle the tn altbat p fettettbpne
bande to,intbelande wbhptber thou goch to con

pum.rrro Merit. xUWben thou baft voted a bow brifo p

eccede 02de tbp Hod, thou thalt not flacke to pape tt.

Baruc gor the Lorde thy God Wyl furclp requpzeit of

the,and tt albetinin the. JEP halt leane vow
ing, it halve nofpnin p:but that white is once
cone out of thp lpps, thou mutt kepe and do, ar-
cozbpiig as thou halt vowed wnto the Lozdthp
Eod ofa frewpl:andas p bak (poten with thp
mouth.culben p commet onto thp nepahbours
ppnepard, thou mapi eate grapes thp vellp ful
~ attbpneovne plealure-but thou Malt put none
inthp befel. Eucnfowben thoucdmettintorbp
i nepgbbonreg come, +tbou mapi plucke theea=
CINDE vos with thpne bande, but thou (alte not moue

a tycle wnto thy nepgbbours cogne,

C The. rriti. Chapter.
Cruozcementeispermpited. re thatis newip marped
Mall noc becompelicd to goto watre ,


y Sse Dena man bathtakena pfcandma

4 s AY wved bee, p pe fpndcno fauour in big

RA CAN G epes,becanfe be bath efpped fome tne

geci (Alenes tn ber.* Chen let him wite der


Alacra a yyll of Deuozcement, and put it in ber bande, E
SaF Cend her out of his boule. And when Weis depar
ted out of bis boufe, let ber qoo, andDbe another
mans wpe. And pfp feconde hulband hate her,
let bpm wepte ber alloaletter of benogcement,
and put it inber band, lend ber out of bts boule
o2 pÉ the fecond man dpe which toke her fo wpte
ber Firft man which ent ber away, may nottake
ber agapne to be bis wpte,afterp theis defpled.
fo Sis abhominacpontnthe fyqbt of thelo2d
And thou tale notcanfe thelande to fpn, which


SICUCCVOUO MII,


the Lozbethp God hall qeue theto enberct.

*t@i pen aman taketh a newe topfe, be Mall i
not go a Warfare, neither Halbe charged wanp Dtu.rrv.b
bufpnes:butthalbe free at pome one pere,and ve
topfe with bis wpfe which be bath taken. «Po eee
man pall take chenetber ozthe vppermplttone “7?
to pledge, Fo: then be pall hurt a manglpie.x 3f.
anp man be founde Fealpng anp of bigbzethzen 7°”
the chpldacn of Flracl,¢abulceh bpm, oz felleth
bpm, the thefe thal dpe. And thou thalt put euel
aap from the. Cake bede to thp felfe ag concer
npng the plage of lepzotp.that p obferue diligét
lp. Andpethal do accozdpng toallp the prettes
of f Leuttes thal teach pou. Euen as Fcomaun
ded thé, Co pe Hall obferne to DO, Remëbze what
a : pe kidt ®ododpd vunto * Pir Jans bp the

wap a ,
thou dott lend thp bzotheranp toma
gotnto bis boule to fctchea pledge from thence:
but alt ande wout,and pman that bozowed
tof the, (hal bzing the pledge out wnto the: tur
‘thattaot fepe


it be {pn wnto the. * Che fathers thal not dpe foz ge FERE
Es EDULE


to
BS


4 6:
A Se
E Ta J


U


— AND LAMES..


terp pe werecomeout teat oan pumpis


e e—a eee


s


|  JPzerceptes


ii.Coz.Fte. certapnnomb:e* forty Erppes be pal qeue him

! and not patt:leff pf pe Puldcerccde g beate bpm
| -aboue:that w manp Mrppes ttp brother Mulde
AET appere ngodlp befoze thine epes. x Chou Malt

i zimo.b c NOLMOCCI $ ore thattrcadrth out thecormecint

ow batne) x Jfbzetbzen dwel together and one of the

| egar. rii. b Dye and baue no chiloe,the wpfeofthedead thal
much.tiitd nos marp without wnto a fraunger:buthis bzo
ther hal goin onto ber, and take her to wpfe,t

- occupy therotome of bis kpntinan. And felvet

fon which fe beareth, tall {uccede inp name of

his bzotber whichts decd: that ppe name be not

put out of ¥{rael. ndpé che man Wwpll not take
ppsbzotbers wpfe, thenlet ber qo vp top gate

nto the clders,and fape:<B)p bulbands brother

refuletbto fkire bp vnto bis bzotbera name ingi

racl nether wpll be marp me. Then the eldersot

Ád bis citpe thal cal ppm,andcomen wd ppm, And pe
be tanda fay: wyl not take her, then thal bps
kpnfwoman come ynto bpm inthe prefence of f


face,and ari were, ¢lape: S0 Hal it be done VH-
to that’ man, p doth not buplde vp bee bzother
boufe. And pis name fhalbe called in Ffrael, p vn
€ pod boule. Jf when men ftrpue together, one w
another, the wp fe of the one ron to,fo2 torid ber
pufband out ot the bands of bpm p (mpreth Bim
and put forth ber bande,and take bpm bp the fe-
creta: Chou Walt cut of ber band, ¢ let not thine
eie pitp her. Chou alt not paucin thy bag two
aeu.ric.g mance Of Mepghtes,a qreatanda [mal:nether
spied. di.e Chalethou baue in thpne poule bpuccle mealures
a great and a fimal.2ut thou Walt baue a right
and tuft wepabt,and a pecfpte ga tulke mealure
{halt thou baue, that thp dapes map belengtpe-
ned tn the land, which the Lo2d thp Ged geneth
the.ffoz alltbat do fuch thinges.andall p do vn
rpabt.ac abbominacpon wnto the Lozdtpy god
“o groti KIRemEeDIC What Amalech dpd wntothebp the
Wwap,wohen pe were come out of Egppt,botve ve
> met thebp the tap. (mote the bindmolk of pou
A all that were febleand came bebind, when thou
watt fapnted and werp, and be feared not God.
mT herfo2re, whenthe Lode thy God path qeuen
the reft from all thine enenstes rounde aboutin p
land wich the Lozdebp god geucth p toenberet
and poffeffe:fe that ë put out thecemebzaunce of

Amalcech from vnder penen and forget not.

€. The.rrvt.Chapter


f ct She fpitt frutes and tpthes cache Lenptes, facberiette,
poowes,and rratingers. A A

=r Ienrp art come into p lande which

J the Lozdtbp god qeueth p to enberet,

Waa and batt entopedit dwellet therin.

eer] «Take of the firk of all p frute of the

ei0.FFiOe parte and pies te out of the lande p the Lozbe

odzouciia thp Goo geucth the, and putitina maunde,€ go

PA ontotheplace which p Loz thy God thal chote

tofethisnameinit. And p Malt come vnto the

seat, that Qalbe in thofedates,¢ lap buto him

j knowledge this dap nto the want God,

: that Jam come wnto thecountrep which p Lord


|


{ware vnto our fathers foztogeuevs. Andthe
yeeft thal cabethe maund out of thpne bande, ¢
ct it boune befoze the aultar of ý Logd thp God

and p taltanlwver andfap befoze the L020 thy


POCUICLOMOMITN.


elpers, and lofe hig (hoo of bis fote g ipptinpigs g


CALIE.
god: The Sirians wentabout todellrop mp fa 25
ther, xand be went dawne into€gipt, gloiour=: S¢-Fbi.e
ned there witha few folke and grew there bute
anacion great,mightp,and ful of pcople.* And eroo.i.b
the Eg pees vered DS, andtroubled vs, gla-

ded ts w mok cruel bondage. And when we cep |
ed donto f Logde God of our fathers, * the Lazo trov/tti.b
beard our bopce,and loked on ouraduerlpte la-

bour and opp2eflpon. And P Logdexbzought vs fro.riiti,e
out of Egppteinampabtyp bande, Ea {tretched

out arme andin great tcrreblencfie, and fpgneg

and wonders. J And bebath broughte vs into

thts place,and bath geuen Ys this land that Ao- a
weth with mplke and bonp.x And nowerHlo,¥ Drini
hatie bought the fp2tt frutes of the land wbpeh

thou( DLozd)hat geuen me. And ë halt ler tt

befoze the Lozde thp God, ¢ wozthpp befoze the

Lod thp God, ¢ reiopee in all the goodthpnges

which the Lo:dtbp God bath genen vntothe g

totbpne boufe, tbou and the Leuite the Araun

erthatis amonge pou. Caibenp bate made an C

ende of titbpng all the tptbeg of thpne encreate:


rs thetbyzd pere. whichis theverc of titbpng:thou


thalt geuc it onto the Leutte, p fraungers, the
fatberles andthe wopbowrs,that they map eate
tithin thy gateg.anp fpl them fclues. And thou
(halt fap befoze plozdthp god. xF baue brought xe,rbiii.d.
the balowed thpnges out of mpne boufe, t paue
gam them vntotbe Leuites, the traungers, ý
atberles and the Mppowes,accozding to al thp
cOmaundementes wbiche thou batt comaunded
me:¥ bauenot ouerlkpppedtbp comaundemen=
tes,noz forgotten them. § bauenot eatentherot
inmp mourhing,no2{uftced ought to perih the
row buclennefie,no2 geuen oucbe therof £02 the
Dead, but baue herkencd puto the voice of p lozd
mp god, € bauc Donexafterall that thoubatt ti: ero.rip.a
maundedine.  X pfa Lobe Downe therfore fti sapure, ye
tby bolp habitacion, cuen Erom beuen and bleffe
thy people Jfrael, andthe land which thou baf
geuen vs (as tboulwarelt puto oure fathers )a
lanbe that floweth bith mplke andbonp. This D
bay the Lozdthp god bath cOmaunded the tovo
thefe ozdpnannces,and lates kepe p tbem, and
pothemw al thine bert,and al thp loule. x Chou £ro.rir,d
paft fet vp the Lozd this dap tobe thp God, and OM»?
to walke tn bis wapes and to kepe bis odpra
ces, bis comaundementes,and bis lawes,and to
berken Duto his vopce. x And the Lord bath let aro rips
the vpthis dap, tobe afcueral people Ynto dim Deu.vti.a.
as be bath pzompled the and that p kepe Dig cO- and. rimia
maundementes,and to make thebpgh abour all
nacpons(wobich be bath made )inpzapte inname
andhonowr:xand $ thou mapfte bean Dolp peds y
ple onto the Lozd thy Godas hebathlapoe. K Jui vina,
| C. The.crvit.Chapter. ee
 Tbep buplde an aultar. [he oiepages in the bel Garp:
av PD Moles with the elders OF Flrael con:
Teg naunded the people,faping:kepeal the co ©
Lee Siraunocmcntes, which 4 commiaunde pou
this bape. x AnD when pe be come ouer Jordan ,
pnto thelande tobpcp the Lozdthp God geucth Jot fafa,
the.tbou palt Cet the vp greate oncs, platter
them witb plater and wzpte vponthem all the
Wo2rdes of thislawe, when p art come nee ee
are


cante thou art come into theland tobich ë Lozd

- thp God geueth the: a lande that flowerh with
- mplke and ponp,ag the eee god of thp fathers
_ path prompted the. Gherfoze when pe be come
ouer Jordan, pe Hal let vp thele Tones, whichZ
comaunde pou this Dapeinmount Ebal, thou
Horii. Shale plater them with platter xAnd ther Malt
tero, rrd thou buplò ynto the Lozde thp God,tan aultar
of tones E lpft bpnone pron npontbem: Chou
fhaltentake the aultar of the Logdethp God of
whole tones and offer burntofferypnges theren
wntothe Lozdthy God. And thalt offer peace
oferpnges, and thalt cat there,¢ eciopce before
the Lozde thp God. And thou halt w2pte | pa
the tonegall the wozdes of this lawe, manife
25 lp and well. And oles and the preatkes the Le
uites {pake bnto all Alrael fayinae:take bede g
beare D Flrael) this dap thou arte become the
people of the L020 thy God. Thou halt berken
therfore yuto the vopce of the Lozdethp God, ¢
do bps cOmaundementes, and pe ozdpnaunceg
which Jcõmaunde F thig T nd oles char

ed the people the fame dap, faping: hele Wall


Diut pid, fade Ypon* mount Garlin, to bleflep people —


toben pe arecome ouer Jordan: Simeon, Leui,
Juda, jlachar, Joleph,¢ Ben Jamin. Andthete
thal kande vpon mount Ebaltocurfe: Ruben,
Gad, Aler,sabulon,Dan,and Rephtali. And p
Leuttes thalanfwercandfape vntoalltbe men
of Zracll with aloude vopce. —

*Curted be the manthat maketbany carued
02 molten pmage (an abhominacpon Ynto the
L020, the worke of the bandes ofp craftctman)


FD. FFs


and putteth it ina {ecrete place: and all thepeos ý


ple epee iy Ded warm UE en
*Curled bebe that cuctethbisfatherand bigs
mother and all the people pall fape: Amen.
*Curted be he ý remoucth bys nepghboures
marke and all the people hall fape: Xmen.
*Curled be be that maketh the blynd ro out
a ae eD beh rs ae p fie oa fape: i
0 De De Chat ppnd2eth the rpahte of
sensi" Fraunger, fatherlelle and wpdote, Aal na
aed HEE eaten by
xeroiitis.  *Curled bebe that lyeth w bis fathers wpfe
and onbealetb bis fathers conctpng.sauall she
zeu.rviit,c People hallfape: Amen.
*Curled be be that Ipeth to


Œro.ppib


DRF D.


Zukerine


thanp mar
beatt,and all the people pall fa tne Meo si
_ x Curledbe be that Ipeth with bps tptter,the
doughter of bps father, 02 thedoughter : of bps
mother,andall the people hallfape:Amen,
latoe,anballtpe poopie eee bis mother tn
i <urteDbet : AeA KE
ecretip-andalltbe people g ; |

Curteo bebe wen nth =i Po al


ghee o te Cape, Am
neled be be thattaketha vewarde to flay

the foule of innocente blouve: . pe
D a faye sien. le: and all the people
‘Curfed be e that contpnueth not in all the
tozbes of this lawe,to do them:andallthe ne

ple hall fape: Amen. fbem:andallthe peo
CCbe.xrrvitt. Chapter,


Le.Foiii,d.
ae.rbili.b.
ro.rri.b,


Czernrriie


Htuieronamtim, -x curiles;
The promples oë the bleflpnges puto them tt fregarbe


Seca Ecth bpsuepabboure fi


_the row eunbementes,anb the curies to the contrarp :
Sth pe Jt * thou Halt berkendtlygentip onto
Pe Lae the bopce of the Lozdthp Godand ob»


PA xq (crucand Doall bis comaundententes,


a
ELctekrhi.g


catel,p encreale
bp epe: blef-


a 3


he the frute of


comelhin.« be L020 thal gene ouer thptic ene- Deuter:


hale lende seu.r0.4
bozowe thy 15
de hal fet the befoze enot be-


Deu,
anb.


iiia
bij.b


r tU, al

xtbete curfes ait eat Spe ae e e Baruc, fe
DOH DE LL EDE EOWHE, ecurleD Dan.tt.e.

inthe Felde:curfed thal thp bafket beg ibp


be baue contumed the From of p

tt.x The Lode Leu.rrvib
tbe withfwellpne, with fenera, bect
butapug


|


|


|
a
A @
*


aF #


=

fa
$
ae


F
f


Lurles,

. barning,and with the lwheard, with wethering
| ‘and with blatpng. And thep thal folowe the pn
pe ame tpll thou perpe. x And the beauen that is oucr
'e thy bead thalbe bzafle,and the cartbtbatis wn-

” Derthe,p2on, Che Lo2de fhal turne the rapne of


all thep come dDotone vpon the, vntpli thou be
Bom bzougbt to nougbt. And the Lozde thal plage
\ ~ befoze thpne enempes: Chou halt come out one
wWape agapnft them,anod fipe feué wapes before
them,and (palt be {catered ainonge allthe kpng
domes of theearthe. And thpcarkafle pall be
meate Dnto all nauer foules of the apze,and bn
tothebeattes of the earth, and no man {thal frap
themawmap.* Tbe Lode wpllmptethe with p
botch of Egppte and the Emarodes,{calle,and
| maungpnes, that thou map not be pealed ther
p. of. And the Lo2d (hal fmpte the with madnes,¢
blindnes,and dDalpng of bert. Chou (halt qrope
at none dapes, asthe blpnd qropetbindarknes
and (halt not p2ofper tn thy apes. Chou halt
ixe. pti. DE OPPeehed with wonge, be polled euermoze
"~ adno man tpalluccourthe.*T hou Malt be be-
 trouthed vuto a wpfe another man thalllpe
Deu rrp.» With ber. x Chou balt bupld an houte,and not
dwel therin. Chou Walt alfo planta vpneparbde
and (alt not gather the grapes. Chpne ore thal
be hans befopetbpnie epes,andp Walt not eate
therot. Cdpne ale Halbe vtolentlp taken awap
cuen befoze thp face , and thallnot be reftozed ta
the agapne.€ bp thepe Halbe geuen vnto thine
p chempes, andnoman thal refcue them. ai
Thpionnegand thp doughters Halbe geuen
Dnte anothernacpon,and thyne epes hal tert, g
Dale bponthemall the daplonge, and there Mal
benompgbteinthpnebande. ‘Chefruteofrbp
lande and all thp labours thalla nacpon whiche
thou bnowell not, eate,and thou igalt contpnu
p ally fure violence onlp, tbe opp2efled alwape
fotbat thou (balte becieane velpoe thp felfe, Fog

thelpabt of thpneepes whicherhou thalte fe.
f. The Lorde Mall {mptethe in the neces andleg-
ii qes with a mifcheuoug botch that cãnot be bea
pentiti» led:cuen from the Cote of thy fore onto the top of
(iparalipo thp hrad. Che L020 thal bepnag theg thy kpng
FEED (xobich p halt fet ouer the) ontoa naci, which
priid — nether thounoztbp fathers baueknowen, $ ther
Herr. thou matitlerue kraunge gods:eucn wood and
ftone. And thou thalt be Wonderd at,{poken of,
andteltedatamongeallnacpons , whptpertbe
Lode (pall carp the. Chou Halt carp mueb fede
into the felde:and palt gather butlptiein,forp
i qrepopers (hall deftrop it. Chou thal plante a
‘ ppnepard and dzefle it, but halt netther depnke
of the wpne,netber gather eo rf ivo?
mes (hall cate it.. Chou Halt Daue Dlpue trees
thozowout all thp cokes, but Halt not auopnte
thp felfe with the ople,foz thine olpuc trees thal
beroted out. Tirou halt beget fons,and Dongh-
ters but palt not baue them:foz thep thalbeca-
rped gr ome a All thp trees frute of thp
j lande thalbe marred with blaftyng. The raun
| get thatis amonge pou, thal climeaboue the vp
' onbpe and thou (alt comedowne beneth alow
Ie Chall lende the,and thou Walt not leade bpm:


_| pon. t7.b


eet ae tt a


@


Meuteronomin.


theland Dnto pouder andduft:euen from beuen.


` Wolers.
be thalbe befoze, and thoubebpnde. €tozcoucr; - |
alLtbelecurfes thal come bponthe,and Mall fo-
lowe the and ouertaketbe,tpl thou bedefiroped
becaufe chou berkenedit not unto the vopce of p
Lede thp Ged,to kepe his chmaundementes,€
Dis o2dpnaunces, which be cOmaunded the, and
they Halbe bpontheasmpzacles and wonders


P and vpotbplede foz eucr,becaulethoulernedtt


not the Lozdethp God wrth topfulnefle and wÙ

a good bert, oben thou badft aboundaiice of alt.
thpnges, therfore thou thal dferue thpne enemp

which the Lode thal fende vponthe: tn hunger

and tharff,tn nakednes,and in nede of all ehpng:

and be thal put a poke of pron po thp necke vn-

tpl be baue bzougbt thetonoug ht. and f Lozie

thal bzpng anacpon Dpon the trom far, and fro.

the ende of the wolde as fwpfie as an Egqleflp-

eth:a nacpon whofe tonge thou thaltnot ynder-
ffande:a barde fauoured nacpon, wbich hal noe

reqazbe the perfon of the olde,no2 baue compat=

{yon of the ponge. The fame (hall eate the frute

oftbp catell,and the frente of thplande yntpll be

paue deftroped the:ethalleaue the nether cogne,
wpne no? ople nether the enceeate of thine oren
no? $ flocks ef thy thepe: vntpl be baue brought s
the to nougbt. And be Hallkepe thein inall thp
citpes, vntpl be baur caltdotone thy bye wals g

ffronge boldes, wherin thou truftcdff, thozows=
outalltbelande.Andhethalbefegetbeinaltbp —
citpes thozowout all thy lande, wbich.the Lord Areni
thy God bath geuen the. xAnd thou halteat p waruc.i:.s
frute ofrbpne owne bodp:the fet of thp fonnes Zea.1rbs.0
and of thy doughters, which the Lozde thy God

bath genen the tn that Ceattnes and lege where

with thptie enemip thal belege the:fo that it Hal

greue the man(that is tender and ercedpng delp
catcamonge pou, )toloke on big bother and v=

ponbis topfe that lpetbin bisbofome, and on p
remnaunt of pis chpldzen, which he bath pet le

Foz feare of geupng( buto any ofthem of p Ach

of his chpldzen, WHO he thal cat becaule de bath
notbpng lefte bpmintbarc pie opi lege, 2
wberwiththyneenemp Hal belege the inal ibe
citpes.Pee,and the oman that isfotender and
delpcate, $ (he dare not aducnture tofet the fole

of her fote bponthe ground, (Fozloftnes and ter

derites )Halbe grrr folokeonherbulbandep  —— ~
Ipetbin per bolome, and on herfonne and onher

pougbter:and on ber after bpzth(thatis tocon

out frombetwene ber legges, and ber chpldzen

Mhich the thal beare:ffo2 whealltbpnges lacke

fhe thal catethem fecretip,in the feqe and ftrapt =
nes, wherivith thpneenempe hall befeqe thein EF. t
thy citpes.xPE thou wpltnot Bepe and doal the

soozdes of thislaw/(p are wapttenin this boke)
andfearethisglozpous andfearfulnameotthe —
Lozdethp God: the Lorde wpll fende vntothe ©
andtbp fede, great plagesand of longecontpnu

aunce, cuellpknefics andoflongeduraunce. --

. PHoreouer,be wpl bypng vpon the all the dif

eales of Egypte, and thofe which thou wafa-

Frapd of thai cleaue vnto the. Andall mance fpi

neles and allmaner plages which are not writ

tenin the boke of this law , pl the L020 kayng

ypon the, ontyl pe bepng the to nought ne


Furies.


Dubia And F baveled pou fortp pere in the wplderneg


momcria Jam the Lowmepoure god. —
mim PS 4 x Bnd pe came ontothps place and Sebon


and tothe balfe mde Hanafle, x bope
foze the wozdes of thisappopntmentand do thë
that pe mape vnderkand all that pe ougbttodo
Pe tande this bape eucrpe one of pou betoze the
Lode pour God: pour captapnes,pour trpbes,
pour elders, pour offpcers,and all the men of 3i
Hofa.fz.z, Cacl:pourcbildzen alfo pour wines the trawi
ger that is in pour botexfrom the bewer of thp
wood, pnto the daawer of thp water: that thou
fhuldeit gointo tocappopnemente of the Lorde


stuteronomitim


thy Good, andinto bps othex tobpebe the Lorde Se. rera
we God maketh with p thisdape. Foz to make w
the a peuple tntobpm ielfeand that bemape be
pinto thea God, as bebathiapde onto the, and
as be bath fwo2ne vnto thp fathers Abzapam,
“Jlabac,and Jacob. ti, ;
J make not thps bonde andthis otbe wpth €

pou onlp but both hitb bpm that fandeth pere
with vstbhis p h ari 1% L020 our God, and
allo with bpm that ts not Dere with vs this dap
ffozpeknowe.bowe webaueDibeltcintheland ——
of Eqppt,and botoe we came thozowe the mpd:
Degotthe nacponswhichepepaticdbp. Andpe  ---
baue fene thepzabpominacponsanbdtheirpdols .
(woodand tone, fpluer and qolde) whiche were
amongetbem. Leite there be amonge pou man
62 woman, bpnred 02 trpbe, whole hert turneth
awape this dape from tie Lozde poure God,to
goo and ferue the goddes of thele nacpong: and

eft there be amonge pou lomme rote that beae
teth gall and wozmewood, fo that when be hea»
reth the wozdes of thts othe. be blptr bym felfe


inbis bertefapinge.+3 (hall bane peace. J wpl Aere.b.c, :


walke inthe meanpng of mpne owne berte, (to
tthe dzonkentothe thzpfie).Andfo p Lode
ppl notconfent to bemercpfull pnto bpm, but
thenthew ath ofthe Lozdetbpsqeloulp pall
(moke again that man, and ail the curfes that
are weptten inthis boke, Hall lpqbt bpon pps
and the Lorde Mall do ont bis name from pnder
beaten, and the Lorde Hall leperate bpm pnto
eucll out of all the tepbes of Firacl, accozdpnge
pntoall the curles of the appointment.thatare
wzytten inthe boke of thisiawe. ,
- Sothat tbe generacionto come of pour chpl D
bien,tbac pall ryle vp after pou, and the train
ger that al come froma farre lande Mall fape
when thep fe the plages of that lande,and p dit
eales wherwitb the Lozde bath {mpttenit.pow
all tbelande is burnte bi wpth bzypmiione and
falte,etbat it is nepther fowen:noz beareth, nog
anp grafe growetd thercin,lpheas in the place
of the oucethzotopnge of Sodome, Gono2,¥ wene.rt.¢
Dama, andseboimn: which the Lorde ouerthzco
inbis wath and angre:Euen then fpallatlna-


pons fape: x whertorebatbethe Lozde done of aere.trs.8 -
thisfacpon vutotbiglandes Dbhotwefearceis ireid


this greate weath:And men hall faye, becaule
they lefte the teftament of f Lorde God Af their
fathers, whpebe be made pth thepm, when de
bought them out of tbe lande of Egypte. Foz
thep went and ferued fraunge qoddes and woz:
thpppedthem: Goddes whtchetiey knewe not,
and tobiche Dad qeventbemnoughte. And tye
wrath ofthe Loge wared whote agapuk this


- Jande,tob2pnge bponit all the cucies tbat arg


wepttenintbis boke, And the Lozbecatke tiem

out oftbep2 lande in anger, wath and great ut

bignacpon,andcall chem mtoa frauncge lande

astbisbape beareth toptuciie. Theiecreres of

the Lozde our God~are opened unte Vg and ta f.co;. (lite

ourchpldzen fozeucr, that wempjpedoo ali type

wozdes of thps lawe. l

CTbe-rrr. Chapter.

@ The wojt of Godisat hande, .


hen


| 2B eee Me yir asaite i a
TA Wea tDE f elipuge FEDE CULLE epe
AJAA ji j baue fet betoze p.tbon palt turne


harip hi.


wate onto thypne bert,amonge all thena-
peheeaed cpons whptherthe Lode + Sod
sath ebzulk the, and come agapne wnto p L020¢
thy God, and berien vuto brs vopce tn all thele
tbpnges tbat dcommaunde the this dape-thou
ab cop chpldzen with alltbpnedertand all chp
rowe. dnd p Lozde thp Godwpllturne thy cap
tiupte and baue compaflpon pponthe, and wpl
turne and fet the agapnefrom all thenacpong,
amonge which the Lozde thy God Mal haue ira
tered the. Though thou watt catte wnto therra
treme partes of beauen:ceuenfrom thence topll f
Lor thp God gather the,and from thence wpl
Hefet the,andthe Lorde thp God wpll bzpnge f
into the lande tobtche tbp fathers poflefed ano
_ thou thalt entopeit.
W: Andbe wll hewethe kpudnefle,and mul:
entero. tiplpe the aboue thp fathers. + And the Logbe
thy God wpll ciccumceple thyne parte, and the
Derte of thp fede that thon mapftloue the 102d
thy God wth all chpneberte, and ali thp foule
thattbou mapttlpue. Andthe Lozdethp God
wpll put all thefe curles bpon thpne cnempes,¢
onthem that bate the,and that perfecute the.
wut thou (halt turne, andberken nto p vopce
of the Lozde,and do all bis commaundementes;
sobiche J cOmaunde the thisdape. And f Lod
thp Godivpl make the plenteous tn ali the wo?
kes of thpne bande, in the frute of thy bodie,and
in the frute of thp cattell, and in the frutz ofthp
ager.rrrii.e lande foz thp welth.«sfo2 the Lorde wpllturne
agapne and retopce ouer thetodo p qood,as be
relopfed ouer thy fathers. JEP berken onelp Vr-
to the voice of the Lozde thy God to kepe big c
niaundementes and bis odinaunces which are
p? Wwzitten inthe boke of thps lawe, and pfp turne
bntothe Lozdethp Gov withall thine bert and
, gromapd. all thy toule, x0? the commaundement which
ss -*FcOmraunde the this dape.isnotleperatedfrom
the, neptber farre of. |
E  AItisnotinbeuen,that thou nedelk to-eccom:
eg Plapne and fape: who Hall go vp foz vs to beuen,
"and fet it bs, that wemapebearett,and doit?
Repther ts it beponde the fee, that thouthuldeE
faye: who Hall qo ouer the tee foz bs, and fet it
ve, thet toe mapebeare it, andboolt: Wut the


Oe ini
=


- r


eure. pib ANd intppne Derte,thatthoubo it. xWepolde
baue fet befoze the this dap lpfeand good, dcat
andecuell: o: where ag ¥commannde the this
Baye,foloucthe L020 thp God, to toalke indis
apes, and tokepe big commaundementes,bis
orbpnannces,and bis lawes(pE thou fo do)thou
Malt lpucand multiplpe,and the Lozbe tpp god
all bleffe the in the lande, whptber thou goet
to pofletic it. 25ut and pf tbpne bertturne awap
D Cothat thou wplt not beave:but palt qoafrap
and worhpp Eraunge qoddes,and ferue then,
J pronounce pnto pou allo thbps bape p pe Mall
furelp perpthe, g that petbal not prolonge pour
dapes Dpon the lande whither thou pallet oner
Deut.tiq.b Adano pollelie if. * JZ call Peauenandcarthe


SILUETON mM.


wo2deis Derpy tive Yntothe:euenintbp mouthe
all


forecozde thpsdapeaqapntte pow, that Jhane 7
fet before pou lyfe and death, blefipnge and cue-

fpnge. Therfore chore lpfe that both thou thp

fede mape lpue, that thoumapf loue the Lode

thy Good, and beobedrent to his bopre,€cleaue
wNtobpm. sor heisthp ipfe,and thé lengtbe of

thp dapes, that thoumayptt dwell byon p earthe

which the Lozdelivare vntothp fathers: ADA-

bam, 4fabac and Jacob to gene them.

CThe.rrci.Chapter.


q oles being redp Co dpe, e:berethzofua torule the pes
piein bis teabe. This booke Heteronomie is W2pttcnanp

lapocin the DSabernacte betpoe the Arke, Phe seuptes are
chargedtoereade tt to the people.


wamane 520 Doles went elpake there woz- 3

Aa ay Des Duto all Fraell,anv fapte unto

ae i Epen, J aman hundzed and twentpe

AVA Ypere olde thps dape and can nomoze
Hieta COCULANdDIn. Alfothe Lorde bathe
fayde Dnto mexthon Halt not go oucr Chis yor- sam,rr.,
dan. Che Lowethp Godhe topl go ouce befoze
the, and be tpl! defFrope thelenacpons before p
andthou thalte conquerethem. *andyolua, ye Aerea
Mall go before the,as the Lozde bath fapde.

And the Lorde Hal doo wutothbem,ashe dpdto
¥*Sehon and Dg kpnges ofthe Jmozitesand cm re e;
wnto the lande of them: whomebedeftroped. ~ i
And the Lozde thall gene them ouer befoze pour

Face that pe mape do dntothemaccordpna Vra

to all tbe commaundementes which J bauecd-
maunded pou. Plucke vp pour hartes therfore,

and be Fronge,dzede notno? be afraide of them

foz the Lozde thy Gob bpm felfedoth go with p.

$e yall not faple the,noz forlake the.

And Moles called ynto i laenama fapde vn
tobpmintie fpabt of all Jiraci, xe ftrongeg Jorat.b.
bolde, fo: thou mult go with tHig people ynto p hake. ia
lande wbpichthe Lozde bath fwozne vntothep2
fathers,to qene tben, and thou Halt qeue tthe
toenderet. And the Lorde he Doth hs befoze the:

De Hall not faple the, nepther forlake the: feare

not therfoze, nozbedplconfoztedD: And Poles

w2ote this lawe, and delpuercd it nto the prea

tes thefonnes of Reup( wpicbexbare the Arke maw. itu
of theteffament of the Lozbde and nto all f el-

bergof Hracl,and {oles commaunded them,

fapinge: x Atthepopntoffeuecnperesinthefo
lempnpte of the free pere,cucn inthe feat of tae Stra
bernacles, woben all ftracl is come toappere be ~|

foze the Lozde thy Good, intheplace whpcbe be

batb cholen:thou thalte reade thys lawe before


rael in theyzeares. Gatberthepeopletoe
gether:men wemen, and chpldzen,and p Eraur
Ger that (g within thp gates, $ they mape beare
andlearne and frare the Lozde poure God, and f
kepe, and obfetuc all the wozdes of thpslatoe,
and that thep: chplozen thbpche know nothpng
niape beare, andlearne totearethbe Lode pour
God, a3 longeas pelpucin the lande : whpther
pegoouer Jordantopotielett. —_

And the Lorde lapde vuto Boles: Webhold
thp Bapes arecome, that thou mut bpe.Calzo D,
fuatperfoze, and ftandepe in the tabernacle of
wythelle tbat mape qeuebpmacharge. And ~
MHoles,andjoiua went, and Tove inthe taber,

nacle


&


Fotuaischoten Perteron


nacle of wytnefle. And the Lozde apperedin the


tabernacle, cuentn the ppller of the cloude. and | P


E NE N
Er Frriti.d Ee * ppller of the cloude ftodeouer thedoze OF kra


the tabernacle. Andthe Lozdefapde onto u})0-
Teg:bebolde thou thalte Nepe wrth thy fathers,
and this people wpl reple bp,and goa whoring
after (traunge gobs of the lande (whptberthep
go )and tpl fozlake meand becake pappopnt=
ment, wbicb J bhane made with them.

And thé mp wath wpl ware wheteagaintt
them, and J wpll forfaire them, and wpll bpoe
mp face from them, and thep talbecontum ed.

Andmuche aduerf(ptpe and trpbulacpons all
come bpontbem, Co chat then thep fopl fap : Are
not thele troubles come of nearer ov
isnot Myth me/ And J alfo wpll Curelp byde a-
yape mp face inthat dape, fo? all tbe euels fake
tbichebep fhall haue thzoug bt, intbat thep are
fourned buto fraunge goddes. Mowe therfore
iwapte pe this fonge foz pou, g teacbe it tbe chpl-
dren of Jlrael,and put it m they? mouthes, that
this fonge may be mp wptnes agapnit the cbpl:
dren of jlrael. ffoz 3 wyll bepng them into the
lande( whiche¥ (ware vutotbhep; tathers )that
Aoweth wpth mplke and ponpe, and they tall
eate andfpllthem (clues, and ware fat, turne
bnto ftraunge Govdes, and ferue tbem, ¢ blaf-

4€ phememe,and bzeake mp couenaunte. Bnd thé


wbenmuchemptchefeandtrpbulacpontiscome gt


pponthem,thps fonge fhallanfwerethemasa
soptnelic. Foz tt hall not be forgotten out of

mouthes of thep? fede: foz J bnowe thep2 pma-
ginacyon, whpcl thep go abouteeuen nowe,be
toze 3 baue brought them into the lanve wbpcb
J (ware. r Holes therfoze weote this fongep
fame feafon ¢ taught it tbe chpldzen of irae.


And be gaue Jofua thefonne of Muna charge, €


zotua. i.b. fapoe: xbe bolde g tronge, fo: thou palt hpna
UMA the cpplozenof Aracl into the lande, whpcbe F
fware vutorbem,and J wpll be withthe.

And whei soles badmade anende of wp:
tpnere out of the wozdes oftbps lawe ina boote
puto the ende ofthe, Moles comaundedp Le:

_ uptes, bpche bare the arkeof the tefament of
Deutera che od lapiig:take pe p boke of this lawe, xe
put it inthe fpde of p avke oF the teftament ofthe

Lode pour Godp itmay be there foz awptnes
«tit, wegas ASAPH the: fto2 Jhnowe thy Toburnessethy-
toile. tpfe necke: wbple Zampet alpue w pou tops


wgaia.tit.> Dayepe baue bene Dilobedpent onto the 107e: -


andbowe much moze after mp death?

S Gather wnto meal tbe elders of pour trpbeg:
and pour offpcets, that 3 map Cpeake thetc w02-
desintbepreares, cal beuen, earth to recoz0¢
agapntt them. S602 J am fure p after mp death,
ye wopll otterlp be cozrupt, eturne from p wap
which J bauechmaunded pou: andtrtbulacpon
wpil come DponpouinthelatterDapes,becaute
pe wall bane wrought topchednefle in thelpabt
of the Lozde, to pzouoke bpm thozowe the wo2-
kes of pour pandes. And Wofesfpake inthe ca-

- regofallthecongregacponof Firael :the Woz:
deg oF this fonge, ontpll pe had ended them,
C The.rrerti. Chapter,
@ Thelonge of Motes,


-thouart laden with fatnefle.
_- Bnd he fo2loke God bys maker,andcegar-


tye God: Foz all bps Wapres are iudgemente. Pe
iga God of truthe,without wpebeonelle-vpgb=
tuoule,andiuftets be.

ffrowardly baue thepdoneagapnpimtho ~ ~~»


a cai al Bis


pgg
SAS
ss = 2
a
eae
ont op
a 9 oF
Fast
Bae
sm
_ et ey
BRS
St =
T) s =F
S58
so 5
S98
SRS
axes
in W e
Yri
ac

To


fed bpn wpth bonpe out of the rocke andwpth
ople out of the moft parde ftone.tatithbutter of .
kpne,andmplise of the thepe, with fat of plam- a7
begand offatrammes and hegoates, wpth the
fat of mof plenteous wheate and that ë mpgb-
teft bepuke the moft pure bloude of the grape.
wut be that huldebaue bene vpright, whew T
He wared fatte,fpurned with bis hele, J
Thou art wel fed, thou arte grawenthpcke


Ded not the God of bps faluacpon. Thep proua-
kedbpmtoangerwpth Fraunge Goddes:euet
vb abbominacpons prouobed thep bpm. x Thep Prale.
offred Dnito devels, and not to God, euen fo god
Des whom thep knew not:to newe goddes that
came newlp ar whom thep2 fathers feared not
Df God that berate the thou arte vumpndful,
and batt forgotten God p made the. Che Lorde
therfore fate it, and wasangrp,bpcaufe of the
prouokpng of his fonnes and of his Doughtets.

And belapde: 3 wyl bydemp face from thé,
and wopli fe what thepzecndethall be. Woz thep
are a verp frowarbde genccacpon , chpldzen in
wbomisnofapth. Thep haue angred me wptb
that which is no god, ¢ prouoked me with their
panities.<and 3 allo wpll prouoke them are uoma r.v.

thofe |


$


É G
i
ef


|
I


i


|
|
|


> Gmac.biie


Poles fonge,
D thole whpche are no people, FJ tpl angerthem
Fereste sitha foolpthe nacpon.x« fl o2 fpze fg Bpndledin
imp wath, and burneth puto the botome of hel.
And bath confuined the earth with per increale,
anb {eta fp2e the bottomes of the mountapucs.
| topll beape mplebeues wpon them, and wplt

deftrope them with mprearowes.

Thep Halbe burnt wpth hunger, and confi:
geerd med with beate and wit) bprter Delfruccton* F
Fort pil alfo fendethe teeth of bealkes vpon them,
wpth the Eurpoutnelle of ferpentes intpedufte .
litho ut Fostbe, Mal the fweard robbe then of
thepzchyldgen:and witbinin the chambze,feare
both ponge men and ponge Wemen, and the luc-
kelpngeg with the menot grape peades. 3 baue
Cape: J topllicater them abzode, and make the
rettembzaunce oF them toccatlefrome amonge
ien. Wereitnot that J feared the wzati of the
enemic len thep2 aducrlarpes Mulde dtterlp w-
Dawe them felueg and lek thep Mulde fape:onr
bpe bande hathdone all this.ana not tpe Lozve.

. fEo2 itis anacpon without fozecall, nepiper
istbere Anp vnd ahe wi inthé: D that tbep
were wple, € wnderfode thps, that thep wolde

confpderthepze latter ende. :

Powe Hulde one chale athboufand,¢ ttoo put
tentboulandeto fipgbt: except thep2 maker had
Licey,» solve them, except the Load had (hut them bps

Sis at Sto: thep2 Godig not ag our Good, xour ene
thpes allo them feluesare Judges. |
€or thep2 wpne ig ofthe vpneparde of Sod0
me, and of thefeldes of Gomorra : Chepze qra-
pes are grapes of Gal, q thepz clafters be bitter.

€ bep? topne ig the poplon of dzaggong, and

tbeceucll gall of alpes. Js nót this lapde in froze
withute,and fealed bp antonge mp treafnres?

Hom.ri.o. wUjengeaunceismite,and ¥ opl ee warde their


DoE. Fee mall fipde due fyine: E02 the bape oftheir
deftruccponts at howesi the thynaesptpall .


come Dpon them, make ba
xc: the Lorde thal tudge pis people. bee
compafipon onbps feruauntes, when helepth ý


their poweris gone,andthatthep beinamancee `


{but vp,o2 bzoubt to naught anv forfaken.
genii Andhe thal faye webere are thep2 qodves/
F they: Godin whometbep truted.
The Eat of whofe faccifpees thep dpd eat and
dranche the wpne of (dep? bepneke offerpnaes?
__ letthetrpfie ppandbelpe pon, and bepour pro-
eH feccpontow (ia aeceliptres,)
Dew, iLE


tasts.tte there ignone Dut ¥:*¥ kpll,¢ wpll make alpue:


zobs d J wounde,and | Wyl heale-xneptheristhercas bz


np that can delpuer oute of mppande.
Jo: I wll lpfte vp impne pande to beaucn,

and wpllfape : J lpue euer:

€ Fe Arwhet the coge ok mp lwearde,and mpne
bande take bolbeto do iuitpce, J wpll recompéce
Dengeannce on mpHe ehempes,and wpl reward
them Kit rk APIAY

- J topll make mpne arrowes dioncke wp

bombe Enp lupeanae Ali Cate eine E chattes
the bloude of the flapne,and fo: tbeir captiupte,
fens the beqprnpng of the tozath of theenempe.


, Komsd.b.  ~pBraplepe betpen pis people, Foz pe tpl a-


Peuteronomium.


Senowebowe that 3.x YaloneamGov,¢


uenge the blonde of bisleruauntes, and wpll a=
uenge bpm of bis aduerfarpes,and appl be mee
cpfult onto bis lande, and to bis people. |
And Doles came and fpakeallthe toozdes G
ofthis fonge inthe cares of the people, be and Zo
fuathefonof Mun. And Boles lpakeall thete


“wo2zdes Ditto the ende to all the people of Afrael


and fapde vntothem:* Set pour hartes vnto al Den bin.)
the no2des which F teltiEpe vntopoutbispap: "1E
and pe al cOmaunde them nto pour chplozen,
that thep mape obferuc and do all the wozdes of
thts lawe. And let it not be a wapne Woozde Duto
pou:fo2 in it ig pour Ipfe, g thozowe thys worde
pe pall prolonge pouredapes in thelande whp-
ther pe qo oncer Jordan toconquereit.
_ Andthe Lozde fpaie vnto Woles tde felfe
fame dape, fapinge : get the bp into tpis moun-
fapne Abarim, OS (that is to fape a pafage) DNEO the aa
mounte Rebo, wbpehbeis tn the lande of Boab: **
ouer agapntt Jericho. And veholde the lanve of
Canaan, woiche Jacue wnto the chplozen of Fl
tacilto polele : Anddpe inthe mounte whpche
tbou gor vp vnto, andthou Malt begathered ©
bntothp people. * As Aaronthp beother dped Aom. tr.o
inmount osand was gathered vnto bps peo. © FF
ple, becaule pe trefpafedagapntt me rp sen ip
chplbzen of Slracl, xat the waters of frpfe, at
Cades in the wpldernes of sin:fo2 pe fanctifped
nenot amongethechpldzcnof Firacli. Chou
alte therfoze le tie lande before the, and thalte
not qo tbptber, vritathe lande which J aene the
chplozen of ita cll.
Che. xrrviti.Chapter.
€ £9 ofte bipnge bleteth allthetepbes of Hfratl.
ranm His is che bleTpnge wherwpth Bo: Z
Face peas (cs the man of Goo bleficd the chpl-


FROME By


w0ozde,and Mall kepe thy coucnaunt. Thep Mal
teache Jacob chp iydgementes, and bia o>
| we


Che death !
~~ lawe. Thep hall put cens befoze thp nole, and
the burnt facettpce wpon thpne Xulare. Wiele
Lode bys fpztte frutes „and accepte the worke
of hts bandeg, (mpte f lopnesof them that sple
ayapnite bpm, and of them that batebpm, that
thep rplenotagapne. | |
€  AndolwWen Jamin helayde. Che Lowes
devipng Hall dwell infaftpe bponbpm and the
Lode (hallcouer bpm allthe dape longe, and

he hall dwell betwene bps thoulders .

And of Jofeph be fapde:blefled of the Lorde
is bis laude foz the frutes of beuen, thozowe the
Dewe and (pzpnges that lpe beneth,andfo2 the
Cwete feutes of tbe encreace of the funne, rppe
frutes of the {toone:foz the ‘p e frutes of the
prpucppall mountapnes,and fo? the frutes that
the bylleg bzpnge Forth fo2 ence and foz the fru-
tes of the earthe, and fulneffe therof:and fo: the

rodii OOD Wypll of bpm that dwelt intbexbuihe, Hal
the blefipng come wpon the beade of Jeleph,and
bpon thetoppe of the heade of bpmebat was le-

erated tromeamonge bps beethzen: bys fpzte

aie ore bath bewtpe, and bis bozneg are as
hoznes ofan CGinpcozne. And with them be tha
trouble the nacpons together,cuer bntotheen-
des of the wolde. Chele ar alfothe many thou-
fandes of €ppzaim, aud the thoulandes of Ba
nales. And vntosabulon pe lapte : Retopce
zabulon tn thp qopnge oute, and thou Blacher
ttbptentes .

Chep thall call the people Vato the bpll and
there thep Hall offer offerpnaes of ryabteout:
neie. Fo: thep Hall fucke of tbe aboundaunce
of the fee , and of treafure ppd in the lande.

D Andvnto Gadbhelapde:blefied be f comme
maker Gad: he Btbelleth aga Lpon, that cat-
cheth the arme worth the bead. ie lawe therfoze
bps begynnpnge,and that there was apozcpon


there to Dpde thelawegeuer,and became wpth


the heades of the people, anderecated the rypgh=


tuoufnetle of the Lopde, andpps Judgementeg
wopth Fraell.


And vnto Danbelapde: Daniga Lyons
wWhHelpe, be Hall lowe From Bafan.

- And onto Nephtalt he fapde: Mephealibath
aboundaunce of Gods good plealure,andis tpl
led with the blefipng of the 102d, and thal baue
bis potielipons towarde thefouthwelt..

_ And vuto Aler be fapde:A fler thalbe blef-
fedwith ch plozen:be thalbe acceptable bnto bis
becthzen, and pall dpppe bis foteinople. Chp
a Bee PON and bealle, andthpue age be
a5 Pourpe,

‘Cbereis nonelpke bnto the God of Ffrael:
whicb though be {yt vpon the beaucnas vpona
bozle pet ishe top belper , whole glozp ig in the
celeltpal places. Tt
and onder thearmes of the euerlatpnge Goo :
thalte thou lpue. He thalicaft out the enemp bes
fore the, and fape:deftrope. {fraell eben thal
Owvel in fafetpy,and alone-And the eve of Jacob
{albe Dpon a lande of copne and wpne andhig
Heauens thal soppe the Dewe.ipappp art thou
<> Flrael whois lpte nto thes D people that
art faued mthe Lozde, whpebers the thylde of


Peuteronominm


there tn the


De eternal Godistbprefuge —


thy belpe,andfthearde of thy glop. Tbpneene: `
mpes baur loft thep2 trengt tothe warde, ant
thou thalt treade vpon the hevath of them,
@ Cbe.rrritit. Chapter. zd
€ Holes dpeth.Alract wepeth. olua fucceveth
in @jofes row me.
ee oneal A dk Doles went from the plapne Bu.rdti.c.
[d ‘Ned of &)oab Dpintomount Neboand ‘iss
w ‘i We ee tbe toppe of x the bpll that ig Pe
Ja Na ouer agapntt Fericho.Andp Lozde _
fetes! Hewedhpmallebelandeot Gilead,
cuen YnfoDan,andall Pepe bale andtbelande —
of Ephraim and Manafle, andall thelande of ye” ~~"
juba:euen ynto the vtmofl fee, and the South : |
and the regyon of the plapne of Jericho the Cp-
tie of palmetrecg euen bntosoar. And p 1020
fapde vnto bpm. * Chis is thelande w r
PA PIGEN IE DETO EDP Ioe a D OMD
png: 3 wpl qeueit onto thy fede, 3 baue canted -
the allo to fett withtbpneepes, *but thou palp Detit.«.
not go oucctbpther. os
So oles the leruaunt of the Lozbde dped
lande of Boab , accozdpnge to the E
wode ofthe 102d. And pe burped bpm ina pa-
lep inthe land of Soab ouer agapnt the boufe
of }Bco7, but no man knoweth of pys lepulch:e
buro thps dape. Hofes was anhundzed and
twenipe pere olde when he dped :bysepe wag
not òpmme, no? bps naturallcoloureabated.


Andthe cBplozen of Ffraecllxwepte for Voleg


in the plapne of S)oab thpztpe dapes. And the 27 F?
dapes of weppnge anDmoncnpnge foz B)oleg,
were ended. | te :
And Jolua the fonne of Nun tas ful of the
pete of wpidome:* foz Hofes had put
__ bis batides vpon bpm. Sndthechptl
den oF Zlrael were obedient yn


cõmannded Mofeg. And ..
there arofenot i
ellike puto Ho

igre voce g :


knewe Face to face,accozdpnge onto all themy: }


Ta


racles and wonders Wwhiche the Lozde fent
bpm to doin thelande of Egypte, on
to Pharao andall bps feruaun--
tesand befozeallitslande = °
and accozdpnge to all
¥ _.. thatmpgbtpband x
atdallthþe —
-great
bifpons, whpehe Doles
thetocd in thelpabe
oral Na: sg
ell. :


Theendeot the fytthe |
bokeof S)ofes,calledin pebgue:Elles
hadbdebatim,andintpeLatpn: `-
Deuteronomium. `


5 Gene. Fii. b z
anb. rbd, be


| : |1920: > e`
* phet fence mA s œ ae


of Motes.
a


oe “i iia


SULT EDI b AA


tobpm,anddpdastbe Logd 6 |


E


i
=
$


h
2 BE
i
ea
HT a


parte of theiSpble con-
taynpng thele
‘bookes.


The booke of Yoluna.

The bookeofthe Judges’ 5,
The booke of Ruth.

| sa ft booke of Samuel,
The.ti.booke of Samuel.
The.iti.booke of the Apnges.
The.titt.booke of thehpuges.
4 e.i.booke of the chzonpeles.


al


Ty


a ate ose eee
ooke 2ag.
Chere vooke of EDAS.
eh booke of Helter.


Te)
Bed AL


ebooke of Hiob.


T E HI


aki
An ca
i
+ E
a tae


E


i
=
$


h
2 BE
i
ea
HT a


parte of theiSpble con-
taynpng thele
‘bookes.


The booke of Yoluna.

The bookeofthe Judges’ 5,
The booke of Ruth.

| sa ft booke of Samuel,
The.ti.booke of Samuel.
The.iti.booke of the Apnges.
The.titt.booke of thehpuges.
4 e.i.booke of the chzonpeles.


al


Ty


a ate ose eee
ooke 2ag.
Chere vooke of EDAS.
eh booke of Helter.


Te)
Bed AL


ebooke of Hiob.


T E HI


aki
An ca
i
+ E
a tae


A yai bet ee Le
| *.eh aut AN re d Meeda i
4 Pst t i | i Ans The
ane : | j : | t } Trt eS ws
P P. i p j" å 2 i © Pa
À P


k


i ay


ae


-sa


~~


{


~


fe hl we ee od f
><


: k gE
virana nE m an


? -= oua,


q The bookeof Folua
lee whom the Pebzues call Febolua.
| The fpr Chapter. en,
| Sean commaunbetp Opus continually o teabe Dette
Tonomig.


CNE


fete thall treade ne ap haue 3 gewen pou as J


aasi» xiREmemberthe wozde, which B oles the ler-
Pe D uauntof the Lozdecommaunded pou, fapinge:


pr es
SUOLY.
the Lozbe poure God bathe qeucn pou reale,
and bathe geuen pou thps lande: Poure wpues,
poure chplizen, and pourcatell pall remapne in
the lande whythe Woles raue pouon thys ipoe
Jozdane : but ye tall go befoze pour bzethzen,
armedall ý bemen of warre,andbelpecbem vn
tplltbe Lorde þauegecuenpourebzethzen realt,
agbebatbpou, and erue alfobaue obtap
ned the lande, whpche the Lozde poure God qe-
neththem . And then thallpereturne ynto the
lande of poure poffeilyon and cniope it, whpcie
lande oflesthe Lozdesferuaunt gaue pou on
thps [pde Jordane towarde the fonne tiie. .
And chep anftoered Fofna lapinge : + All that utes.
thou baftcommatided bs, we wpldo,and whys sece.runa
ther focuer thou fendet ws, we wll go. Acco2-
Dpnge as we obeped Boles in all thpnges fo
Wwpll we obep the, onlp the Lozde thp ®odbew
the as be was w oles . And wodoloener he be
that doth difobepe thy mouth ¢ pl not berken
bnitothp toazdes itt allp thou cOmaundelt bpm,
let Dim dpe:Dnlpe be trong €of good courage.
| C The.it. Chapter.

Jous fenbeth (ppeeto Fericho,whrche were bpd of tahab,

ara Rd Folua the fonne of Nun fent out of X
SA Speftim twome tofppe feceetelp faing
NE go and bewe thelade and alfo Jericho.
Esaa And thep went, andcame intoa barlos
tes boufe named Rabab and lodged there. Jnd
it was tolde the kinge of Ferichoandlapd: We-
bolde, ther came men in bprhertonpabte,of the
chplozen of 4lracll,to (ppe oute the countrepe.

And the kpnee of Ferichofent Ynto Rahab
fapinge: bzpnge forthe the men that arecometo
the,and wbpcbe are entred into thpne boule foz
thep become tolearche outeallthelande. —

And the woman toke the two men cand bpd m epseri.t,
them. Andlapde thus indede therecame men xacs.i.0
puto me, but J wpite not whence they were.

And about the tpme ofthe Huttpng of the ate 5
whé tt was darcke,the men went out, whpther
the men went Fwote not:folowe pe after them
qupckl pe, for pe fhall onertake them . mut tbe
brought them vp to the roffe of the honle, tbid zorur, ore
them pth the Talkes of flare, whpche Hebad
lpingeabzode bpontheroofe. Andebemen of
the citicpurfued aftcr thé,p wape to Jorda,eué
nto the ferpe,¢asfone astbep whpch purfued
after them were gone oute.thep (hut the yate..

And 0? ever Ehep were a flepe, the came Vp vn-
toftbem bpon the roffe,andfapde vnto the men:
4 knowe p the Lode hath acuen pou the lande,
x foz the feare of pou ig fallen bpon es, andthe utero.
enbabpters of thelandefapnt atthe pretence of rront.a.
pou. jfo2 we daue Dearde powe the Lozd*dzied Fo™r.>-2-
pp the water of therced (ee befoze pou,whé pou £o Fite
rioan a and what pou dpd bnto the
bee Hey i mate Ra ve on ue
Ofer ipoe Jordan Deepon g Dg, wpm pe Vi- aum. rri.
terlpedeftroped. Ano asione as webad hearde map
Bete thpngeg or (me were oze atcaped,*) OUTEDETEES za
opodfapnte . Andehbereremapnednomorecou: °
rage inanp manat tbe peefence of pou. For the
02d pour Sod, beis the Godin beauent aboue,
andincarthbbeneth. .

Ait Rowe


—————


Rahab;


| P
Cues.rF€ then the let the downe bp a coarde, * thootwea
Aetea. fid ben p towne wal.


ra ye then (pall pe go pour owne wape.


ave Wom, Wa cacil,and lodged there, befoze thep
Ss wente Our. | |
Andatterthzedapesit fortuned, that the offp-


cers Wente thozowe ontetbeboolte, andcom: PER
maunded the peoplefapinge:when pele parcke pA
odepoureGod and p


of the telLamente of the (
the pzeltes thatare Leuttes bearinge it:pe tall
departe from poure place, and qo after it. So
pet thatther halbe a (pace betwene pou and it,
aboute a tiwo thoulande cubptes bp mealure.
Andpe hallnotcomenpe yntoit, that pe mape
25 knowe tbe hape,bp whpcbe pe mufte qo: fo2 pe
va Danenot gone thps wape intpmes patte ox (ano


Folna.


be ware , that pe appzoihenot npe bnto paske.) AND Jofua
Capd bnto p people: Sanctifie pour felueg, FO? xeu.rr.g
to mozow P L020 Wall do wonders amõge pou, Aum id.

And Fotualpake vnto the pzeaftes fapinge: Form,bti c
Take vp the arke of the couenaunte and gobe-
foze the people. And they toke bp the arke o€ the
Tetament and went befozethepeople. —

And the Lozdeflapde onto Jolua : thysdaye
ropll J begpnne to magnifye the tn the (yabte
of all Jfraell, that tbep mapeknowebowetpat ©
xas J was wpth Boles lo wyll J be wpth the. nome, i.s.
And thou Malte commaunde theppeattes that
beare the arke of the conenaunte fapinge: when
pe are come tothe edge of the waters of Jodå,
pe Hall tande ftpll in it.

And Zolua fapde vntothechplozett of Fracl:
come Dptbher, and beare the twozdeg of the Lorde
poure od. And Jofua fapde: werebp pe Hall
knowe thatthe lpupnge God is amonge pou,
and that be wpll wythout faple cate ont before
pou,the Cananites,and the Pethithes. the Pe-
uptes,the Pherelttes,the Geractites,the Amo C
riteg, and the Jebulptes : Webolvde, the arke of
the apopntement of the Lozde of all tbe wode
oeth before pouinto Jowan . Nowe therfore
take from among pou tiwelne mien out ofthe trp:
bes of 4fraclloute ofeucrytrypbeaman.

Andas fone ag the fooles of the fete of the
preattes ( that beare thearke of the Lode the
 ouernoure of all the wozlde)treade inthe wa:
ters of Jozdane, p waters of Jordane ox (that are ws


| beneth, (hall ronne dotwne,and halbe dcupded: and the


waters that comefrom aboue , (hall tande tpl
bpon an beape. Andit foztuned, that when the é

cople were Departed fré their tentesto go oner

ozdan, the preattes bearpnage x the arke oF te artes v.e
appopntement wente before the people. And ag ;
fone as they that bare the arke came ynto Joz-
dan and p fete of the prealtes that bare the arke =D
Lorre dppped inthe bzpm of the water. * 6402 ecctrpiitia
302dan bleth tofpll allbps banckes alip tyme
of baructte) the waters alfothat came done
front aboue,dpdrple vp vponat Deape -s cana ap: #8
peared as great as a mountapne., Departed farre fron
tie cptte of Ada, that was befpdesarthan. And
tbe watersthat were benethtowarde theleeot
flene arenes, fellawap and rep into the

ELE, coplexWenterpabt ouer agapnet A
Jericho. And paranes that baretbe arcke of ee
theappointment ot the Lozde, fode date within
JSozdane ready prepared, andall the Hraclites
wente ouer thozowe thedzype, vntpl all the peo-
plewere wie tanig He thozo we Jordan.

Joina Certeth bp moe papier. ogba,
cy 20 it foztuned, that whan the people 3
A gwerr all Fonexouer Jordan, the LOWE sou crog.e
bar, ehtpabe bnto Folna fapinge: Cakepou
ease tToelue më out of f people out of euerp
trpbea ma. 4nd commimaunde pou thé faping:
take pou bence oute of the mpddes of Jo2dane l
(enen out of the place where f pzealtes Qodeing
reDines /Eweluees (oF $ mootbaroet ffoneg, wbich
peall take awape wpth pou, andleane tdem “^
in the place, where pou thall lodge thpg npagte

n


d


FYordane-


Megs o


Jame Sota. Sol wy.
And Tofua called p twelve mE,whychdehad tpllpe were yone ouer,asthe Lozde poure God |
h aasi febecbeeat Ata oute of eucrp dpd p red feex which be dzped wp befoze Vg,tpli cro. riii: æ
' teybe a mã, q Jolua lapde vnto the: get pou be- wewer EAA ýpeo le of P world mape
fore the arche ofthe Lozde poure Sod euentho- nowe p bande of p Lode, owmpabtie it igg
ow prota LOL the mpddes of Jozdan * and tabe bpeuerp that pe mpb feats Fe ewbrees Ob fozeucr.


w pous Pemapeantwerethem howe pthetoa- PMA Wakinges ot p Cananites which wee


| man of pou a ftone dpon bis pulber accozdpnge The.v.Chi

la pntothenombze ofthetrpbesoftbechplogenof ==» CL UERANanKesarea sear,

| l grad, that thpsmapebealpaneamongepou. PRESE ppi p eneoes wecelly p t 4
— Chat when pour chplozenatke thepefathersin KENA oe a ron i Wwhyche are be-

| : - tpmeto come,faping: what meane thele tones Rezan ee ponde fo dan wetward, all the


> tergof Jordane veuidedat p pzelence of parcke H hs 3 “bp fee, beardehowep Lozde had
.  oftbeappopntement oftbe Lozde. Foz bhanit d po Dp p waters of J0zdã befoze Pebpldzéof
wente ouer Jordan, the waters of Jozdandeut- | :
ded . Andthele tones are become amemozpall apntedfozfeare.and ther has nofpzete mi the
puto the chpldzen of Blrael foz ever. anp mozefor p peclence of pchpldzen of Ffrael.
aS a And the chplozen of Jfrael dpd cuen fo as Fo: Tba
-> s6.axesum (UA ComMAUNdED, and toke Dp * twelue ones xapabep (yarpe cannes (of ffone)and goto aq Ero itits.
Sato lus rnnige tarde nambiot be "Ano Yoana: bn arpe ies oon 25
eps ofthechden of ln pri a and iea pod iasg eap pate hid
awape wytbtbem buto ceteberetheplod- toppe of thefozclaupnnes. tf ecaule
ged "an OTAN bowie bere . And Tofua DPhp Joina ciwcumepiedalithepeoplethat cam
et vptwelue koncsalfointbe mpodegof Joz: out of Čgipt: Pamelp,tuch as were males bee
Dam ap laer meee te eet ea are araby P ware attertbepcamoutot Catat
Jarg t i FUUG. ' 3 i ;
And tbere baue tbep contpnucd vntothps FEozallt b neopletbatcameout were circamep
pag Paha lhl barethbearkeftode fed. wutalltpe people that were bone inthe
inp mpoddes of Jordan, vutplall wastpnithed wwpldernefle bp the wape after they came out of
that the Lozde commaunded Jotua to fape Yn- Coe edt not ciccumerfed. Joz the chplozé
tothe people.accozdpngtoallebat Moteschar of Airacl 7 Tit |
ged Jolua. And the people batted and wétouer tpllalltbepeople of the men of warte that cam
At fortuned alfo, that whan all the people were oute of Egppt were confumed becaufethep bar
Ca ae eae aae Oane AND Clipertoyetpe Lorne watt tbat be wolbenot
, an CALES OCTO, Die. i! | tbat
alee the ear oF ben, an i ebb pa a, ome Me ene ano ve ped nar SL piiihE,
and balf the trpbe of Sanaties went berozet nto tbep: fathers, tbat bewoldeqpueps,eué ..
ch toet of Jfraell armed, ag Holes charged a landesthat Aowethwpthmplke g bony. And 21, rio.
Sik the.@uc fourtp thoufandepzeparedtozwarre, theirchplozé who be fet vpin they? teade them ©
k? tente before tbe Lozde vnto battel,thozowe p Jofua ciccumctfed:foz thep were yncirciicpfed,
_ © Hotusitt. |
Zola me)


ee zi


lapnedet Jericho tp dapetbe Lod magnifpeð becanfetbep circumepied them not bp p wape.
Bio ua tntbefpabte of all Jiraell, e tpep feared And when thep bad circumcpled al p people
pm,as thep feared Hotes all dapes of bisipf. thep mgt togetber in p booft tpl thep were
And the Lozdelpake unto Jotua,fapinge: tobole.And pi .
commaunde the pattes that bearetbearkeof Bpauctaké awape p Mame of Eqypt fro pou:
foyenefie , to come vp oute of Jordan. Fofua wherfore namicof the fame place iscalled Gil
= therfore commaunded the reattes , fapinge: gal vntotl ig Dap. Andp childzé of Flraclabove —
ome pe Dp out of Jordan. And when thepzea- in Gilgal*e belde theteatt of palleouer pfour= crop, s4.5,
ftes that bare the arke of theappopntement of tencdape of the moneth ateuenintheplapneot ©
the Lozde were come pp oute of the mpdbes of Jericho. And thep dpd eate of Pcozne of p lande
Jo2da ,and as foncasthe fooles of the prealtes onpmozowe after ae fwete cakes § par
fete were let onthe dzpe lande, pwaters of Joz- chedcogneinp felfe fa


dane retourned agapne bnto thep2place,and cealed on ý mozowe after thep had begonne to x


* went ouer all their banckesagtbhep dpd before. cate ofthe come off lande , nether had che chpl-
À Andthe peoplecame vpout of Jozdaneğ tenth Dzen of Ffraell Manna anp moze, but dpd eate
Eii dayeof thefp2 moneth,andpptcbedinGilgal, ofthe cozne of the lande of Canaan that peare.

cuë in the ceait boader of the cptie Jericho. And it Foztuned that when Jolua was nye


i And the twelue tones whpehethep toke out to Jericho aeS bp bps epesandloked : and
| of Jordan, dpd Jolua pptche m Gilgal. Andhe bebolde, there
gov, ptt. Toake onto tbe chplozen of Frael taping: * VE npnge a {oearde Dpawen tn bps bande. And Jo
| pour chplozé athe tbep? fathers in tpme torome [na wente bnto bpm, andfapde wntobpm:arte
€fape:wbat meane thele tones: petballtheme thou on oure lpde oz on oure aduerfarpes. _.
| oure chplozen and lape, sraelcameoucrtbis Andbelapde:Mape,but asacaptapne of the
| "Jordan On Dzpe lande. Eo the Lozde pour God Dooft of the Lowdam 3 | ua
ca dped dp the water of Jozdanebefozepou, bn- tellonbpsfaceto p eavth,¢dydreueréce, ¢ lapt.


Jericho


vntobpm, what fapth mp Lorde onto bps fers
nauntes And Kae captapne of the Lowes
erona.. Lapde puto Jo


Actes, bii.d


| | bootte
1a,* Do thp tho of thp fote, fog


place whero p fadeff,ts bolp.And Jolua did fo
Tbe. vi.cbapter.
C Lhe walles oF Aericho fall,andi¢ ts dettreped.


all tbe aloro en great thowte.
And then thal the wall of thecptie fal bowne, g
the people thallafcend vp, euerp man ftrepabt
befoze bim. And Folna thefonne of Aun, catled
p preattes ¢fapd vntotbhem:take vp p arke of p
appotntinét,elet feuë peeaftes beare teué trom
pettes of rammes boznes befoze the arke of the
ope Sebi be fapde nto the people ago conte
pa e thecptic:and let bpm F ig harneffen, mobe-
fozetbearkeotthe Lozde. And when Zoluabhad
poken onto tbe people, the feucn preattes bare
thefcuen trompettes of ranunce hoznes,¢ went
forth befoze the arke of the Lode and blewe
Wwptd the trompettes, and the arise of the coue-
naunte of the Lozde folowed oem.

Andall the men of armes wet before the prea:


15 ftes, that biewe wpth the trompettes , and the


€


commen people came after the arke : the preas
ftes that went blewe wpth trompettes. 3nd Jo
fua commaundedthe people faping: Pe allnot
thowte,nermakeanp nople wpth poure voce,
neptbher thalllanp wozde peen oute of poure
moutbe, vntpl tbe vape J bpd pou (howte, then
palpe Howte. Andlo the arke of the Lorde ci-


pafledtde cptie,and Wenteaboutit once: ¢thep ga ENE


retourned into the boot, andlodgedthbere.


And Jolua rote earlpinehemoznina,andthe E RA
piccits tobe HU tbe Arar ot fio Deandfeuen |


zeattes bare leuen trompettes of rammes hoz
nes and went before the arke ofthe Lozde, and
biewe wpththetrompettes , And all tbe men of
armes went befoze them, but the commen peo-
pe came after the arke of the Lo20, which went
befoze w the blowpng of the trompettes. And p
petted t . < pained Mod eck
agapneinto p poke andio thep dpo {pre dapes.
: nd whé the feuéth vape came,they cole carly:
euen w the Datonpnge of the Daye, ecompafled
the citie after thetamemaner leuen tpmes:onlp
that dape thep compaffed theciticfeuentymes.
Andat the feuenthtpme, whan the preattes
bletoe w the trompettes , Jolua fapde vnto the
people, owte,foz the Lozd bath geuen pou the
citie. And the cptic Halbe damned both it and al


Polna.


‘men of pai. Andthe men of Hat


that are therit, pnto the Lowe: onlpe Rabat p
batlot hal lpue, and all that are with ber in tbe 7
boule, becaule the * bpd the meflenqers that we Roms. t.a
fent. Jnd in any wple be pe warre of the ercom-
municatethpnaes, lef pe make poure felues er-
communicate), and take of the excommunicate
thpnges.and make the pote of Flracll ercomu-
nicate and trouble it. Hut alltbefpluer, golde,
vetlelles of bzafle, and p26 (balbecéfecrate Vi-
tothe Lozde, andfhallcomeintobpstrcafurpe. `
And the people thotvted,and blewe wrth trå-
pettes. Andwhenthe peoplebeardethefounde =
of Ptrompe,thep thowted pth a great powt:
and thextoal fell dawne, fo that tbe peopie wet
bp into the citic,euerp man frepabt befoze him
and toke thecptie. Andtbep veterlpe defroped
all that was in the cptpe botbe man and wos
man,p ane and olde, ore pepe andatie, wpth
the cde of the fwerde. 3
‘Then Jofua fapte vntothetwomentdathad
{pped out thecontrepe: ~ goointothe harlottes ~~
houte,and bapng out thence the waman andal Farar. tre
that he bath, xag pelware tober. andthe potig ee
inen tbat Werefppes, went in, and bzought out
Rabab, and ber father and mother and per bze-
thzen, and all that Me bad. Andthep bzoughte
outallber kpnrede, and put them wpthour the
bolte of Ffrae. i
And thep burnt thecytpewpthfper, and all
thet was therin. nlp the lpluer andthe golde,
the veflels of brafie and pzon tbep put wnto the
treafure of the boufe ofthe Lorde x And Jolua pebtze.pre.
faued Rabab the barlotte, and ber fathers hou-
tholbde,andall that the bad, and the diwelt in Ff-
raell,euen wnto this dape becaule the pid f mel
po pcb Jofua fent tofppe out Jericho.
_ and Zolua fwwareat that tpme,fapingecur=
fed be the man befoze the Logde, that rileth vp,
and byloeththyscptie Jericho: he hall lape t


foundacponxtn bis elde fonne andin bisNOUs ig,rerorg


gett foune Hall pe fet vp the gates of it And fo
the Lozde was with Jolua, andhpsfame wag
nopled thozowe out all landeg.

© The. vtt.Chapter.


Chants tpped out. a canis Looe,


seas Of sabdi the fonne ofsareth ofthe trpbe Sarai a
of Juda toke of theercommunicate thynges. sere.
And p to2ath of ë Lo2d wared whote agapnite ~
the chpldozen of 3fraell. RESEN
And Folua fent më frå Jericho to Wat, which
is befpde Wethaul, onthe eat fide of bethel,and
fpake onto the,faping:get pou vp,¢ vewe p cot
trep. and f men Wét vp, ¢ {pped out Hai. Andre


tourned to Zofua,efapd wntobym,lct not all $ °


people go bp, but lette agit were a tivo o2 thre
thoufademe goo vp, ¢ (nit Hai emake not al f
people tolaboure thether,foz thep are but fete.
And fo there went vp thetber of the people

about athe thoulande men, tory fled befoze
| mote of them
bpon a thp2tpe and (pre men : foz thep chafed
them from befoze p gate euceu bute Sebariin, €
{mote them


isdeftroped,


ie


2


Tit Hcanthe fonne of Carmp, tbhefonne re


|


|


- Arnis toned


5
| Wlal.Frlisc


|
4
Dente. ir, d
|
|
,


fmote them in the gop nge domne. WU berfo2e,the
berteg of the people x foz feare, melted awape
ipke water. And Jolua rentehpsclothes, and
fell to the earthe tupon bps face befoze the arcke
of the L020, vntplltheeuentpoc, be € the clders
of Jfraell and put earth bpontbhep2 beddes.

- And Folna fapbex Alas, D Lorde God,
therfore batte thou bzougbtethps people ouer
Jozdan,to delpuer vs into p bande of the Amo-
rites,and to vefrope vs: Woldeto God we had
bene content, €dtbelt onthe other(pde Jordan.
Dh Lozde-wbat thall J lape, when Flraell tur-
neth thepz backes befoze theps enempes: Su-
celp the Cananites,andal theendabtters of the
Lande thall beare of it, ball conipire agapnite
v9, ¢ deftrope the name of vg out of the wolde:
And what wplt § do vntothp mpabtpe name?

And the Lozdefapde nto Jolua.qetthe vp:
wherfozelyeft thoutbus ppon thp Faces Flracll
bath Cpnned, and thep bane trantareffed mpne
appopniement, whpche A cdmaundedthem:foz
thep bauctakenof theercommunicate thinges,
and haue ftolen, and diffembled, and put tpem
onto they owne tuffe. And therfore is itthat p
chplozen of Ffraell cannot tande befoze theyz
eneinies, but palturne their backes before thew


-Fofa


And lo Fotua fent melengersg: whych whan
thep ranne onto bis tent bebolde,thep were bya
inbps tent andthelfpluertbhberebnder.

ay rfoze.thep toe them out of the mpodeft
ofbps tent and bzoughte them vnto Jolua, and
puto all thechpldzen of Ffrae, andlapedthem
out befoze the Lode. ° $

And Joluatoke Acanthefonne ofsarethand
thefpluer,and the garment, ethe tong ofgolde,
and bys fonnes and bps daugbters , bps oen,
ppsatles, bps hepe, and bys tent and all that
He bad:andall F{caell with bpm bzongbt them
vntothe balepeof cor. — pnt

And Jolualapde: Ju asmoche ag thou bake
troubled bs. tbe Lorde (hall trouble the thps
dape. Andall Jlcaell Conedhpm wpth ones,
and burned them wpthfpze , and ouerwhbelmed
them wpth tones . And thepcafte pponbypma
great beape of oneg dntothpsdape . And{o
the Lozde turned from the wrath of bps indi-
gnacpon, And the name of the place is called the
palepe of Aco: vntothps vape. i
Cher C Toe. prit Chapter. 2
“ts Jo ruc tectet bp. on Peen l: H Broo.


Solty.


Scarth in mp tenteandthelpluerts ther nder.


encmpes becaufetbep be excommunicate. Re TSR ST Nd the Lorde lapde puto Jolut: %
ther wpll J be ythyou anp moare,erceptepe (S oo, © |feare not,nether be thou fapnte Det, bie
& rote out the excommunicate from amonge pou. 9 Ws darted. Cake all fmen of warre
* Tip therfoze,and fanctifiethepeople,and p27 Na Vee wpth the and vp, andget the to


Ered ripa
: Aster bg A pe N a 7 Gea Q dat. Wedolde, A bauegeueninto
fozfofapdethe Lozde God of Flracl Chereisa Lie Voy @ Ntby bande, the kypnge of Hat, and
Damned thpngeamonge pou D Flrael)¢ thee» pps people, bys cptye and bys lande. s


- And thou Halt do to Haiand ber kpnae, a
thou dpdett vnto Jericho and berkonge ey Forue.bi.d


tope cannot tandeagapnite poure enempes,
uerthelele,thefpople and*catell therof, thal pe Deute, rre


vntpll pe baue put the daned thpnge fr amoge
pou. Comozowe mognpnge therfore pe Halbe


|
#


E.


bzongbt accozdpng to poure tribes. And p tribe
whpcb the Lozde taketh, tall come accozdinge
totie kinreds therof. And the &pured which the
Lozie Gal fpnde gpl tie, tallcome bp poulbol-
des . Ahd the boutpolve wobpebe the Lorde thall
finde fautpe, Wall come man bp man. And pe
is foundeinp ercdninnicacpon halbe burnt
fpache tal p be bath, becaulebe bath rreatgretled
couenatit of p Lo2d q Wzoughe Folpe in Ffrael
And fo Folua role vp erly in the moning and
bzougbt Alraell bp tbey: trpbes: ¢ the trpbe of
Juda as caught. Andhebroughte p&pnredes
of Juva , and toke 4 kpnrede of the sarebites.
And be brought the binrede of psarebites, man
bp ma,and3sabdi was caught. And be beoughte
bps bouHolde man bp man, and Acan the fonne
of Carmp,the fonne of sabdi,the fonne of sareth
in the trpbe of Juda has caught. i
And Jolualapde nto Acanmp forme: J be-
feche tbe, qeue gloapetothe Lozde God of Ji-
raell,and qeue bym p2aple, and pete me wh
thou baffe done, opoe it not Fromme.
AndvAcananlwered Jolna, ándfapdeofa
trutbe J baue (pnned agapnitethe Lorde God
of ${raell,¢ thus and thus bane J done. Jlawe
amonge the fpople a goodlpe Babplonpive gar
ment and two bund2ed ficles of fpluer,¢a tonge
of golde of fpfticlpcles epghte, and FZ coueted
them,and toke them. And bepold they Ipe bid in


take puto pourefelues : And lapea wate
the totone,on the back(pde Eherot. capes

And fo Folua arole and all the men of warre
togo bpagapnite Pai. And Jofua chofe onte
thyetpe thoufande tronge men of warre, and
fent them arwape bp npabte . And becommaune
ded them, fapinge:bebolde,pe pall lapeawapte
wntothetowne onthe backlpdetherof. Gonot
verp farre fromthe cptie but be all readpe.

And J andall the people that ave wpth me,
comenut agapnlie is eai ba
tl aka tbe. dae
come oute atter Ds and we wpll bapne them out
of the cptie. oz thep wpli faye: thep cabetone
bsas at thefpette tyme and we wpil fee before
them . Jnthemeane tyme thall perpfe vp fron
Iping awapte € deftrope p cptie : Eo: the Lode
pour God wpll delpuer it into pour bande. And
wha pe hauc taken p cptie,pe tall fet tt onfpze.

_ Atcorbpngeto the commaundement of the
Lode (all pe Do:beboldr, Jhane charged pou,
Aolua thertoze fent them forth, and they wente
tolpeawapte, and abode betwene Bethel and
Hai on the welt {pde of the epte of Hat.25ut Jo-
{ua lodged that npgbt amonge the people.

And Jotua rofe vp erlpe inthe moanpnee,and
nombzed the people and went bp, be the elders
of Flracl before the people agapnitt at. And all

A iii themen


ee befoze the. ozthep wpl 25


Che Lyte. Hota, of Hat
the meu of warre that were withbynt,went wp. outpleué. And affoness thefunne twas Downe, Deut. Fre
qnddzuenpe,andcame agapnit the cptie, ppt- Jofua commaunded x that thep Could take the . |

. C ched on thenorth (poe of Hat. And there was a carkatie Downe of the tree,ecatkitat pentrpng I. 06
palepe betwene them ¢ Hat. And he toke Dport oftbeqate of the cptie,andxlape theron a great
afpuetboulandemé, € put them to lyeatoapte, peape of tones that remapneth wnto this Day. ven.rrbti.e
Hetwene Bethell and Hai, on the welkfpdeof Then Jofuaxbupltan altare nto the Lozbde
thecitie. And thep put the people(eué all bote oof Srael,inmounte Call, as Soles the
that were ontbhenozthlpde)agapnttetbecptpe, feruaunt of the Lode commaunded the chpld g deu.rrbiLe
& thelpersawapte on the well. nogoluawal of Flraell,andas itigwaptteninthexboke of p Erorr.
ked thefameniqht in the mpddes of the vatepe. lawe of w)oles:ansaltare of whole oneg ouet
Andit fortuned.thatwhethekpngofipaifawe whpchenoman batblpft anp tole of pron. And
it thep batted g rofe bp earlpe, andthe men off theplacrifped theron burnttacritpces onto the
eptpe wente outeagapnite Hraclltobattell.be 1020.4 ofred peaccofiringes. And be wot ther
and allbpspeopleat atpme apopnted, eucnbe= bpon p tones a rchearfall of p lawe of o t8
fore the plapne, and wp not that there were E zote itin P paelence otebe cop incoat Firal. G
Ipcrgawapte on the bactefpbe of the cptpe. And all Frac and the elders therof,and thep2

And Joluaandall Zleacllfapnedthemfel- offycerse Judges tobe, parte on tps (poeth
ues to be pur to tbe wozle before themandfied arke, and part onthatlpde, before the preaftes
towarde the toploerneue. Ano allthe people of that were Leuptes, whpehebarethearke of the
x the towne were called togetber,tofolowe af- appopntment ofthe 1020:48 well the wey Ae:
terthem . And thep folowed after Fotua and ag they that were bozneamonge thers jhalte of
Were datoenawape from the cptpe: Bnd there them on the fozefront of motte Garesin,¢ balte
tas notamantleftcinhatandin Wethell, tbat ofthem on p forefrit of moñt Ebal : as oles
went not out after Zlracll.Andtbheplefttbecp- theleruaunt of the Lode bad commaundcd be-
tpe open and folotved after Jfraell. foze that thep Woulde blee the people Z{racll.
kid's Lozdefapde onto Jotua-fretchout BAéterwarde, pered all the wozdes of the lawr,
thelperepigin thyne bande totvarde at, fo2 4 the bleffpngesandcurlpnges, accozdpnge toall
wpl geucitintothbphand. Ano Jolua retched thatts weptten inthe booke of the lawe : And
out tbelperetbat bebadinbpsbhande,towarde thcrewas not one wode of all that Woles cd-
checptie and Fbelyera aw arte arofequycklpe maunded tohpch Fotua red not befoze al the cõ=
out of thep2 place, andran o oneaszoluabad gregacponot Frael: Che women andcbildzen,
{tretched outebps bande, and thepentredinto (¢tbe {trafigers ý toere com) fadpng amog the
thecptic andtokett,and halted, efet the citte on ~ CThbe.ir.Chapter. |
fy2c. And when p men of Hatloked backe after CHhe Gibronites obtapne peace ok zolua, a
them,thep fawe Plmokeofthecitiealcendebp Eitan Nd it fortuned that when all the
tobeaué. Andthephadnolepluretofipe,epther P 4 aa kpnges that dwel onthps {pode 302
thiswapeorp.ethepeoplep fiecdtathewploer- Faye ban inthe bplles and valepes and
œ nelle, turned yackeacrapne bponthe folowers. oA along bp altbecooftes oftbegreat
Andwben Joluaandall jlracilfawethat EE
thelpers awapte had taken thecptie, that the . ananittg, }
fmoke oF it afcended,thep turned againe layed Pberelites.p Henites g p sebulites beard ther:
onthe men of Hat. And the otberentucd outofý of, thep gathered them chre rog proer tonan
eptic agapntt them. And fo there hep inp mpd- agapnt zolua tagapntt Feral w one accozde.

yorur, bie Delt of Alraell : foz thele were on the onetpde of x And the enbabptours of Gibeon Hearde i.rerrria
them,and thereft on the other{pbe.xAndthep what Joluahad done vnto Fericho,andto wat
layed bpon them, fotbatcheplet none of them And they ope toozke wplpip , and went, and
efwape,nozremapne. Andebekpng ot hattbey made them elues embafladours,¢ tober e(thew . -
tokealpuc,ebrougbebpm to Folna. And when tptapies ano) Olde fackes pon their Alles g wpne
n madeanendeofflapinge,allthein« bottellegolde,and rent and wone, and olds clou


k


abiters of atin p felde of pivildernefie,wher ted thoes dpon thep2 fete, and thep2 rapimente
they chaled them, when thep were all fallen on wag olde, and alltbep2 peoutfion of bzecd wag
the edere ofp werde, Dntyll thep were Waed, dzped vp,and hoozcd . Andthep came bnto zo-
all the ACcaclites returned pnto Pat, efinoteit fuainto the bootte, to Gilgall, andfapde vnto
ineeedacat tbe teres. And allthat fell that o plepa a Jirael: we become
Dave, bothe of men and women, were twelue f
f thoufande,enen all themen of dat. | of Ji
4€02 Jolua lucked not bis andbackeagapn scupte:peraduenture thou dwelletamõge vs:
 Sohich be fretched out vp P{pere,ontplhebad andthen otve can 3 make peace wpebthes
Parr. vtterlpe deftroped all the enbabptonrs of pat. And thep Capde nto Folua : we are chp fer:
UCEF-C x Oynelp thecattell atdtbetpople of peptic, 3f- nauntes . And Solua lapde nto them agapne:
gacltoke unto théfelucs, accozdpnge wntotbe what aveperand tobetice com pes Thep aulwe-
wmode of the Lozbd, whpch becommaunded 70- red bpm: Fra Verp farre countrpe thy feruati-
iua. And Fofua fet Hatonfp2e, and madeit an tegarecome Fo: the name of the Lod thp Gov:
pepe foz eucr,anda wpldernetic,cuen buto thys for we haue bearde P Famece(cetnepower) OF Him, yo
bape. Andthekpna of Haihehangedonatree, gallthathedpoin srots all hat pepe to
ie two


P L eee


The Gibeonites. Jota. o.b.


Lumii! thetivox kpnges ofthe Jmozitesthat wer be: g a 120 itfoxtoned, thart when Ado F


(Ey, Weze@ niscdech kynge of Ferulale had
AAA tya beard how zolua bad tabe Dal
Uperfoze, ourecldergandalltheenbabptours fase, A
of ourecontrepe fpaketovs,fapinge: take bp- KOENA Wap) tbat*as he haddone to Fericho yorms.oie
taples wptb pouto ferue bythe wape, andgoo Py EANNA \ ig ber kpuge. enë lobe baddone and, buia
mete tbem, and fape vntothem:weare pour lters Sese to Daig der kpnacand howe
naunteg. Andnow make pe acouenaticof peace enbabytourg of Gibeon had made prace Wyr
_wpth vs. bps ourefoode of bzeade, toctoke Flraell,and were amongethem.thep feareder=
Lpth vs oute of oure boules whotte,thedape cedpnglpe for Gibconwas agreate cptye, ag
wedcpartedtocome vntopou. Lut nowe bes anpcptie of f kpngpome aes greater then
holde. itis deed vp Ehozcd. Sndthelebottels Iat,and ali the me therof were verp mpadtye.
ofwr ne wbpch twetplled, were new:andfethep xpberFoze Adonizsedech kynge of Jerutale tent
berent . Andthele oureqarmentes Ethocs, are nto obambynge of igeb20n,and onto Piria
wone foz oldencs, bp the realon of thecrcea= kpngcof Jarmuth, g vuto Japhia bynge ofla
dpnge longe tournep. chis and puto Dabir kpng of Eglon, lapinge:
“notbementobe of thep2 vitaples,andcoun- Come vp vntome,thelpe me,p Wemape aps
celed not wptb the mouth of theLogde.And Jo Gibeon: fozthep paue made peace pth zolua
ig.reppia, a made peace wWpth them, and + made cout- andwith p chpldzé of glrael. Tberfore thefpue
| natit wptd tbem, that they Wulde be fufferedto kpngegofthe Amopites, thebyn eot Ferulalé,
| lpuc: antphe Lozdes of thecOgregacpon fware the kpng of Hebzon, the Bpnge o Jarmuth, the
pnto them: And itfortuned, that-ut.datesafter png of Lachis andthe kynge of Eglon gathe
thep had made peace wpth them, they bearde red them (clues togptber: thep w alrpett holtes
thep wer thepz nepgbboures,ethatthep dwelt andbelieged Gibeon, g made arre agaputt it.
amonge them, And the chpldzen of Yracltoke  AWndthemenof Grbconfent vnto yolua,and
& tbepz iournep g cam pnto thepzcptyesptbpzde tothe boofte of Gilgall, fapinge : wpthdzawe
| dap q their cities were Gibeon, g Caphira, 25e- notchp pandefrom thp feruaunteg, come vpta
roth kariath Jarim. And pcbildze of Ffrae ys,tofane vs:¢tohelpe ps.seozall thekpuges
flewetbenot,becaule p Logdes of Pcigregacpd of the Amosites wbpch drocll in the mountap=
hadfwozne onto the bp p Lorde Godot Hracl. neg are gathered togpeher agapnite bs.
And all p multitude murmured againtt p Lor- Andfo Jotua alcended from Gilgall, Ye and
Deg. Wutallp Lozdeslapd dntoallpcongrega all chepeopleof warre wyth bpm, and all the
spon: webauc wone vntothembp the Lozd¢ men of mpagbt,and the Lopde tapd nto Jolua: ¢
godof Fraell,andtbherfozewemapenothurte feare themnot, fo: J baue Delpucred theminto
them. Wut this wetvill doto them. Werwyllet thyne bande. Nepther ball anp of them ftande
«p them lpuc, leftewzath be bpon vs becau coff agapnitetbe . Jolua therfore came puto tbent
othe which welware vntothem. And P Lozdes fodepnip,and went vp from Gilgal allnpgdte.
> peu prir,b APDE DNEO thbemagayne: Let themlpue, xand And the Lo troubled them before Jfracl, and
; H? pewe wood, tdw Water vntoalltpecogrega Newe them wptha greate flaughterat Gibeon,
cepon thepdpdasthe Logdeslapdevntotbem. and chated them alonge the wape that goethe
And Jolua fent foz tbem, and talked wptb ppto Wetbozon, andfmote them to Elaka and
p them, andfapde : Wwherfoge pauepebegpled ys Makeda. Andit foztuned, that as thep fled fro
: fapne:Wwedtbelfarre from pou, wWhanpe dwell Frail, and werein the gopnae Downe to Wr-
amonge DS and nowe arepe curled, andthere thozon, the Lode calte Downe greate tones
thal not feale to be of pou, bondmeé g bewers ot from Deane bpon them, wntpll Efaka. And ther
Sood sdzawers of water for houle ofmp god weremo deed withhaple ones, then thep were
And thep anfwered Jotuaandflapde:it was whom thechildec of Frael lewe wò the fwerde
tolde thp feruauntes, howe that the Lorde thy Thenlyake Jofua befoze the Loze, inthe
Godhadcommaundedhisleruaunte Wolesto dape when the Lorde ye npg the Amozptes
abion alltbeland,and todetropealltheen- betot the chplozen of Firaell, and Hefapde itt
0


ponde Jordane , Schon bynge of Helbon, and
Dg kpnge of Bal ee Aftharoth


ge Se =


abitourestherof out of pourelpabt, and ther: thetpabt of sracl.«counne fade thou fil vpo
xe he were ercedpngelozeaftapdecy(sorrere- Gibeon, and thou Moone, in Aialon, Andthe Eroa
upte)foz ourelpuesat the pzefence ofpou,ebaue Sunne abode,and the Mone tode pll, pntpll
none thys thpnae:andbepolde the arein thyne f people aučged them (elues vpo therr enempes
bande, as tt femetp gan? andepgbte in tbpne Fsnot this wee inp boke of the rpabtcous
epestodovntovs,fod0. — ieee pe tonne (Flay) abode in the mpooe of bea
_” Andeuenlo pd he vntothem,andrpd bert uen and pated not to go vowne bp the {pace of
outeofthebande of thechplozenof Ffracll and anboledape. And there wasna pape lpke that,
thep fleme them not. And Jofua made them P beforcit, oz afterit, thatthe Lozbebearde the
{ame Daye hetoers of wod, tdzalwersofthatce yopce of ama. forthe L020 fought foz Alracil.
forthe conqreqacys fo? paulter of God vnto. And Foluaretourned,andal trael wieh bint
thpsdape, inthe place wobped godfpuldechol, pntothebott of Guigal:but P fpue kpnges fied, *
! CThe.r.Chapter. and wers bpd ina caucat Makeda. And tt was
© Zhe Amozites ave ouercome of Jola, Zt rapueth tones told Jofua of one, fapinge : the fyue bpnges are
Ede (onne Landeth spl. Whe.d.Lepnges are hanged, foude bpd ina Caue mbpcbis at ber
A ' ofna


TiebLBynges whont


Folualapderoule great ones bpon themouth
of the caue,and fet menby it, Fo? to kepe them.
And tande penot pli, but folowe after pour
enempeg and fmpte all the bpndemott: And fu:
fretbem notto entre into thepe cities fog p Lord
oure God hath delinered them into pour band.
And it Foxtuned when Jofua andthe childzen of
Fraellbad made an ende of lepenge them with
anereebpng great laupot tpllthep twere wa-
ted, the relte that remapned of them, entred in-
to walledcptpes.
And all the peoplereturnedto the hotte,to
Jofua at Makedainpeace,neptberdpod is ma
moue bps tonge agapnit the chplozen of Ftrael.
Then lapde Jotua: open the mouth ofthe caue,
and bapnge out thefefpue kpnges Dito me oute
of the caue. And thep dpd lo , and bzought thofe
fpuekpnges pntobpin oute ofthecaue euen the
kpnge of Jerufalem , the kpuge of Hebzon, the
kpnaeof Jarmuth, the bpnae of Lachps, and
the kpnae of Eglon. |
Æe Andit foztuned, that when they broughte
oute thofe kypnacs vnto Zolua: Jofua called foz
allthe men of $fraell and fapde unto thechete
of tbe men of warre, whpeche went wpth ppm:
come nere, and put poure Fete bpon the neckes
_  ofthele kynges . And thep came neve of oo
thep2 fete vpon the neckes of them. And Folna
fapde vntotbem.Pe Hall not feare noz be fapnt
bected:2But be tronge and plucke Yp poure Det-
tes,fo2 thus pall the Lozde do to all poure ene-
mpes agapnite whom pe fpgbte.
And then Jolua (mote them,and Rewe them,
and banged them on fpue trees . And thep Dan-
ged ipil vpon the trees wutpll the euenpnee.
Andat the gopng Downe of the funne tt totu-
nedthat Joina gaye commaundement,and thep
soru biy,e ORC them Downe of the «trees, andca tethem
intotbecauc, (wobere inthep bad bene bpd) and
laped ffones in the canes mouthe , wbpcbe re-
mapne vntpll thbpsdape. |
And that fame dape Jolua toke Bakeda and
{mote it wpth tbe edge of thefwearde, and the
eutere» BYNG therof alfo x deftroped be vtterlpe ,wpth
alltbe foules that were therin, and let noughte
rem es A An pore totbe AA WMakeda
otua pin XAS De Dd Onto the bpnage or Fericyo. |
Fouse hen Jotua went from Hakeda,andall Ji-
raell with bin wnto Libna, and fought again
Libna.And the Lozddelpuered tt andthe byng
therof into the bande of Alracll: and be tmotett


Myth theedaeof the Cwearde,andalltbefoules 3


that were therin 9c let nougbte remapne init,
but dpd dnto the kpnge therofas he dpa vnto
the kynge of Jericho. $

And Jolua departed from Libna, and all Ji-
raell wpth
affaultedtt. And the Lozddelpucred Lachps m=
tothe bande of Fracl,wbpch toke it the feconde


daye and {note it with the edge of the fteearde,,


and all the foules that were therin dopna accep
Dyngetoall,as be bad Done to p cptie of Libna.
‘hen ho2am kyng of Geler came vp to Delpe
Lachys: and Jolua (mote bymand pps people,
vatpllnougbte remapned of bpm.


SFolua.


their lande dDpd Jolua take at one tpme:becaule


pnto Lachps,and befieged it, €


Foluadeflroyed
And frö Lachps Jolua departed, ynto Egli, |
and all Jlraell pth ppr. anea beliemed it,- |
andaffaulted it, andtoke it the fame dape, and |
{mote it wopth the edge of the {tearde, and all |
thefoules that were therin be btterlp defFroped
the fame dape, accozdpnge to all that De bad
done fo Lachps.
And FJolua departed vp from Eglon andall
Birael with bym, pnto Heb. And thep fought
agapnife tt, and when thepbhadtakenit, thep
{motett wptb the edgeofthelwearde, andthe =.
kpnye thero€, andal the tovones that pertepned
toit,andall the foulesthat were therin, and be
lefte nought remapnpnge : but dpdaccozdpnge
toallas be bad doneto Eglon , andderopedit
ptterip,andalltbeloules that there therin,
And Folna returned, andall Jraellwpth G .
bym to mabir,andfoughtagapnttit.And whë
be had taken it,and thek png therof, and all the
townes that pertepned therto, thep fnote them
wth the edge of the Cwearde, and Weterlpde-=
ftropedall thefoules that there therin, nepther
let be ougbteremapne. Guenashe dpd to Pe-
bzon ,fohedpd to Dabir andthe kpngetherof,
as of geen to Libna and ber bpnge.
Jolua therfore (mote all the byll countrepes,
and the fouthe contrepes, and the vallepes, and
the bplifpdes,¢ al thep2 bpnges,andlet nought
remapne of themt,but vtterlp deftroped all that
* bzeathed , as the Lozde God of Flraell com- Deute.rr.e
maunded . And Jolua mote them from Cades
barne wnto Alah, andallthecountrepe of Go=
fan,cuen bnto Gibeon. And thole kpnges and


t


the Lozde God of Flrael foughte foz Frat.
And Jofua and all Flracll retourned ynto the
bofte that oe Sigal i
lis? T Eye taerek of p aah sai isnt

Peay, EERI it Fortuned, that when Ja- 3%
VIES qa; bin ktpnge of Haso: ba Bea x


Mek
Tarna Ce


agreatenombze wpth bozles charrettes erce x
dpngmanp. Andal thele kpnges met feather
and came and pptched togpther at the waters


ppon


The.rretBynges
pon them. Ind the Lorde SOD tbem into
the bande of Ffracll:and thep [mote them, and
chaled them Ynto greate Sidon, and vnto the
Wwbhot waters, and vnto the valepe of Mispa
whbpcheis Eaffwarde : and finote them vntpll
they had none remapning of thé. 2nd Jofua did
wntothé,as the L020 bad bim:be houqhed their
pouezan burnt tbep2 chareettes wprh fpre.
_ And Jolua at that tyme turned backe toke
Hasoz,s {mote the kpng tberof wpth p (wearde
And Haso before tyme was p bead of all thole
kpngoonics. ¥nd thep fmoteall the foules that
were therin topth the edge of thefiwearde, vt:
tetlp Deffropengall :¢notbpnge Leah pri ot
wasletremapn. And be burnt Ha3s02 with fp2e
andall the cptpes of thofe Bpnaes, and all the
kpnges of them dpd Folua take, and finote thé
Withp edge of f wearde, vtterly deftroient be
ero.rriti.o ¥ as Holes theleruaunt of p Lozdcomaunded.
errr ut Firaell burnt none of the cptpes that
~ a tode Epy tn their hrégeb, flaue pazo onlp that
Folna bucnte. And all thelpople of the fapde ci2
tees and the catel,the chpldzen of Flrael caught
wnto them felues. Sut the men onelp thep {mot
wpe the edge of the fwearde yntpll thep bad
Deitroped the,neptber left thep ougbtetbat bad
baeath. As the Lozde commaunded Moles bys
feruaunt,fo did Hofes commaunde Jolua, and
euč lo dpd Jotuaxlo that he minp Hed no worde
of allthat the Lode commaunded Hofes.
Andlo Jofua toke all thelande, the bplies
and all the foutb countrepe, and all the lande of
Golan.and the lowe countrepe,and the plapne,
and the mountapne of Frael and thelowe coi-
trepe of the fame , euen from the mounte of par-
tpnge, that goeth vp to Drir onto the plapne
of Oadin the valepe of Libanon, ynder mount
Hermon. Andal the binges of the fame be toke,
andfmote them. And fewe them.
D ‘Joluamadewarre longe tyme topthtbole
~ Kpnges:neptbher was there anp cptie that made
eace opth the chpldzenof Blracil, faue thofe
‘etbites thatenbabited Gibeon, and therfoze
all otver they toke with battaple,fo2 it came of
the Lode, whpch dpd barden thep2 bertes tbat
thep (huldecome againtt Firael in battaple and
tbat thep Mulde deftrope them dtterlpe, and
bew the no mercp, but tobzpng thé to nought:
Asthe Lozdecommaunded Boles.
and that fame feafon came Jolua, andde-
ftroped the Enakites oute of the mountapnes:
Ramelp out of Pebzon, Dabir, Anab, and oute
of al the mountapnes of Juda, and out of al the
mountapnes of Flraell. And Jolua deftroped
them btterlp, wpth ther cptpes. Chere was not
one Cnakite lefte in the lande of the chplozen
xe potia OF Flracll, onelpin Xiah, * Geth, and Aldon,
thereremapned of them. i
And Jofua toke p pole lande,accozdyne to all
the Lozdfapde unto Doles , e Jolua qanert
sau.rrbi.t, £02. pofleffpon wnto Flraelxaccozding to theirt
partes ¢trpbes: g the landerelted from warre,
ru.Cbhapter


C Che.ru.Cp
© What kpnges Jolua andthe copinsen of Fe
KENED weep e were in nom ze. eri, i s Maci


Deel. pe


Hole


$E0. bi.
rial Dele are the khpnges of theland.which A
spaice childzen of Ffraelfinote and poffet
A eeu fedthepz lande , onthe other {pve Foz-
Ces Dan eaftwoarde from the rpuet Arnon,
bnto mount Darmon andall the plapneecatte-
warde. x Schon kpnee adh Smozttes, tbat eumrric
biveltc in Hefvon, andruledfrom Aroer, whpch Deut.
ts belpde the rpuer of Arnon, # from the mpodole
of the rpuer, andfrom balfe Gilead vnto the rp-
uer Jabok , whpcheisin the bozdze of the chyl-
dren of Ammon. Andfrom the plapne Yuto the
fee of Cencrotheaftewarde, and unto the fee in
the plapne:euen f falte fee caftewarde, the wap
to etb Jelpmoth, and from the fouthe ynder
Fbetprpnges of hod Ae |

And the coafte of Da brng of Waflan whych 35
Was of the remnaunte of the Gpauntes, and
diwelteat Afaroth, and Edzal, andrepgnedin
mount Harmon, andin Salcad:and in all Ba-
fan, vito the bozdze of the Gelurites, g the da:
chatbites,¢ halfe mount Gilead, vnto the boz-
ders of Sehon kynge of Melbon. + oles the cum. rre
feruaunt of the Lozde ,ethe chplozenof ¥raell vids SE
{mote them,+¢ sy eek haere theXLord, 2


ee ee


@.reritf.r.
gaue thettlanbde foz a poleon yntothe Rube Fotu.riit.b


nites, Gaddites, and balfe f tribe of Aanafles Po"
Cele are the Bynges ot tyecountrep whpch
ofua andthe chplozen of Ziracl (mote on this
pde Jordan , ealkcwarde, from the playne of
Gad, whpche is inthe valepe of Libanon : even
wnto the partynge mounte that goethe vp to
Heir . WA bpche lande Folua auc vuto che trp- €
bes of $lracl to pofleffe, to enery man bis parte:
in the vpper lanve,andnetherlande, in plapnes
and bpll fpdes , in the wpldcrneffe, and fouthe
counttepe:the cthptes, the Amozites,the Cå-
nanites,p Pcrelites, P Peuiteg g p Jebulites:
*Tbekpnge of Fericho:was one.s The kpng
of Hat whpch ts belpde Wetbel:one. Chexkyng momsa Ste
of Jerufalem: one. Che kpnge of Hebzon: one. Focu.vii'a
Che kpnge of Jarmuth:one. The kpnge of Lar Aoeu.duta
chys:onc. Che kynge of Eglonone. The png
of Gaeser : one. The kpnge of Debir: one Che
kpnge of Gcder:one. Che epng of Hozma: one.
Che kpnge of Acad:one. The kpnee of Libna:
one: The kpnge of Fdullam:one.Chebpnee of
CHakeda:one. Che kpnee of Bethel: one. Che
kyng of Thaphuab:one. The kpng of wepher:
one. Che kpnge of Aphek : one. Chekpnage of
Lasaron:one. The ipnge of Dadon:one. The
ipnge of aloz : one. Che kpnge of Simrom
inero:one Ehekpng of Achfaph:one. The king
of Thaenach:one. Chekpna af A)eqivdo: one.
Whe king of Hacdes:one. The kpng of Jokneã
of Charmel:one. The kpnge of Doz,inthe coun
trep of Doz:one. Che kyng of the nacpos of Gil
gal:one. Che spugof Chirsa:one. Au P binges
COTE topeni ih i
tiia ha -
qota is camm ants to erii €h 7 Fence Jiraci
geg Olua was olde, € ftrpken in pereg, a X
Cy Aey fapde vntopimthou art olt g
eg ailriben in pereg q thereremapneth pet
aie icedinge muche lande to be polepi.
This igp lande ý pet remaineth:all the regiona
l cFthe


of the Pbilifpnes:and all Gelurt :from Atlus
Which ig onthe out warde parte of Eqppte: wn-
tothe bogders of Meron nogtbwarde., whpcde
lande is counted bnto Cananie euen fpue logde-
Myppes of the Pbilitines , p Afathites, Aoo-
tbites, Alcalonetes,Getbites, Akaronites,and
the uptes. And from theCouth:all the Lande of
the Cananites,and the caue chat is belpde the
Spdonianes,cuen onto Apphek and to the bog
ders ofthe Amozptes. And the lande of Giblp=
tes,and all Libanon,towarde thefunne rpfpng
from theplapne of Gad wndermounte Hermo,
pntylla ma come to Hemath:all f enbabitours
of the bpll countrep from Libanon wnto p wbhot
waters:andaill the Sidontanes, will J calf out
from befozetbe chplozen of Alracil: only fe that
thou inanp wopledeutde it bp Lot vnto the Ffrae
lites, to enberite as 3 baue commaunded the.
Nowe therfore deupde thps lande toenherite,
wnito the npne trpbes and the balfe tribe of a-
nales. ffozwpth the other palfe the Rubeni-
tes and the Gadbites haue recepucd thep2 enbe-
au. rerti¢ titatice,xwbich Holes gaue them beponde Jor
Deut.tg.d, Dane call warde: eué as oles the feruatit ofp
Lozde qauethem: from Aroer that lpeth on the
bapm of therpuce Arnon, and from che cptype p
is inthe mpdodctt of the rpuer. Andall the plapn
of <)edeba nto Dibon and all the cytpes of
Sebonbynge of the Amozptes , w)pche rapg-
ned in delbon,euen nto the bozb2¢ of the chpl=
Deen of Ammon: and Gilead, andthe bozder of
®eluriand achatt, and all mounte Hermon,
wptball alan vnto Salecah:euéall p byng-
Dome of Da in Walan, which cepgnedin Aipa
rothand Edzat: whycbe fame remapned pet of
the rete of the Giaunteg. Thele dpd oles
fmpte,andcaffethbemoute.
Meuerthelefle,thechplozen of Flracl expelled
not the Gelurites andthe Hachathites: wut p
Gelurites andthe Wachathithes dwel among
p Hraclites cuen yntpll this dape. Dnelp vuto
the trpbe of Leui, be gaue none enbevitaunce:
gu, po og ¥ But the offrynge of the Lorde Godot Ftraclt
FO OC ig thoy, enberitaunce,as be fapde bnto them.


Moles qaue vntothetrpbhe ofthechyldzenof |


Sola.


ofthe lande.
(thearde,amoiae other of them that were flapne

And the bozder of the chpldzen of Ruben was
FJordane wyth the countrepe that lpeththeron. `
‘bps was the enberitaunce ofthe chpldzen of
Ruben after thep2 bpnredes, cptpes and pplla-

ges pertepnpnge therto.

And Boles aue enberptautce snto the D
trpbeof Gad euen bnto thechpldzen of Gad
be gaue bp thep: bpnredes . Andthep2 coaltes
were daer. and all the cptpes of Gilcad and
balfetbelande of the chpldzenof Ammon unto
Arocethatlpethbefoze Rabba.Andfromipef= *°
bon unto Ramoth, Wasphah,and Wetonim: e
and from Wabanaim tunto the bozdzes of Libir
And inthe valepe they bad Wethbaram Geth-
nimra,Socoth,and mopoon feel of thekpng-
bome of Sebon kynge of Helbon, onto Jordan
and the coaftes that Ipe theron euen Dnto the
edge of the fee of Cencroth,on the other {pde Jo


4


dan caltewarde . bebe Bey the enberitaunce
the chpldzen of Gad,atter thepz kpnrepes, their
cptpes and ppllages. ial
And Boles gaue enberitaunce Vnto the
halfe trpbe of st)anafles. And thps was the pof
icilpon of the balfe tepbe of Danafles bp thep2
kpnredes. Thep: coatte as from G)abanaim,
euen all Balan, and all the kenqdomeot Dg
kpnge of Malan , and all the townes of Jair
be Spe cin Balan, euen thectcoze cy tpes, and
balte Gilead, Aaroth, and Edzat ,cptpes of
thekpnadome of Dg in Balan x whpche pers me.rrrit.g
tepne bntothe chpldzenof Wachir the lomme of
anaes euen the balfe poecpon of the chpldz¢
of achic bp thep2 kpnredes.
‘Chefe are the thpnges whpch Soles bpd diftri=
bute inthe feldes ot oab on p otber {poe Joz-
dan oueragaint Fertcho eLwarde.+ Sut Dato Hor,ro14.b
the tribe of Leni, poles gaucnoncenberitatice
Fo? the Lozde God of Firaell ig thep2 enberi-
taunce,xas be fapde ynto them. Kuz 08
C faled — open e t
= En A E sia ge (pat Mas prompled bom


g Ruben enbderttaunce, accozdpnge to thep? bpn- gay Ge


redes. And rhep? coat was fro A rocr that lpeth
onthe bancke of therpuer Arnon, andfromthe
cptiethat ts inthe mpddelt of the rpuer, andall
e plapne tobrcbeis bp Dedeba, Helbon, with
alltbepztownes that lpe intbeplapne: Dibon
and the bpll places of aall, and the boufe of
Waalmeon:and Jabasah, and wedemoth and
ephaabhhiviathaim, Dabamath,andsarath
sabarinthemounte of tbe vallepe, the boule of
eoz, and the{pepnges of the bplles:and Weth:
pheoz , andthe ipepniges of Pbalgab : and We-
thiclimoth:andall the cepties of the plaine. And

all the kpngdome of Sehon Bynge of the Amo-

rites, whpcbe repqned tn Helbon, whpche Bo-
feslinote + wpththe Lordes of dHadtan, Eui

PUFA 9% eken sur and Mur and Reba,the which were
dukes of Sebon ,dwellpnge in the countrepe,

And Walaam alfo the fonne of Weoz the forh=
faper,dpd the chplozen of Jiracl Rape wptb the


ia Kf NUFF ALD


i
i
fed


Frbi.E,
FEU. Ge


T


phzatm . And therfoze thep gaue no parte ynto
the Leuptesin thelande, taue cptpesto dwell
Sap Oene bible Aah foztheirbeas

. Attell. x As tHe Lorde commaunded gu.rery.c
Woles: cuen fo thechplozen of 3fracll bpd whë 4
thep deupded the lande.

And the chplozen of Juda came vnto FJofua 45

in Gilgal.


a
Ee eee 5


JA rbiH. i


uriia. in Gilgal.xAnd caleb the lonne of Jephune the
enelite fapde ynto bpm: thou wotteft what p
Lozbefapd onto Holes the må of God, about

gu. rita. mp Matter and thpnein Cades Warne. Forty
pere olde Was 7 when Soles the feruaunt of
Loabdelent metrom Cades barne toelppe out
lande: And J brought him worde agapneeutas
if Was in mpne perte. Peuerthelefle mp bzethzë
that went vp with me , Dplcouraged the bert of
the people. and J folowed the Lorde Goo.

€ And Wofes ware the fame dape-fapings the
auri.. lande oberon thp fete paue trode, Hall be thpne


Detit enberitatice and thy chpldzens foz cuer, bpcaufe


tee ror athe ap one lb) Soh a rei

ene, DELOD Dath wepte me alpue(as Delapd)xthps

EELO Footy and fpue peres euentpns the Lozdefpatse
thps wozde unto Boles, whple the cbpldzen of
Flracll wandzed in the wploernetie. And nowe
lo Jamtbps dape Fourfcoze and fpue pere olde:
‘and petamas ftronqe atrbpstpme,as 4was
when W one g lene me:loke bowe fronge J thas
then, fo tronge am J nowe, whether Jaota
warre 0} tocomeagapne,

D fLowe therfore gpue methismoñtipne wherof
the Lozde fpake inthat dap, fo2 thou bardeftin
that dape bowe tbe Enakime arethere,andtbe
cptpes great and walled. Peraduenture p Lod
Wpll be wpth me, g 3 pall beable to dzpue thé
ontas the Lode lapde: 4nd Jolua blefled brm,
and gane bute Caleb tociompat dephans pe-
bzon toenberit : And Hebron therfore became p
enberitaunce of Caleb the fonne of Jephune the
Lienelite, yntotbis dap:bycaule he folowed the

gotue,rb.c L-02De Good of Firael. And thename of A ego
wag calledin olde tpme , Rariab Arbe. Ito: the
fame wasa Creat manamongethbe Cnakins.
Audthe lanveccated from warre.


C The.rbv.Chapter.
A @ The lotte ofthe chplozen of guba, and the names of


the ipiis and bpiiages of che Lame.


y Gast ps was the lotte ofthe trpbe of the
id A B VA covlDen of Juda bp thep2 kyneedes
A D Namelp, towarde p border of Edom
A Sue uthe wylderneffe of sin, fourhward,
euen from the vtmoft parte of the fourth coate.

aupreiie X And tbep2 Couthecoatke was from the bzpnie
——- pF PLalt (ee, froarocke thatleaneth fouthiard.
And it wente out to the Couth{pde towarde the
gopng-pp to Acrabim and wet along tozinna,

op agcenbpd vp onthe fouth{pde bnto dades
bartte:and went along to Hesron, and went vp

to Adar, andfeta copafleto Rarca . Hrothence

wente it alongeto Asmon,andreached wnto the

tpuerof Egypte and the ende of that coal thas

onthe welte{pde. And this ig thepz fonth coatt.

w _ Thepea coat is the falt fee euen Ynto the
edge of Jordan . And thepe bojar intbenozthe
quarter was from the rocke of the fee and from

odan. And tbe lame bozder wente


the edge of:


‘pp to Wetbbagla,and went a longe bp f nozth=.


Spde of Wetharabah, and vp from thence tothe
one of oben p Conne of Ruben. Andagapn,

` the fame bozder went vp to Dabir from the va-
Icpe of Acoz, and fo nozthwarde, turnpnac to-
warde Gilgall, that lpetp befozetbe gopng vp


Hola, |


OVU.
to Adonim, tohyche ts of the fouthe {pde of the
tpuer. Andthe lame border went Dpto the Wwa-
ters of the fountapne of the Sonne, andended
atthex well of Rogell.And then went yp tothe iier, i.t
valepe of the fonne of Benn, cuen ynto plouth
(pde of Jebuli:the fames Jerufalem. And then
went Dpto the toppe of the bplle that lpeth be-
foze the balepe of Pennon wetetwárde, and bp
the edge of the balepe of the Giauntes noztbe-
warde: And then it compafleth from the toppe -
of the byll unto tie fountapne of the water of
Pephthoah, and goth out at the cpties of move
Ephzon:and dratocth to Baala, Whpchets bis .. ,
tlathtarim,ox (2 et is a eptie of wondes-) and EDentet
compafleth From Salab welkard bnto mounte
Heir, and then qocthealonge onto the {poe of
mount Jarim, whpcbe(is Chefalon)on pnozep
fyde. And commeth dowone to Wethfames, and ©
oth to Ghamnab, and gothe out agapne bnto
$ fpe of Akarõnozthward:And tben drawetp
to Secroné goth alonge tomount Ealah,and
gocth outeat Jabnel:andtbeendesof p coattes
caueat p weft fee. And the weft bower was the
greate (ce, ¢ tbe fame coat twas p coat of p chil
childzé of Juda rounde about in their kinvedes.
Ard vito Caleb the fonne of Fephune dpd
Folua qeuea parte amonge the chpldzen of Ju-
Da,acco2zdpnge tothe mourhe of the Lozde, euen zs
x kpriatbarbe of the father of Enock, See Hor.pitit, D
cpticts Hebzon. And Caleb droue thence p thze
fonnes of Enack, Scfai,and Abia, and Chal
mai, whycbe were, the fonnesof Enack.Andbe
wente vprbence,to the enbabitoures of Dabir.
And the name of Dabirin p olde tpme was ka-
riath fephar. (Spat isarptie oftetters-) AnD Caley go
fapoe:xbetbat{mpteth kariath lepper, and ta- gunte.t.c
keth it :to him wpll 3 gene Aclay my doughter £t
towpfe. And Dthnicl, the Conne of enes, the
bother of Caleb tobeit .AnDbe gauehbym Ær-
fab bypsdoughterto wpfe : Andas the wente in
pnto bpm, Ge moued bpm, toalke of ber father
afeide. andthe alpg ited of per afle.And Caleb
fapde onto ber, what apleth the ¢ Who anlive-
ved -gpucine a dleffpng:fo2 chou batt geuen me
afouth-x( and vee )lande: geuemcalfolppinges s,
Of water. AnD ge gaue her fpzvnges of water,
both aboue benet. Tips isp enherpraunce of
the tepbeof ý chplozé of Juda by ehcir inredes.
And the vtmok cpties of the trpbe of the chyl-
d:en of Juda, totard f coaftes of Edom fouth-
warde were: Rabsel, Eder and Jagur: Lina,
Dimonah,and Adada:kedes, Hazo2 and Jeth-
nan:3ipb, Telem æ Waloth, Haz, Hadathad,
KRarioth Helron( whychis Has0z) Eman, Sa-
mi and @)oladah : Pasargadah, Halmonand
wWethpheleth:palar ual, Werfabe, and 15430-
thab:aalab, Jim and Asen: Eltholad, Cecil,
and Hozma:zikelag edemenab y Henlenah: œ
Labaoth, Selim, Ain and wimon:alltbele ci-
tpcsarefiventpe andnpue wpththep2 villages
And in p lowe cõtrepe thep had CEaol,zarcah
æ Afena):soneah,Engani, Chapbuah e Ena:
ae Mould, Hocob,and Askah:Saarem,
dDithaim,Gederab, and Gederothaim : Foura
tenecptpes wrth thepz vpllages.


senån,


Cihcdeuilion


senam, Dadaab and Dagdalqad: Delcam
Wipaand Jebtbecl:Lachis, Bascath ¢ Egl:
Cabon,Labaman, ¢ Cethlis Caderoth , eth-
dagon, Paamahand Aakedah: Sprtenecp=
ties wopth thep2 vpllages. |
SE. Lebnab, Ether: Alan: Fephtbab, Anab, and
MezibAxeilab, Hapbesip , € WMarelah: npnecp=


tics wrth thep2 vyllages. Akron whertotones ;


and villages. from Akron and Fro the welt all
that lpethaboute Wood w they vpllages. Al-
Dod Wwpth her cownes and bpllages.Asah with
ber townes and vpllages, cuen Vnto the rpuce
of Egppteand the greate (ee was thepe coatte.
Andinthe mountapnes, they bad Samir FJa-
thir , and Socob, Danah: and aria lenathe,
whpebe is Dabir:Anab,Ethemoh, and Anim,
Eozen, Volon, and Gilob, a leuen cptpes wpth
& thep: vpllages. Arab, Dumabh,and Eleam: Ja-
min. Betbapbuab ant Apheab: Humatah,and
Rariatb arbe:wbpehe is cbzon and siog: npne
cptpes wptbtbep? vyllages . Waon, Carmell,
Di b,and Jutab: Jefraell, Jukadan, and Sa-
noch: Cain, Gabaab,and Thamnab:tencptpes
wptbtbep2 vpliages. albull, Bethsur, ¢ Ge-
doz: Waarath, Berbanoth,and Elthecd: Spre
cities With their villages. Leaviath Waal which
s is Liariath Parimox checrtie of wondesand Darab
 ba:twocptpes wtb tbhep2 vpllages.

Jn the wylderneffe thep bad wetharabad,
Heddinand Hacacah:Meblon, the citie offalt,
and Engaddi: Spre cpipes topththep2 vplla-
ges . Nenertheles, the Jebulites that were the
enhabiters of Ferulalé, conlde not thechiloze of
Juda cat oute. But the Febulitcs dwell with p

_ cbpldzen of Juda at Jerufalem wntothps dape.

CThe.cvi.Chapter. |
Tbe Lotte o; parte of Ephraim. ;

SEAS Care Ad the lotte of thechpldzen of J0-

a © li Ver fephfelle from Jozrdanbp Jericho,

: AG onto the water of Jericho Ealte-

KA Vag warde, and to the wildcrneffe that

RSs Sgoeth vp fro Jericho thozowe oute

mounte Bethel: and qoct)oute from ethel fo

Lug and runnethbealonge unto the borders of

. Arcimataroth: and gocth dotone agapue weft-

warde eucn to tbhecoafte of Japhlethi,and tnta

$ tbecoalte of Wethozon the nether, and to Ga-

foz, and the endes of thep2 coattes leaue at the

welt fee. And fo the chplozen of Jofeph Manaf-
fes and & phzaim toke thep2 enberitaunce.

And the bozder of the chyldzen of Ephraim
wag bp their kynred. Thep: border on the cat-
(poe, wag: Ataroth, Ador euen vnto Wethhozd
the ppper,and went out wellcwardeto a.

q Mathab onthe Nozthfpde, andreturneth Cafi-
warde dnto Thaanath Dilo and paft it onthe
Efffide wnto Jonoab, went downe from Jo-

- noabto Atharorh and Raarath, came to Fe-
richo, went oute at Jordan . And thepz border
went from Chapbuah weilwarde ynto therp-
uerkanab,¢ the endes were p welt iee. Chpsis
the enberptaunce of thetrpbe of the chplozen of
Ephraim bp thepz kpnredes . And the leparate
epties fog the childzen of Epbzaim koere amoi
p enberitaunce of the chpldzen of Manalles:cu f


Jofa.


thecpties toptbtbep: vpllages: And they draue
not out the Cananites that dweltin Gatoz:but
the Cananites Dwellamong the Gphzaites wn
tothps dape and ferue wnder tribute.
C'The.x vii. Chapter.

dhet lotte o; pozcpo of the hatte tepbeof gyanales. The
cananites are become tributaries to the Wlraclites. co anal
fes and @phzaimrequpre a greater porcpon of heritage.


== His was the lotte ofthe trpbe of Wa-
: y nalieg, wobpche was thexEldelt fonne A


pamo of sHanaties wobpche was the father |
of Gilead(and aman of warre)bad Gilead and
wafan. cops was the pottedtion of thereft of ý
chpldzen of )analles bp thepz Bpnredes: Ra-
melp, of thechpldzen of Abieser: the chpldzen of
Heleck-the chpldzen of Ariel:the chpldzeé of Si-
chem, the chplozenof epher:thechildzen of Se
mida : fo? thefe were the male chplozen of a-
naficsthefonnes of Joleph bp they2 kpnredes.
xButselapheadthe lonne of Pepher,thefonne


ofthe lande.


bid of Joleph.aAndMachir f Eld fonne Ser.


of Gilead:the fonne of achir,p fopne of a= eu. rroo


naleg, bad no fonnes but Daughters wbofena- roe


mesarethele:ebela, Noa, Pagla, Welcbaé 95
Thtrsa:wobpch came before Eleasar the peat,
andbefore Folna the fonne of Aun, and before
the Lozdeslapingx the Lo2dcommaunded Ho


feg to gene vsanenberitaunceamonge out bee= qu. pror.
theen.Andtherforzeaccozdpng torbe comma: o-*-FFrbe


dement of the L020, De qaue thé an enberitaiice
amonge the bacthzen ot thep2 father. And there
Felle ten pogcvons to Hanatles,belpde the lande
of Gileadand Balan, which is onthe other [pode
Jorda, Lecaule the daughters of Aanafles dpd
enberetamig bhis fomes. And Hanalles other
fonnes,bad tbe lande of Gtlead. nT ye
And thecoafte of Banafles was from Aer
to achmathath that lpeth befoze Sichem g
wenta longe on therpadt dande, euen vnto the
enbabitersof Entapbuab, and the land of Cha
phuab beloged to {anatles, which C baphua
is befpbe the bozder of <Hanafles, anv belpde
border of thecbpldzen of Ephzaim. And p coa
Defcended wnto the riuer Canah fonthward,cué
totberpuerof thecptpes of Ephraim, and be-
twcnethe cptpeg of Wanalles. The coafteof ¢
Janafles wente allo onthe nozth{pdeto theri-
uer, andthe endes of tt qo outattbhelec,fo tbat
thefouth pertapned to €Ephzaim, and the nozth
to Wanatles,and the fee ts his border. Ww t
inettetogetherin Alernordwarde, and ih Flac
carcaltewwarde . And Manaies yad in Flacar
andin Aier, Wethlean,and ber tovones: Fibled,
and bp: totones : andthe endabifoures of Doz,
wptbhthe totones pertapnpnge to thefame:and
the enbabitoures of Endo? wpth the tomnes of
the fame : and the enbabitoures of Chaanatbe
topth bertotones: andtheenbabitoures of a=
gedo Wyth the townes of the fame,cucn thze co-
trepes. Pet the chpldzen of Manafles coulde not
ouercome thole cptpes.2ut the Cana Like pres
fumed todwellinthe famelande.Meucttheleffe,
affone as the chplozen of Ffraell were wared
tronge thep put the Cananites wnder trpbute,
buterpelledDtpemnot. | QT
And pchplozen of Iolephlfpake onto Foha D
fapinae:


— The deutlion.


 {ntbelande of the bere


fapinge:tobp balte thou geuen me but one Lotte
and one po2zcponto enberet, fepng Jama great
people and foz as moche as the 1020 bath blef-
ed me bpthertorAnd Joluaanlwered them: pF
thou be moche people ,then gette the M3 tothe
woddecontrepe, and bpepare tor tbp felfethere
ifes and of the Giaun:
tes, pf mounte ed rte beto narowwe fo the.
Anodthechpldzen of Jatephtayde : The hpllis
not pnough foz vs: andalltbe Cananites that
divell in the lowe contrepe Dane charrettes of
pon, and fo bauc they that enbabtte Wetdlean,
and the totones of the fame, and thep allothat
dwell in pe valpe of Jesrecl. And Jolualapde
wunto the boule of Jofeph, Ephzaimand @a-
natles:pye be moche people, ¢ baue great power,
and fyall not therfoze bane one lotte. Cherfore
the bpll Halbe poures, andpe Hall cut Downe
the wodtbhatistrit: and theendes of it halbe
poures, pfpecatte oute the Cananiteswhpcbe
pane prencharrettes,and are verp ronge.
.  CTbe.rvitt.Chapter.
qcerten are fent to deupbe the landeto theother feien
trpbes. The lotte of the chpldjen of Gen Jamin, s


L
q
et ee, Gs
DENAN


\Md the whole congreracion of f chil-
‘Dien of Firaelcame together at Silo
jæ let bp ptabernacle ot witnefether,
jand the lade was infubteccyd before


them. And there remapnedamong p childzen o
pin rAd temic gu tcl n
thep2 enberitatice. And Jotua fapd vnto p chil-
dë of Sethe ache arepe fo llacke to come,
e poffeife the lande wbich the Lord God of pour
fathers hath geué pous Gene out froamog pou
fos cucrp ttpbethze men, that 3J mape lende the.
And that thepmape rple, and walke thozowe p
lande and Dpftribute tt accozdpnae to theenbde=
titaunce therof,and come agapne tome.
Andletthem deupde it puto chem meo lenen
parws. Jnd Juda (hall abpde in thep2 coat on
the fouth,and the boule of Jofeph thal tande in
tiep2coatteson pnozth. Delerpbe pe thelande
therfoze into leuen partes, andbzpnge the def-
cripcpo bether tome g 3 paleal lottes Foz poun
ere before p Lozd our God. Wut the Leuites
Pac no pace among po, f0,ebep altbode of
o2bi8 thetrenberitatice. + And Gad, g Ruben
g halfe p tribe of anafles haue receaucd their
enheritatice beponde Jordan ealtwarde, which
Poles the leruaunt of the Lorde gaue them.
- And the men arole, wente thep2 wape. And
FJoluachargedthem ý wet to deicribe the Lande
fapinge:Departe,andgothozotve thelande,and


belcrpbe it, come agapne . = bat J mape :


bere cafflottes Fog pou ydi
And p mendeparted walked thoro plande,


E anddelcrpbed it bp cptpes into lenë partes ina


booke andretournedto Jofuainto the hooft at
Silo. And Jolua cate lottesfo2 them m Splo
before the Lorde, andthere Jofua Deupdedthe
lande vito thechplodzen of Flrael, toeche thepz
porcpon. And the lotte of the trpbe of the chpl-
D2cwof Wen Jamin came bpaccopding tothep2
kynredes . Andthe coafte of thep2 lottecame
betwene thechpldzen of Juda andthe chplozen


Folia.


p Jebu


of Jofeph. And thep2 north coat wasfrom Foz
dan, and Went vp tothe l{pde of Jericho on the
nozthtpde, and tent vp thozowe the mountap-
nes weltwarde , andtbep ended at the wplder-
nelle of Dethaucn : and wente from thence to-
tard Lus euentop fouth {poe of Lus (the fame
is Wetbel ) g delcended agapneto Atrothadar,
nto thebpll thatlpcthbonthe fouth{pde of the
nepther wethbozon. Bnd proatt turneth thence
and compatleth thecozner of thefeefourbward,
cuen from the bpll that Iyeth before wethhozb
fouthtoard,¢ goeth oute at ixiriathbaal whpcb-
is tiiriath Jarima cptie ofthe childzenof Juda.
thps isthe toelte quarter: andthe fouth coate
gocthfro the edge of Kiriathtarim , and goeth D
oute wetwarde, andtbence it turneth top wa-
ter wrll of Repbthoab, and commeth downe
agapnetotheedgeofthe bpll, that lpeth befoze
thie valepe of the fonne of penton, euen intbe
valepeotthe Giauntes north tarde and delce-
deth into the valepe of Nennonbelpde Febulp
fouthtoarde,and goth dotoneto the well of Ro
ell ,andcompatethtrom thenogth, and goeth
Toth tothe well of the fonue,and departeth fro
thence to the places of Geliloth, wbpcbe are to
warde the gopnge bp nto Adomun:andeoeth
Dotone to the one of Boban the fonne of Ru-
ben: and then gothe alonge towarde the {pde of


£ the plapnenoztbwarde: and gotbe Downe into


theteldes:andgotbhalonge to the {pe of Leth-
baglab nozthwarde, andenduretp at the popnt
of the falt tee nozth therfrom., eucnat tbefoutb
ende of Jozban . Chpsisthe fouthe coatte.
And Jordan kepeth in thpscoalte on the eat-
[pde and thps is theenberitaunce ofthe chplozé
of Weniamin bp thepz coaltes rounde aboute
thozowe out thep2 kpnredes. Chele were the cps
tyes of the trpbes of the chpldgenof Beniamin
thorowe ont thep2 kpnredes : Jericho, Wetha-
glab,and the plapne of Kasis, Setbarabah, za-
marim, Wethel: Juim, harap, and Dphzab:
Chepar Ammona, Ophmi, and Gabai, twelue
cptics wptdthep? vpllages.Gibeon, Ramah, g
wero): Wasphab,Caphairah,¢ $038): Re-
ken, zarephel and Tharelab,sela, €leph,and
t whpehe is Jerufalem, Gibeath, and Ki-
tiath,fourten cptieg with thep2 villages. Thig
is the enberitaunce of the chyldzen of Beniamin
thozowe out they2 kpnredes.
The.ric.Chapter.


Che lottes o; partes ofzabulon, Hlachar, ae
Acpdedati,Dan,and Forua. jon, Jlachar, ater,


Eg Ad thefeconde lotte came out foz the W
‘cal ttpbe of  chpldzen of Spimeon bptbeir

Wage “A lbpnicedes. And thepz enberitaunce thas
ae Sin thempbdes of the enberitatice of the
bplozen of Juda. Andehep had inthepz enbert-
taunce, Werlabe, Have, and Golobap,Pasoz
Pinoa Sauer Wetbul g Hoz=
mab,sikelag, Bethmarcaboth and Hazetlulab
wWetblebacth, and Saruben , thpetene cptpes
sopth there vpllages.4im, Remon, Ether,and
Afan.foure cities withtbep2 villages:and ther
toalltbe billages tbat tocre rounde about thele
cptieg euen bnto 2alaatp, wWeoz and Ramath,
fouthward.


Ho. vty.


Thedeutfion.


fouthw aro. hye ig P enberitatice of p trpbe of
the chpldzen of {meonthoow outtbep2 Bpi-
redes. Dut of Y lotte of the chpldzé of Juda cant
theenberitaunce ofthe chplozen of imc. Eo?
theparte of the apple of Juda was to moche
foztbem: ¢ thertoze the childzen of Simeonhad
thep2 enberitaunce inthe enberitaunce of them:

And the thpzdelotte arote for thecbildzen ot
sabulon thozotwe out thep2 kynredes.. And the
coaftes of thep2 enberitauce cam to Sarid, and
went bp wekwa and to artalab,ereached
35 to pabaleth,.and came thenceto the rpuce that
lpeth before Jokneucn: and turned from Sarid
eattwarde rowarde the fonnerpfpnae wnito the
border of Chilloth Thaboz:and then goeth out
to Dabereth,and goth vp to Japhia: and from
thencegocth alonge eaftwarde,to Sethah. Fe-
pher, Ftbaband Jasi, € goeth to Remi, We-
thoar, and a2cop . And Heated itontheno2th
{poe to Mathan, endeth inthe palepe of Jeph-
thabel. Ano Jatath,Mabalol, Semron, sc0a=
lab and Wethlebé:tiveluc cities with their uil-
lagi g: Thps isthe enberitaunce of the chpli
of sabulon thozroWwe pute thep: bpnecdeg, and
thelearethecptics wpth thep? vpllages.

And the fourth lot came out fos p childzen of
fachar bp thete kinvedes. And thei coat Yas
Fcfraclah,Cafuloth,and Sunen. Hapharaim,
Sion, and Anabarath : Harabith kplion, and
Abeszrameth, Enganin, Enhadap, ¢ Beti:
phases. And his coatte rea chethto Thabo: and
Ss abasimahand Wethlames, tendethat Jo-
Dan: Sprtene cpties with their villages. Thig
ig the enberitaunce of the trpbe ofthe chplozeit
of Fachar bp theps kynecdes. And thefearethe
cpiieswpth tiep? vpllages.
€ And thefpitelottecam out foz the trpbe of
the chplozen of Afer bp thep2 kpnredes . And
tbeir coat was: Helkath Hali, Bett ¢ Achlap:
Alamelech,Amaad and A)ileal:e came to Cac
mel wettwarde, and to Sibo: , Labanath,and
turned towarde the fone rplpnge fo etbd-

on, andcommeth tosabulonandto the valepe
of Fephthabel,towardthe nozthf{pde of ethe-
mekand Regel, andgoth out onthe lyfte fpde
of fabul-and to Bebon, Robob, Ramon , and
Tanah, euen bntoqreate Siwon . And thenthe
coat furneth to Ramab andto the flronge cite
of 302,and turneth to Wosab, and endeth at the.
fee, bp the poftefipon of A h3tbah: Amab alfo €
Aphek and Robob : Civentyeand two cptpes
myth their villages. This is the enherttauce of
= thechplozen of After bp thepe kpnredes : Chele
arethecpties wpth thep2 vpllages. |

Ano the {prtelottecam out toz the chpldzen
of Mephtdalt bp their incedes. And theircoa
was from Pelephandfrom Clomtozaananint
damni, Nekeb and Aabnecl, even to Lakum, g
Doth qo Out at Jordan. Andthenthecoaketur-
neth wellardetoAfanoth Thabo, and then
qeth outfromtbeceto ukokab, andreacheth
tozabulon onthefouthlpde, and gocth to Afer
ontheweftlpde, and to Juda vpon Jordanto-
qoarde the fone rptpnge. And they? itronge ci-
tics ave zidin, ser Hamat, aca eCenicret,


Folua,


d thefcalloarethecpties and thep2 v


Adamah, wermah and 14302, Redeg, Eai, €
Enbhaso2: eron, agnelel:Io2en, wWethanad
and wethlames :npnetene cptpes el fi thep2
pillages. Chps is the enberptaunce of the teybe
ofthe childzen of MepHthali bp there SEREED ES:
ames..
And the feuenth lotte came out nate trpbe
ofthe chplozenof Dan bp thepz byuredes. And
he coatte oftbepz enberptaunce was :saraab,
haol,xarlames, Saclabin, Piats Fethlad:
Eqlon¢ Thenathab and Akaron: Citpebep,
Gibetho Waalath: Jebud Wanebarak ¢ Gaz
thermon, <)etericon and arcon, w the boder
tan lpeth befoze Japho. And the coattes of the
childzé of Dan wet out fro tbe . And the chplozé
of Dan went vp tofpahteagapnike Lelen, and
toke it,andfimote it Darth the edge of plwearde,
and cotiqueredit,and dwelt thertn,and called it
* Dan atterthename of Dan thep2 father.

This is theenheritaunce of the teybe of the
childzen of Dan in thepz kinredes:thels allo are
thecpties with thep2 villages. Capen thep bad
made anende of deupding p land bp her coattes
the chpldzé of Blvael gauean enberitatice vuto
Zolnathefonne of Nun amog them,accozdpng
to the woz0e oF the Aore id gauebim thecp=-
tie whpch be albed,cue* Chanath lerabi mone
Ephzaim And be bplte peptte and dwelt therin
+Chelcarethecnberptaunces whycbe Eleasar
the pzeatte and Zolua thefonne of Run andthe
auncient fathers of the trpbes of the childzen of
Grael deupdedby lotte in Siloh befoie? 020,
in p Doze of the Tabernacle of wptnetie , and fo
thep madean ende of Deupdpnae the contreve.

, ‘The.rr. Chapter. ‘

Cwbecpties of refuge o} Sauctuarpes.
ag pe Lozdalto fpake nto Jolua faping:
ý a fpeake tothe childzé of Flrael, and fape:
R x Appopnte out from among pou cpttes
of refuge, Where of F fpake vnto poubp phand
of Woles that the lear that killeth any perlon
pnwares  wnwpttpynglpe , mape flee thether.
Ahd thole Tipee S poure refuge from the
a nenger ofbloude. And perbat docth flee puto
one of tholecpties Wall itande at the entrpnge
a gate of the cptic,and Wall wewe his caule
intbeeares of the elders of the cptie.

And they Hall take bpm into the cptie onto
them and geuchym a place, that bemaps duel
amonge tpem.

And pE the auenger of bloude folowe after
hint, thep thal not deltuerthe fear intobis band
becante befmote bys Frendetqnozatlpe,and pa
ted bpmnot befoze tpme. |

nd be hall Dwell in the fapdecptie until be


@ ftande before the congregacponin twogement,
Hatt naplitbe death of ebe D 4


nd wn ¢ peate albe
intboledapes : foz then Wall the iearretourne,
and come bnto bps ownecptpe,and wnto bps
owne houle ,and nto thecptie from whence be
fied . And thep lãctified kedesin Galtle,imout
Aephtalt,and Sichem inmount Ephzaim,and
Jepzia tharbe ( wbpche is Hebzon) inthemoun-=
tapne of Juda. And onthe otherlpde Jordan
oner agami Jericho caftward, they appomt®

0302


ofthe lande.


D


Otorewite *
called, Pcp
tic off fox


i


. : a


qgub».pbtik `
g


Jorrriye `


mu. priii, b


x


sAu.crrh.e ‘ :
Deut pib


Deutr


Fatt Tro r


> ee


oe


Theneuttion


280302 tn the wylderneffe bpon the plapne, onte


D of the trp be of Ruben : and Ramoth in Gilead


oute ofthe trpbe of Gad: and Solanin alan
out of the trpbe of Aanafles . Chele were fep-
tics appopnted fo2 all the chpldzé of Zfrael, and
fo2 the fraungec that fotourned amonge them,
that wbofoeuer kplled anp perfoniqnozantipe,
the fame mpabt hee thether, and thuldenot dpe
» bp the bande of the auenger of blonde, yntpll be


ox [tode befoze the conqregactice co vestare pis caute,)


T Che.rrt.Chaper.

The cpties geuen to the Arwres in nombee. rl bill,
RNG LD Chen came the principal fathers of
TA tbe Leuites wnto Eleasar p prefkand
GANG vnto Jolua plonne of un j nto p


of the trpbe of Ruben, gout of thetrpbe of Gad
and gute of the trpbe of sabulon, twelue cptpes.
Aud thetiplozen of Flracll qane bp lotte ynto
the Leuptes thelecptpes wpth ther? fuburbes,
asthe Lozdecommaunded bp ) ofes:

And thep gane out of the trpbe ofthe chilozen of
Juda, and oute of the trpbe of the chpldzen of
Simeon, thelecptics by name whpche the chpl-
d:en of Aaron bepnge of the binvedes of the Ta-
batpites and of fhe chpldzen of Lent, obtapned:
fo: thep23 was the fpette lotte.

And idep gaue them Rartath Arbe of f Father
of Enack(whpch is pebzon in tbe bpl contrepe
of Juda, wth the Suburbes of the fame rovde
aboutctt. Wut thelandethat pertapned tothe


Rol, riilt.y citte,and the billares therof,qaue thep to* (a=


lev the fonne of Jephune,tobe bps poflef{pon.

a 4“ they gauetothe cay a of Aaron
the pzeatta cptpe,tothe whych p daper mpabt
fpe : euen Hebron wpth her Suburbes : Libna
wpthber Suburbes:and Fatbir wpth ber Su-
burbes,and Eftimoa with ber Suburbes : 190-
lon wrth Der Suburbes Mabw wher Subur
bes. Ain wpeth ber Suburbes: Jucabwpeh her
Ssuburbes : Wetbhlames wpth ber Suburbes:

hptecptics out of thole two trpbes . And out of
thetrpbe of Weniamin,thep gaue Grbeon pth
C ber Subarbes: Gaba w ber Huburbes: Ana-


FHolta:


toth wytb ber Suburbes:Rimon wpthber Su
burbes:foure cpties. All thele cpties of the chpl-
bien of Aaron preatkes,were thirtenecptpes w
they: Subuerbes. And thekpnredes of the chpl-
Deen of Cabath that were Lenites :that is to
fape,the other chpldz¢ of Cabach, bad cpties me-
uenfo2 thepz lotte, out of the tribe of & phzaum.
Ho2thep qaue them thecptye p tbe lear mygyt
fipe buto:iche with ber Suburbes, in moute
Ephraim:and Gaser wpth ber Suburbes : and
Rabsatn pth her Huburbes : and wWethozon
wpth ber Subucbes:fourecptpes.

And oute of thetcpbe of Dan: Eltheke wth


| JE 0,1t.


her Suburbes: Gibthon wpth ber Suburbs: `


and Jialon wpth ber Suburbes, Garhbremoi
wyth ber Suburbes:foure cptpes. |
And out of the balfe tribe of Danafles, Tha-
nach wyth ber Suburbes :¢ Gathzemon wyth
ber Suburbeg:twocpties. All the cities to the
other Bpneedes of thecbpldzen of Cabath , were
ten wpth thep2 Suburbes. :
And outo thechplozen of Gerfon whypch were
of p Linredes of the Leuptes, thep gauc out of p
otber balfe trpbe of Wana ay cptpe of refuge
foz the fear: Golan in Balan w her Sudurbes:
and wWeeltberah wpth her Huburbes: two cp=
pes. And oute of the trpbe of Jfachar, Rpipon
Yopth ber Suburbes: and Daberah wpth ber
Suburbes: g Jarimoth wpth ber Suburbes:
Enganim wpth ber Suburbes:fourecpepes.
And out of the trpbe of A fer, Wifael wpep ver
Suburbes: Abdon wpth ber Suburbes Hala-
Bath with Der Suburbes:and Robob wpthier
Hubucbes:fourecptyes. And oute of trpbe of
fLephthalt,the cptte foz the learto flee pntoAe
Des in Galile wpth ber Suburbes : g Pamoth-
Dog Wopth per Subucbes: and Cartha wpth ber
Spuburbes:thre cptpes. All the cptpes of p Ger:
fonites thozowe out they2 kpnredes, were thp2-
tcnecptpes wyth thep2 Suburbes.

And vuto the orber kpnredes of thechplozen
of Merari tberet ofthe Leuites,thep gaue out
of the trpbe of sabulon : Jecnam wpth per Su-
burbes:¢ Carthab wpth ber Subucbes: Dam-
na wpth per Huburbes, and Mabalal wpth dee
Suburbes:foure cptpes . And oute of the trpbe
of Rubë, 25030? Wpth ber Suburbes: and Jabe
lab wyth ber fuburbes : Kedmoth w her bur-
beg and Mapbhaath wpth ber Souburbes:foure
cptpes. Bnd oute of the trpbe of Gad,thep gaue
thecptpe fo: the lear to fice unto: Ramoty in
Gilead wpth der (uburbes,¢ Dabanaim wpti
ber fuburbes, Helbon wprh ber Cubucbes : and
Jafer wpth ber fuburbes, feare cptpes inail,fo
that all the cptpes ofp chpldzen of erari tho-
rowe out thep2 &pneedes( Whpche were theres
of the kpnredes of p Lenites) were by thep2 lot,
fwelue cytpes.Anvali the cytics that the Leni-
tes bad amonge the polleffion of the chplozen of
Alraell were. rout. wythtbep2 fuburbes. Bnd
tbefecptpes lape euerp one feuerallpe, baupn ye
thepztubucbes rounvdeabout them thozow out
alltbefapdecptpes . And the Logde cane wnto
Slracli alithe landewbyebe x belwareto gene


“wnto thep2 fatpers. Anothep conquered tf, and


Mt dwit


D


Bintbiia


Bubenand Gad
dwelt therin. And p Lozdgaue them ret roñde
aboute , accozdpnge to all that be fiware Dito
thep2fathprs:and there tode nota man of all
thepzenempes befoze them. The Logde alto de-
Ipucred all thepz enempes into thep2 bandes.


zorria «Cherelkapednotbpnge ofallthegoodthpn= $


eres, wohpchethe Loze had (apd wnto the boule
of ¥lracll.zbut allcame to paffe,
The rrii. Chapter.
Cruden, Gad, and che balfe tribe of Gyanatles are
Cent agapne to ther pelleOpons. Thep vuilbe an als
tare fo; amemo;pall.
J EN en Folua called vnto the Rubenp-
| SY Ates tbe Gaddites,¢ to the balfe trpbe
4 T of <Hanaftes , and fapde wnto them:
aurrie Be Sit * pe haue kept all that Woles the ler
naunt of tbe Lozdecommaunded pou, and Haue
obeped mp vopce inalltbat Fcommanunded pou
pebaucnotlett pour becthzen of a longe feafon
puto this dape, but paue kept the commaunde-
ment of tbe T o2de pour God. |
Andnow that the Lozde hath gpucn reff Vn-
to pour baethzenas be prompted them, therfore
returne peand o to pouretenteg, and wnto the
land of pour potieflion, which Hofes p fernaut
of the Lozde gaue pou on the otberfpde Jordan.
nutinanp wple takedpligent bede,and do
the commaundement and lawe , tobiche G)otes
Deute.s.c. the feruaunte of the Lozdecharged pou : «that
peloue the Lozde pout God,and walke inal bis
wapes, and kepe bis commaunde menteg, and
cleaue onto bpm, and ferne bpm witpallpoure
bertesandall pour foules. And lo Folna bleed
them and fent them awape. And thep went vu-
tothep2 tentes.
“3 Unto the one halfe of the trpbe of Wanaf-
fes Poles aue the poffetlis in Walan: and vn
totbcotber balfethercof gaue Jotua amonge
thep2 beeth2en on this fpe Jordan well warde.
And Jofua tent thematwap alfo vnto their ten-
tes, ¢ bleffed them, efapde vnto them : retourne
with mocberpebes onto pour tentes, and with
a greate multitude ofcatell,w {pluce ¢ golde
pencere. VaMe Epron € With much raiment andxdeurde
au.crr.d. the (pople of pour enemtes wpth pour brethren.
Toumit — Andthe chpldzen of Ruben, the chpldzen of
mere Gad,€ halfe p tribe of PHanafles, returned and
Departed from thechildzen of Jfracl out of Si-
lo(whpche is inthe lande of Canaan) to go Dn-
to thecontrep of Giliad totbeland of thep2 pof-
{eflton,wobpcbe thep bad optapned, accozdpnge
tothe wozd of the 1020 bp the bande of Boles.
And whentbep cam vntothe place of Geluoth
befpde Jordan (that ig in the lande of Canaan)
there the chplozen of Ruben, the chploz€é of Gad
andthe balfetrpbeof G)anafies , bupltean al-
tarefa bp Jordane sand that agreataltareto
i prey ies whentbhe chyldzenot Flracl beard
of, thep


p fapde : bebolde,the chyldzen of Ruben,
the chpldzen of Gad, and the balfe trpbe of Gaz
naffes baue buylte analtare in the forefronte of
p landeof Canaan enenin Geliloth belide Fo-

anon the {poe of p childzen of Jfracl. And whe
the childzen of Flrael bearde of it, the whole co=
gregacpon of the chpldzen of Zfraell gathered


Joina,


tbem together to Silo, to make battell again®
them. And thechypld2en of Flrael Cente onto the
chpldzen of Ruben, andtothe chplozen of Gad,
and to thebalfe tribe of #2)anafles into the land
of Gilead, Phinebes the fonne of Cleasarthe
peate, and topth bpm ten logdes , ofeucrpe
chefe boule alozde, thozo we outeall the trpbes
of Jfraell, whpch werebeadesofthep2rfathers `
boutholdes amonge the thoulandes of Ffraell. `
And thep went onto che childzen of Ruben, and
totbechtldzenof Gad, andfotbechildjenofthe  »
balfetrpbe of Hanafles , onto the landt of Gi-
lead and thep (pake wpth them totes 5
‘Thus fapetbe bole congregacpon of Lobelia D
xwbattranfgrelponis thpstbhat pe bauetral= 4.5 rr,
grefledagaint f God of Airael, to turne awap
thisdape from the Lozdinthat pe bane builded
pouanaltare fozto rebellethps vape agapnite
the Lozdes Js the * wopcked Dede of Peoz tolpt= aurra
telfoz vs, where of we are not pet clenfed vnto i
thpsdape, andfoz tbe whpche these wasin the
congregacpå of the people a plage ofthe Lo2d!
Pe alfo are turnedDawape thps dape from the
Lo2de. Andfepnee pe rebelle to dape agapnite
the Logde,it will come to pafle,that to mozotwe
be (ball be wzoth wpthall the congregacpon of
FBraell. Notwprhttandpnge pf pe thynke, that
the lande of poure poffetipon is pncleane, then
come ouer vnto thelande of the pofleftton of the
L020, where inthe lopdes tabernacle dwelleth,
andtake poffeflponamige vs. Wut tranfgretfe
notagaintttbe Lord, no: pronoke bs,t0 buplde
pou anp otber aulter,faue theaulter ofthe 2020
oure God * Dpdnot Acan the fonne of sareth
tre{pafle inthe ercommunicate thpnge ¢ Wiath
fellon all theconqregacpon of Flraell, obpcbe
nottopthitandpnge that be was but one man,
pet be alone perpiped not foz bps wopckednelles
Then the chplozen of Ruben and the chyldzett e
of Had, andbal€ thetrpbe of NManaleganlwes
red, andlapde onto the beades ouer tbe thoufan
des of Flraell : Che God of goddes, the Lozde
@od of erate the 1020 be knoweth, and
alfo pall Jfrael kinowe. Pfitbe to rebelle,ozto
tranfareleagyapnite the Lorde, the thou Lozde
faue Ys not this dape. D2 elles piwe baue built
pean aultertoreturue Fro folowpnge p Lode,
o: to offer theron burntofferpnge o2 meateottes
rpnge,ozto offer peaceofferpnges therou:let the
Lowerequyzeit, ox ( andiudse) Andypf we have
not rather done it ofa carefulnes¢ ofafure oc- **
cafponfaping: jn tpine to come pourechplodzen
mpabtelape onto oures: what paue pe todo w
the Logde Good of Flraellsthe Lozde bath made
JorBana bogder betwene Ys andpou ( pechpl-
dren of Rubeng of Gad ) pe baue nopattether-
fore inthe Logde:and fo thal pour chpld2é make
oure chpldzen ceafle from fearpnge the Lorde.
Wherfore wex-(toke better aduplement and )fapve: yo
(Wie wpll make bs an aulter, not for burntoffe= sp
rpnge,noz foz factpfpce,but fora xthitnefle be: Be.rrrig


Jota, bil. a


buylde an altare. |


sath
|


-


¥ .


twenle DS EPOU, oure generacponsafter vg, ý HoCrrus,¢


we Mulde erue the Lozde, wyth oure offerpn-
ges,tacrpfpces and peaceofirpnaes before bim:
g that pourecbildzen Mulde not ape to weir in

tyme


— Ruben and Gad,


D i ———


pa


Po


tpime tocome:pe baue no parte inthe Lode.


‘Therfozrelapde toe, that pfthep thuldefolape f


£008 02 £0 oure qeneracponsin tpme tocome, p
we woldefapeagapne: Webolde the faflion of
the aulter of the 1.020, whpch our fathers made
nether foz burnt facrifices, but fo: a wptnes be-
twene ws and pou, God fozbpd, that we Hulde
rebell agapnite the Lozde, and turne thps dape

— from after bim,and buplde anp other aulter foz
 Durntofferpnaes,oblacions , 02 facrifpces , fauc
the aulter ofthe Lozde oure God, thatis before
‘bps tabernacle. |

E Anodwhen Pbinehes the prealke,and the lop«
Des of the congregacion € peades ouer the thon-
{andes of Ffrael whpche were pth bpm, beart
thele woordes that the chplozen of Ruben, andp
chpldgen of Gadandtbhechpldzen of analles
Cpake, they Were well cõtent. And pbhinchesthe
fonne of Eleazar the preaft Capde unto thechyl-
d2cnof Ruben andto the childzen of Gad, andto
the chpldgen of Ganafles : thps dape Wwe per=
ceaue,thattpe Lozdeis amonge vs, becaule pe
haucnot done thistrelpatle agapnt the Lozde:
Powe pe hauerpdde the chplozen of Flrael out

ofthe bande ofthe Lode. |
And bincbes thefonne of Eleasar p Decalk
wpth the lozdesretourned from thechpldzen of
Ruben, and from the childzen of Gad out of the
lande of Gilead vnto the Lande of Canaan, top


childzen of Zlracl,and bzougbt tbem tbps word |


agapne. And thefapinge plealed the childzen of
Jfraclandthep blefled God, dpd not entende
toqoagainittbeminbattel,andtodetrope the
land wppcb pchildzen of Rubë z Gad dwelt in.
Aud p chplozé of Rubé gp childzéof Gadcalied
theaulter: Durewptnelle, p the Lozdeig God.
>The.rriit.Chapter.

€ olua erhoztech the people, that ihep ropne noe

them Teure to the Gentples,

Fiery A tt came to paflealonge featon af-

Piatra ter that the Lode had qevenreft un-
apa vy to Jiracl fro all theirenempes rode
Een) about, ý Jolua wared olde, and wag
tericken inage. And Jofua calledfo all Ffrael,
æ for their eldcrs,cheir heades their iudges g of-
ficers,% fapd Ynto thë: Jam old æ trpké in ace.

And pehauefene all thatthe Lod pour God
batbe Done yuto all thele nacpons befoze pou,
howeshe Lorde pour Godbhathfought foz poun.
webolde,F baue {ubbued ynto pouthele nacios
that remapne, to be an enberitatice foz pour tri-
bes:euen from Jozdan, ¢ (from the Lande) of all
the nacpons that 3 auc deltroped, euen wnto p
great fee weffwarde . + ( anv there remapne pct manp
nacpons.) AND the Lozdepour God thal erpel thé
befoze pou, andcaft thë fromout of pour (pape,
and pe(ballconquere thepzlande, as the Lozde
poure Godhath lapre ynto pou.

Goto therfozexas ftronglpas pe may, that
pe take bede € Do all that is wzpttenin p booke
peut. rria Of the late of Hotes, + that pe bowe not afpde
g.rcviid.d, CDerfrom,to the rpghte bande o2 to thelefte:and
700.009. [eft that whan pecome amonge thete nacpons,

Ceucnamong thele that are lett Ù pou)pe make
mencpon og tweare bp the names of thep2 god:


aly


Sew prri.b


Folia:


a | 0 $ ks
des: ethat pe nether lernethem no: bowe poure
clues nto them. Wut that pe tpche fate puto
the Lozde pour God, as pe hauedone wntothys
dape. So pall the Lorde calte oute before pou C
greate nacpons and mpghtpe , asnoman bath
bene able to ftande befoze pón bptherto.

*Dne man of pou fhallchafeathoufand for LALA
L020 pour God he fpabteth foz pou agbe bat
prompled pou. Take goodbedetberfoe ynto
pourfelues, that pelone the Lozde poure God.

Els, pf pe go backe and cleaue nto the relt of
thcfe nacpons that remapne toyptb pouandwhat
make mariages with thé, and go in puto them,
and thep to pou:be pelure , that the Lode pour

God wyll nomoze cafte oute all thefe nacpons
from befoze pou. * Wut thep Halbe {nares and verrriii g
trappes Dito pou and fcourgesin ponr (pdes,
and thoznes in poure epes , Dntpll pe perpe
from of thps qood lande, whpcbe the £020 pour
God hath geuen pou.

And beholde,this dape,do Jentre into p tape D
ofall tbe wolde, and pe knowe in all poure ber=
tesandin all pourefoules,thatxnotbpnge bath zorusrt.o
Fapled of all the qood thpnges which tbe Lorde
poure Sod pzompled pou: Wut all arecometa
pafe and notbing bath fapled therof. Cherfoze
ag all good thpnges arecome bpon pou, whiche
the Lozde poure God prompted pou, fo hall the
Lozde bzpuge vpon pou allenell, vntill pe baue
Dettroped pou fro of thps qoodlande, which tbe
Lode poure Godbhath geuen pou, when pe baue
tranfqceficd the appopntiment of p Lozde poure
God, which be comaunded pou:¢ Haue cone and
ferucd ftraunge goddes,and bowed pour felucs
tothem. Chen Hall the tozath of the Lozd ware
Wwhote pon pou and pe hall peepihe quypckipe
from of the qood ee be bath qenë pou.

@ The. criiti.cbhapter. |
@ olua erbortech thepcopleto che keppnge of the


latwe. Be bpeth. The bones of Jofeph are turpe,
‘Pleazer bpech,


Tay) No Jolua qathered all the trpbes of Ii- Y

an | taclto Sichen and called fo2 theelders

esd of Jiraell, and fo2thep2beades Judges

and offpcers, and thep paclented thë felues be-

fore God. And Folua fapde vnto allthepeople:

thus fapth the Lorde God of Frael:xpourefa- Smeta
fers dwelt on p other fpe of the floude in olde

tyme: cue Charethtbhetather of Abzabamand

of Machoz,andfecued ftraungeqoddes.

And J toke poure father Abzabam fromthe
other fpde of the floude,andbzoughte bym tho-
rowe outall p lande of Canaan and multiplped
bpsfeed,and * gaue bpin Papac. Sette pris
And J gaue vuto Flahac, Jacob eElausAnd 2 —
3 gaue vnto Efau mounte Heir, co pollelle ig. PSF a
Wut Jacob ¢ his childzé wet Down into Egipt.

Slent Solesalloe Aaron. And F¥ plaged oro oe, ive
Egypte: ¢ hen Fhadledoncamong them, F ir.r.¢.¢00.
bro gbt pou out, g J bzought pour fathers out
of Egppt.Andasthep cam vnto $ {ee,p Eqvp-
cyatis folowed after poure fathers wptbcbhars
tettes ehozfinen puto p redfec.k And Wha thep ro, pirti,
crped vntap Lorde, the Lozd putdarknefle ve-
fwene pou and the Egppcias,and broughte the
fee vp them, and conered them. And pour eped

Ott paue


_!


Fotuacrhorteth


‘Jodettroped them from out of pon {pgbt.
DG, FB, ofsipho2,kynae of
Heee Moabarole and warred agapnit Frael fent
andcalled Walaa the fonne of Weoo: fo: tocurfle
pou. Gnt J wolde not kerken tntto Walaa, and
therfoze be rather bleed pou : And fo Fdelpue-
ced pou out of bis hand. And pe went oner 7o02-
danc- came dnto Jericho, € the men of Jericho
fought agapntt pou:the Amozites, Dberelites,
Canaanites, Hethithes Girgolites, Peuites,¢
Febulites, ¢ J delpuered them into pour bande.
¢ And Alentxboznettes befoze pou,wobpch caf
Deut, bif Een oute of pourelpaht : cucnthe tivo kpnges
of the Amozites: but not w pour owne fweard,
op wpthpoure otbnebowe. And Jhauegeuen
poualande,in tobpche pe DpD not laboure, and
cpties Iohpch pe buplte not and whpch pe dwell
in: Dpnepardes allo and olpue trees whychepe
planted not and wherof pedo cate.
Teg, xow therfoze Feate the Lozd, andferuebym
~~ tpertectenefle and truthe : And put awapethe
oddes, whpch pour fathers Cerued onthe other
{pde of the houde,andin Eqppte,andferue pe p
Lozde.And pfit feme cuell vnto pou to ferue the
Lo20,thben chole pou this dap hs pou wil ferue
whether p roddes Which pour fathers ferned (P
<p were onthe other [pde of the foud ) ether p yod-
des of the Amozites,tn whofe land pedwell.as
foz: me and mp boule, we wpll ferue the Lo2de.
The people antieced and fapde: God fozbpd,
that toc fulde foslakethe 102d, ¢ lerue frage
coddes. Foz p 1020 our God, be itis pbzought
ys and oure fathers out of thelande of Eqppte,
and from the boule of bondage, andwbhpch opo
thole great mpzaclesin oure fpabt, epreferued
vein all the wape that we went,¢ amongeall p
naclis which wecamthozow . And p Lod dph
cait out before vs all P nadip seca f Amo-
rites whpch dwelt inp Lande. And therfore wyll
we alfoferue the Lozde,fo2 bets oure God.
œ And Zolualapde ynto the people.Pe cannot
feruc p Lo2d:£o2 De igan bolpe God, ea gelous
Gode cannot beare poure iniquite ¢ fynne. PE
qorrriin pe forlake the Load g lerue fratge goddes, ¥ be
whyll turne €Do pou euell, econfume pou, after
thatbebath done pou good. And F peoplelayde


Folia.


the people.
puto Jofua:nape, but we wyliferue the Lorde. .
And Folna fapde yntothe people:pe are wpt=
uefles poure felues, that pe bauecbofenpou the
Lovbetofernebi:and thepfapd: weare wt
nefes. Che put awape(lapoe be) the fraunge
godbdes tohpch are amonge pou, and bowe pour
bertes nto p Lozde God of Flrael. Che people
fapbde vnto Zolua : the Lozbde oure God wpll we g
ferue,¢ bys vopce wpll we obepe. And {o Folua `;
x madea couenaŭt x the people the famedap,g £57.
Fet an opdpnaiice ¢ lato befozetheminSichem. |
And Jolua wzotetbhele wozdes inp boke of §
lawe of God, andxtoke a great tone t pptched imetia
it on ende inthe fapde plact euen pnder an oke
that was in thefanctuarpe of the Lozd. And Yo
fualapd punto all the people-bebold:x this Fone Sen-rrri.s


thalbe a witnelle nto bs, foz it hath bearde all 2"


the wozdes of the Lozde whyche be fpake wpth
vs. Ft thalbe therfoze a wptnelle wnto pou, lett

eDenyp cx (and optemble wth) poure God. Bnd fo x,
jolna lette the people departe , cuero man Vnto
brs enberitaunce. i

And after thefe thpnges ttcame to paffe that g
Jolua the fonneof Run, the feruaunt of P Load
oped, bepnge an hundzeth Eten pearesolo. And


thep buried bim in p contrep of bis*enberttatice Jorm pipa ° '


euen in Chanath Sareth, whycbeisinmotite
€pbzaim, on the nozthlpdeof the bpll of Gaas.

And Ffrae! ferucd the Lozdexall theDapes Of yara.
Jolua, and all the dapes of the elders that oner rrriiit.s.
lpued Jofua, and wbich bad knowne all p wo2=
kes of p Lozdethat he bad Done fo: Jiraell. And
thexbones oF Joep, mobic the cbplozen of Jf- Sene..
rael bought out of Egypt buried thep in Siche £72-Fit1.0.
tina parcell of rrounde whpehe Jacob bon
of the fennes of Hemo: f father of Sichem, foz

anHund2eth peces oflpluer, anditbecame `

the enberitaunce of the chpldzen of
Soleph. And Eleazar the
fonne of Aarondied, an
whom thep bu-
rpedina


bpl
that pertayned to Phinehes hig
fonne,wobpche (bp wag
geuen bim in mount
ECphzaim.


€ The ende oftheboke of Fofua,» -
whom the Webzues call,
Febolua.


toe.rrpig d


guna. Judges, Holti,
 CTheboke of Judges kerssnyermcrer ntr
ralledin the ebene S>opheten and in eb lapbe boron ed of ber alfe : and Ca-


=
= = = u
— Se
a


EE PEA balte uen mea Southwarde (02d2pe) lande:
C The fpi Chapter. geue me she FD eae panD Caleb
| mis auc her tpapnges both aboue and benet |. an
Stee the anpe eee Jada was contitute Lojd the chilozen of the kenite, Motes father inlaw


TI -
ii


= ms ah


D YJ woos - Son of Zuda,thatlpeth inthe Southe of Arad, and “


Fr ai) Tay iji
a i ae


kalon withthe coattes therof. And Akard with
thecoattes therof. Anothe Lorde thas 10 Juda,
€ De conquered the mountapnes , but coulde not
: E | ehepbabchacreies nema aoa eae
per arge ME epi arrettes of p20. ther qauex Pe- Crtiti.b
A ep fter the deathe af Jora bzon onto €aleb,as Dolce hye g aA Dee piy
sap Aaa came to palle, thatt sare led thence the tbzefonncs of + @nak. tmurtite: -
RIA AVA oe, Dent OF Ifrael alten p Logde * Bnd the chpldzen of Weniamin dyd not catke ‘esha
JG WA Vows LaPtige:wWho thall ga wp foz pate Jedutites Steel wea eeD Jerufalem E
// BSL JBA\ WER] : but the Zebulites dwell wpth thet plzen oi
ASER * nd in lpke maner t fat were of the sory, rp.a
aai AVDE: Juda thal go Yp, * be- boufe of Joleph wente bp to ethel ethe Lom 2
lùe J baue delinered the land into his bandeg, was wpth thë tbe boute of Joleph ferched out
j Let, Wethel which befozetpme was called Lus.and
bp with meinmplotte f te map rs pel the ig m-tbewebstbe hone ee
H thep fayd ynto bpm: ewe Ls the wape intotbe
into thp lotte. and fo Spmicon went with him. epi, and We wpll ete the ee oe
And Juda Went Yp and the Lode delpuered be bad thetocd them the Wap into the citie, tp


| Folue.tt.c, |
the Cananites and berelites into thepz han- finoteit wptbebe edge of tbe Cwearde, but let
: des. And thep Acweofthemin eset ten thou- man andall bps boutbolde Ofree. Andebe mn
lande men. And thep founde A donibesck in We: acai ee nerean tapie
a cptte, and called thename therof Lug whpche -
Cananitegand pbereiptes. But Adonibesek isthe name therof vntothys dave. ae 4f€
fied, and thep folowed after bym, g caugbtbim, *Metberdypd Wanalfeg erpelle Wethieam Jot. pbit.c
15 cut of bps thombes and bps greate toeg, And wb ber townes, Chaanach w bectownes, ae.
Adontbesck lapd: thee fkoze and tenbpngesba bitouregof D0? w ber townes, § enbabttoures
upnge their thombes and greate tos cut of ga: of Feblaa tÙ ber townesnether enbabitoures
Lrurrfite Cheved they? meate wnder inp table: asAbave of Wagedo with ber townes , but pCananites
Iuda done, lo God hath done tome agapne.Andthey were bold to dive] inp land. 2Butit cam to patie
b200 bt bymto Jerulalem,and there he dped. py asloneas Ffraell wag wared, mpabtpe.thep
| i €e cbplbzen ot Juda Fougbeeagennte ve put f Cananttes totributegerpellen them not.
Deute Fre rufalem and tobe itkand {mote it with the edge
ofthe foearde, and fet thecptie on fyre, After- Cananptes that dwelt in Gazer, but thefana:
woarde P childzé of Juda went tofyg again
the Cananites, that dwelt inthe mountapne, ¢ H2epther Dpdsabulonerpell the enbabpton-
towarde the fout in fhe lote contrepe . Bnd res of iketron,nepther the enpabytoureso ‘Pas
Juda went agaputte the Cauanites that owelt belol : But the Cananptes dielte amonge tbé,
TEE Ab Dppche before eine was called dia and became trpbutarpes. i
tiath Arbe.And lewe He at, Abiman g Thal: Fepther dpd Aler cate oute theenhabitou-
mai. Andfromthence thep went totheinhabi- regot Acho . neptber theenbabttoures of pa a
terg of Dabir, pole name inoldtpme wascal- and of Abalab, Acsib,and Halbab, Apbe Rer
J. “se led Rariathlepher,og hac isa cptie oF letters.) of Robob , but the Alcrites owelte amonge the
€ And Caleb fapde:*be that finpteth Rariath Cananptes tyeenbabptoures of thelande, fog
Hotere. fepher,andtakethit to bpm wpll 3 KeueAclah the mpgbtnotdzpue them out. | :
mp doughterto wpfe. and Dthoniel the fLonne Peto Boones Pueout the enba:
of frenes Calebs poñger brother tokeit:to WHYS bitoures of Bethlames, no? p enbabptontes of
wit Wetbanacy


guna. Judges, Holti,
 CTheboke of Judges kerssnyermcrer ntr
ralledin the ebene S>opheten and in eb lapbe boron ed of ber alfe : and Ca-


=
= = = u
— Se
a


EE PEA balte uen mea Southwarde (02d2pe) lande:
C The fpi Chapter. geue me she FD eae panD Caleb
| mis auc her tpapnges both aboue and benet |. an
Stee the anpe eee Jada was contitute Lojd the chilozen of the kenite, Motes father inlaw


TI -
ii


= ms ah


D YJ woos - Son of Zuda,thatlpeth inthe Southe of Arad, and “


Fr ai) Tay iji
a i ae


kalon withthe coattes therof. And Akard with
thecoattes therof. Anothe Lorde thas 10 Juda,
€ De conquered the mountapnes , but coulde not
: E | ehepbabchacreies nema aoa eae
per arge ME epi arrettes of p20. ther qauex Pe- Crtiti.b
A ep fter the deathe af Jora bzon onto €aleb,as Dolce hye g aA Dee piy
sap Aaa came to palle, thatt sare led thence the tbzefonncs of + @nak. tmurtite: -
RIA AVA oe, Dent OF Ifrael alten p Logde * Bnd the chpldzen of Weniamin dyd not catke ‘esha
JG WA Vows LaPtige:wWho thall ga wp foz pate Jedutites Steel wea eeD Jerufalem E
// BSL JBA\ WER] : but the Zebulites dwell wpth thet plzen oi
ASER * nd in lpke maner t fat were of the sory, rp.a
aai AVDE: Juda thal go Yp, * be- boufe of Joleph wente bp to ethel ethe Lom 2
lùe J baue delinered the land into his bandeg, was wpth thë tbe boute of Joleph ferched out
j Let, Wethel which befozetpme was called Lus.and
bp with meinmplotte f te map rs pel the ig m-tbewebstbe hone ee
H thep fayd ynto bpm: ewe Ls the wape intotbe
into thp lotte. and fo Spmicon went with him. epi, and We wpll ete the ee oe
And Juda Went Yp and the Lode delpuered be bad thetocd them the Wap into the citie, tp


| Folue.tt.c, |
the Cananites and berelites into thepz han- finoteit wptbebe edge of tbe Cwearde, but let
: des. And thep Acweofthemin eset ten thou- man andall bps boutbolde Ofree. Andebe mn
lande men. And thep founde A donibesck in We: acai ee nerean tapie
a cptte, and called thename therof Lug whpche -
Cananitegand pbereiptes. But Adonibesek isthe name therof vntothys dave. ae 4f€
fied, and thep folowed after bym, g caugbtbim, *Metberdypd Wanalfeg erpelle Wethieam Jot. pbit.c
15 cut of bps thombes and bps greate toeg, And wb ber townes, Chaanach w bectownes, ae.
Adontbesck lapd: thee fkoze and tenbpngesba bitouregof D0? w ber townes, § enbabttoures
upnge their thombes and greate tos cut of ga: of Feblaa tÙ ber townesnether enbabitoures
Lrurrfite Cheved they? meate wnder inp table: asAbave of Wagedo with ber townes , but pCananites
Iuda done, lo God hath done tome agapne.Andthey were bold to dive] inp land. 2Butit cam to patie
b200 bt bymto Jerulalem,and there he dped. py asloneas Ffraell wag wared, mpabtpe.thep
| i €e cbplbzen ot Juda Fougbeeagennte ve put f Cananttes totributegerpellen them not.
Deute Fre rufalem and tobe itkand {mote it with the edge
ofthe foearde, and fet thecptie on fyre, After- Cananptes that dwelt in Gazer, but thefana:
woarde P childzé of Juda went tofyg again
the Cananites, that dwelt inthe mountapne, ¢ H2epther Dpdsabulonerpell the enbabpton-
towarde the fout in fhe lote contrepe . Bnd res of iketron,nepther the enpabytoureso ‘Pas
Juda went agaputte the Cauanites that owelt belol : But the Cananptes dielte amonge tbé,
TEE Ab Dppche before eine was called dia and became trpbutarpes. i
tiath Arbe.And lewe He at, Abiman g Thal: Fepther dpd Aler cate oute theenhabitou-
mai. Andfromthence thep went totheinhabi- regot Acho . neptber theenbabttoures of pa a
terg of Dabir, pole name inoldtpme wascal- and of Abalab, Acsib,and Halbab, Apbe Rer
J. “se led Rariathlepher,og hac isa cptie oF letters.) of Robob , but the Alcrites owelte amonge the
€ And Caleb fapde:*be that finpteth Rariath Cananptes tyeenbabptoures of thelande, fog
Hotere. fepher,andtakethit to bpm wpll 3 KeueAclah the mpgbtnotdzpue them out. | :
mp doughterto wpfe. and Dthoniel the fLonne Peto Boones Pueout the enba:
of frenes Calebs poñger brother tokeit:to WHYS bitoures of Bethlames, no? p enbabptontes of
wit Wetbanacy


Mthenicl
Wethanath,butdweltamige the Cananptes
theenbabitoures of tbeland/ Reuerthelefle the
enbabitoures of Wethlamesgnd of Wethanath
became trpbutaries vnto them. |

Andthe Amoziteg troubled the chpldzen of
Daninthe mountaine,and{ueredthem not to
come dowone tothe valepe , Andthe Amozites
were content to Divell in mounte Heres-*wdeeb
és by intecpzetacpon:a wptnettpng in arlonandin Sa

labim. Andthebande of Foleph p2euapled,to

va that. thep becametributarpes: and the coatte of

the Amozptes wasfrom the gopnge vp to X-
crabim and from the rocke ppwarde.


C The.tt. Chapter.
© Ebe Angell rebuketh the people, becaule (hep
bap oDe race ott) the Cananites, Joolatres are
punp htd. y


AA po the angell of the Lozbe came vy
à | rom Gilgal to Wochim, and fapd:
yy made pouto goo out of Eqppte, and
JED N pane brought pou vnto p land tohpch
_...- Btware pntopourfathers.x and J lapd: F wil
eu. via, NOE Deak mpne appointmétthat J made with
ampia pou. And pe alfo Mall make no coucnaunt with
the enbabptoures ofthis lande, but pal bzeake
Downe thepzaultares:euertheles pe Daue not
perkened puto mp vopce, why baue pe this done
UWiAberfore, J bauelphewple determined. that J
wp! not cat chem out befoze pou: but thep thal-
be thognes bnto pou, and thep2 goddesthaibea
{nare vnto pou. And whe the angel of the Lozd
fpake thefe wozdes vnto all the chpldsen of Fl-
rael,thepeoplecrped out and toepte: Andcalled
the name of the fapd place.* Wochim, and ofr-
aptaceof red facrifpces vntothe Lorde.

cuchaswep HHO when Jofuabadfente the people awape,
45 the chpldzen of Firaeli went euery man intobps
enberitatce to poftefte p lande.x And the people
zo.sriiit,g Teruedthe Lozde all the dayes of Fotua, and all
thedapes oftheelders that oute lpucd zolua, ¢
hadfene all the qreate wozkes of the Lozd that
pedpod foz Flraell: and Jotua the fonne of Aun
the teruaunte of the Lode xDped, when he was
Jo.rrliti.g aN Hundred and tenperes olde : whom thep bu-
rpedin the coates of bpsenberptauttce: enenin
@bhamnath Vares in mounte Ephraim on the
no:tbipde of the bpll Gaas. Andeuenfoal that
- gencracpon were put onto tbhep2 fathers, and
therearole another generaci afterthem which
- nepther knetve the Lode, noz pet the toozkes

twhpcbebe bad done Foz Flraell.
‘Andtbenthechplodzen of Ffraell x dpd wpe-
yuv.itd.a, kedlp in the (pabt of the Lord, and ferued 26544-
lim, and fozfoke the 1020 God of thepz fathers,
which baone out of thelande of Egypt,
and folotwed fraunge roddes, euen of the goù-
_ pes of thenacpons that were rounde about the,
“and bowed them felues vate them, andangred
the Lozde. Thep forloke the Lozde, and Cerued
Baal and Atharoth, andthe wath ofp Lozde
E waredbhote agapnite Flracll, andhe oclpuered
themintothe bandes of raueners , that {popled
them, and folde them into the
enempes rounde aboutetbent, fo that thep bad


Judges.


ndeg of thep2.


Abud,

no power anp longer fo Fandebefoze their ene-

mpes. But wHyptherloeuer thep wente oute, the j

bande of the 1020 was agapni{t them with euell

lucke,cuen as the Lozde promiled them, ¢ as be

(ware bntotbem . And he punphedthem fore.
Peucctheleflethe Lozde rapled vp Judges,

whpch delpuered them out of p bandes of their

oppreflers, pet fozal ý thep moldenot barken

pnto their Judges: Wut rather wet a whowpneg

after ftrannge goddeg , and bowed them (clues

nite them, and turned quickelp out of the wap

Whichthe fathers walkedin,obepng Pcomau `

Dementes of the Lode: 25ut thep dpd not fo. a
Andwbhen the Logdrapledthem vp Judges,

pe twas with the Judge, and Delinered them out

of the bande of thep2 cnempes all the dapes of

the Judge + fo2 the Lode bad compaffion ouer


thepzfozowpnges,whbpch thep bad, bp the reas eroin:


fon of them that sy doko lg and Vered fhe:
petfoz all that’ as lone as the iudge was dead,
thep turned g dpd wolle then thepz fathers , i anig»,
folowpnge ftraunge goddes, and in ferupnge D
them, and cealed not from thep2 owne inuen=
cpons.no2 from a martien e tape. °

AnDdthe wath of p Lo2d was mouedagaink
Alraell,and be fapde : becaufe thys people bath
tranfqeeficd mpne appopntement whypche Yc-
maundedtiep2 fathers, andbaue not herkened
vntomp vopce, ¥ tpl bence forth not cat oute
befoze thé one tanof the nacpos, which Jolua
lefte when be dped , that thzoughthent J mape
*pzouc Zlraecl, whether tpep wpll kepe p wape
Of the 102d, and walke therin as thepztathers meu,rig,e.
dpd 0? not. And {o the Lozdleafte thofenacpos,
and Douce them not oute pmmediatly , neptper


. delpuercd tbem into the bande of Jolua.


C Tbe iti.Chapter.
C Othoniel delpuercth zirac ahud kplleth k
glon.Samgar kplieth the Sbpipttines. ? rusg,


And the chpldzen of Flrael dwelt among the
Cananites, ethiteg, Amozptes, heretites,


fotbe bandes of Chulan Rifatbaim kpnge of
Melopotamia.,


|


meeer a


Tin


- (ipar. ph.d


X


' g etite.


| umr.p.a


Mthoniel


G)efopotamia,and the chpldzen of Hrael ler-

ucd Chulan Rilathatm. viii. peres,
And toben thechpldrë of Flraell crped vntop
Lo2d, the Lozd fpzed Ypatauer, to 5 child2€ of
Fleracl,elaued them: one Dthontel the fonne of
Kenes, Calebs ponger brother And the [pret of
the Lozdcame Dpon bpm. And be tudged Frael
¢ went out to war. And the Lo2zd deltuered Chu
fan Rifathaim kyng of Delopotamia into pis
bande, this hade preuapled agapnet Chulan Ri
fathatn.And the lande had x rett foztp peres, €
Dthoniel the lonne of Renes died. And the chil
dzen of Flraell went toagapne, and committed
wickednesin the fpaht of p Lord. And the Low
firengthed Eglon the kynge ofthe Woabites,
agapuit the chplozé of Firaell, becaufe thep had
committed wickednes befoze f Lorde. And this
(Eglon gathered vnto him the chplozen of Am
mon andthe Amalekites,and wenteand {mote
Ffraell , econquered the cptie of Daulme trees.
And fo the chpldzen of Flraell ferucd Eqlonthe
hpnge of £Doab .rvlit.peres . But wbhenthep
crped Dutothe Lorde, the Lozde ftpzed them bp
alauet.Abhud the fonne of Gera thefonne of Ge
minia man that couldedo nothpny pandfomlp
wptbhbbysrpabtebande.

Andbp dun pchildzen of Fflrael fent a prelent
nto Eglon p kynge of Boab: but Abud made
Dpma dagger w two edges, oF a cubpte length,
and bedpo qp2bde ft Dnto hy phon eins ppon pps
right thpgh,and carped the prelent Vnt Eglon
the kpnge of Boab: And Eglon was a verp
Fatte man. Andit foztuned that wbe be had pze-
fented the peelent, be fent the people that bare it
awape, but be bpm felfe turned agapne (from
theplace of graucnpmages, that was bp Gil-


gal )andlapde:3baucalecrererrande vntothe, J


D kpnge.Wibrcie fapde: kepelplence. And all
that tode befoze bpm, wente oute from bpm.
And Abudcame onto him, ¢ ina fomer par-
ler, wbpch be pad, Cache him lelfe alone, Abud
fapdex A bauca meflage tunto the fro God. And
be arole oute of pps fcate. And Abud put forth
byslefte pande, t toke the dagger fro bisrpaht
thpabe,and tiru it nto bps belp, and thebatte
met uafterthe blade : Andthefatte,clofed the
bafte fo that be mpqbtenot dzate the dagger
out of bys bely but pdp2tecame out- Abud gat
bpm outeata pofkerne doze ant hut f does of
the pasler about bpm, and locked them.
ben be as gone out, pps ferviaiites came,
and whan they lawe that the dozes of the par-
ler were locked , thep fapde-peraduenture be co-
ucreth bps fete inbps fomerchamber. And thep
tarpedDtpll thep were albamed,¢ bebolde:fepng
he opened not the dozes of the parler, thep toke

‘akep,andopenedthem . Andbebolde,thep2
020 was fallendo tone dead on the earth. And
Apudelcaped (whplethep tarped ) gwas gone
beponde , to the place of the grauen pmages,
andefcapedinto Secirath.

_. Sd when bewas comexhebletoc a trompet
fumount Ephraim. And the chpldzen of Flracil
Went Downe with him from the hpl and he went
befozetbem. And he fapd vntathem,folow me: -


‘Judges.


for the Lozd bath delpuered poure enempesthe
oabptesintopourhand . Andthep delcended
afterbpm, and toke the paflages of Fo2ba, to-
warde Moab ¢ (uitered not aman to palle ouer
And thep lew of the B)oabites:, thelametpme
Ppona ten thonfande men, which were all fatte


andmenofwarandtherfcaped not ama.% So pente.,


)oab was lubdued that Daye, vnder the band
of Flraell:and the lande badreft.lrre.peres,
|#fter bym was Samgar pfonne of Anath,
wbich Newe of the hiliffines. vi. bundzed men
wpthanore Toade,and delpuered Flracllalfo.
The.iiii. Chapter.


mer


WINN


And Deboaa Pany


be lapde:¥ Aa
eall not be foz thyne


| piopthbpm.
aut Paber? entte bih was of bi
AnD pitched bis tent vu:


Fori.


pricrpitt.t
25


ofes )remoued aume,p.b.


Beeb


O24


charetteg,and all bis hoof with the enge of the
(wearde before Barak:lo that Silara lighted
Downe of his charet, and fled awape on Dig tete.
Wut Warak folowedafterthecharettest after
the boft,euen onto Haroleth of p gentples. And
all thebofte of Sifara fell pponthe cdge of the
fwearde,and there was not aman leatte.ipotw-
beit Silara fledatwape on bps fete to the tente
of Jael the wopfe of Haber the kenpte : for there
was peace betwene Jabin the Bynge of 194302,
and the houtbolte of haber the Benite.

And Jacl wente oute fo mete Sifara, and
fapde dnto bim:turnein mplozd turne intome,
fearcnot. And whan be had turned in vnto der
into ber tent, the conered bpm wptha mantell,


m And belayde unto ber, gene me a lptle water to


zmibd Mynke, fog Jam chpatty


Deut, (19.5


pral redia


Juvi.tii.d


prity . And the opened * a
bottle of mplke,and gaue bpm Dzpncke and co-
uered bym. and agapne belapde vito er: Fave
inthe Doze of the tente,and whan anp mandorh
come andenquere of p, whether therbeanp may
bere, thou tpaltelape-nape.

qhe Jacl Havers wyltokeanapleof p tente,
eanbammer inber band, and went foftlp unto
bun,and {mote the naple into tie temples of his
peade g fafkened it into the qrounde,fo? He flom
brepfoze,andwas werp:Andlobedped.

And bebolde,as Warak folowed after Dila-
ra, Faelcameoute to mete bym and lapbe nto
him:come.and F wyl ewe the the man, whom
thoufekct . Bnd twhenbecame into her tente:
Beholde, Hilara lape Dead, and the naple was
inbps temples. And fo Godbzought Jaben the
kpnae of Canaan into fubieccpon that dap be-
fore the chplozen of jfracll . Andthe bande of
the chpld2en of Flraell profpered , and p2euap=
levagapnttc Yaben the kynge of Canaã, vntpll
thep bad bought ppm to nought.

¢ The. bv. Chapter. |

(The fonge and thankes geupnge of Debozaanv

Warak after the bicto;7p.
Hen Debora and Yarak pfonne of X:
binoam fange the lamedape, fapinge:
raple pethe Lode, fo? the auengpug
Laos) of Brac, g fo the people that became
fo wplipnae.eare D pe kpnges, berken D pe
pepuices: 4, euen F,wopll fpnge nto the Lorde.
Jyll peaplethe LozdeGodof Firacll.

-Logde, x wohanthou wentelt oute of Seir,
wha thou departed oute of the felde of Edom,
the carthtrimbled,and the Jeauens rapned: the
cloudes allo dzopped water. x The moutapnes
melted befoze the Lozde,euen ag dpd Synat,
peforethe Lozde Godot Ffraell.

4ntbedapes of x Samgat the fonne of A=
nath, inthe dapes of + Jacl the bye wapes were
Dnoccupyed : And p ronners of the pathes wal-
keatho2rowe bp tapes.

The inhabpters of the townes Were gone,
thep were gone in Zfracl, yntpl 3 Deboza cam
by wbpchecame bp a mother is sleacll.

Thep chole newe Goddes,anod then bad thep
(the cnemp)in p gates tbough ther were hyploe
anolpeate. There was nota (hploe oF fpeare
feneamenge fourty thoufande of Ftracl


= se


$


- Judges.


Gren,

Wyp barte louetbthe youerners of Firaell,and
thent that are wpllyngeamonge the people. ©
praplepe the Lode.

Speake pethat rpde on fapze afles,ttbat tpt
Dppermoft it iudgement, ¢ walke bp p wapres.

‘At the cepengeot the archers amonge the
drawers of water, there all thep [peake of the
rpalteoutnes of the Lozd¢, bysrpgbteoutnetle
inthe wnfenced places of Flraell : then hall epe
people of the Lozde qodowne tothe gates.

oe Dn va paet the re tpnge alonge:
XArple Warak and leadethecaptiuptecaptine ,
thou fonne of Abinoam, i aaa

‘Chenthalithep thatremapne,bauedominton »
of the pzoudette of the people ( of Jabin: ) The
Lozde thall foz mp fake haue dominion ouerthe _
migbtie. Out of* Ephzaim wastherea rote of 3°
them agapnite Ameleck, and after the wenta-
minamonge thp people. Dute of Machir came
rulers, and oute of sabulon thep that gouerne
the penne of the wepter. :

And of Slachar, ther oem ate 5 rar iret
Plachar allog Warak Were tent oft their fete m=
tothe vallepe, whanin the departpngatwape of
Ruben there were great men,and wple of pert?

Wibp abode thou amonge the thepefolies,
tobeare p bleatpnges pf p flockes, eto leparate
thy felfe atoay wpth greate meng wple of Hert.

@ilead allo abcde beponde Jozdane: and whp
doth Danremapnein iyppes:

Afercontpnued onthe lee Hoze, andtaricd
inbps Decaped places.

Wut the people of sabulon baune teoperde thepz
Iyues even Dntothedeathe, lpheasbyd Meph-
thalim inthe bye places of the felde.

_ bebpngescameandtought, then foughte
the kpnges of Canaanin Channab, bp the wa- -
ters of Hegiddo,and wanne no money.

Thep fought from heauen,cuen the tharres in
thep2 courles fought agapnit Difera.

-Therpuer of Cylon remouedthem, thataun-
cient rince, ý epuer Cplon:<)p foule thal treade
(bpm)downe mpabtelp.

Then were the hole bofes mpttena funder
bp the meanes of the ppaunfpnges that thepz
mypgbtpmenmade.
Curte pe the cptie of Seros(fapdethe angell
ofthe Lozvde ) curflethe inbabptours therof , be-
caufetbep camenottobelpe the Lorde, to belpe
the Lozdewpththe mpgbtp. a
ael the wpfeof Haber the kenpte Hall be
bleffed aboue other wemen, blefled (hall the be
ao opn ormen int i eal .
xe alked water,and the qauc bpm mplcke, r
the brought forth butter in alozdip opite. i
xDbe purir bandeto Pnaple,and bit PEDE zun, si.
handeto the (mptbes hammer: wpththebam=" ` `
mer (mote the Sera, ¢ Emote bps peade, wo-
ded bpm, and pearled bps temples. |
He bowed ppm Downe at be Fete, be fell


A


Downeandlape Epil: At bpz fete he bowed bpm

downe, g fell. And whenhe hadloncke Downe,

be lape ftplldefolate.

@hemotber of Sileraloked ont at a window,

ge crpedthozowwethe lattetles Upp is big Hamas
o longe


Gedeon Judges, Fol ti
etnar, n sommpnge- Til bp tarp the weleg of ie inthps thy mygbt,and thon he ot, k lij ®
se beh Ea Flraelout of the bandes of the pantana E
wae wasanta eea te PO Danena d reene ano beans np
antwered ber felfe. Lozde, wberwpth th Vitel
fore thep baue founde, thep denpde the my hynred ig MOO In awe cage 2
ere bath Dee two: Si- inmp fathers boule. The Logde ta Stai lptle
euena pea E i dpuers coloured garmëteg Jwpllbe wptbthe:and tbou balte îm fete
louregano t nat aveindde chen o onDpcos Sadtanites,as thep Were but onem canbe
loures.and that aremadeofnedle worke: rap: antweredbpm: Db. pE J ban pa aedd be
ppp tsa olours¢ofncdle workewbpch t pipgbt,toen ewe mea lygne,that Stace tn
te popia- So perpipealiebpne enemys D S ema aea ee ee Departe nor Dene
E Big Neg = fies A ge come agapne yntothe, g Soei
Lozve:but thepthatlouchpm , let thembeag off Ie, Cpl J bzpnge mpne
the Sonne when berpfeth in bps mpabt yngeand baue fet it befoze the.
Want pea ESY apd: ll ntpl :
And thelandebadretfoztpe peareg, ` agapn A apn. E hei kos OMA eaa D


F Toe. bt. Chapter.
ph las ig onse oio panos: Sebeontens bz oth in a pot, and b
a i dat erer, D of, an ti
IE thechpldzé of Flracl*commpeted derthe Dke and pretented ie AnD theanga oF
jen ex Wrckiednesinthefygbtofthe Lorde. Godfapd vnto bpm: take the flcthe athe tore


EN


(And the L opdedeliuered theminto the kabes, andlaypetbem vponthps rocke €poure


=
=
=
ce
=
g
=
[=]
Ti
"h
=a
T3
=
=d
5"
=
=
ha
=
La |
mi
=
SS
=
=
kari
pem
zJ
r}
Fimi
c
To
=,
k=
=
t
L =
Di
(= d
i
=
=
or
=
O
-=
t}
=
cr
=
ka
ER
TY
E.
m
=
—
J
=


badfowen,the Madianiteg,the Amalechites Sut the i

en, te g 8,tDe. € kes. 2uttheange | l

tbep of p caft coûtre came Dptogetheragain(t of bistpgbe. SnD when Erorien ae out
if Was an angellof the Lozde,be fa pa: Alas, D


thoucome nto Asab:andleftenoluttinaunce the Lo o Face, that 7
A Ot lefi 2de faceto Face, p Iurhi,
He aia iber Depe one Raate eer 4k ea a pnto a trone be onto sbe ba or
thep2tentesasamultitude of ar shoppers to ananiita » thou fpaltnot dpe, Ché Sede made
| that both thepandalfotbeircamels were with Thei eof re vno the Lozde,and called it : n
15 outnombze. Andebepentredinto the lande i cin ode ot peace. And onto thys dave it ig
| deffrope tt. And fo was Frael ercedinglp "Do DEED ete. that pertapneth ntop father
Bet cebinglpimpo ofthe Cierites. And it foz ‘ha )
O one base Aasaa oannes gepe EE Lh tapo bom: abeaponge
> onte 2de. d the chplozen of Ji- bullockeoutof thp fathers Done anr |
be on q tbe Lozdebecaule of the atadi- of. vit. peares olde, an beaten, andanother
Dapa aama nan Charen Rept: Slr tbe atp aro atoom eae
oxen eapo othe: Chus lapetbtheLode aroue that tsbpit, and makean we
God of Firacl: 3 fet poutco€gipte ebrougyt the Lorde thy woo “eng aultare nto
pou ott of § boule ofbõdage and F rpd Son ont law entulenicae; F Upon the top of thpsrocke
oF the handeok the Egppriang and out ofthe locke, andotferbuene tae eee feconde bul
3 "3 3 WEL DI mF i i
brine pon, co Sieou. af eoeou Wipo tyon fbate outo
i sepa fapd bata ; pou: Jam : L0 da shied God i n i edeon toke ten menof ps feruañteg and dpd
Seremp.a, HOE EDC qodDdes OF the mogitesin wbote lanne Dott ape For aaa ce a ale be Duct ned
Erbe aaae copa obere m ere sib So
debe a LoWEcaMe,andlatenn2 Andwhen the men of the ;
E E E Sect amt at *
ia Cone’ ea tes. And was bzokë, andthe qroue cr , :
bis foune Gedcon peed out wheate out of th bp it, and aroue cut Downe that wag
gi 5 a aehetetenk | t, and the feconde bullock D1
 tacegina pele tobpdeit fromthe Badiant. aulter that ta ep puted vponthe
tes: and tie Angell of the Lode apeared wnto anotiet -woho pains And thep lape one to
) i . i : z | t [a] l ¢ JE 4 .
etanat ee aS Ganera Ebtaeommpg. EB engapan anb ae, cy ap Sebe fye
dah EN 1: FOC 4048 Dath doneth , ph ae
nya rame par orcas etal es Tapae ws Ans brag
as sats E yeaa pe ts top tonne. that be map dpe, becaule he hat
=DpDd not the Lorde bapnge ve out of Saviter see mre are Of Waal, andcut dawne the
ine na the Lozdehath fozlakeu be.and de- tpat ove bp pin alpen 4 Parioli
€ And the pies sh NDA tg @adianites. caule:
ý SY Ve be


Gedeon


Fhe bea God let hymbe anenged of ppm that
calt Downe bys aulter. And from that dap was
Gedeon called: ferobaal becaule bis father bad
fapde: Let Waal be auenged of bpm, that bathe
b2oken Downe bps aulter.
cs. Allthe Qabianites therfore and the Amale-
Rites and thep of theealte, tocre gathered toye:
ther,and went, and pptched inthe valep of Fel-
rael :butthe {p2ete of the Lome came ppoti Ge-
POE a. deon. * And he blewe a trompet, called t Abte-
"oser to Folow bim, lent meflengers thorow out
al danafics,t callcd thé, which alfo dpd folow
bym. And be lent meflengers vnto Mer sabuld
and Pepbthalim,and thep came to mete ppm.
And Gedeonfapde nto God: wylet thou faune
Fraclinmyp bande, as thou balk {apd ¢ Webold,
arin a fece of wolle inp thzeatbing place.
nd pf the Dewe come on the fece onelp, and it
be Dape wpon all the earth belpde then Hall y be
fure,that thou wpite faue Ff{racll bp mp hande,
astboulfapact. Anditcame foto pane. ffo2 be
rofe pp carlp on the mo20w, andthulk the fiece
together, and wrong thedewe therout,efplled
 gaborole of water:and Gedeon lapDagapne bn
Se. Toit. to God:be not angrp wpthme, that x Flpeake
once mole. Fo? FJ wpl proue once agapne bp the
flece. Let it bed2peonelp vpo the flece,and dewe
wponall p grounde. And God dpd To that fame
npabte:foz it Was Bape Dpon the fiece onlp and
there was dewe on all the grounde.
@ The. vit.Chapter.


Š @ Gedcon wpth wibundsed men ouercometh ihe


e feabianites,~icb ant zeb are Napar,


Peat.) ehecates of
Gi


eee men. Hut all the remnant of the people
ter. And the Lod apd wuto Gedeon : Wy thele


Judg


tS, ®ecocon,


theebiidzed më f lapped water, wil J fauepou: €


€Delpuer f Sadianttes into thpne bande. And
let al p other people qo cuerp ma onto bis place
Thep thertoze of the people toke vitaples w
them,and thep2 trompettes. Andbelent alltbe
rete of {lrael,eucrp ma wuto bps tente, com-
forted thole threbundzed wpth bym. And ý bolt
of Madian was bencth himina valepe. Andit
foztuned thattbelamenpabtethe Lozdelapde
piito bpm: Arple,qet the Downe Dntothe pofte,
Eo} 3 baue delpucredtt mto thpne bande. Wut g
pf thou feare to godotone , then go thou gha-
rab thy ladde downe to the bot, and thou thalt
berken what thepfape, and fo tall thpne pan- ‘
des be fronge,to go Downe vnto the pote. —
Then wente de dDowne and harab brsladde,
euen barde onto the men of armesthat were in
the bofte. And the Hadianites,the Amalebites
and all thep of tbe Eaff,lap a long tn tbe valey,
lpkea multitude of grafboppers , and thepz ta»
melleg were Without nombze,cuen as the lande
bp the lee fpdein multitude. And when:


edecit
was come: Behold, there was a man that toloe gy
adieame vnto bps nepabboue, and fapoe : We-
bolde, J ozeamıed adzeame, eine (thought that a
lofe of batlep bzeade, tombled into tbe bolte of
Madian and came tntoa tente ,andfmote itp
it Felle,and ouerteurnedit, that the tentelape a
longe. And bis felowe an{ivered and fapde:thtg
isnotbpng elles laue the fweard of Gedeon the
fonne of Joas aman of 3frael:foz into bis hand
bath God Delpuered Padianandall the bote.

Wiben Gedeon barde the tellpneg of p dreame,
andebetnterpzetacton of the fame, be wo2hpp-
ped and returned onto the bolt cf Flrael:¢ fap
vp, forthe Lozde bath delineredDinto pour band
the bolte of adian. And be deupdedp thze bü- ge
Dred men into Ehzecompanpes , and qauecucrp
ma atrompet in bis band,w anempty pptcber,
elampestherin, elapde vnfothe:loke on me,¢
Do likewple that when J come to the fpo ofthe
boffe,eucn.as ¥D0,fo Dopow:Wiben 3 blewe w
atrompet andalltbat are wme,blowe pe with
trompettes alfoon cuerp{pde of the holte, fap:
bere tstbe fuocardeot the Lord and of Gedeon.

And fo Gedeon and thethze hundzed menthat
tocrewpth bpm,.came onto the {pode of the pote
inthe begpnnpnere of the mpddle Wwatche, € rep-
fed bp the watche men. Andtheyp blewe w theit fe
trompettes,and bake the pitchers that wter in -*
tbeir bandeg. And all the thee companpes blewe
With trompettes € brake the pptcbers,¢belde p
lampes tnthep2 leftebandes , tbe trompettes
inthep2 right to blowe withal. And thep crped:
the fwearde of the Lorde tof Gedeon. And thep
tone ftyll,cuerp mantn bps placerounde about
the bofte: And thep within toc bolte,ranne, and
crped and fled. And p thee bundactb blewe with
tropettes, the Lozdletxeucrp manes (wearve , see riiit.
bpon bis nepghbour,thozowe out all the hofic. ii.Par.rre
And the holt ficd to Wetplitah,tosererath, and
to the edaeof the plapne of Hebolab into Ta- os
bath. And tbe men of jfrael bepng gathered to-
gether out ofthe trpbe of Acphtbalun, of Afer,
€ OF all Hanatles folotwed after p Wadia gies

n


Gedeon


And Gedeon lente meflengers wntoallmounte
Ephzaim,laping: com downe agapnit the Wa


‘Dianiteg , and take before thé the waters vnto


Wethbarath and to Jordan. Chen all the mer
of Epbhzaim gathered together toke the wa-
ters vnto Wethbarath,and to Jozda. And thep
toketwocaptapnes ofthe WMadianites , Deeb
and3eb, and fleme Deb vponthe rocke Deb,
and seb atthe prellescb,and folowed after Da


` dian. Andbzoughe the heades of Dzeband3eb,


win


D


to Gedeon on the other [pde Jo2dan.
The. vit. Chapter.

C Ephraim maketh iaturreccpon agapull Goron, but

is Cone pacpfped,
NO Md the men of Epbzatm fapde Dn-
yA) Ds tobim:wbp paffe p ferued ys thus,
eres Vale P thou calledeft bs not, wbenthou
Vy, Ved Wa wentelt to Epght wpth the Madia:
VES nites: andthep chode Wpth bpma
TOOD. s ban all mot done bpm biotence. And Helapd
puto them : What dede baue Jodone lpke Ynto
poures:isiu. a clutter of Ephzatm better, then
the write baruett of Abiezer? God hath delpue-
redinto pour bandes p Lordes of Badia, Diced
seb. And what was Jable to dolpkeaspou
paue Dones And chen thepz(pirites abated from
of bym, whenhe badlapde that. AndGedeon
came to Jordan to pale oner, beandthe theebu
ded men that were wopeh him, verp fapute,and


y5 pet folotwen the chace. And helapd wntothe më


of Socoth:geue Fp2ap pou kakes of bzeade Vir
tothe people that folow me:fozthep be faputie,
that 3 mapefolowe aftersebath , anè salmona
hinges of Padian. And the Lozdes of Doceth
fapde: are the bandes of sebath ¢salmona nowe
inthpne bandes, that we thulde geue bzeade vn:
tothpne armpe-Gedeon fapde,therfoze when p
Lode bath delpuered sebath and salmona into
nipne bande, ¥ wp! teare the fele of pou with
the thozneg of the wpldernes and wprh beers.
And he wente vp thence to Pbanuel, and fpake
onto them Ipkewple. And the men of Pbanuel
auntwered bim agdpd the men of Socoth. And
be faped alfo vntothemen of Pbhanuell when F
come agapne in peace, 3 wil beeake Downe this
towe. sebath ¢salmona were in Carkar, and
thepz botes wptp them, opon a.rv.thoulande
men, which Were ali p there lefte ofall Y hooftes
of thé ofp Eatte:-fFo2 there was flapnea büdzed
and twenty thoufand më, that dzew liweardes.
And Geded went thozow them $ dwelt in ta-
bernacles on f Eat {pode of Aobab € Jebabah,
æ mote the boft:fo2 ¥ bote bpd caft no perplies.
And whanzsebab salmona fedde, be folotwed
after them atoke p two kpnges of Hadi, se-
bath and salmona,¢ difcomfozted all the bolte.
And Gedeon the fonne of Joas returned fró
battell,afoze the funne was Downe, andcaught
alabdde ofthe men of Socoth,¢ enquered of him
Aud he weote of bym thelozdes andelders of
Socoth. Iervit.men. and became vnto the mé
of Socoth,andlapde:2Bebolde, bere ¥ haue se-
bath and3almona, with which pe a ca me itt
the tcthe, fapinge:are the bandes of sebath and
salmona alredp inthpne bande , that we (pulde


Judges.


qene bzeade Yuto thy fapritic men? And he toke
the elders of the cptpe, and thoznes phd ook


dernefle and bzecrs , and made the men of So- fii.reg.rti,€


coth to fele thé . And be brake Downe the towe
of + banuel,and flewe the men of the cptic.
And thenfapde be punto zcbath and salmona, Œ
fohatmaner of men were thep whom pe flew at
Thabo? rand they aunlwered : the lphenefie of
the and them isall one, euenafter the falthpon
of thecbplozen ofakpnge . And be fapte: thep
were mp byethzen, cuen mp mothers chelen.
As truly ag p 102d lpueth pf pe bad faucd thepz
lpueg, J woldenot fiep pou. And helapde unto
Aether bpseldeft fonne: vp and lepe tbem: Sut
the lad Dłue not bps wearde, foz be feared , be-
caule be was pet pong. Tbensebarb g e cone
fapde: Rpfetbou, andfalle vpon vs:foz asthe
mants,fots bis frength. And Geded arole and
flemesebathandsalmona, andtokeawapethe
Oulamentes, that were ontheircamels neckes.
Then the men of Flrael fapde vnto Gedeon:
Repgne p ouer vs, bothe #,thp Conne thp fon-
nes Cone, Eo? P baft delinered vg out of p bade of
<Habdia. And Gedes fapde vnto thé: J wplinot
repgne ouer pou, nether Hall mp chploerepane yE
ouct pou, but the Lozde thallrepane oner pou.
And agapne Gedeonfapd vntothem:F wold


nelpze acertapne requet of pou,cue p pou woy PFS


geue me eucrp man the* earpnges of bis pape.
Foz thep Dad goldé caringes becaulethep were
Slmachites:andthep antwered : We tpl gpue
thé. And they (pred a mantel, and dpdcalt there
ineuerp man the earpnges of bis prape: andthe
wepgbt of the golden earinges that he required
Was a thoulande ¢ feuen hiozed {pcles of qold,
belpdechepnes, pommaunders and purple rap=
ment tbat as onthe Bpnges of Wanian, ebe-
{poethechepnes, that were about thepz camels
neckes . And Gedeon made an Ephod therof


oy es of 5 € |
putit inbpscptie Ephzab And all Flraell went S2eteHo
ax whozpng after it, inthefame place, whpehe 3


thpuge becamea rupne ynto Gedeonandto big
boufe. Thus was Hadian brought low befoze
thechylozé of Flracl,fo that thep lpfte vptbep2
beadesno moze. And Pcountrepe wasin quict:


nes forty peres intbedapes ofGedcon. ©


And Jerovaal p tonne of Joas went,¢ dwelt TT


inbis owne boufe. And Geded badxirr. fonne
of bps bobp begotten foz be bad ane asamt
And bis concubine that twas in Siché, bare him
afonne allo, whofe name be called Abimelech.
And Gedeon the fonne of Joas dped, inagood
hha bo an ‘ered pte of Joas bps
atber,euening that pertepn the
Father of the €srites. ‘shel taboo
wut it fortuned, that as fone as Gedeon wag
bead , thechpldzen of Fraell turned atoapeany
wentea whozpnge after Waalim, andmadea
coucnaunt wpth Wall tobethep2 God, andthe
chplozen of Ffraell thougbte not onthe Lorde
fhep2 god, ope bad delpuered them out of the
bandeg ofall their cnempes on cucrp {pde.Aep-
ther Hetoed they mercp on p boule of Jerobaal,
otberwple called Gedeon, accozdyngetoalithe
goodness whpchebebhad Hewed Ynto Praell.


Che


Fori,


Abinelech kyllech


i C Their Chapter,
Q Gbpmelech is made kpnge,

ENY wWimelech the fonne of Fcrobaat went
>. eto Spcbem, nto bys mothers bze-
Hy ae ie tDzen, and comuned with them g with

Zs 'all his motbersfathers Kinred,Caping
fape J pape pou,in the eares of all the enbabp-
fourcs of Spchem: Whether is better faz pou, p
all che fonnes of Jerobaal( whpch are. lrer. per-
Connes )reiqne ouerpou, epther that oneveyane
outer pour Remembze, that J ant of pour bone,
and of pourefiethe . And bps mothers baethen
[pakke of Dymin the audtence of themenof Si-
chem all thefe wo2des,ethep2 bartes werem 0:
ucdfo folowe Sbimelech. Fozthep fapoe:beis
our bzotber. And thep yauc him. irr. peces of [yl
uct out of f temple of Baal Berith wher wpt
Abimelech bpzed vapne €lpght perfons whych
went With him. And be went vnto bys fathers


fi,pat.fri.a ponte at Cphrab*and fleweall bis bacthzé, the


8 of Serobaal:cuen.Irr.perfons wpth one
fone. Notwithtadpng, pet Joatha ý ponrefte
fonne alpine. aalelcaped, foz be bpd bpm felfe:
And allp më of Dichëgatberedtogither, eal p
boule of Hello,¢ came g made Abimelech king
inp plapne, Where p qreat tone was bp Siche.

nD when thep tolde it to Joatham,he went
and (ove in the toppe oF mount Garizim,¢lpft
bp bps bopce and crped, and fapde vnto them:
Herken puto me pou men of Sechim, that God


tiie, Mape berken bnto pou.* Che trees went forth


tiii b,


toanopntea kpnge ouerthem,elapde vntothe


Dlpue tree:repgne thou ouer bs. wuttheolpue f


treefapde vuto thé:(hulde Z leaue mp fattenes;
whpch both goddes and men prapte in me, qo
tobe promoted ouer p trees? And p trees fapde
to therrase tree : come thon and be kpnge ouce
vs. Chetpage tree anfweredthë : Hulde J fo2-
fake mp {woetnes,and mp coos frute , eqotobe
promoted oucr thetrees? Chen lapde tiie trees
Dito the bpne:come thouand be kpng ouert ve.
‘The vpne fapde yntothem : Mulde 4 leane mp
Wwpne wherbp Fcheare both coddes and men, g
go fobepromoted oucr the trees: Then fapdall
the trees Ynto p pare bulthe:com thou ¢repane
ouer vs. And p Epere bulipe fapd wuto the trecs:
plitbe truethat pe will anopnt me Kytige ouer
pou, tbencome and put youre trufte nder mp
adowe . PFno, thetpze come oute of the fpzre
bufibe,and watte the Cedze trees of Libanon.
Nowe therfore, pf pe do trulp¢ bncozenpely,
tomake Abimelech kpng:and pt pebanebealse
bell with Ferobaal and bys boule, baue done
butodpm accozdpnge to the deferupnee of bps
handes,tudge pe. Foz eu€ he(mp father fought
to? pon and aduentured bps Ipfe and rydde pou
out ofthe band of Hadian. And pe arerpien bp
agapnite mp fathers boule thys dape, and baue
tepne bps chpldzen , euen. Ire. perfonties to th
one tone, baue made Abimelech p Cone of big
mapde feruañit, kinge ouer the nen of Sichem,
becaute bets pour beother:pt pe thenbauedealt
trulp g purely with Fetobaal ¢ with bis boufe


`- Eps dape then retopce pe with Abimelech,¢ let


bpm vetopce pth pou . But pf pou baue not


Folna,


DiS. lrr.Methen,
dealt trulp , then J prape God afpze map come

out of Abimelech, and confume the men of Di-

chem tde boule of Hello. And that there map

come a fpze from amonge the men of Sichem,

and outeof p boule of Welo and confume Abi-
melech.And Joathbam ranne awap, and fledde,

and went to weer anddwelte there, foz fear of
Abimelech bps bother. When Abimelech had A
repiied the pere, Godfent a {pete of hate be» 4
twene Abimelech andthe më of Sichem . And l

the citesens of Sicbemrapled pps Abimelech,
and wpithed that thewpckednesdonetop.irr. |
fonnes of Jerobaal mpgbt come on bpm,¢ that =
God wolde lap the blond of them vnto bime-

lech thepz bzotber whpch flewe them and ppon

the other menof Sichem whpchapdedbhim inp


D tpllpng of bps bzethzé. Andthecptesens of St


chbemfet metolapawapteforbpminthetoppe — “ae
of the mountapnes:wbpchmenxcwppietbep taried se

for bps commpnge) robbed all that came a longe the

Waye bp them. Anditwagtolde Abimelech. —

And Gaal thefonne of Abed cane wpthpys zp

bzethzen and tbep gat tbem to Sich. And the
men of Sichem put thepzcõfidence in bim. And

thep went out into F feldes ,¢ gatheredinthep2
Qrapes.and trode them,and made merp:¢ went

into theboule ofthep2 qoudes,anddpd catcand
dzinche,¢curfed Abimelech. And Gaaltbe lone

of Abed fapd: that ig Abimelech and what is
SHichemsthat we Hulde ferne bpm Fg be not p

onne of Jerobaal-e sebul is bis offpcer Derne
uche as come ofxtyemoz thefatber of Dicbem, oeceriis »

or what realonis it that we tuldeferuebyme
wolde God thps people were wynder mphande,

tha wolde J take Abimelech oute of the wape,

nd be fpake agapnite Abimelech:make thpue

boftegreater:and qo oute.Andwhensebull the

culer of thecitie barde P Wwo2zdes of Gaall fine

of Abed, he was wothe, g lent meflengers Yn- °
to Abimnelech priuelp faping:X3cholde, Gaal p

fonne of Abedand bps bzethzen be cometo Di-

chem:and beholde, thep fet the cptieagaintt the.

flow therfore vp bp npagbt.thou ¢ al the people

thatis wpth p,andlpeinwapte inp felde.And

tplecarlp inthe moznpng as foone asthe funne

ts Dp,andfall ppon the cptie. And pE be and the

people that is pthbpm.come out agapnit the,

bo to bpm tohatthpne bandes thalbeable. And @
Abimelech rofe vp,and all the people Chat were

wbpmbp npabt. nd thep lapdawapt mainit
Dichemintourecompanieg. And Gaal f fonne

of Abed went onte, and ftode inthe entrynaeof

the gate of the cptie. And Abimelech rote vp, g

the folke f were wpth him, from lpinge awapt,

4nd when Gaal fawr the people,be fapde to3e:

bul bebolde,ther come people done at top
ofthe mountapnes. And sebul fapde vnto bpm:
tbe Hadow of p bplles feme men unto p ox («dp
Perroure art P bifceaued. )eGaalanfwered agapne, —
andfapd:fe,ther come folke dotone bp the mpd-
del ofthe land, # another company come along
bythe plapne of thecharmars. Chen fapdsebul
bute bym:wbereis now tbp mouth thatfapde:
what felotve is Abimelech, that we buld ferue
bim- Js not this the people that Phatt i ptt


|


. m


Eo out now g trout rw thé. And Gaal tet oute
befoze p citests of Sichem, i 7

lech. And Abimelech chaled bim, p he Hed befoze

ve Dpitiox( ede dzone bpm into the cptpe ) AND Matp Were

ouce thzotwen ¢ hounded, euen Yuto p entering

of the gate. And Abimelech Divelt at Arumad.

Andsebul thaufte out Gaal and bps byethzen

-a P they hulde not dwell in Sichemen( «tuteren thë

not to tarpe therin, ) AND onthe mozow, itbappened

f Aht people wet out into felde. And thep told

Sbimelech. Xnd he toke p people, edenpoed the

intothze copantes elapd awapte inp feldes, glo

ked, ¢ bebolde,the people were come oute of the

cptic,and beranne vpon them, and mote them.

And Abimelech,2 the copanpes f were wpth
bpm, ab further, æ kode in the entrpnge of
the gate of thecptie . And p tivo other copanies
ranne bponall the people that were in p feldes,
efletve ther. And when Abimelech had Fought
agapntt the cptic all that dape, be toke st, e flew
the peoplethat was therin,¢ deftroped the cptie
and lowed tart thozow it. And when all the me
of the fotze of Sichembeard that, they entred
intoa trong bold of phoule of their god Waall

ex Wertith, #( where cher made a bonde with hpm:ethero€ opp
the place Cake the name, wbpcbe place was erceabpng Qronge. )
Andit was tolde Abimelech, that all the mé of
the tower of Sichem were gathered together,
and Abinelech gat bpm to mounte selms, both
be andall the people that were with him,¢toke
ares wprh bim cut Downe bones of trees , and
toketbeand bare themon bis Hulder, fayd vn
juni, viie to the folke that Were withbpm-* what pe baue
© fenemedo, {pede pourefelues, anddo lpbewple
as J baue done. And all the men ý wereamong
the people cut Downe boues, efolowed Abime
lech put tbem into the bolde, and fet the bolde
c# a fper bp the:fo thatos(rth tmoke and fee) al p me
of the toler of ppchem were flapne, ppona
thoufande menand wemen,

Then went Abtmelech to Thebes, and befe-
gedit,¢foke tt.25ut there waga tronge towze
woptbin the cite, etbpther ranne all the men and
twemë tall thecheferhat were intbecprpe, and

oe (butitto thé, ¢ got them Dp ocr the bulwozkes £0

ý toppeof p towze . And Abimelech cam onto p

fotvzcand fought agapntt it, gwent hard nto

the doze of the towzetofet it onfpze. Andacer-

ti.axeg.ri.b tapne oman x catte a pece of a mplftone vpon
bps beade,and allto bzake bys bzapne panne.

ben Abimelech called battelpe wnto p poung

man that bare bis barnefle,andfapd Ynte him:

f.ve.rrre.b, XDA Wwe thp wearde g flee me,that men fap not

uparara of mesa woman Newe bpm. Aud bps lad thure

bpm thozowe and hedped. |

And when the men of Firael fawe that Ibi-

melech was dead, they Departed enerp ma nto
gudir Dpsowne boule. And thus «the wyckednelle of
Abimelech wbypche be dpd vnto bys father, in
flepnge bpsfeuentpe bretbh2en andtberto all the
wpckedneffe of themen of Spchem , dpd God
bepnge bp their beades And vpon themcame
thecurile of Joatbanthefonne of Jerobaall.
The.r.Chaper.


€ Dbola and Fairare Zulges of Flack,


Judges.


ichem, ¢ og Abime: k


-Gileadite, €iudqed Flraell.rcrit.peare. And be


IFo.tb,


meee Atter Sbimelech there arole, to defend
wA Sex a ltaell, one Chola(p fonne of Phuabh) 4
LY sea Xe bis pnelesfone, ama of Jlakar whpch
eses Delt in Samirin mounte Ephzaim.
And he tudged Fracl. criti. peare edped,¢ was
burpedin Samir . Andatterdbpmarofe Jaira


badthpztpelonnes # xtode on tbpztpe Affecol- IWiriiv,
tes,¢thep bad thpztye cpties, which are called A
townes of Jair nto this dape, tare f lande o
Gilead. And Jair dped g was burped m Rami.
xAndthe childzen of Jfraelwzougbtwpcked: 2
nefe pet agapne,inthefpabt ofthe Loz, efer- 7/05;
ued Baaliin ¢ Afaroth,and the qoddes of Hi- via. vit.g
ria, the qoodes of Sidd, the qodoes of Boab, ©" *
the goddes of the chpldzen of Amms4,¢ theod-
des of the pbilpltpnes, andfozloke the Lord x
ferued not bim. And the Lozde as wroth with
Yfrael, g folde them into the bandes of the pp-
liftines,€ into the bandes of the childzen of Am
mon: Dopich fro that pere forth pple oppzefled
thechplozen of Zlraell. rit. pere all that tere
onthe other fpde Zo2dan:in p lande of the Amo:
rites whpchisin Gtlead.)ozcouer,p chplozers
of Anunon went ouer Jogdan to fpabteagapnt
Juda, Hen Fanin,¢ the boule of Ephraim: To
Slrael was fore cobzed. And the chyld2en of Fi
tatlcrped unto the Lorde, faping:Wwe pane fpn-
ned agapnit the:foz we baue fozfaken our owne
God, g Haue ferued Waalim. And the Lord fapad
tntotpecbplozë of Firael : dpdnot f Eqppcias
the Amozttes, the chpldzen of Amma, the Philt-
fines, the Sibomites, the Amalebites, andthe
2) aobites oppeefle pour And pecrpedtome t J
Delivered pou outofthep2 bandes. And£o2 all p
pe baue foxfakenme , €lerued ftraunge govdes,
woberfore 3 willpelpe pounomoze. Goandcrpe ,.
tnta the coddes which ye bauccholenandxlet sare
them laue pou inthe tyme of pourctribulacpon. D
And p chplozé of Flracllapd wnto f Logne:(We |
hauefpnned: dop onto vs whatfoeuer pleale


Fa


Deliner DS onelp this dap. And thep put awap
Traunge goddesfromebem ¢ferued the Lorde,
And bps foule bad pitie on p miferpe of Fraell,

Chen the chpldsen of Ammon gathered toge- |
ther, and pptchedin Gilead. And the chylozen |
of Flraell gathered them together, and pytched
in<ispa . And the lodes of Gilead fapde eche
to otber : Wholoeuer ie begpnne the battell
agapnitethe chpldzen of Ammon, the fame pal-
be beade ouer all the enbabpters of Gilead,

ss Cheri Chapter.
CAephehad delpuereth Nlracl fromthe Ammonptes:


I
|
<q QD ther was one Jephthaba Gilea- 7 |


(oa) AYD dite, a ftronge man, the fonneofan
hey Ao Al Datlot : and Gilead begat Fephthab
4nd Gilcads wopfe bare bim{onneg,
$ whpche when thep were come toage
thuit out Fephthab, and lapde tnta bpm, thou
palt not enberet in oure fathers boule foz p art
thefonne of a fraungewoman . Chen Feph-
thab ted from bisbecthzen, and dweltin pland p;
of Cob. And theregatpered pdlec#(andtpeaprae)
men to Jephehab,and went out with bim. And -
techaunced tn pzoceffle of tpmethat the chplodzen

of Ammon i


My |
SENA


La
Epa


Damion,


of oure bandes nether wolde be baue (hewed vs
all thele thpnges.nozwolde nowe baur told vs
anp luche. And the wpe barea fonne , andealled
bis name Samlon. And the lade qrewe,and the
Lode bleed bpm. And the (prete of the Lorde
beganne to moue bpm in the bolte of Dan, be=
twene saraah and Chal
CThe.cuti.Chapter.
(Tbe marpage of Sam(on.e kpleth alpon. Be


popounDeth arpodle. Be kplicty thpztic, Bis wple
—— farfaketh bim and taketh another. aie we


of the bncircumcpled Ppplp tines. And Hains


fon lavde dnto bps father: geueme this woman
fo: the pleafeth me well. But bis father and mo


ther wy ite notthat it was the Lordes dopna, g
he fought an occalpon agapntt p ppilittines,
opat ptpme pe ilittinescatqned ouer Firacl.

‘Then wet Samfong bis fathers big mother
_ Bowne to Thamnath cam tothe vpnepardes

25 of Chanaty.Andbepolde,apongess(woo lion
roared Dponbpin. Andetbhe (pret of  Lozd came
pponppm. Andbetarebpm, ashe woldchaue
trenta Bpdde,and pet bad notbpnge in bis band,
nepther tolde bys father g mother what be bad
Done. And be wet Downe, ¢ talked w the woma,
Wpich femed well fauozed inp gbt of Salon,

And wpthin abote (pace after as he wente
thither agapne totake ber to pf, be turned out
of the twape,to fe p carkafle off lid. And bebold,
ther wag a fwarme of bees and bony in the car-
kafe of the lion. And be toke of the bonpe indig
bandeg and wente eatpng,ecame tobps father
and mother, and gaue them alfo . And thep dpd
eate . Wuthe toldenot them, that behad taken
the bonp out of the carkafle of thelpon.

Andfo bps Cathercame vntothe oman and
Sarmlon made thera featf, for fo vledtbe pong
mentodo. And whe thepon( the cptetpus of chatplare)
fawe bpin,tbep beought.rre.companypons to be

 wpth bpm. And Samfonlapd vnto thé: 3 wyll
nowe put foztba rpddle yntopou : AndpF pou
candeclare tt me wpthin. bii. dapes of thefealt,
and fpnde if out, J wpll geue pou.rre.thp2tes,e
trr. chaunge of qarmétes :25ut and pf pou can-
not Declare tt me,then thal pe gene merre. per-
tes and.cre.chaunge of garmeétes. Andthey an-
frocred bpm: put fozth rhprpdle, that we mape
beate tt. Andhelapde ynto them: Out of + ca=
ter came meate: ¢ out of the tronge came fwet-
nes. And thepcoulde not in. tit. dapes erpounde
the riddle. And when pleuenth dape was come,
thepfapd onto Satons wpfe : hater thpnebul-

og bande, ox (and perfware dom ) that be nape Declare
sp vstberpoDdle, leatt we burne pand thp fathers

Houle w fpze. Haue pe called vs bprber,to make

vs beggers ” And Samflons wpe wept befoze


‘Judges.


‘into pc


Santon,


bpyimexccomplaynen and fapd: Surelp thou batet #


me and loucl menot : fo? thouba paroh a.


tydbdle : bntothe chpldzenof mp folke and bafte
not tolde it me. And befapde vnto her: Webold,


J baue not tolde it mp father and mp mother,


and (hall J tellit ther |
And Hamlons wypfe wepte before bpm. bit.
dapes whple the feat lated. And the. vti.dape


e tolde per , becaufetpe lape fofo Dponbpm. —


nè the tolde tt the chpldzen of ber folke, Aud p
mien of thecpttefapde pntobpm p (euenth dape,
before the fonne wente dotone.cadbat is fweter
then bonpe,¢ whatis frongerthenalpor T beg
fapdebe bnto them:PE pe badnot plotecd toprh
mp caulfe,pe bad nor Foñde out mprpddle.And
thelp2ete of ? hy cam bp bim.aAndbe went
Downe to Af kalo, lewe thpatye men of them,
and {popledthem, gaue chaunge of garmentes
yutotbhem whpch expounded the tpddle. And be


wut Samfons vopfe was geuenfeone of bps
companpons,that bebad taken dito bpm.
q Samfontpeth fpzebzanbdes to the fore taples. worth $
fame boneok analichekpliethb athoufanbemen, mute
__ Dt agreate to thein the tate, Ged gave hpm water.


y S2 cucintbe tyme of wbete bernet, that
by = Y Damion vylpted bps wpfe wptba

S244 bpd, aping: 3 pli go into mp wpfe
pamber : but ber father wolde not lufre
bym to goin. Ændber father fapde : Jthougbt
that thou babddefte bated ber, and therfore gaue
FZ per nto one of thp companyons. Bs not ber
ponger Cifterfaprer then we? Cake bee in Feade
of the otber. Samfon fayde wnito thé: Nowams
Fmore blamelefle thé the btlitines, therfore
topli y do them difpleature. i

And Samfon went out and caught thee piin-
Died foreg, and toke Fpzebzanbdes , and faitened
taple to taple,¢ put a fpzebzande in thempoes
betiocne ttootaples . And whan be had ict the


banbdes of fper, be lent thé oute,» (that thre mpade ay


rum te abzode, tobpeh went immediatip ) (nto p ffandpnge
cozne of the abiliflines, and burnt vp botbe the
reped cone and alfo the ftandynge, wpth te Vp-


nepardes andolpucs. Chen f Ppuiflinesfapd: 25


Who bathe donethps? Andit was tolde tbem ý
Hamfonthe fonne inlawe off Chamnite, be-
caule be pad taken bys topfe, and qeuen ber to
bys companypon. Andthe Pbilplipnes caine vp
and burnt ber and ber father wpth pe.

And Samon fapde onto them: Though pe
baue Done thps , pet wpll ¥ be aucnged of poue
then F opliceale . And belmote foemlegge and
thrab witha mightpe plage. And then be went
and Owelte inthe caue ofthe rocke Etam.

Then the Pbpliftpnes came yp, and ppeched


(tt Juba, lape inew(a place,that twas atterwarde called) ga


Lebpex(toatis a Jawe bone, wher thep: het was featered
abode.) And tbe men of Juda fapde, whp are pe
com bp tnta ts Thep anlwered:tobpnd Så-
fonare wecome bp.and todotobpm as be bath


doneto vg . Then thze thonlande men of Juda g


went downe tothe caue of the rocke Etam, and
fapd te Dafon : otter? not f the era


Yas woth and wente vptobps fathers poule. -


ayy cit it chaunced wptbin a while after A


wa


ee | ES pe


Samon.


` arernlerg ouer Se? Wherefore then Dalt thou


zen rriitie Done thus vuto vss Heanlwered che, xag thep


dpd wnto me, fo baue F done Ynto them.

And they fayd onto bimagapne-we are com
Downe to bpnde the,and delpuer the into p bad
ofthe Whilifkines. And Samon fapd vnto the:
&® fweare bonto Me,o#(€ pompite me) that pe fhall not
fall bpon me pour (clues. Thep anfwered Him,
_ faping: Qo, but we wyll bpnde the g deliver the

bntothep2 hades. But we wilnot kyl the.And
thep bounde bpm with two newe condes, and
bz it bim from p rocke.And whe became to
Lebt,p wbiliftineshoutedagapnibhpm . And
the fppute ofthe Lozd came vps dim, and f co2-
des that were Vpon His armes, became as flare
that was burnt wÙ fp2e, foz the bades loofed frb
of his bandes. And He founde arotten tawebone
of anaffe, and put fozthe bis bande, andcaught
it and flue a thonfande men theewrtb.

p _ And Samfó fapd:xd the tawe of an affe haue

Finade cs ofthem: withthetawe of anatle
bane J Rapte a thoufand men. And whe be pad
left (peaking: be cat awape thetawbone out of


Judges.


pall be weake ås other men:

And then p lozdes of the Philifinces brongbt
ber fenë wptbes that were pet grene and neure
Deped, and the bounde pim therwith. Aotwith
ffandpng the bad men Iping in wapte with ber
inthechaumbie. Bnd thelapde vutobpm: the
pbiliftines be vpon the Samion. Xndimmecot-
Ate tie bey pA Are

(chat ts wpne O2CaRCLD , WOEN it releth pre.
And lobis frenath was not knowen. i


#10 Dalila fapde onto Samfon: He, thou ¢


baft mocked me ¢ tolde me tyes. Mowe ¢herfore
tele wherwith p mightett be boñt. ye anlwe
ved ber: pfebep bpnde me wh newer ropes Pueuer
were occupyed, J Halbe Weake,and ag another
man. Dalila therfoze toke newe repes, bound
Dim therwith,¢ fapd nto him: the Whiliftines
be bpontheamfon. And there were (pers of
Wapte in thechambee , q be bzake them from of
Hisarmes, as thep bad bene but a tirede. Bud
Dalila fayd to Saifon, bytherto thou hak beet
led ine € told me lyes:pcttel me bow thou nuvi
te be bounde. he fapde vntober:Pfrhou plat-


JEol.rbtt


bis hande,andcalledthe piace: Ramath Lebi.


om ou (Hbhatis bp interpietacpouzche ipftpng bp oitheiatobong)
“* nobe was fore a thyzft,andealled on f Lod,
andfaypde: thou balk gpuen this qreat bictozve,


teddeft > . pif.lockes of mp heed w an beere lace.
And the fattened tiem witha nayle, and fayde
pitohpm:tbhe Ppilitines be ppon the Hami:
And be awooke ont of his Nepe. and plucked az


inthe bande of thy feruaunte. And now FJ mut
dpe foz thpzftand fallintothe bades of p vnete-
cumciled. But God brake a qreattothp was in
thetawe,andtberecame water thercout. And
when be had deonke Dis {ppritecame agapne,t
de was refrefihed, wherfoze p name thereof ts
called vnto this dape the well of the caller on,
which came of theiawe. Andhe iudged Fleael
in the Dapes of the Dbiliftines twentpe pereg.


waye the uaple that wasin the plattpnge with
the peere lace. And the fapde puto bym agapne:
Howcank thou faye that thoulouct me, when
thpne herteis not with me ¢ Webolde,thou bal
mocked me this thee tpmes , and balk not tolde
me wherein thp great frengtblpeth: |

And as thelape ppon bym with ber wozdes
continuallp bering of bim, bis foule was encd-
beedeuen onto the death. And fo pe tolde ber al


‘Samie A ck fark nig derep bis berte and fayd onto ber: *fhere neuer came Sunilta
pamlen t ates o a De thas - PET ETT - ! UD Fut.
`» ra bp Dalila. Deputteth Bowne the boure bpon the tafour vpon mpne beed, fog F baue bencanab-


Taper : o#crharis to fap contecrate) Unto GOD, Cue! ao


Shilitines, and opeth mith them, |
| from mp mothers wombe-therfoze wien Yaim


Cees pen went HSamlon to Asab, xand


_ Dthertupfe CN OY fawethereanbatlot,¢wétinvn- thauenmp ftrength wyll ge irom ine, ¢ 3 iall
called Saja. Meee 4 tober. Andit was tolde the Asathe ware weake, andbelpkeallothermen. Zuo


eta © tes:faying :alonis come hither:
ee eS and thep wet about, ¢lapd wapt
for him there all night in p gate of p citte,¢ wer
fEpllall § night.faping:in f moming when tris
dap we thall ipl bin. And Salon toke hisrett
tpl midniadt ¢arole atinionight,and tobe the
poreso! pgate of Pcitte,ethe twefpde poftes,
g tent them of, with the barre andall, and put
them bpon bis Houlberg, andcarpeb them bp
tothe toppe ofanbyli that is befoze Hebzon,
Aud after thisit fortuned, that by tberpuer
of Sab, be loueda woman called Dalila: yn
to whome came the lodes of the bilifftines,
andfayd vnto ber: perfuade hpm,and fe where
inbis great Frength lveth,and bp what meane
we mape ouercomebym, that we mape bpnde
Hpm,to bepnge bym vnder:andeuerp one of vs
Hallapuc the a leuen bundzed fyluctlinges.
And Dalila fapde to Samfon: Db, tell me
where thy great Frengthlpeth, and howe thou
mpabteft be bounde, and brought wnder. Så-
fon anfwered vntoher: Pithep bpnde me with
fcnen greene wptbhes that were neuer dzped, y


when Dalila fawetbat he hadde tolde her all
bis berte , the lente , andcalled foz the loves of
the Pbili fines, fapinge-come wp pee tis ones,
forbe bath prewed meall bis herte..

Then p lozbes of the PbHilitinescame yp wit
tober, bzouqbht f monep intbeir bandes. Aud


He made pin Nepe dpa Der kneesow’e torp his ber go’


downeiuhetlap, andthe let foza man, andhedpd
fhauc of the euen lockes of hts beed, and began
to vere bim, g his Kren ath was gour from jim
Bnd the (apd:the bili

fou. And Deawoke out of is flepe,andlapde. ¥
wpll goout now asatofier typmes, and hake
my ‘elfe, and be wpit on the Lozb was depar
fedfrombin, Wnt the Dbiliftines toke bim, g
put oute biseves , and bzougbt bym downe to


*Alsath, and bounde bym with two fetters of ©: waza,


bale. Andbhedpdgryndein the prion Doute:
howbeit the beere ot bis heed beqantogrewea
gapne after that he was Hauen. —

Then the logdes of the jabiliftines gathered
thé togpther fo2 to offre a fol€pne offryng turo
Dagon their God,andtoretople:foz Ba fapd:

AL DUE


ines be bpon tbe Sam œ


Samon


our god hath delpuercd Samon onre enempe
into our bandeg. And when the people lawpim
thep prapledthep2 god, fo2 thep fapve:oure god
bath delpuered into our bandes onrenempand
Deftroper of ourcountry, whiche Aue manye ot
bs. And when thepzbertes were merye, it fo2-
tuned, tbat thepfapode: ende fo Samion, that
be mape maie Delaug). Sa es
And they fet Samion out ofthe pzil boufe,
and be plaped befoze them, and they fet bym be
twene the ppllers. And Samfonfapd vntothe
lande that led bym by the bande : fet me that 3
mape toutchethe ppllers that the boule tanze
pon, and that ¥mapeleancto them. Andeve
Doufe was fullofmenand women. And there
toere all the logdesofthe biltfines. And there
torre bpon the roofe a thze thoufande men and
foinentbat bebelde whple Damion played.
And amnion called vpon the Lorde, g fapd:
D Lode God tbpnke vpon me, ann ftrengthen
me,at chig tyme onelp: D Godthat Jmape be
auenged of the Pbiliftines fo: my it. eyes. Ana


amtó caugbe the two midle pillerson which. EN PA
See eect anponwhichit fhasbozne vp: fa p |


the one tnbisright band, ¢ tbe ot er in bis left,
and fapde:me foule hall dpe w the jobiltftines,
and bowed them v all bis mpgdt. And f Douie
fell upon the lozdes € Dponall the people that
were therein. Bnd fo the deed wobiche de fluc at
his death were mo thenthey which be flucinbis
ipfe. andthe bis bacthee ¢alltbe boufe of bista
ther came Downe andtoke bpm vp, ¢ beougdte
bin and burped bpm betwerte sarah and Efta-
oe in tbe burping place of Hanoah his father
Andbe fudged Firacl twentpe peres.

CThe.xvit. chapter.

€ Di icah, whale mother made bpm

an pooll of fpluer.

a Here was a man inmounte Ephraim
Ea Repainamed Hicap, and be fayde wntobps
1 halal mother:theleué bundzcd {plucrlinges
ies that were taben fromthe about which
thoucurfeoett and {pakeff ttinmpne cares. ee
bolde, f (ylucrigw me, J toke tawap. And bis
mother fapd:blefied be thou mp fon in p Lode.
And whe behad refkored the leuen bundzed fpl-
uerliges to bis mother agapne, bis mother fapo

powrd p fpluer to the Lozd of mpne hand foz
p npfon, pthou (huldeft makea qrauen pmage
andan pmage of metall A otve therfore J wil
apucit Pagapne. And tohé he refto2ed f monpe
vntobis mother, bis mother tole two pudzcd
25 filuctlinges, g gaue thé toa goldfinpth, tobiche
made thereofa grauč pmage, andan pmage of
metau, andit thas tn the boule of Hicah. And
the man Wica pada temple of qoddes, and
s+ Madean E pho and Cheraphim:c cehat isto rape
Q agarment fo: the pzeet,andpdols.) AndEplled the hand


su -cb ited of onre OF Dis ines which became bis pret.» gn


thole dapes there Was no kpngin Zlracl, bute-
uerp ma dpd p which was qoodibis own epes.
And there waga ponge man out of wethle-
bem Juda, cf the kpnred of Juda: Podich ponge
man wasa Lenite, and fotournedthcre.And p
man Departed out of the cptic of Wethlebé Ja-


Judges. | itab.


da, to goo Dwell where beconldefpnde a conuc-
nient place. 2nd became to mount Ephraim to
the boufe of Sica) aspe iourneped. And Wiz `
cab fayd nto bim:Upence cõmet thous The
Leaite anfered bpm: Jam of Hetblehem Fu-
Da,and go to dwell where F map Epnde a place
o% (and whence yi mape efppe it to be foz mp pzofpte.) AND geo
Hicab fapde a gayne puto bpm: divell with me
and be pntomeafather anda preet. And J wil
gpue the ten fpluerlpnges bp pere,twogarmit: *
tes and thp meate and dzpnke.

And the Leupte was content to dwell with x


-tbe man,and iwas bnto bim ag one of pis owne >


fonnes, And Q)icab contecrated the hand of the
Leuite, andthe ponge man became bis prectte,
and wasin the boule of Dicah. Chen [ape i-
cal) :now Jam {ure that the Lo2ve fopl be qood
wnto me:feinge 3 baue a Leuite tomp preet,
C€Che.rvut. Chapter.
E Dhechplozen of Dan takethe goodes and the prer


of cicah awape. hep dettrope Laig and after,
buploeit agapur. 3


ee: 2 f- i
eiA in. fo? Dntop tpme there fell none in= yor.rir.b


beritaiice vnto them amonge p tribe of Zfracl.

And pchildzen of Dan lent of thep2 byme,
P.actine mé tn feates of warre out of thett coo=
ftes,ené out ofsaraab¢ Eftabol,to bewe f lad
g fearchett out,¢lapd vntothem: go,¢fearche
out F lande. Wi pich whé thep came to moiit €-
phzat cué to p boule of icad thep lodged there
And when thep were in f boule of Hicab, thep
knee the vopce of f ponge ma the Lenite : and
whe they turnedin hither, they lapd ynto him:
who brought the bythere what makeft thou tn
this placerand what baft thou Derer And be an-
fwered thé:thus¢ thus dealeth Micah w me, g 15
bath bp2ed me, and Jam becom bis preet. And
thepfapdevntobpmagapne: Afkecosniaple
now of God, that we mape knowe whether the
wape whtche we qo Wall be profperous 03 no.
And the preeft fapde nto them:go tn peace, for
the Lorde gupdeth pour wape which pego. —

The p fpue men departed andcame to Lais,
and fatoetbe people f were therein, Dowethep
Divelt carelefie,atter f maner of f S1d0ns, tpl
and without caitpnge of parpls: and $ no man
madeanptroublein p lande, o0? vlurpedanp bo
minið, but were farre from p Sidons, g bad no
bulpuefie w other mé.Andthepcame wnto theit ¢
beth tosaraabe Eftabol. And their baethré
fapd vntothé:what baue pe DonerAndthep an
fwered:Arple, that we map go tpagapni thë
*fo2 Wwe baue fene the lande: (urelp a Verp good auriii.a
one. And do pe fit tilbe not flouthfulto depart -
Wutcome to cOquere PlanDowcit Hatdene laboure.) W
Pfpewpll yoope MWallcome butoa peoplethat
tàtethnoparplles, and itiga perp large coun:
trpe: which God hathqypueninto pour bandes.
Ftisallo a place whiche doeth lacke nothpnge
that isin the wozlde.

And there departed thence of the kpnred of
the Danites cut out ofsaraahband € fabol, fir
pundzedmenappopnted with das of

arte.


Micah.


warre. And thep went bp and pitched in Lari
ath Zarim which isin Juda. Woperfoze they call
the place, the booft of pan Dnto this dape: and
itis onthe backefpbde of kariathJartm. Ant
thep wenttbence ynto mounte Ephraim , and
caine tothe boule of Hicah. The anfuoered the


Judges.


And thechildz2cn of Dan let them vp the gra
nenpmage. And Jonathan the lonne of Geico
the fonne of Hanalles g big lines were the pze-


tegin p trpbe of Dan * vntpll thep werecaricd Fee rviii.g


awap out of P land captpue. And they fet tbem
vp the kerued pmage which Hicab made, all p


Solr btit.


fpuemenp went to fppe ontthecountrtofLais wpple thatthe boule of God was in Silo.
and fapd nto thep2 beethzen: wot pe not, that be b sin Stl


_ thergisintbele boufesan Epbod, Theraphim, @ The.rir. Chapter.
agraucnpmage and an pmage of metal? Pow DE toe Berean or prc rese eleeaeane


_ therfore confydze what peDaue todo. ean chauncedintholedapes, whethere B
> Bndthepturnedehptberwardescametotbe EA Pei was nokpnge in Fleael , ac e
> þoufeoffpongemanthe Leutte,euen pntothe (Gz TA gle fo Ut M E artane


poute of Hicab, g faluted pim peaceably. And Ë
{pre bundzed men qp2ded w weapons of warre
which were ofthe chtlozen of man, tode bp the
entrpnae of the qate. And thefpue men f went
tofpye outthelande , wentinebptbher andtoke
p karucdD pmage and the E phod, Cheraphim g
thepmace of metall. And the peeckt Kode tn the
entrpnae ofthe gate w tbe {pre bundzed menyp
wertarmed Ynto battarl, whyle the other wet
into Picabs boule, and fet the Kerucd ymage,


Æ the Epliod, T beraphi:and the pmage of metall:


Then lapo f preek vnto tbe: what dope! They
anfwered him:holde thy peace, lape tbpne band
ppd the mouth, and come w bs tobe our father
and preet. Yt ig better for the to be aprec wn-
to the bouke of one man, then to be a preet tnta
atrpbe oz kpnredin irae? And f preet was
glad and tobe the Ephod and Cheraphim, and
the qrauenpmage,and wente with the people.
And thep turned g departed, and put p childzen
the cateland chep? other tub ftatice befoze them.
And when they were a good wape from the

Houle ofPicah, the men p were in the bouis, ¢
in icahs boule, made out crpe , ¢folowed af-
ter the chilozen of pan, and called onto them.
And thep turned thep2 faces, ¢ apie vnto Wi-
cab: what apleth the, that thoumakelt an out-
cepe: And hefapd: pe haue taken awap mp god
des which J made, and alfo che preet, and goo
youre wapes with them. And what daur
smmoze2bowwe then fape pe bute me: what aplet
ther And the chplozen of pan fapde vntobym:
let not thy vopce be heardeamonge vs, letan-
arpe felowes runne bponthe, andthoulefe thp
Ipfe with the lpues of thpne boutpolde . And fo
the cbyipzen of Dan wentthep2 wapes.

And whe Bicab faw ý thep wer to trong foz
hi, be turned, æ wet back pnto bis boufeagapne


G  Andtbhep toke the thynqes whiche Wicah


had made, and the pret which be bad, and came
Yuto Lais euen bntoa people that were at rel
and without miffruft, and {motethem with the
edge of the fwwearde, and burntethecptre with
fyze. And there was nomantobelpe, bycaule
Lats was farre from Sidon , andthep bad no
meddl pnge wtth anp otberinan . And the cptpe
Lobe in the Dallepe that lpeth by Betherod.
And they buple them there a citie, and dwelt


Votw.rir.d therein, x And called it pan after the name of


‘Dan thep2 father wbiche was bone Ynto Ji-
racl. Howbeit in werp Dede the namie of thecps
tic was Laig atthe begpnnpig


there. His matter aunfiwered pim: we wpllnot
tourneintoa ftraungecytie that arenotofthe
chplozen of Jirael:we wpll go forth to Gibea.
And be lapde onto his lad: goo loze warde, and
we (ballcome to oncof thete places, to lodge
alnpgbt either in Gibea ozin Rama. And they
went fore warde Dpon gil wape,andyp inne
went Downe vps them, when they were falt bp
ey. ibia


Pree


The Leute


mens, sit,be


Gibea which belongeth to them of Wen Famin
Rnd thep turned thptberwar’ togotn elodge


all nyabtin Gibea. And when became he fate Porm


Himbdowrein a fereteoftbecptie,forthere was Koz
nomatbattoke themtolodgpng.andbebolbe pee


there came an old man frem Dis worke, out of
feldcateuen, which was alfo of mount Ephzra-
im, and dwelt as a ftratiger in Gibea. Wut the
menoftbe place were the chpldaen of gemini.
E And when be bad Ipfte vp his epes, belawea
wapfarpng manin the retes of Peptte.Andp
olde man fapd: whither goch thous And where
camet thon7ipcanfwerct bpm : we came fron
WBetblebë Juda, towarde thefpde of mount E-
phzait-frathence am F, and J went to WScth-
iehem Juda,e qonow fotbheboute ofthe Lob.
And thereis no mg that recepuet) nic Co boure
Wc haue trawe €prouandsc fo: our afles,and
Decd € wpne for me g thy handDemapoe, and foz
the lan that is w tbp feruañt: € we lacknothig.
~ The olde manlapd:peace be w tbe, all Pehou
fE lacke (halt thou fpndew me:onelpe abpde nit
inp ftretealnpabt, and fo be brought hun into
Dis boule, and gaue foddze Vntohisalies. And
thep wathed their feet, g did cates dynku Aud
astbhep were mabing their bertes merp, bebold
the men of the cptie which were wicked, belet p
bouferoundabout,andtheuf at P doze ¢ {pake
tothe man of the boule, the olde man, fapinge:
bring fosthtbe mantbat came into thpue boule
that we mape knowe bpm. PSU
And-xtbe man of tbe boule, the olde ma wet
ouf,andfayde bntotbem: Ob nape mp beetheeé
donot fo wickedly, feing that this man is come
into mpne Doufe:doo not fo vamete athpnge.
Webholde, berets mp doughter, amapoen, and
this manscocubine them wil 3 being out now
pntopon,and bible them, and do w them what
Cemeth pou good: but totbisman do not fo ab=
pominable a thinge. ut the më wolde not her
ken tobim. And the ma toke bis cOcubpne, and
brought ber out wntothé, which kucwe ber and
abuted ber all f night,cué vntop moning. And
when the dape began to {pzpne, theplet her go.
And thécame the woman intpedawning of
g tbedape, andfell downeat p Doze of the mans
boufe where ber 102d was tplit was dape. And
berlogdearole bpintbe mogninae,¢ opened the
dores of the boufee wet out togobis way. And
wWebolde, the woman, enen pis coucubpne lap a
longe befoze the doze of the boule, and ber pan-
des firetched out ppontbethecltholdc. And be
om cebpnkpnge ber to baue bene attepe) (apd Dnto her: vp


" andlet tåbe qoig. But theanfwerednot. THE


og De MANM percerupage that he wasnerd) COKE fer Dp
ppd an Aile,and Fede vp and gate bym Vito
big one bome. And when be was come to his
houfe, betoke aknpfe andcaught biscdcubpne


and deupocd ber with the bonesintoftwelue pe -


ces,and fet ber intoall quarters of Zlracl. And
all that fawe tt fayde: there wasnofucke dede
one o2 {rene pns tbe chyldzen of Flraelicame
outof€grpt vutothis dape, conlpoze themas
ter, takeadutlement and fape pour mpnd(s.

© Che. re.cbapter.


Judges.


q@ Zhe battaple of the #lraciptes agapntt thetrpbes of
enJamin,foz the Leuptes wpfe which pape te lied.


ee eT


A ferro) oute: and thecongregacpon was
A ERES cathercd togptberas tt bad bene
ied , CAA but one man , euch from manto
| S + es Sa 25cerleba, and yuto the lande of
ilad 1


ntothe Lode tn S)ilpa, ¢ there tode
folke out'of all quarters and of allthe trpbes of


“4frael,in theconqregacton ofthe peopleof Gob ©


foure bunded thoulandefootemen that drewe
fwerdes. And when the childzen of WenFamin
berde that the chpldzen of Flracl were gone Y
to Hipa, and bad fapde : D pe chpldzen of Fl-
racl teil bs howe this wpekednee bappencd.
And the Leupte the womans yulbande p was
flapne,anttoered and fapd, Jcame nfo Gibea
thatisinbenJamin ud my chcubine tolodge al
npg and the mé of Gibca arofe agapnit me,%
beft the boui rounde about Dpon me bp night
and thought to bane apne me, em cocubpne
baue fo forced p (he ts Deed. And Ftoke mp con-
cubpne,and cut Derin peeces, andfente ber tho-
rowoutalp landes of the enberitatice of Jirael.
ffo2 they hauecdmittedabbomtnacton¢ Folp in
Zlcacl.Webold,peareal child? of Firacl.pPon-
Dee thismatter, g apuc pour abupleinthecale,
And al the et ay arole as ithbad ben one ma,
faping:there thal not ama of bs qo to bis tent
neither turneintobis doule.2wut tl istbalbeit p
we wpll doto Gibea, We wil go bp bp lotte a=
gapni it. And we wll take tenmen of the bü-
n2ed thozowont all the trpbes of Firacl, andan
Hund2ed of the.44), anda thoufand out of. r. S).
tofet byptaple fo? the people to make that ther
map goagapntt Gibea Hen Jamin, bpcautle of
all the abbominacion , that thep baue wougbt
in Jiracl.Andfo alithe men of Jfrael pba
fogpther agapnit thecvtic, nyt togptber,as tt
bad bene but oneman.Andtbe tribtsof Firael
fent men thozowe alltbeftrphe of en zamin,


a pen allpchplozen of Flerael went %


and his wpfe


P


E]


faying:xwbat wickednefie is this that is bap- Fol.rrg.v. A


pencdamong pou? otw thefore deliner vst
mé ,thefe cbildzë of Belial wobich are in Gibea,
ý we map flap thé.¢ gur awapeuil from yirael.
HQeuertbelater, thecbyldzen of WenJamin
wolde not berken pntothe voyce of thep2 bres
theé the cbildzen of Flracl: but gathered thé fel-
ucs togpther out of F cities vnto Gibea,;tocom
out andfpabtagarnt the chpldzen of Zfrael.
And the childzen of BenZamin were nombzed
at that tpme out ofthecittes.cebi.tboufandiné
that dzewelwerdes, befpde the inbabitouts of
Gibea, which were nõbzed euen bundzed chofé
men. Jad amonge all thefe folke were feuen Dit
D2cd lefte banded men, which euerpe one coulde
fipnge tonesatanbeerbzeadth,and not mpfr.
And the childzen of Flrael belpde Gen Jamun,
were nobzed foure Dundzed thoufand mentbat.
D2ewelwerdes, and were all tien of warre.


And the chilozé of Birael arofe,¢ went Yp to C


WSethel,g alken coilapl of God who ould be-
gynthe battaplagapnit the childzen of Sen Ja
min. 2nd F Lode fapoe: Juda hal MPKA
the cbilozé of Firacl tode bp early and ee

bed.


è
=
= > — eee oM ——


— Jabes Gilead:


` pattelin the


Gibea. And the nen of Fraell went out to bat-
tellagapnife Ben Jamin, and themen of Flra-
ell pur them feluestnarape tofpgbte agapnite
tbem, belpde Gibea. And the chplozen of Wen-
Jamincame out of Gibea, and deltroped of the
Flraclites that dape. rrii. thoufande men, and
bought themto tye earthe.

And the folke of the chpldzen of Fleaell pluc-
ked bp torp herten, and went to agapn emade

ame place there thep dpd the fpzit

dape. Andthechplozen of Ffracll went vp and
woepre betor ti Lozde Dntocuen, andalbed of
the Lozde, fapinge : (hall we qoagapneto bat-
tapleagapnitethechpldzen of WenZamin oure
baethzens And the Lozde fayde:qo vpagaputte
them. Andthechplozcn of Zlraell came outa-
gapnife thecbpldzen of Wen Jamin the feconde
Dap. And p cbpldzë of WenJamin wet agapn
them out of Gibea, the lecond dape,and deltrop
cb totbecarthe of the chpldzen ot Z{racl once a-
apne. niii. tboufande men that dzetwe fwear=
Des euerp man of them. Chen the chpldzen of sf
tacll andalltbe people wente bpandcame Yne
to EIREANN and fattetherebefoze the
o2de, anù fafted the lame dape vnto cuen, and
offered burnte ofryngeg and peace offerpngeg
before the Lorde. And thechplbdzen of xfrael af-
Bed the Lorde;fo: there wasthearke of the ap-
opntment of God in thofe dapes. And pine-
bes thetonne of Eleasar, plonne of Aaron way
typng bponit at that tpme,fapde-fhall F get me
Pp to go out any mozeto battellagapnit p chpl
€ peno idl DEN pat Aerate

Che Lozdelapde: qo foz to mozowe J wyllde-
Ipucr them into pour bandes. And Flrael fet lp-
ars atbapterounbde about Gibea. And p childzé
of Firacil went bp agapnite p childzen of Wen-
Jaminthe chprdetpme, and put them (clues in
arapeagapntt Sibea,as tiple befoze. And the
chron ef WenZamin came outagapnife the
people.and toere Rawen awape from thecptic.
‘Ana thep began to fmpte ofthe people dead (as
tuple befoze,bp tivo bpe wapes of whpche one
goth bp to Werhel €the other to Gibea thozow
the felde) bpona thpztye mč of Zlracll. andthe
chplozets of en Faminlapde . Chep are fallen
Defore bS,as atthe fpe. Wnt thechyldzen of
Flracl Capde: let vs fipe and plucke them awap
fromthe cptpe, onto the bpe wapes.

And all the men of Flrael role bp out of thep2
place, € put tbe felucs tarape at Waal Thamar.
nd lpkewwopfe pipers in wapte of Flraclicame
forth ont of thepz places, eu€ out of p medowes
pwere about Gibea, cameagapntl Gibea:ten
thoufanbde chofenmen out of all $fraell,a there
wasa loze battell. Wut the other wyit nottbat
fogreat enil Was fonpe thé. And p 102d plaged

wen Jamin before Frael,¢ p childzenof Jlract
4f deftroped of p Wentamites the fame dave. rrv..
thouland tan bidzed më, $ Druclweardeseucrp
one of them. And wha f chpldzé of Wen Jamin
fai > thep were put to p Worl pmen of Flrael
gaut roumeto p Beniamiteg, becaule thep tru-

eb bntop lpers in wapte which thep badlapd
belvde Gibea. And p lpergin wapte palted, and


Judges.


tanne AF Gibea, gwent g fmoteall p cptie vw

pedereo pine Anoan apopntment bad p

men of Jlrael frp lpetsin wapte p tbep Hulde
make a great fmokerpfe vp out of $ cptpe. And
when f më of Jfracl Hed in the battell:Ben Ja-
minbegantofmptedeade of the chplozen of 4i-
racl aboute athptp perfonnes,andfapde : the
otber are put to the wozfe befoze bs, asintbe
Fp2ft battell. wut wha there began to arpfe out
of the rah appller of (moke, the Benianites
lobed backe : and bebolde, the thaffpnge of the
holecptie began to alcende vp to beauen.

Wiben p men of Flrael alfo turned agapne,the
men of Hen Jamin twere abafihed,fo2 thep lawo
pcuellapzoched them. Andtherfore thep turned o
thep2 backes befoze p më of Flracl ontop wape
pleadeth to p wilderneffe, but the men of warre
ouertoke the. And belpde p,tbep wobichcam out
of ý citie detroped them in p middie of thë. And
thus thep copatfed p Wentamites about, cha-
fen thé to B)enuba , g ouerrane thé to Gibea on
Pealtlpd:¢ ther wer laine of Ben Jamin, cvitié
thoufand, which were al mE of warre.And thep
turned ¢ fled top wpldernes warde, € vnto the
rocke of Kimmo. And p other flue bp P wape of
p vett of thé, fpue thoufande men,efticked ynto
the, oa ae came to Gibeo, ¢ fluc two thou-
fande men of thé. So $ all p were apne p fame
Dape of Wen Jamin were. crv.thoulandemep
Dzuclweardes, which were all me of war: onclp
bi.bundzed më turned g fied to Pp wildernes, Vn-
top Rocke of iR pinon, gabodethere. iii. Moa
nethes. And p më of Flrael turned backe agapn
nto P childzé of wen Jamin, ¢fmote thé wpe
thecdge of the wearde inthe cptpes , bothbman
and beat and alltbat came to bande, and fet ot
fp2ealltbe cptpes that thep cude come bp.

KEI T De. rri.Chapter.
~i Cbt enhabitoures of Gilead are vtterip bettroped.


ape IQ cuerp ma of Flraell (ware i Wis- 4
FOTA pa lapeng: there pal none of vs gene
TESA Gi Dis Doughtcr bntoanp of We Jamin
eee to Wpf. And p people came to ethel
gabodetheretpllenen betoze Sod, andlpfte Yp
their bopeeg E wepte loze, z fapd.D L020 Goo
of giracl, hp is thps chauncedin Flracll, that
there (buldebe thps dapeone tribelackpngein
4fracll ¢ And on the mozowe the people role vp

etpme, andimadethere anaultareand offered
burnt offerpnges and peaceofferpnges.

And ý childzen of Flrael afked, who are thep
among aly trpbes of 3frael, $ camenot vp wÙ
cigregacion wnto p Lozder for thep hadmade a

recate othe concernpng bim peame not bptop
Low to Mizpa, laping:be Hall furelp dpe. And
the chplozen of Ffracll bad pptie on en Jamin
tbep? bzethzen, glapde : there is one trpbecut of
frö Afrael thts dape: what Hall we do vuto the
remnañt of them, thatthep mape Daue fopues:
we bauclworne bp the Lorde: that we fopll not
geue them of oure Doughbters to topucs . And
thep fapde: Fs there anp of the trpbes of Ffrael,
thatcame not Dpto spa tothe Lorde? And
bebold, there camenone of p enbabitours of Ja:
bes Gilead wntothe poolte paar he
Q tit 0?


SE ol. tty,


— Jabes Gilead:


` pattelin the


Gibea. And the nen of Fraell went out to bat-
tellagapnife Ben Jamin, and themen of Flra-
ell pur them feluestnarape tofpgbte agapnite
tbem, belpde Gibea. And the chplozen of Wen-
Jamincame out of Gibea, and deltroped of the
Flraclites that dape. rrii. thoufande men, and
bought themto tye earthe.

And the folke of the chpldzen of Fleaell pluc-
ked bp torp herten, and went to agapn emade

ame place there thep dpd the fpzit

dape. Andthechplozen of Ffracll went vp and
woepre betor ti Lozde Dntocuen, andalbed of
the Lozde, fapinge : (hall we qoagapneto bat-
tapleagapnitethechpldzen of WenZamin oure
baethzens And the Lozde fayde:qo vpagaputte
them. Andthechplozcn of Zlraell came outa-
gapnife thecbpldzen of Wen Jamin the feconde
Dap. And p cbpldzë of WenJamin wet agapn
them out of Gibea, the lecond dape,and deltrop
cb totbecarthe of the chpldzen ot Z{racl once a-
apne. niii. tboufande men that dzetwe fwear=
Des euerp man of them. Chen the chpldzen of sf
tacll andalltbe people wente bpandcame Yne
to EIREANN and fattetherebefoze the
o2de, anù fafted the lame dape vnto cuen, and
offered burnte ofryngeg and peace offerpngeg
before the Lorde. And thechplbdzen of xfrael af-
Bed the Lorde;fo: there wasthearke of the ap-
opntment of God in thofe dapes. And pine-
bes thetonne of Eleasar, plonne of Aaron way
typng bponit at that tpme,fapde-fhall F get me
Pp to go out any mozeto battellagapnit p chpl
€ peno idl DEN pat Aerate

Che Lozdelapde: qo foz to mozowe J wyllde-
Ipucr them into pour bandes. And Flrael fet lp-
ars atbapterounbde about Gibea. And p childzé
of Firacil went bp agapnite p childzen of Wen-
Jaminthe chprdetpme, and put them (clues in
arapeagapntt Sibea,as tiple befoze. And the
chron ef WenZamin came outagapnife the
people.and toere Rawen awape from thecptic.
‘Ana thep began to fmpte ofthe people dead (as
tuple befoze,bp tivo bpe wapes of whpche one
goth bp to Werhel €the other to Gibea thozow
the felde) bpona thpztye mč of Zlracll. andthe
chplozets of en Faminlapde . Chep are fallen
Defore bS,as atthe fpe. Wnt thechyldzen of
Flracl Capde: let vs fipe and plucke them awap
fromthe cptpe, onto the bpe wapes.

And all the men of Flrael role bp out of thep2
place, € put tbe felucs tarape at Waal Thamar.
nd lpkewwopfe pipers in wapte of Flraclicame
forth ont of thepz places, eu€ out of p medowes
pwere about Gibea, cameagapntl Gibea:ten
thoufanbde chofenmen out of all $fraell,a there
wasa loze battell. Wut the other wyit nottbat
fogreat enil Was fonpe thé. And p 102d plaged

wen Jamin before Frael,¢ p childzenof Jlract
4f deftroped of p Wentamites the fame dave. rrv..
thouland tan bidzed më, $ Druclweardeseucrp
one of them. And wha f chpldzé of Wen Jamin
fai > thep were put to p Worl pmen of Flrael
gaut roumeto p Beniamiteg, becaule thep tru-

eb bntop lpers in wapte which thep badlapd
belvde Gibea. And p lpergin wapte palted, and


Judges.


tanne AF Gibea, gwent g fmoteall p cptie vw

pedereo pine Anoan apopntment bad p

men of Jlrael frp lpetsin wapte p tbep Hulde
make a great fmokerpfe vp out of $ cptpe. And
when f më of Jfracl Hed in the battell:Ben Ja-
minbegantofmptedeade of the chplozen of 4i-
racl aboute athptp perfonnes,andfapde : the
otber are put to the wozfe befoze bs, asintbe
Fp2ft battell. wut wha there began to arpfe out
of the rah appller of (moke, the Benianites
lobed backe : and bebolde, the thaffpnge of the
holecptie began to alcende vp to beauen.

Wiben p men of Flrael alfo turned agapne,the
men of Hen Jamin twere abafihed,fo2 thep lawo
pcuellapzoched them. Andtherfore thep turned o
thep2 backes befoze p më of Flracl ontop wape
pleadeth to p wilderneffe, but the men of warre
ouertoke the. And belpde p,tbep wobichcam out
of ý citie detroped them in p middie of thë. And
thus thep copatfed p Wentamites about, cha-
fen thé to B)enuba , g ouerrane thé to Gibea on
Pealtlpd:¢ ther wer laine of Ben Jamin, cvitié
thoufand, which were al mE of warre.And thep
turned ¢ fled top wpldernes warde, € vnto the
rocke of Kimmo. And p other flue bp P wape of
p vett of thé, fpue thoufande men,efticked ynto
the, oa ae came to Gibeo, ¢ fluc two thou-
fande men of thé. So $ all p were apne p fame
Dape of Wen Jamin were. crv.thoulandemep
Dzuclweardes, which were all me of war: onclp
bi.bundzed më turned g fied to Pp wildernes, Vn-
top Rocke of iR pinon, gabodethere. iii. Moa
nethes. And p më of Flrael turned backe agapn
nto P childzé of wen Jamin, ¢fmote thé wpe
thecdge of the wearde inthe cptpes , bothbman
and beat and alltbat came to bande, and fet ot
fp2ealltbe cptpes that thep cude come bp.

KEI T De. rri.Chapter.
~i Cbt enhabitoures of Gilead are vtterip bettroped.


ape IQ cuerp ma of Flraell (ware i Wis- 4
FOTA pa lapeng: there pal none of vs gene
TESA Gi Dis Doughtcr bntoanp of We Jamin
eee to Wpf. And p people came to ethel
gabodetheretpllenen betoze Sod, andlpfte Yp
their bopeeg E wepte loze, z fapd.D L020 Goo
of giracl, hp is thps chauncedin Flracll, that
there (buldebe thps dapeone tribelackpngein
4fracll ¢ And on the mozowe the people role vp

etpme, andimadethere anaultareand offered
burnt offerpnges and peaceofferpnges.

And ý childzen of Flrael afked, who are thep
among aly trpbes of 3frael, $ camenot vp wÙ
cigregacion wnto p Lozder for thep hadmade a

recate othe concernpng bim peame not bptop
Low to Mizpa, laping:be Hall furelp dpe. And
the chplozen of Ffracll bad pptie on en Jamin
tbep? bzethzen, glapde : there is one trpbecut of
frö Afrael thts dape: what Hall we do vuto the
remnañt of them, thatthep mape Daue fopues:
we bauclworne bp the Lorde: that we fopll not
geue them of oure Doughbters to topucs . And
thep fapde: Fs there anp of the trpbes of Ffrael,
thatcame not Dpto spa tothe Lorde? And
bebold, there camenone of p enbabitours of Ja:
bes Gilead wntothe poolte paar he
Q tit 0?


SE ol. tty,


l Elunclec


eng » Ulan to Dis enberttaunce.* gn thole
vate has nokpugcin Mracl:but enerp man dpd that


Aor the people were Dewed, and beholde: there
sore € Ae ofp enbabiters of Jabes Gilead ther
Anbdfent A multitude ené. rii. thouland
men ofthe itrongetof them, andcommaunded
tbem, faping yoandfmpt the enbabiters of Ja-
bes Gilead wpth the edge of the wearde, both


aurrie Wemenandchplozen. * Andehps ts it that pe


thal do, btterlp deftrope all the males andal the
wormen that baue lpen bp men. And thep founde
amonge the enbabpters of Jabes Gtlead foure
bundzeddDamolelles, virgpns, that had knowen
no man, bplpenge wpthanpmale . Andthep
bzougbt them bnto the boofte to Silo, Mhypche
ismebe lande of Canaan.
©  Andtbhe bole congreqacpon fent and (pakew
thechplozé of Wen Faminp were inp Rocke of
Rpmmon,andcalled peace ablp wntotbem:and
en Jamincame againe at that time,andebep
gaue them wpues whpcbe thep bad laned alpue
of the wemë of Jabes Silead. Wut hep luffiled
them not. Bnd the people bad chpaflion on Wen
Jamin, becaule that God bad made a rappe in
the trpbes of Jfracll . And then the elders of the
congregacpon,fapd: what Mall we doto frem-
naunt ofthem,to get them wyues, {eying althe
ipues,of Wen Jamin aredeltropeds Andthep
fapbe : there multe be an enberptaunce foz them
that be oe a of Wen Jamin, thatatrpbe be
not deftroprd onte of Ffracll: bowbeit, we map
not geuectbem topues of ourcdougbters . Fo?
tecbpldzen of Jiraell had lwoence, faping:int=
fed be be, that qeueth a wpe to Sen Jamin,
D _ Chenthep lapde : bepolde , there isa fealte of
tbe Lorde perlp th Dilo, whpch is on the nogth-
{poe of Bethel, and on the cat {pode of tic wave
that gocth from Wethel to Siché æ fout) from
Libanon. Cherfoze thep commaundedthe chyl-
dren of Wen Jamin, fapinge: qo elpe in wapte
inthe winepacdes. And whan pele p the doug:
ters of Silocome out to Daunce ina rowe, then
come pe oute of the bpnepardes, andcatchepou
eucrp mana wpfe of the Doughters of Ben Zaz
min. Bnd whan they2 fathers oz brethren come
nto vs focomplapne, we wyll fape ontothem
baue pptie on vs fo: thep2 fakes , becaufe were-
 Terued not toechema bis wpfe in tyme of warre.
Aepther baue pe geuen onto them,that pe buld
ipnne at tppstpme.

And the chplozcn of Wen Jamin dpdeucn fo:
and toke them wpues accordpnee tothe nom-
bze of them that daunced, whom thep caught.
And thep went and returned ynto they2 enber-
faunce, trcpapred the cites and diorle in them.

And thecppidzen of Flrael departed thence at
that tpme ,and vente euerp man to bps trpbe,
andto bys kpured,t went out je, phe eucrp


apes there
whpchelemedrpaht inbys owne epes.


The ende of theboke of Fudees,called
in the Pebe Sophtim.


Ruth, Paomi, q


Theboke of Ruth |
@ The Fp2tt Chapter.


@ Climeleck gocth with bes twpfe and chplozen inte
the lande of goab.


crepe T Fortuned that-s (inthe dares A
ae) MPa of acertapne Junge) wohenthe ind *
heheh] [ace je) Ses tudged there Fella darthe

DS al Began) inthe lande, andacertenma

i) esa OF DethlebemJudawetefo. -
Mare COfotourneinthecountrepoe
mar G S)oab:beand bps wpfe,and :
SE His tivofonnes. Chename of i
the man was Elimelec, tbe name of bps wpfe,
Naomi andthe names of bys tivo fonnes were,
Sablon and Chilis, and thep were Ephreaites,
out of Wethlebem Juda . And when they came
into ë lande of S)oab,thep cõtpnued there. And
Elimelec Naompes bulbande dped, andthe rez
mapned w der two fonnes whpch+2he the wp-
ues of P nacions of the <Hoabites: f ones name
was Dapha,€ the others Ruth: And thep dwel
led there about a ten pere. And Sablon ¢Cbp-
ton dped alloeuenboth oftbem, andthe woma ..
was lefte defolate of ber two fonnese¢ of ber bul $
bande. Chen Kode the vp with ber doughtersin
lawe and returned from the coutrepe of Boab:
fo? the bad barb Cay in ý cofitrep of SHoab, bow
È the Lozde bad vilited bys people, ¢qeué them
breade.Cdiberfoze the departed oute of theplace
where (he was,t ber twodoughters w her-And
they went ontbeyz wapto returne ynfopland
of Juda. And Naomi lapd vnto bert wo dough
tersin lawe: g returne eche of pu bnto pour
mothers boute:¢ p Lozddealeas kpndlp 4S i,
as pe bane dealte w the dead:and wpth me. And
the Lozd geue pou, p be map fpnde ret, eptber 0
of pou inthe bonfe of per bufbande. And than
the Kp ited the,thep lpft vp their bopce, wepte,
and fapde Dnto ber: we wyll go wb the Yutothp
folke . And Raomifapde: turne agapne mp
Dougbters:foz what caufe wil pou go with mes
Arethereanp mochplodzen in mp wombe, tobe
pour bulbandes: Curneagapne oo rage ae la
€ go:fo2 Jam fo olde to baue anbulbande. And
pt J fayd, 3 baue bope, pf 3 tokea ma allothig
npabt:pecegthougbe 3 bad alreadp bozne fon-
nes, wolde pe tarp after them ,tpll chep were of
Aer 02 wolde pe fo? them lo longe refrapne fro
takpnge ofbulbandes ¢ Aotlo mp Dougbters:
foz tt greucth memucbe foz youre lakes thatthe
bande of the Lozde is gone out agayntt me.

And thep lptte bp thep2 vopces, and wepte
agapne, and Dzpha kpiled ber mother inlawe
but Huth abode ttyl by ber . And Naomi fap:
fe,thp {piter inlaw is gone backe agapne ynto
Der people and wnto ber goodes: returne thon
after her. Bnd Ruth anlwered entreate me not
foleaue the, an’ toreturne from after the: foz
wbhprber thou govt, ¥ vwpll qoalfo, and there
thou dwellefte , there J wpllawell :thp people
Sa eny people, andtbp qov mp god. Hbere -
thboudpet tbere wll 3 dpe and there wpll F be
burped, Che L020 do lo efoto me, pFoughet a

deat


a


Li
a a
DS Een ; - a
Ez ee 7 er
iad ariel __ = p j k
s ' E è


l Elunclec


eng » Ulan to Dis enberttaunce.* gn thole
vate has nokpugcin Mracl:but enerp man dpd that


Aor the people were Dewed, and beholde: there
sore € Ae ofp enbabiters of Jabes Gilead ther
Anbdfent A multitude ené. rii. thouland
men ofthe itrongetof them, andcommaunded
tbem, faping yoandfmpt the enbabiters of Ja-
bes Gilead wpth the edge of the wearde, both


aurrie Wemenandchplozen. * Andehps ts it that pe


thal do, btterlp deftrope all the males andal the
wormen that baue lpen bp men. And thep founde
amonge the enbabpters of Jabes Gtlead foure
bundzeddDamolelles, virgpns, that had knowen
no man, bplpenge wpthanpmale . Andthep
bzougbt them bnto the boofte to Silo, Mhypche
ismebe lande of Canaan.
©  Andtbhe bole congreqacpon fent and (pakew
thechplozé of Wen Faminp were inp Rocke of
Rpmmon,andcalled peace ablp wntotbem:and
en Jamincame againe at that time,andebep
gaue them wpues whpcbe thep bad laned alpue
of the wemë of Jabes Silead. Wut hep luffiled
them not. Bnd the people bad chpaflion on Wen
Jamin, becaule that God bad made a rappe in
the trpbes of Jfracll . And then the elders of the
congregacpon,fapd: what Mall we doto frem-
naunt ofthem,to get them wyues, {eying althe
ipues,of Wen Jamin aredeltropeds Andthep
fapbe : there multe be an enberptaunce foz them
that be oe a of Wen Jamin, thatatrpbe be
not deftroprd onte of Ffracll: bowbeit, we map
not geuectbem topues of ourcdougbters . Fo?
tecbpldzen of Jiraell had lwoence, faping:int=
fed be be, that qeueth a wpe to Sen Jamin,
D _ Chenthep lapde : bepolde , there isa fealte of
tbe Lorde perlp th Dilo, whpch is on the nogth-
{poe of Bethel, and on the cat {pode of tic wave
that gocth from Wethel to Siché æ fout) from
Libanon. Cherfoze thep commaundedthe chyl-
dren of Wen Jamin, fapinge: qo elpe in wapte
inthe winepacdes. And whan pele p the doug:
ters of Silocome out to Daunce ina rowe, then
come pe oute of the bpnepardes, andcatchepou
eucrp mana wpfe of the Doughters of Ben Zaz
min. Bnd whan they2 fathers oz brethren come
nto vs focomplapne, we wyll fape ontothem
baue pptie on vs fo: thep2 fakes , becaufe were-
 Terued not toechema bis wpfe in tyme of warre.
Aepther baue pe geuen onto them,that pe buld
ipnne at tppstpme.

And the chplozcn of Wen Jamin dpdeucn fo:
and toke them wpues accordpnee tothe nom-
bze of them that daunced, whom thep caught.
And thep went and returned ynto they2 enber-
faunce, trcpapred the cites and diorle in them.

And thecppidzen of Flrael departed thence at
that tpme ,and vente euerp man to bps trpbe,
andto bys kpured,t went out je, phe eucrp


apes there
whpchelemedrpaht inbys owne epes.


The ende of theboke of Fudees,called
in the Pebe Sophtim.


Ruth, Paomi, q


Theboke of Ruth |
@ The Fp2tt Chapter.


@ Climeleck gocth with bes twpfe and chplozen inte
the lande of goab.


crepe T Fortuned that-s (inthe dares A
ae) MPa of acertapne Junge) wohenthe ind *
heheh] [ace je) Ses tudged there Fella darthe

DS al Began) inthe lande, andacertenma

i) esa OF DethlebemJudawetefo. -
Mare COfotourneinthecountrepoe
mar G S)oab:beand bps wpfe,and :
SE His tivofonnes. Chename of i
the man was Elimelec, tbe name of bps wpfe,
Naomi andthe names of bys tivo fonnes were,
Sablon and Chilis, and thep were Ephreaites,
out of Wethlebem Juda . And when they came
into ë lande of S)oab,thep cõtpnued there. And
Elimelec Naompes bulbande dped, andthe rez
mapned w der two fonnes whpch+2he the wp-
ues of P nacions of the <Hoabites: f ones name
was Dapha,€ the others Ruth: And thep dwel
led there about a ten pere. And Sablon ¢Cbp-
ton dped alloeuenboth oftbem, andthe woma ..
was lefte defolate of ber two fonnese¢ of ber bul $
bande. Chen Kode the vp with ber doughtersin
lawe and returned from the coutrepe of Boab:
fo? the bad barb Cay in ý cofitrep of SHoab, bow
È the Lozde bad vilited bys people, ¢qeué them
breade.Cdiberfoze the departed oute of theplace
where (he was,t ber twodoughters w her-And
they went ontbeyz wapto returne ynfopland
of Juda. And Naomi lapd vnto bert wo dough
tersin lawe: g returne eche of pu bnto pour
mothers boute:¢ p Lozddealeas kpndlp 4S i,
as pe bane dealte w the dead:and wpth me. And
the Lozd geue pou, p be map fpnde ret, eptber 0
of pou inthe bonfe of per bufbande. And than
the Kp ited the,thep lpft vp their bopce, wepte,
and fapde Dnto ber: we wyll go wb the Yutothp
folke . And Raomifapde: turne agapne mp
Dougbters:foz what caufe wil pou go with mes
Arethereanp mochplodzen in mp wombe, tobe
pour bulbandes: Curneagapne oo rage ae la
€ go:fo2 Jam fo olde to baue anbulbande. And
pt J fayd, 3 baue bope, pf 3 tokea ma allothig
npabt:pecegthougbe 3 bad alreadp bozne fon-
nes, wolde pe tarp after them ,tpll chep were of
Aer 02 wolde pe fo? them lo longe refrapne fro
takpnge ofbulbandes ¢ Aotlo mp Dougbters:
foz tt greucth memucbe foz youre lakes thatthe
bande of the Lozde is gone out agayntt me.

And thep lptte bp thep2 vopces, and wepte
agapne, and Dzpha kpiled ber mother inlawe
but Huth abode ttyl by ber . And Naomi fap:
fe,thp {piter inlaw is gone backe agapne ynto
Der people and wnto ber goodes: returne thon
after her. Bnd Ruth anlwered entreate me not
foleaue the, an’ toreturne from after the: foz
wbhprber thou govt, ¥ vwpll qoalfo, and there
thou dwellefte , there J wpllawell :thp people
Sa eny people, andtbp qov mp god. Hbere -
thboudpet tbere wll 3 dpe and there wpll F be
burped, Che L020 do lo efoto me, pFoughet a

deat


a


Li
a a
DS Een ; - a
Ez ee 7 er
iad ariel __ = p j k
s ' E è


$5003. AUU. Jv whi he
Death onelp departe the and meafondze. partelp bnto thy mapde,tobpch pet ain not like
wWihen the fawe that bewas tedfatly mpn- nto one of the mapdens. 2003 fayde Dnto ber
a Oe topth ber ihe lefte fpeatipng onto dev. agaptte: in ee of refeccponcomethou bpther,
And tother Metbeth, wntilebeycameto Weth- andeate of tl )
Ichent. And whe thep were come to wethlebem, ppneger. And the fatte Downe by thereapers, €
it was nopfed of them thozow allthe cptpe,and bereached herxparchedcozne:of the wbpycbe We oraa..
the wemclapd:isnotthpsRaomi: $ndibean= DPD cate and wag ified andlefteparte. And
pg Mered tbem :callme nof Raomi-(hatisto tave Koben (he wasrplen wp to gather, 2003 com-
pH bewtpfutl )but calline Hara, (that is ta cape, better.) maunded big ponge men, fapinge: let Der gather
* forthbealmpabty bathe made me Verp bptter.3] cuenamonge the beapes, totoya yet not. And
went out fuli ethe Lozdbathbzougbt mebome leaue ber tome of the fheues
agapneempty . Wibpthencallpe me Paomi: ttlype,p the mape gather it Dp, e (wethout shame) .
_— RAPMpeLovohatbbumbledme,gpalmpapty sredukedernot. And lofve gathered inthefdo,
Darbbzougheme neo aduerfpte: Anofoszao: wmpleuen,ebzetbed that he bed aaa eag)
mi wpth Ruth the Boabitetie per doughterin wasin mealure vpon an Epharw( Fs coeebubels) ga
law retourned out of p couitrep of Boab g came of barley. andthe toke tt vp, and ent into the. zp
to Wetblepe,wnp CCD of Barley haruc. cptie: ¢ wha ber mother in lave bad fene what


di, Chapter.

qMath sathereth copnem che rates of 16003, tober that the bad reterucd, when pe bad eaten
EA Naomis butband hada kpnimå prouch.andber mother in lawefapd onto ber:
PAA teak trenath and mpght(whichwas ot wher hatte thou gathered to dape! and where
NEN $ Lipnired of Eltmelec) named 25003. wougbtet thourblefted be be. that knewe the.

ES Wynd uth the Boabitellefapde vn- And hethewed ber mother inlaw bowe behad
 toRaòmi:let mego tothefclde, and gather ca- Hoge with bym and Cape: the mannesname
aw reg of cogne- Cucheas tbereapers eane vafteranpmaé wwpth whom F ought todapeig 15003. And

in whofe fpabt, a fpnde grace. And ihe fap on- Aaomitayd Dnto her dougbter inlawe: blefied

tober:gomp dougbter. And the tentandcame bebeof the Loze, foz beceafeth not to pee pes ear iis:

to the felve, and Gathered after thercapers, and to the lpupng and tothedead. And Aaomt tapd obt.fi..

Her chaunce was, that the fame feldepertepned agape vnto ber: the manis npe Dito D8, € of

bnto 2500 which was of the kpnred of Elme- purnerte kpnne. and Ruthth € =) oabite fapd:

lec. And bebold, 25003 came from Bethlehem, hefapde bnto mealfo . Chou palt be topthm

ee Se ontothereapers: eLowdebewpthpou. pong men vntylthep gane ended al mp bacuett:

 Andthep anfwered bym : the Lorde b effethe. And Naomianlwered nto Ruth ber ooughter

y5 Then fayd 25003 buto bis pong man that tobe inlawe:itisbelt mp poughterthat thou go out

bp the reapers. (aa bofe Damofell is thps ¢ Andp wpth bpsmapdens, that they fallnot bpon tbe -

ponge man that ode bythereapers antwered, imanp other fclde . And fo the kepte ber bp the

a fapoe : itis p oabptpth domofell, $ came wS mapdengof 28003, to gather, vuto the ende of

Paomiout of P coñtrep of Moab, fhe tapd vn parley baruet and of wheate baruck alfo:and

40 09:Db let meleale e gather afterthereapers Ddivelt wpe) prr: mans in latoe.


thares that remapne:and fo pe came, ehatve
contpraed euch from the moznpng Neo note, Cath Meapeth at woos fete, and is kuotwcn bys kpfivomart. |
fauc that Mbe tarpe alptleintbe bow. ga en Paomiber mother inlatoe fapde 7
The fapd 25005 buto Buth:beareltthoump EE
Houghtereqotono notberfeldtogather,netther Ry
cro From pence: but abpde herebpmpmapbens. ‘eae |
S0 trppneepes beontbcteldep tbepmap ceape, Wwhofemapdene ğ waf ebolo, be menowett
ecothouatter p mapdens. Paue Jnot charged barley Fo night inthe theelthyng fo
the ponge met, that thep fhalldothe noburte: thy felfetpertoze, and anopntethe,and puttby
<popeouer, whe p art a thyzit.qo wnto Puctels rapmetypo the, eget) downeto pbarne. ue
qopni AEA Pladdesbauedzatoen. THE leenot ama know of P.népll bebaue beasts oe
gerria We Tell on Der face and * bowed per felfe to the tpngg Dapnchpng. And whéebeqoeth to fleape,
rounde,andfapd dneo him: pow ts itp Jbaue marke tbe place wheare belapetphpmt Downe,
ounde grace in thpneepes, and that thou Mul- ethengo¢ lptte vp the clothes, that areonbys
Dekbnoweme,fepingeJamanaliaunts fete, elapetbe Dotone there, and To all be tell
And Woo; anlwered elapoe vnto ber:allis thewbat thon Malt bo. And the anlwered her:
told ¢ (hewed me$ thou bat done ynto ce alltbat thou bpbdelt me, J wplldo. And tothe
ther inlaw, fence p death of thpnebutband, pow
thoubattelettecbp father ethp mother,andthe toall tbat bet motherinlawebade per. |
lande toberethon wall bogtte,¢art come tnta a “end when 25003 padeatcrand Dzonckert, and
nacion wbpcb thou knewell not intpme paled. mabdebim mepe wag gone in, tolpedotonbe- »
A helorde quptethp wozcke,anda full retwarde fpe $ þeapeo
pegeuenthe of the Lo2de God of Jfracll:wnder theclo


Pa Ep
- ec, al


fohole wpnges thou artcometoabpoe. Then (m dnight the man was afrapde g groped. nd ys
(he Sapte : let me fpnde fauour M thy (pabtemp “bebolde:a woman lapeatpigtete. And befapd: :
lozde,thoutbat paltecomfogted me,andipoken whatart thourtpeantwered: Jam Ruth ebpne


€ iit —_bandmayd


$5003. AUU. Jv whi he
Death onelp departe the and meafondze. partelp bnto thy mapde,tobpch pet ain not like
wWihen the fawe that bewas tedfatly mpn- nto one of the mapdens. 2003 fayde Dnto ber
a Oe topth ber ihe lefte fpeatipng onto dev. agaptte: in ee of refeccponcomethou bpther,
And tother Metbeth, wntilebeycameto Weth- andeate of tl )
Ichent. And whe thep were come to wethlebem, ppneger. And the fatte Downe by thereapers, €
it was nopfed of them thozow allthe cptpe,and bereached herxparchedcozne:of the wbpycbe We oraa..
the wemclapd:isnotthpsRaomi: $ndibean= DPD cate and wag ified andlefteparte. And
pg Mered tbem :callme nof Raomi-(hatisto tave Koben (he wasrplen wp to gather, 2003 com-
pH bewtpfutl )but calline Hara, (that is ta cape, better.) maunded big ponge men, fapinge: let Der gather
* forthbealmpabty bathe made me Verp bptter.3] cuenamonge the beapes, totoya yet not. And
went out fuli ethe Lozdbathbzougbt mebome leaue ber tome of the fheues
agapneempty . Wibpthencallpe me Paomi: ttlype,p the mape gather it Dp, e (wethout shame) .
_— RAPMpeLovohatbbumbledme,gpalmpapty sredukedernot. And lofve gathered inthefdo,
Darbbzougheme neo aduerfpte: Anofoszao: wmpleuen,ebzetbed that he bed aaa eag)
mi wpth Ruth the Boabitetie per doughterin wasin mealure vpon an Epharw( Fs coeebubels) ga
law retourned out of p couitrep of Boab g came of barley. andthe toke tt vp, and ent into the. zp
to Wetblepe,wnp CCD of Barley haruc. cptie: ¢ wha ber mother in lave bad fene what


di, Chapter.

qMath sathereth copnem che rates of 16003, tober that the bad reterucd, when pe bad eaten
EA Naomis butband hada kpnimå prouch.andber mother in lawefapd onto ber:
PAA teak trenath and mpght(whichwas ot wher hatte thou gathered to dape! and where
NEN $ Lipnired of Eltmelec) named 25003. wougbtet thourblefted be be. that knewe the.

ES Wynd uth the Boabitellefapde vn- And hethewed ber mother inlaw bowe behad
 toRaòmi:let mego tothefclde, and gather ca- Hoge with bym and Cape: the mannesname
aw reg of cogne- Cucheas tbereapers eane vafteranpmaé wwpth whom F ought todapeig 15003. And

in whofe fpabt, a fpnde grace. And ihe fap on- Aaomitayd Dnto her dougbter inlawe: blefied

tober:gomp dougbter. And the tentandcame bebeof the Loze, foz beceafeth not to pee pes ear iis:

to the felve, and Gathered after thercapers, and to the lpupng and tothedead. And Aaomt tapd obt.fi..

Her chaunce was, that the fame feldepertepned agape vnto ber: the manis npe Dito D8, € of

bnto 2500 which was of the kpnred of Elme- purnerte kpnne. and Ruthth € =) oabite fapd:

lec. And bebold, 25003 came from Bethlehem, hefapde bnto mealfo . Chou palt be topthm

ee Se ontothereapers: eLowdebewpthpou. pong men vntylthep gane ended al mp bacuett:

 Andthep anfwered bym : the Lorde b effethe. And Naomianlwered nto Ruth ber ooughter

y5 Then fayd 25003 buto bis pong man that tobe inlawe:itisbelt mp poughterthat thou go out

bp the reapers. (aa bofe Damofell is thps ¢ Andp wpth bpsmapdens, that they fallnot bpon tbe -

ponge man that ode bythereapers antwered, imanp other fclde . And fo the kepte ber bp the

a fapoe : itis p oabptpth domofell, $ came wS mapdengof 28003, to gather, vuto the ende of

Paomiout of P coñtrep of Moab, fhe tapd vn parley baruet and of wheate baruck alfo:and

40 09:Db let meleale e gather afterthereapers Ddivelt wpe) prr: mans in latoe.


thares that remapne:and fo pe came, ehatve
contpraed euch from the moznpng Neo note, Cath Meapeth at woos fete, and is kuotwcn bys kpfivomart. |
fauc that Mbe tarpe alptleintbe bow. ga en Paomiber mother inlatoe fapde 7
The fapd 25005 buto Buth:beareltthoump EE
Houghtereqotono notberfeldtogather,netther Ry
cro From pence: but abpde herebpmpmapbens. ‘eae |
S0 trppneepes beontbcteldep tbepmap ceape, Wwhofemapdene ğ waf ebolo, be menowett
ecothouatter p mapdens. Paue Jnot charged barley Fo night inthe theelthyng fo
the ponge met, that thep fhalldothe noburte: thy felfetpertoze, and anopntethe,and puttby
<popeouer, whe p art a thyzit.qo wnto Puctels rapmetypo the, eget) downeto pbarne. ue
qopni AEA Pladdesbauedzatoen. THE leenot ama know of P.népll bebaue beasts oe
gerria We Tell on Der face and * bowed per felfe to the tpngg Dapnchpng. And whéebeqoeth to fleape,
rounde,andfapd dneo him: pow ts itp Jbaue marke tbe place wheare belapetphpmt Downe,
ounde grace in thpneepes, and that thou Mul- ethengo¢ lptte vp the clothes, that areonbys
Dekbnoweme,fepingeJamanaliaunts fete, elapetbe Dotone there, and To all be tell
And Woo; anlwered elapoe vnto ber:allis thewbat thon Malt bo. And the anlwered her:
told ¢ (hewed me$ thou bat done ynto ce alltbat thou bpbdelt me, J wplldo. And tothe
ther inlaw, fence p death of thpnebutband, pow
thoubattelettecbp father ethp mother,andthe toall tbat bet motherinlawebade per. |
lande toberethon wall bogtte,¢art come tnta a “end when 25003 padeatcrand Dzonckert, and
nacion wbpcb thou knewell not intpme paled. mabdebim mepe wag gone in, tolpedotonbe- »
A helorde quptethp wozcke,anda full retwarde fpe $ þeapeo
pegeuenthe of the Lo2de God of Jfracll:wnder theclo


Pa Ep
- ec, al


fohole wpnges thou artcometoabpoe. Then (m dnight the man was afrapde g groped. nd ys
(he Sapte : let me fpnde fauour M thy (pabtemp “bebolde:a woman lapeatpigtete. And befapd: :
lozde,thoutbat paltecomfogted me,andipoken whatart thourtpeantwered: Jam Ruth ebpne


€ iit —_bandmayd


$5003. AUU. Jv whi he
Death onelp departe the and meafondze. partelp bnto thy mapde,tobpch pet ain not like
wWihen the fawe that bewas tedfatly mpn- nto one of the mapdens. 2003 fayde Dnto ber
a Oe topth ber ihe lefte fpeatipng onto dev. agaptte: in ee of refeccponcomethou bpther,
And tother Metbeth, wntilebeycameto Weth- andeate of tl )
Ichent. And whe thep were come to wethlebem, ppneger. And the fatte Downe by thereapers, €
it was nopfed of them thozow allthe cptpe,and bereached herxparchedcozne:of the wbpycbe We oraa..
the wemclapd:isnotthpsRaomi: $ndibean= DPD cate and wag ified andlefteparte. And
pg Mered tbem :callme nof Raomi-(hatisto tave Koben (he wasrplen wp to gather, 2003 com-
pH bewtpfutl )but calline Hara, (that is ta cape, better.) maunded big ponge men, fapinge: let Der gather
* forthbealmpabty bathe made me Verp bptter.3] cuenamonge the beapes, totoya yet not. And
went out fuli ethe Lozdbathbzougbt mebome leaue ber tome of the fheues
agapneempty . Wibpthencallpe me Paomi: ttlype,p the mape gather it Dp, e (wethout shame) .
_— RAPMpeLovohatbbumbledme,gpalmpapty sredukedernot. And lofve gathered inthefdo,
Darbbzougheme neo aduerfpte: Anofoszao: wmpleuen,ebzetbed that he bed aaa eag)
mi wpth Ruth the Boabitetie per doughterin wasin mealure vpon an Epharw( Fs coeebubels) ga
law retourned out of p couitrep of Boab g came of barley. andthe toke tt vp, and ent into the. zp
to Wetblepe,wnp CCD of Barley haruc. cptie: ¢ wha ber mother in lave bad fene what


di, Chapter.

qMath sathereth copnem che rates of 16003, tober that the bad reterucd, when pe bad eaten
EA Naomis butband hada kpnimå prouch.andber mother in lawefapd onto ber:
PAA teak trenath and mpght(whichwas ot wher hatte thou gathered to dape! and where
NEN $ Lipnired of Eltmelec) named 25003. wougbtet thourblefted be be. that knewe the.

ES Wynd uth the Boabitellefapde vn- And hethewed ber mother inlaw bowe behad
 toRaòmi:let mego tothefclde, and gather ca- Hoge with bym and Cape: the mannesname
aw reg of cogne- Cucheas tbereapers eane vafteranpmaé wwpth whom F ought todapeig 15003. And

in whofe fpabt, a fpnde grace. And ihe fap on- Aaomitayd Dnto her dougbter inlawe: blefied

tober:gomp dougbter. And the tentandcame bebeof the Loze, foz beceafeth not to pee pes ear iis:

to the felve, and Gathered after thercapers, and to the lpupng and tothedead. And Aaomt tapd obt.fi..

Her chaunce was, that the fame feldepertepned agape vnto ber: the manis npe Dito D8, € of

bnto 2500 which was of the kpnred of Elme- purnerte kpnne. and Ruthth € =) oabite fapd:

lec. And bebold, 25003 came from Bethlehem, hefapde bnto mealfo . Chou palt be topthm

ee Se ontothereapers: eLowdebewpthpou. pong men vntylthep gane ended al mp bacuett:

 Andthep anfwered bym : the Lorde b effethe. And Naomianlwered nto Ruth ber ooughter

y5 Then fayd 25003 buto bis pong man that tobe inlawe:itisbelt mp poughterthat thou go out

bp the reapers. (aa bofe Damofell is thps ¢ Andp wpth bpsmapdens, that they fallnot bpon tbe -

ponge man that ode bythereapers antwered, imanp other fclde . And fo the kepte ber bp the

a fapoe : itis p oabptpth domofell, $ came wS mapdengof 28003, to gather, vuto the ende of

Paomiout of P coñtrep of Moab, fhe tapd vn parley baruet and of wheate baruck alfo:and

40 09:Db let meleale e gather afterthereapers Ddivelt wpe) prr: mans in latoe.


thares that remapne:and fo pe came, ehatve
contpraed euch from the moznpng Neo note, Cath Meapeth at woos fete, and is kuotwcn bys kpfivomart. |
fauc that Mbe tarpe alptleintbe bow. ga en Paomiber mother inlatoe fapde 7
The fapd 25005 buto Buth:beareltthoump EE
Houghtereqotono notberfeldtogather,netther Ry
cro From pence: but abpde herebpmpmapbens. ‘eae |
S0 trppneepes beontbcteldep tbepmap ceape, Wwhofemapdene ğ waf ebolo, be menowett
ecothouatter p mapdens. Paue Jnot charged barley Fo night inthe theelthyng fo
the ponge met, that thep fhalldothe noburte: thy felfetpertoze, and anopntethe,and puttby
<popeouer, whe p art a thyzit.qo wnto Puctels rapmetypo the, eget) downeto pbarne. ue
qopni AEA Pladdesbauedzatoen. THE leenot ama know of P.népll bebaue beasts oe
gerria We Tell on Der face and * bowed per felfe to the tpngg Dapnchpng. And whéebeqoeth to fleape,
rounde,andfapd dneo him: pow ts itp Jbaue marke tbe place wheare belapetphpmt Downe,
ounde grace in thpneepes, and that thou Mul- ethengo¢ lptte vp the clothes, that areonbys
Dekbnoweme,fepingeJamanaliaunts fete, elapetbe Dotone there, and To all be tell
And Woo; anlwered elapoe vnto ber:allis thewbat thon Malt bo. And the anlwered her:
told ¢ (hewed me$ thou bat done ynto ce alltbat thou bpbdelt me, J wplldo. And tothe
ther inlaw, fence p death of thpnebutband, pow
thoubattelettecbp father ethp mother,andthe toall tbat bet motherinlawebade per. |
lande toberethon wall bogtte,¢art come tnta a “end when 25003 padeatcrand Dzonckert, and
nacion wbpcb thou knewell not intpme paled. mabdebim mepe wag gone in, tolpedotonbe- »
A helorde quptethp wozcke,anda full retwarde fpe $ þeapeo
pegeuenthe of the Lo2de God of Jfracll:wnder theclo


Pa Ep
- ec, al


fohole wpnges thou artcometoabpoe. Then (m dnight the man was afrapde g groped. nd ys
(he Sapte : let me fpnde fauour M thy (pabtemp “bebolde:a woman lapeatpigtete. And befapd: :
lozde,thoutbat paltecomfogted me,andipoken whatart thourtpeantwered: Jam Ruth ebpne


€ iit —_bandmayd


003 Ruth, bed, ,
. andmapde {preade thp topna onerthyneband: ¢alltbat was Chilis e Mablons,of thebande é
oe De tor Pact ebencrte of the byrne.dyc (app: of Naot. And mozeouer, Ruththe B)oabite
blefied be thou in the Lorde mp Doughter, foz Ë the wyfe of Wablon, paue 7 jurchated to be mp j
pak thewedmoze qoodnesinthelaterende,thé Wpie to flere vp the name ofthe dead bpon pps
Cath beapnnpng,inasmuchasthoufolotvedelt enberitaunce, and that this name be not put out
not pong vel they were poze ozriche. from amongebps beethzen, and fromthe gate A
And nowe mp dougdtecfearenot, 3 Wwplldoto ofbpsplace:pe are wptneles thps dape.
pall p thou requpreff, pe at bel Ja Andallthe peoplethatwereinthegate,etbe
Dotbe kuotwe,thatParta toma of vertue.aAnd elders lapde:weare wptuefles:theLogdemake
itistrue that Jam of thy nert hynnehowbeit, thewomanthat igcomeinto thpneboute, lpke
tbereigonenpertbhã J. Tarp thpsnpgbt. And *Rabeland Lea, Wwhpche twapne dpd lDep Senerrip,
whenmoznpngiscome,pihe wil marpthe,ttig Doule of Zicacl:doPp alfo valeauntly in “Dba aewerh
cood,folethymdo.wutandpEbewplinothaue ta,andbefamoute tn Wetbhlebem. Thp houte be
the,asfureasthe Lozdelpueth Fivillbauetbe: lpbe the boufe of Pharesxtohpom Thamar bare ce.rrrvitte
Ipes onip Tompnge Ani toe leet Ynto Juda, cuen of the fede whpehe the Lozde
pysfeteontpll themoznyng, Andtpearolewp Mallgeue theofthps ponge woman. —
«p befoze one couldeknote another. And befapde: _ And fo 15003 toke Ruth, g the was bis wpie, D |
_ Ietnoman bnowe, that there came anp woman And whan be went in ynto ber, the 1020 gane, | |


intotbe barne.Andbelapdeagapnebepnaetbe P Weconcepued,¢ bare a fonne. Andthe wemen
mantelithat thoubatt vponthe,andboloityp. lapde unto Naomi:biefledbe the Lod, F wbich
Andwhan hebeldett vp,bemetteinfpremea- bathnotlett the wptboutakpnima., tobauca
— {ures ot barley, and lapdcitonber Andtheqat namein Zlracll,andthat pall beynge thp lpte
___—_—herintothecptie,¢ ban thecameintobermo- agapn,echertihetbpne old age. soz thp dough-
ther inlaw, thefapdbowisitwdthempdough- ter inlawe wobpcheloucth the, bath bopie vnto
ter? And the tolde beralltbatthemanpaddone bpm: tthe is bettertothetha lenen fonnes And
tober . Andfapdealfo:theletpre mealuresof F240nutokethechpld, andlapcdit in ber lappe,
Warley gaueheme,elapyd:P halt notcomeem= Ebecamenourteontoit. Andhernepghbours
ptp vntothp motberinlawe.Chalapoethemp JANE it anam Paring there isa chbplo boneto i
poughter, (pt tpl wntpl ë knowehowe p mat- Haomi, ¢ called it Dbed tbe fame isthe father,
tertopl chaunce.ffo2the mã wplluotbeinret, Of Ilai tbe father of Dauid. Thele perhez l


._ ee


be bauefynpthed pthynethisfamedape, tacpons ofxpPbhares: bares begatsesrO: Hes= t.war.ti.a

= sabe Se Le i à ron begat Ram, Ram begat AmmMadab, Ami: atta
Eons taketh Lucy to wele, of pom bebegettety oben, NaAdDAd begat Rabon, Mahlon begat Salman, i \
f =a pen went 2003 wntopgatcefachim Salmõbegat X003, 16003 begat Obed, Obed k


(Downe there: bebolbe the &ynfman of oe ae
bos Hefapde:comeandf{ptdownebere,and | | 4 CA
led n br bpananie Anse turnedin, lat The fylt boke of Sa o


bs which 25003 pake, cam bp.cinto wha


dowone. And he roke ten men ofthe elders of pcp muelcalledthefpzftebooke er
tic,efapd-{pt pedown bere. Andthep fat down of the kpnaes. t |
And helapde onto the kpn{inan: Naomi that ig @ The ft Chapter. ale / oe


_ comeagapne out of tbe countrep of )oab* wil Tekanna hath.ti.wpucs.Banue and jhenenna,

seer, fela parcel of land, wbich wag our brother Emi i Sol He
bd. ss Melecs.And J thought to do p to wet bpd the
bye it before p enbabitours æ elders of mp peo-
ple. PE tbou be difpofed to redeme it, Do:but g pE

thou wplte not purchalert, then tell me, that J
mapeknowe . Wo: there ts none tochalenaeit,
fauethou,and J neve the . And the other antwe-
ted, 3 WPL pourchale it. EN si

‘Then lapde 5003, what dap P bpe the Felde |
5 of thebande of Raomi, P multetake alfo Ruth ri


ne Å_— —


the Woabite the «topfe of the dead,to tere wp K/L Wie

EPE EEN thenailteae Poeabeb on bpsenberitaiice. The ills iiz SSS
Kpnfman anlwered: J cannot pourchalett,for peacetime aere Was amd of one of f tivo %
marrpngofmpne owne enberitañce: takepmp iasa Peed Ramathes (off kpnred ofzo-
cpabt top.fo: Jcannotpurchaleit. Rowetbis PEEN laeri phim, of mount Ephzaim) na-
was f maner of olde tyme in Blraelcocernpnge Ray ewe med * Elkana the fonne of Je- t Par.vi.c
pourches g chaŭging fo: to ftablitpealtbing:p AEA PaSA robam thefo eof Elibu , the
amanimufte plucke ofthis hoor andgencithps eaves: EA Cone of Chobe , Pline of suph, ~ r:
neighbour, tbis wasalurewitnellein Firacl. ET a an Ephathite:whichhadtwo


Lherfoze p kyniman fapde to 28003: pe it


this dap. $ J baue boughe alf wag Elimelecs, Went pp out ofbpgeptie eucep featful dape, to =F" >


003 Ruth, bed, ,
. andmapde {preade thp topna onerthyneband: ¢alltbat was Chilis e Mablons,of thebande é
oe De tor Pact ebencrte of the byrne.dyc (app: of Naot. And mozeouer, Ruththe B)oabite
blefied be thou in the Lorde mp Doughter, foz Ë the wyfe of Wablon, paue 7 jurchated to be mp j
pak thewedmoze qoodnesinthelaterende,thé Wpie to flere vp the name ofthe dead bpon pps
Cath beapnnpng,inasmuchasthoufolotvedelt enberitaunce, and that this name be not put out
not pong vel they were poze ozriche. from amongebps beethzen, and fromthe gate A
And nowe mp dougdtecfearenot, 3 Wwplldoto ofbpsplace:pe are wptneles thps dape.
pall p thou requpreff, pe at bel Ja Andallthe peoplethatwereinthegate,etbe
Dotbe kuotwe,thatParta toma of vertue.aAnd elders lapde:weare wptuefles:theLogdemake
itistrue that Jam of thy nert hynnehowbeit, thewomanthat igcomeinto thpneboute, lpke
tbereigonenpertbhã J. Tarp thpsnpgbt. And *Rabeland Lea, Wwhpche twapne dpd lDep Senerrip,
whenmoznpngiscome,pihe wil marpthe,ttig Doule of Zicacl:doPp alfo valeauntly in “Dba aewerh
cood,folethymdo.wutandpEbewplinothaue ta,andbefamoute tn Wetbhlebem. Thp houte be
the,asfureasthe Lozdelpueth Fivillbauetbe: lpbe the boufe of Pharesxtohpom Thamar bare ce.rrrvitte
Ipes onip Tompnge Ani toe leet Ynto Juda, cuen of the fede whpehe the Lozde
pysfeteontpll themoznyng, Andtpearolewp Mallgeue theofthps ponge woman. —
«p befoze one couldeknote another. And befapde: _ And fo 15003 toke Ruth, g the was bis wpie, D |
_ Ietnoman bnowe, that there came anp woman And whan be went in ynto ber, the 1020 gane, | |


intotbe barne.Andbelapdeagapnebepnaetbe P Weconcepued,¢ bare a fonne. Andthe wemen
mantelithat thoubatt vponthe,andboloityp. lapde unto Naomi:biefledbe the Lod, F wbich
Andwhan hebeldett vp,bemetteinfpremea- bathnotlett the wptboutakpnima., tobauca
— {ures ot barley, and lapdcitonber Andtheqat namein Zlracll,andthat pall beynge thp lpte
___—_—herintothecptie,¢ ban thecameintobermo- agapn,echertihetbpne old age. soz thp dough-
ther inlaw, thefapdbowisitwdthempdough- ter inlawe wobpcheloucth the, bath bopie vnto
ter? And the tolde beralltbatthemanpaddone bpm: tthe is bettertothetha lenen fonnes And
tober . Andfapdealfo:theletpre mealuresof F240nutokethechpld, andlapcdit in ber lappe,
Warley gaueheme,elapyd:P halt notcomeem= Ebecamenourteontoit. Andhernepghbours
ptp vntothp motberinlawe.Chalapoethemp JANE it anam Paring there isa chbplo boneto i
poughter, (pt tpl wntpl ë knowehowe p mat- Haomi, ¢ called it Dbed tbe fame isthe father,
tertopl chaunce.ffo2the mã wplluotbeinret, Of Ilai tbe father of Dauid. Thele perhez l


._ ee


be bauefynpthed pthynethisfamedape, tacpons ofxpPbhares: bares begatsesrO: Hes= t.war.ti.a

= sabe Se Le i à ron begat Ram, Ram begat AmmMadab, Ami: atta
Eons taketh Lucy to wele, of pom bebegettety oben, NaAdDAd begat Rabon, Mahlon begat Salman, i \
f =a pen went 2003 wntopgatcefachim Salmõbegat X003, 16003 begat Obed, Obed k


(Downe there: bebolbe the &ynfman of oe ae
bos Hefapde:comeandf{ptdownebere,and | | 4 CA
led n br bpananie Anse turnedin, lat The fylt boke of Sa o


bs which 25003 pake, cam bp.cinto wha


dowone. And he roke ten men ofthe elders of pcp muelcalledthefpzftebooke er
tic,efapd-{pt pedown bere. Andthep fat down of the kpnaes. t |
And helapde onto the kpn{inan: Naomi that ig @ The ft Chapter. ale / oe


_ comeagapne out of tbe countrep of )oab* wil Tekanna hath.ti.wpucs.Banue and jhenenna,

seer, fela parcel of land, wbich wag our brother Emi i Sol He
bd. ss Melecs.And J thought to do p to wet bpd the
bye it before p enbabitours æ elders of mp peo-
ple. PE tbou be difpofed to redeme it, Do:but g pE

thou wplte not purchalert, then tell me, that J
mapeknowe . Wo: there ts none tochalenaeit,
fauethou,and J neve the . And the other antwe-
ted, 3 WPL pourchale it. EN si

‘Then lapde 5003, what dap P bpe the Felde |
5 of thebande of Raomi, P multetake alfo Ruth ri


ne Å_— —


the Woabite the «topfe of the dead,to tere wp K/L Wie

EPE EEN thenailteae Poeabeb on bpsenberitaiice. The ills iiz SSS
Kpnfman anlwered: J cannot pourchalett,for peacetime aere Was amd of one of f tivo %
marrpngofmpne owne enberitañce: takepmp iasa Peed Ramathes (off kpnred ofzo-
cpabt top.fo: Jcannotpurchaleit. Rowetbis PEEN laeri phim, of mount Ephzaim) na-
was f maner of olde tyme in Blraelcocernpnge Ray ewe med * Elkana the fonne of Je- t Par.vi.c
pourches g chaŭging fo: to ftablitpealtbing:p AEA PaSA robam thefo eof Elibu , the
amanimufte plucke ofthis hoor andgencithps eaves: EA Cone of Chobe , Pline of suph, ~ r:
neighbour, tbis wasalurewitnellein Firacl. ET a an Ephathite:whichhadtwo


Lherfoze p kyniman fapde to 28003: pe it


this dap. $ J baue boughe alf wag Elimelecs, Went pp out ofbpgeptie eucep featful dape, to =F" >


Elkana. . Samuel. Forti,
papeandto offre Dnto p L0 ofboftesin Si- andan Ephaofflour,andabottleofiwpne,and— .
Lo, where were the two onnes ofEli(Dopbnpyæ brought bpm wnto theboute of the Lozdin Di-
pa the Lordes preaftes. Anditfeliona lo, and Pchplae was pet but tendzcofage. And
olempne dape, that Elkana offered , and yaur thep Auca bullocke, ¢ beoughtintheladto Eli
to 1henenna dis wpfe andtoall her fonnes and and peCapo-<Db mp lorde:as tral as thy foul
Douchters poecpons. Wut bnto Hanna ve gaur liueth mp lozde, Jam p woma $ (Lode before
a pozcton witha beup chere, foz pe louco Hanna, bere pzapenge buto the lozde. Foz thps ladde’
the Lozd bad made herbarren. And ber enemy prayed, and the Lozde bath qeuenme mp defpre
 Pbhenenna) vered ber fore ctinuallp , to moue whpch J atked of bpin: € therfore Jhane geur
er. becauletbe Lozdbadmade der barren.And Dim vnrathe Lozde,aslonge as bets mete fo2
odpaihe pear by peare as ofteasthewetvpto Lozbe Andthep worthpppedthe Lozde there,
38 Phoufe of the Lozde. And lo chafed ber, wbpche C Tbe.. Chapter.
` Mept,gopd not cate. Thãfapd Elkana ber f= _CTdefongeot ganna. Throkence ofthe fonnes of it. .
bandto ber: panna, vobp wepelt thousand whp RRS ND Hanna prapedandlapd:mpne bert wy
cate notre tbp isthpnebertetroubleds am py “aad relopictbin the Lo2zd, and mpnehome
not {bettertop.thentenfonness So Hanna PAP
role pp after f they bad eatentdonckeinSp- m
io. And Elitbe preafte fatte bpona ftolebpone teiopccinthpfaluacpon. There is nonefobelp
of the fpde poftes of the temple ofp Lorde. And as th¢ 102d, fo: wpthout the,isnothpng. Nep-
the was froubled inher mpnde, ¢ prayed pntop therts ther anp of ftréqth as is our God. Talke
Lozbde,t mente fore, ¢ vowed a powr,elapd: not toruche pondelp lette olde thinges Depart
Lo2d of hoftes, pE thou wylt loke on p troubleot out of pouremouthes foz the Lozde isa Godot
thine hadmapn ¢ remébze menot forget thine knowledge, bps purpotes come topatie. Che
bony wn gen pun onto p Laval ape bowe wpththemprbtpe men are bzoken:¢ th


child: J wil geue bim wnto p Lozdall p vapes of that were weake,bauc gpzde tbem felues wpt.
quv.rit.a. DIS lyfe, * ttber thal no raflercome wpa bis bead firengib. Thep that werefull, baue bpzedoute
Aum dib And as the continucdpzaping before the £020, them feluestoz bzeade, and they that werebun-
it foztuncdp Eli marked ber mouthe. ffo: Han- grp ceale fo to be, tpl the baren hath borne feu:
na {pake in ber berte,¢ bet lpppes dpd but moue and tbe tbathadimanp chpldzen, is waredteble. y
onely, but ber bopce as not pard:and therfore * Tbe Lorde billeth,emabeth alpuc:bepnget) oeu.rreg.t.
Gli thought We had bene d2onké,and Eli fapde doibnetothe qraue efetcheth vp agapne .. Che .
unto ber: Potve Longe wplte thoube donker i | | ibe
put amape trom thethewpne p thou bat.pan- lowe,and peueth vponbpe. * He tepleth C pcat.crig.t
g!a anfweredandfapde:notfomp lode, Jama )
poomnan of afozorwtull bert: 3 baue dzonke nep- from tbe dongbpll:to fet them amonge pzpnces,
pran rig.a. Cher WPN NO? troge depncke, but bawexpoto2ed andto enberet them with the Teate ofglorp. Foz
out mp Coule befoze the Lozde. Count not thpne the prilers of theearth are the Lobes, & be at
handmapde to be lpke a Dougbter of Weltal, for fet the rounde wozlde Dpon the. He wpll kepe
once eh bptbert ofmpbeupnesandarete fetcofbps fapntes, tthe wpched Mall kepe fp-
paue enn bptherto. :
Eit-an(wocredheragapne:andfapde, qoin Mallnomanbe tronge. The Lodes aduerfa- Dot
peace:the Good of Fraciiqraunt thetbp peticto, tes (pall be deftroped of bpm:and out of beaue
that thoubatt alticd of bym. be fapd:let thine {pall be thunder bponeuerp one of them : The
bandmapdfpnde grace im thp fpabt. Andfothe Lorde pall indge theendes of the wozlde, and
woman went her wape,and dpd eat, and loked {hall gpue mpgbte vnto bps kpnge, anderalte
x nomoze folad. Andtbep cole vpearipe, woz: thebone of bpsaniopnted. And Elkana wente ©
fhppped befozethe Log. and then returned,and toRamathto bps þonfe and the ladde bpd mp-
came to thep2 boufeto Ramath. And when Cl nifter vnto the Lozde before Cli the prea fte.
kamaknewe anna bis wyle,the Lozde remem nt f fonnes of Eli were chpldzen of Belial,
SE ber, foz it peocefie of tyme it came to patie,
that the concepued,and bare afonne, andcalled alaw foz Ppeople, ý whenfoeuer anp man offe-
pe name Samuel fapinge: bpcaule Jhaucat ceo anp ottryna.the preateg lad came, whple p
sl ly of the Lozde. And Elkana andall bps
boufe wente vp to offer unto the L020, the offe- |
rpnge due fo: thefeatt,and allo bps wowe : Ae: kettle caldzen oz potte.Andall ý the fletpe poke
ucttbeles , anna wétnot bp but fapd wnto der bought vp, that the preatte toke away. Andfo
— pulband:3 wyl tarp wntpl the lad be wepned, ¢ thep opd wnto alltbe Firaclites,that came thp-
tben Y whl beyng bym that be mape apeare be: ther to Silo. Pea and therto,befoze thep burnt
fore the Lord and there abpoe fozener. Elkana thefatte, the preattes lad cameandfapdeto the
ber bulbande antwwered ber : do what femeth the manthat offered: geue fletbe that 3 mape dzee
` bef:tarp at bome, Yntpl thou batt wepned pim, it foz the Pecalte, foz be wpll not bauc fodder
and J beleche f Lo20,t0 make good ade ey . fietbeof the,but raw. And pfanpmanlapd vn-
undo the oma abode, ¢ saue per fonnelucke tobpm: lec themburne the ataccozpnag tothe D
pntpll pe epned bpm. And when beban wep: dape and then take ag muche as tbpne berte De-


ned bim (he toke pim Ù per, With the bullockes fpzeth: Che ladde wolde ant we eae
| Dae


Elkana. . Samuel. Forti,
papeandto offre Dnto p L0 ofboftesin Si- andan Ephaofflour,andabottleofiwpne,and— .
Lo, where were the two onnes ofEli(Dopbnpyæ brought bpm wnto theboute of the Lozdin Di-
pa the Lordes preaftes. Anditfeliona lo, and Pchplae was pet but tendzcofage. And
olempne dape, that Elkana offered , and yaur thep Auca bullocke, ¢ beoughtintheladto Eli
to 1henenna dis wpfe andtoall her fonnes and and peCapo-<Db mp lorde:as tral as thy foul
Douchters poecpons. Wut bnto Hanna ve gaur liueth mp lozde, Jam p woma $ (Lode before
a pozcton witha beup chere, foz pe louco Hanna, bere pzapenge buto the lozde. Foz thps ladde’
the Lozd bad made herbarren. And ber enemy prayed, and the Lozde bath qeuenme mp defpre
 Pbhenenna) vered ber fore ctinuallp , to moue whpch J atked of bpin: € therfore Jhane geur
er. becauletbe Lozdbadmade der barren.And Dim vnrathe Lozde,aslonge as bets mete fo2
odpaihe pear by peare as ofteasthewetvpto Lozbe Andthep worthpppedthe Lozde there,
38 Phoufe of the Lozde. And lo chafed ber, wbpche C Tbe.. Chapter.
` Mept,gopd not cate. Thãfapd Elkana ber f= _CTdefongeot ganna. Throkence ofthe fonnes of it. .
bandto ber: panna, vobp wepelt thousand whp RRS ND Hanna prapedandlapd:mpne bert wy
cate notre tbp isthpnebertetroubleds am py “aad relopictbin the Lo2zd, and mpnehome
not {bettertop.thentenfonness So Hanna PAP
role pp after f they bad eatentdonckeinSp- m
io. And Elitbe preafte fatte bpona ftolebpone teiopccinthpfaluacpon. There is nonefobelp
of the fpde poftes of the temple ofp Lorde. And as th¢ 102d, fo: wpthout the,isnothpng. Nep-
the was froubled inher mpnde, ¢ prayed pntop therts ther anp of ftréqth as is our God. Talke
Lozbde,t mente fore, ¢ vowed a powr,elapd: not toruche pondelp lette olde thinges Depart
Lo2d of hoftes, pE thou wylt loke on p troubleot out of pouremouthes foz the Lozde isa Godot
thine hadmapn ¢ remébze menot forget thine knowledge, bps purpotes come topatie. Che
bony wn gen pun onto p Laval ape bowe wpththemprbtpe men are bzoken:¢ th


child: J wil geue bim wnto p Lozdall p vapes of that were weake,bauc gpzde tbem felues wpt.
quv.rit.a. DIS lyfe, * ttber thal no raflercome wpa bis bead firengib. Thep that werefull, baue bpzedoute
Aum dib And as the continucdpzaping before the £020, them feluestoz bzeade, and they that werebun-
it foztuncdp Eli marked ber mouthe. ffo: Han- grp ceale fo to be, tpl the baren hath borne feu:
na {pake in ber berte,¢ bet lpppes dpd but moue and tbe tbathadimanp chpldzen, is waredteble. y
onely, but ber bopce as not pard:and therfore * Tbe Lorde billeth,emabeth alpuc:bepnget) oeu.rreg.t.
Gli thought We had bene d2onké,and Eli fapde doibnetothe qraue efetcheth vp agapne .. Che .
unto ber: Potve Longe wplte thoube donker i | | ibe
put amape trom thethewpne p thou bat.pan- lowe,and peueth vponbpe. * He tepleth C pcat.crig.t
g!a anfweredandfapde:notfomp lode, Jama )
poomnan of afozorwtull bert: 3 baue dzonke nep- from tbe dongbpll:to fet them amonge pzpnces,
pran rig.a. Cher WPN NO? troge depncke, but bawexpoto2ed andto enberet them with the Teate ofglorp. Foz
out mp Coule befoze the Lozde. Count not thpne the prilers of theearth are the Lobes, & be at
handmapde to be lpke a Dougbter of Weltal, for fet the rounde wozlde Dpon the. He wpll kepe
once eh bptbert ofmpbeupnesandarete fetcofbps fapntes, tthe wpched Mall kepe fp-
paue enn bptherto. :
Eit-an(wocredheragapne:andfapde, qoin Mallnomanbe tronge. The Lodes aduerfa- Dot
peace:the Good of Fraciiqraunt thetbp peticto, tes (pall be deftroped of bpm:and out of beaue
that thoubatt alticd of bym. be fapd:let thine {pall be thunder bponeuerp one of them : The
bandmapdfpnde grace im thp fpabt. Andfothe Lorde pall indge theendes of the wozlde, and
woman went her wape,and dpd eat, and loked {hall gpue mpgbte vnto bps kpnge, anderalte
x nomoze folad. Andtbep cole vpearipe, woz: thebone of bpsaniopnted. And Elkana wente ©
fhppped befozethe Log. and then returned,and toRamathto bps þonfe and the ladde bpd mp-
came to thep2 boufeto Ramath. And when Cl nifter vnto the Lozde before Cli the prea fte.
kamaknewe anna bis wyle,the Lozde remem nt f fonnes of Eli were chpldzen of Belial,
SE ber, foz it peocefie of tyme it came to patie,
that the concepued,and bare afonne, andcalled alaw foz Ppeople, ý whenfoeuer anp man offe-
pe name Samuel fapinge: bpcaule Jhaucat ceo anp ottryna.the preateg lad came, whple p
sl ly of the Lozde. And Elkana andall bps
boufe wente vp to offer unto the L020, the offe- |
rpnge due fo: thefeatt,and allo bps wowe : Ae: kettle caldzen oz potte.Andall ý the fletpe poke
ucttbeles , anna wétnot bp but fapd wnto der bought vp, that the preatte toke away. Andfo
— pulband:3 wyl tarp wntpl the lad be wepned, ¢ thep opd wnto alltbe Firaclites,that came thp-
tben Y whl beyng bym that be mape apeare be: ther to Silo. Pea and therto,befoze thep burnt
fore the Lord and there abpoe fozener. Elkana thefatte, the preattes lad cameandfapdeto the
ber bulbande antwwered ber : do what femeth the manthat offered: geue fletbe that 3 mape dzee
` bef:tarp at bome, Yntpl thou batt wepned pim, it foz the Pecalte, foz be wpll not bauc fodder
and J beleche f Lo20,t0 make good ade ey . fietbeof the,but raw. And pfanpmanlapd vn-
undo the oma abode, ¢ saue per fonnelucke tobpm: lec themburne the ataccozpnag tothe D
pntpll pe epned bpm. And when beban wep: dape and then take ag muche as tbpne berte De-


ned bim (he toke pim Ù per, With the bullockes fpzeth: Che ladde wolde ant we eae
| Dae


Hanna.


fhalt qpucit menotoe: and pf thou wyplte not, J
wyll take it with violence. Anodthe (pune ofthe
ponge men was verp greate befoze the 1 o20¢.
Foz men abhogred the offrpnge of the Lorde.
wut the chplde Samucll mpnittred beFoze
the 1o2de,qp2ded about with a lprnen Ephod.
AHozcouer, his mother made bpma lptte cote,
and brought it to bpm from pere to pere, when
fe came vp with ber hulbande, to offre the of-
frpnge in the folempne featkes : and Eli biefled
Elkana and bis wife and fapd:the Lozdqpue
thefecd of this woman, foz the peticpå that he


alked of the Logve. ep starter naan IERE


owne bome. Andthe Lozde yplited Hanna
that tbe concepued, and bare thze fonnes, and
two dDoughters. Andthechplbe Samuel gret
before the Lorde. |

È €Elitvas verpolde,andhearde all that brs
fonnes dpd Dntoall Fitael, and how thep lape
With the women that wapted at the doze of the
tabernacleof wptnefe,and be fapod onto them:
thy do peluche thpnges ¢ Foz of all thele peo-
ple, J bearceupll repoztes of pou. Dh, nape,
mp fonnes:fo2 itis no good repogt that Jheare
howe that pemake the Lozdes people totref-
pafe. Ff one mafpnne agapnit an other, dapes
menmap be tubges: but if aman {pnne again
the Lo2zde, who wpll be bis dapfman: Potwith
ftandDpynge, thep bearkened not bnto the vopce
of thep2 father, bpcaufe the Lorde twolde Nape


aukee them. Che chplde Samuel profpted * ¢ qrewe


and was th Faudur both with the Lozde,andal
fowithmen. |

And there came a man of God buto Eli,
andfapd Dnto bpm: thus fapeth the Lozde:dpd
not Japeare vutotbhe boule of thy father whe
thep were in earpte, fubiecte puto Pharaoes
poule-And J chole thp father out of all the trp-=
bes of Flrael to bemp prealt, to offre ppd mpne


Linit.. aultare, and to burne incene, xato Doeare an
Dwr Enhodbefozeme. Andy gaue vnto the boule


of thpfatber all the burntoffrynges of the chil:
dzen of Flracl. Wiberfore fread pou Downe mp
facrifice and mpne offrpnge, which J commaun
Ded to be made inthe tabernacle, and bonoureft
thp te ap aboue me, tomate pour felues fat
of the tpztt frutes of all the offrypnges of Ffrael
mp people: Ci perfore the Lorde God of Jlrael
fapeth : J fapoe,tbattbp boule and the boufe of
thp father thoulde walke befoze me fo2 ever.
Wut nowe the Lorde lapth : that befarre from
me: foz them that wozthpp me, J wpl worhip
and thep that defpple me, thallcometothame.
wWebolde, thedapes come, that J wpll cutte of
thine arme,¢ the arme of thp fathers boufe that
ther thal not be an elder thine boul. And p Malt.
fe thpneenempe inp Tabernacle(of p Logde (g
in all p wealth wbich: God) thall qpue Zlrael,¢
there iball not be anelder in tp Doule fozeuer
Freuertheletle, J wpll not deftrope all the ma-
les that com of the frompnealtar. Butto make
Pa epes dale,and to make thpne berte melte.
Andall thep p be multiplied in thine boulexthal


isse.rrit.b DpepE thep bemen.


And this halbea {pane bnto f that halcome


LSamuel


bpd thy two fonnes x Hophnp and Phynebes:


euenin one dape thep pall ope both. And FJ will i.1xeg.11.9,


ftere me bp a fapthful preat, that pal do acco2-
Dpnge to mp berte and mpnde . And F wpil
buplde him a fure boule. And be Hall walke be-
fozempne anopnted fozeuer. Andthep that are
left in thpne boule, thal come and crouchtobim
fo2alptle pece of (pluer g acake of bzead, tball


eli,


Cape:pus medo ape f) inoneoffpeeogothera: —


monge p preties,p map eat amozfel ofbzean,
e.itt.Cbapter. |


@ The Lozar calleth Samuel t retpmes.

a Md the chplde Samuel miniffred onto
wad oa the Lozde before Eli:and the wode of
WATAN tbe Lozd was prectous in thote dapes,
Ea nether was ther anp open vilion. And
it chaunfed at that tpme, p Elilape in bis place,
and Dpsx epes beganne to ware dpmme tbat be


couldcnotte. Andperthelampe of God wente iesite


out, Samuel lapd bpm downeto lepe in p ten-
ple of the 102d, wher thearke of Godwag.And
the Logde called Samuel, and.heiapoe, pere J
am,éberan pnto Eli,andfapde: Pere am F,foz
thou called me. And be lapde: F called the not:
goagapn,and fepe. and pe went and lapd bpm
dotone to flepe. And f Lozd called once agapne:
Samuel, and Hamuelarole and went to Eli E
fapDde: Jam bere:foz thou dibdefE calle me. And
De anlwered: {called p not mp fonne.Goagapn
take thp ret: Samuel knewe not pet p p02,
nether was the tozde of the Lozdep ned
pnte bpm. And the Lozie wente toandcal=
led Samuel the thypzdetpme. And be arole and
went to Eli , and fapd: Fam bere foz thou batte
called me. And Cli perceaued tbat the Lozd bad
calledthechplode. Cherfoze Eli fapd punto a=
muel:qo,and lpeDotone: and pEhecal f agapne,
then tape peake on 102d, fo2thp feruaunt bea:
reth.0 Samuel went, andlapdebpm dowone
inbps place.andthe Lod came, and ttoncand
called as befose Samuel Samuel. Samuel an


J 3


i


5


Cwered:fpeake on Foz thp feruañte beareth. Jnd,


the Lozde fapde to Samuel:bebolde, J wpll do
athpngein jlrael, p both the eares of as man
asbearetbit,hall tpngle. Fn that dape J wyll
rapie bp agapnit lial thinges which 3 baue
(poken concernpnge pra pon t from the begpn
npnge tothe endpnge. J baue toldebpmxtbat J
twpll iudge bps boule toz euer, oz the topched-
nes which be knoteth. oz whé the people cur=
fed bys fonnesfoz the fame wyckednes, be bath
not cozrected them. And therfore J bauclworne
wnto the boule of Eli, that the wpckednefle of
Elies boule,thall not be purged wpth facrifpce
no? ofitpnge foz euer. Samuel a Be l the moz-
ninge, g opened p Does aT boute of the Lozde.
And Samuel feared to (het Elp the vilion.


€


Then Elicalled Samuel, g fapd: Samuel mp —


fonne. And be anfiwered : bere Jam. Helapoe :
what ts it that the Zozdbathfapd nto thes F
zape the bpbett not from me. * Goddoflo,and
oto the.pf thou bpde anp thinge from me, of al
that be fapde vnto the. And Samuel tolde him
cuerp bpt, q bpd nothing fro bim. And be fapd
itis p Lozde, let bimdo what femeth him beft
ind


auth, tte,
D


: r titans : | | ; |
Samuel AAP NGES i orri
Ayn Samu andthe Lordtoas with that hecouldenotle. And § ma layde vnto ei: |
wate o r i Di Lid pnperfourmed 4am be that came oute of the arape, ¢ fted tips i

And all Zracll frome Dan to wWerlabe wpe Dapeout of the hook. And he lapoe-what thpng
that fapthful Samuell wag madethe Lozdes ts foztuned mp Conner Che meticnacr anlwered m

prophrte . Andthe Lode appearedagapnem anbdlapbe. Frael ig fled befoze the Pbililtpnes,

SDilo:Fo2 the Lod opened bpm felfeto Samuel andthereisa greate Mange beee haunted among

in Dilo,tpozowe the wozde of the Lozve. the people, andtbp two tonnes, Hophnie hi-
© Tbe.tui. Chapter. nebes are Dead, ¢ the atrke of Godistaken. And |
The arke of the Lozbec is taken. Eli epis eo ner schece eae En pice wilde ofthe |-

PAEAN Hamucl fpake dntoall Flraell. at DOUCET EO OF Ops tole backiwarde |

ee Na bfeg ipl et inthofebapesthe pap pon the saseg of the gate, and bys necke |
NEA RAY Urns came togetherto tsb. ) And Jiraci, Leake, and de dyed: foz be wasanoldemanand |
e s went ontagapntt tbe pilittpnegto DVeupe.andtudged Firaellfourtpepeares. |
geg bite Dattaple €pptchedbelidetherdelpe tone. And AND disdoughterinlaw ypinebes wp fe was |
ý Wpiliftines pitched in Apheks. And put thé tel. Wetbchylocandnye the bpzthe . And when tye
uestarapeagaint jlrael.Andwbéthepiopnen Dearde thetpdpngesthat the arke of Goo wag
p battel (racl was put to p iworle befoze ) Whi taken,aud that ber fa Cbertnlawe, and Her puf- |


op ie tebe bat aonr thonan iei.” r papnescame vpõ ber. And about ftpme
And wpben p people Werecomeintothepz ten- Of Der death. Fhe wemen ter et about sae dn
fes,theelders.of Jiracil fapa-woberforehaththe VNtOber:Feare not, foz P hatte bozne afoune:but
Lode calte v3 Downe this dape before the Ppi- the anfii ercù not 3 N02 rega rùrcd it . and then a= i]
liftines: let bs fetch thearke of theoppopntmet Mcdp oo bod, faping: The glogp ig de= Riad |
25 ofthe Logde oute of Silo vnto vs,that whenit PAattedird Flracl.wWecaule the arke of Goo wag poro |
commethamonge v3, it mape fane vg,oute ofS tIBeN, €becaule of ber father inlawe ¢ ber pul: |
Hande of ourenemp. And fo p peoplefentto &i- VAND. And Mbe fapd agapne: The slope is gone |
lo, fet from theng the athe oftbeappopnemer fom Jlra see gata big tancn, |
v lia : bene poner ped hata 2 oi CDagonthe God ok the bilities te cak flat befozethearke, |


of Eli, Pophiand ~hinebes wpth thearke of p TRD the Wbtlifkines toke bite at y
t


EER |
appoyntementof God. Andit foztuned , that feds eaand caried it from the belpe pnto
wüenthearkeoftbeappopntment ofthe Lorde Hye SAAd, agapne the Philp lines toke A
came intop bool,al Jlrael Wowteda mpghtpe SES arke of God, g bzougbt it into P boufe
'  .  {botofe, fo that the earth tangge agapne. of Dagon, and fet it bp Dagon. And whenthep
ad Andswban the Philitpnes perde thenople of of Afdodwere vpin f nerte dape in # moning,
the (owte,theplapd: pat meaneththefounde beholde. Dagonlaye bpon theearth befoze the
| ofthis mpgbtp powt in the pootof pEbzueg? Arke ofthe Lorde. Andthep toke Dagon, g et
" Andthep wnderftode ,bowethattbearkeoftbe HDypminbpsplaceagapne. And when thep were
Lowe was come into the boot. andthe Philp- wpearlp inthenertemoznpng, bebolde, Dagon
fines wereafraped,andfapde: Oodiscomein= lape vponpgrounde before the arke of p Lod
- œ tatbebootte. And thepfapdeagapne:Wio unto andbpshead,and pps twobandes cut of bpon
"ws, fo? it wagneuer fo befozethps:ovntovs thzebelde,that onlp p Mape of a fpib was lefte | |
wbo fhall Delpuce Vs oute of thebande ofthefe ONbpm. And therfozeisit.that p preites of ma B |
mpabtpe Godes: thelr are the Goodes ý {mote ba (nether anp man that cometh into Dagons |
the Cgppcpans wpthlomanp plagesinpwpl- pole) treade not on the theetvolde of Daconin I
Dernes. 15e krongeand quite pourelelueslpke AldoD, vntothpys dape. Wut thehand of ji 02d |
men, Dpe Pbilpitines, that pebenoleruahtes Was heup vpo them of Aldon, andhedettropen
gua.yiga VUtOP Cbzueg, as tbep baue benetopou. 28e them,and{mote them withemerodes,both Af-
~ ofamanlpcoagetherfoeandfpgbt . Andthe DOD Ein all the coaftes therof.cw(xbe vinages aito g ga
Pbilpftpnes fought, and Jiraell wag put torpe bp mpre ann eorr ma a conta toon a T eE Cah anb there came
wole g AedDeuerp manintobistente. Andthere And when the mé of Afdod lawe thatitwas fo
was an exeedpng great flaughter, fozther were thep fapd:the arke of the God of Yraelta Inot
onerthzowen of Jirael. rrr. 4).fotemt, andthe abpdebere with 09,f02 bis þande ts foze pd vs
arke of God was taken, ePtwolonnesofElt, and bpon Dagon our God. Thep Cent therfoze
i. neg.tig ¥OPHHILE Phinehes were dead. And thereran and gatheredall the lozdeg of A pbilittyres Dit
aman of Sen Jamin outeofthearape, ecame co them,and fayde:tobat ball iveda vs the Arke
to Silothelamedapewithbisclotpesrentand ofp God of JlracleChep antwoered:let the arke €
earth vponbpsheade . And whenbecame, Cli ofp odot Frael be carped about wnto Gath.
fate vpo a {tole,tlokedDtowarde p Wape:fo2 bis And th Ads the arke of the Gon of Jfraell `
bert Feared foz p arke of God. And wder man bonte. Andit foztuned that when thephadcaz
came into thecptie,¢toldett, alltbecttiecryed. ppenit about, tbere thas by the bande of f Lode
_ Andwhen Eli berdethenopte ofthecrpenge a mpgbtpe greate noplein the cptpe, & he fmote
Hefapd:Wibat meaneththps nopfe of Hrumozer themen of ebecytpe both {inalland great ethep
And the mancamein battelp,and tolde Cue li padfecretedileates - O8( Gnd the Getithes toke counter, 5
weg iiia WAS.rCDUL peare olde, Ex DpslpgbtfapledD pint Emavethe renes prenp Coates of Cepnacs. ) Thertozethep
eit


Pagon


D


fent thearkeof God toPkaton. And afloneas
thearke of God came ta Akaron,the Akaront-
tescrped out fapinge: thep baue bzougbt p arke
co God of Frael to vs, fo flee vs g out people.

ndfo thep fent and gathered together all the
lozdes of tbe ~biliftines and lapde : fend atwape
the arke of f Godof Jlracl, togoagapue topis
owne place that it flee bs not and our people.
Sor there twas qreatlamentacion ouer the dead
thozotoe out all the cptpe,and the bande of God
waserceadpnge fore there . And the men that
dped not. were nitten With tbe Emerovdes: and
the crpeot thecptpe went bpto beaun.

Che. vi. Chapter.

@ Zhe kpne bypnge home thearke wpth the retwardes.
(ects Ie arbe of the Lome hag inthe coun:
A BEA trepe of the Wbplpftpnes feuenmones
y DA thes ma pbilifkines calledfo2 the


partetbnotfrompou. —

Then lapde thep: And what Halbe the trel-
alle ofrpnge, whpcbe we Hall rewarde pim
Thep anlwered:fpue golden ariles and. V. gol-

ben mpce,accozdpng to the nombze of thelozdes
of }biltines. Foz it is one maner of plage on
pou al,g¢on pour lozdes. Uiberfo2e pe thal make
pmageslpheto pouraries and pmages lpke to
pour mpcep corrupt p land, pe bal yeueglorp
nto p God of Frael: ý be map take bis had fr
of pou,¢froof pour goddess, g fro of pour lande.


Wiberfore do pe harden pourebertes asthe Re


— Egipciangs and Pharao hardened thepz hertes?


wbpch when be toke onagapnt them, bpdtbep > SNAG:
not let the peoplego,andthepdeparteds Mowe ey AeA Ye
therfoze,makeanewecarte,¢taketwomelcbe VOR SAS


kpne: on whofe neche there bath comenopock,
Andtpe the hynetotHecarte,andbapna thecal-
uces home fromtbem . Andtaketbearkeof the
L020¢,¢lape it vponthe carte, ¢put theiewels
of golde ( tobpch pe rewarde pim with foz a fpn-
oftcpna)inacofre bp the lpde therof,andfendit
awape, thatitmapego. Dor pr tnar Dego
vp bp the wape of bps owne coalte to Wetbla-
mes:then itis be that bpd bs thps qreateeupll.
PEno, Wwe pall knowe eRe isnotbps band
that {mote Ys:but it was a chaunce that bappe:
ned ys. And themen dpdeuenlo:and toke two
bpne that cauemplke,andtped themto p carte,
and kepte the caluesat bome,andtheplapdethe
arcke ofthe Lozde vpon thecarte and the cofer
Lith the mpre of golde,and with tbe pages of
they aries. and > kpnetoke the ftrepght wape
to Dethlames,e went on tbe itrepgbt wape:
ag thep wét lowed, g turned nether to the rpabt
både ner topleft. Bnd Plosdes of p pbtlittines
went after thé, yntpll p bozbders of Wethfames,
And thep of Wethlames there reappnge thepz
wheate beruckintbe valep. Bnd thep lyftet
thep2 epes,and {ptcd the arch. And reiopled top


L&Samuel.


- befozet


thep lawit. Xund the carte came ittto the felde o€
one Fepotua a Wethlamite,and Kode Eplebere.
There was allo a great tone. Andthep claue $
wod off carte ofred the kpne a burntoffringe
wnto the Lord. And the Leuites toke dotone the
arck ofthe Lozde and the colfer that thas wpth
it woberin p iewels of golde were: and put them
onthe greate Lone. And the men of wWetbfames
facrificed burntfacrifice,and offered offerpnaed,
that pel nto the Lorde . Andwben the
Fpuclozdes of the bplpitpnes badleneit, thep
returned to Akarothe famedape.Andthefle are
the golden arfles wbpch tbe bilitines gaue to
amenasa faye tretyancont ng tothe Lo2de:foz
Aldon one:

@Gath one: fox Akaron one: And golden mpce
acco.dpnge tothe nombze of alltbecptpesof
pPbili fines, cuen accozdpnge to the fypuelopdes,
both of walled rownes g of cownes wnwalled:
ceuen dutotbe great {tone oflamenta i hie pi
thep fet Downe the arcke of p Loreaiich ne
remapneth yntothys dape in the reloe of. Jeho-
fua the Wethlamite. And be plaqed the men of
Wethlames,becaulethep bad enbepgarcke of p
Lorde. Andbe flue amonge p people fpftpe thou
fande and thze (coze and ten men. And the other
people lamented, becaule the £02d had flapne p


w people With lo great aflaucbter. Wiberfoze the


mien of ethlames lapde:wobots ableto tande
before cbe 2020 fo bolp a God: g towbomball
pe qo from vs r And thep lent meflengers to th
enbabpters of Rariath Jarimfaping: Che p
litpnes baue bgought agapne parke of 1020:
come pe dotone therfoze,andfet it Yp topou.

C Tbe.vit. Chapter. ;

CThearckels brought to ariathiarim,


Ata


Lo2de wpthall poure berteg, then oe Ho.rvleGe,


roamong


Us:


The arke,


orxGasa one:foz Alkalon one:f02 o; ase.


bande of the bplpiHpnes. Chen the chplozen Of exat.(iti.b


fraclbpd put awape Baalimanda
erued the Lorde onelp. And Samuel fapode:qa:
ther all $iracll to ispa, and J wpll pape 0%
pou vntothe Lozde. And thep rathzed together
to ee and Ozetbe hater: and pozed it oute
Lorde, €fatted the fame dape g fapde
there:we baue (pnnedagapnite the Lorde. And
Samuel tudged the chplodzen of Firaclin W3-
pa.caibentbe ybpliftines hearde p thechplozen
of Flrael were gathered together to Hispa,the
lozdes of the Ppypliffines went vpagapnite Ji-
racl. And when the chpldzen of Zlraelibeardep
thep were afraped of the WbtlifFines,¢ the chpl«
dzen of Flraell fapoeto Samuel : ceailenot to
crpe


roth.¢ 25


z ü
Gite. bla,


aign e


R


} ii sins E
s `
i
T


cepe Dnto the Lo2d our Godfo2 vs that he map

C faue vs out of the bad of the Pbiliftincs. x And

Sc loLo Samuel toke a fuckpnae lambe, and offered it

all togpther fo2 a burntoffrpug puto the Lorde

andcrped bntothe Lo:de fo: Filracll, andthe

Lo2de bearde bpm. Andas Hamuel offered the

burntoffrpnge, the Pbiliftines came tofyght a-

ade Jltacl.Wutthe Lozde thondzeda great

thondzethat fame nt amonge the ypilift-

nes and {cattred theni, that thep fell before Yi-

racl. And the men of Ifrael went out to ilpa,

and purlued the jobiltftines, and folowed ypon
them bntpl the place that is vnder Weebear.

And then Samuel «tokea tone and pitched

it betwene )ifpa and the marke of the rocke,

irete andcalledthe name thereof, the-xftone of belpe,

fapinge: Hythertobath the Lorde helped vs.

And fo the ~htliines were bought under, g

they came nomoze into the cooftcs of ¥fracl:and

the Dande of the Lorde wagacapnit the bitt-

ftines all the dapes of Samuel, Cherto the cp-

ties whiche the Dbiliftines bad taken from Fi-

rael, were retozcdagapne to Jiracl, cuen from

Acaronto Gath: with she cooles of the fame,¢

Jlerael plucked them out of the bandes of PB

liftines. And there was peace bet wene Frael

andthe Pmozptes. Samuel tudged Fleaclall

the dapes of bis Ipfe, and went about peare bp

pere to Wethel, Gilgaland Wifpa, andiudeed

Straelinall thofe places, ¢cameagapneto Ra

ma:forthere was big boule, g ther be tudaed Jf


For. rriiit.e


ral alo, ¢ there be buplt an alter puto p Lorde. |


€ The. dij. Chapter:


( Zhe people requpze a kp


aN w/oa 4 (Ones iudges oner Flracl. Che name
aan wanton Of Dis eldete fonne was Joel , and}
PAV vas name ofthe feconde Abia: and thep
— wetetudges in Weerl[eba .And his
fofities walked not in his wapes: but turned a=
(pde after lucre, and * tokerewarde, and per-
uertedtherpabt. Chenalltbe elders of Jiraci
gathered them togptber, and came to Samuel
pnto Rama, and fapd ynto bpm:bebolde, thou
fig, att olde,and thy {ines walke not in thp wapes
Pita rite, Owe terforexmake sa kyinge to tudge VB
Ofee.rit.c. AS all other nactons Daue. Wut the thpnge dil=
peed pream Samuel, when tbep fapde: qpuc vsa
‘Byngetotudge bs. And Samuel prayed onto
the Lozde.And the Lorde fapde bnto Samuel:
beare the Vopce of the peopleinallthat thep fap
wnto the. o: they bauenot cat the awaye, but
ime:that J Hude not rayne oner them. Judas
. they baue euer done(fins 4 brought them out of
Egipt vutothis dape:and hauefozfaken me, *

{erued other goddes ) euen fo do they wuto the.
_ Powe therfore Hearken yntothep2 vopce:-bow
Deu. biic Deit yet teitifpe Vntothem and hewe the x the
authozitic of the kypnge that {hall rapgne ouce
then. And Samuel tolde all the wo2des of the
1020 Dnto the people thatafked a kpng of bin
‘itveg. ip €DETapd: this Halbe the aucthogitie of the kpua
that hall capane ouer pou: xbe wpll take pour
fonnes and put them to bischarettes and make
His hozleinen of them, to wine before bis charet


Deal. poi


DANU


bí».


“era wen Samuel wag old, hemavehis we


= ae
F Ta
p in =e a


aie E ;
ARPNAL, FEAT
and wpllinake bpm of them , captarres oner
thoulandes and ounce fpfties, and wyll {et thei
foeare bis grounde andto gather inbishar-
uci, and fomake inffrumentes of warre, and
apparel fo: bis charettes. And he wil take pour
doughters and make them apoticarics,cookes
and bakers. And he (hall take the be of poure
feldes, * and of your Dynepardes,and of poure
olpuc trees, and gpue themtobisleruauntes, —
And he hall take the tenth of pour {eede,and of
pour Dpnepardes, and qpucit tobis chambze-
lapnes :and to bisferuanntes. And be thal take
the beft of poure men feruauntes and mapdefer-
uauntes and ponge men and of pour afles and
put then topig wozke. And he Mall take the
tenth of pour thepe, and pe fhalbe bis feruaun-
tes. End pe thall crite out at that tpme vpd pour
kpnge, which pe pall baue chofen pou, andthe
Lozde wpll not Deare pou at that dape.

— - Peucrtbelefle, the people wold not beare the
popce of Samuel, but dyd fape:naye,not fo.
Wut there albea tpnae ouer vs, that we map
be lpke other nacions and that ourkynge mape
fudge DS, and go out befoze vg and fyabt oure
battaplesox(teads.) @herfore, when Samuel
Hearde al the wopdes of the people, berebearied
themintheeares oftheLozde. And the Lorde
fapd to Samuel: berken vnto thep2 vopce,andD
make them a bpnge: And Samuel fapde vnto
the men of Zlraet:qo enerp man onto bis citit.

€ The.tr.Chapter.

« Satile the fonne of cis is choten kpage,

#5 Pra Dere Wasa man of Wen Jamin na

AIN ee med Cig the fonne of Abiel, the

x IRI fonne ofsero2,the fonne of recho-
Thi


qT ratb tbe foune of Apbiab, the fone
ae ofa man was a Seminife, aman
of Frég th and mpabt:and the fame hada fone
called Saule, a goodly ponge man anda fapre:
fo that among thechtldzen of Fitacl there was
none goonl per then he-sFo2 from thp thoulders
bpwarde, be was bper then all the other people
Andthe Alles of this Cts, Hauls father were
loft:and Cis {apde to Saul bis fonne : take one
ofthe laddes with the,and goo bp, and feke the
affes.and he went thozowe mounte Epheaimn,
and tho2owe thelanbde of Salifa:but thep foiid
them not. hen they went thozow thelande of
Sali, and therethep were not. whe they went
alfothozo we the lande of Jemint, they founde
themnot: At thelat when they were come to
Helandofsuph, Saule fapd yntobhislad that
was withbim:come let bsreturne ,left mp fa-
ther leuecarpng foz the alles andtakethougbt
foz vs. be fayde butohym:bebolde, thercisin
thiscyttea man of God, andbheisa wozpp-
fullman: allthat be fapethcommeth {urelpeto
paffe. Nowe thenlet bs qothptbher : peraduen-
ture be ball hewe bs what wape wemap ao.
Then apd Haul tobislad:pf we wil go, what
(all we bipnge the man? Wor oure beed isail
{pent out of our veffels, and there is none other


7
a,


atte


tit.re.ppl.a


D


wa


<
iceq.r fit, g
ipar. Viii. u


<<


pzelent to bung the ma of God: what pauc wee


And the lad aniwered Saule agapne , g lape:


Sbaue otd about me the fourth parte ofa ticle


that


Saul A


that wil J gyue dma of God,to tel tg our wap
Before tyme in Bleaell whenaman wente
tofeke an anfiwere of God, thus wple be ipate,
come, € let vs goto the fear.sto2 be that is now
called a Pzopbhete wagin the olde tpmecalleda
fear. Then fay de Sanl to bps ladde: wellfapd
ofthe: come, let bs qo. And fo they went ynto
thecptie where the man of God was. Andas
they were goinge bp into the cptie, they mette
with Dametels that came out to Dawe water
and fapde wnto them:is there bere a lear: And p


ve mapDdens anlwered them:pea,ex bere is one) We


ite. rhs


bolde, be is befoze pon. Hake balte now , fo? be
came thig dape totbecptie, for there ts an offe=
rpnge ofthe people thigdape tn the Dpi. Uen
pebecomeinto peitie pe thal finde Dim Erepght
wape per be come bpto the bpll to eate: fo2 the
people wpll not eate wutpil be come, bycaute De
Doth blee the offrpnge. And then eate thep that
bebyndentothefea. Mowe therfore get pou
pp, for this daye pall pefpnde bpm. Andthep
wente bpintothecptie. And when hep were
come intothe mppbdes of the cptie:bebolde, Ha-
muelcame outagapnlt tbem, fo? togo bp top
Dpll. xut the Lozdebadtolde SHamueluihis
care(a dape befoze Saul came) fapwige:tona-
rowe this tyme 3J wrll{ende the & manoute of
the landeof cen Jamin, bym Malte thonan-
nopite to be capitapne ouer mp people Flrael,
that be mape faue mp people out of the bandeg
ofthe biltKines:for FJ bane loked pe mp peos
ple and thep2crpe igcome Dito me. When S4-
mueltherfoze fa we Saul the Lorde anfwered
bim: fe,thigisthe man whom F (pate to the of,
This fame hallrapgne ouer mp people.
Then went Saul to Samuel inthe mpddle
of the gate and iapde:tellme Y prape the where
tbe fears bouteis, Samuclanfwered Sauland
fapde: Jam tbe lear, go vp before me wuto the
bpll,fo2 peall eate with me fobape. Andto-
nmiozowe F wplllettbego , and wyll tellthe all
that igin thpne pert. Andas fo: thbpne ales that
were loft the wie ab o:care not fo? them, fo?
thep are founde. Andmozeoner whole thall the
beautifull thpuqes of Firacl bes Welonge they
not to the €toall thp fathers Doule? Wut Haul
anfwered and fapd: am not F the fonne of a Fe-
minite ofthe mallet trpbe of Firacl? and mp
needis the lect of all chekpnredes of p trpbe
of Ben Jamin. WUberfoze then (peakelt thou fo


tome Zd Samuel toke Haule and his lad, t.


brought them into the parlour, and made them
{ptin the chefef place amonge them that were


of the boule: and toben thep arole earlpaboute
the {pzpnge of the dape, Samuel called Daule
pon the toppe of the boule, fapinge: bp, that F
maye fende theawape. And Saularole.And
thep went out at the dozes, both be ¢ Samuel.
And when thep wer come almoofte oute of the
towne, Samuel fapde to Saul : bpd 6 to
before tg be went befoze) but tand thou tpl
a while, that J map thew the what God fath. ;
EC The.r. Chapter.


Canle is annopnted kpnge,and prophecpeth.


fi ht


L L
7 a | x


z; A h


i


i “J ee WS |
Ep)


ueltokea veffel of ople X


WE Md then Sam


Valand poured it bpon bis heed andxbpl- TEF?


A (cd Hpi, and fapde:hath not the 1 o2de
——=—annopntedtheto becaptapneouerdis
enberitaunce fox (and thon halt velpuce bis peopleoute $
ofthe bandeg of thep; enempes which arerounbde about them,
And this token halé thou baue, that the Lozbe hath annoputed
the to bep:pnce.) CL ben thou arte Departed frome


this dape,thou Malt fondet wo më bp Rapels seu.crrp.c


fepulchze inthe bozdze of Wen Jamun , euenat
salesah. And thep wpll iape yutothe:the alles
which thou wentelt totke are founde, And le,
tbr father bathleft thecare of theaffes , and fos
roweth foz you, faptnge : Ua bat Mall y do foz
mp Onne’ Chen halt thou go forth from tbéce,
and alte come tothe plapne of Thabor: And
there (hall mete the thre men qotnge Dpto God
to Detbel:one carpinee theebpodes : another
carpinge the loues of biecd: andan ofber cary.
inge a battell of wypne. And thep whl falute the
and gpue the thet woloues of breed: whichthou
{halt recepue of theps bandes. After that Malte 25
thou come to the bpll of God, where the Phili-
ines kepe their watch. and whe p art com thi-
ther to the cptie, thou palt meteacompanye of
prophetescompuge Downe fromthe bpl witha
pfalter, atpmbzell, apppe andan barpe before
them:and they thall propbecpe. And the fppzrite
ofthe Lorde wpllcome nom tieel(o- ann e
palt prophecpe with them, and halt be turned


Samuel


_ Dypdden:which were bpon a thyetie perfonnes.
D And Haraucl {apd brto the cooke: bapna forth
the pozcton whiche FJ qane the, and of wbiche y
{a As wnfothe:kepe it withthe. And the cooke
tokt Dp the boulder, and that which was bpo
ft:and fet it before Saule. And Samuel fapode:


intoan otberman. Cherfoze whe * thee fiqnes t-tes. biia
are chaunced the, do what thou halk to doo , fog PFs
Godis with the.Andthou (halt qobefozemeto

Gilgal: and ¥Jalfo wyll come Downe onto the,
tofacrifpce burnt facrtfpces, and to offre peace-
offerpnges. x Carpe forme euen dapes,tpll FM FH


=a. a
la


bebolde, that whith isleft:put tt before the and
EA tebe alae: tfo: the, ofpur-
pote: whe F called the people. Andia Saul dpd
eate with Samuel tbat dape. And wher thep
wete come Downe from the hyll intothecytie,
Hamuel cOmuned with Haul Dpon the toppe


come tothe and thewe the what thou thalt ds.
Audafloone as pe Had turned his Hulder to go
from Samuel, God gane bpm an other mance
ofberte: and all thoit cokens came to paffe that
fame dape. And when thepcame to the bpli:be-
Holde,the company of prophetes met bpm: and
the fppaite


HSamucl.
Lmesrib + the (ppeite of Godcame bponhym alfo, and
he prophecpedamonce thé. Andall that knewe
bpm before, when thep lawe that be prophecped
amonge the propjetes,thep lapde an fo other:
L.ueg.ritd How is this pis bappened wnto the fon of Cis?
xis Hanlalio among the prophetes: And one
of the fame piace anfivered g fapd: whois thep2
fathersAnd thercof came tie prouerbe:whatis
S aulalfoamonge the prophetes? And whe he
had made an ende of prophecping, became top
bpl. And Dauls fathers brother fayd wnto bim
and to bis lad: whpther wet per He fapd:to feke
theafies: and when we fawethat thep were no
where, we came to Samuel. And Hauls vucle
fayde: tell me what Samur! lapde nto pour
S aulantivcred bis vnele:be tolde vs playnely,
that theaffes were found. Eut of the kyngdom
w)creof Samuel fpake, tolde be pm not. Aud
Samuel called p people toxvther puto yp Lod
to ilpa,and layd ynto the chpldzen of Jiracl
thus lapd $ 102d Godof Ferael:¥ brought Jf
raclout of Eqi--t, anddelpucred pou out of the
bande of the Eqyptiang, snd out of the bandes
ofallkpngdomesthattroubled pou. And pe
ire rig,» DAUE this da pe cat awape poure Godtbat hel-
-eris ` pedpon out ofall pour aduerhitiegand tribula-
cions. Aud pe baue fapde vnto bpm: x makea
kpnge ouct bs. Now therfore Lande pe before
the Lozde bp pourtrpbes and pour thoufandes.
And when Samuel bad bzought all the trpbes
of aca oe trpbe of Ben Jamin was caughe:
When be bad broughte the trpbe of Wen Jamis
by thep2 kpnreddes, tbe kpnred of Watri was
caught: andat tbe lat Saulethe fonne of Cis
D wascaught.and whe they foughthim hecould
notbefounde. Cherfozrethep alkedthe Lorde
further, pf that man thoutde come thither. And
the Lozdeanfwered:bedalde be bath byodé bim
felfe amonge the tuffe. And thep ranne and fet
bym pence. And when he (Lode anronge p peo-
S ple, be was bperthéany of the people, from the
> boulders Dpwarde: And Samnel fapde to all
the people: Sepenot him, whom the Lozd bath
chofen:and bow there is none lpke Dim amonge
inersia allthe peoples and althe people pouted ¢lapd
Dew.Foitd + Godlende the lpes.
Then Hamucl tolde the people +the Duty of


it vp before p Lord, and fét all the peopleaway
cuerpmantobis boule: And Saul allo went
bome to Gibea. Andthere folowed him tronge
më, whole berteg God bad touched. Wut p chil-
den of Welialllapo:how (hall be faue Vs: x €
they defppled bpm, and brought bpm no preft-
tes. And pe belde Vig tonge.
C The.ri.Cbapte.
C The people renucth the kpugoeme of Saul.

IEA Abastke Ammonite came, and belies
Dy aki ged Jabes in Gilead. Andall the men
ii of Jabes fapde vnto Nabas : makea


gun. ditt


untes. And fa bas the Ammonite an-


with you, pf ¥ mape theulte out ail pourepabt
eves, and brpnae that hhamevpoall sracl, Ce


iL.ynges,


the kpnadome,and weoteitina booke,¢ laped.


at coucnaunte with bs , andiwe wyllbe


$Fo,cr tit.
whom the elders of Jabes fayd: apus vs feuen
dapegreippte: that we mape iende meficngers
üntoall the coofteg of Zirael. And then ifthere
be noman to belpe vs:we wyllcome out to the.
Thencame the meflegers to Gibea puto Saul
and tolde this tpopngesin the cares of the peo=
ple.And alltbe people! ptt bp thep2 bopces and
wept. And bebolde, Saul came folompng the
cattel out ofthe felde, and Saul armel A
letb this people, that thep weper And they told
bpm the tpopnges of the men of Jabes. Andthe
{ppite of Godcame pon Saul, when he perd
thofetpdpnges, andbe was ercedpng angtype, 23
and tole a poke of oren, andbewedthem tn pee
ceg, and fent them thozowout all the cooftes of
FJlracl bp the bandeg of meliengers , lapinge:
whofocner commeth nor fozth after Sauland
after Samuel, fo Mall bis oren be ferued, Bnd
the feare of the Lorde fell on the people, ¢ tbep
came out as it bad ben but one man. And when Cres.rb.8
De x nombeed themin Weseck, thecbplogen of ©
Jiracl were thzebundzed thoufande men : and
the men of Juda thpztpetboufande. And they
fayd puto the meflengers that came:fofape vn
to the men of Jabes in Gilead: tomozowe by p
tyme the fonne be bote,pethall baue belpe. and
the meflengers came andthewedthe men of Fa
bes, which were glad, T berfoze the men of Ja-
bes fapde: tomozowe we wpll come oute vrito
pou, andpe thalldoo with vsall that pleateth
pou.. Andon the mozowe tt foztuncd, that
Saule put the people in the partes , andthep
came in bpon the hoof in the moznpng watch,
and fluc the Ammonites Vntpll the beate of the
Dave.aAndthep that remapned, were {cattered:
fo that two of them were not left togither, And
the people fapd bnto Samuel: whatis he that
darre fape:(hall Saul rapgne ouer ve r bzpuge
thole men, that we mape Rape tbem. :
And Saullapde:there thal noman dpe thys
dape, for todape the Lorde bath laued Firael.
Then layd Samuel wnto the prople:come, thak-
we may goto Gilgal, andrenuc the kyngdom
there: And all the people went to Gilgal, and
made Saul bpnge there before the Lozdin Gil
gal. And there thep ofred peaccoffrynages be-
oze the Lorde. And there Sauland all the mei
of Zlraeclretopledexcedpnglp.
C The.xvit.Chapter.
CH anwel bectareth bpm Celfeto bean innocent Junge.
xa A muel apd Vntoall Firael:bebolde, J
EN Salhauc berkened bnto pour Voyce inal
exon that pefapd vnto me, &nd Haue made
mae yon a kpng. ow therfore, pour kpng
walketD befoze pou. Bnd Yam oldeandgrape
HededD:and behold, mpfonnesare withpou,and
Jbauc walked before pou from mp chpldehove eet, ring
pto this day. Behold, here Jam:beare record acerr.g |
of me beforethe Lo2zde and befoze bis annopne
ted. * Whole ore baue 3 takensoz whole afte
baue J taken whom bane F done wronge tor
(bom baue Fhurtes o? of whole Dande paue
Jrecepurdanp bipbe to blpndeimpne epes thee
with, aJ wilrekor it pouaqapne. Chey fapd:
thou banom: YS no wonge, no? purt vs n
. rt


ra A
Saul
ther bat thou take ought of anpe mans bante.
Pe fapde bnto them agapne: the Lode is wyt-
nche agapnit pou, ¢ its annopntedis wptnefle
this day, Pye baucfotide nougdtin mp bantes.
Andehep alwered:deis toitnefle.And Samuel
fayd bnto p people:itisy Lozd that made 4Ho-
fesand Aaron, that brought pour fathers out
ofthelande of Egipt. Now therfore tand pl,
that mape realon with pou before the Lozde,
accompngctoall prighteoufhefle of the Lorde,


whpcbe He Hhewed both pou and pour fathers. Rees


* After that Jacob was come into Egypt,


Ben. trivia and pour fathers ceped vnto the Lozde+p Low


rod iid


tero.tit.b. fent olksand Aaron which brought pour fa- Ww


thers ontofEaqipt,and made theni dwelin this
Anata place. ¥ And when thep format the Lozde thep2
God, De delpuered them into the band of Difa-
Jad-rita. ra captapne of the hoolt of Haso: xandintothe
FIND D Hanne of the Dbiltitines, andiinto the bande of
the kynge of oab, andthep fought agapntke
thems Andthep crped ontothe Lo2de,and apd:
we bauc {pnned, bpcaufe we haue fozfaken the
Lod, and baue ferued Waalim andAttbharoth.
Howe therfore delpuer Yg out ofthe handes of
yun.rig.p OUTenempes,and we wil erue the. And Pp Lod
tyud.pia fent Jerobaal x Wadans Fephthap, aud * Så-


hre biit muel, and Deliueredpou outof f bandes of pour.


enenmpes oneucep {pde, and pe Dwellcd fate.
And for al tbat, whe you fawr, that Nahas the
kpnge of tbechridzen of Ammon cameagapnet
‘res. bita nou pe fapoe bnto me: xnot fo, but a kpng thal
tapqne ouer vs: wht pet pLozd pour God was
pourckpnae. Pow therfore beholde, the kpnge
whom pe baue chofen, and whom pe Daune delp-
red, lo, the Lozde bath {eta bpngeouer pou. DE
pe wrll feare the Lo2d and ferne bym,and beare
his vopce,andnot difobep the wozde off Lozd:
both peand the kpnge thafrapgneth oucr pou,
' Mall folowe the Lozde poure God: VF pe wyll
not berken Dntothe vopce of the Lozbe, but dil-
D obepe the Lozdes mouth, then hall the band of
the Lozde be bpon pou, and on pour fathers.
Pow alfo andeand fe this great thing which
the £020 wyl do before pour epesg:isit not now
wheatebaruct:F wyll call ynto the Lord, and
He (hall lende thundze and rapne: that pe mape
Percepuc and fe, bow that pour wyckednellets
great, which pe baue done tnthe fight off Lord
inalkpng poua kenge. nd fo Samuel called
Duto the Lorde, andthe L020 fent thundze and
trapne the lame tape. Andallthe people feared
the Lozdeand Samuclerceadpnglpe. Andall
thepeople fapde nto Samuel: prape for thy
icruauntes Dntothe Lozde thy God, that we
dpe not:fo2 we Pane fpnned inafking bsaking
belpdeallthefpnnes that cuce we dpd.
And Samuel fapd vito the people:feare not
Pe baue tndede done allthis wtikednefle, pet de
arte not from folowpng the Lorde. Wut ferue
pm euen withallpour bertes. Nepther tourne
____. peafter vapne thynges which are not bable to
c-rrrttd.® »2ofpte pou, foz thep are but vanitic. fFo2* the
Sots, biib LOzDe wpll not fozfake bis people, bycaufe of
bis great names fake-bycautett hath pleafea p
Lod: tomabke pou his people. ozeoucr,Goo


i. Samurti.


fozbpd, that 3 Mulde (pane agapnit the Lozde,
and ceafie papinge fo: you , but to Mewe pou
the goodandrypght wape. Cherfore feare pou
tie 10200, and ferue pim it the teuthe, and with
all pour Dettes, and colpdze How great thinges
be Dath Done Foz pou. ut and pf pe do wicked-
lp tbenpal pe perpth, both pe and pour kynge.
@ The. rij. Chapter.
CEbePhitines are fmptten of Saul and Jonathas.


Saul being oifobetpent to addes commaundement™ «
_is Hemed of Samuel that be Halnot rapgne, ;


eT ey Aulebadbene bynge et Abad when X,
ANS È 3 tbet thinges came topafie: ) and be ;

22) rapgned.t. peres ouer Ziracl. And *
pes—<aw | paul chofe bpm thee thoufande men
of ¥fracl, Cwothoulande were with Haulin
Michmasand mount Wethel, anda thoufande

with Jonathas in Gibea WenJamin. And the

reff of rhe people be fent cucrp man tois owne

boufe agapne. nd Jonathas {mote the bold of

the Bhiliftines, tbat was in p bpll: andit came

tothe Dbiliftineseares. And Haul dlewethe
trompetthbozowout all the lande, faping:let the
Hebeues beare. And all Firael berdefape-bowe

that Saul bad deftroped an bolde of f bilitti-

nes, wherfoze Flrael tåke before F Philitineg

Andy people gathered togpther after Saulto
Gilgal. Che Pbilifkesalfo gathered them fel- ?
ucestogpther tofpabt with F{rael, thpztte thou <tre.r.c—
fanbdecharetes and 1 ded aaa bozfemen, w

otber people like plande bp p {ees fydeinmuls
titude,and came Dp, and pptchedin Wichmas
catward from Wetbauen.And when the men

of Flrael {awe tt, thep were tna ftrapte, efcare

came bpon tbe people, and thep bpd them felues

in canes, and tn petute Doles, andin rockes,and

in bpe places, andin ppttes. And lome of p He-

bzues went ouer Jordan to go Vnto the land of
GadandGilead. And! Haul was pet in Gil

gal, and all the people that folowedhpm were t.res.r.b
aftonnped. And he tarped feuen Daves, airh on

to Ptpme that Samuel ¥ badappopneed. But
Samuel caniz not to Gilgal:and f people were
therfoze fcattcred from bin. And Saule fapde:
bzpnge a burntlactifpce to me and peaceoffrpn«

ges. and be offved burntfacrifpce. And afloone

as be bad made an ende of of:png the burntfa-
crifpee bebolde, Samuel came.And Saul wee
agapnit him, to bleffe bpm.aind Samuel fapd:

what balt thou Done: Saul fayd:bicaulag aw

that the people {cattred from me, and that thou
cameft not within the dapesappopnted,¢ that

pico ebay gathered them lelues togpther

fo Sttchmas: therfoze fapde J: the Dbiltftines
fhallcome Downe nowe bponime to Gilgal, ¢

3 hauenot made fupplication nto the Lode.

And when FJ had oucccome my felfe, atthe lal Sen recip
¥ offted a burntottrpnge. And Samuel laypd to “-var.roie
Saul. * thou art become 4 foole, thou baft net

kept the comaunbdement of the Lozde thp God,
whichhecommaundedthe. sfozat thistpme ce
wolde the £ o2de bane fablifihed thy kypnadom © Ee".
wpon Flrael foz cuer. But nowe, thy kpngdom
fhallnot continue. + Che Logbde bath foughte
Dyma ma after hts owne Perte,g the Lord bath


commaunded prm fo be captapne owr bis pro-


ple by=


ea =


ee iiai


= =e aM


7
F:
]


Saul


t.papilg ec N


ple bpeaufe thou batt not kepte that whiche the
Losde cOmaunded the.And Samuelarofe, and
gat bpm vp fro Gilgal to Gibea Benyamin,


ob a the remiuaunt of therolhes wit bp after Saul ta mete the


oF ;
"people whiche feughte egapnite themas thep oe commpnge


from Gilgal to Gibea ia che belle of Ben Ramin.


D. And Haulndbzed f people ý were found with


him, hep wer about a DiC. me. And Haul e
Fonathas hig fonne, g tbe people É were founde


„ ~ With tbem had thepzabpding inthe DpIl of 1Bé


Jamin. wat p Philiftincs pitched tn Aichmas
And there came out of f hooft of the puliitines
thee copanpes todeftrope: onecompanyp tucned
Ditothe wap Pleadethto Dphza ontop lande
of Saul. And an other copany turned the wape
to Betbozon. And the thprde chpanype turned to
the wape of P cool p is fene aboue the valep of
seboim towarde P wplderncfle: Chere was no

in pth founde thozewcout alif lande of Frael.
SEor F Éhilitines fapo: Lek happelp p Primes
make them {verdes o fpeareg. Wut alp Flrac-


` Lites weutehowne to p Dpililtines, toamende


enerp man bis ace, his mattocke, bis are ¢ bis
neceflarptooles. And then the edges of the thas
res, Mattockes,donxforkes,€ ares wereblunt,
€ alfo theforkes were to be fetin. And fo tnttme
of battaple there was nepther wera no (peare
founde tn the handes of anpe of the peop that
were with Sauland Jonathas. Wut w Haul
and Jonatbhag his fonne was there fomewhat
found. And the watcbe ofthe ppiliftines came
out, to go ouer bnto Aichmas, `
! The. riitj- Chapter:
« Fonathas and bis barne(bearer puttcth che
PdiliMiues to flpght.we taketh the honp,


KSD Ni nefie-come,and let Va goo ouer to the
x Hiltjnes watche , that are ponder onf other
Yoe, AND be tolde not Dis father -And Saul ta-
cpedin p vttermoot parte of Gibea under Ri-
mon, which isin Digrs, and the people $ were
with hym were wpona pre banded men, F
Abia fon of Ahitob, Febabods brother, fon
of Mhinebes , the fone of Eli , was the Lodes
pectin Silo and ware an Epbhod. Bnd the peo
ple writ not that Jonathas was gone.

din ý mpodes off pallage( bp which Jo-


15 natbas fougbte to goo ouerto the pbiliftines


watch were there two tharperockes , cuen one
on rake [pde g the other on the other fpde:tbe


one called 150363 , andthe other Senne. Che


forefront of f one leaned nozthwarde towarde
ichmas, ¢ the otber was fouthward toward
Gibea: And Jonathas lapde to the pongman p
bare bis parnefle:com, ¢ let YS go ouer yutothe
watche oftbele bncircumcpled, peraduenture
a, Saget wpl wozke with vs:Fo2 it ts no bard
ewithbthe Lo2de, xto fauecptbherinmanye
prin fewe. And big barnefhearer fapd puto bim
Doallthatisintopue perte: Goo where it plea-
feth the. Mebolbe, ¥ amwmith theas thyneberte
Infferh. Chentavovc Fonathas:bedolde, we go
once bute thole ncn, andal] the we oure fel-
nes onto thes: yf hep fape on this wpleto vs,


i puges è


tarpe, bntpll we come to poun, then we wpl ad
tpllinourplacegnot go bptothem. Wut epf
tbey fape:come Dp nto bs: then we wplgo b


forxthe Lode bath delpuered them into our ha tm. tit.


bes. And this thalbe a fpgne unto vs. And thep
bothe the wed them felues onto the watche ofp
Ppiliftines.And P Wbiliftines fapde:fe the De-
bzues come out of p Holes where they bad ppo
(Heieluesin. Bnd p men of the watch anfwered
Jonathas ebis harnelvcarer,¢ fapd:com vp to
US, q We wpl ew pou a thing: And Jonathas
fapde ynto bis barnelbearer:come yp after me,
for Pp Lord hath delpuered them intop bande of
Sitacl.And Jonathasclame bp vpapadesand


fete,ebisharnetbearee after bom. $ndow(co wpa **


ther ban tene Zonathas face) thep fel before Fona thas
€bisbarnelbearer fluc them after bom . And

fp2tt laughter which Jonathas ¢ bis barne fe-
bearer made, Was vpõa. remen, within p com
pafe as it were aboutan balfacre of lade. Ana C
ther was afearein Phoft in pfeld,zamidqalreo
ple:infomoach $ thepp were gone out off watch
forob, were atraped alfo: and earth trembled
fo? the fearep was fent of Gov. And p watch:
men ila het Gibea Wenzamin awe. And
bebolde,p people (of p Pptliftines ) were fcatte
red and were iimptten as tbep went, Chen {apd
Saul onto the people p were w him. Searches
fe, whois gone frö vs. And whenthey bad nom
bcd, beDolo, Jonathas his barnefbearec were
hot there. And Haul apd puto Abta:bapne bi-
ther Parke of God. fo? farke of God was at
tat tymew thecbplozen of Firael. And it foz-
tuncd $ while Saul talked ynto the p2eekk , the
noplep asin phot of p Mbilikinesf{pzedfar= |
therabzode, ¢encreale Dow bp iptic and Iptie, and gaue #4
a moze cleave founte:) AND Saul fayd punto p preci
withdraw thpne hades. And Saultopned hin


felfe Dito all p people ý were with bym, ether a
came to f battaple.Andbebolvde, *euerp mans A a


{werbe was agapnit bis felowe, ethere wasa
herp great rumoy.dPozeoucr f Pebzues ý were
with E siaina befoze ý tyme, were com
withthem into all partes of the bool, turned to
be the Pieaelites $ were with Sauland Fo-
nathag: And all Pmen of Firari allo which bad
bid tbem feluesin mount Ephzaimas fooncas
they Derde, bow that the ypilikines were fied,
thep folowed after tbem in thebattayle. Bnd
fo God pholpe Frael that dape.And the battapl
continued onto Wethauen.

And whe themë of Firael were kept Downe >


withbungrepdare,Gaulcharged p people


ant oth, faping :Curled be f mantbhat cater) a=
np focby trlnpght,tyt ¥ be auéged of mpe cits
nempes: And fo none of the people talked anye
fulenafice. And al f enbabiters of Plandecame
toa wood where bony lap bpon F ground. and
the peaplecamie into the ood: And bedold, the
bonyeoroyped and noman moued his bandeto
bismouth fo: p people fearedthe ot). ut Jo-
nathas berde not when bis father cbarged f peo
plé with the oto, wherfoze be put forth the curde
of therod that was in bis bance,anddppte it in
anbonypcombe,and put pis aia iig inanty
. ai


Saul.


and bisepes recepued fight. The anfwered one
of tbe people, ¢ fapo:tbp father adtured thepeo-
ple, faving: Curleabe the man p cateth any fue
ftenatice this day and the people were fapntye.
axhen {apd Jonathas my father bath troubled
pous howe mpne epes baue recepued fpgbt,
peaure J tafted a lptle of this pony bow moch
moze then topap pf the people pad eaten of the
fpople of thet enemies which thep founde: And
had there not bene thea moch greater laughter
amonge tbe Philiftiness And they taped on the
Pbhiltikines that vap, from MPichmasto Vial
Andthe so wereercedDpngefapnte.
. Andğ people gat tbem top pople, andtoke
“ Hepe oren,gcalues,¥ fluc them on the qroud,¢
Ze. bii.c.v, the people bpd eate them * tú the bloude. Then
erro men tolde aul, fapinge: webolde , the people
fpnneagapni the Lode, in that thep cate with
P bloud. And He fapd: pe baue tre(pafled. Roule
a great tone Dnto me tbis dap, ¢ auliapda-
apne: o abzode antonge the people, ¢ bpd thé
apne mie cuerp man Hisore,andeverp man bis
(pepe,and Nape them here, ¢ fpnnenot agapull
the Loincatpng w the bloud. And the people
brongit cuerp man bis ore tn bis hand bp nigbt
and fluc them there. And Daul madcanaltare
bntothe 107D. uv p was the fp2tt aultar that
pe made tntothe Lod. And Haul fapd: let DS
qo Downe after the Mbilifines by npgdte, and


fpople them pntplit bepapetnthbemoznpnge,é i


let DS not leauc one ma oF them. And tbep fapt:
Do wbhatloeuer thou thpnkeft bet. Tbhenfapt
pzeft:let vg come bpther vnto GoD. And Sau
alken of Goo: thal ¥ qo Downe after Pp bik:
tineg? Wplt thou delpuer themintothe bades
of Yraels Wutbhe anfwered bpmnotatýtpme.
And Haul fapde:let the people come bpther out
ofall quarters and know and fe bp whomthis
fpnne is chaunced this S :foz as trulpas tbe
Lo:de lpueth which fauet Jiracl, though tt be
in Yonatbas mp fonne, be Hall dpe the Deathe.
asut there was no manamongeall the people,
that anfwered bpm
) @ yen befapde unto all Jfrael: be pe onone
{pde, and Jand Jonathas mp fonnewyll be on
p other fide. Ind p peoplefatd puto Haul: what
thou thinbeft bet, p do .Cherfore Saul fapde
qntop Lozde God of Fracl:gpur a pet fect lot.
“egoet Hob gpucthouthe iubgement.Bow ba ppeneth it,p
e$ thou gpuct thy feruaunt no antweretorape , Hecht fpr be tx
meoin Jonathas mp tonne, Metr tt, oF pi this tniquitre he in


chy peovie,) AND Hauly sonathas were caught,
but the people efcaped fre. Jnd Haul fapod:caft
lottes betwene ne and Jonathas mp fon. and
onathas wascanabt. Chen Haul fapbeto
Yonatbas:telline whatthoubatte done? And
"Leas toldebpm,and fapse:3 talteda lytic
onye witbtheende of the rodde that was tn
mpne Dande:andlo, 3 mutt dpe.

Saul anfvoered:* God do foand foto ine,p
(halt dye the beth Jonathas. And Ppeople fapo
puto Saul : (hall Jonathas dpe whiche bath fo
mpgtely helped Firacl’ Gov forbpd. As truly
are ride agthe Lozde lpucth ethere hallnot one berre of

pisbeed fallto roid, for he hath w2ought w
- Bodthis dap. And fo the people delinercD Jona


Bathie


i.Samuel.


Jonathas


thas, ý bedpednot. And th? Saul departed vp
from folowpnea the Pbttines. And the Phili-
fines went totber2 owne place. And fo Saul
belde P kpngvom ouer Jiracl, æ fought aqamnft
al bis cnemies on euerp {pde, agapnit f)oab:a-
gapni ý childgen of Amm6 : agapnft Edom:a-
Snub the kynges of soba, ¢ agapnit the bili
tineg. And wobptberfocuer he turned bpm felfe,
there be wan: and pe garp ered bis hol togyther

and (mote fx Amale

of the bandes of them that fpopledthem. The

fgnes of Haul were Jonathas, Jefu, S)elebt

fua. And bis two Doughters Were thus named:
S elder was called Herob,¢ the ponger Byichol
Andthe name of Sauls wpf was Ahtnoa the
Doughter of Abimaas And f name of bis chefe
captaine was bner p fon of Mer, Dauls vnrle

And * Cis was Hanis father. And Merthe fa- es. tr.a
ther of Abner was the fonne of Abicl.Andtbere r s
was fore warre agapnit the Philitines all the

Daves of Haul. Andwbomiocucr Haul awe

tobe a tronge man, and mete foz the warre, be -

toke bpm bntobpm.
CTbhexrv.chapter. —
C Saulis commaundcd to flep Amalek. Bele


Bifobespent to the bopceofGob, Samuri
mourneth fo. au


Saul.
ae Amuel fapa onto Saul: xthe Lorde Y
A aa fent me toannopnte the, to be kpnge 1.u69.1r.¢.
RANK ouer pis people Sitacl. Rowe ther=

eo yr foze Dearien thon vnto the vopce of

are 4 the toordes of the Lorde: Thus fapth

the Lorde of booltes : Jremembze that whiche
Amalek dpd to Flrael, xbowe they layed mapt SD
forthemtuthe wape, astbepcame onte of E-
gypte. Rowe therfore go, andfinpte Amalek,
ano Deftrope pe all that pertapnety Dunto tiem,
and fe tbou baue no compaffpon on them.
pe ep oii aes oe ee or both mã 24 rFiGe
and woman, infante anbdfuckelpnge, ore and `
Eres anand

And aul gathered the people togptber, and 15
*ndbzcdthemin Telaim, twohidzcdthoulad D ire
fotemen, and ten thoufande men of Juda. And
Saulcame toa cptie of Amalek, g let watchin
the ballepe. And Saul fapde onto the henttes:
goe Mori eget pou Downe fro amonge the
Ainalekites , lelt J deftrope pou with them:foz
pethemed mertcpe toallthe chpldzen of Ficael,
whe they came out of Eqppte. And fo the rent
tesdepartedfrom amorige the Amalekytes.
And Saul fmote the Amalekites fro Peuila C


(ae a


‘as thou comet to Sur, Pigetp befoze Egipt,¢


toke Agag p Benge ofthe Amalckptesalpuc,¢
otteclp deftropedall ë people w the edge of the
(wearde. x Sut Haul andtbe peoplefparcd B= SUFI
gag, andthe better pepe andthefatter oven, €
the lambes andail that was good, g wolde not
pefrope them. Sutal that was foule nought
worth, that they deltroped beterlp. Then came
the wo2de ofthe Lode Dnto Samuel, fapinn:
it*repentetb me that J baue made Haul kings sene’vi.e
for be ig turued frome, and bath not perfour=
med mp cómaundementes. And Samuel was
eupllapayed, and ceped onto the Lord almgbt
And when Samuel arofe earlp tomete Saul

withe


ites, andrypd Jiraeloute Dierre `


.


pi


ka


Saul,


D
of


inthe moznpnage, it was fold Samuel, p-spaul
wascometo Carmel:and bebold, be hath made
bpmthere a place, andis turned, and departed,
and gone downe to Gilgal:

And Samuclcameto Haul, and-# Sau! ofe
red burnifaccifpce onto PL ozd ofthe tps of f pores whichhe
bad bought Ers Amalec: whe Samuel was come bntoSaul)
Saul fayd puto bim: Wletled be thou inp L020


haue fulfplled Fcomaundemet of Pp L020.a
im fapd: what meanced then the bleatpng of


200. FEL


i


Dep biit.p


ft


the hepe tumpunecares,and the nople ofporen
whiche jheares Saule auntwered:thep paue
brought them (cd the Amalekttes. ffozthe peo
le {pared the beit of the bepeand of the oren to
eater them onto the Lozd¢ thy 69d. and
the remnaunt haue we deffroped vtterlp.
Samuel fapde to Saul: let me teltbe what
the Lorde bath fayde tome thts nygbt. And de
fayd Unto bim:fape on. amuct fapoe:* wert
thou watt lptlein tbpne owne padt, watt thou
not mabe the Deed of the trpbes of stack: Bnd
the Lozpandpated the pug ouer Firacl. Andy
Lode fent the om atournepe,and fapde:G0.and
ptterlp deftrope thofe fynners tbe Amalekites
and fpabtagapnit them, bntpl thou ntterlp be
rope them And wherfoze haft thounot berke-
ned onto the vopee ofthe 10de, but haft tour=
ned tothe peape, and bat Doone that tobichets
wyckedinthe {pabt of the Loze:
And HSaullapde wnto Samuel: pea, J Hane
Herkened Dnto the vopee of the Lozd: and Daue
qone p way which the Loge fent me pnto and
Hane brought Agaa the Bynge of Amalek, and
haue vtteclpdettroped the Amalebptes. Wut Ë
pepple toke of the fpople, epe oren, and pcbe-
folk of the thpnges whichethoulde Haue bert De-
roped to offre vntotbe Loz0thy Godin Gil-
gal. And Samuel fapde:bath p Lorde as great
plea fure in bucntfacrifpces ¢ oir pniaes, as whe
thessapse of P Lozd ts obeyed: Webold, fo obeve
is better the facitpee, € to berkents better then
the fat oframmes. For rebellton isas the ipune


ic ofeqoptchcvatt,and fubbernetic isas the mic-


kepneltc of poolatrpe. Sypcaule thou hatt call a-
wape the too2de of the Loz0e, therfo2ze hath the
z ozde cat awape the allo from beinge kpnge.
S nd Saul fayd nto Samuel: F paue fyn-
ned, fo? 4 bane gone further then the fapinge of
the Lpzv and thy wo2des, bycaufe 3 feared the
people, and cbeped thep2 vopce. Lowe therioze
take awape mp {pune , andturneagapne wit
me that J mape worthyp the Lozde. And Da
muel pd vnto Haul: 3 wyll not returne with
the:fo? thou baft cafteawaye the worde ofthe
Lozde,andthe Lorde bathcall awaye tbe, tbat
thou thalt not be kpng ouret Fracl.Andas Ha
mueltucned bpm felfe to qo awaye, becaughte
the lappe of his coote,anditrent. end Samuel
fapd wnto pym: the Lorde Dathrent the kpng-
Dome of Pracl from the this dap, Dath gpu
it to anepabbour of thpue, pisbetter the chou.
rhe ftrength of irae! wylinot begyle nozre=
pent:for bets not aman that canre pent.
Hefaypoe: 3 haus fponed. ut nowe Honout
mic before Pelbers of nip peonle, g vefore Jiracl


LANs.


and turite agapne w me, that be mape worhp,

the Losdethy God: And lo Samuel tourned As
gapne,¢folowed Saul. And Saul worbyp-
ped the Lode. Then lapde Samuel : B :page
Pebptber tome Agag the kpng ofthe Amakki-
tes. And Agag came Yutohpm delicatelp. And
Agag f{apd:truly thy bptter death commeth on.
And Samuel fatd:ag thy fwerd bath made wo
më childleffe, fo hal thy mother be chiloelelie a-
bone other home: And HaimuclHewed Aeagin


peces befoze p Lordin Gilgal. And thë * Samu ots: tia


eldeparted to Rama. And Saul went home ta
bis bonito GibeaSaul. And Samuelcam no-
moze tole Saul bntil p dap of his deth. Aeuer=
thelefle Samuel mournedioz Saul, g the Lord
repéted, ý be bad made Haul kpng ouer Firal.
C The.xvi.Chapter.
€ Danid is annopnted kpage. du euph (pprete
commeth bpom<paul,
GE =g He LozdefapDde bnfo Samuel: Howe A
LA longe wylt p mourne for Saul, leinge
yea bata! J baue cat bimatoape fró rapgnynge
ea tos ouer Afrael Spl tbpuc borne w opnte-
ment, come, $ Jmape lend theto Flat p eth
Icbemite, foz F bane prouyded mea yng amig
bis (ines. And Samnellapd:bow ca J gor soz
yf Saul bearcit,be wpll hplline. Che 102dan-
{wered: Cake an Depfer withthe, and lave : F
am cometo offre to the Lode . And call Flat to
the offepnge, and J wpllthewethe, wharthou
halt Do:and thou hhalteannopat bim whome F
name bntothe. nd fo Samuel dpd as p Lorde
bad hint, ¢ came to Werblebé, æ the elders of the
towne wereaftonyed at dis compng,andlapo:
xC mei thou peaceably ¢ He an |
am come to offre bnto tbe Lorde. + Sanctifpe
pour felues,€ come with meto the ofring. and


be fanctifped Jlai and pisfines, andbad them ssie


tothe offrpng. And when thep were come De lo-
Redon Eliab and iapd: purely the Lozdes an-
nopnted is before bpm. ut P Lozde apd vnto
Samuel:loke not on pi ge onP bepath
of pis ftature, bpcaufe 3 bane refuled bpm: ffo
Gon {eethnotas ma feet. ffo? man loketh on ý
ouftwwarde apperaunce: but God beoldeth the
pert, The Flat called Abinadab, and made hin


_ come befoze Samuel. X nd he fapd:nepther bath


the Lode chofenthis. Chen Flatmade Dama
come,and pe layne: neptbher pet bath the Lorde
chofenbim. A qayne Plat made tuen of bis fon-


D nestocome before Haniel : ¢ Samuel fayde


bnto ¥lat:the sed gel oy none of tiete.

And Samuel {apd wnto Flai:are Here all thy &
chplazene / Ie fapde:there is pet a lptle one br-
ppnde that kepeth the Mepe. And Samuel ayd
puto flat: fende and fet hurt, foz we wpl nat ipt
Dotwne, tyll be become bpther. And he fent,and
bzougbt hunt in. And he was bzowne, g of aner


cellent beautp, xand welfauouredin light. And se.rrrizb


fhe Lozdfapd: Acple,andannopne bim foz this
igbe. Therfoze Samuel toke the hozne with
the opntment, andannopntcd bym poh mpd-
Desofbis brethren. And the ippzite of the Lozd
came bpon Dauid , from that gape fore warde..
And Samurl rofe dp, and went to Rama.

Dij. wut


SUOLE EDI


ered: Pea, J ires tic


Wowlay


Saul, andaneupl (ppritte lent ofp L020 pered
eal S Sauls add tes fapn jd tobim:6e-
holde, aneupll fppzite fent of God vereth ë, let
out lozde therfore cOmannd bis feruatites (that
are befoze the)to feke a ma, ý iga chnpng player
withanbarpe:that when the eupl (ppatt tent of
®odcimeth vpon the, be mape plape with bis
pande and thou palt be caled. Saul lapd vnto
bis (eruantes : proupde mea man tben thatcan
plap wel, and bzpnge bym tome. Thenanfiwe-
red one of his (ernatites, and fapd: Webolde, F
paue fene afonne of Flaia Wetbledbempee, that
can playe Dpon inffrumentes, and ts anactpue
felowe,anda man of war and prudent in doting
of feates,¢ woellmade,and Y Ladis with him,
Wibherfore Saul fent mellégers dnto Flat, and
fapd:fende me Dauid thp fonne, whtche is with
the hepe. And Flattoke anafle ladé with bzed
anda flacket of wpne, anda kpo, andfent them
bp Dauid bis fon vnto Haul.And Danid came
to Sanl, ¢ tode before bym g be loued Him ve-
rp well, g be was made pis harnefbearer. And
Saul čt to Flat, faping: let Dautdremapne w
me,foz be bath fotid fauour tn mp fight. And fo
it foztuned, Pp when f enpll {ppzite ent of God
came Dpé Saul, Dauid toke an harpes plaped
with bis band.¢ fo Sanl was refreliped, ¢ dpd
amende, andthe eupi (ppzite departed fro bpm.
C Thbe.xcvy.cChapter.
@ Paid ourrcommeth great Goliad.
(Zo A
itt TOUN


ee
= T ooi Š — —
ie al py aes
“ee ee oto i
te rho 1 ty eee ia
i Ctl p a Eon h
Í X
BL ry Mea E 5
i Sie, s
igs Ta
a


mA
te a ar
Cie ot z
‘pg ela


ReeT yaa

X pe coth whicheis in Juba , and pptched
esse A bet wene Socoth and Asecap , inthe
coot of Dammin: And Saul and the men of
Flcaclcametogypther, and pptched tn the ocke-
vallepe,and put them felues tnarape tofigbt a-
capnit the Whilitines. And p ~btliftines tode
onanbpll on the one ide and Firael ftode onan
bylionthe other {pde, and there waga vailepe
-befwene them. And there came aman betwene
them both out of p tentes of the biliftines, nas


Foruria med Goltabxof Gath. vi.cubites ean hadebze-


deth log, badan helmet of bzafle Yp his hed g
acote of mapleabout him. And F wepade ofbis
cote of maple was. v.62). ficles of bza fle. And be
had bootes of brale vps bis legges, ga mild of
baffle bpon bis thoulders. And the thafte ofbis
fpeare wWaslphe a weauers beame. And bps
pean becd weped {pre bundzed por of pzon.
nòd one Dearpnge a (plde went before bpm.

And pe ove and crpedagapnlt f hook of Ff

racl and ard Dntothem: bp are pe come ont


L SYRIRUL L JINU, |


WD  Æutthefppzite of the Lorde departed from


inarape to battaplezam not Fa Bbhilifine and 15
pou {eruauntes to Sauls chofe pona manfrom
ainonge pou , andlethpm come Downe tome.
And pf be bebable tofpght with me, eto beate |
me:then wpl we be pourferuatites Wut 1f Bcd
overcome him g beate bym, then Hall pe be oure
feruauntes,and erue vs. And F Wbiltine fapd
FJ defpe the hook of Ffrael this vape, qpucmea
man, that we mapefighttogpther. Whi Haul
and all Firael bearde thole wo2rdes of the philic
tine thep were dilcouraged, ¢qreatlpatraped. `
Dauid wasp fonne ofan Epheathitcox:pewyom Ho!
mencpon is mabe afoze) OF ethlehem Juda , named
Slat which bad eypght fonnes. And wasan olde >
nan inthe dapes of Haul, ¢ came toageamig a
mé.And p thre eldeft fonnes of Flat went, g fo-
lowed Saul top battaple. And pnames of his
thee fones ý wét tobattayl were:Eliab p eldeft
and p next Abinadab, the third Sima, € Da
uid was Plec. Andthe thze eldett went after
Haul. Daud allo went, departed from Haul
tofcede bis fathers thepe at Wethlebers. And
the Pbiltfine came fogth in the moznpnge, and
euenpnge, and continued fourtpe dapes.
Aud Flat fapde dnto Dauid bis fonne: take €
for tp beethzenan Epbha of rhis parched cozne To
@ tbe le ten loues, ¢ bzpnacit tothe boot totbp :
beethren. And carp thele.r.fredh cheles pnto p ca J
pitapne, andloke howe thy bacthzen fare , and |
fet ont théy2 pledge. And Haul andthep,andal ee
the men of Zitael were tthe ocke vallep, fpgh- oe
tpng with the Dbiltiines.And Dautdrole vp
‘early tn the moznpnge and left the (hepe witha |
Keper,and toke ¢ went as Flat hadcimaunded
Dput,and caine within the compafie ofthe book
And the hoofke went outinarape,and (houred
inthe battaple:fo2 Jfraeland p ppiliFines bad |
put them {elnes inarape , the oneagapnit the o- =j
ther. And Dauid put downe the cere from bpm os
and putthem pnder the bandes of the keper of
the veffels,andranintothe Doft,andcame*tnd a
faluted bis brethacn.And as be talked with thé: of


- Webolde, there tode a man inthe mpodes(Go-


liah the Ppilitine bp name of Gath) out of the
arap of the bili tines, and (pake of the maner
aboucreberted, p Dauid berde it. Andal themé
of Zleael, whé they fawe f mã ran awape from
bym,and were loze afraped . Andeucrpman


of Firal apie: Hawe pe tbis mancome forthe
euen toreuple Jiraelis become. *AndtoHpm yape. roe |
that beateth bym wylltbekpng qpuegreatrp, - p
cheffe and wll qpue bym bis dougbter thereto |


pea, and make prs fatbers boufe free in Ffracl.

And Dauid fpake to the menthat fode by, D
and fapd: Wibat balbe done tothe ma that bea |
teth this Pbiliftine, etakethawape the pame |
from Frael?” And what ts this yncircumet fed
Pbiliftine, ý be Hulde reuple the bost of the ly-
upige 6 onamo be anfiweredbym(after
thig maner) faping:fo palit be done to the ma,
that beateth bpm. And Eliab his eldelt bother
bearde wher he fpake bntothe men, and Eliab
was angrpe with Dauid, ¢fapde-wljycameft ° =
p dowone bpther? and w whom bat p left thofe
ewe thepe inthe wildernefies 3 now tip ee

andthe


Goltah.


andtdemalpce of thyne bert, thattbouartcom
Downe to le the battapl.And Danidfapo. And
wat Daue J now donesis there not awozder

And De departed from bim into the peefence of


Liapnees.


Gregation (all kiowe : that the Lorde faueth
not with iwerde and {peare. Foz the battapl is
the Lozdes, tbe Hali gpue you into our hades.

And whe p Philiftine arale tocome g Mawe


Folrrbi,


àn other, and {pake of the fame maner, andthe


npe Dito Dauid, Dauid Dated € ran intop bat
people anfwered bpm agapne as before.


| tapie enë agapntt p pbilifine. And Daud put ;
And thep $ herde the wordes which Dauid pishandin His bag, toke outa tone, g fang it
fpale,rebearitd thé befoze Haul, whichcauled æ {mote p bil fine in His forebecd, Ý the tone
_-Dimtobe fet. And Dauid fayd to Saul: Let no fonkeintodis fosebeed kana be fellgrouclpnge E4 Mbits
“ mMaänshert faple him bpeaule of bpm. Thyler- toperth And fo Danid ouercam the Dhilifltue
_ HANNE wopllgo,efpabe wD ponder pilikine witha fipngeandattone,¢ mote $ Philitine g
| And Saul iapd to Dautdagapne:thou artnot fiuebim,euen when Danid bad nofwerde inbis
r > Ableto go agapné ponder Philitine to fight ©" bade. wWut Da uldranne, æ Lode bpon f Dptit=
bim. foz Y artebutachplde,but beiga mano ftine,and toke bisfwerde and due tt ont of bis
wat,cuenftobispouth.Dautdantwered onto Meeth, fue bim,andcut of pts peed therwith.
a, DUll: Chp feruaŭt kept his fathers hepe,and And when the whilittinesfawe, p they? chaim- oe
~ BAE tbere camea*ipon¢ lIpkewpie abeere tokea pponwagdeed; xtbep fied. pnd themen of gf Irre |
_ SPUR thepe out of thc focke. And Jwet outatter im racle Juda acole, ¢ outed, g folomedafter p |-
œ ind {note ptm, g toke it out of ismouth. And Pbiliftines, yutpll rhep came to the vallep, and
~ whe pe aroleagapnile me, Jeaughtbimbythe wntop gates of Akard.3nd the Dpiliftines fell
beerde ,¥ mote hime Aue hpm: Andfothplers Downe woundedbp the Wape to Saaraiin,cué
uait fine the Pong thebeere(alfo)bathtbhp ters tonto Gathe x karon. And the childzé of Ffrack
vant apne. And teulpthis wnetechicifed Phi- returned from chafpnge after the Pbiliftines, ¢
e» line Dalbe ag one of chem. ca(gowe wrt 95%% fpopledtbep2tentes. And Dauidtoke the heed
take awape the rebuke ofthe peopte,toz what is tbis bneireum ofthe Bpilifkine and bought tt to Jerufalem:
epid wbiliaine? eing be Dathrapledonthebotof wutheputbisarmourinbistenr. ~
the ipuyng God. And Danid fpake mozeouer: Wide Saul lawe Dauid go forth acavnt f bres ritiig
the Lozde p delpucred me oute of pande of the iliftine, be fapd ynto + Abner $ captapne of
lyon, ous of the bande off beere,be thalldelp- ishooft: Abner, whole fonne ist his pongima?
ucemealto ont ofthebande ofthe Pbiltftine. BAbnevanfwered: astrulp as thy fonie lpueth,
And Saul fapd nto Daud: go, the L020 (Dbing)F canot tel. And f kiny fapd:Euquire
fhallbe withthe. And Saul put hisrapment P whois fonne the ponglpng is. Any when Da-
põ Danid, and put an helmet of brale Vp bis u was returned from the laughter of the DHE
Heed, + puta cote ofmaple ypondbym,andape- liftine, Abnectoke byin , and brought bpm bes
DCB Dauid with bis ownefwerde vponbisrap foze Haul, With te Deed ofthe WbHiliftineinhts .
ment. And beafayedtogo. Andbpcaulebene: pande.And Saul fayd to bpm: whofe fonne art
uer pzoued tf, Dauid {apd yntoHaul:Acannot thou,tbou pongmans Da uid anfwered:F am p
go with tbefe, foz 3 Dauenot diedmyplel€ther= fonne of thy feruannt Slat the wceblebemtte.


+
ks
i


, to: And Dauid put them of bym, and toke bys CThe.rvitj.chapter
atv ibis bande, g chole bpm fpuc mothe fto- Chedoude betwene Danid ano Jonathas Saul
nes out.oFa brooke e pur fhem fn otpepebecbes sib about co tiap Danm, ta Sat


bag which be bad, eina flpnge pobe-@ bis fling MES CENAD whe bebad made anend of A
Ile: yy beak png Ynio Saul, f foule of
Pie Jonathas was knit rd thefoule


wasin dis bänd, and he went tothe wbiliftine.
4 Andp Pbiliffine cameand dzue neteagapntt


— “af i


Dauid, andtheman bare the thplocwentbex pes Yo of Mauid, and Fonathasloued
fore bym. And when the Philiftinelokedabout LAr N ce Dymas bis owne foule: And
and awe Dauid, he difdapned im, fore was Kae Daule coke ym that daye,and
but pouge,and well coloured, Eqoodlptoloke swoldelet him goo homoaze home tobis fathers


bpa And the PhiltHine fayd bnfo Daud: am. Houle. Xund Jonathas made acouenatit i Dä-


Jadogge, thatthou chmefk tome witha Kaffe:
And the Puli ine curled Dauid in the name of
bis godoes. And tbe Whtliftine fapdto Dauid:
chine to me, 3 wpll cpue thy fet wnto the fou
les ofthe ape, and tothe beaftes of the felde,

Then fapte anid to the Pbiliftine:thou com-
meri tome with a fwerbde, a fpeare anda thplve:
Wut Jcometo thein the name of the Lorde of
doctes, the God of the boot of Fttacl, whome
thou baf rapid bpon. Chis dap hail the Lod
delpuer the tito mp bande, and J thal fmpte the
and take thpne beed fromthe, and wpllgpuep


carkatics of the bolt of the wbiltfines this dap
wita Y foules of the apze,andtotbebeattesoF f


erthp allthep which bein the world may know
that tberciga Godin Fracl. Andall this cons


uid bicaute be loued bim ag his owne foule. And

Jonatha put of bis owne cote p was vps him’
be it Dauid, E therto pis cloke, bis fwerde,

hisbowe this gp:dle. And Danid went oute

pasa foruer Saulfent bim, g bebanecd bpm

felfe wpielp. Xand Sanl fet him ouer bis men of

twarre, € he was accepted in the (yght ofall the

people:and tn the fpabt of Sauls feruanntes.


And it happened as they went, when Dauid 25 |


was retourned from the flaughter of the Phili-
fline, that women came oute of allepties of FE
tael,fyngpnceand dauntynge agapntte kpnge .
Sauland with iymbzels, with iope,and w in:

frumentes ofmulpke. And f womeé anfwerrd


One Ait ofber in their playe, ¢lapd* Sant hath Leeg. rrid
flapne bis thoufad, ¢ Damd pis ten thoulanne, ©"? +


D.. ari


|


Saul


And aul was exceding woth, ard the faptg
Difpleafed him, and be fapd: they Daue afcrpbed
pnto Danid.r. 1). andto me but a thoufand, €
what cd be moze Daue, laue y &yngd om: wher-
fore Saul loked on fpde of David from ý dape


T fozewarde. And it happened on the mozowe, È


theeupl ippzite ent of Godcame vpon aul, €
be pophecied inthe middes of ý houte. And Da
nid plaped w bis band lpke as at other tpmes,¢


there was a iaueling in Sauls bad. And Saul iB


toke ptauelpng.e apd: 3 wilnaple Dauid top
wall it. And Dauidanopded oute of his pre-
Tēcetwotpmes. And Haul wasafrapd of Da-
uid bpeaule p 102d wash bpm, ¢ was aa
ted fró Saul. Therfore Saul put him frå i

andmabde bimacaptapne ouer a tboulãde, ¢ be


D went out ¢in before f people.And wauid beba


ued bim felf wilelpinall bis wayes,¢ the 1020
was bim.Ciiberfore whe Saul fare that be
wasto erceding wyte, be wasafcaped of him.
Wut all Zlracl g Juba loucd Danid, bpcaule be
went out in before the.And Saul fapd to Da
uid: Webolde mp elbet Doughter Serob, ber F
wpl qpues to wpfe. Dnelp playp man wme,e
fpgbt p Lordes battaples. Eo: Saulthought:
mpne bade thal not be po Him, but P hand of

Dbiltttines. And Dauid anfwwered Baul: what
ain Jr € what ismy lpfe, 02 byneed of mp fa-


E therin #eacl,p J pulo be fon iv law top king?


Wowbeit whe p time wascomp merob Sauls
doughter fhulde baue ben gpuento Daud, the
was qpué nto Adzrecla <)eholotbite, to wife,
Powbrit, icbol Sauls doughtcr loued Då-
nid. Andthep Hewed Haul:¢ the thing difplea
fed bint not. And Saul fapd: J wpllapue ppm
ber Pipe may bea Mhare to him, that py band of
the Pptliftines map be agayntt him. Wberfoge
Haul fayd to Danid:thou halt this dap be mp
fonne inlawe in the otber daughter. And Haut
comatined his leruatites tocimen with Daur
{ecretly,andtolape:Bebolde, the kpnge hatha
fauourto the, and al dis feruauntes lou the, be
nowe therfoze the kynges fonnern lawe.


SE And Sauisleruauntes fpake thele wordes


inthe cares of Dautd.And Danid fapd, femeth
ittopoualpgbt thyng tobe a kynges fonnetn
lawe: Jama pooze mang of fmallreputation,
And f leruatites brought Haul wozrdagapue,
faping:of this maner i ke Danid. Aud Haul
fapd:this wple Mal ye fa pe to Dauid: thebpng
careth for no nother Dow2pe, but foz an bhd2cd
forelkpnnes of the Pbtlifines to be auenged of
Phyngesenemics.2out Haulthouqhtto make
Mawdfalinto the hades off Dbilitines. And
when his (eruauntes tolde Danid thele wozdes
it pleafed Dauid well , to be the kpnges fonne
in lawe. Ando: the dapes were crpired, Dauid
avofe with bis men , and went and flewe of the
Pbiliftynes , two hundzed men, and Danpd
Hounht thep2 forelapnnes, and fatilfped p king


fiseg.siiec thereof,to be bis fontn lawe.xWwberfoze Haul


ga ue bpm Wichol bisdoughter to wpfe: And
aul fawwe and wndederftode bow that F Lod
was with Danid, and that Sichol bis dough-
terloucd bpm, and be wastbhe moze afraped of


í, Sannuel,


Dauid and Hail became al wap Dantds ene-
mpe. The logdes of the Pbiltkines pfedto goo
forth. And it foztuned, P whenthey went forth
Dauid behaned him felfe wp felper théall p fers
uatites of Haul:fo p bis name was moch ict by
 The.rix.chapter
Saul commaundeth to fap: Dauib.gzichot
bps wpfe faucth bpm.

SPA Dauid * But Jona
KA Seanibad a great fauout to Dauid, and Jos
natbas tolde Dauid, fapinge : Saul my father
rocthbaboutto flapetbe. Mowe therfore , take
eve totbp felfe but pli the moznpng, and abide
in fome fecrete place, and bpde thy telfe. And F
topli go out and ftande bp my father in the feld
wobere thouart, andwpll comune with mp fa=
ther ofthe and wohatfocuer J fe, 3 wrlitelithe:
And Jonathas fpake good of Daud, vnto


aul bis father, ¢fapd wnto bim:let net y bing 25


fonagapnet bts feruañt pautd, torbe bath not
fynnedagapnitt the, € bis wozkes banc bento p


ward berp qood. o? he idx put bis Ipfe inps gon. rits


q Aul{pake to Jonathas bis fonne, and A
toall bis feruaites, peer Mulde kpi - :
thas Sauls fonne (rs-rblite


E


band, g flue p Pbiliftine, g the L020 brought te Piacpip t


alfea great bealthfozall Yirael. Thou fa welk

t, thou retopiedeft: wberfore thé wylt ğ fynne
agapnit innocent blonde, ¢ flape Dauid with;
oute acaule? And Saul hearkened onto the
topce of Jonathas, and fiware: astrulp asthe
Lozdelpueth, be tall notdpe, And Jonathag
called Dauid , andihewedhym all thole woz-
Des, and bzought Dautd to Saul. And pe was
inbis peefenceasintpmes paft.

Aup i oare brganagapne g mauid twente
outæfougbt xd the Dbiliftines, and fine them w
a great faughter, tbep fledfrom bpm. And the
ea titt of F Lozde was bps Saulashe
fat in bis Doufe baupng a fauelpn inbis hand, €
anid played With bis hande. And SHaulereé-
bed tonaple Dauid to the wall with tpesanelin
Wut be rpa bim flf oute of Hauls prefence, as


be finote the (peare ox wrth avapne trokejin tothe xe


wall. And Dauid fied, and was faued the fame
npabt. aul alfofent meflégers vnto Dautos
boule, to watche bpm, andto flape bpm in the
mompuge. And Hichol Dauids wyte tolde tt


bym, faping:PF thon faue not thy felf this night €
fomozoto thou wilt be layne. And fox H)ichol gocue.tie
let arid Downe thezowe a tmpnbotoe and pe Sa


went and fled, and was faued. And thé the toke
an pmageandlaped it inthe bed, and puta ppl-
lowe fluffed with gootes peere Vuder the deed
otit andconeredit witha clothe. And when
See ab: erg tofe tche Dauid, helayd

cisfpeke: And Saul iente the mefiengers a-
gapneto DND OPENEN me,
bedandall, tbat Jmapefapedpni. And when
themenëgers wer comein: Webolde,therelape
anpmageinthebed, witdappllotweofgooteg
beere vnderthebeedofit. And Saul lape Yri-
to Wichol: why bafte thou mocked me fo, and
fentawape mpneenemp, that Deis etapen Wi
cholanfweredSaul:JEo? be fapde tnto me:leg
me go, o2 ley wplliplltpe. And fo Dauid fien,

á an


paid,


| a
|


: andefcaped, and came to Samuel to Rama,
and tolde bpmall that Saul had done to bym.
And be and Samuel went ¢dweltin Natoth.

DW Andonetolde Haul, fapinge:Weholde, DA-
uidigat Maiothin Rama. And Saul (ct mef-
fenqers to fet Dauid, And whé they fare a ci-

anp of propbetes peopbecpinge, and Samuel
andpng fait bp them, p fppeite of God fel vps

_tbemeflengers of Saul, and thep pzopbectes to

And when tt was told Saul, be fent other mef
fengers, andtbeppsopbecpedlpkewple. And
| Saul ient meflégers pet agapne the third tyme
e  —‘andtbep pophecped alfo. Che went be bim elf
to Rama, ecame toa great wel that isin 5e-
| chu,ebealkedand fapde: whereare Samuel €
| Dauid And one faid:bebold, they beat Naioth
- in Rama,andbe went thptber, euen to Natotd
inama, and the {ppatte of Godcame bps him
alfo, and be went peopbecyinge dnt pil became
to Aaiothin Rama. And be tirppte of his clo-
thes, arlapzonbecped befoze Samuel in lyke
maner, and fellnaked alltbat dapeand alltbat
npgbt.* And therof itis, that thep fap:ts Saul
alfoamonae the prophetes’
_ CChe.re.Chapter:
© Da uid complapneth buto Jonathas.

RE MD Dauid fled from Naioth whichis

JA Sen in Rama, and came ¢ lapdbefoze 30-


Ere ipt


E Aiva Ol
Dauecõmptted before thp father, $ be fekethm
lpfc-pefapd nto bim. God forbpd, thou halt
not dpe. Webolde mp father wpldo nothing et-
ther greate 0? (mall, but $ be wpll ipewe tt me:
Bid bow (buld mp father byde this thinge fto
me? He Wil not da it. And Dauid lware agapne
and fapde: thy father kno wet $ FJbaue founde
s race inthpne epes ,andtherfozebe fapth: Jona
thas thal not knotve ít, left be be fozp. And th ve
tp dedesenen as truly as P Logbdelpueth,andas.
trulpas thy {oule lpueth, there is buta ep be-
twene me and death. Chen fapd Jonathas vi-
to Dauid:whatfoeucr thy foule delpeeth , that
y wyl do bnto the. And Dauid fapde Duto Fo
nathas:Bebolve,tomozowe isthe begpnnyng
ofthe moneth,¢ 3 Huld (pt w the king at meat.
aut let me co,that J mape byde myptel€ inthe
feldes Dnto the thypzde Daye ateuen. pr thp fa-
therfpeake of me, then fape : Dautd alked leaue


ofme, Phe might qoto Wetblehetobisownect p


B tie, for there ts bolden a perelp feaft foz all $ kin
red. And pfbe faye: itis well done, then chp fer-
naunt tall baue peace. But and pf be beangrp
the be fure , Pp wpckednefiets veterly concluded
ofbim. And ché p thalt hem mercy Duco thp fer

tve.rdid.s aunt ~ fo: thou bat made vb me thp fernaunt
ere a Hondetn the Loz. Mot withtandpna, tftbere
De inme anp teefpatte: then lape me thy felfe,¢

bıpngeme not to thy father. Apana
| -An Yonathas anlwered:Godkepe $ fro the
| of vm (neither is it poNpble to rome to pale.) fEo2 iF J knew
P toichednes were cõcluded of my fathertocom
ppd the:thinkelt p that ¥ thoulve not telit the?
Then {apd Dautd:who thal tel me tf thy father
anfwercruellp: And Jonathas fapde onto Da-


iZynges.


Fol.crbtit.
uid, conte and let YS go ont into the felde. And
thep went out both of them into the felde.

nd Jonathas fapd nto Dauid:P Lood C
of ¥ (cael loke on it, wbpen J baue groped mp fa-
thers mide, one time oz other win this tij.dapeg
Pit tad welw Dauid. Vf F thé (Cd not Vnto the
€ herve it the, P Lozd do fo ¢ fo wnto Jonathas
Wut ifmp father baue anp plefure todo fF enpl,
J wiltew palog fend pawap ý thou Dann
goin peace.And p Lozd be wtbe as bebath ben
with my father. And thou Malt perfourme Dn-
tome the mercype of the Lozde, not onelp whple
Flpue, but enen when Jam deed, and pluck not
thy mercpeawape fro mp boule foz enwer: (20,
not when the Lozde bath oefroped ee es fha
of Dauid,euerp onc fromthe face of the earth.

And io Jonathas made a bonde with the
houfe of Dauid, delpzpng that the Lorde Huld
feke it out bp the bandes of Dantds enempes,
(pfit wete broken.) And with other wozdes
dyd Fonathas fweare Vuto Dauid, bpcaute be
loued bim. J€o2 be loucd bim as bis owne foule: —
_ Thenfapd Jonathas to Dauid: tomozowe m
isp firt dap of P moone. Jnd thou Walt be mif-
fed, bpcaufe the place where? walk wont to {pe
albe emptpe. Cherfoze this dave thze bapes
come Downe inany wple bnto Pp place where
ppddett bpde opia , whe p bulpnefe was in
bánd:euenby p ftone Efel: And J wil Hote thze
arowes bp f one pde thereof, asthough J hot
the ata marke,¢ wpl fendea lad, bpd bpm go
feke Parowes. Andit J fap onto plad:{e,thea-
rowes are on this {pde p:bzing them:tben come
thou:foz it is peace ¢ no burt,asiureas p Lode
Ipuecth. wut epf 3 lape bntothe lad:bebold, the
arowes are beponde the, then qo-scinpeace for È g
Lozdebathlenttheawape. Andastoutchpnge —
this whiche thou and J baue fpoken:bebolde, P
Lorde be bet wene the g me foz euer, And o DA=.
nidbpdbpin felfe in the felde. And when f newe -
moone wascome, the i fat bym downe to
cate meate. Bnd the kyng fat bpm downe after
the olde maner, in bisteate bp the wall.and Jo Œ
nathas orofe,and Abner fat bp Saules pde , g
mauids place wasemptie. Neuerthelcile, Sanl
fapdenotbpyngatalltbat dape. Eo: pe thought:
fome tbpng bathchaunced bim, ý be is not clene
Wut onthe mozowe which was the lecond dap
of the newe moone, it happened , that pautds
place wasemptpeagapne. And Saul fapd vne
to Jonathas bis fonne:(iberfoze cometh not f
fonne of Fai to meate, nepther pekerdape noe
todape? And Fonathas anfwered vnto Saul.
pautd albedlicéceofme to goto Wethlebe, foz
be fapDd:let me go, Jpzape the , foz our Kyneede
doth bold an offring tu P citie,emy brother hath
fent foz me. And therfoze J bauc fod fanour in
thpneepes: let me goq fe mp beethzeu. Chisis
thecaule that be cometh not puto the kinges ta-
ble. Then was Haul angrye with Jonathas, ft
andf{apd Dntobim: Thou wpcked rebel, do not ~
Jkowe, that thoubatt chofenthe fonne of Flat
puto thpne ownerebuke, and ontothe rebuke g
thame ofthp motber/4fo2z ag longe as the fonne
of Hat lpucth bpon the earth.thou Halt not be

D.ii:  ffablpis


Haul and


ire Teie
integ pilt


G


ireg.tey.b fore PEP pab ou


ftablifthed, noz pet thp biqbom: toberfoze now
{ed fet bim vnto me *foz eis P chtlde of Detb.
And Jonathas anfwered vnto Saul bis
father, andfapoe Dutobym:Wiberfore Muld be
dpe; what bath be Done r And Haulipite Ypa
earetobit bim, wberbp Jonathas wy wel
at it was vtterly Determined of bis father to
faye pautd:And{o Jonathas arole from Pta-
ble ina great angre,and dpd cate nomeateat P
feconde da ye of the moneth,fo2z De was fozp fog
pDautd, bpeaule bis fatber bad done him bame
nthe nert mogning Jonathas went out into
the felde,at the tyme appopnted with Daud, g
a Iptlelad with bum. And be fapd wnto dis boy:
runne,and {eke out mpnearowes which q hot:
anbdas § bop ratt be (hot an arowe bepond Him.
And when the tad was come to the place why-
ther Jonathas had Hotte the arowe, Jonathas
erped after thclad,and fapd: Js not the arowe
beponde thee And Jonathas cepcdafter the lad
agapne,make (pede, and Landnot tpl. and 30
natbaglad gathercd bp the arowes, and came
to big malter. wut the lad wp nothpng of the
matter. Dnelye Jonathas and Danid wpi tt.
And Jonathas qaue bis weapons vnto the lad
that was with bim, and fapd pnto Dim:go ¢ ca
rptbem tothe towne. Andafloneas plad was
gone , Dauid arofe out of a place that was to
warde the fonthb,and fell on bis face tof grofid
and wozrthipped thze tpmes. And thep killed et
ther other,and wept togptbcr folonge,tpl Daa
uid erceadedin weppng . And Jonathas fapde
to Dauwid:qoin peace. And p thinges which we
baue fworne both of vsin the name of the Lozd
faping: P Lozdbe betwene the eme, ebetwene
thy fecdg mpue, let thé tad fo? euer. And he a=
rofeg Departed. And Jonathas wétitop town.


€Thbe.rrj. Chapter.
C David Mipethinto Rob to At malech thepzect,and cetteth
- pfbpm the hewhzeed to Catictpe bis hunore.dftectwoarde be
flpeth to kpnge Achis, and there fapneth bym felte mad.


Te


A aZ ‘was aftonped at the fodapne com
d eae ming of Maud, Elapd nto bpm:
er, 86-4 Wp art chou oloone,andDnoman
with the/ Bnd Dauidlapdto Pbimelech f preft
the kpnae bath cOmaunded me to doa certapne
thyna, and bath {apd onto me: let noma know
obenabout Flende the, and what Jbauccom
maunded the todo. And J haucappopnted mp
feruauntes to {uche g {ache places. Nowe ther:
t onder thpnebande x gpue


Jud, biti.d me fpne lomesofbzed, 07 what cometh tohade.


Andthe preelk anfwered David, andfapde:


5 there ig nocõmen bzecd wnder mpne Hande, but


bereis halowedbzed , pi the pounge men Hauer
kept them {elues from bneleane tbpngeg, efpe-
ciallp women. Danid anfwercd the perf, and
fapd bnto bpin: ofatruthe women hath ben loc


- ke bpfrom bsabout thze dapes when J came


Le.criiti.b
Paat riia.


ont, atid the velfels ofthe ponge men were Holp
Howbeit this wape is bnpuce, and How moch
moze (hall there be bolpnefle in the veflel:x And
fotbhe pecelt gaue bym balowed breed, foz there
was none other breed there, faue the Hewhzed:


í, Samuti.


SA pencameDauidto Nov, toBbi- H
Wes melech the peck. And Abimelech js


desp were taken from befoze the Lozbe,to put
fret beed there, p dape that it was takéawap.

And ther was there the fame dap acertapne
man of the feruauntes of Saul abpoing before
the Lozde,named Doeg an€vompte , theche-
fet of Sauls herdeme


org.


it.
And Dauid apd onto Ahimelech:is not here €


pnder thpne bande eptbher {(peare o; fwerde , Foz
FZ baue neither brought mpfwerd no? mp
neffe me, bpcanle the bypnges bulpnefle requy
redbafte. And the preet (apo: tbe ftwwerd of Go-
liatb the Pbiliftine whom thou Anet in p ockee
pallepe, bebolde, ttisbere weapte ina cloth be-
bpnde the Ephod. Pfthou wplt take that, take
it:Fo ther is none other fane that dere. And Do
uid fapd:thereis none totbat, cpueitme.

And mauto arole and fled the fame dape frå
the pzefence of Saul,and went to Achis p king
of Seth. Andtbe {eruauntes of Achis fapte of
bpm: is not this Dauid thebpnge of the landes
ppd thep not (pnge vutohpm indaunces, fap.
inge: x Saule bath Rapne bis tboulanve, and
Dauid his ten thoulende.

And Dauid put rpolervo2des into his herte,
and was [oze afrapd of Achis the kpng of Gerth
And pe chaunged bis tpeache befoze them , and
fapned bim felte madin they: bandeg and fiera-
bledonthe dozes ofthe gate ,andlet bis {pettle
fallDowne pon bhis beerde: `


age.


i.ce.rbiil,b
FTIF. C


Thenfapde Achis onto his feruaunteg: L0:


pele tbat this manis befpde bpm felfe, wher-
foze then baue pe bzonugbtbymtome! Paue y
nede of mad men, that pe baue bzougbt this fee
lowe toplape the madde man in mp prelemes
Dhall be come into mp houle? Nang
f CThe.rrij.Cbapter, —
Corg betrapeth Damd. Abpmelech is actulcd of treafon
and filapne and Iprriit. pretes mo with him, bpraute thep


recepued Dauid. 20b is benrope of Saul; abiathar tip:
ethte Dauid.


) icaped, andcame nto the caue Dolla
a pass 4 CL bcn bis byctbzen alfo and all bis fa-
bao aed thers houle berde it, they went downe
thytbher to bim: And there gathered wnto bimal
më were in cObzatice ¢ Det, g troubled in thepz
sgn and be became a captapne ouer them.
ND
Deed men. Aud Dauid went thence toifpain
the lande of &)oab:and fayd Duto the kynge of
Hoeab:Let i anbmyp motber (J pape
the )come forthe bnto you, tpll 3 knowe what
chod wpll do foz me. And he brought thé befoze
the kpnge of oab. Andthep dwelt with hym
all the whple that Dauid kept bim felfe in bold.
And the prophet Gad apd onto Dauid: abpde
notin bolde, but Depart and Go into the land of
Beri ben Dauid departed andcametnto the
ore of Hareth. And Saul bherde that Dauid
wasg come abzode, and allo the méthat were w
bim. And Saul fat in Gibea ndera trein Ra
ma,bauypng bis {peare in bis bande and all bis
men fone about him. And Haul (apd onto his
feruauntes that tode about him. Heare F pap
pou, pe fonnes of Jemini: wpl the Tonne of Flat
apue everp one of pon feldesand bpnepard me
make


Kay Auld therfore departed theiice, andet- B


eve were withbim bponafourebun- |


BROAD


mate pou all capitapnes ouer thoufandes, and
ouer bundredes 2


of pou that mourneth foz me, oz peweth it in
mpneeare:bebold: mp fonne bath pred Dpmp
feruatit tolpeawapt againt me this fame dap:


~~ Ebenaniwered Doegthe Edompte whiche |


-Allo Bode bp the feruauntes of Saul, and fayd:
Afa we the fonne of Fiai when pe came to Rob,
to Abimelech the lonne of Abitob, which afked
counlaple ofthe Lozde fo: bym , and gaue bym
bptapleg, and the wearde of Goliah the Phili-
fine allo. Chen the kyngefentandcalled 02 A=
Dimelech the pzeet the fonne of Rhitob , andal
bis fathers boule, that isto faye : thepzecttes
tbat were in Rob.

And thep came all totbekpnge. And Saul


LApnges,


tpebaucalfoconfppzeda> |
3 apne me, and there ig none thattellecbit me |
Crerbute fn mpre eare? *And whereasmypfonne bathe —

~ —- made a bond with the fon of Fiai, thereig none |


ae Pan a Seber
renee: Henthep tolde Dauid, fapinge: Bee
ng “SS bolde, the Pbiliftines føybt agapntt


fapde:beare now thon fonne of Abitob. Pean- lab. A


fwered:bere Jam mp lozde. And Saul fapd vn


tobim:wbp baue pe cõfppzedagapnit me, thon D


and the fon of Flat, in that thou baft puen bim
vitaple,¢a lwrearde, and baltalked cofilaple of
Godfoz him, that be oulde aryfe agapntt me,
and Ipea warte foz me this dap Abimelech ane
fwered the kp nge,and fapd: whois fo fapebful
amonge all tby leruauntes as mauid andtber-
tothe kpnges fonneinlawe,¢ qoethat thy bid-


„AND iS Dad in Honour in thyne boufe bane they


dpn
300 dape falt begontoafke coffaple at God
oz bim? T bat be farfro me(if J pad knows)
let not the kpnge put fuche a thpneg nto bis fer
nant, tn all the boufe of mp father. Ito: thp fer
uaant knewe notbpnge of all this, epther lefe,
oz moze. The kynge fapde:thou halt furelp dpe
* Abimelech, thou, andall thy fathers boufe. And
the kynge fapde nto the fotemen that kode a-
boute ppm: tourne, and faye the preeltes of the
Lozbde, both bpcaufe the pz pandis with Dauid,
andbpcaute thep knewe when Dauid fled, and
fhewed tt notto me. Wut ede feruauntes of the
kpnge woldenot moue thep2 bandesto fal vps
the preeftes of the Lorde.
D Andthekpngefapdeto Doeg : tune tbou,
and fall bpon the p2eftes. And Doeg the Edo-
myte fourned, and ranne bpon the peceses,and
fluc that fame dape foure fcoze and fpue perfons
nes tbat bd pb Wearealpnnen Ephod. And Mob
thecptie of the pectes (motebe with the edge


ofthe (werde ,botbe men and Women,cDplozen fa


and fucklynges, oxen, afles and epe.

And one of the fonnes of Abimelech, the fon
of Abitob( named Abiathar)efeapedand fledde
to Dautd. And F btathar hewed Danid, howe
that Saul bad dapne the 2 odes precites. And
Daud (apd vuto Abiathar: 7 wyt it the fame
dape , when Doeg the Edompte was there,
that be wolde tell Saul.

And Jam caute of the death ofall the four-
les ofthp fathersboute. Abpde thou with me,
andfeare not. Eo: pfanpeman {eke my foule,
bethallfeke thpnealfo, withme thou tbaltebe
in fauegarde. —

C The.rriij. chapter:


ter. And fo Wanid laned the enbabitours of Rei

ea eae cea
eb to Danid to feila, 20u

an €pbod witb bpm in bis bande. Site


Jo,rrir,


qDautd fipeth into the wplpeneffe at sip,


a


And it was tol’ Saul that Dauid wascome B


to Keila. And Saul fapde: God hath delpuered

pm into mpne bande. soz be is hut in howe p

eigcomeintoa towne that hath gates q bar-
tes. And Hani callevall the people togptber
to Warre, fo? to qoodowne to keila and tobe-
fieqe Dauid an tg men. And’ Manto haupnge
Bnowledge that Saul pmagened myfchefe a


gapni him, fapd to Abtathar the peetk.x2 diner {tes.FFF.b


the Ephod. Chen apd Danid:D 1 o2de Godot
a thy feruaiit bath berde, that Saulisas
out ta come agapni Keila to deftroye the cps
tie fo? my lake: wpl the mé of Keila delpuer me
tntobisbander Andwyll Saul come downe
asthy feruaunt bath berde faper D Lorde God
Of Fitacil, tell thy eruaunte. Andee Lode
pd: De wll come Downe. Then fapoe Dauid:
wpli the men of Keila 5 fig and the men,
that are with me intothe bande of Saul anvp
Lozbefapbe:thyp wll betrape you.


Chen Dautdand his men whtch were vpon €


a [pre bundgcdarole, and departed out of feila
and wente whptberthepcoulde. And it wag
tolde Saule, that Dauid was fied from keila,
and be let theiournep alone. Dauid abodein the
wplderneffe th Fronge boloes, andremapnedin
a moñtapne in $ wildernefle of siph.And Saul
fougbt bim cuctp dape, but God delpuercd punt
hot intobts yand. And manutd fawe that Haul
Was come out to feke his Ipfe. And Danid wag
in the welderneffe of siphina serene an =
natha


Haul i. Samuel. Baud
nathas Sanis fon ar fee toettomauidintop femegood in thp (pabt. Then Dauid arole an’
thicket, andcofozted bis bande in God, efapde cut a lappe of Sauls garment priutlpe.and
nto bpm:feare not, foztbebande of Saulmp immediatly Danitg bert note bpm bycaute pe
father thal not fpnde the,andthoutbalt be king badcut of alap of Sauls garmët. Andhe fapd
ouer Jirael ¢ Jmulkl be next utor. Andthat wntohismen: the Lozde kepe me from dotnge

tee roia noth Saulmp father bnowe.* And thep made that thpnge bntomp matter the Lozdes oot

igh a bonbde both of them togptber befozetbe Loz. ted, tolapem ne bande vpo bin, king bets the
and Dani tarpeD line Fbpcaee AMD TS’ eric eae a
nathas toent to bis boule. Chen came the stp naeth crcente the Lorde fmpte bpm , 03 ercepte bis DEPE CAINE,
rertoapaulto Gibea apinge: Doth not Dautd ful vacsme tbat 3 iape not myne bande pone Lorber a
bpdebpm felfe fate bp vs in frongeboldes, in nopntev.) AnD lo Dauid kepte ofbis fernauntes  -
athpchet thatisby thebyll oftachila, onthe with thefe wozdes, and fuffered them not to a=
rpabte fpde of the weldernetie / frowetherfore epleagayntte Saute. |
kpnae, thou mapet come Downe accozdpng to wut Saulrofe vp out ofthe caneandivente =.
all theluft of tbp foule : come Downe, andoure awape: Dauid alfo arole, and went oute of the
part balbe tobelpuer him into the kpnges bad: caue,andcrpedafter Saul, fapinge : 4p lozde
and Paulfapd:Wlefledarepeinthe Lozde:for kynge. Andwhen Haul loked bebynde bpm:
pe bauecompaffpon on me.©o, J pay pou,and Dauid foupedtothe earth and bowed him felf
o2rd2e the matter well, Knoweandfebishaunt, andlapd to Saul:wbherfoze giuclt thonan cate
wbere bis fote bath ben,and who bath fene him to mens wozdes that fape: Danid febeth eupll
there, foz it ts tolde AA papi Morbi And agapnit the Bebold,this vape thpnerpes bath
wozketh craftely. Se therfore, ¢ noweallthe fene, pot thatthe Lozd bath delpucred the this
luckpng places where be bpdethbymielfe, and dapeintompnebandeimthecaue. And fome
come peagapnetomerd thecertentic,e Jwpll badmebyll tbe, but ¥badcompafiion onthe, ¢

ow pou. and pepe bemtbeland, J will ferche fapde: 3 wpli not lape mpne bandes on mp mas

bpm out thozotwout altbetboufanes of Juda. fter,foz be isthe Lozdes annopnted. And mo?e-

m . and they arofeand Wet toziph before Saul ounce mypfather:beholde and te pet the lappe of
yut Dauid and bis më were in the wildernefle thp qarmentinmpbanbde,tn asmoche as 4 ple
of @aon, inthe plapne thatisontherpghthad ledthe not, when Ycut of the lap oftbp garmet.
of Fefimon. Haulalfoandbhismen tet tolcke Tnderfkande therfore and fe, that thereisnep=
and they tolde Dauid. Wiberforebe went onto thereupllno? wychednefieinme, and ý Jhane
arocke,andabodetn the wypldernefie of aon. not fpnnedagapnttethe. And pet thou bunetct
And when Haul bearde chat , be folowed after aftermyfouletotake tt. Che Lo: be iudge be»
Dawid in the wildernetfe of Maon. And Saul twene theandme, and the Lozde auenge me of
and bis men went onthe one fpe ofthemoun- the.Wutmpnebandebe not vponthe. Accdz=
tapne,and Dautd and his ment on the other fine dyngeasthe olde prouerbe fapth: wyckednetle
And Dauidtoke thought, how to get fro Saul p oceadeth from the wpcked. Wut mpne bande
f€o2 Saul and his men compafied pauid and penot wponthe. After whome ts the kpnge of
pis men,round about,fo take them. wut there F{cael come out? After whom doet thou moue
camea mefiengerte Saul, faping:bafte the:and perfecution/after a deed eewe E eA f
come, foz the yabiliftines arecometntotheland. The Lozdebe Judge, and Judae betwene the
WAberfore Saulretourned from isha andme, and fe,and pleate mp caule andauenge
‘pauid,and went aga pni at oh iftines. AnD me of thpnebande.
therfoze tgit,that thep called t SE tect When Danid had made anende of fpeakpng D
of paration. And Daut went t ence,eDdivelt there toosdes to Saul, Saul (apd: + is this thp “re. rote


- m7 Üie


inftronge bolbesat Engaddi. opce mp fonne Danid and Haul lypfte vp his
C The.rrtitj. Chapter. poyce, and wepte , andfapde to Danid,: thou
t C Dauid fipech bute Engaddt,and there bpoeth bpm in artrpabtofer thé J, fo: thou balt rewarded me
a catie,Satll commeth 1 chptber to de bis eafement. tithgood, where as Jhane rewarded thewith
2


= pq ven Daul was come agapne from fo eupl. And thou bat ewed this day, bow that
AAVA lo wpna after the pouty es, itfo2= thoubatt dealt tes withme , fozafinocbe
\ VAG tuned that there were which told bim as whenthe Lorde
heamvaaraitapinge:bepolde, Dan nthe eS, tHon Bpi enot. ffo2 who thall fpnde
Gltapinge:bebolde, Dauidisin thewil de,thou kylledftmenot. Eo? who Wall fpnd
dernefie ofEngaddi. The Haultokethzetbou Hisenemy, anbdlet him Departinto a good, wap!
fandechotenmen out ofall Frael, and ioentto Wlberfoze the L020e rewarde the with good fog
eke Dautdandhisme inthe bepgthoftheroc- that thou baft done bnto me this dap. And now
kes, bere toploc gootcs remapne. 3 beholde, ¥ wot wellthatthou balt bekpnge, `
Ano hecametothefiockeg of bepeinf wap andbat tthe kbpngvome of Afrael ihalbe ftablit-
And Haul went intoa caue tocoucr his fete. ped in thpne bande. | | :
And Dauid and his men remapned in thein- sp wearenow therfore bntome bp the Lord
twarde partes of the cane. that thou halte not deftrope my feed after me,
45 __ andtbemen of manit fayd ontobim:fe,the andthat thou halt not put myname out ofm
pape is come, of which the Lozde fapd wnto the fathers boule. And Dauid {ware bnto Haul:
Beholde, J wll delpuerthyneennempesinto and aul went home. wut Dautd and bis më
thpne band, and thou alt do tobpm agitpal gatthem vp vntoanbotoe. ane


d locked mein thpne ban-


eee
+ t


2


a


ge. prt


a


C The.rrv.Chapter.
cs En ipet into che mpl:


Jre mt A * Samuel dped, and althe


Uw, Jtatlites gathered togrtber, €
EAN lamented bpm, and burped bpm
F NA NE Gin bis owne bouleat Ramas
í 0 SY And waurdarole,andgathym
Fat Soe ps tothe wylderne fie of Poara nd
tbere was a man in oan whofe pofielia twag
in Carmel, and the man was ercedpng mighty
¢ bad thze thoufade thepe,¢athouland gootes.
And be was therpnge bis Hepe in Carmel:
The name ofthe man wag Rabal, and the
name of big wpfe was Abigail, and the wasa
womai of fpnguler wpfoome , and beautifull,
Wut the man was churlpih, and of (zeude con-
dicions, and was ofthe kpnred of Caleb. And
Dautd herd in the wildernellep Mabal did there
bys Depe. And Dauid {ent out ten ponge men
and pd opto alt 2 et pou Dpto Carine! and
goto Nabal,andagretebim inmpname. And
thus pall pe fap:peace beto the, peace be tothp
boufe, afd peace be bnto all that thou bafk.2e-
bolde, Y baue berde faye, that thou batkwerers,
FLow thp Hhepherdes were with vs ov cin ehe wpi-
venete and We Dpdthemnolppte, neither was
there oughtexcocthe tocke) mpi nganto thbemal
the whple thep were tnarmel:atkethpladdes
andtbhep wpll hewe p. :
men fpnde fanonr inthpneepes(fo2 we come in
a food feafon and «qpue Y prape the, whatio-
euce commeth to thyne bande vnto thp feruaun
fe3,and to thp fonne Dauid.

And when Dauids pounge mencame,tdep
tolde Nabalal thole wozdesin the name of pa
nid, ¢ thenDeldethepz peace And Nabalantwe
red Maurdsleruatites,efayd: what is Dauds
and wobat isthe fonne of Flat 2 there is plentpe
of (fruauntes nowe a dapes, that beeake awap
everp må from bis matter. Sbal 3 thé takemp
breed, mp water g mp filele that J hauekpiled

foz mp berers, tapue it winto më whom F wot
not whencetbep be? Jnd fo Dautds kruaŭtes
turned thep2, wape and wentagapne,andcame
andtolbdebym allthofetbpnges. And Dauid
fapd nto his men:gp2de evuerp man bis fwerde
About dim. And they girded enerp ma hisfwerd
abouts bpm : and Dauid was gpzded with bys
ftverde. And there folowed Dauid Vpo a fourg
Hundzed men, and twobundzed abode bp the
Guffe. ut one of the laddes tolde Abigail Ma-
bals wpfe, fapinge: Seholde, Dauid lente mef
fengers bnto ourmaffer out of tbe wyldcrneffe
to lute bpm, and hberapled onthem.andpet

men are very qood Hnto VS, and dpd Vs no dil
pleafure, neptber mpfled we anp thpng aslige
as we wWereconuerlaunte with them , oben we
were tn the felbes. Thep were a wall of defence
nto vs both bp npabt and dave, all the whple
toe Were with them keppna Hepe: Mowe ther-
foze take bede andie what thou bat todoo, foz
therets an occafion of eupll qpuenagapntt our
malter and all bis houtpolde, feing he isa fonne
of 25elial Wugrations to lpraketo. Then ht-


iLZynaes.


iliberforeletthbelepong Ho


Gail made bafe andtokstwo bundzed loues,¢
tWabottels of wpne, and fpue Hepe redyp oef-
ied, and fpue meatures of parched cozne, and an
Hundzed Eraples of replpnges, and two bed
topntttcs of fpyaqes, andladed them onafics,t
fapd ynto her ponge men:qo ye before me. We-
bolde, Fcome after pou. Wut the tolde her huf-
bande Nabal notbyng therof. And as berode
onber affe, thecame p2tuilpe downe the tpde of
the byl and beholde, Danid and his mencame
downeagapntt her,and Hemet them.

And Dauit fapode:in vapne baue Fkepteall D
that this felowe bath in the wildernefie, fo that
nougbt was myffed ofall that pertepned vnto
bym. and be bath qupte me eet fo2 rood. oF
fo Do God Vnto the enempes of Danid, ify leue
ofall that pertepnethto bpm, by the vpi fin
ofthe dape any tbyng that pyilcthagapntt the
wal. And when Abigail faw Dauid, the hated
and lpabted of her afle and fel befoze Danid on
Her face, ¢ bowed ber felfe tothe qrounde, ¢ fell
at bistete and fapd: Let this onbappye deve be
counted mpne, my lorde, € let thpnebadmapde
the ke in thbpne audtentce,and beare the wo2d of
regarde jar vntbzpftie man Pabal: forzashps
naine ts, {ots be: Mabalts big name,andfolpis
with bym. Wut F thpne bandemapde {awe not
the ponge men of mp lozde whom thon fentelt.
Jow thetfozemp lozde, asfure as the Lozdlp=-
ucth,€ as thy foule lpucth, the Lozd bath with-
holden the from coming to Hedbloude, g with-
dzate thou thpn bande from blondhed. Nowe
J peape God, that thyneenempes €thep that in
tende fo domp lozde cupll, mapebeas Rabal. Œ
And now this ig the blefipng which thpne had-
mapbde bath brought onto my lozd,¢ let ithe ap
wen Duto the pongemen, that folowe mp lorde.
Forgpue the treipatie of thpne handmapoe, foz
the Lorde wpll make mp lozde a fure pouk, bp
caufe mp lozde fighteth the battayles off Lod
and there conlde noneeupll befounde in the in
allthy dapes. And pfanp man rple to perfecute
the,andtofekethp foule , the foule of mp lozde
fhalbe bounbde asinthe bondell ofthe lpupng ub
the Lorde thy Sod. And the foules of thpne ene
mipes thal God caff out, eué as out ofthe mpdle
of a Apna. And woben the Lorde pall bane done
fo my lozde alltbe good tpe bath prompfed tbe,
and (hall haue made the ruler ouer Ffrael : then
(hall tt be nodecaye puto the, noz difcourage of
berte pntomp lorde, that thou batt not theadvde
bloube cauleleffe, 102 auenced thp felfe.

wut when the Lozde fhall baue dealt wel
my lozde, then thpnke on thpne bandemapde.
And Dauid apd to Abigatibleficd be the Lozde
God of Fracl, which fent the thts dape tomete
me. Wleledis thp fapinge, and blefled arte
thou, wobiche balk kept methis dape from com-
mpnge fo (Hed bloude, and from auengyng mp
felfe with myne owne hande. Jozin Verp Dede,
asfureas the Lo:d Gon of Jirael lpucth, which
hath kept me backe feom burtpuge the , ercepte
thou paddelt bafted and met me,thpnkelk thou,
there bab oen left ynto Rabal bp the daw npn

of tye


$O,trT,


phebandmayde.Let not mp lozdecx (be konse) #4


Saul


ij te, teb


of the dape,a ppieragapnite the walls And fo
Dauidreceyucd of berhand that which the bad
broughebym, and fapde to Per : goo Mp ti peace
totbpne boufe. Bebolde, J bau Herd typ Yopie
and baue accepted thp perfon. . att

S And Abhigailcameto Rabal: and beboloe, be
belde a featt in bisboule, ip ke the feaft ofa kyng
and Mabals bert was merp within him, for he
was berp dzonken. i perfore (He told bpm no-
thpnge , nepther leflenoz moze, bntyll the mo-
cowe dape. utin the moznpng when the wine
was goone oute of Rabal, his wyte tolde dpm
thofe wo2des,and bis berte dped within bym,¢
he became as a fone. Bud bpona ten Dapesat-
ter, the Lozdefmote Rabal, that be dyed. And
when Danid bearde, that Rabal was deed, de
fapo: Wlefled be the ao that path tudged the
caute of mp rebuke of the bande of Nabvall, and
hath kept bis feruaunt from eupll, andbhathre-
compenten the wickennefle of Rabal, vpon btg
ownebeed. And Mauidientto commune with
Abigati:to thintétto take ber to bis wpfe. And
when the fernauntes of Dautd were come to
Abicail toCarmel, they (pake Ynto ber, faping
 Dauiolent vsto the, totakep to bis wpfe. And
foe arolt bowed her felfe onber face to p erth,
and fapd: beholde, let thp bandemapde be a fer=
uatit,to wath p fect ofthe {eruaites of mp lor


And Abigail batted, andarole, andgather vp


pponanalle, withfpue damelels of bees , that
ment at ber fect and the went after the mefien-
gers of Danid, and became bis wife. Danid al-
fo toke à binod of Jesrael, and thep were both
bis wiues. But Haul gauex Bichol bis dough
fer wauids wyfe , to Pbaltt the Lonne of Laig,
whiche was ot Sallim:
EThe.rrvj. Chapter.
Chau Cepeth in bis tent, and Danit taketh a:
tpar bis (pearcand a crute of water that tode
at bis bee,


Pacey He stphitescame Duto Saulto Gi-
oy Bees bea, faptnge: Dot) not Dautd ppde
| bow. bpm felfein P bpl of Achua which is
Wee before Jefpinon? Saularofe,and
ee ente Downe to the wylderneffe of
sipb, bauyng thze thoulande chofen menof Ji
racl with bym fog to feke Dauidin the wplder=
anh b.And Haul pytchedin the byl of J-
chila w
(pde: Wut Dauid oweltm the wilbernefle. And
be fawe that Saul came after bpm into the wil
Derne Ne. Dauid therfore ent ont pres, and tn-
berftode that Saul was come in werp dede.
And Dautdarole came tothe place where
Saul had pytched, and Dauid bebelve the place
where Daullape, and Abner che forne of Per
which wasbischefecaptapne.Daullap with-
in and the people ¢ the booftround about bim:
‘Thé anfwered Dauid, and pake to Abimelech
the Pethite and toa btiat the fonne ofsaruia €
bzotber to Joab, fapinge : wo wyll go Downe
with me to Saul tothe books And Abilat {apo
 Jwpligodowne with tbe. |
~ Bnd fo Dauid and Abiit came downe top
peoplebpupaht. Andbebolde, Saullape fle-
ppnge wttburrbe poot, and bistpeare ache ur


iLSamuel.


Ipeth before Felimonbp the wapes


the groundeat bis deed. wut Abner and the peo
ple lap rounde about bpm. Then fayt bifat to
Dauid: God path delpuered thyne enemype inta
tbpne bande thisdaye. Mowe therfore letme
fmpte bym ones withmy fpeare totbeerth and
FJ wplinot(mpete bpm the feconde tyme, And
Dauid fapde to bilat: oerope hynt not. Foz
wbocanlape bis bande onthe Lobes annopti=


ted, and be gpltleffes And Danid lavde furthers
1102e:a8 {uce asthe Lorde lpucth:p Lozve ial =


impte bpm 02 bis dape iall come to dpe : 02 be
fhalldefcende into battaple,and thereperpth.
@he Lorde kepe mefromlaping mpne dand
bps ý Logdes antopnted. Wut rake thou nowe
the fpeare tbat is at bis Deed, ethe crule ofwa-
ter, glet bs go. And fo Dautd toke the fpeare €
the crule of water from Sauls berd g thep gat
them awape,and noman awe it, oz markedit
0? awaked. ffozthep wereall afleve, bpcaute g
Lozde bad {ent a deed Nepe vponthem. Then
Wautd went ouer into the other fpog and Lode
onthe toppe of an byl afarce of(d great pace be-
inge betwene them jand Dauid cried tothe peo
ple,andto Abner the fonne of Ner fapttig: Hea-
ce thou not Abner! Abner anfwercd, and iapa
tbat atte thou tbatcrpelEtothe kyuges And
Duid apd to Abner:art not thou a ma:¢ wha
isipkethein Glracl ¢ i berfore then halk thou
not kept thp lozd the kpngs Jeo: there cane one
of the folke in to deftrop the kynge thy lorde. FE
ig not qoopp thou batt done. Astrnlpasp Low


Ipueth, *«peare wo:thp to dpe, bpcaule pe DAUE ireg.rr.e


not kepte poure matter the Lozdes annopnted.
Aud nowe e wherethe kyngeslpeaceis, g the
crufe of water that was at bis peed. %


And Haul buewe Dauids vopce, andfapde D ai
xis tbistbp bopce mpfonne Dauid g Daniy rerriga


fapd:itisinp bopce, mplozde, D&png. And be
fapd: wherfoze Doth mp 107d thus perlecute bis
feruatit:fo2 what baue J donero; what euyi is
inmpne bander Rowe therfore let mp lozde the
kpnge bearc the wozrdes of bis leruaunt. Pi the
Lozde hanclpsred the bpagapnfteince,lethpur
{mell the fauour ofa facrifpce. Wut and pf thep
be the chplozen of men, cucied be they before the
Lorde. $02 they hanecat me ont this dape fro
abpopnge in fhe enberttaunce of the Lord, fap-
ing:bence:and qo erue otber goddess. ow ther
fozelet notmypbloude fall to the carth befoze D
face of the Lord. Fo: the tyne of Flraclis come
out to bunta iye, as whë one dot) bunt a par-
trpge tn the mountapues. Then fapde Haul: Fy
baue fpiuned:comeagapne mp fonne Dauid, f0?
J wll do the nomoze parme, bycanfe mp foule
was peectous tn thyne epes thisdape.wSebalde,
3 haueplaped the foole,¢baue erced ercedingly


nd Dauid anfwered, and fapde: Webolde the —


kpnaes (peare, let one of f ponginen come ouer,
and fet tf. Che Lode rewarde etierp man accor
byngetobisryabteoufnetle andfayth: fo2 the
Lopde delpuered theinto mp bande this daye,
but J wolde notlapempne bande bpon p Lor-
Desannopnted. And beholde, lphe as thy lyfe
was moche fet by thisdaye inmpne cyes:[o be
my lyfe tet bp intheepes of the a i nh Dez

puer me


Paud


-


cd


BAU
Lpuer me oute of all tribulation: Then Saul
fapde to Danid: Wlefled art thou my onne Da-

uid, fo? thou ibalt bea doer, and preuaple.
, And fo Dauid went bis way, and Haul tur


ned to his place agapne.
„ €The.rrvy.Cbapter.
|e Sew Dauid fipeth to gedis kpnge of Seth.
A EEA MD Dauid fapdin bis hert: 3 hall pe-
A karye one dape o2 other bp the bandeo


(Saul. Therfoze ig there notbpyng bet-


futhelanbde of the jabtlifftines, and Saul Mall

ceafle , and ieke me nomozetn all thecooftes of

è Jfrael, and fo Hall J efcape oute of his bande.

: And Dauid atole, andhe andthe fpre Hundzed
men that were with bpm went puto Achis the
fonne of Hacho , spnge of Geth. And anid
Dwell with Achis at Geth, both be and his më,
eucrp man with bis Doutold, and Dauid with
bis two wpues :Abinoam the Jesrabelite and
Abigail Mabals wpte of Carmel,

2 Andit was told Saul that Dauid wag fled
to Geth, and he fought nomozefo2 bym. And
Daud lap vnto Achis:DEF baue now founde
grace intbpne epes, let tbemgpue mea placein

ome towne inthe feldes,p J mape dwel there.

Jo: why thoulde thy feruaunt dwelin tbebecù
cytie ofthe kpngdome with the: Then Achis
gane bin sikleg that fame dap, fo? which caufe
zikleg pertepneth vntothe kynges of Juda wn-
totbis dap. And the tyme that Daud dwelt in

© the countepe of tbe Pbilttines, was four moo-
nethesandcertapneda pes. And Dautd and his

men weut wp andranne vpon the Gelurites, P

rd ede andthe Amalekites : E0? thole naci-

ong


3 were from the begynntng the enbabitours
' - ofthe lande,asinen co to Sur, vnto theland of
Eqppt. And Dauid mote the land, and left net
a tber manno: womanalpue , and Drouncawape
the thepe, the orë, the aties,camels, and clothes
andretarned g came to Achis. And Achis fapd:

=p where hdue pebene aroupige this dip: ¢ And

Daud anfwered: T ovarde the fouth of Juda,

and towarde the fouth of the Jesrabelites,and
totoarde the fouth of the Renites. And Dauid


faued neither ma noz woman alpuc,no2fuftced
themtocometo Geth, fo: feare(fapcetD he) lett tog


F


they hulde telon vg, faying:fo dpd Dauid, anv the


fo wpl be bis manerall the whple be divclietbin
the cofitrie of P Pbilitines. And Achis belencd
Dauid, arog z abhozreth bis people of FF
rael, and therfoze De Halbe mp {eruaitt foz euer.
CThe.rrvitt.chapter.
| : CEbePhilitines moue warre agapnl Saul,
' which feketh after an enthaunter.
SNH MD it chauncedin thoe dapes, that f
eH Dbilifiines qathehed thep2 booft to-
sl cepther to warre, to fight with Frael
= Ese np Achis apo earns aoe
thou thalt xo out with me to tye baftayie, ou
pe Dy nen that are with tbe. And Dauid fapd
to Achis: tben thou Halte knowe what thp fer-
uauntcan do. 2nd Achis fayde agape to Da=
uid: Then FJ wll maize che Beper of mp heed foz
ires rea ener. *Samuclwasthen deed, andall Zirael


L ZAynges,


t yer bp Dreames. And t
_ that thou mape tell me what 3 hhalldo. Chen


ad i
SLOPE,
bad lamented ppm ,andburpedhym in Rama
His ovone cptie. * And Saul had put the womë er-rrtte
that bad {ppzites of propbecpe æ the fothiapers
Out ofthe lande. And the Wbtliftines gathered
togither, andcame,and pitchedin Sunem: And
Daul gathered al Fivael tog pther, and thep pit
ched in Gilboa: Jnd when Soul lawe the hook
of tbe bilttines, be was afraped,and his hert
woas loze aftonped. And when HSanlatkev cot
laple of the Lozde: the L020 anfwered bym not
nictther bp Deeames no: bp Uzim, woz pet bp p20
phetes. Chen lapd Haul vnto bis (eruauntes:
xleke mea woma that bath a {ppztte of pzophe-
cpe, that Jmape goto her, ¢ afke of ber. and bis =" Fo
feruauntes fayd tobpm:%Bchold, there is a wo-
man that bath a {pyrite of prophecy at Endoz.
And Saul chaunged byn felfe , and put on
otberrayment, andtbhen went be and two men
with him, and they came to the woma bp night
Andhelapd:prophec pe ynto me by the {ppaite,
and bepnge me bpm vp whom F Hall name vn
tothe. and the oma [apd nto bpm: Sepold,
thou knowl what Saule bath doone , botoe
be bath deftropedthe women that bad prophe-
cpinge (pyzetes, ethe forcercrs out of the lande.
UWiherfore then feket thou an occaflonagaynt
mp foule, that be map kil me? Bnd Haul {tare
to ber bp the Lozde,faping: As furclp as p Lo
jai there Hal no barmechaunce the fo: thig
thynge. Then fapd the oma: whom thal F fet
bp wntother be aniwered: Szyna me vp Ha:
muel. Tbe the woma fame Samuel, the crped
witha lode bopce, and fpake to Haul: faping:
why bat chou difcepucd merfo2 thou art Saul
And the &pnge fapde puto ber: be not afrayed.
Ubat {cet thour Che woma {apd ynto Saul:
Jle qondesalcendpnae bp out of the earth. He
fapde dnto Der agapne: what faffton is be of?
Se anltocredD: there cometh vp an olde manw
amantel bpon bpm. And Saul percepucd that
it was Samuel,and he ouped with his face to
the ground and bowed bpm felfe. and Samuel
faypd to Haul: whp ball thou dilfqupetedme,te
makeme be bzounht bp? Sanulanfwered:y ant
fore encombzed. Eo: the abiltftines make war


agapnt me, € Godis departed frome, and anf-


ereth me nomio2e, ne seth bp prophetes nep-
erfoze F Daue calledthe


le the Lozde is gone frothe: and ig become
thyneensmpes Crulpethe Lozde bath done foz
bpm lelfe,enenas be pake bp mp pande. * Foz &res-re.t

the Lozde bath rent the yngdorne ont of thpne
bandt, gpuenit = pobboure Daud, p=
cani thou obevede not tbe poypce of the Lo2d,
nozerecutedit bis fearce wath pponthe Ama-
le&ptes, thertoze bath the Lagde done this wn
tothe this dape. nd mozcoucr,the Lozde wy ll
Dclpuer Flrael with the into the Handes of the

Pon *Tomozowe Halte thou and thp ire. resis
onnes be with me, and the 20200 al qpuethe
Hoolt of Firacl into tbe bandes of the paviluttt-
nes’ Theu Haul fell ftrepghdt wape fat on the
eattiaslougeasie wag, and was aia adra :
piaule


oh Samuel: wherfore doe thou alke of me,
woy


Saul


bycaute of the wordes of Samuel: |
D And there was no frength inbym , for be
Hadeaten no bzeedall the Dape and the npgbt be
fo2e. And the woman came ynto Saul, q fa we
that be was foze troubled, and fapde vntobym:
Ee, thpue handemapde bath obeped thy bopret,
gunsia and *baue put mp foulemmpne pande, bauc
ree rina Derbend wnto thy wordes which thou fapdelt
puto me: owe therfore hearken thou allo vn-
tothe vopce oftbpue Dandmayde, and let me fet
amopzfellofbzecd befoze the that thou mapelte
eateandaet the ftrength, and then goo on thy
iournepe. He refuled, and fayde: J wpl not cate:
Wut bys feruauntes andthe woman togpther
compelledbpm, andbedearkened wuto thep2
popce. And fo he arole from the earth, and late
pym ona bedde. The woman hada fat calfe in
theboute,and the bated andkplledit,and toke
floure and kneden it, and dpd bake fwete cakes
thereof and bzougbt them before Sauland be=
fo2e bis {eruauntes. And when they Had eaten,
thep tode vp, and went awape the lame night


CThe.rric.Chapter


C Daud gorth with kpage Achis to fade
agaput Saul.


IU, ; an


art a


went fort with the bundzedes andthonlandeg


chig. Then fapde the lozdes ofthe Whilitines:
are Ja ponder Hebsuces Achis apd pntotie


torbisdape. 3
were woth with bym , and fapde Vnto ppm:
{Pake this felotoe returne, that be mape goaa?
gapne to bis pe wbichethou bat appopnted
hym not godow

taple teft in the battaptebe be


25


Crerbiii.e fangen DaUNces: * Saul fluc dt
Erri,


the lozdes of the Pbiliffines fauoure the not.
€Liberfore note retourne, and go peace, that


í. Samuel.


- Helo, wherea parte of them abode. Wut Daz


Angell oF God. Q otwithfandpng, he lozdes
of the Pbiliftines baue fayd: Let bym not go Vp
with vs to battaple. Wiberfozre nowe, rple vp
eatlpcin the mognpnge with tby matters fers
uauntes that are come tothe : and whe pe be Dp
carlpe(as foone ag ye paue lpgbt)departe. and
{o Dauid and his menrole vpcarlye to departe
in the moznpnge,and toretourneintothelande
ofthe Wbilikines, Andthe Ppiliflines wte
ppto selradel, E


CThe.rrr.Chapter:


C Daum returupnge from kenge Achis,€pndeth
sikicg burnt, .


Fewer Cut when Dauidand bisme were y


"i


geat buf fiue not
them sand went


_ But Dauid tokea good courage tohpmin


the Lozbde bis God, and fapte to Abiatharkhe “er?


*


them, andrecouer the pape.
40 Dauid and the fyre Dundzed men that ©
were with bym , wente, anDdcame to the rpuer


Tag Ta


mas and foure Dundzed men folowed: Joz tivo
 þundzedabode behpnde, beinge to werpe to go
onertherpuer efor. And thep founde an Egi-
ptianinthefelde, and brougbte ppm to Maury,


x and gaue bym beecbde to eate, and water £0 po. ri.e
depnke, and gaue bynta fewe fpgaes, and two
cluftres ofrepfpnges. And whenbe hadeaten
bis (ppzitecame agapneto bym:fo2 behad ease
no beed, no? Daonke anpe waterin thre Bayes,
andthe npgbtes. And Dauid {apd unto bym:
To whom belongett thous ¢ whence art thou:
he fapde. Jama pongeman ofEgppte andir
uauntto an Amalechite:and mp mafterlefeme D
bebpnte, bycaute itis thee dapes agone that F
fell{vche: we came aroupnge dponthedouth of
Cheetus, and agapntt Juda , and towarde the
fouthof Caleb, And we burnt sikleg with tp.
And Dauid fayde to bim:canft thou beynge me
to thiscompanpe s And pe fapde ; fwocare ae

me bp


.
F
;
f
f-


C
=
a
-a +e am s


aiid


me by God, that thou wylt nepther kylie, nog
Delpuer me into the bandeg of mp mater andy
wyll bzpnge the to the companpe. And when be
bad brought bpm thptbec, vebolde,thep lay tca=


i Aynges,


Moree,


cass] he x jBbtliflines foughteagapntte M
Loo Eset S{racl , andthe men of yirael fie da fPar.r.ag


Hras Wape from the Dbiliftines , and fell
Downe wounded in mount Gilboa.


teredabzode bpontheearth, catpngeandbepn- ~. Aa we AND P PB
kpnae,€ paren , bycaule of the plenteous ¢

great pap p thep had carped away out of plad
of the brltftines, and out of theland of Juda.
- yd Dauidlayed vpon them fromthe euen
‘ontpll thetwylpabt onthe mozowe: fo f there
efcaped nota man of them , faue foure bundzed
ponge men, whiche rode awape bpon camels,
andficdde. And Danidrecouered all that the
Aimaichttcs hadcarped awape, and Dauid re-
{cucd bis two wrnes:fo that there was noper-
tonne of them lackpuge, fmalloz arcat, fonie 02
doughter, 2 of the fpople of all that they Yad ta
Ken aware : Dautldrecouered them allagapne:
And Dauid tokeall the Hepe, and the oren:and
thep dane them before big cattel and fapod:this
is Dauds maye. And Dantd came to the two
pundzed men that were to werpe for to folowe
Daud, whomethey bad made alfo toabpde at
tberpuer Scfoz. And thep came to mete D8-
uid, and the peoplethat were withbym. And
when manutd came tothe people, De faluted thé. p, tt
Then anfwered all the wyckedandthe butheif the Pbtlilines camc,aud dwelt in them, «On Sa |
tes ( of the men that wente with Danid, ) and
fapde: bpcaule thep went not with vs, therfoze
topli we gpue them none of the r , that we
paue tecoucred. Wut let eucrp ma tabe his wpfe
andhbischpldzen: Cholelet themcarpe awape
and be walkpnge, ) ren
Then lapde Danid : pe (all not doo fo ( mp hae it inthe temple of thep2 pdols, andamog

F bethzen) with tbat wbhiche the Lode Dathgp- t
uen vs,andbatbpeferued bs, and delpuered


thecompanye that cameagapnite vs, iatooure bodpeontbe wall of Bethan. x When fresi»
_ pandes. f€02 who WHoulde hearken Duto pou in the enjabptours of Jabes in Gilead
er G.c this matters x Wut asbis parte ig that goeth pearde thereof, what the Wili-
TF Sormmeann fpabteth , fo ball bis parte be that fines badde Done to Saul,
tarpethbp p ftutte, that tt map be parted alpke. thep arofe(as manp as
Andfo fromthatdap foreward thas that made ł were Tronge men) t
aftatuteanda lawein Jirael, wntyll this vape: and wëtal night |
= Wiben Danid therfore cametosibleg, Helente and tokethe
ay onCovttes) oF the prape Mutotbe elders of Juda, | — bobye of
g and to bis frenves, fapinge:fe, there iga bletiing Sanl, and thebodyes of bis fonnes, from |
foz pou of tbefpoyle of tye enempes ofthe Lozd the wallof ethfan,% came to Ja-
Ie lent cothem of Wetbel:to them of fouth waz bes, and* burnt thé there,and de.rerlities


moth co them of Zathic: tothem of Aroer: to tokethep2 boncs € buricd | |


them of Hephamoth: to them of Eftbemaa : to thé pndera tree at Za

tbem of Rathel:tothem oftbecptie of Ferab- 3 bcs,anbd faled fe-
meel: tothem of the cptpes of the Renpteg : to () nel Dapes. () 3 |
them of Doma :tothemof wozalan: totbem (2) |


of Atbach:to them Pave tnHebz6, andinal pla
ces where Dauid g hismien were wont to haut. C The ende of the fy2zkbooke of


HPamuel:otherwple cal-


CTbe.rerj.Chapter. ad Ae
y F a. PRR Led the fpzft of tbe
Stee a ta aiviges.


a a E


aiid


me by God, that thou wylt nepther kylie, nog
Delpuer me into the bandeg of mp mater andy
wyll bzpnge the to the companpe. And when be
bad brought bpm thptbec, vebolde,thep lay tca=


i Aynges,


Moree,


cass] he x jBbtliflines foughteagapntte M
Loo Eset S{racl , andthe men of yirael fie da fPar.r.ag


Hras Wape from the Dbiliftines , and fell
Downe wounded in mount Gilboa.


teredabzode bpontheearth, catpngeandbepn- ~. Aa we AND P PB
kpnae,€ paren , bycaule of the plenteous ¢

great pap p thep had carped away out of plad
of the brltftines, and out of theland of Juda.
- yd Dauidlayed vpon them fromthe euen
‘ontpll thetwylpabt onthe mozowe: fo f there
efcaped nota man of them , faue foure bundzed
ponge men, whiche rode awape bpon camels,
andficdde. And Danidrecouered all that the
Aimaichttcs hadcarped awape, and Dauid re-
{cucd bis two wrnes:fo that there was noper-
tonne of them lackpuge, fmalloz arcat, fonie 02
doughter, 2 of the fpople of all that they Yad ta
Ken aware : Dautldrecouered them allagapne:
And Dauid tokeall the Hepe, and the oren:and
thep dane them before big cattel and fapod:this
is Dauds maye. And Dantd came to the two
pundzed men that were to werpe for to folowe
Daud, whomethey bad made alfo toabpde at
tberpuer Scfoz. And thep came to mete D8-
uid, and the peoplethat were withbym. And
when manutd came tothe people, De faluted thé. p, tt
Then anfwered all the wyckedandthe butheif the Pbtlilines camc,aud dwelt in them, «On Sa |
tes ( of the men that wente with Danid, ) and
fapde: bpcaule thep went not with vs, therfoze
topli we gpue them none of the r , that we
paue tecoucred. Wut let eucrp ma tabe his wpfe
andhbischpldzen: Cholelet themcarpe awape
and be walkpnge, ) ren
Then lapde Danid : pe (all not doo fo ( mp hae it inthe temple of thep2 pdols, andamog

F bethzen) with tbat wbhiche the Lode Dathgp- t
uen vs,andbatbpeferued bs, and delpuered


thecompanye that cameagapnite vs, iatooure bodpeontbe wall of Bethan. x When fresi»
_ pandes. f€02 who WHoulde hearken Duto pou in the enjabptours of Jabes in Gilead
er G.c this matters x Wut asbis parte ig that goeth pearde thereof, what the Wili-
TF Sormmeann fpabteth , fo ball bis parte be that fines badde Done to Saul,
tarpethbp p ftutte, that tt map be parted alpke. thep arofe(as manp as
Andfo fromthatdap foreward thas that made ł were Tronge men) t
aftatuteanda lawein Jirael, wntyll this vape: and wëtal night |
= Wiben Danid therfore cametosibleg, Helente and tokethe
ay onCovttes) oF the prape Mutotbe elders of Juda, | — bobye of
g and to bis frenves, fapinge:fe, there iga bletiing Sanl, and thebodyes of bis fonnes, from |
foz pou of tbefpoyle of tye enempes ofthe Lozd the wallof ethfan,% came to Ja-
Ie lent cothem of Wetbel:to them of fouth waz bes, and* burnt thé there,and de.rerlities


moth co them of Zathic: tothem of Aroer: to tokethep2 boncs € buricd | |


them of Hephamoth: to them of Eftbemaa : to thé pndera tree at Za

tbem of Rathel:tothem oftbecptie of Ferab- 3 bcs,anbd faled fe-
meel: tothem of the cptpes of the Renpteg : to () nel Dapes. () 3 |
them of Doma :tothemof wozalan: totbem (2) |


of Atbach:to them Pave tnHebz6, andinal pla
ces where Dauid g hismien were wont to haut. C The ende of the fy2zkbooke of


HPamuel:otherwple cal-


CTbe.rerj.Chapter. ad Ae
y F a. PRR Led the fpzft of tbe
Stee a ta aiviges.


a a E


Dauid


Thre (econde booke of
Hammucl-otherwple called the fe-
conde booke of the ynges.


Tbe fpr Chapter.


€ The lamenttacpon of Dawid fo; Saul and Jonathas,


(arcs ter the death of Saul, when
(Ol A Era Daud was returned from the
sik aa es) ¥ Laughter ofthe Amalekites,
etal ay 4 and bad ben two dapesinstk=
pas ENA’ vailleg. Aebold,therecamea man


Pae Leber le tal Bn E)
. s t
Pog i
pe M E y
r = Ti oja
al viet gt


Cree. fF rent them, and foDpdal the men that were with


- And Danid ape mies the ponge manthat
~ brought bpm theletpopngyes: Ui peceart thon?
And de anfwered: J am the fone of analeaunt
an Amalekite. And Danid {laid nto bim saw
is ttthat thou wai not afraped, tolapethpne
bande on the Lozdes annopated, todebrap him


i. Samuel.


And Danid called one ofbis pongi men, g fapt:
Goto, andrunne Dpon bym, And be more bpm
that be dped, Chen fapde Danid vntobrm:thp
blonde be bpon thpneowne heed. + Wo: thyne
owne mouth path tekifpedagapnt the, faving
3 baue flapne the Lozdes annopnted. |
And Dauid mourned with this lamentation
ouer Haul and ouer Jonathas hisfonne, bad


Daud —


egatriir,
Luke d


tcache thecbplozenof Zfraclthe wleofthebowe
ife


and beholde , itis w2ptten inthe booke

FPTHCOUS.o~ (And helapne:contpoze, O Jfraer there chat
beLcedand wounded bponthp hee belies) D noble Flracl
the woundedare flapne bpon the bplles: Db


Hoe


how are the mpg Be Ouccthzowens #Tellit co ich eo


notin Gath, no? publp (bit inthe tretes of Als
kalon : lefE the Doughters of the Ppttiltines re-
topie,and left the Doughters of the bucircumei-
{ed triumphe. De mountapnes of Gilboa, ppon
pou benepther dewe 02 rapine, no: bpon the fel
des of offepnges. Eo? there the Hplde of f migh
tpe iscat downe:the Milde of Saulas though
bebadnot ben annopnted with sple. The bow
of Jonathas and the fwerd of Haul turned ne-
uct backeagapne emptp, from the blowde of the
flaypne,and fro p fat of the mpabtpe warriours.


Sauland Jonathas were louclpe andplea- wy


fauntcintbepzlpucs, andintbep2 deathes tiep
were notdenpded. Thep were lwpfter then €-
les and ronger tbenlpons. Pe doughters of
fracl wepe oner Haul, whiche clothed pouin
purple, with plealureg, and banged ornamëtes
of golde Dpon ponrapparel. Wow were f migd
tpe apne in battaples Jonathasis deedon the
bye bylles.Uio ts mefo2 the (mp bzother Jona-
thas) bevrpe kpnde Daft thou ben buts me. hyp
louc tome Was wondzefull, paffpng the lore of
WOMEN cH ae a mother lowen ber ovelp chpive,euen fo bin
Flour the. D howe arethe mpghtp ouerthzoweé,
and the weapons of warre deitroped/
CThbe.ij. Chapter: -- ~
Cr auid ts annopnted in Bebon. The battapl of
the Ceruauntes of Dauld and Aloofeth.


Re i fter en rip gn eg a


ra 1 AlkeDd counlaple at the Lozde,
OPM (avinge:(ball 3 go bp into anp of
7 ba VEE the cpties of Jubal And the Lord
ex lapde vnto bpm: go. And Dauid
ay fapDagapne: Whither thal J gor
€0:Cinto Hebzon. And lo Dantd weet
thyther with bis two wpues, Abinoam the Jel
rabelite,and Hbigatl Nabals wpfethe Carme
lite. And the menthat were withbpm,opo Da
nidcarp Ypalfo,'‘enerp man with bis houlpolb.
And they dwelt in the tones of Hebron. And
the mei of Juda caine, andtbere thep annopn-
ted Daud Epngeouer the honle of Juda. And
thep tolde Då
besin Gileadi
ient meflengers bato the men of Jabes tn Gt-
lead, and fapd Vnto them : bleed are pe vntop
Lorde, that pe baue (hewen luche kpndnefle tn-
topourlozde Saul and paueburped ppm. And
no ive the Lorde fhewe mertpe and truthe prio
pou. and Y wpll do pouallo fuche kpndneie as
pe baut done inthis thyuge: Cherfoze po i


a
=


i.ceg. trie


Ute. De


japing: yt ta*the men of Jä- t.eeg, prer
abu ped Saul. And Danid


Dauid


Thre (econde booke of
Hammucl-otherwple called the fe-
conde booke of the ynges.


Tbe fpr Chapter.


€ The lamenttacpon of Dawid fo; Saul and Jonathas,


(arcs ter the death of Saul, when
(Ol A Era Daud was returned from the
sik aa es) ¥ Laughter ofthe Amalekites,
etal ay 4 and bad ben two dapesinstk=
pas ENA’ vailleg. Aebold,therecamea man


Pae Leber le tal Bn E)
. s t
Pog i
pe M E y
r = Ti oja
al viet gt


Cree. fF rent them, and foDpdal the men that were with


- And Danid ape mies the ponge manthat
~ brought bpm theletpopngyes: Ui peceart thon?
And de anfwered: J am the fone of analeaunt
an Amalekite. And Danid {laid nto bim saw
is ttthat thou wai not afraped, tolapethpne
bande on the Lozdes annopated, todebrap him


i. Samuel.


And Danid called one ofbis pongi men, g fapt:
Goto, andrunne Dpon bym, And be more bpm
that be dped, Chen fapde Danid vntobrm:thp
blonde be bpon thpneowne heed. + Wo: thyne
owne mouth path tekifpedagapnt the, faving
3 baue flapne the Lozdes annopnted. |
And Dauid mourned with this lamentation
ouer Haul and ouer Jonathas hisfonne, bad


Daud —


egatriir,
Luke d


tcache thecbplozenof Zfraclthe wleofthebowe
ife


and beholde , itis w2ptten inthe booke

FPTHCOUS.o~ (And helapne:contpoze, O Jfraer there chat
beLcedand wounded bponthp hee belies) D noble Flracl
the woundedare flapne bpon the bplles: Db


Hoe


how are the mpg Be Ouccthzowens #Tellit co ich eo


notin Gath, no? publp (bit inthe tretes of Als
kalon : lefE the Doughters of the Ppttiltines re-
topie,and left the Doughters of the bucircumei-
{ed triumphe. De mountapnes of Gilboa, ppon
pou benepther dewe 02 rapine, no: bpon the fel
des of offepnges. Eo? there the Hplde of f migh
tpe iscat downe:the Milde of Saulas though
bebadnot ben annopnted with sple. The bow
of Jonathas and the fwerd of Haul turned ne-
uct backeagapne emptp, from the blowde of the
flaypne,and fro p fat of the mpabtpe warriours.


Sauland Jonathas were louclpe andplea- wy


fauntcintbepzlpucs, andintbep2 deathes tiep
were notdenpded. Thep were lwpfter then €-
les and ronger tbenlpons. Pe doughters of
fracl wepe oner Haul, whiche clothed pouin
purple, with plealureg, and banged ornamëtes
of golde Dpon ponrapparel. Wow were f migd
tpe apne in battaples Jonathasis deedon the
bye bylles.Uio ts mefo2 the (mp bzother Jona-
thas) bevrpe kpnde Daft thou ben buts me. hyp
louc tome Was wondzefull, paffpng the lore of
WOMEN cH ae a mother lowen ber ovelp chpive,euen fo bin
Flour the. D howe arethe mpghtp ouerthzoweé,
and the weapons of warre deitroped/
CThbe.ij. Chapter: -- ~
Cr auid ts annopnted in Bebon. The battapl of
the Ceruauntes of Dauld and Aloofeth.


Re i fter en rip gn eg a


ra 1 AlkeDd counlaple at the Lozde,
OPM (avinge:(ball 3 go bp into anp of
7 ba VEE the cpties of Jubal And the Lord
ex lapde vnto bpm: go. And Dauid
ay fapDagapne: Whither thal J gor
€0:Cinto Hebzon. And lo Dantd weet
thyther with bis two wpues, Abinoam the Jel
rabelite,and Hbigatl Nabals wpfethe Carme
lite. And the menthat were withbpm,opo Da
nidcarp Ypalfo,'‘enerp man with bis houlpolb.
And they dwelt in the tones of Hebron. And
the mei of Juda caine, andtbere thep annopn-
ted Daud Epngeouer the honle of Juda. And
thep tolde Då
besin Gileadi
ient meflengers bato the men of Jabes tn Gt-
lead, and fapd Vnto them : bleed are pe vntop
Lorde, that pe baue (hewen luche kpndnefle tn-
topourlozde Saul and paueburped ppm. And
no ive the Lorde fhewe mertpe and truthe prio
pou. and Y wpll do pouallo fuche kpndneie as
pe baut done inthis thyuge: Cherfoze po i


a
=


i.ceg. trie


Ute. De


japing: yt ta*the men of Jä- t.eeg, prer
abu ped Saul. And Danid


— Pauw


LJ


Te


å


£
ain, Da.
T


Ti


D


Fo: Abner and the menof


€
©


-ÉSTRE


pour andes be tronge, andplape petbe men:
Sor poure mater Haulis deed. Andthep that
ave of Y boule of Juda baue anopnted me byny
ouer them. Wut Abner the fonne of Rer $ was
captapne of Sauls bool toke Jihotetd p fonne
of Sauland brought bym to Mahanaim, and
mabe hpi kpnge ouer Gilead, and over the Als
{urites,and oner Jefrabel , Ephraim, WenJa=
miy and over all Zlrael. and 4[boleth Saules
ine wasfourtye pere olde when he began to
it Se ouer Flrael,andraigned two pere. But
the Doule of Juda folowed Dauid. * And F time
Lobich Daut rapgned in Hebzon oner the Houle
Of Juda was fenë pereand (pre monetheg, And
Abner the tonne of Per, andthe feruauntes of
BHlholcth the fonne of Saul went out of Baba
naiin,toGibecon, And Joab the fonne ofsaruia
and the feruauntes of Dauid wente oute , and
mict tycm by the poole of Gibeon. And they late
Dowie, he one on the one {yde of the poole, and
tie of lev on the other fpde. Aad Abner fapde to
3048: let the ponge men apie, and plape before
YS: Bud Joab (apd: Let themarple, When there
arolcand went oucr, twelue of Wen Jamin bp
1ombee, which pertapned to Alboleth the fonne
of Saul, andtwelue of the feruauntes
uid. And enerp one caught bisfelowe( that cam
agapnll him) bp the Heed, andtpzukk bis twerde
in bps tpode, and fo they fell Downe togpther.

Ciiperfoze the place was called: Che felde of
the mpabtpe. And itis in Gibeou.And there be
Sananercedpnge cruel battaple that fame dap.


FZlracl, fell befoze

the feruauntes of Dauid: AE
“Lind there were ap fonnes of sarutah there:
Sab, Bhifai,and Alabel. And Afabel was as
ipgbt on footeasa wyldereo, and Alabel folo-


> Serrit woed Aftce Abner and *tourned nepther të the


rpght pande noztotheleft, from Abner: Chen
Abuerloked bebpnde ppm, and fapde: art thou
Afabelsipe aunfwered:pea, that Zam. Abuer
fapde:turue the epther to therpabte bande o: to
the left,andcatche one of the ponge men, ¢ take
the bis pede a Masa Afahel wolde notdepart
from ppm. And Abner fapde aqapne to Afabel:
departe fro me. Ci berfoze Hulde 9 finpte the to
thegrounde , andnot bepable to bolde vpmp
face to Zoabtppbzotbhers owbeit , whenbe
wolde i nowple Departe, Abner with the bpi-
dreende of the fpeare finofe bym Dnoder » the
Mozte rpbbes, that thefpearecame out bebinde
bym : that pe fell Downe inthe fame place, and
Dyed there. Andasinanpeascameto the place
Where Afabel fell Downe and dped, ftode pll,

Joab alloand bilai folowed Abner. Andthe
Tunne went Downe , when thep were come to p
bril Ama that lpeth before Glah, bp the wape
that goeth thozowe the wplodernefie of Gibeon
Aundthechplogen of WenJamin gathered them
{elucs togpther on an beape, to bner , and
tode ontbetoppe ofanbpll. ChenAbnercal-
led to Joab anè fapde:fhall the fwerde denoure
tyll fo2 eucrsnoweft thou not, thatit well be
bytternefle tu the latter ende/bow longe Hallit


be,o2 (hou bpd the peoplereturne fb folowinge -


liLBynges,


of Da- |


Godlpucth, pf thou haddelk not {poten in the
moning, the people bad ben departed en ery one
from perlecutynee bis bzotber.
blewe a trompet , andall the people tode ftpll,
and purfued after Ffrael nomoze, nether fought
thep anp moze.And Abner andhismen walken
all chat upght thozowe the plapne: and wente
ouer Jordan, and palt thozowe all Wethbozon
tyllthep came to abanaim,

And Joabreturnedfrom perfeeutpng Ab=
ner. Bnd woben he hadgathered all the people
togptbher, there lacked of Dautds fernauntes,
npnetene men, and Afabel. ut the feruauntrs

auld had flapne of Ben Jamin, and of Re
nersinen, thze bundzedandthzefcore men. And
thep tobe vp Alabel, andburyed bpm in tpe fee
pulchee of Pts father in Bethlehem. And Joab
and bigs men Wentallnpght, wntil the danning
ofthe dape and came to Bebzon.
CThetij.Cbapter:


Cätnercommeth to Dauid and bipngeth hom bis


Fe | were wag longe warre betwene the y
4| fy Boule of Saul, and the boule of Då-
Ka uid. ut Dauid wared roger and
== ffronger, and the boufe of San! waz


red weakerand weaker. x And vnt Dand {pa die.


Mhereon ore ehpldzen bone in Hebzd : bis clock
fonne alfo was Ammon , of Xbinoam the Jes-
tabelite:P leconded beleab of Abigail the wife
of Rabal the Carmelite:the thyade Ablalom,$
fonne of Baachah the doughter of halmat,
the iynge of Gellur: the fourth, Adonai the fon
of hagith:the fpytth, Sepbatia thefonne of J-
bital: the fprth, Jethaeam, bp Egla Dauids
rope. Thele were borne to Danid in Hebzon.
Andit foztuned, that whple there was warre
betwene the Doute of Saulandthe houle of ma
uid, Abner belde Vp the poule of Haul. And 35
Saul Had acdcubine named Rispa, thedDough-
ter of Abia. Aud Fboleth fapdto Abner: wher
fote batt thou gone into mp fathers concubine?
Then was Abner derye woth fo2 the wordes


of Bboleth, ¢fapd:Am F not ax dorges heed, trerbit.e |


which agapntt Juda do thewe mercpe thig dap
bntothe Doute of Saul thy father, andtobps
beetheenandfrendes , and baue not delpuercd
the tntothe bande of panidsandthoufpndetta


fault tn me this dape Foz this womar*o and te


fo Doo Godto Abner. Horas the Lozde hath
fwogne to Dautd, fo topll Jbeonbis{poe, to ~
bipuge the bpngdame fromthe houfe of Saul,
that the se of Mauid mape be fablpithed `
ouer Frael, and ouer Juda, euenfrom Dan to
weerleba. Andhecouldeqpue Abner neuer a
wode Coanlwere, bpcaufe he feared bpm.

And Abner {ent meffengers to maui fecret- C
lp, faptige:tibole is thelanves Wakea bonde
with me,and beholde, mpne bandeis withthe,
tobzpneaeallZ%acl pntothe: Helapoe: Ftig
good, that 3 make a bonde withthe. Wut one
thpng F requyze of the, that thou fe not my face
except tpou fpr beynge Srp ol Sauls dongh
ter wen thou comme to fe me. t ie

iH


Wol.reriit,


thep: becthren? And Joabfapne: astrulpeas G


And fo * Joab fires. reg


Abner ií, Samuels ‘Blboleth


D And David fente meflengers to Jfbofeth

ap Saulsfonne, faping:*deliuer me mp wife Wi

FPOS chol which J marped with + an bundzed foze-

aie Capnnes of the pbilttines. And Zlbofeth fnt,

TENDS oun toke ber from per hufbandex Paltiel p for

of Lais. And ber dufbande went with ber , and

came weppng bebpnde ber,tpltbep came to 254

burim. Then fapd Abner onto bpm: go andre

turne. And be returned. And Abner had comu-

nicacpon with the elders of Firacl, fapinge : pe

fought fo2 Dauidintpmes pak, that bempayt

be pourkpuge. Mowe then dort-for the Lorde

bath faye of Dauid: Wp the bande of my fers

aunt Dautd 3 wpll faune mp people Fral out

of the baudes of the DyiliTines, awd out of toe

Haude ofallthepzenemypes. And Abner [pake

in the cares of Benyamin, and wente totellin

the cares of Dauidin Bebzon All that Firacl

was content with, andthe whole bouie of wen

jamin. And fo Abnercanre to Dauta to eb}

upnge fyocntpe men with bpm ,and Dauid

madebpm and themen that were with bpm a

fat. And Abner {apde vitto DWanid:J wpll vp

and qogatber all Zirael vnto my Lorde f vides
thatthep mape make an appopntement wit

the : and chat thou mapeft commaundeall, a3

topne berte delpzetp. And when Dautd bad let

Abner departe, be wentinpeace.

E And beholde, the feruaunteg of Danidand

© Joabcame fröckafng the robbers,¢ brought a

great pay w them. Mut bner was Rot w D4

uid in Hebzon: for he had lent hym awap todt

partein peace, When Joabandall the hoofte

that was witb bim werecome, men told Joab

faping: Abner the forne of Mer cameto f kpng

and be bath fent bpmawape, that beis gone tn

peace. Then goad caine to the kyng, and fapde:

what haf thou vone’ Wepolde, Abner came ptt

fotbe, ¢ why bat thou tent bymaway, that be

Mulde efcape qupterTbon kuowelt Abnec the

fone of Rer, fo: be came to difcepuethe,and to

knowe thy outgoing ngotnge,and foknowe

al thou Doct. Jud when Joab wascome out

frö Dantd, de (et mefléqers after Abner, which

brought bim agayne from p wel of Diria Dn-

knowpngeto Dauid. And wien Abner has

come agaptte to Heb26, Joab toke hun alpde in

Zov.ig.c the gate *f0 (peake with bpm ieceretlp,¢ mote

“pin onder the Mozte epbbes , $ be Dyed: fo? the

bloube of Afabel Dis bzother. And whenafter=

qardcit caine to Danidseare, be apie. FF mp

qE kyngvom are gyltlefic before tbe Lorde forener

tcerninge P bionde of Abner the fonne of Per.

Let the biouderemapne on p beed of Joab, eon

all bis fatbers boufe, $ the boule of Foab be ne-

ter without one o2 over P hat) runnpug ifues

o2lepze,andp leaneth ona (taffe,andyp doth fal

onp werde, €lacketh beecdD. Bnd the caute why

oavand Abilai due Abner, was, that Abner

avega pad Mayne thep2 brother Afabel at Gibeon tn

> pattaple: Ynd Danid fapde to Joab, andtoall

iced. the Nie that were with bpm. + Rent youre

clothes, and put on fackecloth, and mourne be-

fore Abner. And kynge Dauidhym eife tolo

wed the coozle. And when theburyed Abnevin


Heb2on, the kynge lpft vp his vopce, and wept
befpde the fepulcde of Abner, and fo dpd all the
people, Andthe kynge lamented ouer Abner,
and fapd:dped Abner as afoolepyethsthp ban-
des were not bounde, no? thy fete bzought into
chepnes: butaga man falleth befoze wrecked
childzen,{o fallet thou. Andall thep that were
of the people wept pet moze oter ppm, i

And when all the people came tocatemeate G
wh Dauid whple tt was pet bap, Dauid (ware,
fapinge: Soandfodoo Godtome , pf ztatte
beeed,o2 ought elstiltbe inne be dawne. And
the people wpfteit, andit pleafed tbem. Ana
whatloecuer the bpnge dpd,tt pleafedalthe peo
ple.4€o2 all the peopleand al Ffrael tndertode
that vaye, bow that it was not the kinges dede
that Xbner che fonne of Mer was flapne. And
theapnge fapde vnto bis leruaunt:s:snowe pe
not, bow that there isa lorde anda greate man
fallentbig dapin Jiraci And Jam thig dap të-
de t anaopnted kpng. And thefe men the Cones
ofsaruta be to bard foz me. Tibe Lozerewarde
the doer of cupll accozdpng to big wpckednef{e,

CThe.tiij. Chapter Ena
Eana h and Mechab Clape Rlooteeh theronne of Haut.
T Hen Sauls fonneheardethat Abe F
TAIA Kner was deed in Hebzon , bis ban-
eG | eee Des were feble, anid all the ¥fraelt=
Ay S | tes were afraped: and Sauls fon


Ipuetb:which bath delpucrizd mp foute out of al °
abduct fitics:


k


5
— m
as =
eel


| disreg.i.c


firepit


i.par.p.a


d


2 Chekpyngealfoandbhismen wentto Fern- i


adueriities: When one ¥tolde me, and {apd that
Saul was decd, thpnkpnacto hbaue bought
goodtpdpnges, Fcaughthpm,and fluc bynriin
sikleq: which thoucht that Y wolde pauer qpué
hpma rewarbde foz bis tpopnages baynapnge.
How moche moze whé wicked men bane layne
arpgbtous perfon,inbis owne boule , and wp
bis bedde, Spall Jnotrequyze his bloude of
porr bande and tate poufromtbecarth? And
Whud commanndedhis ponge men, and they
fluc sbetit,and cut of thepz bandeg and fete,and
Hanged them vp ouer the poole in Hebzon. Wut
tbey toke thebcedof Blvoterh, and burped it in
the fepulchze of Abner in Hebzon.


@ Cbe.v. chapter:


q Dauid is pet agapne annopntcd kpage,and
taketh the arke from Spon.


=e Á


4 Tama Gen came alltbetrybes of Wael xto R
Kyelpauid bnto Hebzon, and lapie: We: ©


Kabolde, we are of thy boneg of thp fet.
Andin tyme pat whé Saul was our


= = = a


kpnge,thouleddett Fraclin andout. And the


ple Jitael, æ thou Malte bea Se did ie ouer JG
: raclcametothe


and thze peres ouerall F{racland Juda.


falem buto the Febulites, theenbabitours of p
lände. tU bich (pake punto Dautd, faping:ercept
thou take awape the blpndeand thelame thon
{halt not come in bpther. Eo? thep fayde. Chou
art not bable tocomembpther. NeucrtHelefie,
Dautdtoke the Bronge hold of Sys. Tbe lame
is the cptic of Dauid And Danid lapd:tbe fame
Dap: pofoencr fniteth the Febulttcs, and get
teth bp tothe gutters of the houles and fmpteth

be lame g blpnde $ hate Dautds foule. *ti ber


f
Leut FF. Fo2¢, thep fapo:tbe blpnde and thelame bal not


Cpar.ig.b


come inte the boufe.Andlo Dautddwelt tn the
tower, ecalledit peptic of David, e bupit roid
aboutit fro Billoumarde. 4nd Danrd protpe
redmarcive, € the Lo2d God ofhooltcs was w
bpm. And Hiram kyng of Cp2e tent meflégers
to auid,€ cedar trees, andcarpeters, and ma-


C fong fo? walles: and thep built Danid an poule


Ano Danid perce pued, that the Lorde had fa-
bipfipedbym kyng ouer Zlracl, and that he bad
eralted bis kigoom fo? bis people Firaels fake,
And Dautdtoke bpmimoconcubpnes and wp-
ucsout of Jerufalem, after be was come from
Iecbzon ,andmofones and doughters were pet
bozne to Danid. * And thee be the names of the
fOnes that were borne bnfobpmin Jerufalem:
Hammua, Soba, Nathan,and Haloms, Jib
bar alfo and Elina, Nepheg, and Japhia, Eli-
fama, Chada, and Eliaphelet:

Wut when p Pbiltines berde that thep had
annopnted Danid png ouer Zlrael, they caine


uKynaes,


allvptoflekemauids Andasfoone as wauin
bearde of it, he gate bpm to an bolde. Xn when
the Dbtliftines came, thep laped them alongein


the vallepe of Raphaim Xx And Daudatked ire.rriifa
counfaple ofthe Lozde,fapinge: Spall J gog test. a


bp to tbe Dbilttines ¢ wple thou velpuec them
intompnebandes! And the Lodeanlwerced
Dnto Dauid: go vp, for J wyll doubtleffe dels
uer the htliftines tntothyne bandes. And Da
uld came to the plapne of Pcrasim , andfnote
them there and fapde : the Losdehathoeuyoed
inptie enhiempes afond2e before me, ag waters
be DenpOcdalondze. And therfore the name of f
place wascalled: The plapne of Werasim. And
there thep left thepz pmages, and Dauid q bis
men toke them vp. And the Dbiliftines cain pet
agayne, andlaped them felues inthe walleye of
Rephaim. Bnd when Dautdalicdat f Lode:


teuer them into mpane harides). Peanlwered: Thou
fhalt not go bp, but compalie them onthe back-
fpde, and come bpa them oucr agapnit the perc=
trees, And when thou beare the nople of a
thynge goinge in the toppe of the perctrees, thé
remoue. Jeo? then Hall the Lorde go out before
the,to fmpte the boote of the Dbiliftines. And
Dauid dpd asthe Lode hadcommaunded bur
and mote the Pbilitines from Gidea, vntpll
thoncome to Gaser,

CTbe.vi.Chapter. — |

€ Bheavke is brought forth of che houle of Abinadad,

Cia is Erpken,and breth. Dawid baunceth before it,

_ ab 's therfojeD2fppfed of his wpfe ajichol.

SAR G apie, Dautd catheredtogptherall B
ea eeaytbe tholen men of Ffracl,cuen thyztpe
Lid folke that were withbym of the men
of Juda to fet away from thence f arke of God
wbholenameis catied the name of the Lode of
Dooftes ý dwelleth vpon it, betwene the cheru-
bing. And thep put the arke of God bps anewe


thoufande,¢arofeand went withal p


cact,and brought tt out xof the bonfe of Abina #-t¢s-bt.a


nadab that was at Gibea. And Usa and Abio
the fonnes of Abinadab draue pnewe cate. And
then they bzougheit out of the boule of Abina-
dabp was at Gibea with the arke ofGo0d:Abio
went before f arke.And Dauid and all f benle
of Jirael plaped befoze P Lozdinfond2y infiru-
mentesmabe of Cedze wood, withbarpes, of
pialterpes,tpmbzcls, fcdles, and fpmvals.

And when they cameto Nachons theelhing 2
flooze Uisa put bis bande tothearke of God, «
belde it, fo? the oren tombled. Andthe Lorde
was wrorh with isa, and Godfmetr bpm
tbe fame place foz Dis faulte, and there he dped
before parke of God: And Dauid was divirta-
fed, bpcaute the Lozde pad finvetenUisa. And
the name of the place wag called peres: Che ccir
Nas Wa bntpll tbis dape. And Dauid was
then dfraprdoftpe Lozde,and fapde: pot pall
thearke ofthe Lozdecometomer Andlo was
uid Woldenot beypnge the arke ofthe Lode vns
tobpmintothe cptie of Dautd. Wut Danid tt-
rpedtfinto the boule cf DbethCoom, a Ges
thite. Andthearkeof the Lorde continued in


the boule of x DbetpEvom the Setbyte, thre tpar.rotg


E.ij. monethes


Wolerrtttt,


ball 3) Go bp agapnt the bilitines? and topit theu de: &d


Danid


monethes and the Logde bleed ObetPEoom,
and all bis houtpolde. And one tolde kyng Da-
uidhow p the Lozdhadbleficd DvethEoom g
alltbat pertapned puto bpm, bycanfe of farke
of God. And Dautd went and beought the arke
of God from the boule of Dbeth€dom , into


íí, Samuel.


Eo: Jhane not bwelt in any boufe fpns f tyme
that Y bzougbt p childzé of Firacl out of Egipt
tnto tbig daye: but baue walked ina tent ¢ ta-
bernacle. gn all the places baa: Sbaue wal:
ked with all the chyldgen of Fltacl, fpate Fone
wode with anp of tbetrpbes of Flerael (fyns 7


Paid


commaundedtbe iudges to fede mp people Fi- ty

racl)faping: wbp buplde penot me an boule of i

Cedar trees? Mowe therfore, fofape bufomp

feruaunt Dauid: thus fapetb the Lorde of byo: 73

ftes. x Jtokethe fromthe hepecoote ( asthou ires. roie

watt folotopnge thepe ) that thou mpgbtel be

ruler ouee mp people Jiraci. Andy was with

the inal that thou wenteft to, € bane deftropcd

alltbpne enempes oute of thp fpgbt , and baue

made the agreate name, lyke bntothename of

the areat menthatare inthe wolde. And ther-

for 4 wpll appopnte a place foz mp people Jf oi

racl, and topl plant it, tbat thep map Owelltna

place of thep2 owne, and moue nomoze, nepther

iball wpckes people trouble them anpmoze as

thep bpdat the begpunpng: fpnsthevpmne that

4 lct iudgesouce my people of Firacl. And F

wpl gpucthereft from all thpne enemies. And

the Lozdetelleth the, $ be wpl make p anboufe: :
And when thy dapes be fulfplied, thou (halt VE

ficepe with thy fathers , and 3 wll {et vp thp

feed after the, which Hall procede out of thp bo-

Dy, and wrll fablphh bis kpngdome. xe thall í

buplde an poule foz my name , and J wyll a- y

bip% tbe feate of his kpngoome foz euer, tJ Wil fiebre.»

be bis father, and be palbe mp fonne:xpf be [pn !i.res-ir.e

J wpllchaten bpm with fuchea ropdeas men PH FE?

bechatened with and withtuchplagesas the t

chylozenof men be plaged with. Sut my mercy $

{yall not departe awaye from bim, as Ftokeit '

fro Saul, whom Jpurdownebeforethe. And ~

thyne boufe and thy kypngdom thal endure with |

out ende aftcr the, xand thp feate balbe Mabli- Ie Fre ©

(pebfozeucr. Accozdpnge toall thetce ozdes,

aud accozdinge to allthis bifpon, dpd Pathan

[peake puto Danid. Chen went Dauidin, and

fet bpm downe before the Lo:d,and lapd:Wwhat

am J, O Lod Godsand whatismyp boniesthat

thou Mouldet bane bzoughe me this tar foathe

And this was peta fall tbpnge intbp Cyabe,

D Lode God, but thou baf poken allo of thp

{eruauntes boule foz a greate whple to come:

Jo: tbis is the vle ofman, D Lorde God, And

whatcan Danid fape more wutothe: for thou,


lee the cpticof mauid with qladnelfe. om (Aun there
mere) Daui feuen Cortes of Daunrers,@ calwes fog facrifice )


And whentbhep that bare thearke of the Lorde
bad qone (pre {paces, be ofred an ore anda fat
on {hepe. And Wautdew (prayed on barpe trenges, and)
Daunced befoze the Lozde with all bis mpgbt,
and was gp:ded witha lpnnen Ephod.o0 ma
utp and al the boule of Flracl, beought thearke
„p CRC cEthE rournaunteyof the Lozde with dhoutpnge
-~ and trompet blowpnae.
æ _ Andittogeuned, that asthearke of P Lozde
‘cameintothe cptie of Daut , ichol Saules
Dougbterloked thozowe a windowe,and lawe
kpnge Dauldlprpnge, and Daunce befoze the
Lorde. andthe defppiedbymin ber berte. And
Dhenthey bzougbt inthearke of the L020 thep
{ct (tin bis place,eueninp mpddes of the taber-
nacle $ Dauid had pitched forit. And Daud of.
Fred burntofirpnges € peaceofirynges before p
3020. Andas toone as Daut had made an cnd
of offe pnge burntofringes € pencea her ate be
bicficd the people inthe name of f Loz of boo:
ftes,and qaue amonge all the Folke, cut among
the bole multitude of Jlracl,as well to the wo:
menasmen, to cuerp onea cake of brec , anda
pece officthe, and a facket ofdzpnke. And foall
the people Departedeuery one to hts boufe.
Then Dauidreturned to blee bis bonfpold
and Spicbol the doughter of Saul came out to
mete Dauid, and fapde : D how glozious was
the kynge of Frael this vape, which was neo
nered todape, inthe eyes ofthe mapDdens of jia
feruaiites, as pfit bad bencalpgbt bzapned te=
lowe bicoucreds And Daud fayde vnto Wi-
chol: 3 thought to Daiice befoze the Lozb, which
chole meratperthen thy father, and all bis bpn,
andcomaunded me tobe ruler ouer allthe peo:
pie ofthe Lode euen ouer Frael. And therfore
wyl J ptap before f Lord. And wil pet be moze
vpicthen fo , and wpll be meke tu mpne one
fpgbt : and of the verp fame mapdeleruauntes,
which thou bat (poken of, pall 3 be bad in bo-
noure. Therfoze Sicbol the Donghter of Haul
pad nochplde, unto the dape of Der Death:


{.reg.b.e
Ceprrii,&


y


T The vii.Chavter Lo Godknowell chp feruaunt. Cuen fort
ae Cee eee seater ut is wozdes fake, and according to thpneowne Ai tt
fosbpoven of Ged. bat thon Done all thele qreat thpnges, tomake


iE foztuncd, thatas thekpnaefatin
‘Disboule(after ý the Lod bad gpuen

au pin ceft rounde about frå all bis ene-
es Bhs mpes be fayd onto Matha p pro; bet
bebola, ¥owelnow nan boule of Cedar trees:
but Parke of God dwelleth within curtayne.
And Nathan fapd wnto the kyng:qo,anddoal
thatisinthpne perte, foz the Lozbe is with the.
And it foztuned the lame npghtz, thatthe
worde ofthe Lorde came Dnto Nathan, faping
to, andtellmp feruaunt Dauid, thus fapth tbe
Lozd:ipale thou buplo mean boule toBrwel tie


them knowen vntothpteruaunt.
Wiberfoze thou art great, D Lorde God:fo2 D

thercis none lye the: *nepther is there anp gob De%->it-

faue thou, according toall that we bauchearde

with our eares.*+ And what one people tn perth... -

iglikethp people Zirael? whole God wentgde TAs

lpuered tbem, $ they mpght be bis people, and ý

be myabt make bpm a name, ¢ to bewe great ¢ ae]

terrible thingesinp erth,fo2 thy peoplex which gr sit.» g

fhouredemelt tothe out of €gipt:eurnthe peor omy

ple with thev2 goddess . Eo? thou bat ozdepned

thp people Ffrael to be thp people foz ma
and


a


a
naiiai a ~ DAAD Ae
baia F ~


And thon Lorde arte become thep2 God: And

now/ 2.920 God) the wozbde that thou batt fpo-

lien concernpnge thy feruaunte and bis boufre,

makcit good fo2 euer,and boas thou bhatt fayd.:

Jo: fo thallthyp name be magqnifyed foz euer of

mien that thal fap:the Loz of bottes is the God

of JZiracl: andthe poule of thy feruaunte Halbe

, Pabluitped before the. 02 thon D Lozde of po-

tes, God of Fracl, bak tolde tn the eare of thy
ftriiaunt, fapinge : J wpll buplde thean boufe.

And therfore bath thp feruaunte founde in

pevrerit.€ DiS bert,to mape this pap pntothe.* Ther=
fo2ze nowe 1020 God, thou art God, thp Woz=

; ‘ des mull be true, thou that balk tolde this good
: ` nele nto thy feruaunt.And now go tog bleffe


- —


the ponte of thp feruaunt, thatit map continue
fozcucr befoze the fo: thou Lode God bat fpo
ken it: and with thy bietipnge fhalltbe boule of
tby feruauntbe ble
CTbe. vii) Chapter.
b the Pbilitines,
Y h Hp |


(ted Fo2 ever.


Dauid ouerco mm


falute bpm with peace, and to blefic pim bicaufe
be Dad foughbtagapns Padareser, and beaten


tiLynaes.


Folrrrh.


bpm: foz Thai had great war with wadareser:
which Joram ) brought woithbhim veels of fil-
uer, veflels of golde, Deffels of bzafle. Wbiche
walie kypng Dauid dpd dedicate Yugo the Lord
with the fpluer and golde that be bad confecra-
ted of all nactons, whiche be fubducd: of Hiris,
of the ber pik ofthechildzenofammony; -+
ofthe jbiliftines,and ofamatecke, and of the
fpople of adareserfonne of Rebob kpynge of
soba. and Dauid gat bpina name after that he
returned. andbad fmptten ofthe Spriansinp
vallepe of Sale.epghtenc thoufand men.* And ou cigs
De pnt kepersin Edom: euenthozowout all =
dom put he fouldicrs, and allthep of Edom be=
came Dautds (ernauntes. And the Lode kepte
Dauid whatfoeuer be tokein bande. And Da-
uid rapaned ouer all yiracl, and erecutcd right
and tuftpce onto all bis people. And* Joab the iiae, rr
fone of saruia was ouer the boot, and Jebeola-
phat thelonne of Alibud wasrecozder. And
Havok the fonne of Ahitob, a nd Abimelech p
fonne of Abiathar were the preekes , and a=
rata wastheltrpbe, And wWanalaputhefonne -
of Jehoiada was ouer the Crethites and f Pde
letpites:and Dauids fonnes were chefe rulers.
QT he.ix. Chapter. à
(pants retozeth all che feloes of Saul, to gg ipbibereth
the fonne of yonathas, :
were $20 D uid fapde:is there pet anp man X
C left of the boule of Sauls S02 ¥ whl
am 4 (ewe ore mercpe foz Fonathas lake
08.8) And there was of the houtbolde of
Saul, a feruaunte whole name wag 3iba, and
when they Padcalledhpm punto Dauid f kpng,
fapde nto bym:arte thou sibar Hefayoe: Tip
feruauntis be. And the kpngefayde :remaypa
neth there pet anpe man of the boule of Saule,
whame J mape thewe the merepe of Gov Ypi;
siba antwoered the kpnge: + Efa a th vet tire tie.
a onne wbicheis lame of bts feete. The kpnge
fapbe tunto bpm: where is herstba fapd buto th
kynge:bebolde, beisin the boule of aachir the
fonneot Amieclof Lodeber. Chen kyage Da: 25
uid fent,and fet bym out of tbe boule of Dachir
the onne of Amiel out of Lodeder. How when
Mipbibolech the fonne of Jonathas , the tonne
of Saul was come nto Dauid, He fell on bps


. face,and Dpdreucrence, And the kynge fapte:


HPHipbiboleth ¢ he anfwered. Beholde thy ier-
uaunt. Dautd fapde bntohym:feare not, for y
wll furelp thewe the apndnefle, for Jonathas
thp fathers fake,and wplrefoze the all the fel-
Des of Saul thp father,and tou thalteate bred
on mpne owne table continuallpe: And De bo-
toed bpm felfe, and Capde: What is thy eruañt
that thou tbouldeft Vouchefafe to loke bpon
fuchbe a deed Dugge as Fame |
Thë the png called Dntosiba Sauls pong C

iianand fapde vntobpm: Fbaue puen puto
thp matters fonne, all tbat pertapned to Saul,
and to all bis bonle. He therfozethat thou and
thy fonnes and thp fernauntes tyl the land, and
bapnge in, that * thp matters fonne mape baue 904
foode tocate. Wut <)ipbiboleth thp matters
fonne (haileate beeedalwaye pon mp table,

a Se E.tij. Jfo2 Zs


TF]
Dai a ‘>
as. anito ra
P eae kT p ri
i


D For ziba had fpftene fonnes, and twentpe fers
naunteg. Chen fapd tba wnto the Byng:Acco2-
Dpng toall ý mp lode the kyng hath comanded
His feruannt, fo thal thy feruañt do.cGell(fapd
the kyng) Hiphiboleth Hall eat bpo mp table,
ag otte or the kpnges (Ones. Wipbibofeth hada
fone p wag ponge, named W icha, andall that
- Dwelled inp boule of stba were fernanntes Duta
Miphiboleth. And iphiboleth dwelt tn Yeru
falem, foz be dpd eate cuer at the bpnges ta ble:
redid xand was lame on both pis feete.
CThe.r.Chapter
qc Themel&cngers of Dauid are vplapnoutip entree
___ ted of the kpnge of Gyoab.
A fee T bappencd after this, that ý bpnge
4 Beas of thechplozen of Ammon dped, nd
} (©) Band his fonne raygnedin his fede.
br Ss) Then {apd Mautd: F wpl Het kind
neie ato Hand P (One of Nahas, as his father
fhewedkypndnefle bntome. And Dauid fent to
chfort him bp the bande of bis feruauntes ouer
ee ox cepedeatd of) hts Father. And Dauids fernattes
came into the lande of tbe chpldzcn of Ammon,
and the Lozdes of tbe chplozen of Ammon fapde
pnito anon thep2 lorde: thpnkeft thou tbatDa
uid Doth Honour thy father, that be bath fent ci-
foztours to thes Hath not Dauid rather ient his
fernauntes vutothe,toflearche the cptte, andto
{ppe tt ont,and to onertbzowe tt?

Wiherfore Wanontoke Daurds feruauntes,
and hauen of the balfe of euerp mannes beevoe,
and cut of thep2 garmentes in the mpddle, euen
parde tothe buttockegofthem, and fente them
awaye.@ben thep toldett into Dautd, he fent
tomete tbem (fog thep weremenexcedprglp a
fhamed ) andthe kpnge fapde: tarpe at Jericho
putpll pour beerdes be growen, ¢ thenreturne.
Mund when the chplozen of Ammon fave, that


pia


thep fanketn the fpabt of Dauid,thepfentand —


Dpzedthe Spztans of the boufe of Rebob, and
the Sprians ofsoba twenty th onfande fotemé,
and ofkynge Q)aacha atbhoutanvde men_and of
Fob twelve thouland men. And when Daud
perde of it, be fent Joab gall the boot of (trong
men. And thecbpldgen of Ammscame out, and
waged battayle atthe entrpnge tn of the gate,
and the &pzians of obab, of Rebob, Fiob, ¢
*Paacah were bp ebem telues inthe felde.

e (üben Joab {awe that the fronte ofthe bat-
taple wasagapntt bpm, before after, be chofe
ofall tbe teem ponge men of Bracl,andput the
finarape agapntt tbe Sprians.Andeberel€ of p
people be Delpucred into the bande of Abifathis
protber, Phe mpgbe put them in arape agape
the chpldzcn of Xminon. And he fapo:te tt
rpansbe trougerthen J, thou halte belpe me.
sut pf thecbplozen of Ammon be toftronge
forthe, 3J wpllcome and fuccoure tie. Therfoze
quyte the lple a man,and let vs tand tpfe fo?
out people, and for the cpttes of our God. And
the Lorde Dootbat whicbeis qoodinbhis owne
eyes, And Joab proceded fort) , and the people
that was with bpm totygbt with the Spas.
asut thep fled befoze bvm . And whe che chilazé

ef g mmô lawetbhat f Spztans were fird, then


It, S amu el.


eS =~


Beth


fled thep alfobefoze Abifai, and entredinto the
cytic. And (0 Joab returned from the chpldzen
of Ammob,and came to Jerufalem. Ano when
&prians fare that tbhep were put tothe morte
befoze Zirael , they gathered them togptber.
And Hadareser Cent, and bronght out the Dp-
rpans that were beponde theryucr. _ Andthep
came withtbep2armpe, andsobai) p captapne
of the boot of #abdareser went befoze them.
Bnd when tt was the wed Daud, he gathe-
redall Fracltogpeber,and paficd oucr Jordan
andcame to Melam:And the Spzians tet them
feluesinaray agapntt Daud, andfought with
him: the Spans fled before Fitacl. And Da-
uid deftroped {euen bundzedcharcttesotthe Si
riang, ¢ fourty thoulande hogfemen, and {mote
Sobah the captapne oftheir boot, wobiche allo
dped there. And when all p kyngeg( p wer ferz
uaŭtesto Hadartser ) law p thep were putto f
wozie before Jirael, thep made peace w theni,
and ferucdtbem. And Co the Sypziansfeared to
Delpe the chplozen of Ammon any muze.
€ The. rj. Chapter.
@ Theaduoutrpe of Dauid with Bethfade

the wpfe of tias.

= 4S |


all #lrael, which defkroped the chlorek of Am
mon, andbelieged Raba. Wut Dauid tarved
{plat Jerufalem. And it chatcedinaneuening
that pauidarofe out of bis bed, € walked wpa
the roofeofthe kpnges: alace,& from the roofe
be fawea woman walibyng her felfe: anv the
woman was verp beautpful toloke dpi. Ind
he fent toenquyze what woman it Houlsebe,
fapinge:is tt not Bethfabe the Doughter of E=
liam,and wopfe to Cizias the Hethite: And Da-
nfofent mefengers, fetber. And Hecam in yn
to bim*bhe lape ber. Andewcimmeniatieyihe was
purifped from ber wnclennefle,andretucned bn
tober houfe.Andp woman cocepued,and fent
told pauid,g fapò:Jam w chploe. And Dauid
fent to Joab (tapin g: \ fende me Uzias the Pe-
thite. J nd Joab lët Cizias to Dauid, And whe
Tiag was come Vnto him, Dauid demaunded
of bim, bowe Joab Dpd,and how the people fa-
red, æ how theme of warre profpered. And Da
utd fapde to Citas: qon Downeto thpnc poule,
and wath thy fete. And Ciztas Departed out of
the kpngespalace, and there folovwed bim a fer
upee fro Pbpnges table. Hut Giztas i n ye
020


4


fabe


D


1. pares


croplia


SA L
deurbe 8 = | -


1D


Daud


doze of P kpnacs palace: wh alltbe fernauntes of
bis lorde, and went not downe tobis boule,

C ibich when they badtolde Dauid ( fapinge:
Gi2ias went not downe into his houte ) Danid
{apd wnto Cizias:Camelk thou not fro rpp tour:
hep? mbp dpddelt thou not godowne then wnto
thpne bouleriztas anfwered Dauid. C be arke
¢ Fitacl and Juda oweltn panilions:¢ mp lod
“Foab and the feruanntes of mp lozd Ive upon p

- flat carth,and hal 3 thenga into myneboute,

meertje to pate and DpH, and lye ithmyp wie: * wp
thy Ipfe, and bp the lyfe ra. Serb wrilnot
do this thpnge . And Dauid fayde onto Citas:
guvsine *tatpebere thisnpghre alfo, andtomozowe J
'  -yopll let the departe. And fo Gizasabove in ye-
rulalem that dape and the mozowe. And when
Manutd bad called bym , be dpd eatcand dzpnke
befoze bim, z be made bym deonke. And at een
be went out to lpe onbiscouch withthe feryat-
tes of bislozde, but wet not downe to bis Houle
Dn them: we Danto wrote aletter to Joab
ana fentit bp the bande of Uzias. And he weote
thus in the letter, fapinge:put Uzias in the fore
front of the harper battaple, andcome pe backe
from hpm, that be map be {mptten,and dpe. 0
wopen Joab belegd the cptie, be allpqned Ui-
a3 Dntoa place , where he wrie that ronge
nich Were. And the men ofebecptie came oute,
And foug he with Joab: Bnd ther were certaz
Ouerthzowen of the people, and ofthe feruauns
tes of mauto, and Cizias the Hethitcdpedalfo.

, Then Joab rente, andtolde Danid all the
thpngesconcernpng the warce, and charged the
meffencers, pinge: when thou bate made an
croc of tellyng the matters of f warre onto the
&pnge, pe be begynne tofume,and fap Dnto the:
wherefore appzeched pelo npe wnto the cptte,
when pe dpd fpabts wplt pe not that thep wold
burle and (pote from the wall? Who fmote A-

4.1.8 bimckeb onne of Jerebolethr*D pd nota woe
mantat a peece ofa mplitone bpd hpm from of
the wall,andbe dpedin Thebes? Wbp went
pounye the walle Then tape thou:thp feruaunt
Cizias the He tbith is Deed allo. |

Syo the mellenger went, g came and hhewed
Dauid all p Joab had fent bpm foz : and p mef-
fenger lapie Dnto Dautd:the men preuapled a-

By gapni b9,¢ came out unto Le into che felde, €

- Wee cwpth byoleact) Tacke Dnto them, cuen vnto

P? the entring of f cate, Bnd the thoters thot fro f

walles vpå thp feruauntes, and fome of f kpn-
ges (cruantes be deed. Bnd thplernaunt Citas
the Dethitets decd alfo. And Dauid fapde vnto
the meffengers:thus Halt thou fape puto Joab

i _— letnot p thynge trouble the. JEO2> cee ebaunce of

3 ~ © iparre ts puera ann) Y ftoerde Deuoureth one ag wel

y asan other :'maketbp battaple moze ftronge
agapni the cptic to ouerthzow it, and fe ý thou

. courage Joab.And when p wife of Uzias Derd
: that her bufbande foas deed, He mourned foz
brm. And when the mournpnge was paft, Da-

ntdfent fet ber to bis boule, and the becam hig

topfe.and barebymafonne. Wut ebts thpnae

a that Danid dpd, difpleated the Lozde.

@ The.xut.Chapier.


“dDede, thon laf gpuč p ennemics of the Lo2dea


Folarr hi.


E Dauid isrerzoued fo: the Mauahler of Gtzias, .
he chpibe cancepued inaduoutrpe bpeth. Aiter
itt Salomon borni;


Faye 20 the Lode {ent Rathan puto ma- X
a Sid. And became ynto him, and tolde

yy. ae. H bym:there were twomenin one cptie

Este the onerpche and the othor poore: the

coche man hadercedpnge many hepe and oren

Xut the pooze hab nothing, faue one lytle epe

which De bad bought, and nozilihea yp. Andit

grewe Vp with bpm and with his chylozenalfo

and dyd cate of his owne meate , and danke of

His owne cuppe,and flept tn bis bofome,¢ was

tntobpm aspis dDoughtcr. Andthere came a

Ffraunger vnto p cyche man. And he coulde not

fpndein bis bert totake of bis owne Hepe, and

of his atone oren fo dzelle fo: the traüger that

wascome vnto bpm. Gut toke the poote mans
thepe, and defied tt foz the man p wasconie to
ppm. And Dauid was exrceadpnge woth with 15

the man, and fayde to Nathan :as furelp asthe
Lozdelpucth, the man f bath done thig thpnee

*1s the chploe of death. He tpalreftoze f lambe irer. rre
+foure folde, bpcant he dyd thisthynge, had ter rritg
noppiie. And Mabtan faydto Danid: thon art |
the man. Thus faperbthe Loade God of Frac:
*XZannovnted the kyage ouer Jleacl, andeyd irertie
the out of the band of Saul, F gaze the thy ma
ftersHoute, andthp matters pues intothp bo

poe eamethe the bont of Zitacl and of Fu


gs aa


MOM pus — bad bene tolptie ) bane
en the fo moche moze. Wiberfore then hatte
thou deipplidthecommanundement of rhe Loeb
tado wpcheonelie tu hes ipqot-tpou bat kylie
Ci pzas the Hethite withtvye fwerde, andhatt ta
ken bis wpteto thp wpfe, andbaft apne bpm
toith tbe fwwerde of the cpplozen of Rminois,

#20 w therfore the lwerde alineuce departe ©
fro thpne boule , bycante thou batt defppfedme,
and taken P wife of Cizias the Pethite tobe thy
wypfe. CQ berfozre thus tapth the Loade:beholo,
A opil pere vp eupllagapnife tbe, euen out of
tipne owne onfe, e wyll xtakethpwpues be- Derviiie
fore thpneeves,  gpue thé vntotbpneighbourg
be thallycew thp wpues inf {pgbe of the funne.
oz P Spdoel re feccetelp. Wur F wpll no this
tobu befoze all Firael, inthe opë funne lprbt, D

ad Daud apd bnto Rathan:xF baue fen EErte

nedarsvnTtbe Lorde. And Pathan Tapd onto :
Dauid: f Lod alfo hath put awap thp fpnne, p
{halt not dpe. Howbett, pcaufe in doinge tins


cauie torarie, thechilde pis bozne vnto the Mal
furcly dpe. Jnd Matha departed vnto bis honie
And tye Lozde rake thechylde p Unas wpfe
bare Unto Dauid, andtrfpchencd fore. Danid
therfore befought God forthe chplac,andfalten
and went in, andlape all nade ppon tbe carth.
And the elders of bis boulz arole, and wentto
bpm.te take him vp from f earth. But he wold

not, nepeber dpd be cate meate with them:
And it happened the feuenth dape, that the
child dped. And Ý leruatites of Danid durfk not
tell bin p the chulde was deed.. Eo? they ipae:
behold, whple Pchplde was pet alyuc, we fake
baio bpm , and be wolde not bearken ynta our
Cty. § Vopee.


Daud
popce. How wll he then bere bym felfe, pf we
tell bpm that the chplde ig deed! And Dauid fre-
ing bis fernauntes wip Spesiig, perrea that
thechyloe thas deed. And Daud fpd onto his
Ceruauntes:ts the chploe Deeds Thep fayb:pea.
And Dauldarotefcom the earth, and walthed
andannopnted bpm felfe,andchaunced bts ap-
yarell,and came into the boule of the 1020, and
wozrlbppped, aud afterwarde came fo his owne
boufe and badthat they Moule tet bzed before
bym, and be dpt cate. Chen fayd bis leruautes

JE vntobpm:what thpnge ts this, that thou batt
done. Thou dpddek fat and wepe for Pchyloe,
topple it was alpue,and affooneastt was deed
thou dpdoeftrple vp, andecate meate.He fapoe:
wbple thechglde waspetalpue, Ffatked,and
wept: ffo2 this J thought, whoca tell whether
God wll paue mercye onme, that the cbplde

ecrFrbiiia mape lpue. wut nowe feinge bets Deed, Wher-
fore (houlde F fat ¢ can Bbhepnge Dom agapne
anp more: y thallgo to bpm, rather then de thal
come agapne tome. And Dauidcoforted Weth-
fabe bis wyfe, andwentein ontober,andlape
ecb with ber, fhe bare a fonne,and called bis name

Rracable x Gyalomon, andthe Logdeloucdhym. Andhe

spar 1.8 fent bp the bande of Nathan the prophete , and

tadou called pipname x Jeoidta, of f Lordes bebalfe.
">or Joab fought agaynit Raba the cptte of the
chpidaenof Ammon , andtoke the cptic of the
hongdome. And Joab fent meilégers to Dautd
taping: 3 baur made aflautat Raba , andbave

taken the cptie with waters. Mot therfore gå-

ther the reff of the people togptber , and befiere

P citie that thou mapei takeit, lett YJ takeit,g

call iraftermp name. And Dautd gathered all

the pe to togptbher,and went agapnite Raba,

Eparrpb and beltegedif,and gatit. xAnd be toke they?
Epnees corone from of bis heed, tebiche waped
an bundzed wepght of golde andin tt were pre-
cious toneg. Andit was fet op Dauids berd: ¢
be brought out the fpople of tbe cpttetn ercedig
great aboundaunce. and be carped out ý people
that Toas therein , and put them wpa fares and
pon pron arowes,and vpd ares of pron, aud
thmt them into the tyle kel. Tbus dyd be with
all f cities of the chilozen of Ammnd. And fo Da
uid gall the people returned bnto Jerufakm.

- CThe.rif. Chapter.
© Ammon Dautbs fonne oefpleth bps (pter
Shamor.Sdlalom therfore kplicth Ammon.
aa fiter this, chaunced,that Abfolom the
Kai fonne of Dauid ada fapze Iper , na-


“ft
me


aimed Thamar, whom Ammon the ton


mi — m


mypbother Abfolomgfpker. Jonadab fapd wn
tobpm:lapetbe Downe on thy bedde,and make


f


i Sameh ;


Salomon.
thp felfe fpcke. And when thy fatheriscome to

fe tbe fape onto bpm : Db, let mp (pier Tha-
marcome, and gpue me meate ,¢ Melleitinmp
fpabt,that Jmap feit, andeate it of ber hand.

“And fo Ammon lape downe, and made bim 25

felfe fpcke. And when the kynge was cometo

febpim, Ammon fapde vntobpm:Dblet Tha- -
marmpiptercome, andmake me a couple of


fryttersinmp ipabte, that 3 mapeeate of bev


bande. Then Dantofent bome to Chamat, lap
inge: qo now to thp bzotber Ammons Doule, €
vefe bym meate. 490 Thamar went tober bee
ther Ammons boule, and he was taped dotone.
And the toke floure,and made pafte,and defied
frptters in bis {yg bf, and dpd bake them, toke
aplatter,and poured them out befoze bpm: but
De wold not eate. And Ammon fapd: Haue out
all men frome. And they went al out from bim
And Ammon fapde onto Thamar: beynge the
meate into the chabze,that ¥ may eate of thpne
bande. And Thamar tokethe frpttere, whiche
tbe bad made, and beougbe theminto thecham
bicto Ammon berbzotber: Andwhenthe bad
fet them befoze bpm to cate, be toke Der, fapde €
pnto ber:comelpe withme mp pier. And de
anfiweredD bpm: nape mp bzother, doo not force
me, fo2 there bath no fuche thpng be done in Fi-
rael:do riot thouthis abbomtnacyon. To} whi-
ther thal J be able to co wò mp pame. And thon
{halt be as one of p folesin Jiracl.D fpeake vn
) the kpng, aud be thal not denpe me vnto the.
powbeit, be wolde not Dearken puto ber
popce,but toke her, andx forced per, lay with eerrriit a
Her. And then Ammon bated ber ercedpngly: fo ** S
that the bate wberwith be bated ber, was grea=
ter then the lone, with tobich be befoze loued bee
And Ammon flayde vito her: Dp, and get the
bence. Sbe anlwercd Dym: th on batt nocaule.
This eupl that thou puttet me awapr,isqrea
ter then the otber, that thou dpodeff tnta mv.
Neuerthelefle, he wolde not Heare her , but cal-
led bis bope that ferucd bpm, and fapde: put a=
wape this woman frome, and bolt the doze af-
fer ber . And he bada kpztle ofdpuerscolours
pponher:fo2 with {uch were the kpnges dough ~.
ters( that were virgins )a pareto Chenbis fcr
uaunte brought ber out, ¢ locked the doze after
ber. And Thamar tobe, put althes onberbeed
andrente ber gaye rd that was on ber,-and
laped ber band on ber heed, ¢ fo went:andas the
went crped. And Abroll her bzother {apd tnta
ber:bath Ammon thp bother bene w ther Pow
pet be ftplimy fpiter:be istbpbzother. Let not
this thinge grene thpne berte. And fo Thamar
remaypied defolate inher bother A bfolds houte
Wut rvepenkynge Dauit berde of althele thin-
ges, be was terp w? Oti. oi And he won not bere the Ae
Cpprite of Ammon dis Conne:fo; beloved bpm, bpcaute he was
bis fpptbozner) AnD Abfolom lapde yuto his bzo-
ther Ammon nepther good no? bad. Howwbeie,
A bfolom bated Ammon, bycaule be hadfoeced
Histyter Thamar. | E
And itbappenedafter two pere, that biol con rert.c


“had xthepetherers in p plapne of Basoz belpde e.rrvut.c


thetrpbe of Ephraim, ¢ bad all the kpnges A
os nes,


a


y = game iss | Pa FO S ‘i : ze F Bei,

Ammon “<  t&ynaes. Woreevit,
hes, and came tothe kpng efapde: bebolde,thp - onber faceto the grounde,anddone obepfannce
{eruaunt bath hepetberers,let the kpngedbis telapde vntothe bpnge:belpe me, Dkpuce.
feruauntescometo thy feruanunt: The king at= j
fwered Vbfolom:nape mp fonne. tHe wpllnor


; m ey p= of = oe di
k n E a a


Che kpnge ht bnfo ber: what apleth ther


She anfivered: Jama wpdvdowe,and mp huf-
banbdeisdeed. And thp handemayde hadtwo
fonnes, andthep rwofoughte togpther inthe
ap E lap thas oman to gobetwenethem)
but the one {mote the otber and Aue bym : And
beholde, tbe bolekpnredisrplenagapntt thpne
Handmapde, and thep fayde: xdelpuer vs by, Dert.rir.e
that {mote pis bzotber: that we mape kpl hym,
fo? the foule of bis bzotber whome be Aue. We
wplldetropethebepze alio. Andlothev hall
uenche mp fparkle whicheisleft, that he mall
pire bp (tomp hulbande)neitber name no if-
P fue byon thecarth. And thekpnge fapd vntop
 Woman-godome to thpne poule, ¥ wplapuca C
D charge fos the. Andthe woma of Thekoa fapa
nto the kpnge:<pp lode, D kpnge, this ret:
ar beon me, and on mp fathers houle , and p
bpngeand his teate begyleietic. Andthe kynge
fapde: Pf anp man {ape ought vatothe: bzpnge
Hpmto me, and he Hall burt the nomoze. Then
fapbe the: Let the kpnge remembze dis Lorde
God, that the anenger of the bloude gather not
oneapes togpthertodeltrope , andthatthey
re Sn la apt henge furcas
CHE Lowe lpucey, x there Hallnot one deere of irspriitia
thy fonne falito the earth. 5 ee
— Chetoman laypde : let thynebandemapde
{peake one wo2de more with mp Lord the king å
nd be fapd:fapeon. The woman {apd : wher


And fo Wbfolom elcaped and went to Gefur, ¢
ivag riere tb peres: And kyng Dauiddelpzed f€o2 wemufnedes dpe, and perpiheas water
to go forth wnto Hbfolom: Foz whereas Zm- fpplt onthe arounde, whicheannot be qathered
mon wasded, Ne wascombortedoucrbpm,  ypagapne.Mepther doth Godfpareanp foule.
Ch be.xitij.Chapter: Let the kynge therfore fpnde the meancs, that
MSP. “<twprvomeoé the woman of bis banntlted be not veterlperpelled from bim


her:fapne tha elietobeain aner, and puton handmade. Ann f
mournpnge a! Jarchi. A nde wdopntnotthy (elf mapde,todelpucr her ont ofthe bande of Pman
witbople. Xit be agi winan thathadlonge that woldedaucdeftroped me, and alto mp fon
tpymemourred fo? fom: Der UboDY. Andcome to out of p enberitaiice of God. Bud thyne hande-
the kpnae ito (peabe of thtsmaner bute bpm. mapydefapde: the wozrde of mp Lorde the bpiige
Ando ah tangit Des whatibe thouldefape, Mal nowebe comfortable. Fozmp lozde the
1 6 Ar g. hn padfallen kpngigaganaŭgel of Godinbearyng ofgoon


i
i


said
and bad:therfoze the Lowe thy God be w the-

Thenthe spnge anfwered, and fapde wnto

the woman:bpde not frome ( F prape the ) the

tbpnge tbat ¥thallatkethbe: And the woman

fapde:lef mp lozde the kpngenow faye on. And

the kyna fapde: F8 not the bande of Joab with

the in allthis matters Che woman antwered,s

(i.ice.rt.d fayde: xas {ure as thy foullpueth mp lod kpn 3

there igels noman (ontherpgbt hande no? onp

left butas mp lozde the kpng bpathipoken, thy

feruaunte Joab He bad me, and be putallthete

woes ti the mouth of thpne bandmapde, Fo?

tothe intent that 3 Moulde alter mp communi-

cacion, batbtbp fernaunt Joab done this thing

And mp lozdets wple euenasan AfigelofGod

to vndertande allthpnaes that are inthe erth:


And the kypnge lapte Vuto Joab: beholde: Fam


content todotbisthynge. Goand fet home the
chploe Abfalomagapne. Bnd Joab fell tothe
grounde onbis face, and bowed bpm felfe, and
bleid the bpnge. And Joab fapd:now thy fer-


nuaunt khoweth, tbat 3 baue found grace tn thp-


‘fpabt(myplozde, Obpng)inthat the &png hath
fulfplicd the requet of hts {eruaunt.Andio J0-
ab arofe,and wentto Geur and pay Ab-
falom to Jerufalem, And the kyngefapde : let
im turne tobis owne boufe and not fe mp face

And fo Abfalomectourned topig owne poule,

andfawenot the kyngesfact.

‘Sutin all Jirae! there was not fo goodly å

JE manag Abfalom, fo? be was verve beautpfull:
infomoche that from the fole of bis foote to the
toppe of bis heed, there was no blemtfp tn bim,
And whe be Mausd his heed, for at eucry pereg
ende be Gauedit, bpcaute the heere was Heup on
ppm, and mull neades Maure it ) the decre ofhps
Deed weped two Hundzed Cycles after the kyn-
eswevadt. AndthsAblol bad the fonnes
pone bpm, and one doughter named Thamar:
tobiche wasafapzc womantoloke Dpon. So
*bfalom dwelt two pere in Jerufalem, ¢fawe
not the kpnges Face. Therfeze balom ent fog
%oab,tobhauelentebymtothekpnge. Wut he
wold not come tobpm. And when delet agapne
He wolde notcome. Therfoze he fapde vito bis
{cruauntes:bebolve, Joab hatha parcel of lade

_faltbp mp place, ¢batbbarlp theccin. Go, ¢ fet
it on fp2e. And Ablal6s feruatites fetitonfpzr.
. væ (Ino Foabs Cerueuntes came th thep; garmentes rent, and

hs fapt: AbColoms feruauntes haue burnt the pece oflandtò fpze.)
~ Then Foabarole,andcameto Abfalon on
© topisboufe, and fayde Dito bøm: wherefoze
baue thy fernauntes burnt mp telde with fpze?
<~ndablalom anfwered Joab:bebolde , F lente
foz the, velpapngy the tocome, bycaufe J wolde
‘ baue (ent the tothe kynge, forte faye : wherfoze
: am 3 come from Gefur ¢ Ft bad bene better Foz
me fobancben there Apl. Powe therfore told
Ficthehyngestace. And pEtbere be anpe trel
paleinme, kpllthoume. Bnd fo Joab came to
thekpnge,andtoldebym: whiche when be bad
fent foz Ablolom, became tothe kpnge, and fell
tothe qrounde on bis facebefoze bpm. And the

&pnge ByficdD Abfolom.


CTbe.rv.chapter.


ti. Samuel.


q Abfalom maketh (ntuerectionagapne his father.
Dauid is Fapue to fipe for Fears of bpm.


y NAN Fterthigitfoztuned , that Abfalom 5,
;


WEN gat bym charettegandpozfes, and fif
WATAW tpe men totunne before ppm. And be
ES arole bpcarlpinthe mormpnge and
ftode inthe place of the entrpngcin ofthe gate.
Anudeuccpmanthat badanpmatter,andcame -
tothe kpnae fog tudgement, bym dyd Abialom
call vito Dym,andfayd:oF what citieart tour
He anfwered: thp feruaunte tg of one of the ei
beg of frac. And Ablalom fapd visto hypmt:fe,
thp matter is qoodandrpghteons, buttpercis
nomanbdeputed of the kpnge to berare the. Ibla-
lom fapd mozeoner:<Db that 7 wermadeiudae “5
inthelande, thateucrp man twobhich batpany ple ~

andmatter inthelawe, mpgbt come tomic,and
that Jmypght Dobyminfitces And Hen anpe
man came npeto bym,and dpb bpm obepfaiice,
be put tort bis bandand tobebpmtobpm, and
kpiepbpm. Andon this mance dpd Abfalom
fo all Z(eacl, that came to the kynge roz iudge-=
ment:and be ftalethbebertes ofthemë of Bfracl.

Andafter fourtye peres tt foztuned, that bla-
Tom fayd wito the bpnge: letme go nowe to he
bzon, and pape my bowe which 4 baue vowed
Dnto the Lozde, fo? thp feruaunt bowed a Dow
(wben J asin Gelur, in thelande of Siria)
fapinge : Pithe Lozde thall bepnge ine agapne
from Zerulalem, J wpll ferue the Lozde. And
the kpnaelapd onto bpm:go in peace. And fo be
arofe ano went to Hebzon. £

wut Abfalom fent fppes thozowont all the
tepbegof Zfracl, fapinge: asfoone as pe beare
the bopce of the trompet blowe , pe (hall far:

Abfalom rapgneth kyng in webron. And with
Ablalom went twohund2cd menout of Feru- —
falem, that werecalleds Andthep wente with

uee pertes, notknowpnaeofanp topna. And »
bfalom fent alfo fo? Abitdophel the Guonite

Dantds counfapler, thathethouldecomeoutof `
bis cptie Gtlo, whple be offred facrifpces. And
there was wrought tronge treafon. 402 the.
people wente , andencrealed with Abfalom in
multitude. And there came a meflenger to Da-
nid and apd: the hertes of fhe mE of Zlrael are
turned after Xbralom: And Danid fapde vnto
all bis feruauntes that were wi) bpm at Jeru
falem: bp, that we mare be gone, fo2 wethall
notels efcapefrom Ablalom. Hake lpede tode

arte, left be come fodapnlpecatche ts, g bzing

ome mifchefe bpd vs, # (mptethe rptie with
edge of thefwerd. And F hinges ersatites fayd
punto bim:bepolde, thp feruatites airredy todo
whatforuermplozde thekpnge (hall appopnte:

And the Kynge and allbis houde, depar: x

ted on fote,andicit bebpndebym *tenconcubls irere ->
nestakepetbeboute. And io thekmgeandall Erra |

the people went out on fote, g tawe ina place
that wasfarre of. Andall bis fecrauntes went
aboute bpm. Andallthe Cerethitsandallthe |
gbhelethttes andal the Getbites-a mpsbetr menor **
warre) (enen {pre bundzed men whichwere come
on fote trom Get) )toenr before the tong. ThE
fapd the bynge to + Zfpai he Gethite: oherfore g.re.rvigs

| - Ommi


4 =


a |


| ` pr
i
J "ai


commeft thou with bss Returne eabpde with
the kpnge, foz thou art a ftraunger,and artere-
mouedfeom thpnc owne place. Thou camel
but pefterdape, and fpoulde F difquypete the to-
dape rto go with ves F wpll go whpther Fcan.
Cherfoze retourne thou,andcarpeagapnethy
brethren. Percpe and teuthe cecha ede owe fewe


+B bontote And Fthatanfweredthekpnge,elapo: |


as ttulyas Godlineth,andag mp lozd the king
Ipucth, in what place mp lozde the byng thalbe


whether ti death oz lpfe,cuentherealfo wilthp
€ leruaunt be. And Dauid the kynge fapdeto J= `


that:come then, and goo fozewarde. And Jepat
the Getbite went fozth,andall bis men, andal
> the chplozentbat were withbyim. Andall the
countrpe wepte with aloude bopce,and fodpd
all the people that went fozth. The kpnae alfo
bpm felfe pated ouerthe brooke Lipdzon. And
all the people went towarde the wape that lea
deth tothe wyldernefie- And Sadok and al the
Leuptes were with bpm, and bare the arke of
the appopritemiente of God. And there thep fet
dowone the arke of God: And Abiathar wet vy,
wut pli the people were atlcome ouer, out of the
cptie. And the kynge fapde ynto Hadok:Carpe
the arke of Godagapne into thetptie. BEY thal
fpnde fauoure in the epes of the Lozde, be wll
bing me agapne, and Hewe me bothit andthe
tabernacle therof.2ut ¢ Ethe Lozbde thus faye:
J paue no lut nto the, beholde, bere am J : tet
bym do with me, what femeth good in bis eyes.
fe. Chekypngelapd allo bnto Sadok the preet
txegirb. Art not thou a *{car 2 Returneintothecytiein
peace:and take pour twofonnes with pou, Abt
maas thpfonne , and Jonathas the foune of A-
biatbar. Webolde, J wyl tarpe in the feldeg of f
` = goplbderneffe , pntplltperecome tome wo2de fro
poutobe tolde mc. Sadok therfore and Abta-
tharcarped thearke of God agapne to Jerufa-
lera,andthep tarped there. And Dauid wente
bpon mount Dliucte,and weptas he wet,and
pad bis beedeouered, and went barefoote. And
alithepeopletbat was with bym pad euerp ma
bis beedcouered, andas thep wente vp, thep
wept alfo. Jnd one tolde Dauid, fapinge-Abt-
thophelis one ofthem that paue c{ppzed with
Adbialom. And Danid fayd:D Lorde turne the

confaple of Abitbophelintofoolpiinetie. —
hen Dauid wascometo the toppe of the
© mount be wo:pppped Good: and behold, Hulat
the Arachite cameagapnt bym with biscoote
tozne,andbaupnge cart) vpon pis heed. into
whome Dauid fapde: pf tbou go with me, thou
alt bea burtbé bntome. But pf thoureturne
to thecptie,and faye ib Abfalom: J wyll be
thy (eruaunte,D kyngt: (a8 J bauethis longe
“ben thy fathers fernaunt, fo am J now thp fer-
uaunte ) thou mapet fozmpfabe deffrope tie
4.tregam, counfaple of *Abitbophel. And thou halt there
riia bs. withthe Sadok and Abiathar the pretes, wn-
to whom thou alte theweall that thou cantt
beare out of the kyngesbhoule. And bebold.thep
» Pauethere witbthem thetrewo fones:Adimaas
&adoks fonne, and Jonathas Abtathars fon:
bptbemalf{o tal pe fende me al shat pe ca heave

A


r


iiAynges.


bym tocurle,*fo2 the


JEotrrh PEA

And fo * Pulai Dauds frende gat

cptte. And Abfold alfo centred into Jerufalem.
Ciba sspears ees Caper: falfelp ac:
cyfe aqiphiboteth. Semeicusteth S auth aud bur:


leth tones at bpm. Sbfalem(bp the counfaple hE Sz
bitbopbel)ipeth with bis fathers cogcubpnes,
e | $20 Wie Dauid was alitle pate
EG tm) the toppe of the byll:bevolde,siba X
A\ ies the leruatit of iphibolerh came
A \Se to mete Dpni, with a couple of al-
cng |i lesfaddled, and pponthemewmo
boy eS )undzedloues , andone bundze
‘Des of tepipnges, and an bundzed frapics
of deved fpgges, anda bottell of wpne. And tbe
kpnge fapd vito siba: what meaneft thou with
thefer And siba fap: They be alics fo2 the kpn-
ges Doutbolde to rpde on, andbzeed andfrute
02 the ponge mento eate, and wpne, that fiche
as be fapntin the wilderneffe may dipnise. And
tbe kpynge fapd: where is thp mafiers loner si-
ba anfwered vnto tie kpng: bepolde,he cavicey
pilat Jerufalem. oz be fapd:this daye Kell
the boule of Jfraclretoze me the kynadorme cf
mp father:then fapd the kynee tostba :bebolde,
e àll At ag Dito ¥ Hiphibo- | g
feth. And siba fapde : Fdo bomage te the: be= SF?
feche the, that ¥ maye fpnde graceinthp iprit,
mp lozde, D knee.

And when kpnge Dauideame to Wahurin ys
bebolde ,tbencameouta manofthe koneet of
the boufe of Saul, named Demet the foone of
Gera, and he came out curfpnge. And he caf fto
nes at Dauid and at all the feruanntes of Bpig
Dauid. Andall the peoplealfo, andalithe men
of warre were on i Dande, and on bys
lefte. And thus fayde * Scmet when pe curfed: eve sie
come fozth come fozthtbou blonder dder: and *
thouman of Belial. The Lozde hath beoughte
wponthe allthe blonde of the boufe of Sant, mn
whole teade thou bal rapgned, and the Lorde
hath delpuered the kpugdome into the bande of
Abfalom thp fonue. And behold, thou art come
totbp mpichefe bycanie p arta bloudgedarr,

Then lapde Abplat the foune of sarnia vito
the bpnge:wobp Doct) this deed dogge curfe mp ~
logde the kpnge r letme go now and faite of tive
beedof bpm. And the kpnge fayd: what baue y
to do with pou pe fones ofsarnia:lethim curte:
for the Lorde bath opdden pym curfe Danid —
Who barre then faye : wherfoze batt thou done
for And Daud {apd to Abifai, andto allbisfer
uauntes:bedoloc, mp fonne which came of mpne
owne bodpe,feketh mp lyfe. Dowe noche moze
tben mape this fonne of get oe it ¢ ony

02de Dat) bpdden DPM: iriver.,
bappelpe the Lozbde wyll loke on mp weppnge Ra
epes and weetchednefle,and do me good foz bis
cutipnge thts dape. Andas Dauw and bis men
went by the wape, Semeei wentalonge on the
bplles fpde oner agapnit bpm, andcurieoas he
went, and theewe Fonesat brm, and can duk.
Andthebpngandallthat werewithbymcame
werpe, andrefrelihed them felues*there. At Bibn

And Abialom and all the people of the mé of tim.

Aicaclcame to Jerufalë , and otaligi <P was
with bim,


i


ii.reg. pina


bymtorhe trereg.d -


—— E


j Dauid


ith hym. And as foone as Hulatthe Acachite
Dautos frend wascome tuto Abfalom,be (apd
pntobpm: God faune thekpnge , Godfauethe
kpng. and Abfald fayd agapiic to Hull:is thts
the kpndenefle thou oweft tothp frende s wbhp
wentet thou not with bym Hulatantwerd yn
to Xbfalom:napenot fo:but whom the Lozbe¢
this people andall the men of Flrael chofe, bys
wpll 3 be, and with bpm wyl 3 dwell.<t)02¢0-
ner, puto whd pall 3 de ferutce, but euen tobis
onne: And as FJwas feruaunt before w thy fa-
tber euen fo hall 4 be with the. The tpate Zb-
alom to Abitbopbel:gpue coŭfapl what ts bet
foz vs todo. And Abithophel fapd vnto Abfalo


ie - Fo. gee thein vnto thy fatbersxconcnbines, which


bebath left to kepe p boule. Andall Flracl Matt
Deare,that thou arte cait out oftbyfatber:then
al the bandeg ofalthat are with the be frog.
And Co thep pytched Ablaloma tente bpon the
toppe of the boufe. Aud be wentin unto his fa<
thersconcnbpnesinthetpabt ofall Ffracl.
Bud the cola pl of Rbitbophel which be cou-
fapled intboledapes, Wasasa man had afked
coiilaple of God:euen fo was all the cofifaple of
Rbirbophel, botpwith Dautdand w Abfalom-
Ther vty. chapter


£ Abithopbel einge bps countaple bptatowwes ef
Bufat,and Cozfakeu,bangeth bem clfe,


s Hithophellapdets Abfald:let me
e chofte out nowe tivelue thoulande
SPB men. And Fwpl vp ¢ folow after
Cee maui this night. and J Wil com
N ppon bpm whple bets werpe and
yo oy er weake baded,and wplfeare him.
And all the people pare with him Wal five And
fo 3 vol finpte f kpng onelp and wplbzpnga-=
gapneallthe people vntothe, euen ag ealeiyas
pe J wolde bepng any other thong. And wher
3 Haue flapne the man whom thou feket althe
people thallbauerelt : And thefapinge pleated
*bialom wel,andall the elders of Jael. The
fapd Abfalom: calalfo jpulaithe Arachite,and


let vs bearebis counfayle: When pula wag


come to Abfalom , Abtalom fpake,ynto bpm,
faping: Abitbophe: bath gputhfacde counfayl:
Shal we Do aftir bis faping,o2 Nostell thou


y _ Hularanfwercd onto Abfall , the cottfaple


that Bbitbophel bath aqpué, ts not good at this
ae 4£02(fapde Hutai) thou knowell thp fa-
cher, and bis men, bow that they be trong. And
thep be chafedin thepz mpndes,and are euen as
axbeererobbed of ber whelpes in the feld. ‘bhp


Pyo.Fbila fatherigaman alfo pra cepled inthe warre,and


€


maketh notarpinge with the people. Bebholde,
he lurketh nowe tn fome cane, 0} infome otber,
(fronge) place. Aud thou ab fone of pis men be
ouertbzowenat the fyette bzunt : pet thep that
heare tt wpll faye: Che people that fol ofve 3 b-
fala be put tothe wozie. And the bel men thou
pat, whole yertes are as the bertesoflionsival
Cozpnbe thereat. Wo? all Ficrael knoweth, that
thy fathecigampgbtpe man , and thep whiche
pe with bym,are all men of ware. EPI
Therfore mp counfaple ts, that alt ¥irael be
gathered bntothe, fri Danto Weerleba(which


areasthelande ofthe fein nombze ) andtbhat
thou go to battayle in tppne otne perlon. Wo?
fo pal we come wpon hunin one place o? otber,
where we thalfpnde him, and we wpl vpo him
cnen as thicke ag thedewe fallethon Pground.
And of allthe men thatare with bym, we Hall
not leave bym one. dDozeour, pl be be goten i
toatotone,then thalall tbe men of Zfrael bang
ropes totbat cytic, ¢ we wpll Dzawertt into the
cpuer, Dntpl there be not one fone found there.
And abfalom andallthe men of Bracllapd:the
countapl of pufai the Arachiteis better thet


the counfapl of Abrtbophel.+ oz it was CUNE terapis la
Lordes determinació to detroy the good coun D


faple of Abithopbel:p the Lorde mpage bzpnge
eupll vpon A bial. Whe fapo*
dok ¢ Biathar the pectes : of this and} mas
ner dpd AbithbopHel and the elders of Flracl cot
faple Abfal6. And thus € thus baue ¥counfap=
lcd. Now therfore fend quycklp, and ew Daz
nib, fapinge:tare notallnpgbt inthe feldes of p
Wpldernefle , but get the ouer, lelt the kpnge be
Deuouredandall the peoplethat are with bin.
How Jonathasand Ahimaas abode bp ý wel
of Rogel: ( fozthepmpabt not be fene tocome
into thecptie.) And a wenche wente , and tolde
them, And thep wet andihewedkypng Danid.:

Peuertbelefle, aladfawe them, and tolde tt


to Ablald.2wut thep went both of thbemaware _


quyckly, and came toa mans boule in Waburi,
whiche bad a wellin bis parde , intothe whiche
thep went Downe. Anda woma toke and fpzed
acouctlet ouer the welles mouthe, and firawed
furnnentpe cozne thercon. And the thpnge was
notelpped. And whe Ablalos {eruauntes came
tothe wrtetotheboute, they fapde: Whereis


Ahimaase Jonathas: The womananfwered ~ ~~


them: thep begone ouerthelptle brooke of wa-
tev. And when thep pad fought them, and could
notfpnde them, thepretourned to Jerufalem.
And as foone as they were Departed ,the otder
came out of the well, and went andtold kynge
Daud, andlapde bntobpm : bp, andget pou
pb eid ouer the water, fo? fuche counfaplbath
bitbopheqpuenagapnie pou: Then Danid
arote,and allthe peoplethat were with bpm, €
tbey were come oner Jordane bp that tt was
pape : fo that there lacked not one of them, that
Was not come over Jordan. And wien Spitho
belfawe, that bis counfayl was not folowen,
befadled bis ae and arofe, and gat bim Dome
to bigowone boufe and tobisownecptie ,e put
bis houtholde in ozdze, and panged bym felfe, €
dped, € was burped in p fepulchze of his father
Chen Dauid came to <Habenaim.And Ab


falom pated ouer Jordan, hea all the men of ©


Blrael With bym . And Abfatom made Amata
captapne of the Doft inthe fede of Joab, which
Amala Was a mannesfonne named Ferhza,
an Blrabelite, that went into Abigail p dough
ter of Rabas, {pier toseruia, Joabs mother.

So Pracl and Ablalom pptched inthe land of
Gilead. Anb when Danid wascome to Wabhas


naim, obi thefonne of Rabas out of * Wave diceg.rta


ba the cptie of the chyloz? of Ammon, and spas
3 chirthe


Abithophel


Pulai puto Aa regrog


= eS A a a


wOtalom

| chit the fonne of Ammiel out of Loneber , and

dine ie * Werselat P Gtleadite out of Roglim brought
bedoes, balens,erthen veflels, wheat and barip
floute,and parched cozne, beanes,rpce, otemele
bony butter, hepe and chele of kyne, fog Dauid
and all tbe people that were with bpm, to cate.
Foz thep fapde:the people ts pungrp, werp and
thpzitpe in the weploerneife.


F


_ | went onteinthe felde agapntte Firael, andthe


the male that was bnder pym went bis wel a


beneagapntt me. Chenlayd Joab: ¥mapyenot `

(tande thus tarpinge with E, ri l
And be toke thre fpeareginbis bande, and D

thu tbem thozowe Ablalom , whple be was

pet alpue on tpe body of p tree. And ten ruat

tes tbatbare Joabs weapons, turned ¢ finote

A blalom,and luehpm. Bnd when Joab blewe

thetropet, the peoplereturned from folotopng

Alrael. Eo} Joab (parcdtbe people. And thep

toke 2 bfalom, andrak him tnto a qreat pptin

the wood, andlapeda mighty great bepe of Fo»

nes pd bym. And all Jiraci fle to the pz tetes.

And this Abfalo pet in his lyfe tpimextose coil- ¢reg.rb.e

faple:¢ reared Dp appller, whicbets mn bynges

dale.. {Foz De fapd: F haue no fon, Andeberfore,

to kepe mp name tnremiembzaunce do Fit. And

Decalled the ppller after bis owne name. And

itiscalled banto this dape:Bblalomsprilec.

Then lapde Abimaas the fonne of Havok: Œ
letmerunne now,and beare the kyng trdinges
howe that the Lozde bath indged ppm quyte of
the bande of bis enemypes. And Yoabfapd vuto
bpm: thou art nomantobcare goodtpopnges:
today: Dou thalt beare tpoingegan otber time
but todape thou alte beare none : bpcaute the
kpngesfonne is deed. Then apd Zoabto Chua


And et bowed bpm felfe vnto Joab, and
tanne.


And Dauid fat betwenethetwogates. And E


Good tpdingeg mp lozdethekpng, fo2 P Lorde
- bath quyte


4


d a i
we a E


Maud


pe buro the people of guwa) Pedre mp bicthzen, mp bos


hathqupte'the this dape out of the bande of all
them thatroleagapntt the. And thekpna fapd
nto Chult: Fs the pounge man Abfalom fate?
Chufian{wered: The encmypes of mp lorde the
kpnge, and all that rple agapnite the to doo the
burte, be as that ponge manis. Andthekpnge
was moucd, ant wet vp toa chambee over the
gate and wept. Andas he went, thus be lape:
D mp fonne A dfalom, mp forne, mp fonne Ab
falom, wolde God J had dped fo: the:D Lbla-
lom mp fonne,myp fonne,
CThe.vir.Chapter
C Datidisrettorrh to bhis kpagrome and bisaght
agapneto Jerutalmii

ERE Mdit thas tolde Joab : Webolvde, the
w AA A kinge mournethand wepeth for b-
ficoatatalom. andthe ppyctozye ofthat vape
ase 4 wasturnedint S mo nerpa se Leap ei
the people. E02 the people bearbe tape tpar
ete t kpuae fozowed fo: bis fonne. And the
people ftaleawape that dape from gonge tnto
the cptie, as peopleconfounded to Geale awape
wben they fipein battaple. Wut thekpnge bpd
bis face,andcrped with a loude wopce. D mp
fonne Xblalom, D Abfald mpfonne, mpfonne.

And Joab came into the boule tothe kynge,
and fapo:tbou batt Hamed this day thefaces of
all thp feruauntes, which this dape baue faucd
thy lyfe,« the lpues of thy foncs-¢ of thy Dougd
ters,¢ the lpues of Soran tby concubt-
nes inp thou louet thpne enemics, batet toy
frcndes.feoz thou batt occlared this dap, ptbou
reqardett neither thp lozdes no? fernatites. And
fbig dape 3 percepue, $ pf Ablalom bad lputd,¥
all we bad dped this daye, P badpleated the wel
Pow therfore vp g come out, and {peake kpnd
iy onto thy feruatites: Foz J fiweare bp p Lozd,
excepte thou come out, there wpll not tarpe one
man with tbe this night. And that wil be worfe
wntothe,thenalltbe cuplip fell ontbe from thy


- youth vuto this boare. Chen the bpnar arole, g
Fat shane inthe gate. Andtheptolde ynfoall.


the people, faving: Beholde, the kpnge dot (pe
inthe gate. Andallthe people came before the
kpnge. wet JALAD cucrp man to bis tent.

Tno tt foztuned, that all the people were at


= € firpfe thozoweout all the trybes of Frac, fap-


ing : the Bpnge faucd Vg out ofthe bande of cur
enempës, be Belpucred vs ont of the band of tbe
Whlitines, ana now be ts fled out ofthe lande
02 Abild. Wut Abfatom whom we anopntes
puer z Sig Derd : in niod pace: : a
efoftyll, ý pebzpngenotthe kpngeagapne:
ndkpng Dauid fent to Sadok ¢ Abiathar p


pacettes,faping:fpeake puto the elders of Juda


and fape:woby are pe bebynde to bepng the king
agapne to big bouie, wing that fuche tpbynaes
is come fromalt ¥frael vnto the kpnge,euento
his bowie sow (Fo; the kpnge had fapte: Shas Galt pe Cape


neg and mp fei: wherfore then are pe thelatt p
bipnge the bpnge home agapnes And faye peto
mata:art thou not ofmy bones of myp fielther
Soddo fo fo tome,pé thou be not captapne of
the boottcto me fo; euct inthe roume of Joab.


=


mie!


tt. Sat


Aan be bowed P hertes of al fmen of Jude, cue
asthe Dert of one man:fo p thep fent this wode
top bpr ve: Returne thou wall thy feruauntes.
Soothe kpnge returned, came to Jodan. And
Juda came to Gilgal, foz to go Downe tomete
the Bpng,¢ tocbucp bpm ouer Jordan. And St


feth


meixthe fonne of Gera, fion of Jemini, which tire. rote


was of Baburim, baked and came with f men
of Juda to mete kyng Dauid andthere Wwerea


fhoufand men of Wen Jamin w bim, and L3tba itre. roha


the feruaunt off boute of Saul, and bis.rv.f6-
nesandtwentpeferuauntes with bom. And
thep went quycklp ouer Jordan before F png.
And there went ouer a boote that carped oner
kpnges boutbolde, and thep dpd bym pre
And Simei the fonne of Gera fell be

kpnge(as be tas come ouer Jordan) and fapa
pnto bpm let not mp lozdetmpute wyckeduefie
Dito me, no? cemebze the thynges that thy lere
uaunt dpd wWpckedlp when mp lorde the kpnge
Departed out of Ferulalem)that the king Huld
take it to bert. For thp (eruaunt dotthknowe,
bow that 3 baue done ampie. And therfore be-
bolde, Jam the fy this vape ofall the boute of
Foleph, that am cometogo bowne, fometemp
lozde the bynge. wut Abifatthe [onne ofsecruia
anfwered, andfapde: Wall not Semet dpe foz
this , bycaule he curled the Loses annopnted:
And Dauid fapde: what matterts betwene pou
andme, Pe Tonnes of scruta? o this Baye pe be
aduerfarpes vnto me. ball there anp man dpe
thisdapein Jlracls Moo not Zknowe, that F
am this dape ipnge ouer Jiracl ¢ And therfore
the kynge tapt tuto SHemet:thou halt not dpe
andthe &pugelware puto bpm.


onthe D


And Piphiboteth the fonne of Saul caine æ
alfoto mete thekpng, andbadneither walpa ~


bis feet no? Hanen bis beerde,noz waitped bps
clothes from the tyme the kpnge Departed, D=
tpilbe came agapne tn peace. Andit foztuncd,p
wheibe was come to Jerufalé, and met p king
the png fapd puto Dim: wherfoze wentelt not
thou with me Diphiboleth Pe anfiwered:mp
lode, D aig ilei (eruaunt difcepued me. Fog
thy teruaunt fapd: J wold baue myne afie lad-
led torpde theron, fo: to go tothe king, bycaufe
thy feruaunt is lame. 4 nd siba bath fallely rea=
ported of thy feruaunt onto mp lod the kpuge.
and mp lorde the kpngis aganaungel of God:
bo therfore what femeth good tn thpne epis.

fFo2 alutp fathers boule were but deedncn be
fore nplozdp kpnge, and pet Dpddeft thou ynt
thy feruatitamig them f dtdeatattbhyne otne
table. Ci bat epabt therfore baue FJ pet ,tocrpe
anp moze bnto the bene And the kynge yor
onto dim: wbp (peakett thou pet inthpne owne


caulecon (Htisdetermpnen,that)Z hane mpo: thou g Pe


siba Deupde the landes betwene pou. And Wi-
phtboleth fapd onto the kpng: pea, let bim take
all: foz fo mocheas my lode the hpngets come
agapne in peace Vnto his owne boule.

And Werfelat the Giliadite came downe frd
oglim , and went ouce Jordan w the kpnae,
focducp him ouce Jordan. Werlelai wasa verp
aged man, cuen fouretcoze pere olde, g proutded

the kpuce


a


Fa


b
| a aa


Amala ii Aynaes, jwo,th,


F thekynege of fulkenaunce, whPle he lapeat spa- trompet, g fapd: we baue no part in Danid, nei:


panang : foz be was a man of berpe greate fub-
atice. And the kpng {apd yuto erfelat:come
thou with me , and 4 wollfecde the with me in


te POLS Bory falé. And x Werlclai laps vntothe kyna:


H.


uu


Jam thusolde, and howam Y bable tago vp
with the Bynge nto Jerufalem: Jam this dap
Fonrefcopge pere olde:and can Y decerne bettoene
goodpreupll: Hath thy leruaunt anp taftein
that be eateth o: deynketh ¢ Can be beare anpe
more the vopce offpngpnge men and women?


Wiberfore thenthulde tpp feruaunt be peta bur


then vutomp lozbde the kynger Eby feruaunte
wvilgoalpftle wape ouer Jordan with F kyng
and why wrll tbe kpng recompence tt me witi


fucbe a cewaroes® let thp feruaŭt turne backe


agarne, that J inape dpe ih mpre owne cptic,
and( be buried inthe graue ofmp father and of
my mother. Bebolde, Dere is thy (ernaunt Cht-
meam, let bpm go with mp lozde the kpng, and
do tohyin-what ipall pleate tbe. |
Andthe bynge anfwered:Chimeam Gall go
withme. And F wylldoto bym that thou Malt
be content with. And whatloeuer thou Halt re
qupze ofc, that fame wpll Jo forthe.And al
the people went ouer Jordan. And when fP king
38 come ouer Jordan, be kpiled wWerlelat,and


bicico dpm, and de ent backagapne pnto hig


owne plafe. And thenp kpnge went to Gilgal,
and chumeamn went with bpm , and fodpdall
the people of Juda, and brought ouer the png
and there were but halfe themen of Jlrael.
And bebolde, all che men of Flraelcameto f
kpng,and lapd vnto him: whp haue our bzethzë
y men of Juda tolen theawap,¢ baue brought
the kpag ¢bisbonuthold,andall Dauids men w
bym ouer Jordan: And all the men of Juda an-
wered men of Jirael:-tbekpnyeisnere ofkpn
to vs: wherfore be pe angry foz P mater: thinke
pep weeate ofthekpnges cot, oz ý we take bs
any apftes: And p men of Firacl anfwercd the
men of Juda, qfapde: toe pave ten partes in the
‘png, g banc thertomozerpabt to Dauid then
pe.cciby thë dpd pe difppfe vs, tbat our aduple


= {ould not be fpi bad, inreltoring our kpnge a=


apne? And the ozrdes of p men of Juda were
Fearcet then thewozdes of the men of Jirael,


ther baue toe enberttaunce in the fonne of Zlat,
let the men of Firael departe Dnto thep2 tentes.
Andfo euerp mant of Ffrael wen from Dauid
and folowed Seba the fonne of Wichet.wWut the
men of Juda claue fat ynto fhep2 kpnage, from
g020an to Jerufalem.

And Dauid came to his boufe to Fernfalem,


*and toke the ten women bis concubines , that i.res.rb,®
be bad lefte bebpnde bpm tokepe the boufe, ang #7


put them in warde,and fedde them: but lapenos
moze with them. And fo thep were cnclofed vr-
tothe dap of their death, lpuingin wpdowbod,

Chen fayd the kynge to Amafa: call me the
men of Juba togprberagapnit the thyzddaype,
and be thou bere allo. And fo Amafa wit toca
ther the men of Juda togpther: but tarped lon-


rt thé the d es wich be bad appopntedbim: ©


nd Dauid fapdto Abifat:now iball Srba the
forme of ichi do bs moze harme,thé oyd Jb-
falem. Cake thou therfoze thp lozdes feruaun-
tes and folowe after bpm, left be get bpm wal-
ledDcpttes,and elcape bs. Dud there went out at
ter pym Joabs më, and the Crethites thebe
lethites,and allthe mpabtpetmen. Anotbep
Departed out of Jerulalé, tofoloweafter Deva
the fonne of ichi. Aud whe thep were at the
nD Joabs garmente (that be bad about ppm)
was eo vato bpm, and be badagyzde thereon
& knypte, which was gpzded falt ro hislopnes in


- fuch atbecth, that(as be went) it fel fomtpmes


out: Aud Joab faid to Amala:art thou inbelth
inp brother? And Foabtoke Amala by the chpn


with tberpgbt band to* irie bym. Sut Jma- D70.FFbi.s


fa toke no bede tothe kupfe that was in Joabs
banbe,foz thervotth be (mote him xint be (boate
rpbbes, and hed out bis bowelsto the ground,
and tb2ult at bpm nomoze,and be dyed.


And Joabe bilai his beotherfolowed after p
Seba p fon of Wichu:€ one of Joabs men tode `


bp bim,¢ fap :be p bearctianp fauourte Joab
02 godd wpllto Dawid, let bpm qo after Joab.
And Amala lape walowed iu bionden y mpd
deg of f thay. And there was a mã, which when


be fawe * p alltbe people tode tril, berowled iresiie


Amafa out of f wap intothe feld, e cata cloth
vpõ bint, bycaufe be lawe that cuery oae $ came
ftode Eyll bpbym. And affoone as he was tom-
bled oute ofthe waye ali the people went after
“goab,to folotve after Seba the lone of Bichri. -


And be went thozowe al the tribes of Frael œ


pnto Abel, and Wethmaacha andalthe places
of Garin. And they gatbared tog prver, t ent
after bym. And thepcame,and betieqed Demin
Abeland Wethmaacha, And they calte ops
banke agaynft the cptic that Lode in the valiep
Ail the people that was with Joab, thule at
tic wall to ouerthzowelt. Thencepeda wple
wora out ofthe cytie, beare, beare, bpd Joab
come bptherthat Imay fprake with bpm. whe


Joab was come buto her, the woman fapd Vne sp


tobpm:beare the wordes of thpne bandDmapode.
And be anfoocred:¥ 00 Heare:¢ He fayd agapne
Thep (pakern the olde tpme, ping : men mut

aike peace


reat ffonein Gibeon, Amala went befoze thé. T


if,teg. tia


ee å


S aules fonnes
Alke peace Epik, bow moche rather Hulde thep
fo do to) Xbrlr Æo: lo batte tbep chtinued(hieder
to:) Jam one of them , that are peaceable and
faptbfnll in Jfrael: and thou gori about to de-
ftropacptie anda mother in Zlracl.Cabp wplt
thou deuoure theenberitaunce of the Lozder

> Bnd ZJoabanfwered,andflapd:Godfosbpd,
CSodfozbpdit me, that 3 Hulde epther Deuoure
o: defrope. The matter ts not fo: buta man of
mount Ephraim (Seba the fonne of Wichy by
name ath lpft vp bis bãdagapnit f png, en€
ayapni Dauid. Delwer vs hum onelp,¢ 3 wwpl
Depart from the cptie. And p woman fapd Ynga
4 Joab : Bebolve bis heed halve thzowen tothe
Duer the wall, And then the woman went Yn-
to all f people xb her wyfaome. Andtbhey {note
of the beed of Weba the fon of Bichri, and caft it
ices.iis ontto Joab .xAnd be blewe a trõpet and they
{catered fed the cptic,euerp nd to bis tent. And

Joabreturnedto Jerufalem Ynto the bpnges
Joab was ouer all the bootte of Jlrael. And
MWanaia the fon of Fehoiada was oucrthe Cre
thites and pbeletiites. And Aburam was o
uerthe tribute. And Jebofaphat the fonne of
Aliud wasrecozder. SHeua wasferpbe. And
S adockand Abiathar were the peeks, And

Jra the Jairite was Dautds peck,
C The.rrt.Chapter.
 Dhiedeare peres. Tbe bengeaunre of the (prneeol Saul
irgbteth on bis. bit.fonnes, which are banged. Foure greate
batts ples which Dauit had agapnft the DL witines.

ate Hen there fell anbungee inthe dapes

a EA | Ma | of Dauid, thie peares togpthce. And

lav eae Dautd engupzed ofthe Lo:d. And the
Gees Hose anlweeed:tt is for Daul and p

ficerrits Douie of bloud, bycaule be flucthe*Gtbaonites

And the kyng calledthe Gibaonites, and fapoe

pnto thé: (Mow p Gibaonites were not of the

«chplozen of Ffrael, but arénaunt of f Amori-

tee, andthe childsé of F{rael fwware wnte them:

And Saul fought to laye thé:for a sete that be

had tothe chplozé of Blrael g of Juda. ) Cliper-

Foze anid {apd wnto them: what thal J dofo

you, ¢ wherwith al J make the attonement
pemape bleie the enberitaunce of the Lorde’

| Che Gibaonites anforred hym:tHe wpll
aue no fpluer noz golde , cf Saul, nozef bps
oe fe: neptber igit cur mpnde that thou Houl:
det bylanp ma in Firad. Be fepd: what fape pe
then f J thal do foz pour Thep anfwered F king
the man ý cofumed vet pmagined to being bs
tonougbt, bim tepl we deffrop, thatnought of
bimcontinuctn any of thecoftes of Firacl. Let

* _* feuenmenofbis fonnesbe delpucred dnto vs,
and we wyl hange them bp vnto the Lorde, in

. Gibeabof Haul, whom the Lozde dpd chole.
Aud the kyngefayde:F wpll qpue thempou.
25 Wutthekpngebadcompaiiionon By bibo
pr tbe fonne of Jonathas tbefonne o Back
peaule of the Lordes othe , thet was betwene
them : cucn betwene Danid and Jonathas the
fonneof aul. Wuthetoke the two fonncs of
Rispa the douchter of Ala (whom the bare yn
to Saul)even Armoni and rphiboleth, and
the f pute fones of S)ichol( $ Donghter of Sant)
whom Me bare toDdzielthe fonne of Weriilat,


Folk, ipt.


ii. Samuel.


the Heholathite. And be delynered them drio
the bades of the Gibeonites, which hanged the .
inthe byll befoze the Lozde. Andthep fell all fe-
net togytber, and were flapne inthe dares of
batueft:ené in the fp2& dayes,andin the begpn:
nynge of barlpe barucf. |

And Rispa the doughter of Ata toke fascloth C
and panged it bpfoztbem bpontherocke,cucn .
from the begpnnpnae of barueft , vnrplirapne
Dropped Dpon them out of beauen: and futero
nepther the bp2zdes of the apze tofall on tbem bp


‘Dape, nozbeattes of the feldebypnpabt. Andie *


was tolde Dauid what Rispatdedougbterof -
Ata the concubpne of Sanl bad done :and Da-
ud wentand toke the boneg of HSaulandofjo © `
natbas bis fonne from the men of Jases in Gi-
lead ( whiche bad tolen tbem from tbe trete of
Wethfan where the Pbtliftines bad banged the
woben the Pbhilftineg had layne Saul in Gil-
boa) And be bzounbt thence the bones of Haul
andthe bones of Jonarbas his onnes, andthep
toke bp the boonrs of them that were banged.
Hnd tde bones of Haul and Jonathag bis tone
buryed they inthe countepe of Wen Jamun in3e
la, in the fepulcbze of Cis bis father. And wher
thep bad perfourmedall that the kpnge comaun
bcd, God was thenat one witb the lande.

3t foztuned, that the bilifines bad pet war D
agapne with Frael. And Mauid went downe,
and bis {cruanntes withbpm , andfougtte as
gapni the Pbilitines.And Danid wared fayn
tpe, and Felbp of Nob one of the ines of the ap
auntes( the pzon of whole fpeare wapedthze bü
Dred iycles , andhe beinge gpzdcd with a newe
Cwerde thought tobaue flapne Dauid. x Wut tive-pris.e
Abilat the fonne ofsaruiafuccouredbym, and _
fmote the Pbiliftine, and kpli bpm. Thentbe
feruauntes of Dautd {ware puto bim, lapinge:
Chou halt go nomoze out with vstobattayl
that thou quenche not the Ivabt of Jieael. Rud
pet after this , there wag a battaple w the Ebi-
litinesat Qoob, and then Sibbechat the Hula
thite flue Sapb, whpche was one of the fonnes
ofthe Gpauntes. `

Andtlere wag petan other battapl tnx ob itar. rris
with the Pbiliftines , where Elbana the fonne
of Jaere Drafn, a Wethlebemite flue one Gos
lia a Gethite:the ftaffe of whofe fpeare was as
gréate as a Weaurrs cloth beame, n

And there was pet another battaylinGeth

where wasa man of a great ature and badon
cuerp hand vt.fpngers,¢ on cucrpfote. vites,
rritu.tn all. And was bozne allo of Papnered of
the gpauntes in Geth. And when he defped Ji-
rael, Jonathas thefonne of Simea the brother
of Daud flue him. Thele foure gpanntces were
boznein Geth, andfel into the hande of Dauid,
andinto the Dandes of pis feruauntes.
er whe fongo f Aa rye bape aie ‘S nempe. a
PANE) Ro Danid fpake the wozdes of this
Awe) long wnto f 102d, whattyme f Load
VEFA Gy Dad deliuercd bim eut of f bano o? al

s Dig enemies, ¢ out ofthe båd of Saul

And pe apde: the Lozdeismprocke pa mp

calreil,


ave panged


ee


+ — lo ee


Daud ij Lynges Soli,
caffel and mp Delpuere2.God is mp ftrength,in andfettethme fat Dponmp bpeholde.

bym wpll Feruk:hetsmy hplde,anBeyepome x He teacheth mp bandeg to fpabt,that euen D |

of mp falnacis:mp wozbpp and mp refu ge:mp &boweoftteleisto weake fo2zmipnearmes.  Picriitiia, |

fauioure,thou halt fane me from wzonge. _ Chou bak geucnmetbe thplde of thp faluact |

paroita x J wplcal onthe Loz whichis peaple woz on, and Wpth thp loupnge mekenes thou doef i

thy, and lo Mall F be faucd from mpneencmpes multtplpeme. Chou alte make mefpace to |

Fo the cozrupciong ofdeathcloledmeaboute: walke in,é mp legges (hal not faple me. 3 twp H

the Roudes of Belial put mecinfeare. Thelozo- followe vponmyne enempes tdeltrope them, € j

wesofhellecompafedmeaboute :thefnareg of turne not agapne yutyl Fhaue confumed them. |

death oucrtokeme. Yn mp tribulacion wyll F 3 Wwpll wate them amdtmptethem, that |

|


call Opon the Lozde,andcepetomp God. And they allnet be abletoarpte: pea,thep thal fal
be ball beare mp vopce out of bys temple, and ondecmp fete.

mp cepethall enter tntobpseares. Theearth Thou halk ie meaboute topth mpabte
trembled and quaked:the foiidacions of heaucn to bataple,and the that arofe agapnit me ba tte
moned and Huke,wbenbewasangry, thou fubdued vnder me.

28 Smoke went pin bps wath, confuning  Ændthon made mpne enempes (and them
fp2¢ ont of bps mouth, cooles were kindled ther that bated meto turne thep2 backestomethat
of. And he bowed heaué, ecamedowne,etbere F mpabhtdeltrop them. Thep loke Fo 2? belpe but
Wasdarkenes onder bps fete. Andhefat pon There iSnonetolauetbem: Pee, euen unto the
Cherub g dpd Epe,bewasfene carped vponthe Lozdedothepcepe, but he Deareth them not.
wpnges cothe wpnde. Hemadedarkenegata>  Fwpll heate tbem as {male as the dult of the
bernacle rode about bpm, waters gathered carth: g Wwpl Lampe them as thedpzt of f frete
togetber in thpckecloudes. Chazow Poaygbt- andwpllfpreadethem above.
nies of bis pectence were thefpzecooleskpndled = Thou Halte delpuce me fromthe diffention

6 Ob EVondged from peuen the thatismofte ofmp beople:tbou thalt kepe meto be an beade
bye dothe put out bis wopee. He Mot avo wes, g ouct nacpons : the people hpehe Fknewenor,
{catered thein-be burled lightning,¢ ouctthzeto faili erue me,
them, Che fowpuges of the {ee appeared, the DHicaunge chpld2en diffemble trth me. Ae
foudactons of the wozlde were fene, bp f realon the brarpnge of the eare thep obepe me:
of therebusinge of the Lozde,¢ thoowtiebla = Straunge chpldzen wll hapneke awape, €
ftynge of the becath ofbpsnotettrelles.be hall thép albe finptten topth fearein thep2 preupe
fendefrs heauen,sfct me, bepal plucke meout chamber. God tS alpue,¢ bleffed be mp maker:
ofmany waters. Hethaldelpuerme Frommp magupfped be God, mp motte tronge faluacis.
mpgbtye aduerlarp, efrommpne enempes,foz Btis God that aiuengeth me, beingeth downe
thop ace to Rronge fo: me. wien tbepbaùdouer- thepeople ynder me. De Te inc frompn

Fawciime tithe Dape of mp calamitic the Lozde enempes,thou alfo (halt lpfteme bp onbpe fra
ated ine pp. sfo: be bought me out into touth themtbatrpfea gapntk me, thou thalte oe ipuer
be delpuered ine, becaufe bebadaloue yntome. mefrom the wpcked men.

q. * TheLordewplrewardemeaccordpngta And thetfoze J wpll prapte the(D Lode)

tiema.ti.o HP Epgbeioplenefle:accogding to the purcnes of amonge Pnacions, € wl fpnge nto thp name.
Mp Hades wil perecd pence me.fto2 Jhauc kept Wibpch Heweth creat faluactonfoz bis kpnae

the wapes of the Lord, edoneno topckedicsa= €dealeth mercpfullp opto bys anopnted: euen
gapniimp God. forallbpslawes areinmp Wwpth Dauid, and wpth bys tede For euermoze.
lygit.and bis tatutes tpl not ¥ put awap fro


-


nie. 30 bys lpabt alfo bauc bene yndefpled, € C The.rriti. Chapter.
pane kepte me fro mpne owne iniquite. C Thr lat cmuntcacpon of Dauid,and the defcripepon
And the Lode dydto me agapue,accogdpng — OF hempabepemento ppm belengpnge, 4


tomp rpghtconties, eucnafter mp purenesin P= =Tpelebe the lakt fapenges of Dauid, Da-
bps epelpadt. pth the codlpethou alte be pa kag Othe Lonnie of Flap fapd: And theman
Codlp.and wopeb the ma that is vn corupt thou SS=, whpcbetas made, theanopnted of the
halt be oncoztupt.cGithtbepure thou thaltbe Godot Jacob and p noble yfalimitt of 3irael)
pure-and oped the frowarde thou thaltebefros fapde : fhe {pete of tbe Lozdefpakebp me, and
Warde. And the poore copletbhat areinaduer= bps wo2dewasin ip tonge. Zhe Godok 7
fite,tbou palt belpe. Andon the proudeibalte rael oe of me, enenthemooft mpgbtp of Fi-
thoucalltbpneepes. @houartemp lpght D rael.tapbe:be that bearethrule ouerin en, ought
Lozbe:the Lozbe thalllpahe mp darkencife. toruietmftlep in thefeare of God. Anda sthe
Toz wyth thy helpe F wplirunne thozowe momnpnge lpght when the Sonnets vp,a mo-
anbooft of men, andinmp Sod wyl F {pipnge npngein whicharenocloudes folet the bapabt
ouer a Wall. Gedis Wncozrupteinbis wape:tpe nestas the gaffe of the earthis bp Che vertuc

wo2de of the Lozdeis trpedin thefpze:beistbe of therapne. bal not mp boule belo with gop tite bitis,
defender of all them that trut in bpm. _ *storhe hath made wpthmeaneuerla png co
Fo: ohois.a Godfaue the Lowdezand whois ucnaunt, parf pte g fureimall popntes:and tbps
mpgbtye,faueourGods Goditrengehethme is frulp all my bealth and allmp deipze that it
LUD power-trpddeth f ape in battapleleare Srowe but not as grafic. wut f pngodlp må of
betope me. He makety mp fctelphkebartesfete, 2Secliall albeasa thone ig pate
| vel


Baud ij. Aynges. Captyues
which tan not be taken wyth andes: wWutthe Meobnai f Hulathite : selmi an Abobite: Wa
man that palltouche them, muft baue pron, 02 barai f Metopbatite: Heleb pfonne of Waanad
alongebelue. x Deellesmuflthepbeburnte an Metoppatite : Jtdat plone of Ribaiout ofa
‘par.ritb, oped fp2e in the fame place. ppl of p child: abu P Pdi
‘hele be the names of the mpabtpe méwhd tonite:ipedatot Prpuer of Gaas: Abialbo p Ar
y5 mauid had: one that fate tn the teate of wple- bathite: Afmauethaa wWarbumite: Elihaba a
dome, bepnige cheret amonge thze,vleafaunte Saalbonite:¢ the fonnes of “Jalen, Jonathas,
fhasheand frronge:be fluc, vit. Hundzed at one Hama f Hararite. Abia the foneof Spararan
tyme. Bfter bym was Eliasar the fonneofo Pararite. Eltphelet pfonne of albai p ronne
dithe Lonne of A bobi, onc of the thre worthpes of a Baachathite: Eliam tbe fonne of itho-
with Dauid, which ocfped the WbHtlitines that phel f Silonite: 4 )
were there gathered together to battel:whethe Arbite: Jagal the tonne of Mathaofsoba: Want — `
men of #lracl were gone wp. e arole and lapea the i °
onthe Dhilitimes wutpll bys hand was werp, thite,wbpcb was the barnefbearer of E the ...,
claue vonto the {tocarde.Andp Lod gaue great fonne of surta. Jra p Jerhzite:Gareb p Jethzit
pyctozp p fame Dap. And p peoplecwbecd ad fi) Uizia the etbhite,thpztp and fenen in all.
ve returned, € went after bimiroruneto thefpoples CTbhe.rr
After bpm thas &) amma the [onne of R ge the z E Dauid raureth the people to be nombzed , # therfore
Hararite: and $ pPobiltttiues gathered together 2 _ there ppeaire.cbourande.
be(pde a towne. Where wagaparcellotlante RERET
full ofrpee and the pegple flenfromebe Ppilite Mes


nes. Wut he froveinthe mpdves of the grounde, pay Sicapnitthem,in that be fapde:xgoand ‘
and defended it, and ne the Phuibincs. And EsSeSnombee slracl ¢ Juda. Moztheupnge wro.rer.b
the Lorde gan great victory. fap? to Joab thecaptapne of bys booft:go thou
x Thele thze (wmbpch were of the Anis chef abzodenowe, thozowe out all the trpbes of 3i- p’
€ captapnes went doneto Dauid m parueft tael, euenfrom Dan to Weer Deba, Enombze


cparaib tpme wnto the caue of Adullam, andthe poof pethe people,that J map knowe the nombze of
the Pbiliftines abode in the valep of qpauntes them. and Joab fapd vtto the kynae. y belech
And Dauid was then inanholde. ano tycfous the Logdetbhp God,to make thp people as ma-
diours of the Philtiiines were wi wWetbleem.  NPMoagthep be: peaandan hundzed tpmesto
And Dantd longed and lapa: sDb, that Fbad Manp mo,and tyat the epes of mp logde Phittge $
of the water that isin tye well by the gate of mapefethen. Andrwbatisthecaule that mp
wetblebem,foz to Dzinke. And tbe rtur mpgbtp lozdethe kpnge bath a lutt to thys thpnge: ot . ee:
Drake thozowe the hoott of the Ppiliftines,and wWithitandpng the kynges Wo2rde prenayled a- T
Fet water out of the well of Werbhlebe that was gapnit Joab €agapnt p captapnes of the bot.
bp the gate,and toke brought itto David. e And Joab g thecaptaynes of the poot wentz?
nectbeles be wolde not dunke therof, but ekre out from tbe pretence of the kpnge,tonombge p 5 |
it unto the Lozde,and {apd :the Lozde fozbpd p peopleot Zracl.Andthep paled ouer Jordan, a
J puide Dolo. Jg not thys the bloude ofpmen andpptchedin Aroer on the rpabt fpveof the cp
that wenteinieopardp of tbepzlpuescandther- tie that lpeth in the middeg of the valep of Gad
foze he wolde not drpnëe it. And fhefecbpnges oucragapntt Jazer, And then thep came to Gi
mA thefe thee muabtp men.x A bifa the beother lead, q to tbe netherlande, Where Was anew ja
tireo rrid Of Joab, p fonne of Haruiad, Wag chefeamõge bitacion,gfrom thence thepcameto Dan Faan
thecbze, ebelpfte vp bys fpcare agapnit thie about to Sidon, ¢cameto the fronge pelde of
pundzed,and flue them, t bad thenameamonge @pzcttoaltbhecpties of the Heuttes eof Ca
thetbze. ozbe wasnobler manthentbetbze, nantes, tthen tornt out to the South of Juda
and was ihep: captapne. Howdeit be attapned
not Dutoon(tbe tretze. Fates | y c
oa - And Wanaiadu plonne of Fehotada (Pine to Serufate agapne,aftee pende of npnemone=
gp of ampgbty man) valpafit in acteg,ofmabseel these twenty dapes. And Zoab Delpnered Dp
fluc tio ftrdqe lpos,euélpos of Moab. ewer thendbee ¢ fume of p people puto f kypnge.And |
downealfo, {luc alpoina pyt in tpmeot inot there were in Fracl epabt bädd thoutand me -|
And he fue an Eqypctana goodly bygge ma, ofmpabe that dete fweardes. And the men of


whpcb badafpearein bps babe. Wut be wente Juda were fpue hundzed thoufande men. ma
Downe tobymwpth a Maffe, ¢ plucked p fpeare And Dantds berte fmotc hym,aftcr that be ed
out ofthe Eqpycias bade, efluchpm wpthbps hadnombzedthe people. And Danidlapd vnto ay

ownefpeare. Chete te Ya dpd Banatahup the Lorde: F bauefpnnedercedpuglp in that 3 oe e
fonne ok Jehoiada,ebadp nameamogepthze baucdone. Andnowe Lozdetake atvaye the A


woztbpes . Ye was honorable amonge thpzty, trefpace of thpferuaunt , fo? 3 Paue Done vetpe
but he attapned not to thecfpet)thze. And Dae foolpihlp. And when Dauid was vp ina mo-
uid made bpm of brs cotcel. Afabel ý brother of npnge.the worde of theL opde came bnto p pro-
Joab alfo was one of thetbyztp. Che Elbana phete Gad mauids fear fapeng : goand fap vit 4
the fonine of D000 of tethlebe-ama Paro to Daud, thusfapethp Lorde: ¥ offre tbethze
nite:Elice P Harodite:Ipeles p Paltite: Ira the thpnaes.chofe p tepych of the 3 palivo puto yp.
fone of Akes p Chehotte: Abreserof Anatboth ` So Gadrame to D anuid and hewed pemg
: ' b apo


fo


"~


La


Dauid ;


apd nto ppm. Miplte thou baue feuen peares
bonger to come in thp lande, oz wplte thou fice
itt. monethes befoze thpne enempes,tbep Folow
puge the, o2 that there be thzedapes peftilence
in thp lande; Rowe therfezre adupfe the, and fe,
wbat anlwere F ball apue tobpm that fente
me. And Dautdlapde Ynto Gad: Jam iner-
treme trouble. *tie Dopll fall nowe into p bade
of the Lozde,fo2 muche is bys mercp,and let me
notfall iuto the bande of man.

Aid fo the Logde fent a peltilence in Flracl
fromthe nk hi ynto the tpme appopnted.
And there dped of the people fró Dan to Weers
febafeuentp thoufande men. And when the an-
Gell Eretched out his bande bpon Jerufalem to
deftrop it,tbhe Lozde bad compaffion to do that
euelland fapde tothe angell that Deftroped the
people:tt is nowe {ufficient : bolde thpne bande.
And the angell of the Lozde was bp the thre-
pnge place of Arefna the Jebulite. Aud Danid

pake onip tie Lozde( When be fatoc the angell
that fmot? p people )¢ fapd:lo, itis F tbatbaue
fpnned, and F that bauedone wyckedlp. ut
thefe thepe, what haue thep Doneslet thine bade


(J paye the) be agapnit me andagapnit mp fa _


thers boufe.

And Gadcamethefamedape to Dauid and
fapd vuto bpim:qo Dpandteare anaultare Yn-
tothe Lozde inthe theetbpng flowze of Arcfna
the Jebulpte. And Dauid (accozdpnge to the
fapeng of Gad) wente vp, as the Lozde comai
bed. And Arefnaloked,andlawe the kinge and
bps {eruauntescommpnge towarde bpm. And
Avcina went out : and bowcd ppm felfe before
the kynge flat on bis face upon theqrotide,and
Arctna lapde: wherfore is mp lozde the kynge


~~come to bps feruaunt: Dauid anfwered: to bpe


the thzetbpng fotze of the, and to makean aul
fare Ynto the Lozde, that the plage mapeceafle
fram the people. |

And Arefna Cayd vnto Dauid: let mp lozde
the bpnize take ¢ offre what femeth bom good
tn bps epes: Beholde here be oxen foz burnt{a-
crilice , anDilcabdes € tbe otber intrumenteg of
the orenfoz wood. ÆU thele thpnaes dpd Aref-
na gene Dntothe kpnge, and fapd mozcouer vn
tothe &pnge:the Lozdthp Godaccept the. And
the kpngelapD unto Arefna : not fo but 3 wpll
byeit ofthe at a pzpce, and wpll not offre facri-
{pce Uhto the 10:0 mp Good of that which doth
cofme nothpnge. ntlo Danid bongbt the
thecibpnge foure, and the oren foz fpftpelpcles
of fpluer. And Daw buple there an aultare yn

tothe Lozve, and offered burntfacrifices

and peace offerpnges. Andfothe
L olde Was tntreated foz
thelande. And the
plageceateD y
glad
Ss {racl. hai
ris


€ The ende of the feconde boke of Samuel:
-otberwple called the feconde boke
of the apnaes,


iij. Apnaes


The thyrde bokeof the


kpnges after therekenpnge of the La-
tintftes : whpch thp2d boke and
the fourth alfo,is but one
top th the Hebzues.


C The fpei Chapter:


(Le Ponge bprgpne Abifag kepeth Danio in hpsertreme
age Zoonia occuppeth the realme bntwptepnae to hps faz
ther. Salomon is anopnted kpnge , and fo Avon {a getteth
bpm atape, é


oe = Ve a SS Se a
a =e a = — [ans cial E
= A
L dae pani i
rme S: Ag
sist = z
palais


NS eee
F E i
LJ


SPA ee kpnge
HAAN frpken in peares:fothat when
€ EF =4 (hcp covered pym with clothes
PA Ws be caught no beate: wherioze
ua wag bys Ceruaiites fap nto bim:
PEE Elet there be fought foz mp lord
Pek SktheBpngeapongemapden, to
tande before the kpngeand tocherpthe bpm.
And let ber Ipem thp bofome,that mp lozde the
kpnge mape get peate. And fo they fought foz
atap2e Damofell thozowe out alltbecoattes of
Alrael,and founde one Abifag a Sunainite, g
bought ber to the kenge. And the damofel wag
ercebpnge fapze, andcherpibed the kynge , and
mpnitred to him. Gut the kpnge knew per not.
And Poonta the line of Hagith eralted bpm
felfe,fapenge: 3 wplbe kpnge. And pe gat bpm
charrettes € boplemen, efpity më toriine before
bym. And bps father wolde not dilpleate bpm
at anp tpme,no2zlapd fo muche to bpin.as, whp
dock thou lo- Andhe wasa goodly man, a bps
mother bare bpm nerte after Rbfalom. Andhe
tokecounfelat Joab thelonne of sarufa,andat


Eor


nid thas olde F y


Abiathar the pet. Andthep helped Adonia. 5


Wut Dadock the prett, Sanaiavu plone of Fe
boiada, Nathan the prophete, Semei and Ret,
anbdall the men of mpght toppch were wpth Da
uid, fauoured not Adenia. And Adonia facrifp-
ced (hepe and oren,and fat catell, bp the tone of
sobeleth, wbpch ts falk*bp the well of Rogel, g


calledalibys becthzenthe kyngesfonnes, and Jeter.


themenot Juda the kpuges Ceruauntes. Wut
Lathan the Pzopbete and wWanaiabu , ‘and
the otber mpabtpe men , and Salomon bps
bother pecalled not. | Ne
Wiberfore Mathan (pake nto Wethlabe the
mother of Salomd, fapeng-balt thou not berd
bowe p Jdonta p Conne of Hagithdotbraigne,
and Dauid our lozde knowerh itnots Mow chee


fozecome,¢€ 3 wpll gpue f councel, bow tofaue


Fü thpne


V/s
sll


La


Dauid ;


apd nto ppm. Miplte thou baue feuen peares
bonger to come in thp lande, oz wplte thou fice
itt. monethes befoze thpne enempes,tbep Folow
puge the, o2 that there be thzedapes peftilence
in thp lande; Rowe therfezre adupfe the, and fe,
wbat anlwere F ball apue tobpm that fente
me. And Dautdlapde Ynto Gad: Jam iner-
treme trouble. *tie Dopll fall nowe into p bade
of the Lozde,fo2 muche is bys mercp,and let me
notfall iuto the bande of man.

Aid fo the Logde fent a peltilence in Flracl
fromthe nk hi ynto the tpme appopnted.
And there dped of the people fró Dan to Weers
febafeuentp thoufande men. And when the an-
Gell Eretched out his bande bpon Jerufalem to
deftrop it,tbhe Lozde bad compaffion to do that
euelland fapde tothe angell that Deftroped the
people:tt is nowe {ufficient : bolde thpne bande.
And the angell of the Lozde was bp the thre-
pnge place of Arefna the Jebulite. Aud Danid

pake onip tie Lozde( When be fatoc the angell
that fmot? p people )¢ fapd:lo, itis F tbatbaue
fpnned, and F that bauedone wyckedlp. ut
thefe thepe, what haue thep Doneslet thine bade


(J paye the) be agapnit me andagapnit mp fa _


thers boufe.

And Gadcamethefamedape to Dauid and
fapd vuto bpim:qo Dpandteare anaultare Yn-
tothe Lozde inthe theetbpng flowze of Arcfna
the Jebulpte. And Dauid (accozdpnge to the
fapeng of Gad) wente vp, as the Lozde comai
bed. And Arefnaloked,andlawe the kinge and
bps {eruauntescommpnge towarde bpm. And
Avcina went out : and bowcd ppm felfe before
the kynge flat on bis face upon theqrotide,and
Arctna lapde: wherfore is mp lozde the kynge


~~come to bps feruaunt: Dauid anfwered: to bpe


the thzetbpng fotze of the, and to makean aul
fare Ynto the Lozde, that the plage mapeceafle
fram the people. |

And Arefna Cayd vnto Dauid: let mp lozde
the bpnize take ¢ offre what femeth bom good
tn bps epes: Beholde here be oxen foz burnt{a-
crilice , anDilcabdes € tbe otber intrumenteg of
the orenfoz wood. ÆU thele thpnaes dpd Aref-
na gene Dntothe kpnge, and fapd mozcouer vn
tothe &pnge:the Lozdthp Godaccept the. And
the kpngelapD unto Arefna : not fo but 3 wpll
byeit ofthe at a pzpce, and wpll not offre facri-
{pce Uhto the 10:0 mp Good of that which doth
cofme nothpnge. ntlo Danid bongbt the
thecibpnge foure, and the oren foz fpftpelpcles
of fpluer. And Daw buple there an aultare yn

tothe Lozve, and offered burntfacrifices

and peace offerpnges. Andfothe
L olde Was tntreated foz
thelande. And the
plageceateD y
glad
Ss {racl. hai
ris


€ The ende of the feconde boke of Samuel:
-otberwple called the feconde boke
of the apnaes,


iij. Apnaes


The thyrde bokeof the


kpnges after therekenpnge of the La-
tintftes : whpch thp2d boke and
the fourth alfo,is but one
top th the Hebzues.


C The fpei Chapter:


(Le Ponge bprgpne Abifag kepeth Danio in hpsertreme
age Zoonia occuppeth the realme bntwptepnae to hps faz
ther. Salomon is anopnted kpnge , and fo Avon {a getteth
bpm atape, é


oe = Ve a SS Se a
a =e a = — [ans cial E
= A
L dae pani i
rme S: Ag
sist = z
palais


NS eee
F E i
LJ


SPA ee kpnge
HAAN frpken in peares:fothat when
€ EF =4 (hcp covered pym with clothes
PA Ws be caught no beate: wherioze
ua wag bys Ceruaiites fap nto bim:
PEE Elet there be fought foz mp lord
Pek SktheBpngeapongemapden, to
tande before the kpngeand tocherpthe bpm.
And let ber Ipem thp bofome,that mp lozde the
kpnge mape get peate. And fo they fought foz
atap2e Damofell thozowe out alltbecoattes of
Alrael,and founde one Abifag a Sunainite, g
bought ber to the kenge. And the damofel wag
ercebpnge fapze, andcherpibed the kynge , and
mpnitred to him. Gut the kpnge knew per not.
And Poonta the line of Hagith eralted bpm
felfe,fapenge: 3 wplbe kpnge. And pe gat bpm
charrettes € boplemen, efpity më toriine before
bym. And bps father wolde not dilpleate bpm
at anp tpme,no2zlapd fo muche to bpin.as, whp
dock thou lo- Andhe wasa goodly man, a bps
mother bare bpm nerte after Rbfalom. Andhe
tokecounfelat Joab thelonne of sarufa,andat


Eor


nid thas olde F y


Abiathar the pet. Andthep helped Adonia. 5


Wut Dadock the prett, Sanaiavu plone of Fe
boiada, Nathan the prophete, Semei and Ret,
anbdall the men of mpght toppch were wpth Da
uid, fauoured not Adenia. And Adonia facrifp-
ced (hepe and oren,and fat catell, bp the tone of
sobeleth, wbpch ts falk*bp the well of Rogel, g


calledalibys becthzenthe kyngesfonnes, and Jeter.


themenot Juda the kpuges Ceruauntes. Wut
Lathan the Pzopbete and wWanaiabu , ‘and
the otber mpabtpe men , and Salomon bps
bother pecalled not. | Ne
Wiberfore Mathan (pake nto Wethlabe the
mother of Salomd, fapeng-balt thou not berd
bowe p Jdonta p Conne of Hagithdotbraigne,
and Dauid our lozde knowerh itnots Mow chee


fozecome,¢€ 3 wpll gpue f councel, bow tofaue


Fü thpne


V/s
sll


- eh abl tears i | +
Paud — 6 tHApnges. ‘Salomon
| thpne otone Lyfe, and the lyfe of thp fonne Sas € Matha the prophet anopnte him there, kynge
loinon.Goand gettbe inpnto kynge Dauid, æ over Zleacl. And blotwe pe wpth trompettes , €
faye wntobpmi: bpddettnot thou(mp lozde D fape: Sodlaue kpnge Salomon. And the come
bpng fweare tnta top hadinapde,fapeng: a pp after bpm, $ be map come ¢ {pt bpon my feat
lomatbpfonnetpallrapgneatterme,ebetball Sozbethalbetinge in mp Meade. And J wpl cd
{yt bpon mp feate, wobp isthen Adoniabpnges maunde bpm to becaptapne oner Flrael g Ju-
Sebolo whplep pet taliet therewthe kynge Da. And Wanaiabu plonne of Fehotada antwe
J pli comeinatter the. € cofpamethp woes. redthe kpnae,¢lapd: Amen. J prape Godp the
¢ And wWethlabe went inwnto the Kyngemto Logde Sod of mp logde the kinge Tap foto. Xna
the chamber. And the bynge was verp olde,é as Godbhath bend my lode p kinge.euento be
oilag the Hunamite mpniibred pitopkinge De w Salomon allo, emake bys leate greater,
And Wetplabe ouped g made obeplatice vnto thépleate of mplogdebpnge Danidbathbene.  -
thekpnge. And the bpnge fapd: what isthe mat And fo Sadock the pret, and Pathan the Eo-
tereSoheantweredbim:mplozde, thoulwarelt prophet, Wanaiabu the lonne of Jehoiada,  -
bp the Loadethp God bntothynebandmapde: the Crethites and Pheletbites wente towne, e —
alomon tby Conne pallrapgneafterme,and fet Salomon vpon kpnge Dauids ule, and
etpallfyt vponmp feate.Andbeboldc,nowis bought bpmto Gibon. And Sadocktbepzett
Adonia,aynge.andmyp lorde the apnar woteth tokeanpozne of ople out of the tabernacle, and
not ofit. And bebath ofered oven, tat catel,and anopnted Salomon. Andall thep of the people
manp thepe,and path called al the Connes of the blewe trompettes,andfapd: Godfaue kpnge
kpnge g Aviathar p prett,¢ Joab the captapne SHaloms.And al the people came vp after bim,
of the booft. But Salomon thy feruaunt bath prppnge ore pppes and tetopipnge greatly, -
pe not bydden. a.nd nowe mp lozde(Dkpnge) fothat thecarth range with f founde of them.
theepes of all 3lraell wayteonthe,that thou = And Adonia cali the gees that he had cal-
CHuloelktellebem, whoongbetolptontheleate led outa bym, berd it,euen as thep bad made an
ofmplosdetbebpnacafterbpm. fFozelswbhen ende of catpnge.Andwhen Joab perde the fond
mp lozde the kpnae (yal Nepe wpthbps fathers, of the trompet,befapo:bowe bappenetD it that
Jand mp fonne Salomon Halbe fynners. there is Cache anoplein the cptie? Andasbe ptt
D And whple the per talked wyth pkynge, Na fot came. dnb aon thefonne of Abiathar


than the peopbete came alto. And thep told the pelt came. And Avonia fapd Yuto hHpm:come
kpnge fapeng :bebolde, bere commethPathap in,foz thou arte a valpaunt man , and bzpngefE
Si es obey whenbe as cometutothespng good tpdinges. And Jonathasantwered g laid
e made obepfaunce before the kpngebponbps to Adonia:Cievelp ourlopde bpnge Data hath
ace onthe groube,¢ Matha lapd:G)plozve(< made Salomi kpnae. And fkpngebathiente
, Kpnge)patt choufapd:Adonia thal rapgneaf- with bym, Sadock p prel, € Ratha Ppropbet
i ter meq ball fpt vponmp leaterfEarbeis gone e Wanatahu the fonne of Fehoiada g theCretbt
Doiwne ths dape thath flaynemanp oren,and tes,¢ the Wheletites. € ther baue fet bpm bpon-
fat thepeebat) called allthebpngestonnes, € the kpnges mule.And Sadock the p2ett,¢ a=
thecaptaineg of thehoott.« Abiatharthepeet. thantbe ropbet, bane anopnted bym Kpngeint e
And bebolde they eate edzpuke before him,and Gibon.And thep came Dp agapne,¢ refoplen, ý 6.
Cape: Godfauekpuge Adonia. Wut methpler= the cptpedpdloudeagapne. and that isp nople
uaunt,and Savoche the pelte, and Wanaiabu. thatpedancherde. And Dalomon iytteth on
the fonne of Jehoiada,and thy teruaunt Salo- thelcateokthekyngdome. Andmiozcouer the
mon bath benot calleo.ssthpstbpnge Doneo? kpnges{eruatites came tobleffe ourlo2d bpnge
mp lode the kpnge and thou aftnotthewedit Danid, lapenge: thy God make the name of
Dato thp Ceruaunt,who tuldfyton theleateof alomon moze honogable then thy teate. And.
a fap je RPNE after bpm the kpnae bowed him felfe pon thebedde.and
ben bpnge Dauidanltoered,andfayde: thusfapd the kpnge:letted be the Lorde G09 `
calme Weeblabe.Andthecame intopkynges of Alracll:whychbath madeone to fptte onmp
refence, and fodebeforebym. Andthekpnge frate thbpsvape, mpne epe fepngeit.
ware lfapenge: Xs truely asthe Lorde lpueth Andall thegetesthat were wpth Aronia
(that bath rpo mp loule out ef all aduerfite)euë were afraped,and role bp,andteenteuctpman |
as Blwave Ynto the by the Low Good of Ffrael bps wapye. And Adonta fearyng the pretence of
fapenqe:palonion thp tonne éhall eapsne atte Salomon, arole and toente,-k( into the tadernacie ng
me ebe thal {pt pponmy feate Foz me, tow LY oftvexoze andcanght boldon the megof the `
do thpsdap. Chen Wetblabebowedonbertace altare. And one tolde Salomon, fapnge: We-
tothe earti),and dpd reucrence Dnto the bynge, bolde,Abonia doth feare kpnare Salomon : Foz
g lapo: J pape God that mplozdkynge Dautd be bath caught boldeon the bozneg of the al- erov.rri.s
mape lpue ecuce. And kpnge Dauid fapd call me tare, fapenge: let bpnge Salomon fiweare n= = `
Sadocke the prelt,eNatvanthepeopbete,and tome thys dape that be wopllnot flapebps ter
Manatabu plonneof Jcbotada.Andthepcame uaunte wpththelwearde.
before p spuge. Chekpnge alfofaid vntothem — AndA\alomonfapd, pF be toplbea chplde of
fake wb vouthelcruatites of pourlozde,¢ (ct a hertne,there Gallnot an beer ofbpm fallto the
tomon mp fonne bpon mpne owne mule, carp earth. 2ute pf wpcbednes be founde inbim,be
ppm Downeto Gibon. and let Sadock Ppt, tall ope.Andlobpnge Salome fent,and they
voug


f


&


ch


- eh abl tears i | +
Paud — 6 tHApnges. ‘Salomon
| thpne otone Lyfe, and the lyfe of thp fonne Sas € Matha the prophet anopnte him there, kynge
loinon.Goand gettbe inpnto kynge Dauid, æ over Zleacl. And blotwe pe wpth trompettes , €
faye wntobpmi: bpddettnot thou(mp lozde D fape: Sodlaue kpnge Salomon. And the come
bpng fweare tnta top hadinapde,fapeng: a pp after bpm, $ be map come ¢ {pt bpon my feat
lomatbpfonnetpallrapgneatterme,ebetball Sozbethalbetinge in mp Meade. And J wpl cd
{yt bpon mp feate, wobp isthen Adoniabpnges maunde bpm to becaptapne oner Flrael g Ju-
Sebolo whplep pet taliet therewthe kynge Da. And Wanaiabu plonne of Fehotada antwe
J pli comeinatter the. € cofpamethp woes. redthe kpnae,¢lapd: Amen. J prape Godp the
¢ And wWethlabe went inwnto the Kyngemto Logde Sod of mp logde the kinge Tap foto. Xna
the chamber. And the bynge was verp olde,é as Godbhath bend my lode p kinge.euento be
oilag the Hunamite mpniibred pitopkinge De w Salomon allo, emake bys leate greater,
And Wetplabe ouped g made obeplatice vnto thépleate of mplogdebpnge Danidbathbene.  -
thekpnge. And the bpnge fapd: what isthe mat And fo Sadock the pret, and Pathan the Eo-
tereSoheantweredbim:mplozde, thoulwarelt prophet, Wanaiabu the lonne of Jehoiada,  -
bp the Loadethp God bntothynebandmapde: the Crethites and Pheletbites wente towne, e —
alomon tby Conne pallrapgneafterme,and fet Salomon vpon kpnge Dauids ule, and
etpallfyt vponmp feate.Andbeboldc,nowis bought bpmto Gibon. And Sadocktbepzett
Adonia,aynge.andmyp lorde the apnar woteth tokeanpozne of ople out of the tabernacle, and
not ofit. And bebath ofered oven, tat catel,and anopnted Salomon. Andall thep of the people
manp thepe,and path called al the Connes of the blewe trompettes,andfapd: Godfaue kpnge
kpnge g Aviathar p prett,¢ Joab the captapne SHaloms.And al the people came vp after bim,
of the booft. But Salomon thy feruaunt bath prppnge ore pppes and tetopipnge greatly, -
pe not bydden. a.nd nowe mp lozde(Dkpnge) fothat thecarth range with f founde of them.
theepes of all 3lraell wayteonthe,that thou = And Adonia cali the gees that he had cal-
CHuloelktellebem, whoongbetolptontheleate led outa bym, berd it,euen as thep bad made an
ofmplosdetbebpnacafterbpm. fFozelswbhen ende of catpnge.Andwhen Joab perde the fond
mp lozde the kpnae (yal Nepe wpthbps fathers, of the trompet,befapo:bowe bappenetD it that
Jand mp fonne Salomon Halbe fynners. there is Cache anoplein the cptie? Andasbe ptt
D And whple the per talked wyth pkynge, Na fot came. dnb aon thefonne of Abiathar


than the peopbete came alto. And thep told the pelt came. And Avonia fapd Yuto hHpm:come
kpnge fapeng :bebolde, bere commethPathap in,foz thou arte a valpaunt man , and bzpngefE
Si es obey whenbe as cometutothespng good tpdinges. And Jonathasantwered g laid
e made obepfaunce before the kpngebponbps to Adonia:Cievelp ourlopde bpnge Data hath
ace onthe groube,¢ Matha lapd:G)plozve(< made Salomi kpnae. And fkpngebathiente
, Kpnge)patt choufapd:Adonia thal rapgneaf- with bym, Sadock p prel, € Ratha Ppropbet
i ter meq ball fpt vponmp leaterfEarbeis gone e Wanatahu the fonne of Fehoiada g theCretbt
Doiwne ths dape thath flaynemanp oren,and tes,¢ the Wheletites. € ther baue fet bpm bpon-
fat thepeebat) called allthebpngestonnes, € the kpnges mule.And Sadock the p2ett,¢ a=
thecaptaineg of thehoott.« Abiatharthepeet. thantbe ropbet, bane anopnted bym Kpngeint e
And bebolde they eate edzpuke before him,and Gibon.And thep came Dp agapne,¢ refoplen, ý 6.
Cape: Godfauekpuge Adonia. Wut methpler= the cptpedpdloudeagapne. and that isp nople
uaunt,and Savoche the pelte, and Wanaiabu. thatpedancherde. And Dalomon iytteth on
the fonne of Jehoiada,and thy teruaunt Salo- thelcateokthekyngdome. Andmiozcouer the
mon bath benot calleo.ssthpstbpnge Doneo? kpnges{eruatites came tobleffe ourlo2d bpnge
mp lode the kpnge and thou aftnotthewedit Danid, lapenge: thy God make the name of
Dato thp Ceruaunt,who tuldfyton theleateof alomon moze honogable then thy teate. And.
a fap je RPNE after bpm the kpnae bowed him felfe pon thebedde.and
ben bpnge Dauidanltoered,andfayde: thusfapd the kpnge:letted be the Lorde G09 `
calme Weeblabe.Andthecame intopkynges of Alracll:whychbath madeone to fptte onmp
refence, and fodebeforebym. Andthekpnge frate thbpsvape, mpne epe fepngeit.
ware lfapenge: Xs truely asthe Lorde lpueth Andall thegetesthat were wpth Aronia
(that bath rpo mp loule out ef all aduerfite)euë were afraped,and role bp,andteenteuctpman |
as Blwave Ynto the by the Low Good of Ffrael bps wapye. And Adonta fearyng the pretence of
fapenqe:palonion thp tonne éhall eapsne atte Salomon, arole and toente,-k( into the tadernacie ng
me ebe thal {pt pponmy feate Foz me, tow LY oftvexoze andcanght boldon the megof the `
do thpsdap. Chen Wetblabebowedonbertace altare. And one tolde Salomon, fapnge: We-
tothe earti),and dpd reucrence Dnto the bynge, bolde,Abonia doth feare kpnare Salomon : Foz
g lapo: J pape God that mplozdkynge Dautd be bath caught boldeon the bozneg of the al- erov.rri.s
mape lpue ecuce. And kpnge Dauid fapd call me tare, fapenge: let bpnge Salomon fiweare n= = `
Sadocke the prelt,eNatvanthepeopbete,and tome thys dape that be wopllnot flapebps ter
Manatabu plonneof Jcbotada.Andthepcame uaunte wpththelwearde.
before p spuge. Chekpnge alfofaid vntothem — AndA\alomonfapd, pF be toplbea chplde of
fake wb vouthelcruatites of pourlozde,¢ (ct a hertne,there Gallnot an beer ofbpm fallto the
tomon mp fonne bpon mpne owne mule, carp earth. 2ute pf wpcbednes be founde inbim,be
ppm Downeto Gibon. and let Sadock Ppt, tall ope.Andlobpnge Salome fent,and they
voug


f


&


ch


Salomon


yonni. b
and.rriiiijo
Deu. rere


"coer |


fil.veg.ir.b


iL. ces. iiic
and IF.é


tire rir. E


rr
™


Ört bi. b


: abare Cla


as Pe Dapes of Dauid Drew npe that be
NA ssa (bulde dpe and becharged Salomon
DA ES a bys forine,fapenge:% go the wape of
l cima AL tpe Yoozlde,xbe thou ftronee ther=
foze,and Wewe thp felfcaman . daepethouthe
watch of tbe Lozde thp God, that thou walcke
in bps wapes,and kepe bis Matutes and bis pe
ceptes, bps iudgementes, and bys teftimonyes,
cucnasttts Wozitteninthelawe of G)ofles:that
thou mapet prolpere in all that thou doct,and
incuerp thpuge that thoumedleft wptball.

That the Lode allomape make good bps
wo2de whpch be (pake bnto me fapnge: pe thy
ropiozn take Dede to thep2 wape p thep walke
befoze nein tructh, wpthall thep2 bertes, and
wptb all thep2 foules,xthen haltetbou not be
Wwpthout aman onthe feate of Flrael.

* &) sa thou totell, bow Joab p fine
ofsaruialernedD me, 4 what bedpdto that two
captapnes of the booftes of Firael:bnto Abner
thefonne of Ner,and yntoAmata f lone of Je-
thev: who be fluc, æ (hed bloude in tyme of peace
(euen as it bad ben in warre and put the bloud
of warre Dpon bps qpzdle that was aboute bis
lopneg andin bys poes that tere on bps fete.
Deale wpth bym therfore accozdpnge to thp
wyiedome,¢ bapuge not bps booze bead Downe
fo the qrauein peace. * Mut thewe kpndnes vn
fH the tonnes of Werlelaithe Gileadite, $ thep
mapecateat thptable. jfo2 they came tome,
when 3 fiedfrom Abfalom thp brother. - `

x Bnd beholde,thou hatte wyth the Semci
the fonne of Gera,the fonne of Gemini, of W4-
burimswhpch curled me wpth an bozrible curfe
inthe vape when J went to Pabanahim. But
became to mete me at Jordane, and ¥lware to
bpm bythe Lozdelapenge:¥ topll not flape the
swopth the (nocabde:but thou palt not count bpm


as Dngplty, fo2 thouarte a man of pledome,


3 Zis tie


and knowelt what thou ougbtet fo do wuto
brm. Pps booze beade palt thou bapnge tothe
graue Wyeth bloude. |

Bhd Lox Dauid lept wpth bps fathers,and
thas burpedin the cptie of Dauid. And p dapeg
whith Dauidrapgned bpon Ffrael, toere four=
tpe peaves:feué peares rapgned be in Hebron: €
thpztp thre peares rapgned bein Jerufalem.


i.par.ppip! abo fat Salomon dpon the feate of Daud
PS


ps Father,and bys kpngdome was Kablpiped
mpgbtelp. and Adonia pfonne of Hagithcam
to Methlabe the mother of Salomon. 4nd Me


tice.rbt.b fapd:*Qomell thou peaceably And he laid pea


ceablp.pefapd, mozcouer : F baue fomwmbat to
fape vnto the. be fapd:fapeon. And be fapo,p
knowelt that the kpngdome was myne, that
al 3fcael Cet thep2 faces onme, $ 3 uldraigne
hovobett,the kpqvome is turned awape,andge


uen tomp bzother:fo2 tt is apopnted bimof tie


iij Ja


Lode: nowe Jalkeap
not. nd the fapd vneo bpm: Sape on. And be
fapd: Speake, 9 pape the, ynto Salomon the
Epnge,fo2 be wopltnot fape p nape that be mene
me Abifag p Sunamite to wpfe. And wWerpla-
be Capd: well, 3 wpli Cpeatse fo? p ynto p kinge.

wethlabe therfore wente onto binge Dalo-
mon, tolpeake Unto bpm foz Adonia. Andthe
kpnge role to mete ber ebowedhym felfe vnte
Her,and fat bpm Downe on bps teate. And there
waga feate fet Fo? the kpnges mother, ¢ the fat
on bps rpabtipde. Chen the lapd:¥ dely2e a lp=
tell peticion of the, Y prapethe faye me not nap
And the kpnge fapd wnto ber: Afke on my mos
ther,fo2 J wll not fape the nape. be fapd:let
ébilag the Sunamite be euen to Aonta thp


eticionof the: deny me


bother to wpfe. Andikynge Salomonanfwe-=


redDand fapd unto bps mother: why doelt thou
afte Abifag F Sunamitefor Adonia! alke foz
bpm the kingdome alfo:fo2 Deis mpne elderb20
fher, and bath oh bpm Abtatbhar the meit, and
Joab the lonne of saruia, Thenkpure Halo:
mon (ware bp the Lozde, fapenge :Goddalo,
andfoteme, è ; Adonta bath not lpoken thpg
wordeagapntt bps otone lyfe. ow therfozeas
trulp as type Logd lpueth,whych bath ozdepned
meand {et me on the feate of Dauid mp father,
and made me an honfe,as be pzompfeo, Adonia
hall dpe thps dape. And bpnge Salomon fent
bp the bande of Wanatabhu the fonne of Jeboia-
da, and be (motebpm that be dyed. |

And vnto Abiathar the pet, (apb Fapnge: G
get theto Anatoth unto thpne atone feldes: 02
thou arte hozthpe of death: but FZ wpll not at
thpstpme kpll the, becaule thou baret the arke
of the Lozde God befoze Danid mp father, and
becaule thoubatk ufred wyth mp father in all
bps aflicciong. And fo Salomon put atap ¥-
biatbar from bepnge pret onto the Lozde:that
be mpaht fulfpll the wozdes of the Lord which
be (pale ouer the boule of Eliin Silo. Thenep
dpnges came alfo to Joab:fo2 Joab eauee
atter vonia though be turned notatter Xola-
lom. And Joab fled bnto the tabernacle of the
Lozde and caught bolde on tpe bomes of the al
tare. Andie tas tolde kynge Salomon,bowp
Joab fied vuto ieee ofthe Lozd ¢ ftode
bp the altare. Ch€ Salom fent Wanaiahu the
fone of Jchoiada fapenge: gogfall vponhym.

And Wanatabu cametothe Tabernacle of
theLozde,andlapde bntobpm. Thuslapeth
the Bpnge:come ont. And be lapde:nape but F
wplldpe euen bere. And Wanatabu bzougbt the
kpnge wozdeagapne fapeng:thug fapd oab,
and thus be anfwered me.

And the &pngelapd.Do cuenas be bach laid
mpte bpm , and burpe bpm, that thoumapet
take awape the bloude whpch Joab Med canfe.
les from me,and from the boule of mp father.
Andthe Lozdethall bapngebysbloude vps big
owne head, oz belmote toomencyabewpter z
better the be,¢ Aue them wpth thefwearde, mp
father Dauid not knotpng therof:enen Abner
the fonne of Mer,captapn off boot of Jirael,


St


Amala the lonne of Zether captapne of the bot


F ni OF Funda


Forli,


Hamon


' of Juda. Thep2 bloude Hal therfore returne- bp


di.ce.cbi,b,


onthe beadeof Joab, € onthe beade of byslede
fo: aea Wut vpon Dauid , æ vpon bys iede.
ppon bps boufe, ¢ upon bps (cate Hall there be
cace Foz euct of the Lorde. 40 Wanatahu the
fonne of Jehoiada went tp, fmote bpm, ¢ flue
bpm, burped bpmrin bis owne houle tn f wyl-
dernes. And the kpnge put Wanatabhu the fonne
of Febotadain bye rowine ouct the Hooft g put
gee an inthe rowrme of Bbiatpar.
Anbdt ) :
fapde vntobim:bupld the an boute in Jerulalé,
atid dwell there: and fe that thou qo not forthe
thence anp whether. Fo? be thoulure, that the
dape that thou goet out, and pallet ouer the
rpuer of Ced20n, thou halt dpetpat bape, thp
bloude halbe pon thpne owne beade. And He
pritapo uo p BPA. Topaia good thpnge
as mp lozbe the kpnge bath fapd:fo wopl bps fer
uaunt do. And Semetdwelt in Jerufalem ma-
np a dape. And it chaiicedafter thre peares,that
two of the feruauntes of Semei ranne awape
tnto Achis lonne of Maacha kynge of Geth.
And thep tolde Semiet, fapeng : bebolde,thp fer
uauntes bein Geth. Demei tode Vp, and
fadled bys Affe,and gat bymto Geth to Achis,
to feke bis feruauntes, and returned, g bzoughet
bpsleruauntesagapueftomGethb. — |
Andit teas tolde Salomon, bowe that Sr-
mei badgone frö Jerufalem to Eeth , and wasg
comeagapne. And the kpnge lent ecalled Se-
mei and fapd bnto bpm: Dpd FJ not charge the
bp the Lozde wpth anotbe, and teftifped ynto
the,fapnge:be fure that when foeuer thou qoet
OIE, Fas Ls aloger eae o betber:9ou alt
bpethedeaths And thou lapdelf vnto me: it is
goodtp Dpnges that J baue berd.Wi bp thé bal
thou not kept the othe sf the Lozde andthecom
maundement that FZ chargedthe wptbali:
Tpi nge fapd mocoucrto Hemet: «thou
remebzeft alithe wpckebdnes tohpch thpne bert
knoweth, that thou dpddet to Dauid mp fa-
ther. The Lozde alfo (hall bzpnge thp wycked-
nele bpon thpne owne beade:anokpnge Salo-
mon malbe bleed, andthe feate of Dauid fta-
blpthed befoze p Lozde foz eucr. So p bynge cd
maiided Danatabu p fonne of Jepoiada: ehh
toent out ¢fmote bim that be dped. And p kpng
dome was Fablpthed in the bade of Salomon.
© Tbhe.iii. Chapter.
q Salomon tabech Pharaos voughter to wpee. The
Torbe appeareth te bpm and gpueth bpm wpledeme.
The pleatpuge of the two hatlottcs whe Hulde owe
the ipupnge copldezand Salomons fentence herin. .
27 (Key Alomon made afinite with Pharao
VA VE kbpnae of Cqipte,and toke haraog
A9) pee | aie gg brought ber into the ct
KA tie of anid, vntplibebad madean
de of buplbpnge bps owne boule æ the boule
of the 1ozde,¢ the wall of Jerufalem rounde a-
bout. Onlp P people facrifpced in altars made
onbplles,becaule ther toas no boule buplt aa
thename of the Lozde, Vntpl thofe dapes. And
Halos loued p Lorde, ¢ walked inp opdinait
ces of Danid bps fatber, laue onlp that be facris
Fyced g offered incenfe vpon altareg in bplics.


kpnge fenteand called Demei and f


Saloman


_ * Andthe binge wet to Sibed,to offer there parta
for ý waga fpecialofrpnge place. Anda thou-
fande burntofirypnges bpd Salomon offre pa
that altare:¢in Gibeon the Lorde appearento
Salomon ina dzeame bp npaht.And Goofaid
alke what thou wplt that 3 mape qeuc it the.
And Salomõ fapd:thou bat ewed ynto thp
{cruatit Dauid mp Father great mercp , whe be
Walked befoze the intrueth, inrpgbteoutnes,¢
in plapnes of berte myth p. And thou batt kept
toz Dyin thps great meccp,that thou bat gpuen
bpm a fonne,tofptonbps feat: agitigcometd =~
pafle thps Daye. x And now, D Lozdemp God, partb
it ts thou that bat made thp feruaunt kpnge in
tead of Dauth mp father.xAnd Jam but page | ira
and wote not howe to go outtin. And tipler: 2°"
uauntis in the mpbdelt of thp people, whpcbe
thou batt choin. And verelp p people arefo ma
np that thep can not be cold noz ndbzed Foz mul-
titude.* Grue therfoze yntothy leruaiit an n= Sapt.ir.a
derflandpnac berte, toiudge the people, that J
mape Decctne betwene good and bad: foz who
ig ableto tudge thys,thp fo mpabtp a people:

And thys pleated the Lozde tel, that alo-


. mon bad Delp2ed dat thpnge. And Govdlapoe


ontobpm:becaule thou batt alked thys tbyne,
€ ball not afked longe Ipfe, nether baft afked rp
ches, noz the foule of thpne enemyes, but batte
afked ynderladpng € difcrecton in iudeenient.

2eholde,F baue done accozdpnee tothy pe C
fiction. Fo: J baue genen the a vople ean bniet-
andpnge ert, Co that there was none lpke the
before the,neitber after the pall any arpfe lpke
onto the. And 4 baue alfo geuë tbe, tbat wpych
thou baf notatked,euenryches and ponoure,fo
that there halbeno kpnge lpke butothe al tip
dapes. And if thou wilt walke in mp wapes,to |
kepe mpne ozdpnaunces and inp commandemé
tes, * as thp father Dauid dpd walke, Fwy tire. roa”
lengthen thpdapes. Wiben Salomon awoke, “
bebolv tt was a dreame. + And became to Feru- traraib —
falem and tode befoze thearke of the tettaméte
ofthe Lozde,¢ offred burnt ofrpnges ¢ peace of
frpnges, and made a feaft to all bis feruauntes.

> Chen caine there two wemen, that were -

havlottes, onto the kpnge and frode befoze him
And the one woma fapd:Dp mp lozde: F g this
woman Dwelin one boule. And ¥ was delpue-
ted of a chplde topth ber in p boule. And p thpzd
dape atterthat Y was delpuered, (ye wasoclp=
ucredalfo:and we were together, and no {trati=
ger wpth Dein the houle faune we two.
_ And this pues chpld dped in Fnirbt, fore
(mothercd it. And the rofe at mpdupabt, g toke
mp fonne fró mp lpde, whple thpne bandmayde
flept,¢lapde it in ber bofome and put ber deade
chpld in mp bofome. And whé Frofe vp togene
mp chplde fucke,bebolbde, it was dcad. Eut whe
3 bad loked bpon it in themoznpnae, bebold, it
wasnot mp fonne,tobpch J apd beare.

The otber woman fayd:it isnot fo: but mp
fonne lpucth,¢ thplonne ts deade. And de lapd
aqapne: 20, but thp fonne is dead and mpne ig
alpue. And thus tbep pleated beforethe kpnge.
Then lapde the bpnge: the one fapeth , tps

‘ba


EI


Salomon


that ig alpucts mp fonneandtbedeadeigthpne
And p other fapeth,nape:but thy Conte is dead
and ebelpupnae chpldeis mpne. And the kpnege
fapd:b2pnge mea learde, Andthep broughte
outa fiwearde before the kypnge. And the kynge
fapd:Deupyde the lpupngechplde tnt wo,e pue
the one balfe to the one, and the otherto p otber
Chen fpake the woman whole the lpupnge
chplde was, vnto the kinge, foz ber bowels per-
neo vpon ber fonne,andlapde: 3 befeche the mp
lode ġpue Der thelpupnge chplde, inno wple
flape ti. But the other lai, let tt benether mpue
.  hozthpne,butdcupde it. Then thekpngeantice
Luke,bti,c reDand fapd:xg pue Der thelpupngechploc,and
«= flapettnot for thets the mothertberof. Andall
thep of Zlrael berd of the iudgement, which the
kynge badde indged, and fearedthekpnge : fo2
thep Cawe that the wpledome of God wasin
bymtodotuftpee. Y
CTbe.ut.Chapter.
C Dbe pipnces and rulers brier Salomon. Lhe pur:
Ucpauns fo: bps bplapliles. £ heuombie of bps holes
and of bps perablee. ai |
es? 2.0 Lo kpnae Salomon was kynge ouer
Jaa all Blraell. And thele were his lozdes. X-
aessartahu the fonne of Sadocke the peette
Elibozeph ¢ Abtab the Connes of Sila, {eribes.
Jebolaphath the lonne of Abid, the recozder.
wWanatabutbefonne of Feboiada was ouer the
booft.adock and Abiathar were the preies.
And Asariabu the Conne of Pathan was ouct
theoffpcers. Andsabud the fonne of Nathan
was a preke tbe kpngescompanpon. Aud Abe
iiiaae, b, d Lat Eewarde of houfholde. ndx Adoniram the
fonne of Abda Was ouer the trpbutes. |
And Halomon padt welfe offpcers oucratt
Fleracl,wobpch pzoupded vptaplesfoz the kpnge
~and bps boutpolde: echeman bys moneth ina
pearc, made p2ouifion foz neceflarp thpuges.


rash And thele are thep2 names : the Conne of Hurin


of moiit Epheaim:the fonne of Dekar in Wakas
i and in Saabin and wWethlamces, Elon g Geth
hanan:thefonne of Heledin Aruboth,to wbont


ertepned ocho andal the lade of epher: the


onne of Abinadab inal ý region of Doz, Which


pad Tapherhthedoughter of Halomitowpte -


waane the lone of Ahilud was ouer Chaanacd
and Pagiddo,and ouceall Bethlan,wbych ts
by sarthana beneth Felrael,frd Wethlan, tothe
- plapne of rbola, cuen vntothe place that is
oucengapntt Jechmea:the lome of Gaber bad


Ramoth Silead, and bys were the tones or .


FYair:the fone of Ganatle, which are in Gilead;
and bnder bimwas the region of Argob which
isin Balan theelcoze great cptics wpth wal-
legand bartes of yam:
Abinadab the lonne of Hiddo had Mabena-
€ im. Ahimaas wag in MNepbtbalim, and be toke
afinath the dougbter of Salomontorwpfe.
aana thefonneot ulat wage Afer and in
Aloth.Fehotapbat the Conne of Paruah was in
Flachar. Semet the fonnesfEla was in wen-
Famin.Gaber the fonne of Urp was in the cou
trep of Gilead, the lande of Sebon kpnge of the
‘Amorites, and cf Da kpnge of alan, was
offpcersloneintbelande. And Juda € Alracll


ti Apnoaes


Forli,

were manp euen as the fande ofthe fee in ndbre
catpnge,dpnkpnge and makpnge mery.4 3nd Sen- rts
Salomon raygned oueral kyngoomes, fr the SEd
+tpuct ontotbhe lande of the WDhiliftines:eué yu teupdzates
tothe bower of Egypte andthep broughee pie-
fentes,¢ferued Salomoall p dapes of bps Ipfe.

And Salomons becade foz one dape was D
krr-quarterg of manchet foure, and thze fe 0e
quarters of meale:ten ftalled oren, andre onte
of the paftures andan budzed hepe.belpode ber=
tes duches, and Wylde goates.andcapons. fEo2
be ruled inall the reqton on the other {poe Eu-
phzates,from Chipbfabh to xAla, pucr alf kpn ©: sasa-
ges onthe otbherlpde prpucr. And be had peace
wptdall bys Ceruauntes onenccy pde. And Fu
Daan’ Flracl divelt wpthout feare, cuerp man
bnocr bps vpne and inder bys frag tree,from
Dan to Werleba,al thedaves of Salomon.

And Salomon hadx.rl.Q).fralles ofporles Dew.rvit.»
Eo? chatrettes,and.xit-&).ozfemen. And the of
fpcers pzoupodcd bptaplefoe kpnge Saloms g
forailp cameout of anp placetokpnge Salo-
inons fable,cuerp ma nbis moneth [otbatther
lacked nothpnge. Barly alfo ¢ ftrawe foz p hoz
tes ¢ mules, beought thep wnto the place where
the ottpcers werc euerp man inbys office. 3

+ Snd God gane Salomon wyledome and eerivitrc
buderfandpnge creeadpnee much, andalarge
berte, euenasthelandetbhatis on the fec Mor:
and Dalomong topfedome excelled the wple-
dome of alltbechplozen ofthe Eafe countrepe
andall the thpfedome of Egypte. soz bewas
wypler then all men, peetben, Ethan the Csraa
bite,and Heman,C aleol, ¢ Darda the fonnes
of Wapol. And bis name was {poke of thozow
Out al nacios on enerp lide, And Halom ipate
thzethoutand prouerbes.Andhys longes were
a thoufande etpue. And helpatte of trees, enen
from the Cedar tree that croweth in Libanon,
vito the Zlope that (pzpnacth out of the wal.
dpe ipake alfo of bealtes, of fooles,of woznes,¢
of fplibes. And there came of allnaciõsto beare
the wpicdome of Salomon, ¢ frö all kpngesof
theearti,wbpch bad berde ef bps wpledome.

€ The. b. chapter.
@ konge Bpzam Cendeth Cedar tpmberta the


buplopnge OFcbetemple. Zhe Dplerppcpon of
tbe workes,


3


l | U 0? IHi- fisttey.v.0
ram Was euer a louer of Dauid, And Shog Horea
i leng


Salomon
iperripa fente to Piram,fapenge:thou knowelt + po {ee
that Dauid my father could not bupld ant onfe

pinto the name of the Lozdebps G od,fo2 f war

reg Which wereabout bim on euerp{pde, vntyl

the Lozde put them wnderthe foles of bps fete.

Wut now the Lode mp Godhath gpuc me reft

_. oneuerp fpde,fo that there is nether abduerfarp,
edid no» anpeucllplage. And bepolde,* 3 am deter-
mincdto buplocan boule wnto the name of the

Lode mp God,as the L020 (pake bnto Daud

my fatber,fapenge:thp fonne whom ¥ wplilet

ppor thp feat fog the,bc (pal bupldanboufe on
totbpname Now cherfore chmaudethoutbat

thep bewe me Cedar trees out of Libanon. And
mp {ernaiites Halbe witbthine, nto the wil
J geue the bpze foz thy leruautes, accozdpng to
alfuchtbpnges as thou Malt apopnte, foz thou
knowet thattber arenot amonge bs,thatcant

Ckpll to betoe tpmber,ipke vnto the é>idones.

5 When Hiram berde the wozdes ot Salons,

He reiopicd greatip and fato: Wield be p i020

- thps vape which bath geu€ onto Dauid a wple
Conne over thys mpabep people. pnd Hira fente

to Salomon, fapenge: Jhaue confpdered the

thpnges Wbpchtpon fenteittome foz, and wpl
accomplpthe all thp Defpze,concernpng tymber

of Cedartrecsandfpare . p feruaunteg (all

bzpnge them from Libanon tothefee, And J
wpllconucp them bp pp vnto the place that

thou palt Mewe me,and wpll canlerbem to be
Difcharged there,and thou Maltereceaue them.

And thou Walt do mea pleafure agapn,pttbou

minttter fode Foz mpne poule. And to Hira gaue
Salomon Cedar trees ¢fpzre trees accozdinge

toall bys defpec. and Salomon gaue Hira-ry.

€ thoufande quarters of wheate fozfoobe tobps
poutpolde,¢ twentp buttes of pure ople. Thug

much gaue Salomonto Hiram peace bp peare

And the Lede gaue Salomon wpledom as

be pronnied pint. and ther was peace betwene
iramand Salomon, and thep tivo were con=

federat together. And Bpnge Salomonrapted

afame outof s{rael ont of all Zftacl. And the

fame teas thpztp thouland men, whom be fent
to Libanon, ten thoufandea moneth bp courte;

fotbat when they bad ben one monet) in Liba-

non. thep abode tho monethesat pome.

Andx Adoniram was ouer tpefüme. And

cc redto.a Salomon bad thzelcoze atid ten thoufand that
pare burthens,t foure {core thoulandemafons

inthe mountapnes:befpdes the Lordes whom
Salomon appopnted to ouverte the torke,cucn

thie thofande andthe bűdzed, whychruledthe

e» people-#(and chem that wzoughtin the woke .

And thekpnge comaunded the to bypnge great
frones, fre toneg, and bewed ftones forthe fou

dacion ofthe boule. And Salomons malong g

the mafons of Hird dpd be We thë with f tozk-
menof the cozners. Andfo thep prepared bothe
tymber and ftonesfoz the buplopng of > boufe

C The. vi. Chapter.
C Howe ano whenthecemple was buploed.

c= Md it cametopafle that in the foure burt
Fy age DAC DE fonre {core peare( afret the chilb2¢
ARN of 3ivael tocre come oute ofthe lande of


ity ZApnges.


Egypte andxin the fourth peare of tbe rapane path a
of Halomon vpon Fracl,andinthemoneth . ii
siffe,wwbpcb ts thefeconde moneth x be beganne 7°"
to buploe tbe boule of the Lozde. And the boule

whych Salomon bupltfoz the Lo2de,was thze

(coze cubptes longe and tiventy cubptes bzoad
andthpztp cubiteshpe. Andxbe made a porche Fod.c-e
before the bodpe ofthe temple, whpch was twe Segt”
tpe cubiteg Longe after the bzcoth of the boule,

and ten cubites bzoad,cuen tn the fozefronte of

tbe boule. And in the boule be made wpndowwes -

broade without, and narowe wpthin.

Andin the wallof the houle,bemadecham= »
bers roñdeabout,(euč inthe walles of p boule)
rode about the téple € the quecr , Emadelpdes .
roumde about. The nethermoft chaver was fiue
cubttes bzoad, ¢ thetbpzde was Ceuencubites
b20a0.4€02 topthout in the wall of the boule be
layed beamcs rode about, that the beames of
the chambers touldenot be fatenedinthe wal- `
les of P boufe. And p boule was bupltof fone,
made perfpte alredp befoze it was bzought thp
ther, fo tbat there was nether pammer no? are,
ctheranp tole of pron berde inthe boufe, wpple
it was ım buplopnge.

The doze of the mpddel chamber wag in the 25
rpabetpoe of thehoute:emé went vp with win
dpnge fLeares nto the mpddle chaver,¢ oute of
the mpoddle, into thethpzde.Andlobebupletbe
boule æ finited it  ronft it with beames of Ce
Dar tpmber. And thë he buplt chabers toalthe
temple of fpuecubptes bepgth, and thep were
iopned tothe boule, wpth beames of Cedar.

Andebe worde of the Lozd came to Halomd
fapenge:concernpng the boufe tebpch thou art
inbuplopng,pEtbou wplt walke in mpne odp-
naunces,¢ execute mp lawes, kepe al mp com =>
maundementes,to walkeinthem:then wpl y
makegood into the, mp promesxwhich F pro ii.re. t.a”


_mpfled Dauid thp father. + ind 5 co Dwellas tero.rrib


monge the chpldzen of F{racl,¢ wp! nor folake
mp people $fracl.Salomonth:rfoze buple the
poute,tfprithed it, fyld the walles of p poule
within with bozdes of Cedar tre:cucn fromthe
paucment of the boule vntop rottedyd be fple
the walles of tt wptbin, with Cedar tre, ¢boz=
ded the flooze off Doule with planckes of Fp2re.

And bhe {pled rwentpeubptes in the Cpoes of €
the queer ot the téple, both Rooze ¢ walleg, with
hordes of Cedar, t dzefled it withinin che tecret
place of thetemple,cnen inthe mooft bolp. And
thefp2tt boule,tbatis tolape,p bobp of thetem
ple without was fourtp cubites longe. andthe
Cedarof the boule wpthin, as kerucd wpth
knoppes ¢ graven With fouses,and al as Ce-
dartpmber,fo $ no tone was lene. And p queer
that was wpthin the temple, be prepared to let
therethe Arke of the appointemcnt ofthe Lod
And the queer before, was twertpe cubptes
longe and twentpe cubptesin bzedth,and tte»
tpecubptesinbepath.and be {pled it ith pure
golde and begded the altare wpth Cedar.

And Salomdallo (pled p boule within with
puregold. And de made golden barres runme a-

nge p queer, which be hab coucred witha 5 ‘


i]


2nd the whole boule, be onerlapde wpth golde,
putpll be hadde endcdit. And the aultare that
was inthe quere he ouerlapde wyth golde alto.
And within the queer he made two x Chern-
bing of olpuc tree,tencubptes ppe. fEpuc cubp-
tcslonge waga wpnge ofthe other Chernb:fo
thatfromthe vttermoft parte of one wyng vn
tothe pttermoolte parte of the other, were ten
cubptcs. Andthe other Cherub was ten cu-
bptesDpealfo:fothatvothe the Cherubs were
of one mcafureand one (ple: orf byath of the
one Cherub was ten cudptes, and lo wasitotp
ss Ot her. And he pucthe Cherubs within the inner
emake boufe. = And the Cherubs Hretched out thepz
~ wopnges,fotbatp one wpnge of the one touched
the onc wal,and the one wpnge of the other tou

cbed tic other wall. Andehe othertwo Wynges

of tbem touched one anothertn the mpdodes of
theboule. And he ouer laide p Cherubs w gold.

And inall tbe walles of the boule rounde a=

boute,be madefpqures of carued ¢fpled wobe:
agnamelp2pictures of Cherubs g paulme trees

and grauen flow2es, bor) withinin p quere and
without in the temple. Andthe flowze of the

boufe be couered with golde, bothe within in the
quere,and allo without inthetemple. Aud inthe

entring of the quere pe made two dozes of oliue

tree: And bothe the ppper andtwo (pde poteg
werefpuelquare. Che twodoozes allo were of
olivetrce,and be qraued them with qraupng of

Cherubs and pauline trees:and grauen flowers

and couered them with golde, andlapde thpnue

plates of golde bpon the Cherubs and pauime

trees. And tn lpke maner dtd be inthe Dore of the
temple, faupna that p poltes were of olpue tree,

foure iquare. The two dozes were of Epare free,

ANd ether doze with two foldpnge leues, be gras
uedtheron C berubs,paulme trees and owes,


#fo.trb. b


She andcouered tbem with golde, which wag laped


thpune bpon the carued wozke.

Ande buple f pnner court with thee rowes
of bewed tonc and one rowe of Cedar wodde.

‘Inthe fourth peace was the foudacton of the
boufe of the Lozdelapde:euen it the moncth sif:
And inthe leucnth peare; in the monety Sull
(which ts the epg bt moneth) was the boule full
Finiftped thozoweout all the partes thereof, ac-
cozbpng toall the faftton of it, and fo was pefe-
uen pere in pip 4 fa l ;

wr? vit. Chapter.
€ Zhe isco i cba P! Salomon. The


boute of PHaraorsdoughter. Thelourme of
____ fhe pliers of bzale:of che bzatcn tee ec
> A Cit Salomon was buploynge bps
d kc Mowne boule thpetenc pere, andfintl-
m WOA Sped itall. And be buplt the boule in
JAS Arbe aod of Libanon an pundzcùcu


aptes longe and fpfrpecubiteg bzode,and thp:=
rt bite pye. Andlit Tode) pd foure roweg
ofCedaz pyllers,andcedar bemest were laped)
ppontbe ppliers. Andee roofe was Cedara-
bone pon tbe beames that lape on the ppllers,
cuett.rly.beamesin fpfteue cowes. And there
Dere Wpndowes in thee rowes , andthe wpn-
powes were one agapnlt an other thze fold. And
the dDoozes with the ipde poles , andthe upper


yp. zAynges


ali 0 nf i *
pot, twere foure fquare,and bad ypndowes one
agapnit an other thzefolode.

And be made a pozche bp the ppllers ( $ bare
bp the honfe)fpttpe cubites lonqe,ant.ree.cuz
bites bisde, and the pozche was vefore thole, g
the otber ppllers. Sfo2 there was arhpcke treit
befozethbem. Then he made a pogchetolpt and
tudge in, fpled toith Cedar thozowout al the pa
uicmentes. And Dis otne houle(that be kept ree
fidence in:andthat was in an other court with-
out thepozche ) wag made of the fame woke.
And then Salomon made an honfe foz para-
ocsdougdter + (wdome he bad taken to wpe) irekia.
lyke vito the fafon of the porche.

And all thele were of the bet tones , hewed 25
after ameafure,andfarocd with fa toes, within
and without,from the foundacton yntotbebea
mes(thatlap aboue, after the meaiuce jand enë
fo ontije outlpde towarbde the yreatcoirte. And
the foundacpon was lapsed vponrpche oones,
and that verp greate tones, wherof fome were
ten cubptes,andfome epgbte cubites. nda-
boue were good (Cones, (quaredafteracertapn
rule and conercdD With Cedar. Andthe qreate
court roundabout was Ww threrowes of Deed
Rones and onc rowe ef Cedar plantes, after p
mancr of the mnec court ofp poufeof the Lo2d,
€ of the pozche of the tenipic. x And kpngy Spaz f-var.tt.s
lomon(ente, and fet one Hiram out of Cpre, a
topodoweslonne of the tepbe of Mepbthalum,
bis father being amanofCpre. Wbich Piram |
was acraftelnanin beaffexiul ofwopldom, vn trosrria
derffandpng and connpnge:to worke all manec
of worke in igale. And becametokpnge Da-
lomon and Weougdt all bis woke. o: becat
*twoppllers of bral: of .rvitt.cubpees bpe a Ithe y
pece, anda Erpnge of twelve cubiteg dpd com: sri.re.proe
paficeptber of themaboute. Andhe made two €
pecd peces of molten baffle ( after the fafon of
acrowne )folet on the toppes of ppplicrs. The
bepgth of the one heed pececontapned fpuc cubi
tes,and the bepathot the otber heed pece cdtap
ned fpuecubites alfo:pe made alfonet wozke g
garlandes of chapne wo2ke vpon the becd pereg
that Wwere onthe toppe oF the pyllersenen (even
(rowers) vpon the oneheedpece,andfeué onthe
ether. Andflobemade the ppliers, and tworo-
Tors roundeabout,in the one to2ethen worke to
couer p bedpeccsthat toere vponthepomgra-
nates. And thus dpt be allo foz p other pecdpece
And the beedpecesthat were onthe toppes of
the ppllerscouered be aboue , with a curpoug
workeof roles towarde tije palace bp the fpace
of foure cubptes. Lpkewople wneer the pecdpe-
ces in. tholetwopplles bencth, oxcragaynite p
mpbdes, and betore the netwozke : And ypon
the fecondebecd pece were there two bunden
pomgranates in five rowes roundabout. And
be {et pp tbe ppllers inthe pozch eof the temple.
And when be had let vpthcryghe pplict,be cals setar
lcd the name thereof. * fachin:¢ when be pad fet nete
wp pleft ppller, becalled ý namethereof x Wo- S's
as. Andin the toppe of the pillers waga worse
ofrof?g , and fo wasthe wozkemanppppe of —
the ppllerstinpfiped.


Se NS E


Salom, iij Apnges Salomon


D Bndhemadea moltenlauatozy, tencubptes the two net twozkes, (euentuwo rowes of pom-
vopde from bym to bepm,rounde in compale,€ granatesinonenct worke) tocouer p tiwa head
fpuccubptes bye. Anda krpnge ofthpztpeubi- peces that were to befet onthe toppes of the ppl
tesdpdcompatic it aboute and Duderthebspmt lers: Andfbe tenfokettes,and ten lauers on the
of itthere toerc knOppesround about, tenin one fokettes. The lauatozp,andtiwelue oren under
cubite : andthep compa fiedthe lanatozp rounde it,andvottcs, Houelleg and bales. And allthele
aboute. andthe knoppes were calte wpthit, in yefielles which Hiram made to kynge Salomi
tworowres, whet wascatte. Andit ode on foz the boufe of the Lod, were oF bapabt baatic. `
tweluc orem: of tobiche the loket towarde the 3ntheplapneot Zordandydtbekpnge catkehe: `
rozth thee totbarde the welke, thre torearde the client inthe chpcke clape betwene Socohsartha
foutbandthee towarde the eafte, and the laua- And Salomon lefte all the vellelles Ditaprd, G
torp ftode wpon them, and alltbep2 ppnderpar= becaule thep were fo erceabpnge many. neptict
tes were inwards. Ft wasan bande bzeadeth Foundethep out the wepabt ot the bafle. `
thicke, and the bepm wrougytipketbeb:pm of  Andofosalomonmadcalithevefleliesthat ` *
a cup withAotwes of lplpeg. And it contepned pertepnedvntotbe douleotthe Lozde:thegol- —
a twotboulande Hattes. den aultare, andthe golden table hereon the
Andbhe made fenlolcttes of bzatle, fourecus Mpewbzead has: And fpue candelftickes,fo2 tbe
bites longe,and foure cubttes boadeapece,and ryabt ipoe, and fpue fo? tbelefte, befoze p queer à
thiecubptes bpe. And the wozkeofthelokettes of pure golde: with lowes lamp egg (notters
was on tbis maner: Thep had {pdes,and thefp- of olde: and boulles, flat peces baleng, fpones 4
Deswerebetwenetbeledges. Andonthefpdes and mafours of pure golde: ¢bpndges made de
that werebetwene theledges, were lyons, oren of gold both) for the Does of the queer the place
gand Cherubs. Andlpkewple vpontheledgcsp mof boly jand foz the dozes of the temple alta,
wereaboue:andbenethPlyonsandoren, were — Andto wasended all tbe worke that kpnge
cettapne addicions made o thpune worke. And Salomon made for the poute of the Lorde. Jnd
pnder cuerp foket were foure bral wiris and +Halomonbougpt in thethpnges which Dae. tiii
Hordes of bzalle. And inthe foure copners there- uid bis Father ad dedtcated:eut thefplucrgold ipa fifi, a
of, were vuderletters (wnderthelanatozp) cal and ve ffelics,andlaped them bp amonge p trea


eche oucragapntt bis felowe. i; fures of the boufe of the Lode. |:
And the alke of the lauatozpe was inthe C The. vig. Chapter. i
' mpole Of if, *#(twhere itis fene onthe out (poe ONE chle aT The ave ts bome inte the temple. 3 clouve fplieth
bpte bye, anda cubitcand anbalfe rounde, and the temple.abe temple ts bleien,


‘HenxHalomos gathered tocetbertie %


inthe bepath of it were grauen wozkes whole | |
elders of. afrael, all the beddes of the iparba


fppes were made Fourelquate, and not reurde.
nd onder the (ydes were foure wobeles,andthe Req Epes Crpbes, (and them that therecaptap-
areltrees topncd faftetotbebottome. Andtihc tes tics amonge thefathersof thecbpldze
Heigtd of euecp whele Wag a cubite and anhalte of Zirael yntobimin Ferulalemp thep mpght —
Anodthe workmanthpy of the teheles was lpke bepng wp the artic of the appopntementrotthe >
the worke ofa charet tobele. And theareltrees, Lo2dxout of the cptic of Dauid, whichis Sion timegi
thenauelies, {pokes andthaftes wercallmolte. Andallthemeno Yraclaflembled bntokpng.
And there Were foure wnderletters in fourcco: alomototheteatte that falleth in themontth
nergof onefocket:andthe ynder fetters xocre of Ethanim, whichis the feuenthmoneti. And all
the verp bottomefelfe. theelderg of a(tacl were come andthepacattes
- Andin thebepath of thebotomewasthcrea folie bp the arke. Thep bace PERS of the Lo2d,
roiide compatte ot halfea cubite hye:andin that intothetabernacle of toptnene, andall the bolp
bepath of the botome , there proceaded bothe pellelies that were inthe tabernacle: thole opd
ledges and {pdcs out of the name. Jeo? in the box the pzcafteg and Leuptes vere. And kpnge Sa-
des of theledges andon the{pdesbhebadgraucn lomonandall the congregacion of Jlvael chat
pictures of Cherubing,lpons and palmetrees, were affembled nto ppm and went with bpm i
one by another round about. Thus made he the befozethearke )Dpd offre (hepe and oreu, that :
tenfockettes after this maner:Andthep Daval could enotbetoldc no: numbzedfoz multitude. |
onefalibyon of caftpnge: onemeature, and one And lo the mealtes brought thearke of the
(ple. [pa made be tenlauers of brafle,onclaucc appopntment of the Lorde wuto bis plate : euen
contapnpnge Fourty ates : and one lauet wag intbequecrof the temple andplace mooft bolp,
Foure cubites,and Dponeucrp one of the tenfo- wnder the topnges of the Cherubs. oz the abe ins
 Rettes. be put one lauce. And be put fiueofthofe rubs ftretched out thepe wpnges ouer the place |
foketies ontheright ipae ofthe bouse,andotber of thearke, and conered both it audalfo the Ta- j
fpue onp left. Andheletthelauatoryonpright ues thberofa bpe vponit. And thep Drew out the pe
fpde of p boule cakkwarde Etowarde thefouth. ftaucs.that the endes of thé mpght appeare out pe) |
And iram made pottes, (Houciles and Da- of thebolp place within the queer,but thep forte;
teng andto finy fhed all the wozke that be made not lene without. Andthertbepbaucbenewuto -
kpnae Dalomontor the houle of the Lord:that this dape, and there wag nothpuge inthe arke,
is to lape, twoppllersandtworoundeheadpe> *faucthet Wo tables of tone Which doles put veat.s.s
cestpat theretobelet onthe toppesof thetwo thereat Ipozeb,in P which tables) p Lod made —
ppllerg, and foure bunden pomegranates foz anappopntment m thechpldzcnot Stack whan =? :
e


preg |
3 mot,


preg eS


E —


4


Salomon
pe brought them out of the lande of Egppte.
And it foztuned that wabenthe peeites were
come out of tbe bolp place, thecloude fplled the
Houle of the Lode, that theprealtes coulde not
tande and mpniffer,becaufe of the cloud foz the
mlozp of the Loze bad Eplied p houte of f Lode
benfpake Salomon: the Lozdexfatd that be
wolde Dwel in the darckecloude. F pane buplte
the an boufe to dwel in an babitacion Foz the to
abpde ufo: euer. And Pkpnge turned pistace,
€ bleiled al the congregacion of Firael, gal f cå
gregacion of Weael kode tpl and be fapde:

_ Blefled be the Lozde God of Fraell,wppch
{pake topth bys mouth onto Danid mp father,
iite: it. e XAND Dath wth bps bande fulfplled it, fapena:
parbi Syence the dapethat J bzougptemp people Ji-

rael out of Egypte. ¥chole no cptie of al che trp

bes of {lrael, to buplde an boule that mp name

tre.rbi.a, MPODE be therin: ut FZ baue choferxDauid,to
“rer? bevuler ouer mp people of Firael,

And (£ was inthe Derte of Dauid my father

to buplde an boule foz $ name of the Lozde Gon

of Flrael. And the Lozde fapde tnta Daud mp


Tew.rbi.a'


fatber:Wbere asit was in thpn berte tobupld
an boule onto mp name, thou dpovett wel, that
thou walt fo mpnded. Peucrtbelefle thou halt
not buplde the boule, but thy tonne ý thal come
out of thp Lopnes,be thal buplde the boule ynta
mp name. And the Lodebath made good hpg
Wozde that helpake. And J amrpfen vp in the
rowine of Daut mp father, and lpt onthe leat
of Jfracl as tbe Lozde prompted, thane buplte
an bouletoz the name of the Lorde God of Ji-
racll. And Zbauepzepared therin a place Foz
the Arke, where ints the conenaunt ofthe Lod
radi be made vw our fathers, whe be bz out
=ihem out of thelande of Eqypt. Dalomi one
before the altare of the Lorde in the (yqbt of all
the congregacion of Zfracl, and ttretched onte


i.pat.bi.0 bys bandes Colbarde beauen, andlapd: * Lorde


ovdok Jlracl, there isno Goo lye the mbeué
aboue, 0}in theearth bencth, thou that bevel co
ucilaunt ¢ mercp Eo? thp feruauntes that walke
befoze the Wpth all thep2 berte : thou that batte
kepte wpeh thp feruaat Dauid mp Father, that
thou pompleatt hpm. Thou (patel alfo wyth
tip mouth and batt fulfplled it withtbhyne bade
as tis come to patie thps dape. Therfore,now
1029 Sod of Flracl,kepe withtbp fernaut Da
nia mp Father, that thou peomefedeft bpm, lap-
| __ enge:+Chou halt not be wpthout ama in mp
‘LUe.bilee Coebeto (peonthe feate of Fraell:fo that thy
chpldzen take bede to thep2 wape, ý thep walke
befoze me,ag thou balte walkcdin mp fpght.
And nowe (D God of Frac, let thp wozde be
vevifped,whych thou fpakeft puto tbhp feruatit
Daud mp Father.

Wipll Godin Dededrwell onthe earth? We-
en. re Doldexthe heauens,and beanens of all beancns
Secs, bg, Ate NOt able to cantapnetbhe : And howe thulde

thé thys poule doit that Jhane buplded: Haue
thou rhecfozeretpecte vnto the paper of thy fer
naunt,¢to his fupplicacion( D Lo2zd mp God)
tobearethe Dopce and paper before the thps
dape:tpat thpne epeg map be open toteard thps


ij. Bynges


SFo.r1 bt.


Houte,npabt and dape,enen towarde this place


Cof whpcb thou batt apne, * By name Halbe Dekrit a.


there.) Chat thou mapettherken wnto p pzaper
whpch thy Ceruaunt pzapetbintbpg place:ino
tegarde thou the lupplicacton of tbp feruaunte
and of thp people Flrael whenthep pay inthis
place: And beare thouinbeanen thy Dwellpnce


place,and ben thou beare, baue mercp. * DE f par: bid


anp man trelpalleagapnitbysnepghbour and
there go anoth betwene them and the one coms
pel the otber, and come {wearpng before tbpne


altare in thts boufe, thë perken thoutn beauen ¢
wozie € indge thp leruaiites, that Pcondemne
the vngodlp cobzpnge bys wape vpo bis head,
and iultifpethe rpg bteous togpue bpm accor
dpngto bysrpabteoulneffe.* when tüp people Deu. rrr.
4lracl be put tothe woe before theenempe,be
cautethep baue fpnned agapnit the , and afters
warde turneagapne to the,and knowled ge vn-
to tby name, and pzape and make fupplicacion
tntotbe in thys boute:then beare thou in beané
tobe mercpfull ynto the fpnne of thp people Ji-


p raell andbgpnge them agapne vnto the Lande,


wppep thou gauek nto thep2 fathers.

x DE Deane be put vp, anc there ve norapne #Erertte
becaule thep baue {pnned agaputt §:pet pft ep
papeintbis place,a bnowlege vnto thy name,
and turne from thep2fpnne, thozotoe thy icour:
gynge of them : then beare thou in bea uen, and
bemevcptutlos (onto the tonnes o£ thp feruauntes


‘and of thp people Firaell, Hthou Hhewe thema


good apeto walke ne Herapne bponthe

ladep thou bat geucnto thy people to enberite.

~ PEthere beinthe lande Dearth, oz peftilence,
D20uth,blaftpnge, gretbopper o? catetpyller,s2 ¢
pF ticp2 enemype belege them inthe lade ofthep2
cpttes, 02 what fo euer plage oz fpeknes chatice:
*then what peapersandtupplicacion fo euerbe onesie
made of anp man of al thy people ¥rael, which “"*"
ial knowlege euerp man p place of bps owne
berte, and ftretch forth bps handes toward thig
boufe. Hearethon then in cauë enë intbp owel
lpnge place and be mercptul,and wozie, egene
cuerp Man accozdpng to bis wapes, (encnasp

that onlp Knotveft pis berte, fo: only knowelt

the bertes of allthechplozen of men:) ¢ Jat thep
mape feare theaslonge astheplpue in lande,
wbpch thou gauek onto our fathers. and lpbe

wple pfa Traunger that isnot ofth people 3f


vael, * come out of a farrecountrep toz thp naz Jobr.rif.c
atnaine, actu.but.c


mies fake, foz tbep thal beare of thy }
and of tpp mpabipe Dandeand of thp ttretchen
eut arme, and (hal come and pzap tn thys boufe:
Chertore , beare thonin beauenthp diwellynge
peann doall an ftraunger calleth to the
o2:that all nacions of the earth map knot thp
name andfeare tbe,as dotbp people ¥racl:and
tbattbep mape knote that thy name ig called
vponmtbps boufe that 3 baue buylee.

PEtbp people go out tobataplaqaint thepz
cnempe,Wwhpther fo cuer thou thalt fendethem,
and pall prape vntothe(D Lozde)*towarde DANDIES
the wape of ote whpch thou halk chofen, g
totvarde the boule p F haue buplt foz thpname:
(Dearethow in beauen thepz prayer and fuppli-

> tación


N


Salomon.

cacion and indge thep2 caule.)
 Pithep lpnneagapnt thex(fo2 ther ignoma
thatfpnneth not)and thou be angrp wrth tbe,
and delpuer them into the bande of thep2 ene=
mpeg, lo that thepcarp them awape ppfoners
pnto tbe lande of theyr enempes, epther farre
ozneare, pet pe thep turne agapne vnto thepe
bertes inthe lande(tothe whpch thep be carped
awapecaptpue,) andreturneand prape punto
inthe Lande ofthbep2 enempes.fapeng : webane
{ynned, toe baue done wpckedlp, and aue come
mptted vngodlpues,and fo turne agapne vnta
the wpth all thepz berte,and all thep2 foule inp
lande of thepz cnempes(bpch led them awap
captiue and prape vntothe,towarbe the wave
of thep2 lande, whichthou gauek wntothep2 fa
thers,t towarde thecptic whpeh thou batt cho-
fen,and towarde the boule bypch 3 baue buple
Amos.. d Forthpname : thé deare thou thep2xpzaper and
{upplicacion in beauentbp dwel mo pyri te

iudge thep2 caule:and be mercpful vnto thp peo

ple that baue fynncdagapnit the, and vnto all
thep2tniquities (wderbp thep baue done wpe-


i. moh. id


Kedlpeagapnit the)egettbou tbem the fauoue


dftholewbpeh led them awape captpue, f thep

map baue contpatiton on them. JEO? ce it thp
people g tbpnenberitaüce, wbhych thou bzough

tet out of Cqppt,euenfrom the mpdodelf of the

F fornace of pron . And let thpneepes be ope puto

_ thepzaperot top feruaunt,and vnto the paper
F203 of thp people 4 raelxto berken vntotbem, inal
that thep call foz wnto the. Eo: thou dpododeft fee

perate them fromamonge al nacions of p erth,
(to be thpne otone enheritatice) as thou faptei
bp p bade of Dolesthp leruatit, whe pbrough
E tet our fathersxout of Eqppte D Lorde Goo.
dpe. bia.) who twpen SHalomonpad made an ende of
Lpa boa sy avengealtbys prayer and {upplicacton ynto
the Lo2de,be arole from befoze thealtare of the
Lo2de,andfromknelpnge on bys knees, ¢ from
ftretcbpnge of bys bandes wp te beauen,e kode

and blefled all the congregacion of Firacl with

aloude vopce.fapenge : wlefledbe the Lorde p
batbgenenrefte onto bps people Flrael,accoz-

umetit PNTE to all that be prompted: * there hath not
" fapled one wode of al the good pzomple which
he p2omplea bp the bande of Woles hislernaiit

Che Lorde our God be w Vs , as he was wpth

out fathers, and fozfake vg not, neptherleaue

bs:but that be mape bowe our bertes wnto pin

that we mape walke inall bis wapes and kepe
byscommaundementes , bps Matutes and bys

lawes, wbpch be conunauded our fathers. And

thefemp wozdes wbprhe F baue pzaped befo2e

the Lozde,benpe vnto the Lozde our Goddape

envabe that he defende the caufe of bys feruaŭt

æ the caute of bps people Zfrael (what thpng fo

euer chalice at anp tinie that al nacios of perth

mape knowe that the Lozde is God, and none

but be. Let pour bertetberfo2e be perfpte wptb

the Lozde our God, that pe walkeinbdps ftatu:

teg, € kepe bys comaundementes, as this dape,

.  enotbeakpnge andall Zlract wpth bpm, of-

© fered offerpnges before the Lozde. *And Salo


Hose 8 mon offered a Cacettpce ot peace offtpruges vnto


Up, ZApnges


tpe Lode andhe offered vntothe Lorde rrii.
thoulande oren, and an bundzed g twenty thou

fande pepe: And fo the kenge andall the chpl-

Den of Frael dedicated the boule of the Lozoe.
helamedap dpd the kynge balowe the mpble

of thecourte, that was before the boule of the
Lozd:fo2 there be offered burntoficpnges meat
offrpnges andthe fat oftbepeaccoffringes: be:


ý cauletbebzafenaltare that was befozep Lo


thas to lptleto recepue pbhurntoficpnges, meat
offerpuaces,and the fat ofthe peaccotterpnacs :

And Salomon heldethat lame tpmeanppe
feat and all Jfrael wpth dyna verp great con
gregacpon,cuen fro the entrpngein of Hemath
puto che rpuce of Eqppte, before the Love Ur pyri, e


P


; Fil ;
E , Ey) ed the buplopng of the boufe of t.par.vg.c
yy ACA the Lozde and the hinges palace,
7 WwaVee@andallthatbebadinbpsmpnbde, .
7 fea Sand was appopntedto make:the
Ce Wy a Sod appeared tonto him agape
ashe nba bntobpmat Gibeon. Andthe
Lozde apd wntobpm: J baue berde thp paper
andthy interceflion,that thou bait made before
me: Jfoz Jbauebalowed thps boulecwbpehe
thou batt buplt, to put mp name there fo2 ever
Ll ied a end cb cape ha per-
seein Pipe f thou wplt walke before me(as——
auidthp father walkied,in purencs of berte g
inrpabteoutnes to do all that J hauc comaut-
ded the, and oplt kepe mp Matutes, mp lawes
then topll 3 fablptth the leate of thp kyngdom
ppon Zlrael foz ener, as Jpzompled tó Danio


thp fatber,fapenge:* Chou palt not be topth= rs ta


outa man vpon the feate of Flracl.

_ Wut and pEpe and pour chyldzéturneatwap 25

From me,and wpll tot Repe mp commaundemée

ted and mp Matutes (whpche baue fet before

pou )but goand lerue other qoddes, Ewozrthpp
them:then wpll ¥ twede Firael out of thelande,

Which J baucgpue the: And thig Houle which y — >
pauehalotoed*fozmp name, wpl gcatontof Hirer a
mpiight. And Jfrael ibalbe a prouerbega fable "`
amonge all nacions. and thpsboufe thalbe ta-
kenawavpe:fo tbat eucrp onethat paffeth bp it,

thalbe aftonped,and thall bpfic, andthep Hall
fape:xwobp bath the Lorde done thus puto this wea.sriry
lande and to thps boulesAndthep Hal anlwwere Be. rrii, o
becaulethep forfoke f Lozdcthep2 God, which
brought theps fathers ont of the lande of Egipt

and hauetaken Holde Dpon other Goddes, and

baue wo2tbppped them, and ferucd them: ther-

foze batb the Lozde brought vpon them althps

euel.x And it foztuned, that atthe cnde of tien fipa. btii.a


tpe perres, Salomon fpnpthed the buplopng of


the two poules,thatis to wete, the boule atthe
oe


Lozdeandthe kpnges palace. And Diramtbe queffions. And the came to Jerufalem wpth a
kpnge of Tpze broughte Salomon tpmber Werp great trapne: wpey wamels p barefwete
of Cedar, and fp2retrecs, molde, and w atio- oDdoures,andgolde ercedprge much, and precis
cuer De delpzed: And Halomonagainegaueii ous ftones. And (he came to Salom, and comu

Nige db ram. rE cptiegin the lande of Galile. ndx Hp nedwopthbpm ofall that was it berbert. And
ram came out from Tiretofethecpties whpcly Salomon declared vntober all der queftions,
Salomon hadgeuenbim,andthep plealedbim fothat tbere Was not one thyngebyd from the
not. And helapd:mpatcpttesaretbhele,whpche &pnge,twbpch be erpound_d not yntoder.
thou Daft geuen me, mp beotber -g be called thë And Ede quene of Saba confpderedal Salo x
thelandeofCabul vntothysdape. AndHiram mong wpledome,and p boule that be bad bu pl-
fent cht lipnge. vi. fcoze budzed wepgbtofgolo ded,andthemcarteof bys table and the {ptting
and thysisthelumme, tohpchkenge Salomd of bys lcruauntes, the o2d2¢ ofhysmpnifters , g

| ,  tapledfozatrpbute when be buplocdtheboule thepz apparel,ppsdapnke æ bis burnt facrifices

P ofthe Lozde and bps owne boule, and Aillo, that be otfred in p boule of the Lode, g (he was


— Salomon tj. Apnges — So.¢ lbit.


n - and the wall of Jerufalem , and Hasocr,and aftonped. And pe lapd bnto Pkpnge. Jt wasa
a WHegeddo,and Sasar. _ truc wozdetbhat F herdein mpne ovone lade of
C j0: Pdaraokpnge of Egypt went vp,and thy lapenges:e of thy w fedom. Dowbeit Jve

. toke Gasar, andbutrnet it wpthfpec, ¢flucthe leued it not tpl ¥cam,elaweit with mpne tyes


Cananites that dweltetnthecptte, andgauett And beholdetbe one halfe was not toide me:fo?
Foza pzefente vnto bps Deughter,alomons thy wpledome E pporperitie erceadetbtbefame
wopfe. And Dalomabuple Gazer and erbyo Wwhpch F bherdeofthe.Happp ave thy men: hap
ron p nechie: and aaiathand Chamarinthe py are thele thp feruaiites, which tandecucr be
wplocrnefleandintheladeandallthetrcatuce fopethe,ebeare thp wpledome. wletiedbe the
cpties tbat SHaiomon bad, wi aad were bnwalled; Lo210¢ thp Sod, which loucd p,to fet p on p feat
va fbofebemavetronge)andcptiesforbpscharrettes, of #fcacl,becaule p Lozdeloued Brael for ever
| andcptiesfor bps boricmen,andallthat Salo Emadethe bpnge, todoequite € rypabteautnes.
, mon delpzedand wolde buplde in Ferafalem,in And fbe gaue thekpnge {pre fcozebundzeth €
Libanonand inall the lande of pis vominion. - Wwepgbt of golde, g of fwete odoures ercedpnge
| Aud allthe people that werelefteofp Ama much and precious ftones. Chere came homoze
E rites dethites,Wbherelites,peuites and Jebuli Cuche aboundaiice of fwete odoures, as p quene
| teg, (whpch were notof thechyloeenof Jfracl) of Sava gaue to kpnge Salomon. The naupe
y thep? chpldzen that were lefteaftertbemin tbe alfo ofthexthpppes of Hiram that carped gold tif. veg. i
lande , whome thechpldzen of Jlraclallo were from Dpbhir)beought lpkewmileqreat plenty of STF
) not able to defkrope. Thole dpd Salomon Almugetreeand precious toneg. And p kinge
compell Cobapage trpbute wutotbpsdape. made ofthe Almuge trees, ptllerstoz the boule
But of the chplozen of Flracli bpd Salomon of the Lozdeand Foz thekpnges palace,e made
| cree abe no bondme, But rhep wereme of warre harpes g plalteries Cog lpngers. Chere cameno
| Leut ere. bps myntlEers, bps lozdes, bps captapnes,t ti: moze Cuche alimuge trees , no? Were anp moze
oo levs of bps charrettes¢byshostcmé. Andetbele fene wntothps dape. Andkpnge Salome raue
| werethelordes, that were let ouer Salomons wntothe Quene of Haba accozdpnge toall ber
wakt: cuen fpue hidz2eD Were thep andfpftp,€ oelpae whatfocuer the alked: belpoes that he
they ried the people that wrought the wozke. pra ae of a free topil wpth bps owne bande.
And ~Daraos Doughtercanicont ofthe citie And fae returned ynto ber owne countrepe:
of Dauid vnto tbe boufe whychalomonhad both Wesandberferuauntes.
buplt foz ber. Andthen dpd be alfo buplde Hile Che wepgoe of goldethatcame to Halomő
lo. And tbiplea pearedpd Salomé offreburnt ín one peare, as {pre bundzedthze (core €lpre
offerpnges and peaccofteringes bponthealtare talentes of gold, belpdes that he bad of cha pme
whpche be buple vntotbe Lode: Andpeburnt and of marchauntes g of Poticaries,¢ of all the
tncenle bpon the altare that was befeze p Lozd oe ges of Arabpe,¢ of the lozdes of the colitrep
and fo be fpnitped the boufe. and bypnge Salomon made two hundzed bouc:
Andkpnge Salomonmadeanaupoftbpp- kelers of beaten golde , pre bundzed fpecies
pesin 4310 Gaber whichis belide Eloth,etpe of golde went toa bouckeler. And he made thre
bepnelse ofthe redfce,intheladeof Gdom.Andé hundzed (ypldes of beaten molde, thre pounde of
Hiram ient bp typ alfo of bps feruauntes,that golde tecnteto one plie, the &pnge put then |
Were pppmen, andhadknowledge of the fee, in the*boule of the wood af Lpbanon. iive pbikb >
wptb the feruauntes of Salomon. Andthep  Andthekpngemadeagreat ieatr of pucty, x °
came to Dpbhitandfctfrom thenceone etwen- andcoucred it topth the belt golde. Andpleate ~
tpe {core bundzed teepght of golde,andbzougdt bhadlpre keppes. And the toppe of the leat wag


ttokpnge Salomon. — counde beppnde, ¢€ there were pomels on epther
CTAC so fpde on thc place of the eat, tiwo Lyons tode
@ She quene of Sabacommeth to heare the wpledom of befpde the pomelles. And there tode.rii. Lions
Salomon, who fe ropaltp is bere Dptcrpbea. | on the tep eS. viona fpe. NE A AiG
A Sy Md chexquene of Habahearpng f fame lIpke(wozke)feneinanpkpngdome. x And all Dev.rbit.»
opet. rit, d ETEA l


Jove Of Dalomon (concernpnge thename of kpnge Salomongdapnkpnee vefletles were of
{i,pat. if. @ eG the Lozbe came to proue bim with pard golde,and lpketopie al the vefelles of oeben

ofthe
m


Salomen.


of the tvood of Libani were of pure golde. And
a3 fo2lpluer, it was notbpng worzthin È Dapes
of Salomon. o: the kpnges naup of thpppes
wente on the fee unto Charlps with thenaupe
of Hirams (hippes:cucn ones in thee peare wet
the naup to Tharfis,and bought gold and fpl


tpar tf ner, Elephantes tet),apes and pecockes.x Bud


ipar iD


fokpnge Salomon erccaded all the kynges of
the earth both in ryches andin wptedome. And
all the twozlde rcfozted to Saloms,tobeare his
wyledom, which God bad put in bis bert. And
brougbt bpm cuerp man bys prefent, vellelgaf
{pluer,and belfcls of golde, rapment, barnefle,
and {wee oBoures,andbozles and mules,peare
bp peare. And Saloms gathered together char
rettes and hozfeimen : and be badde a thoufande
and foure bidzcd charrettes and. rii.thoufande
boslemen whom pebetowedin the charret cp=
tics and with the kpngeat Jerufalem.

* And the kpnge made (plucc in Feculaléas
plenteous ag itoncs, and Cedar as plétecusas
the wpld fpaactrees that growe abotidauntip
inthe feldes. Che brpngpnae of boales allo out
of Egypte : and che colieccio of the Warres: bpd
tie kpnges marchauntes take agapne, folde
the tutte fo2aprpce. Acharretcame out of €-
gppte fo2. vt. pundzed peles of fpluer : that ts,
one bole fozanbundzedandfpftpe. Andeuen
fo fo2 al the kpnges of the Hethitesand foz the
kpnges of Sirta, dpd thep bzpnge chem ont,
thozowwe thep2 bandes.


tes wetbites. WU peze as pet (concernpnae
thefe nacions the Lozdelapod unto the chplozé


er.rrritii.b OF Flracll: kcomenot peat them, nozlet them


come at pou: Elles wyl thep turne pour pertes
after they: qoddes. Meuertheles, Salomon


Derbio claue puto tem in loue.k And be bad feuen Dun


Dyed <Nucnes,and thee hundzed concubpnes , g
bps wpues turned awap Ins berte.ffoz it came
to paile, when Salomon was olde, bys wpues
turned bys berte after other gods:and bis berte
was not perfpte wopththe Lozde bys Goa, as
was the becte of Dauiv bps father:ffo2 Salo-
monfolowed Afaroth the Gadof thestvons,
and &)ilcon the abbominactonof the Ammont


% tes. And Salomon wonght wpckednes inthe


fpgbt of the Lozde, and folowerdnot the Lozde
perfitlp,asdpd Dauldhys father. Fo:thë dpd
spalomonbupldean bpe place fo Chamos the
abbominactonof )oab, inthe bplithat ts be-
Foe Jerufalem, and nto Doloch the abbomi-
nacion of the chpldzen of Ammon. Andlpke~
while bpd be foz al big outlandrth wyues wbich
burnt cenfe and offered unto thep2 qoddes. And
the Lozde was angrp wpth Salomon, becaule
bpsberte was turned frothe Lozbe Goo of Fi-


tj Bynes Salomon


iā.


that be hulde not folowe other goddes. Wut be
kepte not that, wbpcbe the Lode commaunded
dpm : wberfoze the Lozdelapd ynto Salomon
foz a8 much as this is doncof the and thou halk
not kept mpne appopntment, and mp ftatutes
(wobpch JF commaunded the )¥ topll rent p king
dome from the,and wyll geue it to thy feruaunt
otwpthandpnge in thp dapes, ¥ wpl not do
it becaule of Dautdthp father but topill take it
From the bade of chp fonne. Howbeit FJ wyl not
fakeawape all the kpngdome: Wut wyll gene
one trpbe to thy fonne, becaufe of Danid mp fer
uatit,  becaufe of Jeculalé hich 3 hanechote.
Anbdthe Lode Mered vpan aduerlarp vnto ¢
HPalomon:euen one Hadadan €domite,of the -
Epnges fede,whpch was in Edom. o? when
Dauid was in Edom, and Joab the captapne
of ë hooft was gone vp to burp them that were
flapne,be fmote all tbe men chplozenin dom.
Joz. vt.monethes dpd Joab remapnethere and ;
all Ifrael tpll be bad deltroped all the men chpl
dren of Edom. And thys Hadad fe andcerten
orher Edonittes of bps Ceruauntes pth bpm,
to come into Egppte:badad bepnae pet alptle
chplde. and thep arofe out of Badid,and came
to Patan,and toke men wpeb them out of jda-
Fan, andcameto Egppte Ynto harao kpnge s
of Egypte, whpcbe yauc bym an boule,and ap-
popnted bpm vptaples,andgaue bpmlande.
And Hadad gat great fauoure in thefpghte q
Of Pharao,fo that he qauebpm to wpfe the fp: ;
Rer of bps owne wpfe.cuen thelpiter of Thap i


penesthe quent, And the (pfter of Thabpeneg


are bpn Genubath bys fonne, whom Chabpe
nes nozithed in Wharaos boule. And Genubach
was at Pharaos houthold amonac p fonnes pf
Pharao. And when Hadad berde tn Eqppte~——
that Danid was lapde to flepe with bis fathers
andthat Joabtbe captapne of p hott was dead =
alfo be fapdto Pbarao:let me depart, p J map
go to mpne owne countrep. harao apd vnto
bym:wbat baft thou lacked Dere wpth ne.that pi~
thou wolde thus goto thpne owne countrep? ae
pe anlWwered: nothpnge:bowbeit let me go. =
nD God fered him vp another aduerlarpone
Rezon theloune of Eltada,whpch fled fro bps |
lozde Hodadeser kpnge of soba. And þe gathe- =
red men Dnto ppm, and became captapne ounce |
the company, when Dauid fluetbem.aAndthep |
ient to Damatro, and diveltethere,erapirned |
in Damatco. Therfoze thas he anabduerlarp to
Ffracl allthe dapes of Salomon. Andthps
was themplcbhete, inthat Hadad dpd abborre
Jlraclland rapgued oner Siria. 7
And Jeroboam the löne of Rebat an€ybza
thite of sareda( hole mother wag called seru- 5h
|


A n


ab, wbpebe was a fopbdowe, andhe Salamis
feruaunt )lpfte bp bps bandeagapntt p ipnge.
Wut thps was the caule, that he lpfte vp bys
bande agapnuil the kpnge: Salom bduplt Ael=
lo and mended the bzoken places of thecptic of
Dauid bps father. And tbps felow Jeroboam
was aman of harre. And Salomon fate the


unre. tita tacl¥ModpcD Had appeared vntohimetwpte and ponge man that he was able to do the woke, be |
awia ganebpinacparge (concernpugetbpstpynge) mape bunruleroueral pcharges of the one . |
ofep |


a


i Rehoboant


Jofeph. And it chaunced at that ceafon, that Fe
toboam wente out of Jerulalé, andthe prophet
*Bhiab the Silonite met bym bp the wape- pa-
upnere anewe mantell on pin, ¢ ep two were
alone inthe felbe. Abiabcaught the newe man-
tell that was on bim,and rent it in twelfe peces
andfapdto Jeroboam:take the ten peces. Stor
thys lapeth the Lozde Good of Ffrael: bebold, 3
wpl rent the kpnadome out of the bades of Sa


" Apa. vg. ¢ Lomoncand wpll gpuctentrpbes tothe + and be


$


F


Wall haue one, foz mp feruaunte Dautds iake ¢


. fo Se radia cpr whych F bauccholen oute


of all the tribes of Flrael:becaule thep baue for-
faké me,and paue MOPU unto ATbharoth
the God of the sidons, and Ebamosthe Goo of
the Poabites,and )tlcometbe God of thechyl
Dien of Ammo g paue not walked in mp wapes
(to fulfpli mp pleafure, mp fatutes and mp
lawes )as dpd Dautd bys father.

FZ wyll not take the whole Bypngdome ont of
bps bando: but J wypllmake bpm chefe all bys
ipfe Longe, foz Dauid my feruauntes fake, who
Fchole: becaulehe keptemp commaunoemens


it.reg.rit.c tes and mp fratutes.* Dut 3 tpl take pkpng-
pLcrerit.b Dome out of bps fennesbande, and wpllqpuc tt


fi.par.t.a


pnito the,euen ten trpbes of tt,¢ nto bps fonne
wpll 3 qeue one trpbe that Dauid mp fervaunt
mape baue alpght alwape befere mein Ferula
lem, the cptie whych J hauccholé me,to put mp
name there. and J wpl tate the,and thou tale
raygneaccopdinge to al that tbp loule delpzeth ,
and thalt be pO ouer Jfracl. And pf thou her
ken wnto allthat J comatidethe, ew lt walke
inmyp wapes andbBe fhatis rypgbtinimp (pabt,
that thou kepe mp ffatutes € mp comaudemen-
“glas Dauid my feruaunt dpd) then wpll J be
topth the and buplde the a lure boule that hall
continue, as 3 buplte fog mp fernaut Daud, ¢
wll gene Firael yuto the. And F wll foz thps
orence (bpch Salomon bath chmptted) vere
tic fede of Dautd, but not fo? ener.

&alomon fought pa tokpl Jeroboam,
and Jeroboam arole and fedinto Cappte Wn-
to Silakkpuge of Egypte, andcõtinned there
in Eqppte vntpll the death of Salomon. Che
reft of the wozdes that cõcerne Salomon, and
all that be Dpd,andhps toyledome-are thep not
Mzptten in the boke of the worde9 of Halomo/
Thetpme that Salomon rapgned in Ferula-
tem vponall Flracl,wasfouttpepeare. And
SHPalomo flepte ehelapd bpm wyth bys fathers
g was burped tn the cptie of Danid bis father, g
Beboboam bps lomme rapgned in pps eade.

Tbe. rii.Chapter.


a Tbe kpngdome ts benpded, Mechobod rapencth oner
tos trpbestand Yeroboam eurt ten. eure is Toned,
Fersovammaketh golben calues, ;
F===4 Nx Rehaboam went toStchem:fo2 al


A Vint) Jeaell were cometo Sichem, to make


Bee Sppinkpnge.and Jeroboã f lonne of Ma
bat: tbpch was petin Egypte )berde of itxfo2


tilre. rit. g be fedde t o €gppte from tbe p2elence ofkpnge


Salomon, and divelt in Egppte. So they fent
and calledbtm:and Jeroboam and al the cogre=
gacion of 4frael came, and {pake vnto Rebobo
am,lapeng:thp father made our pocke greuous


iij Apnges


nowe therfore, make thou the qrenoufefera
oftbp father and bps fore pocke wbpcbe peput
bpon be,lpapter,and we wpll ferue the. And
b need aden Ns : bepatte pet foz the{pace of
| S, hencomeagapnetome. X
the people departed. ati aig


nd kynge Reboboam toke councell wpe) 15


the olde men that lode before Salomon bps fa
ther, wbple be pet lpucd, and fapd: what exec
geucpe, that Jmape bauematter to anfwere
thps peoplerAndthep apd wnutobpm: Péthou
bea lecuaunte bntotbps people thpsdape, and
folotve tbey? mpndesand anfwere them, and
(peake kpnde wozdestothem : thep wpl bethp
feruauntes £02 euer. ut be fozloke the councel
that tbe olde men bad geuen bpm, andcalled vn
to bps councell ponge men, that were grewen
yp Wpth bym and wapted on bpm. |
And helapd onto them : what councell gene
ye,that we mape anfwere thys peeple:fo2 thep
baue communed wpth me,fapeng: make p poch
whpch tby father dpd put vpon vs, Ipaqbecr:
And the ponge men that were growe yp pth
bpm, ipate onto bpm fapenge.'Chus whale thon
tpeake vnto thps people (that baue fapde nto
tüe:tbp father made our pocke beuye,but make
thou tt oslpgbter.) Cuen thus Walt thou fape
nto them:&)p lptle fpnger thalbe wapabtper
then mp fatber wasin tbelopnes. Andnowe


Where as mp fatber dpd lade pou and put a mre- €


uote pocke Dpon pou, J wpll make it peuper.

Wp father alfo cozrected pou in y AERA a.
but 3 wp-lchaltpce pou wpthlrozptons. And
fo Jevoboam and all the people came to Rebo-
boam the thpzde dape,as the kpnge bad appoin
ted, fapenge:cometo me agapne the thpzde dap,
And the kingeanlwered rhe people chozipthlp ,
andlefte the olde mens councell (that thep qaue
bpm )andtpake to them after the councell of the
ponge men, fapeng p father made pour pocite
grevoule, and J topl make tt qreuouler.@y fa
ther alfo chaftifed pou topth whpppes, but ¥
toy li chattpte pou wth (cozpiong. and f kyng
betkened not vnto the people: for it wasthe oz


Dnatice of God, that de negr erfourme DiS iir regrte


fapenge,whpch the Lozdelpake bp 2h: |
LONE bate TEDOORT IM A T REE D


And fo when al Flracl faw thatthe kyngere mD


garded them not.the people anfwered the kinge
with thele wozdes,lapenge:xtobat pozi bale
we in Daud we have no enberitaice inp Conne


thpne owne boufe Dauid. And fo Firael depar-
ted onto thep2 tentes. Hovobeit, ouer the child2¢ :
of Ffrae! whych divelt in the cptie of Juda, dpd
Wevobsam raygne Epll. ChekyngeRehovoa
fent Aduram precepuer of thetrpbute. Andall
thep of Ffrael Toned bpmto death. Sutkpnce
Rebovoã made {pede to get bim vp to hps char
ret, to fipe to Jerufalem. And thep of Frael re


belicdagapné p bouleof Dauid, ynto this day È


And whe al Flracl bearde tbat Yeroboam was
come agapne,thep ent ¢calledbpm butop mul
titude,€ made bim kpnge ouer al Jiracl: there
thagno tribe f folowed tbe poule of Danid, but


Sto.rlbiy.


ti.reg.tr. fe
of ¥fat. x Co pour tentes, D Frael, nowele to -par.x-.


4


iparrla. Juda onip. x And when Rehobeam wasg come
to Jerufalem, be gathered all theb oufe of Juda
ivpth the trpbe of Wen Jamin anhidzed ¢ foure
(core thoulande of chofenmé( which were good
warriours ) tofpght agapnel p boufe of Ffracl
and to bzpnge the kpngdome agapne to Rebo-
boam the fonne of Salomon.
Mund the worde cf Godcame ynto Semaia
the man of God,fapenge:-fpeake bnto Rebobo-
am the fonne of Salomon kpnge of Juda, and
bntoallthe doule of Juda g BenZJamtn,andto
the remnaunt of the people fapenge: Thus fap
eth the Lozde. Pe thallnot qo bp, noz pet fygbt
agapnitt pout bzethzen the chyldzen of Ffracl,
tefurne cuerpman to bis boule, Foz thistbypnge
ismpodopnge. Thep herkencd cherfoze tothe
wozde of the Lozde € returned to Departe, acco?
dprige to f wozde of the Lozde. Chen Ferovoa
buplt Sichemin mount Ephzain,¢ dwelt ther
FMB, bitin in. Ano went from thence,xand buplt Penurl.
And Jeroboam thougbt in bps berte:nowe
Wall the tyngdome returne to the boule of Da-
uid. soz pi tbps people go vp g do lacrifice in p
boule ofthe Lozde at Jerulalë thé all the bert
of thps people turne agapne vnto thep2lorde
Reboboam kyng of Juda:¢ lo thal thep pl me
: and go agapne to Rehoboam kpuge of Juda.
fe vit.» xW perupon p kpnere toke co‘cell, g made two
fro.rrrim Calues of golde,¢lapd vnto them. Ft ig muche
“ro.rrpiia F0? pou to go Dpto Ferulalé. *webelde, D Fi-
` tael: thefe ave thp goddes, whpch bzoughte pou
Out of the lande of Egipte. And he let the one tn
Wethel,and the other fethe in Dan. And thps
© thpnge turned te fpnne,foz the people toente/ be
caufe ofthe one)as farreas Dan. And be made
Law iiia AN Doule of yl aultares,xand made poealkes of
Hi re.Folig the Lowel of the people, whpch were not of the
fonnes of Leut.And Jeroboam made a featte
r.dape of fheepaht moneth, Ipke nto p fea
that is in Juda, offered on the aultare.aAndfo
dyd He itt Wethell, to offre vnto thecalues $ pe
ad made. And be put tn Bethel the prealtes of
the bylauttares, whpch be bad made. And be of
fred burnt offrpnges vpon the aultare,wobpche
He had made tn Wetdel,the.cv.dap of the epabe
monetp:euenin the moneth whpch behadpma-
gien of bps owne berte : and madea folempne
teaft onto thechpldzenof Jfracl and offred dps
theaultare, and burnt incenfe.


€ Cde.xtit. Chapter.

€ Ferokoam dopnge Cacritpce bnto the caluce,is tipiche

bepofthe M2aphete. ps hane perth be, whple he putteth

iC out agapnit the prophet. Lhe prophet is Kplled,# buried
= 2D bebolde,therecame ama of God out
Vane OF Juda bp the w02d of the Lozde) -ynto
esto! Wethel,€ Jeroboam Lode by the altare
to put incele. And be ctped againtt the aultare
in fhe wozde of the Lozda fapd. D aultare, aul
tare,thus fapeth the Lode: Wcholde, a chplde
albe bozne vito the boule of Dauid, (Jofia
bp name )¢ pon the Mall be offre the paces of
tde bplauttares that barnt incente vpotbe, and
mennes bones Walie bnie ppontbe. Andbe
ganea tokentihe fametpme, fapenge: thps ig
tpe token that the Lode path (poke it. Webola


F


ij, Apnges


maketh calnés, |
the aultare Hall vente, andthe afl bes that are
bpon tt, tall fall out. s


And when thekpnee perd thelapencre of the 15 |

man of God(whpch badcrped agapnit the aul- |

tare in ethel pe firetched out bys bande from

tbe aultave,fapenge:boldc bpm. Andbys hande

whpeb be put forth agapntt Dym. dped dp, and

He couldenot pulit in agapne to bom:the aultar

alfo claue afunder, € the ates fell out from the

aultare, accozdpnge tothe tok? bpchthe man

of Sod bad geuen by the toozde of the Lode.

Andthe A i anfwered ,¢fapd vntothe man —

of God. + Oh pape vnto the Lozde thp God, g SphiHlfb o

make intercefiton fo me, that my bande map be Mu.rri.b

tefozcdmeagapne. Andthemanof Godbe- biie

fought the Lob, andthe kyneeshande Was te

{lo2cd aqapitc,and became agit wag afore. e

And the kpnge fapd bntothe man of Gad, ~. :

come bome with me, that thoum apitdpne, and

J wi lgpucthea rewarde. And the manof God

fayd bnto the kpnge: pf thou wWoldell qeneme

Halfe tbpne boufe, 3 tpl not goin tpth the-nei

ther wapll F eate beade o: Bapnke water in thig

place. #f02 fo basit charged me, thozowe the | |
i


Ti MIM I


worde of the Lozde,fapenge-eate no breave noz
dynie water, noz turne againe bp p fame wap
that thou camet. And fo he went anotber iwape
Eteturned not bp the wape that became to We-
thel. And there dwelt an olde prophet in Bethel
and bps fonnegcame, and tolde bpm all the wo?
kes, that the man of God bâd done that dape in
Setbel, and the wozdes whpche be bad {poker
bnto the kinge tolde they thep2 father alfo.aind
tep? father {apd vntothem:what wape wente
be: And bps Connes thewed bym what wap the |
man of God wente,whpch came from Juda. «

And befapd Ynto pps fonnes:fadle me the alte: -
Wbpche when thep badladled, he gat bym bp |


€


theron and wente after the manof God, and
founde. bpin Cpttpnge wnder atre. And be lapre |
bntobpm : arte thouthe manof God that cas
melt from Juba‘ And pe layd:F am.
Pe fapd vnto bpm:come home wythme, and D ms
eatebzeade. Ie anfwered: J mapenot returne
wpth the,to goin web theneptier wypl F cate E]
bzeade o2D¢pnte water wprh the in ebys place.
Jo? it was apd to me inthe wozde of the 102d :
‘Chou thalte cate no beeade, nozdzpnke water }
tbere, noz turneagapnetogqobp the wapethat |
thoucamett.dcfapd wnto bim: J ama proppet
altoas weil as thou, ¢anangel {pake nio me Ef
in tbe name of the Lozd,fapenq: bapuge bym a-
gapnew the into thpne owne boule, phemape
eate beade g dpnke water. AnddelpcDd vnio
bym. And fo be wente agapne wpth bym, dpd
cate bzeade in bps boufe and danke water.
Andit fortuncd,p ag thepfat atthe table, f E
Ww02d¢ ofthe Lozde came wnto the prophet, that
bz0ugbt Dim aga pne. And becrped vuto y man
of God p came from Juda, lapeng:thus tapeti j


the 1020: becaule thou batt bifobeped f mouth


‘ofthe Lozde,¢ bal not kepte the comaundemét


which the Lode thp Godchmaided the: but ca
melt backe agapne,¢ bat eaten bzead edzonke
water in che place (concernpnae tde mig the

» Lozde


4 k


Lozd dpd fave Dito the. Thou Malt cat no bzed
nO? Dipnkeanpe water ) thy carkafle thall not

come Dnto the fepulchze of thy fathers.
t = Andfoit came topaffe, ý when be badeaten
beecd anb dzonke, the prophet whiche beought
__, bimagapne,fabdled bim anafie. And when be
HetsFF- was gone, * alponmet bym by the wap, ¢ flue
bim, and bis carkafle wascatt inthe waye,and
the affe tode therby, andthe lpon tode by the
coozfe alfo. Ant men ý paflcd bp , fawe the car-
kale cat inthe wap, andthe Ipon tanding ther
by:and thep came g tolde tt inthe towne where
the olde prophet dtvclt. And when the pzopbete
that brought bpm backeagapne fromthe wape
Dearde therof be fapde:it ig the man of God: He
was difobedient onto f wo02d of the Lorde, and
- herfoze the Lozde bath delpucred bim wnto the


r ipon, wbicbe bath cent bün and dayne bpm, ac-
cozdpng tothe worde of p Lod, which de (pake

t nto bym. And be pake tobis fonnes, fapinge:
x fadbdle fit an affe: and fo thep bpd. And be went


and found bis body caft inthe wape, and P afie

and thelpon mode bythe coozfe. And the lyon

i Dad not eaten the carka fle noz burt the affe. And

ri the paano tobe bp tbe bodp of the mã of God

l anù laped it bps the alle and bought it agapne

and the olde 1820pbete came to the cptye, tola-

ment,and to burp hpm. Aud he laped his bodpe

tn bis owne prane aid tbep lamented ouer bim
(Blas , mp bother.) ; i

And when be bad burped him, be paketo bis

fonnes, faping:Wben ¥ am deed fe that pe bu-

$ tymeintbe fepulchze wherein the man of God
ieee tg Apa lape mp aran ir bkt ar erge
ate 02 the faping wbich de crped at f wo2d 0
ora And agaputl the alterin ethel (andagaypn


See allthe houfes of bplaulters which arcinthecp-
a ha ties of Samarie)thallcome to pafe.

i ». beit, foz al that, Jeroboam conuerted

; not from Diz wpcked wape:but turned backe g


made df ploweft ofthe people preftes off bpl-
auiters. Gnd whole pleated dpm, be fplled bps
Danie, and became prec ofthe bilaulters.And
this thpng turned to (pn bnto the boufe of Fe:
roboam , cuento deftrope bym, andto bepnge
bym to nought fromthe face of the earth.


C The.rtij. Chapter.
«£ Feroboame wpfe alketh counfapl of Shia the pro:
i pbhet.zcroboam bpeth.Sitak kpnge of Egppt robz
; beth the boure ofthe Aozbeebeboam bpeth,anb
Abian Cuccedeth bem,


° Cr


= T that


ii apnaes.


FEol.rlir,


felfe,p thon be not knowento bef wpfe of Yero |
boa, get the to Dilo. £02 there is Ahia Pp2o- |
Phet which toldbme*p J buld te king ouer thig firespit
people. id take w the tenlours € cracknels, g
acute ofbonp,and goto bpm,> be map tell the
tobat thal become of the chploe. And Yeroboas
Wwpfe dpd fo: and arofe, and went to Silo, and
came to the boule of Abia. But Apia could not
fe foz bis epes Were Waren dpmine forage. —
Andthe Lozde fapde onto Abia-bebolde, the 2
wpfe of Ferobod comethto afkea thyng ofthe
fo? ber fon, fo? beis fycke. Sut thug alte thou
fape nto ber: And when the came in, the fepned
ber felfe to be an other woman. ut whe Bia
berde the founde of her feet as became inattbe
boze, be fayd:come in thou wpfe of Jeroboam,
twbp fepnet thou thy felfetobe an othe r? Jam |
fent to the to bewe the benpe thpnges,
Gotel Jeroboam, thus fayth the Lod Sod E
of Jirael.( Jtrepëteth me)forafmoch agx Jeg- rere
alted the frõamonge the people , and made the
prince ouer mp people 4 frael: J opd rët the king
domawap frö the boufe of Danid ¢ gauce it the:
HQceuertbeleMe, thou hat not ben as mp feruaiit
Dauid, wptche kept mp comaundementes, and
folowed me toith all bis bert, to do that whiche
IStight it inpueepes:but hat done cuyl aboue
alltDat were before the: fo: thou batt cone and
made the other goddes, and molten pmages,to
prouoke me, and batt cat mevebpnde thy back:"
therfoze beholde, J wll bepnge eupll v pon the
boute of Jeroboam, and wyl roote out from Fe, ,.. Fb,di
roboam euen bym that * ppiteeh iat tje >”
wall, and bpm that tsin prifon and forlaken in
Jfrael, and wll take awape the remnaunte of
the boufe of Jeroboam, ag a mantaketh aap ;
donge, tyll be hath carped out alls D
xU bofoeuer (of Jeroboãsg boufe) dpeinthe inceroi.g
towne, bpm hall thedogaes cate: and hep dp-
ethinthe feloe thal the foules of the ape eat: D:
the Lozde bathe fapdeit. Wp therfore, and get
tbe to thpne boule. Bebold, wbë thp Foteentreth
into the cptte thechploe pall bye. Andall thep |
of 3tracl (hallmournefo2bpm, and burp bpm: `
fo? De only of Jeroboam pal come to the {epul-
chze, bycaulein bpm there is founde coodneffe
towarde the Lorde God of Firacl in the boule
of Jeroboam. )ozcouner, the Lozde hall pare
bpm bpa oe ouer Jiracl which thal deftrop
the boule of Jeroboamin that dape. Wut what
is tt now: Foz the Lorde hall fmpte Frael, ag
when areedis thakenin the water, aud be thal -
wede Firacl out of this goodlande ( whiche be
gaue to thep2 fatbers)and thal fcattre them-bee
ponde therpuer, bpcaute they baue made thent
groues,and angred the Lord. And be thalqpue
Sicael bp, bpcaule of the fpnnes of Jeroboam,
iphich dpd fpnne, and made Firaeltofpnne. e
. And Jeroboama wpfearole, and departed, V
and came to Chicsab, and twben the came to the
thretholve of the doze, thechilbe was deed. And ;
all Zivael burped bym and lamented bpm, ac-
cozding to the tozd of the Lozd which be {pate
by the band of bis feruaunt Abia the Prophet.
Andtbe ret of p wozdes that pe i


"Acvahar
Hergyoam
Powe be foarred,and hou herapgned. Weholde
they are wzptten tu the boke of the Chzoncles
of thie kpnges of Ziracl. And the dapes whiche
Ecroboamrapaned were.rrij. pere. AND when
ie was laped aflepe with Dis fathers, Madad
biz fonnerapguedin pis fede.
© Reboboam the [onne of Salomon rapgned
in Juda and Rehoboam iwas. rli pere Old whe
þe beqd torapgne, andrapgued. rvit. pete in Je
rufalem(thecptie which the L020 dpod chofe out
ofall the tribes of Jiracl,to put big name there)
His mothers name was Raama anamm onite.
And Juva Mzought wickednefe inf fyght off
Lod andangred pim in mo thinges then theye
fathers oydin thepe fpnnes wich cbep [pnned.
4€02 they alfo madethë bplaliers, pma res, and
- grouesonenerp Dpe bpll , vider euctp thpcke
tice. And tbere waga Rues of malechildzeiny
land, gthep dpo aero ORTS all the abbomina-
cions of p nacions which p 1020 cai out before
the cbilozenof Jlrael. no ít fortuned, pth te
fpftiepere of png Rebobcam: Stlab kpna of
@aiptcame vpagapntt Jecufalem,and tokea:
way) traafures of the bou fe of the Lozdr,and p
3 trralures of tbe hpnges boufe, efpopidall that
~~ wastobe bad. And be toke away the tubes of
ai.xeg.t.d. golde x tobicbe Salomon had made. Jn whole
itede kpnge Wepoboam made biaten (pides,
and commptted them wnto the Dandes of the ke
pyng of the captapnes of the garde, which wap
tevat the booze of the kynages boule. Aud when
the kpuge went into the boule ofthe Lord, they
of tie garde barethbem , and bzoughte themas
gapne mto the garde chaimbee.

The ret of the wozdes that concerne Rebo-
boam,andalltbhat be opd,are they not weytten
inp boke of the Chzontcles off hinges of Juda;
And therewas warre bet wene Repoboam and
Jerobeamallthep: lpues. And 1Achoboa a
with bis fathers, and was buryed befpde bis fa
ehergin thecptic of Dauid. His mothers name
wag Naama an Ammonite. And Abiam bps
fonnerapgned in his Mede.

- CTbe.ro.Chapter. |

yOorcken Abiam rapgacth ouer Zudacanw rpghtons ita

qucceoeth inbis roume. The battaple bptwene Ifa and

asta. Pehotaphat tuccebeth Ala. sRadad fuccedeth

y troboam.aats kplieth adab.

came Athe rvii pere ofkyng* Jeroboam
NES? GS thefonne of Rabat, rargned Aviam
parioa |S Ki acuce Juda. © bac peareraygned pein
-Sea Ferulalé,and his mo¢hers name was
spaacha , the Doughter of arte . Andhe
woalkedinall the (panes of bts father, wbtcbe be
had done before bpm: and big herte wasnot per
are tipe, TECE With the Lorde dis Godxas the bert of Da-
Helis nin his father. Qenertheleffe, fo Dautds fake
dvd the Lorde his God gyuchpmalpght tu Fe
rufalem. that be fet vp bis fonneatter pym, and
to frablpth Jerufalem:bycaule Dauid dpd that
which wasrpabt inthe fygbt of the Lozde,and
turned fromnotbpnge tbat be comaunded Him
PPRP A the dapes of bis lyte * laue onelp im the mat-
iresi ror ofuias the Metbite. And there was warre
bet were Rrbobeamand Jeroboam aslong as
thep ipued. The refk of the wo2des that cocerne


ii Zynges.


Abiam, andallthathe dpd, are thep not wey t= 15
ten in the booke of the Cheonicles of the binges

of Juda? And there as war betwene Abian
and Jeroboam. and Abiam llepte with bis ta-
thers: and thep burped bpm inthe cptic of Da-
uid. And Ala bis fonne rapgned in his eve:

* Zu the.rr.pere of Jeroboam kyng of Bfracl iipa.piti.a
rapgued Afa ouer Juva, rli-pereraygned Ye in
Jerufalem, and bis mothers name was Waa-
cha, the Doughter of Abtlalom. And Ala dyd p
emed rpgbt inthe epes of the Lozde,as bib Da
uid his father. x Andhe toke awape the whores “TFs
kepers onte of thetande, andputawapeall the
abboiminable pools that his father Dad Mave. iipar.roa
And he put downe* Aaacha bis mother from ` `
bearpng rule, bpcaute the bad made pmagesin
qroues, And Ala Deftroped Der pmages, and
burnt them bp the brooke Cedzon. Wut the Hpi
auiters were not put dDotone. Meucrtbelefle, A:
faes berte was perfecte with the Lode al bys
dapes. He becught inthe holpe vefels of bis fā-
ther (and $ be bad dedicate) unto the bovie of f
Lode:golocand fpluer, and iewels. And there
was warre betwene Afa and Baala kpnge of
Flraelallthep2 dapes.

x And Gaala kpnge of Firal went Bp a- yy
apni Juda, and buplt Rama, fop be wold let iparvta
noite Go out oztn,to Ala kynge of Juda. Then
Ala tokeall tie goldeg fpluer ý was left in the
treafures off boule ofp Lode, athe treafures
of the kpnges boufe , ¢ delpucred them into the
bandeg of bis l{eruauntes, and Ala tent them to


Benhadad thefonne of Thimon the fonne irera


of Dezion kynge of Diria (that dwelteat Da-
niatco) faping:therets a bonde betwene the and
me,betwene mp father and thy father. Bndbe-
Dolde , Jhane lent wnto theapzefent offpluct, ~
and gold, Pp thoucome æ breake the bond p thou
batt w Waata king ofS fracl} be may departiro
me. 40 Wenhadadherkened vntokpng Ausg
fent tbe captapnes of the hoottes( whichhe bad)
agapnite the cpties of Ffracl, and finote Hiong
Dan, = Abel Beth Haacha,eallthe regyon of œ
Cencroth, withalitbelande of Nephthalt. And
when Waa la herde therok be left buplopuge of
Rama, and Dwelte in Thirza. Chen kyng Ala
made a proclamacion thozowout al Juda tpat
none Choulde be exculed. And fo thep toke p fto-
nes of Ramah, and the rpuct( wherwith Waa»
fa bad buplocd) g bpnge Ala buplt with the the
byl of Sen Jamin and Mispa. Che rénaunt of .
all the wozdes p cõcerne Afa,andall bis might
au all that be dpd, € the cpties wobiche be bupl-
Ded, are they not weprtenin the booke ofp chzo
nyeles of the kpnges of Juda ! Neuvertheletie,in
Hig old age he was difcaled in bts fete. And Ala
flept with brs fathers, and was buried befpdes
pis fathers in thecptype of Danid bps father. |
And¥Jedofaphat bis fon rapgued in his (tede. a as cuss
And Padabebefonne of Jeroboam beganne to matid
rapgne yp Jirael the feconde pere of Ala kyng ¢
of guda , andraygued bpon Fracll two pere.
And he dpd eupll inthe fpqbt of the Lode, wal:
kyngin the waye of bts father, andin bis lynne
wherwith be made Ziraclipn. And cai Ae

of fbia


BOaain
| of Shia whtch was of p bounte of fachar, con-
fppredagapnit bpm,and Baala mote bypmat
| Gtbbethon which isacyptie of f Mhiliftines, for
f Madab and all Jirael lapedfiege to Gibbetha.
Eucninthbethbpzde pere of Ala kpnge of Juda,
, dpd aala flapehym,andrapqned inbis ede.
tiireriys x And itfoztuned, that when be was kpngebhe
{moteall the boule of Jeroboam, and lefte bpm
nought that becathed, butpll be bad put bym
cleane out, accozdpnge to the faping of ë Lozde
which be fpake by bis feruaunt Abia the Selo-
nite: bycaufe of the fynnes of Jeroboam wher-
with be fpnned, and made Frael ipn, whébew
n his prouocacid angred P Lozde God of Frael.
© Theret ofthe wordes that concerne Padab
andallthatbedpd, are thep not feptteuin the
booke of the Chronicles of the kin ges of Yfraecl
And there was warre betwene ia and Waa-

fakpng of Ffraelall thep2 dapes.

H|ointhe thyzde pere of Ala kpnge of Juda,
| began Gaala the fonne of Abia to rapgne ower
$ all Jiraclin Thirza. rriiij. peare. Andhedpv
f- that mbichetseupil in the fpabte of the Lorde,
walkpnge in the wape of Jeroboam, and inbis
fpnne, which made Firael to fpnne.

 The.rbt.chapter
 Febu propbecrrth agapak Gaala, whom la teres
trth gimti kpileth bis matter Ela and dettropeth the
heute of Baala. Ahab fuccedeth Ameri, and taketh to
topfe wpcked Fesabel. i
E oa Hen the wo:de ofthe Lorde came ta
a ee sebu the fonne of Hanani agapnite
EA vA Waala, fapinge : fozag moche as J
/_*.—'eralted the out of the buff , and made
thecaptapne oner mp people Firael , andp baft
walkebintbe wape of Jeroboa, and balt made
my people Jael to {pune, to angee me wò chep2
Annes Webold e 3J wyplroote out the poltcritic
of Baala, and the pofteritie cf hishoute, ¢ wpl
» mate bis Douleipke the boule of Fcroboain the
dikte. rig, Tanne of Rabat. ¥T bat man of Baala whiche
rie © ppethtnthecptte , bpm Wall the dogaes eate:
| and that man of dpm whtch dpcth tn the feldes,
{pallthe foules of the apte eate.
Theret of the wordesthatconceene Waala
7 I5 and what bedpd,and bps power , aretbep not
E - zpttenin the booke ofthe Chzonpcles of the
Pa Lypnges of Flracl/And fo Waala Kept with dis
) fathers,and wasburpedin Thirsa. And Ela
a a bis fonnerapgnedtn bis fede. And by the band
5 of tie prophet Jebu the Tonne of Hanani, came
the wozde of the Lorde agapnfl Baala, anda-
apni bis boufe, and i al all the wpcked-
nefe that he Dpdin the tabt of the Lozde(inan-
grpnge bpm wrbede woke of bis owne han-
__ deg) that he fhoulve be lyke the boule of Fero-
F hoam, and bycaule de Bplled Dyin : ce cwxhatisto
fape: gebu the fonne of Dananithe Pzepbhete.)
© Che rrvl.pere of Ala tpnge of Juda beran
Ela, the foune of Waata torayqne ouer Jiraell
in Thirsa, tivo pere. And his leruauntesimei,
(whicbe was captapne of balfe bis charettes)
confpyzedagqapnit bym , as be was in Thirsa
? Depuking:and was dzonke in the boule of Arsa
| ftuarde ofbishoufetn Chirsa. Aud stmt came
and finotebpm, and hpiled Dym inp. revi pere


— ae


pa


COL AA VITES «


STOL,

Of Alfa kpnge of Yuda andrapaned inbis tede

Andit fortuned that when De was Aub xand ro. rri.b.

fate on bis feate, be fluc all the boune of Baala, HS

not leaupng thereofone tappie agapnita tal,

Vea. be flue his kynffolkes and frédes alfo. And

thus dypdsimet deftrope all the Doule of Baala,

accordplige tothe wode of the Lode which be

{pakeagaynft Baala bp the bande of Jebu the

popbet, foz al the fpnnes of Waafa andfynned

of Cla his tonne, wbiche they fynned ang made

Altacltofpnue, andangre the Lorde Gavo! $f

rael with thep2 vanities. Cheret of the woz-

deg that concerne Ela, andall he dyd : are thep

not Weptten inthe booke of the Chronicles of

the &pnges of Firael ¢ 7
At tde.revit.pere of Xa kpng of Judadyd D -7

simtrapgne.viy.dapesin Thirza, and p peoe

ple was tben in the boot belieging Gebbethon

a cptic of the Pbiitineg. Bad the people ofthe

Hooft Derde one fape:3imri hath con{ppred, and

flapne the kpnge: wherfoze alitbep of Firal

made Jinri (the captapue ofthe doofe ) kynge

oner Firal that lame dape, cuen inthe boote.

And Amri departed bp from Gibbethon, and

all Zraci wrth hbypm,and they belieged Thirsa.

And whensimri atoe, that peptie mut nedes

betaken, be went into the palace of tbe kpuges

boufe and burnt pim felfe and the &pnaes boufe

with fpre, and fodped forbis (pnues which he

{pnned indoing that whichis euplin the fade

of the Lozde andin walkpuge inthe ware of

Jeroboam and his fpnnes which he dpd,and in

that De made Ficael to fpnne.

ThercHofthe wozdes that concerne simti, €
and the trealon that be wzongbte, are thep not
fhaytteninp boke ofthe Chzontcles of p hynges
of Fleacls Chen were the people of Fferacl deny-
DeDiNto two partes, for Dalfe f people folowed
Thibnt thefonne of Ginath makpng dim king
and the other balfe folowed mri. Sut the pec-
ple that folowed Amri prenapled agapatt the
people that folowed Chibnt the fonne of Gi-
natb. And lo Thibnidped, andAinrirayguen.

Juthe.rect.pere of Ha kpng of Juda began
Amri to rapane ouer Fleael twelue pere. pre
pere rapgned bein Thirza. Meboughe the byl
Sehomrs of ane Schemar foz two talentes of
fpluer, and buplttn the ppl, and called the name
ofthe citie which be buplt after Pname of che
mar whiche Dad ben owner of the bpll Schom-
ron. But Amri wrought that which was eupl
intheepes ofthe Lozde , anddypd worfe then all
that were befozeDpm. oz be walked in all the
wap of Jeroboad the fonne of Pabat,andinhis
fpnnes that made Zftael fpnne:toangre f L020
od of Ffrael with theyz vanities. Theret of
the wo2des that concerne Amrt,andall tbat he
dpd,and bis itrength that bethewed: are thep
not w2pttenin the booke ofthe Chzonicles of
the kynges of Jirael i And fo Amri hepte with
his fathers, and was burped tn Schomron,
and A bab bis fonne rapqned in bis Fede. |

Fn the.rccvitj. pere of Afa king of Juda begs I
Ahab Plonne of Amritorapane ouer Flracl, ¢
the fame Ababthe fonne of Amrirapgned ouer

Gij  Fleacl


=


vila Cee ZAVUUL Sd MAUS DZOPYCICS
. in Samaria. rrii.. peere. AndAbab the anddpdasEliafapde: And{oeandherboule
er: att dpd rap inthe fpqbtoftheo2d Dpdeatea good (pace, and the mele watted not
aboucalltbat were beforebym. Joz ttfemed out of thebarel,nepther was the ople {pent out
pntobim butalpabttbing to walkeinthefpn- of thecrufe,accozdpng tothe Wwo2zd of the Logo,
nes of Jeroboam the fonne of Nabat. Hetoke whichbelpake bp the bande of Elia.
a Domea to OLE tmtuentasiend iktonesthine cee IED, IDA p
fiif.re. pD. fe, and wentandierucd the tonne oft te e Doulet .
Re. the SDiDonites to wpe. bis fpckenefie was fo loge, p there was no beth
left in bpm. And the fapd ynto Elia:what haue
Ato do withthe, D thou man of God-art thou
come Unto meto call mp {pune agapne tore=
membzaunce,andtoflayempfonne: He lapde
tnto per : gpue me thy tonne, and be toke a
out of ber lappe, and carped bim bp intoa lofte,
where pe abode, andlaped bym ppinbis owne
bed, g called vnto the Lozd,and fayd: D Lozde |
my God, haf thou punifiped alfo this widowe f
(with whom Fowrellagafraunger) and bat
flayne ber fons * Jnd he ftretcheo pit felfe Dp st.re.teg.e, `
the childe thzetpmeg, €called wnto the Lozde,g¢ I%FFt
fapde: D Lozde mp God, let this chploes foule
come into bin agapne.Andthe Lone berde the
boyce of Clia, and p foule of the chpide came itt
Weer to bymagapne,andbe reupucd. And Elta toke
hax A the Dope and bzougbt bym ddwne out of the cha
ES N bze into the bouie, and delyuered bpm wnto big
mother, and Clia fapd:beboloe, thy fon lpueth, |
And the woma fapd vnto Elia : now F knowe :
that thou art aman of God, and that the 102d p
of the Lozdeintbpmouthis true, Fa -
| @'Chbe.rvtij.chapter,
@tilatsfent te Ahab. mbadia(otherwple called Dhbfa) bp:


beth an handed prophetes, elia kplieth all Saalis propbes
tes:and afterinarbe obtapneth rapne,


be ie
=. 5 pafi
i : a at eee
pot shee a et
: i.
` p n
y i i


 norapne bpon the carth. And P wode ofthe = e
| Losbecame pnto Dyin, laying: * bp, and get the y
zuke. iiine to zarphatb, whichis in S600, and dwel there. Fl
Beholde, J baue cõmaunded a wpddowe there — $


ofuftapne the.oo be arofe:¢ wét to sarppath.
AnD woben became to P gate of P cpticthe wpd-
Dowe wastheregatherpng Kpyckes.aAndbecal- Bay a : |
Huo.fi§.c' leptoher,andfapo: * fetme Jprapetdealptle Pye Vilpere fapinge:qo bewe thp felfe nto
water ina veflell,p Jmapedzynke.Andaswe Ase! Ahab, and J * wpll fenderapneyps ae ee
was going tofettt, Decrpedatterber,andfayd: thecarth.and Elia went to thewebpm elf yn 28% 7
bepngeme J pzape the,amoztell ofbzeedalfoin to Abab , andthere was a great famithmentin
thypne bande. Sbe fapde:AstrulpastheLozde Schomron. AndAbudcailled Dbadia, whiche .
thy Godlpucth, Jbauenobzecdreadpebuteut was F gouernourofhis Doule: and Dbadia fea
anbandefullofmeleinabarell,andalptleople red Godareatlp : 03 when Jebabel i deffroped
inacrufe. Andbebolde, Jam gatheryngetwo theprophetes of? Lord, be tokeanbidzed p20-
peckes fo2 to goin, and Dzefle it for meand mp porregana bpdtbhbem,fpftie menin onecaueand
fonne that we mape cate,and not Dye. pftpeinan other and pronpded byeedand wa
C ‘AndEliafapd ontober-Fearenot,come,and ter for them.And Abablapde vato Dbadia:qo
doas thou baltfayde,butmake me therofalp- intotbelande, onto all the fountapnes of wa-
tlecabe fp2fF ofall: andbgpngett Untome and ter, vntoall the bzookes, i bappelp we map
afterwarde make forthe, andthp fonne. Woz fpnde graffe tofaue the bozfes and the mules,¢
thusfapeth the Lozde God of Fracl: themele that we defkrope not fome of thebcakkes. And
inebebavell tal not be watted-neptber thalithe Lotbep deupdedthe lande bettwenc the to walke |
oyle in thecrufe bedDemtnifiped, wntplthe Lod thozowe tt. Abab went one wape bp bpm felfe, r
paue fent rapne pon thecarth, And Me went, and Dbadia wentanother wapebp me ie
| Yndi


Seca fter procefle ofmanp dapes the word a
tA gof the Lorde came to Elia tn tbe third


-


= we


Guia


+


wape, Clia met bym. Bnd Dbadta knewe bim:
and fell on bis face, and fapde: artenot thou mp
lode Elias And he anfiwercd bym: 3 ambe.Go
anbdtelthy lozde:bebolde, Elia ispere: Helapd:
what bauc FJ lpnned, that thou woldett delpuer
tby {eruaiit into p bad of Abab, to Nape mer As
truly asthe Lozd thy Goodliuetd, there is nona
cion o? Byngdont, whither mp lozd bath not lee
tolekethe.And whenthey fayd: be isnot there,
He toke an oth of the kyngdom and nacion, whe
be founde thenot.andnow thou fayett: goand
tell thy lozde , that Eliaishere. Andas foone
as Jam gone from the, the {ppzite of the Lorde
fhalcaryp the nto fome place p 9 donotknowe,
and fo when J come, andtell Ahab, and be can
not Fpnde the, be hall flape mes Wut F thy er-
naunt feare the Lozdefromp youthbwp. as
it not tolde mp lozde, what Joyo when Jesabel
fluc the Dzophetes ofthe Lozde, howe J bpian
Hundzedinen of the Lozdeg Wrophetes, fpftpe
menin onacaue, and fpftpe inan other, and po:
upded Shem of bzecd and water And now thou
fapett: qo thou now and Wewe thp logde,bebold
Elia ia here, that he mape flape me ¢


And Elta fapde : as trulpe asthe Lorde of ©


hoottes lypueth , before whom F tande, J wll
ewe mp felfe vnto bym this daye. So Dba-
dia went to mete Abab,andtolde pym. And J-
bab went to mete Elia. And it fortuned, that
when Lab awe Elia, he fapde wntohym:arte
thou be thattcoubleth Flrael/He anlwered:it is
not J tbat Daur troubled Firael,but thou, and
thy fathers boule , inthat pe baue fozfakenthe
comaundementes of the Lade thou baft folo-
wed Waal. Qow therfore iende, and gather to

ic all Ffracl, onto moñt Carmel, tbe prophe-


FE ii.re-rrita £09 of Daal x foure hundzed and fpitpe, and tbe


prophetcs of thegqroues foure bundzcd, whiche
eate of Jesabelstable.So Abablente onto all
tht chplozen of Firacl:and qarhercd the prophe-


Aidit chaunced,that ag Obadia wasin the


Wut there was no hopee, noz one to anfwere.
and they lept vpo the alter that they bad made
2nd atnoone it foztuned, that.€lia mocked
them, and fapd:crpe loude, foz beig a od:perad
uenture Deis talking oz occupped (in olowing
of big enempes) o2 ig in bis iournepe, o? happlp
be flepeth, and mut beawaked with pour crpe:
And they crped loude and cutte then feluesas
fbcp2 maner was, with knpucsand launcerg,
tyll the bloude folowed on them. And it chann-
ced, that when mpddape was paled, ther p20-
pores butpll the tpme of the enenpnac facri-
pee. Wut there wasnepther boyce noz one to
anfwere,noz anp that recarded them,
And Elia fapd yntoall the folke: come tome


A nd all the people came to bym. xAnd be repap ire.riti.t,


ted the aultare of the Lozde that was b2oken:


x And Elia tobe.cy.fones, accozdpngeto the Itin


nombee oftbe.rij. trpbes ofthe fines of Jacob,
(Unto whom the word of the Lozpe came) fap=


ing:* ZF {cael Halbe thy name. And witb the to senpprit i


nes be made an alter inp name ofthe Lo2d. And
He made a dptche roid about the alter, as bade
as two fozowes of the cozne feld. Andbe put
Wood in o?d2e, andYewed the ove in peces, an
laped him onthe wood, ¢ fapd: fpl foure barelg `
with water, and poureit onthe burntlacetfice, |
and on p wood. And pe fapd:dofoagapne. And
thep dpd [othe fecond tpine.And he lapdagapn
doolt thethpzdetpme. Andthep dpd it pet the
thpade tyme. Bnd the watcrranneround about
the aulter:¢ be Eplied the ppt with water alfo.
Andit foztuncd, whe the tyme came (toberin g
the burntlacrifice of f cuening vfedto be offred)
Elía the prophet came, efapd: Lozd God of J-
beabam, slabac ¢ of Firael, it hall beknowen
this dape, that thou art the God of Flracl, and
that Jam thy fernaunt,and that J bauc done al
thele thpnges at thp comaundement.deare me
(D Lo2de )Deare me, $ this people map knowe
that thou art the Lod God, and that thou hak


Folli


turned they2 Dert agapn now at the laf. xAnd zu ora
the fpze of the Lozde fell, andcõlumed the burnt ec-ribiti.e,
facrifpce, the wood the tones and the dut, and ©)“


testogpéber nto mount Carmel.
D And €ltacame vito allthe people andfayd
howe longe halte pe betwene two opinions: PE


the Lozbde be God, folotve bpm: but pf Baal be
be, then go after hpm. and cake anlioered
ppninot a worde. Chen layd Elia wntotbe peo
pleagapne: 3 onclyremapnea Propbete of the
Lode: Wut Waals prophetes are fourehadzed
and Eftpe. Let them therfoze apue bs two oré
andletthem chofe the one, and cut bpm in peces,
and lape bpm on wood, and put no fpze wnder,
and 3 wyll dzefle the other ore andlape bpm on
wood, and wyll putnofpze puder. Andcall pe
onthe name of pour god, and ZF wyll call on the
name of the Lozde: and thenthe Govthatant-
wereth by fpae,let brm be Gon.


cg xAndallthe peop anfwered, and fapd:{tis
ueg ipe welfpoken. And E


ia fapd nto the prophetes
of Waal:chole pou an ore, and dzelle bpm fpr,

(Toz pe ate manp) and call onthe name of poure
goddes, but putnofpze vnder. And thep toke
the one ore that be Didgyue them, andthep deel


eath. b.a. (edit, *andcalledDonthe name of Waal, from


moznpuge fonoone:faping:  WaalHeare ve,


Ipcked Dp the water that twag in thepyt. And
when all the people lawe if, hep fell onthep2 fa
ces, and fapoe: Tbe Lorde, be is God:the Lorde
De is God. And Elia fapd ontothem: Cake the
propbetes of Waal, let not one of them etapes
And thep tokethem , ¢ Elia baoughtethemto
the brooke Ril, and Aue them there. Bnd Elia
fapbe Unto Abab.Get the vp, andeateedzinke -
fo? there ig a founde of moche rayne. And fo J-
bab wente bptorate andto dpnke, and Elia
wentop tothe toppe of Carmel. Andhe laped
bpm felfe fatte bpon the carthe, aot ab bis
face bet wene bis knees.and fapd to bis teruaiit
fo Dp A pape the)and loke totbarde the wape
of thefee.And he went vp andloked, anv fap:
there is notbpnge. And be fapd: go agapne feué
tymes.Andit foztuned, that at tie leuéth tyme,
be fapde: behold: bercarpletba lptlecloude of
the feelpke ane Snes bande. Ve fayde: Go,and
fape Dito Ahab : Make fat thy charrette,and
Set tbe Downe, attherapne foppethenot.

©.tt}. “~~ And


Andit came to pafe, that inthe meane whple,
that beauen was blacke with cloudes g wpnde
and there was a great rapne. And Abab gat vp
and came to Jesrael, Andthe hand ofthe 1030
‘was on Elia, and be gymen tp bis lopnes,and
ranne befoze Abab tpll be came to Jesracl.


X The Fesabellentameflenger vn


RG


igre iib f A


lay (34 T to Glia, laping:* fog folet p god-
a iY e Sesdootome, py make not thp
foule lpke one of thep2s bp tomozow this tpme.


Wibenbelawe that, H de arole , and went foz
pis life,and came to Weerleba in Juda, and left
his kruañt there. Wut be him {elf went a dapes
foutnep into the wilderiefle, and came and fat
Downe vider a Juniper tree, andodefpzed foz
Jona iige his foule, that be mpabte dye, and faypode : * itis
nowe pougbe (D Loze ) take mp foule, fog F
am not better then mpfafbers.
$ Andashelapandfepte onder the Juniper-


tree:bebolde,anaungel touched bpm,and {apne . :


pnto bpm: bp,andeate. And whenhelokeda-

pout bpm, behalde, there was a lofe of bropled

bzecd ga vellel of waterat his heed. And he dyd

cate and d2pnke, and laphe bim Downe agape

foficpe. Andthe Aungell of the Lorde came å-

gapne the feconde tyme, andtoutched bym, and

favo: bpand cate, foz thou balk peta great tour

nepe. And earole, and dpd eate and Dzpnke,

ex,rrviiit, and Walked inthe Krength ofthat meate *four

~ ` ¢pe da pes and fourtie npgbhtes, cuen vnto 10-

spattiils von ehe mount of God. KUL en he came thither
tutoacane,belovgedthercinallnpgbdt. — -

£ And bebolde, the worde ofthe 1020 came to

bym, q fapde vnto bin: what voet p bere Elias

And heanlwered. J bane ben gelous fo2 P Lozd

God of bookes fake. oz the chilozen of Zfrael

noma t.a Dane forlaken thp coucnannt, x bzoken Bowne

2 hpne aulters, ¢ flapne thy propbetes with the

{werde,¢ J onlpam left, ¢tbep {eke mp Ipfe to

talc itamwayp.and be fapd,come out and itande

ec.ribiti.a ppo P mont befoze the L020. And bebolde, x the

102d went bp amigbtp trong wpndep rent p

motitapnes , g bzakef rockes before the Lozde.

wut? Lord wasnotinp wpnde.Andafter the

finde came an earthquake.2ut the Lode was

notinthe earthquake. And after the erthquake

came fpze:but the Lode wasnot inp fpze. And

neeee P fpzecamea {mall fpll vopce. And when

lia herdit, be couered bis face wò hts mantel,¢

Wet ont, Kove in p entringinofthe caue: And

beholde, there came a wopce wnto bpm, and

fayd:what doet thou bere Elia? Andbe anwe

ted: 7 baueben gelous foz the L020 God of ho-

ftes fake, bpcaufe Pchildzen of Jirael baue foz-

faken thp conenaunt,caft datne thynealters g

fiapne thy any Seni wb the (werde, ¢ F only am

left,andthey feke my life tot. scit awap. And

the Lod fa pd vnto bpm:gqo ¢ turne thp wap to

the wpldernefle punto Damai, $ thou mapet


iii Bynges.


annopnt* Hasael king ouer Diria, Ande Jehu hies,
the fonite of Aimfi balt thou annopnt kpng Oe tiiii.re.iry
uct Fltacl. nd Elifa pfon of Haphat of Abel Teta ts
WMebolob (alt P annopnt tobe pzopheteinthy ores
coume. And it thal come to pafe, $ wbhofo efca= seus.
peth p Cwerd of Hazael, bim thal Jehu flap: epf

anp ma efcape f {werd of Jebu, him hall Elifa
put todeath. And thertox 3 bane left me bij, g) rera
in Ffracl, of wbich neuer man bowed bis knees

wnto Waal, no? kpiled him withbbis mouth.

Hohe departed thence, ¢founde Elifa ffon D
of Saphat plowpng ¢hauinge tioclue poke of
oren befoze him, and be w the tweluc.And Elia
wt bp Dim and cat bis mantel ppondim.And
be left P oven, g ran after Elia, elapo:*let me y 28's
pray the, kyfie my father g mp mother, «then J
wplfolotve the. He fapde ynto bim:qo backe a=
gayne, for what sit pF baue done tothe? And
when he went backe agapne from bim be toke a
couple of oren,¢ flue them, and daefied the fieh
xb the inftrumentes of the oren , and gaue wnto
the people, and thep bpd eate, And then he arofe
and went after Elia, and mpnifered puto ppm.

‘CThbe.xre. Chapter.
beslegen of Benhabas krogs pia aa a DIt à
WRG. 2d Wenbadad the kpng of Hiria ga
EISA tberedall the boot togpther, banpna
ETA Exel bpnges with bim, and dogtes, €
a= Chatettes:and went bp,andbefieged
Samaria, t Warred agapntk it. And be (et mel:
fengers toAbabbpnee of Flracl, intop cptie g
fapd puto bim:thus fapth Wenbadad: T bp iil
uer ethp goloctgmpne, g the fapzelt of thy wp
ues € of thy chplOzen be myne. And the kyna of
Frael anfwered,¢ apd: yp lozde kyne acco-
dpngto thy faving, Jam thpne, gall ý Jhane.

And whe the meflengerscameagapne,thep > -
fapd:thusfapeth Benbadad: Woz asmocheas °
3 baue fent onto the,laying thou thalt delpuer
me thy fpluerandtbp golde and thy wines'and
thy chplòzen: J topl ther foze fende my fcruaun=
tes buto thetomozowe thistpme:andthep thal
fearche thyne boufe , andthe boufes of thp fer=
uauntes. And what foewer is eN intbpne
epes, thep thal take itin thop: &des, and bung
ifawape. Chen the kynge of Fftael fent foz all
the elders of the lande, g fapd: take pede Fpza’
pou, and fe bow this feloty goeth abontmikbet.
Fo? be fent Duto me foz mp wpues, foz mychil
den, fo: mpfpluer and fo: mp golde: and J de=
npedbpm not. And all the eldersandallthe peo
ple faybde:berken not puto bpm no: confient.

~ Wbecfozede fapde onto the meffengers of ©

Wenhadad:tel mp lozde the kpng.all that thou
Dpddelt fend for to thy feruaunt at p fp2t tyme
that I wil Do, but thisthing J map not do.and
themefiengers departed and bzougbt anfwere -
agapne. Æ nd Genbadad fét bnto bpm agapne
and fayde: thus and thus bo the goddesto me,
pF the duft of Samaria be pnough fo2 al F peo-
ple that folotwc me, totake euery manan Dard
fall. And the kpnge of Jiracl aunfwered, and
fapd:tell bpm: Let not bpm that putteth on bis
þarncMe boot him lelfe, as be that puttetbit of. .

: Andit

: @


“Gia |


” yoCnyagaa


Andit fortuned, that when Wenhadad bearde,
that tpopnges as he was with the kpnges dzin
png within the pauiltons, be fayd tntto bis fer
ualites:put on pour parnefie, and thep fet them


felucginaraye acapnt the cptic.,
€ Andbebolde,tiere camea prophete vuto X-

bab kpug of Ffracl faping:thu “Me the 2.020

Hatt thon fene ali this greate multitude r 15e-
Dold, F wyl delpuer it intothpne hand this dap
and thou (halte nowe, that Jam the Lode.
And Ahab fapo-by whom: He fayde thus fapth
the Lozde: euen bp the feruauntes of the gouer-
ours of the Opes. De fapdagapne-CU ho Wall
Od2¢ the battaples-Audbheantwerrd:thou. Che
He nombzed the feruatites of the gouernours of
the (hy2es, andthep meretwobundzed¢.rrvcit.
and after them alfo be nomberd all the people,
alltbecbpldzen of Flracl enen feuen thoulande.
And thep wente onte at noone: but Wenhadad
DPO dDpaketpll he was dronkenin the pauilp=
ons, bothe beandthehkpnges: cuen. terii. ipn-
ges, that bplpchpm. And the fernauntes of the
goucrnours of the Hyzes vont out Fp,

“And Webavand (Et out, and thep Hewedbim
fapinge: there are mencome oute of Samaria.
He lapie : Ci bether thep be come out fo: peace,
fake thé alpuc:o2 whether thep be come oute to
fiabt, take them pet alpue. 2nd fo thofe pounce
mich of the goucrnours ofp thpzescame out of p
cptic,¢ the hoolt after them, and they fluc eucrp
Onchisenemtepcamein hts wape. And the Ht
rians fled, andthep of Flracl folowed after the.
Aud Wenhadad the hynge of Siria efcayed on
anbozte with bisbogfemen. And the kpuge of
Flrael went out,and finote the bogies ¢ charet-
tes and vw a great flauabtcr tine be f Sirians.

nd there caine a Wzophet tothe bpnge of Ff
acl, andfapde bnto ppm : gofoztbhe, anv pay
tbeman, be wpleand take pede what thou dolt:
foz when the pere is yone aboute, fhe kpnge of
Siria wylicome bpagapni the. And p eruate
tes of the kynae of Diria fapd vuto ppm: Che
goddes of tbe byllesare they: goddess, and ther
toze tbep bad the better of vs: but let vs Frabte
acapnit themin f plapne, and foz what ye wpl
we fhall banc the better of them. Anz this deo:
take the kpnges awape euerpe man out of dps
place, and put dukes inthep2 roumes, anddo0
thou nombze thean boot, lyke the booft prbou
barit fucbe Dozfes and fucbe charcttes , € we
wll fpgbht acapntt the inthe playne,andthou
fbalt f ue cet tie better of them. And be perke-
ned Dutothep2 Vopce, and dpdeuen fo.
Ẹ Audit fozruncy. that alter the pere was gone
about, Benhadad nombzed f Sirians, ¢ went
vp to Aphek tofpgbtagapnt Zlracl. And the
chpldzen of Jiracl were nomb2ed , and w thep?
bole nombze went they agaynfe them, andthe
childzé of Firacl pitched befoze them, lpke two
Iptle flockes of kpbdes : but the Sirians fplled
thecountrpe: Andtherecaimea ma of God, and
fapde Dntothe kynge of Firael: thus fapeth the
Lode: Wpcanle the Sirians paue fapde : the
102d ts but God ofthe dpiles,g not God of the
paliepes: therfore wyl FZ Oclpuer all this greate


ULZAynges


multitude into thpne hande,and ye Chal hnowe
that Jam the Lode, Andedey pitched one ouer
axapnit the other feuen dapes eit came to paffe
tiatin pleuenth dape the battaple wastopued.
And the chplozen of Firael fine of the Sirians
an Didzed thoufande fotemenin one dave. 1But
therett ied to Apbeksintothecytic, Andthere
fell a wall bpon.xevit. thoufande ofthemen

that were lefte. And Benhadad fied, and came

into the cptie, from chambze tochamobze.


And his {eruafites tayo bunto brm, Beholde q
we baue herd fave: the Rynges of f Doute of BE we


racl are meccpfull kpnges. We wpl therfore put
faltcloth about our lopnes and ropes about our
necheg, Go out tothe kyng of Frael:ifbapye-
lp De wll {ane thy lyfe. And fo thep gp2ded ial
clothbabout thep2 lopnes and nut ropecaboute
tiepebedces,€ cam to the kyng of Frael, gfapd:
Cbp leruaunt Benhadad lapth: F pzape the ice
me lpue. e fapde:ig De pet alpuesbe ts mp bzo-
ther. And thep tobe that word fo good tucker y
baly caught it ont of bis mouth, andlayd:-vea
thy bzotber Wenbadad. He fapd:go,bopng bim
bpther.And Wenbadadcanie onte tnta bpm, g
Decaufed ppm tocome Yp into Pp charet. And he
ipd Dnto Dim: the cpties which my father tote
frå tbp father J wlireftozeagayne. Ara thou
balt make ffretes fog Fin Damalto, as my fa-
ther dpd in Samaria. And J wyll make anap-
popntinet with the,¢ fende theawap. And fo be

made anappopntinét w bins, æ fent Dim away.


And there was acertayne man off chploze of €


the propbetes, wbich fayd vnto bis nepabbour
in the worde ofthe Lorde: fmiteme ¥ pray the.
And yma Wold not finpte dim. The fayd be va
to btin:bycanfe thou bak not berkened vuto the
vopce of f L020: behold, afoone as thou art de=
parted fro me alpon pall faye the. And it came
to palie, Paffoone as De was departed {td bpm


axlpon foid hime fue pin. gT hen he fotid ano tirera


ther man,¢ epee me 3 pap f. And pms
finote bim, fo $ infmyting be wonded bim. So
the propbet went forth, g waytcd forf kyng bp
the way, & put him (elfe out of knowledge w af-
{hes which be laped vpo bis face. And when the
Ryng caine bp, beceped bute Hhyng,elapd:thy
feruatit went out in pmpades ofthe battapl : g
bebolde, there wentawap aman, whi another
man brought buto me and fapt: kepe this man
Aud if he be miffed 02 loft, thy life thal go for bis
oz cls thon palt paye a talent of fpluer. Audas
thy feruatit bad bere e there todo, be was gone
And F wing of Fracl {apd ynto bim:eué fo hall
thy pes Meth batt defined it thy felfe.
Aud He hated, andtoke thealfhes awape fro
bis face:and the kyng of Flraclanewe bim that
be was of the Prophetes: And he fapde vato
bpm:thus fapth the Lo2de:bycaufe thou bak let
goaman thatisinmycurle , thy Ipfe palloo
fo? bis lpfe:and thy people fo: bts people . And
the king of Ffrael went to bishoule, wayward
andin difpleature,andcametoSamariat y
The. rri. Chapter.


T
@ Fesabel commanndeth to kpl Maboth,to2 the wpe
parde Chat be refuted te lito Abab. Beliab repo:
urth Ahab:ana be repenteth, ae
G.tty, after


Sol. lit,


UL ZAVY NC Sd esau

ED, wean fter thele thpnaesit chaunced maria: $02 lo, heisgqoone Downe tothe vyne-

ARIA NEN that Naboth P Fezrabelite had parde of Naboth:tetakepofiellpon of it. And

KYRA Wea ppnepardein Jesrabel, barde therfoze thalt thou faye vnto bpm: thus tapeth

pes eon bp the palace of Abab tpng of the Lorde : batt thou kyllcd, and gotten poet

A W Samarta. And Ahab pake vn fpon: And th {halt peake vnto bpm, faping:
thusfapetbtheLozde: xin the place where dog Seere

geslpcked the bloude of Aaboth, thalldogges


of berbesthereof, bpcauleit lpeth fonpe mpne lycke euen tp blouve allo. Bnd Ahab Cayde fo
boufe: and ¥ wyll qpuc the foz tt a better vpne- iy stg ous A ha H A
fe tbe, 7 wpll mpe ¢ Pe anfwercd: F baue founde the: foz thou
rue the, f wo2th of itinm onepe, Bnd Maboth pei euen fold to wozie wyckednelie in the fight
izon to Alab: the L020 fozbyd thatfrome, p3 ? the Lozde. Webholde J wpll bapnge enpl pps
fold gpuep enberttadice ofmp father nto tbe. the,and wll mate cleane rpodantice of thy pa:
xs and Abab eA his pete peer ae ut eritpe . and wpll x deftrope from Ahab, euen treit
apaped, bpcaule of the wozde wyicye Favor : : | i
tbe Jesrabelite had fpokentobpm , fo? De bad that ty Hut Dpano like brppudein Acad ond
fapb: 4 wplinot gpne the the enberitañce of mp bad bent thyne boule lyke the bonte of Jero-
Fathers. x ndhe lapen bim Downe vpon bis bed wears EE E ta ieee - piven
-a anoturnedawape Dis faccom tothe mall F WOLDE arish thoni aise? bale arp Fo
ck 4 € fwith thou bat pzouoked , ¢ mate Ficael tolpn.


parde foz monepe, 0} els pfit pa ae PE cate. Wut there was nonelpke Ahab, whiche


thou a ae r arts ig ed yp,
eecatbzcd,andfetthpnedertatren, wyplqpue )
the the ppneparde of Maboth rhe Fescabelite. ae ; accopopnge toall thpnges as dpd the
Andfo te wore aletterin Ababsname, and g mmogites, wbhometbe Lorde cat oute bes murp,
fealed it with bis feale, and fent the letter Dnto — orethe chplozen of Flracl,
the eloers,and tothe noblestbat were inbtgct=
t emona wen RI tek aah Ba, )
letter fapinge:Broclapme 4 talt ,ano iet j2a- aide |
both onbpe abe the people, and {et two bn- and went barefoote. And the toorde of the Lord
rom thepftes befaze bpm , to beare onctattey woptnetic caine to Cita the Chelbrte, fapinge: feet than
eS sqapnite bpm, faving: thou dpddett blatpheme howe Abab bumbleth bpm fife before mer bp-
Godandthe kynge. Andthencarpeppmonte, caufe befubmptecth bym felfe before me, J wyl .
and tone bpm fo death. not bzpnge thal eupliin bis dapes : but inbys
Andthemen ofbyscptpe , that is tofape: founcsdayes, wll Zbevnge eupll iyi bys
biscptic, bpas Jesabelban Youle. And tbey contpnucd thee pere wWithoute


whiche dwelte in !
fent oo them: ag a rhea tap intbe ite warre betiwene Spia and Firael,
whicbe tbe bad fent vnto them. Toep pzociap -= “He. Lei. on
tata anp tet vor among Ehe chefe e feurebuie at Pipetes abo sitet
ofthe people, andthere came intwomen (the EDAD AEL agapnit ina:
cpyipacn ce ySelial ano fat befoze bim. And the fos biche De 18 mpte and pac impriton.


pf Apasiarothberiwmpfe called Mcholias.


EOE Md*in the thyzdepere dp ex i
spa ea bofaphat the kpnge of a4 sh a


engi: Wea rael. Andtbekpnge of Frael


two vnthepitpe perfonnes wptnelicd agapntte
Mavorhinthe pretence of the people , fapinge:
Maboth dpd blafpheme Govand the Bynge.
actoii.g XAND thry carped Hy out ofthecptie,and o=
He Hedbim with tones thatheopyed.Andthëthep EYEE AN
fenteto Jesabel fapinge: Rabotbistonedto Y JAN irde Duto bps feruauntes :
death. Aud it fozti ned, when Jesabel berd that a 7 EE “ Bho we pe not, that Rano tb in
Naboth was toned to death, the faydDtoAbab GOileadts oursfand we fpt ttpll, and takeit not
pp andtate poflellion ofthe bpneyarde of Na out otthe bande ofthe kynge of Spzia. And be
pach the Jesraelíte , whichebedenyedtogyue fayde pnto Jebofaphat: wyltethou come with
fhe foz moncpe, fc? fabothisnot alyue, but meto battapleagayntte Ramoth im Gtlead?
decd, And when Apavderdethat Pabotbwas And Jebolapbat fapde vuto the kynge of Jl-
Deed, he Lode Dp togobownetop bynepard of rael: x Fwpllbeasthouarte, andDinppeople iiir veiii
Aaboth the Fescacltte, ¢totake poleon ofif. thalbeas tbpne,and mp Dorfes as thynes eretia
e AndthewosdcoftheLopdecamevntoEha And Feb ofapbat fapd vntothe bpngeof Je
the Chetbite, favinge: vp,andgoodotone to rael: xatie couniaple, F prape Ee. at the WCD heeg.ta
mete Bhavkynge of Afrael, whiche ig in Da- of the 10de todape. And then the kynge of 3i-


racl


 DUSQlayyadl


to.ceroat- pael gathered the Prophetes togpther bpon xa


)


Foure bundzed men and lapde vnto them: Mall
3 goo agapnil Ramothin Gilead to battaple,
oz thall F let it alones And they (apde qo vp:Fo2
the L.ozdetball delyucritinto the bandes of the
&Bpnge. And Feboiaphat fapoe:is there here ne=
uera prophet of the Lozd moze,p he mpght ens


qupze ofbyms And tbe kpng of j{raclfapobn- T


to Febolaphat:therets pet one man ( Wichea p
fonne of Jimla) bp whom we maye alke coun-
faple of th: Lozde. Wut F bate bim, for be doeth
thot propbecie qood vuto me, but eupl. And Je-
bolapbat fapd:let not the kpnag fap fo. Then the
kyng of $lrael called a chambzelapue, and fapd
fet Dichea the fonne of Jimla byther atones:

And the kypnge of Jfrael and Jebolaphat the
bpnge of Juda fet either in bisleate , and tbepe
apparell on them: ina vopoe place belpde pen
trpng in of the gate of Samaria and all p 20-
Phetes popbecicd befoze them. And sedekia the
fonne of Canaana made boznes of pzon,¢ lapè:
thusfapcth the Loze: witbebele bones halt
thouputh the Sprians, vntpll thou bane made
anende of them. And all the propbhetes prophe-
cpedcuenfo:fapinge: Go bp toRamothin Si-
lead, and profpere, fo? the Lode Hall delpuce it
into the hypages bande.


C Andthe meflenger that was gene focal Mi-


chea, pake Dantobpm, faping: bebolde,the Wo,-
bes or the prophetes peake good vnto the king
with one mouth: let tbp wordtherfoze (F prap
the ) belpke the woode ofeucepe one of them, to
{peake that which is good.And Bichea fayde:
ag truly asthe Logo liveth, whatloeuce p Lord
fayeth puto me, that wyll Yfpeake. Andto he
came tothe kynee-and the kpna fapd vnto bim
ichea, ought we to gooagapnite Ramothtn
Gilead tobattayple:ozto be ttplle HPeanlwered
pnto bpm: +co, andpzofpere, the 1.020 thal de-
Ipnerit into the bande of tbe kpnge. And p bpng
fapde grto bpm: oandfomanptymes do 4
charge pe that thou tellme nothpng, but that
whichis truein the name of the Lode. Be lap:
g fawe all them of Jirael {catered vpon the pil-
ieg, as (pepe that baue nota thepberde. And the
Lorde lapd-epele haueno mater, let eucrp man
returne Dito bis boule in peace. And the bpnae
of Grael fapd puto Zebolaphat:dpd F not tell
the, that be welde prophcpe no good wnto me,
but cup! And he fapdagapne: beare thou ther-
fore the rwoo:d2 ofthe 102de.3 latve the L020 fit
onbistare, andall the hooft of beauen ffove a-
Hout bim on bisrpabe bande on hts left. Aud:


(.pa.rbilt. 3 orde [a pd: *CaAbo thal perfuade Ahab that be


maye coand fallat Ramothin Gilead ¢ And
one fapde on this maner , andanotber on tbat.
And there came fortbacertapne {ppztte,¢ Lode
befoze f Lozde,andfapde: J wpl perfuade bpm.
And the Lore fapde duto bpm wherewith:

-— -‘Andbefayd:¥ wpl go out, and bea falle fpi
ritinthe mouth ofall his prophetes . Ie fapde:
thou halt perluade bim,and peua ple ge fort)
then, anpdoocuenfo. owe therfore boldre,


yer ritiic X the Lozde Hatve pat a lptnge fpypaite in the


montbe ofalltbeietbp Pzopzophetes , andthe


Lozde bath {pokeneupll fowarde the.

Wut sedekta the fonne of Canaana went to
and {mote Hichea onthe cheke,andlapd: when
went the{ppaite ofthe Lezdefrome, tolpeake
nto ther And Bjichea fapd:bebold,p fhalt fein
Pdap, when thou halt gofrom chabze tocbam=
bzetobpdetde. Andthe bpnae of Flracl apdr:
ake S)icbea and carp bim puto Amon the go
uernour of the citie, and nto Joab the kpnaes
onne and fay, thus fapth the kyng: But this fe
lowein P pifon boufe, and fede bim with bzeed
of affliction,and with water of trouble, yntpll
FJ returnein peace. And G)ichea lapd:pe thou re
turnein peace, the 102d bath not [poken by me.
And be fapd:berken pe people eucrp one of pou,

_ Andflothekpnae of Jlracland Jebolaphat E
thekpnae of Juda ent Bpto Ramoth tn Gi-
lead and the hing of 3fracl {apd to Jebolaphat
chaunge the when thou goet to warre : aud put
onthpneapparel.and the kpng of Firari chañ-
yed bpm felfe, and went tobattaple. Wutthe
kpnee of Sp2iacdmaunded the.rerit. capttaps
nes(that babdrule ouer pis charrettes fapinge:
fygbt nepther with mall noz greate, faure onelp
agapnite the kpuge of Ylracl. Andwhenthe
captapnes ofthe charettes fawe Fcbofapbat,
thep fapo-furelp it is the kyng of Zfrael, ¢ tbep
turnedtofpabt agapni bpm. Jna Jeholaphat
crped. Bud fo tt came to paffe, tbat when theca-
pitapnes of the charettes awe that be was not
the hing of Jiracl, they turned backe from bin:

And acertapue man drue a howe iqnoautlp
And o% (bp chaunce) {mote the kpnae of Zlrael Ve es
twene the rpbbesand bis barnefie. Uiberfoze
Helapde onto the dpuer of bischarcttes: turne
thp bande, ¢carpme out ofthe boote, fo Fam
caco burt. And the battapleencrealedp Dape, #3
andthe kyng Kove ftplin bischaret agapnit the
Sirians,e dpedat taen. And the blond ran out
of the wounde intothe mypooeft of the charet:
And there went a proclamacionthozowout the
poot about the qang Downe of the nne, fap-
ing:euecp man to bis cypftie,¢ to bis owne coun»
trye. Bnd fotbhe kpnge of Hlrael dyed:and they
camcto Samaria and burpedhpmebere. AnB
one walthed the charet inthe pole of Samaria


xand the Dog ges Ipched dp bis bloude(and par Mt FAT


lottes waled by the pooles {pde ) accozdpnge
vnto the wode of the Lorde which he (pake.
Theret ofthe wordesthat concerne Ahab, £
andalltbhathe dyd, and the iuozpe boufe which ~
be made, and al the cpties phe buplded, are thep


p not wpittEinthe booke ofthe Chzonicles of the


kprges of Ffrae: And fo Abad lepte with hps
fathers:and Abasia bis fon raigned tn bis Mede


eae fon of Asa begantorapane t-pavtre


Lu uda inthe fourthpere of Ahbab kpng of
Firacl: and Jebolaphat was.ccrv.peare olde,
wbébe began torapqne, and rapgned.rrd.pere
in Jerufalem. is mothersname was Asuba
the dougbter of Silbi. And he walked tn all the
wapes of Asa bis father, and bowed not theres
from:but dpd that which was rightinepeepes
ofthe Load. Meurrtheleile, thebplaulters were |
not taken out ofthe wape: fog be a one .
i Vy and '


SU e,


 DUSQlayyadl


to.ceroat- pael gathered the Prophetes togpther bpon xa


)


Foure bundzed men and lapde vnto them: Mall
3 goo agapnil Ramothin Gilead to battaple,
oz thall F let it alones And they (apde qo vp:Fo2
the L.ozdetball delyucritinto the bandes of the
&Bpnge. And Feboiaphat fapoe:is there here ne=
uera prophet of the Lozd moze,p he mpght ens


qupze ofbyms And tbe kpng of j{raclfapobn- T


to Febolaphat:therets pet one man ( Wichea p
fonne of Jimla) bp whom we maye alke coun-
faple of th: Lozde. Wut F bate bim, for be doeth
thot propbecie qood vuto me, but eupl. And Je-
bolapbat fapd:let not the kpnag fap fo. Then the
kyng of $lrael called a chambzelapue, and fapd
fet Dichea the fonne of Jimla byther atones:

And the kypnge of Jfrael and Jebolaphat the
bpnge of Juda fet either in bisleate , and tbepe
apparell on them: ina vopoe place belpde pen
trpng in of the gate of Samaria and all p 20-
Phetes popbecicd befoze them. And sedekia the
fonne of Canaana made boznes of pzon,¢ lapè:
thusfapcth the Loze: witbebele bones halt
thouputh the Sprians, vntpll thou bane made
anende of them. And all the propbhetes prophe-
cpedcuenfo:fapinge: Go bp toRamothin Si-
lead, and profpere, fo? the Lode Hall delpuce it
into the hypages bande.


C Andthe meflenger that was gene focal Mi-


chea, pake Dantobpm, faping: bebolde,the Wo,-
bes or the prophetes peake good vnto the king
with one mouth: let tbp wordtherfoze (F prap
the ) belpke the woode ofeucepe one of them, to
{peake that which is good.And Bichea fayde:
ag truly asthe Logo liveth, whatloeuce p Lord
fayeth puto me, that wyll Yfpeake. Andto he
came tothe kynee-and the kpna fapd vnto bim
ichea, ought we to gooagapnite Ramothtn
Gilead tobattayple:ozto be ttplle HPeanlwered
pnto bpm: +co, andpzofpere, the 1.020 thal de-
Ipnerit into the bande of tbe kpnge. And p bpng
fapde grto bpm: oandfomanptymes do 4
charge pe that thou tellme nothpng, but that
whichis truein the name of the Lode. Be lap:
g fawe all them of Jirael {catered vpon the pil-
ieg, as (pepe that baue nota thepberde. And the
Lorde lapd-epele haueno mater, let eucrp man
returne Dito bis boule in peace. And the bpnae
of Grael fapd puto Zebolaphat:dpd F not tell
the, that be welde prophcpe no good wnto me,
but cup! And he fapdagapne: beare thou ther-
fore the rwoo:d2 ofthe 102de.3 latve the L020 fit
onbistare, andall the hooft of beauen ffove a-
Hout bim on bisrpabe bande on hts left. Aud:


(.pa.rbilt. 3 orde [a pd: *CaAbo thal perfuade Ahab that be


maye coand fallat Ramothin Gilead ¢ And
one fapde on this maner , andanotber on tbat.
And there came fortbacertapne {ppztte,¢ Lode
befoze f Lozde,andfapde: J wpl perfuade bpm.
And the Lore fapde duto bpm wherewith:

-— -‘Andbefayd:¥ wpl go out, and bea falle fpi
ritinthe mouth ofall his prophetes . Ie fapde:
thou halt perluade bim,and peua ple ge fort)
then, anpdoocuenfo. owe therfore boldre,


yer ritiic X the Lozde Hatve pat a lptnge fpypaite in the


montbe ofalltbeietbp Pzopzophetes , andthe


Lozde bath {pokeneupll fowarde the.

Wut sedekta the fonne of Canaana went to
and {mote Hichea onthe cheke,andlapd: when
went the{ppaite ofthe Lezdefrome, tolpeake
nto ther And Bjichea fapd:bebold,p fhalt fein
Pdap, when thou halt gofrom chabze tocbam=
bzetobpdetde. Andthe bpnae of Flracl apdr:
ake S)icbea and carp bim puto Amon the go
uernour of the citie, and nto Joab the kpnaes
onne and fay, thus fapth the kyng: But this fe
lowein P pifon boufe, and fede bim with bzeed
of affliction,and with water of trouble, yntpll
FJ returnein peace. And G)ichea lapd:pe thou re
turnein peace, the 102d bath not [poken by me.
And be fapd:berken pe people eucrp one of pou,

_ Andflothekpnae of Jlracland Jebolaphat E
thekpnae of Juda ent Bpto Ramoth tn Gi-
lead and the hing of 3fracl {apd to Jebolaphat
chaunge the when thou goet to warre : aud put
onthpneapparel.and the kpng of Firari chañ-
yed bpm felfe, and went tobattaple. Wutthe
kpnee of Sp2iacdmaunded the.rerit. capttaps
nes(that babdrule ouer pis charrettes fapinge:
fygbt nepther with mall noz greate, faure onelp
agapnite the kpuge of Ylracl. Andwhenthe
captapnes ofthe charettes fawe Fcbofapbat,
thep fapo-furelp it is the kyng of Zfrael, ¢ tbep
turnedtofpabt agapni bpm. Jna Jeholaphat
crped. Bud fo tt came to paffe, tbat when theca-
pitapnes of the charettes awe that be was not
the hing of Jiracl, they turned backe from bin:

And acertapue man drue a howe iqnoautlp
And o% (bp chaunce) {mote the kpnae of Zlrael Ve es
twene the rpbbesand bis barnefie. Uiberfoze
Helapde onto the dpuer of bischarcttes: turne
thp bande, ¢carpme out ofthe boote, fo Fam
caco burt. And the battapleencrealedp Dape, #3
andthe kyng Kove ftplin bischaret agapnit the
Sirians,e dpedat taen. And the blond ran out
of the wounde intothe mypooeft of the charet:
And there went a proclamacionthozowout the
poot about the qang Downe of the nne, fap-
ing:euecp man to bis cypftie,¢ to bis owne coun»
trye. Bnd fotbhe kpnge of Hlrael dyed:and they
camcto Samaria and burpedhpmebere. AnB
one walthed the charet inthe pole of Samaria


xand the Dog ges Ipched dp bis bloude(and par Mt FAT


lottes waled by the pooles {pde ) accozdpnge
vnto the wode of the Lorde which he (pake.
Theret ofthe wordesthat concerne Ahab, £
andalltbhathe dyd, and the iuozpe boufe which ~
be made, and al the cpties phe buplded, are thep


p not wpittEinthe booke ofthe Chzonicles of the


kprges of Ffrae: And fo Abad lepte with hps
fathers:and Abasia bis fon raigned tn bis Mede


eae fon of Asa begantorapane t-pavtre


Lu uda inthe fourthpere of Ahbab kpng of
Firacl: and Jebolaphat was.ccrv.peare olde,
wbébe began torapqne, and rapgned.rrd.pere
in Jerufalem. is mothersname was Asuba
the dougbter of Silbi. And he walked tn all the
wapes of Asa bis father, and bowed not theres
from:but dpd that which was rightinepeepes
ofthe Load. Meurrtheleile, thebplaulters were |
not taken out ofthe wape: fog be a one .
i Vy and '


SU e,


= = 2


Wa tu apnaes. =


and burntincence yet inthebplaulters. And Fe


Eia


And when the meffengerstourned barke a- 25


|
|
|


6
tiir:sro.f fanbat,and the mpabt that be vf{ed, and bow be


Dolapbat made peace with the kpng of Ffrael.
* The tek of the wozrdes that concerne Jebo-


wWarred:are thep not wzittenin the booke of the
Chronicles of the kpnges of Judar And ther-
nait of the tues of the males, whichremapned
in the Dapes of his father, be put cleane out ofp
lande. There was thénokyngin Edom. And
Fchofapbat made.r.fopppes tu the fec, tocome
thozowe Charlis to Dphir foz golde, but they
went not, foz the (hpppes brake at Dsion Ga-
ber. Then leyd basia thefonne of Shab puto
$cboiaphat:le¢mplecuauntes qo with thy fer-
uauntcsin pbpppes. Wut Fcholaphat wolve
not. and Jebolapbat dpd Nepe w bis fathers, g
was buried w bis father inp citie of Daut bis
father. And Jeho2a hts fon raigned in bis ede.

A basta the fonne of Ahab began to rapgue
oner FJirael in Samaria, the feuententh pere of
Febolaphat kpnge of Juda, andrapanedtwo
peres ouct Jiraci. Sut pe dpd eupllth the puht
of the Lorde, and walked inthe wape of hts fas

tberandin the wap of bis mother and inthe
wape of Jeroboam thefonne of Rabat,
whichmade Fleacl tofpn. Fo? befer:
ued Waal, and worthppped bpm:
and pzouoked the Lozde God of
Firacl unto wrath according
Yntoall chat bis father

© The ende of theehpsde booke of the ipneaes,
after the reckenpnge of the Latyntttes:

wbiche the Pebznes call the fp2t

booke of the ipnges.


€A Thefourth booke of


the kpnges after the Latinittes: which
booke andthe thp2de togytber, is
but one with the Hebgues.
© The fpi Chapter
@ Xhe raptapnes over fpetpe with theps Coudiers are burne t
Epe from beauen,bpthe praper of Delia Qbasia isreproucd
of Helia,ebpeth:and Fcboram bis brother Cuccedeth him,
Sd eee


=


EE $20 Woab dyd wyckediye a-
ERVA WARI gapnite Jirael after the death
KAVA ‘aie Of Ahab. And Abasia felltho-
ET he, Weg towe a lactefie wpndowe of
py a “ea Ya bis wpper chambzethat be bad
WES AA Ki in Samaria: g whyle be was


ER


‘ata E


gapne bntobim,be fapd vnio them: why are pe
nowe come: They anfwcred bpm:therecamea
man bpagapnel bs, and fayd tnto bs: go, and
turne agapne nto the kpnge that fent you,and
fape dnto bpm: Thus lapth the Lorde: Js there
nota Godin Zlracl,that thou {édelk to enquyze
of Belsebubthe qod of Ekrom: Therfojze thou
fhaltnotcomedowne fro the bed on wopich thon
arfe gone bp, but thaltcdpethe death. And pe
{apd bntothem: what maner of man wasthat
which came pin pour wap and tolde pou thete
wo2des/ And thep anfwered Dpm:it wasan De-


rpe man, xandgp2dew aqpadle of letderabout egay tthe


hislopnes. And be lapd:itis Elia P Thelbite.

Shéethe king fent vuto himacaptapne ouer C
inh witb bis Fyftpe men) and bebolbde, be fat
on the toppe ofan pll. And be lpake ynto him:
Thou man of Gov, the kpnage bath fapde:come
Dolone. Elia anfwered, and lapd to the captapn
ouer the tpftpe:pEF be aman of God, fpze come
Downe frombeaucn , andconfume the and thp


frftpe. «And there came fpze of God, and con: ZEMS


fumed bpm and bis Fpftpe: And the ky ng went
aapne and fent an orber captapne oucrtpitpe,
with bisfpftpe. Andhe anfwered, and {apd vn
tobim:D man of Gon, thus bath thekpnafapd
make hatte, andDcome downe: Elia auniwerd
and fayd Datothem: PEF be a man of God fpre
come bowne fro beaucn,andcolume the and thp
fyftie. And there came fpze of God Downe from
Heauen, and confuned ppm and his fpftpe. D
And thekpnge wenteagapne,andlent the

thp2decaptapne oner fpitpe with bis fyftp më.
And the thpad captapne ouer Epftpe wes vpand
came, and fell on bis knees befoze Clia, and bes
fought bym,andfayd nto ppm: D ma of Sad
let my Ipfe and the lyfe of the tpfty, thpferuat-
tes beprectousin thy {tght.webold, there came
fpzedowne frombeanet, and burnt pp p two
fore captapnes ouer feftpe with thep2 fpttpes:
therfore let mp Ipfe now be pecctousin thy fight
And paungel ofthe Lozdlapd vu to Elta: goo
Downe whim, ebenotafraped of him. And he a
role and went Downe with him puto the kpng.

Andbelapd vutobpm: thus fapth the Lod: €
fozasnioche,asthou baft iente meficnaersta
alke counfapleat Belsebub the cod of Ekrom,
as thougbe there bad beneno God in Beall,
wholewo2d thou mighteft ickeafter:therfo2e #
fhalt not come dowone ofthe bed on whiche fhor
att gone bp, but (halte dpe the Death. And fo be
dped accordpnag tothe wolde ofthe Lord which —
Elta banlpoken. And Fehoramon vis brother) be xe
gan forapgnein hts fede, th the feconde peare
of JeHozam the fonne of Febolaphat Epnac of
Juda, bycaulebehadnofonne. Cherelle of
the wozdes that concerne Abasia, what thyn-
ges tbat be bpd: are they nor wzpetéin tbe boke
ofthe Chzonscles of the Rpnges of Flvael?

C The.j-Chapter
@ Elia deuppeth the Waters with b's mantel.
facistaken bpinto beauen. Phe bpirer and bez


ncmous waters ate healed. Dhechplazen that
moike €lifrus(otherweyte called Elifa) are res


ih peces,
Andit


= = 2


Wa tu apnaes. =


and burntincence yet inthebplaulters. And Fe


Eia


And when the meffengerstourned barke a- 25


|
|
|


6
tiir:sro.f fanbat,and the mpabt that be vf{ed, and bow be


Dolapbat made peace with the kpng of Ffrael.
* The tek of the wozrdes that concerne Jebo-


wWarred:are thep not wzittenin the booke of the
Chronicles of the kpnges of Judar And ther-
nait of the tues of the males, whichremapned
in the Dapes of his father, be put cleane out ofp
lande. There was thénokyngin Edom. And
Fchofapbat made.r.fopppes tu the fec, tocome
thozowe Charlis to Dphir foz golde, but they
went not, foz the (hpppes brake at Dsion Ga-
ber. Then leyd basia thefonne of Shab puto
$cboiaphat:le¢mplecuauntes qo with thy fer-
uauntcsin pbpppes. Wut Fcholaphat wolve
not. and Jebolapbat dpd Nepe w bis fathers, g
was buried w bis father inp citie of Daut bis
father. And Jeho2a hts fon raigned in bis ede.

A basta the fonne of Ahab began to rapgue
oner FJirael in Samaria, the feuententh pere of
Febolaphat kpnge of Juda, andrapanedtwo
peres ouct Jiraci. Sut pe dpd eupllth the puht
of the Lorde, and walked inthe wape of hts fas

tberandin the wap of bis mother and inthe
wape of Jeroboam thefonne of Rabat,
whichmade Fleacl tofpn. Fo? befer:
ued Waal, and worthppped bpm:
and pzouoked the Lozde God of
Firacl unto wrath according
Yntoall chat bis father

© The ende of theehpsde booke of the ipneaes,
after the reckenpnge of the Latyntttes:

wbiche the Pebznes call the fp2t

booke of the ipnges.


€A Thefourth booke of


the kpnges after the Latinittes: which
booke andthe thp2de togytber, is
but one with the Hebgues.
© The fpi Chapter
@ Xhe raptapnes over fpetpe with theps Coudiers are burne t
Epe from beauen,bpthe praper of Delia Qbasia isreproucd
of Helia,ebpeth:and Fcboram bis brother Cuccedeth him,
Sd eee


=


EE $20 Woab dyd wyckediye a-
ERVA WARI gapnite Jirael after the death
KAVA ‘aie Of Ahab. And Abasia felltho-
ET he, Weg towe a lactefie wpndowe of
py a “ea Ya bis wpper chambzethat be bad
WES AA Ki in Samaria: g whyle be was


ER


‘ata E


gapne bntobim,be fapd vnio them: why are pe
nowe come: They anfwcred bpm:therecamea
man bpagapnel bs, and fayd tnto bs: go, and
turne agapne nto the kpnge that fent you,and
fape dnto bpm: Thus lapth the Lorde: Js there
nota Godin Zlracl,that thou {édelk to enquyze
of Belsebubthe qod of Ekrom: Therfojze thou
fhaltnotcomedowne fro the bed on wopich thon
arfe gone bp, but thaltcdpethe death. And pe
{apd bntothem: what maner of man wasthat
which came pin pour wap and tolde pou thete
wo2des/ And thep anfwered Dpm:it wasan De-


rpe man, xandgp2dew aqpadle of letderabout egay tthe


hislopnes. And be lapd:itis Elia P Thelbite.

Shéethe king fent vuto himacaptapne ouer C
inh witb bis Fyftpe men) and bebolbde, be fat
on the toppe ofan pll. And be lpake ynto him:
Thou man of Gov, the kpnage bath fapde:come
Dolone. Elia anfwered, and lapd to the captapn
ouer the tpftpe:pEF be aman of God, fpze come
Downe frombeaucn , andconfume the and thp


frftpe. «And there came fpze of God, and con: ZEMS


fumed bpm and bis Fpftpe: And the ky ng went
aapne and fent an orber captapne oucrtpitpe,
with bisfpftpe. Andhe anfwered, and {apd vn
tobim:D man of Gon, thus bath thekpnafapd
make hatte, andDcome downe: Elia auniwerd
and fayd Datothem: PEF be a man of God fpre
come bowne fro beaucn,andcolume the and thp
fyftie. And there came fpze of God Downe from
Heauen, and confuned ppm and his fpftpe. D
And thekpnge wenteagapne,andlent the

thp2decaptapne oner fpitpe with bis fyftp më.
And the thpad captapne ouer Epftpe wes vpand
came, and fell on bis knees befoze Clia, and bes
fought bym,andfayd nto ppm: D ma of Sad
let my Ipfe and the lyfe of the tpfty, thpferuat-
tes beprectousin thy {tght.webold, there came
fpzedowne frombeanet, and burnt pp p two
fore captapnes ouer feftpe with thep2 fpttpes:
therfore let mp Ipfe now be pecctousin thy fight
And paungel ofthe Lozdlapd vu to Elta: goo
Downe whim, ebenotafraped of him. And he a
role and went Downe with him puto the kpng.

Andbelapd vutobpm: thus fapth the Lod: €
fozasnioche,asthou baft iente meficnaersta
alke counfapleat Belsebub the cod of Ekrom,
as thougbe there bad beneno God in Beall,
wholewo2d thou mighteft ickeafter:therfo2e #
fhalt not come dowone ofthe bed on whiche fhor
att gone bp, but (halte dpe the Death. And fo be
dped accordpnag tothe wolde ofthe Lord which —
Elta banlpoken. And Fehoramon vis brother) be xe
gan forapgnein hts fede, th the feconde peare
of JeHozam the fonne of Febolaphat Epnac of
Juda, bycaulebehadnofonne. Cherelle of
the wozdes that concerne Abasia, what thyn-
ges tbat be bpd: are they nor wzpetéin tbe boke
ofthe Chzonscles of the Rpnges of Flvael?

C The.j-Chapter
@ Elia deuppeth the Waters with b's mantel.
facistaken bpinto beauen. Phe bpirer and bez


ncmous waters ate healed. Dhechplazen that
moike €lifrus(otherweyte called Elifa) are res


ih peces,
Andit


zi


1.itecum,
Frbiu.B


ee, AS) heauenby a wbhpelempnde: Elta
YES, SN V4 Elia fapd to Elifa: tarpe bere, J


ae on 7 h a ’
yarn || 2
a i ee i met
A Be gle eR
e PN r ea e m pn r
F E = S E — B n A 1


And Elia fapd vnto bym: Elifa; tary here,
Ypoape the, forthe Lorde bath lent me to Jeri-
cho. De fapd:as furelp asp L020 lpueth,and as
thy fonle lpueth 3J wll not lene the, and fo thep
came to Jericho. And the chpldzen of the prophe
tes that were at Jericho came to Elifa ,¢lapde
into bym:knowelt thou not thatthe L070 wyl
takeawaytby mafterfc6 thyne beed this vape?
Peaunfwered: 7 knowe tt allo: Holde pe poure
peace. And Elia fapde vnto ppm: tarpe J pape

ne bere, for the Lozde bath fent me to Jordan.

e apode: asturelp as the Lozdc lpueth andas
thy foule liucth, l notleaucthe. Bud fo thep
two went togptber. And fpftpe men of the fon:
neg of the prophetescameand ftoneon the other
{poe afarre of, and thep two ftode by Jordan.


C AndElia tobe hismantell,and waptit to:


apther,and {note the waters,andthep were de
nypDded, parte the one Waye, and parte the other:
fo that rhep two wente ouer thozowe the dzpe
lande. Andit foxtuned,that affone as they were
ouer, Elia {apd vnto Eltfa:alke what J (pal do
foz the, per 3 betaken awape from the. And E-


lifafepde : 3 peapetbe, let thytppaite be Double ee


pponme. And he fapd:thou batt ated an barde
thprg. Aeuertheletie, pEtboute me when Fam
taken awape from the, thou thalte baucit fo:pt
thou donot, tt thal not be. Andit fortuned, that


as thep went walkpngandtalkpnge, bepolde,
bere appeared a charret of fpze, and bogfcs of


t
Ceebiiia Fyre-andparted them both alondze.* And Elta


went bpthozo the whpzlewpnde into berauen
= nd €lifalaw,anderped:D mp father, D mp
father, the charette of Firael , and the bozfemen
therof,and be fawe him nomoze:and be tote bis
owne clothes, and rent them in two peres.

He tose vpalfo the mantell of Elta that fell
from hpi, and went backeagapne , and ftode
bp Jordans (poe, and toke the mantellof Elia


H Aynges.


(that fell frd byin, jand fnote the watersoxcans #


thepparted not afonbze, and he apd: where is f Low
God of Elta, and be ym elfe? And wen he had
finptten the waters, thep parted this wap and
that waye:and Elifa went ouer. Bnd when the
cbpldzen of the prophetes which were at Jeri-
cho fawe bpm froma farce ,thep fapde : the pp-
tite of Elta doth reff on Elifa and thepcame te
mete bpm, and fell tothe qrounde before bpnt,
andflapde vnto bym:c, there be with thp fer-
uauntes fpftpe tronge men, let them goo , and
feke thy mafker:bappelp the fppzite af the Lorde
datD taken bpm vp, ¢ cat bym vponfome mou
tapne,ozinto lome valley. And Hefapd:pe halk
fende none. And when they lay vpo dim tpll be
wasathamed, be faid: end. Thep ëf therfore
fyftic men, whiche fought bpm thee dapes , but
found him not. And when thep came agape to
bpm, which tarpedat Jericho, be apd vnto the:
Dypd not J faye Dnto pou, that pe hulde not gor

And the men ofthecptie fapde bnto Elita:


beholde: Dyz.thedwellpng of this cpticis plea D


faunte,as thou thp lelfeflecit : Wut the watrris
nought, andtheqrounde barren, ie fapDde:
wBryuge me anewecrufe: and put falte eberin-
And thep brought it to byin. And be went wnto
the fpepnae oftiye waters, and cath tbe faltetn
thptier,and fapd:thus lapebthe Lo2de-: F bhane
bealed this water: there thal not com bécefozth
eptherdeathe. o2 barrennefie. Spo the waters
Were healed Dntpll this dape , accozdpng to the
fapinge of Elileus which be fpake.

Andhe went wp from thence ynto wWethel.
And as be was going vp the wape, therecame
Iptlecbpldzen out ofthe cptic,andimockedhpm,
andlapde vntohpm:Go vptbhou balde heed, go
vp thou balde heed. And be turnedbacke,and lo
ked on them, andcurfedthemin the name of the
Lorde. And there came to Hebecres out of that
Wood, andtare.city .chplbzenofthem. Andbe
tent from thence to mounte Carmel, and from
thence be turnedagapneto Samaria,


he wongbe enpll inthe light ofthe Lozde, but
not lpke bis father € tj bis mother: foz be par
awape thepmages of Waal that bis father bad
made. Meuerthelefle, beclened vnto the fpnnes
of Jeroboam, the fonne of Rabat (which made
Jiraerfofpnne) and departed not therefrom.
And @elakpnge of Moab wasa lozve of
fhepe, andrendzed buto the bpngeot Jraelan
Dundzed thoufandlambes,andanbudzedthoue
fanderammes with the woll. But when Ahab
was deed, it foztuned, that the kynge of )oab
rebelled agapnil the by nge of Jiracl. And king
ebozam wente out of Samaria the fame fea-
on andnombzedall JiraecL and went, and (et
to Febolaphat the kynge of Juda, Pea i a


JoL,


zi


1.itecum,
Frbiu.B


ee, AS) heauenby a wbhpelempnde: Elta
YES, SN V4 Elia fapd to Elifa: tarpe bere, J


ae on 7 h a ’
yarn || 2
a i ee i met
A Be gle eR
e PN r ea e m pn r
F E = S E — B n A 1


And Elia fapd vnto bym: Elifa; tary here,
Ypoape the, forthe Lorde bath lent me to Jeri-
cho. De fapd:as furelp asp L020 lpueth,and as
thy fonle lpueth 3J wll not lene the, and fo thep
came to Jericho. And the chpldzen of the prophe
tes that were at Jericho came to Elifa ,¢lapde
into bym:knowelt thou not thatthe L070 wyl
takeawaytby mafterfc6 thyne beed this vape?
Peaunfwered: 7 knowe tt allo: Holde pe poure
peace. And Elia fapde vnto ppm: tarpe J pape

ne bere, for the Lozde bath fent me to Jordan.

e apode: asturelp as the Lozdc lpueth andas
thy foule liucth, l notleaucthe. Bud fo thep
two went togptber. And fpftpe men of the fon:
neg of the prophetescameand ftoneon the other
{poe afarre of, and thep two ftode by Jordan.


C AndElia tobe hismantell,and waptit to:


apther,and {note the waters,andthep were de
nypDded, parte the one Waye, and parte the other:
fo that rhep two wente ouer thozowe the dzpe
lande. Andit foxtuned,that affone as they were
ouer, Elia {apd vnto Eltfa:alke what J (pal do
foz the, per 3 betaken awape from the. And E-


lifafepde : 3 peapetbe, let thytppaite be Double ee


pponme. And he fapd:thou batt ated an barde
thprg. Aeuertheletie, pEtboute me when Fam
taken awape from the, thou thalte baucit fo:pt
thou donot, tt thal not be. Andit fortuned, that


as thep went walkpngandtalkpnge, bepolde,
bere appeared a charret of fpze, and bogfcs of


t
Ceebiiia Fyre-andparted them both alondze.* And Elta


went bpthozo the whpzlewpnde into berauen
= nd €lifalaw,anderped:D mp father, D mp
father, the charette of Firael , and the bozfemen
therof,and be fawe him nomoze:and be tote bis
owne clothes, and rent them in two peres.

He tose vpalfo the mantell of Elta that fell
from hpi, and went backeagapne , and ftode
bp Jordans (poe, and toke the mantellof Elia


H Aynges.


(that fell frd byin, jand fnote the watersoxcans #


thepparted not afonbze, and he apd: where is f Low
God of Elta, and be ym elfe? And wen he had
finptten the waters, thep parted this wap and
that waye:and Elifa went ouer. Bnd when the
cbpldzen of the prophetes which were at Jeri-
cho fawe bpm froma farce ,thep fapde : the pp-
tite of Elta doth reff on Elifa and thepcame te
mete bpm, and fell tothe qrounde before bpnt,
andflapde vnto bym:c, there be with thp fer-
uauntes fpftpe tronge men, let them goo , and
feke thy mafker:bappelp the fppzite af the Lorde
datD taken bpm vp, ¢ cat bym vponfome mou
tapne,ozinto lome valley. And Hefapd:pe halk
fende none. And when they lay vpo dim tpll be
wasathamed, be faid: end. Thep ëf therfore
fyftic men, whiche fought bpm thee dapes , but
found him not. And when thep came agape to
bpm, which tarpedat Jericho, be apd vnto the:
Dypd not J faye Dnto pou, that pe hulde not gor

And the men ofthecptie fapde bnto Elita:


beholde: Dyz.thedwellpng of this cpticis plea D


faunte,as thou thp lelfeflecit : Wut the watrris
nought, andtheqrounde barren, ie fapDde:
wBryuge me anewecrufe: and put falte eberin-
And thep brought it to byin. And be went wnto
the fpepnae oftiye waters, and cath tbe faltetn
thptier,and fapd:thus lapebthe Lo2de-: F bhane
bealed this water: there thal not com bécefozth
eptherdeathe. o2 barrennefie. Spo the waters
Were healed Dntpll this dape , accozdpng to the
fapinge of Elileus which be fpake.

Andhe went wp from thence ynto wWethel.
And as be was going vp the wape, therecame
Iptlecbpldzen out ofthe cptic,andimockedhpm,
andlapde vntohpm:Go vptbhou balde heed, go
vp thou balde heed. And be turnedbacke,and lo
ked on them, andcurfedthemin the name of the
Lorde. And there came to Hebecres out of that
Wood, andtare.city .chplbzenofthem. Andbe
tent from thence to mounte Carmel, and from
thence be turnedagapneto Samaria,


he wongbe enpll inthe light ofthe Lozde, but
not lpke bis father € tj bis mother: foz be par
awape thepmages of Waal that bis father bad
made. Meuerthelefle, beclened vnto the fpnnes
of Jeroboam, the fonne of Rabat (which made
Jiraerfofpnne) and departed not therefrom.
And @elakpnge of Moab wasa lozve of
fhepe, andrendzed buto the bpngeot Jraelan
Dundzed thoufandlambes,andanbudzedthoue
fanderammes with the woll. But when Ahab
was deed, it foztuned, that the kynge of )oab
rebelled agapnil the by nge of Jiracl. And king
ebozam wente out of Samaria the fame fea-
on andnombzedall JiraecL and went, and (et
to Febolaphat the kynge of Juda, Pea i a


JoL,


-Ella Uu pNgtS.


ktrpag of Goad hath offended agapntt me, wilt
thou come with meaqapntt Boabto battapl/
de anfwered:¥ wpliceme vp, fozas Jam, fo
art thou:andas mp people be fo avethp people:
and thp bozicsasmpne. Andbe fapde: Ubat
aye hall we goo vps And be anfwered: The
waye thozowe the wyldernefle of Edom.


2 Andlothekpng of Ffrae! tobe his tournepe


and the kpng of Juda, and the kpnere of Edom
And when tbep badcompafled the wape feuen
bapes.thep bad no water fo: the boofte, and fos
the cattell that folowed them. And the bynge of
Jael fapde: Alag,the Lorde hath called thele
thre kpnges togpther, to delpuer them ouer in-
to the bande of oad. But Jebolapbat lapde:


ti.cerrite x13 there not berea W2ophete of the Lozde, that


Weimapeenqupze ofthe Lomebphyms And
one ofthe Kynge of Zlracis feruauntes auniwe-
red, and fapde: Here is Eltia the onne of Ha-
phat, wbiche poured water on the bandeg of
€lta.And Jebotapdat fapd : Fs not the worde
ofthe Lowe withbpm:s Ano fotbe kpnge of
J racl, and Seholaphat and the kpng of Edom
went downe to Hym.


C And Elifa fapdevntotbe kpnge of Fitael:


what baue Y todo with the-Get the tothe pio.
phetes of thp father and tothe prophetes of thy
mother. And the kyng of Flraelfayd ynto bim
Db, nape. fforthe Lorde hathcalledtihele thee
spngeg togptbher to delpuer them into tbe band
of <oab. And Elifa fapde:aslureascthe Lode
ofhoftes Ipucth (in whole fyght 3 ftande) and
ít were not , that J regarde tie prefence of Je-
bofapbatthe kpnge of Juda, J woldenot loke
towarde tbe,nog pet le the..

wut nowe bzpnge mea mpynirel. And when
the mpnifrell plaped, the bande of the Lozdcam
ppon bpm. And be fapde:thus fapth the Lode:
Hake this plapne grounde full of dpebes. oz
thus lapth tbe Lozbde:pe pall fe neptber wynde
nozrapne, and pet the broke Dalbe fplied with
water that peimaye Dpinke: both pe and poure
beaftes,and pourcattell. Andthisis pet but a
{malltipnge inthe fpghte of the Lozde, fozas
mocheas be pill gpue ouer the oabites alfo
into poure bandes. And pe fyall (mpte cuerype
{ronge towne and enerp goodlp cptie and thal
felleuerp pleafaunt tre, and Foppe cucrp well
of water, and marre euerp good plot of ground
with foones. And in the moznpnge when
themeateoffrpnge was offred, tt foztuned, that
there came water by the wap from oom: and
thecountrye was Fplied with water.


w. Andwhenall the Aoabitesbherde that the
— kpngeg werecome vptofpgbt agaynfte them,


thep gathered all togpther , from the poungeft
that was bable to put onbarnefle , andfo Yp-
warde and fodein the borde of the lande.
Andtbep were Dp earlp inthe moznpng and
the funne Hone bpon the water, thatthe Hoa
bytes [awe tbe water afarte of,asredas bloud
and they fapde : thisis the bloude of laughter:
the kpnaes are flapne, and one bath fmpttenan
other. How therfore Hoabget thetorhe pople
Aud whenthep came tothe Hoot of Firal, the


fraclptes tode bp , and {mote the )oabites,
o that thep fledde befoze them, but thep folo-
wed bpon them, andimote Doabh. And they
ouerthzewe the cpties:and on cuerpe good par:
cell of lande caft enerp man bis tone, and fplled
it, and thep ftopte allthe welles of water, and
Felledjall the good trees. Dnelpetn the cptie of
brpche left thep the tones thereof:bowbettthep
went about it with ipnges,and fmoteit.

And when the kpng of Boab fawe that the
battayle was fore agapnite bpm, be tobe with
bpm euen bundzed men that dene the wearde
to baue goone thozowe,euen vntotbe kynge of
Edom:but they couldnot. Bndthen be toke his
clock fonne ( that fhoulde bauerapqnedin bps
ftede )and offred bpm Foz a bucntoffrpnge pon
the wall. And there was greate indignacion a=
gaint Jiraci and thep departed from bim, and


”
ai


returned tothepz-otwnelande.
C The.itij.Chapter:

(Sod gpueth a certapne poore Woman ople and floure bp
eliteus.Beliteus( whom the terte calleth @tifa)ot tep.
neth of Hoba chpld fo: bps hottelle: mbich beeth audis,
afterrap(eatolpte. e maketh fwetetbepottage:and

_ OTS DPCM AD CLONES:

ess Wen) man of the wiucs of the prophe
A o) tes bnto €lifa. faping:thptee~

a Lunte mp bulbande ig deed,

j eq and tbou knowefk, that thp ler

fama ALNE DPD fedre the Lode. ~<'
And F creditouris come to fet mp two fones

to be bis bondmen. Elifalapd vnto ber:tell me
what J Haldo Foz ther what hat tboninthpne
boule: Sbe fapd:tbyne bandmayd bathnothig
at alinthehoule, fae a pptcber of ople.elayd
Unto her:Go,and bozow velfell foz the:of them
that ave withoute, euen of allthp nepghboure,

cinptpe veflels:and that not a fewe. And when

thou arte come in, thou palt (hut the dozeafter


the andafter thpfonnes, and poure outinto all 5


thofe veflels, and {et afpde that whichis full?
And fo the woman went from pym and hut
the doze after her, andafter ber fones. Andthep
brought fo Der andhe poured out. And it came
topatic, p when the veffels were full, the farde
vnto her fon: bring me pet a befel. And be fapd
nto per:F baucno mo,Andp opleceafica. T
fhecame and told the man of God. And bpe fapa
0, ¢ fell the ople.e paye them $ thouartc in det
pnto, but lpuc thou and thp chplozé of pret. K
Andit felona dape, that Elifa came to Su-
nem, where was a great woman that toke him
infor to cate breed. nd lott came to pafe, tbat
fré that tyme fozth(as oftas be cam that way)
be turned in thytbertoeate bzeed. And fbe fayd
onto per Dulbande: Beholde, Fpercepue, that
tbis isan bolpeman of God that cometh fo ofte
by our place. Let vs makepim a chãbze(3 pray
the) with wallessanbdlet vs fet bymtberea bed
and a table anda tole anda candleltycke: that
be map turneinebpther when becimetbto vs:
Andit fortuned ona dap, $ became thy tber,
and turnedinto thechambze, e¢lapetherin,and
fapd to Gebesi his {eruafit:call this Sunamite
Aud when be called der, (he pzeléted her He ue
ole Dyn.


(RD there crpedacertapne tox 4


Cie SHunamite


r


-F


|


l Ct


"get. Ebia.D
Romar b


D


€


ial UitLipnges, =


foze him. And ngapa befapd bnto bim: Tel bee
ebolde, thou baft ben carefull fo? bs and batt
made all this peoutltd.Wabat pall we nowe do
fo? the? woldeft thou be fpoken fo: to the kpng,
02 to the captapne of the hott: be anfwered: 7
dwellamongempne owne people. Bnd de fapd
Agapn-w}at is to be dene fo: ber-Gebesi anfwe
ted: Cierelp the bath no chiloe,¢ ber bufbande ig
olde. And be fapd: call ber. Bnd whe be had cal-
led ber, he Lode in $ doze. And befapd*bp fuch
atpine , and as fooneag the frute canlpue thou
{halt embzace a fonne. And be fayd : Dbnape,
mp lozde, thou man of God, do not lye butothp
pand ~~ ¢. Bnd the wpfe concepued, and bare
a fomne that fame feafon that Elilens padfapd
vnto der, a Moone asthe feutecoulde baue lyfe.
and when the chplde was qrowen, it fel on
a bap, that be went out to bis fatber,and tothe
reapers. Andhe apd to histather: mp heed, mp
Heed. And Helapdtoalad: Carp bpm to bigmo
ther. And when be bad carped bim and bzougbt
pim tobis mother, be fat on Der knees tpl none,
and therdped. And the went bp, and laped bim
onthe bedoftbeman of God, and thut the doze
aboute bym, and went out, andcalled vnto der
bufbande,and fapd:fende with me( J prap tbe)
one of the ponge men and one of the aties. Wo
J wrllrunne tothe man ofGod, and come a=
apne.And de lapde: wherfoze wplt thou go to
oy einge that todape is neptber newe moone
no Sabvoth dape ¢ Dbe anfiwered:fo2 health.
Thé he fabled anafle, and fap to her feruaunt
kade away p affe,and makeber not qo fowlp,
(bpcaule Jrpde bpon her) but when J byd tbe.
>is And fo he went, and came nto the man
of Godto mount Carmel. Andit fozuned, that
when the man of God faw Her farre of, be fapt
to Gebesi dis {eruaunt: Webolde, yonder ts the
éyunamite. Run therfore to mete ber, and fape
putober: Fall wel with theand withtbhy bul-
paine with chelads And the anfwered: Allis
well.And when he came tothe man of God bp
totbebpll,thecaught bym by the feet. Sut Gee
best went tober, tothzult berawape. Andthe
man of God fapd: let ber aloone, for ber foule ig
bered within Her andthe Lozde bath bydit fro
ine,and bath not toldeit me. Chen (he fapd:opo
J delp2c afonne Cf mp lozder dpd | notrequpze
the, that thou thouldeftnot dilcepue me?


lilredra.  Ceen helapoto Gebest: xqpede vp thp lop-


Zube.f.a.


hes, and take mp Kaffe inthypnepanae , and go
thp wape. x PE thou mete anp man lute ppm
not. And piany falute the, anfwere ppm nota
gapnesAndlay mp Kaffe vpi ý face of the child


f.xe.roig.b And the mother of p childe fapdD: as fureas the


102d Ipneth, as thp foulelyueth, J wyll not
leaue the. And be arofe, ¢folowedber. Gebcst
went befoze them, ¢ laped the tafe vpå p face
of the childc. Wut there was nepther dopre noz
anp feling: toberfoze be witagapne to mete Dim
and tolde bym, faping: # chploc Snot awaked:


Ft And hen Elifa was come into the honfe,


bebolde, thechploe was decd, andlayed bpon
bisbed. He wentin therfore, and Wut the doze
tothe laband bin, and prayed onto the Lode.


—— E


¥* And went bp, andla


epes, and big bandes ly bis hides, and whé
be fo lave pon the chploe, thefichh of the cbilde


wared warme. And De went aqapne,¢ walked °


ones Dp and Downe intheboute, andthen wt
bpand layed bym lelfe ppon bpm agapne. And
then the chplde gatped feuentpines, and opened
Dis epes. And he called Gebesi,and {apde: Call
fo? this Sunamite. _ Dodecalledber , whiche
wben the was cometn vnto bpm, befapde vnto


eee...


| Vponthelad, and pug té-re.roiim
bis mü uth on bis mout „AnD pis epes pon bia Actes. frt,


Der: x Cake thy fonne. Cherfoze the wente in, xoke,v.c


and fellat bis feete , and bowed ber felfe to the


grotid, and tobe bp ber fonne,and went out. i.
Elifa came agapne to Gilgal, and tbere waga ©


dearth in tbe lande, andtbechplozen of the p2o-
phetes dwelt with bpm. And be fapde nto bis
feruaunte: Seta greate potte on the fpze and
make pottage fo the chilbzen of the prophetes,
And one went oute intotbefelde, togatbher pers


bes, and foundecx asic wereya wplde vpne and _


athered thereof wplde Coloquintibas bis lap
ll, andcameand (h2ed them into the potte of
pottage:foz they knewe tt not. Sothey poured
outetorthementocate. Andit foztuned, that
whEé thep tafted ofthe pottage, they crped oute,
and fapd: D thou man of Goo, there is death in
thepot:and thep couldenot cate therof. ut be
fapbde:bapuge mele. And he ca it into che pot,
andfapde : EPU foz the people , that they mape
cate, and there was nomoze barme inthe potte,
‘Therecameamanfrom Baal Halifa , and
brougbt the man of God breed ofthe fprit feu-
tes, euen twety loues of barlp,and newe cone,
which was pet in bis bagges,andfapde: Gpue
butothe people, that thep mapeeate . And hyg
mpnifter antwered : whp, (hall {let this before
anbunded mens We fapd agapne: qpue tt nto
the people they map cate. 4Fo2 thus fapeth the


102d: xthep thal eate,andthere Halbe left ouce xopn. vra


And fo he dpa fet tt before then, they opdeate,
and left ouce:accozdpng to the word of p Lop.
i t TeDe Da peri
am itia aleb. ; Hh
ei witb lepzospe, bpcaute be ake aeo i
rapiient of Rasman.


I) FAVA [7 toc bone ot Siria, was a greate
yates (4 man, and Donourable in thelpahe
4a N Ofbis matter: bycaute that by him
SAK iy tDe Loghe Dad gpuen health wnto
2S O28 Sirta. ye allo was a mpabtyma
anbderpeste in warre, but De wasa lepe. And
the Sirians had cone id Sn ENPE A, and
bad brought out ofthecountepe of Frael aly.
tle mapde , and pe was with Qaamans topfe.
And He fayd vnto her lady:¥ wolde to Godmp
logde were with the prophete that is in Sama-
tia:fo2z be wold delpuer bim of his leprofie. And
He went in, and tolde bis lozde,faving:thus and
thus lapde the mapde thatis of thelanbde of Jf
tacl. And the kynge of Sirialayde:Come, and
entre in and J topl fende a letter wntothe png
of Firael: Bnd be came, and toke with bpm ten
falentes of {pluer , and {pre thoufande peces of
golde, and tenchaunge of rapmétes: g re ee
e letter


Aamancaptapne ofthe boofte of B


graaman


ebe letter to the kpng of Firarl contepning this

- tenour: HoW when this letter is come onto the

beholde, J baune therwith lent Raaman mp fer

uaŭt to tbe that thou mapettrpd him of bisle-

polpe. Audit foztuned that when the kpng of

 Jiraelbad ved the letter, be rët bis clothes, and

Dertil t fapD: kam J Good, that oulbde Nape and make

alpue! ozbe dorth fende tome, that F houlde

Dcipucr aman from bis lepzolpe:tU perfore con

f{pdze( Apzape pou and fe How he feket) a quae

rellagapnit me. ea when Elifa the man of

Eod had bearde lowe that the kynge of Firael

Had rent bisclothes, be lent Ynto the kpng fap-

me: twberfoze batthourentethpclothes + Let

ppm come nowe tome, and be hall kinowe, that

thereiga eopbhetetn Flracl.

¢ Andflo Maamancame with bishorles and

forth bis charettes and ode at the doze of the

boui of Elifa. Ant Elifa fenta mefienger ynta

bim, laping:q0 wah thein Jo2da. dii.tpmes

’ ano tbp fleth thal come agapne tothe, and thou

malt be clenfed. But Naaman was wothand

wert awap, g apd: Bebolde, Jthouqht w mp

feife:be wolde {urelp come out, ¢ and, g cal on

thename ofp Lozd bis God, and put Dis bande

onthe place , that be mpabt peale the lepofye.

Are not Abana ¢ Warphar rpuers of Damaicto,

better eben all the waters of Flracl: DF J wah

smealfointhem, Hall J not be cleanfed r Ant fo

He turned bpm, and departed with oi{pleature.

And bis leruauntescame andcommuned with

byin,and lapde: father pf the Prophet had bid-

den the do fome great thyng ougbtet thou not

to baue doneits How mocherather then, ben

be fapth tothe: wah, and be cleant Chen went

be downe , and toalihed bym felfe {cucntpmes

in Jordan, accozdpnye to the laying of the man

of God: and bis flefthe chaunged,lpke nto the
fiefthe ofalptiechyplde,*and be was cleanfed.

And he tucned axapne to the man of God, be

and all bis cipany, and lode befoze him g fap:

Webholde, Jknuow now p there igno Godin all

the wolde, butin Firacl. Row therfozctake

fiire.rbita & Diefling of thp (eruatt.2Sut be fapd:xas fure=

ly asthe Lozdelpucth( before whom F ftand) Y

wylrecepue none. Andwhenthe other wolde

bane ciftrapnedhpmtorecepue tt, be wold not,

of And Maaman lapt: euen as chou writ: but 3 belech

"the €yhal there not be gyuen to thy feruaunt, as

r moche of this carth agtwo mules mape beare’

4f02 thy feruaunt wpl Pencefozth ofre nepther

burntiacrifpce noz offryng nto any other god,

faue vnto p Lozde. Wut bereinthe Lo2d be mer

cprfnl onto thy feruaunt,p whenmy mater go:

 € ethintotbe dont? of Rimmon, and docth w0-

fhpppethere, andleaneth on mpne Dand and F


Luc. iiif.e


alfo wozfeppinthe boule of Rimmon.(Yoben f


3 Do Wo? hip, F faye:) inthe boule of Rimmon
the 1020 be inerepinl Dnto thy leruaut bpcaute
of this thing. Unto whom be lapd:gotn peace.
Aud whe be was Departed from bim asit were
afozlonge of grounde , Gebesi the feruaunte of
Elifa the man of Godflapd:bebolde, mp mater
hathfpared Aaamanthis Sirian , p be wolde
not recepuc of bis bande thote thpnges, that be


itiiZynges,


offred. As lurelp as the Lorde lfueth, Y twilrun 4E

after bpm, and take fomewhat ofbym. And fo
Gebesifolowed Naaman. nd when Raaman

fawe bpmrunnpnae after bpm, beliqbt Downe

from the charetetto mete bem, and fayde : * ig tigres
all wells Heanlwered: ALU ts wel. Beholde,mp

malter bath fent me, fapinge: Se, therebe come |
tome, cuennowe from mounte Epbhraimetwo |
pomge men ofthechplozen ofthe Pzopbetcs:

gpyue them 3 pape the,one talent of fplner, and

twochaunge ofgarmentes. And Naama lapd:

With a qood well. Case two talentes : g heti

pelled pim to bpnde twortaletes of filuerintwo
bagges, w twochaunge of qarmentes, elaped i
tbem bp two of bis feruautites, tobeare them T
befoze bpm. And when becameinto a fecrete |


F


place, be toke the fro their bad, € beftowed itin
the houle,¢ themë were let go:¢ thep departed,

Wut be went it,and tove before bismatker. © “a
And Elifa fapd wnto bim : whence ao
aed ta fapd:thp lernatt went no whither:
Wut be fapt wnto him-Wéet not mpne hert wd the
when the man tournedagapne from bis charct
tomete the: sit noweatpmeto recepuc moz
nepe forecepue garimentes, olpue trees, bpne-
pardes, (heepe and oxen, menfernaunteg, and
mapde feruauntess Che leprofpe therfore of
Naaman hall cleaue onto the, and thy feed Foz “Steta
ener. *Andbe wet outfrombis pefencealepee UTS
as tobpteastnowe. —

—  C Tbe. vt. Chapter.


T af
i


|


L


ae j


r. ee


"i Elifa
4 > ~


tcileth thekvuge of Frael : pea, eutn the w02-
des p thou {yakiell tn the preuy chabee. We apa:
0,and cipye where be is, ý 3 may fend and fet
bim. And one told him, faping:bebolde, be isin
Dothan. Cherfoze fent be thyther hozles and
charcttes,anda mpagdty boot. Aubebep came
by iyght,and compaiico tbe cptie about.

and whe p{eruaunt of the ma of Govarofe
Dp carly toga out, bebolde, there was an boot
roude about the towne with bores ¢charettes.
Snd his feruaunt fapde vnto bym: Alas maker
wat Hall we do; be anfwered: xfeare not, fo?
they p be with vs are mothe they ý be with thë.
And Elifa praped,andlapd:L020(F belech the )
open Dis epes. p be map fe. And the Lorde ope-
ned the epes of the pongeman. And bebolde,the
moñtayne was full ofbozfes echarettes of fpze
toundabout Elifa. And whe they came downe
tobpm, Elifa prayed putotbhe Lod, and {apde:


gerirc Duptethis people (F pape the with *blpnd-


Sapi.piz,e Nelle. And He finote them with blpnoneffe,accoz


Dpng to the delpze of Ella. And Elfa fapo vn-
totbem:thisis not the way, neveheris this the
towne:folowe me, and 3J wpl bgyng pouto the
må wb pe eke, Wut be led them to Samaria.

Audit foztuned, that when they were come
to Samaria, Clifa apd: Lozd open thep2 eves
thattbepmayele. Andthe Lozde opened thepe
epes and thep fawe. And beholde, thep were in


the mpodeft of Samaria. And the kynge of 3i-


rael fapd wnto Elifa whe be fawe them: ap fa
ther, pal 3 fmpte them: And be anfwered:thou
fhalt not mpte thé: Wut ünpte them that thou
balt taken With thpne owne (wearde, and with
thpne owne bote. But rather fet beecdandwa
tet before them, that thep may cate and d2pnke
andgototbey: mater. And be prepared a great
refection for tdem. And whentbep badeate and
vonken, be lent themawape: and thep went to
theyzmafter. And fo the fouldpers of Spzia
came nomozeinto the lande of Zlrael.


SE After thisitchannced, chat Wenbadadkyng


of Diria garbei all bishoo,and went vp, €
befiegedD Samaria. Wut there was a greate
derthin HSamaria:and behold, they belieged if,
butpllanafies heed ( was folde ) foz foure toze
fyluer pence, andthe fourth parte of acab ofdo-
nes Donde, fo: fpuefycles. Andas tbe kpnge of
Jlrae’ was goinge Dpon the wal, therecrpeda
woman vntobim fapinge: belpe, mp Lode D
kyng. Helapd: péthe Lode donot fuccour tbe,
wherwith can 4 belpe the : with the barne o: w
the vpnepzefferAnd the Benge fapde vuto ber:
what wilt thous be anfwered:yonder womad
fapD pute me: bzing thp fon, that we map eate
bpm today, and we wrpl cate mypne tomo2zowe.


Zeurroio XAND fo we dzefled my fonne,and dpd catbim.
be.rrrbitit Bnd J fapd fo her this other Day: bryna thy fon


eate Dim, and Medati bpd bee fon
Andit cathe to patie, that when the kpng herde
the wordes of the woman, berent bis clothes, €
went Dp onthe wall. And the people loked, and
beboloe, be had fakcloth vnder, vpon bis feie.

enbefapde:-* God dDofoand foto me, pt tbe


eerie Om
MORES been of Elita tbelonne of Saphat Hal tandon


——


tittBynges.


bym this dape: wut Elifa fat in his boule, and
the cldersfatbp hbym,and the kpnge fenta man
before bpm: Wut perthe meflenger came tobim
be fapd to the elders: baue pe noi fene bow that
the fonne of this mamurtberer bath int to take
away myne heeds be circunfpect when the mef
fenger cémeth, and (hut the doze and bold bpm
at the Doze:ts not the found ef bis matters feete
bebpnde bpm! Wibple be pet talked withthem:
bebolde, the meflengercame Downe vnto bpm,
and fapd:bedolde, this eupllis of the Logd, and
what moze Hall Floke foz of the Lode s
— Che. vij-Chapter:
C Elita prophecpeth plenteoutnelle of bptaple and other
thengesto Samaria. The Sprians run awap,and haug


noman folowpngethem, Thelordethat wolee not be,
leue (he wozbde of Slilaistrodento death,


| \Qjrowe thistpme hala bulipel of fine
ae ¢ 5) A oure be fould Foz a ficle,¢ two buf-
fhels of barlpfozaficletnp gate of Samaria.
ThE acertapne lode (on whole hande p tynge
leaned, anfwoered p ma of God, q lapi: bebolde,
pif Lozd wold make windowesinhené minbe
this faping come to pafles He fapd: behold, thou
alt fe tt thpne epes, but halt not cat therof
And there were foure leperous men at the
entrpng in of tbe gate. And they fapdone toan
other: wbp {pt we bere vntpl we dpe PEF welap
we wylertreinto the citte:bebolbde, the derthis
in the cptie.¢ we thal dpe therin. And pf we (pt
{tpl here, we dpe alfo: Pow therfore come, ¢ let
v8 fall bpon the poof of the Sprians: PEthep
faue our lpues we (hal lpue:PEthep kpll vs, thé
are We deed, And lo thep arole inthenpgbte, to
gotothebooft of the Sirians. And when thep
were come to the ptmoft parte of the pookte of
diria bepolde, there was noman there.


Joz the Lozde badmade the boot ofthe i 2
math b-b.
fa, piii a


riang *to beare anople of charettes, ¢ anopfe
ofhorleg,a the nople of a great pot, Jn fomoch
that they fapd one toan otber:lo, P kong of 3i
rael hath byzedagapntt vs p kpngespf the De-
thites , ¢ the Bynges ofthe Eqiptians tocome
vpd bs. berfoze tbeparofe tied inthe night
and lett thep2 tétes, thep2 bozies ¢ thepz afes, €
thefelde which thep bad pptched, euéasit was
and fled fo? tbhep2lpues. And tobé thefe lepers
came to the edge of the bookte, they went intoa
tenf,and dvd cate and Dppnke, anDdcarped chéce
{pluct and golde,and rapmente, and went and
bpùit, came agapne , andentred into an otber
tent, and carped thence allo and thent ¢ hyd it.

Chen apd one to an other: ie do not well
thts dap, forafmoch asttisa dap to bring good
tydinges, € we bolde our peace. PE we tarp tpll
the day light, fom mifchefe wpl come bpon vs:
ow therfore come, that wemap qo, andtel p


kyngesboulpolde. Andlothep came, and called


nto the poster of thecptic, and tolde them, fap
bige: We came to the pauplions of the irians:


and fe, there was noman there, neither vopce of
man, but bozlesandaflestped: andtbhetentes |


Were cuchasthep were wont tobe,
And lotbe man called onto rhe porters, and
| they felde-


ai en Elita fapd:beare ye the wo2d of A
3 aaaithe Lo2d:thusfarth: Lod: xtomo tt Kesi.)


Elifa


ut.ce.vitea 1P E02 pele: anda bu


A|
tiiteeliğ a


€ thep told tbr kpnges boule within. And F hing
-arofeinthe night,and fapd wnto bis feruaites:
J wp! Drive younow, what the Hirtis haue
Done vnto vs. Thep knowe $ we be bungrpe, €
therfore arethcp gone oute of the pautlions, ta
bpic them feluesin the Felde, fayinge: whe thep
tome out of thecptie, we halcatche théalpuc,€
e¢ intothe cttic. And one of his feruauntes an-
{wered and fapde : Let men take (A prape pou)
fpuc of Che Dozles thatremapne, and are left in
the multitude. Sebolde, thepare cuenasgall the
multitude of Frael that are left in the cptie:be-
bolde (Ffape) they areenenas the multitude of
the Firaclites thatareconfumed, and we wyll
iende, andie. Cheptoke therfore the hozies of
two charettes, andthe kpng lent after the bot
of the Strians, fapinge:goo, and fe. Andthep
went after them cuen puto Jozda, and lo, all p
wape Wastull ofclothes and veflels which the
Sprians bad cat from them in thep: bafte.
D Andthe meflégersretucned, andtold F king
And the people went out, g fpopled the tétes of
the Sirians. And lott came to paffe,p a bultpel
of fyne floure was lolde Foz a ficle,and two buf


tyre bg.a. Mels of barlp Foza {iclexaccozding to p word of


the Lozd. And the kynge appopnted plozde(on
whofe band heleaned)to be at ý gat. And f peo

ple trode pon bimin the gate, ¢ he dped: accor

Dpng to the worde of the man of God, which be

fapd: wien the kyng came Downetohpm. And

- focame the thing to paffe, p the ma of God bad

fpoken tothe ty Fl ie bufibels of bar

fibell of fpne floure fo2 an
other, Halbe * tomozowe thistypme inthe qate

of Samaria. Wi bere vuto that lord anfiwered P

man of God,andfapde: Dea, and pf the 102e
made wpndowes inheauen, mpghtit come to
pafler And helapdesWebolde, thou thalte fe it
with thpne epes, and Halt not eate therof. And

enenfo chaunced it bnto ppm : foz the people
trode bpon him in the gate:and be dyed.

Celia propbherpeth bnto the Sunamite the dearth of freuen
pere.dfter thedcath of Benbabad rapgneth Asaclin Siria.
@ehozam the fonne of Fehotappat rapguethin Juda, £6
falleth from Juda. hosiah fadcedeth Zebozam.

===, pen fpake x Elifa bnto the woman,

eve! (wbole fonne bebadreftozedtolpfe a-

i apeicapue laying: bp,¢ go, thou, ¢ thpne

245) boule, g fofourne wherefoeucr ğ cant,
fo? the Lozd bath called fora derth , and p fame
(palicome bpon the lande fenen pereg. And the
woman arole, and dpdafter the fapinge of the
man of Gop, and wet both the and herboutholy
and forournedin the lande of the Phililtines fe-
uen pete. And atthe leuen peres ende,it fogtu-
ned, that the woman came agapne out of F land
of the Philitines,and went out tocal bpon the

Apng for ber boule g fo? ber lande, And the king

% talked with Gebest the eruaŭt of f ma of God
fayinge :tellme( J peape) all the qreate dedes ,
that €lifa hath done. He toldcthe king, bow be
padreozred a Deedmantalpée agapne:but inp
meane tpme the woman ( whole chploc be bad
rapied vp agapne )crped to pkpng fog ber boufe

and for Per lande And Gebei poe : Bp lozde


iti Bynges.


Okynge, thisis the woman, and this ig her
fonne whome Elifa raped bp agapne, And
wben tde kypnge afked the Homan, the tolbbim
And lo the kpag delpuercd ber achambzelapne
fayinge:reoze thou wnto ber, all that are bers:
and all tbe frutes of the Eelde fpns the dayethat
fhe left the lande, ontylltbistyme,


Baal-


Andr Clifa came to Damalcon, and Wen- of


told bim, faping: The ma of God iscom ppt


Hadad the kynge of Syria wasfpcke. And one tu.regips |


i Der
Andthe kyna fapd puto ¥zabek*takea prefer HLreriiis


intbpne pande and gomete the man of God, p
thoumaplatke the Lozde by bpm, whether 3
thal recouer of this dilate. Jnd lo Pasel went
to mete Dim and toke the prelét witb bom, and
of euctp good thinge of Mamatté,enéasmoche
as fourtpecamellescoulbde beare, andcame and
pran bpm felfe before bym, and fapa : Thp
onne Wenvadad Kyonge of Dpzia bath ent me
tothe, fapinge:(ball 3 recouce of this dileate 2
And Elifa fapde to bym :goo, anid faye nto
bpm:thou Halt recouer,Dowbeit, thea o2d bath
(hetved me, tbat be thail{urelye dpe. And helo-
kedalpde,and wasalihamed, andthe man of
God tocpte.And Azarel fapde: whp wepeth mp
lozber He anfwered:fo2 J knowethe enpl thpn-
ges that thou Halte do nto the chplozenof Ji-
rael : fozthep2 tronge cpfics Halte thou {et on
Fpze,and tiep: ponge men Walt thou lape with
the [werde and Walt dalthe out the bzapnesof
thep2 fuckpnae chpldzen, and all toteare thep2
Women with ee
wut basaclia :
that J Houlde do this great thpnar And Eli


anfwered: Mace bathibewed me, ý thou Walt


be kpng of Speta. And fo be oepartenfrs Ella
andcame tobps malter, whyche fapde to ppm:
what fapde Elifa tothe; He anfwered, be tolde
me that thou ouldeé recoucr. Andonthe mo-
rowe it foztuned, that be tooke a thpeke cloth,
and Dpptett in water, and fpzedeit on bps face,
and De Dyed:and Hasacl rapqned in his ede.
Che fp ith peare of Jebozam the fonne of J-
bab kpng of Firacl, Febolapbat being alfo king
of Juda, Jebozam the fon of Febolaphat kpng


of Juda begantorapque* .crvii.pere olde was (ETN E


be, when be beganne ta rapgne:and be rapgned
epgbt pere in Jerufalem. Aud be walked inthe
wapes ofthekpnges of Frael, agthep were
of tbe boule of Abab, fo? the Doughter of Ahab
wasbps wpfe, and be dpdcupll inthe ipah of
tbeLo:de: Andthe Lorde wolde not deftroye
Juda:andtbhat bpcaufe of Dauid bis feruaunt


xagbheprompikdbimto gpucbinialwap alight LRedtis


omonge bps chpldzen


xFnrhofe dapes Edd dpd wpekedlp when be E me
akpng of their owne. So Fehord wet tosatr, wien |


was pnder f hand of Juda. fEo2 thep made the


í


e.
pb what is thp feruaiit a dor
po'wp bp feruaii T y


begal hischarettes with pim. And he arole bp Perra,


nygbt,and fmote the Coomites whiche cipal
fcd bim in with the captapnes of bis charettes,
and the people fed into thep2 tentes. But Eds
rebelled, forbat be wolde not be nder the band
of Juda wnto thts dape . And iben Lobnah be-
gan to be difobedient eucn that wie ee

Tieren


ii = x E
-i e a i o
+


=


}
+


A
A


SE ~— Hhereof the wordes that concerne Joram
ealltbat bedpd, are they not wzpttenin boke
ofthe-chzonicies of the hinges of Judas And Jo:
ranvrelted with bis fathcrs,and was burped be

ti.pa.rrit.a fpbe bps fathers in the citpe of Dauid. And* A-
basiabubys fon rapgnedin bps fede. Jn the. rit.

- per’ of Joram thefou of Ababbpnge of Ffrael,

- DpD Abhastabu the fon of Jeboram kpnge ot Ju-
Da begintoraique. Two gtwentp pere old was
Abasiabu when be began to raigqne,andherap-
gcd onepere in Jerulalem,¢ bis mothers name
Athaliabu the doughter of mrp kypnge of Ji-
caeli; But he walked in the wape of the ponte of
Abab,and dpd enplin the fyagbt of the Lo2d,eue

as dpo the boule of Ahab. Woz be was thefonne

inlawe of the bouleof Ahab. — |
Andbe went with Joram the fonne of Ahab
fo war agapnit Hazael kynge of Hiria in Ra-
moth Gilead, the Sirias woeikded Jord. And
fificegice KRING Jord went baccke agatne to be healedin
FJesracl of Prwoildes which p Dirtas bad gpuen
bimat Romoth whe be fought agapntt Hasael
king of Siria. And Dhastabu the fon of Fehora
Bug of Juda tent downe tole Joram the fine
of Ahab in Jesracl, bpcaulehe wastpcke there.

 €'Che.tr.cbhapter. .
CC Hevuls made kpugr of Alracl,and kplieth Zehozam
the kpugetberof,and Ahastabuotperwile called Ocho


zias Etbekpng of Juda allo; ecauleth Zesabelice be
cat detone out of awpudow æ the Degges cate ber.


ramos (0 Elifa the prophet called one of p
(TAS) dpitoeen of thepzopbetes, andfapbe
re HAS unto biun:* gp2de Dp thp loines and
. FY tea Crake tbisbore of opletucbphand, ¢
fift.xe, te eee oct the to Ramothin Gilead. And
Lhe 3 compit tbptber, lobe where ig Jebup lon
of Jchofaphat.the fone of Rimlig go to bpm, ¢
€miake bimarple bp from amige pts bacthzen,
andcarp bym to alccrete chabee. Chentake the
’ bore of ople, and poure it on bps bede, and fape:
thus apetbthe Lode: J baucannopnted theta
bekpnee ouer Jiracll. And then open the doze,€
fipewprboutany tarping. andfo tic fernaunte
ot the prophet cat bym to Ramoth Gilead, and
then became in, beholde, the ig oh of the
boot tere {pttpngc together. And helapbe: FZ
baue anecrrande to the, D veka e. And Jepu
fapde:bnto whiche of all vsripe fapbe:to the, D
captapne. And be avole,and went into p boufe.
And he poured the ople on his heed, andfapd
% wnto bpin:thps Capth the 1020e God of Ffrael:
x Zhaue annopnted the to be Bpng over the peo
tii.ve.TiF.t- ple ot the Lorde, euen ouer Jlracll. Chou thalte
fmpte p boule of Ahab thp mapter, that Fmap
auenge p bloude of mp Leruatites the prophetes
and tbe bloud of all the feruauntes of the Lede
of the bande of Fesabell , foz the whole boufe of
ab (palbe deltroped:and* J wpl deftrope fxs
i.re.rrt b cuenbpin ý maketh water agapntte the
TOEN. eall and bpm that is pepfoned and Forfakenin
7{raell:and 3 wpl make the boule of Ahablpke
eboute of Jeroboam the fon of Rabat, ¢lpke
the houfe of aala the fone of Ahia. Andas fo
Jerzabell, *thedogges thall cate her inthe Felde
tiit.ve.pip.e OF festacll,and there (halbenone to burpe per.
And he opened the doze, and fled. |


Ui. Zapiuges


achu came outto the feruanntes of bislozde
and one fapde nto bpm:isall wells Ui berfoze
came this mad felot to the? And he lapde onto
thein:pe bnow what manerofmå itis, ¢ wpat
biscõmunicacponis. Thep Tayde bnto ppm a=
gapne-is it not fo, tell vsr He fapde:thusethus
(pake be tomefaping : Chuslayeth the Lorde:
3 baue annopnted the to be kynge ouer Frarll.
Then they belpde the hozologre batted, toke
pon Peale pn abet utit uber him,
and blewe wythtrumpettes ,fapinge: Febuis
kpnge. Andfo Jebu the Cane of Jebolappatthe
fonne of Nimft confpp2ed agapnit Joram. Jo-
tam kept Ramoth Gilead, peand al Flracl bp-
caule of Hasacl kynge of Siria:and<kpng Fos
tamrcturned to be ealedin Jesracl of the wol


fought with Asacll kpnge of Diria.

And Febu fapd: pe it be pour mpndes, then let
noman Departe ¢ efcape out of the cptpe, togog
tellin Jesrael. So Jehu gat vpintoacharet, t
wentto Fesrabell where Joam lape,and Abas
stahu kpnge of Juda was comedowne thptyer
tole Joam. Andtbe watchemantyat Lode in
the tow2eIn Jesrael , fppedthe company of Jee
bu as pecame,andlapbe:Fleacompanp. And
“Seboza (apd : take a bozleman and lend to mete
them, p be map alke whether it be peace. And fo
there wet one on pozlebacke to mete bpm fapt
thusflapth Pbpnge: isit peacerand Jebulapde:
tobat bat thou to do w peace ¢ turne the bebpnad
me. andthe watcheman tolde, faping:themefl=
fengercam totbent, but be cometh notagapne.

‘Chen be lent oute an other on bozfe backe,


which came to them andfapd:thusfaith f king &


isit peace: Jehu an{wered: what balk thoutode
twyth peacesturne the bebpnd me.Andp watch
man tolde,faping: be camtotbemalfoandcom=
methnotagapne, the shal islphethe dap
uinge of Jepu the lon of Pimfi:foz be eas
charet as be were mad. And Jebozå fapd:make
readp, and the charet was made readp. And Fe:
bozam bpng of Jlracl g Shasiahu byng of Ju-
Da thét out cptberof them in bps charetagapntt
Jebu, mete bim inthe forlonge of Qaboth the
Jesraclite. Andit foptuned, that whé Jehozam
fawe Jebu:belapy : isit peace FeburHe aulwe-
red. Wibat peace Hulde tbere be,lolonge as the
ihhozdomes of thp mother a bell Eber witch
craftes ave logreate / And Jeporam turned bys
bandes, and fled, andfapdto Bhasiabu:there is
faled, D Abasiabu. And Febu toke a bowe tn
bys hanbdes, andfimote Jeboza betwene the are
mes, and the arowe went the2owe bis bert. And
be Fell Downe flat in bis charet. Chen laid Jepu
to Bpdkatacaptaphe:take bpm and caffe bym
inthe plot of qrounbde of Qaboth the Jesraclite
ff 02 Aremenrber that when Jand thou rode to-
aytber in acharet after Abab bis father, pLod
laped bys beupe butthen bpon bpm. J baue fene
pelterdape ý bloude of Maboth, ethe blonde of
bys fones,lapd the £.020:and F wpl quypte it the
intbis qrounde:fapth the Lozbde. Row therfoze
take bpm ¢caft him tn the plot of the ground, ac
cozdpnge to the worde of the Lorde . Wut when

 <Mbaziabu


Holly


(ift.cegurs
bes whpch the Sirtang had gruen bpm, wht be 9-5


iifverbt.¢ creature,¢ burp ber: x E


diverit paunt Eliathe Cb


Ftabel,
Abhastahu the kyng of Juda lawe tbis be fled bp
the way of the caraen boufe. And Febu Folotwed
after bpm, and fapa : fmyte bym alfo in thecha-

ce ref: anothep moteopmjin its charet at the gornig

Dpto Gur bp Fibleam,and he fied to Magtddo,
and there dyed, And bislernauntes carped bpm
ina claret to Jerufalem; and burped bpmtbere
in bis Cepulchee w his fathers, tn the cptie of Da
nto: Andin the.rt.vere of Joram p fon of Ahab,
bead Hhasiabutavatgue ouer Auda. And When
$cpuwas come to Fesvael, Jesabel herve of it,
and ftarched ber faset tyred ber heed, and loked
outata wyndowe. And as Jedu cntred at the
gate,thefapd : bad simrt peace wobiche Newe big

gp mapiters And he lpfte vp bis epes to the wpn-
dowe,tfapd: who is of mp ipoe; Whos Andebhere


lokedout to bpm two ozthzechamberlapnes,¢ k


be fapd:thzowe der Bowne. So they theewe her
Downe ber bloude Dalihed toward the wall, g
towarde the bosles,¢ be trode per uder Tote. |
C o And Pehenbe wascomein,be bpd cat ¢ dapus
and fapb:goe vilpte Jpzrape pou ponder curie
2ibeisakpngesdougb
ter. And{o ben thep cam to burp her,tbep foud
no moze of ber then the fkull tbe feet: the pal-
mes of her bandes. Qi berfoze thep came agapne
“and tolde ppm. And be (apd: thig is tbe worse of
the Lozd, which be fpake bp the bande of pts fcr
ite, fapinge: xin the felde
of {esracl (all the Dogaes cate the fleipe of Fe-
sabel, And fo the carkas Eni egepen as
Dunge vpon the carthin the Felpe of Jesraei : fo
thatnomanmyabtfape: Chis was Jesavel. —


Forvitis. LEDDA we


t


Fa J


tier


=a €
of = a F

f F. Hani .

+ = F


tbem bp, and when the letter came to them:thep
tcketbe bpnges chplozen,¢ letee themneuen.icr


Wi.Aynges.


perfons,andlapbde their beades itt batkettes,and-
fent them tnta bpm to Jesracl: And there came
amefienger and tolde dpm, topaig :thep baue
brourbtthe peades of the kypnaes ones. And be
fapod:let them lap them on tive beapesinthe en-
trpnge in ofthe gate, vntpll the moznpnge.
And when tt was Dap be went out, and Mode
afapd toall the folke:ye be rpgbtuous, Sebolbe
3 colpired ayapnt mp. maier g fluc bym.26ut
wbo flue al tpeleriLearne bere.that ther Halfatl
‘puto the carth nothpng of the wozde ofp Lorde
whicb be fpake concernpnge the boule of Ahab.
for ë Lozd batb bzougbt to palke tbetbpnges ý
befpake bp thehande of bis 3
fo Zebu flue all p remapned ofthe boule of Abab
in one all that were great with bpm, ¢ bis
bpnirolkes g pzcaltes,fo p be Iet nothing of bins
temapne. And be avofe € Departed. tcameto Sa
martia. And when Jebu was in the wape to the
boufe where bee 4 ibe: dpd there thep2 thepe,
be met w tbe bacthzen of Abastabu kpng of Fu-
ba, {apd: what are pes Chepantwercd, the bee
tizen of Ahasiabu are Wwe : ¢ go dotbne tofalute
thechpldzen of p hpng ¢ tbe quene. And be fayd:
take them alpue. Whome when thepdad taken
them alpue, thep ewe thenrat tbe well whicbe
was befpde the boule where P pepe are fwon,
euen.clit.men,neptber left be sf kigis |

And when De Was departed thetice, bemet w m


Jebonadad the fon of* Wechabcoming agapull ger.rrrb,2


bom. And he bleed bpm, lapa tobpm:is thpne
bert eygbt,as mp berteistrue with thpnesand -
Achonadab anltoered:pep it iS:-a(ptiede,taved be) a3
thengpueme thpne bande. And whenbehad gp: <
uen bym bis bande, betoke bpm bp to bin inthe
charet,¢ fapd: come with meand fe p scale that
fete foz the Lozde:¢lothep made hun rpdein

is cbaret. and whé hecametoSamaria,be fue


tto althatremapned ynto Xhabin Samaria,tpl be


bab wypte bpm out, accozdpng tothe laying of
t e £020 tohiche be [pake to Elia. And Febu gå-


ereD al the people togptber,¢ (apd vntotbem:
XS bab Cerued Waal a lptle-but Jebu Hall lerne regrog


bpm moe eg therfoze call wutome althe p20
phetes of Maal, all fuche aslerue bpm, ¢ all pis


re pee glet none be lacking. Jeo? F bauca great


myfied, be (yall not lpue. Hut Febu dpt it foz ü
Cubtpltpe.to thintent p be mpgbe Deltrov the fer
uauntes of Waal. And Febu lapd:proclapme an ge"
bolp conuocacion fo? Waal g Sebulent vntoalt
Fracl.And al thelernaiites of Waal came,tpat
there wag nota man left beppud thatcame not.
And they came into p boufe of Waal, g the boule


acrifice todo fo Waal: g therfore who lo cuer is


of Baal was Full from one ende to another.


And befapd vuto bpm that was the keper of
tbe veltrpe : beynee forth garmentes fo: all the


‘ fernauntes of taal. And he bought them out


garmentes.And when Jehu wonte With Fedo- |
nadab the fon of Rechab into the boule of Waal E
be fapde nto the feruauntes of Waal: learcpe
and loke, that mere be bere with pou none of
the feruauntes of the Lode, but the feruauntes

of Baal onelp. And when thep wente in co offre


facrifpce and burntoferpnge, Jehu appopnted


epgbtye


Feyu;


ernat Ela. AND ix teppe, j


Athalia iiit. Bynaes Folbi,
Irre.men without andfapde:Jfanp ofthemen igbebynde them ofthe gard: and fo pal pe kepe
| Toho J bane broughewnder pour bandeg,clcape the watch of the boule of sH eah and two pare
| be that lettet go, pall dpe foz bym. tes of pou, that ts allthat go oute onthe Sab-
| Æ  Anditfoztuned ý afloneasdehbadmadean both dape thall kepe tye watcbe ofthe boule of
| ; ende of offerpng the burnt Caccifice, Jebu fapde i Loz0eaboute the kpnge,andpe thal copalie
to the men of warre,andtotbecaptatnes:qgoin thekpng round about, and cuerp man thal baue
| and flep the,let none come out. Andthep {mote bis weapon tnbishande , 4nd whofeeuer com=
3 them withp edgeoftkelwearde. Anoebemen meth within franges, let bpmbeflapyne. And
of warrcandthecaptapnescalthemout,rwet fep pe be with the kpng, as begocth out and in.
puto the citicofthe tépleof Waal,efettheyma  Andthe captapnesouer the bundzeds dpd ac: ys
gesout of the tëple of Saal eburnt them. And cozdpngtoalltbpnges ý x Febotada the peet isra,
thep beakep pmage of Waal,e bakes boule of comaunded,¢ thep toke cuccp man bis men that Fiia
waal, made a draft boufe of it pntothisday. were tocomeinon the Sabbothdape w tbem p
Andlo Jebudeflroped Waal out of Ffracl. ut Mulde go out on p Sabboth, and cameto Febo
fro the {princes of Jeroboam the fonneof Rabat iava the precet. And tothe captapnes ouer buns
which made Zlracltolpnne,Jehbudepartcdnot deedesdpd the preekt qpue kpnge Dauids (peas
vx neither fro Folotopig of them ox (nepepertorroke ye) ges and Hypldes that were in the tévle. Ano te yp
the qoldé calucs that werein WethelandinDã ofthe garde fode, and cuery man Dad bis Wea-
Anvtbe Lod lapde vnto Febu:bpcaulethou ponin bishanderounde about the Renae, from
batt bone ryght well inbepugpage topatlecbe  therpght commer of the temple to p left , alonge
thyngebat isriqbt in mpneepes,andbaldone bp thealtcrandthe temple. And De brought out
wntotbe boufe of Abab accozdpngtoalltbpn- the kynaesfonne,and put the crowne vpon him
titie. poe res thatavetnmpne bert, therfore thal thy chil and delpuercd bpm x the wptnelie , and made. A
ben Dito the fourtpgeneracion {pt ontbefeate hpmipng,andannopnted bpm. And they clape 2
of ffracl. Wut Jebucaved not foz this,towalk thepz bandes and fapde:@ od fla
in the lawe of the Lozde Gon of Jfrael With al LTRS et
bis berte, foz be departed not from the fpnnes of a Ea
Jeroboam, which made Zfracl to fpnne. cen | a ff cod \att:
G Yurhole dapes the Lod began to cut Frael a EWP. | A Sees \
UG.ve.bine Korte: xand sara thei allthecooltes
of g{tacl, fr Jozdaneaftwarde,cuen all f land
of Gilead, the Gadites.p Rubenites, and thé p
were of Ganafles , from Arocr wnto therpuer
Arnon:cuen Gilead and Walan. The reff of the
qwo2des that concerne Xchu,andall that be dpd, F Y |
and all bis power, are thep not w2ptten in the cata vee! Fl Tw
boke of Chzonicles of p kynges of Zfracls And — Pe adi
Jebu Mlepte with his fathers, andthepy bucpedD xAnd Wobé Athaliahearde
bpm in Samaria, and Jeboahas Disfonnerap ning of the peopte,hecame to
qnedinbis tede. And thetpme that Jeburap- tëple ofthe Lode.And


P ned Dpon Ffraclin Hamariats.crviti.peres. thekpng tode bpappller, ag
g p € The.xi.Chapter. thefpngers tthe ttopetters bp thekyng, andal
@ Athalia pucteth to death all tbe kpnges fonnes the people of the landeretofed,and bine w trom


az the Conmeof Dhosiak. whichis bpp |
rip tye 7? ber Death is madek pettes. And At


ges
Reames 43D Athalia p mother of Abasiabu wher treafO,treafon. Wut Jebotada F pzelt comaun=
ERASE faw Pherfon was deed thearole,and Dedthecaptaynes of the bundzeddeg that had p
ES neftropedallthekpnaesfecd. ut eho rule of p bot, fapd wntotbébaue ber out with
faba the dougbter of bing 4028, ¢{piterto Aba out teple,p the map be witbineheranges,and
iaButoke JoasPfonof Abasiabdu,efalebym pany folot het,bylibpm w the (werde-fo2 the
rdamong phpngesfonnes Pp oercflapne,ehis Peet padlapd:pemap not be flapnein p poufe
nource Ù pim, out of a leppnge chabee,andhpd ofthe L020. And thep lapedhades on her tpl the
bpm from Athalia phe wasnorllayne.aAndbe cameintep wape, bythe which the horles went
was wÙ her bpd i the boule ofthe Lord tprpere.  intothekpnges palace, there was ihe flapne.
An Athalia bpd rapgueoner the lande. * And poop made a bonde betwene the
Andthe.vii.pere Jchotadatentandfettheru Lorde andpbyng andthe people, ptbep Mulde Soars,
lerg onerthebundzgedes, wtbecaptapnes, tthe betheLozdes people: ¢ alfo betwenethekpnge rive,
ofthe garde, Etoke the tobpmintothebouteof andthe people. And punget of the land wet
= the Lozd,emade abondewmthem, etokeanoti intop boute of Waal, anvodettroped it, pis hpl-
Pk oftheminthehouleokp Lopdeetpewedthemp Alters alfo ghis pmages brake they dowone lus
Eypngesfonne. And hecomaundedthent,fapnge: elp and Aue Mathan p preett of 25aal before
thisisitppemufldoo:onethpzdeparte ot pou, thealters. And thepreelieta watche ouer the
whole dntpeistocomeon tie Sabboth dape, vouleotp Lozde: anvtoketherulers once pune
fhalkepe the watcbeofpiynges boule-Andan Ddaedsthecaptapnes,ethem ofthe garde andal
otber thpzde parte pall kepetbegateof spur: the peopleo the land. And thep broughe p iing
another thpedepartetbalbepethe gatewbiche frathe poule of the Lora: oats bp the ware of
: a ohh tpegate


A


Hejoas


d


the rate of them of the garde to the Epnges pa-
lace. And be fat bpm dowone on the feat of p bpn
ges. And al the people of the lave reiopfed, and
the cptie wag inquiet. And they flue Athalia wd
the Cwearde befpoe the kpnaes palace. Speuen
percolde was Jeboas whe be begantorapague.
The.rit.Chapter.

C Jehoas maketh prouplpon fo? cherepaprpmac of the tE
pie he ts kplied bp two OF bps Ceruauntes ¢ Amaziaburap
neth inbrs Reade, ;
Fae Ode began torapgne in Pfenenth pere
Fan Of depu.xcl. pearerapgued be in Jerul

7 f Febu.cl dhein Jerulalé
pate & hig mothers name was sebiab of Weer
faba. And he bpd tbat whpche was good in the
fyqbt of Lozde,as longe as Jeboiada the pette
enfourmed bim. wut the bplaulters twere not ta
ken awape fo: the people offred burnt incenle
pet pon Pbplaulters. And Jehoas fayd tothe
prettes:al the fpluer of dedicate thinges that be
brought tothe boule ofthe Lozdin curratlt mo
nep that istofap,the monep that enerp man ig
fet at tal the monep p euccp man wptha wpl-
Ipnge berte qpucth ¢ bapngeth into the boute of
the wpe pai the paceites take it to them, Pure
man of bps acquapntatice:to repapre the brok

laces of the boufe : wherefocueranp decapets
ounde. Andfoltcante to palle that vnto.rritt.
pere of pnge Jeboas,the pretes hadmebed no
thynge:that was decapedinthetemple. Then


x3 binge Jehoascalled foz Jeboiada the bpfhop:e


the prceites.¢fapde puto them: wp repap2e pe
not the bzoken places of the temples Pow tper-
fore:fe that pe receiue nomoze monep of pout ac
quapntatice,ercepte pe Delpuet it tarepapze the
temple wpthal. andthe peftes contented tore-
ceauenomoze monep of thepeople:ercept to re=
pape the decaped places of the temple.
wut Jehotada the prett tokea chet ebozed
an bole in the lpn of tt q tet it befpdetbeaultare
onp cya bt {pde,as euerp man cometh into p të-
le of the Lozd. And f pacttes that kept the vef-
‘ele, put therinal the monep ý was bzought tu-
to the boule of the Lozd. Anditfoztunedp whe
thep latwe there was muche money in the chet,


tieram XtDe bpnaes feribeg the bye prefEcame vp, and


Fila.


toldethe monep pivas foüde tn the boule of the
Lode g puticintoabagge. Andtbep gaue the
monep fealed into p bandes of them p executed
the wozke,andp bad the oueripabt of the boule
of tie Lozde: tbep bought it out top carpens
ters ¢buplders(p mzoughbt bpon Pp houle of the
1.020)% tomatons g betvers of tone. And thep
bought tpmber ¢frettone,to repapre the decap
inthe bouteof the Lorde to all ý wente out to
mende p téple-botobeit there was not made fog
the boule of p Lozde, botoles of fplucr:inftrume
tes of muficke,bafons,trdpettcs:o2 anp vellels
of colde,oz vellels of fpluer , of the monep that
was bzougbt into the boule of the Lorde. Wut

they cauetbat tothe wozkemen, andrepap2ed

there wpthtbeboute ofthe Lozde. <ozcouce,

thep rekened not wpth the men, into whole ban
desthep delpucred that monep tobe beftotwed

on wozchimen:fo2 thep dpd thepz bulpnes fapth
fully. Howbeit. trefpafle monep and {pune mos

nep was notbzought intothe boule of f Lozde,


foz it was the preafkes.


fougit agapnit Geth and toke it, t pasaell fet
bps face to go Vpto Jerufalem. And Jeboas
kptige of Juda toke all the hallowed thynages p
Sebolaphat : Jebozam g astabu bps fathers
kpnges of Juda, bad dedpcate, and that be bpm
felfe bad dedpcated and all the golde that was
founde tn the treatuves of the boule of the 102d:
& in tbe kpuges boule, efentitto Hasael bynge
of Spria and lo be departed from Jerufalem.

The remnaunt of the wordes $ cOcerne Jebo
ag gall tbat bedpd,are thep not waptteninthe
boke of the Chzonicles of the kpnges of Juda’
and bps OWne feruaiites arole ¢ wzougbt trea
Con, æ flue Jeboagin the boule of Willo, wbhë be
came downe to Dilla. Josaber the foune of He
meath:¢ Jebozabad p fonne of Somer his fer
uautes linote opn > bedped. And thep burped
bom wrth bps fathers inthe cptte of Danid.

nd Amastabu bys fonne rapgned in his fede.

C The. xiti. Chapter.
E Fchoaes the conne of Febu is oclpucred into the ban


bes ofthe Sprians and opeth. Foaskps fonuera
nity 1 bps teade. Elifa dpeth. RRETA


in ed
i Sig Abasiadu kyng of Juda, geboabas p
Mes! Keay Connie of Jebu beqanto rapyne oner
reeks) srael in Hamaria.cvit.peare. And
be w:ougbt that whpch was euell in thefpabte
of the Lozve,¢ folotved p (prines of Feroboa the
fonne of Rabat. hpch made Frael tofpnne,
¢ departed not thertrom. Andthe Lozd wasan
gtp with Flrael.¢ vy Senet them into f bande
of Haszacll kpnge of Diria, and inte P pande of
Wenbadadthe tonne of Hasael all thep2 dapes.
And Jedeahas befongbt ý Low, ethe Low


b.


bearde bym. #foz be conlpdered the trouble of +
Alracl, Where wpth ý kpnge of Spia troubled =


them. And Pp Logde gaue Firael a delpuerer , fo
thattbhep went out tr wnder the fubreccion of §
Hirias. And p childzen of Flrael dteltinthepz
tcntesas pte tpme. Meuertheles thep depar:
ted not from the (pnnes of the Doule of Jeroboā
which made Zlracl fpnne,but walked inthem.

And thereremapned a groue Epl alfoin Sa
maria. Reptber dpd be leaue of the people to Fe
boabas,but sh gt fencharrettes, eten
thoufande fotemen*


Theret of the hordes that concerne Feboa

andalltpat ġe dpd, and bis power are ‘Dep et
Worittentnthe boke of the Chzontcles of the kin
gesot Ffraeclr And Jeboabhas Clept wpth pis fa:
thers, ¢ thep burped bpm in Samaria, € Joag
bysfonnerapgned in bps kede. Jnthe.rrrvii.
pearc of Joaskpngeof Juda, began Jehoas p
tonne of Feboabas torapgneouer Jiraelin Sa
maria lprtene peare,and dpd that whichis euel
in the fpgbtof the Lozde, and departed not fra
all the tpnnes of Jeroboam thefonne of Rabat
eer walked therin.

‘The renmaunt of


fougbt agapntt cece tre rh eon sare
thep not witten inp chzonicle boke of the ap
geso


R the.rritt.peare of Joas the line of %


or thekpnae of lade sia, ,
roped them, made them lpke ct nd a


the wozdes ý concerne Jo: |
as all tbat be dpd, ¢ bps potver chenevtnte €


Sehoaas —


‘Chen came Hasael kpnge of Syria vp and |


Li b
E E
=
=


Amastaht


ges of Z{lracl/And JoasNept with his fathers,
€ Jcrobod fat bpon hbpsleate. And Joas was
burped in Samaria amõge p kpnges of Flracl
(ben Elita was fallen fpcke of bys pek-
neffe( wobevof he dped ) Joas the bpnge ot Jira-
el came Downe vito bpm, and wept before hin
iresi and fapd:¥D mp father,mp father: the charret
of Firacl tbe poziemen ofthe fame. Elifa faid
vutobpm:take bowe garrowes. Andbetoke
bnto bppmbowegaroweg. Jnd befapde tothe
kpnge of Zlracl:put thpne bande a P bot, g
be put bps bande vponit. And Elifa put bys hå
des Dpon tbe kpnyes bandcs,and lapie: opena
wpndowéeatwarde:g when hebad opened tt,
Elifa lapd:hote,¢ be hot. Andhe fapde:the a-
rowe of eltbof the Lozde € the arowe ot belth
aan Siria: foz thou balte [mpte Diria in
pbek,tpll thou baue madean ende of them.
And be fapde:take the arowes: and he toke
them. And be fapde vntothe kynge of Zfraecl:
{mpte tbe grounde:and he {mote thepfe andcea
fed. Andthe ma of God wag angry w pim and
fapd: thou tbulveft bauefinptté tpue 02 pre.
ve MES» (07 euen temes ) Cthenthou haddett impttë
Siria tpl P baddelt madeanende of thé: where
nowe palt mpte Siria, but thaple. And allo
Elifa ope. ethep burpedbpm : ethe foudyers
of the Woabites came into the lande the fame
peaie. And ifchaunced ag fome of then were bu
rpeng aman s{pped sip s.thep catt the
man into thefepulchze of lila. And when the
man was rolleddDowne, and touchedthe bodpe


| Seribid.a Of Clifa:xbereupued and ode bpon bps fete.


Wut Hasael Vered Ferael, all che dapes of
Zehoahbas, And the Lozdebadmercp on them,
a them: and had refpecte ynto thé becaufe
of bys appopntment made wptb Abrabam, J-
faac,and Jacob : g wold not deftropetbem,nep
ther calt he them fro bpmas pet. So ipasaclp
kpnge of Diria dped: Wepadad bps (one craig
ned in bps teade. And Feboas the Conne of Je-
Hoabas went agapne:¢ tobe out cE tbe bande of
Wenhadad the line of Hasael,thecptics ote the
be hadtakenawap out of the bade of Feboahas
bis father in warfo: thee tpmes dpd Foag beat
bpm rekord thecpties onto Flracll agapne.

Che. xiii}. Chapter.

q Gmatiahu che kpnge of Juda puttech te death the man

quelicrs of bps father:and afterfmpteth Edom, Joas ap

sth and Jeroboam bps fonne Cuccedeth in bps rowme g

after bpm rapgncty jachatiah., Amaziais bled in dLaz

chis ant 23 atta rapgueth in bpe itede.
o Bape feconde peare of Joas: löne of Fepoa-
a wg Y paskpngeof Firael rapaned aimasiabu
fi.pa.reb.a paa: ot guda: * be was


BEE ‘he (One of Joas kpnge ot 3 :
gry.pearcolde voben be began to rapane traig
ned: rrix.pearein Jerufalem, andhps mothers
name was Febodan:of Jerufalem. And be dpd
that whpch is qood inthe fpght of f Lorde pet
notlpke aud bps father, but dpd accopbprnge
toalltbpnges as Joas bps father dpd. Nether
were the bylaulterstakenawape: ffo2a¢ pet
the people dpb facrifpce and burnt tncenfe on p

branos, Andatfone as the kypnqdome was
ngwe rii,b Lettellcd in bis Pande: xit came to paffe p be flue
ss bis leruants Mpwh bad billed f king dis father


tit} Bynges


Io.liz,
Wut thechpldzen of thofemurtherers he Lue

not, accordpnge vntott thatis wepttenin the

boke of the lawe of Poles: wherein the Lorde
comaunded,fapeng:*letnot thefarhers dpe fog deu.rriscip
thecbpldzen,noz let p chpldzenbe flapne fo the ee
father: ut let euerp ma be put todeath For bis ese.rvute
owne fpnne.de flue of Edom inthe falt valeve

*ten thoulande and toke the cafEell on the rocke PENER,
in tbe fame battell,and called p nameof it Jole Erro
theel vntotbps dape.

Then Amasiabu Cent meengers toFeboas 5
thefonne of Jeboabas fonne of Jehu kynge ot
Sltael,fapenge:come,let vs Ce eche otber. And
Achoas the kpnge of Fraellfent to Amasiahn
lipnge of Juda,fapenge:xdpd nota thiftle that Jad.fr.¢
isin Libanon, fendetoa Cedze tre that is in Li ietes.atub
banon fapenge:qpue thp doug ter tomp [onne
to topfe: nd tbe wplve beat that wasg in Lp-
banon, wente € troade Downe the thiftle. Thou
alt inptten Edom, thpne barte hath made the
proude: Eniope thps glozpe: anbtarpat home.

Caibp doft thou prouoke tomplchefe,that thou
{hulbdett be ouerthzotwen, and ¥uda wpththes

Wut Amastabu woldenot beare. And Febo: q

as kpnge of Ffrael went yp:and be and Amasi
abu kpnge of Juda lawe ether other at Wetlsa
nies tobpcbis tn Juda. And Juda was putto p
Worle befoze Frael, and thep Acd enerp man to
thep2 tentes. And Jeboaskpnae of Frael toke
Amaziabu kynge of Juda, the tonne of Fehoag
thefonne of Abasiabu: at Bethlames,andcam
to Ferufalem ¢ bzake Downe the wall of Jeru-
ale frö the gate of Epheatm to thecozner gate,
Foure bitd2ed cubptes. And be tole all the colbe
€ {pluet æ all the veflels that were foundeim the
boufe of the Lode and inthe trealures of fkin
ges boufe, the chpldzen toke be to be bps wara
Bes:and returned to Damariaagapne.

_ Theret of f actes of Jeboas whych he dpd,
and bps power, g boto De fought wyth Jmazi=
abukpnge of Juda, arethep not wpttenin the
Thzonicle boke of the kpnges of Jiraci’ Zn ze
boas flept wpth bps fathers and was burped at
Hamaria,amonge the&kpnges of Fraell: and
Acvoboam bps fonne rapgned inbpsfteade. `

amastabu the fonne of Foas kpnge of uda, E
Ipued after the Death of Jeboas fonne of Fcho-
abas kpnge of Jiraci fpftene peatre.Andtherem
naunt of the wozdes $ concerne Amasiabu, are
thep not written in the boke of the chaonicles of
the bpnges of Judar Wut thep confpyred teea:
fon agapntt bim in Jerufalem when be fed ta
Lachts, gd Asi atter Dpin to Lacbis:andflue
Him there. And thep bought ppm on horzles, =
be Was buryedat Jerulalem:withbys fathers, |
inthe cptic of Daurd.xAndal p people of Juda g.pasrvle
toke Asaria which was.rvi.pere olde, made
bym Gpngefoz bys father Amasiabu. De buple
*Clath,t beougytit agapn to Juda after that r re.riw
the kpnge thas lapdeto relt wpth bps fathers.

Snthe.v.pere of Smasiabu che fonne of yo 4
a8 kpnge of Juda, thas Fcrovoa the lone of Fo: `
as made kpuge ouer Jfraclin Hamaria grai fin
ned.rli.peare : ¢ wzougbt > whpch wageuellin
thelpabe of theLozde .Hetberturned he awap.


a iit from


from all the fpnnes of Ferobod the fonne of Na
bat, wbpch made Flrael to fpnne. pe retord p
coah of 3lraclfrom the entrpng of Mematp, vn
tothe fcc ofthe wpldernes,accozding to p wod
of the Lorde God of Pracl, whpche be fpake bp
sjonas.i.a. tbebande of bps feruaunt * Jonas the fonne of
Amitbhai the prophete:whpch was of Geth He:
pber. fto? the Lozde lawe howe that the afflic-
cion of Flrael was sctpet bptter, infomuch
. thatthe papfoned andthe fozlaken were at an
itii ve.ritid ende. And ther as none to helpe Jfrael.* And
OMe the Loedelapoenot, that be wolde put out the
name of Jfraelfrom ynder beven, but he Helped
them bp p bande of Jeroboa the fonne of Joas.
The ret of the hordes that concerne Jerobo
am,and al that be Dpd:¢ big ftrength, wbich he
executedin tbe warres:and bo hereltozed Da
mafco,and Heath to Juda tn Firacl: ate thep
not weptten inthe boke of the Chronicles of tbe
kyngesof alraele And Jeroboam flepte wpt
bps fathers,euen topth the kynges of Jirael :q
zacharia bps — rapgned nbes teade.
e Ue Lu. ap et.
E Cioban Soila ancien, Bosra
soe mp the rroi peattoe Feroboam bene
ox DES of Afrael oi bd fonne of Ama
CH BS)siakpnae of Juda torapgne.Soprtene
SE“ pearcolde tas he when be was made
apuge:andherapaned tiwa and fyftpe pearcin
Jerufalem, g bys mothers name was Fecbolta
bu of Jeruflalem.Andbedpd that whpcbhe was
rpabein the fpabt of the Lozde, accozdpngeto
alltbpnges as dpd bps father Amasiabu : laue
that rhe bplaultezs were not put awap: n3 the
people offered, andburned incenfe pli on p byl
aulters. And the Lozde finote the kpnge:and be
Leu.riiia thas a leper bntotbe Dape of bps death, xand


b, GU,


DŘ —


the kpnaes fonne qouerned the palace, ¢ tudqed
the people of thelande. Theret of the wozdes ý
cicerne Asaria alp he dpd:are thep not wzpt=
ten inthe boke of the Chzonicles of the kypnges
of Juda/And fo Asaria dept wpth bys fathers
€ thep burped bym w bps fathersin the cptie of
Dauid, e Jotha bps fone rapqned in his eade.
3 Jnthe.rrroiii. pere of Aaria Kpnge of Ju-
da dpd sacharpa the fonne of Jeroboam raigne
bpon Jiraell tn Samaria. vi. monethes : and
wzougbt p Mbyche was euclinthe fpgbt ofthe
3.020, a9 Dpd His fathers:¢ turned not alway fro
thefpnnes of Jeroboa f fonne of Rabat, which
made Zlrael to lprine. And Hallo the fonne of
Jabes colppred agapnit bym, and {mote Him in
thefpabtofthepcople, e&plled bye rapgned
inbps fede. Theret of the wozds that cocerne
sacbaria, beholde, thep are weptten in the boke
of > Chronicles of the spnges of Jlracl. Thele
bealfo the wo2des of the Lozd, whpch be fpake
puto Jebu, fapenge : thp Connes hall fyt on the
feat of Ffrael in the fourth generacion after the
Andit came fo to paffe. |
. SHallunthefonne of Jabes began torapgne
C inthe.rrcix.pere of Asaria kpnge of Juda:and
herapgnedamonethin Samaria, For Wena-


tit) Apnges.


pwelteina feneral boule atlpbertpe, Jothan.


hemthe fonne of Gadi went bp from Chirsa,¢
came to Samaria, ¢ Anote Sallum the fonne.
of Jabes in Samaria, lue bpm andrapgned
in bps teade. The ret of the wo2des ý concerne
Sallum, the treafon tobpceb be con{pp2ed, be-
bolde:thep are wzptten in the boke ot the Chzo
nicles of the kpnges of Flracl. The lame tyme
£Henabem delfroped Ciphlab, gal ý ere ther
in,etbecoaftes theroffrom Charlabyp.aAnd( be
caulethep opened not ta bpm )be finote it erppe


ppalthep2wemen wchploe. Che.rrrix.peare x


of Aaria kpng of Juda began Benabe p fone
of Saditorapqnue vpod Yfraell ten peare in Sa-
maria. And be dpd cucl inthe (pabt of Lode , g
turned not awape albpsdapes fro the fpniie of
Jeroboam the fonne of Rabat, wbhpch made FL
racltofpnne. And bul the kpnge of A ipia
came bpon thelande. And Genahé qaue Phul
a .@).talentes of fplucr, f bps bande mpgbt be


b wpthbbpmeablph thbekyngdomein bishade


And Ganehem made a proclamacion foz P mo
nep in Flrael,p al men of fubffanncefpuld yene
/kpnge of Affpeta fpftpe fpeleg of fpluer a pece
[nd fo Fkpnge of Aflpzia turned backe againe
€tarped nottbhereintbelande: Chereft of the
wo2des that concerne Menahem andal that be
dpd: arethep not wmapttenin the boke of pH Cdz20
nicles of the kpnges of Flracls And BDenabem
flept vopth bys fathers t Pebabta bys lone bpd
in bys teade fuccede bpm in the kpngdome.

An the fpftpeth pere. rg yo kpnge oF Ju-
da, began Pekabia p line of Benabé to raigne
oner {fraclin Samaria two peace edpd that
whpch was eucl in tbe fpabt of the Lozde: g left
not of fri the fpnnes of Jeroboa p fonne of Ra-
bat, tobpch made Firael fpnne. ut Bekah the
fonne of Remaliabu:Mobpch wasa captapne of
bps,cofpired agapnit hpm. fmotepim in ae
matia:cuen tn the place of pkpnges boule witi
Argob ¢ Aria:¢ wpth bpm were fpftp inen of
Oileadites:¢€ he kplled bym,andrapghed in big
roitbine. Theret of the wogdes $ cocerne Peka
bia gal p be dpd bebold they are wepttenintbe
boke of the Cbzonicles of the bpnges of Flracl.

3nthe.lit.peare of Asariakpnae of Juda be- .
gan pebakt Pp gt ice a pe
ouer Jirael in Samaria.cr.pere, Edpdeuellin
tbefpabt of the Lozde: € turned not awap from
the (punes of Jeroboa the fonne of Mabat,that
made Jlrael fpnne. Jn p dapes of Pekabkinge
of Jfrael, came Thiglath Pelelar kpnae of Al
fpria,etoke Fion, Abel: Wethmaacha, Janoah
Hedes, Ha302, Gilead: Galile, € all the lande of
Lephthali,€ carped thé awap to Afiprta. And

olca the fonne of Ela colpired treafon again

ekab the fonne of Remaliab: €fmote bpm, €
fluehpm:¢ rapgned in bps fleade in the twentp
pere of Jotam the fonne of ziabu. Che reite
of the Wwozdes that concerne Pekah and al that
be bpd:bebolde,thep ave wepttenin the boke of
the Chzontcles ofthe kpnges of Firael. ;

The feconde pere of Pekabthe fonne of Re-
maliabu bpnge of Zfrael, beyan Jothã pfonne “
of Cistabu Bpnge of Juda torapqne.fpue and
twentpe peate olde has be when he beganne to

- rapgne


Abas


€


LT


tapgne:andberapgned fprtene peare in Jeru
talem. His mothers name twas Jernla f dough
ter of sadock. And be dpdthat whyche isrpabt
in the (pat ofthe Lozde:euen accordpnge to al
ag dpd bps father Cistabu,fodpd be. ut f bpl-
aulters were not put awape : foz the people of-
fred and burnt incenle fEpll in the bplaulters:be
buplt the bygber doze of the boule of the Lozde.
Theret of the toozdes that cocerne Jotham , €
all chat be dpd are thep not written inthe boke
of the chzonicles of pkynges of Judar Fn thole
dapes the Lorde begantofende into Juda Re-
sn the Binge of Sirta,and Pekah the fonne of
emaliabu. And Jotham lept wyth bys fa-
thers and twas burped wpth bys fathers in the
cptie of Dauid bystather, and Abas bys fonne
rapgnedin bys teade.
€ The. rvi.Chapter.
* Abha; kenge of Judaconfecratech hps Conne in fpersand


hath manp bataplies agapnt thekonac ot Wrarl. Fn ithe
Meabe of Aha; rapgneth Dezekia bps tonne.


met wee deers
eon ae TE
pa £ |
ka i i = gi y
ii q i


ea aan


race Ah began forapgne. CT wentp peare olde
was be, wht he was made kpnge g rapgned lpr
tene perein Jerulalé,¢ dpo not that tobich was
, rpabtin the eves of p Lorde bps God: lpke Da

wid bps father : ut walked inthe wape of the
peu.rbiii.b Bpngeg oE alra eper madexbps fonnetogo
suiverpia thozoto the fper,atter theabboininactons of the
Hepthen , whomethe Lozde cal ont befoze the
HAt of Jirael. And he ofred g burnt iticenle
in the bylaulters € on the bpls and wnder euerp
E E thpche tree.* Then Resin kpnge of Siria and

ppto Jerulalemtofpqht. Jnd thep fought a-

cain Abas, but Ait autant bpm. At

the fame tpme Resin kpnye of Diria bzrougbte

Glath agapne to Spria, and rpd the Jetes
Wien thence. an the syne eas fo Elath, and

Ces Yipell therin ynto thys dape.

sro So Shas fent mellengersto @hpglath Pe.

leler png of Apia lapeng: J am tbp feruaüt
andthp fonne,come vp €delpuer me ont of the
banbe of the Beane ot Dprta, gout of the bande
of the kpnge of J digo a we cpie bp agapntt
me. And Abastoke the fpluer g the goldethat
was fotde inthe joule ofthe Lorde, inp trea
Cures of P kynges boule, g fentearetearde vnto
the kynge of Allpria.x And thekpng of Affiria
cofented unto bpm. oz p kpnge of Afliria wet
ppagain&t Damalco. And whe be badtaké tt:
pecarped the peopleawap to p, iue Resin


fa, biti.b


tli) Aynaes


So.tr,
And kpnge Abas wente vnto Damatcota m
mete Chiglath Pelefec kpnae of Allpria. And
when Bpnge Abas [awe an aulter that was at -
Damailco, he fent to Uzia the peek the paterne
of tbe aultare, andthe fathion of it, andall the
workemanthpptberof. And Uzia p pret made
an aulter nal popntes lpke top paterne which
kpnge Abas badlent from Damatco: Euenlo
dpd Cizta the preft makeit, again kpng Abas
cametrom Damatco. Andf{o hen the bpnge
was come from Damatlco,be fawe the aulter:¢
the kpnge wente toit, offered theron. pox
burnte bps burnt ofrpnge , and bps meat offe-
tpnge,and potzed his dpnkoffrpnge:ipzpni
led the bloude of bys peaceoffrpnaes belpdethe
aultertbat was bp p bealenaultec whych was
befoze the Lozde and fet it wpthout the temple
betwene the aulter and the temple of the Lozve:
and put it on the noztblpde of the aulter. z
And kpnge Abas commaunded Uzia f pe
and faid: upon the great aulter fet on Eper inthe
mo:npnge the burntoffapnge, andin p euen the
meatofrpnge and the kpnges burntlacrifpee €
bys meatofirynge, wpth the burntofepnge of
all the people of the lande,¢thep2 meatoffrpng,
€ Chep2 Ozpnkofkcrpnges : and powe therbp,all
the bloude of the Cactifpce apna Sit bzg
fenaulter wpli J comeandfe. And Uzia P pret
ayd Pana png tap topnaeg as page ate
aunded bym.x And bpnge Abas baake the {p=
des of the botomes. andtoke the lauer from of er?
them,and toke vowne the lauatozy from p bza-
fen oxen that were onder it:and put it ppd apa
uement of tones. Andthe veple fo: p Sabboth
(that thep bad made inthe boule) and the kpn-
Kesentrpe wpthout tournedbhe to the boule of
the Lozde,fo2 feare of the kpnge of Affpeta .
Che ret of the wozdes p concerne bas, what
be Dpd:arethep nat wrpttë tn the boke of p chzo:
nicles of theispnges of Juda‘ And Abas llepte
topth bps fathers: and ag burped wpth bys
fathers inthe cptie of Dawid: and Hezekia bys
fonne rapgnedin bps teade.
Che.rvit.Chapter.


ozea kenge of Plraclistaken. Anp beand all bys rez
ut bzougbe tothe Aiprians, ; be


pecah lone of Remaltahu-kinge of Ffraelcam | wea


iotea became bps feruaunt € qaue bpm p2elen-
tes. And thebpnge of Allpeta tounde treafonin
Hovea:for be had fent metienqersto So, kinge *
of Egypt, bzroughe no pzefent wnto p kyne of
Apia from peare to pere:¢ therfore the kyng


of Prince the totes “apes sae
* AND CDE CDE Spngeot Spa came Vp tho irren

rowe out all the lande,and at opagapnitt Da ve
maria and belegeditthze peace. 3ntbenpneh
peareot Dolea thexkinge of Blpria,toke Daz iriam,
maria, ¢ carped Firael awape ynto Aflpria ,¢ rio.c
put thë in Bala in Pabo; bp priuer of wosa:ein

D üi the


=


,DeurrriS Heare, xbutrather


Halea
the cptics of p Medes. soz it came to patie, that
15 thecbplozen of F{racl fynned agayntt the L020
they: God, whiche had brought tent out of the
lande of Eqppte: from vider the bade of Pha-
rao kpnge of Egypt : g feared other gods. nd
thep walkedinthe ceremontes of the bepthen,
whom the Lorde cat out befozetbechyldzen of
4fracl:¢ in the ceremonies, which the binges of
Ffracl bad made. And p chuldzen of Jtracl were
about tobyde tholerbpngestbat were not wel,
fromthe Lo20thep2 God. And tbep buplt them
pplalters in all thep2 cpties, both in the tows
where thep kepte atcbc, and alfo inthe ftrong
townes. Anë thep made them pmages and gro-
uesin euerp bpebpll,e pndereuerp thpcke tree.
And there thep burnt incéce im all the bplalters,
asbpbd the bepthe(tobom f Lozdecarped awape
before them) and Wzoughe wicked thpnges to
angre the Lode withall:sfo2 they ferucd mot
D pyle pdolles : wherot the Lozde had fapde bnto
eatit them:xPe all do notuche thynge.
And the Lod telkifted in Flracl:andin Juda
__ bpall tbe pzopbetes,and bp al the fearg fapeng:
Aerob s Tuenefrom pour wicked wapes,and kepemp
comaundementes and mp ffatutes:accozbpnge
to all ý lawe which J chmaunded pour fathers,
and wbich F fenteto ja bpmp feruaunteg the
pzopbetes. Rotwithtandpnae, they wolde not
alk uit ardened thep2 neckes, lpke
-> tothe ubburnes of thep2 fathers, that dpd not
beleue inthe Logbde thepz God. oz thep refuted
bis atures and bis appopntment that be mabe
Withrbepzfathers,and Eliit (whertoith
He witnelied puto them ) and thep folowed va-
nitie and became vapne:and went after f pep-
then that were rounde aboute them:concerning
whom, the Lo2de badcbarged them, that thep
hulde not Dolpke them. Wut they lefte thecom:
maundementes of the Lorde thep2 God: made
uceeg.rite them pmages of mefall,xeuen twocalacs:and
made Croues, and wozlbppped all the bootte of
werbiiie Heauct:and ferued Waal. * And they Cacrifpled
thep2 lines and thep2 Daughters intpze, € pied
ve wptcbecrafte and enchauntementes veuen fel-
Ipnge themfclues : to wobe twopckednefe inthe
{pant of the Lozde,androangre ppm.

Bnd the Lorde thas exceadpng woth with
fivevrit o, ¥eael:¢ put them out of his fyght, «that there
taslefte but the trpbe of Juda onlp. Aeuerthe
iche, Juda allo kepte not the cOmaundementes
of the opp thep2 God, but walked in p ceremo-
nies of Firacl, which they made. And the Lode
D cak vpall the fede of Frael,and vered thé, and
Delincreotbe into the bandes offpoplers, vntpll
be badcat the out of bis fpgbt. Jeo? Fleact deut
Ded themfelues from f boule of Dautd, emade
thema &pnge,cuen Jeroboam the fonne of Pa:
op bat. And Jerodoamexd2ule Flrael awape (that
they tpulde not folowethe Lozde)and made the
fona great (pn: foz pchploz€ of 3trael walbeo
iu althe fpnnes of Jerovcam which de dpd, and
Departednot therfco, vutpl P Loz put slracla
wap outof bps fpabt,as de Dad fayde bp all dis

leruauntes the prophetes. | fea ane
e Andi wag stracl carp Dawap outot thepe


ij Bynges.


Hecke
owne lande,to Alyria, euen onto this dape. —

And the kpnere of Apia bzougbt men from
Wabplon.fro Cutha, tr Aua, From Hanath, €
from Sepharuain, and put the inede cities of
Samaria in Kede of p chpldzenof Flract. and
thep poffeiicd Samaria, t dweltein the cepties
thcrof. Andit fortuned, pat poeainningoé their
Dwellpng there they fearednot the Looe. And
the Lozdfent lpons amonge thé,whpcb flue thé
Wibercfoze, menfapdetotbe kyngeot Aflprua.
Thenacions which thou bak trantlated, ¢ put
inthe cptiesof Samaria,knowe not f lawe of
P god of f lande therfore be bath fent lyons wpa
thé, bebold, thep Nepe thé-becaule thep knowe
not p maner of wozipping of p god of f land.

Thenthe kenge of Affpzia comaunded fap =

enq:carte thptber one oztwapne of thepreattes À
thom pe brought thence,and letthë go gdwell
there,and teache them the fatbpon bow to ferue
the god of thecountrep, And tha one of the pea
ites which thep bad carped thence came g dwelt
in Bethel, and taught them bote thep Hulde
feare p Lozde. Dotwbeit euerp nacpon made thé

ondes of thepz owne, and put theminthepou-
es of p bilalters, which p Samarias had made Æ
eucrpnacion in thepzcitieg, wherin thep dwelt. .
The mé of Wabplo made sSocoth Wenoth:and
the men of Cuth made Mergal : and themen of
Hamath made Alima. Che Auites made Rib-
ba3,¢ Charthab: And the Sapharnites burnte
thepzcbpozen wl: for Adzamelech,¢ Aname
lech p goddes of Sepharuaim. And fo they fea.
red p Lord g madethëpreates of the hilalters,
Which lacrificed foz them in tbe boules of p bpl-
alters. And fothep feared p Lozd,¢ (erued their
owne gods after Pp maner of the people: whom
thep carped thence.

And ontothis dap thep do after the olde ma-
ner:¢nepther feare God, neptherdoatterthep2 gx


ordinatices andcuftomes, after the lawe and ge. rrrie


cõmaundement which the Lozdcomaundedthe
chpldz¢ of Jacob, ¥+wpom be called Flracl.And 3.9v
the Lozdmade ana popntment with them, and TAF
chargedthem.fapeng : «feare none otber gods,
no: bowe pourlelues to them,no2lerue the,noz
facrifice to thé:-but feare p Lod which brought
pou out of thelande of Egppte with qreate po-
wer, and a ftretched out arme:bpm feare, and to
him bowe,andtobimbofacrifice.Cheftatutes -
o2dpnautices,lawe,and cOmaundement tobiche
be wote fo? pou, fle that pe be Diligent to Dofo2
enicrimoze:and feare not anp otberqobdes. nd
the appopntimét that J baue made pth pou,fe
peforgetnot ¢fearenone other qoddes:butthe |
Lo2de pour Godpe thall feare, ¢ be haldelpuce
you out of the bandeg of al pourenempes. How
beit,thep dpd not Derk, but dpd after their old
cuftome. And fo thele nacidg feared thepz 1020
andferucdthep2pmages alfo:lpke as dpotheps
chplozen and thep2 cbpldzens chplodzen. Guen
as dpb thep2 fathers:(o do thep wntothis dape.
CTChe.rvit}.Chapter.
CSHeekia kpnge of yuda putteth bowne the bzaten
ferpent,and dcitropeth the pollets, Salmanalar
bipngeth Alraci ta the Adpzians, Zhe blatphemp
of Sennacherib:op Sanperib, -
“an the


j


F
thE


t


ER the thpzde peare of Dolea, fonne of
\€la bpngeok Firael, it came to patie,
Sa BO) that Hesekia thefonne of Abas kynae
fi.pa.rrir.g “= Of Juda repgned. + Cwentp and fpue
© pereoldewashe when be began to repgne, and
teygned.rrir.pere in Jerufalem. His mothers
name alfo was Abi the douqbhter ofsacharia, g

be dpdthat whpchis rpg in tbefpgbte of the

iL o2de,accdzDpnge toallas dpd Dauid bps fa-

Deut.vit.e fder.x He put awape the bplaulters, and bzake
p. e the pinages,and cut Downe the groues ,andall
pumrrie #9 błahe thexbzaten ferpent that {oles hadde
"og Made. for vntothofedapesthe childeen of Fi-
caelord burne faccittce to tt, ebecalled it Rebu

tan. De truted in the Lozde God of Feael : fo

that after bpm was nonelpbke ppm amonge all

the kpnges of Juda nether were there anp fuch
befozebpm. Jfoz be claue to the Lozdeanddez
parted not from bpm, but kepte bpscommaun-

) Dementes, whpch the Lozde commaunded )o-
fes.Andthe Lode was rats bpm: fo tbat be
polpered in all thynaes,wapch be toke tn dade

and be tebeiled agapntt the &pnge of Lilpzia,
andferucdhpmnot. Helmote the ~bilittines

cuen nto B3a,and the coaltestherof, vothca-

Mels where thep kept watches:¢ Fronge cptics

| an and tntbe ae care of Epa ip tin

tiii, (MppcH was the leuenthpeare of Hotea , fonn

pripa of inten i Slracl )ttfoztuned, that Sal-
manasar Benge of Aflirta, cam vp agani Sa

maria and belteged it. And after thre peares,

thep toke it:euen in the prte pearcot Hesekia:

that is tofape , thenpnth peare of Hofeakpnge

of Flracl.And Samaria was wonne. And the

kpnge of Aflpria,dpdcarye atoaye Flrael vis
to Hiria ano ut them indalabandin Dabo?
bp the rpuer of Golan, andin thecpties of the

edes : becaule thep wolde not berken nto p

bopce of the Lode thep? God:but tranigreficd

bye appopntment,and al that Woles p teruaae

ofthe Lode commaunded, and wolde neptiber

beare them nozdotbem. Tete

TDA Fle a Therfore,in the.riiti.peare of kpnge Pese-
zfa rerbia kia dpb Hennacherib kinge of Ailirta come bp
#e-FI¥I9D arrapnttall the pee cptiesof Suda, andtoke
them. And Hesekia Bynae of Juda lente tothe

Rpnae of Afliria to Lachis,fapenge: J baue of-

Eenden: departe from me and all that thou put-
tckonme that wpll J beare. And the kpnere of

Aflitta appopntcd ynto Hezekia kpngeo Ju-

` Datpzebundzed talétes of fpluer,and thpety ta
iim.re.rii.o lentes of golde. x And Hezekia gauebpm al the
sai (pluce that was founde ithe honfe off Lode,


Aynges


and inthe trealites of the tynges boufe. Jt tie
fame feafondpod Hesekta rene of the Dozes of the
temple of the Lode, and the ppllers t whpcbe
the lapd Dezekia bynge of Juda hadcoucrca g-
uer anD gane them A ae bpnge orig,
no the pnge ot A fpeta fent Tharthan g
Bablarig, nd Rab fake fton Lachis to kinge si
Dezekia wpth a great bolt, againtk Jerufalem
And thep went Dp,andcam fo Fern lalem, and
gat them vp,and Lode bp the condpte of the wp
per poole, whpcheis inthe wape of the fuliers
elde. And when thep badcalled to the kpnge,
tberecame out to them, x Eliakim thefonne of Bath.t.b
Elkia Whpche was ewarde of Doulbolde, and
Sobna the {crpbe,and Joch the löne ot Afapp
the recozder. And Rablake fayd yutothé: Tell
pe esekia F pzape pou: thus fapeth the greate
pnge euen the great kynge of Aflpeia : ibat
confidenccisthpsthattboubalt: moet thou e
Cpeake fuch alpgbt wode indede? 1y countell
and power 7 wpll be ae fo make Warre. On
whom then doett thou truft, that thou rebelle
agapnit merxdock thouterutt to p Kaffe of this
broken rede Egqppte,on wWhych pa man leane, ecs.rervt.g
it pil goo into bps bande and pearcert. Euen “3-tre
fois Pharao kinge of Eqipt vnto altbat trut
onbypm. * Dé pelape yntome:we truftein the @-pa.rrrite
1020 Our Good: Fsnot that he whote bplaltars
and bps otber alters, besekia hath put bolbne,
and Dath {apd to Juda and FJerulalem: pe pall
Woztbpp befoze this alta re berein Jerufalem
owe therfore deliner P Wardestomp lozde
the ëpnge of Afliria tbat pe rebell not,¢ J wpl
delpuer ptwothoulande hogles pf thon be able
tolet tpoerg Dponthbem: Cbptbpnket thon
{cozne at thepzetence ofone of the leatt dukes of
mp maptters feruauntes,and truftelt to ripe
Foz chatrettes and boztemen: ft) o2couet, ain y rid
Howe come wopthout the bpddpnge of the 020°
totbys place , todeftrope it:tie Lozde fa poeta
me:go Dpto bpslande,anddelrope te. Ano He
lakim thefonne of Helbiaand Dobna, and 4o
ab fayd ynto Rablake:(peake (F prapethe) to
tby (cruauntes inthe Spzians language, foz
Wwe vndertãdeit:and talhe not wyth vsin the
Fewer tonge, inthe cares of thpg people p are
onthe toal. And Rablake laid buto them: path
mp inafterfent me to thp matter andto the, to
Cpeake thefe tozdes ¢ Ayathpenotlente me bes
caule of the men whycbelpt onthe wall, $ thep
mapecatethepz owne donge anddapnke thep2
owne ppile wpth pours
Andlo Rabfake ode, ecrped wpth a londe
bopcetnthe Jewes language, (paie, fapeng:
beare the fapenge of thegreat kpn geof Aflpria `
Thus lapeth the kynege: let noe: esekia beqple
pou, ĉo? be thall not be able to belpuct-pon pute
of mp bande : neptherlet Wesekia make pouto
truftin the Lode, apenge:the Lorde all {ure
lye delpuer V8: thpscitie thal not be geué ouer
into the bade of the binge of Afitia Aperké not
unto Hezekia, fo? thus tapth ý kingeof X fiiria
Dealekpndlp wypthme,andcomeouttome.
And thé cate euerp manof his owne bpne, tof
bys owne fygge tree, and dapnke cory man of
f


Gi


=r “ ft Le ; . š
Hesckta titj, Aynges Hesekia
the water of bys owne welt, tpll Ycome.andfet roped them. and Walt thouex(atone)etcape? ox
pontoas good a lande as pours ig: alandeot iauethe goddes of the pepthen delinered them
comeand wene,alande of bzeade and bpnepar= vobpch mpne aticeftries baue deltroped/ As Oo
dega lande of ople,of olpue treegan ofbonpe: zan, and Baran, Reseph andthe chpldzenot E-
that pemapelpuc and not dpe. Andberkennot Den whpch were Withlalare whereis f byng
puto Hezekia, torbe begpleth pou,fayence the of Hamath,and the kpnge of Arphad, Pkpnge
tap.rr.d Wore hall delpuce vs. * Hath euctp one ofthe ofthecptie of Sapharuatm,and of Dena g Jua
gondes of thenacions delpuered bps bande out &)0 aw recepued the letter of the bande D
of tbe kpnge of Aflpzia! Wiberets the Godot ofthe meflengers.¢redde it: And Hesekta went
amath:and Arphad/and where isthe God of pinto theboule of the Logde,¢ laped itabzove
epharuaim: Dena and Juar dpd they delpuer befozethe Lorde. And Hesekia prayd before the
Samaria out of mpnehandesand what God is Lozde,andfapd:O L020 Sod of #lracl:wobpcb
itamonge all the gopbes of thenactons, Phath dwelletbetwene the Cherubs thou arte Gov
Delpuercd bys lande out of mpne bande: ball alone overall the Byugvomes of the earth:thou
. the Logde deliner Zerulalem out ofmpne bade? halt madebeauecnandeart): L020 botee Downe
Wut they that were of the people eldethep2 thpnecare.and beare. pen Lode thpnecpes «
peace, g anf wered not bpita WozDe,102 Pkinge (Abelech the)andle-ebearethe woz0es of Sen
pad commaunded,fapenge:antooere bym not. nachertb wbhpchbathlentthysman toraple on
Then Eliakim which wag fuarde ofhouthold thelyupnge God: Dfatruth Lo2de,the hinges
and Sovaab the lcrpbe,¢ soabthelonne of X- of Apia haucdeftroped nactons and thep2 la
faph the vecogder , came to Hesckia wyththey2 des and haue fet fp2e on thepz qodded. Eor they
clothes rent, told him the wozdes of iRablake. were no qoddes, but the woke of the Dandes of
nam UIE a MLL ON AND DEO Drone 00,30
pean gpucthoucanoemen ofthe stowe them. Mowe therfore, D Lorde oure O00, SOC
Score ana Aeae oS piune Tonnes. AMyzians Seunaches foehethe laue thou vsout of bys bande thatall
w SD it came to palle, that when kpnae the kpngdomes of the earth mape knotve, that
Hesekia bearde it, be rent bys clothes thouonelp arte the Loze God. And Haithe
ox qpur onfacke: andDcameintop boufe Conne of Amo; fenteto vole fapenge: thus
eH ot*the Lorde: fent Eliakim wbich fapetbthe Lorde Godot Fraell: that whpcbe
Eag the ftuarde of boutbolve, ¢ Sob toon bafte paped me , concernpnge Denna-
na thefcrpbe,and theelders of the preattesclo< e crib kpnoe of Affpzia: baue pearde it. This
thedinfacke,to fapthepropbhetetbefonneot is therfoze the wozde that the Lozde hath fapt
Amos. And thepTapd unto bymn,thugfapth he of bpm: The virgpne cuenthedougbter Of P=
sekia:thps dape iga dape of tribulacionand of on, batbdclppiedtbe:and laughed the to fcozue,
rebube,andblatpbempe. Sfozthechpldjenare (D thoukpnge of Alpzia) thedoughter of ges
come tothe bpzth,and ther ts no firength tobe ‘culalem bath thaken der Heade atthe. * tU pome mat.rriii.o

35 delpuered.Beraduëture, the L020 thp Govwyl batthourapled on,and whome baft thou blaf- sacha.ti.b
bearcall the toozdes of Rablake, whom pking - phemedsAgapntl whome bat thou exalted thp agg
of Aflp2ta bys mafter hath lent, toraple onthe bopce,and lpfted vp thpne epes foppe.fuen az |
ipupnge God, and to rebukebpmibith woes capnit the Bolp of $frael. wp the bande of the
whypch the Lobe vee odbathberde.Andlpft mieflengers thoubatt rapled on the Lode, and
thou vp thy praper to? the rénaunte pareleft: fapd:withthe multitude of mp charrettes Jams
Spo the leruautes of binge Hesehta came toF%- come vptotietoppes ofthe mounfapnes, euen
fap-And Flay lapo vito them: Spo tat pelape alongebp thefpdesot Lpbanon,and wpllcutte
topourmatter: Chus fapethtbhe Lozde:benot dotonethe hye Cedartrees,and theluttye prre
afrapd of Eb eee thoubaltberde,w trees therot sand J wpll gointo the lobgpng of
whyche the ponge men of the kpnge of Afipzia ppsnelt-¢tnfothe wood of bys plapne: J baue
hauerapled on me: 2Bcholde, F wyllputhpmin paged, and ronke traunge waters:and With
another mpnde,¢ De thal beare tybpnges, tiore the iteppe of mp gopnge wpl 3 dzye al the wa-

E srenti e UNE tO bps owne lande: x And Bwrllbzpnge ter oolesthatarebelicged.
a Gata topatie.that be Mall fall bpon the fivearde * c= aft thou not berde, pote J bane opdepned €
PaF? Honinbps owne lande: fuchea tbpngea great whple ago, and paue pze,

T And Rablakeh wente backeaqapne, and pareditfromthe be nnpnge: Ando Mall Zoe _
founde the kpnge of Affpzia Fpabtpnae againt nowe bepnaett fo2th,that temap deltrope, and
atte fee had berde pots i e was departed tobspnae tronge cpties tnta wattebcapes of
From Lachis. And when he Hearde men peo? ffonesrandthe tnvabitours of thétpalbe oflp= `
hirbakakynge of the blacke Wos: Webhold tel power, andfaynt perted,and confotided, and
pe iscomeouttotpghtagatntt the, bedeparted xfhalbelphetbhe gra pof J ode aran DECODE Sr erproita
æ fent meflengers nto Hezekia apenge:Thus ozagtbebep of thetoppes ofp boutes: ozastbe `
{peaketo Pesckiakpng of Juda-fapeng:let not corne that is pnrppe,¢ (mptten wptbblatpng
thp Good difceiue the in whom thoutruttelt fap Bknowethbp dwellpnge,t peommpngeout,= `
enge: Jerufalem fhall not be delpueredintathe thp gopnge in, -#(am top wape and thp furpea> |
bande of the bpnge of Aflpata. Webolde,thou gainfme.andb caulethourageft agapnit me
hatte bearde what the kpnges of Affyziabaue andthinkeltthpt lfe fo bicfled:this is come Dp
Done to alllandes, howe thep paue veterlpedes Duntompne cares and J wpll put mpne pohe o

P


‘L


m = ———”—<“‘<—itCtCt:t~™*”


i
i


o qm


ee i


Hekia


thp noffrelles,¢my bptinthy lpppes, and wpll
bzpnge p back agapne p fame wap thou came
¢. And tips thalbe alpguevato the D Pese-
kfa)petballeate thpspeare of fuche thynges as
growe of them felues:andthe nexte peare,fuche
as come bp of thole f dpd qrowe of thep: owne
accozde. Andthetppzde peare lowe pe reape:
pant pynepardes,andeate the frutes therot.
nditthatis efcaped andlefte of the Doughter
of Juda, (hall pet agapne take rootpng Downe
warde,and beare frute ppwarde.ffo2 out of Fe
) rufalem thal goa remnaunt:and a nombze that
4 {pall efcape out of mount Spon :the sele of the
L020 of booftes (yal bapng tips thinge to pafe
©  Iwberfore,thusfapth the Lozdeconcetnpng
thekpnge of Affpzia: be Halinotcometothys
cptie no? otean aro into it,nozcome before
it pth ploc, noz cafe banke agapnt tt: but
hall cobacke agapne the wape be cane: Mall
not come into tbpscptie,fapeth the Lorde: 02
J wopll defende thys cptieto Tane it , fo? mpne
owne fake : and fo? Danid my fecuauntes fake.
And(oit cam to pafle:p the felfe lame ngit
the aungell ofthe Lozde went out and [mote in
the boot of the Aflpzians anbidzed foure froze
andfpue thoufande. And when the remnaunte
were ” early in the mozupnge:thep fatoe,th
Were all Deade coozles . + And fo Hennacheri
kinge of Affp2zta auopded and Beparted, g Went
agapne:and dwelt at Piniue. And it foztuned
thatasbe was in chp oy wozthppppnge Mit
roch bps god, Adzamelech and Sparesar bys
otone fonnes mote bpm toptb thefmeard. Bnd
they efcaped into thelande of Armenia and -=
farbadon bys fonne rapgned in bps feade.
 CChe.xr.chapter. |
QC Bescbla ic pike, and recepuech che frgueof bpe bealfh.
Be recepucth rewardes of Benodach , andisreprehended
ə of Flap, bpcaule be heed bpm the Creature. Be apech,and
, Ssanalleh ops fonne rapaneth in bys Reade,
y E Gout that tymextoas Hesekta fpeke bn
Ear ©) a LUG
: eee HY a todeath. And tbe prophete Fiap f lonne
rat BREN OF Amoscame to bpm, g fayde onto pym
rribite Wbustapeth the Lorde: put tbp poutboldin an
O2d20,f02 thou Halt dpe, and nos lpue. And He-
sekia tourned bystace tothe Wall, and prayed
tothe Lozde ,fapenge: J beleche thenowe, D
Lozde , remembze howe baue walked before
the in truth and toptha parfpte berte, and paue
bone that whyche ts good in tpp ipybte : and
___ Hexekta wepte foe. |
03 ` Andit foztuned, that afore Flap has gone
out into the mpddle of the courte,p wozde of the
ZL o2decame to bpm.fapnge: turne agapne, and
tell Desekia thecaptapneofmyp people: Thus
fapeth the Lorde God of Dauid thy father : F
bauc berde thp paper, and fene thp teares. And
bebolve, J wpll heale the fothat on the thpzde
dape thou Malte qo pp into the boule of y 10d
And J wpll adde wnto thp dapes pet fpftene
peare,and wplldelpuerthe and this cptie out of
the bande of the bpnae of Aiipzia; and wpil de-
fende thps cptie foz mpue oWAelake, ¢ fo? Da-
nid mp feruatites fake. And Flap lapd: Tabra
lompe of fyages. And thep toke it andlaped it
onthe foze:and he vecouered.


—_ id


Tobi


iiif Bynges


And Pesekia fapd bnto Flap : what halve


fe tbefignethatthe Lozdewplhealeme, and that


Jal qo vp tuto the boule of the Lozde f thbpzd

bap? flap anfwered:tbhis (pane halt thou baue

of the Lozde, that the Lo2d pl do that bebath

(poken. * Syhalltbe hadowe go fopwardeten ce rivits
Degrees,o2 go backe agapne tendeqrees:Ipese-

kia anfwered:it isalpabtthpnge fo: f hadow

tO To DOW Cen Degrees:o# nether is that mp eetpze) xn

but pfthe Madotoe qo backwarde ten degrees,

itisno lyght thpnge. And Flap the prophet cal


led nto the Lozde, + and be beoughtethe a= ecrwitie .


boweten degrees backWarde bp wppcbe it had
gone Downe inthe dpall of Abas.
¥ Che famefeafon wWerodach Waladam the €
fonne of aladam bynae of Wabpion, {ent let-farrr a
tersanda peelent toesekia,forbebadbearde
howe that Hesekiawaslpche. Andiesckia
was glad of them,and ewed them al bys trea
fure Do puer be e odours, precious opita
ment all the boule of bys armourp, and al that
was fotidein bys treatures:there wags nothpng
inbps boule and inal bps realme, that wesekia
ewed them not.
And Flap the prophet came vntokpnge be
sekia, and apd vnto bpm: Chat fapd thele më
and from whécecame theptother And Hesekia
fapode : they be come froma farre countrep,eucn
from *Sabplon.And be fapd agane: what paue
thep fene inthpne poufleresekta anf tered, all
thethpnges that are in mp boufe baue thep fene
there is nothbpnge amonge my treafures,that J
bauc not ewed them: And Flap fapd vnto He
sekta:igeare the wode of the Lorde : Aebolde,
thedapes come,tbhat althat isinthp boule, and
what locuerthp fathers bauelaped vp in froze
‘bntothpsdape,xthalbecarpedinto Mabplon, Kier.
and nothinge thalbe left fapeth the Lorde: And pn
of thplonnes( that Mall procede out ofthe, and Hece.re.b
whpch thouthaltbeget )thalthbeptakeawaye, —
and tbey albe chamberlapnesin the palace of
the kpnge of Wabplon. And Hesebialapd puto
Alay: Welcome be the wode of the Lorde which
thou batt {poken. and be fapd: al there not be
peace andtrueth in mp dapes?
‘The temnaunt of the wozdes that concerne
Hesekia,and all bps power, and hotwe he made
apoole anda condpte, andbzought ater into
the cptie: are thep not wpttenin the booke of
the Chzonicles of the kpnges of Juda! x And l
Hezekia ept wpthbpsfathers: zand Wanae Thar
bps fonnerapgnedin bps teade. -  $egathia
C Tbe. rri. Chapter.
MOpcked Janale retopeth agapne the Fools, and after
bpeih, in whore Rede Amon bps onne Cuccedeth,whpchis
Epiled of bps otwne Ceruaunntes. Aiter bpm rapaneth fapthz
full Jolia whome we fete call Folias:o; Foliabu.
TENS Anafe * was.rit.pere olde whenbe n
pA p vegannetorapane andrapaned FPE Pisara,
SA Se tpeandfpuepearein Jerufaleni:DPS prina.
Y Epa N mothers namealfo mas re


css €Hedpdeuell inthe lpabt of p Lorde
een after the abbominacion of the hepthé wha

the + Lo2de caft out before P chpldzen of Flracl dev-rotii.p
{for be wente and buple the bplaulters,* which tiisameg,


Hesekia bisfatber had deitroped. and be reared rota .


bp aul


olti.


i
j


E N


bp aulters for Waal, andmade qroues (asdyd

Abab kpnge of Frac, ) and worthyp yo althe

poof of beauen andferucd them. And be buplte

aultareginthe poufeof the Lo2zde, of wbyche

t.reg.oti. the Lozde fapo: x 3n Jerufalem woyl J put mp

tesar è name, Andhe buplt aulterg foz allthe boot of

heaven: cuen in twocourtes of the boule of the

retray Lorde. * Andbeokiredhpsfonnesinfpre,and

dew rbid.b aue bede nto twptcheraft and fozcerpe, and

sii.te.Fb18 maintapned workers with {pirites and tellers

of fortunes :and brought much topckeonefle in
thefpabt of the Lozdeto angre im.

Ano be put anpmage of a grove(thathehad

25 made Jeuen inthe temple, of whpcbhe the Lorde

had {apd to Dauid and to Salomon bis fonne,


titveg.ip,a 2ULEDPS boule andin Jerulalé:( Pobpch J haue


Zlracl moue anp moze out of the lande, whpche
‘Aqauc thep2 fathers: fo that thep wyll oblerue
and do all that J baue commannded them: and
accozdypnae to al the lawe that mp feruatit Wo
fes commannded them, 25utthep berkencd not,
and Wanae led them out of p ap, todo moze
topckedlp then dpd the bepthen people So apt
the Lorde deftroped befoze p children of Jlrael.

And the Lode lpake bp bps (eruauntes the


© prophetes, fapenge:bpcaute Manae bpnge of


Juva bathdoneluch abbominacions,and bath bp


Wzougot moze wpckedly thenall thatthe Amo
rites (wbich Were before him) dpd:¢ hath made
Juda fpnnealfo wpth bps Fdolles. Cherfore,
yere. pip, a tbus lapeth the Lozde God of Flracl.xWehols
J wpil bepnge fucpe eueli vpon Jerufalem and
"Juda, that wbo fo heareth of it, both bys cares
(pall tpngle.And J woplt Kretch oner Jerufalë,
tbe (quaringe lyne of Samarta:and the plomet
of p boule of Aab. Bud F wp! wppe out Feru-
falem, asa man wppeth adpibe , ¢ Whebe Dath
soppedit,tourneth tt vplpde Downe. And FJ wil
Icaue the remnaunt of mpne enberitaunce, and
Deipuer chem into the bande of tep? encmpes, E
thep thalbe robbevand {popled of all thep? ad-
nerlarpes, euen bpcaule thep hauc done evellin
my (pgbte, and bane angredme, (pus thetpme
they atbers came out of Egipt yutyl this bap
nd Wanafle (hedinnocent bloude erceding
much,tyll be replenpihed Jerufalem fromco2-
net tocozgner, befpde bys fpnne where Wpth be
made Juda folpnne,and todo cupl inthe lpabe
of the Lorde. |
The relt ofthe wordes that concerne 4a-
naffeandall bathe DpD,andbyps (pune that be
{ynned: aretbep not W2ptten in the boke of the
Cheonicles ofthe kpngegof zuda” And MWA-
aie Rept with pis fathers, and was burped in
bps owne boule enen in the garden of Ula:and
Amon bps fonne eae inbps fede.

x Amon Was.rrit-peare olde, WHE be began
torapgnc,and berapgned two peare in Jerula:
lem. ps mothers name allo was elulemech
thedoughter of barumof Jotba. Andhedyd
enclin the (pabt of the Lozd(as bystather Ha
nafle bpd and walked inall the wape that bps
father walked in:and ferued the Adolles phys


D


papp
d


iiij Apnges


chofen out ofallerpbes of Flracl)wplJputmyp mey
namefoz euer.Mepthce wpll FmaketheFcteok E pe


Jolia
father ferued:and wor bipped them. Jnd he foz
Coke the Lorde God of bys fathers:and walked
notin the wape ef the Lorde. :
Andtheleruauntes of Amon confppzed a=
apnit hyn, flue the apnge in bis owne boule
nd the people of the lade fue al them that bad
confpp2ed agapntt kinge Amon,and the people
made Jolia bys fonne kynge,in bps fede. The
ret of the wozdes that concerne Amon, what
thynges be bpd: are they not eptten in pboke
of the Chzonicles of the kpnges of Juda! And
tbep burped bpm in bpsfepulchze, in p gardé of
difa:and Jolia bps fonnerapgned in pps itede.
CThe.rrii. Chapter.
e otthe boke ofthe latwe that was


ofthe ranger ofkpna Jolia the kinge fent Ha ruid
fonne of Asalia the fonne of 4Helula


ple:).and baue delpuercd it vito thé that do the
odie. nd that Daue p ouer'pabte of the bonfe


clotbeg. And the kpn lkiat
pet, and Abikarnt e Connie of pbc tng 405
boz the fone of Hichata and Sapbhan p {erpbe
and fabia a feruannt of the kpnges, fapenae:
xgo peand enquypze oF the L020 fo2 me, and £0? yere.rrna,
the people,and fo2 all Juda,conceenpnge Pwo
des of thps boke that is founde , ffo? great ig
tozath of the Lozde thatis kpndledagaint ys,
becaule our fathers baue not berkned ae Le
tyo20e


l


ı Folia


thozdes of thygboke,todsaccozdpnge nto all
that wbpcb is w2ptten therinfoz vs.


D Ho Weikiathe bpe pect and Snkam, Aeh-


è


iiBaval. KAN


rrii, a


ititira HNal€qreat. An


bo: € HSaphan,anv Alabia went vnto Pulda p
pio phetefie the wy fe of Sullam, the fonne of

bitkua,thefonne of Barban keper of p ward-
rope: whpch pzopbetetle duvclt in Jerutalem in
the boufe of the doctrine, and thep communed
wpth ber. And We anfwered them : thusfapeth
the Lozde God of Flracl: Cell the man p iente
pou to me,thuslapth the Lode: bebold, 3 wpl
bapnge enel vpon thys place,and on the inpavi-
ters therof:(euzal p wo2des of the boge whpeh
the kpnge of Juda hatbred) becaule thep baue
foxfaké me, g bane burnt incente vnto other god
des, to anger me tepth all the ozkes of thepz
bandes. Wp wrath alfo Halbe kpndled agatntt
tbps place and allnet be quenched.

Wut tothe kpne of Juda (wbpch ent pou to
alke counfell of p Lozde fo thal pefay:thus fap
eth the Lozve God of Zfraell, as touchpuge the
wordes wWhpch pe baue bearde: Wpcaulethpne
berte did melt:¢ bpcaufe thou palt bumbled thp
felfe befoze me the Lozd.wbé thou berdzit what
FZ ipake agapntt thps place.¢ again the inba-
bpters of p lame(bow p thep thuldbve deftroped
f accurted: and batt rent thp clothes and wept
before me: of that alfo baue J berde, tapeth the
Lozve: Sebolbde, therfore J wplirecepue the vn
totbp fathers, andp ipalt be put into thp graue
in peace, and tbpne epes thal not feall tbeeucll,
whbpcb Y wll bzpnge vpåtbps place. Andthep
brought the kpnge wozdeagapne-

C Che. rrii. Chapter.

€ Fofiarcabeth Deuteronomy betoze the people. Heput
teth ootone ¢ goolles: after be bad kplled the prettes thee
of. Se kepeth Palleourr. Be was kplled in Gpagedo , and
bps conne Jeboaas rapgnerb in bps teade. Steer be was

taken, bps fonne Jehoatpm was made kpage.
TRA ay. Mdxthen the kpngelent, ¢ there
GA Viet’ Gathered bnto hpmal thecloers
kG | Sy i of Juda ¢ of Jerufalem. And the
ied oe WA Synge went vp into Phoute o
(SA WA Looe,v altbe menot Juda and


EAE S: nee 4 ee

PSN althe inbabitoursof Jerufalem,

with p pecites% poparen 3 althe people both
be vevintbe cares of the x all

boke of Pconcnatt: which was


the wozdes of p
ey the fr of the Lode. And ë kpnee


founde in


yo.rriig. e LODE LP a ppller, *and made acouenatit befoze


45 Andthebyngecsmaunded He


the Logde,thep $ Mulde walkeafter the Lorde,
€ kepe bys comatdemeétes, bps wytnelies, and
bps (fatutes, wytb all thep2 berte,and all thep2
(oul, make good tie toozdes of p fapdappoint
ment ý were weptten in the foxlapdboke. And
all the people confentedto turaapopnement.
liia p bpe pze
and the inferiour bye pretes, and the keperg of
the oznamentes, to bzpnge out of the temple of
the Lowde, all the vellelles. that twere made foz
Waal , foz the qroues , and fozall the boolte of
heauen. And be burnt them wpthoute Ferula
leminthe feldes of Cedzon, carped tbe alpes
of them into Wethel. Ande put done p mput
fiers of Baal, who the khypnges of Juda bad fou


_ ttit, resum Ded to burne incentei the xbplaulters ecptics —


iiij. Bynges


of Juda, that twere rounde about Ferulalen :
alfo them $ burnt incenfe wnto Bal , top lane
to the moone,to the planettes,¢ to all the bool
of heaucn.And pe bought out the groue frö the
temple of the Lozde wptbout Jerufalem Ynto
i} broke Cedzon, ¢ burnt it there at thebzoke
Ledzon, F itampt it to poulbdze, ecalketheautte
tberof upon the graues of the chpldzen of f peo-
le. And be bzake Downe thecelles of the maleg
ueg that Were bp the boule cf the Lord, where -

the women Wwoue hangpnges for the groue,

And he brought all the peettes out of the cps
tiesof Juba, and defpled the bptaulters where
the peeaftes pad burnt incenfe:cuen from Geva
to Weerleba:anddcftroped the aulters ofthe ga
fes,that were in the entrpnge in of the gate of
Jotua the gouernoure of thecprie whpche were
(as aman gocth tn) onthe lefte bande of p gate
of the cptic. Meucrtbeleic the prettes of thebpl
aulters camenot bp tothe aulter of the Lowe
in Jerufalem, faue onlp they dpdeat of p fwete
b2eade amonge thep2 bzethzen.

And bedefpied * Copketh: whyche fs inehe


Solr


EPF


ug


ballep of the chpld2é of Hinnom:byeaufenomå ¥ere.btt.


{pulde offre bis fonne o2 bis Dongbtcr infyic to

olech : be put Downe the boles $ the roth
of Juda bad g uento theiunne at the entronge
in ofthe boule of the Lozde,bp the chabze of Ba
thanmelech, thechambzelapne whpch was ru-
let of the fuburbes,¢ burnt the charreites of the
funne topth fpze. And theaulters that were on
the toppe of the patloure of Aba; ( wWhpch ý kpn


ges of duda had made) andthe*aulters WED stii.ve.reta


anale badmade in P twocourtes of fP honle
ofthe Lozdcdpd p kpnge bzeake ajk eau
théce: ecatt p dult of them in the broke of Ced36

And the bplaulters that teere before Ferufa-
lem on therpght bande of the mount Dlinete,


*(wobpch Salomon the Kenge of Zirael Hadde sieeg.yen


buploed tor Altharoth the Fodoll of the s1dong,
and foz Chamos the Jdol of the Woabites z:


p Eo: Sjilcbomtbeabpominable Fdollofthechpl


dzen OF Ammon) tholethekpnge defpled : and
bake the pmages,andcut dotwne the groucs, g
fplleo thep2 places Yopth the bones of men.

SH ogeouer-xthe aulter that was at Bethel


the bplaulter made bp Jeroboam, pfonofPa- Ter


mi Sapa made Flrael fpnne) both the aulter
€allo the bpll,be bzake Downe andburnt P ppl
aulter and Fampe it to powder, and burnte the
groue.Andas Folia turned bpmfelfe, be Cppen
the qraues,that were in the mounte,and lente ¢
Fet the bones out of the qraues,and burnt them
ppontbe aulterto polutett, accozdpnge tothe
toozde of the Lozde that the manof Godpzo-
clapmeDd+ivbpch tolde the fame woes.
Then de lapde what graur tone is ponder


that Fle / And the men of the cptic tolde bpm, it D


is the fepulebze ofthe man of God, whpci came
from Judaand tolde p felfe fame thpnaes that
thou baf done to the aulter of Wethell. Andbe
fapd let bpm be:fe that noman move bps bores
And fo bps bones were faued with the bones of

a propbetc that came out of Samaria. :
Andall the boules of the bplaultersin the
tptics


fiire tifa


e cities of Samaria which p kiges of Flracl bad
ov made to angresx(the Zone) Woithall: thole Jolia

put out of the wap, dpd tothem accozdpng to

all the actes ý be bad Done in Bethel. And pe fa-

crifpced all the pretes of the bplaulters ý were


there cuen upon the alters,and burnt meng bo:


ties pponthem,and returned to Jerufalem.

E Andchekpngecommaunded all the people,
tt pa.rro-a fapinge: x kepethe feale of paflcouer bnto the
ome TEDI Lode pour God, tas itis toeptteninthe booke
xiienie oOftpigcoucnaunte. * There was no palfeouer
holdenlpke that from the dapes of the Judges
that iudged Jfracll, andinalltbe dapes ofthe
kpnges of Jirael, andofthekpnaes of Juda.
Juthe.rviit. pereok kpnge Folia was this pal-
puer bolden tothe Lozdein Jerulalem.

Andtherto workers with (ppzites and foth-
fapers,pmages, pools , ¢alltheabbominacpos
that were elfppedin thelande of Juda and Jeru
falé,thofe dpd Jolia put out of the wap, to pers
fourme the wozdes of p lawe which were writ-
tenin the booke p Helkia the prett found in the
bonte of the L020: lpke Dufobpm was there no
png before bpm, that turned to the Lord with
all bis bert, with all his foule, andal bis mpage
accozopuge toallthe latve of Hotes, neprbher
after bpm arole there anp fuche ag be.

Notwithitandpnge, the Lowe fourned not

fri f fearcenefic of bis great watb (tberwith
be wag angry agapnlt Juda) bpcaule ofall the
pouocacions that anaffe had prousked bpm
Withall.Andthe Lorde lapd: x3 wpl put Juda
alfo out of mp (yg bt.as 3 baue Doncawape 3t:
racll: and wpll cafte of thiscptie Jerufalem,
whiche 3 bauecholen,and the Doule of wbich F
fapde:mp name thalbe there.
The rch ofthe wordes that concerne Jolig,

F anallthat he dpd : are thep not weptten inthe
booke of the C dzonicles of thekpnges of Juda?

marya Xan bdisdapes Pharao Necho kpng of Egipt
Pato? pent wpagapnt the kpng of ANpua to the rp-


(iff. Ineg,
priri a


pm, and was layne of bpm at Magiddo, tobe
p badfene bim. nd bis leruauntescarped bim
deed from gHagiddo,and brought ppm to Jeru
Talem, and burpedhpin in bis owne lepulchze:
And the people of the lande, toke Jehoaahas,
the Lonne of Jolia , and annopnted bpm, and
made ppm kenge in pis fathers Eede.
Jeboaba; was.rriii.pere olde whe pe began
S torapgue,and rapgnes the moncthes in Jeru-
falem. is motbersname alfo thas Hamiel the
Douerbter of Jeremia of Libna. AnDdDbedpdeupl
in} Cyabt of the Lord, accozdpug to alltbinges
asbhistatbersbadbdoone. And pbharao Mecho
tbpminbondegat Ribla inthe landeof Ha-
matb,p be hulde notrapagne itt Jerufalem, and
put thclandtoa tribute ofan dundzed talentes
of fpluer and a talent of cold. And pharao Ne
chomade Eliakim the fonne of Folia kyng in p
romme of Jolia bis father: andturned his name
C to Fehoakim,and toke Jehoahas away, hich
when becamecame to Egppte,dyed there.
And Jedoakim gaue the fpluer and the gold
to Pharao,and taxed thelande, togpuc the mo


tit}, Apnaes


uer Eupbzates. And king Joliatoentagapn g


nep accorzdyng totherequet of Byarao: requp
rpng of eucrp inan(accozdpng tothep: abilite)
fpluer and golde:euen of the people of the lande
togpue into Harao Mecho. JFedoakim was
Frv.pere old whe he began torapgne, ¢ Derap-
gned.ti.pere in Jerulalem. His mothers name
allo was sebuda the dougbterof Pedaia of Ru
ma. Andbhe dpd that whiche was eupll inthe
fpabt of the Lode, accozdpnge toall thbpnges,
as bisfathers bad Done.
CThe.rritii.d hapter. :
CBehoakim opeth. Perulalem is befpeged of the Babyz
lonpans. Jeboakim peldeth bpm (elfe to thekpng of
Ieabplon. and tn his roume came Gyjathaniah which
thas calith cdekiab.
Re eet Mbpsdapescame Madbuchodonoso2,
HR ge of abplon vp,and Fehoakim
Eg Os


becamebisleruauntthze pere, andthe z

turned andrebellcdagapni dim. nt
the Lorde fent vpon bpm men of Warre from a-
mong: tbe Caldecsfrom amongetbe Sirians
out of the Goabites, and fromthe chplozen of
Ammon:and fente them agapntle Juda, to de-
{trope it,accozdpnae tothe laping of the Lorde
which belpake bp his leruaites thepzophetes.
Dnelp at the bpooprge of the Lozde Happencd
it fo to Juda,to put them ont of bis tpahte foz
thefpnnes of Banalle, accozdpngeto all that
bedpd,and foz the innocent bloude tbat He Med,
andfpiled Jerufalem with innocent blond: and
the Lode wolde not bereconcpled., ,

Theret of the wozdes that concerne Tehoa: 25
kim and all that be bpd, are thep not wapttenin
the booke of Cbzonpcles of thekinges of Juda!
Andfo Feboaktm lepte with big tatbers: and
* Jeborcpun bis fonnerapgnedin pis Mede. And mathi
the kpnae of Egppe came nomoze oute of bps IF"
lande : fo? the kynge of Wabplon bad taken frd
therpuer of Egypte, vnto the rpucr Euphrase
tes,allthat pertapned to the bpnge of Caypte.”
Feboachin was epgbtene peare olde, and raps
ned in Jerufalem thze moonethes. His mo-
thers name allo bas Nebula, the doughter of
Elnathan of Jerufalem. And be did that which
was eupllin the fpgbt of the Lorde, accozdpng -
toallas bis fatber bad done. * Jn p tyme came Paita
the fernauntes of PMabuchodonozo2 kpnge of
Wabplon bp agapnll Ferulalem, and the citie
wag befieged. And Mabuchodono302 Benge of
Wabpli cameagapnl the citte,and bis teruañ-
tesdpd beltegett. * And Jeboachin thekpnge
of Juda came out to the kynge of Wabplon, ve -
and bis mother, big leruaunteg dis lozdes,and g
tbl ambzelapnes. And the kpng of Wabplon is.re.rr.e,
foke bymintbe epabt pere of bistapane. se fap.
x And becarped out thence all the treafures F?
of the boule of the 102d, and the trealure of the
kpnges bonfe:and bzake all the veflels of gold,
twhiche Salomon kpnae of Fltael had made in
the'tcmple ofthe Lozde,as the Lozde pad fapde.
Mndbecarped atoape all Ferulalem,and alltbe
lozdeg, and all the tronge men of warre, euen
tenthoulande intocaptpuitie : and all craftef-
menand kepers.none remaynpng fane the poze
commen people of thelande,
. And


Etheria $


Fehoakin


f


Ti a


D. *Fndpe carpedawape Feboachimto Ba-
| Derren) bplon, and the kpnges mother, andthe kpngeg

Aea sopues. bys chabverlapnes, and them that were
mpgbtpeinthelande:thofe carped be awape in-
focapttuptefcom Jerufalemto Babilon: And
alltpractpue menof warre, enen. vii thouland
and crafts mé ¢ popters a. $). allp were rong


it.Sarayt, AnD Apt Foz war dpd Pkpng of Wabilon biyng th


rrutb. to Babilon captive. Andthe kpnere of Habp-
AeFFUHS tom made Dathanta bps fathers bother, apne
serecit,a, M Dis Seade:t chaunged his name to scdekta.
e e ¥3edeKta WAS. Crt. pere olde whenbhe beran
fo rapgne and berapaned eleten peare in Fern:
- Talem. dapsmotbers nameatfo was bamicall
the Dougbter of Jeremia of Libna. Andhedypo
cucilin the iygot of the Lorde, accorpng to all
as Jehoachin had done. o: p wrath ofp Lod
tas moued agapnite Jerulalem and zuda Via
trilbecalt thcmout of bisfpabte. Andsedekia
rebelled agapult the kpnge of Babplon.
~C Che.rev. chapter.
@ Felatalcmisdefegenof mabu chobonazar , ofherinpre
_ falleo Paduchabneszer, and tte thecempie are both burne,
Zoe Connes of schekia are Clapue beieze bps epes atd after
| are his otne epes pur our, Judais brought to Babiion, a
 alteris Feboacyinesaltea,
) merria Fee Sz Ut foztuned that in Pnputhe
enaa FO om ume JPEE Of His rapane,thetenth dape
ey A Uoff the tenth moneth : Qabuchad-
BY Na Enea kpuge of Babplancame de
I bya Wiandall bis bot agapntt Yerufalé


a bekta.* And thenpnth dape of the moncth, ther


And the kpnge went the wapetotarde the
plapne. And the loudpers of the Chaldees fola-
wed after the kyng.andtoke ppm inthe plaptie

of Jericho, andallbpsarmpe were (cattered a

P” wape from bpm, cecanviertedom.) Dothep toke
i the kpngeand brought bym to Pebuchadnesar
| the Hipnge of abplonto Rypbla, where they
| reafoned wpth bpm. Andthep fewe the fonned
:


DPS e] ıt oute the

€ epes ofsedekia g fettered bymiwptý two chaps

- negand carped bpm to Wabplon. os

And the. bit.vaye of the. ¥.moneth tobiche id

| the. ttr.peareofkpnge Aebuchadnesachpnge
| of Babpion,came Nabulacadana fernaunt of
the bpuge of Wabploi , and chefe captapne of p

| men of warre, unto Jerufalem: and burnte the
; boute of the Lozde,anbdtbe kpngeshouleand al
| tbe boules of Ferulaiem , and all greate boules
burne be with fpze. And all the foudpars of the
Daldces that were wpth the chefe captapne of
| themen of warrebzoke Downe the walleg of Fe
rufalem roundabout. Sut theret of thepeople

that were lefteinthecitp,¢ them that were fed
am, tothe bpng of Mabpion,w the remnaunt of the


of sedekia befoze bps epes: and pe


iit Bynges.


~ i te
Soli.
comen people dpo Pabulacadanthe chefe cap-

tapne of the men of ware carpeawap : but the
captapne ofp fouldpersiefte of thepooze of the

lande to dzelle the vpres: ¢ toeplthelande. .

* And the pyllerg of izale that Were inthe itii nesas
boule of the Lorde andthe fockets andthe bza mee hes
fentlauatorpp was inthe houfeof the Loddpdipasouip
je Chaldecs beeake,and carted all the beafie of
them to Dabplon. Andebhe potted, Houels,d2cf

lpna &npues, (ponies, € all the velicls ofp baffe
that thep minpttecd in,tokethep awape. And Dp
Epe pannes, ¢ bafens, efuche rhpuges as were
of golbde,audoflpluce, themtoketbe chefe ca pe
fapnea wape: eaen twoppllers onc lanato2p,¢€
thelockets wppche Salomon bad made F 02 the
boule of p Lozde. The bzafe of all thefe Veffells
Was Without wapghte. The epeh of the one
ppller was.r but. cubptes, and the beade theron
was bale, and theecudptes hye t vponp bead
Was there a wetbe workeand pomegranates
rounde about, all of brate, Andof the tame fal-
{pon was thelecond ppilec, w awzetheworke €
Andthe chefe captapne of the men of warre
tose Saraia the chefe Delte, esephonray the
bpelt preltelauc one, andtpcthze Kepars of the
bolp thpnges. And out of the citpe be toite a ch-
berlapne, that padthe once(pghte of the menaf
Warre,and.v.men of them that were cuccinthe
Gpriges peelence, whiche were foundein p citpe:
and ppm that was (crpbe to the captapne of the
Dot, whiche baought out the people ofthe lande
to Warre,and thze [coze men of the people of the
lande, that were founde inthecitpe. And Qebus
faradan the chefe captapue of the men o€ warre
toke thele,¢ fee ik tbem tothe kpnere of 6a
bplonto Ribla. And ý kpnge of Babiion (mote
tdem, ghue them at Wiblamp hand of ipanath
And fo Juda thas caried awap out of their land ft
Howwebett, there remapned people in plande
Of Juda whome Nabuchadnesar bpnge of a=
bilonlefte, and made Gedalia the fonne of Xhi-
Bau the fonne of Sapbanculer oucethem.aAny
all the captaps of the fouldpers and other men
Dearde,that thc kpne of Bavilon badmabde Ge
balla gouernet:# there cam to Gevalia at az
jade: {lmael thelonne of acthania, Johann
t of Tkarvea, Haraia the fonne of Than
sce the Nethophatpee, and Fasaania the
neof Paachatt,and theprmen. Aud Geda-
lia fivare tothem , andto themen whome thep
bad wpthtbem,and fapte vato them: feare not
pe becaute pearethe feruauntesof the Chalde=
e8, Dwell inthe lanbde,andferuc the kpng of Ba
bplott,and pe thall be well.
Wat it chaunced in he feuenth moneth, that ©
Emael the fonne of Acthanya the fonne of Elé
ania, ofthe &ynaes bloude, came, and ten men
fie bpni,and finote Gedalia, that bedped:and
fo dpd bethe Jewes, andp Chalaces that were
iopthbymat@ispa. = AA
< Andall the people bothfmall andereate, g
thecaptaines of warre arofe,¢ came to Carp té
fosthep were afrapde of P C baldecs. Rot with:
fandpnge pet tn the (eucn and thp2tpe peareats
ter Jepoacbin yng of Juda was carped ae


D. *Fndpe carpedawape Feboachimto Ba-
| Derren) bplon, and the kpnges mother, andthe kpngeg

Aea sopues. bys chabverlapnes, and them that were
mpgbtpeinthelande:thofe carped be awape in-
focapttuptefcom Jerufalemto Babilon: And
alltpractpue menof warre, enen. vii thouland
and crafts mé ¢ popters a. $). allp were rong


it.Sarayt, AnD Apt Foz war dpd Pkpng of Wabilon biyng th


rrutb. to Babilon captive. Andthe kpnere of Habp-
AeFFUHS tom made Dathanta bps fathers bother, apne
serecit,a, M Dis Seade:t chaunged his name to scdekta.
e e ¥3edeKta WAS. Crt. pere olde whenbhe beran
fo rapgne and berapaned eleten peare in Fern:
- Talem. dapsmotbers nameatfo was bamicall
the Dougbter of Jeremia of Libna. Andhedypo
cucilin the iygot of the Lorde, accorpng to all
as Jehoachin had done. o: p wrath ofp Lod
tas moued agapnite Jerulalem and zuda Via
trilbecalt thcmout of bisfpabte. Andsedekia
rebelled agapult the kpnge of Babplon.
~C Che.rev. chapter.
@ Felatalcmisdefegenof mabu chobonazar , ofherinpre
_ falleo Paduchabneszer, and tte thecempie are both burne,
Zoe Connes of schekia are Clapue beieze bps epes atd after
| are his otne epes pur our, Judais brought to Babiion, a
 alteris Feboacyinesaltea,
) merria Fee Sz Ut foztuned that in Pnputhe
enaa FO om ume JPEE Of His rapane,thetenth dape
ey A Uoff the tenth moneth : Qabuchad-
BY Na Enea kpuge of Babplancame de
I bya Wiandall bis bot agapntt Yerufalé


a bekta.* And thenpnth dape of the moncth, ther


And the kpnge went the wapetotarde the
plapne. And the loudpers of the Chaldees fola-
wed after the kyng.andtoke ppm inthe plaptie

of Jericho, andallbpsarmpe were (cattered a

P” wape from bpm, cecanviertedom.) Dothep toke
i the kpngeand brought bym to Pebuchadnesar
| the Hipnge of abplonto Rypbla, where they
| reafoned wpth bpm. Andthep fewe the fonned
:


DPS e] ıt oute the

€ epes ofsedekia g fettered bymiwptý two chaps

- negand carped bpm to Wabplon. os

And the. bit.vaye of the. ¥.moneth tobiche id

| the. ttr.peareofkpnge Aebuchadnesachpnge
| of Babpion,came Nabulacadana fernaunt of
the bpuge of Wabploi , and chefe captapne of p

| men of warre, unto Jerufalem: and burnte the
; boute of the Lozde,anbdtbe kpngeshouleand al
| tbe boules of Ferulaiem , and all greate boules
burne be with fpze. And all the foudpars of the
Daldces that were wpth the chefe captapne of
| themen of warrebzoke Downe the walleg of Fe
rufalem roundabout. Sut theret of thepeople

that were lefteinthecitp,¢ them that were fed
am, tothe bpng of Mabpion,w the remnaunt of the


of sedekia befoze bps epes: and pe


iit Bynges.


~ i te
Soli.
comen people dpo Pabulacadanthe chefe cap-

tapne of the men of ware carpeawap : but the
captapne ofp fouldpersiefte of thepooze of the

lande to dzelle the vpres: ¢ toeplthelande. .

* And the pyllerg of izale that Were inthe itii nesas
boule of the Lorde andthe fockets andthe bza mee hes
fentlauatorpp was inthe houfeof the Loddpdipasouip
je Chaldecs beeake,and carted all the beafie of
them to Dabplon. Andebhe potted, Houels,d2cf

lpna &npues, (ponies, € all the velicls ofp baffe
that thep minpttecd in,tokethep awape. And Dp
Epe pannes, ¢ bafens, efuche rhpuges as were
of golbde,audoflpluce, themtoketbe chefe ca pe
fapnea wape: eaen twoppllers onc lanato2p,¢€
thelockets wppche Salomon bad made F 02 the
boule of p Lozde. The bzafe of all thefe Veffells
Was Without wapghte. The epeh of the one
ppller was.r but. cubptes, and the beade theron
was bale, and theecudptes hye t vponp bead
Was there a wetbe workeand pomegranates
rounde about, all of brate, Andof the tame fal-
{pon was thelecond ppilec, w awzetheworke €
Andthe chefe captapne of the men of warre
tose Saraia the chefe Delte, esephonray the
bpelt preltelauc one, andtpcthze Kepars of the
bolp thpnges. And out of the citpe be toite a ch-
berlapne, that padthe once(pghte of the menaf
Warre,and.v.men of them that were cuccinthe
Gpriges peelence, whiche were foundein p citpe:
and ppm that was (crpbe to the captapne of the
Dot, whiche baought out the people ofthe lande
to Warre,and thze [coze men of the people of the
lande, that were founde inthecitpe. And Qebus
faradan the chefe captapue of the men o€ warre
toke thele,¢ fee ik tbem tothe kpnere of 6a
bplonto Ribla. And ý kpnge of Babiion (mote
tdem, ghue them at Wiblamp hand of ipanath
And fo Juda thas caried awap out of their land ft
Howwebett, there remapned people in plande
Of Juda whome Nabuchadnesar bpnge of a=
bilonlefte, and made Gedalia the fonne of Xhi-
Bau the fonne of Sapbanculer oucethem.aAny
all the captaps of the fouldpers and other men
Dearde,that thc kpne of Bavilon badmabde Ge
balla gouernet:# there cam to Gevalia at az
jade: {lmael thelonne of acthania, Johann
t of Tkarvea, Haraia the fonne of Than
sce the Nethophatpee, and Fasaania the
neof Paachatt,and theprmen. Aud Geda-
lia fivare tothem , andto themen whome thep
bad wpthtbem,and fapte vato them: feare not
pe becaute pearethe feruauntesof the Chalde=
e8, Dwell inthe lanbde,andferuc the kpng of Ba
bplott,and pe thall be well.
Wat it chaunced in he feuenth moneth, that ©
Emael the fonne of Acthanya the fonne of Elé
ania, ofthe &ynaes bloude, came, and ten men
fie bpni,and finote Gedalia, that bedped:and
fo dpd bethe Jewes, andp Chalaces that were
iopthbymat@ispa. = AA
< Andall the people bothfmall andereate, g
thecaptaines of warre arofe,¢ came to Carp té
fosthep were afrapde of P C baldecs. Rot with:
fandpnge pet tn the (eucn and thp2tpe peareats
ter Jepoacbin yng of Juda was carped ae


Huda


the Lenen and tiwentpedape of the twelueth mo
neth, Euilmerodach king of Wabilon,che tame
ere that be beqanne to rapgne.dpdlptt dp the
ave of Aehoachindapnge of Juda oute of tbe
pripun pakebpndly to bpm: and fette bys
‘cate aboue the leate ofthe kynges that were
wpthbymin Babplou-and chaunged bis
ppiongarmëteg. And Dpd ener cat
2eadbefore bpmtall pdapesofbis -
ipfe.dpis pozcpon toas acontp-
nuall pogcponthbat wagal —
paned bpm of f pug
euctp Daped cer=
tapnaslong *
agbe lp-
ued.


The ende of the Fourth boke of
£ ~ the bpnges.


Cheonpclescalled in Latpn, Gerba dierum: 02
after the Grekes, Paralipomenon: wbich
the Hebsnes call Dibzi Hatamin,
andreken both the bokes
but Foz one.
€. She fp2k chapter.

qr Lbreferebervall of alttye genealo get of godam, and fo

forth bnto the fonnes of Erau and Jatah.
Teea e ‘pamxDeth, Enos, Renan
geneva MEEAVA AS  Machalebel, Jared, Henoch
DAAE rm Ham, g Japheth Che


ELFA.) paea \
| = i- = aS a


| ee I Ae eS: Thubal, Welech,and Thir
BSE Das asthe fonneg of Gomer, Al
Diphath and Chogarma. And the fon:


china


b
neg of Jaunan Elifa and Charitla, Citim, and


odanim. The tonne of pant, Chug and Wil
raim, but and Chanaan. Che tons of Chas,
Siba ¢ Pautla, Dabvetbha,¢ Rabma.¢ Sab-
thecba-And the Connes of Rabma, Seba € De
dan. And Chus begate Mimrod:¢ be beganto
bempadty vpontbe carth. Milraim begat Lu
dmand Anamin, Lababim ¢Mapberbaim, Pha
trulim and Caluim of which came p ~pilitty-
nesand the Caphthozites: Canaan begat sido
his eldeft fonne,and Heth :Febuli atfoe Amo-
rand Girgalt, peut, Arabiand Sintand Ar-
uadi,samart and Hematht. |

‘inte eConnes of Sem, Elam ¢ Allur, Arphac
fad, Lud ¢ Aram and Us, Hul, Gether giha-
fech. Arphaclad begat Selah. Selah berate
Eber. And onto Eber were borne two fonnes:
thename of the one wag Peleg, becaule thatin


Hig dapes the lande wasdenpoded.aAndbhisbro- |


thersname was Joktan. Joktan begat Ximo-
dad and alph pA: and Zerap, pa:
bord allo and Gilal ¢ Dikla, Ebal and Abina:
eland Seba and D phir.dpautla and Jobab.
Alithele Were the fonnes of Joktan * Dem


meur File


i Lbeonicles


Arphaclad, Selah: Eber, Peleg, Jebu, Derug, A
Napo, Cherah, Ab2a,otherw e called Aba
bam. The fonneg of Abzabam, Ifaac ¢ Jimael
Andthele aretbep2 generacpons: x p eldek lon Senerrob
of Blmael was Rabatoth then kedar, beel,
and Wibfam, Mifma and Dumah,B)alka Ha
Dad and Thema, Jetur, Maphis and Kedma.
hele are the fonnes of Bhnaell, thechpl> C

Deen of Hetura E concubpne: the bare
simam, Jokfan, Heda, Midian, Jil bobe and
Suabh.Cbechpldzen of Jokfan, Heba e Deda _
e#DbechplozenofDedan,aturimandLatulimeLaomim. ga + *
‘Tbe ebplbpen of @)idiam , pba, and Ephar,
enoch,Abpda,and Cldaa. * Uthelearethe sene.rros
chpldzen of ketura.

ynd lo Abraham begat Jlabac:the fones of


Babac, Efau and rack. Chelonnesof Claw, oe rccoin.


x Eliphas,Rebuel, Jebus, Jaelam, and iroad
Ehe chpldzen of Eliphas, Eheman, Dmer,ze=

piand Gatha, Kenas, Thimna and Amalek.

becbplozenof Rebuel, Pabatb.serah, San
maand Mia. * Chelonnes of Heit, Lotan, servi.
Sobail.zibeon,and Ana, Dion, Eser and Di-
fan. Chechpldzen of Lotan, Hozi and noum,
and Thimna was Lotans piter. Che chplozen
of Sobal: Alian, Wanaatb, Ebal, Hepht,and
Dnan. The fonnes of sibeon, Ata and Ana.
Andtbefonnes of Ana, Difon. Che fonnes of
Difon,Hanran, Elban, Fithzan, and Cherar:
T be founes of eser, ulban,sacuan andsaba
Ghelounes of Dilan, U3 and aran. |
x Thete are the kpnges tbat rapgned inthe B

lande of Edom, befoze anp hpngerapgned ouer SEFOLe
thecbplozen of fracl. Xela the fonne of 25202:
andthename ape was minbaba. And
weladped,and Jobab p fone of serah of fe
ra rapaned inbps teade. And when Zobabalto
wag deade, Hulam of the lande of the Thema-
nitestapqued in bis teade. And when Dufam ©
wagbdeade, Hadad thefonncof Wedadivbpebe.
{mote idianin the felde of Hoab,raygned in
hig teade and pname of big citpe wag Auith.
So Wabadoped,and Samlaot Gparetba rape
qned in bis meade. And Damla dped,and Daul
ofRebobothbby therpuerfpde, rapaned inpps
teade. And when Saul was dead, Haalhanan
the fonne of Achbozrapguendin bis teade. And
aBaalbanan died, g ipadad rapgned in bis ead


ha andthename of biscitye was abt,and big wp


ueg name Bebetabeel the Doughter of B)atrev
the Daughter of )elahab.

Hadad dpedalfo,and there tere Dukes, in
dom, Duke Thimna, Dube Aliah, and Dube
Fetberh: Duke Apholtbama, Duke Cla, Dube
ae , Duke keuaz Dube Themam , Dube

a seat Wagodiel, and Dube Fram.
‘hele are the Dukes of Edom.

3 C. The.ti. Chapter.

C Tbe cencalogpe of Juda vnto fai the father cf Dauit
merena Dele are the fons of Firacl, Ruben y
KERSEN Simeon, Leut Juda, Aacher,and
Be a pal Gap and Mller Tr

ER Meph ad and Afer. * El

Brae sess fonsof Juda, Er Dnran Sela. a
Thelo the were bopmeto ppm oF ath, ua
- ¢


Huda


the Lenen and tiwentpedape of the twelueth mo
neth, Euilmerodach king of Wabilon,che tame
ere that be beqanne to rapgne.dpdlptt dp the
ave of Aehoachindapnge of Juda oute of tbe
pripun pakebpndly to bpm: and fette bys
‘cate aboue the leate ofthe kynges that were
wpthbymin Babplou-and chaunged bis
ppiongarmëteg. And Dpd ener cat
2eadbefore bpmtall pdapesofbis -
ipfe.dpis pozcpon toas acontp-
nuall pogcponthbat wagal —
paned bpm of f pug
euctp Daped cer=
tapnaslong *
agbe lp-
ued.


The ende of the Fourth boke of
£ ~ the bpnges.


Cheonpclescalled in Latpn, Gerba dierum: 02
after the Grekes, Paralipomenon: wbich
the Hebsnes call Dibzi Hatamin,
andreken both the bokes
but Foz one.
€. She fp2k chapter.

qr Lbreferebervall of alttye genealo get of godam, and fo

forth bnto the fonnes of Erau and Jatah.
Teea e ‘pamxDeth, Enos, Renan
geneva MEEAVA AS  Machalebel, Jared, Henoch
DAAE rm Ham, g Japheth Che


ELFA.) paea \
| = i- = aS a


| ee I Ae eS: Thubal, Welech,and Thir
BSE Das asthe fonneg of Gomer, Al
Diphath and Chogarma. And the fon:


china


b
neg of Jaunan Elifa and Charitla, Citim, and


odanim. The tonne of pant, Chug and Wil
raim, but and Chanaan. Che tons of Chas,
Siba ¢ Pautla, Dabvetbha,¢ Rabma.¢ Sab-
thecba-And the Connes of Rabma, Seba € De
dan. And Chus begate Mimrod:¢ be beganto
bempadty vpontbe carth. Milraim begat Lu
dmand Anamin, Lababim ¢Mapberbaim, Pha
trulim and Caluim of which came p ~pilitty-
nesand the Caphthozites: Canaan begat sido
his eldeft fonne,and Heth :Febuli atfoe Amo-
rand Girgalt, peut, Arabiand Sintand Ar-
uadi,samart and Hematht. |

‘inte eConnes of Sem, Elam ¢ Allur, Arphac
fad, Lud ¢ Aram and Us, Hul, Gether giha-
fech. Arphaclad begat Selah. Selah berate
Eber. And onto Eber were borne two fonnes:
thename of the one wag Peleg, becaule thatin


Hig dapes the lande wasdenpoded.aAndbhisbro- |


thersname was Joktan. Joktan begat Ximo-
dad and alph pA: and Zerap, pa:
bord allo and Gilal ¢ Dikla, Ebal and Abina:
eland Seba and D phir.dpautla and Jobab.
Alithele Were the fonnes of Joktan * Dem


meur File


i Lbeonicles


Arphaclad, Selah: Eber, Peleg, Jebu, Derug, A
Napo, Cherah, Ab2a,otherw e called Aba
bam. The fonneg of Abzabam, Ifaac ¢ Jimael
Andthele aretbep2 generacpons: x p eldek lon Senerrob
of Blmael was Rabatoth then kedar, beel,
and Wibfam, Mifma and Dumah,B)alka Ha
Dad and Thema, Jetur, Maphis and Kedma.
hele are the fonnes of Bhnaell, thechpl> C

Deen of Hetura E concubpne: the bare
simam, Jokfan, Heda, Midian, Jil bobe and
Suabh.Cbechpldzen of Jokfan, Heba e Deda _
e#DbechplozenofDedan,aturimandLatulimeLaomim. ga + *
‘Tbe ebplbpen of @)idiam , pba, and Ephar,
enoch,Abpda,and Cldaa. * Uthelearethe sene.rros
chpldzen of ketura.

ynd lo Abraham begat Jlabac:the fones of


Babac, Efau and rack. Chelonnesof Claw, oe rccoin.


x Eliphas,Rebuel, Jebus, Jaelam, and iroad
Ehe chpldzen of Eliphas, Eheman, Dmer,ze=

piand Gatha, Kenas, Thimna and Amalek.

becbplozenof Rebuel, Pabatb.serah, San
maand Mia. * Chelonnes of Heit, Lotan, servi.
Sobail.zibeon,and Ana, Dion, Eser and Di-
fan. Chechpldzen of Lotan, Hozi and noum,
and Thimna was Lotans piter. Che chplozen
of Sobal: Alian, Wanaatb, Ebal, Hepht,and
Dnan. The fonnes of sibeon, Ata and Ana.
Andtbefonnes of Ana, Difon. Che fonnes of
Difon,Hanran, Elban, Fithzan, and Cherar:
T be founes of eser, ulban,sacuan andsaba
Ghelounes of Dilan, U3 and aran. |
x Thete are the kpnges tbat rapgned inthe B

lande of Edom, befoze anp hpngerapgned ouer SEFOLe
thecbplozen of fracl. Xela the fonne of 25202:
andthename ape was minbaba. And
weladped,and Jobab p fone of serah of fe
ra rapaned inbps teade. And when Zobabalto
wag deade, Hulam of the lande of the Thema-
nitestapqued in bis teade. And when Dufam ©
wagbdeade, Hadad thefonncof Wedadivbpebe.
{mote idianin the felde of Hoab,raygned in
hig teade and pname of big citpe wag Auith.
So Wabadoped,and Samlaot Gparetba rape
qned in bis meade. And Damla dped,and Daul
ofRebobothbby therpuerfpde, rapaned inpps
teade. And when Saul was dead, Haalhanan
the fonne of Achbozrapguendin bis teade. And
aBaalbanan died, g ipadad rapgned in bis ead


ha andthename of biscitye was abt,and big wp


ueg name Bebetabeel the Doughter of B)atrev
the Daughter of )elahab.

Hadad dpedalfo,and there tere Dukes, in
dom, Duke Thimna, Dube Aliah, and Dube
Fetberh: Duke Apholtbama, Duke Cla, Dube
ae , Duke keuaz Dube Themam , Dube

a seat Wagodiel, and Dube Fram.
‘hele are the Dukes of Edom.

3 C. The.ti. Chapter.

C Tbe cencalogpe of Juda vnto fai the father cf Dauit
merena Dele are the fons of Firacl, Ruben y
KERSEN Simeon, Leut Juda, Aacher,and
Be a pal Gap and Mller Tr

ER Meph ad and Afer. * El

Brae sess fonsof Juda, Er Dnran Sela. a
Thelo the were bopmeto ppm oF ath, ua
- ¢


Juda.
the Cananiteffe. And Erf eldelt Conne of Juda
was eucllin the fpgbe of the Lozd, € be flue bin

sacha And Chama his doughter inlatoe bare bim
Pyan AUD sara:and fo all the fonneg of Juda

- werefpue.

bin. Cdelonnes of Phares, beston and Hamul

S EDAD The Connes of savad:simet, Erba, ema, Chal
Chol and Dara:bpch were fpuein all,

Foru.its And F Connes of Charmi, x Acha that trou-

bled Ffracl, tran lavedipng inthe thpnge > was

dampned. Che Cones of Ethan, Asaria. Che fő

nes allo@s Hesron that were bozne pntobpm:

egathin Zerba, Ram g Chelubat. x And Ram be=

Sat Ammadab:and Aminadab begat Pabfon

a lozbe of the chplozen of Juda. And Mahlon be

gat Salma : ¢ Salma begat Boas: oas be-

| beerenb. gat Obed:¢ Obedbeqat Hat. * And Flat be-

© Gat his eldek fonne Eliade Aminadab p lecdd

and Samaa the thpzde, Pathanael the fourth,

and iadat the fpfth, Osem the lprte, and Da-

utd the feueth. Whole fiters weresaruta g Abi-

gail. Che fonnes of seruta, Abtfai, Joab t A3a

Crerbt.c Del:thze. Bnd Abigail bare Amasa: x thefather
of whypch Amasa was Fetber an Ffmaelite.

and Caleb the fonne of Hesron begat Aluba

of his wpfe J fuba and Feriborh, whole fonnes

ave thele: Feler, Sobab and Yrdon. And wien

Auba wag deed, Calebtoke Ephata, wbpche

erorri a VATEDPM Dur. x And Pur begat Uri, and Uhi
"begat Bresaleel.

¢ _. Afrerward came Hesron tothe dougbter of

Bachw the father of Gilead, and toke ber whe

be was thre fcoze pere old. And the bare him He

gub:and Scqud begat Jair, whpeh bad. rrii.

cpticsin the lande of Gilead. And pe ouercame

Scllur and Aram,and toke the townes of Jair

from them Dobpcb owelr in them:¢ Henath and

the townes therof:euenthzefcoze townes. All

. thefe ere the Connes of
Gilead. Andafter tbat Hesron was deadat Ca
lebin Ephrata, Abta Efrons topfe, barepym

G.nsy.itt., * Apurthe father of Thekoa. a

D And Plonnesof Ferbarucel che elpetk Conne
of Hesron Were: Ran theeldefe, Buna, Dzen,
Deng Aiia. And Jerhameel had pet another
topfe named Atbara, wbpch was the mother of
Dnam, And the fonnes of Ram the eldek Conne
of Ferbamcel were Haas, Jamin and Ekar.

The fonnes of Onam were HAmais Jada.
Che fonnes of Hainmat:avab and Bbilur.
and the topfe of Abilur wascalled Abifail, g
the bare pym Abban g Holid. Thelines of Na

E dab:eledand Appaim.And Heled dped with
Sut chpldzen. Chelonie of Jppaim: Felci. And
thefonne of Felei: Selan. And p fonnes of Se-
fant, Mblat. And the fonnes of Fada the brother
of Hamat: Fether and FJonatham. And gether
dped wopthout chplozé. Chefonnes of Jonatha
welethand Gasa. Chele were the fonnes of Fer
bameel. Selan bad no fonnes, but dougbters.
And Selan hada Ceruauntethat was anEgp-
ptian named Jerha:to who he gaue bpsdough=
ter to wpte:and the bare pim Athai. And Athai
begat Mathan:and Pathan begat sabad. And
sabad begat Apblal: an’ Aphlal beat Obed.


LLionieles.


achir, the father of


Tallies,
Obed begat Jebu:and Febu berat Asaria: Bsa
tla begat Males :and Bales begat Seats
begat Spifamat:and,Dilamatberat Sallum.
Dalla begat Jecamta.xecamia begatElifama —

The fonnes of Caleb, the bother of Jerba- Jf
meel: Wela bis elvet fonne,wbpch be tba fae
ther of *3iph:¢ the fonnes of arela the father ire rrii. d
of Hebzon. Che fonnes of Hebron, Corab ETa —
pu ap Rete t Dama. Sama begat Rabam
the father of Ferkoam. And Rekem beat Då-
mai. The fonne of Sammat was Waon. And
aon was the father of Betbsur.

And Epha a concubpne of Calabs bare Pa-
anand Hofa and Gases. Daran begat Gases
Che fonnes of Jabdat were Regem, gotba, be
fan, Bellet, Epha,and Saaph . And Waacha
thas Calebs concubpne, of whom beberat Se
mer and Chirhama. And he bare allo Haaph,
tbe father of )admaxna,and Seua the father niet
of Dachvena:& the father of Gibea * And ach Ae
fa was Calebsdoughter. Thele were the Cones
of Caleb the fonne of Pur thecldeft fonne of E=
piata: Sobal the father of Hpetath Jearim.
Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph
the father of Seth Gader.AndDobal f father
of itppath Zearim bad fonnes,and bela toe the
balfe of the countrep of the manfioug. !

The kpuredes of Lepziath Fearimare thele: 6
the Autbrites.tbe Happuthites,the Hallumathi
tes and Che Halmirattes. And of themcamerhe
sarathites,¢the Ethaulites. Che fone of Hal«
ma,tbe Hethlehemttes,and Dathites the
Glozpe of the boule of Joab, halfe the cottrepe
of the nanftons gat thesaratbites. Che kpnres
des of the wzptersdivelte at Jabes, the Thira-
thptes, the Spmeathites, the Suchatbites, |
* whpcbare the tienites,tbat came of Hemath Favi.t.0
the father of the boule of Rechab,

—- | The.it. Chapter.
C Zr genealcgpe of Dauid in Bebzonandin Jetufalm,
ees Hele were plonnes of Daui which A
gra Were bozne vnto bpmin Pebzon.


re * Cbeeldett Ammon of Abinoam, tiregis


Ke
EON «Wags te Ataclitetie. Che feconde Daniel
risana OF Abigail the Carmelitefie. The

tipzde Abfalom the fonne of WMaacha Dough-

ter of Cbalmat kpnge of Gefur. Che fourth A-

donta plouofagith. Che fyith Hephatia of
Sbital.Chelprteh Fethream bp Egla bis wpfe

T bele (pre were bozne vnto bpm iniebz6:and

there berapqned feucn pere and {pre monetheg,

Andin Feru alem Derapgned.ceriit.peare,

* And thele were bozne vnto bim in Ferulalé i
Simeia, Sobab, Matha and Salomon{tik. of í.ixeg.d.e
Wathiua f doughter of Ammiel, Jbbar aifo x
Eltfama, Elipalct, Noga, Mepheg ¢ Japbia,
Clifama, Cliada g Elippelct,npneimnombze,
Theleare al pfonneso eia ei foned
of concubpnes,and Thamar wasthepe tpfer.

Salomons Conte was Rehoboam; whole
was bia: Bla was pps fonne,€ Jebolaphat
bis fonne:wholelonne was Jozã:and his fonne
was Abasia:and Joas was his fonne. Amasia
bys fonne, Xsariab bps fonne,and Yotbam ipg
fonne. Phas was bys fonne, eens res tonnn


Juda.
the Cananiteffe. And Erf eldelt Conne of Juda
was eucllin the fpgbe of the Lozd, € be flue bin

sacha And Chama his doughter inlatoe bare bim
Pyan AUD sara:and fo all the fonneg of Juda

- werefpue.

bin. Cdelonnes of Phares, beston and Hamul

S EDAD The Connes of savad:simet, Erba, ema, Chal
Chol and Dara:bpch were fpuein all,

Foru.its And F Connes of Charmi, x Acha that trou-

bled Ffracl, tran lavedipng inthe thpnge > was

dampned. Che Cones of Ethan, Asaria. Che fő

nes allo@s Hesron that were bozne pntobpm:

egathin Zerba, Ram g Chelubat. x And Ram be=

Sat Ammadab:and Aminadab begat Pabfon

a lozbe of the chplozen of Juda. And Mahlon be

gat Salma : ¢ Salma begat Boas: oas be-

| beerenb. gat Obed:¢ Obedbeqat Hat. * And Flat be-

© Gat his eldek fonne Eliade Aminadab p lecdd

and Samaa the thpzde, Pathanael the fourth,

and iadat the fpfth, Osem the lprte, and Da-

utd the feueth. Whole fiters weresaruta g Abi-

gail. Che fonnes of seruta, Abtfai, Joab t A3a

Crerbt.c Del:thze. Bnd Abigail bare Amasa: x thefather
of whypch Amasa was Fetber an Ffmaelite.

and Caleb the fonne of Hesron begat Aluba

of his wpfe J fuba and Feriborh, whole fonnes

ave thele: Feler, Sobab and Yrdon. And wien

Auba wag deed, Calebtoke Ephata, wbpche

erorri a VATEDPM Dur. x And Pur begat Uri, and Uhi
"begat Bresaleel.

¢ _. Afrerward came Hesron tothe dougbter of

Bachw the father of Gilead, and toke ber whe

be was thre fcoze pere old. And the bare him He

gub:and Scqud begat Jair, whpeh bad. rrii.

cpticsin the lande of Gilead. And pe ouercame

Scllur and Aram,and toke the townes of Jair

from them Dobpcb owelr in them:¢ Henath and

the townes therof:euenthzefcoze townes. All

. thefe ere the Connes of
Gilead. Andafter tbat Hesron was deadat Ca
lebin Ephrata, Abta Efrons topfe, barepym

G.nsy.itt., * Apurthe father of Thekoa. a

D And Plonnesof Ferbarucel che elpetk Conne
of Hesron Were: Ran theeldefe, Buna, Dzen,
Deng Aiia. And Jerhameel had pet another
topfe named Atbara, wbpch was the mother of
Dnam, And the fonnes of Ram the eldek Conne
of Ferbamcel were Haas, Jamin and Ekar.

The fonnes of Onam were HAmais Jada.
Che fonnes of Hainmat:avab and Bbilur.
and the topfe of Abilur wascalled Abifail, g
the bare pym Abban g Holid. Thelines of Na

E dab:eledand Appaim.And Heled dped with
Sut chpldzen. Chelonie of Jppaim: Felci. And
thefonne of Felei: Selan. And p fonnes of Se-
fant, Mblat. And the fonnes of Fada the brother
of Hamat: Fether and FJonatham. And gether
dped wopthout chplozé. Chefonnes of Jonatha
welethand Gasa. Chele were the fonnes of Fer
bameel. Selan bad no fonnes, but dougbters.
And Selan hada Ceruauntethat was anEgp-
ptian named Jerha:to who he gaue bpsdough=
ter to wpte:and the bare pim Athai. And Athai
begat Mathan:and Pathan begat sabad. And
sabad begat Apblal: an’ Aphlal beat Obed.


LLionieles.


achir, the father of


Tallies,
Obed begat Jebu:and Febu berat Asaria: Bsa
tla begat Males :and Bales begat Seats
begat Spifamat:and,Dilamatberat Sallum.
Dalla begat Jecamta.xecamia begatElifama —

The fonnes of Caleb, the bother of Jerba- Jf
meel: Wela bis elvet fonne,wbpch be tba fae
ther of *3iph:¢ the fonnes of arela the father ire rrii. d
of Hebzon. Che fonnes of Hebron, Corab ETa —
pu ap Rete t Dama. Sama begat Rabam
the father of Ferkoam. And Rekem beat Då-
mai. The fonne of Sammat was Waon. And
aon was the father of Betbsur.

And Epha a concubpne of Calabs bare Pa-
anand Hofa and Gases. Daran begat Gases
Che fonnes of Jabdat were Regem, gotba, be
fan, Bellet, Epha,and Saaph . And Waacha
thas Calebs concubpne, of whom beberat Se
mer and Chirhama. And he bare allo Haaph,
tbe father of )admaxna,and Seua the father niet
of Dachvena:& the father of Gibea * And ach Ae
fa was Calebsdoughter. Thele were the Cones
of Caleb the fonne of Pur thecldeft fonne of E=
piata: Sobal the father of Hpetath Jearim.
Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph
the father of Seth Gader.AndDobal f father
of itppath Zearim bad fonnes,and bela toe the
balfe of the countrep of the manfioug. !

The kpuredes of Lepziath Fearimare thele: 6
the Autbrites.tbe Happuthites,the Hallumathi
tes and Che Halmirattes. And of themcamerhe
sarathites,¢the Ethaulites. Che fone of Hal«
ma,tbe Hethlehemttes,and Dathites the
Glozpe of the boule of Joab, halfe the cottrepe
of the nanftons gat thesaratbites. Che kpnres
des of the wzptersdivelte at Jabes, the Thira-
thptes, the Spmeathites, the Suchatbites, |
* whpcbare the tienites,tbat came of Hemath Favi.t.0
the father of the boule of Rechab,

—- | The.it. Chapter.
C Zr genealcgpe of Dauid in Bebzonandin Jetufalm,
ees Hele were plonnes of Daui which A
gra Were bozne vnto bpmin Pebzon.


re * Cbeeldett Ammon of Abinoam, tiregis


Ke
EON «Wags te Ataclitetie. Che feconde Daniel
risana OF Abigail the Carmelitefie. The

tipzde Abfalom the fonne of WMaacha Dough-

ter of Cbalmat kpnge of Gefur. Che fourth A-

donta plouofagith. Che fyith Hephatia of
Sbital.Chelprteh Fethream bp Egla bis wpfe

T bele (pre were bozne vnto bpm iniebz6:and

there berapqned feucn pere and {pre monetheg,

Andin Feru alem Derapgned.ceriit.peare,

* And thele were bozne vnto bim in Ferulalé i
Simeia, Sobab, Matha and Salomon{tik. of í.ixeg.d.e
Wathiua f doughter of Ammiel, Jbbar aifo x
Eltfama, Elipalct, Noga, Mepheg ¢ Japbia,
Clifama, Cliada g Elippelct,npneimnombze,
Theleare al pfonneso eia ei foned
of concubpnes,and Thamar wasthepe tpfer.

Salomons Conte was Rehoboam; whole
was bia: Bla was pps fonne,€ Jebolaphat
bis fonne:wholelonne was Jozã:and his fonne
was Abasia:and Joas was his fonne. Amasia
bys fonne, Xsariab bps fonne,and Yotbam ipg
fonne. Phas was bys fonne, eens res tonnn


Suda.


A
gererbif.g [ie
BB. FIBID. jE


€ anafle bps fonne. And Amon was pis fone
and Jolia was bysloune.aAnd the fonnes of Fo
{tab tere: the eldettfonne Jobanan, the feconde
Achoakim, the thpzde sedekia, andthe fourth,
Sallum. Che lones of Jeboakim were, Jecont
a) bys onne,andsedekiah bps fonne.
€ Chelone of Jeconia: Aificand Schealthiel
bpstone.@)alchiram allo and bedata, Dena
cb, Jecamia, Holaina and Nebadia. The fones
of Bedaia wereso9babel,and Semel: F (ones
of sozrobabel, Belulam, Hanania, and Selu-
mith:thepz piter g Balubab, Dbel, Werechia,
Haladia,and Judlabbeled,fpuein nombre.
D  Chelonnes of Hanania: Pelatta,e Aclata:
wobofe fonne was Rephaab, andbpsfonne Ar-
nan,and pis tonne was Dbabdaia, and bis fine
SDechanta. The foime of Sechaniah was De-
maia. Anè the fonnes of Semaia were Hatus
Ageal: Bartap:Naariah ¢ Daphat g Sela. vi.
And the fonneg of Qaariad were Eltonat:Pese
31a, and Azricam,thze. And the fonnes of Elio-
nat Were: Hodaiah, Cliath, Bheleia, Akub, Fo
panam: Dealata and Anani:fenen.
| CThe.itti. Chapter.
@ The genesiogpe of (hefouncs of Juba and
Spiron.
mees ie fonnes of Juda: + Phares, Pes-
eA Eiron Carmi Hur and Sobal. And
4 ¥7—9 Rata the fone of & obal begat Fa
KC? aa bath. And Jabath begat ADyumat
ness and Labad: and thele arethekpnre
Des of the sozoathites. And of thele came theta
ther of Etham: Jeltacl, Jifma and Fidbas:and
the name of thep2 (pier was Daslelpeni. pan
el was tbefather of Gedor. Ano Efer the father
of Hula. And thele are the fonnes of Pur theel-
Deft fonne of Ephata the father of Wethlebem.
And Apur the father of Cheboa, bad two wp
ues: HeleabandNaara. And Maarabarehbym
Abufan, Hepper, Themni and Haaart.T hele
torre thefonncs ot Paarah. Andthefonnes of
Deleab foeresareth, Jesoat andEthnam, Fnd
os begat Anub:andsobeba,and the kpnred of
Abarbel the fonne of Harum. |
W And Jabes was moze honourable then bps
bethan. Bnd bys mother calleahpsname Fa-
bes,fapenge:becanle J bare bpm wpth fozowe
And Jabes called on the God of Firael,fapeng
Pitou wrlt blee me tn dede , and enlargemp
cooftes,¢ thalt let thpne bande be with me,and
Wpithepe me from cuell,thactithurteme not?
And Godgrauntedhvmbypsdelpre.
€ Chbelubthe brother of Suab begat Dehir,
. Mhych was the father of Ethon. And Ethobe
at Wethrapha, and Paleba t Thebenna the
ther of wee eat Nabas: thele are the mé oF
Reha. Che fonnes of ieenas:Drbnicl and Sa
vaia. andthe fonnes of Dthniel were Hatbhate.
And Meonathi begat Ophran. And Heraia
begat Joab thefatheroftbe Yallepe of craftes
men(focalled bpcaule thep toere craftefmen.
And thefonnes of Caleb the fonne of Aephune,
were: Ju; Ela and Maan. And the fone of Ela
was Licnas. And the fonnes of Fehalelel were:


sipbandsipbab, Thiria and Alarel.And ffon-


LLhronicles.


nes of Esra were Fethit and ered, Epher,Ja
lon, Tbhahar, and Miriam, and Sammat, and
Jilbab the father of Efthbemoa. Andhys wyfe
$ehudta bare Jared p father of Gedoz,and He-
ber the father of Socho,and Jeruthiel p father
ofsanoah. And thele are the fonnes ot Kithat
the Doughter of Bharao,wbych Sered toke.
‘The lonnes of the vwopfe of Hodia , the {pfter of
Nathan the father of Heilay were Barmi, and
€fthbemoa p Waachathdite. Che fonnes of Sp-
meon were Jmmonand Rimua. Wenhanan g
Chilon. And the fonnes cf Zilli Ww? igs sobcth,
and Wensobheth.

x The fonnes of Selah the fonne of Juba


were €r the father of Lecha,and Laada the fa- gerrig


ther of s)arela, and the kpnredes of the boules
poldes of themtbat wzougbt lynnenin f beufe
of Albea. And Jokim and the men of Chofebah
and Joas,¢ Saraph, whpcb bad the Dominion
in oad, and Jalubi, Lebem. Chele alfo are
wozdes of olde. Chete were potters, and dwelt
there amonge trees hedges npe tuto pkynge
becaule of bps worke.


The lines of Spmed were Hemucl, Jamin, Œ


Jarib,scraband Haul: whole fine was Salli
ethefon of bpm was Diblam,¢ bis Tonne Wif
ma: And the onne of Wilma was Hamuel,and
bps tonne was sachur, andthe lone of bim was
Semet. Hemet had.rvi.fones,¢. vt. doughters
Wut bis beeth2é bad not many childzen,nepther
Wasall the kpured of them Ipke tothe chpldzen
of Juba in multitude. And thep dwelt at Seer
feba, Dolada , tat Hasar Sual, at Wilba,at
Esem, and Cholad,at DHcthuel, at Homa and
atsiblag,at ethmarcaboth, Hazar, Sulim,
at Wethvirei,andDat Haaraim.

Ghele were theprcpties onto the rapqne of
mpauib. And thepz vpllages were Etan, and
Ain, Kimmo, Cochen and Afan , fue townes
and altbep2 bpllages that were rounde abou ce
the fame cpties vnto Waal: Chysis the babita
cpon of them,and thep2 genealogpe.


olovab and Zamlech,and Jola ? fonne of +


Rmalaa:and Joe! ¢ Jebu the fonne of Folibia,

the fonne of Sarata, the fonne of Afiel,and €-

lionaei æ Jaacoba, Flopata,andAfaiah, Adil,

4fimiel and Benata, ¢3i3a thelon of Schibbe,

the fon of Alon, thefonne of Feoaia, p fonne of

semri,thefon of Spemicta. pele are famous ca
itapnes tn thep2 kpnredes,fettpnge bp great.
pethe boule of tbey: fathers.


‘And thep wenttotbhe eitrpnge in of cdo: 6


cucn tntto the ealte [pide of the valley, tofcke pa
ture for thep2 thepe. Ane they fond fat pafture
and good and a pode lande, quiete anbieutfull
fortbep of Mam had divelt therebefoze. And
thefcnowe afoze weptten by name, came inthe
dapes of Hezekia kpnge of Fuda,and {note the
tentesof them, ethe babitactons $ were found
there,and deftroped them vtterlp vnto this dap
and dwelt in thep2 rommes: bpcaute there bas
patture there Foz thep2 mepe. |
And Come of the chplozen of Spmeon twente
to moŭt cir euen. v.bidzedD mendaupuge foz
thepa captapnea, Pprlathia Menria,Raphala,
an


Simeon,


uber.


15


and Ciztel the fonnes of Flt: and (mote theret
ofthe Amalekptes that were efcaped,and thep
dwelt there tuto thps dape.

 The.v. Chapter.


C The gencalogpe of Ruben i AARMA ofthe halle
trebe of panatle.


Cae UTS beep pave was gpuen wnto the
Connes of Joleph the Conneof Flrael.poroveit,


fhe gencalogic isnot rekened after bys bpath=


rpabt. Jeor Juda,he preuapled aboue his bze-
then, and of tppstrpbecame the chefe, andthe
bpatbapabt was gpué to Jofeph. Che lones the
of Rubë the eldett tonne of racl were Henoch
balu, Hesron and Charmi. The Cones oF Fort
Samatah bis am eer bys fonne and Sem
bíi bps Conne, Wicab bis Lonne, Reaia his fonne
and Baal bis fonne, Beera bis fon: whom Thi
garv Bui kpnge of Affirta carpedawape:

ozbe Was agreatelogdDeamonge the Rubeni-
tes. And oben bps bacthzeninthep2 kpnredes,
reficned the qenealogpe of thepz generactons:
Feiel andsachartach were the chete.

And Baal the fonne of Asan, the fon of Sem
thefonne of Joel dweltcin Arocr: andflotozry
unto Mebo and Maalincon. And caltwarde, pe
inbabpted vuto p entepnge tu of the topiderneg


from therpuce Cupheates ,fozthepbadmuche | z 6


cattellin the lande of Gilead.
Andin the dapes of Haul thep tarred with


the aqarites, whtche were ouerthzowen into |


thep2 bande. And thep dwelt in thepztentes tho
rowout all the cat lande of Gilgal. |
Xndebechplozen of Gad dwelt ouer again


LL YONIcies,


And they toke of thep2 cattel, and ofthep? ca
els Epftpe thoufande and two bided, and Fo
tpetboutande thepe, and two thoulande afleg,
and of the foules of men an bundzedthoufande,
and there fell many wounded, bycaule p warre
wag of Ged. And thep otvelt in thep: tedes, on
tplltbe tpme that thep Were carped awape .
And thechpldzen of the baltetrpbhe of Wa- yp
nafle Dwelt inthe lade from Wafan unto Baal
Permon and Semir, € nto mounte Hermon:
foz thep were growen toa great multitude. And
thele were the peades ofthe boutholdes ofthepz
fatbers:Epber and Feli Elieland Asriel Jere-
mia and Hovania, and Jobdiel ronge men and
valeaunt famous men, and peades of the pout:
boloves of thep2 fathers. |
And toep trantgreffedagapnike the God of
thep2 fathers, and wente a wbozpnge after the
goddess of the people of the lande, whome God
Deftroped befoze them: and God pred vp the
fpzete of bul kinge of Aflpzia. And thelpzete
of Thigiach Prlneler kpnge of Ailpata, and ca-
rpedthentatbape:cuen the Wubenites,the Gad
Dites,and the balfe tribe of Banafle,¢ brought
them wto Dalab Haboz, Hara:and to the rtuer


Golan, vntothpsdape.


C The. vi.Chapter:
© Whe genralogpe of the fonnes of Eedi.


wg, De Lonnes of Leut:Gerfon, Cabath 4


TA E} Amram, Jabar, ebon and Uzul
efi <4 The chyldzen of Amram: Aaron
WSs Holes € Biria. Che fonnes alfoo
Aaron, Qadab, Abibu, Eleazar : ¢ Ithamar.,
Eleasar begat Bhinebes. Pbinebes begat Abi
fua. Bbifua begat Boki. Woki begat U.U


SCOLILE


mei q Derari.* The tonnes of Cabath, Sene.rivib


begatsarapia saraiba begat @aratoth. Wa-
ratoth begat Ainarta,e maria begat Abitob
Abitab begatsadoc:and sadoc begat Abimaaz
Abimaas begat saria, and Asaria begat Jo-
pana. Jobana begat Asaria , Whpchmpntitred
in the temple that Salomon bupit in Jerulalë.

x Asaria begat Amaria. maria begat ADi- t.parrore
tob.Abitob begat zadac,andzadoc begat Sal:
lum. Sallum begat Helkta, and Helkta begat fire.rrib
Asaria. Asaria begat Haraia,andt Darata be tiikeri
gat Jebosedech. And Jehosedech departed wp F”


tbem inthe lande of Salan-euen ynto Halcha.
And in alan Focl was the chefell , and a=
pham the nerte, then Janarand Saphat.And
thep2 brethzenof the houtholde of theyz fathers
were ichacl,@eolucla, Seba, Fora, Facha
ia, Eber, feuen. Chele are she chplozen of Abi-
ail:the fon of uri, theLone of Feroab,the fone
of Sticab,thefonne of Michael, the fonne of Fe
lai rhe Tonite of Jahdo,the tonne of wus. Ayi
. (the fonne of Zbdiel) the fonne of Suni, was a
captapne of the houtpolde of thepz Fathers. And


thepdweitin Gileadin Balan, and ther tow
nes,and inall theSpuburbes of Saron, and in


thev2 borders.
ed


Il thefewere rekened bp kynredes inthe
dapes of Jotbam bpnge of Fuda,tin the dapes
of 3evoboain bynge of Firal.
2 ube and of Gad, Ethe halfe tepbe of G)analle
soere fpaptpuge men and ableto beare hploe g
{wearbe, andto Mote tpth botve,ercercpled in
warre enen foure and fourtpe thoufande, feuen
Hundsed ana thre kozep went out tothe warre.
Audehep fought wopth p <A Sp ee wpth Je-
tur, ACpHis and Nodab. And hep were helped
of the Lorde acapnit them, and the Hagarites
were Delpucredintothep2 bande,and fo were al
that were with chem. Woz they crpcd to Godin
the battaple,and be bearde them, bpcaute thep
put thep: trui indpin. SRR, |


be fonnes of-


the Lozdecarpedatoape Juda and Jerufalem,
bp tbe bande of Rabuchovonalo? .


x Toelonnesaf Leni:Gerlom, Cabath and Bog


Werari. And thefe be the names of f fonnes of
Gerfon:Libni and Simbi. Andthefonnes of
Cabath were aae r:ebzon ¢ Wiel.
The Cones of Aerart:Hablie Vulia thele ar
the kpneedes of Leniconcernpng thep2 fathers
‘Tbe fonne of Gerfom wasLobni, whole fon
roas Jabath,and bis (ounce semmna,¢ bys fonne
Joab and bysfonne 3ddo, bys fonne serah,€
bps onne Jeathrat. Che fonnes of Cabath: A=
minadab, and bps fonne Hozab, andhpsfonne
Afp: and his fonne Elcana,and bpsfonne Ebt
alaphand bps fonne Afo? : and Chabath was
bys fonne:and Cisiel bys Conne: and Uta bys
fonne:and Saul was bps tonne.
-Tpelonnes of Elcana: Amalai: and Apt-
% ui. mofp


AEL


woth ¢ Cleana. The fonnes of Elcana, sopbat,
whofe lonne was Pabath, ebys fonne Eliab;
and Feroham byg fonne, and Cleana bys fonne
and Samuel thefonne of bpm. And the fonnes
of HSainuel:the cldekk:Cia{ni and Xbia.

Che fonnes of Herari: Bablt,ebpsfonne
Libut,and bys fonne Simbi g bys fonne tsa,
and bys fone Simba, ¢ bps tonne Hagia, and
bys tonne Alia.


€ Mndthele be they whome Dauid fet for to


fynge in the boule of the Lode, after p the arke
hadretl. Andthep mpniftred before the awel-
Ipnge place, and the Tabernacle of wytnefle w
Epua pnge, bittyl Salomon badbuyle the boule
ot the Lozdein Jerufalem. And then thep wap-
tcd on thep2 offices, accogdpnae to the order of
them. ‘Cheleare thep that wapted wyth thepz
chplozen, of the fonnes of Cabath : Hema a fpu-
ger, wh pch wag the Conne of Joel, the fonne of


mente Demuel the fonne of+Elcana, the Conne of Je-


€


yoritib


anori b


robam, tbe fonne of Eliel, the Conne of Choad,
the fentie of suph, p fonne of Elcana , the fonne
of BDebath, tpelonne of Amaflat, thefonne of
Elcana,plonne of Joel,the Tonne of Faria, the
fonne of sephanta, the fonne of Thabath,p lone
of Ap, the fonne of Cbialaph, the fonne of Ko
cab,tbe Lonne of Jfabar the fone of Cabath, the
fomne of Leui:the fonne of 3frael.

Audhys bother Afaph ode on bpsepghte
bande, and Alap) tas the fonne of Warachia,
the Conne of Simba, the fonne of Bichaell, the
fonne of Waalata, the Conne of Melchia,p fonne
of Atham, the fonne of sarab, p fonne of Adaia
the fonne of Ethan, tbe Conne of sima,tbefonne
of Simbi the Conne of Jabath, the fone of Gera
Fom, the Cone of Leui,

And thep2 beetbzen $fonnes of erariftode
dü the lefte bande: euen Ethan the fonne of Rili
the fonne of Abdi the fonne nine hag @ fonne
of Halabta , the Lorine of Amasia, the fonne of
Helita the foune of Amst, the onne of Wani, ý
fonne of Samer,the fonine of Wabli, thefonne
of Dul the Lonne of erart,the lonne of Leut.

Thep: brethren alfo p Leuites were appoin
ted brite all maner of {erutce of the Tabernacle
ot the boule of God. But Zard and bps fonnes
burnt incenfe pon the aulter of burnt offry ng
gon the aultet of incenfece Were appointed Eo?
all (hat wasto do inthe place mot bolp,andto
make an attonemét fo? thé of Ffrae according
toal p Doles p feruañt of 600 bad c maüded,

_Tbeieare p Connes of Jaron:Eleasar whofe
foune wag Phinebes, and bps lome Abifua, g
bys fonne Boki: whofe fonne was Usiand bps
fonneserabia:and tbe foune of bpm eraioth,
and bys tonne Amaria:¢ thefonne of hym : Api
tob and sadoc bps fonne, ¢ Abima a3 Dis fonne.
_ and theleare thetwellpnee places of them
(thozowout thep2 townes andcoattes) eucn of
the Connes of Xaron thozowout the Kpured of
tye Caatbites, fo2 fo the lotte fel fo2 them. And
thep qane vnto them * Hebron inthe lande of
luda aud the fuburbes therofrounde about it.
Wut the Felde of the eptic,and the bpllages per-
capnpuge therto, thep gaue to Caleb the fonne


of Fephune. And to thefonnes of Aaron thep
gaue the cptics of refuge: cuen Hebron and Lib
na, wpth thep? fuburbes, Jathic and €ithemea
wrth thep2 fuburbes: and Hilen with ber fubur
bes,and Dabir wpthher fuburbeg : Alang ber
fuburbes, Sethlenies gher fuburbes. And out


of the trpbe of WenFamin, Gebaand ber fubur —


bes, Alemeth andher fuburbes, Anathoth and
ber fuburbes , all thep? cpties thozowont theps
kpntedeswerethbpetene. == $
And wnto the fonnes of Cabath the remnañt
of the kpnne of the trpbe, there cpties geuen out
of the Halfe trpbe of Hanae bp lotte: cuenten
cpties. And the founes of Gerlom thozowoute
thep2'bpnvredes,bad out of the trpbe of Jlachbar
out of p tribe of Aler g out oF the tribe Of Neph
tbali: g out of thetrpbe of )anaffein Balan,
thpatene cpties.And onte the fonnes of Wera-
ti were qpucnbp lof tbo2ow ont thep2 kpnreds
Dut of the trpbe of Ruben, gout of the trpbe of
Gad, out of p trpbe of sabulon,tivelue cptics.
Andehechplozen of Slrael aue the Leuites
cPtics with thep2 fuburbes,¢ that bp lor, ont of
the tribe of tbe chpldzen of Juda , and out of the
trpbe of tie chpldzen of Simeon,and out of the
trpbe of the chplozen of Wen Jamin, thele cptics
wbpch thep called bp ed tab |

And thep that were of the kpnredes of f fon-
nes of i ag 2 a cpties and thep2 coattes ont
of the trpbe of p ; ;
them cptics of retuge: Sichem inmoüt €phza-
im and ber fuburbes, Caler æ her fuburbes, Foc
meam and ber fuburbes, Sethho26 and ber fub-
urbes, Sialon and ber fuburbes, Geth Rimm
aud ber fuburbes. And out of the baltetrpbe of
Danalle, Aner and her fuburbes, and Bileam
and berfuburbes fon tbe tpnred of the remnatit
of thefonnes of Cahath.

Ænd onto the fonnes of Gerfom were genen
out of the kpnred of the balfe trpbe of Hanae
Solonin Datlan, and her fuburbes, aud Athos
rotbanbd her fuburbes. Dut of the trpbe of Figs
char, ikedes and ber fuburbee, Dabzath and ber
fuburbes, Ramoth alfo g ber fubutbes, Anem
and ber fuburbes. And out of Aficr, Dalall and
Her fuburbes, Abdon and ber fuburbes, Hukok
and Der fuburbes, Rebob eberfuburbes. Dut
of the tribe of Mephthalt, Redes in Galileaant
Het fubucbes, Hammon and her Caburbes, Riri
athattm and ber fuburbes,


And vnto the relk of the chplozenof Merari G
Were qpuen out of the trpbe of sabuld, Rimm


and ber fuburbes, Tha voz and her faburbes.
and onthe other {poe Jodan bp Jericho, cuen
on the ealt {pde of Jozda,were gpuen them out
of the trybe of Ruben: Weserinthe wyplocrues
wyth ber fuburbes: Jabsab wpeb ber fuburbes
de demoth Myth ber fuburbes, Dephath wth
ber {uburbes. Dut of f trpbe of Gad, Ramoth
tn Gilcad with ber fuburbes, Babanaim with
ber {uburbes, Helebon wpth pet fuburbes >and
azezer pth ber fCuburbes,


@ The. vit.Chapter.


CMe genealagre of Hlachar. Sen FZamin, ephtdall
Hanae, Spygarn,and afer, PONG
Che


HEU,


Haiin.xAnd thep gaue yuo zorurct.


|


fs a or I eaat rieh | i :
Benjami. i Lijouitics. JOLIE.
A gamma Ie formes of Flachar: Thola, Bhua, ued, Evare bym a forte: and he called thename

7p) gatub,Simeonfoure. And the fons of it, eria:vpcaule it went enpl with bys bou-

RA INF nes of Chola : Uist, aRephata, Fertel, Cpolde.And bys dougyter was Seera : whpcde

py WE] Jamai, Jebfan and Hehruuel wbich Duplee Bethozdthenether tallo the vpperand

"were heades í Shoutoldesok thepz Wan Syecra. dnd Raphab was his fon:whote

fathers of Chola,men of mpage intbepekpnre fonne twas Weleph, and Thelah : whole lonne

ve pitit a DES, xwOole nobze Was intbedapes of maud, was Thabam:andhpslonie Lavan: andhps
two and twoentpe thoulande,andfyrebundzed. fonne Amipud.and pps fonne Elifama, and big
he tonnes of Wi: Fsrabia. The fonnes of 3z- forme Hun, and ps tonne Sebofua. -

rabia: Wichacl, Abadia, Joel and Fcfiah, fpue Thep: polfeMiongehabıtacion was in e= JE

menallcaptapnes. And wpth them in thep? ge phe the townes that longed therto,and puto

neracions after the poutbalde of thepz fathers ecalt of Qaaram, qon the toellfpde of Gaser
ss toere [pre and fhpetpe thoufande fouldpers wpth the cownestocrof, Sechem €the tones

| and balcaunt men of warre: Fog they bad manp therof, #data ¢ the cownes therof,¢ aldg bp the
wpuegand fontes.And thep2 beethacn amonge bozders of the childzé of manatle ‘Wethlean and

- alltbekpneedes of Bachar were valeaunt men her totones, Chaanach F her covones, Mitt
of warre, reckened inall foure froze and feuen bo q bertowneg, € oz € ber totones: Fu thole
thoufande. | welt the chplozen of Jofeph the fon of S{rael.

% Shelonnegof BenJamin:2ela,Wecher, The loues of Aler: Jimna, selua, Jluat,and ©
and Jedicl:thee. The lonnes of Wela: Cbon, Berta, & Sevab thers (pier. Che Cones of Be-
Uzi Cisicl, Jerimoch and Fri, fpuebeabes ofp tia, zeberand GHelchicl, whiche ts the father of
Houlbolves of af fathers,menofimpgdt,and 2oirlaith. And Dephee begat Jephlet , Homer

Ü


ps
ñ


ivete rekened bp p qencalogpes.xreit.tboufand Hotham. q Sua was thep2 (piter. Thelones of
and thpatpe and foure. FJapvlet, Palaph, Simhall e Ainah. Theleare
Shelonnes of Wecber: semira, Joas Eliezer che chplozen of Fapblet. The fomes of Semet,
Eltonai, Dmri, Ferimoth, Abia, Anathoth.t AhiRobaa, Febuba card. And p tones of bys
AMlamath.And all thele ave thechplozen ofe- brotber:elemsophah, Jina, Seles € Amall.
cher and the nombze of them after thep: genea- Thelones of 30pbab, Suab, Yarnepher, Sual
logpe€ generactons,and captapnes of chou- Ieri, Jira, Weser: od, Hama, Silla Feta,
foldes of thep2 fathers men of mpabttwentp and Weera. Che (ones of Jetber, Zephune, Pil-
thoufande and two bundzed. T eConnes of Fe- pat Aro. Tho lanes of Dla, Areb, Hanitell,and
diel: Wilban. The fonnes of Bilhan: Jeus, Een Resta. AU thele were the chpldzen of Aler, and
= gamm, ha tp Canaana,zetha, Charlese heedesof thepe fathers boules, noblemen: and
hilabar. AU thele are the fonnes of Fcdicl,au- nipgbty beedcaptaynes. @benowbze thozow-=
event heades ¢ men of warre.rvit.&). andtwo out theqencalogpe of them that there apt to the
tse oc ater Sewers y plaen ¢ war and battalewas.revt.thoufande men.
Ssuppimand upim Wweretbechpidzen or ptti.Cbapter.
| ae yno the Dulites were tbecdpldzen of Aber. BS ipdn a ath
: è j @befonnes of MepHtbalt: {absiel, Suni, Fe- ey En Jamin begate Belabpseloete 3
| prone ee 5 OU ANA Dalum: T He chpidzen oix Bipa. die P ED ye) fonne, Aibel the feconde: and Apa-
o Sd onnies oF Manae: Asriel whome (bpswpte) | Poe, ratbthe thpzde: Moab the fourth:
bare ynte bim:but Aramiab bis cOcubpuebare Fy pay pand Rapbeh the f fth.And the fon
Machir thefather of Gilead. And Machir toke batons nes of ela were ver, Gera Abis
sp wopues foz Huptm g Supi o¥ pps tonnes.) And pud, abifna, Paaman and Aboba, Gera, Sr-
the name of bis {iter was Maaca. Aud fname pbhupban,and Duran: Andtbele are thefonues
puroi b of an other fonne was3clophabad. x And5elo- of Ebud:and thele ate auncient beades amonge
atid-FFot. phahadhad doughters. And Maacha thewpfe theinbabpters of Grba: € thepcarped themi to
of Bachir barea fon and called bys name be gpanabath, Naaman, Ahia and Gera, tbhpcbe
re3,andtbe name of bys brother teas 5eres: and Geracarped them awape:andbegat Ula and
ppsfonnes were Ullamand Reken. *Mhibud. Andhe begat Saharan inthe Feld of
D. e fonnes of Ulla, weda: Chele are fon- sHoab,afterhebad fent them away. putin al-
-D neg of Gilead f fonne of Machir, ğ lonng o ga fo ¢ aavah were hys topucs. And be begat of
nalle. And bps (pier Dolecath bare Jetyud: a podeshps pfe, Fobabandstbea, Gelaand
Pieler and abelah . And plonnesot Semida Halchawt, Jeus and Sachia q eHirma, Chele
were Abiam,Dechem, Likehiand Anibam. were bps fontes and anncient fathers. |
The fonnesof Ephzaim: Suthalap : whole And of Hulim pe begat Apitod and Elpaal, 15
fonne wah Wered:and eT et. che founes of Clpaal were Eber, Hitabamt
pes fonne Gladab:¢ Chabathhistonne,e S4- Samed, whpche buplt Dno: Lod tthe tones
< ab bys fonne:¢ Suthelab bps fonne:and Cler therof: Geria g Secma wereauncient fathers a
and Elead. And the men of Gath p were bone monge the enabtrours of Aiala:¢ they daue a
FA intbatlande,flue them:bpcaule thatthep were Wape the inbabptours of Geth. And aio SDa-
| comedowne to tabea wape thep2 cattel . And facand Gerimoth: Sebadia: Ared and Ader:
Epbaimebepefathermourned manpadaye,e Michaely Jifpa:and Joba: f Connes of Berta:


Hysbretheencametocomfoztedpm. ` zebadta: eHelullam: Bese s Heber: Fimerat
e And when pbe wente into bps wpfe the chcep= alfoand Jeliap: Jabab the fones of Gikan


OC Vat, LEDUS, Leui,


T Jakim andsich and Habdai,Clicnai,silthai, thefonne of Adicl,the fon of Fehsrab,tbe fon o€


and Cliel Xora and Weraia, estneeth the fon-
nes of Simbi, Fifpan, Eber and Eliel, Abdon,
and stcctand Panan, Panania, Elcame Antho
thia, Jepheta and benuel the lines of Hatac.
And Samblerai, Sebaris e Athaltab, Jarcfia,
Elia:andsicri f fonnes of Feroba. ‘CHele were
aunctent fathers¢ captapnes in thep2 kpnteds,
and ehele dwelt in Jerufalem. And at Gibeon,
dwelt Abi Gbe, whole pfe was called a
_ acbad. And bps eldeft fonne was DRbds: thé sur
Cis, Baal,and Padab, Gedo, Abio and sacher
And wHikloth begate Simea. Andebheleallo
Dwelt wpe thep2 brethzein Jerufalem oucra-


<Heflullaim,the foniue of ell! omith, the fon of
Smmoz. And chep2 beethzen which were beadeg
of P aunciét boutboldes of thep2 fathers a tlou:
fandefenen bundscd and tize froze actpue men,
Foz the worke of the ferutce of the boule of God:

And of the Leuptes, Semeta the fon of Pa-
fub,the fonne of Airicam, the fonof Haflabara,
of plonnes of erat. Jnd Wacbaker and He-
res and Galal. And Qathania the Tonne of BE
cab,the fonne of stchet,the fonne of Xfapb. And
Obedia thefonne of Semeia, thelonne of Ga-
lal,the foune of Jouthi. and wWerechia the fone
of Sfa,thefonne of Elcana that dwelt in p vpl


I
i ee er a


eues ipa Javnt hem. Mer begatCis,andxCisbeaate lages of the Nethopatis. =
Saul, Haul begat sehonathban, Walchilua, x The porters were Halli, Achub, Calms m
Abinadab ¢ Clbaal. And plonof Febonathas Ahimon, andthepz brother, Sallum, wasthe t.etesic


thas <Hertbbaal:and Bertbbaal begat Micah
= And the Lonnes of Dicah were Hitha, Weleh,
Charea and Ahas.And Abas begat Jehoiada.
Aud Jehotada begat Alemeth, alinaueth,and
zimri:simri begat Hosa. Wosa begat Winea,
whole fonne twas Rapha, andbps fonnewas
Elala and bps fonne Azel. Bnd Azel hadipre
fones, tohole namesare thele:Elricam, Bochi
$(mael, earia, Dbadia and Hanan. All thele
were the fonnes of Asel. And Plounes of Eleke
His bzotber were: Ti llam bis eldelk, Jebus the fe
conde,and Elipbelet the thpzdc. And the fonues
of Ullam Were mpgbtpe men, and ftrongear«
chers and bowmen, and bad many fonnes and
Connes fonnes, an bundzedand fpftpe . All tbele
are of the fonnes of Ben Jamin,


chefe. Eo: thep watched hetbverto, euë wnto the .


kpnges mate ealttharde, thorowoute the tentes
of ibe ch: ld of Leui. Jnd Halli the fon of Co»
rab tbhefun of Abtalaph the fone of Coah, and


Dis brethzé theCozathites (of the boule of thep2 -


fatier) bad thepz bulpnefie ¢ offpce takepe the
pozches of the tabcrnacie,and thep2 fathers the
hooft of the Lo2b, kept the entring. And pine
hes the fon of Eleazar was thep2forequypode , €
the Lo2d was with bun. Andsacharia the fone
bf Gelelemta kepte the woatche before the doze
of tbe tabernacle of wpenefie. Altbele were cho
fenmen to ee tbe thzefibolbes,euen two buns
O2cD and tweluc,andthozowout all the genealo
gye were thep nombzed in thep2 vpllages. And
them dDpd Dauidg Samuel the learinfitute,
bpcaule of thep2 fidelitie. So thep ethep2echpl-
dzen bad the ouerfpabt of the ateg of the boule
of the Lorde euen of p tabernacle to kepe them.


x Jn foure quarters dpb thep kepe the watch æ
tofvarde thecat wet, north efouth.aAnd thep2 ausg.e
bacthzeneemapned in the countrp,and cameaf« o
ter (euen dapes from tpmeto tyme wpth therr.
J€02 the Leuttes(tbych bad the oueripgýt of p
verpes and trealures of p Houle of God) were
Dunder fhe cuflodtc of foure notable porters and
thep laperounde aboute the boule of God: bp=
caule the keppna therof pertapned tothem, and
thep bad the kepes to opë cuevp moznpug. And
certapne of them bad the rule of the mpnifteyng
beiris and brought theminand out bp tale.
Some of chem Were appopneed to ouerfe p vel=
{cls and al tbe oznamentes of the fanctuarp,and
of the foure wpne ople frãkenfence, andfteete =“
odoutes: AnDdcertapne of he Connes cf the pee
fies made oputmentes offwetcodours.
And Bathathta one of the Lenttes whyche fE
thas p eldek (on of Sallnm:the Cozathite,bad
the oueclpgbt of the thynges p were made in p H
bok 3 ca And other of thep2 bzethzen the fon-
‘nes of Cabab bad the overlight of tie herwb2e0 :

whpch thep prepared euerp fabboth. Thele are

tbefpngers cuen auncpent fathers of the Leni

tes, which dwelte in leparate chambres, € were T
TOL Si fre:fo2 thep bad to do (in thetéple) both dapee f
tbe fonne of Apitobtbhechetct m Phouleof god npabt:Thefe were auncient fathers ofthe Leni Rr,
And Adaiahu the fonne of Feroham the fonne tesinthepzqeneractons:« dwelt at Jerufalem e
of ppaHur, the fonne of Yelchia. And Maali And Gibeondweltat Abi Gibeon, and at

ol


© biel whole wyte wascalled BaachabiseldelE arole


7 Saul i. Lmonitdes. Eol.lrhi


fonne wag Abdon, tyensur, Cis, Waal Mev, € bodp of Haul, andthe boopes of hig fanes,and
adab, Gedo, Adio, sachariagapkloth.And brought thé to ya bee „an erie the bones of
WMibkloch begat Simed. Andthepalfodweltw thë onder an oke in Jabes: fatten fut vapes:
thepe brethren at Ferufalem:euenbhardeby the. So SHauloyed for bes tretpatte that petrel-
And Merbegat Cis,¢*Cisbegat Daul. And paticdagapnite re Logde, in that be kepte not


i f.reg.tl a
| «pa fbiil.a saul begat Jebonathan, Malchifua, Abina- the Wo2de oF the Lozde, andinthat be foucbte,


daband Efbaal. And the fonne of Jebonathan andafked counfapl ofa woman that wrourdt
was <Hettbbaal. And Qeribbaal begate Wi- witha f, : Eth
cab,e the (ones of Hicab were Pithon, Welech therfore pate and ated not ofthe Lode. and


$. fine bpm, and tin pe
and Thabh:ea. And Abas begat Jahra: FJabza nto Daui 7A bath ana wee the byngdome


begat Almaneth, Aimaneth simet:simert begat
%03a: %03a begat WBinea, whofe tonne was aeter penea COET Cbapter: di
Rephata,¢ histone was Elala, andbhistone C sheavugrer eas Daui annopnted in ebron,
Asel. And Aselhbadfprefonnes, wholenameg . EFH tbrtowze of Spon, Dis men are nombzed.
are thete:Asricam, Woch, Finacl, Searia,
DObadia g Hanan: 7T pefe are the fines of Asel.
| Che.r.Chapter. |
@ The battaple of Saul agaputt the Bbllitines:
intobich be Dpeth and bis fonnes alfo.


jueces to Dauid Vuto Hebzon, * lap”
“a inge:bebolde, we be thp bones and
X tby fielthe. And mozeouer, intyme
Pees patt.eucn when Saul was kpnae
thou leddet Jiraclonte andin: Andthe Lorde
thy Godfapd Vnto the: thou balt fede mp peos


ati a
2


ree FYiracl. CTherfozecame all the elders of


od


againtt tes the enbabitours of thelande.And the enpa


PS
|


wed, and were frarce after Sanl ehisfonnes, the Jebulptes fr: , Hall be the principallcap-
and the Philiftinesfmote Fehonathan, æ bi- tapne,andalozde.4oo0 Joab the fonne ofsaruia
ngdab and alcbifuathelones of Haul:And went fp wp and was made F chefecaptapne.
the battapic was [oe Eg ee Haul, andthe And Dauld dwelt inthe calle Spon, and ther
archersfoundebym, and be was woundedof fozethepcalledtt thecptpeofmauid. Andhe
moters Then fayd Haultobhisweaponbearer bhuplethecptie oncucry ipie, euenfrom Willo


rg ¥DMawetbpiwerde andthutmethozow thee roundabout.and Joabrepapzed the rett of the


+
|:
f
B,
arin A
PL)
i


aegris =k Bnditfortuned,thatonthemozowe when  ehite, whiche was one ofthe thze myopie


with tbat tbeie bncircumcifed comenotanddo cptie. And Danid prolpered, and wared great.
me pame, but bis weaponbearer wold not, fo And the Lorde of hoolkes was with pym.


be feared ercedinglp. HoDaulcaghtatwerde +«Cheleare the peincipall menofpoter whi ¢


(al the Erongell of them)and fet avoaye$ D


ple Ffrael, and thou Halte becaptapne oncemp `


F


:


í,


297A Penall Jfraell gathered them fel” an


VES ES Gilboa. And the Pbiliftinesfolo- nid, AndxDautdfayde: wholoeuce tmpretl rs.


g fel bps it. And when his parnelbearerfawep Dauid bad,andp clauetobymin his kpngdom tre rritt.e


Saul was deed, be fellonafwerdallfo,edped: tvithall Zfrael, tomakebpm kynge: accopdpng


And this Saul andhisthzefonnes, andall tothe word ofthe Lode unto F{racl. And this
thep of bis boule dped togpther, Andwhenall isthe ndbze of the mpgbtpemen whom mauid
the men of Firarl that were inthe balley fawe pad: Fofobeam the fonne of Hachmoni, chefe
bow thep fied, € that Sauland pistines were amonge thictpe:belyptte vp bis (peareagqapnite
deed they forwlokethepzcpties, andDranawape thee bundzed, and wounded them at one tpe-
and the Ppiliffines came,and dwelt inthem. After bi wasEleasar bis vneles fone an Aboa


the }bhiltlines came (toficppthedeedbodpes) was w Danid at Paldamin,¢ there the bili-
thepfounde Sauland Dis fonnesonerthzotwwen. Mines twere qathered togpther tobattaple. And
in mounte Guboe. Vnd when thepbaditrypte there was there a parecel ofgroud ful of barip,
bpm, tbey tobe bis eedand bis barneffe, fent ppcople fled before ý Pbiliftines . And therC
themintothelande of the Pbiliftinesroundea- tii. afozefa p>) ftepte fozth into p mpdodes of the
boute tothewe them pntotbhep2 pdols, tothe felde, and flue ti
people. And thep put bis barne fe in theboufeof ybtliftines. Aud p L020 qaue a great victoze.


their yod, fet bp his beed in fhe téple of Dag Andthe thre or the thpztpe chefecaptapnes D


And when all they of JabesinGileadheaty went toarock to Danid, tntothecane Adalla.
all chat the Whuikinespaddoneto Darl, thep And the poolte of tye calc abode he Ua
i ALT: alep


auedit from butnpnge, and flucthe .


atid LLheonicles. Datt


palepeof Rephaim : And when Dauw wasin the fonnes of Elnaam, and Jitümaa Moabite.
the bolde, the }iltfines watchewagat Berb Elieland Dbed,and Jafiela Seiobatte,


lebem the fame tyme. Bnd Dauid longed, and Tbhe.rit.Cbapter.
iire rige fq po: x Db that one wo lde gpue me Mynke of emits beri} € wh ab Dauid
tbe water ofthe welthatisatthe gate oft5eth when be fled from Saul,


Ichem. Bud the thze wake thozowe the boot of
the Pbililines, anddzue water out ofthe well
that was bp the gate at Wetblebem,andtoke ts
and brongbt tt to Danid. Menertheletie,pauts
wolde not dDepnke of it, but rather offercd tf to
the Lo2de,andfapd:mp God forbyd tt me, that
3 (houlde do this thpnge. Shall 7 dzpnke the
bloude of thefe men , that bane put thepzlpues
inicopardpe ¢ (foz wit) the icopardype of thep2
Ipues they beoughtett ) therfoze be wolde not
dapnike it, andthis opotbele thee mpabtpef.
And Abifatthe brother of Joab:he allo was
captapne amonge thze:fo2 belpft pp bis {peare
agapnt.in.c.and woudedthem, hada name
among $ thae:Pea, among thebe was moze bo
nourable, thë p two, fo: be was tiers captapne
Powbdeit he attapned not wnto thew fete thze:
° ` wBanata the fonne of Jehoiada (the fonne of
avery {trong man)dpd greater actes then Cab
seel: For be fluet wolpons of <poab, and went
Downe, and fluealpon ina pptin tyme of fnow
And be Nue an Egiptian, whole ffature was
euenfyuecubptes longe, andin the Egtptians
bande was a ipeare lpke a weauers beame. And
the otber went Downe tobpm witha walker, ¢
plucked the (peare out of the Eqrptians bande,
and flue bym with bis owne {pcare.Suchtbpn <2)
ges ppd aana the fonne of Jehotada,and had
thename among p thre mighticl,¢ was ponon
tableamonge. rre. but attapned not bnto the
(firtt)iij. And Dauid made him of dts coufayl.
Che other men ofarmes were thefe: Afabel
the brother of Joab, Elhanan his yucles fonne
F of Bethlehem Sammoththe Harodite: elez
the Pelonite:Fra the fonnes of Jekes the Tbe-
toite: Bbielerthe Anathotbite: mibacatthe Hu
fatbite: Flai the Aboite : Dabarat the Netho-
phaite: beled the fonne of Haana, the Metbo-
phathtte: Ftbaithe Gne of Ribaiof Gibea that went outto metetbem, anvanfwered andfapd
pertapnetbto the chpldzen of en Jamin.wWe- wutothem:PFpebecome peaceablp bnfome,to
nata tbe Whtrathourte: Hurai ofthe tpuergof belpeme,mpne bert balbe knypt puto pou. ut
Gaas:Abiel the Arbatbite: Asmanctbtbe Sa and ypEpoucome to betrapeme to mpne aduerla .
barumite:Elibaba the Saalbontte. Che fon- rpes(feing therets no wpckedneffe in mpne ban R
nes of Basem the Gescmite: Jonathantbelne des)the Godot our fathers loke theron, andres the
of Sage an Waraite: Abiam the fone ofSacar bukett. Xud the {pprttecame vpon Amatia, '
the Haratte,Eliphal the fonne of Ge: Hepher P whpche wasthechefeamonge thyztpe , and be
PDeeberatbpte: Abiathe Pelonpte: Hesrothe Capd:tbpne are we pautd,and on thy fpde thou
Carmelite: Naari the fonne of Esbat: Joelthe fonneot Flat: *Peace,peace be ontothe, and
brother of Pathan: Wibhar the lonneofHari: peace be Dntotbpne helpers, forthp Godigthp T.F
selegamthe Animonite: Mabaraia Mevothpte, Helpe. Then Daud recepued them, and made |
the bearer of the barne ffe of Joab , the fonne of them bedeg of companpes of the men of warre, i
seruta: Jra the Jitherite:and Gareda Gethzite And there fell fome of Wanae to Danid, D T
ia the Hetbite:andsabadtbefonne of ADlat when De came w the Dbeliftines aga pnt-Saul
Adina the fonne of isa a Wubenite, acapi- tobattapl, x but thep helped them not. oz the ireg, rors
“tapue of tbe Rubenites,and thpztie withbpm. Lordes of the japtlittines We i and p
Jpanantbe fonne of Waacha, and Jofaphata fenthpmawape agaypne,fapinge:be wpl fal to i
ePitbanite : sia an Aftberathite, Sama and bis malter Saul to the teopardye of our pedes. k
Jebiel the fönes of Hotbanan Aroerite: Fediel Ms he went tosikleq, there felltobpm of Wa- |
the fonne ofsimri and Icha bis beotberan Ha- naleh: Sona, Jolavad, Fedtel, Btchacl, Jofa-
thistte:-Eltela Bapantte :Jertbatand Jolaia bad, Glin andzilthat, Deedes of the PENR es
d tpat


'


Maud


prepared


Deere


hat there of Danafle. And they bolpwauida-
gapni the rosers. Æo: thep were all mygbtpe
men of warre, and captapnes tn the booft : oz
at that tpme there came one oz other to Dauid,
dape bp dape to helpe Dim: Yntplit was a great
Hooft, lpbe the boot of God. |
And thists the nombre of tbechefecaptapnes
that were ppeparedto battapl, andcameto pa
uid to Hebzon fo tourne the Ryuqdome of Haul
tobpm, accozdDpnge tothe worde of the Lozde.
Thechplozen of Juda that bare Hplode and
{peace were (pre thoufande andepabt hundred
reabpe peparedtotbe warre. Df tbechyplozen
of Simeon men of mpgbt to warre, feuen thou
fande and one bundzed. Of the chpldzen of Leni
foure thoufande and {pre bundzed. And Jebo-
iada was the chefe of them of Aaron: and with
bpm thre thoufande andleuen bundzed. And 34-
dok a ponge man fronge and valpaunt , and of
bis fathers boutholde.rrit.capttapnes . And of
the cbpldscn of en Jamin the bacthzé of Saul
thze thoufande. And a great parte of them (Opp
pito that tpme)folowe the boule of Haul.
And the chpldzen of Ephzatm: rr.thoufande
and epgbt bundredmpabtpe men of warre, and
famous menin the boutbolbe ofthep2 fathers.
And of the balfe teybe of Danafleh.xviit.thou-
fande, which were appopnted bp name to come
and make Dauldkpnge. Bnd of the chplbzen of
Fsachar whiche were men that had ynderftan-


o* Opngein the rpabt tpme,to kno weos pow to com:


maunde) What ¥ltael ought to do. Che heedes of
tbem were two bundzed, andall thep2 bzetpzen
were at thep2 wyll. And of sabulon that went
out fobattaple,and proceded fort to the tear:
wit) all manerinftrumentes of warre, fpftpe
thoulande that were prepared tothe war with
outanp doublenelfe of berte. nd of Mephebalt
atboufandecaptapnes, and with them w plod
and {peace ree vit.thoufande. And of Dan pre-
pared to battaple.revtit.thoulande and (pre
Hundred. And of Aler that went out top warre
and kept the forefronte of the battaple , fourtpe
thoufande. And ofthe other pde of Jordan of
the Rubenites and Gaddites , and of the halfe
trpbe of Hanae with all maner of infirumen


@ tes of war, a bundzed andtteentpe thoufande.


All hele were men of warre, kepynge the
fozefront of f battaple w perfect bert, i came to
Hebd to make Danid king oneral Firal. And
all p reit of Jfracl was of one accozde, tomate
Dauid kpng. And there thep were  Wautd. itt.
dapes catyng g Depnispng,fo7 tbe rbhacthré bad

02 the. $ opeoucr thepp were npet
pity! Slacar,sabulon and Hephebalt bzonghe
breed on affes, camels, muleg, g oren and meate
Roure fpages,repfpnges, wpne and ople, ore g
ipepeabundaŭtlp. Fo: there wasiop in Jiracl.

— CThe.xiit. Chapter.
C She atkeis brought agapne feom Mariath Fart
to Jerufalem, Asa(otherwpfe called Mla opeth.
Neu] ND Dantdcounfapled with the capt-
Pa way tapnes of thoufandes and Pundzeds,
VEGA Sy and with all the lozdes, and Apd Dn-
mses t Oalltbe congregacponot Ziracl: LE


iZbh2oniteles.


it eme pou good, andto be of p Lozde our God
Yo? iopll take ad iende wnto oure brethren, that
areleftinall the lande of Firal: and wit) them
alfo, tothe precikesand Leuiteg whtche arein
theprcpticsandluburbes, to gather themtogyp
thee nto vs.And we wll bepnge agapne the
arke of (be Lorde to vs , fo: wereqardedit not


inte dapes of Saul. Andall the congregacion 25


foas content that be (houlde bolo, foz the thing
emed good inthe epes oF all the people.

So Dauid gathered all Jirael togypther fra
Diho: in Egppe, onto theentrpng of Hemath,
to bzpnge the arke of the Lozde from iapziath
Jecartm .And David went ypandall Jfracl to
anbyeplacetowardes Kpriatb Jearim, that
wasin Juda, to fet thence the arke of the Lorde
God that dwelleth betwenethecherubes wher
bis name tscalled on. Andehep carped the arke
of Godina newe carte out ofthe boule of Abi-
nadab. An’ Usa and bis brother quyded p tart
AND Dauidand all Jlracl plaped vefoze parke
of Godw all thep2 myghet, with {png pnge and ws
hatpes, plaltecpes and tpmb2cls and trompet-
tes. And when thep came vnto the thaclipvuge
flooze of Chtdon, Cisa put foztb bis bad to bolo
the arke,fo2 the orencoxcoeinge airtte wontäbicd
And the Lozde was woth with Usa, g note —
bpm, bpcaufe be put bis bandeto thearke. And
there De dped before God. And Danid was out .
of qupete, bycaule the Lorde badrent arente in
€13a, and De called the name of that place therë-
tynge of üla Duo this Daye. And Danid was
afraped af God that dape, faptng:bowe tall J
bepige the arke of God home tome? And fo wa
uid bzought not the arke home tobpm tothecp-
tie Of Dautd: but carped it into the boule of D-
bed Edoma Sethite. Bnd che arke of Godre-
mapned with Dbed Edom, euen in his boule:
tize monetbegs. Andtbe Lozde bleficd the boule
of Dbcd Edom, andall that beban. -

| CThe. riii. Chapt -—
Cram fendrth wood atd wezkemen to Dauid,
wbpch bath two bprtezpes ofthe Philitpres,
raara D Vam the kpng of Tpze fent mef- +
evs va engers to Dauid ,andtymbze of Te-
Sea ae trees, with mafons andcarpenterg
Ei O bupldedpman bouke: And Danid
perpen that the Lozdehad confpzmed pym
pny vpon Zlrael, and that bis kpugdom thas
lift bp on Dpe, bycaule of bis people Frael. And


Mautdtoke pet mowpues at Jerufalem , and 5


begat mo fonnes and dDoughters. Thele are the
nam7s of big childzen whiche were borne tnta
bím at Jerulalé:Hamua, Soba, Pathan and
Halanton : Jibpar, Elifua g Eliphalet, Roga,
Mepber€ Japbia,Elifama, Weliada, and Eli
phalet. And when tbe Pbiliftines bearde that
Dauid was annoputed png pon Flrael: all €
the Bhilitines went Yp to feke Dauw. And

Dauid berdeofit and went outagapnt them.
And the Philitinescamein, and praunced thos
rewe the valey of Rephaim. And Dauidalaecd
counfapleat God, fapinge: thall Jqoagapnie
the Philitincs, and wplt thou velpwer them in
tompnebander And the Lozdefapd vntobpm:

J.V. go vp,


$o,lrtr,


|


Cee PETES
go bp, for J wyl delpuce them into thrne band,
And fo they came Dpto Waal rasim andDa
uib note them there, And Dauid fapte: God


Hath denpded mpne enemypes with myne pande


asaman wolde Deupde water, Andtherfore


zim. And When tdep bad left their gondesthere
Dauid gaue acommaundemente, ethep were
burned witb fpze. |
D  Andthe phulittines came togpther agapne,
e€rulihedtnto the vallepe. And Dauid alwedae
gaypne at God. And God faid to him:gonot vp
after them, but turne away fro them, thatthbou
mapek come vpon then ouer agapntt tbe pere-
frees. And when thon beare a founde qooin
the toppes of the peretrees, then go out to bat-
taple: fo? Gods gone forth befoze the, to finite
the Dooft of the biliftines. Danid therfore did
a5 Godcomimaundedbym: andthey {mote the
boot of the Philitines from Gibcon to Gazer.
And the fame of Dauid went out inte alllan-
des:and the Lorde made allnacions feare bpm:
‘CThe.rv.Chapter.


T
The Leuptes bapngetheacke agapne. Daud daunz
Cpnge before itis belppled of bps wpe sicho


re Patate the painea fathers ofthe Leuites [Epes


fe that pe be polpe with youre beetheen, that ye


ra pe bepng tn tbe arke of tbe Lorde Gov of Jr: za


tael, bonto the place that 3 baue prepared fog tt:
Eo? bicaule pe Mere not there at P fz, P Lod
out God made arenteamonge v3, for that we
fougdt bpmnot,asthe faflion ought to be. So
the pelkes æ the Lcuites fanctifpcd them f clues
tofet the arise ofthe Lorde Gon of Firacl. And
the childzen of the Lenites bare the arke of Gop
bps their Poulders w taucs theron, as sy ofeg
comaunded-accozding to the w0zde of P Lorde.
€ And Wanid (pate to che chefe beedes of the


ILyonices.


Leuttes, that thep Honlde appopnt certapte of
thep2 bzetbzen to fpnee with infrumentes of
mufpebe,plaltertzs, barpes andermibales: that
they mpgbt makea found:,and to Ipnge onppe


with iopfulnefe : And the Leniteg appovnted 7
they called the name of that place: Baal Pera- P


eman the fonne of Yoel: and (of bis bzeth 2en)
Afapb the fonne of Werachia:and ofthe fonnes
Of erari and of thep2 beetheen: Ethan f fine
of Chufaiabu. And with them thepz byethzen
of the feconde degree : 3acDartabu, en Fassel,
Semtramoth, Jechiel Cunt, Cltab, Wenatuby,
Waalas, Dathatiabu, Eltphaledu, Piknia-


~ eee,
{anD |
|


bu, DbedEdom, and Jatel porters.So hema, 23


Aaphand Ethan the fyngers madea found vw
mbales of baffle, And sachariabn, Ariel, De-
miramoch, Febiel, Unni, Eliab, Paafiahu, ¢
Danatahu plaped with plalteryeson an Alas
moth. {Hathatiabu, Elipbalebu, Wikniabu,
ObcoEtom, Feteland Asasiab plaped bpon
barpes an epabt aboue, withcourage. and Che
naniabu the chefe of the Leuptes , was matter
of the fong, fo? be taught other to (yng: bpcanle
be wasa man of bnderftandpnge, D
wWerechia and Elcana kepte the doze ofthe
arke. 4nd Secantabu, Jebolaphat, Acthanacl
Amafat, sachartabu, @anaiabu, and Elieser,
tbe perfes opo blowe with trompettes befoze
the athe of God. And DObed€dom and aebia, >
were the kepers ofthe Doze of thearke. |
¥And Daurd and the elders of Firael andthe“ testis
captapnes ouer thoufandes, went tofet h arke
ofthe appopntment of the Lo2de out of poule
of DbedEdom with gladnetie. And whe God
belped the Leuites that bare the arke of the ap-
poyntment of the Lozde, they offred feuen oren
andfeucnrammes. Bnd Danid bad on bpm a
lynnen garment,lphe ag had alfoall the Lenup=
tes that bare the arke, and fo bad the (ynqers:¢ r
Chenanta tberuler ofthe fonge with $ fongers
And Danid had vpon biman Epbod ofipnnë,
And all they of Jiracl bzoughtetbhearke of the
Lozdes couenait with outpng and blowpng


nople with i mbales, plalterpesand harpe h


E e
r


a ee. u.


of the hawme and trompettes, mhares a
be on


_ _Andas the arke of the appopntement oft
Lozde came into the cptie of Dani, Pichol the
Doughter of Haul lokpnae cut ata Wpndowe,
fawe kynge Dauid daunfpnge and plapinge,
and the dilppied bpm inher berte, :

The.rti.Chrpter.
Caud ozdepneth raph and bis bzethjen to mpniftre


befose the Lord: Be bpm feite peapleth tbe Lojde »
__ Sob of Ffracl.


#
i a a


Ande appopnted certapne of the Leuptes
fo mpniftre befo2e the Lozde, andtore te and
to thanke and peaplethe Lozde Sod of Yfrael,

And Afaph


Baud


| And Afaph was the chefe, and nert to bpm sa-
ss charia, Jetel, Hemicamoth, Jehiel Mathathia
tirer. bib. Eliab, enaia, ¥DbedEdom, and Feiel with
plalteries and darpes. Gut Alaphmade a (ond
| with{pmbales. Wanatabu and Jahasicl prea=
ites, bletbe with trompettes contpnuallpe bea

| fozc the arke of the couenaunt of God.


: =e
Andthat fame tpme Dauiddpd appopnet che
ad Ap totharnkep Logdbp Afapp and bis betheen
prat etita ¥ D gpie thankies vito the Lorde, call wpa his
fap. Fib name, make hisactes kuowen aniong p people.
Synge vutohpm,and playe wntobpm:talke
of all bis wandzeful drdes. Retopie imbis bolp
name: let the bertes of them that fhe the Lorde
be glad. Heke the Loade and his Trenged: feke
bispeelence alivape. Re -
Remembze hismaruaples whiche he dpd,
and bis wonders, andthetudgementes of bys
mouth. Tire (ced of Fleaclarebis feruatices the
chpldzen of Facobare his cholen. ets the Lord
our God, inalllandes are bpsiudqementes.
Thpnke on bys appopntement foz ener: (and on
the wode which be commaunded toa thoulãoe
generacions ) whiche be made With Abraham,
aid of bis oth to Blabac-which ve fet befoze Fa:
: cob fo2 a Decree, andto Fflracl fo: an enerialking
couecnaunt, laying:to tbe wypll 3 gpue the lande
of Cbunaan , to be the pozcpon of poure ettberps
taunce Wen pe were fewe, and final innome
bze, and fotourners therein. Andthey walked
from nacion to nacion and from one kpng dom
to another people. De fured nomantovorbem
wonge: butrebnkedeucnhynges fo: they. fa-
kes. Toutche notmpne annopnted, and tomy
Prophetesnobvarme. | |
| ¢ *Sypnge vntothe Lorde allthecarth, and
4  ptatrev.a erbe from vaye todaye bis faluactox.
T Tell of his qlezpe amonge the Heptjenr:pps
a foond2efull dedes AMonge all nactons.
fo greatis p Lord, and wWosthp to be prap-
federcedpynglp:be ts tobe feared abouc al goos,
f€o2 all the goddes of the propic are of tio yas
Ine.2ut the Lorde made beane., |
zapiec and honour are in bis pzeléce:firength
and gladne arein bis places
Aicephe bnto the Lorde pe kyneedes of peo-
ple:Alcephe tothe Lode, qlozpe and dominion.
Faferpbe tntothe Lorde the glozy due vnto bis
4 name: biphge facrifpces and come befoze bpm,
and worlbypthe Lorde with Holy honour.
Let all the earthe feare bpm,althoughe the
topafte ofthe earth fo be fablpfiped thatitcan
not be moued : letthe beauensreiople,andlette


= = 3


T La
———


j.Lyzantcics


oirr.
tye earth be glad, andletmentelamongetbena
ctons, that the Logbcis kpnge.
Let the fee thundze, andthe fulneffe thereof:
let the feldesretopfe and all tbat is therein. |
Then thall the trees of the toad retople at
the pzefence of the Loate , bycaufe becdmeth to
tudge the earth: D gpue thankes vnto p Lazde


fo: bets good, fog his mercpe endureth fo2 cuce:


and fape pe:faue vS (O God) of our faluacpost,
gather vs togyrber,e delpuce Vs from amouge
tie Depehé,p We mape gpue thankestothp holp
hame,€ triumph in the prapie ofthe. leled be
the Lozde God of Flrael foz euer andener: and
let all people iape: men: and vpapie the Lorde.
And fo be left there befor thearke of the Lor
Des coucnaunt Alaph and bis bretheen, to mint:
fier befoze the arte contpuuailp, in fuche thpu-
Ges as Were to be Done dape bp dape : owcannehat gs
bp thep: courtes.) And DbcdLdomandbhisheetine —
thiclcoze andepgbt: and Pbrd Eoom the fone
of Jcduthun, and Yofa , were appopnted tobe
porters, Andsadok the pzeelt and his beetbecn
the prcettes, were befoze the Tabernacle ot the
LOZDe, tu the bye place chat wasat Gibeon, to
offre burutofitynges wnto the Loze, vpon the
burntofiring alter perpetuallp, in the mozuing
and euenpug:accozdpuge onto all that whichis
weyttenin the lavwe of the Lorde, which be cons
maunded Ffrael. And with them were igeman,
and Scouthun,¢ other that were cholen( whole
names were erpzelled ) to gpue thankes to the
Lode, that bis mercye lafkethencr. And pth
them dpp Hemanand Feduthun lpnge with the
trompettesand fpmbales, makpng a farte me
lodp withinftrumentes of mufpke and goodlpe
fonges. And the fonnes of Feduthun were por=
ters. Bnd all the people departed, eucrpe mati to
bishoule:e Dauid ecturneo to blefle bis poul.


@ The.rbvii.chapter.
€ Panid is fozbpadento buplocan bout bate
the Zone. Chipet is prompfed baber the fp:
gure of Salomon. ,
ES pd it fortuned, that whé Danid W
OG e jowelt in bis boufe, be fapd to a :
ag KS atban the Prophete: lo, J owei*in Trte
ta Vee an boule of Cedar tree, but parke


than fapde to Danid: doalltbatistutbpnedert
Dauid my fernaunt,thus fapththe Lozde:thou B


baue cone from tent to tent, and from one babp=
tacpontoan otber. And wherfocuce F haue wal
ted withall ¥fracl, mpake Frucr one worde to
anp ofthe tudges of Ffrael ( whom Fcomimatis |
ded to fede mp people fapinge: wbp daue pe not
buplt mean boule of Cedar trees Mow therfore
thus thaltthou fape puto mp feruaunte Dauid:
thus fapth the Lode of boottes: Ftokethe cute
ofthe patturcs wbentbou wente o epr,
jë 0


said


pa


€


D


that thou (huldeft be capitapne ouer mp people
Blracl. And J bauer bene with the whptberioe-
uer thou Dae Walked, and baue toeded oute all
thpne enemypes ont of thy fight, and haue made
thea name, Ipke the nanicoscof one) of the gred-
tet men thataretnthe earth. And J paue o2dep
neda place foz mp people Firael, ¢ made it faf,
fo that not they maye dwell in thep2 place,and
imoucnhomoze: Mepther thal the chyldzen of wie
kednefle berethbemanp moze, asatthe begpn-
npnge: And fpns the tpme that Fcommaundeod
iudges to be ouce mp people Fracl: F bane Tub-
Duedall thpneenempes,and F told the, that the
Lorde Wwolde buylode the an boufe.

This alfo alcome to pale : when thp dapes
be exppzed, that thou muft go vntothy fathers
J wyllraple vp tp leedafter the, which Halve
of thy fonnes,and Wwpl prepare fo: prm the bt-
gbdome :e Hal buplde mean boule and J wpll
ftablpth bis feate foz cuer: 3 wpll be bis father,
andhe albe mp fonne:and J wyl not take mp
mercp awape from bpm, as 3 toke it frombpn
that was before the. Wut F wplt fet bpm in
mrpne boule, andin my kpngdomefoz ener: and
bis [cate Halbe fare Fo? cucrinoze.

According to all there wordes,e accozdpnge
toal this bifid, did Matha tel king Dauid. Ano
mauid the kpnaecameand fat before the L029
and fapd: what am ICD Logbd God) and that
is mpne Poutbolbde, that thou balk promoted me
thusfarre? Andpet thisfemedlytleinthpne
epes, D God: Wut thou afk alfofpoken of thy
fernatites boule, for a great whpletocome: and
batt loked bps me as Dpon a man of hype degree,
(<D L020 God. Wi bat hal Dauid delpre moze
of the fo? the honour of ty feruaunt D Love,
fo2 chp (eruauntes fake, ené accozdpng to thpne
owne bertebat thou Done all this magnificëce
to ewe all great thinges. Lozde, there ts none
lipke the:neptber is there anp god faue thou: ac-
E allt hat we bane Derde with cur ca-
res. St) ozeoucr, what nacion on the earth ts itk-
thp people Jirael,to whom Godbath vouchelas
fed tocome and redeme them tobe Hts tone pro
ple, and to make thp name ofanercellencreand
terriblenefie, with caftpng out nacions from ke:
toe tby p cople, whome thou balt delpuered out
ore gypt.

hyp people Fleracldpooek thou make thpne
otone people foz euer , and thou became thepz
God. Therfoze nowe Lozvde,let the thynge that
thou bat (pokenconcernpnge thy feruaunt and
pis bouie, be true foz cuer, that thou doas thou
batte fapde : let it come to paffe, that thp name
mape be wie ee ener, thatit map be faid
the Lozde of boofkesis God of Afrael (euentbe
God of Firael ) and the boute of Daurd thy fer-
uaunt endureth fable befoze the. o2thou(D
mp God)balk told thy feruaunt that thon wilt
buplde bpm an bonte. And therfore thy feruaue
bath foundeinhis bertto praye befozethe. And
nowe Lorde thouart God, and hafepzomplep
this goodnefle bnto thp feruaunt. Zowe ther
foze , letit be thp pleature , toblefie the boufe of
thy feruaunte, that tt mape contpnue before the


 tLhaonitles.


foz euer. Jeo? tohom thou bieflelk( D Lozbde ede
fame ts blefied foz ever.
C The.r viii. Chapter:
C Zhe bartapic of Dauid agapn the Phititines,


pas v E A a uid {note the ~biliftines, and fub-
| cae Fi pued them, andtoke Seth andthe


darezee, and beaten bym ( foz Cou
with Hadareser) and Dauid brought al mance
ievoels of golde, fpluer and beaffe with bpm.
And kpug Dauid dedicated them ynto yop,
with the {pluerand qoldethat be bichir from
allnaciong:from Edom, from ®oab, from the
chplozen of Ammon, from the p ilitines, and
from Amalecke. And Abifai the fonne of seruta
flue ofthe Edomptes inthe falte vallepe.rvitt.
thoufande, and put fouldpers in Edom, and all
the Edomptes became wautds {(cCruauntes.

A a Lode kept Dautdinall that be toke

npande.


And Dauidrapaned oner Frac, anderen: D


fedindaemente andrpgbteoutnelle amongeall
bis people. And Joab the fone ofseruiah was
oucr the boot. And Jeolaphat the fonne of B=
pilud recozdev:and sadock the onne of Abitob,
and Abimelech the fonne of Mbiathbar were the

2eeftes:and Sauela was {crpbe, and Wanatae
ba the fonne of Jebotada wasouer the Cretht-
tes and Dhelettes:and the elvek (ones of Da-
uid were next Dnto she Bpnge.


CThe.xle. Chapter:


C Hanon kpnacofthelonnes of Ammon doth great
iniurpeto the feruauntes of Daub


=e fter this it chaunced, that x Rabasthe
Mi


ibis fonne trapgued tn bis Mede. And Da-
uid fapo


Baid


aea d after this if foptuncd, that DA x
i W | "i


ey S fovoies that « longed therto, oute ii.re.rvig.e


€


~ kpnge ofthechplozen of Ammon dyed, € iireg.pa


|
|
|
l


Wa,lery.
uid defbroped of f Hirians fené thoufand char:
bettcs,and. rl. thoutande fotemen,<¢kylics g-

pbhach the captapne of the boofte. And when the
eruauntes of Madareser, fawe tbat they were

put to p wozie befoze them of Firael:they made

peace with Danid, and became bis feruauntes.

Hrepther wolde the Hiriangs Delpe tbe chplozen

Of Ammon any moze.

Che thie meok bpctozious batta PlesoF Dati,

arei 3 ote cam to pafie,that after Spore A

bts \eekey WAS exptred( xabout the tpme that tris. ri s
ty PAN We Berges qo outa Wattefaze:) Foab

ry Sera byes arped ont the armye of the boot, i

axtiend x DcfEropedthe country of thechpl- “19 F-


— Paid j.Lbzonicles
| uidlapde: F topll bewe kpndnefie unto Hanon
the lon of Mabas: bpcaute his father delt kpnd=
ipe with me. And Dauid fente meengersto
comfozte bym ouerthe Death of bis brother.
And theferuauntes of Dauid came into the
lande of the chplozen of Smmonto Hanon , to
comfo2te Dym: Wut the lordeviok the cyplozen of
Ammo lapo to Hanon: thynkelt thou that Daz
4 utd Doth honour thp father in thp (pape: that be
bath fent comforters vutothe ¢ Are not his fers
ualltes come to fearch, to lobe e{pye out plade?
25 Wiberfoze anon toke Mauids feruauntes
om on(and poldethem/and aued them, ent oftbepe
cootes Darde by thepz buttackes, and fent them
away. And there wente certapne andtolde Da-


Ea EER


=~


i


(


uid:bowe the men were ferued. Andthe kpnae
fent to mete them/(fo2themen there erceadpnce
lp atbamed) andthe kpng fapd:tary at Jericho,


` Ditpl pour beerdes be qrowen: ¢ then retourne.


And when the chypldzen of Ammon fawe that
thep fanke tu the {pqbt of Danid, anonand
thechpldgen of Ammon fent a thoufande talen-
teg of fplnerto bpze tbemcharettesand bo:fmé
out of Heiopotamia and out of Siria , aa-
cha, and out of soba. Jnd thep bpred.ceeti.chou
fande charettes, and the kpnge of Qaacha and
bis people, which came and pitches befoze We-
oba. And the chpldzen of Ammongathered thé
felucs togyther fro thep2 cpties, anodcame to ba
tapi, And when Daui berde of it, be lent Joab
and all theboof of frige men. And the chyloré
of Ammon came out, andput them felues ina-
rape to battaple before the mate of the citie. And
the Gpnges that were come, kepte them bprbem
feluesbackeinthefelde.

Giben Boab alto fate that the front of the


© battaple wasagapnt bym before and bebpnde


he chole out al tbe chofenmen of Strael,and put
thcinin arapeagapntt the Sirians. And pf ce t
of thepeople be Deliuercd wnto the bande of Abi
fai dis beother , ethep Bs them feluesinaravpe
aqapnt the chpldzen cf Ammon. And be fapde:
Vithe Diriang beto tronge forme, thou walt
fuccour me: and pf the chyldzen of Ammon pres
uapleagapne the, J wopll belpe the: Blucke vp
thpne bert and let vs play the men:fo2 our pro:
piis fale and foz the cptics of oure God,and the
oa hall vothat whichis qood inbps owne


abt. 0 Joabandthe people that were with


/ Him: deue npe before the Sirians watothebat- ı


f
f
j


` tayle,and thep Aicode befoze bpm. And when the
children of Sinmon {awe that the Hirias were
fied, thepranne awape ipke wple before Abilat
Hps brother, and gatethemintotbecptte. And


`A, Goabcame to Jerufalem, |
= Andwhenthe Sirians fate that they were


put tothe wozi before Flrael, thep fent meen-
gers andfet out the Sirians that wereb epond
therpuer and Sopbachthe captayne of p booft
of Habvareser wentebetoze them. And it wag
tolde Dautd:and pe gatheredall Firael, ¢ went
togpther ouer Jordan, and came g fet vpathem
And when Damd had puthym felfeinarape g-
gapni the Sputans, thep fought wypth bem.

Dut the Sinans Aed befoze Alracl. Andwa-


gen of Ammon, andcame and beliged Rabba
and defEroped it: Sut Dauid tatped at FJerufa=
lem wobple Joab mote Rabba and deliropedit


* AnD Dauid toke the ccone ofthepz BPNGE page, rig
if y


from of bis beed, g founde that tt bad p wepgh

ofa talent of golde and there were precious fto
nes iN it: and it tivas odepned fo? Daulds heed.
Andde brought alfo erceadpnge mochefpople
out ofthe cytic. Andhe bzourbt ont the people
tbat wereinit:  tozmented them with fates,
and Datowes of pzon, and with other tharpe in
ftrumentes, and fo dealt Dauid with ali the cp
ties of the childzen of Ammon. Jnd Dauidand
all tbe peo
ter thisttfoztuncd, that there avofe warre at
Gazer with the whiliftines. At whiche tyme £
SDobakai tbe Hufathite Ane Dippat, that was


ofẹ cbplozé of kRephatm:¢ thep were {abducd sene.riit’.s


And there was battaple agapne with the
Pbilifines : and Elband the fonne of Jair flue
Labemt , the bzotber of Goliath the Gethrte,
whofe {peare was lpke aweauers beame. And
there chaticed pet agapne warre at E eth, wiere
ag wasa må of a great ature, with. reiii fen
gers and toes. vion enerp Dand and. vi.on enc- D
rp foote: and thas the fonne of Raphath. But
Yoben he def ped Bleacl , ¥ehonatha the fonne of
Sinead Dautds brother Nue ppm. Thef were
bome unto Rapbabat Geth, ¢ were oucrtp20-
Wen inthe bande of Danid: and in the bande of
bisttruauntes.

CThe.cri. Chapter,
€ Dauid caulety the people to ve nombsedsand there
bre. lr .thoulande men gë the peftilence.

Ren $20 Dathan Kode vp agapnit Firad 4
Pio tres and prouoked Dauid tondbre Firacl
roe “4 And Dauidfapdte Joab:and top ru
Ee lers of f people: Go pe and nobze f=
tacl irs weerleba to Dan, and bzinge itto me
3 map know the nõbze of them. Xut Joab ant
Wered:the Lo2d make bis people an pundzed tp
meg fo manpas thep be. Sut mplogde, D king
arethep not allmplozdesferuanntes? why tha
Doth mp logde requyze this thynae ¢ why wll
myplo2de be a caule of trefpafle to Firacl.
. Neuerthelefle, the kyngcs wo2de preuapled
again® Joab. And Joabdeparted and walked
thozotee out all thein of Fitacl,andcame to Fee
tulalomagapne, € gaue the nombze of compet
of P people bnto Dauid. Andall thep of Hirael


lecameagapne to Yerulalem. x Af iiresrrio


aud


Mereathoufande, and an bundred thoufanve
men that dzewe wearde: and Juda was. cece.
ict.thoulande men that Drewe fwerde. Wut the
Ueuitegand Wen Jamin counted be not amog
them. o: the kpnges wode was abbomita
bie to Joab. And the Low was difpleafed with
this thyng:and {mote Firari. And Daud {apd
puto God: Jhauclpnnederceadpnglype in da=
inge this thynge. Andnow( 3 beleche the doas
wapetbe yckeduefle of thp Ceruannte , fo2 9
hauedone perp foolytblp.


w RAnothe Lordefpake unto Gad Dauds fe- |
bug utd buplte there anaultare puto the Lozde,and


ar, fapinge:go andtell Daui, fapinge: T
fapeth the Lorde : 3 avuc the the chople of thre
thpnacs: ole the one of them, that simape DO
puto the. dnd Gadcameto Daud, and faid vn
tobim. Thus fapth the Lozve: Chole the epther
chee peares fampihment,o2 thze monet hes tobe
Dettroped before thpne aducrfarpes , and the
wearde of thpne enempes mape oucrtake the,
o? els the fwearbde of the Lorde and peftilence tn


— the Lande tbzedapes:and the aungel of tbe 1020


peftroping thozowout all the cooftes of Jirak.
Andnow aduyfethp telfe, what wozde 3 Mal
bpngeagapne tobym that fente me, And Da-
utd fayd vnto Gad: Jaminanexceding rape.
Let me fall nowe tnto the bande of the Lozve,
for paipuge greate are bps mercpes, but letme
not fallinto the bande of men: |


€ othe Lod lent pelttlence bpon Firacland


there were onerthzotoé of Frael. iee.thoufande
men. And Godlent the aungell into Jerufalem
-to Delkropin it.aAndag be was about todeltrop
the 102d bebelde, and bad compaffion onpeupl
andfapd tothe aungel p defroped:-itis pnough
let now thy bande ceafle. And the aungell of the
Lozde kode bp the theelibynge toure of Dan
the gebuiite. And Dauid lyft vp hisepes,and
fave the angell ofthe Lozde tand betwenc the
cartbandbeauen, bauyngea dzawen iwearde


_tnbps ps e out towarde Jerufalem


Then Dantdand the elders of Flraell, ohpcde
toere clothed tn Cacke,fel vpon thep2 faces. ind
Dauid fapd bato God: Fs tt not J tbat comau
ped the people to be nombzedr Ft is J that haue
fynned anddone cupl indede,¢ wobat daue thele
(hepe done? Let thpnepande(D my God) be on
meand my fathers boule, but not on thp people
that thep fouldebe punpliped.

And the angel of the Lozdcomannded Gad
fofapeto Dauid, that Dauid Mulde go vp,and
fet bp analter butothe Lordin the thzpiibpng
fiooze of Dynan the Febulite. And Dauid went
ypaccordpnge to the fapinge of Gad, which be
fpahe intbename of the 1020. And D2nan tur
nedabout,andfawe the aungel, ¢€ bis foure Lon
nes were withbpmandbypod them felues : Wut
Oman was theelibyng whrat. Andas Danid
came to Denait,D2nan loked and lawe Dauid
and went out of the thzelibpng flooze, ¢ bowed
pym {elfeto Dawid with bis face tothe ground.


D ‘And Dauid fapd to Danan: gpue me f place


ofthe theclibpnge fiooze , that 3 mape buploe
an aultace therm wnto the Lozde. Chou Malte
gyucitine fo} ag moche monepye.as itis wozty,


iLheonicles.


that the plage mape ceaffe from the people. And
D nan tayd onto Danid :takeit tothe, and let
my lozde the kpnge Do that whiche femeth good
in bisepes: lo, 4 gpuetbe oren alfo fo? burnt fa-
crifpces , and the thzelppnge fleades foz wood,
and wobeate Foz meatoficpng: 3% qpucit all. And
kpnge Dauid faydto Denan-not fo: but wyt
bpe ttfoz as mochemonep asitis worth. Stor E
topl not take that which is thpne fo? che Lozde
no? offre burntoffrpnges without cof.

And fo Dauid gane to Dman fo? that place
ficles of golde. vi.bund2¢e0 bp ate Lom Da


ofred burntoffcpnges and peaccottrpnges, and
called ppontbe Lozde, and be berde Pim fró bea
neninfp2e ppon the aultare of burntofirpnge.
And whenthe Lozse had {pokento theanngel,
be p vp bis fwearde agapne into the theeth of
it: At that tyme when Dauid lawe that p L020
had bearde ppm iu the thectdbpnae flooze of D2-
nan the Jebulpte, be bled to offre there: 30? the
Tabernacle ofthe Lorde whyche Boles made
inthe wopldernefie,and the aultere of burntoffe-
rpnge were at that feafon inthe bpllat Gibeon
And Dautd coulde not go befoze it to alke coun
fapleat God, fo; he was afraped of the frocarde
of the Jungellof tbe Lorde.
 CThe.rrit.Cbhapter. —
C Dauit wplleth bis Conne Salomon to buplbe the


temple othe dozve:which thpng heppu Certe was
fozbpobenfob


a.

=A AD Dauid lapde: thysis the boufe of the
APAL ode God, and thists the aultar foz ia
Bsesi burntoficpnge of Slracl: And Dautdco-
maunded toga yer togptherthe ftrafigers that
werein the lade of Firael , and he fet malons to
ewe free (tone fo? thebuployng of the boufe of
God, Bud Danid prepared plentpe of pron for
naples,and dozes of the gates , € foropue wrth
al and aboundafice of bzaffe without wapabt,
and Cede trees without nombee. Jz the 51008
and thep of Cpze beoughte moche Cedar wood
to Dauid. And Dautd fapd:Saloms mp tonne
iz pounge and tender, and the boule that ts tobe
buplte fo: the Wozve, mu erceade m greatnefie
that tt marpe be fpoken of, € peapfed inal landes
4 wyll therfoze make ogdinaunce foz tt. And fo
Dautd prepared many ehinges before bisdeath

And be called Salomon bisfonne,and char-
gepbrmtobuplye an boufe forthe LozdeGod


of Hracl. And Dauidlayde to Salomon: *mp »


Paud


4


forine, J thougbte( agit wastn mpne berte ) to ite


buploanboufe vntotbe name of the Lode mp
God. wut f woe of the Lozde came tome fay
ing:thou bat ted moch bloude, and balt made
great battaples: thou thalttherfoze not buyloe
an boufento mp name:fo2 thou baft (hed moch
Dloude bpon theearth in my fpgbt. Beholde, a
fontic is bozne to the, anv be thalbeama of ref,
for 7 wpllgpuebpmret trontall bisenempes
counde about. Eo? bis name is Salomon: and
q wyl fendrelk ¢ peace Dpd Firar! indis dapes

He thall buplde an koule foz my name,and be
thall be mp fonne , and 3 wplbe pis father, and
wopll prepare the feate of bis bpngdome ppon
Flracl foz euer. Howe therfore my tonne, ue

0


a a
—=_—


Lozde be with the, and profperethe, and ë halt
buplde the boule to the name of the Lo2de, thy
@Gov:as ye bath lapd cf the. Aud the Lorde hall

—- gpuetde wplpome d Dnderfrandpugeand all

€ agpuc the commaundementes fog Jlracl, that pe
mape Bepe the lawe ofthe Lozde thy God. Fo?
then thou Halt pzofpere: cuen when thou takei

ede, and fulfplicé the fatutes g lawes whiche

Lo2dcharaed oles with for Flract.pPlucke
pp thyne berte therfoze, andbe ronge, Deade
not, nog be Difcouraged. Webolde, tnmynead<
uerlitie baue Jallo prepared foz the boute of B
Lode an bundzed thouiande talentes of golde,
e¢athoufante thoufandetalentes of fplucr,¢ as
foz bzaffe and pron it cannot be nombzed, fo? it
is verpe moche. And Zbaue peeparcdtymbze g
fone, ¢thou mart ob moze therto.<t)oze
ouer, thou batt workmen withthe pnough,and
malong , andcarpentersto wozkein tone aud
tymbze, and manp men that be actiue foz euerp
wozke, Arid ofgolde, fplucr, Vae, and pzon,
there ig no nombze.Cip therfore, and be Dotnge,
and the Lorde balbe with the.

D Rud Dauid commaunded allthe lozdes of
FHeaelto helpe Halomon pis fonne , fapinge:
Fsnotthe Lorde pour God with youre harp be
not gpu? pourch onencrp fide-Fozbe bath gue
the imbabttours ofp landintomy band, and the
landis{ubdued before the Logd and befoze bis
people. Powe therfore fet pour bertes and fou-
les to (chef Lod your God. dip,g buplde pe P
téple ofthe L020 God to being p arise of the cos
uenaunt ofthe Lorde and p dolp veflels of od
into the houtefs buple fog the name ofthe 1.020.

Cherri. chapter:
Canit beinge aloe, o-depneth Salomon kena,
ppe cauteth the Leuptes to be nombzed, and al:
(pgneth them ta they? o&pres,
exer D, when Dautd was olde and full of

HM Py 4 Dapes, * be made Salomon his fone

itt.reg.te oe ~ eal LP


Erode


par.big Wong Castel foure.*« The {ii esof Amran: aa:


jp Lhontcies,


JË J lr a E
vong Hofes. And Yari twas feparated to haue
tberule off oly thynges inp place moot dolp,
be and bis fonnes foz cuer, ¢ to burne incenfe be=
foze the Lozd, and tominiftre puto bhm, andto
bleffe in bis name foz euer. oles alfo the man
of God, and his childzen , Deere named With the
trpbe of Lent. Che fonnes of oles: Gerfon, g
Elieser. Df the fonnes of Serion: Hebucl was
thecbefe. Che tones of Elieser: Webabia p chefe
And Elteser Had none other Lonnes: ut plone
neg of Rebabta were verp many, The Snes of
Jabar, Salomith the chefe: Che fonnes of He
bzon: Feriapu the fpek, Amaria the leconde, za
bastelthe thyzde,and Jecaniamtbhefcurth. E
-Thelonnes of Csiel:)icha the faite, ¢ Fe-
fia the feconde. Che fonnes of Herart: Dabire
Mult. Che fomes of Dahli, Cicasar and Cis.
And Eleasar dped, g bad no lonnes, but dough
ters, ethep2 bzetbzen the fonnes of Cis toke tye
The fonnes of Hult: Babli, Eder g Fertmoth
the. Thele ave the chpldzč of Leuiaftcryp boufe
bolbe of thep2 fathers, ené the aunctent of the ta
thers accozdpnge to thepzotipees, and after the
nombze fumme of the nantes of them thas did
tie worke inthe feruice ofp boule of the Lorde,
from theage of twwentpe peares andabouc. And
Dautdlapo : the Logde God of Jirael bath gr-
ucirelt bute bis people, that they map dwel in
Fervulalé forener. Chat the Leutes alfohuide
now nomoze beare that tabernacle €allthe vel
fels foz the ferntce thereof: foz accozbpng to the


laft wodes of Danid, the Leuites were nobecd


from twentpe pere €aboue , Etbepz opce was
wnder the bandes of the fonnes of Hard, foz the qy
feruice of p boule of the Lorde , tithe courtes e
celles,€ind es of albolp thinges,andin
the worke of p lerutce of p Houle of Gov. Fn the
etor breed, inthe fpne flonre, inthe meatotte-
rpnge, inthe wafers of fwocte bzeed.tu p irping
panne inp arpdy2on, einallmaner ofmealu-
regandcple , eto fandeenerp daye in themo2z2
npnge.to thanke and prapic the Lorde ¢ folpke
wpleateuen. And to offecalbucntiacrifices bu
tothe Lozde, in the Sabbotdes, in p nete mo0-
neg and on the frattfull dapes bp nobze and cit
fEomecontinuallp(astbep were cominaunded)
before the Lorde. And that thep Houlde wapte
onthe tabernacle of wptnefle , and on the Doipe
place and on the fonnes of Xaron tep? beth2e
inthe feruyce of the boufe of the Lode.
@ The.rriitt., Chapter.


Hinete ace the denilions of the tones 3
Te Madab, Situ, Eleazar, t Jha


Ress) & Ae aUctoze töcir father, and bad no chit
cameo pien: Mus Elazar and Fthamac

executed the precitesoftice. And Dauid o2d2e0

themen this mance: sadock of thefonnes of E=
leasar,and Bbimelek of thefounes ot Fepaniar :
were accozdpnae to thep2 offpcesin thep2 mint- |
tracion. And there were moauncient mefoide

amonae the fonnes of Eleasar, then the tonnes

of Athamar.. Andrus were thep ordet togpe


said


ther: Amorige the onnes of Eleasar there were
Laas rulers, accozopnge tothe poutpoloe of
thev2 fathers, andepabt amonge the Cones of
"Ithamar, accozopnge to the houtbolode of thep?
fathers. Andthus were they put in o2d2¢ bp lot
the one fogte fromthe otber, and fo were thers
culers inthe Sactuarp and lozdes befoze God,
as wel of the fonnes of Jthamaras of the tones
of Eleasar. And Hemeta the fonne of Ratha-
necl the (crpbe, of the kpneed of P Leuites wote
tbem before the kpngesthelozdes , and before
sadocke the preat and Bhimelecke the fonne of
Abiatbar, € befozethbe aunctente fathers, before
f vieftes and p Lenites, one principall houthold
beinge referned for Eleasar g one for Ftbamar.
23 Andtbefpztt lot felto Jeboiarib, and the fe-
conde to Jedaia. The thyede to Harim, nnd the
fourth to Schozim. The Epfth to Pelepia,and
thelprte to Wiamin. Cheleuenth to Hakos,
andthe epabtto Abia. Che npnth to Feina and
the tenth to Mecaniabu. Che eleuenth to Elia-
fyb and the twelucth to Jakim. The thyztenth
fo Dupa, and p fourtent) to Felebeab. Che fpf:
tenthto Wilga, the fprtenthto Immer. The
feucntéth to Hesir and the epghtéth to Hapse3,
The npnetenthto Vathahia,andthetwentpeth
to Jebclhel. The.rri.to FJachin and the.rrii.to
Gamal. Che.reiii.to Dilaiabu, andtpexritti.
to aafiabu. 4
Thefe are p oedpnaiices of them in thep2 of-
fices, whe they cam into F boule ofp Lozd accoz


Dyn to thep2 maner wnder Aaron thep? Father,


ag the Lord Gon of Flrael hadcimatined bpm.
© TCherelt of the lanes of Leutare thee: of the
fonnes of Amram, Subael, of the fonnes of Su
hacl, Jebedtabu. DE the fonnes of Webabia: the
hy Jeta. Othe Fesabarites, Dclomoth. OF
the fonnes of Selomoth, Febath. Hrs Tonnes Fe
riabu. the fp2f Amartabu, the feconde. Jabasiel
thetbp2de, and Jchameamthefourth. Df tbe
fonnes of Uifiel, Wica. DFthe fonnes of Wi-
cha, Samir. Che brother of Picha was Filia,
DF the fonnes allo of Filia, sechartabu. The tő-
nes of Herari tere Habit and Muli. Che fons
nes of Jabaltabu, Beno. The fonnesot Wera-
ti bp Jabasiabu, Beno, Hobe, sacurand Fmi.
PF Bebelicame Eleasar, and De bad nolones.
DF thts: the founes of kis, Jerabemeel. Che f
nes of Huli: Mahli, Ederand Ferimoth.
_ Chelearethe chplozen ofthe Leuites after
theboutbolde of thep2 fathers. Andthelecatte
_ lottesnerte totbhep2 beethzen the fonnes of Fa-
rom, tuthe ppefence of Danidthe kpnge , ofsa-
dock and Abimelech ¢ the auncient fathers, pze=
fies, and Lenites:euen the peincipall fathers bes
ow Fore they? ponger brethren: om evetot mane equat pp
*  itributionsmonge rhe.rtb Chapt
RE. + et.
Cc y Pt ag ate appopnted, with thep2 places


= 0 fo Dautd and the captapnes of


ve ý fr ar
iy sy ~


TA the boot apppopnted out todo fer-
bes Mig gy uitce:tDe fonnes of Afaph, Beman,
; RUE Hand Jcduthun when thep dpd p20-
E phecpe, with harpes,plalterpes, &

8. Hud there wag a multitude ofthe me


i. Lbeonicies.


that were appopnted to the ferutce andimpny-
firatton. DF the fines of Alaph-saccur, Jofeph
Mathania, and Alerela that wapted on Alaph
which propbecped bp the Bpnge.
ME Feduthbun:the fonnes of Jeduthun, Gede wz
labu, seri, Jelatabu, A fabiabu, and Hathathi-
abu, {pre : nder the bandes of thepz father Fe-
duthun, which peophected with an Parpe,fo2 to
e E enat papies vntothe Lozd:of e
man:the fonnes of Heman:Wuktabu, Datha-
niabu, Cistel,sebuel,Zerimoth, Hananta, Hana
ni,&liatha, Gedalebi, Romacht, Eser, Folbe-
kala, Dalothi, Hoth eMabastoth . Allthele
were thefonnes of Heman which was the kpn:
ges fearinthe wozdes of God to lift bpp borne
oftheregall dignitie. And God gaue to Heman
tiii. fonnes and thee dougbdters. All tbefe alin
were at the band ofthep2 father {pngpng inthe
boule ofthe Lorde with (pmbales, plalterpes €
barpes, when Alaph, Jeduthunand Hemant ere
cuted theferupee tu the boule of Gora the kpu-
ges bande. And the multitude of thé wich theye
bacthzen that were infkructe in the fonges of the
Lozde,cuenalltbat wereconnpnge, weretwo |
bundzedfoure {core and epabt. And thep * calf nouri»,
lottcs amia them feluesdow thep Huld hapte
ås well foz the imallas foz the areat,foz tbe {coe
ler as teell as foz the {cholematter. |
And the yet lotte in Alaphfell to Jofeph. ©:
Mhelecondeto Gedcliahu ( with his bzethzen,
andfonnes) which men were twelne. Che third
fell tosacur with pis fones and arapa eA
twelue perfonnes. Che fourth to Jsri With his
(onnes and bzetbzen, twelue perfonnes.

The fpfth to Nathaniabu with his fones and
b2eth2en, ttoelue perfonnes. Che fyrth to Wut
abu with bis fonnes and bzethzen , tioelue per=
fines. Cheleuenth to Jefarcla with bis lines
and betinen, twelve perfonnes.

Theepght to Felatabu with his (ines € bee-
theen,tweluc perfones. Thenynthto A)atha>
niabu with bis fines ¢ bzethzen,twelue peris. m
Thetéthto Demet with bistinesandbeecthee
tioclucperfones. The elenenth to Asaracl with
bisfonnes and bzethzen, twelueperlones. The
rit. to Afabia with his fonnes and beeth; ae
perlons. Chethpztenth to Subael with bis on
nes aud brethzen,twoelue pecfonnes. Che fours
tenth to Sathathiabu with his fonnesand bze»
theé.rit.perfonnes .@he fpftenthto Ferimoth,
With his (onnesand been nt «al pad The
{prtenthto Panantabs with bis nes and bze=
th2en,ttoelue perfons. Che feucntenthto Jofbe
kata with bis (Ones and beetheen rit.perfones.
Che epabtenthtoHanant with bis tonnes and
Drethee twelve periods, Che:rir.toDalotbi,w
pis fonnies and beethzé, twelue perfons. The.rr
to Eliatbath with bis fonnes and bzethzen rit:
perfonnes: Che rvi.to Hothir witd byg fonnes
and bzethzé,ttoelue perfonnes. Che rrii.to Gi-
daltht toith bis Connes and beethzen tivelue per
fonnes. The rriii.to Mabasioth witb bis fon-
nesandbzethzen twelue perfonnes. Che. xritits
to Romantht Aser, with pis fonnesand bze-
thaen tivelue pertonnes: i


Se - e


Maud


CThe.crvi. Chapter.
Picea an
Peon eam, of Cie ate the Deuilions es
E gees Among p Cozctbites: <t)ctelemia
Seu pu : thelone of doze of forint of
Bd e Alaph. And p ines of Welelema
Key, “ain were thele:sachariabu peloelf,
Fevipel p fecond, zebadiabu the thpede,¢ Jathne
el the fourth, Elam the fptth, Jebobanan p tre,
and Eleonat the feuenth. Chelonnes of Dsed
Epom:Semeia the eldek, Jebolabad the lecd
Joab the thyzde, Sacar the fourth, and Metha-
acl the fyftb, Amiell the fprtb,€tachat the fe-
nenth, Peultbat the epaht,for God blefied bpm.

And to Simeia bis fon Were fonnes bome,
that ruled in tbe boule of thepz father „fo? Bt
were men of might. The lanes of Spemeta Dt
ni, Repbaell, Obed and Elsabad , and bps bze-
tbzen were rong mé:Elthu,and Samabtabu.
All ehefe were of thechplozen of Dbed Coon,
thep g thepe chplozer and thepz bretbrenactpue
men of ftrengtbe todo fernice , enen.irtt.of D-
bed Edom. And Melintab hadfonnes and bze-
thzenactpue men.rvitt. Che fonnes of Hola of
thechilozen of Merari: Simri chefe, ethoug
he wag not the eloelf, pet bis father fet bpm in
chefett place : Helkiabu the feconde : Tebaltahu
the thp2be,andsachartabu the fourtb:alltbefon


_. nesanothe bzetbzen of pola toere. rit.


Amonge thele was deuided the office of he
pozterthpp that thep Hulde be auncicnt men, to
wapte with thepz becthzé, when thep minitred
én the boule of the Lozd. And they calt lottes be-
twene thegreat efmalafter f boutbold oftherw


fatbers,fozenerp gate. Andebelot onthe cate Bete


{ydefel bpon Spalemetabu. And fozzachariabu
big fon( wbich was a wple counfapler)tbepralt
iotteg, and biglot cante out towarde the nozth.

Ares Obed Edomg lot fell tothe fouth. Ano
for bisténesfellto the boules of Alupptm. Fog
Supbin and Hola towarde the well, wpth the
gatetbat andeth totoarde the pper waye: one
iwatche beyn fea dab an other.

“Inthe eatt were {pre Leuptes:¢ toward the
no2¢b.titi.a Dap:toward Pfouth.ttit.a dape, and


towarde Afupbhim,two ¢two. Jn Pdarbarto- -


ward the Welk roo at thegoinge vp.and twoim
wMhatbar. helearetve biupfions of the poz
tergamonge the fonnes of Cozeh, andamong p
fonnegoksperart. And ofthe Leuptes, Aiah
bad the ouerfpabt ofthe trealure of the Doute of
God,and oftbetrealure of f dedicate thynges.
ARs concernpng che fonnes of Laadan which


” guerethecbplazenof p Gerlonites. DFLaadan


came auncient fatbers:eué of Laada there came
Gerluni ¢ Jebieli : Che lonnes of Febielt:setha
and Joel bis beotber, which were ouer the trea-
(ures ofp boule of tbe 10:0. Di the Amramitcs
allog Ssabarites, Hebzonites g Dsiclites was
Syabnell thefonne of Gerfon, the foune ot )o2
feg aruler oucrp creatures. And of bis bzethzen
the fonnes of Eliezer was ababiabu, w ofe
fon was slaiabu, whole fine was 3028, whofe
fonne toas zicb2t, whofe fonne wag Spelomttp


LLponicles:


which Helomithand his brethren were ouer:

the treatures of the Debica thin es bich Da-
utd the bpnge, andthe auncient fathers the ca-
pitapnes ouerthboutandes ¢bundzcdes, and the
capttapnes of the boot bad dedpcated of p.fpop-
les wonne tn battaples : thep bpd dedicate them
to mapntapne the boule of the Lozde : andall
that Samuel the lear, and Saul the fon of Cis
and bner the fonne of er, and Joab thefonne
noi en ae an edicated, and wholoeuct padde-

: iwetbynge it was wnderepe bande o

Selomith and of hig brethren. ioina


Df the Fabacites was Chenantabnandbis >


fones,appointed tothe bulpnefle withoutfoat

ouer Zlracll,foz thep were officers pd anit
And of the Hebzonites , Hlabiabu and pps bes
thzen men of actiuttie , a thoufande and feucr
Hundzed were officers amonge them of Feaelk
beponde Jordan well warde, tn al bulpnetfe be»
longpnge to God,and {erupce of the Rpnge. a=
monge the Hebsonites was Fedia the chetel,
euena prince amonge the Hebzonites ¢ fathers
of bys kpnred. And in the.rl.peare of the kyng=
dome of Mautdthep were fought Foz. And there
were founde.amonge them men of actinitie at
Jazer in Gilead. And bps bzethzen were men of
actiuitie, euen two thoulande and leuen badzed
auncient fatbers, whom kyng Dauid made tus
lerg oner the Rubpnites, Gaddptes and ouer
the balfe tribe of manafic, foz suerp Patter pee


tapnpng to God, and for tbe kpnges bulpneiie. —


@ The.rr vif. Chapter.
Dl the princes and rulers that iminifred pute (hekpnge.


A Baas be of them, the auncient peedes and
epe ? captapneg of thoufandes and putt-


Irritt,


m $C Chpldzen OF Ffraelafterthe nom- B


ee


SS —————— —
— Se Ee a a


Da,
Theepabtcàaptapne fo: the epght moncth, was
Sibechaian ulathpte of the kpnrede ofzarhi:
and in bis courle were.xetitt. thoufande. Their.
captapne fo? thenpnth moneth has Abteser an
Anathothite of thefonnes of Jemint:and in bis
coutfe were.rrtitt.thoufande. The tenth cap-
tapne foz the tenth moncth, was Sabari, the
Petophathite of the sarabptes:and in bis courte
weretwentp and foure thouland. Tbe eleuenth
Fo? the clenentl moneth, was Wanaia the Pira:
thonpte of the chpldzen of Ephraim: and in big
courte were.rriitt.thoufand. The tWwelueth cap-
tapne foz the rweluecth moneth, was Heldai the
Methopbhathyre, with Dehoniel : gin his courte
Were. critit.thoufande. And the rulers ouer the

C trpbes of Flrael were thele.Amonge the Rube-
nptes was Elieser the fonne of sichat. Amonge
the Simeonptes allo was Saphathiabu plone
of Haacha. Amonge the Leuptes:Halabia the
fonne of kemucl. Amonge the Daromptes :3a-
dok. Amonge them of Suda : Elihu of the bze-
thzen of Dauid. Among them of Flachar: Dm-

i ri the fonne of Dichacl. Amonge them of zabu-

~ don: ¥Jefmatabu the fon of Dbadiabu. Amonge
them of Repbtbali: Ferimoth the lonne of A3-
viel. Amonge the chpldzen of Ephraim : Hofera
the fonne of Asariabu. Fn che balfe trp be allo of

Pana fle : Joel the Conne of Pbedtabu. DF the

~ bal€tepbe of anafle in Gilead. Fido the fonge
ofsachatiabu. Amonge them of Ben Jamin:
Saaliel the onne of Abner. Amonge them of
Dan : Asarel the fonne of Jeroham. Cheleare
the lozdes of the trpbes oF Jfrael.

Wut Daud toke not the nombze of them Vn-
der. rx.pere:bpcaule the Z o2delapd be toolbe ens
creale Firaell lpke vnto the Farteg of the {hpe.

Cpar.rrija, BUD Phos the forme of saruia beyan to ndbee:
but be fintlibed tt not bpcaufe p there ell wath
Fo: tt agapntt Flraell, nepther was the nomb2e
put into the cheonpcles of kpnge Daud. |

D Due thekpnres trealures was Jsmaueth
the fonne of Adiel. And ouer the trealures of the
Feldes in the cpties € villages g caltels, was Fe-
bponstban the fonne of Gsiabu. And over the
wozkemen in the felbes that tplled the gronnde
was et the fonne of Chelub, And the ouet-
fygit of the wpnepardes bad Semei the Rama-
thre: Duer tbe encreafe alfo of the bpnepardes
and ouer the tupnetellevs, was Sabdi the Hali-
phuiyte: and once the olpuetrees an’ mulberp
trees that were in the valleps, was Waal pa-
nat the Gederpte. And ouer the trealure of ople
was Jas : Duer the oren that fedde in Haron
was Setari the Haronpte. And ouer the oren
that were in the valeps, was DSapdat the fotine
of Adlai. Duer the camels, Dbi the Fimaelite,
And ouer the alles, was Jobadiabu the Hero=
nothpte. Duer the Hepe, was Jasts the Hage-
rpte, All thefe were the rulers of the fubfaunce
of &png Danid, And Jehonetban Mauids vnele
aman of counfaple and of onderftandpne, was
a feribe,and Febicl the fonne of Machmony was
with the ipnges fonnes (enftructypnge them).
and Ahitophel wag of the Bynges counfaple.
And Hulatthe Arachpte wag tbe bpngeg coni


a


LLhronpeles:


Panid,
panpon, And nerte to Abitopbel teas Jehoiada
thefonne of Wanaiabu and vbiatbarcand cap:
tapne of the hpnges warre was Joab, 3

; -~ CThe.rrviit.chapter.
C Spcaule Dauw wae fozbrooen te buptive the


temple, be erhortety Salomon andthe prope
to perfourme it.


Poe Rd Dauid gathered togpther allthe 3
4 Lozdeg oF Firael : the lozbes of the trp-

a3 bes, the lozdes of the companpes that
teed) Mplpitred to the kpnee bp courfe, the
captapues ouer thoufandes oner bundzedes,¢
tbe lozdes that bad the oueslpabt ouer al the lub
ftaunce g poffetipon of Dauid, bis fonnes, with
thecbamberlapues : all the mpgbtp æ valpaunt
andall actpue men bnto Ferufalem-Aand kpnge
Dauid ode vp bpon his fete, and fayd:

- Heare mp bretbzen and mp people xa bad itt tres bya
mp Dette to buplde an boufe of reit forebearke ?
of the couenaunt of the Lozbe, and fo the foote
tole ofour God, and bad made redp foz p bupl-

Opnge. But God Tapd puto me * thou fhalt NOÉ iireg.s.a
bupldeanboule foz mp name, bpeaufe thou bat ie
bena man of warre and baft Hed blonde. Bore
ouer i Lode Good of Frael + chole me before Lresrons
all be oute of mp Father,to be kpnge ouer Ue
racll foz euer, oz in Juda wolde he chole acap-
tapne and of the boutpolde of Juda is the boufe
of mp fatber, and amonge the tonnes of mp fa-
ther be bad a luft to me to make me kpnge ouer
all Glraell. And ofall mp fonnes (foz the Lozde

ath qpue ine maup fonnes) be bath chofer a:

omon mp fonne to {pt bpon the trate of p ipung-
dome of the Lozbde in Jiracll. And beflapt tnta
me:* Salomon mp fontie,be (hall buploe mean tpa.roie.c
Houle ¢ courtes, F baue chofen bpm tobe my fon "ar-di.b,
and J topl be bis father. top! ably bis king
Dome foz ener:VE be til be frronge todo mp com
maubemtentes €mp lawes, ag tt goeth this dap:
Row A obit SUL ce fyabt ofall Zfrael the con- a
gregacton of the Lozde, g in the andpence of eur
God: kepe and feke fo2 all the comanndementes
of the Lod pour God,that pe map entop a good
lande and leauc ittberptaunce foz pour chplbzen
after pou foz euer, And thou Salomon mp fone
knote thou the God of thp father,¢ ferue bpm
with a pure berte, and with a (wee courage.
* JED? tHe Lozdefearcheth al bertes,and Under- prar. è
tandet) all the pmagpnacpons of thoucbtes:
And pf thou feke bpm:be wpll be faunde of the.
Hut pt thou forfate bpm, be wpll caf the of toz
ener. "Cake hede now, fo: the Lorde bath chofen
the,f0 buplde bpm an boule of a Sanctuary. We
Fronge therfore, and plape the man.

and Dauid gaue Salomon bis fonne the pa C
terne of p poche kot the tempre arto) and Of P Hot- x
{es that longed therto, of the toze boutes pper
chainbzes, inner parlours, ¢ of the boufe off mer
tpleate: and the erample of all that be had in bis
mynde fo: the courtes of the boule of the Lorde,
and fo2 all thecelics rounde aboute, fogthe trea=
fures of the boule of Gob, & foz the treafures of
the Dedpcate thpuges,¢ fo: the Dinifpons of the
panes and Leuttes that thapted by courte; and
fo all the woozkemanthyp that toulde ferne foz
theboule of the Lozde,and fo2 al the Mihi
TN ii


D
oH


ànd


Mulde ferue in the boule of the Lorde : Eo: gold
andto: the apabe of golde, foz all vefelleg of
fondzpe miniftractong : foz al maner of veffelles
of fpluerin wapabte, and Foz all velfelles what
focuer ai ie thep (erued vnto. Che aight of
golde Foz the cand lettpches ,and the golde foz p
lampes, w tbe wapgbt foz eucrp candicitpcke,¢
fo: the lampes therof. And fo: the candlettpc=
kes of fpluer bp wapgbt , both Eo? f canbleftpcls
andalfofo: ber lampes, accozdpng to the diner-
fitie of the Yie of euerpecandleftpcke. Andbp
wWapght-a(be sauegoloe for the tables of Mewe-
beed,eucn fo enerp table:and lpkewpfelpluer
Foz the tables of fpluer. And golde Fo: fehokes
cuppes,and dDepnbpng pottes. And pure goldin
wapabt Foz bales, ene toz enerp balen. And like
wple fpluerbp tapght for euctp baleot fpluer
Hund for the alter af infece pure yold by warght
And golde foz the paterne of the charet of p che-
rubs that fretched out thep2 wpnges, and coue
red tbe arke of the couenaunte of the Lode. All
(fapde be) was gpuen bp taptpnge of the bande
of the Lorde, wbich made me vndertande al the
wo:kemanthpp ofthe paterne. —
And pautd fapd to Salomon his fonne: be
{fronge, and Domanlp , feare not , no? be fapnte
werted:fo2 the Lord God, euch mp Godig wth
the,and be Hal not faple thenoz feztake the, Vn-
tpll chou bat finifthed all the wozke that multe
feruefortheboute ofthe Lozbe. Webolde, the
p2eeites and Leuites are Deupded incompanpes
o2 all maner of ferupce that pertepnetd to be


i. Lheonicles


And fo P auncient fathers and thelordes ofp 43
trpbes of ‘{Sracl,the captapnes iim soi E
bundzedes , Wpth tbe lozdes that were rulers os
uer the kynges woke, were wpllpng, and gaue
fo2 the ferupcee of the boule of God, je thou:
lande talentes of golde, and ten thoufand peces
of golde, andtcn thoulande talentes of {plucr
and.rvitl. choulande talentes of bzafle, and one
bundzed thoufandetalentes of pron. Andthep
wpb whom prectous Cones were founde, gane
tbem tothe trealure of the boule of the 1020, bp
the bande of Febicl the Gerfonpte.

And the people retopfed when thep were fo
wpllpnge to gpuetbep2 goodeg and with a per-
fect barte thep offered wnto the Lode. And wa:
uid the kynge reiopicd wpth greate qladnefie.
And Dauid blefled the Lorde befoze all theton-
gregacion, andlapod:Wlelled bethou Lod God
of Flractl our father fro euer gfo? ener. Thpne
(D Lopde)is qreatnefle and power, glozpe, Vi-
Chop and prapte: fez all that ts in beauen and its
cartheistbpne, andthpneis tbe bpnadome (O
Lorde) and thouercellett aboue all, ewenas the
Heedof all. Andepehelleand honour come of the
and thou rapqnett ouer all, and inthpne bande
ig potver and itrengtbhe, andin thpne bande itis
to make greate and to gpue frength puto all.

ANd nowe our God, we thanke the,¢ praple
thp gloziougname. Sut whoam Jand what
is mp people, that we Hulde enforce oure felues
togpucthelethyngesf{orpllpnglpe: Wutall
tbpnges come of the:and of that which we recep
nedatthpynebande we paue gpuenthe. x


| boufe of God:thep are wpth the Foz all maner of
| wozkemanwpp,andfoare all that ercell in wil-
Dome foz anpmaner of ferupce. Thou batalio
Lo2des and all the people fo2 cuerp thpnge that


Fo
we be but fraugers before the, andfotourners este


a3 were all onre forefathers. Dure dapeg onthe Sebze. pie
earthe allo are butasax (hadowe, andthereis


thoupatnedesf. = noite abpopnge.D Lozde our Sod,al this tufe 24°" *
C The.xric. Chapter. that Wwe pauc prcpazedtobuplde the an boule for
i € The olterpnges of Dauid and sf Che pzineee foz the thpne bolpe name, commeth ofthpne bande, and


Hiirega


a bupiopageotthetemple. Dauid dpeth:and Salomon
bry ronne rapgneth in bps Menr
me fd Dauid the kprge fapde wntoall
Aa the congregacton:* God bathe fpecp=
oa walally choten Salomd mp fonne wbich
Sap Siispet pong andtendze,and the worke


(Lae ate m


isallthpne. (3 wote alfomp God) pthon trepet
the bertes, and batte pleatarety Ueber
And inthe onfapnednetle of mpne berte:¥ baue
wplipnglpe ofred all thele thpnges. Andnowe
baue A tene thp people wobich are founde bere.to
offre vnto the wplipngl pe and wopth gladnefic .
D Lozd Godot Abpapam, Flaa and of F{ractt
our fathers kepe this Foz euer ag tbe beapnning
of the thougbtes of the perte of thppeople, and
prepare thep2 pertes vntothe. Andqpuewvnto
Salomon my fonse a perfecte herte tokepe thy
commaundementeg, thp tebimonpes, and th
fFatutes, and todoall, andfobuploe the boule
foz the whiche FJ baue made p2ouifion.

Ano Dauld lapde toalltheconqregacion: €
Mot bleffe the L020 pour God. And al $ cores


 gacton blefed the Lord God of thep2 fathers, €


bowed Bowne thep2 heedes,and wo: hipped the
Lozde and the kynge. Bnd thep ofred offrpnges
wntothe Lode. Andontbe mozotve after the
fapbe dap, thep ofred burnt ofrpnges wntothe
Lode, euena thoufande pongesren , athboulad -
rammes, andathoufande eepe, wopth theps
depnkofcpnges : Wanpe lacrificeg ofred thep
Foz all Firaell, € dpb eate and dzynke before the
Lozve the fame dape with greate glavnefe. —
Bt. Bnd


D
oH


ànd


Mulde ferue in the boule of the Lorde : Eo: gold
andto: the apabe of golde, foz all vefelleg of
fondzpe miniftractong : foz al maner of veffelles
of fpluerin wapabte, and Foz all velfelles what
focuer ai ie thep (erued vnto. Che aight of
golde Foz the cand lettpches ,and the golde foz p
lampes, w tbe wapgbt foz eucrp candicitpcke,¢
fo: the lampes therof. And fo: the candlettpc=
kes of fpluer bp wapgbt , both Eo? f canbleftpcls
andalfofo: ber lampes, accozdpng to the diner-
fitie of the Yie of euerpecandleftpcke. Andbp
wWapght-a(be sauegoloe for the tables of Mewe-
beed,eucn fo enerp table:and lpkewpfelpluer
Foz the tables of fpluer. And golde Fo: fehokes
cuppes,and dDepnbpng pottes. And pure goldin
wapabt Foz bales, ene toz enerp balen. And like
wple fpluerbp tapght for euctp baleot fpluer
Hund for the alter af infece pure yold by warght
And golde foz the paterne of the charet of p che-
rubs that fretched out thep2 wpnges, and coue
red tbe arke of the couenaunte of the Lode. All
(fapde be) was gpuen bp taptpnge of the bande
of the Lorde, wbich made me vndertande al the
wo:kemanthpp ofthe paterne. —
And pautd fapd to Salomon his fonne: be
{fronge, and Domanlp , feare not , no? be fapnte
werted:fo2 the Lord God, euch mp Godig wth
the,and be Hal not faple thenoz feztake the, Vn-
tpll chou bat finifthed all the wozke that multe
feruefortheboute ofthe Lozbe. Webolde, the
p2eeites and Leuites are Deupded incompanpes
o2 all maner of ferupce that pertepnetd to be


i. Lheonicles


And fo P auncient fathers and thelordes ofp 43
trpbes of ‘{Sracl,the captapnes iim soi E
bundzedes , Wpth tbe lozdes that were rulers os
uer the kynges woke, were wpllpng, and gaue
fo2 the ferupcee of the boule of God, je thou:
lande talentes of golde, and ten thoufand peces
of golde, andtcn thoulande talentes of {plucr
and.rvitl. choulande talentes of bzafle, and one
bundzed thoufandetalentes of pron. Andthep
wpb whom prectous Cones were founde, gane
tbem tothe trealure of the boule of the 1020, bp
the bande of Febicl the Gerfonpte.

And the people retopfed when thep were fo
wpllpnge to gpuetbep2 goodeg and with a per-
fect barte thep offered wnto the Lode. And wa:
uid the kynge reiopicd wpth greate qladnefie.
And Dauid blefled the Lorde befoze all theton-
gregacion, andlapod:Wlelled bethou Lod God
of Flractl our father fro euer gfo? ener. Thpne
(D Lopde)is qreatnefle and power, glozpe, Vi-
Chop and prapte: fez all that ts in beauen and its
cartheistbpne, andthpneis tbe bpnadome (O
Lorde) and thouercellett aboue all, ewenas the
Heedof all. Andepehelleand honour come of the
and thou rapqnett ouer all, and inthpne bande
ig potver and itrengtbhe, andin thpne bande itis
to make greate and to gpue frength puto all.

ANd nowe our God, we thanke the,¢ praple
thp gloziougname. Sut whoam Jand what
is mp people, that we Hulde enforce oure felues
togpucthelethyngesf{orpllpnglpe: Wutall
tbpnges come of the:and of that which we recep
nedatthpynebande we paue gpuenthe. x


| boufe of God:thep are wpth the Foz all maner of
| wozkemanwpp,andfoare all that ercell in wil-
Dome foz anpmaner of ferupce. Thou batalio
Lo2des and all the people fo2 cuerp thpnge that


Fo
we be but fraugers before the, andfotourners este


a3 were all onre forefathers. Dure dapeg onthe Sebze. pie
earthe allo are butasax (hadowe, andthereis


thoupatnedesf. = noite abpopnge.D Lozde our Sod,al this tufe 24°" *
C The.xric. Chapter. that Wwe pauc prcpazedtobuplde the an boule for
i € The olterpnges of Dauid and sf Che pzineee foz the thpne bolpe name, commeth ofthpne bande, and


Hiirega


a bupiopageotthetemple. Dauid dpeth:and Salomon
bry ronne rapgneth in bps Menr
me fd Dauid the kprge fapde wntoall
Aa the congregacton:* God bathe fpecp=
oa walally choten Salomd mp fonne wbich
Sap Siispet pong andtendze,and the worke


(Lae ate m


isallthpne. (3 wote alfomp God) pthon trepet
the bertes, and batte pleatarety Ueber
And inthe onfapnednetle of mpne berte:¥ baue
wplipnglpe ofred all thele thpnges. Andnowe
baue A tene thp people wobich are founde bere.to
offre vnto the wplipngl pe and wopth gladnefic .
D Lozd Godot Abpapam, Flaa and of F{ractt
our fathers kepe this Foz euer ag tbe beapnning
of the thougbtes of the perte of thppeople, and
prepare thep2 pertes vntothe. Andqpuewvnto
Salomon my fonse a perfecte herte tokepe thy
commaundementeg, thp tebimonpes, and th
fFatutes, and todoall, andfobuploe the boule
foz the whiche FJ baue made p2ouifion.

Ano Dauld lapde toalltheconqregacion: €
Mot bleffe the L020 pour God. And al $ cores


 gacton blefed the Lord God of thep2 fathers, €


bowed Bowne thep2 heedes,and wo: hipped the
Lozde and the kynge. Bnd thep ofred offrpnges
wntothe Lode. Andontbe mozotve after the
fapbe dap, thep ofred burnt ofrpnges wntothe
Lode, euena thoufande pongesren , athboulad -
rammes, andathoufande eepe, wopth theps
depnkofcpnges : Wanpe lacrificeg ofred thep
Foz all Firaell, € dpb eate and dzynke before the
Lozve the fame dape with greate glavnefe. —
Bt. Bnd


Salomon,
F And thep made Halornon the fonne of Dauid
kpnge the feconde tyme, ¢anopnted ppm prpnce
| befoze the Lo2zde, andsadoc tobe the ri Mage
fitxes.tic. x And Salomon fate onthe feate of the Lo20e,
and was kpng in Fede of Dauid hts father, and
profpered : gall thep of Slrael obeped bpm. And
all the lozdes g men of power, and ail the fonnes
ofspng Daud lubmitted them lelucs:and Were
fies. tiin DUDEr KPH Salomon. * And the Lorde magni-
fped Salomon indignitie in p (pat of all them
of Jlracl, € gaue bym fo qlogpous a kpngodome

_ asnokpnge badbefoze bpmin Frael.

&  Andfo Danid the fon of Flap rapgned ouer
all Jlracl. And f (pace that be rapgned ouer Fle
rael was.rL pere:feué pere raigned be in eb26,
and. rectit_percrapgned be in Zerufalt:g he dped
ina good age: full of Dapes,rpches and Honour.
And Salomod bis fon rapgned tn his fede. The
actes of Dauid the kpuge fpi andlat:bebolde
thep are writtenin the boke of Samuel the fear,
e inthe boke of Pathan ë propbete,¢ inthe boke
of Gad the fear, with all bis kpnqodom g potver,
anb tymes that went ouer bpm, g ouer al gfrael
and ouer all the kpngdomes of the carth.


CThe ende of the fpr boke of the Chz0-
nypcles:otberwovle called the frat


bo ke ot Paralivomenon.


The feconde booke of
the Chzonpcles:wbiche in the ebzue
is one with the fpr.


=
T Ne on
= : ; =!
ia |


= = av Hews TT


Ciivetiia jay


‘ea lomon fpake wuto al 4lrael,to
A ‘yd the captapnes ouer thoulades,
ES tothe captapnes ouer punde-
des, to the iudgeg,g to cucrp officer inal Flrael,

and tothe aunctent fathers. And fo Salomon g
id.reg.tiia allthbe congregacion with ppmxwent tothe bpe
iparra place that was at Oibeon,+ foz there was theta
Sro tereh bernacle of p witnes of God* which Mofes the
vit.  Certantof the Lozde made inp wplodcrnes. But
Hivebte Ehearke OF God tbad Dauid brought fro pu:

ath jearim,into p place whiche David had p2e=

parcd therfore. Eo? be pad pptebed a tent foz tt
ercrrbitia at Ferutale, ozeouer,the baalen aulter * that


ti.Lponyeles.


Ca bymin the dignitie. ANd Da- k


Salomon,
Wesalecl the fonne of Cicithefonne of Hur bad

made, was there before p tabernacle of p Lozde.

And Salomon ethecongregacpon went to via

fite it. And Salomd gat vptbere before f Low

to the bzafen aulter ý was befoze the tabernacle

of witnes,¢xoffred a thoulande burntlacrtfices ti.reg.tit.e
Bponit. And the fame npght pd God appeare

nto Salomon, g fapd into bpm: alke what J

fhall qpue the. And Halomon fapd ynto God:

thou pall thewed great mercp bnto Daud mp


fatberandxbak made me torapane inpig kede. Satir.s


+20 therfore, D Lowe God, let thp promple pira uea

whiche thou made ynto Daui mp father, be 25

truc. Fo: thou bat mademe bpng ouer a people

whicheislpke the dut of the earth in multitude:

Wwherfore gpue me now wpledom e knowledee,

that J map be abletogo p and out befoze thig

people:foz who clg-#(wozthelp can indge this peo gs

plethat ts fo great? * And God fapd to Halo- ¢

mon: bpcaule this was tn thpne perte g bpcanle iireg.iitb

thou batt not afked trealure,rpchefte,¢ honour,

and p lpues of thpne enempes,nepther pet longe

lyfe: buthat alked wptedome g knowledge foz

tby felfe to tudge mp people, ouer which 4 haue

made p kpug:wpieoom g knolbled ge isqrauted

Duitothe,and F wpll qpue thetrealure erpchess* -

and gloap: fotbatamong the kpuges that paue

ben befo2e the o2 after panone waso: thal belike

the. Jnd fo Salomon came from the bplaulter

(that was at Gibeon) to Jernulalé,from theta-

bernacle of witnes,éraigned oner Firal. x And D

Halomon gathered the charets ¢ hozlemen:and i.reg.rd

be badatboutande ¢foure bundzed charets:and

rit. <2), bogfinei, whom be beowed in the charet

cpties,¢ with tie kpng at Jerufalem. And x the iit.reg.t.0

kpnge nade nener and golde at Jerufalem, ag

plenteous as tones : and cedze trees made be as

pemp ag the multerp trees that groweinthe `
alep s: the bozles wobiche Salomon bad, were a

bzougbt bpm out of Egppt bp the bpngeg mar-


chauntes that were togprber, whiche bepnae of ~


one companpe, toše them out at a pepce, Thep
came allo and bought out of Egypte a charet
for {pre bundzed peces of fpluer : euen an bozfe
foz an bundzed ano fpftpe. And fo bzougbt they `
pones foz all the kpngcs of the Hetbytes, and
oa the Kynges of Sparta by thep2 owne bande.
C The.ii.Chapter.
G Salomon fendrth to Hiram the kpngtof~ -
pie to: wood and wozkemen.
Nd Salomi determpned to buplde an
y boule fo? the name of the 02d, and an 3
am, W poule fo: bis kpngdom:and Salomon
emi —itolde out tize {coreg ten thoulandimen
fo beare burthens, and fourefcoze thoufandimen
to pete toneg in tde mountavuc:and thre thon-
fande and fpre bundzed to ouerle them.
` ¥ And eN. fentto Hiram the kpnge OË irena
Qpe faping: Hs thou dpddelk deale with Da-
utd mp father, €* pudet fen’ bpm Cedze wood ires.b,b,
to buplde bpman ponte to dwell in euen fo deale
with me. For F am abort fo buplde an boule foz
thename of the Lozde mp God, to offre wunto
bpm bolp thpnaes, and to burne fwete incenfe,
and to tet (embzeed befogze ppm iad gy Fi
ne < offr


r
|
|
l


Salomon,
F And thep made Halornon the fonne of Dauid
kpnge the feconde tyme, ¢anopnted ppm prpnce
| befoze the Lo2zde, andsadoc tobe the ri Mage
fitxes.tic. x And Salomon fate onthe feate of the Lo20e,
and was kpng in Fede of Dauid hts father, and
profpered : gall thep of Slrael obeped bpm. And
all the lozdes g men of power, and ail the fonnes
ofspng Daud lubmitted them lelucs:and Were
fies. tiin DUDEr KPH Salomon. * And the Lorde magni-
fped Salomon indignitie in p (pat of all them
of Jlracl, € gaue bym fo qlogpous a kpngodome

_ asnokpnge badbefoze bpmin Frael.

&  Andfo Danid the fon of Flap rapgned ouer
all Jlracl. And f (pace that be rapgned ouer Fle
rael was.rL pere:feué pere raigned be in eb26,
and. rectit_percrapgned be in Zerufalt:g he dped
ina good age: full of Dapes,rpches and Honour.
And Salomod bis fon rapgned tn his fede. The
actes of Dauid the kpuge fpi andlat:bebolde
thep are writtenin the boke of Samuel the fear,
e inthe boke of Pathan ë propbete,¢ inthe boke
of Gad the fear, with all bis kpnqodom g potver,
anb tymes that went ouer bpm, g ouer al gfrael
and ouer all the kpngdomes of the carth.


CThe ende of the fpr boke of the Chz0-
nypcles:otberwovle called the frat


bo ke ot Paralivomenon.


The feconde booke of
the Chzonpcles:wbiche in the ebzue
is one with the fpr.


=
T Ne on
= : ; =!
ia |


= = av Hews TT


Ciivetiia jay


‘ea lomon fpake wuto al 4lrael,to
A ‘yd the captapnes ouer thoulades,
ES tothe captapnes ouer punde-
des, to the iudgeg,g to cucrp officer inal Flrael,

and tothe aunctent fathers. And fo Salomon g
id.reg.tiia allthbe congregacion with ppmxwent tothe bpe
iparra place that was at Oibeon,+ foz there was theta
Sro tereh bernacle of p witnes of God* which Mofes the
vit.  Certantof the Lozde made inp wplodcrnes. But
Hivebte Ehearke OF God tbad Dauid brought fro pu:

ath jearim,into p place whiche David had p2e=

parcd therfore. Eo? be pad pptebed a tent foz tt
ercrrbitia at Ferutale, ozeouer,the baalen aulter * that


ti.Lponyeles.


Ca bymin the dignitie. ANd Da- k


Salomon,
Wesalecl the fonne of Cicithefonne of Hur bad

made, was there before p tabernacle of p Lozde.

And Salomon ethecongregacpon went to via

fite it. And Salomd gat vptbere before f Low

to the bzafen aulter ý was befoze the tabernacle

of witnes,¢xoffred a thoulande burntlacrtfices ti.reg.tit.e
Bponit. And the fame npght pd God appeare

nto Salomon, g fapd into bpm: alke what J

fhall qpue the. And Halomon fapd ynto God:

thou pall thewed great mercp bnto Daud mp


fatberandxbak made me torapane inpig kede. Satir.s


+20 therfore, D Lowe God, let thp promple pira uea

whiche thou made ynto Daui mp father, be 25

truc. Fo: thou bat mademe bpng ouer a people

whicheislpke the dut of the earth in multitude:

Wwherfore gpue me now wpledom e knowledee,

that J map be abletogo p and out befoze thig

people:foz who clg-#(wozthelp can indge this peo gs

plethat ts fo great? * And God fapd to Halo- ¢

mon: bpcaule this was tn thpne perte g bpcanle iireg.iitb

thou batt not afked trealure,rpchefte,¢ honour,

and p lpues of thpne enempes,nepther pet longe

lyfe: buthat alked wptedome g knowledge foz

tby felfe to tudge mp people, ouer which 4 haue

made p kpug:wpieoom g knolbled ge isqrauted

Duitothe,and F wpll qpue thetrealure erpchess* -

and gloap: fotbatamong the kpuges that paue

ben befo2e the o2 after panone waso: thal belike

the. Jnd fo Salomon came from the bplaulter

(that was at Gibeon) to Jernulalé,from theta-

bernacle of witnes,éraigned oner Firal. x And D

Halomon gathered the charets ¢ hozlemen:and i.reg.rd

be badatboutande ¢foure bundzed charets:and

rit. <2), bogfinei, whom be beowed in the charet

cpties,¢ with tie kpng at Jerufalem. And x the iit.reg.t.0

kpnge nade nener and golde at Jerufalem, ag

plenteous as tones : and cedze trees made be as

pemp ag the multerp trees that groweinthe `
alep s: the bozles wobiche Salomon bad, were a

bzougbt bpm out of Egppt bp the bpngeg mar-


chauntes that were togprber, whiche bepnae of ~


one companpe, toše them out at a pepce, Thep
came allo and bought out of Egypte a charet
for {pre bundzed peces of fpluer : euen an bozfe
foz an bundzed ano fpftpe. And fo bzougbt they `
pones foz all the kpngcs of the Hetbytes, and
oa the Kynges of Sparta by thep2 owne bande.
C The.ii.Chapter.
G Salomon fendrth to Hiram the kpngtof~ -
pie to: wood and wozkemen.
Nd Salomi determpned to buplde an
y boule fo? the name of the 02d, and an 3
am, W poule fo: bis kpngdom:and Salomon
emi —itolde out tize {coreg ten thoulandimen
fo beare burthens, and fourefcoze thoufandimen
to pete toneg in tde mountavuc:and thre thon-
fande and fpre bundzed to ouerle them.
` ¥ And eN. fentto Hiram the kpnge OË irena
Qpe faping: Hs thou dpddelk deale with Da-
utd mp father, €* pudet fen’ bpm Cedze wood ires.b,b,
to buplde bpman ponte to dwell in euen fo deale
with me. For F am abort fo buplde an boule foz
thename of the Lozde mp God, to offre wunto
bpm bolp thpnaes, and to burne fwete incenfe,
and to tet (embzeed befogze ppm iad gy Fi
ne < offr


r
|
|
l


od


| Salomon
d


óffre burnt lacrifices fo2 the moznpnae and cuc-


npng:onthe Sabborhdapes.inthelyetday of Ay
cuerpeneme moone, andintbelolempnefeaites Pirmat S)opiaxwbere (the Lozde appeared H. Pa.rri.a


of the Lozde our God: foritiganozdinaunceto —


becontinuallp&cpte of Firaell. And the boule
Lobiche F buplde Halbe greate, foz qreatis oure
Godaboue all gods. Wut whois hadle to bupde
bpm anboules whenthat beauen, andbeauen a-
bouc all Deauens ts not bableto recepuc bpm :

patam FJ the pF thuldebupldbpm an Hoyle?
nap, buteuentoburne facrifice before bpm, all


25 this bupldpng be: fende mmenow therfore acon


npnge man tbat can worke in qolde ¢fpluer, in
batle and pron, ih purple, cremofpn and pelotoe
fplbe, ¢ that can(&pl to grane wm theconpng më
that are wpth me in Juda and Ferulal€,whome
Daud mp fatherdpd prepare. Sende me allo
Cedze trees, Wpnetrecs t Almuge trees oute of
Libanon. For J wot prby feruauntes can (kyl
tobewetpmbzein Libanon. Andbebolode ; mp
men Halbe wpe thpne , that thep may prepare
metpmbze pnough.Jfo2 the boule whiche Jam
Determ tif tobuplde Halbe wondzcfull creat .
And bebolode, foz the vie of thy feruauntes p cut
fers and the bewers of tpmb2e F baue gpuen.tr


ti. Lheonices


Fol.lrrh.


RE PLD Dalomd beganto buplvoe f honte


teal ofthe Lowdeat Jerufalem in mounte


SS Nat gu a"


ESS Vito Dauid bys father, euen in the
place p Dauid prepared tn the thzel(png foure


of Donan the Febulite. And hex bega to buploe Actes.vit.¢
in the feconde Dape of thefeconde moneth +the tit.rea,v/,0


fourth pere of bps rapgne. And thele arethe paz
ternes wperbp Salomon was inftruct tobupld
the boule of God. The lengeh was threlcore cu:
bptesafter the olde mealure, andthe becdth.rr.
cubptes. Che poche, $ was inbredthe as la raè
as thetemple,bad.re.cubptes : and thebepathe
Wasanhundzedand.cr.cubptes. Andbheoucr- -
ae it on the inner fpde wpth pure golde.

And the greater boule he {pied with fprretrte
tobich pe ouetlaped wpth the belt gold, and gra
ved therto palmetrees €chapnes. And he ouers
laped the boufe topth pzectoule fone beautpful-
lp. And tbe golde was golde of Waruaim. The
boufe(3 fape)the beames,pooltes, walles, and
Dozes thereof oucrlapedhe wprh golde, ¢ made
grauen Wwozrke bpon the wailes.

And He made the boute meolke bolpe,whofe
length thas twenty cubptes lpk tothe breorh of


4 ¢ thoulande quarters of beaten tebeate, and.rr.
tpoulanbe quarters of barlp, and.rr.thoulande
bateg of topne,¢.re.thoulad bates of ople. Bnd
Hiram kpnge of Cpe anlwered in w2ptpnge
which belent to Salomon: Wypcaule the Lozde
thloued bis people, therfoze be bath made the
png ouer them: And Hird fapd mozeouer blef-


the Houle, andthe beth thereof was alfo.re.cys
bptes. Andde suctlayed itwyth good golde, ee
nen wopt). v1. budzedtalentes. And the weperhe
of thenaples of golde was fpftpe (prices. nv be
ouerlaped the Vpper chambzes wpth olde.

+ And iu the poule moolte bolp be madetio C
Chrrabpns of pmagewozrkelykechplozen, and Erorr.


5
<3 bs.


|
|
|


fed be the Lozd God of {lracll which made bea-
uch and earth, andthat bathe gpuen Dantd the
kpnge a wplefonne, g one that bath difceetion,


| prudence and birdertandpng to bupld an boule


toz the Lozbe,¢ a palace fo: bym felfe. Andnow
J baue fent a wpie man, anda manof bnderta


éG.re.bti,b. pi 4s alan inp father Hird Dpd dle) the lon
.


woman of the doughters of Dan, € bps fa-
ther was amanot pre, ebecanlkpl to Wozke
in golde and {pluer, inbzafle andpzon in fone,
andtpmbze , in purpleand pelowe plke, infpne


D Whpte and crymofpn:andcan qrauelundzp ma:


ner of graupnges, and fpnde oute Dpucrs max
ner of fubtle Wozke that halbe Tet before bpm ,
pth thp connpnge men, and wpeb the conning
men of mp Zo2de Dauid thp father. Mow ther=
Fore the wheat and barlp, opleand wpne, whpch
mp 1020 Datb{poken of let bpm fende bnto pps
feruauntes. And Wwe wll cut wood tn Libanon
ag mucbeas thou Halt nede, and wpll bepnactt
to thein bppps bp theleeto Fapbo, fr whence
thou mapi carpe them to Ferulalem. And Das
lomd nombzedall the firaungers that were inp
‘tande of Ffrael, after the nombze of them whom
bpsfatber Danid badnombzed. And thep were
ounde an bundzed and.liii.thoufande, and {pre
uundzed. Andhe lette.ler.thoulande of them to


cateburthens, and.irre.thoufandetobew ros |


negin the mountapne: andthe tboufande and
Tore bund2cd officergto fet the peoplea wozke.
— CThe.itt. Chapter.


C Ehr tempie of the Lozbe and the porche are bapl:
P Ded twrty other thpnges thereto belongpnge.


"k


ebaptpe cubptes bpd compatle itroundeabont.


oucrlaped tbem wpth rolde. And the wingers of
the Cherubs were.rr.cubpteslonge. he one
wpng Was.V.cubptesreachpng top wal of the
Houle, €the other wpnge was lypketpfe.y.cu-
bptes, reachpng to the wynge of the other € hes
tub. And euen [othe one wing of the other Che:
tub was.v.cubptes reachinge tothe wall of the
boule, g the otber wrge was. v.cubptes allo, g
reacbedtotbe wpnge ofthe orber Cherub. So
that the Wwinges of the fapd Cberubs were fret:
ched out.re.cubptes.and thep fede on their feet
andlokedinwardes. And bemade afore bhan-
puge of pelowefplke, purple, crpimofpn, and
ne woDpte, and canfed the pyctures of Cherut-

bestobebzodzedthereon. And be made vefoze
the boule two ppllers of. xrrv.cubites bpe. ana
the beed that was aboue onthe top of every one
of them was. v.cubites,and be made chapnies of
Yozethen worke foz the quere , g put them onthe
beedes ofthe ppllerg, g made anbundzed pomes
granates and putthem on thechapnes. And be
reared vp tbe ppllers before the temple: oneon
the regbt band, andrbe other on the icf: and cala
led the rpgbt Jachin and the left weas,

-A < C Cbe.ttit. Chapter.

[he aulter ofbzale, the lauatozpe the befesta

wathe twptd, pe canbdletprkes, ec.
may dbe made an aulter of bzafle.re.cnby- A
yan tes longe,and.rr.cubpees bode, andten


Ae


a


tozpe of ten cubttesfrom bapm tobzym, rounde
incompatle,and fpue cubpteshpe: and alpne of


Ti: ttt, ana


es Cubptes bpe.x And becata beafentanas ttire.vit.e


od


| Salomon
d


óffre burnt lacrifices fo2 the moznpnae and cuc-


npng:onthe Sabborhdapes.inthelyetday of Ay
cuerpeneme moone, andintbelolempnefeaites Pirmat S)opiaxwbere (the Lozde appeared H. Pa.rri.a


of the Lozde our God: foritiganozdinaunceto —


becontinuallp&cpte of Firaell. And the boule
Lobiche F buplde Halbe greate, foz qreatis oure
Godaboue all gods. Wut whois hadle to bupde
bpm anboules whenthat beauen, andbeauen a-
bouc all Deauens ts not bableto recepuc bpm :

patam FJ the pF thuldebupldbpm an Hoyle?
nap, buteuentoburne facrifice before bpm, all


25 this bupldpng be: fende mmenow therfore acon


npnge man tbat can worke in qolde ¢fpluer, in
batle and pron, ih purple, cremofpn and pelotoe
fplbe, ¢ that can(&pl to grane wm theconpng më
that are wpth me in Juda and Ferulal€,whome
Daud mp fatherdpd prepare. Sende me allo
Cedze trees, Wpnetrecs t Almuge trees oute of
Libanon. For J wot prby feruauntes can (kyl
tobewetpmbzein Libanon. Andbebolode ; mp
men Halbe wpe thpne , that thep may prepare
metpmbze pnough.Jfo2 the boule whiche Jam
Determ tif tobuplde Halbe wondzcfull creat .
And bebolode, foz the vie of thy feruauntes p cut
fers and the bewers of tpmb2e F baue gpuen.tr


ti. Lheonices


Fol.lrrh.


RE PLD Dalomd beganto buplvoe f honte


teal ofthe Lowdeat Jerufalem in mounte


SS Nat gu a"


ESS Vito Dauid bys father, euen in the
place p Dauid prepared tn the thzel(png foure


of Donan the Febulite. And hex bega to buploe Actes.vit.¢
in the feconde Dape of thefeconde moneth +the tit.rea,v/,0


fourth pere of bps rapgne. And thele arethe paz
ternes wperbp Salomon was inftruct tobupld
the boule of God. The lengeh was threlcore cu:
bptesafter the olde mealure, andthe becdth.rr.
cubptes. Che poche, $ was inbredthe as la raè
as thetemple,bad.re.cubptes : and thebepathe
Wasanhundzedand.cr.cubptes. Andbheoucr- -
ae it on the inner fpde wpth pure golde.

And the greater boule he {pied with fprretrte
tobich pe ouetlaped wpth the belt gold, and gra
ved therto palmetrees €chapnes. And he ouers
laped the boufe topth pzectoule fone beautpful-
lp. And tbe golde was golde of Waruaim. The
boufe(3 fape)the beames,pooltes, walles, and
Dozes thereof oucrlapedhe wprh golde, ¢ made
grauen Wwozrke bpon the wailes.

And He made the boute meolke bolpe,whofe
length thas twenty cubptes lpk tothe breorh of


4 ¢ thoulande quarters of beaten tebeate, and.rr.
tpoulanbe quarters of barlp, and.rr.thoulande
bateg of topne,¢.re.thoulad bates of ople. Bnd
Hiram kpnge of Cpe anlwered in w2ptpnge
which belent to Salomon: Wypcaule the Lozde
thloued bis people, therfoze be bath made the
png ouer them: And Hird fapd mozeouer blef-


the Houle, andthe beth thereof was alfo.re.cys
bptes. Andde suctlayed itwyth good golde, ee
nen wopt). v1. budzedtalentes. And the weperhe
of thenaples of golde was fpftpe (prices. nv be
ouerlaped the Vpper chambzes wpth olde.

+ And iu the poule moolte bolp be madetio C
Chrrabpns of pmagewozrkelykechplozen, and Erorr.


5
<3 bs.


|
|
|


fed be the Lozd God of {lracll which made bea-
uch and earth, andthat bathe gpuen Dantd the
kpnge a wplefonne, g one that bath difceetion,


| prudence and birdertandpng to bupld an boule


toz the Lozbe,¢ a palace fo: bym felfe. Andnow
J baue fent a wpie man, anda manof bnderta


éG.re.bti,b. pi 4s alan inp father Hird Dpd dle) the lon
.


woman of the doughters of Dan, € bps fa-
ther was amanot pre, ebecanlkpl to Wozke
in golde and {pluer, inbzafle andpzon in fone,
andtpmbze , in purpleand pelowe plke, infpne


D Whpte and crymofpn:andcan qrauelundzp ma:


ner of graupnges, and fpnde oute Dpucrs max
ner of fubtle Wozke that halbe Tet before bpm ,
pth thp connpnge men, and wpeb the conning
men of mp Zo2de Dauid thp father. Mow ther=
Fore the wheat and barlp, opleand wpne, whpch
mp 1020 Datb{poken of let bpm fende bnto pps
feruauntes. And Wwe wll cut wood tn Libanon
ag mucbeas thou Halt nede, and wpll bepnactt
to thein bppps bp theleeto Fapbo, fr whence
thou mapi carpe them to Ferulalem. And Das
lomd nombzedall the firaungers that were inp
‘tande of Ffrael, after the nombze of them whom
bpsfatber Danid badnombzed. And thep were
ounde an bundzed and.liii.thoufande, and {pre
uundzed. Andhe lette.ler.thoulande of them to


cateburthens, and.irre.thoufandetobew ros |


negin the mountapne: andthe tboufande and
Tore bund2cd officergto fet the peoplea wozke.
— CThe.itt. Chapter.


C Ehr tempie of the Lozbe and the porche are bapl:
P Ded twrty other thpnges thereto belongpnge.


"k


ebaptpe cubptes bpd compatle itroundeabont.


oucrlaped tbem wpth rolde. And the wingers of
the Cherubs were.rr.cubpteslonge. he one
wpng Was.V.cubptesreachpng top wal of the
Houle, €the other wpnge was lypketpfe.y.cu-
bptes, reachpng to the wynge of the other € hes
tub. And euen [othe one wing of the other Che:
tub was.v.cubptes reachinge tothe wall of the
boule, g the otber wrge was. v.cubptes allo, g
reacbedtotbe wpnge ofthe orber Cherub. So
that the Wwinges of the fapd Cberubs were fret:
ched out.re.cubptes.and thep fede on their feet
andlokedinwardes. And bemade afore bhan-
puge of pelowefplke, purple, crpimofpn, and
ne woDpte, and canfed the pyctures of Cherut-

bestobebzodzedthereon. And be made vefoze
the boule two ppllers of. xrrv.cubites bpe. ana
the beed that was aboue onthe top of every one
of them was. v.cubites,and be made chapnies of
Yozethen worke foz the quere , g put them onthe
beedes ofthe ppllerg, g made anbundzed pomes
granates and putthem on thechapnes. And be
reared vp tbe ppllers before the temple: oneon
the regbt band, andrbe other on the icf: and cala
led the rpgbt Jachin and the left weas,

-A < C Cbe.ttit. Chapter.

[he aulter ofbzale, the lauatozpe the befesta

wathe twptd, pe canbdletprkes, ec.
may dbe made an aulter of bzafle.re.cnby- A
yan tes longe,and.rr.cubpees bode, andten


Ae


a


tozpe of ten cubttesfrom bapm tobzym, rounde
incompatle,and fpue cubpteshpe: and alpne of


Ti: ttt, ana


es Cubptes bpe.x And becata beafentanas ttire.vit.e


Halomon,


And wonder it was the faflion of oxen wich dpd
compalle it rounde about: wpth tencubites dpt


hep copafletbe lauatozp rounde about , € there A L
were two rowes of ore whprhbwerecakofipkhe Peis


molten wozke. Andit fodc allo ppd tivelue ore
thecloked towarde the north, thee tomarde the
woeft,thze totoarde p fouth ethee towarde f cat
and thelauatozp was fer pponthem,¢ alltpep2
backes were toward thelanatozp. And the thtc-
kelte of it wag anbandbzede, andthe bzpmiphe
the bapin of a cup,topth foures of lplics. And tt
recepucd,and belde thee thoulanbde bates.
93. * AndDemade tenlaucrs,nadput fpucon
fit,ye.by.c, EBerpabt bande : and fpuc on the lefte, to wame
andcleante tuthem Cuche thenges as thep ofred
fora burt oring. wut the greatlanuatozp was
fo: the pee to wai in. And þe made tencans
Dieltyches of golde accodpnae tothe paterne p
as gpuen of them ) and put them in the temple
fpneonthe right bande and fpue onthe left. and
be made alfo ten fables, and x: them tn the té=
ple:Fpue ontberpabttpde, andfpue onthe lefte.
And be made anbundzed baleng of golde. And
be made tbecourt of the preeltes and the greate
courte and dozes toit: and ouerlaped tie OOO2ES
of rbem wrth bzafle. Ard be fet the great laua-
tory onthe right five of p eal ende oueragapnit
thefouth. Ind Hiram made pottes,ouels and
bafens , and finifiped the wo2ke that he was
@ appopnted tomakefo2zbpnge Salomon inthe
boule of God. Chettwo pplicrs, the coucrpnges
o2ztivo heedes on the toppes of the ppllerg, and
the two weethes tocoucr the twolcalpes oz He-
pesthat wereon the toppes of the ppilers: and
foure bundzed pomegranates on the treo We-
thes , tihorowes of pomgraratcs on one weth
tocoucrthe two toppesozbecdes , that were on
the ppllers. And be made two botomes:andla-
tiers made be bponthe botomes:the great laua-
tozp,andtibelue oren bnder it. ottes alfoand
{pouels,fichhokes, andall tele veflels bpd Hp-
ram(bis father) make to bing Salomon foz the
houfe of the Lode of byyg bt baffle. 3n p plapne
of Jozdandyd the bpuge calte them, cucn inthe
clape grounde that is betwene ocot) and sa-
redatha. And Halomonmadeall thele vellelles
in great abounbdaunce, Fo: the wapabt of bzatie
cule not be reckened. -= X
And Salomon made all thele veflelles that
were Eo: the boule of God: the golben aulter al-
fo and the tables to let (hetobrecd upon. )oze<
ouer, the candleffecbes , wpth thepzlampes (to
burneafter themaner befoze the quetc) and that
of prectoule golde : and the Aoures and the lam-
pes, and the tuoficrs made he of golde, and that
erfccte molde, and the deeflpngebnpues, balég,
pones and cenfers of pure gold. AnDeacbemare)
the Doze of the temple, and the inner does pth
inthe place moolte bolpe , and the inner Dozes of
thetemplewercgplted. Andfowasallthe
worke that Salomon made fozthe boule of the
1020¢e Finifiped. ,
€ The.v. Chapter.
raphe arte fs brought (nto the tem: bich
AAE a


ò. Salomon,


=


ter and golde, and all the tetocls, and put them


cient Fathers of the chilozé of Fitael unto Fern-
faléto bring the avke of pconcnatit of the Lod
out of the citpe of Dauld: which ission. Wher `
foze, al the men of Jlracl relozted wuto the king
in the feaft enë inthe. vit moneth. 2nd al he el=
Ders of Aracl cant,e the Leuites tobe Dp arke
Andtbe peefted and p Leuit ozaagbt awape
arkeg the tabernacle of wptnefle, and all p bol)
velfelles ernace, ani
tbem. 2nd kpnge Salome and all the congrega
cion Of Jirachi p iere allēbled vntobpm befoze
the arke, offecd pepe ¢ oren, fo manp, that they
couldenot betoldenoznombzed fo multitude. _
Andtbhe pecelkes bzouge the arke of theap- 2
popntiment of the Logde bnto pis place, euen m-
to the quere of the téple, wptbin the place mooi
polp and fet it vndec the wpnges of f Cherubs
thatthe Cherubs ftretched out thep2 wynges o-
uer the place ofthe arke, andthe Cherubs coue-
red bothe thearke and her barres abouc onbye:
And the barreg of p arke were folong, ptbhe be=
bes of the barres were fene without the arke w
intbe quere,but not Mpthout. Andtherep arbe
temapned into tbpadape. Wuttherewasno-
thing in parkexfane the two tables which 2)o sit.re.otit.«
{es put therinat Wozeb when tbe Lozdemadea C
couenaunte w the chpldzen of Flvaell, after thep
Yocre come ont of Eappte. And it foztuned, that
wobé che preftes were come out of the bolpe place
( the Sanctuarpe was fplled wpth imoke ) foz >
althe mectes that twere prefent were fanctificd
and bpd not then Maptebp courle, that borbhthe
Lcuptes andthe fpngers vnder Afaph, Heman
and Jeduthun were appopnted tofundgpe offi-
ces, wptbtbep2 chplozen and boetdzen,and vere
araped in rpne wbhpte, baupnge fpmbales, ptal-
terpesand barpes, and tode at theecaltend of p
alter, andbp ed an bund2ed g tWwentp preftes
blotopnge wpch trumpettes. And the trumpets D
blowers and the fingers foagreed,that it femed
but one popece in paplynge and thankpnae the
Lozde.And when they lift up thep2 vopce wpth
trompettes, fpmbalegs, and otber mifirumentes
of mufpcke : and when they paapleotbe Lorde,
on (and fapd;) Dow that De ig good, and phys mer= x
cp lafteth ence: the boule of God Was filled with
acloude, fo that the pretes coulde not endureto
miniféte bp the reafon of the cloude. Wo: fma-
ieftpe of the Lozde bad Eplied the boule of God,
C Che. vi.Cbapter.
@ Zhe wozbes of Salomon terpe people,and

the prapec Chat be made bnto mod,
> i peun Salomon fapd: + the Lo bath %
NI : Fath oben, bow that be wpll dwrlin thei ire.viib

17 wa oude . And} paur buplt an babita-
(372 ehcis fop anda place for thp magi

02


oo


P were inthe tabernacle, and thep bare °


p i


ii pa. bu.0


Epil Oe j


ii.ceg.bit.a MP people 3


vacl ode. and be lap


in tbat mp name might bethere ,neptber cole d
anp man to be atuler ouce mp people Frael: faz
upna that * J baue polin Feru! alé,

mpabtbe there, Daue cholen Dauta to be ouce


ael. x And whenit was in p bert ot


ire td aun mptatber ta buploe an boule For p name
ipari pe ple LoaDGodot sracl.the Lozde lapata Da


‘pio mp fatbe


per : Foz atmoche a8 tt was Ut thy bert
to buplne an boufe Fog mp name; p prec well
that thou fo chougbtelt mthp bert. porwmichita
apnige.thoutpalt not buploe p Ponte. but thy fon
wbich is pceded out of thy l yee: foal buplde
an boule Foz mp name. The 2 ozde therfore bath
made good bis apinge that be batb{pobeu,and
y amrplen vp in the roume of Danid mp father
and am (et on p feate of Zlrael,asthe Lode p202
pied, and bane buplte an boufe fo the name.of
the Loade God of Flrael. And init baue J puty


-arke wherin isthe coucnaunt of § Lode that be


made wtbecpuldzen of Flcacl. And p kyng tode


> Apeforetbe aulter of the Lozbe,in p pretence of all


thecongregacion of (racl,and frvetched out big
bandes. Earnot Salomon bad made abzaten

ulppt of fpue cubptes Longe, and fpuc cubptes

2one,¢thze of hepabt.¢ bad fet it inthe mpodes
ofthe great court, and vponit be tode and kne=
ted Downe bpon bis knees befozeall the congres
gacpon of Jlrael, and ftretcbed out bis pandes


q towarde beauen,and fapo : x D Lode God of


fityve,biit.e Brack, there 1s no god lyke the in Peauen and


i


iii regum


‘gartp,wbich kepeit couenaunt and MetoeM mer-


ge unto tdp feruauntes that walke befoze the
wityall thep2 bertes. Thou whiche halt epte
wit) thy fecuant Daud mp father the thynges
that thou peomptedvett bpm : thon fapbodett tt


with thy month, and batt fulfpited it with tbp:


Hanes, as tt isto fe this Dape.


ynd now Lode Godot Jleacl,bepe with thp


fcruautit Dauid mp father, F cbpnges that thon


core baie ppm, * fapinge : thou Halt inmp.


pabt not be without a man that pall (pt upon
the teate of Alracl:fotbat thp children takebede
tothep2 wapes, to walke in mp lawe, as thou


S walked before me. And now Lozde God of


Crack let thy fapitig be true Which thou pakek
Duto thy feruaunt Dauid. And wpll Godin De-


rp dede dwell with men on earth’ Beholde,


ii.ve.did.c x heauen, and beauen aboue all dDeauens donot


fa. tlbi g


act.vil.t


contapne the: bots mochelefle the boule wbiche
Fbaue bupldeds Let it bethp plealure therfoze
to turmetatbe paper of thp feruaunt andto bis
fupplicacion ( D 102d mp God) fo berken puto
tbe opce e prayer wobiche thy Ceruaunt praperd
before the, and let thpne epes Be open towarde
this boule bape € npgbt ouer this place, wherint
thoubalt fapd:that thou woldeff put thp name,
to berken vnto the pzaper wbtche tpp feruaunt


ý ftenelt them: th


. mn tbp wapes as


Tee pE ETETEA OO a


fozener, And the kpnae turned his face, bleed
the pe METRY of Alracl,¢all the congte-


prapeth inthis place: barken wuto the papers

of thp feruaunt,and of thp people Jfract which
thep prape in this place:Dcare thou (Jape) out
oftbpowellpng place cuen out of beaun beare
and be mercpfull. x Pfa man fpnne agapnit iirebiiin
pis nepghbboure, and take not an othe agapni
bym,and make bym to fweare, and thep bothe
come befoze thpne aultare in this poule : then
Heare thon from beaucn,and wozke, and udge
thp feruauntes, that thou rewarde the vngoblp
andrecompence pym bis wape vpon bis peade,
and tuftifpe therpgbtucus,and gue Dym arco
ppnge to bia rpabtuoulnefe.

And pf tby people Bleacl be put to the wale D
befoze the enempe, bpcaule they bauctpnncd a=
gapni the. Det pf thep turne ¢ gpue thankes vn
to tby name, ¢ make intercellpon g prape befoze
thein this boule, then beare thou from beauen,¢
be mercy full onto the fpnne of thp people afracl
and bapnge them agapne vnto the lande whirbe
thou ganeft tothem and to thepe fathers. ,

x bhen peauen is Wut vp, and there beno €-
rapne,bpcaule thep Dauc fpnned e iat mintis: Nis
yfthep pape in this place, confette thp name, € a ha
repent toz thep2 tpnne, foz the whiche thou da=
en beare thou in beauen,and be
mercpfull puto the (pune of tip {eruauntes,and
of thy people Ffrael, and gupde thou them into
the good wape to walke m, ¢ {endetapne vpon
thy lande, wbiche thou ball gpuen wnto thp peo
ple foz an inberpraunce. | |

And pf there be dDerthin the land 0? peffilence,
corrupcion, 02 blaftynge of cozne, gretpoppers,
o? caterppllets, o2 that thepe cnempes belpege
them in the cpeies of thepz lande,o# (and ortrope the ga
countrres) D? what Coeuct plage o? fpckneleitue,
Then what fupplicactons ¢ prapersfocuce fhall
be made of anp man,and ofal tbp people Afrael,
wbich Hall know every man bis owne foze,and
pis awne grefe, Mall feetche out their bandes
foward this boufe, thou Walt beare fro beauen,
cucn from thy dwellpng place, and Walt be mee
cpfull, anid gpueeuerp man accopdpnge Onto all
bis ces ote aN asp Doet knotte cuerp mannes
perte: fo? thou onelp knowet thebertes of the
chploze whit thep map feare the, ¢ walke

onge ag thep Ipue in the lande
wobiche thou gauel nto thep2 fathers- |

x (Hozcouer,the ftraunger Which isnot of thp = ee
people Aivael, pë be come from a farrelande foz eae
thy great namestate,e thy 50 aig thy Actu, biyé
eetched out arme. DE thep come ( fap) prape
in this bonte: rhon {halt heare from beauen, euen
from thp dwellpng place, ¢ thalt do accozdpnge
to all that the {traunger calleth tothe fo2 :that
all people of the carth map knowe thp name,
and feate theag docth thp people Aract, that
tbep map kinowe, Dow that in this boule which
4 baue buple,tby name ig called vpon.

PE thy people go out to warre agapnit thep2
enempes, bp the wap that thou palt fend then,
and thep pape to the,inthe wap + totwarde thts peu.vin.
cptie whiche thou Dalf chofen, eacntowarde the
houle wbiche 3 bauc buplte for thp name : then
beare thou from beanen thep2 fupplicacpon and

Hult. paper


LFDONL d and deliver


Harton,


paper and belpe themin they rpg bt.
PEthep (ynne agqapnt’ the:as* there is nomi
G.re.diit.a. Hut he toth ipune, andehou be angrp with them
chica oner before theit enempes, and
thep take them and ledethein away bntod land
farre 02 nere, pet pe thep repent in thep2 Bere ti
the lande where they be in captinitte,and turne
and mape Dnto the um the lande of thep2 captint-
tie fapinge: we baue fpnned, we baue Done cupll
and wpcicdlp: and turne agapne tothe with all
cieve putt and all thep? toule, in the lande of
tiep2 captinitic, where thep kepe theii in von-
dage, and fo prave towarde thepz lande whiche
Y ehou gauct Dato thep2 fathers , euti towarde
thecptie whiche thou balk choten,¢ towarde the
boule whicbe J bauc buplte for thy names pen
Dearethou from Deauen enen fró chp do wellpnge
pu they? A le andthepe paper and
ndge thep2 caule and bemetcpiull Dntathppeo
ple whbichebaue Cpnned agapnt thero cns
Pow mp God,let thpnecpes be openjethpne
eares attente vito the paper that ig made tn
ptcrrtita. thig place. Mowe bp * D Lorde Sod into thp
reftpng place, thou and the arke of thy {trength.
 1Lo2de God, let thy preattes be clothed with
Dealt: and let thp fapuetes retople in qoobnes:
D Lode God turne not awap the face oF thyne
annopnted. Remembre the merepes which thou

_.. ball ppompfed to Danid thp feruaunt,
ae Fe peinusntwetecenetpmes cc) se ES


f2d* when Salomon bad made att


tire biit. Soa ESR HE ende of prayeng,+ there came Downe

Pheu. HEAD Fie RE wri from beanen and confumed the

titre bits BY, fy a) Wx butnt offtpige and the facriiices.

Boaster And the houle was fplled with the

gloap of the Lorde, and thepecaltes coulde not
go intothe boule of the Lozde, bpcaule the glup
of the Lorde bad fplled the Lordes boufe- and
When al the chpldzen oF irae! atoe how the fpre
and the glory of the Lozbe caine dotone vpon the
boule, thep Fell dowone. flat bpon they2 faccs to
thecarth, pon the paucment; and wo2tbppped
and cofeifed wuto the Lozde,that beisqracions,
and that bis mercy laftet) euer.

%. Andthe kpnge and all the people ofred facri:
tices before the Lode. Aud kpng Salomon of-
Fed a facrifpce of.crit.thoufande oren, and an
bundzed and twentpe thoulande hepe. And fo
the kpnge and all the people Dedicated the boule
of Sod. and the preattes wapted ou thep2 offp-
ces, and the Leuttes bad the infkrumentes of mu
{pie of the Lorde, hich png Dauid bad made
to coufeile onto the 1020, tbat bis mercy lafteth
cuce: plapenge a plaline of Dauid wpth thep2
bande. And the nreafkes ble tbe With trumpettes.

' ‘Dbefogetbem:andalltbep of Jfrael tode. —-

Mozcouer,Halomon Halowedthempddle of
the courte that was befo2e the Lozde, for there


be ofred burntoffringes,andthe fat of the peace, E


offrpnges,bpcaufe the brafenaulter which Sa-


lomo bad made,was notable torecepue Sburnt, W


offrpnges,and the meateottrpnacs,¢ the fat.


(Matis Hoatthelane tyne Salomon keptxa feck


fie


UL onpeles.


‘be apzonerbe and a icit amonge all nacpons.


Salomon,
Offenen dapes, Andall hep of Alrael with hym
anercedpng x cat congregacpon,enenfrom the
etittpiig in of Hamath: onto the rpuer of Egipt.
And inthe epaht dape thep made agatherpnac:
5toz thep kept the dedicacton of the aulter fenen
Daped, and the feet (cucndapes. Andthe.rriit.
bape cf tbe feuenth moncth be lee the people des
arte mfotpep2 tentes glad and merp tn herte:
ortte goonnede that the Lorde had thewed to
Daud g to Salomon, eto Frael Spee
¥AND Salome finthed the boule of che Lowe ©


€ 4
and the kpugeshoule,eall that came inbishert ESTs.


ta make tn theboutle of the Lozde,¢ inbis omne
boufe wente peotperoullpfoxewarde. oone
Bnd the Lode appered to Salomsd bp npahe
and fapd to bpm: haue perde thp eticion,and
* Häne chofen this place foz mp felfe, to be am -pav.di.e;
Houle oflacrifice. VE Jout vp beauen that there
benorayne:o2 pf -¥ comaunde the locuftes to de=
ucite the lande:o2 pe F iende pelbilence amonge
Mp people: and pf thep that are of mp people,az
mong whom my name is called vpon, do bumble:
them felueg and make interceffpon,and Teke mp
prefence, and turne from thep2 wycked thapes:.
thew wplt y peace from beauen,and be mercpful
tothep2tpane:and wyilbedle thepzlande.
“| Gnd from beneeforty mpne epes hal be ope =p
and mpic cares atéente wuto the paper thatis
imade in this place. And therfore notoe x J have tpar-bre
choten andlanctifped this boule, tbat mp name
be there fo2 euce:and mpne cpes and mpnederte
fhall be there perpetually. |

And pe thou wylt walke before me, ag Da-
uid thy father walked, todo all that J bane com
maunded the and halt obferuc mp fatutes and
my lawes, then topl 3 ftablptthe the Teate of thp
kpnqbome,accozbpig as J madethecanenaunt |
with Dauid thp father lapinga: * thou thalt not rr aa


be without a man to be ruler in Blrael.wut and ipara, bie


pf pe turne awape,and foxlake mp tatutes and
cOmaundementes whiche baue let before pon,
and pall qo and ferue other qoddes, € worlbpp
them:then wopll 4 plucke them wp bp the rootes,
out of mp lande whicbe 3 paue prun them and
this boute which 3 baue fanctified foz mp name
wpil J cat out of mp fpqbt,and wpll makeitto


Andeuerp one that patleth by (hall beaftonpen
at this poufe whiche belonged to the moot bpe
God, and Hall fape : + whp hath the Logde delt aeu.rrir.».
on this faflpon with this Lande, and with thig st.res.tr.b
boule? And thep Hall anfwere: bycante thep 7:7"
fowloke the Lorde God of thep2 Father, whiche
Hrougbe them out of thelande of Egypte, and
cagat holoe on other goaddes, and wo2rtbppped
thent, and fernedD them : euen therfoze bath pe
bought all this cupll vpon then. tot

€ The. vitt. Chapter.


CZbe cepties that Salomon buplocd after that F
che peute of Gov was Enpithen,


Repos fb * it fostuned,that after.cr.perc he X

wa Goalonton bad buplte the boule of the Hers Fid
ame A Lot & his owne boule:be buple peep
SiS Stieg Hiram gaue pym, put of pebpl
baer of Afrael tn the. And Saioms went to a=


math


#


|


= =


math soba,* Eregehed it. And he buplt Thad-

mozin Prwploeruef{e, andrepapzed all p Forze ct

tics which werein Pamath.And pe buut Beth

bozonthe wyper, € DWrebhoz6 the nether, trong

citpes, baupnge thalles,qates and batres. AnD

Waalah,and all the Fore citpes that Salomon

had, and all the chavet citpes, andthe Citpes of

-o the hogfemien,s cutrp pleafaunt place that Sa-

lomon had tuft to buylde in Jerufalem, ¢ Ltba-

Hon, #tbozowontalthelande of bis dominpon.

1 . Mud all the people that were lefte ofthe He-

thites;Amozrptes, Wbherelites, Heuites ant Fe-

btilites wobpebewrrenot of the chpldzen of 3i-

bide peel bat were tie chplozen of them twhiche toere

lefte after them it the lande , and tere not cons

Citmedof the chplbzenof Jiracl,tiembdpd Salo
monmake to pape trpbute bntpll thyg dape-

Wutof che chyldzen of Braell dp Salomon

niaheno bondinen fo bis Worke: buttbhep were

mof Marre and rulers, and qreatlozdes wprb

bpm andcaptapnes ouer is charettes ¢ bhozle-

nici. And kypage Salomonsg olfpeers that ouer

faweyandrulcd the people, were fimo bundzed

and fpitpe. Bnd Salomon beouge pdoughtee

of harao oute of the citpe of Daupd, into the

boulerhathe had buyldcd for ber. oz belapoe:

my topfe (hail notdwell in the boule of Daupd

ç kprige oF giracl, foritig bolp :becaute that the

So ARto tpeLodeigcomne bntoit.

a 9) Apen Salomon ofred burnt offrpnges dD-
fothe Lopde,onthe aultare of the Lorde, which
be bad buplte before the poztche Dopnae cuerpe
thynge tii bis due tpitic,and offerpng accozding

etree pk Moles, vit the Sab-
suran bi BOEbes newe Hoones and tolempric feates,
ero.rritie ¥ thee tpines inthe yeare, that isto lape sinthe

Dewrbice feat of lwete bread, inthe fealk of weakes and

intpcefeattecE Cabecuaclkes. =. 3
Bud Salomon let the fortes of preakes ta
tiep: oftpees, as Daupd his father pad ozdered
them, and the Leuptes in thep2 matches.foz to
prapleeminyfter before the prefbes dap bp dap
andrbe porters bp coutie,at eucrp gate,
nxor Ta bad Danid theman of God cimaun


LOase® non np thep ompttenot the cOmanndement.


ofthe kpnge puto the preatkes andthe Leuttes,
coticcrnpnge anp maner of thpnge, andDconcet«
npnge the tvealurcs. Eo: Salomon made pro:

i utip he dda! hs Ad CA
‘the foundacpon of the boule of the Lorde was
lapde,tpllit was fpnifthed, thatthe bonte of the
Lozde twas perfpte. Chen wente kpnge Halo-
<a moto Eston Gaber, and to Eloth at thecu een)
bpm bp the bandes of bis feruauntes, thppp


es,
and {eruatites ý bad klowledge of the fec-¢ thep.


came wW the feruauntes of Salomoyto Ophir,

and carped hence foure hundzcdandfpetp talen

tesofgolde.¢ broughtitto kpng Salomon,

| C Tbe.ir.cChapter. - :
C Dhe comunicarpon of Halomon topth the gnent of Sa:
ba,and the grftes that che one caur theother Zhe beath of
Salomon, after whom furcepech Heboboam.


ea MD* when the Nuene of Daba beard of


mat. pinid na fthe fame of Salomon, He caine to proue-
meses byt in parde queftpons at Jerufalem,


iLhronicles.


_ betoze f alwap, and beare thp wildan. keen


fee{pdetntbelandcot Edom. And Hiram lente


Jol.lrebif,


witha vetp qreatecolmpatip, ith camels that |
barefppces and plentpe of golde, and pzecpous |
Rones. And when He was come to Salomon, |
{pe communed wpthbpm of all that He badin
ber berie. And Satomon fopled ber all her ques
pots, and there was not one worde yd Frome
Salomon, whiche petrolde her not. |

And when the Ducne of Haba had lene the +35
wyfedome of Salomon, andthe boule that he
Dad buple,¢ the meateof brs table,thelpttpug
of bis feruauntes, and the fandpng of bis hap
fers,thep2 apparell, bys buttelers, thep2 appa»
rel, pis qopnage dp, by the whiche be wente inte
the boule of the Lozbe,there was nomoze {yzete
inper. And ihe fapde to the kynge:the fapenge
wich F perde in mpne owne lanve, of thpne ac-
tes, andofthp wyledome,isttue., Abeleucd
not the wordes of them, vntpll F cante, €mpne_
epes pad ferne it. And behold theoncbhalfe of op
topfedome was not tolde me:fo2 thourrceadcit-
the fame that 3 beror. Happpare thy menani,
bapppeare thele chp leruauntes whiche tande:


berbe Lozde thp God, whiche bad lul tothe, to
{ct tbckpng on bisfeate,thattpoumpaghtetbe '
Kpnge,o2depned by the Lod thp God. wWecaule: ~
thp God loueth Jlrael,and bath delpfe tomate
them contpnuecuct:therfoze made be thebpnaqe.
ouer them:todorpghtandequitpe.- a
— And he gaue tde kpnge an hund2d and. rr. E
talentesof golde, € of fppeeserceadpnae great
aboundannce and precpous Tones neither was
thereanp moze luch{pyce, as the lucie of Sa
ba ganekpuge Salomon. Bnd the feruaunces
of ippzam,s the fernauntes of Salomon which
brought golbeirs D phir, brought alfo Aleume
wood and precpous tonces. And the kyng made
of the Alquime wood, fepresin the boule of the
Lo2d,and inthe kpnges palace, and barpes and i
plaltcrpes foz (pngers. Andthere wasno luche |


wood lene before tntheland of fuda. 4nd png
Salomon gauetothe Quene of Saba cucrpe |
pleafaunt thpnge ihealked, but not fo muche |
asthe bzonght vnto the king. nd fohe turned |
€ wentawåp tober owne lade w her fernañtes K
The Loepagptof golde hat cameto Batons -y å
inonepeare, wag fprepãdzed.lrvi.talenres of
golde belpdes that hich apmens marchat- H.
teg bzougbt:and all the kpngeg of Arabia qru- |
lees of that cofitre, bought golde andfplucrto }
Halomon. And kyuge Halomonimadetwo ha |
d2ed bucklets of beaten goldc,andiprebund2cd |
fycles of beaten cold were {rent ppon one buc
ler,and thze bundzed Hhpldes made he of beaten |
golde, and one (hpldecofk theepundzed peres of f
golde, and the kynge put them intheponlethat |
wasin thefork ot Libanon. | :
 Andchebpnge madea great leate of Fao ,
onerlapode it with pure golde. Bnd there were
pre feppesto tie (cat, witha fofclFole of qolbe
fattened tothe feate : andpommels on eche (poe
of chef pttpnae place, and twolpons ftandpnge
bp the pommelles. Wud, rif.lpons Tobe on pone
{poe and on the other npon the {pre eppes, fop
tpere ag no (icp wozke made tnanp Seas
: Oe oll


é


Sasi WL ponies. Rehoboam
E  _Andall thedzpnkynge vellelsofkpng Sa the counfaple whpche the elders gaue bpm, and
lomon were of golde, andallthe vellcllesotthe toke countaple wpth the porgemen that were
bonfethat wasinthe fozelt of Libanon wereof growen Tite that ftode in bis pee-
precious golde:foz fpluer wascounteduotbyng tence. Andbelapd nto them: what aduile geue
worth, inthe dapes of Salomon. othe pn- pe, tpat we mape anlwere this people , whpche
Gesthippes tent te Thari withthe feruaun bauecomuned w me.faping: Abate fombpat of
teg ot pram :cuerpetbzepeareonescame the the pocke wpbcb thy father dpd put pon vs.
tbpppesto Charlis,and brought golde,tpluct, | Andthe ponge men that weregrowen vpw C
Juozp,and apes and pecockes. bpm. {pabe vntobym, taping: Thus balt thou
TX And bpnge Salomon paticdall thekyn- anfwere the people that tpake to the, lapinge :
nessa Meg ofthe carthinrpebelleand wploome, And Tip father made oure pocke beup: but mabe p <
allthe kpnges of thecattbefougbt tbe paclence ti fomvsbatlpgbter foz vg. Thus Halt thou fap
of Solomon ,tobearcebpswpldome that God vito them: mp lptle fpnger albe Deuper them
Had put indis bert. nd thep brought cuerpma, mp fatberslopnes. x302 where mp father put tires. rhc
bps prelent,vellels of fpluer,¥ vetielgof golde, a Deup pocke vpon pou, J wpl put moze to pour
tapment,barneties,(ppces,bozfes,andimules,t porse: inp fatber chaltpled pou wpth wbhpppes,
wyatlocuerimpgbt begotten perebppere. — but 3 wpllchaltpcepouwtthtcorppons., -~
titre tita - x Bnd alomonbadfoure thoufand falled And fo Jeroboam andall tbe people came
fo? hozleg and charettes,andtwelnethoulande to Reboboamthe thyede dap,as the kpnge bad,
Dostemen, whome be beowedinthecharvetct= fapenqe: come agapne te methetbp2dde dape; -
tpes,andlome were withthe kpnacat Ferula- Andthekpngeanlweredthemccue lp:¢ bpnge
lem. Andbe rapgned overall thekpnges that Re HOD ORE lefte the councell of the aged men, €
Were from Euphrates onto the lande ofp phi- anlweredthem after the abuple of p ponge men
liltpnes:andtothe bozderof Egypte. ` fapenge:<)p father made pour pocke qreuoug,,
iworo - xAndthekpngemadefpluerin Jerufalem, and J wplladdetherto:mp father chattiled pon
“Parid: ag plenteougas toneg. And Ceder treesas ple Wwptdwbpppes, but 4 wpllchatyce pou wpth
teous ag the monlbere trees that growein tbe feozpions. And fothe kpnge berkened not onto:
Dallepes. And thep brought buto Salomdbhoz the people, but the occatponcame of Goa that *%
feg out of Egppte,and out of alllandeg, , Lopbempabe make good bis apeng, xvobiche a-mrest..
fife, FL | x The reft of tive actes of kpn ge Silom ot be {pake 5 bp the hande of Abia tbe il onite to D
“fpatt andlaftarethep not weptteninebelapins Jeroboam p fonne of Mebat. And wobenalthep
Ges of Natdantheprophete, andintbepzophe- of Alracllawep the kynae wWoldenotagre tnta .
cpe of Shiab the ionite,andtn the vitponsof them, the people antwered thekpnge, lapenge:
dbathe (ear of vifpong agapni Jeroboam p what part baue toe vb Dauid, 02 enberptatice ws
fotine of Nabat: Jnd Dalomon rapaned mar the fone of Ffairlet euetp ma of Flrael goto pig iĝe Tio
„And Salo inresa


Te tufalem ypen all Jirael fourty eres tent: And now Danid, letothpne ownehoule -
3 mon flept witb bis fathers and thbep butricdbim And foall Jlraell gat them to thepatentes,fop ©.
inthe cutpe of Dauid bis father-andRehoboam Rehoboam rapgned ouerno mo of Pcbildzen o£
bis Connerapgued in bis teade. Altacl, the dwelt in f citpes of Juda. Ché byng
@ebe.¢.ebaptee Wepoboamalfofent Madurd Å was ruler oneg
CTbe coop Genri oF mee Boars anD the the trp bute, € the chplozen of Frael ftoned dim


aa x na wpth toneg $ be dyed. Wutkpnge Rebóboam:
* ae FN Nd Rehoboam wente to®Di- made ipedetoget bpm bp to bpg haces to fipe.
tise Fite MAGA Veeseaichem:fo2to Siche were all 3l- to derufalem. Andtbep of Firaell rebelled a-


‘ae


i sa cacll come togptber, to make gapni the boufe of Dauid vnto this dape.
AA Y DE ne oe CThe.ri. Chapter.
iiiteg- fg. ; 4 SEMI. Ge xine fa Einsi jae @ Keboboam fs fozbpoden Co fpgbt agapnt Jeroboam. pe


pefence of Salomon ibe bpnige pearbett,bete riipi eieae katat enk hens FFI. x `
tourneo out ot €gppt. And thep fent andcalle s =R when Reboboam was come to ctt.reg.Ft,
bpm. Andflo Jeroboam and all thep of Fracil TACSI Jerulalem,*he cathered of Shanra |
caine and comuned with dichoboam, fapenge : hay a a e gathore uot Phoute
‘Th? father lapd a greuoug poke Vpon vS:now ci 43).chofen men of warre to fpgbt a:

gapni Firael gto bepng the kp 5


A I Ra yerr lA o Aa AAs AD.

: put bpon vs:and we wyl ferue the Andhelapd Lozdcameto Socmelabn Merana Bob tye.
to themt:come agapne Dutome after thie dapes etig:fpeake onto Rebob oam,tbefonne of Sa»
Andtbe pzoplepepartin. | „~ lomonbpnge of Juda, €toall themof Jfraell p

wud bynge Reboboan cofifapled twpththe are n Juda, and Wen Jamin,andlapethustap
elders that baa tande befoze Salomonbhpsta: eththe Lore: Pedball not wo vp no Epabte a-
ther, wiple be pet lpued, and Delapbe: what capnit pour beetheen:returne eucry mat to hig
countaplegeue pe me,to anfivere thps people a- bouteto this thpngisdoneofme. And they o-
apne: Andrhep tolde bym, fapeng: Petboube bepedthe wordes of the Load, and returned fro
pndetothis copte ano Wewe thp felfe lawlp gopnge agapnite Jeroboam.
fo them, and{peakcloupng wozdesto thepm, ` and Reboboain dwelt tnyerutalem,¢ buile.
they w pl be tp lernauntes Foz ence. But be left ftiongecitpesin Juda. e builoed vp Meares


aims a


Repoboam ii Lhonicles. Follrebii:
and Etham, and Tieko: Bethsur,Hocho,and pad trantgrcied agayntt p Lord.. ris. chas .
Abdullam: Catb and @arefa:and ipb Adura- rettes.. borfemen. Enar the people were
bim, Lachis and Alecha:so2¢a, Aialon and ie- wptbout nombee, $ came x bym out o €aqppe
bzon, whichis in Juda and Wen Jamin, fronge Lutim, Suckim,g the blacke mozeg. And thep
citpes . Sndherepapred the tronge boloes and tote $ (rong citpes nguda g came to Ferulale
put caplapnesinebem,and ftoc of bitaple,and hen came Semeia the pzopbhet to Rebobo 25
wpne and ople. And tn all citpes he put ples am ¢to tbelozves of Juda, that were gathered
and {praces, and made them exceadpnge krong together within Jerutalem foz Delacsand ei
daupnge Juda and Ben Jamin on pis {fpbe. .  butotbem: thustapeth the Lode, pe baue lefte

C Andthepretter etheLenttestbat were inal meand therfore baue 4 alfoleftepoumebe ban
Altacl, refozted unto Dpmout ofalltbepzcoas des of elac. CUperuponthelosdes of Flrael,¢

tpa riip EES- WO the Lenites lett thep2 fubucbesethete thekpngebumbled them{elucs, and fapbde : the
Cap pal be caine tO Judaand Ferulale: fox Lordets rpabteous: nod wien the Lozdefawe

3 croboain ¢hisfonnes had cat them out from that ebep{uvinptted them feltesz the sa AN of p

time, rig Minpitepnge puto the Lorde. XAndheozdep- Rodecameto emeia,fapenge: Ehep fubmpe
ned bpm Pzelkesfo2 the bplauletcrs, foz Pdcuels themfelues, tperfoze F wpll noe deftrove them:

‘and fo? the calues wobpch be bad made. And af- Wut J wll delpuer thepm fomwbat, and mp
ter the Leuites there went of all thetrpbesofZl theathe thall nat burne bpon Jerufalem by the
tacl,fuche as fubmptted thep2 bertes to {che the bande of Sefac.Meucrebel thep Halbe hisler
Zo2de Godot Feael,and came to Yerulalen,to vatintes,to knowWwe what opference ts betwene
offer Unto she Lorde Gon of they Eathers. And mp terupce, and the Cerupce of the kpugdomes
fo thep renched the kpngdomof gada,emade ofthe woslbde. And fo Sctacbyngeak Egypte ¢
ARehodoboam the fonne of HPalonionmpabtye came to Jerufalem, and toie atoape the treatu:
thre pearclonge.fog thzeprarethep wallcdinp ves ofthe boule of the Lozbe sand the trealures
alomon. ; of tbe kpnges boule: De toke euenall. And be ca
D. And Reboboamtokehpm Dahalathebe ryed awape the thpldcs of golde wich Salo utares.e,
ren hap of Jerimoth the Conne of Daupd to monmade. In fEcade of tohpcb,.kpnee Rebabo:
wpte, €Abipail the doughterofEliabehefone am nade (hploes of bzafle, and competed them
of Hat, whicbhe bare bpm chpldzen Feus. Dama tot e bandes of thecaptapnes: whycbe hadthe

iii wepo. tia andaba, Anda cr berbe tokex aaka p ouerlpgbt oF the fote men, and that kept the ene
dougbter of Ablalom whpchebarehpma Abia, traunce of p kpnges boule. Andit came to paffe
Aftiat,3t5a,and Selomith. And Reboboa lo- that wben the kpng enteed ito the boule ofthe
ued SHaacabtbedougbter of $bfalonaboucal Lozdthe marde cameandfet themnand brought
bps Wpues and cOcubpnes, Foz be tobe epg btenc tbem agapne vntothe gardechaber.and when
wpues , and thze froze concubpnes, and begate Debumbledbpm felfe, the wrath of ë Lozdetur
rbbtit.foneg,anbd thee {coze dougbterg.ğno Re nedfrom bym, that be wolbde not deitrope alto-
Doboam made Abtab the foune of Waacabthe Metber.Andin Juda all was well.
cbefe ruler amonge bis beetbzen,and to bauetbe : Sndlokpnge Rehoboam wared mpagbep.€ D

: ouerlpaht of the kpngdome. And beplapdewmp tapgnedin gerulalem.and Repovod teas.tlr.
felp,anod fcatered all bis chpldaenthozowont al peace olde, wbenbe began torapgne,erapaned a
the countrepes of Juda and Wen Famin ynto e- Ldt.pearesin Jerufalem, the -itpe wbichethe
uerp ròngecitpe. Andbegauetbem abouns Lo2de badchoten out of all the trpbes of Jirael
Daunce of vitaple,and obtapnedmanpwpueg, to put Disuame there. 4nd bys mothers name


@ The.rii. Chapter. Ea a aa mondea AND DED Ò euel Ureeritit
C Setack bruse of Cgppte robber the tempie of the becaule be preparedriot bis here tole Loa:
brid bpm» OAN DPED anD Abia bps Lonne caccee- The actes alto of Reboboam, fpztandlat,


are thep not w2ptté inthe fapenacsof Demeia
theppopbete, and of Fddo the Sea r,wbpchuos
ted the gencalogpsand there was warre alimap
betwene Reboboam and Jeroboam. And Re-
boboa flepte witb bps fa thers, and was burpea
th the citpe of Daupd, and Abia his fonne trāpa
ued fubys Eeade,
Chapter.


Che. xiit.
Crh: bietozp of gbia agaput gieroboati,


e


Arend it came topalie, thatiwhe Rebo ey een falem. meal
Yi Doam bad Fabl p Med the kin Dome emer sh ichaiabu the douchtcr of Uziel!
' een and became mya hep, befozlokethe of Gibea. Andtherewas warre betwene Abia
. PRAN awtoftbeLorde Andall Zlracllys Jeroboam. And Xbia made pzoutfpon fo2 the
16,re.plid.¢ Bies € hin. x Andit fortuned that inp fpft warte, baning baleaunt gerpert men of warre
pore of brn Behobian aeree hyng of e, enen.titt. €.).chofenme. And Zero boa fet him
gyptcame vpagapn Ferulalem,becaute they {elfinarap to fpabtagapatt brin ie

~e


ee


3 ppcte men which were ftronge € men of arines.
Bnd Abia tode vp pon semeraim an byll,
whicbets inmount Ephzatm,¢ lapde:beare me
thou Feroboam gall 3 frael.Do not pou kinowe
hotee that the Lode Govof jlrael gane p bing
dome ouer them of Flrael,to eit fozeurt, c=
ucnto bpmand tobis Tonnes wpth a faltedco>
nenaunty Bnd Jeroboam the fonne of Rebat ý
fernaunt of Salomon the fonne of Dautdts cp
fen vp and bath rebelled again pts Lod. and
tbere gathered to him leude menthe chplozen of
Welial,epzcuapledagapnlt Keboboa che fonne
of Salomon, whé Repoboam was ponge and
tender berted, ¢coulde not tande befoge them.
And nowe pefape,p pebeabletopzeuaple a
gapnit the kyngbdome of the Lozde, whicheis it
the bandes of p fonnes of Daud, g pe be a great
tinere multptube, Haue she golden calues* which Je
it, Par.ctc robo made pou foz gondes. ¥ And baue penot
catte out the peeattes of the Lozdethe fonties of
Jaron andthe Leuttes and baue made pou pre
{tes aftertbemaner ofthenacpong of other lan-
pes ‘fotbat wholoener cometh EcOlecrateth bis
band witha ponge ore €. dii.cams, p fame map
bea }zcalte of them thatare no qobdes.
€ Wut webelonge ontop Lod our God whi
we bauenot fozfaken, ¢ the preltesare f fonnes
of Jaron whiche minpiter nto the Lozde,and
tbe Leuttes wapt vp thep2 offpce. Thep burne
pntothe Lode euerp moznpuge and encnpnge,
burntlaccifpcees g lwete incenle, pie we bzeade
fet thep inorder bpd a pure table: € prepare the
candelitpcke of golde w the lampes of the fame:
tobutnecuerat euen. And truelpe toe kepe the
watche of the Lord our God: but pe Dane fogla-
Kenhpm. And behold, God bpm felfe,ts our cap
euir tapne and bps petes blowe wpt D the x trom=
ettes and crepe alarum agqapnit pou. D pechpl
ben of Fitacl,fyqbt not agapnlt the L020 God
of pour fathers,fo2 it wyl not pzolpet w pou.
‘ut Foz all that, Jeroboam conucped më pre
uelp aboute,to come bebpnde them: and fo thep
dere befoze Juda , and the lpers in apte were
Debpnde them. And when thep of Juda lobed a=
boute, beholde the battaple was befoze and be-
hpnde,andthep ccped vnto the Lozdc,and p pze
ites blewe with the trompettes,and the men of
Juda gauca Houte. Andasthemenof Juda
thouted, tt came to pafe, that God (mote Jero-
boam and Frael before Abia g Juda. And the
chpldzcn of Flracl Aed before Juda, and God de
ipucred them intotbep2 bande. and Abia g bps
people flue a greate laughter of them :there fell
Downe wounded of Zfracl.v.C€.).cholen men
Andlothe chplozen of Ffrae! were brought vn
der atthat tome: €thechplozen of Juda pzeuap
led: becaule thep leaned vnto the Lozde God of
thep2 fathers. And & btafoloted after Jerobo:
amand toke citpesfrombim, ethel, with the
townes bélogpneg therto, Jelana w the townes
that loged tbherto,¢ Eph: wb ber townes. Jnd
Jereboå recoucredno firégtpagapn inf dapes
of Abia. And the Lord plaged bpm,ebedped.
Hut Abia wared mpatie, € matped.xitit.
pues, ebegqat. crit fonnes.€.xvtdoughters.


i Chronicles


Thereof the actes of Hhia,hiscuffoms big
fapengs ar waptté inp frozp ofp proppet Jodo.
Che. rit. chapter.
(Ct Atabkpnge of Huda,


AA 7 D Abia flepte with bis fathers, and F


ED i tbep burped bpm inthe citpeof Da-
i4


o a tupt, and Ala bps fonne rapgned in Idi..
NE bps teade: Jn whole dapes the land

=e as in qupetnelleten peare. " ih.ate.tb.8
Snd* Ala dpd that was qoodandtpabtein `
the epes of the Lozde bis God-fozbetoke awap
range aulters ¥ the bilaultets,¢ brake downe
the pages, and cut downe the qroues,and co-
maunded Juda tolebke the Lode God of thep2
fathers and fo Doaccozdpnge to the latwe Ecom
maundement. And be put awap out of al citpes
of Juba the bplaulters andthe pmages:and the
eyngbon was qupet before bym, Andde buple.
rronge Citpes in Juda : becanlethelande wag
in reft,and bebadno warre tatbole pereg. Foz
the Lorde bad genenbpm ret.

Thertoze be fap toJuda:let bs bupls there B
Citpesand make aboute them walles, towzes,
ate pra barres,fo2 the lande ts pet inceit be-

02€ DS, becaufe Wwe baue fought the Lozdz oure
God: we haue fought bym, and be bath qeué vs
reft on euerpCpde: and fo they buylte and it pzo-
fpered opeb carne And’ Ala bad an armp of me
that bare Hpldes and (peares oute of Juda thee
eat Nt spe ee out of WenFaminthat
bare (bpldes,and dzue bo wes, two Dundzed and
foure (coze thoulãd al thele were valiaüt men.

And therecame out agapntt them sarab,the ¢
blacke @ oppan x wpeh an boite of ten unded i pariie
thouland, and the bundzed charettes,andcame
as farre ag Marela. And Ala went out vefoze
bpin,and thep topned the battaple in the vallep
ofsepbata befpde Darefca. And Alacrped vn $
to the L020 bps God and [apd Lozde, *it is no treri,
barbetbpnge wpth theto belpe eptber manp,oz
them that Daue no power : belpe vs therfore, D
Lozde out God, fo? we trut tof, ¢inthp name
Yor qo gapni thys multptude. Chou arte the
L03de oure God , and no man (all pecnaple a=
gapni the. So the Lozbe fmote p blacke mozeg
before Mla and Juda and the blacke mozes fied
nd Ala andthe people that was wth bpm fo
lowedafter them onto Serer. Andebe blacke
mozeg bolte wag ouerthzowen, that there was D
none Of therm lefte, but were delbroped before p
Lozde and before bis hofte. And thep carpeda-
Waypeampabhtpe create prape. And thep mote
alltbe citpes roundeabout Serer. Foz the Feare
of the Lozb came bponthem. And thep fpopled
all tbe cttpes, and there waserceadpnge muche
{poplein them,ebep {mote allo the tentes of cat-
tell, and carpedawape plentye of (pepe and ca-
mels,andreturncdto Jerufalem.

@ The.rv. Chapter.

C Gpnce dlabp themontcpou of the prophete Ataria faz

eanta to rande . He oeppurto bps mother fryme
ead the lpzeteof God came bpon Asaria: B
Fem te fonne of Dbed~ And he wente out to

== mete Xa, and lapde vntobpm : pearce me
Ala,and all Zada,and WenZamin. Che Lode.


Sg H


ala


i is Wprh pou, tobple pe be wpth bpm, and when
pe feke bpm, be wpll be Founde of pou:¢ agape


| when pe fortake bom, be alfo wpll Eozfake pou.


And teuelp fora longefealon in glraell no man
fought the true God, no man regarded the peclk
that taught them, nomancarcd fo2thelawe.
f And wheanp man indis trouble dpd turne un-
| totbe Lorde God of Flracl,and fought ppn, be
wasg fonnd of them. Andinthat tyme ther was
no peace fo bpm, that dpd qoout ein: but great
fedicpon tas there amonge all the enbabpters
ofthe carth. Bnd nacion was deltropcd of nacp
: on, and citpe of citpe: foz God dpd moue all ad-
uet(ptie amoncge them. Plape pe therfore p men
and leenot pour bandes Rache, foz poure worke
13 (pall be rewarded.
Bnd when Ala beard thole wozdes, andthe
| : propbefpe of Xsaria: thefonne of Obed the pro
| phete,be toke courage, and put awape the abbo
: minable pdolg oute ofall the lande of Juda and
| Wen Jamiti,¢ out of the cityes Which he wanne
| inmount Ephzeim, andrenuedthe Aultare of
the Lozde,that was befoze the portch of p Loyd
And he gathered al Juda g Wen Jamin and the
ffraungers wpebtbemoute of Ephraim : Wa-
nafleand Simeon. fEo2 there fell many tobpm
out of {lrael, when thep faw that the Loze dis
Godwas withbym. S0 thep allembled to Fe-
cufalem the rhpzde moneth, the fpftenth pere of
the rapgne of Bla. Andthep ofred unto p L020
Plame tyme of f {poile whieh thep had brought
- bit. Dund2¢d oren,and.vit.thoulande Hepe.
€ And thep made a couenaunt tolfeke p Lozde
E God of thep2 fathers pth all tPep2 Herte, and
| all thep? foule. And who fo cuer wolde not (eke
the Lode God of Pract, Hulde dye foz it: wipe-
ther be were finall 02 great,man o: Homa. And
thep fware tnta the Lorde bptbalende vopce
(houtpng and blobpnge wpth trompettes and
ihdwines. Andallthepin Fubda retopeed at the
othe, Fosthep bab (woztie Dnto the Lorde wyth
all thep2 barte and foughte bym wpth allthepz
luft,and de was foundeof them. And the Lozve
S gaue them rek roundeabount on cucrpfypde.
D  Andkipng Afaput Maacha bismotber ont
_ OFauctozpte, becaute the admadeanabpomyp-
p op Hable pdollow (of pztapas)in a qrouc:¢€ Ba brake
Downe ber pooll,¢ ampedit, eburnte tt at the
bioke Cedzon. Wut allepe hplaulters were not
taken awape out of Httacl:th ougbethe berte of
fa was perfpte all its dapes. And be brought
tntotieboufe of God thethpnges that bps


ST


cate:euentplucr,and goloe and Jewelles. And
Fuviiiid. (here Was no moze warre vutothex. cery, pere
oftherapgueot Afa.
i @ Che.rvichapeee.


« Ala fo? frare of Baafakpnge of girati maketh a cours
nannt With Benhadad Kpnae of Sitpa.


cs


a 2 tbe.rerbl.pere of p sapone of ala


Nr} Bede caine * Baala bpnee oF 3


| rael Dp a-
| pa CapntZuda,e buplt Rama fo thers

74 tent p he wolde let nonce ae Out 02
aa Nox (ratp to Ala king of guda. And


i Lhronicdles:


fa fetou golde and fplucr out of the trealurs


a 4444 “S
Solreirs
es.of the boufe of p Lob, te oë the kpnaes boule
¢ {ent to Wenbadad kynage of Sirya owelt at
Darimetec,elapde:Cheretsaconfederactonbe —
fwene me ethe betwen mp father ¢tbpne. Wes %5
bolde, 3 bane lent thefpluce ¢ gold,that ë voplt
come goreake thine appopntment with aala
lipnge of 4fvael ý bemape departe fr me. And
Wenhavad qraunced onto kpnge Bla,e (ent to
the captapnes of bis army to thecitpes of Fira
cl. And thep (mote Jion, Dan, Abelmain,and
the trong citpes of Qephthalp:Anodwhen wa
aia beard this,be lefte PoPa of Rama, and
let big twozke ceale. And then Xia f kpngetoke
all Juda, carped awap the Fones g tpmber of
Rama Wwbherwpth Waala wasa bupldpng and
De buplt therwith Gcba and Hispa.
At that fame tyme Hanani the fear came to g
Afa kynge of Juda:¢ lapd wntobpm:becaulep ~
Hatt truked inthe kipng of Dirpa , € not rathec
put thy teutt inthe Lozde thp God.therfore isp
bolte of the kyng of Sirpa elcaped out of thine
bade.*ad not the blacke Mozes, g Lubiman g.pa.riittc
erceadpnae greate bofte wpth many charettes
and bozfemen? And pet bycaule P truftedett tn
the Lo2de, be Delpucred them into thpne pande.
Foz theepes of the Lozde bebolde all § carth,to
fFrégth them p are of perfpte bertetotardppm
x erin thou bat done foolpilpe, therfore fró goin:
benffozth thou Halt dane Warre. And Ala twas n
Wzoth with p ear, € put bymintoa pzefö ponte
fo? be was dplpleafed ws bym , vecaule of thps
tena And Ata e certapne of p people =
fic lame cecalon. And bebvold, thefededes of Ala
fpitand lait are wptten inthe boke of the kpn:
Kesof Juda and Flrael. And Ala inthe-rrrir-
pere ot pigrapane fell fpcke inbis fete,anderdbat
dpleafecontynucdberpelonge, And*Kin bys gere,
fyckeneffe, beCougbte not tbe Lorde, but phifp= rer bitte
ctong. and Ma flept with bis fathers,and dped
in p.rlt.pere of his rapgue. And they burtcd bint
in bis ovone fepulchze , whpche be bad made foz
bpm felfe inthe Citpe of Waupd and lapdebpni
im the bed which be bad fplled with opuerfe apa
des oF (pyces elwete odoureg, made bp f crafte
of the potecarpes. And thep burnte werp muche
ippecaboute pym.
CTbhe.rvii- Chapter.
CIerbolaphat cauleththe frare of the Lorde to berenuga
amonge the people,
ee MD * Jeholaphathisfonerapgned A
KSAR tn Dis eade, and preyatiedagainge 4tb,t.d.
| $lracl. And be puttoulbpersmal p
Ne trong cities ef guda and fet rulers
naiai] in thelande of Juda tintbe cities of | -
Pbaimn, which Bla his father bad wore. Xna
2 02De was pth Jebolaphar,becaute he wal
Hed inthe olde wapes of bis father Daupd,and
fought not Waalim. Wut loughe Pp Lowe Good
of bisfatber,and walkedin bys comaundemen
teg.and not after the doinges of Slrack. andthe
Lozde tablpihed the kyngdome inbishande,¢
àlithep that werein Juda, brought ppm pelen
tes, fo that be badaboundaunce of rpchefieand
Honoure. And helpfte vp his bert wnto f wapes
of the Lode gheput Downe pet moze of the byl
Hi l aulters
~-


Ahab


i]
ef


aulterg and grones oute of Judai


1  Jutbetbpadepeare ofbpsrayane pe fent to


py slozdes,enento Wenbail, Obadia zacharia
Methanel, and to Hicbaabu,that thep thoulbde
teachein the citpes of Juda and wpth theym de
Cent Leuites:euen Semeiadu, Lethantahu,3a
badiabu, Afabel, Hcmiramoth, Jebonathan,
Adontabu, Cobtabu,¢ Cubadonta,and wpth
them Elifamab andZebozam preltes. And they
taught in Juda, and bad the boke ofthe lawe of
God with tbem, and went about thozotout al


€ the citpes of Juda, and taught the people.


And the feare of the Logdefell vpon all tbe
kpngdomes of the landeg ý wererounde about
Juda thep Fought not agapnit Jebolaphat,¢
fome of p pbtlifkines bzought Jeb mi oe pi-
tes etrpbutelplucr. And therto the Arabians
brought bpmcatel:cucn. vit. ).¢. vit. C.rams
g. vti.sd).€. bit.C.begotes.Andlo Jebolapbhat
prolpered g grue vp onbpe. And be bupltin Fu-
da,caftels € tronge citpes,¢ be bad greate fub-
ftaunce inthe citpes of Juda,but the men of at=
mesand frongeft Coudpers were in gerufalem


2D Andthele are the offpcesof theintheboules


of thep2 fatbers, the captapns ouer thoufandes
in Juda. Bona the fg i hn wpth bpm of
fpabtpng men.iii. C. 4H. And necte to bis bade
was Jebojanana captapne, € wpth bpm.it. T.
€.lere. H. Jnd next bym was Amasia p fone of
sichzi, which of big owne good wpll ofred bpm
felfe unto the 10:d¥ with bym.t.€.-<).mpgqh
tpe menof warre. And of thechpldzenot en-
Jamin, Eliada a man of mpgbt, and Had with
bpmarmed men wpthbowe g pplde.ii t. 4).
And nerte bom was Jeholabad,¢ with bym an
©. lrre.). p were prepared fo: the war. Cele
wap ted onthe kpnge,befpoes thole whiche the
kpng put in p fronge cttpes thozowout al guda
a Tbe. rvii. Chapter.
@ after Ahab had arkea counceli ofthe foure hundzed pro


phetes be put ichra in pzpfon.Bedpeth wrth the Motte
-_ ofan arrotwe,


H Gey Er Pd Febolaphat bad aboundaunce
[ee a) lof rpcbes and bonoure,¢ topned af-
i ce.rrit. KoA Vet fpnpte witb Abab. Andxafter cer-


ELAS tapn peres be wt downe to Ahab
JEEE Sto Samaria. And Ahab fuemany
{hepe q orenfor bim and fo? the people $ be Dad
Mithpym,andentreted bpm togo vpwhim va


ta Ramoth in Gilead. And Ahab bpng ipa


elfapde to gebolaphat Bpng of Juda: wplt P go
withme to Ramoth im Oileads And he antwe-
eed bpm: J tpl beasp and my pesple thalbeas
thpne,and we wyl go with the to the warre.
And Jebotaphat lapde vnto the kyng of Jl-
” rael:afkecouncel J pzap the at the toozde of the
Lozdetbpstamedape. Cherfozretbe kpnage of
FBracll gathered together of prophetes. iiit.g.
men, q faide Onto them:(pal we goto Ramoth
in Gilead to fyght,o2 Hulde Jceales And thep
fapd:go vp,¢ G00 hall delpuer it into the kpn-
es hande. But Jebolappat fapde:ts there pet
ere neuer a pzopbete moze of P Lozdes that we
mygbtaike ofbpine Andthe bpnge of Flracll
fapd onto Lg et deh there is pet one man,bp
whom we maye alke the Logd. wut F bate him


ii, Lhronicles


FAeholaphat


foz benenerpzophecpeth me good, but alwape
ettell, tbe lane ts ichea the onne of Jimla,
and Jebholaphat Capde:let not the kyng Tape fo.

And the kpnege of Jlrael called one of bischa C
berlapns,¢lapde,fetche bether quickly <Hichea
the fonne of Jimla. And the kpnge of Flraclle
Aebataphat kynge of Juda late epther of them
onbpsteateintbep2 apparel , tna thaelhpnge
foutre belpde the gate of Samaria, andall the
prophetes propbhecped befoze them. And onese=
Ockia thefonne of Chanana bad made pym hoz
nes of p2on, and fapde: thus lapth the Lorde, ws
thefe (halt thou ouerthzowe Sirpa , ontpl thep
be brought to nought. And all p prophetes pza-
phecpedcucn lo,fapenge: GO bp fo Ramoth in
Gilead, and tt Hall prolperere wpep the: fo the
Lod (hal delpuer it into p bande of the kpng.

And p meflenger p went tocal Wichea fpake D

fo bpm.fapenge:bepolde,the wozdes of the pro
pbhetes {peake good top kpuage wpth one affent,
let thp wozdes therfore belpbe one uF thep2s, È
thou fpeake that whiche ts plealaunt. and Bye:
cheafapbde:as trulp as P Lo2d lpueth: eué what
mp Gadlapth ý wplF tpeake. And whe be was
come tothe kynge, the ipnge fapde vnto bpm:
&) ichea , (hall we goto Ramothin Gilrad to
Fyabt,o2 leaue of And he fapde:qo bp, eal hal
be well: andtbep Hall be Delpucred nto poure
bande. And the kpngefapde to bym: Ho and fo
manp tpmes do J charge p,that plape nothpng
but the truth tome:tn the name of the Lorde.

Chen he lapde:¥ dpdlealithem of Zfracl {ta
tered in p mountapns,as Depe p haut no thepe:-
berde. And the Lord faide:thefe baue no matter
let them returne euerp man tberfoze to bis boule
inpeace. Andthe kpug of Flracl fapde to Jeho
fapbat: dpo J not tell the,p be wold not prophe
cpeqood butome:but evel: But bhelapde agapn
therfore beare pe p wozde of the Lorde. xy law riire.rriin
the Love (pt vpon bys leate,ealtbecopanp of Er bia.

cauen {tobe on bystpabt bande g on bps lefte.

nbd the Lo2delapde: who Mall deceaue Ahab
kpnae of Zlrael:p he mape go vp € be ouerthz0-
hen at Ramoth in Gilead: And helatd-one lap
eththps,another p. And there came out alprete
æ tode befoze p Lozd g fapd: 3J tpl deceaue btm
Andp Lodlapde vuto bpm: berein? Hnd bhe €
fapde: 3J wpl go out, andbealpengtpzeteintbe
mouth ofall bys prophets. and the Lozdfaphe
thou palt deceaue bym:¢ halt preuaple qo out i
anddo euen fo. Ano now therfoze beholde, xthe rer g
Lo2de bath putalpenge {p2ete in p moutbes of ese. riie
allthefe thp Prophets, the Loade bath poken >
euellagapnit the. And sedekia the fonne of Cha
nana went to, {mote )ichea vp the cheke : ¢
fapd, bp what wap went p {peete of PRozde frå
meta fpeake w thesAnd Wichea fatoP thalt fe
the dape when y Halt go th fromchabze tocha-
b2e,fo2 to bpde thp felfe. And the kpnge of Fira
el apd: take pe S)ichea,ebzpng bpm to Amon
the goucrner of p citpe gto Joasp kynges fone
ano pe ball fare tbusfapthtbekpng, put thys
Felowe in the pzefon boufe, fede bym w bzeade E
ofaffipeciong water of trouble pntpl Frome ae
gapnein peace. And Bpichea favo:pl P come ae

gapne


i


Feb


G


Gapnein peace, chen hath not the Lozdelpoken
tome. And be fapde berke to pe people cucrp one
of pou. And To the kynge of Alracl and Fevola<
phat the kpuge of Juda went vp to Ramothin
Gilead. And she kpnge of Flrael fapde bntoJe-
dolaphat:F mulkchaunge me, when 3 goto tbe
bataple:but fe that thou paue thpne owne appa
rel bpon the. Bnd the bpnge of Flrael chaunged
bpm eife and thep came to batapl. Sut p kpna
of Diria bad comaunded pcaptapns of thecha-
retsp were withbim,fayinge: fe f pefpgbtnot
agapntt (mall o: great fane agapntt the kynge
of Slrael onelp. And when the captaynes of the


charettes {ate Jebolaphat,theplapde:ttisthe LET


kpnge of Jlracl , thertore thep copafied about


bpm Co fpaht. Wut Jebolapbat crped out ethe hu 5


Love Helped bim, e God chaled them awap fra


of the charcts percepued pit wag not the kynge
of 4{lrael,thep turned backe agapne from ym.
And a cerfapne man dzewe a bowe With all his
myabt,¢ {mote the bpnae of ¥frael betwene the
topntes of bis babergqin.Andbe faideto bis cha
retmait:tarne thpne pande, that thou wd Caz
tpe ine out of p holte, fo: Jam wounded. Jnd p
batapleceaffed that dape. Howbeit the kpnge
of Firacl caufed bys charette to tande tplla-=
ganthe Sirians vntpll euen, And about the
tyme ofthe lunne gopng Downe; pe dped.
C Che.cir.Cpapter.

@ After Jrhoraphat twasrebubed bptheprophet Febu, be
called epapnthz people tothe bonourpng of $ £ozoc.
Epp Md Feholapbat pking of Juda came
ZAIN bomeagapneinpeace todeculalem.
i, SS Sl Bnd Febu the fon ofPanani the lear
By AVA Vivent out co mete bim, slapd to king
Biasa Jeholaphat:(dlolvelt p belpe the vn


bpm. SEozit cameto red taste Apne fome p


i gobly,¢ loue them tbat bate Lod: therfozcig


` gozathcome bpon ffrom befoze P L020. Neuct=


theles,there ar fome good actes foundinthe, inp
chou batt bevoen boinne p geoues ont of lande


- and baf prepared thpne Dert to leke god.Andio


Sebolapbat dwelt at Zeculalé: andtacned and
oe ont top peoplefrom Meerlebato mout €


ppzaim,andbaongbt them agapn vonto p Lozd
* 5 od of thbepz fathers. And be let judges in che
_ Sand thozowontal f Erong citpes of Juda citpe


\ Romig. d.


Actes.F.e


E ph é. bi, ba
collo, i.d


@ ofthe Leuites,¢ of thepzetes ¢ of the auncpent


bp citpe: &fapDdeto the judges: take bebe what
pebdo,foz pe erecute nok iudgementes of man,
but of God, whpcbe igw poum therudgenient.
Wiberfore now, let the feare off Lozdbe Vpon
pouand take bede,and be Doing( the thing that
plealeth bpm) foz there igno varypghteoutntetle
wpth the Lozde our God: xthat he oulde bane
anyp vclpecte of perfones.o2 takercroardes.
Pozcouee inZernfalem dpd Jebolaphat {ce


fathers ouce Jirael in themmodqement caute of
the Logbe. And thep returned agape to Ferta
falem. and be charged them fapeng: Thus thal
ye Dointhefearcottbe Lode, tbe truthanda
pure berte : what caule foener come topou of
pourbzechzen powell in thepzcitpes , bëtwene
blondegblondebetwenelaweg cOmaundemét
betivene Matuteg g ozdinaunces,pe Hal warne


ti. Lheontcles.


them pthep trelpace not agapntt PLo2de, ¢ fo
wy2ath come bpon pou € on pout bethe. Thug
Oo ¢peallnot ofende.Andbebold, Amariap
bpe pref isanonge pon inal matters of p Lod
€3cbadla the Con of slmacl,a ruler of f boule of
pada be is ouerfuch bulpnefics as concerne the
phge:tbhere be offpcers of p Leuttes alio before
pou, ‘Cate courage to pou therfoze,<ebedopne
mantullp:¢ the Lozd fpalbe vb luchas be good.

— €be.rr. Chapter. |
Synge oC Juba nnpnt toe apoabps, ibe DEETAN

__ Gmmou, aiid them of Seir, pth sod atita
god apps cyl02¢n OF Boab q the childzen o


ars
rog


BAGI a


pecfence,fortby name isin chis boule gerpe viv
fo the mour fribulacpon,Deare tou and belpe,
And now beholde, the i ot of Aniunon g
)oab,¢ mount Heir, by whome p wolde not
let them of $lraci go, whe thepcame out of the
lande of Egipt:bnt thep departed from tbem,
beftroped them not, Se, how theprewarde vs,
torome foz to caft bs ont of thy poflelits, which
thou ball geué bs toenberet.D our God, wple
chou not iudge thems foz we bauens mpg be a=
gapni this great copanp p cometh agapnit vs
thee wote the whatto do:butonrepes be vr
tothe. Anbaljuda ode before the Lozd with
thepzyonge ones, theyz wpues, ethep2 chplozé
and¢pere wag FJehaliel the fone of zacharia the
fontic of Wana the fonne of Fehiel the fonne of
Gatbania,a Leurte of the lines of Afaph,and
bponbynicame the (pzete oly Lopbe,cucnin
the mpbs of the congregacton.y
kenall Juda. g pe enbabtters of Jerufalem, and
thboukpngeyepofaphat:€husfaptb the Lorde


bnto pou: benot afrapde, no2fapnte derted bp


reaton of this great multptudc: fo: the bataple

isnot poures, but Goddes. Tomoowe ope

vowne agapnite themfoz they come vp atte
PR


Foker:


nd be fapdeber D


Eei E E T a aaaŘIŘħo


ye thall fpnde them at the ende of p broke befoze
the wpldernefic of Jeruel. Vethallnot nedeto
Fpabt in tbis battaple:but tep foztb and Mandt
and bebold the belpe of the Lozde which ig with
pou:feare not,noz let poure bartes faple pon, D
pe of Juda and of Jerufalem. Comozowe goo
out agapni them, foz p Lozde wplbe with pou
And Febolaphat bowed his face to the carthe g
all Juda. and the enbabiters of Zerutalem felbe
foze the Lozde, workhpppynge the Lorde. Ano
tbe Lenites of the copldzen of the Cabathites,¢
of tbe sate be ofthe Coratbptes ode Dp, to
prapfetbe Lorde God of Flraell: wpth aloude
Dopce on bpe. And when thep arofecarlpe tn the
mozpnge, thep gatthem ont vito the wplder-
nele of Chekoa. Andas thep went oute, Jebo-
e fapbat tode glapd: b are me, D Juda, y pe cn-
© habpterg of Jerulalé. Put pour trukk inp Lode
pout God, that pe mape be founde faptpfull,
‘Geuecredence tobps prophetes, and fo Mall pe
zofpere. Bnd be gaue the people coticel,andlee
fometo fpnge vnto the Lozde, eto pzaple bpm
inthe bewotpe of bolpneg, and to go out before ý


arinie,astpep went,andtolape,praplepiowd en


foz bis mercpelaftetbeuer. And what typmeas
thep began tolaude andpzaple then the Lozde
{tered bp certapne of the chpldzenof Ammon g
Moab, wWhpch lapde wapte fo? them that were
of moult Seir: which were come agapntt Juda.
And thep were oucrthbgowen wprh Crokes a-
monge them felues. Foz the childzen of Ammon
and @)oab role agayntt the inbabtters of mot
cir. Andthep lewe and beftroped them: And
wher thep bad made anende ok the enbabpters

of Sur euerpe onc belpedte dDeHrope an otper
amonge them {elues.

! And when Juda came to the edge of f wpl-
Dernellc,thep lowed wnto the multitude. And bè
bolbe,thep were dead carcales fallen top earth,
anbdnoneefcaped. and whe Jebolaphat and pis

. people came totakeatwape the (poeple of them:
they found amonge them aboundaunce of goed

~ beg, rapmente pleafaunt Jewels, wbpcbethep
~ toke Foz themfelues, moze then thepcoulde carp
- qawape:fo that thep were thee Dapesin gathes
rpnac ofthe {pople,itwastemuche. And th
~  fourtbdape thep affembicd inthe vallep of blet-
fpnge,foz there thep bleed the Lode. And ther
foz: thep calledtbe name of thefame place, the
wallep of bleffpnge vutothysdaye. Andfoall
tbe men of Juda and Jerufalem returned wpth
3 Febofaphat tbepz bead, foz to qo aqapne toje
cafalem with gladnetle foz the Lozde bad made
tbemtoreiopceouer theprenempes. Andthep
came to Jerufalem with plaltertes,and barpes
and pawmes cuen nto the boule of the Lorde
Andthefeare of God Fell inthe kpngdoms of al
landes ,wobentbep badde bearde that the Lorde
* fougbtaqarnt theenempes ot Zirael, Ando
the realine of Jebofaphat was tn tranquilptpe:

and bis God gaue bpm reft on euerp fpde.

> And*aebolaphatrapgned bpon Juda,and

tice pri ag. erru. peare olde hen be began to rapgue
andrapgned.rccv. peare in Jerufalem, and pps
motbersname Was Aluba the Doughter of Sil


ii, Lhponicles


bi. And be walked th the wapes of Ala bps fa-
ther bowed not ther from, dopna that which
wWasrpabt in the fpahe of the Lorde. Howebeit
the bplaulters were not taken atvape,foz p peo:
ple bad not pet prepared thep2 bertes wnto the
God of thep2 fathers. Theret off actes of Fe-
bofapbat fpr elatt beholde thep are oz ptte a=
monge the fapenges of zebu p fonne of Hanani


io pnr bpm (clfe witb Abastabu kpngeofgirael
w


Shaveta pe thi Asia Aba bat, fap
te


Pre.
a € bolapbat alfoxflepte w bis fathers, % `
i poe and was burped With bisfathers inp (i. Re. Hg
eAcitpe of Daud, and Jepozambps fine
ome rapgned inbis Meade, pe bad bzethré
which were thefons of Jebolaphat, Asaria, Je
bil tia, Alaria, Michael,¢ Hepbhatiabu.
All thele were the fons of Jebotaphat kpnge of
Juda. J rid reall teed gaue them manparcat
gpftes of cold efpluer g other [pecpal fubitaiice
witb frongecitpes in Juda: but the kyngoom
gaue be to Fehoram,foz be was theeldel. And
Schozam rofe vp agapnittbespngbome of bis _
father.and prenapled,andxiineall bisbzetbzen 2° %*
topth the lwecarde,¢dpuerle of the Lozdes of Fl:
rael, * Jebord was.trrit. pere olde when be Dea “ITs
antorapane, €betapgned. biti. pere in Jerus
falem. Jnd be walked in the wapes of Pkinges
of Jirael,lpke as dpd the boule of Abad, for be 5
had f Doughter of Phab to wpfe gbe wougbte
evelin the epes of the Lorde. ipowbeit,p Lode
wolbenot deffrope the boule of Daupd, becaule
of thexcouenaunte that debad made wpth Dae i seo tic,


a


tbe uid.asbep2omplesto geuea lpgbt tobpym, and ano.ir.b.


tobps Connes Foz euer.+ Jn big dapes p Cdomts “par:bi.c.
tes rebelled whëthep were Ynderp Dominion oF gir.re.birte
Juda emade them lelucs a kynge. And Febord ttrecrtts
went forth Ù Dig Lozdes,¢all bis charet were pie.
wpth bpm:¢ berole vp bp night,¢ {mote p Edo
mites, which copafled him m, æ the captapne of
thecbarets. Wut Edom rebelled pll, fo p thep
wolde not be onder f bande of Juda ynto thys
dape. Chat lame tpme alfo dpd Libnadeparte
fro bepng nder bis bande becaule Jebozã had
forfaken p Lord God of pis fathers ozeouer C
be made hplaulterg tn p citpesof Juda cauld
p inbabpters of Jerulalë tocõmpt foznicactd,¢
p2ouoked Juda to Jdolatrp. Andtherecamea
weptpugerobpm from Elia p prophete fapeng
Cpuslapth p Low gov of Dauw tby father be
caile p pall not walkedip waps.of xebolaphat
thp father,2 in p ways of Afa king of Juda, but
walkedelt inp ways of f higes of Mracl, hal

made


Abasiabu.


B:


D


diii ve biie


=


1


made Juda g Che dwellers of Jerufalem tooa
whozpnge,lpke to the wbhozedome of p boule of


Abab,and batt flapne thp bzethzen cuen thy Ea-


thers boule, tohpch were better then thou : be«
bolde, wpth a great plage wpl the Loedefmpte
ioe folie, fop copin. ray wpues,¢thp goodes.
And thou alt lufre great payne: euĉa dpfeale
of thy bowels vntpl thy quttes fall out bp rea-
fon oftbp {pchnes,dape bp Bape. ,
And lo the Logde fered vpagapnE Febo2ra
the {pete of the Whiulttines, andthe Arabians
ý were belpde the blacke mozeg. And thep came
pinto Juda, and waited it, and carpedawape
all the fubtaunce that was foundeinp kpnges
boufe and bis fonnes, ¢ bis Dpues:fo tpat there
was Neuer a fonne lette bymfaue Jehopabas,
wh ych wasp pongeltamonge bis fonnes.4nd
after alltbele thpnges the Lozdefmote ppm in
bis bowelles withan wncurable difeate. Audit
came to patie, that in peoceffe of tyme,eue after
the ende of Leo pereg, bis guttcs fell out m hps
fpchnes:¢ lo be dped of verp eucl bpieates. and
they made no burnpng foz bpm lyke p burnpng
of bysEatbhers. pen be beqanne to rapgne, be
was.rrit.peare olde,andrapgned in Zeruialent
viii.peare,and lpucd weetcheblp: howaett they
burped bpm in p cptie of Dauid:but not amoge
the lepulchzes ae kpnges.
€ Ghatiahburapgneth prerii CORRECT Zchukprge
of a{rael kplicth Ahatiahu.dthatia puteeth to beath althe bpaz
ges Ipnage:onip Joas efcapeth. |
pere EE Ad*tbhe tnbabpters of Jerufalem
eed? made Abaztabu his põge fonking


V in bps tepe. Eo? the men of warte


a aA ANA xthat came with p boot of tbe Ara


PNA piang, bad Maine al pis eloch foncs
And fo Ahasiabu the fonne of Aebordbyuge of
Juda, teas made kpnge. wo andfourtppeare
olde thas be when be brgan to rapgne, andhe
ratgned one pere in gcrulalé.bis motpersname
was Athaliabu thedougbterof Amri. And pe
walked alfointhe wapes of the boufe of abab
foz bis motber( bp ber coulel entyfed him to do


wychedlp. Gberfore be dpd p whyeh was euel


inthe fpabtofthe Lorde, asdpa thep that were
of p boufe of Abab:foz thcp were bps couicclers
after the Death of bps fatber,tobps deftruccton

And de walked after thep2 councel, and went
toypth Jebora the fonne of Ahab kpng of Flracl
tofpgbt againtt Hasabel kyng of Sirtaat Ra
moth in Gilead:andthe Sictas (mote Joram.
And be returned tobe healed in Fesrell, of the
Yordes which Were geu bpm at Rama, When
be fought wptb asacilkpnge of Siria. And
Abasiabu thelonne of JehozamBpnge of Juda
wente Downe tole Fcboram tbe fonne of Ahab
at Jesrel,bpcaule be was dilfeafed. Andit came
of Bod, that Abasiabu (huldbe defppled for bis
comminge to Jebozam:foz when be was come,
be wente out wyth Feporam agapnlt Jehucve


(tires ir.b Conne of Rimix whom the Lorde Hab anoyn-


tedtodeftrope the boule of Abab.

And (oit came to pale that when Jebu was
erecutpnge tuftice bpd the boufe of Boab ebad
founde the lozves of Juda and the fonnes of the


ij. Lbonicles.


Dretheen of Abasiabu p hapted on Ahastadu


be fine them. x And he fought Ahasiabu,e thep firere


caught bpm where be was bpd in amatia ,€
bzougbt bpm to Jebu. And whe thep had flapne
bpm,thep burped bpm, bpcaule( fapd thep be ts
the fonne of Jebolaphat.whichlought p Lode
wptbhallbpsberte. Andthe boule of Abastadu
had no power to kepe ftpllepekyngoome,

Wut when Athaliabu the mother of Xha-
siabu fate that ber fonne was deed, fhe arole €
deftroped al the Hinges (edein the kyneed of the
boufe of Juda. And Sebofabeth the Doughter of
thekpnge toke Joas the line of Ahaztahu, and
ftalebym from amonge the hinges fonnes that
were apne ahd put bpmand bis nurce ttt a pre
uy chambze. And lo Jebolabeth the doughter of
king Febo2ain the wpe of Febotava the preetk,


D


and the lpiter of Abasiabu hyd brm from Atha


liabuthat be wasnot fapne. And fo be was w
toem bpd inthe bonleof God fprepeare, And
Atbaliaburapgntd ouer tpe lande.
CTbe.rriii Chapter.
E Foas the fonne of Ahatvabu ts made bpng,
Athaliabu is put to death.


Sey Md x inthelenéth pere Jehoiada A


aye Gye Of hundzedes, Asartabu the fonne
De? Na Yee of Fchozaur, and Flmael p onne
ey aye Slot Jebobana , A gavtapil fone of
We CN aS Dbed,Maaltabu the fonne of As
naiabu, e€lsapbat the fonne of sichzt y made a
Donde wpth them. Anothep went about in Fu-
ha, and gathered f Lenites out of allthe cpties
of Juda,andtheauncient fathers of Aftael:and
they cameto Jerulalem.And all the conaregact
on inade a bende wpth the kynge tn the boule of
God. And he lapd ynto them: beholoe,the&
gesfonne muftrapqne, xas the Lost bathlapd
of the chpldzen of Dauid. |

bis tat checfoze that pe al do: Che thpzd
parte of pou Pallon tbe Sabboth)come to the 25
precites, Lenites, kepers of the posches. Bnd


another thped parte palbe bp p kyngespoute,
and an otber thp2de parte tpall beat the gate of


the foundacton,and all the people Hall bein the
x courtes of the boule of thedLozde. Wut there r-rrvtt.d.


{hall none come into f boule of the Lorde, faue
the peettes,and thep that mpnifter vuto the Le
nites. Thep thal go ta, for they are bolp:but all
tbe people thal kepe the teatch of the Lo2d. 2nd
the Leuttes Wall compatfe the kynge rounde a=
boute,andeuerp man pall hauc bys weapon
bps bande: and what otber man fo euer dothe
come into p boule of the Lozde,be thalbe fapne
and let them be wpth the kpnge, when pe com-
meth in,and eben he yocth out.

And the Leuites andal Juda dpdaccordpne ©
to altbpnares that Zeboiada the preek bad com
maiibed,and tokecucrp mA bps men that came
onthe Sabboth, with then that wente out on
he Sabboth daye, nepipece dpd Jepatava the
preeltlet thecompanpes departe. And Feboia=
da the preeft Delpucred to the captapnes of buns
Drees, {peares,ibplocs.and bucklers, that bad
pectapned to bpnge Dauid, t wee the pous


STOUT EE.


; Spee d bepna belòt, t oke the capta mes Litt. Fe. rib


SPU iy tegira


irb

ipar. bič
bit.b.and
pri. b


Joas.


oE God. And he let all the people eucrp manbha-
upngebps teeaponin bps pade.frd  rpqhtfpde
ot the temple, to the left fpe of the téple alonge
bpthe alter ¢ the téple roude aboute the kpnace.
And thep brought out the kynges onne, € put

DewLrbs.2 Ypon bym the crotone, and * the teltimonpe,o»
OF (andéhep gauchpm in bps banbe,the lawe that wasto be Kept)
» andmadebpmbpnge.and Febotada t bis fon-
nesanopnted bym,¢lapd:Godfauc the kynae.
When Athalfabu herd thenople of p people
runnpnge and praplpng the Rpnge.the came to
the peopletntotheboute ofthe Lozde. And the
loked and behold, the kpng Hode in pis place at
the entrpng it,andthelozdes andthe trompets
were bp the bpnae, €alltbe people of thelanbe
reiopted, blotoinge with trompets.¢ dpd pane
iy thinitrumétes of mulpke,¢ taught to
and papie. Wut Athaliabu rente ber clothes, =
Capd:treafon,treaton. And Jcbotada the preelE
wente out tothe captapnes of bundzedes that
were qouerners of tpe booft, ¢ fapd wnto them:
baue ber ont wpthout the daze of the téple:and
who lo folotvetd her, let bpm be apne with the
fwearde. Foz the pzeeft fapd that thep oulde
not flape Der inthe boule ofthe Lorde. And thep
lapde andes on ber, tpt the was come tothe en»
trpng of the boglegate, befpde the kpnacspoule
and there thep Aue ber. Es
> * And Acbotada made a bonde bpttvene him
fif.reg.rt.0 AND al tbe people and F tynge, that thep hulde
be the Lozbes people. and al the people went to
the boule of Haaland deftroped it, ebaake bps
altere and bys pmaces, and Newe athan the
Preelt of Waal, before thealters.And Jehoiada
___ _ put the offpces fo? the Doufe of the Lozbe bnder
tpar-rba) the hande ofthe p2 eeftes and Leuttes.+as Da
uid had dilributed them inp boule of the L020,
nu.protii,a £9 Ore burnt offpuges wntotbe Lowe, + as it
is Tez ptten inthe lawe of Wols, wpebreioy-
fpng andfpngpuge,as it tas opdepned bp Då-
uid. And he let porters bp the gates of the boufe
of the Lorde, that none Whych was wncleanc in
anp thþpnge Hulde entre tn.

. And he toke thecaptapneg of Dundzedes and
ailtbenobles,and the goucrnours of the people
eal the folke of tiglanve, and caufed the kpnge
focome Downe out of the boule of the Lo20,and
thepeame thozow the bpe gate in totbekpnges

~ boufe, fet the kpnge Vpon the feate of f kpng=
Dome. and al the people of the landereiopled, €
the cptte was in tranquilitic,after that they bad
flapne {tbaliabu pth thefwearde.
s E The. rriiii. Chapter. —
q Qoas burpuge the pte of Fehoiaba kepeth (he latwe: Eut
atteg bp death be tegartcthituot, Mckpllethsachariah


the prophete. Joas 1s keled of bps otne (eruauntes ; after |


ppm rapgucth Amatrabu,

, ea Das was feuen peare olde when be
|) B2abeqantorapgne,x¢ beraiqnedfour
FH tye percin Ferulalem. bps mothers
s ta namcealfo was ien of Beer Seba.
~— «0 Foas bid thar which was right
_ intbefpgbt ofthe Lo2d,al the dapes of Fehota-

ba the preet. And Fehotada toke bpm tivo wy-
ues,andbebegatfonnesanddougbrers. `
a Bnd itchauncedafter thps, that Joas was


u.Lhronicles é


pige f


¥Hoas,
InpuBed to renue the boule of the Lorde, and be .
gathered together tie preettes and tie Levites
and fapd to them: go out vito the cpties of Ju-
da anb gather of all Ffrael monep torepapre p
Houle of pour God,from pere to peare, afe that
pe bafte the thpnge : bowbeit,the 1 cuttes were
flacke. And the tynge called ¥ebotada, p' was
the chefett, and lapt vnto bpm: Upp requpzet
thounot of the Lenttes tobzpngin out of Juda
€ Fcrulalé, the colleccton of monep,accogdinge ero.rcp.
to the cOmaundement of Doles the feruante of
the Lozde:and the cogreqacion of zirac! Hulde
offre it fo? the tabernacle of wptnelle. Foz wpe:
Bed Athaltabu and ber chpldzen brake wp the
boule of God, andall the thpnges that were de-
dicate forthe boufe of the Lo2de dpd thep be-
owe fo: Wealim.
Andat the kpuges commaundementxthey C y
made achell, q let it wptboutat the gate of the tiireriie.


boule of p Lozde:4 made pzoclamacion thozow
Juda and Jerufalem, to bzpngeintc the Lorde
* thetaracton of money,that Moles f feruaŭt a pery
of God fet bpon m inthe wptoernele, gny “E
the Lodes and all p pok refopled g brought
in call into thecbett,wntpll tt was full. X nd it
fostuned,p at the fame time thep brought inthe
che onto them whpch were inthe bpnges bux
fynes)by the bade of the Leuttes. And whë thep
fae that there was muche monep, the kynges
ferpbec one y elt bp the bpe peeelt) came
and emptped the chef, and toke tt,andcarped it
to bps place agapne:thus thep bpddape by Dap
and gathered much monep. 3

And thekpnge and Jebotada qaucit tofuch D
ag dpd tbe labour and wozke in the boule of the
102d¢, and A ee ea and carpenters tore=
papze the boule of the Lozde, and fo dpd the ar-
tifpcers in pron and beafle, toamende the boule
of the Lode. Andfothe wozkemen wougbt, °
and the wozke amended thozow they: bandes:
and they made the boufe of Godas it onghteto
be, and ftrengthedit. And then thep bad fpnp=
edit, they bzougbt theret of ý monep befoze
the kpnge and Feboiada , and there wyth were
made veffelles fozthe boufe of the Lorde: cuen
velicls to mpntfter wythal.¢ to ferue foz burnt
rei th TORE hose age of gold
andipluer. Andtbep offered burnt offerypnges
inthe boule of p Lorde continually al the dapes
of Jehotada: Wut Feboiada wared olde, dped
fuil of dapes. fozanbhundzed andthpatp peare ©
olde was be WE be dped. Andtbhey burped bpm
in the cptie of Danid amonge the kpnges , be»
caule De delte well wpth Ziracl,and wrth God
and with bps boule.and after p death of Febot
ada, came the lozdes of Juda , and made obep=
faunce tothekpnge. Andtbebpnae berkencd
vnto them. And le thep left the boule of f Lozb
God of thepz fathers, and ferued qroues and'p-
bolles. And then came the wrath of God vpon
Juda and Jerufalem, foz thys they: trelpaties
fake. Andbe fent prophetes to them, to bapnge
themagapne wnto the 1020.Andthep teftifped
Dntothem: Wut thep oldenotheare. — :
And the (pacte of God came vpon sacha ee
tye


Amastaju.
ria thefoune of Jehoiabda the pret, which Lode
by the people and fayd bnto tbem: Thus lapth
Eod: whp teanigrele pe the commaundemen=
tes ofthe Lozde,that pecannot prolpere s s02

__ becaule pe Daue foztaken the 1020, be alfo bath
wat.rriti.d Fozfaken pou. «And thepcon{ppredagaint bim
and ftoncd bpm tepth tones at the commaunde
ment of the kpnge:euen in the court of the boufe
ot the Lozde. Ano To Joas the kyng remembeed
not the bpnanetle whpch Jehoiada bps father.

bad Done to bym, but ine bps fonne.

And when be dped, be lapd:the Lorde loke'bp
pon tt,andrequypieit. and when the peare was
out, it foztuncd that the boott of Stria came yp
agapuit bpm and thep came aqapnit Juda and
Jerufalem, anddeltroped all the Lodes of the
people from amongethe people and ient all the


"a pople of them vnto the kpnge of Damatlco, foz


- the Strians came topth a fmal company of më,
andthe Lode delpuereda berp great hooftintoe
thep2 bande, becaufe thep bad Fozfaken p Lorde
@od of thep2 fathers. .Andmozeouer, they fetr-
ued Joas accozdpngeto bys dedes.

; And when thep were departed frdbpm,thep
tiii.rerit.B left bpm in great opleafes,and x bps ovone [ers
nauntes con{ppred agapnit bym foz the bloude
of the childzen of Fehoiadva the preelt,¢ luchim
onbys bed, g be Oped, andthep buried him inthe
cptic of Dawid: but notin the fepulchzeg of the
kpnges. And thele are thep p conlpp2ed againt
bpm :sebad the fontieof Siimeatban Ammo-
nite,and Jepolabad the fone of Sinrith a Hoa
abite. And bys lounes andthe fumme of F tare
that was rapled in bps tyine, andthe repapzing
of the boule of God: beholde, thep are wzytten
inthe ftozyp of the boke of the hinges. Jnd Ama
stabu bps fomne rapgned in bps ficade.

b C The.crv.Chapter. A

q amatiagu oucrcommeth the coomites.2nd Joas kyng
® of gfracl cucccommet) Aamafiabu,
CEES Daliabu was.crb.pere olde, whe
a as a) be beganne torapgne, and be rapa


riiit,a


mien out of Zlrael,foz an biidzcd talentes of fpl-
ber. Andtbere came aman of Godtohbpm,and


y.Lhowieles,


: Tonne of Jebu kpnge o


fayd:D kinge let not thearmpe of Yiraelcome
with the:Foz the L020 ts not with Flraclnether
Wwithal p boule of Ephzaim. Hut pftbon wylte
nedeg be fapthleffe, come on, € take the battapl
in pande and God Hal make the fall before the
enempe. Fo: Godbathpowertobelpe, andto
caft Dotone. And Amasiapulapde tothe man of
Gop:what thal we do cthen, for the bundzed ta-
lentes whych F Daur geuen foz the boote of Ji-
racli The man of God anfwerecd:the Lo2d is a=
ble togenue the muche moze then thep be.

And Amasiahufeuered them to p army that ¢
wWascometo bym out of Ephzaim, to qo home
agapne. (ibertoze thep were ercedpnge 20th
with Juda and returned home in greate anger.
and Smasiabu toke erte,¢ carted out bis peo
ple, and tent tothefalt vallep,andxfmote of p tti.teg,
chplozert of Seir :tenthoufande.Andotberten ”
thoulande dpd thechplozen of Juda take alpue,
andcarpet them pntothe toppect arocke and
call them do Wne from the top of the rocke, that
thep ail to burite: butthe foulopers ofthe armp
whyeh Amasiabhu (ent awape, that thep thulde
not go wyth bps people to bataple, fel pon tpe
cptics of Juda from Samaria onto Wethho20
and fmòte. iii. sH .of them, and toke much (pople

And it chaunced after that Amasiabu was D
come frome the Raugbter of the Edomites. be
b2ougbt the qoddes of the chpld2en of Seir,and
fet them bp to be bis gods,and botved bym felfe
before them: and burned incenfe nto them.
Yhbperfore the Lorde was woth with Amasia:
hu,and fent onto hpm.a prophete, tbpche fapd
vito bpm: dbp batt thon foughte f gods of the
people, whpche were not able to delpuer tbey?
owne people out of thp hander Andit chaunced
thatas the prophetctalked with ppm. the kpng
fspd vito bpm : bane men made the of the kpr-
ges countaplesceale, whp wplt thou ve beaten?
And the pzophete cealledand fapd: Jam {ure
God is mipnded todeftrope p,bpcanfe thou ba
done thys, andagecelt not Dutomp counlaple. E

x Then Amasiabu bpnge of Juda toke ad- Sr regun
upfe,andfent to oust onne of Jeboabam the piiga

Jiracl and fapde: come
that we mape fe p Ga other. And Joaskpnge
of Zlrael fent to Amaziabu kpnge of Juda, lap
enge:athpflethbatisinxibanéfenttoaCeder
trec of Libanon, fapeng:*gpuethp doughterto {"t.xeaum
mp fonne to topte, Andtherecamea wpld beak Juvi.ir. e
of Libanon, and trode downethethypiiie. iiec tuth

Thou lapett that thou bak beaten the Edt-
mites and thine Derte maketh the p2oude to gto
rifie thpfelfe. Moto therfoze bpde at home: yp
dofte thou prouoke bnfo evcll, that thou map
perpe, boththbouand Juda wptdthe. —

Wut Jmasiabu woldenot berkento bpm:
fozitcameof God, euen fo deliucr them into the
hade of they2 enempes,becaule thep fought cou
fapleattheqoddes of Edom. And fo Foasthe 6
kpnge of Jitaelcame vp: and thep fawe eptber
otber, both beand Amastahu kpnge of Fudaat
wWethlames, whpch isin Juba. And Juda was
put tothe wogle before Ffrael, thep iicdeucep
mantobpstent, And Joasthe hynae of Sfeact

ii ẹ


x


Chia.


éif.re.tit,b


toke Bmasiabu kyng of Juda plonof Foshas
the fon of Foboabas of Wethlames: ¢ brought
bpmto Jerufalem, andtare the wallof Ferula-
lem(from the gate of Ephraim Wnto the gate py
thas our agapntt it)foure bhd2cd cubites. and
be tokcawape alfoal the golde and {pluer, and
alltbe Jewelles that were founde in the boule
of God With Obed Edom,and the trealures of
the bpnges boule,and the ponge wardeg, andre
turned to Samaria. And Amasiabu the fon of
“goas kpnacof Juda lpued after p death of F0-
asfonneof Jeboabam kpnge of Frael Epftene
perc. Theret of theactes of Amasiabutpzet ¢
laff,are they not weprtenin the boke of the ipn
ges of Juda g Glracl? And after the tyme that
Amasiabu dpd tourne awape from the 40de ,
*thep confppzed treafon aga pni bpm in Feru-
falem:and whe be was fed to Lacbis, thep lent
to Lachis after bpm ,and flue bpm there: and
bought bpm vp with hosles g buried pim With


Zeke ib DVStathers a cytic of Juda. /


Che.revtCpapter. |
C Utes p beach of Amasziaburapgnech Gifiabucochcriuple
called Ofte) whch is Krphen wptp the lepze,and Fotham
rap gueth in bps rewine.


awa lycnal the people of Juda toke Uzia
fen feel whpch wasatprtene peare olde and
GG pee Made bpm kpnae inp rowme of bys
aco ke atber Ama3ztahu. And be buplte €-
cement Oth) and brought it agapneto Juda
after that thekpuge was lapd to lepe witb bys
fathers. S>prtene peare olde was Usia , whe be
began torapgue,and be rapgued.lit.pere in Je
tulalent.bis mothers namealfo was Fecholiah
of Jerufalem, nd be dpd p whpch was rpabte
in tbe fpgbrtof the Lorde: accozdpngetoall,as
dpd bps father Amasiabu.Andit came to patle
that be fougbtGodxtn the dapes of sachariahu
(wbpch mapntepned che fear of God)e as loge
as be ought ë Lo2dc:qod made hun to pzofpere
And pe went to battaple agapntt p japtlittp
fies and brake Downe the Weallof Geth, andthe
foall of Zabne, and the wall of Ffdod,and built
cepties aboute Aldod, andamonge the Philip-
nes. And God holpe ppm agarnft the Pbulittp-
nes,andagapntt the Arabians,p dweltinGue
baalaud Pammebunim. Andthe Ammonites
gaue trpbute to Uia, g bps name {predabzode
cuen totbeentrpnae inof Egtpte:fo2 be played


y.Lyronicics.


ofthem wag the army of the men of Moarre,cuen
thachundzedand leuen thoufande, andfpue bun
d2ed that made warre w the power ofan armp,
belppngcthe&pnge agapnit the enempes. And
tiia proupoedthem thozotvout all the poole,
(pploes,fpeares,pelmettes, babergpns, bowes
and fipnges foz to cait Mones. And be made fub
tyllcngyns in Jerufaleni, ohpch be inuented E
laid onthe towzes and cozners,to tote aroibes
and great Rones eptball. And bysname Cpzed
farre abzo00e, becaute be was Helped fo excellent
lye, fo that be became verp mpgbtpe.


Sut in bps irength, bis herte arole to his de D


firuccion.sto2 be tranfgreficd agapnit the Lob
bis God, and went into the temple of the Lozde
to burne cence bpon the aulterofincenfe. And
Asartabu the preet went in after bym, ewptp
bpm fourefcoze preftes of the Lozde, that were
palpant men. And thep Rode bp Usia thekpng


andfapd unto bpm : xit pertapneth not tothe Surtia


ta to burne tncenle unto the 1020, but tothe
peeltes the childzé of Yaron, that ave conlecras
ted Foz to ofer tucenfe:Come therfoze out of the
Sanctuarp Fo thou baft trefpalfed, and tt ig no
wozryp totbebefoze the Lozde God.


And Cizia was woth and had tneenlein bis È


bande to burne tt:and fo whple he bad indigna-


cron agapnit the pre fies, « the lepzolpe T pange fi(i.re.pb.a


in bps fozebeavde before the precitesin the hou
of the Lorde euen belpde the incenfe aultare.
And Asariabu f chefe preci wpeh all the other
pereitss lobed bpon bpm: and bebolde, be was
ccome alepze in bys fogebcade, and thep vered
bimtbéce. And be was fapnetogo our, bycaute
the Lozde bad fmptten bpm. And Cizia rf kinge
continued alepze nto p dape of bys death, and
Divelte feucrall,in an boufe bepnge alepze, and
(put out of the boule of the Lorde. {nd Jotham
biston bad the goucrnaunce of p kpuges boule,
and iudged the people of the lande. The tel ofp
actes of Usia fpattandlatt , oyd Jlape the pro-
pbet the fon of Amos wpte. And fo Usta lept
with bis Fathers, € they burped bin with bis ta
thers,in the felde of p burpal which was belpde
the {epulchzes of p &pnges.sfoz thepfapd:beis
à lepze. And Zotbabps fon rapgned in bis Eerad
CThe.rxvi.ch apter.


E Fothamecap garth ant oucecommeih the morptes.a7
‘bas bps onne rapaneth in bps Beabe,


Hotham,


|


the ma ercedpnglp.S)ozeoucr, Uia buplt tow
tes in gerufalem bp the cozner gate, and bp the
Dallep gate,and at the turmaga of the wall:and a. |
made them (tronge.Andhebnplttowzesinthe kass Gye Hib motherstriame as allo Jerula
topldernelle,andopggedinanp weiles: Forde S rhedoughter ofsadoc. And he dydp
bad mucbcattel inthe valleps plapneg plow: which wasepabt inthe pape ofthe Lozde inal
men, and vpne preflersinthemountapnes,and popntes as dpd bis father Qia, fauc p be came
£ in Charmel: fo: be loucd bulbandze. not into Beet ofp Lo2zd., and the people dpd
~ And Cisiabad anboof of fpgbtpnge méthat pet wpckedlp.e buplt the bye gate of p temple


sp Dtham was fpucand twentpe pere X
a" Er olde,when bexbeqan torapguc, and titere. bd
A wee rapgucd [prtene peare in accufalem


Went out to warren the armpe, accozdpnageto
the noimbze of thepz offpce vnder the bade of Fe
iel the (crpbe,and Baasiadu the ruler, and wn-
_ bertbebanbde of Hanantabu, bpch was one of

the Kinges lozbes. And the whole nombze of the
auncient Fathers, and of themë ofmpgbt, were


two. 4). and {pre pundzed: and ynder the bande


of the Lo2b,and on the wall where the poule of
ozdpnaunce was) de buplt much.Wozeouer,be
buplt cpties inthe mountapnes of Juda, andi
the thoodcountrye be buplt caftels and tow2es.


He fought with thebynae of the chplozen of ©


Ammon and preuapled agapntt them. Jnd the
chyldzen of Ammon gaue him the aa an
undren


Hesckia.
bundzcd talentes of fpluer: andtenthoufande
quarters of tobeate, andten thoufande of bat-
ipe.>0 much bpd the chpldzen of Ammon geue
bpm the feconde pere and the thpzde allo. So Jo

- tham became mpgbtpe, bpraule be dpzected bps
-Wape before T Lode bpe God. |
D Theret oftheactes of Jotham, and all bps
* warces and bps connerfacion,lo, thep are wipt
teninthe boke of thekpnaes of Ffracl,and Jus
ba. He Was.crV-peare olde when he beganne to
rapgne andrapguediprtene pere it Ferulalem
And Jotbam flepte wprh bys fathers: andthep
burped bym tn thecptie of Dauid: and Abas bis
fonne rapgned in bps fteade.
—« EC Tbe.rrviit.chapter. -
© Zhe wpekcvocile of Ahaz kpnge ok Juba. Atter bpm
rar gucth Bezebla. ‘
Ad serene pas was xtwentp pere old whebe
iter IG Aves beganne to raigue,and caignedlic
FAA p tene perein Jerufalem: ano pe dpd
Sa not that whichisrigbtin the ligt
maosa Of the 102,48 Dyd dps father Da-
uid : ffo2 be walked in the wapes of the kynges
of Firaell, and made molten pmages foz Baa-
lim. pe offered incenfe inthe valley of the fonne
peu. Forts of Hinnom , and x burnte bys chpldzen in Epze,
ria alter the abbominacions of che etben,whome
the Lorde call out befoze the chplozen of Frael
ie ofred alfo, and burnt incenfe in bplaultecs,
and on Mountapnes and dnderenerp grene tre.

‘itiverbia UWAherfo2e the Lozd bis God deltnercdbim

Sabia into the bande of the kpnge of p SH prits- which

bet bpm, andDcarped awaye a great multptude
of byscapty ue,and brought them to Damatcé
And he was delpucred into the bande of p kyng
of ffracl, wich (mote him with a great laugh
ter. 1o: Becab the Conne of Remaliabu,fvein
Juda an bundzed and twentpe thoufande in one
dape, which were alfpgbtyng men:and that bp
caule thep bad Foslaken the Lozbe God of thepz
fathers. And sichzia mpgoty man of Ephraim
flue Waaliabu the kpnges fonne: and Arica p
gotiernoure of the boufe, and Elcana that was
nerte totbekpnge. And tbe chpldzen of Ffraell
toke pzpfoners of thep2 bzeth2en, two hund2ed
thoulande wemen, fonnes and Dougbters, and
carped awape muchelpople of them , ebzougbe
the fpopleto Samaria.

ie cast ut there wasa Bropbhete of the Lordes

= (whofe name was Dbed and be wente out be-

fore the boot coat came to Samarta,andfapde
nto them: Webolde,bpcaule the Lode God of
pour fathers ts woth wpth Juda, be bath velp:
ucred them into pour bande. And pe baue flapne
them wpth cruetneile, that reacheth vp to Bea-
nen. And now pe purpofeto kepe onder the chil


s vm


deh Of Juda and Ferulalem,andto make them-


bondmenand bondwomen, And do pe not lade
pourflelucs with fpnne inthe Cpabe of the Lo20
Se lanceaaea bot atitikti eve aus tueen ot
thecaptapnes aapne, whpcbe pe paue taken o
pout etheen : fo elles Hall the greate wzathe
of Godbe yponpom — f
erfoze certapne ofthe beades of the chpl-
drehof Ephratin , as Aaria the fonne of Fepos


i Lbonicles.


Hol.iceee.
banan, Berechiabu theforine of Hefillemoth,
and Jebeskiabu the fone of Sallum, and Ama-
fa the fonne of adlayp, tode ot od feo them
that came from the warre and fapd buto them:
bepnge notin thecaptpuesbyther. ffozwbere
as we baue offended toward God alecadpe, pe
entende to adde moze fo oure [pnnes € trelpafie.
JF 02 our trelpafle ts great alreadpe,and there ig
afeatce wrath aqapntt Jiraci. And bpon that,
themen of armes left the captpues ethe fpople
before the lozbes and all tbe congregacion.

>- Andthementhat were nowe rehearledby C
name role vp and toke the pzpfoners,and with
the fpople clothed all that were naked amonae
them,and araped them, and poed them, ¢ qanc
them to eate and todzpnke,and anopnted them
and carped all that were feble of them pon al-
es, and bzoughe themto Jericho (the cptte of
paulmetrecs to thepz bretzen : and then thep
returned to Samaria agapne.

* At tbat fame tyme dpd apne Abas lende rii.teg.
tntotbekpnges vf Aiur, to Dane helpe of them Hi»
And the Edomites came agapne,¢ Aue the (one
of Juda, andcarpeDawape captiues. And the
Whilifines cnuaded the cpties in the lowe coun-
trep,and towarde the South of Juda, and toke
Bethfames,and Aialon, And Gederoth,¢ Ho-
cho,wpth tbe tomneslongpng therto, ¢ Chun
na topth the townes of the fame : Gimlo,and f
townesticrof, and Dtvelte there. sfo2 the Lorde
brougbt Juda lowe, bpcaute of 4 has Rpnge of
poa DOP made Juda naked, € tran(gretled
fozeagapnit the Lozde. And Thilgath ;ulneler
Bynge of the Allirians came tpå bpm and trou
bled him rather then posse ay bim. £o: Abas
toke atbay a porcion out of the poule of p Lorde
and out of the kpnaes boule, and out of the loz:
bes houfes,and gaue vntothe kpnge of the Al-
fyzians,and petit belpedhbpmnot. Andinthe
verp tyme of bps tribulacpondpd kpnge Abas
trelpatle pet moze agapnik the Lode.

f€ 02 be offered vnto the godbdes of them of D
Damalco, whycbe bette bom, andhelapde:bp-


_caule the gobddes of the kpnagesof Sprabelpe


them.therfoze wpll J offer tothem, they map

belpe meaifo. wnt thep Were bps deftruccion,

and the deftruccion of all Jlracll. And Abas ga
theredtogetberthe vellels of the boule of God.

and bakie them, and * Hutte pp the Dopzes of the t.pa.rrir.a
boule of the Lorde, andmade bpm * aulters in g.pappr a
evlerp comer of Jerufalem. Ans inal the cptics

Of Juda he made bplaultaces, to burne incenfe

tnto other qgoddes , and angred the Lode God

of bpsfatbers: The relte of bysactes , and bps

wozkes Fp2it and latte : bepolde,thep are wz pt- .

ten inthe boke of the kpnges of Juva, and Fira

ell. And Abas llepte wpth hisfathers,and thep

burped bym in the Cptie of Jerufalem : but

b? ought ppm not onto the fepulchzes of p hpn=

ges of Zlracll. And Hezekia bps lonnè raparen

inbps tteade.


CChe.criv.Chapter:
C Besekia cthecwple called ezekiaa(o Fedisklahu)rete
reth bnto the Temple ofthe Lozbe all thethpuges thathad
Boe bene regarbed of bps pyedeceMours.


x it.  Mezckia


y


Bl3thia,
a | 3 Eschia began forapane, whenhe


payd was fpuc and ttventpe pere olde, ¢


bps rapane )e€repapzed them. And be bzoughte
inthe preltesand tbe Leuites, Eqathered them
togetberintotbe cat rete: ¢fapyd vnto them.
peare mepe Leuites, ¢ nowe belanctifped
andbhalowesbe boule of the Lorde God of pour
fathers bapnare fpltbpneffe out of the boly place
ff 02 our fathers baue trefpatled, and done cupl
Bin theepes of the Lorde ovr God, andbhaue foz-
fakenbpm:and turned awape thep2 faces from
the babitacion of the Lozde,¢ turned thep2 bac-
keg on it. And belpoe that, thepbauc (hut vp p
oozes of the pogchc,and quenched f lampes,and
baue nether burnt incenle, no2 ofred burntoffe-
rpnges tithe bolp place tnta the God of #rael
WA berfoze the wath of the Lozde fell on Ju
Daand gerulalem: and de bhoth bzougbt them to
trouble to be wonded on andto beppfiied at,e-
uenaspe fe wrth ourepes. orlo, oure fathers
tere ouccthzowen wyth the fwearde, and oure
fonnes , out Dougbtcrs and our pues Were ca-
rpedDawapcaptiuc Foz the famecaule.Andnow
trisinmp berte,tomake a couenaunt wp tb the
Lozbde Goodof #lracl:that he mape turne awap
bis beupindiqnactonfrom vs. Mowe therfore


seuroina mpfons,ve not negligent: foz the x 1 ode bath


chofen pou to kande before bpm, and Eo: to my
niffer and ferue ppm,and to vurne incenfe.

€ Chenthe Leuitesarole: Gabath the fonne
of Amatai and Joel the Conne of Afartabusip
chplozéof the Cabatittes. And ofthe lonneg of
Werart, Ris the lonne of Xddi and Alaciabu p
fonne of Fcbalelel. Aud of the fonnes of the Ger
fonites, Jobab the lone of Simma, t Eden the
Tonne of Joa). And of the fonnes of Elisaphan,
Simri and Jehiel: And of the fonnes of Afaph,
sechariabu,and @)athantabu. And of pfonnes
of Heman,Jebiel, and Hemet. And of pfonnes
of Jedutpum,Hemaia and Cistel. And thep ga
theredtiep2 bretzen, and purifped them felues
andcame accozdpneeto the cOmaundemente of
thekapnge, and the wozdes of the mate fo2to
clenletbhe,bonfe of the LoD. Aap P p2ettes went
intotheinner partes of the boule of the Lozd,to
clenfeit: tbzougbte ont all the buclenneffe that
they founde in tpetemple of the Lorde, into tbe
courte of the boule of the Lorde.

And p Leuites tole tt, to carp it out into the
broke Cedzon.'€ dep beganne the fpette dape of
thefp2lt moneth to purifp.and the epabt dap of
the moneth came thep tothe poztch of the Lozdc:
and pourged the boule of p Lozd inepabt dapes
and in the {precne dape of the fpi moncth thep
mabe an ende. And thep went into Hesckta the
Kpnge and fapd: we paue clenfed al the boule of
the Lozde,the aulter of burnt offepnge,wyth al
bps veliels,and the Hetobzeade table, wyth all


WLijonicies.


bpsapparell: and all Af teels wobpche Kpnge
Abas dpd caftalpde when be rapgned, g tranf-
greficd, them we baue prepared andlanctifpen:
and vebold,thep ave befoze p aulter of the Lod.
And Peschta the kpng role early, and cathered
the lozdes of the cptic and iwent vp tothe boule
of the Lorde. And thep bzought feucn oren , fe=
uen ramines.fenen Hepe,andleuen beqotes, to
be alpnoffcepng fo: the kpngoome, fo? the fan-
ctuarp and fo: guba. Andhecommaunded the
preeltes, ý founesof Jaron, to offer tbem on the


aultare of the Lorde.
Andtbep Aue the oxen, andthe Preclkesre- E,


cepued the bioude,g fpapnbled it bpon p altare:
Kena fe wben tbey pad layne therams , thep

papniled the bloud pion theaultare :tbep flue
alfo tbr thepe,and tbhep (papnkled the bloude v-
pon tbe aulter. Andtben thep brought forth the
begotes fo: the (pnoticpnge befozetbe kynatg
the congre gacpon,and put thep2 bandes bppow
them. And p preites flue them,and w the bloude
of them tbep clented the auitare to mate Catilfa
ction fo: all #fracl, for tbe kpnge commaundedD
that the burat olfrynge and the fpnneoferpnge
fhulde be madefo2 all Zfracl.


And fet the Leuttesin theboule of the Lord FE
topth (pmbalcs,plalteries,and barpes:xaccoz= + Pat-tre.a


bpuge to thecommaundement of Dauid, g Gad
the kpnges{caz,and ANathanthe prophete. Fog
fo was the comaundement of the 1020, thoro
the bande of bis propbetes. And p Leuites tode


baupnge the inkrumentes of Dautd,ethepeec= `


ites beine the trompettes. And Hesebia comaun
Ded to offre che burnt offerpng vpon the aultare
And when the burnt offerpng began, the fonge
of the Lode begannealio, andthe trompettes,
wyth f inttrumentes that were o2deined bp the
bande of Danid Rpnge of Firacll. Andallebe
congregacion woztbypped,fpngpngeafonge €
blowpnge with the trompets , eal thpscontp<
nued, Vntpll the burntofirpng was fpnpiped.

And whentbhep bad made anende of offrypng
the &pnge andall that were peclente wypth bpm
bowed them felues,and woribppped, And ese
kia the Benge and thelozbdes {pake to the Leui
tes to praple the Logde Wopth the wozdes of Da
uid,and of Mfaph thefear. And f Leuites fange
papies wpth qladnes, € the other bowed them
felucs and orhppped.


And Heschia anlwercd, and fapde: nowe pe G


haueconiecrate pour babes tothe Lozde: goto
therfore, and bepnge tn the facrifpces ¢ thankof
ferpnges into the boule of the Lod. And the c-
gregacion baougpt tn the lacrifpees, and thank
offecpnges and burnte oferpnaes,as man pas
Were of fre ipberal berte. And the nombze of the
burntofitpnacs twiich p congregacion bzougbt
Was.lrr.oren,anhundzed rams, etivo hundred
pepe: which toere al Fo? the burnt offcing of the
Lod. andehere weeededicated (pre Hired or-
en:and thre thoufaude hepe. And the Beates
twere to fete to flape all f burnt offepnges:but
thepzbetheenthe Leuttes bpd belpe them, tpll
thep bad endedthe ozbe:and yntpl the preftes
were fanctifped.ffoz p Lentes were purer ber

| troto


HGRA


f


F
i


Hekia,


|


;


ted to be fancttfped, then the pretes. Bnd ther-
fo the burntofrynges were manp, witb the fat
of the peace offrpnges and the Dapnkofferpnacs
that belonqe to the burntofierpnge. And fo the
ferupce pertapnpnae ta the houle of the Lode,
was fpnpihed. And Hezekia retopled and at the
people that Godhad made the folkeloreadp:¢
that the thpnae was lo foone done.
Tbe.rev. Chapter.


€C
ft C Bezekra cenucth the feat of Pallcouer,


erare (20 esckia {cnt to all Jlraell, and
ey Na imand G)anafle,that thep Houlde
kga S come tothe boule of the Lod at Se
nsa rufalem, andoffer Baffeouer bnto
the Lozde God of Jlrael. And thekpnge held a
councell pth Dis lo2ded and al the congregact-


‘umir onof Jerufalem xto kepe the feaik of Palleouer


in the leconde moneth. For: thep coulde not kepe
itat thattpine:bpcaute the pretes were not ian
ctifped fukictentlp,nepther was the people ga:
theredtogether to Jerufalem. Andthe thpnge
pleated the kynge.and all the congregacion.
And thep decreed that it houlde be proclapmed
thozowout all Glracl from erlabee to Dan, ý
they hulde come, and bolde the feat of Bafle-
ouct unto the Lode God of Flraell,at Jerula-
lem: foz thep bad not done it of a qreate feafon
asthep mulde baue done bp the lawe.


So the potes went with letters of phade of —


the kpnge, and of bpslozdes thozowout all gi-
racl and Juda: and at the comaundement of the
ipnge thep fapd: Pechitd2cn of {lrael,turne a>
gapne puto the Lozde God of Avzabam, Jia-
hac and {lracii,and let eucryp one returne tothe
remnaunt that are efcaped pou oute of the ban-
des of the Lipnges of Aflur.And benot pe lpke

our fathers and pour bzreth2en, wbich trefpal=
ed agapuite the Lozde Eod of thep2 fathers:


m wirchyane tbem vp tobe deftropedaspele.


ndnowe be not pe Epinecacdlpke as were
pour fathers:but pelde pour felues ynto P Lod
aubdentre into bis boly place, wbppcb be bath fan


. ctifped foz cuer: and ferue the Lozde pour God,


and the fearcenefie of bps wo2athetpall turne a-
wape from pou. ffo: pe pe turneagapne wnto p
Lozde,then thal pour bzethzen and pour childz€
fpnde compafiion in the prefence of them that
toke (hem captpue,and thep pall come agapne
ynto tps lande, xfo: the Lod pour Cod is gra


Erari cpougand mercpfull, and twplnot turneawape
rvi e pps face from pou pf pe conuerte vnto bpm.


A ndio the poftes ent fromcpttie to cpticin
the lande of Ephzaim and Banafic, euen vnto
sabulon. Wut thep laughed them toftomne,and
mocked them. Meuertheletic, pet dpuerle of A f=
fer, anafle, and of sabuldé{ubmptted them fel


© ues and came to Jerufalem. And the bande of


God wasin Juda- lo that be qaue thé one berte
todo the commaundement of the kynge g of the
rulers,accozdpngeto the wozde of the Lowe.

And there allembledto Jerufalem much people
and there was prelent ampabepe great congre
gacton,to poide the featt of fwete breade in the
feconde moneth. And thep arole, remoucd the


Ubonicics.


into the bzoke Ced20n. Andtbep flue Pafleouce
the fourtenthdape of p feconde moneth. Jnd the
peettes and Leuttes whpcb were afpamend, fan-
ctitped them felues,andbrougbt in the burntof:
ferpnges into tie boule of the Lozde. Andthep
ode in thep2 office after thep2 maner,anDaccoz
dpnge to the lawe of Moles the man of God.
And the Preces (papnkled the bloude, whpch
thep tecepued bp the hades of the Leuttes. Foz
tbere were manp inp congregacion p tere not
fanctifped: the Leuites dpd Rape Pafleouer
Foz all that werenot cleane,and that mpabtnot
erecute the bolp wozie ofthe Lorde. ffo2 manp
of the people,and Verp manp out of Ephraim,
Manatle, {lahat and sabulon were not clenfed
and pet bpd rate Bafleoucr agapnt the latwap-
popnted. diberfore eselita praped forthem, g
fapde: the good Lozde be mercpfull ynto them:
Hozhe let his bole herte,toleke the Lorde Goo,
euethe God of bps fatbers:but al the other dpd
not fo,accosdpnge to vnfapued Dolpuele. And
the Lowdeperde Hezekia, and healed the people
And the chpldicn of Flracl that Mere pzelent at
Jerulalam,beide the featt of fete beade leuen
dapes with great qladnes,and the Leutics,and
the prceltes pzapicd, and magnitped the power
of the Loz0e,dape bp dape, vpron infrumentes.
and Hesckia Cpakebertelp pntoall the Le-
uptes thatbad vuderfandpnge, and were of a
ood mpnde towarde the Lode. And thep dpd
cate thozowout that feaff, feuendapeslonge, ¢
ofred peace offerpnaes, andthanked the L020
God of thep2 fathers. And f hole aflemble toke
counfaple, todofoother Ceunendapes, andthep
belde thole feuen dapes with qladnefle.sfoz He-
schia kpnge of Judatoke ont(fromamoge bps
cattell )fo2 the congregacion, a thoulande poge
oren and feuéthoutande fhepe. Andehe Lodes
gaue out to the congregacion a thoufand ponge
oren and ten thoulande Hepe. Anda great nom
bze of the preettes were fanctifped. 3

And all the congregacion of Juda wrth the
preates and Leuttes, and all the congregacton
thatcame oute of Zlracll, ¢ the fraungers that
caine out of the lande of Ffracl,and that dweite
in Juda cetopced: and there was great qladnes
in Jerulalem. Sorfens the tpine of Salomon
the fonne of Dauidkpnge of Fracll , there was
no luche iope in Jerufalem. And the pretes and
the Leuttes arole and blefled the peopie, their
vopce Was Derde of the Lozde,andtpep2 paper
came tp unto Deauen:bys holp Dwellpug place

 The.rrri.Chapeer.

© After that Bejekta bad called agapuc thepeople bnto the

toape of the Lozae, be ogdepnes the preces, bato whom be
commannbcd te geur trihis. i : .
agp rons $20 whenall thele thynaes twere fp- 8
eGonpimed, all thep of Flraeil that were
aa prelent inthe cpties of Juda, wente


ra DOW Che poolles qvoues, andal to


bake thebpe places,andxaltars thozo\pout al ipara,
Juda, and Wen Jamin, in Ephraim aifos Wa- F7"


nale wntpll hep þaddetroped themal. 2nd al
L tit the


x aultares that were in Jerufalem. And all thie t! ne
veffels of incenfedpd thep away, and cat them F"


4 out and brake thepmages, *and cut pariin a


an +

HD StRA,
the childzen of ¥fracl returned cuerp man topis
ota sete and totbep2 otne cpties. And iese
ia appoyntcd fondape companies of p pretes
and Leuites after the dpucrtitic of thep2 mpnt-
{tracions, euery manaccordpnge tobps oltpee,
both preltes and Leuttes,foz the burntofferpng
aud peace offerpnges, to mputiter,t to geue tha
kes,and papie inp gates of the bolt of p Lode
Andthe kpnges porcpon of bys tublfaunce that
be qauc, were daplp burntofferinges inthe mo?
npnge €cuenpnge,and burnt offeringes forthe
Sabboth dapes, newe Boones, and folempne
narrib feaftes,accozdpng as it is written tn che lawe
ofthe Lozde. Ano pe badthe people that dwelt
in Jerufalem gencthe parte to the preleg, and
Lenites,that thep mpght fubiianctallp applpe

tbem (clues tothe lawe of the Lod,

O  Andaflone as thekynges commaundement
came abzode,thechpldzen of Zlrael brought a-
boundaunice of fp2it frutes, of come, wpne ople,
honye,and al maner of frutes of thefelde,g the
tptbes of all manet of thpnges, brought tdep in
nlentcoullp. And thechpldzen of Flrael € Juda
yp dwelt inthe cities of Juda, cthep alfo bought
inthe tprbes of aren and thepe, otber holp tp-
tics whpch were confecrate Dnto p Lozdthepz
od, they dpd offer, ebzought thentall bp bea-
pes. jn tbe thpzde moneth thep beganne to lape
the bepes(inmance of a foundacton and fpnyl-
thedthemitche feuenthmoneth. And whe He-
schia andthe lozbes came, and lawe the beapes
thep bictied the Lozbde € bps people Zfrael. and
Pesckia queitioned wpth the paclkes andebe Le
uites concernpnge the beapes. And Asarta the
cipefe pact of the boule of sadock,anfwered bin
anbdfapo:(pns the people begannetobapnge the
beucolferpuges into the boule ofthe Lorde: we
alfobane bad pnougbtocate,tbcre remayned fo
muclje : foz the Lorde bath bieiled bys people g
this beape ts left. And Hesckia bad prepare the
chamberstnthe boufe ofp Lozde.Andthep dpd
prepare them, and carped tn the fpr i feutes,the
tptbeg and the dedicate thpnges fapthEnllp. —

C  MDuerwhpch,Conaiabutbhe Lenitebadthe
rule and Semei bys beothernerte tobpm. And
Febiel, Afartabu, atbath, Afacl, Jerintoth,
Jofabad, Eliel, Jelmachiabu, Wabath g Wa-
naiapu, Were oucricters ozdepned ap Chonanta-=-
bu Semet bps brother wasan officer of Hese
kiathekpnge and Asaria was therulerof the

ow Doule oF 500, os (onto whome alcherechpugerbelonged)
~ And Chore the fonne of Zimna the Leute ¢ por
ter ofthe Zaft doze, bad the suerfpaht of p thpn
ges that were ofred of a Frewil ynto Goo(and
Were Keuenin maner feucrallp onto theLo2de)
and oucethe thpnaes aot holp. And vader His
bate were Eden, Daniamin, Jefua: Hemetaz
bu, Amariahu,and Sechaniapu inthe cpties of
the pretes apointed of thep2 fpdclitcto eue to
thep2 beethzenthep2 pozcions: alwel to p {mall
astotbeqreat.€rceptthat tothe males p were
relscned from tize pereand avoue/ among all ý
Went into the boufe of p Lozd)tbep Mulde genue
dape bp Bape, foz thepe mpniftracpon, and foz
thep2 qpupng attendatice,and fo thep2 dpucrfe


>


ii. Lhonicles.


waptpngesby courle. And to p pretesand Le-
uitestbozetbout the boutboloe of thep2 fathers |
fromftwentpe peare andaboue, towapte when
thep2 courfes came. .
And tothe familpes of all thepz babes, wp- >
ued, fonnes,and Doughters thoro we all the con-
qregacion. Jo: bpon the fpdclitie of them were
thebolythpnges beftowrd. Tnd tothe childzen
of Aaron, the pzeftes wbpche were in the Eeldes
and fuburbes of thep2cpties, cptte bp cptie, the
men whofe names were erpaciled afore \pulbde
gene pozcions, euen £0 all the males amonge the
preattes and fo allthe Leuitcs, accozbpnge fo
thep2 nombze. And of thpsmanec dpd Ipesekta
thozowouteal Juda, g wzoughtit that is good,
andrpabt andtrue, before the Lozde bps Gob.
Andim all the wozkes that be beganne foz the


sSeunacherib, -
|
|


|

i

i

fcruyce of the boule of God,foz the latwe and foz oe

the commanndementes,be fought bys Gob and 2 |

that dpode wrthall bpsberte, and proipered,
CTbererit.chapter. »

q_ Sennacherih (eo; Sanherib) belegpnge Ferulalé ts Trpke


OF the angel) Hezekia bpeth atter Mbom Cucccdeth A) anaile,
<=" — T =


= Ll
oe a ore
is
] r j
x h,
SEADA ee
Seer n a oe
ty bebe tes =e ne: }
= $ t uae |
TET AR at F,
eis SS ae |
Se =o
pa pet =r E
Se db d a Voie jaa |
š = TE 2]
Å- e TEA E ET
zH E | phain
Er at ee ay
Bl T E A
La h es T
T i Sea Pag!
i yii le W =
: a
cane aa a ie pool
SNS fee oe
= E eee tg ge | oo, |
——— = bi ia o
eee a = : ee am TE mbes Pa
oe a EAE


emn ren Stter tbat thele dedes were Fapthful silt
see lp Done:+¥ Sennacherib kpnae oF Al regnu. mi
g BE A lurcame,andentred into Juda and Pe j
F. a AA Y compafied the ronge Cptics, and ec pwit =|
kasai thought to wpn them foz ppm felfe. |
And io when Heschkia lawe that Sennacherih
Was come, andthat he was purpofed to fpgbe
agapnit Jerufalem, He toke counfapie with bis
lozdes and mê of mpabt, to toppe the water of
the Fountapnes without the cptie: andthep dpd
belpe bym. gto? there gathered manp of the peo=
ple together, and (topte all the welles, and the
toke that ranne thoro the mpds of the lande
fapenge : wbp Mall the kynges of Aflur come g
Fynde muche waters And Mesekia wente to luz
elp atid buplt pp all p wall where it was bzo-
Ken,and made ozdtnaunce Dpon the towzesand
tothe other tall wpthent,andrepapzed Sulo |
intbecpticof Dautd, andimade many dartes z |
{peldes. And pe [et captapnes of warre ouer the x3 |
cople,and gatheredtbem together to byminp
large ftrete of the gate of the cptic and [pake gë |
telp to them fapenge : Plucke vp pour hertes.%
be (tronge: 25e not afcaped nog dilcouraged,fo2 i
the kpnge of Aiur , foz all the multptude that |
be bath w bpm: «soz there be mo wptbh vs then tire. otc.
|


With bpm. With bpmis anxarme of fet, Wut Ier-rvii. b
wpth vsis the Low our God, fo: to helpe vs, g%
tofpaht our battatles.And the people tokeaca
rage thozow p WozdeS of Heschia king of 3 she
PILET


Hekia.


fire peiii,o


x After this dpd Hennacheevh king of Z Tur


_ fende of bis feruatites to Jerufalem’ but be bim


fiire, pbiii
č


(elferemapuced befpde Lachis : haupnge all bps
power with dim) unto Hesekia kyna of Juda’ f
vito all Juda that were at Jerufalem, faping:
Thus lapeth Hennacherph kynge of X ue:
xwherets Bo petruk, Opetbar otoellin yeru-
falë which ts beligeds Doth not Heselita entpce
pouto gpue oucr pourfelues puto death, bigre


- andthpatt, faping: the Lede our God thallryd


Ys out ofthe bande of the kpnae of flur; path
not the fame Pesekia put dotone bisbpe places
andbisalters, andcoutmaunded Juda g Feru-
falé, aping: Pe tall wo2lh pp before one aulter,
and burneincenfe pon the fame.

Linowe pe not what J and my fathers pane
done vnto the people ofaillandes? ere che
gods of p people of other landes able o? mpabtp
tolauc thcp2 landes out of my bande whicye of
al tie goddes of thole nacions (that my fathers
Deffroped) coulde not delpuer His people oute of
mpne bande: And thal pour God ve able to de-
lpuer pou out of mpne bande: berio nowe,
let not Hesekta Decepue pou , nog per{toade you


y.L2onicics,


#


bing toit ý be pad Hewedhim fo: vis hert arofe
and there came weath bpondym, and tpon Zu-
da and Jerufalem. Rotivittandpnge ieschia


E fubmptted bpm felfelafter that bis bert was rp


fen Dp )be,and the inbabiters of Zerufalem:and
the wath of the Lorde came not vponthem wi
the dapes of Heselia,


Stair


rh,


And Hesehia Dad ercedpng mochepehesand 6


Honour. Andbhe qat hun trealures of fplucrand
golde, precious tones and {ppees, pides, and
ofall mance of pleafaunt tewels:and made tore
boutes fo? p frutes of cogne, fo? wpne ando ple:
and Falles foz allmaner of beaftes, andfoloes
for bepe. Ande made him cities.¢ had of Hepe
and oxen great aboundaunce. Eo: Godhadgy
uenbpm fubtaüce ercedpug moche. Chis fame
Hezekia topped the vppcr water fp2pnacs of
Gibon, and brought the downie to the weit de
of the citie of Danid. And Heseksia profpered in
al Dis workes, And then the vepnees of Babi-
lonfent Yuto bym embaffadours, to cnqupze of
the wondze that chauncedinthe lande, God left


bym * to trpehpm, and thatall that wag in hig drvia


brete mpatt be kuowen.


hs


ofthis fafllpon,noz pet beieue bym,

Joas no qodamongeall nacpous ekynq-
domes wasable tortd his people out of mp had
and out of the bande of mp fa the t.dowe moche
lee (hal pour goddes be able tokepe pou out of
mp hander And pet mo thynges dpd his feruait=
tes {pcakeagapntt the 1020 God, andagayntt
Histeruaunt Hezekia. And Spenuacherph)allo
Wwzote alettre,tatayle on the Lorde Godot Fi
vacl ¢fpakeagatntt Dim, faping: as the gods of
the nactons of otDer landeg g uenot benable ta

-Deliner their people out of mp pand. Exé fo Hal
not the God ofPezeckia deliure his people out of
mipae Hande. And they cepcd wh aloude vopce in

. the Jewess {peache yuto the people of Ferulalé
that were on the wal to frare themanbd tomake
them fapnt herted, and that thep mpgbt fo take
the citie. Bnd thep (pake agapnutt the Godot ze
rulaléasagatallp goddes of the nactons of the é

erth, which were f Workes ofp handesofimen. |
Wut Hezekia the yng, andthe prophet Flat j
@ the fon of Amo3 prayed agapnt p blafphempe
ahd ceped ypto Heaucn. Fund the Lorde fentean
aungel which defkcoped all the men of war,and
tic lozdes and captapnes off bool of the &png
Of Aflur, that he turned bis face agapn w ame
tewarde bis ofoneland. x And when be was
come info the houfe of fis Gon, they thatcame
of pis owne body Aur a there toith the fyocrd


‘Che ett of the dedes of igesekia,ant bis ood
nes,bebolde , thep are weptien inthe vplyon of
Aiai thepzopbet thelonne of Amos inthe boke
of the kpnaes of qudaand Fracl. 3nd Heschia
flepte with dis fathers and they burped ppm ins
the moot wozthp place of the fepulchres ofthe
fonnes of Dautd:and all Juda x theinhabpiers
of Jerufalem dpd bpn wozdpppe at his death.
And Manaks pis lonne rayaued in hig (ede.


€ The.rrrili. Chapter.

q Manat ts taken p2pfonersand after that he cometh
but.bebettrcpeth the paols. Beareeh: and atter hpm
ftireencth Amos, Which is kplicd of bee owne peo bless
Holias hes Connerapgned in bps itede,


apr Anale tas. rtipere olde xwhenbe X
Pag fa OeCatttie to rapgne, and be rapgned otera
( eo (ue atid fpftpe perein Ferufalem:

9 Seay A but dpd euplin the lpaht ofp Lo2zd

stna lite Vinto, the abbominactés of the
eer » WHomethe Lorde catt out before the
chplozen of Flracl. ozbe went to,andbuypite
the Dtlaulterxwhtch Hezekia bis farber Dad bzo
KE Downe. And percared bp aulters for Waali,
andmade groues, and wozhypped all the boft
of beauen,and ferucd them.

Andhe buyltaulters in the boule off Lod
iwbhereas the Lorde pet bad fapoe: xin Ferulalé
{Hallmp name be for ener. And be buploed aul-
tcrsfozalltiichooft ofprauenintbe twocour-
tes Foz the Doule of the Lorde. And he burnt bys
chpldzentnfpze, inthe vallep of the fon of Hine
Non. e Was a fozcerer:be regarded the erpinge
of byzdes, vied incbauntmentes,and mapntap-
ned workers with (pyrites, ¢ fears of foztuneg:
and Wrought mocheupllinthe (yqht ofp Lo:
toangre bpm withall.

nd pe put the keruedpmage and pool which 15
He had made in F honfe of Gov. Of whech houle
od had fapde to Dauid and to Salomon byg
{onne:tn this boule andin ial a J

fi Up pate


D


dy


dili geirg "ree bi.

j, par, h Ei

Andfothe Lozde faued Yesckia andthe babi ——
ters of Jerufalem out of the band of Sctinache
tpb bpnge of iur, and fromthe bande of al o-
ther, and mapntayned them on cuer (poe. And
manp brought offeypnges wnto the Lozde to Fee
vulalem,and prelentes to Hesekia kynge of Ju-
da: fo that be was magnifped inthe fyahe of all
nacpons from thence forty.

x §nthole dapes Hesekia was fycke vntothe
irite, rp.a DCALD, AND praped Yntro the Lo2d, whichanlwe:
ctarrrbide ved Dim:and he wedhim a wonderfull miracle,

Wut Hezekia pd not agayne vnto God accoz:


Mianaiic


fives vii hanecholenafoge all the trpbes of Fitacl,xwyl


diire. bili
ii.parbia
g bil.c


ZB put my name for ener, and wypl nomoze bring
the feate of ¥fracl from the lande which J paue
o2rdcined fo2 pour fathers. Vifo be thatthep wil
be diligent,and do all that 7 bauecommaunded
theminall the laweand ftatutes, and ogdinaun
cesbytbe bande of Poles. And fo Ganatle


< thade Juda and the tnbabiters of Jerulalemto


eree, and todo wozie then the epthen whome
the Lozddritroped beforet be childzenof Firael.
And the Lozde paketo Hanafle and tobis peo
ple, but thep wolde notregarbe.


© Wherforv, the Lode brought vpon them the


captapnes of the boot of thekpnge of the Alp-
riang; which toke Hanafle tn bolde and bound
bya with chapnes,and carped bpm to Wabpio.
And when be wasin tribulation, be befougdt
the Loe bis God, and humbled pm felfe erce-
bpnglp before the God of his fathers,and made


interceflionto bpm: and God wasentreated of


bpin,and berde his praper, and bought bpm a-
gapne to Ferulalé into bis kingdome. And then
Hanae knew? thatthe Lorde was God. —
After this be buplta wail without the citie
of panid, on the weit Pde of Spon inthe valep
as thep come tothe fpth gate, and round about
DOphel, €broughbtit vp ofa werp qreatbepghde,
and puf captaynes of Warre inall the rong cp,
ties of Juda. And be toke awape (traunge god-
Des andpmages out of tde boule of God, and


(.ps.rtitta kal the aulters that be had ouple ti the mounte


Eppa


ofthe boule of God, ¢ Jerufalem, and cali them
out of the citie. And he prepared the alter of the
Lorde, and facrifpecd theranpeaceofirpnges , €
thaukeoferpuges, and charad Juda to ferne p
Lode Godof {lracl. Meucrtheletle,the people
dpo offre Tpllinthehplaulters , bowvett, ynta
the Lorde thep2 God onelp.


| p
wW Chetek ofthe actes of Hanae ghis paper
' nto bis God,and the wo2zdes of the fears and


of them that paketo bim inthe name of p Lob
God of Firacl,bebolde,t hep are wepttemim the
fayinges off kpnaes of Zlcael. And bis paper,
and bow that be wasberde, and all bis iynnes,
and bis trelpatie, and the places where he made
bpylaulters,and itt vp qroues and pmages( be=
foge be was mekened ) bebolde, they are wept:
tcn amonge the fap nges ofthe fears. And Wa
naffeflepte with bis fathers , andthep buryped
bpm in bis otont boule:And Anon bis fonrap-
gned in bisronme, Amon was twoand twen-
tpe pere olde when be beqantorapgne andrap-


- gnedtwo pearein Feruialem. Wut he dpa euyl


inthe fyabtof the Lorde, lpke as dpb Danafle


Hisfather,for Amon lactifpeedtoall the kerned


pinages, whiche Mana fic bis father bad made
and ferucd them and fubmprted not bpm felfe
befoze tbe Lozde: as Danafle his father padde
mekened bpm felfe. But Aman trefpafled great
lp. And brs owne feruauntes cofpp2ed agapnt
pym, and flewe bym in bis owne boufe, But the
people of tie landeflucall them that bad cofpp-
redagapnit kpng Amon. And f fame people of
thelandmade Jolia bis fon king inbis roume.

The rrriii Chapter.


íi Lizouicics.


(Folia denvopeth the pooliessannretozeth the temple
in wbpehis founde the bookestthelawe. Be (Edeth
to Dulda theprepbetele tp; countaple.


00 O Wbiche teas rpahtin the fyght ofthe
Ste Lode, and walked inthe wapes of
Danidhysfather, and bowed nepther to the
rpabe bandenoztheleft. Yu the cpabt peare of
Hisrapane( when he was peta chploe bebeqan
tofeke after the God of Danid bis father. And
intbetweluctbpere be beqanto pourge Juda,
and Jerufalem from hplaulters, qroues,kerued
pmages,and pmages ofmetall:and thep beake
Downe the aulters of Waaliin, enenin bis pre-
fence:and other ymages, that were in greater
bontoure then thep, be cauled to be deftroyped.
And the qroues, berued pmages,and pinagesof
metall, be bzake and made Bulle of them, and
ftrawedit bpon the graues of them that bad of
fered vutothem, Andde burnt the bones ofthe
preaftes pponthe aulters of them, and cleanfed
Juda and Jerufalem. And euen fo dpd he in the
cptpes of Hanae, Ephraim, Spmeon, vnto
Mephtbalt. And in the wylderuetles of them,
rounde aboute , Deplucked afondze the aulters
andthe groucs,and dpa beate them and tampe
them to pouldze, and beate Downe all the pma =
gesthozowoute alt the lande of Flrael : andre
turned to Jerufalem agapne.


Ae =


qn the.cvtit.pere of big rapane toben be bad 215
pourged the lande and the temple, «he fent Ha tore.rriis


phan the fonne of Amasiabu,and Daafiah the
goucrnour of thecptpe , and Foah tbe fonne of
Joahas therecozder, Corepapze the boule of the
LowdebisGod. And wopenthep came to Pel-
kiabtbhe ppe preek, thep delpuered ‘hem the mo-
nepe that was bzougbt into the Loule of God,
whiche the Leuptes that kepte the entrpes ,bad
gathered of the bande af Hanae, ¢ Ephzatm,
and of alltbat pet cemapned in Flrael, and of al
Juda and BenJamin, and of the inbabptersok
FZcruialem. Andihep putitt inthe bandes ofthe
wozkementhat badthe oucrlpabt of the boufe


of the Lode: andthep gauctttothelabourers


that wought in the boule of the Lorde, to rez


- papze and amende the Doule. Eucnto mafonse¢


carpenters gaue thep it toget fone andtpmbe
foz couples and fo: beames ofthe Deules, which
the Aranea of Juda had defktoped: And the men
dpd the woke fapthfullp.


And the ouecfears ofthemtocourage them €


forwarde , were Jahath ¢ Dbadiahu Leuptes,
of the childzen of Herari:and SHecharta,¢ We
Cullam, of the chpldzen of the Cabatbptes , and
other of the Leuptes: whiche allcoulde Ce pll of-
inftrumentes of mulpke. And ouer p bearers of
burtpþeng and ouer al that wrought, in whatia
eucr wozkmanibppit were, were thele trybeg,
offpcers,and porters ofthe Leuptes.


And whenthepbeought out the monep that m


was hrought into the boule of the Lorde, Hel


kia the prealt * founde the booke of the latwe of sttre.rrita


the Lozd gouen bp Doles And elbtaantwe-


red


Poti.


sq Dlia was epgbt peare olde whenbe y
I E began totapgne, and Deraigned in nines
see Serulalem.ceri.peare. And hedpop Frits


“Hotta.
redelaps to Saphan the {erphe:F hauc founde
the booke of thelawein the houle ofthe Lorde,
and Belkta gaue the boke to Hapha. And Sa-
phan carped the boke tothe kpng, and brought
the kpnge Wo2deagapne,fapinge: all that was

) committed to thy fernauntes, that dothey.aAnd
| they bauc gathered togpther the monepep was
founde inthe boufe of the Lozde,and Hane delp=
| ucredinto the hades of p oncrlears of the work
| ` andfotbebandes of the tho2kemen. Jrd then
HSaphan the lerpbe hewedthe kenge, fapinge:
; Delta the preatte hath gpuen mea bonke, and

: Daphan red init befozethe kynge.
;  —-s HndDit forztuncd, that whenthe kpngebat
Herd the wozdeg of thelawe, be tare bis clothes
and the kynge chmaunded Helkta and Abikam
the onne of Haphan, and Abidon the fonne of
Picab,and Haphan tbe lerpbe,and Afaia a fer


natitot tie kpnges, pinge: goandenquyze of cx:


the Lorde foz me , and Foz them that areleftein


the 1020 that is fallen pon vs, bpcaute our fa-
thers hauc not Bept the wo2de ofthe Lode, to
doafter all tbatis tozpttenin this booke.

And Helbia and thep that the kpnge had ap-
popnted, went to Hulda a propbetefle the wpe
of Sallum, the fonne of Cokbath, the fonne of

_ Hatra keper of the wardzope (fo? the Dwelte in
Jerufalem within the feconde wall)and fo thep
communcd with ber. be anfwered them: thus
fpaeth the Lozde God oF Flracl: tell pethe man
that fent pouto me.€ucnthuslapth the Lorde:
beholde, 3 wyl bepng cupl ppon thts place and
porn the endabtters therof(euenall the curfes,
tbat are Written inthe boke whichthep hauered
befozethebpng of Juda)bpcaule thep Dane fore

„faken me,and offerd otto other gondes , toan-

gre me with all manér wozkes of thepzbandes
therforeis mp wath {cet onfpre.agayntte thyg
jlace:and (hall not be quenched. Andas fo2 the
kyng of Juda whHichfent pou to enquyre of the

Lozode, fo hall pe faye vntobym:thus fapth the

Lorde Godot Flrael , concernpnge the wordes

sobtch thou balt perde: ,
wWpcaute tbpne bert dpd melt, andthoudypok

meke thy felfbefoze God when thou herdekt his
wozdes againt this place andDagaint the inba
biters therof:andbumbledtt thy telfe before me
 '* and taret thy clothes, and weptett befoze me,
| that Daue F berde allo fapth the Lozde. wWeboldoe
© ‘FZ wl take tie to thy fathers, andthou thalt be

putin tby qraucin peace, andthpne epes thall

not {eall themptchefe that 7 twpllbzpng vpon

this place, and vpon the enbabpters of the fame

‘ti.regum, eid thep brought P king wod agapne.x Cha

rita othekpngefentand gathered togpetber alltbeel-
ders of Juda q Jerufalem. And the kpnee went

vpintothe houte ofthe Lorde, andall the men

of quda- and the tmbabpters of Jerufalem, and

the peettes and Leuites andall the people great

andiimal,and the &png dpd reade inthep2 earcs

allthe wo20es of the boke of the couenauutthat

was founde inthe boule ofthe Lode, Andthe

bynge ode at big Landpnge,and made acoucs


kn


\


aji


ij. Lionicics,


4iracland Juda,concernpng the wozdes ofthe ; vee j we
booke thatisfounde. fforqreatisthe wrathof kra


"4 apt %
sta, leet,
naunt before the Lozbe,to folowe the LoD, and
to kepe biscommaundementes, Dis wytnelies,
and bis Catutes, with all bis berte, a nd with all
His foule, and to falfpl tbe wo2des of Ë appopne
tement wzptten tithe fame booke,

And be ietin thepz roume all them that twere
founde in Jerufalem , and WenFamtn, and the
enbabpters of Jerufalem ppd accozdpnee to the
coucnaunt ofthe Lorde Goa of there fathers.
And Jolia put away almanee ofabbominacp-
ons out ofall landes that pertapned to the chyl-
deen of Firacl,¢ brought in allthat were found
in F{tacl to wozthyp and to ferue P Lode thepz
God. And thep turned not alpde fromafter the
L020 God of thep2 fathers aslonge as be lpued
@ Che.crey.C bapter:


Folia Voldeth paleouce De fpghteth apapun the kpug
breid The peope bewaplebpm, `


Pikia and to the pretes, and onto the Lenites.


offepnges, twothoufands ipre hundzcd teepe,
and thee bundzed orett:Conanta and Semeiabu
and Nethbanel his beethzen, and Hafabiahuand
Jatel,and Jolabad, rulers ofthe Leuptes gaue
pntothe Leuptes pallecoucroffirpnges,cucntiue
thoufande thepe,andfpuc hundre oren. |
And fo the (erupce was prepared, the p2ea-
ftes tode inthep2 places, the Leuitestnthep2
diffinct cOpanies at the kpnges chinaundement
Anbdthep tiuepafleoucr,andtbe preattes (prpn- _
Bled the blond with their hand,and the Leuites
pulled of the {kpnues ofthebeattes. And thep
fet awwap the burntofiryngesto qpue them Wn-
tothe people that were deupded bp auncpente
boules, andtbat thep Muld offre vnto the Lod
Iphkexas tts wz2itté inthe bole of ) we z n 4 Heulia
| odp


at +. 3
ZAylige’
cron. fonpd they withthe orenalfo. And *thep drel

Ced the Pallcouce with pze asthe mance was.
And the other dedicate bealtes fod they inpot-
te3,cauldernes,and pannes, and Deupded pem
amongeallthepeople. Andafterwoarde they
made cedp fo2rthem felues and fo? the preaftes:
for thechpldzenof Aaron were bufped in offe-
ryng of burntofrpnges the fat bntpilnpabt: ie
therfore the Leuttes prepared fo? them lines, g S er” ut |
foz the peeattesthe fonnes of Aaron. and be rapgned thee monethes in Jerufalem. |
And the fpngers the cHildzen of Afaph Mode And che hynge of Egipt put bpm downe at
svarmi Mthepz ftandyng xaccozdpnge to the amaun- Jerulalë,e merced the lande inan hundzed talë- |

siria, ; Dement of Danid, and Ala ph, Weman, and ge- tes of fplucr,andatalent of golde. And pkpnge ,

Duthuutbekynges{ear:andp porters wapted of Egrptmade Eliakim as pa tah Sra mg
ateuerpaate and migbtnotdepartefromtheie Auda and secufalem, and turned pis name He
freupeertez they beetbeentheLeuites prepared to Feboalkim-and Hecho toke Fehoabaz We Nee
forthem. And foallthe feruice ofthe Lo2d was ther,and carped bpm to Egrpe. Jeboabun was
naepared the famcdape,to offre alleoucr , and rrv.pere olde when bebeqantorapgne, and be
to offre burntofrpnaes bpon tbe aultare ofthe rapgned.rt-perem Jerufalem : and dyd cupll in
Tome, accozdpngetothe commaundementeof thelygbt ofthe Lorbdebis Gov.
kpnae Folia. xE - Aap bim then came vp Nabuchjodono3o2 5
Hd fo thechplozen of Flracl that were pre- Bpnae of Sabplon, and bounde bpm with fiw ~
fent offred Baficouce the fametpme, andkepte chapnes fo carpe bpm to Babplou. THe Kpnge iti regu
the featte of Cwocte bzeed fenen Dapes and there *abuchodonozo? alfocarted of the peels of rritite |
fas noDallcoucr Ipketotbatkepte in Airacl, the boule of he Lozd to aby ton an put thent
fromthe dapes of Hamucl the prophetn either inbis temple at Sabplon. Theret of theactes
pydalthe kpnges of Feral bolde tuche a Palle- of {ehoakini,and his abbominacions whichbe
ouer featkas opd Jolia æ the prealtes ¢ Leuptes Dyd,andcarucd pmages that were laped to bis
‘and all Juda, g Flracl that were pre fente, tbe charge, bebolve thep are wepttentn the boke of
inbabiters of Jerufalem. This Wafleouer was the kpngesot Jiraci & ZJuda:and Fehoacw opa
holden in the. t viti. pere oftherapgne of Zofia. fonnerapgned in bis kede. Jeboacin was cps t

O m” x after thig, when Jolia bad prepareo the pereold wyende begantorapgne, he rapgued

ti.veFFig E temple, Pechotyng of Catt came bptofpabt thzemonetbesand ten dapesin Jerufalem: and
agapntt Carcamis belpde Euphzates,and fo- dpd ewpl tn the light of the Lod. and whentbhe

cers to bym, and fayd: wbat paue Jto do with fet bpm to Wabplon with the goodly vefiels of

|


WLhronicies. Jolia,
Citer Jola rapeneth Zedoabas, atter Jeboabaz Bebo: |
akim,after #eboakim 4, eats fter a pe ti y meet j
in tabofe tpme all the people toere carped atwap to abp
lon anè were brought agapne thefeusntpe pere after bp
kpnge cpzussothermpre called coles. |


Ger aT A Rdkthe people of theland toke Je- a

Bip aA Doabas the fonne of Jolia, ¢ mave “ re.rritci
Fee pim bong his fathers teden Fe

BAEN S tulale. And Feboabas was rriti.

You pere olde wben be began toraygne


E tbe thou kpnge of Judar We net thouagapnite tbe houfe of p Lozd,¢ made sedekia (His fathers

thp felfe this Dape:for mp warreisa apnitano bother)kyngeouer Juva and Jerufalem.

ther boufe and God bad me make batte. Leaue — ~ sedehia wag. rri.pere olde , when be began i

oftberfozeandmedle not with God whicheis forapane, andrapgned.rt. pere in Ferwlaleim. sere. tb. a
withme lett be deftrope the Menertbelelie, o> Andbedpd cpl the {pabte ofthe Lozdebps frie.
| {ia wolde not turne his face from bpm , but ta- God,and humbled not hrm felfe befoze Jeremia
_ thertokeadupleto fpght with bym, ¢ derkened the propbetat the mouth of the Lorde. And be '
| not tntto the toozdes of Mecho out ofthe mouth rebelled agayni Aabuchobonosoz,whiche had |
| . BeGod,andcameto fpagbtinthe vallep of a= recepucd an othe ot bpm bp God. Hut be wag >
| r gedo, andthe Moters hot artes at tynge Jo- ftpfnecked,andto bard herted to turne wuto the |
| fia. Andtbe kynee fapdto bis feruauntes: cary Lorde God of Jlracl. B)ozeouer, all therulers,

me away, for Jantioze wounded. tig lernaun. the preaftegand the people trefpatled moze, fpr

tes tberfoge bad bym out of that charet, aad ut npng afrerall maner ot abbominacpons of the
c% Himes (as akens) (nan other caret that toep ad Pevtben,« polluted the boule ofthe Lo which |

| qnd when ther had brought him to Ferutatem be had halowed in Jerufalem.
| ON Hedyed, and was burped in the fe pulchze ofbis = * and the Lorde God ofthepz fathers fentto £
| 70.018 fathers. * Andall Juda and Jerufalem mour- them, bp bis meffengers , mane pp bp tpmes, zerro. @
| ned for Jolia. And Jeremia lamëted Folta,and and fendpng, for be bad compatiion on bis pros
| ali fpngpnge men and (png ynge women mout- aoe on his dwellpnge place. Wut hep moc-

ned for Zofia inthepzlamétacionstotbisdaye, benthe meflengers of God, ¢ defppled bis woz-


and made the famelamentacios an ozdinaunce
in Firacl_ and bepolde,they be wzitten inthe las
mentacpons. The rett of the actes of Jolia and
his coodnes which bedpd in folowpne the wei
tpng of thelawe of the Lozde,andbis fapinges
fp2fteand laft: bebolde, thep ave wzptten in the
booke of the Bynges of Flracland Juda, `


ECTbe.rrrvi.chapter:


Des, anv mpluled bis ppbetes, vntpll the wath
ofthe Lozdearofeagapntt big people , and tpil


there was noremedy. And fox he brought Ypi tig.re.rpb a


them the kpng of tbe Caldees, wohiche Aue they?
pong men with the feocrde mn thep2 bolp temple
and fpared nepther pounge man, mapden, olde
man, no? bpm tbat Couped for age, Ie gaur
them allintobisbande. bai:
Bndal the vellels ofthe ponle of God’ ek
grea


j Eas


greatand {mall ) and the teealures of the houte

of the 102d, and the trealures ofthe kpnge,and

Of bis lozdes:al thefe carted he to Habilon. And

thep burnt the boule of God, and brake Downe

the wall of Jerufalem, and burnt all the places

thercof with fpze,and deftroped all the qaodlpe

tewelles therof. And the ref that bad efcaped p

f{ioerde carped he to Wabilon, where they were

_ bounde to bpm and his chplozen, vntpll p tyme

that Perfia bad the Empire. To fulfplp word

gere.rrb.b Of fbe Lozdexby p mouth of Jeremia, vntpl the

lande bad Der plealure of ber HSabbothes:£oz ag

longe as thelape defolate . the kepte Sabboth,
vntpll feuentpe peres were fulfplled. ;

* And the fpi pere of Cpzus ne of Berlia

(toben the worde of the Lozde + (poken bp the

mouth of Feremta was fpnilthed the Lod fr-

red vp the fpprtt of Cpzus kpng of Berlia, that

Hemade a proclamacion thozawout al bis kin-

godom, and that bp w2ptpng,faying: Thus fap”

eth Cpzus kpnge of Berita: allthe kynqdomes

of the earth bath the 102d God of deauen qpuen

me, and hath charged me to bupld bim an boule

in Jerufalem that isin Juda. Herfore, wholo

ever is amonge pou ofall Dis propie, the Lode

Dis God be with him, and let pyn go vp.


The ende of the feconde booke
of the Chzonycles.


The fylte booke of
Edag,
The fork Chapter.


E Cpius Cendeth agapne the people that was it captinitie:
and retozech them Chey; bolp beets, And commaundeth
, hemo buplde agapue the temple.


D
i Eml A
Frbi,c


te oo —
mait TYE aL


ag yt eae
a fea


4 pe ee
G parprbip | eee) tad Fa


' cated tobe proclapmed thozowout all bis em-


13 = Waofocucrnowamonge pou is ofhis peo:
ple,the Lozde bis God be With him,and lee bim


€ to buplòd the houte of p Lozd whichis at Feru
faleni. Andall they that were about thé B.


ri


out of Jerulale, ¢ bad put ind boule of his Gon. Serta
=


F Tbenombze of them that returned fromthe captiuptie, 3
(cota) ele ar the chpldzen of the lande that
[Sa Coal went bp out of the captinitic (wbom

> a


JAI DN 2a buchodonosog P kpng of Babilon
ieee Had caricd awap ynto Sabil)g cam
agapne onto Ferulal€,¢ into Juda, euerpe one
tnte dis cptie. Chey that came w soz0babel ace
thefe : Fefua,* Aebemiah , Syaraia, Raclata, tiemwzita
Pardochat, Willan, Dilpar, Wrguat, Rehun,
aana. This is the nombze of the men ofp peo
ile of Alrael. Che chpldzen of bares, tio thou
and,an bundzed feuentpe' and two:tbe chpldzé
of Sepbatia , theebundzed fcuentpe and two:
the chpldzen of Arath, feuendundzed, and fpue
and Ceuentyp: the chtldzen ofthe captapne of Bo
ab,amonge tbe chplb2€ of Jefua and Joab, two
‘thoufande, epgbt hundzged and twelue:tbhe chyl-
Dren of Elam, a thboulande, two bunden , and
foure and fpftp:the chpldaen of sathu, nyne bun
ded, and fpue and fourtp, the chpldzen of saccat
feuen bundzed, and thee {coze: the cbplozen of
Want, (pre bundzed, and two andfourtye : the
chpldzen of Sebai, Cpre hundzed, and thze and
twentyp:the childzen of Xirad, a thoufand,two
Dundzeb, atid two and twentye : the chpidzen of
Adonicain ,Cyrebundz2ed , and {pre and {prtpe:
the en of Wequat, two thoufand, and{ypre
and fpftpe:tbe chyldzen of Adin, foure bundzed
and fourec andfpEtp: the chpldzen of Ater of He-
sckhia,cpabtand fipnceye tie chplozen of Wesat
thze bundzed, andthe andtwentye : the chpl-
den OF Joza,anhundzed, andtwoelue : the chpl-
dren of Halam,tino hbundzedandtbhze and twen
tpe:thecbpldzen of Gebar,fpuc and npnetpe the
chil of Wetbhlepem, an dundzed andtbze m D
twentp


j Eas


greatand {mall ) and the teealures of the houte

of the 102d, and the trealures ofthe kpnge,and

Of bis lozdes:al thefe carted he to Habilon. And

thep burnt the boule of God, and brake Downe

the wall of Jerufalem, and burnt all the places

thercof with fpze,and deftroped all the qaodlpe

tewelles therof. And the ref that bad efcaped p

f{ioerde carped he to Wabilon, where they were

_ bounde to bpm and his chplozen, vntpll p tyme

that Perfia bad the Empire. To fulfplp word

gere.rrb.b Of fbe Lozdexby p mouth of Jeremia, vntpl the

lande bad Der plealure of ber HSabbothes:£oz ag

longe as thelape defolate . the kepte Sabboth,
vntpll feuentpe peres were fulfplled. ;

* And the fpi pere of Cpzus ne of Berlia

(toben the worde of the Lozde + (poken bp the

mouth of Feremta was fpnilthed the Lod fr-

red vp the fpprtt of Cpzus kpng of Berlia, that

Hemade a proclamacion thozawout al bis kin-

godom, and that bp w2ptpng,faying: Thus fap”

eth Cpzus kpnge of Berita: allthe kynqdomes

of the earth bath the 102d God of deauen qpuen

me, and hath charged me to bupld bim an boule

in Jerufalem that isin Juda. Herfore, wholo

ever is amonge pou ofall Dis propie, the Lode

Dis God be with him, and let pyn go vp.


The ende of the feconde booke
of the Chzonycles.


The fylte booke of
Edag,
The fork Chapter.


E Cpius Cendeth agapne the people that was it captinitie:
and retozech them Chey; bolp beets, And commaundeth
, hemo buplde agapue the temple.


D
i Eml A
Frbi,c


te oo —
mait TYE aL


ag yt eae
a fea


4 pe ee
G parprbip | eee) tad Fa


' cated tobe proclapmed thozowout all bis em-


13 = Waofocucrnowamonge pou is ofhis peo:
ple,the Lozde bis God be With him,and lee bim


€ to buplòd the houte of p Lozd whichis at Feru
faleni. Andall they that were about thé B.


ri


out of Jerulale, ¢ bad put ind boule of his Gon. Serta
=


F Tbenombze of them that returned fromthe captiuptie, 3
(cota) ele ar the chpldzen of the lande that
[Sa Coal went bp out of the captinitic (wbom

> a


JAI DN 2a buchodonosog P kpng of Babilon
ieee Had caricd awap ynto Sabil)g cam
agapne onto Ferulal€,¢ into Juda, euerpe one
tnte dis cptie. Chey that came w soz0babel ace
thefe : Fefua,* Aebemiah , Syaraia, Raclata, tiemwzita
Pardochat, Willan, Dilpar, Wrguat, Rehun,
aana. This is the nombze of the men ofp peo
ile of Alrael. Che chpldzen of bares, tio thou
and,an bundzed feuentpe' and two:tbe chpldzé
of Sepbatia , theebundzed fcuentpe and two:
the chpldzen of Arath, feuendundzed, and fpue
and Ceuentyp: the chtldzen ofthe captapne of Bo
ab,amonge tbe chplb2€ of Jefua and Joab, two
‘thoufande, epgbt hundzged and twelue:tbhe chyl-
Dren of Elam, a thboulande, two bunden , and
foure and fpftp:the chpldaen of sathu, nyne bun
ded, and fpue and fourtp, the chpldzen of saccat
feuen bundzed, and thee {coze: the cbplozen of
Want, (pre bundzed, and two andfourtye : the
chpldzen of Sebai, Cpre hundzed, and thze and
twentyp:the childzen of Xirad, a thoufand,two
Dundzeb, atid two and twentye : the chpidzen of
Adonicain ,Cyrebundz2ed , and {pre and {prtpe:
the en of Wequat, two thoufand, and{ypre
and fpftpe:tbe chyldzen of Adin, foure bundzed
and fourec andfpEtp: the chpldzen of Ater of He-
sckhia,cpabtand fipnceye tie chplozen of Wesat
thze bundzed, andthe andtwentye : the chpl-
den OF Joza,anhundzed, andtwoelue : the chpl-
dren of Halam,tino hbundzedandtbhze and twen
tpe:thecbpldzen of Gebar,fpuc and npnetpe the
chil of Wetbhlepem, an dundzed andtbze m D
twentp


TY


chuplbpuge


fwentp:the men of Aetopba, {pre and Fpfty: the
men of puothoth,an hundzed andepabt twt-
eve: the chplozen of Afmaucth, two and fourtye
the childzen of Lriviath Jarint, euen the childzen
of Cepbira, and Weer oth, fenen hundzed ¢ thee
avd fourtpe: the chplozen of Harama and G eba
{pre bundzed and one and twentpe: themen of
pebmas, anbundzed, and two and tiventpe:
themen of Wetheland Hap, two Hund2ed, ant
thre and twentpe: the chplozen of ebo, two g
re chplozen of Wagbis an bundzed and
preand fpftpe:tbe chpldzent of the other Elam,
a thoufand,aud two pundzed,andfoure and fif-
tpe:tbe chplozen of Marin, thee hundred g t wen-
eve:the cpplozen of Lopbadid and Dno, feuen,


— Hundzedand fpuc and tiwentpe: thecbpidzen of


Jeticho, chrehundzed and fpue and fourtye : the
chplozen of Senaa, thee thoufande, (pre pudzed
anothp2tye. of |

abe preattes of the chilbzen of Jedaia of the
boule of Jefua,npneHundzcd and thze and feu-
tye:the chpldzenof Jmuet,a thoufande, g to
aud fpity:tbechilozen of Phapur ,atboufande
tiwo Pundzcd and feucn and f ourtp:tbecbplozen
of Xarim,atboufandand feuentene.

The Lenites: Che chplozen of Jefua, e CAd
micl of tbe chplozen of Hedauta , foures feuen-
tpe. The fpngers the chitdzen of Afaph, an bun
Ded and cpgdt andetwentye. Thechyloren ofp
poze keper. Che chplozen of pallii:tbe cbpldzctt
of Ater the chplozen of Talmon, the childzcn of
Akub, the chilozen of Hatita, the childze of o-
bat:all tomptheran bundzeed and. rete.

The Nethinims.the chplozen of siba, the chil


~ pren of Aafupha,the chpldien of Tabaoth, the


chtlozen of Ceros,the chilozen of &picha,the chil
Dzen of Padon,thechilden of Levanaa,che cbtl-
Den of Hagaba, the chpldzen of Akub, the chpl-
Den of Pagab,thecbplozen of Samlat, thechil
pen of panan, tbechplozen of G pooel, the cbpt
Dzen of Gahar, the chpldzen of iReaia, the chyl-
Den of Razin, the chypldzen of Mecoda,p chive
of Galam, the chpldzen of Gila, the chpldzen of
panah e chplazen of Ba Nat, thechpldzen of
hina sthechildzen of HPebunim, thechplozen of
Mepbuilim, the childzen of Wacbuc. the children
of Hacuba,the chilozen of 4 arbur, thechpldzen
of aslucd, thechilozen of Hebira, the childzen
of Maria, che chplozen of Warcom sthe childzen
of plara: the childz€ of Thainah, the childzen
of cum b tbe chyldzcn of Hatippa.
Thecbplozen of Salomons fernauntes: the
chplozen of Sotat , thecbplozen of opbereth,
the chpldzen of Peruda , the chplozen of Jaala,
the chylozen of Darcon, thechplozen of Gtdvel,
the chpldzen of Sephatiah: the chrldzen of Pat-
til, the chtldgen of Pochereth, Hosb aim, the cbil
dren of Amt. All the Aetbinims, andthe chpl-
Dzen of alomdg eruauntes were all togpeyer
thze bundzed,npnetpeand two.
Aud thete went vp from Thelmelah,¢ from


D Tpelhbarfa, Cherub, Arron, and FJmmer. wut


they coulde not difcerne thepz fathers houfe and
thep2 feed: whether thep wer of Ylracl. The chil
den of Delatah, the chplozen of Cobia: Che


LEMAS.


ebplozen of Accoda , Tyre bundzed and fwoand
irean of the cppldzen of the pzealtes. The
chylozgen of Debata : thechplozen of pacos, tbe
children oF erelio toke one of p dough
ters of x Werst


eupdence amonge them that ban thereqy fer of
ppzth,and were not found therin, therfore were


dD thep put from the realtbone, And Hathirfatha


fapd pnto them, that thep thulde not cate of the


mooft bolp,tyll there rofe Dp axpecakcowmeare er wie


im and Thumim.

The whole congregacion togither was. rit
thoufande, thee bundzed and thzefcoze: belpde
thep2 feruauntes and mayoens: of whom there
were (cucnthoulande, thee bundzcd and feucn €
thpstpe. Bnd there were amonge them two bur
Dred fpngynge men and women: Thep: boris


- were fuen pundzed and i rcandtbpety. Their


mules, two hundzed andfpuc andfourtpe and
thepzcamelg foute bundzed and frye e tbpetpe.
hep: alles fpre thoutande, ienen birndzed and
twenty. And certapn ofthe chefe fathers: when
thep came bpcaufe ofthe boule of the Lozde., at
Jerufalem, thep ofred them ieiues wyllinge fog
the boufe of God, to let in big place: ¢ gaut gold
after their babiltte, nto the treafure of p work
evren.Irf.thoufande peres, and fpuc thoulande
pounde of (pluce: and an dundzed preattes gars
menteg Spo the pretes tthe Leuites, and a cers
tapne of the people, andthe ip ngers andthe po?
ters, and the Merpmins dwelt in thepzcptics,
and all Zlracl inthepecpttes.
E The.it. Chapter.


"i R
mond Avera and the childzé of Jfrael were now tcc. oie
EY AA a in their cities:the people came togp til, OC, ¥.8)


tonne of3 ofedec:and bis bzethzen tbe pecattes,
and 3020vabel the fonne of Salathiel, and bye


and the aultate (et thep Y on bis fockettes (foz
andthe ke nó them, bycaute of


pape bp daye. ter warde they offered Daplpe
purntomepnges alfo andin the newe moncthes,


anbinall tbe fealtoapes that wer cifecrate Wn-


tothe Lozde,¢ fox alltbem which bpd (of theps
oiwnefree wll )ofice vutotbe Lorde.
from the fpaite dave of tbe fcuenth moneth
began thep to offre purnte facrifpees vnto the
3.020e: cuen when thefoundacpon of the cemple
ofthe L020 was not pet laped. Thep gaue moe
nep alfo vito the malons ¢ carpenters, g meate
and depuke:and ople bnto them of stdon and of
Eyre, robrpnge thë Cede tpmbee from ma


aithe Siliadyte to wpfe : AND tire.cevts
wagcalled after thepe name:thele fou she thep TeSt


ofthetemple.


—EO rr


=
—


oe


— . nal
SEES SS a


TY


chuplbpuge


fwentp:the men of Aetopba, {pre and Fpfty: the
men of puothoth,an hundzed andepabt twt-
eve: the chplozen of Afmaucth, two and fourtye
the childzen of Lriviath Jarint, euen the childzen
of Cepbira, and Weer oth, fenen hundzed ¢ thee
avd fourtpe: the chplozen of Harama and G eba
{pre bundzed and one and twentpe: themen of
pebmas, anbundzed, and two and tiventpe:
themen of Wetheland Hap, two Hund2ed, ant
thre and twentpe: the chplozen of ebo, two g
re chplozen of Wagbis an bundzed and
preand fpftpe:tbe chpldzent of the other Elam,
a thoufand,aud two pundzed,andfoure and fif-
tpe:tbe chplozen of Marin, thee hundred g t wen-
eve:the cpplozen of Lopbadid and Dno, feuen,


— Hundzedand fpuc and tiwentpe: thecbpidzen of


Jeticho, chrehundzed and fpue and fourtye : the
chplozen of Senaa, thee thoufande, (pre pudzed
anothp2tye. of |

abe preattes of the chilbzen of Jedaia of the
boule of Jefua,npneHundzcd and thze and feu-
tye:the chpldzenof Jmuet,a thoufande, g to
aud fpity:tbechilozen of Phapur ,atboufande
tiwo Pundzcd and feucn and f ourtp:tbecbplozen
of Xarim,atboufandand feuentene.

The Lenites: Che chplozen of Jefua, e CAd
micl of tbe chplozen of Hedauta , foures feuen-
tpe. The fpngers the chitdzen of Afaph, an bun
Ded and cpgdt andetwentye. Thechyloren ofp
poze keper. Che chplozen of pallii:tbe cbpldzctt
of Ater the chplozen of Talmon, the childzcn of
Akub, the chilozen of Hatita, the childze of o-
bat:all tomptheran bundzeed and. rete.

The Nethinims.the chplozen of siba, the chil


~ pren of Aafupha,the chpldien of Tabaoth, the


chtlozen of Ceros,the chilozen of &picha,the chil
Dzen of Padon,thechilden of Levanaa,che cbtl-
Den of Hagaba, the chpldzen of Akub, the chpl-
Den of Pagab,thecbplozen of Samlat, thechil
pen of panan, tbechplozen of G pooel, the cbpt
Dzen of Gahar, the chpldzen of iReaia, the chyl-
Den of Razin, the chypldzen of Mecoda,p chive
of Galam, the chpldzen of Gila, the chpldzen of
panah e chplazen of Ba Nat, thechpldzen of
hina sthechildzen of HPebunim, thechplozen of
Mepbuilim, the childzen of Wacbuc. the children
of Hacuba,the chilozen of 4 arbur, thechpldzen
of aslucd, thechilozen of Hebira, the childzen
of Maria, che chplozen of Warcom sthe childzen
of plara: the childz€ of Thainah, the childzen
of cum b tbe chyldzcn of Hatippa.
Thecbplozen of Salomons fernauntes: the
chplozen of Sotat , thecbplozen of opbereth,
the chpldzen of Peruda , the chplozen of Jaala,
the chylozen of Darcon, thechplozen of Gtdvel,
the chpldzen of Sephatiah: the chrldzen of Pat-
til, the chtldgen of Pochereth, Hosb aim, the cbil
dren of Amt. All the Aetbinims, andthe chpl-
Dzen of alomdg eruauntes were all togpeyer
thze bundzed,npnetpeand two.
Aud thete went vp from Thelmelah,¢ from


D Tpelhbarfa, Cherub, Arron, and FJmmer. wut


they coulde not difcerne thepz fathers houfe and
thep2 feed: whether thep wer of Ylracl. The chil
den of Delatah, the chplozen of Cobia: Che


LEMAS.


ebplozen of Accoda , Tyre bundzed and fwoand
irean of the cppldzen of the pzealtes. The
chylozgen of Debata : thechplozen of pacos, tbe
children oF erelio toke one of p dough
ters of x Werst


eupdence amonge them that ban thereqy fer of
ppzth,and were not found therin, therfore were


dD thep put from the realtbone, And Hathirfatha


fapd pnto them, that thep thulde not cate of the


mooft bolp,tyll there rofe Dp axpecakcowmeare er wie


im and Thumim.

The whole congregacion togither was. rit
thoufande, thee bundzed and thzefcoze: belpde
thep2 feruauntes and mayoens: of whom there
were (cucnthoulande, thee bundzcd and feucn €
thpstpe. Bnd there were amonge them two bur
Dred fpngynge men and women: Thep: boris


- were fuen pundzed and i rcandtbpety. Their


mules, two hundzed andfpuc andfourtpe and
thepzcamelg foute bundzed and frye e tbpetpe.
hep: alles fpre thoutande, ienen birndzed and
twenty. And certapn ofthe chefe fathers: when
thep came bpcaufe ofthe boule of the Lozde., at
Jerufalem, thep ofred them ieiues wyllinge fog
the boufe of God, to let in big place: ¢ gaut gold
after their babiltte, nto the treafure of p work
evren.Irf.thoufande peres, and fpuc thoulande
pounde of (pluce: and an dundzed preattes gars
menteg Spo the pretes tthe Leuites, and a cers
tapne of the people, andthe ip ngers andthe po?
ters, and the Merpmins dwelt in thepzcptics,
and all Zlracl inthepecpttes.
E The.it. Chapter.


"i R
mond Avera and the childzé of Jfrael were now tcc. oie
EY AA a in their cities:the people came togp til, OC, ¥.8)


tonne of3 ofedec:and bis bzethzen tbe pecattes,
and 3020vabel the fonne of Salathiel, and bye


and the aultate (et thep Y on bis fockettes (foz
andthe ke nó them, bycaute of


pape bp daye. ter warde they offered Daplpe
purntomepnges alfo andin the newe moncthes,


anbinall tbe fealtoapes that wer cifecrate Wn-


tothe Lozde,¢ fox alltbem which bpd (of theps
oiwnefree wll )ofice vutotbe Lorde.
from the fpaite dave of tbe fcuenth moneth
began thep to offre purnte facrifpees vnto the
3.020e: cuen when thefoundacpon of the cemple
ofthe L020 was not pet laped. Thep gaue moe
nep alfo vito the malons ¢ carpenters, g meate
and depuke:and ople bnto them of stdon and of
Eyre, robrpnge thë Cede tpmbee from ma


aithe Siliadyte to wpfe : AND tire.cevts
wagcalled after thepe name:thele fou she thep TeSt


ofthetemple.


—EO rr


=
—


oe


— . nal
SEES SS a


Si = tale


Thetemple.


itus bp fee vnto Yoppa,accozdpng tothe qraunt
that thep Dad of Cizus the kpnge of peria.

Jn týe fecond pere oftheyzcdmpna wnto the
place of the boule of God at Jerusalem tn the fez
cond monet beganszozobabel the fonne of Haz
latbtcl, and Fefua the fonne of Fofedec, and the


" remnaunt of thep2 becthecn the peettes and Le-


iL Papbi, b


#


ilire pbo


nites, ¢ alltbep that were come outofthecapti
ulfpe vito Feruialem,¢ appopnted the Lemteg
from twentp pere olde andaboue, tote that the
woke of the boule of the Lozde went forwarde
And Felua ode with bis fonnes and bictheen:
and Cadmiel with bis tonnes, and the chplozen
of Juda, to forther the workmen ofthe boule of
©od,cuen the chplozen of penadab, with they?
chplozen,and thepz beethzen the Leuptes. :
And whenthe baploers layed the foundarts
of the temple of the Lozde, the preaftes ttode in
tbepz ardp with trompets. Andthe Leuttesthe
chpldzen of Afaph with cpmbales:topraple the
Lozve:xafcer the maner of pauidkpnge of Fi-
tacl. Andthey fange togyther when they gaue
papie e thankes Dntoths Logde, bycaule peis
gractous, e bycaule bis mercp endureth fo2 euce
wito Jiraci. Andallthe people thowtedloude,
in paplpng the Lorde, bpcaufe the foundacpon
of the boule of the Lozde was layed.anp allo
of the prcaftes g Lenites andanncyent fathers:
wobiche had fene the fyatt boule (when the foun-
bacion ofthis poule was layd befoze their epes )
wept wa loude vopee. And manp outed with
iope, fo thatthe nople qauca great founde:in fo
moche that p people coulde not difterne f topful
founde ¢ gladnes, from the nopfe ofthe weppng
among the people :fo2 the people pouted witha
loude cepe:and the nopfe was berde farre of.
€ Che. titt. chapter:

AL Tbe buplopnge of thetemple is bpndred and let.

i cay) Citxthe aducrfartes of Juda and WE
A D3224 Jamin berde, thatthe chpldzen of the
a4 Bs yi captpuitie buploed the temple wuto f
be Se L020 on of Fracl. Andthepcamto
3020Da bel, ¢ to the patneppall fathers,andfapd
nto them: We wpll buplode with pou: foz: we
Teke the Lorde pout Godlpkeas pe do. And we
baue pone faccifyce Vta bpm (png the tyme of
Aforipavon the kprge of Alurx which brought
vs bp byther. Andso2obabell, and Felua,and
the other auncient fathers of Ylrael, fayde yuto
them: Jf can not be, that pou and we toapther,
(oulde buplac the boufe puto cur God: foz we


. our felues wpll buylde alone nto the Lord our


1,@fb,i.a


Godof Flracl, *as Cyrus the kpnae of erlia
hathbcommaundedys, |

and ttcameto palle that the folke of the land
bpndzed the people of Juda, and troubled them
as thep were buplopng, and byzedcounfapicrs
agapilt chem,tobpndze tbepzocupce. as longe
as (pus the kpnge of Perlia lpucd, wntpll the
rapgne of Darius kpnge of erfia. Andinthe
rapane of Abalucrus (eueninthe beqpnning of
Histapyne) wrote they yntobpinacomplapnt
agapnit the inbabiters of Judaand Jerufalem

And inthe dapes of Artharerles, wote Wi-
thzidab Gabeel, € theotperof pig cogil puto


j.€idvas,


Artarerfes the kpny of Werlia vs fa 2e Wo2des.
nd the tcrppture OreDeletter wa Saupe in
the Diris ipeche,and interpzetated ti the lan-
Guage of the Sirians: Rebuni the recordec,and
Ham [ai the {eetbe wote aletter from Setulalé
to Artharerles the kpnge:asit folowsth.


Chen Rebum the recorder, and Samfai the 15


ferpbe, and otber ofthepz: com panpe of ina, of
Arpbafath, of Charpla, of Petlia, of Arach,of
Babylon, of Hulan, of Deba, of Elan, other


Salerry


of the peoplex whom the qreat and Roble JMA- giive.roeo


par bzougbt ouer: and fet in the cptpes of Sa-


maria ant otbher,that are nowe on this pde the '


water. Chisis thecoppe of the letter that the
fent vnto kpnge Arthaterfes. PEFP

Thy leruauntes and the mentbatarenowon
this [pde the water. 25t it bnotwen dnto P hpna
that the Jewes which came vsfrom the to bs,
ave cote Onto Jerulalem (a cptic feptcwousand
frowarbde and bupldethelame,andfette vp the
walles thereof, and lape the foundactons.%c it
knowen now alfo onto the kyu, that pEtbis cp
tie be builded, and the walles therofmade Upa:
gapne then Hall not thep gpue tolle,trpbute, g
cuftome, andthe kpnges pzofpte tall incucre


Damage. And now inthe meane fafon webane C


deftroped she temple and wolde no longer fe the
&pnges Dionoure. Cherfoze fent we out alfo,
and certifped the kpnge: that it mape be fourde
inthe booke ofthe Chzonpeles ofthy progeny.
tours, and fo balt thou fpnde in the boke of the
Chronicles, and percepuc that this cptic is fedis
tpous and noplome buto kypnages ¢lanacs, and
that they caule other alfo among them to rebel


of oldes and fo? the fame caule was this cptpede


roped. Cherfoze do we certifpetbe kyng that
pf this cptie be buplded aga pne, and the walles
thereof made bp: thou Malte hereafter baucno
porcpononthistpoethe water.

Then lent p&pnge ananfwere nto Rebum
the recozder,¢ Samat P fcribe, g tothe other of
their copanions that dweltin Samaria,g vato
the otber tbat were beyond f water, in Selan €
Chebeth. She letter which he lent unto ve,bath
ben openlp red before me, € Fbauc cOmaided to
make Ceatche:¢ tt ip founde : P this cptie of olde,
bath made infurrectionagapnite kpngeg,g that
rebellion æ {edition bath benecOmptted therein.
€ bere haucbenmpabtpe kpnges allo at Jeru:
falem, wbiche baue rapqned ouer all countrpes,
beponie the water:andtolle,trpbute,s cufome
thas gpuen vnto them: Gpue pe nowe therfore
témaundement, that the fame men be fozbpodé
andtbat thecptie be not bupldeD aqapne, tpl 3
hatte Ttuen an other cé6maundement. Take pede
now that pe be not negligent todothtis:fo2 whp
fpoulde the kpnye paue barmetbercthozowe 2

PLOW Wen thecoppe ofkynge Arthaxerles
lettre wasted before ebum and Sanilat the
ferpbe,and thep2 companyons, thep went Yp in


all the bateto Jerufalem, vnto the Fc wes, ani


fozbade them witb violence and power. “pei


ceafled the woke of the boule of Sodat Fe rufa.


lem:andcontpnaed fo wnte the feconde peare of


Darius bynge of Perlit. The


The buylopnge


The. v.Chepter.
Cwp Che erhortation of Aggeus andjacharpeis
the temple buplbed agapne,
proppen Ayreus andsachary
fonne of Jodo prophecped wiito


aad feng seculalent, tn thename of the God
iolanda Of Jirak.
xThen gat dp s0zobabel the fonneof Gala
thiel, anid Jelua the fonne of Joledec,and began
tobuploc the boule of God at Jerufalem : and
with thé were the peophetes of God, which hel-
pedthem. Atp fame tpme came to them Tath-
nai wbhiche was capfapte on this lpde the wa-
ter,and Sotarbasant, ¢ they: companions, and
{apd thus vnto them: Miho pathbcommanunned
pouto buplde this Dowe, and tomake vp thele
falles? Tbhentolde we them the names ofthe
men that madethis buplopnge. Wut theeve of
thep2 God was bpon the eldersof the FWS,
fat thep coulde hot caufe them to ceaffe, tpl tbe
matter was bought to Darius, and then tDcp
anfweredbyp letters there vito.


6 . Thisisthecoppe of the lettre, that Tabnat


C


Hire tia.
i par-iii à


&


(wobhiche was captapne on this pde the water)
and Starbasant , €the counfaplers of Aphat-
fab(tbich were on thts {pte the Water) fent vit


toRrng marius. And thematter that they fent,


prito bym, was witten thus within the letter:
into Darius the kyng, al peace. ett kuo wen
into the kpnge, that we tent in tothe lande of
Jewzpe tothe boule of the great God, whichis
builded with migitp great tones, and beames
arelaped in the walles,and the worke gorhtalk
‘forth, eprolperct) in they bandes. Then ald
we the elders, lapa vntothem asit foloweth:
Wiho comaunded pou to buplde thts houfe:and
to make vp the wallesthereofs Wie afked thep2
naines allo, that we mpabe certify the, € weyte
the names of the men that were thep2 rulers:
ut thep anfwered vs with thele wozde, g
fapd: Wie are the feruatites of bpm that ts God
of beauen¢ evthsand buplde the oufe that was
buplded many peres ago, x which a great png
of ¥itacl buploed, E iet vp. wut afterp our fa-
ther pad prouoked p God of beaut wuto watb,


aö.rerrtiii He Tave them ouer into the band of Mabucho-


GY


ponoszo2 the king of Babilon, ¢ of the Chaldecs
yoprcbe bzake Downe this boule, and carped the
apleawape captpue winto wWabplon.
x Butin the fprlt pere of Cpzus the kynage of


LEi .a abil onthe fame kynge Cyprus gaue comantt=


itio id


Dement concernpnge thig houle of God, thatit
(huldbe bupided agapne. Aud f vellels of gold
and fyluer of the boule of God, which Nabucho
Donoso: toke out ofthe temple that wasat Fe-
rufalent, @ brought them into the temple at Ba
pilon thole dyd C pens tbe kpnge take outof the
temple at wBabplon, and Dep were delp tiered
nto one Spalbasar bp name, whome bemade
captapne,# fayd bnto bpm: Cake thefe vetlels
andgothy wap andfet them inthe temple that
igat Jerulalé,and let the boule of God be bupl«
dedin bis place oben came the fame Sa fa sat
aid iaped the foundacton of the boule of Gov,


of the tenipie


whiche igat Jerufalem. Spnsthat tyme alfo
yntplinow batbit benin buylding, and pet ts tt
not finpithed. PE it pleafe the kynge nowe ther-
fore let there be ferche made tn the Kpnges ltbza
rye whiche is thereat Wabilon, whether it baue
ben kynge Cpuscommaundement , that thys
temple of Sod at Jerufalem tulde be buplded,
and let bpm fende vs the kpngeg mipnde concer:
npnge the fame matter.
— CThe. vt. Chapter. 3
C At the commaundement of Darius Kpng of Perfia,


atter the tempie was buplded and bedicate,the chil
__Drem of Flrael kepethe feat of balcuended beers.


Fag Hen cimannded kynge Datius, and a
AE ze y Aare S deiari aoea iep

4 PN inthe place where tyep taped v the ,,-
NS peat Babits. x and therewas e
founde ta corem the place thatis in the laud
of the Aedes )a volume, and therin wasit thus
wrptten,€iuchea memoziall: Jn the fp2tt pere
of kpna Cpzus,qaue the fame king Cpzus com-
maundement concernpnge the boule of God at
Jerufalë, that the fame boufe Mulde be buplded
în tbe place where thep offretbefacrifpces , and
totopne the walles togptber of thzetcoze cubp=
tes bepath.and theeicoze cubptes breadth. Thze
rowes ofrougbe toneg, €onerowe of tpmobze,
and tbe erfpences pall be gpuenof the kynges
Doule. Andlet the qoldeand {plucr vetlel of the
houle of Good, ( whiche Mabuchodonos 02 toke
out of the temple at Jerufalem andbzougbt wn
to Babplon ) berefto2red, and bzoughteagapue
puto tbe temple at Jerufalem to thepz place in
the boule of God.

Get pou far from them therfoze, thou Thad |
natcaptapne beponde the water,and Starbu- 15
zani, and pour counfaplers and Apher Secbet,
which are beponde the water, get pe awap from
them. Let the woke of the boule of this God a=
loone, that the captapne of the Fewes and thep2
clers mave buploe p boule of God in his plate.
¥Fhauc cimaunded what Hall be Done to the el-
Ders of Juda fo? the buplopnge of the boufe of
God, that there pall be dpligent Dede taken of
the kpnaes qoones , eucn of therentes beponde
the watcr,and gyu? wnto the men, that thep be
notbpnd2ed, Andpfthep haue nede of calues,
rammes,  lambes fog the burntoffrypnge of the
Sov of beanen, wheate, falte, wpne, and ople,
after the cuftome of the preaftesat Jerufalem,
let the fame be gpuen them daylp without anpe
pelap:that tbey mape offre fwete fauours dnte
the God of beanen,and pray fo? the kyngeslpte
and for bigchplozen. Aud fuche a commaunde-
ment bane J gpuen:that what man focuce be be
that altereth this toozde, tbere halla beame be
taken from bis boule, and fet bp, and be (hall be
Hanged thereon , and bis boule Wall be madea
donge bpll, for the fame thynge.

And the Gov tbat fet bisname there, deftrop
allgpngesand people that pa to tbep? band to
altre, ¢ to bzeake Downe p boule of God which
is at Jerufalem. J Darius baue commaunded,
that this be Done with (pede.

Then Thabnat the captapne of thecountrp
beponde f water,and Starbosanai with there
countaplers


a


EL. CDA


counfaplere to whom kpiye Marius bad lene,


C Dydthep2 Diligence: And p Elders of the Jewes


dipa bilib


buplded, and they profperedthozow the prophe |


cpenge of Aggeus the prophete andsacharp the
fonne of Jodo :andtbey buyplded andlaped vp P
foundacton , accozdpnge to the chmaundemente
of the God of Alracl,and after the commannde-
mét of Cpzus.and Darius and Artarecfes kit-
ges of Peria. And theboule was finplibed the
thyade day of the monety Adar, even tn the lyre
peate of therapane of kypnge Darius: |

x Bnd the chpldzen of Zlrael,the prelkes, the
Leuites, ethe otherchplozen of p capttuite Held
the dedicacion of thys boule of God wpthtope,
aiid ofredat the dedicacion tee boule of god
an bundzed oren : wo bundzedrames: foure Di-
Ded goates,¥ for the reconcplpnge of all iral
twelue peqoates : accorpnge to the nombze of
the tribesof Jfraell,and let the preeles inthepa
fondzpe courtes: andthe Leuitesin there diuers
offices to minre Dnto God at Jerufalem: ag
it ig wozptten mthe boke of 4) oles


D Anothe opioa of thecaptini tie beld Balle-


duer pon the fourtenth dape of pfpattemoneth
for tbe pecattes and Leuptes were purpfyed, fo.
that thep were allcleane togptber , and &plled
Pafleouce fozall the Aia he of the captiuttte,
gfo: thepzbzethzen the preftes gfo: them felues
Andehechplozenof Iiraellwbpech were come a=
gapne out ofcaptinite, andalifuchasbadlcpa-
rated themfelues unto them,fritbhe fplebpnelte
of tbe beptben of the lave: tolekethe Lod God
of ¥{racl,Dpdeate, and belde the feat of vnleue
ned bzcade leuen dapes Wopth ope: foz the Lorde
Had made them glad,¢ turned the bart of p Bing
of Affucynto them, to rengthe chep2 hadegin
the wozke of p boule of god,euc p cod of Ffrae.
€ Cbe. bii. Chapter,
Hp the commaundement sf Arthareries, Eroras
taketh bps compapnpons thechplpjen of #fracll
aD returneth to Zerulalem,


giter thele actes, there wasin the


Er a de
i atti ey
T i Sm
`


A EENES rapaneof Artarerfeskpng of Par


ii(iel bina Get


atrov.fT.a


ath Vem fia, one & fo2a8 the lone of Sariah
[vee Site fonne of Afaria, the fon of Hel-
Wie Skia, thefonne of Sallum, the fone
of sadoc, thefonne of Abitob, the fonne of Ama
tia, the fonne of Afaria, the Conne of &)eratoth,
the fontre of seraia, theloune of Git, the fone of
Buckt,thefoune of Abifua, thefonne of Phine
hes, che fonne of Eleafar, thefonne of Hard the
chefe pet. Thys Efozas allo went vp fro 5a-
bylon , Wasa perfpte fcribe in platve of o-
fes,* Mbych the Lode God of Fwael opdgpue.


Andthe hing gaue bpm all that he requypzed bp


caufethe bande of the Lorde bis God was dpon
bpm. Andthere wente Dpcertapne of the chpl=
Dzen of Slracil:o€ the peeattes, Lcuites,tpngers
po2ters, of the Actbintms wnto Ferulatem, in
the feuenth peare of kpnge Artarerles . And be
came to Zerufalemin the fpfth moneth, eucnin
the feucnthpeare of the kprae. J02 vpi p pelt
dape of the fpzfte moncth, vegan be toya vp tro
Wabploit, g on the fp2lt dap of tbe fpi moneti
cain he to Jernfalem, bycaufe the good bade of
Godwas vron bpm. fo, Eoas preparedops


berte to leke thelawe of the Lo2d,¢ to doit,and
Co teache the precept andtudgementin Zlraell.
and topa ig the coppe of p letter, thathpnae z5
Artharerlesqaue vnto Elozas the preafkeand’
{cribe, whiche was a weptter of the wordes and
cOmaundements ofthe Lozde, eof bps Katutes
ouer Firacll.Artbarecfes akpnae of kpnges.
Ginto Eldzas the preal elcribe of the lawe of
tie God of heuen.peace g falutation. Z baue cha
maunded, that all thep of the peopleof Jiraell,
of the pecaftes,4 Leuptesinmprealine(wbpche
are Ar of their ofone good wyl to yo pyta
Jeruialem ) go wpth the:and therfoze art p fent
of thehpnge ¢ of bps leucn coiilaplers, to vifpt
Juda g Jerufalem, accozdpnge to Plawe of thp
God, whpcbeisinthp bade. Andthat thon pula
det take wyth the hej €golde.whych f kpn
€ bys coiifaplers oftre of thepz owne good wpli,
unto the God of Fracll (whole babitactonis at
Ferulalem ) €allehelpluec g golde ¢ thou taut
fpnde inall the countrep of 2abplon, topthit
that the people offre of thepz otpne good will
andthe p2celtes gpue foz the boule of thep2 God
whpche ts at Jerufalem. i
Take thou the fame, bpe diligétlp wpth the ¢
fame monep oren, rãmes, and labes, with their
meatofferpnaes € Dapnieofferpnges :andthon
alt offer them Dpon the aulter of the boufe of
pour God, whichis at Jerulalé. And loke what
ii lpketh the, æ thy baethzento do wpth the rem-
naunt of the money, that do after p topll of pour
God. And the vellels that ave qpucn tbe forthe
minitracion th the Doufe of chp God, thole deli<
uer thou before Godat Jerufalem.,
And what focuer thing moze Halbe nedeful
foz f boufe of thp God, whichetsneceflacp foz p
tofpende, thou Halte recepue the charges out of
the &pnges trealure boule, J kpnge Artarerfes
baue cOmaiided al the treafurers beponde p thas
ter, that loke what foeuct Cfdzasthe prceit and
fcribe, inthe late of the God of beauen, requp=
reth of pouthat pefulfpll thefamefpedelp, vn-
tyllan pundzcd talentes of fpluer, vntpll an bi-
b2ed quarters of wheat and tpl an biid2ed Wat:


thes of wpne, and tpll an bund20d% Wattbes of iire.bit.a


ee faltewpthout mealure. Uibatlocuer
alfo belongeth top lawe of f God of beauen, let
the fame bedone woptbout anp delap fo: f Houle
of the God of beauen,p be be not wath ayapnit
therealine,tagapnt the hpnee: €pyschpldzen.
Anbdwe certifpe pou : that pe Daue no autho
ritietovequyzetarpnge and cuftonic, epcarlye D
rentes pponanpe of theprecttcs, Leuptes , {pn-
gers, porters, Pethinims , andmintiers inthe
boule of bys God. Andthou Efdzas ( after the
goptedome of thy Gov, that is tn thp bande ) {et
tudges and arbitrers by mp authopitic, toiudge
all the peopletbat is beponde the water, cuenal
(uche aslinowe the lawe of thy God: and them
that knotwertnot:thofeletbatpeteache. And
whofocuer wpil not ful€pli the lat of thy God,
andthe kpnacslawe, lettebym baue bps tudge=
menfewptboutbelape, wherberit be puto death
02 tobe rooted out , oto be condempned ingon-

des:02 tobe putin pecfon,
).i, iced


o IOLE,


l


LECIDMAS, ;


x Wlefled be the Lorde God of our Fatherg,
fobičhbe fo hath infpircd the Bpnges herte,to gar
npe the boute of the Lozbde,thatts at Jerulale:
andbhathenclined bis mercp vntome in the p2e-
fence of the Bpnge bis counfaplers : and befoze
all the kpnaes ppe eltates. And Jwas chforted
ceuen as the bande of the Lozbe mp God was
pponme)andlo gathered ¥ the beades of Zlrael
togpther, that thep mpaht go bp with me.

The. vit. Chapter:
C The nombre of Chem Chat returned Ce Feralas
acs Dele ave the paincipall fathers of
bee, e tbem, e thisis thepz regitter that


and tize tcoze men.

DE the chpldzen of Webal,sacharp the fonne
of Webat,and with hpm epabt and tioentp nen.
Df the chpldzen of Afgan, Fobanan the fomne


of Pakatan, and with bym an bundzed and ten.


men. DE the chplozett of Adonicam, that we
the lat, whofe names are thefe: Clipbelet, Jez
biel Samaiah, and with them thee fcoze men.


the rulers,and to Joiarib and Elnathan, tobiche
were men of ynderftandpnge.and to thole ane
J commaundement : vnto Fdo the chefekk at
Calpbhta, that thep thulde fetche bs mpnpfters
Foz the bouie of our God,and F tolde them tbat
thep Hulde fape puto Jowo:and tobis baethzen
the Nethinims at Calphia. |

And (thozowe the qood bande of onr God
bpon Ys) thep brought vs a wpe man from a=
mong the chpldzen of Stools the fonne of Leni,
the onne of Ffrael:and Sarabta with bis Conne
and pis beetbzen,enen eyghtene. And dalabia,
and with bpm Fiat of the chplozen of WHerari,
with bis bzethzen, andtbeps fonnes twrntpe.


And of the Methinimg, whome Danid andthe
pens yane to minifter Dnto the Lenptes, two
bundzcb and swentye of Methintns, whiche all
Were named by name.


And even there at the water, belpde Abaua, =


Y proclamted a fai, that we mpgbt bumble our
felues befoze our God, and feke of bym a rpgbt
wape fo: b3,and foz our chpldzen and foz al our
{ubfaunce. fo? J was albamed to requyze of
the kpnge,fouldpours and bopfemen,to delpe va
araynt the enemp inthe wape: but toe lapd vn-
to the kpnge: Che bande of our God is vpon all


them that feke bpm in goodies, ¢ xc is vominton)
is Diolence and wath is agapnit all them that “


fozlake bpm. £o we fated, and befougbt our
noe ot ie fe ee eats:

ND J FOSE DUS | OF CDE Chere prealies:
arabia and Halabia,and ten oftheir beethze


* withtbem,¢ faped them the fpluer rolde and
vi weffels that were appopnted fo: the boule of our


God, whiche the Bpnge and bis counfaplers and
His lozdeg, all Jlrael that were there at pande


ad gpucntegyther. And Jwaped onto thep? œ


ande {pre bundzed and fpftp talentes of (pliner,
and intpluec befell an bundzed talentes, and ii
olde an bundzed talentes : twentpe baleng of
golde ofa thoulande peces and tivo cofflp ona:


the mentes,of good bzafie,as cleave as golde: anv y
. fapd onto them:Pe ate confecrate bute p Lode,


Ipke as the veflels are holp allo, and the golde €
fpluer are gpuen of a good wril vnto the Lozde
od of pour fathers. Watche pe,and kepe tt:foz
pe Hall wape it dotone befoze the chefe preaftes
and Leuites,€ serpents fathers of {lrael at Je-
rufalem tn the trealurpes of p bonle of the Loz.
Shen toke the peeattes and Leuptes the waped
fyluce and gold, and vellell to bzpnge it to Fee


tufalem, buto theboule of our God. And we -¢


beake vp, from the water of Abaua onthe tioel-
ueth dape of the fp? moneth, to go bnto Fern-
falem : and the bande of onr God was ps echt
and E oa vs from the bande of the encmpes
and of fuche aslapbde tvapte fo? bs bp the wape.
And we came to Jerufalem, and abode ther thze
bapes. nt on the fourth dape was the fpluct €
gole and befell weped in the boule of our God
ip the handot S)eremoth the fonne of Uria the
preat, e with bin was Eiemar plone of Bpi-
nebes, with them was Jolabad p lon of Felua,
g Roadia the fonne of wWenoi the'Lcuites. Accoz
ns tothe nombze ¢ wepabt of eneryp one, wag
the Wwepabt all heptten bpat thelametpme. -


And che chpldzen of the captiuite, which were gy


come out of prplon,offeed burntofirpnges wnto
the God of 3ltael, twrelue bullockes, foz all Fi-
racl,fyre and nputperammes, leuen and feuen-
tpe lambes,tioelucheqotes Foz alpnueofitpng,
all tothe burntofirpnge of the Lode. And thep
Deliuercd the Rpnges comiffion vnto the kpuges
offpcers, andtotbecaptapues that were onthis
fpoethe water. Andthep promoted the people
and the Doufe of God.
CTbe.ir.Chapter,
@ @fdzas complapacth on the people that bab tuts
ned chen Celucs from GoD ano marped wth tye


@rntples,
Cuber


i. CMS Folre,


ave thele thynies were done, theru- comaundementes , and makecontract pth the

| lers camtome,¢ laid: Che peopleot people of thefe abbomtnacions , wplte thou not

KA VG | Acacl,ethepreltegand Lenttes are then be zathat ve (and not witboutcaulerepl

SAVAY ge] tot Ceparated from the people ofthe we be vttcrlp cofumned, fop nothpngeremapne,

aehehoesdlandes(as touching their abomina: and tyll there benodelpucraunces © 1020 God

tions namelp, ofp Cananites,ethites,wbere of Hracll, thouartrpabteous, for we remayne

lites, Jebulites, Ammonites, Doabites,Egiptt: pet elcapedas itis tole bps dap. Webolde alio,

Dev. biia, ang, Amozites. x oz thep bane takë f dough - intbp peefence are we in ourtretpaties , and bp-
uD AA. ‘ters ofthefametotbemfelues,etothepzfonnes cauleofit mape wenot tande befoze the.


the bolp (ecd is mpred wpth the nacions inthe Ther. v,
lande, and the bande of the pone and rulers CTh peo eee os pe + put amepe
bath ben prncipall inthe tretpatte. chep? Beauige wpues


tietie xAND When bardethisfapeng, rent mp EFF “raf Nd when x Eas prayed after g
clothes and mp garment, and plucktoftbebeer Bese cs pathis maner, eknowledged, wepte, ienbitg
of mp beade, and of mp beerde, fat mournpng Ey fat lape befoze the boule of god, there
and there tefozted vnto me allfuche asfeared E S\ceforted vnto bpm outof Jirarlla


\, E
M


the wozdes of the Lozde God of Frael, bpcaufe if


of the trantgretfion off people of the captiuttic.
And J lat mournpnge yntpl cbe se pap
fice. Andaboute the euenpnge facrifice, Jarofe
vp fromppeupnes and rent mp clotbesand mp
rapment and tell Dpon mp kriees,and (pzede out
mp bandes bonto the Lozdemp God, andlapd.


% Wp God, Jamathamed,and dare not lpfte


DP Mpneepes Dntomp God: Foz oure wpcked-
neleg are qrowen oner oure Head, € our trelpas
ig wared greate bntothebeaucn. Spns f tyme


Se. DELP e Create congregacion of men
and Wome ¢ chyldzen:and the people wept verp
foze. And Sechanta f fonne of Jebicl one of the
chpldzen of Clam,anfwered:and fayd unto €f-
da8: We baue trefpatled agapnk our God, and
baue taken fraunge wpucsof the peopl: of the
lande. Potoe there ts hope pet tn F{racil concers
npng thpsthyng: Fo:now we wpll make aco:
uenaunt wptb oure God, and put awapcall the
wines (and fuchas are born of them accozding
to the counfaple of the 1 ozde:¢ we wl be tn the


me,rotit.» SF ouretathers, paue we bene ingreatetrelpale fare of the comaundemétes of our god, that we
it-pa.rpriib DNEO EDP Sdap, xand bpcaule of our wychednel> map do accozing to thelat. Get the vp:foz thig
a. FY feg baue we and our kpnges bene delpucted into inatterbeligeth vnto the:we allo wyl be wpth


3


Dea, boa,


tbe bande of the bpnges of the nacpons, into the
fwarde, intocaptinite, into tame, and into co-
fulton of face:as tt isto letbpsbape. |

And not ts there a lptle and lodapne araci-
oufnefle come from the Lozde oure Sodin caus
png fome of bs to efcape,and that he mape gine
bs a haple tn bps bolp place, and that oure Gov
mape lpghtourepes, and gqpue vga lptlelifeto
take bzeathin oure bondage. Fo: we are bond-
Hew, Tout God hath not foslaben vs in oure bi-
dage, and batbeenclincDmercpe ynto bs inthe
fpgbt of the kynaes of Parlia, to gpue vslpfe
to fet vp the boule of our God, andtoredzefle 5
defolation therof, and to gpue vg a wallin Ju-
Da and Ferulalem.

And Nowe oure God, what Hall toe faye af-
ter thps/stoz we baue Fozfakentbp commaiine:


_ menteg wbiche tbou bat cOmaunded bp thp ler-


uauntes the prophetes, fapenge: Thelande Vr-
towppcb pe goto pofeffe, it igan wneleanelãde
bpcaufeot the fplthpnefe ofthe people ofp lan-
des, whpehe wpth thepz abbominaciong baue
made it ful of Dnclénefle oncenerpelpde.x Ther-
fore Wal penot gine pour dougdters vntotheie
fonties , €thep2dougbters thall pe not take Dn-
topoutfonnes , no? [eke thepz peace and wealth
foz ener, that pe mape be ftronge and enfope the
goodintbelande,and that pe and pour chypldzen
po baue the enberitaunce of it foz enermoge.
nd after that all thele thpnees are come Y


D on vs(becaule of oure euel dedes, aud great trel:
pottea ehon our god bak then downe our wpe


ednefies , andbalke gpuen vga delpueraunce,


ow viae itis cometo pale thps bape.)


And piwe turne backs againe,tolet go thp


the:be of good comforte therfoze,and do it.


* Then arole Efozas:¢ toke an oth of p chefe 25
Prekes € Leuttes, of al Fleacl,thattiey puling HELF a


Bo accordpng to thps worwe:andthep (weare.
And Sldzas Code wp fro vefoze f houle of God
g went intotbe chabze of Jobanan the fonne of
Eliatth. And when becam thpther, be dpdeate
no bread, noz Dronke water, foz be mourned, bp
caule of the trantgreffion of thepeople that bad
beneincaptinite. And thep canfed a proclamact
on togothorzowoul Juda and Jerufalem, vnto
allthe chplozen wobpche bad bene in captinitic,
that th i gather themlelues togpeber vn
to Jerulalé. And that wholoeuer came not with
inthe elder an tonic thedeupce of the tu-
lersand elders, all bys fubftaunce Hulde be foz-
fapt and be Mulde be put foztp from the congres ,
gacion of thecaptiue.
Then al the men of Juba and Wen Jamin
gathered them lelues together nto Ferufalem
Yprbin the dapes, euen the twentye dape of
thenpntb moneth : andal tbe people fate in the
(trete befoze the boule of God, and trembled bp
cauleofthps matter, andfoztberayne. Anu
Eas the peat tode bp, and fapd vnto them


x Pe baue tranlgrelled, and baue taken ftraung Den, vita,
wpues,to make trefpaffe of Ifrael pet moze:ch= Iia.


feile nowe therfoze wnto the Lod Godot pour
fathers dopis PAH papah keg
fro the people EP lade, t feo the ftratige wpues.
Andal the congregacion anfwered, and fapd w
aloude voyce:it albe lo: te wpldo as ë ba
fapde. Wut the people are manp,g itis arapnpe
wether, and the people areto fapnte to tarpe
wptbout inthe Crete, nether ts me : wozrke =
Ñ, on


i. CMS Folre,


ave thele thynies were done, theru- comaundementes , and makecontract pth the

| lers camtome,¢ laid: Che peopleot people of thefe abbomtnacions , wplte thou not

KA VG | Acacl,ethepreltegand Lenttes are then be zathat ve (and not witboutcaulerepl

SAVAY ge] tot Ceparated from the people ofthe we be vttcrlp cofumned, fop nothpngeremapne,

aehehoesdlandes(as touching their abomina: and tyll there benodelpucraunces © 1020 God

tions namelp, ofp Cananites,ethites,wbere of Hracll, thouartrpabteous, for we remayne

lites, Jebulites, Ammonites, Doabites,Egiptt: pet elcapedas itis tole bps dap. Webolde alio,

Dev. biia, ang, Amozites. x oz thep bane takë f dough - intbp peefence are we in ourtretpaties , and bp-
uD AA. ‘ters ofthefametotbemfelues,etothepzfonnes cauleofit mape wenot tande befoze the.


the bolp (ecd is mpred wpth the nacions inthe Ther. v,
lande, and the bande of the pone and rulers CTh peo eee os pe + put amepe
bath ben prncipall inthe tretpatte. chep? Beauige wpues


tietie xAND When bardethisfapeng, rent mp EFF “raf Nd when x Eas prayed after g
clothes and mp garment, and plucktoftbebeer Bese cs pathis maner, eknowledged, wepte, ienbitg
of mp beade, and of mp beerde, fat mournpng Ey fat lape befoze the boule of god, there
and there tefozted vnto me allfuche asfeared E S\ceforted vnto bpm outof Jirarlla


\, E
M


the wozdes of the Lozde God of Frael, bpcaufe if


of the trantgretfion off people of the captiuttic.
And J lat mournpnge yntpl cbe se pap
fice. Andaboute the euenpnge facrifice, Jarofe
vp fromppeupnes and rent mp clotbesand mp
rapment and tell Dpon mp kriees,and (pzede out
mp bandes bonto the Lozdemp God, andlapd.


% Wp God, Jamathamed,and dare not lpfte


DP Mpneepes Dntomp God: Foz oure wpcked-
neleg are qrowen oner oure Head, € our trelpas
ig wared greate bntothebeaucn. Spns f tyme


Se. DELP e Create congregacion of men
and Wome ¢ chyldzen:and the people wept verp
foze. And Sechanta f fonne of Jebicl one of the
chpldzen of Clam,anfwered:and fayd unto €f-
da8: We baue trefpatled agapnk our God, and
baue taken fraunge wpucsof the peopl: of the
lande. Potoe there ts hope pet tn F{racil concers
npng thpsthyng: Fo:now we wpll make aco:
uenaunt wptb oure God, and put awapcall the
wines (and fuchas are born of them accozding
to the counfaple of the 1 ozde:¢ we wl be tn the


me,rotit.» SF ouretathers, paue we bene ingreatetrelpale fare of the comaundemétes of our god, that we
it-pa.rpriib DNEO EDP Sdap, xand bpcaule of our wychednel> map do accozing to thelat. Get the vp:foz thig
a. FY feg baue we and our kpnges bene delpucted into inatterbeligeth vnto the:we allo wyl be wpth


3


Dea, boa,


tbe bande of the bpnges of the nacpons, into the
fwarde, intocaptinite, into tame, and into co-
fulton of face:as tt isto letbpsbape. |

And not ts there a lptle and lodapne araci-
oufnefle come from the Lozde oure Sodin caus
png fome of bs to efcape,and that he mape gine
bs a haple tn bps bolp place, and that oure Gov
mape lpghtourepes, and gqpue vga lptlelifeto
take bzeathin oure bondage. Fo: we are bond-
Hew, Tout God hath not foslaben vs in oure bi-
dage, and batbeenclincDmercpe ynto bs inthe
fpgbt of the kynaes of Parlia, to gpue vslpfe
to fet vp the boule of our God, andtoredzefle 5
defolation therof, and to gpue vg a wallin Ju-
Da and Ferulalem.

And Nowe oure God, what Hall toe faye af-
ter thps/stoz we baue Fozfakentbp commaiine:


_ menteg wbiche tbou bat cOmaunded bp thp ler-


uauntes the prophetes, fapenge: Thelande Vr-
towppcb pe goto pofeffe, it igan wneleanelãde
bpcaufeot the fplthpnefe ofthe people ofp lan-
des, whpehe wpth thepz abbominaciong baue
made it ful of Dnclénefle oncenerpelpde.x Ther-
fore Wal penot gine pour dougdters vntotheie
fonties , €thep2dougbters thall pe not take Dn-
topoutfonnes , no? [eke thepz peace and wealth
foz ener, that pe mape be ftronge and enfope the
goodintbelande,and that pe and pour chypldzen
po baue the enberitaunce of it foz enermoge.
nd after that all thele thpnees are come Y


D on vs(becaule of oure euel dedes, aud great trel:
pottea ehon our god bak then downe our wpe


ednefies , andbalke gpuen vga delpueraunce,


ow viae itis cometo pale thps bape.)


And piwe turne backs againe,tolet go thp


the:be of good comforte therfoze,and do it.


* Then arole Efozas:¢ toke an oth of p chefe 25
Prekes € Leuttes, of al Fleacl,thattiey puling HELF a


Bo accordpng to thps worwe:andthep (weare.
And Sldzas Code wp fro vefoze f houle of God
g went intotbe chabze of Jobanan the fonne of
Eliatth. And when becam thpther, be dpdeate
no bread, noz Dronke water, foz be mourned, bp
caule of the trantgreffion of thepeople that bad
beneincaptinite. And thep canfed a proclamact
on togothorzowoul Juda and Jerufalem, vnto
allthe chplozen wobpche bad bene in captinitic,
that th i gather themlelues togpeber vn
to Jerulalé. And that wholoeuer came not with
inthe elder an tonic thedeupce of the tu-
lersand elders, all bys fubftaunce Hulde be foz-
fapt and be Mulde be put foztp from the congres ,
gacion of thecaptiue.
Then al the men of Juba and Wen Jamin
gathered them lelues together nto Ferufalem
Yprbin the dapes, euen the twentye dape of
thenpntb moneth : andal tbe people fate in the
(trete befoze the boule of God, and trembled bp
cauleofthps matter, andfoztberayne. Anu
Eas the peat tode bp, and fapd vnto them


x Pe baue tranlgrelled, and baue taken ftraung Den, vita,
wpues,to make trefpaffe of Ifrael pet moze:ch= Iia.


feile nowe therfoze wnto the Lod Godot pour
fathers dopis PAH papah keg
fro the people EP lade, t feo the ftratige wpues.
Andal the congregacion anfwered, and fapd w
aloude voyce:it albe lo: te wpldo as ë ba
fapde. Wut the people are manp,g itis arapnpe
wether, and the people areto fapnte to tarpe
wptbout inthe Crete, nether ts me : wozrke =
Ñ, on


| - WES, O
oeaan ee Earne Dootanoemertaei A OOE feconde Dookt oE ~~


all $ congregacpo,¢ letal them wbich baue takë


ftratiqe wpues in oue cepties- comeat p tymeap: acca ei booke

popa nan 2 the il (3 vo ve stoepe i
judges be w tbem, tpl tbep Daue turned p wz = |

of ae God away fro vs cocernpng thismater. C Gbe fpr Chapter.


© When were aypopnted Jonathan the Conne of
aebeuezaba ta tbe fonneof Chekua ouer this
matter: And BelullF¢ Habathat the Leuptes
Delpedthem. And the chpldzen of p captiuite dpd
eucnfo. And Eas the preat, the auncpent
peades thozot p poule of thep2 fathers, all men
of great fame, feparated them fclucs.¢ fat thers
dowone inthe fpztvape of the tenth moneth, to
exampn the matter.aAnd pntpll the ey pl of
the fp moneth thep were finitppng p bufpnes,
with allp men that bad taken ttraunge opus.
Andamong the colaen of the pzeaftes there
wcre men fotlde that had taken ftratige wpues,
namely among the chplozen of Jelua, the Lonne
of Joledec,and of bis bzethzen, Galiab,¢ Elie-
ser, Jarib,g Gedalia, € thep gane theyz bandeg
thereppon,that thep wolde put away thep2 wp
ucs,¢ foe the Aig hegpeeid es togpucarame
foathep2 trelpafle. po arrore ie chpldzen it
Emer, Honanp,andsabadia. Amonge eaer
dzen of Harim, Saalia, Elia, Semetab, Jebiel
and difia.Amonge the ee of Baur, Eli-
penai, Waafia, smacl,Methancl, Jolabad and
Elala. Amonge the Leuiteg, Folabad, Dimei g
elaia, (wbicpe lame is Balitbah) Patbabtab,
Au da € Eleazer. Among the fpngers,allo Clia-
ib-Bnd amonge the pozters,Helli,and Telem
=p and Uri. And of Aeacl. Amonge therpildzen of
Pharhos,Wemeta, Jeltah, Walebia, Miamin,
Elasar, Balchia g Baania. Amonge the chple
deen of Clam, Hathania, sacharp, Zebtel, 4D- tapne dapes, and fated and prayed befog
di, Jerimoth and Elia. Amonge the chpldzen of God ofheanen, and fapd: D Lozde God of pea- o-
satbu, Eltocnat, Eliafib, Dathant, Jerimoth, uen, thou great and terrpble God, *thou'that £rob.rr.e.
zabad and Jia. Amonge the chpldzen of 25e-
ba, Jebobanan, Aananta, sabat, and thalai. the and obferue thy cimaundementes: let thpne
Amonge the chpldzen of Went, Hellam, Ha- eareg berken, F belecbe the, and let thpne cares
luc, Adaiah, Zatub, Haal g Scene Ta A be open, that thou map™ beare the paper of thp
thecbplozen of the captapne B)oab, Adna, Cho oze the dape
lal, Benaia, Walia, Mathaina, Weseclel, We- andnygbt,for thechilozen of Ffrael thp feruati-
nutand G)anafle. monge the chplozen of Ha- teg and knowledge the (ynnesof the childzen of


E hemia butteter to kpnee Srtarettre
peapeth te God foz the people,


rim: Elieser, Jelia, Aalebra, Hemeta toem
on Benjamin, Datluch g Samaria. Amonge
ebe childzen of alum, athanat,Wathathap,
geben ere clet, Jerempe, B)anatle,¢ Hemet.
mong the childzen of Want: Madai Amram,
Hucl, Banca, C belubt, Wadatah,Ganiah, iHa-
remoth,¢ Elialib, Pathania, Dathanai, Jae-
fi, Bant, Benig Hemetah, Helemia, Rathan,
Foaia, Hachnadbdat, Salat, and Sarat, Ala-
tel, Selemiahu, g HSamariah, Sallum, Ama-
‘tia, and Jofeph. Amonge thechpldzenof Reba,
Jebi, Wathathia, sabad, sabina, Jadai, Joel,
and anaia. All thele had taken frraunge wp-
ucs. and among thefame,there were fome that
bad chpldien bp the wpues.


CThe ende of the fpak booke of
Eldzas.


=
>
at =
E
2
g
a
(=j
=
=
>:
D
ta
=
=
Ss
sabe mina


ue not kepte thp cOmaundementes, Matutes
and lawes, whiche thou commaundeddeft thp
{ernannt doles. J beleche the, call to remem-
baunce the wode that thou commaundeddelt
thy feruaunt Moles and fapdeft: Pe pl tranf-


grene, and + J wll {catre pou abode amonge De. proiit


thenacpons. wut pe pe turne puto me, and kepe
mp cOmaundementes, and do them: though pe
were caft out wnto P vttermoft parte ofbeanen,
pet wpll F abt ol pou Fed thence,¢ wpll bapnge
pou bntot eper tbat J baue cholen,to fet mp
name there. Thep are thp leruauntes and thp


people,whome thou hat oclpucred thozotwtbp ©


Great power in tby mpabty bande. D Lozde,
F beleche the, let thpne care perken tothe pare
A


| - WES, O
oeaan ee Earne Dootanoemertaei A OOE feconde Dookt oE ~~


all $ congregacpo,¢ letal them wbich baue takë


ftratiqe wpues in oue cepties- comeat p tymeap: acca ei booke

popa nan 2 the il (3 vo ve stoepe i
judges be w tbem, tpl tbep Daue turned p wz = |

of ae God away fro vs cocernpng thismater. C Gbe fpr Chapter.


© When were aypopnted Jonathan the Conne of
aebeuezaba ta tbe fonneof Chekua ouer this
matter: And BelullF¢ Habathat the Leuptes
Delpedthem. And the chpldzen of p captiuite dpd
eucnfo. And Eas the preat, the auncpent
peades thozot p poule of thep2 fathers, all men
of great fame, feparated them fclucs.¢ fat thers
dowone inthe fpztvape of the tenth moneth, to
exampn the matter.aAnd pntpll the ey pl of
the fp moneth thep were finitppng p bufpnes,
with allp men that bad taken ttraunge opus.
Andamong the colaen of the pzeaftes there
wcre men fotlde that had taken ftratige wpues,
namely among the chplozen of Jelua, the Lonne
of Joledec,and of bis bzethzen, Galiab,¢ Elie-
ser, Jarib,g Gedalia, € thep gane theyz bandeg
thereppon,that thep wolde put away thep2 wp
ucs,¢ foe the Aig hegpeeid es togpucarame
foathep2 trelpafle. po arrore ie chpldzen it
Emer, Honanp,andsabadia. Amonge eaer
dzen of Harim, Saalia, Elia, Semetab, Jebiel
and difia.Amonge the ee of Baur, Eli-
penai, Waafia, smacl,Methancl, Jolabad and
Elala. Amonge the Leuiteg, Folabad, Dimei g
elaia, (wbicpe lame is Balitbah) Patbabtab,
Au da € Eleazer. Among the fpngers,allo Clia-
ib-Bnd amonge the pozters,Helli,and Telem
=p and Uri. And of Aeacl. Amonge therpildzen of
Pharhos,Wemeta, Jeltah, Walebia, Miamin,
Elasar, Balchia g Baania. Amonge the chple
deen of Clam, Hathania, sacharp, Zebtel, 4D- tapne dapes, and fated and prayed befog
di, Jerimoth and Elia. Amonge the chpldzen of God ofheanen, and fapd: D Lozde God of pea- o-
satbu, Eltocnat, Eliafib, Dathant, Jerimoth, uen, thou great and terrpble God, *thou'that £rob.rr.e.
zabad and Jia. Amonge the chpldzen of 25e-
ba, Jebobanan, Aananta, sabat, and thalai. the and obferue thy cimaundementes: let thpne
Amonge the chpldzen of Went, Hellam, Ha- eareg berken, F belecbe the, and let thpne cares
luc, Adaiah, Zatub, Haal g Scene Ta A be open, that thou map™ beare the paper of thp
thecbplozen of the captapne B)oab, Adna, Cho oze the dape
lal, Benaia, Walia, Mathaina, Weseclel, We- andnygbt,for thechilozen of Ffrael thp feruati-
nutand G)anafle. monge the chplozen of Ha- teg and knowledge the (ynnesof the childzen of


E hemia butteter to kpnee Srtarettre
peapeth te God foz the people,


rim: Elieser, Jelia, Aalebra, Hemeta toem
on Benjamin, Datluch g Samaria. Amonge
ebe childzen of alum, athanat,Wathathap,
geben ere clet, Jerempe, B)anatle,¢ Hemet.
mong the childzen of Want: Madai Amram,
Hucl, Banca, C belubt, Wadatah,Ganiah, iHa-
remoth,¢ Elialib, Pathania, Dathanai, Jae-
fi, Bant, Benig Hemetah, Helemia, Rathan,
Foaia, Hachnadbdat, Salat, and Sarat, Ala-
tel, Selemiahu, g HSamariah, Sallum, Ama-
‘tia, and Jofeph. Amonge thechpldzenof Reba,
Jebi, Wathathia, sabad, sabina, Jadai, Joel,
and anaia. All thele had taken frraunge wp-
ucs. and among thefame,there were fome that
bad chpldien bp the wpues.


CThe ende of the fpak booke of
Eldzas.


=
>
at =
E
2
g
a
(=j
=
=
>:
D
ta
=
=
Ss
sabe mina


ue not kepte thp cOmaundementes, Matutes
and lawes, whiche thou commaundeddeft thp
{ernannt doles. J beleche the, call to remem-
baunce the wode that thou commaundeddelt
thy feruaunt Moles and fapdeft: Pe pl tranf-


grene, and + J wll {catre pou abode amonge De. proiit


thenacpons. wut pe pe turne puto me, and kepe
mp cOmaundementes, and do them: though pe
were caft out wnto P vttermoft parte ofbeanen,
pet wpll F abt ol pou Fed thence,¢ wpll bapnge
pou bntot eper tbat J baue cholen,to fet mp
name there. Thep are thp leruauntes and thp


people,whome thou hat oclpucred thozotwtbp ©


Great power in tby mpabty bande. D Lozde,
F beleche the, let thpne care perken tothe pare
A


bbe EMA al


ot thp feruaunt and to the paper of thp ferna-
tes , whole delpze ts to feare thp name, Elet thy
feruaunt profpere thys dape, and graunte ppn
meccp in thelpqbdtof tbps man, foz J Wwastpe
ipnaes buiteler. ` i

ärter pekema had obtapned letters of Attarartes,

be camie to gerolalem and buploed the walls.


T found; that inthe moneth* Ni-


=


a X DS fanin the twwentpetbpeare of king Ar-


arche.


. And it pleatedthe kyng tolende me, €.


p oY ea tararics,the wpne fode before bpm, ¢
Ce 4 toke Dp the wpne, eqaue tt vntothe
png. And F was heupe in his prelece. And the


kpngefapde punto me:tbp loket thou fo fablp 3


whe Part not lickesit ignotbhinge els,but that
arte beupe berted. Bhd J was foze afraped, and
fapd onto the kpnge, Godlanetbe kynges lyfe
Foz euer. Dote fyulde J not lobefadlp, whe the
citye and place of mp fatbersburtallipeth watt
andthe gates therof are confumed wpth fyre.
And the bynge apd wnto me:wobat ts the tbp re
Quet J made mp paper alfo te the God of hea=
uen,efapd bntot nh, he Sama eh ya
and pf thp fernaunte baue founde fauoure in thg
fyabt ,{endeme into Juda vnto the citye of mp

fathers burpall, that 3 mapebuplocte.

- Andthekpnge fapd bntome( the quenedps
wytelettpnge bp bpm ) how lige Mal thp tout=
nep cõtinue, and Loben wplt tou game bee

thim
atpine, andfapde vuto the kpng:pfit pleate the
kpng , let bpm gpue me letters totbecaptapnes
which are beponde the water, that thep map co-
uap me ouer, tyll Jcomeinto Juda : andletters
pnto Alaph the lozde of the bpnges wood , that
be mape gpue me tpntber to make beamestoz
gates of the palace (wbich ig berde be tbe boule)

gforthe wailesoftbecitpe, foz theboulep F

{hallentreinto. And tpe kpnge gaut me accor»

D ngo the bande of mp God, whpch was good

hon e. Bnd when F came fothecaptaines be:
ponde the water, Jqaue them che kpnges let
ters. TE SPEE apea i er
menw


ptbme. i
€  &anabalatalfo the Pozonpteand Tobia a


feruauntelthe Ammonite)pearde it, andit gre-
ncd tbem oze tbat there was come a mã whiche
fought the wealth of the chplbzé of Jfraell. and
Jcameto Jerufalem, and was there thre dapes,
g J gat me vp inthe night feafon, anda fe më
wptyme.neptbertolbe Janpe man, wpat God
pad gpuen me inmp bertetadoat Jerufalem : g
there was not one beat wpth me, faune it that 3
rode Dpon. And ¥Bodepartedinehenpadt bp the
pallepe port, befoze the dzaggon Welland to the
donge pozrte,andcon[pzed the toalles of Ferula:
lem howe tpep tere bzoken Downe and the poz-
tes thereof confumed with the fpze. And J went
puer vito the well porté ond to the Bpnges con:
dupte, g there Mas norowme foz the beat that
was pndermetopalie. Then went Fon in the
night bp the bzooke (pde, andcoltiered the wal,
and turned backe,and came bomeagapne bp the


D vallepe popte.


And the rulers Bnewpe not tobptber J twente


0: what Jdpd:nepther dpd Jaspet tellit nto
the Fewes,to the preftestotve noble men tothe
rulers, etothe other that labouredin Prone
Then fapde J wnto them :pefe the mplerye that
Weare tn, how Jerulalelpetb watt , Ehowethe
gates therofare brent with fpze:come therfoze ,
that we mape buplde vp the wall of Jerufalem,
that toe benomozea rebuke. And Zetolo them
of thebandeofmp God, (thatit was gractoule
oucrme )g the kpnges wozdes that be pad fpo»
ken Dnto me. Andthepfapd:let vs get yp, and
buplde:¢ thep Trengthed thep2 bande toqood.
Hut teen Sanabalat the Pozonite, g To-

bia the feruañt (an Ammontte,) and Gelem the
Arabian berde tt:thep laughed veto lcogne, and
mocked bs, andlapd:what is thystiat pe bor
Ui pllpe fallawapefrom the kpnger Chen an-
ftoered 3 them , andfapde: the God ef Heauen,
be tt istbat bathbgratited Ys peotperitic:and we
be bpsfernauntes. Let baget bp and buplde.

sto; pou,pe haue no porcron noe rygHe,noz res
inembzaunce in Jerufalem. |

EC Spe-tii.Chaprer.
Ce homebze efthemtbat papocothe wares.


iad Yee With bis bectbyen thepacettes and thep
aaa a\buploed the thepegate. hep repapred
baeit and {et vpthe dores of it: euen Duta


the men of Feticho. And belide bpm Sachur the
fonneofaAmit. But thefpithe porte dpd the
childzen of Sanaa buplde, which alfolapedtve
beames thereof feton the 002¢9,lockes and bar
res of it. And nert vuto him builded SHerimotd,
the fonne of Uria, the fonne of ipako3:andunexte
puto them buplded elulam the line of Wara-
chiathefonne of Belefabect: and nett Bnto pint
buploed sadoc the tone of Saana. And next vn=
tobimbuplded thep of Chekoa. wWutthe great
men that were amonge them, pnt nottbeps nec.
kes tothe wozke oftheir Lode.


be Dlve gate buploed Zehotada theforne 25


of Paleah,¢ Befuld the Conne of Welonia, thep
laped p beamestherof, ¢ fet onthe dozes, lockes
g barreg of it. Mert nto thé buylved Belattah
of Gibeon, € Jadon of Merano. me of Gibeon,
g of shilpa, where be that has captaine on this
(pde tbe water badamantion. Herte vuto bpm
buploded ciliel the fonne of Harbabiah the qolv-


(niith. Merte outobym alfobuplord Harnania _


the fonne cf Harakim, ethep repayzeb Ferufale
putotbebzode well. erte ontorhem Vaplocd
a apbatab the fone of Pur,thHe ruler of thehalfe


parte of Zerufalem. Mert vutohbpm buplded Fe C


pata thefonne of Harumaph overagapnuttehps
Honle:¢ nerte wuto bpm buploed patus thetine
of Halabnia. But B)elchia the fonne of artim
¢ Palub the fine of the captaine of <t)oab buyl-
bed the other pece, and the towzebelpoetbefo2-
naces. Perte vntobym buplded Sallumalpn-
gers fontie,the ruler of thebalfe parte of Zerula
ent,pe and bys doughters.


The wallep gate buplded panum, tbecite D


sing of sonoa. T pep buploed it, feton p dors,
Witi locke


k


wt Meh A


RTEA Eliafibtbebpepcattgatbymbp@ ~


thetowze Sea repapredthepit, and pnto thes Serer.
towze of Hataneei. Mere vito him alfebuilees 1s


|
|
|


bbe EMA al


ot thp feruaunt and to the paper of thp ferna-
tes , whole delpze ts to feare thp name, Elet thy
feruaunt profpere thys dape, and graunte ppn
meccp in thelpqbdtof tbps man, foz J Wwastpe
ipnaes buiteler. ` i

ärter pekema had obtapned letters of Attarartes,

be camie to gerolalem and buploed the walls.


T found; that inthe moneth* Ni-


=


a X DS fanin the twwentpetbpeare of king Ar-


arche.


. And it pleatedthe kyng tolende me, €.


p oY ea tararics,the wpne fode before bpm, ¢
Ce 4 toke Dp the wpne, eqaue tt vntothe
png. And F was heupe in his prelece. And the


kpngefapde punto me:tbp loket thou fo fablp 3


whe Part not lickesit ignotbhinge els,but that
arte beupe berted. Bhd J was foze afraped, and
fapd onto the kpnge, Godlanetbe kynges lyfe
Foz euer. Dote fyulde J not lobefadlp, whe the
citye and place of mp fatbersburtallipeth watt
andthe gates therof are confumed wpth fyre.
And the bynge apd wnto me:wobat ts the tbp re
Quet J made mp paper alfo te the God of hea=
uen,efapd bntot nh, he Sama eh ya
and pf thp fernaunte baue founde fauoure in thg
fyabt ,{endeme into Juda vnto the citye of mp

fathers burpall, that 3 mapebuplocte.

- Andthekpnge fapd bntome( the quenedps
wytelettpnge bp bpm ) how lige Mal thp tout=
nep cõtinue, and Loben wplt tou game bee

thim
atpine, andfapde vuto the kpng:pfit pleate the
kpng , let bpm gpue me letters totbecaptapnes
which are beponde the water, that thep map co-
uap me ouer, tyll Jcomeinto Juda : andletters
pnto Alaph the lozde of the bpnges wood , that
be mape gpue me tpntber to make beamestoz
gates of the palace (wbich ig berde be tbe boule)

gforthe wailesoftbecitpe, foz theboulep F

{hallentreinto. And tpe kpnge gaut me accor»

D ngo the bande of mp God, whpch was good

hon e. Bnd when F came fothecaptaines be:
ponde the water, Jqaue them che kpnges let
ters. TE SPEE apea i er
menw


ptbme. i
€  &anabalatalfo the Pozonpteand Tobia a


feruauntelthe Ammonite)pearde it, andit gre-
ncd tbem oze tbat there was come a mã whiche
fought the wealth of the chplbzé of Jfraell. and
Jcameto Jerufalem, and was there thre dapes,
g J gat me vp inthe night feafon, anda fe më
wptyme.neptbertolbe Janpe man, wpat God
pad gpuen me inmp bertetadoat Jerufalem : g
there was not one beat wpth me, faune it that 3
rode Dpon. And ¥Bodepartedinehenpadt bp the
pallepe port, befoze the dzaggon Welland to the
donge pozrte,andcon[pzed the toalles of Ferula:
lem howe tpep tere bzoken Downe and the poz-
tes thereof confumed with the fpze. And J went
puer vito the well porté ond to the Bpnges con:
dupte, g there Mas norowme foz the beat that
was pndermetopalie. Then went Fon in the
night bp the bzooke (pde, andcoltiered the wal,
and turned backe,and came bomeagapne bp the


D vallepe popte.


And the rulers Bnewpe not tobptber J twente


0: what Jdpd:nepther dpd Jaspet tellit nto
the Fewes,to the preftestotve noble men tothe
rulers, etothe other that labouredin Prone
Then fapde J wnto them :pefe the mplerye that
Weare tn, how Jerulalelpetb watt , Ehowethe
gates therofare brent with fpze:come therfoze ,
that we mape buplde vp the wall of Jerufalem,
that toe benomozea rebuke. And Zetolo them
of thebandeofmp God, (thatit was gractoule
oucrme )g the kpnges wozdes that be pad fpo»
ken Dnto me. Andthepfapd:let vs get yp, and
buplde:¢ thep Trengthed thep2 bande toqood.
Hut teen Sanabalat the Pozonite, g To-

bia the feruañt (an Ammontte,) and Gelem the
Arabian berde tt:thep laughed veto lcogne, and
mocked bs, andlapd:what is thystiat pe bor
Ui pllpe fallawapefrom the kpnger Chen an-
ftoered 3 them , andfapde: the God ef Heauen,
be tt istbat bathbgratited Ys peotperitic:and we
be bpsfernauntes. Let baget bp and buplde.

sto; pou,pe haue no porcron noe rygHe,noz res
inembzaunce in Jerufalem. |

EC Spe-tii.Chaprer.
Ce homebze efthemtbat papocothe wares.


iad Yee With bis bectbyen thepacettes and thep
aaa a\buploed the thepegate. hep repapred
baeit and {et vpthe dores of it: euen Duta


the men of Feticho. And belide bpm Sachur the
fonneofaAmit. But thefpithe porte dpd the
childzen of Sanaa buplde, which alfolapedtve
beames thereof feton the 002¢9,lockes and bar
res of it. And nert vuto him builded SHerimotd,
the fonne of Uria, the fonne of ipako3:andunexte
puto them buplded elulam the line of Wara-
chiathefonne of Belefabect: and nett Bnto pint
buploed sadoc the tone of Saana. And next vn=
tobimbuplded thep of Chekoa. wWutthe great
men that were amonge them, pnt nottbeps nec.
kes tothe wozke oftheir Lode.


be Dlve gate buploed Zehotada theforne 25


of Paleah,¢ Befuld the Conne of Welonia, thep
laped p beamestherof, ¢ fet onthe dozes, lockes
g barreg of it. Mert nto thé buylved Belattah
of Gibeon, € Jadon of Merano. me of Gibeon,
g of shilpa, where be that has captaine on this
(pde tbe water badamantion. Herte vuto bpm
buploded ciliel the fonne of Harbabiah the qolv-


(niith. Merte outobym alfobuplord Harnania _


the fonne cf Harakim, ethep repayzeb Ferufale
putotbebzode well. erte ontorhem Vaplocd
a apbatab the fone of Pur,thHe ruler of thehalfe


parte of Zerufalem. Mert vutohbpm buplded Fe C


pata thefonne of Harumaph overagapnuttehps
Honle:¢ nerte wuto bpm buploed patus thetine
of Halabnia. But B)elchia the fonne of artim
¢ Palub the fine of the captaine of <t)oab buyl-
bed the other pece, and the towzebelpoetbefo2-
naces. Perte vntobym buplded Sallumalpn-
gers fontie,the ruler of thebalfe parte of Zerula
ent,pe and bys doughters.


The wallep gate buplded panum, tbecite D


sing of sonoa. T pep buploed it, feton p dors,
Witi locke


k


wt Meh A


RTEA Eliafibtbebpepcattgatbymbp@ ~


thetowze Sea repapredthepit, and pnto thes Serer.
towze of Hataneei. Mere vito him alfebuilees 1s


|
|
|


See LUE,


‘Lockes ¢ barres therof,and a.&).cubptes on the
wall, onto the Donge porte. Wut the Donge post
buplded Helchtah the Lone of Rechab, the ruler


of the fourth parte of Wethcharem:herepapzed a


át, and fet on the dozeg,lockes € barres therof.
Wut the well gate repa lu t
Cbholbotab.the ruler of p fourth parte of Ahilya.
Jae buploed tt, and lapde the beameg and fet on
the does, locke? and barres tberof and the wall
nto the poole of Siloah, by the kinges garden,
and nto the ke that ge Dotone from the cp=
tie of Dauid. Ater ppt buplocd Mebemiah the
fonne of Albok : the ruler of the palfe parte of
Wethsur, pntpll the otherdpde over agapnet the
fepulchzes of Danid, and to the poole that was
repap2ed,and bnto the boule of the mpadtp.

È ter bym bupldtd the Leuptes, Repum the
fonne of Wani :and nert Ynto bpm buplded Pa-
fabia theruler of the balfe parte of Keilab inbis
quarter. After bym buplded their beethren:28a-
tiai the fonne of Denadad the ruler > balfe
parte of Hcilab:and.after him buploed Eser the

onne of Jelua the ruler of Silpa the other pere,
barde ouer agapnt the gopa. wp topbhouteot
the opdpnaunce that was inthe comer. agapte,
after bym brake fozth Baruch che line of sacpat
of indiqnactd, ¢repapzed the other pece from the
turnpnge cozner, bnto the Doze of the boule of
Clialib the ppe preat. And after bym allo bupl
ded Werimoth the Conrte of Urta the fone of Pa-
cos the other pece fri the doze of p Houle of Elia-
fib, euenas longe as the poule of Eltalib erten-
FE ded. After bpm buplded the pzeateg, the men of
A sid ne. After bpm buyplded Hen Jamin and
Palub ouer agapnitthep? boule, and after ppm
tought Alarta,the fonne of <)aalia,the onne
of Ananta,nert vuto bis boule. After bym alfo
buplded Wenni the fonne of Hanadand the other
pece from the boule of Asaria Dato the turnpug
of the wall and unto the comer.

Sfter bpm buploded Pala the fonne of Ulat,
oner agapntl the cogner æ the brgh towe, whirh
Iipetbout ouer from thekpngeg oufe, that wasg
belpde the courte of thep2plon. Biter bpm Ppe-
Bata the fone of Phathos (as forthe Netbinims
thep dwelt in the ronge bolbe buto the water-
- gate towarde the eall,t tothe towe that ipeth

out.) After bim bu peste te ay A Say
ece ouer anapun p Creat totoe, that Ipetho
Wane hafo tbe wall of the tronge polde.
- Wut fromaboue theborte gate ort buplded
~ the preattes, euerp one ouer ngaen bis boufe,
And afterthem buplsed sadok the Lorne of Im-
mer ouct agapnt pis Houle. After hpm bupided
alfo Semeta the fonne of Sechania the afi of


the caftgate. After bim buplved Banania p Cine
Of Sclemta,e Hanun the fonne of salaph p tyre
tie other pece. Andafter bpm buylocd Wefullã
the fon of Barachta over againkt “gen ae w
After pym buplded Walachia the golafmprbes
fonne, Ditpll the boule of the Acthinimg and of
themarchauntes ouevagapné the mate G)epb-
Had, ¢ to fhe parlour th the cogner.and bet wene
the parlour of p cogner vnto the Hepgate buyl-
ded the golotmiprbes ¢ the marchaustes.


ed Salli the fonne of S pra’


CThe.titt.€ t

{ PETE ha adams wi anb tet,
ut the #ctmcs bupibeit, bepng redpe barnelled,

Act thep? enempes Muloe inuade them.


| a A Po 1
REA wi fed H
ate ee


Day La veteri wall. he was weothinbym
ad Ea ylelic,¢ toke great indignacion, moca
Bedd RED the Jewes, ¢ fapd before big bze-
tizen and the fouldpours of Samaria: what do
thefe impotent Fewes ¢ wpll the beathen (ufkre
them- pall thep offrerthall tpep perfourme it in
one dape: thal they make p ones whole agapne
that are bought to dult ebzents And Cobi bp
Ammonite was belpde bpm, andfapd: Though
they buplde,pet pf a forego bp, be pall breake
Downe thep2 ony wall. eare (DP our God)
foz we are defpiled, turne their bame vp they
owne peade, and Cyne them oner into detppipng
in the lande.ofthep: captinitie. Coner not thepz
wpckednes,and let not thep2 (pnne be put out ts
tip pretence : foz they baue prouoked the buple
bers. And fo buplded we the wall git was iop=
ned hole togptber, puto the balfe bepigbt theraf.
Aud the people were mpuded to labour.


Gy Cit when Hanabalat berde that we F


And tt foztuned, that when Hanabalat,and B


Tobiah, ¢ the Srabians, Ammonites, e Afya-
bites berde that the walles of Jerufalem were
made vpe that the cappes began to be topped,
thep were terp wot! econ(piebal ogttert
come efyght agapnit Jerufalem, to make the
people an bynderaunce therin. Nenertheleile we
made our praper onto our God, fet Watchmen
bp them, vargi hag nme bap andnpabt ouer a=
gapni tbem. And Juda fapd:tbe frength of the
bearers ig to feble: and there is pet moche moze
moter, we are not able to buplde onthe wall.
And our aduerfarics fapd:thep pall not kinowe
neptber fe, tyll we come in the mpdodes amonge
theni,¢ flap them,and bpnbder the worke.2ut it
foztuned that when the Jewes( which divelt bes
{pde them )came,thep tolde bs as goodastentp
mes:that inal places tobere pe go bnto, they are


— ~


appoynted to fall upon bs. Therfoze fet Bebe ¢


eople aftcrthep2 kpnrebes toith chetrfiverdes,
peates, and bowes bpnethe in the lowe places
bebpnde the wall,and ¥lokeb,¢ gat me bp:and
fayd bnte the chefe men: to the rulers:andtothe


otber people, be not pe afrapbe of theut: + but iew.. p:
thpnke rather bpon p great Lozbe, which ought 20r


tobefeared, andfpgot foz pour beethzen, pour
Contes, pour Dougbters, pout wpues, and pour
houfes. Meuertbheles,it chaunced that when our
enempes Derde,that we bad gotten wode of it,
Sod brought they2 counfell to nought : and we
turned all agapne top wall: cuerp one vnto bis
labour. Jud feo that tyme forth tt came to patie
thatthe balfe parte of the ponge men dpdthe la-
bour and the otber balfe parte of then belde the
fpeares, tp lies, bowes, ¢ bzeftplates : and the
rulers ftode bebpnde all p boule of Juda, wwhiche
buplocd on the wall bare burthens from thole
that ladeb them. With one bande dpd euerp one
woke: and with the other belde his weapen.
AND enerp one that buylded, bad bis fwearde


gpzbde bp bis thpabd, and fo buplded thep. And -


the tettmpet blewme belpde me.
and


WW. Cideas
D And Alapd onto thepzincipalmé,totberu-
lers „and to tbe other people:the wozkets great
and large, and we ave feparated bpon the wall
one farcetrd an otber. Loken what place thers
-foze ye beare thenopte of the trumpet, reto
SFF € thpther wnto vs, xand oure God thall fpi


tlabourethat mapntapneth not thys wo2d:ené

thus be be pakë out, ¢ bopde. And all the coare-
gacion laid: Amen, prapled the Lod: And the

ja peopledpdfo. And from the time fogtbebat(the

io nge) commptted onto meto bea captapne of

trog them that werein the lande of Juda eve fro fre


Ds:and the tpl be labourpuge in the wopte.
Andthe balfe port of them pelde the fpeares fri
tbe mozningelpzinge:tplthe ftarcescam fozth.
Andat p fametpme fat J vntothe people:eut=
tpe one abpde with bps leruaunt at Jerufalem,
that inthe niqhtleaton we mape watch and la-
bour on the daptpme. As for me mp bzethzen,
mip Leruauntes and the men of the watch (Mbich
were Debpnde me) we put neuer of oureclotbes,
nomoze the the other dpo chep2 barnes laue one-
Ip becanfe of the water,

(Lhe people are bered tupth honger. fee requpeth

mot the [pupnge of a captapne,
peas there arofeagreate complapnt of
oy) “ea the people and of thep2 agues agraint
a focraSecthaen the gres.: ‘op tber were
Ecce (ome that fapd:our!
ters and Wwe are to manpe therfoze topli we take
coznefozthem,p we mapeeate andlpue. Some
alfo there were that fayd: lee be fet our landeg:
wpiepardes € bouleste pledge g take Dpcozne
inthe dearth. Wut lome there were p fatd:let vs
bozowe monep for the kpnges tribute: and that
bpon ourlandesand bynepardes. 2ebolde, our
bobdpes as the bodpes of our baethzen,¢ our chpl


Drenasthepzchplozen:elsthulde welubdue our


fonnes and daughters vnto bondage, and fome


of ourdaugbters arefubdued bntobondageal- fi


redp and no frength ig there in our Dandes, and
ofber men baue our landeg and vpnepardes.
And when F barde thep? complapnte gluche
wazdeg , it dilplealed me lore, and Zadutlealo
in ny ie bat Arebubed thecouncelers,and
p rulets, g {apd wntothem : Euerp one of pouis
tochatgeable nto Dis beother. And 3 brought


a Qreatecongreqacionagapn them, and fapde |


vnto them:we (after our abtlitie) banc boughte
our bretbzen the Jewess, which were (olde vnto


the beatben. And wyllpoutellpourbrethena- .


apn bntotbe beathe,after that thep baue bene
‘olde Dnto vsr Chen helde thep thep2 peace, and
coulde fynde notbpnge to antwere.

Aud Nehemia lapo: Fis aid bat pe
€ d0. Du gbt penot to walke in the feare of God,
becaule of the rebuke of the beatbentbhat are our
enemies: 3 and mp bzethzen,and mp feruauntes
Dolenvde them money and cogne:but as foz viurp
let vg leane tt. Cherfoze,this fame dap J prape
poule that perettoze them thep2 landes aqapne
thep2 vpnepardes, ople gardens and thep2 hous
feo, andrempt the bundzed part of the monep of
the cozne, wpne and ople that pe Daue wonne of
them. Chen fapde thep:we topll refto2e them a-
qapne, and wpll requyre nothpnge of them:and
wplldoas thou balk (poken. And Zcalled f pre-
fees, g toke an oth of them, cthatt pep Could defo.
And J Moke mp lappe, ¢lapde: God (hake ont
euetp man after the lame maner from bps boule


nnegand doughs —


eare bntothe.rrrii peace of kpnge Artbarer-
Flach alae me baet Elpucdnot
of fuch fubfaunceas was qyuentoacaptayne.
Fo: the olde captapnes p were before me, had
bene chargeable bnto the people, ¢ bad taken of
them bzeade and wpne; ¢.r1.fpcles of fpluer:pea

epe rerunntes naponi? cd p people, Sut
Lobpanot F, gtbatbecasleofthefeareof Gon.
Wut J labouredalfointve orie tpå the wal,
@bougbtnolande. Andall mp feruauntescame
thpther togetber vnto p wozke. Bozeoucr ther
were aemp fablean.€.and,l.ofthe Jewess € ru-
lerg, whicpeame unto me feoamong the bethez
thatarcaboute vs. And there was prepared foz
medaplpean ore.g (pre cholen thepe,¢ byrdes,F
cuer Ones in.t.dapes a great fumune of wpne.
AY requpze not 4 tbhelpupnae of a captapne fog
the bondage was greuous vnto the people.


* Tbinke vpon me mp God vntothe bell, accor t.cn.ven
Dpngetoaltthat J bauedone foz thpg propie., rb,


~ ` ETbe.vi.chaptee.
Tbe buplopnge is pet agapacyyavered and let,


i 1
kuwi


ar
i


¢ Selem bath lapde it that P tbe Juesthpnke
to rebel, foz tbe obeh caule P bupidet che wall
that P mapke be theyz bpnge in thelematterg, æ
me ozdepned the prophetes to preache of the at
etsfalem,aud to fape:ipe is kpnge of Juda.

And now Wal ths cometo the kpnges cares 93
come note thertoze,¢ let bs take our colicell to-
seeder. and Alene vntop m,fapeng, there is no


fuch thingedone as thou lapel: fo2 thou fapnel


them out of thpne owne berte, Jo: they twere all
mynded tomake bs afraped, fapeng:they Hall


Aopthdzawe thep2 bandes fro the wozte, that it


{hal not be fpnitped. Howbdeit, J Erengthed mp
Hande the moze. And {came tothe boule of r-


meia the Tonne of Dalata the fonne of Bebeta=
‘Deell,¢ be bad hut bpin felfe wythin,elapde:let


bs come together nto p poule of God,eué nto
P mpdbdes of Ptéple, qut p DOES ofp téple foz
thep wpl come to lap p:pea,eue in p npg pewpl

th,  tpep


they come to put the fo deth. And J fapd:fhulde
anp inche manag 4 Alper Wi bo is that bepngeas
4 am, that wpll qo into the temple, tolane bis
ipfe ¢ J rwpll nof go mM.
€ And | percepued, that God had not fente
ppm. Pet fpake be prophecpe vpon me,nenerthe-
iefic, Tobiah and Sanabalat had bpzed bim foz
monep.Cherfoze take be p money, that through
feare 4 (pulde fo do,and (pnne:thatthep mpghe
baue an eupll repozte of me, to blafpheme me.
Wp God thpnke thou bpon Tobiah ¢ Sana-
balat accozbpuge vnto thele thep2 wozkes,and
of the propbete soadta,¢ of the other prophetes
that wolde Daue put mein feare.
And the wall was fonplihed on the fpue and
twentp dap of che moneth Elul, in twos fpttye


dapes. Andwhenallour enempes verde therot, —


all § beathen that were about vs, were afvapde,
and their courage Fapled them. Aub thep percep:
ned, that gti areir- of our God. And at f
Came tyme were there manp of the chefe of Juda
tohofe letters went vnto Tobiah, agapn from
& obiah-onto them (fo2 there were many in Zu
ba, that were fwozne Dnto bpm, for de wast
fone in lawe of Sechanta, the Conne of Arab,
and bis Conne Febonathan had the doughter of
4) efullam, the fonne of Warachia,¢ thep pake
good of bpm befoze me:¢ tolde Dim my wozrdes)
and Tobiah Cent letters, to put me in feare.
The. vit. Chapter.

E Zier the wall ones buplocd: is the watch appepntes.
Dover that returned from the captiuite are nowmb;ed.
CE | Cwe when the wall was buploeb : F
WRAN banged on the dozes allo, and the poz=

hUa ters tpngers, ¢ Leuttes were appopn-
Seten, And J comaunded my b other Da:
nani and Banania the culer of the cafkell at Fe-
rufalem: foz be was afapehfull man, and feared
God moze then dpo many otber. And F fapd bn
tothent: let not the gates of Ferulalé be opened
pntpl the funne be whote. Jnd Whple thep were
ftandpng inthe watcbe,thep put the dores and
barred them. And we appopnted certapne ipte-
{png of Jerufalem, to be watche men, enerp one
| fokepe bis watche, and enerp one tobe ouer a=
gapnit bis boule. As foz the cptie, tt was large
ofrowme and great: but the people were fewe
therttt,and the boufeswercnotbuploed.
And mp God gaue me nmp herte,that Jas-
fhered tagitber the principal ment, ¢ the officers
and the people,to nombze them: and J foundea
demr ti.a reiter of the nombye of them xtobiche came vp
before out of the captiuite: and founde waptten
theritt : hele are the Connes of p lande that went
pp fro the captinite ofp carpenge awap (whom
Pabuchodonosoz the kpnge of Sabplon bad
brought awap) and came agapne to Jerulalé¢
Juda:euerp onewnto is citie. Thep which came
with sozobabel are thefe, Jelua, Qcbemta, Aa-
riab, Raamia, Mabamant, Bardochee, Bella,
SHetperath, Wegual,Nabum, and Waanah.
€  Thisisthe nombze of the men of p people of
4frael. Che childzen of Pharaos were. it. 4). an
Hundzed and two g feucnty.the chplbzen of Da-
phatiad,thee bundged ¢two g (euentp: the chpl-


i.€fozas,


tapne of @oab amonge the chpldzen of Felua €
Joab,tivo thoulande, epabt budzed € epgbtene:
the chpldzen of Glam,a thoulande, tive pundaed
and foure ¢fpftpe:the chpldecn of sathua,epabt
Hundjed and fpue and fogty: the chpldzen of 3a
chat, feuen bundzed and thze fcoze : the chpldzett
of Wanut,{pre bundzedand epaht and foztp.the
cbplozen of Sedat, fpre pundzed and epght and
twentp : the chylozen of Aigad, two thoufande
thze hundred and two and twenty : the chploeen
of Adonicam, {pre hundzed thee fcoze andfenen:
the chpldzé of Begoat,two thoulande thze [coze
and feuen : the chpldzen of Adin, {pre pund:ed
and fpue and fpftpe:the chplozen of ter of Hes
sehia,epabt andi


chplozen of Welat: ii. C. and.rxittt. the chplozens
of Hariph an bundzed and twelue: thecbpldzen


of Gibeon,npnepe and fpue:the men of Wethle .


Hen and Metbophab,an pundz2ed fourre fcoze and
epabt:tbe men of Snathorh.an hundred e epgbt
and twentpe : the men of Beth Afmaneth,two
and fourtye : the men of Hartath Jarim, Cephi=
rab and wWeeroth, leven hundzed g thze and fours
tpe : the men of Ramah and Geba, fprehundzed
and one and twentpe : the men of {4)tchinas, an
Hundzed and two and twentpe: the men of e-
theland Af, an hundzed and thre andtwentye:
the men of Acebo an hundzcd and tio and fpttp:
the chplozen of the otber Elam, a thoufand,two
bundzed and foure and fpftp:thechpldzen of a=
rim, thee bundzed and twentpe : the chplozen of
Fevicho,thze hundzed and fpue andfourtpe : tpe
chpldzen of Lopbadid and Dno, leuen Hund2ed
and one and twentp:the childzen of Sanaa,thzre
thoufande,npne bundzed and thp


pity,
She prealtes. Che chplozen of Jedatah of the œ


boule of Felua,npne bundzedand chee ¢feucntp:
the chpldzen of Jmmer,a thouland and two and
frftpe:the chplozen of jabatbur, a thoulahbd two


bundzed and feuen and fourtpe : the chpldzen cf


Parim, a thoufande and feuentene. |

The Levites-The chplozen of Felua of Cad:
miel, and of the chpldzen of Boduab, foure and
feuentpe. The (pngers: The chplozen of Alapd,
an bundzed andepabtand fourty. Che pozterg:
@bechplozen of Sallum, the chplozen of Ater,
oe chilozé of @almon,the childzen of Bcub : the
chplozen of Hatita,thechyldzen of Sobat,alto
aptderanbundzed andepabt andthpztp.

The Nethinims.'The childzen of siba, the chit
den of Halupba : the chplozen of Tebahoth, the
childzen of €eros:tbe childz€ of Sia, the cbilozen
of Phadon:the childzenof Lebanab:the children
of pagaba, the childzen of Salmat, che children
of anan-the chpldzen of Gidel : the chplozen of
Gaber:the chpldzen of Reata,the chtldzé of Re-

inebe chploacn of Mecoda : the chyldzen of Ga-

‘ant: the chplozen of Ufa : the chpld2en of Pha-=
fea, the chyldzen of wefat.the chtld2en of en-
nim, the cbplozen of Aepbullim, the chpldzen of
wBachuc, the chy Open be fear tapas Een
of Harbur, the chplozeno wWaslith,¢be chplozen
of SHebida, the chylozen of Harfa, the chplodzews
of 2Barcog,


{ nh ; i
The chtldzen of Halom.tit.C.and. ervi. the D


©


' Ce WEL we PUSHES


of Barcos,the chploeen of Sittera: the cbylbze Mande dpd berken wito it bpon the fpei Dap of
of Chamah, thechpldzen of Aesiab, the cyt thefenentbmoneth, andberedde therein, inthe
deenofHatipha. (trete that toad before the watergate (from the
tT pe cop ioro Mealomons ierann Ea mo:npnge vntpllthenoone Bape )befoze meng
chplozenof Dotai: thechplozen of So peretb, Women chat dpa harkentolt :andetbeeares of
thechplozen of @pcrida, the chpldzcn of Jaala, alltbe people toere inclpned Dntothe booke of
thechpldzen of Darcon, thechplozenof Grodel, thelawe. and Elzas thelcrpbe tode bport ar
the chplozen of Saphatiay,the chpldzen ofiga- bpepulppt of wood whiche thep bad made foz $
l tyll tbe chpldzé of Bochereth of sabaint,p chpl- preachpnge,and befpde bpm Lobe Wathathia,
| Den of Amon. All the Pethenims,andp chpl Sema, Ananta Thiab, Helbta, and sHaateta,
nen of Salomons (eruauntes, were thre hurr onbisrpgbt bande andon biglefte banoe kode
| Dyed, npnetpe and two. pidaia, tH) ilacl, Galchia, Palum, Halebada-
as And thele wie vy allo of Thel, Mela, Thel na sacchari, and @efulam. :
Harla, Cherub, Foon, ¢ Jmmer: but chep could And Efd2ag opened the boke beFozeall Ppeo 25
not (heme theps fathers boufe,nottheyztede,¢ | le,foz be Lode aboue all the people: And when
that thep were of Ffracl.ChechpldzenofMala Ye openedit, allthe people tode bp. Jnd Ef-
fap:the chpldzen of Thoota,and the chpldzen of Dzaspeapledthe Lozde the great @od.andall
Sechobs.tyre pundjee andtwoandtourtpe. tbe peopleanfwered: Amen, Amen, with thepe
And eh st chplozen ofPabpiab:the Dandes bp, and bowed them feluecs,and wo-
chplozen of Pacos,p chpldz¢ of Werlilai:which {pppped the Lozde,fallpnge Downe vpon there
toke one of the Doughters of eriilat the Guta faces tothe qrounve. And Fefua, Gaam, Sera
a bite to wpfe and was named after thep2 name. biah, Jamin, Scub,gcbatbhat, Hadala, Maas |
EheleCougbe they: wrirpnge inthe regptter of fia, Celita, saria, Jozabad, Yanan, Pelaia-¢
their gencracid, but thep tere not founde,tber- the Lcuptes caufedthe people fo gene bede bu
fore thep were put from the prethode. And pa to the latwe, and the people tobe in thep2 place.
thirfata fapDe nto tbem : that thep Mulde not Hud thep redinthe boke of thelawe of G od Dp:
cate ofthe moft bolp, tpll there came vp ap ref fipnetipe and plapnelp, fo that men bnderftode
whiche hulde were Cirtm and Cumin. the thyng that wasted. And Aecbemiahi which
And fo the ole congeegacpon togptber wag is Hathirlata and Eldrags the Peel andierpbe
two and fourtpztboulande, thacbundzed ¢ thze and the Leuptes that caufed the people to take
{coze, belpbes thepz feruauntes and mapoens, hede fapde vntoall the peovle:tiis dape ts Holp
of whom there Were. it.thouland, thze bidzed wnto the Lorde poure God:be not pou fozp,and
i and.rerbii. And thep bad two hundzcd ¢.rl vit. thepe not. Joz all tbe people wepte, ben thep
| fpnapnge men and wemen. Thep: boles, fenë bearde the wozrdes of tielawe.
| Hundzev and [preand thpatpe,and thep2 mules and be fapde buto them: * qo pour wap and £
pwo handed andfpue and fourtpe.Che camels eateof the fat, and Mynke the fwete, and LENDE tier trs
foure bundzed and fpueandthpetpe:fpre t bons Patt onto them alfotbat hbauenot prepared the
fande, (cuen pundzed and twentpe alles. felues : Foz this bape is bolp wnto our Lorde, be
a ©  Andcectapne of the auncpent fathers gaue not pe Cozy therfoze:foz the iope of the Logde ig
pntotbe worke. atbirlatha gaucto thetrca- pour frength. H And the Leuttes Milled al the
fureathoulande peces of golde, fpftpe baleng, People, and fapde: bolde pout peace, foz the dap
Epucbundzedand thpetpe prealtes qarmentes. isboly, vere not pe pout telues. Andall the pro
_ And Come of thechete fathers gaue vntop trea le went fhep2 wape to eate and Dapnke, andto
{ure ofp worke,tibentp thoufandepeces of gold ende parte nto ofier, An make great mp2
and two thouland andtwo pundzed pounde of becaute thep had yuderftandethe wozdes that
fpluer. And the other people gane twentp thou- were Declared dato them.
fande peces of golde, and two thoufand pounde And on the necte dape were gathered toge
of fplucr, and thze fcoze and feuen prealtes gar- ther thechefe fathers among all the pcopleand
mentes. andtbe preattes and Lenites,tbe poz- the peftesand Leuptes, vnto Clozasyp terpbe,
tergandthe (pngers and tbe otber of the people that thep mpg bt vnoertande the wozdes of the
and the Rethinms g all Frac, dwelt in thepz lawe. Andthey founde Wozpttcnin the lawe,
Citpes. And the Ceueuthmonethcame, and the +(wbicbe the Lozdebad commaunded bp S0-
chplpzen of Flcacl were in thepz cttpes. "7 fes)that the chplozenof Jiraci Houlde owel in ies stikt,
© The. ditt. Chapter. i bothes inthe Feat ofthe feuenth moneth, and P iiggarist
q emas gathereth together che peopte, reabeth to the tbep poulde caule it to bedeclarcd and porlap
thelamwm. Shep Eepe the feat of tabernacles o} bothes, med inall thep2 cltpes,and tho 20tvout tifa
a Eerie Morkalxthe people gathered them lem.faping:gofozth vnto the mownt, and fetch
Lemw.tiia. Woes fake felues together: agoneman,tntbe olpucbzaunches, pinebsaunches,mp2bratiches
aripa EAA trete that tas befozethe waters Palme beaunches andbzaunchegotthpeke tre:
wy ESP) W , yes, and beaunches ob thpcke tre
v boa ¥4 gate, and they fapybevntoEld2as tomate bothes,asttis wrptten
ISLS the ferpbe,that be Wulo fetcbexthe nd fo the people went forth and fet them, D
boke of the lawe of Wales, whicbep Lozdecõ- made thembotbhes,cuctpe one vpon theroofe of
maundedto qeacll. AndEldzasthe Pzeafe bis houle,and tn thep2 courtes, and tn the cours
‘bong he thelawsbefozetbecongregacpon both tes of the boufe of Sod, and inthe Rretebp the
ofmenand omen: andalltbatcoulde puder: svatergate,and inthe Frete bp alae a
420 And


à Seu.teei.t
, > titverpifia


 Fne-rbii,a


U,V,


- And alebe congreqacion of them that were com
agapne out of captiuptte made bothes, and late
wnder the bothes:fo2 (png the tpme of Jolua the
fonne of Run Dito thpsdape, badnot thecbpl-
dé of Flraeldone lo, and there was verp great
gladnefle. And cuetp dapefrom thetprite dape
vito the laft, red Efdzas inthe boke of the law
of God. And feuen dapesbelvethep thefeatte,t
on the epabte Dape thep gathered together, ac-
cordpuge onto themaner.

; , Sie a Pant ep: Mraunge wears LE
apai the benctetes of God, repe (pns of $ people.
aagi 2 the.rriiii. bay of this moneth came the
Lervig WA pia of Flfracl together agapne with
Sfalbiti, Ae *faftpng fakclothes.and earth bpon th
and thep that were of the fede of Jlrael were fes
perated, From all the fraunge danei g tode
and knowledged thep2 fpnneg and the Wpcked-
neiles of thep2 Fathers and Mode pp in the place
and redin the boke of the lawe of the Lozdtbetr
Sod four tpmes on the dape, and thep knotole-
ged and woztbpppedthe Lo2de thep2 God four
tpmes on ne dap. And the Leuites tode on bpe
namelp Jelua, Bant,Cadmiel, Sabaniah, u
ni, Hareblab, Want and Canant, æ crped loude
wnto the Lozbde thep2e God. And the Leuptes,
Feluaand Cadimel Wani and Halabnia, Se-
rebia and Podla, Sebania ¢ Pbathabia laypode:
{tande bp, and praple the Logbe poure 60d fo
eucr:and let thankes be geuen bnto thenameo
thy glozy, whtche ercelleth all thankefgeupnge
and pzaple. Chou atte Lozde alone. Chou bat
made eauen, and the heauen ofall Heauens,
wytbhall thep2 Poolte, the earthe: andall thpn:
ges tbatare therein, the (ee andall that ts ther-
Ia nò thou pael feruc z asko all, and the Hooke
f Heuenworlbyppeth the. :
©  “Chouarte the Lorde Good, that baft choten
gene. ria, SULA, ard broughtek him out ofin Chal
oq DeA:t and calleddelt bpm Abzabam, and foun-
Delf bis bert faprhfull before the xand madeta
couenaunt withbpm, to gene onto bps fede the
lande of the Cananttes , etbites , Amozptes,
Pberelites , Jcbulites and Gerfites, and pate
made qood thp to2des : foz thou arte rpabta-
oug. xand balte confpbered the mplerp of our fa
thers in €gypt,and bearde thepzcomplapnt b
therebdice, and (heed tokens and woders vy
pPbarao,and on all bisferuauntes,and onalthe
people of bys lande: fo: thou knewett that thep
were peelumteous and cruclagapnt them,and
fo madeft thou the aname, ag tt ig tbps dape.
And the red {ee dpddek thou denpde infondze be
foze them , fo that thep went thozowe the mpd=
- Des of the fee dzpe Hodde: and thep2 perlecuters
thzetoell thouin tothe depe (asa ftone) in the
mpabtpe waters : and leadett them onthe dape
tyme Wpth acloudpe ppller, andon the nyabte
feafon tn a pylier of fpze to hewethemlpabt in
the wape that thep wente. |
*Thoucamet Downe alfo ppon mount Hi-
hat,and {paketit ynto them from euen, and ga
uel them rpghe iudgementes, truclawes,qood


5 EnG, rb.b


Eroii Dd,


Eio, Fip ile


Commaundementes and Matutes anddeclarca:


aD,


Deft onto themtbp bolp Sabboth, ecommaun

dedit them preceptes, ozdpnaunces and lawes,

bp the bande of Holes thy (eruaunte: andxqa= CFD
Deft them bacade from denen, when thep were.
Dungrpe, and+bzougbtelt forth water foz them sero.rv1i.
oute of the rocke, vben thep were thpzEpe: and 24. Trob,
p2ompledtt them that thep Hulde goin, etake
pofleffpon of thelande:ouer wbich thou haddelt

lpfte bp thpne bande Foz to cene them.

Wut thep and our fathers were proudeand
Berdened:lo that they foloteed not typ cOmaun:
Demetites : and wolde not obepe, nepther were
mpnbdefullof tbe wonders that thou dpdett foz
them:but became obftpnate ebeadpe, infomuch
toai roti tourned backe to theprebondace foz
thepzdifobedpence. Andthou mp Godforga<
uet and wak gracpous,metcpful,pacpent and
of greate goodnele, and forfokett not them.

x And though tbep madea molten calfe(€ fap tro.rrriis
Tbig is tbp Gods that bought che oute of the


lande of @gppte)and dpd grcate blalphempes,
pet foal bu them notin the ine a
accozdpnig to thp great mercp.* and rbeclonop So-rHt.t.


ppller depatted not from them onthe dap tyme: bcopa-pa
toleade them the wape, nether the ppller of fpze

in the npabt feafon, to Gewe them the lyghe im

the wape tbat thep went. ;

_ Andthou gauek them the good {ppayteto D
enfourme them,*¢ Withbelbeftnottbp anna EFPL,
from thep2 mouth,*and waue thé water when eae
thep there thp2iy.sfourtpe peres longe madet TIE
thou p2ouilpon foz them in the wpldernefle,fo p
they lacked notbyng:*tbepz clothes toared not neu. wiit.v.
olde, and thepzfetetwellednot. And thou ga- Fira
uct them kpngdomes and nacpons,and parted
deft them accozdpuge to thep2 pozcpons:to that
thep pollefledxthelande of Sehbonkyng of pes Bam.rr.t
febon: and the lande of Dg the kpna of Lalan.
Anbdtbhep2 chpldzen multiplpeddeft thouas the .
farveg of beauen,and beoughtelt theminto the
lande: toberof thou haddef {poken unto thepz
fatbers, that thep pulde go intoit, anv baue it
in poffefpon.

And the chplozen went in, and poffeffed the €
lande, xand thon fubduedelt befoze them the in Iota. titi
babpterg ofthe lande, euen the Cananites : ang *
Gauch them into thep2 bandes with thep: kpi
ges and the people ofthe lande that chep might
Do with them What they wolde. And thep wan
thep2 Gronge citpes anda Fat lande, æ toke pof-
fefipon of boufes, that were full ofall maner of
qoobes: welles Dpgged out, vpnepardes, oples
gatbens,and manip fruteful treeg and thep dia
cate,and were fplled:and became fat,and lpued
in welth thozow thp great qoodnes. Qeuerthe
lele thep were difobedpent,¢rebelled agapnite
the and cal tby lawe bebpnd thep: backes and


* Aue thp prophetes whycherbozted them car qire.rip.p 2


netlp tbat thep mpgbhe bapng them aga
tothe)anddpd stents bla ‘Ay Maan @ ecane
thou qauett them oter into tbe bande of tbepze
ie Arrietan other troubl
Andinthetpme of thep2 trouble hep
coped Unico the: thou beret them frou maa
and thozow thp great mercy thou qauelt them
faupourd


WC. ——— SUOL ETT


fanpotrs tobich helped them out of the bande of


z —p


iE, r a p e a
$ ee ae
Le]
The
realy


chplbzen of pencdbaband Cadmiel. And thep?
brethzen Dechanta, Podia, Celita clata:Ba


nait, Picha , Rehob, and Jafabiah, Srachur,
Heredia, Dabania, Hodia, Bani and wWentuu:
The heedes of the people were, Whares the

captapne of Moab, Elam,sathu ¢ Want Woni
Aigad, Gebai, Joonia, Wegoai, Adin, Ater,
Hesekia, Ainur Hodia, Halum,Welat, Bariy, A-
nathoth and Nebat, Wagphiag, Nefulam, Pe
Se Rr Sabri panor JEA Ppiatin pana
Anania, Polea Hanania, Batub, Halobes, pba
lea, Dobek, Repum, Patebna, WHaafia, Abia.
Aananand Znan, Dalluch, Parim Baana.

ana me otber people,the zefes, Leuptes, 25

osters,tpngers, Methinims,andall thep chat
bap feperated them (clues frome the peopleinp
landes Dito the lawe of God, wpth thep2 wp-
ueg thepzefonnes and thepze Dougbters andas


p manpagconlde bndertanbe and their logdes P


Dad rule of them.recepuedtt foz thep2 bzethë,
* And tbep came tofiweare and to bpnde thé Fo.rersitte


{clues w an oth to walke in Gods lawe, wbtche Pare


Was geuen bp Woles the feruaunt of God: and
that thep wolde obferucand de accozdpnee vu-
foalltbecommaundementes,tudgementesand
Matutes of the Lorde oure God: x and that we Drt-tia
Wolbe wot geue our Doughters onto the a
tntbe lande,neither to take aid, bougbters fos
foare on the Saboth and all maner of bptaplcs |
tofell,that the wolde not take it of them on the
Sabboth and onthe bolp dapes: xand that we xent.rrv.a
wolde ae hiu perebetree concernpnge PrF
âllmancrof charce. -

And toe decreed a Matute bpononr feluesto
gene perelpthetbpzrde parte of alycleto theni-
niftracpon tt the poule of our:50D, tothe thew
bzecd, tothe daplp meateoferpne, to the daply
burntofetpnge of the Sabborthes, of the newe
moones and feakdapes and tothe thpnges that
were lanctifped and to the offtpnaes of attone
ment toreconfple Flracl withall, andto all the
bulpnelle in the poule of our God.

bud woe cat the Lotte amongethe pretes, Le D
uptesand thepcople, fozoffrpng af the wood to.
be brought Ynte the boule of oure God fra pere
to pere: atter the houles of oure fathers: that it
mygbt be beent attymes appopnted, bpon the
aulter of the Lozde God, asit te Waptteninthe
lawe:and to bepng the fp2fElpnees of out lande
and the fpgtelpnees of onre frutes of alltrecs:
pue bp pere wntothe boule of the 202d: andthe

pettipnges of our Contes, and of our cattell,as
itis waptten tn the lawe andthe fy2ftlinges of
oue oren and of our no gf a we Huld bring
to the boule of our God, bnto the Weekes that
minp er tn the boufe of cure God:and that we
fulde bzpng the fyzflpnges of our dough and
oure beueofierpnge, and thefrutes of all maner
of trees, of bpne alfo and of ople, wnto the W2e-
ies, to the cheltes of toe Boule of ous God. And
the tpt bes of our lande nto the Leuitegsthat p
Leuites meade Daue the tptbesin all thecttpes
of our mintitracpon. And the Weft the fonne of
Baron Hall with the Leuptes, haue allo of the
tpthesot the Leuptes, fo that the Leuptes hal
hepnge vp the tythes of thepre tythes sii ve
oufe


25


(AELA Feb


ç
f. para. p.b


CIDAS,


poufe of our God,to the Lore boules andto the
treature boules, 02 thecbpldzen of Ffracl and
the chplozen of Leuy pal bzpng vp the beue of-
ferpnges of the cogne , wpne and ople wnto the
froze houtes, there ag arc the velels of the fans
ctuarpe: and the prealtes tb enunyfter,and the
portersandlingers,p we fozlake not the boufe
of oure God.

Cheri. Chapter


Yoho Dwelied in Ferutalem after # was bupioed,
" giip who in thccitpes of supa.
gæs MD the rulers ofthe people dweltat
RST Ayeey Jerulalem : The other people allo
SFA ical lottes,p amonge ten,one parte
M (hulbe goto Jerufalem meot epo:
ie sb Slip citpe to Dwel,and npne partes to
be the Cutpes: andthe people thanked allthe
men that were wplipnge to dwel at Zerulalem.
hele arethe bedes of che lande that dwelt
in Ferulalem and inthe Ciepes of Juda, eucrye
one in pis poffeffpon, and in they? citpes:tbep of
‘iracl tbe pactes Lenien Ar Diana ge
chpldzen of SSalomonsleruauntes. And at Fe-
cufalcm dwelt certapne of thechplozen of Juda
and WHenJamin.

Dé the chplozen of Juda: Athaiab thefonne
oftia tbe fonne of sachatt,tbe fonne of Ama-
ria,thefonne of Saphatia,the foune of ane
laleel:the chpldzen of Coat coal eHaalia the
fonne of Waruch,the fonne of Chal Hole, fone
of Halaia,thefonne of Adata,tye lone ot Jola-
cib. rhe fonne of sacbary,tbe fonne of Stlonp.
Blithefe were f chpldzen of Phares that dwelt
at Jerufalem, cuen foure bundzcdthzelcoze and
cpabt baleauntemen. -

Theleare the childzen of Wen Jamin, Salu
the foune of Betullam,the fonne of Focv,p fon
of Dedala, tbe Conne of Calata,thelonne o ipa
fia the Connie of Jtbicl the fonne of flat.andaf
ter bpm Gabai Selai npne hundzed and-rrvitt
Bnd Joel the fonne of sichat had the ouerlpghte
of them: and Juda the fon of Socnua Was nerte
uct the cite. yet

x Fthe peites: Jedatab the Conne of Zota-
rib, Zachin, Saratahthefonne of elbia:p fon
of d)cfullam, the fonne of sadoc,thefon of We-
taioth, thefonne of Abitob, was P2pnce inthe
houle of God: and bps bzetbzë that perfourmed
the wozkein rhe temple. vit. HundzedD and. crit.


i


ofsabdithefonne of Alapb: was the pzpneipal
to begpnne the thankelgeuing and praper. Ano
Wakbukia the feconde amonge Dig beethzen, €
Abda, the forine of Sammua, the fonne of Ga-
lal,thefonne of Zeduthbum. AlitheLeuptes in
the bolp citpe Were two opel foure froze and
foure. x And the porters Acub
thepze baetbzen that kepte the portes, were an
Dundzed and two and feuentpe. As fo the refp>
Due of Ffraell, the Pzealtes aud Leuptes , thep
were in all the citpes of Juda, euerpe one tndps
inberptautice. )
And the Methinims dioelte in Dphel-andst:
ba and Gifpa was let ouer p Nethinims. abe
ouerfear of the Leuites at Jerulalem was Cit,
the Conne of Haani, the Tonne of Aalabi, plone
Ere
fthecbpldzen of Alaph there were (png
aboute the bufpneffein the boule of Boe. »
wasthekpngescommaundement concernpnge
them: that the lpngers thoulve dealefapthtullp
euerp dape as wagaccodpnge. —.

_ And Pathaia the onne of Welababel of Ë
chpldzen of serab the fone of Juda nert Phpnge
tn all mattersconcernpng the people:and theps
vpllages and landeg. And fome of the chplozen
of Juda that were without the townes of their
lande Divelt at Rariath Arbe and inthe vplia-
ges therof:at Didon, and inthe vpllages thera
of: and at Jezabel, and inthe vpllages thereok:
at Jelua, WHoladab, Wethphalet in f towne of
sual, Deerleba,and in tiep: vpllages:at Dis
kelag ¢ Soconap, andthep2 vpllages :andat
Enremon, sarah, Jerimoth, sonoa, Ddoellam,
andinthep2 bpllages:at Lachis and tn pfeloes
therof:at Cka and mthe vpllages therof:and
thep dwelt fr Werlabe vnto f valep of Hinnd

be chplozenalfo of Wen Jamin, of Geba,
deltat Dachmas, Ata, Wetbel, andin thepz
prllages. And at Anothorh, Rob, Ananjah,
Paso, Ramah, GetPaim, Hadid, seboim, Ra-
aie Lasse Soba hs

. u ad polletipon botpe in Jud
sab tit en Jamin. P p Juda,
CThe.rit. Chapter.

Zhe prates an | ‘ten
Sofestauatwaretowbicoaas wate states


And Bodata thefonne of Ferobam ; the fonne of ae | te


alaliel, the fonne ot Ami the fon, of sachart,
thefonne of Phapur, the lone of MHalchta : and
bis bzethzenchefe amongetbe fathers. two bun
p2ed and two and fourtpe. And Amafat the fon
of Asrael,the fonne of Ahalai,the fone of <t)o-


felemoth,tbelonne of Fmuner:andhis brethren Ip


were baleaunt men: an bundgedandepabrand
tmentpe. and thep2 ouerfear wag zabdiela fon
ofoneoftbhe great men. |

x Df the Leuptes: Semeia tbe fone of Ha-
fub the fonne of Alerikam, the fone of Halabia
the fonne of Gunni, and Sabathat, and. olfa-
bad ot the chefe of p Leniteg bad the oucelpgoe
of the outwoarde bufpneffe of the boule of 60D.:
nbd Hathaniabn the fonne ot Picha, the line


mong the peeltes:and thep2 brethzen inp dape:
Fhe Lent hee x E bapes


Eliaftb: and Elialtb berat Jotada: Joiada be-
gatgonathan:and Jonathan begat eshiaas
the


and Talm and rpari


3
r


i.Cldas.


the bapes of Joakim were thele f chefe fathers
amonge the preltes: vnder Sararia,ararta,
prder Feremp, Hanania, bunder Efdzas,qpetul
la, ynder Amaria, Jeboana: onder Milico, J0-
natban: Dunder Sebania, Joleph: vnder Harim
Adua: Ynder Haratoth, etl :Duber JODO,
sacbati: wunder Genthon, <)efullam: under A-
bia sichi: onder Winiamin, and SHoadia, Pil-
tat: Dnder Welga, Samua: ver Semeia, Je-
ponathã:vnder Joiarib, Pethanat: under Ja-
dala, Ult: wnder Delai Relai:bnder Amok, E-
bet: bnder Helchia, Halabia:vnderJadaia, Na
theanael. And in p tpme of Elialib, Joiada, Job


45 nan and Jadua, were the chefe fathers amonge


the Leuttes and the pzeaftes witten wnder the
rapgue of Darius the Perlian. Che chplozen of
Leui, the principal fathers were Wzptten in the
Chzonpcles wutothe tpme of Jonathan the fon
of Clialib. And thele were the chefe amonge the
Leuptes:Halabia, Serebia, and Jelua thefon
of Cadmiel, and theps beetbzeninthepe prelece
to gene p2aple and thankes, accozbpng as Da-
nupodtbe man of God dad ozdepned it, one thatch
ouer agapnike another ‘@atbania, mMalbubia,
Mbadia, Pefullam, Talon and Abub were
poters tn the watche at the thzeltholdes of the
gates. Chele were inthe dapes of Joakim r
tonne of Jelua , the fonne of voteDét.and intbe
bapes of Mebemia the captapne,and of p preal
Elidas tbe Scrpbe. |
Andin the dedicacion of the wall at Jerula
lem:thep fought the Leuttes out of alltbep2 pla
ceg, thattbep mpght be brought to Jerulaleto
kepe the dedtcacyon g gladnefie, pth thankel-

; geupnges and (pnapng with cpmbales, plalte-
rpes and barpes. And the chplozen of p(pngers

gathered them {elues together from an pde
out of the plapne countrep about Jerufale,and
from the bpllages of Metopbatht, fro the boule
of ileal, and out of the contties of Geba,and
Almaucth , fo? thetpngers had bupldedthepm
ppllages rounde about Jerufalem. And p prea:
{Fes and Leuptes Were purifped and clentea the
people:and the qates.and the wall,


And J brought the przpnces of Juba Dp dpon f y Ae ea
the wall, and appopnted two agreate queregof |


mento gene thankes, whiche went ontherpabt
bande of the wall totwarde the donge gate, and
after them went Hofata, and balfe of the p?


pii-
ces of guda,and J faria, Eas:ano Wefullam


balfe parte of the popli bponthe wal, beponde
thefomace gate Dnto the beode wall,¢ beponde
the pote of Ephzain, and bepond the olde gate
beponde the fpibeqate, and the tower of Pana-
necl,and the totver of Wea, ontpl the hepgate
And they kode Fpl in the p2pfon gate, elo ode
the twoqueres (of them that qaue thankes) in
the boule of god: and FJ, andthe halfe of the rtu
lers With me, and the peeftes, namelp Eliakim
Haalita, Miniamin, ichaia, Elioenti,sacha
rp,and Hanania: wpth trompettes, and Mai-
fia, Cemetabh, Elealar, Ufi, Jebobanan, Hel-
chiap,€lam, and Ser. And the fpngers fange
loude.baupng Feltabtab foz thep2 auerfear.

Andthe lame dape thep ofred greate facrp=
fpcesanbd refopced : fo2 Godhadde qeuen tben
great gladnelic, fo that both the wpues g chpl-
dzen were topfull: andébempzth of Ferulalens
was bearde farre of .


Joli,


At the fametpme were there menappópnted &


ouer the trealure houfles( wherin were the heuc:
offtpnges:thefp2flpnges, andthe tpthes that
thep hulde gather them out of the feldes about
thecitpes.to deitrpbute them onto the pears
and Leuptes,accozdpngeto the lawe: fo: Juda
thas glad of the preltes and Leuptes, that thep
ftode and Wwapted vpon the offpce oftbep2 God
whichisa pure ofpce. And the fpngers and poz
ters tote after thecommaundement of Daupd


and of Salomon pis Conne, * foz tn the tpnre of i partita


Wautdand Alaph were the chefe (pngers four
ded, and thelonges of p2aple g thankelqeupne
pntoGod. Jn the tpme ofsozobabel, and fea
bemiah dpdall thep of Flracll, gene pozcpong


vito the (pngers and porters, cuerpe dape bpe .


popon, and thep qgaue tpthes nto the Leup-
tes andthe Leuptes auc tpthesagapne punto
thecpbhldzen of Xaron .

© Cie. xttt.chapter.


CThelaweisred,and when thep hance herde re
feperate from them all draungers, ec,


eg MD Chat dape dpd thep reade te the
OCP NES boke of Woles and the people har-


Juda, Wen Jamin, Semia g Jeremp:gcertapn Now when


of the pzeltes chpldzen wpth trompets, namelp
zachar tpetonnao Jonathan, the fone of De-
ahg tee on of SHatbanta, the Con of Wirbaia
the fonne of sacur,thefonof Afaph and bis bee:
thaen, Semeia, Alarael, Balalat,Gilalat,Qa
at, Pathanael,and Juda Hanani, with Pinus
fpcalinitcumentes of Daud theman of God.


-D And EfdraspPlccpbe went before them and


belpbe the Welgate, thep went vp ouer agapull
them bpon the Feppes of the citpe of Daupd,at
the qopnee vp of the wall beponde the boule of
Dauid, onto the watergate Ealkwarde. —
The other quere of them that gaue thankes
Went oner againg them, anda after them, ¢ the


3


i.Cldas.


the bapes of Joakim were thele f chefe fathers
amonge the preltes: vnder Sararia,ararta,
prder Feremp, Hanania, bunder Efdzas,qpetul
la, ynder Amaria, Jeboana: onder Milico, J0-
natban: Dunder Sebania, Joleph: vnder Harim
Adua: Ynder Haratoth, etl :Duber JODO,
sacbati: wunder Genthon, <)efullam: under A-
bia sichi: onder Winiamin, and SHoadia, Pil-
tat: Dnder Welga, Samua: ver Semeia, Je-
ponathã:vnder Joiarib, Pethanat: under Ja-
dala, Ult: wnder Delai Relai:bnder Amok, E-
bet: bnder Helchia, Halabia:vnderJadaia, Na
theanael. And in p tpme of Elialib, Joiada, Job


45 nan and Jadua, were the chefe fathers amonge


the Leuttes and the pzeaftes witten wnder the
rapgue of Darius the Perlian. Che chplozen of
Leui, the principal fathers were Wzptten in the
Chzonpcles wutothe tpme of Jonathan the fon
of Clialib. And thele were the chefe amonge the
Leuptes:Halabia, Serebia, and Jelua thefon
of Cadmiel, and theps beetbzeninthepe prelece
to gene p2aple and thankes, accozbpng as Da-
nupodtbe man of God dad ozdepned it, one thatch
ouer agapnike another ‘@atbania, mMalbubia,
Mbadia, Pefullam, Talon and Abub were
poters tn the watche at the thzeltholdes of the
gates. Chele were inthe dapes of Joakim r
tonne of Jelua , the fonne of voteDét.and intbe
bapes of Mebemia the captapne,and of p preal
Elidas tbe Scrpbe. |
Andin the dedicacion of the wall at Jerula
lem:thep fought the Leuttes out of alltbep2 pla
ceg, thattbep mpght be brought to Jerulaleto
kepe the dedtcacyon g gladnefie, pth thankel-

; geupnges and (pnapng with cpmbales, plalte-
rpes and barpes. And the chplozen of p(pngers

gathered them {elues together from an pde
out of the plapne countrep about Jerufale,and
from the bpllages of Metopbatht, fro the boule
of ileal, and out of the contties of Geba,and
Almaucth , fo? thetpngers had bupldedthepm
ppllages rounde about Jerufalem. And p prea:
{Fes and Leuptes Were purifped and clentea the
people:and the qates.and the wall,


And J brought the przpnces of Juba Dp dpon f y Ae ea
the wall, and appopnted two agreate queregof |


mento gene thankes, whiche went ontherpabt
bande of the wall totwarde the donge gate, and
after them went Hofata, and balfe of the p?


pii-
ces of guda,and J faria, Eas:ano Wefullam


balfe parte of the popli bponthe wal, beponde
thefomace gate Dnto the beode wall,¢ beponde
the pote of Ephzain, and bepond the olde gate
beponde the fpibeqate, and the tower of Pana-
necl,and the totver of Wea, ontpl the hepgate
And they kode Fpl in the p2pfon gate, elo ode
the twoqueres (of them that qaue thankes) in
the boule of god: and FJ, andthe halfe of the rtu
lers With me, and the peeftes, namelp Eliakim
Haalita, Miniamin, ichaia, Elioenti,sacha
rp,and Hanania: wpth trompettes, and Mai-
fia, Cemetabh, Elealar, Ufi, Jebobanan, Hel-
chiap,€lam, and Ser. And the fpngers fange
loude.baupng Feltabtab foz thep2 auerfear.

Andthe lame dape thep ofred greate facrp=
fpcesanbd refopced : fo2 Godhadde qeuen tben
great gladnelic, fo that both the wpues g chpl-
dzen were topfull: andébempzth of Ferulalens
was bearde farre of .


Joli,


At the fametpme were there menappópnted &


ouer the trealure houfles( wherin were the heuc:
offtpnges:thefp2flpnges, andthe tpthes that
thep hulde gather them out of the feldes about
thecitpes.to deitrpbute them onto the pears
and Leuptes,accozdpngeto the lawe: fo: Juda
thas glad of the preltes and Leuptes, that thep
ftode and Wwapted vpon the offpce oftbep2 God
whichisa pure ofpce. And the fpngers and poz
ters tote after thecommaundement of Daupd


and of Salomon pis Conne, * foz tn the tpnre of i partita


Wautdand Alaph were the chefe (pngers four
ded, and thelonges of p2aple g thankelqeupne
pntoGod. Jn the tpme ofsozobabel, and fea
bemiah dpdall thep of Flracll, gene pozcpong


vito the (pngers and porters, cuerpe dape bpe .


popon, and thep qgaue tpthes nto the Leup-
tes andthe Leuptes auc tpthesagapne punto
thecpbhldzen of Xaron .

© Cie. xttt.chapter.


CThelaweisred,and when thep hance herde re
feperate from them all draungers, ec,


eg MD Chat dape dpd thep reade te the
OCP NES boke of Woles and the people har-


Juda, Wen Jamin, Semia g Jeremp:gcertapn Now when


of the pzeltes chpldzen wpth trompets, namelp
zachar tpetonnao Jonathan, the fone of De-
ahg tee on of SHatbanta, the Con of Wirbaia
the fonne of sacur,thefonof Afaph and bis bee:
thaen, Semeia, Alarael, Balalat,Gilalat,Qa
at, Pathanael,and Juda Hanani, with Pinus
fpcalinitcumentes of Daud theman of God.


-D And EfdraspPlccpbe went before them and


belpbe the Welgate, thep went vp ouer agapull
them bpon the Feppes of the citpe of Daupd,at
the qopnee vp of the wall beponde the boule of
Dauid, onto the watergate Ealkwarde. —
The other quere of them that gaue thankes
Went oner againg them, anda after them, ¢ the


3


jp


p ‘


¢.b.b.¢,


Ether,


i to Jerufalem. Andy gat knowledge that Clia-


{ibapd vnto Tobta,in that be bad made bynia
chambze in the court of the boule of God, and tt
rened me Core, 3 cat forth all the veflels of p
oufe of Cobia out of the chambge,andcomaun
Dedthem tocteanfe the chambzes- and op
bzougbt 3 agayne the vetlels of p boule of God
withthe meatoferpng and theincente.

Andy percepued thatthe pozcpons of the Le
nites were not genë them, g that cuerp one fied
to big lande,cuen the Leurtes and fyneers that
erecuted the woke. Then nra the rulers
and fapde: bp is the boule of Godt orlaken?
And FZ gathered them together, and fet ther ttt
thep2 place. Then beoughtall Juda thetpthes
of cozne and wpne and ople, wnto the trealure.
And J made trealurers ouer the trealure , eutn
Selemiab thepzett, andsadoc the fcrpbe,aud of
the Leuptes, Pbabdaia, and vnder thepze bande
was Danan thefonne tril ee fonne of a
thanta, fox ¢hep were counted faptbfull,¢ thepz
offpce was to diftrp bute p pozcpons onto thep?
bzeth2e. x Cbpnke Spon me D mp God berets
and ype not out mp mercp that Z baue ewed
onthe boule of mp Gob, andon p offyces therof.

At the lame tyme faw J fome tredpng wpne
peles onthe Sabboth, ¢ bapngpng in penes,
andaties laden witb wpne, grapes,tpgges and
bapnapng all maner of burtpens Wnto Ferula-
lem wponthe Sabboth dap. and FJ rebuked the
carnefelp the fame dape that tbep lolde the Vpt-
taples. Chere dwelte mess of Cire allo theres,


wbicb bzought fpf) and all maner of ware, and


€


foldeontbe Sabboth bato thechplozenot Fu-
dain Jerulalem. Then repzoued F the rulers i
Juda,and fapde wntothem:-wpat euell thyng ig
tbis that pe Do, and bzeake the Sabboth wee
sppdnot pour fathers euen thug, and oure © ov
brought all tHig plage Dpon vs, and Dpon thps
citpe: And pe make the wathmozepet pps Ji-
racl in that pe bzeake the Sabboth.

nd tt toztuned that when the pozteg of Fe
rufalem began tobe darke in p euenpnge before
ý Sabboth, J comaunded to hut tbe gates and
charged.that thep (huld not be opened tpll atter
the Sabboth:¢fome of mp feruatites tet 3 atp
qates,p there fhulde no burthe be bzougbtin or
the Sabboth dape. Thenremapned thechapmé
and marchauntes ones oztwple ouernpgDt m=
out Jerufalem with allmaner of wares. Then
reproued J them loze, lapde wnto the-whp ta-
rp peall npabtaboutthe walls DEpe dott ones
agapne, J wpl lape bandes ponpon. fro chat
tpme forth came thep nomoze onthe Sabboth.
And Flapde wntothe Lenites ý thep Huld cléfe
themtelues, g that thep wuld come and kepe the
gates,tobalowe the Sabboth vape. Chpnke
yon me (D mp God) concernpnge thps allo,¢
{pare me accozdptige to thp great mercpe.


o AndvatthefametpmelawZJewesthatma


rped pues of Afdod, of Ammon, and of Boab
and tbep2 chplozen {pakebalfe in the fpeache of
A Mod and couldenot (peake in the Jeweslan-
quage.butby the tunge mpgbt aman percepue
enerp people, Chetty vepzoued thent,andcurtea


tbem „and {mote certapne men of then, made
them bare,andtokean oth oftbembp God: Pe
{hall not geue poure Dougbters pnto thepz fon-
tes, neptber (pall pe take thep2 Doughters wnto
pour fonnes,o2 foz pour felues.Dpd not Salo-
mon the byng of Flrael lynne Foz fuche? and pet
amonge many bepthen was there no kpng lpbe
bpm, whiche was dere nto bps Sod, and God
made bpm kpnge ouer Alracl: and pet neuerthe
lefe, outlandpipe women cauled bpm fo fpnne.
Spall we then obepe vnto pou, todooallthys
qreate euell, and to tralgretleagapnt our God
mag 2 chp Hie est Sebola P
And one of the chplozen of Fedoiada the ton
of Elialib the bye preatte bad made a contracte i
0 Sanabalat the Pozonpte : but Jchaled bpm
frome: (D mp God)thynke thou bpon them Pp
defple the pzelthod ¢ the coucnaunt of the preft-
bode ofthe Leuites. Thus clenled 3 them fro
alfucbeas were outlandpf{h,ans appopnted the
courtes ofthe pzeltes and Leuptes exerpeoncin
Petes better CBORD Sg
melO mp God)foz the bellos camen.) : es


C The ende of the leconde boke of Eldzasothe
wpfe called: the boke neem ie


4


CTheboke of Eher.


The fz Chapter.


1)


ita


eh


ere T foztuned, inthedapes of Abatue- %
BA) faze tus, wbich capgned from andra bn:
acs Gi Ethiopia(oueran hundzed and fe
(,), (Luen and twenty landes)enentn edote

ae 2 Ppayes when f bpnge Abaluerus fat
on parearen A Erani. e
chefe citpe, in the thpzde peare s derf maeng be
madeafeat onto all bis papnces and feruaun=
teg. Andthe mpabtpe men of Perfia and He-
dea, the captapnes alfo and rulers of bps coun
trpes were befoze bym,andbe (hewved prpcbetle
and glozp of bis kpngdome,¢ the glozpous woz
(bpppe of bis greatnes manp dapes longe: euen
anbunbdgedDand. Irre.dDapes.

And when theledapes were erpp2ed,p kpng 25
made a feaft to all the people that werein Su-
fan the chefecitpe, bothe wntogreate andfimall
fenendapes longe inthecourte of the garden hs

g


y — ———
T


jp


p ‘


¢.b.b.¢,


Ether,


i to Jerufalem. Andy gat knowledge that Clia-


{ibapd vnto Tobta,in that be bad made bynia
chambze in the court of the boule of God, and tt
rened me Core, 3 cat forth all the veflels of p
oufe of Cobia out of the chambge,andcomaun
Dedthem tocteanfe the chambzes- and op
bzougbt 3 agayne the vetlels of p boule of God
withthe meatoferpng and theincente.

Andy percepued thatthe pozcpons of the Le
nites were not genë them, g that cuerp one fied
to big lande,cuen the Leurtes and fyneers that
erecuted the woke. Then nra the rulers
and fapde: bp is the boule of Godt orlaken?
And FZ gathered them together, and fet ther ttt
thep2 place. Then beoughtall Juda thetpthes
of cozne and wpne and ople, wnto the trealure.
And J made trealurers ouer the trealure , eutn
Selemiab thepzett, andsadoc the fcrpbe,aud of
the Leuptes, Pbabdaia, and vnder thepze bande
was Danan thefonne tril ee fonne of a
thanta, fox ¢hep were counted faptbfull,¢ thepz
offpce was to diftrp bute p pozcpons onto thep?
bzeth2e. x Cbpnke Spon me D mp God berets
and ype not out mp mercp that Z baue ewed
onthe boule of mp Gob, andon p offyces therof.

At the lame tyme faw J fome tredpng wpne
peles onthe Sabboth, ¢ bapngpng in penes,
andaties laden witb wpne, grapes,tpgges and
bapnapng all maner of burtpens Wnto Ferula-
lem wponthe Sabboth dap. and FJ rebuked the
carnefelp the fame dape that tbep lolde the Vpt-
taples. Chere dwelte mess of Cire allo theres,


wbicb bzought fpf) and all maner of ware, and


€


foldeontbe Sabboth bato thechplozenot Fu-
dain Jerulalem. Then repzoued F the rulers i
Juda,and fapde wntothem:-wpat euell thyng ig
tbis that pe Do, and bzeake the Sabboth wee
sppdnot pour fathers euen thug, and oure © ov
brought all tHig plage Dpon vs, and Dpon thps
citpe: And pe make the wathmozepet pps Ji-
racl in that pe bzeake the Sabboth.

nd tt toztuned that when the pozteg of Fe
rufalem began tobe darke in p euenpnge before
ý Sabboth, J comaunded to hut tbe gates and
charged.that thep (huld not be opened tpll atter
the Sabboth:¢fome of mp feruatites tet 3 atp
qates,p there fhulde no burthe be bzougbtin or
the Sabboth dape. Thenremapned thechapmé
and marchauntes ones oztwple ouernpgDt m=
out Jerufalem with allmaner of wares. Then
reproued J them loze, lapde wnto the-whp ta-
rp peall npabtaboutthe walls DEpe dott ones
agapne, J wpl lape bandes ponpon. fro chat
tpme forth came thep nomoze onthe Sabboth.
And Flapde wntothe Lenites ý thep Huld cléfe
themtelues, g that thep wuld come and kepe the
gates,tobalowe the Sabboth vape. Chpnke
yon me (D mp God) concernpnge thps allo,¢
{pare me accozdptige to thp great mercpe.


o AndvatthefametpmelawZJewesthatma


rped pues of Afdod, of Ammon, and of Boab
and tbep2 chplozen {pakebalfe in the fpeache of
A Mod and couldenot (peake in the Jeweslan-
quage.butby the tunge mpgbt aman percepue
enerp people, Chetty vepzoued thent,andcurtea


tbem „and {mote certapne men of then, made
them bare,andtokean oth oftbembp God: Pe
{hall not geue poure Dougbters pnto thepz fon-
tes, neptber (pall pe take thep2 Doughters wnto
pour fonnes,o2 foz pour felues.Dpd not Salo-
mon the byng of Flrael lynne Foz fuche? and pet
amonge many bepthen was there no kpng lpbe
bpm, whiche was dere nto bps Sod, and God
made bpm kpnge ouer Alracl: and pet neuerthe
lefe, outlandpipe women cauled bpm fo fpnne.
Spall we then obepe vnto pou, todooallthys
qreate euell, and to tralgretleagapnt our God
mag 2 chp Hie est Sebola P
And one of the chplozen of Fedoiada the ton
of Elialib the bye preatte bad made a contracte i
0 Sanabalat the Pozonpte : but Jchaled bpm
frome: (D mp God)thynke thou bpon them Pp
defple the pzelthod ¢ the coucnaunt of the preft-
bode ofthe Leuites. Thus clenled 3 them fro
alfucbeas were outlandpf{h,ans appopnted the
courtes ofthe pzeltes and Leuptes exerpeoncin
Petes better CBORD Sg
melO mp God)foz the bellos camen.) : es


C The ende of the leconde boke of Eldzasothe
wpfe called: the boke neem ie


4


CTheboke of Eher.


The fz Chapter.


1)


ita


eh


ere T foztuned, inthedapes of Abatue- %
BA) faze tus, wbich capgned from andra bn:
acs Gi Ethiopia(oueran hundzed and fe
(,), (Luen and twenty landes)enentn edote

ae 2 Ppayes when f bpnge Abaluerus fat
on parearen A Erani. e
chefe citpe, in the thpzde peare s derf maeng be
madeafeat onto all bis papnces and feruaun=
teg. Andthe mpabtpe men of Perfia and He-
dea, the captapnes alfo and rulers of bps coun
trpes were befoze bym,andbe (hewved prpcbetle
and glozp of bis kpngdome,¢ the glozpous woz
(bpppe of bis greatnes manp dapes longe: euen
anbunbdgedDand. Irre.dDapes.

And when theledapes were erpp2ed,p kpng 25
made a feaft to all the people that werein Su-
fan the chefecitpe, bothe wntogreate andfimall
fenendapes longe inthecourte of the garden hs

g


y — ———
T


Ciyer. Sol .Kebe.
tbe tipnges palace : where there banged tobyte finall. Chigpleated the bpuge and the ppnees,
pepe rloweclothes, faffened withcozdes andthekpn br bacconapegenF Wozbe of {Hea
of fpne fplke,and purpleintiluer tyngessvpon mucan. fto? De fent letters fort) into all thekin

g ppllers of marble one . | ges landes tito enerp land acco; png fO P Wi-
 - Thebenchesallowere of golde andfpluer tpngtherof,andtoeuerp etn ter thep2 lane
made bpona pavement Ofgrene, whpte,pelow guage, that cuceye man tboulde belogde in bps
and blache marble. Andthepdzankeinvefiels otwone boule. Andtpis canted be to be fpoken af:
of golde.Andchaunged velielatterveffel.And tev the language of bis people,
the&pnges Meme aanu peano pegero the nines |

| i { ihe Pai 5 h E] TEF) UETE f ita  CErTa: ‘oobfP re
popu forte asin ition 0 Sean feacebeh pae Eala a ne E E Ponge Onti
ffp Bo


j PAE 6 1s maté Surni. A ardorbeus openett
ofhehpnge bab comaunbed bp tbe of peers t codhenpuge botethetwolbe DEITA DM nee ee
bys boule, that euerp one (hulde do, as it Ipbe nnen Stet thele actes, whenthe dplpiea-
othe wemeri inthe palace of Apaluerns. And “ae ealapoe, be thought vpon Ciatht,ana
on theteuenth bape tpentbekpnge wasmerp: BY AVA YW) what the haddone,and what was co
after the wpne, becõmaunded Hepunan,2i3- BLIEAN clubedagapntt ber. Then fapde the
tia, Hacbona, Wigtha, Pbagthan,sethar,anB kpnges feruauntes that minpiteed bntobpm :
Charchas, the feuenchamberlapneg (that dpd Let there be Fayre ponge virgins fougbt Foz the
{erupce in the pretence of Rpnge Ahatuerns) to kpnge, and thekpnae appopnted certapne men
Fetch tbe Duene Gatkhiwithebe crowneregal inalltbelandes of bis emppae,whome bechar-
intotbekpnges pretence, j poe a canon ged that they Mulde bypngetonetber all p fapze
the people and princes ber fapzenes,toz the ivag ponge vitgpns ynto Sulan the heed citpe, top
beutiful. Out the Nuene Uatbi wold notcom temens buplopng, onder the bande of baqget
at the bpnges worde, bp bys chamberlapnes - thebpuges chamberlapn,p kept the wemen, to _
Then was the kpnge Verp woth,and bis indi- geve themehep2 apparel,ox (and other typngcs neset #3
gnacponbpndledinbpm.  —— | Care to be bad.) Bud that the damlel which pleated
D, Andthe bpngelpake tothe wple men, that fhe Bpnge Houlder be Nuene in vatthis teade,
ad Dndertkandpuge ithe opopnaunces of the And this pleated the kynge-and be dpd fo.
andes foz the kenges matters mult be bandled Inthe Citpe ot Sulanthere was a Jewe,
befozc alltucheas Dauetnowledgeof thelawe ywbolename was Bavdochens the fon of Fair.
en BND iudgemente : and the-acchere anv )nerte wnto the fonne of Semci, the fon of is aman of Fe-
moments E E
ACCS, Aa/A0Cena ANO SHamucan p lenen prite Den sewonia the pnge of Juda was led q- trerrtrite
ceS of Berlia and Sedia, which flawetbekyn- wape, (whome Mabuchodonsso2 the kynge of 1


ges facc,and fat aboue tn the kpnaoome. ibat
latve(lapth the Binge) thulde be erecuted ppon
the Qhuene Cathe, becaule the dpd not accoz-
dprge tothe wozde ofthe Rpnge Abalucengs,
which be commaunded bp bis chamberlapnes ?
And Hemucan anlwered before the yng and
the pepnces: the Quene Valkbi bath not onel,
done eucllagapntt the Benge, butalfoagapn
all tbe ppprices, andDagapnié all the people that
are inall p landes of pnge Abaluerus:fos this
deve of the quence thal come abzode vnto all we-
men, To p thep pall belppfe thep2 bulbandes, be
foze thep2 epes,and Wal fape:the&png bale:
bus comaunded Cialbt the quene to be brought
inbefoze ppm, but He wolbenot come. Andlo
Mall che papneetlesin Berlia and Dedta, {ape
ipketople vntoalltbe Rynges princes whe thep
bere of thys Dede of the Nuene : thug thall there
arple to muchedefpptefulneffe and wath. Prit
mai Oe byes erfoze-lettetbere yooacom:
maundemente From bpm, andlet it be waptten
accozdpnge to tbe Lawes of the Perlpang, and
Hediang(and not to betrantarefed) that Gla.
fbicome nomoze before kpnge Ahaluerus:and
let the kynge geue ber byngdome nto another
thatisbetterrben tbe, —

; And Wen this comatindement of the kpnge
(which Halbe made )is publithed shozowout al
bis emppze(tobich ís great all wemé thal holde
tbeir pulbandes it bonour both among great g


BA


Wabplon carped thence) ebe nozpthed Avala,
(that is Etther bis vucles doughter-forthe bad
nepther father noz mother , and We was a fapre
and beautplull damefell : whome Dardocheys
(when Der father and mother was deed) recep-
ued fo: bts otone dougbter.

Do it foztuned , that obenthe bpngesconts
maundement andcommifipon mas publpihed ,
and manp Dametlels were baoughte together in
Fa dy of Dufan, vnder the bande of hagaci:
Ether was beoughtalfo vntop kynges houle,
onder the band of Haggeithe keper off wemé,
and the Dam(ell pleated bpm, and the founde fas
uour in Dis fpgbt.and de canfed oxnamentes to
be genen ber, andfuche thpnges as belonged to
Det, and appopnted her fenen comelp damfelles
out of the spnges boufe, andfauouredborh ber
and her gentplieomen fpngularlye in the boule
ofthe women. Wut Ether Hewed not ber peo
le € berispneed : foz MHardocheus had characd

that the Mulde not tel it.And Dardocheus
walked euccp Daye befozc the courte of the wo-
mensboute, that be mpabt knowe bow Either
Dpb, and what Hulde become of her. l

And when the appopnted tyme of eucrp dant
felcamte, that the Hulde qo intotbekpngy Apa-
fuerug,after that the bad benct welucmoncethcs
intbedsckpng of the wemen(fo2 thep2 deck pug
muf baue fo muche tyme, namelpe, pre mone
tieg with Hame and mpre and {pre no

wit


Ciyer. Sol .Kebe.
tbe tipnges palace : where there banged tobyte finall. Chigpleated the bpuge and the ppnees,
pepe rloweclothes, faffened withcozdes andthekpn br bacconapegenF Wozbe of {Hea
of fpne fplke,and purpleintiluer tyngessvpon mucan. fto? De fent letters fort) into all thekin

g ppllers of marble one . | ges landes tito enerp land acco; png fO P Wi-
 - Thebenchesallowere of golde andfpluer tpngtherof,andtoeuerp etn ter thep2 lane
made bpona pavement Ofgrene, whpte,pelow guage, that cuceye man tboulde belogde in bps
and blache marble. Andthepdzankeinvefiels otwone boule. Andtpis canted be to be fpoken af:
of golde.Andchaunged velielatterveffel.And tev the language of bis people,
the&pnges Meme aanu peano pegero the nines |

| i { ihe Pai 5 h E] TEF) UETE f ita  CErTa: ‘oobfP re
popu forte asin ition 0 Sean feacebeh pae Eala a ne E E Ponge Onti
ffp Bo


j PAE 6 1s maté Surni. A ardorbeus openett
ofhehpnge bab comaunbed bp tbe of peers t codhenpuge botethetwolbe DEITA DM nee ee
bys boule, that euerp one (hulde do, as it Ipbe nnen Stet thele actes, whenthe dplpiea-
othe wemeri inthe palace of Apaluerns. And “ae ealapoe, be thought vpon Ciatht,ana
on theteuenth bape tpentbekpnge wasmerp: BY AVA YW) what the haddone,and what was co
after the wpne, becõmaunded Hepunan,2i3- BLIEAN clubedagapntt ber. Then fapde the
tia, Hacbona, Wigtha, Pbagthan,sethar,anB kpnges feruauntes that minpiteed bntobpm :
Charchas, the feuenchamberlapneg (that dpd Let there be Fayre ponge virgins fougbt Foz the
{erupce in the pretence of Rpnge Ahatuerns) to kpnge, and thekpnae appopnted certapne men
Fetch tbe Duene Gatkhiwithebe crowneregal inalltbelandes of bis emppae,whome bechar-
intotbekpnges pretence, j poe a canon ged that they Mulde bypngetonetber all p fapze
the people and princes ber fapzenes,toz the ivag ponge vitgpns ynto Sulan the heed citpe, top
beutiful. Out the Nuene Uatbi wold notcom temens buplopng, onder the bande of baqget
at the bpnges worde, bp bys chamberlapnes - thebpuges chamberlapn,p kept the wemen, to _
Then was the kpnge Verp woth,and bis indi- geve themehep2 apparel,ox (and other typngcs neset #3
gnacponbpndledinbpm.  —— | Care to be bad.) Bud that the damlel which pleated
D, Andthe bpngelpake tothe wple men, that fhe Bpnge Houlder be Nuene in vatthis teade,
ad Dndertkandpuge ithe opopnaunces of the And this pleated the kynge-and be dpd fo.
andes foz the kenges matters mult be bandled Inthe Citpe ot Sulanthere was a Jewe,
befozc alltucheas Dauetnowledgeof thelawe ywbolename was Bavdochens the fon of Fair.
en BND iudgemente : and the-acchere anv )nerte wnto the fonne of Semci, the fon of is aman of Fe-
moments E E
ACCS, Aa/A0Cena ANO SHamucan p lenen prite Den sewonia the pnge of Juda was led q- trerrtrite
ceS of Berlia and Sedia, which flawetbekyn- wape, (whome Mabuchodonsso2 the kynge of 1


ges facc,and fat aboue tn the kpnaoome. ibat
latve(lapth the Binge) thulde be erecuted ppon
the Qhuene Cathe, becaule the dpd not accoz-
dprge tothe wozde ofthe Rpnge Abalucengs,
which be commaunded bp bis chamberlapnes ?
And Hemucan anlwered before the yng and
the pepnces: the Quene Valkbi bath not onel,
done eucllagapntt the Benge, butalfoagapn
all tbe ppprices, andDagapnié all the people that
are inall p landes of pnge Abaluerus:fos this
deve of the quence thal come abzode vnto all we-
men, To p thep pall belppfe thep2 bulbandes, be
foze thep2 epes,and Wal fape:the&png bale:
bus comaunded Cialbt the quene to be brought
inbefoze ppm, but He wolbenot come. Andlo
Mall che papneetlesin Berlia and Dedta, {ape
ipketople vntoalltbe Rynges princes whe thep
bere of thys Dede of the Nuene : thug thall there
arple to muchedefpptefulneffe and wath. Prit
mai Oe byes erfoze-lettetbere yooacom:
maundemente From bpm, andlet it be waptten
accozdpnge to tbe Lawes of the Perlpang, and
Hediang(and not to betrantarefed) that Gla.
fbicome nomoze before kpnge Ahaluerus:and
let the kynge geue ber byngdome nto another
thatisbetterrben tbe, —

; And Wen this comatindement of the kpnge
(which Halbe made )is publithed shozowout al
bis emppze(tobich ís great all wemé thal holde
tbeir pulbandes it bonour both among great g


BA


Wabplon carped thence) ebe nozpthed Avala,
(that is Etther bis vucles doughter-forthe bad
nepther father noz mother , and We was a fapre
and beautplull damefell : whome Dardocheys
(when Der father and mother was deed) recep-
ued fo: bts otone dougbter.

Do it foztuned , that obenthe bpngesconts
maundement andcommifipon mas publpihed ,
and manp Dametlels were baoughte together in
Fa dy of Dufan, vnder the bande of hagaci:
Ether was beoughtalfo vntop kynges houle,
onder the band of Haggeithe keper off wemé,
and the Dam(ell pleated bpm, and the founde fas
uour in Dis fpgbt.and de canfed oxnamentes to
be genen ber, andfuche thpnges as belonged to
Det, and appopnted her fenen comelp damfelles
out of the spnges boufe, andfauouredborh ber
and her gentplieomen fpngularlye in the boule
ofthe women. Wut Ether Hewed not ber peo
le € berispneed : foz MHardocheus had characd

that the Mulde not tel it.And Dardocheus
walked euccp Daye befozc the courte of the wo-
mensboute, that be mpabt knowe bow Either
Dpb, and what Hulde become of her. l

And when the appopnted tyme of eucrp dant
felcamte, that the Hulde qo intotbekpngy Apa-
fuerug,after that the bad benct welucmoncethcs
intbedsckpng of the wemen(fo2 thep2 deck pug
muf baue fo muche tyme, namelpe, pre mone
tieg with Hame and mpre and {pre no

wit


Either,

i yth rooplppees : fotvere the foetrienbeautp> not,andthep tolde baman:thatthepmpabtete
Sar T rement ebere dae bameClt onto $ kpng powe Bardocbensmatters wolde endure: foz
-x and whatforucr herequireDow so chaticrecrcemp) Hehadtolve them, $ be wasa Jewe. Andwbhen
-7 that mult be genenber togo with ber outofthe Pamanfawethat ardochens bowed notthe
womensbuplopng vntothbekpnacs palace. jn knee vntobym no: worthppped bpm, be was
the euenpnge the wente,andonthe mozotve a= full of indignacpon, andthougbteitto Iptieto
mapneintothefecondehoufe ofthe wiemenabp- lapbandesonelp on Hardochcus: fo2thep had
dpnge vnder the bandeokSaalgasthekpnges Mhewedhpmehenacpon ot Mardocheug, wher-
chamberlapne, which bepttheconcubines.and fozebefougbte to deftropeall the Fewes, that
(hecameintop kpngenomoze,erceptitpleated were thozowout thebole emppre of Ahatuerug

€ P kpngtobaneherand pbecalledberbpname. and that were ofthenacponot WMardocpeug,

ow whenthetpmecame of Efther p dough nthefpzt moneth( pisthe moneth Rifan) 3

tevof Abiam the bnele of Bardochcus(whirbe inp twelucthpere ofbpng Abaluerus:thep cat
haddereceauedherashpsownedoughter) that Phuc(that tgalot) before Hamanfrom dap to
ibe (houldecomeinto the kpn ge (pevelpzedDno Dapc,andfrommoneth tomoneth, to thetwel-
| puges chambze- uethmoneth,that is themoneth Adar.A nd ha
lapne the beper of the wemen favoe. man apd unto kpng Abaluerng: Chere ig here
.. And Ettberfoundefauourein the fpqhtol a peoplefcattredabzode,2 difperfedamonae at
allebem that lobed bponber. And Efther was ae cin all the landes of thpne emppee, ethep
jane thep2 lawes contrarp from allpeople, and
in the tenthmonetb,whiche ig the monethxTe donotattcr thekpnageslawes, neptherisit the
beth inthe lenenth pere of bis rapane. kpnges pzofpte tolufter them after thismaner.
Andthckpngeloucd Eitberaboucallpwe- PE it pleale the yng, letit bewpiteen that thep
men.and(befounde grace g fauoureinbisfpabt mape be deffroped,.and fo wplZ wepdowne.r.
before alithe vpagins:fotbathelerthecrotone ¢houfande talcntes of fpluce bythe bandes ofp
» ofthe hpagbome vponberbeade, andmadebee wozkemen,tobe brought into the v estreas
Muene miede of Calkyt.Aandthekpngemade furp. And the kpng toke hisrpnge frd his hand
a great feate vntoali bis p:pnecsg leruaunteg and gaucit ynto Daman tbelöncof Amivatha
(wbichfeall wasbicaute of Eftherjandcauled the Agagite the Jewes cnemype.Andthe hpnge
the landeg to be inqupetnelle,andqauegpttes, fapd onto HamansLet thelpluce be genenthe,¢

as became the ropaltpe ofa kpnge. do With that people ag tt plea feth the. :

m . Andwhenthe Dprgins were gathered toges ‘Then were the kynges fcrphes called on the €
ther the feconde tyme, Mardocheus late inthe thpztenthe dapeofthefprtemonethorximian #
kinges gate. Andaspet hadnot Ether ewed and there was woptten (accogdpnge as Daman ™
berkpnredanb people, accozdpnge ag Warda- cõmaundedvntoal the kyngesoffpcers,audto
cheus hadbpddenber : fot Ckberdpdafter the the captapnes that were inall the landes, and
wode of Aardocheus,lpkeas the badbencpet tothe rulers ofeuerp peopletn thecountrpeson
pnder bis gouernaunce. Atplametpmerwbple euctpfpde,accozdpng tothe wppepnee of enerp
MPardocheuslatinthekpnges qate,twoolthe nacpon,andaftertheps language: mtbename
kpnges chambelapnes, Bigtbanand Theres, ofkpnge Abaluerus waste wzitten,andlealen
which kept the Doze were woth, andfoughtto with thekyngesrpnge. And the wrptpnges
liap thep: pandeg onpkpng Abatuerug:wherol Mere fentby potes intoall thekpnaeslandes,

enber. bia allo Hardocheus gat knowledge xandtolbdett toroote oute tokpll and todeftrope all Jewes,
~ puto ucne Eber, and Elthercertifped the bothe porge and olde, chpldzen and women, in
kpnge thevotin <pardocheusname. And when one dape(uamelp, Ypon the thprtenth dape of p
inquilpcion was made , it was foundefo. And twelueth moneth, which isthe monethxXdar) PERRA
thep were bothbbhanged ontree:andit wag wit and tofpople thep2qoodes.
tenintbechzonpeles before the kpnge. This wasthe lum ofthewptpug that ther m
= CE The... Chapter. Mulde bea cOmaundement geucninall landeg,
C Haman tye Gjacedoman,atterve waseraltedobtapned ann publitbed puto al peop e,thattber huld be
teadpagapult thefamedap.And K potes ent
inall the hatte, accopdpnye tothe bpneescom-
maundement. Andin Sufan Pebe ecitpe tbag
the commaundement deupled. And thekpnge e
aman fat and danke, when in Pmeane tyme
the citpe of Sufan was difqupeted. .
C Chet. papter.
e re
da oS pa we Darvocheus percepuedall that J
Aw sya) tas Done,Derente bps clothes, and
fa okak, PUETCON fabclotp, wptbalibes,and
ya venom woente oute intotbe mpddes of the
PTS Ce COR EC eTEE Sa : um pitye, anderpedlowde, andlamei-
fpaketiia daplpe nto pym, de folowedthepm tabip andcame before thekpnces gate, but be
5 ee i mpgot


a
a lhe ee eee ee ee


————————————— a


SHOULD,


Adon f ehprdday it Fortuned chat A


Cryer.


myabtenot entre wpthin the kpnges gate, bp-


caule be badfackloth on Andinallandes,coun- F mate
trpesandplaces , asfarreasthe kyngestoozde Aik
. andcimaundement ertended, there wasgreatc ig


lamentacion amonge the Fewes, faltpnge, We-
ppag and mournpnge,and manp lape in fakelo-
thes andinaltyes.o0 Ethers damfelg and ber
chambzelapnescameandtolocither. hen
wasthe Queneercedpnglpe affonped. And the
fent rapment, that Gardocheus Mulde put on,
and lape the fabcloth from ppm: But <+)ard0-
cheus wolde not take them. Chen called Either
Hathath one of the kinges chabzelapnes(wbich
ftode before ber Jand gaue bpmacommaunde-
ment vnto Mardocheus,that he mpghtknowwe
hat it were, wherefore bedpd fo. So Dabath
wentefozth to Hardochens wnto the rete of
the citpe, wbpche was before the kpnges gate.

And Pardocheus tolde bpm of all that had
happened vnto bym , and of the fumme of fpl-
uer that Baman Dad pzompfed to wepe Downe
intothekinges treafurpe bicaule of the Jewes,
pf be wolde deftrope them (and be gauebpm the
copp of the cone commaundement that
peupled at Sulan, to deftrope them, phemight
hee it vnto Eftbher ) and fo (peake to ber, and
charged ber, thatthe Hulde gointothe &pnge,
and make ber peaper and fupplicacion vnto pim

Foz bet a |
€ And when athath came in, he tolde Ekber
adhe of Hardocheus. Andagapne,EE-
bec lpake vnto Pathath,and commaundedbim,

to {ape nto Sardocheus: all the kpnges ler-
nauntes andthe pa in the landes of the king
bnowe that wholoeuer cOmoth within the court
puto tbe kpnge, whether tbe man o? woman,
vobpcb isnot called, the cimaundement ts, that
the fame thall dpe : ercepte the kpnge holde oute

oldenfceptre buto Hpm, *intoken of gractout
note £03 then De Wall lpue.As foz me, J baue not
bene calledtocome nowe vntothe bpnge thps

Baad “hrs pat Sale
D  <Andthepcertifped Dardocheusof Ethers
wo2des:and Hardocheng bad lape agapne Yn-
to & {ther :thpnke not tofauctbhpne owne Ipfe,
tobple thou artein the henger boule, befozeall
Jeteg : for pë thon boldeftethp peace at thys
tyme, then thall the Jewes baue helpe and delp-
raunce oute ofan other ae au andtbp
fathers boule Halbe deftropedD. And whokno-
weth whether thou arte come tothe kyngdome,
for thps cautes faber Ether bad the giue Sar-
Docheus this anlwere:Goothouthy wape , and
mather althe Juestogptber p are found at Su:
ran ano aee pr eate meg Dapuke
inthze s nepthber dap nozgnpabt . J and mp
Seog epi Fat phetople, and oxpll Jqoo
into tbe Bynge, tobpebe thpngets pet contrarpe
tothe commaundement : and pf J perp the F pe-
tpi. So Dardocheus went bys wape,and dpd
all that €ftber bad commaunded bpm.
@ The.v. Chapter.
qr ether entreth into the kpnge,and bpobeth bpm


and Bamantoateat. paman preparct a gas
lous fo; Mapbocpeus, i j


D ee C ther put on ber ropal apparel, ¢
vo eon, (tobe inthe courto€ the kpnges pa-
Vee ate. lace voptbin, ouer agapni the kpn-
ies es ges boule. And the spngelat vpor
big ropall Watene kpuges palace ouer again
the cate of the boule. And when the kpnge fate
Efther the cruenc (Fading tu the court , the foñd
grace inbps{pygbt. Andthe kpnge belde out the
olden (ceptre that wasin bpshanbde towarde
Ther. Ho Ether feptforth, and touched the
top ofthe fceptre. Then Tavd the kpng vunto her
Ubat wpltethou Ruene Ethers and What re-
qupzetttbou safe cuen the balfe oftbeemppze ,
eit palbegpuenthe. And Ether anfivered : pE
it pleafe the kpnge, iet the king and Hama come
thps dap vntothe battet. tbat J baue prepared
foz bpm . And the bpuce lapde:caule Paman to
make hatte that be map doas Ekber bath fapd.


S otbebpng and Hamancame tothe banker 25


that Ether had prepared , and the Kyngelapde
tnta Efther at the banket of wpne: wiat is thp
petition, thatit map be qpuen ther And wyatre


has guyzelk thous VE it be cue thehalte of theemppze


tt tpallbe Done.

Then anlwerede Ether, and fapd:mp peti»
cionanddelpzeis, pf J baue founde grace tn the
fyabtofthe hynge, and pfit plealetbe&pnge to
gpucme mp peticion and fulfpll mp requet, tha
lettbe kpnge and Hamancome tothe banker p
J thal prepare Foz them, and fo wpll J do to mea:
rowe as the kpnge bath fapie.


Then wente Haman forth the fame dap top- C


full and merp in pis mpare. And when thelame
Hama lawe Aardochcus inthe kynges gate p
be tode not bpand kneled befoze bpm , be wag
full of indignacion at Aardocheus. Meuccthe-
lefe, Haman refrapned bpm felfe : and when pe
came home be fent,¢ called foz bps frendes , and
saves bis wpfe, and igamia tolde them of the glo
tp ofbpsrpcheffe , and che multitud of bps chpl-
Den and all fogpthec howe che kpnge had pro-
moted him fo greatlp,¢ bot that be bad fet ppm
aboue the pzinces and fernauntes of the kyngt:


Jaman apd mozeouce: Vea e Efther the quene m


dpdlet nomancomein with thekpng to the ba=
het that the bad prepared except me. Andto mo:
rowe amt 9 bpovden vnto her alto with the Byng.
Wut tn all thpsam Jnotfatilfped ag longeas
Ale Mardocheus the Jewe fptting at thekpn=
ges gate. Thenlapd sares pts wyte and all big
frenaes butobpm: Let themmate a qalous of
fpftye cubptes bpe,and to mozowe (peake thou
puto the kpng, that Bardocheus mape be pan=
ged theron:and go thou in merelp with the king
vuto the banket.. Jnd Haman bas well cotent
wptball,and caufed the qalous to be made.
- CThe.vi.Chapter. :
whe kpngeturneth ouct the Chrontcies, and tpnbeth


the finclitie of CQatdocheus :¥ then to the confufion oF
Bami,cOmanndech Aarbockeus to behadin honour,


sp Ne lamenpabt could not $ kpng Repe


tara a fe
VAIRA


land becõmaunded to bzpng P ch2ont-
S N Ecles € totes : whped when chep were
SY) NG red before the bing, they bappened on

=the place, where tt was weittenbowe
Ri.  Mardocheus


IF AEST Ls


Wl


Cd erAid x Dardocheus had tolde that Wiethana, and
Theres the kpnges two chamberlapnes (which
Kept the thzeltholded) foucbt to lape bandes on


kynge Abhaluerug. And the kynge apd : what


wWozthpp good bane wedone to Bardorbeug


therfore:


mpnpltred vnto bpm: Chere ig nothpnae at all
done foz bpm, And the kyng fapd: Who isin the


Then (apd the kynaes Ceruauntes that


courte’ (fo? aman was cone into the courte


peake vnto the tyng to bange Hardocbeus on


before p &pnges boule) that be mpabt


the tree (that be bad prepared fo: bpm). And the


bpnges (eruanntes apd nto him:bebolde, Ya-
tandetd wont in the courte. And the khpng


man
fapd: let


inthe kpnge fapd ynto hym: Wbhat all be done
vito the man whom ý kpng wold Fapne bepnge


bym come in. And when aman came


bnto wortbpps Haman thought in big berte:


bom delpeeth the kpnge to bapuge unto wo-


fhpp moze then me? And Haman anlwered the
kpnge: Let the man whom the kpng plealeth to
bepuge vnto wo: ppp, be bzoug tbptherc : tbat
De imap be araped w the ropal garmentes, which
the Bynge vfethto weare:and the bozle that the


Kynge rpdeth pon, and that the crowne ropall


map be fet bpon bis bead. And let this rapment


and Dozle be delpuered ynder the bande of one of


the kpnges pzinces, that thep map arap the man
withall (whem the kpnge is dilpofed to bzpnge
to honour) andcarp bpm vpon the bozle thozow
s trete oftbecptie and proclapme before Dim:
thus pall tt be done Ynto the man whome the
kpnge pleafeth to bepuge to honour,

L  Badthe kynge lapd:make bate, and take ag
thou batt fapa: the rapment andthe bozfe : and
Do euen fo vito Pardocheus the Jewe,that lpt:
teth befoze the kpnges gate, € let notbpng faple


ofall tbat thou ba


(poken. Chen toke Haman


the rayment and the hogle, and araprd Hardo-


the frete of thecptic,¢ proclapmed befoze bpm:


uen this


all it be done to the man whom the


lipuge ig dilpoled to honour. And MWHardocheug
> Cameagapn tothe Bpnaes gate:but Haman gat


bpm bome inalltbe ba


emournpng barebeded,


and tolde sares bis wpfe g all bis frendeg eucrp
thpnge that bad happened bym. Then fapd bis
wple men, and sares His wpfe vnto bpm : pf it
be WMardocheug of the fede of the Jewes, befoze
whom thou pat beron to fall,thou thalt not pre
uapieagapnit bpm, but thalte furely fall befoze


bpm. Andwh
bpm, came the


le they were pet talkpnge with
pnges chamberlapnes,and caus


fed aman to make bafte,to come ynto the ban
Ket that Ether had prepared,


a iG


aD ppepared fo: CQarbocheu


91 s


Dee athe cuen balfe of the emppze andit hall be
Done. And Elther the Qucne anfwered,e fap):
DE J baue founde grace in thp Pabe (D kpnge)
and pfit pleafe the bpnge, then graunte me mp
lpfe at mp Delpze, and mp people foz mp petp=
cpons (ale: fo2 woe are folde, J and my people,to
be deltroped, to be apne, and to perpithe. Bnd
wolde God that we were folde to be bendmen x3
and bondibomen,tben wolde 3 bolde mp tonge:
Fo:tbcenemp pondzeth nos the kpnges Darme,
Tbhekpnge Abaluerug anfwered, and fapd yn-
to Quene Ekber: Who is ber and where igbe,
that dare pzefume in Dig mpnde to doafter that
maner! And Ether fapd : the enemy and aduer:
farp ig thig topcked Haman.

Haman was ercedpnglp afravd befoze f kpang ¢
€ He Nuene. And the bpng arole fed the banket
and from the topne in bis difpleature,¢ wente in
to the palais garden. And aman tode vp, and
befought Quene Etter foz bis ipfe:foz he fawe
that there was a mplcbefe prepared foz bpm of
the kynge altedp. And when the kynae came q=
gapn out of $ palays garden, iuto p place tobere
thep dranise vpne, paman bad iapde pym bpon
the bed that €ftber tat bpon, Chen fapd pkpng
topl be force p Duenealfo befoze me in f boule?
As ioone as that wozde went out of the kpnges wz
mouth,thep couercd amas face: and Harbona
one of p chamberlapnes that ftode befoze È king
fapd:bepold, there tandetha galong in Pamang
boule.l.cubites bye, which be bad made 02 har
docheus,that (pale good foz pkpng. Che kpng
fapd: bang bpm theron. 0 thep banged Hana
onthe galous, that be bad made foz t¢)arDoche=
us. Then was the kynges wath pacifped,


@ Che. viii. Chapter.


After (pe death of Daman was ajartochens eralted,ana
Chen ave there comfortable letters fent boto the Hewes,


gh the boule of aman the Jewes enemve
see Dito Quene Ether. And Qardocheng
came befoze the kpng:foz Eftber tolde how tbat
be belonged vnto her. And the kynge put of bis
hget arpuge Wwbiche be had taken fr aman,
and gaue tt nto Gardocheus. Bnd Ether fet
{Hardocheus ouer the boule of Paman. Bnd
Ether (pake pet moze before thekpna: and fell
bowne at bis fete weppnge, and befouht bys
that be wolde put awape the topchednes of Has
man the et Peet ce tbat be bad pma-
gined agapnit the Jewes. Andthe kyngoxcaccoz a
venge tothe maner) elde Out the golden (ceptcr toz "°
warde Ether, a iwherebp was declared a token of gra: y
coutnette.) Then arole Ether, and fode before ys
the kpnge,andfapd: YE it pleafe the gynae, and
pF baue founde grace in bis fpgbt and pf it be
acceptable befoze the kpnee, thenlet it be th2pt=
ten, that the letters of the deupce of Haman the
fonne of Amadatha the Agagite maybe called
agapne: wbiche letters he wote to detrope the
cives, Which are inall the kynges landes. Foz
ot can J lufre and fe the eupll,that pall haps
pen Dnto mp people: Dz bow can F lobe vpon
thedeftruction ofmpkpnred?
And thebpnge Abaluerus apd onto Quene


Der:


kea ine fame Dap dpd hyng Abalucrus qpue
cheus, and brought bym on boglebacke thozo PA 7 ehh Ap gpue B,


PHATOOCHYCUS, ©


*SD ape.


=
a
“fe


ai A
-aå


Fchpuarre
¢


Cryer.


&fther andto ardocheus the Jewe : Webolde
J bauegpuen Eber the boule of Haman, Who
thep baue banged bponatree, bycaule belaped
band vpon the Fewes.@epte pe allo fo2 the Fe:
wes, as eh i- pou in thekpngesname, and
fealeit wprd the hinges rpnge, (fo: the w2ptin-
ges that were w2yttenin the hinges name, and
fealed with the kpngestpnge, durt noma dila-
null.) Chen were the kpnaes (cribes called at p
fame tpme,enen inthe thpz0 moneth,that ts the
monethx Sinan on the. rriti.dape.

Audit was waptten(accozdpnge toallas
MPardocheus cOmaunded ) nto the Jetes and
tothe princes, to the Deputies and captapnes in
the lades whych arefrom Jndia nto Ethiopia
namelp anbundzed and feuen and twentpe lan-
des, Unto eucrp one accozDpHg tothe wptpuge
therof, and to euerpe people attertpep2 {peacbe,
and the Fewes accozdpnge to thep2 weptpnge
andianguage. — eee
z elk aprpeea intbekpng DAhaluerus name,
andteatedit with Sothypges tpi. Ane bp po-
Ges thatrode bpon bozfes , and {uopfte pounge
muleg fent be the wptpnges wherin the bpnge
graunted the Je toes (in what citpes Locuer thcp
were )togatber them lelues togither, eto tande
fozthepe lpfe , and fo2toroste out, toflayeand
to deftrope althe power of the people and lande
that wold trouble them wpth chplozen and wo-
men, and to fpople they: qood wpon one dape in
allthelandes of kpnge Abatucrus,namelp, Yp-
on the thpetenthdape of thetweluct) moneth,
whpche isthe monethx Adar. |

The lumme of the weptting was, bow there
fhulde be acdmaundemente gpuen itall landeg,


- andpublpfiiped amongeall people, and that the


tx


Ferwes Mulde bereadp agapnilke that dape , and
foabengetbemfeluesontheprenempes. And
fo tbe pottes that rode vpdthe fwyplt bozfes and
mulegaade baffe with all (pede, toerecute the
hpnges wo de: and the comaundement was Be-
upfcd m Sufan thechefecitpe. |
And Watdocheus went autor trom thepatace €)
from the kpnae in ropall apparel of pelowe and
tobite, and witha qeeatcrowne ofyolde, being
avaped wptha garment of fplkeand purple,and
thecitpe of Sufanrceiopled and was glad, and
onto the Jewes there was comec#(ancwe)lpght
and giadnefle, topeand woztbpp . jnalllandes
and citpes, into what place Cocuer the kpnges
wo: and commaundement reached , there was
tope andimpzth, prolperitpe and good dapes a»
monge the Jewes:inlomuche that many of the
people of the lande became of the Fewes belefe
and the feave of the Jetoescame Dpon them.
€ The.ixr.chapter.
atthe cimaundement of the Rpnge,the Rees pag
tep; apustfarpes to Death : Zhe fonnes of Daman


arebanged. abe Hewes kepe a fall dape intemem:
braunce of ghep? beliteraunce


the fame bap that the enempes Huld paue
veltroped the Jewes, to pane oppeelicdtpent , it


turned contrary topie, eurnthat the gues pult
{ubbuethepz ennemypes, Eo? thep catheredtbe
Aethes togptbherin thepz citpes wpthinall the

landes of king Ahaluerugs, to lap bande on fuch

as wold Do-them eupll, andDnomancoulde with

tande them : foz the feare of them twag come 0-
ucr allpesple. And all the culersinthelandes,
and pzinceganddeputpes toficergof the king,
promoted'the-Jewes , forthe feareof Wards
cheus came pon tbem. Foz Pardochens was
great in the bynes boufe and the report of hint
wag nopfled mal landes, howe he encreated and
grete.

TChusthe Fewes (mote allthepzenempes d
afozetiaugbter, and Que and defroped and dpd
after ng G wl onto fuche as were thepzaduct=
farpes. aroni eee Spee ae
wes, and deffroped Fpuehundzed mien, and flue

bariandatha, alpbon Afphat sPbaratha

Dalia, Aridatha, Wharmaltha, Arilat, ridai
and Gaisathatheten {ines of Haman , the fon-
nes of Pamadata the enempe of the Fries : but
onbps qoodes they tapednobandes.. At prame
epre was the kpngeccttptped of the nombze of
thofethat were fapne inp citye of Sufan. And
the kpng fapd onto Quene Either: Che Jewes
bane lapneanddeftroped fyuc hundzeD men its
the cetpeof Sulan,and the ten fonnes of pamë
what baucthep done ( thpnikelte thon ) inotper
landes of the kpnger And what is
that it mapebe gpuentbes D: that requypzette
thoumozetobedones E€ltheranfwered: Prit
pleafe the kpng,let bpm fuffre the Jewes to mo:
rowe allo tods accozdpnae wnto thpsdapes tõ-
maunDdemente , that thep mape bange Damang
tenfonnes bpontree. Andtbhe kpngecharged to
do fo, and the commaundement was dDeupled at
Hulan and thep banged Hamans ten fonnes.
Sfoz the Fetoes that were in Sulan gathered
tbem felues togptber, bpon the Fourtenth dape
of the moneth Adar, and Aue thze bundzedmen
at Sulan, but on thep2 goodes thep laped no
bandes: Xs foz the other Jetoes that were in the
kynges lades,thep came togpther,and tode Fog
they: Ipucs, that tbep mpgbt bauerelt fro thep?
cnempes:and flue of thepz enempes fpue ¢ feuen=
tye thoulande : bowbeit, thep laped no hades on
thep2 goodes. Ehpsthep dpd onthe thpetenth
dape ot thenoneth Adar, and onthefourtenth


bape of the fame moncth reftedthep:whpchdap m


thep belde wpth featpnge andgladnefle. Wut
the Jetoes that thereat Sulancaime together
botbontbetbp2tenth dapre, and onbefourtenth,
and onthe fpttent)dape of the fametbep refked
and beld that dape topth fealkpng and qladnes.
And therfoze the Fewes that dwelt in the bila»
ges and bnwalled fownes, belde the fourtenth
dape of the moneth Adar, wrth gladnefle and
feaftpnge,and kepte bolpe dape, and eucrpe one
fent apfttes nto an other.

And ardocheus wrote thele actes, lente
the wapttpnges vito al the Jewes that were its
all the landeg ofkyng Abalucrus, bothnpe and
far tbat thep Hulde make alawe amonge them
felues, and boldethe fourtentbe, and tpftentd

ey fA. — Dapeok


SOLO.


thppeticion, `


a ee


` irr.


*SD ape.


=
a
“fe


ai A
-aå


Fchpuarre
¢


Cryer.


&fther andto ardocheus the Jewe : Webolde
J bauegpuen Eber the boule of Haman, Who
thep baue banged bponatree, bycaule belaped
band vpon the Fewes.@epte pe allo fo2 the Fe:
wes, as eh i- pou in thekpngesname, and
fealeit wprd the hinges rpnge, (fo: the w2ptin-
ges that were w2yttenin the hinges name, and
fealed with the kpngestpnge, durt noma dila-
null.) Chen were the kpnaes (cribes called at p
fame tpme,enen inthe thpz0 moneth,that ts the
monethx Sinan on the. rriti.dape.

Audit was waptten(accozdpnge toallas
MPardocheus cOmaunded ) nto the Jetes and
tothe princes, to the Deputies and captapnes in
the lades whych arefrom Jndia nto Ethiopia
namelp anbundzed and feuen and twentpe lan-
des, Unto eucrp one accozDpHg tothe wptpuge
therof, and to euerpe people attertpep2 {peacbe,
and the Fewes accozdpnge to thep2 weptpnge
andianguage. — eee
z elk aprpeea intbekpng DAhaluerus name,
andteatedit with Sothypges tpi. Ane bp po-
Ges thatrode bpon bozfes , and {uopfte pounge
muleg fent be the wptpnges wherin the bpnge
graunted the Je toes (in what citpes Locuer thcp
were )togatber them lelues togither, eto tande
fozthepe lpfe , and fo2toroste out, toflayeand
to deftrope althe power of the people and lande
that wold trouble them wpth chplozen and wo-
men, and to fpople they: qood wpon one dape in
allthelandes of kpnge Abatucrus,namelp, Yp-
on the thpetenthdape of thetweluct) moneth,
whpche isthe monethx Adar. |

The lumme of the weptting was, bow there
fhulde be acdmaundemente gpuen itall landeg,


- andpublpfiiped amongeall people, and that the


tx


Ferwes Mulde bereadp agapnilke that dape , and
foabengetbemfeluesontheprenempes. And
fo tbe pottes that rode vpdthe fwyplt bozfes and
mulegaade baffe with all (pede, toerecute the
hpnges wo de: and the comaundement was Be-
upfcd m Sufan thechefecitpe. |
And Watdocheus went autor trom thepatace €)
from the kpnae in ropall apparel of pelowe and
tobite, and witha qeeatcrowne ofyolde, being
avaped wptha garment of fplkeand purple,and
thecitpe of Sufanrceiopled and was glad, and
onto the Jewes there was comec#(ancwe)lpght
and giadnefle, topeand woztbpp . jnalllandes
and citpes, into what place Cocuer the kpnges
wo: and commaundement reached , there was
tope andimpzth, prolperitpe and good dapes a»
monge the Jewes:inlomuche that many of the
people of the lande became of the Fewes belefe
and the feave of the Jetoescame Dpon them.
€ The.ixr.chapter.
atthe cimaundement of the Rpnge,the Rees pag
tep; apustfarpes to Death : Zhe fonnes of Daman


arebanged. abe Hewes kepe a fall dape intemem:
braunce of ghep? beliteraunce


the fame bap that the enempes Huld paue
veltroped the Jewes, to pane oppeelicdtpent , it


turned contrary topie, eurnthat the gues pult
{ubbuethepz ennemypes, Eo? thep catheredtbe
Aethes togptbherin thepz citpes wpthinall the

landes of king Ahaluerugs, to lap bande on fuch

as wold Do-them eupll, andDnomancoulde with

tande them : foz the feare of them twag come 0-
ucr allpesple. And all the culersinthelandes,
and pzinceganddeputpes toficergof the king,
promoted'the-Jewes , forthe feareof Wards
cheus came pon tbem. Foz Pardochens was
great in the bynes boufe and the report of hint
wag nopfled mal landes, howe he encreated and
grete.

TChusthe Fewes (mote allthepzenempes d
afozetiaugbter, and Que and defroped and dpd
after ng G wl onto fuche as were thepzaduct=
farpes. aroni eee Spee ae
wes, and deffroped Fpuehundzed mien, and flue

bariandatha, alpbon Afphat sPbaratha

Dalia, Aridatha, Wharmaltha, Arilat, ridai
and Gaisathatheten {ines of Haman , the fon-
nes of Pamadata the enempe of the Fries : but
onbps qoodes they tapednobandes.. At prame
epre was the kpngeccttptped of the nombze of
thofethat were fapne inp citye of Sufan. And
the kpng fapd onto Quene Either: Che Jewes
bane lapneanddeftroped fyuc hundzeD men its
the cetpeof Sulan,and the ten fonnes of pamë
what baucthep done ( thpnikelte thon ) inotper
landes of the kpnger And what is
that it mapebe gpuentbes D: that requypzette
thoumozetobedones E€ltheranfwered: Prit
pleafe the kpng,let bpm fuffre the Jewes to mo:
rowe allo tods accozdpnae wnto thpsdapes tõ-
maunDdemente , that thep mape bange Damang
tenfonnes bpontree. Andtbhe kpngecharged to
do fo, and the commaundement was dDeupled at
Hulan and thep banged Hamans ten fonnes.
Sfoz the Fetoes that were in Sulan gathered
tbem felues togptber, bpon the Fourtenth dape
of the moneth Adar, and Aue thze bundzedmen
at Sulan, but on thep2 goodes thep laped no
bandes: Xs foz the other Jetoes that were in the
kynges lades,thep came togpther,and tode Fog
they: Ipucs, that tbep mpgbt bauerelt fro thep?
cnempes:and flue of thepz enempes fpue ¢ feuen=
tye thoulande : bowbeit, thep laped no hades on
thep2 goodes. Ehpsthep dpd onthe thpetenth
dape ot thenoneth Adar, and onthefourtenth


bape of the fame moncth reftedthep:whpchdap m


thep belde wpth featpnge andgladnefle. Wut
the Jetoes that thereat Sulancaime together
botbontbetbp2tenth dapre, and onbefourtenth,
and onthe fpttent)dape of the fametbep refked
and beld that dape topth fealkpng and qladnes.
And therfoze the Fewes that dwelt in the bila»
ges and bnwalled fownes, belde the fourtenth
dape of the moneth Adar, wrth gladnefle and
feaftpnge,and kepte bolpe dape, and eucrpe one
fent apfttes nto an other.

And ardocheus wrote thele actes, lente
the wapttpnges vito al the Jewes that were its
all the landeg ofkyng Abalucrus, bothnpe and
far tbat thep Hulde make alawe amonge them
felues, and boldethe fourtentbe, and tpftentd

ey fA. — Dapeok


SOLO.


thppeticion, `


a ee


` irr.


MACH OTYCUS,
- Bape of the moneth Adar, as the dapes wherin
the Fewescametoreft from thep2 enempes,and
as amoucth wherin thep2 payne was turned to


iope and thep2 fozowe into an þolp dape and


that in thole dapes thep fhoulde make feaftes,
and cladnuefe, and one tofende gpftes nto an
other, and to diribute wnto the pooze.


E Bund the Fewes were content with it that -


thep Sad begon to bo , and that arbocbheus
wrote vUtOtprm:bol that Haman the fonne of
Hamradatha all the Jewess enemp, bad wy ia
agapnittic Jewes, bow be mpgbt dcltrop them
and cauled to call Pbhur (thatigalot) fozto put


them imfeare,¢ to bapugetbemtonought,and -


~~ bots Either wenteand{pake tothe kpnge, that
thoronve letters bis wpcked dcupee (whiche be
pmagineDagapntt the Jewes mpg be be turned
vpon bis Dine head, and ho beandhisfonnes
Werehanged on tree. ffo2 the whtcHecaule thep
called thig Baye burin, bpcaule of the name
ofthrlotjand bpcaule of all the wordes of this
Wpipnge:and what thep them felnes bad fene,
and what bad happened unto then.


‘CThe booke of Fob.
| CTbefreChapter. ©


Q Tobis plaged of Ged bp the io
ef hps goobes and chpidzen.


‘$00. 3


=
ra
fi:
itm E


And the Jewes fet tt wp , and toke it bpon Eai Kee. E be badi


them and thep2 fede, and bpon all fuche as iop-


neothem felues bntotbem, that tbep wolde not


mpi but obleruc thole two dapes petelp, acco,
dpnge as thep were waptten and appopnted:
hob that thele dapes are not tobe forgotten, but
to be kept of chplbers chpldze amonge all kpi-
reddes m all landes anDeptpes. Thep are the
bapes of burim, hich are not to be ouerflypt
amotige the Jewess andthe memozpall of chem
ought not to perpty from thep2 fede:


And Quene Eleber the dongbterot Abibail


and Bardocheus the Jewe wote with all au-
cthovitie (te confy2me the feconde wrptpnge of


Purim) andfenethe letters wntoalthe Pewes 7


in tHe hundred and feuen and twentp landeg of
the emppzeot Abatuerus, with trenbdly g faptp=
full wo2des,toconfpame tiefeoapes of Phurim
in thep2 fpme agpopnted, accozspnge as War-
Dotheus the Sepe and Ether the Nuene had
appopnted thet. And thep bounde thev2 foule


anothep2 fede to fattpnge and paper. And Ef- —


` Her ftablplihed the wozdes of thelelottes, as it
wepften inthe booke.


G  Anochekpng Adalueruslaydetribute vpon


tbe lande and pon the ples of the fee- And all
thabbe dps bp his power and auctbozptpe, and
the great wozibpp of Mardocheus, whiche
the kpnge qane bpm,be they not wept=
‘tenin tbe Cbhzonicles of the kynges
of &)edia and Perliar soz Dar
docpeus the Jewe was the
feconde nerte bnto
kynge Abalue-
tus, ¢ great
anonge the Jewes,andaccepted amonge
the multitude of bis baethzex,ag one
that feketh the welth of bis peo-
ple, and {peaketh the beft
foral! bis fede.


CThe ende of the booke of Ether.


And the Lorde fapd unto Satan For me 5
that there


7


a
ĵ = * ad
TAi i < = ts
i a. È ,
i a
b


4 . j a
“=i. ue i g = me
a


ai


gas:
ti J s pA‘:


pee


fe alte |
= WA aS
pr ray a


Tit ee es
a Lg. e E: =


H


ae


MACH OTYCUS,
- Bape of the moneth Adar, as the dapes wherin
the Fewescametoreft from thep2 enempes,and
as amoucth wherin thep2 payne was turned to


iope and thep2 fozowe into an þolp dape and


that in thole dapes thep fhoulde make feaftes,
and cladnuefe, and one tofende gpftes nto an
other, and to diribute wnto the pooze.


E Bund the Fewes were content with it that -


thep Sad begon to bo , and that arbocbheus
wrote vUtOtprm:bol that Haman the fonne of
Hamradatha all the Jewess enemp, bad wy ia
agapnittic Jewes, bow be mpgbt dcltrop them
and cauled to call Pbhur (thatigalot) fozto put


them imfeare,¢ to bapugetbemtonought,and -


~~ bots Either wenteand{pake tothe kpnge, that
thoronve letters bis wpcked dcupee (whiche be
pmagineDagapntt the Jewes mpg be be turned
vpon bis Dine head, and ho beandhisfonnes
Werehanged on tree. ffo2 the whtcHecaule thep
called thig Baye burin, bpcaule of the name
ofthrlotjand bpcaule of all the wordes of this
Wpipnge:and what thep them felnes bad fene,
and what bad happened unto then.


‘CThe booke of Fob.
| CTbefreChapter. ©


Q Tobis plaged of Ged bp the io
ef hps goobes and chpidzen.


‘$00. 3


=
ra
fi:
itm E


And the Jewes fet tt wp , and toke it bpon Eai Kee. E be badi


them and thep2 fede, and bpon all fuche as iop-


neothem felues bntotbem, that tbep wolde not


mpi but obleruc thole two dapes petelp, acco,
dpnge as thep were waptten and appopnted:
hob that thele dapes are not tobe forgotten, but
to be kept of chplbers chpldze amonge all kpi-
reddes m all landes anDeptpes. Thep are the
bapes of burim, hich are not to be ouerflypt
amotige the Jewess andthe memozpall of chem
ought not to perpty from thep2 fede:


And Quene Eleber the dongbterot Abibail


and Bardocheus the Jewe wote with all au-
cthovitie (te confy2me the feconde wrptpnge of


Purim) andfenethe letters wntoalthe Pewes 7


in tHe hundred and feuen and twentp landeg of
the emppzeot Abatuerus, with trenbdly g faptp=
full wo2des,toconfpame tiefeoapes of Phurim
in thep2 fpme agpopnted, accozspnge as War-
Dotheus the Sepe and Ether the Nuene had
appopnted thet. And thep bounde thev2 foule


anothep2 fede to fattpnge and paper. And Ef- —


` Her ftablplihed the wozdes of thelelottes, as it
wepften inthe booke.


G  Anochekpng Adalueruslaydetribute vpon


tbe lande and pon the ples of the fee- And all
thabbe dps bp his power and auctbozptpe, and
the great wozibpp of Mardocheus, whiche
the kpnge qane bpm,be they not wept=
‘tenin tbe Cbhzonicles of the kynges
of &)edia and Perliar soz Dar
docpeus the Jewe was the
feconde nerte bnto
kynge Abalue-
tus, ¢ great
anonge the Jewes,andaccepted amonge
the multitude of bis baethzex,ag one
that feketh the welth of bis peo-
ple, and {peaketh the beft
foral! bis fede.


CThe ende of the booke of Ether.


And the Lorde fapd unto Satan For me 5
that there


7


a
ĵ = * ad
TAi i < = ts
i a. È ,
i a
b


4 . j a
“=i. ue i g = me
a


ai


gas:
ti J s pA‘:


pee


fe alte |
= WA aS
pr ray a


Tit ee es
a Lg. e E: =


H


ae


—


,tevecame a pode


sof kai te |


Ay


Fapzemognipng, Oprane tt: AOD
the lande,and walked thozowe it. that bare me . E0} then Hulde the fozotwes bane


andcotinuct) itpllinbpsqonlpnefie. and wbpgauctbey me Coucke topeh thep2 brea tes?
4 dt me pb bpm,tbat J thulde pu- Then thuld J now hauelyen tpl, F bulde baue


Ibom. ball erecepucpeolperttte atthe wolde dpa itout o laces, wich
rete pest not recepuc adueriitpe;xan  beexceadpnge gladand retopte, pE they coulde
5, 00.106 TV


—


,tevecame a pode


sof kai te |


Ay


Fapzemognipng, Oprane tt: AOD
the lande,and walked thozowe it. that bare me . E0} then Hulde the fozotwes bane


andcotinuct) itpllinbpsqonlpnefie. and wbpgauctbey me Coucke topeh thep2 brea tes?
4 dt me pb bpm,tbat J thulde pu- Then thuld J now hauelyen tpl, F bulde baue


Ibom. ball erecepucpeolperttte atthe wolde dpa itout o laces, wich
rete pest not recepuc adueriitpe;xan  beexceadpnge gladand retopte, pE they coulde
5, 00.106 TV


| ; - | i h |
OU. )

| fonde they: graut anp where. That thoulde ve rooted and fodepriiy, 7

) tope fo that man whore topeisbpdde,andGod His child zen were Wr thout pgofperitic,and they

| E e it backe from bpm. Woz mp fpghescome were flayneinthe vate and

j befoze Jeate,andmp rozpngesfallout lpkethe to delpuert


| water. ffor the thyage that Y feared is come

| Hpotn ime: and the thpnge that 4 was afrapde of
ts happened vnto me : was 3 not bappy wad

Í J notqupetnele: Was Fnotinrek i Andnow

| conuneth lucbe mplerpe ppon me: r

@ The.iiii Chapter:

| @] Fobicrep:chended of tmpacience ant Briuftyre:anB

of the preiumtion of bps otmne rpghteoufnelle,


reee 2D Eliphas the Chemanite anfwe
RaT /Avaby red and Capd: Pf we begpn tocom:
-EW Aa Vig mune with the, wylte thou be dif-


| Esae contents Gut who can withbolbe of lowe derre. ond that thofe whiche are in be JA
| asse DPM [elfe from {peakpngsiSebolde upneffe map come to prolperitic. ie deftropetD i
| ball benachaltener of manp,and balk com: the deupfex o" the fubtple, fo that thep2 bandeg
| foxtedtbewerphanves, = | ave not abi: to verfourme anp ftedfalt thynae. a
| Top wozdes baue let vp thore that were fal- x we com Tet) the wple in thep2 owne craf tcoztie
len, thou hatt refrelthed the weake knees. But tpnef- -= ouecthzoweth the counfaple of the f,
nowe that the plage igconte bpon ais age art wpe! —niomoche,tbat thep cunne nto darts y
| | arte tapute bated A ISNA TAS TS ifestbou net fabie dape,* and grope aboute them at oe. rroia £
Ho't.tid.e arte Fapnte berted. ¥ Fs not thig pfeare,tbp the one čape lpke as inthenpabe.
| DEC a Kedfattnelic, thy pacpence, and the perfectnele 3 iball Delpuer the pooze from the werde, C $
of thp wapeg:Conlpdze (X pzape the) who euet £ t Reatnpngeg of the vngodlp, g from the 3
perpitbed bepng aninnocent: D whenweretbe jiolence of tbe oante mae rahe pope of pooze: 2
vodiy delroped: fo (as F bane proucdbperpe: 4 the mouth of thc wovcted pall be topped. KS
Bee eminent ate ir trent and rfo -i ebole, xpa preis the man whome God merrie |
xozetchednetie,reape the fame. Witb the’ Se gunptiberhy: therfore refulenot thou the chatke- specie: S
of God they perphh, and with the bzee oF bis ywnge of the alnpgbhtp.sorsthougbbemakea orr
she dy ikea thep an aave : Sra es | ee be penera nater :tboury the, ere $
tPA: Of He Lipon, Dp ep oth,any Hig bande maketh whole agrayne, Fi
tbe teeth of the Ipong whe). s arc pulled ont. < 4 p 4


The lpon perpleth fo? lacs of ape, andthe
lpons whelpes are fcatten sürede.
© Andtomecameth: worvereceetlp,andmpne:
carebath recepucd a) fic) cok. Jn the though-
tes and vifionsinély iog ht (Dopen Hepe cimeth
On met) fea: ceame Yoon me, and Dzebe whiche
mate oll my Sones to hake. Che wpnde paled
bp, iore my pretence, and made the beeres of
mp ñc to tande vp. be Mode there, F news
not bis face :an pmage there was before mpne
Zob.rrb.a CPES and in the Tplnes Derde Ja wopee. xhal!
Prone Man be moze iut then Gods D? (halla man be
—  pneet then bis makers webolde, be founde no
AETIA IAN treioth ¿iti bis fer uanntes, and xin bis aungelg
D there wag fo a4 pon moche moze in them that
Dwell in boutes of clape, and fobofe fFoundacpon
is but dull: Dobiche hall be confumed as it were
with amoth: Thep pall be fmpteen from the
mompnae trto the ply liaa i dng Deo
rpip foz cuer, Wwbenno man tbpnketh theron. 38
not thep2 rovaltpe gone atoape with them: thep
ipallDpe trewlp:and not in wpfedome.
a The. t. Chapter.
` C She cube of a foole: The epghteoumette o (Sod fhe
Horde chaSenech Disana delpwereth them agapne,


ion 5 E 4 Rpe(F


atrrrog.e x3 Dane fenemp felfe, when the Foly


=


-


the feuenth there ball no eupll come to the. Fn
bungee be Mall laue the From death:and when it
B warre from tpe power of the fverde.
_ Chou Halt be kept from the eupll tonge and D
bë trouble cdmeth,thou palt not nede to feare.
Jn deftruction g berth thou thalte be merp, and >
* balt not be aFrapd of beaftes of the earth. SEO rareta
the toneg ofp tand thal be confederate with the,
and the beattes of the Felde Mall gpue the peace.
Hund thou balte bnowe that thy dwellpnge
place Hall bein ret, and thou thalt aog beholde
thy Dabitacton, and palt not (prne. Chou palt
fe allo, that thp fede Chall encreafe,and that thp
ofteritpe tall be ag the rale ppon the earth,
ou (halt come alfoto thp graue inafap2 age:
ipa as Wbe tbep take bp a cozne thefe indue fea-
on. LO,tbis we our felues baue paoued bp erpe-
rience,and cuen thus it is. Herken thou to tt alfo
that thou map take bede to thp felfe.
Tbe. vi. Chapter.


> de thall belpuer the in {pre troubles, and itt |
A
ky


ames. tta xpath the wploe afleroze.


Dz ctpeth theoxe when hep.
That tobpcbhis vnfauerpe, thal .
out falte? 02 is there any tafteintbe .
egge: Chetbpnges that fomtpme Fn,
awape wpthal,are nowe mp meate Foz very »-
rowe.D that J mpabt baue mp defire,and that
God woldegraunt me thetbynge that Jlonge
for. D tbat God wolde begpnne and{mpte me:
that be woldlet bys pande go,and take me clene
awape. Then hulde Jhaue fome comfozte:pca
3 wolde Delpze bpminmy papune , that be Mulde
not {pare, foz 3 wplnotbeagapniethe wordeg
%5 of the bolpe one.
J€.02 what power baue Fto endurer And
whatis mpneende, that oat fy pa:
entr Jemp frrength the ttrength of toneg r
ig nip fieh made of bzafler Jg it not fo, that
there is inmeno belpe:andthat mp {ubffaunce
is taken fro me? He that isin tribulation ought
to be comfozted of bignepgbbour: butthe feare
of the Lome ig cleane amwape. Hpne owne bze-
then palie ouer bp measthe water brooke, and
ag the rpuer of the water,vo bafielp go atvape.
ee eee s frot, the fnot thal
all pon them.
€ Waben tbepe tome commeth,tbep Hall be de-
ftropedand perih: wbenthep be fet on fpze tep
doalbe remoued out of thep2 place foz the pathes
that thep goin, are croked, thep baftafter vaine
thpnges and thall perpe. tucne them to
the patbes of Theman, and tothe wateg of Ha-
ba, voberin thep baue put chep2 trut .Confourt-
debate thep that put anpe confidence in them -
4€o3 wbe thep come to obtapn the thpnges, that
they loke Ct are brought to confulton.
Euenlo are pe allo com putome:but note
that pefemp mplerpe peareafraped. DP F
pefp2e pou to bapnge wnto me,oz to gpueme a=
ny of pour fubftaunce? Co delpuer me fromthe
eficmpes bande ,oztofaneme from the hande sf
tpratited? Ceachine , and J wpl holbe mp tong:
and toben Adoerre, Mewe me Wwherin . Howe
{redatare the wo2des of trutbe/ And tohpcbe of
poucan rebuke and reprouethem ¢ wopetake
deliberati tocbecke mens fapenges, and iudge
a poze wozdelpoken in bapnes Ve fall pon tye
fatherleffe ,and qoaboute to ouerthzowe poure


D


owne frende. Jnotherfoz becontente and loke . |


nowe bponme, and J wplinotlpebefoze poure
face. @urne(F pzapepou)be indifferent nogen
turne agapne, and pe pall fe mp. vngplty ;
whether there b eap purpagbteoutnese in mp,
 fonge,o2 Vapnetoazdesinmp mouth..


©. Tbe. oti. Chapter.
C Fob Hewerd chat cbpsirte but is abattaple,
o} warfare. r
za Ith man anp certapnetpme bpon
KAAN cath: * Are not hps dates alfolpke
corer te Dapesof an bpzed feruaunte ’
phe fo: lypkeaga bondeferuaunte dr-
ara (pretp tbe Hadow, and as an ppe-
fapnebaue anende of bys worke. ©
 - @uenfo bane laboured hole monethestonge :
chutin papne ) andmanp acarctull MPgDE Dave


Jw hed
‘yen Jlapemedowne to Nepe Alay, rroi g
ma Jarpie! Agapne, Jlonged Toge
nap gor.
- Andinthemaene tpymeam Ffnil of foz0- 25
is ontplitbe twplpgbt.d)p feh is clothed w
sores and duft of the earth:myp Tkpnne ts wp-
thered and become pazible, * mp Dapes palle o-
uer moze (pedelp thena weuer can weuc out hpg Feb .tr.<.
web,andare gone 02 Aamaware. Dremembze “FS
that mp Ipfetsbuta wpnde, andtbat mpnecpe
Mall nomoze fe pleafures therof:pea, and pnone
other mens epe Hall lemeanp moze. Joz itthon
faten tbpne epe bpd me, J comtonought. The
cloudets confuined and vanpliped awape, euen
fo be that goeth Bowne to the graue Hall come
nomoze vp, no? tourne agapne Dnto bps boule:
neptber Hall bys face knowe bpm anp moze.
Eherfore bys not spare mp mouth, but g
wyll(peake in the trouble ot mp {pirite , ¢ mufe
inthe bpetternefieof mp mpnde . Am Ja fec o:a
wobalefplibe, thatthoukepei me fo in prifon ¢
edi ben 4 Cape: mp bed thall comfozte mv, q hall
paue fome refrelippnge bp taliipnge tomp felfe
npon mp coutche.* Che troubleit rhoumie with Danika
Dacames, and makeft me fo afrapedtho20w i=


Tiong that mp foule wylthetb rather to perpe


and dpe, then mp bones to remapne.
q canfenoremedy, Jthaillpuenomoze, D
{pare me tha, foz mp dapes.are but vapne: what
igman,p thon bat bpm in {uche veputation,and
fettet fo mocb bp hime Chou wiitek bim early
and euerp Dape:fodapnlp doek thou» teye bynt. Sibiya
Wibp qoet thounotfrome, nozlettesinea> m
loone,tolonge d te FYmapelwalowe Downe mp
fpetle/ 3 baue offended, and what Hall Jon-
tothe, D thou preferuer of men: ep baft thou
made me to Rande inthe wape, andam To peupe
aburtben onto mp felfe! Wbp doek thou not
fozgpue me mp fpnner Wherefore takbeEr thou
not awape mp wpcbednelle ¢ Bebolde, nowe
mut J flepe inthe dut, and pf thou feket me to
mozotve inthe mognpnge, 3 iall be gone.
The. vili.Chapter.
E Hod is repzehended and noted Co hane beferucd
pes papne @ be(eription of pppocrilie.

wabi antwercd Wypload the Hubitand
ev] pA lapde : owe longe wplte thou tale
A poy ce ache shpnigea Howelonge hall
Ha Withp mouth tpeake foprondevoozdes/
moth God peruerte the thynge that is lawfull?
2 dothe thealmpabtpe deltrope the topnge,
thatisrpabter Stoz epnigesbat thy tonnes pte
ned agapnite bym, dpd not be punp tbe them Fog
thep2 wpekedneNe: DE thou woldek now refozt
onto God bytpmes , and makethpne bumble
paper tothe almpa tpe,pE thou woldcit lyuca
pure anda qodlpe lp e, Hulde penot awake vp
bnto thetmimediatlp, and g netbe the beautpe
ofrpgbteoutnesagayne 3n o much, that wher:
info enerthou baddettlptic afore, thou (huldeft
nowe bane qreate aboundaunce.

Engupre ( Fpzapethe ) of thers that haue
pose befoze the,xand fearche diligently amMONGe ores,
thepafathers.sto2 we are but cf peltecBape,and Zod.bie.


cortvnze Not, that* oure dapes ry ae ALE pl crrpir.b
me s ili.


but


ecei.biit. a Mnto bitm:¥wpat Boe


but a terp adotve. Shall not thet.
and tell the: peeand gladly confeffc th,

Hap a rufe be grene without mop
Or map the cerile qrowe without wate.
but(o2z euer it be Sot fost),and 02 tt be g
red) it wpthereth before anp other berbe. ©
fogorth it with all them that forgette God, anv
euen thus allo all the bep ocrites bopecome to
nowght, bis confpdence thall te detroped , and
pis trut hal be a (ppders webbe. pe (pall leane
bpon bis houle, but it tall not tande: be Hall
bolde bym Falk bp it pet Wail it not endure. Ft ig
euen asa grene tree befoze the Sunne, and Mo-
teth forth tbe beatiches inpis garden. Jt taketh
manp rootes bpa wel fpde,in to moche that tt ts


«pipke att boule of tones. Wut pe it be taten out


of bis place, euerp man denyeth it, fapinge: 3
knotwe the not. LO, thus is tt with bpm, that te-
fopicth in Dis owne Dopnges : and ag foz other,
thep qrowe out of the carth. | rege
Webholde,God wpll not cafkawape a Vertu-
ous man, Nepther wpll he helpe the pnqodlpe.
bp mouth Wall be fpl with laugbpnge, and
tbp lpppes with gladnefle. Chey a fo that bate


_ the, pall be confounded,and the dtoclipng of the
-pngodlp Hall come to nougde.


CThbe.ir. Chapter.
© @ Fob declaceth the benefptes of Godant that
Mane tpgbteoufiels is nothpng.


es DD anlwered, and fapde : q krnowe it
4 bests fo of a trewthe. ftor bowe map a


pfa.critit. a G : ‘c) man (compared puto God) * be tuft:
pra crun ee


Ssa fyed/ PE be wpll argue with bpm, there
ig not one amonge athouland that cananlwere
ppm. Concernpnge {uche as be wpe of herte.op
mpghtpe in Frength, whe cuer protpered, that
toke parte agapnite bpm’ ine trantlateth the
mountapnes oz ener thep be aware. {tts De that


‘pucrthoweth them in bis wath. He remoucth


the carth out of ber place, that the ppllers therok
make withall. be commanndeth the funne, and
it rpleth not : be clofeth bp the tarred, as tt
were wider a (panet. ie bpmielfe alone Cprea-


deth out $i heauens, and gorth bpon the was Bee
ee. He maketh the waues of peauen Wak
amosbitd the Drion, « the leuen arres, and the tecrete Eii


ues tn the


places of the South, Ie doeth great thynges,
uche as are onfearcheable : pce, and wonders


without nombze.


40, when be qocth ouer bp me, I Mall not fe


6 bpm. And when pe Departeth bp me, 3 thali not


ioke vpon byat. 3 tall not percepue bpm. VE be
be baltpe to take any thpnge awape, who wll
make bpm reffoze be! pe a age wypll lape

thous Bets Bod, whole


taeren path no mau map Withitande, but the prou=


Deftof all muğ Koupe wnder byin- owe Hulde
J then anlwere pym r Dz What wogdes thulde
F Fpnde out agapit bpm r Vee, though F were
rpahtous,pecnughe 3 not gpuc bpm one worde
agapne, but mekelp fubmpt mp felfe to bpm as
mp tudge. PE F bad called Dponbpm,and pe pad
anfwered me : pet wolde F not bpleuc, that be
berde mp wopce: hetroubleth mefo with ethe tem


pett,and wonndeth meout of mealure without i


E


cet mp fpitpte be in cet,
yOPptternen


iC. 7
At peake of irengtbe 1d -be is


men wyll {peake of rpghtoutuefie,

se mp vecozdes PEY wpll wftifpe mp

vut owne mouth Hall condempnie me: pl

3 wyll put forth mp felfe foz a perfecte man, be

(pall repzeue me arwpched Doce. Koz though J

bean innocent,and my confcpence cleare, pet am
q werp of my Ipfe.

Due thynac tt ig, and therfore J (apd: He
Deftropeth botbe the rpqhtuous and vngodlp.
And though be fap fodepnlp with the Ccourge,
pet wpll be langhat the punpihment of the i=
nocent. Ag fo: the wozlde, ttis qpuen ouer into
the bande of the wycked, and be Mall couer the
faces of the tudges therof. Jg it not fof wher ia
there anp, but be ig luche ones


tbep are gone, and Dane fene no good thynge. Adie |


Thep are paleo awape as the fhpppes that be
good under faple,andas the Egle that fipeth to
the pape. When 3 am purpoted to forget mp
complapnpnge,toleaue cf fro mp wath, and to
comfoate mp felfe, then Jam afrapde of all mp
fozowes:fo2 J bnowe that thou wplt not nage
me innocent. PEJ be thena wpcked doer, Wp

laboure 3 in vapne ¢ DEF walibe my felfe wit
[nowe water , and make mp bandeg neuer to
cleane at the well, pet palt thou dpppe me in the
my2e, and mpne owne clothes Mall defple me.
ffoz be that 3 mufte qpucgmnlwere onto, and


swith thom F gotolawe,isnotamanas Jam.


eptber is there anp Dap Anan tolape His bande
byt toene ds: Let hym take bisrodde awape fro
me: pee, let bpm make me no moze afrapDde of


pynt, and then Hall J anfwere bpm wpthout


anp feare :fo2 aslonge asitis thus, J can make
no antwere,
, wher. Chapter.
(Fed is werp of bps ipfe,and tceteth out bys fragts »
lititie before Gor. Hedeipseth tye tpmeco repeate,
4 oeftription of Death. F


i make mp cõplapnt, and sipah ake

Fout of the verp beupnefie of mp foule,
ti J topll faye onto God: D donot con
Satas Hempne me, but Wewe me the ranle
toberfoze thou contende i Co with mei Thpnkeft


f "e r


os ms it toell Done to. apee me, to caft me of,


keth D2 are thy Dapes


(bepng the wozkes of i stab and to mapn-
tapne the counfaple ofthe vngodlp i Halt thou
felpe cpes ¢ 02 Dott Chou loke as a man lo-
| io the dapes of man,
and tby peares as marines peares ¢ that thou
maket tuche mnquificpon fox mp wprkebnete,
and fcarchelt out mp (pnie: tbere as (notwith


ftandpnge) thou knowell that ¥anino twpcked


perfon, and that * there isna man able to belp> deu,


uer me out of thy pande.


“+ Thyne bandes bath made me, and faffpo- 25
ned me alltogpticr rounve aboure,wplte thon SO.


a


then Deftrope me lodeynips DO cememboe (3 be-


feche the: ) bowe that thon maù: Ee me of the
pe be carth, and alte Dinge me nto
a oa se : if | | i pat


 ¥ Q)p Dapes are moze fwpfte then a tumer: D


= T greuet) mp fouletolpue: Fwpll Æ


Fri $i


S


pve


A Halk thou not turned me as tt were mplie,
andturnedme tocruds Ipke cheles Thou halk co
uered me thith fapnne ¢ felh.¢ topned me toge-
ther with bones efinowes. Chou hak gratited


meipfe,and Done me good-and the dilpget pede.


that? toket bpd me, bath preferued mp (pete.
€ bou batt bpd thele thpnges tn thpue pert.
am fure that thou remembzelt this thyna. PE
J opo lynne, thou addet anepe vnto me, an
halt not dcclare me tnnocét becaule of mine of-
fence. DEF baue done wpckedlp,wo is me ther-
foze. PE Fbhaue done rpabteontipe, pet Barre J
- notlpfte bp mp beade fofull am ¥ of confulpon

anole mpne owne mpflerpe.

Shou puntet me out(beinge tnbeupnes)
agit were a lpon,and troublet me oute of mea=
fure. Thou bapngef frethe woytuefle agapntte

mob.ciip. Meandthp weath increafett chou bpon me, De-
wibe D that J bad perphhed, and


asfooneas J was


fewe: Let bpm then leaue offro me and let me a-

lone,that 3 map cafe my felfealptle afore 3go

thptber,from whence % thal! not turne aqapne

cucnto thelande of Darkenefle andfpadowe of

death:pea, into hedarke cloudy lande and dead
- lpe Shadowe, whereas is no o202¢, but terrpble

feare ag inthe darkeneffe,

C The.ri. Chapter.
Aob fs buiukiprepzehenden oF Sophart. God is incom:
prehentpbte Be isimerephull tothe repentaune.


a 3 pr ma thyte,and fayde: Sbuldnot bethat
fe vue maketh many wo2dcs, be auntwee
aru) a Wa CCD! Sobulde he that bableth muche


— r i e
m


a to commended therin! Sbulde men
necare tntotbeonely? Chou wyltlangh o-
ther riven to fcozne, and thall nobody mecke the


a
i that J take indandets perf pte,and Fam cleane
intbhplpght: D that God wolde fpeake g open
Dis lpppes agapnit the, that ve mpght Mewe p
(onte of bys fecrete wploome) topp be rebar-
Deth the Double as be was appopnted todo: the
(puldel€ thou knowe, that God bathfozgotten
the becaule of thpfpnne. —
Arte thon able to fynde ont the fecretes of
Goode Dz wplt thou attapuc to the partitnes of
s thealmpgbtperbeis bper then beucn, what art
thou ablerodos Deyer thenthe hell, howe wple
thou then knowe bpm Hps length exceacth the


length of thecarthe, andbpsbzedth the beenth ©


of thefee. Though) beturne all thpnges bp {poe
dDowne;clote thz imn mather them together, who
wll tirne ppm from bys purpoless#(o¢ who map

we fapebnte bpm, whp deet thou Ce.
care roio, *dozitis bethat bnoweth the vanite of më
~e pitte Hefecth theps Weckcbueffe alfo , Fhoulde he not


pial.om-e. hencompDder its A vapne bodpeeralteth a
e
f


y Tome Ceres anda ma netoc bogneislpke a wpldea
colte. DE thoubabbdeft no we 4 rpgbt herve,
tcf bp eppne pandreg fowarde pun


EA al P r
‘the be


rpe many arcthe plages that 3am in. «Ui bers"
fore balte thou bzougbte me out ofm lid dai
tnoepe |
‘pad tetee ET 31 DAT metompgraue I

bome then thule Jbenowe |
astbougb Jhar neuce bene. renotmpaped |


zei pen anfiwered Sopharthe Naama `


agapne’Wple thou tap winto 60d. Thetbpng TY


: eo Sera A
pelt put awap the wickedueffe which thou balt
inbande,fotbat no ongodlpneile Dwell tn thp
boufe then mpabtetthoulptt vp thp face wut
out bame, and then poultret thou be fure, and
bauc nonedetofeare.

Then byldet thou forget thy mpferp and
tbynke nontoze ponit, then vpon the waters
thatrunnebp. When thoulde the reipoue ofthp


Dp Ipfebeagcleareas the noone Daye, and f{pppnge


oath as themoznpnge. Chen mypghtell thou
Daunecofozte,inthe bope that thou bate: flepe
qupetlp, ben thou art burped. Then Houldell
thou take thpreft,andnoman mabe the atrapd
pea,manp one thouldelet muche bp the. As foe
the epes ofthe bngodlpe:thcy albe confined,
and not elcape: thepzebope fpalbe mplerpeand
fozowe of + tae .
C The.rii. chapter.

C Hob Hewpnge his pecpence, dectareth che meh and pe
wer of God.

gery D Job antwered,andfapde:Then(uo ag
an Quad doubt pe arethbemenalone,and wpl-
aa Ya Dome fallperpipe pth pou. Wut F
meas paue Dnderftanding alwel ag pe, and
am no lefie then pe. Pea, who wnotecth not thefe
thyngess Thus he thatcalleth ppon God,and
whome Gor heareth, ts mocked of bpsnepghs

boure: the qovlp and innocent mats laughedto
fcozne.Oodlpnes Wan roelppledin the bar-
teg of tberpeheandigiet foz them to omble Y-
on. Thebonfegofrobbergarcin welthg proz
fperptie:§ thep that malicpouñp medie agapntt
God, dwell without care in thofethynges that
God bath geuen enue with bis banden
Afke chp catell,and thep pall enfourme the ws

the foules of theapze,etbep thal tel the. De the
increale of the earth, andit tall Hete the. D?
the fptbes of thefee, and they thall certpfpe the.
tH bat (8 be, but he knoweth chat the band of Sapt.itt.a,
the Lozde mate all thelle! + In whole hande isp
foule of cuerp liunpnaetbpnge,and the bzratpo
eficthe of allimen.

xHauenot the eares pleaface in bearpnae, =
themouth in taftpnge thethyng thatit cateths sob.rrrits
Amenge olde perfounes therets wploome,and
adnage is bnderitanbynge. Vea, wpth Sadis
sopicbome and rength ttis betbat bath coun-

ccliand +e kuowledge. Webolde, pF be breake

Downe atbpnge who canflet it bpagapnesxPE |
‘he put atbyng, who wl open itsSchalve,+ PE Feta,
be withholds the waters, thep dye bp. Pf helet tetap.t.as
them go.tbep delttopetbe earthe. ith bpmis
frrengtb and wpldome: be Bnowerp both the de
cepuer,and bpm that is Becepued. |

. Hecatyetbatwape the wple men,as it tere C

alpople, and bapngeth the Judges cut of thep2


Yk


tHob.rrpilg
te


wopttes. Detaketh awape the furieccponoftbe


people fro thepzkpnges:andgprdetbtbeprlop= ,


nes witha bande. De leadeth awape the greate
menintocaptiupteantturnctbtoempgbtp yp .
[phe Downe. xHectakethtbe verpte from out of Rep Ss
-themont), and difapopnterd the agedofthepee een
reafon.e pourceh ‘b

andcomfoztetb them that baue bene oppacthed .


¢confufpon wpon prpnees
* Lobe whatlpeth hrom basheneties be oe ‘aati.


‘Hon,


reth it opentp:& the verp Hadowe of death bzin
getbbetolpgbt. He both increaletbthe people,
and deftroperh them. pemaketb themto multt

ipe, and Dapueth them awape. pe chaungeth p
hertesof them tbat culethe people of the earth,


and dplapopnteth them :fotbattbhep go wan- i 8


Dapnge ont of the wape, and gropein the darke


wptbout lpabt: be maketh them allo to tacker EMNE


toand iro pa gp rac .
Che. riii. er.
å c yoo Gyra birime ith chep: otptiefapenges,@
condDempleth PPOCTPIPE »
D D allthpsbaue 3 lene wpth mpne
l Yee epe,berd withmpne care,and onder
i fae Canbe tt. Lobe tbat pe Bnowe,chat
Sioa ameda J know allo, nether am Z in
F< “Vferpor vitopou.. Meuerthelehe, J
talke with tbe Jim gbtie, emp defpzeistoco-
» Menwith God. Astor poupe ar toozkematiers
oflpes, ¢ onprofptable xpbilpcions altogerber
tLolbe God pe bept pourtonge,foz then my bt
pe betaken foz wple men Rowe heare mpc pa
Dpna,andpondertbetentence ofmplpps. —
sopetpeake inguiteagapni God g talke
anapnt bpm witbor ceptertipli pe not accept
the perfon of bym: D? Wyl pe contende w Gods
ball that belpe pon when de calleth pou tores
&enpna! fos agonema mocketh an other,fo do
pemockebpm. ie Mall punp pepon, veproni
pou, pf pedo fecretlp accept anp perfone. pall
| enot make pou afrapoe, when be Wewetbhim
elfe ball not bis terrphle feare fal ppon pou
pourremembzaunce is lpbe vated (parke, and
pour boopesipke theclape .
olde pour tonges,toz mp Cake,that 3 alfo
mape {peake, and mp fozowe fpalbe the lefe.


qumi. ria Zyherforedo beare mp Aew in mp teth, xand
la. efir. d put mp
ta.rrrit.b Mepet Dopl FZ putmp trufteinbpm. wut yrwpl
akerb.2, repzouempne owne tapes tabis fyabt be thal
. make me Wwpole:¢ there mape no ppocepte come b


oule inmine babes’ Lo, tbough be lap


eare mp Wozbes, and ponder mp
pour cares. Webolde, now baue
tudgement,¢bnowe thatZ mal
teous. Wibatis be, that wpli go


, befoze bpm.

“fapenges wrt
y peepareom
be founde rpg


oF to lawe wpthme r ox et bra comethat J mape


nowe holvemptonge,anddpe. Menertpeletic,
graunte me tivo thpnges, and then wpll J not
ppdemp felfe from the-


D Gipthbdzawe thpnebandefromme, And let


not tbe feartull dzede of the make meafrapde.

Aud thencall me,and J wpll anlwere:o2 els let
mie (peabe,and geueme thou ananlwere. How
manp are mp mploedes g punes; Let meknow
mp tran(greflionsand offences: Wi berfoze bp-
Det thou typ face,and boldek me Foz thpne ene-
mpe/Wlylt thou be focruelland ertreame nto
a penge Leafe , and folowe bpon Dzpe (rubble:
fo2 thou lapek (harpelptomp charge and punt
(heft me* for thelpnnesofmyp poutbe. + Chou
puttet mp fete alloin the fockes:andlobeft na
rowlp yntoall mp pathes, and markel p itep-
pes of mp fete where as J(notwithfandpnge)
niufteconfumelpke asa foulecarpon, andaga

slotbetbatie motheaten.


@ Fob difcepheth the Ipit ot man, and propberpech of Che
relurreccpon. Hope (utrpueth the goblp, (rll ¢hep abtepne
that thep lake Foz,


e AUE 4 as it were a (adobe, and neuer co
tynucth in one fate. Dol thou open thpne epes
tyon uche one,  bepngelt me in Eby tudgeméety

bocanmakeit cleane, that cometh ofan wm-
cleane thpnge: 20 bodpe.*
relpeare Determpned, the nombze of bys mones
thes are knotwen onlp bntothe. Choupatt ap-
pores pym bis boundes, which be cannot go


eponde.o fro bpmebat be ape reflow a irti


bntpll bigdapecome: wbichebelokerbfoz,Ipke *
ag anbpzelpnge doctb.

Pta tre be cut Downe, there fs fome hope pet
that it wpll{p2oute. and Mote fozth che bzaun-
chesagapne. oz though? roteofitbe waren
olde, and the Focke therot be dead in Pqrounde
pet tobenit getteth ptent of water, it wpl bud
and bapngefostbhe bowes, Iphe asa tree that ts
lanted. wut ag foz man, when hers dead, perp:
dand columedDawap, what becdmeth of hpm

The fondes when thep be Dzped bp,and p rp £
ners when thep beemptpe, år fplledagapne tho
cowe the flowpng waters of the fee: but when
man fiepeth, be rpfech not agapne(ofbps otpne


Ten r ompli ebenean peP RED ne is:
she AAR


wake vp.noz rpfe out of bis
woldeft kepe, and bydeme in the bell, putplepp
wath Were fplicd,andtoappopntemeatpme,
wherein thou mpgbtefremebzeme. apea


Deademanlpucagapnes * All thedapes of mp we. rivit.


Ipfe wpll 3 wapte tpl tell mp chaungpng hal
come. Thou alte call me:and 3 fal E
the,*delpple not thou the wozke of thpne owne


andes. |

for nowe thou ndbzeff all mp gopneres, pet
benot thou toertreame bponmp vines BE D
iniquite is fealed bp, agit vere ina bagge : but
be mercpfnll inguin de ep bvie pale
nes fallarwapeat thelatf, the rockesareremo-
ued out oftbep2 place, waters pea rce thozow
the perp ones bp lptle q Iptle,p foudes wathe
awape fed ag andearth. And ele 4
the bope of ma ¢ Chou preuaplett Epil againtt
bpm, lo tbat be palletD awape: thou chaungelt
brsettate,andputtelt bpm fromthe. And wpe-
ther bis chplozen come to Wozthpp orno, be can
nottell. And pfthep be men of lowedegre, be
knowerb not. Clibple be lpuctb:bps feme mut
baue tranuaple,and whple the fouleisinbym,be
mut be infozome .

-C The.xb.Ccdapter.
e T A A
leth on tbe wpched,rekenpng Jobta be oneers mae

peel pen anf wered Elipbas the Chemanite W

NA ea and fapbe: pall a wple piace

eon De the lcpence ofthe wpnde,andfpll anp
mans bellp,asit were the wpndeof the Eaker


al


halle repzoue with a Wozde that is nothing
t


woth


The apes of må fu Bob. dite,


=
= eee is


‘Hou:


woth, and (peake the thynges : whiche tan do
no gogod: Xs loz thame,thou balt (et it alpde,els
twoldelt thou not makelo many wozdes before
God, but thy topckednelle teacheth thy mouth,
and fo thou batt choten pacraftptonge.@ bine
owne mouth condepneth tbe snot J:pea thine
. Oone lpppeg bapeananfwere aga pnite the.

~ Arte thou tbefpz mã, that euer was bozne
D2 wat thou made before the byls/batke thou
erde the fecrete councell of God that all wple-
Soute ts Folptle forthe: What knoteet thous
betfin ibe hots And what onderitandelt thou,
but Wecanthe lame/t ith vs are both olb and


thp father.

S  Cbynkelk chouita final thynge of the con:

Tolactong of Goods With the is.alpinge twozde.

Cibppoth topne bart fo be witch p. And wher

foze wpnkett thou Wwpthtbpne eves, that thp

mpnir islo puft pp agapnit God, lettet fuch

wazdes $9 out of thp mouth: Wbat isma,that

be Huld ve cleanes what bath be, wpich is bone

of a Woinan)ioperbp beimpgbt berpabteous?

aiob.titt.b. ¥Beholde he dothnot teuk bis fapntes:pea,ebe

"Bend Herp heavens arc not cleaneinbis(pgbt bowe

mucpimoze thenan abbompnable and wple ma,

. tobichb Ozpuketh wpckennes lpke watery wpl

teli the beare me:and ¥ wpl ewe the ý F haue

- - Fene: wbiche wple men baue tolde and bath not

~ benpydfromthepz fathers puto whome onlp p

erty was gene gno Krauger went amõgethë.
Sentii, ~- Cve*x Dugadly lozotweth all ý dapes of bid
` "Ipfe agit were a woman with a chplde, andthe
nombze of a tp2auntes peareg is pnknowen. a
fearEull founde ig euer in big careg and when it
ts peace, pet Feareth be dettruccper.ipe belcucth
` neuer to be Delpucred oute of Darkenefie,foz the
` fwearde isalwape befoze bisepes. ti ben be go
eth forth to get bis liupnge, be ine ea p
tbe VARE D DAERA sat hande, Soow and
carefulnefic wpl make bim afrapbde,¢ compa fe
bpitrounde aboute, lpkeas it terca kpnae w
bis Doke ready to the bataple. ozbe bath fret
ched out bis bande agapnite God, g armed bpr
felfeagapuik the almpabtpe. ic runneth proud
Ipc Dpon byin,and with a Epiteneckefpgitety
beagapn aid be whereas becoucreth is face
wpth faffeneile, and maketh his bodpe well lps
kpnge. Therfoze thall bis dmellpnge be in defo
late citpes,andinboules which no maninbabp:
.teth, but are become beapes of tones. ee thall
ap list berpcbe, nether fhali bis fubfaunce contp=
| ~ nue nozencreale Dpi earth. He (hal neuer come
oute of darkenefle, the flame thall dave bp bys
bzaunches: Mteh the blak of the mouth of Gon,
Mall þe be taken awape.de beleneth not that be
isin patipte, andpet be ts out of the wape g va

nite albe bisrecompence. | |
pethall perpihe, afore bps tpme be wo2ne


=" mn š
a


out and bis beaunche Mallnotbegrene.e thal —
be plucked of agan bntimelp grape fr p wpne:


Ra. ard ipalllet pis flourefall, as theolpue doth.
Soa ran epetan : i
late and vnte „and the Fpze hall confine
the poufeg of fucheaz are gredp torecepue gpf-


ueetull


aged mien: pea, facbeas bane lpuedlonger then F
D er


Onotppocrytestalbedefo Eå


Sol. cif,

tes.cide chnicepueth tranaple,and beareth bang par vonas

te,and thepz bodpebapngetbEoztbdecepre, SOLEA )
d The roi. Chapter )


CF obrepe tareb chat pé Curre mož


ng bis mprerte,
thea bis wpcheones bath dereru


ch


= Sa


_ Drpat
fpeake


le pour papine With the taispngo |
lpppes.cs (Suc what Hall Fdo0) fFopallmpwo 20S, ad
imp fo2o2010¢ topl not ceale:and though Fholde
ntiptonge, pet wpl if not departe from ine. But
now that Sod bath fent me aduerlitte,thou pat
troubled allimp congregacyon,

And ebat thon bak fylledme wpth Toapntk- 25
leg, my fletbetsrecozde, an’ mp leaneffctpfeth
Dpagapnit me, ¢ beareth wprnes agqarnift me.
iets anagrpe at me, be bateth me: and gnatbetp
bpon me wptd bystecth - Dpneenempefou-
leth upon me With bis epes.

‘Cher haute ial et a 10
me, xand Im ptten me vponthe chekede pptetul iitre.rrir.n
lpe, thep gather them felnes together agapnite ™4!-F9-8
nieo hath put me tn preace wpth the pngod
Ipe,and delpuered me into the bandes of P wpc-
hed. F was ta welth, buthe hath beoughe meta
nought. je bath taken me bp the necke,be hath
tente me,anodfette meas amarke fo2 bpm felfe.
Ðpsarchers compa fe meroude about: be woi
ded mp lopnes,anddotb not (pare. Wp bowelg
bath be poured bpon the crounde. He bath gps
uen me one Wounde Dpon another, and{s Fallen
bpon melpke a gpaunte. F bane foweda laches - .
clothe bpon inp fkpnne, and Ipe wptbmp heare
eN Eae fotoin |

Up tacctst wollen with weppnee.e mpre D
epes ts the avolwe of death. Howbeit there is
Ho Wopckcdnefic inmp bandes, but mp pzaper ig
cleane. D earth,coner not thou mp vloude,and
let mp crpengefpndenorownie.

$f 02 Lo, mp wptnefleis in beuen: and be that
Sinoteethme,tsaboue inthe bepath : Bp fren-
Des eue me many Wozdes to {cone : and myne
cpe poureth out teares tnta Gov.D that a bo-
dpe mpg bt pleate wpth God,ag one mandocch
wpth another: pet thenombze of mp pearesis
come, and the wape that ¥F mult gots at bande,
from whence F thallnot turneagapne.
The. rvii Chapter,


T Job Capeth that be confum ware. a t
Bacpentip al poet, n eth aware, aud pet borth


nipbdapes are
! | rdeat Deathes &

doze. Frowarde men are wpth me,
jand mnpneepe mutcontpnuetnthe
Y a bptternetfe of them. D delpuerme,
aid loke out one to be mp fucetpe in thp (yghte.
UI bat is be Chat knoweth who wpl pomes foz

: me


= — J,


: thou balk witholoen their hartes from
tunder anopnge:theréoze halt? nociet( theme
endes parte of

bysqood, buthys ownechplozenf{pendelt. He
.~ hath mademeas ti were abpwozde of the peo-


- pepe ig dpmuie for perpe deupnefie, and all mp
trengtpis become lyke a thavowe. Cicrtuoule


menthertore al welcontpdec this, and thet ia


€ pect take parte agapnft the ppocrpte.


j cleane andes, topll euet be Frons
gerand i ibid ¢ da turne pou, and get


@ Bpldad rehearlerh the papnes of the bnfapth=

fulj and wp cket, 7
Pen annfwered Wildad the Subite
Cer fe and fapa: when wplpe make an enbde
NIA AAF poure wozdes Marke well, and

Ey) NE tben we wpllfpeake. Ciberfoze ar
faye counted as bealtcs., and repnteD
‘fo pplelin pour HA he deftropod bpm felfe
topt bps anger: bal th earth be fozlaken,o2
any (tote remoucd out ot bps place , bpcaute of
thec Pea tbelpgbt ofp vugodiy Walbe put out:
andthe fparke of bps fpze yall not burne. The
pabt thalbe barke inbys Dwellpnge, bts cant
25 nell albe put out wpth bpm. Hpg pelumptu-
ous gopngés are Kepte n,and pis owne counfel
- al cat bpm dotbne. oz bis fete are taken ag
itwercinthenet, and Deis at bys wpttesende,
Ips fote Halbe holden in the finare, andit pall
catche them that be thpzitp of bloud: Chelnare


iglapde foz bpmintbe grounde,anda pptfall in,


the ware. |
C © fEearfulneffe Hall makehpm atrapode on cue
rpfpde,that he bal not know, where to get out
unger Halbe bys (renathe:mplfostunc Hall
Hance vpon bpm. Be Walt cate the Mrengthe of
bpsowne lkpnne euen the fp: ome of beathe
ipalleatebps firength. Vps Hope thalbcrooted
out ofbpsdwellpnge, verpefearefulnefte (hall
bapnge bpm to the Beng. Dther men thallowel
itt bps boule( but (pall be none of bys) and bum
{fone thalbetcattred vpon bis babitacpon.ipps
D rootes halbedzped vp byneth, andavoue Mall
_ pig brannche be cut downe: His rememb2aunce
~ {hal perptbe from the earth, and be al banue uo
name in the ftrete : ep fhalldzpuchpm fro the
iperbte into Darkenefle,and calf ppm cleane once
of the wo2ldedpe Hall nether bane chptdzen og
&ynffolkes amonge bps pcople,no,no2 anp po-
fterptein big dtwellpnges. Chep tpat come atter


ppm, Galbe aftonped at bys dape and they that
go before, Halbe afrapde. Suche are nowe the
Dioellpneres of the wpched, and thisis the place
of bpmrbat knowethnot God. ;
C The. rir. Chapter.

Fob reepteth his miterpes and geuous papnes: He pz02

phecpeth of the generall relarreccpon.
aq Db anfwered and fapde, bow longe wyl A
Z E ipe bere mp loule, and trouble me wpti
Vee woes Lo tentpmeshaue perepzoued
me :and arenotatpamed foz to laugheme foto
fcomne:pf J qo wonge, J Fo wonge Comp felf.

aut ye pe wyll enbaunce pour lelucsagapult
me, €accule me to bea wpe cd perfon, becaule


Œ ofthe tame that iscome vponme:bnowe this


then,thatit is Gov thatbathbanbdledme fo vio
lentip and bath compaficd me abonte wpe big


D net. PE¥Jxcomplapne of the vpolence done Adee abaca, ta,


me, gcannotbe heard. And pl Jcrp.thereisno
fentence geuen withme . Ie ref hedged bpmp
popee, that can not pafic,and be bath fet dar-
kenenem mppathes. x He bathelpopledme of Fob.t.e.tt,


P mpnehonoute, andtaken the crowne aap fro


mp beade. He hath defkroped me on cuerp {pde.t
Yam vadone:<pp hope bath be takenawaptro
me as tf were attee plucte Dp bp the roote. Dis
wath iskpndledagapntt me: De takethme,aa
thougbe J were bps enempe. |

ys men of warre came together,whpcbe 2
mane thep2 wap ouer me,and beteged mp dwel
Ipnge rounde about. xDe path put mp D2etHrer prrrrviit e
farre awap feom me , and fuch ag were of mpne
acquapntaunce,are become flratigers vntome
x sepne owne kpnfefolkeg paue folaken me, € prprrvilie
mp frendeg bane put me onte ofremembzaunce.
‘Eye feruauntes and mapdeng of mpne otone
poule toke mefoza Erañger:and J am become
aganalcauntintpep:fpabte.

J called mp feruaunt,and be gane me no ana 7
fwere:no though J payed bim with mp mouth
<Ppne owne wopfe mp cl bad ind ha Pet T
3 wag fapne fo: cofpeake fapze to: the chyldac
of mpne ownebodp. Vea, the chplozen delppted
Hie. And when J was qone fro them,thep tpake
encll vponme. All fuche as were mpmofte fa-
milpers,abbogred me:and thep whome F loued
bet, are turned agapn me, <p bone Danger
to mpCkpnne,and mp Repe is awape,onlp ther
islefte me the fhpnne about mp teth. Hane pre
tic ie me hauc ppite bpon me, ( D pe myp tee.
Des kor the bade of God Hath touchedime.Cabp
po peperlecute me ag God doth, and are not fa-
tiffpedot mp feme.

— - Dtbatmp worded were nowe heptten:D y
that thep were putin abooke:wolde God thep ~
were grauen wptbhan pron penneinleade, ozin
fronetocontpnue. For Jam lure, tbat mp rede
merlpucth,and that J Walrpie out oftheeartd
inthe latter dape:that 3 Halbe clothed agapne
wyth thys{kpune,and le Godin mp fepe. Pea
“4 mp felfe thall beholde bpm, not woth sabut
withthele fame epes. Wp rapnes ar conten
soptbin me,bpd not pefape:tobp doeth be luffre ©
nerfecucpons 4s there founde anoccafpon tn ime
But beware of the wearde foz the fwerd wyl


beauen
| a rotete i


‘a


i


j


be avenged of wpckednefle:¢ befure,that there
igaJudgemente.


mouth, be bpd it vnder bps eee: That he fa-


cate it Dp. r
Geese ainvie balbe maki fos tycheffe,


€ but be hall not entope them. And twbp: De bath


oppzeficd the poze, andnot helped then : poxfed
batb befpopled,and not buploded them. wig bel-
Lpcoulde neuer be fplled, therfore thall be perp
inbyscouctoufnefic. Cheare thallnone of bys
meatbe lefte bebpnde, therfoze all noma loke
for bps pzolperpte. Whew be bad plenteoulnette
cleucrpethpnae.pet teas be pooze, thoughe be
tas helpedon euerp fpe.


yp . Jor though the wpched haue nener fo much


to fpil bps bellp,pet God (hall fende bis wath
bpon dim, and caule bis tndiqnacponterapane
ouer bpm : fo that pe be flpe the pron weapons,
be albe (hot wpth the elebowe. The arowe
istaken Forth, and gone out of p qupuer, anda
piVRirengetioearue thozowe the gall of bym,

care pal come bponbim. There hal no darke
nefle beabletobpoebpm. An vnkypndlpd tyre


ge allume bpm, and loke what remapnety in


bys boule, it Halbe delkroped. Chebeauen hal
Declare bps wpchednelle, ethecarty thalltake


om


Ea lii,


pers agapnlt pitt. Che lubflatice that behath
in bps boule- halbe taken atape and perpin
thedape of the Lordes wath. x This isthe poz Hob.rrbire
cponthat the wpckedinan all baue of God, g
thc berprage that pe mapelokefoz of Gov: bpa
caule of bps wozdes. SIRI

C The.rri Chapter:


I ico fote ot pou. Suire mea lptie; that

eee) Jmape peake alfo, andthenlanghe

mip WozdEHtO tcomNeoR(pFitipepow.) Bott toz ga

mannes fake that make thts dilputacpon?

Whpche pf it toere fo, Houlde not mp tpzere be

then loze introuble’ arke mewell, and ve a=

balbcd and lape pout bande vpon pour mouth

Jo: when F contpoer mp felfe Zam afcaphe,¢

mp fletbeis (mptten with feare.xtUberfoze do pes teritt.a

wpcked mentpue mbelthandproiperptpcome Dere-Ftte

to thep: olde age, and increaly intpebes: Cheie

chpldzen Ipune inthep2 (pabt, and thep2 qeneras |

cponbefozethep2epes. ‘Chepze boutes arefafe

From all feare, and the rodde of Goddarth not

finpte them. Thep: bullocke qendzeth, and that

not out of tpme: ebepze colve calueth,and ignore

vnfrutefull. — | PF ee

Shep lendeforth thep2 chpldzen bp flockes ys

and thep2 fornes led the Daunte. Thep beare ctap,.c;

Lopth them tabsettes and barpes , and pauc ine

ffrumentes of mulpcke at their pras: Thep

fpende thep2 dapesin welthpnetle: but fodapn=

lp thep godowne to bell. Cheplapealfo vnto

God, co trom vs: we delprenot the knowlenge

of thy wapes. * Cibo is the Aimpabepe, that ttar.v.9j

Wwe Mulde ferut ppmr And what profptetpulde

we baue to fubimptte our felues vntobpmr Lo,

tbere i8 vtteripe no goodnelfe in tbem, therfore

K wpll not Dauc to do with che counlapleof the
ngodlp. Howe ofte (hal the candle ofthe wpe-

Bed be put outrbotwe oft commeththep2 veltruc

cpon unto them: D what fozow thal God qpue

them fo? thep2 part inbis weath:Pcathep thal .

beeué as bape befoze the wpnde, and*ag chafe istalmsb;

that the kozme carpeth awape.

_ Andthough Godfaue theyz chylozen from T

Cuche {o20we, pet wpll he fo vewarde them fela

ucs, that they Hall knotve tt, Thep: owne de-

Gruccpon and mplerpe pall thep fe wpth thepz

epes and dapnite of the fearful wrath of the di.

mpabtpe. o: what careth be what becometh

of bis boutpolde after bys death, when the nom

bze of bps monethes is cut Worte: nas muche ©

thenas Sod batie the bye power of all, who -

can teach bpm anp knowletge:Dnedpetbnow

When beis mpgbtpe, andat bys bet reche,and

in pzolperptie euen wben bis bowels are at the

fattett, and bysbones fullofmatye. Xu otber

byeth inforowe and beupnefle,and nenet badde

good dapes. Thep Hall fepe bothealpke inthe

earth, tthe wozmes Mall couer them. Beholde,

J knowe wat pe thpnie, pea:and the fubtpltye 9

that pepmagynagapni me-fto: pe fap wyere

ig the peynceg palace ¢ exopere ig the ak h

ait


‘Sob,


p the wap! woubtleffe,ye cannot Denpetbeve
kene,tbat x the wpcked ts kept bato the bap


enbeth Rob eee aar fe.
= iphbas the Chemanpteqaue ått-
(Cease iwere,andfapd: ava man be profp
om Gea table buto wb 00,a8 De p is wple mape
iaeeces ve piofptable to bpmlelfs Fe it any a-
ualntage Lute the Almpg tye, that chou atte
rpgbtuouss D2 thall tt profpte bpm, that thou
 mabell thp wapes parfptes is be afrapde tore-
prouetbhe,and to freppe foath with theinto ind-
gement: 4s not thp wpckednelie gtcat,ethpne
Hugracpous dedes innumerable: o: thou halk
taken the pleoge from thy bzotberfo2 nougbte,
#5 and robbed thenaked of thepzeclotbynge: Co
fucbe as were werp bat thou gpuc no Water to
dipnbe,andba lle Withdzawen bzeade from the
bongrpe. Sbulbde fuch one the as bfeth violéce
DzoNge and oppzeflpon (Dopnge all ehpriges of
parcialite, and baning telpect of perfons owel
intbelande: Thou baklent wpoowes awape
emptye,and oppzeffed the pooze Eatherlefic.
@berfoze art thou compatied aboute wpth
{nares onenerpelpde, and todenlp tered wpth
feare:fpuldeft thou the fe no barknetie: Shulve
cerrito. not the waterflouderunne over thes ow *bp-
geid caufethat Godis pper then the beaueng,and bp
caute thou lept that the acces are lo bye,wplt
thou therfozelape: Tuh, bow Huld God know
Doth his daminpon reach beponde the cloudes:
Tupé, the cloudes cover bpm that be mape not
Ce and be dtvelleth aboue bean. Doe not thou
kepe the olde wape that Dapne men bauc gone!
UI dich were cut daotne out of tpine,and whole
foundacpot was asa runnpage water, wbtche
fayd bnto God:go from bs,and what dpd p Al
mpabee opiy them: Be Fplled roep: boules w
gor tbpnges. Wut the counfaple of the god
peisfatre frome. Che rpgbteous lawe it,and
twere glad, theinnorcent laughed bim to frome
Jgour encreale bewen Bowne? As foz the rem-
nauntofthem, the fpze bath confumed it.

@ berfore reconcple the puto God, ¢ be con-
tent, fo tall all thynacs prolpere with prpabt
well. Recepuethelawe at bps mouth,andlape

Deu. Feb bp Hpswozdes in thpnebarte. oz * pE thou
woplt turne to the stun LA thou alt tande
fat and put all vnrygiteoulneg from thp dwel
Ipnge: Thou Halt make golde as plentpfullas
the dufte, and the qolde of Dphir as the fipntes
oftherpuers. Pea, Almpghtpe Godbps owne
Selfie Halbe thp defence and chou Malt paue ples


tpeoffpiner. Thë Halt thou bauethpdelpte in
the Almpabtte,and lpfte vp thp face tnta God
Then (halte thou maketbp prayer punto bpm, €
be all peare the, andtbou thalte kepe thp pza-
mpieg. Chen lobe tbat thou taket tn band, be


Mal makeit to pzofpere witb the:anbdst ly
Mall hyneinthy wapes: Worx whofobü Pro, Frip.c
bpm felte, bpm thal belet bp:and whofo lok
mekelp thalbe bealed. PE thou be innocent, thon
alt delpuer thecountrp, bpcanle ofthe vngpl
tynefie of thy bandeg.

be.rriti. Chapter.


zob atfpimeth that beboth knoweth æ feareth the pow
erand fentence of (he Jutge, and fapth that be hathe wal:


ked in bie rpghteouluche, '
Exa Db anfwered.andlapde: @ptaping F
ys fac eet this bape mbytterne eand mp
CY denabandeheup.bpcaute of mp gronpuge.
= D tat] ed had rhs Gar Din
D that ¥ mpgbt come befoze bis feate topleate
mp caule befoze bim, and to fpl mp mouth with
arqgumentes. Chat Jmpabt knowe, what an-
Bead De Wane Led MERSE ATE ii-
derffand what be wolde faye nto me. cipl be
leateagapnit me wpth bps greate poter and
tength: Ho, but be wpllmake methe Mron-
po igini, Hal entre dpfputacpon wih .
pm, and mp uge chal delpuer me Foz euer. e ys
bolde , thougbe 3 go before, J fpndebpm. IA
come bebpnde, J can getno knowledge cf hpi:
JEJ yo onp lette fpde where be doth pts worke
“J can not attapne nto bpm. Agapne I 4g9
ontberpabt fpoe, be bpdeth bpm felfe that can
not fe bpin. ut ag fozmp wape be knowetp tt Sapi.tib.
andxtrpeth me asthe golde in p fpze. fetes. hb
Pp fotedoth kepe bis path, bys bpe wape |
bane Jbolden, and Wpll not go out of it. J wpll € |
not fozfake the commaundement of bis lpppes,
butloke what becharged me wpth pps mouth,
that baue Jut bpinmp barte. Heis Epllat
one popnt, and who wyll turnebpm backer He
docthas bym lpiteth, ebzpngethbtopatiewpat
bewpll. Her perfourmetbtbetbpna thatigsap- <4
pornea oam, aa manp ucbethpngeaborth
e. Chis is the caule tbat J Mzpnkeat bps pre- _.
fence, fo that when Jeólfpder bym, Jamafrapd *
of þpm. fo? in fo muchas bets God, be maketh
mp barte fofte:and fepna that beis Almpgbtp
de putteth me tn feare. Chuscan not J get out
ofdarbenes,neptber bath he couered the cloupe
fromp face.
: CThe.xvittt Chapter. |
CAE
Sse hha
wags Dnitpderpnge then,’ theretgnotpme % °
VEENA bpd from the Slmpghtte, howe happe
i ect ai ietb tt, tbat a whiche knowe bpm,
(ores NOt regarde hpsdapes: Foz lome
men there besthattremoue other mës land mar Dest. trr.
kes:tbat robbe them of thepz cattellandkepep “PP? =
fame Foz fhep2 oone: thatx Dpue awape Pale ere.reis.c,
of the fatberietie: that take tbe wpddowesore |
fora plebge:that thiut ppo oze out of the wape
and oppzeile the fpmple ofthe Dozlde togpther
webolde/euen as the wplde affes tn the delecte
gotheptozsth to thepze woke: g aie
6


a


pople


Gpoc. tir.
it @t.cb.5


à
* Dok rrit.g


599


B tofpople:Dea,the bery top loernefle miny ftreth
foodefoztbdepzchplozen. Chey reape the core
felde that isnot thep2 owne: g let the ppnepard
of the vugodlpe alone. Chey are the caule that
fomanp menare nakedand bare, baupuge no
clothes to coucr them,¢ to kepe them from cold?
S othat when the powes inthe mountapnes
baue rayned vpon them, g thep be all wet, they
paue none otber {uccoure, but to kepethepma-
monge therockes.


C Thep fpopletheluckpng fatherlelle chpld, f a


and take the pledge from the pooze. Info much
that chep let bpm qonaked mptbout clotbyna:
and baue taken awape the theake of the bongry
The pooge ave fapne tolabour inthetr oyle mpl
les:pea, and to treade in thep2 hip haere
pettolufiretbpatt. Chemen ofthe Litpecrpe
tothe Lozde wprbspabpnae, the foules of the
(apne allo make thew complapnt. But God de
ftropcth themnot foz al ebig, whereas thep(not
withandpng are conuerlaurit amonge typem,
that abbaare the ipgbt: they know not Nis ap
noz contpnuein bis pathes.«Cpmelp in p moz-
npngedo they arple,to murther thefpmple and
ay ives intbenpgbtthepqgoattealpng.
be epe of the aduoutrer wapteth foz p date
kenes, andfapth thus inbymlelfe. Culh,there
(pall no epefeme: and fo he difgupleth bys Face.
An che nyabt {eafon thep fearch p Houles and
bpde them felues in the dape tyme, but wplinot
Knowe the lpabt. fFo2 afooue as the dape birra-
keth, the hadow of death commeth vpon ther -
p and they goin bhozepble dariines. Che vugodly
is{wpfter thentbe water: thep2 pozcpon thalbe
curfed in theearth and be hall not beholde the
wape of the ypuepyardes. Dthat thep (fo2 the
wyckednes which thep bane Done) were Drawe
totbe bell, Toner then now meltetbat Pdzouth
and beate. D that alco pafipon vpon them Wer
A forgotten:that thepz bapnties were wo2mes,p
thep were cleane put ont of remembaunce,anod
pngorlpneile vtterlpe bewen dowen Ipkeasa
tree. He bath oppeetiedthe barren, that peran
F not beave, and vito the wpddowe bath de done
no good. ie dzeWwe the mpgbrpe after bpm with


bys potver, and when be wasgottendp,noma | Ae


was topthout feare,aslongeas belpued. And
though tbep mpabt be fafe,pet thep topll not ve
cepuc tt fozthepzepes loke bpon thepze owne
wapes. Thep areeralted foz alptle, but poztlp
are thep gone, brought toertreme poucrtp,and
tikenout of the wape: pea, and Vtterlp plucte
pfas tbe careg of cogne. 3s it not for Who wt
then repzone me aga lpar and fap that mp wag
degare notbpna worth .
CTberrv.chapter.
C Splbad preucth that no man is citane awd
without (pane before God,


mames Hen anfwered pldad the Su ite,


Jebel bles,
canbe becleane,that ig bome ofa woman iSe- 5
boldethe Hoone bpnetbnothpngaincomparp= |
(onto bpm ,andtbe tarres are bucleate in bps
fpabt. Powe mache moze then man: that ts but
co2zrupcponsand the fonne of man, which is but
a@ Woz Me.
E The.rrbi. chapter. |
Fob eweth that man can not hcipe God, and
prourth it bp bpsmpractes,
a,b an{wered,andfapde: whom baft

3. thon belpeds Pym that is torepoute
eq (trenaths lhat cofozte gpuett thou
7 zA unto ppin that bath no trrengeb ¢

cate prere isthbeconnflaple that p Hul-
deft qpue bpm, whyche batbuo wpldomes Halk
thou tbeied the wapeok ryote ttupnges Co |
whome pate thoulpoken thole wozdes: UDO wg
made the bzcatbtocomeoutofthp mouth” Are
not Dead thpnges Hapen bnèrr the waters:and
thypnges bp Pp waters (pode: fell is naked befoze
ym andthe verp deruccpon tt felf cannot be
pdout of bps lyghte.de frretcheth out p nogeh
ower the emptye, andbaugeth p earth vponno=
thpnge, de bpndeth thexwaters in hig cloudes senene
and the cloud ig not broken wnder them. He pal: C
deth backe bys tole, that it cannot befene: and
{p2edethbhpscloude befozett.

* bebathcompafled the waters top th cer: wob.tr.
tapne boundes,ontpll the Dapeandnypoitcome Dral eliit. b
toanende: The Verp ppllerg of peauen tremble Jerem.v.e.
andquake at bysrepzofe. * beftplieth the fer arat.vtitg
wt) bys power, and thozotve bys wyledome, D
fmpteth De the trength therof.ipstpete bath ©
garnpiped the peueng and bis bande path made
thercbellpous ferpent.Lo,this ts nowe a Mot
fumme of big wapes. But whots able luiipep=
entlp toreberfe bis wo:bes tho can percepue
and undertande the thundze of big power ¢
C The.rreit.Cchapter


€ Whe contaunine Ne and per fptnelle ars ob, and the parte
ofthe bnfapehfull wpeh Goo. |


pecan AD Fob proceded g went forth q
7 wae In bis communicacpon,fapeng.
SNS Astrulpas Godlpueth( which
Copy Yan bathe taken awapemp tndge=
Gages Vial ment) andtbealmpabtpe tjat
Fem aq\ bath veredimp mpnde: ep lyp
Ses eg (ball talke of no banptye,=
mp tunge Wall (peakeno dpfeepte,whple nip
bzcathisin me, andaslonge as the wpnd(that
God hath geuenme)iginmyp nofkrelics.
od fozbypod, that Fuld graunt pour caufe
tobetpabt. Asfozme, yntpilmpne endecome ~
wpll J neuer go frompne tnnocencp, 3) p rpab-
tuousbealpuae kepe F fat whypche J wpll not
Folake: mp Darte Wall not reppoue me of mp
dapes. CTherfoze myne enempe thalbe foundeas
the bngoalp, and be that taketh parte aqapntt
me,ag che burpabruous,F 02 what hope bathp
ocrpte though be bath great qood,¢ thougpe
0b Cpue bpm tpchelic after bis bartes oelpee?
Doeth God beare bym the fooner, when be crp=
eth vutobpm in pis necellitp: bath be {uch plea
Cure and delpteinthe Almpabtye, that bedarre


a


so


ie beter ae!


opiti?


| alwape call bpon God? 3 wpll teach pou in the
(Dos cri? mancopared vito Gov -xbetutbitpeas D2 boo


name of God, and the thyna that J bane of the
pabtp


Aob,


Imvabtye wpl Inot kepefrom pou.wWepold goldenoz chypftall , neptber fwete odoures, nog
ras Gaa Phat E wne an cepte, as thoughpe yar late. Chere is nothpnge fo wo2thpe,o2
© kneweall thpnaes. WAberfozethendopegoa= foercellentc, as ones to be named vnto ber, Foz
Fobrrd. ponte wh luche bapne Wwozdes, fapinge: * ‘bps pertpte wyledome gocth farre beponde them al
igthe porcpon that f wpcked al baue of God The Copas that commeth out of Jnde:map tr
and the petitage that tpeauntes tpal vecepue of nowplebelikened vnto bec-:pea,nomaner of ap
the Xlmpabtpe. Pibe get many chylozen, thep parell hotveplealaunt and fapze fo eucr it be.
fhallperplipe wptb the wearde and bps potte- Jerom whence then commeth topledomand W
rite tall baue fcarcenetfe ofbzead.Lokewbom where is p place of vndertandpng: be is bpp
pe leueth bebpnde bpm, thep fall Dyeebe bu- fromtbecpes ofall menlinpnge: pea, and from
rped:and no man thall haue pitpe ofpiswpddo the foules of theapze. Delbruccponand deathe
wes. Though he bane as muchemonep asthe fape,webaue beard tell of Der wpth oure cares.
duft of the carth, andrapment as readpeasthe Wut God feeth ber ay,and knoweth bev place .
clay,be mape well prepare tt:but the godly thal ozbebeholdeth the endes of the world, andlo
put it pon bpm,and the innocét tal oeaie out keth bponallthat is under Heauen . When be
the monep.49ps boule tpall endure agthemoth, wepedthe wpndes ¢mealuredthe waters: whe
’ SD andagabouthebat the watchman maketh . fet tbe rapne in ozder, and gaue the mpabtpe
- Pralri.d vans hen therpde madypeth,becarpethnothpng floudesalawe. Chen dpobe le her,tbé declared
spats yoptb bpm: eis qone intbetwpniselpnge ofan beber, prepared berandknetoe her. And nto ecereti.t.c.
epe:and nid nothing. Detbruccpon taker hoD manbelapde: Webolde:* to fearcthe Lozdets porin.
pon him aga water Aonde, the tempett teas wpledom, ¢tofozfakeencllis vnderfandpng. “
Leth bpmavoape,in p npght featon. A vebemét The. crix. Chapter. F
cattwpnbecarperdbpm pence and DepartetD:® GZP toupnye ane tecnver of taurybrcanecoe phe
tome plucketb bpm out of bps place. Jtrul- that Jab futfrep atcojbpugete bisdeferupngr.
Gethin oponbpmand(pacethbinnothe map mpag D Job proceabedand wente foztbcin g
not efcape from the power therof<Cbhenclap me DPS communtcacion,faping: Dthaty
thep2 bandes at bpm:pea and icit of bpm, when Pe fa were ag 3 vagin ë monetbes by pat,
thep loke bpon bys place. Sasaaiandin the dapes when God pzelerued
€ The.rrvitt Chapter. a me:wben bis lyght Hpned vpo mp beade, when
C Fob Heweth that the wpfedom of Sep isb jap J wente after the fame logbe and bpninig euen |
zerer HERE ts a place: wherelpluct'S Fhorowethe darkenefle. Agit toode wprbme |
baa an} brought oute of,and where golde when J was ponge: when Godpzolpercd mp |
penod Wage Fay crped* where pron ig DPSTCOOUED” Honfe-wwben the Slmpabtpe was pet wpth me:
ESY EAA the grounde and (tones refoluedte hen mp chpldzen ftode aboute me : when mp
Eri ba metalle è The darkenefie pall ones wapes tanne ouer pth butter and when p ito
cometoanende:becanfekeoutthe grounde OF npe rockes gaue merpuers of ople, when F wet
all thpnaes the toneg thedarbe ,andtheWa> thorowetbecitpe vnto the gate and when thep
dowe of deathe. Wipththerpuer of water pat- ferme achayze in the (rete: when the ponge më 2B
teth be a fonder the vated people, tbat kn ow casfone agthep fawe me) bpd them felueg, and -
no coodnepgbbourbeadestucheasarerude, YN when theaged arole, tode vp onto me:wben
manerlp and bopfterous.e bepngetd foodout fhe Depnceslefte of thepz talkpnae, andlapde


— test a


of theeartbe , and that whpcbets pnder, confu- thepz bande to thepzmouth: when the mpabtp


meth bhe wptbhtpee.


35 There tafounde a place, whole Tones ate


allcleane apbirs,and tobere the clottes of the
eartbare all golde. Chere ts a Wap allo thatthe
bp2des know not, that no bulturs epe pathlene
whereinthe Lyons whelpes walke not,t wher
no Lyon commeth. There putteth be his bande
dpon the fonye rockes, and oucrthzoweth the
mountapnes. Rpuers flotve out of the rockeg :
and loke what ts pleafaunt,bis epe leetbit.

Dut of dzoppes bapngeth be greate floudesto-


kept thep? vopce, and when theps tonge cleucd
totberoofe of thep2 mouth. Wibenall tyep that
beard me called me bappp: and when all cbep

faweme, pake good of me. Ffor FJ delpucred

pooze Mben becrped,and fo bpd F thefatherles,
andbpmtbat Dadnonetobelpebpm. ie that
buld baue bene loft, gate mea good wo2d and


the wpodowes pare prepausi Anowpp. Fe
in


put bponmerpgbtuoutnes, whpch covered me
agagarment, andequptp was mpcrowne. J
was anepe to the blpnde,and a Foote to Plame:


DIL APR eB ee ee,


gether g thetbpnge thatis bpd, bopngethbeto Ywaga father vntothe pooze: ¢ when Junew
Erat, s ipgit. Howe commethaman then bp wpledom not p caule, 3 fought it ont dilpgentlp. J bzake
Sacobl. 1a XU berets the placetbat men Emde pnderftan= thechawes ofthe vnrpabtuous ma,xaudpluct Senspire
fi.meaitd Dpnges Clerelp no mancan tell howe worthy a toe popit ee teth. |
aind shonge (peis,neptberistpefoundcinthelanbe © Tperfoze, F tbougbe berelp, that 3 thould
oH of them tbat lpue,-#cac ther: owne picature) Dave dped in mp neft:andtpat mp dapes pould D
=~  € Chedepelayth:heisnotwithme.+Thelee Haucbeneasmanp as the landes of the lee. Loz
Sapt.dit.b Caveth he isnot withme. Specannotbe gote mproote tas{pzed out bp the water (pyde: and
ox fenifozcs(themotpuregolde,neither map ppzpce thedewelape bpon mp cozne. Mp bonoure ena
of ber be bought withanpfpluer-Mo wedges of creafedmoze and moze,andmyp bowe was euer
qold of Dpbir,nopzecious Dnir toneg,no Ha the ronger in mpne hand. Antome men gaue
phirsmape becompared Dntober. Ro,nepther ecare,metbep regarded:and With (epléce thep ta


tped


a
z l
z a, ll ger


“Hob.


tpedfor mp counfaple. DE Ahadlpoken, they
wolde haneit none other wapes, mp wozdes
toere lo well taken amonge them. Thep wap-
ted foz meas Foz the rapne:and qaped pponme
as the qroundedothtorecepue the latter oure
Widen J laugbed, they knewe well it was not
carnet. and thelpabt of mp cottenatice wolde
thepnotpucout. wMbenAaqrecd vntotbey2z
wape, J was the chefe,and lat asakpnge wpth
bpsarmpe about ppm. And when thep were in
beupnes, J was thep2 comfoztour.
— CTbe.rrr. Chapter: —
Q The great delppipuge of men,anbeurle of God
that Job futtreth.
Se t now they F are ponger the Y, paue
TEA in derifion:pea, euenthep whole fa
| 3 withers 7 wolde baue thought frozneto


-SN haue fet withthedogges of my cattel.
. The power € Trength of thep2 bandes mpgbte
dome no good, forthe tymeis but lo amonge
them. Eos verp mplerp and bongerthep fedit  g


tothe wyldernefle, a darke place, Hozribleand
teall,pluckpnge bp nettels amonge the bues
and the tuntper rotesfo2 thep2 meate. And whe
thep were dzpucn forth, mencerped after them,
agit bad beneafterathefe. Chep2dwellpnge
was belpde foule bzookes: pea tu the caues and
dennes of the carth. Amonge the bulthes wente
thep about cepenge:and onder the thoanes thep
s Catheredthemfeluestogether. Thep were the
chplozen of Fooles and bpllapnes which are Ye-
mhzetiig KED Out of the wozlde. *Mow am ¥ thep2 fonge
Piane andam become thep2ieftynae tocke : thep ab-
Dozre me and fpe Farre feom me,and tapne mp
Cacewopthipetle. Eo? the Lozde hath looled the
rengti of mp bodp, andbzougbtmelowe: _
‘The bzpdle haue thep cat out of my lpaht.cips
mp tpght bande cpte the ponge mé agapni me,
thep bauc purt mp fete treadpnge vpoume, as
Wpon the apes that thep wold deltrop.a)p p
thes baucthep cleane marred. Yt wasfocalye
foz tbem todo me parme, tbat they nedcd noma
to belpe them. Thep fell vponme asit bad bene
the bzeakpnge in of waters and came inbp bea:
pestodeltrope me. Scarfulneffe is tourned a-
gapni me,

E  Mpnebonoure vbanqupliped awape more
fwp tly then the wpnde, and mp pzofperitie de-
parted bencelpke asit werea cloud. Therfore
is mp mynde poured full of beupnefle, and the
dapes of mp trouble baue taken bolde pon me.
<p bones are pearfed thozowe inthe npgbttea
fon, and my fpnewes take no reft. Eo; the vehe-
inencpe of fozotwe is mp garment chaunged,and
accozDpnge to the dpucrtitie of beupnetie, am J
gpzded pth mp coote. bebathcalt meinto the
mpe, and J am become lpkealthes andoutte. ,
Ube F crpe unto the, thou doek not beare me,
and though 3 tande before the,pet thouregar=
defimenot, Chouartebecome mpneenempe,
and wpth thp Diolente bande thou takelt parte
agapnt me. gn tpmes paft thou dpddef fet me

D vp onbpe.as tt were aboue the winde, but now
batt thou gpuen mea Verp fozefall. ure Jam
that thou tplrdelpuerme ynto death:cuen to p


ali Q i + cu 4
long png that is due wnioal men Ipupng. Row
Yie not men tod o violence vnto them , thatare
deltroped alreadp, but where burt is done, there
viethep tobelpe. Dpd not J wepe withbhym p
vasin troublesbad not mp foule cõpaflion Ypa
the poozes Pet neuerthelefle , whereas Floked
fo: good, cupl happened nto me : g whereas J
Wapted for lpgbt , there came darkenelle, Dp
bowels teeth within me, ¢ take no refke,fo2 the
dapes of mp trouble are come ppon me. Dekely
anDdlotolp came Jin:pea,and topthout anp dif-
pieafure: 3J Rode vp in the congregacion: com=
muned with them : Wut nowe Jama copanton
ofdagons, g a felow of Etriches, 4p fkpnne
pon meis turned toblacke , and mp bones are
bent with beate: my Derte ig turned to fozowe
and inp pype to weppnge, fes
TThe.rrri. Chapter:
€ Job recpteth the anocencpe of bps Ipupnge,and
nombze of bps bertues.
z= (Dade acoucnaunt withmpneepes A


Fi (cll. Eo: bow great a pozcton thal F

leg , wri Daue oF God r g wbat enberptannce

eat fri the almpabtype onbypes As fog the
vngoblye t he that topneth bpm felfe to the com

anp of wicked doers, hal not deftructtOemps op rrriire
ferp come Ypå bym * Doth not hele mp Wapyes p;ouer. b.d
g tellall mp qoinges ¢ pf J baune Walked tn bas
nitie, o2 pf my feet baue rine to dilcepue , let me
be wapedinaneuen balaunce, that God map fe
mpne innocencpe. * PEfobe p FJ paue withdra- Plat. oi.
wen my feet out of the rpabt wape pimp bert ©
bath folowed myne epe (pght: PE Fbaue tained
o2 defpled mp Hades:tha Hal F lowe, an other
cat:pea mp gencractd g pofferitic halbe cleane
rooted out. PEmpne berte bath luted afier mp
nepgbbours wpfe, o: pf 3 bauclaped wapte at
bpsdoze. Dthenletmp wpfe gepnde vntoar
other man, and let other më Ipe with Der. x Æo
thisisa wyckednefleefpnne, that is worthpe
to be punpived: pea a fpze that vtterlp hulde
fume ¢ root out allmp fubfiaunce. Dpd F euer
thynke (come todorpabt pntomp feruatites €
maphés, whe thep badanp matter agapni mes
ut feing p God wpll (pt in iudgement, what
pall Fdo And fozfomoch as he wpl nedes vp-
(pte me, what anfwer Hal Fqpuchpm: He that
faffioncd mein mp mothers wobe, made De not
by allo were we not both Hapenalpke tn our
mothers bodpes: (ben the Ae delpredanpe
thynge at me baue J denped tt thés Paue FJ caus
fed the wpddotr to ftande waptynge g meitt
bapner Daue Jeatë mp pozcponalone, that the
fatberletic bath bad no parte wpthmerfoz mere
cp gre we Dp with me fro mp pouth,tcopatiton
from my mothers wombe. Paue F (ene any ma
perp thozow nakednefie,t want ofclothpng?s
D? anp pooze man fo: lacke ofta pment, whofe
fpdes thanked me not, bycaule be was warmed
with the woll of mp Hepe! 7

Dpd Feuer lpft vp mpne hanvde to hurt p fa: C

therlefles pea, inthe gate where F lawe mp felfe
tobeinauctbozitic, then let mpnearme fallfra
mp Hulde, and mpne arme poles a a o


æru. rrii.


4 *that J wolde not loke vpona dam Free y


‘Sob.


fhetopates. ffo? Fhaneeuer feared the venge-
dunce and punpipinent of God, and knew erp
tool, that 5 as not able to beare bps burthen,
Haue J put mp trulingolde’D2 baue J fapde
tothe fpnelt goldcof all:thou art mp cõfidence?
Saue F reioited bpcaule mp power wasqreat,
padite alto bpcaute mp bande gat io mucher x Dpdy
Sap. pitt. a CUCL LEQarde greatly the rpfpne of the Sunne?
D} Dad F the qopnae Downe of the Doone in
great reputacton: Hath mp berte medledpzeue-
[pe wpthanp decepti De dpd Feuer ky fle mpne-
owne hanbe/that were a yckednelle worthpe
tobe punpthed,fo2 then thuld F baucdenpedtbhe
Godthatisabouc.

x Paue Feuer retopled at the burte of mpne
enemper 2 Wwas Feuer glad, that anp barme
Happened vite him: Dh, no: J neuer {uffred imp
mouth todofuchea fpnne,as to wphbypmeuel.
Dpoanot the nien of myne otone boutbolve fap :
who Mal let vs tohane our belp ful of bis Aeir
4 pauc not fufferedDa traanget to lye wpthout,
but FJ opencd my does Duto bpm, that went bp
thewape. Haue FZ kept fecret mp [pnne, and bpo
mpneinguitic,as Adam apds Pane Ffeared
D any great multitude of people: o2 pE ¥ had bene

dplppled of thelpmple, D then Mulde J haue

ben afta ped. Thus bane FJ quietlp {pent mp lyf,
and not gone out ofthedo2e: D that Fbad one

Wwhpch woldeheare me. Lo,thysis mp caule.

Su the Mhpch thealmpabtpe Mall anfwere foz

ine:though be that tg mp contrarpe partpe bath

wpttena booke agapnime. Yet wrllJtake
bim bpon mp Mulder, andas agarlande about
mp peade. J Well tel bpm thenambee of mp qo-
puges, and gonto iym as to ampnee. Sut pE
cale bethat mp lande crpeagapnitme, o2 that
the fozowes tperofmabeaupcomplaynt : Pig
baue cate the frutes therof yupayd for: pea, pe
baue greucd any of the plowwmen:-thelet thy
les grote in Meade of mp whcat,and cocklefoz


Ho rbil.a


SS pth Job, bpcaufe he belde hpmfelfe


Ean he


ii. Regum.
iind


the in{pivacion of the JImpabtpe that g pucthand.tit. 3
pnderltandpnae. Greatemenare notalwape £e Pi
tple,nepther doth eucrp aged man bnderlkade Poia
thetbpnagetbatislawiull. Cherfore, wp yat
fpeake allo(beare me)and 3 topll thewe pou al-
fo mpne Duderlandpuge.sfo2 whe J had waps '
ted tpll pe made an ende of poure talëpnae, and
Hearde poure topledome , bat argumentes pe
made in pourcommunicacion: pea, ben F hab
diligently pondzed what pelapd, J founde not
one of pou p made any Goodargumnent agapnft
Job, that dprectlp coulde make aunfwere vnto 25
bps wodes:lcft pe thulde fape : Wie haue fode
out wpledome: God Mall catbpm downe,and
noman. ipe Hath not poke nto me,and J wpll
not antihere bimas pe bane Done(fo2rthep were
fo abathed, that thep coulde not make antiwere,
no? a ede Wozbe) but info muchas pe wpll
not {peake, Tandpnge pli lpke domme men, €
makpugenoantwere: ¥hauca goodhope fog
inp parte, to pape biman anfwere,and to Mew
bpm mp meaupnge: oz ¥ am full of wordt g, g
the {pete thatis within me compelleth me.
Webolde, mp bellp isas tbe wpne,whyche
bath no went and buritcth the newe veflelies in
fonder. Cherfoze wpll J lpeake,p Jinape baue
a bene: F wpll openmyp lpppes, and make aun-
were. 3 pliregarde no maner of perfonne, no
nian wpl J {paze.jtor*pl Z wolbe qoabout to Sals.1.b)
pleafe men, 9 snowe not how Toone mp maker
woldetake me awape. —
C Tbe.rrriii. Chapter.
C elihu Hheweth where in yob offended: wpth Gob mape
Ye not @rpur, 1na? curioufip fearche
; out bps wozkes, 5
Caeser PX\| MerFoze, bear mp hordes(D y%
LADA Fob land berken wntome alp
aihe ea 3 wyll fape: Bebholde, Y haue
TA VA hon nowe opened mp moutbe, mp -


i i Atõgebatb fpoktinmp thzote:- z


NSG Alves aryabt, ymp ah es


ut lobe bath ppched a quarel agapnitine 25


andtakethme for bps enemp: «be bath put mp Hevri.o.  *.


Foote in the ftockes, andlokethnarowlpe vnto
allmppatbes. Mebolde,tnthps bhatt thou not
doneryght.F twpllmakeanlwere wntothetbat _
Codis moze then man. And wbp dock thou thé
ffrpue agapntt bpm:foz be thal! not Geue the ac
comptes ofall bps wozdes. _ i |

Foz whE God doth once cOmannde a thpnge ©
there thulde nomanbecurpousto fearchwhe- aene rpa
therit berpgbte. * Sn dpeames and oie EFFIE

of the


BHD p Olthenpabt (tober lombspnge comineth vpor
eoath.iid, Men, that thep falla fleape tn thep2 beddes) be
roiideth chem in the caves, be tufourimeth them,
and (heweth them plapulp that ttisbe,wbhpcbe
wpthdzaweth man from eucll, delpuecreth ppn
from p2pdc,bepeth bpm fro the araue, andpps
Ipfefromtbrfwearde. |
D Hechaltenethhymwpth pckenefic,¢ bryn-
actb bym to bps bed:be lapeth foze puny met
pponhps boneg, fothatbps lpfe mape awape
wpth nobzeade, and bps foule abbozreth to eat
anp Dapntpe meate : info muche that bps bodpe
iscleane confumedawape, andbys bones ap-
peare nomoze.ipis life Deaweth puto the graue
and bps lpfe to death. Mow pf therebea menen
ger ( one amonge a thoufand) fent Foz to fpeake
unto man, and to hewe bpm the rpabt wape:
thenthe Lozde ts mercpful bnto bpm, g Tapeth:
e albe delpucred, that be fali not Downe to
the graue,foz Jam Cafficientlp reconcpled.
| rhen hall bps fepe be as tell lpkynee as
| {twas afgze,and thalbeasit wasinbts youth.
| Soz pf be fubmptte ppm felfe Yuto God, he thal
be gracious bnto bpm,and ewe bpm his coun
tenauncetopfullp, and rewardeth man for bps
tpabteoulneg. Suche arelpecte bath be ynto
men. Therfoze,let a manconfefle (and fape)¥
Hane offended: Y dpd Dnrighteouflpand it batb
donemeno good. Pea, debathdelpuered mp
Foule from dcEruccion, and mp Ipfe thall fe the
Ipabt.Lo,thus ozketh Godalway bith mat
that be kepeth bps foule from perpippnge, and
letteth bpm entope thelyabt of thelpupnee.
Marke Well (D Job) and heare me: bolde the
fipll,and J wyll{peake. Wut pftbou batt anp
thpngetofap, then anlwere meand (peake:fo2
thy auntitere pleafethme. PE thoubafteno-
thpnge, thenbeareme, and bolde thy tonge:fo
R thall J tcache the wpfedome:
© Thbe.rrviiit. Chapter,
 elibupapteth the tultpec of od, whpch iungeth
the wozlbe and goucrneth all.


Libu proceadpneae forth inbps


— ~ eo.
$ "F *


——


Fi


A eeraa D pe wple inen )bearken puta
aya pean me,pe that baue onderltadinge
4 | fto2 the care proucth æ dpfcer=
e netbthewo:des , * qg the mouth
| Ibi) E tafleth the meates. Asfo2 itd-
E gemét let vs feke it out amoge ourfelucs, p twe
| map knowe what is good. And why” Fob hath
f” apd: J amrpaptcous, but God doth me wrige
| ‘A muite nedeg be a lpar, though mp caule be
$ tpgbt, and violentlpe J am plaged where as y
miadenofant.vobere is therefuch a one as Job,

| that Dzpnketh bp (cognefulnelie, lpke waters
wiped goeth inthe campanp of topcked doers,
? and Wwalketh topth yugodlp men: oz be bathe
, fapbe, though aman be good, pet is benaughe
Eke befoze God. Cherfore berken Ynto me, pe that

| baue undertandpnge. ]
E 2G" Flare bet from God, thathembulve menle
T twrt) wypchednefle, and farre be tt from the Fl-
wet api n WPADEPE, that he Hulde medlewpth ynrpah-


nomasi b LEUS- Dealpnge: * Wos pe Hall rewarde the


ey ant were fapd: ear mp wordes


ee = Y a ‘ m "i
Jt t g oh Pa be
wozkes of man, andcaule euerp man to fpnde
accozdpnge to bps wapes. Fo: fureitis, that
* Godcondempneth no man Wwonfullye, and Bema.tine
the tudgement of the almpabtpe ts not vnrpah
feous:Uiboruleth theearthinbps teanc! a2
whom bath be fet to qonerne the whole wolde
Towhome hath be geuen hts herte,fo2 to draw
hes [prete and breath onto bpm: All Aethe (hall
come together butonaughte, andall men Hal...
turne agapne bnto x duite. VEtbounote Haue pray civics
tnòcrtandpnae beare what Jiapeandberken
tothe vopre of mp wordeg. A

Wape bebearuler that loneth norpabtes ¢
Dımape dethatisa verp innocent man, do bn
qovlper Fe itreafon that thou Monlet fape
tothekpnge: Chou arte wpeked, o2 thou arte
pigodlpe, andthat before the papnees! * Deg pa rir. e.
batino vetpecte vito the perfoues of the logde- Komati.,
ipe, andireqardethnot the rpche moze then the Errem

oor. f€ortbep beall the worke of bys bane ec. rrp. b
des. Jnthetwpnckelpnge of anepe hal ebep
Dye:andat mponpabt when the people and the
tprzauntes rage, then Mall thep perpe and be
taken atvape Yopthout bandes: And whip
¥ bpSepesloke pponthe wapes of manandhe lee a
fepthallbpsqopnges. There isnodarkened “"
noz{badow of death, thatcanbpdethe wpcked
doers from ppm. Fo? noman Halbe fuffered to
yointo iudgement wpth God.

WHanp one: pea innumerable doeth be pu-
npe and fetteth other in thep2 teades. Ther-
Foze fhall be Declare thep? workes, be Mpal turne
the npabte, andthep halbedeftroped. Thep
that were in the teade of Sears, dealt lpke vn
gobdlpe men : and therfoze be punithed them, be-
canfetbep turned backe from bpm, and wolde
notconf{pderallbyswapes. 3nflomuche that
thep batie canfed the popce of the pooze tocome
wnto bpm, andnowe be heareth rhecomplapnt
of fucheagsareintrouble. |

PE be qraunt pardone, who topll condémnes qy ;

Andpf dehyde awape bps countenaunce, who
palbe able to feits whetherit be to the people
otoanpman thus wpl be Do. Fo? the pngqod=
Ipnefle of thepeople, doth God make an ppocrit
torapgneoucrthem . Woz fomuchethenas F
baue begonne totalke of God, FJ pl not hpi
det the. PEJ bauc done amp Me, enfonrme thou«
me: PF Jbaucdone wonge, Fwpliteane of.
Canbedo notbpnge woythoutthes Fo:tbou
hatte reproucd bps tudgement. Chou alfobate
tbpne ownempnòeanonot F. Wut lpeake on
what thou bnoewell. Let men of snderfianbpng
tcilme,andlet awypfe manbearken vito me.
Asfo2 Jobhe bath nepther {poken to the pur-
pole: no: topfelpe. D father, let Job de well
tryed, becaufe bedathe aunfwercd fo: wpched
men:pea, aboue bys (pnne be doth wpckedipe:
triumphethb amonge vs, andinulfpplyerh bys
wWozdesagapnt Gop. | 3


C Therret. Chapter.


C septher doth gonipneile preftpte : of bugonipnede
burteto Goti butto man, ek
te D tt €libu


25
of fromthep2 wpckedneflc, andto amende. * PE


tapas


2D


Sob. $


les of beauen. ;

Planp uche complapne,no man guethan-
fwere, and that bpcaule of the wopctkednefle of
proude tprauntes ut pia man call ppo God,
both not he beare bpom orth netthe Jlmpgh-
tpe accepte bps crpe! When thou peake then,
fhuldenot be pardoue the, pftbou open thp felfe
befoze bym, put tbp trut in bpm: Then vleth
beno biolecein pps wath, netber batb b spe
Lure in curious and Depe tnquificions. Cherfoze
doth Jovopen bismouth but in vayne,and foo
Ipiplp Doth be make fo many wozdes.

CTbe.rervt. Chapter:
Celibu heweth wbherfoze Goo punpijeth ant
cozeecteth.

ren Libu peoceaded fozthinbps talkpnge,
H eand fapa: Polde the tpl a lptieg J Wall
= ewe the what F baue petto lpeake on
@ods bebalfe. J wypl open punto the pet moze of
mpne Duderfandpnge, and prone mp matter
rpg ytcous. Bnd truely, mp twozdes Mall not be
ea be , fey nge be is wrth thethat is perfpte ii
knótwlege,bebold:the arceat God cafketh awape
no man, foz pe bym flelfers mpahtpe im power g
pledome. A: YE

As fo: the Dugodlp,be Hal not preferue bim
but fhalldelpe the poore to thepztpaht. He thal
turne bps epes awaye fromthe rypgptcous, but
as kynaes thal thep bein thep2 trone:be thal fa
blpihe them foz eucr,and thep thalbeeralted.

wut pEthep be lapedinpzefon and chap-

tes,02 bounde Wyth the bondes of trouble, then
wpli be wewe them thep2 wozke and p fpnneg
wWHertopth chep bauc vied cetiel Violence.

ipewpth punpippnge andnurtrpnee of thé
rotideth thé inthe cares, harneth tbem to leave


they nowe wpll take bebe andferuc bpm, thep
Hall were out thep2 Dapes in peolperite, g tbep2
pearesinpleafure:andtope. ut pf thep wll
not becken,thep Hall co thozowe the wearde,


andperpibe o2 euer thep be aware. As for luch
as befained ppocrites,thep thal heap bp wath
Foz thé tclues:fo2 thep cal not Yp bpm,though
thep be bps prefoners. Thus iall thepy2toule
perpibe tn Foolpipnefle, and thep2 Ipfe halbe co:
Demned amonge thefognicatoutrs. Che poore
{hall be Delpucr out of bps afliccion, and roñde
themin the eare when thepbeintrouble. Cuen
fo thal be kepe the( pe thou toplt be contente)fro
the bottomlefle ppt thatis beneth: and pf thou
wplte bolde thequpete, be Mall fpil thp table a
topth plentcoutnetle.

Meuerthelelle: thou halk condemned the ind- ¢
gement of the pugodlpe,pea,enenluch a indige
ment aud fentence (halt thou ire .

Jeo: then {hall not thy caufe be fplled wpth
crueltpe,noz pacifped with many gpftes. Chin
kel thou, that be wpll regarde thy cpcheiler be
(pall not cave fo2 gole, no? Foz al them that ex=
celin fkrength.2olonge not thou the tpme,tpl
there come a npgbt fog the,to fet other people in
thp ffeade. Wut betware that thou turne not a=
[phe to wyckedneffe and fpnne, whiche betherto
thou batt chofen moze then mekenefle. Sepolde,
@odis of ampahtpe bre power: W bere is ther
(uche a gupòe and lawe qeucras be: Wibo wpll
rcpzoue bpm of bps wape:tHbo wpl lape bnto
ġprm:thou bat done wonge.
D confpder powe great g ercellent hps wa: m
kes be, wbome almen loue and paple:pea fort
der abypm, and pet thep fe bpm butafarre of.
Weholde:fo qreate is God, that he palfeth oure
knowlege, nepther are we abletocome to the
experience of bpspeares. * eturheth the was Deurs
ter cofmall droppes, be depucth bys cloudes tox Morrie
gether foz torapne,fotbat thep poure dowie €
Doppe pon men. He can (prede out the cloudes
(acouerpnge of bps Tabernacle andcaule pps
lygbt to bpne bpon them,and to couer the bot- ©
tome ofthelee. wWypthelethpnges qouernethhe
bpspeople, and qeneth them aboundaunce of
meate. ipth the cloudes be bpdeth the lpght:¢
at bys commaunDement it commeth agapne.
Gherplynge vp therof heiveth be to ppg fret
Des, and to the catell. l
1 Che.rervit. fer.
Pb stad dy Chapter. of Gob
is butercheables

Pew) T thys mp herte igaonnped, eB
om tom, Moucdoutof hpsplace. Heare
Pome A ela, then the founde of bps bopce,and
Dan Kis Qe tbe nople that gocth oute of bys
ao its S mouth. pe qoucenetbencep thine

2 Sy gS ynbdec the deayen,and bys iyghte
teacheth ontathe ende of thewozlde. Broa


De


C  Helendeth feate bporcuerpe man, that they
mpgbt knots thep2 owne workes. Che bealtes
crepe into thepz denneg, andtake thep2 ref : out
of the South commeth the tempe , andcolde
out of the orth.

At the breath of God the froofte commet,
and the waters are Hedabzode. Hemaketh the
cloudes to do thep2 labour, ingpupnge mopit=
nele, andDagapne with bislpgbt be dzpueth a-
toape the cloude. He diftributeth alfo on eae
{pde,accozdpnge as tt pleafeth bym to deale cut
bis wo2kes : that they mape do, whatforucr be

d commaundeth them thozowe the whole wozlde
whether it be to punpp anp land, 02 to Dogood
vntotbem tbat feke bpm.

| C Herken vntothis( D Job:) Land Epl, and

5 confpdze the wonderous workes of God. Arte

thou of counfaple with God, when He dothtbeie
| tbpuges ¢ When be cauleth thelpght to come


— -m =- a ulu ël agM oc o a


i forth ofbiscloudes? Art thou ofpis countaple,
when befpreadeth outthecloudes: afk thou
| the perfecte knowledge of his wonders: And
| botoe thp clothes are Warme , when the lande is
| pli thozowe the South wpnde: Hat thou del


eo bpm to fp2cade out the beauen, wbiche isto.

oke ppoun, asit were cait out of cleare metall;
Teache vs what we thallape vutohpm,fo? toe

p are vnmetebpcaule of Darkenefle. Sballit be
tolde bpm what we fape? Sbhulde a man peake
ortpoulvebe kepeit vacker ffoz euerpe man
fecth not the lpqbte tbat be kepeth cleare inthe
cloudes, whicbe be clenfeth when he maketh tbe
wpnde to blowe : Golders bought oute of the
noztb, but the praple and Donour of Gods feare
commeth from God bim felfe. Ft is not we tbat
can fpnde ont the alinpgbtpe:fo2 tn potver, equi
ticandrpabroutnelie : de is bper then can beer-
prefied. Let men therfore feare bim,fo2 there Wal

, no man fe Dim, that ts wpe tn pig owne cocept:


.  E@be.rerwit.chapeee.


The wondjes and maruaples that the Lezbehath
bone from the begpnnpnge.


Pannen en antwered the Lorde vnto
SN || S Job, out of the tome, €lapo:
piers) [eres What ts Dep bpdeth bismpnde
sou tees With foolpth wozdes? xGp2d
EN AC] Dp tDplopnes lpke a man , foz
LA J Wyll quettpon with the: fe,
iio Tho Tpuemea Direct anlwrr,
Where waf thou oben F layed the foundaciog
ofthe earth: Cell plapnely, pf thou hat ynder-
fannar. (Abo bath mealured tt, knowelte

thou? D? ho hath fpzed thelpne Yponitr
daiberevpon Fandetheppllersofit? D: who
laved the cozner fone therof: Ubere waf thou
whenthe mbznpnge ftarres peapied me togp-
pq (Det andall thechildzen of God retopied terium:
ITa phantly: x Cho ut the fee withdozds, when
peat, ciii.» Uf D2ake forth as a chploe oute of bys mothers
25 wombei Ci hen F made the cloudes fobeacoue
rpng forit and fwabdledit with the darker whe
Jaane tt mp commaundement ,makpng dod
and barreg forit, layinge: daptherto malte chou


Hob, tLe


a
p &
2a ä


pI ai = ai
re Ae aor j


HE ae ‘ca im
Boe cet
a


‘Job.


JE al cht.


conse, but no farther, adhere Halte thou lape
bownethpproude and bpe waues. aftetbou
gpuenthe mognpnge bis charge(affoneas thou
walk boane ) and fhewed the dape {pzpnge bys
place, that it mpabe take Wolde of the cozners of
the earth, andthat the pnugodlpe mpabt be Ma-
Ken out? Thep: tokens and Yocaponsare tour=
ned lyke clape,and {er bp agapne: asthe chaun=
gpng of a garment. Che ynqodly Halbe diapa
popnted of thepz lyabt:and the arme off proud
balbe baoken.Cameft thou euer into the groti
ofthe fecr o2 Walked in thelowe cozners of the
Deper Paue the gates of death bene opened wn-
tothe, ozbaft thou fcue the dozes of the Madow
ofpeath: Halk thou allo percepucd howe brode
the earthis: Péthou ball knowledge ofall this,
then ew me where lpghet dwelleth: and where
darkenefle is: that thou mape t bepnge vs Dato
thep2 quarters, pftbou call tel the wap to chet


boutes.
iinewelk thou P(afo2re P wae bogne ) bowe C
olde thou Houldelk ber Wintel} thou cucrinto
tic trealurpes ofp tnowes o2 batt thou fene the
{ecrete places of the baple, xwhiche J bane prc= Sro0-t-€
parcdagapnt the tpme dftrouble,agapntte the #°""
tyme of battapleand warres Bp what waypeis
the lpabt parted, and into what lande breaker)
the calt wpnde Who deupdeth the aboundatce
of waters intorpucrs ¢ oz whomaketha waye
fo: the lpabtenpnge and thundz¢ , thatit wate-
reth and mopiturech the dap and baren ground:
tomake the graffe rowe , tn places Where nos
bodp dweileth, and inthe ploernefle where no
mati ccmapneth i Wibo is the father of capnes
D whoabathe beqottentbe droppes of dewe!
Dut of whalewombe came the pier Who bath
grendzcd the coldencile of the apze, that the toa
ters are as barde as ones: andl ye congeled a-
bouc the depe’ Cll yite thou hpndze the (ioete itt-
fluences of the feucn karreg ¢ 2 art thou pable
to bzcake thecpale of Deauens
Cant thou binge fozththe moznvnge tarre, =p
o2tbeeucnptiqe tarre at conuenpent tpme,and
conuepe them pome agapne? Tino wef thou che
courie of beaucn, that thou mapett fet bp the 02.
Dpnaunce therof yp the cacti: @)ozeouer,cantt
thou lpft vp tbp vopceto thecloudes, that thep
mape pouredowne a greaterapne bpon thes
Cantt thou thundze alfothatthep may go thepe
wape and be obedpente Duto the, fapinge : Lo,
Dereare we ? Wbogpucth fure wpledome, oz
tefat vnderftandpnge ¢ WU bsnomberth the
cloudes in wpldomer Who Fplleth the vehemet
waters of the beaucn? Who turneth the clottes
to dult andthen to be clotttes agapne: Wiplte
thou bunte the prape from the lyon, o2 fede bps
whelpes Lpinge in thepz dernes, and luckpnge
intbepzcourcyes’ Cibo x proupdethincate [02 pr. crivite
therauct, when bis pongeoncs crpe puto Dov,
and fpe about fozlache of meate r


CThbe.perte. Chapter.


C God Meakerh onto Fob, Gewpnge bpm bp the
crampies of bis woxkes: that hisrpgpteoul
neke is Datearcheabic.


Out,  Rnowell


Ca


| if
Joo.
R ; | pyme when CT) etl. Chapter:
ponge amonge the ffonpe Fob humbleth bpm felfe brito God:the bez
D2 layelt thou oapte fcrpption of Weyemoth and Leupathan,


meg Decoucr, Sod {pakke ufo Job,
OM] & and fayoe: Canbe that ttepuerh B
aa withthe almypabtye, be at reit:
beh Wye ba Sbulde not be which difputeth
ERD VAY fe) With God, gpue bin an antwer
growe bp, and wategreate Be ALD @ Job anflwered the Lord. (aping:
| | =e Weholde. Jam to vple a perfon
| meipboletteththe toanfwere the, therfore wyll Jlapempnehand
ce o2 toholoofeth thebondes of bpsmpmMouth. Ones oz twpte paue 3 fpoken:
| J wbich baue gpuenthe wyloer but Sd Soh Chet
betheprboule,andtbevntplicdlandeto — <Thenantwered the Lorde onto Job out of
ace. Chat thep may gpue the forme, and fap: xgved wp thy lopnes now For
| tude of people inthecitics Ipkeaman, and tell me the thpnges that J woyl *
pinge of the depuce : but afke the.ediplt thou difanul mp iudgement’ O?
utethemountapnes, and wpltetboucondempneme, that thou thp felfe
pllthe Dnicozgne be fo mape Ebe made rpabteous? Jethy power then
ortoabpoettl bpthy lpkethe power of Gon Maketh thy vopce tuck
| pokeaboutetbe afounde as bis doth: Then arme thp felfe with
| bpm ploweats tbyne otone power: wp, Decke the intbp tolpe as
| | $¢apetttboutentbym, rape, poure oute thetndiqnacpon of thy wath:
ig tronge ) ozcommypt thplaboure fethat thoucalt owneallthe proude, loke well
ayett thou beleucbpm, thathe thatthou makel fucbe as be fubburne to obep:
methp co2zne,02 to carp anp thing fread Bowne all the pngoolp in thep2 place, caf |
reropnges them downeintotbe dut, andcouer thep? faces
ethers wnto with darkencfle: Chen wpll FconfeMe vuto the
intbeeart) alio, that thpne omnerpgbt band thal faue the.
mbzetbnot Weboldethe beate Webemoth (whome I
| ect, 02 broken made withthe) wbich cateth bape as an ore:lo, ;
ebealt. Sobardis bevnto his howe Krongebeisinbislopnes, and what po- :
Hthey were nothis,andla werbhehathinthenaupll of bis bodye. He fpzea-
o


thoutanyefeare. Andthat Deth outhis taple lpkea Cedre tree, albis Vap-
b taken wpledomefrombym, nesaceftpfie. His hynnesare lyke pppes of
ppm vnderfandynge.wbe baffle, bisrpdge bones are lyke fraues of pron.
istome ts that be fipet op onbpe be caret Sepelke. when Godmade bym , be ozdapned fhe
— neptherforb pfe noz man. Wwyldernefle fo: bym:that tbe ae pet Ge uld
€ Halkthougpuentheborledisttrengeh ozler- qpue bym gralle, pere all the beater of the
ned bpm to bowe Dotone bis necke with feare, Eelde take tbey paftpme. We lpeth amonge the
that belettetbbpm felfe bedpuen fozthlpkea reedesin the moffes, the fenneshpdebpm wrt) ¢ Į
eretpopper, whereas the foutenepinge that be they2 Hhadowe,and the wpllowes of the brooke b
` maset, ig fearefull? Hebecaketh the grounde coner bym rounde about. Lo, withoute anye la-
with the boofes of bis teete chearefullpeinbps bourmpghtbe depute out of the whole flonde, 2
ftrength, and runneth to mere the barnett men. and {up of Zozdan without anp tranaple wbo 3
c lapeth afpde all feare,bis fomacke ts not a: Darre lape bande bpon bym openly, and wnder- f
bated nepther fartethbeabackefozanpfwerd. take tocatche bpm D2 who darre put anhooke
Though the quyucrs rattle pon bym, though thozotoehisnofe,and lape a fnare for bym
the {peare and Hylde gipiireth, pet rultheth be marret thou draw out + Leniatha With an or, eevirs
infeatcelpe,and beatcth vponthegrounde. He anglecrbpnde bigtonge witha Mare: Canik pra.lrriiie
Feareth not the nople ofthe trompettes, butag thou putarpnge in tbe nofe of bpm, o? boze pis
fooncas be deavetbebetharwmes blowe,tulhe, chawe fhozowe with a naule: Witlbemake ma
(fayth befor be {metic the battapleafarre of, npe faye tordes withthe, (thyntefi thou ) og
the nopbe the captapiies,and the toutpnge. - flattre ther wpll be make acouenaunt with the:
= Commerhitthozotvethp wytdome, thatthe Dart thou bable to compel bpm todo the con
gothauke fipeth towarde the fouth r peethtde finnallferupces A pite thou take thp paftyme |
cale mount bp andmatse bis nett on Dye at thy with bimasa bpzbde,oz qpuebim vutothp map D
camaundement/ipe abideth in the Tonp rockes Dens, tbat thp companions mape make refectio
and ppon the bpetoppesotthebarde mountay- of bpm, o2 that he mape be parted amonge the
nes, wherehoamancancome. ffromthencefe: marchaut menrCantt thou tpl the bafket with
keth he hig pap, andlokethfarabout teith bis Dis fkpnne, o? the fpitbepanper with bis heeds
masir, e CPES. Dig pondeones ate fed ith bloude: xand Darreft thou lave band bpon bpm Feis bettce
| wpcreany dect body Iyeth theretsbeimedtatlp fog the tocontpoze what barme mygbt goa


$ =P p


“Sod.


therethozowe, and not fouchebym. Jeo? when
thou ehpnaeit to haue bolbe bpon bpm, be Wall
begple the.
@ The.rli.chapter:
€ Sf the fame Leapathan whercofis mencionca
s it the Ebapters afore.


D manis fo cruell that ts Hableto


y A a \\tparchpm vp. * Whois pableto
gemis pie tda Lande before me D?+who hath gp
HHom, pid iS meee él nacnine any thyng afore Dande, that


ERASI F maperewarde bpm agapner All
thynges Dunder beaut are myne: F feare him not
“wobether be threaten oz fpeake fapze. ho lpf-
teth bpm vp, o2 fterpppetd bim out ofbis clothes
02 who taketh bpm bp the bptte of bis bapdles
Wo opencth thedoze of bis Faces £02 bebathe
hozrpbhicteztproundeabout. His bedpiscoucs
red with icales asit were with plies locktin
> Kepe and toell compact togpther. Dne ts fo top-
> ned toan otber, that noapzecancomein: Pea,
one bangeth fo vpon another, and ftpcketh fo
togvtber, thattbep cannot befondzed. His ne-
fyngeislpkeagipiierpngefpre ,and bps epes
Ipue the moznpuge wpne. Dut of his mouth qa
torches, and oute of Disusitrelles there qoctha
noke lyke as out oFandote {ethpnge pot. ips
bzeath maketh thecoles burne, andthe famme
gocth out of bis mouth. yn bis necke remainetp
itrenath, and notbhpnae ts to labozious fozbpm
The membres of his body arctopnedf{o (trapte
one to an otber, and cleane fo fait togptber, that
Hecannotbemoned. `
His perte isas Darde asa fone, andas fait
asthe Gptbpe that the impthimptetb ppon,
WiLhen de gorth the mpabtpeare afraped, and
feare troubietp them. Pranpe man pawe outa
{werde at bpm, it Hall not burt Dym : there map
nepther {peace , tanelpnge no? beeftplate abpde
« hiss h cttcti as moche bp a krate ag bp pzd,
andas moche bp arotten Mocke as bp baile. pe
ftactethnot away foz bym that bendeth f bowe
andas fo2(ipage Tones, becarcth as moche fo?
ftubble asfoztiem. He counteth the dartes no
D better then a trawe, pe laugbeth bpmto fco2ne
thatibaketh toe (peare:ip¢ iveaderh the golde tn
the mp2e,lphe the barde potiperdes. He maketh
the depe to boplelpke a pot, and perch the fee
togpther Ipkean opniment. He maketh a pathe
to ve fene after bym , the decpets bis walkpnge
place. ipon carthis there no power lpke vuto
bis:foz bets lo maderbat he fearethnot. DE ama
wryliconipaze allbpethpnages, thisis a kpnge
ouctallthe chpldzen of p2pde.
Che.rli. d Baptet:
C Tberepentaunie of Fob. Ge prapetd for hés freen
Des and bis gostesare rotor double bnto bpm.
amewa Hen Job antwered the Lorde, and
afa.rbiii.c Deora A lapde:* F knowe that thou bat po=
iire pbi b ae eae quer ouer all thpnges,and that ther
larra ig no thought bpdde Dnto the. o?
ov xa" ypho cant kepe bis owne counfapl fo


etait


ar


Folcviit,
feerete, but it Halbe knowen ? Therfore baue J
fpoken that J wuderftand not,the thpnges that |
are fo bpe, and pale mpne vnderftandpnge. D
Derken thou puto me alfo,awd let me (peake:an-
{were bnto the thypnge that Fwyllatkethe. F
baue gpuendiligent eare vuto the, and nowe J
fe the withmpneepes . Uberto, J aput myne
owne felfe the blame, and take repentaunce inp
duff and afes.
. flow When the Lode had poken there oz
des “nto Job, it foztuned , that the Lozve fapde
puto Cliphas the Chemanpte: Jam difpleatea
withthe, and thp two frendes , foz pe haue tiot
fpoken of me the thing that igrpght:lpkeasmp
feruaunt Job path done.

‘Therfore,take pou now ruen oren and feug
temmes, and goto my feruaunt Job and* offre ayath..b
pp fo: pour lues a burntofirpnge:andmy iet: egarie.v.e
uaunt Zob (hall pave fo: pou. pm wryli Jac-
cept: and not deale with pou after pour fooltih-
nefle:tu that pe Daue not fpoken the thing which
isrpgbt,lpkeas mp teruaunt Job bath done.

&0Elipbas the Chemmanite,and Wplaad C
the Subite, and Sopbar the Naamarhite wee
thev: wape anddpd arcozdpng as the Lord ci-
maunded then. x Che Lozde allo accepted the Seneta
perfonne cf Fob, andthe Lorde turned thecap= i
tiuptie of Job, wobenhepraped foz his frendes:

Pea, the Lod gaue job *twrpicas mocpeashe Mat. rra

Dadafore. | .
Andthencame there dnto ppm all bis Dre-

tizen, all bis fpfters, and all thep that bad bene

of his acquapntautice afoze , and dpd cate baeed

withbpm tn bis boule, wondpnge atbpm, an?

comfoztpnge bym ouerall the trouble that the

Lode bad brought bpon ppm. €ucrp man alfo

gauc bpm a certapne fumme sf moncpe, and a

tewell ofgolde. ;

And the Lorde made Fob rpchee then he was m
befoze:foz be bad fourtene.<).thepe, fpre. <3) 6a
mels,a.@).poke of orë and 4.42).alles. He bad
feuenfounesalfo , and the Daughters. = The
fpf dougbter called pe Jemina, the feconde ie-
31a, and thethprde tierenpabuch, Fnaltpeland
Were no women founde fo fapre as the dough-

ters of Zob:and the p2 father qane them enpe-
rptaunce amonge thep2 bicthzen . After
this lpued Joba Dund:ed and fonr-


tpe peres,fo that be lawexbys ened ”
cpplazen,and Dis chpldzes ee


childzé into the fourth
generacion. and fo
Job dyed: bring
olde,and of
aperfect
age,
(:)


CThe ende ofthe booke
of Fob.


Pr


Srey |


sit nei a F Ei CTIS $ s . .
i pies st Wah & a $i ` Alqateng a =z a ;
te Meee pees E


=
2


&
rà
et dae


ETO EENET ' nun Sits oma ~s:
ANIES EOD] a aa
RTU Bree NETS: on É B iE GF ae.


b
|
iA


pis: A E Oe a
Bea SDN PEES sito FETS Been ee iS
> ee Te bo Su Tind SERERE e wireeee d


RENET


a


cies ee) prt oy aii ith Heys >;


eet eee hs a
Beto ban TAIN Aa a 5 EE Eru DETINE ae


E insestis: Sits OD Obie esate wis SOT Oy nhs ‘ele seeds "E :

; tea $t H É: HS ea e py rme ERE |

sia ' pB y TIURA + “ay l Wes Ad rs TIA Oua. “tp :

Tating es) y ZES sie S807 Te a SS GON DED ZER. a T
Lets US. ANONN 62 ai pts ) oe


S i y Wh oe


TRLD DSU AI oy Se Mi
lit WOE r ni 3 i f p . i iha


as d .
è =< + m t -> Tif SN ' ; * ’ pa w ty w J £ *
aa aye ati? he dey - di oP “win ih, wee rua Gi
EA S O ATO GS
ig . x a s a A


- E
ref >
. í


Gar INF f laseri wya WEL


Se FE ay ine a a Hi nu?
ee ed, ee \Ai alge ees s ia


ele 2% « r3 iw +t + ~ Se" Tr p S _
er. = io mgs , + = S } J 1 j J x x
a IPE ia Tari ii . 3h poh eee pe TAN ted FIs E , Pye ETa — ` > “4% T prey
- a = of Wl Den ate i r s j =f ae | St ee 7 3 a Se ST S
= an aw- $3) ESIET Erts Olt: Wrist ts! F a IENE hii LR 4 | . va ma ers = 3 1 es = i is
el ant ‘ oa e rei ny ss (fen in Eo iv coins TETS Mita fa a | Eott, > A a k eae se ge ee Ez ie es re id =. x Yi
S Ri AA =o d reas ed et) tile Dens 5 V a E yas kee eee ae Pa ee en T da e UT 27 W
' z w % “a ‘ © ‘ j - í z - ~i yee) tees 4 J y
Pests REBORN OS PD Berio eh Seis. We eh pee nit re EE S E test
z P è es rin -=S a E æ
l $ <= rds dx5 4 St by sie ee, <i a vs ‘Sas eu Tip Ee a eee ed Be ge ee
fa AE A a a ahs ARH GSS re ry Pitti PE T sgh WA Sat aoe inr ee yids th S à
— es Remakes Fae weir rar p atl { * E ` lll Ped =f. trg z SA > or F, T 11* A
' i 4 ee ars 2 s ae P foa er: i ea ey + ie Tel he H
en x a yet) sae Jt., 1 | A z dip bel 4 aoa meres rhs ter baer t= = ae =. a # = +s
LGASUAES 5) teh ana ES E mara 3
3 ? vI j A = à METIS NETE: Bight te zi t by ` Pi
ara INT ! eel ta fc) a Sith Spach aaoi ih f
A r - ` i Pecan a = = -
-aid geek Fri = -- i - . IF A Eh | = s Tess . HE r "ay i y
as! ot Pl > cok an ah te to RRS TR iy OS ol os ne) re i i
wh Bras - 35 BS ode i ete tae = ar ! Ve
an z 4 E: TE Rinie ty s > exes 1
- se. Ler ve : lane
` 7” “Rat ACES cs Pete} T h i A x
ë =. EA ~ T = 1 oy +


aE x 2 J - a : A : Ms 4 3 » E. = re >> a
wAn —_— ' 7 PRP FU f ’
A f i A w b t P ERI >v A mae ase ayer | uf ee pte +


~ a
yi sed - 2 roe


EA tered:
e a d


Tis pnan ie a


2 i : i :
Ta ae A rill 4 Ç Pi
= el aa a z | 7
+ z _— Ee | Ti a a 1 È j
q i a — oF a BS i F E x F; = a =
pi Pe T = 1 = E - - =
os Š toe = E ae ==. —
Po Mi ae oat - fe = ———
aP : n = e i i k a
eae ae = Ye = y
ire a i, -- a
| e RS E J —a
ope es ees i a
re pee i 4 a s T
er s A J a Ay = = qh --
: eee a eee - ae Bt F
p P EE at jh Di J p 3
Í yo seat T Deka A
= 2 5
§
4 y q z ey
i
q p :
i E


. partcof the Bypbletot:
tapnpnge.thefe
bookes


Thepfalter. Che prouerbes.


HINA


= -i
ee oo
j i a i a
TEn h i, baii
Fia e a! ae
eel is A me
ey aS goo


‘ie

[mie

ee
Afi shia!


Lisa!


‘The prophetes.
-r E€fap ‘Jonas.
Oo ERNEA JA SASS AW Aeremp. MHicheag.
> oh S | a A A || Esechiel Naum.
= | r =i E Wantel. Abacuc.

mel aks T E) er Dieas. Sopdonp.
Joel. Aqaeus.
Amog. sacbarp.

Malachp. .


|
By


|


i
a


Wecletiattes. Catica c&ttcogn.


5 T j =
J i r i
F Tfi AT per ala,
] i Se DA
i É | 4
st Ak oe Ee Pea ee |
= a} i |
z i "r ae
ra See ee ee
=
f;
F, F


Tis pnan ie a


2 i : i :
Ta ae A rill 4 Ç Pi
= el aa a z | 7
+ z _— Ee | Ti a a 1 È j
q i a — oF a BS i F E x F; = a =
pi Pe T = 1 = E - - =
os Š toe = E ae ==. —
Po Mi ae oat - fe = ———
aP : n = e i i k a
eae ae = Ye = y
ire a i, -- a
| e RS E J —a
ope es ees i a
re pee i 4 a s T
er s A J a Ay = = qh --
: eee a eee - ae Bt F
p P EE at jh Di J p 3
Í yo seat T Deka A
= 2 5
§
4 y q z ey
i
q p :
i E


. partcof the Bypbletot:
tapnpnge.thefe
bookes


Thepfalter. Che prouerbes.


HINA


= -i
ee oo
j i a i a
TEn h i, baii
Fia e a! ae
eel is A me
ey aS goo


‘ie

[mie

ee
Afi shia!


Lisa!


‘The prophetes.
-r E€fap ‘Jonas.
Oo ERNEA JA SASS AW Aeremp. MHicheag.
> oh S | a A A || Esechiel Naum.
= | r =i E Wantel. Abacuc.

mel aks T E) er Dieas. Sopdonp.
Joel. Aqaeus.
Amog. sacbarp.

Malachp. .


|
By


|


i
a


Wecletiattes. Catica c&ttcogn.


5 T j =
J i r i
F Tfi AT per ala,
] i Se DA
i É | 4
st Ak oe Ee Pea ee |
= a} i |
z i "r ae
ra See ee ee
=
f;
F, F


Palih


-Ehe Plalmes of
DB


Che fritt brame.


_ BEATVS VIR QViNON ABIIT,


-E TA Leledisthat man that bath
Al E not Walkcd in the councell of

ane kd ED AR ppe nes Noe Salad ha
serait N eased © ape otfpaners, aupbath
AB eed jae notiptin the feate of the {coz

wu nefull. Wut bis delpteisin


n
Rages 1
Tin m a a


in bps latve


planted bp the water fpde , that wpll vapi re
foathe bps frute inducfeafon. ipg leafe al-
_ fo pall not topther and loke what foeuer he
25 doct thal polper. As fo: the vnagodlpe,
moure {tig not fotopthe thent: but ttep are lpke the
rre. chate whpche the wpne (caterethe atwape ox
> š cEcom tbs faceoff earth) Therfoze the Dngoblpe
~~ thallnot beable to tande in the iudgement,ne=
ther the (pnnersin the congregacton of tpcriah
teous. Wutthe Lorde knolweth the wape of
therpabteous, and the tape of the ongodlpe

hall perpe . i
C The feconde pfalme.


ean DP,andthe rulers take councell to-
tat. Frbtle cre ther x agapnite the Lozbe, andagapnitehys
atiopnted. Let vs becake thep2 bondesa fun-
der and call awape thep2 coardesfrom ve.
ieee e Be that divelleth in beauen * thall lang he
«~""” them to fcozne : the Lozde thal baune them in de:
tpfpon. Then pall hefpeate veto them in
bps tozath,and vere them tn bps toze drip:
hal i ps en te hpi iy ho
POPL ot Spon. 3 wll peace the lawr,
Iwhereof the Lode bathe fapdé ontom
A r mi reroll phe or ba
EDG ottenthe. cipe OF mé, and all geug
pis tbe the Heathen fos Sope enberptaunce, and
- the btmott partes of theearth for thp poffelfp-
Avocats on. * Thou thalte bule them pth « ronde
fetasprc. Of Fron, and beeake them inpeces Flpke apot-
ters wellell, Be Werle nowe therfore, Dye


Lptiges. belearned, pe that are tudes of the
na . Herve the Lozde tn feare, and toll
cw(buto bpm) Wpth rencrence. pile the fonne gs
lethe be angrp ¢ fope perri fr thes» (rpete) go
WA OEE TIa be kpndled( pee butà Ipele) -
bleffed are all thep A a eh aip trutin bpm,
Che thpzde Plalme.
DOMINE OVID MVLTIPLICATY,
CX plalme of Daupd when he fled fron
the face of Abfolon his fonne .

gea Dede, howe are thepincteated,that X
E E trouble me? manpe are thep, that
im peeeeatpleagapniteme. any one there
ey CUI be, that tape of mp foule: there isno
poses’ Delne fo? bim indes God., Sela. ag

ut thou O Lozde,artemp defender: thou `
art mp wo bpppe t tbe lpfter bp of mp pecd.
J bdpdcall ppon fpe Lojbde st mp Dopee dd
be bearde me out of be Dolpebpll. Sela. J
lapde me Downe and ept, and role bp agapne,
fo? the Lozve fuffapnedDme. F wpll not be
aftapbe fo? ten thoufandes of the people that


i hauefet them {clues agapnit merounde about,


Tip Lozdand Helpe me, D mp God, fo: thou
iimptetal mpneenempeg Dpon the cheke bone,
thon batte bzoken the teeth of the vngodipe.

Syaluatponbelongeth wnto the Lozde, thp
bleflpnge ig Zhe the people. Selah.

~— Che fourth plalme, ,
CYM INVOCAREM,
To bpm that ercelleth inmulpke.
a plalme of Daupd.,
apes Cate me, when F call, OGodof F.
+ mm a mp rpabteoufnes : thou paftefett
le ay eA A meat lpbertp, when 3 teagintroy
by ee xo ble: baue mercpe vponmeand hers
pated Sasi ken vntomp paper. Dpefons
nes of men howe longe wpl pe blafpheme mine
cape and baue fuch pleafuretn vanpte and
eheafterleafpna: Sela. Rnowe tbpsalfo,
that the Lozde bath chofen to bpm felfe the ma
that is godlpe:topen F call upon the Lozbe, be
topll beate me. Stande tnatve,and fpnne not:
comen wpth poure otne berte, and in poure
chambze,andbef—pll. Sela. Offer the fa =
reli of tpabteoufnes, and put pouretrng in
tbe Lozde. There bemanpe that Tape: who 25
topl Hewe bs anp good: Lozdelpftethon vp
thelpgbte of thp countenaunce bpon be.
Thou hatte put qladucs in mp berte , fence
the tpme that thepz cozne and wpne,» cand opie)
úncrealed. J tpl lape me Downe in peace, ad
tabe mp refte : Foz it ts thou Loze onlye, that
makete me dwelltnfafetpe, |
v. plalme,


Qp vopee balte thou beare by tymes, D
Loavd,carely: in the moning wpll J dprect mp
ti paper


Folii


fal. bibi bii,


prio paper onto the and topllloke wp. * Foz thou takeme:peclethpm-tteade mp lpfedotone vp


artý So that bath no pleafureintoickednes the earth,clapempue honoure in thedulk. Se
neptberfballanp enel Divel pth . Sued la. Stande vp, Loin thy mzdth: æ lpfte.

- asbefolptye,tpallnot fade in thy pat, for 8 Dpthp felfe becaufe of the indiqnactis of mpne
patett all enetbatworke vanpte. “Chou (halt chiemies:arple bp for me, inthe 1d emét that
Defirope the that ep iat a Lozdivil thou baftcommaunded.and fotpall the cigre-
abborre both the bloudthiritp,t difceatinl ma. ether Bee peop ome a e ae (be

‘But ag forme J wpl come into thp boufe cue fakes:therfore lytt tp thy felfeagapne. The

 ppõtbemultitudcof tpp mercy ,adinthpfeare Lozdetball tudge the people, geur fentéce with

pt sero typl F woeyppetowardethpholpy temple. me, D L020, according to mp LAE Ae spade
K eade me, D Lozd,in thy rpabtiopinesbecaule. andaccozding to the innocenciethatisinine .

of mincenentics: make thp wape plapne before Dhlet the wpckednes of the bngodl pe come to

mpface. Jfozthereis nofapthfulneticinbps an ende:butqupde thou the uit. #02 therpab-

moutb:theie inwarbe partes are werpe wicked teous Godtrpeth the verp berted erapnes.<t)p

eoma tiie NES * Their thzote isan o enfeptilchze:tbep pelpe commeth of Goad, which pzeferueth them

“3 flatter with their toge. Defrope thou them D that are true of berte 4 * BOD ig atpabteous
God letthem pery thorowethete otonepmas Budge,-w aronse ane padi) and God is Prouo= peny.

i qinactons,caft the out inthe multitude of they: bedeuerpoaye. PE aman wpllnot turne, De x=
\A pngodlpnefie:fo2 thep baue rebelled agapnitp. tpl wbet bis fiocard,be bath bent bis bowe ad
Andletallehem that put their teutintberez mabdettreadp. He hath prepared him pinftru-
iopce:thep balicuer begeupnge ofthakes, be: mentes of deathe : be ozbepnethhps arotwes a-
cate thou Defendefte them: thep that loue gapni bepetfecutours- Cas De, * De tras
thpnametpalbe topfulinthe. foz thou Lord naplethepty bi date he par conceaucd{o-
writ geue thp blefipnge vnto therpabteous: Towe, brought forth bngodlpnefie.x Hepath —« -
and wyth thpfauourablekpnoncs wpitetyon grauengipgged wpa ytte andis fallen bpm Fod.rb.»
| felfe into poettrucct6 that be made (fo; other, ) corre
_ Stor bps trauaple pall come Dpon Hps ONE vzo. rrota


pate. Jwpllacuethankes tunto the £070 ac- )
cozdpngtobps tpabteoulnes, and tpll peapte i siti
the name of the Lozde tbe moot bpe.

C The. vitt. Blaline.

DOMINE DOMINVS NOSTER;
Tohim thatercelleth in Giebeth,

a pfalmeof anid. — |

yny L020 our goucrnoute, Hot excellente q
Sia gist panum inal the wolo, thou that

AY At Apat fet thy glozp aboue theheuens ¢
Press «Dut of the month of verp babes Ad math.rrib
fuchlpnaes balt $ ozdepneditren b besaule of
thpne enemics,that a ia tpl tbeenemte
etheaucnaer. Eo? J wplicofpdze thy brancs,
cuen p toorbes cfthp fyngers:the Gooner the


> VET | | s i
math.bit? caufeofallmpneenempes. x Awap fro meall man, tbat partmpndefull of him and onne
up.frb.p. CA 4 beLozdbatbhearo ofman,thatthouwifptet yim? ahou navet
be Lod bath beard bym lower the the afigels,tocrotone bim wptp
rippericid,the Lowplleeceanemp prayer. glor ¢ worthippe. & poumakett bunto baue
qi mine enemics albe cofonded € Loze pered, Dominion of the workes ofthp bandes:€* thou
thep pålbe turned backee uttotbamefodtlp. paft put allthinges m {ubtectid vnder his fete.
k - -C The.wii.Bralme. Al pepe and oren pee andthe bealtes ofthe
efoules of the ap , and the Epi ofp
l AA aie Aet
thes of the Oe ae r owe

the toozloe.


eb.if.b
1.00},7D.B


im thatercel
Dena pra


ppm, f withoute feig mpneencmpe Z Lees he wp areca tabthes ciate ot
: wmithouteanp caute is mpneenempe. jee the, pea, mplonges Wyplt J make
brm-Necmyneenemipe perfecutempfoulcans thpnameDthonmookibpelt, -5
3 ee ee) E
2 r ;
e


Headx g bis pchedues pal fall vpo hps otone Zr FpD


t .
ftarres which thou pat osdepned.* Ubat is pictus


j x


hplempne enempes are dpnt backe the

y ritari perphhat thppectence. Wo: Pha
mapntepned mp rpght,¢ mp caufe:thou art fet
inthetrone p tudgeit right. Chou batt rebuked
the Heathé,¢ defkroped the bngodlp, thou batt
put out their nameta: eucrandeuer: D thou
5 nemp, Delfruccpons ate come toa perpetuall
c ende:cuen asthe cpties whtch thou batt deftrop
ed, their memogzialis perpthed withthe. But
f Lozd (hal endure foz euer, be bathalfoprepa-


f ted big featefoz indgemët. o? be thalindge p
wolde intpahtcoutnes, g mpniltre true iundwe
= ment bnto the people. ‘Che Lozd alfo wplbea


@trpriit,a Defence fo? the oppefted: * euena refuge tn due
tpme of trouble. Tan bepp pet pd nane:
topl put their trut in the:fo2 thon (Lorde batt

i neuer fatled thé that (che the. Dpzraife p Load,
- platrrtt.s x pobpch Dibelleth in Spon, theive the people of

| bis dopnges. Fo: whe bemakethinquylitpon
pfal.rrii.e. £02 bloud,be remembzeth them: ¢« fozgetteth

not thecomplapnt of thepooze. Daue mercpe

port me D Lod )conlpoze the trouble whpcb
E J fuffre of the that bate me.tbou thatliftetme
pp fro the gates of death. Chat ZF mape thewe


allt apies fopthin p portes of the Daugh= -ppe pe
PAo “a ia ee 3
Kar e)

Nee SE


ter of Spon, 4 topll retopee in tpp faluacpon.
€ The Beathe are founcke dotone in the pptte
thatthep made:in the fame net whichthep bpd
) picurip te theivotonefote taken. The Lozve
tg Knotwe to crecute iudgement: the pngodly is
å trappedin the wozke of bis otone bandes. a cå-
A D {pderacion.Scla. The tickedthalbeturned
puto hel,zal the people that forget God: For
tic pooze thal not be altwape fo2zqotté the pact:
: ente abpDding of p meke pall not perpth foz ener
] Vp towe, let nomanhauethe wpper hade
letthe Beatit beiudgedinthplpabt. ut thé
o in ®care( D 1030) thatthe Heathe map kinowe
i t b uleluestobeputmen. Sela.
i CThe.r Plalme,


"VT QVIO DOMINE.


itta pen tnta me. -* Pps mouthe ig full of cur:
ome! bone , and dpiceate and fraude , under bps


on,lurbeth pe ibis denne) that be mape ranih
thepooge. dpe doth raupthe the pooze, when de


JF ol. ti.
gptteth bpmintobps net. De fallethdotwone

€ bubleth him felfe that the cigzegacpon of the

ony map fallinto pbavde of big captapned.

pe Hath fapd tubishert: Cutpe,Gon bath fo2-
gotten, be bydethatvap bis face,and be wplnes
uetfeit. Arple(D Load God) ¢ ws bp tbpne
bande,forget uot thepoze. Wiberfoze Muld the
wpcbed blafpheme God, a be doth lape in
bis bert:tuth,tbou Godcarett not fo2 it? Sue D
telp thou baft fene it. Eo thou beboldeft pngod
lpnes and wonge. ‘Chat thou mart take the
matterinto thp bande:the pooze comitteth bim
felfe vntothe,foztbou art p helper of the frend-
lefle. zeate p the potver off ungodly ¢ mali-
cpous,tabe albap pis bngodl pnes,¢ thou thalt
fpndenone. Che Lodis hinge foz ener euer,
€ the Heatheare perpihed out ofp lande. Low
P ball bearde p delp2e of the pooze: Syrepareite |
tbeir berte g thtne careberkenethtberto. To
belpe ; fatherles € pooze vntotbeirrpabt: p the
ma of p earth benomozeeraltedagapntt them.

‘The.xt.pflalme.
IN DOMINO CONELDO.
Co the chaunter,a Pfalme of Daud.

ges, A the Lord put J mp teukt-bowe fi


ya eas abepde dito pourbpls jfozlo, the
at A DUGCDIp bende their botve,s ake rca
Dp thep2 arowes within pquypuer, pthep mape
p2euelp (pote at thé whpcheare true of berte.
Woz the foundacions wylbe caff dotwne, & what
bath therpghtcousdoner +The Lodismnbis avast»
bolp templet p Lozdeslette ps tn beaué. Pig ep: erasota
esconfpderen (che peore) g bpgepe Ipodes trpeth ë 25
chplozenofmen. Che Lozdaloweth the righ: s
teous:but the pngobdip, and bpm that delpecth
in wickednes, dott bisfouleabbozre.Aponthe —
ungodly de Hal rapgue (nares, fp2e,and bepa
tone torme and tempefte: thps thalbe thepz
oscpontodzpnecke. €or the righteous Lord
ouethbrpabteoutnes:bpscountenaunce tpl be:
bolde the tbinge tbat isiufte .
~~ Wbe.xit. pfalme.
SALVVM MF FAC, *
Co him that crcelleth oponad infErumente of
epg ht frpngesa Plalme of Dauid. |
Ve xa A Elpo Lord fo? thereisnot onc god %
d Rp lip manicfte. Eorp faythfularemp= ~
he R py uithcd tro amoge thechplozé of men.
omit] @ Hep talise of Danite,cucrp one with
bis neighboute, thep Dobut flatter wpth thepz
lpppes and diffemble in npete double berte .-
The Lod thall rote out all difccatfullpppes, ¢
the tonge that {peaketh pzoudthinges. tabich
paue fapde: vb our tonge wpll we preuaple : the
are thep that ougbte tolpcake , whois Lode
ouer ug: ow fo: pconfoztlestroublesfake of BH.
pueadp,*¢ becaute ofthe depe fpgbtbing of the Psript
pooze. 3 wpll vp(fapthebe Lozd) ¢ wplibelpe
cuetp one.from Dim that fwelletbagaint him,
and topl fet théatrell. Che wo2des of p Lod
are pute feozdes cut as thefpluer, wbicbe frons —
carth ig trped g purified feu€ tyinesin the fpee.
Thou thalt kepe them (D Lord) thou thal


preleruc bim from thps gencracpon Foz ever, | w


SA Hi The


Mii


ILA LUT LUD. CVE PU.


She hulp walke oneuerp por: when they


are exalted, pchyldzen of më are putto rebuke. Fea


€ The.xivi.lalme.
VSQ.VEQ VO DOMINE-


_ Cothechaunter,a plalme of Daud.


4 head i Zozde)foz cuer? powe lige wylt thou
G BVA Ul bpde thy face fro me: owe longe thal
E2] feke councell in mp toule:¢ be to ver
edinmyne bert: bowe longe Hall mpne enemte
trpipbhe ouer me Conlpdze beare me (0 Lod
mp God)lpghtenmpne epes,that 3 lepe notin
death. Left mpneenemp fape: J haue preuap=
ledagapnite bim:fo2 pf 3 be cat Downe, the >
trouble me wplleciopceat it. wut mp tru is
inthp mercpe, andmy hertets topfullin thp fal
uacton. J wyl fing of the Lozd, becaule be bath
deltefo oupnatpe pth me. cece, FZ well prapletbe
o® name of the isde the moot bpelt.
C The. rtitt. lalme.


DIZIT INSIFIENS;


pra, itina. yy FA


gd NGI


- pfmen,tofepf there wereanp that wold vnder:


vy
* ‘eneracponoftherpabtcous. As foz pou, pe
b nanea mocke at the counfell ofthe poore,
i ille pe pottea bps trutin the Lozd. Wibo
fhall geue | |
Roma pie mre “i FE tates ao
le, thé pal Jacob veiopee,t Jira de glad.
vere C Tbe.rY. Palme. 7


DOMINE QVIS HABITABIT.'


eap. r.d,


a


re MeSH


==


pia.rriiiia SSES k ed
Sepie keththetruthfribpsbert. Pethat hath vied


ath not

_. pours. be tbat lettethbnot by bpm felfe: but is

lowip in bps olbne epes ad maketh much of the

thatfearep Lozde: be that fiveareth Dnto bys

y Depot ado abe Sgdagoe re

peoi, a Were bys o ne bpnderaunce. x He that

e hath not geuen bps monepe vpon viurpe , no?

shcpaterage atic.
0 etopnges, Siiyiive Gis
CONSERVA ME DOMINE!


d


Dive longe wplte thou forgetmecD on


chplo2é


ae
iS | eA a cle: tho pall ret vpon thy polp hpll’


‘polodthp preléce in rightoufnes:¢ wbt J atake


The badge orarmes of Danid.
A LKeferueme, D God, fozin the pane 3


ften me intheniqht {eafon. 3 baue fet Godal- 5


Mpallrefeinbope. Wo: tobp:*theu Malt not mera


wnder p padot of thp wingeg. Kro p ongooip pm gp Pr
adea


ppatter thplpkenes 3 palbe fatifited wy th tt.
Che


AA UMKE.


CThe.rvtit Ptalme.

_ __' DILIGAM TE DOMINE: spas
To thechauntet of Dauid the eruaunte of the
LOjde, which (pake Muto p Lozd the wozdes of
this fonge(in the dap the Lozd delivered him
from the bande of all bps enempeg, ¢ from the

x bande of Saule Jana be lapie.
at A Wipl lone $, D Lozd,mp ftrégtd.
SEd ka TheLodis mp ftonp rock, ¢ mp de
© (O fence, mp faupour,mp God, and mp
a. might tn whom J tpl truft,mp buc
oof mp faluatio, ¢ mp refuge .*


ea


&
ler,p Dogne al


|. tire,rrit.s ¥ topll call bpon p Lozd wobich 18 worthy to be


pzapled,fo pall J be fafe fro mpne enempes.


Praherbl.s The forowes of death compatted me, andthe


ouerfloinges of biugodlpneffe made me atrap
ed. Theipapnes of hell came about me, fina-
res of death ouertoke me. jn mp trouble wpl J
call tpa tie L020, ecomplapue bntomp God.
po pall be beare mp vopce out of his cboire) të-
ple mp cOplaint pall come befoze him, tt thal


mat.rrbifé cntrecucninto bis eares.* Cheearth trébled


g quaked, fhe verp foundactds allo of the billeg
{hoke ¢ ereremoued, becaule he was woth.
There benta fmoke out inhis prelence:¢ a co-
fuming fpze oute of hpsmouthe,fo that cooles
torte kindled atit. Hebotved the beaués alfo,
and came Downe, tf has Darke tunder his fete.
Herode bpon cherubpng opd Ape, became
ûping bpd the winges of thewpnde. Hemade
darknelie bps fecrete place:dis pa uplion roñde
about him x dark tater g thicke cloudes toco
uer him. At the brightnefle of bis pretence bis
- cloudesrcmoucd, bapleffones,t cooles of fpze.
The Lod alfo thadzed out of heaué,¢ thehpett
 gaue iS thunder, bapleffones g cooles of fire.
`- Helent out hisavotwes and fcattredthem, de
€ cat forth lightninges,¢ deftroped them. The
fpringes of waters Were fence, ¢ the foundactos
of the raund wold twere Difcoucred at thp chp-
diug, DQ Lod, at p blafting of the bzeth of thp
difpicafure. Peal fend dotone fro the Heigth
tofetch meand thal take me oute of manp iva-
ters. He thal deliver mefromp Hrogefl encmp,
€ from the wbich bate me:foz thep are tomigh-
tpfozme. Thep pzeuented ine in poape of mp
trouble:but the Lozde thas mp bpholder. He
bought me fozth alfointoa place of Ipbertp:
be bzougbte me forth, euen becaule he bad a ia-
noure butome. Che Lozd thal retoarde me af
termy rpabhtecous dealing:accogding to the cle-
nesofmyp hades thal he recopence me. Wecaufe
* Shane kept the apes of p Lozd:¢ baue not foz
faken np Godas p topcked doth . Foz J baue
anepe onto al bis lawes:¢ pl not catt outbis
cOmaundemétes frome, 3J tas allo bncozrupt
befoze bim: elcpued mpne owne wpricdneg .
Therfore Wall the Lozde retwarde me after mp
tygbteous dealpng:¢accozdpnge vnto the clê-
ries ofinp bandes inbps epefpabte. Withbthe
bolp thou Malt be bolp, ¢ ith a perfect man ë
p palt be perfect. With pcleane thou thalte be
cleaue:¢ with thefrotward thou thaltlearne fro
Wardnes:For thou Malt fane the people pare in
aduerfite g palt bainge dotwne pbpe lokes of p


SEAL tiii


proide. Thott alfo Halt ipahe iy iàndel: thè
Lode mp God pall make mp Alaa to be
light. foz in the J ball opfeoné pte ant boot of
men: 4D w the belpe of mp God F thal lepe once
val. Che wap of Godisan bndefpled wap
the wozde of the Lozde allo ig trpedinp Epe:
be igp defender ofall thé that put their trut in
bim. Joz * whois God but the Lozde, 02 who
Hath any Trength except our God? Ft ig Gov
that gp2deth me w ftrength of warreg maketh
nip wap perfect. x He makethmp fetclpke bev Adacsti(o
tesfete:¢ fettcthmebpon-bpe. pe teacheth Č
mpne bandes to fyghte and mpne armeg all “territ
bzeake euena bowe of tele. Thou batgeuen cane
me the defence of thp faluacié:thp rpabe bande
alfo pall bolde me bp, ethy loupng cozreccion
al make me great. Chou halt make romme
pnougbe bnder me foz togo, f my fotefeppes
(alluotttpde. 3 wplfolowe vpon mpne ene
mpes,¢ ouettake thé, nepther topll J turneas
gapne,tpll 3 baue deltzopedthé. J topl {mpte
the,tbat tbep thal not be able to ftande: butfal
winder mp fete. Chou batt gpzded mew Trégth ¢
wito the battaple, thou Halte thzowe dowone -~
mene enempes vnder me. Chou hafe made
mpne enemies alfo to turne their backes bpon
meg Jpaldekrope thëthathateme. Thep prouti
{pal crpe but there thalbenoneto belve the:pee,
euch into p Lozd thal thepcerpe, but be Mal not
beare them. 3J wpll beate thé as fmalias poui
befoze p thinde 3 wyll cat thé out,as f clape in
tbe tretes. Chou palt delpuce me fra che fire
utnges of the people:¢ thou tpaltemake nte the
beade of the Heathen. A people bom Jhang
not knott thal ferue me. Joncas thep beare
of ine thep thal obep me:but the Rraüge chilozé
thal dplicmble withme. Che frrafige chplo2é
pall faple,and be afrapde out of their prpions. |
The Lozalpueth:¢ bleffed be mp ronge bel G
perg peapled be  Godofmpfaluacpon. Eué
the God which fech that J be anenged : g fub-
Ducth the people Muto me. Ft is he that deline
reth me from mipox ¢cructs enempes,and fetteth s
ine Dpabwoue mpncaduertarpes: thou halt rpd |
me fromthe topckedDiman. * $€02 fhps caufe y Mort.tb.b
wpll geuc thabes vnto f D Lo2d,amonae the
Gentils andfpnge peapics ontothp name.
* Great popat geueth be vnto bis kpnge:e trees,
thetocth louing kindnes tuto Dautd pis anotit
tcd,and buto bps fede for eurrinoze, r
The.rir.Piaslme.
_ CELI ENARRANT:
_ Cothe bei Plalme of Danid. 3
gep Ve Deauts* declare palozpe of God, $
S Leg € the firm amente emer DiS banpp *o™!>6
WA DN work. Dne daye tellethanotber: aa
t ONE NICHE certifpethanother. Ciere
isnetherfpechnozligage,buttheirbatecsare
Heard amoge the. * Their fondeig qonc into al neria p:a
lade: their wozdesinto pendes of p wozlde.
Jn them aera tabernacle forthe funne, `
which cometh forth aga bzidegrome out of big
chamber, andretopfethas a gpaunte to runne
Digcourle. Jtaoethfozthfrothe vemok part
Of the Heaué,andrunneth aborte unto theende
. But, ofie


rat ei Bz
and crit. È
Deut, iii ë


J
le
.
|


pro viit.b. erpgbtcousaltogetber. * ozetabedefpecdD fpnge and zaple thp power. hr
foe- z The eri. palme i


ofttagapne,anb there tanothens Dette jada eine D Thep: feute Malte
fpLowisanbnde: t


€ totbefpmple. The latutes of the Lorde are deupce, astbhep are not bable to perfourine .
papt andreiopee the bert: the comaundement Therfoze Malte thou put them to fipabte, and !
ofthe Lozde ig pure,and geuethipgbt nto the the id A of thp botve Malt thou mabe redp k
againftetbefacesoftpem. 25r thou exalted
retb fozeuer,p udgementes of p Lozdearetruc Lode, in thpue otne ftrengthe : fo wpli we ai


ter alfo then bony cobe ¢ p ponp. Mozeouer bp To the chaunter bpon | theppnde of p J 4


theretsareaterewarde. iho can tell howe Dawnpng.a Plalme of Danid.
fede ofende po s Me = Pk God, Mp G 0D: tobe bpon me) Hp 4
A f Ean roon totana be oea of et
iA fro mp health, andtro tyr Worve of mat.rrbti.
URS mp coplaine? Omp God, J erpein TAREBEGOSE
offence. Let thewordes ofmpmouth,andtbe tbe Daret e, but thou beareit not: andin the
„y meditation ofmp Dert bex cawar acceptable tr npabt {eaton alfo J takenoreite. Bnd thou
” thp {pabtD Low, mp ftrégth Admp redemer. contpnuettebolpe, D ai twozrthpp of Ffract.
C The. rr. Palme. Murfathers hoped in tpe, sagt deste the &


. =
> an


EXAVDIAT TEDOMINVS. | thou Dpoddelt delpuer them bep called wpa
‘Cothechaunter,a plalme of DAUID. the, ad tere belped:thep put their trut in the, A
g E Lordebeare theinthedap of trou- andwerenot confoñded. Wut as fo: me Jam hi


{ible p name of p Godot Jacob deféde a twozme g no ma:a Werp fcozne of men and the


Fez Exalithe Gcndethebelpeteo the Sactua ontcatt of the people. * Althep pfe melaugh
ee Karp and ftrégth the out of pon. Re metofcozne:thep Wote out thew ippes ¢ pai Pral.cip.d
nicmbze all thp pn per ,eacceptthp burnt- thebeedfaping: * He trufted in God that de mat. Freie
raunttbetbp bertesdelire, olde delpuer bpm: leth mdelpuer bpm pi be
efulfplal thy mpnde. we wplretopleinthy wpllbanebpm. + Zut p arte be that toke me r“ irr, a
falnacion:and triumphe in the name © PLowde outof mp mothers wõbe : thou watte mp hope
pur God, the Lorde perfourme all thp pettctos. whe sbagedpet bpd mp mothers beeaftes. 3
95 Rowe knowe 3 tbat the Losdedelpethhbys haueben left vnto theeuer fpng 3 thas bome: €
anopnted,and topil beare bim fro bisholpebea art mp God ent fromp mothers wobe. Dgo
neu: cuen wpth the wbolfome ireengthe of bys notfrome,foz trouble ishardeathand,¢ there
ryabtbande. omeput thep2trn incbaret=- ignone tobelpeme. <anp oren are come a-
teg, and fome in bozfes : but Wwe topllremembze bout me fat bulles of Malan clofe me inon cue
pname of p 1.020 our ov. Thep arebzougbt rplpde. Chep gape ppome woptd their met- -
dorone and fallen, but twe are rpfen, and ande thegagitwerearamppng g roringlpon. * F Joro.bi b |
pprpabt Saue Lorde, heare vs, Dkpnge ampouredoutlpke water, ¢ allmp bonesare


ai
o? -m~ m _ — =


= 0b beauen, when toe caller (bponthe) out of topnte:mp bert alton the mpoddeftof m |

| non ETE EVA ik raed eum Anshi Sejne mp ci aa |
NEIN VIRTS | © pan anii is dped bp lpke a potiberde,F mp Con tleuet

To thechaunter,a Praline of Dant. to my giimes : æ thou thalte f nueme tata the a


mcs E c kpng thal reiople tn thy ftrength puftofdeath. Forsman DoTges are come a= go
ek a j Lozde:exceadpng glad albe be boute meand thecounfaple of the wpcked lape
N 2) of thy faluacto. Thoubattegpuen fiegeagaintt me. Thep pearled my bandes g f
Ya pim bpsbertesdefpre andha enot mpfete, 3J mape tell almp bones tiep fade fta
im thevequett of bisltppes . Sela. rpngeelobpngevponme. *Chep partemp mat.rrvgo
~ -4€02 thon thalte prenent bpm wpth the blef- crarmentes amoge thé, and calottes bpon mp at
{prnges of gooonetle and alte feta crovoneof ‘vefture. ut be not thou farcefro me, D Loz: A
 puregoldevpon bps becd. | ycalkedlpfeofthe thou art mp fuccour, balt the to þelpeme. De |
and thou gauek binta longe pfe euen fozener lpuermp foulefrom thefwcarde, mp dearlpng -F
andeuct. Hig honour is great in thp faluacto: from the power of tbedogge. Hauemefrom © i
I clogp and great worthippe thalt thou lape bpo thelpons mouth:thou batt bearde mealfotrom
m.$€o2 thou palt gpuc bimrenerlaftyng felt- amonge the boznes of the tnpcoznes. J wpll :
cptic,¢ make him glad with thetope o thp cou Drelare rop name BOR Ra Jobr.re.b
teriaunce. gnd whpsbecaule the kpngputteth deftof pcogregacts wpl Fpzapt tbe. Dpzaple a |


truft inthe Lo2de, and in the mercpe of the the Lorde peptcare bim:agnifp hintal pe of
motte bpeft be thal not mypfcarp. All thpne ene thefecd of Zacob,¢feare bpm al pe feed of 3fta-
micg thal Fele thy babe: thp riant havetbalfind el.* Eo be bathuot defppled no: abborred A POT
_puttbemtbatbatetbe. “hou fbaltmakethé lLotne eftate of p poze:be bath not bio bis face fro Penta
ipke afpzte puen E se th:p Lorde him butwbë bpecalled vnro bim, pe bearde Dim. i i
all detropethem in his dy leafure, andthe p prapleis oftheinthegreat cOgregacps,
mp


B- imi Se es
è


!


ASLAL ARUN UU ROAR OCA POU.


mp botbes wpl y be inthe fyaht of thé
thatfearebim. ‘Che poze thal eate,¢ be fatit-
fied:thep ý feke after the L020 thal peaple bim;
pour perte ball ipue foz ener. All 3 endeg of 5
wozlde pall remembze them felucs,¢ be turned
puto the Lozd, andall the kynredes of f nactos
thal toozthpp before bim. Jo? the kingdom ig
the Lordes, and be is the qouernour among the
© people. Alluchas befat bponcarth,baueca-
tenand toozthppped. All thep that go Downe in
to the dut, pall knele befoze him, ¢ noma bath
c* quickened bis owne foule::+cer feed thal ferue
dpm:tbep Halbe coñted vnto p Lozd fo? a gene
s* racion. Chep pall come, Fox tbe beauens pall de=
clare his rpghtcoufnefle, bntoa people p thalbc
bone, whom the 102d bath made,
@ Tbe. xriit.pfalme.
DOMINVS REGIT MEI:
= APLalme cf Dauid.
A TE De Lord is mp thepherd: therfore can
af Ad lacknothing.. Hethallfedeme m
hiya BS aa grene pafture,andlead me forth be
[oA Woilpde P waters of cofozte . ie thal cb:
uert mp foule, ¢ being me forth in the patbes of
of rightoutnes forbis names fake. Pea tbough
FJ walkethozow p vallep of pihadow of death:
Fwpl feareno eupl.foz thou arte w me: thp roa
æ tbp fafcofoztme. ‘Chou Malt preparea ta
ble before me agapnite them tbat trouble me:
thou bat annopnted mp heed ithople,andmp
cup thalbe full.2utex (top lontng kyndneffe ad
ox mercp pall folotve meall the dapes of mp Ipfe,
€ J pl iwell inthe boule of the L020 02 ener.
The.rritit.olalme.
DOMINIEST TFRRA
: aninas(t iri bapeot
A fale of Dauid-en oe


L Ni prar. 70,0. *(bo malafcendeinto p bpll of the Lorde’


eesrrtiec 2 who Wall pie op in his bolp place Eut be


sa fioozne to difcepue ov chisnepsbbonr,) He Hal re


hops DE


=
i L i
|


autd.
See al s2t0 the, D Lozde) pl Flytt bpm
W7 foule. 4) Gov. 4 bane put mp eruit
pa ea (n the: Db let me not becofounded: net
eee thet let mpre enemics trpumpbe ouce


ine. *f€o2 al thepthat hope ttt the Halnot be “om-tr.c
afbamed:Uut fuch as tranigreffe wout acaute, EET biiid
fbalbe put to cifufton. Spetwe me tbp wapes: -
D 1020, ãdteache me thp pathes. Leademe
forth in thp truth,¢ learne me, fog thouart the
God of mp faluacion:in p bath bene iH sa
thedap longe. Cal to remébzaunce (D 10de)
thp téd2e mercpeg, and thy loupny kindnefies,
wbpch baue ben euer of olde. Dhremembre 75
notthe*fpnnes ¢ offences of mp pouth,but ac: rob ri.
cozdpnge Dntothp mercp thpnke thou bpime
CD ZLo2d)fo2thpgoodnefle. Gracious righ
teous ts the Lord. therfore pl be teach finners
inp wape. The p be meke thal he gupde in ind-
gemét,andfuch as be gentle,the thal be learnt
bps wape. All thepathes of the Lod are mer
cp etructhvntoluchaskepehiscoucnauntee C
bpsteitpmonpes. * ffo2 thy names fake D Erria
02D, be merciful Duto mp finne,fo2 it ig great
— UBbat man is he that feareth the Lo2d-bpm
fhallbeteache inthe ape that be Mal chole.
dis foule hal Divell at eafe and bis {ced that
enberettbelande. Chefecrete of the Lozdcis if
among them that feare bim* and be wyl thee ant
them bis coucnatit.)pne epes are cuerlobing š
bntothe Lorde, foz be ball plucke mp fete oute
ofthenet. Turne the vntome, and haue mers
rst fo: J am defolate,andin miferp.
be fozotves of mp Hert are enlarged. D bzing
thoumeoutofimptroubles. Loke bpd mpne gy
aduerfitpe and miferpe, and fozgpue me allmp
fypnne. Confpdze mpnecnempes bowemanpe
thep are, thep bearcatp2annous pate agami
me. Kepe mp foule aud deliuerme:let me not
be confounded, for J paue put mp truftetn the.
Let perfectnetle ¢ tpghteous dealpng wapte
pponme,foz mphopehath beneinthe. Delp-
ner Flrael D God, out of all his troubles.
C The. rrii. Balme. °
IVDICAME DOMINE.
o%(4 Brame) COE Dai : (afore be wasenbalmed, y
(Te TE thou mp * tudge, D Lode, foz q 2
a bases baue Wwalbedinnocentlpe: mp trufe Foe
py Y Dath bene alfo in the Lozde therfore
anes pal FZ tot fal.* Eraméme, D Lo2d, pr.crrrir.»
€ pzoue me, trpe out mprepnes,e mp bert .s02
thy louing bindneffe 18 befoze mpneepes,and 7
topl halkeinthptruth. 3 banenotdibeltu
bapne perfones.neptber wpl 4 bhauefelooipip
With poptceptiull. Yhauehatedthe congre-
acion of the wicked and wpll not [pt amonge
pbongodlp. «4 tpl ath mp bandes in inno: Erat. ie
cencte, D L020, and fo wpll 3 goto thpne aul-
ter That J mape hetve the vopce of thankel 15
gpupng,andtell of all thy fonderous wozkes.
Lozbde,¥ bane loud p babitacté of thp boule,
and the place where thpne Donour dtwelleth .
 thut not bp mp foule rtd thefpnners nog
mplpfe withthe bloubdtbiritpe. Qn tobole hã- €
desis wpckednelle, and thepzrpabt bandes ps
fullofgpftes. 2utasfo2me 3 wpll walcke
innocentlpe: D delpuerme,and be mercpful on:
tome. pfoote fandethrpgbt, J wplpzaife
the Lozde (ntbecongregacpons.
CThe.rrvel.Wlalme. |
AAV. Domi,


JUU U,


mp Ipfe:of whom then wal J


S— i
e
Es
mi
=e
=

Se
3
=

Le
g
by
=
=
fis
=
=
=
Tt
=
Parl
©
=r
Las a
Tt
=]
=
=J
—
T?


3
3
=
T
g
gz
zi
Ez
2
=
x
har]
g
=
Th
Z
=
©
8


D diben mp father and mother fozfake me, the
Lozdetakethmebp. Ceache me thp wap D
od, and leade metherpade wap bpcaufe of
mpne enempeg. Delpuec me not ouer tntote
wpll of mpie aduerlarpes foz there are falfe
witnefles rpien bpagapnit me,efuch as (peke


: J bpleue werelp tofe the qoodnefle of the Lod


crest DES Leplure* be ffrong.and be thal chfozt chpne
PALF ert and put thou thp trutt in the L020.
C The.crvit.yfalme.
AD TE DOMINE CLAMABO,
| A plaline of Dauid.
fer uy = Bea oila cepe, D ae frégth


aN A /3 pnkenofcogne of me let, pf # make
A Wea pas though 3 derde not, J become
ESES Like thé p go ddtneinto det eare f
l bope of mp humble peticions, whe Ferie unto
: eee 3 olde bp mp Hades totvarde the mer
cpleat of thp bolp téple. Dpluckmenotatbap
qq OF Mepther dettrope me) pth the vngodlp e wpcked
Seve, tis DoOers* thpcbe fpeake frendlp to thep2z nepgh-

2 bours,but pmiagpn mptchefe in thep2 bertes.
» fob, rriiti, x Rewarde them accozdpng to p thickednefle
Be oftbetrownetnuentions. Recompence them
after the thozke oftheir bandes: pape the that
thepbaue delerucd. #02 thep regarde notin
thep2 mpnbde the workes of the Lode, no: the
„operacion of bis bandes, therfoze pall be bzeke
thédotone,tnotbupldethembp. Pzapledbe
the 1020¢.fo2 be bath beard the vopce of mpne
€ bumble peticiong. * Che Lozdis mp frégth
amt oiih @mpthylde:mp bert hath trutedinbim, and F
ambelped:therfozemp perte Daunferhfoz tope,


ma’.rbi.d
Homi b


4 Mmavethemalfotofkyppelpkea Cafe: Lpba-


Monge. Fibuldvtterlphaucfapnted: buté
intheladeofthelpupng. Dtarp thbouğ Lo: we


HILAL PULL K DOULA RU EER: |


andinmp lige byl Fpeatle bpunt: ‘Che Lod
is their frength:and be is p wholfome defence
of hisannopnted. Dfauethp people tapue
thy blefipnae vnto * thpne enberptaunce: fede desrreii.b
them and fet them bp for ener.
CThbe.rrix.ptlalme.
AFFERTE DOMINO, | PT
A Plalme of Danid atthe pertourmenge otera <“
za R inge dntothe Lorde ( Rae eke 7s


ae iow (bipngeponge rémes bnto the How) a

BO onto the Lozde toozthpy g ftrenath.
Gpue the a ys Bno a Pa pes name: |
thozthpppe toe 2 020¢ olpihozthpppe. en 0
r Lozd that commañdeththe waters: Sou”

it ig the qloztous Oootbhat maketh the thine:

x Yt isthe Lozbethatruleth the fee. Che emne =)
fhopce of the Lozdets mpghtp in operacpd: the yg >
popce of the Lozde is a glozious vopce. The creme
popee of f Lozdbzcaketh p * Cedze trees: pea, ;
f Losdbzeaketh the Cedzesof Lpbanus. be


nus alfo, and Spion lpke a ponge Gintcoane.

he popece of the Lorde Deupodeth the fa-
ines of fpe, the vopce of the Lorde (haketh the
wopldernefle: pea the Lo2zd thaketh the mploere |
nefle of Cades. be bopee of the Lorde ma -g
ketb the bpndes to bepnge forth ponge, æ difco
uereth the thpcke bulthes :inbps temple doth
euerp ma fpeake ofbpshonour. Che Lo: fit
tetb aboue the water floude, gr Low remap
netbakpnae fozeucr. Che Lorde Mall gpue
rengto vito his people, f Logdihall qpue bis
peopte the bletipnge of peace.

CTpe. rre. Balme.
FxALTABO TE DOMINE,
A pflalme and fonge of the dedpcatpou
p of the boufe of Dauid. j
Se UF atiptneanete the,D Lode forth me
Ba? PAA bait {etme Yp, not made mp fqoes ta g
Ey ee etrpumpbe ouerme. D Lorde mp God,
EDS crped Dnto the, and thou batt bealed
me. hou Lozd haft brought mpfoule out of
bel:thou batt kept mp life,from the ý go Downe
totbeppt. Spnge peaples vnto the 1020( D
pe fapnctesof bps ) €gpuctbankes nto arm .
OF if. cop.itito


re
¢


ozaremembzaunce of pps bolpneife. *

his hzath endureth but the twpnklpuge of an 25
epe,and inbps pleafuretslpte : heupneite mape
endure Foz anpabt, but tope commesth it p moz-
npag. anar Poe fapde 3 pall
neuer be remoued:thou Lorde of thy goodnefle
baddeit made mp bpl fo ftroge. Chou dpddelk
turne thp facesactcomeyand J tbag troubled. ` g3
Tpencecped J intothe, D Lorde, tgratmeto ~
mp Lowerparbebublp. What profpreistbere
inmp blonde, hen J goodotwne tothe ppt?
Shal the duf gpucthankes vito thes D2 (hall
itdeclaretbetruth: Deare,D Lod, andbanc
metcp bpome Lozdbethoumpbelper. Chou €
batt turned mp Heupnetie into tope: thou bate
put ofmpfakcloth,and gp2zded me wpth glad
nele. ‘herfoze thal(encep good man) {pnge
of thp praple Wpthout ceafiyng:D mp God, F
Wpll gpue thankes yntothefozcucr,


Je ,


7 Ti
4. i
a i
4 f


| CThe.rveré.Blalme:
INTEDOMINE SPERAVY.


S Salet meneuccbe puttoconfulpo:delp: |


ey) (Ge uct meintbp rightuoufnefle. owe

cae es DO wile thpneeare tome, make balk to

5 delpuerme. And be thou mp Fronge rock and

R boule of defence,ptboumapeltfaucme. Ior”

M o art mp ftrongerocke,¢ mpcaffel: We thou al-
fo mp qupde,t leade me fo: thp names fake .

h Dawe me out ofthe net pthep haiie laped pry-
luk.rediit.€ elp Eo? me , Fog thouartmp rength. *3nto
Actebii § thp handes J comende mp fppzite: soz Ë haft

y5 redeemed me, D Lorde Godoftruth. Fbaue

bated thé that bolde of fuperfticious vanitpesg,

gmp trut bathbene inthe Lozde. Y wpil be

a? glad ¢reteplem thpmerccp : for thou batt cofp-

| Dred mp trouble- bat knowen mp fouleinad-

!

f

|


F]


ucrfitpes. Tphoubatnot Wut me vp into the
bid ofthe enemie,but batt fet mp fete ina large
roibiie.Bauc mercy ppome, D L020, fo? Jam
in trouble; mpneepers cõfumed fo perp benp-
nelle, enen mp foule and mp bodpe. Jeo: mp
vf Ipfe 1s waren olde wpthebeupnes , and mpne
peares wpthe mournpnge - p firengtbe
fapleth ine bicaufe of mpne iniquitpe ¢ mp bo-
negare confumed. Jbecamea reprofeamige
almine enemies, but fpecially amõgemp neigh
bours, t thep of mpne acquapntaunce were a -
fraped of met thep that dpd fe me without, tõ-
ucped théfeluesfrome: 4 amcleane forqotté,
i as a decd manoutofmpnde: Jam become lpke
| ab2oké beffel. Eo: J baue berde $ blafphemp
of ee Sey ¢feare tg onenerpefpde whple
thep contpp2e together agapnite me, and take
tbepzcounfapll to takeamape mp Ipfe: But
mp hope bath bene inthe, D 1020,7 baue fai:
-g , Dtbhoattmp Sod. Wptpmeis inthp bade,oe:
K lener me fro the bade of mpne enempes, æ from
F them that perfecuteme. bewe thp feruañt
the lpabt of tbp cofitenaunce, æ fauemefo: thy
mercpes fake Let me not be chfoiided?, D L020,
Fo; Z baue called bpd pilet p morales be put to
cofulid ¢ be put tolplecein f graue. Let piping
lpppes be put tofpléce, which cruelly, difdapn-
fully ¢{pptefullp (peakeagaintt tbe rpghtous.
Dhow plentpfullis thp qoodnefle , whpch ë
t € batt laped Yp, fo? thé that feare theg that thou
L hall prepared fozthé,that put their trutt in the,
E i i a of me? oe et bpbe
thé pepuelp bp thpne owne prefence fro the p20:
uobing of allmen,thou palt kepe thé fecretlpe
iu thy tabernacle fró p ftrpfe oftonges. Thã-
kes be to the 1070: fo? be bath dhewed me mar-
uclous great kindnelle ina flrogecptic. And
tohé 3 made batt, J fapd: Jam caffe out of the
fight of thinecpes. Meuertbheleffe, thou berdi
P vopceot mp paper he J crped vnto the .
pta.sroui,» Dloue the L020, al pe bis fapuctes,foz p Lord
erie pelerueth the thatarefaptbiul,¢ plenteouflpe
retbardethbe the proude doer. * We ltronge,
and be pall fablpihe poure berte , all pe that
putpouretyufeinthe Lowe.
CCbe.rrcit.plaline,


BEATE QVORVM.
Ah inftrucepot of Dauid.


Alis fozgiuč:¢ whofe finne ig couered,
A yx lefed is p man, onto bom the
fata an) L020 imputeth no (pnne,¢ in whofe
{pirtte tpere is no ge e. Fo: wbpky belde mp
toge,my bones cotumed awap thozowmpdap —
lpcoplapnpng. ffo? thp bande ts heup vps me x5
dape g night,and mp mop ture isg like pdzonth
inSommer. Sela Fipll bnotledgemp
fpnne unto the, ¢ mpne bneighteonf{nefic bauc |
Junot bpd. ¥lapde:* J topl confeile mp finnes Fob rite,
bnto p Lod, qio thou forzqauelt the hickednes =e
ofmpfinne. Sela. J€02thps thalleucrp one
that ig goblpe, makebps Paper pitothe ina
tyme whe thoumapelt betotide, butinp great ¢
Water loudes thep Hall not come npe ppm .
‘Chou artea place to bpde me in, p thatt prefer-
ue me fro trouble: palt cõpaffe me about wld
ges ofbelpuecraunce. Sela. ¥topllenfourme
thet teach the in the wape where tn thou thalt
00: and Fpl quyde the wpth mpneepe.
We pe not lpke bozle and mule , Dobich bane no
bnderftandpnge, whole mouthes mutt be dolo€
with bpt and bole, lel thep fall bpon the .

Great plages remapne fo: the yngodlp, but
Whofo putteth bis trut in the L020, mercpem-
beacetbbpmoneuctye fpde. Weglad, Dye
righteous , andretopfe inthe 1020: and be top=
full all petbat are true of berte.

—— CThe.xrrtit.plalme.

EXVLTALE lVSTLIN DOMINO. a
Pee Ciople* inthe Lo2d, Dperightous, pte.rchf.b
j Ea ee : teph.b.p
ie fay, S fozitbecommetbwelp iut to be thaes Ene tis
UG iull. *B2aplep Logde pth barpe,

saa =(iugitigeplalmes ynto him wpth the

luteand inftrunient of ten ftrpnges. Spnee

nto the Lozdea netoefonge, finge prapleslue xs

ftelpox contobe witha goodcorage. Foz the

Wwo2de of the Lode 13 true, andall bis wo2kes

ate fapthfull. aie aie tightcoutnetie g iud-

gemet,theearth ts fullof p goodnes of p L02. Sene. i.a ;

xip the wozde off Lozdare thepraués made:

¢ al tie boottes of théby p becath of hig mouth.
Hegathereth the waters of the {ee toapeber

agit were bpian depe, Elapeth wpthedepe ag

inatreafure joule. Letallp earth fearcthe

Lo2d: ande thatoc of bim.all pe that ditvell it

thetozlde.  * Foz be [pake andit twas done : Priis

De commaunded and it todefak. Che L020 Sam. t.a

bringeth p «a coiifapl of p Heathé tonouqht.¢€ eta. bib

maketh p cuties of the people, tobe of none ef: te

fect:ow ( aud catteth out ¢he countaples of pzpnees. ) The

counfaple of the Lozd mall endure foz euer:and

p thoughtes of his hert from gencracpon toge-

neracion. lefed are the people, whole God

isthe “ai Jebouah, and bieiled are the folke p

have cholen bpm tobe theirinherttaunce. The

Lode loked Downe from Heaué, and bedeloe al

> childzen of men : from the habptacpon of bps

dwellpnge , be confpdzeth all thé that dwell in

theearth. ipefatlponcth all the bertes of thé,

and bnderfandeth all thep2to2zkes. There


isnobpngctpat can be laucdbp hae |
| oran


VOL BI.
a


AL fled is he, whole vnrigptesufieg "is


AVAL LCL AT ED.


ofan hoot, nepthet is any mpabtpe man delp-
stot moch flrength. Bbhozte is counted
but a bapne thpng to fauc a mattnepther mall
pe delpucranp manby bpsaqreat ttregth. . 25e
Hold, the epe ofthe Loeis vpon théthatfeare
him, bpon thë that put tbeir trult in bis mer-
cp. Todelpuertheirfoulegfrom death andto
fedetheminthetpmeot dearth. Dure foule
bath pactétlp tarped foz the L020 for be is oure
Helpe andonrthpld. soz our becte thal retople
in bim, bicaule toe Hane hoped in his bolp name
Let thy mercptull kpndneffe, D L020 be wpa
. belpbeas toe paue put oure truik inthe,
The.cecitit.falme.
BENEDICAM DOMINVM, _
OF Daud , whe he chafiged bys fpech befoze
Abimelech, wbpch dzone bpm atwape
and he departed.


DE
by aan eate tboump caule, D Lo2d, wpe
is re ) them that trine with me : and fpabt
i] PSG) thou agapnite them that fpabtea=
| ygapnt me. Lap bande bpon p child


y warded mecupl fo: good, to the


and buckler,and Fande bp tabelpe me, W2ir
forth the {peare,¢ fopthe wap agapnt bem p
perfecute nmic:fape bnto mp foule: Jam thp fal-
uacton. Let them beconfoüded g put to pame
ý feke aftermp foule, let them be tourned back,
€ brought toconfutto, that pmagpne mpichefe
fozme. *Let thé be as the dull befoze p Wind, pirri. e
e theaungell of the Lozdicattrpngethe. Let
thepz wapebedarke ¢fippperp.andlet the aŭ-
geloftheLozdeperfecutethe. Joz thep paue 25
priuelp layed their net to Deftrope me woute a
caufe,pea enë wopthout a caufe baue thep made
apptfozmpfoule. Leta fodapnedeftruccpon
come Dpon him bnawares: and bys netthat he

ath lated prinelp,catch bim felte:that be map

allinto bis otone mpfchefe. Andmp foule be
iopfull in the Lozd:tt cpio in bis faluact
on. Allinp bones thall faye, 02d, whoislike
wnto ý: tohpch delpucrelt the pooze from bpm
thatis to trong fo: pin:pea, the poore and bim
tbatiginmilerpefrombpm that lpopleth bim.

alfe witneile didrple bp:thep lapedto mp
chargcethpnges that Jknowenot. -Thep res
cate dilcom-
fort of mp foule. Meuertheleiic, when thep
toerefpcke, J put onfacke clothe: andDdumbled
mp foule wpthefatpnge and mp pari pall
tourneinto mincotwonebofome. J behaucd mp C
(elfe as thougbit bad ben mp frende 02 mp b20-
ther. 3 went peuclpe, as one that mournethfoe —
big mother. Wutinmpne aduerlptie thep re=
topted,¢ gathered the togpther: Pea, the verpe
abtectes came togither agapnit me pnatoares,
makpnge mowes at me,andceaflcdnot. With
the flatterers were bulp mockers, which anaf-
hetb bpon me With theirtceth. Lozde, Dowe
longe Wwplte thou loke bponthis’ D delpuer
mp loule fro the calampties whpchthep bringe
onme and mp dearling from the lpong, Hoa ` s
Wwpll J gpue thethankes inthe greatcongrega -.
cion 4 topl prapfe the amongemoch pebple .
DO let not them thatare mpne enempes Ka


` umphe ouer me Dngodlp.nepther let thë thin


with theirepes that*bate me without a caule. parira
And wohp-thete cmunpnae isnot Foz peace, Hod Fha
but thep pmagpne difceitfull ozdes aqapnite
them that arequiete inthe lande. ube gaped
pou me with ther mouthes,and fapde: fpe on
the, fpe on the : toe dpd fe it wpth oure epes.
Thisthou patt fene, D Lorde: bolde not thp
tonge then,qonot farre fro me, D Lod. J- D
wake g Hande bp toiudgemp quarell, auenge i
thou mp caule, mp God,and mp Lord. Fudge
me, D Lo2de pea od, accozdpnge tothp righ:
teoutnelie,¢let them not trpumpbe ouet me.


. Let the not lape in thete hertes,there,there,fo


wold the bane it:neptherletthem flap : twe baue
deuourcdbpm. Let them be put toconfulpon
and pame togpther that retopfe at mp trouble:
let the beclothed pth rebuke and dp(bonoure
that booftthem feluesagainme. Letthbem
be glad and reiopfe that fauoure mp epabtous
Dealpng:pea,let thélape alwape: bleficd be the.


£020, tobpch bath pleafure in the profperptpe


ofbpsteruaat. Andas for mp toge,t¢ Halbe
talkpnge


3
n
TAr
à
oe
|


-~ talckpnge of thp rpabteoutneffe , and of thp
puaple, allthe dape Page.
CThe.rrrdi.pialme,
DIXITINIVSTVS. |
To Pchaater of wiis tbe fe pamat of 4 ie
Aiea P berte heweth metbhe topcbedne
4 Se } 4 ofthe pagoblp, p*therets nofeare
NAVA of Gon before bys eyes. Sor be
Ha N AA flatceth bim {elf in bisowne fight,
hae aie. tpl bis abbominable fpnne be folio
The to20ce8 of Dis moutbare yurpghte-
ous æ full of op{cepte: be bath left of to bepane
- Dimfelfwpielp ¢ todogood. dpe pmagpneth
mplchefe Dpon bis bed, and bath fet him felfein
no good ibap, neither doth be abdorreanp thing
thatiscupl. hp mercp D L020, reacheth bn
.. tothe beauen,tt faptbeulin e Unto the clon
des. Chpyrpahtcoutnefle ftandeth lpke the
ftrongqeimountapnes: thp iudgeinétes are lpke
the greate depe. Thoi Lode thalte faue bot
manandbeett. Howercell€tisthp mercpe:
Gody the chpldzen of men Hall put their trut
yg DiDEr the Maddotwe of thp EE id od ipil
befatpfricd with Pplentcoutnetie of thy boufe,
¢ thon Halt qpue thé dppnke of thp pleatures,
as outoftherpuer. jo withthe ts p toell of
lpfe,¢tithplpabt,tpall elelpabt. D conti-
nue forth thp loupng bindnefle vnfo them that
knowr the, thprpabteoufneile pnto thé that
are true of berte. let not the foote of p2pbe
- come agapntt me:andlet not the bade of the bn


' out.


gqodlpcafimedotone. CThereare thep fallen
o#(alip horke thickeniefle:thepare catt Downe
and pall not be bable to ffande. :
CTphe.rrrvii.pfalme.
Til ) NOLITE EMVLARE.
u; BPlalme of Danid
E aa Bet not thp felfe bpcaule of the wn-
[o BEd Raa codlpe: nepther be thoucnupous a -


Py Fong gapnit tbe eupll doers. Jo? thep thal


;


thptruintheLogde, anddoo good: Divell in
~ thelad ¢ nerelp thou halt be fed. Delpte thou
inthe Lozde,¢ bethall qpue the thp bertes de-
ipze Commit thp wap vutop Lo2d,¢ put thp
truffin Bien sac ween D eit to pate. P
{pall make thp rpabteoutnefie as cleare as the
lpgbt,¢ thy tuffocalpnge as the none dave.
olde the pl th f Lord, and abpoe pactentl
yon pim:but greve eh Rat at him whole
125 wape Doth prolpere agapnit the man p doth at:
- terenellcounfaples. Reaue offrom tozath,¢
let qo difpleature:fret not th? felfc.cls alte Pp
bemoucdtodocupl. Wipcked doers Halbe ro
ted out:ethep that pacientlp abpde the Lode,
thole pall enberitthbeland. Peta lptle while,
- andthe pngebdlp thalbe clene gone : thou Malte
loke after bisplace:ebetpalbeatap. utp
mekefpirited saat elie the earib.e thalbe re-
frethedin the multitude ofpeace. Che vngod


Pial LELOLAL EDIE LE DU


He tree: J wente bp andloo,


ipefkethconfapll again thetut,egnatiheth pe on


JEOUVIT.
weart, g batie béded their bowe,to cafe dotone C
the pooze enedpe,eto flape {uch as be of righte
conucrlacion. Their fwearde thal gathozowe «-
their otone bert,and their bowe thalbe bzoken,
Aifmall thpnae that therpabteous ath ,is
pedis, Yad rpcbefleoftbe vngodlp: Jos
the armeg thc ait d pa
L020 vpholdcth the rpgbteous. ‘“EbheLoz
hnoiweth the Dapes of the godlpe,andthete en:
beritaunce thallendure forener. P ball
not be confounded inthe perilous tpme,einthe D
dapegofderth thep thal bane pnough. efor p
pnqgodlpe,thep pall perpih:and theenemies of
the 1020 thall confume,as the fat of labes,peas
ené as the (moke thalltbepconfumeatoape. | =
The yngodlp bozo eth Ad papethnotagaine;s ©
but therpgbteousis mercptulland liberal.
Such ag be blefled of God, hall polielle p lade;
€tbhep that be curled of bim,thalbe roted out.
‘The Lord o2zd2eth a goot me a mioa
maketh bps tape acceptable tòbpm felfe:
* Though he fall, be palluot becatkeawaype:
foz the Lozve vpholocthbpmwithiishade. F E
bauebenepounge,enoweamolde:andpetlab =F
alieuer the rpghteous forfaken, nozbyaleede Bioipid = _
begapuge thepsbreade.: * The rpabtious ig
euer mercpfull,and lendeth and bis teed tg blet
fed. SElpefromeupll,anddo the topnge tpatis
Tood:and diwelfoz cuer- fForthe Lozoeloucth
the thinge that ts rpg bt; befozlaketp ior bps p
begodlp, but thep arc preterucd foz cucrmoze:
ow(Hbe burfghteous Halbe punprien: as fozthe feed of
the bngodly,it halberooted oute. “Che rpape
teous ivallenberpt the Lande; and:dDiwell therin
foreuer. * Che mouthoftherpabteousiser-
ercpled in wploome,¢ bis touge wplbe talking
ofindgement. Chelatoeof bps God isin big
bett,and bis gopnges thal not tipdes | Che bn
Odp feeth therpabteous ¢feketboccafpon to =
apebpm. ‘be Lorderwpll notleaue bhim
inbps bande, no? condempne bpm when pe ig
tudged. Popethou panone pe bya
wape. be ball promotep, thatrbou balte pot
fefetbelands: when the vngoblp wal perpth, p
palt feit. 3 my ielfe baue fene the wngodlpe
ingreat potoer,¢ Aopbpnge lpkea tone: 4 :


pin. fð


f


' be wag gone : J #
fought bim butexcbesplace) coulde: no where be
foiibe. Tepetnnocencpe, and take hede ontop
thpngethatisryght, oa (bat thal bepnge ain
peaceatthelafte. As foz thetranigreffours
thep pall perp togpthcr.and the ende of p vna
godlpe ts,tbep thalbe voted. out atthelaft. But
the faluacpon of the eee commeth of the
Lorde whichis allo tbeir frengep inthe tpme


. of trouble. And p Lord thal tandbp the,¢ taue


fot sang ye them from the pugodlp, g
tpalfaue tee bream they putthepetrulkin bi
be.grevtit.yafalme,
DOMINE NE IN FVRORE.
ApPlalmeofWauidforremembsannce. A
Fauitme * not totebube( DL ogde) in paldi a


DPA hin wpth bis tecth.TChe Lord hallaugy ES Elebpneanarce : nepther chatten mein

bpm tofcogne,foz be bath feene,tbat bys dape |e SS top beupbit leatute. Seon thynearos |
Scompng. Che vngodlphauedzatocnout p ease rg tpekefa tinme lias Dare a
effethy
P. PA


> pelfeth ne rore. here ts no health in my feh,
pem of thp bptpleature, neither s there anp
#3 rein mpbones,bpreafon of mpfpnue. stop
” mp toickednefies are gone ouer mp beed,ad are
lp nox bute, to benp foo mp tobeate.
Hp tootides puke ¢ are cozrupt, thozotve mp
Fcolptynetie. J am brought into fo great trou:
ble andsisplerpe,that J qomournpnae al p dap
longe: feozmplopnes are fplicd witha foze di:
Cealejand there ts chee ap inmp panes:
‘= “Jam feble andfozefmptte<3 paue roredtoe
cp dpfquypetnefie of mphert. Lozdthou kno
weka {nip delp2e,andD mp gronpnge is not pid
fri the: bert pantctp,myp trégth batbfap-
© led mesg the lpgbcof mpue epesis gone frome.
goitia- *Qploucrs¢e mp nepghbours dpd tande lo
kprige bpon mp trouble, ¢ mp kpnfinen tode g
farreof.. They alfothat fought after mp lpfe,
- taped {nares foz me-and thep that tent aboute
‘¢o Dame euplttalbked of hyckennefe g pmagi-
neddifceptealithe dape longe. As foz me, F
wasipke sdcafe ma gbherde not: g as one that
=o Ag domwmbpchbothnot ope pis mouth. J be-
"D cattiecnenagamathat beareth not: g tt whofe
c qmoutharenorepzofes. Sfozinthe, D Lorde,
bane Fputmptiut thoupaltanf were foz me
MOLowmp God. Jhautrequpzed, that thep
o$ ck (euen mp ip re enne yaaa ue -
fo2 whenmp fote stbepreiopled greatlpe
agaynibaie: And 3 truly am tet inthe plage,
and mp beupnefie tg ever tn mp Pabe. oag
top ll confefiemp topchednefle, ¢ be orp foz mp
fpnne: Wut mpneenenpes lpue,¢ are miigh-
ed ord eg eae eee he
nőbe. Chep altatpat pirea i foz good,
-~ areagapnitme,bpcaule Jfolowethe thpngep
goodis. sorlakeme not D L020 mp God.)
wWenotthoufarrefrome. Baftethetobelpe
bs me, D Lozd-x(Gon,) mp faluacport.
The. reric.wlalme.
, Dig! CVSTODIAM VIAS;
To the chaunter Jeduthun.
a Plalme of Dauid.


ar i


(ae) Wae | pe
EL Sda b2pole wobile the pngodlpisinmyp
fpabt. ybelde mp tonge, and {pake nothing.
R sept filence:pea,cuen from mood wordes, but
t has papnes grefe tome. Sp bert wasg bote

wpthin me, ¢ tobple J thas thus mulpnge, the
frac kpnnled :¢ (at thelatte) 3 tpake wpth mp
prape tonge: *Lozd,letme knowe mpneende, ¢ the

Æ nombze of mp Dapes:that Jmape be certpfped
ree o's Howe ionge bauc tolpue, * Æebolde, thou
e pamade mpdapesas it twere a fpanne longe,
andmpneagetscuen asnothpng in refpecte of
the: berelp cnerp ma lpuing tsaltogeticr ba-
nitpe.Selab. JSfo2zmanwalketh ina vapne,
thabotve, 4d dilquicteth bim felfe in papune, be
gurrie Heapeth prpcbefle*¢ cannot tell who thal ga

therthé. AndnoweLozde, whatis mp hope:
trulp mp bopeiscueninthe. Delpuermefrom
alimpne offences. make me nota rebuke bis
> `  tetbefolpth. Abecame domme, ¢ opened not


my mouth, fozitthas thp dDopnge. Take thp T
plageawapfrome: Jamené confumedbpthe — -
meanes of thp heup pande. Wipe thou with rea

bukes doft chatté man foz pune, P maket pps

beutpe to cofumie awap, like asit werca moth
frettingagarmét. Cuerpma ea isbut
paniti. Selah. Pearemppzaper,D Lorde,

andw thpneecarescofpdzempcalling:boldnot.
thy peace at mpteares. for * Jama ftraun: 604, frire
ger withthe, ada fotourner.asall mp fathers


ë were. Db oan alptle,p J map recouer mp


frenath,b FYoohece ano be nomozc lene.
cg T rat ptaltae. . f l
EXPECTANS EÆPECTAVI:


To the chaunter a Plaline of Danid.


SL e


{beri the mp2e spent hae Fon da ete
wpo prock € o2dzeD mp goinges. -And be hath Jerid
puta netoe fonge in mp mouth,cuéathakesap |
uinge unto our God. bee (hall ic tt,¢ feare:
Mal put thetr trut inthe Lo2zd.* Wledig p -
ma,that bath fet pig bope in ip, 1020, g tournen
not nto the proude: æ toluche as go aboute w
Ipeg. L020 mp God, great are thp wonde-
rous ri el Ya Hry baft donc:like as be al
fothp thoughtes which are to vs ward: ad pet
thereis noma p o2d2ethebé trito p. PEF wold
occlare them, g peake of thë, thep poult be mo
thé Jam Dableto Endo Shacrifpce meat A
offerpnae thou woldctt not bane, butmpne ra- °* Fo
res ba opencd:-burntoffringes and facrifpce
faz (pnne balk thounotrequp2ed. ‘Ché fapo 3:

Lo, come. Jn the volume of f boke tt is tzit

të of me, $ 3 Huldfulfpl thp tpl, D mp Eod: F

ain contét todott:pea, thy lawe is twptbinm

Dette. Jhaucdeclaredtdprpghtcoutnelietnp . .
great cOgregacpo: Lo, J wpll not refrapne mp

lippes D L020,and that p kroivell. Fhaue not

bpd thp rightcoulnes within my berte,mp tal-

kinge Dath bene of thp truth ¢ of thp faluacps,

“J bate not kept backe thp louinge mercpe and
trucbfrithegreatcigregacion. tithdratwe

not #tbp mercpfrome D Lozd: let thp loupne
kindnesg thp truth altvap preferue me. fFo2 ts
numerable troubles ate come about me,mp fin

nes hauc takë (uch bolbe bpome,that Jam not
hable toloke bp:pea,thep are mo in nobether

the beeres of mp heed, gmp bert bath faileome.

Lozide, letit be thppleature todelyucr me,

makebatte(D Lozd)tobelpeme. Letthem XD

be atbamed ¢ confounded togpther $ feke after ~

mp foule todeMropeit : let the be Dzpuenback=

warde æ be put torebuke that wibe me eupll.
Let thé be defolat g rewarded w bame ý fape
vnto me:fpe bpõp fpe bps p. Let al thole pieke
pobe topfull ¢ glav nthe: let Tuch aslouethp
aluacpo,fape alibap:the Lozdbe pzapied. As
forme, Jam poores Neabpecbut p Lod carcth
fo: me. Chovarte mp helper eredemer:make
nolonge tarpinge(D mp Goo.

Che. xi. wlalme,

BEATVS QVI INTELLIGIT,


Tothe


Se
pe i i S DŘ r


'
|


!


PAPE LL Ltt, Sol. Witt,


‘Co the chaunter, a plalme of Dauti, Sopich is p beige of mp cofitenannte, € Mp God.
rr y Lelledishe * that confpdercth the vere Plame. | :


WA LoD pei
pbe bled


thep map leane me, € bapne eme vntotbp bpo- -
ge. Sndthat ymeveoo i


lop
tp opl FZ cpue thakes vn:
marr 4 Agpue tha


es wbich is P belp of mpcotenatice.s mp Goo.
gp papol pia me. PTEE:
DEVS AVRIBYS NOSTRIS,


To the chaunteran inttruccpon of


W


But thp tpabt både t th prearmeg the liqhte

. ethoubabddefteafa-
uoute vito the. * Chou art mp kingi D God) P-Fvit,a
pice da eb Jacob. Thozoiwe the yl we
ouertDzoWwe our enempes, and inthp name tpl
Wwe tread the wnder thatrple bp agapni bs.
$02 J wyll not trut inmp boive: itis not mp
fweard that pall belpe me. ut itisthou that
fauct bs from out enemp,¢ puttet them toco-
fufpon pat bate bs. Wire make oure book of
Godall p dap loge, ¢ topll prapfe thp name fo2
ener. Sela. Wutnowethou art farre of,¢ put
tet bs toconfulpon.and Fic notfozth tpth wrat.ri.¢
ourarmtes. Chou matett bs toturne ourbac
kes Dpé oute enemies, fo $ thep which hate ve,
popu oure goobdes. Thou lettete ds becaten E
vp lpke thepe,¢ bat fcatred usamonge f pead:
the. Thou fellelt thp propie fo? naure. g ta=
keffnomonepe forthé. Choumakert veto be
rebuked of oure nepabboures to be laughed to
{cozne, ¢ bad tn Derilto, of thé thatare rounde a-
boute vs. + Chou makes vs to bea bptoogde pta.isriz.a
amoge the Heath, that the people thake their
Headcsat vs. p cifulionis daplp before me,
€ the pame of mp face bath couercaine. Foz
the vopce of the lañdererg bla(pbemer, foz the
enemp Eauenger. Andtboughalthishe come yy


‘To the chatiter,a monicté of F fones of Cozah.
t ropa Obe as the bert delpeeth p water izo
q be py hes, Co logetp mp foule after the ( D
i PA CoD.) Sp foile iga thurtt foz Gon,
5 ipee euen foz thelpuinge God, when


a Ee
i na


He alert bal THF
OAL sie a


asc thall J come toappeare before P pre:
tence of God! * Wyp teares baue bene mp meat
dape Enpght, whple thep daplpe la e bntome:

‘treci.ic. DDeretgnowethp God! Mowe whe y thincke
| Piatra tbere pponx J potoze out mp berte bp mp felfe,
| foz 3 went pth the muititude,¢ beougbe them
| f forth unto p boule of God inp vopce of pzatfe ¢
= _ thankefgeninge,amoge fuchag Fep poly Dap.
© *Wibp art thou fo ful of beutnes(D mp foule)

b pral riiiia q ur att tbou fo Duquict within me? Putthp
B truitin God fo: 3J wpil pet gene bpm oom
forthe belpe of bpscountenaunce. yp God,


- pfalJcrr.a


Des


__ mp fonle ig vered toithinme:therfore wpll J re
Jolu. ria mEbze the concerning p* lande of Jordane and
tbe litle bpl of Dermonim. Dnedepe calleth a-
nother:becaule of the nopfe of thy water pipes,
*all top toaues and formes aregone ouer me,
Jaz ‘The Lo2d hath gratitcd his oupng Byndnes on
f: the dap tyme g tn the npgbt featon dpd J fpnge
o ypt ie tlh Unto the God of mp
ipie. Awplllape onto the God of mp frréaeh:


|


904. ii,a,


Yop batt thou forgotté me : why co ¥thus bhes
uelp:wobile p enemp oppzefeth me? <3) p bones
© are (mité a fideras aliwearde tbple mpne
oF entempeoncp trondte me) CA mein Preth. Namely:
whplethep fape daplp wnto me: where is nome
thp God’ bp art thou lo vered D mp foule)
and whp art thou fodpiquieted withinmes D
put thp trul in God :fo2 J wpll pet thackebim


po vs, pet do the not forcette the, noz bebane
our felueg frotwardlp intbpcouenaunt. Dur
berte ignot turned backe, nepther oure teppeg

one out oftbp wap. Nonot when thou datte
inytten bs intop place of Dzagons , € coueredD
08 w the hadotuc of death. YF we bauefozgot
të thename of our God, ¢holdé vp our paves ta
any krage cod: Sbalnot Goodlearch e ne


a


SA


Pial rothi rbir
_— forbe briotheth the Verp fecretesof thebert. the bpllesbecarpedin thempobdeft of thefee.
savit! x fozthy fake allo are we bylledall the dape A a ader waters therof rage ¢ {well ad Pra.reitts
longe, ¢ atecountedas epe appopntcd to be though the motitapnes hake at tépeft of the
fiapne. UpLowd wh) Gepett thous Awake, F fame. Sela. Cherpuers ofthe Houde therot
be not abfent from Ys fo? euer. Wiherfozehi- Wall makegladthecptte of, God the bolp place
deft p thp face, forgcttett our miferp ad trou- of Ptabernacles of p mott bie t, God ts in p mid-
pta.ccit.d. ble? * Fto? ourToule igbzougbt lowe pntothe deft ofber,therfo2tpal enot beremoucd:God ~
pufE:our belp clencth wnto the gronde. Acple hall helpeher,ethatrpadt early. The Heathé
anbhelpe ve, ¢delpuer Ys fo? thp mercpes fabe. make muche a 00,¢ the kpnqbdomes aremoued:
The.rlv.plaline. but God bath heted his vopce, € P earth Hall
ERVCTAVIT COR MEYM melt away. The L020 ofhoottes is woptd bs, 15
Topim that excellcthamonge lplpeg ? God of Jacobig our refuge. Sela. Dcome
an intruccion of the cpplozen ot peber, bebolde the workes of che Lozd, What
Cozab,a fonge of loue. Deftruccpons de bath bought bpon the earth, Petreta
mE Eg P bertigendp ngcofagoodmat- — Hpemaketh warrestoceaticin al the wolde,
HAVE giter. a fpeake o thetbynges, wbycD he bacaketh botoe ¢ kuappeth pfpeare infun-
VO- | Abaue made onto p Bing: Sp fae dze Eburnethebe charettes inthe fpee.2e tpl
AG baay, i ig the pen ofa redp writter. T ou theng bnotee p Jam God: J wopll beeralted as
aden art faprer then chplozé of me, ull monge the Heathen,andy wylvceraltedin the
of grace are thp Ipps,bpcaute God bath bleco earth. Che Lord of hoottes is with vs, the Oop
the for ence. Girde the with thp fivcard Ypo thy of Jacobisouce defence. Sela. `
thyab ( DPmokt mpghtpe) accozdpnae to thp Ceberivii.Plalme.
wmozthpp trenotwne. ®oodlucke haue thou OMNES GENTES PLAVDITE.
thpne bonoure, rpe on becaufe of the wozde of Tothe chaunter, a oe the chpl-
truth,of mekenes e rpabteoutnes,¢ thp rygbte deers of Cora.
bande thal teache the terrpble thpnges. ‘Ct ETEN
ee arata tae pohe (
ubdued vntothe,euenmtoe MPT E A Peg go vopceofmelopp. SEozthe Lorde pra rcon a
$ kpngescnempes. xTbhpfeate( Doden: BM A shpe E
Pebe, st, Ha for ener s the ferme thp APOR inen, onic ai 3hpe E*tobe feared, Veis theqreat
righticepter: Chouhattloued rpgytcounce, ple wnder Vg, tbenactons wnder ourtete. He
ehatedintquitie,wherfoze God (cue thp (e0) iballcbufe out an berptage fo? va: euen p nate
De spande tbtpe ople of gladneflea- fhpp of Jacob wha beloucd.gela.God is gone


a
; 4 Tlappe poure bandeg together (al
ve people) D fpnge vuto God wyth


oF tur of goly» Cwzousdee aboutetpty vpurrte coloutes.) peth oyerthe Heathen. God Cptteth pon bys
perkt. Oodaughter econtpder:enctpnethyne holp feate. in ss Aba
ing Boab holy be pzinces of the peopleare top


ay inthy betotpe.foz bets thy Logd-xson)ad W0: the carth, ent :

= Toppbim. And the daughter of Cire thalbe thecarty nnie e E ae.
there witha gpftl KE as rpcp alfo amonge p MAGNVS DOMINVS- |
peopletpall maket eir fupplicacion before tbe. A fone of a fale of the chyldzé of Cozah. =

‘The kpuges paughbteris algloztous prbin olin the fecond dape of oure Sabboth.) a

| per clotppng tg of tought golde. Shetalbe Pama Beate ig the Lozde, andhpgblypeto be
broughte vntothekpnaeinrapmente ofnedle i Rre apia thecptie of oure Gad, euen
wozke:the virgins : | Hipon bps bolp ppl. Tbhebpllof Si-
her cõpanp,and thal ebrougbhtvntop. With “=—onisa tape place,¢ the top of P whole
iopet gladoneg pall thep be brought, g alien- earth bpotbenozrb{ide lieth theciticofpareat _
treintotbebpngesplace. Jn teade of thyfa- kpng:Oodts wel bnowe m ber placeg, as a fure ao
thers p palt baue chpldzen.whomthoumaptte refuge. Soe lo, the Kinges-#(ot eartbe) Are Ga-
makeppnees inall landes. Y pll remem- theredand gone bp together. Thep maruap-
bie thp name from one genercpon pntoano< led,tofe {uchthpnges: they toere aftonped, and
ther : therefoze Wall the people geuc thankes Codenlpcatt Downe. fEcare came there vpo the,


‘pntothe wolde bd eg ende. andfozotve as bpona woman tn ber trauaple.
“CTbe.rlot.plalme. hou Halt beeake the hyppes of the fee,tha

DEVS NOSTER REFVGIVM, rotuctbceaftiopnde. Lpkeas toe baue beard,

To the chaunter,a fongefo2 the chpld2é fo bauc we fene in the cptie of Lo2d of boftes ,

— of Cozab bpon amotp. inthecpticofoure God. God ppboloeth the

ağ Bp] Dois our bope g ffrength:a verp prelit famefozeuer. Sela. Wewapte foz thp lo=
le. @bherfore wpll not toe upnae bpnones ( D God)inthempede of thp


1 2a ppeive introub | . |
ii re though p earth be moncd ¢ though temple. (D God) accoropnge vnto thy nami


e. a =


lalrlin Lt


$ ig tbp pari? Dito p tooskdes ende:thprprbt
Pandets
onreiople,€ the daughters of Yuda be glad ves
tauleofthptudgemetes. Walke about Sion,
C F Go roundeabout ber, tell thetotwzes therof,
Warke well her bulwozkes , fet Yp her hous
fes,that pe mape tell themtbat come after.
S02 thys Godig our God foz eucrand ener,
be Halbe oure qupde wnfo deathe.
@ Cbe.rlir.Vlalme.
AVDITE HEC GENTE.
athe chaunter,a latme fo? the
___ ghpldzen of Cozab.
ge a N areare thys , all pe people:ponder ft
Sera \ PED ponte cares, all pe that Dwell


ea POOP, ONE w another. Gp mouthe
all peate of oploome, g mp barte hal mufe
of wnderffandpnge. Fiopllenclyne minecare
tothe parable,¢ theive mp darkelpeach vnto p
barpe. Wiberfoze touldeJfeare in tire dapes
of wpckedues : ¢ when the wopckedricile of mp
tal. ti, b Peles compafleth me roundeaboutes * There
LUbET e he fometbat put thep2 truttin theiccopdes, ad
boal them (clues tn the multitude of thepe rp-
ches. Wut noman mape delpuec bys baother,
ipet: nozmakeagremét buto Godfozhbpm. xo?
‘sop. a tt cofte moze to redeme their foulcg , fo that be
muftlettdataloncfozeucr. Per, thougbebe
teenie lpuclonge:elenotthegraue. +o befeeth, p
ome topie men alfo Dpeand perp together:as el
iot- rrerib AS ERE tquozaunt g foolptpe , and * leane thep2
Suswe rpcbestoz other. Andpet thepthpnke, pebep2
Houles thall continacfo2 euer, that their dwel
Ipnge places (all endure from one generacion
foanotper,andcallthelandes after their owne
Hames. Neuerthelefle , man Dpllnot abpdein
Honoure,fepnge be mape be compared vnto the
` beattes that perpthe-thps is the wape of them.
Chis is their foolpthnes, and their pofteritpe
zaple tbep: taping: Sela. Chep lye in p bell
lpke ibepe, death gnatveth vpo them, ¢eherigd
C teous Hall bane Dominacpon of the in the moz=
ninge: their bewtpe Mall confume in the fepul-
che out of theirdwellpng. Wut God Wall deli
uer mp foulefrom the place of hell,foz be thal re
ceaue me. Sela. Wenot thou afrapd though
one be made rpch : 02 pf the qlozpe of bps boufe
fob.rrbiia beincrealed. * Moz be hall carye norbinge a=
wape w bpm toben de dpeth, neptber Hall bys
pope folowe pim. Foz whple be lpued, be coü-
ted bim felfe anbapppe man:¢ fo longe as thou
doei well nto thp felfe, men wpl peake good
a thal folotve f generactis of bis fathers,
¢thallneuctlelpght. Ban bepnge in bonoure
dath no vnderlandpnge, but ig compared yn-

to the beatles, that perpe.

| be.l. @falme.
DEVS DEORVM DOMINVS
A Plalme of Alaph.

J De Logd, cuethe mot mighty Sodhath
FA baa (poke,¢ called p wozldfrd the rifinge vp
Soe OF the funne punto the copng downe ther
xteretta OF. *Dute of Spd hath God appeared in per-
fect betoty. Dur God (hal comie,¢ thal not Bepe


Pra


*


ullofepabhteoufnes. Let pmoiite Si f


| E líntbe wold. Hpe g lowe:rpeh and


Hol.ig


filence:there tall go beFoxe byt a confuinpneye
pec, Ea mpgbtie tempel thalbe tered proud
about bim. He thall call the beant fro aboue,¢
tbe earth tdathe mape iudgebig people. Gaz
thet mp Saintes together vnto me,thole that
baue made a coucnait with me, with facrifice.
nb p beaués thalbeclare ppsriqghteoutnes:fo2 1
Sod ig Judge an D nip peo
ple:and 3 wpl {peake, 3 my felfe topl teftifpe a:
gapnitethe, D Ffrael. fo? Jam God, er thp
Gov. J rg sep teprouethe,becaule of thp {a
cviftves,o2 foz thy burntoffringes, becante t
there not alwape befoze me. * J wll take no erapl
bullocke out of thy boufe:nozbe qoatesoute of gaere
thp foldes. Ho; al f beaftes of f fozelt are mine,
¢ fo are thecatel bpia thoulao pilles. J hnowe
al p foules vpé the mofitapnes * the wplde bea
ites of the felbeareinmptpaht. Pegbebigry —
Fwplnot tell §:fo2* the whole woi is mpre, Len erh, t;
@ all that therm ig. Ehpnkett thou, ý J wpll Maat
cate bulles tlethe, ¢ depute f bloude of goates! g
Offre unto God thanbelgeuing,¢ pape thy vo
thes Dntothemoft breil. And * call bpon me apa, fv. à
ín the tyme of trouble,fo wpll Fbearethe and p
balt maple me. Wut ontothe pngodlp lapre
God. Wibpdoelk thou preach mp lawes, ad tar
kelbmpcouenaiiteinthp mouth: Wibereasp
batelt to be refourmed,and pafe cafte mp wo-
des bebpnde ther When thou fatet a thefe, p
confentedeft Dnto hint, ghat bene partakerw
the aduouterers. Chou hatte lee thy mouthe
fpeake topckednes,¢ with thp tonge thou balk
fetfozthdifceate. Chou lattefte s (peakelt a-
gapnit thp bzotbher:pee,¢ batt fclanndeed thyne zy
owne inotbersfonne. Chelethinges bak (pou xs
Done,¢ FJ beld mp tig: # thouqhteik>s,wiexerip)
p Jam cue lucha one as tpp leife:bue Jwpl re:
proue the,¢ fet before the,p thinges p thou hak
done. Dcontpderthps pe pfoaget God:lelte y
plucke pou awap, and tiere be none to belpuee
pou. Uibolo offreth me thakes g prapte: be bo
houreth me, æ tobimp orth bps conuetfacps
Ont pgvt bpl J Mewe the (aluacton of God.
E Cie... Blalme,
MISERERE MEI DEVS. d
To the chafiter,a Plalme of Dautd, whé
the profet Nathan came puto hi after
be as gone into Wethfave.

eS gy Aue mercp vponme(D God )after thy 4
Ete oovnes:according Dutop mul: ga
feed fitude of thp mercies,Do awap mypneot- `
fences. Gath me thozowlp fro mp wtckedues;
g clefeme fro mp finne. ffo2*¥ knowledge my zob: re. e
fauteg E mp finne ig ener before me. Agapnt p usero. v
only paue Y finned, g done thigeuelin thp fight
+ ; migbtef be iuttificd in thpfaping,¢ cleare tuota,

Part indged. Behold, J was apt in wpe


ty


_ Gednes,¢ infinne bath mp mother cõceanecd me


Wut lo, P requiret truth in pinward partes, €

Halt make me to vnderflade wtfoomefecretly.
‘Chon halt pourge me w* aope iu Y thalve nume.riz.o
clene:$ palt watheme.¢ Fibalbe whpter then

fro we: Thou thalt make me beare topes glad=

nes, È the bones tobich thou bate bzoke, mape

tetople, Curne thp face frome or (ynne,


Pla liii liidh.


BeF andputontalimp mpfocdes. * Makemea
cleane bert(@ God)andrencwearight fpirite
withinme. Catmenotatwap fri thp preléce,
g take not thy bolpe fpzete from me. geue

moe toe content ire lweagapne:ad tabip

mew tbpfrefpecte. The tal F teach thy wap
es vnto the topcked, g tpnners thalbe conuet =

ted vitotbe. Delpuer me from bloude gpltp:
nefle( D God)P that art the Godofmy health

and mptonge thal fynge of thy rpghtcoutnetic.

Thou thalto empu pe D 1920) mp mouth

D pall hetwe thy papie. fo thou defpzetteno

Pala  facrifice:els wolde igat it the: * but thou de

amos b.oiptetnotinburnt offerpnge. Che laccifpce of


ahha Hort D Gody (hale thou notdetpite. D be fa-
uourablee gracpous onto Sion, bupldthoup
walleg of Zerulalé. Then halt thou be plea-

row.rit.e fed vb the* Cacriftce ofr OP EG Fi
purntoffrpnges and oblacions, then Wall thep
offre ponge gh ppontbpneaultare.


ra


be.lit. falme.

QVID GLORIARIS IN MALI TIA.
TCotbechaunter , anerboztacton of Dauid,
when Doeg the Edompte came to Saul ad
pote’ eh Dauid is come tothe

oufeof Abimelech. :
een MP boatete thouthp felfe, p Tp-
| JAraunt, > thou cant do mpicbete.
‘AEAT bere as p qoodnes of Ood endu-
RAT Vy eal ccth pet daplp. Chp tong: pmagp-
LAE neth pckednes,€ with lpes p cuta
teitipweaiparpratoure. Thoudattloucd on
cractouf{nes moze thé qoodnes:¢ totalke of lp:
esmoretbenrpgbteoutnes. Sela. Thoubal
25 Loued to (peakse all wozdes that mape do butte,
® thon falle tonge . Cherfoze Hall God de-
firopethefoz ener, be Wall take the € pluche f
out of thy Divellpng,¢ rote p out of p lãd of p lp
uing. cla. The righteous alfo thal fe thts, ad
feare,¢ thal laugh bt tofcozme. Lo, thisis p mă
pfartir.a Prokenot God for bis trégtb,but*trufted tn-
a ae 3 multitude of bis riches, ¢ Erëgthedbimtelf
in bis wickednes. As foz me J am like a grene
onfe of God, mp trut is inp ten-
der mercp of God Hf: ever ¢euer. J tpl alwape
euethabesbnto p:foz tbat p halt vone: F wil
opein thp name,to2 top fap nteglpke tt well.
CTbe. litt.laline.
. DIXIT INSIFIENS
‘To the chaunter opon Dahalah, an
inftruccton of Dauid. |
J rm pe* toole body hathlapdein bps bert,
4 Ei there is no God. Corrupte are thep, ¢ be-
24 comeabbompnable in their wpckednefie
pfa.'riit.a xtbereisnonep dotbgood. God lobed Downe
mou.ti.c. From beauen bpon the chpldzen of men, to fe pe
there were anpe that wolde Dnderftande ¢ feke
after God. Wutthep areall yone oute of the
z iwape, thep are all together become abbomp-
nable:thereisalfonone that doth good,no not
one, Arenottbep wpthont ynderflandinge
wozke wpckebnes,catinge Dpmp peopleasp
thep wolde cate breadsthep bauenotcalled bp:
pon God. Thep were afrapde, Mherenofeare


olpue trein


— rn m e
i ŘĖĖĖ


Sites. d4. Godisa troubled fpete, ta bzokengacontrite i


gbteoulnetle wpth the Sel
with them that bpholdempfoule. x Hethall ows pe
y


ivag : foz God hath beoken the boones of hpm
that befieged the: thou balk put them toconfu-
pate Godhath delfpplea them. Obthat

faluacion were qpuen dnto Ffrael ont of Si-
on: Db thatthe Lozde wolde Delpuer bps peo=
ple out of captiuitte. Then Mulde Jacobre-
topfe and Ffrael houlde be rypght glad.

— CTbe.litij. Palme;
DEVS IN NOMINE TYO.

€ othe chaunter in melodpes, an infkcuction of W
Dauid when the ad salad came and fapd brto
Haul hath not dautd bpd Him felfamogeft vss
Spry Aue me( D God) for thp names fake
Qad € Auenge mein thy Tréqth. bearemyp
yy yas paper D (God )eberke Dito p wos
mare DES OF Mp mouth. Eor ftraungersare
tyin bp agapnét me, € tpzatites (whiche haue
not God before theit epes) {eke after my foule.
cla. ebolbe, Godis mp helper, the 102d ts


rewarde eupl vntompne enemics:delkrop thou
themin thy teuthe. An offepnae of a free berte x
wily gpue the, and p2apfe thp name( 1020)
bpcaute it is fochfoztable. Eo? be hath delpue-
red me ont ofall mp trouble, and myne epe path
{cnc bis Defpze DPon mpneenempes,
E The.lv.Blalime:
_._. EXAVDI DEVS; _ ;
op chañteri melodtes anitructið of Danid. g
Era a Care mp paper D God) g byde not
MW ava huthp felfe fromp petiti. Take bede vn
Y EZS gto me, ¢ beare me, howe J mourne in
aos ip paper, Fam bered. Theeceneinye
crpeth fog the vngodip commeth on fo faft:foz
they are mpnded todo me fome mylcpefe foma i
licioufip are thep fetagaynt me.®p bert isvif
qupeted within me and the feare of death ts fal
lenbponme. S€earfulnefle g tremblpngeare
come Yponme, andan Dozrible decde barh ouct °
helmed me. And F f{apde : D that Jad
Winges lphea doue, fo? then wold ¥ fipe atap,
and beatreffe. Lo, then wolde Fact mead- 45
wape farre of,andremapne inthe wpldernefle.
Hela. Jwolde make hat toelcape,vecaute
ofthe fozmpe wpndeandtempefte. Deltrope
their tonges(D Lozde) & x Deupde the .f02 F wenerie.p
baucfpped burpghteoulnes anditrpfe tnthec
tie. Dapeand npg tgo thep about wpthin
Walles thereof: mifchete alfo,andfozowe are tit
thempovdeft of tt. ipckednefleistheretn,dp-
{ceatc,¢ gple xo notout of her kreteg. ffo (tts
notan open cnempe that bath done me thpsodt- C
{ponoure:fo2 then 3 could bane bozne tt:nether
fas it mpne aduerlarp.thatopomagnifp dim
felfe agapnitt me:fog theo peraduenturre) F wold |;
baue bpd mp felfe from bpm. * Wut it Ag UË arare;


=


ee) =


famplpetfrende. Wietokelivete counfell to-
gether, and walked in the boule of God åg fren
des. Lette deathe come bafkelpe bpon them,
andlet them go Dotone quycke tnto hel, foz tote
keonelleisin thep2 Divellpnges, and amonge
them. As for me, Fiopll call ynto God,
andthe Lorde fhalifaue me. Jn the cues
npnge and. moznpngc, and at none dape wpll

3 peaple


b


T


tboumpcompanpon, mp gupa sEMPNE OWNE Hops
t


i.
F \ it


a


Plal.loilhilbuiiriy.


a papel tþatinftantip and be all beare mp
popee. Ft ishe p delpuered mp foule in peace
from the battaple f was agapnf me : foz there


p weremanp wpthme. Pec euen God that endu


retbfoz cuer, pal beare me,g binge the downe.


foule tgamongelpong, ånd Fipe etien amonge
thecbplbd2é of men (that are feton Fp2e) twopofe
tecth are{peares and arowes andthep2 tongea
fparpelearde. Set vp thp felfe (L God)a-
boue tbe beaués,and the glozp aboue al peart


SFist


Sela. Soztbep wpl notturmenozfeare God.  Chephauelapde anette fo2 mp fete,ad pet: 15
ine lapde þig bandes ppotucdasbeatpeacers fed dowone mp foule:thep DanedDpgged a ppt be
bim, De bzake bis couenatite. Chewozdesof fozeme and are fallé into the mpddeg of it thë
pis mouth were lofter then butter, bauing war felues. Sela. * Dp herteisfpred(D God) piseti,
in pis barte:bis ozdes were {mother theople, mpbertis fpred: J wpllfpnge ¢qeue prapte.
math. vi. pet betbep werpfwecardes. *Deatkthyburs Awake, lmp glozp, awake, lute ddharpe.
owe then pon the Lorde gbe thallnonpihthet not 3mplelf wplatwakecpabtearlp. Jwplgeue
. "OT  (uffeethe trpghtcoustofalfozcnet. Andasfoz thankes yato the(D 102d) amonge p people,
them thou, God )ihalt bzpnge them into the ea ppl {png vnto the amonge toe nactons.
pptofderuccpon. Chebloudthuriipeg dp *: ote greatneffe of thp mercp reacheth yn: Bta.cia.b9
ceatful men thal not lpueouthaltetbeirdapes. tothbebcauens thp truth into thecloudes.
sp Peuertheles,mp teut halbeinthesscoxeee) Set yp thpielfe( D God)aboue thedeaueng,
, = €Chbe.loi.plalme. ethyqlozp aboue all the earth.
MISERERE MEI DEVS QVONIAM, i C The lvii. plalme.
3 To the chaunter pon the douc of bpm that _ _SLVERE VTIQVE IVSTICIAM.
Mas Downe in afar couteep:thc badges (oe othe chaunter,delkrope hot . Che badges
aries of Dantd,whéethe Pptiflincstoke . -oz armeg of Dauid. —
dpm in Deth. | Ee gaia te pour mindes fette bponrpgh- F
¢ ee E mercpfull wnto me(D God)for ma . Hey area teoulnelle: D pecigregacpo: € do
ED Le octhabouttodeuoureme:peisdaplp pacar, VG pe indae the thpnge that is tpgbte
H ES itpabtpngcandtroublpnge me. Wine aes, NS Dpefonnegotmen? Pee, pe pma
lm enimpes arcdaylpcin bande tolta- Eorl
Lote me wp:fo: thep be manp p fpgbtagainte `
b MeO OOY Pro Sih Peucrtheletle, thougbe
Jamfomtpmeafrapde, pet put Jmp teultcin mothers wõbe : as foone as thep be bozne thep
+. he. Jwpipapie God, becaufe of bis wozde: qoattrapetpeakelpes. Thep are as ventmous
| jaue put mp truffin God, andwpllnotfeare agp popfon ofa ferpente eut ipae the deaty an
| ab ff in God, and wyllnotf : fon ofa f Iphe th bad
whatfletcandovntome. Thep daplp mp- derthat* oppethber cares. Wippehrefuteth detet, g
fake mp Wo2de9,al thattbeppmagincistodo tobeare the vopce of the chariner, Charme De ne
E. mecucll. Chepholdealtogetber,ekepethem uer fo twpielp . Wreake thep2 teth D God) im
| felucs clofe:¢ marckemp fteppes,wbetheylap their mouthes:fmpte p chawe bones of f Lyõg
F toapte foz mp foule. Sbal thep efcapefozthbeir (D Loze: )Letthem fallatwapelpke water pH
inpckednefle:thou( God) tnthp dpfpleature runnetha pace:and when thep Mote tþepz arro
alte cat them dowone. Thou telletmpäpttin wes,letthemberoted out. Let themcontume
gce put mp teares inthpbottel:arenotthels awapelpkeafnapleandbelpkethe putumelpe
thingesnoted inthp boke’ When foeuer Feal frute ofa woman, and let thenotle tbefonne. -~
C ppon p,the hal mpneenempes be puttofight Dz cuer poure pots be made ihote w thoznes:
this J bnowe,foz Godigon mpfpd. Fngod- folet ndignacton vere bym cuenagathpnye p i
bes too2des Wwpll ¥reiople, inthe Lozdes wod ig rave. *Therpghtcous ipalleeiopfe Whe be i.cc,rrp.9,
wpl Fcomforzteme. Pee, in God bane F put fepth the béngeaunce:be thal toaltbe bpsfootcs
ir mp trutt, 3 wpll notbeafrapde What mancan. ftepsintbebloude of the yngodlp. aopama
|. > peut.» DODNtOME. * Cintothe( God) wplFJpay fhallape: verely thercisa rewardfo2 yp riydte
|) < piachoie mp poteg, Dito p wpl y geuetbakes. sor*p


F. batdelpuercd mp Coulefrodeath, mp fete fro CThe.lip. Plaine.
E ga falipnae , that 3 mape tvalke befoze God in ERIPE ME DE INIMICIS
„8 thelpabteotthelputnge. To the chaunter , deftropenot: The |
| E The.lbti. falme. badge 02 arme of Dautd, when |
MISERERERE MEI DEVSMISERE. Gaul fent thep dpd watch
tbe boufe tokpilbpm. |


Topchsriterdeftropnot:thebadgesozarmes °


of Dauid, whebeAedfrom Hauleintopcauc. es
| pee E mercifull unto me( DO God)be Me wy
f 3 AEA Fos merciful vntome,formpfouletru: (a EY
| i ieee (eth in p,e * Dunder p padot of thy :


E ie ae


profeofbimtbatwolbecatemebp. Sela.
®odhallfende from bis mercp æ truth. |p.
a


m


=


Wialle ler lei lcit.


then:¢ benot mercpfull onto them $ offende of
malicious wpckednes. Sela. Soy qotoad

25 fro in tbe enenpng thep grennelpke a dogge, ad
runne aboutethogotwe thecptie. wWebold,thep

peake pth thep2 mouthe , dof weardes are it

thep2 Ipppes fo: tobodotpheare? Wut thou D

od) *thalt paue them in derylið, g chou Halt

prelia Laughalleathentofcoene. Sp ftrégth wpl
poui Jafcrphe nto the, fogto art the God of mp
refuge. Godshevoet me bys gooones pintes

€ sufiye,and Goothall letteme emny belp2e pps
mpheencmics. Dlape them not, lect mp pea
plefozget it-but {catter them abzoade amonge

thy people,and put them dotone( D Lozde out
Defence. Sort r aen eaii wert 2

the wozdes of thepz lpppes thep albe takt in

tiep: pepde t wbpsthep2 preachpnge ts of cur

Cpnge andlpes. Confume them in thp wath,
contume them that thep mape perp, ehnowe


thatitig Gov whpchrulethin Jacobandvnto
theendes ofthe worlde. Sela. Andinthecue: ,


yna thep tpl ectucne:qrenne lpke adogge ad
MA OA p cptte. ‘Ciep opi runne bereand


thearefor meate, g grudge pf thep be not fatittt -


ed. Jafo: me, J wyl (pnge of thp power: g wpll
pratle thp merepe bp times in the mozninge.foz
thou bat bene mp defence and refuge in tbe Dap
ofmp trouble. Unto the, O mp ffrengtp, topl
J {ynge.fo2 thou, D Good) arte mp retuge and
mp mercptull God.

The.le.plalme.

DEVS REPVLISTI NOS,
Tothechannter, opon the rofe of wyptnefle,the
badge ozarmes of Daupd, to? toteache : when
be fought aqapnite )efopotamia, and Siria
of s0ba:¢ when Joabturned backe anbdilue. rti
thoufande Eoomptes inthe falte vallepe .

amy God,thou that baft caft vs out q frå-
TESA tred vs abzode : P haftealfo bene Dpf=
A A pleated. D turne f vnto vs agapne.
(ees, §=@€poubaft moucd toelande andde-
up


dedit peale the fozes thereof for it Makbeth.
hort hatt tetoed thy people heup thinges,*p
erie bat geuen vs adepnck of decdlp wpne. Chou
Ierro? haf genena token foz luchas feare the: ptbep
mapetryumphe,becaufeofthetrueth. Sela.
= Æ Qherfoze were thp beloued delpuered, belpe
prat coit me wpth foprpabtbande,® beareme.* God
bath {poken in pps polpnes: 3 wpl retople and
Deupde Hichemn,ad mete out the vallep of Su:
choth. Gilead ig myne, ¢ Hanafiesis mpne:
Ephraim allots the trengthofmp head, Ju-
daismplawegener. Moab is mp wathepot,
omr Edom wpll F catte out mp woo. Phili-
itea be thougladofme. Wiho wplleade me in
tothe ftrigecpttes Wipo Wwpll bzpnge me into
€ Edom’ Hatt pnorcat vs out D God) wylte
pta.ctiit,< not thou( D God)* go ont wpth our ho oes ¢
D be thou our helpe in trouble, foz bape is
the belpe of man. ‘hozowe God we Mall

Do greate acteg fo? it tg pe that sas

Downe oureenempes. >

E¥AVDI DEVS DEPRECA, M

 €Ede. let

Tothechaunterin


th
e


plalme. — :
she meleoyes of Dantd. -


PS


a


Wan €arempcrptnge(D God )rene care X
i bord BA Dntomppzaper. Erő the endes of the
i SA Dcarth tpll Fcall tnta the, when mp
dems pert is in beupnes. Db fette me Dp
ppontherockethatisbper theng. Fo: thou
baftbenemp hope, anda ronge totver foz me
agapnittheenempe. Btopllowellin thp ta-
bernaclefozeuer, ãd mp trut albe under the
couerpugeofthp wpnges. Sela. Sozthou D 5
Lord, batpearde mp delpzres and patt geučan
berptage Vnto thole that feare thp name. i
"Thou alt grauntthe king alongelpfe,chat
bis peares map endure thozotve out al genera-
clos. Deall divell before God. forener: D
pevare pigie g fapthfulneg p they
ro ae y: beg! ernie Sm Tea

name,* Pp J map datlp perfozme mp vo fal, Ipi,

‘ Tepe li Dne. ed
NONNE DEO SVBIECTA. >

CTCothe chaunter:f€o2 Feduthunt. —

| 9 ipad nta be ca
earmen 2 loule trulpe wapteth fpl wpon
We tf i i Sod.fo of bpm cometh ity faluact n
Ne | Kyou. De verelpis mp rength and
RS) Gmpfatuapon: We ig mp defence fo
pote tes that J tballnot qreatipfal. Howe
lige top! pepmagine milchere agapnite everpe


i


' marpe thalbe apne all the flopte of pou: pec, as


atotterpng wall thall pebe, and Ipea beoken
hedge. Thep: dentceis onlp howe to put ppm

out whom God wpleralte: their delpte is intp
es:tbep geucgood wozdes withthep2 mouthe,

but curie veptb their pert. Dela. Meuertheles, 3
mpfoule waptep ftpll bpon God, fo? mp ee .
isginhpm Ber frength and mp fal 15


nacion:beismptefence fo that J thall not fall.


_ gn Godis mphelthandmp qlorpe, therocke


of mp niqbt,ein Godis mp trut. D put pour


b


t


truf inbi alwap(pe people) *potoze out poure inesi


pertes before hym,for Sodis our hope. Sela.
As for the childzé of men, thep ate but tapre,
thecbplozen of men are difceatful npon f teap-
testbhep arealtogetberlpabter then vanpte it
felfe. D trnfi notin weoge and robberpe, geue
not pour felucs wuto vantte:p£ riches tncreafe,
{et notpourbert ppon thé. Godfpake once ad
tivpce: J bauc alfo bearde the fame:that power
belongeth bntoGod. Andthat thou Lozpvare


mercpfull for * thou retoardefke cucrp man ae = pra.pvrit e


cozdinge tobps hozke..
Lahe tii. Balme.
DEVS DEVS MEVS.

A plalme of Dautb whenhe has

inthe Lopldernes of Juda.

<4 God, Part mp God, early w Paky s, |
i &@Wp foule thuriteth for p,mp fet alfo lő
eeth after p inabaré ¢dzpe lade, where
no toateris. Thus haue J lobed foz pin polp-
nefie,p J might behold thy powere glorp. o?
thy loupng byndnefle ig better the p lpfe tt fell,
mp lpppes pall peaple p. X2 loge as Jlpue wil
y magnifp p on this maner,elpit vp mp hades
intbp sabes foule thalbe fatilfied,eué as it
Were w marp etatnelle, he mp mouth pap: 95
fetbthe wiopfullippes. auc ao


Es


mat.Fbi.b


Pla plii.a |.


|
|


|
$;


Pal WUC. irvi drii,


theinmp bed and thoughe tpåthe, whe y was
aall es Sha thou baff bene mp helper,
therfoze wnder the adote of thp wynges mpl
{retople. Sp foule bageth bpon ‘pri bt
ane bath vpboldenime. Chere alto that fete
the burt of mp foule,thep thal go onder pearth.

ts nese ple age ot De va p
thep mape bea pozcpon fo: foresg. Wut pking


Debie fhallreiople in God: *all thepallotbat{weare —
bp bpm Halbe commended foz the mouth of thé `E


at [peake lpes,albe foppped.
: C Che. lrittt. falme,
EZAV DI DEVS ORATIONEM.
_ Cothechaunter,a Plalme of David,


H Ba E cr pzreferne Sd fri fearco
1 EA Py mp. Hpde me


ote at UPIORA erfecte:fodenlp do they


worke. Therpabteous thal vite e y 2070,
pparectrue


CThbe.lry.Blalme. |
TE DECET HIMNVS. :


To the chatiter,a Plalme g longe of Dauid.


A a DON D GoD arte prapled in Did g vn-


on |


€ it berp plenteous. T


A hy tc the thal p wotwe be perfourmedenc niae
bees ratale) Chou phearette the prayer onto p
fpaliallfethecome. MWp mpldedes p2reuaple
agapnit me: DD bethbou mercpful onto our fin
nes. lefed is the ma whom thou chofetk gre-
ceaueft buto p:be thal divel intbp courte: ¢ thal
be fatilfped with the pleatures of thy boule, cué
of the bolp teple. Chou palt thewe vs mider-
full chinges in epgbteoutneffe. (D God)of our
faluacto,p that art the boope of allendes of the


earth, q of the that remapne inthe bzoade fee: -
WU bich inbis trégthlettethfattetbe moitay> p=
23 nes,¢ ig qpzded about withpower. Wibich fil


letbtberagpng of the fee,¢tbenopte of bp wa
ues,¢ the madnes of the people. Thep allo that
dwel in tbe ottermoft partes( ofthe carth thal
be afrapd at thp tokés,thou $ maket f outgo-
puges of the moning eucnpna to praple the.

pou wilttett the earth, ¢ blenet it: makete
be rpuet of God ts full of
thater,p preparetf their copne:fo2 Co thou pzout
delt foz earth. Thou waterelte ber forowes,
thou fendelke rapneinto p lptle valepes ther-
of: Pmakelk tt fotte witb p droppes of rayne, g


bietielt chincreafe of tt, Chon crownell p peare


 oneuerpipbe.. Che foldes thalbe full of ibepe


2 Tver


Folgi
ibith thp qoodtteffe:andebp cloudes özóppefat
nelle. Thep Hall droppe bpon the didellinges

of the thplocrnes:¢ thelptle bplles thal reiopfe


the eee oie Seen pec’ > tbpcke wpth
cozne,that thep pall laugh and fpuge.
AI eye ici palme.


IVBILATE DEO,


Tothechaunter.Chefonge ofa pfalttie:


Fema +e fopfullin God,al pe landes.fpng 3
MPA i partes bntop honoure of bps name, praes
saag A Make bis prapleto be glorious. Sap
SS to God: D potoe wonderfull arte
int Kah aa oe or E TRANTE ea po:

ball thpne enempes be founde lpers tnta
the. Jozallthe wozlde pall woethppype the,
{pnge of the,¢ praplethpname. cla Dcome
Dpther g bebolde the wozkes of God, howe wie .
derfull De ig in bps dopnge totarde the chilazé 48
ofmé, ie turned the {ee into dpe lade ‘+ f0 Ý ero. miig
thep went er P tater onefote:there bpp FIN
Doe rctople therof. Pe ruleth with his potnze Foz
cuet,bisepes bepolde the people: ¢ fuchas wpl
not beleue.thall not be able to exalte the felueg.


‘Sela. D praple our Sod pe people) g make p


Dpopce of
deth our


Sprapletobebearde. Ciibpchbol=
uleinlpfe, ¢fuffereth not our fete to


P flpppe.sfoz thou, D God)pafk proned bs: thow


allobafte trped bs, lpke as por is tryed.
Chou broughtett vs into p {nare,¢ lapte trón- ©
ble vpi our lopnes. Thou luffredefe më toride


"Oner Ourbeades,* we wetetbo2owe fire g wa: "FAA


ter ãd P bzougbtet bs outintoa telthp place.
J pl go intothp boule bentoffrpnges, and
wpl pap p mp woes * hich J promiled with cecie. a
mp lppg.qfpake Dithmp mouth whe J wagin Desr. i
trouble. 3 wpll offre buto the.tat Daentlacep: 777e
Fices w theincence oframes. 3 wyll offre bul-
lockes anDdgoates. cla. Dcomebptierand
berké all pe Pfeate God:¢ F tpl tell pou what
bebathbdonefozmpfoule.  % called bntobpm
wimp mouth, g gaue him pratles hithmp tige
PE ZF encline yuto topchednes w nip Hert, plozd
topllnot Deareme. Wut Godbath beardme, €
con{pbzed the bopceofmp paper. Dzapledbe
God wobich bath not cak out mp praier:no tur
ned pig mercpe fro me.
TThe.Irhii. laine.
DEYS MISEREATVR NOSTRIN
Cothe chauntetinmelodpes:a

plalmeandfonge. |
we] Dd, * be mercpfull nto bs, and 4
om. (bleie bs, and ipewe bs the lpaht of fum.. d
cep bps COUMPENAUICE: o4. and be mercptull geg
S onions) Sela. Chat thp wape

— a

È


= MA pe be knotben bpon earth, thp |
perb amogeannnciong: Let the people
paple the D God: pec iet alL tUr pranie puaple
the DOlet thenacponsretople ¢ be glad: Eorp
{halt tudge p folke righteoullp,z gonerne f nas
cions bpdearth. Sela. Let p people mapie
the, God, let all the people pearle the. @be
ball the eartbe bapnae forthe ber encreafe, and
God, enen our owne Godthal gpue vs bis blef
fpnge. oval ORENA PADS Mat


Witt


the fooglbe (hall feare bpm.
@ The. lrvtt.falme.
EXVRGAT DEVS.
Tothe chaunter,a Plalme and
fonge of Dauid.


i S] [catred:let them alfo that bate bpm
J Bevin fpebefozebpm. Lpkeasp fmoke
Etam: Danpliherp,fo Walt thou due them
away:t lplicas ware meltethat p fpre, folet p
vngodlp perp h at the pactence of God. ut
let therpabteous be glad, reiople befoze God.
iet them alfo be merp and iopfull. sDpfpnge
puto God, fpnge praples onto bis name:ma-
gnifpe bimthat rpoeth wpon the beaucns, as
it torre Dpo an iposi : pare bpm in bps name:
pea,andretopte befozebim. *Peisafather of
tije fatherlefie,and deftocth the caule of p toyd-
Dotbes:cné God M bis bolp habitacion. Mets
the Godthat maketbmen to be of one mpnd in
> auboule,¢ bapnacth the pzifoners cut of captt-
an Ultpe: but letteth the rennegates contpnucin
ne tee tcatceneiic. God, when*thou twenteft forth
asfa.cut.d, Defoze the people, whe thou wentelk thozowe
wildernefle. ela. Che carththoke,and p bea
ueng Dzopped at the prefence of God:eul as Si-
natalfo was moucd at p prelece of God: whpcl)
is the Godot Blracl. ‘Chou D God, fendeta
racyous rapne bpon thpne enberptatice , Œre-
Freqeet it when it was werp. Thp congre-
acpontbaldtwel therein: Jo: thou, D God;
Bs of thp qoodnetle preparedto the poore.


Deu7.F


Peacucn fo2 thpne cuempes,
Se i o eie g Prapfedbe


lal bitileir,


God, hotve thou gockl,bowe thou,mp God and
kpnaeqoetinthelanctuarpe. Thefpngerg
go befoze,them paoia folowe after:in p mpd
des are p Damicls st ee: ith the tpmbrels.
Gpue thakes D Firael onto God the Lorde
in the congregacpons, from the grounde of the
bert. Theretslptle Ben Jamin thetrruler: g
the pzpnces of Juda thep2 coulaple.the princes
ofsabulon,e the pepnces of Pephtbali. Thp
Godbath fent forth frrength for to ablpthe p


t thyng D God, that thou bat wzoughet tn vs.


fforthp tempels fake at Jerulalem:fotball —
kpnges bepnge prelentes vntotbhe. benthe
company of thefpearemen,andmultitude ofp
mpgbtteare {cattred abode amonge the beaz
tes of the people (fothat thep bumblp bzpnge
peces of [pluer and then be bath {catered p peo:
ple that delite in barre. Chen (hal the princes
come out of Eqppte,the Dozpans lande thall
Coone ftretch outher bades bntoGod. Singe
unto God, D pe kpngodomes of theeartie: :
fpnge prap fesvnto the Lord. Hela. Wippche
{ptteth in the beauens ouer allfrom the begpn:
npnge: Lobe Doth fende out bys bopce:pea, €
thatampabtpevopce. Alcrpbe pe the power
to God ouer Flrael:bps whozhip g tréqthb isin
f cloudes. D God, Wwoderful art thou in tpp bo:
lp places enë p God of Flrael:he wpl gpue tré-
gth power Vnto his people. Wlefled be God.
@ The. lrir. Blaline .
SALVVM ME FAC DEVS
To the chaunter dpon Hofanini of Daud. |
aa Aueme, D God:fo2p watersare


p


api come inent puto mp foule. 3 Tpcke

so talk in p depe mp2e, where no grod

Boos 8 18:9 am come info depe waters , fo

ms y the floudesrenneouerme. Zam

werp of crping,mp thzote is Dape:mp fight fay

letb me, foz waptpngefolonge wponmiy Gov. -
‘hep that * bate me tpthouta caule,are ptat.crrv.c

mo then the beeres of mp beade, thep that arc 2°¥-Fe>

mpne enempes , and wolde deltrope me gplt-

leffe are mpap tpe: J paped them the tbpnnes $

Jneuertoke. Godthou knoe mp tpmple-

nefle,and mp fautes arcnot bpdfrom the. Let

not them thattruff inthe D Lozde Good of ljo-

tes, be afbamed foz mp caule, letnot thole that

feke the be confoundcd thozowse me, D Lozde

od of yfrael. And wbpifo: thp lake baue 7 25

fuitred repzofe:fhame batt conercd mp face.

Jam become a ratiger punto mp bacthren:cu€

analeaunt nto mp mothers chplozen. for -.

+ theseale of thpne boule bath eurn eaten me, ¢ t5-11.bs

«the rebukes of them that rebuked thearefal- i om.rya

lenbponme. ¥Yivepte andchafkencd mp felfe” ~


ie


fa


Chey plpt in thegate,Cpakcagapnt me, the q k


Db let me be Delpucred fri then that hate me,
e out ofthe depe Waters. Letnot che late
(oude


fioude browne me :rieptherlet Sdepefwaldwe pe
me bp,andlet notte Sy sel Ae meee |
nefle is comfoztable:turne the UNFO ACCOR. ioe


D me. Heare me, D Lozde,foz
Dpnge vito the multptude of thp mercpeg.
And Dpde not thy face from thp ferua a: for 7
amin trouble: Dbdaftethe,and beareme. —
Dawe npevntomp foule,andfaueit: Mbhde
linet me,becaule ofmpneenemics. Choubatk
knowë mp ceprofe,mp bame ¢ my difhonoure

@ Mpneaduerlarpes arcfulinthpfpabhte. hp
rebuke bath bzokenmp berte ain full of beug


neie, J loked foz fometo baue pptie ppon me, .


serpin DUE there has noman:neptherfounde 3 anpe to
Ferrite comeortme. * Thep qaueme calito cate i nd
then J has thyettpe thep gaueme vpneare to
thtom.rt b rs pi . + Let their table be madea Minareto
take them felues with all, and let thetbpngeg
(that thulde baue benfoz their wealth )be nto
thé an occafion offallinge. Let thetrepes be
bipnded,p thep {ce not:¢ euer bowe thou Downe
their backes. Poure out thpne indignactd pps
tben glet thy weathfull oilpleafure take bold
ofthe. *Lettheirbabitacion be opde enoma
todiwelintbheirtétes. Jo: thep petlecute bim
whom thou bak hnitté,¢ jali talke bowe tbep
mape Vege them hom thou bat wounded.
Let them fal from one wickedneffe to another,
Cr; Freis not come tnte thprpghtoulnelle. «Let them
be Wpped ont of the boke of the lpuing,¢ not to
be tozptten amonge the tpabtcous. a3
foz me , when 7 am ay and in beupnefie ,
_ thpne belpe( D God)thal lpfte me vp. | wpll
maple the name of God wptha fonge:andma-
© gupfie it with thankelgeupng. Thys alfo tal
pleate the hozdc better then a bullocke,p bathe
hoznesand boofes. Che bumble thall cilpdze
thps.¢ be glad:feke pe after God, ¢ poure foule
i pallipue. Fozthe Lozrdebeareththe poore,
bilppleth notbis pzpfonnerg, Let heaué and
earth papie Dim, tbe fee, and all that mouctb
therin. Jo: God pall faue Spon, sd buypide
the cpties of Juda, that men mape Divell there,
and baue itin poflettpon. The pofteritpe al:
fo of bps leruauntes thall enbertt it : andtbep p
loue Dts name Wall dwell therin.
CTbe.ler.pfalme.
DEVS INADIVTORIYM


Co the chaunter of Dautd to bspnee to res


F


mat-rriii d
detl,


o Membauntee# (Cbecaule the Horde Caucd me.)
SB GAL p, D God, todelpuer me:make balk
iaria . ees Gto belpe me, D Lod, * Let them be a-


aot med E confounded,p feke after mp foule:
let them be turned bark ibarde,¢ put to confult
on dad ba 2 meeupll. Let them (foz thepz
retparbde) be foone brought to pame, that crpe
ouer me, there there. Wutletallepole that
feketbe , betopfull and arabes the: and Iet all
fuche as delpte in thp faluacpon, fapealivaype:
the Lorde be prapled. Asforzme, Jam pore
andin mpferpe,Datte the nto me(DGod.).
hou arte mp helpe and mp redemer: D
Lode, makeno longe tarpinge.
@ The. lrri.wWlalme.


IN TE; COMINE SPERAVI.


Sol tii


Ti RP * D LoD batie 3 pur mp tent % r
P Mya let ine neuer be put toconfulpon:btit brar rroa
Bag PD me:¢ Delpuce mein thy riabteout s


e. e thou mp ronge bolde(w z
toyJmapalwap retort) pp a b (wberebn


mpi engb apleth ozm

mp rengthbfaplethbme. Sfozmpneenemped

fwabescapntt me:and thep that lape awapte

fo} mp foule take thep2 coifaple together, fay:

inge: Godbathforlaken bpm, perlecute ppm,

and take ae there isnone to delpuer Ge
Gonotfarre “come D God:mp God,hatte f .

tobelpeme. Let them beconfounded g peri, €

that are agapnft mp foule: lettbem be couercd

witb hame and Dplhonoure, that feke to dome

eupll. Asfozme, J wpll pacientlpe abpde ats

wape and topll peaple themozeandDmoze.

Hy mouth pall daplp {peake of thpryabte out

nefie and faluacton,fo2 J knowe no ende therof

FJ wpl go forth inthe kréqth of the 202d God,

and topll make mencpon of tbp rpabteontneile

onelp. Chou D God, batke taught mie fromp

pouth bp ontpll notve, therfore wpll y tell of

tbp wonderouswo2rkes. forlakemenot, D

God, in mpne olde age, wpe Jam grap becded: |

bntpll 3 bane thetoed thp* frengeh onto thys Deu.01.8 |

generacpon and thp power fo alltbem that are

pet foztocome. Chprpabteoulnelle( D God)

ts berpe bpe, and greate thpnges are thep that

thou bat done, D God, Wpotslpke bnto the: :
D what great troubles ad aduerlitpes batt

thou ewed merand pet opdelt thou turne ad

tcfrefbe me‘pea,t Wonga mefrom the depe

of theearthewtagapne.) Choubalk bzougbt me xs

xto great honoure andcomfozted me oneuerpe ii.me.vitb

fpde. herfoze topl J prale theandthp faith

fulneffe OCRE onan intrumente

of mufpke:bnto hah s Jipnge vpon p barpe:

D thou bolpe oneof Ziracl. <p leppes tpl

be fapne when J tpnge bntothe:and fo pl mp

foule whom thou balt delpuered. Gp tonge

alfo all talke of thy rpqbteoutnefle all p dape

longe,fo2 thep areconfounded and bought yn:

tofpame,tbat feke todo me cull,

The.lrrit.wWlalme.


DEVS IVDITIVM,
o#( 2 praim) Fo? Salomon. rE:
sp Due the kinge thy tudgementes (D B
TIE one ee ee vntothe
ea oi kpnges fone. Thé hal be iudgethp


D


a fpeople,* according onto right E de: Deut,rott,
É foe p pore. Chematapnes alfa bal?
epnge


2525 itii


©- Pialrrtiter titi,


bapnee peace, € thelptlebplles riqhteoufncile
wntotbhe people. He thal Bepe the finple Folke
bp their rpabt defende the chilbzé of the poe
g punpie the wonge voer. Thep Mall care p
pra teri. eaS longe* as the funne Fd noone endureth, fr
onegeneractd to another. He Mal come downe
Ipketberapne into a ficle of toll, cucnastbhe
proppes that water the carth. In bis tyme thal
the tighteous fope: pea, andaboundatice of
Æ pearetalonge ag tbemoone endureth. * ps
tiretti. e Domini thalbe allo trõtheone fee to the other,
_ andfromthe Roude bnto the woles ende.
„Thep that Dwelin the wilderneffe hal knele
before bpm: hisenempes hall lpcbe the dull.
meth.ti.b x Che kpngeg of Charli and of the Fles tall
ZC lD cone nretentes:the Bynaes of Arabpe t Haba,
fhalbangegpftes. All epnges thal fal dotone
before bim:-all nations thalldo bpmferuice. —
_ S€orbethaldelpuer the pooze tobe be crpetp:
the neadpealfoand bim that bathno belper .
€ He thalbe fauourableto the fympleandnea-
vpe anoman het foules ofthe poore.
Pe thal deliver tbeir foules from falthed and
müge g deare thal their bloude be in bps fight.
De fhallpue.and Ynto bim thalbe qput of the
goldof Arabia: Praper Halbe madecuer ynto
dim gdaplp pal pe be papred: There Halve
ai Deape of cozne tn the carth, bpe bps the bpl-
les:bistrute pall hakelpke Libanus, € all
be qrene inthe cptic.lpke gralle tpi the erthe.
D His name (hal endure Fo; euer:Disname pal
~ vemapne pnder the funneamonge the poftcritt
eg which Halbe blefledthozowe bim andal the
prarpeipalprape pen Wletled be p Lorde
Sov, even the Godoi Eien PB eed onlp doth
zav.rii,» Wonderonsthinges. Andblefledbethe name
prcrrsbi.a Of Nps mateftpe Foz euer: andal the carth Mal-
| wed Na a eal i lg
Hele endeththe prapersof Daurd
the fonnes of Flat.
@ The. leriti. Blalme.
QVAM FONVS ISRAEL,
A pfalme of Afaph.
Sean geet WAUlp Godisloupnge dnto Ffrael :
pa eS“ eut nto luchag are of a cleane bert,
ESU EZA Meuerthelelle, mp fete were al «
e oes moolt gone, mp treadinges had wel
npe ppt. Xndiwbp’* F wag qreuedat f tote
miria ked, J Do fealfo the vngodly in tuch profperitie
IEEE op thep are inno perpl ofdeth but arelutpe g
ftronge. ‘hep come in no mpffoztune lpke
otberiolBe,neit epee plaged lpke other
men. Andthisisthecaulethat thep be fo hol
_ Den topth papde,¢€ ouer whelmed With crueltie.
15 ‘Chetr epes well foz fatneffe : andthep do ene
whatthep lut. Chep corrupt other, (peake
of topcked blafphemp: thetr talking ts aqaintt
the mooltbpeft. Jo thep ftretche forth thep2
~ mouth onto f beaué,anbd their tonge gocth tho
rotoethe worde. Cherfoze fal the people nto
«thé,¢ theroutfucke they no fmall aduatitage.
„Tui Capethep howe houlde God perceine
pLrctif. b 1¢rig there knowmledgetnthe moo byes Lo,
ingia ee on E ele pzofpere m p wozlde,
ehauerpe


and thet


andcome toa fearfullende? * Dea,eucnlpke


inpoffefipon:onanvran) scart, bedotbit hpmiicife, x Chou dptr de- Eror ie


Then haue Fclenfed my herte in vapne,¢ wal-


‘fbed mp handes ininnocencpe. All the dape .
donge baue J bene punpihed, and chaffencd enue


rp monpnge. Pea, and3 Dadalmoft faid eug
as thep:butlo,therthuld 3 Haue condempned
theqeneractonofthpchtldecn. Chenthought —
J to vnderitade this but it was tohardfo2 me. ©
Untpll Jwent into the Hanctuarp of God,
thé wnderftode Atheende of thefe men. Na-
mély bowe thou Doct fet them in theth Pppe
places g caftest thé Domne and detropedft the.
Mhotwefodapnlpdothepconfume,perpihe,
agadeame then oneawaketh, fo thaltethou © FF
maketheir pmage to vanpih out of thecptie .-
Thus mp bert was greucd and tt ente cue
thozotwemprepnes. Dofoolpiy was Jand
y pena agit tere a beatt befoze the.
Leuertheles, Jam altoap bp the,foz thou bak
holdenme bpmprpght bande. ‘Chou Malte
gupde me with thy cotifaple-and after that re-
cepue me wò glozp. bom bane Fin beaué but
the? And there ig none dponearth,that Joe
{pzeinciparpfonotthe.)pfletheandmyppert
fapleth: but Godis the frengthe of mp herte, D
xandmp porctofozeuer. F€ozlo,thep thatfo2=
fake the thal perpth:thou batt deftropedall the rout:
that commpt foznicacid aqapnit the. wButitis
good fo me,toholde mefat bp God to put mp
truit inthe L020 Gode tolpeake of al tüp woz
BCS : cH (din the gates ofthe Doughter Spon, )
@ Cbe. lexi. Bfaline.
VT QVID DEVS REPVLISTI:
AninfruccionofAfaph. —
== God, wherforeart thou abfent frö F
Gicdy vsfolonge s why is thp tozathe fo
Tg | od Se the epe of thp pa-
PE A D thpnke ppo thp congre-
teres apon, Whé thou hak purchaced E a
redemed of olde. ‘Chpnke bpon the tepbe of
thypne cuberitauniceand mount Spon wierctit
thoubattdivelt. Lpft up thp feete,that tio
mapett vtterlp deftropecuerp enempe, ohpcbe
hath doneeupllin the Sanctuary. ‘Chpne ad
verlarpes rooze in the mibdes of thy congrega
clons:¢let bp their banersfoz tokens. Hep
Hethed tpmbze afoze oute of the thycke trees,
thas knowcn fo bapngett to anercellét too2zke
wWutnowe thep Leake dowone all the carugd 13


ea


eee ge eee — — ——
: ry


oye


fhorke therof witharese hammers. * Thep ttitrerrs.c | ~


baue fet fpze bpon thy bolp places, andbauede {PFT


fyled the dwellpnge place of thp name euen dn
to tbegrounde. Pea, tbepfapdin their pertes
let us make hauocke of themaltogetber : thus
baue thep brent vp all the houtes of Govin the
lande. Wiclenot ourtokens : therets not one
Pzophet moze, nono one is thereamonge vs
that pnderftandetbanp moze. D God hotoe
longe Wall the aduerlarp doo this difkonoure?
bowe longe thal f enemy blafpheme thp names
Foz cuersCbyp wptbtzawell chou thy pander
by slaras thou not thy typghtebande oute
ofthp bofome, toconfumetheenempes F€o2
Godis my kyng of olde:the pelpe tis done vpi


upie


Wlal.leevlecbilervit lee bi,


. de the fee thozotwe thp potver : thou beakette


FEES ronett bim to be meate foz the people in wildet


nelle. Chou beougbtelt out fountapnes g wa-
ters out of the barde rockes : thou depedett bp
mygbhtp waters. Chedape isthyne,andtbe
npgot ts thpne:thou-hatt prepared the lpabt
thefunne. Thou ha fct all the bowers of $
earth tboubat madefommer and Wpnter.
Remembze thps DLo0:d, howe theenempe
bath cebuked,and bote the foolit people bath
blaipbemedthpname. Ddelpuernot ptoule
of thp turtle doue buto the multptude ofp ene-
mies and forget not the congregacid of p poore
>» fozeuet. Loke Dpo the couenauntefo2 all the


carthisfullofdarkenetie,andcruetlbabitacp- ER
ons <Dletnotthelpmpleqoawapafthamed: [Fes Y


but let the pooze ¢ ncadpe gpuc parle pnto thp
name. Arple D God, maypntapne thpne owne
caufe:rcmember Dowe the foolptp man blalphe
methtbedaplpe. JEozget not p vopce of thine
enempes:the prelumprio of them that bate the
encrealetheuet moze and more.
CCbe.lrery.zalaline.
. CONFITEBIMYR TIBI.
. Cothe chaunter:Dekkropenot.
Plalme and fonge of Afaph.
Nee soto the( D God )do we gene thikes:
AWA pea, Luto fdo the qpue thankes. Thp
= Ename alfois fonpe,e that do thp won:
SaaS Derous wWorkesdeclare. WibeF res
ceauc the congreqacpo, J thal indge accozding
' ‘Dnto rpgbt. Cheecarthis weake andall f in-
babptourstherof: J beare vp the ppilers of tt
Sela. Blapyd vntothe foles:deale not iomad
lp:and tothe ynqodlp.fet not bp pour ho2ne.
Sct not bppour pozne onbpe, and{peake not
*  _ Wptha fptnecke. Foz promocton cometh nep:
25 thet fro the ca.no2 fromthe wete, no2 pet fro


Se prrod ¢hefouth. And twbp! * God is the iudge:he put


tcth Downe one,and fetteth bp another. o? in


| eea the bande of the Lozbdeisthere* acuppe ,andp


ARE? Myoneigeed, Bis fullmprte, € be poureth out
oftbefame. Asfo2 the dreqqes therofall =
bngodlp of the earth thall Dapnke them,¢ fucke
themout. Wut AZwpl talke ofthe Gon of Fa
cob,and praplebpm fozener. All the bomes


k of the bngodlp alfo wil Jbzeake: and f hozmeg


E
al


ofthe tpgbtous thalbecralted.
. C The. lervi.lalme.


' NOTVS INIVDEA,


‘A tsqreate in Fitacl. AtSalemis

| | bpstabernacle,and * bys divellpnge

| iwin, ees in Spon. Bch habe Do ‘parow
F | bowe,the tpplbde.the fiverde and f bat:


founde nothing. Atthprebuke (O Godof Za
cob) both tbe charretandbozteistaue. ‘Chou,


l eheebes of the deagonsin the waters. Thou.
| zeno fmootet the beedes of x Leutatha in peces, et |


Long aphe
A EERE P Jewipis Sooknowen,bysname


Sol. citi.
enctt thou art to befeared:and who map tande
in thp [pabt wbpen thou artangrpe Tpoudpd:
deft caule thp iudgement to be bearde from bea-
uen:the earth trembled and was ftpll. * wh 25
God arole toiudgemente, eto belpe all p meke erorii
vpicarth.Dela. ‘Che fearcencile of manthal
tourne to thp papie: and the fearceneffe of thé
palt thourefrapne. rompie onto p Lorde
pour God, and* kepe tt all pe that he rounde a= deurei
peed seis ngepzeichtes unto bomp ovghte Es
tobefeared. He thalrefrapne #ippzrite of pi-
ceg, ig wonderful sats 3 kmges ofp carthe.

C The, lrivi. Pfalwe.

VOCE MEA AD DOMINVM,


A
pla, tri, a


the Lode: mp foze ranne and ceafled notin the

npgbt feafon:myp foule refused cõfozte. Wie

Jam in Deupneile , F wpll thpnke ppon God

when mp bert is bered g wpll coplapne. Sela. ng
‘Thou holdek mpne epes wakpnge: Jamis ~

feble,that Jcannot{peake. Ybaue co{pozen

the dapes of olde, andthe peares that are palte.
Acalltoremembzaunce mp fonge : and in the

npabe Fcommune wpth mpneowne berte and

fearche out mpfpp2ites, CApllp Lozde abiit

pim fel€fo2z euer: And wpil be be nomoze intrea

ted Ashpsmercp cleaneqonefozeuers And

is bis prompfe come vtterlp toanendefo2zeucr

moze: Hath Godforgotter tobe qracpous:

And top! he Hutt yp bps loupnge kyndnefle

indplplealurerHela And Flapd:Ft ts mpne

otpne infpzniptie: But F wpll remebee the pe-

reg ot the right Dave of tbe moftbpet. Fwy!

vemebze the workes of the Lode and * call £0 serey

minde thp waders ofoldetpme. Biopltbinke ¢

alfo ofall thp toozkes , andmy talkpng malbe ©

ofthpdopnges. hp tape, D God,isholye:

thos fogreataAGodagsex(our) God. Chou .,

art the Gob that doth wond2zes,and patt decla-

redthp polver amoge people. Chou ha migh

telp Delpuercdthp people,cué the fonnes of Fa-

coband Jofeph. Sela Che waters lawe tie,

D God:the Waters latoe the ad were afraped: ~

the Deptbes alfowere troubled. Checloudes

poured out water the opie thondzed: and thine

arotors went abzobe. Che vopce of thy thodze

was berde rode about,the lightenmges Mone

bpon the grofide,the earth was moued ¢ Moke

wrthall. Chp wapeistntbhelee, and thp pa-

thesin the greate haters:andthp footefieppes

arenot knotten. Chou leddeft thy people lpke


> fpeepe.byp the bande of Boles and Haron.


E€ The. lexvit.plalme.
ATTENDITE POPVLE MEVS,
| Aninitruccpon of Mapp.
wreeae.a Care mp late, mp people, ett-
fa Vai Wea clpne pourcarcs bnto the wozdes
coer aS ofmpnouth.* 3 topllopen mp
be occ HA4 mouth ina parable, % wpil declare


maé tiike


SAG yard fentences of olde. Gaypebe
2335 0 the


- Pialyrbiii


ade: iiti. fhe hane berdand knotten: and*fuch as our fa-

ot fa thers Daue told ug. That we Moulde not hyde

 thëfrom thechplozé of the qeneracpos to come:

but to bewe p honour of the 102d, bps migde,

| and thondzefull ozkes thatbebatboone. ie

uane 4 ees with Ly naiga pe stat
secrit.o. elalatoe* which becomatbded our tog er

Folu.tii.d gg ceachethepzchbploaen. That thetr polteri-

tpempgbte knowelt, and thechplozen wbpche

tere pet bnbowne. Co thintent that whe rbep

23 came bp, thep mpgbee ewe thepz chpldzé the

. fame. hat they mpgbte put tbep? trute in

God, and not to forget the ozkes of od, but

tokcpe byscommaundementes. And notte

esse hex ag their forfatbers* a faptbletic and tub-

40E-FFFUIS urne generaciã:a generacion that fet not tbeir

berta rpgbt and whole fpiritecleauecd not fed-

faftlp onto God. Lyke as the childzë of Cphza

im, wbich bepnge barnefed and carpinge bow-

es turned them {clues backe in the dape of bat-

taple, hep kept not the couenaunte of od,

and wolde not walke inbislaibe. Wutforgat

tbat be bad Done, and the wonderfull toorkes

thathe hadthetocdfozthé. Maruaplousthin

ges dpd deinthelpabt of our fathers inthe lade

ero.ritiin Of Cgppt.cuenin thefeldeofsoan. *ie Deup-

ded the ice, and let thé qo thozoiwe : he made the

Eroria. e waters to tande on an pepe. + 3ntbhe dape

Bun-rk-> tomealfobe ledtbem wpth a cloude,andall the

ero.rott.b NPADEthozotwoe wptblightoffpze. Pe cloaue

the berde*tockes in the wpldernefle, and qaue


them dzinke therof,asit badben out of f great


copra vepth. He bzrought waters out of the* ttonp
rocke ,fothatit quilted outlpketberpuers. |

Petfoz all thps.thep (pnned mozeagatnt dim,

and prouoked the molt hpeft tn the wpldernes.

‘They tempted God inthep2 dertes:andrequt:

€ repimcatefoztbepzlut. Cheplpake agapntt
eron.rbib Godallo,faping:(bal God prepare a* table in
Aume.rib ¢heypldcrnefler ie lmote the Tonpe rocke in
Dede. that the ater qultedout, and f tremes

flotved wpthall: but canbe gpue bzeed alfo,o2
pcupdeflethfoz bps peoples Wibe the Lozde

bearde this, be teas wzotb:fo the fpze was kind:

led in Jacob, and there came vp heupe dpiplea-
fureagapnite Jlrael. WWpcaule thep bpleucd

notin God,and put not thep2 truf in his belpe.

So be commaunded the cloudes aboue,¢ a

tied the Doves ofbeau€é. Herapneddowne Wå-

et te naalfo pon thé fo2 tocat,and qaue the* foode
san rba rom peaven., Somandpbeate aungelsfode,
Jogn.bi-d fo? helentthbemmeat ynough. Hecauled the
Ealt wpnde to blowe vnder the beauen, g tho-

rowe bps poiver be bzougbe in the fouthwefte-

ero.rotn. wpnde. * je rapned Aeb bpon thé as thycke
PUES ae dut and fetheredfouleslpke as the fande of
thefee. Peletitfallamdge thep2 tentes, cu€é
roundeabouttbepzbabptacpo. Sotbherdpo

cate , and were well fplled : Foz begane them

thep2 owne delpze. Thep were not dplapopn:

aum. pg CeDofthep2 lul * Wut whple the meate wag
pet intbep2mouthes, the beupe wrathe of God

came apan them, € Aue the weltbpett of them:

pea ad{motedDotone, the chofen men that were
aupin a glact. * Wutfoallthpg, hep tpnned pet


moze:and bylened not bps wWonderous tvorkes: |
Cherfore,thep2 dapes dpd be confume in vant
tre,andrtbepzpearesintrouble. * Wibhene oum.ri.g
flue them, thep fought bpm: andturned thé ears corar.
lp,andenqupzedatter God. Andthepremem
bred that God was thep?2 Frength,andtbat the
bpabe Godwastheps redemer. Meuerthelefic,
thev dpd but flattre bpm topth thep? mouth, ão
dpiembledwpth bim in thepıtõge. Woz their
bert wagnot whole wpth ppm, neptber contp-
nued thep tedfatinbps couenaunt. Wut
waslomercptulltbat be fozgaue thepz mpide-
Des, and deltroped the not. Dea, manpa time
turned be bps weath awape,and wolde not fut
fre bps whole dpfpleature toarple. * JEO be weal. ctit.c
confpdzed that thep tere but fletbe,andpcbep .
were even a topnde that palleth alwape,and ci
methbnotagapne. Danpatpmedpdtbep pro `.
uoke pim in the wpldernefte and grend bpm in €
thedeferte. Thep turned backe andtempted
God, and moned the holy onein Firael. oe
thought not of bps bande, and of the dap ben
be delpucred them from the bandof the enempe.
Howe be bad wrought bps mpzactes in Egipt,
and bps tondzes in the felde of soan.* Be tour ero.vit.ni
nedtbep2 haters (nto bloud.fotbatthep might
not Depnaeottherpuers. * ielentlpceamog ero oi»
thé,anddenouredthem vp:* andfroggesto des , “Ais
trope them . Ieqauctbep2frutes wnto the
*caterppller, andtpep2 laboure pntotbe gtel= ero.r.e
bopper.* Hedefkropedtheyz vpnes with baple zeren..
ffones , andtbep2 mulberptrees withthe frott
*elmote thep2 cattel allo ith patle ones, erov.tr.c
and their flockes wpth pers beep eos pe
cait vpontbem the Furpoufneffe of bys wath,
ange difplealure and trouble, g fent eupl aun:
gelgsamongetbem. *Pemadeawapeto bps eron.tr.a
tndignacion, g (pared not theirfoule fró death,
butgaue apa fe ouer tothe peftilëce. * And crov.pee.c
Emote alte fpattbozne in Eqppt, the mofk pein oaimch-°
cppall and mpabtpelf inthe dthellinges of Hå. %
Wut as for bps owne people, de led thé forth 15
lpke pepe and carped the intbe toplderderneffe
lykea floche. ie brought them out fafelpe, ý
they thulde not feare: and ouerwhelmed tere
enempeswptbhtbetee. Andbeought them in
the bozders of bys Sanctuary: euétothis mou
tapne whichbe purcbaced with bys rpgbt bade.
xpe cat out the eathé allo before thé, cau= Dewiti.a
fed thep2zlanbe fo be Deupded amonge thé foz an I06vir.Fi
betptage,andmade the tribes of Firael todel
intbeirtentes. Sotbeptépted anddpfplea-
fedthemoolt bpe Sod, and kept not hig teftimo
npes. *WDuttournedthep2 backes: andfellae
wap like thepz Fozefatbers, farting afpde,lpke
abjokenbowwe. Sfo? tbep greued ppm pth
tbep: bplialters,andproueked bpm toDdifplea
{ure wptp thep2 pmages. Wiben God bearde
thys,be was woth, and toke toze st saab
at S{racl. So that be forfoke p Tabernacle
in Silo euen the tet that be bad pitched amige
men. He delpuered thep2 potver into captiupe
tie and thep2 beautp into the cnempes bande.
He gaue bps people over allointo thefwerde
and was woth topth the enberptaunce. The
3e


o A


fpzeconiumed thep2 ponge men: and thep2 map
dens Werenot qpuentomarpage. Their pzre-
ftes there kapne wpth the wearde , and there

twere no wpodotwes to make lamentacpon. —
othe Lodawaked agone ont of ficpe,elpke
icegu.d .b a qpauntercfrefiped wpth wpne. * pe {mote
his cnemtesin the bpndze partes and put them
toa perpetuali pame .
_ nacleof Jofeph,and chofe not p tribe of Epiha
piirrrvifa jin. *Sut cholethe trpbe of 4uda,cucn p ppll
of pon tobpchhelowed. nd there be bupl-
bed bps temple on bpe,andlaped the foundacp-
. onocitlpke the qroube hhpc) ac hath made co
eggi e tinuallp. *Hechole Dauid alfo bps feruañt,
and toke’bpmawarpe fromtbethepefoldecs.. As
be thas folowpnge the ewes great wpth pong-
ones be Coke Dim, tpat be might fede Jacob bts
people,and Siracl his enberptaice. Sobe fed
them yptha fapthfullanod true bert, and ruled

them paudentire wpthailbps power.
€ The.lrrir. Balme.
DEVS VENERVNTGENTES.


Plal.lrrir.lrrr.l tri


Si rribi ALAN


l menio AIE
EAHA: ;


calleabponthpname. Wo?tbep bane deusu-
ren Jacob, ¢ layed Wall bps dwellpnge place.
x MD remembz2e not our oldefpunes, but baue
mercp bpon bs, and that foone-fo2 we are come
togreat mplertie. Np vs, D God of otic fal
nacpon.foz theglozp ofthbpname: D delpuer


efa.iciitt. e


bg.and be mercpful butvourfpnnesfozthpna pees


pfalirbs megfake. * Wiberfore Dothe Heathen lave:
€ where ignote thep: God D letthe venge -=


aunce of thpferuauntes bloubdthatisthedbeo: | iam


ienlp hewed dpon the Heatden in oure fpabt .
Det the fozowfull fpabpnece of the pyton-
ners come befoge the:accozdpng Dnto the great
nelle of thy potver:pzeleructhou thofe tbat ate
appopntedtodbpe. Andas fo; thebla


The krr. falme.
QVi REGIS ISRAEL.
‘Co the chaunter bpon Solanimn,a te=
fFyimonpe and Plaime of Afaph.


Ma


Herefuledthe Taber: tdp


pe


EXVLTATE DEO,
To the chaunter ppon Githith.


o (4 pfalme) OF Afaph in the (Eth bape


the Sabboth.) Ha


wylteberken bnto me. Cheretpal no firange
godbe


Mealy eetilecctiuleriitlye ry.


gon beinthe,nepther Halt thon worthppanpe
erov.rr,a other god. *Jamthe Lord top God wbypcve
brought the out of the lande of Egypt, ope thy
mouth wpDde,and J tall fpll it.
© ple wolde not heare mp vopce,ad Ffracl wolde
somi.d notobepme. x03 qauethé vp bnto thepz
otne pertes luff,and let thé folotwe their owne
maginaciong. D that mp people wolde haue
herkenen onto me, foz pf Ffrael bad walked in
mp apes. 3 tpulbe foone paue put Downe
thep2 cnempes,and turned mpne bådeagaintte
thep2aduerfarpes. ‘Chebaters of the Lorde
fhould baue bene foundelpers, but thepztpme
foulde bane enduredfozeucr. We fhoulde paue
fed them alfo wpth the fpnette wbeate foure,
beurit and x pthbonpe out of the ony rocke ould

A bauelatptiped the.

@)Che.irectt. Blaine.
DEVS STETIC IN SINAGOGA-
= A ptaline of apb.

4 Od fLandeth m the congregacyon of


princes. Ar D Eod, indge thou fearthe,
fo? P palt take al Heathe to thmeenberitaŭce.
C The.lrrriit. Plaline.

; DEYS QVIS SIMILIS,

A onge andplalme of Alaph.
cag Dde not thp tonge,D God, kepe not
4a hi ftplifplence,vefrapne not thpfe fe D
Pralii b: KY pete


plarrro.a toa whele,andas* the fiubble befoze the wind.
Lpkeas a fpzetbatburneth vpthe wood, and


=


ut mp peo.


as the flame that confumeth the moutitapnes.
Perlecute themenen fo wpth chp tempe, ant
make them afraped wpth thy tome. ake
thep2 faces afthamed,D Lorde, that thep map
feketbyname. Wetthembeconfolibedand ve-
red euer moze and moze: let the be put totbame
andperpih). Andthep Hal knowe „tbat thou
(tobole nameis Febouah)arte onelp the mooi
bpefte ouer all the earthe.
CTbhre.lerriiii. falme.
QVAM DILECTA TABERNACVLA. |

To the chaunter bpon Githith,a Plalme.
___ ofthe fonnes of Cozap.
Pare abote amiable are thp Divelliges, f A
A VLordothootes’ Ay foule pathea
| rg sdelpre g liginge focntre into prout
P<orgSites of p Lod, mp bert ¢ mp hele re:
{opfeinthelpupng God: ea, thefparote path
foiide ber anboule,¢ the ftwalowe a neff, where
the map lape ber poge:euentbp alters Dod
of hooftes,mpkingandmpGod. Wlelledare
thep that Dwell intbp poule, thep wplbe alwa
2aplinge the. ela. Wlefledis ý man, whole 2
fren tp isin the,tn whore pert are thp tapes,

Wibpch gopnae thopove the vale ofimpierve
ple it foz a Wwell,and the hala are fplled pth
water Thep wll gofri flrength to ttrégep:
gonto the God of roddes appeareth cuerp one
ofthemin Spon. D Lorde Godot hooltes,
Deare mp praper, bearken, D God of Jacob.
Selah. Webolde,D God onredefohder: gloke
bps theface of thpneannotnted. o: one bape
intbp courtesis better then a tboulande. 3
bad tather be a Dooze teper in the boufe of mp
God, tben fo divell inthe tentes of ungodliness.

fto the Lozde God ig alpghe and defence, p
Lozde wpll geue grace and woztbpppe, andro
goodthinge thal be witholde from the that lpuc
agodlplpfe. Lorde God of hooftes,bleved £
isthe man, tbat puttetb bps trutintie. ° .

- CChe.lecry.PDlalme.

BENEDI¥ISTI DOMINE. ;
Tothechaunter.a lalme ofthe
— fonnes of Copad.
aap Dide,thouartbecomenractousdntos
ia Mew ibp lande thou balte turneda wap the Pit-FFFH.a
(3 ASA captinpticof Jacob. Chou hatt foz-
=== enë theoffence of thp people,*¢ coue
redalltbep2fpnues. Selah. Chouhatt takë


| atvapeall tbp ike iat turned thp felfe


fromtbp tozatbfull indignacpon. Turne vs
then, Godour Haupoure, ¢letthpneanger.
ceaflefrombs. Wiplte thou be dpfpleafen at 25
vs foz euer?g wplte thou Tretch out thy wath
from onegeneracpontoanotber’ Ciplt thou
not turneagapne and qupchen bs, that thp peo
plemaperetople inthes Sbetve vs thp mer:
cp(D Lozd)andgrauntysthpfalnacpon. F
wyll berken what the Lorde God wpll tape,
ex(concernpngeme) £02 be Wall {prake peace Duto ga
bps people:and tobps fapntes, that thepturne .
notagapne. for bps faluacpon is npetiem
that feare bpm, that glozpe mape dwell in oure
lande. ercpe andtruethare met together ,
rpabroufnes and peace bauc kp fled eche ath
Truth


SER | : ;


Plal.lerebileerbiilecebitdertit,


‘Truth Hall flozpth ot ofthe earth, andrpgh-
ceoutnes, bath lobed Dotone ftom beaué. ber,
tbe Lozd thall thee loupnere &pndnes.and our
lande ball gene ber eucreafe , m pabteoufneg
baligo befoze ppm , and pe thal bpzecte bps
fopnge in the wape.
. CCbhe.lerrbt.wlalme,
INCLINA DOMINE AVRKEM,
: A paper of Danid.
A Bienes) Woe Dotone thpneeare,D Lord, ¢
a ACE pA peare me foz Jampoozeandin mi:
EAP. Bzeferuethou mp oule, foz
C Di ambolpe : mp God fane thp ters


We mercpfull vnto me D Lozde )fo2 4 topll
call Daplp wpon the. Contfogte p foule of thp
feruatit.toz vnto the( D Lod Jdo Zl ptt vp mp

‘errt§.a Foule. *4€02 thou Lorde att geod and gracp,

Gore OUS ANDOFgreatmercp vnto all them that call

— «Placrints BPonthe. Geuecare Lod bute mp gaper
Fb ponder the vopces of mp Humble depres.

5 sit the tyme of mp trouble F topll call bpon

- phiri o (9.602 thoubearetme. x Amonge the god-

oS Des there ts none lpke pnto the, D Lozd) there

isnot oncthatcandoastbhou dock: All naci:

ong whom thou pat made, thall comeand wo:

{yppe pD Lozd)and thal flog pfie thy name.

Foz Chou artegreateand Doette wonderong

thpnges,thou art Godalone. Teache me thp

Wave sD Lord) and J wpl alge in thy truth:

enpimp bert onto the, thatit mapefeare

thpnamse. | topll thakethe,D Loy mp God

wWpthallmp berte & wpll peapte thp name foz

euer. Horaqreat is thp mercy tawarde me ad

pealerir. a *tDOu hatte deliuered mp foulefrom the nether

C moti yell. D Goof poude arerplen again

. meand the cogregacpons of nougbtte m have

fought after mp foule,and bane not fet the bes


| ‘a mera Eoxetheprepes. * By tthou(D Lode God)
Biches avte fulbof compaffpon,and mercp, longe fuffe=


tpng ,plenteousingoodnes € truth. D turne
che then onto me and baue mercp ypon me:qeue
tby ftrength onto thp feruaunte, and helpe the
{one of tipne banbemapde. Shee fome to-
Ben bpd ine foz good, that thep bpch bate me,
mape fe tt:and be athamed,becaute thou Lozde
Dal helped me and comforted me,

CChbe.lrrrvit.Blalme.

FVNDAMENTIA EIVS,

# Plalme andfonge of the fon-
nes of Copal).


Nye €rfoundaciong are bpon theholp


uatt.that patteth brs trutt inthe.-


Solr.
tchearle. Bll mp freltbe fpynges Halbe in the.

be E Che, leer tit. faime. p

DOMINE DEVS SALVTIS:

A longe and falme of the fonned of Coza:

Co thechatiter vpon B)abelath, to reune tha

Ges:an infftuccpon of Beman the rabite. .
Pes 1920 Godofmp faluacion, F dane X
TIAN erpedDdape enpabt before the: Dp

| ROE j let Mp peaterentre into thy pzefëce,
bs NED) 4 encline thine eare bnto mp calling.
ered $02 mp foule ts full of trouble. g
mp lpfedzatoetbnpe bntopell. Yamcounted
as one of them that go dotone vntorhe pptte,¢
3 dauebeneeuenasa ma that bath no fFrégth.

SHreamonge the dead , phe ynto themtbat 25
be wounded g pein p graue, iobpch be out of re
membzaunce,g ate cut awap From thp bande:

Thou baft lapd ine in thplowek pytteina

lace of Darcknes andin the depe. bpncins
ignactonlpetbbarde bpon me, and thou hatte
bered me bpthall top formes. Selah. Thou
batt put awap mpne acquapntatice far fro me,
and made meto beabbozred of them: Jam fo
falte tn pzifon, ý ¥ cannot get fozth. p fight
fapleth foz verp trouble : Lorde ¥ bane railed
Daplp wpon the, g baue ftretcpedout mpnepan __
bes brito the. * Dofke thou thews Woubers a- pac Fe
monge thedead? D2 hall tbe deadepfe pas `
apne ãd paplether Dhal thy louing kind-
neffe be pewed in the grane, o? thy favtbfulnes
indefiruccpon: Shall thy wonderoug W022 it
Kes be knowen in the barke.awdthp vpabtcont
nes in the lande where all thpnges are O2fot=
ten! ntothebaue Fecrped D Lod, gearlpe
{hall mp pzaper come before the. Lorde, why
abbozref thou mp foulesap Hioektbou thy face
frome? Zam inmplerp,adlpke pneo bpm that
igat the popnte toape ( euen fronip pouth pp)
thp terrours baue 3 tuffred wyty a troublien
mpnde. Chp W2athful dilpleature coty ouer D
meand the feare of the bath pndotie me. Ciep
came tounde about me daplp lyke water, g cõ-
paficd me together on cuerpfpde. yp louers
and frendes ba thou put awape fro me, g bpo
mpneacquapntaunce out of mp fpabt,

@ Che. lerrir.ylalme, ‘
MISERICORDIAS DOMINT,

Anineuccpon of Ethan the €srabpte.
rare ws V * fonge thalbe altwap of plouinge eter
RINS Fa Bbpnduefie ofthe Lod, w mpmoutih Pa
KA SPwpll J cuer be hewpngetpy truce
J EPA V Erom one generacpon to another.
ee Sor FZ bane fapde : mercpe thalbe
fet vp fo cuer,thp trucththalt thon ftablpi in
tbebeaueng, * 3 bauemade acouenannte y 8-0-4
mpchofen. Bhaue deat nto Dautd mp fer .
uaunt. * Chy fede wpll ¥ fablyth for ence ad plan
lette bp thy thzone from one generacion toang
ther Selah. (D Loade/* the Derp braueng Plal.nrs
{al pzapfetbp wonderous Wwo:kes,g thy truth
in fhe congregacion of thefapntes, Jo: whe
is deamonge the clouded , at Halbe chpared Biin
Dnito the Los And xwhat ig he amonge [he ann...
Toddesthat (halbelpke onto the Lorde? God
18 Derpegreattye tobe fearcdin the gu a


ri
IT


Pial.


that thefapnetes,andtobebadinreueréce of al
thatareaboutpim, sD Lozde @odofhottes,
whoislpbe nto the! thy cructp(mook mpgy-
gro.rittiv CPE Ose Jia On gas 1s Sa x Thou rulett p
mat biii d cagpnae of the fee. Tp n ftpliette the wanes
therof,wbentbeparple. Chou hatte Mmbdued
Egypte ¢deftropedit, thou ff fcatred thpne
cnempes abzodewpth thp mpg btie arme. be
beanens are thpne,thecartha' foig thpne: thou
hatt lapde the fondacpon of the ronnde world
andal that therin ig. Chou bafk made p nott
anotbefouthb. Tabo: Harmon {bal reiople
in thy name, Thon ba -ampabtie arme,
ffronge is tbp bande, ¢ bpe is thy rpgbt bande.
Rpadtcoulnes ¢equptictst ebabptacton of
tbr ate,mercp g trueth tal gobefoze thp face
*Wielled ts the people D Lozd)thatca retople
inthe:they thalwwalbe in the lpgbt of thp coun
tenatice Thepz delite thalbe datip tn thy name,
andinthp rpabtcoutes tall they mabe thep2
boat. sto2thou art the glozy of thep? treqth,
andintbp lounge kpndnes theu Hhaltiptt yp

<fape.t.a. DUTHOZNCS. SrO? the* Lode is our defence.


zD Thebolp one of Acaclisourehipnge. Chou


focakeftfomtpme in vpfions ontothpfaintes, IA"


anbfapoett: J bauclapbde belpe Dpon one that

ismpabtpe. 3 baue exalted one chofen oute of

actesni.o thepeople. * J baue foñie Dauid mp feruatt

shag with mp holp oplebaue J annopnted pm. Hp

Esbe donde thal holde pim fafteandmpne arme (hal

firengthen btm: Theenemp fhallnot beable

to doo bpm bpolence,the onne of wpckednctic

fhallnot burtebym. J tall fmptedotone bis

foes before bys face, ¢ plage thé that bate bpm.

7 Sp trueth alloandmercp thalbe with bpm,

areni a andInmp name tall Hig poznebe cralted. x3

oA pll fette bps bompnton alto in thefee,andpis
rpabtbanveinetbefloudes. pe thal call me:

acte mp fatbeemp God emp fronge faluacio.

And F topllmake bym mp fpzfte vone, pper

thenp kynges of tbeearth. Shp mercp wpl 3

E kepe for him tog euermoze,¢ mp couenatit Wall

tand fat toptbbim. His fede alfo fopl ¥ make

toenoute Foz euer,and bis trone ag the Dapes of

Deucir. Sut pf pts chplozen fozfake mp laie ¥


bce Gn walkenotinmpiudaemetes. *Dithep breake

ee" mp fatutes € kepe tot mp commaundemettes.

+g wpli bplet thep2 offences pth the rod, &

thepe (prince pth fcourges. Feuertheletle,mp.

loupnge Bpndnes wpl Anot vtterlp take front

beno? iuffremp Cruces tapit. Pp coues

naunt wpll 3 not beeabe noz alter thetbpnge ý

| ig gone outofmplpppes. Abaueliozne once

its Mate bp mp bolpne a seed Y wopll not faple Danio

DNE His fede thalendure Foz cuer, andbpsteate ts

tp, iprii.a phe asthe funnebefozeme. ie thall Ü
a


TEF..


ande
ft foz enermozeas the moone, eas the fapth-
fullwptnesindeaucn, cla. Wut thou bate
abbozredand forfakenthpneanopntcd.¢ ave dt
{pleatedathbpm. hou hatte beoké the coue-
nauntof thp feruaunt.¢catte bis crotone to the
etree SOTD. * Thou batt ouerthzowen all bis bed
rer ges and boken done Dps sees
‘Alltbep thatgo by, fpople bpm: beis become


arcoube ontobigneighbours. Thoubaltiet


pps aduertarpestoretopte.


pp therpabt bande of bps enempes: g made all
Chou hat taken
awapethe edge of bps fowvcarbde:t geuelt bimno
pictozpe inthebattaple. Chou batt put oute
bys glozp.¢ call bps trone Downe to} groude.
Ehe dapes of bps youth bat thou oztened:
and couered bim Mopthdpfhonoure. Selay.
Lorde,hotoe longe wplt thou bpde thp Celf: fog
cucrig ball thp wath burnelpkefpze! Dre:
smembee,bowe oztemp time ig, wherfoze bak -
thou madeall men foz naught: * WAbat man Ses.ii.c
ishethatlpucthand pall not fedeath: adfpal
pe delpuer bps owne foule from the pade of bel:
Selah. Lode, Whereare thy olde loung Bind
neles, Cope thouftoozeft pnto Dauidin thp
truths iRemembze( Logde) the rebuke that
thp feruaiites baue,¢ bowe 3 do beare in mp bo
fome the rebukes of many people. Wiberwit)
thpneenempes baue blafppbemed the. ¢fclaun-
ver thefote epee oftbpneanopnted. Peap-
fed be the Lozdfoz euermoze. Amer Amen.
CTbe.rc.Blalme.
QQLHABITAT IN. |
_ ApraperofBotes the man of God.
(ee Drde,thou batt bene ourerefuge fr 4
te ap} one generacion onto another. Be
E RAS fore the monntapnes were bought
Py = *Forth,ozeuct the earth € the wozie
here made.thouart Godfromeucrlatpng and
wolde ee] thoutende. Thou tunete man to
deftrucepå. Agapne thou fap: comeagapne


chpldzenof men. * Fora thonfande pearegin tico: vie 2


thp (pabt are butagpelterdape,fepnge thatig “> f
tasa watcheint enpavee. Fe fone as p vf
catrett them,tbep areentas a fleape ,andfabe
atoapefondenlpelpke thegrafle. Jn temo?
npnge it is greneandgroweth vp, butin peue-
npnge itis cutte Dotene-ox( vepcd bp E Wp thereD xe B.
Sto es confumeatbay ix thpdplpleature,e e
are afrapde at thp tozatbfull indignacton: |
‘Shou bhatt fet oure mpfoedes before the, our
fecreeCpnnes in thelpabt of thp countenaunce.
f€o2 when thou arte angryp, all our Dapes ate
gone:toe baing our pearestoanende,as tt were
a tale p ig tolde. Che dapes of our age are thre
{cozepeares¢ ten: and though men be fo trge
that thep come to fourefcoze peares, pet is their
ftrength thé butlaboure ¢ fozotwe:fo foone pal
fethitatoare,¢ earegone. ut thoregar E
deth the power of thy weath.foz cuen theratter
agamanfateth,foistbydpipleature.  * D pra.rrrir a
tcache vg tonombze ourdapes, that we ma i
applpe our bertes vnto wpioome. Tourne t
agapne,( D Lozde)at thelaff, and be gractous
pntothpferuauntes.- Dfatilfle vs withthp
mercp and that foonc,fo thal we reiopfe and be
gladalthedapes of our lpfe. Comforte Ysa
gapne,nowe after the time that p Date plaged
ys and Foz the peares therein we baue tukred
aduerfptie. bewe thp feruaüteg thp twvozke,
and thep2 chplozen thy glozye. Audthp aglo-
rious matettie of the Lozde our Hod be Ypi vs:
protper thou the toozke of ourbandes pon Vg:
D pzofper thou oure handy wozie,
CThe. rei. Balme.


a,
i +


Qui


Plal LCL UCU, POUL LTE,


| -QVI HABITA. —

4 Ea Dolo Divelleth wnder the defëce of
TET s tbemott ppe all abpode ype
thadotve of thealmpahtic. J topl


a
a


i oes
| inbpm
from th


E inthenonedape. Atbouland tyallfall befyde
l tbe:and ten thoulanbe at thyrpabt bande, but


a eS BONVM EST CONFITERI.
CX plalme and fonge fo: the
abboth dape.
ee as TC iga good thpnae fo yene thakes


ELS pnto the Lo2d2,and tofpnge pzaifeg
bas (ay unto thpname, D moo brett. To


an tbougbtegare berp depe . An yniwife mã dot


€ when althe wozrkeg of wpckednes do Nozi,

then thal thepbe deftropedtogencr. Wutthou

_ Rozde arte the moolt byefkfoz cucrmoze. Fo?

lo, thine enempes, D Lozde,lothpneemics thal

perpt,and all the workers of wickcdnes Mal-

be defroped. Wut mp hone thalbe exalted, like

| the bo2ne of an Unprozne, foz J am anopnted

| wtb feetbe ople. Hpne epe alfo thal fe his lut

>i € of mpneenempes , gmpne care pall beare bys
| delpze of the opcked $ rple bpagapnil me.

Therpydteous bailor H lpbe a palme tree,

andihail{pzede abjoode lphea Cedzein Liba-


-o
á =


hus. uche as be plantéd inthe boute of the
Lozdthall Rope in the courtege cofcyeboure)
of our God : Thep thal allo bzpng forth moore
futein thep2 age, ¢ thalbe fat and wel lpkpng.
That thep map Helo, hotbe true the Lozde mp
firégthis, ¢ Pthere igno wnragbtcoutnes in bi,
€ The. rciit.falme,

DOMINYS REGNAVIT: _
on 26 pe LOIS Kyug, ão báthýutonglo s
PME. ; ai; spons appena : ne Loe bathe 4
pod Eye PUL on Dps japparell, and qp2ded pry priit;
Oe ) GE pm felf wpth fei th: * be bath pale
made proud World fo lure that it cannot be mo
ued. Cuerlénce the ozld beqane bath thpfeat
bene prepared thou arte fromeuctlattpnce .

«he floudes are rplen (D Lozde)tbe fou-
deg haue Ipit up thep2 nople the floudes litt pp
the waues. ‘Che wanes of thefee are mightie,
g rage hozriblp:but pet the Lo2zd powelleth on


_ bpe.is migdtier. Cbp teltimonies, D Lozdare


verp fure bolineg becOmetp thine boulefozcucr
@ The. rctiti.laline.

DEVS VLTIONVM, 7 = mr

aq] Lozde God* to whom vengeance dea.rrrit.o


frel a Y Y belongeth: thou God to whom ven Seret


E?


Gi » | Arpe thou tudee of the wolde, g


eth manknow- ONH?
Wleliedis the man, wha thou chafkenelke (D E


vntpll the ppt be dpaged bp pe the wugodlpe.
sth o2d topll not faple
ther topll befozlake bysenberttaunce. Cintpt
rpabtcoutnesturne gh ten vufoiudgemente.
Ufuch ag be true of perte pall folowe it.
Wibo wpllrpfe bp wpth meagaputl p wpe-
ked? £2 Who topll take mp part agapni the
euclldoers! Pfthe Lozbde badnot helpedme;


tt badnotfapled: but mp loule dad bene put to sr-treic 6


fcplence. *25ut whe: My cca fotebatyilpp pp FE
ped, thp mercpe( D Lordbelde me Yp.? JntHE Jobn, i-d
multitude of plozowes that Jhadin mp Herte, Picota
thy comfoztesbauerctretpedmpfoule. Wilt D
thou bauc anp thpnae to do w the (foole of wpe
kednes,wbpchpmaginethmifchefe as alates
Chep gather them together agapnite the
foule of (herepgbtcous , andcondmpnethe tts
nocent bloude. Wut the Lozdeig mp refuges
Pees


Wlal.rcb.ccbi,ccbit.ccbiti.cete


‘and mp God is the Erengtbe of mp confp -


Bence.  Methallrecompence them thep2 wye
Kednes € Deftrope them in thep2 otne malpee,
rope them,


pee the Lozd our God hall de
CThe.rcv.ptalme.
% VENITE EXVLTEMVS. —
2 eee Come,let vs ine DOE aie ~ Wet
f RA lps bertelpreiople inp frength of oure
A


i
H
Vie a


AfaluacpS. Let vscome before his pre
ane ferice pth thakeigeuing, ¢ heme our
felfe gladinbim wpth plalmes. jTozthe Lord
isagreat God, a great hinge aboue al Gods.
$n bis bande areallthe cozners of theearth,
and a Erengtbofthebpllesisbpsalto. Che
fee is bps and be madett,anb bis bandes prepa:
redileDzpelande. O come, let vs wo:rhpppe
and fall Downe,and knele before the Lorde, our
ox maker. 0? Deighe oure GOD: and the
25 are the people of bps paure, € the pepe of bps
Debztiib Handes. * Codape pipe topl Heare his vopce,
abid harden not poure hertes:asin the prouocacpon
and astn the Dapre of tentacponin p pldernes.
Che pour fathers téptcd me,p2oued me : and
favocinp toorkes. Stourfp yeateslonge thas
F greued w the generaci, g lapde: itiga people
js p odo cerre inthep2 bertes:fo2 thep Daue not kno
se ia, wen mp Wwapes. * Unto whom z3 lipeareinmp

| " wath tbat thep thuldenotentretnto mp reft,

@ Tbe.rcvi. Palme.


CANTATE DOMINO.


4 \(pnge unto the Lorde: all the whole
Sa dearth. Spnge vntothe Lorde, and
Cay Apeapte higname,be tellpng of bis fal
PACON : frõdapeto dape. Declare
bys honoure bnto p Heathen, and bps waders
Bra rive Hntoall people. * Sfo2 the Lozdis qreate can
orren, a NOt Wozthelp be prapled:be ig moze * to be fea-
| tedthenallgoddes. Ag foz all the qoddes of
the Heathen, thep be but Jdolg but itis p Lod
that made the heauens. Glozp € ozibyppe
yg are befoze bpm, OMe € Donourcare tn his tan:
ctuasp. Afcrpbe yntothe Lozde (D pekpn-
redes of the people) alcrpbhe ynto the 1020:1007
pral reire (hippe and pote. *Alcepbe vntothe Lorde,
the honoure duc onto bis name’, bringe peelen =
tes,andcometnto bis conectes. D wozribpppe
the Lozd in the bettie of polpnes.let the whole
earth fandein ate ofbim. ‘Tell tt out amige
the Deatben tbat the Logdig kpnge: and that
itishewopch Hath made the rounde wogldefo
. faite, thatit ca not be moued, and botectbat be
C mallinogetbepeoplerpabteouflp. Let pbea
ucngretople,andlet the earth be qlad:Ict the lee
make anople,andallthattherinig. Let the
. felbebetopfull andall that igin it:then thal all
tise trees of the woode retopfe befoze the 1020,
for be coineth:foz be cmeth to tude the earth:
and wpip rpgbteoulnes to tudge the wozlde,
andthe people Yopth bys tructh.

The. cco. Balme.

ae BeLordighing-thecartd
ad pmj #7¢ 28 ng:thecarth mapebe glad
eis. thereof: ce #multitude of thei Jles map
mmr E lad therof, Cloudeganddarckyeg


a BY,
‘par.rbi,c E p


z yung vito the Lode ancwefonge AWK


areround about a2 ca etudgemet
are thebabitactonofbisteate. Chere thal go

afpee before bim, g burne bys enempes ov eue=

tpfpoe. Hpslpghtenpnaes gaue pne vnto

tbe Wwo2ld,the earthlawe it:andwagatraped.* Imta -
‘Che bplles melted lpke are at the prelence of

the Logd,atthepzefenceoftheLord,of f whole —
carth. +The beaués paue declared bysepabte trsrira
oufnes,andall the people baue fene bps glozpe.

* Confounded be allthep that wozthippe car #%.rv.a
ued pmages,€ that Delite in bapne goddes:wo2 5
tbpppebpmallpeqoddes. Sponbearde of it,
anDretopled : and the Daughters of Juda were
glad, becaute of thy ivdgemétes D Lo2d. Foz
thou Lozd art bpertben all that are in pearth,
thou art eraltedfaraboucallgoddes. Dypet
loue the Lozde, fe that pebatethe thyna whic
igeuell,theLozbde peelerueth the foules of bys
Dapntes,be thal delpuce thé from the bande of
tiebngodlp. Chereis{pronge bpaliaht foz
the rpabteous, andiopfull qladntffe foz fache
asbetruecherted. * Metoplein the Lorde, pe riria
tpgbtcous : and geue thanekes foz a remem a
beaunce of bpe bolpnefe.

C The. rcviit.faline.
CANTATE DOMINO.
A falmer fo7 wauw.) Pe
x png puto theLozd a netoe lige y


oe ae
le a |
sero ges. Cipth his otonerpabte bade
A Vay A and witb bis bolp arme hath he got
AA) Cenbimn felf the victoep.: The Lod
declared bps laluacpon bis ryabteoufnes bath


Shee pane feluesiopfull vnto the Lozde at
ye landes,fpnae, reiopfe, and gene thankes. s


<pbe.b.0


and the people topth equptie.
Che xi. Aline ox(ofDauld) =
DOMINVS REGNAVIT. e
= pe Lorde is kpnge, be p peopleneuer
SNe BaP (> chanmevent pe h A pr wam the
AL a Cherubpne,be the earth neuce fo vn-
tae quycet., ‘Che Lorde ts great in id,
andbpeaboueal people, Thepthallgeue tha
kes buto thp name,wbichisgreat,tonderfull —
andbolpe. he kpnges power loucthmdge- |
mét p baf prepared equite, Phat executed iud- 1B
ement ¢rpabteautnesin Jacob, magne
etbe Lozde oure God, andfall Dotone befoze
bys foteftole,fozbeigbolpe. olegand Aa:
ron amonge bps preaffes ,and Samuel amoge
haa i


— sie ———


i foz be bathDoue merueplousthpne prrcvia,


Ilal.c.ci,ctt.ciit,


gz the Lord, ehebcardetbem. Helpake ynto thé
se Soutok tbe cloudp ppller. tor thep kept bis te f
ires iiia monpes,¢ the latve that be gaue tbem. Chon
beardeftthem(D Lozde our God) thou fozga-
ueit them, D God,and punpihedek thep2 owne
tnuencpons. <Dmagnpfic the 1023 our God,
and wortbpppe bpm upon bps poly bpll,foz the
Zozde oure God ts holpe.
CTbhe.€. Plalme,
IVBILATE DEO.
A pfalme foz thankefgeupnee. a 5
end * Be toptull in the Lo2de(all pe latides)
* ata an A ferue tbe Lorde wpth gladnefle: ¢ come
O BSA e bps pzelence witha fonge. Wepe
fure thatthe Lozdeheis God: Ft isbepbhath
måde bg and not toe our felucs,we are hys peo
ple,anbd the pepeof pis pafture. Dgopoure
Wwape into bps gates wptp Cpe ie i he €
into bps courtes pth peaple, be thanckful wn-
tobpm.and{peakegoodofbpsname. for p
Lo2d is qratious, «pis mercpis euetlafkinge, €
bis truct) endureth fro ynares gencracié.
C The.Ci.plalme.
MISERICORDIAM ET,
Aplalme of Dauid.
MS (aL *loge thalbe of mercp g indyemët:
A KA longo the( D Lozde)wpll 3 fpnge.

HRVA R D let me bane vnderfandpng inthe
UY) wape of godlpnes. Whe wyltethou
come vito me: F pl walke in mp boufe witha
erfect berte. J Mil takeno wpcked thpngein
banoe 9 batetbe fpnnes of bnfapthfulnes.ther
ipallno fuch cleaue pntome. J froward perte
sballbepacte frome, J pli not knoe a wpe-
og Kedpettonne. Who fo preuelp flaundereth bis
netghboure, bum wpl Joettrope. CAbofo bath
allo a proude loke g bpe tomacke, 3 tpl not
fuffiebpm. pne cpesloke vntofucheas be
e  faptbfullintbelãde, thatthep map divel wpth
me? Wibololeadeth a goodly lpfe, be thalbe mp
feruaunt. Chere hall no dpiceatfull perfonne
diwel in mp boufe:be i telletp Ipes, gal not ta=
tpinmyp {pgbt. 3 thal foone deftrop all the yn:
godly p are tn thelade,that J map roote out al

wpcked — <n the cptie of the Lode.


: CU, q åq me f
DOMINE EXAVD1L ORATIO.


pl.crbii.a


ofa.crina I Zim,


240244 me when Fral: D heare me, and $
trpabt foone


. one . Stozmpdapesareconfumeda: Aegle. The Loaderecuteth epabtcoulnelie ¢
wapelpbe fmoke,¢ howd arebzent op, as tudgemét,foz all them that are oppeeffed with
it verca fpze bzãde. Hp bert ismittedotone: wonge. He thetoed bys wapes nto Mofes,
and wptberedlpke gralle, fothat J forget to bps wozrkes wnto tije cbplozen of Jiracl. * THe cr. rrritita
cate mp bzead. z tbe Dopce of mp gronyng, 102d is full of copatlion g mercp,loge luffring: pr-Irrroie
mpboneg toplfcarte cleauctompficty. Jam andofgreateqoodnes. Hewpllnotaltwape IFD ~


ecomelpke a Pellicane of the wpldernes, and
pkeanowle tbat isin the defert. J baue wat:
ched, am euen as tt toere a {parotve , that ipt-
tetDalonebpontheboufetoppe, pneene-


Woal.rbii.
mypesteuple me al p bap longe: ¢ thep that ate 15
madde bpon me are fwozne together agaputte
me. woz J baue eaten ales agit were bread,
be ber trains ana’ CA e. Andp
becaule of thpne fap A t $tb2atb „Foz thou
baft take me vp,ecattme Downe. yp dapes
ave pone tbe a wavotve.¢ Fam tptbered phe
gralle. Wut thou( D Lozde)thalte endure foz
euer and thp remembzaunce thozowe out al ge
neracions. Gpoutbalt arpfeand pane mercp
ppon Sion, fozit is tyme p thou baue mercpe g
bponber,pethetpmeiscome. And whp:ethp tema.
feruauntes thpncke bpon ber ones, and it pp = 41-4
tieththemtoteberintbedutte. Che leathen
fhalifeare thp name D Lorde and âll the kpr-
ges ofthe earthtbp mapeftie. Wibenp Lorde
pal buploe bp Sion, and whé bis glozp thal ap
peare. CAben be turneth bym yntop praper of
the pooze deftitute,¢ delppleth not their defire.
This Halbe weptten foz thole that comeafs
ter:* and the people whiche Halbe bone, pall Perris
raple the Logd. sine il lokeddowne fro
ig Sanctuarp, out ofthe Deauen dpd p Lorde
bebotde p earth. Chat be mpght beare p mour-
ninges of fuch as bein captiuttpe,anddelpuer f
chplozé appointed bnto death. Chatthep map
declare thename of p Lozdin Sion,ebps wo2-
thpp at Jerulalé:Wi bë f peopleare qathered to
ether g the kpngdomg alfotolernethe Lord.
ebzougbt Downe mp ftrengthin mpiournep,
€ (hoztencd mp dapes. But F faid, D mp Goo: D
take menot awap tn the mpoddeft of mpneage,
as foz thy peares, thep endure thozoweoute all
qeneracions. * Chou Logd, in the begpnupng sinis
batt lapdethe foundacton of p eartbe, ¢ the bea- eemo
uengare p thozke of thp bandeg. They thal pe-
tpp, but thou Maltendure: thep allthail ware
oldeasdotha garment €asa veture thalte p
pal them,¢tbep Halbe chaunged. Buty
arte the fame,¢ thp peares thall not faple. Cpe
c a oie p feruauntes (pall continue, ano
their fede hall ftande fat inthpfpgbte.
. Cbe.cttt.p


BENEDIC ANIMA MEA.
ices et ae
Se ee * Raplethe Lorde, D mp foule, g -
CNY all that is foptbin me pzapfe bys EAE


ri
;
|


d bealetball topne infympties.
cfrom deftruccpon,t


pd ha bi bis owne chpldzen,eut lots
€ ci


a


parifon of the earth,fogreatis bys mercy alfo
totvardetbempfearebtun. Loke howe pode
alfo the Gaff ig from the wet, fo farce hath be
fet ourefpnnesfrombs. Pec lpke si 7 pai

ulontotbethatbearehim. or peknotweth


BC.IFFb4> Syherof twe be made, * peremtbzeth that we are


but dut. Che dates of man are but as gralle,
foz be forpibetpasa flourcofthefeld. foras
{oone as) wpne goth ouerit, itige gone,¢ the
placetperof Il Snotwe tt nomoze. Wut pmer
cpfull goodneffe ofthe Lazdendureth foeter g
ener, vpon thé that feare pim, ¢bpstpgbtcout=
nes bponchyldzeschplozen. Euen vpon luch
as kepe bps conenaunt, and tppnke bpon pis co
maundementegtodothem. be Lode bath
prepared bps feateinpeanen, ¢ bys kpngoome
quletbouerall. D pork the 102d pe Angels
of big pe percellin frength:pe that fulfpll pps
commaunbemente, g perken nto the nopee oF
bpsibozgdes. D praple the Lozdall pebisho-
fics, pe (eruatites of bys.p do bys pleafure. D
[peake good of the Lozdeall pe wozkes of bps,
inall places of bys dominpon : prapte thou the
Love, D mpfoule.
The. ctitt, Palme. ox (ef Dauit.)
BENEDIC ANIMA


as
a FG hee $1020 Dmp foule: D Lod
mp


aa ADN
fal, ia FH ra


Drd. ic


gta.coier Dpltes.


JA od, thou arte become ercea =
S IS<) opnge glorpeus, thou arte clothed w
C Pen aiettpe andponoure. ‘Chou dec:
kell chy felfwopth lpabt.ag tt were yrp a gar
ment and {pzedeft out the beauens lp&e a cur:
tayne. eibpcbelapeth thebeames of bps cha
bers inthe waters,and maketh thecloudes His
caret and Walketh wp the inges of p hind.
+ He maketh bys angels fpzeteg and bps mi
apfkersaflampngefpze. Helapdethetounda
cpon of theearth, that ttnener Mulbde moueat
anuptpme. Thou couerdette tt wprb the depe
Ipke ag tpt) a garment-the waters fandein $
xt thy rebuke thep Ape, at the vopee


18 of chy thondertpepareafrapde. Tep go vp


roie poputedfo? them. *
Pertin boundeg , wppehe thep


LIAR:


Enid


as bye as the bplles,anddotone tothe vallepes
beneth:enen nto the )
on balt (et them thep?
il not palie: nepther
curneagapnetoconctthecarth, we lendeth p
fpmpnacs intotherpuers,w sia runne amoge
be bplies. All beattes of ptelde d:pnke there
of and the toploe alles quenche thep2 thpzfe.
wSelpbe them (hall the foules of the apze Daue
babttacton,¢ eng amonge the bzanncheg. He
wateretbebebplles from aboue,.the earth is til
led wpth the frute of thp wozkes. He ly
fo2th graffe foz the catell,and grene perbe foz
ferutce of men that be map* beinge foode ont of
thecarfth:¢ wpne that maketp glad
man andople tomakebpm a cheareful counte:
naunce,¢ beeade toftrength mansbatt. The
trecs of the Lozd alfo are full of fappe,cuen the
Cepres ot Libanus which he bath planted .
Wibereitthe bpzdes makectheps netes, and
the fpare trecs are a Dwellpnge fo? the Mocke.
Thr pe plies area refuge fo: f tople goaa


Pial


lace,whichbthou batap |


iy perte of,


cift
tes. fo are the onp rockeg forthe pei De
appopnted the Soone fozcertapne featons ad
the Suune bnoweth his gopng towne. Chou €
makeft Darcknefle,that it map benpabt, weer
in all the beaftes of the fozeftedo mone. Che
Lyons roarpnge after their prape tofeke thepa
meateatGod. ‘TChelunnearpleth, andthep
get them atvape together, andlape thé Downe
ini their dénes.* Man goeth forth to bis wobe, genig.»
andtobypslaboure bntplltpecuenynge. * D xpe rete
Lod, bowe manpfolde are thp ozkessin tbii-
dome paft thou made them all: thecarthis full
oftbprpches. $o ts the greatand wypdelee
alfo, whetinare thinges crepyng innumerable,
botbfmall and great bealkes. ‘Chere gof pip wp 7
pes,andtbercisthat: * Leutatban, whome <ta.rrvite
thou bat made.to take bys paftpmetberein. Ayer,

t+ Thep toapte all pon the,that thou map: tpta.cpis e
eff geue them meat indue fealfon. Wipenthen
geuett ittbem.thep qatberit-and when thou os
penet thpne bande, dep are fplled wyth rood:

‘WMbé thou eee thy Face.thep are troubled
whe thou takeft ateape thep2 breath, thep dpe:
andare turned agapne to their dute. Wiben
thon lettett thp breathe gofozthe .theppalve
made:and thou halt renue the face of f earth.

The glozpous mateifpe of the Lorde palen-
dure foz euer,the Lozd (hall rctopfe tnhps wo-
hes. Whecartbhe thall tremble atthe looke of
bpm: pf beds but touche the bplles , they Malt
fmoke. 3wpll{pnge vnto the Lozde ag longe
as 9 lpue. J Wpl praple mp Godwhple F paue
mpbepnge . Andio thall mp wozodes pleate
bypm:mptope balbe inthe Lozde. Asfoz ipn
ners, thep Dalbe confumed out of theearthand
the Dngodlp Wal come toan endexpzaple thou #tat.clta
the Lod. D mp foule. Pzapfe tie Lorde.

€ The.cv. wialine.
2m(zaple the Lozo) ge °
CONFITEMINI DOMINO, °°


W fee ree DD
a Brey a D let pour fonges beof ppmn:ad
PA eae 4 GO papie Dim andletpourtalking
bo ution VE Of Al bis Hhonderous orkes.
Retople ndis bolp name, let the perte of thert
retopiethatfeketheLogd. eke f L020, ¢ bis
firength:feke pis faceeucttoze. Remembre
the maruclous toorkes that be bath done, bps
fhonders ¢ the tudgementes of bys mouthe.
D peleed of Abraham bis feruaunt, pe chplo2é
of Jacobbischole. Be tg the Lord our Goad, bis
iudgemétesarcinalpwe2d. He bath beneals
wap mpnodefull of bis couenaunte g promifle,p
be made to a thouland generacpons. ENE the wenrore
coucnatt thatbe made with Bbpapa,and * the soe reves
cothe that be loze unto Flabac. * Andap- +se.rrped
pointed the fame nto Jacob foza lawe andto * :
Frael fozancuerlakpna teftament. Haping: af
puto f wpl FJ qeue the lade of Canaan, p lot of
pourcenberptaice, @Wibenthere was pet bub 5
afetbe of them, and thep fraungers in the lade.

Ulibat tpmeasthep went from onenactonta
anotber,frd one Bpnagdome to weed i

* Be


VIAL.


sario He fulfredD no man todo therm wyonage, but


| MOTT vonroucdceuéhinges fo: theirfakes. Couche


not mpne anopnted , and do mp prophetes no
harme. Q)ozeouer,becalledfoz a darth ppon'p
lande,anv Ocftroped al the peoupfpon of bzead.

* ®Buthe had lent a man before them,eué Fo
feph, wbpch thas lolde to be abonde feruaunt.

Ui bolefete thep hurte in the ockes, * the
pronentred into bps loule. intpll thetpme
came that big caule was knowen; the wode of


toea,rib.b


Lake, ii, d


© Said the Lopdtrpedhpin. * Che kpney fent anddeli


re. ai at ae Lo2dalfo of ns boufe, and


rob, F ù


Sarre. and caterppllers innumerable. Anddpdeate


ter.ri.b P Ep?
.  boanetrtbeirlande, euen the chefe ofall thep2
piit rang - e bzougbt thé forth alfo wlpluer


CTbe.cvt.pfaline ,


CONFINEMINI DOMINO.
- . Bzaple the Logde.


tiated P (Gon GY iS qtacpous : g bps mercy endureth
Piona Ka ‘fozener. Wihocanerpaefle p noble
Ser actes of p Lorde, 02 bewe fozthall
Eta piia Dpspeaple: Blend arethep that


altbape kepe (udgeinenteborpabteouties,
: Remebee me, D Logd,accordpneg top favour
that thou beare bntotbp people: D, bpiet
me wyth thp faluacion. That 3 mape fep fe-
licitpe of thy chofen,andretopfein the gladneg
of thp people,¢ geuethankes With thpne enbert
faunce. le Daue fpnned with ourtathers,we
Daue done amilfe,and dealte wpckedlp. Dure —
fathers regarded not thp wonders in Egypte, 25
nepthet kepte thep thp greate qoodtiefic in re-
nlembzaunce:but were bplobedpent at the fee,
cuenattberebdbdelec. Meuertheletle, hebelpen
thefoz bis names fake, tbat be might make bis
por fobeknowbe. *Perebuked p red fee al- ptal.ctiti.a
0,€ it was Dzped vp:fo be ledde them thozowe
the Depe,asthozoea wpldernes. And be fa-
ued the fro the aducrfarpes bande, g delpuercd
thé from the bade of the enemp. + As fo2 thole teratitis
that troubled the, p waters ouer whelincd thé,
there thas not one oftbem left. *@hen beleucd tere. ros
og bps wozdegand tange praple puto bpm.
Wut within a wbple thep fogat bis wozkeg:
and wolde not abpdebpgcounfaple. WButluft È
came Dponthétn the wploernele and thep tem
pted Codin the delert. And he gaue them their
defpze andlentleaneffe withal into tbeir foule.

Thep angred B)ofes alfo in thetentes,e Za F
ron tbe fapnte ofthe Lozde. * Hote earthe auttte
opened andfiwalowed vp Datha, andcoucred
the congregacpon of oiram. And the fpre
teas Bpndledin thepz company , the flame b2et
bp the vngodlp.* Thep made a calfe in Horeb, Er Freri
and Wwozpppped the moltenpmage. * Thus ironie
thep turned their glozpe into p(pmplitude ofa
calfe, that eatethbbape. Andthepforgat Gon
thep2 Sauyour, whpch baddone fo qreatthpn
gesin Egipt. Wondcrouswozkes inthe lave
of Ham and fearfull thpuges bp tke ved fee.

Ho bhelapde:he wolde Haue deftroped them,
Hadnot Boles bpschoten tande beforzebpmin
that gappe :toturne atvapebps tworathfulline a
dignacton, let he Houlde defkrope thé. «Pea, au.rttiia
thep thought fcozne of the plealaunt lande: ad
gaue nocredence Ontobps tobe. wut mur:
miured tit (hep tentes, berbened not wnto the
pope ofthe Loz). Chenlpfte be vpbis hive
agaputte them to ouerthzowe them in the tpl-
bernefle. Cocafte out theirleedamonge the
nacpong andto {cattre them in the landes.
* Thep topned them felues nto Waal De-
0? :andeatetheoffrpnaesofthedead. Thug Aui. rrda
thep pouoked bpm wnto angre topth thepz Joret
owne inuenciong , and the plage wasgreatea- ge’
monge them. * Chen ode vp Dbinebes Fu rro.
and praped:andlotbeplage ceaffed. Andthat
thas counted vnto bpm for rpahteoutnefie, a -=
mongeall pofterptics fozeucrmoze. *Thep errosa `
angred bpm alfo at the waters of ftrpfe,fo that aum-r,0'
be punpihed Holesfo2 thep2 fakes. . We-
caufe thep prouoked bps {ppapte , fo that be
{pake bnadurlelp pth bistippes. Pepther
Deffroped they the Heathen, * asthe Lowwdcom: bared
maundedtbhem. Wnt werempngledamonge Funia
the Heathen , and learned thepz workes .
3n fo moche that thep r i thepe
G@ i pools


Pial bibi `


-  poolg,whpcheturntd tothep2 oone decape.
beuFrrit.c x Dea thep ofred their fines € their daughters
iire pru Dntodeuplg. +Andpedtnnocent bloude, euë
£ e pri.» HOC BLOND oftheir fonnes ad of their Daughters:
Jr aie WOO hep ofred wnto the pools of Canaan,and
Ferlin che lade was defplepwith bloud. Chuswere
Cite they ftapned with their owne wozkes:4 went a

whosPnge wpthtbepz owne inuencios. Ther:
fore was the tozath of p Lozd kpndled againtt
bps people:infomoch, pheabbozred bps owne
© enberitaunce. And pe gaue them ouer intop
hand of tbe Weathen, andthep that hated them
Were lozdes ouer them. Their encmics oppeet
feothé, ebadthein{ubtectpo. *anpa tyme
dpd be delpuer them, but thep rebelled agapnt
bpm wpth their otone tnuectos,¢ were ought
dorone in their opchednefle. Meuertheletle,
toben be fate their aduerfptpe, be perde they?
Deu.rrr.a coplapnt. Hethought vps his couenalit,e*pp
tied thë according wnto p multitude of bis mer
cpeg. Pea,bemadeal thole that bad ledthem
atbapcaptine,topptpetbem. Deliner ws sD
- Wozde our God)and gather vs from am onge p
Ieathen: that we map geue thankes to rbp Qs

lp name and make oure booff of thy paple.


uke. t.g ae Wlefledbe the Lozde Gov of ¥Flracl from
evuerlaftpnge and toozlde wpthout ende,andlet
allpeoplelape Amen: Ame. Pzaple f Lor.

€ The.cvit. falme.

CON FITEMINI DOMINO.

y ey Geur thankes bnto the Lorde, fo?
ina oi oll OSFA T beps gracpoug : andbpsmercp endu-
Piacoa AGRE Aitethfozeuer. Letthemgpue thankes
goha ka ppom the Logdbatbredemed and de=


aori. e puered fromthe bade of theenempe. Andga:
rari a. Cheredthe out ofthe landes, feo theeafk, efrom
the wet from thenoztband from the foutd.

Thep went atrape in the toploernetfe out of f

wap, efoundenocptictodivellin. Hungry €

thpzitpe:theirfoulefapntedinthé?. So thep

crped vito the Lordin their troubleand be de=

Ipuered them from their ditrelle. Pe led them

forth by therpabt wap,that thep mpabt goto

15 the cptte,tobere thep Dwelt.Dtbat men wolde

therfoze praple the Lozd,fo2 bts qoodnes: ¢ de:

clare fhe wonders $ pe doth fot the chplozen of

ero.rbia. men, * E0: Delatiftped the emptiefoule, ¢fpl-

Deu. vitt,s led the hungerp foule pth qoodnefle. Suchas

{pt in Darchnes ¢ tn the Hadow ofdeath,being

faft boiide in miferp €p2on . Wecaule thepre-

belledagapnit the w ozdes of the L020, ¢ lpabt

lyeregaroded thecounlapll of f mok bpet. He

alfo bought Dotonetbetr Dert thozowebeup-

nefle:tpep fel Dotone, ¢ there has none fo belpe

them. 0 thé thep crped onto p Lordin their
trouble,be Delpucred thé out of their dpftreffe.

Corde bzougbt thé out of Darknefic, ¢ oute of

the tbadotwe of death, adbzake thep2 bondes in

ge fondze. D $ men woldetperfoze papie the

Lozd fos bis goonnefle : æ Declare p wonders ý

- pe doth forthe chplozé of men. oz de bathb20

hE thegates of bafic,and{imptten the barres of

proninfodze. Holp men are plaged foz their

offence becante of thetr wyckednefic. Their

fonleabbozred all maner of meate: ¢tbep were


euenbarbdeatbeathesdoze. Spowhbe thepcrp

ed nto the Lord their trouble he delpuered .
théout oftheirdpttreiie. * Pe lent his worde. mtd. dita
æ bealed the and they were faued from their dez
firuccpon. D that më olde therfore praple
the L020 fo2 his qoodnefle: and declare the wi-
ders that be dothefo2 the chpldzen of men.

* Chat thep waldofre onto him the facrifice Bed. rii.»
of thankefgeupnge:and tell out bis workes w sort
gladnefle. hep that qo dotone to the fee in wom.rti.6
thpppes, andoccuppe their bulpneffe in greate P?
Iaters . heiemen fe the wozkes of the
Lozd,and bys wonders in the depe .*« Pozat 2°"?
bys thozbde the tomp wpndearpleth, whpcp lie
teth vp they wanes therof. Thep are carped vp
tothe beaué,¢ Downe agapne to the depe, their
foulemelteth awape becaute of the trouble,

‘hep cele toand fro and flacherlpke adzonké
mat-and ate at their wpetesende. So when
thep crpe onto P Lozde in ebep2 trouble, be delt
ueretbtþem out of their dpitretie. Foz he ma matti. s
beth the torme toceafle,fotbat the wanes ther
of ave tpl. Tht arethep glad. becaute thep be


| atrelt:and lobe bepngeth them vnto the beané


where thep wolde be. D that men wolde thers
fozepzaple the oiha goodneNle:and de:
clare the wonders p be doth fo: the chplozenof
men. Thatthep wolde eralte bim alfo inthe
congregacion of the people: andloue bim inthe
Ceateoftheclderg. *Wipichturnedtheffoudes iirersis -
intoa twpldernele:¢dzpeth op the waterfpzin D
ges. Afrutefulllande maketh be barren : For
the topchednefle of themtbat dwel therin. M-
gapne,bemateth the toilderneffe a fading wa
ter and ore Be Ne ofadzpe grounde.

and there be tecteth the bungrp that he map
bupldcthtacptictodwellin. Chat thep map
fowe thep2lande,¢ plant bpnepardes, to pelde
themfrutesofencreate. eblefferb thé, fo f a
thep multiplpe erceadinglp:e fuffreth sot tocte
cattellfobecreale. Andagapne, tohen thep
are minpthed and beoughte lowe thorowe op-
prefltd,thozowmeany plage o? trouble. Choug
be nire the to be uel entreated thozowe tira
tes æ let thé wandze out of the hap in f wyldec
nefe. vient tem be the pooze out of inplecye.
and maketh Dpm boulholdes Ipke a flocke of
pepe. Thetpabtcous wpll confpoze thys,e
retopfe:and the mouth of all typchedneffe pal-
be flopped. Wiboto ts wpie , wpil pondze
thete thynges: and thep pall vnderitande the
loupnge kpndnefies of the Lode.

@ Che.cviit. pilalme.
PARATVM COR MEYM,
A fonge and Palme of Danid.


| , S J athe befte gumbe that J baue .
l g utead ba tpe, Ej inp


ueng:andthp glozp aboue all the earth. That
thp beloued map be Delpusrend: let


tbp rigbt ook
PtaLir.b fauethbe:andbearethboume. * God bath ipo-


ken in bpsbolpnefie: J wpli retople the tote +€
deude Sichem:and mete out the valur, rå a
ning:


qotal.ie.h. coth. +Gitleadis mpne,and Mana fieg


15


T veredat the pert.


€pbhaim allo isthe frength of mp beed: Juda
ig mp latwegeucr, 4Hoab ts mp walhpot, ouer
Edom topll J cak out mp thor: vpon Ppiliftia
Myll Jtriumphe. Wibo topl leade me into the
ftrongecptte £ Andiwbo pli bzpnge me into
Edom” Halk not thoufozfaken vs ( D Cod! )

And toplt not thou God, goo forth with oure
botes? D helpe vs agapatte the pnempe :fo2
hapneistbehelpeofman. Chozotoe Sod we
Wal! do great actes: and it tg be, $ hal treade
Downe ollre cnempes .

@ The.civ. falme.

DEVS LAVDEM MEAM.
Tothechauntera Plalmeof Danis.
“= a Dlbenot thp tonge (O God) of mp
Ml veaple. Sfoz Pmouth of f vngoblye:
Ni pea, ethemouth oo Gate be il r
2 ned Dpo me: thep Daue (pokéagailt


a


fromtbeearth. Andthat becau pis mipnde
twas not todo good: but perfecuted p pooze bel
peleffe man, tpat be wai flape bymthat was
3 Delpte wag in curlpna,

andit pall bappen nto S erone not blef
fpnge: hm pall itbe tarrefrombpm. Hr
clothed bpm ielf with curfpny lpie as wpth a
rapyment:and it (bal come tnto bis bowels lpke
water,adlpkeopleintobps bones. Letit be
writo bym asthe cloke that be bath vpon pim: ¢
as the qp2dletbat be ts altoap gpzdcd Wwpthal.
Let it thus happen fromthe Lode, wnto
mpne enempes, and to thole that fpeake cupll
aopn mp foule. Mutdeale thou topth me
(D L07d God) accowmpnge onto thp name, foz
fueteistbpmercp. D delpucy me, for J am


Seo ty.


belpleffe ¢ poode,< nip biert is woinded wpthin
me. Jaod hence lye the adowe that oepar-
teth,andam Ogpuen alvap as the gretbopper .
£P knees are weake Hhozow faltpng, inp fcH
isdzped vpfoz wateoffatnefle. “Abecameal- D
fo a rebuke unto thent: * thep thatloked bpon Pral.rgtt
ime,fhaked their beedes. Belpe me(D Lorde
mp God) Ob lave me accopdpng to thp nercp.
Anbthep Hall kuowe howe that thpsisthp
band. thattbou Lozbbatdoneit. ‘Chough
thep cu re bleie thou:¢ let them be confou-
bed that rple bp again me:butlet thp feruañt
teiople. Letmpue abduerlarpes be clothed w
fpame:ãd let them couer them felues with theter
owne contulpon,astpthacloke. Asfozme,
J topll geue great thankes vntop Lorde wptb
mp moutb,and mane bpm amóse ý multitude
* £02 be thal Fade at the righthand of f pooze, pra.rit b
to faue bis foule from wnrpabteous wodges.
€ The,cr.laline.
A plaline of Daud.
DixlT DOMINVS DOMIN
n pe Lopdelapd wntoimp Lorde: *tpt F
ETA EAG thou onmp right bade, butyl J make mye ye e
Apa thpneencmpes thpfooteltole. The paaa
be SA Lode (hail fende therod of thppo- Brdzie
ter out of Spon:betpou ruler cuen in the mid.” EF»
Deftamongetbpne enempes. Fn the dape of
thp power thal the people offre the frewplofice
tpnges withan polp woztpp, the dewwe of thy
bpztbe is of the wombe of the moznpnge.
x The Lozde(warcand topll not repente: Bibbie
+ Thouart apreell foz ence, after the 02d2e OF rye; iig 6
Pelchilevec. Che Lode wpon typ rpgote vte
banoe, Wall wounde cuen Bpuges in the Day of 25
bps wath. Helhalbeiudge amonce the Hea
then, be pall fpil the places pth dead bodpes:
and (mptealondee the beabes ouce dpuers coi-
tepes. efhaldapnbe of the brooke mp wapa
therfore thall be lptt bp bps bead.
draple the Lorde.
Che.cri.Plalme. -
CONFITEBOR TIBI DOMINE.
Sn mag pll qencthakes bntothe Lordi x
Sei hws pth mp bole bert,fecretlpe amonge pi. crepie
Peni wey thefaptbfull: andintbe congregact: 4


cinnpng of tepldome:a good vnderitandpage Poe
ets ie ieee i hang tt


Piah riirii, rD.


pane allthep that do therafter: the praple of tt
endureth fo2 ener.cuPzarle the Lorde fo; the returneng
c4 agapneof Aaggrus and zachary the Pzophetes, )
k Praple the Lod.
€ The.crit.Pialme,


umeawap:p Delpze of
f Agaa the Logde. '


LAVDATE PVERI.


EFEO a X Sx]


uA
=E


yg glory aboue the beauens. Uipoislpke ito f |


negii areinbeautgearth? * He taketh pp pfpmple


the princes of bps pod sgh


ther of chplozen.: | ,
pene zaple pe the Lozve.
C The.critit. plalme.


IN EXITV ISRAEL.


ay (= Sen Ffrael came out of Eappt,and
: 4 A O Warp ate oF Jacob frome amonge p
eron. it. a hea ZA iraunge people. * Juda hashps


VAY Vas Sanctuarp.€ Jlrael his dominto.
ter. riiti.e VeV X Che feefawethat and fled: * Foz
¥ 595.040 Dan MasDepue backe. The mountapnes {cpp=
pedi phe rames:and thelytle bplles pke ponge
epe. Wibatapleth the, D thou fee,that thou
fleddeft-¢ thou Jozda that P walt depue back:

— Pemoñtapnes that petkhippedlpke rammes:
andpelptle Pit piled dad fa fhepes Treble
thouearth at the pzefence of the Lozd: at p pze-
fence of the God of Jacob. *Wbpeh turned p
ate tockeintoa ii Y water, the fipnet
tone intoalpringpnge Well. :


ro.rbhb
SAUTE D


@ Che.cry. Plalme.


NON NOBIS DOMINE


tek ie,
our God


p |
inthe Lopd:hetsthep2 belper defender. Che
Lo2zd bathbenmpndfulof bs, g pe all bleie T -


Pzapfe the Lozde.
C' Cpe.crvi.plalme.
| DLLEZI QVONLAM.
Pe ea am Well pleated that the Lozd bath herd q
sv. the vopcesfmppraper. Chat he bath
= enclpned bps eare buto me, thetfo2e toil P
Acall vponbimas ligeas Jlpue. *Ehefna: Prapo'tia
tes of Death copafied me rounde about, andthe ETF-a
papnes of bel gat bolde bpon me: J Wall fynde
trouble and beupneffe:and J thall call bpon the
name of the Lo2d( D Lode) F beleche the delt-
uetmpfoule. Gracious isthe Lozd,andrigh: 5
teous:pea,oure Oodismercpfull. Che Lozde
EA the fimple: 7 thas inmiferpe, and be
elpcbine. Curneagapnetben ontothp ret,
D mp foule:foz the Lozde bathrewardes the.
nd wbpr * thou palt deltuered mp foule Ftd prar, v.b
death , mpne epesfromteares and mp fete frd
fallpnge. ¥Jtopll halkebefozethe Lozde inp
lande ofthelpupnge. * F belened, therfore teori.:
tpl Flpeake, but 3 was fore troubled: FJ lapde S
inmp dafe:* Alméarelpers. Wibatrewarde tolls
Hall J gene bntothe Lozdc, for all the benefp=
festhat be path Done bnto me! F topll res
cepue the cuppe offaluacpon,andcall bpon the
name of the Lode. Fiopllpapemp volves
note in the prefence of allbps people, rpgbte
Deare in the typahte ofthe Lorde, ig the deathe
of bps fapntes. Webolde ( D Lorde) howe
that Jam chp Ceruaunte : Jam thp feruaunte, D
and the fonne of thp handmapde, thou batt bzo:
kenmpbondes infonde. J fopll offre tothe
facrifpee


Eal]


ee
=" : a SSSSSSSem™m


i iż Gites iit.t ner,


ALALLE DLE UUL Uh


the facrifpce oftbankefgeupnge, and twpll call
prerii e Moonthename ofthe Lo20. * Y wplpape mp
BOF © yowes onto the Lozde, in thefpgbte of all bps
people:in the courtes of the Lordes boufe enë in
the mpodoelt of the, D Jerulale.Pzaile p Loz.
The, crvit.plalme.
LAVDATE DOMINVM


Be Y Gea \ praplehpmall pe nacpons. +o? bis
nents A BROS Amercpeull bpndnefle (8 euer moze and
4s) moze totoarde be, and the truth of the
ozdeendurethfozeucr. wWeaplethe Lozde.
eC he.crotit. falme.
CONFITEMINI DOMINO.


x Gpue thikes onto the Lorde, foz
pta.co-8 omy be is gracious : becaufe bys mercpe
ima tate N pasa | endureth foz euer. Let slcael nowe
Elsti a (2) Sy) A cOFefleew(s beis gracious, eP Dis mercp


parotid EALE endurethfozeuer. Let the boule of

* Baronnowe confefie, that bys mercp endureth

fozeucr: Pea,let thenowethatfeare p Lode,

confeffe that bys mercp endureth foz euer. F

called bpon the Lozdin trouble, andthe Lorde

briti. b DerdDemeat large. * Che Lozdis onmplpde,
” 95 a not feare bat man docth vntome .

tt faketh mp parte pth them p helpe


me:therfoze pall F fe mp delpze Yp mpne ene-


mpegs. Btisbettertotrul inthe Lod, thento


putanpconfidenceinman. Jtisbettertotrul
in the Lobe, thento put anp confidence in pain:
ces. Alnactonscompafled me rounde about,
butinthename ofthe Lozde wpl J deftrop thë.
Thep kept me tn on cuerp Cpde: thep kept mp
in ($flape)on euerp pdt: but tn the name of the
Lozd, J wplodeltrope thé. They came aboute
nielpke bees:and are ertpncte, euen as the fpe
amonge the toneg: fo2 in thename of p Lozde
€ ‘Jwylldefkropetbem. Chou bat thzulk foze
at me,that J mpabt fall:but the 1020 bas mp


 gfon.ro.a Delpe. * Che Lozdeis mp ftrength ¢ my loge


fara andigsbecomempflaluacid. he vopce oftop
and bealtbisin the Dwellpnges of the rygbte -=
ous:tbhe right bande of the Lozo bzingeth migh
typetbpngestopafie. Cherpabtebadc of the
Lod bath the preeminence, the rpght bande of
the Lo2de bzpngeth myahtpe thpnages to pale
FJ wpll notodpe:butlpueand declare p ozbes
ofthe Lode. Che Lozdpathchafiened g coz=
recte me, buthe bath notgpuen me ouer bnto
Death. Dpenmethe gates ofrpghtcoutnelle,
that Jmap qointotbem,and gpue thankes bn
totbeLozbe. Chysisthegate ofthe Lorde p
tpabteous pall centre intoit. Ftopli thanke

the,foz thou balt bearde me:and art become m

matric faluacpon. * he fame tone wbych the bur


makpi Derg refuled ig becometbe heed Mone inthe coz«


ke. rre


D maruaplousinourepes. This ig poapwhich
the Lozdedath mave:we ah téfople gbe glad
init. Helpececme)nowe, D Lorde, Œ Lore,

math.rric fend bs nowe prolperitpe. * WieMedbede

BAMF commeth inthe name of the Lorde, we baue wil

warkri.b (Ded pou good lucke,pe that be of the boule of p
Lode. Godig the Lorde, whpch hath Hew:
ed vs lpabte-bpnde the faccptpce wpthcozdes :


Chps has the 5. Ee ts goat itis


= * 2aple the Lozde all pe Deathen,


————


GE
he
ha a at
Ls


2


-ae a Ic e


O O lS T ee i, abet CONE tn: titi i ———_ a


ma Vfal.cri¢.


| ofthp ffatutes:and 3 thall Bepe tt onto p nde,
| Gpueme onderlandpnge , and J thall kepe
thp latwe:pea, J thal kepeit w mp whole berte.
| Wake meto gooin the i pa an
| mentes: fortberinismpdelpze. Cnelpne mp
| bert bnito thpteftimontes,¢ uot to couctoutnes
Dturneawape mpne epes, lete thep bebolde
panitpe:andquyckcnthou me imthp wap. ~
g tablpthp wode tn typ feruaunt,thati map
| fearethe. Takcawap the rebuke that Jam
| afraped of, foz thp iubgementes are goon. Be
Holde,mp delpte ts in thp commmaundemenites .
D quické me in thp rygbteoulnele. Letthp
lonpng mercp come alfo vito me, D Logd:cuë
| thy CaluacponaccozDpage puto thp worde.

| ofgall J make anfwere wuto mp blatphee
| mierg :fozmp truftetsinthp wowe. D take
| not the wozd of truth btterly outofmp mouth:
|] fop mp bope ig th thp iudgementes. So Hall
a q altwape kepe thp lawe pea fozeuerandeuer.
F] And Jwpl walkeat lbertte fo? J feke thp cö
| maundementes. 3 wyliCpeakeot thy teltino
4 nies aifo,euen befoze kpnges : & toll not be a-
F amed. Andmp delpte thalbc in thp comaun
| dementes Dhpcbe AbauclouedD. Lip Dandes
d © alfo wpll Fl pit bp vntothp commaundemen=
| } aie ba pane Loued:and mp ftudp albe in
E top atures. Dthynke ans tbp leruaunte,
1 | ag coccrnpnge thp wozde, dberin thou þat cau
ig fey metoputmptrut. Tbhefameig mp con-
i| forte in mp trouble,foz thp wode hath quicke =
H nedme. Theproudebanebadmeerceadinglp
| inderifpon pet haue J not Mpneked from thp
| lawe. 102 Fremebedtbpnecucrlattpng iud
qemëtes, D Lo:d:andrecepuca comfozte. J
amboprible afraped for the ungodly, chatty s
faketbplawe. Gbp flatutes pane vene mpto-
creo, in the boule of mp pplaremage . FZ baue
thougbt bpon thpname, sD Lozde mtbentybe
P Ceafon:and baue kept thp lawe. Thps J bad,
Awrotire hecaule Jkept thp commaundemetes:* Chou
art mp poacpon, D Lozde: 3 baue peompfedto
Kepethbplatve. . made mpne bumble petició
in thp peefence toith mp tobole pert, D be mer

cpfull onto me accozdpnge onto thy worde.
4 call mpne owne tapes to remeébzautice, and
turnemp fete wntotbptetpmonpeg. Jmade
paite and peoldged not tokepe tby commatide=
mentes. Zoe congregacpos of p vngodlp bate
robbed me, but 3 bane notfozgottenthp lawe.
Be mpdnpghte wpll J rple,to gpue thankes
pntotbe:becaufe of thp rpghtous ep 3
Jamacompanponofal them,thatfeare the:
nò kepe thp commaundemi ae + Tbheearth,
D 1020,{¢ ful of thp meere: D teach me thp fta
tutes. OD Lozde, thou balk dealte gracpoulpe
Dopth thp {eruauntaccozding wuto thp wozde.
y, Dearne me true pnderftandpnge,¢ Enon-
ledae.fo2 J baue beleued thp comaundemétes .
Before J was troubled F toent wonge: but
math. pire nowe paue J ne thp wode. AS drodeta yoon
and gracious: D teach me thy ffatutcs. ‘Che
zoude baue pmagpned a lye agapnite me, but
5 topli kepe tp commawhdementes twpth mp
Dolepert, Tpeirherteigasfatagbrawne but


pla.rrriga


D . the topl


inpdelitehath beninthplawe. tis good foz i
mep J bauebenin trouble, that 3 map learne
thy Matutes. ‘Chelate of thp mouth is dea-
rer bntome thé thoufandes of golde and {pluer.

* hp bandes haucmade me and falihioned Senet.
me: D gene me dnderftandpnge,that mape 2"
ate OY. commaundementes. T ds feare

be glad whe thep fe me,becaule J baue
put mp trult inthp wozde. J knowe,D Lozd,
that thy indgementes arerpght,and that thou
of ber p fapthfulnes halt cautedme to be trou =
bled. Dletthp mercpfulkpndnefle be mp con
fozt,accozbpng to thp Wwozde vntothpleruant.
D let thp loupnge mercpes come Dnto me,that
4 map (pue:foztpplaweismpodelpte. Letp
pzoude be confounded, fo? thep go wprkedlp a-

ont to deftrop me:but F toil be occupledinehp
commaundementes. Letfuchas fare the, €
baueknowen thp teftimonpes be turned Dnto
me. Det mpne berte be Lounde tn thp Fatu-
tes, that Jbenot ahamed. Myloulehathe
longed fo2z thp faluacpon:¢ ¥ bane a qoodbope,
bpcauleoftbptozde. Hpne epeslonge {ooze
fo:tbp En bales Dwhen wplt thou cofozt
mer ffo} Jam become l pie a botle in p finoke:
petdo Jnotfozgetthp fatutes. Howe ma-
np are the dapes of thp Ceruatits tbe wplt thou
be auengedof them tbat perflecutemes Che
poude baue dpgged ppttes Foz me, wobpcheare
notafterthbplawe. All thpcomaundemetes
aretrue, thep perlecute mefalfipe : D be thou
mp belpe. Thep had almooft made an ende of
me Dpoearth: Wut J fozloke not thy comaun:
dementes. D quicken me after thy louing Bind
nefe, id fo pall F kepe the tefpmonpes of thy
mouth. © Lord thp worde endureth for ener )
inbeauen. * bp trueth alfo remapneth from Pits
one Gencracton toanotber:thou hatte lapdetbe °°
foundacpon of theearth:anditabideth. Thep
continue this dape according to thpne ordinau
ces:fozaltbingesferucthe. Dfmyp delptebad
not ben intbp late , 3 Hulde paue perp Hedin
mp trouble. Jwplneuer forget thpcomaunde
mêtes, for wprb them thou bat qupckened me,

Jam tbpne, Db laue me : for J Haueloughte
thr commaundementes. he wngodlplaped
wapte foz me todeftrope me: but Jwpll con
{pdzethp tekimonpeg. gJ fethbatallthpnges
come foanende:but thp commaundemétes are R
erceadpngebzoade. o%(Lozne) What loue haue z;


=


_Fvnto thplatee fall the dapelongeis mp u= `-


dpintt. Chou,thozote thy commaundemé-
tes bat made me topler thé mpne enenipes, foz
thepareenertoithme. Bhaue moze vnderita
arta mp tcachers:fo2 thy tetimonieg are
mpftudpe. Jam ioplerthen the aged:becaule
Zkeptthp comaundementes. J pauerefrap-
ned mp fete feom euerp cupll wap,that F mape
kepe thp wod. Jbauenot Mpynked fro thp
iudgementeg :Fozthou teachet me. D powe
fwete are thpwozdes Dntompthzote: Vea,
fwetertbenbonp vatomp mouth. Chozowe
thypcommiaundementes Jaget vndeclanopng, D
therfoze J bate allwpckcd tapes. * Chp Prape
wo2rde iga lanterne Dnto mp fete, and alpabte
nto


gubris


Hla


into mp Eeh Fhauelwortie.¢ am tedfatt
ly purpoled to kepe thprpabteous tudgemens
tes. Jamtroubledaboue mealure: qupcker
me D Lodaccozdinge bntothpworde. Let
the free wpll offrpuges of mp mouthe pleale p,
D Lozde,and teache me thp (udgementes .
*@)p foule is altyape tn mp pande petdonot


Jobrih t g forget thplatwe. Che vugodlye bauc lap=


eda [nare fo: me, but petfiarucd not Jiro tpp
commaundementes. Why teifpmonies hane
4 Clapmedas mpne heritage Fo: euer: ad whps
thep aretbe verpiopofmpnebert. BJhaueap
plped mpne perte tofulfpl thy fatutes alieap:
euen butotheende. Bhatethemthat ihe
eucll tbpngeg, but thp latwe doz loue. Chou
art mp defence and plo, ãd my trut igin thp
wode Jwapefromepewpeked, J wplkepe


3 the commaundementes of mp God. D fta-


bipih me accopdpng wntothbp worde, pF mape
lpue, and lette me not bedpfappopnted of mp
Dope. Pploethou me vp, ¢ J talbelafe: pea
mp delpte (haleucrbein thp flatutes. Chou
batt troden dotone all them that departe From
tby fatutes,fo2 thep punpa but dpfcepte.

. Thouputtetawapeallthe roel k ofthe
earth lpke dzoffe:therfoze Jloue thp teftpmoni
eg, &)p fletbetrembleth foz feare of the: and J
am atraped ofr kumaen: Jdeale with
thetbpng thatislawfullandrpgbt: D gpue
menot ouer Dutompne opprelfourg. Make
thou thp feruanntetobdelpte inthat whpchets
qood:that the pzoudedo meno wonge. Wine
epes are walked awape topth lokpnge for thp
bealth and forthe wode of thy righteoutnefic.


OQ Dodealewpth thy feruannt accozdpng pute


thp loupe mercpe:tteache me thp ffatutes.
Jam chp (eruaunt,<D graunte me bnderitan:
bpng, that J mape knotve thp tetpmonies .
at is tpme fo2 the 1020 to lape to thpne pande,
ozthep hauedeftropedthp lawe. Foz Flouer
thyconimaundementes aboue goe and poeet,
ous tone. Therfoze bolde FZ ttrepghteati thy
commaundementes and al falle apes J Dtter


B lpabbozre. Chp telkimonpes are wondzeful:


Tra. IPT. b


yCa.rit.b
FbU,E


maund


therfoze both mp foule kepe the. Wibcn thp
thozde goeth forth, it qeuety lpgbt g vuderfan
òpng enë onto plpmple. Jopened mp mouth
and Daue in mp breath, foz mp Delite was inthp
commanndementes. Dloke thou Dpon me, ¢
be mercpfull onto me ag thon viet todoo vnto
thofethatlouetbpname. Dzbdzemp eppes
in thp toozde; g fo pall no topcbedueffe Dane do
minponouceme. DMdelpuermefrom p Wg
Full dealpuaesof men,¢fo Mall J kepethp com
entes. Spbhetoetbhelpabt of thy cot
tenaunce bpon thp fernaunt, andteach me thp
ftatutes. <Dpneepes qup oute pth water,
becaulemenbepenot thplate. iApabteous
arttbou,D Lozde:andtructsthpiudgemente.

Che teflimonpes that thoubaftecommaun-
bed, are exceadpngcrpabteous andtrue. +2
scalebathcuenconfumedime,bpcanfte mpne ene
mypes bauefozgotté thy wozdeg. * Thp wo2d
istrped tothe vttermoofte : and thp leruaunte
louctbit. Jamfmall,and ofnoteputacto:per


donot Forget thp commaundementes. Thy
i abies ig aneuerlaftpnge rprbteonf=
nefie:and thp latweis the trueth. ouble g
beupneffe baue taken polde upon me :petig mp
Delptein thp commaundementeg. Therpgp-
teoulnefle of thp teftimonpes igeuerlatpng :

Mgraunt me dndertandpng, and F thal lpue.
Jcal wyth mpne hole bert, beare me, D Lord,


J pll kepethp fatutes. Pea, cuen bponthe T


DO Fcall,belpe me:and F hall kepe thy tetimo
npes. arlp inthe mognpnge bo F crpe wnto
the: fozinthbp twoodeis mp trut. Wpneepes
prenent thenpabt watches, that J mpghte be
occuppedinthpivozdes. weare mp vopee, D
Lozde,accozdpng wnto thploupnge kpndnefle:
quickenme accozbing as thouart wont. Thep
Dawe npe that of malpce spa me:andare
farre from thp latve. thou npe atbãde,
D Lozde:fozalthp cimaundementes are true.

As concernpng thp tefpmonies, 3 bane kno:
wen longefpns, thatthou baf qrotided thé foz
eucr. Mcontpdze mpne adueriptype, and delp-
tier me: fo2 J donotfozgetthplatoc. Auenge
thou mp caule,and delpuerme: qupcken me ac-
cozbpnge tinto thp wade. ealtbe ts farre
from the ungodly, foz thep reqardenot tdp ta-
tuteg. Greatistbpmercp, D Lozde:qupeken


meastbonart wont. Wanptherearep trou: ey


ble me „and perfecute me: pet do Fnotfwarue
from tby tetimonpes. Itareuethme, when
Jfethetraniyrefoureg: becaule thep kepe not
thplate. Conlpd2e,0 Lorde, bowe F loue
thpcommaundementes: D gepeken mie accor
dpngeto thploupngekpndneiic. Chpwoz2de
is truefromeucrlaitpnae: all theiudaemecntes
of thy rpgbteoufnelte endure foz euermoze.
Princes baue perlecuted me wpthout caufe-:
but mp barte Fandethinawe of thp toozdes.


x Jam as glad of top worde,as one that fin: eraip.a


dethareatefpoples. Asforzlpes, Fhateand
abbozrethem:buttbplaive Do Floue. Scué
tpmesadape, doo Fprapiethe, becaufeofthp .

tighteousiudgementes. Great isthe peace
thep baue whpcb louethp latwe, € thep arenot
offendedatit. Lode J haucloked fo2 chp fa =
upng health and dDoneatter thy comimaundemé
tes. $p foule bath kept thpteiipmonics,an
loucd them Ce ann ky Sbauc kept thy ch
maunbdbementes and teitpmonpes , Eo: all mp
iwapesarebeforethe. Let mp complaint come
befoze the, D Lo2d¢,qpue me ynder tandpnge,
accozdpnge Dntothp wode. Dblet mp fup-
plpcacponcome befoze tbe , Delpuer me accoz-
dpnge tothp wode. BW)plippes hall Cpeake
oftby peaple,when thou pañ taught me thp ta
tutes. Pea, mp tonge pall {png of thp tozd:
fozallthp commaundementesarerpgbteous.
Let thpne band belpme, fo: % baue chofer —
thp commaundementes. J Daue longed foz
thy faupnge health, D Lorde, and in tbplate
igmpdeipte. Dplet my foule lpue and it that
praple tbe and thp indgementes thall belpe me,
4 bauegone attrape lykeca perpe thatts lott.
Ob feke chp fernauntte, foz 3 donot fozcet

thp commaundementeg.

| CT CTChe


STOLE


QOLAL CELT TEU D UL Bite


Alone of the Meares.
AD DOMINVM CYM TRIBV.
Se vy oen J wasintrouble,*3 called bp:


Diran mp foule, D Lode frå


LEVAVI OCVLOS,
_ Afonge ofthe ffeares. _ a:

Mie mary WUplllpft yp mpne epes puto f bpl-
SA aA les from tobence commethmyp delpe.
KS E «= * 2) p belpe cõmetheuen from the
pre? Sd Lorde, which bath made Deaucnand
earthe. te fopll not fuffre thp foteto be mo-
ued, and bethat kepeth the wpll not lepe-

x Bebolde.be that hepeth Flracl Hal neither
flombzenoz lepe. Che Lozde bpm felt ts thy
keper, the 1o2de ts thp defence vpon'thp rpg bt
pande. Hotbat the funne thall not burne the
by dape, nepther the moonebpnpghte. Che

_ -Rozdethall preferue thefromalleupll: pea, it
igeucnbe that thallkepe thp foule. Che Loz0
fball p2eferue thp gopng out,and thp compage
in:fromebpstpmefozthfozeuermoze, =

CTbe.crxtt.talme,
LETATVS SVM. |
J longe of the teares of anid,
araya Was glad, tobétbep Taide Hnto me:
A Fe *wewilgointo the poule of p 1.020.
e=4| Dur fete thal tande in thp gates,

Ol SD Jerufalem. Jerufalem ig bupl:

ted ag acptie thatisat bnitpein it
felfe. S€o2 thptber the trpbes goo Wp, euen the
trpbes of  Lopo:toteltifp buto Frael,togpue
thankes bnto the name of the Lozde: oz there

is the feate of tudgemente,euen theleate of the

yg Doute of Dauid. Dpape fo: the peace of Feru
falem:tbep (ball pzolpere thatloue the. Peace

be opetin thp thalles, ¢ plenteoutnefie wpthin

thp places. fo: mp beetheen and companios
fakes, J rab pda fy dh at iad Pea,be-
caute of the boule of the Lozde our God: 3 top lt
Teke todo the qood. ea |
CThe.crriii. Balme.

AD TE LEVAVIL. .

Afonge of the Meares. a

a Mtothelptte J bpmpneepes,* thou

yA that dibelleftintbebeaués. webold,

\ V4 cucn as the epes of fcruauntes loke bn

Se to the bandof their matters: ad as the


Erap. b.g


drte-bii, F ie


Hepa Dio epegofamapdë onto the pande of bes matres:


cue {o ourepes wapte ppon the Lo2d our God,
ate E A ae auc mercpe
bpon vs, D Lorde daue mercp Dpon vs:Fo? toe
ave btterlpdelppied. Durlouleisfplled with


the fcoznefull rep2ofe of the toealthy, and with
the delpptefulnetfe of the proude.
@ The.crritit. plalme.

NISI QVyA PDOMINVS,
_Afonge of the Keares of Daui.
PATE the Logde bpm felf badnot bene of 4
VA our (pde(notoemape slraell faye: )
feel DPEtbe Lozde btm felf padnot bene
gS 0F out jhe thé menrofe vpagatntte —
3.* Thep badlwalowed vs vp quycke, whe Honte
thep were fo tozatbfullp difpleated at bs. Vea,


the Doaters bad dzotoned bs: and the reme had
-gone oucrourfoule. bedeepe haters ofthe .


pzoude bad gone, enen ouer ourefoule.

Wut papled be the Lorde , Mobpche bath
not qpuen vs ouer foz a pape Ynto thep2
teeth. Durefouleiselcaped tuen aga bpzde
out ofthe fnare of the fouler:the finare ts broke,
and toe bie trates x Dur belpe tandet srs pria
in the name of the Lozde, whpche bath made
Deauen and earthe . e
CTbe.crrv. Plalme.

- QVI CONFIDVNT. '
Afongeotthe feares.

m bep tbat put their truttin the Lod, 4
EV eatpalbeceutas themount på, whpeh 1-F»
$ Foa mapenot be remoued, but fandeth
br Sue fa forener. The bplles tande a-
Donte Jerufalem: encn{o flandeth the one
rounde about bis people:frs this tpme foztd foe
cuctmoze. Jo? the rodofthe vngodlp cometh
not into the lot of the cpgbtcous, icitcbetpah-
teous put tbep2 bande yntotopckednefle. wo


fell, D Lode, nto thote that be good g true
ofbert. Asto: luchas turne backe wntothert
ptbue wpckeonefe:the Lozb thal lead Ee Cov) |
w the eupldoers:but* peace Halbe bpd Zlracl, Saibi, d
 The.crevi.yalalnie.
IN CONVERTENDO; l
-A fonge of the Keares.
ca HEN the Lod turned agapne f W
y ITST icaptiuitie of Sion, thë were toe
T EA WA J lpbe onto them that dreame.
ATATAJ Then wag our mouthfplled
AA OPAVA Moped laughter, and oure tonge
PAAVAAVSy| wptbiope. Then Tapd thepa-
eee mongethe Heathen : the Lorde
bath done greate thpngesfozthem. Pee, the
Lode bath done great thingesfoz vsalreadp,
toherof toeretople. Curne our captiuttic,
Lode, astherpuersinthelouthbe. Chey that
fote inteares , allrcapeiniope. ie that
notve gorthbin bps wape weppnge and bearetD
forth good fede pal Boutles comeagaine wpth
iope and bepngebps heaucs Mpth him.
CTbe.crervij.Plalme:
- -NISI DOMINYVS,
A fonge of Salomon of the tapzes.
iP Ecepte the Lozde buplde the boule, g
l FAH tbepz laboure gee Lo thae bere |
Y Egat: Crceptetpe Lorde hepety p Cp:
a> tie , the watcheman taketh butin
T apne, Jt 18 but loficlaboure that p:cucr,r,
pebaftctorpie bp carlp, and folate take me
ecate


ro


Sid itt KONEI Ak kbl, tlle


and eate the bredde of carefulneffe:fo2 fo be gp-
uethdpsbeloucdfleape. Lo, chpldzenand p
frute of tbe wombe arcan berptage and gptte,
that cometboftheLozd. Lpkeagthearowes
intbe band of the qpaunt, enë foare the ponge
chpldzen. Happpeistheman, thatbath bps
qupuer full of thcm,tbhep thall not beatbamed,
thé thep (pcake wit) their enempes inp cate.

€ The.crevut plalme.

BEAT OMNES

A fonge of the feares.

> Lefled are all thep that x fcare the
J ky iLozde,and walke inbps wapes -


“J pappre thalte thou be.


fhalbcas the fcuteful vyne bpon the walles of


rety ator thatitbe plucte wp.


Afonce of the Meares.
ia Ut of thedepehaue F called Dnto
P fa \VD 10d, Lordheare mp vopee. Dp
PANES dleethpneeares confpdze wel f voice
zodia ey aotmpcomplapnt. * Dtthou L020
PCs, ey lte be ertrcme to marke what is

done ampfle, Dh Lorde Who mape abpde it?

_ f€oz thereig mercpe topth the, therfoze halt
thoubefeared. Zlokefoz the 102d, mp foule
doth aptc foz bpm. in bps wozdcis nip truf.

Wyp foulefipeth tnte the 1020¢, before the

mampng watche (Alape before the mognpnge
watcbe. D Jirael trut inthe 1023, fo: with
- the Logdtherets mercp and pth bpnis plen-
tzougredempepon. Andpetpall redeme Fira
elfromall bps fpnnes .
@ Che.crect.plalie ,
DOMINE NON EST FA,


[Sass <i fF02 thou Halt cate the laboures of >


Qu,
wauidsfonge ofthetteares $
ww Dde Jamnot bye mpuded Wane Æ
bs es nopzoudelokes.* Adonoterercife Esiti, ¢
Yon) mp felfe in great matters, wbich are
ytobpefozme. se sigehsarke beet
Cakap foule, g kepe itlowe, Ipkeaga child
that is weaned from bps mother, pee, mp foule
iseuenagatoeanedDchplde. DAlracltruin
the Lozde.from thps tpme Fozth fo: euermoze.
MEMENTO DOMINE,DAVID
Afongeoktheficares. - 4,
Aen | DW remembze Dauld, andall h a a,
Cor !trouble. * Hpotoe he fwoze wnto the for
: aes (Lorde and botved a botve Dito pal: ipart, b
2 —Aimightpe GodokFacob: Jwpllnot
come topth in the tabernacle of mp boufe, noz
clpmebpintomp bed. Frwpl not fure mine
epesto fepe, no} mpneepelpddesto flombze: _
o® (neptherthe temples ofmp heave to take anperete.) #9
Gntpll J fpnde out a place foz the temple of p
Lode: an babitacponfozthempgptpe Godot
Jacob. Lo, Wwe bearde of thefame at Ephza-
ta,andfoundcit in the oode. Wie mpl gotn
tobpstabernacle:andfalleloweonourehnees =
before bis foteftole. *Arple, D Lozdincorpy Parbig
reftpnge place.thou ad the arke of thp fregth.
Let thy peeattes be clothed wrth rpghteoul-
nes,and let thpfapntes Ipnge pth topfulnes.
ffozthpleruaunt Dauidsfake,turnenota č
toape the pzefence of thpneanopnted. * The tees.oito
Lorde bathe madea faithful othe buto Dauw,
andbe pall not thepnkefcomit. +DEP frute t4ct-ritis
of thp bodp pall Ziet bponthpfeate. PEtbp
chpldzen wpll kepe mp couenaunte, and mp tea
ftpmonies that 4 Wplllearnethem:thbeprchpl-
Deen alfo pall {pt Dpon thp feate foz euermoze.
Foztbe Lozde bath choten Ston,tobeanba C
bitacpon foz bim felfebath belonged foz ber.
bys fhalbe mp reltfoz euer Dere topl J dwel,
for Jhauealldelpte therin. Awpll dlefle her


r
fa


ž FIE,


at


TH
4%


t bptaileg wpthincreaie, and wplliatpifpe ber


pooze twpth beeade. Fitopl decke her Pzealtes
pth helth,andher faintes thal reiople, ¢ ling.

There hall 3 make * the howe ok Dautdto Aube. tf
flozpibe: Jpaue ozdepneda lanterne fozmpne
anoputed. As forbpsenenrpes, F thal cloth
tbemwpth Hame, but Dpon bpm leite pall
bpscrotone flozpihe.

C The.crertit.pialme.
ECCE QVAM BONVM, |

AfongeoftheffearcsofDauld. | ,
RYNG) Cholde , howe good andiopfulla B
by, (CR) bya hp nge tt is* beethecnt todwwel to- pyiti.e


ay ip "
+ z -= <2 The
1


Saetherinwnite. AZislpbe the pre e


bay Bi cpous opntmente bpon tbe beade,
ES that ranne Dotone Duto the beard :
euen bonto Aarons bearde, and went done to
thefkpates of bps clotbpnge. ALpkethedewe
of Hermon, wbhypch fell vpon the bpll of ston. ai
4fo2 there the Lorde pzompled pis bleflpnge, .
and lpfe fo? eucrmoze.
CThe.crrriiii. falme. —
ECCE NyNC BENEDICITH,;


AfonmeoftbefFceared. = = 5
sit Weholde


ete


Pial eerriii, b bibi wut.


2B Cholde,ovcnowe)* praple the £020, al
a $ pe Ceruauntes of the Lode, pethat bp
pagia nyabt fande inthe boule of the 1.020,


tte as seca een tate fan tong
ea ke ouret bandes inthe fanctuarp, an
bi Aleti ko vig TheLozde $ made pes-
muw,bib prapte the 10? +
neand cartb.genctbe biefipng of out Sion,
The.crryy.Plalme.
LAV DATE NOMEN DOMINI. the ;
1 SST * zaplethe Lord, landepe tpenam
7 A a cette Lozd,peaplett, D peferuautes
a A A A ofthe Lode. Dethat fave t ne
tara of the Lorde, tn tbe courtes of p boule
ofourGod. Mpraplethe Lord, for pLozdis
ET gracpons: D fpnge prâples vntebis name, fog
peu. Mhe itiglouelp. * IO Whp’tbe Lorde bath chofen
= Jacob onto hum felf,g Afrael foz bis owne pol
fetti. f€oz Yknowe that the Lozde is greate,
and that onr Lozbisaboue allgodbdes. What
Coeuer the Lozde pleafed, that dpd be in peauen
germ. Ld andincarthandinthe fee, andinall depe plar
part? ceg, x He bepngeth forth the cloudes fro p en «
deg of the world, efendeth forth lighteninges
25 wth tbherapne,bppnapnge the Wpndes oute of
gro.ri.e Hpstreaturpes. *Helmote the fyzft bogne ot
scro.vive Sappte bor of manandbeatt. * He bath (ët
and.cb.e fokens and Wonders into the mpddeft of the,
‘DO thouland of Egypt, vpon Pharaoandall
eae pis fernuauntes. * igefmote Dpuerle nacpons,
zeure any fete mpabtpempnges. * Sebon|hpnge
of the oman De the kpnge of Walan,
Horse andall thekpngevomes of Canaan: * And
gaue thepz lande tobe an berptage,euen an pe-
nen nto Flrael bps people . Thy name
Lozbde,endureth foz eucr,fo doth thp memos»
| rpall, © Lorde from one generatponto an
Srur other. x Stoz the Loze vopliaucngebis peo-
rota.cro.a PIC, and begracpous vnto bps feruauntes.


Sapir... +49 fozthe pmagesof the heathen, thep are 3 ED) |


Sarubbi but fpluer and golde the thozbe of mens hades.
Thep banue mouthes g peake not: epes paur
thep buttbepfenot. Thep haue cares, and pet
thep beare not,netther istber any bzethin their
moutbes. @bep that maketbem ,arelike yn
totbent, andfo are altbep that put Bena trute
intbem. zaple the Lorde 2 houle of Ffrael,
prape the Lozdpe þoufeof Xaron. Pzaplep
more boufe of Leni, pethat feare the 10:de,
prapletbeLozde. Pzapfed bethe Lozdeoute
of gion wbpeh dtoelletp at Jerufalem.
Pallelupa.
CThe.cerrvt. palme.
Alt, CONFITEMINI DOMINO.


feat


the eartbaboue the thaters,fozbps mercy endu
said rethfogeugs. * Uibpche path made greate


lpgbtes ,forzbysmercpeendurcth fozcuce.
€ be'funneto rule the Dap, fo: bps merpen-
duretbtozeuer. The moone ãdthe arres to 25
gouctnetbenpght.fo: bpsmercpe endureth foz
ener. * Wbpcplinote Cgppt with tbepz firi Erie
bone, foz big mercpe endureth Fozener. And ogo, ritit.c.
brought out Jfrael from amonge them for bps
mercpeendureth Fozeuer. Wapthampgbtpe
bandeanDda fretcbeDout arme , fo: pps peripe
endurethfoz euer. Wihpch deutded tHe red tee
in tivo partes,fo2 bps mercp endureth fo2 ever.
% Andmade Firacll to goo thozotve the mpd=
delte of tt, fo2 bps mercpeendureth for ever.
‘ut ag foz harao and bps pootte,he oucr-
thzetoe them in the red fee,fo2 bps mercp endu-
rethforeucc. *lbich led big people thozowe Fs. 50.50"
the toilderneffe,foz is mercp endurcth fog ener,
*UWibpcebfimote great pnges:Fozbps merce xorw,rit.a
endurethfozeucr. Pec,¢ lee mpgbtpekpn-
ges:Fo2 bys mercpenduretbforener. * Selo sume.rrt.c
Rynge of the Amozites,fo2 his merep endureth 2 *
fozener. And Os the kinge of alan, foz bis
mercpe endureth foz eucr. And gaue awape
tbeir lande fog an berptage,fo2 bis mercp endus
reth fozeuer. Cuenfozran berptage vito Fl-
ede t feruaunt:fo2 bis mescp endureth foge-
uer. Cal bpcb remébzed vs, whe toe were in trou:
ble: foz pig mercp endurethfozener. And bath
Delpuered vs frd our encmpes,foz bis mercp en |
Dureth foz euer.*Wipichgeueth fode toal AeH. Brasi
foz big mercp endureth foz euer. D giue thakes
nto f god of beaué.fo2 bis mercp endureth tog
ener. +(D geuethakes tothe Lozd of Lozdes, fo; ppamerep we
endureth fo; ruer. À i
CThe.creriii. falme.
spCDE zerem)


SVPER FLVMINA. i


ngt
Sion. Bote thal oe ff ne


preferre not Jerufalé in mp mpotp 8


CONFITEBOR TIBI.

preg * Wpligeuve senon D ,
ENA FA LoD wptdmp bole bert : eu before rahne
on (a tbe ODR EAE ky piepe bas ý
(©) ANC tothe. +J wpll wozthpptowarde 2e001.0.:


== thpbolp temple, praple thp name,
becaule


f


= y
a a =


—_—- ee M re


Pialerririerlrit


becaule of thp louitige kpndnelle and truth: Foz
thou þat maqnifped thp name, and thp too2d¢
aboucalltbpnaes. Wiben F called ppon the,
thou heardeft me,and enducdelt mp foule with
muche trength. Alithbekpnges ofthe earthe
tball pzapfe the: D 1020, fo: thep baue bearde
the wo2rdes ofthp mouth. Vee,thep tal linge

5 inthe Mapes of the L023, that greate isthe glo
preria. ppeot the Logd. * Foz though the Lord be bye,
pet hath berefpect vnto the lotol
p20ude,be veboldeth bpmafarreof. Though

3 walkein the mpre of trouble, pet haltep


refeetheme:thou thalt fretche fozth thpne bade et
ppon the furpoufnes of mpneenemtes,and thp


rpabt pande Mall faune me. Che Lorde all
make good bps loupnge bynonefie toward me:
iob.pitite. pec thp mercpe, D Lord endurethfozeucr,*de
{pple not then p wozkes of thpne owne pandreg.
 Tobe.crrvic. Blalme.
DOMINE PROBASTI,
Tothe chaunter, aplalme of Dauid.
Fpi Love, thou hatte fearchedme out, ad
Gi ¥knotenme. Chou knotoclle mp


L thou buderikidell mp thougbtes loge

before. Chouartabout mp path, andaboute

my bed:and{ppefk outallmp tapes. F0? 10;

thereig nota wozdeinmp tonge, but thou, D

Lowe knoweftit alltogetber. Chou Dat fal

bronco mebebpndeand befoze,and lapdtbpue

Dande bponme. Suchbnowledge is to won:

derfull and excellent foz me : Fran not attapne

imos.ir.e ONtoit. * WibptherthallFqo thenfromtbp

15 Cp2eteo2 whither thal J qo thenfrothp peetéce:

PEJ clpme vp into peauen,tbhou art there:

PEF Foro Downe to hell,thou art therealto. pt

Jtaketbewpnges of the moznpng,eremapne

‘inthe bttermoot partes of $ fee. Euëthere

> alfofballtbp bandeleademe : ethp rpabt både
fhall bolp


eme. DF Alape : paradnenture the
darckenefle (allcouce me, then tall mp night
Deturnedtodape. Dea,thedarknes is no darts
nele with the:but the npghtts allcleareas the
| dape:the Darknes and lpapt to the)arebotbe a
€ Ipke. Sfo2 mprepnesarethpne, thou batt co-
uered me tninpmotherswombe. Fioplgeue
thankes bnto the for Jam fearfullp ¢ wonde-
roullpmade:maruelous are thy workes,t that
mp Couleknotecthrpgbtitvel. Wyp bones are
not bpd fromtbe,though 3 be made fecretlpe ¢
fafhyoned benethinthecarth . Chpneepes
dpd femp {ubftaunce, pet bepng Dupertcct and

in thbpboke were all mp membzes wptten .
Wibych dape bp Dave were Fathponed, when as
pet there teas noncof them. Howe dercarc thy
<p councelgpntome,D Gon? D howegreatis
the fummeofthem: DEA tel the, thepare mo
innombeetbenthelande : when 3 Wake Dp, 3
am hector see be Sok Wiplt thou not flap the
wopehed, D Gods departe frome pe bloudtbur-
ftp men. Sozrthep peake burpabtcoufipe a-
gapni the, andthpne encmpes takiethp name
invivne. Donot Jhate them, D Lo2d,that
> Ddatepddamnot Jareued with thote chat rife
. ppagapntt thes Dea, J patetpemrpgbe fozes


e:asforthe * :


A dDotonefpttpnge and mpne wprifpng : .


cuen astpoughe thep there mpre enempeg.


SOULE.


@rpcme,D God, andlewe the qrounbe of Prartv a


mpne hert:prouc MEE eramen mp thoughtes.
Loke toellpftbere beanpe tape of topcbed-
nefe inme gleademe tn the wape euerlaking.


ERIPE ME.


102d God,thou frrégth of mp health, thou hat
coucrenmyp beedinthe bape of battaple. Let
nottbe pngodly paue bps delpze, D Lorde, let
not bys mpfcheuons pmagqpnacts p2ofper:leett


thepbetopzoude Sela. * Let the mplchefe of wrai,vi »


thep2 otonelpppes fal bpon the peed of them, p
compaffemeabout. Let hoote burnpnge coo-
leg fall wponthem: let them be cattc into p fper
andintothe pit:that thep neuer rife bp agatne.
A man full of wozdes (hall not pzolper vpon p
eartbhe :enell Wall punte the wpcked perfon, to
oucrthzowebym. Sure Jam, thatthe Lot
wpllauenge the pooze:and mapntepne p caule
of thebelplefle. Cherpghteous allofhal qeue
thankes butothpname, andtheiut tail contt
nucinthp (pabte .

@Thbe.erlt.lalme.

" A plalinie of Dauid.
DOMINE CLAMAVI.


Awe i
i


and


anid let me ener eftape then.
E The.crlit. wlalme. —
VOCE MBA AD DOMIENVM,
The inftruccpon of Dautd, a paper
Whenbewasintbecaue.
ary k Crped vito p Load teithmyp votce:


pilcrbii,a ie
= Eomp fupplicacpon. J potozed oute
Smp complayntes before bym, and the
wedbpm ofmp trouble. Wipe mp fpzete wag
inbeupnes, thou knewcH mp path:in the wape
‘woherin J walked baue thep preuclype laped a
fnarefoxme. J loked alfo pon mp rpgbte
bande, æ le there was noma that woldcknowe
me. J bad noplace to fice ynto andnoman
caredfoz mpfoule. Ycrped into the, 102d,
and fapde:thou art mp Dope and mp pogcron in
thelandeofthelpupnge. Confpdze mp coms:
pa pnte: for Fambzought verplowe. Dde:
puer mefrommp perlecutours: fo2 thep are to
ftrongeforme, Wzpnge mp loule out of pzp-
fon,that Jmap qeue thankes bnto thp name:
Wwhpche thpnae pt thou wplt graunteme , then
pall the rpabteousrefozte Ynto mp company.
 The.crliti.plalme.
DOMINE.EXAVDI.
op =. NPLalme of Dauidow (wen hic otne
| conne pertecuted bpm)

onna Eate mp peaper,D Lod, and cow:
UAT Ve poe mp defpze : berken vnto me
Cera Foz tby truth ¢ righteoutncs fake.
bs Gla xa Andentrenot into tudgemente
fob.tiit,, CAECCA thith chp feruatit:fo2* in thy fight
acs fhallnomanlpupng betuttitped. Fo: pene-
mp bath perfecuted mp foule : be bath fmptten
5 mp lpfedowne to the grounde: be bathlapd me
intbedarkenes, asthe men that baue bene lige
dead. Cherfore is mplpeete vered toptbin
priro e Mesandmp Hert wpthinme ig defolate. *Pet
Do Fremembee the tpmepatt, 3 mufe pponall
thp horkes:pea, ZF erercplemp felfe in the tho2=


Kes ofthbpbandes. J ftretebe fozthmpne ban: [aa ae


bes vito the: mp foule galpeth puto theasa
ex.trriitic thpzitplande. elab. + Peareme,D Lod,


peiro a ang that foone:foz mp tpeetetoerethfapnte, KO


bpde not thp face from ine, lefte J be lp&e wnto
them tbatqoovdowneintotbe ppt. Dletme
DETE * peare thp loupnge kpndnes bp tpmes inthe
HIN mompng, for inede ig np trutt, ipewe thou me
the wape that 3 thulbde walke in, to? J lpfte vp
mpfoulepntothe. mDelpuer me, D Lozd, fro
mpneenempes:foz 9 fipe vnto the to hpoeme.
Teach me todothe thynge that plealeth the,
foz thou arte mp God, let thp loupnge {pirite
Icade me fozth into the lade i T aes nes.
 DQupchen me, D Lode, fo: thp names fake
¢fozthbpryabteoutnefle fake bapnge mp foule
outoftrouble. Andofthy coodnes flay mine
enempes, and deffrope aiitbhers that vere mp
Foule fog Jam chp leruarut, -
© The.crlitii.Wialme :
`“ *BENEDICTVS DOMINV Se


DE Dauid.


Taz í ito the Lozd dpd Jmabe -
payee, euen nro e Mop tes refpectontopim: 2 pfonnesfma,that thou
forecardefEbims * @Manislpke athpnae of Ibba


ruc,

reece eled be the Lorde mp firengthe, B
D ya bye tcachethamyp hades to War, trerite

em, es tmpfpngerstofpaht. <phope ”  ~

zao Band mp foetrefte, mp catel, and de-

Soli linerer, mp defender in whome F

trut, whpcbfubduecth mp people thatig under

me.. *iLo2d, what is man tbat thou pa {uch prar.piit.a


nougbt,bpstime pafleth aap likea fhadowe. -


: -Bowetbp heauens D Lor, € come done,


foucbe the mountapnes, andthep thall{moke.
Calk forth the lpabtenpnae, and teare them
pote out thpne arowes, and confume them.
Sende dDotone thpre bande from aboue, deli
uer meand take me oute of theqreate Waters,
from tbe panve of fraungechplozen. Apote.
mouth talketh of banpte, € theterpgbt bandits
arpabtebanbdeofiepckednes. Fwpllifpnge a
neiwe fonge bntotbe, D God, andlpnge pap
Teg unto the bponatenfirpngedlute. Thou
that qeueft ppctozp bntokpnges and pate de- ~
lpuered Dauid thp feruaunt from the parell of


.thbefiwearde. Saueme, anddelpuer me from C


the bande of fraunge chpldzen , whole mouthe
talketh of banpte, andthetr fo a bande iga
rpabte bande otiniquptie. Chatourfonnes
mapegrotoe bp as the ponge plautes, ¢ that
our daughters map be asthe polpfibed cozners |
ofthetemple. * Chat our garners map be ful eroga
and plenteous wpth allmaner of fooze : p oure
thepe mayebzpngefostythonfandes g ten thou
fandesin our ftrefes. ‘Chat oure orenmap be
tronge to laboure ,that there be tio Decape, no
leabpnge into captiupte,andnocomplapninge
inourefiretes . Pappy are the peoplethat be
infuch acale:pee bleffed are the people tobpche
bane the Lozd fo2thep2 God.

CThe.crly. Palme. e

EZALTABO TE DEVS. oe

A thankelgeupnge of Danid.


Plalr.a


and talke of thy poter. l
glozp andmpgbtinelic of thp kpngoom,migbe
be Rowe


pa ms _ =. }


7
=
——, i a eer


——


Plabir tot Dit Dit ip


€ be Browen pntomen. *Thpkpnadomeisan
Duki eue rlatpnge bpngdome,and thp domnpon en
anaia Duretbtpozotwe out allages. ‘Che Lode bp
| boldcth all fuch ag fall, andlpftethb bpaltbole
apt.citit, o thatbe Rowse. * Cpe epes ofall wapte bpon
oy the, osi Xop) andthou genek the their meate
 tnduefeafon. Chouopenett thpnedande, and
fpllefi all thpnges lpuing wpth plenteoulneffe
Che Lozdiserpgbhtcous ith all bps tapes , €
bolp nall bps twozkeg. Che Lozdisnpe tn-
peu, ii.b fall them* that call vpenppm, peeallfuche
ascall vpon bim fapthfullp. Pe wpll fnlfpll
the delpre of teem thatfeare bpm, he alfo wpll
beare their crpe, and wypilbelpe them . Che
Lorde preferucth allthem that loue pom , but
frateetbabzoadeailthe yngodlp. Gp mouth
{gal (peake the prapie of the Lod, ¢letal fleth
gue hikes yuto bis polp name foz euer ener.
E The.cetat Plalme,.
LAVDA ANIMA MEA.
& Pialmeof Aggeus andzacharp )
Hallelupa.
nye Rape f Lord, D mp foule: whple
e g lpucwpll J paple the Lotd:pee
aglongeas * J baucanp bepnge,


iy
E a
P: ov
pa:
Ar
eE y:


ceg nozin
inthent. Woz tobenthe breathe of mangocth
pun 2 forth, be tpallturne agapne toppgeartp and
s FH ehenall pistboughtes pevpibe. Wlefledis be
wacpiti.e Chat hath the Gov of Zacobfoz bps helpe, xand
whole pope isin the Lozdepps God. Uippep
made Peauen andearth,the tee, and al that thee
inis, Wwhpyche kepet bys prompte foz euer.
25 Wibichbelpeth thé to right that ufer mige,
whppchfebetptbebongrpe. Che Lowdelofcth
men out of 2 ioe 9 lozde FFaniey tothe
blypnde, Che Lozdbelpeth them vp» are tal-
len, the Lovo carethfoztherpgbreous . The
Lozd carethfoz the feraungers, be defendet f
fatberleg and pdowe:a8 to the wap of the vn
godly De turnetHit Mphidedotone. Che L020
typ Sod, D Sion: Halbe kpnae Foz euermoze,
aud fpozotve out all generactongs: Hallelupa.
CThe.criott Palme.


LAV DATE DOMINVM.


iseeet'thankfull. Che Lorde both buploe
bp Jerufalem and thali gather together fout-
caltes of Zivacl. He pealeth thole that are b20
ee ken in barte ant geueth medecine to beale their
teg, and calleth them all bp thetic names.


t) oo Meee oe os

Saleriii.
geueth foddze onto thecattell , tandfederh rye (59 prrot
pougcrauensthat call pon bpm. ebathe °
not pleafure inthe ftrength of an bozfe,nepeper
delptethbe inanp mans enges, Wut p Lozdeg
dDelpte einthem that feare bpm, and put thepi
trut in bps mercy. Baap tbe Lod, D Jeru
falem:pzapfe tby God. D Sion. for be bath
made fat the barres of thy qates,and path blef
fed thy chplozé topthintbe . te maketh peace
inthp bozders,andfplleth the with tie foure of
wheat Helendeth forth biscommaundement
bpon ecartp,and bps worde runneth very fwple


Ip. BHegeueth (notve lpke woll ard (catercey
thedozefroftlpkeattbes. Mecattethfozthiis


ple phe mozlels,who is able toabidedts froit?
He fendeth out bis wode and melteth them,
be bloweth toith bts winde, ¢the haters fiowe
He thetocth bps worde bnto Jacob, bis tatu
tes Ad ozdinaunceg unto Brael. Hepathnoe
dealt {ow z nacion, neither paue the Heathé
knowledge ofbpslatweg. Pallelupap.


C Che.cel viti.wialme.
LAVDATE DOMINVM DECE,


ij wyliing paples pntomp God. PERG
au * Oputnotpouretcultin pain: i ESEG
anpchild of ma, foztheveignopelpe Peeps


{ycnelfe. irae alk op toele names. PAS


Great ig our Lorde, andgreatishis power: £ Yes


yeebpstwpfdome tginfinite. Cpe Lorde fet-

tet) Lp the meke, andbzpngeth the vngodlye

tez. iir. e DOWNe to thegrounde. * Mfpnge vutothe
25 iode bpththankelgeupnge png pzaple Ypå
thebarpe bntoour God. Wptch couercth the
teb.prrbio Heauen toptheloudes, g x preset rapic fo:
the earth,¢ maketh the arate to growe fa

eg MOUNAPNES,o# (and perbe fog the vie of wen, pich


ay, es


Ter
\


Plabir tot Dit Dit ip


€ be Browen pntomen. *Thpkpnadomeisan
Duki eue rlatpnge bpngdome,and thp domnpon en
anaia Duretbtpozotwe out allages. ‘Che Lode bp
| boldcth all fuch ag fall, andlpftethb bpaltbole
apt.citit, o thatbe Rowse. * Cpe epes ofall wapte bpon
oy the, osi Xop) andthou genek the their meate
 tnduefeafon. Chouopenett thpnedande, and
fpllefi all thpnges lpuing wpth plenteoulneffe
Che Lozdiserpgbhtcous ith all bps tapes , €
bolp nall bps twozkeg. Che Lozdisnpe tn-
peu, ii.b fall them* that call vpenppm, peeallfuche
ascall vpon bim fapthfullp. Pe wpll fnlfpll
the delpre of teem thatfeare bpm, he alfo wpll
beare their crpe, and wypilbelpe them . Che
Lorde preferucth allthem that loue pom , but
frateetbabzoadeailthe yngodlp. Gp mouth
{gal (peake the prapie of the Lod, ¢letal fleth
gue hikes yuto bis polp name foz euer ener.
E The.cetat Plalme,.
LAVDA ANIMA MEA.
& Pialmeof Aggeus andzacharp )
Hallelupa.
nye Rape f Lord, D mp foule: whple
e g lpucwpll J paple the Lotd:pee
aglongeas * J baucanp bepnge,


iy
E a
P: ov
pa:
Ar
eE y:


ceg nozin
inthent. Woz tobenthe breathe of mangocth
pun 2 forth, be tpallturne agapne toppgeartp and
s FH ehenall pistboughtes pevpibe. Wlefledis be
wacpiti.e Chat hath the Gov of Zacobfoz bps helpe, xand
whole pope isin the Lozdepps God. Uippep
made Peauen andearth,the tee, and al that thee
inis, Wwhpyche kepet bys prompte foz euer.
25 Wibichbelpeth thé to right that ufer mige,
whppchfebetptbebongrpe. Che Lowdelofcth
men out of 2 ioe 9 lozde FFaniey tothe
blypnde, Che Lozdbelpeth them vp» are tal-
len, the Lovo carethfoztherpgbreous . The
Lozd carethfoz the feraungers, be defendet f
fatberleg and pdowe:a8 to the wap of the vn
godly De turnetHit Mphidedotone. Che L020
typ Sod, D Sion: Halbe kpnae Foz euermoze,
aud fpozotve out all generactongs: Hallelupa.
CThe.criott Palme.


LAV DATE DOMINVM.


iseeet'thankfull. Che Lorde both buploe
bp Jerufalem and thali gather together fout-
caltes of Zivacl. He pealeth thole that are b20
ee ken in barte ant geueth medecine to beale their
teg, and calleth them all bp thetic names.


t) oo Meee oe os

Saleriii.
geueth foddze onto thecattell , tandfederh rye (59 prrot
pougcrauensthat call pon bpm. ebathe °
not pleafure inthe ftrength of an bozfe,nepeper
delptethbe inanp mans enges, Wut p Lozdeg
dDelpte einthem that feare bpm, and put thepi
trut in bps mercy. Baap tbe Lod, D Jeru
falem:pzapfe tby God. D Sion. for be bath
made fat the barres of thy qates,and path blef
fed thy chplozé topthintbe . te maketh peace
inthp bozders,andfplleth the with tie foure of
wheat Helendeth forth biscommaundement
bpon ecartp,and bps worde runneth very fwple


Ip. BHegeueth (notve lpke woll ard (catercey
thedozefroftlpkeattbes. Mecattethfozthiis


ple phe mozlels,who is able toabidedts froit?
He fendeth out bis wode and melteth them,
be bloweth toith bts winde, ¢the haters fiowe
He thetocth bps worde bnto Jacob, bis tatu
tes Ad ozdinaunceg unto Brael. Hepathnoe
dealt {ow z nacion, neither paue the Heathé
knowledge ofbpslatweg. Pallelupap.


C Che.cel viti.wialme.
LAVDATE DOMINVM DECE,


ij wyliing paples pntomp God. PERG
au * Oputnotpouretcultin pain: i ESEG
anpchild of ma, foztheveignopelpe Peeps


{ycnelfe. irae alk op toele names. PAS


Great ig our Lorde, andgreatishis power: £ Yes


yeebpstwpfdome tginfinite. Cpe Lorde fet-

tet) Lp the meke, andbzpngeth the vngodlye

tez. iir. e DOWNe to thegrounde. * Mfpnge vutothe
25 iode bpththankelgeupnge png pzaple Ypå
thebarpe bntoour God. Wptch couercth the
teb.prrbio Heauen toptheloudes, g x preset rapic fo:
the earth,¢ maketh the arate to growe fa

eg MOUNAPNES,o# (and perbe fog the vie of wen, pich


ay, es


Ter
\


The Prouerbes,


‘Debsittc, AND* a two edgediwerde intheirbandes. Ca
15 prong te of D aaa ent Aon a
ople. Tobpudethep2 bpnges tnchapnes,€
DEFTIG, f, fbepznablestpep Ipnkes Seppon. * Chat
thep mape be anenged of them,agit ig Lo2ptté :
i Suche þonour baue all bystapntes.
allelupab.


CCbe.cl.~lalme.
LAVDATE DOMINVM IN,
PHallelupah.
ea) Papi Godin his holineffe,pzaple
aver C bpm inthe 2 ona ie of bis pow
foes fer. Pzaple bpm inpps noble ac-


AEA A tes , papie bpm accozdpnge vnto
Enea Hysercellentgreatnefle. zaple
bim in tbe founde of the trompet , praple bpm


bpon the lute andbarpe. (zaple bpm in fpm
bales anddaiiles, pzaple bpm wpon the ftrpu=
ges and pppe. iy
Pzaple bpm vpon the toeltuned cpmbales,
pape bpm bpon the loude cpmbales. Let
euerp thpnge ps rhe oe th,pzaple the 1020.


all ;
Prapletheeucrlattpnge.
EC The ende of the Platter.


CThe P2oucrbes of


Salomon.
CTbefpEChapter.
C The praple of wploome. We mape not birken bnto
the boluptrous pzoueract onginel guee of fpnntre.
öp ome complapneth bet to be befppled of all men,
€pophecpeth detruccpon bato ber delppfers,


A prema Ye Prouerbes of Soalomé the
wa NE a fonne of Dauid kpna of Flra-


ee) (Pale el:to learne opfoome, eto per-
D 2 ev, Ceane theintteuccid and toper-
wes een 1 eane the ozdes Of DNDErtian
re teen Ding:andtherbp coreceaue pzu


Lass dence, rpagbteoulnes indgemët


lawr of thp motber:fo2 that Hall bapnge
yntothp beade, and sibs a a hape a ou
tbp neche


pt thep cntp
pon


and fplloureboufes wpth ef . Catt intbp
a


=


Conne walke not thou with them-tefrapne thp

fote from their wape. For «their fete runne to PNN

eucll:gare DEPE blonde. ut in bapne

isthe net lapdtogth befoze the bpzdeg epes, pea

thep them felues lape thapte one for anotberg

bloude ¢ one df them wolde Aepanotber. There S

ave the toapes of al fuch as be couetous, theone

Woolderaupthanothers Ipfe «Wa tfoome crpeth Povia

opt hout.¢ putted forth ber voice inthe reteg,

HDbe calleth befoze the congregacion in the opé

gateg and Hetveth her toozdeg thozowee the cp=

tie,faping: D pechplozen, howe longe wyll pe

loue chplòp pueg: howe lige tpl the (kozners

delpte tn fcoznpnge, and the vnwpte be encmp-=

eg onto knowledge: D turne pou punto mp coz

teccpon:lo J toplerpzefle mp mpnde nto pou,

€ make pou vnderftande mp wozdeg. * Zhaue <te.trob

called, ad pe refuledit: J bane ftretched out mp I% bes

Hand:andno man regarded tt:but allmp coun-

{cls baucpe defppfed :andfet mp cozreccpon at

naught. Cherfoze hall ZJalfolaugyin pour dg

ftruccion, and moche pou, when that thpnae $

pe fave cometh vpon pou:euen tobhenthetbing

that pe beafrapde of, Falletp in fodenlpe ipke a

Rozme and pour mpferp lpbe a tempelte: pea,

when trouble and beupnes cometh bpon pou.

‘Chen hall thep call vpon me, but J tpl not
eate:thep thal feke meearlp, but thep hal not
pudeme. And that becaule thep bated knot

ledge: and recepued not the feare of the Lozbde:

but abbozred mp counfell,¢ defppfed all mp coz

reccpon. Cherfoze thall thepeate thefrutes of

thep2 owne wape, ¢ befplled wpth tbeir owne

inuencpong, fo; the turnpng atwap of p bntople

thall lepe themt,¢ the pzolperpte of fooles Hal-

be tbeir otone deftruccton.* Sut wholoharke: pz.

net) onto me, Hall dwell fafelp, ¢ be lure from

anpe feare ofeucll. _

CTphe.ii.Chapter. l
MOpibomeis to be embjaced and fet bp. Andadvog
Cerous woman ts to be elchued, i
Tareara V tonne, pfthou wpltrecepue mp -

| yr } H too2des and Kepe np commaunde- 3

p: A7 Me mentes bp the, thatthou wplteen-=

DBAS Ey clpne thpne eares nto wpldome,

baie applpe tbpne bert thé to vnder ta:

bpnge. fo pé thou crpett after bpfdome , and

calle foz knotoledge : pE thou tekefke after ber

as after monep and digg eft fo: ber as for trea-

fure,thentbaltthou bnderftande the frare of p

fc rA She fie aae ge ghey s ae Jacobta
ti 02d tpat geucth ploome,out of bps Eeti. t.a

mouth cometh knowledgeand dnderftanding. 222e


De bpdeth vp belth foz the righteous. He pete and. ilid,
et


5


ace uethtbe welfare ofthe rpabteous ãd defend
t tbemtbat walke {pneerelpe: betepeth them it


theriabt path, and pzeferuetbthe wape of fuch
Aalia m with godlpnes. Theale thou ve 5
derftande rpgbteoulnelie,tudgemeét , ¢ equptie:
pea andeurrp good path. Uhen wpis entrerh
ntoth d a dd fe delite in knowledge:
thé hal counfel preleructhe,¢ vnderftandpnge
tball kepe the . Chat thou maptfte be delpuered
fré the eupll ape, and from the ma that ipea-
keth fromarde tbynaes. From luchag iang


The Prouerbes,


‘Debsittc, AND* a two edgediwerde intheirbandes. Ca
15 prong te of D aaa ent Aon a
ople. Tobpudethep2 bpnges tnchapnes,€
DEFTIG, f, fbepznablestpep Ipnkes Seppon. * Chat
thep mape be anenged of them,agit ig Lo2ptté :
i Suche þonour baue all bystapntes.
allelupab.


CCbe.cl.~lalme.
LAVDATE DOMINVM IN,
PHallelupah.
ea) Papi Godin his holineffe,pzaple
aver C bpm inthe 2 ona ie of bis pow
foes fer. Pzaple bpm inpps noble ac-


AEA A tes , papie bpm accozdpnge vnto
Enea Hysercellentgreatnefle. zaple
bim in tbe founde of the trompet , praple bpm


bpon the lute andbarpe. (zaple bpm in fpm
bales anddaiiles, pzaple bpm wpon the ftrpu=
ges and pppe. iy
Pzaple bpm vpon the toeltuned cpmbales,
pape bpm bpon the loude cpmbales. Let
euerp thpnge ps rhe oe th,pzaple the 1020.


all ;
Prapletheeucrlattpnge.
EC The ende of the Platter.


CThe P2oucrbes of


Salomon.
CTbefpEChapter.
C The praple of wploome. We mape not birken bnto
the boluptrous pzoueract onginel guee of fpnntre.
öp ome complapneth bet to be befppled of all men,
€pophecpeth detruccpon bato ber delppfers,


A prema Ye Prouerbes of Soalomé the
wa NE a fonne of Dauid kpna of Flra-


ee) (Pale el:to learne opfoome, eto per-
D 2 ev, Ceane theintteuccid and toper-
wes een 1 eane the ozdes Of DNDErtian
re teen Ding:andtherbp coreceaue pzu


Lass dence, rpagbteoulnes indgemët


lawr of thp motber:fo2 that Hall bapnge
yntothp beade, and sibs a a hape a ou
tbp neche


pt thep cntp
pon


and fplloureboufes wpth ef . Catt intbp
a


=


Conne walke not thou with them-tefrapne thp

fote from their wape. For «their fete runne to PNN

eucll:gare DEPE blonde. ut in bapne

isthe net lapdtogth befoze the bpzdeg epes, pea

thep them felues lape thapte one for anotberg

bloude ¢ one df them wolde Aepanotber. There S

ave the toapes of al fuch as be couetous, theone

Woolderaupthanothers Ipfe «Wa tfoome crpeth Povia

opt hout.¢ putted forth ber voice inthe reteg,

HDbe calleth befoze the congregacion in the opé

gateg and Hetveth her toozdeg thozowee the cp=

tie,faping: D pechplozen, howe longe wyll pe

loue chplòp pueg: howe lige tpl the (kozners

delpte tn fcoznpnge, and the vnwpte be encmp-=

eg onto knowledge: D turne pou punto mp coz

teccpon:lo J toplerpzefle mp mpnde nto pou,

€ make pou vnderftande mp wozdeg. * Zhaue <te.trob

called, ad pe refuledit: J bane ftretched out mp I% bes

Hand:andno man regarded tt:but allmp coun-

{cls baucpe defppfed :andfet mp cozreccpon at

naught. Cherfoze hall ZJalfolaugyin pour dg

ftruccion, and moche pou, when that thpnae $

pe fave cometh vpon pou:euen tobhenthetbing

that pe beafrapde of, Falletp in fodenlpe ipke a

Rozme and pour mpferp lpbe a tempelte: pea,

when trouble and beupnes cometh bpon pou.

‘Chen hall thep call vpon me, but J tpl not
eate:thep thal feke meearlp, but thep hal not
pudeme. And that becaule thep bated knot

ledge: and recepued not the feare of the Lozbde:

but abbozred mp counfell,¢ defppfed all mp coz

reccpon. Cherfoze thall thepeate thefrutes of

thep2 owne wape, ¢ befplled wpth tbeir owne

inuencpong, fo; the turnpng atwap of p bntople

thall lepe themt,¢ the pzolperpte of fooles Hal-

be tbeir otone deftruccton.* Sut wholoharke: pz.

net) onto me, Hall dwell fafelp, ¢ be lure from

anpe feare ofeucll. _

CTphe.ii.Chapter. l
MOpibomeis to be embjaced and fet bp. Andadvog
Cerous woman ts to be elchued, i
Tareara V tonne, pfthou wpltrecepue mp -

| yr } H too2des and Kepe np commaunde- 3

p: A7 Me mentes bp the, thatthou wplteen-=

DBAS Ey clpne thpne eares nto wpldome,

baie applpe tbpne bert thé to vnder ta:

bpnge. fo pé thou crpett after bpfdome , and

calle foz knotoledge : pE thou tekefke after ber

as after monep and digg eft fo: ber as for trea-

fure,thentbaltthou bnderftande the frare of p

fc rA She fie aae ge ghey s ae Jacobta
ti 02d tpat geucth ploome,out of bps Eeti. t.a

mouth cometh knowledgeand dnderftanding. 222e


De bpdeth vp belth foz the righteous. He pete and. ilid,
et


5


ace uethtbe welfare ofthe rpabteous ãd defend
t tbemtbat walke {pneerelpe: betepeth them it


theriabt path, and pzeferuetbthe wape of fuch
Aalia m with godlpnes. Theale thou ve 5
derftande rpgbteoulnelie,tudgemeét , ¢ equptie:
pea andeurrp good path. Uhen wpis entrerh
ntoth d a dd fe delite in knowledge:
thé hal counfel preleructhe,¢ vnderftandpnge
tball kepe the . Chat thou maptfte be delpuered
fré the eupll ape, and from the ma that ipea-
keth fromarde tbynaes. From luchag iang


the bye fErete,¢ walke itt f wWaies of darknefie:


imiia j


ethe peace. Let mercp efapthfulnes


DyN
neuer gofromtbhe:bpnde thëaboute thp neche g
wptetbëintbe tableg ofthpue bart. S0 palt |
thoufpndefauoure and good vndertandpnge Ee


inthelpabtof Godandmen. Putthptruftin | 4


God wpry al thpne hart:¢ leancnot ynto thine
otne wpt. Fn all tpp apes bauerefpect wito
@tap,p.e Dpm:¢ be thal ogver thy goinges.* Wenot wile
ikom.pii.c Inthpne owne cocepte:but feare the Lozbe, and
departe from euell:fo pall thp nauel be whole,


tob tiib s thy hance Fräne t nee i
se a & COP bones Erõge.t Honour the Lozd with thp
mala b. fubltaiice:¢ with the
ero ritie € CeGAte,em(geue bute the poeze, fo (hall thp barnes be
EFi © Folle wptbplétcoulnefe: and thp prelies pall
7 flowe ouer pth itoete topne. 4p fone delpyle:
nottbechatening of the Lorde, neither fapnte
Deb-ril.b. when thou art rebubed of bpm. Foz whom p
apolt A orploucth, bpm be chattenethe, epet delpterh
indDpm,euen as a fatherin bps owne fone.ciiel
(3 bymtthatEpndeth wpfoome ,¢ tea Dr-
deranbdpnge:fo2 the gettpng ofitis better thé
€ anp marchatdy ee uct, €ppzotpte of itis
Pioba Heeger chengoloe. x pome is moo arth
then pecpous toneg: ¢ all the thpnges $ thou
cant aefpzeare not tobecompared wutober.
Upon per rpabt bande is lige pic, ¢ vps ber
left bande is ryches ePonoure. Her wapes are
pleafafit mapes, all ber pathes are peaceable.
be is a «tree of Ipfe to them that laye bolde
pponber.¢ bleed is be that hepeth ber fatte.
Wipth wpldom bath the Lod lapde the fouida-
cpi of theeartp:¢ thozowe buderfadpnae bath
De tablyed the beauts. Thozowwe bys wpf.
dome the Deapthes bzeake Vp, andthecloudes
broppe Dotone the dewe. Hp (ne,let not thele
thpnges departe from thynecpes : but kepem
tawe and mp counfell, that thou maptte baue
pleafure of longe ipfeand ynderitiopnge : toz
tbey thalbe lpfe bnto mp foule, and grace Dns
tomp mouth, Chen Malte thou walkefafelpin.
thp ware:g thp fote Hall not Fomble.*DEtpow


Geng, tt.b


pro.f.b-


bi Sal onioit.


ritlpnges of al thpne cit


— Molsrh..


fleapette, thon fhaltenot be afrapde:but Halte
take thy reit, ¢ flepe{toetelp: Thou nedefte not
to be afcapbde of anp fodepne feare,nepther foz p
dpolent rufthpnae inoftbe yngoblpe, when tt _
commeth. Woz the Lod fhall ftade bp thy fpe, D
andkepetbp fore, that thou be not takë. icp:
Da We ho good thinge from thë that haue nedes
fo lige as thpnebandisableto dott. Sap not
witothp neghbour:gothp wap. come agatne;
to mo2owe wpl 3 geue the: whereas thou hat
nowe togenechpm. Fntende no hurte ynto thp
nepgbboure,fepnge be doth dwelin reft bp the.
Strpue notlpghtelp wth anp man wptbhout
a caule whereas bebathdonethbenobarme. .
¥fFolowe not a wpcked man, and gol none of P:s
bis wapes:fo2 the Lozd abbozreth p frotwarde:
but Dpscounfell is amonge the rpgbteous.
‘Che curte of the Lozde is inthe boule of the bn
godlp:but be blefleth the Dwellpnees off rogo
teous. As fo2 the fcoznefull vothe not belaugy
tiem to formes but he geueth grace wnto plow
lp. The tpfe thal paue hononre in poflettis:but
Hame ts the promoci that fooles pall Yane.
Che.wit.Cchapter, —
@ YOoplbome an her frutes ought to befearched. .
err aay Care, D pechplozen, thefatheripe B
nya Cebogtacpon, and take goodbede ,
ave that pe mape learne wpioome.
ae Eor Fhaue geucnpoua gooddo-
ieee ctrpie, forlake tot pe mp latwe.
o: when FJ my (elf was mp fatbhersdere fone,
andtenderlp beloucd of mpmotber:betaughte
me alfo,andfapde bnto me. * Let thpne parte deve. ob
receaue mp wozdes, kepe mp commaundemens FFs
tes, etboutbaltlyuc. Getthe ploome: g get
the vnderftandinge-fozgette not the wozdes of
toy noaie ana tbapnkenotfromtbem. E0-
fake ber not and the Hall prelerue the: loueber `
and the pall kepe the. i |
The chefe popnt of wpldomeis,that thou bé 25
fopllpnge to obtapne ypfdome : and before all
thy gooves toget the buderitandpng. * Dake veu, rrbiv
mocheofberandihethallpromotetbe: Pca, ph
thou embzace ber, the hall bzpnge the pnto po:
noure. She pall make thea gracysug hecd,and
garnpibe the ypth a crowne ofglozpe. Weare
be: fonne g reccaue mp wordes: and the peared:
of thp Ipfe Halbe manp. F baue Hhewed the,the
tape of topldb,¢ led thetnto the rpabt pathes.
Sotbatp 4 goet therein there Halno trapt
nes binder p.q wbt thou rine, p thalt not fall,
Take falte holde ofdoctrpne, andlether not €
goo: kepeher, fo: theisthplpfe. * Come not prai. a
inthe patbe of the bngodlye, and toalbe not in and. Frbita
the ape of the wpcbed. Abhozrc tt, and qonot
therein:Departe alpe and pafic ouet bpit. o?
thep cannot Qepe crcepte thep baue fpe done
fomempfchefe:neptber take thep anp refe, ers
cept they bauefirtdonefomebarme. Wor thep
eaite the bzeade of bpchkcdnefle. andDd2punke the
wpneofrobbery. The pathe of therightwpfe
fhbpneth asthe lpabre thatiscuer bipaqytcrand
bupabter vnto the perfcctedaye, Wut the wap
of the bngobdlpts as the Darkenes,thep Bnotwe


| '
DD Gp lone


not where thep falle.


the bye fErete,¢ walke itt f wWaies of darknefie:


imiia j


ethe peace. Let mercp efapthfulnes


DyN
neuer gofromtbhe:bpnde thëaboute thp neche g
wptetbëintbe tableg ofthpue bart. S0 palt |
thoufpndefauoure and good vndertandpnge Ee


inthelpabtof Godandmen. Putthptruftin | 4


God wpry al thpne hart:¢ leancnot ynto thine
otne wpt. Fn all tpp apes bauerefpect wito
@tap,p.e Dpm:¢ be thal ogver thy goinges.* Wenot wile
ikom.pii.c Inthpne owne cocepte:but feare the Lozbe, and
departe from euell:fo pall thp nauel be whole,


tob tiib s thy hance Fräne t nee i
se a & COP bones Erõge.t Honour the Lozd with thp
mala b. fubltaiice:¢ with the
ero ritie € CeGAte,em(geue bute the poeze, fo (hall thp barnes be
EFi © Folle wptbplétcoulnefe: and thp prelies pall
7 flowe ouer pth itoete topne. 4p fone delpyle:
nottbechatening of the Lorde, neither fapnte
Deb-ril.b. when thou art rebubed of bpm. Foz whom p
apolt A orploucth, bpm be chattenethe, epet delpterh
indDpm,euen as a fatherin bps owne fone.ciiel
(3 bymtthatEpndeth wpfoome ,¢ tea Dr-
deranbdpnge:fo2 the gettpng ofitis better thé
€ anp marchatdy ee uct, €ppzotpte of itis
Pioba Heeger chengoloe. x pome is moo arth
then pecpous toneg: ¢ all the thpnges $ thou
cant aefpzeare not tobecompared wutober.
Upon per rpabt bande is lige pic, ¢ vps ber
left bande is ryches ePonoure. Her wapes are
pleafafit mapes, all ber pathes are peaceable.
be is a «tree of Ipfe to them that laye bolde
pponber.¢ bleed is be that hepeth ber fatte.
Wipth wpldom bath the Lod lapde the fouida-
cpi of theeartp:¢ thozowe buderfadpnae bath
De tablyed the beauts. Thozowwe bys wpf.
dome the Deapthes bzeake Vp, andthecloudes
broppe Dotone the dewe. Hp (ne,let not thele
thpnges departe from thynecpes : but kepem
tawe and mp counfell, that thou maptte baue
pleafure of longe ipfeand ynderitiopnge : toz
tbey thalbe lpfe bnto mp foule, and grace Dns
tomp mouth, Chen Malte thou walkefafelpin.
thp ware:g thp fote Hall not Fomble.*DEtpow


Geng, tt.b


pro.f.b-


bi Sal onioit.


ritlpnges of al thpne cit


— Molsrh..


fleapette, thon fhaltenot be afrapde:but Halte
take thy reit, ¢ flepe{toetelp: Thou nedefte not
to be afcapbde of anp fodepne feare,nepther foz p
dpolent rufthpnae inoftbe yngoblpe, when tt _
commeth. Woz the Lod fhall ftade bp thy fpe, D
andkepetbp fore, that thou be not takë. icp:
Da We ho good thinge from thë that haue nedes
fo lige as thpnebandisableto dott. Sap not
witothp neghbour:gothp wap. come agatne;
to mo2owe wpl 3 geue the: whereas thou hat
nowe togenechpm. Fntende no hurte ynto thp
nepgbboure,fepnge be doth dwelin reft bp the.
Strpue notlpghtelp wth anp man wptbhout
a caule whereas bebathdonethbenobarme. .
¥fFolowe not a wpcked man, and gol none of P:s
bis wapes:fo2 the Lozd abbozreth p frotwarde:
but Dpscounfell is amonge the rpgbteous.
‘Che curte of the Lozde is inthe boule of the bn
godlp:but be blefleth the Dwellpnees off rogo
teous. As fo2 the fcoznefull vothe not belaugy
tiem to formes but he geueth grace wnto plow
lp. The tpfe thal paue hononre in poflettis:but
Hame ts the promoci that fooles pall Yane.
Che.wit.Cchapter, —
@ YOoplbome an her frutes ought to befearched. .
err aay Care, D pechplozen, thefatheripe B
nya Cebogtacpon, and take goodbede ,
ave that pe mape learne wpioome.
ae Eor Fhaue geucnpoua gooddo-
ieee ctrpie, forlake tot pe mp latwe.
o: when FJ my (elf was mp fatbhersdere fone,
andtenderlp beloucd of mpmotber:betaughte
me alfo,andfapde bnto me. * Let thpne parte deve. ob
receaue mp wozdes, kepe mp commaundemens FFs
tes, etboutbaltlyuc. Getthe ploome: g get
the vnderftandinge-fozgette not the wozdes of
toy noaie ana tbapnkenotfromtbem. E0-
fake ber not and the Hall prelerue the: loueber `
and the pall kepe the. i |
The chefe popnt of wpldomeis,that thou bé 25
fopllpnge to obtapne ypfdome : and before all
thy gooves toget the buderitandpng. * Dake veu, rrbiv
mocheofberandihethallpromotetbe: Pca, ph
thou embzace ber, the hall bzpnge the pnto po:
noure. She pall make thea gracysug hecd,and
garnpibe the ypth a crowne ofglozpe. Weare
be: fonne g reccaue mp wordes: and the peared:
of thp Ipfe Halbe manp. F baue Hhewed the,the
tape of topldb,¢ led thetnto the rpabt pathes.
Sotbatp 4 goet therein there Halno trapt
nes binder p.q wbt thou rine, p thalt not fall,
Take falte holde ofdoctrpne, andlether not €
goo: kepeher, fo: theisthplpfe. * Come not prai. a
inthe patbe of the bngodlye, and toalbe not in and. Frbita
the ape of the wpcbed. Abhozrc tt, and qonot
therein:Departe alpe and pafic ouet bpit. o?
thep cannot Qepe crcepte thep baue fpe done
fomempfchefe:neptber take thep anp refe, ers
cept they bauefirtdonefomebarme. Wor thep
eaite the bzeade of bpchkcdnefle. andDd2punke the
wpneofrobbery. The pathe of therightwpfe
fhbpneth asthe lpabre thatiscuer bipaqytcrand
bupabter vnto the perfcctedaye, Wut the wap
of the bngobdlpts as the Darkenes,thep Bnotwe


| '
DD Gp lone


not where thep falle.


The Poucrbes :


weute ob «Sp fonne,markemp wides, ¢ enclpne thine
and HE earebntompfapinges. Let them not departe
from tbpne epes but kepe them euenin the mtd-
deft oF copne herte: 4fortbep are lpfe Suto alt
thofe that fpnde them. bealthe on
bodpes.iiepe a withall dilpgence,foz
thervpobangeth lpfe. Put awapefro the afro
ward mouth, andlet the lpppes of Cclaundze be
farrefrathe. Let thyne epes bebolve the thing


isrpgbt, Eletthpne epelpddeslowetrepghe |


eforethe. Pondethe pathofthp feet, eter al

+Deut,b,d thp wapesbe ozdzedarpgde. * Currienota-

F-Frbi.D fope, nepther to the ryabte bande, no? to the
lefte :buttoptpbolbetbpfotcfromeucll.

en (Hozthe Lore kneweth the wapes that are on therpabte

- bande, 2g for the mapes that beonthe left haoc,thep be frotward

Jo be hall Dpzect thp gopng¢s,and thp wapes he (all gupve i


(Be warnech to efchucand Ape whozdeme: Be fosbpd:
beth prodigalptpe € WalEull (pendpuge, Hewplieth veto
Ipueofour one labours. egen mut loucthbep: mpurs.
yawa P foune,qeuebpde bnto mp wpf-
SAA Dome, g bote thpne care wnto mp


S hs y ey peudence:tbat thou mapett regard-


ean good countapll , andthat thp ipp-
ele. pes mape (peke knotbledge.

om  (aAppip not thouthp Celfeto tbe bpiceptfutnetfe ofatvoman)

pre.ft.b St0z thelpppes of an harlot area dzopppng

and,biis honpecombe, andher thzote te moze glpitering

thenople. Wutat the lakee isas bptteras

 womiwod andher tonge) aS arpe asativoo

# eped lwerde, Per fete godowne vntodeath,

25 ano ber Keppes pearic thozowe bnto bell. Per

 chaunce,thou dwellpng wpth ber, wplt pondz¢

the path of lyfe : fo pnttedtalte are ber tapes

thoucanfnothnowethben. Pearemenowe


_ therfore (D mplonne) anddeparte not frome


the wozdes of mpmouty.
€ tkepetbp wayefarre fromber, andcome not
nvyetbedoozesofberboule. Chat thou geuc


not thp ftrength vntoother,andthpearestop (t


crucll. @bat other men be not Fplicd with thp
eodes, and ý thp labours come notina fratige
houle. Pea that thou mourne not at f lat whe
thou bat {pet thp bodpandlutp grene pouth)
and thë fap: Blas, why hatid J nurtourerwip
ppd mp bert ak a corection-Hbherfoze was
not 3 obedpent vntotbe vopce of mp teachers,
and berkencdnot bnto thé that enfourmedmes
4am comcalmoftinto all mpffoztune in f md
Deft of the multitude € congregacpon. Dz2inke
ofthe hater, of thpne otone well, of therpucts
ap thatrunne oute ofthpne owne fppynges. Let
- thp toelles Aotwe outabzoade, that there mape
berpucrs ofwatersin the ftreates,butlet them
be onelp thpne owne, and not ffraungers pt
me a id ee concrete
the wyfe of thppout). Loupngers the Dpnde,
nn frenbip $3 eroo: let ber bpeaties altvape
fatiffpe tbe and bolde the enercontent witb Der
loue. : Paget ns Serpent baue pleatur
inanbarlot, ¢ embzacethe bofome of another
gob.rrrta Woman! * Foz euerp Mans wapesare openin
@Frritt.c, ¢hefpabt ofthe eet acy pala be
gopnges. The wprkednelle off bngodlp hal
catcbe btm felf,and witp the Mareg of his otne


prtoalltbep: —


[iberoen fale opinen TRAns
u


fpnnes pall bebetrapped. ethall dpe with
outamiendemerite, and fo? bys qreate foolptp-
neebe hall qoaftrape.
- C THe. vi. Chapter.

E Tbe Clouthfull and flougepth ie pipched and fprredto

wozke. fhe (ep(matpck is repzourn, Aouowltrpe ougheto be

earneitip ayopoed. |

PETEA) V Conne x pfthon be (uertpe for thp J
V VAN Eincpgbbour,and batt fattened thpne w20-rbit.<
by) band foz another man, part bode +F“
was U pth thpne owne wozdes, 4 taken

ied t thine atone peche. Cherfoze mp
fonnedo thys. thou palt be bifcharged: when
thou art cometntotbp nepahbours dDaunger.
Go thy wapes then loone, buble thy lelf.¢ with
thy frendes tntreat thp creditoure: let not thine
epes fiepe,no2 thpneepelpodes flombze. Saue
thpfelf agadoofrom the hand of p punter and -
as abpadefromtbebande of thbefouler: Goto
theemmet(thout wr Pb el wap
es and learne tobe wple. hehatbnoguide, —
no? oucrfear,noz ruler:petin pfomerc Me proup
dethber meat, andaathereth ber fode togpther 25


~in the bþaruc t. * Howe loge wilt thou Nepe thou pro riit.»


Auggphman: When wplethouarple oute of
thy cpe, Praficape onftpllalptle, flombea
Iptle, folde thpne bandeg togpthet pet alptie,
that tion ve flepe:fo pall pouertp come VR
totheas one that trauaypleth bp the wape € ne-
celiptte Ip kea focaponed man.


Batpethou benot Cloutheull,thbphartiete Mall cometas a -
fpipngpag twell,anbd poucrtpe Hall fipe favre from the. i


And bngodlp perfona wpcked man goeth w
afrowarde mouth, be wpnketh wpthhis epes, C


p betokeneth twpth bps fete, be popntedw bis fin


gers, he is euer pmagening mifchefe € fromard

tpit in bis bert, and caufeth diicorde. Therfore

(hall his deftruction come battely vpon bpm, To

denlp Wall be bealltobzoké,andnotbebealed.

x Cocele (prethpnges doth the Lorde hate.and yo :0.70,¢
efeucnth be vtterlpabbozreth: X pzoudloge,) =-
alpinge tonge,badesthat thedinnnocét bloud ~~
an berte ý gocthaboutw wpched pmaginacy
ong,* fete that be lwpft inrunnpngete DOMP] ora cage
pio.ta


oneas folveth difcozd¢e amonge brethz€ —
i onne kepe thy fathers chmaundement, ap

efozrtake notthe latweofthp mother, put the
pp together in thpne bert,¢ bpne them about
thpneck. Chat they map lead p where 3 gorm,
peclerue the whé thouarta fepe, tyat when p
awakcff,thoumapell talke ofthe * Fog the co pros crip n
maundement iga lanterne g the latve a lighte:
pea chattenpng g nurtcuris the wape of lpte, ¢
thep map kepe thefrom*thceucll woman ant sonani
from the flatterpnge tonge of the bartlot , that «
thouluftenot atter ber bewtpein thpneberte,
and left thou be taken peh ber Fayre lookes.

Anbarlotte Mpllmakea man to begge bys
bzeed and a woman wpll pag 2 the precp=
ouslpfe. apamantake fpzeinbisbofom,
anddpsclothesnotbe brente” — ,

Dı can one qo bpd boote cooles,andhis fete

notbeburter Cuenfo, tehofoecuergocthinto
bis neighbours topfe € toucheth ber,cannot be


yngpltpe. * BWedonot veterlp delpple a Ero.ppii.a
tpat i


a


= Sl pm
i F


t
j =
2 = a
i
a


rs a
=


A hy \Gh T


of Salomon —


that Fealeth,tolatpltpebpysfoule whe be is bi
grpe : but pibe mape begotten, peretozetha =
gapne fcuentpmesas moche , oz els pe maketh


recompence withal the good of bisboule. Wut F
swwhofo commpttcth aduoutep piga womat ig


peis afoole, and bepngeth bis lpte to deltrucct-
on. We getteth bim felfe alfo pame anddpiha
nour, fuche as thal neuer be put oute. oz p ge
loufp ¢ tozath of hema wll not be tntreated :
no,thougprpou woldeff offre him great gpftes
fomakeamendes, be Yoplnotrecepne them.
c þe. vii.Chapter:
CSod ought to be feared and honoured. ps römann:


ARE

US Yeuen as the apple ofthyueepe g thor
Qaltlpue. 2pnde them vpon thpt igers, g.,
opte them inthetable ofthpnebarte.. pape
bnto wploom thou art mp {pier:and cal bnder


prti bria tandpnae thpkynlwoman: x that they mape


25


kepe the from the fraunge woman, and from p
harlot whpchgpucth forte Wozdes, Foz ont
of the wpndowe of mp boufe F looked thorotve.
thelatie,and bebdelde en athe and ae
mongeotherfimple fol&es. 3 Pe one pong
foole,copnee ouer the Aretes, bp the comer ing
wape towarde the harlottes boufe, inthe twp-
lpg bt of the euenpnge,tohen tt begannowto

npabt darke. And beholde, there mete dyin a


gecline YWomanxiwpth opt tokens of an harlot, onelpe


€


ber bert thas bpode. Sbe was ful of loude Woz
desy ceadpeto Dallpe: whole fete couloe not a-
bpde inthe houle,nowe is the wptbout,notoe in
the fitetes,elapetha barte in enerp coner, the
caught p ponge ma,kpiled him, as notatba
medfaping: 3 bada towe of Cpaceoffcpnaes to
pape,andthps dape ¥ perfourmett. Cherfoze
cante 3 forth to mete the, that J might Teke thp
face tobane Jfoundethe. Jhauedeckte mp
bed wprpcoueringesand clothes of Egypte.
(Pp bed haue J made tofinel of Dp2re, Aloes,
and Cpnanon. Comelet vslpe togpeber,and
take our pleafure tpl it bedap Ipaq be: q we wpll
entope the pleafures ofloue. Jo? the qood ina
isnot atbome,be ts gonefarre of. Pe bath ta:
ken the bagge of monep wprhhim:and topl re-
turne bome at the appopnted folempnie feae .
‘Thus with manp lete woz2des the ouercame
im, and wyth ber flatterpnge lpppes the entp-
eodymfodapnlp tofolowe her: agit were an
orcled tothe laughter, andlpiie ag tt were a
foole that laugbeth when be gotb tothe fockes
tobe punpltped fo longe tpll he had wounded
Be leuer topth ber darte:lpke ag pf a bpade pa-
ed to the fnare, not Enot) ig te theperpll
of bys Ipfelpethtberppon . Heare me nowe
therfore, Dmp chpldzen, and marke the woz =
besgofmpmouthbe. Letnotthpne bart wadze
in ber Doapes, be not p Decepuedin ber pathes.
Sozmanyp one hath He wounded, g calf cotone:
pea,manyp a froge ma bath benfapne by ý mea
nes ofber. per boufeg are p wap Dnie bell: and
bepugemendoine tite the chambers ofdcatp.


è | ‘ m e n ae
rê r


 Dopee. Cake bede butokna


- open mp lpppes tot


C Tbe. viii. Chapter.


_ MZ be prapte ofthe wploemeof Gon,


+f ‘Ate bope Standeth the not tn p ppe


Peres ge palaces inthe fretegand wapes/
leis ceca DOCCH fhe not crpe befoze the hole
cpticand in the qates tobere mé go out and ins
SAE Gant dibs Kien Tare rR OE wpm Feal
nto(the chplozen of henao Alpfte pp mp

pede wntobnowledge D pe ig-
Hozaunte: be pe plein perti Dpefooles.
Geue care,fo2 J pil ope of grcat matters;
: e Lebpnges that be right.

- oz mp thzote albe talkinge of the trueth,
€ mplpp


Pe L
| Ey


frowardnefle noz faled therin. Chey are all
plapnetofluch as topll onder fande,andtpabte
tothem tbat fpnde Knowledge. Aecepue mp
Doctrpne, andnotfpluer:¢ mp &nowledge moze


Ferg Dethnot* tpfoome ae docthe F
pay tot Dnderitandpag puth fozth ber prase


: abbozre bigodlpnefle. All the B
` woordes of mp mouthare rpgbteous there isno


| Solari.


fie fpite qolde.+ Wo: plod is moze worth the H10.111.6


precpots rones:pca, all thpnges that p cante
bel pze, mapnot becopared vntoit. J wpldome
baue mp Divellpnae pep bnowledge.and pzu:
Dent counfapllis mpne owne. Che feare of
Lo2d abboaretpwypckednelle,pzyde, Dpldayne,
g theenel wap:anda mouth that {peaket) wpe
hed thin pet vtterly abbozre. Jean gpue cot
fapl , € Aconterr


tbynges : J haue vnderitan- €


bing, Fhauefkrégth. *Chozowe me, kpnges duton
rapgtie:tbozowe me,counfaplers mabe iut las $% vir


weg. Thorotme, do prpneeg bearerule:and
allindges of thecartherecute iudgement. J


amloupnae puto tholethatloucme:and*«thep Lak, tiv


that {eke mecarlpthallfpndeme. ychelle y
honour are wyep me:pea,ercellent qoopes and
rpgbteoutnefie. <p frute is better then gold
and precpous (fone , and mpne encreale modjze
wothtben fpne lpluer . F wpll gupde the in
the toape ofrpghteoufnelle , and in the krere of
indDgemente. ‘Chat J mapelende prolperitpe


totbofe ý loue me, €toencrealethep2treafurc, D


* The Lowe bymfelfebadme in pofleffpon Sarir. 6


inthe beqpnnpnge of bys wapes, oz euer pe be-


ganne bps tworkes afozetpme . * J bane bene ecerrstitsb


orbepnedfromeucrlattpnge , andfrom thebe-
nnpnge og enerthecartpe has made. EU hë
cf fas borne, there were nepther depptes noz
mpngcgof water. Wefore the foundacpongs
of the monntapneg Were layed: pea, befoze all
bplies was Jbome. Che earthandal thatis
ppon theearthe toas not pet made, nonor the
groundeltfelfe. xo: when be made the pea-


neng, 3 Was peelent: when he fet vpthe depp- S2PMe-b:


tesinordze,tohenbe banged the cloudegsaboue,
when be fattened the (pzpneres of the depe.


When he Chut the fee within x certapne boñ See.


des thatthe Materstynloe not gooouce thép: arrua
marches that becommaunded. pral.ctitt b


Wiben he lapedtbe folidactons of the earth J
was with him, osdzinge all thinges:delptpnge
daplp and refopipnge ae befoze ppm.

Ag Foz the rounde compafle of thps woelbe,
FZ make it (opfull:foa mp delptets to be amoge
! DP ii the


Pa ae
me


The Brouerbes


thechplogen ofuten, Gherforederke vnto me, eptigehanvemakethepcpe.


D pechplozen , blefled are thep that kepe mp
fhapes. D geuceare dntonurtour,be wpe, €
refulcitnot. Wletledis the man that pearcth
ine:Woatchpnge Daplp at mp gates, andgening
attendautice at thepoftes of mpdeozes. Eog
oto Fpndeth me pndeth lpfe:¢ al obtapne
quoure oa D. Wut wholo offendetha-
yapn me, burteth bps owne foule. But
that bate me,aretdeloners ofdeath. | ;
eS ETheie Chapter. ——
COHploomemoicth allmenta embraceber,
whe propertpe oF am toho., an SP
Tages Pfoome bath buplded her felfe an
Ea (ee © boufe, g bewen out feuen ppllerg ,
Ae | the bath bplledber vptaples, pous
ay, revout per wpne, and prepared dec.
pos omitable. <bebathlente forthe ber.
mapbéestocrpe vpon the bpelk place of pcptie,
Wiotoisignozauntet pm come Dptyer. +;
6  Andtothe vuwplethelapd:Dcomecon pour
fape,eate mp beecd,¢ depne mp topucwbpeh
Jhane poured outfo2 pou. fforlakeiqnozaice,
and ye thall lpue: and le that pe goin the wape
of wnderitandpng. UWipoforeproucth a fcozne
fullperfonne, getteth bim felfe oplhonoute:and
betbatrebubeth the Dn godly Fatueth pin elf.
Bepzoue nota (corners let be owe p eupil wpl:
but rebuke a ple man, and De wplllouctbe.
Othe a oplerere manbutan occafpon andbe
topll be the Mopler:teachearpghteous man, and
pewpl! enera lps Ning 9 ;
= x The feare of the Lorde ts the begpnnpnae o
sabe b wione æ thebnotledre of Dolpe ebenace sig
Bomis onderftandpnge. Jo? thozowe metbp dapes
"O halbe prolonged, € the pearesoftbplpfe Malbe
- manp. PE thou be i thy wpidome thal do
thp felfegood:but pf thou thpnkett tcozne ther-
of,it albethpneownebarme. A fooli retch
lefe oman full of o2des,andfucbe a one as
batbuo knowledge , fptteth at thedooze of per
poule,¢ inthe pe places of the cptie,to cal {uch
as qo bp,and that walke ffrepabt in thep2 wap-
es. Ciibolots tqnozaut(fapeh ibe)let bimcome
byther,e tothe pnwple He fapth: ol waters
are fwete:¢ me beced thatis prenelp caté, bath
agoodtaft. And he doeth not contpdze, ptbep
are but deed wHpch be there,and that ber getes
are inthe depe of bell. |
(For he that well beiopned bate her, Hall go bowneto hell:
CH but be that auopaeth From ber, malbe tauro.
= CTbe.r.Cbapter.
Eyn thys chapter and all that folowe bnto thethpatp,
the wplemanerhozteth bp npuers featences, whpch be
calleth parables to Folowe beries and Ape bpces. And
fetweth allo what pro fpi commeth of wefaomes¢ what
bpnberaunce proceabethoftcolpinette, —
__ CPzouerbes of Salomon.
y eS CPE Uile*fine maketh a gladfatber:
AnA epee butan wndilerete fonne isan peni-


ir - j = s 7
a roe a ai
à ù Pode a 7 Wack F
E i. i, =

ag ee Le

pla EA
tor F = oy igi ke ag Fi =
= a i oe

i! Fa


Nan


sodlpthallperpih. Thewapeof the L020 ce,


— {hall perpe. koaa atd


-o (MDbolo regardeth lelpages , Edeth the wpnderanddoeth
but folowe bprbes that haur taken thep} cpa ee


: min)
holo gathereth in Sommer, ig wyle: but > |
bethatis floug ith in Paruelk.beingetDt im {elf '
toconfufpon. Wlelpngeg are se ced of |
the rpabtcous, andthemouth of the pngodlpe i
bepetb mpichefein feceete. * Chememozpall ira, crita
ofthe uf pall baueagood repay Dae fname
of the Ungodly pall tpnke. A topfeman topt
recepuc warnpnge, but a peatpnge foole thalbe
punpihed. +*2e that leadetbaninnocentelpfe, tetris.
ivalhethfurelp:but whole gotha te20ge Wap ,
albe tnotwen. * Pethat wenketh wpth bys ecc.rposi.
eve, wplldotome barme:but be that path afoo
Ip) mouth, thalbebeaten. he mouthe of a |
tyghtcous manis a well of lpfe: but the mouth E
offbe bigodlp kepeth mplchefeinfecrete. —
- Cupl NOEL REGED Vp Erptr:x buttone cone feet 2253
retbthe multitude of fpnnes. Fn thelpppeg g|
ofppm that bath brea ee ane ES 4 man all
fpnde toifoome, but therod beligethto p backe
of the foolpthe. Wiple menlay vp knowledge, Tys
but the mouth of the Foolpihis A scible ete Ej
Therpeh mansgoodesare hps tronge bolde, EA
but thetr owne poucrtic fearcth the poôze. The ‘Ad
rygbtcons laboureth todo good, but the yngod
lp vlethb bps encreafe unto lpnne. Co take bede j
unto thechaftenpnae of nourtour tg the wape
oflpte but he that refulech tebe refourined,dif-
cepuetbbpmi felfe. x Dpllemblynge lyppes pe.p.»
Bepe batrediecretlp:and be that{peaketh anpe
fclaundze,igafoole , Wibere moch bablpynge
ts, tbere muff nedes be offéce:and pethat refray `%
neth bislippes.is tepfe. Aninnocent tongeig E
å noble trealure : but the berteofthe wngodlpe ae
ignothpnge wothe. Chelpppes of the rpgh- Aoi
tcousfedea whole multitude: but fooles thall a
dprinthep: owne foolpe. Theblefpnye of i
Lordmaketh rpchmenxag fo careful geanapl piarrot.a -|
ifdotbnocbpng therto. A foole noeth wpcked= ee oe
lp,and maketh but a {pozte of tt: but woploome
tuletbtbe man that bath pnderftandpng. Che
thpnge that the vugodlpe are afrapedof, hall
come Dpon therm, but the epghteous (hall Daue
thepz defpee. Che vngodlp palleth whenthe =
tempe commethbe: but the rpahteous remap =
neth (ure foz euer. As ypnegre is tothe teeth,
andasfimoke ts vnto the epes,enéloig.a foug.
qpU perlon to them that lendeth bpm foztp.

‘The feare of the Lorde maketh alonge Ipfe,
"a bepactene e a totic

De pacient abpopnage of the rpgbteous thal

be turned to qlapnette: bat the boo e of tbe un-


* . -
ee


ucth curage buto the godlp,but it tg a feare for sal
wpcbeddoers. *Cherpadtcous thallnenerbe torera
ouerthzowé, but the vngodlp thal notremapne ys
intpelanbe. * Che mouth of the tuft wpll be ot.rreb9.c
ANDONE. betes arb aa ce
! , Lbe lpppes of p rpgbtcous are |
occhpped in acceptable thpuges:but the mouth >
ofthe wiigodlp taketbtbemtothbewost. 4
E The. ri. Chapter,


 Afalfe


of Salomon.


meee ies k falfe balaunce (gan abbomina:
RAG cti ontop Lo d:buta true weight
Aea YE pleafetd pim. yere pe deig tier
Pa ican, Wea is pame alfo and contu

N A.


pro.t.a


Ecct,b,b elpenot in the bape of vengeaiice, but rpghte-


D
ou


tngodlp tall fallin bps owne wpckednefie .
berpgbteoutnefic of the tutte (hall delpuet
thé:but the topcked Halbe taken in they: owne
Vngodlpnefie. bean yngodlp man dpeth,
Sapi,o.b Pyshopetsqone:the confidence of rpchefle mal


perpibe. Che rpghteous Halbe delpucredoute |


of trouble, tbe bngodlp the come in bis Arde.
Thorotwe the mouthe of the diffembler is bps
nepabbour deBroped: but thozotoe knowledge

pro. piiri, (Hall the tuff be deltuered. * GbE tt goth well
fopth tbe rpabteous,the cpticis merpe:4 when


the vnqodlp perpth,thereisgladnefle. When the


thc tufte aren Wealth, the cptie prolpereth: but
toben the vugobdlp baue f ruleitdccapethb. J
foole bapnaeth vpa fclaüdze of bis nepghboutr:
vuta wple man wyll kepe itfectete. * A dpi-
femblpnge perfon top! d sconer peup nien,
but be thatis of a faptbfull berte wpll kepe cou
d.oeg-rit,a faple. * Wibereno goodcounfapll ts, there the
people decape: but where as manp are that can

tozo.bt.a‘ gpue counfaple, there is Wealthe. + He thats
and.Frbitc fuertic fora traunger hurteth him felfe:andbe
that medleth not topth furetpihpppeis ture. A
gracpous woman mapnteineth honeftp, as fog

ot.rrreite tC Wpckcd, thepmapntepnerpchelle. * ipe
is mercpful,doth bpm (elf a bencfpte:but who-
foburtethbbysnepgbbour,isatpaaunte. ‘Che

. laboutot the vhgovip pao tpeeeip not, but bep
folueth rpabteoutneiie tail recepue a Ture re-

warde. Likeasrpabtcoulnelle bapnaeth lyfe:

cuch foto cleue Dntoeucll bepngeth death. ‘Che


PPE


pererotin DPanacpon. * 19
epia goodes, andis t


D upige
ii.ca. tpb Petts m


ttefromnotbpnge,F
[ii Emas it
ralia i os
Rev.bii.b deth vp his cozne, Halbe curledamonae p peo-
ple:but biellpn otha alllpabted aH Phe Deed
IDE.) ee Ha


falt, mnhigri
Ptt p Eeth inbigric


maketh oplquperneffe tu bys owne poule , be
fall have wpnde foz bys berptage, g thefoole


Soler bet.


halbe feruaunt tothe wple. ‘Chefrute of the

tighteousisa tree of life:e de that endeuonreth

bimi felfe to wpnne meng fonles, is wple: * DE ipitin

the rpghteous be recopented Dpon carth , howe

moch moze then the rey be and the fpnner. ¢
CThe.rii. Chapter.


sere Yolo loueth wridome toplbe con- %
AVON tent to bercfourmed: but be that ba;


f AN Vi i ‘oobma is acceptable unto p Lòrd Ben. tiga


one that is gozgpous andlackethbeceth A righ
teousmaregarodcth thelpfe of bps cattel, but
pngodlpbhauccruellbertes. x He that tpllety eer rey
bps lande, all haue plétcoulnefle of breed: but

be that folotweth pbleneffe, is a werpe foale.:


(Mobofs hath pleafureto contpnuc at the wpne,leaucth dp: a
fourtpe in bps ownedtweriipage. P


)
The delpze ofthe vngodly hunteth after mis
{chefe:butthe roote of the rpgbhtcous bepngetD


ý fosthfrute. Che wycketh falietpinto p{nare,


thodowe the malpce of bis owne mouth, but the
inf thallefcape onfofallperpll. Cuerpe man
{palleniope good, accozdpng to thefrute of bis
nrouth,and after the ozkes of bys bandeg thal
beretoardedD, Loke whatafoole taketh in
ande, be thpnketh tt welldone: butte that is
topfe,vpll be connfapled. A Foole ttereth bps
thzathin all the bafke-:but a Dpicrete man couc-
reth wonge. Aiulman wpll tell the tructhe,
and thetve the dt thatisrpabt: but afalle
witneffeopfcepuethb. A {claunderous perfon
prpketb lphea fwerd, buta topfemannes tige
igtobolfome. Atrue mouth is ever contant:
but a dpilemblpnge tonge ts ioone channged.
hep that pmagpneupl in they, mpnde, wil
Difcepue:but the counfaplers of peace pal bane
fopefolowpngethem, Chere thallno mptfor
tunebappe vntotbeiuft,butthe bngodlp pall
befpiled wpthmplerp. * Che Lozdabbhozret hy nord
Iping lippes-but thep # labour fo; truth pleate
ppm iethatbath vnderlandpng,doth bpoe
wifdome:but an ondifcrete bert telleth out his
foolptbnefie. A dilpgent bande pal bearerule: D
put thepole sc piver tribute, * weuinefle 170P y
bpfcozageth phert of ma:buta good hozDema esci,t7y.6
Ketbitgladagapne. Cherpabteous excelletB
bys nepabboure: but the wape of the vngodlp
fpllopiccpucthemfelues . The dpleepttull
man (ballnotro® , that be toke inbuntpuge,
DD iu but


ss Hut cherpchelle of the iuft man is of great va-
Titid Ine Inthe wape ofrighteouluelle there ts lyfe:
Deruta anp inthe fame wape thereisno death

CTbe.riii. Chapter.
FEET atiplefonne wpllherkentobps
Va) fathers warnpnge, but be that

VALS istcounefull, wpl not beare whe

py) be 18 repzoued: 2 goodman

crte VA Walentope p frute ofbis mouth,
e Enl but be Phatha froward mindes
{palbetpopled. We that kepeth bps moutig-
eth bys lpfe:but wbolo opencth bis lpppestt
cupl deftroyeth bim felfe. Che llogarde Welt
fapne baue cannot get his delpze-but thetoul
oftbedilpgentthallbaueplentp, Ariqhteons
man abbozreth Ives: but the bngodlpepamett
botbotberandbymfelfe. Ryabteoulnetleke-


a


peth thetnnocent inthe wape: but pngoblpnes
prrrrbtib DOCtD oucethzowe pipnner. * Somemenare
e.Fe.8 cych though they baucnorhpnge:agapue,fome
PIO menare poor, baupnge qreatrpcbefle. With
ooves cuctyman Delpuercth bps ipfe, and tbe
poole wplluot berepzoued. Whe lpghte ofthe
pro.rrtié.c tpgbteons maketh topfull, but x the candle of
75 the vngodlp Halbe put oute.Amonge p proude
chete 1s euer firpfe:butamonge thole that doal

l thpnges with aduplement,toere is topldome
| wapnelpe gotten qoobes are Coone {pente:
i Dut thep that be gathered together wpth the
| bande, thallincreafe. Longetarpinge fo? a


i oA
=


me 3 tit


thynge thatis deferred, qteuecth the berte , but


| when the Defpae commieth , itis a tree of lpfe.

- Wpolo defpyleth anpe thpnge Halbe hurte
fo: the fame:but be that feareth the commaun-
| demente , Hall baue the rewarde. .

Ii on ( DLoifceptiull Conne Hall haue ne go ob, but a bpferete fer:


_ uaunte Hall bo Full well, and bps wape Hall protpere. )
C— Thelawe isa wel oflife wuto the wple that
\it may kepe bym from the {nares of deat |


Good dndertandpi ggchet auour, but Dar
is the wape of thedelpplers. Æ wple man
pothall thpnges wth opicretpon : but a Foole
tpl Declare hps ae _ An dngodlpe meflen=
get falleth into mptchefe:buta tapehbfulambat
fadouristbolfome. Hethat thynketh{eozne
to be refourmed,commeth topouertpe g wame:
but Mhoforeqardeth cogrectpon, tall come to

D ponoure. Wihena delpze is beougbtto paffe,
irdelpteth the toute: but fooles counte it abbo-
minactotodepartefromcuell. Hethatgoeth
in thecompany of wopfe men, Dalbe topfe: but

[i tohofs ig a companpon of fooles, thalbe hurte.

Hi .  Mpichefefoloweth bpon fpnnerg , but the

t * rpabtcoustbalpaueagoodrewarde. He that

li . `~ igberteoug.leauethan berttatice Vnto big chil:

|i tob.proiie Des chpldzen: and* the rpches of the fpnneris

ill- laped bpfo2 the int. Chere is plenteoutnetfe

l ss gf fade inthe Feldes of the pooze but the feld not

| ESES well ozdzed ig topthoutirute, +Pethatipa -


“~~ veth theron bateth bis fonne:but whofoloucth
areettit pim chafteneth bim bp tpmes. * Che righteous
He cateth,andis fatiffped : but the belp of the w=
i. -  gob’p bath neuer pnougde. i

€ The-riiii. Chapter.


+ The Prouerbes


Pie womé bpholdethep2 boule:but J


À WE: |a foolpthe topfe plucketh te Downe.


=en, rita t
@fatoo .


but afurpousfoole goethon priat btn hi


iqnozaunt baue folptpnefle in poilefipor, but
topie are ccomned wpthbbnowledge. Che eup
{hal botove them felues befoze the good: and the
pngodlp Mall wapte at the Dozes oF the righte-
ous: The pooze ts hated enë of bys owne neigh
bourg,but therpcbe batbmanp frendes. Cibo
fo defppleth bys nepabboure doeth ampfie, but x
xbleffedig be that bath pptie ofthe poze. PIAF s.
(Bep putteth bis trut in the 07d loucth to be mercpfult, ) a
- Wiptboute doubte thep erre that pmagpne
topckednefie, but thep that mule bpon good


T.


thpnges, vito fuche thall pappen mercpe and oe :


fapthfulneffe. amener labouretbere is fome
rofpte. Wut onelpefapne hordes, bepnge
UM dala 4g Rypchelle areas a crotone W-
tothe wple but the iqnozaunce of fooles ts bes
rpfoolpthnefie. A fapthfull wptnefie delp-
uereth ant E pla Se

eth foztblpes. be | ciga
ronge bolde g bis A peh ure Des
rae T ob aye a wel of ena :
noide ý mareg of death. Theencrealeepzotpe sm
ritpe of p cmengisthe bi ee ut tbe a) ai


es bonou

decape of the people , ts the confufpon of the
prince. Wethatis pacpente ,hathmoche H=
derftandpnge, but pe thatisfoone dpf{pleated,
proud:


efeare of the re ities


of Salomon. Mol.er vit,

pronoketh foolpthnetie. Amerp bertisthelpfe Che toay oflyfeleadeth wuto heané; thata ma

of the bobp:butrapcoureconfumetbawape the fpulde beware of Pell ap The Lo2d topil -
P bones. * He thatdotha pooze man woge bla: bzeake Downe the boule of p proude; but bepal

"o Spbemeth his maber-but whole bath pytie ofp, makefatt the bowers of the wpddowe: Che 9
aaron ng honoure Dnto God.: Che Dugod- Lozdeabhogreth the pmaginacions of the Mic-
piscaawapefo: bps iniquitpe, but therygh ed, but pure toozBes of innocttesare plealañt
tcous hatha good boope cuenindeath.. CApi-' wnto pi. Che couctous marooteth vp bisatone


a]


-


O pigs


' a


Kokig pretvith cuel wpl. oir A


Domecefteth mthe bert of bpm that bath vnder `
ftandpnae.and it halbe bnotoen amonge them
Popid thatarepnlearned. yd apbepceahabat54
vptbe propie the facrptice of the Heathers
fpnfull. Boplcrete ferunaunt isa pleature Yna
. totbeBbpnae: but one thatis not bonet prono-
eth bpm bntowzathe.
CTde-rv.Chapter.
T TRAF, ess» x Soft antteere puttethdowne di


ei a Pe
re.
i MN


lethoute notbpng but foolpiinefle. The epes


: $ lpfe:but be that abuleth it, bath a brok minde. He p
i Pato na reproucd , (pall fag, eat,


b- Dauethemooze vnderftandpnge. __-


Oy
5 Fhe boule off righteous ts Full ofrpchefle but.


poi;
B:arriDd. of f Folpih FARAS 0


boufe, but holo hateth rewardes (hal lpue. -
(ZX bojowe mercpeand fapth are (panes pourged ; and tho: gi
totue the feart ofthe Lozd both etierp one efchur eupil.), :


The bert of f righteous fudpethb bps anfiwere
afoze: but the wicked manes mouth fpueth out
mpichete. he Lorde is farre from the vigon
lp buthe beareth the peaper of the rpabteong,
Lpkeas the clearnefle of the eyes retopfeth the
derte,fodotha qooduame fede the bones. Che
care that berbeneth tothe refozmacton of ipfe,
{pall dDfecll amonge the wple. He that retulery
to pa oarn hork <fede ps owne foule:but
be that fubmyptteth bym felfe to cogreccpon ig
wpe hig of the Lorde ig the rpabt (ctéce
of wploomie:¢ lomlpnefle goeth befoze, Honour.
nh ror Tapet ete:

wre Sta map well purpofe a thpt
wea in bps berte but the ant rhb


ae


, ta


E T pa


eth out knowled esbuE g bere ges foz bps owne fake: pea, and whew pe kes
í AEI pozreth o | peth the vugobdlp foz thedapeofwath. The.


ece Perit facrifice of the vngodlp, utthbep aier of $ igh , Loje abbozreth all fucbe as be of a proude
a


pcsrrett-b connalfeatt . * etter is alptle w tbe fearc of


ther. X foole A in foolyptdpnaes, but
seth Well to his owne qopnacs.


dethe
poples


4
y
E

r


Tie qazotierbes


warde:and Hpth dplerecpottoughte warres to
betakeninbande. Thecrafty dplccatiull be-
Lozapeth{ecreeecountel:and to bynt that cutto-
erop rrp Meth flaterpnge lyppes iopne not thp felfe.
ieu.it.d *UUbolo curiech bps fatber and mother: bps
ven roic EBDE Dalbe put out in the mypddef of Darcknes
tecraab,a wte berptagetbat commetDto Datelp atthe
winsth.¥.€ fp2ftfpalnot be papiedat the ende. * Sap not
sonnis thou: 3 voplirecompece eneli-but put thy trute
pio.ria inthe Lo20,¢be fhalldefende the.* The Looe
android abjozrethtivo mance of wepgbtes, anda falfe
#00 FD Halannceiganeucll thpnge.* Che Lorde o2de-
retheuerp mans gopuges: Pole map aman the
Daderftandebps owne waper Ft isa {nave fora
man todeuouretbat whpch is bolp:and atte
powe to turne to thpne owne vfe, the thpnge p
Lvegth.e batt powed.* Awple kyna deftropeth p vngod
lp,andbapneeth the whele ouer them. pelan-
terne of the Lodis the beth of man,and gorth
thozowe alltheinteard partes ofthe bodpe. .
*iPercp and fapthfulnes preleruethe bpnge :
anbdwrthloupng bpndnes bye feate ig bolben
pp. The fréath of ponge menis their wozthip,
anda grape Headeisan honoure buto the aged
*oundes Dppuc awapeeuell,andlo Do Mripeg
theinivarde partes of thebetpe.
 The.rri.cbapter.
mare De * kynges partig tuthebande of
re iithe 1o2d¢,lphe ad are the rpucrs of


pio pip. b


He-HE? Hath no pptte bpon bps nepadbour
{coztiecfalis punplthed, the iqnozatittake f bet
ter beade: when pe feith the wple mépzolpere,
be wpllreceane the mooze bnderandpnge .
Therpgbteous man tplelpe conlpdereth the
poufe of the tolcked:¢ Foz their Wickednes God

mat.rbian OUCttD2oweth the wngoolp. * Apolo foppeth

pseares at thecrpinge ofthe poze: be thal crpe
“Dun elf g not be bard. aA peup pawarbpartieto
Dpiplealureg a gpfteinthe bofome, fpllethfu-
«cpoulnes. The Jute delpteth indopng ý thing


thatis rpabt:butouerthe workers of topcied= -


nesbangethdeltruccpon. Che man that wan

pre, rrriiie Dereth out of P Map of topfoome, fall remaine

€ inti congregacyd of thedead. * Hetbat bath
plealure. inbankettes, Halbe a pooze man.


W1bholo delpteth in topne ¢delicates, (hall not
berpeb. Che vngobdlp thalbe creué for therpab:.
teous and the wpcked fo: the wif.

*Ftis better todiwellin the ploernes then eecct.crv.«
topthachpbpngeandanangrp woman. Fna
wopfe mannes poule , there is greate treafure g
ople:but a foolpth body Cpendeth bp al. Who-
fofolotecth rypqbhteoulnes and mercp, fpndcth
both Ipfe rygbteoufnes and bonoure. Æ tople
man wpnneth the cptie ofthe mightpe: ¢ as for
f trengthý they tren in,be batngeth it Downe. vz0.sii.b -
* Wibofo kepetb his mouth and bps tonge, the
fame kepeth bisfoule from troubles. He that
is poude g prelumptcous,is called afcoznefull
man, tobpc) tn wath dare worke malicioutlp. -

The volupteoutnes of the flouthfull ig bps `.
owne Death:fo2 bps Dandes Wwpll not laboure: ~
Pe coueteth and delpzeth al thedapelonge, but
the typabteousis alibape geupnae, andbepeth
nothpnge backe. | :

The lacrifpce of the bagel efgavhompna-: D
cpon, bowe moch moze when thep offre ptbpng
thatis gotten wpth wpchedims. * A falfewore oro-rir.s
nes thal perpih:but be that iga true man bolde
lp fpeaketh that bebath pearde. An pugodlpe
man goth to2th rathlp : but theinfte refozmeth
bpgotone wape. *Chereis tio wploome,thet Lra.»
igno yndertadpna,thereignocounfelagaingk Ere
tbe Lon +The pozie is preparedagapnit the tPirrritie
dap ofbattaple:butthe Lord geuecth victozpe.

— CThe.rrii. Chapter. |

eee al


aT ie c

leffed: gine ae x
5

out toptb bpm:pea, barpaunce€ fclaunbder fal


ceale. Wibolodelpteth to be of acleaneDerte €
of Sod eye pts ns ool Ne ce sfréde.


t


A E


we.”


a
a
gs


j
ti
oP
| a
i
a
1


k


‘ ere
Se wien ee


of Salomon.


C itatape. Wiholoboth a pooze nan weonge
` toinceeafebps ownerpches,and qeueth onto p
tyche to pleate him, at the lak cometh to pouer
tpebpmtelfc. <)pfonne , bowe Downe tdpne
eare,¢ berken Ynto the wo2des of pldome,ap
lpe thp mpnd bnto my doctrine:fo2 thou halt
eexcellent pf thou kepe it intbpne bert, ¢pra-
ctp itinthp mouth, that thou mapfte put thp
truf_intbeio20. J hance theted the thps dape:

the thpnge that thou inoweft. banc not F war

nedthe very oft wythcountel ¢ learnpnastbat
{Ympght ewe the f truth and that thou with

the betptempahtett antinere thé that fende D-

D tother He that thou robbe not p poore, becanfe

be is weake and opprefic not thetpmplein iud:
gement:fo2 p Lode bimfelé topli defend thep2
caule,and Do Dpolence ynte tiem that baue v=

- {ed vpolence. WHakeno frendipp woprh an an-

ty toplfull man,¢ kepe no company wrth the
furpous:let thou lcarne bps wapes, €receane

:ou,bi,a þurtin thp toule. +e not thou one of théthat
Der bpnde thep2 bande bpon promple gare fuertpe
FOLE For wapabty canfes:fo: pë p patte nothpnee to
pape,thep thal take awape thp bedfrom pnder


pwerta b te. Chou halt not remoue the lanvde marke,
f. urrie Iwhpche thy foozeclders baue fet. Seefte thou


not, that thep whpcb be oilpaentin thep2 bulp

; Ase a oe &puges, andnotamonge the

pmple people ¢ nA =

C Thr. reiii Chapter. Da

A Sse benthoulittelt ai thetabletocate w

i, Eaa 1020, o2der thy felfe maneelp wptp
y AVAA the thpnges that ave fet befo2e the .

N LHealurethpne appetpte:e pt thou

plt cule thpne otone felfe, be woe ouer gredpe

f: of tips meate, fo? meatbegiletbanddifeeaueth.

Jerod * Cake not ouer great trauaple¢ laboure tobe

i empi (Pc beware of fuck apurpote. + er: wrlte

thou leg thyneepe vpontbethpnge, whpeh flo-

deip banpibetbawaper o: riches make thé


{clues Wynges, and take thepefiyghtelpkean by E


Acgleines theapze. Cate thou not wpth p en-
upous ,anddelpze not his meate. Eo: bedoth
asa man that prelcrpbeth ameafuce to the im
bpsberte. Ipetapth ynto tbe: eatanddzpnke,
whereas bps dertignot wpththe. Yea, f moz

fels that thou batt eatenthalte thouperbzake

lefe thole fwete wordes. Tell nothyng into
. cares ofa foole,fo2 be wpll delpple the vopfoom
portb OLfDpwordes. * Temoue not the olde lande


(| Beutroite marke,and come not topthin the Fclde of the fas


therles. Fo: be that delpuercd them,is myab-
ty.euen be thall defende thep2 caule acavate } 4
Applpe thpneberte nto cozrectpon, ethpne

care tothe wozdeg of risen a |
| morio = * Wptholbenot cozreccpon from thechplde,
|, cedera fo2 pf thou beatelt him withtberod, be hal not
E ` dpethberof. VEthoutmpte ppm wpth tbe rod,
thou palt delpuer bps fouletrom bel. <p löne
pftbp berte receaue wpldome,mp bert alfo tal
rctople:pea,mp repnes thalbe verp glad: pf thy
_  pro.rritita lpppestpeake the thyng thatisrpght. * ict
— and Heel $e ietbhgciry 3a o5 7 folotve ipnners,but
kepe the ftpllinthe feare ofthe Lod all che dap
longesfo2 the enve is not pet come, tby pacient


abpbdpng thal not bein bapne. Wp fonne,ceve
eare,and be Yople:and fet trapte thpne berte in.
the wape of the Lozde.


*hepe not companp. ee topne bpbbers at |
uch as be dzonckar Portit


rpotouseaters of fietbe:fo2
des And ryotous hall come to pouertye, and he
that is geuen to muche fleape, Hall yo wpth a
ragged coate. Geue care yutothy father that
begat the , and delpple not thp mother when
fhe igolde. Laboure fo: toget the tructp: fel it
notatvap andfo Dobp pldome,nourter, and
pnderandpnge:fo2 arpobteous fatier ig mar
uelous glad of a wpfe fonne,and be that beget.
tethawple chplde thal baue greate pleafure of
bpm. wmofotbat thpfatherand mothermape
be Ss ofthe.and that the that bare the map re
tople. &)p fonne qpue methpne herte,and let


- $ol.rer.


tbpne epes baue pleafurein mp tapes. * JEO? pio rrii.e


an whore ig a depe abet anbarlot igana-
roweppt: Spbelurketh lpkea thefe,and izpn-
geth pnto ber fucbemen asbe full of ypee.


wbo hath too? tho hath Tozowe? who hath W


rpe wbo bath batoling/an who bath wou
des toptpoutecaute? D: wbo bathredepes ’
Cuen thep that be euerat the wpne, g feke er-
cefe. Lobe not thou bponthe wyne,powe red
it igand tobat a colovre it qeueth in the gla Me.
Jt qotd downefoftlp, butat the latte tt bytery
lpbeaferpent, anditpngetbasan Adder. So
all thpneepes loke vnto ftraungewemen, g
thpne bert hall mule bpon frowarde thpnges:
pea,p palt beas though thou lapett in p mpd-
deff ofthe fee, oz epreft pon the top of p mat
ofa bpp. ‘Chey wounded me(thalt thoulape)
but tt Dath not burte me : thep baue all to brok
me,but Jfeltitnot. When Jam well wate:
ned, J Wpll co tothe depnkeagapne,

CChe. revit. Chapter,


m JE* not thou geloufle ouer wicked me 3


f pay gand delpze not to beamongethem.
t AND their lpppes talke of mpfcbefe.
Thozowe wplodome isanhonle builded and vb
bnderitandpngistttet bp. Chozotve difcrecp
on pall tbe chambers be fplied wpth all coftip


pis.rriti.b


Sy 302 their bert pmagineth to do hurt, arrie


€pleafanntriches. Atoplemanisenerffrige: -


pea,a ma of onderflabing encrealeth of frégth
JES? wth dpicrecpon mutt wares be taken
in bande, and Where ag are manp that can geue
countell,thereis the vpctozp . Wipfoome ts to
bye a thynge foga foole, foz be darenot op bpa
mouthin pate. that pmagpneth mpichefe,
mape well be called an wngracpous perfonne .
be thought of p foolpth is {pnne, and f {co2-
nefulligan abbominacpon bntomen. Péthou
be ouctfene and negligent in tyme of nede,then
istbp ftrength buttmal, delpuerthem that go
wnto Death, € are led awap to be faine, g be not
neqligét therin:p£ p be able todo themqoon.
Pithon wplt fape:J knewe not of it. Thin-
kelt thou that be wbpcb made the berteg, doeth
not con{pDd2e it r and that be whpcbe reqardeth
thy foule,feeth it nots >pallnot be recompéce
euerp man accozdpng to bys Wozpkess plone
thoneatett ponpe g the fwete bonpecombe, be
caule


=


Sal


cate tig goodandliveteinthp mouth. Euen
fo thal pumpiogpor wypldibe vntothptoule,
affoneas thou haf gottenit. Andtbhou Malte
Dauclonge dapes:pea, thp boope hall not bein
papne. Lape a e wayte(owpcked man)
wpou the boule of the rpghteous anddplqupct
of.rrrbiid not bps reftpuge place. * fora tuft ma falleth
eal fenentpmics,¢ rifeth vp agapne:but the wgon
FP70-FOHS Ly Fal: into wpcbednes. + Relopfe not thou at
the fal oftbpne enempe,¢ let not thpne perte be
lad when he ombleth. Let the Lo2d( when
e feetbit ) be angrpe, and turne pps wathe
from bpm vnto the. Wh, |
€ x Letnotthp wrath andgeloulpe moue the
pro-Fritt-© to folotwe the wpcked and vugodly . And why!
= ob.rrib the topcked Mall baue no polterptte and * tpe
caria cadle ofthe vngodlp taibe put out.* Wp fone,
PTH. Fearethou the Loade,and the kpnge, ¢ bepeno
company toptb them that fipde back from pps
feace: fos thep2 deftruccpon thal come fodentp,
and dbo knoweth the aduerlite fhat map come
fromtbeboths Chele are althelapinges of the
pro.reiti,b ple. * Aeisnotgood,tobaue relpect ofanpe
perfonne iniudgement. He that lapth tof wn-
godlp:theu art rpghteous, him thal the people
curfe -pea the cominaltpe (hallabbozre bpm.
Wut thep thatrebukethe prgodlpe,tnthbem
Docth God delpte, anda rpcbe bletipnge pall
came bponthbem. Cuérpe man Wall bpile bys
lobes that ai agoopanfwere .
tpit make bp thp wozketbatis wptdoute
andloke well vnto tbat tebpchtbou batin the
Felde then buplde thpne boule. Wenot a falle
opens agapnitppnepgbbourand fpeake no
falthode wpththp lpppes . Sape not: J topll
handle bpm:-euen ashe bath dealt w me,¢ topll
tetwarde enerp man atcozdpnge tobps decies.
J went bp the felde of the foutbful,¢ bp the ti-
neparbeofthetoolpihe man. Andlo, it tas al
coucved pth nettels, and ffodeful of tppitles,
p70u,tr.b and theftone wall tbasbzoken done. * Chis
-Jiawei g confpdered tt well: Zloked ppor it,
ov toleitfo2a twarnpng: Pee fepe on Epler)
alptle, omber a lptle , folde thp bandestoge-
ther pet alptle:fo pall pouerte come vnto the
as one f trauapleth bp the wap, Enecellite like
a wepencd man:
| CTbhe.rrb. Chapter. —
@ Thele are alfo the parables of Salomon,
whpch the men of Esekiah kpnge of 3
Juda copped oute,


D


ro Ei tbpnae fecrete, but the Hpnges ho-
G fi noure ts to fearche outea thpnge.
aed a Co4 Chebeaucn ts hpe,the cath ts depe,
Goines and the khpnges berteis puleatchea-
ble. Cake the dolle Fro the Cilucr.¢ ther talbe
acleane veffel therof. Cake atvape pngodlp-
nefle from the kpnge, andbps feate thalbe fta =
: ah hE La lpr ciel scandens thp
Gok.rthitd felfe in the peetence of the Bpnge, and pefe not
aa gs op once, er debi * Wetter ts it, p
it be fapde puto the:come vp bhptber.then thou
- qeec.viti-b TO be put lowerin p peefence of the pepnce whi
mathbb thou feettwptptbpnecpes. *2enothaitpeto


Kant aae T is the honoure of God to kepe a k ea:


 CheBrouerbes


go tothe latoe,lef bappp thou do fome offence
after the frpfebeended, wherbp thpneighbour -
put tbeto pame. Handle thp matter bith thp 25
nepabboure bpm felfe, ¢ dpleouce not another
mans fecret, let when më bearetherof ,itturne
totpp Dpthonoure, ¢ leatte thpneeucliname do
not ceatle.ce (Grace and frendihppee doth delpuer, whpry ge
fe that thou kepe foz thp Cette , lete thou berepzoued. ) i
A wode fpoken indue ealon, is lpkeappelg of
goldeina gtanued ozke offpluer. Thecozrec
cponot the wpletsfo an obedpent care a gold?
chepne ga Jewel of aya Lykke as the wpnter
coldcitt the baruet loisa faptbfull meflaiig r
tothem that fende bpm : foz be refrelpeth d ¢
matters mpnde. i polo maketh qreat boates:
g geuethnothpnae, is lpke cloudes and topnde
wptbhoutrapne. Gpth pactéce ga p2pncepa = PÀ
cifped,and » wpth a loft tonge ig rpgozon neg Reri i
boken. PfEthoufpndelt bony, eate fo muchas irerroc
isfuffpctent foz the:let thou be onerfull,¢ pers
brake it outagapne. Giithdzawe thp fote fri
tby nepgbbours boufe:left bs be pk Of the, €
foabbozrethbe. Wibolobeareth falle wytnes
agapnit bisnepgpboure, beiga berpe clubbea
fheard,anda tharpe arotbe. The boope that
ig putina falle manintpme of neade, islpke a
rottien totbanda {lppperp fote. Wipofotaketh
awape amang garmente in the colde wether,
islpke bpneger ppon chalke 0: lpkebpm that
fingethbfonges toan benpe berte.caciikeasp moth ya
burteth a garmentc:and a wezme a tree: fo both the BeUpnes of
amanburtetheberte.) » Dfthpneenemp donger, pale :
fedeDpim, pf be thpatt.gpue bymozpncke foz fo
{halt thou beape cooles offpze bpon pps beade,
and the Lozbe (hall retbarbe the. Che Morth:
wpnde aay awape the rapuc,enen{o docth
an eatneite {ober countenaunce a backbpters
tonge. * Ftisbettertofptina comer vnder F pro.srte
rofe then pth a bzablpng woman ina wpe ;
boule. good repote oute of afarrecountre
is lpkecolde ater toa tbpatty foule. Arpgh
teous man fallinge Downe before the wngodip,
tslpbe a troubled well,andalpzpng that isde-
ffroped. Lpke as itis not good to cate to moch
bonp,»cuen fo be that wpl earch out bpe thpn eecie.tit. s
ges,ittbalbetobeupfozbpm. He thatcannoe
rule bpm felfe is lphe a cptie Pohpchets broken
towne, and bathe nowalies. l

The. crdi. Chapter.
wpa Uke as fnotwe is not metein lommer %


a ee py bee bnlemelp fozafoole. Lykeas

pdea the fwalowe take thep2
ces A hte andie bereandtbere, fo the
cucletbatis geuentn vapne,thallnoe lpgbt yp
ponaman. * Cintotbe hoale belégeth a tobip, pta.rrrit,b
tothe Affe a bzpdle, anda rodde tothe fooles
backe. Geuenot the foole ananlwere after big
foolptbnes.leafke thou become lpke nto bpm,
butmake tbe foole an anftoere tobis folitynes,
leatt be be wple in bis otne conceate.

Heislame of bis fete, pea dzoncken is be in
banpte, pcommittethb any meflageto a foole.
Likeas in alame mã bis leqges are not equal,
euenfoisaparableinafoolesmouth. be that 25
fettetpafooleinbpedpanite, thatigeucnaspf
aman


$


oi Salomo,  -


> amanput aftoneina fpng: Aparabletn a
fooles mouthe is Iphe a thozne that prpckethba
deonkenmanintheDande.ce (Greatisbethathaty

pag fozimed all thpuge, be rewarbeth the fok and tec ompenfeth the
ranigreftours:) Aman oferperpence bifcerneth
allebpnges well:but be that putteth ue foole

ipetriio fofcilence endeth the irpfc. *Lpheas piogge
turnethbagapne to ppsomne bomite,cuentoa

€50le beapuneth bis foolp mnes agapne a fre.

. Detbou feet aman that tg tople tn bps owne
tonceate.there ig moze hope ina foole thetnbun

€  *«Cheflouthtull fapeh:there ia Lponin the
os ware and Lyon inthe midelt of the kreteg:
Lphe as the doze turneth aboute pon tbe pen-
es,cucnfo doth the louthful welter bpm telfe
indpsbed. * Tie louthéul boop theuileth bis
‘Handeinto bys bofome, ¢it greucth bpm to put
'itagapnetobpsmoutb. Cie flogardethpie
; kets bpintclfe wopler then feucn men that {pt €
E feach. Wipofoqocth byandmedleth w orper
mens frpfe:betstpke one that tabetha dog bp
“thecares, Lpbeasamad man peatteth tpee
bandes, (hoteth deadelp aromwes and dartes,

enen fo Doti)a Dplicmblee wyth his nepgobour.

o& Andebenlapth he:ce whan peistaken) ch it
butin{pozte. Caere no Wose is, there pl pre
gocthout: Guen fo where tpe tale betraper is

ec proiit. d takcnawape,there the itrplecealeth.* Cooles
hpndle heate,and wood ce fpze: euenfodoths
biatolpngefelowellerc wp Warpaunce.

D A talebearers wordrs are lyke mE that trike
with bamers,but they pearfe the ttwarde par-
tes of the body. Clenemouslpppes and a Wie-
ged berte,are lphe a pottharde coucred Wwpth lil
uce pole. Anenemp thalbe brown by distal
Epng,tin themeane featon be pmagineth mp-
{chefe,but when be fpeakethfapze, beleue bpm
not: fo2 there are fecucuabbompnacpons tn bps

x barte . (bolo kepeth euel wpl fecretlp todo
buste, pis malpee tpalbe pewed befoze f pole

veder.b congregacpon. * Wihofo bpageth upa prt,
ese rkoti e Thali fall therin : and be that Wweltretba tone,
thali tomble bpontt bym elfe. A difembling


‘Pro.cipe


tonge bateth onethatrebubethb ppm,¢aflatte- Ki
' t


epnge mouth workethmplehefe.
> ` CThe.rrvi.cpapter.


Fam. tid GAVA Pitadape. Let another man peapte p
UW € not thpne ote moutbe:pea, other
Eélkeg lpppesandnotthyne. Che one ighe-


upand the fande toepabtte: but a fooles wath
isbeuperthenthemboth.

Wirachis a cruell thpnge, and furpoutnetle
isa very tépeft:but Mhoisabletoabpde enups
Sn openrebube ig better thena fecret loue. -
fEapthfull are the woundeg ofa louer, but the
kpiiesofancnempe arecruell . He that is full
abbozretbanbonp combe, but pntobim thatis

bongrp.euetvefotoze thpnae is fwete.

e that oftpmes flytteth,1s like a bp:de that
fortaketbberneft.2alme g fiwete incenfe make
thep2 bert mery: fois the lwetecoŭlel ofa mas
FErende pagreethtobps purpofe. Torne owne
frédeand thp fathers frend fe thou fozfakenot:


a7 lake notthp boat of to mozotbe* for erfad
All lS ef ge herp go lon
ep,


Foltrri
butgoonotintothpbrotberg Houle in tyme of

tbp trouble . JEo? better isa frendeathande,

tbéa bzotþerfarreof.  ®p fonnet, bewple:

thou palt make meaglad perte fothat g mall —
make anani were vutomprebubers . A wple

man fepnge the plage , wpll bybde bpm felfe,

as fozfooles thep go on ftpll, and fuffre harme.
x Cake bpe garment thatisfuertp foz atrai rot ¢

ger and take a pledge of bom foz the bnknotwë eae
mansfake. Dethatistopattpe to pzaple bps
neparbbouraboue mealure.thalbetaken as one

that geuethbpmancuellreporte. | =
-x Abpatlpnge woman and the roofe of the ees
houfedgopppngetnarapnye aint
compared together. He that retrapneth ber,re
frapneth the winde,andboldcth the ople fatin

bys bade. Lphe as one pron whetteth another;

fodot) onemancomfozte another. Wiboloke:
pethpys fpage tree, hall eniope the frutes ther

of: euen fo, be that wapteth upon bps matter,

fhall come tobonoure . Lpke as tn one water

there appeare Dpuerfe faces, euenfodpuerfemée
bauebdpucriebertes. Lpkeashellanddeftruc:
cpon are neuer full,cuenfo + the epesofmen ca gieta i
neuer befatiffped. Spiluer is tepedin pmould and proiit
q goldeinthefognace, € fo isa man, when be is

opelp peapied to bisface.cucaxbebert ofa witken ma ga
Cebeth after mptebefe, but atruc bert (eketh fo? nowlebge: ) i


Though thou tuldettebrapea foole wpth a
petelina moter Ipke fprmentp cone, pet wpl
notbpsfoolpihnesqofromppm. Se tbatp
knowe the nombze of thp catell thp felfe lobe
welltothpflockes. Fozrryebhegabpdeth not
alibape and the crowne endureth not foreuer.

The bye Grotweth, the grafle commeth wp and
berbes are gathered inthemountapnes. The
lambes (pal clothe the and fo2 the qoates thou
{halt baue monepe totbp bulbandzpe. Chou
foalt baue goates mplke pnouqh to fede the, to
pphold thp boutold,¢ to fufteine thy mapdés.
aiken ner
Rie ee A pe Dngodlp A peth wheno ma cha- -
Pas ne ore) fteth pym: butthetpgpieous Fan: ES


x pethat turncth atwape bps ote


abbominable. CWipofoleadeth therighteous —
into an cuell wape,fhall fall into big Te $
a e: bu


ec, fa


The Brouevbes


but the in Gall have the goon in pofleifpor.
Eherpchmantbpnbeth bpm felfe tobe wple,
but the pooze that batbe wnderilandpnge, can
era perceaue bpm well pnough. * Wibenrpadte-
pi. FFE? one men arein pzolperitpe.then doetd honoure
flora, but when the vngodlp come vp, f fate
ofmenchaungeth. Petdat pheth bis pines
sobre fpallnot pzofper:but*whefo nowlegetb thë,
‘.iobu. i.» € forfaketh them Hall bauemercp.

C. Wellishpmtbat andeth alwapein ate,
as foz bim tbat bardenetb bisbert,be pali fall
into mpichefe: Lpke asaroacpnge Lpon, and
anbonarp beare,euenfoigan bngobdlpe p:pnce
ouerthe pooze people. bere rhe apnee iS
wpthout wnderandpng, theets greate oppret
{ponand weonge:but pf be befuchaoncas Ha-

Sen.tG.) seth couctoutnerie, be fhallongerapgue. * He
that bp bpolence hedctbeanp manncs blowde :
aibe arennegate bnto bps graue; andnoma

pord fhalbe able tofocoureppm. ~ Wihofo leadetD
| AGodlpandan tnnocentelpfe Halbe Caucd : but
verti» DEV Goeth frowarde apes thal once baue a fal

Keelt b * be that tplleth bps lande, hall pauc plen-
teonfneg of bzead:but be $ foloweth poclneffe,
fall baue pouertpepnough. Amanthat dea»
lech faptbfuilpsbalbc Fplied wpth bleitpnges,

txi vib; and * be thatmaketbto mocbe bafte fo2to be

P20.FFHLa poch, (hall notbe vngyltpe. Cohauerelpecte
of perfonginiudgement isnot good. And wp!
Jman wyll do tezonge : pea, euen foza pece of
beade. be that wplberpceh all tofcone, bath
an cuecllepe : andconfpderethnot,that pouectte

allcome bpon bpm.

D etbatfolowpnge mp preceptesrebubbeth a
man, pall fpndr moze fauoureat the laf, then

marba hethatflatterethbpm. *Wipolo robbeth bis
father and mother, and fapeth itis nofpnne : p
famcisipkevntoadelbroper. Hethatisofa

toude fomackeand wptboute feare: freateth
bp ftrpfe: but be that putteth bps trufe tn the
Lorde balbe welfed. wethartruitcthinbps
owne berte.is a foole:but be that dealeth wple
g.cozi,> Ip,tpalbefafe. * Ie that geneth vnto p pore,
: pall notlacke, but pe thatturneth atwape byg
eyes from uas x z per ; an hia
ns era» create ponertpebpmlclfe. * Wibenthe yng
a ip are come vp, menare fapnetobpoe them te l=


nes:but whe thep pertih,therpghteousincrele. $
CTh


— C7The.rrir. Chapter. |

Hera € na necked.and topl not be

prrrbiis.d [eat Ves rcfourmed:thall fodenlp be deftro-

Ces «Sl ped wout anp belpe. * UWiben the

by oa A rpghteous bauethe oucr hande tbe

fatal Zcea people are in prolperite, but when

 ~Pungodip veareth rule, ther p people mourne.

è TUbofoloueth wploome maketh bps father

pra aghadman: * buthe that kepeth cipanp wprh

Ruke.roe Harlottes.{pendethawapthathebath. Wiry

truetudgement the bpnge fettetb bpthelande,

but yf be be aman that oppeeficth the people w
gatherrnges be turneth it he nob done.

Wiholoflatterethhps neighboure, lapetbanet

forbpsfete. he {pune ofthe wpckedis bps

owne fnare, but tbe rpgbteoug docth{pnaqe and

2 reiopfe, Cherpabteous confpbereth Y caule


=


of the pooze:but the bagodlp eegardefp no vn:
Detftandpnge. Wpckeù people bepnge a cptie
inDecape,but wplemenfetitypagapne. PEA
topfe man go tolatoe wpth a foole (whetser pe
deale wpth bpm frendlp oz rougbip) be qettcth
noret. Che bloudthp2ttp hatethertqhteous,
but the iufte feke bps foule. Aale pouei
out bis (pete altogether, but a wife ma kepeth
ttintpllaftermarbe. PFapzpnce delpteinlp=
eg all bisferuauntes are pngoedlp. Che poore. -
andthe lender mete together andthe Lozdliqh €
teneth pres eh AA x Che feate of the 220.150
kpnge that faptbtull
continuefurefozcuermoze. ‘Cherodde€cor=
reccpon minifter bpldome,but pfa child benot
leked wnto, be bzpngeth bis mothertothame-

WM ben f vngodlp come vp, wickednes increa
fetb:but therpabteous pall fe theirfatl. Aur
tour thpfonne pth correccion, and thou hale
be at reft:pea, be thalldo the good at thine pert:

Wiben the eozde of Godig not preached ,

the people pe (pe: but wellis bpm that kepeth
thelawe. Aletuaunte wpll not be the better
foz wozdes, fo th: ugh be vnderftande:pet tol
betiotregardethem. PE thou fect a man tpat
is baftpe tofpeake pnadupled, thoumalt trul
afoole moze then bim. Hethat deltcatelp bat

eth bp bps feruaunt from a chplve, pal make
bpm bps matter atlengthe. |

Anangrp man ftpzeth vp trepte, and pe that D
beareth euell wpllin bps mpnde , doeth moche
eucll.. Afterpepdecommetha fall, * but a lo- Hod-Feud
tvelpfpzete bepngeth greatemozthyy. Who-
fokepeth cõpanp with a thefe, bateth bis owne
foule:be Drareth blafpbemtes,and telletp it not
forth. ie thatfeareth men, thal pauca fal:but
twhofo puttteth bys trulte in the Lozd is with-
out dauttger. any therebe $ feke the ace we
fauour,buteuerp mas iubgemér comet) ro the
Lo2d. The righteous abbozreth f bngooly out
asfoz thofetbat betnthe rpabte wape the wpe
KeD Hate theme (A chyive that kepetp the wozde, Halbe
topipout Deltruccpen, )
. CThe.rrr. Chapter.
Tbe purenes ofthe wozbde ofod and what weoughle


to requpze OF God, wpth certen wonverfnll thpiges that
arelichistozlde.


eres He woes of Ague : the fonneot 2

ey I akei andthe prophecpe that tbe -
Na aves lame man (peake bnto Jthiel, cué
(Pav cde onto thiet anddicball: Jam
py ee moore foolph then anp man, and
Dauc no mang wndirftandpnge. Ancueclears
ned wpioom, no: Hadknotlesge of holp thyn-
es. (Mibobathclpmed vpintobeauen’ Ubo
tbhcomedowne from thence Wibo bath pols
Denthe wpnde fatinbps bande; Ubo bath co:
peann the waters ina garment Wibo path
etallthe endes ofthe toozlde ¢ What ig brs
name,ozbypsfonnes name? Canitethoutell!


p Judgetb the pooze, hal e Sa


|
|
|


* al the wo:des of God are pure and cleane, fo; Wral-pip. e |


inbpm. + Putthounothpnge vnto dys Wo? and, prii d
des, leafte be repzoue the, and thou befoundea —
lpar. Twotbpnges haue Jrequpzedof tbe, 6 -
that thon wplte not Denpe me be oar: : i

ACHOU


Þeiga (hploe buto al them, that put their tru tora. ffita


r


|


j


|
|
;


an: g


t ge
i}
E
|
r te


4


of Salomon. Sol.rr rit.


Remane frome vanptleandlpes:qeue menti- . = E PTO m,
torr ponertpe norris oneremraunremea “EHC WOES OF kýnge


ean at ei | Lamuell,and theleffonthatbpa
Crovi.b: a npe the, fape:* hoisthe Lorde. Andleaft other
sorene Abepngeconttrapnedthozoweponerticfalyn Mother tangbthpm, 4
Hod.rr.b to ftealing,etakepnameofmpGodinvapne. fF Winey E 2 fone (why do pe fo)thoutsne
: Accule nota feruaunt onto his mapfter,leatte RAN Va oomp bodp:D mp dere beloued
be tpeatse cucll of the,andDtboubeburt. There Eil a) (tone: geue not ouerthp fkréqth
ága generactonthatcurlethe thep2 father, and KH ey) V] [a and wapes dnto heme, pcb
doeth not blefle theyz mother. Chereigage: PIRA LSH | neuen of bpr
neracpon that thynke themfelues cleane, and IS not Foz kin
petisnot clenfed from thepzfplebpnes. depnke tine,
‘Chere tg a qeneratiothat hath a — loke, no2z pepnces ftronge dapnke oxo; there is no tecrete
andDdothcalt vpthep2 epelpodes . There isa peneth, left thep beinge Daonké,
generation whofe teeth are fwerdes, and with € parucrte the iudqement of al


thep2 chatwe bones thep confume,anddeuoure pooremenschpldzen. Geue rongedapnke vn
thefimple Etheearth,¢ the poozefromamige tofuch eare condempned to deathe g topne vr
men. Che horteleache pathtwodaugbtergerp totbofe that mourne: that thep eo bepubkett ,
inge'bapnge Dpther, bzpnge bpther. and forget thep2 miferp andaduer ptie. We
C Chere be thre thingcs that are neuer latpltp- thou an aduocate,foz the dombe ¢ ftandeinind-
ed:pea,foure thynges fapeth neuer boo . he erai thp felfe, to {peake fo2 all fucheas be
raue, a womang wombe cloled: ¢ the earthe p ocoutlefie tn thps tranfptozpe wogloe. Dyer
AR eiga water pnough. Asforfpreitfateth thymouth,defende the thpngethatis lawful¢
ero.rsi.b nenerboo. * Wipotolaugheth bysfather to rpgbt.andthe caufe ofthe pome andbelpeg.
Pen Frbite cone ¢ fetteth big mothers cõmaundementat — Cibolo fpndeth anbonett fapthfull woman, 25
naugbt:therauens ppcke out bys epesin p val fhe ts moche moze bees tben perles . The
lepe, and Dewoured be be of the ponge Vegleg. Hert of ber bulband may fafelp truftin ber,fo p
bere be thee thpnges to bpe Foz me:¢ a8 foz P bhethalfalinnoponertie. he wil do Dim qood
fourth ppafiethmyp E SE Wapofan Enotcuel,all the dapes of perlpfe. She occu:
Acglein the apze.the wape of a ferpent onera Sob flare,¢laboureth gladlpe wth
ffone,the wave ofa thpppeinthefee:andp wap der bandes. Sbe ts lpkea marchauntes Dyp,
of a man Wopth a ponge woman. Such is p wap that bepngeeh ber vitaplesfroma farte. She
alfo of a wpfe that beaketbwedlocke,whpcbe is vpin thenygbt feafon:to proupde meate foz
toppeth ber mouth lpke as whé the hath eaté,¢ ber Doutholde,g foode for bermapdens. Sbe
fapeth: Xg foz me, F baue doneno parme. Cho conlpdereth londe, and bpetbit, and wpth the
rowe theetbynges thecarthis dplquyeted,and frute of ber bandes fhe planteth a ypneparde.
the fourth mape tt not beare: Thozowe a lere SHbegpsdethber loincs With frength, g coura
| uaunte that bearcthrule. Ehozoweafoole p EAA aiae And pt the perceauetbat pee
oF . Hath tomochbzeade ,thozotvea wpfe toozthbye Doulwpferic doth good, ber candle gor not ont
hatred When beig marped,¢ thozowe an ade= RAD pee Dt ete ber Fongers to p fppnole:
=p mapdë samena sps maptters. Chelebe andber bande taketh holde of theopttatte. Hie
foure thynges tn the earth, the tobpchare verpe opencth ber band to the pore, pea the frretcheth 7
|: Iptle:but in wplds thep erceade the ple. The fozth ber bandes to fuchas bauenede. HDhefra C
| , Sou bhs emmetsarebut weake people*pet catherthep rethnot that the colbe of wpnter thall hurt pee
a their meatetogetber in the baructte peconp: boule foz all ber houthold folkesare clothed us
es are butafebletolke,petmake they thepzcon tharlet. Sbe maketh ber felfe fapzeonamen
“ches among the rockes. Che arethoppers baue tes, ber clothyngeis whpte fplke and purple.
nota —— Piorthtogetber byheapes Her hulbandets moche fet bp in the gates, whe
The ippderlaboureth wpth ber bandes, ig in Detpeceebamonge theculers ofthe lande. Sbe
.  hpnaesplaces. herebe theetbyngesthbat maketh cloth of vile:and felleth it and del pue-
go ftpilp:pea,fourearecomelp in ‘opng. ALi ret) qp2dels vntotbemarchaune. SHtrengthe
on topped ts rongetamong beattes, eqgeueth andbonourets ber clotbpnge, and in the lat- 19
pare mans Agrephoundfrongin phpn- ter dape the Hall tetople . Sbheopencth her
er partes. Arammeallogakpnge,agapntte mouth rw wildom, einher tonge ig the late of
whom noman arpleth vp. grace. Spe loketh Well top wapes of her bout
Lf thou balk done folpthelp when thou watte bolde: catcth not her bread ui pdelnes. Her chil
in hpe eftate,ozpt hou batt taken euclcounfel: Dë (yallarple,¢ call ber bleffed:¢ ber bufoande
then lape thpue Pande bpon thp moutbe..  Mallmakemocbofber. Wany daughters ther
Ubolochbpemetbh mplke maketh butter: ¢ be be f gather riches together: but p ocite aboue
that ruobe bps note, maketh tt blede: Even the all.Asforfauour.tt is dplecatful,e betwtpe
fobetbat caw th ozath bepngeth forth itrpfe. isa vapne thing:buta womd Pfearcthp Low
MERU ATENA T e eaa ear kai k
T: pngeso ough to fudge iateip: Zhe propertpe ofan hoz reg cemlinie Ay ndlet her otone wozkeg papfe


ppc CThe ende of f Proucrdes otsalomon.
e


of Salomon. Sol.rr rit.


Remane frome vanptleandlpes:qeue menti- . = E PTO m,
torr ponertpe norris oneremraunremea “EHC WOES OF kýnge


ean at ei | Lamuell,and theleffonthatbpa
Crovi.b: a npe the, fape:* hoisthe Lorde. Andleaft other
sorene Abepngeconttrapnedthozoweponerticfalyn Mother tangbthpm, 4
Hod.rr.b to ftealing,etakepnameofmpGodinvapne. fF Winey E 2 fone (why do pe fo)thoutsne
: Accule nota feruaunt onto his mapfter,leatte RAN Va oomp bodp:D mp dere beloued
be tpeatse cucll of the,andDtboubeburt. There Eil a) (tone: geue not ouerthp fkréqth
ága generactonthatcurlethe thep2 father, and KH ey) V] [a and wapes dnto heme, pcb
doeth not blefle theyz mother. Chereigage: PIRA LSH | neuen of bpr
neracpon that thynke themfelues cleane, and IS not Foz kin
petisnot clenfed from thepzfplebpnes. depnke tine,
‘Chere tg a qeneratiothat hath a — loke, no2z pepnces ftronge dapnke oxo; there is no tecrete
andDdothcalt vpthep2 epelpodes . There isa peneth, left thep beinge Daonké,
generation whofe teeth are fwerdes, and with € parucrte the iudqement of al


thep2 chatwe bones thep confume,anddeuoure pooremenschpldzen. Geue rongedapnke vn
thefimple Etheearth,¢ the poozefromamige tofuch eare condempned to deathe g topne vr
men. Che horteleache pathtwodaugbtergerp totbofe that mourne: that thep eo bepubkett ,
inge'bapnge Dpther, bzpnge bpther. and forget thep2 miferp andaduer ptie. We
C Chere be thre thingcs that are neuer latpltp- thou an aduocate,foz the dombe ¢ ftandeinind-
ed:pea,foure thynges fapeth neuer boo . he erai thp felfe, to {peake fo2 all fucheas be
raue, a womang wombe cloled: ¢ the earthe p ocoutlefie tn thps tranfptozpe wogloe. Dyer
AR eiga water pnough. Asforfpreitfateth thymouth,defende the thpngethatis lawful¢
ero.rsi.b nenerboo. * Wipotolaugheth bysfather to rpgbt.andthe caufe ofthe pome andbelpeg.
Pen Frbite cone ¢ fetteth big mothers cõmaundementat — Cibolo fpndeth anbonett fapthfull woman, 25
naugbt:therauens ppcke out bys epesin p val fhe ts moche moze bees tben perles . The
lepe, and Dewoured be be of the ponge Vegleg. Hert of ber bulband may fafelp truftin ber,fo p
bere be thee thpnges to bpe Foz me:¢ a8 foz P bhethalfalinnoponertie. he wil do Dim qood
fourth ppafiethmyp E SE Wapofan Enotcuel,all the dapes of perlpfe. She occu:
Acglein the apze.the wape of a ferpent onera Sob flare,¢laboureth gladlpe wth
ffone,the wave ofa thpppeinthefee:andp wap der bandes. Sbe ts lpkea marchauntes Dyp,
of a man Wopth a ponge woman. Such is p wap that bepngeeh ber vitaplesfroma farte. She
alfo of a wpfe that beaketbwedlocke,whpcbe is vpin thenygbt feafon:to proupde meate foz
toppeth ber mouth lpke as whé the hath eaté,¢ ber Doutholde,g foode for bermapdens. Sbe
fapeth: Xg foz me, F baue doneno parme. Cho conlpdereth londe, and bpetbit, and wpth the
rowe theetbynges thecarthis dplquyeted,and frute of ber bandes fhe planteth a ypneparde.
the fourth mape tt not beare: Thozowe a lere SHbegpsdethber loincs With frength, g coura
| uaunte that bearcthrule. Ehozoweafoole p EAA aiae And pt the perceauetbat pee
oF . Hath tomochbzeade ,thozotvea wpfe toozthbye Doulwpferic doth good, ber candle gor not ont
hatred When beig marped,¢ thozowe an ade= RAD pee Dt ete ber Fongers to p fppnole:
=p mapdë samena sps maptters. Chelebe andber bande taketh holde of theopttatte. Hie
foure thynges tn the earth, the tobpchare verpe opencth ber band to the pore, pea the frretcheth 7
|: Iptle:but in wplds thep erceade the ple. The fozth ber bandes to fuchas bauenede. HDhefra C
| , Sou bhs emmetsarebut weake people*pet catherthep rethnot that the colbe of wpnter thall hurt pee
a their meatetogetber in the baructte peconp: boule foz all ber houthold folkesare clothed us
es are butafebletolke,petmake they thepzcon tharlet. Sbe maketh ber felfe fapzeonamen
“ches among the rockes. Che arethoppers baue tes, ber clothyngeis whpte fplke and purple.
nota —— Piorthtogetber byheapes Her hulbandets moche fet bp in the gates, whe
The ippderlaboureth wpth ber bandes, ig in Detpeceebamonge theculers ofthe lande. Sbe
.  hpnaesplaces. herebe theetbyngesthbat maketh cloth of vile:and felleth it and del pue-
go ftpilp:pea,fourearecomelp in ‘opng. ALi ret) qp2dels vntotbemarchaune. SHtrengthe
on topped ts rongetamong beattes, eqgeueth andbonourets ber clotbpnge, and in the lat- 19
pare mans Agrephoundfrongin phpn- ter dape the Hall tetople . Sbheopencth her
er partes. Arammeallogakpnge,agapntte mouth rw wildom, einher tonge ig the late of
whom noman arpleth vp. grace. Spe loketh Well top wapes of her bout
Lf thou balk done folpthelp when thou watte bolde: catcth not her bread ui pdelnes. Her chil
in hpe eftate,ozpt hou batt taken euclcounfel: Dë (yallarple,¢ call ber bleffed:¢ ber bufoande
then lape thpue Pande bpon thp moutbe..  Mallmakemocbofber. Wany daughters ther
Ubolochbpemetbh mplke maketh butter: ¢ be be f gather riches together: but p ocite aboue
that ruobe bps note, maketh tt blede: Even the all.Asforfauour.tt is dplecatful,e betwtpe
fobetbat caw th ozath bepngeth forth itrpfe. isa vapne thing:buta womd Pfearcthp Low
MERU ATENA T e eaa ear kai k
T: pngeso ough to fudge iateip: Zhe propertpe ofan hoz reg cemlinie Ay ndlet her otone wozkeg papfe


ppc CThe ende of f Proucrdes otsalomon.
e


i ae The Boke


Tye boke of the Prea:


cher:otherwple called Eccleliattes.


Eccl pli,e z


fte mp boules.andplanted binepardes. 3 made me


cesurnerpagapne 60 bpmielfe . * All floudes


perfect cannot be sagt abe ) thpuges that
are perfect. Jcdmune


Lenbefoze me tn Jerufalem. Pea mp herte pad
great experpence of Mploome g knotledge,foz
theronto Japplped mp mpnde, that J mpghee
Lnowe what were wildom and bnderlading,
what torre crrour ¢foolptpnefle:and ¥ percea-
ued,that thps teas allo but a beracté of mpnd:
foz where moch wploomis, these ts alfo great
trauaplandbdplquietnefle:anb the moze know:
ledge a man bathe mee isdpscace.
C'Tpe.ii. Chapter.
C abountaunce ofrpcpede, and pleature,and
‘o€buplopnge age bapne thpnges,

ams rend oen {apd 3 thus in my hert: Rote
Po Ba goto, J wyltabempue cafe, g paue
LO (Si good dapes. ut lo,that is vanity
7 somalfo:infomoch,that 3 lapde vnto p


man qpuéto langhter:P artemad, eto mtrthe:
what doek thous So Ftboughtinmyp Dert to -
geue mp Aei unto topne.andagapnetoapplpe P
mp mpnde Dnto wpldom, Eto conprcbendedto
Ipipnefle bntpll thetyme that (amongeall the . |
thpnaes whpcbare vnder the Sine) 3mpagbt ere
fe what were belte foz men to do,fo lige as thep
IpueDnderpeaues. Lisi

* Jmade gozgtous Fapze hoz Reg. F builded ilere. ti.
ochardes ¢ qarbens of pleature € plated trees s
in them ofall maner frutes. * ZF made pooles 0€ 3 see sie
twater to water tbe grene g frutefull trees wal. |
J bought {eruauntes and mapdens: and hada
great boutbolde, Asfoz catelland pepe, Fbad
mozelubfaunce of themt,cbe all thep that were
befo2e me in Jerufalem, J patero fpluer and
golde together cuenatrealure of Bpndes q lã-
Des. J proupdedme {pngers and ome ,whpche
coulde plape on infrumetes,tomake mé mirth


ee


|
|
|
a


E
!


$ gpatpme.3Jgatmeplaltericg g fongesof muz |
fpcke. And Abas greaterse in moore wor Gpp
then all mp predelfours in Jerufalem. o0? wil-


dDomeremapned with me: and loke whatloener

mpne epes Delpred, Flet them baune it: wherin

foeuermp berte delpted oz bad anpepleafure, J

Mithelaeit not from it. €Tpug mp bert reiopled

inalltbat 3 dpo:F this has my pozcti ofalmp

trauapll. wut when Fconfpazedall the two: = $
kes that mp pãdes had wrougbte,andallthecla aq
boure that 3 Dad taken therein: lo, all was but
yanpticand veracps of mpnde, Enothpnae of

anpe value vader the Sunne. !

Then turned J meto colpdze topfoome,er= 3
four ytong nefie(fo2z What is pe amõge më, ý Rel
mpabt be coparedto me the &pnge in fuch wo
tess )¢ Flawe that wploome ercelleth foolpth


ncfe,astarveas lpabt boethdarkenelle . 02 a H
topic man bath bps Se inbps becd,butpfole \
goeth in thedarkenelte: J percepuedallo pthep ‘


both had onecnd. Chen thought Jin mp mind,
PF it bappe wnto the Foole ag it doeth yutome,
what nedeth me then tolaboure anpemooze foz
wp{domes So F cofelled opthin mp bert, that
thps.alfo was but Danptic.s€o2 f ple are cuer
ag lptle invemembzaiice as the foolt(he.fo2 the
dapes Mall come when allthalbefozgotté:pea J
the wple man dpetbas wellasthefoole. i
Thus begnane Fto be werpe of mp lpfe, infos |
moche that J couldcawap wpthnothpne that
ig done binder the Sunne, fo? all thas but bani-
tpeand beracidb of mpnde: pea J was werpe of
mip laboure, which J pad tate under the funnt,
becaute J Houlde be fapneto leane them bnto
another ma that commeth after me: And who
knowethe whether be thalbe a wpre mano? a E
fole: Ænè pet (hal De be Loz of all mp labours, ma
wdpeh F wpth luche wyldome bane taken Viz no
der the funne. Tbps is alfoa vapne thpnge. i oo
. HO Fturned me torefraine mp mpide from D ‘

all {uch tranaple, as J toke vnder the Hunne: |
foz fomoche asa må (houlbde werpe bim felfe w$
wpome , tepth buderfadpnge g opoztunitie, |
æ pet befapne to leaue ppslaboures nto anos
ther that neuer fwete fog them. Saa a |
vapne


i ae The Boke


Tye boke of the Prea:


cher:otherwple called Eccleliattes.


Eccl pli,e z


fte mp boules.andplanted binepardes. 3 made me


cesurnerpagapne 60 bpmielfe . * All floudes


perfect cannot be sagt abe ) thpuges that
are perfect. Jcdmune


Lenbefoze me tn Jerufalem. Pea mp herte pad
great experpence of Mploome g knotledge,foz
theronto Japplped mp mpnde, that J mpghee
Lnowe what were wildom and bnderlading,
what torre crrour ¢foolptpnefle:and ¥ percea-
ued,that thps teas allo but a beracté of mpnd:
foz where moch wploomis, these ts alfo great
trauaplandbdplquietnefle:anb the moze know:
ledge a man bathe mee isdpscace.
C'Tpe.ii. Chapter.
C abountaunce ofrpcpede, and pleature,and
‘o€buplopnge age bapne thpnges,

ams rend oen {apd 3 thus in my hert: Rote
Po Ba goto, J wyltabempue cafe, g paue
LO (Si good dapes. ut lo,that is vanity
7 somalfo:infomoch,that 3 lapde vnto p


man qpuéto langhter:P artemad, eto mtrthe:
what doek thous So Ftboughtinmyp Dert to -
geue mp Aei unto topne.andagapnetoapplpe P
mp mpnde Dnto wpldom, Eto conprcbendedto
Ipipnefle bntpll thetyme that (amongeall the . |
thpnaes whpcbare vnder the Sine) 3mpagbt ere
fe what were belte foz men to do,fo lige as thep
IpueDnderpeaues. Lisi

* Jmade gozgtous Fapze hoz Reg. F builded ilere. ti.
ochardes ¢ qarbens of pleature € plated trees s
in them ofall maner frutes. * ZF made pooles 0€ 3 see sie
twater to water tbe grene g frutefull trees wal. |
J bought {eruauntes and mapdens: and hada
great boutbolde, Asfoz catelland pepe, Fbad
mozelubfaunce of themt,cbe all thep that were
befo2e me in Jerufalem, J patero fpluer and
golde together cuenatrealure of Bpndes q lã-
Des. J proupdedme {pngers and ome ,whpche
coulde plape on infrumetes,tomake mé mirth


ee


|
|
|
a


E
!


$ gpatpme.3Jgatmeplaltericg g fongesof muz |
fpcke. And Abas greaterse in moore wor Gpp
then all mp predelfours in Jerufalem. o0? wil-


dDomeremapned with me: and loke whatloener

mpne epes Delpred, Flet them baune it: wherin

foeuermp berte delpted oz bad anpepleafure, J

Mithelaeit not from it. €Tpug mp bert reiopled

inalltbat 3 dpo:F this has my pozcti ofalmp

trauapll. wut when Fconfpazedall the two: = $
kes that mp pãdes had wrougbte,andallthecla aq
boure that 3 Dad taken therein: lo, all was but
yanpticand veracps of mpnde, Enothpnae of

anpe value vader the Sunne. !

Then turned J meto colpdze topfoome,er= 3
four ytong nefie(fo2z What is pe amõge më, ý Rel
mpabt be coparedto me the &pnge in fuch wo
tess )¢ Flawe that wploome ercelleth foolpth


ncfe,astarveas lpabt boethdarkenelle . 02 a H
topic man bath bps Se inbps becd,butpfole \
goeth in thedarkenelte: J percepuedallo pthep ‘


both had onecnd. Chen thought Jin mp mind,
PF it bappe wnto the Foole ag it doeth yutome,
what nedeth me then tolaboure anpemooze foz
wp{domes So F cofelled opthin mp bert, that
thps.alfo was but Danptic.s€o2 f ple are cuer
ag lptle invemembzaiice as the foolt(he.fo2 the
dapes Mall come when allthalbefozgotté:pea J
the wple man dpetbas wellasthefoole. i
Thus begnane Fto be werpe of mp lpfe, infos |
moche that J couldcawap wpthnothpne that
ig done binder the Sunne, fo? all thas but bani-
tpeand beracidb of mpnde: pea J was werpe of
mip laboure, which J pad tate under the funnt,
becaute J Houlde be fapneto leane them bnto
another ma that commeth after me: And who
knowethe whether be thalbe a wpre mano? a E
fole: Ænè pet (hal De be Loz of all mp labours, ma
wdpeh F wpth luche wyldome bane taken Viz no
der the funne. Tbps is alfoa vapne thpnge. i oo
. HO Fturned me torefraine mp mpide from D ‘

all {uch tranaple, as J toke vnder the Hunne: |
foz fomoche asa må (houlbde werpe bim felfe w$
wpome , tepth buderfadpnge g opoztunitie, |
æ pet befapne to leaue ppslaboures nto anos
ther that neuer fwete fog them. Saa a |
vapne


a vapne thpnge eqreat mplerte. Fo: hat gee:
teth aman ofall thelabour and trauaple of bis
mypnde,tbat be taketh nder the funne,but beui
nefle,fozowe,anddpiquietnelie all the dapes of
bys ipfe: $nfomoch,tbat bis bertecannotrefte
inthenpadt:thpsisalfoa vayne thpnge. * 3s
itnot better then foz amantocateedzpnke,€ one dpeth,fot
pys fouleto be merp in bps labour: Pea, Flawe
that thys alfo wasa gptt of God. ?
4fo2 ho wylicate 02 gomoze luflelp to bys
twoke then 4: And wohpsSod gpucthto f må
that is ood befoze bym, wyfoome, vndertan-
Dpnge and qladnefie: but Duto the (yuner de ge-
og Ueth Werptielle-s (and Cuperdous care) that he mape
gather,and beape together the thynae that af-
terwarde Halbe qpuen Ynto him, whom it plea


SUOE AAR


Eiri D.D


ie. |
Thep go all ont ove place, fo: as thep be al m

of buit,fo thal t allturne vatobutt agayne. |

xipo knoweth the {pirite of man that goth Sapi,tia |

bptvard,¢ the beeath of the bealk ý goth Downe |

totbeearth: Wiberfoze 3 percepue that there |

isnothpna better foz a man, tben tobe iopfull

|

|

|


reri erreit
d


{eth God. Thisisnowea vapnethpnge:peaa inbpglaboure: fortbhat is bys ocpon. wut
verp oplqupetnefic and beracten of mpnve . who topll bapnge bpm to fe the thpnge that
Theri. Chapter. marj tall come aft bent
All Chpnges come in their tpure,and palie atwap CTbe.tiii.cp apter.
“ iE == see a a Hbemilterpes of the innocent, Tbe lupetrfluots labours
a eann A terp thing bath atime:pea,al ofmen. Zhe cbploe that is pooze and tople. ec,
i vow etbatis bnocrppeancbathbrs Ea DF turnedme,and* conlpdz2ed all y%
el conuentent{eafon. @hereisa EAr the ppolente belpa SA: ACISDOONE abacuc.tia
d Boy.) time to bebogne,¢ a time to dpe | NCU) onder the funne:andbebold,the tea Ert |
Ae keai | Chere tsa tpmeto plate, and a AST reg offucheas were opp2efled: and |
Sarees tpme to plucke bp the thingep EA there was no man toconfozt them,
isplanted. Atpmetoflape, ¢atpmetomake ozthatwolde delpucr and defende thé from the


intbofe orng tere is nothpnge better fo: a
pen
belpueth. Fozall thata man ecateth anddzpn-
ketb:pea,tobatloeuera maneniopeth ofall bps
` Jaboure,thatfameisa qpft of God. J cõfpdzed
alfo that tobatfoeuer God docth, tecontinuctd
© for ener. Aud that nothpnge can be put vutote,
no? taken Fromif,and ee God doethit tothe
intent that më oulde feare bpm. * Che thing
that bath bene,tsnotve: and the thynge that ts
foz to come, bath ben afore tpme, fog Godtetto-
retbagapne the thynge that was palt. 40:20-
uer, J latve bner the funne Dngodlpnetie in
fede of Se eas iniquity in fede of righ
teontnefle, Chen thought 3 inmyp mpnde: God
fhallfeperate the rpabreous frothe vngodly, ¢


piolence oftheiropprefours. UWiberfoze F iud
cred thole that are deed, tobe moze Dapppe then
thote that bealpue: pea, bpm pis pet Dnbozne
to be better at cafe thentbep bothe, becaute be
fecth not pmiferable wozkesthataredone Yi-
ber the funne. Agayne, Ilawe that alltra- 25
vaple anddplpgense of labour that cuerpe man
talsctbinbande, was done of enupe agraint bis
nepabboure . ‘Chps is alio a Dapne thpnge,
ana veracpon ofmpnde. Che folefoloeth bys
bandes together and eatetb vp his owwnefletbe.
Dne handefull (fapeth be ) ts better wpth
refte.then both the bandes full wpth laboure €
ite Ses ofinpnde. Horeoner, turned me,
and beholde pet another vanitie under p funne:
There igone man, no moo but bym felfe a- C
lone baupnge neptberchplde noz bzother : pet
is there noendeot bps carefull trauaple: bps
cpes cannot befatilfped opth rpcbelle, ow ¢ ret ws
both be not remembze bpm felfe , and Cape: ) ffoxwhomboa —
4 take Cuch trauaple:f02 whole pleature do F
thus confurneatvapemplpfer Chpsisalloa
papneandimpferabletbpnge. Therforetwo
are bettce then one: for thep mape twell entope
the profpt of thep2 labour . ffo2zpf one of thems
fall,bps companypon belpeth bpm Dp agapne:
ut woots hymtbat igalone : for pf he fall, be
hathnot another to belpe bim bp. Agapne.whbe
tivo flepe together, Separ warme : but potee
canabonpe betoarmealone: Dnemape be o=
nercome, buttwo mape make refpitaunce.
A theefolde gableis not lpabtelpe broken.
A poozechplbde bepnge topte ,isbetter then an


p olde kynge that doctcth , and cannot beware
in tpnte to come. | ial
x Someone commeth out of prpfon, and ie fps rrr
made a kpnge:t another Whpch ts bognetn the iitirerrda
©- ECC Kpnavs


CUE UGK.


Epm@rdome commeth onto pouertp. And F per
--cepuedthat allmenliupng onder the funne,go

sopth the feconde chplde,that Hall Lande Spin
the ftede of the other. As foz the people that
haue bene before bim,and come after him thep
are innumerable . And thep. tbat come af-
ter bpm thallnot reiopte of him. Chpsisalfoa
paine thenge ¢ veracpon ot mpnde. Habe thou
commett into the boule of God, kepe thy fote.¢
Dawe npe, that God W)pche isat bande mape
heare:* that thou gpue not the ofringes offo-
les:fo2 they knoe naught but todocuell,

| The. b, Chapter.
@ In abmoniffionto beware of rahe communicacpon. woe


ought not to maruaple atthe oppzet(pon ofthe poot. these
ueteus isnot Catpltped topth bps epchelle:


pee € not baltp wpth thy mouthe.¢ let
H ED Beg tot thpne berte [peake anpe thpnge


LTREDE


A llet thy Wo2desbetewe . Foz were


Mec, a
Abac.ta


- nep wpll neuer be oid 4
elle (pall bane no pzofpt
therof. Chisisalfoa aol dnd be ber a
_ mochrichefle t,there ave manp allo that{péde
thé atbape.And what pleafure moze bath be $
polteileth them, faupnae that be mape loke bpo
them with bpsepes ¢ Alabourpng man flepeth
fuoetelp,tobetber tt belptleozmoch pbecatcth,
_ but theabounbaunce of the rpch, wl not fuftre
€ B toflepe. Petis there a foze plage, whped I
auefene onder the line,(namelp)rpcbes kept
to the buct of bpmtbat bath them in poffeffion.
te Cane

| ferpe ettouble:and pf be bauca chplo,it gettet
zob.»  notbpnge.* Lpkeaghe camenaked out ofbps
Zin bid mothers wombe fo goth be thethberagapne: ¢
carpeth nothbpngeawape wrth ppm of all bps
labour. bps tsa mplerable plage that be Mal
wal goawape ené as be came. Wi bat delpethit him
-R then that be bath laboured in the poe ANS

tecie iio Dapes OF Dis life alfo be dpd eate inthe darke,

D greatecarefulneffe, Cpcbnefle,¢ fogowe.* Ther:


net g
raion e ; a emen:
Ree e WHE Oodgencth ama richelle, goo
ww à be wantethno=
eee ere s parte cande


Cpe, and pet God geneth bpm not leaue to en-
iope the Came, but another man fpendethe thens
Thisisa vapne thing a miferabe plage. PF
a manbeget bundeed chplozen,¢lpue manp pea
reg fothathisdapesaremanp imnnombze ¢ pet
cannot eniope bps good, nepther be burped, as
Foz bim Jfape: that vntpmelpe bpzth is better
then be. oz becometptonaught.¢lpeoeth bps
tyme tn darchuefle.¢ Dis name is forgotte.<t)o-
reouer,be feeth not the funne,¢ knoweth not of
it: pet bath be moze refte then the other. Pea,


‘though be lined two thoulande pereg, pet bath


be no goodlpfe. Come not allto vod Sp All ¢
the labour $ ama taketh is foz bimtelfe, evet

bis defpzeisneuerfplledatterhismipnde. Fog

what bath the tople moze thé p fole. pat bel-

peth it ý poze, pe knotoeth, to walk w foles be

fore the lputnges Thecleare fiqht of theepes is

better thenp the foule thould walke after defp-
regoftbelufte. Botvbeit,thisigalfoa vaypne
thing æ a difquietnefle ofminde. The thyngeP °
bath béis named alreabp, g knowt pitiseuen

man bim felfneither map be go tolatwe bpm x

Hie mpabticreben be. any thynges there be

p encreale wanptie:¢ What hatha man els‘ oz
toboknoweth whatis qoodfo2 ma lpupnge,in


g the dapes of bps vapne lyfc,wbpcb is but a pa:


dowe: D2 who tpl tell aman what thal pap-
pen after bpm wnder the Sunne.
The. vit.chapter.


C That whpch palleth our Trengthes and w pttes,
ought toc not to CeKe atiet


Forax Goodnameis more wozrth,then precp a


Pray ougopntment,and p dap of deatbis bets propria &


eter the p bay ofbysth. Ftis bettcrtogo Ta is,
into an boufe of mournpng, then into a banket-

tpnge boufe. Eo? therets the ende ofall men: g

be thatis tpuynge,ta ketbit toberte: qrauptie

is betterthentolaugbe: foz when the counte =

naunce is beup,the bert is refoucmed. The Dert

of f wife ig in p mourning boule, but p berte of

the foolpthisinthe boule of mpeth. * {tis bet p:a, petra
tcrfogpuecaretop chafentnge ofa wpieman,

then to beare the fonge offooles. Sfozthe late:
gbing of foolesislibe pcracking of thoznes Dn

ber a pot. Andthatis but a papie HONS


Oye W2eaCHET


The wple man hateth tozonge dealpng:+ ab:
Hozrethtbhe bert that couctethrewarbes. Wet-
tevisittocdlidze p ende ofatbpng then the be-
gpnnpng. The pactent offpirpte is better then
thebpempnded. Wenot haltelpe angepinthyp
inpnde, fo: wath refteth in tbe bofome of foo-
se pt ba thou-ddibatis the caule,that the
dapes of the olde tyme were better then thep
be nowe fo: that were no wple queftpon. wit:
dome With enberitaunce is good:pet bettetisit
wÒ them that wptboute care mape beholde the
Sunne- For toildd ocfendethas wel as menp,
¢ the excellente knowledges wploome geueth
Ipfe bnto him that bathit in pollelion.c ifie
the Wozke of God, Powe p noman can make p
tbgnge ftrepght wbpeb be maketh croked.

Cle tel the tpme of ppofperitic, ¢remembze
thetpme of mptfoztunc:foz God maketh f one
bp the other fo pa man can fpnde nothpneg els .
allthbpnges paue ¥conlpdzed in p tyme of mp
vbanttpe:tBat the iute man perpfipeth foz bys
righteoulneffe fake,¢ the bugodlp lpueth in bis

rem rite WPChednelle. Therfore,+bethounether torigh
"' feous noz oneriople that thou perifp not,be net
ther to burpgbteons alfonoz tefoolptp, leite p

dpe beforethptpme. Fis qoodfo2 the to take

hold of this,¢notto let that coout of thp bade

So2 De $ feareth God, cimeth forth w them al.

Wilds geueth moze courage wnto the wple,

iire. viite Denten mpgbtp men of tbe cptie: * foz there is
ipabi.g Notonetul pponearth p doeth good efpnnctp
riba NOt. Cakenobede onto cuctyp tozde thatisipo
`> ken, lette thon beare thp feruaunte curfe the:foz
thpne otone Dert knotveth that thou thp felf al-

fo bait oft tpmes (pokéeucll bp otber men. All

thele thinges paue 7 proued in ploome: J


- dobrrotiie CHOUGHE to be wopfe * but pe wente fartperfro


me then the thas before: pea, andfo depetbat F
» wD Mpghtnotreach vutobher.Japplped mp mynd
alle bntoknowledge.¢ toleke g learche out fei-
ence,opldom g duder{tanding:to kuowe pfoo
lifpnelic of the bngoblp.¢ tee errour of dotinge
fooles. Jnd J founde,that * a womad is bptte:
revehenbdeath,fo2 pe bath calf abzove ber berte
as anet that men fpihe pth: €-ber bandesare
chepnes.@ bofo plealeth God, thall efcape fró
Hev:butthelpnuee wpllbetaken wptbber.
Webolde(fapeth the preacher) this baue Jdi
ligentlp fearched out and pzroued. Dne tbpnge
mull becolpd2ed with anotber,that ama map
comebp &nowledge:tobpcbeas pet F {eke and
fpndeitnot. mongsa thoulande men Fhaue
Eounde one, but not one oman amonge alo,
this only baue J fofide,p.* Godmabde ma intg
tpat but thep fought many inuencpong.
ii C The. viri.Chapter.
CTbr kpuges commaundemente ought to be obeped.
MHladneticis oncokthe chefe chpuges buter the funne.
mars Hots wple, Mibohath knowlege
ftomakeananfiocrer A mas ple
dd * maketh bis face topne: but


pro.bii,b


mnf, d


S fauour.3 mutt kepe the k
Eod, renot patty togo out ofhisfygpt and fe


o ontbamefattnctie puttctbit out of: i
= pnaes co
udement, ¢ the oth that F baucmade buto iE


chee gh ab) th

Jr! ohh Å i
thou continucinnocuell thynge, fo: whatloe-
uer it pleafethbim that doth be. Lpke as hen
akpng geuet)a charge, bps commaundement
ismpabtie: Euenfo, * wbo mape {ape vnto Fob.ir.b
Dpm:wpat dock thous * Wihoto kepeth the chs te.rviii.«
maundemente , tall fele no barme, but a wyfie
mans bert bifcerneth the tpme and tudgement.
f€02 euerp thpnge wpll hane apertninees iud %
pe pa Ps 18 the thpnge that maketh men

ulofcarefulnefie, andlozowe. And iwhp: ama
knoteth not what is for to come:foz who wpll
tell Dim? Metthevisthere anp man that bath
power oner thelpirpte, tokepe Tpll thefpirpte
no: to baueanp power inthe tpme of deathe: ig
tt not De allo that can make anende of the bat-
taple: nepther mape vngodlpneffe delpuer thé
that mebdle toptball, | ,

All thefle thypnges baue Fconlpdzed,andap, C

plpedimp mpnde yunto eucrpe worke pis onder
the funne: bowe onemanbathblozahyppvpian
other tobps owne harme. Eo; * J paue fene ofe OFrFbit.c
tenthe bngodlp brought totheir graues: epet
thep bane returned intothecptie agapne , and
came agin mage tpl men, which in pcp=
tie were groten out of nemozp, as there thofe
allo plpued well. Chpsisalfoa vapne thinge:
becaule note that enell hoekesarcnot bakelpe
punpibed,the bert of man gpuetb bpm felfouer


-pnto wpckednefle. Sut thouqbe an euell per-


fonne ofendean bundzedtpmes,% Goddefer,
geupnge bim longe Ipfe: pet am 3 fure, that it
thall go tel wptd the that feare God, becaule
thep baue Dim before their epes. Againe,as fog
the vugobdly, it fhall not be tell wpth him, nep
ther thall be prolonge bis dapes , buteucnasa
fpabdowe:fo pall he be that feareth not Good.
Petis there a vanitpe ppon earth: Chere be D

iutmen, pnto whom it bappencth, as thougbe
toe beD the toop bes of the yngodlp.

gapne, there be vugobdlpe, pth whom it
gocth as though thepbadp wozkeg of therigh-
teous. Cbs baue Acalledalfoa vapnetbing. —
Cherfore J commende gladnelle, becanfea ma
hath no better thpnge wuder theunne , then
focate anddzpnke, and to bemerp:fortbat thal
be Dauc of bpslaboure all thedayes of bps lyfe,
whic) God geueth hym wndrr the Hunne. 3nd
fo Japplped mp minde to learne Wifoome,and
toknowethe trayapl thatis inthe wo: (and
that offucbe afafiyon, that 3 luffrednotmpne
cpesto flepe,neptherdape noz npgbt)¥ under:
tode of all the wozkes of God, butitis not pot
{pble foz aman toattapne vate the Workers $
ave done bnderthe Sunne: andthoughe pebe=
Rowe bys iaboure to fchethem oute,pet canbe
wopreache onto thent: pea, thougba wpleman
ivolde bndertake to knowe them, pet hall he
notfpndetbem. | |

C Coe.ir.C bapter,

E Aman twotteth not bp the cpgbteoufuede of bps otone tworz


Kes, tobether be be worthp of loue ór bate, € mä ought colpue
merplp topth bpatopfe.a praple ofmpfoome. — - è
a DAU thele thpnges papio ERLE
EJB a mp mpndeto feie oute. Cherpabtes

S SRA ous ¢ wple: pea, and thepzferuautes
Saeed Alo arein f band of God:¢ therisna-
€¢€w man


ee —— = — ŘE
— = — A SS


The Booke.
man that knowethep Herloue oz bate, but alt cesses ee ANE?
i, Athappeneth wneoone q Ebenptierécebetwprt a Fote and a topic mare Fortunate
Onto anotberit goth Doitbtberpgdtcousas —_ «dave sibs eeb fi pe Dorth Corrupte
gobie topth the wngodlp:*wpth tbe good and cleane, Za AS) kare pet el d
veya eee opntmét.¢ maketbit to tinch.
E Eun fo ofte cpmes be that is
: Pasza oq madefoz totfoome g honour, ts
a vaaithappenetdontotbeperinted,(obap- DE rater
cnet) italle,tobpmtbatts atraped to befor: ane 1 Ipipnetle. A wple mans bert is
Pnet. Amongeal binges tbatcometo pale wpontberpgde barre, but a fooles bert pon ë
pnder theLunne:thisis a miferp that it bappee Left. A foole wpll Wewe him fel when be goeth
neth pnto allalpke. Thisisthecaufealfotbat bp the marr: pet ee NE S a Neipall
the hertes of men are full of to chepnicfle ,and Ddothasfoolpihly as bim felfe. PEapapnctpall
madde foolpipnefie igum ebep2 bectes -aglonge fppzitebegenentbetobearerule,” be not neg Kom.rit.>
astbep lpue, bntpllebep dpe. Ipgent then intbpne offpce: for be that can take
% And whpeas longe asa manlpueth, be bath cure of bpuv elf, anoybethgrea toe
an pope:for aqupcbe Dogare(fape thep is better Another plagets there, tobpche 3 bauc lene >
thena deed Lpon:fo? they fbe lpupnge.knowe Vnder the funne:namelp,.theignozaunce tpat is
that thep pat bpe-but thep that be deed, bnotwe commenly amonge p2inces: in thata Foole tpt
notbpnge: neptberdeferue thepanp moze. Stor ide roy ESANEZ EPDE WDD DOREN.
their memoziallig fozgott?, fo that t epbenep beneth: baue tene eruaŭtegrpde wpd boztts.
ther loued, bated noz enuped-neptber bane tbep q pepnces goinge upon their fete ashi ert
| anp moze pen the wozldeinallthatigdone uaunteg.* Bur be thatdigaeth vp a pptt pall taal dotted
| onder the funne.Go tbou thp wape then , cate fall therin bimfelf: and wholo beeaketh Downe
| onor a oprbiopesebrpnbecbpwpnetotip a tbe Dedge.aferpent vall opte Drm. CN
| clad pect,fo2 thy workes pleale God. Let thy mouth the trons, dpall bane trauaple Nepal
| sansib garmentes be altoap wobpte,xand let thp beede ¢ be Phetwet) wood, balbe burte therwr th,
| jacke noopntemente . abenan pronis blunt e the popntnot fbar €
pouse x Tle thp felftolpue iopfullp with thp wife pened it mult be whetagapne,ethatw might:
| whom thou loueft,al poapes of thp ipfe wbhicp Eučfodoth wilds folowe diligéce. X babler of
|
|


ig but vapne, that God gpucth the bnder the pystongeisno better thena Cecpent that tpn:

funne all the dapes of thy vanitpe : fo2 that tg geth wptbout byiipnge. Che wozdes out ofa

thp pozcionin tbyslpfc,of all thy labours tra: wpe mansmouth,are gracious:but thelippes

naple that thou taket ynder p Sunne. What of a foole tpl deffrope bim fell. Che beginnin

foruct thon tabett inbande todo, that botopth ofbistalbingts foolitpnelic ,¢tbhe lat wozde ot

| allebp potwer,foz intbe graue that thouqoette bps mouthig tarkemadnefle. A foolers full of

| pnto,there ts neptber toozke,counfaple, bnote- woes, ¢ and cannot tell what Mall come to

| ledere nor plore, | afte, who wyll then warne him ofittHat iall

€ o Fturnedme Vnto other thinges pnderp foloweatter bpm: be labour ofthe foolptp ts 7

| gunne 3 fator,p in cunning it Dele a greuous onto the,wbplethep knowe not howe

| be fwpft:inbattaple ithelpeth not to be went rogointo peptic. Woobe wuto p(D plande) D

| to feping.it belpeth not to be topfe: to cheie, wobofekpngets butachplde.¢ whole pepuces

| ithelpethnot to be fubtpll:to be badintauour, arecarlp at their pakettes,2ut well is the D

| it helpethnot to be cõnpnge: but that all Ipet Plande) whofe kpn -iscome of nobles, whofe

gub.rri,b. intpme Eoztune. for a ma bnotbeth not bts pemes cateinduefealó, for neceflttice not toz

| tpine,but lpBe as the fptbe ate taken teptbtbe luit. Thorotwe llourhfulneiie the balkes fall

| | angle. eas Pbpzdesare caught with thetnare. Downe, g thozotve pole padesitrapnethinat p

| _  Guenfo aremen takenin theperpllous tpme, Houle. Heat makethmeto laug).¢ *wopnic ma Plat.cttith
| Mhenitcommethfodapnlp pon them. ketb them merp:but Yuto monepe are all thpn=
| D Tips wopfoome haue Alene allo pnder the gesobedpent. With the kynge no enellinthp
| funne me thought ita greate thpnae. Chere thougdt.¢fpeakene burt of prpchin thy peup
wasalptlecptic,and atiwe menwpthinit: fo chambze:fo2 a bpzde of the apee pal betrap thy
| there camea great kpnge ebelpegedit, emade Dopce, and toprh ber ferbers Hall We bewape

great bulwozkesagapnitit . Andinthecptie thp tWozdes. : |


there thas found a poole ma(but be was wple) CThbe.rt.cpapter. a

wbpch tb th bys tepidome belpueredD the cptie: herle ougst to be bpRrpbute bate the nebpe.

p wasthereno body thathadanperefpectto EE Ap thp bzeed wpb wete faces, andio q
ucha fpmpleman. Then fapd Fwplosishet (A > A Walt thoufpnde after manp dapes .
terthen ftrength. Meucrtheleve, a fimplemans fF | Geuc parte feuendapes,andalfo Dp

wyfoome is Befppler, anne wozdes arenot pon p. viii. foz P knowetke not what

pearde. J wple mans coun apl that is folowed miferp pall come bpon carth. WUD


5 in{cplence,isfarreaboue the crpinge ofacap= thecloudes areful,t oure out rapne Dpon p
gapi vi. a FAPNE amongefooleg, * Jfoz Weploomets bet: earth. and whe p tree falletb(wbether it be to-
sre. roiie. tor thet harnefle:-but one ontbeift alone deftro: ward p South oz Noth) mn What place foeuct

iiye priit peth moche go od. 2


ofthe Bechet,


iwpude, Hall no fotve and be Phathe no relpecte
unto thecloudes,tpal not reape. Powe, pke as
thou &uowelk not the wape of the {pyzitebowe
it entreth into p lptle boop; bepng pet inp mo-
thers wombe. Eun fo thou knowelk nop too;-
kes of God, bhpch is the Mozkemafter of all.
€ eatle not thou therfoze wpth thy bandes ta
fotve thp ede whether it be inthe mompa 0}
wi the euenpnge:fo2 thou knoteft not het er
tbps o2 that fballpzofpere, ¢ pf thep both take
itis the better. Che lpgheis fwete ta plealaiit
thpnge isit fo the epes toloke bpon f Dume.
Dea man lru: manp peares, andbe qladinthé
all let bpm remembee the dapes of Darksenefle ,
yp Wbychthalbe manp and that foloteeth:al thin:
ges albe but vanpte. Wegladthen( Othon
» pohgeman)intby pouth.¢let thy bert be merpe
intbp ponge Dapes:folowe the apes of thyne
OWne berte, and the lufte of thpne epes but be p


fure, that God thallbzpnge the intotudgeméte |


foz all thelethynaes.
CTbhe.rii. Chapter.
€ From our pouth ought wero contpbye,
enbregarbethe goodnefle sfGon,

Say yy ort albape Dpfpleature out of thpne
X9 ji bevt.¢ remone cuell from thp bovpe s
SKA for chilbbode ¢ pouthis but vanttie.
| Keen Remembze thp maker the feoner in

bp pouth,o2 tuer p Dapes of aduer vate come, €
ape: J baue


turne a gap ne after the rapne whé the keperg of

5 the baule tal tremble,¢ when the frougemen

Hall bowe them felues , oben f mplners Fade

ttyl, becaute thep be Co ferwe.and when the fight

of the windowes thall ware bpmme, tohen the

dozes in the ftretes pale Wut, y when p bopce

r ofthemplner thalbe apen Downe : he më thal

rple bp at the wopce of the by2d, and oben all

daughters ofmulike thalbe brought lowe: toi

menthallfearein ope piacra, and beafrapedin

© the &retes,toben the Almondtree Hall flozpth,

and be laden wpth be aeetbopper,anb wbenal

` lut pall pafle(becaule man goth to bps longe
Home,and the mourners qo aboute the reteg)

2 euer the filuer lace be taken awape, ¢ 02 the

golden well be beoken, D? the pot be bzokenat

the well, ¢ iiy tbele vpon the chefterne. Then

{hall the dufte be turned agapne ynto earthe ,

From whence ít came: ¢ the {prete thal retourne

ceia Dréo God, wHpch gaue ft. * Allis but vanities

| (fapth the preacher alts but plapne vanitpe.
. Che preacher was pet moze topie æ taughte


tufe gatheredisbolden vp: for they are geucn
of onetbepd } pe. Th

tomake manpbokeg
and toloudecrpinge


Werpeth the bodpe.


rye tbatisbetpbethys:for ESI
sitiganerdelele woke: fee


Sol.cerb.
Let vs Deare the conclulpon of all thpnaes:
Stcare God, and kepe bis commaundementes:
Eo: that touchety all men. E0: God hal iud ge E
al twozkeg and fecrete thinges, whether thep be
good Pach Se Ae
The ende of the boke of the Preg-
cher, otbe od Sic aad
Cccleltattes.


The Hallet of Ballet-
teg of Salomon:called in Latpn, Can-
ticum Canticum.
Thefpette Chapter,
@ 2 mpLicall fonge ofthe Cpiritual and onip loae


betiwene Chpt the fpoute,and the church
D} cougregacpon bps Cpouletie


a, That be wold kpe me wpth
CEN) fbrte of bys month: topp 2
mera F lone is moze pleafaunte then
mea 8 |. Dine, that becaute ofp coon
4 g and pleafaunt fancure of thp
AS 77 ( moot peecpous balmes.€ bp
eee ig * à lete finelipn C ect.of, «


Eee NAME
opnutment when it ts thed forth, therfoze dot
mapdeng loue the, dzate thou me vntothe: we
wpll runneafter the. Thekinge bath bzougbte
meintodps pziupe chambzes. te wplbe glad
¢retople tn the:wethinke moze of thy loue then
of wpne. Thep thatberpabteous louethe. J
am black( D pe daughters of Jerufalem )lpke 6
as * the tenteg ofthe Cedarenes,¢* as thean Bre.rrro,d
gengeg of Salomon, but petam J fapze g wel t-pa.ig.e
auoured withal:<Paruel not at me that Jam
fo blacke:fo2 wbp the funne bath pned dpors
me. p mothers chplozen pathe eupll wyll
åt me, tep made me the keper of the nf te a
des butmpne otne dineparde baue 3 not: Ept
Tellme of bpn whom mp fouleloueth wher
thou fedel the pepe, where thoumakeitetbem
retat p noone dap: fo: thy thal Abe lpke bpm
that goeth wonge about the flockes of thy ci:
pantons:Dfthou nowe not thp felf (D P fap-
refamouge wenten then go thp tap forthe af:
ter thefotetteppes of the thepe ,efede thp qoa-
tes belpbe the Hepherdestétes. Unto * p ooft 7
of Pharaos charettes baue Jcomparedebe, g Eromi
mp loue. Chp chekes g thp neckets beautpfull
asthe turtles , and banged topth fpangeg and
goodly terwels : a neckbande of golde wpll we
make the wypthipluer buttons. WH the king
fptteth at the table be Hall finel mp Rardus:a
bondel of mpzreig mp loue puto me:be wyll pe
bettoprt mp beeattes:a cluftre of Camphire in
P binepardes of Engaddi ig mp loue bnto me.
*D howe fapzeart p(mploue) Db howe fayie m
art prthou balt doucgepeg. D howefapre art Santita,
4 mp beloucd,)botbe wel fauoured art $/ Our
ed te Dect floures,the telpnges of oure boufe
are of Cedze tree, onr croletoiteg of Cipzeffe.
C Che.it.Chapter.
En ea a inthe lplpe of the felde, and rofeof %
bes, the vallepes: as the roleamonae the
ao Sxathoznes , fo18 mp loue amonge the
== daughters. Lpke asthe apple tree
Citi ameonge


ofthe Bechet,


iwpude, Hall no fotve and be Phathe no relpecte
unto thecloudes,tpal not reape. Powe, pke as
thou &uowelk not the wape of the {pyzitebowe
it entreth into p lptle boop; bepng pet inp mo-
thers wombe. Eun fo thou knowelk nop too;-
kes of God, bhpch is the Mozkemafter of all.
€ eatle not thou therfoze wpth thy bandes ta
fotve thp ede whether it be inthe mompa 0}
wi the euenpnge:fo2 thou knoteft not het er
tbps o2 that fballpzofpere, ¢ pf thep both take
itis the better. Che lpgheis fwete ta plealaiit
thpnge isit fo the epes toloke bpon f Dume.
Dea man lru: manp peares, andbe qladinthé
all let bpm remembee the dapes of Darksenefle ,
yp Wbychthalbe manp and that foloteeth:al thin:
ges albe but vanpte. Wegladthen( Othon
» pohgeman)intby pouth.¢let thy bert be merpe
intbp ponge Dapes:folowe the apes of thyne
OWne berte, and the lufte of thpne epes but be p


fure, that God thallbzpnge the intotudgeméte |


foz all thelethynaes.
CTbhe.rii. Chapter.
€ From our pouth ought wero contpbye,
enbregarbethe goodnefle sfGon,

Say yy ort albape Dpfpleature out of thpne
X9 ji bevt.¢ remone cuell from thp bovpe s
SKA for chilbbode ¢ pouthis but vanttie.
| Keen Remembze thp maker the feoner in

bp pouth,o2 tuer p Dapes of aduer vate come, €
ape: J baue


turne a gap ne after the rapne whé the keperg of

5 the baule tal tremble,¢ when the frougemen

Hall bowe them felues , oben f mplners Fade

ttyl, becaute thep be Co ferwe.and when the fight

of the windowes thall ware bpmme, tohen the

dozes in the ftretes pale Wut, y when p bopce

r ofthemplner thalbe apen Downe : he më thal

rple bp at the wopce of the by2d, and oben all

daughters ofmulike thalbe brought lowe: toi

menthallfearein ope piacra, and beafrapedin

© the &retes,toben the Almondtree Hall flozpth,

and be laden wpth be aeetbopper,anb wbenal

` lut pall pafle(becaule man goth to bps longe
Home,and the mourners qo aboute the reteg)

2 euer the filuer lace be taken awape, ¢ 02 the

golden well be beoken, D? the pot be bzokenat

the well, ¢ iiy tbele vpon the chefterne. Then

{hall the dufte be turned agapne ynto earthe ,

From whence ít came: ¢ the {prete thal retourne

ceia Dréo God, wHpch gaue ft. * Allis but vanities

| (fapth the preacher alts but plapne vanitpe.
. Che preacher was pet moze topie æ taughte


tufe gatheredisbolden vp: for they are geucn
of onetbepd } pe. Th

tomake manpbokeg
and toloudecrpinge


Werpeth the bodpe.


rye tbatisbetpbethys:for ESI
sitiganerdelele woke: fee


Sol.cerb.
Let vs Deare the conclulpon of all thpnaes:
Stcare God, and kepe bis commaundementes:
Eo: that touchety all men. E0: God hal iud ge E
al twozkeg and fecrete thinges, whether thep be
good Pach Se Ae
The ende of the boke of the Preg-
cher, otbe od Sic aad
Cccleltattes.


The Hallet of Ballet-
teg of Salomon:called in Latpn, Can-
ticum Canticum.
Thefpette Chapter,
@ 2 mpLicall fonge ofthe Cpiritual and onip loae


betiwene Chpt the fpoute,and the church
D} cougregacpon bps Cpouletie


a, That be wold kpe me wpth
CEN) fbrte of bys month: topp 2
mera F lone is moze pleafaunte then
mea 8 |. Dine, that becaute ofp coon
4 g and pleafaunt fancure of thp
AS 77 ( moot peecpous balmes.€ bp
eee ig * à lete finelipn C ect.of, «


Eee NAME
opnutment when it ts thed forth, therfoze dot
mapdeng loue the, dzate thou me vntothe: we
wpll runneafter the. Thekinge bath bzougbte
meintodps pziupe chambzes. te wplbe glad
¢retople tn the:wethinke moze of thy loue then
of wpne. Thep thatberpabteous louethe. J
am black( D pe daughters of Jerufalem )lpke 6
as * the tenteg ofthe Cedarenes,¢* as thean Bre.rrro,d
gengeg of Salomon, but petam J fapze g wel t-pa.ig.e
auoured withal:<Paruel not at me that Jam
fo blacke:fo2 wbp the funne bath pned dpors
me. p mothers chplozen pathe eupll wyll
åt me, tep made me the keper of the nf te a
des butmpne otne dineparde baue 3 not: Ept
Tellme of bpn whom mp fouleloueth wher
thou fedel the pepe, where thoumakeitetbem
retat p noone dap: fo: thy thal Abe lpke bpm
that goeth wonge about the flockes of thy ci:
pantons:Dfthou nowe not thp felf (D P fap-
refamouge wenten then go thp tap forthe af:
ter thefotetteppes of the thepe ,efede thp qoa-
tes belpbe the Hepherdestétes. Unto * p ooft 7
of Pharaos charettes baue Jcomparedebe, g Eromi
mp loue. Chp chekes g thp neckets beautpfull
asthe turtles , and banged topth fpangeg and
goodly terwels : a neckbande of golde wpll we
make the wypthipluer buttons. WH the king
fptteth at the table be Hall finel mp Rardus:a
bondel of mpzreig mp loue puto me:be wyll pe
bettoprt mp beeattes:a cluftre of Camphire in
P binepardes of Engaddi ig mp loue bnto me.
*D howe fapzeart p(mploue) Db howe fayie m
art prthou balt doucgepeg. D howefapre art Santita,
4 mp beloucd,)botbe wel fauoured art $/ Our
ed te Dect floures,the telpnges of oure boufe
are of Cedze tree, onr croletoiteg of Cipzeffe.
C Che.it.Chapter.
En ea a inthe lplpe of the felde, and rofeof %
bes, the vallepes: as the roleamonae the
ao Sxathoznes , fo18 mp loue amonge the
== daughters. Lpke asthe apple tree
Citi ameonge


Can. bif.a


Cat.tit.b


25


Catt.bi, a


=
{= ae
oth Sin
ma r


5


€


|


The Gallettes.


{yluer thecouerpnee of golde, the feate of pur-
grane groundeis plealauntlpepaurcd w loue,
02 the Daughters of Jerufalem: Gofoztbe, (D
ve då ughters oF Spon)and bepolde:kpng a
mont


amonge the trees of the wood,fois me beloued
amongethefonnes. <)p delpteis tolpt onder
bps thadotwe, for bps frute ig fwete vnto mp
thiote . Pe bzpngethme into bps wpne feller,
bis banner fpzed ouer mebysloue. Set about
me cuppes of wopne,cifozt me wpth appels: foz
Yam tpcke of louc. x His lefte bande Iyeth vn-
der mp heed. and his epght bande thal embrace
me. x J charge pon D pe daughters of Ferula
falë) bp the roeg and bpndes o et that pe
takenot bp mp loue, noz touche ber : tpll pe
be content ber felfe. He thpnke, Fear p vopce
of mp beloned: lo, there commeth De Dopppnge
tipon the mountapnes , ¢leappnge ouer plptle
Dilles. sYp beloucdislike aroo 024 pong Dart.
Wehold, be tãdethbebpnde our wall, he loketh
in at pwpndowe, g pepeth thozowe the grate.
Hp belouedanfwered,andfapd bnto me. —

D fade yp mp loue,mp beutpfull,and goto
thpne owne:fo2 lo, the wpnter is nowe palt the
rapnets alvap g gone. Che fi oures are come Wp
inthe felde,the tpme of the bpzves (pnapngets
come,andthe bopee of the turtle Doue is bearde
in our lande. Che fpgactrec brp ngeth forth ber
Frages,¢ the ppnes beare bloffomes, and paue
a good {mell. D tande vp thë € come mp loue,
mp beutiful,¢come Jlap (Omp Done ont of p
caucs of therockes out of the holes of the wall:
Det mele thp cotitenaunce,t beare thp vopee,
for fmeteisthp vopcee,¢fapzeis thp face. Get
vs the fores;pea thelptiefores,that burt f bp:
nes:fo2 our wpnes beareblofomes. +p loue
ig mpre,¢ J am bps: which fedethb amonge the
roles bntpil the dape byeake:and tpl the tcha-
Dowes be qone.Comeagapne( D mp beloned)
and belpke aga Roo, o2a ponge parte pon
the wpde mountapnes.

Che ti. Chapter.
. = P npabtin mp bed Jlougbte bpm,


watchmé alfo that qo aboute pcptie fotideme.
SHawe pe not pim whom mp foulelonetb:.
40 then F was alpétle pat thé, J founde Dim
whom my foule loueth. J bauc gotté polde vpo
bpmand wpll not lee bpm qo, vntpll Jbzpnge
bpminteomp mothers ponle, into berchabze


canit ¢hatbareme. *9charge pou, D pe daughters


of Jerufalem , bp the Kors and Hpndes of the
Felde that pe wake not bp mp loue , no: touche
per tpll the be content per felfe. botsthps,
that commeth vp out of the toildecneffelpke ba
pours of finoke,as tt Deere afimel of mpre, fra=

incetice, and allinaner Cpyces of the Apotcca-
tye: Bebholdc,about Halomons bedflede ther
{ade thze {coze baleatit men of the moot migh
tpein Zfracl. Thep holdefiverdes euerpe one, g
ave expertin toarce. Cuerpe manalfobath bys
fwerde vpon bis thpgbe, becaule of feare tn the
mA Dan! A ope lr had made bpm felfea
palace of the wad of Libanus,the pillers are of


“i


one nnfrutefullamonge them. Chplpppesare
Ipkearofecolonted rpbande,tbp wozdes are lo-
uelp,thp Side dilly al ak pa toy ranat
topthin thine beeres. Thy necke is phe p tower
of Dauid buplded wpth coftlp toned, lping out
on the{pdes where bpon there bange a. W. Mil-


deg:pea all the theapis of the qpauntes.* THP canvia.


two breattes are lpke tivo tivpnnes of pounge


Roeg, whyche fede amonge roles. D that J
mpgbt gotothe mountapne of mpzre , € tothe
bpll of frankincé(e: tpll the dape breake,¢ tpl ý


fhadotwes be pat atbape. Thouarteall fapre, 2


(D mploue ) no fpot ig therein the. Come to
me frõ Libanus (D mpfpoule) come to me frå
Libanus,loke feo the top of Amana, from the
top of Hantr,and Heemo, from f lyons dénes,
and fro tbe motitavnes ofthe leopardes. Chow
paft witbloue bewitched mp hert,D mp pter,
mp ipoute:P batt betoptched mp berte twptpone
of thpne epes and ith one chepne of thy neche,

D bowe fapze are thp brealkes, a er, itp
fpoule ¢ Chp beettes are moze plealaunte then
topne and tie [mell of thpne opntmeétes pafleth
allfppces. bp lpppes,D mp fpoule, dDropas
the bony combe: pee mplke and ponpe is nder
thy tunge and the fmeloftbp qarmétes,is lye
thefmellof Libanus. A garden welllockedis
mp fp Moat eh oule:a garde toel locked, anda
fealed well. The frutes that are planted inthe
atelpkea berp paradpte of pomgranates, with
fwetefeutes:as Camphpze, Pardus, and Daf-
fron, Calamus, Spnamo,tpth al fiwete {mel
lynge trees: ) pare, Aloeg,andall the beft {pps
ceS:a tell of gardeng.a well oflpupng waters,
whbpchranne DitonefromLibannus. Ciptbon
nozthwpnd,come thou fouthwpnd, and blowe
ppon mp garden, that the fmell therof mape be
carped on euerp {pde:pea,that mp belouedmap
come into bis garden, and eate ofthe fuoete fru>
tes that qrowe therin.


‘bonp wptbmp h "Jhane
dm D2Okemp wine with mpmilke. Eat,
D pefrëdes,ynkeandbe merp, © pe beloued.

As F amallepe, andmp herte is wakpnge F
deare p bopce of mp beloucd, wbt be knocketh.
sD pen


“heyy, yum


Can. bif.a


Cat.tit.b


25


Catt.bi, a


=
{= ae
oth Sin
ma r


5


€


|


The Gallettes.


{yluer thecouerpnee of golde, the feate of pur-
grane groundeis plealauntlpepaurcd w loue,
02 the Daughters of Jerufalem: Gofoztbe, (D
ve då ughters oF Spon)and bepolde:kpng a
mont


amonge the trees of the wood,fois me beloued
amongethefonnes. <)p delpteis tolpt onder
bps thadotwe, for bps frute ig fwete vnto mp
thiote . Pe bzpngethme into bps wpne feller,
bis banner fpzed ouer mebysloue. Set about
me cuppes of wopne,cifozt me wpth appels: foz
Yam tpcke of louc. x His lefte bande Iyeth vn-
der mp heed. and his epght bande thal embrace
me. x J charge pon D pe daughters of Ferula
falë) bp the roeg and bpndes o et that pe
takenot bp mp loue, noz touche ber : tpll pe
be content ber felfe. He thpnke, Fear p vopce
of mp beloned: lo, there commeth De Dopppnge
tipon the mountapnes , ¢leappnge ouer plptle
Dilles. sYp beloucdislike aroo 024 pong Dart.
Wehold, be tãdethbebpnde our wall, he loketh
in at pwpndowe, g pepeth thozowe the grate.
Hp belouedanfwered,andfapd bnto me. —

D fade yp mp loue,mp beutpfull,and goto
thpne owne:fo2 lo, the wpnter is nowe palt the
rapnets alvap g gone. Che fi oures are come Wp
inthe felde,the tpme of the bpzves (pnapngets
come,andthe bopee of the turtle Doue is bearde
in our lande. Che fpgactrec brp ngeth forth ber
Frages,¢ the ppnes beare bloffomes, and paue
a good {mell. D tande vp thë € come mp loue,
mp beutiful,¢come Jlap (Omp Done ont of p
caucs of therockes out of the holes of the wall:
Det mele thp cotitenaunce,t beare thp vopee,
for fmeteisthp vopcee,¢fapzeis thp face. Get
vs the fores;pea thelptiefores,that burt f bp:
nes:fo2 our wpnes beareblofomes. +p loue
ig mpre,¢ J am bps: which fedethb amonge the
roles bntpil the dape byeake:and tpl the tcha-
Dowes be qone.Comeagapne( D mp beloned)
and belpke aga Roo, o2a ponge parte pon
the wpde mountapnes.

Che ti. Chapter.
. = P npabtin mp bed Jlougbte bpm,


watchmé alfo that qo aboute pcptie fotideme.
SHawe pe not pim whom mp foulelonetb:.
40 then F was alpétle pat thé, J founde Dim
whom my foule loueth. J bauc gotté polde vpo
bpmand wpll not lee bpm qo, vntpll Jbzpnge
bpminteomp mothers ponle, into berchabze


canit ¢hatbareme. *9charge pou, D pe daughters


of Jerufalem , bp the Kors and Hpndes of the
Felde that pe wake not bp mp loue , no: touche
per tpll the be content per felfe. botsthps,
that commeth vp out of the toildecneffelpke ba
pours of finoke,as tt Deere afimel of mpre, fra=

incetice, and allinaner Cpyces of the Apotcca-
tye: Bebholdc,about Halomons bedflede ther
{ade thze {coze baleatit men of the moot migh
tpein Zfracl. Thep holdefiverdes euerpe one, g
ave expertin toarce. Cuerpe manalfobath bys
fwerde vpon bis thpgbe, becaule of feare tn the
mA Dan! A ope lr had made bpm felfea
palace of the wad of Libanus,the pillers are of


“i


one nnfrutefullamonge them. Chplpppesare
Ipkearofecolonted rpbande,tbp wozdes are lo-
uelp,thp Side dilly al ak pa toy ranat
topthin thine beeres. Thy necke is phe p tower
of Dauid buplded wpth coftlp toned, lping out
on the{pdes where bpon there bange a. W. Mil-


deg:pea all the theapis of the qpauntes.* THP canvia.


two breattes are lpke tivo tivpnnes of pounge


Roeg, whyche fede amonge roles. D that J
mpgbt gotothe mountapne of mpzre , € tothe
bpll of frankincé(e: tpll the dape breake,¢ tpl ý


fhadotwes be pat atbape. Thouarteall fapre, 2


(D mploue ) no fpot ig therein the. Come to
me frõ Libanus (D mpfpoule) come to me frå
Libanus,loke feo the top of Amana, from the
top of Hantr,and Heemo, from f lyons dénes,
and fro tbe motitavnes ofthe leopardes. Chow
paft witbloue bewitched mp hert,D mp pter,
mp ipoute:P batt betoptched mp berte twptpone
of thpne epes and ith one chepne of thy neche,

D bowe fapze are thp brealkes, a er, itp
fpoule ¢ Chp beettes are moze plealaunte then
topne and tie [mell of thpne opntmeétes pafleth
allfppces. bp lpppes,D mp fpoule, dDropas
the bony combe: pee mplke and ponpe is nder
thy tunge and the fmeloftbp qarmétes,is lye
thefmellof Libanus. A garden welllockedis
mp fp Moat eh oule:a garde toel locked, anda
fealed well. The frutes that are planted inthe
atelpkea berp paradpte of pomgranates, with
fwetefeutes:as Camphpze, Pardus, and Daf-
fron, Calamus, Spnamo,tpth al fiwete {mel
lynge trees: ) pare, Aloeg,andall the beft {pps
ceS:a tell of gardeng.a well oflpupng waters,
whbpchranne DitonefromLibannus. Ciptbon
nozthwpnd,come thou fouthwpnd, and blowe
ppon mp garden, that the fmell therof mape be
carped on euerp {pde:pea,that mp belouedmap
come into bis garden, and eate ofthe fuoete fru>
tes that qrowe therin.


‘bonp wptbmp h "Jhane
dm D2Okemp wine with mpmilke. Eat,
D pefrëdes,ynkeandbe merp, © pe beloued.

As F amallepe, andmp herte is wakpnge F
deare p bopce of mp beloucd, wbt be knocketh.
sD pen


“heyy, yum


| | oi Saloni,


e Dpë tomes Dmp ipti loucsinp doue, mp

ig derlynge fo? mp Deade te cull of dewe;g the loc-
fies of my beare are full ofthe npgbt droppes.

Jbaue put of mp coite, howe can J O00 tt ona:

gaines¥ paue walibed mp fete,bowe pal F file

| 43 theagapnes <p louce put inbps badcat the

i bole, mp Dert was moucd witixnme. J ftode

| Dp toopen wntomp beloucd, € mp hades drop-

od wpth )pere, g the pre rane Downe mp

pugers ppon thelocke. 3 opened Dnto mp de-

: lowed, but pe wag Departed and gone bps wap.

f~LZowe when be pake, mp berte wag gone: J

fought bym, but ¥ coulbenot fpnde ppm: Ferp

ed opt Dim nenertheles, be yauc neo aniwer.


&o p watchinen that went about f eptie fote
| uw:imote me,t wollded me: Dea, thep p kepte
= the wwalles,toke atbap mp kercheafe fro me.

| charge pou therfore,D pe daughters of Fe
| ruialem, pfpefpnde mp beloued, p pe tell bpm
howetbhat Jam fpcke fo loue. CAbat maner of
| manis thploue aboue otber loners ¢ D p fap-
ret ambg toeme: Dz what ca thp loucdo moze
| thé other lovers that p chargett vs fo fraptlp?
"| 4s tozmy loue, beis Wwpprte g redde coloured,
a goodly perfonamonge tenthoufand bis bead
F igas the moft fpne gold, the lockeg of bis beare
n are bufbed, and blache as acrowWwe.biscyes are
asthecpes of Doues bp the water brokes, as
| thoughthep were Mahed with mplke.g are fet
= Ipke perles in golde. 218 chekes are lpke a car:
| den bed, Wbherin the Apotecarics plante all ma
i. ner of {ivete thpnges.
af D Wypslpppesare liberofes that droppe (were
finellpnge<Dprre. is handegarelpkeqolde
rpnges, paupnge inclofed the pzecpous tone of
Charlis. Prs body is asthe pure puerp,decte
ouer wpth Sapbires: Ppsleqgesare as ppil
lers of Garbel,tette ppon fockettes of olde.
Pps faceisas Libanus.and ag the betotpe of p
Cede trees. ‘Che wordes of bys mouthe are
{wete:pee,betsaltogetber louelpe. Suchone
| isimploue. Opedaugpters of Ferulalem,fuch
Hp A a one ig mp louc. —
@ Che. bi. Chapter.
A Fae Dp ther ig thp lone gone then( D
| Aora E thou fayzett amonge wemen) wp
4 bl | a ther ts thplouc Departed: Wie topl


aleke bpm with p. Dp loucis gone
poe mee DOWN Mto Dys garden , onto the
Tweete imellpnge beddes that pe mape refecithe
bpm felfin the garden t gather roles. 4p loue
i is mpneand Jam bys, whpche fedeth amonge
j w therofes. Thouartbewtpfull,o mp louc, ag
pa istheplace of Thirsa, thou arte fapze as Jeru-
falem Fearfull ag anarmpe of men, wpth thep2
baners. Turne awape thpne epes frome , for


are [phe a flocke of goates.thozne ppd p motite

of Gilead. Chp teethare lpbea flocke of hone

= pepe, whpch qo ont of f wathpnge plage: wher

| enerp one bearethbtipns, ¢ not one wiruteful

| amongethem. Thpchekesarelpkeapeceofa
k Fo pomgranate. Wpthin thp volupers. Chere
o- iitweg pie ate* Le. Quenes. ieee. pues, anddamilclics
wythoute nombee. Dneig mp douc,one to my


= ee toep pane etme an fyze.* Ghpbearplockes |
4


— OU ETbt,
derlpnae.Spbhe is the ottelpe beloued of ber mo-
thet,andderevntobertbatbarcber: =
iiben the Daughters latwe ber,thep fapd he €

twas biefled. Pea:the chuenes and wpucs prap:
fedber. What is the thys that loketh forth as
the moznpnae-fapreas the moone, Cleareas p
fonne,and fearfullasonarmpe of men thepz
banners. Jwent dotone into thenut qardenco
Te wbatgrewe bp the bzokes, and toloke pf the
tpneparde flozpibed , o2 pf the pomagranates
were thor forth. Jkhewe nst that mp foule bad
made me thecharpot of p people that be wnder
trpbute. Curneagapne turneagapne. Dthou D
perier one turne againe turne agatne € ibe toil

oke bpd ý. What whl pefe in the Sulampte?
Speis like mé of warre ling pnge in a cipany.

The. vii. Chapter. _ l
pee powe plealauntare thy tradynges $
Kaaa a Loptb hp thoes, thou Pzpneesdau=

| dae | gbter l bp thpabes are lpie a
BETIA tape iewell, wbpcdts pe N bp
SIR aconnpnae woke mater. C bp na
ucltg alpke ronde goblet, wHycb is neuer With
oute dDepncke. Tip wombe is lpke a pepe of
wheattbatisfetaboutwptbrofes. .

x Chp two brekeg arelpke ttooo tiophs of can.tiii.a,
ponge rors . Thp neche ig asit werea towe 25
of puecp:thpnue epes alfo are lpke tbe water po-
les thatare tn Helebon,befpode the porte of wa
thzabbim, thy nofeis lpke the tower of Libas
nus, whpcllokethtotearde Damalcus. —

That heave that ftandethe bpon the , is lpke
Carmell:and the beare of thy peade ig like pur-
ple, audlpke a kpnge gopuge forthe pth bys
garde about bpm.D hove fap2e andlouelp art
thoumpderlpngetnpleafures: Chyp ature
istykea palmetree, and chp beefkes lpiie pagra-
pes. 3 iape Fpl clpme vp into the Palme
trec g tabe bolde ofbps bpe bzaunches.

Thy bees allo Halbeas the wpne cuers C
thefinell of thp nofkcclles lpke as thefmell of
appela,¢ thy tatbes lpitc the belt wpne.

CA bpeh goth rapte yuto mp belotcd,¢ bau-
Reth forth by the lpppes of the auncpet cloers .
‘Chere Dopil J turne me ynto mp loue, ¢ he hal
turine bim wnto me. D come on mp louc we wil
gofozthintothe felde, and take oure lopgpnge
inthe ppllages. Anthemoznpnge yl we qo
fe tie Dpnepard: toe wpll fepf ë vpne be (price
toztb, pf the grapes be growne,andpftbe pom<
granates be thot oute. Chere wpll J gene the
mp beekes the Badsaqozas qeue their Tete
finel,and belide oure do2¢8 are al mance of plea
faunte frutes,bothnetoe golde: whyche 3 paue
keptefo:tbe, omp beloucd.

~  CTbe.bii. Chapter. |
Tey That 3 mpabe fpnde che wpthoute, 4

je bpfle the, whom J loucag mp bzo-
ther wiped fict mp mothers betes:
EEKAN] that f Halt wot be defpifed, J wpll
leade p æ bzing pinto my mothers houle:that p
migbtetteache me,¢ ý ¥mpght geue $ dzpnkie
of fppced wpne, ofthe fwete lappe ot mp på-
6 opel * Ape’ apt ual DNOETINP can, ite
rade, t bysepgbt bande Hall embrace me.
Ee wh Behar


X x 3 Hi


| | oi Saloni,


e Dpë tomes Dmp ipti loucsinp doue, mp

ig derlynge fo? mp Deade te cull of dewe;g the loc-
fies of my beare are full ofthe npgbt droppes.

Jbaue put of mp coite, howe can J O00 tt ona:

gaines¥ paue walibed mp fete,bowe pal F file

| 43 theagapnes <p louce put inbps badcat the

i bole, mp Dert was moucd witixnme. J ftode

| Dp toopen wntomp beloucd, € mp hades drop-

od wpth )pere, g the pre rane Downe mp

pugers ppon thelocke. 3 opened Dnto mp de-

: lowed, but pe wag Departed and gone bps wap.

f~LZowe when be pake, mp berte wag gone: J

fought bym, but ¥ coulbenot fpnde ppm: Ferp

ed opt Dim nenertheles, be yauc neo aniwer.


&o p watchinen that went about f eptie fote
| uw:imote me,t wollded me: Dea, thep p kepte
= the wwalles,toke atbap mp kercheafe fro me.

| charge pou therfore,D pe daughters of Fe
| ruialem, pfpefpnde mp beloued, p pe tell bpm
howetbhat Jam fpcke fo loue. CAbat maner of
| manis thploue aboue otber loners ¢ D p fap-
ret ambg toeme: Dz what ca thp loucdo moze
| thé other lovers that p chargett vs fo fraptlp?
"| 4s tozmy loue, beis Wwpprte g redde coloured,
a goodly perfonamonge tenthoufand bis bead
F igas the moft fpne gold, the lockeg of bis beare
n are bufbed, and blache as acrowWwe.biscyes are
asthecpes of Doues bp the water brokes, as
| thoughthep were Mahed with mplke.g are fet
= Ipke perles in golde. 218 chekes are lpke a car:
| den bed, Wbherin the Apotecarics plante all ma
i. ner of {ivete thpnges.
af D Wypslpppesare liberofes that droppe (were
finellpnge<Dprre. is handegarelpkeqolde
rpnges, paupnge inclofed the pzecpous tone of
Charlis. Prs body is asthe pure puerp,decte
ouer wpth Sapbires: Ppsleqgesare as ppil
lers of Garbel,tette ppon fockettes of olde.
Pps faceisas Libanus.and ag the betotpe of p
Cede trees. ‘Che wordes of bys mouthe are
{wete:pee,betsaltogetber louelpe. Suchone
| isimploue. Opedaugpters of Ferulalem,fuch
Hp A a one ig mp louc. —
@ Che. bi. Chapter.
A Fae Dp ther ig thp lone gone then( D
| Aora E thou fayzett amonge wemen) wp
4 bl | a ther ts thplouc Departed: Wie topl


aleke bpm with p. Dp loucis gone
poe mee DOWN Mto Dys garden , onto the
Tweete imellpnge beddes that pe mape refecithe
bpm felfin the garden t gather roles. 4p loue
i is mpneand Jam bys, whpche fedeth amonge
j w therofes. Thouartbewtpfull,o mp louc, ag
pa istheplace of Thirsa, thou arte fapze as Jeru-
falem Fearfull ag anarmpe of men, wpth thep2
baners. Turne awape thpne epes frome , for


are [phe a flocke of goates.thozne ppd p motite

of Gilead. Chp teethare lpbea flocke of hone

= pepe, whpch qo ont of f wathpnge plage: wher

| enerp one bearethbtipns, ¢ not one wiruteful

| amongethem. Thpchekesarelpkeapeceofa
k Fo pomgranate. Wpthin thp volupers. Chere
o- iitweg pie ate* Le. Quenes. ieee. pues, anddamilclics
wythoute nombee. Dneig mp douc,one to my


= ee toep pane etme an fyze.* Ghpbearplockes |
4


— OU ETbt,
derlpnae.Spbhe is the ottelpe beloued of ber mo-
thet,andderevntobertbatbarcber: =
iiben the Daughters latwe ber,thep fapd he €

twas biefled. Pea:the chuenes and wpucs prap:
fedber. What is the thys that loketh forth as
the moznpnae-fapreas the moone, Cleareas p
fonne,and fearfullasonarmpe of men thepz
banners. Jwent dotone into thenut qardenco
Te wbatgrewe bp the bzokes, and toloke pf the
tpneparde flozpibed , o2 pf the pomagranates
were thor forth. Jkhewe nst that mp foule bad
made me thecharpot of p people that be wnder
trpbute. Curneagapne turneagapne. Dthou D
perier one turne againe turne agatne € ibe toil

oke bpd ý. What whl pefe in the Sulampte?
Speis like mé of warre ling pnge in a cipany.

The. vii. Chapter. _ l
pee powe plealauntare thy tradynges $
Kaaa a Loptb hp thoes, thou Pzpneesdau=

| dae | gbter l bp thpabes are lpie a
BETIA tape iewell, wbpcdts pe N bp
SIR aconnpnae woke mater. C bp na
ucltg alpke ronde goblet, wHycb is neuer With
oute dDepncke. Tip wombe is lpke a pepe of
wheattbatisfetaboutwptbrofes. .

x Chp two brekeg arelpke ttooo tiophs of can.tiii.a,
ponge rors . Thp neche ig asit werea towe 25
of puecp:thpnue epes alfo are lpke tbe water po-
les thatare tn Helebon,befpode the porte of wa
thzabbim, thy nofeis lpke the tower of Libas
nus, whpcllokethtotearde Damalcus. —

That heave that ftandethe bpon the , is lpke
Carmell:and the beare of thy peade ig like pur-
ple, audlpke a kpnge gopuge forthe pth bys
garde about bpm.D hove fap2e andlouelp art
thoumpderlpngetnpleafures: Chyp ature
istykea palmetree, and chp beefkes lpiie pagra-
pes. 3 iape Fpl clpme vp into the Palme
trec g tabe bolde ofbps bpe bzaunches.

Thy bees allo Halbeas the wpne cuers C
thefinell of thp nofkcclles lpke as thefmell of
appela,¢ thy tatbes lpitc the belt wpne.

CA bpeh goth rapte yuto mp belotcd,¢ bau-
Reth forth by the lpppes of the auncpet cloers .
‘Chere Dopil J turne me ynto mp loue, ¢ he hal
turine bim wnto me. D come on mp louc we wil
gofozthintothe felde, and take oure lopgpnge
inthe ppllages. Anthemoznpnge yl we qo
fe tie Dpnepard: toe wpll fepf ë vpne be (price
toztb, pf the grapes be growne,andpftbe pom<
granates be thot oute. Chere wpll J gene the
mp beekes the Badsaqozas qeue their Tete
finel,and belide oure do2¢8 are al mance of plea
faunte frutes,bothnetoe golde: whyche 3 paue
keptefo:tbe, omp beloucd.

~  CTbe.bii. Chapter. |
Tey That 3 mpabe fpnde che wpthoute, 4

je bpfle the, whom J loucag mp bzo-
ther wiped fict mp mothers betes:
EEKAN] that f Halt wot be defpifed, J wpll
leade p æ bzing pinto my mothers houle:that p
migbtetteache me,¢ ý ¥mpght geue $ dzpnkie
of fppced wpne, ofthe fwete lappe ot mp på-
6 opel * Ape’ apt ual DNOETINP can, ite
rade, t bysepgbt bande Hall embrace me.
Ee wh Behar


X x 3 Hi


The Prophecype


15 “Achargepou,D pe daughters of Jerufalem
that pe wake not bp mp loue,noz touch ber, tpt
{ye be content ber felfe. Ubat is tye thps. that
commeth vp from the wploernefe:and leanetb
bya het loues J take the vpamonge theappell
trecs, where thp mother conceaucd the, where
top mother ( 3 lape) brougbte the into the
wolde: Dletmeasa feale vponthpne bert,
€ ag a feale bpon tbpnearme:fo? loucts migh=
tpeas the death and geloufp as the bell. Herco-
iegareoffpze,and a verp flame of the Lode :fo
that manp waters are not ableco quêche loue,


€ nepther map the tremes dzowne it.


ce pfa man wolde geut all the good of bys
Houle fozloue,be Hulde cotite it notbpng . Dur
(piteris but ponge, and bath no bectkes » What
{pall toe do fo: our {pfter, when fhe Gall be fpo-
Ken for? PE We bea wal, we thal buploca filuer
bultoorke there vps: pf the be anopen Doze , We
(hall fatten ber wpth bogdes of Cedze tree . J
am a wall, mp bzefteg lpke totes, then thas
yag onc that hath founde fauonre tn bis fib.
Salom hatha vpneparde at Waal pamon, g
thps vpneparde delpuered pe vntothe bepers:
peuerp one fo? thefrute therof (puloe geue Him
a thoufande peces of {pluer:

Wp bpneparde ts in mp fpgbt:thou D Sa
lomon)muft bauca thoulande, and the kepers
two bundzeth wpth the rute. Thou that dwel
let inthe gardepns, D let me beare tüp wopce,
that mp companpõs mape berken to tbefame.

D get tbe awape, mp louc, ahd be ag a Ro00:0}
aponge berte vpon tbe iwete tmellinge moun-


tapnes.
: € Theende of the Wallet of Ballets
tesof Salomon cailedinlatpi
Canticum Canticozb.


The boke of the P20:
pbhete Efap.
C The fpr chapter.


LE (PSY of Uia, Joatban. Ahas and
ot) DEA Jebena kyntes of Juda.


Eo docar .JEoz tbe Lozdbatbfpo
n. 3 paue nop hed brought vy chpldz¢,but


f


isto whole parte inall poure body, butall are
Houndes, botches,fores,€ Hrtpes which can ne
ther be belped, bound vp, molified,noz cated w
anpe topntemente.


Pour lande lpeth al,pourcpties are beent ©


LY, pour enempes Deuoure pour lande, pe mult
befapne to tãde,g loke Dpontt:¢ itis dclolate,
agit were wpthenempes ina battaple. W0-
reouer,the Daughter of Spion is lefte alone tke
acotageina brnepard ,lphe a lodge ina garde
of cucumbers. lpbe abelegedcptie. Andexcepte
the Loz of Hotes badiet: vs afetve alpue: we
fbulde baue bene as Sovoma,¢ lpke vnto Go-
mora. Weare the wozdof the Lod: pe Lordes
of Sodoma: and berken vuto the late of oure
od, thou people of Gomorra. Wbp offre pe fo
manp facrpfices nto mes Jam full of the bzčt=


offcpnges of wetbers, and of the fatnelie offe D


peaftes. J baue no pleafure in the bloud of bul-
lockes, lambes,¢ goates, Uhen pe appeare be:
fozeme, who he dat ponto tredde wpthin
my peochess Dftre meno mo oblacpons , foz it
is but loftiaboure. Jacenfeis an abpomtnavle
thpnge vnto me. Jmap not awape with poure
newe Boones, poure Sabbotbhes g folempne
dapes. Pour faltpnaes arcalfotnvapne. J date
pour newe bolp dapes and faftpnges, euen fro
inp verp herte. Thep make me werp, Jean noe
abpde them.d ben pou hold out pour pades, ¥
wpltucne mpne epes from pou. And though pe
make manp prapers,pet wpl J Dearenothpng
at all,fepnge pour bandesare full of bloude.
Hape pou, make pou cleane, put atoap pour
encll thougbtes out of mp fpgbt,ceafe from do:
nae of cuell. Learne to vorpgbt apple poure
clues tocqupte,Deliucr the oppre ed, belpe the
fatberlefferobpstpgbtletthe wpdotves come
plapntconie befoze pou Mowe goto lapth the
Zopde let vs talbe together. Cyough pour fin:
nes be ag red ag (catiet,thep (halve as whpte
as (note. Andthough thep werelphe purple,
thep thalbe as wbypteas wolk PE pe beloupnge
g obedpent pe allentoye the bette thpnge that
gtotbech in the Lande. Wut pf pe be obfkpnate ¥
rebelloius,pe halbe Denourcdw the fiveard: for
thus p Lozdbath pzomifed w bis owne mouth


€


Dowe happeneth ittben p the rpghteous cp: fE


tie (tehpcbe was full of quptic)is become Dit
faptbtullasan whores pgbtcoutnelie dwelte
intt,butnotwe murtherers. Che fpluer ig tuts
red fo Drofle,and thp wpne mprewpeh water.
Thy papnees are wpcked and companyons of
theucs. Cheploue qpftes altogether,and gape
fozrewardes . As fo thefatberles, thep vee
bymnot tobpsrpgbt.neptber wopll thep let the
fopdowes caufes come befozethem. Therfoze


- faptb the Lod Godof Poltes,thy mpghtie one


of Flracl: Ab, gmuk cale me of mpne enemies,
andauengeme of mpne aduerlarpes. J al lap
mp band ypon the, burne out thp drolle from
thefpnet and puret, g put out all thp time,and


fetthpindaesagapneasthey were Lomtpmeg -


thp Senatouregasthep werefrom the begpn=

npnge. Chen halt thou be called therighteous

cptie,the fapthfull cptic. Sion palbe oe
a wyt


The Prophecype


15 “Achargepou,D pe daughters of Jerufalem
that pe wake not bp mp loue,noz touch ber, tpt
{ye be content ber felfe. Ubat is tye thps. that
commeth vp from the wploernefe:and leanetb
bya het loues J take the vpamonge theappell
trecs, where thp mother conceaucd the, where
top mother ( 3 lape) brougbte the into the
wolde: Dletmeasa feale vponthpne bert,
€ ag a feale bpon tbpnearme:fo? loucts migh=
tpeas the death and geloufp as the bell. Herco-
iegareoffpze,and a verp flame of the Lode :fo
that manp waters are not ableco quêche loue,


€ nepther map the tremes dzowne it.


ce pfa man wolde geut all the good of bys
Houle fozloue,be Hulde cotite it notbpng . Dur
(piteris but ponge, and bath no bectkes » What
{pall toe do fo: our {pfter, when fhe Gall be fpo-
Ken for? PE We bea wal, we thal buploca filuer
bultoorke there vps: pf the be anopen Doze , We
(hall fatten ber wpth bogdes of Cedze tree . J
am a wall, mp bzefteg lpke totes, then thas
yag onc that hath founde fauonre tn bis fib.
Salom hatha vpneparde at Waal pamon, g
thps vpneparde delpuered pe vntothe bepers:
peuerp one fo? thefrute therof (puloe geue Him
a thoufande peces of {pluer:

Wp bpneparde ts in mp fpgbt:thou D Sa
lomon)muft bauca thoulande, and the kepers
two bundzeth wpth the rute. Thou that dwel
let inthe gardepns, D let me beare tüp wopce,
that mp companpõs mape berken to tbefame.

D get tbe awape, mp louc, ahd be ag a Ro00:0}
aponge berte vpon tbe iwete tmellinge moun-


tapnes.
: € Theende of the Wallet of Ballets
tesof Salomon cailedinlatpi
Canticum Canticozb.


The boke of the P20:
pbhete Efap.
C The fpr chapter.


LE (PSY of Uia, Joatban. Ahas and
ot) DEA Jebena kyntes of Juda.


Eo docar .JEoz tbe Lozdbatbfpo
n. 3 paue nop hed brought vy chpldz¢,but


f


isto whole parte inall poure body, butall are
Houndes, botches,fores,€ Hrtpes which can ne
ther be belped, bound vp, molified,noz cated w
anpe topntemente.


Pour lande lpeth al,pourcpties are beent ©


LY, pour enempes Deuoure pour lande, pe mult
befapne to tãde,g loke Dpontt:¢ itis dclolate,
agit were wpthenempes ina battaple. W0-
reouer,the Daughter of Spion is lefte alone tke
acotageina brnepard ,lphe a lodge ina garde
of cucumbers. lpbe abelegedcptie. Andexcepte
the Loz of Hotes badiet: vs afetve alpue: we
fbulde baue bene as Sovoma,¢ lpke vnto Go-
mora. Weare the wozdof the Lod: pe Lordes
of Sodoma: and berken vuto the late of oure
od, thou people of Gomorra. Wbp offre pe fo
manp facrpfices nto mes Jam full of the bzčt=


offcpnges of wetbers, and of the fatnelie offe D


peaftes. J baue no pleafure in the bloud of bul-
lockes, lambes,¢ goates, Uhen pe appeare be:
fozeme, who he dat ponto tredde wpthin
my peochess Dftre meno mo oblacpons , foz it
is but loftiaboure. Jacenfeis an abpomtnavle
thpnge vnto me. Jmap not awape with poure
newe Boones, poure Sabbotbhes g folempne
dapes. Pour faltpnaes arcalfotnvapne. J date
pour newe bolp dapes and faftpnges, euen fro
inp verp herte. Thep make me werp, Jean noe
abpde them.d ben pou hold out pour pades, ¥
wpltucne mpne epes from pou. And though pe
make manp prapers,pet wpl J Dearenothpng
at all,fepnge pour bandesare full of bloude.
Hape pou, make pou cleane, put atoap pour
encll thougbtes out of mp fpgbt,ceafe from do:
nae of cuell. Learne to vorpgbt apple poure
clues tocqupte,Deliucr the oppre ed, belpe the
fatberlefferobpstpgbtletthe wpdotves come
plapntconie befoze pou Mowe goto lapth the
Zopde let vs talbe together. Cyough pour fin:
nes be ag red ag (catiet,thep (halve as whpte
as (note. Andthough thep werelphe purple,
thep thalbe as wbypteas wolk PE pe beloupnge
g obedpent pe allentoye the bette thpnge that
gtotbech in the Lande. Wut pf pe be obfkpnate ¥
rebelloius,pe halbe Denourcdw the fiveard: for
thus p Lozdbath pzomifed w bis owne mouth


€


Dowe happeneth ittben p the rpghteous cp: fE


tie (tehpcbe was full of quptic)is become Dit
faptbtullasan whores pgbtcoutnelie dwelte
intt,butnotwe murtherers. Che fpluer ig tuts
red fo Drofle,and thp wpne mprewpeh water.
Thy papnees are wpcked and companyons of
theucs. Cheploue qpftes altogether,and gape
fozrewardes . As fo thefatberles, thep vee
bymnot tobpsrpgbt.neptber wopll thep let the
fopdowes caufes come befozethem. Therfoze


- faptb the Lod Godof Poltes,thy mpghtie one


of Flracl: Ab, gmuk cale me of mpne enemies,
andauengeme of mpne aduerlarpes. J al lap
mp band ypon the, burne out thp drolle from
thefpnet and puret, g put out all thp time,and


fetthpindaesagapneasthey were Lomtpmeg -


thp Senatouregasthep werefrom the begpn=

npnge. Chen halt thou be called therighteous

cptie,the fapthfull cptic. Sion palbe oe
a wyt


of Elay,


wptbequitpe.andthep (hal turne agapne onto
berinepabdteoutnes. soz the tranfgreffoures g
Dugodipe,and uch ag are become wnfaptheull
puto the Lode mutt al together be ytterlp de-
 ffroped. Andercepte pe be athamed of the oke
trees wherin pebaue lo delpted, g ofthe qardes
- that pebanechofen, pe albe as an oke whole
leanegare fallen atwa re €aga garde that bath
ttomopfines. And as to? the glozp of thelethpn
- gesit halbe turned to Dye trate ghe p made
thé toa (park. and thep Wall both burne toge«
ther,fo pno man tpalbe able toquenche them.
C The leconde Chapter.


Of the commpnee anddeath of Ch:pite,and of the cal:
Ipuge of the Beatben.
ces er T i


from Jerufalem, and (pal gene fentence amoge
the eeathen, € (hall refourme the multitude of
people:tbhep (hall breake tbep? fiweardes alfo in
to mattockeg, g theis fpeareg tomakefpthes.
And onepeople pallnotlpfte bp a weapon a-
gapnifte another, nepther Hall thep learne to
_ frabte from thence foztbe.
-~ Come pe( D boule of Jacob) let vs walbein
the lpabet of the Lorde. Hut thou halk fozlaken
thy people the boule of Jacob, becaule thep goo
farre beyonde thep2 fathers in Sozceres (wd
thep bane as the Philp tines padje in fraunge
childaen thep thinke thé felues to Dane pnougy.
Thep2 lande ts full of fpluer and golde,nepther
is there anp endef theter trealure: Thep2 lade
ts alfo full ers ie nite ende is tber of their
charettes. Chep2 lade alfo is ful of apne god
bes, ¢ before the worke of thepz owne bandes
bauethep botved them felues, pea cuen befoze f
hd he pa pz ovone fpngers paue made.
‘There knelethbtbhe man, there falleth the man
«pane before them, fo that thou caf not being
bypmawapefromtbence. |
C. Andtherfozeaet the into fomerocke , ehpde
the in the qrounde foz icare of the Lo2d, andfoz
Palop of bps mapeftpe: Wi bich calketh dotwne
the bpgbe lobes of pzefumptuous perfonnes ,¢
bepngeth lowe the pzpde ot man,and the Lozde
onelp (halbeeraltedinp Bape. forthe daype of
the Loz of Hottes thall go oucr all pzpbde g pre
fumpcton Dponall them that evalte thë felues,
& (ball bzpnge them all downe: bypon allbpgbe
and Fonte Cedzetrees of Libanus and vponal
the okes of afan, bpon all bpabe bplleg, and
bponall toute Wountapnes, vponall colpe
totozes,¢ bponall tronge alles, ppon al Mip
pes of the fee, and ppon cuerpe thynge thatis


glospousand pleafanntetoloke upon.


Andit Hall bopnge Dotone the p2pde of man, D


and lape mans prefumpteoufneilefull lowe, g
the Lozde thall onelp baue the bictozpein that
Dape. Wut the pdols Hall ptterlp be roted out.
en thal crepe into boles of fone,¢into canes


ofthe earth,foz feave of the Lo20,¢ fo: p glozpe


of bys maieftp:wobat tpmeashe wal wake him
bp to condépne the earth. Chen hall man cat
aibape Pre godves offplucr,and bps qoddes of
qolde (which be neuertheletle bad made toho-
noure them) yuto oleg Wattes. Andthep
{ball crepe into the canes and rockes € into the
cipftes ot barde tones, fozfeare of God,andfoz
the glozy of bpsmapettic, when be rpleth to cé-
dempne the carthe . Feare not pe then anpe
man, bole beetheisin bis nofkrels. Eog what
is be of teputacpon:
@Tbe.tti. Chapter.
CBepiophecpeth that atthe commpuge of thpt ati

frength € powze Halbeput forth of Zurp


at
E lih


fe PAS take alvape frö Jerulaléand Juda
all poffefftonsand power,all meat


g depricke, the captapne € the fort


ph See Dpar.the tudare q the Prophete the
Wwpleand theagedD man, the prince of fpftp peace
olde, the bonozable : the Senatours and men
of buderftandpnge:the mapitets of craftesand
matourg. And 3 Mall geue them chpldze to be
their pepnees,¢ babes thal Daue therule of pou.
The people alfotalbe pplled g polled, and one
pall euer be Dopnge Violence € wzronge to ano-
ther. Che bope thal prelume agapnlt the elder,
and the vple perfonne agapni the honozable.
Dee, one (hall takea frende of bps one bpnred
bp the bofome,¢fape-thou batt clothinae:thou
Malte be oure Deade , foz thou mapie kepe vs
from thps fall and parell.


Then hall he lweare g fape: J cannot helpe 15


pou, t)ozcoucr, there is neptber meate no? clo-
thyngeinmp boule, make me noruler of p peas


ple. o: Jerufalem and Juda mut decape,be.


caule that bothe their odes and conniels are
agapni the 102d,to prouoke the pzeľčce of hig
mapepe wnto anger. The chaigynae of thepz
countenaunce bew2apeth the , yea thep declare
their owne (pnnes them felucs,as the Sodomi
tes,andbpdethemnot. Wobe vntothepz fou
le8,for they baue rewarded encll vnto them fel:
ues. pod the rpghteous do well , foz thep thall
entope the frutes of thep2 Tudpes. ut wobe
totbe vngodipe ¢ burpabtcous,foz they albe
rewarded aftertheps ozkes.Cbplozenare cra


tozcponers of mp people, ¢weme paue rule of q


them. Dmp people tbe leaders deceaue the,
¢ Depeane the ape of thp fote eppes. Che
Lo2zde is here to commen of fhe matter,and fta-
deth to geuetudgemet of the people: The Lord
fbailconte fo2tb torcafon with the Henatours
€ Pepncees of bps peopl... Ft ts pe phauc burnte

ppinp vpneparde,the Nai is tn pour boutes.
Wiberfoze do pe oppzetle mp people, ¢ marre p
faces ofthe pooze, lapthp 1020 God of boftes?
Worcouer,thustapth rhe Lopde:epneae the
CEwu daugh


Wol.eee vit.


He D2 lo, P Lod Godof Hokesdoth J


eee


of Elay,


wptbequitpe.andthep (hal turne agapne onto
berinepabdteoutnes. soz the tranfgreffoures g
Dugodipe,and uch ag are become wnfaptheull
puto the Lode mutt al together be ytterlp de-
 ffroped. Andercepte pe be athamed of the oke
trees wherin pebaue lo delpted, g ofthe qardes
- that pebanechofen, pe albe as an oke whole
leanegare fallen atwa re €aga garde that bath
ttomopfines. And as to? the glozp of thelethpn
- gesit halbe turned to Dye trate ghe p made
thé toa (park. and thep Wall both burne toge«
ther,fo pno man tpalbe able toquenche them.
C The leconde Chapter.


Of the commpnee anddeath of Ch:pite,and of the cal:
Ipuge of the Beatben.
ces er T i


from Jerufalem, and (pal gene fentence amoge
the eeathen, € (hall refourme the multitude of
people:tbhep (hall breake tbep? fiweardes alfo in
to mattockeg, g theis fpeareg tomakefpthes.
And onepeople pallnotlpfte bp a weapon a-
gapnifte another, nepther Hall thep learne to
_ frabte from thence foztbe.
-~ Come pe( D boule of Jacob) let vs walbein
the lpabet of the Lorde. Hut thou halk fozlaken
thy people the boule of Jacob, becaule thep goo
farre beyonde thep2 fathers in Sozceres (wd
thep bane as the Philp tines padje in fraunge
childaen thep thinke thé felues to Dane pnougy.
Thep2 lande ts full of fpluer and golde,nepther
is there anp endef theter trealure: Thep2 lade
ts alfo full ers ie nite ende is tber of their
charettes. Chep2 lade alfo is ful of apne god
bes, ¢ before the worke of thepz owne bandes
bauethep botved them felues, pea cuen befoze f
hd he pa pz ovone fpngers paue made.
‘There knelethbtbhe man, there falleth the man
«pane before them, fo that thou caf not being
bypmawapefromtbence. |
C. Andtherfozeaet the into fomerocke , ehpde
the in the qrounde foz icare of the Lo2d, andfoz
Palop of bps mapeftpe: Wi bich calketh dotwne
the bpgbe lobes of pzefumptuous perfonnes ,¢
bepngeth lowe the pzpde ot man,and the Lozde
onelp (halbeeraltedinp Bape. forthe daype of
the Loz of Hottes thall go oucr all pzpbde g pre
fumpcton Dponall them that evalte thë felues,
& (ball bzpnge them all downe: bypon allbpgbe
and Fonte Cedzetrees of Libanus and vponal
the okes of afan, bpon all bpabe bplleg, and
bponall toute Wountapnes, vponall colpe
totozes,¢ bponall tronge alles, ppon al Mip
pes of the fee, and ppon cuerpe thynge thatis


glospousand pleafanntetoloke upon.


Andit Hall bopnge Dotone the p2pde of man, D


and lape mans prefumpteoufneilefull lowe, g
the Lozde thall onelp baue the bictozpein that
Dape. Wut the pdols Hall ptterlp be roted out.
en thal crepe into boles of fone,¢into canes


ofthe earth,foz feave of the Lo20,¢ fo: p glozpe


of bys maieftp:wobat tpmeashe wal wake him
bp to condépne the earth. Chen hall man cat
aibape Pre godves offplucr,and bps qoddes of
qolde (which be neuertheletle bad made toho-
noure them) yuto oleg Wattes. Andthep
{ball crepe into the canes and rockes € into the
cipftes ot barde tones, fozfeare of God,andfoz
the glozy of bpsmapettic, when be rpleth to cé-
dempne the carthe . Feare not pe then anpe
man, bole beetheisin bis nofkrels. Eog what
is be of teputacpon:
@Tbe.tti. Chapter.
CBepiophecpeth that atthe commpuge of thpt ati

frength € powze Halbeput forth of Zurp


at
E lih


fe PAS take alvape frö Jerulaléand Juda
all poffefftonsand power,all meat


g depricke, the captapne € the fort


ph See Dpar.the tudare q the Prophete the
Wwpleand theagedD man, the prince of fpftp peace
olde, the bonozable : the Senatours and men
of buderftandpnge:the mapitets of craftesand
matourg. And 3 Mall geue them chpldze to be
their pepnees,¢ babes thal Daue therule of pou.
The people alfotalbe pplled g polled, and one
pall euer be Dopnge Violence € wzronge to ano-
ther. Che bope thal prelume agapnlt the elder,
and the vple perfonne agapni the honozable.
Dee, one (hall takea frende of bps one bpnred
bp the bofome,¢fape-thou batt clothinae:thou
Malte be oure Deade , foz thou mapie kepe vs
from thps fall and parell.


Then hall he lweare g fape: J cannot helpe 15


pou, t)ozcoucr, there is neptber meate no? clo-
thyngeinmp boule, make me noruler of p peas


ple. o: Jerufalem and Juda mut decape,be.


caule that bothe their odes and conniels are
agapni the 102d,to prouoke the pzeľčce of hig
mapepe wnto anger. The chaigynae of thepz
countenaunce bew2apeth the , yea thep declare
their owne (pnnes them felucs,as the Sodomi
tes,andbpdethemnot. Wobe vntothepz fou
le8,for they baue rewarded encll vnto them fel:
ues. pod the rpghteous do well , foz thep thall
entope the frutes of thep2 Tudpes. ut wobe
totbe vngodipe ¢ burpabtcous,foz they albe
rewarded aftertheps ozkes.Cbplozenare cra


tozcponers of mp people, ¢weme paue rule of q


them. Dmp people tbe leaders deceaue the,
¢ Depeane the ape of thp fote eppes. Che
Lo2zde is here to commen of fhe matter,and fta-
deth to geuetudgemet of the people: The Lord
fbailconte fo2tb torcafon with the Henatours
€ Pepncees of bps peopl... Ft ts pe phauc burnte

ppinp vpneparde,the Nai is tn pour boutes.
Wiberfoze do pe oppzetle mp people, ¢ marre p
faces ofthe pooze, lapthp 1020 God of boftes?
Worcouer,thustapth rhe Lopde:epneae the
CEwu daugh


Wol.eee vit.


He D2 lo, P Lod Godof Hokesdoth J


eee


5


2


4


daugdters of Si6 are becomefopzoud, come
in with firetched out neckes,¢ ity yapni wa-
toncpes:fepnge they come inteppppng fonice-
lp oprb their fete: Cherfore Hall p Lod Haue
the beades of the Daughters of Dion, and tall
Dilcouce thepz fame. Jn tbat dap thall p L020
takeatwap the gozgpoutnelle of thetrapparell ,
and {panges chepnes, partelets,¢ colars, brace
lettes,¢ booues,te pooblee Renee’, wpde and
bzopodzedrapment, bgooches,andheadebades,
rpnges and qarlanbdes,bolp dape clothes ¢ Va=


les, Kerchefes and ppnnes, glatles ecpprelics,


bonets ,andtaches. |

And in tade of good mell, ther halve Minke
amon seneni AOLO Hens ara ee
belcofe bandes. And fo2 wel fet beare ther Wal
be balones . Jn fteade of a Fomacher, a lacke
clothe, and fo2 ther2 betotpewptbhcrdncs, and
funne burnpnge. Poure bulbandes g mpagbtpe
men hall perpth pth the fwcarde in bataple.

At that tpmethall thep2 gates mourne and
complapne, and thep thall{ptag delolate folke
wponthecarthe. — l

C Cbe.titi. Chapter.


@ For wante of mex, feuen women Belpreto Have
one mare


zavecra Den (ball feuen topues take bolde
iE SONS of one man:and lape, twe tpl lape
-Ca reve allouremeate andclothpnae toge
sree therin commen:onlp that we map
pg 8s8 becalled thp wpuegand that thys
fhamefull repzofe mape be takin from vs. Af-
ter that tpme all the bzaunche of the Lode
be bewtifulland mightpe,¢ the frute of f earth
(halbefapze and pleafaunt foz thole s{raclites
that tall t spngetberof. Chen Mall theren-
naunte in Sion and the remnauntat Ferula-
lé be called bolp: Namely al fuche as are Wwzit-
ten amonge the liuingeat Jerulale: what tine
as the Lode Hall wathe awape the fpltbpueite
of the daughters of Sto, g purge the blound out
from Jerufalem wptb tie wpnde of bps tudge-
ment,and wptbfpze. Hozcoucr,vpor all the
Divellpnges of the hplle of Sion € vpon thpep?
wholeconaregacpen, {pall the Lozde proutde a
cloude g moke bp dapet the thpnpnge of a fla
mipnae frre bp pte foz all thep2 glozp tal-
be preferucd. And Jerufalem albea taberna -
cle foz a thadowe-, becaufe of beate inthe Daye


~ er sa place refuge Mberea man mape kepe |


pinfrom wether andrapne.


` tetoufies and dponkennes.


: d hee r
‘= [FE a iT e i


Tie Popyerpe


FJ prape pou betioprtme, emp wpnepade.
bat moze could baue ben Done,for1t p J bane

not doner Ciberfoze then bathe it geuen twos

nes :where Jlokedto paue had qrapes of tt ¢


Well, nowe J Hall tell pou bowe J wpldoo 3%


topth mp vpnepard. FJwpll take the hedge fró
it,thatit mape perip and bacake Downe p wal,
that itmape be troden vnder fote, J tpl lape
it wate tbat tf halnepthce be Dpaged no: cut,
but beare thoznes and bzeares. 3 wpll alfofoz
ppdde the cloudes that thep hall not rapne vp
it. As forthe ppneparde of the Lorde of P00-
ftes: tt is the boufe of Flraell, and whole Juda
isfapze plantpnge. De thefe be lokedfo2 equy-
tic, but fe there ig wonge -fo2 righteoutues,lo:
itis but mpferpe.

Ubo vntorhem that fopne one boufe to ano
ther, and bepnge one lande fo npgbe ynto ano-
ther,that tbe pooze canget no moze qrounde &
that pe mape dwell vpo the earth alone. C hele
thpnges are tn the eares of the Lozdeof holtes:
(pall not manp greater € moze qozqpoushou-
{cs be Co watte that noman ball dinellin the ¢
Mndtenakers of ppnes thal qeue but a quarte,
g thpztp butbels of fede Hall euc but an Epha

Wiobe nto them , that rpc pp earlpe to fo-
lowe Dronkennes,andtoe them that continue fo
wntpll npabdte, andtpll thep belette on fyre w
twpne. 3n thole companpes are harpess lutes,
tabzettegæ pppes, and wpne. WButthepre-
garde not the wozke of the Lozde ¢ colpd2e not


the operacion of pps bandes . Cherfoze cometh D


mp folke allo into captpuptpe, becaufe thep
paueno vnderitandpnge. Chey glorpeis fas
mpihed Pde Pet a tberapi Dris marred
foztopzite. Cherfoze qapeth Hell, and openeth
ber mouth maruclous wpde: that their pryde,
booftpng, and weith, wtp {uch ag retopte ther
in,mape belcenbde into it. ;
bus batb man a fall, and is brought lowe
andthe bpabloke of ý pee Dalbe laid Downe
ut the Lord of Poltes thalbe exalted tniud:
gemente, and Godfhat is holpe,is prapledin
rpabteoutneffe: Chen Hall the fhepe cate inor:
der, @ the rpebe meng landeg p were lapd wafi,
(pall traungergdcuoure.tUo be vutetbem, p
Dawe Mpchednes Dnto the wpth cozdes of wa:
nitpe ¢Cpnne,ag tt were with a carte rope.
Wibpcd wfe to fpeake on thps mancr:let im
make baftnowe,and qo forth hptp his ozke,
that we mape feit. Let the counfel of the polpe
one of Flracl come, date npe, that we mape
knowsit. Hobe ynto them p cal enell good,
and good cvell, whpch made darckeneflelpgbt,
light darkeneffe,p make lowe fivete g Mbete
fowr. Wo be vntothem that are wpleintheps
otone fpabteandthpnkethëfeluesto paue wn-
derftandpng. Wobe vnto them that are frige
to uppe out topne,¢expertmen to fet bp dzon-
kennes. Whete qeuclentence topth the vngod
ly fo2 rewardes,but codempne the tult canie of
tbe rpgbteoug. Cherforelphe as fprelpeketh


: pprtbeftraweandas the lime contumeth the


ftubble:Guen fo thep2 rote Halbe as cogrupeis:
and thep2 blofome tall vanpthe awape Tip
uff:


EES === a ey


i == — e-


DÊ Efay.


putt: for thep baue cat away the laty of p Loz
of poir aia bemed the wozde ofthe polpe
maker of Zfracll. Hy
4¢  Tbherfozeigthe wath of the Lo:dekpndled
alloarapnthbpspeople, ¢ be haketh bpsbade
atthem:pee,pe batbimptten,fo tbat the billeg
bpd tremble, Andthetr karcales dpd lpe tn the
opé firetes,lpke mper. Andinallthps p wath
of God bath not ceafied, but bps bande ig ftret-
chedout ftpll. And be thall geue a token bnto
a ftraunge people:and call pntothemin a farre
countre:and beboldc,tpep hhalcomebakelpe w
ipede. Chere hall not be one fapnte noz feble
omenat tbem,no nota floggith no
onne.
gpzdle from bys lopnes, nog lowfe the latchet
of bps poo. Hisarowesare tharpe, gal his bo
wes bent. His bozle hoofes ave lpke flpnt.¢ is
carte wheleslpkea tomp wpnde. Hypscrpe
ig. ag tt were Of a Lpon,¢ bcroarethl phe Lpos
wpelpes. Thep Hall roare, and bantche bp the
pape and noma (hall recouer it,o2 gette it tro
them, Fn tbat dape they thalbe fo fearce Dpon
tiem.as thetee. And pf toe lobe Dnto thelande,
- beholde , it albe al Dacknefle æ fozowe-Piwe
loke totwarde beaué bebold, it thalbedarche.
€ The. vi.Chapter.
q_<lap fawethe glozp of the Lozd¢, and was Cent to pro
___ bbecpe the Defolacpon of Furpe.
Sa, V AN N thelame pearethatkpnge Osiad
5 Gol Dped, J lawe the Lozd [pttpnge vp
F Jo ponas bygbetandglozpous feate.¢
Lis 9 “ON bps trapnefplleng the temple :And
about bpm tode Serapbing, wherok eucrp one
ae pre wpnges. Wiptbt wapne cachcouered
is Face, With twapne bys fete, ¢ pth tihapne
bpd befipe. ‘Chep crped alfoechbone to another
‘ontbpsmanet:Dolp, bolp, bolp ts the Lozde of
Hoftes. The whole world is full of his qlozpe.
Pee, the qeaftes and dozechekes moucd at bps
crpinge and the boule thas full of fmoke. Chen
Flapd,D woig me: Foz Jam loft:inas moche
as Jaina man of Dncleanelpppes, andbwela
monge people that bath pncleane lpppesalfo:
foz mineepes baue lene p bing & Lozd of holtes.
Chen fletve one ofthe Scraphpns Dntome
Daupnae a bote cole in bys bande, whych be bad
taken from the aultec wpth the tonges and tou
` ched mp moutb:andfapd,lo:thysbatb touched
thplpppes, andDtbyne Dnrpahteoufnefie ts ta=
© genawape,e thp {ypnnefoggeuen. Hilo, 3 beard
- the vopce of the Lozdfaping on thpsmaner :

- Wibom all 3 fende and oho wpll be our mef
faunger Then Ffapde:bere am J: fende me.
math.tiiibd And be lapde:qo, and tell chps people: ype thal
mat pare Deareindede , but pe Wall not wnderftande : pe
art.rrbii t (pall plapnlp fe andnot perceauc. arden the
sop bert of this people, toppe their cares , and Wut

thep fe not topth thep2 epes, pearc


"" thepzepes ý i |
not wtth thetveares, and Dnderftand not wpt)
tbeir bertes,¢ couerte: and be healed.
—Thenlpake FZ: Lozde,Potve longe’ beanfwe:
red: ontpl tbe cpties be btterlp tealted without
inbabitours,¢ the poules tptbout men, tpl p
lande be alfodefolate.andlye pnbuplded. Foz


ecpper | J
‘Chere hall sah pegs Ap et g


Mol.errbut.
the Lorde (hall take the en farreawape, fof

tbe lande tpalllpe waftealonge feafon,pet init
fhallfuccede ten Bpnges,and thelanbde thall re-

tourne and belapd walte. Anuas the Terebint

tree and oke in ivpnter cat their leaues,and pet
bauethep2 lappein them : fo thall the polpe fede
continue in their fubffaunce,

Che. vii. Chapter.


C Tbe Sirians moue bataple agapnl Jeralatem,
g birgspne all beare achplee.


ite thas not able totopnicit. Mowe whentije


cade of Damalcus is Rasyn. And afterfyue
€thzefcozepeare, pall Epbhzaim benomoze a
pa And the cptie of Ephzaimis Samaria,

ut the beade of Samarta is Romelies fonne.
PE pe beleuenot,it commeth of this:that peare
wnfaptbful fo God. @)ozeouer, God pake once
agapne unto Abas lapinge, requypze a token of
the Lode thp God, whpeber tt be totvarde the
depth beneth o towarde the bepghte aboue.
Then lapde Phas: ¥% wpl requpzenone,neptper
opi Jtempte the Lorde.

y Lorde anfwered: Then bere to,peof the €
houte of Dautd: isit not pnougbefo: pou that
pe be qrenous dito men, but pe mufte grene mp
Hod alfo: Andtherfoze the Lozd thal gene pou
atoken:2cbolde a bpzgpne Hall conceaue and
beareafonne,and(thoubps mother )thalee call
bis name Emanuel. Wutterandhonp thalbe
cate tbat be mape knowe to refule theenell , ¢
chofethe qood. oz ozreuertbhechbploe cometo
tnotoledge:toelchue the enel,and chofe p good,
thelande( that thou fo abpoarefte) thalbe defo-
late of botbeberkpnges. Che Lozdealfo pall
iendea tpme pon the, vpon thy people,¢ bpon
tbp fathers boute(fuchb ag neuer came fence the
tpine that Ephzatin departed from Juda) tho-
rowe the kpnge of the Allprians. Wozet plame

tpine


- not walke in the capoeira


tyme tpall the Lorde tobpttle fo the fips that

are about the tater of Corp. qto? the ees

inthe AMictans lande. Thele hallcome ¢ Hall

Ipabt allin tbe defolate valepes,in the holes of
ones: pon all thognp and bulhp places.


D Anvtbelame tpme: thaltbe Lorde thauc the


peare of thebead g tpe fete andthe beard cleane
of, pth the ralure that be hal bper wig hale
water:namelp- pth thek ge of the Aflirias.
At the fame tyme Hala ma lpue wpth a cowe,


‘andtivo pepe. The becaufe of the aboundalice


of milke,be tall make butterandeatett. S0
that euerp one Whpch cemapnety in thelanbe,
{hall eate butterandbony. At the fame tpme al
ppnepardes(thougbe there bea thoufande Yp-
nes {none and tere (olde fora thoulande fpluer
Ipnges ibalbe turned to bgearers and thomes:
Lpke astbep thallcome intotbe lande w tha=
rothegand bowers fo fhall all the lande become
bocars and thoes. Andas foz all hplles that
are bewen Downe, there Wall not come vpb the
any feare of brears ¢thognes. ut p cattel al
bedrpué thytber, the mepe all Fede there.
The. viti. Chapter,


C Tbe detpucraunce of thelandeby Emanueil, Zhe tone
of offence, at whpch manp Hall fumble,


revere Deonet the L020 fapde bnfo me:
Aia Cake the agreatleafe, g tozpte in
KANE it,ag men do tpty apenne, make
PANGAN patty {pede totobbe, ebatteto the
Efpople. And ¥ called vnto me faith


bz0de wpnges, D Emanuel. wWzeake dotone(s
pe people of Aflur and pe fhalbebzoke Dorone,
herken to all peoffarre countrees.


€ Wuterpou,and pethalbe brok? dotone,pze-


pare pou tobattell ¢ pon tpalbetozne im pereg:


‘take pour countell together, pet mut pour cot


fell come tonau gon De withal, pet thal
itnotpzoľpere : foz Godiswpthys. Forthe
102d (pake thustome inthe potoze of bis bade
g warned me, lapinge puto me: that 3 Houlde


He fapde mozeower,counde topth none of the
Wwpofoeuer lape, ponder people arc bounde to-


Che Prophecye


gether:feare thE hot. tiepther be afra poe of thé,
mit fanctifpe the L020 of boffes,let Dim be pour
feareand dread. or be Malbe the bolp place to
fipe to,and (fone to ftomble at, the rocke to fall
ppott,a {nave and net to both p houles of Fira-
el,and the tnbabptours of Jerufalem. And må-
np pall fomble, fal:and bebgoken bpon bpm:
pee: thep Halbe nared and taken.

Powe lape the toptnefles together andfeale D
Plawe wpth mp difcpples. Thus wplF wapt
ppon the Logde that bath turned bps Face from
the bonte of Jacob,and¥z wll loke fo: ppm.
But lo,as foz me:and thecbplozen whpcbe the
Lode Path qeuen me: Wwe area token anda wi-
ber in Blracl,foz the Lozd of hoftes fake, which
Dwelleth pon the bpllof Spon..

‘And pf they lape onto pou:afke countell at ğ
Spothlapers, Wi ptches, charmers , and coniu»
rers then make them thpsanlwere. Fs there a
peopleanp where , that afketbnot counfellat


bps Ooo: * Sbulde mencunne vnto the deade Lupriiiis


fo: thelpupnge: Pfanp man wante lpabtc, let
bpm loke pon thelawe, and the teftpmonpe,
whether they fpeake not after thpsmeaning.
PE be do not thys.be Lumbleth and fuffreth ba
ger. and pf be ps {uffce bungerbe out of pactens=
ce,and blafpbemeth bys bpnge and bps God.
‘Thenloketh be Dptoarde, anddoiNewarde ta
the earth,z bebolde:therets trouble ¢ darknes,
peractonis sound¢eaboutebpm, andthe cloude
ofcrroure.And out of {ache aduerfptie Mall be
notefcape.Cuenlpke agin tpme pate: it bathe
bene well fene , that thelande of sabulonand p
lande of Nephtalp( where thozowe the fee wap
goeth ouer Jordancinto thelande of Galilee)
twas at the fpzite in Iptie trouble : but after =
warde fore dered,
CThe.ir.Chapter.

C Hepropheepeth of Chrpites natiuptpe aud dominpon.
ie aaa de people that walke tn darkened g
Pea RE bane feneagreatlpabt. As for thé
ieee Yuck that Divelinthelande of P thadow
RO $ ti? of death, bpontiem bath the lpgbt
ped ees (ppd. Thou halt ites ed the
people andnotincrealedtihep2 tope.* 4
tople befozethe,cuenas men make merp inbar
uet andas men tbat baue gotten the bpctozpe,
twbhenthep deale the fpople. Ho? thou bat bzo:
Ben the poke of the peoples burthe: the ftaffe of
bps Houlder and avian of bps oppzeffoure ,


agin the Dapesof Madian. |
And truclp enerp battapll that the warriour
acoomplptheth,is done wpth confuled nopte,
and Defplpnge they qarmentes topth blonde.
Wut thys bataple thalbe wpth burnpnge ¢ c=
fumpnae of fp2e. Eo: bnto vs a childe is borne,
and bnto vs afonne ig geuen , Ci pon bys pul
der Both the kpnqdome Wes q be igcalled wpth
bps otnenaie wonderfull. Che gener of coun
fell the mpabtie od, thecuerlailpng ld a ;
prince of peace,be pal make noendetoencreate
the kpngdome and peace,and hall {pt pponthe
feate of Danidand in big kpngieme,to etopp
fame andto fablpthit bpth equyticandrpgd:
teoulnies,from bencefoethioz cuermoze . oT
i


ep te: pisl, crir.e


of Efay.


(hall the qelotolp of the Lozd of Hoftes beypnge


€ topafle. Che Lozdefentea wozdeinto Jacob,


the fame ts come into Jfrael.Andall the people
of Ephzaim hall knowe, and thep that dwell
in Samaria,thatlape wpth pryde and ppe fto:
mackes,on thps maner. Che tplewozke ts fall
len do wne but we pil buplde tt pth (quared
tones. Che molberp tpinber ts broken, but we
thal (efit vp agapne with Cedze. Neuertheles,
the Lod Hall prepare Raspn penemp again
them, and fo oDe thep2 aduerlarpes, that the
SHitpans Wall lape bolde vpon them before, €
the Philiftines bebinde and fo deuoure Flraell
wpth open mouthe.

Afterall thys isnot the weathe of the Lode
ceafled, but petis bps både ftretched oute ftpl.


_ o: the people turneth not ynto him that cha-
ftpteth tbem, nether doo thep(ckethe Lozde of


oes. Cherfoze bath the Loz roted out of Ff
racl bothbcadand taple,braunche and tiopgae
inonedapt. the bead is wnderftande the
Senatoute and honourable man,an bp ptaple
the prophet that peeachedDlpes: Sfo2all thep
iwhyche enfourme the people : that thep be tna
epgbtcale,fuci bedpicteaucrs. Suche as men
thprcke alfo to be perfecte amongethele, are
but caffeawapes. .

Therfore hall the Lozde hanenw pleaturein
thcpz ponge men, nepther fauour th eps father:
lele and wpodowes. Woz thep are alltogetber
ppocrpfes and WpckeD, and all theirt mouthes
fpakefolpe. Afterallthys, isnot the Lozdes
Wath cealled: but pet bps bade is iretched out


~ ftpll.3€o2 ongodlpnes burneth,aga fpze inthe


bapersandthoznes. And agit were oute of a
Fpze ina wood: 02a rede buthe , fo alcendeth the
fi Mishel AAA Md EOT des cs dt pbrtrtig
of the Lorde of Holkes.is thelande full of Dake:
neile, g the people beconfumed, as it were with
fpzenomandocthlpare bis bzotber,but berob-
bethontherpabt bande: and doeth fampthe , be
eateth on p lett babde.¢ be thal not pane pnough

Cuerpe man {pall eate the fepe of pps ovone
arme.Danafles thaleat Ephzatm, and Ephra
im anales and tbhep both thalleate Juda.
After all this is nottbe Lordes wath ceaflen,
but pet taora Dante etched out pll.


, ie FAUNIN] TE
C Hethreatencth che oppzetfours of Che pooze,and prophe:
cpeth agapnt Sennacherpb. - |
“ta Cone D ve Dntothem that make burpgh
Ta Va Wives: teous latwes , and deupTe thpnges:
Ma yaya wobpch betobarde fo: to kepe: wher
SAAVA thozotve the poore are oppzefled on
— poet abs) {pde, Etheinnocentes of mp
people robbed of tudgemente : that wpddotwes
ree be i ot and that thep mape robbe
the fatherlefle. Wibat wpll pe Doin tyme of the
bpfptacton,¢ when deffruccpon thal come from
farre” Zo whom tpl pe runne foz pelperand to
whom pds gene poure onoure, that be map
kepe tf: that when J ibptpdzawe mp bande, pe
come not amonge the pzplonners,o: lye amodge
the dead: After all this Doth not the wrath of p
Lord ceafie.but petishishad Kretched out il.
Wo beallovnto Aiur, Whycheis a Kaffe of


mp to2ath,tn whole handeig the rod of my pu:
npipinente. J haltfendehbpmamonge thofe pp:
pocrptith people, amonge the people that haue
Belerued mp dplfauoure thal 3 fende bym, that
be map veterlp cobbe them, (pople thé,¢ treade
them dotone,lpke the mpze in the trete. Powe
beit, bys meanpng is not fo, neptherthpnbeth
bis bert on thps faffyon.2ut he pmagyneth on
lpe, bowe be mape rote out and beftrope moche
people fo? belapeth:arenot mppzpucesal kpn
geg” JsnotCalnoagealpetotwopinecagahar=
chamis: 3s it barder to conquere Pamath then
Atrphads Dzigit lpgbter to onercome mama:
cug then Samaria: As who faye: 3 were havle
to wpnne the kpngdome of the Zdolatrergand
thep2 godbdes:but not Jerufalem , and Sama-
tla. Spall J not do nto Jerufalem g thepee
pinages.as Jdid Dnto Samaria g their pdolss


CUiberfoze the Lozd fapeth: Aone as 3 dane €


perfourmed mp bole wozke vps the bpll of Sp
ong Jerufalem, then wpll J vylet the noble g
tout Dert of the king of Afip2ta with bis proud
lokes. oz be fadeth thus in bis owne concept:
Chps doo 3 thozotwve the potoer of mpne owne
Hande,andthozowe mp wpldome: jfo2 Jam
wpfe:¥ am be that remoue the landes of p peo-
ple, J robbe thepz treafures: and (lpke one ofp
Wwo2rthpes) Z dapue them from thep2 bpe feates.
Hp bande Dathfounde oute the trength of the
peopleasttwerea neft.Andlike ageqqes that
woerelaped bere g there, are gathered togpther.
000 ¥ gather all countrpes. And thereis nos
mantbat darre be fo bold,as to touche a fetber,
that darre open bys mouth,oz ones toby iper.


Shall che are boott tt felfe agapnit dimtpat m


ebayer an Doth the laine make anpe
2aggpngeagapntthpmtbatrulethits Chat
Were cucnlpke,as phe roddpderaltettfelfe a-
gapntte bpm that beareth tt: ozas thougbe the
tate Hulde magnifie tt felfeas wo fap-tt wee
no wood. Therfore Hal the L020 of hoites fend
bpm amongeHistatlpnges,leanefle, andburne
Dp bis glozp,as it were w a frre: Wut thelpabe

Sleael halbe that fpre, and bie Sanctuarye
balbe the flame, anditihallkpndle and burne
Dpbyps thoznesand brecrs in one dape : pea, all
the glozp of bps thoodes and feldes thalve con-
{fumed w bodpeand foule: Andthep Halbeas
an boofte of men whofe tãdert bearer fapleth.
‘Che trees allo of thefelde which remapue,(pal
be of fucha nombee,thata chplde mape tell thé.


After that dap Hal theremnaunt of Jfrael €


and fuch ag are efcaped out ofp boule of Facob,
feke nomoze comfort at bym that {mote them,
but wprb fapehfulnefic g tructh thal the Ae sc
vito the Lozbde,the poly one of Firacl. Theres
naunt,cuen the pofterptie of Jacob Hal couerte
tnto Gov ë mpaghtic one. Eo: though thp pro-
ple( D Firael)beas thelande of thefee pet thal
the remnaunte of them connect in bpm. perfect
isthe iudgement of bpm that fowetbinrpabte
outnefle, and therfoze the Lo2d of boottes Mall
pertectlp fulfpil the tbpnae that be bath deter=
mpnedin the mpodell of rhe bole ozlde. Cher
foze, thus lapth the 2029 Godof hoftes: _
mp peop


Folrrrir.


- Sallin) Halbe bearbe nto Laps and to


S Mall Dw


for the kpnac ofthe Aflirians: Ie fall fmite
the prbarod,andthall wagae bis tafe at $,
asthe Eqppttang bpd fome tyme: ut Coone
after halimp wzathand mpneindpguacion be
fulfplicbin the deftrnctponoftbhem. $
<)orcouer, the Lord of botes all prepare a
fcourge for bym, Ipke as was the flaughter of
avian vpontbe rocke of Deeb. And He tall
ipft vp bpsrod oner the fee,as he dpa fomtpme
ouct the Eqgpptians. Chen Mall brs burtbé be
taken from tbp (oulders,and bys poke fro thp
necke:pea,the Came poke albe corupt fo2 ve
cp fatnefie Be hall come to Liab and goo tho-
rowe towarde )pgron: at Michmas allie
lap opps barncite, andgoouer the foorde.
Gibea albe thepe repna place:Ramatb bal


© beafraped:Stbea anle hall fipcawap. Che


popece of the nople of thy Dorfes ( D Dangoter
ĝ=
thoth, which allo albe introuble. Gadmena
all tréblefo2 feare,but the cptcsins ef Sabin
are mantp,pet thall be remapneat Mobp dape:
After that hall belpft vp bysbandeagaputte
the mount of the Dangyie &pon,tpe bpl of Fe:
rulalem. Butte, the 102d God of hooftes Hall
take awape the peoudefrom thence wopth feare.
Pe Mall hetoe otone the proude , and fell f dpe
mpnded. Thebulmpes allo ofthe wood wall pe
coote oute pth pron and Libanus Mall baue
ampgbtiefall: |
 CThe.ri Chapter.
CBE propbecreth of the natiupte of Chzifte and of bre peo:


picrolthe rempaunt sf girati, and of the fapth ot tbe Beas
_ then of Sen
at Cre


ANGEE kynired of Fiat anda bloffom thal
ASA QE flop H out of pps rote. Chelpirite
sean Vea of the Lord pall Ipght bpon bpm:
USS Sthelppzite of wpfbont and ndet
frandpnesthe lppatte of sya Se and frégtd,
the fpirpte o kuowlogeanDe the feare of tbe
Lod: thal make him feruét in p feare af Gov.
£02 be halnot geue fentence, after the thing
that albe bought before bisepes.neptyer re:
poue a matteratthe fpi bearpng, but righ
ccoutneffe Wall De tudge w poder wrth po
ipneffc hal be refourme thc pmpleof f wozld.
pe (hall fmpte the wolde wpth the rode of
pps mouth, and wyth the breath of bys mouth
al be fape tbe vngodly, Ryagbdteoutnelle Mal-
be the crpzdle of bpslopnes:truthe and faptpfal
nele the gprorng vp of ps repnes. Che wolfe
clitpptb tbelambe: and the Leoparde

(pallpe Downe bp the goate.*Wullockes,lpons,


andcattel all kepecompanp together fothat |


alptle an fhall rule them.
Che


owe g the beare thallfede together € ic 5
. there põae rr viha together. TDelpõ pal
¢


cate Grate like the ore ozthe kote. The chyld
whyle pe fucketh hall bauc a delpze to the fer-

entes net, and ibe beis weaned, he Hall put
bps pandetntothecockatrpeedenne. Noman
fall docuel Duta anothes.noma Mall oefrove
another in all the bplt of mp holpneffec. 02 the
earth thalbe full of the knowledge of P Lezde,


— Che Prapbecye


J mp people that Delite in prane notafrap-
0


ples. . KOT
RAS Adtheretalcomea ron forth of p iS


cuen asthe fer flotweth once wyth water.


Andinthat dap Hall eh: Gcverples enqupze C


after-the roote of Zefe whpch Hhaibe fet vp foz
atoken Dito Lad eople,¢ bys disellpnge Mal-
be glomons. tthefametpnac pall the Lorde
takeinbandeagapne, to conquere therénaunt
of bys people(xobpch albe lefte alpue)from p
Niwpans,Egprptians, Srabpans, Worpans,
Elamptes,Caldees, Anthiocbpans : and from
the landeg of the tec. And he tall fet vp a to-
ken amige the Gentples, and gather together
the difperfed of Flrael: pea, and the outecattes
of Juda from the foure copners of the wozlde .
The hatred of Ephzaim allo enempes of Fu-
da Halbecleane roted out. Ephzaim thal beare
none eupll wpllto Juda, ¢ Juda tall not bate
Epheatm-but they both together (hal we Ti}
the thoulders of the Pbiliftines toward p welt
and {pople them togetbec that dwell toward ?
Ealt. oh an andthe Moabpteg iall
let thep2 ndes fall and the Ammonites pal-
beobedpent bntothem.

The Lozd allo Mall cleane the tongeg of the
Egiptpanstee and wpthba mpabtp wpnd hal
belpfte vpbpsbade oner ilus and thal finite
bps euen treameg and make men gooner dzie
bod. And thus Mall there beatwape for hts peo
ple thatremapneth from the Allprtans,ltieas
ithappened tothe Zlraclptes what tyme thep
Departed out of the lande of Caqppt. |

 CTbe.rit. chapter.
CThelonge oF the church fos the obtepnpuge ofthe bptto-
rp and oucrcommypnge ofthe wore, | ;
=- D that thetbou palt fap : D aonn
UC Nh 3 topll thanke the , foz thon walte
<<) Difpleafedat me:but refrapne thou
KOS from shy wzath,and comforte me.
=a Heholde, Godis mp sop iit


wbi J top ll truta not be afraped. sf oz p 1020
Godis mp Krength and mp fonge pe alfo ts be-
come mptaluatpen. | set
Thertore ith iope (hallpedzawe water out
of the telleg of the faupoure , and then pall pe
fape:qpue thankes bnto the L020, call vpi pps
name, declare bpscountaples amonge the pro:
ple, kepe themin remébzaunce,foz bes namcis
excellent. Oe paies unto the Lozd, f0?
be bathdone great thpnges, as tt ig knowen in
all tbe two2lde.Crpe out,and finge thou p twel


D


x3


5


Vet rs bit-0z erat Ie ARDY ONE EE fracl
of the |


inthem poet: ;
) —CCThe.rtit. Chapter.


mMIpnge agapneceftheprople.


a te C0


ied 2 ee E bye bpll, call ontotbem,bolde vp
ogra ee POUL ande tbat the prpnces map
coin at the doze. J banc lent for mp deputpes E


Hoe Roe


| Car propheipeth the betruccpon of abplon: ae eaptinp ,


my gpauntes Capth the Loor) wpb Wa Cree


cute twzath:3 twpll call fo fuch as tryumphe in
mp qloape. Thereiganopie ofa multitude
inthe mountapnes,Ipke as ofa great people, a
rufibpnge as though the Beng domes of the na-
cyonscame together. (And the Lodo bottes

; multerctp


_ muntkreth bps armype to battayle. ) m pep come The people Walltakethëand ca tye thé bome
out of a farre countrp,from the endeofbeauen: to tbep3 otone lande. And make them to enberit
 Cuenthe Lorde bpm felfe wyth theminpfers the boufe of Jfraelin the lande of the 102d,tbat
_ Of bys wath, todetrope p bole lande.@)ourne thep map beleruauntes¢ bandBemapdens of the
pefo? the dap of the Loan isat bande andthall Lod. Tbe {hall take thofe papfonners tobofe
2 comeas a dettroperfrom the almpghtp. Ther- captpues tbep bad ben afoze andrulethote that
foze pall allbanades beletten Dotone ¢ all meng bad oppetled them. tben the Lozdnowe fall
Hertes Halmeltatoap,thep pal fanbinfeare, bepnge the to rel fra the trauaple,feare,¢ bard
carefulnefleand fozowe pal come pon them, pees. Sans thou waft lad? wpthal: the alt
and thep pall bàue papne aga woman tra: thon tfe thps mockage bpon the kpnae of Ba-
uapletd wpeh chpld. Onethalbeavatthedofan bplon,¢ fape: ow bappenceth tt tbat p oppet- x5
ofbhes,¢ thep2 faces thal burne lpke the fame of fourleauetbot: 3s the golden ftpbutecome to
Epe- Devold,the dape of the Lozotballcome an endesChe Lozdbath broken the {ceptre of
-. terrpblp,andfull of ndigqnacpon, furoure, and ungodly, and the rodof the lozdlp.cibich top
- Dorathto make thelande wat andto tooteaut peig tozoth (mpteth the people wprbcontynus
thelpnncrstierof. o? the arres and plane- all frokes, €tpzanoull praygnerh ouerp Pea-
. tegofheane thal not gene thep2 lpght, the fine then, pom be perlecuted wptbout compafira,
halbe darkenedin therplpnge, and the moone And therfoze the wpole woplde ig nowe atrefft,
fhallnot pne wpth dis lygbt. Jnd J wpll pus andquype tneffe:and men fpnge for tope .
npthe the wpckednefie ofthe worlbe,and pipn-= Pea euen the Fyre trees € Cedzes of Lpbaz g
nes ofthe ungodly, fapth the Lod. , ius.cetopleatthptall, laying: Qowethatthou
C. Ciedve Fomactes of the proude wyl Jtake artlapeddowne, there come nomo bpto bete
atvape,anDw?pil lape Dotonethe booltpng oftp downe vg. Hell allo beneth tremblethto mete
rauntes. Jwplimakeamandearee thenfpne theat tbp ppd nbd fo thp fake bath rap
goldc,andaman to bemoze orth thenagol- f cd bps dced.¢ all mpabtpye men and pzpnices of
Den wedge of Ophye. TCherfore 3 wpl hake the earth. All pnges of the earth tande vp fró
the peauen,and the earth hal remouc out of ber theitfeates.p they map al anfwere,and [peake
place:intdewathofthe Lodof botes andin Ynto the.Arte thou become weakealfoas we /
the dap of Ops fearefull indpqnacpon.And Ba arttbou becomelike unto bs/Chp pompe and
. bplon Halbe as an punted oz chaceDDoo,andas thp pepde ig laped Downe into the ppt.and fois
a thepe that noman taketh bp. Cuerpma pall the melody of thy inffrumétes. Wozmes be lap
turne tobpsotone people ,andfipeechoneinto ed ynder ches wWozmes be thy couerpnge.
bps owonelande.<Aboloistoundealone,thalbe owe art thou fallenfrom beauen( D Luci: x
(hot thozowe. And wbholo gather together thal fer )ebou fapzemognpnge chplde ‘howe patep
—sopterrepit, DE dDeltroped mith the fwerde. pee) gotten afall euen tothe qrounde,e arte become
Bs , * Cdepechyldzenthalbe flapne befozetbep? weaker then the peoples J€oz thou faydettein
W eyes, thep2 boules {popied, €thepzwpuesra- thpnebert:3 pli clpme bp into beaué,and er-
upie. oz lo, 3 (hall bapnge yp the Wers alt mptbozne aboue,belpde the farres of Gov.
agapuil them, whpch tallnot regardefpluec, F twpll {pt alfo vpon the bolp moiite toward p
) no, be Delprous of gold. Wi pth bowes fhaltbhep Roth, J wpl clpme v aboue thecloudes, and
deltrope the othe chpldzen,¢ baue no pptp bp wplbelp&e the bygbeit of all. Pet thon alt be
chptde,¢ they, faces tpall not brought downetotbe depeof hell. Thepebat
{pare thechplozen. And Wabyplon( thatgloop {eke the thall narowly lobe Vp the,¢ tbpnkein
| of kyngdomes and beautpe of the Caldees po = thé felues,faping: 3s this the ma that brought
on etre, POBTC thalbe detropedeuen ag Godbdeftroped allland esinteate,andmade the kyngdomesa-
| Bure kedi g Gomo. it hall not endure Fo? euer, frayed: 38 thps be thatmade the wold ina ma
Á nepther thal there beanp moze Divellpng there, ner walle, andlaped the rptics to the grounde,
from generacponto generacion. WDpch let not bpspzpfonners go out? e
| The Bynges of the nacpons lpe everpe one
neptber all the hhepherdes make thepa foldes in bys owne houtewpth Wortbyppe, and thou
there anp moze:but one beafes thal arecat out ofthe grauelpbea fpltbpe abbot
ive thers¢ the boufes thalbe full of great owles. nablebra unche : lpkeas becd meng rapmente
Ctiriches hall dwell there,eapes hall daunce thatare thot thozowe toyth the fweard and ga
Downe to the tones of the depe:ag.a deed coozle
that ts troden vnderfete: and art not burped w
them. Cuen becaule that thou hatte twafted a
lande,and detroped thy people. The generaci
of the tepcRcd thalbe without bonourefozeuer .
Let there a wap be fought to deftrop thep2 chil
Den, that be in their fathers po traded that
they comenot to bch elie the lande, g
fylithe eye Se ull of enempes.

3 wpll tande vpagapnite them(fapeth the F
Lozbde of hoftes Jand root out the name and të-
naunte,fonne, and fonnes fonne of sai

Pe


+


TCheProphecye


(Capt) the Lorde) andwyllaqeucitrothe Dts


terg- Wopll mate water puddles ofit. Am ï


wpll fwepe them out with the befomeofoettru


ctpon,fapth the Lorde of hottes. The Zozde of


Votes hath fwogncanoth,faping: Ft thal come :


to pafieags y baue determined, and Halbe fulfil
led as 3 baue deup ttd. So that Afpriathall J
deftropmmyp lade, and Ypo mp mountapues
wyl Frreade bpm vndcr fote. Wibherethozotve
bys poke thall come frd themanddps burtber
fhatbe take frothetc pulze: Typs deutte batb
Eod taken thozotwe the hole teozld-andthps is
bps bande ftretched ont ouer all people. Stor yt
the Lozb of boftes determpne a thpnge- wpois
abletodplanullíit? And pt be ftretcbeth forte
pps bande, whomape albert agapnes


E. Thelamepeare that hyng Abas dped, God


threatened onthpsmaner: Reiopfe not (thou
whole Daleflina) becaule the ro of bpm tbat
Deateth theis bzowen : for oute of the ferpentes
rote there pal comean adder, the frute Halbe


afpape fipinge wozme. Wutthefprteborneof DA


the pooze Halbe fed,and pfpmple pall divelin
faftpe.Cbproote alte wpl J deftrope Ù higre,
git allilap thy remnait.<pourne thou pot,
tepe thou cptie,foz( O whole lande of Paleti
najthouartlaped tafte , foz there tall come
fromthe noztha fmoke that not one alone map
abpde in bps place. Wibo tall then anuwere
the meflengers of the Gentples: SEoz the Lode
bath abl pliped Spon, andthe pooze of his pes
ple that be therin, do put thep2 trutt in bpm-
-  (Tbe.rv.Chapter .
bi @ &propbhecpe agapnitc AJoab .


pen bisig Pheup burthé vps Moab At
fee Peasy of Lt)


za fussy of Moab tas deftroied E oucrthzo
Sar ewe, wei p night fealo. pz altoin {3)0
Sy Bye) ab mas Deitroped, ¢ perpiihed in:
Eee npt. Thep Wwete dp to the pools
bouleeuento Dib top bye places to wepe fo
Pebo,¢ Boab didmournefoz Medba:Al their
bedes were balde ,andall thepz berdes Maucn .
Jn thep2 fretes are thep gp2ded aboute wptb


5 fackcloth. 3nallthetoppes of thep2 boules and


tretes Halbe notbpnge but permet & we-
ppnge. pelbonand Clealethall crp, that thep2


popece fhalbe herde onto Jabas. Che worthpes
alfo of )oab Hall bleate oute,and erpe fol ve-


~- rplozote of thepz mpndes: Wo thal mp herte


be for Woabs fake, Thep Hall Ape onto the cp
tic of soar which islpke a fapze pounge bulloc

of thee pere olde,for thep Halal go vnto iuith
weppnge. Euen fobp the wap towarde 00-
naim they pall make lamentacion fo? their wt
terdeftruccys. Kor the eaters of Rimrim thal
be dped Dp, by realon toherof the grafe ts top:
thzed.the berbes deftroped, ¢the grene thinges
gone. Wo therefpdue that hebath donc, tep
arelow. Asto2 their fubltaunce, the enempes


yp thep paue caryed them to the bzooke of p wyllo
Meg. or the crpe went over the whole lande of


PMoab:onto Eglaim¢ vnto Wer, Clim was
thernotbyng but mournpng,becaulep waters
of Dimi wee ful of bioud fo? J f L020 thal fede


moze blonde bps Dims, €Lposvpoprenatite | à


5 resipont


ote lande; tòn th mn Pare efcaped frö Moäb:


jem
be.rot.Cbhapter.


qa beftruccpon of @joab.


andmabpnebatte bntotyabteoutheile. We
pefumpteous arrogant, and ful of indiqnacps
onand bapne are bpslpes. Cherfore hall 4) 0:
ab make lamentacion becaule of the S)oabttes


ue herdof p prpde of Hoab,bets erp proud, -


(hat thalbe flapne)pea, they thal waple all to ?


gether. Becaute of the foundactons ot P cptic p

ig made of bapcke, fall pe complapne: ewn pe

lame peopletbat aveleftonelpbeppnde.
f€or the vpnes of Helbonarecutdowne: Vs


forthe ppne of Spbua,the lozoes of f Heathen


baue broken Dotone her pepnetpall beauncdes :
thep arecomeeuen vito Jaser , thep wente on
Waridzpnge Dnto the toploernefle. Her qoodlpe
b2aiiches were theotven dotoneas thep wente
ouer the fee. Cherfoze wpl J mourne fo: Fazer,
€ foz the me of Sibna. 3 pli poure mp tea-
be, D Helbon and Eleale, foz perpe
of tbpneenempes is fallen bpd thp fommer feu
teg and bpon thp berue. Che micthand chere
is takenatvap out of the plentpful felde and in
the vpnepardeg , there Halbe no tope no; glad-
nele. Whe treader pall treade out no wpne
in the prefies, the före ofthep: merp chere baue
Jlaped done, Wiberfoze, mp bowels allri:
bic lpke an barpe for oabs fake,andmpne in
br ab bot thecptics fake that ig made
ofbape c. And it hall come to pale, that when
itigtene that Doabthalbe made werpe of Hpg
bpl chapels, he palcome to bps tépletoprape,
but betballnotbe able. So then, thpsis the
fapinge that the Lozde bath poke concernpng
@) oab,{pns that tpme . Wutnowve the Lorde
bath fpoken,fapinge: 3n thee peres, tobich Mal
be as the pereg of anbpzea teruaunte,thall the
glozp of £#)oab be turned into confulpon, tho-
rowe outeall bps multptude, wbpcbe ts verpe
great. And tbat whpcheremapneth, Malye Ve
rp {mall and feble . altak
CTbhe.rvii. Chapter. -


E Sprophecpeagapnite Damafrus, —


S RE feus:beolde, Damatcus ig takena-
a Des) toap.to be nomogc a cptte, bur thalbe
oa beape of woken tones. Che watke
3 cptics


sA


D


=F 11s ig the beup burthë vpon Dama: $


—— a


of Efaye


cptpes of Arder balbe foldes for catell,whpcbe
fhall lpethere,and there Halbe none tofrape thé
atbape:€ phzatm allo Mall nomoze be tronge,
and Danralcus thallnomoare be akpngedome,
and the remnauntol Diria thalbcas the qlo2pe
ofp chyldzen of Jirael, fapth the 102d of hoftes
~ And tn that dape it (hall come-to pale, that Ja-
cob fhaibe made berpe pooze, and the fatnes of
bys fete thal ware leane. And he halve ag one
that gathereth bp cozne inperuet euëlpke pim
whole barme reapeth the eares of cozne. |
He thalbe allo lpke bimthat qathereth eares
of commie inthe valley of Raphaim. Some gathe
rpiige indede (hall there be lefte in it, cuenagin
f (hakynee of an olpuctree,there remapnetwo
O? thre beries inthe toppe ofthe wttermott bow
- and Foure o2 fpue inthe brode frupeefull bzaun-
8 ches thereoflapth the Lorde God of Firael.
~ ben thallmanturne agapne tobpsinaber
andbps epes hal bauerefpect tothe bolp one of
Siracl.As fo: theaulters whpche archps otne
dine a thal not regarde them, and the
thpnges that |
- Uegandpmages) tho |
Dnto.3nthat dape hall thep2 ronge cptpes be
as thefoplaken Hubbes and beaunches, which
thep LcEt becaule of the chpldzen of Bfraell: and
thelande albe delolate.Wecaule thou baffo?
often Godthp faluacion,zbafk not bene mpnd
rull of thp rong rock:therfoze Halt thou let ple
alaunt planteg and (halt graffe the bzaunche of
an otbermannes bpne. Inthat dape (halt thou


make thy plant to qrote,andearlp in themoe= 38


npnge haltthou make thp leedeto flozpib. Che
baruclt thalbe gone in the dape of enberytaunce
and there halbefozow wpthout Dope of cofort:
€ Wiothalbetothe multptude of much people,
‘Mobpch Hall make å founde Ipke the nopie of the
fee. And the vpolence of the nactons, which Hal
ragelpke thetutbpnae tn of many waters: Cue
Ipkemanp waters Mall p peoplerage.Ood (hal

_ eebukebpmt.and be thall fipe farreot Ie Malle
chaled away lpke as dpe firawwe npon the moti
tapnes before the wopnde:andlpkeathpng that
turneth befoze the Fozme at eucn,bebolde ther
¢asrouble:and o2 ener it be moznpnge: loo, be fs
gone. Chys ts the porcpon of them that oppzetle

bg, and the lot of tbemthatrobbe bs.
(Tbe. rviti. Chapter.
(A pzopbhecpe agapan ¢gppt.

Gana THatlanve thattrutketh onder the
7 Ki % padotie of wpnges,p lande tobpch
N eaa) | (8 beponde the waters of Ethyopia
NGOS, | popes S meflantiqers bp the lee,
Smee lleg of redesouer the waz


weth wpth thetrompe. ior fothe Lo2defapde
buto me:ag for me, J wil fake mp ret and loke


} bps tpngers bauemade(as gro- |
ethall benotcalt bpsepe |


aii ol wk lt.
bponthematterinmp babitacpyon,lpkeafaper
Deateafter the rapne,and lpke a cloude ofdewe
inthe beate of barnett. ia} :

Hor afore the paruelke when theBzaunche ig
Trowen, there (all come rppetcupte oute of the
floure:aud be pall cut downe the increate with
fptbes , andthe bzaunches tall betake atvape
wpth hookes, Thus Hallthep be lefte together
onto the foules of the mountapnes ¢totbebea
eg of the earth: foz infommer the bpzdes thall
remapne Dpon it, eeuerp bealk of the Lande (hall
be vpon ft intbetopnter. Si ehat tpine thal ther
apelente be brought ynto the Lozde of Hofted
enen & People that is (catered abzoade, and rob-
bed of that thep hadde, that fame people tpppch
baue bene feartull from thepz begpnnpngebp-
therto,anacpontrodendowneby lptleand Iptle
ipholelande thefloudeshaue fpopled top place
nthe ob the Lorde of Hooltes,cuen tothe

i. -


mount Sp
@ The.rir.Chapter.
( Dbe prophecpe agapnt <apypt,
mem He beupe burthen of Eaqppte: We:
a) bolbe.tbe 1020 rpdethdpon a (wife k. |
ig? gta cloude and (hall come into Eqypte ~
NS, p74 and the Jols of Eappte hall erent
aes ble at the prealence of bpm, andthe
Herte ot Cappte (hall quakeinthe mpod efte of
Der. Aud F wpil ict the Eappeyansone agapntt
another, fo that one char thal fpabt agapnet
bonre agapnite another,


|
|


alfo (hall mourne,and all thep rie ihe ih


aplers of Pharao whole wp ttisturncd to foo
[pihenes Dowe fap pe vito harao. Jam come ¢
of ple men, and ofauncpentekynaes? Where
arenowe the wplemen: Let thé tell the( pe thep
ap fd Be 1020 of Hookkes hathdenplen bp
The paprces of soan are becomefotes.§ prin
ces of Moph are Dplceaned,thep i
appre


pou be


Dpiceaned


as be a tohen and-awoptnelle butotbe cam :
Lop tot pookiesintpelandeof €g te. Stor hathbeturned agapnite me intofeare . Wibple x5)


Anodthe Lode albeknoweninEgypt.and thplde.oz thus baththeLordelapde ontome, * ~


goote rag nate erat erfourmeit. The pon, withthecarpage of anafle,andthecarpage
Lozdeallo Hal i
opp anata (halbeconuerted ontop Lo:de pede. Anùtde Lponcrped, Lode, 3 kande wap-


pal Larai A aae hahen ha sas roddes'Dathe Defmpiten


Thps that Jbearde of the Lozdeof Hooltes the -`
God of Flraell haue J Hhewed bntopou, -
‘Tbe burth? of Duma-Hecalleth onto me out
of Sep2: WMatchbeman what bate thoueclpped ¢ -
by npabtes Watchman tobat balte thouetppea `
bp npabte: The watchmanlapd: Theimompng
commeth,and fo Doth the npabt. Pf pe topl alke
anp queftion,then alte tt:returne g come anapi
l Tbheburthen concernpnge Arabpa:3n p pla-
; Saunt groundeof Arabpa pall pe tarp allnpabe
the eueninpfiretesof Dedanim. Che inbabptours
ofthe lande of Chema broughte forthe toater to
i bimthat was thp2ftp,thep prevented bpm with
takeoftbefackcclotbefromtbplopnes.and put thep2 breade that was ied alvape. W0: becaule
of thp (hooefromtby foote.Andbhe bpd fo,wal- offweardes are they become fugptpue,cuen foz
kena Mame ene uarrtoste | the drawenlweard, and forthe bente bowe and
Andthe Lozdefapbe:lpkhe as mp faruañte®- becauleofthe qrenoulnesotivarre , ffozthus
fay bath balked nakedDandbarefotcfozalpqne baththeLozdelapde unto me:
and Monder the veates opon Egypte AnD E Shere (set apeare accodpnge tothe pea-
tbpoppa:Œuen fo pall pkpngeotAffpzpatake regofani pip carseat Sy the glozpeof Ce
atvape Oute of Eqppte and out of Ethiopia,chil dar Malfap Pipa hl hig sight git at thal
dumand olde men,nabed and bare fote,webep2 efcapefcome the botves:(halbe punpthed bp the
Lopnes vncouered tothe greatthameofEgppt mpabtpe chplozen of Cedar, foz fo the L020 god
Thep thalbebooughteinfearealfo,anbatha of Ficacl bath lpoken. |
25 mev om of another : Ethpopia of:Egppte and i Thee
Egpptot Ethpopia,contpderpnge obat glozp CTbe. rrii thapter.
tpepwereinafoze, And thep $ doelt inthe fame ES proppeceeagapns zerutalem, =


The


of Efayt ol.clit.
xAnd the kepe ofte boulfeof Daupd wpllZ €

lape vpon pps uldir, (0 that be tpall open and 2000-5118
‘no man fhall (hut: be hall put and no må thal
open. And J wll pte oye ag anapleina fure
place.and be malbe the qlozpousteate of bps fa

thers boule. H ozeduer.all generacpons and po=

(terptpes thallbange bpon ppm all the glozp of

tbey: fathers boule all veffelles both great and
fmatl,¢ all in frnmentes of mealure ¢mulpke,

E pabitin the Lozbe of Hoolkes Mat
thenaple that (tfaftchedin plureplace,departe

be broken and fall,and the burtpent bat asbp

a ee pluck¢atpape:fo2 fotpe 2.020 path


aa non De. Tr Coane: that it harbe-
reltozeb agapne, : -
aston ye burthenof* Tpz: ourhe pethip y
% « ofhoxtmen,tbe cptpe of kp: (hewed the pple Ly PPA peg of Charis, foxtbere cometh fach dice of
. RA Eye Deftruccpon, that pe thalinot paue an
teg and thebozimen fet thepe faces byzectlpe tò ee Mm! Houle to entre into: ute o€ the landé
warde the cate, AndinthatDapedpDtheenemp of Citpmbaue they knowelegeofthps plage .
takeawape thebewtpeofjuda,ethendpddell we tpll petbat bwellin the Jle the marchaune
thonloketowarde thearmoure ofthebontecfp egofspdon,and fuch as paffeouerthefee, baue
Fozelt. Pe baue lene alfothe broken places of the iniabe te plenteous Sebe coebe teak aeoetD b
cptpe of Daupd, bowe thattheparemanp, and. the greate watersofMilus, andthetruteg of
tpe cathered togetberp waters of thelower i rpuer were ber Ditaples,forbat tt became acom
d ~menmarteofthenacpons. WMealbamed thor
‘3idon,foz the fee , (enettthe irength of the fee,)
make the wall ronge. A ppt alfo bane pe made batbetpoken faring: Abaucnot traupled no:
rougbe forthchpldzen , noznozpfiped bp ponge
pooleand haue not regardedthe makerthereol menozbzougbt ms vpgpng.
Whentpopngescommetbto theEappepans,
T And inthat vape bpd tbe Low Godokottes 'theppalbefopefo; the rumoure that gocth of
- call men vnt weppnye and mournyngetobald ire.Getpouto Tharlis,mourne pe thardwel 14
-nele and qp2dpnae about tpthfackclothe And inthe Fle. Jsnot thpsthat gloepons Cptpe of
bebalde, hep bauetopeand gladnefie, flapinge pours, whpchbebath bene ofolbe antyquyty. ver
oren zkpllpnge Ghepe,catpnge flethe, anddapne ofonefettedpallcacp pee fortheto bea (efournee
torro., konee wpre.¥Let V seate tdipncke,foztomo- tntoafarrecountrpe, Wado hath deupied thpga
Srpien td ome me alldpe.And itcameto theearesofp gapni Cpze(that geucthgarlanpeswntoother
Lod of hotes: This iniquptpe halnot be pour cptpes whole marchatites are pzpnces:¢ whofe
| captapnes are bonourable inthe wode. Eucn
of Hoolkes. Thustapth the Lorde Godof oo- the Lordeof Hoofkes bathedeupted thys,to put
fFes:Go,cretthe onto ponder treafurer: enen be dotonethep2pde of mene as glozpous, and
sta:prrot.a COX Debna whpebe ts the ruler of heboute. tompnpthe all them that be pzonde dponearthe
| that thouto doberevandtabompattthbou Gét the oute of the lante onto the Daughter of
erertbat thou Mulde bere bete the outafepul -Gharlps:lepngethou pall nomoze frength.
r cheas it were one that bewetb bym out atepul ethatfmote thebpngdomes together polo
chic on bpgb,ozthat qrauethanbabptacponfoz Deth out bis hande ouer ebefee,euen? Lod ppm
bpartelfe inanbearderocke . - felfehdath gewnacommaundement again tpe .
l rhois D thou man,the Lode (hallcarpe famecommenplace of marchaundpee, that thep
ap theatwapeintocaptpnyte and Mall (urelp coner E Dire Sepia ete ejot. And
b contutyot. be Lozdethallturnethe bhefapd, akenomoze thpbolt(Dvirgintpou
ow Oner lpheabaltwopthbpsbandesor(egattensedey Daughterztbon thou thaltebe beoughtbdotone,
-intoa favre countrpe,tbere (haltetheu dpe, and. Gp.get theouervnto Citim:ipberenenertheles
there (in Feade of the Charettes of thy pompe) thou thale bauenovell. Deholbethps people co-
Malthe boufe of f Lordebaueconfulpon:F wpl menotof the Caloers:but Allurmade the tro
dwue the from thp place, ¢ out ofthp dwellpnge pode ef St her Se
(hall bz ouerthrowetbe. And inthat dape Hall- therot;andd oped dis places andhe bzoughe
J call mp (cruaunte Elpakpm thefonucofbel- tt indecap i gl ak e a.a Thatipg fog
bpa. And tWpth thp qarmenteg Wpl Felotbbpni  poure Mrengthig byougheoowne.
and toptbthp qpzdle wpll J Erengthebpm: thy  Andinthatdapethall Tprebe torgottente-
ower alfo wpil ¥commptintobpsbande.and uentp-peres(accordpnaetop peres ofonekpug)
ethalbe a fatber offuchag dwellinJerulalem, . andattertheende of the leuentp pearcs hal Tp
and fn the boufe of Juda.. - oe ae a i cela hit ie Tae 2
2 ro


D


f w gedHopherye |
o aboutetheeptpe(thoubatlotthoubatt bene outotehe pt; palbetakeitwptb the-(nare, FF

Pcotten make wete melody, finge mo fonges Ehesopudsmsestcomonbpabare open ; ari tbe 3 |

that thou mapeff be bad in rememb2aunce, Ahd foundacponsoftbe eartbaremoucd, -

aftectheende befeuentpe peares foal Loi heearthis vtterlp bzoken Bowne, the earth

bpfet Eyre and tye thallconuerfe vito herrés Hatha fore cupne,the earth quaker) erceadpnig: >
Sarde, and (pall commpe feznpcacpon wptDall lp. he earth thal relethtoandfro,(pke adjon=

thebprmedomes of the earth taretnp world karde, halberemouedlpkeatttes(ofonenrgbr) , |

< bep occnppinge alto atid Fep reward thal andt einiquite therot (halbebeaupevpon it. Ft *°

bebolpe wntothe Lorde: Cheyegapnes (halnot thall fallandnoteple sn agapne. And thtbat

belatenbpnoz bepte in öze but it palbe theirs bape (hall the Lozde bplet the. hoo aboue that


that dwell betozetbe Logde:that thep map eate (Son bye,andthebpnges f the world p arebpa
pnonaband baueclothpngefuffpcpent. theear pia Halbecathered together, ag
— CTye-rriiii. Chapter. ep that bein pai


on:and Mep Malbe en
ward,and aite many Da és (pal thep be bifited
« [he mone Halbe abathed atid fhe funne alha gure.pri.c;
medtobhen the 109d of potes halrapue tn mout
aportin (tk Seentaleat worth Mosbpppe, and
in tbe Spabee of fuch as ha beof bps councell.


: e. $ ter.
A thanckelgtupn ge to God fot hps wojckes,


isfebleanDperpihetp , org teen people of the
ecartbarecome tonaughte. Che earth alfo igbe:
come vnpzofptable onder the enbabptours ther
of tobich pauctrangreficb the lawes, chaunged


Wiherfore the enbabitones of the earth are perp
hed vopthdzong bt, t fewe menare leftbebpnde


kpngeof Dipues : andasthe grapes neo


of thberpabtecous. And fapbe: 3 knotbe a thpng outebpsband itt pen rbt Gla gpa


eacefulnes,tbe ppt and the {nare arebpcnt aT Pe ba ronge holde alfo and Defence

bw of thy walleshatbbe ouccthozowen and caftda
topatletbat wholoencr efcapethip cavful nopte hones brought them to p ground, cut bntodutt:
(Hallfall dato theppe-Andbe that commet vp: CThe.rrvi. chapter Uini


+


Sehe ta, Deoucr pa


oF Elaye


A fongtof the Delpucrantee of the people.
a e À that dape pall this fonge befonge itt
noros KOH Ratbeland of Juda. x Wie hau a tronge
SA IS Septie. Saluacpon hall Godappopnte
pficrbtj.p, Eain fede of tpatles and bulwarkes,

-x Openpe the gates that rpabtcons people
tobpch kepeth thetructh mapeentrein. ‘Chere
mpndets fet bpon the becaule thou p2eleruette

xoma.b,a, tbem x inpeace:pee, enen in peace: becanfe thep


put tbepztrutteintbe. Putpepourtrutalwap PA


in the 1o2d: fozinthe Low God ther is Frenghe
eta reba. Foz cuermoze. *f€o2 be bath bzought Downe the
bye mpndedcptesins. As foz the proudecptie de
bath bzouqbtit low, cuen nto the qrotide (hall
hecalk it bowne ¢ bringe it vuto dulte. Che fore
euen the fote of the pooze,and the eps of facpe
as be inneceffpte pall treade (¢ bowne.
5 Chepath BAG SRL thou graunt bnto p
Drbe Mee o thou moolt rpg htcous,» thou Malt oder
” f path ofbanthatts rrabteous. Pee, in p wape
of thp iugementeg, D Lode, Daue we put oure
trut inthe. Tbpnamealfo #theremembzraunce
A See of theis the thinge that our foule longethe Foz.
and clita Pep Py Loule path longed forthe al the npgbe, and
piia S
ivith mp (prete(oppch ts withinmewpil Fieke
tbe carlp inthe monpnge.Forwhentbp iudge-
menteg arein pearth, p mibabptoursof p world
(pall learne rpgbteonines. Sball the vugobdlye
man be fadpured, whpcb bath not learned rpad
@  teoulnes but dothwyckedlp in the earth, where
nothpnge oughte to be Done but that whpecheis
*spabteous: He thallnotfe the glozpe ofthe
Zod when thy bande islpfte bp to firpke.thep
feit not: but thepthallfert, andbeconfound:d
» withthe3cleofthe people, ¢ the fper that confus
meth thpne encmpes (hall deuoure them.
Lozdvnto vs thou Malt proupde peace :* foz
pbpliia. Chou allo bat wrought alloure wo2ckes in bs,
L020 our God, other lozbes befpbe the bathe
as fubdued wg but we foplbe mpndful onlpe of the
and thp name: Thedead wpil not lprie:and they
that be out of Ipfe wopll not rpfe arapen, thefoze
bate thou wilpted and rooted the out : ¢deltrop
cd all memory of thé. Chou balte increaled the
people(D Lozd) P balte increafed p people, and
thou ate preapten:thou batt lent thetarre ot, bn-
xewrpbt.s eg all thecoattes of the carth. + Lode in trouble
bate thep uplyted the: thep powzcd onte thepz
> praper oben thy chaffeninge was vpon then.
x Lpke aga woman w chpide that drawerthe
D nye towardeber traupll, ts lope ecepeth in ber
Ihonrbie jooneg, cuenloharc we beneinthpfpabte. D
nom. bigo Lowe. xUde baue bene w childes tufted paine,
asébough webad pay pes ie Un -JE02
thert ig no faluacpon inp earth pe doethin
habprourgs ofthe'wozlde fubmpt them telues.


> corbi ¥Tbp deademen thal lpue,cueh w mp body thal eee
theprpfe agapne. Awakeand {pngepepotoell | ha (bat


inout. sto? the detec is cuentas the dewe of ber-

__ bes, etheearth ial cate out them that be bnder
Sepir. her, Comemp people, x entre thou into thy cha-
apace. bin DELS, and thutte thp Dozes about the: + hpbethp
: felfe fog alptle whple, vntil the indpngnacpon
.xffozlo p Lorde is commpnge out

' ofbps place, to wifpte the wpekeoneMe OF fiep


ts


, Sole lute.
as Dwell bponearthe. The earthealfo hal dpl-
clote ber otone blonde, and thal nomoze bpde the
thatareflapneinber.. tee
—— |ESherrvil.chapter.
q propbecre of the commpnge of Chpt and bekruccr-
onof 3polattp.


ares A that bap. thellon wÙ Dis fore great y
We Wie ic Ai wearde hall bplptexLe- t.co:,rb.¢
wE ye utathan ptugitpueterpent,eucn Le- apoca ptit
S er utathan that croked ferpente,and De
éca (hat flap the dzagon p is in the fee. Fn
that dap,fe p pelpnaeoftbecongreqacté which
is the bineparde,p bepnacth forth the belt wpne
Guen J the Lozddo kepeit.jn due feafons hal
Y water it,and leat the enemp doit anp Darme
Fwpll bothnyghteand dape preferuc tt. Chere
isnodplpleafureit me els(wbenthe Dpneparde_
bzpnaethpme forth beeers and thoznes) J wolde
go tho2ow it bp warre,and butne (typtogetbet
Let it takeboldeofmy Frength,andit thalbeat
enewpthme,euenatonethallitbewmpthbme 25
The dapes arecommpnagep Jocob thal take
roote. {rac albe grene and flozpihe, and the
wolde halbetplled topth Frute. Bathe be impt- :
tenbym as fooze ag be bpd the other that fmoote >
bym: D>? ts he lapue with fo fozea Haughteras
bep bad $ ewe him? Fn mealure dotbe be fmpt
bpm. whple be fendeth unto bpm luch thpuges,
toberbp he commeth to bpsmpnde agapne. oz
in thedapetbat thecat winde blowseth (ooze, if
aith diar E the frutes, Thng therefore (hal
Dy a Ai Jacob be recon{pled, and here ts all
the frupteofthetakpnae awape of bpsfpune,
pf be mabe all the toneg of the aulter of Zdoles,
as chalke ones tbat are beaten infunder, that
ferons and Jmagegsrple not bpagaphe: ¢
ls pall the tronge cptpe be delolate:and p
pþabptacp on forfaken and lefte phe a woilderncs
here fall the calfe fede and there Mall He Pre,
and eate bp the araffestherof. Wibenthe bzaurs
ches of it ave Dep. thep ave broken of, and the we
men conte, and Cet themon fpre-* Io IFiS a Peo meu. eerisy
pleofno onderffandpng, and thetfo2z be p made
thé pali not fauoure them, ebetbatcreated thë
ball rene themno grace. And inthat dape Hall
the Logdemake a thzetbing fromthe mpades of
therpuer pot gta ontotberpuer of Egy pee
t


epechpldzen of {irael Halbe qathered toret
one to another. In that dape (hall p qreattrom
paeieeg that thep which were loftin the
lande of Affp2ta,and thep that were banithed in
to thelande of Eqgppte,thall come and worthip
the Lozde inthebolpemounteat Jerufalem-

€ The. rrdtii. Chapter: |
qaeapnt the Pepbe or cobra, the agapnite falfe preaz
ftes and preachers, -
CN a ay © be onto the ceowne of ii ené

av al +totheD2bken people ot Cphratnt orca

6 | ees wobo ecrcatpompetgaftourethat~ i
bd) a, o Faderh atbapebpon the beadeof the
a Nallep of fucheasbeinwelthe,and
are oucrlade Wptp wpne.wcholde,+ there com= egat.rvi.t,
meth a nebemente and a fore dapefrom the Lo
ply toy yara ank ey eriloug tempe
euen iphe $ force ofmpabtpe q Dozrpble waters.
i AES it that


rare tiie, * The prea


fape.t.a’ | 3
phe date leffone,anoe


¢.cor riifie


llep offatnes , pall


ment and frengt


iudacment. sfo2tablesareto


- . Che Prophecype


that bpolently beareth voirie all thpnaes.che thal it gothozotve:and tobeit thie nopfetherot ig
eroine of the papoe of the Dzoncken Ephiacmp perceaued,it ball qendze veracpon: stort he bed
fap tes (albetrodcn vader fote:* fothat efloure igi rowe, åndnot large:and the couct
ffcandbewtpe , wmppede isintbe Cmalltpatamancannot topnde d
adeawape, it.” foz the Lorde Wall kande as
ag Dothan bntpmelperppe tpg eaforeberuette rafpm,g albe wrathlpke agin p vallep+Op-
Wi bpcb whara man (ppeeb, Pe loketh vpon it, ¢ beon:that He map do byg ftraunge Wwozcke, atid 9-per.ts >
whpie it tg pet in bys bande, be catethit wp. bzpiigeto paffe bis acte, ppg Eraungeacte.
_-nehat dap (hall the Loe of coftesbethe owe Cherforele tbat
25 cromneof aloz, + dpamounde of bewtp wt
refpduc of ppg people,
perfecte Pee son mébat fptteth


wo2de Of the Loze(leffon vpontefion, commati >
Dement bpon comaundement, rule vpon rule, th |J woyl lape fege
oninfruccpon,thercalptle æ there there Halbe peu


alptle) albe puto theman occalfpon offtom> andit halbe nto meecucnas an alt
bipaa shat they mape goon ano fall backward ter. 3 wpll belegetherounde about,
be bzuled, tangled andinared . gang thethozowe abulwozcke,and wplreare
_ MderFore, beare the worde of the Lozve pe, Dp dptcbes agapné the. Thou palt be brought
mockerg pethat banc rule of thps people,tobich Downe, (alt {peake oute
alem. wecaule pe hauelapd: we baue ata golowe out of
madcacouenaunt Mpehdeath,andwypepbelare t0
we at agrements.Andthoughbe there go fotha awptch:and thp talkpnge
Át (hallnot come nto bs. o: weda
althone oure refage and bnder banpte
pd. Therfore fapth the Lod: God: He oftpaauntes(balbexas dep rawe t
bolde, J lape in Spon for a feundacpona tone, tarp:eucnfodenlps tna
euena tried fone,a ous cozner tone, a fure hou Malt be vplited of
founbacpon, Cibo obeleucth,tetbpmnotbeto thondze eatthbequake, and
haltpe. Frdgemente allo toll FJ lape tothe rule ‘opth formes tempeff g with
and rpgbteoutnelfe to thebalaunce , fothattbe mpnaefpre. Anvthenmltptudeotalnac cnsp
haple ball take awape poure papnecontpbence fpabt agapnit Ariel thalbe ag adzeameicne DP occrretite
ag a bzoome and the pzeup place of pour refuge npobexeuenfo thal althep be,
(hall tie waters renne onet. ini it, ftrong bol 8 to oucrcomeit,¢ that lap
ustbecouenauntetbat pe made wpth anp fege tnto
bedplanulled:and poure agrement whenanbongrp mandreameth ý be (s eatpnge,
that pe made topth Dell Mall not tande. Per, e woben be awakethe, bps foule is empty.sd2 as
when the foze pla e oeth foztb.pe thalbe trove iobhenathepitpemandzecameth thet bets dzpne
Dotone ynder it. Fromthe time ptt qoethfortbe kpnge:andtopm heawaketh,be ts pet fapnte &
it hall takepou atoape. Foz earlpe in the moz- bps oule batbeapetpte. Euen fo hall the mul-
. Aprige cuerp bape-pee, botbedapeand npgbte, tieudeof allnarpons that fpabteagarny on
Ajk KD?


inde ot pontop pour punttmentincrea

etoplbedlica 1 af of Lorde ofhoottes, that there Mallcome a Mote
bp nudge: ende bponthe wholecarth.peare pe
plifotbemtbattucne awape ken Dnfomp vO ce,contpeze g pond
the battell fo the gate of the enempes. Wut thep wotfhnotthcbulbandman
are ouf of the wapebp teaton of wpne'pee,tarte openeth and breaketh the
are thep thozowe ‘ftronge Dzpncke that be mape fotve when
alfo and p pzopbetaregoneaftrap wypll be not (prede abzode t
gof MrongedpnckethpareDnon compr, and cait in wpeate,
bh topne,thep go ampie tpozowe trong appopnted barlepand
Dapneke,thep faplein popbecpinge ¢ Fomble it fopll inftructe bpm to baucdp
fo fulofompteand Godiwpliteachbpm . For
Epitbpnetie Chat no place ig cleane .Waihome ther thaeftped topth an parowe, 8
{pall fuch one teach nowlege And whom thal whele be bzoughte tho
be maketo bnderttande the thynges that bebra fetches are beaten oute
reih:sorthey areas ignozaunt ag pongechpl- wpa rod. Wut thelede that bzeade ig made cf
Den par takenfromethe mylke,g are wepned. isthzethed,tbougb itb
o2 thep that be fuche, muftebaucafterone And thecart whelemu
her leffon:xatteronechmaunbdemtt Degrpndeit w thbystectb. Chis allocomuieth
maundemet,atter oneruleanotber Of the Lozde botes, whych wozcketh w won-
| inffruccpon: anothecinftruccpon Derful wp{dome,¢ bapnge
therea Iptle ¢therca lprle. S02 bethat fpeaketh topaffe,
puto thys people,is euenag one thot se rube TherrirEhapt

nes of fpeche anda ftraunge language. L
ran tape bntotbem:lo,tbpsis theret wherew Pcs di tn edo
pemapecate bpm that isivecve,thbpsistherefre DAR eet
{yynee,thep wpllnot herken * @herefore,the VA


lowe all€pedape.t
ottes of pps ground
be bath mabe it plane
be fetches,and lowe

bp meafure,and the
tpe in thepz places God
fcrecpon,euch bps


epther Hall acarte
20e the
wptha ftaffe,and comin
enotalwapeathzetbin
ft be brought ouer if,le


th excellent noozches


anpe 4 propheceeagapnt yerutalem,andagaputt the bapae


e Lowe of hooirsw
wytha greate nople


t. Jnconclufion.it Halbe cum ag


letek
for Fhauebeardeok p


sD wntothe,D Arpellthou cvtpe p 2


i.tegu, bt


ralf b


pa)


—


of Clay


C Pordze thele thpnees once ih pour mpnoes ,
math.Fb,b, € wonde. x Wlpndedarethep them felues and
the blpnde gupdes of other. Thep are dzonken:
but not% topne,tbep are bnitable but not tho-
rowe fronge D2 pne the Lorde bathcoue-
ted pou wptba lomberpnae (pete, and batbe
clofed peut eyes. Pour prophetes allo ¢rulers
<fap.vi.b. $ (puldfe,them bath be couered.* And tbe wild
of all the pionbetenig become nto pou, asthe
ozdes ota boke thatis fealed yp, whpch men
Delpuer toone that is learned, lapin g: Reade
init. And be fapth:3 cãnot, foz itis lealed. an
the boke is genen vnto bin that is not learned,
faping: Reade thon init and helapth: Fam not
karned. Cherfoze thus hath the Lozbefapde:
* Ffo? Lo mochasthps people when thep be im
trouble,bo onour me wpthtbeir montband w
` thepelpppes:but their berte isfarfro me, ¢ the
y feare whpchthep haue vnto me, procedeth ofa


: 13b. rb. a
mae, Biia


comaudement pistaughteofmen. Eherfore of


wpll J domaruapls amonge thps people euen
asorte marnelous thpnges(¥ fay anda wider. xo
‘Conte the toploome of their wptemeé thal perpth,¢ the
wnber fading of thep2 titty më thal bive it elf
Wo onto them $ kepeth fecret thep2 though
t¢s,to Dpde thep2 countel from the Lozdanddo
oe thep? thop kes indarknedle,faping: *tobo fepth
seep, ipe USSE WOknoweth bs? Moutles, pour deftruce
cponis}inmp bandes inreputacton astbe pot
ters clape. And doth the hozke [ap ofbpm that
made tt, be made notinesAn doth an eartbé def
fel fape of bim that fallptoned it, be badno b=
derflanding ‘Fs tt not barde at bande,that Lp-
banus (halbeturned intog lowe felde,and that
thelotve feld halbetaken as the wood: Andin
thatbape pall deaffe men beare the wozbdes of
the boke and the epes of the blpnde thal fe euen
out of tpeclonde € out of darcknes.

€ Che meke preted alfo Halbe merp inf Lozd,
and thepoozeamonge themtbat be lowlp, thal
retople in the bolpe one of Jfrael. orbe papo
bpoletice,ts bzoughtto naught and p fcozneful
manis confumed:and thep roted out that toere
batty Co fone to bnrpghteon{nes, making a ma
tolpnne inthe tozbe, andthat tokebpmina
(nave: whpch repaouedthem in the open place:
and thep that bane tuened the caule of therpap
teoustona ts Seger berfozethusfapth p Lozde
) bnto the poule of Jacob, euen thus tapethhep
gra tifie VeDEMeEDAbLzabam: * Jacob thal not nowe be
confounded,no2 bis face pale, But whe be feeth
Dyschpldzen the wozie of mp bandesin p mpd
des of bim,thep thal factifie mp name,¢ paple
thebolp Logde of Jacob, ¢ feare the Goof gf
Sot a alto that baue bene of an crronioule
paete hal cometo wndecikadpnae, g thep that

paue bene fcoznefull, pall learnedoctrpue.

, C Che.rre.Chapter.
«Agapnitethem that fozlakethe countcll of God g cleucta
the counfell of men. Zhe prophet alfo thzcatenethe the rem:
Haunt ofthe people, that after the drtruccion of Jerufalem
went inte @gppe.

A PRET Las , for thofe aplobedyente chplozen,
ima (Capth the 1o2d)*that thep wil take cot
p= fell opthout me. Alag,p thep wpll take
afecreteadupce,and not oute of my fpecte, and


Sol rliit.
therfoze adbde thep tinne bntofpnne. Enen thep
that walke to go Sctone into Egypt, andbaue
alsednoqueftpé at mp mouth but feke (treqth
tntbe mpg bt of Pbarao,¢ trultin the hadowe
ef gppte. Cherfoze thall the trengt of Pha
tao be pourcotulton,¢ the trut in the thadotoe
of Egpnvt per Mame. Fo? biscaptapnes were
at ís ambaflabours came nto Hanes


do them nogood,and that might not delpe thë, i.b
noathetve them oip p:ofpte, but werethep2 c= oye ria


pe thep wyplifetle thep2 mpndes inquyetnes.

ibid erfoze,gotbp wapeand forpte thpa Eis. bii. à
befoze them ina table note itina boke that it

niape fpnallp remtapne g be kepte Epll fo2 euer.

Sct thpsisan obftpnate people: * and dpl = ef2,1.n
femblyng chplozen,chplozenthat refule to beag
thelawe of tbe Lozde.

Foz thep lape vnto the feerg: Senot,andto €
them p becleare of iudgemét:loke not outright
thpnuges fo2 vs:but (peake fapze odes vuto
vg:lobe outerrourg get pou out of thps wape,
departe out of thys path, ¢ turne the polpe one
of Jitael from vs .Ciberfoze thus fapth the bo
lp one of 4lraell: Secaule ponr þerteg ephe a-
gapnit thps wozde,¢ becaule pe trnit inwõge
Dealpnae g peruerte tudgement,¢ put pour con
fpdence therein. Ebherfoze thallpe hauethys
mplchefe foz poure beftruccpon and fall.lpke ag
anbpe wall that falleth, becaule of fomerpfte
02 Plate DOl Brean page comerp fodenlpe.

x And the hurte therofislpkeanerthen vellell, pratit
wbpch beeaketh optbhout belpe:fop inthe bur-
ftpng of it tper ig notfoñde one theuer to fetche
fp2¢in,ozto take Water bptbal out of the pet oy
» Stozthus fapth the Lorde God, euen the bolp aroia
one of 3lrael: Iuvepentaticegein* cele (pall pe pag pr.
be fafe: inqupetues and Cure confpdence balbe |
poureftrengthe. Wut ye Daucbadnolutk ther
to,fo2 pe bauefapd:Ro, but we wpll efcape tho
rowebozles. (Cherfoze thallpe fipe and we
wpll get bs vp bpon (iopfte bealkes. And there
foze Gall pou erfecutourg be fiopfter. k g utrla
thoulande pall peat the rebuke of one andat

ý rebuke of fpue thall pe all flpe,tpll pe be lefte

asa bpppe mat wpon the top ofa mountaitie,

and aga beaken bponan pplle.xC herfoze Doth trawnika
the Lozdcaule pou to wapte that be mape baue

niercp Dpon pou:tothintente,that be map haue

the preeminéce, when be igqractous buta you.

Fo: the Lorde tg the God of mbdgement. Elei

fed areall tbeptbat bope indim., toe

DE the people remapne in Sion, andat Jeru È
falem, thou (halt not be in beupnes: but at the
nopee EOE Sepa Parva Beene, ih bya p

ik Ang


peu tif, ial y,


And when he bearetbét pe Hall genethean an=
{wer. Aud though the Lord gene pou the bzead
of trouble: ¢ the water of aduerfptic, thp caves
albe nomoze fofkant but thyneepes Hall fe
thbprapne . Dee,andthbpnecate pall beare ý
talkpnge of bpm that both fpeake bebinde the.

xThysis the wape walke peinit. Turne not
alpde,nepther to the rpabt bande no? to flpft.
Pe thalldeftrove alfothe couerpnge of pour fpl:
uer pmages, and the deckpnge of poure golden
pools. Euf as fplebpnes thal pe put thë atoap.
Andthouthalt {ape vntoit.Get thebece. Che


— hall God gene rayne bufothp feed that p palt


St


petit b


ræs


©


ffa.ta


fowe the qrounde wpthal.and beade of the t=
create of the earth, wbpcl thalbe fat € verp ple:
teous. Antbat dape alfo pall ehpcatell be fed
inlarge paftures. Tbe oren|pbewple andthe
pounge affes , thateate the grounde thalleate
tleane peouendze, tobhpcheis pourged pth the
wipnde andthe fante.
 -fEpnallp, vpon enerpe bye mountapne ¢ Dpll
(hall tbere berpucrs ¢ Kreames of waters,x it
theday ofthe great flaughter,whe the towers
fall. ozeoticr, thelpabt of the mone thalbe as
the lygbt of tbe funne, andthe funne lpgbt all
be fenen Folde, and baucas moch Hpne as tn fe-
nendapes belpde, when the 102 bpndeth vp ý
fore of bis people,and healeth the froke of their
fhounde. Webold, the fame of the Lozde cometh
from farre, bis peelence is fo pote, that no ma
19 able toabpde. wis lpppes are Full of indigna-
cpon,and bpstonge igas a confuminge fpre. _
Pps beth isasa vebemente A oude of water $
reacheth vp to pnecke.@ bat be map lift a tay
ý Heathen in the fpue of vanttp. And bys beet
1s.asabzyole oferrour inp chatoes of p people.
Anope thallipnge,lphe asin thenpabt, whe
thebolpelolemnitpe begpnneth. And pethall
hauegladnes of bert, phe as when one cometh


wptha pppe vntothebpll ofthe Lorde andto i


the mooitempabtp one of Firacll. And p Lozd
hall caufe bps glozpous vopce tobehearde, €
Mall declare bys Eretched outarme wpth a ter-
rible counitenaunce ¢ wpth the flame of a coniu
ming fper, wpthn oplomelpgbtenpnge, wptd a
Hower wprbhaple tones. Fo? thozowe the
popee of the Lozde tall x Aflurbedeftroped,


- whypcb {mote other men wpth theronde. And tt
fhalcome to pale, that whitberioruer be goeth,


therodde Wall cleaue butobpm, whpeh p 1020
fhallape bponbim iyth tabzettes and harpes,
& wptb great warre (hall be fpabt agapntt bys
Hoolt. * oz the fper of payneis ozdepned from
thebeqpnnpnae:pee, euen for kpnges isit pre-
pared. This hath the Lozd fet inthe a rand
made it wpde:the burnpnge wberof isfperand
much wood. be beeth of the Lozde, oh pce ts
arpucr ofbzpm{fone doth Byndle tt.
© Che.rext.chapter.
«He curfeth them that fozfake God, and frke
fo; the belpe c&men.
eee D be dnto them that go Downe into €-
Na oppte foz belpe.¢ truf in bozfes,and put
aAes rheivcontpoece in charcttes,becaute tiep


i Beast SEs


The Prophecye.


be manp,and in borfemen,becaule thep ve luitp
g ftronqe. But thep reqardenot the bolp one of
Frael,¢ thep alie no queltpon atthe Lorde.

(ibere as he neverthelefie(bepng toptctt of al)
plageth the wicked, and pet goct) not from pis
wo2de,wohen be feppetbforth,and taketh p vt:
cfozpagapnit the boufholde of the frotvarde , ¢


agapnit the belpe ofeuell doers.f2owe the Egi |


prpang ate men, ¢ not God, ethep2 bosles Aep
and not {pect.Andaflone asthe Lozdftretcheth
out bps bade, then thal the belper fall, g be that
fpulde bane bene hel ped,and thep pall al toge«


ther be defFroped. fF 02 thus bath the L020 fpo- ;
+ LPONS pornba


ben vnto me: * Lpke as the ipon
whelpe roareth pon p pzapethat be Dath got:
ten,andisnotafrapde though the multitude of
(hepberdes crpe out bpon hpi neither abatiped
foz all the beape of them. Sy Mall the Lorde of
potes come Dotone tofpgbt fo mounte Spon,
and defende bps hpll. Lpkeas bp2des Aotre a-


bout thep2 nelteg, * fo thall the Lorde of bofkes dre.Frry.s


kepe fauc defende, y delpucr Zerutalem.


perfore, O pechplozen of Ffracl, turne a- €


gapne from that inftdelitpe, Wherin pou dow


ned pourefelues. * Fozinthatdapeenerp man <tar-tt.c


fhall caf out bys pools of fpluer ¢ bps pools of
golde whpch pe paue made wpth pout owne Hå


bes onto pour fpnne.* Ailur allo thalbe flapne et.rrrvts,e
wptbthelweard,not wptha mang fiveard, ne: D


ther thal the fwearde of anp man denoure bim :
And be Hall fle fra the laughter, ¢ bysteruatt-
tes (halbe bp{confptedin thet bertes. He pall
mofo feare to bps tronge holdes, € bys pryt
ces pall flee fró bps badge. Cbps bath p Lozde
[poken whofe lpabteburnethin Spon, € brs
fper in Jerufalem.
The.rerii. Chapter.


« The convicpons of good rulers end offprers.


ery Eholde,akpnge thal gouerne after g


A (oR) the rule ofrpgbteoutnes, ¢ the pein
AEs Aei ces fhallrule,accozdpnge to the ba=
' By launice of epatta tma pal
me aan ve nto meas a defëce foz Propnde,
eas arefugefoz the tempelt:lpke as arpuct of
water ina thp2tte place, p (hadotwe of a great
tocke ina Dapelande. The epes of the fepnge
{hall not be bpm, ¢ the cares of them tbat beare,
thalltakedpligenteDede.

Thehert of the vntople thal attapne to know
ledge andthe wupgofpte toe thal [peake plap
nelp and dpftpnctlp. Then thall the foolph np-
garde be nomoze called gétle,noz the churie Ip-
berall. wut the npgarde Doplbe npgardlp mpn
Ded and bps berte pl toozke euell, andplape
the ppocrptc,and pmagpne abbompnacpons a:
he God,tomake the bigrp leane,t to with
holde Dapncke from the thyzity. Chele arc pper
lous weapons of the churlpthe, there bp bis ha
mefullcountels : that be mape begple the poore
With dpfecatEull wozdes: pee, cucit there ag be


(hulde geue fentence wpth the poore. * Wut p rzo.rvti b :


liberall perfonne pmagneth honelt thpracs, F
commeth Dp For liberal ptte Dufo premocpor.

Cip(pe epche and poell wemen) herken Dn-

to mp voper. Pecareles cpties, marke mp - »

ts,


O DL CARY,


des. Rites peares anddapes Bt be bzougbt
in fear, D pecarelescpties.stoz baruel Halbe
out, and the grapegatherpnge Hall not.come.
Mperpeh poell cpties pe that feare no parell,
Ie abated, poun that lpue in aboundaunce:tré-
ble, pou that lpuecareles:caft of poure rapmét,
: make pour felues bare, put facke clothe aboute
pou. ozas themfantes wepe when theps mo-
. thers teates are Dzied:[0 pal pou wepe for pour
fayzc felbes g frutefull bpnepardes. Sp peo-
ples felde hal bapnae thopnes g thifles: and fo
thallit beeuenincucrpe Doufe of voluptuoul-
- nefle,andDineuerp ci tic that reiopleth The pla
- * cegallotpalbe bzoken, and the qreatlp ine 1
.  egdepties defolate . Chetomzes ¢ bulwarbes
tall becomme Dennes fo2 euermoze,tie pleafur
of mules thalbe turned to paftuve foz pepe: dn
tothetpme that the {pete be potozed Dpon wg
- fromaboue. hen Mall the wpldernes bea
frutefull felde,and the plenteous Felde thalbere
kenedfo2 å ood. Chen fhallequptic dwell tn f
pefert,andrpagbteoufnes in a Erutefull lande.


xom.b. a) * And the rewarde of rypghtcoutneffe halbe


peace,and ber Frute cell and qupetnes fozeuer.


Jerrrie x 3nd mp people (hall dwell inthe pnneg of


peace, andin {uve diellpngesin fafe places of
confogte. And when the baple falleth, tt thal fal
inthe woode.and the cptie fhalbe fet lowe in the
vallep.<D howe bappp Hall pe be, when pe Hal
fafelp fotve pout feed befpde all waters, ¢ daine
thpthecthe fete of pour orenandafles .
TThe.rrriii. Chapter.
C Zhreatenpnge agapnd the Ailpzpans, F beletps
pepon oftbem that Hall re the Lorde.,


RSA D tothe that deftropett, wht thou
(7 (eo fa Wwalte not deftroped, thou beeakelt
a | Fact Etheleage, where as none bath bzo-


JSL kiN


tpe Sod .* Pe thallcoriceaue Rubble, y beare arete
arawe, and poure {pete halbe thefper, thatit

map contume pou and dnd abe fbalbe burnt
Ipbelpme,andas thoes burne that are bebe
of,and catin the Ais Rote herken to pe that

ave farre of ,bowe 3 bate done, andcofpde mp
power pethat be at pande.

Thelpnnersat Sis areafrapd,alonenfear €
fulnesiscome bpon the ppoctites , what ts be
amotge bs, lape thep, that Hall dwell bp the
pie Ae. ear bctotneke abpbetbat
euetlafipngebeats « Hethatleadetha qodlpe pra. ritii.a
ipfe fape J, and {peaketh the tructh. He thatab -Frita

ozreth qapnes wonne bp violence and dilcept:

e that kepeth bps bande that he touche nore-
een dr Pi bps careg tbat be heave
nocounfellagapnit f innocent bloude: whpehe
holbdeth dowone dis epes that he fe none euel. He
it ig that Hall Divell on ppe : whofe Caucgarde
fbalbe ina bultvarke of rockes , to bpm malbe
geué meat, bis waters Hallnotfaple.Thpne
epes pall fethe bpnge inbps glozpe: cuen the
kpnae of the farre countreps Wall theple:tbine
pert tudped fo feare thpnkpnge thug. * Ci pat csta
fhall then become of the {cepbe ¢ of the recepuer
of our orig oe bim thattared our fap
reft boules:‘Chere talt thou not fea people of
a ffraunge tonge to bauefo diffuled a laguage,

Pit map not be wnderftande,nepther fo ttraiige
a din it thalbe perceaucd. There thal Si-
onbefene the beade cptieof ourfolépne featics.

‘There (hall thpneepes fe Jerufalem p glop- D
ous babitactd: * the tabernacle that never Mal wed.t¢.
remoue:whole naples Wall neuer be taken out
rozlde Without ende:whole cozdes cuerpcbone
{hall nener coprupte:fo2 the glozpous matcftpe
of the Lozde ball tbere be prefente amonge vs:


SS we, kenit wpth p: Foz when thou Walt asa place, where fapzebzroderpuergand firea-

isu rcii eene leaue deftropinge, x thouthpfelfe megare,thozotwetbe whpehepallneptherga-

ay tee balt be deffroped. And whenthoucealett from leprotbe,noz great Hpppelaple. * Worp Lord Itii

si iS our inde the Lozd 1s ourlawe geuer. Che
the. D Logde, bane mercp Vp vs:ee haueput Loedeis our kinge, and be dpm felt albe oure

orrip DUE Dole teutkinthe. Beanarmeto fuchearlp: faupoure. Chere are the cozdes fo lapb abzode,


= - — hin NS


gers tpallcepe wytbonut:¢theambafladours of
peace (pall ivepebyptterlpe , Che fkretes are
Watt ther walkethno ma therin. God bath dzo
ken p appopntcmet,the cptiesare calte away,
andméurenothyng regarded, p defolate earth


Sariislpkea toplderneffe: Galan and Char-
melare fpopled of their frutes: etherfoze faith
the Lode, J wpil bp nowe: nowe wpll F bea-
naunred; noe wpll F becraltedas ampah-


that thep can not be better. And’ therfore thep
bauenot T their malt no? fpredabzod there
favle. Thentbere is dealed qreatefpople:pee,
lame men ronne fter the prape. There lpeth
noma thatfapth: gam Cpck, but all euellista-
ken atoap from the people that dwell there.

EC The. rect, chapter.
C Whe lat oefruccpon ofthe Sinagoge m whprhe
the Kpigbome and nicibobe of Chat peeple wag traf
lated to che church æ congregation of chzpe.
aaa Dine pe Heathe ¢ beare,takebede pe JA
7 Apae people. Berke p earth and al $ ig ther:
n Waray ut: thou tobe chpas ¢ all tbat grow-
= ea eth there ppo,foz f Lozd fs angrpe w
all people, bys difplcafure is kpndled again
al tbe multptubde of thé, be bathocitroped thé,
and Delinercd them to the Laughter.op their
flaine halbe catt out, ¢ their bodpes finch that
enép werp billes thalbe wet w the bloude of thé
Sli the farres of beaué hal wat, the Deae
Dall folde togetherlpkea roll, gall the ttartts
therofthall fall iyke asthe leaucs fall, from p
tpneggfpornetrees.Formp mE Kaie i


The Prophecye |


thed in Heaué,¢ Hall immediatly come: dowie
intudgement dpon Jumea, g vpon the people
whpcb $bauecurfedfozmp wengeaunce.
2 Andthe Logdeslwerd Halbe full of bloud.¢
be rufty with the fatnes ¢ bloube of lambes and
goates.wwpth the fatnes of the Kpdneps of we-
thers. Eo: the Lord (hall kylla great offerpnge
> tnBosra,¢ agreat laughter inthe landol Jou
mea. here fpall the Anicognes fall d thé, and
the bulles with the qtauntes, € their lande Mal-
bethozotolp foked with bloude,¢ the geo’
` corupte wpth fatnes. Unto the alfo, D Sion
thalicome the dape of the bengeaunce of God,
# the pere voben thpne otone tudgementes thal
be recompented. And bps houdes thalbe turned
topptche.¢ bigearth to betmitone:¢ there wi
fhalltbelandebe kindled, fo pit thal not be qu
ched Dapenoz npgbt:but Cmoke cuermoze, and
fo fozthtolpe watt. and noma thal qo thozow


itfozener. But pelltcancs, forbes, qreatoules RR


erauts thal bane itin poffchib,¢ dweltherin.


C- fo Godihalfprede out the ipne of delolatts 1,2 A ik


tpi it, wepe it with the toneg of emptines -
Wbé bpuges arecalled bpd, there Halbe none,


all pzpncesthalbe away. Chomes thal gro
in thetr places.neties¢ thpitles intbeir Troge I


boldes,p the Dzagons map Dave their pleature
therin,¢ that thep map be a court fo2 eftrpches.
Chere (hal Fraunge vifures g monfterous bea
fies mete one anotber,¢ the a fe kepe compa:
np together. Chere tall thelamia lpe,g baue

. per lodging. There thal the oule make per nei,
buplde,be there at pome ¢ bzinge fozth bis poge
ones. There Hall the bytes come together,
eche one tobpslpke.

D apts ANEKA E fie of tbe rey € read
it. T bere thal none of thele ebpnges bel pft out,
there Wall not onenozfuche lpke, faple. oz
what bis mouth Chenansiteth, | Teme bat 8
fpzete gather together,o2 fulfpl tp. DHedbathe
caffe the lotfo2 thé, ¢tothole beattes bath pps

panbers veupded plpne:therfoze thole Mall pof-

{cHe the. enberitaunce fro g eneracpo to genera

cpon,and Divell therin fo? cuer,

C The.rrxv.C hapter.
eof thetpme and kpngbome of Chzpite.

pag Cit the delert g wildernes thal reiotce,

(4 ei? walt grounde Halbe glad g flozphe

Kj Pap astbelplip.<pbe thal forpt pleataut

EmA |p g be iopfull.andener begeupng tha

Kes mozeg moze. oz the glozp of Ltbanus,ti

betptpe of Charmel ¢ Haron ret penile

Thete hall knowe the bonoure of f L020, ¢ the

mateftp ofour God.* Aub therfore krengthe p

weake bandes, conforte thefebleknees.

enter), Dave wnto them that are of afearfull perte

Deutera ve oF goodcherc,andfearenot.* Webolde, pour

Godcommeth to take i a Siete pou thal
fethe rewarde Pp Hod gene


Heb filb.


eret th. ®od cometh bps
math.ri.a otone felf,¢ wpl dDelpuer pou.* he hall f ep-
uk roe Oo OF theblpnde belpghtened,and the cares ot p

deaffe opened. CWhenthalltbelame manlecap
pra.vii.a ASAN Hert and tHex dome mans tonge thal geue
sata rie ehankes.* gutbe woploernes alfo there thal wel
a besfpepnge,and floudes of tater in the delert.


eS ee a


The dpe qrounde Hall turne torpuers,andp g
thpettp to fpzpnges of water: Wibereas dza-
vons dwelt afore, there (hall grote fwete Aous
teg and grene tufbps. Chere thalbe fotepathes
fe come shail fa thalbecalled the bolp wap.
Ro vncleane perfonne pall go chozotwc it : foz
the Lozd bpm felfe pall go wpththem,p wap ,
and the thayfarer,102 iqnoraunt thall not erre.
Chere thalbe nolpon,¢ noraupihpnagebeattes zw
ball come therin, noz be there but menredemed
{pall qo there fre and iafe. And the redemed of f
Logo, Jlape:thall conuecte and come to Sion
topth thakefgeupnge. Euerlatpnar iope hall
thep baue pleafure,end gladnes thalbeamonge
them. Andaz foz all fozoweandbhenpneffe, tt
Wall vanppe awape.
—  CEhe.rrrvi:Chapter,
E Ferulalemis befeged bp Sennacherphintbetpme
otkpuge BeseBias,


CETA iS


all them tbat trutt in)
lape to me:WictrufkintheLosdourGed. A
gooblp Gon in Dede: whole ppe places and aul«
tares Hesekia coke Downe and cimaunded Fu
ba æ Jerufalem to wozthpppe onelp befoze t

aulter. Mowe therfore delpner Hottages that
thou rebelle nomoze agaynlt inp Lode p kpng


ut pEtbou wole


of Aflirpans.Anbd J wpll geue p tioothoulade
pozles:pf thon be able to fet men vpõthë. pote
dareft thou reli the power of p imalett ppince,
thatimp Lozbe path powe dareft thou trugetn
thecharettes and bozlemenof appt: Bore: ¢
uer tbpnket thou that Jam come pp hither to
ocftrope thps lande Molt bout the Lozdes wpll ¢
Che Lozdlapde ynto me:go vp into the lande,
that thou mapedefiropeit. Chen lapie Elta=
kin, Sobna g Joab vnto Rablaketh. Speake
to vs thp feruauntes( Wwe prape the) inthe Sis
rpans language fo: tee bnderitandeit tell.
And (peake not to bs in the Je wes toge , teft
the folkte beare whpcblpeth bpithe al. Chen
anliwercd Rablaketh:thpnk pe,p thoking {ent
meto {peake thps onelpe onto the Lozde ce -
< paty


—


Ot Ciaye,


path be not fent me wntotbemalfo eat Ipe vps
the wall’ thep map be copelled toeattetbep2
wne donge, g Ozincke thepz owne tale tb pou?
and Rabiaketh lode ttpt,¢ crped witha londe
Doi In the Jewes tonge,andlapd:nowe take
dede. howe the great kpnie of the Aflirians, ge


C ueth pou warnpnge. Thus fapeth the kpnge:


fap.f.a


 tiiges,¢ anfivered not one 0 020; fo2 p pot: pap


Let not Hesekias dpfccaue pou:fo2 be thal not
* beable to delpuer pou. )ozeouer, let not Peze
Kiagcomfogte pou iu the Lorde: when befapech
the Lode thithoute doubte,thal deféde be, and
{hall not geue over this citic into the bandes of
tbeking of the Bilictang, belenebpmnot. wut
thus fapeth the kpng of Allicta:optapne mp fa-
noure,cnclpne to me,fo mape cuerp manentope
hig bpneparde and fpgtrees, and dzpncke th
water of bis cefterne, onto the tyme J come mp
felfcand bepnge pou into a lave pis lpke pour
owe, Wberinis tbhete ¢ wpne,whiche is both
fowen with feed, ¢ planted with vpnepardes.
Let not vp tie bilceue pou toben be fapetbe
YDntopou:the Lozde Hall delpucr vs.* Bight
the Goods ofthe Getples kepecucrp mans land,
from the power oftbebpnge of the Aflictang.
Uibereis p cod of Hemath eArphad-: Wibere
iS p god of Hepdarauim: And who was ablefo
Detende Samaria out of mp bande! D2 whiche
ofall the Gods of thele landes hath delpuered
thep2z countepe outof mp power isthe Lorde
in dede abletodelpuer Jerufalem From mp had
Tinto this Hexekias mellaungers belde thep2z


cbargen tee Ptbep huld gpuebpm noanfiwerc.

o'came Eliakim Helkiasfonne the pectpdent

Sobna the Scrpbe,and Joab Alphas lone the

fecretozpe, onto Hesektas With rente clothes,

and tolde bpm the wozdeg of Rablakerp
CTDe-rr


Delfe is kpUed of bisone fonnes,


Taaa Hen Desekias berde that.be rente

ilit, r A p BP en & Ms ie a g put on afackclotbe
ERES I (ed | lead land ment into the teple of p Loze
Say E72 El but be (et Deliabirs the pactiber,

oreo te | obna the terpbhe, with the eldek


gona. tija


25


sea trp. b


reftes clothed in xfacke wnto the prophet €-
ape the fone of Bmo3,andtbep laive wnto him:
Thug kapet neseka tia is date of troubie
of plage and blafpbempe:fo2 the chyldzen are
come tothe place ofbpethe:but there ts nopo-
tecr tobapuge them forth. Che Lordetdp God
(no Donbee bath well confpdered the wozdes
ofRablabeth, whome hys Lod p byng of the
Afiprians bathe fent to defpe and blalpheme
the lpupnge God, with [uche wozdes as the
Lozde thy Sodhathbearde ryghte well. And
yet fo2e lpite bp thy paper for the remnaunte
fat arclifte. Bo eferuaunteso€ the bpnge
Hesckias came to Efape. 3
And Clape gaue them thug anftoere, Sap
thus pnto poure Logbde:thus fapeth the Lorde,
a3enot afcaped of the thozdes that thou bate
beardewheretwpth the kynge ofthe Alirtans
feruauntes baue blalphemed me.” ebole, F
wyl caule a winde to go oucrhpm affone ag be


‘trees, F topl! up into the bpath of it,


beatet) the rumouee, he thalgoa apne into big
countepe, there wpll F deftrope bom Wwpthe the
wearde in bps one-lande. x sothe when Rab:


Solrlyr.


laket roneo peranane a bx isk vata Lap (-terbii’s


ingeleege to Lpbnasg, Foz he
bewas departed from Lachpa.- a ee caine
atumoure that Tharakes byng of Ethpoppa
Wascome fortheto warre agapntebpm, And
when thekyngeof Alliria bearde that , betent
otbermeffengers tokinge Pesekiastopth thy
commaundement. ape thus to Hesebfas kpng
of Juda. Let not thy God dpleeaue p, inwpome
thou bopeft. and fapelte: Jerufalem fhall not be
bg the bandes of thekpnge cf A fliriá. -

02100, thou kbnotoeft well bowe the kpryreg'of
Airpa baue bandied all the lande p they baug
fubuerted, and bopeltethou to elcape:talerethe
people of the Gentples (whomemp p2ogenptos
urs Conquered) Delpuered at anpetpime thozotve


a


Donderandep C


thepze Gods *  Asnamelpe, Gosan, Haran, dice rbtt ia


Reseph and thecbpld.en of Eden, wobpcbe were
at Chaflalar. Whereis the kpnge of Hemabh,z
thekpngeofArphad, and thekyng of thecrrpe
ot tei Cua aud Ana rowe when Hea
sehia had receaued the letter of the meflaungers
and reade it, he wente vp into the boule of p 202
be,and opened the letter befoze the Zo23¢e:and

esekia, pzaped befo: the Lode. on bps maner

) Lozde of booltes thou God of Zraell, whpch


dDwellet opon + Cherubin. Chou arte the God, ¢ro.rrb.c


that onelp teod of all&pnagdomes ofthe wold


fo? thou onelp bat «created peaucn and carte, $E"


+ Enclpnethpne care Lozde and con[pder, open
thpnecpes,D Lome and fe, and pondereall the
Wo20c8 pon Sennacherib, whyche bathe fent
bpsembalfage to blalpheme-thelpupnge God.
AtistrueD Lozbde.that the kpnges of Aflprpa
baue conquered all kpngedomes and landes and
catethepzgoddegintbefp:z. Qotvwopthftan-
bprige thole were nogods , but the wo:ckes of
menghandeg, of wood,0? fone, therefore bane
thep easy be them.Delpuecr vs then, D Lorde
oure God,from ý bandeg of Sennacherib, that


allkpngedomes of tbe earth mape knowe, that


thou gnelp artethe Lode. bgp pat Clape f fonne
of Amos fent vnto Hezekia, laping: Chuslap-
eth the Lozb God of Firal. Wher as thou halk
made thy pzaperontoe me, as touchynge Senna
chertb the kpnge of Afipzia thys is the aunlwer
that the Lozde thath geuen, concernpnsze bpm.

Dilppled arte thou,¢ mocked(D daughter Sp
on) be bath thaken bis beade atthe, O daughter


Strufaiem. But thou Spennacherib: x whome «sachate-b
baf thou defped g blafpbemed: Agapit whom enatirrtn,


halfethou lpttcd bp thy bopce, and eralted thy
proudelokesseucn agapntt the bolp one of Fira
cil. Thou wpth chp feruauntes batt blafphemed
the Lozdc, and thus bolet P of thp felfe--¥ wyll
couer thz byemountapnes and (poes of L pba-
nus wpth mp bozfemen. Ad there wpll J tutte
dotocthe bpe Cedzes trees and the fayrelte FEpre


and into f
chefefteofbpstpmber woddes . Pftherebe nd
water, y wpll graucanddzpncke. Anda for


waterg of Defence, Fall dpt them yp wreg
ete


Barney


čete of pune ootte-Dee, hatte thounot dearde and contpdered thp teares, x bebalde, 3 wil put Jonas: tis
| what J paue taken m bande, and bzougbte to Epftenepeares mo tnta thp lpte, and delpuet
|. atic of olde tyme: That fame wpll Jdonowe the and the cptpe allo, from ty bande of the
| cp- Spree of AGpria, £0} wil defende the cptye-


tyes nto beapes of tones. soz tbey: inbabp- *Ano take the this token ofthe Lo20e, tbat nents
ke lame ma, brought in feareand Wwpll do it.as be bath (poken: wWeholde J wpll- .
confounded. Chey palori be p graffe and gre returne the tbabowe of
ne berbes it the fcldclphe t cbeye bpon p boufe lapde oute with the funne andbepng tt ten Dez
toppes that metbereth afoze it e growne Dp. grees babward «So thefunne turnedtett De- socye,r,c
ge, Abnoweth wapes thp pe forth and greesbakward, p which be tag detceded afoxe
” thp commpng pome: pet» andthp madneficae  CAthankeg geupnge which Hesebta
apnit me. Cherfore thy furpoutnes agapnite ipnr of Juna wote when he bad
meand thp pzpoeig come before me.Jwplput bene (pcke and wag recouered.
my epngein thp note, and mp bzpole byt in e ie oe
chatves of the,ani turne Fhe aborte mirens a eee Ge
meteape thou cammett. 3 wpll geuethe alfo ICA AE
ate tarbe D Wa Perann foe ROM A OA tberelidue j ieer4 tbat ia eoe
gatclucde as grou UE DOME eh S OND ENF aire within my iee: Sy alneuct Dp
pear,that tobich frepnget ag: pne of thefame | GADI 4 a pide Fia j
to


ped, pall come together, and the remenaunt cottare Jhane hew of mp Ipfe bp mp finnes:
hall rake roote beneth,¢ bapnge forth teute Be CaS kank cust orbis toebbe.Bewpll
boue. Ior ebe cen tbe gooutofgerulale, wtthppnpuge prkenche make an | ende of mie:
Hs : "H. pee be topll make anende of me tn one ape:
And this tall sk Sa of the Lode of ka ouch J wolde haue Ipued Dnt DLL the sob tiii, b
Ee | = and in one dape thou toplt make an ende orme.
ang. te hall not come into tbis cptie am wall Then ebasten Jlphe a {ialotee, and Ipbes q
Chotenoaroweintoit,there tallnetplde burt agraneandmognedasa Dour. nto. g
it nether thal thepcattedptchesaboutett.Ghe 3 iptt wp mpne eyesinto thebepabte:D Lod
3 aan atape ebe Lampabmane
! + sad - onemedit, 4 tall tberfoze fo longe as 5 tpue
noxeswg * Cus the Angel of the Lorde dent Fostbe cemmember ys optternes of mp pte. D Lode
cc-rtoit- and flue of fbe Afierianshootte,ar.C.lerr.and menmap lpue deponde theye peres:and 4 pil
omae pbo St). and whanmen aroteearlp inp mopntng eau at AUA euen i eyot pearen, J
aue a topfull Ipfe tbat itwas thou p caute- >
| deade bonpes.oo Serinacherpb the & nge of PA fpd takka reta cučlpte tome
| the Afirans beake bp and dweltrat Mintue. wsepolobitteras gal was mp Stifneg, tofoe
| Afterwarde it chaunced,asbe pated inthe t= lö eD Jo belth. Andit hast p plealur to De- `
S irae RITE Sa aae
d tD, that palkcalt all mp tpnnes bebinde thp backe.
on flerdetnto tbelande of Armenpa. And a: xto: Well pap not the, death, dothnot kpati
arbabon bis abe yak tn eina in agnptpe p> thep td at go Doone intotbe g er lps Ne
| : yah gi t „~ praplenot the trueth:but the lpupnge: pee:the “>
| Sean eat tee beatbe:but ia eS ee benetpte pupnge bnowlege toe lve ag 400 this bape:
<n "Gircuemnto bean was Heselkta neg.* Co healeme isthe : ordes woke, ouy daia


| fii vert, ae RAYS a Cpcke vito Death, xand the pro- we wplfpnamp fonges me onfe,al f Da
| {i were PACA ke phet Claie p fone ot Amos, care ofourel Sib Etap aio tate aplatir offi

bey RATI ka, to bpm,and fapde: Thug cont eeg and lape tt wps chefoze,to al it be whole.
ANG RE mannded the Lowe: hag Then fayd Hezekia o what agreat mpacle ts
LAN., S poule mozd2c,fo2 thoumutdye, thig that J thal go np into the boufe ofp Lod


anb paltcnotefcape.  Ehendpeschias tur- SEDE EERIE CDAvLEE. ges
| ned dig face toward the wall, andpeaped nto cones Crei oe compe sen ERER


the Lo:de,q fapde: Remember Lowethat creature bute the embattabours ofigabplon, ,


| aue walked befoze the in tructh and a feds Ree OTe aie &
| fak berte,and baue bone thetbpngtbatisplea Pecar was T x kame tyme, Gerodach ae A
| faunt to the.and besebta weptfoore. Chen peer ladam, Waladamus fonne bing OF iiit refre
| fapde God vnto Etaie:Go andl eakebitobe hee >) wWabplon,{ent letters and pretéteg
| kia: The Lorde God of Dautdthefatherfen Ki ‘Se to pesekia. E02 He vnderifode how
q deth tbe thig wozde: Apane bearde thp peaper, . Eesalato tont ehadben tich, anwas rec
| y


of Efaye,


‘parc Ueredagapne. And wesekia thas glad theref;

25 aan them mai esti of bis trea-

fure of fpluer of golde,of fppces and rootes of

precpous oples.all that was inbis cubberdes

anv treafure boules. There was not one thpng

in Hesckias boufe,and fo thozowouthe all bis
Bpngdom but he let them fe te. |

‘Chencame Clape the prophete to kpng De-

$ehla, and fapde Dnto bpm: Wibat baue the

_ menfapbe and frome whence came thep Ynto

ay the: Hesckia aunfwered, hes came oute ofa

“Carrecountrpe Dnto me out of WBabplon :Efap

fatd what baue theploked vponin thine boule?

Hesckia anlwered : All that ts in mpne Houle

Dauetbep fene-andtberets nothpng inmp trea

fure but 3 (hewedttthem.


€ hen fapde Clape Vuto Hesebia: Minder:
ooh. Lande the wozde of the Lozde of hoftes. * Wee
: boldethe tyme wpll come that enerpe thynge
which is intbpne boufe, andall that thp proge


nitours baue laped Yp in froze bntpil this daye
{Halbecarped to Wabplon, and nothpnge lette
bebpnd.Chuslapetbthe L020: Pea and parte
of thp fones.that come of rhe,and whome thou
qp Walt get Malbe carped bence,and become gel:
~~ Dedchamberlapnes tn the kynge of Wabplons
courte. Chenfapde Hesehtato Clape. Mote
Eod p2ofper his otong counfaple twpiche thou
bakte toldeme. de lapd mozeouer.othat ther
be peace and faptbhfulnes in mp tpme.
@ The.rl. Chapter.


aL She cemmpng of $. Jhon Bapipt, The pseparacion of
the Apofites, The callpng of the Gentples.


A Cee and tell ber:that ber trauaple is at
wa an ende that ber offence tspardoned
= thatthe bath.ceceaucd of the Lo2des bande fuf-


satb tii a Epepent.cozrecepon foz all Der {pnnes. * A botce


sHacck.ia. Crped tn wpldernefie : repare the wape of the
weer 1 0zd¢ in the wploerneiie, make ftrepgbt the
Staivg.c’ path fo: our Govinthedelert.Let al wallepes
beexalted, audeucrp mountapne and bplle be
laped lotve : what fo ig crocked, let it be made
Trepobt andlet the roughe, be made plapnfel-
Zebn,r.b Des.xjozthe qlozp of the Lorde hall appreare,
25 and all Aei Hallat ones fe it, foz tobp: mouth
of the Lozbe bath fpokenie.
‘Che lame vopce {pake. Motwe crpe. Andthe
opbete an{Wwercd: what thal J cries*thatall
Teeter ib eee ls qrafle,and that al the ca bein ther
ewp b OF 18 as the Roure of the felde: Che graffcis wi-
thered, the honre falleth awape. Euen fo is the
cople asgratle,toben the beethe of the Lozve
blotbeth vpå them. Meuerthelefle whether the
arale iebpther,o2 that floure fade awap.* Pee
SC rsrtit.d the Worde of our God endureth for euer. Go vy
Laprterd.b tito the bpebpll( D ton thou that bepnac
Jacob.ib good tpbpnges, Ipit vp thp vopce with power
aD thou preacher Ferutalem. Lyfteit bp with-
out teare, andfape bnto the cyptpes of Juda:
€ wWebolde poure God, beholde : the: Lowe God
{hall come With power,and beare rule with his
aime. Wepolde, he bepnget) bps trealure


Ptalm.t.¢
Siacob.f.¢


| Sol. rivit,
inpth ivin and big foorkes go Before bynt. De
tall fede bps hockelpke an berdeman. ie hau
Gather the a ae a wptbbisarme ard
carpe them in bys bofome, and Malt kpndlp en-
freate thofethatbeare ponce. ney 3
Cibo batbholden the waters inbps Epker
albo bathe meatured beauen wppi bys fpame
and Hath comprehended all the earty of the tool
Detnthepe mealuress Wi bo bath Meeped themo-
unfapnes and bpllesina ballaunce- Wibo pathe
refourmed the mpnde of the Lozder0 to whome
Hath be hetwed his counfell/ xD? wotg of bps s
councell to teach bpm:o2 tobobathe geuen DPNT Sapt.tr.b
onderffandpnge and bath taught bpm the path Kom.Fib
of iudgement Who taughte bym connprg and
pha Unto bpm the wape of vnderftandpnae?
ebold al peopl Careincomparilon ofbpmasa
d20ppe toa buckctiul,andare counted ag the lek
thynge tbat the balaunce wepeth. Pee andthe
Jleg He taketh upas a Verp iptle thynage.Lpba-
nus is not luftpcyent to mpnpkere fpze fox hig of
ferpnge, all the bealtes therof,arcnot pnouch
to Onelacrptpce. Ail people incomparpfon of . Ree
bymarereckened as notbpnge x pfthey becom <
parede Wpth Dpm,leflethbennorbpnas ag it that
isnot. Combomettjen wll pe ipken Gone 02
what fimtlptuderopli pe fet op writo bpm: bal
the cartier make bymacaruedpmage: and pal
the qoldefmpth coner bpintwopthe golde orcate
bpm into a fourme of fpluer plates ¢ sHozeou et,
(pali the pmagemaker(that the poze men which
ts bplpoted mape hauefome thynqe to fet vp al-
fo)teke out echofeatre that ig not rotten, car-
uetberoutanpmage that mouethnot 7 noie
pe nothpnge,D toretches: Dearde pe neuer of tt
Hath itnot bene preached unto pou fincethe bes
pnnpnger Pane pe not bene enfourmed of thyg
p the Eoundacpon of the earth, p Helyereth vps
the cpacle of the wozlde and that all the indvabp:
tours of the wozlde are in comparpfon of ppm,
butas grethoppers: « Chat be redetb out the era, pitta
Heanens as acouerpnges that be ftretcheth tbem JẸ
out.agatentetodwelin: Chat he bsingeth pin
cestonothpng,¢ the Judgesof th: earth tobult
fo that of them tt mape be fapdethrp benot plan
fed no? fotven agapne, nepther thep2 tocke roo-
fed agapne it the earthe. ffo2 allone as be blow-
eth vpon them, thep vobpter and fade away lpke
the trate in awbpzle wpnde. Ta whome
nowe wpll pelpke meg tohome pall F be Ipke
fapeth $ bolp one:Lpfte vp poure epegon bpe,
confpder:«wpo bath made thefethyongeg wbich ist.ctrvg.e
come out bp fo qreateheapessand Hecancall the ©
al bp thepznames.ffozthercignotbynabpabn
fothegreatnes fo bys power, frengbt gmp abr
How map th? Facob A acl or howe map Fira
cll fape.&)p wapes are bpd from the Lozdeand
mp God kuoweth not of mp iugemites. now
etp not‘oz hatte p not heard that the cuerlafti
God fee which mabe all $ cogners off carth
igicther werp norfapnt andy bys topldomecã,
not be compzebendcd: but phe qeuerh Erengtbe
bntop mere power wuto the faynt? Chpldzen
ate werp g tapnt, tthe Fronget men fall.x ut Irtis
wufothem é banethe 1020 beforthepz kihen
y rengthe


cCatlfiil.a
and Cl biit.c
apoca, bdb


€


efap Flitt. b


D yenger. Bebold, J wpl


The P2ropHecpe


firenabte be incteated. Aegles wynges ball

qrowe tpos them when thep cunnie thep pall

not fall:¢ whentbep goo thep thal not be werp
C The.rli. Chapter


«> Ethe goovnes and mercy o E@odtomardethe propte.


k i
ae i iTe a
| E #7, Dehi 4 ie
| : ap ieee ie i Pi 4
et iL. at T bta
Pe pa ae Ee i Gd
Rei poe - Fa i
a T be
A


neraciésfrothe begpnn
which amp
it,¢ dpb feare, and the endes of theearthe, were
abated diewenpe, came bether.cu maer
Horted hisnepabbour, ¢ brother, ¢ bab bem be
rome. The catpeter comforted the goldimpth,
and p golbtmtt Sa ma a ae S erna
do verp wel in tt. Ft Halbe vagd, P we fattetbis
cait wogcke-¢ then thep fattened tt tith naples
that it huldenot be mowed. Wut ë Frael arte
mp feruatit:P Jacob art clecttbou art
Abzaha mp Pansa oan — thd 7 led fro
the endes of the earth bp the bade. Eo? Fcalled
the from farre euen fro amõge the gloztous me
of it, ¢fapbe bnto the: Chon art mp feruaunte.
Jhaue caps) He caft tbe awap*be nota
fraped, to: Jam w tbe. Welt not away as war


foz Jamthp God,to firengthtbe,belpthe,and z
to kepe the w this rpght badeofmine. Webold af
all thep prefpit thebalcome to confufionand A Ey
fhame,etbpne aduerfaries halbedeftroteD and |


Hougbrtonaught. Sop whole teeth attere
the hal not fide the. Chp dettroters thal perih
and fo thall they $ vndertake to make batapla
gapntt p,beas pts not, tasa thing of naught.
Tto? FP Lozd E God pl Frengthenthp epade
de Cuen Jý fape onto the. Stearenot: F wil
Ip p.We not afraied thoutitle woe Jacob,
and thou defppled Flracl:foz J wpll belpe the,
fapeth p Lorde, t ne Mrael thpne ad-
make pa treading cart

anda newe flatle p thou matet theetbe grinder
the mountapnes,andbzpnge pplles to poul
Det. Chou Malt fannechem,¢ the pnd thal ca-


 -tpethem awape,and the wbpzletoinde thal fra


en.prit. ¢


a’ fale tem not* aoumgetoredBoudes n theha


ter fhem. But chou Walt reiotte in ë Lozde,and
thalt delptein prapfpna the De one of Ffrael.

+ Wibenthethyettp € pose te e water q find
none, € whe thep: tonge is ozpe of OC qene
ittbemfapetbthe Loz0: 9 p Godot Jirael fog-


leg% welles in the plapnefeldcs: J turne p wil
bernes to tpuers,¢ the dopelandeto chouttes of
foater. J plantein the wate ounde trees of ce
p2e,bore,mpare,and olpucs. And inthe dpe, J
fet fp2re trees, elmeg g bawthoznes t ether
All shig do Z,ebat hep al together, map te and


feede oF


marke, perceaue ith thepe hartes and cotidze


that the bande of the Lozde maketh thele thpn- JE


ges that the bobp one of Ffraell bapnaeth the
topafle Stande at pour caule(fapeth p 1028.)
and bapnge fozth pour ftrongett gronde faieth
the kynge of Jacob. Let thë bzpnge forth thepe
godbdes,¢ let their gods tel Yg what thal chauce
bereafter:pee let the thewwe vs the thinges pare
paft, tobat thet be:let them declare thé onto Dg:


frõ that the mate take them to berte,and knotwe the


hereafter. Ether thewe vs thinges foz to come,
and tell vs what thalibe done bercafter:fo tall
tve Kno tbe, P pou are qods,do fome thing ether
goodo? bad:fo wpl we othe knowlege fame,
and tel it out. Bebolde,pe are gods of naugdte,
and pour makpngis of naught: pee, abbomp:=
nable is tbe man p bath chofepou.Meucctbheles
x J baue waked wp one fro the nozth,e be tall
come. Andanother frå the ceat, which Mall ca
ppon mp name, thal treade npon princes ag
bpon clape:¢ ag the potter treadeth dotone the


mypze.Uabo declared this fro p begpantng, and.


we topl Bote bim Dz from p old times, F we
wpl cofelle g fape Phe is righbteus. Wut thercts


none p{hewweth oz declaretbany thyng:tberets
pef -


none alfo that beareth pour wozdes.
ig that pal fape to Spo. Webolvde, behold thep
are peclent:¢ to Jerulalé se felfe wpll J geucart
Cuangelifl.wWut when J chltder, there is nota
man among them no? atp that can gene coun:
cell noa when F eramen the that canantwere
one wode. Loo
the tbpnges alfo that tbep take in Danar, pee,
thep:epmages are but rf g vapn thingcs.
— - CAhe.xlét. Chapter.

The commpng of Chrittsand bis baptitme.

eal Ebol

whome F


leane, mp electe in tb
Etym mp fprete, that be mape


tples. De Hall not be an outcrper, nog lpfte bp
bis pope. mis vopce thal not be bearde in the
ftretes. And abo enrede (pal be not breke and
the {mobing flare thal be not quéch but fait ful
and truly thal be geue gudgemét,noz be petpue
noz carefull, that be may reftoze rpg btcou nes
pnito the erth t the gétples allom kepe bis la


toes * oito ibe Godp Lod Onto hp: éfip.pir, b


(euenbe that made the peautg g (mede them a=
bzode, fet fozth p earth w ber increafe: wbich
geucth beath onto p people $ isin it: y prete


tothe poweltherin) 3P Lozde baue called the Zuke.iie'


in righteoutnes,andicd the bp the bade.* Chee
foze wpll Jallo defede the, € geuc poz a coue-


naunt of p people, gto be p xlpgbt ofp Settles sachtr.


that thou mapelf open p etes o theblinde, let
out p peploners from thep2 bondes: the p Cpe ,
indarchenes,out of the Dongeon ouie Cuen d |


amp Lode thisig mp name: x And mp glozp Pir.


foil 3 gene touoneotbher,nether mine honourto
grate (mages. Webold,old ehinges are come to


palle new thpngesdo Fdeclare . AnD o2 ever Ç


thei come, 3 tel pou of the. Sing unto p 10de,


a netoe fonge of thackelgeupng, blowe outbis |


peeaple -


dex thigis mp feruaunt bppon Æ
XS He Soath.tii b
PAY mp foule ig pacpfped, J baue euen paruis
CWE I Me
forth Judgement, andequptic among the Gen enn Atie


wopched are thep, vaine with
f \


— -


-=


a


of Elaye,


piapte from the ende of the wo2ld. Thep that be
pponthe fee, and ali tbat isthecin parte bpm,
the Jlezgallthep p dwl inthbem. Let the wpil
€ dernes wptptbe cpties Ipfte wp thep: vopee, the
towneg allo p thep of Ceder divellin. Let tbem
beglabd $ ipt vponrockes of ftone,andlet them
crpeDownefrom p bpe mountapnes alerpbpnire
glozpe buto the Lobe, ¢magqnpfie bpmamong
the Gentples. Che Lode (hall come fortheas a
©paunt takea fomacke punto bpm lpkea Fre-
heman of barre. He Mall rozeandcrpe, ouer
come bps cnempes. J haue longebolden mp en
ce(lapeth the Lorde) Fhaueben ftpli andrefrap
ned mp felfe, butnowe F wpllerpelvke atraue:
Ipnge Womsit, and atoOnce Mopll J Derope and
Deuoure, ¥ihypl make alk both mountapne and
D pil, dpe bp cuerp qiene thpne that qroweth
thereon. “FZ wpll bape Vp the doudes of water, ¢
Dipneke bp the rpuerg.y wll bepirrethe blpnde
into a @rete, that thep knowe not, lede them in
toafotpath > thep are ignorant in. 3 (ball make


darckeneg ipght befoze them, and tbhelygbt that.


{scroked tobe ffrapht. Chele thpnaes Daue 7
enpo Done nto them endnotfozlaken then » Thep
are falien backe: pee æ let them be apamed ear-
nefily,tbat poope in Zdoles, and lape to fathpo-
ned Pmages:pe are our gods.peare, D pe deafe
men, and tharpen pour {pgbhtes tofe(D peblpn
eget.rd, d DÈ) Wha tebipnde but mp leruaunt/D?2 fo dea
feag mp mefienger, whom Flente vuto them:
Eo: who ig the ruler [o bipnde(fapethep asthe
perfecte mang foblpndas the Lordes fernaunt
‘Thou vuderandelt much, + kepelt nothing, the
Cates are open, g nomen beareth, CheLozdeis
mercpfull nto themfo2z bpsrigtheoutnes fake
Phpswode mpadtebe maguyfped, ¢pzapled:
Sut th ein a ein felues isrobbed ¢ troden
nrt d ote chapned indongeons, € tbepall J
DEFEN: d fave) be ut into preafon boules.* Thep areca
tped atvapecaptpue, gno mandoth lofe them.
Thep be troden onder fote gno ma Doth labour
panie tra t0 betgethe agapn.x26ut tho is be among pou
Tobita &Dat pendieththps,that conlpdecctpit, taker
aarue Ad ff fora warnynae in tpme toceme!s
Siap b xtUbolukercd Jacob be troden nder
> fote, g Blraell to be (popledDpdnot the Lorde?
Wecaule we bauc P eees ae peeve Dane
- bad no delpteto walke inbps wapes, nether be
ne obedpent nto bpslawe. Therefore he athe
poses vponbpm bps wzatbfull opipleature g
ronge battel, tobpebe fr2eth bpmin enerp {poe
pet wll benot tunder e, Hebuenetppim v
pet (pubetb it not into bps berte.
r C Ther H ey ml A NARS bis
ñ DE wë Die ' ]
Wants iapa toicriathieameetes ya owne fake,


atari d nl EK D Alrael faveth thus: + scare not
a Pee) By Fo? 3 bane cedemed P.» J dauczat-
DAFOE terme Led P Dp name thou art mpneoione.
vii petal beech water, J ibpll bew
Dan dia the, P the rong floudes Hhulde not plucke thea
waves And pf thou toalbell thozowe the fpzc, it


båli not buene the , anv tH? Ramme hall not


SEoL. bi j7,


kpndle wpoit the. s€o2, % am ihe Lorde thp Gov,

the bolp cne of #lrael thp fautour.¥ genene

Eo? thp dDelpneraunte, the Woziang, ethe Sabe

es for the:becaule p watt deareinmp pabr, gbè

caule Z {ct bp the, loued the. Jwpil geuc ouet -

all mento: tpe,ahddelpuer vp all people for thp 15

lake fearenot:forx Jam toptbrbe.» F wplbring:-

thp (de frome top Eate, andgathee the tome Star.rit.p

Fher from the Wiehe. 3 wpll (ape tothe Mort): ys

let FOO. And to th: louthe, kepe not backe: hut Sarris. n

bring me mp fonnes from farre,¢ mp Daughters Saia.. s
fromthe endes ofthe wode. Pamely al thofe p

be called aftetmp name. s€02 them J baue crea-

ted ,faflponcd andimadefo2mphonoute. -....

* ing forthe f people, wbpcbis blpnd andpet: :- -.
bathepes,whyche are deaf all though thep hane =" FHM.
eats'* DF all nacpons come in one be gathered epig,
together : whych among them thaldeclare (uch
thpnges, gto tell vs what istacome: Let them

bepnge thep2 weineg To Mall thep be Fre, els let

tbem beare,anbd Cap: it id truth. Pouaremp wpe

nelles( fapetbthe Lo2d) amy feruannt, tobom J
auecbolé,therforebecertpfiedegencmefapth .

ful credence, cofiderx ý Jam be, before whom eta.stee.t

ther was neuer anp Good, etbat there Halbe no 4092-1.

neafter me. Jam, eucn Jam the onelp Lode + g Dreri

belpbeme there is no faupour.¥ geut wacnpng oe 8

Amade whole, Jtaughte pou, when there was

no fraunge God amonge pou. Andthysreco2

mult pe beare poure felues: (taper the Lowde)p

Jam God. Andeuenheam J frome thebegyi \

npnge,andrthere is none p cantake anp thpnge zhanr¢

outofimp bande, F dothe woorcke and tho hall

beabletolet tte Ehuslapeththe Lode theholy

One of Flr aell poure vedemec: * for poure Cake Y érti
bauefent to Babplon, andbroughte Downe the
Grongelt of them. All thep are fugptpue wpih p
Chaldecs that bofte them of thep2 thippes. Eug

J the Lorde pour bolp one whych baut made Ji-

tacll,and Jampourkynge. Chuslaperbp Lob

Natal betbat maketh a toap in the * fee anda Jotti. t
ofepathin p migbtp waters) whpch vziitgeth Sro.rtiii è

forth the chavettes and boztes, the boot and the etap.r:a

power ofwarre, that they mape fall andtrener *>-FF OA

rple and be erfpnete, Ivke as toweis quenched.

Remember not thpnaes of oldr, andreqaide D

tiotbpnge that is palte:X5cbolde, J pall makta

newe thpnge,and thoztelp thal it apere;and Hal

Pou not Bnovwe it F wll make Fretes inthe de-

fert,andrpuers of water inthe wild: tnefie: The

wplde beaftes ball wo2thpppe me: the dragons


P andthe poung Eltriches.*4fo2 3 thal qeue wa: Prahrada


terinthe wploernes,and Freames inthe deferte pela
$ map mene dzincketo mp people, whom Fchole rs
Chps people haue J made fo2 mp lelfe:and thep

Mall thewe fozth my praple. sto? P (Jacob) wol

defEnot cail vpon te, but Ë habdeltean vnlu fe
towarde me D Firar! Chou gauek menot thp

bealfes for burnteofferinges,netherttoet hon

urme wyeh thy facrpfpces. Thou boughtelt me
nodearefppee wyth thy mony, nether pouredee

the fatteof thpfacrptpces Dponme. * Howe prays,
bett, Fhaue not betiechargeable otto theth ofe Gite biie
rpnges,netber greuons in incéce. But thou halt
ladenme wprbtpp (pines, ahd werped ee

N


Opn x WBebholdeal the felo


The Prophecpe


Per a ebpne bhaodlynes,Uibereas J pet, euen Jam


be onlp that for mine ownelelucs fakedDoawap


tbpne offences and forget thp Cprines, fothat 3

{op ll neuer thpneke bpon them. Put me nowe in

remembzaunce (for we wpllreafon together) q

(pete what thou bate foz the,to make the riab-
Sene, iib tcous.x Thy Fyatke Father offended fore, and thp
sui ,tt-b rulers paue fpnnedagapniteme. Thrrfoze 3

ether (ulpéded,o2 flue the chefette princes. opd

curfe Jacob, and gaue slraell into repzote.

The.lritts. Chapter
C Chri prompteth to'pelpuer bps chutche,

=z D beare nove, D Jacob mp ferud-
APS unt,and FJlraell whome 3 baue cho-
“ii fen, togthus fapeth the Lorde, that
AE made the, fatpponed the, and Delped


Erato enot afrapeth, D Jacob mp fernaunt Pp rpade

aru teong whome J bauecholenxJfo2 J pan

cerrota Water Dpon fhedzpe grounde; and rpuers vpon

jorge  thethpettpe « 3 thall pour mp (pete bpon thp

acnceib ferde and mpneencreate pon thy tocke. Thep
hall growetogetherlpke as the graffe, andas
the wpllowes bp the waters {pde.Dne thal fape
Ja mthe Lordes: Another (hall call him felf at-
ter the name of Jacob. The thp2d hall fubfrribe
wrth big bande vnto the Lozd,and geue bimfete
vnder the name of Zlrael.

% bushath the Lorde fpoken, cuentbekpnge
| of Jlraell and bisredemer, the Lode of bookes
pipe xJamtbefp:t andthe lat, and 'wpthout me is
Eia Fiti b thereno God, PEanp belpkeme,letbim cal for p


tipna pat and openlp preiwit and lap ttplapne th


dpo ib.
ELORD befozeme, what bath cbaunted fpnce J appopr-
tedthe people of the wozlde,¢ what Halbe Mot
Ip, 02 vobat (hallcome to paffe, intpmeloinge to
come,let the thew thelethinges.Wenot abathed
nozafraped Jeo: Dauenot Feuer told pou hetber
fo æ warned pou’ Pecan beare me recozde poure
Celues. Js thereanp Godercepte mesozanp ma-
ker that 3 pule not bnowe ppm
Al kernersof pmages are but bapne, and the
karuedpmages that thep loue,cando no good.
Thep mut bearerecozd them felues,that (feing
thep ca nether fe noz onderfiand: thep Malbe cd
founded. «UL bo Dare then make agod, o: fatbp
onan pmage,that of el dato fo2 nothpnae;s
: ine(ppppe of them multe be
Fie bzougbte tocontulpon. And trulp as the wozcke
maftersof themare men, thep thalbe gathered
togetber, thep hall tande, tremble, and be con-
founded one wbypth another. Che fmpth maketh


€fa tid


anare, andtempercth tt wpth bootecooles,and:


fathponeth it wpthe bammers, and wozketh it
wptball the ftrengbte ofhbps armes:pee,fometp
me be is fapnte Fo? Verp bunger, and fothurtpe
that be bat nomene The carpenter (02
mage karuer) taketh meafure of thetpmber, ¢
| Seiya bps lpne: de maketh it pth lome
coloure, beplanetb it, beruleth it,and{quareth
it, and maketh it after the pmage of aman: and
accozpnageto thebetotpe of amanthat it mape
(tande mebetemple. | |
€ Woreouer, be coeth out to hetve doivne Ce-


bre trees, He bengetbe home Elmesand Dkeg ,


2244 the, encnfrom thp motbers-wombe


byspeople:lette all that igbere


weet en reee
pon girael. Chuslapethbthbe Logdepprepemer |
es pet thatfalthponed the Sine the moteta Staite


and takpnae a bolde courage, befeketh oute the
belt tymber of the word. He bpm felfe bath plan
teda pine tre, wbich praine bathlwelled, which


wodde beset foz mento burne. Dftbhps betas -


kethand Sarmeth bpm felfe with al-be maketh
a fp2e of it to babe bzeade. And atterioarde ma
ketha god thereof to honoure it andanpdollto
knele befozeit-Dnepeacebe burnethin the fpze
wyth another pe roteth fepe, tbat be mapeeat
rot pps bellp full:wptbthe thpzde be warmeth
bpm felfe and Capeth Aba. 3am wel harmed. 4


paue beneat the fpze. And of the relpduc be ma-
seth bya God, ean poollfoz bpm lelfe-yekne


ket before tt De imo BE ese t, e p2apetD onto


it,andfapth:delpuerme,fozthou arte mp God. Erarik


xPetmenneptherconfpderno: bnderlfande,


becaute thee) epo capeton thep cannot—


fe:and thepz berteg tbat thep cannot perceaue,
Thep pondze not in thep2 mpndes,fo2 thep bane
nether knowlegenoz pnderilandpnge to thinke


thus. gbaue bzent one peceinthetpze. Jbaueba


ked bzeade opth thecooles thero aad
Fletpetopeb all:anbd eaten it: hall J note of the
refpouemake an abbompnable Zdoll, and fall
Downe befoze arottenpece of wodde: -Chushe


-Dotbh but lefebpslaboure-and bps hert whpehe


ig Dpfceaued doth turnebpmalpde, fo that none
— cant baue afre contcience totpincke map
nor Ferre: re FiF :
nt idol DFacob and Ffrael )fo2 Hou
pvt mp ernannt | mat agg sa )
teffeferue mes D Flraell foz get me nott As for
thyne offences, J bauedzpucn themawape,|pke
the cloudes, and thplpnnes as the mpi: Turne
the agapne pntome. Jo: J baue redemed the,
We gladde pe beaucns:tohome the Lod path
made,fo2 the Lorde bath dealt Sracouity wpth
| eneth bponthe
eatth betopefull . Reiopce pe mountapnes and
wooddes, wpth all thetreeg therof.fozthe Lod
bewe bps mercp


wombe.*¥ the Lozdedo all thypnges mp telfea


lone. 3J onelpfpzeadoute the beauens,and Jon-


ly bauelapdethefoundacpon of thecarthbp mp
neownelelfe .Zoelkrope thetobeng of wptched
andmake the fothlapets Fooles-As forthe wple
FZ turne them backtoarde, and make tbep: cone
npnge foolpihercs. na

Hedothlet vpthe Sede yes bys feruaunte
and fulfplieth thecouncell of bps meflaungers,
Concernpnge Jerufalem helapeth: Ft palbe in
babpted. And of the cptpes of Juda: Thep pal-
be buplded agapne and Jtopli repapzethep2de
caped places: He lapeth tothe qrounde: bedrpe
And J wpll bape vp the water loudes, Helapth
of Cp2us:He fg mp bearde man, fo p be pall tul-
Fril allthpnaes after mp wll: defapthalfo of
Jerufalem:
ít halbe fat grounded.


C Tbe.rlb.Cphapter.


q The delpueraunce ofthe people bp cpus. The comz
mpnge oFChepHt,and callpngeoftheGentples


=


tthalbe builded, andoftpetemple —


la. pliiib


— my wee


ee |


E


of Elaye


assem uslapeth the Lod nto Cyrus bis

Sy Pealanopnted, whom Jhane takenbp the

Re DA tygbt band,tofubdue nacpons befoze

Ecma 1.3 pee Som! bpm. * Jwpll lore p qprbdleof kpnges

and ¥ whl open the gates betozebps face, not

to ut thep2 002¢8.9 Wwpll qo befoze the, emake

the crotked frepabt, J hall bzeaketbebzafendo

res and burm the pron barres,% thal gene the

bpd trealure and the thynge tobych is feceetelp

kept thattbou mapeff knowe fhe the Lode

Godoi Fracl which baue called the bp thp name

Sen.tte.rs any*that fo: Jacob mp feruatites fake, and for

Fleaclmp choten.sfoz 4 called tbe bp name,and

era. riip OAIN the ozeuer thou knetoette me. x Cun
taerem..a J the Lowe before whomethere ig no other:fo

25 wpthout me therisno God:+ ZF haur prepared $

' g2euer thou knewell methat 3 mpabt bebnow

enfromtbe rpfpng of thefonneto p going dow-

ne of thefame,p al is nothpna without me. For

‘Jam the Low, and ther is els none, {lis {tbat

Benea <createy the lpabte edarckenes.+ 3 make peace

+HWDEAFD any trouble:pec eunt y p Lowe Do all hele thin

qeg. Pe beauens from abouedoppe doie, and

iet fhecloudes rayne righteoutnes. The earth o-

peneth ttfel€,and bepnaeth forth bealth,p therbp

rpabteoultes mape Rope. Cuen 3 the Lorde

#ta.rrir.c. bopnge it to pafe. xW be bntohpm that Erp-

Fere roti E nen empeh bps maker,the pottherd with the pot

ixomans.(r ter. Darth theclap to the potter: bat makel

LCEGY eon ror Eby os race for totbpitg. Wo be

onto bpm that ag a Ait pt na ti Sa

tet thoucAnd to bis mother, Wi bp bacelt thou,

hus fapeth the 102d, cuen i one and

mater of Jiraci. Wkeme of thinges foz to come

concernpnae mp fonnes: and put mein rememe

bzaunce as touchpnge the wozckes of mp Dan-

des. J paue madethe carth and created man bp

one: pth mpne bandes baue Y fpecad forthe

j cauen and geuenacommaunDdement fozal the

hootttherof. 3 (hall wakebpm bp wpth rpapee

oulnes,andodze all bps wapes.
AERTS He (hall buplde mp cptie and let dut mp pzp-
‘CMS Conerg,and that nether tor apfte no? rewardeg,
T


fapth the Lode of botes: Chus fapth the lo:d

The occuppersot Eappt. Che marchaunteso
the Hortans and Spabees, Mall come unto the

wpth tepbut,thep Halbe thpne:thep Wall Folow

the and gowpthechepnes bpon thep: fete. Thep

~ (hall fall owne before the,and make fupplpea-

cpon onto the. ffo2 God(wpthoute whom ther

oma ‘rip IS NONE Ober God)ipalbe wpththe.x D howe
~~ paofounde arte thou D Good, thou Gm and Sa
upoure o£ yirael Confounded arethepall, and

put to dpthononre:thep are gone hence together

topth Chame,cuen the makers of Ymages. Wut

Flracll HalbeCaucd inthe Lozde:toppebe ig the
encrlaftpige faluacpon.Vethalnot cometotha

me hi con iets ote tron oni gn

DAR apeth the Lome, euen hep created bean
ii tee wep P rane the earth, tbat fatbioned it,and
fett forth Dedpd not make itfornaught butto
beinbabpted.Euen F the Lode wpthoute who

zron rre there ignone other Fbauenotfpoketi fecrettp,
neptherindarcke places df thecrth. Jt isnottoz
naught,» gfapde yntotpe lene of Jacob fekeme


Sol.rliv.


Jam the Lorde vd chad ‘FZ (peake,declare
thethpnge pis rpgbteous andtruc, gather pou

and come together, Dawe npepethet, pou p are

elcaped oF p people.x Daune thepanp vudcritan- D
dpnge,p {et vp the Fockes of they: Foles, and cia 10.
prap ditto a god, P catindt Helpe themsdzawenpe

come bether,and let them alkecoficel one at ance

ther,and thewe fortp:Wibat is he p tolde this be

fozeroz who (pakeot it euer fence the beginning ee, ppt s

Haucnot Jthe Lod doone it/xiwithout whom "7
there is none other God! ptrue Gode faupour,
and thereig elg none but J/sAnd therfore turne sf rui,
pou bnto me(allpecndes of the earth )p pe map
befaued:fo2 Jam God.and thereisels none, J
Moeare bp mp felfe,outeof mp mouth commethe
the word of rpabtedufnes, ahd that no manmay
turne:*but al knees (hal Dotbebnto me, and all tom.eriie
tonges (hall (ineare bp mp name,fapinge:Tiere PIENA
Ip, inthe Lowe ig mp riabteoutnes and frength
Co him hal men come, but al they that thpncke
[corne of bpm, halbe confoided. And the whole -
fede of Jiraell Halbe tuttptped, aud makethep2
boatlintbe Lode.. ER

C Che, tui. Chapter.
bolatrpeferepraurd, l
; p ld dic bese fd, be Health ere bp |
yoke tabalich aoa isbzoken — a,

D) Fa WODOLe imane Fe A DUTEDEN COR Frese. rt.
B <en the beattes and cattell, to onerlade Fda
n by by) tDci,andtomake thé werp. Thep
Ee Are fonkedowne, q fallen together
fo2 thep mape tot ealethé of thép: burthen, ther

emufttbep qo into captpuptpe. .
erken bute me, houte of Jacob, and alpe
that remapne pet of the boutbolde of 3frael wha
J baue bozne frome poure mothers wombe:and
bzougbtepou bp fromponce bp2th,tpll pe were
groten Jd, tbe hallbearepou pntopour

ateage. Jbauemadepon: J wrtli alfonozpbe B
pou beare pou, and faue pon. x tHbhome wpllpe Eott:
make me lpke ozto wpll pemakeme ea .
quall oz compare me that J tbulde be Ipkebpm,
in fatppon oz Jmage, that Imapebelphe bye ero prrira


€ xDPefoles(nodoubfl)wpll take out fpluer æ yold


oute of poure purfeg and toepe pt,ebpre a gold-

fnypth to makea God of (t,that men mape knele

oowne atid forhpppe itx Pet mutt bebe takë era.tiiitie

onmennes Molders and bogne and fette in bys Barnc.vi,c

tans bemape Fande,and not moue outeof
psplace. Alastbat menthnldecrpe brito bpm

whpcbhe qeueth no anfwere: anddelpuer not the

inantbat calleth ppon ppm frombps trouble.

Conlpder thps well,and beatbamed.Goin-

topoure ownelelues(D perunnagates) Remé

bzethe thpnaestopycb are paft,fpncethebeqyn

npnee of the toozlde,that Jam Hod, andp ther

ig elgo God:pec,and thercisnothpnaelykeon

tome,inthe beqyunpnge ofathpnge % ewe p

ende thereof and J tell befoze,thynges that are

not pet come to patle.<t)p denice Fandeth tead: |

faltly abl pthed and J fulfpl al mp pleaturex y Eros


‘callabpade out off cat ati the man bp whom


mpcouncel albe tulfplled out of far countrpes
ag fone as 3 thpucketo deuplea thynae.3 do it.
GG Peare


ayer. Pbi.b


The Prophecye


|, deare me, Dye that are ofan dpe omacke,
but aree Frott pa brenna ADAN DAPIT EOR
mp rigbteoufneg.3tignot farre,andmp pealth
fall not tarp longeawape.4 wll lape bealtbe
i Spon, and in Ffrael mp glozpe.

C The.clyu. chapter.


Ebe wore of the Hoppe agaynt Wadpion.


Wa Rv E
T: L if


a CPN WDabplon) {pe thou downe tn the
joule {pt bpon the ground, ted in


g SS) Ha pon fbe gronna. ond dea)
Thon (halt nomoze bé called tendze and pleafa-


unt. Bapnge forth the querne:and arpnde mele,
untrue thp brodered beare, put of thp Moves,
make bare thp knees and wade tho2zothetbe wa


aaum dpe tee CPUeES,* Chp pame thalbedplcoucred and


thp pepuptpes balbe fene. oz J wyll aduenge
me of thes topli (pete no mercpe totpeas Fdo
to of ber men, fapeth onreredemer:tobpch scala


“3 led the Lozbde of hoftesthebolp one of Ffraell


Dpt pil bolde thp tounge and et tbeinto
fome Datckecozner, (D daughter Caldea ) foz
thou balt nomoze becalled ladpe of kingdomeg
3 thas fo wrathe wth mp people, that J pu-


#70, rri.bsnpibed mpne enherptaunce, and gauethem into
Jeem. tb. thp potver.zPeuertpelefle,p (hewdelke thbemno


mercy, but cuenthe Verp aged men of them bpd
dc thou oppreflerpght fore with thp poke and
thou thoughtell thug: y thalbe labye fez ever.

And belpde all ý, thou halke not reqarded there


thpnges.netheccememb2ed what was the ende
‘Of citie Hevutalem Beare nowe thesfoze,thon


wplful,p {pttett (o carelefle,and {peakett thug


ap poig tntopne rte:* Jamaloneand wpthoute me is


Panic e't 4 Pamelp,sopddotobeade and delolacp


etenonc: 3 hall never be wpddowe noz deld-


‘lafcagapite.And pet both thefe thynges Malco


me to p Dpona Dape inthe twpnckling re e
jon. Thep
Mall npabtelp fall vponthe, foztbe multptude
of toptches,and fozthe great beapeofthp coun


evans e arer feor thou balt trufedinthp wpckedrez


alt fapd:* Romanfeethme. Thpneowne
wpledomeand cunnpng batbopiceaucd the. Fn
that thou haft fapbe: Jam alone, and wptboue
me there tsnone.Cperefoze (pall trouble come
bpon the and thon Walt not know from whence


-~ tthallarpfe.<t)picbete pall fal vposthe which


thou thaltnot beableto putof.Atodapne vtter
befFruccion thal comebpontbe o2 ence ý beware
foie qo to Chpnecouniurers, andto the mul


_ tptude of thy wpeches(wpth whome thou batte


# i


werped thp Telte from tpp poutbe pEthepmape
belpe theoz fengi P- Tponpaf byriertahad
manp councels of them-fo let the beauen afers
andthe bepolders cf Farres,and mocne prophe-
tes come on note and Delpuer the:pee, and lette
them thewe when thelethpnaes challcome Yp-
pou the. Sehoto,they Halbe lpbe rave, which
beara tibet ae p io nian map rpd it foz
tbe vebeminence of the flame. And pet it qeueth
nofinders to warme aman bp.nozcleare fp2eto


fry hus ace tbey wtb thon thou batwe thu


epid th : And tug are thy marcheaunteg
that bauc benc wpththe from thy youth: Enerp


Sy) Cifasfo2the(Ddaughtec:thouvp2: |


one pat taken bps owne Wap and none ofthem ~ f


| ; 9. r M


CAAS eS MCOE the Lorde, and beare wptnefe
bp the God of Araell(but not wp th teuthe and


God of Fr ael, # w bote @fape. li, c,


es i Sete FERE
nges that Jtbewed pou euer fence


begpnnphg,netoe and leceetet |
Buotvelte not of, * And fome Bone nowe, not of errepor
olde tpme, whereof thou nener beardefte before,
the Dive ANE LAK wal ee cant not fap
Webolde ¥knethe of them:eHozeouer , epere be
fome wherot ë halt nether beard noz knowen,ne
thee banethep bencopened onto. thpneeares a-
foze tyme, Eo? 9 knewe that thou wolvet malp
cpontip offtnde,therctoze bane Fralled Patran,
aveffoure,enen fr motders wibe. Penerthe
e8,fo2 mpnenames take, ZF worlbwpepdiawe °
mp wath and ft thalbefop mpnedonours fake
pl Jpacpentlp forbeare the and rote the not out
Web Hort ret de d tie etmotaslpluct eront:
* J bauecbotenthetnthefpze of afilpccpon,and |
that onlpformpne owne fake:pee,xeuen for mp <tave.sii.a
ne tone take wpll J bo thysozels,wobat dopio Hs. band
noure Wolbe thepdo tomp name? Herken vnto | —
ine, D Jacob and Feael whom Fhaue called,

Jam euenhe thatis, 4 am the tp2tt and f latt
Sp bandebath lapde f Foundacyon ofthe earth q
and mp rpgbe bande bath {panned ouer the bea=
vens.Afoone as Feall them thep are tbere,Ga-
thee pou altogetberand berken: whiche ot pon-
ber goddes ae declared thys The Lode hath
& lone ynto byth,and be thal pertourme bys wil
agapntt Babel anddeclarehpg power agapnth
the Chaldees. J mp felfe alone euen Y bauetold
p tps before: Dee, Fdpdcall bpm: and byna
JPmtotb:and be tall make bps wapes prolpe-
tous,¢ omenpeand beare ths: baue Flpoken
anpe thpnge darckelpe’, fencethe begrrnpnaes
when a thpugebegpnnethAam ther. Wiherfore
the Lode God e bys {pzete bath fente me. And
ancot Wrath A anbe or ie eee

HTAC amti orde tpp God: Ippe i
teacbe the + profptable thpngeg , and leade LE Po.iib
tbe @pmo.itib


of Eflaye,


Derrbill.e¢he thp wape, that thou (huldelt go. tD that
Aelia ths mp comatidementes, then i
thy welthpnes ben as the ater reame and thp
rpabteoulnes as the wanes flowprig inthe tee.
D ` Thy Tede allo bad ben lyke as p lande inp lee,
and the frupte of thp bodp Ipke p grawell Rones
therof. Pig name thuldenct be rooted out: no?
zerem. lia helFroped befoze me, x60 awap from Wabplon,
‘eral Ave fromthe Caldecs, with a merp vopce fpeake
of this, Declare it abzode, and qo Forth wnto the
chde of the worlde, lape pe: Che Lorde dath te-
demed his fernaunt Jacob, that thep Cufferrd no
thurte, be ledde them thozotve ti A gaitariek
caufed the waters to flowe out wnfo them from
gro.'rbtib ont of the rocke. * Heclauetherocke afonder, €
Hum-FF-? the Mater quihed out. t As for the vngodlp, they
Stap.1oie Hane no peace, fapth the Lorde:


C The.rlic. Chapter.


Cohet H ll gather togpt her all nacpons bethep
neuer fo farri of.


E Fleg, berken Unto me, ¢ take bede
A \Co/Arive people from farre- Che Lozde bath
MWA called me fro mp bpzthe, and made
etape.ti.c. DA Keno) nentcy on of mp name fro mp mothers
ee he “worrbe: be x bath made mp mouth
tepbe.bi.c tlphe a Harpe werde Dnder the thadotoe of pis
bande bath be defended me,and bpdde me in bis
qupuer as a qood arowe, and fapde nto me.
boroto Shou arte mp Ceruaunt Flracl, +3 wyll be po-
noured inthe. Chen anlwered Y: Fhaue lo— mp
labour, J baue {pent mp trength in payne.

5 reucrthelele J wpll compe mp cauleand m
woke Dnto the Lode mp God. Andnotv faptt
the Lode, enen be that falbponed me fro mp mo
thers wombe to be his {eruaunte, that 7 map
b2pnge Jacob agapn onto bpm: hotbeit Firaell
Sopll rot be gathered wnb bpm agapn. Juwwhole

3 fpabt Jam great whiche allo ts mp Lo20¥, mp
God, gmp Hrengthp.And he fap: itis butalmal
thynee that thou arte mp feruaunt, to lee up the
kpnreddeg OF Jacob, gto reftoze the Detruction

Erev Mibe OF Ifrael, gto Banc made the thetpaht of the
Zcte itie Oentples, that thou mapt be mp belth nto the
ende of the worde.
<Hozeouer,thuslapth the Lorde the redemer
and holp one of {lracl: bpcaute of the abborrpng
g delpifpng amonge the Gentples,concernpnge
the feruaunt of all them that beare rule.tkpnges
and papnces (hall fe and arpfe and woztbpp,byp-
caufe of the Lozbde that is fapthfull: and bycanfe
of the bolp one of Frael, whiche bath chofen the.
ico; PiS And thus fapth the Lorde: x Ju the tyme accep-
arp tiit.a ted Pate J berde the,andin the dape of faluacion
eta, rida haue J bhelpedthe. +7 wpll prelerue theg make
the to be the attonement of the people, tbat thou
mapt belpe Dp the carth agapne : and pollee
zacbar.ir.b aqapne the Delolate herptages. « Chat thou
duke. mapik lape to the pzpfonerg : go forth, and to
thei that are inDarcknes, come into the lpabt,
thep {pall fede in thebye toapes, and gette thep?
apoca bte PAlture nall bye places. |
x Thep Hall nepther hunger no: thur, beate
no: funne thal not burt them. Forde fauourety
tbem, thal leade thë, g gine She dean ofp {pzing
of Wels. wpl make wapes bpo al mp moütap-


neg aiid mp foote pathes albe exalted. And be
holde they thall come from farre:lo, lome frome
the nozth wet, fome fromthe lande of Sinps,
whpcb isin the fouthxiRetopce peheauens: and D
fpngepzaples,thou earth .Calke of tope pe ppl- Errente
e9.fo2 © od hath comfo2ted bys people, and wpl
bauemercpe bpon bps that be introuble. ERN
But Stonlapd,*Godhath forfake,¢ mplord ~ i
bath fozgottë me Uil a wpfe fozgetp chplde of
er wombe, not pptiethe lionne whom the hath
ome’ And though he do fozget.pet wpll Jnot
forget the. eholoe, J hanethepttenthe vpypon
mp hades, thp walles are ever itimp fight. Thep
make bal tobuplode the bpagapne. As for thore
ý oucethzewe the, emade the walte,thep halde
a from the.xLpfte bp thpne epes,¢looke a= Eron.rwa;
out the:altbele qather them together cometo <taresrisa
the.As tralpaga lpue(fapth the mee (balte
puttbem all Dponthe:as anapperell, and gp:de
thé tothe asabzpde doth ber Femels.As fo: thp
lande ý lpeth delolate walked ¢delkroped, tt hal
be tonarotve Foz them ý thal dwel init. And thep
that woldDeuoure the,thep balbe farre awape,
fhenp ae whom p bare thal beyng forth vn-
the pall lape tn thpne eave: thps place is te na-
rowe,geue placetbat J mapehanerowme-Ché
halt p thpncke bp thp {elfe:Wi bo bath brqotten
me thelerfeinge Jam baré alone,acaptpue gan
outcalks And he bath nospihed thé vp fo: me?
Jam delolate € alone, but fd whéce come thefe
And therfore thus {apth p 102d Gon: wWebold H
E Dpi retche out mpne bande to the Gentples
andlet bp mp token to thepeople. Thep tall
bepig the thp fonnes inthep2 lappes: and carpe
thy Doughters Dnto the pon they? (boulders.
ftorkpnges Halbe thy nurlpna fathers.¢ Que
nes thalbe thp nutipna mothers. Thep thal fal
befoze the with thep? faces flat på the earth: €
lycke Ht duff of, thy feete:that thou mapefte
knowe Dow that Fam the Lorde. * and whofo
utteth bis trui inme all not be confounded.
bo {popled the geau of bis pzapro: who ta
keth the pzifoner from the mpabtper And thers
foze thus fapth the Lozde: © be prifoners thalbe
taken from the gpaunt : and the fpople delpue-
red from the violent, for 3 wll mapntapne thp G
caule agapnite thyne aduerfaryes, and faue thp
fonnes. And fopl fede thpne enempes with theit
owne fet, and make them dapnk of their owne
bloude,as offwctefopne. Andall felhethall
knowe, Jacob, that Jam the Loze, thy fas
upour, hy noble redemer,


| € Tbe.l. Chapter:
Che Hewes are repzoued,and alfo called.

pang Hus fapth the Lod: xwhere is the bylof A
by eg pour mothers deuozcemeét ý 3 fent her az Atte
Land WAP o? Whois the vlurerto who F folde |
Our * Debolde,foz poure owne offences are pe Staretir.e

olde, g peni of poure traniqreffton, ig poure
mother fozlake. Fo? why told nomatirecepue
me, when 3 came ¢ € when ¥ called, noma gane
meaunlwere. x¥smp bande tpoztened, that it ‘hanes
Invade not Delpe ’ o: Daue Anot power to delp- tape iris
uctslOzat a worde J Ozinke bp tbe fee, xg of wa FErri.a
ter Routes mate Dave lande: fo that foz want 2°" HP

OG... of water


The Brophecype


of fhater thefpiheeosrupteand bye foztiuite.
gropu,t.a. * AS Foz beaun, J cloth with tarcknep and put
ag it toere a fache ppon tt: iri
B The Lod God bath qenenmea wel learned
ticos tonge, xlo that Jcáncomtozt them whpche are
froubled:pec,and that in due fealon, De waken-
PE edee alela a mame r de

_,, mthemonpnge, Jfape:be wpl wake mpne ear
een dire {J mpabt berken as tothe (cole malkers.*+ Che
mat.rrot. g OWE Godhath opened myne cave, therforecan
Lube, pr. J notlapenape:no2 wopebozatoe mp felfe :+but
© Joffer mp backe puto thefmpters.and mp che-
Aer vita Bes tothenippers. x Jturnenot mp face frome
~"" hame and Cppttprge: and the Lagde God Mall
belpe me therefoze pall Jnot beconfounded s,

baue berdencd mpfacelpkea fipnte Foone te d
amfure that 3 thallnot come toconfulpon e
igat band that tultpfpeth me, who wpll then go
fopth me tolawes Let vs (bande oncagapntt a:
sxzom,diit.o Nother:pE there be any that wpllreafon With me
let bymcome bere forth tome.*25ebold, f Lod
pame g 0d fandeth bp Ee ishetben that can co
RECH Dempnerloo,xthep albe lpke as an olde clothe
themoththalleatetbembp. |
Theretoze, whole fearcththe Lorde amonge

pou,let bpm pearethe vopee of bys icrnaunte.
WAbolo Walketh in batckenes,and nolpabe typ:
pet bpm, let bpm put ppe trulinthe name
ofthe Lozbe,¢bolde bpm.bp bys God, Wut cake
cde,peallkpndleatpecot the truth of O0d,¢
fteare bp the cooles,walke on inthe gipiterpng
of pour otne fpze and in the cooles that pe paue
kpndled. Chpscommeth onto pou fro mp pand
namelp that pe ae: cinflozowe.
e-li.Chapte


x j ter. t j
@Confolacpon and ia yanina bnto the fapthfull,


EREE] WF int we hoinat ahi bd
a (a4 E peareewen,and to the graue tober
waSe.prlas Mio) out pearedpaged.Confpder * Abra
nomi. a Ham pourefatherand Sara that barepou:bow
teen FS 5+ Fcalled bpm alone,and blefled bpom gud encre
cobpmn. Cherfore al the Lozde comtoite Sp-
On,andrepap2e all herdecape, mabpnge Derde-
{ert a8 a paradpce:and ber vopldernes ag the gar
den of the Lozbde.)p2tb and iope thalbe founde

tbere thanfgeupnggtbe vopce of pavle.
atare,t.a. DauCrelpecte tnto me then, D mp people both
~"" bpgbandloweandlape thpnecareto me * foza
lathe ani ozdpnatice thal go fozthfrome,tolpgd
tenthe Gentples.3t is beard bp that mp Dealth
op and mp rpabteoulties pall qo forth and the peo
ple halbe o2d2ed with mpne arme. Che plandes
that be mthe Gentples,@all hoopemme, ¢ put
tyep2trult inmpnebarme.Lpft vp pourepes to
Salme Warde beauen,and loke bpon the earth benethe.
mae rrio e Eo p heauens (pal vanpih awap lpke fmoke
ed snnebecarthe pall ware oldelpke aclothe, and
theptbato well therinthall perp tbe tu lpbe ma-
ner.25ut mp faluacpon pal endure foz ener, and


myrpabteontnefie (all not ceatle. Herken Dito |
Fere.rrri.e mepe paur ae? lian yt vetoes on N


Sare X people thatxbearet mp lawe in


tfecrenot the curfeofmen:benotafrapedol © AE


thepzblatphempes,and reuplpnires + For woz PAd»
meg and motbesthall'eate them wplphecloth g
wWoll.2Sutmprpgbhteontnes al endure foz ence
and mp faupnge bealtb from generacponfoge-
neracpon. Wake bp, wake bp,and be frong.<D
thou arme of the Lord, wake vp:lpkeagintpme
palt euer and fence the wolde beganne: tarii.»
 *Artnotthou thefamearme,that baf Wonn gropinis,
ded the poude Eqppte.«€ bedon tbe Dagonin
peces.: pinat hale ke adn | bach pet Ha
thebepeot the fee, whyche batt made plapne the
fee groundep the delpucred mpabt qo thozow ¢
Therforetheredemed ofthe Lorde (hall turnea
apne,e come forth iope trnto Spon, ther to en- x
Dure Forener. That mpzep and qladnes miahe serpie.t.o
betopth them, that fozotve and wWompabt Refr
them.xDee, J, Jameuenhe,p tnallthpnazes ge irents
ueth pou contigs oa tai bat art thou then,that
fearelt a mafa man:the chplde of man, WDP oo
xqorthatpayeasdoth the flour And forgettell iorta.
the Lozdethatmabdetbe.tbat tpzcdoutthbebea-
uens and lapde the foundacpons of the earth .

wut thou arte cuer afraped forthe lpabte of œŒ
aie ba Ah igreadpe todo harme
Hber 8 the wrath of the oppeflours Chetpme
commeth on fat wpen the pepfoner thalbe low: .
icd and peall not dpetutbedongeon, nozpet
beconfumedbp fampihement,+¥ am thp Lore egat.vtii.a
thy God(that make p lee to be Miland torage:) Enron.
opole name isthe Lode of hookess pane put Erri e
mp thozdes in thy mouth, and Daue defended the
inthe hadoweos mp bande:that J mapeplante
the þeaueng and lape the foundacponofp carth
and lape tnta Spon:thou arte mp people.

Aibake awake, and tand


mde bp. D Jerufalem, F
thou that from the bande of the Lode bat dzen ie
Kenout*the cup of bps wrathe:thou that alte ger re og
{upped of and tucke out the bzeqaes of bis Dead
Ipe cupneto the bottome.jtozamonge al the [=
nes whome Debathe beqotten,therets not one p
mape bolde it pp,and not one fo leadeit by the
bande ofall the tonnes that bebath no2zpiped.
wWoththele thpnages are happened wnto thc, but
who istonpe toy (t/Pee,deltruccpon:waftpnge,
bunger and frocacd but who wyl comfozte thes
‘Coby tonnes Ipe comfoztelefie atthe beade of cue cs
rpe firetelpkeataken benpfon , and are full of
the terepble wath ofthe Lozde,and punpipmee
of thy God. And therfeze, thou milerable tdo
ken(bowbeit not wpth wine, bear trs: Thus
fapth the Lozde:thp Lorde, God p defender of
bps people: 2Bebolde: 3 wpl take the ombring
cuppe onte of thp bande euen the cuppe with the
Dreqaesof mp wrath:that from hécefozth,thou
Walt neuer depncke it moze, but J vopll put ft in
to thep2 bande that trouble the: wbych bane fpo
ken to thptoule, Coupe bowne,that we mape go
ouer the,andthoulapdelt thp bodpenen wyth p
gtounde,and as the irete fo ge bpon.
The lit. Chapter
E Spon yp A,
ai put on thpponelie rapmente,D Jeru= a
eA lalem,thoubslpecptype . wo: from thyg


=“) time fogth:tbere (hal no bncpzcumctled
nog


ja


bf faye,


no? Ducleane perfone come inthe. hake the fro

the duft:arpie and kande pp, D Ferulale:luk

_- But ehpneckefromthebond D P captiuedaugh
outa. bid ter Spon fo: thus fapth the Lozde,* peare fold
> foz nauabe,tbherfoze pall pe beredemed alfo w-
outanp monpe.fto2 thus fapeth the Lowe God
*@)p people wente dolne afore tyme into E-


meneribl a .
s.a Ppt there to be Fraungers,tand the bpnge of
wit egaa Apzian eppreHRDIDE WEDO anp cante nb


_. hofve what profpteisit tome( faptptheLo2de)
that mp people ts frelp caried awape, g brought
3 into ade bp thep2 rulers, x Pal Biren bai
ae FEE © tpl blatphemed fapth the Loder 25ut that mp
"~. people mape knowe mp name, therfore Flap in

` ‘§hat dave thep thallknowe tt,thatF ain de that
fu, tia: Do peake Flape euch F.* Dbotve bewtpful are
Moman.F.c the Fetc ofthe ambafladour .p bipngeth themel
faqe fromthe mountapre,§ poclapmethpeace

tbat bapngeto good tpòpnaecs , and preachethe
beltb.¢lapeth nto Spon-thp Goditsthe kpng

.. Shp watchemen Hal lpte vp thep2 vopce:wopth

~- lond bopce thal thep preach of bym fo? thep thal
canon ie Xe bpm peclent,when p Lozd thal conuert Hið
Ionic ISe glad wptbthanfaeupnge.D thou velo-
crap. pupe late Jerufalem. retopce together:foztheLozde


hath comfo2ted his people,be bath Delpucred Je t


_. rulalem.@be Lo2de bathe mane bare bys polpe


pla.rcoit atpleg xandall the cnbdes of the cartp bath len
sico: bt, cfaupnae bealthof our Godt Awape awape, g
pou out from thence,¢ touchno bncleane thpug
Gooutfromamonge luche. And be cleane that
beare the veffelg of the Lorde. Woz pe (hall not ef
Fero tid cane bp runnpnge nog bp Elpinge atoape-butxp
Lo2de (hall yo befoze pou andthe Gad of Fira-
ell Hall gather fe together.
Wehold,mpferuaunt thal deale wplely ther
D Fore pall be be magnytped, exalted, and greatly
_ pononred. Lpke as fhemultptude Mall wondze
Dpon bpm, becaule bps face Halbefodefourmed
erap wire, WOME as a mans face,bps*berwtp lpkeno ma
mare Enen fo thallthe multptude of p Gentples loke


les anal De croes ofe cartat en b


tntobpm andkpnges halut they: mouthes E


fapta before bpmi* feorthep tbatbauenotbenetoldof i
em pom hal fechpm,andtbep that beardnotbpng Ia
of bpm (pal bebolde bpm.
€ The.liii. Chapter. .
CPeptophecreth eudentlp of the Papo of our S aup
sur zelus Chiti. |
ee mmr) Cit wmbohathxqeuen credenceinto the
sthon. site. ma? dealt hing that we bane bearde: D? ta wha


Wa ruis the arme of the Lode knowen: Fo?
S emet he Dyd qrowe before the Lozdelpke as
Sape.tit.c abzaunchand as arote inaDspe qrounde, * He
hath netber betwtpe no? fauonre. When woe thal

loke bpon bpm there albero fapznes: we Mall
Hebit0,6# Hane no lut onto bpm. Deis dplppled ¢abhoz
revofmen.beis(uchbamanas is fulloffozowee

a ® aghath good expetpence of infppmitics: We pa
ne tekenned bpm morier metra out Faces from

o> ppm:pee, be Sas dpfppted and thefo2re we regar
mat.vid.d Dedhimnot, Potoebeitx he onelp hath taken on
Peterdi Hon our infirmities, ¢ borne our paynes.Pctwe
i corp, pi, e DPD fudge Op, as thoughe he were plaged and
gai downe of God:and punphed* topereas pe


So l, lt


(notwpthfandpnye ina Wounded for oureof-
Fences,and spittin Foz our topckednes. othe
chaftelment ofoure peace tas lapde bponbpm, -
and PAA ge frppes toe are healed.
*ASfor ds, we baie qooneall affrape(ipke PT «Fi
fhepe )everp one hath turned bys owne wape.
wut the Lorde bath beapedtogether vpon bar
P iniquiticof bg al efuffredopolence and wag
f£uell intreatedD,and Dpd not pet open bis mouth
RAN al aga tbepetobe apne, pet Hall . iiid
bebeas tpllaga lambe before the bearer and aore
not open bys mouthe.eloas had awape frome ts.0100
pepfon:bps cante not beardeand wprbout anpe ="
ndgemente: Whole qeneracpon pet toho mape
nombzerbe was cut of fromthe ground of the lp
Ate ‘Sebpch punpihemente dpd go vponhpm,
foz thetranfarefipon of mp people, whtch in deve
bad deferned thagpunitpment.xbisqraue was inate
Geuenhymibpehthecondempned,ardwptbthe —__—
rpcheman at hys deathxUihereas hedyd neuer corbe
bpoplenceno2 Dinpabtnepther hath therebenca PETS
nyd fceattulnes in bpg month. ' D
"x Pet bath tt pleated the Lowe thug to burte Fointii.
bpm wptbplageg andto fmptebpn pth inip} Roma. vid
mpte tbat when be had made bps foule an ofe-
renge foz fpnne be mpabt felonge laftyna feed.
ndtbps deupceofthe Lorde wall pzolpere in
Ps hande.W pth trauell and labonrcof bps fou
leall beoptapnefeute and betbalbefatplfped =.
*bp the knotblege of bpm whych is mp rpabte. Memassite
ous feruaunt:be hal tuftpEpethe multptude,fo2
be thal beare awape thep2 (ynnes. Cherfore wit
4 gene bpm the muleptnde fór bys parte,and be
{hal Deupde thefpople opth f tronget, vecante
Degeuethouer pps fouleto death,* And isrebe aah ihri
ned amonce the trangreffours.tobpebnenerthe Tukrriy,
lelle bath taken atwape the(pnnes of the multp=
tude,and made intercefipon [foz the mplooers,
| C Che lilt, Chapter.
€ She create ompnpon of hrpi: The inopsnacpert


OF God endureth buta Moztefpace, :
Uerlaltpnge, ib tefp but brs mercpe ist:


Fee E glad nowe,*thou baren that bea satatt.b:
W ret not triope, pice, and be nerpe Lubert
m ae thou thatartenot pth chplde: Foz
Zam A the detolate batbmo chpldzen then
actu the marpedtopfe, fapeth the Lowe.
ke thp tentes wpder,and {p2ede out the ban
gpnaes ofthpne Se S mat not, lap forth-
tbp co2des , and make fate thp Rakes, fo: thou
fhalte be multpplyed on therpabtelpde and on
tbe lefte, and thy feede pall Daue speGentples
fi poffefiie and dwel tn the delolate cities eare ..
tiof,toz thou Malt not be confounded: Wetiot a= 2S
(amed, fo: thou Malte not come to confulpon.
ee tbou alte forget the Mame ofthp poutbhg
alte not remember the dbpipcnoure of thp wp
Dowheade. for be that made the thalbethplo2 . ~~
xand bulbande(wbolehame tsttbe Lomeo ho Saker
tes jand töp redemer thalbe cuen the bolye ote tt.coz.ri.0
OF Flcael,the Lorde of themmpole world. oz the trbuie
Lo2zdbathcalled the bcpna as adefolate fotota
full woman, and asa pouge wpe that bathbzo
kenber wedlockefapththp Gop. -eitilt
xAlptle obple haue J forfaken the, but toyed pralrrirs
great mercpfulheg Hall J take the ponto me,
GG tit Mhu


The Prophecye


C-ben 3 wagangepe, J bpi mp Face From p fo?

a iptle Ceafou,but chozowe enerlatpngemercpe

ecenig.» PAUC J pardoned the, Capth the Loze thp rede-

d mier xandthpg ig wnto me as the water of Roe,

| fo2lpkeas 3 bauefwome pF wpll not bepnge

Orebta, the water of Oe anp moze vponthe toozldexto

baue 3 lworne that 4 toll nenerbe angep wpth

the,nOzrep2oue the: Che mountapnes thall re-

moue,and the bplies pall fall Dotone: but mp lo-

upnge yndnes (hall not moue andthe bonde of

my peace (ball not fal Downe from the,Capth the

Lowe thy mercpfulllouer.webolbe, thou pooze

oucrmbelmed with tempeftand«wprbout com

forte: ¥ tpl make thp twalles of precious (ones

and Aiora g betel megs reyr ppoow

eg of Chapttall, thy qates of fpne cleare toone,
sp. andall tbp bozderg of pleafaunt kones. f

Laoi X Chpchplozen tha allbetaugbtof gop, t]

Hden.joie. opl geuetbem plenteouhregofpeace. jnrpabte

- gufnes thalt ¢ be groñdro, g befarrefco oppzel-

Ciä Eo: p which p nede not to be afrated nether

fo: bpnderaunce, for it pall not come npe p.25-

bold thealeaunt p wasg farre fro me, Hall dwel


Siap bib


with tbeandbep iopnetbbattel agapnt p tbat S


perpibe. Wepbole, J make thefmpth Pp bloweth
the cooles in the fpze,¢ be maketh a weape aftee
bis bandp worck. F make allo the water tode-
ffrope:but all tbe weapons p are mabe agapnit

Lukes. © the.tall not pzofpere. +J as fozalltanges ý
(pal relpit thein indgememét,p Malt ouercome
them:and condempne them. Thys is the berpta
me of the Loydes feruauntes,and thepzrpgbteos
ufnes commeth of melapth the Lode,


aeuo ¥ Hood tp,and pe phaueno monpe. Come bp
AE dawn that pe mape baue to eate. Come bpe


aceit d, Tone, x fo? J fpli make an euerlattpnge coue-


fy
one of ¥fracll,whyche qlozptped the. Seket


people Ger


andmp theugbtes pones.* And ipheas he tay Desr
ite and nowe commeth downefrom beauen,a
returneth not tp epee agapne but tatercththe
earth,maketh itfrptinllandgrene,pitmapege |
ue come tnto tpe fower,andbeeadetoppm that .
eatetb, S0 tbe wo:deallothatcommeth out of
mp mouth:Wall not turne agapne vopde tnta
me,but fpall accomplpthe mp topll and pzofpere
in spe topnge wherid J fende it. |
blo pall pe qo foti wpth iope, and be led
wpth peace, Che mountapnes ¢ pls pal (png D
forth pou foz tope, and all the trees of the felde ~
(palte yo bd pl. bandeg. oz thoes ther Hal
growe Stpere trees:and the Gicretree inthe te °
abdeofbzeares, And this thalbedone to ab
fe of the Lorde, and fozan euerlafipnge token
fhall not betaken awape.-
% CTbelvi.cbhapter. —— —
ån treaztacpon to iudgemente andto tpghtroufnes,
anbtothe ipprptuall keppnge ofthe Sabboth, garate
Shephardgathatdeuouretheps Mocke, `


CER bus lapth the Lorde:xkepeequptpe: B
sy Bn povpubte,tormy arnt peal PRAD tiie
(pall come fpoztlp,and mp rpgbteout:
PAS SW nes (palbe opened. B lefed is the man
a ee atte tee

a $ € e 3 i n
bet not the Sabboth(thatis)be that kepetp ee


hymifelfetbat be donone evel. Chen Halnot the

rauncer pasty cleauetp to the Lozde fapt: # meue.rptite
Alast Lord ththut mecleane outfrom bis 25 `

thallxthe gene manfape:loo, Sapietii.d

am adrpe teree. For thuslapeth the 2020 bute
the gelded that hepeth mp Sabboth. Ramelpe
that boloeth aréatlp of the thypngethat pleatet
me and Kepeth mp coucnaunte:dinto them top
7 qeue in mp Houthold,and within mp walles,a
better heritages name then pEthep babbencal- _ a
led Connes and daugbters.* Fwpl gene them an *3°d" +
cuerlafkpng naine,tbat halnot perplb-Agapne
the traungers that (tpcketo the Lozde,toferue
bpm, and toloue bpsname:xand tobe bps erua 30008
nutes. And al thep whpch kepe the flues, that
thep bnbalowe not the Sabboth namelp, that
thep Eulfpl mpcouenaunt, Chem wpl F bzpnge
tomy bolp möŭtapne, q make thé iopfull in mp

oufe of praper. Thep: burnt oferinges g facri

pees balbe accepted bpd mine aulter.+Jto2 mp acre.bite
boule (halbecalled ã boufzof prater foral people mato
Ehuslapeththe Lorde God whpyche catherety Barrio
together thefcatercd of Jfrael: Fpl beng pet 3 m8
another congreqacpou to bpm. Comeall pe bea
tes of the felde, tbat pe mape Deuour all the bea
Eeg of the wod. * Fo: bps watchmé are al blpnd yore. sy,
thep bane altogether no vnderftandpuge, thep serge”
areall bome bogges , not bepngeablefo barke: Pa
the p are fleppe,flogagpibe ave tep and lipe fno:
tpnge:tbep are pameleie dongc# that be neuer
fatplfped. Whelhepperdesallo in Ipke maner
baueno onderftandpnge ,xbut euerpe man turs Fer.
neth bpsowone twapet, euerpe one after bps one
couetonfnes toptball bys power. * Come(fape Hes SOs
tbep) 3 wyllEerch wpne, fo hall ive Fpll oure fel- Sepai.b
ues:that we may be dronken And doto mozow
Ipke agta Dape:pee,any much moze, a

| | è


of Elaye,


CTh lvii Chapter: .


af The Fees are redute foz thepz imurpe soneto Chpt


Sap, ti.b


.  inthey2chaumb2es, and befoge the godlpe man
isu chplozen, * pefonnes ofthe aduontrer, and tie


fF Mcouered thp felftoan
other then me, when thon tetert vp, made thy
bed wyrer, € With thole pdoles balk thou made
a couenatt, piece
ii (Pot them. Chou toente Ll frepght tokpnges
Eerde Ypith*ople g bpucts yb Ale (thatis) thon
uE. bat fent thp mefiengers i


map bealea troubles mpnde tia contryte berte:


ma ,
_ Eptalettta + se 92 Y chpde not tuer, and ain not woth wptd


Bere iii.c


Sol, Ut,
and to thofle that were fope with byim. Jmake
the frutes of tbankelapupnag, that bemap tape:  _
Peace, peace * yuto them that are farre of, and epde.i.c,
fothemtbhat arenpabe,fapeth the Lozdc,an0 7
make bpm whole. Sut the wycked are pike the
tagpnae ie, that cannot rete, whole watert fo-
meth withthe mpreand grauell. Eunet fotie
‘Yopcked baueno peace, fapth God: |
-C 'The.luti. Chapter. . -..
@ The Lozrd( bp themouth ofthe Hrophet)reptaueth th e
people fo; thepz fattpng, which were full of bppocrpere.
Fe R perno we asloude asthoucanth y
fag 228 lcauenot of, pft vp thy vopce pie seitt
"lev j atrompct.t ewe mp people thep2 acre. pia
a eter.) offences, ethe boule of Jacob thep2
nace a (ynnes.jtoz tbep feke medaply,and
-Wyl


HOW MP Wapes,euch asit were a people
that dpd epg hr 030 not forfaken the atures
of thep2 God. They argue with me concecipag
Ba he iudgement,and wyll be npe bits Goo,
*tdiherfoze fait we(fape thep) and thon leet it oyat. ird
notribe put ourlpucsto frapineiic,and for re:
gardettitnot. — i |
~- xiBebold, when pr fall, pour lufkrema precy crop.c.s
‘ipl for ye Donoieile bioléce to pour Netters: lo, 2
yefaftto,firpfe ¢ocbate, €to mest wp pilot
smycheonetie. Mowe pe Mall nottake thas coe
‘pou map emake poure vopce be ratte abou, oat
-x Thinke pe this fat plealeth nic, pa ns munine oe
chaftébim felfe foza dap.¢ to w2pih bis Need i-
bout Ipke a boke, tolpe bp f earth it an bra-
rpe cloth: Sboulde that be called faftprge,oz a
dape that pleafeththe Lozde:Docth not (htsta
fiynge rather pleafe me,p thouxloofe bpm cute messis
cf bonnan a ig in thy Datiger:that p breake
the othe o ret bargapnessthat thou let the
_oppicfled go free,and take from thé all maner of
purthés/ «to deale thy bzeedto the bungrp,and sero"
prpuge the pooze wand? ige» home into thpne Pr"
poufer voben thou feet ý naked that thou couce
-pym, g bpde not thp face fromtby nepghboure,
vE (and petpplenot thpne oton fief,

x Then thal thy light bzeake forthas the mor ©
ning, ¢tbybhealth flozpip right hoztip:thy righ *
toulne fle hal qo before the, andthe glozp ofthe
Lod thal embeace the.« Chepltpoucalletsthe porro
2020 fhallanfwere tbe:pf p crpelt,he Mall faye:

ere gam. Vea, pl thou lapek atape fro the (by
urthens,and boldcft thp fpnqers,«ceale ft iro
blatphemons talkpnge , rf thou baffe compat: tahtia
fő Dpon the hungry, andrefretbetk tye troubled OA"
foule: Then hall the lygbte fpzynge cute in the
“parkenefle, ¢ thy dDarkenefie thalbe asthe none
dap. The Lod hal eucr be thy quyde, efatiffp
P delp2e of thpnebertin ptpme of drought efpl
thp bones’ marp. Chon Walt belpkea freie
watered gardë xlphe pfountapne of Wwaterý nee aopn giiia
uer leanethrunnpnae. Then the placcs p paue
ence ben wate halbe buploed oftbhe:thcre Halt
thoulap a fourbacion fo: many kbpneeds. Thou
fhalt be called the maker by of bedaes , and tye
bulder agapneof the wape ofthe Sabdozh. )
Pea, pftbouturnethp feteinthe*Sabvoth, °°"


The Peophecype


polpe and glozyous Spabboth of the Lowe, and
that thou qene bpm the bonoure, lo that thou bo
not after ¢hpne owne pmagynacpon,nether feke
thyne otone wpl,no: ipeake thine owne wozdes
Then Malte thou baue thy plealure int
Lorde and 3 wopl carpe the ppe aboué theearth,
t fede the twpth the heritage of Jacob thp father
o2 the £02be8 ame pont bátbéfo p2ompled.
be lit


lir € papter f
The Losdetsmpghtpe to fauc,ane readpe tebearcour
umedt d RA r BS


Ferem.b.b ae. es
aC fap.t.o» LACED POU


pourebandes ate defp : :
fpnaers wrth sinpabteouMetle. Poureipppes
(peakelealpiiges,and poure tounge fetter oute
ioychedies: Aamanregarbeth rpgbtcoutnetfe,


*Fob.Fb.b (Pape


ishil- ceanethmweareneg t bepnacth fozthecnel. Thep


Wut pf one treade Dpon tbem:ther cometa
aterpente. Thepzwebbe makethnoclethe,an
they mace not couer them twpth thepz laboures.
Thep: dedes are the dedes of wopckednefle, and

the Doogck of robberp is in thepe habdes.* Thep?

Srourr.t.e feeterunneto eucli,andthep make baf to Medd

andpiia innocent blonde,thep2 councclsarc wickeDcoun
cele barmexand dettrnecpon are inthcp: wapres

toma piiio Wut the wape OE peace thcp know not. Jn their
D oingigignorquite:thep: wapegare fo crokrd

$ motorne gocththerin:knoweth of no peace
Andthpsisthecanlethat equpteislofar from

i ve.andthatrpattcoulnes commeth notnpeds

Stapeba xtQcloke fozliqhte,loo,tt is Darchenes, fo2 the

IFE momnpnge yn ay ella abd |

Serrpiic  tuelegropelpae tye bipnve pon the wal, we

sobeettise grope even as onep bathe none epes. (die foble
at p none dape as though it were toward npghe
in the fallpnae places , phe men that are palfe
deade. (Cie rooze all Ipke Meares, and mourne

nyua doueg.Uleloke Foz sd ab ag ig
nene:fo2 bealth,but tt is farre from vs, Wozour
offences are manpebefore the, and oure {pnneg
fcftyfpe agapnt vs: Dee, we muit confefie that

we offendre, and Sas we Do dt Ord
Hamelp,tranigrefle and dp! emble agapnit the

Lode and fall atpape frome oure God vipnge
pzelumpteousand trapterons pma: pnacpons,

and caltrngefals mattersinto ouredertes. And
therfoze is equpte gone afpde.and tpgbteoutnes
oreliga fandeth farre of x truche is fallen downe tn the
firete,and the thpng that is plapne ¢ opet, map

not be (hewed, Pee the truth ts takenawap,and

ethat refrapnetb bpm felfe fromeunel, mufte be
opled.Ual ben Che Lozdefatoc this, tt dptplea-

fed pm (oze, chat there toag no cqupte. te fawe
alfo,that there wasno manrpabteoug and pe
nthat fhere was no manto belpe bpm.

Peele bym bp bys owne power,


andhe fuftapned bym bp hps otne rpabteonf-
nes. Hexput righteoufnes wponbpm fora beetl eyyer.oib
plate,belet the belme ofbealth wponbps beade. zpet.v.a
pe put on wath in teade oraraa and toke
geloufilpe aboute bpm fo: acloke:(Ipheas topcn
aman goeth forth wzathtullpto recompence bis
encmps,andto beadueiged ofhps aduerfaries) €
Mamelpesthat bempaht rechpence and reward
the Jlandes, wher thozow the name ofthe L020
pe Lae be fearcd from therpipnge of the funne
and bps maieftpe, onto the going Downe of tbe
fame. go? be pal comeas a vpolent water Erea
me wbpcbe ibe Moinde of the Loze bathe moud
_ *2But vnto Spon theretal comea redemer ptsim.reits
aud bntothemin Jacob that turnefrom wicked “OY
Ine tort Pean Capt EDE Loabe) sp (paete tbat
nt with them (fapeh ede Lode) Hp pete that
is bpd p,and p wordes pif Fbaue put inthp
mouth (ball neuer go out of th montB,osout
of the mouth of thp chpidzcs childze: from tbig
tpine Forth Foz cuermogze Wolde wptbonte nde,
faptb thekopie OFRE
y i akki anter. PE
ca faeces and ELVA > aR
ee Dale temis, be bepabte z;
alem}tO


tudeof Camels, fall couer hot sahara dh 15
Ul tbep of Daba, fmacp. n>


that tiep: kpnges may be bzougbte trito §.4Fo
cuery pcopleg hpngedome that ferueth tte
all


E Fre pFrik d pei


of faye,


(Hall perpihe and be DeFroped with vtter deftru
ctpon. The glozp of Lpbanus (hall'come wnto f
Che fprretrees. Woresand Cedzres togprber,to
garnp the place of mp Sanctuarpefo2 J wpil
glozpfpe tiie place of mp Eeete,

)o2€ouer,thole hall come knelpnge wnto
the that paue bered the:and all thep tbat dplpp-
fed the, Hall fall Downe at thp fote. Thou Walt
Decalled thecptpe ofthe Lorde, Spon the cptpe


Solthebolpeonc of Ffracll. wWecaule thou hatte -


* bene fo2rfaken and pated : foo that noman tente
shoz0ive the : J topll make the | Sh ab foz euer
and fopfull thozoibe ant al potterptpes.* Thou

gemie Malte fuckethemplke of the Gentples,and kpn-
ges deltes Malltede the. And thou Malt inowe

tbat tbe Lode am thp faupoureand redemer

the mpahtpe one of Jacob. oz brafle wpll FZ ge

ue the golde and fo: pzon fpluer: Foz wood bzaffe

and fog toneg pzon. J topll turne tbpne oppeefip

on into peare, andthpne eraccpis intorpabtea

D ulnes.Cifolenceand robbery thal never be beard

of intbp lande, néptber barme and deftruccpon
whptbinthp boders.: Epp walles halbecalled
Spoc.Fri.a health and thy gates thepzapleof God, * The
|  funnefpalneuer be thy Daplpgbt: andthe lIpabt
} of tbe moone Wall neues Hpne vnto the : bat the


| Sol, litt,
thep2 (ubfkautiee. For poregreat rep2ofe po
{pall haue double tope;and fo: pame shall thep
hauctope of thep2 pozcpon. For thep Wall haug
double potlefflion in thep2 lade,and eucrlaitpng
tope Halbe with them. o2 3 the Lozdewbiche
loue right andbate robberp( though ittwere offe
red me {ball make thep2 wozckes full offapth-
fulnes ahd make an cnerialtpnge conenaunte
sar aly PEIEE PESTER AE Walt
C Dep? ecdealto:and thep2 generacion Hall ¢

be knoien amongetbe Sentpleg and amonge
the people. All thep that fe them, Wall tnotwe
that thep arethe bpab bleflen fede of the torde,
And therfoze «J am topfull inthe Lozde, and Luke-t.b
mp foule retopteth in mp God + Foz he pathe Fen,
put Bpon methe garment of faluacpon,and coa
ueredme with the mantell of rpghteoufnefic.

xe pall decke me Aes fd AND AS eyee.rbt, D
abepbethat bath berapparell vponber. .


Sozlpkeag theqrounde bapngeth forth frute
and as the garden thotcth forth {eed:fo pall the
Lopde God caule rpghteoulnes.and preaple to
flozpthe fozth befoze all the Heathen.

C Tbe. lrtt.Chapter:


Lorde bpmielfe thalbethyne eucrlattyng Ipabt hey he W


andthp God albethp qlozpe.
Apor trib
mone (hal not be bpo:fo2 the Lozd bpm felfe thal
” be thpne eurrlaftpneelpabt,and thy lo: il
dapeg thalbe ended. Chp people Halbe all tab
teous and pofleffe thy land euer, tbe foure ot my
plantpnge:the wogcke of mp bandes where of J
wWrllreiopee. Che pongef€ and leat (pall qrotve
intoatboufande, andthe (pmpleft into aftrong
popie: Ithe Lode Mall poztelpebzpnge thps
byngeto paffe in bys tpme.
i e lri. Chapter.

3 C He propbelpech $ chzpite Halbe annopnted ¢ Cent to pzeache
Ra e ype (prete of the Lode Godis upon
; WE yp A. the Lozde hathannopnted me,
By Sz) andfente me to preach qood thpngcs
Y NGI onto the power, that Jmpabe bpnde
fa.ridit.b yp the wounded hertes x fpat FJ mpagde pzeache
SUD IOLA Selpueraunce fotbe captpue, and open the ppl
totem that are bounde:that Jmpgbte declare
the acceptablepeave of the Lode, and the bape
goath.rh., Of Dengeaunce ofour God: «that Jmpahtcom
ands  Fo2rtballthemtbat areta heupnes,that 3 mpgbt
gene vntothem that mourne in Spor, that
mpabt qeue Faye betotp in teade of ates, top-
Full opntimentfo2 (yg htpnee, pleataunt rapment
-— - fozanbenpe mpnde. Chat they mpgbtebecalled
trecsofrpabtcoutnes, a plantpngeof the L02d¢

fo: bpmte relopee in.
2B Thep ball buploc thelonge roughe tylder=
neg, fet Dptbe wpldedelere,thep Malrepapzep
walt places, fuch as paue bene popde thozrowe
dnte manp generacions.Straungers thal tand
anb fede poure catell, andthe Alearntes Halbe
Ctarivle poureplowmen g dDzeflersof pour ppnes. *25ult
enamed the pretes ofp £020, ¢me ipal
call pou the feruauntes of our God. Pe hall ens
fope the goodes ofthe Centrio and triumphe in


x Thelunnetallneuer godowne, andthe P


forfaken,¢ top lande palbe no moze cailed the


fure igin per:and thp lade Halbe called $ mari-

ed woman, for the Lozdeloucth the ethp lande
fhallbe ionedinmarpage. * Andlikeas a pOg rtersib
man taketh a Doughterto marpace, f0 Maltiy oter.it.c
fone be maried onto p.Andasa bzpdeqromeis = '4-4
glad of bis bzpde,fo thal thp God retoice ouer f

3 baue fet watchmen bpon thp walle (D g

Fctulalem) which tall nepther ceale wape noz
npabteto preachethe Lorde. And pe alfo that
remember the 1020,ye thal not kepe bpm clofes
no2leauctofpeake of ppm wntpil ferufalem be


J (et vp.emade p preaple of p wozld. Che L028


path two2ne bp bis rpqhe bande æ bp His trong

arme,that frö bencefozth be pli not qeue thy

come to be meat Eo: thine cnemics,noztbp time

(Mperit thou haf labourcd) fo be d2pucke fog

the fraungers. But thep tbat haue gathered in

the come pall eate it, and geuc thanckcs bnto

the Lod and thep that baue bogie in the wpne,

thal dzincke it in the courte of mp Sanctuarpe
Gopou,go poutboow the gates inake clette

the wape fo2 the people, make plapne, make

plaine thefotepath,and take awaie the Tooncs

outeofit.andletouteatokenfozthepcople. _
Webolde, the Lorde proclapmeth wnto the Hoe?

endes of the toozld: * tel thedau pte wrni BAFFI, A


=


To.Tha


fap Eà


The Propherye


tip Saupoure conimetb:bebolde, be bepnaeth
bis ceeatace witb byin,and bis wozches gobe-


ut aH j Fz
aha a]


cbeth


delpuered ig come-Jlokedaboute meand ther
fhas no matita Mewe mean
that no manielde mety. T


ute gupon p earth) wpl g lape thep2 ftrenat::


x | Wpll declare thegeodrs of the Lode, pees
anO the veaple of the Lozd fozall that be bathe


aiid rrilie anmercll tbat went foztbErom his peeatence de=
ai Un es oem DE DEEP loucand &pndnes that


east. quttteue of thy mercies,and thy loup


and, cpg a


father: Eo: Abzabamknoweth vs not repther

ig Jiraell acquapnted wpth vs. wut thou 1020
arteourefather anDredemer, andtbpnameise
uerlaftpnge.D Lode, therfore hatte thou led Plat epid
be oute of thy wape: Wiberfore halt thou Darde-

ned oure berteg that we feare the nots We at on

twpth vs agapn,fo2 thy Cernauntes fake,and fog

the generatpon ofthpneberrtage. Thy people
pauchad butalitle of thy Sactuarie tn pofleiiid


- Eog oure enempes baue troden Doone the bolpe


place. And we were thpne from the begpunpng


b when thou wat notthep2 Lozde,forthep baue


not called bponthy name.


C The. leit. Chapter.
EZ beprophete (onverthe pcr(on of the yemes ) bewapelethe
thepzeriigand banp@ement,  gyaunesrpghteoulnes is ipica
clochoefplep topib the Aoures ofa woman, i
ZA) Chat thou wolar cleauethe bea- x
T fe) (uenit fonde, andcomedowne: that
| GIJ | the mountapnes mpght meltcatvap
be Aatthppzelence, pheasadwhotetp=
rand that tbemalpcpous mpabte boplpeasp -
ipaterdothepontietpee. ho
Wi herby thpnaine mpaght bp broiben amog
thyne enempes, andthat the@ entples might
tremble befozethe . When thou wroughtcte
wonders fFraunge workes, welokedD not fo2
them. Zhou cammett dotone,and thedplies mel
ted at thy pacfenceffozfence the begpnnyng ct á
§ worldett pathnotbine beard ozpereeaud ne Os”
ber bathatip eve fencanother god betid p wiche
doele fo much foz tpem Pp put thép: trulte in the
Thou helpelk bpmepatdoth epahe wprhe sz
chearfulneffe and them that thpncke Vpon thp ~
foapes. Wut loo:thou halt bene angrpe , for we
offended and bane bene euer (nfinne,chough the
wo:lde hauecleaned to them * pet Mall we ve iroma.tiib
faned. Wearealagan pncleantthpng ¢ al oure ptatrii a
rpabtcoulnes areas the clothes tarned w fous >
res ofa woman, we fal cuerpecbonagtheleafe,
fozoure (punes carpe bs atwapelphetie wpn. .
Therisnoman that called bpon tppnamn e,
that tandeth vptotake oldebptbp. Cherfoze
bpdet thou tbptacefrom vs, and confumelt bs
becaufle of our tpnnes. But newe, D102, thou
father ofours »wearethp dape and thonarte Somat,
Dure potter,¢ we alare the worcticotthp bandes .. rrrir
+ He notfofozcdplpleatcd( D Lode) and kepe Jeron r.d
not oure Offences to long inthp remembzaunce; D
butconfpder that weareallthp people. Thecp _.
ty of thp S actuary lpeth wattx Sion iz a topl eared.tit,e
dernes, and Ferufalema Delerfe. MDureholpe
boufe wbhpchts oure bewtpe, wher oure fathers
prapled the, is brent wp: pee ali ourecommodp=
types and pleafures are waled awape, Wpit P
not be intreatcd( Lode) for altbps r Wipittbou
boldethp yas mo {come vg fo foe?
eru. fer. .
‘whe felpeptie of BS heia A sli nb fthe beathen: a
cS e bep eke me,thathprberto bauc not Eta. tic
: H Ser atked forme, sal fpndemepbdeptiec —
a IS a tobane not founhteme, parve fapte somara
Y NGI Fam bere, Fat Here. am Found of
a people p hetiercalled vpon mp name. ffo? thus
long Have 3 euer Holden out mp babes toan Wn-
fapthful people tpat gonot therpgbtwapr iut


Esa
a


ALEF


after thep2 oton: pmagpnacpos: Coa peoplep
Deuriib Beucrdetpngemeto mp face. * Thep make
and.Fiti.b ¢hep2 oblacpona in gardens, g thep2 nake bpon
Eror aulters of bepcke, thep lurke amonge the gra-
meu cities VESNO lye in chepz deneg allnpabt.*Chep eat
Zeut cia Opg Aetbe:¢ Vucleanebzoth is in thep2 velle-
les. Pithou commeftenpe them, thep tapd touch
meniot:fo2 Jam Dolper thenthou, |
= Allttere men when Zam angepe, Halbe tur
nento (mokeand +fpze that Hall buinefoz euer
wrhalde. itis waptten befo: mp face, g (hall not
jere.vit. a Defozgottin, but recomprntcd.+Fihalrewarbe
rap toes it them intothep2 bofome: J meane pouremplde
HDF Yeg andthemploedes of ponr fathers togetber
(fapthe ý Lo2d) Mbpch haue made thep2tmokes
ppon tbe mountapnes, and blafpbemed me vpo
the bplles : therfore wpi 3 mealure thep2 olde be
soma,ri.b Desintothepz bofomeagapne . A)ozcouet thus
fapth the Lode:  Ipke ag when one wolde ga:
thecholp grapes, minfape pntohim :bzeake it


mab prih o


attrerire notok fozitisbolp: peuenfowpil J doallofor
ntes fakes, that Jwplluctbexrope Ka


Momat. ory (ej


them all. But J wll tabea teed ont of Jacobe —


out of Juda one,to take poficilpon of mp hpil.
<Yp chofen (hall pollee thefethpnges emp ier:
uauntes (pal dwell there. Haron thalbealhepe
folde and * the vallepe of Achoz Mal qeuep Fal
Ipnge for thecattell of mp pecplethat fcare me.
pioner d.c * Ut as for pou,peare they Ò bauc fozfaké the
Ferr.bi,b 1020,and forgottenmy holp hyl.Pehauelet vp
anaulter tinto Juppter,and geuen rpch depnls=
f ofrpnges vntothepleneteg.. Therfore wpll ZF
nomb:epou pth the (werde that pe Halbe de-
ftroved alltogpther -JFo:wben F called, noman
ganeme anlwere: wpe F (pake,pe barkenednot
bnto me but opd vwpchrednelle before mpne epes
and chofethe thpnge that pleated menot.
 Therfore,thuslaptihithe Lode God: Webolbe
my ieryauntes thalleate,but pe pal pane biger
Beholde, mp feruatites Hall d:pnke, but pe pal
{uffcr thp:te- Weboldec, mp feruauntes Hall be
merp but pe malbe confounded. Wepold,mp fer
nauntes (pall reiopee Fora verp quietnes OF bert
Wut pe tpalcrpe Foz [020 tw of herte:and cõplepn
for veracpdofmpnd. Pouwrenampe thal leane ac
curfedamonge mp chofit, foz God the Lode
qeraja Mall fape pou, and call iis feruauntes bp ano:
iconas thername x«tUiboforeicpleth bpon earth, hall
i.cozrl¢ reigpleinthe true God. Anditohofo wearer
Dpcn f earth (hall (weave nthe true God. Fog


Jota .bit.d


the oldeenemp thalbe fo) gotten, and taken as


tH. petty p WAVE OUE of mp fpabte: x Jfoz loo, J thal make
apoc pria Awe Heaven and a newe carth. And ág forthe
olde, thep thal nenerbe thought Ypon,no? kepte
fnmpnd:but the Lozd fapetbe-be glad and ences
moat retople,foz the thypnges p 3 pall do
Ro whys Webolde, Fihall make a fopfull
Jerufalem and bps people topful:pce, ¥ mp fel-
fetopliretopfe wpih Jerufelem, and be glad w
Gpoc.FA.a mp people.* And the wopce of weppnge¢ wap-
Ipnge Mall not be beard in her from thence forth
her all neprber be chpld, oz olde man, that
baue not thep2 fullbapes . But rwbeutbecpplde
commet) toan.€ peareolde tt tpalldpe. And p
betbat tgan.C.pcar of age do wrong be Halt


D


A iba Pa Stol iit,

carted * Thep Hallbuploe houtes and dwell itt

them tbep (pall plant Dpneparbdes, and eate the pam,

frute of them: Thep thall not buplde and a no-

ther pofle fle:thep balnot plant,¢anothereate

+ Butthelpfe of mp people fhalbe tphe a trees menestix

andfotpallthbewo2ckeofthepzbandes. .- (aert reli.
£})p chofen tball Ipue longe, thep tall not °°" *

laboure in bapne, noz beget with troubles toz

thepace thebpah bletten {cede of the Lorde and

thep2 frutes with them. And it Halbe; that og

ga sien tha hepy pih ara OAE

Wibple thep are pet but thpnckpnge bowe -. . .

tofpeate, ¥ thall beare them.x Che wolfe ani <4?

the lambe thal fede together,andthe Lyon thal

cat bape like pbutlocke.* Wut carth Halbe the ine cic

ferpentes meate: Chere thall nomanbhurte noz

flap anotbet.in al mp bolp bpl, faicth the £ ord

Chelrvi.dbapter. |...

C God dwelleth not intempics mabe bp mannes hante,

Be gr dead facepfpers Bone without mercp and fapth.

Hod chfozsteth them thatare troubled Foz bis fake among

the Chipten:the Sabboth ts contpoualk, |  ———

A Spe DuSfapetbthe Lorde: * Heauenis g..

[s SAn klage = arep Atir a ttie Bi

En OA itol where balnowethebhoufe a0 ot...

DINA that pe wpll buplde bntomer And —

where thalbe the place that F twpll dwell iné

As fozthele ebinges mp bande bath made them

all,and tbep are all created, fapetb the Lode

+ UWibiche of them thall J then regarde / Cuen israirn.t.d,

bpm that {g pooze ¢ ofa lowlp troubled fpzretr: pag E

and ftadethin awe of mpwozdes. Eo: wholo

flapeth an ore Foz me doth me fo greate difho-

nourag be tbat hplleth aman. Hethat bplleth

a pepe fox me.knetchbeth a dogge. te that bina

geth me meatofferinges,offercth Cwittcs blonde
Mibofo maketh me a memozéal of incence;

prapleth thetbpnge that is ourpabte. Pet take

thep fuch thpnges in bande and thep2 foule de>

Iptetbintheleabbomunacpons. eet
x @herfoze wpll Jallo pane pleafurein lagh

ingetbétotcozne, andthe tbingtpatthepfeare

wpl J bringe bpon them, * Foz: when Fealled Enp.it. b

no man gaucantwere:wben Jfpate thep wooly P

not bearc:2ut dpd wickednes before mineepes

and chofe the thpnges that difpleafe me. Heare

the worde of the Lozdall thatfearethe thpuge

which be fpeabeth.Dour vr bate.por

and cak pou outcfoz mpnamesfake,fape: Che


Ss.
goif. D


D Lozdeisgqreuousagapné bs: but pou Wall fe .-


bpmin lopewhen thep halbe confounded. l


* @bhen tha be beatbe a great noplefrom the chaith a


-cytpeandthe temple, the wopce of the Lozde,


thatwpl rewarde and recompece his ciiemics,

Ilpkeas when a wife boat? otha mã child,

o2 euer the {uffevthe papne of the bpztb,andan:

mro of the trauell. Wibo euer. bearde 02 fae
{uchetbingesdoth theground beare it one Dap

o2 arethe people bogneat once,as Spon tränas

led incbild bp2eh and bare bet fonnegr jtog thug
wey. Lode: linr ;

x Am Fbetbát maketh other ta beare, and s

beare not mp felfe! Am not Fbetbat bearetd sinari
and inaketh barren: fapeththbp God ¢ Retople crseccza


with Jerulalé and beglad with her, all pe that
lows ee:* e topeul WIP ber.at pe p mourien salsa
o DCE


after thep2 oton: pmagpnacpos: Coa peoplep
Deuriib Beucrdetpngemeto mp face. * Thep make
and.Fiti.b ¢hep2 oblacpona in gardens, g thep2 nake bpon
Eror aulters of bepcke, thep lurke amonge the gra-
meu cities VESNO lye in chepz deneg allnpabt.*Chep eat
Zeut cia Opg Aetbe:¢ Vucleanebzoth is in thep2 velle-
les. Pithou commeftenpe them, thep tapd touch
meniot:fo2 Jam Dolper thenthou, |
= Allttere men when Zam angepe, Halbe tur
nento (mokeand +fpze that Hall buinefoz euer
wrhalde. itis waptten befo: mp face, g (hall not
jere.vit. a Defozgottin, but recomprntcd.+Fihalrewarbe
rap toes it them intothep2 bofome: J meane pouremplde
HDF Yeg andthemploedes of ponr fathers togetber
(fapthe ý Lo2d) Mbpch haue made thep2tmokes
ppon tbe mountapnes, and blafpbemed me vpo
the bplles : therfore wpi 3 mealure thep2 olde be
soma,ri.b Desintothepz bofomeagapne . A)ozcouet thus
fapth the Lode:  Ipke ag when one wolde ga:
thecholp grapes, minfape pntohim :bzeake it


mab prih o


attrerire notok fozitisbolp: peuenfowpil J doallofor
ntes fakes, that Jwplluctbexrope Ka


Momat. ory (ej


them all. But J wll tabea teed ont of Jacobe —


out of Juda one,to take poficilpon of mp hpil.
<Yp chofen (hall pollee thefethpnges emp ier:
uauntes (pal dwell there. Haron thalbealhepe
folde and * the vallepe of Achoz Mal qeuep Fal
Ipnge for thecattell of mp pecplethat fcare me.
pioner d.c * Ut as for pou,peare they Ò bauc fozfaké the
Ferr.bi,b 1020,and forgottenmy holp hyl.Pehauelet vp
anaulter tinto Juppter,and geuen rpch depnls=
f ofrpnges vntothepleneteg.. Therfore wpll ZF
nomb:epou pth the (werde that pe Halbe de-
ftroved alltogpther -JFo:wben F called, noman
ganeme anlwere: wpe F (pake,pe barkenednot
bnto me but opd vwpchrednelle before mpne epes
and chofethe thpnge that pleated menot.
 Therfore,thuslaptihithe Lode God: Webolbe
my ieryauntes thalleate,but pe pal pane biger
Beholde, mp feruatites Hall d:pnke, but pe pal
{uffcr thp:te- Weboldec, mp feruauntes Hall be
merp but pe malbe confounded. Wepold,mp fer
nauntes (pall reiopee Fora verp quietnes OF bert
Wut pe tpalcrpe Foz [020 tw of herte:and cõplepn
for veracpdofmpnd. Pouwrenampe thal leane ac
curfedamonge mp chofit, foz God the Lode
qeraja Mall fape pou, and call iis feruauntes bp ano:
iconas thername x«tUiboforeicpleth bpon earth, hall
i.cozrl¢ reigpleinthe true God. Anditohofo wearer
Dpcn f earth (hall (weave nthe true God. Fog


Jota .bit.d


the oldeenemp thalbe fo) gotten, and taken as


tH. petty p WAVE OUE of mp fpabte: x Jfoz loo, J thal make
apoc pria Awe Heaven and a newe carth. And ág forthe
olde, thep thal nenerbe thought Ypon,no? kepte
fnmpnd:but the Lozd fapetbe-be glad and ences
moat retople,foz the thypnges p 3 pall do
Ro whys Webolde, Fihall make a fopfull
Jerufalem and bps people topful:pce, ¥ mp fel-
fetopliretopfe wpih Jerufelem, and be glad w
Gpoc.FA.a mp people.* And the wopce of weppnge¢ wap-
Ipnge Mall not be beard in her from thence forth
her all neprber be chpld, oz olde man, that
baue not thep2 fullbapes . But rwbeutbecpplde
commet) toan.€ peareolde tt tpalldpe. And p
betbat tgan.C.pcar of age do wrong be Halt


D


A iba Pa Stol iit,

carted * Thep Hallbuploe houtes and dwell itt

them tbep (pall plant Dpneparbdes, and eate the pam,

frute of them: Thep thall not buplde and a no-

ther pofle fle:thep balnot plant,¢anothereate

+ Butthelpfe of mp people fhalbe tphe a trees menestix

andfotpallthbewo2ckeofthepzbandes. .- (aert reli.
£})p chofen tball Ipue longe, thep tall not °°" *

laboure in bapne, noz beget with troubles toz

thepace thebpah bletten {cede of the Lorde and

thep2 frutes with them. And it Halbe; that og

ga sien tha hepy pih ara OAE

Wibple thep are pet but thpnckpnge bowe -. . .

tofpeate, ¥ thall beare them.x Che wolfe ani <4?

the lambe thal fede together,andthe Lyon thal

cat bape like pbutlocke.* Wut carth Halbe the ine cic

ferpentes meate: Chere thall nomanbhurte noz

flap anotbet.in al mp bolp bpl, faicth the £ ord

Chelrvi.dbapter. |...

C God dwelleth not intempics mabe bp mannes hante,

Be gr dead facepfpers Bone without mercp and fapth.

Hod chfozsteth them thatare troubled Foz bis fake among

the Chipten:the Sabboth ts contpoualk, |  ———

A Spe DuSfapetbthe Lorde: * Heauenis g..

[s SAn klage = arep Atir a ttie Bi

En OA itol where balnowethebhoufe a0 ot...

DINA that pe wpll buplde bntomer And —

where thalbe the place that F twpll dwell iné

As fozthele ebinges mp bande bath made them

all,and tbep are all created, fapetb the Lode

+ UWibiche of them thall J then regarde / Cuen israirn.t.d,

bpm that {g pooze ¢ ofa lowlp troubled fpzretr: pag E

and ftadethin awe of mpwozdes. Eo: wholo

flapeth an ore Foz me doth me fo greate difho-

nourag be tbat hplleth aman. Hethat bplleth

a pepe fox me.knetchbeth a dogge. te that bina

geth me meatofferinges,offercth Cwittcs blonde
Mibofo maketh me a memozéal of incence;

prapleth thetbpnge that is ourpabte. Pet take

thep fuch thpnges in bande and thep2 foule de>

Iptetbintheleabbomunacpons. eet
x @herfoze wpll Jallo pane pleafurein lagh

ingetbétotcozne, andthe tbingtpatthepfeare

wpl J bringe bpon them, * Foz: when Fealled Enp.it. b

no man gaucantwere:wben Jfpate thep wooly P

not bearc:2ut dpd wickednes before mineepes

and chofe the thpnges that difpleafe me. Heare

the worde of the Lozdall thatfearethe thpuge

which be fpeabeth.Dour vr bate.por

and cak pou outcfoz mpnamesfake,fape: Che


Ss.
goif. D


D Lozdeisgqreuousagapné bs: but pou Wall fe .-


bpmin lopewhen thep halbe confounded. l


* @bhen tha be beatbe a great noplefrom the chaith a


-cytpeandthe temple, the wopce of the Lozde,


thatwpl rewarde and recompece his ciiemics,

Ilpkeas when a wife boat? otha mã child,

o2 euer the {uffevthe papne of the bpztb,andan:

mro of the trauell. Wibo euer. bearde 02 fae
{uchetbingesdoth theground beare it one Dap

o2 arethe people bogneat once,as Spon tränas

led incbild bp2eh and bare bet fonnegr jtog thug
wey. Lode: linr ;

x Am Fbetbát maketh other ta beare, and s

beare not mp felfe! Am not Fbetbat bearetd sinari
and inaketh barren: fapeththbp God ¢ Retople crseccza


with Jerulalé and beglad with her, all pe that
lows ee:* e topeul WIP ber.at pe p mourien salsa
o DCE


The Weophecye


{mpte thpue
fe


knowpied Se 0 fob. Thereturne of Jiraci bnto God:
- tonfellpns D cp: offence


A Z í
oteiia notthis felve then defiledand vneleane' x Wut


ere.prtli.b


*Z put herawat,¢ gaue ber abil of deucscemét
uiiweroita Kozal this, per wnfaprpfull (pier Juda


teat bla hem ig:
favebfulip Costa n
Fere.b. b
Siap tbli,a


qeneratpon, fromamonge pou ¢bzingepouinto ©


labour from our pougbte vp: pea, tDep: pepe g Batuct,b
bullorkeg their fonnes gdaugbterg. —
alto


>


SSS LSE
=
+


The Weophecye


{mpte thpue
fe


knowpied Se 0 fob. Thereturne of Jiraci bnto God:
- tonfellpns D cp: offence


A Z í
oteiia notthis felve then defiledand vneleane' x Wut


ere.prtli.b


*Z put herawat,¢ gaue ber abil of deucscemét
uiiweroita Kozal this, per wnfaprpfull (pier Juda


teat bla hem ig:
favebfulip Costa n
Fere.b. b
Siap tbli,a


qeneratpon, fromamonge pou ¢bzingepouinto ©


labour from our pougbte vp: pea, tDep: pepe g Batuct,b
bullorkeg their fonnes gdaugbterg. —
alto


>


SSS LSE
=
+


hte, p
(balte


Ze-ot di amongethetbozneg.x 28e circumeptedin the


I m & Dreachein Fuda and Jerufalem, crpe oute
Eraba and Baer Ot oe the tionipettes in tbelande,


geet tn Spon, fpede you,and make no tarpngexskoz
J wpirezingea ceate plage,anda great dceru

ctpon from the Porth. soz the {poiler of the GE
Fn tyics is bzoken vp from bys place, asalyon out
of bys denne,that J mape make thy lande walte
and dDeftrop the cpties, Co that no manmap dwel
therin.(lberfoze,qp2de pour felues about with
racke clothe, mourne, and tepe, forthe Fearful
w2ath ofthe Lozd isnot with beawen from vs.
C ` At thelame tpme (fapeth the Lowe) the
Herte akaa Tps ofthe princes Halbe qone
the peckes albe aftonttyed and the $20-

| phetes albe fore afzapen, Then fapd FD lord
| Dewrriit.s Gon, bate thou then dilcepucd thps people and
Ferulalem, fapnge: + ‘Ve Hall hauepeace,and

nowe thelwearde qocth rhozowe thep2 lpues:
ben all it be fapde to che people and to Jeru
Fevem,t.b falem: a Cronge wopnde inthe bpe places of the
mpldernefic commeth thozowe the wape of mp

veople:but nepthertofan, no? tocleante.

*MFtecthat hall there come dnto mea rong
D wpndefromethote places, and then wpll Falta
apue fentence bpponthent" Fo? lo, be commeth
bp Iykeasaclonde,and bps charettes aretphe a
| Tompe wopnde: » DPs horlmeriare fwrite
Zbre-tl. a thentheaegle. Woo dnto wg, foz we are dei-
roped. D Jerufalem, twalbe thpne berte fro-


Eee wopchednefie,tbat thou mapette be belped.


Powe longe tall chp noplome thoughtes re- fA


mayne vopey the:


4£02 a vopee from Danand fromthe bpll of


Ephzabim{peaketh out,etellept of adcitructpo
Remembre heathen and gpue Jerufalem wae
 nynge and preache onto ber that watchers ouer
bet arecommpnge frome farre omnpey. Thep
hauecryed oute agapnite thecptieso Juda.
And thep haue belette pep: aboute m enerp


of Jeteinpe:


. Sol lve,


placelpke ag the toatcbe men in the felbe:* ffo?


- thep baite pronobed me to wzath, faith p Loz. 3944"


*Chp wapes tby thotightes, baue brought ;
the onto tbig, fuche is thpne owne wickednetle tssgecetl
and Dplobedpence, and bpcanfe itis a bptter
thpnge,it bath fepben the to the berte. Ab mp
elpe, abmp belpe (alte thoti cepe) howe i
mp hertefofo2emyp berte panteth within me:
J can not be pll, for 3 baue berde the crp-
engeof the trompettes, and peales of warre.
Tep cepe:murther bppon murther, the pole
lande Mall perpibe. Ymmedpatlp, mp tented
vere Delkroped,and mp banginges in the twit
kelpnge of an epe. Howe longe Hall F fe the
tokens of tvarre and heare thenopleof the trá- JẸ
pettes:Meuerthelelie,this hal come Dpon thë;
* bpcaute mp people is become folpibe, and Etar: t.h
batbnot bnowenme.* Thep arethe chpldzen Sire. p
of foolptbneffe, and withoute anp difcretion,
TCovocupll, thep baue wptinnough:butto do
twell,thep baue nowploome. 3 paue lokeD ppa
theecarth, and fe: it as wait and boyd. Jlo-
ked towarde beauen, and it baduofppne. F
bebeldtbe mountapnes:and lo,tbhep trembled,
andall the bplles verein feare.Zloked aboute
meand there as no bodpe,and all ths bp2des
of the apze were awape. J marked well, and
tbe plotved felde wasg become tate: pea:all .
jep: cities Were bzoken Downe at the pretence
ofthe Lozde,andindignacton of bis wath.
J0: thus hath the Lorde fapde: Che bole lade
fpalbe Defolate,pct wpll Fiiot then paue Done.
And therfoze Wall the earth mourne,and the
cauen be {orp aboue:fo2 the thpng that Jbaue
poben(to the prophetes) and taken bpon me
to Do, fpall not repent me,and J pl not qo frå
ft. Che bole lade thal fipe.fo2 the nopfe oF p hozt:
men and botemen: thep hal runneinte denes,


into woddes,and clpm bpthe fonp rockeg: Bl


the cittes thalbe voped,¢no:nd Dwellig therin:

- Gabat wilt thou not do, # bethag deftroped;

x Soe thoush Fou Tag! thp fel 4 wis iar siecem fh, e
ef,and deckel the With golde: * Hough COOU tri regir,
papntettbp face with colours, pet palt thou AREA
trpm thpfelf in bapne.Æ03 thole that pptherto

baue ben thp great Fauourers,fhal abbozre tbe,

atid go about to Nape the. Fto? 3 bearea nople,

Ipke ag it were of a woma traucling,o2 one la-
bourpng of ber fp2ft chplbe: Cuen the wopce of
the Doughbter Si, caffeth out her armeg, and
fotwneth,faying:¥b, woo ts me,how fore dered
and faint ig mp bert: fozfeareof p murtbherers?

The.v.Chapter.


ans,
are Dhe thozowe Jerufalem, beholde
Adnand fe: Seke thozowe bere fretes


T
=


the opoe) xoz though thep can fape: the ie ig.a.rite
Lorde lpucth, pet do they {weare to dilcepur.


The Prophecpe


Chouhatt (couraged them, but thep tobe no re-
pentaunce: thou þat cogrected them foz amen-
Dement,but thep refuted Sop carrececan. See
made thepz faces barberthen a fone,and told

tot amende: >
Therfor J thought in mp peraductute
thep are (ofpmple and folpth,that thep onder:
ade nothpng of f Lordes wape eiudgemctes
purar Of our Go0.* Therfoze wopll J godno thepre

Hedesandrulers, and talke withthem, pf
knowe the wape of p Lozdand the tudgemetes
of our God. But thele (inlpRe maner)hauedzo
fen the pocke,and burke the bondes tn fondre,
*@Wiberfore, alpon out of the tooode bathe
urte them, and a wolfe in the euenptig Malde-
rope them. The Leoparde doth lpe lurapnge
by thep? cities, toteare in peces all them that
come therout. 02 thep2 offences are multp-
plped,andthep2 Departing atvap ig encreafcd.
hulbde Feber foz allthis baue mercpe Vpport
Soppon.ta the: bp chploze baue fozfaken me, *fworne
bp them that areno gobdes. And albeit, that F
fende them to theful.pet thep fall to aduoutrp,

€ and haunte barlottes boufes.
Jn the defpze of onclélp lulk,tbep are become
Ipke the foned bozfe* cuerp man nepethat bis
3t.1F4.b nepahbours wpte: + <houlde J not coz-
zerera tectetbis,fateth p Lopd¢huld Fnot be auen:
men" geno euerp people p iglike bitothis ¢ Clpme
hp bponthep: walles, beate them Downe, but
Deftrote them not wttcrlype: takeawape thepze
foztrefies, bycaule thep are not aoa.
4fo2 pnfaptbfullp bath the Doule of Jiraeland
‘sedi, a Juda fozlaken me, fapeth the Lozde:* Thep
Dauc dDenped the Lorde, and fapde: tt isnot be
zere.ritil. shat loked bpon g.t TuM there Mall nompt
anoite ES apune comedpon vg we pal fe neither liwert
Sophoie yor bungre,* As foz the warning of p prophe-
taere. teg thep takett but foz wpnde:pea there is none
of thele tobiche wopll tell them,that fuche thpn-
ges. Wall happen nto them.


bin TIED


be fs,


‘aha bycantfe pe fpeake fuch wozdes,bebold: x


woo2dcs tbatare intbp mouth wpll 3 turne to LR ce
fy2e,and make the people tobe tvone thatthe, om


Derrett.c pre map confume them. * L0, Jwpll bapnge

baractilte g neonle ppon pou frofarre, D houte of Ziraell

(fapeth the Lode) a mpgbtp people, an olde

people, a people whofe tpeache thou knowelt

not, neptber Dnderftandelt what thep lape.

‘hep2re arowes are fodapne deathe: pea,thep

them felues be Werp qpauntes. Chis people

(hall cate bp thp frute and thp meate-pea, thep

pall Deuoure toy fonnes ¢ thp Dougbdters,thp

foepe andthp bullockes. Thep thall eate vp

th geapey.s fpages. Asto: thp trong well

Fenfedcitics,whretn thou dpddeft trute, thep

(ball bzpngeto ponertpe dud that thozowe the

zernrbi.b Swerde.* Aeucttbeletie J wpll not then baue

| “bone with pou lapth the L020. 2But pi tbep fap

Muperione bord P Lod our Godal this pnto bs!

oerroiig Chenanlwere them.* byamt, that lpke asg
pehaucfozlaken me, and |

des fnpourowne lande, cuen To Mall pe ferue

other goddesalfoina fraunge lande. Pzreache


cued ffraungegod ií


thys onto the boul eof Yacob andctpeit ountin
Juda, andfapetbus: Beare thyg (thou folpihe
and vndifcrete people) *pebaue epes but pele
not: cares baue pe butpebearenot. JErarepe ERIEN
not me,laptbetbe Lower Are penot atbamedto 27"
loke mein tbe faces xwbpebbind piee wptb tbe zo,rrvs.0
fande,fo that it cannot paflebpsboundes. JEO -Froit.
thougptt rageteican i¢donothpnge, tthougp

the waucg thero pareti ranap e tpa go.

oner. ut thps people bath a falle and obffinate
barte:thep are departed and gone away fro me.

Thep thpnkenot intbep: bartes: D let ve feare E
the Lozde oure God, that geucth vsrapue earlp
andlate, Dobennede fe:wwbpcbe kepeth euer Epil

the batuctt foz vsperlp.

--¥ Meuerthelelie, pourempldedes Dane tur- Sr
fedthelefrompou, ¢poure(pnnesbauerobbed.
pou berof. Wor amonge mp people arefounde
wopcked perfones, that pzpuelp lape nares and

wapt fozmen,to take them and velfrope them:
And lpke as anet is fullofbpzdes, fo avethepze
houles full of that wbpeb thep baue qottcn wpth

faltbed and bilcepte. Iperf commer eben great m
fubffaunce and rpcbetle. berof arethep fat and
welthpy,€aremoze mpicheuousthen anp other. raia

* Thep minplre notthelatoe:thep makena “7E

ende ofthe fatberleffe caule: pea, and thep pro-

fpere: pet the tude not the pooze accozbpnge to

equpte. «Shuldz not punphhethelethpnges. zer.o.bir,
fapth the Lozder Mulde Fuot be auenged of all :
fuche people asthele bes Hozrpble and qreusug
thpngesaredoneinthelande. Che propbetes
teache Falfelp, and the pute receaue gpftes,
and mp people bath pleature thesin.  Uibat otee.vii«
fopll come tperof at the latte: Bont .d

C The. vt. Chapter.


am Dime oute of Jerufalem, pe ronge 4


Bi Sak Chpldz€ of Wen Jaminblowe vp the |
ISA [ce trompettespe + Tecuptes,tet opa NER


“weoee tok bnto Wethcaran, fora plage
2g and agreate mpferpe appereth out
20m the Roth. J wpl phen f daughter Spon
toafap2e etendze woman, andto Her hall come
the ipepo thepzflockes: Thep: tented 8
{hall thep pptcheround abouteber, and enerpe
one (hall feede themtbat are buder bys bande.
dake battapll agapnite ber (Mall thep Cape)
Atpfe, let vs go bp, Wwbple itigpetdap. Alas,
the bape cocthawap, the npabt hadoives fall


Downe. Arple,let bs qo Dp by npadte,t defro
ae ftrongebolbdes, Foz thus bat PLonbe of id


escommaunded.Heioe down hertrees, and lee
vp bulivozkesagapntt Jerulalem,fortbetpme
is come sad idee! i gay unptyed: forin op
ote all malpcpou . Lpke as a condpte

outeth out waters, tope fpeuteth oute ber
wopckedneffe. Robberp and buepabtcouneffe is
berdeinber, fozote and woundes are ever there
nmp {pabe. ende the (sD Jerufalem) lefte
J wpthozawe mp bart fro the, gmake poelolat


‘and thp land allo, nomandwellinit. Foz thus
= - fapth


of Jeremype>


Capty the ode of hookes. Che relpouc of Fira-

el halbe gathered asthe remuaunte of grapes.

And therefoze turne thpne bande agapne into

€ thebalket.lpke the grape gatberer. Hut ynto

i — Sobome mall Jlpeake,tohom thal F warne that

edt Demape take bede: * Chepz caresarelo vncpz-
nm" cumepled.that Retiree

Feremp.v.c Webolde, x thep take the wowe of God but

andipb forafcozne,¢ hauenolutt therto. And therefore

Jam fo ful of thpneindpanacion,(DiL02d)that

J mape fluffer nolenger but (hed itout bponthe

chpldzenp are fopthout and bponal ponge mer.

Vee, the manmnufte be taken p2pfoner wptbh the


wpfe,andtheagedtoyththecrepell.Chepzpous `
{es with thep2 landes g wpuesthalbeturnedvn


to fraungers when F retch out mpne hand yp
ponthbe inbabpters of fhyslande,fapth the 1020


EES *fFoztrom thelelt onto thbemot, tbep bang all pras


Na amen the prophet puto the
ii Hea! cera. hep eater eb and pes.

D *an
s¢fape.lbi,¢ people fopth were wordes, faping:peace,peace
Finger: Penn tec Aa ace at al. tere thepa amed
| shale An mptted abbominacton:Crulp
gere. biti. chap thep be pall Hhame.* And ther£ore they thal
` Fallamong the flapne¢ inthe boure wh ma thal
vplet them, thep palbe broughte Downe fapeth
the Lo2d: Thus fapth the 1020:00 into the Fre-
tes,confpder and make tnquplicpon foz the olde
vape and pf it bethe good erpabte toape then
oo therin, that pe mape fpnderelt fo2 poure fou-
les. But thep faye we wplnot walke therin, F
topli fet watch men ouer pou,aud therfoze take
bede Duto the vopcee of the tropet. wut thep faye
€ toc topll not take bede. Pearce therfore pe qentp=
les, æ thou congreqacpon balte kinowe, what F
bauedeupfed Eo: tbem. Beare thou eartbiallo,be
gerim. Firs holde,¥ wpll caule + a plagetocome vpontbhys
° people enen the Frente of thep2owne pmaginacp
ons. fro thep haue not bene obedpent bntomp
, ozdes Eto mp lawe but abborre them Wher
Herein, orexbapnige peme incente From Saba, elwete
l menge Calamus fró farrecountrpes:P oure
burnt offeringes dilpleate me, g ¥ reiopce not in
pourfacrpfices. And therfore thus lapth p Lod
Hebold, Fy wpil makethps people fall,z therfore
fhal fal fro among them the father topep the chpl
d:en one nepabbour thal perpe wpth another
‘Thustapth the Lozde,x2Sebolde there (hall
gerem. ix come a people From the Mozthe:and a great peo=
soote, ple pall arple tro the endes of pcarth,w bowes
‘ie — andippthdartes (hall thep be weaponed. Ft is a
rough ¢fearce people.¢ an bumercpfull people,
thep: vopce roatethlpke thelee.theprpde bpon
bozles wel appopnted to the battellagapntt the
D Daughter Spon. Checrpeoc€ then haue we
bearde. Dure armes are feble, heupnes and [020
we is come bpon b3,a8 bpd a twomã trauclpng
topth chplde:Let noman qo forth into the felde
let ho man come upon the bpe itrete:fo2 the live
gp atdeand feare of the enempesison enetpelpde.
Wil bertoze qpe a lackeclothbaboutethe(<D


fhou daughterofmp people ) {papncklethpfelfe. fe


, p pth ates: moutne g wepe bptterlpas upon
Amo-OtH. cy ne onelp beloued onne Joz p deltroier all


de that thep healetheburteofmp |


‘Sol, lvit,


fodenipe fall bpon bs. Them batie Flettefor a
rongetower( Dthou prophet )and a well fen-
fed iwalamonce mp people tolekegtoteptbep?
Wapes.* Fo? thep are al fubburneapoates ¢ paip a
fallenatope, walkpnaedpfeepttullpe, they are iromarittic
cieane bzaffe,and p20 , foz they burt and deltrop
enerp ma . Che belloug are bent in w Fp2e,the
leade ig not molten:the melter meltethin ba
For the euel isnot taken away fromtbem. Ther
fozedo thep call themnauabtvefpluer, becaule
the Lozbebathcakthemout. —

| C The. vil. Chapter


=i
hy? 3 der the gafeofthe Lodes hHoufe and =
Y LOF A ctve out thele wozdes there toptha
eee [OUD Dopceatid lape: Heare f wed
of the L020 al pe of ube RoN thys dozeta
woz(bpp the Lod. Chuslapth the Lozdcot po-
fes,the God of fleacl.xAmende pour wapese Kitap, i
Kour eonig eap let pou dwel thys place. Aevesrros.6
tuff not infallelyinge woes, fapinge: bere
is thetempleof the Lo2d, bere isthe temple of p
Lode, bere ig the temple of the Lorde. 7
Wut rather indede amendepourwapesand 5
couricelg,xand iudaerpgbte betwoprte a mane Sro frites
bys nepabboute.oppreticnot the taunger,the iea..rris.g
atherleffe,and the wpddowe:fhed not innocent IFN
bloude intbpg place,cleaue not to firaunge god
Des to Pour ownedetruccion, tben wily let pou
dwel in thps place-pec,in the landethat 3 aaue
atoze tpme buto pour fathers foz ener: 5u t ta-
Ke hede:pe tru inlpinge taleg tbat beaple pon
andDopouno good: fo: when pe Haue Kollen,
murtheredcommptted adoutepe,and periurpe,
Wiben pe haue offered onto Waal, folopnge
Traunge and onknowen gods (hall pe be'onpy
npthed: Det thencome peand and befozeme ttt | aii
thyg boule xwbpeh bath mpname geuen onto fire
it ¢fap: Cathe, we are abloluted qupte though €
{oe paue done all tbele abbompnacp ong. Erape.lir-b
* UW patrtbpncke pouthpg boule that beareth 30%.6-b. è
mpname. ig adenoftheneg:t And prety fe bat fiere rrri
pou thpncke,fapth the Lode. Goto mp place in tIorbya
Splob,*wpere Onto Joauemp name atoze tp Éter, ni
ine,andlobe well+ib qDpD tothefame place 9.0.1,
For the wwpckednes of mp people ‘of Flraell.and
nowefpough pe Daue done al thelededes(fapth
fhe Lozde)and {mp felfe set Mets bp tpmes :
towarne pou and tocomen wrth pon,pet wold Pion
penotbeareme.x J called pe wold not anfwere Sip ar t
And therfore teuenas J bane donennto Dvplop gure,srs, g
fo wopll Fdo totbys boufe tbat mp nameis ge-
urnbinéo(and tbat pou put pour truf in pee tni
tothe place that J baue geuento pon:and pour
fathers. Andy hall thu pou out of mp (pabe tceg.rpit.a
¥ag J bauc cal ontall pour bzethzen the whole
ede of Ephraim i D ian
+Tberetoze , thou thalte notipzape fozthpg tetri?
cople thou Male nether eee nOz bpd ¢, zon, t.:


| |
K f vnto JFeremp.lapinge:-*tand vn Sr


|


prayer


The Prophecye


paper fo? them:thou alé maken thterceflpon
tO me fo2 them, fo: inno tople wplabere the.se
eft thou Mot whatthep do inthe cptpes of Suda,
and inthe Eretes of Jerulalem:* Ehechpldzen
gather itpches, the i ale aoa 2e, the
women knede dough: to bake kabes tor p quene
cf heaucit, Thep poige dutd?
buto fraunge gods, toprouoké me buts
Horobelt thep hurt 7
rather confounde and thamethemfelues. And


Her, Tlie


Fbectore thus faptbthe Lobe Gov:bebolbe,mp ba


wath and mp inbpgnacpon Halbe pourcd oute

bpon thps plate, bpon mien and cafell, bponthe

trees inthefelde,and frute of the Lande, ¢ it (al

€ be burnt fothatnomanmape quench it.

xeren Chung fapththe Lorde of pooltes the God of

o Srael:Deape bp poure aapea iy Sad D

E aper g pepe face treet an catetde felbe.* £o: when

bzougbt poure fathers out of Egppt Jfpåke

no to2de bnto them ofburntofferpnges and fa

Kefo.rits reeet thyg Fcommaunded them.faping

*Derben and obepe mp Vopce,and J dhalbe pour

@ovd,ard pethalbe mp people: fothatpe walke

(nall $ wapeg toppch FI baue commaunded pou,

zacha, btia that pemape prolpere.« Wut thep were not obe

bient they inclined not their eares therunto, but

went after thep2 owne pmagpnactOs,and after

themocpons of thep2 owne wpcked berte,and fo

tucned them felues away,and conuerted not bn

tome. And this baue thry done, fromthe tpme p

pour fathers came out of Eqppt, vntothps dap

PTE a * E CR ao pou, all mp fers
rrip.c.ruua HAUNECS (De pzoppetes. Ec

$ E LA Aieiaia offer


mpnactonsintbeboute that bath mp name,and
Daucdefpled it. Tbep Hane alfo bupldcD an aul-
perite. ferat Copheth, whpehe is in the vallepeof the
aifi.cegum. chpldpenofPennom,pthep mpaht burnethep2
Tre core Connes and Daughters in fpze,woppep I neuce cf
Jere piia maunded thé nether came it euer in mp thought
And therfore beholde, the dapes Mall come (fap
eth the Lozbe)that it thallno moze be called Co
pbhetb,o2 the valley of the chpldzen of Dennom,
zeem HF but balley of laugbter,xfo2 in Copheth.tbhey
yere, viti b Halbe burped, becaulethep Call elles paue no-
anope rowme. x Pee tbedeadebodpesofthbpspeople
fpalbecaten bp of thefoules of theapze:¢ wplde
poberecn gnc aap and no man Wall frap them
sere.rolb amape.* And ag for the vopce dot at glad


ee roi bNeNeoFthe Cptpeg of Juda, and Jerulalemthe


Ofat fis ey fe
renot me(fapththe Lorde but i AY


vopce of p bapdeqrome,and ofthe bapde, 4 twpl
mabe pat caffe : Foz the Sten nes Defolate.


C Che. vii. Chi
@ She dektuccpon of the Hewes, Thewo2de mouth the people
to amenbdement,rekenpnge bp theng panes. we repichenvech
the Iping bo ctrpne ofthe ppopbetes and prises,


Pn & thefame typmefapeth (be Lorde, X
r= thebones of the kpnges of Juda, p
bones ot bps papnees.the boones cl
ya. Soca Wa (he prtattes and prophetes:pee and
ECs aS the bones of the cptispns of Zerufa
lem (palbe bought out oftheir qrauesanbdlapp
agapnitxp funne the mone,andall the heauenlpe * >the
poft:tebom thep loued, whome thep fernet: whi
‘hep ranne after, whomethep fought and wo-
brpped, ep balnetherbegatpered together
nozburped, but (hallpeasDonge vpon thecarth .
to they2 hameanddplpplpnge. 7
xAnball thep thatremapne of thps wycked , 1 erig, c
qreneracpon, (pal delpze rather to dpi thétoipue s
whereloenerthep remapneand where as J lca:
ter them, fapth the Lozde of botes. Thus hale
thou fape onto them alfo thus fapeththe Lode yz q
Domen fall lo, that tbep arplenot pp aqapne:
Dı pF Ffrael repent, wil not God turneagqarne
totþem:Ulberfoze then is thps people and Fern
falem gone fo farre backe that thep turnenot a>
qapuer Thep areeuer thelonger the moze obit p
nate and wpll not beconuerted.
xoa J baue looked and confidzed but there esere,
fsnoman that lpeakethea good wo:WDe: thereig =
no mantbattakethrepentauncefo: bps pnne $
topli fo muche as lape: wperefoze, paue J Doone
thps/ But euerpeman(as Cooneas be is turned
Backe runneth forthe Epli, Ipke a pldchorlein
abattell: he Storckeinthe apzeknoweth bys
apopneed tyme, the Turticdoue:theSwalowe
and the Crane,confpber the time of thep2 travel
*but ME EORE U nof knotoe the tyme of the +Erpess
punpihemente of the Lode. Holoedarzpe faye
toena SCENON bauethelaweoftheLorde
monge bs:
Trulpe in bapne bathe be prepared bys penne T
and bapnlp baue f wepters wepetenit, therfore
(pal the wple be confounded, thep (halbe afrapo
and taken:fozlo,*thep baue cafte out the wode Dette
of the Lozbe: what wpfoomecanthé be amonge i
them:Ullperfore Fat at qeue then: wpuesbnte


si


e L02b )fothat there fhall not be one grape
bpon the bpne,netber one fpae bpont he fpatre
and theleaues (palbeplubte of. And the thpnge
that 3 baue geuen them Halbe takenfromthem
why pzolongewetbetpme. Let bs aes

clue


ji:


|


Heremype,


FE felines together, and go into the Eronge Cptpe,
there pall we ve in rene. forthe Lord our God
bath put bg to feplence ¢ geuen ps water mprte

wprb gall,to depucke!, becaule we hauefpnned
arerin agapnt ppnt.* Wie lobed foz peace, and we fare

_ not the better, we wapted fo2 the tyme of bealth

— andlo,beretsnothbpnaebuttrouble. -

: The wt ot bre boles is bearde From Dan
the wholelandefs aftaped at the nepingeof pis
onge bo2les,fo2 thep are come in,an’ bauede
- poured thelande, pty all that is in it:thecities
Lea.rrot.o And Chole that divell therin.* A)ozecouce Fwpll
fende Cockatepces and ferpentes amonge pou,
(wbych wpll not be charmed andthep thal bpte
pou fapth the Lode.
© Fwpoldehauebadcomforte agapntte lorte
+ but lozoteets come bponme,and Heaupnes ver
eth mp berte, fo: loo,the popece of the crpingeof
mp people ts bearde foz feare of them, that come
frome a farvecountrpe. Fs not the Loein Dp-
on Js not thekynea inber? Wiberfore then baue
thep qreaucd me(thal p Logdelape)wpth ther:
pmages and Foolpthe trraungefatbpons of atoz
epne God: Theberuek is qone,theSomer hath
an ende and toe arenot helped. Jam Tore vered
beæuleoftbe hurt of mp people, Zambeup and
abathed,{s not there not trpacleat Gplpads Fs
thereno Poepen tbere? abp then ignot the
bealth of mp people recouecred.
TheirCpapter: | os
C Ebde complapnte and betwapipng oftheprophet thema
Ipce of chepeople. Falye knowlege of Hod ought we onip
to refopcee, be bneppiumip: pen of tee here.
a Albo * wpll geuemp heade water
| pnougb,anda well ofteares foz: mp
neepeg, that 3 mape toepenpadtes
A Wey A dape fo: the flaugbterofmp people?
, E Uode God that Fbhadde a cottage
Come wbere larre from Folke.that J mpabt lea-
*.. nemp people and gofromethem, foz thep beall
> aduontirerg and a thepnkpng fort. Thep bende

-. thepztongesg likebowesto thote outlpes. Thep
ware Eronge bpon earth Asfo? the truth, thep
mape nothpnye atvape wpth all i the worde.
4€o2 they go frome one wopckednetle to another,

-- and vopll not knowe me, fapth fay Lode.

*Pee,one muft kepe bpmfelfe from another

Fere-rit. b noma mayefatelp trutt bps owne bzother,+ foz
seaatd-r.c one brother yndermpniethanother one nepap:
mer. diia Hone heaplethanotper. Vee, onediltcblethwith
pte.rroiica ANOthet,and thep deale Lopeh wo truthe.« Thep
i " Haue pzactpled thep: tounges tolpe, and taken
greate papnesto do mplchefe : Thoulptteke in

the nepbdes of a dpiceatfull people, whpche to;

terp dyflemblpnge falihed, wpll not knowe me

q aptbtbe Lowe.

'- “@herfore thus faptbthe Lorde of hoolkes, be
bolde, J wpl melt them, and frye them:-fe2 what


| pre.rbrii a (ould gels do tomy people.*Chep2tunges are


Pfa,Foiits ave lpke (harpe arowes,tolpeake difceat.caith
thep2 mouth thep (peake peacpablp to thep2 nep
ghboure, but peuelp thep lape wapte fo: bpm,
*Syulde Jot punpihe them for thele thpnges,

aerem.. b saprot Lower. D2 fhulbe J not beaduenged
of anp Puche people as thys: dipon the mountap
nes wpll 4 take vp alamentacpon g alozowlul


Sol. Mrhiti,


crye,and. a mournpnge bpon the fapze plapnes

ofthe wpldernes.Pamelp Howe thep neo beet

Dp:fhat no man goth there anpe man moze. Pree ;

aman (hall notbeare onebeatt crpe there ene
wirdes g catell are gone frå thence, x J wpll Bored’ the

make Jerulalem alfoan beape of tones, aden

pth be aye ER en fopl mabe the Cp

tpegof Judalo walk, no man thal dwel there

in. What man isto tople,astobnderkade thys”

D? to whome hath the Lozd (pokenbp mouth

be mape (ewe thps and fay: thou lande,whp

perpibelt thou Cor 2Uperfoze arte thou fo bzente

bp, lpbe atppldernes, > no man goeththozotve

Pee the Lozdehpm lelfefolocthe fame ynto thé

that eh Rahn adie! gat aha ld A

that be gauerbemincomaundement,neptberlp

ued thereafter: but folowed the wpckednes of pew.rrit.p

tbepz otoneberteg,and ferucd ttraunge gondes; 22 rige

as thep2fatbers taughtetbem, |

berforetbus Capeth tbe Lorde ofhooffes p
God of Firael. Webolde,¥ topl fede thps people
wpth tome wode, g genethem gal todzpncke: eit tht
xJ topli fcatre them alfo amonge the dpeathett. Fere.rriiit
whom nether thep noz their fathers bane knot Hormt.rrè
tand 4 wrll fende a fweard among them, toper
fecutetbem, vntpll F bepnge themto naugrbte
£¥)o2couer,thus fapeth the Lorde of boofkes.br-
ware ofthe vengeaunce that bangeth ouer pon:
and callfoz monenpnge wpues.¢ lende fo: wple
ibemen tbhattbep come (hoztelp, and {pnge a mo
urnpnoefonge of pou,tbat the teares mape fall
outol onreepes,and that oureepelpddes mape
guibeoute of water. a,

fforthereiga lamentablenopfe beard of Sp 7
on.D howeare toe fo fore Deftroped Dhow are
we fo petconflp confounded: tie mufte forfake
oure OWHe natural countrpe, and we are (Hutte
out of Our ownelodgpnges. Pet beare p toO2b of
the Lo2b(D pe wemen)¢ let poureares regard
the wozdes of bps mouth, ¢ pe may learne pour
doughbterstomourne, g Pp euerp onemap teach
Hernepgabboursto make lamentacpon. Ramelp
thus:Deathis clpmpng bp that our windoters
hefscome into onre houles,todeffrope p cbylde
befozetbe doze,and the ponge man in! the rete.

Wut tell thou plapnipe.thus lapeth the Lorde.

x The deade bodpegof men hall Ipe bponthe S
grounde,a8thedonge bpon the felbe and ag the Beem bit
bepe after the mower, and ther Halbe no man to ss
takethbem bp. Thus fapeth tbe Lowe. Det ace
the ple manreiopce inbys topledome: no? the
(tronge man in bps Erength: nether therpeh ma erepei.s
in bps rpcbes.x26ut wha fo wpllreiopee let him torn.
reiopce in this, tbat bewnderftanbdetb,and know *°?-*
eth me:foz Jam the Lozde whpchedo mercye , aoathsr.o,
equptye,erpabtcou(nes bpon theearth.+ Ther andrie.
foze baue 3 pleature in {ache thpngqes.fapetbtbe 0" °
Lode, Webolde , thetpmecommeth(fapeth the
Lode that F wopll vplet all them, whole foo2e-
fapnnets vncpecumcplen. Che Cappepans.the sore irii..
Fewes, the Edomites,the Ammoniteg the 1) 0 Fere.rrv.n
abptes,xandtbethaucn <)adpanptes H dwell and rrei e
in the foploernes. Fozallthe'Gentples are wn- '
circumepied in f Refy b nal the boule ot F&a-
elare tnepleumeptto m tpe perte, Bhu

yeeros Hit Che


The Prophecye


tihe sont ee, sepa piee. not to be featen;

= - een af püols;and atthe — Sob, iD
ssa Cate the Bdide dk the 107d that be
4‘ plpeaketh tnta the. D thon boufe ot
girael. Chus lapeth the Lozdex Ve


tadaa A pearje, anb petballnot be atraped,
For thetokens of Ipeauen:fo2 the Heathen are d=


etarigs Evapde of fuche:pea, allebeeuftomes:ana laiwes
of the Gentples are nothpng but waniter Thep
bewebownea tree in the woode, with the hades
ofthe worckemah,andfathpon it woptp the are,
thep coner tt ouer twpth qolde o; fplucr, thep fax
ften it with nates 4 hammers, thatit mone not
At Tandethe ag Apie asthe Palmeteee, itcan
Barar-bte nepther peake noz go one feote, but mufte be
Gi rerois oon. Ie not pe atratd ofluch,foztbep cando
Spoca.rd.a HepEDer ood noz euell. Wut there ignonelpke
onto tbe, D L020, xand great isthe name ofthp
power. (Uho wolde not teare thes Obpng ofthe
 Sentpls. fo: tbpne isthe dominion.
245  Kozamongal thewple men ofthe Genitpls,
én al thep2 kpngbdds, ther is nonethat mape be
Ipkened wntotbe. Thep are altogether vnleare
ned and oniwple in thps one thinge. Al thep2 cds
nyugis but vanite:namelp wod, fplucr : wobpcp
tregu. ir.a iS baought out of Charlis, and beatë to plates:
and golde from Dppir, «a toozke tbat is made
with the band of thecraftefman,¢ the cafterclo
thed wrtb peloteefyicke ¢(carlett ,euenfo ig
the woke of thep2 wple men altogether. Wut
—Lo2deig a true God, alpuynge God, €ancuer=
Humes Laftpng Rpng . «PE be be Wroth,the eartbe pa-
kot the Gentples mape not abpbe bps in-
Astor hep: gods thus thal pou {ap to theri:
thep are cobdes,that made neptbce Heaucn nos
cartb therfore pall thep pérpth From the earth,
agene.t, a MO from all thinges bnder beauen. Butas foz
” out God)xHe made the earth topth bps power,
€ with bis topfdome doth he order the hole cj-
patie of world, with bis deftrecton bath be fpzed
@ outthedeaucns. Athys wopce the waters qa-
pta.cridy a ther together in adel ahd d2aweth vp Prlou
des fromthe vttcrmoft partes of f carth:be tur-
neth lpgbtnpuge torapne,and bapngetbe forthe
the Wpndes out of thep2 trealures. His wildom
makethballmenfooles: And confounded be ca-
Terg of pmageg, ror thep cafe is but a bapne
ered  tbpngeandbatbeno
Ferem.vi,c MENW thep2 Wozkes, that thep inthep2 banitie
baue mabe, thal perp one with another in time
of vifitacpon. Aeuerthele fle Jacobs pozcponis
none Cuche:butitis be tbat bathe made all thin-
Gcs,and Flraelis prod of bis enberitaunce. Che
£020 of hooftes ishisname. Gather vpthp wa
res Out of thelande thou that arte in the tronge
place. Fozthuslapeththe Lord. webold, J wp


now th2owe as wpth a fone ipne the inbabp-


tours of thpslande at thps once, wpll bay
trouble bpon them that thep thal proue trne i pe
Wolde, that Fbaue pokea bp the prophetes.
Alas,botve am J burt/Alasbotwe paynfull
ave mp (courges Dnto mes Hox Jconlpore thys


pie. x Che bapnecrafte Y


fozowe bp mip felfe and Jiul (uffre it.) pta>

ernacle ig deftroped, gall mp coardeg are bzo-

| up nome are gone frome, cd no wpe
befounde owe baue F noneto fpzede outemp
fent,andtolet op mp Dangpnges. sop the berde:
men bauedonefolpihly,p loep bane not fougbte.
the korbe. Sbectoee baue they dealte pnwplelp W
wpthtbepzcatell:and are fcatercdabzode. We-
bolde the nople isbearde at bande and great les


Ẹ


to pape fo? them. | i
>, 4h ig another fermon, wbpehetbe ¥
or ERV Lobe commannded Jerempe forto
Rey ey, Decach. lapinge: Weare the toozdes of
apo) a Cey CDE Coucnaunte,and [peake bntotbe
ss men oF Juda and toall them p imet
at Jerufalem. And fapetbou bntothem: Thug
fapcth the Lorde God of Frael:*Curled be cue meu.sror.
tp one p(s not obedpent Dnto the Moodes of thig a rrvuts
couenaunt:tobpcb J commaunded bnta pour fa 2!
thers what tpme as 3 brought them out of €-
appt ftom ý pion fognace,faping: * Be obedpet earo.sis s
into mp bopce, edo accogdpng toalp F comma
unde pou fo thall pebe mp people, and FJ wplbe dani
pour Gob, and fopll kepe mp promple, x that J Sore ne
aueloo ne Dnto pourfathers.Mamelp that | relic
wolde gene them a lande|wppcbe Loweth wpth
mplkeand houpe,as pe fe,(fis come to paffe bri
fothps dape. Then ere erasi fap: më
Let it beenenlo Legde as thou lapet. 15
‘Then the Lord fapd vntomeagapne:Pzeach
thps tn theeptpes of Juda erounvdeaboue Jeru
falem,¢ tape beare the hozdes of thps couenañt -
that pe mape kepethem,fo3 J baucdplpgentipe
erbozted poure fathers cuer fence the tpme that
bzougbt them out of the landeof Egpptesnto
tbps dape. J gauetbemivarnpng bp tymes,fap __
ing:Derken wnto mp vopee.* Renertheles thep HF
wolde not obep menoz enclpnethep2earesvnto
me but Folowed the wpekedpmagpnacpong of
thep2 omne pertes. And tbectore, 4 haue accufed
them as tranfareffours ofal the wo2des ofthpg
couenaut,that J gauethemto kepe whpch thep
(hotwptdtandpngebaue not kept.
und the Lode fapbewnto me:3t (s found out


puge ptobole Flraell ¢ all the cptispng of Ferulalem


ate qonebacke. Thep Haueturned them felueg
to the blatphempes of thep: forefathers, whpch
bad nolui tobeare mp wodr, Eucnlykewple
paue thee olfofolowed raunge Goddes, and

ss MOA Mppped


The Prophecye


tihe sont ee, sepa piee. not to be featen;

= - een af püols;and atthe — Sob, iD
ssa Cate the Bdide dk the 107d that be
4‘ plpeaketh tnta the. D thon boufe ot
girael. Chus lapeth the Lozdex Ve


tadaa A pearje, anb petballnot be atraped,
For thetokens of Ipeauen:fo2 the Heathen are d=


etarigs Evapde of fuche:pea, allebeeuftomes:ana laiwes
of the Gentples are nothpng but waniter Thep
bewebownea tree in the woode, with the hades
ofthe worckemah,andfathpon it woptp the are,
thep coner tt ouer twpth qolde o; fplucr, thep fax
ften it with nates 4 hammers, thatit mone not
At Tandethe ag Apie asthe Palmeteee, itcan
Barar-bte nepther peake noz go one feote, but mufte be
Gi rerois oon. Ie not pe atratd ofluch,foztbep cando
Spoca.rd.a HepEDer ood noz euell. Wut there ignonelpke
onto tbe, D L020, xand great isthe name ofthp
power. (Uho wolde not teare thes Obpng ofthe
 Sentpls. fo: tbpne isthe dominion.
245  Kozamongal thewple men ofthe Genitpls,
én al thep2 kpngbdds, ther is nonethat mape be
Ipkened wntotbe. Thep are altogether vnleare
ned and oniwple in thps one thinge. Al thep2 cds
nyugis but vanite:namelp wod, fplucr : wobpcp
tregu. ir.a iS baought out of Charlis, and beatë to plates:
and golde from Dppir, «a toozke tbat is made
with the band of thecraftefman,¢ the cafterclo
thed wrtb peloteefyicke ¢(carlett ,euenfo ig
the woke of thep2 wple men altogether. Wut
—Lo2deig a true God, alpuynge God, €ancuer=
Humes Laftpng Rpng . «PE be be Wroth,the eartbe pa-
kot the Gentples mape not abpbe bps in-
Astor hep: gods thus thal pou {ap to theri:
thep are cobdes,that made neptbce Heaucn nos
cartb therfore pall thep pérpth From the earth,
agene.t, a MO from all thinges bnder beauen. Butas foz
” out God)xHe made the earth topth bps power,
€ with bis topfdome doth he order the hole cj-
patie of world, with bis deftrecton bath be fpzed
@ outthedeaucns. Athys wopce the waters qa-
pta.cridy a ther together in adel ahd d2aweth vp Prlou
des fromthe vttcrmoft partes of f carth:be tur-
neth lpgbtnpuge torapne,and bapngetbe forthe
the Wpndes out of thep2 trealures. His wildom
makethballmenfooles: And confounded be ca-
Terg of pmageg, ror thep cafe is but a bapne
ered  tbpngeandbatbeno
Ferem.vi,c MENW thep2 Wozkes, that thep inthep2 banitie
baue mabe, thal perp one with another in time
of vifitacpon. Aeuerthele fle Jacobs pozcponis
none Cuche:butitis be tbat bathe made all thin-
Gcs,and Flraelis prod of bis enberitaunce. Che
£020 of hooftes ishisname. Gather vpthp wa
res Out of thelande thou that arte in the tronge
place. Fozthuslapeththe Lord. webold, J wp


now th2owe as wpth a fone ipne the inbabp-


tours of thpslande at thps once, wpll bay
trouble bpon them that thep thal proue trne i pe
Wolde, that Fbaue pokea bp the prophetes.
Alas,botve am J burt/Alasbotwe paynfull
ave mp (courges Dnto mes Hox Jconlpore thys


pie. x Che bapnecrafte Y


fozowe bp mip felfe and Jiul (uffre it.) pta>

ernacle ig deftroped, gall mp coardeg are bzo-

| up nome are gone frome, cd no wpe
befounde owe baue F noneto fpzede outemp
fent,andtolet op mp Dangpnges. sop the berde:
men bauedonefolpihly,p loep bane not fougbte.
the korbe. Sbectoee baue they dealte pnwplelp W
wpthtbepzcatell:and are fcatercdabzode. We-
bolde the nople isbearde at bande and great les


Ẹ


to pape fo? them. | i
>, 4h ig another fermon, wbpehetbe ¥
or ERV Lobe commannded Jerempe forto
Rey ey, Decach. lapinge: Weare the toozdes of
apo) a Cey CDE Coucnaunte,and [peake bntotbe
ss men oF Juda and toall them p imet
at Jerufalem. And fapetbou bntothem: Thug
fapcth the Lorde God of Frael:*Curled be cue meu.sror.
tp one p(s not obedpent Dnto the Moodes of thig a rrvuts
couenaunt:tobpcb J commaunded bnta pour fa 2!
thers what tpme as 3 brought them out of €-
appt ftom ý pion fognace,faping: * Be obedpet earo.sis s
into mp bopce, edo accogdpng toalp F comma
unde pou fo thall pebe mp people, and FJ wplbe dani
pour Gob, and fopll kepe mp promple, x that J Sore ne
aueloo ne Dnto pourfathers.Mamelp that | relic
wolde gene them a lande|wppcbe Loweth wpth
mplkeand houpe,as pe fe,(fis come to paffe bri
fothps dape. Then ere erasi fap: më
Let it beenenlo Legde as thou lapet. 15
‘Then the Lord fapd vntomeagapne:Pzeach
thps tn theeptpes of Juda erounvdeaboue Jeru
falem,¢ tape beare the hozdes of thps couenañt -
that pe mape kepethem,fo3 J baucdplpgentipe
erbozted poure fathers cuer fence the tpme that
bzougbt them out of the landeof Egpptesnto
tbps dape. J gauetbemivarnpng bp tymes,fap __
ing:Derken wnto mp vopee.* Renertheles thep HF
wolde not obep menoz enclpnethep2earesvnto
me but Folowed the wpekedpmagpnacpong of
thep2 omne pertes. And tbectore, 4 haue accufed
them as tranfareffours ofal the wo2des ofthpg
couenaut,that J gauethemto kepe whpch thep
(hotwptdtandpngebaue not kept.
und the Lode fapbewnto me:3t (s found out


puge ptobole Flraell ¢ all the cptispng of Ferulalem


ate qonebacke. Thep Haueturned them felueg
to the blatphempes of thep: forefathers, whpch
bad nolui tobeare mp wodr, Eucnlykewple
paue thee olfofolowed raunge Goddes, and

ss MOA Mppped


amo, bii,b.


- Moaxthppped thei. Che boule of Blrael and Ju-


. C Therefore thug fapeth the Lowe. 2eboldt, 4


‘goben thou bat dóneeuellmakelt thp bolt of it.


een ros * Che Low callevthe agreneDlpue tre, afapze


xomai. ONCA Frutfull one,a goodly one:but wpth great


-D Thys DLD haue Jlearned of the,andon
Sfape.lit.b gpnacpoug. = Wut Jamagameke lambe an


xyere.rr.a VPON. Therefore, 3 topll befeche the nowe D
ano. pph, bs Loe 0 j praag pat
t therepnes and the berteg:Iet me fethe


flap. Frb me, fapinge.* Wzeache not onto bsinthe name


ai Da TE ve


a, $


. weth


fol lit


godly ig fo paofperousandtbat it oct) fo wel
wpth them whpch/ wprboutanpe Hame ofen


Dedelpue inwpckednefles Chou plantek them `


thep takereote,thep crowe, g bapng forth frute

Thep bot much of the,pet arte thou farre from

thep2 rapnes:25ut thou Lozde(to whome Jam
foclknowen)thou thatbalk{entandDproucoOmp . .
bertxtaketbematoap,lpke ag a flocke ig carped PeH.
tothe flaugbter poule,and popnt themfo2p dap

of hangbhter. Dowe longe Mall the land MOUNE 2 ins
xandalltheberbes of the felde perpe, fozthe ”
wpckednesotthemtbatdivcltherin. =
” ‘Chbecatellandthebpedesareqodone:petlape ys
thep tutbe.*Gond wpill not deltrope bs beterlpe Dra. rire.

inge Chou arte werpe int runnpnge topeh the Hertme-» »

-otement, bowe wylt thou then tnne WRIS þor- Basal
fes/in a peaceable furelandthon mapett be fate
Wut howe wplt thou do inthe furpous papbe of
Jordane: foz thp bacthzen and tbp kinred baug
altogether dplppledthe:anderpeboutwponthbe =
in thine abfencex2Belene them not,thouah thep sere trie
(peake fapze'wmo2des to the. As for me(F fape) q

baue Fozfakerimpne owne Dwellinge place,and

lefte mpne berptage. Hp Ipfe alfothat Fone fo

well bane Jacuen into the Dandes of mpne ene-
mpeg. * Hpne berptageis become bintOme, as. i
alponin the wod, 3tcrpeth out vpon me, there EHF
fore bane 4 foaken it. Hpne herptace is bnto

meas afveckled bpzde,a bp2de of Dpuerle color

resis ponit. Come and gather petogetber al

beafkes of thefelde, Come thatpemap eateit yp y

* Diverle herdmenhaue broken Dotone mp Vp ors iri
neparde,and troden bpon mp poecpon - DFMPp tetapib.a.
pleafaunt pozcion.thep baue made a topldernes
anddclert. Thep baue lapde it walk-and aeure

it ig wat, it (pabetbontome.Pee, the bole la

Ipeth Walk, tno man regqardeth was deftrop=

erg come ouce the brath eterp wape, Eo: plwerd


. Of the Lode dothconfumefromp one endofthe


landéto tpe other and no fepe batbrelte. Thep
baue fowne wheate,and reaped thoneg. Thep
hauetaken berptace in pollelipon, but it doethe
themno 060 an O ol ike et
fee ruptes,becaute of the great wath of
the Lode. | 3
Thus Capeth the Lorde bpon all mpne cuell 2

nepabboures,tpat lape bande ppon mpne berp=


tage, wh a Uae BONE ee my people of


{lrael:Webolde, 7 wpll plucke them (namelpe
{lrael out of thep2 laude,awd put ont the poufe
of Juda fromamong them.xAnd when J haue Deut. iré
rooted them out. J wplibe at one wpththem å- See inib
capne:and % topll baue mercy Dponthem:Fand iE.
bzpngetbentagqapne,euerpe man tabps owne
berptage,and into bps lande.And pF thep(name
Ip that trouble mp people) wpll learne tbe wap:
es of yee fwweare bp mp name. Che Lordlp
pheagthep learned mp people to fweare
eae etree A
people+ Wut piopll not obepe, ten wpe. pue
rote outthe fame folke,anddeltrope tbem fapth


the Lede. TO
tr C The.rtii. Chapter.


l rig Thedetructpon ofthe Fetwes te prer guren and tòrp (pac


fpnge abgoabe:twbp Ffcael was ceceauien co the peopl: of Gob
and tebp thep were fosfaken, ;
Thug


4949 tit


The Peophecye


» Hot peetiaple s€o2 J mip felfe wplbe twp th the,to
Helpe the and Deipuce the Caper the Lorde. And

J wplivpd hz out of the bandesof the wopckcd,

, anid Delpuce the out of the bandes oftpzaunteg.


fapeh p Lozde:Thep thalldps an borrtble death
arewt d: viroman tal mepe foe themmnoz burptbem, but
4 thep pall type asdonge bponthe earthe.- Thep
acct cere, Wallperphhe thozowe the fiwcarde and hunger,
Seria anD thep2 bodpes thalbe meat foz tye foules of
: theapze andbetegofthecárth. Fo? thus lapth
- the Lode, Go not thou in vate them, nozcome
tomourneand wepe fog them:fo2 Y bauetaken
- mppeacefromthps people(fapth the 1020 )pee,
my fauonre and mp mercpe. And inthpslande
‘Malltbep vpe olde andpounge,and thall not be
burped,noman pall bewepethem, noman Mall

clpppe o2 paue pym felfe fo: them.
35  ‘Therethalnot one piet another tomourne
forth them fo? Lad ddan to comfozte them.
S One {hal ttot offer another peup of confolacpon
toforget thep2 beupnefle foz fatder and mother,
{coz ro.b * Chou Halt not go into thep2 feat houle,to tit
Dolbre.to eat and dDapncke with them: ffo2 thus


fapeth the Lowe of hooftesthe Godot Flracil. th


Here.vit-o. x Beholde, Jall take awape out of thps place

anDsFFE-D’ the wopce of mprty and gladnes.the votce ofthe

beyDeqrome ¢ of the bopde,pee,and that in pour
dbapes,thatpe mape feitt. |

©. fretee when thou hewelk thys people al thele

sevem. b.p MODES e they Cape Ditto the: ¥ Miperefore bach

the Lode deupledallthys qreate plage for ver

«D2 what is p offence and fpnnep the haue done

. aqapntt the Lorde cure God! Then make thou

moteti them this anfwerex Wecanle pour fathersbaue

Iwen dtt fo2faken meLapeththe Lorde and paue walked


after Eraungegodbes whem (hep bauebonon= —


~ a tand worthypped; but me thep bane fozlaken
entip BNO Dauenot kept mp lawe.x And pe with pour
ae Aamful blafpbempes:haue erceaded the wpked
nes of pour fathers, for enerp one of poubath fo
lowed the frotearde and cuell pmagpnacpon oF
‘bps owne hertc:end isnot obedpente bnto me.
Serotec. ~ Cheriore wpilF caft pou oute of thyslande
intoa lend thatpe and pour fathers knowe not
ena there hal ve ferne frraungeqoddes dap and
Jerri tnpabt there wpil Y petore pou nofauoure.* we
‘holde,therefore(fapcth the Lozbe)thedapes are
come thatitthall no moze be fapde: Che Lorde
Ipucth whpch brought thechpldzen cf ¥frael out
~ofthelande of gppte, atit thalbelapde:the
~ §Lozelpueth, that bought thecbpldzen of Fira
elfrom@henonthe,and from all landes wherebe
hadlcatired them: dfo F wopl bpn thin agap
“oo | elite feline that y gane vitro rbep2 fathers


WBebolde(fapththe Lowe) bpl indt onte D
many fpthers to take them, and after that wpil ehti
Alcndeout huntersto punte them oute from all
mountapnes and bplleg and out of the caues of
tone. for mpne epes beboldcallthep2 wapes,t
{Herp cannot be bpd fro mp face nether cantbepe
wpcked dedeg be kepte clofeoute of mplpabte. —
wut Fp2lke wpll y lufpepentelpe rewardethepz
(hameful blatphbemics and tpnnes,becaulethep
baue defpled mp lande,namelp topth thep2 ipn-
hynge pooles and wopth thecarpons of thep2 ab
bompnacpons, wherwprbthep bauc filed mp -
neberptage'¥ Lozde,mp frengtp,mp pies Jere.ritiia
and refuge,intpme otironble The Getples Mal Meroe
come wnto the.from the endes of the wold, and
Cape, Verelp our fathers bane cleaued bntolpeg
thep2pdolled are but vapne and Ynpzofptable. `
Howecan amanmake thole bps qods,whbpehe
arenot able to be godss And therfore g tpl once
teach them,fapth the Lozde:J wpil ipewe them
mp bande and mp power,that thep mapehnowe
that mp name ig tbe Lobe.


| C The.rvii. Chapter.
Tbe frowardnes of the ewes. Curie te (hole that put
thepz confroencein man, andthole bleflcd that trotto Gop
(ans bert istwpcked,Gadisthe fearcher ofthe bert. Tbe
Ipupnge waters are fozlaken, She balowpnyge atthe Sab-
botpiacommaunved,


bd opi theqreate fpnne that pe bane :
doone


whofe herte departcth fromthe Lorde, pe Mall Lrourri, e
belpketh: beathe,that qraweth inthe wplder= in.rtiie
ties. As fo? the good thpnee, thatistoz tocome <3e.\crir.«
be foallnctle tt: but dwellina dye place of the i
woplderneg ina falte and wnoccupped landex@ Pemet
bleffed ig the man, that pntteth ppstrufte inthe wrou.rrife
Lorde. and whole boope is the Lozbe hymn Celte. etm.
+ffo2rbethalbeas atrethatis plantedbpthe ~
waters {pbe:wbpebelp2redeth oute (hz roote pn
tomopfineffe, wpome the beate cannot Harme:
wh? itcommethb,but bys teaf thalbegqrene: And
though there qrowe but Iptlefrupte, becanfe of
Drouth,pet is henotcarful,but benenerteaucth
ofrobarngefozthe frupte. Amonge all thpnged
manbath the molt bpficcattul ¢ fubburne bere,
— Mbo thalt ben bnowe ttr+EuenZthe Lod e
fearche onte the qrounde of thc Berte , and aL Siecem.c1-p
f z poca,f.t.


———


| Serre inearthe-¥ fortbep


-of Serene,


Srii d Hs rayness eretardeucey man Accosypng to bys
“"" Wapeg g accodpng to the freute of pps mokes.
Prorritts x ‘The partrpehe makethbeanel ofeqges,
ralle wobpcbe lhe layed not. decommeth bp rpchetle,
uch ENS Hut not rpgbteoutipe. $n ths mpbdelt of bpsipfe
multheleaue them bebpnd ppm.andatthelatte
befounvea werpe foole. wut thou (D Lode)

bole thozne is moolte qlo2pous, ercellent,and


Folk t;


‘Then thal y fet Fyre pon the cates of Jerufa
lemand tt fall butne bp epee of Jertfa-
lem and no man fhalbeable co quencd tt.

C The rvii. Chapter. aig


of mooft antiquptie,whpchdwellekinthbeplace A=


of ourebolperette: Chou art thecomforth of Ji-


racli. Alltbepthatforlake the,thalbeconfoutt- |e


yere tip DeDd:alltbep thatdepart from tye, Halbe waptté
ucfofaken the Lode the

hon.tt.0 perp condupte of the waters of Ipfe,.
D PHealeme,D Lowe, and ZF halbe whole: fane
thou meand J halbe faued: Foz P arte mp praile


webolde, thefe men faye onto me:Wbhereigthe d


w020 ofthe Lorde’ (Letitcomenowre.) Wher
ag JF neucrtheleffe, obeopentipefolowwed theag
athepHherd,and baucnot wncailed taken thps of
Fpce bponme, thpsknowelte thoutoell. Wp
Her.etég.a. Wo2rdes allo were rpg ht befozethe. We not now
aib-roi.c, tperphie pntome, D Lode, xstoztbou arte be
_ -Inwopome J hope, when 7 amin parpll. Let mp
er in be confounded butnot me:lettbem
eatraped, and not me. Chou halt bapnge po
them thetpme of thep2 plage and Walt deftrope
apa them tpabte fore.

doris _ Chushaththe Lomelapde wntome: * Go g
- Pande onder the mate where thozowre the people
andthe kpuges of Juda qo oute andin, pea, Yne
Der all the cates of Jerufalem and lape vnto thé
Heare the wode ofthe Lorde, pe hynges of Ju-
da, andallthou people of Judaandall ý cptp-
png of Jerufalem, that go thozowe thps gate.
#rorrtitto Chusthe Lod commanndeth:* Cake bede foz
Deut.5 poure lpues,lebat pe carpe no burthben vpon pou
0 intbe Sabbothto bepnge it thozowe the gates
of Jerufalem:pe pall beareno burthenalloeute
eropp Ofpoureboulesinthe Sabboth. Vethalldono
* laboure thetin, but halowe the Sabboth, «as
Acommaunded poure fathers. Horobepe, thep
obeped me not, nepther barkened thep Vrto me:
but were obftpnat and fuburne, € neptper obe-
pedime, hoz reccaued mp cogrection Penertheles
pf pe wpil beareme (fapth the Lozdé)e beareno
burthen into p eptte rhozow thps gate tpõp fab
both pf pe wrl balow f fabboth, fothat pedono
woch therin:the halter qo thozow p gates of
thps cptpe kpnges and ppnces, that hall (pet vp
onthe tbzone of Dauw: Thep'thalbe carped vpo
charettes, andrpde pon bogies bothe thep and
thep? +d agg Pea whole Juda ethecptesing of
Jerufalem Hal co Here thozowe: andtbhiscptpe

` fhalleuer be the moze and moze inbabpted.
_. ‘Chere Hhallcome men alfo from the cptpes
OF Juda, frome aboute Jerufalem and from the
lande of Benyamin, frome the plapne feldes,
from the mountapnes,and from tbe foplbderneffe
_ Sebpcbe tall bapng burntofirpnes, faceptpces,
oblacpons, andincence, and ofre vp thankel=
gyupng in theboufe of the Lord. Wut pi pe wpl
not beobeapent wnto me, to balowe the Sab=
both, fotbat pe wpil beare poure burtpens tho-
F awe the qates of Fernlalem pps the Sabboth.


thus vito me: * Bape not J do with pou ap Cous
APCED itomaiir. ¢


and Do euerpman accozdpng tothe wplfulneffe
fa nag ei y £
e tbus fapeth the Lode: Afke a-


grauen awape, that thep runne nomoze, eue
e feuptful ¢ ut mp people
äs


make them fallinthep: wapes from the auncy:
cnt pathes,¢ to gointeafote wap not wied to
be troden of tull mé.Ciberethozowethep haue
bzought thep2 lave intoaneuerlattpng wilder- severe.
nes efcozne. x Sotbat Mhofocuer trauapleth anv.risz.c
thereby, thalbe abafiped,and wag their beates

With an Eat wpnde wpll J lcaterce them
befoze thepsenemp. And whe thep2 deitruccion
cometh, gwpl turne mp backe Ypon thè, but _
nof one aaen Sgen ale eoep = comeie, bs ping ITT,
gpuefomethpraeagapnit this Ferempe : Foz
the pzeattes thali not be deftptute of councell,
tioz the prophetes beftieute of the wozde of gop
Comcandlet vs {nite him with the fonge,and

BDV. ‘tet hs


The Peo


let ws marke all DiS oosde8:Confpoer me :
Lozde, and beare the bopce of mpne enempes
Brale. a x thal they recommpence euel fo? good fog t ep
Ferd D bauc dpgaed a ppt for mp foule. + Remember
eT that Z ttope befoze thesto (peake qoodfozthem
and to tutne awape thp wath from them. —
Pranritb + Cherfore,let theps chplozendpe of bunyer
Ebunu.fand let thë be oppzefied with the wearde. Let
thepz topues be robbed of thepa chploz¢ and be-
come wpddowes : let thep2 hulbades be flapne,
let thep2 poge men be kplled with f fwearde in
the felde. Let the hoile be berde out ofthepzbou
RTO fes wbë f murtherer cometh Codenlp vpon thë.
IETLS. t -Eo2 thep hauc dpgged a ppt totake me,and
lapcb {nares fo2 hip fecte. Det Lorde Knowelt
all thep2 councell,that thep baue deutfed to fap
me. Hoagete not thep2 wpckednes: and let not
thep2 Cpnne be put out of thp (pabt, but let thë
be Judged before theas the gpltpe . Chis walt
thon do bntothemin tpme of thp indignacion,
@Cbe.ric.-Chapter:
qe propherpeth the veteuctpon of Herulalem: foz the conz
tempie and dp(ppipng ofthe worde of Bod,
wears pusfapde the Lozde:Goathp wap
CAR] gand bpe the an carthene pptcher,
sg eo erand bepnge Forth the Senatours
7, Ei and chefe prea
SIE of the chpldzen of Hemon, whic


l eth b the doze that ig made of bzpe
P emi the wozdes, that 3 pall
tell theand {ape thus bnto them, Heare p wod


pf the Logd. pe Bpnges of Juda and pe cptispns
Eteri. € of Yernfalem.* Thus fapeth the Lorde of ho:
aeret Fes the God of Jlrael: * Webold,F pl bap
fncbea plage bpon thig place that the cares
all that beare it pall glowe. And that becaufe
thep baue fozfaken me, and vnbalotwed this
place g baue offrcd init onto Fraunge gondes:
whome nepther thep.thep2 fatbers.noz the kin
Æ ges of Juda baue knotwen. Thep hauefylled
Sund this place alfo with the bloude of innocentes
‘fal. cbi.c * E02 thep hauefet bpan aulter vnto Waal,
Zevke topurne thepe chplozen foz a burnt offerpnge
“Ho Onto Baall, whtch J nether commaunded noz
charged them.netber thougbte once ther bpon
weholdthercfore* the tpme commeth((aith
the Lod tbat this place fall nomoze be called
‘Topheth,noz the vallepe of the cyt) enof He:
t on,but the vallepe of laughter. Sfoz inthis
q place wpll 3 flape the Senatozes of Juda and
‘erulalé,andkpl them dotone with the fweard
inthe (pabt of thep2 encmpes,andof them that
fete thep2 Jiriki thep2 dead carcafles wpl
J apue to be meat foz the foules of the apze,
and the beaftes of the felde. And FJ wpll make


Fere. bil,


hiai thig cptpe fo defolate and Defppled, + that oe


Leirie foeuct goeththerbp halbe abatiped and iea

_.,.., Bpot ber, bpcaule of all ber plages.

Thieliil.b "+ | topli fede them alfo withthe fieltheok

neu.rrbitt.e Vep? Connes and thep2 Doughters, x Peaenerp

dit.ceg-bt Cone (palleate bp an other.inthe befiegpng and
ftraptuefle, where wpth thepre enempes (that


feke thep2 lpnes) Mall kepe them in. And the


pptcher thalte thou bzeake in the (pgbt ofthe


men that halve wpththe, andfapewntothem: ofbpm moztopseache anp moze inpps nags ;


Svntothe vallep E


pyecye


Chuslapeth thé Lode of hootkes.


_ * Euen fo wp J ueteope tbps pedple si Ferepbills | ==


a. |


that Feve.bti.p


cptpe, ag aman breakethancarthen ve
cannot be made wpole agaptie. + Jn Topp
thalltbep be burped, fo2 thep thall baue none g=

ther place: Thus wpll Fdo vntothps place al-
fo,fapeth the Lozbde:and to them that divel ther

tn:ped, J wpldo to thps cytieas puto Copheth

(Sto? the boules of Jerufalem, and the boules of

the &pnges of Juda Halbe defpled, phe as To-

pheth) bpcaute of allthe houfes, tn whole par:

lourg they dpdfacrptpce wnto all the boote of

beannen, and powzed 2 ge offrpnaes bnto tra

unge goddes. And lo Jerempe came frome To-

pheth, where the Lozdepad fent hpm to prophe-

cpe and toode tn the court of the Logde, ¥ pake

toall the people: bus sappa Lorde of hoo:

es the God of Araell: webolde, 7 wopll bapng

bpon spt i and vpon euerpe tomne aboute

ff-all the plages that Fbaue deupled agapnite sere.picc.
tbem: Sozthep banebene obftpnate,and Wold and. rib
not obepe mp warnpnges.

T E a ae e ngeof

the wode of Gob. De prophecpeth th Pettus octane.


He complapneth that beis amdckenge foocke fo? the wo
5 0b: De ts compelled bp coe piet iijar Daaa oj
ae Ee ae


GA pa Den Pbalbur the pzeate.the lonne A

i p of Emer.thefeofthepoufeof plod  —

pel g aby nis e preach fo fteadfat

eye Min biochee thes theb

AAt Fees | are i egat

of en Jamin, inthe boufe of the Loaber mere

The nerte dape folotopnae Phathur broughte

Jerempe oute of the fockes agapne. Eden Capd

Acrempe wito bpm: Che £020 halcal f nomoze

jbhathur (that ts ercellente andincreafpng, but

t)agqoz(that is fearfull eafarped) enerpe wher

Jo? thus fapeth the Lo: bebolde, FJ wpil make

theafraped euen thp felfe and al that fauoret he

whpche hall perpthe wptb the lweardeok thep;

enempes: euen befoze thp Face. 5
And F wpll geue whole uda bnder the po-

wer of the Benge of Wabplon,whpch (hall carp.

fome onto Babil6 papfoners, and flape feme wh

tbe wearde. » @ozeouere, all the fubaunce OF ttt ve.py.e:


ct Feii a


thpsland,allthep2 pzecpous and gozgeous Woz tyere.rv.c


keg ali coftlpnes, and all the treature of thekpy 1 Fou a
wes OF Juda, wpl F gene into the andes of thetz
chempes whych hall {pople them, and carp th
unto Wabplon. utag foz, the(D palour
¥ thalte becarped ynto Wabplonwpthalithpne
Houtholde, and to Wabplon thalte thou come,
where thou tale dye,and be burped: thou and al
thp fauourersto whome thou bat preached lies

D Lorde: PF Jam dilceaued,then hatte tbou
dpiceaued me:thou balk dealt rongip,and batt zp: db
pzeuapled and makete me krongeagapne» All
the dape longeam Jdplppled g laughed tofcoz=
ne of euerpe man, becanfe 3 bauenowe preached
longe agapnite malpcpoug tprannye and pe-
wed them Pe betea: Fo? the pcehecaule Irem, b.b
they catthe wozde of the Lozdein mp teethand €
takemeenertotheworfte.
Wiherfoze J thought frd héce forth, not to {peaks


il


erempe,and put him bore.


|


*


. tarrri.b


Fe Frb. a


of Feremype.


Wut the worde ofp Lod waga herp burnpnae
~ fprein mp herte and inmpbones, whpchemben
J wolde baue topped: J mpabtenot. oz why:

¥xipcardefo manpe derplyons and blafppe=
meeen eucecy {pde of me,complayne Dpon bpm
ape thep: and we topll tell bys tale, pea, cuenaf


mpn: owne coOmppnpons:and fucheas werecon


uetfaunte fopth me, wente about to murther me
fapnge : bpon bpm, foe hall one wape or othere
beqple bpnt, and peenapleagapntte bpm: and be
aduenged of bpm.


wut the L020 Hodebpmelpkeampabtpe -


apaunte, therfoze mp pefecuters fell, and coulde
Donotbpnge. Thep thalbe fore confounded, fo


yerib EDEP baue Done Dnioplely,thep thal baue an ener


laftpng thame: «And nowe:D Lod of hooftes
thou rpabteous {earcher,(wbpcbe knoweffe the
rapnes, andthe verp pertes ictmeletpem puny
sp thed,foz nto the, Jcommpe mp caule.

Spngt dnto the Lo:d, and preapfe bpm: Foz
þe þathdelpuered the foule ofthe oppreficdfrom
godta the bande ofthe vpolentz: * Curled hethedape
Fecerd.s wwbherin JWwasbone:wnhappp bethe dape wyer
fnmp mother bought me forthe. Curfed bp the
man that beougbte mp father the tpbpnaesto
__ make bpm glad, faying:thou bate gottena line
See A ot ithappen wnto thatman, agtothecptpes x
whpchtpe Lod turned bplpdeDowne. Let bpm,
-beareceping intbe moznpng,and at moneDapele
mentable bowlpnge. Wbp feiet thou not me

affone a3 J came onte of mp mothers tomber
<D that mp mother had bene mp grane Der felfe,


gob  tatthebpzth mpgbt not pauecome oute,butre


boure g fozowe, ¢ toleabe mp lpte wpth pame?
T Che.rrt. Chapter.
A ec we propbervety that zenekrad Haldetake,« the eptre burned


mE 7 > dele are the woes that the Lorde

| Me A [pake vito Ferempe + what tpmeas

He j ya lbpngesenebtab fente pnto bpm pha-

[eZ SHifur thefonne of Belebias, and H0-

bonfag the fonne of Saalias prealtelapnae: x
Alke councell at the LOwe( we prape the) of ouc
‘bebalfe,foz Nabuchodoro502 the kpng of babp-

1 lonbeleegethe bs, pethe Lopne(paraduenture)
fopll Beale Mopth vs , accopnge to bps merucl-
ous potber,and take bpm from be.

‘Then (pake Jeremp : Geue sedekiasthps
anfiorre. Thus lapth the Lode God of Flraell
beholde, 3 wpl turne backe the weapons that pe
baue lnpour bandeg, whertopeh pefpghte agap
inft the png of Babplonand f Chaldeeswhich
beleetre pou rounde aboute f walleg:and F wll


itt.ce critth
if.parbidta
lere puta


j


bipng them together intothemiddetl oftbpscy b


‘tpe and Ymy felfe wpl Epabt agapnit pou with
anoutetretchrd bande and wpth ampahtyear-

me, inareate Dp{picalure and tcerpble wuathe
aer.rrria. anid vopll finpte them p dDivell in thyscptpe pee,
both men,and catell halodpe of qreate pefttlence

x And after thys (fapeththe Lod) F thalldclp-

vier sedekpas the kpng of Juda, ehypsferuaiites

hs people(andluche ag are efcaped inthe cptpe

Frome thepeltplence , erde and bunger) into


KA


mapned fpllinber.s@Wiberefozecame Jfoztbof .
mp mothers toombes Cohaucerperpence flas


‘the power of Nabuchodonozo2 kpng of abp-
‘lon: pea,tnto thebandes of thepa enempes,into
the bandes of thofle that folowe pe thep2 lp;


neg wbich Hailfmpte them wit


that no man mape quenche it, becaule of the- —
wpckedn effe of pour pimagpnacions. x Webold Fe Fb, a


kpnge of quda,that fpttctt inthe kynglye feate
of Wauypd:thou and thp leruauntes andthy peo


Lowbdecommaundet): x Kepeequyticand ryg: Sree’


teoufneffe, deliner the oppzefled From the power zarhavi. £


e Downe thp efpecpall Cedze trees,and to
cate them inthe Fpee. |
Andallthe people that qooby this citpe hal
{peake oneto another * Wherefore bath the Dew-rrir.p
Lozbedone thus onto this noblecptper iy MEGA, b
CH


— The Prophecye


i'.taic.ir-b l
setna broken the coucnaunt ofthe Lozde thep? od;
ib i and worlbppped and ferued Hraunge godoes.
iti Regt


rite -fortbem, but be forpe foz bym that departeth


#0p-b.¢ fhig laude nomoze.* Uoo Worth bym p bupl-


parlours with the good that be bath Seer b
ppolence: obich neuer recompencet)


oppzeffed and ap thep2 tpabte, then prof-


ecaufe be bad me befoze bis epes, fapeth the

Lorde: Menertheles,as fo? thyne cpes € thpne

- herte,thep looke bpon couctoutnes, to ped in-
nocente bioude, to do thzonge, and wpoienee.
diimegum X Andtherfore thus lapethtbe Lorde again
priitic and “$coak the Conte of E ag kpnge SA ate.


U the beromen Halbe dzpucn with the opnode,
and thp derlpmyes thall be carped awape into
captpuptie. Then Halte thou be bzougbte to
Mame and confufpon becaufe ofal thp wprked
neg thou that dwellet vpon Libanus, and ma

etap.riitd ket thpnelt ta the Cedzc trees. * D How Iptle
anv.rr a fhalt thou be regarded hen thp fozotwes ¢ pan
Jere-r'-b reg eg come pas a toma traveling with child:
xik eau * Ag trulpas Jlpue( eee Lode) Though
Frits) C onanias the onne of Jeoakim, kinge of Juda
weretbhefpanet of mp rpgbte bande, pet plg

' plucke bpm of. And J topl gene thetnto the po-

+E wer of them that feke to ape the, and into the
potver of thé that thou feareft, into p power of
Nabuchodonoso2 the kinge of Wabilon,and in

to the potoer of the Chaldees. Dozcouer, J wil

fendthe thp mother that bare p into a tratge

lande where pe were not bogne, and there tall

pe dpe. Wut ag foe thelanbde that pe Wwpl delpze


he tballanpofhps feedebe


Pe lcatreand thu


toreturite bnto.pe Hall neuer come at ie agape
Thps man Conanias Habe lpke an pmage rob-
bed and forne in peaces,wbhpcheplealeth noman
forall bps apperell. @iberetore, both beand bps
feed halbe fenteawape,and cafteout intoa land
that thep khowenot, |
@D thou carth earth earth: beare the wode G
of the Lorde. Thug fapeth the Lo20:Wi2pte this
man amonge the outlawes, forno Ai ot
{pall thyc mandaue all ppaiviclonge. Pepthes
. 0 þapppe,ag to {pt pps
pon the feate of Dautd:¢ to beare ralein Juda.
The. rriti Chapter.


T Dtfpraketh agaputte cucll curates that make Hanock ofthe
tocke ofthe Lozbe. tthe convertion oftheremnaunt ofthe Fe
wes to the fapth The commpnee of the true Hepherbe Chepiti«
propbhelpeo.agapnit falfe p: pbetes:when a prophet preacbeth
$ bpd BF Got, Hod conmuerteth f hertes otf beaters.aqapnt
prophetes that preach iper bubertbenameotGod. Dhempza-
cleso f falfe prophetes,


aija . a

siea D be x nto f epherdes,that rerebte,

n EA if og A deffrope  fcater mp flocke, fap FEPNA
NS PAA etbthe Lozde: Wberefoze thys

lis the commaundemente of the


Na ETS le
IA ; p > i Lorde God of Flracll: wntothe
eV IR VE SS Chepberdes that fede mp people


e outemp flocke anblooke :
not bpontpem. Cherfore noive wpll F vplet the
ippchednes of poure pmagpnacpons, Capeth the
Lo:And wll gather together the remnaunte
of mp flocke Frome all landeg that q padedzvuers


“them onto,¢ wpll bapnae them agapne fo thepz


pogue? thep map grow and encreafe. F wpl

{et (hepberdes alfo oner them, whbpcbe Mall fede

them. Thep thall nomoare feare and dzeabe, 02

there ballnone of them belofte, fapetbthe Lom _ +

p abebolbe the tpme commeth fapthethe Lobe BFFs

that J wpll raple bp the rpahteons bzaunche of

Dauidt whpch kpng thal bearerule,and he thal terr.ria

protpere wpth wpledome,and Mall fet bp equy=

pean drpabteoutnes agapne in cartbe. sii tied
Fu bps tyme hall Juda be Caued, and «Ble PrE

racli (pall Divel toptboute feare, And thps tS the «cots, ia

name thatthep Wall call bpm: x eucn the LODE + y6e c54,¢


couretpabteonthes, + And therefoze bepolde, the


tpmecominethe, fapth the Lopde, that it thalbe
nomozelapde:the Lode lpuetp, wbpch bought
thechplozen of Frael out ofthe lande of Egipt
wut the Lozrdelpuerh wbpehebzougbte forthe, -
and led the feed of the boule of Yirael oute of the ’
Po2theland and from all contrpes wher F bhbauc
{cateredthem:and thep hall diel in thep2 owne
lande agapne, |

_ Wpbertebreaketh in mp bodpe, bpeanfe of
the falfe prophetes all mp bones pake. Jambe:
comélpke a donkenman (tbat bp thereafon of
topne canne take no reall )for verp feareofthe
Lode and bps bolpe wozdes : becaulethelande
is full of abuouterers, and tho2ote fwearpnee,


itmourneth,x and the plealaunt paffures ofthe aercssiiis
Delertearedzped vp. Pee, the wapetbat minta- H


kets wpkeb, and thep? gouernaunce is notbpna

Ipbe the bolpe wode of tbe Lorde. €
Eo Pprophetesand the preltes themfclues
aire poluted ppocrites and thep2 wpkednes haue
Jtoundeinmp boule, Capethe the Lode. Ci bere
fo2zetbep2 wap thalbe llpperpe evens
wherin


Jereriiib 020 and pet thep ranne,


Feremype,


wherein tdep mape Eacker and fal. or J wyll
ppaigea plage bpon them, euë the pearof thep2
bplptacpon, fapeth the Lozbe. Y bane fenefolpe
amoge te prophetes of Samari, that preached

fo? 15 aal, and dpfceaued mp people of frael.
J baue lene alfo amongethe prophetes of
Jerufalem foule aduoutepe, and prefampteous
- Ipes. Thep take the moolt Hhainetul menbp the
bande, flaterpnge tbem, fo that thep cannot re-
turne from tbep: wpckednes. All there wd tbep2
_ | plespnsare onto meag Sodome, and agthein

babptourgof Gomoze.

‘Therfore thus lapeth the Lorde of boolkes
Hera fs.b CONCernpHEe tbe prophetes * . Webolde, F wrll
fede them wpth mozmewode, and make them
dpe the water of gall. oz from the pzophe-
tes of Ferulaléis ppecri{py come intoal plande.
And therefore the Lorde of hoottes geucth
‘airy’ POUbYS warnpnge. * Ipearenot the wordes of
the p2ophetes that preach vntopou,anddpiceas


~_ Mepou,truelpe thep preach pou vanite, fozthep Ba


\fpcake the meong of thepzowne bert andnot


ad a se rhe : FEINEN femti Eh
“Fits jep lape Yntotbem that dpippleme: Che
peliat £02) bath {pokenit : a obs ah [pere


tpabt well. And unto all eben that walke after
the luftc of thepz otwne berte : thep faye: Cute,
there Hall nomplfoztune happen pon. 102 bo
bath (ptten n¢pecountaple of the Lode that be
Hato hearde and onderitand , what eis aboute
Codortiibo bath marked bpsdeuple, and beard

Iece-Frr d tf * Webholde, the Loznpe wether ofthe Lorde
(thatig . bys tudpquacpon) ball go forty , and
a bpolei:: tobpzle wpne Hall fall Downe vpon
tbe beade of the vngodlpe.

And the wath of the Lodeball not turne
agapne,ontplhe perfourme efultilthethongbt
ICEF of bhpgberte. x Bnd in the latter dapegpe Hall

>» —_ Knowebis meanpnee.

ZF bauc not lente thefle popbetes (fapeththe

| Sdauenot poken to

them,and pet thep preached. Wut pftbep bad co
tpnued in mp countel, thep had opencdtomp peo
le mp Wwodeg, and thep bad turned mp people
om thep2eucil wapes and wycked pmagpna-


x Bome. cfjg:* Am then Gobtbatteerbbut thetyince IE


ezevii,o Sbpicheisnpeatbande, andnot that is farre of

votacrrire Caprtp te Lowe ¢ * tap wh fein bpde bpm

xera.irbt.a Celfefo that ¥ thal not febpm,tapeth the Lords

Actes buf ADO NOE F ful€pl beauen and earthe ,fayethrbe

aun GOLD Loder F haue heard well pnough, tbat the pro

: poetes lap tbat preach lies inmp name,faping:
Paue dreamed: J baune dreamed.

Howe longe whyll thps contynuein the pro-
beteg Darte to tell lpes.andtopzeach p craftpe
ubteltpe ofthep2 otone bert: bore purpole ts

(ptd the Dreames that euerp onetell) to make

mp people forget mp name, asthep: forefathers

a, DPD, When Waal came bp. Che prophete that
(ene t's bat) a Dzeatme, let him tel itx and be that vndet:
fandeth mp word, let him eive it fapthfullpe.

Fot what bathe chafe and wheatetodo to-

gether, fapeth the LozderFsnot my wozde lyke
afpze ,fapethtie Lode? andlpke an bammer,
È bzeakctp p beards koner Cherfoze thus Capetp


andto fape: The Logdebat


| — Sollttii,
theLozde:bebolde, Jtopll pponthepiophetes
that teale mp toode KA Grater nee
Wedolde here am F(fapeth theLo2de) a apni
tbe prophetes that make tiges tendze tofpeake

bath laybett.2zebolde,
beare am Y(fapetb the Lozde) agapnite thole
prophetes that darre prophecpe lpinge drea-
mes, and mypzacles, home FJ heuer fente noz
commaundedthem. Thep tall do this people
greate barme,fapetb the Lozbe. i

PE thig people, aaa peopbet 02 preafte
alke the, and fape , what is the burthen of the
Lozde: Chou thalt fape nto them:twbhat but-
then: Cherfoze wpll 3 raft pen frome(fapeth _
the 102d )becaufe pe poure felues areok ca bure) #5
And the Peobete, Brea fte,oz people that ieth
De mee (the nk ai our LoO2D) pim topl

an callo. i

Wnt thug pall pe faye enerp one toanother ©
and euerp manto bis brother. bat anftvere
th the Lozde geuenswbatis the Lozdescom
maundemente + And as foz the burthen of the
iL o2d:ye (hal (peake nomoze of it,fo2 eucrp tan
nes owne ivozde is his bucthen becaule pe baue
altered the woz2des of the lputng God,theLod
of booftes ore God, |

Thus thalleuerp man fape to the propbes
tes, wat anfwere pathe the Lozde genen the!
sD; whatfapeth the Lorde And not once tona
mie the burthen of the Lode. Cherfoze thus fap
eth the Logd. Foz fo micheaspehaue bicdthis -
tearme the burthen of the Lorde where as F
notwithtandpnge fente brito pou, and fozbad
pou tofpeake of the Lozdes burthen.

Webold therfore, J wpllrcpute pouasa bur
then,¢ tpl cat pou out of mp prefence,pee,e the
crerenito that 3 gaue pou æ pourc fathers: and
wpll bepnge pou toancuerlaftpng confulion:
And into fucha pame as al nener be fozgotté:

Che.xrttit. Chapter.
«_ Whe bPlpon of thepapners of (pages, Whe ipi betpon tra:
Hptpethchat patteofthe people hulbe be Brougbt sgapne front


captpupte. The feconpesthat scoekiagand the rea otthe peas
Pls ulve be betragro, oe


Wi ses befoze the temple of the Lozde tif. Resum
b


of Babplondabledawapecaptpue Fechoniag
the fonne of Jeoakprii:kpng of Juda the mpah
tpe men allo of Juda Muth tbe Worckhe makers,
anbdconnpnrge men of FJernfalem:ynto abp-
lon. 3n the one maunde were verp qoodfpy-
ges, cuen lpke as thole that be fpatterppe.4n
the otber maunde were Yerpe noughtye fpg-
cs, weeks mpabte not be caten, thep torre
ocuell. Then fapde the Lorde nto me: what ees
fcet thou Zerempe r Flapde: * fpgges wher S!
éffomebe berpe good, and fome lo enell that
nomanmapeeaterhben. 5
Then came the wode of the Loade bnto me
after this maner: Thug oe the Lod f Gad
of Afracl,ipbe ag ë kuowell the goodfigges,fo
al ¥&nowe themenled awape whom ¥ baue
ent oute ofthis place, into the land of the ot


The Prophecye


dees, fot thep2 profpteand topil fet mpne epes

- ppon Sieh: the befte,fo2 3 topll bepnae thé
agapne into this lande: J topl! butlde them vp,

and not beeake thembdotone: J wyll plante the,
Sewrtrir, a AND Not rote them oute.* And J wpll geuc the
Jerc.rrr.d anberttoknowne howe that Jam the Lozde
FFFUTFFEILE thew (halbe mp people, ¢ q wil be thep2 00,602
| thep thal returne vnto me with thett whole bert
Jere x BAndlyke as thou kuotvet the nougbtpe
fogge wbpep map not be eaté.thep are foeuck
uenfo wpl ¥(fapeth the Lorde) Let sedebtag
the kpnae of Juda(pee,and all bis pepnces.and
the relpoue of Jerufalem, that remapne ouet in


this lande,and them alfo thatdiwelin Eappte) :


-Lirras DE Dered and plagedinall bpngdomes and lan-

Stal te.

Daui a DES. AND wpil make them tobe a * repzoffe, a
commen bp tozdea laughbpnge tocke g Mame:
inall places, where thal fcatre them. J wplt
fende the {ioeard,bungre and peftplece, amon
them, tntpll J bauecleane confumed thë out
the land, 3 gaue onto them andthepz fathers


C The. rrd. Chapter.
€ Ferempe prophecpeth that thep Halbe in captpupte.tr.peares
anb.r.becaule they contemned and betppled the tvojte of Hod
iae Hherweth them that afterthe.tr.anb.r.peares,the Babplens
hulde be dettroped. The deltrucepon of all narpons is prophecp
ed, Be meucth the Pyeattes of the nacpons Co waplpnge,


ce, ee Dermon that was geuen wnto Fe:
Pon es ee vem tan prase ot sede


OSGI) pe cokpm the
as x DS fonne of Joliasking of Juda that


lem, on this maner.
ferom the thpztene pere of Jolpas the fonne
of Amon kpnae of Juda, wnto thts pretent dap
(thatis even thze andtivintic peare, tbe wozde
Jete-FHHr. © of the Lozdebatb ben commptted bnto me.
a x Andlo Y baue fpokentopon, J bauerpien
ipa.serbie Dp earlpe,.4 baue geuen pou warnpnge meea-
fon but pe wolde not beareme,* Though the
Loade hath fente bis leruauntes,all the prophe:
tes onto pou inceafon:Pet wold pe not obepe,
if-ve.roti¢ pe wold not enclpne pourecates to berare.
pe se td x turne agape everpe man from
bps euell wape, and from poure wpcked pma-
phacpons, and fo Mall pe dwell foz cuer tn the
ande that the Lozde prompled pou, and poure
fo2efatbers. and gotiot after fratige roddes,
ferue them not, woztbpppe them not, and angre
me not With the wozckes of poure Dandes: then
topll J not pnnphypou. Meucrtheles, pe wolde
not beare me(fateth the Lozde) but haue defped
mewiththe wozckes of pour bandes, to poure
owhe greate Darme.
@Wiberfo2e, thus ik the Lode of boeg
x becaule pe baue not hberkened bonto mp o2d
100,7 wll fende out,andcal Foz al the people
ararz.g tat Divell in the Nozth(fapeth the Lozde and
Larra Dopll prepare Pabuchodonozoz the ipnge of
+Babplon mp feruaiite,and Wpllbepnge them
bpon thisland,¢ opon al that dowel cberin,and


gerem, ib


bponalthepeoplèthatàreaboütetheit, ¢wpl
ofterlp roote themoute. J tpl make of them a
wldernes, amochage andacontpnuall dDeferte € |
¥Gozeouer J wpl take fromtbem f vopee «er, vii.
of gladnes aud folace,the popece of the bzpdegro %°-FPo
me and the bzpde, the vopee of the annopnted w
thecreflettes, andthpstpolelandethalbecome -
afoploernefie, and thelenacpons thallferue tbe a oa pong
Ine Peawea areernpden ra OML optptetbetwPes Leet: ©
sUEK.Pi p2ed.'F wpll bplpte the wpe (= t7.9-
Kednes of thelspnge of Wabplon, and bys people do.ssrir.b


fapeth the Lorde: pea,and the lande ot the Chal- Daut.trs


dees, and wpll make ita perpetual wyploernefie 1941
and wpllfulfpllalimp wozdes bpontbat land
whpche A haucdeupledagapnée it pee all that ~
igivzptenin this book waved Ferempe bath pro
pbecped of all people:fo that thep alfo Halbe tub
ued Dnto Dpuers nacpons and qreate kpnges,
fo? 3 wplrecompence them accordpng totbeiz Job.Frriiig
dedes and wozkes of thepz ownebaades.
SorthushatbtheLosde God of Aeacll fpo: D iia
ken vntome: Cake thps +twopne cuppeokindpa irairrib
nacponfromp Dand, thattboumapeltecauleall
ibe people to whom Flende the, foztodzpnke of
it: that wben they bane dronken there of thep
mapebemadde, ¢ oute of thep2 wpttes, whe the
fibearde commethe that J wpli fende, amonge
them. Chen toke Zthe ex pp nia Lodes
bande, andmadeallpeople todzpncke there of,
wnto whome the Lozde had tente me: Ç
ut Epette, thecptpe of Jerufalem and all


thbecptpegof Juda, tbep: kynges and papnees,


to make them delolate, afte, Defppled, and byf
fedat, and curfed, accozdpnge as it is cometa
paffetbps dape. Pea, and baro the bpng of €-
gppte. bys feruaunteg, bys pepneeg tis people
atthe foci etal eare 2 Shirin
ndeof pus: All kpngegofthePbplptp
negand w Alcalon, Asab, Accaron, andtherem
naunteol Aod, the Edomptes.the Goabptes -
and the Ammonptes, All the kpnaes of Cp2ug,
and Sypbon,thekpnges of the Fleg, that are be-
ponde the fee, Dedan, Thema, Bus.and al them
that dwell inthe vtermofte partes of the world
all the kpnges of Arabp,and(qenerallpe)all the
Bpnges tbat dwell inthe befecte: all the kpngeg
ofsamet, aed iy Me of Elam,al the hinges
ofthe Hedes,allthe kpnges toward the Porth
whether thep be farreo2 npe,euerpe one again®
bps npeghbboures: Pee, and al thekpnadomes
ate pontbe tobole earth. The kpnae of Herach +
fapbe be:thalldapneke wpepthemalfo. -
‘Therfore,fape thou vnto them: Thps is the
commaundemente of the Lord of holtes the god
of Ffracll:Dapncke,and be Dzoncken,(perde and
fall, that pe neurt arpfe, and that thozowe tbe
fwearde, whpcbe J wpllfendeamong pou. Wut
pE they wpl not receaue the cap eofthpne band
anddapneke t:then tel them: Chusdoth p 102d
of booftes thecten pou-dzpnicke pe thal, andthat Isr
(ho2telp.f€oz loo,+ J beqpnne toplage the cptte iett s
thatmpname ig qeué vnfo,thpnck itpethenp | .
AWpllleauepou wnpunithea: Pe thallnot go
gupte.fo Jube Scant fimearannh ah pata
bptersof p earth:lapeth thet o2d¢ of poottes.
Eherfoze


y hi


of Feremye,


Therkote,teil thom al thefe worded, and Cape


Zork iti brito them: + Che Lorde fhallerpefromaboue,


atid let bps bopce be herd from bps bolp habpta
tion. Taped a greatnopte pall be crpe feom bis
court reqall: an ER enr Uee
thegrapegatDerers)and the found therof malbe
berde vnt the endes of the world. For the Lo2d
Hathe aiugement togpue Vpon all people, and
wll phai j wit ay cg efh,and
unpibe the pngodip:fap aude.
: SHoz thus Capth tye Lozd of hofkes: xwebhold


mere mplecable plage Mall goo from one people to


another, anda great fozmpe Water Hall arpie
from alltheendes of the cath . -And the fame


the people: thet p preettes, the propbhetes, and
allthe people toke bolde bpon ppr, and fapde:
thou (alte dpe. ow datrett thou be fo bold, ag
to fapein thename of the Logde:it pall happen
to this boule asitdpde puto Hilob:and thes cp
tpe (albe fo wate, ý no må thalldwell therin
And whé al the popa were gatberedgbott E
Acréemp in the boule of the Lozde, the pzincesof
Juda Derde ofthis sumour,andtbep came lone
out of the bpugeg palace, into the boule of the


Lozbe, and fat them Downebcfoze the x newe t6-re.r0.¢
Doze ofthe Lozde. Chen (pakethe peecftes and IerirrFLi b


the peopbhetes wntotherulers andto all the peo
le thele wozdes:* Chys ma ts worthpto dpe, .


SEol tri,


‘02 be hath preached agapnite this cytpe,as pe aaeb
pour felues paue berde with poure cares. ,
Then lapie Feremp onto the eulers ands D
allthe people: She Lord hath tent meto preach
cai hsoes thishoute and agapntt this cptye all
Woo2des that pe paue bearde. Cherfore a-
mende polite wapes,anDyoure aduplementes,
and be obedpent ynto the voyce of the Lorde P
pour God: [o hall the Lod repete of theplace,
that be bath deupled again pou. Move as foz
me: Jain ih poure bandeg, do with me as pe
thpnkeerpedpent and good. Wut this wall pe __
knowe, pipe putme to death: pe ball make Satsrikte
pourlelues, this cptpe,andall tbeinbabptoursg
thevot gpltp of tinocente bloude. ffo2 this igol
atcuthe, that the Lozdbathf{ente me ynto pou;
to fpeate all thefe wordes tn pour cares. onty @
nto


bape hall the Lowe bpm felfe Nape them, from
One ende of f erthto an other. Ther thalno mone
. be mabe fo2 any of thé, none gathered Dp, none
burped-but Hal (peas dunge vponthe ground.
Ourne D pe (hepHerdes)and cepe.{papnkle
po Celues wpth athes,D perames of p flocke:
o2fhetpme of poure laughter is fulfplied, that
petall flape one an other, and pe palbe fcatred
and pe pall fail lpke veffels newlp made.
«Che Hepbherdes thal baue no iwape to Aye,
and the camimed of the flocke pall not efcape.
‘Then Hall the hepherdes erpe hozpblyc, and
the rammes ofthe flocke (hall mourne: fo2 the
et batb confumed thep2pafture, andthey2
belt feldegipe deed bycaute of eben led
ofthe Lode. Chery parue forlakenthep2foldes
lpke as alpon. So2zthepzland is walte, bpcaute
| of bis furponsceueltic, and foz bis fearetull in- ben fapDde the rulers and the people
| bignacpon. \ the precites and prophetes: Chis man map not
| C The rrbt- Chapter. be condDempned onto death,foz he hath preached
C Fetemp mouth the people to amendement, Peistaken of ünto tsin the nate of the Lode OuE GOD. ‘The


Er AO Dra ts Rplleo ot Hebocbia coat ole ote elders al{o of the lande fode Vp and fapde thug


Pachis


| vntoall the people: )tcheas.tie Mozatkehtte;

| cal x whiche wasa afra ec Esebiah kpnge Bt

| of Juda,fpaketoallthepeopleot Juda: Thus

| fapeth the Lorde of booftes: * Sypon thalbe Mihei s
Bas plowed lpke a felde, Jerufalem Halbe an heave

| Eaetts x StandeintbecourteoftbeLogesboute, and of ones, and thebpl of the Lozdes boufe pall


beturnedDto an hype wood. Mpde Esckiah the
Epnge of Juda andthe people of Juva put bpm fase
death fo2 this’ Ho verelp: x but rather fearcd 3
the Lorde, made th paper nto pin. Foz
the which caule allot o20 repeted of p plage,
that be bad deupiedagapntt them. Sbulde toe
then Dofuchea thamefulldede againtt our fou
lese Ther was a prophet allo ý pacached pip
in pname of the 102D,called Ciriab thelonne of
Socmtah, of Cariathiarim:this man preached
alfo agapnit this cptye, and agapnét this lave
accoding foalas Jerempe faith. Low wc Laas
* Jeboakin the king with al the ettates ¢petn
ces, Dad berde his woes, P kpnge went about ——
to flap bpm. * Wiben riab percepuedthat,be pategatc.
thas atrated and fied and departedinte Egypt
‘Chen Feboakim p king fent big leruauntes
into tbe lanbe of Egppte: Namely Ginathan
thefonne of Achboz:and certain men with dim
le hearbe Jerempepzeache thele wogdesinthe into appt, which fetched Uiztabout of Egipt; .
oufe ofthe Lozde and brought bpm bnto kpnge Zeoakpm, that
Row wopen he bad fpoke ont allthe woes flue bpm with tpe werde, andcaft bis decd bo
that the 2020 commatioed þimto preacbe puta Opeintotbecomen people eave. ni Ma st |


" alforepente of the plage whpcbe Jhane deter-
mpnd tobypnge bpon them, bpcaule of thep2
9 wopcked inuenticns. ,

And after this maner (halt thou fpeake bnto
them. Cbuslapth the Loz: pipe wil not obep
me, to walke in mp lawes yppch Jhane apuecn
pou moe an A pastored ens p

es whome F fen | pou, tplpnge vp

ae ,and pl acer : Devs forll not fo-
Kerem.bia lotor them(F tape) then spl FJ dof thys poule
¥ ag J pd vnto Splob.and wopll make thyg cp:
tye tobe abbozredotall the people of the earth.
And the preekes, thepropbetes and all the ped-


The Pzophecye


Y


i pn
(ss
Ba


PUFF


Fere.rri.b. mine himtodobhimfleruice.*aAnd al people Mal
F Eb. thadpii adh 3 Platon e,and bischildzes children,


5


of Habplon:) fame people wpill A bplypt with
rh a ips hg te yt ip ilence, Dntpl


Ahaueconlumedtheminbhishandes,faicth the |


aer.trit.e. Mowe. * And therfore Lolowe not pour prophe

FB teg fotbfapers, erpounderg. of Dzeames, char-

mers and wythcbes, whpcbe fap opro p Ou: pe

pall not ferue the tynge of WBabplon.Fozthep

zeache pou lpes:tobzinge poufarrefrom pour

ande, and that J mpabtcatepou out, and de=

— pou. Wut the people that put thep2 nec

kes bner the poke of the kpnge of akplon,

‘and ferue bym: thole wpll Fletteremapne tpl

in thepz owne lande (fapeth the Lode) and
thepthall occuppeit and Divell therein.

€ A thefe thynaes tolde Jzedekiathe king

Ferb of guda andfatd:<Put pour neckes wnder tHe

poke ofthe kpnae of abpton, and ferue bpm


anbdbis people tbar pemapelpue. Wbpwplte bpl


thou andthy people perp toith the fiocarde,
oth bungre, with pelkplence:lpke as the Lozd
hath deupled fo2z all people, that wpll not ferne


the kpna of Babilon * Cherfoz qpucno care:


Ber. eriil, c
ertrinb, wontothole peopbetes(that tell pou: pe thal not
: feructDekpnge of Wabplon \fortbep preached
oulies:nether haue F lent them,tatth p Lozd:
wheit they are bold, fallelp to pzophecpein
mpname,that 3 mpabe pooner dziue pou out,
and that pempabt perih with pour preachers.
ED Sear the preeftes alfo and toal the peo:
ple: Chuslaieth the Lod : Heare not the woz:
ves of hole prophetes that peeache buto pou,


yolar : Webolde.+ the bellels ofthe Lordeg IFrviy.a
oufe thall thoztlpe be bzoughte bptber agapne
from Wabpion: soz they prophecpelpes bnto
pon orare Danang, butferuethekpngeot iba
plon: tbat pemapelpue. . Uiberfore wpll pe
make thps cptie to be Deltroped: Wut pEthep be
true prophetes in berpedede, and pE thewozde
ofthe Lowe be commptted bute them, then let
them pzape the Lode ofbooteg, that the rem-
naunt of the ommamentes( which are in the boule
of the Lode, andDremapne pet in p boule of the
kpngeof Juda and at Jeru maenor eaepeD
to Wabplon alfo. o: thus bathtbe Lodof bo
{tes poken, concernpnae the ppllerg the lauer,
thefeate-and the rendue of the oznamentes that
pet remapneinthis oprie peh RabucHodDono tiit.ce rtitia
soz the kpnge of Wabplontokenot, x when be
catpedawape Jeconiabthe fonne of Jeboakim


D


- kpnge of Juda wpthallthe power of Juda and


Jerufalem onto Wabplon oti See y
Prea thug batbthe Lozde of hookkes the God
of Flracll (poken,agstouchpna the refiduc of the |
Oznamentes oF the Lozdes boule, ofthe kpnae Herero.
of Judaes poule and of Jerufalem: = Thep
balbe carped bnto Wabplon,and ther they thal
remapne wntpil J vplpt tbem, fapth the Lorde, , EEN
Then wpll 3 bzpngetbembptheragapne., "70e
And thps was done inthefame perc cueninthe
Seay nnpuae st eberapgueotsebebiab kpnge of a
uda.
© Therrbiii.Chapter.
SE Doania o Bananai ie te EIEk E


the other prophetes. De beinge inippred ofthe Logd, tepzouet
pananiah,propbecpingebps deat. » Fepzoueth


erana Utin the fourtbe pere of therayane of 4

prs rekia bose Juda, intbefpfth

d= sinoneth, te dappened that Hananiab the
fonne of Aiur the prophete of Gibeon, paketo

me in tbeboute of the 1.020 inp prefence of p pre

{es and ofjallthe people,and per Tns apep

the Lozde of hooftes the God of Ffraell: J baue

bzoken the pocke of thekpng of Wabplon, +and yer.trog.e
after tio perefopll Jbepnae agapne intothps

place all theoznamentes of p 2 odes houfe, that
#abuchodonoso2 kenge of Wabploncarped a-

wape fromthys place,vnto Wabplon. Peay
wpll bepngeacapne Picea the tonne of Fee
boakim the ie of ‘Juda bpm felfe, wpth all
the paploners of Juda (that arecarped vnto wa
bplon even intothpsplace.fapthe the Lode.

fto J well bzeake the poke of the kypnae of wa


plon.
Then the Prophet Feremp yane anlioere vn
to the prophete ananta before the preetes and i
befoze all the people that were pzefente in the
po of the Lode- x And the prophete Jeremp ihti, e
apbe: Amen, the Lozde do that and qraunte the
thpng wbhpchthou bat prophecped:that bemap
bepnge agapne all the oznamentes ofthe Lo2-
des Houle, and reffoze all tbepzplonners frome
Wabplon into this place. Peverthelefle bearké
thou alfo what 4 topll faye, thatthou and al the
people map beare. Che prophetes that were be-
02¢ Dain tyme palite, wppch peopbecp p of ar
2 trouble


The Prophetye


Ficaltes-foberin thou toaptett thus néo bpm:
‘Che Loabde bath ogdepned theto bea pealt in
ftead of x Jeboiada the peal that thou Mulde
bethe chefein tbe boufe of the Logde, aboue all
Prophetes and preachers, ahd that thou mpab:
tefl fet them bpon tbe ppllerp,o2 in the forkes.
Howe bappeneth te then, tbat thou hatte not rez
p2oued Feremp of Anathoth, tobp che neuer leas
ucth of bps prophecpinges And belpde all thps,
sce reir. che bath fente vs wowexvntoe Wabplon,¢ tolde
vs plapnelp:that oure captpupte fhalllonge ena
Dure:that we Hulde buplde vs boules to diell
therin:and to plante bs gardens, that we mapé
entope the frutestherof,cabpebletter Sopho-
niahthe pelt rede,andlet Jerempethe prophete
beare tt, Chencame the wozde of the Lozde dn-
o Fetemp fapinge:fende word to all themtbat
beincaptpupte:onthpsmaner: Thus habe the
Sce-protiic 0200 fpokenconcernpnae Sempah the Nethe=
lampte*becaulethat Sempab bath pzopbecp=
Ed Bnto pou topthout mp compiipons b2oughte
Pou into afalle bope tberefoze thus pu doth
certpipe pon: Behold, J wpll vplet Semiabthe
F2ehelampte,ebps ferd: that none of bps hall
remapne amonge thps people, and noncof then
balle tbe good p ¥ topl bo fo2 this people, fapth
the Lode. For be hath peechedtallelp off Loyd
Ghe.rre. Chapter
q The Nh Add ta det ng abplan mob bp bis


chattenpnge hetweth that the people is (pnnefull,the dec
Trucctonofthernempes of girat

mae a Dele are the wordes.that the Lorde

I Bey) (bewmeth vntoXeremp,fapng, Thus

Merem prre pee © wea laptch the Lode Goo of Fraell :*

JOm opte bpDdplyaentip al the wozbes

ecs PF pane Tpokenvuto the,ina booke

fto? loo, thetpme commetpfapeh the Lod that

J wll bapnee agqapne the pzpfoners of my peo

ple cl Flraei,and Juda fapeth the Lode. Eo: J

Mpll reftoze them tntothe lande, that J raneto

_thep2 fathers, and they thaljauc it tnooffeltya

agapne,thele wozdes (pakethe Lorde, concer-

npnge Flracl and Juda: Chnslapeth the Loze

We paue beardea terrible cep, feave and dptqup

etneg Eo: what elles doth thpsf{panplpe, that

l ‘3 ferMQamelpe that al Cronge men fmpte enerp

HereHilt man pps hand ppon bis lornesxas a womanin

thepapnecthertrauatle.@ipo eucr fate amatt

franaple pth chplbe“Enquypze thereafter,and

{c.Vee,all thep2 faces are maruclous pale.

alas for thpe Dape,tohych is (0 Dredeful that

nonemape belpkenedD onto tt,and alasfo2thetp

me of Jacobs trouble, forthe Mhych be fall pct


lilL.regu.ria
Lpa trpia


bedtipnered. Fo: inthatdape fapethtbe Lowe `


ofHoites F fopl take bps pockefrom ofthy neke
and beakethp bondes: And Eraungerg thal no
mszeleruebym, but tiep thallda |


Feel Chome 3 wyllvaple vp nto them.z and asto?
the .<Dmpferuaunt aerob „Eeatenotlapththe
Lorde andbenotafraped, D Jirael. Foleo, y
wopll helpe the allo from farre and thep fede fro
tbe lande ofthepzcaptpuptpe, And Jacob hall
furneagapne,be palbeinrefe and havea prof
prong tpit,andno man all makebpmafrapd


‘ : erupce Ynte
ee ri"? Gon thep2 Lobe, and to Daupd their kpnge,


Bes iyi
Aa ee et


Sto? Fain wpth thé tobhelpe thefapehthe Lorde |
AND though J thall deftro atl tbe ae wer
monge whom F baue {catered the pet topl F not
Beftrope the, but correct the xand that WPHOPE rms, g Š
creacpon: Wo: J knoto that thou arte inno wple j
*wpthóut faute.Cherforethusfapeb the Lod er.rrrii.a.
Thy bzolpiigės are parlous : ahd thp thoundes Satumia
tedp to caft the inito fickieg; There ignomanto €
mredlewpth thy caule, 02 tolape platter ponp
orfobpnde Dp the wounded there mape no matt
Helpe the, Bll thp lovers bauefoigotten the and
carenothpne Fo? the, tfo2% baueccuentbeaccu
el Erroke and chaftelicd the roughly:and that for
he multptudeoftbp mpldcades-fo2 thp(prines
baue had the ouerpand. bp makettthou mone
=: sopi oe h a e, ja aein epi

ndinteoparbpe, butfoz themultptude oftby. .
mpfdedes and fpnnes:F baue done thiswnto the Ie..
, xAnd therefore all thep that deuove the, Hal yrim, sie
be Deuourcd, and allthpne enempes albe led in amoro
tOcaptpupte. All thep that make the wat, hal:
be watéd them felues,and altbofe that rob the
wp make Alfo tobe robbed. Eol J topll qeue
thetbp beltb agapne ¢ make thp wides whole
fapthtbheLosde:becaute thep reupledthe,asione
caft awap tt lla dind oe thep )is the wha
no manregardeth, Fo: thus lapth the 020.2
porad wpll bepnge agaphe the captpupte of rria

acobs teteg ebetede his Divellinge place. The > |
cptpe Halbe buptded in her oldecitate,ethe pou
tes (pal bane thep2 right foundacion, And out of
them thal qsthanfqeupng:s the vopce of iope:

A wpll multpplpethem,and thep thal not be

Feroe: Fall endue them wpth ponoure,and no
man Hall fubdue them. Cheprechplozen thalbe
ag afore tpmeé,and thepz congregacpon thalcon
tpnucinmp (pabte. And al tholethatvere them |
topl 3 vplct.xAcaptainealfo halcome ofthem @?%*>-
aitd a p2pnice (hall (peynge outfrometbe middefk e
of thems, bym wpll 4 chalenqetomp felfèand be
{hal come onto mex Foz that ishethat ceucth Fhon.bte;
ouer bys berte to come ynto melapththe Lorde
*De thalbe mp people alfo,and Jwpll be poure Fere.rritrb
God. *Seholde: onthe otherlpoptpal the wrathe id rrrs
ofthe Lozde becake out aga Eomp water aga sece.sritte
mpabtpe whpzle wpnde, and pall fall pan the 2° rroa
beades of the yneodipe. |
‘Che terrpbledpipleafure ofthe Lorde Mall
not leane of, ontd bebauedone,and perfourmed }
the intenteaf bys berte,xtobich inthe latter dap It
espetball pnderftande:At the fame typme-fapth
the Lorde pall ¥bethe God ofall qeneractong
of Frael,and they talbemp people.


ofthe Jieto ae buplopuge agapne sf J crufalem.
coma $US lapt the Lo2de*the people of Fr
tael Wobycbeeicaped inthe wpldernes eter
A Ey from the (ibearde, founde grace toco-
neem me into thep2relt.ucnlo palf Lod
noire alfo appere tnta me from farre ano (ape,
Tione


of Jereniye;


Hobuol, d X J lone the with an eneclattpng lone, therfore
bp mp mercp J bane dzatwen the tome. 3 wpll
repapze the agapne, D thou doughter of Jirael
that thou mapi be fatt g fure. Thou Malt take
thp tabzets agapn and co forth with them that
teade the Daunce. Chou thalte plante bpnes a-
gapne pon the bplles of Samaria, the grape

. gatherers Hall plantand comenlp eate of tt.


46" Stor the dapes pall come when the watche=


men pon the mount of Cphzatm Hall crpe,az
eterdis gple,*letysqo oe eee Sid to our Led God
for thuslapth the Load: Reiopce with qladnes

bpcaule of Jacob, crpe nto the bead of the Gen
tples:{peate out, fpngeandfape:D Lozde faue

thp people, the remnaunt of Zfracl> and make

them whole. 2ebolde, FZ wpll bapnge them a=

- gapne from out of the nozth lande, and gather

them from the cndes of the wozlde, with the

blpnde and lame that ave amonge them, with


the women that be great with chplde,andfuche b


as be alfo Delpucred : and the companp of them
that come agapne,thall be great. — |
Thep thall come weppnae with mercpfull
pitpe pl Zbzpng them bprber agapne, J wpll
leabdethem tothe rpuers of water in a ftrapgbe
serria wape, Where thep thal not tumble. * Foz jam
omrivio Bleracls father,¢* Cphzatm ts mp firt bozne.
i Heare the worde of the Lorde, D pe Gens
tples, peeache in the ples, that lpe farre of, and
ape : be that {catered Firacl, Mall gather bpm
togpther agapne,and hall kepe bpm, as a pep-
berde Doth bis locke. Foz the Lozde hath redes
med Jacob, and rpd bpm From the bande of the
violent, and thep thall come,¢ retopee pon the
brll of Sion, and tball haue plenteoulnefie of
qoodes, wbhiche the Lorde thall gpue them. Ha-
amelp, beate,wpne, ople,ponge thepe q calucs.
notbhep2 confcpence pall be aga well watred
p arden, fo: they hall no moze be hungry.
€ ‘Then Hall the mapde retopce in the daunce,
pee, bothe ponge and olde folkes. o: 3 wyll
turne thep2 fozowe into gladnes, and pil com
Forte them from thep2 fozowes:and mabe them
(opfull. J topll powze plenteoulnefle bpon the
bevtes of the preattes,¢ mp people thal be fatif=
Fped withimy qoodnes,fapth the Lode.
Jemie Chuslapth the Lorde: the vopce of benp
Mate nefe, weppng €lamentacion was berde on hye
euen of Rachel, mournpng fo? ber childzen.and
fold not be cofozted, bpcautle thep were aap.
But now fapth the Lozd,leaue of from wr-
ppnge and cepenge, withbolde thpne epes from
teares, fo2 thp labour pall be rewarded, fapth
the L020. An’ thep hal comeagapne out of the
lande of thepz enempes:Pee,euen thp pofteritpe
oo baue confolacponinthis,fapth the Lorde,
t


that tbp chplozen ball comeagapneintothep2


owne lande. Hozconer, J herde Cphzaim;that
was led atbap captpue,complapne on this ma-
ner. x D Lorde, thoupaft correct me,¢ thy rcha-
ftenpnae paue Jreccaned, agan tntamed calfe,
+ Conucrt thou me and 3 Hal be conuerted: foz
thou art mp Lozde God: Pee, as foone as thou
turnet me, 3 fballrefourme mp felfe: when J

nocrftand, 3 hall (mpte bpon mp thpgd. X02


yt. Thee


E Te
zacha d.à


ol Ut bi,


berelp 3J hauecdmptted hameful thynges. flor
J Dane bone preprofe g confulpon of mp pouth
-Tipon thps complapnte,F pty thusbp
mp felfe, y isnot Ephzaim mp dere lonnes Fs he D
hot thechplbde, topthe whome J baue bad all mp se.rtoiit.o
mp2the and paftpmes ffo2fensthetpme that J
fp2ite comened wpth bpm, baue bpm ener inre
membzaunce: therfoze, mp berp berte d:pueth
me Dnfo bpm, gladlpeandlouinglp pll bane
mercpe bponbpm faptb the Lode: Get f watch
men, proupde teachers fo: p : {et thpne berte bpd
the erpabte waye, that thou (huldeft walke,and
furneagapne,D thou dDoughter of Flrael,turne
agapne to the cptiesofthyne. Howe longe toplt
thou goaffrape, D thou thapnkpngedoughter r
Eo: Efe Lozde wll toozke anete thpnge bpon
earthe. A woman ball compaffea man. — |
ffo2 thus lapth the Lozde of hotes the Gon E
of Flrael Jt wpll come therto,thatweben Fhaue
loughte Juda oute of captpuptie,thele wordes
albe bearde intbelandeand in bpscptiegs.The
AR isthe fapze x bapdeqrome,o2 rpg @r-F4.4
teoutnetie, make the fruteEull, D thou bolp ppl.
And there (hall dwell Juda andall her cptpes, p
thepeherdes, aad hulbandmen. stor J <thallede ariya
spe bang foule and refretheall fapnte bertes. anope
Uhen ‘fheardethps, J came agapnte mp felfe,
A muted, Ipke as 3 had ben waked out of alwee
fepe. Bebolde,fapth the Lorde, thedapes come
that 4 topli fowe the poule of Firaell g the boule
of Juda, wpeth men and whptcatell. SS. PO
x Dee, tt hal come therto, that Ipkeas Jhane dearest
gone aboute intpmes paft torote them oute; to Iretrot


fcatere them, to bzeake them Downe, to deftrope
tbem, andchaffen them. Cuen fo topll 4 alfo go
opipgentlp aboute, to buplte them vp agapne,4 |
toplantethemfapth the Lode. * Chen Hallit esésrosicrg
nomoze befapbdethefathers haue eaten alower
grape,andthechpldzensteth are fet oned ge fog
euerp gt h for bis owne mpldede-fo that
{ohofoeateth alower grape, bps teth thalbe tee
onedge.xWepold,tbhe bapes come,fapth p L020 webj,ouiw
that J wypl makeanewcouecnauntwitpphoute - |
of Sfraelland wyth the boule of Juda:not after
thecouenaunt that J made thith thep: fathers,
tohen F toke them bp the band and led them out
of the landeof Egypte: toppcoe couenaunt thep
breake: pee, enë when Jasanhulbandbadrule —
ouer them Capt) the Lorde. x Sut thps Hall be wedi.r.y
theconeuaunt that J wpllmake withtheboule _..
of Araellatter thofedapes lapth the Lorde. x 4 cidade
wyll plante mp lawe inthe inwarbde partes cf
theni,and wepte itinthep2 bertes, sand wpll be ge.rtitti.
they: God,and they Halbe mp people. — and-Itt. B

Ayd from thence fosthe, Mall no matiteache 4
bps nepabboure o2 bis brother and fape:knowe ~
the Lowe. Sut thep thalallknoweme from the
lowelt vntothebpeftefaptitheLozde. Fog
wpll forgeue they: mplPcdes, and topll nenes re:
membzetbepz (pttnes anp moze. Chusfapth the
Lo2de,wbpebe qaue thexfunne to bealpghet fog St
thebape, andthe mone and fEarrestotpneing `
noabt:wbhbichbmouethtbhe fee, ro tbatthe foudrg -
therof ware fearce: big name igthe Lozd of Po-
tes. Lpkeagtbpsozdpnaunce fhall neuer be

AAi. taken


The Prophecye


Ce Tia


-paco: larged From the * totte of Hananecl, vuto the


Att.rir.b. fOppe of Gareb, and thal come aboute Gaathp,


De.
a


Sanita SNathoth unto thy feifex foz bp realon of bpite
enore bia CED ites EDP I pape to redeme ttandbpeit oute.


WOT pliLa


from Iatianieel of Anatvorb,mpne Lncles Tonne
Ct) Waped ppm edire fhe monep : enen fenen ip-


$ great power and bpearme,and there ts nothing


cles,andten (pluer pence. sis l

J caufed bpm alfoto make a waptpuge, and E
to leale it:and called recozde therbp, and tocped
him there the monep bpon the wepabtes. 0 F
toke the cupdence with the coppe wben tt was
ozderly fcaled ered it ouer and F gaue the cup-
Bence nto Waruch the fone of Mertab,the fone
of <)aaliah in p {pabt of Hananegl,myp cofyne,
and inthe paclence of the optnefits,that bena-
med in the cupdence: and befoze all the Jcwes
that were therbp in the courte of the papfon.

3 charged Baruch alfo befoze them, taping.
The Lorde of botes the God of Flrael marn
deth the, to take this fealed cupdence with the
coppe: and te lape tt tnancrtben veffell thatit
map longe contpnue. oz the Lozbe of holies,
the Good of Firael bath determined that boules.
Feldes and an fhalbe pofietied agape
inthislande. Pot tohenZdaddelpuccedthbe `
eupbdence Ynto Waruch plonne of Meriad, F ve- wene.t.e
fougbt the Lozde,faptng:D Lozde God, *tt ig Here.r.b
thou that hal made beauen and earth with tip


conan * Thou ewe mercp Dpon thou-
andes thourecompentell the Mpckednes of the
ete ea bafomė of thechildzentbat come
after them. Chou act the great e mpabtp God,
whofe name ig the Lozde of booltes : greate in
councell, and excellent in wozke. Chpne eped nomai a


Toke pponall the Fee hee of meng chplozen,~* to


rewarde cuerp one after Dig wape: and acco2z=-
bpnge tothe frutes of bis inuenciong.

- Chou batt done great tokens and wonders nf
*inthe landeof Egipt as toe fethisdape bpon Ero. bibi
the people of Flracl,¢ bpon thofe men, tomake i onia
tüp name great, as tt is come to paffe this dap.

Cou halt brought thp people of Zfrael ont of
thclande of Cgppt with tokens, bith wonders
with ampgbtp band, with a Eretched out arme
and with greate tertpbleneffe: and baft gpucn
then: this lanoe,lpkeas thou bandet promifea
nto thep2 fathers. Mamelp.that thou wolicl
gpue them a lande, that foweth with mplke
andihonpe. * Noid then thep came therinsand govt, tit,
: ofleffen it, tdep Folowed not thp bopce, wal- MP4 bit.
Bed not inthplawe,* but all that thoucomaun tro
deft them to do,that baue thep notdone,¢ ther-
fore come all theie plages wpon them.
wWebolde, there are bulwozkes made nowe
acapntt the cptp to take it:and it (halve wonne
of hs Chaldees that befpere it with fwearde,
toith Dunger, ¢ Death: and loke what thou batt
fpoken,tbat fame Hall come tpon them. E
Forloalthpngesare prefent onto tie. Pet
(Tapt thou onto me D Lode Godjand com-
maundell me, that 3 mall loofe a pece of lande
Dutomp felfc,¢ take foptnefles therto: andpet
inthe meanceteafon the cptye ig Delpucrcd into
the power of the Chaldees.
Then came the wozde of the Lorde wuto me
faping:25ebold Jam the £020 God ofall e
is tbere anp thpnge then to barde foz me: Ther-


: Foge thusfapth the £020: * Webolo, F thal be- ig by


lpuct thts cptie intothe power of the Chalaces,
and into the ower of PROT the
aruge


X


er FIFitia


Lipnee of Wabplon,thep Hall take it.

0? the Chaldees (halcome and topnne this
citte,and {et fpze bpon it,and burne it withthe
gozgpous houles, in whofe parlers thep pane
made facrifpce vnto Waal, and potozed dDapnke


offerpnacs bnto fraunge goddes,to pzouoke |


ine nto ath. Foz fepnae the chpldzen of 3f-
raell, and the chyldzen of fa bauc wrought


A a befoze me euer fromthep: pouth wp
w


at baue thep els done but pzouoked me with
thetoozkes of their owne bandes,fapth p Lod!
Dz what hath this cptpe ben els but a prouo
spna of mp ath, cuer fence thedap that thep
buploded tt, ynto this Doure wherin J caf t¢ out


-of mp fpgbt, bpcaule of the great blatphempes:


of the chtldzen of Flrael and Juda, whiche thep

` bauecdone to pronoke me:pee thep, their kpnges
thep2 pepnces, thep2 peeattes, hep prophetes,

the men ofGuda,¢ the cptespns of Jerufalem.

7 When J tode bpearlp,and taught them €
inftructed gh! Ana their backes tome
and not their faces. Thep woldenot heare,to be
Here.bit,d, refournted € cozrect, + but fet thepz pdols inthe
boufe,that ig balowed bnto mp name,todefple

it. Thep baue buplded bpe places foz Baal, in

the Yallep of the chpldzen of Pennom, to Vowe

thep2 fonnes g Doughters nto Woloch, which

J neuer chmaunded them, nepther came tt euer

tnimy thought to make Juda fpnne with {ache
abbomtnacpon. And nowe therfore, thus bath

the Lozde Good of Flraell (poken, concernpnge

this citie- wbich (as pe pour felues confeffe) thal

be Delpuered into the bande of thebpnge of Wa-

bplon then it is wonne with the lwearde, with

Denver. Dunger,and with peftilence. * Webolde,¥z wll
gather them togptbherfrom allandes, wherin y

paue {ta sa eo inmp heath inmp fearfull¢

i great difplea lure g pl bepng themagqapn vn:
tothis place, where thep Wall dwell fafelp. And

thep pall be mp people, ¢ J pil be thep2 God.

© x*And FZ topil qpue them one bertone wap,

Prat cres.¢ that thep map feare meal the dapes of their life
that thep ¢ thep2 dS after them map p02

esesrrtie pere. And J pli fet bpan euctlattpng coues
naunt with tbent. Pamelp, that J wyll nener

_ ceal todo them good, and that J wpll put mp

feare tn their partes, fo i thep thal not runne
beu.rrriz.b awape from me. ¥ Pee, J wpll baue aluff, and
IFE  pleature todo them good, ¢ fapthfullp to plant
them tn this lande with mp tohole berte.e with

ali mp foule. Foz thus fapth the Lorde: lpke as

Adaur brought all this great plage bpon this

people cuen fo topll J allo bapng vponthem all

the qood that 3 baue prompledthem.aAnd men

{hall baue they polletitons in this lande:wober=

of pelapenoww,tbat tt hallnecuer beinhbabpted

of the people, noz of catell:but be delpnered into

the bandes of the Chaldees. Pee, lande thalbe

* bought foz monep, and eupdences made there-
wpon,¢ fealed before wptnelles tnthecountrep

of Wen Jamin and rounde about Jerufalem, in
thecptics of Jubda,in p cpties that are bpon the
mountapnes,¢ in them that lpe beneth:pee,and


Fete.it.o


- inepties tbatare inp fouth. dto: J wpll bepng
thep? peploncrabpthberagapne,tapththe L020.


of Jeremye; Sole bit


C The.rrriii.. Chapter.

C Sheprophetets monpihed ofthe Lozdeto pzaye for the belpae
raunce OF tbe people, whpebe the Lozbepzompreth: «od fo: ge:
nowne. DEEDE DPRr a an Soe aae ees
churchealineucrbeeaben, == + iit

| Dzouer, the wozde ofthe Lod came A
J Unto Jerempeon ths maner, x when 3ere.tr.a
be was pet bounde inthe Courte of ™"
Steppin. Chuslaperhthe Lorde,
Wwbpch fullplleth the thpnge that befpeaketh:the
Lode whyche perfourmethe the thpnae that be
taketh in bande, euen be pote name is the Lo i
+ erpe bnto meand Fwpll anfiwere, and thew p Erori h
greateand bpetbynges whpeh were vnknotne =
nto tbe. Chus (J lape)fpakethe Lozde God of
ie ou cOcetnpnge the boules ofthis cptpe and


the boules ofthe kpng of Juda, p they are broke
thozowe the ozdpnatice ¢ the {wearde: Wecaule
the Menai of thiscptiehauecome to fpabt
again p Chaldees,and thep are fplicd with the
Deade karkales of men whome Fhaue flapne te
my Sezathe and bpfpleafure : when J turnedmp
face from tbps cptpe.becauleo€ allper wpeked
nele. Weboldelapth the Lowe, J wrll repapre
and Heale thep: woundes,and make them whole
J wpl open them thelargetrealure of peaceand
truth. And pll returne thecaptpupte of Juda
were afoze. + From all mildedes, wherein thep
ane offended agapnEme, Jwpliclenfe them.. -.
Andall thera blafpbempes wohpch thep baue D
heagapnit idan HA at regarded menot, J
wpi Forgeue them. And thps Mal yetme aname
ap2zapte, and honour amonge all the people of p
earth, wpcbe thallbeare all the qood.that J wpl
mewe bnto them: pee, thep Halbe afarpoe: and
atopned at all tbe good dedes and benefpteg p
Awplldofozthem. Cozeouer.thuslaprhthe —
Lozde:* Anthps place where of pe lape that if aite bini;
albea topldernetfe, whetin nether people noz
catell Hall Otbell: tnlpkemaner inthe cptpes of
Juda and wpthoute Ferulalem(wppch allo hal
be [o vopbe, thatneptirr people no: catell halt
Divelthere (hall the vopce of gladnelle be hearde
agapne, the bopceofthe brpdeqrome and of the
bepoe,p SER tbat pall fpng: «2aple wes.couta
the Lozde of ooltes, fo? be ts loupnge:and hpg Hautin
mercpeendureth foz euer, andthe vopeeofthen
that thall offer vp giftes in the boule of f Lorde
JE 02 Jrwpil retoze the captpuptie of thys land,
agit was atoze:fayth the 102d, Thus fapth the
Lode of hotes, Ft (hall come pet therto, that in
thpslande, whichis bopdefrommenand catell
and in all the cptpes of the lande,there thalbe fet
bp hepebeardescotages: tn thecitpes pponthe
mountapnes:and inthe cpties that lpe pon the
plapne,and in the eA dt oftbefouth. È
ntbelandeot en Jamin, inthe Fldegoë
erufalem, and inthe Cpytpes of Juda thall the
epebe nombecd agapne, bnder the bande of
bpm, that tellethbtbem, Capththe Lorde: x We- sex. rtlies
bolde.thetpmecommeth, fapth the Lorde: that
J wpll petfourme that goodthpnac, whpche F
baue prompted onto the poule of Ffracll andto


pout Da.
sti edeate AZ. Fnthote


+


"J


a


Sento ee ee ee ee
t =


The Prophetpe


gn tole dayes and at thefame tyme, 3 toll
bepnge forth onto Danid, the braunche,ot rpgh
tcoulneffe, atid be Chall Do equptie and ryapteouf
= melfeinthelande. Jn thole dapes Hall Juda be
ETa FFL: pelu and Jerufalem (all owel lafe, and pe p
a prensa eating Le ot Et
thus the Lorde promptetp * Dau neuer
ADIL Santonetol t vpon tbe tione of f houleot Bl
iateg dig tacll: ~neptber (pall the wrealkes and Leuptes
ante oneto offer alwape betoze me burnteof-
Fecingés,tokpndle the meatectterpngcs, andto

prepare the facepfpces. 7
Aundthe wowe ofthe Lorde cane vnto Jere-
myeatterthypsmaner. @huslaprhthe Lowe:
Semptit,y Lave He cou añt xwhpch J bane made wpth

~~" Dapeand npe th

bedapand pt e feafon ¢ Thenmapemy


ASS bethe Lorde
Bev.trir.a Ae NZ ke bnfto Fercmpe » Mobattpmeag
"TE BE 9 abuchodonoso2 thekpng of Babp-


| ion g all big boltes (out ofall the bing


da: Thus fapth the step the. Thouthalt
wearde, but thaltdpein


prorenprours were bzent:fo ale thou be brent
aifo,ginrbpmournpng thep Hallfap:Dp Lord


bebzoken, that there buldenot ba


EF
$


Jo: thus hane Fdctermined fapth the Lode.

- pen pat palaes tbe pzopbete all tbefe 25 = *
ww0de8 bntosecdekiab kpng of Juda in Ferula:
lem:wbat tpme as the kpng of Babtions hoot
befieged Ferula g the remnaunt of the cptics:
Mamelp, Lachis and Asekah, which pet remap
ned of the * tronge fenledcpties of Juda.

‘Chele are the wo2des that the Lorde fpake
nto Feremp the prophete, when seockiab was
agreed with all p people at Jerulalé,that there
Mulde be ppoclapmed * alibertie, fo that cuerp fred.


fi, Parts


tman Hulde let dis fernaunt ¢ bandimapde a pans :
De


fre: Bebzue and Deb2uelle, and no Jewe bo

bis bzothec asa bondman. Nove as thep bad
confented, all the princes gall the people hich
aD Gathered wnto thts agrement, peucrp man
hulde fet at libertpe bis bonde feruaunt,¢ bond
woman, no longer to bolde them bonde, cuen
fothep were obedpent,and let them qo fre. But
afterwarbde thep repented andtokcagapne the
feruauntes and bandmapdens, whom thep hat-
let go fre and fo made them bonde agapne.
 SEo2 theitwhiche caule the wozde of the Lorde q


| came dDnto Jerempe from the Lorde bpm felfe,


fapinge: Thag Capth the Lorde God of Fracl.
x J made acoucnaunt with pour fathers, when Dra.rt.a
Jbzougbt them out of Egipt,(that thep thulde FFs
nomoze be bondmen) faping: Wiben fenë pereg
are out,cuerp man thal let bis bought feruaunt
an Hebzue gofre,p be bane fernea bpm {pre pe-
res. But pour fathers obeped me not and berke
ned tot bnto me. As foz pou pe were note tur:
ned.anddpd rygbt befoze me intbat pe proclap,
med, cucrp man tolet bis nepghbour qo tre and
intbat pe madea couenaunt befoze me tn ý tem
ple that beareth mpname.2ut pet pe bauc tur
ned pour leluegagapne,¢ blafpbemed my name
Buthis,p cucep man hath requy2ed bis {eruatit
andbanbmapden agapne,wbom pe paye let go
quypte and fre, and compelled them toferue pou


5 agapne.¢to be pour bondmen and bondwomen


And therfeze thus fapth the Lozde:pe bane-not
obeped me euerp man to pzoclapme fredom Di
tobis brother and nepghbour-wherfoze F wpll
call pou bntoa enean the Lozbe : even
bnto the fwearde,to the peftilence g tobunger,
and fopll make pou to be plaged in al the kpng:
domes of p earth. Vee.thofe menthat haue dzos
Ken mp coucnaunt, €not kept the wo2des of the
appopntmet which thep made before me when


* thep bewed f calfe in tivo, ¢ then there went genro.» |


thozoto the tivopalues therot:the pancos of Fu
ba, the papnees of Ferulalé, the gelded men, the
peeattes,and all the people of the lande whiche
went thozowe the twoolpdes of the calfe
Thole men wpli J gpue into the power of thelr
ehenipes and into the bandes of them that fo-
lowe Dpon thep2lpues.

* And thep2 dead nebpes halbe meate Fo? pratirgira
the foulcs of fhe apze,and beattes of p felde. Ag Rece.dit.o
for sedebtab the bpng of Juda and his princes,

J pil delpuce them into p power of thepzenes

mpes,andofthem that delpze to lap chem,and

into p bande ofp png of Wabilons bott, which

* now ig departed From pou: But aa Mp FeFere tx
cOmaun


oe


of Jerempe,


commaunoement (Tapeh the Lorde) thep Hall


come agapne before this cptpe.thep pall Epgbt |


agapnit it:wpnneit and burne te-d)o2couer, J
wll lape the cptpes of Juda fowalke,that no
man Hall dwell therin.
CTbe.rrrv. Chapter.

q_ Bepropoundeth the obedpence of the stethabites, ther
bp comfoundeth Che pipe of the Juecs: [he chmaundement
oF Zonadab, the father of the kechabites. He thyeatenrth
punpihment byte the rebellpous Fewes. Be prompleth pro
Tperptpe bnto Che echabites, fo: thep2 abeppence.


Ny) to Ferempe, tn the rapgue of Jeboa=
WA | bin the fonne of Joftah kpnae of Ju-
Beate eben on ano bange bem
Re COG F CALL EDEN ouf and Dipnge tHent
MERE Eo the boufe ot the Logte into Tome comm odp“
ous place, € gpue tbem wpne to dzpnbe. Then
3 a 4 Jazantap, the fonne of Jeremy the Tonne

ofa


astnial, ¢ bis bzethzen, æ all bis fonnes,

and the whole poulebolde of the Rechabptes :
and brought them into the boule of the Lozde,
intotheclotet of pcbpldzen of Hanan,the fomne
 Jegedali@h the man of God, whiche was bp
the pzpnces, that is aboue the clo=
: altah the lontie of Selum, whiche is
gg the treaturer, And before the fonnes of the kpn-
~~ ved ofthe Rechabites, ¥ fet pottes full of wpne
and cuppes,and fapd Dnfo them: D2pnke wpne.


wut thep fapd:we wpl dzpnbe no topne:fo: Jo ©


nadab the fonne of Rechab our father cõmaun-
Ded Ys faping:Pee and pour fonnes all neuer
INEF b popnke wpne,» buploe no houles, {owe nolede:
lant no bynes, pee:pe Hall haueno bpnpardes
ut fog all pour tyme, pe tall dwell in tentes,
that pe map lpeeires ot the lande wherin pe be
ftraungers. |
f dement of Jonadat the fonne of Recbab our fa
| ther, inall p bebath charged bs, ¢ fo we dzpnke
| s no wpne all our ipfe longe : we noz our wpues
d out fonneg ¢ourdoughterg. Neither buplde we
anp boufe to dwell therin, we baue alfo amonge
bs nepther vpnpardes no: cozne lande to fotve:
but toe dibeltin tentes, we obep,€ voaccodpng
bnto all p Jonadab our fathbereõmaunded vs.
Wut not that Pabuchovonoloz the kpnge
© o£ Wabplon came vp into the lande, we fapde:
come,let bs go to Jerulalé,that we map efcape
the boot of the Chalbdecs and the Affirtans,and
fo we Dwellnow at Jerufalem. Chen came the
3 wo2de of the Lozde nto Jerempe, fapinge :
Thus Capth the Lozdeof botes the Eod of Ji-
ratl: Go and tell the men of Juda and the mpa-
bitours of Jerulalé : pil pe not be refourmed
toobepmp wozdes,fapthp Lorde- Che wozdes
‘wohiche Jonadab the fonne of Wechab cOmaun-
«ded bis fonnes,that thep buld dzpnie no wpne,
are faft and (urelp kepte:foz nto this dap thep
dıpnke no wpne, but obep thep2 futbers com
maundement. ut as fozme* 4 haue tande vp


oa catly, 9 baue (poben Dnto pou, gpuë poucac:


n i
WE. ie e Te oe
$


iioii


— 2 = —, Ss a a —


7 a
+


byent nto me. Pee, J daue fent mp feruannteg
All p prophetes onto pou, Jrole vp carlp,¢fent
ort 0020, faptng: D turne pounow euerp man
com bis wpcked wape:amende pourlpucs,and
gonot after fTraunge godeg toWwo:ppp therm:


—— 7) end =p


|


bus baue toe obeped thecõmaun- F


neit warnpnge :and pet paue pe not ben obe=.


Hol. levity
that pe map contpnue inthe lande wpebe Jhane

Geurh Vnto pou and poure Fathers, but pe wolde
heptber beare meno: foloipe me.

Che chpldzen of Jonadab Rechabs fonne, D
baue edbaltip bepte thepze fathers commaun:
Dement, that beqauethem, but tops people ig
not obcDpent unto me. And therfore thus fapeh
the Lozdofhottesthe Godot Fraell: Websloe,

3 topll bapnge vpen Juda, and pponeuecpe one
that dtbellethin Jerufalem, all the troublethat
J baue deupied agapntt them. x Foz J bauelpa aoue e
ken bute them, but thep tobalde not folowe : J etay.irh.c
baue called nto them,neuertbheleffe, they wolde Fere.v:.b
pene me noantwere: Jerempe pake alfototbe
oulebolde of the Rechabpthes: Thusfapth the
Lode of holtes the God of Firaell. Fo? fo much -
as peDane obepedthecommaundement of Jona
dab pour fatber ,and kepte all big pzecepteg and
done accosdpnize yn to all p hehathbpdden pau.
Therfozetbuslapththe LerdofhotkestheGod _
of Jfracll: x Jonadad the Cor-ne of Recbab Chall Iie
not faple, but bau e one out of pps ftock,to ftand
alwape before me. as :
C Che.rrcvi. Chapter.
« Baruch wepteth, as Feremp eu dpreth the boke ofthe cartes
agapni Juda € Aitacll. Be is Cent mpeh the boke bnto the peo
pleand ceabdet hit befozetyem all. Bete called before the rulers
and teabeth it befeze them allo. Therulers Hew bnto the kpng
the twozdes ofthe bor. Rebunttaketh the bokeandreadetha
Iptle o€ it,anb calteth t¢ inthe jeher is another wzpre atthe
commaunbdeme nt ofthe Lorde,


AR P fourth pere of Feboakim Plonte X

of ‘Soltal the kpng of Juda,camethe
wode ofthe Lo20 bnto Jeremp, fap _
eel 2 Siig. + Take aboke, and wipte ther IFE a
inalltbe wozdes that FZ haue lpoké top agapnt


) 3
Ma


Jiraell ,agapnee Juda, andagapniteall the peo
ple,fromthe tpme that J beqanne foz tolfgeake
onto the (inthe rapgne of Folpah) unto the
dape. Chatiobentbhe boule of Juda beareth of
the plage, toppeh J baue deuplcd foz them thep
mape paraduentureturne eucty man fron bps Fev rbille
fopched wape:that Jmape forgeucthep: offi-
cegand{pnnes. Chen bpd Jerempecal Baruch |
tbe onne of Merpabx and Waruchwzpte in the 140.4
bokeat the mouth of Jeremye all ehewo2des of
the Lode, wpcbe behad fpoken vntobynt.

And Aronne cõmaundd Waruch faping: Y
am íinp:pion, fothat Jmapenotcome intothe
boule of the Lorde: therfore go thou thprherand
readethe beke that phatk weittenat mp mouth
framelp.the wo2d¢s of the Lowdeand reade the
inthe Lozbes boufe pponthe fattyna dap, ý the 5
people, whole Juda, and all they that come onte
ofthecptpes map heave, Peradusture,ihey wyll
peap mpkelp befoze the face oftpeL cade, turne
euerp one from bps topcked wape. For qreat ig
the wath and dplpleature, that the Lozde bath


taken agapnet thps people. S50 Baruch ý fonng


of Neriahdpd accozdpnge dntoall that Jeremp

the prophet comaunded bim.eeadpng f wordes

of f 102d out of f bokein f Lowes poule. And

thes was done in p fpft pere of Feboakim f löne

of Joliah kpng of Judas, inthe. ir.moneth. when

xit was cOmaunded that all the people of Jerit yotus.s.s

falem hulde fate befozethe 1.020¢ & thep alfo

were come from p citics of Juda vnto Ferufare.
JAM. Then


prm


O J


E Thenlapde the princes vnto Waruch: Go
‘thy wape, bydethe with Feremp,fo that nomat
Rnowe where pe be: Jnd hep went into pkpng
fotpecourte. Wutthep kepte thehooke inthe
chambze of Elizama the Socrpbe, and tolde the
kyag all the wo2des. that be mpabt beare. $o p
pug lent Jebuditofet bpm the boke whpcbebe
. bz:ougbteout of Elifama thelcrpbes chambze.
And Febudi red init thatthe &pnge and alttbe
‘petnces tobpcbe were aboutehpm mpagbte beare.
Mowe the Rpnae fat in the wpnter boule, Fozit
wasg intöe.ir.moneth and ther ioag a fpze befoze
ppm. Bnd when Fehudi bad red thre o2 fourelea
«>, Mes theref, be cnt theboke in peces w apenknpfe
‘apace anbxcalt tt ato thefpre on thbebarth gn f
bokcwas ail bzent in thefpzre DpontheDartp.
+  Petnoman wasabaliped thereof, o2 rene
bys clotbes:nepther the kpnge bpm Celle, noz pis
feruauntes, thoughe thephearde all thele woz-
oes. Neneithelefle, Elnathan, Dalatah, and
Gamartah beloughte the kenge that he wolde
not burne the bobe:not withiandpng the kpnge
wold not bearethe .butcimaunded Jerahinael


+ thefonneofAmelech:Haraiah tbe Conne of €-


rcll,and Selamtah the onne of Xbdiel, tolape
bandes bpon Wacuch thelcribe,¢ upon Jeremy
the prophet: but $ Lode kept them out of fpabt
After note that the kpnge bad bzent the booke
and plermons which Baruch wote at f mouth
of Jeremp. See worde of the Lozdecame onto
Jerempe, fapinge: Wakean other bookeand
wozptte tn it ali the Fozefapde fermons, that were


=i | bas made kpage thozowe Nabuchodo- thursan
F- anolo bpng of Babplon,rapqnedinthe “
)eo7A) Lande of Jada, inthe feadeok Conontab
a= the fonne of Jeboakim. Wut nepeber be
noz bis feruauntes, nog the people in the lande
wolde obep the wo2des of the gry oon. pa be:
fpake bp th paopiete seretey.% euertbelefie, Jer.trrt.a
sedektab p king fent Febucal the fonne of Hele: A
nifab,¢ Sophoniah p lone of Aaaliah f peelt
tothe prophete Feremp, Caping : D pape thou.
Dito the Lorde sur God foz vs. Noto Feremype:
walked fre amonge the people atthattpme,and.
was not put inpepfon as pet.x Wharaos hook x. coe 53
alfo was come out of Egypt: whicbe when the
Chaldees that belpeged Jerufalem percepued,
thep Departed frome ee ee eS

t


of the Lozde nto the prophet Jeremp, faping: ~
Thus lapeh f Low Gob of Firael, tbis anfwer
pall pe gpucto the kprig of Juda that fent pou
bntome fo: coiifaple.* wWebold,Wbaraos bofte Feresttbe
ibbiche ts come Fozth to belpe pou, pall returne
to Čgipt into his otone lande:but the Chaldeed
fhallcome a ae and fpgbt aqapntt this cptie,
wpnne it,¢ tetfpze ppon it. o thug fapeb the `
Lozbde: dticepue not pour otne mypndrs, thpn=
pug on this mance: Tuh,p Chaldecs gonot
thep2 wapefro vs. Mo,thep all not go thep2
wape. Fo: though pe bad flapne the whole hoe
of the Chaldces that belpege pou, and euerp
one of the apne lape in big tent, pet ouldethep
Rande vp and fet Fpze bpon this oae z
Howe when the Botte of the Chaldecswas q
broken bp from Jerufalem,foz feare of f Egip
clans armpe: Ferempe went out of Jerufalem, ~
towarde the lande of Wen Jamin, to cette byw
from amonge the people. Z
“And


#


And wher be came Dndee Wen Janipns poste

there was aporter,called Jerpab, thelonne of
Selempabehe lore of xHanantah, whpchfell
Fe-Frbtil.b yp on bpm, and tokebpm,lapinge:thp mpnde ig
torunneto the Chaldees. Chen lapde Feremp

_ . Ft tsnotfo, Jgonot tothe Chaldees. Aeuerthe

les, Jerpah wolde not beleue bpm: butbioughbt

_ æ 'Jermp bound befoze the papnees. Wi berfoze the
peplices wer angtp woth Jeremp,¢fmote bpm
andlapd¢ bp min i eet ae pe Jona-
thas the icrybe. Fo: be was theruleroftheprp=
son, Tbus was Jerempe put intothedonqeon g
p2pfon,andfolape there alonge tpme. + Than
edekpah the Rpnge lent fo: Dym, and called bim
Ån alken bpm qupetlp in bps owne boule, fap-
ingethpnckedt thou tbpg bulpnes(that nowe ig
in handa)commeth of heLo20- Jeremy aunfwe
red pee, that ftdoth:and thou(fapoe he) halt be


i
7
\,
h

[1

\ :
w
S,


D oe cower Jcrempelapde bute kpnge sede

kpab:

thp feruaunte8,02agapnEtbps people, that pe

ye proiil baue put me in prplons+Wibere at pour propbe

| 8 tobich baue pzopbecped wnto pou and fapd:

etbat the kpnae of Wabplon hulde not comme a
gapni pou and thpslandes And theefoze beare
nvive D mp Lode the kynge-let mp praper be

-accepte before the,and fend meno moze inte the
bouie of Jonathas the lerphe,p Fope not there,
Chinsedekpabthekpnge commaunded to pnt
Jere lp a Sa eppo and dap

I ptobeqeuenbpma kake of bzeade oute ofthe
bakers Freate wntpll all the bzeade inthe cptve
war eaten bp. Thus Jerempe remapued inthe
fozecutrpeinthe p2plon. .

a The.rrvviti. Chapter:


J af


sf


ae a ey
Pert pe |
| Deans)


ape th D
Ata” fo remapnetbinthpscptpe, pall perpe epthet


bein ropscpipe ano tbe bandes ofall the people
peaketh fuch wozdes vnto them. Thig


; mape senpi pounotbpnae. Then toke they. cee
mpe and call bpm intothedongion of Selchiab

j the fonne of Amelech that bivrlte in $ foze entre
Of the peplon: And thep let Downe Zeremp wpth


of Ferempe, `>


\ Belpuered into the kpiige of Wabplcnspower. -
bat baue Jottéded again the,aqain€


Hollis.
coarbesinto ihedongpon, tobere there tagina
water but mp2e.o Ferempe Hackefak inthe
myze. Rote when Abemelech p Boyan, being
acbamberlapne inthe kpnges courte, pnderftod
that thep bad cat Jerempe into thedonapon,be
wenteoute of the kypnges boule and fpake tothe
Kpnge, (whpch then fat vnder the poste of Bn:
Jampn )tbele woozdes:mp Logd the kpng, wher
asthelemen mediewpth Jeremy the prophete, €
thep do bpm wonge, Mamelp inthat they pave
put bim in prifon, ther to dpe of buncerfo2 ther
ig no moze bzeadeinthecptpe. EChenthekpnge
commaunded Abemelech the WHorpatand fapt
Take from pence.rrr.men whom thou wplte, e
Deawe vp FJeremp the prophet out o€ the donge
on before bedpe, So Abemelech tooke the men
wpth bpm,and went tothe boule of thekpnee:
And there onder the treafurp begat olderagqges
and toute cloutes,and let them down bp a coat
de into the dongeon to Ferempe. . _

And Abemeleche the Gozpan fapde vito _
thepzophte Jerempe: D puttheleraqges and w
cloufes onder thpnearme boles,betioprte them
and the coardes:and Jerempe dpd fo, So they
dete Vp Jeremyp With coardes , andtoke hyni
out of thedongeon,andderemapnedinthefoxe
entrpe of the prifon. Chenxscdehiabthe kpng etrr i
fent, andcauled Jerempe the prophet to be cal-
led bntobpm, intothe thpzde entrpe that igir
the boule of the Lorde. And the kpnge fayd vn-
to Aevemy:3 wpll afke the fomwmhbat, but prie
nothpng frome: Chen Jeremp anfwered zede-
kiab: PE 3 be plapne wnto the, thou wplte caute
me toluticc death: VE F qpue thecounfapl, thou
topite not folowe me. othe kvit re {ibare att
oth tecsetlp wnto Feremp, fapinge:Astrulpe ad
the Lorde lpueth, that made vs thelefoules, J
Yopll not Rape tbe , no? gpue the into the bandeg


- oftbem that tebe after thp lyfe.


When lapde Ferempe vntosedchiap: Thug G

faptb the Lozde of bootesthe God of Fracl.
x Pi cafe be, that thou wpltc gofozth wnto the Ferrvite
kpng of Habplons princes, thou halt faue thy
lyfe,and this cptie tall not be bent: pea, botbe
thouandthyp Doutholde thall efcape wpth poure
Ipucs. Sut tfthou twplt not qo forth top kynge
of abplons princes, then Wall this cptic be Deo
Ipuered into tbe bandes of the Chaldees, whiche
Wall fet fpze Dpon it, and thon palt not beable
toctcape them. Andsedektahlapde unto Jere-
mp: Jain afraped fo: the Fewres that are fiedde
pnfothe Chaldces, lett 3 comein they? bandeg,
andfotbep to baue mein derifion.

Wut Ferempe anfwered:No,thep thall not
betrape the: D berken ynto the vopcee of p Lod
( Jbefeche the which 7 lpeake puto the io (bale É
thou be wel and fanctbp lyfe. But pé thou wilt
not go forth, P Lozd bath tolde me this plapnlp
Webholde, all the women that are leftind kyng
of Judas boule, balbe led fosth outtop kpnge
of Wabplons pepnces. Bnd they hall fape, that
thou ast difcepued: and the menin whome tHon
bpdek put thy trut baue gotten the wnder , and
fet tdp fret fatt in the mpze, and gone thepz wap
fromthe. Cherfozcalithp Pena twitbtbep?

| 34.0. = chpldzen


The Bropherye


ckplozen Hall they Iede forth onto the Chaldees
and thou (halt not efcape they? pades, but Haite


betbeizpnge of Sabptons paploner: and thps.


cptpe fhaltthou caule tobe beent.€ hen {apd se:
dekpah wnto Feremp:loke that nobobdpe hnowe
of theletoo2d¢9,and thou thalte tof bye. wut pe
the papnces perccauc that 3 haue talked topth p
and comme Ynto the {apinge: D (peake, what
fapdetbekpngetother bpde tt not from bs,and
we wpl not put the todeathe.Cel vawe prape
the) what fapoe the kyng to ps Sethou geue thë
thys anlwer: 3 baue humbly befougbt the king
that bewpll tet melpe no moze in Zehonathans
boule that 3 dpenot ther: Chencame al the pris
ces onto Jeremp,and alhed bpm . And be tolde
them, efter the manerasibe bpnge badde ppm.
Tbhenthep heldethep2 peace and let bpm atone:
forthey perceancd nothpnge* S0 Acremp abod
gerrteite Rpil ihe fooze entrpe of the pzplon, vntpll the
bape that Jerufalem mas wonne,
C The. rrrir-Cpapter

ET Mabuchebonoso7 »ereegeth Jerufalem,zeoekpad fpeth. BE
is taken of tbe Chalbres. Dps Connes areflapne, Disepra are


thiut out, geremp ts prouibed foz- Abemelech is beliuered fr
captputte,becaule ofthe confidence that be þat in Good.


A e Dhe whentbecpty of Jerufalem
Jev.rrrii a AVENA C wag taken (tO? inthe. ir. pear of 3e
“WL TEFFDS U LANS Gly ekpabbynac of Juda, in thetenth
LAS ri} Elmonet), came abuchodcnozoz the
Pores’ kpnge of Sabplonand all bps bolt,
and belegd Jerufalem, and fought agapnite it,
Andinthe. c.peare ofsedebiah in Ehe. tiii. mo-
neththe.ix.dape ofthe monet ieee intotbe
cptpe) Chen all the lage thekpuge of 15a
bploncamein,and latte them Bowne nder the
porte Mereqel,areser, Damgarmebo, Hare
chachpm,iRablatps ,Aereqell, Sarezer, Rab-
mag wpth allthe other papnces of the Rpnge of
Apres WabplonxAnd tohen scdekpab the kyu ‘eof gu
FEF yy toth bps Coulopers Cavothent, thep fied, and
Departed out oftbecptpe by npaght, thozowe the
Rynges garden and thozowetbe pozt that ts be
twene thetwo Walles,and fo thep went toward

tje wploernes. |
Wut the Chaldees hook folowed falfe after
sg them, and tokezedekpab in the feibeot Jerycho,
and brought bpm pepfoner FoMabuchodon0302


the kpnae of Babilon bato Reblath.that perth


inthe land of Hemabh, where he qaue tudgement
ppon bpm. Sothekpnge of Wabploncauled
chpldzen of sedekpal and sam blegof Juda to
beflapne before bps faceat Reblath. And made
sedchpagepes to be put out, and bounde pym%
tiochapnes and (ent bym to Wabylon.
xPoreouer,the Chaldees bzente vp the bpn:
{iit rerrov eg palace, wptbh the otber boufes of the peaple,
Fecesrt.d any bzakedewne the walles of Jerufalem: As
foztbe temnaunteofthe people that tere inthe
cittc:and fuchas wercometo belpe themt(wbat
focuer was lefte ofthe comot forte) Mabusara-


ban the chefe captapnecarped them to Babilon:


wut Aabusaradanthe chefe captaine let the ral


call people(andtbofe that badnotbpnge dwell.


Fpilinthelandeof Juda,and gane them vpne:
pardoegandcomefeldesat the fame tpme. abu
chodonose2 alfo the Hpnge of Wabpion gane.


Mabusaradan the chefe captapne a charge con-

cenna Jeemy fay nye:take, andcherplh bpm

and.make much of bp, fe thou do him noharme

but intreate bpmafter bys otne defpze. D>

So Mabusaradanthechefecaptapne,Mabu `

fasban Rablares,Mergal, Haresar, Rabmag

andall the bpnae of Wabplong Lozdes lente foe

Jerempe, xand canted bpm to be fet Oute ofthe se,rrroicp

foze cntrpe of the pzpfon, and compttcd bpm bit

to Godoliah the fone of Abicam the fome of Da

phan:that be Chulde carpe bpm bome:xand lobe zere.r.b

Welte amongetbhepeople. Powe whyle Fere-

mp lape pet bounde in the Foze entrpe of the pzp:

fon.the worde of the Lode came wntobpm fap: -

{ng:Go and tel Abemeleche the &) ogian. Thug

faptbetbe Loze of hooftes the God of Ffrarli: |

wWeboldethecrueland tharpe plage that Shaue |

deupled for thyseptpe,tpll 9 bapna bpon tbem |

chat tbou dpa eit but Apit dripne the fay- |
|
|


=, —= = E e MI


eth the Lozrde)and thor Malte not come inp han
des of thole men whom thou fereare. o0 donbte
les, J wll faune the,fo that thou Malt Rot perp=
fhe wyth the fmearde: but thp Ipfe thalbetaucd
and that becaule thou baft put thp true in me:
fapethtbeZode. _
— CThe-xl.Chapter. —

 CFerempebath licence to go whether he will. He ntwellelo
toith thepeople that remapneth at Zerufale moire whomBo
bolpab ruleth Robananpzophecpeth death bonto Godota),

yaaa DiS is the wozdethat p Lo2d (pake B

Gg a) Dito Jeremp, xwhen Mabusarada areni6.s


x |


yA |from* Ramath, whether he had led Jor, rbit


xBebolde,al chelandisatthp wpll loke where y
thou thpnekett conuenpentand good fo: thetoa ©
bpbde,theredwel. Fozrag pethe wagnot gone eea


ba(tehpchetwpth tbepz felowes weretcatereda- ©


OF PELERY E,


that man, Wwpfe, and chylde, pee , andthe poore
men in plande(tpat ioere not led captpucto 2a
Dplon)ipulde be vnder bps {urpfopetpon: TOP
cameto Godoliah wnta Mispa: Mamelp qimay
el the fonne of Matyantad Johanan, and Joni-
than thefonnes of Cartab,Darcab the foun? of
Thahometh:thefonn egof Dpbat,the petopha
tite: Jefanpad lane of Daachatp, wpth ther?
company ons, a

cam. tbe conne of Saphan fwarepnto them and


-stiio thep2felowes in thys maner. x yenot afrapde


toferucthe tU paldees,Owel in. thelande,and da
the kpnge of Babilon ferupce,fo thal pe profper
Beholde, 4 diel at G)pspa to peanoffpcer in


 paloces bebalfe and to atpifpefucheascome: P
to vg. Chertore gather pou Wpne, come, tople,
- and kepe them in poure ware boules, anddivell ba


in poure cytpes that pe paue inkeppnge.


D Pee alitye Jewes allo that dioelée in Hoad


ynder the Ammonyiesin Joumea and inall toe
countipes toben thep bearde thatthe Kpnaeo
Wabylonhad made Gorolpabebe fonnet a
bycam thefonuc ot Sa hangoucrnoure, Dport
themebat were leftein Juda. All the Jetwes(F
faye returned out ofall places where thep were
fied vnto, and came (tito the lande of gudatoGe
Doliab wnto Appa ard gathered wpne ando-
ther fruteg and that very much.

étozcouet Johanan ehefonne of Caread and
alltbecagtapnes of the botte that were fcatered
piicuerp tpde tn the lanbe,cameto @obolpahiut
) pspa,and Lape buto bpm:ianowell thou rot
that aallis thebpnge of theammonites bath


the remnaunt in Juda perp And Govolpab ý
Conte of Abpea fapte bnto Johanan the forne
of Careah. Chou Halt nat oo it,foa thep are but
ipes, that thou lapel of imacl.

| CTi rlé.Chapter.


aimat kpllech modolpah gplel iip, and mahy ofber
topth bpm. gjopanan Eoloweth atter gimarl ;
mapas Cit intheleuenth moneth it happe-
G3 ined, xtbat Jimael the onne of 2a -
LLS tyanyabtbhefonne of Elifama ( one


—<—————


repos os that were reatett aboute the kyug
Perch hat weretwozne worth bpm: vnto
Gopoliap the foune of Abicam toB)ispa,t tbep
dpd cate to gether. aud Jlinael the foune of Ra
thantab with thole tenne men that were fwape
tob m farte np,and fmote Govoliabthefonne
of Ahbpcam the tonne of Sapha wyth the werd
and flewe bpin,toho the kpnge of Babplon had
mabe moucrnour of the land 2, Fimael alfo Lew
all the JeWes that were with G odoltab at Dis
pa galltpe Chaldees that be founde thire Wap;
fpngevponbym thole that were able tofpgyt
peleto tph ppm.


no Gonolpah thefonne of Ibp


ý: bnto bpm)fl


e Ddppcaltthedeadebodpes


fy outfor tofyabtwpth gimael p


 gonites. Chen
all tbe captapnes of the oote, that were w hin


Ey of the kpnaesbloud came topeh thé fp


aw Seth SEG


ebenertedape after that bebad flapne Se:
dolpab(the matter was pet unknewen) athere
came certapne menfrom Sppcbem, front Splob
and Samarta,to f nombze of.lrer. whpch haa
(haven thep2 bearbes,rente they? clothes, 2 fore
all beaupe,bepnapnge meateo erpnaeg andin-
cence intbepzbandestootre itintheboute of
Hod. And jlmael the fonne of Qathaniah Wet
foath of Sy pspaxweppnge.to metethem Row eerie
when pemet them, be fapde:Gopoure wap” to
Eodoliabthefonneof Abicam. And when Hep
came tnte ebe mpdoelt of thecptpe, Slimaell the
onne of Nathaniah( with the tpat wer {woe
ewe them,euen at the mpodell of p
ppt.among thefefoure {core men there ther tent
that fapDe nto “{macl: Db. flep vs not for we
ue pet great atreatur tithe Feld of wheat,bar
ipe ople and bonpe. i
-ope paeen them, and fewe them tiot topth vE
tbepzbzethzen. Mowe the * prt wherein Jimael Mites Foe
peal of the men(wobomte be
fetve becanle of Godoliab)pad kynge 43a cau~
fed to be made for feare ot waaza the krng of $C
racl athe fame ppt dpd Slmael fpl opty Aapne
men. Ha forthe cemnaunt ofthe people, the kpre
es Doughtersanbd ailthe people that were pet |
elfe at Shyspabpon wbomarsabuzaradan the titaerrbe
chefe captapne bad madde Govolyah thefonne
of Bhicam gouernoure:-shmael the forine of a
thaniab carped tbem awape p2plonerstowarbe
the Ammonpteg, Wut when Fobanan the fonne
of Carcab,and all thep wbpch bad benecaptaps
neg otter the kpnaes poot wyth bimn.berbde of ak
wpchebues that fmacithefonneofMathaniad
pad Done,xthep toke thep? com panione,t Dene í reg. ptt
fonne of Natha Sn Mo
rifab,andfounde bpm by the great waters that
are in Gpheon. Mowe when all the people wha
“Emaelled captyue,fatwe Yohanan the tonne of
Wareah,and all the other caplarns of the pot,
thep were glad. So all thepeop ep flmael had
carped away fro Mpa, Were bioughtagapne, .
And when eoep returen, Der came to goba ©
nanthefonie of Careab. wut Fimael the fonne,
of atbariab, fied from Johanan wth. viit of
bps (woznecompanyons,ans went tothe Am-
Jobananthe fonne of Lareah y


toke all the remnaunt of the argipen Gls
marl the fonne of Mathanpa hab led aware.

(When be pad apne God oliabthe fonne of Abt

can whome thep alfo bad retcrucd frome bpm:
pabtpuge men, women andcbpldzen,and Grle

Hep men whom ep beoughtagayne from Gp

beone went from fperice aud fat themibownte ag

Geruth Canaan whpeblpetpvetpoe wWetblem,
sxtbattbep mpgbt gotro Eappte for ferae OF sere Fl. s
the Chaldecs : of wobomethecp were afrapd, be

caute that Sfimacl the Tonne of Matbaniab hav

flapne Godolpah Apycamis fone whome the yerFht
kpnge of ASabplon path made goncrnour inthe


lande ETbe rlii. Chapt
DE RL. | pres
cre E A eA pha mpe tobat thep
gugbtctoboo.Fcrempes pmonpiery theremuaunte cithe
pecple notta gointa TEPLE, . |
So all


The Prophecye


Ê The Lowefogbyddeth pon D pe reranaunte of
, Juda that pe Halnot qointe gp


thefonne of Careab,and pa et tit Eo e


e warre, beare the nople of Che tropet.no2fultre
bungee, tbere wpllwedwell . Wherefore, Heare
nowethe wode ofthe Lorde: D pe remnaunte

ger proiia of Fuda:* Tbus lapth the Lo2de, of hookesthe
od of Frael:PEpebe wholpe purpoled toroo
into Eqypte,and to dwell there as Traungers:
* The lweard that pefeared, Hal onectake pou
Jerem. Flit in Eeqppte,and the hunger toherot pe be Hearea
Erapde:{ball bange vponpou:and folotve pou in
to Eqppte, and there pall pe dpe, Andall thep
that of fet purpofe bndertake togo inte Eqppt
to fofourtie there, (hal perpthe toth the fweard
topeh hunger and petplence notne of thë tall
remapne, there fpall noneefcaperpe plage, tbat

¥ wpil bapnee bpontbent.
-` or thus lapth the Lode of booftes the God
D of Jiracl, Ipkeas mp wath and indpqnacpon ig
moucd agapnit the inbabptours of Jerufalem:
fo hall mp dplpleafure be bpndled agapnil pou
alfo,pf pe qointo€appte,and there pe Halbe re
upled,abbozred: baoughteto hhameand contu-
{pon:a ag fozthysplacepe Hal neuer fe it moze,


| pte,

And forget not that F bane warned pou ear-
neftlp tbhpgdape , for pe bauedpicembled wpep
ite: JEo2 pe fent me Dntothe Lode poure God Ire title
andfapde:D prapetbou the Lorde our God Foz
bs :and loke topat anlihere the Lo2deoure Goo
geneth aay a bapnge bs agapne and we pal
DO therafter.owe baue ¥ ewed and declared
vnto pou,but pou baue notobeprd the bopceot
the Logb pour God, f0? the Dobpch caule be bath
fent me bnto pou. '

Mowe therefore, Pfpewpllnotfolotveit, me.rrviite
be lure thatpe wal papive penip? {wearde, = -
wpe piiger and peltplence:enen in the fame pla
cewbere pour lull isto go and divel.


E The.rliii Chapter
PRR Di ais mi rA ople inte £gipt
contrarp to the mpnbe of zeremp.geremp prophecpeth the i
_ deftruccion of £gppte.


t
iDioe wher Jeremy had ended althe 4 |
Sy Gioo2des of the Lozde bps God: vnto he
A Che people whpch to declare p Lode

tdep? God had fent him to themne `
R “all thefe wozdes, 3 lape /Asacpab f” '
fonne of Dsiah Johanan the fome of Careap |
fopth all the fubbourne perfons.fapde vnto Fe

remyp:* Thou lyet, Che Lozde oure GOD DADE ie
nottent thetolpeakeunto vg, that we Muld not * ** |
e iae E pey Dwel there. Wut Waruche

the fonneof Merpab pzouokeththeagapni vg, z
tbat be mpabte bapnge vs into thecaptpupte of |
the Caldees, that thep mpgbt Lape b3,anb carp

DVeawape pzploners bnto Wabpion, |

0 FJobananthe fonne of Careah, and althe +z

captapnes of the poot and all the people folotp f
cd not thecommaundement of theLozbe:Qame 1
Ipe,te Divell in the Lande of Juda. Wut Johanan | |
the fonneof Careab,andal the captapnes of the

hoott, carped awape all the remnauntein Juda,

*that were come together agapnefrome alithe ayer rie.
Heathen(among whom thep had bene fcatercd) J
todivell inthelande of Juda, Ben, wemen,chpl
Dien, the bynes Daughbters:all thofethbat Rabun

saradan the chefecaptapnebad lefte wpth Go-

dolpab the fonneot Abpkam, the fonne cf Sa-

phan. Chep carped awap allothepzophct Jeres
mpe.Waruch thefoune of Pezpah, andfocame

into €qppte:fortbep werenotobedpente bnte
eee nates of God. Thug came thep

o Taphnis.

Andin Taptnisthewome of the Lowe Hap- ©

pencd bnto Ferempe,fapinge:Cake greate Eo-
negin tbpne bande and bpdethemin the bapche
wall Vnder he Doze of Wharaos Doulein Taph
nis tbat all the men of Juda mape fe andfapevn
to them: Chusfapeth the Lord of hottes f God
of Blracl.xWepolde, J vopil fende g cal fo? SIA- Yarepleie |


= —— Àe. ii i


buchodonolo:thekpna of Babplonmp feruañt
and wpll fet bps leate wpontbele Toonesthat J
Hauehpb,and be thal{pzedebpstenteouerthent

And whinh:commeth,betball (mpttbe land D.
of Egppte-fome wpth lauchter,fome with pap
fonment:andfome wpth tbe fwearde . all
fet fpre bponthe templesof p Eqppcpans

| t


7 ee ee
a bes
Ta A ii hiii
A Ay hy Ls r


- ofboo


of Fereniye, Kol.lrci,


DeS,andburhethem op, andtake them felucs
prifoners. <Hozeouer , he Hallarape bpm felfe
with thelande of Egypte, tpkeasa thepherde

utterb on biscotc, and tpall Departe bis wape
rom thecein peace. Che pyllers aifoof tbe tem
ple of the Tuine thatis in appt, thal be beak
in peces, and burne the temples of the Eapprts


ang Foodes.
The. tliii. Chapter;


© Berepzoucth the people foz (hep? poelatrp. Shep that fet A


Ipgbt bp che ibzeatenpug ofthe Lozbeatcchattened. Thede

fructionof appt anbthe jewestherinis prophecpen.
wma Dis is the wordetbat was thewed
bey tO Serempcocerning al the Jewes:
p Wich Dwellineappe: at Digdol
meta at Taphnis,at Qoph, e inthe land
untae OF Patures. Thustapthehe Lorde


the God of Flrael:Pe baue {ene althe


ae Sa
| T
D
as:
eh Pt
| het


miferp that 3 baue brought ypon Jerufalem, g
pon the cptics of Juda :fothat this vayethep
ace Defolate,andDnoman Dwellpnee thercin:and
that bycanfe of the greate blafpbempes whiche
thep committed, to provoke me unto angre. Jn
that thep wente backe fo Do facrifpce and wo-
{bpp nto ftraunge qoddes: whome nepther pe


ouer tbep thalbe reniled abbord framed and
cõfounded:Fo: F wpil vplet them that dwell in
Cgppte,xas Jhane vplyted Jerufalem, wpth wets
(He wearde wpth hunger and wpth pettplence

o tbat none ofthe remnaunt of Juda, wbych
ate gone todwel in Eappte, Malbelert to come
dgapne into thelande of Juda althoughe thep
thpucketocome thether agapne,eto divel there
ele Hall come agapne, but facheas are

CHenallthemen wobpehe knewe that thepze D

Wpues had offered yuto fraunge roddes and a
Sreatelorte of wpuesthat oode there, pee and
all the people that Divelte thereiss Egpptein the
cptpe of Patures anlwered Feremp,and lapòt:
Xs foz the twozdeg pthou bak pone onfobs:it
Ebe name of the Lorde, we wpll inno Lote Beare
them, but what forner goeth oute of once owne
mouth. tbat We wpil doo. We wll do facrpfpce |
and offer oblacpons tnto the quene of beauen.x FF?
Ipke ag we and oure fozefatbers , oure kpnaes


1 and onrebeades haue Done in the cytves of Ju-


da and inthe Eretes and feeldes of Zerufalent.
Fo2thenhadweplenteoutnes of ypraples then


aeve.rrp. a 102 pout fathers baue knowe. Hotebeit, afent were Wein profperptpeand ro mplfoetune came
anorrrir.c, Vato them mp icvoagatce alte propbe tes. xy ponds. | á
tofe bp carly, J fene Onto them, andgauethem xut lence we leftetoburne incence: ahd 10 Soovib p
warnpng. D donoluche abbomtnable thingegs do facepipce vntotheguencofbeauen, webaue K
ethpngesp J pate. Wutthep woldenotfolowe hadlcarcenes of all thrnges, and perpibe wyth
no? berkento turne from thep2 wickedneg, and ftwearde and hunger. Latte of all: toben we we:
"D tobonomoze facrifpcees butottraungegoddes. men dydlacepfpce and offered bntothequencof
Ci perfore mpne Mdignatis and weath was heaucn,dyd we make her canes and power Vato
2 kpnodled andit bent vp thecyties of Juda, the herdzpnekoferpnacs.cucntothat pmage dpd
felnes with the Aretes of Jerufalé, fothatthep welacrpfpce anv lecupce, wytbout oure hulban
were made wateand deflate, asttiscometo destoplles. | |
fe this dape. Powe therfore,thustayethbthe  TChenlapde Feremp vntoalthe people tothe
ozne ofbooftes the God of Arael:owbappe mentotbewenien and to allebefelche tobpehe
: nethtt,that pedofogreatcupl vntopourowne hadgenendpm that anfwere,dyd net the Lowe
foules:thustodettropethemene women: chil: remembeethelacrpfpces that pe, poureforefa:
dzenand babes of Judar fothat none ofpouts thers, pourkpngesand rulers, whych al che peo
lefte, becaute pe prouoke me vnto weathe pt Ae ple baucoffered thtpe cptpes of Juda, in the ftre
the woskesofpourownebades: Wibenpe offre tesandlandeof Jerufalem-and bath henot con
pnto fraunge Goddesinthzlandeof€gypte, fpderedtbhypsin pemurah thatthe
tonere aspebegonctodwell. Chatpempahte Lordempabte nolonger luire the wyckeonetic
vétetlp perpe ,andthatpemypabtebercupled of poure inuencpong and the abbompnakle thin
and Hameiulipintreated of allnacpons. Dz geswhpcbepedpd:x As not pour lande delolate rapia
baue pe uot fozgotten the wpckednesofpoure and bopde': pee, abbozecd andaccurled fothat
Forefathers the wpchednes of the kpngesof Ju noman diwelleth therein anpe moze, ag it íg co-
da and their wines the wickedncesthatpepour mepalietbpadape:
{eluesand pour wyuesbauedoncintheladbeof *Dpdnotalithyshappenvntopou.becaule Æ
q Juda, inthecttpe, inthe tretes offerufalem? pemadeluchelactpfpcestopdolles,and fpnned ice rosie
- Petarepenotforp wntothpsdaye, pe feare agapnittye Lodet Vehaucnotfolowwedhpg pemi
not nether walke petuinplaweandinmypcom vopce.to walke inbpslaty, in bys ominaunceg Harmi g
maundementes , that J bane geuen bntopoug . and Fatutes.
pour forefathers. Pee thpsisthecaufethatall mplfortunehap
Therfore thus lapeth the Lorde ofbooffes: pened vntopou:as itis come topali: thysdaye
the God of Fleactl. Jain ledfallpaduiledand A)oozeouce Ferempetpake tnta all Che people
determined to punpipe you, andtoroteoutall gtoallthe women. Beare the words of the L020,
Juda. efor theremnaunte of Juda,that pur- all Juda,pe that be in tpeland of pitts Cougs
polip wentinto Egppte tbere todwell, Fwpll fapthtbhe Lorde of hooltes the God of firer De
agove.ritic, CAKE tbém , Kandthep Hallalbedettcroped. An andpoure wpuesdanelpoken Wyth your owne
ano siita fhelanbofeqppte thal thep perire, beingecon mouth,thatthpng thatpe bauetultpliedindede. |
fuined wrth the wearde and Meith buncee . x Pee thug bauepefapde: We wpll not faple Aerer e
ff02 from the leat vntotbe mof, thep pallpe- butperfourme the bowes that we bape Low
rie With the fureardeand with hunger. Boze we roplldolacrplpce ¢pourz out opp ae


The:


meststhequene of ieauent: Purp ofclp wypl pe fet
Dp pour obne meanpngeg and pecfourme pour
owes. And therfore beate the! ode ofp L020
all Juda, pe thatdwell inthe lande of Eappte:
Smrria — WeholWe,*s ave lwoenebp mp qreatname
fapetb the Lozde: that mp name thal tot bere:
hearledthozowe anp manes mouthe of Juda, ii
allthe lande of Egppte,to lape, Che Lord God
luce), Foz Aol watche,to plage them,and
notfozthep2 weltp. — |
= E Ie themenof Juda that be intbelande
of Eqppte tall perpe wpth the fwearde and
wptbbunger, pntpll the be ptterlpedeltroped
Neuertbeles.tbovetbat fled awapetozp (oeard
{hall comme agapne into thelande of zuda, but
there (halbeberp fewe ofthe. And ail tie vem:
raunt of Juda that are goneintoCagppte,tyere
todwwell, thal hnotve whole woozdes Malbe fou
trne:thep2g 02 mpne. Cakethpstoz a toben that
J wpll vptet poumpa neath eh
and that pemap knowe that 3 (toptbout doute)
wopl perfourme mp parpale OPS pota prae
pon. wWebolde,fapeth the Lorde, J wplldelpuer
Dharao,Hophzea bpnge of Egppt into the hart
‘iii.ve.rrba Deg Of bps enempes that feke at er bps Ipfexeut
Fed gg F cane sedekpab the kynac of Juda into the
tls of fect onoo? Erne of s abplon
bps enempe, wbpch fought arter Dporpte,


‘ser fig.e


|


is


of Folias hi


itive H ar iil
= ia PA far i
Fe ee |


rr,  ¢a0,s2echokpng of€qpptttorn be was inChar


diii iegut,


Pophetyt


Forth to figbt:barnes panre poles and fet pour
{clues vpon thé, (et pour fallettes fat on, bring
foatb (pearestcoure pourlweardes: and put on
poure b2eltplates.

wut alas howe Dappeneth it.tbat J fe poufo
afraped/ why thrincke pe backer Thep: worthy
esare flapne. Pee, thep runne fo fall away, that
none ofthemloketh bebpnd ppm, Sfearfulnes ig
fallen bponenerpe one of them, fapeth the Lotd
@ belpabtct of Foote pall uot fle awape, and p
tooztppes Hal not etcape. |

owarde the north bp the water of oiga |

tes,thepdpd Humble and fall. wut whatisde 5
thys that fwelleth vp, ag it tere a floudderoa-
trnge gun ragynge Iphe the Ereames of water?
“at is Eqpptetbatcpletp vp lpke the floude,and
calteth out p waters wpthlo arcate nopfe.

And belapde, F wpil qo vp,and wpllcouer
theearth, 3 wpl deltrope specptpe wpth them f
avetherin, Get pe vp pe pozles:role forth pecba
retteg come forth’ wozthpes:pe owang. pe Li
beangwith pour buklers, pe Lideans with pour
botweg. Thps dape of the Lozbe God of hooftes
is abapeot vengeaunce,that be mape abuenge
bpm of ppsenempes. Che fwoearde hall deucur
it halbe fatplfped and bathed in thepze bloude.
$f02 the Lozde@od of hooltes thal havea flapne
offerpngetowardep nozth,bp the water of Cu
pbrates.Go bp, D Gpipad,and bapnae trpacle €
bito thedaugbter of Capp . Wut in vapne
{halt thou goto furgerpe.fo2 thp thounde mall
not be topped. Che Hepeben baue beard of thp
(ame and thelande ts full of thp confulton:foz


f one ronge man dp Fombie bpon another and


thep are fallen both together. i

x CThele are the wwozdes thatthe 102dfpake D
to the pzophete Jeremp concernpnge the com- Jere, Mi»
mpna of Aabuchodonoloz the kpnee of Wabp:
aae spea ede once A ó
qppte.Pacheoutthozowep landeof Egppe:
and caule it to bepzoclatme at ¢)iqdol, Guibe
and Tapnis,andlap: Stad Fpl maketbe redp
a ueni aa a r the sae about.

owe bappencth it tbat tüp mpabtp wort
eg Sre fallen (abp ode thep not fat; Euen be
caufe the Lozde thmi chem Downe. Che laugh
ter twas yreat, fo: onefel ener Fil upon another
Mneceped Bpon another.Up let vs qo axapne
to ourpeople,and to oure owne naturalconntre
fromtbecruel{wearde,

Thep dpb crpe euen there, D Pparao, kynge
See bier pea ain IARA |
bapna Cedpbpcpon. Agtrulpas 4 lpuclapththe E
kpnge,x whole name isthe Lode of booftes,i¢ Se- FFF
pr ee aber E nA git Lg
nus tt it ode inthe fee. D thoudanghter of E-
apptemake readpe thp geareto flipt. o: Ropp
albe vopbe and defolate, fothatnoman hall
bwelltberein , Chelandeok! Egypte is lpke a=
goodlpefapzecalfe :but Defteuccpon \thall come
oute of the nozthe J lap it commeth.Her waged
foudpers that be wopth ber are lphe fattecalues,

‘Cher allo all leawape together,¢ not abpbe

foz the dape of thep2 laughter , andtbhetpime of

tbep2 vplptacpontballcome bpontbem.
‘CThecrp


=
L
#


T


|


|


|


|


of Heremye, Hol. lecit,
KK Thecep of hent Hall make anopte, asthe Eves pug fapeth the Lore ofhoftes the
blaffe of a trompet. Fo? thep thallenter in wpth CVA Oodol Firal againtt? €oab:tvo - ‘a:
thzp2 bootees; and come wopthe ares, ag it were eto the citye of Nebo:Foz itis laid rvi.arrh.d
bewersdowe of wood. Bnd they hhallcutdowe A
ber wood, fapeth the Lord: Chep balbeinnume Piety is
rable:fozthep Halbe moze innombzetbëp gre! to thame gafrapde: oal can boatt nomoże of
bopperg, lo that no mat Halbe ablttoteltbenm.  Iefeb foz they baue deupted acapnt it.Come
Thedanghter of Egypte tsconfounded,andde fhal thep fap,let 03 rote thé out, that tbep map
Ipuered into the handes ofthe people of p Mort: henomoge amonge thenombec of the ®entpics
„Tbug lapeth the Lorde ofhookesthe God andthat the madmen map nontoze be toughte
of Fraell. Sepolde, J topl vplet that rettles peo ppon:¢ the fihearhe thal perfecute the. X Voice
pi of Alerandzpa, Pharaoand Eappte; pée, hall crpefrom OZanaim=with greatwa line
othfhepze roddes and thepehpriges:cuen iba anddeftruccponts Poabmade delolate. —__
rad,andallthemedat put tdep:trutin Din. Lee Chpldzen coulde tel of the cepe therot. soz at
J wopll Delpucretbem tntothe bandeg ofthole, thegopng dp ynto Lupth, be arole with lameit
that feke after thepz pues. Pamelpintothe po: tacionandmourting,and pote totarde Ho-
Mer of Habuchobonosoz thekpugeod! Wabplon, ranaim,thep bearde a ceuelanddeadlycrie.Oct
and into the power of bis teruauntes Andafter pouawa due pour lineg, andDbelike vutothe |
all thele thynqeaMt Walbe inbabpted ag afoze i athin the woploertes.« $02 becaufetboubatt era .ci.b.
tyme, lapeth tbe Lode. | truftedin thpne owne wozckes and treafure, Eor na
G n Ţ_ Mutbenot thou altapede(D mp feruaunte thou alt detaken.Chamos with bis preattes 27
eerie hotter tutor te O70, Fiopll and pzinces Hallgoo atvap into captiupte. |
ethefromfarce, andtppledefremtbelande The deltroper pall come bppon all cptpes sn
of thep2 captpupte. Jacob alfo (hall come agpue none thal efcape. Che Valleys albe deftroied,
ahd be tn cefte:pe hall profpereand noman all and the feles thatbe laped watt; lpke as the
Dobpmbarme. fcarclhounot (DJacobmp Low pok Sat 38) interes? =-
feruaunte) fapetp the Lowe fo 3 amwpththe:  Gpuetopnacspito Woah, that the get ber
- and topll delttope all nacpons, among whome J awape Cpedply foz hercptpes tall be made le
hauelcateredthe. Peucrtheles, ¥ wyllnotcons delolate, that no man ball dwell therin:
tume the : butchatentheandcozrecte the,pee,e Curled bebethatdoth thozke of the Lorde
that toptheDpicrecpon: nepther wp Flparethe negligently and curled be ic tbat &epeth backe
“as oanetbat werefauteles. : | þig x lwearde from Hedpngeofblóude: |. sore sits
C The.tlvti. Chapter Hoab hath euer ben rpebe and careles from
C The worde ofcheLozde sgapnk the Philipines, ber pory bp, the bath (pttenand taken ber cafe
e] Feed cto sere wode that tbeLon ake wll
ira keg NCO Jerempethepzophete, agapiultthe © l | :
Be m?) poplptpnes, veto tbat A preda atvap into ot aoe rea ber caufe remap
a  thecptpeotasab. Chustapeththe Lorde: we: vieth,and ber fano | ner-
bolde, therethallivatersrpfeoute of theo:th: _ Wut lo,thetpme eae wr ft €
and Hall qrowetoa greate Houde runnpngeo- that 3 Hall fende ber truffers to trul
uer and couerpnge the lande, the cptpesandtye Which Mall rentoue ber from her divellpng :and
thardibelltherin.: i empty ber bellelleg, ¢ beeake ber wpne pottes.
a.  Andthemen hall crpe,andalletbepPodwell And &)oab tall be ahamed of Chamog, lpke
~~ &ébelande,hallmourne at thenopleand tam- 48 Afrael was ahamed ofx Bethel, wherin the Bis oe
bpne oh Ea Tonge barbedpozles, atthepa: Put der trut :Uberfozeno pe thpnkethug, we Tera
Gphge Or EDEP: Harettesandat the rumblen ! : i
of P wheles. The fathers pallnotloketo'thepze ig befbroped:and her cpties brent vp: ber chofen
cbpldzen, fofebleand werp hall thep2pandes be Pougmen befiapne, fapth f kyng, whofename
at ý fame tyme when be teal be ther, to defkrope tthe Lozd of bottes. Chedelkruction of fav
the whole lande of the Pbplifipnes. He Gayl ciniethona pace,and her fallis athande.
make woalke bothe Tprus, Sion, and all other
that are wone tnta them. P rya
C „Oz Ebe Losdewpl deltrope the Philitines, Dappeneth tt,that the trong atke,¢ the goobly
~ Eheremnaune of tbepleofCaphtor, Walduesig rodde ís thug broke ¢ And thou doughter Divs
comebpon Aab, Alcalon wpb other valleys come Dotonefcrom thy glozp,and (pt in thpette.
{pall kepe ber peace. Foz be that deltropeth Moab, thallcome vpto
- _ Hotrlongewpleetbouflepe, Dehoufwerd the allo e bzeake downe thy tronge bolocs.
ofthe Loder ban wyltetpouceaterCurnea: And thon that divellett in Arece, get the to
gapneinto thp lwete ret and leaue of: Wut how o fretet loke aboute the, afke then that are
can it ceate,wobhen the Lozdebymlelfehathege- E Eblas at AA j
uenbpm acharacagapnite Alcalon andrapiea Ned Ob. WMoabisconfoundedandonercome,
if op agapnite thecptpes of the fee coattess
C Theriviti.C havter. ppon the plapne lande. Namely : bpon Polon,


C Whrivczdeolshs Lopoeagapnetye eqoabptes, and Jabasah, Upon WHephaath g An
- a00


Aabo.andthehotfeot Deblathatm wponCa- (hallnomozebes peopled cante Cyebath tet op -6
tiathiarim and vpon the boule Gamull vppon ber felfe oleate toe esi propa had graphie
the ponie Woan, and Carpothe ppon Bosra), thallcome vponthe,D Boab, fapth the Lorde.
nb allthe cittesinetbelandeof Boabwpether Thole efcapeth tbe feare dhall fall inthe prt,
thop Ipe Tarte oa ey ig Cmptten Dodmeant soot aettet ous of the ppt Halbe taken inthe
He homie of oad is {mptten Dotoneand (hare. stor J wpll bayngea peace of wplptation
Her arme broken, fapetthe Lode. Makeber pon d)oab,fapth the Lore. Thevt atareba
azonchen,fordyemagnptpedbertelfeabouc the bleto fipe,thall tande nder the thadowe of e
Loxbe,that men map clap thepe bandeg at ber Cebon: oz there wall go. Fy2e onfe of Helton,
poméite and the allo map belaughedtofcozne anda flamefrom Spon, and iburne vpthat
pe O Feaell,thalt thounotlaugh bpmto (cone, —proude peopleof Moab, andthe top of thole fe-
SHETIDA wyenheis taken amona teneas aay Dpcpouscbpldzen. ate Gs i
of thp wo2rdes that thou pakte fpoken agapnlt {Go be viito the, D Aoab, For thou peovle
bpmý palt be deputawap.Le s Joabites thal tree es Denese DOU
leane thecitics,¢ doel incockes of fone and be fers thalbeled awaycaptpue. Vet at th: latte,
e tometybe ciate eersnEnES n Doe rf yg O tare be Dag
Etap. POLOG. tpoe, epea > fapeth the Lode. | cor.
pahe peis verp bpe minded. J knowe ber Koutiiclic, Moab. oe. Chuskarreis ofthe plage
be on A pts a be K C The.rlir.Chaptg.
ex ftomacke fapetbthe Lozd, J Enottape when | sagt i
the Loade)ber indignacpon, the doth notrpgbe, © The wore the Lorne agapnte the Ammonptrs,agAPnte eae
per wozdeg are kpe ana thepbanenotdelt tru- WG ey Sconcernpnge the « Ammonptes, Eyer. d
ip. Tberfor Wall there mournpnge bemadcfor Ries Raq thus the Lozde lapth:wath Biraclino Cate
PHoab, and euerp man fhall cepe foz Boabs. yay Yq cbplozcn, orishewptbouteanbep2e:
fake: a psec hg (albe made tothe men ES Wabp patbyoure kpngethen taken
that tande pon tbe wall. Eo wpll Jmourie Gadin i herfozedoeth bps peop edwel in bis
for thealfo,  Jaler,andfoz the, D thou Vp- cptpes.¢ Webolde therfore, the tyme commeth,
nepardeof Sabmad. Chp vine baaunches thal. fapt b tbe Lode : that 3 topll bepnge anople of
come ouct the fee andthe beaunches of Jaser, WarreintoRabap ofthe Ammonites:and it pal
but onto the fee:the deftroper all baeabeinta belapedocna nefolate beape and ber cpties brent
thy baruett andarapeqatbherpnge: mpathe and. wp : andthe Firaelpteg balbe lozves ouer thole
chere pall be taken awape frome the tpinbzpe thar bad them in poffetftonafoze, faythtbe Lod
felbdc, and from the bole lande of Moab. Masa (pall mousne:for Ap thalbe reted out
 Bherethalbeno fwete wpne m the peefic.the. ofthe rounte, lapth the Lorde.
treaner pall baue no tomache tocrpe:pea ther The cptpes of Rabab thal crpe out, and gpd
be none to erp onto bym:twhich afoze tyme wer chem felues wopthfackeclo sthep hall mourne.
Derde fro Hesebon to Cleale and Jabas, twbithþe and rune about the toalles: ‘orthbep2 kpnege Hall
ipfted vp thepz vopcefrom soar nto ozona- beled awape p2ploner:pea, bps peites and prin...
im,tbe bullocke of thze pere oldemallgomour- ces wpe bpm. 5
ning. The waters alfo of Hemvim Mhatbe dry: WAberforeteu tele thou in the pallepe? thep
ed vp. B)ozeoucr, J topll make goab ceale, valley hath howed atbap,D thou Fearcedougd
fapti) be Lorde, from tpeofferpngee and cen- ter,and thynket thou that thou arte fofafe, bp
ng ý ebath made bntober opoesinbpah reafonoft trealure, thatne man (hall come
places. abortos my bere aeng fo: Moab, tothe: We olde, 4 wpll bopnge a feare bpontbe
phea croude plaping an beup fong:and foztbe fapth the Lorde God of hoottes, Frome all thole
mensfake of thebepebwa'linp Dect mourneth thatbe about the:fotbat pe (halbe {catred euerp
alfe:eucnasa pppe tbat pppet a doleful fong: man from an otber, andno man Mall ather thé
acs foz thep (palbe Werp t we, and Deltroped. fogpther aapne that be fled. Wut erthat F
carbo x Allbeedes thalbe Hauen, and all beerdes wpilbzpraethe Ammonpteg allo oute of captp=
clppped of allhandes bounde. lopnes gp2dedD uptpeaqapne. |
about with fackcloth.Cipo all the Doule toppes x Cipon tbe Evomptes bath the Lode of po Erar.rri. b
and fetes of Woab there thalbe lamentabic. fies fpoken ontbys maner: 3g thernomoze wil- ee
mourcnpng: fo: J wll becake q@oablpke an domein Chemans 48 there nomoze good CONN- FrFb.s j
pnp20 table veffell fapthtbe Lorde: 4 bow fapleamonge pyspeoples 48 thep2 wpldome
ig thedeitroicd’ D how mourneth hee D Howe then fourned clenetonongbt? Get pou Hence,
Doth Moab bange downe her heed, andisatha: tournepoure packes, crepe dote into thedepe,
med- Thus hall Moab bea Ly Ak focke, sopecptpsens of Deda. €
nerevtii.e, AND Hadin Derpfion ofall them that be rounde f€02 J wyll bapnaedefeructpon bpon €fau:
Jeri piip o avout her. ¥ For thus fapththe Lozd:%ebold: peas the dap of bys wplptacpor. JF the grape
the enemp @alicome dpan agan Egle:and matherers came vpon the, poulde thep notlene
{pred bis wpnges Dp Moab. Thep talelpine fome rrapes r Pf thenpabt robbers came ppor
over the walies, and wpn the ronge poloes. rhe Muld tbep not take fo moch as thep thought
Then the mpgbtye mens hertcs in £t)oab Mat- werepnougher
belpke p herte of a womi rrauelpng with child wut F wpll make Efau bare,and ppfcouere
nd Moab malbe made fo delolate that te pps fecretes, Co that pe thal not be Sigua
, her.


-a —


i


of Jrremye.


them. ope {ede fhalbe waited awape: pea, bis

bzetbzen and bis nepgbvours: and be ppm felfe

hall not be lefte bebpnde, - CE
Thou thalteleauc thp Fatherles<chplozen


FJ wpl Bpndle a fpe in the walles of Damafleng

whpch al confume the palace of Menpadad. sip srt.
¥48 lo: Cedar andthe kyngdonie of Hasoz =”

tohom Mabuchodonoso2 the yng of abylon


bebpnde the,and 3 wpll kepe them:and thy Md [mate Downe, the Lozde bath fpoken thus vp


| dowes (hal take thep2 comfozte tn me. forti
aicte.rrb.b Hath the Lobe fpoken. x Bebolde thep that më
retire thought were bmmnete to Dapnite of the cuppe,
bane dronken topth the fp2ft-:and thypnkelt thou
thento be free. |
#20,nNo,thou halt nepther be qupte noz free:
but thoumuftedapnbeallo. o: wbpr Yhaue
Tuwo2ne bp mp felfe, fapeth the Lode: that 1503-
rab hall become a topldernefle, anopen thame
alaugbpnae focke and curlpnge:and al ber cp=
ties fhalbe a continuall deferte.
D  o2 Zam pecfptlpeinfourmed of the Lo2zde
that be bath fent a meflage already puta the be=
then.@Gatlur pou togetber,€ go forth agapnite
them:make pou readp to the bataple: fo2 lo, xy
twpli make the but {mall amonge the Heathen,
TA andlptleregardedDamongemen. `
Seaia  *¥ Thebpe tomackeand the pepde of thp
bert baue Deceaucd the, bpcaule thou voplt dwel
in p holes of onp rockes and paue tbe bpemoŭ
tapnesin pollchion. Qeuerthelelke, though tbp
net were as bpcasthe Eagles: pet wpil Fratte
thedovone,fapethbthe Lorde. <t)o2couer, zdu-
Rer.rbtti.b mea Halbea wpldcenes : * who fo gocth by it,
Hebd  Chalbe abaliped, ¢wondze at Her milerable pla-
Generis. e SE8-* Likeas Dodom, Gomogre, andthe citics
"" that lape thereaboute wereturnedD bpfpdowne
fapeth the Lozde:fo Hall nobody dwell in Jdu-
mea, and no epee baue Dis babitaciton there
webolde, lyke asp Lpon, fo palla deftroper
come bp from the plealatit medotves of Jordan
‘pinto the tronge Divellpnge place: and when J
baue made pim qupet, ¥ wpllimake bpm to fipe
= from Per:and all chofen men wpil FZ let in arape
agapnll ber : bo is lpke bnto mes bat is be
that wpl ftrpuc withme: Ci bat epherd map
tande in mp bandeg’
pErrrbiLd  *Therfoze bearethe counlaple ofthe Lorde
that be bathtaken bpon Joumea:and pps pur-
potetbat be bathe deupfed pon thecprisens of
‘hema. The leatt of the locke thalltcarethem
inpeces , and lobe whatfapze thpnge thep haue
thep hallmake tt watte:and them felnes alfo.
At the nople of thepz fall: theearth hal quake:
tbecrye of tiep: wopce Halbe berd Dntotbered
ye Cee. Weholde the enempe Halxcomeand fipe vp
brtbher.lphe as it were an Cagle, and fp2ed bps
Mpuges bpon Wosrah. Then (hal the Vertes of
the woztbpegin Edom be as the barte of a wo-
#fa. biia mantraueplpnge of child. + Upon Damalcus,
4081.4. Hemathand Arphad hall come confulpon:fo2
_ thep hall beareeuell tpdpnages , thep thalbe tol-
{cd toand fro lpke the fee that cannot fandityl
Damatcugs Halbe foze afrapde, g pal fipe trem
bipuge fhalcome bpon her.Soz0we and payne
fall ouertake ber as a woman traueling with
chpld. wut pot Muld fo wozrthppful g clozions
acittebefozfaken: Dere therfore : ber pouge më
thalfalinthe Fretes, al er men of war Halbe
take awap inthat time, lapeth p 202d of pottes


Abbii.a


Fe. elb


them:Arple, ¢ get pou vp puto Cedar, and de«
trope the people toward the eat. Thep: tentes
and their lockes,thal thep take awap:pe,thep2
banginges andthep2 veflels. Thep? Cammelt-
allo thal they carp awap witd them. Thep thall
crpe tothem:ftcarets onenerp (pde.

Fle, get pou fone awape,creape info canes, ft
that pemap dwel there, D pe inbabpters of ha
foz,fapetb the Lorde : foz abuchodonosoz the
kynge of Babplon bath poldena coticel concer=
npng pou:and cocluded bps denpee arapni pou
Arple,and get pou bp agapnét ponder rpchanb
careles people ( fapth the Lo2zd) which bath nep
ther gates no: Dooze barres,busdwellalone. _
Thep: Camels Halbe tolen, andthe dzoues of
thepzcatcllagpuen awap.<)ozcoucr.thole wpl
Blcatter towardal the Wpndes:andbepng the
to deftruction:pea, andtbhat thozot thepz owne
famplpers lapetbthe Lode. Palo: alfo Halbe
à dwrellpng Foz dagong, ¢ ancuerla linge wpl-
dernes: fo that no ed (pall Dwellfhere:and no
man (bal paue there bis babttation.

b EEA ea on a
the prophet Ferentp,concerninges Elam, mle ere rerio
begpamnpn of Prapane of sebebiab king of Yu danbin a
da. Thus fapeth the Lozde of hoottes : Hebols,
J top ll bacake p botoe of Elam,and take awap
tbep2 trength: and bpon Elam J wll b2puge
the foure pndes fromthe foure quarters of he-
uen, and wpll {catter them agapnite the fame
foure fhpnves. And there Hallbe no people, but
fome of Elam (pall flee vnto them. ;

J€02 3 wplicaufe Elam to be afrapde of their
enempes, and of them that feke thepzlpues:and
toyll brpnige pon them the indignacion of mp
wrath lapeth the Lode. And F wll perlecute
them x the fwweard,fo long tpll 3 pane bzought
them tonaugbt. J topll et mp thzonein Clam,
J tpll deftrope both the kynge and the princes
from thence fapeth the Lozd. wnt tn proceffe of
tyme 3 wpll bzpnge Elam out of captinitie as
gapue,lapeth the Lorde.


The.l. Chapter.


C Be prophecieth thedritruccion of MHabplon,and (he de:
ipuctansce oë #lraell which was in captinitic.


Rh — De worsdesthat the Lordelpake bn: Æ
7 Mile {pa


XE Sto the prophete Jeremy, concecnpnae

R A (ash Moabplon, and the landes of the Chal
A NG ees: x3zeache amongetbeGentp: ;
ieg,let poure bopce be berde,makea token crpe {Hehe
out, kepe no filence, but fap: Babplonis wonne zere.rrd, b
XWBell tg confounded, and Aevodach is ouer- wes |
come.

+ Pea, theps coodes be bzoughteto Hame |
andthep2patages burl tn peces. Fo? out of the zen
nozthe there dothecome a pcopleagapnitc ber,
fobpcbe make ber lande fo wate, that no bodpe
Dwell therin, neptber man, noz beatke : foz thep
fipe anddeparte from thence, x jn thofe UAR LERA R


P


Ael
(E E


=-


«Sol Uerity.


Che prophecve.


at tbat tyme, lapeth the Lorde: the chpldzenof
“yfracl hal come,thep.and the chyldzen of Juda
wepypng g makpng balt, and Mal feke the Loa
thep2 Gad. Chep ibalatkte the wape to Spon,
tbprber pall thep turne thep2 faces, fapenge:
Come and We wpll cleave tothe Logde , inato-
uenaunt that never Halbe broken.

Wp people hath bene alokexflocke, mp Tite
git.rritts perdes bane dpiceued them, and Haue made thé
GEFLE ey aftrape ppon the bylles. hep baue gonckrd
the mountapne to thelptle pile, and forgotten
thep2 folde. All thep came bpon them, Haue de-
woured them:andthep2 cnempes fapd: we baue
made nodefaute again them:fo2 thep bauc dil
pleafed the Lozde:pea euen the L020, wp pcb is
thebcwtp of thep2 rpgbteontnes andthat defen
Dedthep2 fathers. Yet thall pe fipe from abp-
lon and departe cut of the lade of the Chaldees
ebepeastherammes that go before tie Rocke.
* $€02 10,3 pli ake wp an poolk of people fro
the nozthzenlande,and bzpng tbem vnt abp
lon:tbhefe hal lape fege to it and wpnit.Thep2
arrotwes (pall not mpfle.lphe as a connpnee art-
cher huteth not wonge;

And the Chaldecs Halbe fpopled andal thep
that {pople them, thalbe latilfpedfapth p Lod
efaribtia *altbaugh pe were lo cheartul ¢ glad.totreade

Downe mpne heritage, and fulfpiled pour pica-
fures, as the caluesin p graffe, and trpumpbed
ouer themlpke p bulles, wien pe bad gottenthe
pictozp. Pour mothers albe loze confounded,
and thep that beare pou, all come to ame.

Sbe albe the leak fet bp amonge the nacions
popde:Wwalted and dped vp. Mo man Halbe å-

; ble codweilthere,fo2 the feareoftbe Lozde,but
mer.rbitt.b (he Malie whole belolate. x All they that go bp
HEDE 5 sb ylon, all tande ftpll andbeabatped, and
fallwonder at all ber plages.

Go foztbin pouraraye agapnt wabplion
rounve aboute, all pep canbanodle bowes pote
at ber, {pare no arowes : foz he bath (pnneda-
gant f Lozd.Crp out: vpo per, wpa her, agaitt
ber rounde aboute: We Mall pelde ber felfe, Der
foundaciong Hall faland ber walles (hall come
botwne:fo2 tt Halbe the vengrauuce of the Lord
eros Sireni fs lice Malbetaken of ber antas the
ve rrii d Hath done, fo deale pe w per. Rote out tbe lower
JjeeLthb from Wabplon,and Dim that bandleth the fycle

inberuet. foz feare of the fweardof the ensmp

every man Wal get bim to biz owne people:and

eucrp man tball ee tobps owne lande. Firari ig

ittee rotre ® Attered Rocke pipons baue dpiperied tbem,

atap.r.a * Sepattethbe kpugeof the Affpuans devoured

ig. rero. them, * lat ofal this Nabuchodon0302 kyng of
Habplon hath vroledall thep2 bones. .

D> Cherfore thus lapeth the Lo20 of hofies the

God of Flracl: Bebolve, F wyl vpict the kynge

tiiverir, a of Sabplon and his kyngdome asx F Daue vifi

FUD? tep the kynge of the Bipriang, and wplbzpnge

FBlracl agapne to his plealaunt paure, chat be

map fede bpon Charmel and alan andbe fa-

tiffped Dpon the mounte of Ephraim g Galaad

* Zn thole bayer andat thelametpme fapeth p

102d: Jf the offence of Firael be foutht Foz, ther

(hail none be fonude. Jf men enquere foz plpnne


Bere.t.g


€


Jien ILe


of Juda:there Halbe none:fo2 J wpll be merci-
ful vntotbem, whom Ffuftretoremapne ouer.

Go Downe:D thou auenger, into f enempes
lande, æ vifit thé that dwell cherin:Downewith
them. lmpte them wpon the backes, fapeth the
2.020:D0 accozdpneg toalthat 4bauccomauded
the. here isqone aboutethelandeacrpe ofa


flan bs great murther, namelp on tbis ma-


owebappencth tt,that the Dammer of the


Het.
Whole wold is thus broke ¢ bzopledinfond2e/
dow chañcethit: p Babpils ig become a wplder
nes among p bea ten onthis maner! J mp felfe
Dauc layed waptefo2r the, thou art take: pna-
Wares arte Ptrappedand{naved: foz whprthou
baft pzouoked the Lord puto angre. Che Lozd
Dati opened bis poule of ozdinaunce , ¢ brought
Forth the weapons of bis wath. Eo? the thypng
tiats5 Bove in theland of the (Lbaldees, it is che
Loveoiboeswozke. e

Come againt ber. foz this is berende:bzeke œ
vp ber chefies:thacthe ber as pe thzeH cozne:de-
ficope ber that nocbpnge Walbe left. Slaye all
tiep2 mpabtp (oldiers, e puetbeto death. Wo
be Duro typem, fo: the dap tpme of theps vifita
clon is athande . We thpnke 3 beare alreadp a
crpe of them p be fled zefcaped out of p lande of
Toabplon, which thewe in Sion the vengeatice
of the 1020 our God, the vengeatice of bis tem-
ple:yea a vopce of them, that crpeagapnit Wa-
bplon, Call vp all tbe archers agapnitt Wabi-
lon.pptch pour tenteg rode abonte ber, ý none
elcape. * Recompence ber as the hath velecucd: Fenti
gaccozdpngastpebath done,fodealewpthber
agapie,fo2 ihe bath* fet vp ber felfe agatnit the intperti.a
Lozd,agapnét tie boly one of Jirael. Cherfo2e
tal ber ponge men faldotone inthe firetes, and
all ber men of warre Halbe rooted out iný dape
fapth the Lode. Weboloe, ¥lpeake vntotbe,
D thou proude, lapeth the Lorde God of hoftes e
foztbp dap Malcome euen the tyme of fhp vplt
tacion. And the proud Hal fomble andfal,and
ne man thal belpe ppm vp. q wpll burne vp pig
opties wypth;fpze, andithalconfume al that ts )
rounde aboute bpm. *

Thus lapeth the Lorde of holtes: Che chpl
dren of J {tacland Juda fuffre violéce together
Al thep that baue them tncaptiuite, kepe them I
faie, aud wpll not let them go bat thep2 auen
ger and redemer is mpghty. Choke name is the
Lozbe of hoftes:be hal mapntapne they2 caule
be yall make the lade (hake, and tude thé that
dweltheri, one wpthanother. Whelwearde
fhalcome vpon the Chaldecs, layeth the Loe
ppon them that dwel in Babylon, vpoutbhep2
pzpnces, and vpon thep2 ple më. The weard
ppontbep2 ED SPER AE Foz thofe.tbep Wal be
come fooles. Che lweard vponthep2 woztpics,
fotbat they Hall Fandeinfeare. Che lwearde
pponthep2 bozlemen andcharretics and bpon
all tþecomen people that dwell ynder them: fo
that they Hallall becomelpke omen.
The (wearde vppon thepz treature , fo that it
{hall be Kollen awape, Adzroughte vppor
they: Waters, fotbat thep Chall be dped vp.

_ Foz the lande wmozthppyeth pmages , and
delptetiy


z of Jcremype.


delpteth (n Leauge wonderfull thynges. Cher
foze (hall wpldc beatles , Lamiaand Catte of
moütapnes, and elttiches diwel therinfoz there
{hal neuer man dioel there nether thallanpman
baue his habitacion there fo2zeuermoze. Lpke
Heer. Cas God deltroiedk Dodomand Gomozre:wypeh
the cpties that lap there about,fapeth the LA.


0 pall no man dwell there alfo, neptberthall -


zerem, Lb CHP MAN Daue there big babitacion. x wWebolde,
be. prbtit e tbere Hall come a people from the nozth wpth a
great bonde of men, Emanp kpnges thal tande
vpfromthe endes of theearth. Thep beare bo

, Wesand bocklers,ccucl ave thep ¢ Snmercpful

SG Thep: vopceroarethlphe the ragpnee lee,

thep rpde bpon Hozles, andcome weapenedto

fyabta Ht dae the, D Wabplon. Alone asthe

- Kyng of Sabplon beareth tell efthem,bis ban:

des thal are feble.Dozowe and beupnes Hall

come DponD yn. as a Woman trauclpnge wypth

aerie chploe. 2S chold, *lpkeasthelpon commeth vp
from the pleafaunte medowes of Jo2dan vnto

tbe geene paftures of Ethan fo wpll ¥dzpue

them forthe,and make them conne agapnit ber.

Wut whom (pall F chofle out, ¢ ozdepne to fuche

goss Dd. aAthpnger * Fo: whotslpike me, 02 Wo weil
Bre gennee mer o: What ihepherde map anode

agapntt mee T perfore heare the coiifel that the

Lozde bathe qpuen bpon Wabplon , and the de-

upce $ be barh taken Dpon the lande of the Chal

bees. Tie leafte amonge the people thallteare

tbem in pereg, and lobe What pleafaunt thpnge

they bane:thep Hall lape it watt. The nople at

the wpnnyng of Wabplonthalmouc tpeearth,

and thecepe balbe berde amonge the Gentplg.

Che.lt.¢bapter.


(Howe Babpion thulde be ouecchsowen. Jeremy geueth
bps bekelo Saratas


Totora Lodenly is Wabilon Fallen,and deftroped.


=


 Wwpl eive


] (TE.
Hol lerinj.
but (heisnotrecouered. Cherfore yl welet
Deralone,and qo cuerpman to bps otne coune
trep. Fo? ber iudgementis come into beaut and
is qone Dpto pf clouds. Che Lod bath bzoughe
fozthourrighteoufnes. And therfozcom on, we
ponp wozke of p Lozd our Goo,

Wake Harpe the arrowes and multpplpe 28
pon thylbdes : *toztbe Lozde thall rapie vp the ERE

2ete of tbekpnae of the Wedees, whyeh bath "S
alreadpe a delpze to deltrope Babplon. Thys
(balbe the vengeatice ofthe Lode and the ben-
geaunce of pis temple.

Sret vp tokens ppon the walles of Wabp-
lon:make pour watcbe tronge, fet pour watch
Metin arrape:pea, bold peup watches: and pet
fos althat Wall the Lozde go fozth wyth the de=
upce wbpch behathtaken vpon them ý dwelin
Wabplon. :


D thou that dwellett bp fhe great waters, D

thou that batt fo great treafuce erpches, thpne

ende tg come, and the rebenpuge of thp wpnnpn
ges * Coe Lod of hootkes bath fwozne bp BPM amos.vr.e
ilfe , that De wopll oncerwhelme the wrth men, gererrit.a
Ipke gretboppers tnnombze, wheche wtb aco

rage ipal cepe,alarum,alarunagapntt the.
+ Pea cuen the Lozbde of booftes, that teprb bys Ht-Frrt.b
power madethccarth,wpthbps wpledame pre
pared the rounde wolde, and wpth bys dpitre-
ctonipzede out the eauts.4 flooneashelettcep
bps vopce be berde the waters inthe aver ware
fearce.¥ipe Draweth bp thecloudes From the en vi rrrs.d
des of the earth. Pe turneth the lpabtnpnges to

tapne, be bzpngeth the topndes out of thep2 fe-

cret places: Pf thep be etemeco bp thep2 wpleda: ,
altinen are become fooles. * Confounded be al rid a
thecafters of pmages, fozthe thyngetbatthep P? -
make is but dpiceate,ebath no byeath. Vapne

is it and an errontoute wozrke: and inthe tpme

of wplitacionit hal perpthe. |

Preuectdelefle the pozcion of Jacob ig none C


y fuche-but be sy made al thpnges, whole name


is the Lorde of hooftes, be ts the rodde of bps en=
berttatsnce. Chou balk bene mpne hammer and
wWerapens foz warte-Fo2 with the baue J brokers
the people in peces:¢ with the baueZoderoped
kpngoomes. Chozow the ¥ haue beaté to poul-
der bofe and bozfeman, pea, thecharrettes and
fuchas fat bpd them. Thozo we the ¥ baue b20-
kenmat and woman, olbcandponge, bacbeler
and mapbden. Thozow the F bane detropcd the
(hepeberde and bis Rocke, the pulbandman and
bps catel,the pepnees and the rulers. Therfoze
topl J retoarde the cptie of Babplon,and al ber
cptesens,the Chaldees wptb al the enel whycbe
they bauc done Ynto Ston:pea, tbat pe pour tek
ues Hal leit fayeth the Lozde:2Schold, ¥ come
ppon the,¢bou nopfome hpil, fapeth the Lorde :
thouthat deftropeft al lades: 3 wpl fretche out
mp hande onerthe,and cat the dovone from the
{tony rockes: and wpl make thea bente bpl: fo
that neither coznet Tones, no? pinacies, nozfcit
bacions of ones Halbe takenanp mare out of
the, but watt and delolate halt thou lpe foz euer

moze,tayerh the Lozbde. x
Hct vpatokeinthelande:blotee the trapet
wiz tt tes


ii coz. bie


. The prophecye.


tesamongethe Hepthen : pronokethe nacpons
agapneft per , call tbe Bpnaedomes of Ararat ,
Pennt:  Afcanes atrapnite ber: Het the prince
agapntt ber, bapnge as greatea Torte of terpble
bozies agapntte Der:as tl thep were
Prepare agapnifle thé the people of ¢
wpthtbepzbpnges, princes and al the chefern-
lers:pee, tpe tobole lande that is pnbder bpm.

` ‘@belanve alfo (hal Habe and be afrapde whé
thedeutce of the Lozdetbalcome forth agapntt
Wabplon:to make the land of Wabilonte watt
that no man (pall Dwell anpe moze therin. Che
woztbyes of Babylon Mall leaue the bataple
and kepe them feluesin tronge boldes, thep2
ftrengeb Dath fapled them, thep albelpke we-
men. Chep2 dwellpnme places Halbe bent bp,
thett barreg Halbe broken. One purieuatit hal
niete an ofber:pee, one poft halcom bp anotber
to bzyng p kpnge of Wabplontidinges:that bis
citpets taken in on euerp bpbde, the foozdes occu-
p path bent bp, and the fouldiers loze
atrapoe. :

D> Porthuslapeth the Lorde of hots the God
of Firael : the Dougbter of Wabilon hath ben in
ber tpme Ivke asa thzelthpng floure, but thozt-
ip pal pber baruettcome. Aabuchobonoso2 the
Kpnee of Wabtld hath deuoured edeltroied me,
He bath made mean empty veffel.ibe fwalowed
me bp lpke a Dragon, and fplled brs belp topth
my dplpcates:be bath cat me out.be bath taken
my fubfaunce awap andthe tbpnae that was
leftme bath becarped vnto Wabplon, tapeth p
noughter $ dwellethin pyon:pea,e mp bloude
alfo nto the balbees, fapeth Fernfale. Ther-
fore thus lapet the Lozde : Bebolde, ¥ whl de:
fende thp caule, and auenge the : 3 topil bepnke
vp ber fee and dave bp ber water lpzpnges.

* Babplon pal becomean bepe of ftonesa
erap.riic DWellpnge place fo; Deagons , afearfulnes and
ondzpng,becaule no mä Dibelleth there. Thep
{hall roare together lpke lyons, as the ponge
Lpons wen they beangrpe,fo thal thep bende
them feluesg. Jnthep: peate J thall gpue them a
geremii.b Dpnerandthep Halbe dronken Foz iope. x Chen
pal tdep lepe aneuerlatpnge fepe, and nener
wake fapeth the 102d. F thal carp them downe
tobe flapnelpbe Hepe like wethers and qoates
sD, dow was Selach wonner D, how wasthe
glozp of the whole lãde taken: bowebappeneth
it, that Wabplonisto wondzed at amonge the
, DHepthenrChe ni tplen ouer Babilon, path
couered Der pth bis great Maucs. ipercptics
are laped wall, thelandelpeth pnbuplded and
nopociit is å lande where nomandwelleth,ana
where no man trauaypleth thozowe.<dozcouer,
sever ve x F pl vplet Wel at Babplon:and the thynge
pan. rid that De Dathe twalowed bp, that fame thall J
plucke out of bis cdma oo the call thal

rune nomoze unto Dym:pea and the walles o
5abplon thal fal. oe
D mp people, ¥ come out of Babylon, that
exerp nanmape {auc bis lyfe frome the fearful
wath ofthe Lode. We notfapntherted and
feare not at enerp cumour that dhalbe bearde in
_ te lande:foz cuerp pere bzpngeth newoetpdpn-


Sap Ab


thoppes -
Peedes


ges and in the pere Folotopnae newe tpbpnges,
and robbpnge inthe landeand lode Dponlozde
And lo, the ee that z err ete tie
pinages of Wabilon, and the whole lande Mall

ie confounded:pea,and ber flapne thallpe inthe
mpddeft of ber. Heaucnandearth wpth al that
istherin, halreiopfe ouer Babyplon when the
Deftropers thal come bpon ber From thenozthe,
fapeth the Lorde.

* Lpkeas Babilón bath beaten Downe and
flapne manp out of Jfracl, fo thal ther fal many Fecemp.(.c
and be flapneinalber&pngdome . Pe $ haueel=
caped P{teard bat pou, rade not ftpl,remem-
bzetbe Lozde afacte of , ethynke vpon Ferula-
lem,fo2 we are albamed to beare p blalphemies
our faces were coucred with fhame,bpcaute the
firaunge aleauntescameintotbefanctuarpeot -
the Lozde.Ciberfoze bebolde, (fapeth the Lord)
thetpmecimeth p J tpl vplet the pmages of
*Wabplon,and thorotve the bole lande tbey thal


mourneand falx Though Babplonclpmed vp AFF?


into beauen,¢ kepte her power on bye: pet hal J
lende ber deltropers,fapeth the Lorde.

A pptious erpe thalbe berde from Wabplon
anda great mplerp from the lande of the Chal-
dees when the Lozd deltropech them, and wp
be dztueth out the bye Tomack and poude boa


‘ fEpnere, wheriopeh they baue bene as furious ag


the wanes of qreat waterfoudes,t made arceat
crakes wpth they2 wozdes. Eo? thedeftropers
foal come bpd her( euen ppon Wabllon) whpch
{hal take thep2 worthpes,andbpeake thep2 bo-
wes:fo2 Godig dplpoledto autge bpm felfe vp
ponthem and luiticientlp to recompence them .
Dea fapeth the Lozde)¥ top! make they? pepn-
ces, thep2 wple mé,thep2 chefe rulers, ¢ al thep2


- wo:tbyes dronké:fo that thep thal Nepean ener


laftpnge flepe:andneuct wake. Chusfapebtbe
kynge, whole name is the Lorde of boottes.

G)ozeouer, thusf{apeth the Lorde of hooters €
‘The thycke wall of Aabpion albeboken, ¢ -
ber bpe gates Halbe bret bp. And f thynae that
the Gétples and the people Daue wrought wth
great trauaple and labour, alcome tonoughe
and be confumed inthe fpze.

TChys ts the charge that Zerempeqaue nto
araiab the fonne of Meriah, the fon of Waa-
Crab, when He went totoarde Babplon wpth se-
dckiah f Rpnge of Juda, in p fourth pere of bya
rapane. Nowe thys Haratap waga peaceable
prince. Feremp Wote ina boke all the mylerpe
that (hulde come bpon Wabpld:pea andal thele
fermons that be woeptten agapnit wabplo,and
gaue Saratabtbps charqe.ahen thou cdiet
puto Wabplon.fe that thou reade al tiere we-
bes andfape : D Lode thou art deterinincd to
rote out thys place,fo pneither people no2catel
thal dwellthereanp.moze: but tolpe wale foz
euer: and when thou Dae redde oute the boke,
bpnde 4 {tone toit andra tt inthe mpdbdelt of
Caphara fape:Guen thus thal Wabplon
pnie and be thut Dotone with the burthen of
trouble, that q wpl bspnae ppd ber: Co that he
(hal neuer come bp agapne. Chus farre are the
Pzreachbpuges of Jerempe. <i

¢


sie ;


=
en -pE z
th.
k


. = : j :
+ ai a“ x L
panapana ap tm SS ee ee eee
ale . A
k ü


d e e e eer oh Ean
P
.


=


J


Or Hiremype.


Forth ofpipion, and fed ipke abpnge, A
og Sdekiah was * one and.cr.peare olde,
A | Key! when be wasimadebynge, andberepg-


fii.est, PRES ned a lenenpeare in Jerufalem. Hig mo-
Parai [yA thers name was Hamutall, Ferempes
FFFOLD = (EARS Dauchter of Libna. Helpucd wpckeadlp


befoze the Lopteenenas Jeboachimbdypd. Foz
the Lozde thas angry at Jerufalem and Juda,
fo longe tpl be badcat them ont of bts peefence.
erreira, AND scbebiad fell from the bpnge of Wabplon.
uurcrrea * utin the nupnthepeare of bys repgne mthe
~~ fenthmoneth,p tentbdap of the moneth it hap-
pened. that Mabuchodono302 the bing of Wabt
lon with al bis hot came befoze Fernfalem,and
beleged f,and made them bulwo2kes round a-
bonte it. And this belegpng of the citpe endured
pito the clenenti peace of Kynae sedebtah.

23 xAndinthe fouth moncth,cthe.rc.dap of the
Heed ed. moneth , there aslo great bonger in tbe citpe:
crrrio-D ehatthere were nomoze vptapies fo2 the people

of thelande.Soall the fouldiers brake awape,
and ficd out of the cifpe bp npgbte thozowe the
wap of the porte bet teene the two walles by the

_ kpnges garden. Nowe the Chaldecapadcom-

pafled the citpe rounde aboute, pet wente thefle
men thep2 wape towarde the wpldernes.

Andfothe Chaldecs folowed vponthem,

and toke sebekiab the kpng inthefelde of Jeri-

cho, when bis boote was runne from bpm:o

they carped p Bpng awap papfoner to Reblath

-‘pnto the kpnge of Babylon in the lande of Pe-


| dia måtb, + where be gaue tudgement pon pin.


The kpna of Babplon alfo cauledsedeki-
basfonnes to be layne befoze bps face,pec,and
ut allthe ptinces of Juda to death at Reblath
ozeouer, be put out theeves ofsedekiab, and
canfed bpm to be bounde wyth two chepnes, to
be carped vnto Wabplon:andlet ppm Ipem prt
fon,tplibedped: ` 3
Powwe the tenth dape of the fpfthmoneth, in
the nyntbepeare of Mabuchodonos02 kynge of
Wabplon, Pabularada the chefe captapne,and
thekpnge of Wabplons teruauntes came ynto
Jerufalem, andbłent vp the boufe of the Lozde.
` Pe bzent vp allo the kpnges palace all the bou-
- fesandallthe gorgeous bupldpnges in Ferula-
- lem. Andthe whole bot ofthe Chalodees p were
with the chefe captapne, beakedowne al p wal:
les of Jerufalemroundeaboute. =
=>  Asfortbepoze people andfuche folke as pet
was lefte inthe citpe : which alfo Were fallen to
the kpnge of abplon.pee,and what people ag
pet remapned: Mabularadan the chefecaptapn
carped them atoap pzpfoners. But the pore peo
nic of tbecountrep, bpd Mabusaradan the chefe


- captapne leaucinthe lande,to occupp the bynes


pardes andfeldes. The Chaldecs alfo brake $
b2afen ppllerg that werein phoule ofthe Lozve
pee, thelcate andthe bzafen lauer that was in
the boule of the LozDe:and carpedall the metall


of then wnto Wabplon. Thep toke awape alla


thecaldzong,toules, fietbokes,{peinklers,{poe
neg andall the beaten velfel that was occupped
in the ferutce, with the balés,colepatines, {pzpit
kelers,pottes,cadleftpches, fpones, and cuppes
woherotfome were of goloe,andfome offpluer.
‘The chefe captapne toke allo the two ppllerg
the lauer, the twelue bale bullockesthat tode
wnder the eate x tobichkpnge Salomonmade
inthe boule of the Lo2dc:and all the veflell con:
fepnedlomuch.metall,p it mpabt not be weped
Sto enerp pyller was epg btenc cubttes ppe:and
the rope that wente aboute it, teas tivelue cubt-
teg and fourefpngers thpcke androide. Nowe
pDponthe rope Mere bzafen knoppes, andeuerpe
knoppe was fpue cubptes bpe:€ pon the knop
es Were Whopes, and pomgranates tounde ae
outeof cleane baffle. |
After thps maner toere both the pplices fa-
poned wpth the pomgqranates , wherof there
Wereanhundzed and.rcvt.wbpeb banged bpon
the whopes rounde aboute. Che chefe captayne
‘allotoke Sariabthe bie pret, and Sopboniah
that was chefe nert bpm, and the the kepers of
the treafurp. ie toke out of the citpea chamber
lapne tobpchbe waga captapne of the fouldiers,
and feuenimentbat were the kpngesferuauntes
whpeh were founde intbecptye: and Sepbhera
captapne that tied tomufter the men of warre,
with thacicoze men ofthe countrep that were ta
heninthecitpe. Chele Pabusaradan the chefe
captapne toke, andcarped them tothe kpnge of
wWabplon Yntoe Reblath andthe bing of Wabi:
lon canfed them to be puttodeatheat Reblath
in the lande of Hemath.And thus Juda was led
awap captine, out of bps owne lande. Thpg is
tie fumme of the people, whom Pabuchodono-
- 302 [cD aape captpue.


SCOLIOU,


Ẹ


iğre bih d


i


Jnthe feuenth peareofbigrapane,be carped gs


awap of the Jewes, theetbouland and thze and
twenty. Fn the.rbiit.peare Pabuchodonoz02
carped awape from Jerufalem epabt bundzeth
thp2tp and two perlones. Jn the.rrtit.peate of
FLabuchodon0s02 Nabusaradan the chefe cap-
tapne, tokeawap leven biidzetb foztp and Fpue
Jewes pploners. Che wholefummme of all the
prpfoners , isfoure thoufand and fire bundzeth

3uthe.rrewti.peare after that Jeoachim the
kpnge of Juda was carped awape inthe. rru.
dape ol the.xit.moneth. Eutlmerodachapng of
wWabplon ( thelame pear thathe repqued ) gaue
Fcboachim thekynee of Juda bys pardon, and
let him out of priton,andfpake louinglp to hint
And fet bpstrone aboue the trones of the other
kpnges that werewpth bpminWabplon. he
chaunged alfo the clothes of bps pzpfon,pe,and
Dedpd cate wpth bpmal bys tpfelonge. Andpe

hadacottpnuall lpupng geuen bpm of the

king of Wabplon,euerp dap a certapn
4 thpngealowes ppm all


the Dapes of bps
lpfe ontpl be
Dyed.
€Theende: abthe boke ofthe =<’
op {eremp.
CARS Bw The


. = : j :
+ ai a“ x L
panapana ap tm SS ee ee eee
ale . A
k ü


d e e e eer oh Ean
P
.


=


J


Or Hiremype.


Forth ofpipion, and fed ipke abpnge, A
og Sdekiah was * one and.cr.peare olde,
A | Key! when be wasimadebynge, andberepg-


fii.est, PRES ned a lenenpeare in Jerufalem. Hig mo-
Parai [yA thers name was Hamutall, Ferempes
FFFOLD = (EARS Dauchter of Libna. Helpucd wpckeadlp


befoze the Lopteenenas Jeboachimbdypd. Foz
the Lozde thas angry at Jerufalem and Juda,
fo longe tpl be badcat them ont of bts peefence.
erreira, AND scbebiad fell from the bpnge of Wabplon.
uurcrrea * utin the nupnthepeare of bys repgne mthe
~~ fenthmoneth,p tentbdap of the moneth it hap-
pened. that Mabuchodono302 the bing of Wabt
lon with al bis hot came befoze Fernfalem,and
beleged f,and made them bulwo2kes round a-
bonte it. And this belegpng of the citpe endured
pito the clenenti peace of Kynae sedebtah.

23 xAndinthe fouth moncth,cthe.rc.dap of the
Heed ed. moneth , there aslo great bonger in tbe citpe:
crrrio-D ehatthere were nomoze vptapies fo2 the people

of thelande.Soall the fouldiers brake awape,
and ficd out of the cifpe bp npgbte thozowe the
wap of the porte bet teene the two walles by the

_ kpnges garden. Nowe the Chaldecapadcom-

pafled the citpe rounde aboute, pet wente thefle
men thep2 wape towarde the wpldernes.

Andfothe Chaldecs folowed vponthem,

and toke sebekiab the kpng inthefelde of Jeri-

cho, when bis boote was runne from bpm:o

they carped p Bpng awap papfoner to Reblath

-‘pnto the kpnge of Babylon in the lande of Pe-


| dia måtb, + where be gaue tudgement pon pin.


The kpna of Babplon alfo cauledsedeki-
basfonnes to be layne befoze bps face,pec,and
ut allthe ptinces of Juda to death at Reblath
ozeouer, be put out theeves ofsedekiab, and
canfed bpm to be bounde wyth two chepnes, to
be carped vnto Wabplon:andlet ppm Ipem prt
fon,tplibedped: ` 3
Powwe the tenth dape of the fpfthmoneth, in
the nyntbepeare of Mabuchodonos02 kynge of
Wabplon, Pabularada the chefe captapne,and
thekpnge of Wabplons teruauntes came ynto
Jerufalem, andbłent vp the boufe of the Lozde.
` Pe bzent vp allo the kpnges palace all the bou-
- fesandallthe gorgeous bupldpnges in Ferula-
- lem. Andthe whole bot ofthe Chalodees p were
with the chefe captapne, beakedowne al p wal:
les of Jerufalemroundeaboute. =
=>  Asfortbepoze people andfuche folke as pet
was lefte inthe citpe : which alfo Were fallen to
the kpnge of abplon.pee,and what people ag
pet remapned: Mabularadan the chefecaptapn
carped them atoap pzpfoners. But the pore peo
nic of tbecountrep, bpd Mabusaradan the chefe


- captapne leaucinthe lande,to occupp the bynes


pardes andfeldes. The Chaldecs alfo brake $
b2afen ppllerg that werein phoule ofthe Lozve
pee, thelcate andthe bzafen lauer that was in
the boule of the LozDe:and carpedall the metall


of then wnto Wabplon. Thep toke awape alla


thecaldzong,toules, fietbokes,{peinklers,{poe
neg andall the beaten velfel that was occupped
in the ferutce, with the balés,colepatines, {pzpit
kelers,pottes,cadleftpches, fpones, and cuppes
woherotfome were of goloe,andfome offpluer.
‘The chefe captapne toke allo the two ppllerg
the lauer, the twelue bale bullockesthat tode
wnder the eate x tobichkpnge Salomonmade
inthe boule of the Lo2dc:and all the veflell con:
fepnedlomuch.metall,p it mpabt not be weped
Sto enerp pyller was epg btenc cubttes ppe:and
the rope that wente aboute it, teas tivelue cubt-
teg and fourefpngers thpcke androide. Nowe
pDponthe rope Mere bzafen knoppes, andeuerpe
knoppe was fpue cubptes bpe:€ pon the knop
es Were Whopes, and pomgranates tounde ae
outeof cleane baffle. |
After thps maner toere both the pplices fa-
poned wpth the pomgqranates , wherof there
Wereanhundzed and.rcvt.wbpeb banged bpon
the whopes rounde aboute. Che chefe captayne
‘allotoke Sariabthe bie pret, and Sopboniah
that was chefe nert bpm, and the the kepers of
the treafurp. ie toke out of the citpea chamber
lapne tobpchbe waga captapne of the fouldiers,
and feuenimentbat were the kpngesferuauntes
whpeh were founde intbecptye: and Sepbhera
captapne that tied tomufter the men of warre,
with thacicoze men ofthe countrep that were ta
heninthecitpe. Chele Pabusaradan the chefe
captapne toke, andcarped them tothe kpnge of
wWabplon Yntoe Reblath andthe bing of Wabi:
lon canfed them to be puttodeatheat Reblath
in the lande of Hemath.And thus Juda was led
awap captine, out of bps owne lande. Thpg is
tie fumme of the people, whom Pabuchodono-
- 302 [cD aape captpue.


SCOLIOU,


Ẹ


iğre bih d


i


Jnthe feuenth peareofbigrapane,be carped gs


awap of the Jewes, theetbouland and thze and
twenty. Fn the.rbiit.peare Pabuchodonoz02
carped awape from Jerufalem epabt bundzeth
thp2tp and two perlones. Jn the.rrtit.peate of
FLabuchodon0s02 Nabusaradan the chefe cap-
tapne, tokeawap leven biidzetb foztp and Fpue
Jewes pploners. Che wholefummme of all the
prpfoners , isfoure thoufand and fire bundzeth

3uthe.rrewti.peare after that Jeoachim the
kpnge of Juda was carped awape inthe. rru.
dape ol the.xit.moneth. Eutlmerodachapng of
wWabplon ( thelame pear thathe repqued ) gaue
Fcboachim thekynee of Juda bys pardon, and
let him out of priton,andfpake louinglp to hint
And fet bpstrone aboue the trones of the other
kpnges that werewpth bpminWabplon. he
chaunged alfo the clothes of bps pzpfon,pe,and
Dedpd cate wpth bpmal bys tpfelonge. Andpe

hadacottpnuall lpupng geuen bpm of the

king of Wabplon,euerp dap a certapn
4 thpngealowes ppm all


the Dapes of bps
lpfe ontpl be
Dyed.
€Theende: abthe boke ofthe =<’
op {eremp.
CARS Bw The


à ii.re.d ifj d. es Tl pote


The Lamentations. © >


_ ofFeremp,
| € Che fyrt Chapter.
at happened alter Flrael was bzougbt into captinptle and
Jerufalem detroped chat xeremp the prophet fat weprage
and forow fullp bewapted Jerufalem and (pghpng andhou
ipuge with an heup and wo full herte, arie


A eaaa Las bow [pttethtbhecptiefode
acy, Urn folate, that fomtpme was full
We of people?powers the become
wan pke a pboowe which was
lite. Fees E foamy, Va tbe lady ofall nactons; Howe
Pike go ais the brought pndertrpbute,
: that ruled al landess phe we-
i se eti) foe in the npabt,fo that}
tcaresrunne Downe Herchekes : foxamonge all
_ ber loners, there fs none thatapucth der any co-
Fob.vib fozt:xpea ber nerte frendes tran{arelie againtt
her andare become ber enemies. Judais taken
pritoner, bpcanle the was defpled: ¢ foz feruing
fo many ftraunge goddes, the Dwelleth now a-
2 monge the bepthen. Sbe fyndeth no celt,al thep
that perfecuted ber, toke Der in rapte places,
cobere he coulde not elcape. Che tretes of S10
mourne, bycaufe nomancommeth nomoze to
folempne fea tes. All ber gates are defolate, ber
petes make lamentacton, ber mapbdes are care
ul:and fhe Der lelfeis in greate beupnefle. Her
enemypes baue bene rulers ouer ber, and der ene:
„r,e Mites Daue ro(percd, bpcauie the Lozd bath cba
FeHEMMEE Conen her for ber great wopcheducfle: «her cbpl-
deenareled aware captpue before thep2 enemy.
Allthe beauty of the Dougter of Sion is awap
her pine ave become lyke bartes that fpndoeno
palture. Thep are depucnawape befoze thep?
enempe,fo that they Daue nomoze power.
Now doth Jerufalem remembze the time of
hermilerp and difobedience:pea, the iope € plea:
fure that the bath bad intpmes pafte,feinge ber
people is brought davone thozowe the power of
thep2 enemy, and there tg noma foz to belpe er,
; Her enemies tande lokpng at her, and laugh ber
'  &abbothdapes to rozne. Ferulate batbfinned
cuermoze and moze, therfoze is fhe come indecap
_ Milebep that bad her inbonour velptic Her, fo?
they bane fene ber fplehinelle. Yea, the fyabeth,
and ig atbamed of per felfe. |
D “Her kp2tesare defpled, the remembzed not
. - bat wolde folowe: therfoze is ber fall fo won
preful,¢ there ig noman to cofozt ber. D 1027r,
confppze mp trouble, foz mpneenempe bath the
ppperbande: The enemy hath put hrs bandeto
all ppzectous thynges tbat the bad, pea,cuen be
fore Derepescame the bepthentnand out ofthe
permite Sanctuary: * whom thou(nencetbeles att foz
bydden focome within thy congregacion,


‘wie te All ver people ieke thep? breed voith heup:


nes, and loke what precpous thynge euerp man
. Hath that gpueth be fo? meate.to tane bisipfe,
CTontpoze, D Lozde,and fe howe wple Jam be-
come. Haue penoregarde, D all pe pgo farbp
bepolde and fe, pf tbere be anp fozowe lpie wnto
myne, wherwith the Lozd bath troubled me, in
the hap of bis fearfull wzath.strom aboue bath
De feut dovone a fpe into mp bones and it bur=


nethebem crucllp:he bath lapeda net foz mp feet
and thzowen me wpde open : De bathe made me
vefolate, fo that J mult ener be mournpnge.
The poke of my tranlgreffponis come at the €
laft, pth bis bande bath be tak ctf op, and pat
itaboutempnecke. Hp trengthe1s gone : the
102d hath delinered me into thole hades, wher:
out 3 can not quyte mp felfe. Che Logd hath de-
ftroped al the mpgbtp men, that were nme. de
Hath pzoclapmeda feaft, to laughter al mp be
men. Che Lord bath troden downe the dough-
ter of Juda, lyke as tt were in a wpne pefe.
xTherfoze do J wepe, andmypne epes guth OUL Here. iiti. e
of water:fo2 the comfozte that Moulde quycken 7t
me,isfarrefromme. -
Mp chpldzen are depuen away, fot whys the I
enempe hath gottentbebpperbande. |
poncatteth out ber bandes and there is no
mantocomfozteber. Che Lorde hath laped the
enmpesrounde aboute Jacob , and Serutalent
is becomeabbominaciontin the mpddelk of then
*The Lorde is rpgbtous, fo2 J Daue pzouoken Dams
his countenaiice vntoangre. D take Dede all pe
people,and confpd2¢ mp beutnes. ap maydens
and mp ponge men ate led albap into captinitie
J called foz mp loners (but they begyledme) ©
foz mp pretes and coiifelers,but thep perpiped:
euen whple thep fought foz meatetotaucthep? wueno, we
lpues. ¥ Lonfpd2e( D Lozde howe Jam trou- a
bled, my wombe is difquteted, mp Herte turnetD gs
about i m¢,c# (and 4am ful ofbcupuette) bpcaufe J `
rebelled fubburnelp. Che Cwerd purteth mew-
out, and within Jamlpke pntodeath. Thep
Deate mp mourning, but there is none that topl
comfozte me. Almpneenemics baue berd of mp
trouble ¢ are glad therof,bpcaule p bal done it:
and thou batt bzougbt fo:th p tyme which thos
calleddeft , when they alfo Halbe lyke Dnto mes:
from the thal come all thep2 adueriitie,thow '
alt pluckethem awap enen as thon baft pluce
ked me, bpcaule ofallmp topckednefie. omp
fozoweis verp great and mp bertis peup.
k: Thei. Cha ter:
Fy Las, *bow bathbthe Lozde darkened the W
haps oougbterof Spon [ofore inbig weaths+ Toe. thy
Ent As fo the bonoure of Jirael, bebatpcak
it Downe frõ Deaué unto p earth. Howebappe- |
nedit ý Deremembecd not bis owne x fote ftole SPe Ti
wbhë bhe wasangep ? The Lobatbeatdowne = =
alltbe babitaciong of Jacob wout anp fauonrt:
althe Grong places of the Doughter Juda bath
be broken in bis wath, and thzowé th? downe
tothe grounde : ber kyngdome and ber pzpneeg
hath be fulpended. Zu the wath of bisindignas
cpon be bathe bzoken all the bozne of Ffrael : be
batb withdza wen bis right band frd the enemp
peaa flambe of fpzeis kpndlevin Jacob, g path
cofumed bp allrounde about: Hebath bent aps
bote Iphe an enemp:e bath fafkened bis rypghe
hande asanaduerlary: and enerp thpng P was
plealatit tole, be bath fmptté it dotone. He bath
poured out bis tezathipke afpze into the taber:
nacle ofthedoughter of Spon. —
‘Tbe Lorde rs become lpke as tt twere anene
mp, be bath deuoured Zlracl and al bis pug s
y


alt on ~ — m
$


à ii.re.d ifj d. es Tl pote


The Lamentations. © >


_ ofFeremp,
| € Che fyrt Chapter.
at happened alter Flrael was bzougbt into captinptle and
Jerufalem detroped chat xeremp the prophet fat weprage
and forow fullp bewapted Jerufalem and (pghpng andhou
ipuge with an heup and wo full herte, arie


A eaaa Las bow [pttethtbhecptiefode
acy, Urn folate, that fomtpme was full
We of people?powers the become
wan pke a pboowe which was
lite. Fees E foamy, Va tbe lady ofall nactons; Howe
Pike go ais the brought pndertrpbute,
: that ruled al landess phe we-
i se eti) foe in the npabt,fo that}
tcaresrunne Downe Herchekes : foxamonge all
_ ber loners, there fs none thatapucth der any co-
Fob.vib fozt:xpea ber nerte frendes tran{arelie againtt
her andare become ber enemies. Judais taken
pritoner, bpcanle the was defpled: ¢ foz feruing
fo many ftraunge goddes, the Dwelleth now a-
2 monge the bepthen. Sbe fyndeth no celt,al thep
that perfecuted ber, toke Der in rapte places,
cobere he coulde not elcape. Che tretes of S10
mourne, bycaufe nomancommeth nomoze to
folempne fea tes. All ber gates are defolate, ber
petes make lamentacton, ber mapbdes are care
ul:and fhe Der lelfeis in greate beupnefle. Her
enemypes baue bene rulers ouer ber, and der ene:
„r,e Mites Daue ro(percd, bpcauie the Lozd bath cba
FeHEMMEE Conen her for ber great wopcheducfle: «her cbpl-
deenareled aware captpue before thep2 enemy.
Allthe beauty of the Dougter of Sion is awap
her pine ave become lyke bartes that fpndoeno
palture. Thep are depucnawape befoze thep?
enempe,fo that they Daue nomoze power.
Now doth Jerufalem remembze the time of
hermilerp and difobedience:pea, the iope € plea:
fure that the bath bad intpmes pafte,feinge ber
people is brought davone thozowe the power of
thep2 enemy, and there tg noma foz to belpe er,
; Her enemies tande lokpng at her, and laugh ber
'  &abbothdapes to rozne. Ferulate batbfinned
cuermoze and moze, therfoze is fhe come indecap
_ Milebep that bad her inbonour velptic Her, fo?
they bane fene ber fplehinelle. Yea, the fyabeth,
and ig atbamed of per felfe. |
D “Her kp2tesare defpled, the remembzed not
. - bat wolde folowe: therfoze is ber fall fo won
preful,¢ there ig noman to cofozt ber. D 1027r,
confppze mp trouble, foz mpneenempe bath the
ppperbande: The enemy hath put hrs bandeto
all ppzectous thynges tbat the bad, pea,cuen be
fore Derepescame the bepthentnand out ofthe
permite Sanctuary: * whom thou(nencetbeles att foz
bydden focome within thy congregacion,


‘wie te All ver people ieke thep? breed voith heup:


nes, and loke what precpous thynge euerp man
. Hath that gpueth be fo? meate.to tane bisipfe,
CTontpoze, D Lozde,and fe howe wple Jam be-
come. Haue penoregarde, D all pe pgo farbp
bepolde and fe, pf tbere be anp fozowe lpie wnto
myne, wherwith the Lozd bath troubled me, in
the hap of bis fearfull wzath.strom aboue bath
De feut dovone a fpe into mp bones and it bur=


nethebem crucllp:he bath lapeda net foz mp feet
and thzowen me wpde open : De bathe made me
vefolate, fo that J mult ener be mournpnge.
The poke of my tranlgreffponis come at the €
laft, pth bis bande bath be tak ctf op, and pat
itaboutempnecke. Hp trengthe1s gone : the
102d hath delinered me into thole hades, wher:
out 3 can not quyte mp felfe. Che Logd hath de-
ftroped al the mpgbtp men, that were nme. de
Hath pzoclapmeda feaft, to laughter al mp be
men. Che Lord bath troden downe the dough-
ter of Juda, lyke as tt were in a wpne pefe.
xTherfoze do J wepe, andmypne epes guth OUL Here. iiti. e
of water:fo2 the comfozte that Moulde quycken 7t
me,isfarrefromme. -
Mp chpldzen are depuen away, fot whys the I
enempe hath gottentbebpperbande. |
poncatteth out ber bandes and there is no
mantocomfozteber. Che Lorde hath laped the
enmpesrounde aboute Jacob , and Serutalent
is becomeabbominaciontin the mpddelk of then
*The Lorde is rpgbtous, fo2 J Daue pzouoken Dams
his countenaiice vntoangre. D take Dede all pe
people,and confpd2¢ mp beutnes. ap maydens
and mp ponge men ate led albap into captinitie
J called foz mp loners (but they begyledme) ©
foz mp pretes and coiifelers,but thep perpiped:
euen whple thep fought foz meatetotaucthep? wueno, we
lpues. ¥ Lonfpd2e( D Lozde howe Jam trou- a
bled, my wombe is difquteted, mp Herte turnetD gs
about i m¢,c# (and 4am ful ofbcupuette) bpcaufe J `
rebelled fubburnelp. Che Cwerd purteth mew-
out, and within Jamlpke pntodeath. Thep
Deate mp mourning, but there is none that topl
comfozte me. Almpneenemics baue berd of mp
trouble ¢ are glad therof,bpcaule p bal done it:
and thou batt bzougbt fo:th p tyme which thos
calleddeft , when they alfo Halbe lyke Dnto mes:
from the thal come all thep2 adueriitie,thow '
alt pluckethem awap enen as thon baft pluce
ked me, bpcaule ofallmp topckednefie. omp
fozoweis verp great and mp bertis peup.
k: Thei. Cha ter:
Fy Las, *bow bathbthe Lozde darkened the W
haps oougbterof Spon [ofore inbig weaths+ Toe. thy
Ent As fo the bonoure of Jirael, bebatpcak
it Downe frõ Deaué unto p earth. Howebappe- |
nedit ý Deremembecd not bis owne x fote ftole SPe Ti
wbhë bhe wasangep ? The Lobatbeatdowne = =
alltbe babitaciong of Jacob wout anp fauonrt:
althe Grong places of the Doughter Juda bath
be broken in bis wath, and thzowé th? downe
tothe grounde : ber kyngdome and ber pzpneeg
hath be fulpended. Zu the wath of bisindignas
cpon be bathe bzoken all the bozne of Ffrael : be
batb withdza wen bis right band frd the enemp
peaa flambe of fpzeis kpndlevin Jacob, g path
cofumed bp allrounde about: Hebath bent aps
bote Iphe an enemp:e bath fafkened bis rypghe
hande asanaduerlary: and enerp thpng P was
plealatit tole, be bath fmptté it dotone. He bath
poured out bis tezathipke afpze into the taber:
nacle ofthedoughter of Spon. —
‘Tbe Lorde rs become lpke as tt twere anene
mp, be bath deuoured Zlracl and al bis pug s
y


alt on ~ — m
$


of Jeremype.


pea all bys tronge boldes bath he deftroped , q


. SEoi. tera.


fylled the Doughter of Judawpthmuchfozowe S


and beupuefte.

* Her tabernacle (whpch was lpkea garden
of plealure) bath be deltropend: ber byefolempne
fcalles bathbeputdowne. The Lozde bathe
brought ittotopafle : ý thebpe folempne fea-
Geg and SHabbothes in Hion:are cleane forgot
ten. jn bps beupe dplpleature bath pe made the
Kpnge and precttes to be defppied. |

‘The Lozvde bath folaken bps owneaulter,
and bathabbozred bis owne Sanctuarpe ,and
bath gpnenthe thalles of thep2 townes into the
handes of the enempe. Cheprencmpes made a
‘nople in the boufe of the Lozde,a¢ it bad bene in
a folempne featt dape.

‘Che Lowbethought to breakedotone f wal
~ leg of the doughter of Spon, belpreade out bys

lpne and. deers inbps bade tpl be bad deftrop
ed them. Wherfoze mourne the turretsand the
broken walles together.


Here. biih


Fere(tt,b batres are bzoken, and {m ytten in fond2e 3 ber
kpnges and pppnces are carped awape top gen
noz pet anp vplton from the Lode.
~- ‘Che fenatours of the doughter of Spa lye
bpen the grounde in Eylence: thep bane ftrawed
alpes bpon thep2 pecdes, and qp2ded them fel-
ues wpth fakcloth. The “es pode of Jerufalem
Hage bowne their bedes top grond. Hpne epes
Thren i, a Vegyntofaple me thozowe weppng;xmp boop
is dplquietcd,myp leucrig poured vpo tde carth,
foz the great burt of mp people, feyng pchplozé
and babeg dpd fowne in the frretes of the cptic.
Euren when thep Cpake to thepz mothers:
where is meate and dzpnke r foz whple thep fo
fade, they fel Bowne in the fretes of thecptie,
` ipkeagtbep badbene weunded, andfomcoped
. _ tn theprmotbers bofome. |
What pall J lape of the, D thou dongbter
Jerulalem, to whom Hall J lpke thee Ta wb
{pal J compare the,D thou dougbeer Sion, ta
eofozte the wpthall: C bp burre is phe amapne
fee:wbho mape Deale ther . l
E: *Tbppzopbetes bauelokedont vapne and
Ferem.b.b foolpt thpnges foe the:tbep baue not ewed p
| ue rt of chy wpekeonefie, to kepe the from captiuttie:
Lo witb.  buthaueouctladenthe, etbozotwe faled feat-
| tredtheabzode. All tbep that gobp che,clappe
|
i
|


they: bades at the: bpiipngand waggpng their
beabdes Dpon the Boughter of Jerulale, and fap
isthys the cptie that mencalfofapze:wherin p
bole lãde retopfeth: Al chyneenempes gape vpo
the, whplperprge g byrpnge thep2tecth,tapeng
ict bs Deuoure, fo2 the tpme that we loked foz,
iscome, we baue founde and Cene it.
The Lozde hath fulfplied thetbinge that he

F was purpoledto do: eperfourmed that be bad
denpledlongeago: hebathdeltroped, and not
fpaved : be bath caufed thpne aduerlarpeto tep-
umphe ouct the,and fet vp the bozne of thpnee-
nempe.* Let thpne bertecepe vnto the Low, D
o Danae ehoucptie ofthe Doughter Spon: let chp teares
Sex. pris, c PUNNeDOWNE lpie arpuer dapeandnpgdt,retke


. Her gatcs aretonke dotone to the qrofide ber.


tples. ‘Chephaucneptherlawe no: prophetes, ai ;


_ The
n Am the man, that(thozowe the rod q


3 OF bts oath )baucexperience of mi-


SNPA, into Darkeneffe, but not into
——  paht. gapni me onelp he turnetp
bps bande, ano lapethiteuer upon me. —

)p fewe and mp fkpnne bath be madeolde
and mp bones bathhebauled. He hath buplocd
rounde about me, and clofedime ti with gal and
tranaple. ie dath let meindackenefle , as thep
thatbedcadefo2eucr. -

Hehathlobedged mein, that Jcannot qet
ont,and bathlapeo benpelpukes pponmie.
Though FJ crpe and cal pitioufly,pet beareth he
nofmp paper. He bath lopped bp my wapes 5
with fourelquared Fones and made mp pathes
crokcd. He lapeth waptefoz melpke a Bere, g
asa Lponina bole. pe batb marred mp wares,
and bzoken me inpeces,be bath laped me wate
altogether. De batb bent pis bow and made me
asit wereamarketothoteat. Theacowegof
bys qupuer bath be (hot eaen intomp repres.
* Jam laughed tofcozne of ali my people, thep Ris
makefonges vponmealltbedayelonge. eA Fe?
bathiplled me wpth bptternelic, and gpuen me
wWozmelwod todzinke. He hath linptten mp teth
inpeces With tones and rolled me in the dut.

He bath put mp foule out ofret, ¥ forget al
good thpnges, J thought inmy felfe: Jam vn-
done,there isna bopefoz me inthe Lode.) re-
membze pet mp mplerpe , and mp trouble, tbe
WoImewood andthe gall.

Pea thou tale remembze fhem, foz mp foule g i
melteth awapeinme.. Whple {con{pdethete ~”
thingesin mp bert, J get a pope againe. Rame
Ipitisofp Lozdes mercpesthat wearenot vfa —
terlp contumed. Eo: trulp dis pptiful cipaffion
Hath not cea Med. sete mercyes thall the Lorde
(ewe vpon thecarlpein the dave {pzpnge,(sD-
Lode )great istby faythfulneffe.

_ * Che Lois my pozcion,faperh mpfonle Pral rdha
therfore wpll J bopcinbpyin, D howe goad ig
the 2029 onto rhe, tpat put thep2 trut bim, s
IK. tothe


D


Leegtiieb


The lamentations.


tothe foule thatfeketh afterbym. Chegood
man wptb ftpines and pacience, tarpeth forthe


ey oP Lode. |
boto cood isit fora mato taketbepoke
bpon py frombps pouth vp.dpe lptteth alone
He boldeth fpll, and divelletp qupetly bp bym
{clfe.oclapeth bysface Dpontheearth, pf(per-
cafe there bappento beanp bope.ipe offreth bis
cheise to P{mpter.e wpl becdtent w reproues
$€02 the Lozde wpl not fozfakefo2 euet,xbut
though bepunpibe bpm: pet accozbpnge tothe
multitude of pps mercpes, be recepucth to grace


agapne:J£o2 be Doth not plage, andcattoutthe PA


chpldzen of men from pps berte. |
Totreade al the pzplonners of the earth tn-
Der bysfete. To moucthetudgement of man be


e foze the moolt bygbelt


BB.Trri.b


Tocondempnea må in bpscaunle. The Loyd
patbnot pleafureinfuchtbpnges. _

- Wbatis betbhen that lapeth:ther Huld fome
thpnge be Done wpthout the Lordes commauts
dement. Dut of the mouthe of the moll byabelk
qroeth not.enell and good:

CUibertoze then murmureth the lpupng må?
let bpm murmureat bps ownefpnne.
x Let vs loke tell bpon our owne hapese


> fa.FiHi.8 remembze oure felues , and turne agapne tothe


Lozde.Let vslpfte vp our pertes with our ban:
bes unto the Lorde that is inbeancn. Cie bane
bene diffemblers,and baue offenbed, wplt thou
therfozenetbeintreated? Chou balk coucred


zes ryen a BS IN Ebp Wzatbe,and perfecuted vs, thou hatte


TrtthlD


f ignoret.


z


flapne bs wpthontanp fauoure. x Cpou bate
bpd thp felfe tnacloude,that oure paper Hulde
not gothozowe. Chou halk made vs outcaltes,
and to be Delppled amonge the people. All oure
enempes gape Dpon bs. 7

fFcare,and pptie is come bpon 3, pea,de-
cepte and deftruccion. x Wiole rpucrs of wa-
ter cut out of mpne epes Foz the great burte of
mppeople.
pne g rine,andcannot ceale , For there

D L020.when writ thou lokedowne
from beauen,and conlpod2e/ |

<)prie epes breake mp berte becaule of all
the Dougbters of mp cptte.<) ynecnempes pun-
ted meout harply,|phea bp2dc,pea,and p with
out caule. Tbep hauc put dotone my lpfeintoa
ppt. and thep Daue cai fones bponme, Thep
pourcd aicr pon mp Deade, then thought y:
nowe am J bndone. 3 called bpon thp name, D
Lozd, out of pdepe ppt. Thoubal berd mp voice
gbat not turned away thpnearesfro me fa:
piuge & cepenge. Thou bat enclined top clfe bit
tome, when ¥ called Dpon the, and baftelapde:
feare not. Thon D Lode) balk mapntencd the
caule of mp foule, and bal cebemedmp Ipfe. sD


Lozdthoubattfenempblafpbemers taketbou The


© mpcaule bponthe. Chou palt twel con{pdered


bowetbep qo aboute todo me harme, andthat
all thep2counfelles areagapnit me. Thou bak
bearde thep2 delpptfull wozrdes(D Lozde)pea,
andall thep2 pmaginactons aqapnét me.

be lpppes of mpne enempes,and thep2 des
upfestbhat tocp tabeagapnite me, all the dape


a kera bi Syanctnarp thustcatred in p coz

Loa Fell nev of cuerp Arete. Che AA
ka of pon that were alwap in Ho:
nonr e clothed Wpth the mookt precioute golde:
how are thep now becomelphe the earthen vef-
felles, which be mabe the potters bande: The
Deacons mene thep2 ponge ones Cucke with bare
brettes : but p daughter oy pale cruell,¢
Dwelleth inthe wplocrnefle lphe the Cttrpehes
abe tonges of thefuckpng chpldzen cleueto the
rofe of their montbes foz Verp thirll. Che pong
chylozenalhebzeed,but there is noman that gp-
ucthit them. Thep that were wont tofare delte
catelp, perp inthe ftretes:thep that afoze wer
bnougbe dp in bag epee now much of bong:
‘The fpnneof the Daughter of mp people ts be
come greater thenxthe toickednefie of SHODOME some per, «
that fodapnlpe was deftroped, and not taken
wypth bandes. oe

dcrobltapners(o2 Mazaries) tere wohpther s
then tbe fnomeoz milie:thepz colour was freh
red 02 Cozall, thep2 beautplpbe the Saphire.
Wut now thep2 faces be verp black. Fn lomoch
that thou thuldefte notknowe themin the Ere=
tes. * ChepzChpnnecleancthtotbep2 owne bo- Prasei s
nes. 3tisopthered, g become phe adzpe Kock.
Thep that be flapne wpth the fwearde are bap-
pper then fucbe as dpe of bungre,and perpe a-
wape famplihpng forthe frutes oftbefeloe.. ii

x The women which of nature ave petpeull) (Fre sis
banefodden thep2 otne chyldz¢ wpth thep2 ban
des, thattbep mpabtbe thep2 meatein the mts
erable deftruccpon of thedougbter of mp pets

le. The Lozd hath perfourimed pis benp wat
be bath poured oute the Eurpon(nelle of bys dil-
pleafure,be bath bpndled a fpze in Sion, which
bath con(umed thefoundacionstberet . |
either the kinges of the earth,noz al thein E
babitours of the orld wold paue belened ý the
enemp and aduerlarp Hulde paue come in at the
gates of thecitpe of Jerufalem, wbpcbe neuer:
thelefle ig come to pafe Foz thefpynne of ber pro»
pbetes, andfoz tbe wpckednefie of ber precited, gene..
that baue hedxinnocentesbloude Within ber. Trents
So tbat blypnde men wente tomblpnge inthe
ftreteg and fapned them felues wpip blonde.
p woldeinno wple touche thep2 garmen-
tes. ut thep crped onto cuerp man,fipe p tap-
npnge awape get pou bence touche itnot. Pea
thep fled, eremoned fromtbem: pea, thep baue
fapbeamonge the Hepthen, thep hall no moze
owellinthpscptie. ,
@be countenaunce of the Lozde bath banp

(hed them and pal neuer loke moze pponthemt, -


] 3 S : ET h a -


‘fe


-- -nh
a Ia a -
- =


` Do vsno good. Thep lap fo tpa


of Feremy.


Horthep them felueg nepther regarded the pze


ites not pptped thepzelders. Ui berfoze pet our
epes faple YS: whple weloke fo: vapne belpe,fe
inge foe beeuer waptpnge Dpon a people, pcan
waptfo: vs
that wecannot go tafe Dpon the tteetes,fo2 our


=D ende iscome oure dapes arefulfplled, ourende
Ferettii.a ig heree«MDur perlecutersare Cuvifter then p E=


abac.ib


Hen, tib


gles ofthe ape, thep folowed Dpon vs once the
mountapnes andlaped wapt fo? vs in the wpl=
dernefle. The verp *bzeth of our month:eué the
anopnted 1020 pim felfe was taken in thetr net


ofiobom we fape: Cinderbisthadow teethalbe |


pelerued among,the bepthen. and P Didougd«
tev Edom ) that otwellettinthelande of Dus, be
glad and retopfe:fo2 the cup Hall come unto the


. Allo, wbich when thoufuppett of, thou Halte be


Donken. Chyp lpnnes be well punpipen( D theu
poucrbter Spor) pe (hall not fuffre the to beca-
eyed aap anp moze. Hut.


nes take be (pall leade the into captinitic,
| ! € The. v. Chapter.
Cbe prayer of Beremp,
meen Ail toremembzannce( <D Lorde, )
y Aari vobat we baue ufred, confpdze, g
eves (e our contulion, Dur enheritaunce
a Yep vay Sis turned to the fraungers and our
=== joules to the aleauntes. We arebe


| come carcfulland fatberlefie,¢ our mothers are
~ asthe mpddowes, Weare fapne to Dapnkke one


otone water fo2 monep, g our owne woodmulk
we bp with monep. Our neckes are under per:
 fecnfion,weare werp, and bauenorek .


3 Afozetpme we pelded our felues tothe Egip


tiang and note to the Ailp2tans, onelp that we


zerersrie might bate brd prough.* Dur tathers( wbicy
Eepos nog are cone bane fpnned, and we mut beare


thep2 wickeonelle.Sernauntes bane therule of
B8,¢ noman Delpucreth bs Out of thep2 bandes.
Wc muft get our lpupug With the perpll of our
ipucs, bpcaule of the Dzouth of che Mplocrnefie.

Dur fepnisastt badbene brent inan ouen
foz werp fore bungre. Che wynesarrauitpedin


€ Spon and themapdensinthe cpties of Juva.


She princes are hanged vp with the hand of the
enemics, thep baue not {pared the olde fage men
thep baue taken ponge mens lpues from them,¢
the bopes are banged bp wpa trees. The elders
{pt none Luder the gates, ¢ the yongmen ble
nomozeplaping of mufpke. Che top of our ert
ig (one, our merp quere (S.turned into mourniy
The garland of our bed is fallen: alas, that w


D ener fpnnedfo fore. Cherfore, our berta ig fut of


Heupnefle,and our epes Opm:bycaule of thehpll
of Sint ig detroyed. Jnfomocbe that p fores
conne bponit.Æutthou, D Lorde, that remap
nelEfoz eucrmoze, andthp feate world without
ende: wherfose wplt thon Fil forget bs,and fo?


mee rtis fake ys lolong: xD Logdturne thou be bntop


g fo pall we be turned. Renue onr dapes asin
olde tpmes,foz thon bat banythed bs now lige
pnouqb,and daft bene foze difplealed at yg.
L‘Cie enbe of thelamentacpong
of Berempe.


wprkednefle(D teraf aha, IN rech
dougbter Edom) thal be dvlit,and foz thy fpu- of bE Lad ada bale cht


CT Cije booke of thep2-
. piete Ezechiel, c |
sie PER OPE CREES anb in vhat place


Dis offpipnge and ofpce, sh: Lee of tbe feure beates


The bplpon of the wheies: ahret eve
the pmageaboue tbe tho itia bptpon ok the throne and of


Kes piece] T chauncedin thethyety vere y


Scn the fpfth dape of thefourthino
3 neth, that J wasamonce the
| eae paifoners bp tbe rpuer of Co=
abcd W\ ae ar:wobere the beuens opened,
| KP BY ta) and J fawea vylion of God.

pees Now the Fpeth day ofthe mo
need made ont enefpfey perce of bynge Joachins
captiuitie. At the fame tyme came the worde of
the Lozde Yntro &sechiel the fone of Bust the
preal, in the Mande of the Chaldees, by the wa-


oc


bot brm. And J loked,and bebolbe,a Lozmpe
Wpnde came out off Porth witha great cloud
Full of fp2e, which with dis giyttre Ipgbtened al
rounbde about, And in the mpooeE of the fpze it
Was allcleare lpke the face ofan Aungell, and
as it were the lphenefie of four bealtes, and thig
was thep2 lpkenefte. Thep were faflponed lypke
a man :faupnge that cucrp one Dadfonre faces,
andfouretpnaes. — at


Thep: legges were freyght, but thpefeete ye


Were Ivke bullockes feete,and they alpitred, ag
tt Had bë fapze {conzedmetall. Cinder tbeir win:
ges, Dponal the four ¢ cogners they bad mennes
Dandes. Thep2 faces and ther? winges were to
warde the foure comers:pet were the hinges fo
that one euer touched an other.cliben thep wet
thep turned them not aboute:but eche one went
firepgbtfozwarde. Hurtheemoze this was the


fimilitude of theys Faces. *Cipon the riebe (poe
oftbete foure, thepz faces were Iphetbeface of q


a man, and the face ofalyon. Wut Ypon the left
{pre thep bad the face of an ore , and the face of
an Aegle. Chep2 faces alfoandthep2 wpnges
were (peed ont aboue:fo that tivo wiges of one
touched ouer two witiges ofan offer, and with
the other thep coueredthep2bodpe. Euerp one
when it went it went frrepght forward.Wipere
as thelppzite lea them,thprber thep wente, and
*furied not about intbey2 qoinge.


Sh. p.t
faffpon andcountcnaunce of the bes- D


T
ftes was lpke bote coleg of fpze, eué as though
burnprce ceeflettes bad bene amonge the bea=
{EeS:>%(cbis was the bpcion) and the fpre qaue a glp-


fter and out ofthe fp2e there went ipgbtenpnge. &


When Che bealkes went fozwarde g backward,
one wolde paue fong it bad lygbtened. Pow
when Fhad well coniydzed the beatles, F fawe
a wozie of wobeles vponthecarth, wpth foure
faces alfonpe bnto the beattes.

@befaflpon and wozke of the wheles was
Ivke the fee. Che foure Wheleg were topnedDand
made(toloke bpon) as it pad ben one whele in
another. when one weit fozwarde,thep wente
all foure, a8 turned da penne > thp?

ropiices. Thep were large, greate and pozrpile
one GR. t, toloite


Hol lexi.


See A A A


-- -nh
a Ia a -
- =


` Do vsno good. Thep lap fo tpa


of Feremy.


Horthep them felueg nepther regarded the pze


ites not pptped thepzelders. Ui berfoze pet our
epes faple YS: whple weloke fo: vapne belpe,fe
inge foe beeuer waptpnge Dpon a people, pcan
waptfo: vs
that wecannot go tafe Dpon the tteetes,fo2 our


=D ende iscome oure dapes arefulfplled, ourende
Ferettii.a ig heree«MDur perlecutersare Cuvifter then p E=


abac.ib


Hen, tib


gles ofthe ape, thep folowed Dpon vs once the
mountapnes andlaped wapt fo? vs in the wpl=
dernefle. The verp *bzeth of our month:eué the
anopnted 1020 pim felfe was taken in thetr net


ofiobom we fape: Cinderbisthadow teethalbe |


pelerued among,the bepthen. and P Didougd«
tev Edom ) that otwellettinthelande of Dus, be
glad and retopfe:fo2 the cup Hall come unto the


. Allo, wbich when thoufuppett of, thou Halte be


Donken. Chyp lpnnes be well punpipen( D theu
poucrbter Spor) pe (hall not fuffre the to beca-
eyed aap anp moze. Hut.


nes take be (pall leade the into captinitic,
| ! € The. v. Chapter.
Cbe prayer of Beremp,
meen Ail toremembzannce( <D Lorde, )
y Aari vobat we baue ufred, confpdze, g
eves (e our contulion, Dur enheritaunce
a Yep vay Sis turned to the fraungers and our
=== joules to the aleauntes. We arebe


| come carcfulland fatberlefie,¢ our mothers are
~ asthe mpddowes, Weare fapne to Dapnkke one


otone water fo2 monep, g our owne woodmulk
we bp with monep. Our neckes are under per:
 fecnfion,weare werp, and bauenorek .


3 Afozetpme we pelded our felues tothe Egip


tiang and note to the Ailp2tans, onelp that we


zerersrie might bate brd prough.* Dur tathers( wbicy
Eepos nog are cone bane fpnned, and we mut beare


thep2 wickeonelle.Sernauntes bane therule of
B8,¢ noman Delpucreth bs Out of thep2 bandes.
Wc muft get our lpupug With the perpll of our
ipucs, bpcaule of the Dzouth of che Mplocrnefie.

Dur fepnisastt badbene brent inan ouen
foz werp fore bungre. Che wynesarrauitpedin


€ Spon and themapdensinthe cpties of Juva.


She princes are hanged vp with the hand of the
enemics, thep baue not {pared the olde fage men
thep baue taken ponge mens lpues from them,¢
the bopes are banged bp wpa trees. The elders
{pt none Luder the gates, ¢ the yongmen ble
nomozeplaping of mufpke. Che top of our ert
ig (one, our merp quere (S.turned into mourniy
The garland of our bed is fallen: alas, that w


D ener fpnnedfo fore. Cherfore, our berta ig fut of


Heupnefle,and our epes Opm:bycaule of thehpll
of Sint ig detroyed. Jnfomocbe that p fores
conne bponit.Æutthou, D Lorde, that remap
nelEfoz eucrmoze, andthp feate world without
ende: wherfose wplt thon Fil forget bs,and fo?


mee rtis fake ys lolong: xD Logdturne thou be bntop


g fo pall we be turned. Renue onr dapes asin
olde tpmes,foz thon bat banythed bs now lige
pnouqb,and daft bene foze difplealed at yg.
L‘Cie enbe of thelamentacpong
of Berempe.


wprkednefle(D teraf aha, IN rech
dougbter Edom) thal be dvlit,and foz thy fpu- of bE Lad ada bale cht


CT Cije booke of thep2-
. piete Ezechiel, c |
sie PER OPE CREES anb in vhat place


Dis offpipnge and ofpce, sh: Lee of tbe feure beates


The bplpon of the wheies: ahret eve
the pmageaboue tbe tho itia bptpon ok the throne and of


Kes piece] T chauncedin thethyety vere y


Scn the fpfth dape of thefourthino
3 neth, that J wasamonce the
| eae paifoners bp tbe rpuer of Co=
abcd W\ ae ar:wobere the beuens opened,
| KP BY ta) and J fawea vylion of God.

pees Now the Fpeth day ofthe mo
need made ont enefpfey perce of bynge Joachins
captiuitie. At the fame tyme came the worde of
the Lozde Yntro &sechiel the fone of Bust the
preal, in the Mande of the Chaldees, by the wa-


oc


bot brm. And J loked,and bebolbe,a Lozmpe
Wpnde came out off Porth witha great cloud
Full of fp2e, which with dis giyttre Ipgbtened al
rounbde about, And in the mpooeE of the fpze it
Was allcleare lpke the face ofan Aungell, and
as it were the lphenefie of four bealtes, and thig
was thep2 lpkenefte. Thep were faflponed lypke
a man :faupnge that cucrp one Dadfonre faces,
andfouretpnaes. — at


Thep: legges were freyght, but thpefeete ye


Were Ivke bullockes feete,and they alpitred, ag
tt Had bë fapze {conzedmetall. Cinder tbeir win:
ges, Dponal the four ¢ cogners they bad mennes
Dandes. Thep2 faces and ther? winges were to
warde the foure comers:pet were the hinges fo
that one euer touched an other.cliben thep wet
thep turned them not aboute:but eche one went
firepgbtfozwarde. Hurtheemoze this was the


fimilitude of theys Faces. *Cipon the riebe (poe
oftbete foure, thepz faces were Iphetbeface of q


a man, and the face ofalyon. Wut Ypon the left
{pre thep bad the face of an ore , and the face of
an Aegle. Chep2 faces alfoandthep2 wpnges
were (peed ont aboue:fo that tivo wiges of one
touched ouer two witiges ofan offer, and with
the other thep coueredthep2bodpe. Euerp one
when it went it went frrepght forward.Wipere
as thelppzite lea them,thprber thep wente, and
*furied not about intbey2 qoinge.


Sh. p.t
faffpon andcountcnaunce of the bes- D


T
ftes was lpke bote coleg of fpze, eué as though
burnprce ceeflettes bad bene amonge the bea=
{EeS:>%(cbis was the bpcion) and the fpre qaue a glp-


fter and out ofthe fp2e there went ipgbtenpnge. &


When Che bealkes went fozwarde g backward,
one wolde paue fong it bad lygbtened. Pow
when Fhad well coniydzed the beatles, F fawe
a wozie of wobeles vponthecarth, wpth foure
faces alfonpe bnto the beattes.

@befaflpon and wozke of the wheles was
Ivke the fee. Che foure Wheleg were topnedDand
made(toloke bpon) as it pad ben one whele in
another. when one weit fozwarde,thep wente
all foure, a8 turned da penne > thp?

ropiices. Thep were large, greate and pozrpile
one GR. t, toloite


Hol lexi.


See A A A


The PBrophecye


toloke bpon. Db rbackes were full ofepes forded, be not abalthed at thepe lobes, for tt is

; counde about themall foure.eiben the beattes afrotoard boutholde.- Se that thou lpeakemp
| wente the wheles went allo with them: And wo2rdes vntothem, whether thep be obedient og
when the bealkes tyftethem felues vp from the not,fo2 they are obftinate. D
| earth, the wheles were Ipit DP alfo. @ibptber- Therfore, thou fonne of man, obepe thou all
| foeuer the (pprite went thytber went thepalfo thpnges that g faye wntothe,t be not thou.ttpt
and the wheles we relpft üp and folomed them necked,lpkeas thep area ftpinecked poupoldr.
j fo2 the fppzit of Ipfe was tn the wheles. ibe Dpenthp mouth, andeate that FJapuethe.o
|| beaftes went forth, tove fiyll, 0 ipftthem el- ag J waslokpnge vy, bebolde,there was fente
| nes from theearth, then the whelesal{o went, vntomea bande, wherin was clofed a xbobe, g Tror-b-s
i ftode yl,and were lpft vp, fo? thebaetboflyfe the bandeopencd it befoze me, and tt was wept=
was inthe wbcles. Aboue ouer the beedes of ten within and withoute full ofcavetull mour-
bealtes there was afirmament, wbich was faf npnges:alas,and woo.


| fporcd asit bad bene of the moofte pure Chap; C The.ttf. Chapter.

ii ftal, and that was fpzed oute oboue Dpon p? € ao proppet being tra weed the wearer’ iehida

| press er tpe Lanns framan ntt eteran R Danne e a ane
| two topnaescoucred the body of euctp beatte. pery Wears ster this lapde be vnto me: Thou y
|


se and hen thep wente forthe, Abearde the ioraa Yonne of man, cat that, whatfoeuer
nopte of thep2 wpnges,lpie the nog ofgreate SELA yey
watcrs,asithbad bene the nople of p great God 5 Aad © WAP, and fpeake bnto the chyldzen dpoca.pb
and atulbpng togpther astt were ot an boote Peay
ofmen, And wbhenthep Mode ttyll, theplette qaucine the boke fog to cateand fayd vn
Downe they: wpnges. ow whe they (ove {tpl tome:@boulonne of man,thp belly thal cate, ¥
andbad letté powne their wpnges, i thund2ed thy bowels tpalbefplicd with the booke,that J Fau
intbe firmament that wasabouc tYep? pecdes. gpuethe. Chen dpd Feat the boke, xandit was hai
Aboue thefirmamen that was ouer thepzbee> mmy mouth fweter then bony. and belapd Wit- Apoca. pia
Des, there was thefallion ofaleate,asithadben tome:thon fonne of man,raqct the fone vntothetITete
gS made of Saphir. Upon the feate there fat one ponte of Ffracl,and (het them the wozdes that ~


——


-= —_—
=m ——


esecbitie heaman.x 3 bebelde bym,and be Was Ipbean “ycomaunde the:for F fende thenot tothe people
angell,agithad beneall of fpze within fombiS that hatha ftraunge vnkotoen, oz barde tpecbe
lopnes bpiwarde. And beneth, whe 3 loked vpS pur yntetheboute of F frael: Aottomanp nacyp
bpm onder thelopnes, me thought de wasi e ons, which paue dpuers Cpeches and barde lan-
a bynpng fpre, that gpuethlygbtoneuerp pde l
Pea, the tyne andagiptkerthatipabtencd rode xfreuerthelefe if Ffent the to thole people they yug, tia
about waslpkearapnbotw whicheinarapnpe wolde folowe the: Wut thehoufeof Jiraci wp | `
dape appeareth intbecloudes .Cuen fowastbe not folowe the, fo: thep wpl not folowe me:Pea
fimilétude, Wherein the glory of the Lozdappea all the boule of #frael bauc tpfe Fozebedes, and
red. beng faweit, J fell vponmptace,and pardehertes. <wWebolde,therfore J Wwpllmake syih.tio
Herkcacd vito the vopceofbymthat paie. thy face peeuapleagapntt thepz faces, dnd par-
C Che.ti.chapter. pen thy forebcedagapnite they? fozebeedes : fo
The nrophee e Cent to call the people from Cheps erreur. that thp fozebced (hall be barder then anx ADA: etap.t.b
ae) P20 then faypd he bnta me: Stand manto: flint ftone:tbat thou mapelt feare them
D cer, woop, Dp DPON thp feete( Dthoufonof thelefle,andbelefleafrapd of them, foz thep ate
Se ADD man )and J wyll talie withthe. a frowardr Doutholde. ~
A Na ERAND agbe wascõmming w me Ie (apde mozcouer bnto me: thou fonne of C
He bist = the fpirit came into me,and fet me man, take diligent Dede wiebthpne eares to the
Pa Gy es pp ppon mp feete(otbatJmar= wo02d¢ sthat Ifprake vntotie, faen them in
ked the thing that be fapd wntome. And de apd tbpne berte: and goto the pepfoners of thp pros
Sebolo thou tonne of man:§ wpllfendetheto ple, fpeatée vnto them, and fape on this maner.
the chplozen of Jirael, totboterunnagatesand ‘bus the Lozde Ged hath poken: whether pe
obftinate people:Fogtbep bauetake parta gaint beare oz bearenot. tilith that the fpirtt toke me
eat ~ me,andarerunncawapfrome,*boththep and ‘vp. And ¥bearde the nopie ofa great ruibpng
FO.FFH® teps forefathers wito this dape: andremoupng of the mooft blefied glo2pe ofthe
yg- pea 3 wpll(ende the bntoa peoplethathaue Lozd¢ oute of bis place. hearde alfo the nopte
rough vifagesand ftiffe Tomackes: ynto whom ofthe winges ofthe beattes, that rufibed one a=
> thou thalte faye on this mance: Chis the Lozde gapnitan otber:pea,andtheratlpng of tbe whe
EoD ppm felfe hath poken , that whether thep esthat were by them, which rultppnge nopi
pe obedient o? no( foz itiga froward houthold) was perp arceat. xMowe whenthe (pyrite tobe Sentits
thep map knowe pet that there bath benca peox me vp,andcarpeDine awape, J wente witban
phetamonge them. ~~ henpand fozorfull mpnde, but the bande of the as
gamp. te *- F erfoze(thoufonneofman)fearethent Lozde comforted ime rpg bt foone.

E not, nepther beafrapedoftbep2 wozdes:forpo | Aud fo fn thebeqpanpng of p moneth Abib, z
uokersand thognes are with the. Pea thoudot Acametothe peploners xthat dwelt by the Ws orecrregs
Dwellamonge (cozppons: but feare not theyg ter of Cobar, andremapnedin the aiak ;

ther


= = M -


The PBrophecye


toloke bpon. Db rbackes were full ofepes forded, be not abalthed at thepe lobes, for tt is

; counde about themall foure.eiben the beattes afrotoard boutholde.- Se that thou lpeakemp
| wente the wheles went allo with them: And wo2rdes vntothem, whether thep be obedient og
when the bealkes tyftethem felues vp from the not,fo2 they are obftinate. D
| earth, the wheles were Ipit DP alfo. @ibptber- Therfore, thou fonne of man, obepe thou all
| foeuer the (pprite went thytber went thepalfo thpnges that g faye wntothe,t be not thou.ttpt
and the wheles we relpft üp and folomed them necked,lpkeas thep area ftpinecked poupoldr.
j fo2 the fppzit of Ipfe was tn the wheles. ibe Dpenthp mouth, andeate that FJapuethe.o
|| beaftes went forth, tove fiyll, 0 ipftthem el- ag J waslokpnge vy, bebolde,there was fente
| nes from theearth, then the whelesal{o went, vntomea bande, wherin was clofed a xbobe, g Tror-b-s
i ftode yl,and were lpft vp, fo? thebaetboflyfe the bandeopencd it befoze me, and tt was wept=
was inthe wbcles. Aboue ouer the beedes of ten within and withoute full ofcavetull mour-
bealtes there was afirmament, wbich was faf npnges:alas,and woo.


| fporcd asit bad bene of the moofte pure Chap; C The.ttf. Chapter.

ii ftal, and that was fpzed oute oboue Dpon p? € ao proppet being tra weed the wearer’ iehida

| press er tpe Lanns framan ntt eteran R Danne e a ane
| two topnaescoucred the body of euctp beatte. pery Wears ster this lapde be vnto me: Thou y
|


se and hen thep wente forthe, Abearde the ioraa Yonne of man, cat that, whatfoeuer
nopte of thep2 wpnges,lpie the nog ofgreate SELA yey
watcrs,asithbad bene the nople of p great God 5 Aad © WAP, and fpeake bnto the chyldzen dpoca.pb
and atulbpng togpther astt were ot an boote Peay
ofmen, And wbhenthep Mode ttyll, theplette qaucine the boke fog to cateand fayd vn
Downe they: wpnges. ow whe they (ove {tpl tome:@boulonne of man,thp belly thal cate, ¥
andbad letté powne their wpnges, i thund2ed thy bowels tpalbefplicd with the booke,that J Fau
intbe firmament that wasabouc tYep? pecdes. gpuethe. Chen dpd Feat the boke, xandit was hai
Aboue thefirmamen that was ouer thepzbee> mmy mouth fweter then bony. and belapd Wit- Apoca. pia
Des, there was thefallion ofaleate,asithadben tome:thon fonne of man,raqct the fone vntothetITete
gS made of Saphir. Upon the feate there fat one ponte of Ffracl,and (het them the wozdes that ~


——


-= —_—
=m ——


esecbitie heaman.x 3 bebelde bym,and be Was Ipbean “ycomaunde the:for F fende thenot tothe people
angell,agithad beneall of fpze within fombiS that hatha ftraunge vnkotoen, oz barde tpecbe
lopnes bpiwarde. And beneth, whe 3 loked vpS pur yntetheboute of F frael: Aottomanp nacyp
bpm onder thelopnes, me thought de wasi e ons, which paue dpuers Cpeches and barde lan-
a bynpng fpre, that gpuethlygbtoneuerp pde l
Pea, the tyne andagiptkerthatipabtencd rode xfreuerthelefe if Ffent the to thole people they yug, tia
about waslpkearapnbotw whicheinarapnpe wolde folowe the: Wut thehoufeof Jiraci wp | `
dape appeareth intbecloudes .Cuen fowastbe not folowe the, fo: thep wpl not folowe me:Pea
fimilétude, Wherein the glory of the Lozdappea all the boule of #frael bauc tpfe Fozebedes, and
red. beng faweit, J fell vponmptace,and pardehertes. <wWebolde,therfore J Wwpllmake syih.tio
Herkcacd vito the vopceofbymthat paie. thy face peeuapleagapntt thepz faces, dnd par-
C Che.ti.chapter. pen thy forebcedagapnite they? fozebeedes : fo
The nrophee e Cent to call the people from Cheps erreur. that thp fozebced (hall be barder then anx ADA: etap.t.b
ae) P20 then faypd he bnta me: Stand manto: flint ftone:tbat thou mapelt feare them
D cer, woop, Dp DPON thp feete( Dthoufonof thelefle,andbelefleafrapd of them, foz thep ate
Se ADD man )and J wyll talie withthe. a frowardr Doutholde. ~
A Na ERAND agbe wascõmming w me Ie (apde mozcouer bnto me: thou fonne of C
He bist = the fpirit came into me,and fet me man, take diligent Dede wiebthpne eares to the
Pa Gy es pp ppon mp feete(otbatJmar= wo02d¢ sthat Ifprake vntotie, faen them in
ked the thing that be fapd wntome. And de apd tbpne berte: and goto the pepfoners of thp pros
Sebolo thou tonne of man:§ wpllfendetheto ple, fpeatée vnto them, and fape on this maner.
the chplozen of Jirael, totboterunnagatesand ‘bus the Lozde Ged hath poken: whether pe
obftinate people:Fogtbep bauetake parta gaint beare oz bearenot. tilith that the fpirtt toke me
eat ~ me,andarerunncawapfrome,*boththep and ‘vp. And ¥bearde the nopie ofa great ruibpng
FO.FFH® teps forefathers wito this dape: andremoupng of the mooft blefied glo2pe ofthe
yg- pea 3 wpll(ende the bntoa peoplethathaue Lozd¢ oute of bis place. hearde alfo the nopte
rough vifagesand ftiffe Tomackes: ynto whom ofthe winges ofthe beattes, that rufibed one a=
> thou thalte faye on this mance: Chis the Lozde gapnitan otber:pea,andtheratlpng of tbe whe
EoD ppm felfe hath poken , that whether thep esthat were by them, which rultppnge nopi
pe obedient o? no( foz itiga froward houthold) was perp arceat. xMowe whenthe (pyrite tobe Sentits
thep map knowe pet that there bath benca peox me vp,andcarpeDine awape, J wente witban
phetamonge them. ~~ henpand fozorfull mpnde, but the bande of the as
gamp. te *- F erfoze(thoufonneofman)fearethent Lozde comforted ime rpg bt foone.

E not, nepther beafrapedoftbep2 wozdes:forpo | Aud fo fn thebeqpanpng of p moneth Abib, z
uokersand thognes are with the. Pea thoudot Acametothe peploners xthat dwelt by the Ws orecrregs
Dwellamonge (cozppons: but feare not theyg ter of Cobar, andremapnedin the aiak ;

ther


= = M -


of Esechiel. Fol lerhi
thep were:AudfocdtinuedJamongethemlené popnted thou Halt lepe bpon that lyde, beare
_ Dapes being Verp lory. And whethe fenédayes -thep:ipnnesg. *Menerthelefie, Zz wpllappopnte Dani ire
BEFEL apereerpp2ed, the Lorde fapde wnio me:* Chou theatpme(to put of thep2 fpnnes)and the nom:


fone of nan, J baue mabe the a watchman yn:
tothe boute of Zfracl,therfozetalke qood hedeto
the too20es of mp mouth, andgpue them war-
npnge atmpcommanndement. |

f J lape unto theconcernpng the bngodlyp
man that witdont Doubt )be mutt dp, and thou
gpueft not pin warning, noz peake puto bim
that be mape turne from big eupll wape:and fo
tolpue. Cha thal the fame wngodlp man dpein
His otvne Dnrighteoufnelle-but bis bloude wpll
3 requpze of thpne band. Neucctheleffe, pf thou
gpu warning Dnto the wicked, and pet be fo2=


be of the dapes: Thre bundzed ¢.xc.Dapes mut
thou beare the thickenneffe of the bonte of Fraek
Whe thou batt fulfplled thefedayeslye Downe
agapne ,and llepe bpon thp rpabt (pde fourtpe
daves, and beare the tpnnes of the boufe of Juda

xA Vape foz a pere,a Dape( F faye) foz a pere
wpll Jeuerlapevponthe. ECherfore {et nowe
thy faceagapnilt that befieged Ferulalé,anddit
couet thpnearime, that thou mapel propbecp aa
gapnif tt-2Bebold, J wl lap cbapnes vpon the
that thou Walt not turne the frontone fide to an
otber, til Ë balt ended the dapes of this hefiging


u rplijs


fate not bis pngobdlpneffe: then pal be dp in his Udiherfore take Dnto the wheate,barly.beas s,
owne wickednelle,butthoubakdifcbargedthp nes, qromiell feed, Dillium,andfptcbes and put ™:


_ tpgbtoutnefie,and dothetbyngethatiseupll:§ bzeed thereof , accozdpnee tothe nomb2e af the


-n a


b
——— "=


wyll lapea tumblpnge blocke befoze bym, and
be thal dye, bpcaufe thou baft not qpué bim, war


Jt npng: pea, Ope thal be in bis owne fynne, fo that


the Vertue whpeche he dpodde before , hallnot be
thought bpon: but bis bloude wpl J requyze of
thpne band. Menerthelefle,yfthou crboztett the
rpabtcous,tbat be fpnne not,andfo the ryqbte-
ous. 000 no fpnne : then hall be lpue, bpcaule be.
hath recepued thy warnpnge,and thou pat di-
charged thy foulie. And there came the bande of
the 1020 Wpon me, and he fapd bnto me :{tande
pp,and go nto the feldc, that J map there talke
with the. So whë 3 bad cpien vp, ¢ gone forth
into the felde: Webdolde, the qlozpe ofthe Lorde
Gode there, xlpie as J fawe tt afore, bp the wa-


sebis ger of Cobar.* Then fel J Downe vpon mp face
giech.il.s and the pzpte cameintome, wbichelet me vp


bpon my feet,and fayde tyus onto me: Gothp

Ware and (but thplelfeinthpne boufe.Aebold,

( D thou fonne of man:) there hall chapnes be

brougpe forth to bynd the witball,forbat thou
halt noteltape out ofthem. And J wpll make
thy tonge cleane tothe roofe of thp mouth, that
thou tbaltbe domme, andnot beasachpderw
them:fo2 ttis an obftinate boutpolde. i

. But wen J fpeake vnto the, then openthp


mouth, and faye: Thus fapetb the Lode Goo,


whofo bearerh, let bym beare:twobofo wyll not,
ict bym leaue, foz itis an obftinate pou heldes
= ` CThe.titt. Chapter.
(The belpege ot che cptpe of Fern{alemisfpgnp per.
He longe contpnosunce of the captpuptpe of #lrael
an bungreisprephecped to comein the captpuptre.


erasers Pou fonne ofman:tabea tple tone
T y) and lape tt befoze the, and defcrpbe
pte <2 pponit thecptie of Ferufalé,bowe
Ci cee itis befieged, bow bulwwozkes and
free Camel tronge Dyches are grauen oneuctp


fyde of it: deferpbe alfotentes and an Hoo teot
menroundeabout it withenging of warre.
<Ho2eouer,tabe an pron panne, and fet it be=
ttaitt the and the cptic, in fede ofan pzon wall.
Then let thp face towarde tt, to beliegeit,¢lap
owinaunce agapntt it to wpnne tt. This Halbe
a token onto the boule of Jfracl. Wut thou thalt
fepe bpon thp left {pde.aud lape the lynne of the
Houle of Firacl vponthe, Certapne Dapesap-


apes that thou muff lpe bpon thy (poe: that p
mapi baue b2eed fo eat foz thee bundzed and. te
dapes. And the meat that thou catet (hallbaue
a certapne apght appoyntrd: namelp twenty
{pcles euerp Dap. This appopnted meate (halt
cate Daplp from the begpnnpnge to the cnde.
Thon thalte Depnke allo acertapne meafure
of water : Namely, $ (prt parte of an Dinpalt
thon dzpnkedaplp from the beapnupng bnto p
end. 2Darlp cakes thalt thou eate, pet palt thou
fpi toot themat afpzemade w mans donge,
that they map fe it. And with that fapd p 102d:
Cucn thus thal the chilozen of Firael eate thep2
Befpled bzecd inthe mypodet ofthe Gentples, a=
monge whom F wvl icattre them,
Then lapd F:<Db 102d God. Sebold, mp foule


was neuer pet ayned:£oz fromp pouth vp vn- >


to this bour, J dpd neuer cate of a deed carcafle,
0} of that whiche was flapne of toplde beattes,
neteber came there euer any wneleane Aeh in mp
month. Wibere vnto be anfwered meand lapde:
well, then 3J wyl qraunt p to take cowes donge
fo: the donge of man,and to tool the bzed with
all befoze them.

: And He fapde bnteme:Webolde, thou fonne
of man, + J wyll mprplipe all the proupfion of


bzced tn Jerulalem, fothat thep Wal wep they? Fire”
bzced and eate it witbicarcenelfe: Wutasfog it.rerros


water, thep thal baue berp lytle meafure therof
toppynke. And when thep baue nomoze bzecd,
no? ater, one Halbe deffroped withan other,
and fampth aware forthep2 wpckednefie.

| € The. v.Chapter.

C Dherpoodle of che heares,bp whpcoe is fponifped the
befeuction of the people. Hhe caules o€ (heangre
of Gob towarbde the peeple.


i arpe knpfe:namelpe , a rafoure.

it~) A Cake that and aue the beere of thy
Pose bed and beerde. Then take the fcales
and the wepght,and deuide P heerealödze. And
after thou halt accoplpthed the dapes of p liege:
burne the thyzve parte thereofin thefpzein the
mpodel€ of the citie and cut the other thp2d part


inpeces witha knpfe.*« As forthe thpzde parte yere, vii.»


that remapneth caft tttnrbe wypndc,and J wpl
dza We out a fwerde after tiem.


Pet


ZITO) Chow fonne of man, take the thena 3


exec.rvitia foule, Owe pfarpgdteousmangofrom*xbis theletogpther ina veel, and make the loucs of


The Prophecye


x  Petafterwardetakealptle of the fame, and
Hynde tt inthp cote lappe. Cher tatkea curtelpe


ofitandcalt itinthe mpdelt of thefpze,gburne
it inthe fpze: Dut ofthelame fyzethalthercgo brow, Ye
aflame bpontbe whole houle of Fleacl. oreo Papen Yes
uertbus{apthb the Lozd God: This fame is Je- Pree

tufalem. 3 te 4 a inthemybdeft of thebepthen, KA


andnacpons that are rounde about ber, but the
hath defpiled mp indgemétes moze then p Gen-
tpleg them felues, and bzoken mp commaunde-


menteg more thenthenacpons thatipe rounde


about ber. Wor they baue cafe out myne odp-
— naunees,andiot walked in mplawes: Ther-
Le. Foig.d Fore thus Capeth the Lorde God:« oz fo moche
agpe bane bene moze augmented tn nombze of
people thenthe Pepthen that dwelroundabout
pou-:and pe baue not walked in mp lawes, nep=
ther bane pe kept mpne ozdpnaunces, € pe paue
not linedforightontlp as F bepthen p areround
about pou. Cherfore thus fapth f Lode God.
ao Bwplalfocome a the, 3J my felfe, J fap:
fo2z inthe mpdodeft of the wil F iptiniuogement
inthe fpabt of thepepeben,and wyll handle the
of chea faflpon as F neuer bpd befoze, andas
y neuer wrll do from that tyme forth, and that
bycaute of all thpre abbominacions. Foz tu the
peu.rrbaite fathers * talbefapne toeate thep2 owne fones,
Ebiewititb any p fones theyr owne fathers.couche a courte
, topli J kepe inthe, andthe whole remnaunte of
the wyll ¥ tcattre into all tbe topndes.
Uiiberfoze,as tule as J lpue(fapth the Lom
God)feinge thou halt defpled mp Syanctuarype,
with allmaner of abbominacions, and w al thy
thameful offences. Eo? this canfe wpl Fallo de-
Heresb.a rope the. pne epe thall not ouerte the, neither
spit J {pare the. One thpade parte within the
{hall dpe of the peltplence and ofbungre: An o-
ther thyzde parte pall be flapue Downe, rounde
aboute the with thefwearbde: Che otberthpzde
parte that remapneth wyll J icattre abzode to-
tvardallthe wpndes and dawe out the fwerde
after tbem. Thus 3 wyl perfourme mp indigna
cpon, and fet mp wzatbagapnt them, andrafe


mp felfe. Sothat when Y haue fulfplled mpne


yp angre agapni them,thep thal knowethat Jam
the Lozde,tobiche with a feruent geloulpe Dane
fpoken it.@)ozeouer, F wpl make the wate and
abbhozred, befoze all Pbeptben that owellabout
_ the, andin the fight ofall them that qo bp the:fo
that when Fpunplipe the in mp wath,inmpne
angre and with the plage af my whole dtfplea-
fure:tbou palt be a Verp abbominacpon, ihame
agafpnge andDwordzpnae tocke, amonge the
epthenthatlyeabout the. Cuen F the Lorde
paue fpokenit,and it (yal come to pale, when
fhote amonge them the perplous dartes of Dun-
ate, whiche thalbe but death. Dea, therfoze Hall
"FB thote them, bycaute J topl defroy pon: tpl
eztei. e xencpeale hungte, and mini allthe pzouption
of bzeed amonge pou. Plages and mplerp wpll
FZ {cnde pou: pea, g wplde beates alfoto deftrop
pot.weltilence and bloudehedopnge thallcome
bpon pou, andthefwearde wyll F bepnge ouce
pon.Euen J the Lorde bauelapdeit.
C The. vi. Chapter.


_the (rowarde is prophreped. F
Fea Md the wode ofthe Lod came D y

ome, aping: Thou fonne of man,

a atume thp facetotbexmountapnes ese, rrroi.a
a Ye) of Jfract, that thou mapei prophe
Petea Nepe bntothem and fape: Heare the
wode ofthe Lozde God , D pe mountapnes of
Jirael:Thushaththe Lorde God fpoken to the
mountapnes, bplles, vallepesanddales. Xe-
holoe 3, 3mp felfe J lave: wyll bepnge atwerd
ouer pou,andDeltrope poure bpe places: 3 wpil
cafk Downe pour alters, and breake Downe pour
pinages. Pouce Rapne men wpll 3 laye betoze
pour goddess , and the decd carcafies of the chyls
den of Flracl wpll Jcalk before toep? poolles,
pour bores wpl Y deftrope rounde Aboute pout
aulters and dDivellpng places.

The cptics ta lbe delolate the byl chapels ys
laped wafte:pour aulters deftroped and broken
pour goddes caft Downe,and taken awap,pour
téples laped euen with the qrounde, pour owne
workescleane roted out. Dour lapre men (pall
Ipe amonge nm bone maryelearne to Bnowe,


bow that Jam p Love. Chole that be amonge
pou, and baue clcaped the ftocarde, topl J leaue
amonge the Gentples, for J wpll {cattre pou a-
móng the nacions. Andthep that efcape of pon
thal tbynke ppon me among the bepthen, where
thep thalbe in captinitic. As for that whoztth F
pnfapebfull bertes of thepzg , wherewith thep
runneawape frome: J wpll breake it: pea, and
put out thote epes of thepes, that commpt fogni:
cafion with thep2 pools. p.
Chen thal thep be althamed and difpleated
withtbep2 telues, fo? the wickednefles andab-
bominacpons whiche they baue Done : and Mall
learne to &uotoe that Jam the Lorde, Dowo that
(tis notin vapne,p J the Lozdelpake, to bzpng
tuche mpferp bpon them. The Lorde lapd moze
ouer Dntome: Empte thyn bandes togpther,¢
ftampe with thp fect,and fape:Wo wozthal the
abbominactons and wpckednelies. of the poule
of fracl, for bycaute of them thep thal perifthe
witb thefwerde, with bungre, and with peftt-
lence:Wpbofo ts farre of hal bye of the peftilence


Hetbatisnypeathande, thallperplthe with the


fwerde:and the other thatremapneandtbatare ~
befieged, thal dpe of bungre. |
@ bus wyll J latylfp mp wo2atbful difplea-
fure bpon them. and fo thal pe learne toknowe D
that 3 am the Lode, when pour flapne men Ipe
amonge pour pDdolleg, and about pour aulters,
bponall bpebplles and toppers of mountanes,
among all grenetrees , amonge alltbpcke okes
eureninthe places where thep dpdfacrifpce to al
thep2 pools. 3 wil firetchb mpne bande out vpon
them,atd se in make p lande wate. So that it
fballpe Defolateand Dopde,from the wildcrnes
of Deblotbab fosth, thozow al thepz babitacios
tolearne them foz te knowe. » Jam the Lorde,
The. vit.Chapter.
F Wheenbe of all thelande of Flracl Hall Copapnip come,


be caule ofthe veftructiontherot. She prophet is com:
miaunbes to ewe the fume of the eupls (hat are at ‘eb
. (4


|
|
:
|


—


|
|


f LT


of Esechiel.


sates Ie worbeofth: Lorde came vnto
MEER eae mic onthismanec: Che ¥ call, DË
a Pe ar fone of man. Chuslavth the Lod


a
he


a | a
fa oh,

i e

(pa oF ER

= a ik
eh a


Tic tpine cominet), the dape Dzaweth npe:
ico: by.b ¥7ZLpofo bpeth, let bpm not reiopie: be that iel-
t3ere.rb.b leth, let Vpn be fozpe:fo2 whys + Trouble Hall
.Thel8 come inthe mpodelt of thc al: fothat the feller
thal notcome agape tothe thpng that be foloe
alcboughthep2 ipfe be pet with thelpuing. Wo?
toben the propbhecpe has preached wntoall the
people,none turned from thepz fpnne,andnoma
toke ftrength tobymagapntt bis wyckedneffe,
€ tofauc bis ownelpfe. Che trompettes (ball pe

‘ blow, € nake pouallteadyp, but noman Hal go
_ tothe batapl, to: Jam woth ithal the whole
multitude. Che Mararde balbe Without, pep-
lente and biigre within :fo that whofo is in the
felde Halbe flapne withthe werde: anabethat
iginthecptiexthal perp Doth bungre and pe-
ftilence. and fuche as eicape, and fictro among
them tall be pon the dbplles,lpke as the doues
tn the felde:cucrp one Galbeatraped, bpcaule of
his owne peck onele,
: Allbandes (hall be let dDotone,and all knee g

fhalte focake as the water:they hal gird them
fall vpontbé,


Deu.prii.B


neptber fpllthep2emptye bellpes thertoith: Fo?
it iS become thep2 owne decape thozowe thep2
wpchednefle. xAndthep: beptpfulcoftly ozna- Of biit a
ment that God bad oe pned to be thep2 qreate
Glozp,inittbep daue let bp abbominactons tr-
tp thep2 pools. Foz this caule wyll F make the
andit tobe abbogred. @)ozeoucr, 3 wplapue t
into thebanbdes ofthe ftraungers to be (popled:
andto the wycked fo? toberobbed , g thep Hall
acftroptt.<)p face wyl J turne from them, mp
trealurp Dalbe dDefpled:fo2 the theues Hal goin
toit and{pendcit, Dakeachayne,foz theland
is whole befpled with Dutpghteous tudgement
of innocent blonde, and the cptie is ful of vpolét
oppeciiyon. =. | it
CiherFoze J pll bapnge the mock cruelty G

rauntes fromamonae the bepthen,to take their
boulesin poffelfpon. J wpll make the pompe of
the proude roceaffe, andthep2 fanctuarpe Halbe
DeEpledD.ciihen this trouble commeth,tiep Mall
feke peace, but thep (hall bane none. Dne mph


chefe and fo2zowe Hall folotve an other , and one


rumoure fhallcome after an other. + Chen Hall Ierro
be feke pyltonsin vapne at tbey: Propbetes.
The law thalbe gone ts the pretes and wpf
dome from the elders. The kpnges Hal mourne
the ppnceg palbeclothed with peupnefe andaf
Hanoes ofthe people inthe lande Mall tremble
Fo: fcare. 3 wpll do bnto them after thep2 owne
wapes, accozdpnge tothept otone iudgementes
wyll z iudge them,tolearne them foz toknote
tbat Jam the Lorde.

The. biii. Chapter:
€ Aa appetaunce of è imilituse of gow Ezechiel is brought to


Aerufalem inthe (pprite. The Lorde heweth the prophet the
poolatrpes of the boute of 3fraei, anv chetcip ofthe preetes,


vem Thappened,that inthefprepere, fa
com? E fpfthdape ofthe fperet monerth, te


Shane & (mp boufe, and the Lozdes of p coti-
KEDA fapl of Juda w me: and the bande of

S48 the Lord govfelenen there ppd nic.

And as Jloked bp, x Jlawe asit there alpbes erec).1.c
nele of fpze from Dis lopnes downer warde, and

from bis lopnes ppwarde:tt yned maruclous
clere,andlphe anangel toloke bpon. x Tits li- 15
nulttube (fretched out an bande and toke me bp £ ebid
the beery lockes of mp beed, and the {pyrite ipft ®t?
me bp betwprt beauenandearty: and bought
me ina vpfionto Jerufalem, tatothe cntep of p
inner poate that lpethtowarde the Rorth:thece
tode an pmage, with whom be f bathalltbpn-
gegin bis poter was verp woth.

And beholde, the qlozpe of the God of Yiracl
wasin the fame place: cuen*as J badde feneita
forcinthefelde.andhefapaebntome: Chou
fontte of man, D Ipft vp thpneepes, and loketo
warde the Noth. Then lpit J vp mpneepesto
wardethe Noztb, and bebolve : befpde the porte
nozthwardc, ther has anaulter made vnto the
pimage of prouocacton inthe werpe entrpnge is
And he fapde Furthermore vutome: Thou tone
of ma, feet thou what thele dor Sret thou p
greateabbominacions thatthe boule of ¥fraet
cõmitteth in this place,to Dpue me from mpg
ctuarp Sut turne the about, and tjou Haleete

petrarca


Ezechias


The Prophecype


and wag come dowone tothe thae@old of phcule tit.re,bit,p


et qreater abbominaciss. And with phrougdt

be me tothe courte gate: and when Floed , be-

olde there wagan bole inthe wall. Then fapd

epntome: Tbhoufonofman,opgacthozowe

the wall, Hud when F bgar thozow the wall

behold, there was a doze. And be fayde nto me

gro thp wap in,andloke what wycked abbomp-

nacionsthep dohere. So J wentin, and fatc:

anbdbebolde, there wereall maner pages of

wozmesand bealtes, all pools and abbomina-

cpons of the boule of Firacl , papnted cucrp one

- goundeabout the wall: Chere ode alfo before

ero.rbti® the mages. xirt. lozdes of thecoiifel of f boule

M.D oF Braci,andinthe mpolt of them (ode Jaasa:

nib, the fonne of Haphan. Andeucrp one of thé

hadacenfour in bis band,and out o theinfence
there toentafmokeasithadbenactoude,

È Then fapde be nto me:thoufonne of man,
balte thou fene what the fenatours of the bouie
of Firacl do fecretlp, cuery oncindis chambre’

zob. trit.b ¥J€02 they lape: Tu (be, the Lorde (ceth vs not,
ill Fe the Loderegardeth not f World. And he lapur
Jee pre? onto me: Turne the pet agapue, and thou palt
fe pet greater abbominactons that thep do. And
with tbat bebzouche meto the doze of the porte
of the Lozdes boule totvarde the nozth. and be=
polde,there fat women mournpng for Camus.
@ba {apd be vnto me: halt thou tene this, thou
onne of man: Turne the about, and thou walte
ff fe Aap aoe abbominacions then thefe are.

And fo he beoughe me into the tnwwarde court of
the Lozdes boule: And behold, at the poste of the
Z odes houle , bettoprte the fore entrpe and the
aunltar, there were rxv.men, that tourned thep2
backes pponthe temple ofthe Lozde, and thepe
faces totoarbde the Ea fte, and thete woztbppped

the Sune. | l
And pe fapde ontome: balte thou fene this,
thou fonne of man; tbynketh the ponle of Juda
thatit ie but atrpfle, to Bo thele abbomtnacios,


S


porecepulbetbepépil the lanbe fullofwpckeD- Ko SACA


nele and ondertake to prouoke metoangre?
Pea, and purpofelp tocat pp thepz nofs vpon
mer Therfoze wpli F allo do lome thpnge tnmy
w2athful difpleature, fo that mpne epe (pall not
prourr.f.¢ onerte them, neptbher wpll 3 (pare tbem. * Dea,
a and though hep cepe tn mpne cares witha loud
ichita Dopce, pet wpll not Pedre them,
C Tbe.ir. Chapter. Ea
A The dettruction of puolatrers,ans Che contirfiono¢ the
epobtous. Thep chat halbe Cauca are markeb. Dhep that
atc bumarked are Clapne. A ciplapnt of che prophet fo;
toe tettruction of the people.
memes È ceped alfo with aloude yopce it
at “We mpre eares.fapinge-Come. Dear?
0° pe rulers of p cptte, eucep ma with
MN ona £4 bis weponcd bad tothe flaugbter.
Pees CAH @hencame there fyre ment out of p
(trete of the bpper port towarde thenozth, and
ettcrp mana Weapon in bis pande to the flaugd-
ter. There was one amongelt them that bad on
byraalpnncnraparent.anda waiters pukbogne
hp fus{poe.
| Defe wente in, and Mode befpde the beaten
aulter: foz the glorye of the Lozde was gone a-
wape from the xXCperub which was vpon prm


fr." 1¢
aum tte


andbecalledthe man p bad the iynnenrapment
ppon him, aud the toziters pnkbomne bp bis fine
andthe Lozde apd wnto bpm: go th? wap tho-
rowe the citie of Jerufalë and ieta marke s da
the Forebedes of them that mourne and areiorp
forall the abbominacions that be Donethercin.
Andto the other be fapoe,that JI mpabt beare.

x Go peafter bpm thozowe thecptie,flape,ouct gudia
fe none, {pare none kyll, and deffrope both olde
menand ponge, maysens,chpldzenand wpues.

- Wut as to tbo that baue the marke ppon C


them, fe that pe toutch them not: xand begpnne =i


at mp fanctuarp. Eben thep beganne at theel- Lpetadlttee
ders, which were inthe templeto? he bad fapde
prito them:Wibenpe bane defpled the temple, ¢
fyllet the courte withthe flapne, thengopoute .
wape fo2th.potbep went out and fluc Downe
thozowe the crtic. owe when ther baddone f
flaugbter,and ¥ pet efcaped: Z fell Bowne bpon
my face,and crped,lapinge:D Lo2d God, wplt
theu then defkrop al the refidue of Zfrael,in thy
{oze dilpleafure that thou bat poured bpon Je-
rufalem? Then fapde be onto me: Che topcked-
nefle of the Doure of Fleacl ¢ Judats Verp qeeat
fo that the landis ful of blonde and the cptte ful


of virfa pebfulneffe.4fo2 they lape:* Culthe, he yod. rrid -
Lozbderegardeth not the earth, De feeth vs not. <ta.rrir.e.


Cerra


Thecfore wyl J vponthemsmpne epe al not
oxucric them:nepther topl 3 pare them, but wyl
recontyence thep2 toickednefie bpon they: Dedeg
Ana behold, the manthat bad thelpnenvaymet
ppon dim and the wzyters pnbbozne bp bts fide
tolde al tbe matter boto tt happened, and fayd:
Lo2dc as y haftcomaunded me, fo J paue vone.


Dic OF the wheles of the Cherubins,m token ofthe burning
of Jerufalem. A rebearfall ofthe bpfpon ofthe wheles,o€ È


vea She that fat therin, fo him that had p
Ipnen ramet vpon bim : Crepe in betwene tbe *
whelesthatave vnder the Cher ubing and take
fhpne bande full of bote coles ont from betwene


e


from ynder the cherubing, vnto the fpze ý was
betwene


qzi bika


bem: Then faid Creech. ir.a


Eeh iD


— ali
=


Oe
7 a


|. Fitlta, =


- ech. pid


| of Csechicl. aliere.


E 5 betwen the Cheeubpns,and toke theecof, and


gaucit onto,bun that bad on the linen tapment
ibis Pande: which toke it and went out, And
binder the y Air of the Cherubpns, thereap-
peared the lphencile of a mang bande. FZ fawe al

ofour wheles belpde the Cherubpnnes, fo chat
bpenuerp Cherub there tode awhele. And the
tobeles were (to loke ypon) after the faffyon of
thepeecpous itone of Charfis: pet, ( wnrothe
fpaht ) thep were all foure of onefaflyon ,as pf
one wobele bad bene nan ofper.


€ Wbentbey went forth, they went allfoure


fogpther, not turnpnge aboute in thep2 goinge
Wut where p firk went, thither went thep after
alio fop tbey turned not about inthep2 goinge.
Thep: whole bodpeg, they? backes, the p2 ban-
Desand winges:pea and the whelesalfo wer al
fullofepesrounde about them all foure. And F
heardchym-cal the wheles. x Euerp one of them
Padfour faces: fothat the onc face was the face
ofa Cherub. the feconde of a man, the thpzbe of
alpon,the fourth ofan cagle, and thep were lp
ted ppaboue. Cisis the beaite that Jlaweat
the water ofCobar. Pow when tbe Ciecrubins
went the wheles weit with them, and when the
Cherubins Hoke thep2 winges tolpft them iel-
ucs Dpward, the whelesremapned not bebinde
but were with then alfo.Syhoztelpe when they
tode theleffodeallo. And wheuthep were lpi-
ted bp, the wheles were lpfte vp alio with them
Eo: thelppaite oflpfe wasin the wpeles.

x Then the glozpe of the Lorde was lypfte bp
fromthe theeibold ofthe temple and remapned
pongbe Cherubpns: Andthe Cierubpns flac-
kered with they: wpnges and Ipfte chem felucs
wp feo Peart): fo that 3 awe when thep wente
andthe wheles withthen. Andtbep ttode at p
eaftclpdc of the postetbatis inthe boule of the
Loe. Sothe glop of the LozD was vpon thë
Thisisthe beat that J fawr buder the God of
Blrael by the water of Cobar. And FJ percepucd
thatit was the Cherubpns.Euerp one ad four
faces, and cucry one four Winges, € Dunder their
Wpnges,as it were mens handes. owe the fp-
qure of tbeir faces was cucnas J pad fene them
by the water of Cobar, and fo wastbe countes
nautce of them. Cuccp one in tas goinge went
ftrapabt forwarder.

| Che. ri.chapter.

Who thep were chat reduced Che pespie of yirik Tgapnt
there be propbetpeth, iewpnge them how thep Halbe dil:
parted abzobe. Zhe renupng ofthe berte cometh of Hob,

otbertopie can wenot walkein bps commaunbementes,
ie threatencth Chem Chatlcane bate thep; stone coiilels
genes D concer, the {pirite ofthe Loz lift
Meine Dp,and brought me nto peak
(Ce ave 5H pozte of the Lordes Houle. And bez
Pa Sep Val bolde there were.crv.tien vnder
Baite] Dore amonge whom J fa we Faas:
niab the fonne of Asur, and Phelthiab tde fone
of Gananiah, the rulers of p people. Then Lapd
the Lozde tunto me. Choufon of man, tbeir men
pinagine mpichefe, and a wpeked cotlaple take
they inthis cptielapinge: Cutbetiere ts note-
fiructionat bande, let vs buplde boutes:this Ze
culalentiscthecauldzon, and we be the Repe.


SS es <i a


Therefore Halte thou prophecpe neorhem:
pea, propbecve Halte thou vnto them, D ome
ofman. And with that fell rhelprite of ë Lorde
ppon ime, and iaid ynto me: Hpeake, thus faprh
the Lob: Du this maner pance pe fpoken( D pe T
boufe of frar and Jhnow the pmaginaciong
of pour bertes. any one pane pe murthered in
this cptre,andfplled the Fretes full of the flapne
Cherfoze thusfapth the Lo2d God: Che layne
men that pe Daue laped on the qrounde mthe ci:
tpe are the fleithe, and this citie ig the cauldzon:
xut J wil inge pou out of it+pe baue feared Gerria
the wearde and J pli bapnge a (oeatdeouer tartti
pou fapth the Lozde God. F topil dzpue pow out
of this citie anddelpuce pou intopourenempes
band and wl condemprie pou. Pe Halbe llapne
in all thecottes of Birael , 3 Yopll be aucnged of
pou:tolerne pouto knowe that Jam the Loz.
This cptiethall not be poure cauldzon, neprber
thal pe be the fich therin:but inthe coftes of yi
raclwpll 3 punptipe pou, that pou may knowe:
that 3am che Lod: in whofe comaundementes
pe bane not walked, no? keptedps lawes: + DUE geerbtit a
haue done afterthecuflomes of p Pepeben, that Petrs>
lpe counde aboute pou.
Plow wien F preached. Dbelthtah the fonte _.
of anantah ped. Chen fel 7 downe ypon mp €
face and cricd w aloude bopce,fapmge: D L020
God, Wrlt thou then Dtterlp deltrop all theren
naunt im gleacls Andlothe too2de of the Lorde
came wntome onthismaner:thou fone of ma,
thy baetheen, thy kpalfol&e, and p whole bouie
of uda Which dwell at Jerufalem, faye: Uith
Dawe pefareefrom rhe Lorde, for the lande ts
qpucn nsinpoflefivon. Cherfoze tell the: Thus
fapth the LozbeGod: J wpll fende pou far of a=
mong the Gentples,and {cattre pou among the
nacpo2s,and 3 wll ballowe pou but alptic,in
the landes where pe fballcome. Tell thim alfo
€ hus rth the Lode God: FJ wpll gather pou
agapne out of the nacpong and bzpng pou ‘tort
thecountryes where pe be (catred, and Jivpit
gpue pou thelande of Jiraclagapue. Andtycp
fpallcome toptber: And thep Hal take awap all
thepz pdols,and all thep2 abbominactons from
thence.* And J wpllgpue pou one perte, and J D
wyll plant a newe {pyeite Witbinpour bowels. sev. rrei È
That tonpe berte wyll J take out of poure SIFF.
bodpe, and gpuepon a flethlp berte, that pe map
walke in mp cOmaunbementes, and kepe mpre
ozdpnaunces,and do them: that pe mapt be mp
people, and J pour God. Hut loke whole bertes
are difpoled tofolowe thep2 abbominacpons €
wicked lininges thole mens vedes wl F bag
tpontbepz owne heedes, fapeth the £026 Gov.
After thisntd the Cherubins lyf tp thry wm=
qes and the wheles went withebem, and p glo
rp of the Lorde was vponthem. * Do the glo: corey. ps
rpofthe Lorde went vp from the middei of the #1110
cptic,and fone Dpon the mount of the cptte, to-
warde the Gall.x But the wpnde toke rite Dp, F eee sited
ina vpfion( wbichcame bp the (pprit of God it euti.a
brought meagapne into Caldea among the pri
foners. Chen the vplion that ¥ had lene Vanple
{hed awaye fre me S3 J [pakie ute the ater


The Brophecpe


ners, all the wordes of the Lorde, wobich He had
mewt l


me
CThe.rii. Chapter:


@ The parable ofthe beilels of thec tpuptpe. whe er:
poficpon ofthe parable, bp twbpch thetakpag of kpng
zebekiah is (pqnitped. An othet parable wherebp the
diktee of hungre aud Chpztis tpsupped.


Hine wode ofthe Lorde came Lito


s EES me,{apinge: Chou fone of man p
pear ewes UWellcfttn the mpoft of a froward


and pet beare they noe, yd are an ob-
by fapze dape lp abe, thar coe map fe. pea euen
al


de that they bea difobedient houfpolde. bhp
qere that thou bat maderedape to fipt witDall,


bt.
23 Jntbep:pgbt halt thou veare ppon thep2
that J bad made reavpe ney, J out bp dap.


€ roo2ne ofthe Lode Unto me, fapinge: Thou fon


and get pym awape.
He (hall breake Downe the foall,to cary tuffe


grec roia eounde with bis epes:* Wp Ipne topli J (pzede


TrEriA


Lzrh tr b x So when Jhaue (cattered them amonge the
Bib |


fulltremblynae Walt thou eate thp bzeed, wyth
carefulneffe and fozowe thalte thou dzpnke thp
water. And wnto the people of the lande [peake
thou on this maner : thus fapth the 1 ozbe God:
to them that dwell in Jerufalem, andto planbde
of Jfracl: Pe tall cate pour brecd with iozowe
and dzynke pour water with beupnetle. Pea the
land with the fulnefte therof Halbe laped wafe
for thewpckednefle ofthbem that dwell theret.
And thecpttes chat now be well occupped, Mall
be Vopbe : andthe lande defolate: that pe mape
BKnowe,bow that Jam tde Lo2de.

Pet came the wozde of the Lorde wnto me a> JE
gapne,fapinge: Chou fonne of man, tbat ma
ner of bp wode ig that, wbicb pe vie intheland
of Fracl,fapinge: uth, xleinge thatthe dapes .
ate fo flackeincommpnge,all the diftons are of i.pet.td.b.
none efecte: Telltbem therfoze,thus fapethbebe
Lode God: J wpl make that bywoorde tocate
fotbatit thalnomoze becõmenlp vied in Firael

Wutfay this wntothem: Pdapesare at bande
that enerp thpnge which bath bene popiera;
Mall be fulfplled. There Mall no pion be itt
vapne,neither anp pzopbecpe fapleamonge the
chylozen of Flrack: Foz itis F tbe Lo2zdp {peake
it:and whatloeuer 3 the Z ozve (peake, it thalbe
perfourmed,andnot be Nacke tn commpnge..

Pea,cucn in pour tapes (D pe frotard hou: ©
(holde ) wyll 3 deuple ome thynge, and bapnge
it to palle, (aptb tbe Lorde God. Andthe word
ofthe 102d came wnto me, faping: Dchold, thou
Conne of mats. The boule of Flcacl fapth on this
mancr. Cut), ag forthe vilton that pe baue fene
it wpllbe manp a dape 02 it come to palle: Ft ig
farre of pet, the tbpnge that be propbecpeth.
Cherfoze fap vnto them: Thus fapth the 102d
God. Alimp wogdes thal nomoze be flack. Lobe
what 3 {peake , that fame tpallcome to paffe, |
fapth the Lozde. ws ; ‘

i € The.riti. Chapter.

GC rhe wore of the Lore agar nā falfe prenbetes, hich
teache the peeple the countapice o ftbep2 olone brrtes.
respe pe wade of the Lorde came Dnto A
SE Beye me, lapinge: Chou fonneofman —

Ko? Sage) Dpeabe, peophecye a gapni thofe
ied pele, propbetes, that peache in Blrael:

Meg «aes and fape thou wnto them $ peopbe
hese rowne bectes:bear


as table the Lozde bath not tent them. Ciayue
pyfions baue pe fene , andfpoken falfe prophe"


whereas F neuer fapde it.
Therfore thustapthp Lorde God: Wpeaule
poure wozdes be vapne, and pe feke oute ipes. 6


egath.bii.c


of Esechicl.


Wpne bandes thal come bpon the prophetes
that loke out bapne thpnges, and preache Ipes:
they (halnot be infbecouncel of mp people, noz
wzpttenin the bobe ofthe boule of Jiracl, nep-
ther thalltbep come inthe lande of Firal : that
g mp knowe how thatigam the Lode God

that Foz bpcaute : thep baue dplcepucd mp


n
Here biiid people, xand told them of peace, where nopeace |


twas. Dne fetteth upa walle, andthep Dawbe
it wpth lool clape.

Therforetell them wohyche datobe it wrth
putenipered morter, that it mall fal.+fEo2 there
pall come a great Hower ofrapne, great haple
ftones thal fall vpon it,¢ a foze torme of wynd
fall beateit, fo tall the wallcomedowne.
Shalit not thé be fapd nto pou: where is now

. tHemozter that pedawbed it wpth all: Ther-

Fo2e thus fapeth f Lord God: J wplbzeake out

inmp worpful di{plea ture with a ttozmp wind

fotbatin mpne anger there pal come a mpabtp

{power of rapne, and baple Tones inimp wath,

todeftrove wpthall. |

Ag foz the wall that pe bauedawbed wpth

Mntempozed mozter, Jwypll brale tt Downe,

make iteuen wpeb the qrotde:fo that the foun:
_- pactom therof Hall remouc, andit Hall fall, pea

and pe poure felucs wall perpen the mpide


therof:tolearne poufortoknow,thatZamthe -


Lorde: Thus wil F perfourme mp wrath vpon
tbps wall,and vpon them tbat haue dawbcd tt
with vnfempozed mozter, and chen wpl F lape
puto pou:the thal is qone, and thedatwbers are
awape. Chele are p pzopbhetes of Flracl, which
prophecye wnto the cptie of Jerufalem, and loke
out vilpons of peacefoz them, wher as no peace
is fapeth the Lozde God. perto, (D thou
fore of ma fet thp face agapntt the Dougbters
of thp people, which prophecy out of their otne
Hertes:and peake thou,pzophecy agapntt them
andfapetpus.. tts

Thustapeth p Lod God:o be bntopou,
that lowe ppllowes vader al arme Holes,¢ bol
fiers wuverthe beades both of ponge and old to


etay.v.e.2 Catche foules Moithal-*floz whe pe Daue gotten
sHich. tid the Loulesofmp people in pour captinite, pe pro


~ mpe themtlpfeand dtthonoure me to mp people
fo2 airhandful of barlpe and Foza pece of bread
when pekplithe foules of them that dpe not, €
people lpfeto then that lpuenot: Chus pe oil
: {cmblewith mp people, that belpucth pour lpeg
Wiberfore thuslapeth p L020 God: Webold
J wpl alfo vps the ppiloes, wherwuth pe catche
thefoulesin ping :them wpl ¥ take from pour
armes and let the foules wo that pecatcy fiping
Pour bol (ters allo topl J teare in peceg,and de=
Ipuer me people out oF pont bande, Cothatthep
(hall come nomoze in pour handes to be fpopled
anv pe hal knotwe that Jam the Lord. Sepn
that with pouripes peatiromEogte the pertes o
thsrpabteous, whom F haue not dpicomfozted


ond Agapne,fozfomuch+as pe cozagethe bande of


the wpcked,fothat he mapenot turncfrom bps
topched May and Ipue,therfozethall pefppe out
nomor banitie,no2 propbecpe poure stone gel-
fpnges : Fog 3 wopll belpuer mp people oute of


poure bande that pe mape bnowe, Dotwe that
amthe Lozde. 3 2 s+ 3


C Tbe. xiii. Chapter.


eclders of Flracl, and latdobne


Erpen >

fies in thep2 bevtes, and go purpolelp vpon the
ftomblinge blocke of thep: owne wpckconelie :
Chulde Y then anlwere at thepz requet f Ther-
fore {peake buto them,and {ape : thuslapth the
Lorde God: Euerp man of che boule of Flracil,
tbat bearech bps pncleane Jodolles in bps berie,
purpotpnge to ombleinbts owne wpckedtics
andcõmeth toa propbhet,toenqupseanpthbpnge .. -
at me bp bpm: Yuatothat man wyl J the Lozde
my felfe qpueanfwere, accodpng to the multp
tude of bis Zdolles:that tpe Doule of Fleacl map
befnared in thep2 owne dertes , becaule thep be
cleane gone from me , fo? thep2z abbomunacions
fakes. berfoze;tell the poule of ffael: thus


fapeth the Lorde God: * We conucrted,forlabe csech.rr.c


our Jdolleg and turne pour wpues from pour

pitbpuefie,and turne pour faces from all poure
abbominacions.

foz cuerp man, (cobetber be be of the boule 25

of ¥frael o2 a ftraunger) tbat fogeournethin Af
racli, whpche Departeth fro me, and carpeth 3-
dollesin bys berte, purpolpnge to go pil fom
plynge inbps owne wpckednefle,and commet)
toa popbet,fozto athe councell at me thozowe
bpm: puto thatman topll 3 the Lorde gpucan=~
worre bpmpne owne felfe. J wp! fet mp lace a-
gapni that man, and wpll make bym to bean
erample foz other, pea,and a comen bpwoz8e: g
topllrootebpm out of mp people, tbat De mave €


ktnowe bowe that Jamthe L0: *and pf that : radia b


Pzopbhete be Decepucd, whenbe telleth bpma
wo2de:then ¥ the Lode mp felfe haucdecepucd
that peophete,and wpll fretch outanpne bande
pon bpm,toroote bpm out of mp people ofal
‘racll: andthep botbe thalbe punpthed fo: thepz
wryckednefle. Accozdpugetothelpnue of hin
that afketh, hall tbe fpnne of the Bzop):te be:
that the boufe of Flraell be led nomoze tromme
thooweerroure,and benomoze deFvledin their
wopckeducile:but that thep mape be mp people,
and 4 thep2 God, fapeth the Lozde God.

And the wo2de of the Lozecame vntome, D
fapinae: ‘Chou fonne of man, wohentbelande.
fonnerbagapnite me, and goeth forth in wpe-
Keonefie : 4 wpll itretche out mpnebande Vporn


it,xanddeltrope altbe proutlionofthepz bread pirs


andfendederth vpon them, toderop Manand .
beaft in the lande. And though Moe, Damel g
Job, thelecbremen were amonge them, pet Hal
thep inthep2 rpghteoutnette delpuce, but tcp:
owneloules,fapetbthe Lozde God. ae
- PEF bainenoplome bea kes tuto p landeto €
wafe it pp,and ft be fo defolate, $ noman map

| “LiL i gothei


Fol. lect.


erereloztedxbnto me cerfapne of on


Eee


The Prophecpe —


go therin For brafes: pF thelethee me were alfo


uitbelande,astrulpas Jlpuc(fapth tbe Lorde pera


God) they thallfaucneprber lonncs noz dough-
ters but be onclp Del puered themfelucs : and ag
fo: the lande, it albe walk.
SE «Da pl Bbepnge alwerde intothe lande, and
charge it to xo thozowe the lade: fo that 3 flap
Downe manand bealk init,and pE thel tize men
wocrecherit: Xs trulp as ¥ lpue(Capth the L020
God )thep thal deliucr nether fonnes nop Dough
ters but only be faued them Celucs. DEF fende a
peftilence into the lande,and poure oute mp foge
indignacion wporit im blond,fo that Jrote out
of tt both imanand beat. And pf Roc, Daniel g
Fob were therin, as truely as Flpuc (fapeth the
Lode Gov )thep Hal delpuer nether Connes noz
Doughters, but laue thepz owne foulesin tyepe
righteoutnes. M ozcouer, thus lapth p lozd god
uche moze when J iende my * foure tron


Fe-rrdii.b. blous plages vpon Jerulalem:the Nwerde, Hon-


ger perilous beaftes and peftilence, to deftroye
man andbeall out ofit. w2eboldetherethalbe a
remnauntlaued therin, which hal bepng forth
thep2fonnes and dDougbters. Scbholdc,tbcp that
conte forth vito pou,and pe (halite thep2 Wape,
and what thep take in bande;and pe thalbecom
fozted, as touchbpnge all the plages that F paue
brougbdt Dpon Jerufalem. Thep Mallcomfozte
pou,wbhen pele theps wape and workeg: and pe
{pal knowe,bowe that it isnot withouta caule
that J bauedone foagapni gerulalt, ag 3 opt
fapeth tbe Lozde God.
CTbe.cv. Chapter: :

f ds thebnpratpta: te ood et tbe vpne tree ie ca inte
the fpre,Co faprth pe that Jerufalem Halbe byente.
Srey ae wode of the Lod came vufome

T1 ER fapinge: Chun fonne sf man: what
i Vee vcomery of fhe bpneamonge al other
/ drees : andof the wplbde vpne Locke


aa Ven Oapne the wode of the Lozdfpake
så AA HA nto N laying: cpou lommeof man
Sa ew the cptic of Jerulalem theirab
74 (es au) ov pomittaciong and fap-thustapeth p
TIR Bodt ito | erufalé: bp pros
genp and kpnred came ont of the lande of Cana
antbp Farber wasan Smogztte,thp mother ale
thite,thuswas p maner of thy birth. 3n the da
of thy bpzth whentiou watt vozne, p itrpng o
thp nauel was not cut of: ¢ walte not bathed in
water to make peleane: € dou walk nether rub:
bed w falt, noz fwadled inclontes. Ro manres
gari $ fomuch, as todoanpof thefethypnges
02 tbe, forto ewe the uch fanonr, but p walk
ptrerlp cat out upon p Felde:pca,veippled wat
thou inthe dap of thp bpath. Then came byf
andfate the trodendetone tn thpneo
and fapde vnto the: Lpuc, moe boun be des
fpledintbyne otone bloud,pea,cue 4( F tell the)
fayde bnto the lpuc although thou be defpledin
thpne owne blond. So FJ plated the, as p blot
fom of p felde thou arte qrowen vp, and waren
greate:thou batt gotten a maruclous pleataunt
beutp, thy bzefts are come bp.chp Deereis qood
lye grott where as P walk naked g bare afoze.
Powe when J wente bp the, andloked Dpon
the:bebold,the tpme wascome:pee,euen p time
towowe the.’Chen{pacd FJ my clothes ouer fto
couer thy drthoneftpe:pee: 3 made anoth unto p
xand marped mp felfe with the(faptHthe L020
@od)¢ lo thou became mpne owne. Che Wwa-
ped 4 the with water, and pourged thy blonde
from the. J anopnted the with ople, 3 gauc the
chatigeofrapmentes, 3 made the thors of Car
usletper: ¥qgpbedtheabout wyeh whpt fplke:
Fclochcdp wpth aerchefces, Fodecked the wyth
coftlp apparel, J put rpnges Bpon thp fpngcrs:
acbapne about thy neche,(panges vpo thp foge
beade,carerpnaes vpon thpne cares, ¢ feta beu


4


eblon .


ffap.b.0
JRE


gere iiia
Ole, pte


_ eo = amõgealothertymberoftpegroue tpfulerowne bpont pne becd. hus wafttbou z 4
Do wen take wood of it,tomake anp worke w Decte Wwpthlyluer and gold, tip rapment was
al‘D2 map thereanaplebemade ofit,tobange of fone wobpic fplke of ncdle wozae, and of Dps A


anp tbynge bpdrbebolde,itiscafe inthe tpreto
be brent, the Epze confuneth both the enves of tf
the mpodft 1s brent to albes. Fs tt mete thenfoza
np wake? Ao. Sepnage then that te was mete


g fono worke,bepng tpole:muchiche map ther


anp chpnere be made of if, whe thetprehachcon
fumed andbzent it. And therfore thus fapedthe
Lowe God: Lpke as Fealk the vpneinto p fpze
Foz to be baent,as other trees of the wood: Cucn
fo wpl Joo wythebem that dwel in Zerulalem
and fee mp Face agapnit them: they hall qo out
from the fp2e, and pet the Fpre tall confume the


uers colours. bon dpdelt eat norbpng but fim
nels.boupe and ople: maruclous owt ma tp
and beutpful:pee cuena verp quene waffe thou.
Znfomuche p thy bentp was (poke ofamige
the Detben foz thou wakercellent inmy beutp
wbich J put bpon the, fapth p Lozde God. But


‘thou balt put confidence ut oath owne beuty g


plapde the barlot: when thou padt gotten the a
name. Chou bali competed whozedome with al
that went bp pand haltfulfplled thep2 delpres:
pea,thon batt taken thp garmetes of diuerie co
lours,t dDectethpne altares therwith, wbherupo


€


astch rie ¥ Then hal pe knowe,p Fam the Lorde, wien
and Fr. b; Jlet mp face agapntt them.andmake thelande
waft:vecanfethep baucloloze offended, fapeth


thou mpabtelt fulfpll thpne wpozcdome, xand zere..
of fuchatatpion,as neuer was done, noz Halbe ">
¥* The Good| p ognametes g tewels which Fqa= era. rivi. a :


the Lode God. uetheotmpne owne gold g fpluer, Daf thouta- Ot |
ee er ken and made themens pmages therof,andcO- esec.vit.n
The.xvi.Chapter. myptred wohozcdome wpthall, and.F}.D


by qarmentes of dpnerfe coloures hafte
thou taken, and Decte Chem theewitp:mpuec ople
and incenfe bate thou {cette before thepm.
p meate Whpch FI qgaue the,aslpmnels, ople,
bonp:(to fede the itbat ghar baty fet ns
i toem


@ Ebrpropheteentendpng to (peake of (he abhominacions

of serulalem, both fpr ihewe thet euetites of Sod toward

it. Jerufalem tereproed of bakpnoneile, Coz ber fornicari
on topth Woolles. Be ut ipeth the wpckeones of other peo
plein comparrlon ofthe fprnnes of Ferulatem, Whe caule
of (he abbompnacpons into mbpceb toe Hopomptes fc,
Enere is prompfen tothe repentaunt,


of Esechiel.


them Fog a fwocte fanour. Andthys came alloto
_. euroi, e pafle fapeth the Lorde God:* Thou bak taken
~~ -Beupou.» @Dpne ovoneLlonnes and doughters,wpom thon
anv. rrrti.c Daddelt begotten wntome: and there patethou
arebo offered wp wnito thems,to be thepz meate. F8 this
Platcb,a VUE afimal bozedome of thyne(thinkeft thou
taba Dut afimal Mbozedome of thyne(thinkeft thou)
that thou Rape Emp chyldzen, and acuelt them
ouer, to be bzente vonto tbem: Andpetinallthy
abbominacpõs and Hhozedomes,thou bat not
remembzed thedapes of thy pourh , bot naked
and bare P walk at that aee and trode Downe
intbpne owne blonde. After all thele thy wpc-
kednefies (wo too vito the, fapeth the Lode)
oR (thon bai builded thp tewes and brobel hotles in cuetp place)
“” Chou balk buplt bpe places:pea,at the beade of
euerp ecte balk thou bupldcd the an aultare.
Thou ball made thp beutp to beabhpozred,thou
` baftlapdout thp legges to euerp one that came
yp bp,andmultiplped thpne whozedome. * Thou
crni o Dall cOmpéted foznicacpon with the Egipcians
tby nepabvours, whpcbe bad muche felipe:and
thus batt p encrealedthinewbozdome,to anger
, me. Sebold, Jopo fEretch out mpne bande ouer
eyer tii. d the and Dpd*nipnpibe thp moze of fobe, ¢ delp-
b.d.Filit ered the oner into the wplles of che bulueines
thpneenempes, tobyche are ahamed of thp ab-
pominablewape. - |
x Thou bak played the hoze allo pth the
Affpzians,becaule thou watte infatiable: Pea,
thou batt( 4 lape) with them plaped thebarlof,
and pet baddet not tbou pnough. ‘Chusbatte
thou furthermoze cOmptted thp fozntcacion fro
; } the land of Canaan bnto the Chaldecs, and pet
+


Ere. ppiiia


tby lutenot fatilfped. Dowe ob inate is thpue
berte(fapth the Lorde God )fepngetboudolt al
thefe wo2kes of anecrraunt whore: bupldpnge
thp ewesat the beade of euerp fteete, andthp
bzodell boules tnall places? Chou bat not ben
| : » ag another whoze that boldeth {cozne of afmall
| å reibarde, buta wpfe that bzcakcthy wedlocke, g
À taketh other in teade of berbulbande. Gpltes
are qpué to al other whores, but thou gpuelt re-
wardes ontoall thy loners:¢ offerelt tbem gpf:
fes,tocome vnto the out of all places,and toch-
mpftte fornicacton withthe. Ftis come to patle
wypthtbeinthy bPozcdoms ay to the vie
of other wemen:pea,there bath no luche forni-
cacion bene commptted after the, fepnge p thou
profereft gpftes vnto other , and norewardeig
genentbe:thysisacontrarpthpnge,
| Therfoze, berare the worde of tye Lorde, DË
barlot,tpustayth the Lo2de God: oz lo much
i as thou Daft lette Forth thp poutbto tbozdome
and dpicoucred thy bame, thozotwe thy whoze-
| dome wpthHal typ loucrs,and with al the pdols
of thy abbominacponsin the bloude of thp chpl
iire roia U2°N,*Wobome thou ball geuen them: Depolde,
| a amusbit.c thertoze J wpll gather toctber all thplouers ,
| vnto whom thou pat made thy felfe comé: pea
Í and alltbem tehome thou Fauoureff,¢ cuerp one
that thou batet J wpl Jlape) gather them to
| eta-ribita gether roude about the: xand tpl dpfconer tpp
fui’ tame before hep thep map feal tbp fpitbpnes
LO SRF "kM opcouer, Jwpliudge the as a beeatice of
| tocdlocke and a murtherer , and recompence the


+


Follrrri,
thin owne blondin wrath g ielonfp J wil geue
the ouerinto thep2 powes eall bzeake dotonie €
thp tues and deftrope thp bzodell boulcs : thep
{pall trppe the out of thp clothes, all thp Fapze
æ beutpful cewels Hall thep take from the, and
folettbelyt naked gbare:* pee, tbep thal bzpng £e4- tr.b
the comen people vpon the which thall ftone the
and flap the Downe wyth thep2 fwocardes. Thep
* hall burue vp thy boules, and punpihe the tn riii.regt,
the fpqhtofmanp wemen, Thus wpll 3 make Frb-b
thy hozdomtoceatie , fo that thou thalt eue
out no morewardes. Sbuld J make my wrath
te be ffpl take mp geloufpefro the, be contente
and nomto2e to be dplpleafed:fepnge thou rremë-
belt not the dapes of thy pout), but balt pzouo
kedmeto wrath in all thelethpngess Webolde
therfozc, 4 wyl bzyng thpne owne wapes bpon
tbpne beade, faytb the 102d God:bowbeit ZF ne
uct Dyd Dutothe accozdpnge to thy wpckednes
and all thy abbompnactons.2cholde,al thep p
vie comen prouccbes, thal vie this prouerbe al-
fo agapnit thefuchea mother, fucha Dougbter.

Chou art ceuen thp mothers owne doughter
tbat bath caT of ber bufbande and hee chplozen:
Pea,thou art the fpitcr of thp (pers, wopich Foz
foke thep2 bulbandes and thep2 chyldzen. Dour
xmotieris a Cethpte,and pour father an Amo ts-rbta
tite. Thbpne eldeft (plterts Samaria, Weg ber
dougbters that dwel Dponthp left bande.

wut thy pongelt (ptter that owelleth ontbp Æ
rpabt baders Sodoma and ber doughters. Pet
hatte pnot walked after thep2 wapes,noz done
atterthepzabbomtnacios: but thou Modet alp-
teland berp fmaltpme, andinall thp tapes:
hat bene moze cozrupetbenthep.As truly as 4
lpue,fapeth the Lo2zbe God: Sodoma thp fpfter
with bec dougbters, bath not done fo euell, asp
and thp Dougpters. Beholde, xthe Cpunes OF EYP pone ott.c
fpfter Sodoma were thele: pde, fulnelle oF s.rviisc.e
meate,aboudaunce and poelneffe:thelethpynged ro.e
bad peant her dDougbters. Welpdes that thep
reached not thep2 bande tothe poozeand nedpe,
but were proud, and dpd abbominablethinges
befoze me:thezfoe J toke them awape,as plea-
fed me. Aether hath Samaria done halfe of thy
{pnnes, xpea thou hat erceadedthéin wpcked- ‘
nefe: nfo muche that in compari on of all the 2° *
abbominacions which thou bat done thou batt
made thp {pers good wemen. Therfore thou
(which diidek condempne thp (pfter) bearethpn
owne pame, fo: thpne owne offences,that thou
bat comptted, moze obbominable then thep oiv
which in Dede are mozerpgbteous then thou art
be thou( 3 fap atbamed, and bear thp hameful
tebuke:fepng that thou balt proucdthp {pfiters.
incompacpton of the rpabtwpfle.

Astor thep2captiuitienamelyp the captinite
of Sodoma and her doughters : pcaptivitic of
Szamaria g her doughters: J topl bzprge thea
gapne,fo wpl J alfobrpnge agapue thp captp=
uitte amongethem:that thou mapt take tppne
owneconfulion pon tbe, and beafamed of al
tbat thoubatk done, ¥tocomfostethen. Thug
tby {piters(namely) Soma and her dough-
fers: Damatta and per Doug ne ma thy felt

i and


The P20 phecpe


and thp voughters Halbe bzoughte agapne to
pour olde etate. when thou walt in thp p2pde,
and befoze thp wpckednes came to lpabt:P wol
Deft not beare fpeake of thy fp ter Spodoma, Wn:
tpl ebetpme that the Sirtas pth al thep2 tow
neg and the Philiftpnes with all thatl pe roude
aboutethem,bzougbt the to pame and confult
on:thatrbou mpabtelt beare thpne owne fplthi
neg and abbominacion fapeth tbe Lorde. 3
ffoz thus Capeth the Lorde God, J fhulde( bp
rpgbt Beale wyth the,as thou batt done. Thou
batt defppled the oth. and bzoken the concnaut
g2encrthelefle, J topll remember the coucnaunt
that J made wpth tbe in thy pouth, info muche
that ittbalbeaneuerlaftpng coucnaunt:fo that
thou alfo remébzcthp wapes, andbdeathamed
of them: then palt thou receaue of me thp elder
and ponger (piters, bd J wil make chp dough
were. Fel, ¢ terg and that befpde thy coucnaunte. + And fo
Deild soy] J renuemp couenaunt wyth the, that thou
mayt knowbe that Jam the Loz, that p mapi
thpnke vpõit:be atbamed, ercule thpne owne
confufponnomoze: when J baue fozqeué the, all
thatrboubatt donc, fapethe the Lozbe God.
— CCTbe.rvit.Chapter.
€ Tbe parable ofthe cwo Acglies. |
p: mone p n o: came ae ae
aa prays aping: Thou lon of nan : put fozt
Ererig a al 3 &  *adarke (peakpng a parable, yn-
S Eto the boule of stacl,elape: Thug
> a T Fs sient e 1020 God. There ae a
an. bi, a Greate Teale wpth great wpnges : pea, pth a
pega mpabtpe longe body, ¢ full of fe thers ofdpurrs
colours upon the mounte of Libanus, and toke
tbe bpcft bzaŭche from a Cedre trec, and bake
of thetoppe of bps twpgge.andcarped it into p
lande of Canaan,and let itinacitie of marchat
tcs. 19e toke alfo of the fecbe of the landeg platt-
teditinafruteful grounde, be bzoughte it vnto
cat waters, efet it as a wpllow tree therop.
‘Che dypd it qrowwe, and wasa great vpne frock,
but lowe by the grounde whole bzaunches tur=
ned into it felfe , and the rootes of tt were falte-
ned vnder it, thus therecame of it a vpne,and it
brought fozth blofloms,efp2ed out beatiches.
aa Wuttherewas another Aegle agreate one,
whbprcbe had great wynges emanp tethers:and
Debolde, the rotes of this vpne had an hoger at-
fer bpm, [pzed out bps blaunches toward bin
that be mpgbe water ber wptbh p ochpard that
He bad planted. Aeucreheles, tt was plated Yp
Ona good grounde befpde great waters:fo that
(bp realon) it hulde Haue bzougbt out braun
ches and Frute,and paue bene a q0 odlpe bpne.
Speake thou therfore thug fapth the Lode


knowe pe not, what thetethpnges do fyqnifpes
Tell them: ebol, * pkpng of Wabiloncame dee
to Ferufalem,andtoke thekpnge and bisp2pn-— `
ceg,and led them to Wabilon. He foke of the kin
ges fede,and made a conenaunt wpth bpm, and
tokcanotbeof bpm : Che prapnecs of the lande
toke be wpthhbpm alfo,that the lande mpatt be
bolden infubtection, and not torebell, but kepe
the coucnaunte, and fulfpllit. Wut be fell from
pym,andfentebpsambaflptours into gppte,
that be mpabte bauebozles and muche people.

Shuldethatpzotperes Sbulde be be kepte æ
Cafe,that doth Cuchetbpngess D: Mulde be ef-
cape tbat bzeaketh bpscouenaunt:Astrulpas .
J ipuc fapththe Lozde God, He Mall Dye at Wa
bplon,in the place where the kpnge Dwelleth,p
made bpm kpnge:whote othe be bath defppled, —
and whofe coucnaunt be bath bzoken. Nepther
fhall harao wyth bps great boot and alk t
tude of people,mapntapne bpm in the war: whe
thep cait bp dptches , efet vp bultoozkes to de-
{rope muche people : Joz fepnae be bath defpy-
fed the othe, and bzoken the coucnaunte( where
as bepet gauebis bande therppon)anddone all
tpefe chpnges,be thal not clcape.

Cherfore thus lapeth the Lord God: As tru 5
lpas 3 lipne, J wpl bgpnge wpne othe ý be path
Delppled.and mp coucnaunt that be hath bzoké
pon bps otne peade. x J wpll cal mp nette a= ezer, rib
boute hym,and catch bpminmyparne. Co Wa aw.prra
bpfon wpl ne bpm,tbere wpl J punph bhim
Decaule of the great offece that be made me. As
fo: thole that fic from bym out of the bolt, thep
thalbe flayne wpth ë Cweard. The relpouc thal
be {catered towarde al the fopndes: and pe Mall
knows that tbe Lozdebauclpokentt. |

Thus lapth the Lorde God: ¥ wplalfo take G
a braunchefrom an bpe Cedze tree,and wopll fet
it,andtakethbe Dppermoft twpage , that petig i
but tender, and plante it Dpon an bpe bpll: Ra
melp, pon the Dye bpll of Spon wyll ¥ plante
it, thatit map bapnge forth tiwpgges,and geut
frute, and bea great Cedze tree: lo pat all ma-
ner of foules mape buplde init, andmake thepe
nealtes under the Matowe of bys braunches.

And alltbe trees ofthe felde thal nowe that
J the Lozdchaue bgoughtdownethe bpetrec.e .
fet the low tre vp:that J haue doped vp p grene
tree, made the dipe treto fope. Eun J the
Lode ý fpake it bauc alle bought tt to paffe,

The.rviii. Chapter.
(be Geweth that cuerp man hal beare bys etone pr.
To hpm that amendeth, 19 faluacpon prompted . Deo th


is prophecped tothe rpghtcous, whpcpeturacth baike
fromthe rpghe ware.


€ Gov:Dhal thps vyne profperrtyalnothysroo Few
tesbe plucked oute, bysfrutebebzokenof,bps 4 bs


grene braunches wopther and fade awapes pea,
witbout ether Frsge arme oz many people, Hal

it be plucked Dp bp profes. Behold, tt was plan
ted: ipalit profpercthcrfozer Shalit not be dp-

cd bY and wptbered:yea,cucnin p Wutpnge out

of his blofoins.affone ag p eat wind bloweth:
Hozcouer,the wove ofthe Lorde came Vi-

=p tome laping: Speake top fromard houthalode:


ismpne, fotsthefonnempneallo. Wbeloule
that fpuneth, Maldpe. x Lfa man oe Leu, rbiil.s
othe


+


b-


m


Or C ECDL,


dothe thynge thatis equal andriqght.becateth

not bpon the Dplles:be lyfteth not pys epes vp

to the Foule pools of Jfrael:be defpleth not pps
nepgbbours wyfe:be medleth wpth no meitrn-

ous woman:be greueth no bodpe:beg pucth bps
-Detter bps pledgeagapne, betabeth none other
etro e mang good bp Dioléce:xbe parteth bys meat w


— Pasba the pongey : be clotheth thenaked : + he lendeth


notbynge upon vfuep,be taketh nothpng ouer :
be withdraweth bis bade from Dopnge wonge
he dDealeth fapthfullp betwene manand man: g
walkethinmpcommaundementes,and kepeth
mp lawes, and perfourmeth them fapebfullp.
* This is a tpghteous man: be pall furelp lpue
Diyen Lode God.


Ronia- p-a


PE be nowe get afonne, that is amurtherer,
a bedir of bloude: pf be do oncofthefe thpnges
‘(though be do notall) be eateth wpon the byl-
les:bedefpleth bis nepgbbours wpfe:be greucth
the pooze afid aedy : be robbeth and fpopleth: be
geucth not the etter bps pledge agapne,Be lyf:
teth vp bys epes unto pools:and medleth wpth
abbominable thpnges:bhe lédeth bpon vlurpe,t
taketh mo2zcouer. Spal thys manl pues ie thal
not lpue.epng be bathdone all theleabpomt-
nacpons,be thal dpe,bis blound malbe Dpon bin
Mowe pftbhps mä get alonnealfo,thatleeth
all bps fathers {punes, wbpcb be bath done:and
feaveth,neptbce doth fuch lpke: Mamelp,be ea-
teth not bpon tie motapnes.he lpftcth not bis
epes vp to the Jools of Frael: hedefplerbnot
bis nepgbbours wpfe:he vereth no main: deke
pethno mans pledge:be nether fpopleth noz rob
bethany man:he dealeth bis meat with the Don
grp: clotheth the naked:be opprefleth not p pore
be receauety no Yiurp, no2 anp thpuge ouer: De
kepetb mp lawes, and Walketh mmyp comma
. Dementes. Toys ma thal not dpeinbis fathers
fpnne, but thaillpue wpthout Faple. Is foz bps
father, becaule pe oppetted and Cpopled bis b20
ther, and dpo wpckedlp amoge his people:lo, be
ig Dead tn bis otne fpn. And pet ape pe: Wier
fore then Quld not this fonne beare bps fathers
fpnie? Cherfore, becaule the fonne hath dance e-
quitie and tpabe, bath kepreall mp comaunde-
mentes,and done them: therfore hall helpucin
dede. The fame foule that fynneth Hall dpe.
= ¥ Thelonne Mal not beare thefathers offéce
een. rrifit.c nether (bal the father beare the fonnes offence.
Fifi coum @perpabteoutnelle of the rig bteous,tbalbe yp
gpa. rro. d ponbpm, andthe wyckednelle of the wpcked
yer.rvtiia albe Dpon bpm felfe allo.x 25ut pf the bngod-
serrr. 1p wpll turne awape from al bps {pnnes that be
path donc,andkepeallmp commaundementes
and othe thpnge thatis equal andrpght:dout
les be Hall ipue,e tot dpe. As fo: al bysipnnes
that bedpd befo2e,thep thal not bethought på
put inbrsrpghteoulnelle that be bath done, be
(bal lpue.* fo; bauez anp pleafurcin the death
of afpnner,fapth the Lod Gob, but rather p be
coucrte tlyuesAgapne: pithe rpabteous turne
awape from bisryabteoufnes and do tniquite,
accozdpng to al the abbominacions,that p wic
kedmanbotbh:thallbelpuer Altherpghtcoul-
nes that pe bath done thal not be thought bpon:


Fato.ii.b,


€


d.pet,tti.b


SUOLUE EE US


ebaue Done: * make pou new bertes anda new eroep.rt
Eprete.UUiberfore spl pe dpe: D pe boule of Ji- and-rpuie


AS Cit thoulone of ma mourne thou fo? 4
22 the pepnceg of Jlrael, and fap. Wiber


pray yi fore lay thp mother plponefie amoge
pe Aa the lpons,and nozitbed ber pige ones
amdge tye lyong whelpess One of ber whelpes


the brought up and it became a lyon, it learned
to fpopie, anù to deuourefolke. Gbheleathen
bearde of bpm, and toke bpm in thep2 nets, and
bzougbt bpm inchapneg wnto plabe of Egppt.
Mowe hen the damme awe, tbat all her
hope and comfo2te thas awap, the toke another
of ber whelpeg and made a lyon of bpm: wbhpcb
wente amongethe lyons, and became a fearle
Llpon:lcarnedtolpople and to Deuoure Folke : be
Oeftroped thep2 palaces,and made thy: Cpeics
watte. Jn fomuche that tbe whole lande and t=
uerp thynae therin, were vtterlpe defolate, tHo
rowe the werp vopee of bpsroarpnge.
~ Thencame the Heathen ot ood on cucrpe
fpde out of al countrecs agapnitt bim, lapd their
nettesfor heman toke pimin tbhep? pptte. a
xthep bounde bpm toprh chepnes and MoungDteE iire reba
bpm to the kpnge of Wabplon: whpch put bpm ae ee
{inp2cfon,that bys vopce thulde nomoze be herd 8"
ppon the mountapnes of Atacl. As for thp mo
ther,the islpkea vpne thp bloud, plated bp
water (yde:ber frutes and bzatiches are growwe
out of manp waters, ber ffalkes werefo rage |
thatmen mpabe baue made ffanes tberof foz of
Epcers:the grewe lo bpe in ber italkes. 7
So whenmenlawe that heerceaded the
LL itt. Depaobe


The Brophecpe


bepgth multitude of ber braunches, the was te
ted oute indpfpleature, andcafte Downe to the
Grounde. Che Ealte wpnde dped vp ber frute,
der tronge alkes were bzoken of: wythered €
b2ent in the Epe. wut nowe the is planted in the
wWpldernelle,in a Dye andthpzttp grotide. And
thercisa fpze gone oute of ber ftalkes, whpcbe


bathe bzente vp ber bzaunches and ber frute : fo


that e bathe nomo ftronge ftalkes, tobetta-
ucsfo2otfpcers. Thysiga pptious and mpic-
tablethbpnge.
The.re. Chapter:
© The Lozbe che. oye ls Ca AEP when thep
pape forthe offenceof bnkpndoncte whpcke bebere obiec:
cech.&eprompreth that bps people Mall recurne from captp:
upte.Sp the mocd that huldebe Lrente, istpgmfpeo the bur
upnge of Ferufalem,


Say ory M the fencnth peare thetenth dape of p


(Which whole kepeth hal lpue inthem)andimp
Sabboth dapes bane thep qreatlp pnbalowed.


nacion Dpon them : and to conlume them inthe urri. b
ef 3J wolde not doit, fozmp na- pra. pcb,


wmpldernefie. ;
meg fake, left it wuld be dithonoured before the
Heathen, from the Mhpch Y bad carped them a-
wape. ut J iwoze vuto them in f wyldernefle
that 3 wold not bzpnge chem into f lade, which
4 gauc them:a lade that fioweth wpthmylke €
honp,and is a pleafure of allandcs:andthat be
canke thep refuted mp lawes and walked not in
mpcomanndemenees, but bad ynbalowed mp
Sabbothes,foz their bert was gone after their
pools.s2cuertheles,mpne epe fpared them, (op
J wold not vtrerlp Nape them, ¢confume them
ii the wplocrneffe.f)o2¢eouer, 3 laid vntathetr


x Then made me to poure outmpneindig- D


re ——=


= === ag ay ae


eat (<= fpith moneth,xithappencd ,thatcer= Fonnes inthe wploerneffe:xwalke notin the fta ero rvitio
PA Wes tapne oftbeelders of sfraclcame nto tutes of ponrfozefatbhers, kepenot thep2 odp-

e e for to atte conntell atthe Lozde, natices,¢ defple not your felues w thep2 pholics

and flat them Downe bp me. Then came p word fo: Jam the Lorde pour God. Wut walke im mp

of the Lode pntome onthpsmance: Choulon tatutes, kepe my lawes and doothem,halowe bac

of man:{pcake bntothe elders of Wracll,elape mp Spabbothes,*fo2 thep area token betwirte pire O
Ynto them: Chusfaperhthe Lode God:are pe mMeand pou, that pe map knowe bow that Jam

come bpthertoafkeanptbingeat nesAsteulp the LozdepourGod.fotwprbfitandpnge,theps

ag $lpue (fapeth the Lode) J wpll gpue pou fonnesxrebvelledagapntt me alfo, thep walked aurr, a

no antiere. Wyle thou notrepzouechem(thon notinmp fatutes, thep keptenotmy latoegto Len rotia
onne of man) wylte thou not repzoue them ¢ fulfplebem( wbich be that doth Mal lpne inthe) aoma.r.a


25
Zrob.iii, b wpe


*Denbi a


€


ewe them the abbominacions of thep2z fo2e-
fathers and telltbem. :
Thug capers the Lorde God: x Fn the dape
mn F chole Jir


the fede of the Doule of Jacob, ¢ Hewed mp leife
onto them in thelande of Egypte: Pea, when F
lyft bp myne bande once tbem, fayd: 7 am the
Lode pour Gud, cuen inthe dape that J lpft t
mpne bande ouer them,to bzpnge tbem out of
landeof Eqppte,intoalande that Fhad proup
ded fo: them, Which foweth with mplke and ho
np-andis a pleafaunt landeamonge all otber.
Chen fapd J vnto them. + Catke ataye encrype
man the abbominactOs that be bath vefoze him
and dcfple not pourelelucs wpthtbhe poolles of
Eappte foz 3 am the Lozde pour Goo.

Xut thep rebelicdDagaint me,and wold not
folotee me:to cateawapecuerp man the abbo-
minaciong of bps epes,and to forlate the pools
of Egypte. Chen Y made bpm fopoure mpne in
Dignacton ouer them, andto peal ae a wath
bpon them: pea, cucn tn the midoett of the lande
ef Egypt. ut FZ wold not dort: fozmp names
fake:that it Hulde not be pnbalowen before the
Heathen, amonge hom thep dwelt, eamonge
whome Fhewed mp felfe vntothem, p J wold
bzpnge them outof thelande of Eappte. 2 owe
when F Dad carped them out of the lande of E-
gppte,and brought theminto the wploernefic:
3 gaue them mp coOmaundementes,and thewed


seut itip EVE MP lawes, xwbpch who fo kepeth allpue
Balatiib inthem:3 gaue themalfo mp bolp dapes. tobe
Zenrbiina 4 token betwprteme g them, € tberbp to know


#ro.chi.c


rec.ccrerice tbat Fam the Lorde, whpch balowe them. and


pet p boule of Firael rebelled agapnt meinthe


acl, €lpft bpmpne bande vpo |


nether balomed thep mp Sabboth dapes. The
J made meagaine to poureout mpne ndiqnact
onouer them, ¢tolatilfpe mp wath vpå them


inthe wyldernefle. Peucrthelefe, J withdzewe €


mp bade foz mp namesfake, let it Hulde be vn-
halowed amd ge the betben, befoze whom Fbad
bought them forth 3 pft vp mpre Dande ouer
them alfo in the wildernciic,that J wold frater
tüemamonge the Heathen, and Frawe them a=
monge the nactons, becaule thep badnot kepte
mp lawes,but caf aide mp comanndementes,
wibalowed mp Sabboties,andlpfte pp thepz
epestothep2fatbers Jools. Wherfoze J gane
thein alfo chinaundementes not good, lawes
thozowe the wbpreh thep Hulde not lpne, and J
bnhalowed them in thep2 owne gpftesx iben
Jappopnted foz mp felfeall thep2 fpzft bome )
tomate them ètfolate: tbattbep mpabt knoe
howe that J am the Lorde.

Therfoze(D thou Conne ofman, tell f bonte
of #lracl, thus lapeth p Lozde God.) welpoe al
thys pour fogefathers bane pet blafppemed me
moze andgreatip offended agapnit me. fFo2 af;
ter J bad bzoughte them into the lande, that Y

omp fed to geuc them, when thep lawe everpe

pebpll andaltbe thycke trecs:thep made there
thep2offerpnges , andpzoucked me topth thepz
oblactons,makpnae lete fauoure there,¢ pon
redout thep2 dapnhe offerpnges. _ i

‘Then J alkedthem what ts thebpil altare
thatpegotoite Andtbherforcis itcalled the
bpe place vatothys dpe. CAberfoze, fpeake tn-
tothe boule of Siracl:thuslapth the Lorde god
Pearcenenas vucleane as pour forfatberg and
compe whozedome alfo w ther2 abbominactis,


wplocrnefle,thep wolde not walke ininpcom: Jn all pour pdolles,whbervnto pebspnge pour thie
maundementes,thep dauccaflawapimplawes oblacions, x ¢to pole honour pe burne poure ano rbb


cbylozen


of Csechtel. Mol lerett;.
litte erin, (Dv ldzett.pe def ple pourefelues, euenontothys Cbenlapde Z:D Lorde, thep wll fayeofime:
cria Dape:Dowedarepetbencome,andalkeanpque -»Culibe,they are but fables.thathetelleth,  Here-rr-b.


il pabila {tion at me: D pe houtpolde of Jirael Ag true-


sEfapiie
 FETb


Deu riia’
and. riii, b


Here. bitte


Foilf.and
FrItec


lp as J lpue(fapeth p Lorde God) pe get no an-
(were of me:andas Eozthe thynge that peqoa-
boute,tt thal not come to palle, whereas pe tap
we wpll be as the heathen, and do ag other peo
plein thelade,wood¢ Fone wpll toc twoztbpp.

Astrulp as J lpue, fapeth the Lozd God, F
mp felfe wpllrule pou witha mpgbtp bande, w
a Eretched out arme, andivithindignacion pow
red out Oucr pou-and tpl bgpnge pou ont of the
nacions and Landes, bere inpe are (catred,and
gather pou together witha mpgbty bade, with
a ftretched out atime and with indignacion pow
redout Dpon pou:and yl bzpnege pou tnto the
woplderneile of the people,and there J wylirea-


fon wptb pon face toface. Lpke as J punpibcd


ourfozfathers in the wpldcrneffe of Egypte,

o topll Zpunpth pou alfo,fapththe Lozde God
¥F wyll bzpnge pou vnder my turt{diccpon, and
vnder the bondeof thecouenaunte, Che forla-
Kers alto and the tranfqreffours wil J take fro
amonge pou, and b:pnge them out of the lande
of pour babptacton: as fo2 the lande of Jiracll,
thep pall not come init: that pou mape knowe
bowe that yam the Looe.

©o fonoive then(fapeth the Lorde God) pe

boule of Firael.xcuerp oneof pou folowe pour
pooles and ferue them, fepng pe refuleto obep
me. @ndmyp polp name pall pe nomoze wnha-
lotve With pour offerpnges and pdolles.j€o2 vp
pon mp bolp bpll euen vpon the bye bpll of Flea
ell fapth the Lozde God, thal all the boule of Ji-
raclandall that tsintbe lande, wozibpp me: *¢
inthe fame place wpl Ffanoure thé, there wpl
Arequyp2e pour heucofferinges and pfpatlinges
of pour oblactons, wth all pour bolp thynges:

— A wpl accepte youre fwete fauoure, when J
bzinge pou from thenacions,and gather pou to

ether out of thelandes, toberin pe be fcatered:
tbat map be balowedin pou befoze tbe beatheé
and that pe mape knowe , that Jam the Lorde
wbpch haue brought pou intothe lande of Jira
el: pea, into thefame lade, that F fwore to genue
bnto pour forefathers. Chere (pall pe call tore:
membzaunce pour owne apes andal poure p-
maginactons, oberin pe baue bene defpled: and
xpe (hal iudge pour felues too2thp to be deftrop
edfo2 all pour wpckedneffe,that pe baue Dene.
And pe hallnowe, that Jam the Lo2d, when
Fentreat pou after mp name,not after pout iic
ked Wapes, noz according to pour corupt 1002-
kes Dpe boute of Jfraecl, fapethbthe Lorde.

, B)ozeouer, tbe Wozdrof the Lozde came Vn-
tome, fapenge: Chou fonne of man:Tet thp face
foward thefouth,and{peaketo the fouthtopn
and fape tothe wood towardetbelouth:ipeare
the wozde of the Loz, thus i the Lo2dqod
Webholde F wopll spnodle a fpze inthe, thattall
confume the grene trees withthe Daye. oma
thalbe able to quenche bis flame, but al thatlo-
keth from the fouth totbenogth, halve baente
therein: andall flethe thal fe, that F the Lorde
bane bpudlcd it,fo chat noman map quencheit,


4


CDer threatencth the (mearde, that istofape, vetraction
te checpeieot Ferulalem. te thetocth the fall of kpnge ge
Bekiah. Beis commaunded to piophecpe the defrucrpon oë
the chplozen of Ammon. After the laughter ofotber, atthe <
pees e Lode thzeateneth death banto Matuchoponolo;
PT LELE


gas
s2


Pre see cpeagapntt thelande of Jfrael, fap
tötbe lande of Flracl: Chustapeth the Lorde:
Webolde,F topll bpon the, and wpllBzawe mp
[wearde out of the Meath. rote out of the both
thetpabteous andthe wycked.Sepngthétbat
¥ wl rote out of the boththe rypghteous g wpe
ked, therfoze thallmp fwearde qo oute of bps
theath agapnft all fletbe fromthe Mozthtothe
South:that al lepe map knowe bow that Jp
Lode haue daten mp Ciocarde out of f brath
and it (hall not be putinagapne. 8
HPourne therfore (D thou fon of man that
thy lopnescracke wpthal, peamourne bptterlyp
fo: them in ther? Smii And pf thep faye:
Wwherfoze mournet thous Then tell tHem:foz p
tyopnges that cometh, attbe whpche al bertes
pall melte, all bandes (halve letten done, all
tomackes Wall fapnte,and all knees Wal ware
feble.weboldec,it conumeth and thalbe fulfpllea
fapetb the Lorde God. — a
Aqapne, the amer of the Lozde came onto
me, fapenge: Chou fonne of man, prophecp,and
{peake. Chuslapth p Lorde God-fpeake. Che
fwearde,thelweardeis Dora and wel fcon
red. Sharpened is it foz the flauqhter, andfcou
red thatit mape be bapght. Sbal we then make
dad Agapnit thextrpbe of mp Tonne it ig
gone fo2th deltropeng altrees. be hath put bps
wearde to the Dpahtpnge, that good hold map
betaken oF it. Chis lweardeis tharpened and
Dpabte,thattt mape Caden tote the bande of
the manflaper.€rpe,(O thou fonne of man and


- poule.foz thps wearde fhal{mpte mp people,¢


altberulers in Jlrael, mp people thalbe feared
thorowe thigfwearde.mpte therfore P ypon
tby thpah, foz it ig cone foztbto makea trpall.

And What atrpal thal this be, wbheneuen mp
fcepter albe repzoueds Jt ipal not be fapththe
1020 God. Prophecp ë Conne of ma, andfinpte
thpne hades tometber:make the fweard two rtd-
ged, pca,make it three edged p maflapers fwerd
tbat weard of the qreat laughter, which Mall
fmpte thé,cuen inthep2 preup chabers:to make
them abatbed g faynt at the bertes, and inal ga
tes to make fome of théfal. ¥baue gpuen $ fear


d fullweard. D bow bz yah ¢ Harpe is ic, bowe


well Dpgbt and mete Foz the laughter: Get the
Come place alone, ether pon right bade 02 on
the lett, whither fo euer thp face turneth gwpl .-
impte mp bandes together alfo and fatilfpe mp
t2athful indignacion: Euen J the Lode bane
fapde it. Che wode of the Lozoecame pet Vito
ine agapne laipng: Chou fon of må, make p-ti,
Fretes,Ptbe fweard of p bpng of Babilon may

LL il. cone


lap Fa -


The Prophecye


come. woth thele tretes thal go out of one kpn-
geslade.And chole thea placeat f beade of the
(trete chole outa cozer. ake thea firete,that
€ the {wearde mape come towarde Kabath ofthe
Ammonites, and to the ftronge cptie of Ferula-
lem. Jo: the kypnge of Wabtion thal tande in
the turnpnae of the wape,at p peade of the two
Heu.tir€ ftretes: ktoatke countel at the fotbfapers, ca-
anora tynge thelottes with bisarowes,toalke coun
fellat the pdolle, and tolokeinthelpuer. Wut
the fotblapenge thal point to therpaht {pde vp
pon Jerufalem, that be mape fet men of warre
tofmpte it with a great nople,tocryeont alaru
to (et battelrames agapnit the gotes, to graue
pp dyches, and to make bulivozkes.
fe Rewe etbelefle , ag foe the fotblapenge, they
_Abatholde tt but fo: vanite. Andeltemethemas
thofe to whomethep pane often{togne: Rot-
foithitandpneae he (halvemember thep2 wpcked
niefir,fo that be rpabt thep muft be takë g wine
‘Tbherfore lapth the Lozde God. Fo? fomuchas
pe pour lelues ihe we pour offence, and baue ope
ned pour wpckedues, fo that inal pour wo2kes
menmap fe pour [pnites:therfoze are pe come to
remebzaunce,and pe (halbe taken bp violence.
D thou Mamefull wpcked quyde of Fracll,
poboledape iscome:cuenthe tpme that wpcked
tiefietbal baug anende. Thus lapeththe Lopbe
God: takeawape the qarlande, and putot the
crowne and fois it awape: the buble tseralted,
andthe pzoude bzougbt lowe. Bunpihe,punph
pea punpi them tpl F,and deftroperbem:and
that thal not be fulfullpd wutpl become,to who
=, the tudgemente belongeth , and to whome F
j bane geuenit. Bnd ci fonne of man) pro-
phecpe and (peake:thus fapt the Lozd God to
yere. riir-d the chplozen of * Ammon, and to thep2 blalphe=-
ERE mp, fpeake thou: The werde, the [werde isda
st- wen fo2ztbalreabp tothe laughter, andfcoured
roconlume,that it qlpftreth ( becaule thou hatte
lobed the out vanities, 4 pzopbecped Ipes \that
itimapecome Ypon rop oeae lpkeas vpon the
otber wngodlp, which be flapne whole dape cam
when thep2 wpckedneffe was ful.
éyhulde F put it bpagapner Rape Fpl pu
npibe the, inthe lade where thou watt nop wed
and bozne,and poure mpne indiqnacton bpon p
and tpl blowe pon the inp fpe of mp wath,
and Ddelpuer f nto cruel people, Dobpchare lear
nedto Deltrop. Thou Halt fede thefpecandth
-_ploude halbe thedde inthe lande, that P mape
be put out of remembzaunce.Cuen J the Lorde
bauelpokenie.


The.rxti. Chapter.

C The iwode of the Lozde agapntt Ferufalem fo; manfat
ghter, anù Benpinge bac benourc bntothep? Fathers ¢ moz
thers and ether wprbeanetice. OEthe wrecked doctrpne of
the falle prophetes and preetes, and of thep? bnfaria ble coz
coe ht ae ofrculers, She wpckeduelle of the
people. ;
Fag


Saa Dcoucr the word of the Lorde came
AWA hiontome and fapd: tbou fonne of man,
ABA 4 poplttbeunotrepzoue this bloud thur
= S==\(Ipecptier Shere them theyz abbomi-
hacpons,andteltbem: Chuslapth the Lozde
Gov: D thou Cptic, that eddelt bloudin the


mpovet ofthe that thp tpine map come alfo: €
make(tthe poolles todefplethe withal. Thou
paft made thp Celfe qpltpe, in the blonde p thor
hatte ed:and defpled the in thepdolies, which
thouhaftmade, Choubafkecauledthp dapes 25
to bzawwenpe,andmadethetpmeofthppercsto
come. Eberfore wpl F make thetobeconfoun:-
Dedamonge the Heathen, andto bedelppled in
althelandes.wbetber thep be npe oz farrefrom
the:thep wallaugb the to fcozne,thou that patt
gotten the fo foule a name, andarte ful of mpi-
chefe. Beholde f rulers of Flracl haue brought |
eucrp man bis potoer,to (hed bloude tn the.*« gn Dane, :
the baue thep delptiedfatherand motber,in the “PP”
paue thep oppzeffen the Mrañger-in p Daue thep
pered tye wpdowe,andthefathericile. Chou
hatte delpplep mp Syanctuarp, and Dnbalotocd
mp Sabborh.Auctherers are there tnthe,that
{hed bloude, anv cate pon the hplics,and inthe
thep vile abbomitacton. i |
x Ju the haue thep dpfcouered thep2 fathers
pame: inthe bane thep vercd toemen Mtep? gra. rete
fyckeneffe. Euerpman hath dealte Wamefullp
witb bisnepabbours wpfe,andabbominabdlp
dDefpled bis dougbterinlatwe. yn the bath eucrp
man forced bis otne Cpker enë bis fathers dou
ahter:pea xgpftes bauc bene recepued th the:£0 ven. proite
fhende bloude:+T hou halt taken wlurp anden: Fete
create, thou bate oppreffed thp nepgbbours bp
ertozcion, and fozgottenme fapeth the Lo2de
Eod. Webold, Jhauelmptten my bandes vpon
thy couctoulnelle, that thou batt bled.and vp-
on tbe bloude whych bath bene ped intbe. F
Jg tbp berte able to endure tt,oz map thp b: zp |
bes defende themfelues, inthe tyme that J thal
bzpnge vponther Euen J the Lozdthat (peake
it, wplbzpnae tt alfoto palle. + BJ wpl lcatter esec.rit. s
theamonae tbe Peathen,and rowe the about *-F?-*
inthe landeg , and wl caule thy fpitbpneffets
cealic outeof the. Pea,and thou alte be thpne
owne enberttaunce andnot myne in p fpghe of |
the Heathen, that thon mait knowe,that Jam
the Lozde.AndtbewodeoftheLozsecamedn `
to me, fapenge: Choutonne of man, #tbeboule erap e
‘of Jfraeltg turned to drolle. Al thep that thulde |
be Dzaffe, tpnne,pzon and lead carcin p fpze be-
come dolle. Cherfore,thus fapeh the L020 goo
Joz fo muche as peal are turned into drofe |
beholde: J wp! bapnge pou together nto Jeru |
falem,|pbeas tplucr,bzafe,pron,tpn,and lead |
are put togetber inthe formace, and the Fpze blo
wentbere pnder to melte them. Euenfo wpll F
gather pou, put rouintegetber, and melte pou
inmp tozathandindiguacion. Jrwplbepnge
ou Fab ot a the fpze of mp difplea=
ure whder pou, that poumapebe melted ther-
in. ©pkeastbelplucrismeltedinebe fpze, fo i
(hal pe alfo be melted therin, that pe map know
powe that J the Lorde haue potd mp wrath
pon pon ,andthe wozde of the Lorde came vn
tome, taping: Thou fon of man,tcllber. Chou
artan bucleaneland,whbich ts notrapned upon +
intbe dap of the crucl wzath: *thp prophetes Ë agiche.ttt.s
arcinthe,areltoozne together to beuour foules,
like ag a roarpng ipon, that lpucth bp dis A n 4


Ss =


Or Cseciyter.


Thep recepue richesand good, sud make many
wpddowesinthe. Chp meles beeake my lawe
and defple mp fanctuary. + Dep put no dpffe=
rence bef wene the dolp and wnbolp, neither dif-
cernethep betwene the clene and vncleane:thep
turue thep2 eyes from mp fabbothes, and Jam
pnbalowed among them. Thy rulers in the are
ipke rauplhpng wolues to ed bloude, and to
Aiii deftropefoules for thep2 ofonecouctous luchze.
Soph tii.» ¥ AS LOrehy pron etes they Danbe with vntem
fsecpiti.b peredclapethep fe vanities, and prophecp lpes
pntothé,laping:the Lode God fayth fo, where
asthe Lo2zde bath uot fpoken: The people tn the
land bfeth wicked ertoztion androbbzy. Thep
berethepozeandnedp and* oppeeiic the frat:
geragapnlt rpgbt. And q fought inthe land fo?
aman, that wolde make ppthebedge, and fet
bimfelfein ý gap befoze me inp Landes bebalfe
that tt (hulde not becorrupted:but Z could fprd
‘none. Gbertoze wpll 3 poure out my cruell dif-
plealure bpon themt,and burne them inthefire
of mp weath:thep2 owne wapes wyll Frecom=
pence bpon thepe beedes, fapth the Lo20e Goo.
~ C Tbe.rritt. Chapter. |
Cdl the fognicacpoi,thatis Co tape of che poolatrpeok Samas
rpa and grrufalem, puberth: names of holab and obalr:
bab. 7n comrarplonof Samarra be fheweth that the feznp
cacpon of Jerutalemis (be fplehper. She deftructionof e:
cutalem is prophecprd. The aducutep of both the whozesis
founde ont. Thep: beiruction.,
a= e wode of the Lorde came nto me lap
2 S ing: @bou fonne of man, there were two
thep wereponge ) begantoplapethebatlottes


Lenit.te


EFO.FF. A


¥ eneepr a Kin Egypt. Chere were thep2 bekes bufen, ¢


thepappesofthep2 mapdenbeed dpd the Cay: .


ptiansdeltrope. Theeldeltofthem wascalled

Dholab, eber pongett fpker Dbolibah. Thee

two were mp wpues,and barefounes¢ dough

ters. Thepr names were Samaria, and that

was Ohbolab:and Jerufalem that wag Dpoli-

bah. Js for Obolah the beqanto goa whoring
tiure pod when Fbadtakenhertome. *Hbe teas tet on
fp2e bpon ber lonersthe Affivians as ber nepah
bours whtch bad todo with her, euch the prpn-
cesandlozdesthat there dectincoftlp arap,tayp2
potge men, luff pe rpders of Portes.

Thus thozotve her whozdome, the cleued dite
toalthepong men of A Nliria. Pea, fhe was mad
bpontbhem , and defpled ber felfe with all thep2
pools, Acither ceafled the from the foznicacpon
that tbe vied w the Eq pptians:fo; tn ber pouth
theplap with ber, thep bzofed the bzettes of ber
mapdenbeed , and poured thep2 WhoDom dpo
cid.reroge Her. berfoze x FJ delpuered perinto the hades

of berlouers : euen p alliriang whé the fo loued.
@ dele difcouered ber hame, toke her fones and
bougpiers e flu ber w thefyoerd: Jn cupl name
cat fhe of all ber people, andthep punpiped ber.
* per {pier Dpolibah fawe this ; and de=
Feretd Eropedber felfe with tnogdinate loue, moze tha
Ka.re.xbt DOAN erceded ber {pfterin wpozdome xpe lo:
menie Ucdthe Aflirians ( which alfolave with her )na-
melpe the princes, and qreate lozdcs, that were
clothed with all maner of gozgioug apparcilat

Luty boelemenand fapze ponge perfons.
€ Chen slawe,that thep both were detpledae


25


iwomen thathad onemotber:thele (whe:


WILED.

Ipke. Hut theencrealcd fkpll in whozdome foz.

oben he fawe men papnted vpontie wall, the

pinages of the Chalbdees fet fozth with fret co-

lours, with fapze qyzdles about them,¢ goodly:

bonettes i thepz beedes, lobpng alllpie prim

ces( afterthe maner of the Dabplonpans , anv

Chaldees tn they? owne lande there they were:

boznc)immediatlp, as foone as the fate them,

the beent inloue Ypi them, andfentmeflengers |

for themintothe lande of the Chaldees.
Howe when the Wabplontans came tober;

tbep lape with ber , and defpled ber with thepz

whozdome,andfo was the polluted with thent.

And when Herlutt was abated from themper

tphozdome and pame was difcouered and lene: irs ce >

then mp bert fozfoke ber,lpke as imp berte wag Ezero.

cone from ber iffer allo. Menertheletie, he vied

ber iobozdome euerthe longer the moze,and re-

membzed the dapes of her pouth,wberin the pad

plapedthe harlote inthe landeof Egypte: x the csee.roie

Dentin lufte tpon tbem , whofe fleth was lyke

the ficth of Aies andtbhep2leed lpke the fecd of

boles. Chus thou haf renued the fplthynes of

thppouth, when thp louersbauled thy pappes,

and marred thy bzealteg in Eg ype.

Therfoze D Dholtbabh thus tapth the Lozd
@od:3 wrllrapfe Vp thp loners ( with whome wm
thou bal fatiffped thy lu agapnit the, and ga
therthemtogptberrounbde aboutthe:namelpe,
the Sabplonians, and all the Chaldces, rulers,
mypabtie men and tprauntes, withalltbe A ffiri
ang:all ponge and fap2e louersprincesand lor:
des, knpabtes ¢ gentle men, tobiche be all good
hozfemen, Thele thallcome vpon the with boz=
Ces, charettes, anda great multitude of people:
which Halbe harnefled about the oneucep ipoe:
with baeftplates, fhpldesand belmettes: 3 wpl
punpip the befoze thé:pea,thep them felues thal
puntithe theaccozding totdep2 owne tudgemet
4 wpl put mp gelouflp wpb the, fo that they thal
dealectuellp with the. Thep thalcut of thy note
and thyue cares, andthe remnaunt thal fal tho,
rowe § fwerd. Thep thalcarp amap thy fonnes
aud doughters, € the refldue halve bent in the
fp2e. Chev thal Fepp the out of thy clothes and
carp thp cofflpiewels awap witb ther. e

bus topl J make anende of thy fplehpueile €

and whozdome, which thou balk bzoughé out of
thelande of Egypte: fo that thon thalte tourne
thyne epes nomoze after théand cat thy minve
nomoze bpon Egypt. Fo: thus lapth p Lozde:
beholde, 3 wyldelpuer the into the handes of
tbem, whom thou batct:pea,eucn into the pans
des oftbem with whom thou balk fulfplled thp
lut which thal deale crucllp With the:

All typ labour thalthep take bith them, and
{eaue the naked and bare,and thus the bame of
tby fplebp wbozdome {hallcometolpghte. AU
thefe thypnaes Hall ia pntotbhe bycaufe of
thp tehozdome which thon bak vie amonge F
Gentiles, bith whole poolles thou halt oettted


thy elie. Chouhatt walked inthe wape of thy

fitter, therfore wyl Fgpue her cup fu thy dand.
Thus fapeththe Lorde God: Thou Malte

dinke of thy tibers cuppe, vow, bepeand farre


L-0. forner


The Prop


foeuer it beto p botome. Chou Walt be laughed


to {cozne, and bad as greatipetin Derifion,asis ER


poftible. Thou palt be ful of peonkenneffe and
fo2otve, fo? the cuppe of tbp piter Samaria is
a cuppe of deftruction and waftpnge: the fame
halt thou depnke, and (uppe it out euen tothe
Deeqaes: pea thou (halt cat vp the beoké peces
of it,and{oteare thpneowne breites. soz euen
J baue fpokentt,fapth the Lozde © oo.
‘Tberfore thus fapethtbe Lode God. o:
Comocheagthoubattorgotten me and cat me
afpve bebpnde the, fo beare noto thyne owne fil
thineffeand whozdome. The Lozde apd moze:
puer Dnto me: Chou Con of man, wple thaw not
reproue Dbolaband Dholthabs sphere them
thep2 abbominactisnamelp that they paue bzo
Ken thepz wedlocke, and ftapned thep? handes
with blonde:pea, cuen with thep2 poolles paue
epcommpttedaduoutrp x and offred them bp


l t


Ezec rtie


whom thep bad boznewnto me. Pea, this paue
thep Done ùnto me alfo:thep Dauc de filedmyp fa
tuary in the fameDday,and baue pndalowea mp
Sabboth. soz when they had fiapne thetr chil:
Dzen Foz thepz pdolles,they came thefamedaye
into mp fanctuary to defpleit.

Lo,thushbaue they done in mp boufe: wefpde
allthis, thou baft fente thy meflengersfozmen
out offatre colitries: and eben they came thou
palt bathed ¢ papnted thyne epes toith colours
trpmmed and fet fozth thy felfe of the bef fal-
fion:thou fattet vponagoodlpbedand atable
(ped befoze the, whervpon thou paft fet myne


erorte xinfenceandimpne ople.


Then toas there greatecheare toith her to
obtayne peace, and though with thofe men ma-
np men came, pet were ther alfo brought më of
Saba from the wilderneffe:ohich gane thé bza
celettes pon thep2 bandes: andfette glozpous
trownes vpon thepzbeedes: and F fapte wnto
ber:> eing the was ferpkenin age inber who-
domes: nowe (hall bet fozntcacpons come toan
ende with ber. And they went into ber as Ynto
acomen barlot.€ué lo went thep( J lap)to D-
Holaband Dbolibab thofe fylthy women. Dal


toured pep lone bertue andryabtoutnetic,tudge them,


cst. poio PUMPED) them:*as aduoutrers andmurtherers,


ought to be iudged and punpihcd, Fo? thep are
beakers of toedlocke, andthe bloudis tu thep2
handes.diberfoze thus fapth the Low God: J
wll bpnge a greate multitude of people bpon
them « make them be fcatred and {popled:thefle
(hal fone them, and qozerbem with thepz iwer
des. Thep (hal flap their fonnes and dougdters
and burne vp thepz Doufes with Epze.

~ Tbus wpl 3 deltrop all fuche Eplthinefle out
ofthe lande:that all women map learne,not to
do after ponr pnclenneffe.
 Andlothep thalllape thep2 fplthineie bpon

our owne felues,and pe halbe punthed for the

pines that pe baue comittedD with pour pdols,
and petpall knotve that Jam the 10e od.

í E The.rriiii Chapter.
q Se prowcth the tprpnge of Ferufalem bp a parable of g


frthpug pot. Bheparable of esech ele wpte being bee
-. twhpeh be aftererpoundeth, Exe Dates bree


asr A the nputhpere, inthe téth moneth 4
3 ee the tenth dape ofthe moneth rame

Ak Fawon of the Lozde vnto me, laying:
Ub) Ela D thoufonne of man, wepte vp tbe


at name of this dap:pea,enen the boure
of this pzefent Dap, when the kpng of Babilon
fet hun felfeagapnt Jerulalé. Shewe that ob-
ftinat houdold xa parable and (peake Dnto thé esec.rvit.a
Thus fapth the Lorde God: Get the ax pot, let esecd.rin
it on,and potoer water into tt:-put all the peces
forptbherin it all theqood peces: the lopneand
the fhuldze,and fplit withthe belt bones. Cake
one of p bet pepe , andan beape of bones with
all-let it bople well; and let the bones feeth well |
therin. With that fayde the Lorde Gov on this oan i.e
maner. xlo be wnto the bloudpcptie of P pot, Abar.itb
where bpon the ruftinefle bangeth, ¢isnotpet 25
fcoured awap. Cake out the peces that are tn tt
one after an other: there neade no lottes becafte
therfoze,foz the blondis pet init. Cipé a plapne
dave tone path (he pouredit , andnot vpontbhe
grounde thatit mpght be conercd with dute.
And therfore baue 3 letten her poure her bloude
vpona plapne deve Mony rocke, bicaute tt pula
not be hpd,and that 3 myght being mp weatb-
ful indignacton and vetigeaunce vpon per.
rberfo2ze thus faprb the Lorde God: D wo
be Dnto that bloudtbhpzttie citic, fo? whom euen
Fmplel€e wpllmakea great fpze and fet moche -
wood, andkyndlethe fpze,andleeththefich, gE .
fppce the pot, fop the berp bones Halbe brent.
<Pozeoucr , J wylet the pot emptpe bpon the
coles, lo that pis metall Halbe bent, andmol-
tenalfo foz beate, andthe filthinefle of it Halbe
molten init and the dzofle of it (halbe columed.
Thou taket great payne this to def ple thy felt
And it wll not be pourge fromtbe ercedpnge
dofie in it:but thozowe fpze thall tbe drone otit
be purifped. Fu thp filebinefle euenin the mtiche D
uous dedes thou dof contpnue, and bicanle thp
filthineffe is abbominable,foz J baue cléfed the
but thou artnotclented. Chou thalt not be puc
ged from thpne bnelëne Me til Z baue poured mp
wzathful indignacion bpi the. Euen Jp Lord
paue fo Deupled. Pea, itis come thertoalreadpe
that J wll doit: 3 wpllnot goobacke,Jwyll -
not (pare, 3 toil not be entreated:butaccoding —
tothp hayes and pmaginactons thou thalt be
punpfthed:fapth the Lorde God. And the word
of the Lozdcame tntto me,faping: Chou fonne E
of man bebolde, J plitake awap the pleafure
ofthpne epes witb aplage:pet (halte thou nep=
ther mourne noz wepe, noz water thy chckes:
therfoze thou mapet mourne by thp felfe alone
but bieno deedlp lamentacion. Hold on thp bo-
net,and put ontbp thoes Vp thp feet, couer not
thp face,¢ cate no mourners breed. So 3 pake
wuto the people bptpmes inthe mprnpnge, and JE
atenentnp wpfedped:then bponthenertemo-
rowr, J did as J was cOmaunded, and f people
fapde Dnto me, wplt thou not tell vs what this
fiqnifieth totvard bs, foz this thou vof Foz our
fake. ¥ anlwered them, the worde of the Lorde
came nto me, faping: Cell the boule ot Jfrael,
thus fapth the Lode Good: beholve,¥ wpll fale.
| pende


es


Ot CsecHiel.


fpende mp Sanctuarpe, cuen the qlozp of pour
power,tbe plealure of pourepes, and thethpug
that pe loue:pour fonnesanddoughters whom
pebaue lefte thal fall thozowe the fwerde.
Lplic as 3 baue done, fo hall pedo alfo: Pe
© (hall not bpde pour faces, pe hall eat no mour-
ners b2eed: poure bonnettes (hall pe baue ppon
pourbeedes,and hoes bponpourfeet. Ve iball
neither mourne noz wepe, butin pour {pnnes pe
fhalbe fozowfull, and one repent withan other.
Thus Esechicl ts pour (yewetoke. fFozlpke as
pe Daur done lo hen tits cimeth) ype Haldo al
fo:that pe mape leane to knowe that Jam the

Lo2de God. ut beholde, D tbou tonne ofman

Jn tbe dap wht Ftakefrom them their power,

tbeir tope and ponour, thelutt of thepz cpces, the

burthcn of therlpucs:namelp thep2 onnes and

Douqhters, (hal not this be bnawn: Chen thal

there one cicape, and come onto the fortowmerwe

the. Jn that dape thallthp mouthe be opened to

bim webichis elcaped,that thou mapi (peake,¢

be nomoze dom. Pea and y halt be thep2 fhetoe=

token Pthep map inowe bow p Fam the Lord.
| — C The rrv.Chpter.

C Phe wojzde of Che Loz de bpon the tonnes of Ammon, which
reioptrd at the Fallot Ferulalem. Agapnl cg oad and Sep}.
agapat JDumea,agapnitig: Pbilitpnes.

‘rere a Ie word of the Lozd cate bnto me
RAS meres faving: Thou fonse of man, fetthp
ea a faceagapnitte P xAmmonites,p20-

FD) caso pbecp wp them , and {ape vate the
poe See smmonptes:beare the wozd ofthe


Lorde God. Thus lacpth the Lode God: for ae


fomoche os thoulpeakett oute mp fanctuarye.
Aba, J trowe it benow fufpended - and cuer p
lande of giracl: F trowe it be now defolate:yea,
and ouct the boufe of Juda, Jtrow fhep be now
led atwap prifoners:2Sehold, J wpl delpuct the
to the pcovle of the cat, that thbep map dane the
in pofictlid:thele Hall fet thep2 caftels and hou-
{es inthe. Thep hall cate thy frute,and dDpnie
tptbp mylke. As fo: Rabath, J wpll make of
it a tall fo? camels and of Ammon a Hepefolve

andpetballknowe that Jamtbe Lorde.
13 kor thus faptb the Lo2de God: Fn fomoche
astbou pafte clapped with thpne bandes, and
{taped with thy feet: pea, retopfed in thpne bert
ouer the lande of Blrael with defpitc:bebolde, q
wpl fEretcbe oute mpne bande ouer the allo, ano
Delpucrthe,to be (popled ofthe Heptbhen, rote
the out from among the people, and caule theta
be dettroped out of alllandes:pea, J wpll make
the tobe lapd waf, that thou mapli know that

Jam the Lode. | Eee

Thuslapththe Lorde God: fozfomoche as
eco.rb.rb! x )oab and Seir do fape: Asfor the boufe of

Sopye.4.b Auda, itis but phe asall other Gentples be.
Sherfoze beholde, Jwpll open tie pie af Wo-
ab,andtakeawap thep2 ftrength thepzcpttes,
andchefe cooftes ofthep: lande, wobiche are the
pleafures of thp countrpe. Asnamelp, Wethte-
imoth, Saalmon, and Cartathbaim, thele wylt
Jopin vutothem of the calf, that thep map fall
bponthe Ammonites , and wpllgpue themin
offeflion, fo that the Ammonites thall nomoze
be padinremembeaunce amonge the Pepthen,


i


Cuen thus wpll Ypunpip Poabh alo that hep
mape Kuowe bow chat Jamtbe Lorde.

Wozeouer thus fapth the Lozde God. Bp- e
cautethat* Edom hathauengedandealed hpi eca.cectigie
elfe bpon the boufe of Juda, bath donegreat get ig
offence , and auenged bim felfe vpon themtber- Sen
fore thus fapththe Lorde: J wpllreacheout mp
bande vpon Edom : andtakeatwape man and
bealt out of it. From Theman vuto Deda wyl
A make tt Defolate: thep balbe flapne with the.
{ioerde* thozowe mp people of Fitacl wll Ja- isga. b.s
uengeme agapne Dpon Edom, thep thal handle
bpm sccozdpng tomp wath andindiqnacts, fo
that they pall knowe mp vengeaunce fapth the
are ier D m sail

| us lapththe Lorde God:sEorfomoche ag erite.
the Dbiltitines baue done this:namelpe taken Soppata -
vengeaunce with delpitefull Lomackes,and of
an olde ceupil wpll fet them (clucs to deftrope,
therfoze thus fapeth the Lorde God: Weboloe,
J whl Lretche out mpne bande onerthe hiliki
neg, and dDeftrope the deltroper, andDcaule althe
reninaunt of the fee cooft to perih. A great ben-
geaunce wyll F take bponthem, andpunplibe
theimcruellp:that they mape knowe bow that J
ain the Lozde wbich baue aucnged ime of them.
The.rcvi.chapter:
© He propbecpeth that Tpins Halbe ouerthzetwen bps
catile it ret opted at the vettraction of Ferulalem: The ws
Dipnge and aftenupiment of the marchauntes fo; the de-
fr uctionof Epris.

cava T Dappencd, that inthe eleuenthpere, ¥
ppeaithe fpi vape of the monet, the wode
rea Aof the Lo2zde came onto me , fapinge:

S STA Thou fonne of man,bpcaule xP pre Erria


bath {poken bpon Ferulalé.¥ ba,not Ftrowe žerou


commeth to thy poztes, ag men Dointoan shel
CPriee


~The Pronbhercye


cptie. Uith the bones ofbis bole fete thall be

_ teeade Downe all thy tretes.
€ Pethall flap the people with the fwerde, and
beake Downe the ppllers of thy frenath.Cbep
bal waft awap thy eyches,audfpople thp mar
chaidple. Thy twalles pall thep becake Downe
and deftroy thy boufes of pleature. Thy Tones
thp timbee ¢foidactons thal tbep caft in p wa-
ter. x Thus wpl Jvzpnag the melody of thp fö-
ges andthe vopce of thy mpnftrelfpe to anende
fo that they thall nomoge be berde. 3 wryllmake
abare tone of rhe:pea,a deping place fog nettes
 anotbou thaltencuce be buploedagapne: fo?
cuen 3 the Lod baue {pokenit,fapth the Lorde
(od:thus hath the Lozd God fpoken cocerning
Tpre. The ples Halbe mouedat f nople of thy
fall,€ atthe cepe of thp flapne tbat Halbe mur=
theredinthe. Allkpnges ofthe fee hallcome
Downe from thep2 featesregal:thep thal lap a-
wape thep2roobes, andput of thep2cottlp clo-
thpng.Pea,with trembling thal thep be clothed
they thal (pt vpon tbe grounde : thep Wall be a=
frayed at thp fodapne fal, and be abaliped at F.
D They tall mourte foz the, and fape wntothe:
Theno-ta xD thou noblecptie, that bat bene fo greatlpe
1PFUGEE’ cecunpedof olde, thoutbat bat bene p ftrongelt
bpon the fee with thyne inbabptours, of whom
alimen ftodeinfeare. Ioweartetbounowe fo
beterlp defkroped: Nowe at the tyme of thp fall
the inbabitours of the ples: pea and the ples thé
felues pall fandein feare at the ende. Eo? thus
fapeth the Lozde Gon: when J make the a defo-
late cptte(as other cpties be, that no man dwell
in)and when 4 bapnaethe deape Dpon the, that
great waters mape couer the. Then wpl J cait
thedowne pntothem that defcende into theppt


Fert. bib


Dito a people that bath bene longe decd, and fee


the in alande that is beneth, lyke the olde wpl-
pernefie , withthem whiche qo bowne tothey2
graues, fo that noman thallowell moze inthe.
And J wpll make the tobe nomoze in honoure,
inthe lande of the lpuyng. J wp! make an end of
the,and thou halte be gone. Cbhougde thou be
fought Foz, pet balt thou not be found Fog cuer
moze:fapth tbe Lozde God.
@ The.revti.Chapter.
CTbe prophet te moved to bewaple the defolation of Zp2us
Bc leiteth out the pzaple of Dpzus toz the bauatpng ofmar
Syauntes Chereta.


masa ie wordofthe Lozd came ynto me
faping: D thou fon of man, makea
lamentable coplapnt Dpon * pre
andfape bpd  pze:thou which art
pia a port of the fee, that accupicll wrth
moche people.and manp ples:thus fpeaketh the
Lo2ve Gov, D Tpze thou hatte fapde: what 7
ama noble citie,tbp bozders arc in the mpddeft
of # {ce,and thy buploers Hane made the marue-
lous qoodlpe. Ali thy tables baue thep made of
Cpp trees of P mout Sanpz. From Libanus
haue they taken Cedze trees, to make p maltes,
and the okes of Balan to make the rowers.

% Thy bordeshaucthep made of pucry,and of
coftly wood out of ppleofcethpm. Thy taple
wasg ofdpucrs colours, {mall nedle wozke oute
ofthe lande of Eqppttobange vpon thp mafe


icc. tela}
Frbiti,


and thp bang pnges of pclotve fylke, purple, out
ofthe ples of €lilah. Thep of Spdonand Ar-
nard were thp marpnecs, and p wpet in Cpe
were thy hipmatters. Che eldcK and wpleft at
Gebal were thep that amended and Lopped thy
fpppes. All hpppes of the fee with they: thy:

men occupped theps marchaundpie in the. ee
pPerles, Lidians ¥ Pbutens wercinthpncebhott,
and belpedthetofpabe , thele banged bp thepz
nie pi belmettes withthe, tbere let tortb

‘bp beautpe.

Thep of Arnad were with thpne hoof roude
aboutetbp walleg : and the pameniang were €
thy watchemen vpon thp towers, there banged
bp thepzqupucrsrounde about the walles,and
madep matuelous goodly. Charlis occupted w
the tn all maner of wares, in {plucr, pron, tpnne
and leade and made thp market greate. Jauan
Tubal, Wefech were thp marchaiites, which
brought the men and ognamentes of metall foz
thy occuppig. They of the boule of Thogarma
brought unto the at p tpme of thy marte,bozfe,
hozfinen and mules. Thep of Dedan were thp Eer.:
marchañtes:and manp otber plestbat occupied
withthe, beoughe the wetbers,clephant bones,
and jecockes Foza pecicnt. Che Sirians occu-
pped w tbe bycaute of thp dpuers wozkes , and
increaled thy marchaundple, with Smaragdes
witb fcarlet, with nedle wozke, with wbhyte ip-
nencloth, with (plke,and with chzpitall.

Juda and the lande of Ffrael occupped with m
the, andbzougbt vnto tby markettes topeat of
MHinith, and Paneg, ra ee Gel! a
acle: Damatcusalfo bied marchaundple with
the inthe bet wpne of Helbon,and with wol bp
caufe thy occupping wasfo qreate, etbp wares
fomany. Dan, Jauan, g Wefal, baue brought
pitothy markettes,pronredp made, with Caf-
fia and Calamus, according to thpne occuptic, e
Dedan occupped w the infapze tapettrp wo?
and culfppns. Arabia andall the princes of Ce
dar bauc occupped with the , inthepe, werherg,
and gootes.

Themarchauntes of Seba and Rema baue œ
occupped alfo with the, inallcollp (ppees,in all
pecvous Cones and golde, which they broughe
wnto thy markettes. Haram Chene,and Eden,
the marchauntes of Saba, Affirta, eChelmad
Were all dores with the,and occupped witd the-
Fu coftlpe rapmente of pelowe ple , and nedle
fozke ( verpe peecpous, and therfo2e pacteand
paunde toaptber with ropes.) Dea, andincedze
wood,at the tyme of thp markettes. The bpp-
pes of Tharlis were the chefe of thp occupping.

Thus thou art ful, andingreat wozpppe,
enenin the mypodett of tbe fee. Cbp robbers thal +
bzpnge the into greate waters, the eat topnde
{yall ouerbeare theintbe mpddefke of the Cee, fo
that thp wares,thymarchaundpie, thp rychefir,
thy mariners, thy hppmatters,tby builders of
tby bzoken places, thy occupyers ( that brought
thethynges neceflarpe ) the men of War that are
inthe andal the cimens thal perp in the mpd-
Deft of the fev, inthe dape of thp Fall: The fubuc-
bes thal (hake at the loudecepe of the Hppm Lan


e og a S a y
=


of Esechtel.


Al wobery men, and all marpners vponthe fer,
{hall leape out ofthbepz botes, and fet thé felnes
bpon tHe lande. Thep Malllpft vp thep2 vopce
bypcaule of thee make alamentablecrpe. Thep
hall catt Dutt bpon thepz bedes, and ipe done
intbe ales. Thep Mall Haue them Celucs,and
put fakcloth bpon them foz thp fate.

Thep tall mourie Foz the with hertfull fo-
cowe and heup lamentation:pea, they alfotbal
wepeforthe. Alas, whatcptie hath {o bene de-
froyedtn thelee,as Cpzciss benthp wares
and marchaundplecame from tye fers: thou gaz
uct all people pnough, Chekpnges of f earth
batt p maderpche,thozowe the multitude oftbp
Wares g occupping. But p art now cat dotwne
into the deepe of tye fee, alltbprefozte of people

ts perpiibed with the. Alithep that dwelinthe

plesate abatthedat the,and al thzp2 bpnaes are

atrapcd: pea thep2 faces baucchaunged colour.

Che marchatites of thenacions wond2c at the

3n that thou arte fo cleane brought to noughte
audcommett nomoze vp.
© The. re vite. Chapter.

Tbe words of Gov agapntt the kpnac of Tpras , fez bps

prPde.Danicithe propheteis mourd to bewaple the kpnae

of SPus. Zhe moze of the Lozbeagapnf Spoon. The


Lorde promprech that be tpl, cather togprber the chp:
denot gira, pil gather togprher che chp


x ats Reo a Pe woh of the Lo2d came bntome
creeert HAN oi faptnge:tbou fonne of man,tell tbe
Fro. EASE There prpnice ofx Cpec. Thus Capeth the


OSAA L020 God: bpeaule P bata poude
ee berte and bat fapde:* Jama God
Jbpauemp feateintbe mpddeltol the fee lykea
god, wher as thouart but aman ¢ not god, and
pet ftanett in thpne otone cocepte, that tbou art
god: ebold,thou thpnbelk thp felfe wyler tha
«Daniel, that ther is nofecretesbpd fromthe.

ith thp wyldome and thp wnderftandpng
thou bait gotten the great welthpnefic, and ga-
thevedtrealure of {pluce and golde. Withthy
great MplDome and occupying hal thouincrea
fed thp power, and bpcaute of thp areat rpchefle
thpne berte ts pronde, set
»  herfoze thus pth the Lorde Gon: fFarfo
1 mochag thou bat Ipft vp thpne bertasthough
thou were God, bepolde, J wplbzpnee enemes
põ the, cuen f tprauntes of the spepthen: thefe
thal dpa we out they: fwerdes vpon thy beauty
and topfoome,and pall def ple thp glorp. Thep
alcak the bowwne tothe pyt,fo that thou Malt
dpe in the mypdodelk of the fee,asthep Pp be lapne.
Let fe, pf thou writ faye then before them that
flape the) Jam God, wher as parte buta man
and not God,tn the bandes of them that dep the
wpe Halte thou, eucnasthe pnciccumeypfed in
tbe bandes of the ennempes foz J my felfe bane
fpoken it, fapth th e Lozde God.
<Pozeouce the wode of the Lozdecame vn
© tome, faping: Chou fonne of man,makealamé
table complapnt ouce the kyng of Tpzre and tel
bpm: Chuslapeththe Lode God: thouartea
Crale of alphenefie, ful of wopiome andercellét
beautpe: Chou Halk beninthe plealaunt garde
of Gon: thou art decte with all maner of precpa
ous fones: with Rubp, Topas, Chaittall, Ja-


aS


DantdiD


Wollicevit.
cynt, Dnir, Japis, Saphir, Smarande, Care:
buncleand gold. Che beauty and the holesp be
inthe were fet fozth in the dave of typ creation.
Thou arta fapze Cherub,eralted by the annopn
ting, fEretched topde out foz to couer. Fane let
the inthis dignitic pon the bolp mount of god
there baft thou ben, g walkedDamon ge the fapze
qlpfirpng tones. From thetpme of thpercatta
thou daft benrpgbeercellent, tpll wpckednefie
thas founde in the. 2Spcaule of thp great mar D
chaundpfe,thpne bert is ful of wickedne ffe and <fr.ti.b
thou haf offended; Cherfore wyll F catt the fed
the mount of God (D thou coucrpnge Cherub)
and deftrope the amouge the glpftrpnae tones.
‘Thy dert was proudetn thy fapre he t and
thozot thy beautp thou batt deitroped thy wpf
Dome: J wyl call the Downe tothe grounder, and
that inthe fpabt ofkynges. Chon batt defylea
thy fanctuary with the great woickednelfe oftpp
prtpgbteous occupyinge. ¥ wpll bepnae a fpre
from the mpodett of the,to confume the:and wyll
make the toatthes, inthe fpabt ofall them that
loke bponthe. AU thep tbat bane bene acquapn
ted with the among the depthen Halbe abated
at the, feinge p art focleane bzought to nought,
andcominett nomoze pp. |

And the wogde of the Lozdecame vneome, I
faping: Thou fone of man, fet thy face agayntt
&pdon:xPophecp buto tt, and {peake. Thug
fapeth the Lode God: Webolde, D Hydon, ¥
wyl Dpon the,and get ine honour inte: that it
map be knowen, bowe p Jam the Lorde: when
3 punpfthe her, and get me honour tuber. Æo: F
wl ende pefilence and bloudihedding intober
reteg , fothat thole tobiche be hapne with tbe
fwerd thallpe rounde aboute inthe mpdoett of
Her: andthep thall knotbe that Jam the Lopde.
Sbe thallnomoze bea pppchpna thozue,and an
hurtpne bzper buto the poule of Firael, noz vn-
to them thatipe roundeabout per and hate per,
and thep hall knowe, tbat Jam the Lorde.

Thus faptb the Lode God: when Faather
the boutboloe of Jfraecltogyther axapne from
thenacions amonge whom thep be lcatred, tha
hall J be fanctifpedinthem in thelpahe of the
Gentples, and thep Hal dwell inthe lande, that
J qaucto mp (eruaunt Jacob. Thep thal dwell
fafelp therin, buplde bouteg, and plant ypnepar
pes:pea,fafelp*Mhallehep diwel therin: when F neu. rviti.¢
baue punpihed althofethat delppfe them rode etar.trv.0
aboutc:and then hall they knowe , that J am
the Lozgdethep2 God.


goil i.s
sarh.ipia


3


|
|
|


The Pzophecye


of Egypte, J wyll upon the thou great agon
that lpett in the waters:thou that lapelt:the wa
teris mpne,¥ baue made tt my felfe. J wpll put
anbokeintbpchawes,andbange all the tp in
thp waters vponthp (cales: after that , J wyll
Dawe the out of thy waters:pea,and al p fpe
of tbp waters that bange vpotby fcales. J topl
cat theout of the Deve lande, withthe ple of
thy waters, fo that thou Walt lye wp the felde.
Shou Malte not be gathered no? taken bp: but


y5 fhalt be meate foz the beaftes of the felve, gfo?


the foules of the apze, that all thep wbich dwell
in Eqppt mape knowe:that Jam the Lozv:bp-
caute thou bat bena xftaffe of reed tothe boufe


ift,txegum of Ffrael: Whe thep toke hold of the with thep?


Foilt.b


ef. TErTEF


, bandtbou brake and peychedt them on cuctp


sraba {pde:and pfebep leaned vponthe,thou bzakelt g


DurtedefE the rapnes of thep2 backes. Cherfore
thus fapth the Lorde God:bebold, J wpl bepng
afwerde bpontbhe,and rote out ofthe both man
and beat: Pea, the landeof Egypt Wall be delo-
late,and watte,and thep thal snotve, that Jam
the Lorde. Hycanle De lapd:the waterig mpne:
J mp felfe baue made it. Sebold therfoze, ¥ wpl
pponthe,and vpi thp waters: 4 wyll make the
lande of Eqppt walte and defolateandinabath
ment, from the towze of Sppenes vuto the boz-
ders of the orians lande: fo that infourtp pe-
resthere thall no foote of nan walke there, ney=
ther foote of catel qothere, nepeber thallit bein
babpted.¥ wpll make the lande of Eq ppt to be
Defolate among other walke countrpes and ber
cpties tolpe D aae fourtpe peres amonge other
pophde cptics: And F wpl fratre the Egyptians
among the Depthen and naciong, andttrowe
them in thelandes about.


¢ Agapne:thuslapeth the Lorde Godxwhen


Fer. rivier Che.xl.pearesare erppzed, J wpl gather the E-


gyptians togpther agapne,out of the nacpons,
among whom tbep were {catred, ¢ tpl bapnge
the pzifoners of Egppie agapne into the lande
of Pathuces thepz ownenatpuecountrye, that
thep map be there a lowly {mall kpngoome:pea
thep Halbe the fnalleft amonge other bpngodo-
mes, left they exalt them (clues aboue the Hep-
then: foz J wyll fo mpnypth them that thep Hall
nomoze rule the Hepthbev. Thep Hall nomoze ve
anbope vnto the houte of Flrael, nepther pro-
noke them anpe mozeto wpckedueiie, to caule
them turne backe,and to folowe them: andthep
(hall hnowe, that Jamthe Lorde God: )
Anthe.rxvit.pece,the fp2tt dape of the fp2ite


D monethcame the worde of the Lo2de bntome,


faping: Thou fonne of man, Mabuchodono302
the kpng of Wabplon hath made his holt, with
great trauapleandlabout tocome befoze Cpe
thateucrp heed mape be balde, teucry Houlder
bare. Pet hath Ty2e qpucn nepther bim no: bis
booft any rewarde, foz p great trauaple that be
bath taken there. Chertoze thus fapeth p Lode
God:bebholve, J wyll gpue the lande in Egypte
puto Nabuchodonos02 the kynge of Wabplon,
that be map take away al ber fubitaunce, robbe
Derrobzpes, ¢ [pople ber fpoplesto pay bis bot
they: wages withal. 3 tpl qpue bin the Lande


of Cayet foz bis labour, that be toke foz me be-
fore Tyre. Atp Came tyme wpll J caule f borne
of the boule of Zlrael to qrowe forth, and open
thy mouth agapne among them:that thep map
knowe, bow that Jam the Lozie.

C Whe dekruction of apptand af pps cptpesis betwarled.
areca De wod of the Lobe came mozeo- a
es Aina uct Dito ime,fapinge:thou fonne of
heya ves man, prophecy & fpeake:thus fapth
Rip aay. the 102b Gov. Vourne, wo woth
po Se this vape foz the dape tbere, the
Day off Lod iscome:the Darke Dap of p bepthé
the houre ts at bande. the fovearde cometh vpon
Eevye. Uber the wounded men fall Downe in
Ecypt e when her people are taken awape,and
then ber foundacpons are deftroped,the <)ozt-
ang land (palbeafraped: pea the G)ozians land
Libia and Lidia,altbep2cémen people, ¢ Chub
and all that be confederate vnto them, tall fall
with them thozowe the fwerde.

Thus taped the Lone: The mapntepners of 35
thelande of Egppte hall fall, thepapde of her
power pal come Downe cuen nto the towse of
enpenes thaltbep be flapne Downe w thefwerd
fapethtbe Lozde God : amonge other oefolate
countrpes thep Halbe made defolate, among o-
ther waite cepties thep albe toatted. And t
(yall knotoe that Jam tbe Lorde, when J kpn-


dlea fpze in Egppt, and Mohen al her helpers are
deftroped. At that tyme Hall theyz meffengers
go forth from mein tbpppes, to make thecare-


leme Hozpans afraped, and fozotve Mall come
Dyponthemaccozdpng tothe dape of Egppt foz
poubtleffe tt Hall come.

Thus fapth the Lorde God: F wplimake an C
ende of the people of Cayo thozowe the hande
of Pabuchodono3z02 the kynge of Wabplon. pe
and bis people ith hym:pea, and the cruell tp-
rauntes of the Hepthen hall be bzougbt to de=
ftropethelande. Thep thalldzawe oute thep2
fweardes bpon Egypte, and fli thelande full
of Aa pne men. J wplldzpe vp thep2 floudes of
fater,and fell the lande tnto the pandreg of tic:
ked people. Che lande andall that is therein, J
tpl deltrope thozowe the encmpes.cuen F the
Lorde hauclaypode tt.

And thus fapth the Lozde God: + FZ wl de= p


ftrope the poolles, and bepngetbe pages of zach. riita


Moph to an ende. Chere thall no moze bea
puince of Egipt, and a fearfulneffe tpl F iende
into the Egiptians lande, As for Pathures , F
wy ll make tt defolate,and kpndle a fpzeinsoan
thecptic. Mo, Fwpllpunpiibe and poure mp
watbhful indiqnacton bpon Sin wbiche is the
ftrength of qypte. Ail the tubtaunce of Ale-
rand2ia wpll J oderope, and &pndle a fpretn


Egypte. i
- Sinthalbein greate beupneie , Alerandzia
hall berooted out, and Noph Hall pauc dapipe
fozowe. Thebeft men of Heliopolys and Wu-
bato thalbe flapue with thefwerd, and carped
awapecaptpue. At Caphnis the dape Mali be
darke, when J beeake there thetceptve of f land œ
of Egypte, and wbenthe pompe of dev gi
a


or C3ecHiel,


pall baie ancnde . A cloude thallcouerber,and
ber doughters Halbe ledde awape into captiut-
tye. Chis wpll Jpunph €gppt, that thep map
knowe bowe that Jam the Lozde.
Jt bappened in theelenenth peare, pponthe
feuenth dap ofthe fir maneth, that the Lodes
Yoo2de came Vnto me, fapenge : Webholde, thou
fonne ofan, J wyll brake the arme of Pharao
Kynge of Egypte : and lo, it hall not be bounde


4 Upto be healed, nother thall any plaifter be layd


ponit, fozto ealeit, o2 tomakeit fo ftronge,
astobolde alwearde. Therfoze thus fapeth the
Lode God. Weholoe, F wpll upon Pharao the
kpnge of Egypt and beule bis {trong arme( pet
isit buta broken one) ¢wylimpte the fuscarde
out of bps bandes.

28 forthe Eqgppcians, J wyll feattre them
among tbe heathen, and Frame them inthe lan=
desaboute. A ay 1e Y wll firengthethe arme

_ ofthe kpngof Wabilon, and gpue bima werde
in big bande, but 3 wyll bzeake Pharaogarme,
fo that be thal boldit befoze him ppteoufely like
a wounded man. —

Pe, J wpll tablpibe the kyng of Wabilons

~ atine, and tbearmes of Pharao al Fal Downe:
that it mape be bnowen, that 3 am the Lo2de
Minch gpue the kinge of Wabplonmyp [werde in
pis hand, that be may dzawe it out spop plande
of Eappl, tthat when J fratre the Egivetas a-
monge te Gentples,¢ Trotve themin p landes
about, thep mape knowe, that Jamebe Lorde

The.xrre.Chapter.
a comparild of the profperite ot Bbharao wpth the pres


Cpecite ofthe Ailvrians. Se propherpeth a lpke peruccp:
on fo them both.


rary > 2cour, tt baphencdintheeleuenth
Safai pe Pete, the fpett bape of tbe thyzbe mo-
hy PAs WA eth, that the worde of f Logd came
7. oe Sa Onto me,lapenq:thon fonne of man,
senses tpeake pntoWbarao the kpng of E-
gppt and toali bis people. bom art thou like
intbp greatness Beholde Aur waslpkea Ce-
De trer Vpon the mounte of Libanus torth Faye
baaunches: fo thpcke, that be qanethadowes, €
Wote out verp bpe : Hpstoppereached yntothe
cloudes. The waters made hymagreat, andthe
95 depe itt him bp an bpr. Rounde about therotes
of opin ranne there floudes of water he lent out
bigtptlerpuers Dutoailthe treesof thefelde,
Tberfore was be byerthenall the trees of the
feld, and thorowe tie multitude of waters that
be fent tro bim, be obfapnedmanp longe braun-
ches. AU foules of the apre madethepznefiesin
his bzaunches: onder his bowes gendzed all the
beattes of the Felde, nder his thadowwe dwelte
al people. Pape se bewtiful was bein dis qreat
tes € tn the length of his beaunches, foz bis rote
ffobe belpde great waters, noCedectree mpgbt
hyde bpm . Jn p pleafaunt garden of God, there
was nofpere trec like bis bzaunches, the plapne
trees were not Ip&e the botwes of bpm.
al tbe treestn the garden of God mpabt not
becompared Vnto bpm in bys bewtp, fo tapre g
goodly Dad J made bym wrth the multitude of
ps braunches. Gulomoche thatallthetreesitn
- the pleafaunt garden of God padenupeat dym,


Wol leerbhitt.
Tierfore thus fapth the Lord Good: fo2z fo moch à
as be batb lyft yp bpmielEe fo bpe, and ftretchen
Distoppeinto the cloudeg, and fepngebis harte D
is proube in bys bpgbnes, ¥ wplldelpuer pim ín
tothe bandeg of the mpabtyet among the Dea-
then, wbpche hall rote opn out. Acco2zdpuge to
bis wpckednes wpl ¥calt bpm away, p encntype
{hall dettrope bpm, and the mpabt pe men of the
Heathen Wall f (catce bpm, that his braunches
Malilpe bpon all mofitapnes, and in all valeps:
His bowes halve bzoken Downe tothe grounde
thozowe out thelande. Chen al thepeople ofthe E
lande hall go from big fhadowe, and fozfake
bpm. When beis fallen,al the foules ofthe apze
Wall (pt vpon bpm and all the wplde beaftes of
the feloe all go aboute amonge bps beannches
fo that from benffozth, no tree inthe water hall
attapne to byshpabnetle, noz reache bystoppe
witothe cloudes, nepther thallanpe tree of the
water Fonde fo bpe,as be bath done ; Foz vato
death Hal thep ail be delpuered nder the earth,
atid go Downe to the qrauelpke otber men.

Dozeouer thus fapththe Lorde God: Fn the
bape when he goeth dovone to the graue, ¥ wpll JE
caufelamentacion tobe made, F wll couce the
depe Dponhpm, J wpll ffaunche bis Aoudes, g
the great waters thalbe retrained. 3 thal caufe
Libanus to be fozow full foz bys fake, and al the
trees of the felde pall be finytten. ¥ wll matte
the stag hate at the founde of his fal when
J call bpm Downe toxhell, with them that del eta riit, c
cendetntotheppt. Altbetrecs of Eden, with al Serrie
thecboten and beh trees of Libanus, pee,andal
thep pare plated wponthe waters hal mourne
wpth bpm alfo in the lower babitacios: foz they
{hall qo downe to bel opthbim, vnto tbem that
be layne wyth the fwmerde, whpchdwelteafoze
ynder the hadowe of his arme anong the Pea- S
then. To whom balte thou belpened,that art
fo glozious & great, amongeshe trees of Eden?
Det art thowcaik dawne wnderthe erth(among
the trees of Eden) where thou mult lye amonge
wnciccuctles, wpth them that be flapne wth the
fwearde . Cuen thugis tt wpth Dbaraoandall
bps peoples faptb the Lode God:

Che.recti.chaptec.
«Zhe prophets ia commaunden te bowapie harao the


Kpnge of Sagppte. He prophecpeth that detruccpon Mall
cone bata Egppte thazowe the kpnge of abplon.


pay R theelencnthpere, the firt vay of y
sat welucthmoncth, the word aff lord
? F iacame onto me, fayeng : thou fonne of
HG. ei ma, take tpa lamétacid bpon* ha ere.rrira
SeN rao pking of Eaipt, fap puto pim: Er

part prente? asa Lyon ofthe heathen, gasa
whalfplihe in the lec. Chou caltek thy waters
aboute tic, thoutroublett the waters teptbebp
Fete,and fampelt intbeps Goudes, Thus layed ory,
the Lowe God: ¥3 wpl prede mp net onecthe, «roi,
na bial a great multitude of people, thefe wall -
Dipuctheintomyp parne, fo: Jwpicatthe wpon
tbhelande:andlet thelpe vpon the felde, thatail
tbe foules of tdieapze mape {pt upon the. 3 wpll
gpucall the beaikes of the felte pnougbe of the.
Cop flelthe wll Z cat upon the pplleg, and fyl
the valeps with thp pighnene. 3 wp! wee o

lande


The Prophecype


Lande With th: aboundaunce of thp blond, cuen Thepz burpallis qpuen them, andalleheps se
tothe mountapnes, and therpucts Cpalbefulof people,amonge them that be flapne.Chep2 gra


~ thybl


oude, Wilben thou art put out, 3 wplico- eg arerounde about all them whtche be pncic


efer.rl.d perthe heauc,and make bis arres bpmime xJ cumciled,and withebem thatbeflapnethbozot

wll fpzeadea cloude onerthe Sunne, and the theltwearde : foz feinge that intpmes palt, thep
moottetball not gpue ber lpgbe. A tbe Ivabtes made theland ofthe lpupng afeaped, they mult
of heauen topll | put oute ouert the ,andbiynge nowebeare thep: owne Mame, tithrbem that
sarkenetie bpouthplande,fapththe L020 G00 gO downe tothe pytte, andlpe amonge them,
3 wplitronble the bertes of many people,when that be flapne.

a pynge thy deltructton am onge the Hepthen Chevers Helechalfoand Tubal, and theps
ano countrpes, whom thou knott not.Pea, g people,andthep2qraucsrounde aboute. Chele


ropil


mascmanype people withtbeps byngesto alare amonge the pneircumctfed, andtbem that


afrayped thozowe the, that thep2 beer thalftand be flapne with the fwearde, bpcaufe afoze tyme
pp, when J pake mp Cwerde at thep2 faces. they made the lande of the lpupnge atraped.
opapniy Wal thep be alfonped, cuctp m anin Ehulde not thep then lpe alfo among p tho2-


í
vi


mielfe at the dape of thp fall.. JE0? thus fapth thpes q vuncircticifed gpauntes ¢ wbich wthepe
Lode God, the kynge of wabplonsf{werde Weapons are gone Dovwne to Hel wholefiberdes .


hatcome vpon the, with pfwcrdesorthe woz: are layed bnder thepebeedes, whole wickednes
thpes wpll 4 impre Downe thy people. All thep 18 bpon thep2 bones: bycaule that ag wozthpes
that bempgbtp among the Gcnttles thal waft . thep baue bought feare into the lanbe of the lp=
the pzoude pompe of Cgppe, and d2inge Downe upng. Pea,among the bucircumcifed Halt thou
allber people. Uli the cates ifookeaypt wyll bebeltropyed and fepe with them that perpiped
Foeftrope, that they thallcome nomoze Dp onp thozowethefiverde.


wate


clave (all tpzre themanp moze. Eden wpl y and princes allo, which with thep2 irrengeh ace sore ei
make Deir waters Depe,andcauletbeirfloudes layed bp tbem tbat were lapre with p wearde See y


ro totbatnepther mans foote noz beaftes TbhereisftandeofxEdom with her kinges


torunne lpke ople, tapti the Lode God. Wiben pea among the Dneire umcilcd, and them which Fea
-3 make the lande of Egypt delolate, and when áregonedowneintotheppite.Wozcouer, there
~ fbecounteye witbalthatıs theret, fbalbelaya be altbepzincesoftbhenoard, withall the Sp-
tsat and when J (npieailtbem whichdwelin Dontans, whtchare gone towne to the flapne.
it. thatthepmape knowe that Jam the Lozode. tuith theop2 feare and firengeth thep are come


Chis


isthe mournpnge that the Dougbters of ~ to confulton,and Ipe there buctrcticpfcd among


the Pepthcn al make.Pea,afozowe and lamë thofe that be layne with the fwerde , and beare
tacyot (hall they take Dp Dor Eqppteandall they: owne Mame, with them ý be gone Downe
ber people, faptbdthe Lorde Gov. tothe pptte. Nowe when Pharao leeth this, be
D Jn the.cit.peare.the. rv.bape ofthemoneth, Dalbe cofozted oucr al bis people, that ts flapne
camethe wozde.of the Lorde wnto me, fapinge: With the fwerde, both Bbaracandalbis hoof,
Thou fonne of ma: @ake vp alamétation ppb fapth P Lode God. ffo2 3 baue qruen mp fare


the people of €appt.t cafttbedotne:peathem inthe landt of the lpupnge. But Pharao and al ‘


FZ fap
ta, ctiti.e eutr


_etbemypabtr people ofthe epthen alfo his people halllpeamonge the bucircumcpicd


tó them-xtbat dwel bencth:and wit) them andamonge them that be layne with p ferde,


gzrrit tpat godowne into p graue. Downe bowfape faptb the Lozde God.


fo ener thou be) lap the with p wncircumetted. The.rrriii Chapter.
ongebocbe be dame nt ire, ec
wall they lye. To the fwearde is tye already es Setar ate Scie te that difpapze,audbol — ;
ipucrcd: therforeplucke Downe totbegrounde, cpe Lozar agapnt ae Paa ant of tye propte-agarnt

_ Her techers ofthe wozdes Of fhe prophete


Her eall her multitude: hempabtpwothpes —_.


thal {peake to pim out of he Hel ¢ to bishelpers ise, Gen A@apne, the wod ofthe Lozd came 4


| Wunto me, faping: Chou fon ofman
Bos, dan Vota Speake tothe chplozen of thy peo-
ee NS Te and tell them: Wben F fende a


thelpupnge. | | | , :

ee ee xT reis Elam alfo with all bis people , € and take ppm away, bis bloud palve Dpon his

Dam V106 tiep? gaues ronndabout:Wwhichalbeing wo owne heed: for be berde the founde of the tton-
fla


dcd g


apne with the fiwerd are gone Downe yn: pet,andwolde not takebede, therfoze bis blond


circhiciten wudertbecarth, wbichenenerthelefie be ppon bpm. mut pe pe wptrecepue warupng,
fomtpme brought feare into the lande of the lps He (hall faur hislpfe. iat, |
upner-for f whicbe they beare thepz fhame, with Acapne,vpt the watchmanfe the {teerd come


the of ber shat be gone Downe tothe grane. and ferve it nos Dithtpetromperte,fo a t oe


ple


Uitte. pit.


ri ee ee


Df Ezechiel


people isnot warned: pi thefwearde come then,
and take anp man from amonge thent:the fame
fhalbetakenawape inbps owne [pnue, butbps
ploude wpl Frequypze of the Watchmans bande.
xAndnotoe(D thou fonnesf man) Jhaue
made thea watchman vntothe boule of Flrael:
that whearcasthou bearell anpthpnge out of
mp moutbe, thou mapet warne them on mp be=
balte. Jf 3 fape wuto the topcked thou wpcked,
thou palt (urelp ope and’ geuck bim not war-
npng, that de apua of bis wmgodlp wap:
then thal the wpched dpe inbpsownfpnne, but
pysbloude wpll FJ requypze of chp pande, sreuer=
theles, if thou warne the wpched of bys wap.ta
tourne from it, where ag be pet topll not be tut=
ned from ít, then (bal be dpe becante of bis fpnne
but thou þat deliuered thp foule.
€ Therfore(Dthoufonne of man)fpeake Dri-
tothe boufe of Jlracl. Pee, fap thus:<Duc offeces
and (pnnesipe Dpon vs, and we be corrupte tn
tbem, botwe tyulde the then be refFored Vnto Ipfe
cre rotii t Tellehem:+AS tempas Jlpue age pears
60d, 3 baue noplealure inthedeatH ort
ked but much rather that $ wpeked turne from
bps wape andlpue. Turne pou, turne pou Erom
pour wngodly wapes : D pe ok the boule of Fl»
racll Ob toberfoze wyl ye dpe!
Thou tonne of man,tellthechplozen of the
Ss.rblit.d. people: x Che tyadteoutnes of the rpabtcoute
thal not laue bim, wher foener pe turneth ateap
pnfapthfullp. Aqapne,the wopckednefie of the
wpcked thal not burte ppm, whan Cocuer becon
uerteth from bcos ep
Bnd the rpabtcoutnes of therpadtesute Mal
not fauc bis Ipfe, whan foener befpnneth. JJ
fap bntotbhe rpabteous,that be Mall furelp lpue
ann fo be trutt to bis owne righteoufnes,and 09
fprne,thentballbpse gbteoufneffe be no moze
œ thought ppon, butin wpckednes that bebath
erta.. nonebetpallape. <Aagapne „pig lape unto the
Je-Foiit.& yyycked: thou thaltefurclp dye : and fo be turne
from bps tpnnes, and do the thpng that ig law-
Fulland rpabe : Anfomuche that the fame wpe-
ked man geneth p pledge agapne, reftozetbtbat
be bad taken awwape bP robberp ; toalbethin the
comimaundementes of lpfe, and doth no wrong
Then (hall be furelelpue,andnot dpe. Pee, the
fynnes that be bath done , alnener be thought
npon. Jozin fe muchas be Doth notoe the thing
that tg latofull and cegbt ge pallpue. And pet
the chplozenoftbp people fape : Cuth, tbe wape
of the Lode is not tp
thep2 owne wape ig rather tn
benthe rpabteous turneth


3tch.til,¢


big wpckhednes, Dopng the tbpn that islawful

az: roire, ANO PDE, be Wal lpue therfore. dies ad
Sr gap ofp Lozd isnot equal: D pe boule of feaell
mestia *3 Mopllindsgye euctp one of pou after his wairs
An tbetroelueth peare, the fpfth bape of the

tenth monet) of oure captiuitte, it bapened, that

one wepiebe was fled out of Jerufalem, came ons

tome, andlapde: thecitpetsderopen. Mowe

tbe bande of the Lozd bad bene bponme the cee


Tope


t.buttbeplpe, whereag |


t. s

om bisrigh on F A
tcoutnegand doth thetbpngethatis wprkedbe PF NAN
thal dpe therfore. Butiftherwpckedtutnefrom ig i


ie J

Fol.lrtrir
npngafoze this man( which was elcaped came
vntome, and bad opened mp mouth, yntpll the
moznpnge that becamtome:pee, be openc’ mp
mouthe, fe that 3 was nomoze domme. Then
came Che woz2de of the Lo2de wnto me, and lapd:

Thou fonne of man, thele that dwell inthe wa-
{ted lande of Jiraell fap: Abrabam was but one
man, and be hadtbe lande in pofefpon :nowe
are We manp and f lande ig geuen vs to pollee
alfo. Andtherforetellebem: Thus fapetbthe
Lode God:* Fn the bloude haue pecaten, pour xea.rvit.b
epes baue pelptte bp topdelles, xand paue Med peutie,
bloude:fhal pe then baue the lande inpofleflpon:

-Pe leane bpon pour lweardes, pe Wwozke ob-
Dominattos,cuerp onedefpletbbisnepgbbours E -+
wpfe:and pall be tben potteffe the lande? Sape F
thou thefe wozdes vnto them. Thus fapeththe
Lozde God. Astrulp as Jlyueall pethat owel
inthis wpldernes,thalbe flapne with p (weard:
wbat fo ener is Dpon thp Felde, J wp! gpue unto
the betes to be dDeuonred:thole that bein Brong
holdes anddennes, (hall dpe of the peftplence.
$024 tpl make theland fo defolate and watte
andthe pompe ofber frrengtbe thallcometo att
ende. @he mountapnes of Flrael albe lo walk
thatno man thalltrauaple therbp.

x Then thallebep learne tohnowe, that ZG
am the Lozde, when make the lande Waff and sertve
defolate becaule of al they: abbominactés, that
thepbaue weonghbt, And thou fonneof man,
the chplozen of the people that talke of the, bp
the walles andin the dopes of thepz boules lap-
enge one to an other. Come lette vs beare what
wo2defs cone forth from the Lozpb. Thele come
Dntotbe,afterp maner oF a great people:yer,as
Who faieth they were mp prople,thep {yt borne
befozethe, and pere thp Wozdes, but thep do not
theraftersfoz in thepz moutbesthep maben iet Siete
of them and thep? batte goeth after thepzowne ~ "
couetouslucre, andas a balet that bath a liwet
tune, aud is pleafaunt to finge fo Malte thou be
pnto them:thp toordes (hal thep beare, but thep
fopl not do therafter.Wipa this cometh to patie
(fo? lo: it cometh in Dede) then thal thep Bnowe,
that there bath bene a propheteamonge them.
C The. rrritit. Chapter.
EAgapakt wWithoppes and curaces that vetpice che flecke

af Chit, and feketbep; owne: The orde fapeth that

he well beet bps bitpected Hocke , and gather them te

gether. Be reprourth the malpce of certen of the flocke

Be prometet tpe trew Hepherd Cprit, ano with hpu


a AD the wode of the Lomecame |


Da So > e ee Ae Sb ope SAA
erdesof Jirael that fede thë flues. Spuld Fia
eH be de oprrnes fede the flockes? AIEE
: Debauceaten pthefat.re banc clorbeoy ae
foith the woll:the belt fedbaue peflapne but the
flockebauepenotnourpiped. Che weake paue
pe not holden bpxthelpche bane pe not healed: garetts.
the baoken baue pe not bounde together, the out
caftes banc pe not bzoughbtagapne-thelott baue
_ DÉ penot


lll ee


The prophecype :


e@ete.b.2. Pe not longhi but * churlpihlp g cevelly bane pe
ruled them. Lous avethep tcatted bere and there
without a tbepberde : pee, allthe beaftes of the
felbeDeuouretbcm,andthep qoa rape. -

% yp foepe go wandzpnge vpon all moun=
faynes,and bpon enerp bye ppl: ce,thep be fea
tred abzonde in allfcldes,and ther is no man that
careth foz them, 02 feketbattertbem. Chertoze
D pe Hepherdes, beare the worde of the Lorde.
bus lapth the Lozde God: As trulpas 3 lpue,
for fo moche as mp thepe are robbed, and denou-
red of all che wylde beaftes of the felde, baupng
no (hepberde: g fepnge that my thepberdes take
no eigar bemp EPPA them felues one-
lp and not mp thepe. @herfoze,Heare the wode
of the Loade (Dye thepherdes) Chus faptb tbe

© Lozde God: Webolve, ¥ mp felfe wpll vpon the
fpepberdes : and requyp2e me oror from thep2
Handes, and make chem ceatle from fedpnge of
my tbepe:pee, the thepherdes (hall fede them fel-
Res no moze. JFor J Wopll Delpucr mp pepe ont of
thep2 mouthes, fo that thep thall not denoure
them after this: oz thus lapth the Lode Oo:

Iyon T.e.. & Sebolde, 3 Wwpll loke tomp Wepe my felfe, and
Debi-vitl fehe fhem. Lyke as a Wepherdeamong the locke
~ feketh after the thepe that are {catred abzode,

cuen fo topll 3 (eke after mp pepe, and gather

chem fogyeber out of al places, where thep Daue

ben atred tn the cloudy and Darke dape. 3 topll

bepnge them out from all people , and gather

them togptber out of all landes. 3 wll bepnge

sp them in to their one lande,and Fede them Dpott

the mountapnes of Jfracl,by the rpucts, andin

all tbe places of the countrep. 3 topl fede tbem in


cpa bt good pattures,¢ wponthebpemotitapnes Byrn A


of Zirael thall theyz foles be. There thall they
ipe in a good folde,and ina Eat patture tall thep
fede:cuen vpon the mountapnes of Flrael.

J wll fede mp thepe mp felfe, bzynge them
rube.iii.d tofbepz ret, Capth the Lozbe God. ¥ Suche ag
Hova.r.a-: he lot, wpll Fieke :fuche as goa get are

bapnge agapne :fucbe ag be wounded, wpll
ppnde vp:luch ag be weake, wopl J make Fronge
fuche ag befat ¢ ronge thole wpll 3 roote out,
and fede them with the thpnge that ts lawful.
œ And as for pou (D mp thepe) fapth the Lorde
matro. (Od.* 3 Wpll put a diference among the Hepe,
amonge the weebers and the gotes. Was it not
gnou foz pon to eate bp the good pature,but
pe mult treade Downe p cefpduc of pour pature
with pour fere alfor@ias it not pnough to: pou
~ to Dzpiike cleve water, but pe mull trouble the

refydue allo with yout fete:

Thus mp pepe multe be fapne to.eate the
thpnge, that pe baue troden Bowne with pour
fete and to Dzinke tt,tbat pe with pour fete paue
netpled. Therfoze thus fapeh the Lorde Goddn
to them : Webolde, J wpll fener the fatte they
from the leane : foz fo moche as pe baue or the
tocake (hepe bpon the [poeg and Houlders, and
runne vpon them with poure hognes, lo longe
tyll pebauc vtterlp fcatced them abzode. 3J pil
helpe mp fepe , fo that thep Mall no moze be
ipopled: pee, J wyll dilcerne one epe from an
ot ber. 4 Dyll rapie bp Unto them onc onlp Hep-


berde,cucn mp Cernaunt x Dauid, he Halls fede gece.cre &
them, and be fhall be thep2 thepbherde.9 the Lord tirti.
wll be thep2 God, and mp feruaunte * Dawid pgicye, oa
oma toep? paprice. Even J the Lozde Haue
0) Ut.
<Po2coucr, J topll make acouenaunt of peace JE
with chem,and dapue all eupll bealtes ont of the
tande : fo that thep map divell fafelp in the wpl-
Dernefle,and fepe in the weddes. Good foztune
and prolperitpe wpll J qpue them, and nto all
that be rounde aboute mp ppll. x X profperous Dent.rt b
pt and rapne wpll J fende them in Due Cea- * FFM
fon, that the trees in the wodde map bapng forth
thepz frutes,and the ground ber encrcate.Cbep
fall be fafe in their lande, and pall bnotbe, that
Jam the Lorde, wbich haue broken their pocke, 2
and Delpuercd them out of the bandeg of thole
tbat belde them tn fubiection. =
Thep hall nomoze be fpopled of p Heathen, G
no? Deuoured with the beattes of the lande: but
afelp Hall thep dwell, alee per man (hall frape
them. J wpll fet bp an excellent plant fo2 them,
fo that thep Mall fufre no moze bunger in the
lange, nepther beare the repzofe of the Heathen
anp moze. Thus Hall thep vuderfande, that F
the Lozbe tbep God am witb them, that thep
(euen the boufe of Flracl) are mp people, farti
the L0:de God. Pe menare mp Hocke + pe ate ptareh. b»
the hepe of mp patture: and Jam poute God, Pe
faptb the pitt pes site
Che a at n Tonet: Sept, that


tg on the Foumeans,becaule thep troubled the people ok
the Zozbe, A ebep tr the peop


SINE AS Dreouer,the word of the Lod came |


Erec TEDA Syoy2) walte glad, be


and, Fol. a


Piei.


the Lod Sod:agtrulpas J lpne, J wpl handle
~ the accozding to thy wathand geloufp lpkeas
thou bafodealt cruellp with them that 3 map be
knoWenamong thé, howe Bhaue punpihed the
Pec aud Ptbou alfomailk be Cure,that Jp L020
_ baue decd altbp pe A ful wo2des, which thou
D pattefpokenagaputt the mountapnes of Fraell
fapeng : Lo,thep are mabe walte, and geuen vs
< todenoure. Thus wptppour mouthes pe Daue
made pont boft agapnit me,pec, and multiplied
our pzoude wozdes agapnit me, obpch F paue
apra altogether. Wberunte,thus fapetbthe
Lode Hod: tothe tope of allthe wolde wpll 4
make the wate. xAnd lpke astiou (D mounte
becaufe the berptage of the
boufe of Zlraell was etroped:euen fo wpl F d0
_ Bntotbeallo , tbatthou and whole Edom Wall
be deftroped, andknowe,that Jam the Love.
° € The.reevi.Chapter |
€ Be promplech the delpueraunce ofthe Sentpis onto Jr-
tatil. Zhe benefptesoone bnto the Fewesarctobealcrt .
bento the mercpe of God, not bunto thep? belerupnges:
@obdrenucth our hartes (hat we map walke in bps com
maunsmcntes.


Rae) E&i tbe moñtainesof Flracl andfpeake:
. © xprarethe wode of the Lozoe, D
W Ape mountapnes of Flfrael. Thus lap
ee oth the 10d God becaule pour ene=
mpe Hath fapde vpon pou : Aha, the byeeuerla-
ftpnqe places are nowe become oureg, prophecp
therfoze, and {peake:thuslapeth the Lorde God
&citig pe be waited and troden Downe onencrp


=a ipoufonticof man, propbecpe pot


ted, andthe decapedplaces thallbe repap2ed as
gapne : J wpll pzenpde pou wpth muche people
and cattel, which thal encreafe andbapng frute:
J wyll reftoze pou allo topour olde eftate and
thetbe pou moze kindnes then ouct pe bad before
Dperby pe thal knowe that Jamtbe Loz: Vee

cople wpll F fende vnto pouc Dmyp folke of

Cracil wpiche hall baucthe inpoffepon, and

palt be thep2 enberitaunce,fo that tion Halte
nomoe be wpth them. Aqapne thusiapeth che
Lode God: Eolo muchas thep lap wntopou,
thouarte ancater vp of mé, anda walker of thy
people: therfoze thou (halt cate no momen, neps
ther deftrop thy people anp mozefapth ibe Lo2d
God. And J wpllnot fuffre the: for to beare
thpne owne confulpon, amonge the Gentyples
from bence fozth. Thou thalte not beare the re-
protec of the nacions , nog cate oute thpne owne
people anp moze,fapeth the Lorde God.


Gozeouer the worde of the Lozdecame puto D


me fapeng : Dtboufonne of man, when f boule
of Flracldwelte vpon thep2 owne groive, thep
defpledthe felues wpth thep2o%ne wapesand
pinaginacions:fo that in mp (yabttbep2 wape
as like the pnclennes of ainenttruous woman
Wiberfoze, Jpoured mp wrathfullovlpleafure
pponthem , becaule of the bloube thatibep bad
{hed tn the lande, and becaufe of thep2 poles,


foherwyprhtbhep baddcfpicd themfelucs. Flca-.


tred them alio among the Heathen, fothat thep
were ffromeDabonte inthe landes. Accozdpnge
to thep: tapes andafter thep? owne mucucp-
ong, fo bpd F punpiie them.


 -Sol.re,


fpde and become a poffeffion Ynto the refpdue of x¥Mowe when thep were gone bufothe pep: E
_ the Gttyls: which bauebzoughtpourntomens  then,andcome inamongethem,thep dpiponous Fror»
mouthes and vnto an eucil name amonge the redmp bolp name:fo that it waslapde of them.“


people. Cherfoze,beare the wozde of the Lorde
God: D pemoutttapnes of Jirael. Chuslapetb
the Lode God bnto the mountapnes and ipl-
les, valleps and dales, tothe popbe wplocrnes
~ anddecfolate cities, wbich arcf{poilcd,and bad in
Derilion on cuetp fpde, among the refpoue of the
Beatpen : Dec,cucnthuslayethebe Lorde God.
Jithe pze of mp geloufp baue J taken òeuice
againt the refpdue of the Gentpls,andagapnit
allx Edom: which haue taken mmplande vnto


EFDS thom felues foz a polleMpon: wbich alforetopced


fromebep2 whole barte wopth a Delpptefull Mo-
macke to walteit,andtofpoplett. E
5 P2ophecp therfore bponthelande of Flraell,
fpeabe Dnto the mountapnes and pplles to wal-
leps anddales, thus iapeapepe Lozde God. We-
holde,this baue 3 DeutledDinmyp geloufp and ter-
tible wath. Jolo mucheas pe baue luffredre
profe of the Heathen , therfore thus fapeth the
LozdeGod. Jhauelwo2ne that the Gentples
which lpe aboute pou, tall bearethbep2 cofution
thelelues. Andas for pon, D moiitapnes of Ff-
rael) pe pal Wote out pour bzauncheg, g bzynge
forth pourfruteto mp people of Ffrael , fo2 itig
barde bp that it wpl come. webolde, 4 come Un
fo pou, and nto pon wpll F tourne me, that pe
tape be tylledD and fowen. |
€ 4 wyll fende pou much people, whpebe Halbe
of all thc boule of 3lracil, the cttiestpalbe mia-


Are thele the people of God, and mull go out of
thep2 owne lands Chen lpared ¥ my bolp name
whpcbe the boule of Jiraci had dp Honoured ap
monge the Gentpls,to whom thep came. Thre-
foze tel the boule of Yirael. Chustapeth p Lod
God : Jdonot thps fog ponrflakes (D doule of
Frac!) but fozmp bolp names lake, which yc dil
bonoureD among the Heathen, when pe caine to
tbem. Cherfore, J wpl halowenty great name
agapne wbpcbamong the Gentpists cucll ipo-
ken of: foz pe pour lues baue Dphoneured it a=
mongethen. Andthe Gentpls hall know that
Jamthe Lozde, when Jam honoured inpou be
fore thep2 epes.fapeth the Lozde God.

As fo: pou, J wpl take pou fromamong the
Heathen‘and qather pou to gether ont of al coi-
trees, and bzpnge pouaqapne into pour owne
lande. * Chen wpll J poure cleane water boon


pou, and pe tall becleane:pee,from all pout DH erary
clenncs andfro allpour podolg Hall J clenfe pou Sennen


A newe berteallo topll y qpucpou, andanewe
{p2ete opll Fputintopou. Asfez that tionpe
Darte, ¥ wpl take it ont of pour bodpe,and gene
poua fetbly bert. FJ wpl qeue mp (pzete aniong


pou* andcaule pon fo walkein mp commaune Debit,


Dementes to Kepe mp lawes,and to fulfpl ther,
Anbdlo pe hhalldweltnthelande,that 3 gaue
fopour fozefathers, and pe (ball be mp people,
and j Wpll be pour God. J wpil bealpe pouont
£4) <2). ft. of al


I


men.f.b.


Tye propyerpe 1


of all pour bnclenttes. J wopll call foz the cone,
and wvllencreale it and let pou baue no hunger.
FJ wpll multiplye the frutes of the trecs,and the
inereafe of the felde foz pou, fo that pe thal beare
no movereprote of hunger among the Heathen.
Then Hall pe vemenibzepoure owne wpcked
ywapes, and pour pmagpnacpons, whiche were
not good :fo that pe Mall thynke that pe were
tvoztbp to be dekroped: foz pour (pimes andab-
pompnacyons. Bias 3
Sut J wopll not do this fo2 pour lakes (Cape
the Lode God) be pelure of it. Cherfore, D pe
poule of Feacll, be ahamed of poure Cpnnes.
£Vozcauer, thus fayth p Lo2d God: What tpme
as 3 hall clenfe pou From al pour offences, then
Wwpli 3 make the cpties to be occupped aqapne,¢
tpli repapre the paws that be decaped. Thede
folate lande thal be buploed agapn, whichafoze
tyme lape Wate inp fpabt of al them that went
bp-Then thall zt be po hess walte lande ig be-
come lIpkeagarden of pleafure, and the vopde,


Defolate g zoken Doone cpties are no Eronge
and defeheed agapne. Then the relpdue of the
Heathen that lpe rounde about pou, Hal knotwe
that J am the 102de, whiche repapze that that
was broken done, and plant agapne that, that
was made walte. Euen F the Lowe baur fpo-


theiwpnde: prophecpe:and (peake tothe wpnde.


Thus lapth P Lowe God. Come (Dthou apze)


from the Foure wpndes, and blowe vpon theie f
flayne, tbat thep map be reftozed tolpfe. 907C “i
prophecpedashebadcomaundeDme:thencame — |
the brethinto tben, ¢ thep recepued lpte,¢ fode
wp bpon thep2 fete, a meruelous great fozte:
£2) o2eouer,be fapd vnto me: Thou fonne of
man, thele bones are the whole boufe of Ffrael-
wWebolode, thep lape : Dur bones dped wp, our
bope ig gone, we are cleane cutte of. Cherfore D
pzopbecpe thou, and fpeake bnto them : thug
fapth the Lozde God. Webolde, I wpll open
pour graues (D mp people) and take pou out
of youre fepulchzes, and bepnge pou into the
lande of $lrael agapne.Do ibali pe knowe that
Jam the Lorde, when Jopen pour graues and |
bpnge pou out of them. Sp Mopao wpll 1
3 putin pou, and pe Wall lpue: F wll fet pou |
agapne in pour owne lande,and pe Hall knowe
that 3 ain the Lozde whiche bane fapd it, and --
fulfplled it in dede. D
The wodeofthe Lorde came vnto me, lap-
enge :tbou fonne of man, take a flycke,¢ wzpte |
ppan it. Tinto Juda andto the chylozen of 3i-
racl hig companpons. Chen take another Kpcke i"
and Wpte bpon tt: into Jofeph the tocke of
€phzatin, and to all the boufebolde of Ztractt —
Dis companpors. And then take bothe thele E
togpther in thyne bande, fo Wall there be one ~
ftpcke therof, owe pE the chpldzen of the peo-
ple fape unto the, wplt thou not Merwe vs what
thou meaneft bp thefes Then qpue them this
anfwere : thus fapth the 200e God: bebolode,
¥ J wll take tbe tocke of Jofeph, whicbe ig oree,t.n,;
in the bande of Ephzaim, and of the trpbes of
“Alracll bis Eelowes, and wpll put them to the
ftocke of Juda, and make them one tocke, and i
thep thall be one in mp bande. And the two
ftyckes where ppon thou weptelt , alte thou
bauc in tyne bande,that thep map fe, ant palt
fape unto then. | |
Thus lapth the Lorde God:bebolde, J wplt
take awap the chplozen of 3lrael from amonge
the Heathen, onto whome thep be gone, ¢ wpll
gather them togpther on euerp {pde,and bapnge
them agapne into thep2 owne lande:pee, 3 wyll
make one people of them in the lande, Dpon the
mountapnes of Fracl,and they al Hal banc but
one kpnae. Thep pall no moze be two peopled l
from bence fogth, nepther bedeupded in to twa |.
kynabomes : thep Hall alfo defple them felucg
no moze witb thep2 abbominactons, Jools, and
all thepz wopebed bones. g wll helpe them
out of all thep2 Dwellpnge places, wherin thep
bant fpnned: and topli fo clenfe them, that thep


i


ll bemp people and F they? God.

Danid my feruaunt Wall be their kpnge,and 5
tbep al (bal baue one thepherdeonlp. Thep Hall -
walke in mp lawes, and mp cõmaundementes
pall they botbe kepe and fulfpll. Thep Mall
dwell in the lande, that J gaue vnfo Jacob mp
fernañt whereas pour fathers alfo haue dwelt:


- Pee cuen in the fame lande ball thep,thetr chpl- f


Den and thep2z chplders chpldzen dtell fo? cuer=
moc and mp feruaunt Danid hal be their eurr- ;
lating petnce, @opeoner, Iwi mabe abon |

e


PE Ssechiel:


peace wpththem , wobpché (halbe bnto them an
cuctlaftpng couenawnt. J wl fettle them alfa,
and multiply them, mp Sanctuarpe wpll J let


Leutroi.b aMongeéhë foz encrmoze.«xd)p Dwellpnge thal


be thith them:pee,¥ wpl be thep2 God, and thep
fhalbe mp people. Thus the Heathen allo Mall
Rnotve , that Ftbe Logdeam the bolp maker of
Slrael, tobenmp Canctuarp Halbe among them


` Foz eucrmoze.


@ She.rerviii. Chapter.

Be prophecieth that Bogand agog Hall came wpth
an appopnted bostinto the lanbde of promes. 2 hep; enz
tent. Be tcherteth thatthe cOmpage of Gog was before

propbecped of the pzophetes. The deftruccpon of bpm.


PASS Nd the wozde o£ tie Lozdecame nto
A eeu me,fapeng : © hou foune of man,turne
sA We chp face toward Gog the lande of Wa:

= gog tbpcheis thechefe prince at We-


E
Bera AR eah,


kii fechand ‘Cuball:propbecpe agapnite bpm, and
praying fape: qhuspa the Lode God: * O Eor
e p?


ince of Selech and Tubal:behold,


— Atopll vpon the, and wll turne the avouteand


put a bptintbpchawes: J tpll bapngs the forth
andal thy boft, both bo2fe and poz
be all weapened of the bet fathpon, agreat peo
hee Dandle altogetberfpeares, (hpldes,and
weardes:the Peries, veoz1ans and wyth then
the Libians, wppcbeall beare hpldes and bel-
inettes: Gomer andall bps booftes:the boule of
© hbogozma out of the nozth quarters, gall bps
booltes,pce,and muche people w pth the.


%  Aherfore prepare the, let thptelfeinarape


wpth allthp people, that arecome nto the bp
beapes and be thou thep2 defence. After manp


dapes thou Halte be vilpted, and in tbe latter pe x


res thou (baltecomeintop lande that bath bene


_ beftroped wpth the fwearde, andnowwcts reple-
 npied agapue wyth opuerfe people vpon the


mountapnes of Fleaell, whyche bane longelpen
wate: Pee,thep be brought out ofthe nacyons,
and dwellallfafe. Chou thalte come vplpkea


 {tozmp wether, to couerthe land, and agit were eis | oe ,


a Darcke cloude,thou wpth ali thpne poteg and
a great multitude of people wyth tbe.


© Wozcoucr, thuslapeth the Lode God: Ht


the fame tpme thal manp thinges come into thp
mpnbde,fo that thou palt pmagpnmilchefe,and
lape: J wpll vp to ponder Leda eight s fepnge
thepfpt at cafe, g Dwell lo Cafelp( for they dwell
all Mithout anp wallesthep bane nether barreg
no? bores to lpople them, torobbe them to lape
bande bpé they: to well inhabited wylderneffes
agapnitthat people, thatis gathered together


=p fromamonge the Heathen, whppcbe bane gotten


cattclland good and dlvell inthe mpddek of the


- lande. Then hal Saba e Dedan, andthe mar=


chautes of T barlis with al thep: wozthies faye


- Muto the: Actetboucometorobber Hake thou


gathered thp people together, becaule thou wylt


_Tpople: totake fpluer and golde: tocarp atape


cattcll and qood,andto bawe a greate prap/
Cherfoze,D thou fonne of man, tbou balte


— ~peophecp, and fape vnto Gog. Thus lapeth the


Lode God: Znthat dap thou thalt knowe that
mp people of Flracll Owelleth {ake : and thalte
come from thp placeout of P noztb partes:thou


emen which —


5 conn VOLE,
ano muche people wpth the. wobpcberpde wpon
Doates. Wherefore a great multitudeand an
innumerable forte. Dee, thou baltecome vpor
mp people of Flrael,as a cloud to couer thetand:
Chps thallcometo pale inthe latter dapes: F
Lopll bzprge the bp into mp lande, that the pea-
then mape knoe me, whan J get meDonoure
bpon the D Gog) before thep2 cpes.
Chusfapeth the Logde Gov: Chon arte he of 4
whom F baue poken afoze tpme bp me feruañ-
tes the peophrtes of Zicael, which prophecied tn
thore Dapesandpeares,that 3 bule pha the
vponthem. Bt tbe fame tpme, when Gog conta
meth vp tuto p landeof Firael(fapethtbe Loze
60d )halimp indfgnacid go fo2thinmyp wrath;
Jotin mp qeloutp and bote dp{pleature F haue
deupledxthat pions SA ble in the Daut.rit.a
lande of Jfrael at that time. Che verp Epes in marrit » |
the fee , the foules of the apze , the beaftes ofthe |
Felde, andall the menthat are vpontheearthe,
(halt tremble foz feare of me. 5
The bplies alfo Halbe turned vplidedowne g
the tapzes of ftone (all Fall, andal walleg that
[pnie to the grounde . J wpli callt Foz afwearde
upon tbem tn al mp mountapnes fapeth Lord
God-fo that cuerpe mans fwearde halbe vpon
att other. pth pelktlenc and blonde wyll 3 pu-
npe bpm : tozmp rapne and baple ftones, fpe
and bzpmone wplt Fcauletorapne yponhpm
and all bys beape, pee, and bponall that greate
people that is wptb bpm. Thus wpll 3 be mage:
nifped, honoured, and knotyen amonge the Hea
enva thep map be fure, bowe that Jam the
F:


ent bps cowpanp Hall be oewourdothpzirs aitb beas,
tes therfore $ honteot Hfeactis maken: hepr bria
, Spenge agapne fromcaptitite is prompted,


Derefa, Othoulonne of man, A


4 POzphecy agapnit Gog, g {yeake
Cee eT Ihe gabe yd Lod Gob: Be.
evn, SEA VOID, KD Gog:thou chefe prince rero, e
A) een ae at elech e Tubal, J tpl upon
aca the, € punptbe the topth {pre pla-
ges and lead the from then th partes, ¢ bapne
the dp to the mountapnes of Flac. As fo: thp
howe, F topli (mpte it out of thp lpftr hand and
ca thpne arowes out of thp right bande. Thou
topth all thpne beape , and all tbe people thati¢
fopth the, muf fall pon the mountapnes of Fi
rael. Than wpll F geuc the vito foules & wyide
beaftes of the felde, to be denoured : there muite
thou Ipe ne the felbe : fozcuien F the L oodhaue
fpokenit,tapeth the Lozde God.

Into Hagar and amonge thei that (pt to 25
carcles in the ples: wpll ¥ fendea fyre, andthep
hall bnowe, that Jam the Lorde, ¥ twpil make
alfo p name of mp bolines to be knowen among
mp people of Firacil:and F wpltiot let mp bolp
name becuelfpoken of aipe moze:butthe werpe
Heathen alfo pal knowe, that Jam the Lode,
tbe bolp one of Ffraell: Webholde, itcommeth,
and pall befulfplled indede,fapeththe Lozde,
God. Thps ts the dape wherof Fhaue lpoken.
Wu. Shep


The prophecye


Zep that dwell in the epttes of Firacl, Hall go
_ fozthand fet fpze ppon the weapens, and burne
them : Spldes and {peares, bowes and arowes,
Dylles g clubbes:feuen pearcs Wall thep be bur-
npnge therof, fo that thep Hall clics bpne no
{tyckes from the felde,nether paue nede to Dewe
Downe out of p wodde. fo: they Halt baue wra-
-pens pnougb to buene. Cbep Hall robbe thole
- thatrobbed toem, and fpople thofe that fpopled
© thew, fapt the LogdeGod. At the fame tpme
_ gop 3] gpue wnto Gog, a place to be burped m
a tacl, cuen the Valley, where thozowe mengo
rom the eat top leeward. Thole that trauaple
therbp, all top thepz nofes foz tenche, Chere
{hall Gog tall bis people be burped:¢ tt Wall be
called the vallep of p people of Gog. Scucn Mo-
nethes Longe thal the boule of Firacl be burp mg
of them, that thep map clenfe the lande. Pee,al
the people of p lande ball burp them, D, tt Hall
bea qlozious dape, when 3 get me that honour;


i oe the Lozbe God. ThepMallozdepnemien Fas
~ alfo tobe dead burpers,cuer gopnge thozow the xy |
Lande,and appopnt them certepn places to burp
- thote in, wbich remapne vpon the felde, thatthe È


lande map be clenfed. Erő ende to cnde Wall thep
fehe,and that feuen monethes longe. fo thole
that qo thozow thelande, where thepfea mans
pone, tbep thall Cet vp a token bp ittpll the dead
burpers baue burped ft alfo, tu the vallep of che
people of Gog. And the name of thecptic that be
called Jpamonal) (that ts a multptude.) Chus
 Walithbep make the lande cleane. =

E- Anthon fonne of man:thus fapth the Lozde
od, Speake onto all the Foules ¢ cuccp bpzde,
pic, to all the woplde beattes of the felbe, beape
poutogptbhert come gather pou rounde aboute
bpon my flaughter, that F baue apne fo? you:
euena great faugbter dpon the mountapnes of
Fracl, cate fictthe, and dpnke bloude, Ve Wall


apocrine Xeate the flelthe of the wozthpes,and dapnke the


bloude of the pzptices of p lande: of the wetbers,
of the lambes,of the gotes,and of the oren that
pe all Gapne at Balan. Eate thefatte pour bellp
Full,and Dpnie bloude,tyll pe be Dzonben of the
flaugbter, whicbe F baue layne vnto pou. pll
pou at mp table with bozfes and Mronge porle-
mmen, with captapnes and men of warre, fapth
the Lode G00. : 7 tHe
4€ Jwpllbynge mp glop alfo among the gen-
tples, that all the Heathen map fe mp iudge-
ment that J bane kepte,and mp bande whiche F
baue lapde ppon them: that the Doule of 4ftacl
map knowe, bot that Jam the Lod their God
from that dape forth. And the Heathen Mall
-knowe, that where as the Donte of Ifrael were
< ledde into captinitpe: tt was fo: thep2 wpcked-
nes fake,bpcaufle thep cfended me. .
£02 the wbyche caule 3 bpd mp Face from


then, and delpucred them into the bandeg of


thepa enempes, that they mpabt all be fapne
withthe fwearde. Accozdpnge to thep2 wnclen-
nefic and wnfapthfull dealpnaes, fobaue J ei-
treated them, and bpd mp face from them:

© Therforcthuslapth the Lorde God: ow wl
J bapnge agapne the captpucs of Jacob, € pane


=z,


mercp wpon the whole bonte of Firacl, € be te-
lous foz mp bolp nameg fake. AU their contutrors
and offence that thep baue done agapntt me, pal
betaken awape : and fofafelp thall thep dwell
in tbep? lande, that no man pall make them a-
frapde. And when J baue bzougbt them agapne
from amonge the ips ge base baue gathered
them togptber out of thep2 ennempes landeg,
and am prapted tn them before manp Heathen:
“pen Hall thep knowe, that J am the Lode
thep2 God, whiche fuffecd them to be ledde into
captiuitpe amonge the ipeatben, but now paue
J beought them agapne into thep2 owne lande,
and not lefte one of them ponder. |
After that wpll J bpde my Face no moze front


them, * but wpll powe ont mp (p2pte wpon the ese.rrrvt.s


bonte of Alracl,fapth the Lode Ged. :
C The.xl. Chapter.


a Dherettorpng of the citpes and of the temple that was
, tecometathemed bnto the pzopbete.


aR the.rev.pere of our captinitic,in the Æ
ex begpnnpnge of the pere, the tenth dape
Gq He of themoneth: that ts the. rittt.pere ata
sao © 24 ter that the cptie was fmptten Downe:
the fame dape came the bande of the ode bpors
meand carped me forth: cuen into the lande of
Jiraci bzouqhe be me inthe vifions of God:and
fet me Downe Dpona meruelons ppe moutapuc,
were bpon there was a buplopnge (as it bad
ben of acptpe) towarde thenozth.

Thpther be carpedme,and bebold,tbere was
aman, tobofe fimilitude was Ipke bgaffe, topicde
bad a:thzede of Aare in bis bande, anda metrod
alfo. be {Lode inthe Doze,and fapd wnto me: thou
fonne of man, marke well with ropne epes, Dar=
ken to with chpne cares, and fatten tt in thyne
berte, What focuce J Mall pewe the, foz top cn=
tent tbat thep mpabt be (pewed the, therfore act
thou brought bptber. And what Coeucr ë feel,
thon Walt cevtitpe the boule of Flrael therof.


Beholde, there was a wall on the out{pde %


rounde aboute the boufe:the metrodde that be
had inbishanbde,was {pre cubptes longe and a
panne. Sobe mealured the bacdth of the bupl-
Dpnqe,whiche was a metrodde, and the bepabe
alfoametrodde. Then came he buto p eat doze,
and wente vp the tapzes,e meatured the poltes
of the Doze, woberof every one Was a mictroboe
thpcke. Euerp chambje was a metrodde longe €
b20de:bpt tence the chambzes were fpue cubites.
Che pot of the doze within the porche, was ene
metroode. Ae mealured allo the porche of the
innermer dore, wbiche contayned a metrodde.
Shen mealured be the entrp of the Doze, tbat con
tapned epabt cubptes,¢ bis ppllers tive cubttes:
and this entrpe ode inwarde,

The chambees of the doze cafkwarde, were C
thee oncucrp (pode: alpke bzode andlonge. The
peg alfo that fode of bothe the tpoes, vocte
of one mealure. After this, be meafured the
topdenche of the doze, wobiche wastencubpics,
and the bepabe of the doze thyztene cubptes.
The edge before the chambres was one cubpte
rode Dpen bothe the fpes, and the chambecd
{pre cubptes poe of epther pde. ipe ott

3 be


Ara: ih


_


H Nf


&


LILLIE


the doze from therpdge of onechambze fo ano-
ther, hole wpdenes as.cry.cubites,and one
Doze (Lode agapnit another. He made ppllers al-
fo.lr.cubptes bpe,rounde aboute the courte doze
wefore the inwarde parte vutotbe fozeentrp of
the innermoze doze, were fpitp cubites. @hecha
bers ¢ thepz ppllers wpthin, rounde avout vnto
the doze bad [pde wopndowes. Soo Hady foge en-
treys allo, whole windowes went round about
wit. And vpon the ppllers there obedate trees

Then brought he me intop fore court where
ag were chambers and paucd wozkes , manent
thefoze court round about.crr.chambers bpon
one paued wozke. Mow the paucd woke was a
longe belide pdozesand ý was the lower paued
woke. After thps be mealured the bzedth from

Tower Doze, Vnto the innermozecourte of the


alfo paddate trees. on anbringa: tep-
pestoge Vp bpon. Andbe


porches bad topndotbesrounde aboute : whole
bepgbth was.l.cubptes and the bzeadth.rrv.


— SOLE,


ps pillers fode toward the vtmofkcourt,and .


bpon them bothe were date treeg,and. viti. Eep:
pes to go bp vpon. Chere tode a chambje allo,
whole entraunce was atthe Doozeppllers, and
there the buentoffrpnges were waltbed.
Inthe Doze porch, there Lode on i aga
two tables forthe laughtpng:toflap the burnt
offerpnaes : (pnofferpnges and trefpafofferpns
gestherupon. Andonthe outlpdeasmen goo
fosthto the nozth doze, there fedetotables, .
ffoure tableg ode onepther (poe ok the Donze
that tg. biii. tableg:wherupon thep laugbted.
Sfoure tables were of betwen {tone foz the burnt
offerpnges, of acubtteanda halfelonge ebzode
and onecubpte bpe, whereupon were laped the
veficlles and oznamentes whpcbe were vied to
the burnte g fapneoferpnges : whenthep were
flaugbted. And wpthin, there were bokes foure
fyngers bode, faftened rounde aboutetobange
felipe bpon, and vpon the tables teas lapde the


f offerpnge fich. Dn the outltde of the innermoze
+ Doze were the 1 os pare ita inthe intoarde
e


courte belpbe the nozth dooze oner agapnite the
foutbe. Chere tode one alfo belpde the cat Doze
And be fapde onto me: Chps chambze onthe
fouthe ipoe belongeth to the preatkes , that kepe
e babptacpou-andthys toward thenozth, +18
the preaftes that wapte yponthbeaulter:wbrcd
be the fonnes of Hadoch that do leruice before


noth marde.


the Lozde in Meade of thechpldzen of Leui. So
be mealured the foze court , wbych bad inlength
an bundzeth cubptes, and almuche in beedbt bp
the foure cozners. Mowe the aulter Lode befoze
the boule. And þe bzougbt meto thefoze entrep
of the boule, and mealured the walles bp the en
trep Doze Lobpch were Fpue cubptes longe on cp=
ther aie- Tbhetbpckenegallo of the doze onep=
thertpbde , was thre cubptes. ‘Che length ofthe
pozche was.rr.cubptes:the breadth.ri.cubpted


f and upon feppes tent men vp toit:bp the tat
legalfotwere ppllersoneptbertpde one. =
3 - CThe.cli.Chapter.
_ © Thedifpoticionandoeuile of buplopngagapnethe `
temple and ofthe other thpnges therto belongpng,


tt
a .


G


i pat.frb.a


dif, egg E


aboute the boule, were enerp one Foure cubptes there were made depe Wpndotbes «Date trees,
wpbe: and one ode bard vponanotier,whcrof haupnge beames and balkes, lpke ag the boule
ten wWere.rrriit. there tode poftes benethe bp had. | :

the wallesroude about the houle, to bearethent  - CTberlii.Chapter.


typ, but in the wall of the oufe thep were not qocthe chambers of the temple foz the petes
. andthe holp thbpnges,


fattened. The (pde chambzes were, the bper the
wpder, and had Keppes thozowe them ronnde
2B aboute the boule. Thus wasit wpder aboue,
that from the towet, men mpabt go tothe hpelt
bp the mpd chambzeg. ¥fawe allo that f boule
toas verp hpe roundeavoute. Che Coundacpon
of p (pde chambzes was a metrovde, that is. vi.
cubptes brode. Che thpcknefie of the pde wall
without, contapned.v.cubptes, and fo dpd the
Out wall of the chambzes inthe boule.
Wetvoene the chambzes was the wpones.rr.
cubptes counde aboute the boule. Che chambze
Doozes Mode ouer agapni the out wall, the one
doore Was towarde the nozth, the other toward
the fouth: and the thpchnes of the out wall was
D.cubptes rounde aboute. Mot the buplopuge
tbat was feperated towarde the wet, was.irr.
Te a de:
‘B,.cubptes EOPCRETONNOE avout, ANO EDE LEN aning pillerg lpike the fozecourt:therfore were
foure (cozecubptesandten.Sobemealuredthe thepimaller then tbofe bahy q ite S
boufe, wbhiche was an.€-cubptes longe, andthe toreken fromthe grounde vpwarde.
feperated buplopnare with the wall, were an, C. The wall wout that tode bp the chambzes 35
cubites longe allo. Che wydnes befozep boule, towarde the vttermoft courte vpon the fo2efpbe
_ andof tt that was feperated towarde thecat, of the chamb2e3, was.l. cubptes lowe.
‘Was an.C.cubptes. — I length of p vttermoft chambees in the foze court

C Andpemealurcdthelength of the buplopna was.Lcnbptesalfo:but thelenath therot before
before g bebpnde withthe chambzes vponbotbe the temple wagan.€.cubptes. be ecbambges
thelpdes, and itcontapned an.C.cubptes. The had onder them an intraiice of p eatklpoe, wher-
innermer temple, the pozche of thefozecourt.the bp aman mpabt qo into thé out of the foze court
fyde poftes, thefe thee bad fpbewwpndomes, and thozoto thethicke wall of the Fore court toward
Latir rounde abonte ouct agaputt the poftes,

vom the grounde Dpto the wpndowes. The dpng. Wefoze the fame buplopng ypon this {poe
wpndowes them felues were tpled ouer wpth there werechambres allo, whiche hada wap yea
Hoozdes :andthuswasttaboue thedoore Duto tothem,lpkeag the chambze of thenozeh {poe of
themmmof boufe, ¢ without allo. Pee, the whole thefame length and wpdenefie.
wall oneucep {pde,bothe withing without wag ` Thep: intraunce, fatbpon,and doozes were
fCpledDouce w great boozdes. There twere Cheru- allo of the fame maner. Pee, euen lpke as the
rc Poo veers ete ete Deke opa manu d002e3 were : fo were thole alfo

ODE CUE E crubpns.sDnecpe- of the loutblpde. And befo .

| rub bab tno aces. tbe face ofaman lokpnge a- And before the wape towarde
poetowarde the date tree, ¢ alponsfaceontbe adoo2e to moin at. Tdenlapd he 12: T
E een tiem AAE ya beats aboute in bese (Neel Se asd ty
all p Doule.vec,the Cyeruvins g date trees were ftande before the backe buplopnere: thole bebo-
made from the qrounde dp aboucthedooze, elo ty habitacions,wherin tbe: sse that do fers
ode they alfo vpon the wall of the temple. upee before the Lorde, sd eate the moot bol

The bpe polkes of the temple were fourlqua: ofterp k
Sit a AAEE eR, amma meat oereage, (yan of
CPa.FFD.e ea : «+ Che and treipace owerpnges : Foz iti 0z
upea of aiin re i me anicar rpnges p pngesg : toz itis an bo

ptes tonge : Drs corners ipe length tyewales (all not go out into the forecourt: but (fepnge

were of wood. And hefapd wntome:Chisisthe thep bebolp) thep pall leaue the clothes erue

table that pall tande before P Lozde. Thetem- mpnyltracpon, € put on other garmenteg, when

ple andthe Dolpelt ofall bad epther of them two thep baueanptbpngeta do with the people.

oozes, AND eucrp dooze had tvo Iptlewpckets Mote when he bad mealured all the inner- 1D

Ywhich were Folden in one ypon another, on eue- mer houle, be baought me Forth thozorve the cat

ty poe two. And bponthe doozes of thetemple parte, and mealured the fame rounde aboute.

there Were made Cherubingand datetreeslpke tye meatured the cal (yde with the metrodde,

- As bpon tbe wales : anda great thycke balke of thiche rounde aboute contapned.v.C.metcods
Wood Was before on the outlpde of the pozche. des: And thenozthipde mealured be, which cona
pon borhe the fydes of the walles of p pozche, fapnedrounde.aboute euen fo moche. Che otber
| : two


pF esechyell,


fwotpdesalfo towarde the fouth and the weft,
tobpebe be mealured, contepned eptber of them
tpuc hundzcd metroddes. So he mealuredall ë
fourelpdes, where there went a wall rounde a=
bout Fpue bundzed metroddes longe yas bzode
alfowppych bel tbe bolp from the vnboly.

| @)'Che.rlitt. Chapter.
€ De freth the giszp of God goinge (nto the Temple from
| ‘tndenceit bab before departen, Be mencponeth thepbelatrp
OF (he chpib78 of Firact, fe? the tohich thep tucre confamed


and brought tensught. $e iscemmaunded ta callthema:
gapneto cipentaniire,


SHORE” gon was * ipkethefpzitethat 3 fae, when J
tent tn, what tpme as thecitpe huld rhe bene
Pedra detroped:xandlpke the vifpontbat Fiawe bp
“""" thewaterof Cobar. Then fell J vpon my Face:
but the glozpe of the Lozdecame into the boule,
thozowe the eat Doze. Doa wpnde toke me bp
nd bought me into the innermer courte, g ber
` polbe:the boule was ful of the glozp off Lozbd.
25" _-Fdearde one fpeakpnge buto me out ofthe
houfe:and there tode one bp me,that fapd unto
“tap bla. nye: thou fomne of ma, xthys romets mp feat
Zporpia, andthe place ofmp fote fteps, whereas J wpll
——- Phellantonge the chpldzen of Fraell foz euer-
moze:fo that the boule of Jiraci thal nomoze de-
Eple mp bolp name-nepther thep, no2 thep2spn-
estbozowe thep2 whozdome,thozowe thepze
bre places, and thozoWwe p dead bodyes of thep2
phges: todiche Daue buplded thep2 threthoaldes
in maner barde bponmy thzetholdes, andthep2
potes almoff at my poftes:anda wal betwprt
_meandthem. Thus bauetbhep defpledmp bolp
» `` name with tbeyze abbominacpong,ý they baue
cOmptted. Wiberfoze F paue detroped tbem in
mp tath. 2ut notve thep thal put awap their
C whozdome, andthe beade bodpes of thep2 kpn-
ges out of mp fpgbt tbat mape dwellamong
sachata ¢hemfozeucrmoze.xCbhertore D thaufonne of
man bewe thou the Doutpolbde of Ziracll a tem-
ple that tbey mape be atbamed of thep2 wpckce
riefle and mealure thé (clues anerample therat:
Aud when they ve athamend of al thep2 woz
- kes, then Mewe them the fourme and fatpton of
~ thetemple,the compngein,the gopnge oute,all
the cara iedi7 S therof. ee, all the t
fes and ozdpnatinces of it thbattbep map aae g

fullfpll all tbe fatbyons and cuftomes therot.
D Chisisthedeltripcpon ofthe boule. Aboue
pon the mount rounde about allebecozners, it
ipalbe the Dolpe of all.webolde,thatisthede
fcripcpon and faibpon of the boule. Chisistbe
incatur of theaultar, after p true cubpte:wbich
fe afpanne longer then another cubpte,bis bot=
fominthe mpd waz acubpte longe and wpde,
andthe ledge tat went tounde aboute it,wasa
fpanne bzode. This tthe bygeth of the aultare.
| Se omtpegroundto the lowar teps, thelength
tg two cubptes: andthe bedthe onecubpte:and


feomthelower Reppeg to thebpaber, ave foure


JFol-xctif,


cubpted, and the bzedth but one cubpte.
* The aulter was fouce cubptes bpe, fron SF rroga
theaultare pptwarde (ode foure bozneg , and i
Was twelve cubpteslonge, and twelue cubpted
b20de Dpon the four cozners:the couerpnee of p
aultar was fourtene cubptes longe and bzoge Y
pon tbe fourecozners, and the ledge that wente
toundeaboute pad balfeacubpte, andthe bots
tome therof roundeaboute one cubpte:bis ftepg ©
flode fowardethecafte. And be fapde yutome:
‘hou fonne of man, thus lapth the Lorde God
thetc ave p ozdpnantices andlawes of theaulter
inthe dave when tt is madeto offer bucnte ofe-
tpnges,andto {pzpnisle blonde J pre Top
pzelteg,tothe Rcuites that be of the lede of Sa : =
bochxandtreade before metodo melernyce, fap aiir b
ctb the Lod God Uintothele geuethoua pong
bullocke Foz a {pune offerpng: and take p bloud
o pesana fp2putsle big Foure bozneg withal;
the Foure coznerg of the aultareconerpng, with
tbe ledge that goeth rounde aboute, berewpth
alte thou clente it,zreconcple it. x Thou Halt xentsvt ¢,
take bullocke allo of the fpnneoffrpng,and FE
burne bpm tn a fenerall place without the SAh-
ctuarp. Che nerte dape,take a gote bucke, with
oute blempe Fo: alpnne offcryng,toreconcple
the Yultace wythall, lpkeasit wagreconcpled
wrth the bullocke. H
Mowe when thou hal made it cleane,then |
Ofera ponge bullockex without blempihe, and Zerre
& camme oute ofthe locke Without blempibal
fo. Dffer them befoze the Lozde,and let p ack .
caft +falte therupon,and geue them fo wnto the Leie
Lorde fora burnt offeryng. Scuendapes palt
thou bzpnee enerpdaye a gote bucke Foz fpune.
ai ponge bullocke and a ram of the f ocke, botbe
without blempip, thal thep offcr.cuen dapes
Mall thep reconcple andclente the anlter and of:
fer Dpon it. Wien tbefe dapes are erppzed, then
bpon tbe epabte dapeand loforth,the Pecaltes
all offer thep2 burnt oferpuges andpeltbofe . »
tpnges bpon the aultare: fo ¥ wpll be mercpful hi
vnto pou, apid the Lozde God. >
C Che.rlitt.Chapter, —

Cie Seweth what doze of chetemple ts Hut, iets came
 ‘Maunbed to Dpbzaps (he people topeh ihep: offence. The br

circumtp ied in berte,andin thefiehe Who are to beapmpe

Ced to the ferupce ofthe temple: and who to be refuren, Be
_ Geweth what preltcs be olde paue admpered into tye boip

place,anbd alfo thepz o Epee,

m fter tbps be bzoughtme agapne to x4
ky the out Warde doze of the Sanctua
‘Aiepeon the eatt {poe ¢ that was hut
3 @ ben lapde the Lozd wnto me:thig
seen] DOL HALDE Fpl hut:and not opened
foz anp manto go thozotve tt : but onelp forthe
Lode God of Fleael: pea, be Hal gothoowit,
ciles Hall it be put Fpl. Che wWepncee bpmfelfe
thallcome thozowcit,that be mape cate bzeade
before the Lode. Atthe portche hall be come
in, and there hallbeqoo outeagapne. Then
bzougbte be me tothe doze bpon thenoztbelpde
of the boule.Andas ¥lokedaboute me, bebolde er.rrii.t
*theqlozpe of the Lozvefplled the boule,and F smoke


_ AUMIA


fell Downe Dpon mp face. -


Do the Lorde tpake vnto me: D thoufonne pma
of man, taten thps ese Fo eae 5


O O O a


y Tye Prophtepe,


takedilpgent bede toall that J wpllfape tonto’ per bulbande: but a mapde of the fede of p boule
fp Lode of Hrael,o2 a wopdow è hath hada prek before. A

and ali pistawes:ponder well with thyne rte Thep pall thetoe mp people the Dpfference Deut. rhi
thecompng mofttpe bouleand the gopng! 2t betwene the bolp and wnbolp, tmprtepcleamt =
ofthe Sanctuarp:and tell tbat obftpnate dout and bnclean. Pf any oifcogde arple thep aldit
olde of Zfracll. Thus fapthtbe LD G0: D cerne it: andgeuefentenceaftermp tudgemens
boufe of Biracll, pe bane nowe done proughe Ù tes. Sp folempne Feattes, mp latoes and o2bp
allpoure abbomtnacpons , Cepnae that pe paue naunces tall thep kepe, and batotve mp Sab-
bzougbte intomp Sanctuarpe rraunaers, pa- botheg.x Thep Mall comeat no deade perfonto.,..,
npnge vncircumepled hartes and felie, where defple them felues.erceptit be fatheroz mother Trace bles
thozowe mp Hanctuarp tg Defpled,wohenpe of fonne Ozd0Ng ter brother oz fpiter, that bathe `

freme bgeade,fat,and blonde. padypetno bulband, m fuchmap er bedefyled -

Thus with al pour abbominacpons pe bane And when bets clenfed, there Ma berekened 6

poken mp coucnaunt,and not kept the Holp 92° pnto bpm feuen dapes:and pébe go into $ Dan "te
Dynaunces of mp Sanctuary : buttet bepersot ctuarp agape todo ferupee,be dalbepng a fpr a2)

mp Danctuarp,euen after pout otonempnoe. —offerpng,fapththe 102d od,* Thep hal haul De.rviit.s.

@ berfoze thuslapeth the Lorde God:of allthe anberptage:pee, 3mp felf wplbe thepa peritage HD
qranngers thatDdtoell amonge the chplozen of elicsthallpe genctbemno offeliponin Firat `
Jiraell, no traungerwhofebarteand fictive ts foz Jam thep: polieiipon.’ þe meatofferpnge,
not circumepled, (ball come within mp Sanctu Tynne offerpng and trefpace offerpn alltbep -

atp: #20, oz the Lenitestbat begone backe fro cate,and enerp Dedicate thpna in jfrael,halbe

me:and paue difccaued p people of Frael wpth thepzs. The Fp2ftlpnges of all the Fatt frutes,
allerrouts.gopngeatter thep2 Jools itherfoze andallthe frepl oftcpnges thalbe the prettes.

Epall thep beare thepz owne wyctednes. Sbuld Pe thal geue vuto the pealt allo alltbefp2i

they befetand ozdepned to minptter onder the frute otpout fp2ft bome, allg fape,and all that

dozes of the boufe of mp Sanctuary’ Andtodo isteperated onto God.all pour beue offerpnges: |
Cerupce tn the Doute:to ape burnt offerpngce $ (Bla ethalbe the perttes,and allo the fyzttipy

Cacrifyces fo: the people: to Mande befozethem, gesotpour Bough, that God mape prorpere E96 ereta
andto ferue them, fepnge tbefernpce that owp: telpone. x Sut no dead carpon all the Pea e Erap è

boute cate, noz luche asig deuoured of wpldsbeafies, =


of Araceli to ftumble thozow thep2 wpckednes. foules,o2 cattell. | }
niteeie,  *Jeortde which caule 3 baue plucte out imine . CChe.xlo.Chapter. a |
bandeouner them,lapeth the torde Hadfothat --  qouteok the lande of promes are there feperate foure per


we they yearet atone inig Ho ` cpons, of which the fpr is geuen Co thepzettes eto the tem ]
notwe thep muit beare Eber! a ep Poepp poe: ‘sensu ancanaron anto erenrat in: DY
bode inmp sanctuarp, andmoft bolpe “ofall; wt wersbces ¢ meatures. RORE ER. T, x | |
a — i |

esepiviie |


bominacpons, wobich they hauc douc. Spule]
bfe themto be posters of the poufe,eudtealthe |


p


' pen of Zfraell were gonefrom me,thatcomie to pnito the Hanctuarp.v.C.meteroddes tn all eh
metodo meferupee,to Mande before me, and to bd Danera Poy Seaton


| put onlpnen clothes, fotbat no wullepnecome prefteg whicbe do ferupce inthe Sanctu 5.
D on them tobple thep do ferupce wider p Dores He Lone and go oep Pe SA ai h ;

| of the innermer courte and tithin. Ghepthall th ttbep mape baue rowme todwell in.As fos

haue fapzelpnen bonettes vpont 2 heades;t the Sanctuary.tt Wall Lande foz it felfe:and to


ep tha
thep gofozthto the people into p outwardcourt length, and ten thoufande bzedth : petal gene


| Sanctuary, and puton otberappacil, leftthep fpoet arteof the Sanctuary: i
| gg Dibalowe the people with thepz clothes. P a be Sanctuarp-ehat whatbe tor


preu. prib mottecourte,@alldzpnbe no wpne.* Thep pal


HLeut.p.t. Headesonlp.* Ali thepeettes that gointo the it Ipeth ourcagapnite the Citpe: asfarre agreas,
Oiataitt marp no Mpoowe, neptheronethat is put front © beaglongeas one parte, from the w


trie re : |
| deal He omethe upe ofebepebeate;butroundetbepe there albe qeucn ontotbe popnce wpat focuer;


t


$
j


Oi Esecyyeu.
cat. ThisHalbthis otne landeimzfracll that gapen
mp pzpnces benomoze chargeable bntomyp pcos | m ei


ple. And {uch as pet remapneth oucrintbclande
fhalbe geuen to the poule of Fracl accozdpug to


thepz trpbes. Thus lapth the Logot G oD: ye | z


pneis. pe baue nowe oppeeffed and delttoped
pnough:nowe leaue of bandle nowe accozdpng
to the tbpnge that ts equall andlawful:¢ thult
put mp people nomozelapth the Logde God.
wring * Pe thal bauc a true wetgpt,a teue Eph. And
Seu. Fre eatrue bath. Che Ephabandthebath Halve a-
egy phe. One bath thal contapne the tenth parte of
- anbomer,andfo thallone Ephabbo:thep2 mea
¢ero.rrrb Sure albcafter the bomer.: Dnefpde maketh
tea srbtio etpentpe Tatras. Sotwentp [peles and. crv.
AUNT eh Cycles make apounde. Chis is the beucofe-
png tbat pe thal geuc to be heaucd:namelyp, the
{yxtene parteot an Epbab, oute ofan homer of
-~ Spbéate,andthe.ryt.parte ofan Ephabh,oute of
an boner o€ barlep. Che ople Halbe mefared w
the batb:encn p.x.part of one bath out ofa Coz
GE  Tenbathesmake onehomer:foz one homer
frlleth ten batbes. And one lambe fro two hun=
Meth Hepe out of p paure of Fleael:fo2 a meat
offerpig, burnt offerpng, and beltbofferpnag to
~: geconcple them faptbtbhe £020 God: All the peo
ple of the lande Hall geue this beucofring with
afrewyl fo: the people of Ffrae! Agapn,tt thal
be the peprces parte to offer burnt offerpnges,
meatofierpnges,and Dzpnkeofrpnges vnto the
Lorde, inp bolp dapes new mones, Sabdbbothes
ahdin all the bpe Ecateg ofthe boule of Firael.
- @befpnne offepng,meatofirpng, burnt offeyng
Dan beltpofferpng Hall be gene to reconcple the
7 boule of 3lracll,
SE -- Thus lapth the Lorde God. Che fprlk dape
of the fp2f moncth thou Walt take a ponge bul
“= Jocke without blempebe, and clente the Sanctu
~~ Atp. Dobe preat thal take of the bloude of the
{pnofirpna, and (pzpnisle tt vuto the poltes of p
 poufe,and bpon the foure corners ofthe aultar,
with the doze poteg of the imermercourt. Xud
thug palt thon do allo. p fenenth dape of the mo
suno. nethælfo? {uch as baue tinned of panozaunce,o2
‘bepng difceaued) toreconcplethe boute withal,
crosif.e, KUpOnehe.xcuitt.dape of p fpzite moncth,pe Hal
Leu.rriit.2 kepe cater. peuendDapes Mall the fealke contp=
DeuFle sue wherein there Hall nofowse noz leuended
beade be eaten. |
®G°  Cponthelame dape, hall the Bapnee qeue
_~ fozbpmfelfe and all.the people of p lande, a bul
locke foza Matis ana in fe ealt of the fe
uci dapes be (hall offer cuerp Dape a bullocke €
aramme,tbat are without blempth foz a burnt-
ofterpng vntothe Lode: andan begote daplpe
foz alpnofferenge. Sfo2 the meat ofterpnges be
thal geuc cuer an Epbab toa bullock an pha
toa ramme, and anbpn of opletoane€pbhab’
Tipon the.cv.dap of theleucuth moneth,be thal
kepe the feuendapes holy, one atter another eut
asthe otber fencn dapes: with tbelprotterpng,
burntofferpng,meatoferpng,and with ople.
C The.rlvi. Chapter.
T tad Cacrifpces ofthe Sabboch and of (he neiwe mones.
Sie fn few hs de pores Chep mn go in,of come ont oF (be


SCOLACY.


B29 RACA Dapes : but in the Sabbotb,and tt
ATY 2 ef the dape of the new mone tt Halbe
ke ened, Chen Hall f papiicecome
bnder the doze poztch, tande tpl without bp
the dozecbeke. So the pretes thal offer bp bps
burnt and beltbofferpngaes. And he Hall W02-
{bppat the Doze pot, ggo bts wap fortbagapn
but the doze (pal nomoze be Hut tpl p enenpng. 15
Dn the fame maner pall the people of f land
alfo Dothep2 woz ppp befoze the Lozb prhout
this doze bpon the Sabbothes and new mones
Chis is no we the burntofferpng,that Ppepnee
fall bzpng punto the Lozbde vponthe Sabboth
fprelambes without blem th, and a ram with
out blemptp, and an Ephad foz a meatofferpng
with tbe ram. Asfoz thelambes,be mape geue
as many meatoffrpngesto them as be tpl: and
an dpi ofople toanephab. an thedape of p neo
monethit halbe a ponge bullocke without ble-
mp{p:{prelambes and a ramallo without ble=
mpih:(éLich the bullocke De ali geucanepbab
and wpth che ramme ancphab allo fora meates
Offering, but to the lambes,wbat he mape come
bp. And cuer an Hin of ople to anephab. €
When the papncee cometh, be algo vnder
fhe doze poztche,and euen there departe forth a-
apne. wut when the people of f lande come be
02e the 102d in the bpe folempne featt,as many
ascomeinbp the nozth doze todo worth pp, thal
gooutagapnattheCouth doze. Andehep p come
nat the fouth doze, Hall go forztbagapne at the
Hozth Doze. There all none go out at thedoze,
Where be camein, but hallgorpghte forth ouer
onthe other fpe and the Pe2pnee tall goin and
outamonge them, Ciponthelolempne and ppe
feat dapes this halbe the meatoikerpng.

An Ephabh toa bullocke, andDanepdab toa zy
ram,and to thelambes,asmanp as he wpl:but
cuer an binof opletoan epbab. owe when the
n2pnce baynaeth a burntotiring, o2 anbeltbofte
rpg witha frewpl onto the Logd, the ealt doze
fpalbe opened Duto bym, thathe mapedo top!
bis burnt and belebolfcinges,as he Doth ppon
Sabbotb, when he goethforrbe, the doze Hall
be (but after bym agapne. be (hall daplp bypng
nfo the Lorde alambe of a pere olde withoute
blempibe foz a burnt oferpnge:thps Hall edo
euerp moznpnge. |

And for ameatofferyne, be hall qeuep fprte gz
parte of an Ephab,and p thpade parte of an bin
of ople,to mpnale with p cakes euerp moznpng
Pee this halbe a Dapip mcatofferpng vuto the
{Lo2de:fo2 anteuerlaftpug ozdpnautice:and thus
foal the lambe the meatoffrpng and opie be ge=
wen cuerp moznprig,fo2 a oey burnt offerpug.

ocom. ueiayey the Lozde Gob: Ff the
prince eue agpfte Duto anp ofpisfonmies then
fHall it be hysfonnes berptage perpetuall,that


pdemap polleffe tt. ut pt be wpl gene one of bis


feruaiites,fome of bis berptage,tt Halbe pista

thexfre pere,andthento returne agapne vntop Mie os

pepnce:fo2 bis berptage Halbe bis tonnes Zs ‘Auctrrbig
VE


The Brophecpe,


+The ppnee alfo (hall take none of the peo-

les tnbecptaunce noz put them from thep2 pol-
eftpon but to bis owneionnes Hall be geuc bis
ioftefipon, Pp mp people be not {catered abode,
but that eucrpsnan mape baue bys owne. And
be bzougbt me thozowe the entraunce at p fpoe
ofthe doze to the babita ‘er of the Sanctuarp
that belongcth to the peeltes and Mode towarde

the nozth,and bebold:rhere was a place bpon p

gs wel (poe then fapde be Unto me.

; € vig isthe place where the Beates Hal
dpabt the trefpace and (pnofferpnges,and bake
the meatofirpuges, that thep nede not beare the
fucotbe ontwardecourte:and fo to pnhalowe
people. So be brought me into f vtmof courte
rounde aboute all the foure cozners. wWebholde:in
euerp coner of thecourte, there wag pet a lptle
courte. Pea,inal four cogners of the court,tpere
was made 4 Lytle court of fozty cubpéestonge,
and tbpatp cubptes bzone: thele faur lptle cout-
tes were of onelpke meafure,and there wentes
rpdge wallroundea bonte rhemall four, onder
the which ther were harthes made round about
@benlapde be nto me. Thig is f beche where
tbe minpiterg of the boufe thall dpght the flapne
offerpnaes of the people,

CTbe.rlvou Chapter. |
Cabe iipon of the waters tbat Came oute of Che temale,
he coattes of the land of pzemene, andthe peuilpou ther:
ot bp trpbet-
prema fter thys be brought me agapn be-

7 fv ey oze the doze of p boute:and bepolve

E i AY there quilted out waters from Vn-

FA Co AS rpe pones of the boule cRiward,

ifor the boule Mode totwarde the eat


tilre rrit.
dieg ipb


that ran dowone ypontherpabt ipdeof p boule,
Pobhich lpeth to the aultar foutpwarde. Chen ca-
ried be me out tothe nozthdo2e,and bought me
forth there rounde aboute bp the vtmoft Doze
sacb-riff.a. turnet ealkwarde.* Weboloc,there came fort
AND.FUEY: the Mater pontberpght {poe Powe when the
man that bad the metrod in bis bande went vn-
co the caft doze, bemealarcd a thoufand cubites
ano then be brougbte me thozowe the water, e=
uento theancles: fobemealured petatbouland
and bzougbt me hap PRA er ot Sd ne
to the knees : pet meatured be a thoufande , and
brought me thozowve the water vuto plopnes.:
$  Aftertbisbe meafurcdatboulandeagapue


tben wag itfuchearpuer, Pp 3 mpabtnot wade.


thozow it. Che water was Te depe, thatit wag
nedefalltobaucfwpmmied , fozit mpgbt not be
wadedouer. Andbe fapde vntome: bate thou

fene this, D thou lon of mans and wpb tbat pe
bought me totberpuerbankbeagapne. Mowe

tehen Fcamethere,there tode manp trees upon

ether {pde of the rpuer banke. Chen fapde be vn

tome: Tbps water that flometh out towardp

cate, audrunnethdowne tnto the plapnefelde,
commeth tnto the fee-and from the lecttrunnetd
out:and makethbtbe waters whole. Pee-alltdat

| lpueand moue, wherunto thpsrpuer commeth
sgat.tid-c. hall cecoucr.* And where this water commet
to.it. tbere albe muche fpi. fozallcbarzcomethte
and, bii phig water Halbe lultp and whole. Wp thisrp=
uer pall the fplipers kande from Engaddt tis


to En Eglaim,and there lpredde out thep2 net-


Ipne. Parte it ndifferentlp onto one as eae
nother:xof the topiche landeg woe wnto pour wen. frite
fatpers,thattt Mulde falltopourenberptaiice, .
Thisis the border of thelande bpon f north
{pdc, fromthe mapne fee, ag men qo to sadada:
namely, emab, erotba, Sabarin, rom the
bozderg of Damalcus and Hemah bnto Pasar,
‘Tichon,and that lpeth vpon the coftes of Haue
tan. Thus the bozders from the lee forth, thalbe
Pasar, Euan:the border of Damaleus,pnoztp
and the bozdersg of Hemah,f isthe nozth parte.
The ealtelpde Hall pe mealure from Paue: W
ranand pamalcus,from Galead and the lande
of Jiraell bp Jordane and fo forth, from the lees
coft,that pets eftwarde:¢ this is the eattpacte.
TChelouthlpdets,from Thamar forth to f
xwaters of rpfe puto Cades, the rpuertotbe
mapne (ee: and that ts thefouthparte. aap
The weltparte:namely the great leefeom T"
the bozders therof,tplla ma come vnto Hemap
Oia pis lanbe pal
* Chis lande hal peparteamonge pon, at- of
codpunge tothe trepbes of Mraell, anddcupdeit as
to be an bezptage fo2 pou + and fo: p ftraungers
thatdivellamonge pou, andbegetchpldzen. tH en-rie.g
fo: pethall take them amonge the chpldzen of Saari:
Alrael, lpheas though thep were of pour otone |
Houtholde,andcountrep, and thep (pall haue pe-
rptage with pouamonge the chpldzen of Jfrael
a aarde aeaa m a s
ntbetar be (hal pe Geue bpm His herptage
fapetbtheLozdeGod. | oe ce
© The. rclviti.chapter.
reuen é s {i æ
TeS e ep aa eatit:


tpe, of Chepepnceatereberced, whe lots ct
Ape gates ofthe sttre, nF LEED other trpbes,


popon. Upon the bozdergof Manaffes fro
the caltlpde Ynto the welk, hall Ephraim paue


of Danyell,


1 po2cpon.Ci por the bozders of Ephzaim,from p
eat parte vnto the wete pall Rubenbaue bis
| pozcpon. Cipor the bogders of Ruben, from the
caffe quarter vnto the welk:thal Juda bane his
porcy on. tipon the bozders of Juda, from p eafk
part Unto the wet, pe pall fet alpde one pozcp-
on Of. reb. S). metroddes longe and bode, Ipke
as another pozcponfromthecaltefpor nto the

wet, wherin the fanctuarp pall tande.
 * sfo? the porcpon that pe pall feperate
out fo? the-Lo20,t¢ thalbe.try.9).lon ge,and.¢
42).bzode: whtchleperated bolp pozcpon Halbe
longe unto thefe: namelp to p preattes.toward
thenozt). rev. &).and towarbdethe welk.¢. S.
| b2ode,towarde the catt.r.<).b20d¢ alfo, andto
warde the louth-rrv.<).louge, wherin the fan:
ctuaty of the Lorde thall tande. Pea,this fame
place balbe the petes that ave of the chpldzen
eseritit-. of*Sadochband bane kept mp bolp ozdinaunce
si x3 Which Went notattrapein the ervour o€ thechpl
been of Sfraell, Ipke as the Leuptes ave gone a=
| Grape: and thys feperated peace that thep baue
of lande Halbe the mot bolp, barde bpon ğ bog
derg of the Leuttes. Andnerte onto the ety
ball tbe Leuttes baue.rry.<).lonee,ano.¢.<)
b20de.,C hts fhalbe on everp {poe. rrv.).longe
and.r.&2).beode. Dé this pozepon thep tall fell
notbpnge, noz make anp permutacponthereof,
Act the chefe of tbe landefal unto other,fo2 tig

balowed vntothe Lozde.

The other. v. . after the bredth that Ipeth
by the.rry.@).tbalbe comen:te ball belonge to
the citpe and tothe Cuburbes foz babptacpons
and the Citpe ball tande inthe mpodet tberot

Let this be the mealure-towarde the nozth part
v.C.and. ttt. @).towarde the fouthparte. Y.C.
and.ti.).towarde the call part. v. C.and.iiii.
42). towarde the welt part, Y.C.and.iiii s9,

zs |. Cpeluburbes hard wponthe cifpe (bal Daue
fowarde the nozth fpftpeand.u-€.towarde the
fouth.t.and.it.C€. towarde the cafte.Land.if.c..

towarde the wee alfo.l.and.i. As foz the re

{pdue of the length, lyeth barde vpon the fepe

i. tated bolp ground:namelp.r.<).toward peal
and.t.<t).fotbard p welt, nert unto pholp poze

cpon-tt € fhe encreate therof thallferue foztbep2

meate:tbat labourin thp Citpe. Chey that la-
bour fo? the Welth of thecitpe, hall mapntapne

| © this alfo,out of tobat trpbe Cocuer thep be in Fe
1. tact, All thatts Ceperated of the.rev.@).longe,
| and.rry.@).brode onthe four partes, that hal
|


se, FDA,


peput atpde foz the feperated pozcpon of p lan-

ie An O de a Ad abadga
gT e elaine on both thefpbes off fanctu
Cc ary ¢ pottellpon of thecitpe, Wal belonge to the
prance betore the place oF tbe. rrb.). onto the
eafte ende, and befoze the place of the. rey..
weifibarde ynto the bozders of f citpe, this thal
be the Pzpnces porcpon. Chis ed ae
place and the boule of the fanctuary (hall tand
in tbe mpddet, Hozeoucr fromthe Lenttes and
tbe cityes poflefpon, that Ipeinthempdt of the
ppnees parte: loke what remapnetbbetwprte
__., thebmderof guda, and p bozder of Wen Famin

it palbethe Pzpneeg.


. EJN cp MooMŘŮŘ >
~
k J

|


_ owtoftheotdertepbes,

From the eak parte vuto the wef, pal ai,

Jamin bauehps pozcvon, Tipon the borders o

en Jamin from the calte fpde wnto the rockte,

all Simeon bane his pozcpon. Capon the boz-

derg of Simeon from the calk parte onto p toef

(pall Flakarbaue bis pozcpon. Ciponthe boz- D

ders of Flakar from theeatt{pde vntothe welt,

Pra bulon baue bis pozcpon. Upon the boz-

der of sabulon from the cat part vntothe welk

pall Gad baue big pozcpon. Upon the bozderg

of Gadfouthbwarde, the coftes Hall reache from

‘Chamar forth vuto the waters of Erpfeto Cas

bes,and Co the floude,cuen puto the mapnefee. eae:
_ Tbig isthe lande with btsxpozcpons, which to.reet.rt
ethall dpitrpbute bnto the trpbes of Braell , Bam.rreis
apth tbe £020 God. Thug wpode (hall the citpe

reache bpon the nozthe parte. v.C and. tit.@.

mealures. Che portes of thecitye, Mall haue

names of the trpbes of Blracll. Che poteg of

nozeblpde,one Ruben, another Juda ,thethy23

Leut.Cipon the eatfpde. v. Cand. iiti, @.mea-

furs, ptb thre poztes, tbeone Jofeph, another

Wen Jamin, thetbpzde Dan. Cponthefouth,

fpbe.v:C.and.tiit.<t).mealures, withthze pozz ~-

tes:tbe one Simeon another Isakar, the thp:d

sabulon. Ænd bpon the wetlpde. v.C.and.iiit,

£2). mealures, with thre poztes allo: Pone Gad

another Jier the thpzde Pephealt. Tbus hall

tt Daue.rbvitt.s).meatures roundeaboute. 4nd

From that tyme foztb, tbe name of the citpe Hal

be, the Lo2ders there.


C Tbe envde o£ the prophecpe of Csechiel.


Prophet Danpell.
Che fprte Chapter,
yet Hetweth the captiupte of Heboakim kone
oF judar we coe tonnes tout weren caper ees
rommaunbeth to chofe whpch of chem Hulde betaughe the
learnpnige and language ofthe Cabloces. Thep arc alowen
the Epnges feppag. Danpel abMepucty from the meat of the
aspngeot Gabploar,


za) the thirde pere of f rapgne B

4| OF Jeboakim bpnge of Juda,

“| came Rabuchodonolo: syne

£ of Wabplon ynto Ferulalem

(. on bef aydaa ie 5 Eyrina Uipassrote

| Delpuere Oakim p kpnge Friit.a.

A een) OF Juda into bis bande witb miner

ome. Certapnognameétes of $ boule

of od, obiche Addin awape Dntothelande

of Sennar, tot e Doule of bis qob,and there be

broughtbhem into bisqondes trealurp. Andehe

Bpnge pake unto aE chefe chambers

layne that be thulde bapnere bymecerta ne ofthe

chplozen of Fracll,chat were come of kpnges

fede and of pzpnees,ponge fpapngaleg without

any blempth,but fapzet welfauoured,inttruce

tn all wp ome, connpnge and dnderandpnee

wobiche tere able to ttande inthe kpnies palace

to reade and to learne for to {peake ws e A
into


of Danyell,


1 po2cpon.Ci por the bozders of Ephzaim,from p
eat parte vnto the wete pall Rubenbaue bis
| pozcpon. Cipor the bogders of Ruben, from the
caffe quarter vnto the welk:thal Juda bane his
porcy on. tipon the bozders of Juda, from p eafk
part Unto the wet, pe pall fet alpde one pozcp-
on Of. reb. S). metroddes longe and bode, Ipke
as another pozcponfromthecaltefpor nto the

wet, wherin the fanctuarp pall tande.
 * sfo? the porcpon that pe pall feperate
out fo? the-Lo20,t¢ thalbe.try.9).lon ge,and.¢
42).bzode: whtchleperated bolp pozcpon Halbe
longe unto thefe: namelp to p preattes.toward
thenozt). rev. &).and towarbdethe welk.¢. S.
| b2ode,towarde the catt.r.<).b20d¢ alfo, andto
warde the louth-rrv.<).louge, wherin the fan:
ctuaty of the Lorde thall tande. Pea,this fame
place balbe the petes that ave of the chpldzen
eseritit-. of*Sadochband bane kept mp bolp ozdinaunce
si x3 Which Went notattrapein the ervour o€ thechpl
been of Sfraell, Ipke as the Leuptes ave gone a=
| Grape: and thys feperated peace that thep baue
of lande Halbe the mot bolp, barde bpon ğ bog
derg of the Leuttes. Andnerte onto the ety
ball tbe Leuttes baue.rry.<).lonee,ano.¢.<)
b20de.,C hts fhalbe on everp {poe. rrv.).longe
and.r.&2).beode. Dé this pozepon thep tall fell
notbpnge, noz make anp permutacponthereof,
Act the chefe of tbe landefal unto other,fo2 tig

balowed vntothe Lozde.

The other. v. . after the bredth that Ipeth
by the.rry.@).tbalbe comen:te ball belonge to
the citpe and tothe Cuburbes foz babptacpons
and the Citpe ball tande inthe mpodet tberot

Let this be the mealure-towarde the nozth part
v.C.and. ttt. @).towarde the fouthparte. Y.C.
and.ti.).towarde the call part. v. C.and.iiii.
42). towarde the welt part, Y.C.and.iiii s9,

zs |. Cpeluburbes hard wponthe cifpe (bal Daue
fowarde the nozth fpftpeand.u-€.towarde the
fouth.t.and.it.C€. towarde the cafte.Land.if.c..

towarde the wee alfo.l.and.i. As foz the re

{pdue of the length, lyeth barde vpon the fepe

i. tated bolp ground:namelp.r.<).toward peal
and.t.<t).fotbard p welt, nert unto pholp poze

cpon-tt € fhe encreate therof thallferue foztbep2

meate:tbat labourin thp Citpe. Chey that la-
bour fo? the Welth of thecitpe, hall mapntapne

| © this alfo,out of tobat trpbe Cocuer thep be in Fe
1. tact, All thatts Ceperated of the.rev.@).longe,
| and.rry.@).brode onthe four partes, that hal
|


se, FDA,


peput atpde foz the feperated pozcpon of p lan-

ie An O de a Ad abadga
gT e elaine on both thefpbes off fanctu
Cc ary ¢ pottellpon of thecitpe, Wal belonge to the
prance betore the place oF tbe. rrb.). onto the
eafte ende, and befoze the place of the. rey..
weifibarde ynto the bozders of f citpe, this thal
be the Pzpnces porcpon. Chis ed ae
place and the boule of the fanctuary (hall tand
in tbe mpddet, Hozeoucr fromthe Lenttes and
tbe cityes poflefpon, that Ipeinthempdt of the
ppnees parte: loke what remapnetbbetwprte
__., thebmderof guda, and p bozder of Wen Famin

it palbethe Pzpneeg.


. EJN cp MooMŘŮŘ >
~
k J

|


_ owtoftheotdertepbes,

From the eak parte vuto the wef, pal ai,

Jamin bauehps pozcvon, Tipon the borders o

en Jamin from the calte fpde wnto the rockte,

all Simeon bane his pozcpon. Capon the boz-

derg of Simeon from the calk parte onto p toef

(pall Flakarbaue bis pozcpon. Ciponthe boz- D

ders of Flakar from theeatt{pde vntothe welt,

Pra bulon baue bis pozcpon. Upon the boz-

der of sabulon from the cat part vntothe welk

pall Gad baue big pozcpon. Upon the bozderg

of Gadfouthbwarde, the coftes Hall reache from

‘Chamar forth vuto the waters of Erpfeto Cas

bes,and Co the floude,cuen puto the mapnefee. eae:
_ Tbig isthe lande with btsxpozcpons, which to.reet.rt
ethall dpitrpbute bnto the trpbes of Braell , Bam.rreis
apth tbe £020 God. Thug wpode (hall the citpe

reache bpon the nozthe parte. v.C and. tit.@.

mealures. Che portes of thecitye, Mall haue

names of the trpbes of Blracll. Che poteg of

nozeblpde,one Ruben, another Juda ,thethy23

Leut.Cipon the eatfpde. v. Cand. iiti, @.mea-

furs, ptb thre poztes, tbeone Jofeph, another

Wen Jamin, thetbpzde Dan. Cponthefouth,

fpbe.v:C.and.tiit.<t).mealures, withthze pozz ~-

tes:tbe one Simeon another Isakar, the thp:d

sabulon. Ænd bpon the wetlpde. v.C.and.iiit,

£2). mealures, with thre poztes allo: Pone Gad

another Jier the thpzde Pephealt. Tbus hall

tt Daue.rbvitt.s).meatures roundeaboute. 4nd

From that tyme foztb, tbe name of the citpe Hal

be, the Lo2ders there.


C Tbe envde o£ the prophecpe of Csechiel.


Prophet Danpell.
Che fprte Chapter,
yet Hetweth the captiupte of Heboakim kone
oF judar we coe tonnes tout weren caper ees
rommaunbeth to chofe whpch of chem Hulde betaughe the
learnpnige and language ofthe Cabloces. Thep arc alowen
the Epnges feppag. Danpel abMepucty from the meat of the
aspngeot Gabploar,


za) the thirde pere of f rapgne B

4| OF Jeboakim bpnge of Juda,

“| came Rabuchodonolo: syne

£ of Wabplon ynto Ferulalem

(. on bef aydaa ie 5 Eyrina Uipassrote

| Delpuere Oakim p kpnge Friit.a.

A een) OF Juda into bis bande witb miner

ome. Certapnognameétes of $ boule

of od, obiche Addin awape Dntothelande

of Sennar, tot e Doule of bis qob,and there be

broughtbhem into bisqondes trealurp. Andehe

Bpnge pake unto aE chefe chambers

layne that be thulde bapnere bymecerta ne ofthe

chplozen of Fracll,chat were come of kpnges

fede and of pzpnees,ponge fpapngaleg without

any blempth,but fapzet welfauoured,inttruce

tn all wp ome, connpnge and dnderandpnee

wobiche tere able to ttande inthe kpnies palace

to reade and to learne for to {peake ws e A
into


The W2rophecye,

x  Cntothele the bynaeappopntedarertapne pps dzeame. Soo thep came and (robe before the
porcpon of bps owne meate : and ofthe wpne, Epnge. And tie kpngefapde vnto tbem: J baue
wbpehe be Drankebpm felfe,fotonozphhetbem dreamed a dzcamc, andmp f{pzete was fo tron-
thie pere:that afterwarde thep mpg be tand be bled therctopth, that paue cleane forgotten,
fore the kpnae. Amonae thelenowe were cer what J Dzeamed. Ayee the Chaldecs aun-
fapie of the chplazen of fuda:namelp manpel, (weredtiekpnge inp Diryans{peche:  bpng

/ Bnantas,aifacland Asariag. Unto thete the @onlanethp lyfe for euer. Shewe thp feruaun
chefe chamberlapne gaue otbernames.andcal: teg thp deame,and toe all Mewe the, what it
ied Danyel Walthatar Anantas,Didpach:Gt meancth. Che kynge gave the Chaloces thep
facl,<e)ifach:and Alarias, Abednago.wut Da anlwere and fapde:3t isqonefrome.PEpewpt

mepit. npel toag ata popute wyth bpm felfe, * tpat be notmake me pyndertande the deame wpth the
etn olde not be Defpledtporowe the kpngesimcat interpzetacpon therof,pe pal dpe and pour Dou
nog the wpne whpehebeozonke. And thishede- fes palbe pipita, ;
{pred of the chefe chamberlapne,lette he Moulder Wut pipe tell me the dreame ¢ the meanpng 25
defplebpm felfe. So Hod gaue Daniclfauoure therof,pe Mall pauc of me gpfteg,rewardegand 3
and qracebefoze tbe chefe chamberlapnetbatbe great honoure: onelp thewe me the dzcameand i
fapbe onto bpm :-aam afcapbe of mp Lo2ve tbe Ses parutyear oe ofit. Thep anlweredagapne |
space, which bath appopnted pou ponr meatg atid fapde:thebyng muft there is teruauntes
Dapritse: lect helppe poure facestobe worlelp: the dreame-and (o all we Declare whatitmea
q kenge tben the otber tpepngaldes ofpourage,¢ neth. Thentbekpngcanlwercd fapinge: pere — ,
fo pe fhall mate me lote mp peade bntopkpng: cepueofatruth,thatpe do but peolonge p tpme l
Then Danpel anfwercd Melafar, wyone foz fo much aspele that the thpng is gone from
the chefe chamberiapn bad fet ouer Daniel Ana me. Therfozepfpe wpll not tell me the oan,
niag, Milal and I riag and fapde: D prone pe hallall paue one indgement. Hut petapne €
butten dapes with thy feruatites, ¢ let vs auc Diflemble with vayne oozdes,whych pe fpeake Ls: i;
pottage to cate, and water todzpube,then lobe befozeme,to put of the tyme. Cherfore tellme p . |
dpon our faces and they2s tbateateofthekpn: Deame andto (ball 3 knowe,pfpecan ew me
geg meate. And as thou tept, fodealewpthvs xwbaritmeancth.Cipon thig tbe Chalbees gaue
thy feruaŭtes. oheconfentedto theminthis aunlwere before the kyna, and lapde: there ts
matter,and pzoued them r. Dapes. Andafterp no man vponearthe, that cantellthe thpnge,
tendapes thepzfaces Were bettcelpbpnge and wbicbhe thetepnge (peaketh of:peathere ten a
fatter thettall p ponge {prpugaldes, which opd ther kpng prince no? Lozde tbat cuer afked fu f
cate of thekpnges meate. tbpngegatafotblaper, charmer o? Chaldep:foz d
Thus Welafar coke awap thep2meateand it iga verp barde mattcr,thatthbekpnge cequp= i
qwptie,eqgauc them pottage therfore: Godgaue reth. Meptbherits there anp,thatcan certifpe the
nowe there four (papngaldes connpng and leat- kpnge therof, excepte the goddes : wpoledwel-
nyngemallicepptuce and topfedome:butbnto lpng isnot amonge the creatures.
Danypel{pecpallp,de gaue pnderftandpngofal — forthe whichecaule the kpngewas woth C
pifponsand breaines. Owe when p tpmewas with greateindignacpon, and commaundedto
erpp2ed,that theapng bad appopntedtobapng deltrope all the wpfe menat Iabplon: and the
inthefe ponge fpzpngaldes bite bpm, the chete procenata a fozth.@ tbe wple men were
chamberlapne brought thembefoze Qabuchos Uapne. Thep fought alfo to Nape Danpel wpth
dDonoloz and thcbpng comuned with them. Wut bpscompanypons. Then Danyel enqupzed of k-
amonge them all were founde nene chas DA Arioch the kRpnges Lewarde, of the iudgement 3
nich Ananias, Sifael, and #fartas. Therfore and fentence,that was gone forth already tokit P
ftove they before the kyngeinall wpidome, and {uche ag were wple at Sabplon. He antwered f
matters of bnderitandpng,that beengupzcd of andfapde buto Srioch bepnge then the kpnges 4
them,foundthenten tpmesbettcr, thenall the Deputpe.cclby bath tbe kpna proclapmedtocces re
foutbfapers and charmer, that werein all bps ellafentences So Arioch tolde Daniel the mat — i
realme. Aud Danpelabode pll, unto the fpett ter. Upon this went Daniel Dp, and delpzed the
percokbpngedinus. | kpnge that bempabt bauelepture, tothewethe
ca a EDADE ue ote ggapneand etmen eherDpng to namins, CPA
C Thedreame of Mabuchenonolor, we cary ain m agapne ano w png to Anamiag, 4%
robtapers ano reduit oo ee eerreannoroew ACLAND Atarlas his companpons:P pep thud
íc. The kenge commaundech all the wpfe men of arpion, petechthe God of beuenfoz grace inthis fecret
to be (lapor. Daniel tcqupzethtpme to foluretbe queftpon. th at Daniel and bis fel lowes wp t b other tuche
pnta the kpng, and Hrtorth bpm bps deeane,e the interpre as were wplein Wabplon,perpihed not. Chen
- tacpou therof. DE the eucrlattpnge Kengveme of Chrete. qwastbemifterphewed vito Daniel ina vifp


Hh H the feconde peare of therapane of onbpupabte. Aud panpel prapted the Godot
Bt fea Mabuchodonolop, bad Mabuchodo- Apeauen. Danielalfo ceped londe, anblapoe D
glob. bit, d; By Fay nolozabzeame,” where thozow bes thatthe name of odmpgit be prapled foz euer


TEA: +


4 ee [pivpte thas bered, ehis flepebzake andeucr, foz wpldom ani firength ar bis owne

pe lerom hint. Chenthebpngcommaun *«bechaungeth tbe tpmesandagessDeputteth oan.vit.n,
‘bed fo call together alltbe Cotpfaters,charm ers Doone kpnges.be fetteth Dp&pngesxbe geneth tluke.t.c,
wpptches,and Chaloees foto pewethekpnge wploome vntotbe wyle, and pnueetonarage Serra
TAF . to tole


—_ a z
b ` oe


The W2rophecye,

x  Cntothele the bynaeappopntedarertapne pps dzeame. Soo thep came and (robe before the
porcpon of bps owne meate : and ofthe wpne, Epnge. And tie kpngefapde vnto tbem: J baue
wbpehe be Drankebpm felfe,fotonozphhetbem dreamed a dzcamc, andmp f{pzete was fo tron-
thie pere:that afterwarde thep mpg be tand be bled therctopth, that paue cleane forgotten,
fore the kpnae. Amonae thelenowe were cer what J Dzeamed. Ayee the Chaldecs aun-
fapie of the chplazen of fuda:namelp manpel, (weredtiekpnge inp Diryans{peche:  bpng

/ Bnantas,aifacland Asariag. Unto thete the @onlanethp lyfe for euer. Shewe thp feruaun
chefe chamberlapne gaue otbernames.andcal: teg thp deame,and toe all Mewe the, what it
ied Danyel Walthatar Anantas,Didpach:Gt meancth. Che kynge gave the Chaloces thep
facl,<e)ifach:and Alarias, Abednago.wut Da anlwere and fapde:3t isqonefrome.PEpewpt

mepit. npel toag ata popute wyth bpm felfe, * tpat be notmake me pyndertande the deame wpth the
etn olde not be Defpledtporowe the kpngesimcat interpzetacpon therof,pe pal dpe and pour Dou
nog the wpne whpehebeozonke. And thishede- fes palbe pipita, ;
{pred of the chefe chamberlapne,lette he Moulder Wut pipe tell me the dreame ¢ the meanpng 25
defplebpm felfe. So Hod gaue Daniclfauoure therof,pe Mall pauc of me gpfteg,rewardegand 3
and qracebefoze tbe chefe chamberlapnetbatbe great honoure: onelp thewe me the dzcameand i
fapbe onto bpm :-aam afcapbe of mp Lo2ve tbe Ses parutyear oe ofit. Thep anlweredagapne |
space, which bath appopnted pou ponr meatg atid fapde:thebyng muft there is teruauntes
Dapritse: lect helppe poure facestobe worlelp: the dreame-and (o all we Declare whatitmea
q kenge tben the otber tpepngaldes ofpourage,¢ neth. Thentbekpngcanlwercd fapinge: pere — ,
fo pe fhall mate me lote mp peade bntopkpng: cepueofatruth,thatpe do but peolonge p tpme l
Then Danpel anfwercd Melafar, wyone foz fo much aspele that the thpng is gone from
the chefe chamberiapn bad fet ouer Daniel Ana me. Therfozepfpe wpll not tell me the oan,
niag, Milal and I riag and fapde: D prone pe hallall paue one indgement. Hut petapne €
butten dapes with thy feruatites, ¢ let vs auc Diflemble with vayne oozdes,whych pe fpeake Ls: i;
pottage to cate, and water todzpube,then lobe befozeme,to put of the tyme. Cherfore tellme p . |
dpon our faces and they2s tbateateofthekpn: Deame andto (ball 3 knowe,pfpecan ew me
geg meate. And as thou tept, fodealewpthvs xwbaritmeancth.Cipon thig tbe Chalbees gaue
thy feruaŭtes. oheconfentedto theminthis aunlwere before the kyna, and lapde: there ts
matter,and pzoued them r. Dapes. Andafterp no man vponearthe, that cantellthe thpnge,
tendapes thepzfaces Were bettcelpbpnge and wbicbhe thetepnge (peaketh of:peathere ten a
fatter thettall p ponge {prpugaldes, which opd ther kpng prince no? Lozde tbat cuer afked fu f
cate of thekpnges meate. tbpngegatafotblaper, charmer o? Chaldep:foz d
Thus Welafar coke awap thep2meateand it iga verp barde mattcr,thatthbekpnge cequp= i
qwptie,eqgauc them pottage therfore: Godgaue reth. Meptbherits there anp,thatcan certifpe the
nowe there four (papngaldes connpng and leat- kpnge therof, excepte the goddes : wpoledwel-
nyngemallicepptuce and topfedome:butbnto lpng isnot amonge the creatures.
Danypel{pecpallp,de gaue pnderftandpngofal — forthe whichecaule the kpngewas woth C
pifponsand breaines. Owe when p tpmewas with greateindignacpon, and commaundedto
erpp2ed,that theapng bad appopntedtobapng deltrope all the wpfe menat Iabplon: and the
inthefe ponge fpzpngaldes bite bpm, the chete procenata a fozth.@ tbe wple men were
chamberlapne brought thembefoze Qabuchos Uapne. Thep fought alfo to Nape Danpel wpth
dDonoloz and thcbpng comuned with them. Wut bpscompanypons. Then Danyel enqupzed of k-
amonge them all were founde nene chas DA Arioch the kRpnges Lewarde, of the iudgement 3
nich Ananias, Sifael, and #fartas. Therfore and fentence,that was gone forth already tokit P
ftove they before the kyngeinall wpidome, and {uche ag were wple at Sabplon. He antwered f
matters of bnderitandpng,that beengupzcd of andfapde buto Srioch bepnge then the kpnges 4
them,foundthenten tpmesbettcr, thenall the Deputpe.cclby bath tbe kpna proclapmedtocces re
foutbfapers and charmer, that werein all bps ellafentences So Arioch tolde Daniel the mat — i
realme. Aud Danpelabode pll, unto the fpett ter. Upon this went Daniel Dp, and delpzed the
percokbpngedinus. | kpnge that bempabt bauelepture, tothewethe
ca a EDADE ue ote ggapneand etmen eherDpng to namins, CPA
C Thedreame of Mabuchenonolor, we cary ain m agapne ano w png to Anamiag, 4%
robtapers ano reduit oo ee eerreannoroew ACLAND Atarlas his companpons:P pep thud
íc. The kenge commaundech all the wpfe men of arpion, petechthe God of beuenfoz grace inthis fecret
to be (lapor. Daniel tcqupzethtpme to foluretbe queftpon. th at Daniel and bis fel lowes wp t b other tuche
pnta the kpng, and Hrtorth bpm bps deeane,e the interpre as were wplein Wabplon,perpihed not. Chen
- tacpou therof. DE the eucrlattpnge Kengveme of Chrete. qwastbemifterphewed vito Daniel ina vifp


Hh H the feconde peare of therapane of onbpupabte. Aud panpel prapted the Godot
Bt fea Mabuchodonolop, bad Mabuchodo- Apeauen. Danielalfo ceped londe, anblapoe D
glob. bit, d; By Fay nolozabzeame,” where thozow bes thatthe name of odmpgit be prapled foz euer


TEA: +


4 ee [pivpte thas bered, ehis flepebzake andeucr, foz wpldom ani firength ar bis owne

pe lerom hint. Chenthebpngcommaun *«bechaungeth tbe tpmesandagessDeputteth oan.vit.n,
‘bed fo call together alltbe Cotpfaters,charm ers Doone kpnges.be fetteth Dp&pngesxbe geneth tluke.t.c,
wpptches,and Chaloees foto pewethekpnge wploome vntotbe wyle, and pnueetonarage Serra
TAF . to tole


—_ a z
b ` oe


| of Dairpeu.


a at ie Reothote that buderlEand,be opencth the depe fe
| ambn Cvetes: be Buoweth the thpng that lpecbin dark
ti aope Nelle,eforthelpabte divelletbwptp bpm.
Jtbanketbeand papfe the D thon G DD of
mp fathers) that thou batte lente me wpledome
and ftrengthe and balte petwedimethetdpnge,
that we delpzed ofthe, fo: thou balte opened the
&pnges matter vntome.

| Gipon this wente Datpel in nto rioth,
a8 whomethe Gpnge had o2depnedtodefrope the
A: wre at Babylon, pe wente dutohpin,e lapde:
$ Deffrope not fuche asbe wyle in abplon, but
bzpnge me in butothe kynae,and F (pall wewe
the pnge the tterpretacpon. Chen Arioch
brought Danpelintothekyngein ali the hatte,
atid fapde onto bpm: baue founda manamog
| the pzploners of Juda that thal Mewe the kpang
tbetnterpzetacpon. Chen anlwered the Rpnge
and fapde Bute Danpel whole name was Wal
 thazar. Arte thou pethat cante hewe me the
| dreame, whiche Y haue fene andthe interpreta
cpon therof/Danpel anfwercd the kpnge to bis
facc and fapde:Asfo2 this lecret:Foz the which
the kpnge maketh inquifpcion: it ignepther the
a Wpte,theloscerer, the charimer,to2 the deuel cou
EIDEL dover that cancertifpe thebpnae oftt. x Onclp
Godin Heanencanopenfecrettes, and de itis
that theweth the kpng Mabuchodonoloz what

igfo2 to come in. tbe latter dapes.
hyp Dzeame,andthat which thou bak fene


in thpne peade vpon thp bed, ts thps: D kpnae,


|
| thou dpdefkcakinthp mpnde, what Huld come
bereafter.Sobethat ts the opener of mpfteries
| telleththe, what isfo2 tocome. Asfozme,thps
fecrete is not fhewed me,foz anp wploome that
| 3 baue, moze then anp othbeeliupnee, bat onelp
that J mpghet Hete the bpnge the mterpretacp
ir on, and that be mperbe knowe the gy of
) bis owne barte. Chou kyng iator, g bebolde,
| ‘there tode befoze thea greate pmage wholefp:
gure toag marueloufe greate and bps vplage
Ie gtpmine. Che pmaces beade wasot fyne goloe
k bis beett and armes of {plucr,birbodpeand lop:
neg were of copper, his legges were of pron, bis
fete worre parte of pzon,and parte of earth.
l *Thps thon fawel tpll the tpme that with
outeanp Dandes, there was petoen of a tone,
which (mote tic pmage bport the Fete that wer
both of pronandcarth,and brake them topouls
bere : then Was the pron, ecarthe, the copper,
the [plucr and golde bzokenall together in pes
ces:and became lpke the chaffe of comie,that the
wpnde blowethatvap from the fomer floures,
aa? that thep canno moze befounde. Butthe {tone
x that fmote the pages becantea greate moun:
tapne, whiche ful€plleth the whole earth: Chis
is the dreame. Bnd nowe wll we thee before
thekpnge what it meaneth.
Daneta *D Bpnge,thouartea Rpnge of ikpnges,
$02 the God of heuen hath geuen pa kpngovom
ee tpches, frength,and mateftpe:and bath delpue-
E red the allthbpnges, that are amonge the chpl-
dzen of men: che bealkes of the felde and the fou
les under the Meanen, and geuenthe Dominpor
ouer themall:Thouart that golden beade: #E-


Take.rr.b,
gaat. rei,s,


akri,


ter tbhatthere thal! arple another kpugdbomme,
wbich albelefie then thpne. Sheebprdé kyna
done Halbe lpke copper,and bane Dominacpon
inalilandes. @hetoucth kpnedome thalbe ag
{trong as p2on.jroz lpke as pron beulethe baca
keth all tbpuges: Pea,enct as pzon beatetbeue
ty thpnge Dotene:fo {hal it beate Downe and de
rope. (bere as thou latock the fete and toes,
parte of carthand parte of pzon:that is adeup=
ded Kpngdome, Whpche neverthelefle hall paue
fome of the pron groundemprte wpth it, foz fo
muche as thou atte fene the pzonmprte with p
clape. Che toes of the fetethat were parte of p=
ronand parte of clape, {pqutfpeth : that it hall
bea kpngdom,partelp tronge epartelp weake
And tobere as thou lave pron mirt with clap
thep pall mpngle them {elucs topebthe fede of
fpniple people, and pet not contpnue one with a.
nother lpke ag pron wyllnot de fouldered with
apotte thearbe. pe be

Anthedapes ot there kynges, Mall the God g
of heauen let bp anxeucrlaftpnge kyngdomme srap. tra
wbich thall not perp he and pis kpnadome Mal
not be genenouet to another people:yea,p lame
(hall bzcabe, and deftropeall thefe kpngdomes
buttttballendurefozcucr.

And whereas thou lawe that Without as mer, rir
np bandes there was cut out of the’ mountet a sgac.rptc,
ffone, tobiche brake the pron, thecopper,p earth
thefpluer and qolde in peces : bp that bathe the
greate God hewed the kpnage, what wpl come
after this. Chisis a truedreame and the inters
pretacponot itis fure. Chen p kyng Mabucho-
Donolar: Fell Downe bpon his face, and bowed aete.piind
bpm felfe bunto Danpel,and commaunded that
thep thoulde offer meatofferpnaes and Cwete 0-
doureg wntobpm, The kpnge anfwered Danp-=
el,andlapbde:pee.of atructh pour Godisa God
aboue all qoddes,a 1020 aboue all typuges,and
anopence of fecrettes:fepng thou cant difcouer
this mitterpe. So p kpng made Daniel a great
man and Cave Dp manp and great apftes.

*ige made bym rular of all the countrees of
Wabylon, and Lorde of all the nobles, that wee
at Wabplon. Mowe Daniel intreated the kyng
for Sidpach, <t)tfach,and AbeDnago,fothat be
made them rularg oucrall the offpcers inp lana
of Wabplow: Wut Danpel bpm lelferemapucd
fpllin the courte by the kpnge,

) C The. ié,Chapter.
C Whe kpng fetteth bp a golpen gurage, whicb be cima
beth to be woshpppen.Sildzach gyifach,and Abednagoe ar
accufed brcaute thep def pe feothekpnges commagndemét,
i: Eyer are bionghtetntot eRpnge and cOmau nbed tn woz:
„pp fhe pmage,thep refute te doit, and are put into a bus:
npnge ouen. ISP terefe in God grr are Stipuercd frome the
Fpze. Mabuchegonuolo: contelleth the power of Hod after

thetpabt atthe mpracic.


popes Sbuchodonoloz thebpnge cauled a ag


EAF è


n, and {ent outeto gather togetber ý


ae *


i


The Prophecye.


thepmage, wobiche La buchodonofoz the kpn
badiet vp:o the dukes, Lozdes and nobles,
Audges and offpcers,oebytes and heeucs with
all the rulers of p lande gathered them together
and caine oiito the Dedicatpnae of the pmage,p
Pabuchovonoloz the kpnge had let vp.

Powe when thep ove before the pmage,
{ohiche Rabuchodonolo; fet vp.the bedel crped
out withall bis mpabe:D pe people,kpnreddes
and tonges, to pou be it lapde: f when pebeare
the nopfe of the trompettes, whpcbe thalbe Vlo-
toen, wpththe barpes, havomes, jlalterpes,
Simpbonyes and allmaner of <pulphe:pe fall
Downe and worhbyppe that golbenpmage,that
Pabuchodonoloz the kpnge path tet vp. Who-
fo then falleth not Downe and boweth dym felfe
thalleuen p fame boure be cak into an hote bur-
npng ouen. Therfoze when all che folke bearde
the nople of the trompettes that were blowen,
With the barpes, fhatomes, plalterpes, Spm-
 phontes,and all Bpnde of melodp, ther all f peo

ple kpnreds and nacpons Fell Downe, and bow-
ed them (eluelues bunto the goldenpmage,p a
buchodonofoztbebpngepadfetyp. =
solve there there certapne men of the Chale
Deeg, that went eué then and acculed the Fewes
andfapde vnto the kpnge Nabuchodonoloz:D
kynge, od lane thy lpte fo: euer. Chou bepng
kpnge ball geuen a connaundemente , that all
men when thep Heare the nople of the trompets
harpes, pawines, Plalterpes, (pmphonies,and
alltbe other melodpes Hall fal Downe and bow
tbem felucs, towarde the golden ymage: wHo fo
ther fellnot Downe and worthppped not that he
Mulde becat into an bote burnpng ouen. ow
wani. d.o, arethere certapne ewes x whome thou baf tet
oucr the oftpcers of the lande of Wabtlon:name
Ip, Sidzach,<ifach:and Abednago. Chele më
(Dkpnge)regarde not thy comaundement,pee
thep wpll not terue thp goddes, no: bete then
felueg tothe qoldenpmage,that P balk let vp.
Then Mabuchosonolo2 tuaccuell wathe
and difpleafure, comannded that Szach, Wi-
fach,and Abednago Muld be bzoughe wnto him
So thele men were bought befoze thekpnge.
Then Mabuchodonoloz fpake vnto them, and
fapde:what? D Diath, Milah, and Abed-
nabo, wpllnot pou ferue mp goddes? nozbotoe
pourleluesto the golèen pmage, that baue fet
pp el, beredp Dere after. When pe beare the
nopte ofthe trompettes blowe withthe barpes
fharwmes,plalterpes.{fpmpbonies andall theo-
tber melodpes:that pefall downe and worthpp
the pmage whibe J ane made. Wut pf pe Wo-
ppppe itnot, pe Halbe cat immedpatly into an
pote burnpnge ouen. Let te, bat Godis there,
+ thatmapedelpuer pououteofmp bandes. SDi-
Dach, Wilach,and Abednago anfweredp king
" andfapde. D Mabuchodonoloz, we ougbte not
to content unto the tn this matter,foz why sour
Gov whome welerue x ts ableto kepe vs from
thebote burnpnge ouen (D kpnge) €canrpabe
weil delpuer vaout of thp bandes, iG
And though he wyl not, pet halt thou know
(Dhpnge) that we wpll not ferue thp qovdes,


26


uu, poi.g.


Ẹ


nozbo renerence tothat Jmace, wbpehe thou
batt fet pp. Chen vas Mabuchodonofoz fullof
indignacion, fothat thecountenauce of bis face
chaunged pon Sidzach, Bilach,and Abedna
go, Cherfore be chargeVand commanunded that
the ouen fhuld be made leuen tpmeg Dotter then
if wag wonte to be: and fpake nto the Eron-
get woztbiesthat therein bis polte,foztobpna
sHifach,and Sidzach,and Abednago,etocalk
them into the bote burnpnge ouen,

— Sothele men Were bounde intheyzecotes,
bofen,tpoes, with thepze other gavinentes, and
calte into an bote burnpnge ouen : foz toe Ryn-
gescommaundement was fo fFrapte,and theo-
uen Waserceadpnge bote. Asfoz the men that
putin Sideacb,@)fach: and Abednago f flam
of the fpzedeltroped them. And thelethze men,”
Sidzach, and Q)ilach,¢ Abednago felloowne
inthe bote burnpuge ouen,bepng fafke bounde:
Then Mabuchodonoloztde kpnge maruepled
and tode Dp inall Dafte:be (pake ynto bis coun:
faple,and fapde, bpd not youcalte thele thzement
bounde into the fpaes Chep anl wered, andlapd
pntothe beng: Pea, D kpng. Heanlwered and
fapde: lo, foz all tbat, pet do Fle fouremengo-
png loule inthe mpdtoftbetpze, and notbpng
cozrupte,and the fourth is lpbe the fonne of god
to loke ppon. |

tipon this went Mabuchodonoloz onto the
moned of the bote burnpnge ouen, belpake allo
andfapde:D Stdach, d)ilach and Abednage
pe feruauntes of the bpe god.qofoath, and come
bptber. And fo Szach, B)ilachand Abedna-
qo went out of the fpze. Chen the dukes lozde8,
andnobles,and the lkpnges counfaplecameto-
gether toletbele men, + bpon wbome the fp2¢
padnomaner of potoer inthep2 bodpes. Fn fo-
muache thatthe verp beare of thepze beade wag
not burnte and thepz clothes vnchaunged:pra,
there wasno fmellof fpze felte vpon them.
Then fpake Rabuchodonofoz and fapde:Wlef: c$
fen be the od of Sidzach, Wifach and Abed-
cee fA a bath fent bis aungell, and detent pr.rrrsttt.«
ded bis leruaunteg, that put thepz truftein him Dant-vi.a.
that bath aultercdtbekpnges commaundemet Fs
andteoparde aaa bang bpon, rather
then they toouldel £0, wenbpppe anp other
God:erceptethepz owne Godonlp:

-  @Eberfoze 7 whll and commaunde, that all
people, bpnreddes, and tonges, wbpcbelpeake
anp blafpbemp agaputt p God of Sid2ach, He
Cach and Abedniago,fball bye, andthep2 boules
halbe pzpled: wWicaulerthereisnoGodp map erar. ire,
faue,as this. Hothekpugepeomoted Sidsach ore.put.,
Pilachand Abednago in plande of Babylon.
The. titi. Chapter.


fa. Fue


T Mabuchodonofoz Beamech agapn Danpel interpreteth
if. s2abuchodonolo; ts put oute of bis realme: and eatety
With beates.ioe contefleth the polwer of Soy, and is rete
reo bntobrs Kpagoome,


“Wiple,bypnreddes,and tunges p dwell wait.


gofal.rib.b
Dani, dit,
Takeit.


of Daittei.


D, howe ttveat ave bis tokens, and bowe nipab-
tye are bps wonders‘ xpypskpngoome isane-
uerlaftpuge &pngdome, and pps polwer lafteth
Foz cucr,andcuct. bi

J Mabuchodono3zo02 bepnge atret inmpne
doule, and flozpipnge in mp palace , fawr a
Dreame,wbpchb made meatraped: the though-
testhat 3 bad vpon mpbed, wyth the vifpong


manita, of mpne beade, troubled me. «Chen lente Jout


&


acomnuflion that all thep wbpch were of wple
Dome at Wabplonfpulde be brought befoze me
cotellmethetnterpzctation of thedzeame . So
tbere came theforhlapcrs, charmers,Caldecs,t
coniuters of Devels : to whom F told hedzeanie
but what itbetokened, thep could not Mew me:
tplatthe laff, there came one Daniel(otpertorle
called tealthasar, accozdpng tothe name of mp


’ God) whpch bath the (ppete of the polpe roddes
3 inbpm, to whome F tolde the Dreame , fapenge:


D Balthasar, thou peince of Cotblapers: Io?
fo mucheas Abnowe, thatthoubatetbelprete
of the bolp qovdes, and no fecrete is hyd fro tbe:
tell me therfoze, what the vifpen of mp dreame
(that J paue fene mape lignitpe.3 fawea vilp=
oninmp beade bpon mp bed: and beholde there
ftodea tra grounde, which was Verpe
bpe greatandmpgbtpe:the bepath reached Dn
to beauen, andthe bzedthertended to all the en-
des of thecarthe : bpsleaucs were fapze De bad
verp much frute, Cothat cucrp man badpnougy
tocatetberin.

The beattes of the Feld hadHadowes wder
it, andthe foules of the apze dwelt inthe bowes
therof. Spboztly all crcatures fed of it. 5 faw in
mp beade a wilpon bpon mp bed:andbepalde, a
watcherand a bolpe onecame Downe Front bea=
ucn,andcrped mpghtelp, fapenge:Hewe towne
she tree, bzeakeof Dis bzauncheg, habe of bps
leaues, andfcatre bps frute abzode: that all the
beattes mape get them awape from Ynder hpn
and the foules trom bps beaunches. Peuerthes
lefe. leaue the qroide of bps rote ftplin p earth,
andbpndc bpm wpon the plapnefelb.wytbebep
nes of pronand tele. Wipth chedewwe o beauen
(hall he be wet,and be (pall paue bts parte inthe
herbes of the grounde worth other toploe bealtes

hat mans hatte of bps thalbetaken from
pr aa the beaftes harte albe gpuen bim tpl

cuenpeares be come and gone upon ppm.


€ Thpsearandeofthewatecher, isacommaun


dement grounded and fought out in thecouncell
of bpm, that ig mool bolpe:to learne men fo? to
puderftande,that the byett bath poteer ouer the
kyngdomes of men, and gpueth them, to whom
itlpketbbpm and bzyngetbtbe verpe outcattes
ofmenouerthem. Chysts the D2came,that F
kynge Mabuchadono3o2 baue lene Therfoze D


waltbasar, tell thoume what itfignifpeth:for by


fo mucheagall the wple men of mp kpngdome
are not able to (ewe me whatit meancth. Sut
thoucdtt dott, for the {ppete of p holp goddes ts
inthe. Chendaniel( tole name was wWaltha-
sar)peld bps peace bp the fpace of oneDoure and


bpsthougbtes troubled bpm. Sop kyngfpake |
. andlapd: DWalthasar, let nepeber the dgeame


i


| 4
no: the mterpretacion theroffeare the. Waltha»
zarantwered lapeng: D my Lorde, this dreame D
bappen to thbpnecnemeis, and theimterpzetacid
tothpne aducrlaryes . Asfo2thetree that thou
fawelt whpch was fo great and mpgbty, whofe
bepath veached wuto the heauen,and bps bedth
tnfoall the ws0210, whole leanes were fapze,and
the fente muche, under the whiche the beattes of
the Felde had thep2 Dabitacion, and vpon whole
heaunches the foules of the apzedyd ipt,

Di Euen thou: D tpn g artethe tree qreat and
ffrige.Cbhp qreatnelic encceafeth and veacherh
vuto heaucn,todoth thy power totheendes of p
earth. But where as the kyuge fawe a watcher
cuenan bolp angell, that came done from peas
uen, and fapd:hetoe Downe the tree,anddelkrope
it:petleaue the qrounde of the roote inthe carth
and a bym bpon the plapne feld with chep=
nies of pon ¢ kele. ie (halbe wet with the dewe
of benen and bis part Halbe with the brates of
thefelbe, tpl. vii.peares become and gone pon
bpm: Thys Dhpnge)is pinterpectacion, pea,
it isthe verp Deupce of him, that ts bpettoralle
it touchetb my lozdethe Rpnge.

Thou palt be cat out From me,¢ thp dwel- €
tynger wpe the beaters of the felde, with
gralle Halt thou be fed like an ore. Choumufte
be wet wpth the dewe of the beauen: pea, feucn
peaves (hall come,andgo bponthe, tpl Pp knowe o anre:
xthattbebpelt batbepower vpon the kynado= Jerroti.a
mes of men, andgpuerhbthemtowbomebelpt.
<Yozeouer, where asit was apd, ptheroote of
the tree (pulde be lefte Rpllintbe qrounde:it be-
tobeneth,> thp&pnqdoie Wall remapne whole
puto the after thou ha learned to knoe, that
the power cometh from beauen .Wa berfoze D
kpnge becontente wpth mp councell , that thou
mapitredeme thp (pnnes ithalmeflexethpne eccte.rir.a
offences wpth mercpe to pooze people : foz thps
fbalbeanbealpngeotthpneerroure. All thele
thpnaes touch the hpnge Nabuchovowosop.

 Soatter.rtt.monethes, the kenge walked JE
bpanddotonetn the palace of the kyngdome of

abplon, andlapde: Chpsis the qreate citpe
of Wabplon, wobpche Jip felle ( wpth my po-
Shevand fengtde ) baue madea kpnges courte,
foatbebonoureofmy maicfipe. Wibple thele
wo2des were pet in the kpngcs month, there fel

a vopce from beauen, fayenge:D kynge Rabu-
chodonos02,totbe be it (poken: Thy kpngdome
{hall departe From the , thou thalte becat out of
meng companpe:tbp Dwellpnae Halve wpth the
pealtes of thefcld, fo that thou Galt eate grafe
aganore, tpll feuenpeares be conte and gone 0-
ner the:cuen vntplithou knotwel, that thehpelt
bath power vpon the kingdomes of men, that
be mape gpuc them , vuto whome it pleateth

m. he verpefame boure wasthbysmat-
ter falfplicd Dppon Pabuchobono302 : fo that
be wasg calte oute of mens companye ,and bpd
cateqraflelpheanore. ips bodpe thas wet
twpthtbhe detoc of beauett, tpllbysheeres were
ag great ag Aegles fetherg, and bis naples lpke
bpzdesclates. y

When thys tpme was pat, F Nabucdodo- G
Be Rate AKA. n030}


a


Dan, itt,


pla.crrria.


The Prophecye,


nolo: pit bp mine epes buto Heauen, and mpHe
Dnderitandynee was rclkozed Onto me agapne.
© ben rane ¥ thankes nto the bpe. g magni-
fyed and pzapicd bpm that lpucth Fog enermoze
*snpofe potoer endureth alwape, and bys kpng
bomiec fram one generacion to anotber:in compa:


rifon of whom alltbep that dwel vpon thcerth


arctobereputedas notbpnae. | |

xpe bandletb accozding to Dis wyl,amonge
the potvers of beauen, and amonge the tababp-
fours of the carthe: and there is none thatimape


Hobu.t9.> relpite bps bande, 02 fape:what doek thourx At


thelame tpme was mpne vnderfandpnge ge-
nenmeagapne, ¢ J was refozed tothe bonoure
of mp kpngdome, tomp Dignitpe , andfompne
owne ape agapne. Wp great effates and print:
cesfoucbt bntome , and 4 was fet inmp bpng-
Dome agapue,fo p J had pet greater oozthyp.

Chen dpd J Mabuchodow03502 , loue, mag=
nifpe and praple the kynae of beauen:foz all pig
wo2rkes are true and bps wapesrpabt . Asfor
thofe that go on pzondipe, be tg able tobppnge
them Downe.

€ The. v.chapter.
qBalthaler kpnge of Babplon,abulpag the belles of
the temple, teeth an bandwiptpng inthe wal. The Toth


Capers called of the kpnge, can not erpouube theiezps
tpip: Daniel is called, which reabeth it einterpretcth


it alfo. wWalthalar bepug apne: Darius [ureradeth in

bps rolwne.

_.. Png Balthasarmade a great banket
{| to bys thoufande Lozdes: withal thote
= thoufande be mabe great chere: NE


=


Saabe wagdzenken With wine becoma
Sped to bzpnge bpmtbe golden g ipler


Learrrbie peffels xwbich bis farber Pabuchodonofoz bad


gemd a


taken out of tbe templeat Jerufalem : that the
kpna = bis lozdes with bis quence and cocubpnes
mpgitdpnketheront,

othep bzougbt the golden befel, that was
taken oute of thetemple of the Lozdes poulrat


bis quene and concubpnes bronke ont of them.
Thep Duonke topne and pzapled thep2 Fools of
EP Ps PSE Pony sadaf ea: one.
An ebe very fame
gets, ag it had bene of a mang bande w2ptpng,
rpabe ourragapnite thecandlefEpcke bpon the
p apne walin tbe binges palace,and the kpnge
ate the palme of the pande that wote: x be
chaunged the kpnge bps countenaunce, and bis
thoug}tes troubledbym ; fo tbat the topntes of
bys bobdpe thoke, elis knees [mote one agaput


partie theother.«tiiberfooc the kpnge crped mpgbte-


ipe, that thep Hulde bepiige bpm thecharmers,
albdces,anDdconturersofdeuels. Chekpnge
{pake alfo to the wplemen of Babplon,¢tapd:
tdi bo focanveade thys weptyng, and the we me
the plapnemecanpng therof:thalbe clothed with
purple bane achepne of goldeaboute bys necke,
and cule the thpzde parte cf mp kingdome.

_  Giponebps, cameall the kpnges wyfe men:
butebep couldenepther reade the wzytyna , nor
ewe the kpnae what ttliqnpfped. Then was
the hpnge Cozcafraped, info muche, that bygco-
lowe chaunged, and bys lozves were foze tered


ouretbereappeared fpn= w


‘gobo iç


Ho bp reafon of this matter that padbappened
tothe kpnae and bys Lozdes, the Ewen wente


wp ber teltetn the banket boule, anaCpakeDnto -
tie kpnge.fapeng : D kpnge, Gov ep Spe €


foz cuct . Let not thethboughtes trouble the, and
let not thp countenanncr be chaŭged . $€02 rt
there ig amanin thpkpngdome, thatbathbet


(peete of the holpe qoddes wpthin hyni, * agtt man.y.a


was fene inthpfatbers dapes. Ie hath wnbder=
fandpnge and wpledoame lpke the godbes. Dea
a Bpnge Nabuchodonoso2 tdp father made
thps ma,chefe of the fothfayers,charmers, Cal-
dees, and readers of deftenpes:becaute that fuch
anaboundait fpzete, knowlege and wpiedome
(to eXpounde Dreames, to open fecretes, and to
Declare hardedoubtes) has founde inbyim:-pea,
euenin Daniell, bom thekpngenamed Wal-
tbasar. Let thps fame Daniell be (ent foz, and be
Mall tell wbat it meaneth: ;

Then was Daniell bzongbt befoze the king.


So the kyngelpake vito Daniel and lapide: p


Act thouthat Daniell: oncof the pzelonerg of
Juda, whome mp Father the kpnae brought out
of gew 3° J baue berde {peakeot the, tbatthou
balt the fpzete of the bolp qoddegerperience and
pnderftandpngc,and that therebath bene great
wrledomefounde inthe. Rowe hane there bene
bzoughte me, topfeand connpnge charmeg, to
teadcthps wzptpnge andto tpewe me the meas
npnare therof. Sut thep conlde not tell me, What
thys matter fiqnpfped. Chen barde ¥ ape, that
thou cant erpounde darke tbinges anddeclare
barde doubteg. Weil, then pfebou cant reade
thps w2ptyug,and theweme the meaning thera
of, thou palt be clothed w purple, baue achepne
of golde aboutethpnecke, and tule the thpzbe
parte of mp kpngdome.
Danici anfwered,and apd before the k


i ea hh tbr reari hip oen to top feite, Eoia
rpche gpEtestoanothber : pet not the egaths. a,
Jerufalem. Then the kpnge andhps Lodes w ele, 1S de PARERES


s J Wpll rede the wptynge Yntothekpnge
and pete a E tberof. K D
kinge beare.God the byet gar
Donoso} thp father.the diqniticofa kinge wpth
o2tbyp andbonoure, fo tbat allpeople, bpn-
redes and fonges fobde in atwe and fearcof bpm
p reglon of the bpeeftate,tbat be bad lente bpnr
02 Wp , be fewe whome be wolve: he fmote,
pleated ppm. Agapne:vobom be wolde
ye Cet Dp:and whom be lpit be put down . * But


ecaufe bys barte was i! ara ebpsttomack Aea


fet fo fait tnto wylfulnefie: be was depofed frö
bpshpnglp trone , and pps mateftye was taken
fro bpm. He was Hut out fro amonge men, pps
barte was lpke a beatles barte, and bps dwel-
ipne was wpth the wplde affes : he was fapne
to cate graffelpke an ore, bps bonpe was wet
wpth the dewe of the Deaucn, tpl be Bnewe,that
the byek bab power vpon the kpngdomes of né
and tetteth cher them, whom be lpi,


And thou bystonne( sD Waithasarjfoz all e


thy, bate not fubmpttedthpne barte, houqbe

thou kneweff altbcfe thpnges:but bal magni-

fyco thy lelfe aboue the Lozde of beauen,fo that

the vefiels of bps boule tere bzoughe betog Ge
: a


gaue Duto Rabucho Diir


Actu.rotib


of Daniel.


that thou, and thp Lorded thyeh ep quenteand


fbp concubphes;mpaht Dipnke wpne therout.


And batt prapteb LDS Jo oles of fplucr and golde


copper and pzon,of wood and fone, whpch nep-
ther fe, heave no? vnderftande. Asto: the God
xin wpote bande confitetd thy breath, tall tby
wapes:thou baf not loued bpm. |

_ Cherfoze ts the palme of thps handefente
bptberfrom bym , to token vp thps weptpnge.
And thpsis the (cvipture, that is wzptten bp :

ane, Thetel, Bhares. Now the interpretactd


- OF the thinge is this: ane, God hathnomb2ed


the kpnadone, and bzougbt it to anende: The-
tell, thou arte thayedinthe balaunce, andarte
Foundetolpgbt: bares, thy kpngdome ts delte
tn partes, and qpuento the edes and Parles.

Then commaunded Waltbhasar, toclotb wa


. nieli pth purple, to bange achapne of goldea-


efa.piblit


Datla,


%


bout bps neske, and to make a proclamacioncd=
cernpnge bpm: that be thulde be the ruler of fhe
thp:de part of bps kingdome.xT be verpe lame
npgbt was Balthasar the byng of the Calvecs
flapne,¢+ Darius ont of sHedea toke the king
dome, bepng. Init. peare of age,


ae O
telagaint che kynqvome:pet coulde hep fpnde
none occafion nozfaute bpon bpm. Fo: whyp-be
was fo faptbfull, that there wasno blame neo?
dithoneftpsfounde in bpm, |
Then fapde thefemen:we can get no quarcil
agapnit thps Danicll except tt be inthe lawe of


bps Gov. cipon thps, went thepzpucesandloz=


SEol-rchtif.


it. Mote when Daniell onderlode that ý wip-
tpnge was madrebe went into bis houle:and the
wpnvowes of bys wall towarde Jerufalé tode
open. Chere kreled dedowne vponhps knees,
tie tpmes a Dape:there he made bps peticion:
papled bps God ,Ipke as bpsmaner wasto do
afoze tpime. :

Then hele men made learche,¢ founde Da-
niel mapnge bps peticton,and prapenge puto
bps God.Dothep caine to thekynge,andfpake
befoze bpm conceenpnae bis commaundemente,
fapenge:D kpnge,batte thou not fubfcribed the
{tatute : that wpthin.cre.dapes whe fo i.
veth bys I pete anpe God 02 man but onelp
of thp felte, D kynge: be thalbecatt into p denne
of the Lyons¢ Che benge anlwered, andlapde:
pea, (tis true. Jemutte be aga latwe ofthe Wee
deg and perfes that mape not be bzoken. —

Thenanfwercd they, andfapde vntothe D
kpnye: Daniell one of the pzefoners of Juda, O ~
kbpnge regardcthnepther the, no? tbp tatute,p
thon bat made:but makerhbhis peticion thzetp=
ies adape. When the kpnge herb tpefewomeg
pe was loze gerved, and wolde baue erculed Da
niell, to delpucr bint, and put of f matter, pntpll
the Sunne wente Downe to the intente that be
mpgbt lane bpm.

hele men percepupnge the kpuges mpnde
fapbe Dito bym:knowe thesi D png thatthe
lawe of the <edesand Perlesistharthecoms


maundeiment and Latute whiche the kpnge ma-


keth,mapenot be altered. * Chenthe kinge bad
them bgpnge Daniel, andthep cat him into the
Lpons denne. |

be kpngealfotpake bnto Daniell, and
fapde:tbp God, whom thou alwape feruete, eo


 nenbe pall defende the. And there was brought


a ftone,and laped ppon the Dole of f denne, thes


— the bpnge fealed wrth bps ovwnerpnge, + wpth
- the fp anet of bps pppnees:that the spnges com>
i Bor nee CORT ARREDRE ubt bE
bgoken.


` So the kpnge went bnto bis palace,and cate


‘no meate that npg bt nether was there any mp-


niffcelfpe brought inbefoze bpm, nepthercoulde
be tate anp flepe. Wut bptpmes in the moznpng
atthe bzeake of the dape, the bpnee arole, and
Went in all bat pute the denne of the Lyong.

' Powe ag he came npe nto the déne, becrped
wptha ppteeus vopce puto kaare kpng
fpake and Capde Ynto Daniell: —D Daniell, thou
feruaunte of thelpupnge God, ignot thy Gon


destogetber wnto the Rynge,and fayd thus Vn-
tobpm:iapnge Darius, Goodlauctbp lpte foz r-
uer. Alitbegreate efFates of the realwe.as the
P.phces, Dukes, evatours,and Judas, are


(whom thou alwape feruet)able to delptice the æ
fromthe lpons: Daniell fapd vntothe kpng. D ssc.
kpnge Godlaue thy tpt fozeuer. ¥ p God aetri.c. .
bath fent bps angell whpeb bath put the Ipong I2-rti. c


reg- Cbe


determed to put outa cOmaundenient of p kpng -
ana tomake alure Katnte:namelp, that wholo


defpzetbany peticton , ether of anp God 02 man
(wopebinthele.rrr.Dapes) exceptett be onlp ofp,
D ipnge :the fame perfon map becafteinto the
Lyons denne. Miberfoze, D kpnge , confirme


thpsftatnte,and make a wptpra: f thetbpnge `


wobycbe the Aedes aud Perles paue ozdepned,


be notaltcrtcd no? broken.


€


49 Darius made the wptpnge:¢ coftrmed


mouthes,to thattbep mpabt not hurte me. o?
whys mipne Dngpltpuctic ts founde oute before
bin, And as for p, Dbpng, neuer offeocd the.

‘Chen wasthe kpng exceadpng glad, and ci-


P maundedto take Manicll out of thedenne. So


Danicl was brought out of the denne , eno maz
ner of burt, wasg founde vpo him. Foz he put bis
trulin bps god. And as fo: thole më witch bad
acculed Daniel, the png comaundedto bapnge

| LAW. them


 Theprophecpe,


- them, and to caff them in the lpons denne:tbens,
Dan.cliits ehep2 chpidze and they: wpues . * 0 the lpens
had themattey of them, andbzake alithep2 bo-
nes alonder, 02 ener thep cameat the qreunde,

xAiterthpg wote kpnge Darius wnto al
people, kyiiredes,and tonges, that dweltein all
Jandes:peace be multiplied wptbpou. <p com
maundementc is inall mp Dominion and Geng:
dome , that men feateand Rande in awe of Da-


niels Goo. |
Dewitt ... xito he fs the lpupnge God, whyche abp-
ata piii. b Detbeuer:bis kpnapome Hall not faple, and bis
Diente poorer is cuerlathing. «jt 1s he that belpucreth
Danih and Caueth: be dothe wonders and marnaplous
woozkes in beucnandin cart: de batb pzclerued
paniel from the power of thelpons. bps Da-
niel p2ofpered m the rapgue of Darius and Cp-
rus of aeria.
C The. bii.cChapter.


tweed nio D


Dan, tit,t,


lees Pea of abplon, fawe Daniella dreame,
4 esa vipon was in bys beade bpon bps
cael hepde, Tibpche dacame de wrote, and
tie lumme of the matreris tops: Dantell (pabe
andfapd F, fawein mp bilponbpnpgbt,and be
holde: the foure Yopndes of the beauen froue x
pon the fec, and Foure great beattes came Yp fró
| p cbelce one lpke another.
ceitra  detpzrtt wasasxa lion,and pet bad hetae:
zerbi a gles wpnges. Jlawe that hps wpuges were
pluckee from bpm,and be taken awape from the
earth : that be ode vpon bys feteas a man, and
ttýere was gpucn bpm a mang barte.
Webolde,thelecond bealk was likea * eer,


PoFo. an kode bpon the one (pde. Amonge bpe tecth


in bps moutbe be bad .tit.qreate longe teeth and

itwaslapde wmtobpm: Arple:eate vp muche

fleibe. Then Jloked, and beholde, there wag an

otber lpke Dntoa Leoparde, tbpsbad wpnges

Dan.bii.b ag ofoule, xeucnfoure bpon thebacke. Chps

anara. -beate bad foure peades, e there was pover gp-

“ee” genbpm. After this 3 lawe ina vifion bp night

and bebolde , the fourth bea was grymme and

bozrible, and maruclous itronge. Je had greate

prontecth it teuoured and Ocftroped, g (tainped

the refpbue onder bps fete. Jt as farre bnlpke

- the other beaftes that were befoze it : foz if bad
gosc.ritic Xtenpomes, wherof Jrokeqoodhede,

atid. rbis And beholde; there came vp amonge them

another Iptle bone, before whome there were

thre of thefp2fte bomes pluckt awape. Webpolbe

itt tbpg bozne bad epes lyke aman: and mouthe

arro, peakpng peelumpruous thpnges. * J lobed tpl

Darka tycleates were prepared , aud tpli the olde aged

fatppmdowne. Bypsclothbpnge wasas wipte

as (notee andthe bectes of pps bead lpke p pure

woll. ips throne was lpke the Fpzpe dame.an’

bps t)clesas the burnpuge fpze. Thiere Dewe

fotha fppe freme: and went oute fiom bpm

aposto, * X thoniandetpmesa thoufandelerupo him. r.

W.tpnes ren tboufande Hode before bps. $e


judgement thas fet, g the bokes opincd . Tpen


toke F bede therebnto, bpcanle ofthe vopce of
the pzroude worded: Which the porne take A bes.
bolde tpll the beat was lapne, and bis bodp de=

roped, xqeuen ouer to be bzente tn the tpe. seeing

As for the power of the other bealtesallo se"

if was taken albape, but tbepzelpues be, pe |
longed foz atpme and teaton 4 fawe ina DION W
bpnpgbte ,andbebolde, * there came oneintde cratpike
cloudes of beauenlpke thefonne ofa mã WIPED gpocs.s,
wente nto the oldcaged, before whome ther
beougbtbpm. Then gaue be bym x potoer and Pr.g.a
Dignitieregal, that al people,trébes and tonges
fulde ferne bpm. xps power isan enerlatting Ft FFM


wer, wbich Hall never be put Downe:and iS Ibaa.rii.s


tpngoome endureth wncozrupte. G)p bart was 3
vered, xe 3 Daniell bad a troubled {pzete with: MS
inime,¢ the bilions of mp peade made me afrap- =
ed,tpl J gat me bntD*one of them shat Kode by, Dent (eR
toknowe the truth, concernpnge all tele tbpn=

ges. So be toldeme,aub made me vnder tande

the a She sey oftbeletbpnacs. —- |

Ebele foure great beattes,arefoure binges €
wobpcbe thallarpte out of the carthe Thel all
take inthe kpngdome of the fapntes of the mof
bpet, and pofictle it pl moze and moze foa
longefeafon . After thys 3 veanyaeh Wligentirs
to Buotwe the truth, concerning the fourth beat
iohpche wasfofarre vnlpke tbe otber beattess
at Co hoztble, whole teeth were of pron, tps
naples of soy pepe benone and deftroped
andftampedtherelpoue under bps fete: delp=
ced alfo to knowre the truth, as touchpng p *ten ee y
pozneg that be bad bpon bps beadeandthpg os `
tore beche came vp after twarde , befoze whole
face there fell Downe thze, which hazne badepes
ea mouthe that (pate pzefumptuous thpnges »
and loked pth a grpmmer plage then bps fes
lowes. J bebelde, and the fame pozne made ba-
tell agapnit the fapntes, pea,and gat the victo=
rpe of them wntplithe tpme thatthe olde i os
came, tbat the indgement wag gpuentotpeche-
feite fapntes : and tpll the tpme that the fapntes
had p Bpnagdome is potefpon.Ie gaueme thps
anfwere. That fourth bealke albe the fourthe
kpngoome wponearth:it Malbe moze then alo
therbpngdomes,tt thal dewoute, treade Downe,
and deftcope all other landes.

x Ebe ten bozncs,aretenkpnges, that hall g
arple out of thehpngdume after whome there zachte,
pall tande dp another, whychealbegreater ——
then the ti pall fabdue thee kpnges.and a
Chall fpeake toozdes agapnite theppetofall:pþe
(hall beftroye thelapntes of the moolt bye, *E Dange
thpnke, that be map chaunge tpmes and lawes
hep Halbe gpu onder power, XDNtPLS gpsc.ri(.e,
tpuie,twwotpmes and balfe atpme. EN

Wut tbe mogement Halbe kepte, fotbat hrs
ower halbe takenfrom bim, foz be Wall be de-
roped, perp at the lat. As fo3 pkpngdom,

power, andal mpgbte that is wonder the beauen:
it albe gpucn tothe bolp people of the mootte
bpeit, *wpolt kpngdomeis enerlatpnge be tuke tE
alpawwers iwal fertic and obepe pim. Thus trarre Dg Flidee
ectéde the wordes. Meuertheles.y Danicil was


a.


fo vexed mmp shoughies,that mp contenaunce
| chaunged


Pa |


ot Daniell,


inketce chaungedx but p wordes Bhept (pl inmy part
CEhe.vitchapter,
Sy uoeetabing ace vied ane atest
the! p i an E Epuge off $c rec +
che Gamcleskonse anya a o O
ee 2 the thprdepeare off rapaneokkpng
= ereny cared a bilið yne


a NY eS
~ Danbiia, SES kip
fatoi | vbpet

ser-rltr-£; Ipethinthe Lande of + Elam )and inthe vilpon,


». SERO me thouaht 4 was bp the rpuer of Gilat,


pores owe be Dpd as bpntlpiked, g Wared great


pe. Jtobchede yntothps, and then came there -


238 This qoate Dada mari deg dal
e


to protpere tn al thpnqes, that it teent about,
-A Gponthps Jparde one of the fapntesfpeax
apse, whtche fapnt fapde nto one that albed
ps queltton. Howe longe Hall thps vifpon of
the Daplpelacrifpce and of the walkynage abbo-
minacton endure : (hat tbe Sanctuarpe and the
owe (pall fo be troden Dnder fote r And he an-
wered Dp: Unto the enenpnge andthe moz-
npnge, euentwo thoulande and thze bundacth
dapes:tFan al the Sanctuarp be cléled agapn

» _ Mowe when F Daniel had lene thyg vilion
and fougptfoz the vnderftanding of tt : bebolde


“eon call Downe the veritieto the qrounde, g


A


Folter.
tberetodebefozeme athyneelyke puto aman. `
ind Jharde a mang boitein tberpuerof Ulap
wbpeh crped.andfapde:D Gabziel, make thps
man to ynderflande the vifion. Sope cameann
fodcbyme. Wut J whagatrapen at bpscome
mpnge,and Fell dotone bpon mp face.

‘hen fapd he vntome: Drhou Lorne of ma Œ
marche well,foz inthelatttpme Wall thys vifp-
on be fulfplicd. Nowe ashe Mas fpeakpnge vn:
tome, 3 wared fapnt, fo that J fanke Downe to
the qrounde. Wut be toke hold pon me, andfer
me Dp agapne, fapenge: wWebolde, J wpll he we
the, what Hall happen inthelat wath: Foz in
the tpme appopnted it halve fulfplico,

The Ramme wbpch thou lawelte wypth the
two hones tsthekpnge of the Hedes and Der
fes: but the qoateiskpnae of Greke lande: the
isthe pinctpallkpnge. Wut whereas it brake
andfourcother tole pp in the teade: tt fignpfp=
eth, that out of thys people thal Fand ypxfoure t.crach.t,2
: hr bert et fompabtye agit.

After thele kpngdomes(whple ongedlpnes FE
íg a growpng) therethalacpleakynae of an vn
pinan a whyche thall be wple in darcke

prabpugces.
De thalbempebtpe and fironge, but not ig
bps owne ftrength . He thal deftrope aboue mea
ute, and all that be goeth aboute thalt paotpere
de thall flape tie tronge and belye people. Hud
thozowe bys chaftpnes, falthed thal pofpere


b greate home that ove betwprtebpsepes,that


“in bps bande, bis berte halbe proude,and many


‘one hall be put to death in bps welthpneffe .

tall tande vp agapnite the prpnce of pepuces,

*but be thal be deftroped wpthout bande. Aud tmar.tr.c
thys phon that pien nto the, ig as fure OERE
asthe cuenpuge and the moznpnge: xT herfore era vr
Dpt thou vptypg fpabte, forte Wpll belonge ©”
oz it Come topatie. .

4, APON EIS was J Daniel verp fapnt, fo that
Alape fpckecartapne dapes:but whe J role yp

3 Wente Aboute the kpnges bulpneffe, andmar
ucledaty vifpon, nenertheles, noma knew of it


CThe.te.Chapterr.
Daniel detpreth to baue chat perfourmen of Gob, whreh
beba prompted concernpnge the returne ofthe people fr
_ they: banpmentetn Babplon. Atrueconfetion, Daniz
els piaperisbarbe. abziell the aungely etpoundeth bnto
bpm $ difpon ofthe.lrr.weakes. he anopntpuyg of Chri:
She buplaing agapneol Jerufalem paver Medemiah. whe
Drath of Chit,


p

prophete : that Jerufalem Hulde lye wafte.Irg. Here.
peares:a tid J turned me vnto mp Sod the Loza TF?
8t to papeand make mpne interceflion, wpth
Faltpnge, lachelothg alpes ,andpzaped before
the Lozbemp God.andbnowleged,fapenge: |

* D Lo2vde, thou greate and fearfull God ir.em.ta.
thou that kepel couenaunt andmercp wi them, amine
Whpch lone the, and do thy commaundementes,


J


The Prophecpe,


gaui g Me hauelprned, we have offended, toe bane
bene dpfobediente and gone backe:pea, we baue
Departed froalthp preceptes andtudgementes.

= Gle Molde neue Eolowe thp feruauntes the

5 propbetes , that (paket thy name to oure bpi-

Tes g princes.to our forefathers and toal the pro

Srenold ple of thelande.*D Lozde,tpghtcouines belon
geth unto the, unto vs petepnethnotbpnge but

open pame:agit ig cometo palie thps dape wn-
cocucrpinanof Juda andto them that dwellat
Jerufalem. Pea, vntoall Fraell, whether they

befarre op npe thozowre out al the landeg: wber-

intbou hatte frrowocd them, becaufe of the offcn-

ces, that thep bad dDoneagapnit the: |

a Pea, D Lome, onto vg to our binges, € pin
ptat.chia, Ceg, to our foztatbers,euen to bg all, *that bane
offended the, belongeth open Hane. Tut vnto

the, D Lozde our God, pertapneth mercpeand
fozqeucnetie. Astor Vs, we are gonebackefro

bpm, and haue not obeped the vopee of the 1.00

a peti». -our Sov,to walke inhpslawes,* which belapd
jacha.0l.> Hefore HS bp bps leruauntesthe propbetes:pea,


al 3frael baue teanlgvelfed, and yone backe fro .


thy lame sfo that thep baue not barkened wnto


-thp vopce. f
meu.sroti,  berfoze thecurfe and otbxtbhat is tvzptim
androg. intbelawe of Holes theferuaunte of G00 ( a-
Leu. HOt ante whom we paue offended)is porwzed ppb
saruct, a US XAND de hath performed his wopdes,wpicv
be {pake agapnét vs, and agapntt our tudges p
indged Ys:tobepnge bpd vs luch agreat plage
asneuer Was wnder beanen, Ipke agit tsnowe
come to pafie in Jerufalem. Dea, all thps plage,
as itis wepttenin thelawe of oles, is come
pon vs. Pet made wenot our paper befoze fhe
3L02dc oure Gob, that we mpgbte turne agapne
From onr wickeanes, gto belearned inthp vert-
tie. Cherfore bath the Lozd mave bal, to bapng
thys plage bpon wg, fo: the Lorde oure Godig
epghteous, inall bps wozkes which be both:foz
‘toe wolde not berken ynto bps Vopee.
zy *Andnowe, D Lode our Godsthat wpth
saruci b amparbty bande hat bougbt thp people out of


ter. rinri Eeppte,toget chplelfeanamewhycberemap= —
ode, done po,


anb. riihi, b,


neth this bape, we baue fyned D
wpckedly agapnit all thp rpgbteoulneg:pet let


te watbfull dilpleaturebeturnedawape (F |
[e


che the) from thp citpe of Jerufalem thp bo-


ty dll. And twhp-foz outelpnnesfakeandfo ý -i


wopcheonese of oure fozfatbert , is Jerulalem g

typpeopieabporro oral faen pas ape naout

p3:320Me therfore, D oure Sod, hearey praper

of chp feruaunte:and bis interceffion:<D let th

Pact Copii oneethp spanetuary, tbat bret) walt:
A fFoztbe Lozbes fake.


D mp God,enclpne thpneeare, andberken w


“Cas Ede Lett Fo? chine owne fake) open thpne epes
at hotve we bedefolate , pea, andthe citpe
alfo,whpcbe is called after thp name: Foz toe bo
not cai our papers befoze pin our owne rpgh-
tcoufneffe:no, but onlpinthp great meccpes, D
Ode: Heate:D forgpue hozbe, D Lozde conli-
Dev, cay not ouerloge-but loz thpne ovonefake
Doit. D mp God:Foz chp citpe and thp people ig
callcd after thy name,


E


-AgJ Has pet fpeakynge at mp papers
knowlegynaempne ovane fpunes, and thefpn=
nes of mp people, makpnge fo mpne intercefit-
on before the Lode mp God. fo? the bolp hylles
Cake of mp God:pea:while 3 was petfpeabing  -
in mp peaper:bepolde; the màn Sabaicl, (xwb Darie,
J badlene befoze inthe bifpon) came fipengeto ` `’
me, and touched me aboute the offrpnge tpme in
the enenpnge . He imfozmed me, and fpake vito
me: D Daniell lapd he: Jam now comic tomake
the bnderitande it. ft 02 as fooneas thou began:
nefttomabketbp paper, tt was lo deupled, and
therfozeam Jcometotbetverbe. Anbwhy: Sarpa;
*Jfo2 thou arte aman greatly beloucd. E T
Wiberfoze,pondze the matter wel, that thon

wiapelt learne, to onderfande the vplpon. trr.
torakes are determined cucrthepcople andover
the bolp citpe:thattbe pckebdncile mape becost
fumed, that f fpunemape pane an cnde that the
offence mape be reconctled,and to beige tn cuce
laftpnge rpabtcoulnelie tofulfpll the vifpons €
the prophetes and annopnte the moot colp one
inveritandethys then, andmarke tt well:that
fromthe tpme it albe concluded fo (0 and le- tparroiin
papze Ferhfalemagapne, wntoChaiit(o2 the as itm
nopnted) peynce:there balbe leuen weke: The
tbail the Rretesand walles be buplbed agapne
ittt.tocakes:but wpth barbetroubloustpme.

fter thefe.lrit.toekes , (hall Chtaike be flapne,
and thep Hall baue no pleaiure in bim. The at
therecome a people wopth the pzpnee , quetrope
the citpe andthe Sanctuary:aid bps ende Hall
comcasthe water foude . Wut the delolacton
(pall continue tpli the ende of the battell.
Hethallmake a Fronge bonde wpth many
for the fpace of a weake : and toben the weakeis


balfe gone, be Wall put Downe the apne and aeei a À


meatoffeynge. * And inthe temple there Halbe ayar piina
an abbominable defolaciğ,tpll it baue deffroped
all. And it ig concluded, that this walkpng Hal
continue tothe ende.
C The.x.Chapter.

l Te eppea nt tiell an Di ns
a a T

=f the thpzde peare of kpuge Cprus &
A ESAE Perlia, there was Merwed dnto
= pee Daniell ( otberwpfecalled altha=
ag Cer) a matter, pea ,ateuc mattcr,bue
d= tanit is peta longe tyme bntoit, He Dn
derftode the matter wellandpercepued what f
vifpon teas. At the lame tpme: 3 Daniell mour
ned For the (pace of thze weakes , fo that 3 bab
no luff to cate bzeade : asto: lepe g wpne there
came nonc wpthin my mouthe: Ro, Jdpd not
onceanopntemp felfe,fpl the whole thee weirs


ere out.

pon tbe.rriiii.daye of the fp2tte moneth,:
was bp the greate floud, called able att.bii,b,
Dp mpne epes,andloked:and beboldea manelo- 424s
EDeD inipnen., wopolelopnes were gpzded vp vb
fpne golde of Arabye : bps bobpe waslpke the
Chaptolpte fone, 4 open foloke bpon ) was
lvkelpabtenpnge, dpsepes asthe flame of fpze
dps armesandfete were lpkefapze gipiterpng


metall, but the wopcc of bps wozdrg was tybe
' ig


ol


ae | =
a = =
=


—


lac g eea prs arian eee nie teed
= : $
B z '


og Qs ap sl aie ai
' 2
s +


PEN a


i


5


Drame. -


the bopce ota multitude;
*Dantell alane fawe thps vifpon, tthe men


Dandie that were with me lawe it not:buta great fear


tact.ir.a


Dar.fr.b,


fulneffe fell bpon them , fo tbat they fledawape
andbpdthbem lelues. J was lefte there mp felfe
alone,and fate thps greate bifpon, fo longe tpl
thereremapnednomoze ftrength wpthinme.

Pea, Jloft np colourecleane ¥ walked awape,
and mp ffrength was gone. Pet parde 7 p voice
or Sate oe oone ag J barde it, fapnt
nelle came pon me, and ¥ fell Downe fat tothe
grounde ypon mp face. And beholde , an bande
toucbedme , whpche let me bp bpon mp knees
pppon the palmes of mp bandes , fapenge vnto
me: +D Daniell,thou well beloued man:take
good bede of the wozdes , that 3 hall lape nto
the, and tande rpgbte bp, for Dnte the am 3


' notbeflente.


Jonh, t:
Wan. pia


© Daniph,


A


“


And when be bad lapd there wosdes, J ove
bptrembipng. Chen fapd be vnto me-Feare not
Daniel:Foz whps fence p fp: dap that P ae
{et thpne barte to vuderftande,and dpddelk chaz
ften thp felfe before thp God: thp wozdeshaue
ben berde- Bnd bab come Dnito the, when thou
beqanett tofpea&e, badnot p prince oner pking
dome of the perles wpthitande me.rri.dapes.
wut lo, *pichacll one of f chefe pzpnces,came
to belpe me, ¢ 3 was left to cotinue therwpth p
kpnges of Pertea,eam come to Metve the what
thal bappen onto thp people in the later dapes.
Atot it wplbelige pet o2 the vilion be fulfplicd.

Powe when he hadfpokenthele woes vn-
tome, Fiale Downe mp bead tothe qronude and
belde mp tonge, Wepolde, there touched mp lpp-
pes one verp ipke Wntoa man. Chenopencd y
mp mouth,andfapd vnto bim,that Code before
me, D mp Lozde, my topntesareloolcd inp up-
fponand therets shies Saale topebinme.
pow map mp Lozdes feruaunt the talke wpth

p Lozder fepnge there is no ftrengtbe in me,fo
that 3 can not take mp bzcath:aipon thistbere
touched me agapne , one much lpke a manxand
comforted me, fapenge: D tbou man fo well be-
loued fearenot:be content, tabe a good bart Vn
tothe and be tronge. Spo wben be badfpoken
bnto me, ¥F recovered, and apd: Speake onmp
Lorde, fo: tbou balte refrelibed me. Then fapde
be:knoweh thou whcrfoze Jam come wntother
nowe tpll 3 goto fpght wprb the kpng and the
pince of the Peres . AsToone as 3 go foztb,lo,
the prince of Grekelande all come. Meuerthe=
lefe J wopil thetbe the that thynge, that is fatte
nofedinebe {cripture of truth. Andasfo2 pons
Det matters,tbherc ts none that belpcomemebé,
but {ichacll pour prince.

CThe.xri.Chapter. :

@ Apropherre ofthbekpaacs of Seclia, OF the kpnadome

of rece. OF the Rpagoom of egppt,andoef the bonbde ther
of,and ofthe battell wpth the kpnegdome of pra. Sithe
gewees that fpe bnto the kpnge of Soppte, whome Anco:


chusthe kpuge of Spria pertecateth , whpch tpgureth bn:
atots Antichzi. The pipoe of Antiochus,


cara] MD in thefpette pere of Darius of Bedia


Jae\ 3 Lode bp bpm, tocomfrozte bpm, and to
Emosiitrength bpm andnowe wpl Jewe the
the truth. ebolde, there hal tande vp pet thee


bpngesin Perlia, but the fourth thalbe farterp
cher then thep all. And when beis in the chefelte
power of bypsrpcbhes, be Wall prouoke euetp mg


agapnit the vealme of Grekelande. x Then Hal Dauba


there arplepet ampahtpe kpnge, that thall rule
Yopth greate Dominton , and do what bpm lpite.
x AnDasfoone as bps kpngdome cometh vy, it


fhal be beftroped,and deupded totvard the foure “4


wpndes of bcauen. Thep that came after bpn,
pall not baue [uche power and Dominion as be:
but bps &pngdome halbe (catered, pea, cuen a-
mongeother then thole. And the Kpnge of the
fouth balbe mpgbtper, then bps otbec papnees.
And one hall be ronger then be, and thallrule
bps dominion wpth great power.


And in the ende of peares, thep balbe fopned yg


together, and the pnges daughter of thefourh
fall come tothe kynge of f Poztb, for comake
Frendipyp, but be Wal not obtapne the power of
that arme.netDer thall the be able to endure thos
rowe bps mpgbt:but ibe, and {uch as bzougbte
her (pea and detpat begat her, andcdfozted ber

oz bps tpme Mall bedelpucred bp. Dut of the
baaunches of het roote,there Mall one tande vp
in bps teade whpch topth power of armes Mall

0 thozowe the kpuaes lande of the nozth, ana
bandle bpin accozdpnge tobps ftrength. As for
thep2 Jdols and pepnces, wythetbep2 coltlp Jea
nels of golde g {pluer, be hallcarp them awaye
capfiues into Cappte, and be thal rapgne moze


h periei kpuge ofthe North. And when


eigcome into the &pnges realme off fouth, be
(balbe fapneto turne agapun into bis owne lana


‘Hberfoze bis Cones palbe difpleated,¢ thal ga-


ther together a mpgptp great boot of people: €
one of tem {hall come, go thozotwe lpke a a=
tet foude-tpen Hall be returne,¢ go forth wpth
befpenge and boaftpnge bnto bps one lande;
‘Chen the kpnge of the |
and pall come fozth tofpgbt agapntt thekpne
of the noztb:pea,be Hal bapngea qreatemulty-


“tude ofpeople together, and a greate beape pall


be geuen into bps bade:thete tall becarpawap
wpth great pzpde , for lomucheashebathcalte
downe fo manp thoulades,nenuerthelefte, he thal
not preuaple. oz the bpng of the noty thal ga-
ther( of thenewe )a greater beape of people tien
afoze, and come foath(after a certapnetpmeand
Aesth mpepampapiye poot, and exceadpnge
eategood.

At the lame tyme there Hall manp Mande
bp agapnite the kenge of the Louth, fotbac the
wpcked chpldzen of thp people allo halleralce
them Celues (to fulfpll the vifpon)and then fall,
Do the kpnge of f nopth hal come tolape fere,
and to take the frongefentedcitpes : And P pos
wer of them of the fourbe Wall not be able toa-
bpde bpm, g the befte men of the people hall not
be fo fronge, ag torelpf bpm. Sboztip whe be


Sol.c.


fouth halbeangrpe ¢


cometh, be hall bandlebpm agbelpit,enoman `


(albe fo hardy as to Landeagapnitebym. Pe
{hal tandein the pleafaunt countre, whpech tho:
rowe bpm halbe detroped: He thal{et bys face
wptb all bps power to optapne bys kpngdome ;
Eto be lpkeit. Pea, that pall bedo, ¢qpne bpm

PA Ut, bunto


i


yg


‘CUE PROPHYELVE, :


Hito the Doughrers amonge wemen , to deftrop
Þppm.t5ut be pall faple, nether hall he optapne
bps pucpole. After tps thal be (ct bps face wn-
tothe Zies etakemanp of them. A prepuce Hall
toppe bpm, to dbobpm thame, belpde t confus
fionthat els hall come vntobpm. Thus Mall
be turnecagapne to bys owne lande, fomble and
fall and be nomoze founde : fo be that came bps
ppm andodpoppm violence, Mall Fandembps
place, andbaucd plealaunt king dome:and atter
ewe dapes be thalbe deltroped, and that nether
in wrath, noz in battel. yn bys teade there Mall
_arpfe a wple perfone, not bolot worthy ofa bpn
eres dignitie : thys Hallcomein peaceably , and
optapne the kpngdome wpth Rare wonen: ae
thall fyabtagapntte thearmes of the mpgbtpe
(and dettrope them) pea and agapuit the prpnce
oftiecouenaunt. — |
40 after that be bath taken truce wyptb bim
befall handle Dpiceptfullp:that he map get vp
eouercome bpm wptbatmall focke : elo pth
craftpnefic to get bpm tothe fattet place of the
lande and codcaleotbertople, then ether bps fa
thers 02 grafiofathers dpd. Woz be thal dcttrope
the thpnge, that thep bad robbed € fpopled, yea,
gall thep2 fubtaüce, pmagpnpng thougptes a=
capnit the ftroge bolocs,¢ that foz atpme. ips
potver g barte albe kered bp wpth a great at-
mpe agapnite the bpnge of the fourh where tho
-rowe the kpnge of thefouth Halbe moucd then
puto battell,woptb a greate mpabtye bool al-


fo. Meuertheles be thal not beable to tande, foz


thep pall confppze agapntt pim. Dea, thep that

cate of bis meate thal burt bint:fo that bis hoot

fpallfall,and manp be Rapne Downe. 7
pyeletwo hinges thalbe minded fo do mif-


~ chefe,andtalke ofdpicepte at one table:but tpep


fhallnot prolpere foz wbpr the ende (hall not


i, egac,b a come pet: nto the tpmmeappopntcd. + then Hal
ew. bego bome agayneintobps owne lande wytd


aurri o And Why! xtbhe hippes with Italias
Y


Pa


a


€


—~ Prà, be al turne pim, and Date fu


great good, and Cet bps barteagapnit the bolpe
couenaunt,be (al bulpe agapnil it,andtbenres
turne bome. At the time appointed be Hat come
agapne go towardethelouth. Ho Malit bap
penotbertople then at thefpette,pet onte againe

sipal come
ponbpm.that be mape be fmpteen and turne a-


gapue:thathemapetakeindignacton agapnite [ins


tbe erat pden Apt eye ab oe it.
) l ch onto pim
ag leaut the bolp couenaunt,


SÈ Sanctuary of trength,to purdowone the daplp


offrpne , and to let vp theabpominabledefola-
cion. And fuchc as breake the conenaunt (hall be
fatter wopth fapze wozdes. ut the people that
Sop] Bnowe they; God, hal haue the ouerbande
and pzolper. Cholealfotbatbaue ynderifan=
dinge amonge the people hal enfourme the mul
titude:and foz a longe feafon, thep Halbe perle-
cuted wpebfmearde, wth fpre, wrth captiut-
‘tie and wprbtbe bande awape of thep2 goo-
deg. More hen they fall, thep Hall beiet vp
wopth alptie belpe:but manye (pall cleaue vnto
themfapnedlpe.


ffer,as the fpr


Det Tome of thole whiche Dane wuderading
fhalbe pet fecutedalfo , that thep mape be trpcd
purificdandclenfed , tpl the time be out:foz ther
is pet anothertpimeappointedD. The kinge Mal
do tobat him lpi x be hall eralte and magnifie Epris
pm felfe againfte all tbat is God. Pea, be pall
peake maruclougthingesagrayniethe God of
all goddes whertn be Hall pzofpere,lolongetpl _ ~
xtDe wzath be fulfplled, foz theconcluftonig de rne
upledalreadp. Wethall not reqarde the Godot
bis fathers, but bislut halbe vpon wemen.
Dea, de pall not care foz anpe God, fo be Hall
sage bimfelfeabone all. Ju bis place thal
be woztbipche mightpe Fout God:andthe God
Whom his fathersbuewe not, Mall behonoure
with gold and {yluer, with paccious Tones and
pleafaunt Jewels.
Thus thal be do, thozotve his Fronge fen- a
Ced places, (ettinge vp bis fraunge God whom ~
be confelleth andenctealtng bisglogte. Such
ag wpl receaue bim, take bim fo: God, be hal
geue them great wozhhipt power: pea emake
them lozdes of the multitude, and gine them the
lande toithretardes. Inthe latter tyne hal ğ
hinge of the fouth ttriue with bim,and tbe kinge
of p nozthinlpke maner hal come agapné bim


-Wit charettes , pozfemen and with a great na-


up of (bpppes. He pal come into the landes, de-

Mrop € gorhbozow:be thal entreallointo pfapze

plealaiit lande : anp cities and countrets {hal

Decape*ercept Edom, oab,¢ the beft of f chil Tesh t

dzen of Ammon, wbich thal elcape frå his pand.

De thal fretch Coch bis bandes vpon the courne

treys, the lande of Egypt thalnot efcape bin

4Fo2 thozow bis gopng un. betbal Daue bomini-

on ne Gedye aar golde, paan-

neral the precious Fewelsof Eappe, Libia,

Ethiopia: * Meuertheles, be tibinges out of the 8M"

Cat ¢ thenozth Hal trouble bim, foz the which

caufe pe (hal go forth to defbrop androote outa

Treat multitude. The teres of his eae thalbe

pitched betwert the ttoo fees, bpd the bilof the

noble Sanctuarp , fog be al come to bis death

xandthen balnomanbelpebim. a
C The.cti. Chapter:

“He ppophec Cipi
Ssarteete of peprepbeaeetmante o T
wimg pe tyme wplcomealfo, thatthe %

jateat prince* Spichael, wobpcbhe apoc:riy.a

Ta abethbonthy peoples ipoe, thal —

A eta arple bp, for there hal come a mat-rriig.e

a fgetoan CPine Of trouble, fuche as neuer

ene eons Was, lence there beqantobeanp


arrir. d
TUR AA


Pa T a |
‘|


i k Mote ss


e Bla St
the opie (fuch as bane tang er)ibalgip= Setrit.
ng ofbeauen : ethofetbathaue S T
inftruct che multitude nto qodlpnefic, Halbe
as the ftarves, woglde toptbout ende.
And thou D Daniel, Wut vp thele wozdes, z3
and feale the boke tpl the latte tpme.<)anp thal


— goaboute bereg there and then Hal bnowlege


' incereale


OLIULAS CULE


encredfe.o J Daniel lobed, and beholde, thee
cx fodcon(astt were) other tivo, one Dpon this More
of the water.the other bpomponderfpde. And
one of then apd bnto bpm, which was clothed
inlpnien, and fobe aboue bponthe waters of
the fioude : Howe longe Mallit beto the ende of
a thelewwonderougs wozkesr
~ Thenderde 3 the man with the lpnnenclo
Spore theg, wbiche ode aboue vpon the waters of f
floude, when be belde vp bis right and left band
nto beauen, and (tare bp bym whiche lpucth
apop rge Oe cher, X that tt all tarpefo2 a tyme.two tp-
”  megandhalfea tpme:4nd when the power of p
Holy people ts cleane (cattreD abzode, then hall
all thete thpnges be fulfplled .
BJbearde it Welbut ZF onder odett noe.
Thenlapode J:D mp Lozde, what thall happen
after thats Deantwered:Gothp wape Dautel,
Fo: thele toozdes Halbe clofed bp,andfealed,eu
thelafftpme:and manp Halbe purttped,clented
oy AND CrpeD -Has it were with eze) Sui the vngqodlp
up Walllpue wpckedlp,xandebole wpcked(ag ma
Pat FLD Hy of themas thep be) all baueno wnderftan-
— bpng. As foz luchag baue ynderftanding, thep
(hall ceqarde it.And from the tpme forth tbat
daplp offerpng albe put Downe, and the abdo
minable defolatpon fet vp, there thalie a. 4).
sath. p,e, cexc.Dapes. * D wellishpm that wapteth and
Fria, commeth tothe.<t).1.¢. and.ccrb.dapes. Go
thou tbp wap nowe tplltt be ended:take thy rek
andabpbe thp lot, tpl tbe dapes baue anende.


© Theenvde of the Dzophecp of Danicl:


f : | | a
The booke of the
) Prophete Dleag.
€ The fp2ke Chapter.
Eats ir tanta TEMEN pote ong


Hohe deruccpon of the offpzpag of Hchuando€ the Flcae:
iptes, ie ppophecprd.


oo BE P came bnto Dieag thefonne of We
i Ir Ae aelerp xin thedapes of Dieas Joa-
iiti neguz, Hee E ban; X bas and Jesekiag eg


FED. Frbi, ier ames


san aS 0,8 a boam thefonte o£ Joas Kpnae of
Jirael. Epa


ErP blind oft zesracl vpon the houte of Jebu, wpl


tiilsertid hapnere fhe kpngdome of the boule of Flraell to
an ende. Thu well 3 bzeake the boty of Fira-
ellin tbe pallep of Atstacl.,


+ ;


Sbe concepucd pet agapn,and batea dough C
ter: And befapd vnto ppm:Call hee natie Los
bamap(thatis,not obtapning mercpe:)xiog g tirerpt,
wpli daue nopitpe ppon the boule of Flrael,bue
forget tbem, and put them cleane ont ofremema
beaunice. *Meuertheletie, Jwpll baue mercp w- Serie.
pon the boufe of Juda, and wpll faue them euen
thozowe the Lorde thep2 God. Wut J wpllirot
Delpuer them thozowe anp bowe, twerd , bats
taple,bo: les and bozfemen.

201W whë We bad wapned Loznbamah,the D
concepued agapne,and barea fonne. Chenfapo
be:callbtsname Loamp. o: whp- pe arcnot
mp people : therfoze wpll F not be pour God.
and though the nombze of thechpldz€ of 4fracll
be as the lande of the tec, whicbecannepther be
meafured no: tolde: pet inthe place where itis
Tapd onto them, *pe benot mp people: en€ there woms.tr.c
pallit be thus repozted of tpem* thep be § chil- xobu.t.a.
been of theliupng God. + Then hall f chplozen tes.rrrvite
of Juda, andthe cbylozen of ¥rael,be gathered
togither agapne,and chofe them elues ane bed,
and then departe out of the land:Fo2 great Wal-
bethedapeot Jirack. |

@ The ti. Chapter.


Lhe people is called to repentaunee,


pazar El pour bzeth2é,that theparimppeo g
a ple:and pour lpiters, that they baue


1


Obtained mercy. Asto? pour mother
petallchpde with þer, andrepzoue
ber, * foz the ig not mp topfe, neither acre, tua;


aL Yo


Er am 3 ber bulband:onles the put awap ber who:


Dome out of mp lpaht, ¢ ber aduoutrp from ber

bietes. Pino, 3 Mall trip bernaked, andleeper |

xeuenas the came into the woelde: pea, J pall Sst. roia

lape ber wate, and make ber Iphe a wploernes,

andilape ber forth t.3 Hall baue no pptte ale

fo vponber chpldzen: * foz thep be thechpldzen Hob. dtii

of fozntcacpont.,. es
CTChepamother bath beokeu her wedlock, and yz

Hhethat varc themxis come toconfulpon. JEO? iin.re rbis

fhe fapde : F wpll qo after mp louersthat qpue

memp water and mp b2ead, mp toolland flare,

nipic ople anomp dzpnke. Sut F wpl hedge her

wape with thoznes, and Hoppe it, that the hall

not fpnd her fote teppes, and though Me runne

after ber loners, pet thal the not vette them: he

bal feke them, but not fpnde them, x Then Hal Leas, rb g

(he fape:wel, Jw yl goturneagapne to mp fizi

bulbande:fo2 at that tyme was betterat cafe

then noto. Dut this wold the not bnotve where

as ¥ pet gaue ber cone, wpne, ople, (luer, and

golde, xwhiche the bath banged pon Waal.

Ui derfozenowe wpil J take mp come and erob.
wpne agapne in thep2feafon, andfetagapnmp S
woland mp flare which F ee ber toconer ber
Hame. + Bud now wpl 3 otleouer per Folpfynes setiti:
enen in the (padt of ber louers, and no man pal "7S
delpucr ber out ofmpne bandeg. Sozeouer, J
ibpll take awape all ber mpzth*her holp DAVES meurvor e,
bernewemoones, ber Habbothes,and al berlo
kmpue feattes:¥ wpldoekrope ber vpnepardes
and fpatrees.thoughthelapth:lo,berearmp re-


mardes that mploucrshaucqypucnime. Yiply
oe. re D aA, make


ary:


OLIULAS CULE


encredfe.o J Daniel lobed, and beholde, thee
cx fodcon(astt were) other tivo, one Dpon this More
of the water.the other bpomponderfpde. And
one of then apd bnto bpm, which was clothed
inlpnien, and fobe aboue bponthe waters of
the fioude : Howe longe Mallit beto the ende of
a thelewwonderougs wozkesr
~ Thenderde 3 the man with the lpnnenclo
Spore theg, wbiche ode aboue vpon the waters of f
floude, when be belde vp bis right and left band
nto beauen, and (tare bp bym whiche lpucth
apop rge Oe cher, X that tt all tarpefo2 a tyme.two tp-
”  megandhalfea tpme:4nd when the power of p
Holy people ts cleane (cattreD abzode, then hall
all thete thpnges be fulfplled .
BJbearde it Welbut ZF onder odett noe.
Thenlapode J:D mp Lozde, what thall happen
after thats Deantwered:Gothp wape Dautel,
Fo: thele toozdes Halbe clofed bp,andfealed,eu
thelafftpme:and manp Halbe purttped,clented
oy AND CrpeD -Has it were with eze) Sui the vngqodlp
up Walllpue wpckedlp,xandebole wpcked(ag ma
Pat FLD Hy of themas thep be) all baueno wnderftan-
— bpng. As foz luchag baue ynderftanding, thep
(hall ceqarde it.And from the tpme forth tbat
daplp offerpng albe put Downe, and the abdo
minable defolatpon fet vp, there thalie a. 4).
sath. p,e, cexc.Dapes. * D wellishpm that wapteth and
Fria, commeth tothe.<t).1.¢. and.ccrb.dapes. Go
thou tbp wap nowe tplltt be ended:take thy rek
andabpbe thp lot, tpl tbe dapes baue anende.


© Theenvde of the Dzophecp of Danicl:


f : | | a
The booke of the
) Prophete Dleag.
€ The fp2ke Chapter.
Eats ir tanta TEMEN pote ong


Hohe deruccpon of the offpzpag of Hchuando€ the Flcae:
iptes, ie ppophecprd.


oo BE P came bnto Dieag thefonne of We
i Ir Ae aelerp xin thedapes of Dieas Joa-
iiti neguz, Hee E ban; X bas and Jesekiag eg


FED. Frbi, ier ames


san aS 0,8 a boam thefonte o£ Joas Kpnae of
Jirael. Epa


ErP blind oft zesracl vpon the houte of Jebu, wpl


tiilsertid hapnere fhe kpngdome of the boule of Flraell to
an ende. Thu well 3 bzeake the boty of Fira-
ellin tbe pallep of Atstacl.,


+ ;


Sbe concepucd pet agapn,and batea dough C
ter: And befapd vnto ppm:Call hee natie Los
bamap(thatis,not obtapning mercpe:)xiog g tirerpt,
wpli daue nopitpe ppon the boule of Flrael,bue
forget tbem, and put them cleane ont ofremema
beaunice. *Meuertheletie, Jwpll baue mercp w- Serie.
pon the boufe of Juda, and wpll faue them euen
thozowe the Lorde thep2 God. Wut J wpllirot
Delpuer them thozowe anp bowe, twerd , bats
taple,bo: les and bozfemen.

201W whë We bad wapned Loznbamah,the D
concepued agapne,and barea fonne. Chenfapo
be:callbtsname Loamp. o: whp- pe arcnot
mp people : therfoze wpll F not be pour God.
and though the nombze of thechpldz€ of 4fracll
be as the lande of the tec, whicbecannepther be
meafured no: tolde: pet inthe place where itis
Tapd onto them, *pe benot mp people: en€ there woms.tr.c
pallit be thus repozted of tpem* thep be § chil- xobu.t.a.
been of theliupng God. + Then hall f chplozen tes.rrrvite
of Juda, andthe cbylozen of ¥rael,be gathered
togither agapne,and chofe them elues ane bed,
and then departe out of the land:Fo2 great Wal-
bethedapeot Jirack. |

@ The ti. Chapter.


Lhe people is called to repentaunee,


pazar El pour bzeth2é,that theparimppeo g
a ple:and pour lpiters, that they baue


1


Obtained mercy. Asto? pour mother
petallchpde with þer, andrepzoue
ber, * foz the ig not mp topfe, neither acre, tua;


aL Yo


Er am 3 ber bulband:onles the put awap ber who:


Dome out of mp lpaht, ¢ ber aduoutrp from ber

bietes. Pino, 3 Mall trip bernaked, andleeper |

xeuenas the came into the woelde: pea, J pall Sst. roia

lape ber wate, and make ber Iphe a wploernes,

andilape ber forth t.3 Hall baue no pptte ale

fo vponber chpldzen: * foz thep be thechpldzen Hob. dtii

of fozntcacpont.,. es
CTChepamother bath beokeu her wedlock, and yz

Hhethat varc themxis come toconfulpon. JEO? iin.re rbis

fhe fapde : F wpll qo after mp louersthat qpue

memp water and mp b2ead, mp toolland flare,

nipic ople anomp dzpnke. Sut F wpl hedge her

wape with thoznes, and Hoppe it, that the hall

not fpnd her fote teppes, and though Me runne

after ber loners, pet thal the not vette them: he

bal feke them, but not fpnde them, x Then Hal Leas, rb g

(he fape:wel, Jw yl goturneagapne to mp fizi

bulbande:fo2 at that tyme was betterat cafe

then noto. Dut this wold the not bnotve where

as ¥ pet gaue ber cone, wpne, ople, (luer, and

golde, xwhiche the bath banged pon Waal.

Ui derfozenowe wpil J take mp come and erob.
wpne agapne in thep2feafon, andfetagapnmp S
woland mp flare which F ee ber toconer ber
Hame. + Bud now wpl 3 otleouer per Folpfynes setiti:
enen in the (padt of ber louers, and no man pal "7S
delpucr ber out ofmpne bandeg. Sozeouer, J
ibpll take awape all ber mpzth*her holp DAVES meurvor e,
bernewemoones, ber Habbothes,and al berlo
kmpue feattes:¥ wpldoekrope ber vpnepardes
and fpatrees.thoughthelapth:lo,berearmp re-


mardes that mploucrshaucqypucnime. Yiply
oe. re D aA, make


ary:


Se Og ee


The prophecype,


make (ta wood, and wplde bealtes Hall eate te
pp: 3 wpll punpth ber alfo foz pdapes of aal
gavictb. xperin dhe cented bym beckipng bin wito ber
Fo  earpnres and chapnes, when the olotoed ber lo
gp Hers, and fogat me: fapth the lode.
| Miberfore beholde,¥ wpll caller agapne,
bzpng berintoa wildernetle éfpeakefrendlp bn
tober: there wpll J grue ber ber vpnepardes a=
apne : pea and thex vallepe of Achoz allo, to
{ewe her hope andcomfozt. Chen thal the fpng
ameba. phere” ag intbetpme of ber poutb, andtlpkeas
ets FOB in phe pape when te caine out of the lande of €-
appt. Chen (fapth the Lozde, the Wall faye vnto
me) Omp Hulbande, and (hall call me nomoze
saall : foz 4 wpll take awape thole names of
3 abaal from permonth:pea, de Mal neuer remt-
Let. rroia Hee thepz nameg anp moze. * be wll Jmake
acoucnaunt with them, withthe woplac beattes
with thefoules of p apze,and with cucep topna
that crepeth Spon beeattb. |
x Bs foz bowe fwerde and battaple, 3 wpll
peftrope luche oute of the lande, and wpll make
zec por.b them to fepe fafelp.x@hus wpl J marp the on
to myne owne felfe foz euerntoze: pea eue tomp
felfe wpl 3 marp thein cpa btoutnerfe, im equite
inloupnge bpndnelle and mert e. Fn fapthallo
wpll 3 marpe the unto mp felte,and thou balt
bnowe the Lode. At the fame tpme wpl y pew
mp Ceife frendly and gractous Dito thebeucns,
fapeth the Logde:and the beaucns thal belpethe
carth, and the earth Dall belpe the cogne, wpne
C.Bete.tt.» andople, and they Wall belpe Jesrael. J wpill
~~ foxwe them bpon earth,foz a fede tompne owne
+uomir.e felfe: sand wpll paue mercp pon ber,that was
without mevcpe. And tothem whiche were not
mp people, 3 wpll fape:thou art mp people:and
be Hall fape:tbouart mp Ooo. |
CThe.tti.Chapter.
@ Oitheloucof Goo towarbe tbe propre.
same en fapde the Lozbe to me:*Go pet
aA Gay thp Wap cand Wow an adtoutrous
eS p woman, whome chp nepgbboure lo-
J \Saiueth, as the Lozde doeth the chpl-
2 So 2en of Ifrael: bowebeit, thep haue
“4 Eru velpecte to firaunge coddes,* and loue p wpne
08. vha cannes. 40 agate ber foz )
-aud fo an bomerand an balfe ofbarlp,¢ fapde
pntoper: Thou Halte abpoe pth mealonge


gofu. bil.


fap.il.a


EP ee feafon,but te that thou pla pel not the Darlor.¢


loke thou medle with none otber matt ,andeben

wopll Jkepemp felfe fozthe.
ipartoa * Thug the chplozen of qltael thal fptagreat
43 whple without Bpng and pepnce, without offe-
rpng and aulter, without pzeffe and cevelacton


3 But afterwarde Mall the chplozen of Ffrael co


eze.rrriitio uert, and leke the L020 thep2 God and * Dautd
thep: kpng:and inp Latter dapes thep thal wo:
{ppp tbe Logde,and his loupng Bpndnelle.
€ The.wii.Chaptec.
qa complapnt agapn the people;and the
wpealtes of Ficacl.


. SAUERI Eare the worde of the Lozde , D pe
Fe rat a chplozen of gfracl.stoz ë Lord mui
si punpth themë Divelin thelade. Aud


| peg obp’ theretsnotrueth,tbereisno A


ASRA inercp, there snoknotledge of god


ftenefplueripnges -


inthe lande: but fwtarpni lipny manilangh-
ter, thefte and aduouttp baur. ottenthe pper
bande: and one gpltpne Ne foloweth) another.
before thalltbelandebetna milerablecale , ¢
all they that Dwell therein Hall be rooted oute.
The beafkes tn the felde, the foules tn the apre
and the fpltbes in the fee (pall dpe: Vetistbhere
nonethat wpl chattenno; repone an other. soz
*thp peoplerebulkcth the paeattes, which Huld satec.t,
refourme other men. |
Thertore omblett thou inthedapetpme, ¢ 5
thep2opbet With the inthenpght.3 wrlbopng arue sity
thp mother tofcplence:and whpsxmp people pe ly ha
rpib, bpcaule they baneno knowledge. pepnge
then that p bal refuted bnderftandpnge, ther
foze vopll Jrefulethealfo:fo that thou (halt no-
moze be mp p2ett. And fo fo muchas thou bat
forgotten the lawe of thp God, 3 topllalfotoz=
get thy chplazen. Che moze thep increafed in p
muitprude, the moze thep fpnned acupnite me,
therfoze wpll 3 chaunge thepze Honoure into
bame. x Thep cate vp thelprines of mp people Leura,
and courage them inthep wopchednes. + Sus ever. rite
the peeatte is becomelp the people. Wiberfoze **
J wyll punplhe them Fo; thep2 wypcked wapes,
and rewarde them accozdpnge to thepz owne p
mainacpons. wes deg gate, and not Daue Len. rrbf.p
pnoughe. hep baue vied wbozdome,therfore S<.0-*
fhallthep not pzofpere:and whp:tbep baue ie tt
falsen tbe Lode, and not regarded bpm.
WI hosBome, wpne,and deonkennefle taketh ¢
the bettawape. xp peop alike counfaple at ist.sxe,t.a0
tiep: tockes,thep2 ta emufttell them. #024
whorpa mpnd bath becepued them to that thep
commit Foznicactonagayntt their God.* Thep ott, megn
make Cacrifpees pon tbe bye mountapnes, and enue
burne thepz infence bpon toe bpileg: pea among
the okes,groues,and bulpes, to: there arg g900
adotweg. Therfoze pour bougbters are becom
barlottes, and potire fpontes baue bzoken thep2
eons ol ng peop eame S4
epng betpled, and pour brydes p became WHo- mugro, n,
rcg: xtepnge f fatbers them {elues bane medled Sa
witbharlotsandofred w wnthziftes:butp peo
ple that wpl not onderftand, mut be punithed.
‘Thoughtbou Arael arte ditpoted to plape =
the harlot, pet (puldeft not thou baue offended,
D Juda: thou thouldci not daue tunned trnto
Gilgal, «102 bane gone vp to Wethanem:+103 fiire. rif.
paue wone, the Lozvelpucth. soz Flracilis FIDEGLF.0,
gore cek pets oes cow. The Lord ther-
oze thal mabe ber fede as the lambe that goctb .
atrape. And whereas Ephraim is become par
taker ofpdolg: well, let bpm go,thep2 dronken-
neffe batb put them back, and bzought tbemto
wobozdome. Tbepzrulerglone rewardes, yng
(faye thep to thepz owne pame. A wpnde Mal
take bolde of rhepzfethers: and thep fpalbe cone
founded in thep2 offrpnaes.
€ The. v. Chapter.
@ Agapnt ye nzealkes and rulers of #ract.
FED Pe preattes, beare thys,take Here, D 4
hy see, @ thou bouthold of Zfracl: gpue care, D
. aay A thou bpnglpe þoufe, fozit toere poure
45 part to fe mogement done:but p ouart
ecome


#
=


n X i al
ri m


=


Š


Se Og ee


The prophecype,


make (ta wood, and wplde bealtes Hall eate te
pp: 3 wpll punpth ber alfo foz pdapes of aal
gavictb. xperin dhe cented bym beckipng bin wito ber
Fo  earpnres and chapnes, when the olotoed ber lo
gp Hers, and fogat me: fapth the lode.
| Miberfore beholde,¥ wpll caller agapne,
bzpng berintoa wildernetle éfpeakefrendlp bn
tober: there wpll J grue ber ber vpnepardes a=
apne : pea and thex vallepe of Achoz allo, to
{ewe her hope andcomfozt. Chen thal the fpng
ameba. phere” ag intbetpme of ber poutb, andtlpkeas
ets FOB in phe pape when te caine out of the lande of €-
appt. Chen (fapth the Lozde, the Wall faye vnto
me) Omp Hulbande, and (hall call me nomoze
saall : foz 4 wpll take awape thole names of
3 abaal from permonth:pea, de Mal neuer remt-
Let. rroia Hee thepz nameg anp moze. * be wll Jmake
acoucnaunt with them, withthe woplac beattes
with thefoules of p apze,and with cucep topna
that crepeth Spon beeattb. |
x Bs foz bowe fwerde and battaple, 3 wpll
peftrope luche oute of the lande, and wpll make
zec por.b them to fepe fafelp.x@hus wpl J marp the on
to myne owne felfe foz euerntoze: pea eue tomp
felfe wpl 3 marp thein cpa btoutnerfe, im equite
inloupnge bpndnelle and mert e. Fn fapthallo
wpll 3 marpe the unto mp felte,and thou balt
bnowe the Lode. At the fame tpme wpl y pew
mp Ceife frendly and gractous Dito thebeucns,
fapeth the Logde:and the beaucns thal belpethe
carth, and the earth Dall belpe the cogne, wpne
C.Bete.tt.» andople, and they Wall belpe Jesrael. J wpill
~~ foxwe them bpon earth,foz a fede tompne owne
+uomir.e felfe: sand wpll paue mercp pon ber,that was
without mevcpe. And tothem whiche were not
mp people, 3 wpll fape:thou art mp people:and
be Hall fape:tbouart mp Ooo. |
CThe.tti.Chapter.
@ Oitheloucof Goo towarbe tbe propre.
same en fapde the Lozbe to me:*Go pet
aA Gay thp Wap cand Wow an adtoutrous
eS p woman, whome chp nepgbboure lo-
J \Saiueth, as the Lozde doeth the chpl-
2 So 2en of Ifrael: bowebeit, thep haue
“4 Eru velpecte to firaunge coddes,* and loue p wpne
08. vha cannes. 40 agate ber foz )
-aud fo an bomerand an balfe ofbarlp,¢ fapde
pntoper: Thou Halte abpoe pth mealonge


gofu. bil.


fap.il.a


EP ee feafon,but te that thou pla pel not the Darlor.¢


loke thou medle with none otber matt ,andeben

wopll Jkepemp felfe fozthe.
ipartoa * Thug the chplozen of qltael thal fptagreat
43 whple without Bpng and pepnce, without offe-
rpng and aulter, without pzeffe and cevelacton


3 But afterwarde Mall the chplozen of Ffrael co


eze.rrriitio uert, and leke the L020 thep2 God and * Dautd
thep: kpng:and inp Latter dapes thep thal wo:
{ppp tbe Logde,and his loupng Bpndnelle.
€ The.wii.Chaptec.
qa complapnt agapn the people;and the
wpealtes of Ficacl.


. SAUERI Eare the worde of the Lozde , D pe
Fe rat a chplozen of gfracl.stoz ë Lord mui
si punpth themë Divelin thelade. Aud


| peg obp’ theretsnotrueth,tbereisno A


ASRA inercp, there snoknotledge of god


ftenefplueripnges -


inthe lande: but fwtarpni lipny manilangh-
ter, thefte and aduouttp baur. ottenthe pper
bande: and one gpltpne Ne foloweth) another.
before thalltbelandebetna milerablecale , ¢
all they that Dwell therein Hall be rooted oute.
The beafkes tn the felde, the foules tn the apre
and the fpltbes in the fee (pall dpe: Vetistbhere
nonethat wpl chattenno; repone an other. soz
*thp peoplerebulkcth the paeattes, which Huld satec.t,
refourme other men. |
Thertore omblett thou inthedapetpme, ¢ 5
thep2opbet With the inthenpght.3 wrlbopng arue sity
thp mother tofcplence:and whpsxmp people pe ly ha
rpib, bpcaule they baneno knowledge. pepnge
then that p bal refuted bnderftandpnge, ther
foze vopll Jrefulethealfo:fo that thou (halt no-
moze be mp p2ett. And fo fo muchas thou bat
forgotten the lawe of thp God, 3 topllalfotoz=
get thy chplazen. Che moze thep increafed in p
muitprude, the moze thep fpnned acupnite me,
therfoze wpll 3 chaunge thepze Honoure into
bame. x Thep cate vp thelprines of mp people Leura,
and courage them inthep wopchednes. + Sus ever. rite
the peeatte is becomelp the people. Wiberfoze **
J wyll punplhe them Fo; thep2 wypcked wapes,
and rewarde them accozdpnge to thepz owne p
mainacpons. wes deg gate, and not Daue Len. rrbf.p
pnoughe. hep baue vied wbozdome,therfore S<.0-*
fhallthep not pzofpere:and whp:tbep baue ie tt
falsen tbe Lode, and not regarded bpm.
WI hosBome, wpne,and deonkennefle taketh ¢
the bettawape. xp peop alike counfaple at ist.sxe,t.a0
tiep: tockes,thep2 ta emufttell them. #024
whorpa mpnd bath becepued them to that thep
commit Foznicactonagayntt their God.* Thep ott, megn
make Cacrifpees pon tbe bye mountapnes, and enue
burne thepz infence bpon toe bpileg: pea among
the okes,groues,and bulpes, to: there arg g900
adotweg. Therfoze pour bougbters are becom
barlottes, and potire fpontes baue bzoken thep2
eons ol ng peop eame S4
epng betpled, and pour brydes p became WHo- mugro, n,
rcg: xtepnge f fatbers them {elues bane medled Sa
witbharlotsandofred w wnthziftes:butp peo
ple that wpl not onderftand, mut be punithed.
‘Thoughtbou Arael arte ditpoted to plape =
the harlot, pet (puldeft not thou baue offended,
D Juda: thou thouldci not daue tunned trnto
Gilgal, «102 bane gone vp to Wethanem:+103 fiire. rif.
paue wone, the Lozvelpucth. soz Flracilis FIDEGLF.0,
gore cek pets oes cow. The Lord ther-
oze thal mabe ber fede as the lambe that goctb .
atrape. And whereas Ephraim is become par
taker ofpdolg: well, let bpm go,thep2 dronken-
neffe batb put them back, and bzought tbemto
wobozdome. Tbepzrulerglone rewardes, yng
(faye thep to thepz owne pame. A wpnde Mal
take bolde of rhepzfethers: and thep fpalbe cone
founded in thep2 offrpnaes.
€ The. v. Chapter.
@ Agapnt ye nzealkes and rulers of #ract.
FED Pe preattes, beare thys,take Here, D 4
hy see, @ thou bouthold of Zfracl: gpue care, D
. aay A thou bpnglpe þoufe, fozit toere poure
45 part to fe mogement done:but p ouart
ecome


#
=


n X i al
ri m


=


Š


E GAT T


< laS


hecdmealnare bnto Wisphab , andalpeed net
pito the mount of Thabor. Thep bpll lacepfp
ces bp heapes: and turne fare fromthe Lode,
sec. biad and P have bene artbuber ofthbemal, * J know
JTF Gen at wcll phough,and giracl is not bpove
“ frome; loz Ephraim ts note become anbarlor,
and Zleaclis defpled. Thep are not mpndedto
turne veto tiep: God, fo they baur anwhorih

25 harte,tothattbep cannot knowe the Lozde.
Ofer BHD” LIB utthe prpde of Jiraci wpll be rewarded
byntin bis face: pea botbe Firacland Ephraim
gerei, Wall fall FO? they2 wpckednefle,and Juda with


tomine Chem allo. x Tiy Hal come With thepztpepes —


5c. Hite Hullockepeto feke the Lode, but thep tall nat
Ebe brm ton bee oie from them. Æg tothe
Lorde, they bane refuted pit, and bronghte pp


Ders. And as thenes armed, wapee fo:


and fet me at nought. Gilead iza citpe oF mpr-
ked doers of maltcpous people,and blond Nip
ag eh piitbat
patleth bp the wape: fuche ig tecounfapic of
pckes, which with one agreed counfapl, niur-
fhur cruellpefuche agtepe the wape :pea > thep m
Darre do All Dnfpeakable mplchefe. xPozrpble Her.viii.d.
thpnges bane 3 fene inthe bouleoF. fråcl there
plapeth €phzaim the barlot, and rael ige-
ier: pea and thou Fuda kepe anharlotte toz
bp telfe , when J rerurne the captiuprie of mp


peopi¢. Aad pal a
© The. vit. Chapter.


€


' : CHO revpces and wantonnctle ct the people,


battarde chpioen: ameneth therfore tall des RAYAS if


i toure them with thep2 poracpons. Wlowe with


the hawmesat Gibea, andiwpth pterompetin |


© 43 amab,crpe out at Wethauen yponthe ponde-
en s e imin Jntbetpme of p plage mpal


{pd | .
a &phraim be lapde walte therfore dpd F apip- `


<. EUllp watne the trpbes of Frael. Petare p prin
| Rane" cog of Gada become tpketbemeebat remoue the
landemarkes : Thérfoze pl y poure oute mp
th2ath bpon themlphe water. Ephraim is ap-
prelen, ¢canbaneto rpg bt of the law:fo2 wpp
ep Folowecd the doctrpnes of pngodlpe men.
Therfoze wpll J be unto Cphzaimn asa moth,
and to the boule of Juda a caterpplicr.
‘D Gben Ephraim fawe bis lpckhnesandguba
iii re ro.a big dileate,x Ephraim went vnto Allure fente
‘vito kpnge Jareb: pet coulde not he belpe pou,
1502 vale pou of poure papne: Jam puto Ephra=
imag alpot,andas a lpons whelpe-to the boule
‘of Juda. Eucn J wpll fpoplethem,and yoo mp
awape. Fpl take them w pe) meand noman
thallreleue them. F tepllgo,and retourne to mp
` place, tpll thep knowledge that thep bauc fpn-
ned andlekeme ,
€ The. ti. Chapter.
qr AElistpon caufetha man to tiraue to God. Whe wpe:
hepueile of Che picales
rams A thepz aduerfpte, thep thal earlpe
sme by (eke mer aril ie eri
ob, bb, Musson ay agapnetothe Lorde: + foz be bat
, peck I (mptten vs,and be hal beale bs:He
fas hath wounded vs and be (hal bpnd
Jos dp agapne:aftertwo dapes thal be qupcken
— bg, íin the topzde dape pall raple bs bp, fo that
we {balilpucin bis lygbte. Chen Hall we bane
bndecitandpng,andcndever our (clues to know
rA tbe Lorde, De thall go foztbe as the (pepuge of
tropoa FPOe dape and come bute Ygtag the euching and
moznpnge capne Dpon theearthe.
. DE phzatim, what pall J do vntothes O
Juda, bow hal ¥ entreat therfeing pour loue ig
Ipke amognpnge cloude, andlypkea dete that
` orth earlpawape. Cherfore bane J cut dowone
tie propbetes , elettpemt be apne fozmp Wo2«
des fakre:fo that thp punpimente hall come to
eoat.ir.b. lpabt.* Æo: 4 have pleatucinloupng kpndneg,
ore taf c, 740 Not inoffcpng:pea inp knowledge GoD
more then in burnt faccifpce: wut eucnlpkeag
Dene, tite ¥ poamopd,fabaue thep brokenmy conenaiit


> a


-belet them, whisbe Fle well pnoughe. xEhep roma, i»,
‘make the iepuge and the Dzpuces,tabaue pica: 25 .
Lutein they topcked 38 pes. au thete barne
in aduouttpe, agit were an onen that the batter
beateth when he bathiett knedpne, tpll pdowe
be leaucned. Cuenlocorth this vape with oure
kynges and princes, fo: thep beapn tobe wood
Dongen thozotve topne, thep vie familpa titpe
with fucbe as decepue them. Thep with the pa
Maguiacion of thep2 bere arelpbean ouen, their
flepeis all tie npabt Ipke the flepe ofa baker, ttt
the moznptge is Pe as bote as the flame of fpe:
{hep are all together ashoteasan ouen.
_ Chev pauc Deuoured their owne Fudgesall C -
thep2 apuges are oye Sh ig there none of the
that calleth pone. Cheefozre nut Ephraim.
bemictamonge pbheathen. Ephraim ig become
iphe a cake thatno man turneth,ftratigers baue
Heuoured bis Erength : pet, he reqardethit not.
De Waretd fullot qrape beeres, pet wpll be not
know if:*and the pepde of Zlrael is cat Downe Otee.t.a;
betoze thepz face, pet topli thep not tutne tothe
Lorde thep2 God, nozfeke hym fo2 all this.

~ Ephaaim tg Iphea Douce $ isbegtled,and hath |
nobart. «Row call thep vpon the Egipepans nO b
now go thep to the Aflprtans:bufwhiletyep be ~
going bere tbere. J topl fpzed my tictoner thé,
and dawe them dorone as the foules of f apze:
and accozbpnge asthey baue bene warned, fo
wp A puny tbem. xlo be vntothe,£o2 ter sera 45:
bane fopfaken me. Thep muft be deftroped, fog
thep baue let meatnougbt: x3 am be that rede- Betta:
med them andpet thep diffeble with mes They a sete
callniot bpon me With thep2bartes, but lye pou rapire
Ipnge bpon thep2 bedbdes. bere agthep come e Ferite
together, itis but foz meat and dzpnke, andme
thep wpli not obepe : 3 baue taughtethem, and
defended thepz arme: pet dotdeppmagine mp f-
chefeagapniteme. Thep turne them felues, but
not tothe moot hpelf,and are becomeasa b20-
ken bowe. Thep? pzpuces Halbe flapne with p
fwerd,fo2 the malpee of thep: tonaes,{ucbe {coz
nes thal thep bane inthe lande of Egypt. Th

-


i f


Wolt.


+


‘QYCASLONUCCPe,


Dci. rrri D


} „biii. er.
Thed C The Dit Chavet (taci bpcaute of thepze
poolattpe. blowe
reper Et the hogne to thy mouth, and
R aA fopttlp(as an Egle) hall the chempe
Piers pas come agapnite the poule ofthe Lobe:
Pieti Fortbep bauc boken mp + couenaunt,
and tranfqreilea mp lawe. Bfraeltoulde baue
fapde butome:thouartmp Gob, we buowethe
but be bathrefuled the thynge that ts good, ther
ti ate riie. Fore (hall heenempe Folow vponbpm. * Thep
Daue o2depned bynges, but not thozot me-thep
baue made popues ann Jmutnot knowe of it.
eec. vio. ¥DEthep2 piuerand golde baue thep made the
~~ pmages ,to bepnge them feluegto deffruccpon.
inrer * Top calfe D Samaria pall be taken a-
wape, foz mp wathfull indignacpon is gone
fortbaqapn the. Dow longe top it be. 04 thep
y5 canbeclen{ed. foz the calfe camefrom Zlraell,


the wo2keman made ff,therfoze can tt bento god
tat euen inpeces (pall the calfe of Samarta be
broken. Thep baue lowed wpnde, werfoze Hal
thep reapea Fome. |
f Thepretede pal beare nocogne, there tall
110 meale be made of thepzencreafle-thougb they
reape pet pall fraungers deuoure it Dp. Firacl
{hall perpfibe , the Gen thallintreate bpm
-agafoule veffel.pns thep went bp to the At:
fpzpans, tbep arebecome Ipke a wplde Bile in
q the delerte.

eye poi though tier bpze them amonge the Hetben, pet
ELTDI oio | M,
now wpll J gather tbem vp. Thep thall begpn
tobe werped wpth the burthen of Rpnges and
‘papnices. eae bathmade many anltars to

bdo wpckednette, bis aultars(Blape : be pad to
hisfpune- Though F thewe them mp lawe ne-
uerfomoch,thep countit but ffraunge doctrine
D Wibhere as thep do lacrifyce, ofrpna the fletihe,
and eatpng tt, the Lozde wpll bauc no pleature
therein: but wpll remembze they? topckednefle,
pe | punplibe thep2 fypnnes. x Ifrael turnetb a-
nitre paia Capt ito Egipt t whe ial oi bpm that
made them, tbep buplde fapze palaces, and Ju-


cit. wegus Damaketh many ronge citpes:« therfore topl
FFD, De A Cendea fp2einto thep2citpes,and it thal
Tume thep2 palaces .
@ Che.ir. Chapter.
CC otide hunger and captiaptpe of Hfraet.


Leon:


to them as mourners meates , woberetn all thep
that eatetbemaredefpled, Hoztbebsead that


* Ephraim qpueth cetardes to get lovers, t-


they baue luche lut buto, Hall not come intop
boule of the Lozde.tibat wpll pedo then in the
folempnedapes,and in the fealk of the 1020/20
thep Mall getthem awap foz the deftruccpon.€
gipt halrecepuethem,¢ Nopb thal burp them.
The nettles thal oucrgrowethep2 plealaunt 15
qoodes,and burresthalbeinthepztabernacles. .
we pelure( sD Alracl thetpme of wilptacponis
come , theDapes of recompenf{png are at bande:
And then pall Ffrae! now, that thep were de-
cepucd bp a prophet foolpt and madina fran-
(ye, foz the multptude of thpne iniquitpe ,@od
fhall multiplpe enempesagapntt the Ephraim
hath mabe bpm felfe a watcbemanof mp Goda
prophet that is become a iare todo burt in eve
tp rete, and abbominacpon inthe boule of bys
God. Thep be goneto far, and haue deltroped
them felues,|pheas thep did afozetpme*at Ga Juv. rir.a
baa:t therfore they2 wpchednefle halbe temeltt time. p.e
bed, and thepz{pnnes punpiped. “| ttii.regip.e
Jfonnd Fracl irae grapes inthe wploernes C
and fawe thep2 fathers as the Ep2it x fpqaes its Ie. rriiti.a
thetoppe of the fyage tree. +25ut they are rone PT?
to Baal Peo: , andrunneawape frometo that
fhameful pdoll, and ar become as abbominable
asthepaloucrs.€pbzaimfipethlpkeabpzde,fo —
thal thep2 glozpe allo: Gnlomuch chattbep Hal
nepther beget,concepue,noz bearechyld2é. And `
thougbe they bzpige bp anpe, pet pil J make
them chplolesamonge men. Pea, wbo Malcome
tothem, when g departe from them.«Ephzaim Servis
(asme thpnke) ts plantedin toelt bpnette slpke
as Cp2us:but nowe muft Me bzpnge ber owne
cbpldzen Forth to the manflear.
D Logdetbou halt geue them: what Halt D
thou qeuc themsgeuethem an vnfrutetul wibe
and dupe brea ftes. All their wpcbeonesis done
atxOugal,theredo¥ abboz them. Eor the wn: 2°" *
gractoulnefie of they? owne inuenctons: 4 wyl
dıpue them oute of mp boule. 3 wplllone them
nomoze,fo2 all thep2 pepncesare onfaptbfull.
Cpbzaim is bewen bowne, thep2 roote is died
vp,fo that thep pall bzpnge nomoze frute: pea,
and though the bay gefozth anpe, pet wpll F
flape euen the beft beloued frute of thep2 bodpe
Hp Godthall cafke them atwape, fortbepbhaue
not bene obedpent vnto bpm:therfore thal thep
goaltrape rene the Heathen.


eg ct.
todas bps poolies,


litbentbe <A che bsr Thep com-


nibmentas procdes inthe fozowes of the lade
| Thep


of Bleas,


6  Chepthatarwell in Samaria baue worppp
ped the calfe of Dethanen:therfo2e hail the peo
ple mourne oner them. Pea, and the preites alfo
thatinthep: weltbpnelte retopced wpth them:
andwhp it tballpalleawapefromtbem.

> Ft thalbe bought tothe Aflirpan, fo2 a prelent

wntokpug Farch. Epbeatin thal recepuc ful pu

npipment. grael thalbeconfotided fo: bis owne

pinaginacions. Samaria with bis kpnge wall
vanpiibeatvape asthe (comme in the water.

‘The bpe palaces of Juen where {lracl do finne

_ all becatke dowone: thp files and thoznes hall

Zux.rrite Growe Dpon thep2 alters.« Chen (pall tor fap

Apoc. bic. tothe mouttapnes : couer bs,and tothe pplies,

fall vpon bg.

D Jiraci, thou hak fpnned as x Gabaa dpt

Fud, pipa, Aozetpme Where thep remapned:Moulde not p

-battaple then come ppon p wpcked chpldzcn as

wellag bpon the Gabaonites’ Fwplilecbaten

tbem , euen.after mpne owne Delpze: the people

fhalbe gathered together ouer them, when J pu

nye them toz thep2 great wpckednefic. Ephia

im was Yntome,asacowe thatis pfedto goto

plotve, therfoze Jloucdhpm, and fell ypon bys

 fapze necke: Jùroue Epzatm, Juda plowed, ¢

Jacob plaped the bufban’eman. Dowe vuto


cygbtoutnefic, andreapethefrutes of weldoing ©


plowe bp pour fret lande, foz tt is tpme to leke
the Lo2de,tpll be come andraprerigptoulnefle
bpon pou. But pou baune plowed ongodlpnette,
D pe baue reaped iniquptie pou bane raten p frute
* ofipes. Sepnge thou puttet thy confpdence in
thpne owne wa yes, and lenei to the multitude

of thy woztbpcs:there Mall growwe a fedicion a-
monge top people. Allthbp tronge citpes Halbe
lapde walte, cuenas Salmana twag deftroped
with bis familperg thozow bpm that wag auen
qed of Arbel, inthe dape of battaple, where the
mother perpibed witb ber chpldycn.@ué fo al

it go with pou’ D Werbel)bvicaule of poure ma-


licpous wpckednes. Lp4z ag the mozning goth..


awape, fo Hall the kpnye of Firar! pale.
c C Theri. Chapter.
. Cagapnt the bnkpnon Me of Ffrae,


B aaen Fracil waspongeg loncd bim
Eron tib. A A EIA dl and called nip fonne out of p lande
paath. ttc. PA AEAN oE Egypte. Wut the mozetbép were
anad PATM Aacallen themozthep went backesof
\Vitire.bic, e AfA'2-4 frpng vutopDdols of Saal, and cen:


png pmages.3 learned Ephraim to go,g bare
tbem in mpne armes but thep regardednot me
that wolde haue belpedthem. J led them wpth


cozbes of arog 4. wpth vandes of loue. J |
la


» wag euen be that lapd the poke upon thep2 nec
7 Fb. eg. x3 gane them Fovder mp felfe, f thep huld
| not go agapne into Egvpt. Jnd nowe is Alur
thep2 bpnge. oz thep wolde not turne punto me
Ther fore hall the fwerde begpnin thep2 citpces
the foze that they bauelapde vp, Halbe defkrop
ed and eaten: and tbat bpcaule of thcpze owne
pinagitacpons: and mp people Hall ftande ina
Doubt whprber toturne them, for when the pio
pbets called them to the mot Drei, not one pet
wolde geut bpm bigglorpe.
25  Wibatareatctppnges Dane J geuentpe, D


»


*


mh i e i o
Foki.
€pbhiatn:howe fapthfully baueZocfeudedthe
D Jiraek paue J dealt with theas with * mba agg
ma‘ Dz pane Jentveatedthelpke Heboim Mo Pra
mp bert is otheriwple mpndced. Pea, mp mercpe
is to faruent: therfoze bane J not turned me to
detrope Ephraiminmp watchful dpfplea fure.
oz J am Gad andnoman,7F am euen that bo-
ly one in the mpddeft of tbe, though J came not
Within tbe cttpe. E

‘The Lode rozethlpke alpon,thatthep map ~
folow bpm: pea,xas a lyon cozeth bethat thep *7°%-*-4,
map be afrapdelphe thechpldzen of the {ce,that
they mape be (cattred awape from ¢€gppte, as
men {catter bpzdes:and Frapde awap(as douca
bfe to be)from the Jficiang lange, and tbat b
caule wolde baue them tarp at pome, lape
the Łozde. Mut Epua gorth about me with
Ipeg,and the boufe of Jiraeldphembleth. Dnip
Juda boldetb bpm with Sod, and with the trug
bolp thpngeg. |

‘The.rit. Chapter.
E Agapatte the bapne trut of the people.

a Phraim is fed withayse,and Eolo- a
‘wetbafterthe eatwind:beig euer
f increalpnge lpeg and Deftruccpon.
ae Thep beronfederate wpth the Ai-


i
Hi
g


Bee a(yztan, * Thepz ople is carped tts ir vervi
ta €gppte. The Lode ba a courteto Polbe eta iib


wpth Juda, and wpll punplipe Jacob. Aiter
theyze owne wapes, and accozdpngeto thepze
owne inuencpons,@all be recõpence them. xe SF-A
toke bis bzother bp the bele when he was pet i
his mothers wombe: and in pis Frengtb be wres
{tled with God. He x Eroue wpeb the Jungell, serri
and gat the victozp:fotbhat bepzapdeanddelp= _
red bpm. «de founde bpm at wWetbel, and there Se Fred
betalketh wpth vs. See
Pea tbe £020 God of hookkes.cuet the Lo2d

bpm felferemembzedbpm. Then tourne to thp
God, kepe mercpe and cquptte,and hope (tpl ws
thp God. ut thos actlpke the marchatt,that
pete a falle wapgbe th bis pand, be bathbaplea-

ute to occuppe ertogcpon. EphaimedpnserD ooo wc,
thus:* Tup, gam rpche, J baue good pnougp: -
inall mp wo2kes hall not onefaultbe Founder, .
that Jbaucofended. Vet am Fthe Lozde thp
®od,euenas when J brought the out of pland
os ear fean Cette thetntbp tentes,and ag in

_ a baue fpoken thozowe tbe piopbetcs and ¢
ewed dpuerfe bifpong , and declared np felfe
bp the mintfFracpon of the Pzopbetes. %ut at
Gilead is theabbontinacpon, thep are fallenta
vanite. At Gilgal thep baueflapne oren:as ma
np beapes of Lones.as they badin thepze lande-
fo, Prega Feces netbep mabe. x Fa- Sepoy
cob fled into the lande of Spzriaand Jlracl fege
ued foz a wpfe and fo? atoyte be kepte pepe.

- Wy a prophee the 1020 broughe them out of
Egipt and bp a prophet dereleruedthem. Wut
Ephzaim bath prouoked him to difpleature tho
tow bis abbominacpos, therfore (hal bis blound
be poured bpon bpm felfe, andthe Lozd pis yot
(hall cewarde bpm bis blatphempes.

Bh C Ther. Chapter. Be


of Bleas,


6  Chepthatarwell in Samaria baue worppp
ped the calfe of Dethanen:therfo2e hail the peo
ple mourne oner them. Pea, and the preites alfo
thatinthep: weltbpnelte retopced wpth them:
andwhp it tballpalleawapefromtbem.

> Ft thalbe bought tothe Aflirpan, fo2 a prelent

wntokpug Farch. Epbeatin thal recepuc ful pu

npipment. grael thalbeconfotided fo: bis owne

pinaginacions. Samaria with bis kpnge wall
vanpiibeatvape asthe (comme in the water.

‘The bpe palaces of Juen where {lracl do finne

_ all becatke dowone: thp files and thoznes hall

Zux.rrite Growe Dpon thep2 alters.« Chen (pall tor fap

Apoc. bic. tothe mouttapnes : couer bs,and tothe pplies,

fall vpon bg.

D Jiraci, thou hak fpnned as x Gabaa dpt

Fud, pipa, Aozetpme Where thep remapned:Moulde not p

-battaple then come ppon p wpcked chpldzcn as

wellag bpon the Gabaonites’ Fwplilecbaten

tbem , euen.after mpne owne Delpze: the people

fhalbe gathered together ouer them, when J pu

nye them toz thep2 great wpckednefic. Ephia

im was Yntome,asacowe thatis pfedto goto

plotve, therfoze Jloucdhpm, and fell ypon bys

 fapze necke: Jùroue Epzatm, Juda plowed, ¢

Jacob plaped the bufban’eman. Dowe vuto


cygbtoutnefic, andreapethefrutes of weldoing ©


plowe bp pour fret lande, foz tt is tpme to leke
the Lo2de,tpll be come andraprerigptoulnefle
bpon pou. But pou baune plowed ongodlpnette,
D pe baue reaped iniquptie pou bane raten p frute
* ofipes. Sepnge thou puttet thy confpdence in
thpne owne wa yes, and lenei to the multitude

of thy woztbpcs:there Mall growwe a fedicion a-
monge top people. Allthbp tronge citpes Halbe
lapde walte, cuenas Salmana twag deftroped
with bis familperg thozow bpm that wag auen
qed of Arbel, inthe dape of battaple, where the
mother perpibed witb ber chpldycn.@ué fo al

it go with pou’ D Werbel)bvicaule of poure ma-


licpous wpckednes. Lp4z ag the mozning goth..


awape, fo Hall the kpnye of Firar! pale.
c C Theri. Chapter.
. Cagapnt the bnkpnon Me of Ffrae,


B aaen Fracil waspongeg loncd bim
Eron tib. A A EIA dl and called nip fonne out of p lande
paath. ttc. PA AEAN oE Egypte. Wut the mozetbép were
anad PATM Aacallen themozthep went backesof
\Vitire.bic, e AfA'2-4 frpng vutopDdols of Saal, and cen:


png pmages.3 learned Ephraim to go,g bare
tbem in mpne armes but thep regardednot me
that wolde haue belpedthem. J led them wpth


cozbes of arog 4. wpth vandes of loue. J |
la


» wag euen be that lapd the poke upon thep2 nec
7 Fb. eg. x3 gane them Fovder mp felfe, f thep huld
| not go agapne into Egvpt. Jnd nowe is Alur
thep2 bpnge. oz thep wolde not turne punto me
Ther fore hall the fwerde begpnin thep2 citpces
the foze that they bauelapde vp, Halbe defkrop
ed and eaten: and tbat bpcaule of thcpze owne
pinagitacpons: and mp people Hall ftande ina
Doubt whprber toturne them, for when the pio
pbets called them to the mot Drei, not one pet
wolde geut bpm bigglorpe.
25  Wibatareatctppnges Dane J geuentpe, D


»


*


mh i e i o
Foki.
€pbhiatn:howe fapthfully baueZocfeudedthe
D Jiraek paue J dealt with theas with * mba agg
ma‘ Dz pane Jentveatedthelpke Heboim Mo Pra
mp bert is otheriwple mpndced. Pea, mp mercpe
is to faruent: therfoze bane J not turned me to
detrope Ephraiminmp watchful dpfplea fure.
oz J am Gad andnoman,7F am euen that bo-
ly one in the mpddeft of tbe, though J came not
Within tbe cttpe. E

‘The Lode rozethlpke alpon,thatthep map ~
folow bpm: pea,xas a lyon cozeth bethat thep *7°%-*-4,
map be afrapdelphe thechpldzen of the {ce,that
they mape be (cattred awape from ¢€gppte, as
men {catter bpzdes:and Frapde awap(as douca
bfe to be)from the Jficiang lange, and tbat b
caule wolde baue them tarp at pome, lape
the Łozde. Mut Epua gorth about me with
Ipeg,and the boufe of Jiraeldphembleth. Dnip
Juda boldetb bpm with Sod, and with the trug
bolp thpngeg. |

‘The.rit. Chapter.
E Agapatte the bapne trut of the people.

a Phraim is fed withayse,and Eolo- a
‘wetbafterthe eatwind:beig euer
f increalpnge lpeg and Deftruccpon.
ae Thep beronfederate wpth the Ai-


i
Hi
g


Bee a(yztan, * Thepz ople is carped tts ir vervi
ta €gppte. The Lode ba a courteto Polbe eta iib


wpth Juda, and wpll punplipe Jacob. Aiter
theyze owne wapes, and accozdpngeto thepze
owne inuencpons,@all be recõpence them. xe SF-A
toke bis bzother bp the bele when he was pet i
his mothers wombe: and in pis Frengtb be wres
{tled with God. He x Eroue wpeb the Jungell, serri
and gat the victozp:fotbhat bepzapdeanddelp= _
red bpm. «de founde bpm at wWetbel, and there Se Fred
betalketh wpth vs. See
Pea tbe £020 God of hookkes.cuet the Lo2d

bpm felferemembzedbpm. Then tourne to thp
God, kepe mercpe and cquptte,and hope (tpl ws
thp God. ut thos actlpke the marchatt,that
pete a falle wapgbe th bis pand, be bathbaplea-

ute to occuppe ertogcpon. EphaimedpnserD ooo wc,
thus:* Tup, gam rpche, J baue good pnougp: -
inall mp wo2kes hall not onefaultbe Founder, .
that Jbaucofended. Vet am Fthe Lozde thp
®od,euenas when J brought the out of pland
os ear fean Cette thetntbp tentes,and ag in

_ a baue fpoken thozowe tbe piopbetcs and ¢
ewed dpuerfe bifpong , and declared np felfe
bp the mintfFracpon of the Pzopbetes. %ut at
Gilead is theabbontinacpon, thep are fallenta
vanite. At Gilgal thep baueflapne oren:as ma
np beapes of Lones.as they badin thepze lande-
fo, Prega Feces netbep mabe. x Fa- Sepoy
cob fled into the lande of Spzriaand Jlracl fege
ued foz a wpfe and fo? atoyte be kepte pepe.

- Wy a prophee the 1020 broughe them out of
Egipt and bp a prophet dereleruedthem. Wut
Ephzaim bath prouoked him to difpleature tho
tow bis abbominacpos, therfore (hal bis blound
be poured bpon bpm felfe, andthe Lozd pis yot
(hall cewarde bpm bis blatphempes.

Bh C Ther. Chapter. Be


The prophecpe,


(Mde abbominacpon of zifra. |. —


£ Wy J! vicd:and De Waseralted amonge the
BK iy ie Zlraclptes, but beig gone backe to
Ramen) e gal-therfozemutt be dpe. And now
ate. raia chep fpnne moze and moze:xof chep2 {pluer thep
ere) roi maketbem molten pmages, after the pmagina-
and, bitte. cpons of they: owne bzapns, thatis verp pools
and pet allis uothpng, but the worke of thecrat
telinan. Potwithfandpng,tbep preache of the
fame to {uch ag therlacrifpeth: whole wyl bpile
thecalucs,offreth perfectly. Cherfoze they thal
beagtbe moznpng cloude,audas the de we that
early paffeth awape, andlpkeas dufte that the
wbpzle wpnde taketbaway from the fore, and
as tbe{moke that goeth out of the chpmmnep.
KF amtbe Lozde Hod, whiche brought the
outof tbe lande of Eqppte:that thou oulbek
khow no God but me onlp, and that thou Hul-
ffa.riiti.b DefE yane* nofaupout but onelp me. Ptoke Dp=
Ipgente bede of the tn the wpldernefle, that dype
lande. Zut when thep were well fedde, and bad
Sro.Flitt.b onongh,tbep warcd proude, *forgat ine:xtber=
| fore wpll F be pntothemas alpon, andagale-
opard inthe wapes to f Aflprians. J wylcome
bpon them, asa the bearetbat ts robbed of ber
toHelpes,and J wp breake the Fubburne bart
of thep2s. Chere wpl J devoure them aga lpon
pea,the wploe beaftes (hal teare them.

xD Firacl,thpneintquyte bath oeftropedp
butin me onclp is thp Helpe. i bere are thy kpn
gesnowe, that Huld belpe the inalltpp cttpes¢
Care vite VAND hp Judges , of whome thou fapdett :

"© *qpue mea Rpnge and Prpnces: (well) FI gaue
thea kpnae inmp wath, andin mp dpfplealure
ropl take bpmttomtheagapne. Che wpcked
nefe of Ephzatm is bounde togptber, and bps
fpnne Ban bpd. Tbherfoze (pall lozowegcome
bpon bpm, as vpon a womantbat trauapleth.
Ain yndifcrete fonne ts pe, fo2 he con{pdeth not


Efod. fpa,


Job. prila


that be houldenot baue benebable to paue Ye | :


duced tn thetpme of bpsbpzthe, baùnot 3 de
fended bym fromthe graue, and delpucred bpm
Frome Deatbe.


teonrbé. « ¥Ddeath, J wl betdy death:D Hel, Jwpl ES FA,
Broze. t.a he thp tpng:pet can ¥ fenocomfOzte, foz when - 7


D pe igsnowethe qoodlpelt among the bzethzen, f
_- gaftwopnde (enenthe wpnde of the Lorde) hall


come dDotone from the wploerneffe: anddzpe vp -


_higcondptes,and kibiy vp ea welles: pe thal
fpople the treafure ofall pleataunt veffels.

-As fo: Samaria, thep Halbe lapde wafe,
and whyp:thep are difobedpent puto thep2 God.
Thep Mall perpih with the ftoerde: thep2 chpl-
pls pei So eg weinen creat forth
chptde tpalberppte vp.
be CED riii Chapter.


ace. CBI Gea! ;

as thele wozdes pth pou tobenpe tnene
the 102d,andfape Dnto bpm: D forgpue vs
prar rcii.a All our [pnues,cecepue BS gracpoufip,xand tha
Hebi. iiie. pll we offer the bullockes of ourlpppes wnto


Frig.c
fui.tepiic


a igen €pheaim (pabe,the eathentre


the: A ffur hall be nomoze oure helper, neptber
wyll we rpde bpon bozles anp moze. Asfor the
workes of our bandes, we wpl nomoze cal bpd
them: ffo2 it is thou tbat art our God:thou Me-
wet cuermercp wntotbefatperlefle. =
D (pi thep wolde dothps)¥ythoulde beale 15

thep2 fozes:pea with all mp barte volde 4 loue
tbem: fo that mp tozath Wulde cleane be turned
awape from them. Pea, J wolde be vnto Jirael
as the dewe, and be thoulde growe as the lplpe
and Dig roote poulde bzeake oute as Libanus.
pis bzaunches thoulde lfpzeàadé out abzode, and


beag fap2e asthe olpue tree and {mell as Liba-


nus. Chep that dwell onder bis Hhadowe Huld
come agapne, and growe Dpas the copne: and
fope asthe vpne. He fhoulde baucas good a
name as the wpne of Libanus. ces?

D Epbhzaim, what baue 3 to do with pools €
anp mo! J wpll qracpoutipe berare bpm, and


leade bpm foztbe. 3 wpil be Dntotheas a grene
Fpace tree: Dpon me thalte thou Fynde thp frute.


*(iipofots wple Hall vnderitande thig:and he sere.tr..
_ thatisrpgbtenttruct; wplreqarbett.+J€02 p PRF
Wwapes of the Lozdearerpgdtous,fucpe
agbe godly wpll walke in them.
Asforthbe wpcked,theptopl -
tomble therein,
E The ende of the P2opbhecve
of Dicag.


. CThe booke of the
- Peophete Foell.
She fpe Chapter.
C 2 prophecpe agapnl the Fetes. He erborteth the preaz


(testo praper and faltpnge ta: the mplerpe that wae camz
mpnge at panir.


een HIS ts the wozde of the Lopdtbat
Rael aame bnto Joel the fonne of Pha: %


dapeg of pour fathers. llpour chpldzen of tt,


beth ber {clfe wpth lacke, bpcaufeok herbzpoe-
grome. JFo: the nieate and dapnk offepng uae


-g


f
ag i a


The prophecpe,


(Mde abbominacpon of zifra. |. —


£ Wy J! vicd:and De Waseralted amonge the
BK iy ie Zlraclptes, but beig gone backe to
Ramen) e gal-therfozemutt be dpe. And now
ate. raia chep fpnne moze and moze:xof chep2 {pluer thep
ere) roi maketbem molten pmages, after the pmagina-
and, bitte. cpons of they: owne bzapns, thatis verp pools
and pet allis uothpng, but the worke of thecrat
telinan. Potwithfandpng,tbep preache of the
fame to {uch ag therlacrifpeth: whole wyl bpile
thecalucs,offreth perfectly. Cherfoze they thal
beagtbe moznpng cloude,audas the de we that
early paffeth awape, andlpkeas dufte that the
wbpzle wpnde taketbaway from the fore, and
as tbe{moke that goeth out of the chpmmnep.
KF amtbe Lozde Hod, whiche brought the
outof tbe lande of Eqppte:that thou oulbek
khow no God but me onlp, and that thou Hul-
ffa.riiti.b DefE yane* nofaupout but onelp me. Ptoke Dp=
Ipgente bede of the tn the wpldernefle, that dype
lande. Zut when thep were well fedde, and bad
Sro.Flitt.b onongh,tbep warcd proude, *forgat ine:xtber=
| fore wpll F be pntothemas alpon, andagale-
opard inthe wapes to f Aflprians. J wylcome
bpon them, asa the bearetbat ts robbed of ber
toHelpes,and J wp breake the Fubburne bart
of thep2s. Chere wpl J devoure them aga lpon
pea,the wploe beaftes (hal teare them.

xD Firacl,thpneintquyte bath oeftropedp
butin me onclp is thp Helpe. i bere are thy kpn
gesnowe, that Huld belpe the inalltpp cttpes¢
Care vite VAND hp Judges , of whome thou fapdett :

"© *qpue mea Rpnge and Prpnces: (well) FI gaue
thea kpnae inmp wath, andin mp dpfplealure
ropl take bpmttomtheagapne. Che wpcked
nefe of Ephzatm is bounde togptber, and bps
fpnne Ban bpd. Tbherfoze (pall lozowegcome
bpon bpm, as vpon a womantbat trauapleth.
Ain yndifcrete fonne ts pe, fo2 he con{pdeth not


Efod. fpa,


Job. prila


that be houldenot baue benebable to paue Ye | :


duced tn thetpme of bpsbpzthe, baùnot 3 de
fended bym fromthe graue, and delpucred bpm
Frome Deatbe.


teonrbé. « ¥Ddeath, J wl betdy death:D Hel, Jwpl ES FA,
Broze. t.a he thp tpng:pet can ¥ fenocomfOzte, foz when - 7


D pe igsnowethe qoodlpelt among the bzethzen, f
_- gaftwopnde (enenthe wpnde of the Lorde) hall


come dDotone from the wploerneffe: anddzpe vp -


_higcondptes,and kibiy vp ea welles: pe thal
fpople the treafure ofall pleataunt veffels.

-As fo: Samaria, thep Halbe lapde wafe,
and whyp:thep are difobedpent puto thep2 God.
Thep Mall perpih with the ftoerde: thep2 chpl-
pls pei So eg weinen creat forth
chptde tpalberppte vp.
be CED riii Chapter.


ace. CBI Gea! ;

as thele wozdes pth pou tobenpe tnene
the 102d,andfape Dnto bpm: D forgpue vs
prar rcii.a All our [pnues,cecepue BS gracpoufip,xand tha
Hebi. iiie. pll we offer the bullockes of ourlpppes wnto


Frig.c
fui.tepiic


a igen €pheaim (pabe,the eathentre


the: A ffur hall be nomoze oure helper, neptber
wyll we rpde bpon bozles anp moze. Asfor the
workes of our bandes, we wpl nomoze cal bpd
them: ffo2 it is thou tbat art our God:thou Me-
wet cuermercp wntotbefatperlefle. =
D (pi thep wolde dothps)¥ythoulde beale 15

thep2 fozes:pea with all mp barte volde 4 loue
tbem: fo that mp tozath Wulde cleane be turned
awape from them. Pea, J wolde be vnto Jirael
as the dewe, and be thoulde growe as the lplpe
and Dig roote poulde bzeake oute as Libanus.
pis bzaunches thoulde lfpzeàadé out abzode, and


beag fap2e asthe olpue tree and {mell as Liba-


nus. Chep that dwell onder bis Hhadowe Huld
come agapne, and growe Dpas the copne: and
fope asthe vpne. He fhoulde baucas good a
name as the wpne of Libanus. ces?

D Epbhzaim, what baue 3 to do with pools €
anp mo! J wpll qracpoutipe berare bpm, and


leade bpm foztbe. 3 wpil be Dntotheas a grene
Fpace tree: Dpon me thalte thou Fynde thp frute.


*(iipofots wple Hall vnderitande thig:and he sere.tr..
_ thatisrpgbtenttruct; wplreqarbett.+J€02 p PRF
Wwapes of the Lozdearerpgdtous,fucpe
agbe godly wpll walke in them.
Asforthbe wpcked,theptopl -
tomble therein,
E The ende of the P2opbhecve
of Dicag.


. CThe booke of the
- Peophete Foell.
She fpe Chapter.
C 2 prophecpe agapnl the Fetes. He erborteth the preaz


(testo praper and faltpnge ta: the mplerpe that wae camz
mpnge at panir.


een HIS ts the wozde of the Lopdtbat
Rael aame bnto Joel the fonne of Pha: %


dapeg of pour fathers. llpour chpldzen of tt,


beth ber {clfe wpth lacke, bpcaufeok herbzpoe-
grome. JFo: the nieate and dapnk offepng uae


-g


f
ag i a


„Ipoh


€ takenawape frome the boule of the Lorde, and


the preattes the Lordes minp ers Hall mourne
‘The felde Halbe walked, the lande Hall beina
myplecable cale:foz the cozne Halbe beftroped,p
fioete wpne thall come to confulpon,and p ople
btterlp defolate. Chebufbandmen and $ wpne
gardeners Wall loke ppteoullpe and make la-
mentacion Co: the wheate, wpne and barlp and
bpcaute the baruelt bponthe Felde is fo clenede
ftroped. Che grape gatherers Hall imate great
mone, whenthe ppneparde and fpgtrers be fo
vtterlp wafted. Pea all the pomgranates palm
trees,apple trees and other trees ofp felde thal
wptherawaye: Thus the merp chere of thechyl
Den of men (ball come toconfulpon.


> Gpadepou, and make ponr mone, D pe pre-


Jetliid


tes mourne pe minpfters of the aultar:qo pour
Wapein, and Nepe infakeloth, D pe offpcers of
mp God:fo2 the meate and dzpnkoferpng Hal-
betakenawape fromthe boule of pour God.

oclapme a faftpng,cal thecongregacpon qa
ther the elders, xandall theinbabptoures of the
lande together into thebonte ofthe Lazde pont
Sod, and crpe Dnto the 1020:alas,alas fo: this
bape. And toby: the Dap of the Lozdeis at band,
and cometh asa deftroper from the alinpabtpe.
Syhal not the meates be taken atbap befoze our
epes, the mpzth allo andiope from the boule of
our Good! Che fede pepe! ae inthe grounde,
the garners pall lye wafte,tbhe flozes thalbe bzo
ken Dotone, fo? thecozne Hall bedelkroped. D
what afpebprae make the bpne ‘the bullockes
are in berpe cuell lp&piig, bycaufle thep bane no
pafture : and the Hepe are fampthed aware.

A Lade, tothe wpl F crpe:fo2 the fp2e bath
confumed the qoodlp pafkures of the wilderness
andthe hambe bath burnt bp al the trees of the
felde. Dea,the oploebeaftes crpe alfo winto the
forthe water rpuers are dped wp, and the Ep2e


Abath confumed the pattures ofthe ip ldernette..


CCThe.ii. Chapter. —
eprepbecpeth the commpngeand crucifpe ef be =
Hdd spe ortacponto MODECO to Spirit bia pe ru


plealure befozebpm:but bebpnde bpm thal it be
avere we fte wpldernelic,and there is noman
that thal elcape bin: bep aretoloke vpo lpke
barbed bozles,and rutinelpkebozfemen. Thep
fkpppe vp bpon the bplies agit were the found
of charettes -asthe famme of fpzetbat confu-
meth the trawe, andaga mpgbtpe people redp
to the battaple.


%  hefolkethalbeafrapde of bpm,allfaces


halbe as blackeasa potte: pele thal runtpke


Sol. citij.
gpauntes, anDdleape ouerthe wallesiphemen  —*
of warre. Euerp man in his going thalkepebig —
drape, and not go out oF bis path. Chere hall
not one Dppuean other, but cache (hall kepebys
otone ap. Thep Hall bzeake tn at the wpro
Wes, and not be hurte. Thep thall come into the
citpe, and runne vponthewalles. Thep Hall |
clpme Op Dponthe boules, and flpppe in at the r
wopnoowestpkeathefe.Cbe earth thallquake € *
befoze bim:pea the beneng Halbe moned. * The Feel: tit. c
Sunneand the moone halve darkened and the "or"
Marres Hal withdawethep2 bpne, The Lod l
{hall Wewe his vopce befo2e his hoolte, Foz bys
boot is greate, fronge and mpabtye,to fulfpll
nseuaplou artulbaptie Lose a
APLOUS CCATU Dape ofthe Lorde. ra
graei rsh ; n ipa aai
ow tDertoze lapt the Lorde:+ Turne poy tDe-titi.c.
nto me With all pour bartes, with fattpng.we PRES
peng and mournpnge:tent pour bartegand not
pour clothes: Turne pou vntothe Lode youre
00, x foz be is qracpoug and mercpfull, LONTE of irrroi.s
fufitpna.and ofgreatcompafipon:andreadpto
pardon wypckeduelle: Then nodoubte)he alfo
ipal turne, and fozgpue,s after his chateninge
be (Hallet pourencrealecemapne for meate and
daputoftrpnges Dnto the Logde pour od.
+15 lows out With the trompet in Spon, pr0- Hoet.t.c,
tlapmeatatpng call the conqregacpon,andga D
thet the people togyther : warne the congrega-
cpon, gather the elders, bapnae the chplozenand
fuctipnges togpther. Lette che bepdecrome go
forth of bis chambze,and the b2ide ont of ber clo
fet. Let the prettes ferue the Lode betwprt the
ozche and the aulter, wey Phage, and fayinge-be
anourable, D Lozde, be fauourable puto thr
people, let not thine heritage be bzougbt to facb
confufpon, let tbe Heathen belozdes thereof.
* Wi bertoze Hulde they fape amonge the Peg: Pirrip
then: where is notee thep2 Gods
‘Chen Hal the Logde be geloule oner his land €.
and i re bis people: pea,the Lozd thal anfwer
pon toke pe aon ae ele
DINC, >4n0 ople, lo that pe pall paue
plentpe of them : and 3 wpll nomoze gpue pou
ouet,tobeareprofeamonge p Hethen.Agayne,
ag for bpm of thenozth, 3 thal Dapuc ppm Farre
From pou:and Gut ppm out into a dpe x walte
lande, bis face fowarde the cafe fee, and his bpn-
der pattestowarde p vetermoft fee: The tinke
of bpm hall goo vp, andhig Fpltip corrupcpon
Maltal vpon bpm felfe,bpcaute hebath dealt fo
proudélp. Heare not Dlande but begiad,and
velopce:foz the Lorde wpll do greatethpnacs.
ASe not pe afrapde nepther( D pe bealtes of the
felbe) fo? the pattures thalbeqrene, andp trees
{hall beare thep2frute: thefpgtrecsand vpne-
pardes Mall qpne thep2 increate ;
we glad then (D yechplozen of Spon and k a
tefopceimthe Lozdpour God,fozbebatbgiuen
pou a teacher ofrpabtoutnetic: xand heitis that Let. ret.
(pall fende pou Downe poures of rapne, carlpe ¢.rrous.
andlate in the fick moncth:fo thatthe garners
Halbe Cull of come, and che preffes plenteougsin
Iopne and ople. Andasto2 thepeares that the
gtefpopper


„Ipoh


€ takenawape frome the boule of the Lorde, and


the preattes the Lordes minp ers Hall mourne
‘The felde Halbe walked, the lande Hall beina
myplecable cale:foz the cozne Halbe beftroped,p
fioete wpne thall come to confulpon,and p ople
btterlp defolate. Chebufbandmen and $ wpne
gardeners Wall loke ppteoullpe and make la-
mentacion Co: the wheate, wpne and barlp and
bpcaute the baruelt bponthe Felde is fo clenede
ftroped. Che grape gatherers Hall imate great
mone, whenthe ppneparde and fpgtrers be fo
vtterlp wafted. Pea all the pomgranates palm
trees,apple trees and other trees ofp felde thal
wptherawaye: Thus the merp chere of thechyl
Den of men (ball come toconfulpon.


> Gpadepou, and make ponr mone, D pe pre-


Jetliid


tes mourne pe minpfters of the aultar:qo pour
Wapein, and Nepe infakeloth, D pe offpcers of
mp God:fo2 the meate and dzpnkoferpng Hal-
betakenawape fromthe boule of pour God.

oclapme a faftpng,cal thecongregacpon qa
ther the elders, xandall theinbabptoures of the
lande together into thebonte ofthe Lazde pont
Sod, and crpe Dnto the 1020:alas,alas fo: this
bape. And toby: the Dap of the Lozdeis at band,
and cometh asa deftroper from the alinpabtpe.
Syhal not the meates be taken atbap befoze our
epes, the mpzth allo andiope from the boule of
our Good! Che fede pepe! ae inthe grounde,
the garners pall lye wafte,tbhe flozes thalbe bzo
ken Dotone, fo? thecozne Hall bedelkroped. D
what afpebprae make the bpne ‘the bullockes
are in berpe cuell lp&piig, bycaufle thep bane no
pafture : and the Hepe are fampthed aware.

A Lade, tothe wpl F crpe:fo2 the fp2e bath
confumed the qoodlp pafkures of the wilderness
andthe hambe bath burnt bp al the trees of the
felde. Dea,the oploebeaftes crpe alfo winto the
forthe water rpuers are dped wp, and the Ep2e


Abath confumed the pattures ofthe ip ldernette..


CCThe.ii. Chapter. —
eprepbecpeth the commpngeand crucifpe ef be =
Hdd spe ortacponto MODECO to Spirit bia pe ru


plealure befozebpm:but bebpnde bpm thal it be
avere we fte wpldernelic,and there is noman
that thal elcape bin: bep aretoloke vpo lpke
barbed bozles,and rutinelpkebozfemen. Thep
fkpppe vp bpon the bplies agit were the found
of charettes -asthe famme of fpzetbat confu-
meth the trawe, andaga mpgbtpe people redp
to the battaple.


%  hefolkethalbeafrapde of bpm,allfaces


halbe as blackeasa potte: pele thal runtpke


Sol. citij.
gpauntes, anDdleape ouerthe wallesiphemen  —*
of warre. Euerp man in his going thalkepebig —
drape, and not go out oF bis path. Chere hall
not one Dppuean other, but cache (hall kepebys
otone ap. Thep Hall bzeake tn at the wpro
Wes, and not be hurte. Thep thall come into the
citpe, and runne vponthewalles. Thep Hall |
clpme Op Dponthe boules, and flpppe in at the r
wopnoowestpkeathefe.Cbe earth thallquake € *
befoze bim:pea the beneng Halbe moned. * The Feel: tit. c
Sunneand the moone halve darkened and the "or"
Marres Hal withdawethep2 bpne, The Lod l
{hall Wewe his vopce befo2e his hoolte, Foz bys
boot is greate, fronge and mpabtye,to fulfpll
nseuaplou artulbaptie Lose a
APLOUS CCATU Dape ofthe Lorde. ra
graei rsh ; n ipa aai
ow tDertoze lapt the Lorde:+ Turne poy tDe-titi.c.
nto me With all pour bartes, with fattpng.we PRES
peng and mournpnge:tent pour bartegand not
pour clothes: Turne pou vntothe Lode youre
00, x foz be is qracpoug and mercpfull, LONTE of irrroi.s
fufitpna.and ofgreatcompafipon:andreadpto
pardon wypckeduelle: Then nodoubte)he alfo
ipal turne, and fozgpue,s after his chateninge
be (Hallet pourencrealecemapne for meate and
daputoftrpnges Dnto the Logde pour od.
+15 lows out With the trompet in Spon, pr0- Hoet.t.c,
tlapmeatatpng call the conqregacpon,andga D
thet the people togyther : warne the congrega-
cpon, gather the elders, bapnae the chplozenand
fuctipnges togpther. Lette che bepdecrome go
forth of bis chambze,and the b2ide ont of ber clo
fet. Let the prettes ferue the Lode betwprt the
ozche and the aulter, wey Phage, and fayinge-be
anourable, D Lozde, be fauourable puto thr
people, let not thine heritage be bzougbt to facb
confufpon, let tbe Heathen belozdes thereof.
* Wi bertoze Hulde they fape amonge the Peg: Pirrip
then: where is notee thep2 Gods
‘Chen Hal the Logde be geloule oner his land €.
and i re bis people: pea,the Lozd thal anfwer
pon toke pe aon ae ele
DINC, >4n0 ople, lo that pe pall paue
plentpe of them : and 3 wpll nomoze gpue pou
ouet,tobeareprofeamonge p Hethen.Agayne,
ag for bpm of thenozth, 3 thal Dapuc ppm Farre
From pou:and Gut ppm out into a dpe x walte
lande, bis face fowarde the cafe fee, and his bpn-
der pattestowarde p vetermoft fee: The tinke
of bpm hall goo vp, andhig Fpltip corrupcpon
Maltal vpon bpm felfe,bpcaute hebath dealt fo
proudélp. Heare not Dlande but begiad,and
velopce:foz the Lorde wpll do greatethpnacs.
ASe not pe afrapde nepther( D pe bealtes of the
felbe) fo? the pattures thalbeqrene, andp trees
{hall beare thep2frute: thefpgtrecsand vpne-
pardes Mall qpne thep2 increate ;
we glad then (D yechplozen of Spon and k a
tefopceimthe Lozdpour God,fozbebatbgiuen
pou a teacher ofrpabtoutnetic: xand heitis that Let. ret.
(pall fende pou Downe poures of rapne, carlpe ¢.rrous.
andlate in the fick moncth:fo thatthe garners
Halbe Cull of come, and che preffes plenteougsin
Iopne and ople. Andasto2 thepeares that the
gtefpopper


„Ipoh


€ takenawape frome the boule of the Lorde, and


the preattes the Lordes minp ers Hall mourne
‘The felde Halbe walked, the lande Hall beina
myplecable cale:foz the cozne Halbe beftroped,p
fioete wpne thall come to confulpon,and p ople
btterlp defolate. Chebufbandmen and $ wpne
gardeners Wall loke ppteoullpe and make la-
mentacion Co: the wheate, wpne and barlp and
bpcaute the baruelt bponthe Felde is fo clenede
ftroped. Che grape gatherers Hall imate great
mone, whenthe ppneparde and fpgtrers be fo
vtterlp wafted. Pea all the pomgranates palm
trees,apple trees and other trees ofp felde thal
wptherawaye: Thus the merp chere of thechyl
Den of men (ball come toconfulpon.


> Gpadepou, and make ponr mone, D pe pre-


Jetliid


tes mourne pe minpfters of the aultar:qo pour
Wapein, and Nepe infakeloth, D pe offpcers of
mp God:fo2 the meate and dzpnkoferpng Hal-
betakenawape fromthe boule of pour God.

oclapme a faftpng,cal thecongregacpon qa
ther the elders, xandall theinbabptoures of the
lande together into thebonte ofthe Lazde pont
Sod, and crpe Dnto the 1020:alas,alas fo: this
bape. And toby: the Dap of the Lozdeis at band,
and cometh asa deftroper from the alinpabtpe.
Syhal not the meates be taken atbap befoze our
epes, the mpzth allo andiope from the boule of
our Good! Che fede pepe! ae inthe grounde,
the garners pall lye wafte,tbhe flozes thalbe bzo
ken Dotone, fo? thecozne Hall bedelkroped. D
what afpebprae make the bpne ‘the bullockes
are in berpe cuell lp&piig, bycaufle thep bane no
pafture : and the Hepe are fampthed aware.

A Lade, tothe wpl F crpe:fo2 the fp2e bath
confumed the qoodlp pafkures of the wilderness
andthe hambe bath burnt bp al the trees of the
felde. Dea,the oploebeaftes crpe alfo winto the
forthe water rpuers are dped wp, and the Ep2e


Abath confumed the pattures ofthe ip ldernette..


CCThe.ii. Chapter. —
eprepbecpeth the commpngeand crucifpe ef be =
Hdd spe ortacponto MODECO to Spirit bia pe ru


plealure befozebpm:but bebpnde bpm thal it be
avere we fte wpldernelic,and there is noman
that thal elcape bin: bep aretoloke vpo lpke
barbed bozles,and rutinelpkebozfemen. Thep
fkpppe vp bpon the bplies agit were the found
of charettes -asthe famme of fpzetbat confu-
meth the trawe, andaga mpgbtpe people redp
to the battaple.


%  hefolkethalbeafrapde of bpm,allfaces


halbe as blackeasa potte: pele thal runtpke


Sol. citij.
gpauntes, anDdleape ouerthe wallesiphemen  —*
of warre. Euerp man in his going thalkepebig —
drape, and not go out oF bis path. Chere hall
not one Dppuean other, but cache (hall kepebys
otone ap. Thep Hall bzeake tn at the wpro
Wes, and not be hurte. Thep thall come into the
citpe, and runne vponthewalles. Thep Hall |
clpme Op Dponthe boules, and flpppe in at the r
wopnoowestpkeathefe.Cbe earth thallquake € *
befoze bim:pea the beneng Halbe moned. * The Feel: tit. c
Sunneand the moone halve darkened and the "or"
Marres Hal withdawethep2 bpne, The Lod l
{hall Wewe his vopce befo2e his hoolte, Foz bys
boot is greate, fronge and mpabtye,to fulfpll
nseuaplou artulbaptie Lose a
APLOUS CCATU Dape ofthe Lorde. ra
graei rsh ; n ipa aai
ow tDertoze lapt the Lorde:+ Turne poy tDe-titi.c.
nto me With all pour bartes, with fattpng.we PRES
peng and mournpnge:tent pour bartegand not
pour clothes: Turne pou vntothe Lode youre
00, x foz be is qracpoug and mercpfull, LONTE of irrroi.s
fufitpna.and ofgreatcompafipon:andreadpto
pardon wypckeduelle: Then nodoubte)he alfo
ipal turne, and fozgpue,s after his chateninge
be (Hallet pourencrealecemapne for meate and
daputoftrpnges Dnto the Logde pour od.
+15 lows out With the trompet in Spon, pr0- Hoet.t.c,
tlapmeatatpng call the conqregacpon,andga D
thet the people togyther : warne the congrega-
cpon, gather the elders, bapnae the chplozenand
fuctipnges togpther. Lette che bepdecrome go
forth of bis chambze,and the b2ide ont of ber clo
fet. Let the prettes ferue the Lode betwprt the
ozche and the aulter, wey Phage, and fayinge-be
anourable, D Lozde, be fauourable puto thr
people, let not thine heritage be bzougbt to facb
confufpon, let tbe Heathen belozdes thereof.
* Wi bertoze Hulde they fape amonge the Peg: Pirrip
then: where is notee thep2 Gods
‘Chen Hal the Logde be geloule oner his land €.
and i re bis people: pea,the Lozd thal anfwer
pon toke pe aon ae ele
DINC, >4n0 ople, lo that pe pall paue
plentpe of them : and 3 wpll nomoze gpue pou
ouet,tobeareprofeamonge p Hethen.Agayne,
ag for bpm of thenozth, 3 thal Dapuc ppm Farre
From pou:and Gut ppm out into a dpe x walte
lande, bis face fowarde the cafe fee, and his bpn-
der pattestowarde p vetermoft fee: The tinke
of bpm hall goo vp, andhig Fpltip corrupcpon
Maltal vpon bpm felfe,bpcaute hebath dealt fo
proudélp. Heare not Dlande but begiad,and
velopce:foz the Lorde wpll do greatethpnacs.
ASe not pe afrapde nepther( D pe bealtes of the
felbe) fo? the pattures thalbeqrene, andp trees
{hall beare thep2frute: thefpgtrecsand vpne-
pardes Mall qpne thep2 increate ;
we glad then (D yechplozen of Spon and k a
tefopceimthe Lozdpour God,fozbebatbgiuen
pou a teacher ofrpabtoutnetic: xand heitis that Let. ret.
(pall fende pou Downe poures of rapne, carlpe ¢.rrous.
andlate in the fick moncth:fo thatthe garners
Halbe Cull of come, and che preffes plenteougsin
Iopne and ople. Andasto2 thepeares that the
gtefpopper


The Prophecye,


rrothovper,locut, blafpnge,and caterppller,
E A hott whpch J lencamonge pou ave
eaten pp; 3 thallecttoze them to pow agapne, fo
that pe (hall bane pnough tocate, and ve fatpl
Eped:andy:aple the name of the Lozd pour € od

that (o maruaploulp bath dealt with pou.
And my people thal never be confounded anp
moe. De (hal wel kinowe, that Jam intbempod
- Delk of Acacl,and that 3am p Logbe pour God
pea,andthat therets none otber:and mp people
E allnomorze be brought to confufpon. >
aument x After this wpllg poure out mp (pzpte bpo
cta rittt-® 11 fl efipe:and pour Contes and Dougbterg Halt
Actes. iit. pzopbhecpe:pour olde men {hall Dreamte Dzeames
and pour pong men Wal fe bilpons:pea tn thofe
dapes 4 wyl poure outamp (ppette vpon feruatt
tes and mapdens. 4 wpl thewe wonders in Yeg
uenaboue, andtokens inthe erth beneth:bloud
and fp2e, andthe bapoure of fmoke. be funne
halbe curned into darkenefle, and the moone in
to bloune befoze the great and notable dape of p
noma f.t. Zod come. And thetpme fhallcome,thatxwbo
focuer calleth onthe name of the Lode, all be
fanen. 02 vpontbemounte Spon, andat Fes
tufalem, there Mall bea faluacpon, lpkeas tbe
Lorde hath pzomp fed: pea andamonge p other

remnaunt,wobome the Lorde allcall.
C The.tit. Chapter. |
qr Of the tubgement of God agapuk the entrspes
ofbpspecple,

sense D: take bede:in thole dapes and at
A Sana the fame tyme, when J turneag 7»


A
eu


ale it
Erbil Frit Don and all pe bozders of the Phili


them forth to fell onto them of Saba , a people
eha


etaytia, p warrpours of them.*x Make pou fwerdes of


pour plowihares, and fpeates of poure fpekeleg
andlytbes: Let the weake manlap: Jam krige


Huftre pouandcome,all pe Heathen rounde a»
bout gather pou together:there Mall the Lorde
lapeail thy gpauntes tothe grounde. Lette the
pro learple and get tbem to tbe vallep of Jo-
aphat, Coz there wpll F ipt, and ind my et
then rounde about. «Lape to pour fpthes,toz p Tpoc.titib
barueft igsrppe-come get pou Downe: the wpne=
2eficisfull: pea, the wpnepecties tunne euet,
ozthep2 wpckednelle ig Daren great. |
Inthe valley appopnted there Halbe many ©
people: fo: thedape ofthe Lozdeisnpe, in the
vallep appopnted. * Che funne and moone thal zoer. iio.
be darkned and the fare Hall withdraw thep, = Ht.b


lpabt..* The Lorde thallroze out of Spon, and Ferre,


cepe out of Jerufalem, that the beanens and the
earth thall quake witbal.wuttbhe Lode Halbe
a Defence unto bps otone people g arefuge fo2p -
cbyld2en of ¥fracl. (hus pall peknowe thata *
the Lozde pour God dwel pon mppolp mount
of Spon. Then pall Jerufalem beholp,e there
Mall no fraungers gotbhbozoweheranp moze. D


x Chen hall the mountapnes droppe fwete amos.ip,s


wyne,and the bpiles thal lowe with mplke. Al

therpuces of Juda hall haue water pnoughe,

anb oute of the Lozdes boufe there Wall lowe a

{pzpnge,to water the baooke of * Sitim:but E- eretta
ppt thalbelapde watte:sand Edom thalbe de= HIFU
olate: bpcaule thep bauedealtelocrueilp wpth

thechpldzen of Juda , and thedinnocente blonde

intdepzlande. Aqapne, Juda Malbe inbabpted

foz cuermoze and Jerufalem from qeneracpo

to generacpon: foz J wpl not leaucthep2 blonde

phauenged.Andthe Lod Halldwellin Spon.


€ Theende of he pzophecpe of Foel.


CTbebooke ofthe .


zophet Amos. |


r Ta E, =
5 T
rare BY

;


i


ere Fri.B
ogl Hi, te


pleafaunte boufe: fo tbat the people Halbe dzy-
uen out offapze Sirpa:faptp the Lode, heed
apt


The Prophecye,


rrothovper,locut, blafpnge,and caterppller,
E A hott whpch J lencamonge pou ave
eaten pp; 3 thallecttoze them to pow agapne, fo
that pe (hall bane pnough tocate, and ve fatpl
Eped:andy:aple the name of the Lozd pour € od

that (o maruaploulp bath dealt with pou.
And my people thal never be confounded anp
moe. De (hal wel kinowe, that Jam intbempod
- Delk of Acacl,and that 3am p Logbe pour God
pea,andthat therets none otber:and mp people
E allnomorze be brought to confufpon. >
aument x After this wpllg poure out mp (pzpte bpo
cta rittt-® 11 fl efipe:and pour Contes and Dougbterg Halt
Actes. iit. pzopbhecpe:pour olde men {hall Dreamte Dzeames
and pour pong men Wal fe bilpons:pea tn thofe
dapes 4 wyl poure outamp (ppette vpon feruatt
tes and mapdens. 4 wpl thewe wonders in Yeg
uenaboue, andtokens inthe erth beneth:bloud
and fp2e, andthe bapoure of fmoke. be funne
halbe curned into darkenefle, and the moone in
to bloune befoze the great and notable dape of p
noma f.t. Zod come. And thetpme fhallcome,thatxwbo
focuer calleth onthe name of the Lode, all be
fanen. 02 vpontbemounte Spon, andat Fes
tufalem, there Mall bea faluacpon, lpkeas tbe
Lorde hath pzomp fed: pea andamonge p other

remnaunt,wobome the Lorde allcall.
C The.tit. Chapter. |
qr Of the tubgement of God agapuk the entrspes
ofbpspecple,

sense D: take bede:in thole dapes and at
A Sana the fame tyme, when J turneag 7»


A
eu


ale it
Erbil Frit Don and all pe bozders of the Phili


them forth to fell onto them of Saba , a people
eha


etaytia, p warrpours of them.*x Make pou fwerdes of


pour plowihares, and fpeates of poure fpekeleg
andlytbes: Let the weake manlap: Jam krige


Huftre pouandcome,all pe Heathen rounde a»
bout gather pou together:there Mall the Lorde
lapeail thy gpauntes tothe grounde. Lette the
pro learple and get tbem to tbe vallep of Jo-
aphat, Coz there wpll F ipt, and ind my et
then rounde about. «Lape to pour fpthes,toz p Tpoc.titib
barueft igsrppe-come get pou Downe: the wpne=
2eficisfull: pea, the wpnepecties tunne euet,
ozthep2 wpckednelle ig Daren great. |
Inthe valley appopnted there Halbe many ©
people: fo: thedape ofthe Lozdeisnpe, in the
vallep appopnted. * Che funne and moone thal zoer. iio.
be darkned and the fare Hall withdraw thep, = Ht.b


lpabt..* The Lorde thallroze out of Spon, and Ferre,


cepe out of Jerufalem, that the beanens and the
earth thall quake witbal.wuttbhe Lode Halbe
a Defence unto bps otone people g arefuge fo2p -
cbyld2en of ¥fracl. (hus pall peknowe thata *
the Lozde pour God dwel pon mppolp mount
of Spon. Then pall Jerufalem beholp,e there
Mall no fraungers gotbhbozoweheranp moze. D


x Chen hall the mountapnes droppe fwete amos.ip,s


wyne,and the bpiles thal lowe with mplke. Al

therpuces of Juda hall haue water pnoughe,

anb oute of the Lozdes boufe there Wall lowe a

{pzpnge,to water the baooke of * Sitim:but E- eretta
ppt thalbelapde watte:sand Edom thalbe de= HIFU
olate: bpcaule thep bauedealtelocrueilp wpth

thechpldzen of Juda , and thedinnocente blonde

intdepzlande. Aqapne, Juda Malbe inbabpted

foz cuermoze and Jerufalem from qeneracpo

to generacpon: foz J wpl not leaucthep2 blonde

phauenged.Andthe Lod Halldwellin Spon.


€ Theende of he pzophecpe of Foel.


CTbebooke ofthe .


zophet Amos. |


r Ta E, =
5 T
rare BY

;


i


ere Fri.B
ogl Hi, te


pleafaunte boufe: fo tbat the people Halbe dzy-
uen out offapze Sirpa:faptp the Lode, heed
apt


fapeh the Lode: Mor thee and four wpckednel-

sacha.it.a. feg of kCaza, J wpll not {pare her-becaulethep

make thepaploners pet moze captpue,and haue

deuen them into the lande of Edom. Chertoze

wpl J fendea fp2c into the wals of Gaza, which

falldeuoure ber houtes. J wypllrote outtpem

thatdwellat Avon, aud bpm that holbeth the

{copter of Bfcalon, and firetche ont mpne bande

duer Accaron,that the cemnaunt of the piltti
negthall perpipe.fapth the Lorde.

©  Chuslapehthe Lorde : soz thzeand forre

zota wpckednefies of the Cttpeofx pec, J wpl not

_ Gpate ber: becaufe thep baue encreated the captt:

~~ apte of the Edomites, and baue not remembzed

(if.ARe.v.a. Ehexbzotherlp couenaunt.€ berfoze topl FZ fend

~~ afpzeinto p walles of Cpe, that allconfume

_ becrpalaces. Chusfapth the Lo2zd: FF oz thze and

= foure wpckednelles ofxEdom F A not ipare

Tona ppm, becaulerhe perlecuted bis bother with the

tae.rrbitg Cweard, Deltroped his mothers tombe, bare pa:

fred verp Longe, and fo kept indiqnacponalwap


by brm. Cherfoze wpl J lende a fpze into The- | F X


man, which Hal deuoure the palaces of Wofra.
D deel) age pei Oar an four tic
gere.cue Bednefles of the childzen of * Ammon, FJ wpl not
wser-os fpavetbem-becauletbep tppt aroma great
me wptbehploe in Galaad, tomate the borders of
thep2 landes the wpder.Tbherfoze J wpl kpndle
afpze in the walles of Rabbath, that Mall con-
fume þer palaces : witha qreatcrpe; nthedape
of battaple, intempeft and inthe Dape of torme
fo that thep2 kyng thal go tnto captinpte pe and

bis popnces roget ber,fapth the Lozde,

C Chbe.ti.cbapter.
@ Agaputt goab zubaani Jiran.


crampas Dus lapth the Lorde: oz thre and
DRD fourewickedneffles of) oab, F wpl
etapida. ee RB Dagga not fparebpm :becaute be bent Ë
Fey, riba. | Re LTS bones of the kpnqe of Edom toal=
recite Ege s (hes. Therfoze, wpll F fende a fpzè
into Hoab,whiche Hall confume the palaces of


Carioth :fo that )oab thal perpe with nople

and the founde ofa hatome. 3 topl rote oute the

Judge from among them, and flap alt ote Deri’

ces thitbbpm,fapehthe Lozbe. Chuslapth the

63 iche. ire LOBDE:Foz theeand four wpckednetles of guva

J wpll notiparebpm:becaule be bath cat alpde

the lawe of the Lo20e,and not bept bis comaun

yer.rltiit e Dementes:foz why: x thep wolde nedeg be oticep

LIED FEE nen with the lpesthat thep2 forefathers folowcb

axberfore wpll J lende a fpze into Juda, which
fhallconfume the palaces of Jerufalem.

@ bustapeth the Lorde : Foz thee andfoure

€ sopcheonefies of Firaell, J wpll not ipare bym,

becaule bebatbe lolde therpgbtcous foz money,

and the poze fo? hoes. Thep treade vpon pooze

mens beades. tithe duk of thecarthe,and croke

the wapesofthemeke. Chefon and thefather

oer arlot, to dDifponouremy bolp name, they

Feb poe every aultare, pon clothes taken to

pledge and in p boule of thep2 godstbep dapnke

the wpne of the oppefled. Vet deltropedz tie A

-. moapiexbefoze them,that was as dpe asthe Ce

BUNGE >, 6 treeg.eas frrongeas the okes: notwithftan

drng ¥dehroped his frute from aboue and ppa


=F


Folh:
rotefrom Buber. x Aqapne,y heoughepou-out crocs’ s
of thelande of Ca ppte,andleDpoutoztpe petes ~
thozow the wploernes, that pempadthaue the
Amoozpteslandes in pofiellpon.F rapled yp pre
phetes amonge pourchplbdzen, andabftepners a -,
monge pout pongemen. 3sit not lo, D pechpl-
ben of Hrael,faytbthe Lorde x Buitpegrauep 2m s
abflepners wpre codzpuke:+pec,yecimaunded tI 0
the prophetes taping. 2z20phecp not. Weholde
wpllcratbe pou tn fonder; lpke ag a toapne eral-
(beth that tsfullo€ theaues, focbat the fwpfte
Wall not cleape, nether the tronge beable toda
anptbpnae :no,the G paunte hall not faue bps
ownelpte. Thearcher Hall not abpoe , andthe
fiotfte of fote Hal not elcape. Che boziinan hal
not fauc bis lpfe, and be that is as manip of ito»
mackeas a gpaunt, malin that dape betapneto
runne bis wape naked, fapthtbe Lort: r
oo Che. Chanter.
(be repourth the poute of adiraci of wpckeonetle,
a= are, what the Lor {peaketh onto 4
Grou Dre fi of eat names 4
ilp ynto all p trpbes, ough
out of Egypt, and fapde:* pou onelp arte
ae MANETTA capea fromallthe genera-
cpons ofthe carth:therfoze topl F vilet pou inal,
Pour LOpickednelies. pape twapne walke toge
thersexceptthep beagrecd amonge them lelues? gobos,
¥ DOE) alpon core tn the wode,ercept be haura
prayer D2 cepeth a lyons Dobelpe out of big den, 25
ercepte be bane gotten fomtipngsDothabpade |
fallna finare vpon the earth wpere no fouleris i
CTaketh) aman bis {are vy from theqroundas
fozebecatchfomwmbate Crpethep out Xlarum
withthe trompet in che citye,and the people not
afrapbder Commeth thereanp Lip Si acitpe, ~
without tt be the Lozdes dopng: Mowe doth the
Lorde Godnomaner of thyng but be teileth his
fecret befo2e buto bis fernauntes the prophetes
tdibena Lponroareth who wpll nofbeatrapd
Sepng then that the Lod Godbpm felfe ipea-
keth, who wpilnot propbecpe.
< Ppeache tr tbe palace’ at Aldod, andin the €
palaces of the lande of Eqypt,and fape:gather
pou tegetber Dpon the mountapnes sf Samt-
ria fotpall pefe greate murther and violent op
pefipon sap tbepm, fo: whp: thep regarde
not the thpug that istpobt lapththe ¥o20:thep
Gather together euell gotten goodes, and lape
vp robberp in thep2 poules, |
- - Cherkore, thus lapth the Lod God. This
lande Mall be troubled and beleaqed rowndeas D
boute, thp frenath albe plucte fromthe, and
thp palaces robbed. Thus tapth the Lozde,lpke
asanbeardmat taketh two leqaes, 02 a pere of
aneare oute of the Lponsmoutpe: Euenfo the
chplozen of Ffrael(that dwell in Samaria ba:
upnge tbeps couchesin the cogner,thep2e bedves
at Damatcus , albe plucteawape.
xipeare cad bearetecozde inthe Houle of Fas seron
cob(fapth the Loide God of Dotes) that when Meee,
FZ begpnne to bplet the wpckednefle of Flraell,
J wpll wplette the Aultares at Wethellalfo: fo
that the boznes of the Xultare albe bzoken of
and fall tothe arounde,
= DD, Ffo


> il


fapeh the Lode: Mor thee and four wpckednel-

sacha.it.a. feg of kCaza, J wpll not {pare her-becaulethep

make thepaploners pet moze captpue,and haue

deuen them into the lande of Edom. Chertoze

wpl J fendea fp2c into the wals of Gaza, which

falldeuoure ber houtes. J wypllrote outtpem

thatdwellat Avon, aud bpm that holbeth the

{copter of Bfcalon, and firetche ont mpne bande

duer Accaron,that the cemnaunt of the piltti
negthall perpipe.fapth the Lorde.

©  Chuslapehthe Lorde : soz thzeand forre

zota wpckednefies of the Cttpeofx pec, J wpl not

_ Gpate ber: becaufe thep baue encreated the captt:

~~ apte of the Edomites, and baue not remembzed

(if.ARe.v.a. Ehexbzotherlp couenaunt.€ berfoze topl FZ fend

~~ afpzeinto p walles of Cpe, that allconfume

_ becrpalaces. Chusfapth the Lo2zd: FF oz thze and

= foure wpckednelles ofxEdom F A not ipare

Tona ppm, becaulerhe perlecuted bis bother with the

tae.rrbitg Cweard, Deltroped his mothers tombe, bare pa:

fred verp Longe, and fo kept indiqnacponalwap


by brm. Cherfoze wpl J lende a fpze into The- | F X


man, which Hal deuoure the palaces of Wofra.
D deel) age pei Oar an four tic
gere.cue Bednefles of the childzen of * Ammon, FJ wpl not
wser-os fpavetbem-becauletbep tppt aroma great
me wptbehploe in Galaad, tomate the borders of
thep2 landes the wpder.Tbherfoze J wpl kpndle
afpze in the walles of Rabbath, that Mall con-
fume þer palaces : witha qreatcrpe; nthedape
of battaple, intempeft and inthe Dape of torme
fo that thep2 kyng thal go tnto captinpte pe and

bis popnces roget ber,fapth the Lozde,

C Chbe.ti.cbapter.
@ Agaputt goab zubaani Jiran.


crampas Dus lapth the Lorde: oz thre and
DRD fourewickedneffles of) oab, F wpl
etapida. ee RB Dagga not fparebpm :becaute be bent Ë
Fey, riba. | Re LTS bones of the kpnqe of Edom toal=
recite Ege s (hes. Therfoze, wpll F fende a fpzè
into Hoab,whiche Hall confume the palaces of


Carioth :fo that )oab thal perpe with nople

and the founde ofa hatome. 3 topl rote oute the

Judge from among them, and flap alt ote Deri’

ces thitbbpm,fapehthe Lozbe. Chuslapth the

63 iche. ire LOBDE:Foz theeand four wpckednetles of guva

J wpll notiparebpm:becaule be bath cat alpde

the lawe of the Lo20e,and not bept bis comaun

yer.rltiit e Dementes:foz why: x thep wolde nedeg be oticep

LIED FEE nen with the lpesthat thep2 forefathers folowcb

axberfore wpll J lende a fpze into Juda, which
fhallconfume the palaces of Jerufalem.

@ bustapeth the Lorde : Foz thee andfoure

€ sopcheonefies of Firaell, J wpll not ipare bym,

becaule bebatbe lolde therpgbtcous foz money,

and the poze fo? hoes. Thep treade vpon pooze

mens beades. tithe duk of thecarthe,and croke

the wapesofthemeke. Chefon and thefather

oer arlot, to dDifponouremy bolp name, they

Feb poe every aultare, pon clothes taken to

pledge and in p boule of thep2 godstbep dapnke

the wpne of the oppefled. Vet deltropedz tie A

-. moapiexbefoze them,that was as dpe asthe Ce

BUNGE >, 6 treeg.eas frrongeas the okes: notwithftan

drng ¥dehroped his frute from aboue and ppa


=F


Folh:
rotefrom Buber. x Aqapne,y heoughepou-out crocs’ s
of thelande of Ca ppte,andleDpoutoztpe petes ~
thozow the wploernes, that pempadthaue the
Amoozpteslandes in pofiellpon.F rapled yp pre
phetes amonge pourchplbdzen, andabftepners a -,
monge pout pongemen. 3sit not lo, D pechpl-
ben of Hrael,faytbthe Lorde x Buitpegrauep 2m s
abflepners wpre codzpuke:+pec,yecimaunded tI 0
the prophetes taping. 2z20phecp not. Weholde
wpllcratbe pou tn fonder; lpke ag a toapne eral-
(beth that tsfullo€ theaues, focbat the fwpfte
Wall not cleape, nether the tronge beable toda
anptbpnae :no,the G paunte hall not faue bps
ownelpte. Thearcher Hall not abpoe , andthe
fiotfte of fote Hal not elcape. Che boziinan hal
not fauc bis lpfe, and be that is as manip of ito»
mackeas a gpaunt, malin that dape betapneto
runne bis wape naked, fapthtbe Lort: r
oo Che. Chanter.
(be repourth the poute of adiraci of wpckeonetle,
a= are, what the Lor {peaketh onto 4
Grou Dre fi of eat names 4
ilp ynto all p trpbes, ough
out of Egypt, and fapde:* pou onelp arte
ae MANETTA capea fromallthe genera-
cpons ofthe carth:therfoze topl F vilet pou inal,
Pour LOpickednelies. pape twapne walke toge
thersexceptthep beagrecd amonge them lelues? gobos,
¥ DOE) alpon core tn the wode,ercept be haura
prayer D2 cepeth a lyons Dobelpe out of big den, 25
ercepte be bane gotten fomtipngsDothabpade |
fallna finare vpon the earth wpere no fouleris i
CTaketh) aman bis {are vy from theqroundas
fozebecatchfomwmbate Crpethep out Xlarum
withthe trompet in che citye,and the people not
afrapbder Commeth thereanp Lip Si acitpe, ~
without tt be the Lozdes dopng: Mowe doth the
Lorde Godnomaner of thyng but be teileth his
fecret befo2e buto bis fernauntes the prophetes
tdibena Lponroareth who wpll nofbeatrapd
Sepng then that the Lod Godbpm felfe ipea-
keth, who wpilnot propbecpe.
< Ppeache tr tbe palace’ at Aldod, andin the €
palaces of the lande of Eqypt,and fape:gather
pou tegetber Dpon the mountapnes sf Samt-
ria fotpall pefe greate murther and violent op
pefipon sap tbepm, fo: whp: thep regarde
not the thpug that istpobt lapththe ¥o20:thep
Gather together euell gotten goodes, and lape
vp robberp in thep2 poules, |
- - Cherkore, thus lapth the Lod God. This
lande Mall be troubled and beleaqed rowndeas D
boute, thp frenath albe plucte fromthe, and
thp palaces robbed. Thus tapth the Lozde,lpke
asanbeardmat taketh two leqaes, 02 a pere of
aneare oute of the Lponsmoutpe: Euenfo the
chplozen of Ffrael(that dwell in Samaria ba:
upnge tbeps couchesin the cogner,thep2e bedves
at Damatcus , albe plucteawape.
xipeare cad bearetecozde inthe Houle of Fas seron
cob(fapth the Loide God of Dotes) that when Meee,
FZ begpnne to bplet the wpckednefle of Flraell,
J wpll wplette the Aultares at Wethellalfo: fo
that the boznes of the Xultare albe bzoken of
and fall tothe arounde,
= DD, Ffo


> il


Che propyecpe,


-As Fo: the wpnter boule and Commer houle;
4 topli fmpte thensdowne: and the houfes of p-
uecp:pec, aud many otber poules thal perpive, t
be delivoped, fayth the Lorde. :


-t ao E Tpe.iii Chapter:
k Cagapat the Gouerneurs of Samaria,
‘AEE seq) care this wordepe fat bpne that be


SPA Wuponthe Dpll of Samaria: pe that do
eras Aygo nen WzoNge,and oppacflethene


ee
yg tor cape; fapth the Lorde.


Hola.pbi.a


afer uet, x3 withbelde the rapne from pou:pe, 4 rap
outs ned Dpon one Citpe : andnot pon another, one
Fosie. pére of ground was mopftured with rapne,and
a grounde that FJrapneDnot bpon, tas dape.
Wiherforetivo:pee thze citpes came nto one,to
Depnke tater: butthpep were not fatiffped, pet
wpll pe not tutne Dato me,fapth the Lowe.
Shane lmpttcn pou Wwithdzout and blatyng
andloke howe manp oztchpardes, spnepardes,
fpgttecs and oipue trees pe bad: the caterppller
Datheatenthem bp. wWut pet wpll penotturne
| bntoine,fapeth the Lozde.Peltplence bane y fent
Erd ainonge pou, xas Fapt in Eqppte: pour pon
menbaue ZF ilapne with the fwearde,andcauied
pour bozies to be takencaptpue: 3J madep pn
Benge fanoure of poure tentes ,ta come Dp into
pour noditrels.Det wpl pe not turne pute me,fap
seueris.c OD the L020. Some of pou hane 3 overthzotoen
y. pet, iib. ¥A9 3 ouerthze we Sovome and Gomozre:fop
D peware asa brande piucteonte of thefpae. Pet
topil pe not tucne tnto me, fapth the Lorde.
Therfoze tbus wpll Y bandlethe apn. r
FOE Ra OE A anD soe, Hake the
redp tben to mete thp God, D Flrael. oz lo, be
maketh the mountapns,be ozdepnetb the wynd
be prweth man moea isaboute to do: Pemas
beth the moznpnge and the darkenefle , be trea-
deth wpon the hyc places of the earth:the Lozbe
God of Hoftesis bys name.
Chev. Chapter.
_@ A complapnt of thecaptpuitpe of Hfraet.
mira Care this worde, D pe ponteok zirac,
ml eg ad CODY! 3 muke make thps moneto por.
Sss C he Drigpyn {lrael thal fall,¢ nenerrpfe
bp agapn: the Halbe cat Downe bpon her owne
Lrounde, andno man hall belpebervp. soz


thistapth the Lob God: Wii bere as there Dwe
a thoufanbe in onecitpe,there albe lefte toare
an bundaed therin:and where there dwelt are
tbere thal carce ten be letrin tbe boule of Friel
Preuertbeletle thus lapth the Lozd wnto p houle 25
of Firacil: Hckeafter meand pe pall lpue, but
feke not after Bethel. Come not at Gilgal,and
gonot to Werlaba: fo Gugalthallbecarpeda= -
waye captpue Ane Wethel Hall come to nought
Dehe the 1.020, tbat pemape lpuc :lett the poule
of Yoleph be beent with fpze andconfumed, and
let there be noneto quenche ethel, -2

Pe turne thelawe to womewood and calf
botonerpabtcoulneffe vnto the grounde. x Pe Ibir.
Forfake: be Lozdetbat maketh the fenen tars g
the D2ions, that turneth poe Pate into dap, E Eons.:
of thedaphe maketh Darcknes. x: ecallethtbe iiini
waters of the fee, andponrethtbemoutvponp `
plapne grounde:p Lodig bis name. De raplet
deltruccpon Pee WE LA peop hand DPR
getb bowwne p ronge bolor, Hut they owe bpunt
cue lop. tbat eepzoacty tbem openlp: ¢ who fo
telleth them the plapne truth,thep abborre ppm
SFozfo much then as pe opprefle the poozre, rob
bim of bis beft fulenaunce: x therfore whereas pen.rrorte
pe baue buplded boules of (quare tonc, pethall Saph.te
nosdwelinthem.<Paruclouspleafauntbimpar
bes (pal pou plant, but the epi of them thal pe


Not d2pnbe:and whp/asfo2 p multitude of pout
wpchednefles pour koute panes, F know the
rpght well.Cnempes arpe of therpgbteous,pe D :
*takerewarbdes, pe oppzefle the pooge in tubge: eae |
ment. €berfoze the topie mutt nowe be fapne to i
polbde bis tunge, fo wpekeda tpmeigit. —
eve after the tbpngethatis qgood,and not
euell,fo thal pelpue: pee,the £020 God of poltes
albe with pou,accozdpng to pour otpne def pre
xate theeuel,andlouc the good:+ipt v | eae Of. febil. b
agape in the pozte :t(no doute)the Lode Sod Mou Fiet,
bottes thalbe merc full vntotheremnaunt of eF"
Aoleph. gino (fayth p Lod God of oikes) oe E
albe mourupnginall Éretes:pee,tbep thalfay
incucep rete:alas alas. They Hall cal the huf-
bandman tolamentacpon,¢luchascanmourne
to mournpug. Jnall vpnpardes there thalbe be:


upnefle, foz 3 pil come amonge pou, fapth the


Lozbde. Wo be vnto then that delpze the bape of
the Lozd.eiberfoze wolbde pe haueit’As for the
bape of the Lozdc,tt Halbe Darke and not elere.

Dee, lyke aS when amanrunneth fromatlion
anda Seer meteth with bpm : o when becom:
meth into the boule, andleanctbbis bande ppon .
the wall, alecpentbptethbpm. BDballnot tbe zseni..
daye of the Lozde be darker and not cleres Hall Sopd.i.c. ”
it not be cloudy, and no (hpnein it? +F bate and ? Sfr: f b
abbozre pour bolp bapes , and whereas pecenle eaic.vi..
me when pecome together, F topll not aecepte it 18t
And though pe offer me brentoftrpnges g meat-
offerpnacs,pet bauc F no plealure therin. Xs foz


| pog fatte thankeoficrpnges , Jwpllnot loke


pontbem : Awape with tpatnopte of thp forts
es. Awpllnotheare thp plapes of mulpcke:
ut [e that equitpe loweas the water,andrpgh |
teoulnelle aga mpabtpe freame. D pe Donte Dra
of Zlracll,x gaue pe me afferpngegand paver mite bike
ces thofe


ces thole foatpe peres lone in the wylbdertiefie ¢
pet bauepe fet vp tabernacles to pours otoch
and Jmages of pour pdolles : pee and the farre
of pour God iRempba,fyqures whiche pe made
to wo:ppp them. Therfozre wyll Fcaulepouta
be carped awape beponde Damaicus,fapth the
SARE or eo ea e


: È. be a
€ Sgapne che pzpnces of Jfracit liupage in pleafures,


eurra
Hier E


Zuke.bi.c | (aes Tij


. j
15 L
a] Et
‘i
E
fe


pepon bebbdes of puerpe, and dle poure wan-
fonnefie Dpon pourcouches:pe that eate the befk
lambes of the flocke, andthe fattet calues ofthe
Dh pe or TOTOE nbn Nee
272, of inftrumentes compare pout felues bntoxDa
ss Mpa: pe that dopnke wypne out of goblettes,and
anopnt pour felues with p belt ople, but noman
is fozp foz Folephs hurt. Cherfo2re:natoe thal pe
e bethe Epatt of them, thalbeled atapecaptpue
q and § lutty chere of f wplful halcometoan end
Rerem.ti.c. ,
mo. bilt.8 felfe tape the Lozd Godot Hotes) Fbatethe
pzpde of Jacob, and ¥ abpogre pps palaces: and
J wpll eue ouer-tbectepe wpthall that is thers
tu: fo that though there remapne tenmeninone
boufe,thep pall dpe. So toepz nertekpnlfolke
andthe dead burpars (hall take them, and carp
awape thep2 boneg and fape pute bpm, that ig
it tbe innermer bonfe:ts there pet anp moby the
And de Halanlwere:thep are all gone,boldethp
tunge( Mall be fave)xfo2tbep woldenot remem
bzetbe name of the Lode.


*


Dru. bitid


D
teate boufes,fotbat they thalldecape: andthe
ptle poules, tbat thep Hall cleane a lunder.
Cibo can runne with bozles, 02 ploive withore
en bpon the barde rockeg of tone: Fo: wbp , pe
baue turned true Judgementeinto bprterneile €
the frute of ryghtuoufnefle into wozmewood,
Pee, even pe tbat retopce in vapne thpnges : pe,
that lape: baue not te optapned boznes it oure
owne firength: Welltake pede, D pe boule of


3lcacll, fapth the Lode Godot Holtes:¥F wrll
bipngea people bpon pou, whiche thalltrouble |


pou from the aye that qocth toward.
wnrito the bzoke in the medotwe.
The. vit. Chapter.
€Oltbe captiupte of Jiraci and Juda.


Demat


ISSA (pon, bebola there kode onep made


a


thas potpngefoztpafterthe byny
eee hadclppte bysthepe. Mowe when
thep pndertoketo eate bpall the geene al ig
inthe lande, glapir: D 1020 God, be mercptul,


x The Lorde GodhathCwornecuenbphpm ani


Webolde, the Lozdeis mpnded fofmptethe pe


e Loyd God ewed me fucha bie.
res retpoppers.cucn whenthe come


Folc,


5


Downe molberpes, and q
the Lozdetokeme, andlapde vntome: Gothp


i @:pzropbecpe notagaputt Fira
el anb peake noring agape ebonteot fa
ac stoge thus tapt P Lode. Thp wpe hal


bemecatured outewptht
fpalt dpe inan retest hi


C The. biti. chapter.
@Agapok the ralers of Firari. Dhe Hop dCwereth t be wp
Calfplebethpnges topich pe bach ortermpnry pad 4 faa


iwcreda mand with


- Comer frute. Eben lapie the £ o2de vntome:the


ende cometh bpon mp people of {fracl, Fwpl no

moze ouerfe them. Jn that dap hal the fonges of

the temple be turned into fozowe,fayth p 2 ode

God: manpdeadbodpes Hallpetneucrp place, 15
and be caft forthe fecretlp. rar thps,D pe Erap.b.a,
thatoppreife the pooze,and deftrope the nedp in

the lande, lapinge: Wi ben wpllthe newe Soa


- netbe be gone, that we mape fell vptaple, and


the Sabboth, thatwe mape baue fearcencfe
DDii, ofcozne


w=


ces thole foatpe peres lone in the wylbdertiefie ¢
pet bauepe fet vp tabernacles to pours otoch
and Jmages of pour pdolles : pee and the farre
of pour God iRempba,fyqures whiche pe made
to wo:ppp them. Therfozre wyll Fcaulepouta
be carped awape beponde Damaicus,fapth the
SARE or eo ea e


: È. be a
€ Sgapne che pzpnces of Jfracit liupage in pleafures,


eurra
Hier E


Zuke.bi.c | (aes Tij


. j
15 L
a] Et
‘i
E
fe


pepon bebbdes of puerpe, and dle poure wan-
fonnefie Dpon pourcouches:pe that eate the befk
lambes of the flocke, andthe fattet calues ofthe
Dh pe or TOTOE nbn Nee
272, of inftrumentes compare pout felues bntoxDa
ss Mpa: pe that dopnke wypne out of goblettes,and
anopnt pour felues with p belt ople, but noman
is fozp foz Folephs hurt. Cherfo2re:natoe thal pe
e bethe Epatt of them, thalbeled atapecaptpue
q and § lutty chere of f wplful halcometoan end
Rerem.ti.c. ,
mo. bilt.8 felfe tape the Lozd Godot Hotes) Fbatethe
pzpde of Jacob, and ¥ abpogre pps palaces: and
J wpll eue ouer-tbectepe wpthall that is thers
tu: fo that though there remapne tenmeninone
boufe,thep pall dpe. So toepz nertekpnlfolke
andthe dead burpars (hall take them, and carp
awape thep2 boneg and fape pute bpm, that ig
it tbe innermer bonfe:ts there pet anp moby the
And de Halanlwere:thep are all gone,boldethp
tunge( Mall be fave)xfo2tbep woldenot remem
bzetbe name of the Lode.


*


Dru. bitid


D
teate boufes,fotbat they thalldecape: andthe
ptle poules, tbat thep Hall cleane a lunder.
Cibo can runne with bozles, 02 ploive withore
en bpon the barde rockeg of tone: Fo: wbp , pe
baue turned true Judgementeinto bprterneile €
the frute of ryghtuoufnefle into wozmewood,
Pee, even pe tbat retopce in vapne thpnges : pe,
that lape: baue not te optapned boznes it oure
owne firength: Welltake pede, D pe boule of


3lcacll, fapth the Lode Godot Holtes:¥F wrll
bipngea people bpon pou, whiche thalltrouble |


pou from the aye that qocth toward.
wnrito the bzoke in the medotwe.
The. vit. Chapter.
€Oltbe captiupte of Jiraci and Juda.


Demat


ISSA (pon, bebola there kode onep made


a


thas potpngefoztpafterthe byny
eee hadclppte bysthepe. Mowe when
thep pndertoketo eate bpall the geene al ig
inthe lande, glapir: D 1020 God, be mercptul,


x The Lorde GodhathCwornecuenbphpm ani


Webolde, the Lozdeis mpnded fofmptethe pe


e Loyd God ewed me fucha bie.
res retpoppers.cucn whenthe come


Folc,


5


Downe molberpes, and q
the Lozdetokeme, andlapde vntome: Gothp


i @:pzropbecpe notagaputt Fira
el anb peake noring agape ebonteot fa
ac stoge thus tapt P Lode. Thp wpe hal


bemecatured outewptht
fpalt dpe inan retest hi


C The. biti. chapter.
@Agapok the ralers of Firari. Dhe Hop dCwereth t be wp
Calfplebethpnges topich pe bach ortermpnry pad 4 faa


iwcreda mand with


- Comer frute. Eben lapie the £ o2de vntome:the


ende cometh bpon mp people of {fracl, Fwpl no

moze ouerfe them. Jn that dap hal the fonges of

the temple be turned into fozowe,fayth p 2 ode

God: manpdeadbodpes Hallpetneucrp place, 15
and be caft forthe fecretlp. rar thps,D pe Erap.b.a,
thatoppreife the pooze,and deftrope the nedp in

the lande, lapinge: Wi ben wpllthe newe Soa


- netbe be gone, that we mape fell vptaple, and


the Sabboth, thatwe mape baue fearcencfe
DDii, ofcozne


w=


The prophecye,


of cose to make the bul(hell lefe , and the {pele
7 greater! We (hall fet vp falle wepabtes, that
we map get the poore Duder bs with the p2 mo:

E nep,anotpenedp allo fo2 thoes:ver,let vs fell ë
ants. bib chaffeforcome. x The Logde bathe imone a=
gapntt ý ppoe of Xacob,thele wos bes of theirs

wopll Fneuee forget. ball not torian trem-

ble,and all thep thatowelltherein, mourne Eo?

thys? ball not thepzedekruccpon come bpon


them lpkea water treame and flow ouer then,


See rhb. asthe PALA the fame tpme(fap
eth tbe Lozde G00) A thal caule the funneto go

l bowneatnone, andthe landetobe darke inthe
Soviet? coregape.* Pout hye feaftes wpl J turne tolo-
rowe, pour fonges tomoutnpng: J wpl being
fackcloth Dponall backes, and baldnes vpon e-

gire, vip VEEP bead: pee,fuche amontupnge wopll 3 fende
™ thei, xasigmade ppon anonlp begotten fonne

_ andthep hall banea mpferable ende.

Be olde, tbetpmecõmeth fapt the Lorde
gov that ¥ hal lende an hunger into the earth
not the bunget of beade, nozthe thpz&e of wa-
tcv:but an bunger to beare the worde of p Lozde
fotbat thep Hall qo from the one fe to the otber :
peefrom the nozeb onto the eat running about
to feke the wozde of tbe 102d, and thal not fpnd
it. In¢ebat tyme tall the fapze virgines and the
pongemen peripe toy OE geerte eens

are isthe execrable calfe of Samaria: fayt


astruly as thp Goblpucthat Dan:and as tru:

lyas thy Godlpucthat Gerlaba. Chele Hal fal
and neuer vple bp agapne.
CThe.icr.chapter. -


EC Whreatenipngesagapnt Jirar omen cen ` `-
neck Mercapeebe bande of


acne at


bel. ATA


ee rounde:Disnametsthe Lode.
chylozen of 3traell, are pe not Dutome, cuenas


the MHozians,fapth f Lowshanue not beoughe
ibe pam pr hd be hte be pp Geut.e.b~
Itffpnes from Captho2:and the Sicrpans Creme
Cir? Webold.the eves of the Lozde are pon the
realinetbatipnneth, toroteitcleaneoutcofthe °
earth: Menertheles,*¥ wplnot vtterlp derop aat ar
tbe boufe of Jacob, faptbthe Lorde. ikonip,t
f€o3lo,tbis Jpzromple: thoughe JipEtethe €
boufe of Jfraclamongallnaciongílpke ag thep
vie tolytte ina lpue)pet thall not p mallet gra
nel fone fal bponthe earth: Wut all che wpched
boars of mp people,that fape : Cuthe,the plage
is notionpe to cometobattelp bpon bs :thete
hall perpibe with the (ioearbe. x Ft that tpme ste..
wyl 4 buplocagapne the tabernacle of Danin, 2794n
thatts fallen Downe, and bedge Dp bps gappes
andloke what is beoken, 3 ihallrepapzett: pee,
Fall bupld tt bpagapn.asit wasafozetpme -
that thep mape poele the remnaunte of Coons
pee, and all fuche people ascall bpon mp name,
w them lapth p Lozd which doth thele chpnges
Webolde, che tyme cometh (fapth the Lod)
that the paten fpall onertake the mowar,¢
freabdero |
moutitapnes (hall Dpoppe fwete wpne, andthe
bplles albe fruteful,and J wpl turne the capte
upte of mp people of ¥rael:thep Wall repapze P
walte Citpes and baue them inpofleflpon, thep
pal plant binpardes,anddzpnke the wpne ther
of.tbhep (ball make qardeng,and entope the fru-
tesot them. And J pli plant them bpou thep2


esta bpm that foweth fede. +e goo sie >


owne grounde,(otbat 4 wplincneccootetbem y.


out agapne from thep2landewhbiche Abauc ges -
uenthem fartb tbe Lorde thy God, i


EC The enve of the prophecpe of
amos.


CThe Booke of the
- Pophete bdp.
C The fp2 Chapter.


aa E ghom andthetruttbatth
an þat in tpihis, anki


i
ap PS
ore |


Y. Kand praese i ebus athe +
; p


ODS: Kez fage fentamon etbebeathen: “"***
PTAS Weve: cip,ict bsarpleandipgbtea-


make thefmallamonge the betben, fo that thou
{halt be vtterly defpiled. Thy pride of thine pert
bath lpfte the vp $ that dwellet inthe fronge
boldeg of tone, and baffe made thean bye feate.
Thou fapeğ inthynebarte, ho Mall calte me -


bh dotone tothe qrounde:+25ut though thou wen: amos..


tet vpasbpeagtbe Aegle and madek thytnch 5
aboue amonge the karreg: pet wold F plucke p TA t.
dowone from thencefapththe Lorde. °
_ Bethe thenes androbberscame to pbp nini

how


= caput them. Behold, F wyl Here. Ipip.t


The prophecye,


of cose to make the bul(hell lefe , and the {pele
7 greater! We (hall fet vp falle wepabtes, that
we map get the poore Duder bs with the p2 mo:

E nep,anotpenedp allo fo2 thoes:ver,let vs fell ë
ants. bib chaffeforcome. x The Logde bathe imone a=
gapntt ý ppoe of Xacob,thele wos bes of theirs

wopll Fneuee forget. ball not torian trem-

ble,and all thep thatowelltherein, mourne Eo?

thys? ball not thepzedekruccpon come bpon


them lpkea water treame and flow ouer then,


See rhb. asthe PALA the fame tpme(fap
eth tbe Lozde G00) A thal caule the funneto go

l bowneatnone, andthe landetobe darke inthe
Soviet? coregape.* Pout hye feaftes wpl J turne tolo-
rowe, pour fonges tomoutnpng: J wpl being
fackcloth Dponall backes, and baldnes vpon e-

gire, vip VEEP bead: pee,fuche amontupnge wopll 3 fende
™ thei, xasigmade ppon anonlp begotten fonne

_ andthep hall banea mpferable ende.

Be olde, tbetpmecõmeth fapt the Lorde
gov that ¥ hal lende an hunger into the earth
not the bunget of beade, nozthe thpz&e of wa-
tcv:but an bunger to beare the worde of p Lozde
fotbat thep Hall qo from the one fe to the otber :
peefrom the nozeb onto the eat running about
to feke the wozde of tbe 102d, and thal not fpnd
it. In¢ebat tyme tall the fapze virgines and the
pongemen peripe toy OE geerte eens

are isthe execrable calfe of Samaria: fayt


astruly as thp Goblpucthat Dan:and as tru:

lyas thy Godlpucthat Gerlaba. Chele Hal fal
and neuer vple bp agapne.
CThe.icr.chapter. -


EC Whreatenipngesagapnt Jirar omen cen ` `-
neck Mercapeebe bande of


acne at


bel. ATA


ee rounde:Disnametsthe Lode.
chylozen of 3traell, are pe not Dutome, cuenas


the MHozians,fapth f Lowshanue not beoughe
ibe pam pr hd be hte be pp Geut.e.b~
Itffpnes from Captho2:and the Sicrpans Creme
Cir? Webold.the eves of the Lozde are pon the
realinetbatipnneth, toroteitcleaneoutcofthe °
earth: Menertheles,*¥ wplnot vtterlp derop aat ar
tbe boufe of Jacob, faptbthe Lorde. ikonip,t
f€o3lo,tbis Jpzromple: thoughe JipEtethe €
boufe of Jfraclamongallnaciongílpke ag thep
vie tolytte ina lpue)pet thall not p mallet gra
nel fone fal bponthe earth: Wut all che wpched
boars of mp people,that fape : Cuthe,the plage
is notionpe to cometobattelp bpon bs :thete
hall perpibe with the (ioearbe. x Ft that tpme ste..
wyl 4 buplocagapne the tabernacle of Danin, 2794n
thatts fallen Downe, and bedge Dp bps gappes
andloke what is beoken, 3 ihallrepapzett: pee,
Fall bupld tt bpagapn.asit wasafozetpme -
that thep mape poele the remnaunte of Coons
pee, and all fuche people ascall bpon mp name,
w them lapth p Lozd which doth thele chpnges
Webolde, che tyme cometh (fapth the Lod)
that the paten fpall onertake the mowar,¢
freabdero |
moutitapnes (hall Dpoppe fwete wpne, andthe
bplles albe fruteful,and J wpl turne the capte
upte of mp people of ¥rael:thep Wall repapze P
walte Citpes and baue them inpofleflpon, thep
pal plant binpardes,anddzpnke the wpne ther
of.tbhep (ball make qardeng,and entope the fru-
tesot them. And J pli plant them bpou thep2


esta bpm that foweth fede. +e goo sie >


owne grounde,(otbat 4 wplincneccootetbem y.


out agapne from thep2landewhbiche Abauc ges -
uenthem fartb tbe Lorde thy God, i


EC The enve of the prophecpe of
amos.


CThe Booke of the
- Pophete bdp.
C The fp2 Chapter.


aa E ghom andthetruttbatth
an þat in tpihis, anki


i
ap PS
ore |


Y. Kand praese i ebus athe +
; p


ODS: Kez fage fentamon etbebeathen: “"***
PTAS Weve: cip,ict bsarpleandipgbtea-


make thefmallamonge the betben, fo that thou
{halt be vtterly defpiled. Thy pride of thine pert
bath lpfte the vp $ that dwellet inthe fronge
boldeg of tone, and baffe made thean bye feate.
Thou fapeğ inthynebarte, ho Mall calte me -


bh dotone tothe qrounde:+25ut though thou wen: amos..


tet vpasbpeagtbe Aegle and madek thytnch 5
aboue amonge the karreg: pet wold F plucke p TA t.
dowone from thencefapththe Lorde. °
_ Bethe thenes androbberscame to pbp nini

how


= caput them. Behold, F wyl Here. Ipip.t


1. Copii ¢ phe Pople men of Edom , and thole tbat baue Wi- (Pale BY


€


gere.Le


4


falem, and thou thp felfe walt as one of them. ben
D Thon thalt nomoye le thedap of thp brother spe mien nto bps God: and the gode that were


; nuitba ue: anothps pofte fhalb ether ted of erpe foz this mangdeathe, nepther lape thou


h
' sach.riigb themounte of Elauxand the &pngdome Halbe bpng vowes nto the Lozde.
E CT ve. t.Cb


me OfJonas, — $Fol.cvit
Hate eaccmensan < A Che Doke of the
| _ Bzropbet Jonas.


thow thal thep reape Efau, and feke out bis
trealurs Pee the men that werelwor2ne ynto the (ofthe ER A A ae pad to preachy


- thalldzpue the out of the bozders of tipne owne A tempett arptech and caeth bpm in the fee


for bys biobebpence,


lande.'


aang
auntes(
the laugh


fet tbptclfcagapnitebim,eucn whenpenemtes si ene L0zdehurleda gteat mea into tbefee


thon thalt nomoze beholde the tyme of bis captt in tbe ppp ab pat o Weto lpgbten it
e rut m. Wut Jonas gatte bym nder thebat-
of Juda, tn thedape oftbepzdefteuccpon, FDOR ches, parched os bpm hy and ee.
bic. Chou thaltenomozecometnattheqateso€ ay othe matiter of fhetbpppecamefo ppm
mp bays etpme of thep2 decap:thou Halt sem fapa omo ye fombzeft thou? Gp,
not fethep2miterp tn the daye of thep: fall: cal pponthp God: Jf God( apply wl thinke
~ Thou tale Cende out no managapntt thepz bpon ve,tbat weperphenot. And thep tapde
bote, imtbedape of thepzabduerlitp:netbertbalt iye pepe piney Ea, ON Raa a
thou tand wapting anp mozcat thecozners of tr oub! ob. gn) C3 they 3 ; t lot teg f the lot Fell 300biie
mpyloners that remapne in p dape of th põ Jonas. Then lapde thep vnto hymn: tell ys
eaNe, Jope Dap eof rpe Lombi baroc bP b: oin Revearon whence comme ots
ponallthe pethen.» Like as thou batt Done , fo “a ts om nba rae man aretbauan oi
n acn vpd thy bead. for likewpleaspebaue poue at nacions ie anfwered them: Jaman C-
peiie si holp bpl, fo thal all tbe bea- venra a boat Panun Dean.
then dpankecontpnuallp:pec,depnbethal they E iere the Jeo y 5 cp pop ande. Then
fipalow wp, fop petalbcas though pe bad ne: SHEE a pet Oe foe fo SPT aE
ner ben. But vpon the mount Sion Wal the fal be wes as ester ater ve fee
uacpon be,and polines,thefe balbe boip anh tO" be bap tolbetbem) A tayo merone Unto im
boule of Jacob (hall poffetfe:euen thole, xý had bat al Teo pntor) that íe mape feafie
nle of Jacob thalbeafp2e.thehouteof Jolepb tronbloug: ng D8" (Tor the tee wrought was
Donte of Aa pescbonte of tau balbe $ trawe troublous) ith oeann and calf
tobich thep thal kpndleand confume;fo that nos menuose nS: eat tie tt vette , Foz
thpng Wwalbe left of the boufe of @fau.the L0: TECON eit ; bps great tempe
bpm felfe hath fayd it. Thep of p fouththalbaue ~ En P noh atavee tebrot: D
Pemont th P ra
lieth pat e ground, $ thal the biléing paur n ot be, becante the ; o 20 ughe ef an as ís
nay , gareja ’ troublousagapnite tbem. tai berfore thep crpcd
fefle:¢ the mofitaynes ot Galaad thal Ben Fa- ves shea one, andlayde: D Lozdelet vgnot


pe mango |

te ntosareptad,andin Sepbarad,p bate innocente bloude nto our charge :fos t o,D, ;
sagi the abicec pon of Yerulalem,ethecitpes aera RATI A ae aan: b jiii
of ebetoneb ball enberetit. Thusthep p eiae fee andthe PNE aRt t Ano themen areo
ppontbe bpllof Spon, thallgo Dptu punpbe ties orde excedpngly,dopna faccityces and ma


the Lowes. ee
ETheende of the bobe of the prophe- CAonas is Eaa pe ete piaps
| tpeot Abdp. _ ẹpof Zonas. DDii But


— -


1. Copii ¢ phe Pople men of Edom , and thole tbat baue Wi- (Pale BY


€


gere.Le


4


falem, and thou thp felfe walt as one of them. ben
D Thon thalt nomoye le thedap of thp brother spe mien nto bps God: and the gode that were


; nuitba ue: anothps pofte fhalb ether ted of erpe foz this mangdeathe, nepther lape thou


h
' sach.riigb themounte of Elauxand the &pngdome Halbe bpng vowes nto the Lozde.
E CT ve. t.Cb


me OfJonas, — $Fol.cvit
Hate eaccmensan < A Che Doke of the
| _ Bzropbet Jonas.


thow thal thep reape Efau, and feke out bis
trealurs Pee the men that werelwor2ne ynto the (ofthe ER A A ae pad to preachy


- thalldzpue the out of the bozders of tipne owne A tempett arptech and caeth bpm in the fee


for bys biobebpence,


lande.'


aang
auntes(
the laugh


fet tbptclfcagapnitebim,eucn whenpenemtes si ene L0zdehurleda gteat mea into tbefee


thon thalt nomoze beholde the tyme of bis captt in tbe ppp ab pat o Weto lpgbten it
e rut m. Wut Jonas gatte bym nder thebat-
of Juda, tn thedape oftbepzdefteuccpon, FDOR ches, parched os bpm hy and ee.
bic. Chou thaltenomozecometnattheqateso€ ay othe matiter of fhetbpppecamefo ppm
mp bays etpme of thep2 decap:thou Halt sem fapa omo ye fombzeft thou? Gp,
not fethep2miterp tn the daye of thep: fall: cal pponthp God: Jf God( apply wl thinke
~ Thou tale Cende out no managapntt thepz bpon ve,tbat weperphenot. And thep tapde
bote, imtbedape of thepzabduerlitp:netbertbalt iye pepe piney Ea, ON Raa a
thou tand wapting anp mozcat thecozners of tr oub! ob. gn) C3 they 3 ; t lot teg f the lot Fell 300biie
mpyloners that remapne in p dape of th põ Jonas. Then lapde thep vnto hymn: tell ys
eaNe, Jope Dap eof rpe Lombi baroc bP b: oin Revearon whence comme ots
ponallthe pethen.» Like as thou batt Done , fo “a ts om nba rae man aretbauan oi
n acn vpd thy bead. for likewpleaspebaue poue at nacions ie anfwered them: Jaman C-
peiie si holp bpl, fo thal all tbe bea- venra a boat Panun Dean.
then dpankecontpnuallp:pec,depnbethal they E iere the Jeo y 5 cp pop ande. Then
fipalow wp, fop petalbcas though pe bad ne: SHEE a pet Oe foe fo SPT aE
ner ben. But vpon the mount Sion Wal the fal be wes as ester ater ve fee
uacpon be,and polines,thefe balbe boip anh tO" be bap tolbetbem) A tayo merone Unto im
boule of Jacob (hall poffetfe:euen thole, xý had bat al Teo pntor) that íe mape feafie
nle of Jacob thalbeafp2e.thehouteof Jolepb tronbloug: ng D8" (Tor the tee wrought was
Donte of Aa pescbonte of tau balbe $ trawe troublous) ith oeann and calf
tobich thep thal kpndleand confume;fo that nos menuose nS: eat tie tt vette , Foz
thpng Wwalbe left of the boufe of @fau.the L0: TECON eit ; bps great tempe
bpm felfe hath fayd it. Thep of p fouththalbaue ~ En P noh atavee tebrot: D
Pemont th P ra
lieth pat e ground, $ thal the biléing paur n ot be, becante the ; o 20 ughe ef an as ís
nay , gareja ’ troublousagapnite tbem. tai berfore thep crpcd
fefle:¢ the mofitaynes ot Galaad thal Ben Fa- ves shea one, andlayde: D Lozdelet vgnot


pe mango |

te ntosareptad,andin Sepbarad,p bate innocente bloude nto our charge :fos t o,D, ;
sagi the abicec pon of Yerulalem,ethecitpes aera RATI A ae aan: b jiii
of ebetoneb ball enberetit. Thusthep p eiae fee andthe PNE aRt t Ano themen areo
ppontbe bpllof Spon, thallgo Dptu punpbe ties orde excedpngly,dopna faccityces and ma


the Lowes. ee
ETheende of the bobe of the prophe- CAonas is Eaa pe ete piaps
| tpeot Abdp. _ ẹpof Zonas. DDii But


— -


1. Copii ¢ phe Pople men of Edom , and thole tbat baue Wi- (Pale BY


€


gere.Le


4


falem, and thou thp felfe walt as one of them. ben
D Thon thalt nomoye le thedap of thp brother spe mien nto bps God: and the gode that were


; nuitba ue: anothps pofte fhalb ether ted of erpe foz this mangdeathe, nepther lape thou


h
' sach.riigb themounte of Elauxand the &pngdome Halbe bpng vowes nto the Lozde.
E CT ve. t.Cb


me OfJonas, — $Fol.cvit
Hate eaccmensan < A Che Doke of the
| _ Bzropbet Jonas.


thow thal thep reape Efau, and feke out bis
trealurs Pee the men that werelwor2ne ynto the (ofthe ER A A ae pad to preachy


- thalldzpue the out of the bozders of tipne owne A tempett arptech and caeth bpm in the fee


for bys biobebpence,


lande.'


aang
auntes(
the laugh


fet tbptclfcagapnitebim,eucn whenpenemtes si ene L0zdehurleda gteat mea into tbefee


thon thalt nomoze beholde the tyme of bis captt in tbe ppp ab pat o Weto lpgbten it
e rut m. Wut Jonas gatte bym nder thebat-
of Juda, tn thedape oftbepzdefteuccpon, FDOR ches, parched os bpm hy and ee.
bic. Chou thaltenomozecometnattheqateso€ ay othe matiter of fhetbpppecamefo ppm
mp bays etpme of thep2 decap:thou Halt sem fapa omo ye fombzeft thou? Gp,
not fethep2miterp tn the daye of thep: fall: cal pponthp God: Jf God( apply wl thinke
~ Thou tale Cende out no managapntt thepz bpon ve,tbat weperphenot. And thep tapde
bote, imtbedape of thepzabduerlitp:netbertbalt iye pepe piney Ea, ON Raa a
thou tand wapting anp mozcat thecozners of tr oub! ob. gn) C3 they 3 ; t lot teg f the lot Fell 300biie
mpyloners that remapne in p dape of th põ Jonas. Then lapde thep vnto hymn: tell ys
eaNe, Jope Dap eof rpe Lombi baroc bP b: oin Revearon whence comme ots
ponallthe pethen.» Like as thou batt Done , fo “a ts om nba rae man aretbauan oi
n acn vpd thy bead. for likewpleaspebaue poue at nacions ie anfwered them: Jaman C-
peiie si holp bpl, fo thal all tbe bea- venra a boat Panun Dean.
then dpankecontpnuallp:pec,depnbethal they E iere the Jeo y 5 cp pop ande. Then
fipalow wp, fop petalbcas though pe bad ne: SHEE a pet Oe foe fo SPT aE
ner ben. But vpon the mount Sion Wal the fal be wes as ester ater ve fee
uacpon be,and polines,thefe balbe boip anh tO" be bap tolbetbem) A tayo merone Unto im
boule of Jacob (hall poffetfe:euen thole, xý had bat al Teo pntor) that íe mape feafie
nle of Jacob thalbeafp2e.thehouteof Jolepb tronbloug: ng D8" (Tor the tee wrought was
Donte of Aa pescbonte of tau balbe $ trawe troublous) ith oeann and calf
tobich thep thal kpndleand confume;fo that nos menuose nS: eat tie tt vette , Foz
thpng Wwalbe left of the boufe of @fau.the L0: TECON eit ; bps great tempe
bpm felfe hath fayd it. Thep of p fouththalbaue ~ En P noh atavee tebrot: D
Pemont th P ra
lieth pat e ground, $ thal the biléing paur n ot be, becante the ; o 20 ughe ef an as ís
nay , gareja ’ troublousagapnite tbem. tai berfore thep crpcd
fefle:¢ the mofitaynes ot Galaad thal Ben Fa- ves shea one, andlayde: D Lozdelet vgnot


pe mango |

te ntosareptad,andin Sepbarad,p bate innocente bloude nto our charge :fos t o,D, ;
sagi the abicec pon of Yerulalem,ethecitpes aera RATI A ae aan: b jiii
of ebetoneb ball enberetit. Thusthep p eiae fee andthe PNE aRt t Ano themen areo
ppontbe bpllof Spon, thallgo Dptu punpbe ties orde excedpngly,dopna faccityces and ma


the Lowes. ee
ETheende of the bobe of the prophe- CAonas is Eaa pe ete piaps
| tpeot Abdp. _ ẹpof Zonas. DDii But


— -


1. Copii ¢ phe Pople men of Edom , and thole tbat baue Wi- (Pale BY


€


gere.Le


4


falem, and thou thp felfe walt as one of them. ben
D Thon thalt nomoye le thedap of thp brother spe mien nto bps God: and the gode that were


; nuitba ue: anothps pofte fhalb ether ted of erpe foz this mangdeathe, nepther lape thou


h
' sach.riigb themounte of Elauxand the &pngdome Halbe bpng vowes nto the Lozde.
E CT ve. t.Cb


me OfJonas, — $Fol.cvit
Hate eaccmensan < A Che Doke of the
| _ Bzropbet Jonas.


thow thal thep reape Efau, and feke out bis
trealurs Pee the men that werelwor2ne ynto the (ofthe ER A A ae pad to preachy


- thalldzpue the out of the bozders of tipne owne A tempett arptech and caeth bpm in the fee


for bys biobebpence,


lande.'


aang
auntes(
the laugh


fet tbptclfcagapnitebim,eucn whenpenemtes si ene L0zdehurleda gteat mea into tbefee


thon thalt nomoze beholde the tyme of bis captt in tbe ppp ab pat o Weto lpgbten it
e rut m. Wut Jonas gatte bym nder thebat-
of Juda, tn thedape oftbepzdefteuccpon, FDOR ches, parched os bpm hy and ee.
bic. Chou thaltenomozecometnattheqateso€ ay othe matiter of fhetbpppecamefo ppm
mp bays etpme of thep2 decap:thou Halt sem fapa omo ye fombzeft thou? Gp,
not fethep2miterp tn the daye of thep: fall: cal pponthp God: Jf God( apply wl thinke
~ Thou tale Cende out no managapntt thepz bpon ve,tbat weperphenot. And thep tapde
bote, imtbedape of thepzabduerlitp:netbertbalt iye pepe piney Ea, ON Raa a
thou tand wapting anp mozcat thecozners of tr oub! ob. gn) C3 they 3 ; t lot teg f the lot Fell 300biie
mpyloners that remapne in p dape of th põ Jonas. Then lapde thep vnto hymn: tell ys
eaNe, Jope Dap eof rpe Lombi baroc bP b: oin Revearon whence comme ots
ponallthe pethen.» Like as thou batt Done , fo “a ts om nba rae man aretbauan oi
n acn vpd thy bead. for likewpleaspebaue poue at nacions ie anfwered them: Jaman C-
peiie si holp bpl, fo thal all tbe bea- venra a boat Panun Dean.
then dpankecontpnuallp:pec,depnbethal they E iere the Jeo y 5 cp pop ande. Then
fipalow wp, fop petalbcas though pe bad ne: SHEE a pet Oe foe fo SPT aE
ner ben. But vpon the mount Sion Wal the fal be wes as ester ater ve fee
uacpon be,and polines,thefe balbe boip anh tO" be bap tolbetbem) A tayo merone Unto im
boule of Jacob (hall poffetfe:euen thole, xý had bat al Teo pntor) that íe mape feafie
nle of Jacob thalbeafp2e.thehouteof Jolepb tronbloug: ng D8" (Tor the tee wrought was
Donte of Aa pescbonte of tau balbe $ trawe troublous) ith oeann and calf
tobich thep thal kpndleand confume;fo that nos menuose nS: eat tie tt vette , Foz
thpng Wwalbe left of the boufe of @fau.the L0: TECON eit ; bps great tempe
bpm felfe hath fayd it. Thep of p fouththalbaue ~ En P noh atavee tebrot: D
Pemont th P ra
lieth pat e ground, $ thal the biléing paur n ot be, becante the ; o 20 ughe ef an as ís
nay , gareja ’ troublousagapnite tbem. tai berfore thep crpcd
fefle:¢ the mofitaynes ot Galaad thal Ben Fa- ves shea one, andlayde: D Lozdelet vgnot


pe mango |

te ntosareptad,andin Sepbarad,p bate innocente bloude nto our charge :fos t o,D, ;
sagi the abicec pon of Yerulalem,ethecitpes aera RATI A ae aan: b jiii
of ebetoneb ball enberetit. Thusthep p eiae fee andthe PNE aRt t Ano themen areo
ppontbe bpllof Spon, thallgo Dptu punpbe ties orde excedpngly,dopna faccityces and ma


the Lowes. ee
ETheende of the bobe of the prophe- CAonas is Eaa pe ete piaps
| tpeot Abdp. _ ẹpof Zonas. DDii But


— -


The pophecye,


pire ea Cit the Lode prepared a great Eph:
<9 Mito {talot vp Jonas. So was Jo-


a (eae -<inaginthe belly ofthe fip thee dapes


Palet: Helly, fap: x jump trouble J called ynto the
Zo2de,and he berde me:out of tbe bellp of bell, F
crped, thou berdefi mp vopce. Thou haddelt
cat me Downe depe inthe mpdoelk of p leeg the

iral piiio ffoudes cOpatied ine abonte:vee,allathp waues
eroules of water went oner me, y thought that
Fbad ben caft awap out of thy fight: But zwil
pet agapnicloketowarde thy bolp temple.

s The watergcompalfed me, euen to the werp
foule:the depe lape aboute me, the webes were
wapte about mpne pead. J went Downe to the
botome of p y pitas barred inwithearth
Fox euer. Gut P, D Lode mp God, balk boune
vp my ipfcagapn out ofco:rupcpon. ben mp
foule fapnted within me, J thought vpon the
Lozde: and mp paper came in bnto the, cuen in

€ totbp bolp tempie. Thep that hold of bapne va
nytpes, wpll fozlake pig merep. nt F wpll do
the Cacrifpce with the vopce of thankefgpupng,
and wpll pay that that F bane towed, fo whip
faluacpon cometh of the Lorde. And the xorde
fpake vito the tpfe, and it caffe out Jonas a=
gape Vponthe vpe lande.


@ The.tii.cbapter.
@ Jonas is tent agapnete inpute. Whe repintaunce of
the krage cf sinpue.

am LICH Caine fhe worde ofthe Loze w-
Si ita Jonas agapue,fapinge:* bp € get
ie Weithe to Ntniue that greate Tripe, and
W WA iprcache bunto them the preachpnge,
= whpiche 7 bad the. So Jonas arole g
went to Niniue at the Lozbes cömaundement.
Sinine Was a Great cptpe Dnto God, namelp of
25 tbe dapes tourney. And Jonas went to,and en-
tred into thecptpe: enen adapes fournep.e€crped
fapinge: Chere are pet Cortpe bapes, and then
ecrrrotie Hall Rinine be ouertheowen. x And tbe peoi
oe of Niniue beleucd God, entrap 7 s
garaped theni felues in facke cloth, ag well £3
great as plmall of them. Aud the tidinges cate
wnto the kpng of Aintue,whiche rofe out of his


feate,and dpd bis appa Ut of, and put on facke


cloth, and fat bym Downe in altoes. |

And it was crpedand cOmaunded in Ninine,

by the auctozite of thekpng and bis lodeg, lap-
gast.rite. € gc: «fe that nepther man, nos bea

URET C


gerbia ERCAT:€ crpe mpabte
cuerp man turne From bis uh wape,and from

the Wpckeduele that be bath ix hande. :
Gibo can tell ¢ God nap turne,ayd repent E
ceafe from bis fearce wrath. that we cpb not.
_ Andwhen God lawe thep2 wozkes bowe thep
et.rrrbill b Pees on top Dabe tA wapeg:* De repented
on the cupll, wotche He fapd be wolde do nto

fHem, and dpd it not. sl


_..  ,&Cbe. tit. Chapter:
CFonas ts eeppoeroas Sov,


J CO Jexthze npabtes: And Jonas paves pny È
ra ynto D LoDIS God,out of pfitbes —


P pauefoadom abone bis bead,todelpuer pim


Ort, 02 |
epe talte ought at all: ethat th nepeber fede asec a
DOLE ORS Ea a eA: thbothiman Kerad fee

pLutoGod:*Peelethbat [eee See


panais Iperfo2e Jouas was fore bifcontét t B
Aon Ges angry. And be praped vntop Lorde,
) ew GUD apd: D Lozde, was not thigsmp


aM Wad (apitig (Apeap the when ¥ was pet

Sadasa £12 IP COUNELYP £ be et ed ra
ther to flee bnto Charlis. x Stop Krome well pt.treret.n
pnouch. that thou arte a mercptull Gon, Full af 2°"
compa fiyon,long fufferpng,¢ of great kpndneg
andrepentell when thou Hulde take punpije-
ment. and nowe * D Lozde,take mp lpfe fri


And the Loade God paepared a wylde bpne,
biche (pange bp ouer Jonas, that be mp z


of bis payne. And Jonas was ercedptig ale
the wplbde vpne. Wut bpon the nerte mozgte a=
capnit tbe (papa of the dape, the Lorde pzdep-
ned a wozme, Wwhiche mote the wplve Ypne, fo
thatit wpthered awape. And when the Cone
thas bp, God preparedaferuttcalwpnde: and .
the fonne bette ouer the bead of Fonas, that be
fapnted agapne,andwyihed nto bis foule that

be mpqbt dpe, fayd: 3t is better fo: meto dve, g
then to lpue. And God lapd vuto Fonas : Arte
thou fo angry foz tie wylde vpne ¢ And De lapad
pee, verp angrp ait F,euen butothe death. and
the Lorde fayo:f batt compallion bpon a toploe
vpne, wheron thou beltotedelf no labour :noz
madelt it grotwe, which [pzang Dp in one night, -
and perpiped in another: Aub Hulde not 3 then
baue compafiion bpon siniue that great cytie,
toberin there are aboue an Hundzed and.rr. T.
perlong, tbat knowe not theperpabde band from
che left. belpdes moche cattells


Th ende of the propbecye of Jonas.


The boke of the


: ERED tty
© The fpr Chapter.


=a Hebe detruccpé of Samaria becaule of (hep: pholatre.


a a wag
ps j an T
| fe ey Bo hy my

See


4


yo out of bis place, come Dotbne,¢treade npon
thebveehpnges off carth. The moñtapngpall ~
confume Dnder Dim, and the


foz the wpckednes of Jacob, tthe [punes of the


. boule of xlrael.2ut what is p tickednes of Ja
cobr gg


E i
ees e ’


The pophecye,


pire ea Cit the Lode prepared a great Eph:
<9 Mito {talot vp Jonas. So was Jo-


a (eae -<inaginthe belly ofthe fip thee dapes


Palet: Helly, fap: x jump trouble J called ynto the
Zo2de,and he berde me:out of tbe bellp of bell, F
crped, thou berdefi mp vopce. Thou haddelt
cat me Downe depe inthe mpdoelk of p leeg the

iral piiio ffoudes cOpatied ine abonte:vee,allathp waues
eroules of water went oner me, y thought that
Fbad ben caft awap out of thy fight: But zwil
pet agapnicloketowarde thy bolp temple.

s The watergcompalfed me, euen to the werp
foule:the depe lape aboute me, the webes were
wapte about mpne pead. J went Downe to the
botome of p y pitas barred inwithearth
Fox euer. Gut P, D Lode mp God, balk boune
vp my ipfcagapn out ofco:rupcpon. ben mp
foule fapnted within me, J thought vpon the
Lozde: and mp paper came in bnto the, cuen in

€ totbp bolp tempie. Thep that hold of bapne va
nytpes, wpll fozlake pig merep. nt F wpll do
the Cacrifpce with the vopce of thankefgpupng,
and wpll pay that that F bane towed, fo whip
faluacpon cometh of the Lorde. And the xorde
fpake vito the tpfe, and it caffe out Jonas a=
gape Vponthe vpe lande.


@ The.tii.cbapter.
@ Jonas is tent agapnete inpute. Whe repintaunce of
the krage cf sinpue.

am LICH Caine fhe worde ofthe Loze w-
Si ita Jonas agapue,fapinge:* bp € get
ie Weithe to Ntniue that greate Tripe, and
W WA iprcache bunto them the preachpnge,
= whpiche 7 bad the. So Jonas arole g
went to Niniue at the Lozbes cömaundement.
Sinine Was a Great cptpe Dnto God, namelp of
25 tbe dapes tourney. And Jonas went to,and en-
tred into thecptpe: enen adapes fournep.e€crped
fapinge: Chere are pet Cortpe bapes, and then
ecrrrotie Hall Rinine be ouertheowen. x And tbe peoi
oe of Niniue beleucd God, entrap 7 s
garaped theni felues in facke cloth, ag well £3
great as plmall of them. Aud the tidinges cate
wnto the kpng of Aintue,whiche rofe out of his


feate,and dpd bis appa Ut of, and put on facke


cloth, and fat bym Downe in altoes. |

And it was crpedand cOmaunded in Ninine,

by the auctozite of thekpng and bis lodeg, lap-
gast.rite. € gc: «fe that nepther man, nos bea

URET C


gerbia ERCAT:€ crpe mpabte
cuerp man turne From bis uh wape,and from

the Wpckeduele that be bath ix hande. :
Gibo can tell ¢ God nap turne,ayd repent E
ceafe from bis fearce wrath. that we cpb not.
_ Andwhen God lawe thep2 wozkes bowe thep
et.rrrbill b Pees on top Dabe tA wapeg:* De repented
on the cupll, wotche He fapd be wolde do nto

fHem, and dpd it not. sl


_..  ,&Cbe. tit. Chapter:
CFonas ts eeppoeroas Sov,


J CO Jexthze npabtes: And Jonas paves pny È
ra ynto D LoDIS God,out of pfitbes —


P pauefoadom abone bis bead,todelpuer pim


Ort, 02 |
epe talte ought at all: ethat th nepeber fede asec a
DOLE ORS Ea a eA: thbothiman Kerad fee

pLutoGod:*Peelethbat [eee See


panais Iperfo2e Jouas was fore bifcontét t B
Aon Ges angry. And be praped vntop Lorde,
) ew GUD apd: D Lozde, was not thigsmp


aM Wad (apitig (Apeap the when ¥ was pet

Sadasa £12 IP COUNELYP £ be et ed ra
ther to flee bnto Charlis. x Stop Krome well pt.treret.n
pnouch. that thou arte a mercptull Gon, Full af 2°"
compa fiyon,long fufferpng,¢ of great kpndneg
andrepentell when thou Hulde take punpije-
ment. and nowe * D Lozde,take mp lpfe fri


And the Loade God paepared a wylde bpne,
biche (pange bp ouer Jonas, that be mp z


of bis payne. And Jonas was ercedptig ale
the wplbde vpne. Wut bpon the nerte mozgte a=
capnit tbe (papa of the dape, the Lorde pzdep-
ned a wozme, Wwhiche mote the wplve Ypne, fo
thatit wpthered awape. And when the Cone
thas bp, God preparedaferuttcalwpnde: and .
the fonne bette ouer the bead of Fonas, that be
fapnted agapne,andwyihed nto bis foule that

be mpqbt dpe, fayd: 3t is better fo: meto dve, g
then to lpue. And God lapd vuto Fonas : Arte
thou fo angry foz tie wylde vpne ¢ And De lapad
pee, verp angrp ait F,euen butothe death. and
the Lorde fayo:f batt compallion bpon a toploe
vpne, wheron thou beltotedelf no labour :noz
madelt it grotwe, which [pzang Dp in one night, -
and perpiped in another: Aub Hulde not 3 then
baue compafiion bpon siniue that great cytie,
toberin there are aboue an Hundzed and.rr. T.
perlong, tbat knowe not theperpabde band from
che left. belpdes moche cattells


Th ende of the propbecye of Jonas.


The boke of the


: ERED tty
© The fpr Chapter.


=a Hebe detruccpé of Samaria becaule of (hep: pholatre.


a a wag
ps j an T
| fe ey Bo hy my

See


4


yo out of bis place, come Dotbne,¢treade npon
thebveehpnges off carth. The moñtapngpall ~
confume Dnder Dim, and the


foz the wpckednes of Jacob, tthe [punes of the


. boule of xlrael.2ut what is p tickednes of Ja
cobr gg


E i
ees e ’


The pophecye,


pire ea Cit the Lode prepared a great Eph:
<9 Mito {talot vp Jonas. So was Jo-


a (eae -<inaginthe belly ofthe fip thee dapes


Palet: Helly, fap: x jump trouble J called ynto the
Zo2de,and he berde me:out of tbe bellp of bell, F
crped, thou berdefi mp vopce. Thou haddelt
cat me Downe depe inthe mpdoelk of p leeg the

iral piiio ffoudes cOpatied ine abonte:vee,allathp waues
eroules of water went oner me, y thought that
Fbad ben caft awap out of thy fight: But zwil
pet agapnicloketowarde thy bolp temple.

s The watergcompalfed me, euen to the werp
foule:the depe lape aboute me, the webes were
wapte about mpne pead. J went Downe to the
botome of p y pitas barred inwithearth
Fox euer. Gut P, D Lode mp God, balk boune
vp my ipfcagapn out ofco:rupcpon. ben mp
foule fapnted within me, J thought vpon the
Lozde: and mp paper came in bnto the, cuen in

€ totbp bolp tempie. Thep that hold of bapne va
nytpes, wpll fozlake pig merep. nt F wpll do
the Cacrifpce with the vopce of thankefgpupng,
and wpll pay that that F bane towed, fo whip
faluacpon cometh of the Lorde. And the xorde
fpake vito the tpfe, and it caffe out Jonas a=
gape Vponthe vpe lande.


@ The.tii.cbapter.
@ Jonas is tent agapnete inpute. Whe repintaunce of
the krage cf sinpue.

am LICH Caine fhe worde ofthe Loze w-
Si ita Jonas agapue,fapinge:* bp € get
ie Weithe to Ntniue that greate Tripe, and
W WA iprcache bunto them the preachpnge,
= whpiche 7 bad the. So Jonas arole g
went to Niniue at the Lozbes cömaundement.
Sinine Was a Great cptpe Dnto God, namelp of
25 tbe dapes tourney. And Jonas went to,and en-
tred into thecptpe: enen adapes fournep.e€crped
fapinge: Chere are pet Cortpe bapes, and then
ecrrrotie Hall Rinine be ouertheowen. x And tbe peoi
oe of Niniue beleucd God, entrap 7 s
garaped theni felues in facke cloth, ag well £3
great as plmall of them. Aud the tidinges cate
wnto the kpng of Aintue,whiche rofe out of his


feate,and dpd bis appa Ut of, and put on facke


cloth, and fat bym Downe in altoes. |

And it was crpedand cOmaunded in Ninine,

by the auctozite of thekpng and bis lodeg, lap-
gast.rite. € gc: «fe that nepther man, nos bea

URET C


gerbia ERCAT:€ crpe mpabte
cuerp man turne From bis uh wape,and from

the Wpckeduele that be bath ix hande. :
Gibo can tell ¢ God nap turne,ayd repent E
ceafe from bis fearce wrath. that we cpb not.
_ Andwhen God lawe thep2 wozkes bowe thep
et.rrrbill b Pees on top Dabe tA wapeg:* De repented
on the cupll, wotche He fapd be wolde do nto

fHem, and dpd it not. sl


_..  ,&Cbe. tit. Chapter:
CFonas ts eeppoeroas Sov,


J CO Jexthze npabtes: And Jonas paves pny È
ra ynto D LoDIS God,out of pfitbes —


P pauefoadom abone bis bead,todelpuer pim


Ort, 02 |
epe talte ought at all: ethat th nepeber fede asec a
DOLE ORS Ea a eA: thbothiman Kerad fee

pLutoGod:*Peelethbat [eee See


panais Iperfo2e Jouas was fore bifcontét t B
Aon Ges angry. And be praped vntop Lorde,
) ew GUD apd: D Lozde, was not thigsmp


aM Wad (apitig (Apeap the when ¥ was pet

Sadasa £12 IP COUNELYP £ be et ed ra
ther to flee bnto Charlis. x Stop Krome well pt.treret.n
pnouch. that thou arte a mercptull Gon, Full af 2°"
compa fiyon,long fufferpng,¢ of great kpndneg
andrepentell when thou Hulde take punpije-
ment. and nowe * D Lozde,take mp lpfe fri


And the Loade God paepared a wylde bpne,
biche (pange bp ouer Jonas, that be mp z


of bis payne. And Jonas was ercedptig ale
the wplbde vpne. Wut bpon the nerte mozgte a=
capnit tbe (papa of the dape, the Lorde pzdep-
ned a wozme, Wwhiche mote the wplve Ypne, fo
thatit wpthered awape. And when the Cone
thas bp, God preparedaferuttcalwpnde: and .
the fonne bette ouer the bead of Fonas, that be
fapnted agapne,andwyihed nto bis foule that

be mpqbt dpe, fayd: 3t is better fo: meto dve, g
then to lpue. And God lapd vuto Fonas : Arte
thou fo angry foz tie wylde vpne ¢ And De lapad
pee, verp angrp ait F,euen butothe death. and
the Lorde fayo:f batt compallion bpon a toploe
vpne, wheron thou beltotedelf no labour :noz
madelt it grotwe, which [pzang Dp in one night, -
and perpiped in another: Aub Hulde not 3 then
baue compafiion bpon siniue that great cytie,
toberin there are aboue an Hundzed and.rr. T.
perlong, tbat knowe not theperpabde band from
che left. belpdes moche cattells


Th ende of the propbecye of Jonas.


The boke of the


: ERED tty
© The fpr Chapter.


=a Hebe detruccpé of Samaria becaule of (hep: pholatre.


a a wag
ps j an T
| fe ey Bo hy my

See


4


yo out of bis place, come Dotbne,¢treade npon
thebveehpnges off carth. The moñtapngpall ~
confume Dnder Dim, and the


foz the wpckednes of Jacob, tthe [punes of the


. boule of xlrael.2ut what is p tickednes of Ja
cobr gg


E i
ees e ’


| | Pi licyeas,


iceriLe cobr Janot» Hamariazwbich ar p bie places of
ttire ria Judar Je nots serulalé:Cherfore 3 hall make
asra Samaria anbeape of ones in faine to lap a=
bout the ppnepearde-ber ones thall q catt into

the vale, anddtfcouct ber foundacpons . Bll de

pmages halbe bzokenDowne, andall bes gar-
| mentes thalbe bzent in p Epze:pee, allberpdoles
De, Fite. wpll ¥ deltrope :foa why: æ thepare gathered


n ——————_—— =


"ii


out ofthe bpze ofan whoze, and intoa whores
bpze paltbep be turned agapn, wherpoze J wpl
: mourne and make lamentacpon, bare and naz
sed wpll 3go: 3 mut mournelpke she
| and take fozowe:asthe Eltrpches, fog thep2e
| woundeis pallremedp. Ando Bpr Ftis come
: sito Juda, and bath touched thy’pozt of mp peo-
iS leat Jerulalemalreadp.xUaepe not let they
| < at Seth percepuett. RIES
A. Thouat Wataphza, walter thy felfe in the
Fi dutandames. ThoutbatDwelletat Saphir
H get the betice with ame. Che pzoude thal vot
nomoze Foz verp loote: dnd toby ? ber nepah-
| bour alltake from ber What the hath. Che re
bellpoug citpe bopeth that tt Hall not be focuell
but Foz all that,the plage thal come from p L020
euen into the porte of Jerufaiem. The qreate
nopfe ofthe charcttes thal fearc them that dwel
atxLachis , whichis anoccafion ofthe fprme of
m thedouahter of Spon, foz inthe came wp P wic-
kedneffe of Ffraell. Vee, He fenteber couriers
intothelandeot Geth. Che houles of Ipes wyll
Difcepue the pnges of Flractl. Andas for f(D
thou thatdwellelt at S)o2affa ) J hallbzpnga
pofleftponer ppon the, ¥tbe plage of Ffract Hal
reacbe bnto Drulla. Hake the bald, ¢ paue the
becaufe of thp tender chyldzen:) ake the cleane
balde as an Aegle, fox thep Halbe carpedawap
captpuc from the.
— CTbeleconde chapter.
C Dhicatupuges agapnt the potul people,
Peal Uo bnto them, Pymacen to do bharnie
NSA Vi anbddeuple vngracpoulnes Dpon tpeye
, ake Al beades,to perfourmieit in the cleredap
Afo they2powct sagapnit god. ben


(iti. Regus
FUILT


lence tbep rob men of thep2 boules. Thus thep

oppeefie a manfo: bys Youle andeucty man fo

bis heritage. Cbherfore, thusfapeth the Lorde:

Gmos.b-b. $Seholde, xagait this houtolde Daue J veui-
feda plage, were out peall not plucke poure

neckes: Pefpallnomoze goo lopzoudlp, fotit

5 woyl bea perplous tyme. gu that dape Hall thps
terme be wied, ga mournpnge Halbe made cuer

; pouon thys maner. (Ue be vtterlpdefolate,the
ozcpon of mp people istranflatcdo. den wpll
epart puto bs the lande,p be batb taken from

nu.rrrtit t ggr. Pencrtbelefe, xthere Halbe nomanto de-
npde the thy popen in the congeeqacpon of the

€ Lode. Tupe bolde poure tonge (ape they) yt
vl, fhal not fall pon this people, we Hal not come
4 foto confufion, fapth the boute of Jacob. Fs the
X fpiriteofthe Lozvefocleaneawape: 02is befo
7% mpndrdr Cruth tf ts,mp wode arefrendip bn
tothem chat lpucrpabe but mp people doth the

f contratp.tberfore mutt 3 take part agapnil thé
f Eozthep take awap both cove and clokefrom the


lber Y


e B irera thep couetto bauclande, xthcp takeitbp Ypo- fo


Epmple. Pe bane turned pour feluestofygbt,the
wore of mp people baue peut out a esi


good boutes, taken awap mpneercellent apes


tesfromtbepzcbhplozen. Tip renee ame, 02
bere (ball pe bane no reff. Becaule of thep2 pdo-
latry,thep are cozrupte,¢ thal milerablp perp
DE ¥ were a fiehlp felon, anda preacher of lpes


IWol.chiry


anbdtolde them that they might {pt bibbing and yx


Bolling,and be dzonken. D tyat were a prophet
Fo: this people. 23ut J wpll gather pindede, D
Jacob, € d2pue the remmaunte of Zlraell altoge-
ther. 3 Malcarp them one w another aga floche
inthe folde,andasthe catell intbhep2 tals, that
thep mape be difqupeted of other men. Wibole
bzeaketh f gappe, be thall go before. Thep pall
b2eke vp thepozrteandgo mand outatit. Che
kpng thal qo befoze them , and the Lorde Halbe
bpon the beade of them.
(I Cp ei. chant er.
 Agapnt tiecpzanip ofpzinces,and falle prophetes. |


ENSY


m TEDE
Ta y


the temple Halbe turned toan bpe w909.
‘ C Tbr. tit. Chapter.
CHF the callpngokehe Sentels, and DD tii of the Fetwes.


Di. wut


—
=


| | Pi licyeas,


iceriLe cobr Janot» Hamariazwbich ar p bie places of
ttire ria Judar Je nots serulalé:Cherfore 3 hall make
asra Samaria anbeape of ones in faine to lap a=
bout the ppnepearde-ber ones thall q catt into

the vale, anddtfcouct ber foundacpons . Bll de

pmages halbe bzokenDowne, andall bes gar-
| mentes thalbe bzent in p Epze:pee, allberpdoles
De, Fite. wpll ¥ deltrope :foa why: æ thepare gathered


n ——————_—— =


"ii


out ofthe bpze ofan whoze, and intoa whores
bpze paltbep be turned agapn, wherpoze J wpl
: mourne and make lamentacpon, bare and naz
sed wpll 3go: 3 mut mournelpke she
| and take fozowe:asthe Eltrpches, fog thep2e
| woundeis pallremedp. Ando Bpr Ftis come
: sito Juda, and bath touched thy’pozt of mp peo-
iS leat Jerulalemalreadp.xUaepe not let they
| < at Seth percepuett. RIES
A. Thouat Wataphza, walter thy felfe in the
Fi dutandames. ThoutbatDwelletat Saphir
H get the betice with ame. Che pzoude thal vot
nomoze Foz verp loote: dnd toby ? ber nepah-
| bour alltake from ber What the hath. Che re
bellpoug citpe bopeth that tt Hall not be focuell
but Foz all that,the plage thal come from p L020
euen into the porte of Jerufaiem. The qreate
nopfe ofthe charcttes thal fearc them that dwel
atxLachis , whichis anoccafion ofthe fprme of
m thedouahter of Spon, foz inthe came wp P wic-
kedneffe of Ffraell. Vee, He fenteber couriers
intothelandeot Geth. Che houles of Ipes wyll
Difcepue the pnges of Flractl. Andas for f(D
thou thatdwellelt at S)o2affa ) J hallbzpnga
pofleftponer ppon the, ¥tbe plage of Ffract Hal
reacbe bnto Drulla. Hake the bald, ¢ paue the
becaufe of thp tender chyldzen:) ake the cleane
balde as an Aegle, fox thep Halbe carpedawap
captpuc from the.
— CTbeleconde chapter.
C Dhicatupuges agapnt the potul people,
Peal Uo bnto them, Pymacen to do bharnie
NSA Vi anbddeuple vngracpoulnes Dpon tpeye
, ake Al beades,to perfourmieit in the cleredap
Afo they2powct sagapnit god. ben


(iti. Regus
FUILT


lence tbep rob men of thep2 boules. Thus thep

oppeefie a manfo: bys Youle andeucty man fo

bis heritage. Cbherfore, thusfapeth the Lorde:

Gmos.b-b. $Seholde, xagait this houtolde Daue J veui-
feda plage, were out peall not plucke poure

neckes: Pefpallnomoze goo lopzoudlp, fotit

5 woyl bea perplous tyme. gu that dape Hall thps
terme be wied, ga mournpnge Halbe made cuer

; pouon thys maner. (Ue be vtterlpdefolate,the
ozcpon of mp people istranflatcdo. den wpll
epart puto bs the lande,p be batb taken from

nu.rrrtit t ggr. Pencrtbelefe, xthere Halbe nomanto de-
npde the thy popen in the congeeqacpon of the

€ Lode. Tupe bolde poure tonge (ape they) yt
vl, fhal not fall pon this people, we Hal not come
4 foto confufion, fapth the boute of Jacob. Fs the
X fpiriteofthe Lozvefocleaneawape: 02is befo
7% mpndrdr Cruth tf ts,mp wode arefrendip bn
tothem chat lpucrpabe but mp people doth the

f contratp.tberfore mutt 3 take part agapnil thé
f Eozthep take awap both cove and clokefrom the


lber Y


e B irera thep couetto bauclande, xthcp takeitbp Ypo- fo


Epmple. Pe bane turned pour feluestofygbt,the
wore of mp people baue peut out a esi


good boutes, taken awap mpneercellent apes


tesfromtbepzcbhplozen. Tip renee ame, 02
bere (ball pe bane no reff. Becaule of thep2 pdo-
latry,thep are cozrupte,¢ thal milerablp perp
DE ¥ were a fiehlp felon, anda preacher of lpes


IWol.chiry


anbdtolde them that they might {pt bibbing and yx


Bolling,and be dzonken. D tyat were a prophet
Fo: this people. 23ut J wpll gather pindede, D
Jacob, € d2pue the remmaunte of Zlraell altoge-
ther. 3 Malcarp them one w another aga floche
inthe folde,andasthe catell intbhep2 tals, that
thep mape be difqupeted of other men. Wibole
bzeaketh f gappe, be thall go before. Thep pall
b2eke vp thepozrteandgo mand outatit. Che
kpng thal qo befoze them , and the Lorde Halbe
bpon the beade of them.
(I Cp ei. chant er.
 Agapnt tiecpzanip ofpzinces,and falle prophetes. |


ENSY


m TEDE
Ta y


the temple Halbe turned toan bpe w909.
‘ C Tbr. tit. Chapter.
CHF the callpngokehe Sentels, and DD tii of the Fetwes.


Di. wut


—
=


P| Ze.erbi.g fs aii 3
Fig THOA: Y oe


Tye prophecye,


7 Cit tin the latter dapes it wpll come
924 to palle, that the bpll of the Lozdes


) p |
Feet Fall batte them thpther,faping : Tome, tlet ys


grib yapni another: pec, tbep tpallno moze learne


esih bb thou be delinuered,x g there the Lozde Mall loofe
D Powe alfoare there manp people re


@ Of the beftraction of Ferufalem. -
Es seer that Malte thou be robbed thp felfe,
eao > thou robbers doughter:thep pall lape
- RES tege agapntt bs, and (mete the moge of
pes Firael With a rodde bpon the cheke.x Andtbon
F090: +> oehleem Ephrata, art lptleamonge the thou-
Candes of Juda, Dut.of the Hall come wuto me
Whiche hall be the Couetnourin Blracll: whole
oufgopnge Dath ben from the begpnnpnge and


a


From cuerlaffpnge. Yn the meane tobple be pla-

geth them fo: afeafon, vntpll thetpmie that the

(fobiche Hall beare) baue bozne: then Mall the

remnaunt.of bis beethzen be connerted nto the

chplozets of Flraell. g

qyue fodein the + renge of Lode and inthe 2aimkS

wictozp of the tame of the Lorde bis God, and

when they be conuerted, be Wall be maqnifped

wntotheturthel parte ofthe welder. 6
Then thal there be peace.fo that the Aflirian

map come ito pour lande,¢ treade in pout Dou-

fes. We Hall bapng vp. vit. fbepberdes and. vitt.

pipnces ppon them:thefle Hall fubdue p lande of

Alar with the (weacde,e the lande of Mimrod Sears -

with thep2 naked weapons.+ Thus al he delp O°

ucr vs fro the A flirpan, when be cometh within

our lande, fetteth bis fote within ourbozderg. `
Andthe remnaunt of Jacob hal be amonge C

the multitude of people asthe dewe of the Lord

and as the D2ops pou p grafic, that farpetb foz

no man, apteth of no bodp.xVee,therelioue sen.ritr, b

of Jacob (hal be among the Geniples g tbe mul:

titude of people,asthelpon amonge the bealkes

of tbe Wood, andasthelpons wielpeamonge a

flocke of thepe:tebiche (when be goeth thozow )

freadethdowne,teareth in pcces,and there ts no

manthatcan peipe. Chpne band Hal belpft vp

bpon thpne enemypes,and all (hpne aducrlarpes

hail perpip. The tyme thal come alfo,fapth the >

3 o2d¢,that 4 wpl take thy bogles from the,and

deftrope thy tharets. J wpll bzeake dotone the

cpties of top lande,¢ cuertbzolwe al thp tronge

holdes.* Al Weitcherafts wil Frote out of thpne oew.rbiii,1

bande, therefpall no mo fothlapinges be within

the. x Thyne pools g thpne pinages wll FJ de paum,i.b

ftrope out of the:fo tbat thou Malt no moze bots

thy felfe bnto F workes of thyne owne bandes,

Thy croucs wil J pluck vp bp protes,ebreake

dowone thecptics. Thus topl ¥ be anenged allo,

pponall the Heathen that wpii not Heare.


€ The. ti. Chapter.
An erhoztacpon to beare the iudgement agapnt Ffeael bez
png bakpnde what maner e€ Cacrifpres do plea Goo.


Erkennowe what the Lozdefapth: A


poli ar) TEH 3
7 Wien
T B: = a A
: Fal +i 3
mi y ia i
$ 4
a ar =, j i ]
| Fan" 3 i
Ez a è
t ae -A J
I


Hath the Lorde a plealure in manp thoulande
RATHER ESTOS GUE Steame otopiti thal
D2 tha


e pall tande fatl, + and se.rrritte


Cr MOrbhalIgeucmypfpot hoje Foz mine ofen

ceg and the frute of mp body foz the ipune of mp

foules 3 tpl ewe the, man, what is yod, g

what Lozb requiveth of p,namely,to dorpabt

to baue pleafure tn loupnge kyndnes,to below-

fap. tde Ip andto walke withthp God. * he Lozrdes

wopcecepeth Unto the citpe, andtbeman p hall

be tauedcon{pdereth thpname( D Lorde. per:

| ‘Ker whatis pour rodde,andheare him that war

zeu cir g. neth pou. * Sbulde ¥ not be oifpleated, fo2 the

Farb. Daerpgbteous good tn the houtes of the wycken,

£7¢.r1b.b AND bpcaute the mealuce is minpthed: Dz Huld

j Bj tufiptpe the falfe balaunces,and the bag of vif

| ss Reptfullwepabtes, amonge thofle that be full of

i / rpches Unryghtuoully cotten:topere pcptelpns

Beale with faltpede,(peake peg, g pane dilcept=
IF _ Eniltonges iutbepz mouthes?

D Cherfore Jwplltakeinbandeto punylte

the,andto make the defolate,bpcaule ofthp {pn

ee, NES. x Chou thalte eate,and not pane pnougbe:

Gsse.c.a, pee, toutbalte bepnge thplelfedowne. Chou

thalte fice, but not efcape:¢ thofe thatthou wol-

beu-Froty a Delt atic, wpll F delpuer tothe*fweard. Thou

fhalte owe, but not reape: thou palt peeffe out

olpues , but ople Halte thou not bauetoanopnt

thy iclfewittball: thou Haltetreade oute fwete

i muft, but palt Ozpnke no wpne. Pe kepe the oz-

i dpnauncegofxAmriandallthecutomesof the

o EPLE Houle of Ahbab :pefolotwe thep2 plealures, thera

5 \ Foge wpll make the wate, canle thpinhaby-

JA tera to be abpogrred. Dimp people:¢ thus thalte
thou beare tipne owne pame,

C'Tie. vit. Chapter.


CI complapat of the ipti: wombje of $ righteous. @aapnt
th


etruth cought wenotto bolor with ong aretet renders.
we) Dis me: Jam become ag ote that
vaatia Gleanpnge inthe baruelte.
AAP CDere are no imo grapes tocate, pet
Bev cal VOF fapne( With al mp bert haue
mom ilib, ESLER of P heft frute.* Chere ts nota Tod-
TE ip vponcartb thercignotonerigbteousamong
W | men. Thep labour all to (pede bloud, and elierp
: man bunteth bis bzotber to death: pet thep faye
thep Do Wel, whenthepdocupl. Ag p2pnee opl
- fofapth the Judge, p be mapedo ppm a pleafure
j agapne. Che great manlpeaketh what bis bert
ri Delpreth:and the hearers alowe bpm. The beft
i of themis butagathptle and the mof rpaptu-
| ous of them ig butasa beer in the hedge. wut
when P dape of thy preachers cometh, that thou
Galt be vifpted, then Mall thep be hafted awap
Sevem tre ¥ Let no man beleve big frende noz put bis con-
fpdenceinabzotber. epe p poste ofthp mouth
i from per that lpeth in tbp bofome, x foz p fonne
Sater Call puc bis father to ditponoure,the deughter
ereid EPalleple agapntte ber mother, the dougbter in-
env... awe agapnite her mother in late: anda mang
— foes halbe euen thep of his owne Doufpolbde.
Henertheletley wrl loke bp wnto the Low
J wll pacpentlpabpoe on my faupoure : mp
p30.5bit.e GOV Hall beare me: * D thon enenpe of mpne,
reiopcenot at mp fall, fo: J Gal get Yp agapne:
and thoughe ¥ (pt in darknefle,pet the Lozdeis
. MPlpgbt. 3 pil beare the punptyement of the
Tode (fo? hp, 3 baune offended bpm)evil be pt


i
pea]


d


Df Pahum.


Fokeir,


intudgement bpon mp canfe,andfe that 3 bane
tpght. De wpl bzpnge me fozth to the lpght,and
A pall fe bis rpabteoulnesie.
She that is mpne enempe thal loke wponit €
and be confounded, which nowe fapth:x Where Hirer a
tS tP Lozde ods Hpne epes thall beholde her
when the Hall be troden dovonc asthe Clape in p ae
fivetes.* The tyme wopll come,that thp gappes #2"
Hall be made bp, andthe latwe Wall qoabrooe: |
and at that tpine pall thep come vuto the fron
# fur vnto the fronge cityes,g from the trong
citpeg bpon theriuet:from the one fee to f other
from tbe one mountapne to the otber, |
MotwithLanding, thelande mulkbewatked
bpcaule of them that Dwell fherein, and foz the
frutes of thep2 owne pmaginactong. Wherfo2re
fede thp people with thp rod, the Rocke of thpne
Derptage,woiche dwell defolate ta the wood: p
tiep map befed upon the mount of Carmel, 2a
fan, and Galaad, ag afozetpme. $Herueloug en
thpnges wpl 3 ewe them, xlpke ag whenthep erorita
came oute of Egypte, D
Thts thal the heathen Te, and be athamed foz : !
All tiep? potver, x fotvattbep Halllape thepze 12t- rriro
banbe vpon tbeir mouth, and foppetbeircares —
* Thep iballlycke thedutte lpke ate rpente,and Smite
as the wogmes of the erth,¢hat trembicin tbepz
oles. Chep thalbe afrapdeofthe Lorde oure
Sod, andthepipallfearethe.
CUpere ts thberefucha Godas thourthat par
donei woychedues and forgenelé the offences of
the remnaunt of thpne berptages De Kepeti not
bis Wath foz cuer: q wbpr bps delpte istobaue
compafipon:x be thal turne ATApHE And bemev gere. ira
tyful to vs:be hal put downe our Wickednefles
andra al our fpnnes intothe botome of the fee,
Thou halt kepe thy trewth wpth Jacob, g thp
mercpe fo: Abzabam, lpke as thou ba fio2ne
bnto our fatberslonge ago,


~ CTheende ofthe popheeye of AHicheag,
Thebookeofthe —
Prophete Mahunt.
C Che fpr Chapter.


Ort the ettruccpon of inpuc,and o€ the dapye-


raunce of Ffrael.
TOE AT ees | Dis is Ebebeup burthen Of Ri- 4 i
VEN Vas Dvd wepte ashe lawe itx Che Deute,v,b;
S ihe, wae) LODCIS a geloule Bod, ana

ie FAG) and maothfuil. x The Lorpe romana


Hy Pea, niue, which Rabum of Alchog
eae, taker of bengeaunce is p Lod
by Pee ee Ta taketh vengeaunce of Hig ene.


. SS = re
teres 1, y


hie ang... mpeg, Erelerueth oplpleafure

fo? bis abuerlarpes. x The Lorde Cuffveth Longe woma fig
beis of greate power, andfo innocent, + that be er.ccritta
leucthno man fautletfe befozebpm. The Lozde ther-rer.b
gorth forth intem cand fozmpe wether , the

cloudes ate the dug of bisfete. Wibenbe repro-

ucth tbetee,bedrpeth it vp, ¢ furneth the flouded
fodzpelande : 15alanisdefolate: Charmel and ©

the pleafure of Libanug Walkcthawape. The
mountapnes tremble fozbyin , the bpllestconte

DD.v. fume


Cr MOrbhalIgeucmypfpot hoje Foz mine ofen

ceg and the frute of mp body foz the ipune of mp

foules 3 tpl ewe the, man, what is yod, g

what Lozb requiveth of p,namely,to dorpabt

to baue pleafure tn loupnge kyndnes,to below-

fap. tde Ip andto walke withthp God. * he Lozrdes

wopcecepeth Unto the citpe, andtbeman p hall

be tauedcon{pdereth thpname( D Lorde. per:

| ‘Ker whatis pour rodde,andheare him that war

zeu cir g. neth pou. * Sbulde ¥ not be oifpleated, fo2 the

Farb. Daerpgbteous good tn the houtes of the wycken,

£7¢.r1b.b AND bpcaute the mealuce is minpthed: Dz Huld

j Bj tufiptpe the falfe balaunces,and the bag of vif

| ss Reptfullwepabtes, amonge thofle that be full of

i / rpches Unryghtuoully cotten:topere pcptelpns

Beale with faltpede,(peake peg, g pane dilcept=
IF _ Eniltonges iutbepz mouthes?

D Cherfore Jwplltakeinbandeto punylte

the,andto make the defolate,bpcaule ofthp {pn

ee, NES. x Chou thalte eate,and not pane pnougbe:

Gsse.c.a, pee, toutbalte bepnge thplelfedowne. Chou

thalte fice, but not efcape:¢ thofe thatthou wol-

beu-Froty a Delt atic, wpll F delpuer tothe*fweard. Thou

fhalte owe, but not reape: thou palt peeffe out

olpues , but ople Halte thou not bauetoanopnt

thy iclfewittball: thou Haltetreade oute fwete

i muft, but palt Ozpnke no wpne. Pe kepe the oz-

i dpnauncegofxAmriandallthecutomesof the

o EPLE Houle of Ahbab :pefolotwe thep2 plealures, thera

5 \ Foge wpll make the wate, canle thpinhaby-

JA tera to be abpogrred. Dimp people:¢ thus thalte
thou beare tipne owne pame,

C'Tie. vit. Chapter.


CI complapat of the ipti: wombje of $ righteous. @aapnt
th


etruth cought wenotto bolor with ong aretet renders.
we) Dis me: Jam become ag ote that
vaatia Gleanpnge inthe baruelte.
AAP CDere are no imo grapes tocate, pet
Bev cal VOF fapne( With al mp bert haue
mom ilib, ESLER of P heft frute.* Chere ts nota Tod-
TE ip vponcartb thercignotonerigbteousamong
W | men. Thep labour all to (pede bloud, and elierp
: man bunteth bis bzotber to death: pet thep faye
thep Do Wel, whenthepdocupl. Ag p2pnee opl
- fofapth the Judge, p be mapedo ppm a pleafure
j agapne. Che great manlpeaketh what bis bert
ri Delpreth:and the hearers alowe bpm. The beft
i of themis butagathptle and the mof rpaptu-
| ous of them ig butasa beer in the hedge. wut
when P dape of thy preachers cometh, that thou
Galt be vifpted, then Mall thep be hafted awap
Sevem tre ¥ Let no man beleve big frende noz put bis con-
fpdenceinabzotber. epe p poste ofthp mouth
i from per that lpeth in tbp bofome, x foz p fonne
Sater Call puc bis father to ditponoure,the deughter
ereid EPalleple agapntte ber mother, the dougbter in-
env... awe agapnite her mother in late: anda mang
— foes halbe euen thep of his owne Doufpolbde.
Henertheletley wrl loke bp wnto the Low
J wll pacpentlpabpoe on my faupoure : mp
p30.5bit.e GOV Hall beare me: * D thon enenpe of mpne,
reiopcenot at mp fall, fo: J Gal get Yp agapne:
and thoughe ¥ (pt in darknefle,pet the Lozdeis
. MPlpgbt. 3 pil beare the punptyement of the
Tode (fo? hp, 3 baune offended bpm)evil be pt


i
pea]


d


Df Pahum.


Fokeir,


intudgement bpon mp canfe,andfe that 3 bane
tpght. De wpl bzpnge me fozth to the lpght,and
A pall fe bis rpabteoulnesie.
She that is mpne enempe thal loke wponit €
and be confounded, which nowe fapth:x Where Hirer a
tS tP Lozde ods Hpne epes thall beholde her
when the Hall be troden dovonc asthe Clape in p ae
fivetes.* The tyme wopll come,that thp gappes #2"
Hall be made bp, andthe latwe Wall qoabrooe: |
and at that tpine pall thep come vuto the fron
# fur vnto the fronge cityes,g from the trong
citpeg bpon theriuet:from the one fee to f other
from tbe one mountapne to the otber, |
MotwithLanding, thelande mulkbewatked
bpcaule of them that Dwell fherein, and foz the
frutes of thep2 owne pmaginactong. Wherfo2re
fede thp people with thp rod, the Rocke of thpne
Derptage,woiche dwell defolate ta the wood: p
tiep map befed upon the mount of Carmel, 2a
fan, and Galaad, ag afozetpme. $Herueloug en
thpnges wpl 3 ewe them, xlpke ag whenthep erorita
came oute of Egypte, D
Thts thal the heathen Te, and be athamed foz : !
All tiep? potver, x fotvattbep Halllape thepze 12t- rriro
banbe vpon tbeir mouth, and foppetbeircares —
* Thep iballlycke thedutte lpke ate rpente,and Smite
as the wogmes of the erth,¢hat trembicin tbepz
oles. Chep thalbe afrapdeofthe Lorde oure
Sod, andthepipallfearethe.
CUpere ts thberefucha Godas thourthat par
donei woychedues and forgenelé the offences of
the remnaunt of thpne berptages De Kepeti not
bis Wath foz cuer: q wbpr bps delpte istobaue
compafipon:x be thal turne ATApHE And bemev gere. ira
tyful to vs:be hal put downe our Wickednefles
andra al our fpnnes intothe botome of the fee,
Thou halt kepe thy trewth wpth Jacob, g thp
mercpe fo: Abzabam, lpke as thou ba fio2ne
bnto our fatberslonge ago,


~ CTheende ofthe popheeye of AHicheag,
Thebookeofthe —
Prophete Mahunt.
C Che fpr Chapter.


Ort the ettruccpon of inpuc,and o€ the dapye-


raunce of Ffrael.
TOE AT ees | Dis is Ebebeup burthen Of Ri- 4 i
VEN Vas Dvd wepte ashe lawe itx Che Deute,v,b;
S ihe, wae) LODCIS a geloule Bod, ana

ie FAG) and maothfuil. x The Lorpe romana


Hy Pea, niue, which Rabum of Alchog
eae, taker of bengeaunce is p Lod
by Pee ee Ta taketh vengeaunce of Hig ene.


. SS = re
teres 1, y


hie ang... mpeg, Erelerueth oplpleafure

fo? bis abuerlarpes. x The Lorde Cuffveth Longe woma fig
beis of greate power, andfo innocent, + that be er.ccritta
leucthno man fautletfe befozebpm. The Lozde ther-rer.b
gorth forth intem cand fozmpe wether , the

cloudes ate the dug of bisfete. Wibenbe repro-

ucth tbetee,bedrpeth it vp, ¢ furneth the flouded
fodzpelande : 15alanisdefolate: Charmel and ©

the pleafure of Libanug Walkcthawape. The
mountapnes tremble fozbyin , the bpllestconte

DD.v. fume


| JLE- b.


Qhac.iita.
| aph.iiib


gich. b.e


girap- liia
Hoima, p.i.


The Wrophecye:


Cue. St the lpabt of bim,the earth quaketh:yee


the whole wozlde, andalltbat dwell therin.
xU1bo mape endure befoze bis rath: Dz who


era.rtriid a ig abletoabpbe bts grym dilpleafures Hpsan-


ger taketh onlpkic Epze:andthe parde vockes are
cloucnin funderbefoze bym. |
ffull gracpousis the Lozde, anda fronge
poloc in the tyme of trouble, be knoweththepm
that putthep: trut inppm:wpen the floude ren-
nethouer and deftropeth the place:and whe the
darknes foloweth pl ppon bis cnemics.Wibat
do pe priagpn chen agapnit the 102d on this ma
nerti ‘Tulbe, when ye bathe once made an ende,
there pall comenomozetrouble.) Sfozlphe as
the thoznes that itpche togethcr,and as thcdzpe
ftrawe : fotpall the Dzonkardes be confumed to-
gether cuen when thep be full. Chere come out
of the fucbe as pasar ae and gene Vi-
gracpouscountellagapnitthe Lorde.
Gherfore thus fapth the Lozde: Let thembe
as well pepan : pee andasmanp asthep can
pet hall thep be been Downe, and pafle a wap.
And ag for the J wpll vere che, butnot vtterlp
deftrope the. And nowe wpll Jbzreakehisrodde
from tbp backe, and burte thp bondeginfundze
aut tbe Lozde pathgencna commaundemente
cocernpng the,that there Wallecomenontoze fede
of thp name. + Thecarued ¢caltenpmages wpl
J rote outeof the poule sfthp God. <p graue
pal J prepare fo: the, and p palt be contouded.
CThe.i.Chapter.
He detirpoeth the birtozpe ofthe Chaldres agapntte the
Sulmiuptes « 5
= Cholde, x bponp mountapns come
Gy WW) tbe fete of bpm. that bapngeth good
sm een tidpnaes:tpreacheth peace. D Jua
a e Jp) ba. kepe thp bolprapes, perfourme
eed thp proinples:Fo2 Weliall thal come
nomoze in tpe, bets utterly rooted oute.
‘@helcaterer Hallcome vp agapntt the and
lape fege tothe caitel. Loke thou wel tothe ftre-
tes maketbp lopnes trong arme thp felfe pth
alithp my gbt:fo2 the L020 fhallrettoze agapne
the qlozp of Jacob, lpke asthe qlozp of Firael,
Che deltropers Daue brokentiem Bowne, and
marred the vpne beaunches. Che hplde of bps
gpatites glpiteth, Dis men of warre areclothcd
inpurple. Ppscharettes are asfpze , when pe
maketh him foztwarde,anb bis ipere thaftes are


i


j F


2 fokedin benom. Che charetttesrolle vpon the


firetes, and Welfcrintbebpewapes. Chep are
toloke uponlpke creffettes of fp2e,¢ qolwpftilp
asthelpgbtnpng. TG benbedoth but warne bis
gyauntes,tbep fallin thep3 arap,¢ Daftelp thep
clpine bp the Walles: pec.thecngpne of the war
ate prepared alreadp. The watcr poztes albe
opened, and the ktpnges palace pall fall. Che
guene ber felfe halbeled awapcaptpue,and per
gentyliwemen Hall mourne asthe doucs,and


sob. riiit Grone with tep? battes.>sMinine ts lpke a pole
Soph. iia,


full of water, but chen (hall thep be fayne to fie.
éptande, tande, (Hall thepcrpe)and there hall
not oneturnebacke. Away w tbefpluer awape
wtb the golbe, fo2 there is no ende of treafure.


Shere thalbea nualetude of all mancr ofcolip


omamentes. Thus mul he be fpopled,empticd
and cleane fftrppped out:that thepa bartes mape
be melted atbape, thep2 knees tremble,all thep2
lopnes be weake g thep2 faces blacke ag a pot:
ii bereis nowe the dwellpng ofthe Lpons
and the paffure of the Lyons whelpess where p
iponand the liones went with the whelpes and
noman frapde thematoap: Wut thelpon {pop-
led pnough omy bis pong ones and Deuoured foz
bis lyones:he Fplled his Dennes with bps pape,
and bis dwellpng place With ý be had raupihed.
Webholde, J wpll pponthe , fapeth the Lode of
boftes, and tpl fet fp2e vpon thp ane that
thep pall moke witball, andthelwearde Hall
Dcuoure the ponge lions. 3 wpl make an ende of
thy {popling from out of the earth, and p vopce
oftbp ne (hal nomoze be pearde.
© CThe.itt.Chapter.
d Pt the fall of Aimur,
= Dto the bloudtburitp cite, which
\ Ais allfull of lpegand robberpe , and
MAVAN wll not leauc of from raupibpnge.
RATAN Sa Chere aman mape beare {courgpng
SAE rulbynge , the nopte of the wheles,
thecrpinge of the boztes, and the rollpnae of the
charettes. (bere the hozglemen get bp wpthna=
kedfwerdes, and glphrpng (peares:therclpetD
amultitude flapne,anda great beape of Dead bo
dpes:there ig no ende of dead cogles:pee,men fal
bpon thep2 bodpes. And thatto2 the qreate and
manpfolde wbhozdomre, of the fapze g bewtpfull
harlot whichis a maltres of wptchcrafte: pee,
felleth the people thozowe ber whozdome,and
nacpons tho2owe ber weptchcrafte.


=
Ta


ta
x Sehalde,¥ lealthes the (fapeth the Lo2b T uu


of boftes and topl pulthp clothes ouer thp bead
that J mape thewethp nakednes among F bea:
then,¢ thy ame among the kingdomes, § wpl
cait Duct bpon the,tomake the be abbozred,and
agalpng orke: Pee al thep that lobe bpontbe
Wal tarte backe and fape: Ainiueis deitroped.

dbo Wyllbaue pptie Dpon the: where (hall
J lcke one tocomfozte the: Art thou better then
theqreat citpe of + Blerandria: that lapeinthe
waters, and had the waters rounde aboutett :
which was flrouglp fenced and walled with the
fee‘ Ethiopia and Cappe were Per ftrength and
that erceadpng great aboue mealare. Aphzica


€


r. U


Zbac..b


s


}


r
x
J


Eit Fbi,


Ezec FFE


and Libpa were der belpers,pet was be Diuen |


awape, and brought into captiuptpe, ber ponge
chpldzen were finptten Downe at the bead of eue
tp ftrete.the lottes were caf fo2themof auncyp:


ent men tuber, andallber mygbtpe men were g
bound tncbepnes.€uenfothalt thou alfobed20 ~


ken and hyde tiie cife æ tebe Come belpc agapult
thpneenemp. Bll thp ftronge citpesibalbelpke
frgtrees with rppe fpages:whpch whena man
(paket, they thal fal nto the mouti of p eater.
Webold,thy people within pare but wemen
the poztes of tp lande Halbe opened wnto thine
enempes and ticfp2e (ball dDeuoure thp bartes.
Dawe Water nowe agapnife thou be beleged,
make bp thp Tronge holdes cooimtotheclape
femper the moter, maite rouge bzpckhe:+Pet
frecthallcontume the, the tiwcarde pal be p
; = o epe


p Shep tas.
Fa akit |
FOP sacd Eb.


a
a


| JLE- b.


Qhac.iita.
| aph.iiib


gich. b.e


girap- liia
Hoima, p.i.


The Wrophecye:


Cue. St the lpabt of bim,the earth quaketh:yee


the whole wozlde, andalltbat dwell therin.
xU1bo mape endure befoze bis rath: Dz who


era.rtriid a ig abletoabpbe bts grym dilpleafures Hpsan-


ger taketh onlpkic Epze:andthe parde vockes are
cloucnin funderbefoze bym. |
ffull gracpousis the Lozde, anda fronge
poloc in the tyme of trouble, be knoweththepm
that putthep: trut inppm:wpen the floude ren-
nethouer and deftropeth the place:and whe the
darknes foloweth pl ppon bis cnemics.Wibat
do pe priagpn chen agapnit the 102d on this ma
nerti ‘Tulbe, when ye bathe once made an ende,
there pall comenomozetrouble.) Sfozlphe as
the thoznes that itpche togethcr,and as thcdzpe
ftrawe : fotpall the Dzonkardes be confumed to-
gether cuen when thep be full. Chere come out
of the fucbe as pasar ae and gene Vi-
gracpouscountellagapnitthe Lorde.
Gherfore thus fapth the Lozde: Let thembe
as well pepan : pee andasmanp asthep can
pet hall thep be been Downe, and pafle a wap.
And ag for the J wpll vere che, butnot vtterlp
deftrope the. And nowe wpll Jbzreakehisrodde
from tbp backe, and burte thp bondeginfundze
aut tbe Lozde pathgencna commaundemente
cocernpng the,that there Wallecomenontoze fede
of thp name. + Thecarued ¢caltenpmages wpl
J rote outeof the poule sfthp God. <p graue
pal J prepare fo: the, and p palt be contouded.
CThe.i.Chapter.
He detirpoeth the birtozpe ofthe Chaldres agapntte the
Sulmiuptes « 5
= Cholde, x bponp mountapns come
Gy WW) tbe fete of bpm. that bapngeth good
sm een tidpnaes:tpreacheth peace. D Jua
a e Jp) ba. kepe thp bolprapes, perfourme
eed thp proinples:Fo2 Weliall thal come
nomoze in tpe, bets utterly rooted oute.
‘@helcaterer Hallcome vp agapntt the and
lape fege tothe caitel. Loke thou wel tothe ftre-
tes maketbp lopnes trong arme thp felfe pth
alithp my gbt:fo2 the L020 fhallrettoze agapne
the qlozp of Jacob, lpke asthe qlozp of Firael,
Che deltropers Daue brokentiem Bowne, and
marred the vpne beaunches. Che hplde of bps
gpatites glpiteth, Dis men of warre areclothcd
inpurple. Ppscharettes are asfpze , when pe
maketh him foztwarde,anb bis ipere thaftes are


i


j F


2 fokedin benom. Che charetttesrolle vpon the


firetes, and Welfcrintbebpewapes. Chep are
toloke uponlpke creffettes of fp2e,¢ qolwpftilp
asthelpgbtnpng. TG benbedoth but warne bis
gyauntes,tbep fallin thep3 arap,¢ Daftelp thep
clpine bp the Walles: pec.thecngpne of the war
ate prepared alreadp. The watcr poztes albe
opened, and the ktpnges palace pall fall. Che
guene ber felfe halbeled awapcaptpue,and per
gentyliwemen Hall mourne asthe doucs,and


sob. riiit Grone with tep? battes.>sMinine ts lpke a pole
Soph. iia,


full of water, but chen (hall thep be fayne to fie.
éptande, tande, (Hall thepcrpe)and there hall
not oneturnebacke. Away w tbefpluer awape
wtb the golbe, fo2 there is no ende of treafure.


Shere thalbea nualetude of all mancr ofcolip


omamentes. Thus mul he be fpopled,empticd
and cleane fftrppped out:that thepa bartes mape
be melted atbape, thep2 knees tremble,all thep2
lopnes be weake g thep2 faces blacke ag a pot:
ii bereis nowe the dwellpng ofthe Lpons
and the paffure of the Lyons whelpess where p
iponand the liones went with the whelpes and
noman frapde thematoap: Wut thelpon {pop-
led pnough omy bis pong ones and Deuoured foz
bis lyones:he Fplled his Dennes with bps pape,
and bis dwellpng place With ý be had raupihed.
Webholde, J wpll pponthe , fapeth the Lode of
boftes, and tpl fet fp2e vpon thp ane that
thep pall moke witball, andthelwearde Hall
Dcuoure the ponge lions. 3 wpl make an ende of
thy {popling from out of the earth, and p vopce
oftbp ne (hal nomoze be pearde.
© CThe.itt.Chapter.
d Pt the fall of Aimur,
= Dto the bloudtburitp cite, which
\ Ais allfull of lpegand robberpe , and
MAVAN wll not leauc of from raupibpnge.
RATAN Sa Chere aman mape beare {courgpng
SAE rulbynge , the nopte of the wheles,
thecrpinge of the boztes, and the rollpnae of the
charettes. (bere the hozglemen get bp wpthna=
kedfwerdes, and glphrpng (peares:therclpetD
amultitude flapne,anda great beape of Dead bo
dpes:there ig no ende of dead cogles:pee,men fal
bpon thep2 bodpes. And thatto2 the qreate and
manpfolde wbhozdomre, of the fapze g bewtpfull
harlot whichis a maltres of wptchcrafte: pee,
felleth the people thozowe ber whozdome,and
nacpons tho2owe ber weptchcrafte.


=
Ta


ta
x Sehalde,¥ lealthes the (fapeth the Lo2b T uu


of boftes and topl pulthp clothes ouer thp bead
that J mape thewethp nakednes among F bea:
then,¢ thy ame among the kingdomes, § wpl
cait Duct bpon the,tomake the be abbozred,and
agalpng orke: Pee al thep that lobe bpontbe
Wal tarte backe and fape: Ainiueis deitroped.

dbo Wyllbaue pptie Dpon the: where (hall
J lcke one tocomfozte the: Art thou better then
theqreat citpe of + Blerandria: that lapeinthe
waters, and had the waters rounde aboutett :
which was flrouglp fenced and walled with the
fee‘ Ethiopia and Cappe were Per ftrength and
that erceadpng great aboue mealare. Aphzica


€


r. U


Zbac..b


s


}


r
x
J


Eit Fbi,


Ezec FFE


and Libpa were der belpers,pet was be Diuen |


awape, and brought into captiuptpe, ber ponge
chpldzen were finptten Downe at the bead of eue
tp ftrete.the lottes were caf fo2themof auncyp:


ent men tuber, andallber mygbtpe men were g
bound tncbepnes.€uenfothalt thou alfobed20 ~


ken and hyde tiie cife æ tebe Come belpc agapult
thpneenemp. Bll thp ftronge citpesibalbelpke
frgtrees with rppe fpages:whpch whena man
(paket, they thal fal nto the mouti of p eater.
Webold,thy people within pare but wemen
the poztes of tp lande Halbe opened wnto thine
enempes and ticfp2e (ball dDeuoure thp bartes.
Dawe Water nowe agapnife thou be beleged,
make bp thp Tronge holdes cooimtotheclape
femper the moter, maite rouge bzpckhe:+Pet
frecthallcontume the, the tiwcarde pal be p
; = o epe


p Shep tas.
Fa akit |
FOP sacd Eb.


a
a


è
m n
mea i aM o M


Sarda, thouartefromethe begpnnpnge, therfore Mall


of Abacie.


the:pee ds the lout doth, fo thall it eatethe vp.
St Mall fall beuplp bpon the as thelocufes:pee
tpabte beuplp Hallit fall pponthe, cuen asthe
rretboppers. Chyp marchauntes baue bene nont

zed worth the Marreg of eauen, but nowe Mall
thep [prede abzode as the locuftes, and fie thep2
wape: Shp Lozbes ave as the qrethoppers:and
thy captapnes asthe multptube of grethoppers
which when thep be colde,remapne inp beoges:
but whet the Sunne is vp, they leeawap , and
no man can tell Dobere epar become. bhp
thepheavdes are a lepe (D bynge of Aiur) thy
wWoztHies are lapde Downe, thp people is {catred
ab20de bpon the mountapnes, and no manqas
thereth them together aapne, hp wounde
cannot be bpd, thp plageis fo foze. All thep that
beare thps of the, pall clappe thep2 bandes ouer
the. foz what is be,to whome thou hat not al-
wape bencdopnge urte,


€ be ende of the propheepe of Rabti:


k .
` CTheBooke of the
usni Pophete Abacuc.
CThe fpzE Chapter.
CA complapnte agaput gradi,

"menea be @aopbet Abacucopd ie. D
Sa Lode, bow longe thal Xerpe
¢ thou wplt not bearer Powe
‘a longe Hall 3 complapne vnto
d the, fufferpnge wonge, thou
=) ELSA wopleenot pelpes Up lettet p

ASEAN wie fe werpneficand laboure?
tectelta + Syrannpe and violence are befoze me, power
ouergoeth ryghte:Foz the late ts togne in peces.
ge AND CVerecannot rvaght Lab pene tae forth.and
tobhprthe wngodlpe ts moze let bp then the rpgb-
tuous:thigis the caule,that wonge tudgement
astepti procedeth:* Bebolde amonge the Heathen,and
loke Well, wonder at tt, and be abated : foz F
wplldoathpugein pour tpme, Xbpcbe though
Be.rrbiti.t it be tolde pou, ve tpall not beleuc. x Stozlo,z
wpll rapie wp the Caldees, that bptice ¢ fioptte
people: whiche Hall qoas wpdeasthe lande ts,
totake poilefiyon of dtvellpnge places, thatbe
not tpcpz owne. X qrpmme and boperous peo:
ple igit, tbele pall (pein tadgement g panpthe.
Sopd.tii.n TOEP? Dozleg arefwpfter then tbe cattes of the
= gœ mMountapne,and bpte loer then * the wolues in
the cucnpnge. Thep? a perdi come bp greate
beapes from farre, thep Ape batkelp to beuoure
asthe cfle. They comeall to {pople, onte of
themcommethan eaftwpnde, tobpebe blowerh
_ and Gathereth thep2 capfaynes, lpke agp fande
Thep Bal mocke the Bpnges,andlaugh p pzpn-
cestofcogne. Thep tall not let bp any tronge
holde,fo2 thep Hhalllape ozbpnaunce agapntt tt,
ete.rivi.g at take it. Chen tall thep take a fretpe copage
ii Saran Onto thent:to cro forthandto do moze cupll, and


pra rria PEEN] |
FJa b.Fifa, È


a


. ebeno. fo aferpbe the powcr butoxthep2 God.
p oeae Wut thou O Lode mp Sodtmp holp one,


oler,


we wofdpe, D Lorde, thou balk ordépned then
Foza punphmente, and fet them torepzoue the
mpabtp. Chpnecpesarecleane,thoumapit not —
fecupll, thou cant not bebolve the thynge that D
(Siopcked. + Hiberfoze then doelk thou lobe W- Nere. rite
ponthe ongodlp, and boldek thy tonge then p est
wpcked Deuoureth the man thatis better then
bym felfer Chou maket men as the fpe ia the
fcc, andl phe asthe creppnge veattes, that baue
no gupde thep take bp all with their angie,thep
catche tt intheyz nette, and gather itin thepre
parne:wherofthep refopceandare glad. Ther-
foze offre thep onto thep2 nette,anddofacrifpce
bnto thep2 parne:bycaufe that thozowe tt thectc
Poztponis become fo fat,and thep2 meatloplen
teous. tdi berfoze,thep cat out thep2tiet agapne
and neuer ceafeto fape the people,
@ The.ti. Chapter.
E Of the bilpon of the prophet. Agaput pollpny,couctousl
mefle and phelatrpe.

Sa ban fode bpon mp teatche, and fet me

iis FS) opon mp bulwozke,toloke and fe 4

i Y what be woldefape vsto me,t what
eg Ajani iere y thulde geuc bpm that rez

amen proued me. Mut the Lozde anfwered
me,andlapbde : WH zpte the bifpon plapulp por
thy tables. that who focémeth bp, mape revett,
+foz the vilponts pet Farre of fo2 a tpme butat h Dant.,
laf tt pall come topaffe, and not faple. + And. wevie,r.v,
tbouybbe tarp, pet woapte p fozbpym forin perp
dede He topll come, and not be flacke. |

_ Bebold,the vurpahtcous thypnketh bpm iell
sn fanegarde,as ina tronge bolde: *but the tuft toms-t.b.
hallipue bp bis fapeth. Lpke asthe wpne dpi- Deneri.
ccaucth the dzronkarde , eucnfo tbe prouade thall 25
Faple,¢not endure. e opencth bis delpze wpe
Dp asthe bell, xand igas walacpableas beathe. ProFrr b
All Heathen gatbereth beto ppm, andheapeth
bnto ppm all people.

Wut Hall not all thele take by a pronérbe a-
gapntt ppm, and mocke bpm with a bpe wode,
andfapes Go wnto bpm thar heapeth vp otber
mennesqoodes. owe longe wpll belade pps
felfe wpth thpckeclapes D howe fodenlp wpll
thep tande bp. that Hall byte, and atwake,that
{yall teare the in pecess pee, thon thalte be they: |
paper * Sepuge thou hat fpopleamanp Pea. 66

Den: therfoze Mall the remnaunte of the people
fpople the: bycautc of mens bloude, and fo the
wonge done inthe lande inthe Citpe and unto
allthem that dwell therin.

* Cio vnto bpm, that couctonflp gatbereth erap, b.s ,
eupli gotten qoodes into his honfe, thathemap avei.i.c.
fet bysnetk on bye, to clcape fromthe potver of C
mptfostune. Chou hate oceupfen the hame of
thpne one houle, fo? thou pak layne to muche
people, and hate wplfullp offended: fo thatthe
oerp +ifoies of the wall fall crpe out of it, and L1 rire:
the tpmbze that lpeth betwprte the toyntes of
thebuploprge pallantwere. + tio vnte prt ese.critt.g
that buplbdeth the towne withbloude, emapu- Patil a
taptieth the cttpe toith wnrpabtcoutnetie. Shat H-S
not the Zo20c of hoies bepng this topafic,that
thclabourers of the people tall be biente wpth
a greatefpze, and that the thpnge where gr


è
m n
mea i aM o M


Sarda, thouartefromethe begpnnpnge, therfore Mall


of Abacie.


the:pee ds the lout doth, fo thall it eatethe vp.
St Mall fall beuplp bpon the as thelocufes:pee
tpabte beuplp Hallit fall pponthe, cuen asthe
rretboppers. Chyp marchauntes baue bene nont

zed worth the Marreg of eauen, but nowe Mall
thep [prede abzode as the locuftes, and fie thep2
wape: Shp Lozbes ave as the qrethoppers:and
thy captapnes asthe multptube of grethoppers
which when thep be colde,remapne inp beoges:
but whet the Sunne is vp, they leeawap , and
no man can tell Dobere epar become. bhp
thepheavdes are a lepe (D bynge of Aiur) thy
wWoztHies are lapde Downe, thp people is {catred
ab20de bpon the mountapnes, and no manqas
thereth them together aapne, hp wounde
cannot be bpd, thp plageis fo foze. All thep that
beare thps of the, pall clappe thep2 bandes ouer
the. foz what is be,to whome thou hat not al-
wape bencdopnge urte,


€ be ende of the propheepe of Rabti:


k .
` CTheBooke of the
usni Pophete Abacuc.
CThe fpzE Chapter.
CA complapnte agaput gradi,

"menea be @aopbet Abacucopd ie. D
Sa Lode, bow longe thal Xerpe
¢ thou wplt not bearer Powe
‘a longe Hall 3 complapne vnto
d the, fufferpnge wonge, thou
=) ELSA wopleenot pelpes Up lettet p

ASEAN wie fe werpneficand laboure?
tectelta + Syrannpe and violence are befoze me, power
ouergoeth ryghte:Foz the late ts togne in peces.
ge AND CVerecannot rvaght Lab pene tae forth.and
tobhprthe wngodlpe ts moze let bp then the rpgb-
tuous:thigis the caule,that wonge tudgement
astepti procedeth:* Bebolde amonge the Heathen,and
loke Well, wonder at tt, and be abated : foz F
wplldoathpugein pour tpme, Xbpcbe though
Be.rrbiti.t it be tolde pou, ve tpall not beleuc. x Stozlo,z
wpll rapie wp the Caldees, that bptice ¢ fioptte
people: whiche Hall qoas wpdeasthe lande ts,
totake poilefiyon of dtvellpnge places, thatbe
not tpcpz owne. X qrpmme and boperous peo:
ple igit, tbele pall (pein tadgement g panpthe.
Sopd.tii.n TOEP? Dozleg arefwpfter then tbe cattes of the
= gœ mMountapne,and bpte loer then * the wolues in
the cucnpnge. Thep? a perdi come bp greate
beapes from farre, thep Ape batkelp to beuoure
asthe cfle. They comeall to {pople, onte of
themcommethan eaftwpnde, tobpebe blowerh
_ and Gathereth thep2 capfaynes, lpke agp fande
Thep Bal mocke the Bpnges,andlaugh p pzpn-
cestofcogne. Thep tall not let bp any tronge
holde,fo2 thep Hhalllape ozbpnaunce agapntt tt,
ete.rivi.g at take it. Chen tall thep take a fretpe copage
ii Saran Onto thent:to cro forthandto do moze cupll, and


pra rria PEEN] |
FJa b.Fifa, È


a


. ebeno. fo aferpbe the powcr butoxthep2 God.
p oeae Wut thou O Lode mp Sodtmp holp one,


oler,


we wofdpe, D Lorde, thou balk ordépned then
Foza punphmente, and fet them torepzoue the
mpabtp. Chpnecpesarecleane,thoumapit not —
fecupll, thou cant not bebolve the thynge that D
(Siopcked. + Hiberfoze then doelk thou lobe W- Nere. rite
ponthe ongodlp, and boldek thy tonge then p est
wpcked Deuoureth the man thatis better then
bym felfer Chou maket men as the fpe ia the
fcc, andl phe asthe creppnge veattes, that baue
no gupde thep take bp all with their angie,thep
catche tt intheyz nette, and gather itin thepre
parne:wherofthep refopceandare glad. Ther-
foze offre thep onto thep2 nette,anddofacrifpce
bnto thep2 parne:bycaufe that thozowe tt thectc
Poztponis become fo fat,and thep2 meatloplen
teous. tdi berfoze,thep cat out thep2tiet agapne
and neuer ceafeto fape the people,
@ The.ti. Chapter.
E Of the bilpon of the prophet. Agaput pollpny,couctousl
mefle and phelatrpe.

Sa ban fode bpon mp teatche, and fet me

iis FS) opon mp bulwozke,toloke and fe 4

i Y what be woldefape vsto me,t what
eg Ajani iere y thulde geuc bpm that rez

amen proued me. Mut the Lozde anfwered
me,andlapbde : WH zpte the bifpon plapulp por
thy tables. that who focémeth bp, mape revett,
+foz the vilponts pet Farre of fo2 a tpme butat h Dant.,
laf tt pall come topaffe, and not faple. + And. wevie,r.v,
tbouybbe tarp, pet woapte p fozbpym forin perp
dede He topll come, and not be flacke. |

_ Bebold,the vurpahtcous thypnketh bpm iell
sn fanegarde,as ina tronge bolde: *but the tuft toms-t.b.
hallipue bp bis fapeth. Lpke asthe wpne dpi- Deneri.
ccaucth the dzronkarde , eucnfo tbe prouade thall 25
Faple,¢not endure. e opencth bis delpze wpe
Dp asthe bell, xand igas walacpableas beathe. ProFrr b
All Heathen gatbereth beto ppm, andheapeth
bnto ppm all people.

Wut Hall not all thele take by a pronérbe a-
gapntt ppm, and mocke bpm with a bpe wode,
andfapes Go wnto bpm thar heapeth vp otber
mennesqoodes. owe longe wpll belade pps
felfe wpth thpckeclapes D howe fodenlp wpll
thep tande bp. that Hall byte, and atwake,that
{yall teare the in pecess pee, thon thalte be they: |
paper * Sepuge thou hat fpopleamanp Pea. 66

Den: therfoze Mall the remnaunte of the people
fpople the: bycautc of mens bloude, and fo the
wonge done inthe lande inthe Citpe and unto
allthem that dwell therin.

* Cio vnto bpm, that couctonflp gatbereth erap, b.s ,
eupli gotten qoodes into his honfe, thathemap avei.i.c.
fet bysnetk on bye, to clcape fromthe potver of C
mptfostune. Chou hate oceupfen the hame of
thpne one houle, fo? thou pak layne to muche
people, and hate wplfullp offended: fo thatthe
oerp +ifoies of the wall fall crpe out of it, and L1 rire:
the tpmbze that lpeth betwprte the toyntes of
thebuploprge pallantwere. + tio vnte prt ese.critt.g
that buplbdeth the towne withbloude, emapu- Patil a
taptieth the cttpe toith wnrpabtcoutnetie. Shat H-S
not the Zo20c of hoies bepng this topafic,that
thclabourers of the people tall be biente wpth
a greatefpze, and that the thpnge where gr


è
m n
mea i aM o M


Sarda, thouartefromethe begpnnpnge, therfore Mall


of Abacie.


the:pee ds the lout doth, fo thall it eatethe vp.
St Mall fall beuplp bpon the as thelocufes:pee
tpabte beuplp Hallit fall pponthe, cuen asthe
rretboppers. Chyp marchauntes baue bene nont

zed worth the Marreg of eauen, but nowe Mall
thep [prede abzode as the locuftes, and fie thep2
wape: Shp Lozbes ave as the qrethoppers:and
thy captapnes asthe multptube of grethoppers
which when thep be colde,remapne inp beoges:
but whet the Sunne is vp, they leeawap , and
no man can tell Dobere epar become. bhp
thepheavdes are a lepe (D bynge of Aiur) thy
wWoztHies are lapde Downe, thp people is {catred
ab20de bpon the mountapnes, and no manqas
thereth them together aapne, hp wounde
cannot be bpd, thp plageis fo foze. All thep that
beare thps of the, pall clappe thep2 bandes ouer
the. foz what is be,to whome thou hat not al-
wape bencdopnge urte,


€ be ende of the propheepe of Rabti:


k .
` CTheBooke of the
usni Pophete Abacuc.
CThe fpzE Chapter.
CA complapnte agaput gradi,

"menea be @aopbet Abacucopd ie. D
Sa Lode, bow longe thal Xerpe
¢ thou wplt not bearer Powe
‘a longe Hall 3 complapne vnto
d the, fufferpnge wonge, thou
=) ELSA wopleenot pelpes Up lettet p

ASEAN wie fe werpneficand laboure?
tectelta + Syrannpe and violence are befoze me, power
ouergoeth ryghte:Foz the late ts togne in peces.
ge AND CVerecannot rvaght Lab pene tae forth.and
tobhprthe wngodlpe ts moze let bp then the rpgb-
tuous:thigis the caule,that wonge tudgement
astepti procedeth:* Bebolde amonge the Heathen,and
loke Well, wonder at tt, and be abated : foz F
wplldoathpugein pour tpme, Xbpcbe though
Be.rrbiti.t it be tolde pou, ve tpall not beleuc. x Stozlo,z
wpll rapie wp the Caldees, that bptice ¢ fioptte
people: whiche Hall qoas wpdeasthe lande ts,
totake poilefiyon of dtvellpnge places, thatbe
not tpcpz owne. X qrpmme and boperous peo:
ple igit, tbele pall (pein tadgement g panpthe.
Sopd.tii.n TOEP? Dozleg arefwpfter then tbe cattes of the
= gœ mMountapne,and bpte loer then * the wolues in
the cucnpnge. Thep? a perdi come bp greate
beapes from farre, thep Ape batkelp to beuoure
asthe cfle. They comeall to {pople, onte of
themcommethan eaftwpnde, tobpebe blowerh
_ and Gathereth thep2 capfaynes, lpke agp fande
Thep Bal mocke the Bpnges,andlaugh p pzpn-
cestofcogne. Thep tall not let bp any tronge
holde,fo2 thep Hhalllape ozbpnaunce agapntt tt,
ete.rivi.g at take it. Chen tall thep take a fretpe copage
ii Saran Onto thent:to cro forthandto do moze cupll, and


pra rria PEEN] |
FJa b.Fifa, È


a


. ebeno. fo aferpbe the powcr butoxthep2 God.
p oeae Wut thou O Lode mp Sodtmp holp one,


oler,


we wofdpe, D Lorde, thou balk ordépned then
Foza punphmente, and fet them torepzoue the
mpabtp. Chpnecpesarecleane,thoumapit not —
fecupll, thou cant not bebolve the thynge that D
(Siopcked. + Hiberfoze then doelk thou lobe W- Nere. rite
ponthe ongodlp, and boldek thy tonge then p est
wpcked Deuoureth the man thatis better then
bym felfer Chou maket men as the fpe ia the
fcc, andl phe asthe creppnge veattes, that baue
no gupde thep take bp all with their angie,thep
catche tt intheyz nette, and gather itin thepre
parne:wherofthep refopceandare glad. Ther-
foze offre thep onto thep2 nette,anddofacrifpce
bnto thep2 parne:bycaufe that thozowe tt thectc
Poztponis become fo fat,and thep2 meatloplen
teous. tdi berfoze,thep cat out thep2tiet agapne
and neuer ceafeto fape the people,
@ The.ti. Chapter.
E Of the bilpon of the prophet. Agaput pollpny,couctousl
mefle and phelatrpe.

Sa ban fode bpon mp teatche, and fet me

iis FS) opon mp bulwozke,toloke and fe 4

i Y what be woldefape vsto me,t what
eg Ajani iere y thulde geuc bpm that rez

amen proued me. Mut the Lozde anfwered
me,andlapbde : WH zpte the bifpon plapulp por
thy tables. that who focémeth bp, mape revett,
+foz the vilponts pet Farre of fo2 a tpme butat h Dant.,
laf tt pall come topaffe, and not faple. + And. wevie,r.v,
tbouybbe tarp, pet woapte p fozbpym forin perp
dede He topll come, and not be flacke. |

_ Bebold,the vurpahtcous thypnketh bpm iell
sn fanegarde,as ina tronge bolde: *but the tuft toms-t.b.
hallipue bp bis fapeth. Lpke asthe wpne dpi- Deneri.
ccaucth the dzronkarde , eucnfo tbe prouade thall 25
Faple,¢not endure. e opencth bis delpze wpe
Dp asthe bell, xand igas walacpableas beathe. ProFrr b
All Heathen gatbereth beto ppm, andheapeth
bnto ppm all people.

Wut Hall not all thele take by a pronérbe a-
gapntt ppm, and mocke bpm with a bpe wode,
andfapes Go wnto bpm thar heapeth vp otber
mennesqoodes. owe longe wpll belade pps
felfe wpth thpckeclapes D howe fodenlp wpll
thep tande bp. that Hall byte, and atwake,that
{yall teare the in pecess pee, thon thalte be they: |
paper * Sepuge thou hat fpopleamanp Pea. 66

Den: therfoze Mall the remnaunte of the people
fpople the: bycautc of mens bloude, and fo the
wonge done inthe lande inthe Citpe and unto
allthem that dwell therin.

* Cio vnto bpm, that couctonflp gatbereth erap, b.s ,
eupli gotten qoodes into his honfe, thathemap avei.i.c.
fet bysnetk on bye, to clcape fromthe potver of C
mptfostune. Chou hate oceupfen the hame of
thpne one houle, fo? thou pak layne to muche
people, and hate wplfullp offended: fo thatthe
oerp +ifoies of the wall fall crpe out of it, and L1 rire:
the tpmbze that lpeth betwprte the toyntes of
thebuploprge pallantwere. + tio vnte prt ese.critt.g
that buplbdeth the towne withbloude, emapu- Patil a
taptieth the cttpe toith wnrpabtcoutnetie. Shat H-S
not the Zo20c of hoies bepng this topafic,that
thclabourers of the people tall be biente wpth
a greatefpze, and that the thpnge where gr


The Brophecpe.


the people hatte werped thepm felues, all be
ero.it.c. lofte? + oz thecarthe Halbe full of knowledge
em ke of the Lo2des ponoure ,lpke asthe waterstbat
couer thetee.


lobe ntobpmtbatgenethbisnepabbour D


dapnke, puttpng in a makpng bpm dlo-
Seneipd. ken * that pemape
with wame Walt thou be defpled, in Eede of po=
noure. Depnke thon alfo,tpll thou flombze witb
all:foz tbe cuppe of the Lozdes rpgbt bande thal
| compafie the aboute , and Mame: ull {pupnge in
geralt frene of thp wortbpppe. x Sor the wonge that
“ shou balt doncin Libanus thal ouerwpelme the
and the toplde beates pall make the afrapde :
becaule of menneg blonde , and Foz the wzonge
doneintbelande,in the citpe,and wnto allfuche
as dwelltherit. |
tbat belpe then Hebe proage bo, upor
the wozkeman bath f pa 2 the vapne
catymage wberin becaule thecraftetman put:
teth bis truft:tberfoze maketh pe bomme pools:
Wio wnto bpm fapeth toa pece of wood: arple
and toa dumme ftone, tande vp: Wor wobat im-
firuccponmapefucheonegeues Webolde, tts
see lapde ouer with golde and fpluer,and theretsno
Pralea  peath init. x Sut the Lode in bis bolp temple
is be, whom all the toozlde Mulde feare.
= CThe.iti.chapter.
<r “CA pzaper of the prophet Abacuk foz the ignozaunt.
PSS Lode, when J bearde peake of tbe,
F<) VJ wasafrapde. @bhe worke ý thou
i Weng Abaltc taken in bande, Malt thou per=
S67 fourne inbis tyme, Lozde:¢ when
top tyme commeth,thou tpalt declareit. Intbp
Dery wrathe thou thpnkel vponmercpe, God
commeth from Theman,and the bolp one from
themounte of Pbaran:Selap. |
pis qlozp couereth the beauens,and pearth
48 full ofbispzaple. Hig Hpne is asthelunne,¢
beames of lpabt qo oute of bys handes,there ts
pis powerbpd. Deltruccpon orth before bpm,
and ro toad ea coethfrombpstete. .
amos. ir.a x pe Landeth andimealureth the carthe. Helo-
keth andthe people confume awape, the moun-
tapnes of the toozlde fall Downe to ouldze, and
the bpllesarefapnetobowe them lueg, fos big
B gopngesare euerlaltpnge and fure.


D


7 fate that tbe paupipong of the @oziang, D


and the tentes of plande of Hadian were Vered
Foz werpnefle. alk thounot angrp,D Lode
inthe waters/was not thp tozath in the Roudes
and thp dilpleature tu the fee ¢ pes, when thou
fattelt bpon thp bole, and when thp charettes


pad the victozy. Chou thewdett thp boweopen- Mpp


__ Ip, Ipbeas thou bandei peompfed with an othe
seuvloic x puto the trpbes. Selah.
: “hou Dypddelt Deupde the waters ofthe erth.
When the mountapnes lawe the, thep were a=
frapode,the waterffreame went atoape,the depe
made a nople at thelpftpnge Dp of thyne Dande.
@ pe * funne and moone remapned ftpll inthep2
habitacion. bpne arotoes went out gipitrpng
and tbpCpeares asthe pne of the lpgbtenpng.
sofa, ria. + Choutrodelt+doton the lande in thpne angere,
and Dpodefk thaclthe the Beathen in thp ditplea=


ECARTS


cbpspzíupties. Therfore


Ture. Thou camel forth to belpe thy people, ta
clpetbpneannopnted. Choulmotell Downe p
ed of the boule of the Dugodly,and difcoucred ii
ps foundacpons, euen nto thenecke of ppm .


clad.

Thon dpd trpke thozotve with bis lceptre
the beades of bis plapne people, whiche comeas
a ftozmpe Wpndetolcatter me abzoade , andare
glad when thep mape cate bp the pooze fecretip.
Chowrimakell a wape fo: thpne hozles tn the fee
euen in thempddet of the great waters. Tiber
FZ beare thig, mp bodp is vexed, mp lpppes trem
ble at the voice therof,mp bonescozrupte, Jam
afrapbe vobcre J tande. D that I mpabe rekin
the dape of trouble, that J mpgbt goo vp tnta
our people ry so fee arereadp prepared.

Sor the fpgtrees thallnot be qrene:andtbe
bynes ail beareno frute. Chelabonre of the
olpue halbe but lot, andthe lande Hall bzpnge
nocozne : the Hepe thalbe taken out of the folde,
and there fhalbenocattell inthe talles, WÆutag
foz me, J wpll be glad in the Lode and Wwpll re~
topce in God mp taupour. * Che Lode God ig pra.rbiiib
mp ftrength, be pall make mp Eceteas the fecte
of partes: and be which geueth the victozp Mall
bepngeme to mp bpeplaces,tpngpnge vpon mp
jlalmes. x
CTheende of the prophecpe of Abacuc.


Thebooke of the
Propbhete Sopponp.
€ The fea Chapter.


C Thrcatenpnges agapnk Juda and Ferula lem
bpcaule of (hep 2 pbolatrpe


CE FEES wiypche came vnto Sopbonp :
e ei the Conte os Eat oar “A Y
ove) Aa Gedolia:thelonne of Amariah

A reg the fon of pesehiab,tnthetpme Mt.rress


: kpnge of Juda. Fwpllgather a


pec andeluche ag opon they2 boule toppes We}. eee
COT eng: ITED. D.


netberfeke afterthe Lord, nogregarde bpm.
¥18¢ fEpllat the peefence of p Lozd a fig Fete


ftraunge clotbpage. gntbe fame vape alfo wpl
J opict all thole that treabe oner the thzetp "x
yi


The Brophecpe.


the people hatte werped thepm felues, all be
ero.it.c. lofte? + oz thecarthe Halbe full of knowledge
em ke of the Lo2des ponoure ,lpke asthe waterstbat
couer thetee.


lobe ntobpmtbatgenethbisnepabbour D


dapnke, puttpng in a makpng bpm dlo-
Seneipd. ken * that pemape
with wame Walt thou be defpled, in Eede of po=
noure. Depnke thon alfo,tpll thou flombze witb
all:foz tbe cuppe of the Lozdes rpgbt bande thal
| compafie the aboute , and Mame: ull {pupnge in
geralt frene of thp wortbpppe. x Sor the wonge that
“ shou balt doncin Libanus thal ouerwpelme the
and the toplde beates pall make the afrapde :
becaule of menneg blonde , and Foz the wzonge
doneintbelande,in the citpe,and wnto allfuche
as dwelltherit. |
tbat belpe then Hebe proage bo, upor
the wozkeman bath f pa 2 the vapne
catymage wberin becaule thecraftetman put:
teth bis truft:tberfoze maketh pe bomme pools:
Wio wnto bpm fapeth toa pece of wood: arple
and toa dumme ftone, tande vp: Wor wobat im-
firuccponmapefucheonegeues Webolde, tts
see lapde ouer with golde and fpluer,and theretsno
Pralea  peath init. x Sut the Lode in bis bolp temple
is be, whom all the toozlde Mulde feare.
= CThe.iti.chapter.
<r “CA pzaper of the prophet Abacuk foz the ignozaunt.
PSS Lode, when J bearde peake of tbe,
F<) VJ wasafrapde. @bhe worke ý thou
i Weng Abaltc taken in bande, Malt thou per=
S67 fourne inbis tyme, Lozde:¢ when
top tyme commeth,thou tpalt declareit. Intbp
Dery wrathe thou thpnkel vponmercpe, God
commeth from Theman,and the bolp one from
themounte of Pbaran:Selap. |
pis qlozp couereth the beauens,and pearth
48 full ofbispzaple. Hig Hpne is asthelunne,¢
beames of lpabt qo oute of bys handes,there ts
pis powerbpd. Deltruccpon orth before bpm,
and ro toad ea coethfrombpstete. .
amos. ir.a x pe Landeth andimealureth the carthe. Helo-
keth andthe people confume awape, the moun-
tapnes of the toozlde fall Downe to ouldze, and
the bpllesarefapnetobowe them lueg, fos big
B gopngesare euerlaltpnge and fure.


D


7 fate that tbe paupipong of the @oziang, D


and the tentes of plande of Hadian were Vered
Foz werpnefle. alk thounot angrp,D Lode
inthe waters/was not thp tozath in the Roudes
and thp dilpleature tu the fee ¢ pes, when thou
fattelt bpon thp bole, and when thp charettes


pad the victozy. Chou thewdett thp boweopen- Mpp


__ Ip, Ipbeas thou bandei peompfed with an othe
seuvloic x puto the trpbes. Selah.
: “hou Dypddelt Deupde the waters ofthe erth.
When the mountapnes lawe the, thep were a=
frapode,the waterffreame went atoape,the depe
made a nople at thelpftpnge Dp of thyne Dande.
@ pe * funne and moone remapned ftpll inthep2
habitacion. bpne arotoes went out gipitrpng
and tbpCpeares asthe pne of the lpgbtenpng.
sofa, ria. + Choutrodelt+doton the lande in thpne angere,
and Dpodefk thaclthe the Beathen in thp ditplea=


ECARTS


cbpspzíupties. Therfore


Ture. Thou camel forth to belpe thy people, ta
clpetbpneannopnted. Choulmotell Downe p
ed of the boule of the Dugodly,and difcoucred ii
ps foundacpons, euen nto thenecke of ppm .


clad.

Thon dpd trpke thozotve with bis lceptre
the beades of bis plapne people, whiche comeas
a ftozmpe Wpndetolcatter me abzoade , andare
glad when thep mape cate bp the pooze fecretip.
Chowrimakell a wape fo: thpne hozles tn the fee
euen in thempddet of the great waters. Tiber
FZ beare thig, mp bodp is vexed, mp lpppes trem
ble at the voice therof,mp bonescozrupte, Jam
afrapbe vobcre J tande. D that I mpabe rekin
the dape of trouble, that J mpgbt goo vp tnta
our people ry so fee arereadp prepared.

Sor the fpgtrees thallnot be qrene:andtbe
bynes ail beareno frute. Chelabonre of the
olpue halbe but lot, andthe lande Hall bzpnge
nocozne : the Hepe thalbe taken out of the folde,
and there fhalbenocattell inthe talles, WÆutag
foz me, J wpll be glad in the Lode and Wwpll re~
topce in God mp taupour. * Che Lode God ig pra.rbiiib
mp ftrength, be pall make mp Eceteas the fecte
of partes: and be which geueth the victozp Mall
bepngeme to mp bpeplaces,tpngpnge vpon mp
jlalmes. x
CTheende of the prophecpe of Abacuc.


Thebooke of the
Propbhete Sopponp.
€ The fea Chapter.


C Thrcatenpnges agapnk Juda and Ferula lem
bpcaule of (hep 2 pbolatrpe


CE FEES wiypche came vnto Sopbonp :
e ei the Conte os Eat oar “A Y
ove) Aa Gedolia:thelonne of Amariah

A reg the fon of pesehiab,tnthetpme Mt.rress


: kpnge of Juda. Fwpllgather a


pec andeluche ag opon they2 boule toppes We}. eee
COT eng: ITED. D.


netberfeke afterthe Lord, nogregarde bpm.
¥18¢ fEpllat the peefence of p Lozd a fig Fete


ftraunge clotbpage. gntbe fame vape alfo wpl
J opict all thole that treabe oner the thzetp "x
yi


The Brophecpe.


the people hatte werped thepm felues, all be
ero.it.c. lofte? + oz thecarthe Halbe full of knowledge
em ke of the Lo2des ponoure ,lpke asthe waterstbat
couer thetee.


lobe ntobpmtbatgenethbisnepabbour D


dapnke, puttpng in a makpng bpm dlo-
Seneipd. ken * that pemape
with wame Walt thou be defpled, in Eede of po=
noure. Depnke thon alfo,tpll thou flombze witb
all:foz tbe cuppe of the Lozdes rpgbt bande thal
| compafie the aboute , and Mame: ull {pupnge in
geralt frene of thp wortbpppe. x Sor the wonge that
“ shou balt doncin Libanus thal ouerwpelme the
and the toplde beates pall make the afrapde :
becaule of menneg blonde , and Foz the wzonge
doneintbelande,in the citpe,and wnto allfuche
as dwelltherit. |
tbat belpe then Hebe proage bo, upor
the wozkeman bath f pa 2 the vapne
catymage wberin becaule thecraftetman put:
teth bis truft:tberfoze maketh pe bomme pools:
Wio wnto bpm fapeth toa pece of wood: arple
and toa dumme ftone, tande vp: Wor wobat im-
firuccponmapefucheonegeues Webolde, tts
see lapde ouer with golde and fpluer,and theretsno
Pralea  peath init. x Sut the Lode in bis bolp temple
is be, whom all the toozlde Mulde feare.
= CThe.iti.chapter.
<r “CA pzaper of the prophet Abacuk foz the ignozaunt.
PSS Lode, when J bearde peake of tbe,
F<) VJ wasafrapde. @bhe worke ý thou
i Weng Abaltc taken in bande, Malt thou per=
S67 fourne inbis tyme, Lozde:¢ when
top tyme commeth,thou tpalt declareit. Intbp
Dery wrathe thou thpnkel vponmercpe, God
commeth from Theman,and the bolp one from
themounte of Pbaran:Selap. |
pis qlozp couereth the beauens,and pearth
48 full ofbispzaple. Hig Hpne is asthelunne,¢
beames of lpabt qo oute of bys handes,there ts
pis powerbpd. Deltruccpon orth before bpm,
and ro toad ea coethfrombpstete. .
amos. ir.a x pe Landeth andimealureth the carthe. Helo-
keth andthe people confume awape, the moun-
tapnes of the toozlde fall Downe to ouldze, and
the bpllesarefapnetobowe them lueg, fos big
B gopngesare euerlaltpnge and fure.


D


7 fate that tbe paupipong of the @oziang, D


and the tentes of plande of Hadian were Vered
Foz werpnefle. alk thounot angrp,D Lode
inthe waters/was not thp tozath in the Roudes
and thp dilpleature tu the fee ¢ pes, when thou
fattelt bpon thp bole, and when thp charettes


pad the victozy. Chou thewdett thp boweopen- Mpp


__ Ip, Ipbeas thou bandei peompfed with an othe
seuvloic x puto the trpbes. Selah.
: “hou Dypddelt Deupde the waters ofthe erth.
When the mountapnes lawe the, thep were a=
frapode,the waterffreame went atoape,the depe
made a nople at thelpftpnge Dp of thyne Dande.
@ pe * funne and moone remapned ftpll inthep2
habitacion. bpne arotoes went out gipitrpng
and tbpCpeares asthe pne of the lpgbtenpng.
sofa, ria. + Choutrodelt+doton the lande in thpne angere,
and Dpodefk thaclthe the Beathen in thp ditplea=


ECARTS


cbpspzíupties. Therfore


Ture. Thou camel forth to belpe thy people, ta
clpetbpneannopnted. Choulmotell Downe p
ed of the boule of the Dugodly,and difcoucred ii
ps foundacpons, euen nto thenecke of ppm .


clad.

Thon dpd trpke thozotve with bis lceptre
the beades of bis plapne people, whiche comeas
a ftozmpe Wpndetolcatter me abzoade , andare
glad when thep mape cate bp the pooze fecretip.
Chowrimakell a wape fo: thpne hozles tn the fee
euen in thempddet of the great waters. Tiber
FZ beare thig, mp bodp is vexed, mp lpppes trem
ble at the voice therof,mp bonescozrupte, Jam
afrapbe vobcre J tande. D that I mpabe rekin
the dape of trouble, that J mpgbt goo vp tnta
our people ry so fee arereadp prepared.

Sor the fpgtrees thallnot be qrene:andtbe
bynes ail beareno frute. Chelabonre of the
olpue halbe but lot, andthe lande Hall bzpnge
nocozne : the Hepe thalbe taken out of the folde,
and there fhalbenocattell inthe talles, WÆutag
foz me, J wpll be glad in the Lode and Wwpll re~
topce in God mp taupour. * Che Lode God ig pra.rbiiib
mp ftrength, be pall make mp Eceteas the fecte
of partes: and be which geueth the victozp Mall
bepngeme to mp bpeplaces,tpngpnge vpon mp
jlalmes. x
CTheende of the prophecpe of Abacuc.


Thebooke of the
Propbhete Sopponp.
€ The fea Chapter.


C Thrcatenpnges agapnk Juda and Ferula lem
bpcaule of (hep 2 pbolatrpe


CE FEES wiypche came vnto Sopbonp :
e ei the Conte os Eat oar “A Y
ove) Aa Gedolia:thelonne of Amariah

A reg the fon of pesehiab,tnthetpme Mt.rress


: kpnge of Juda. Fwpllgather a


pec andeluche ag opon they2 boule toppes We}. eee
COT eng: ITED. D.


netberfeke afterthe Lord, nogregarde bpm.
¥18¢ fEpllat the peefence of p Lozd a fig Fete


ftraunge clotbpage. gntbe fame vape alfo wpl
J opict all thole that treabe oner the thzetp "x
yi


| fo proudly, tobiche Fpll thep2 Lozdes boule with

| robberp aud falthede. Jt the fame tpme (faye

. “the Lorde there pall be berdea great crpe from

fierd.Uie the x fpibe porte, ¢€anbowlpnae from the other
porte, and a great murther from the bplles.

ofvle pe that dtvell in the mpll,foz all the mar

| “ebatne people are gone, and all thep that were

laden with fpluer are roted out.

| At the fame tpme wpll F feke thorotve Je-

| rulalem wtb lanternes, and vplpte them that

contpnue in theps Dregges , and (ape in thep2

artemis bertes:* Tup, the Lozde wll do nepther good
set tare NOL eupll. Thep? goodes Mall be fpopled, and

tamos.d.c thep2 bouftes lapde wafe: + thep Hall buploe
boules, and not Divell in them, thep Hall plante
ypnparbes, but not Dapnke the wopne therof. —

D Fot the great * dape of the Lorde igat pande, if
gorta. ghade bp and commethonapace: Horpble is

the tpopnges oF the Lodes dape, then Hall the

- gpauntecrpe ont : foz thatdapis adap of wath,

a dape of trouble and beupneffle, a dape of btter

Deltruccpon and mplerp.a Darke and qlompuge

_. Bape, acloudp q {tozmp dape, a dape of the nople

of trompettes ¢ fbatoines, agapull the tronge
cpties and bpe tow:es. J wpl bapnae the people
into fuche veracpon, that thep Hall qo aboute
lpke blpnde men, bycaufe thep paue enned a-
gapnit the Lozde. Thep: blonde Mall be thedde
asthe oulk,and thep2 bodpesas mpre. * Aep-
ther thep2 {pluer woz tbep2 golde Mall be able to

dDelpucr them in that wzotbtull dape of f Lo2de,
Hoph.tt.b but the * toholelande Hall be confumed thozom

the fpze of bis geloufpe : fo? be Wall foone make

co tpbbdaunce of all them that dwell in the

ande.


Ere. bila,


ei


on
Po


rfa.rb.rbic AND turne amope theppcaptiuite.* J haue perde .


derea e Pe Uelppee OES


pF Sophony. -


€ The.if. chapter. i
Gd. Y


SEolicrt.


chpldzen of Ammon, boto thep have hamefullp t
intreated my people,and magnified them feluca
within the borders of thepzlande. Therfore, as
truely as J lpue (fapth the Lorde of boottes the
God oF Fracl) oab hall be as Sodome, and -
Ammonas Gomozra: even dope thozne hedges,
falt ppttes, and a perpetuall wploernefle: Che
refpoue of mp folke Hall pople them, the rem-
naunte of mp people tall baue them in poffel-
fion. ¥ Chis hal pappen onto them foz thep? sede
pride, bycaufe thep bauc delt fofhamefullp with

the 1.020 of boottes people,and magnifped them

felues aboue them. The Lorde hall be qrpmme

bpon then, + and Delfrope all the qoddes th tHe <tap.(t.¢
lande. And al the Fleg of the Heathen (pal wo2-

pp bym,cuerp man in bis place.

Pe mozians alfo Dall perp toith mp Cwerd: D
Dee, be Mall Eretche out bis bande ouer p nozth, |
and Ddeffrope Alur. = As fo Piya all Toorts
make it dcfolate, Dye and wate. The flockes
and all the beates of the people Hall Ipe in the
mpbdell of if: pellicanes and ozkes (hall abpde
inthe vpper potes of it foules (hall fpngeinthe
fopndolves,and rauens pall (pe vpon p balkes,
fo: the bozders of Cedze Mall be rpuen downe.

‘This ts the proude and carelefile cytic,thatfapo —

in bec berte.* J am,and there is cls none. <D how “iif te. cir.e
is the made fo walte, that the beaftes Ipe ther- ="
in Who fo goeth;by, mocketh her,and popnteth

at ber with bis fpnger.


~ CThe.tti. chapter.


E Agarri the gouerners of Fcrulatem,of the callpnge of at

the Gentpls.a comforte to therefpoue et Hfrael.
READ to that abbompnable, fpltbp, and,
À \ (Ji ccucll cptie:wbhiche wpll not beare,nog
MA Wave, be refourmed. ipertruft ig not in the


244 Lod neptber wyl the polde ber tober


errulers within berare as rozpng * lps a
ong : her iudaeg are as + Wolues in theenenynae Pim, £
whiche leaue nothpnge bebpnode them tpll the:
mole. Her prophetes are lpgbt perfones and
vnfàptbfnil men, ber preaftes vubalotoe the fan
ctuarp,and do wonge bnder the pretence ofthe
late. ut thew Lorde that doth no vurpabt,.
was amonge them, everp mompnge Hewpuge
them bis latweclearlp,andceaficd not. Eut the
pngodlp wpll not learne to be athamed. 'Cher=
foe wpll F roote out this ee deftrope
thep2 totbies: pee, and make thep2 fireaies fo
popde,thatno man Mall gotherin. Thep? cp-
tpes thal be beoken dotwne,fo that no bodp pall
be lefte, noz well there anp moze.

J fapd vito them: D feare me, andbecon- yg
tent to be refonrvined. That thep2 dwellpnae
fbulde not be deftroped, and that there Hulde
bappen bute them none of thefe thpnges,wher=
witb J tall vilite them. Dut neuertheles,chep
tande bp carlp,to foloive the fplthpnes of their
owne pmaginacions. Therkoze,pe Hall wapte
pron me (fapthtbe Lo2zde) ont yl the tyme that
3 Lande vp:fo2 Jam determined. to gather the
people, and to binge the &pnagdomes togptbers
that 3 map powe out mpne anger, yee all mp
wathfull x difpleafure vponthem.+ $£02 al the rpi
wozlde hall be confumed with the mar EEEREN
u


-pat


ba


| fo proudly, tobiche Fpll thep2 Lozdes boule with

| robberp aud falthede. Jt the fame tpme (faye

. “the Lorde there pall be berdea great crpe from

fierd.Uie the x fpibe porte, ¢€anbowlpnae from the other
porte, and a great murther from the bplles.

ofvle pe that dtvell in the mpll,foz all the mar

| “ebatne people are gone, and all thep that were

laden with fpluer are roted out.

| At the fame tpme wpll F feke thorotve Je-

| rulalem wtb lanternes, and vplpte them that

contpnue in theps Dregges , and (ape in thep2

artemis bertes:* Tup, the Lozde wll do nepther good
set tare NOL eupll. Thep? goodes Mall be fpopled, and

tamos.d.c thep2 bouftes lapde wafe: + thep Hall buploe
boules, and not Divell in them, thep Hall plante
ypnparbes, but not Dapnke the wopne therof. —

D Fot the great * dape of the Lorde igat pande, if
gorta. ghade bp and commethonapace: Horpble is

the tpopnges oF the Lodes dape, then Hall the

- gpauntecrpe ont : foz thatdapis adap of wath,

a dape of trouble and beupneffle, a dape of btter

Deltruccpon and mplerp.a Darke and qlompuge

_. Bape, acloudp q {tozmp dape, a dape of the nople

of trompettes ¢ fbatoines, agapull the tronge
cpties and bpe tow:es. J wpl bapnae the people
into fuche veracpon, that thep Hall qo aboute
lpke blpnde men, bycaufe thep paue enned a-
gapnit the Lozde. Thep: blonde Mall be thedde
asthe oulk,and thep2 bodpesas mpre. * Aep-
ther thep2 {pluer woz tbep2 golde Mall be able to

dDelpucr them in that wzotbtull dape of f Lo2de,
Hoph.tt.b but the * toholelande Hall be confumed thozom

the fpze of bis geloufpe : fo? be Wall foone make

co tpbbdaunce of all them that dwell in the

ande.


Ere. bila,


ei


on
Po


rfa.rb.rbic AND turne amope theppcaptiuite.* J haue perde .


derea e Pe Uelppee OES


pF Sophony. -


€ The.if. chapter. i
Gd. Y


SEolicrt.


chpldzen of Ammon, boto thep have hamefullp t
intreated my people,and magnified them feluca
within the borders of thepzlande. Therfore, as
truely as J lpue (fapth the Lorde of boottes the
God oF Fracl) oab hall be as Sodome, and -
Ammonas Gomozra: even dope thozne hedges,
falt ppttes, and a perpetuall wploernefle: Che
refpoue of mp folke Hall pople them, the rem-
naunte of mp people tall baue them in poffel-
fion. ¥ Chis hal pappen onto them foz thep? sede
pride, bycaufe thep bauc delt fofhamefullp with

the 1.020 of boottes people,and magnifped them

felues aboue them. The Lorde hall be qrpmme

bpon then, + and Delfrope all the qoddes th tHe <tap.(t.¢
lande. And al the Fleg of the Heathen (pal wo2-

pp bym,cuerp man in bis place.

Pe mozians alfo Dall perp toith mp Cwerd: D
Dee, be Mall Eretche out bis bande ouer p nozth, |
and Ddeffrope Alur. = As fo Piya all Toorts
make it dcfolate, Dye and wate. The flockes
and all the beates of the people Hall Ipe in the
mpbdell of if: pellicanes and ozkes (hall abpde
inthe vpper potes of it foules (hall fpngeinthe
fopndolves,and rauens pall (pe vpon p balkes,
fo: the bozders of Cedze Mall be rpuen downe.

‘This ts the proude and carelefile cytic,thatfapo —

in bec berte.* J am,and there is cls none. <D how “iif te. cir.e
is the made fo walte, that the beaftes Ipe ther- ="
in Who fo goeth;by, mocketh her,and popnteth

at ber with bis fpnger.


~ CThe.tti. chapter.


E Agarri the gouerners of Fcrulatem,of the callpnge of at

the Gentpls.a comforte to therefpoue et Hfrael.
READ to that abbompnable, fpltbp, and,
À \ (Ji ccucll cptie:wbhiche wpll not beare,nog
MA Wave, be refourmed. ipertruft ig not in the


244 Lod neptber wyl the polde ber tober


errulers within berare as rozpng * lps a
ong : her iudaeg are as + Wolues in theenenynae Pim, £
whiche leaue nothpnge bebpnode them tpll the:
mole. Her prophetes are lpgbt perfones and
vnfàptbfnil men, ber preaftes vubalotoe the fan
ctuarp,and do wonge bnder the pretence ofthe
late. ut thew Lorde that doth no vurpabt,.
was amonge them, everp mompnge Hewpuge
them bis latweclearlp,andceaficd not. Eut the
pngodlp wpll not learne to be athamed. 'Cher=
foe wpll F roote out this ee deftrope
thep2 totbies: pee, and make thep2 fireaies fo
popde,thatno man Mall gotherin. Thep? cp-
tpes thal be beoken dotwne,fo that no bodp pall
be lefte, noz well there anp moze.

J fapd vito them: D feare me, andbecon- yg
tent to be refonrvined. That thep2 dwellpnae
fbulde not be deftroped, and that there Hulde
bappen bute them none of thefe thpnges,wher=
witb J tall vilite them. Dut neuertheles,chep
tande bp carlp,to foloive the fplthpnes of their
owne pmaginacions. Therkoze,pe Hall wapte
pron me (fapthtbe Lo2zde) ont yl the tyme that
3 Lande vp:fo2 Jam determined. to gather the
people, and to binge the &pnagdomes togptbers
that 3 map powe out mpne anger, yee all mp
wathfull x difpleafure vponthem.+ $£02 al the rpi
wozlde hall be confumed with the mar EEEREN
u


-pat


ba


| fo proudly, tobiche Fpll thep2 Lozdes boule with

| robberp aud falthede. Jt the fame tpme (faye

. “the Lorde there pall be berdea great crpe from

fierd.Uie the x fpibe porte, ¢€anbowlpnae from the other
porte, and a great murther from the bplles.

ofvle pe that dtvell in the mpll,foz all the mar

| “ebatne people are gone, and all thep that were

laden with fpluer are roted out.

| At the fame tpme wpll F feke thorotve Je-

| rulalem wtb lanternes, and vplpte them that

contpnue in theps Dregges , and (ape in thep2

artemis bertes:* Tup, the Lozde wll do nepther good
set tare NOL eupll. Thep? goodes Mall be fpopled, and

tamos.d.c thep2 bouftes lapde wafe: + thep Hall buploe
boules, and not Divell in them, thep Hall plante
ypnparbes, but not Dapnke the wopne therof. —

D Fot the great * dape of the Lorde igat pande, if
gorta. ghade bp and commethonapace: Horpble is

the tpopnges oF the Lodes dape, then Hall the

- gpauntecrpe ont : foz thatdapis adap of wath,

a dape of trouble and beupneffle, a dape of btter

Deltruccpon and mplerp.a Darke and qlompuge

_. Bape, acloudp q {tozmp dape, a dape of the nople

of trompettes ¢ fbatoines, agapull the tronge
cpties and bpe tow:es. J wpl bapnae the people
into fuche veracpon, that thep Hall qo aboute
lpke blpnde men, bycaufe thep paue enned a-
gapnit the Lozde. Thep: blonde Mall be thedde
asthe oulk,and thep2 bodpesas mpre. * Aep-
ther thep2 {pluer woz tbep2 golde Mall be able to

dDelpucr them in that wzotbtull dape of f Lo2de,
Hoph.tt.b but the * toholelande Hall be confumed thozom

the fpze of bis geloufpe : fo? be Wall foone make

co tpbbdaunce of all them that dwell in the

ande.


Ere. bila,


ei


on
Po


rfa.rb.rbic AND turne amope theppcaptiuite.* J haue perde .


derea e Pe Uelppee OES


pF Sophony. -


€ The.if. chapter. i
Gd. Y


SEolicrt.


chpldzen of Ammon, boto thep have hamefullp t
intreated my people,and magnified them feluca
within the borders of thepzlande. Therfore, as
truely as J lpue (fapth the Lorde of boottes the
God oF Fracl) oab hall be as Sodome, and -
Ammonas Gomozra: even dope thozne hedges,
falt ppttes, and a perpetuall wploernefle: Che
refpoue of mp folke Hall pople them, the rem-
naunte of mp people tall baue them in poffel-
fion. ¥ Chis hal pappen onto them foz thep? sede
pride, bycaufe thep bauc delt fofhamefullp with

the 1.020 of boottes people,and magnifped them

felues aboue them. The Lorde hall be qrpmme

bpon then, + and Delfrope all the qoddes th tHe <tap.(t.¢
lande. And al the Fleg of the Heathen (pal wo2-

pp bym,cuerp man in bis place.

Pe mozians alfo Dall perp toith mp Cwerd: D
Dee, be Mall Eretche out bis bande ouer p nozth, |
and Ddeffrope Alur. = As fo Piya all Toorts
make it dcfolate, Dye and wate. The flockes
and all the beates of the people Hall Ipe in the
mpbdell of if: pellicanes and ozkes (hall abpde
inthe vpper potes of it foules (hall fpngeinthe
fopndolves,and rauens pall (pe vpon p balkes,
fo: the bozders of Cedze Mall be rpuen downe.

‘This ts the proude and carelefile cytic,thatfapo —

in bec berte.* J am,and there is cls none. <D how “iif te. cir.e
is the made fo walte, that the beaftes Ipe ther- ="
in Who fo goeth;by, mocketh her,and popnteth

at ber with bis fpnger.


~ CThe.tti. chapter.


E Agarri the gouerners of Fcrulatem,of the callpnge of at

the Gentpls.a comforte to therefpoue et Hfrael.
READ to that abbompnable, fpltbp, and,
À \ (Ji ccucll cptie:wbhiche wpll not beare,nog
MA Wave, be refourmed. ipertruft ig not in the


244 Lod neptber wyl the polde ber tober


errulers within berare as rozpng * lps a
ong : her iudaeg are as + Wolues in theenenynae Pim, £
whiche leaue nothpnge bebpnode them tpll the:
mole. Her prophetes are lpgbt perfones and
vnfàptbfnil men, ber preaftes vubalotoe the fan
ctuarp,and do wonge bnder the pretence ofthe
late. ut thew Lorde that doth no vurpabt,.
was amonge them, everp mompnge Hewpuge
them bis latweclearlp,andceaficd not. Eut the
pngodlp wpll not learne to be athamed. 'Cher=
foe wpll F roote out this ee deftrope
thep2 totbies: pee, and make thep2 fireaies fo
popde,thatno man Mall gotherin. Thep? cp-
tpes thal be beoken dotwne,fo that no bodp pall
be lefte, noz well there anp moze.

J fapd vito them: D feare me, andbecon- yg
tent to be refonrvined. That thep2 dwellpnae
fbulde not be deftroped, and that there Hulde
bappen bute them none of thefe thpnges,wher=
witb J tall vilite them. Dut neuertheles,chep
tande bp carlp,to foloive the fplthpnes of their
owne pmaginacions. Therkoze,pe Hall wapte
pron me (fapthtbe Lo2zde) ont yl the tyme that
3 Lande vp:fo2 Jam determined. to gather the
people, and to binge the &pnagdomes togptbers
that 3 map powe out mpne anger, yee all mp
wathfull x difpleafure vponthem.+ $£02 al the rpi
wozlde hall be confumed with the mar EEEREN
u


-pat


ba


The Bropherye.


-geloufpe. And then wpll J clenfe f lpppes of the
people, that thep map cuerpcbhone call ppon the
name of the 1020, and ferue bpm with one Mul-
Der. Suche as Ff baue fubbued,and mp chplozen
alfo whom F baue {catred abzode, Hall bapnge
me paelentes beponde the waters of Ethiopia.
Sutbat tyme Halte thou nomoze be confoun
ded, bycaule of all thy pmagpnacpons , where
Bread thorotoc thou badodelt ottended me:for x F wpll
take awap the ppoude boafters of thpne bonour
from the, to that thou Halte nomoze trpumphe,
bycaule of mp bolp bpll. Jn the allo wpl J leaue
a mall pooze {pmple people, whicbe pall trut
in the name of the Lorde. Che remnaunt of 3i-
_ taell (pall Dono wpckedncfle, noz (peake Ipes :
€ neptber ball ther anp oifceatfulltunge be foñde
inthepzmoutbes. jfoz chep hall be fedde, and
take thep2 ref, and no man (hall make them a-
ofrapde. Gpue thankies, D doughter Spon, be
topfull,D jlraeil: retopce and ganne from
top wbole Verte, Ddoughter Jerufalem, foz the
Lot bath taken awape thp punpibment, and
turned acne topar enempes. Thekpnae of Fle
tacll,cuen che Lozbde bpm felfe ig witd the: fe
tbat thou ncdeft nomoze to fear anp miffo2ztune.

= Jntpattpmceit all be fapd to Jerufalem :
< feare not,and to Spon: let not thpne bandes be
Gacke, foz the Lozbde top Godis with the; itis
be that bath power to faue : be bath. a Fpecpall
pleature in the, and a maruelous loue towarde

the : pee, be retopicth ouer the with gladneffe.
Suche as baue ben in beupneffe, wpil J aqather
toapthcr,and take out of thp congregacion: as

fo? the ame and repzofe that bath ben lapde
pponthe,it all be farre from the. And lo, in

that tpme wpll J weftrope all thole that were
epic, the: * J wpll belpe the lame, and gather vp the
| > caffawape: pee, 4 wopil get them prapleand bo-
noure inall landeg, where thep baue ben put to
pame. Lt che fame tpme wpll J bepnge pou in,

andat the fame tyme wll 9 gather pou. 9 pll

get poua name and a good reporte amonge all
people of the erth, when 4 turnebacke pour cap:

tiuttebefoze pour epes, lapth tbe logde.


C The ende of tbe prophecpe `-
P of opbonp.


 Thebooke of the


P2ophete Agaeusg.


a


~ CThe fpr Chapter.
natal on of tbe propbecpe of Agaeus. An erboztarpouto


Lembe elvan


modia NA] (eae Dape ofthe moneth, came p wozd
z; [ere nea OL the Lozbde( bp the zopbet Ag
ute a S°us) vnto*soz0babelithe fonne


r; g to etua re fomne of ole the bpe paet:
f bolteg,


fapeth. This people doth ape. Thetpmeis not
a come to buplode yet des boule. Thes
akethe Lozde bp the pzo bete Aggeus, and 5
apde. * Pe pour felueg can tpnde tpme to divell Heve.frit.e
in {pled boufeg, and thall this boulelpe wate?
Cülpdze nowe pour owne wapesin pour perteg
(fapeth the 1 020 of boftes)* Pefowe much, but xLeu.rror. o
pe vapng litle in:pe eat, but pe bauenot pnougb mikes
e dpnecke but pearenot fplled: pe decke pour maala lib
elues but pe be not warme :and he thþatearneth
anp Wages, putteth itina bzoken purfe.
Thusfapetbthe Lorde of botes. Conlpdze €
pour owne wapes in pour berteg, get pou vp te
themountapne,fetche wood, andbuplbebpthe —
houfe that tt mape be acceptable vnto me,and ire bute
that Jmap Hhewe mine honour, fapeth the Lo2d
Ve lokedfoz muche andlo,itis cometolptle,and
thougbe pe bepnac it bome, pet do J blows ita-
wap. And why fo fapetbthe Lozde.0F pooltes:
* @uen becaute that mp boule lieth fo wat, and itoz..
petunrecuerp mandnte his owne houle.Wiher strc
oze P beaué ig foz bpdden to qeue pou anp dewe “s?
andthe eartbisfozbpdden togene pou encreale
*3 baue called fo: adzouth, both vponthe land we.srosis
and bpd the moñtapneg, ppb cozne, ppon wpne,
bpon ople, bponeuerp thyng that the qrounde
bepngeth a Dpon men and bponcattell,pee,
and bpon all bandp labour.

Mowe when so20babel the fome of Hala: I
thiel,« Jclua the fonne of Joledech the hye pret
withtberemnaunt of the people, berd the vopre
of the Lozde thep2 God, andthe wozdes of the

ophete Aggeus(lpke ag the Lode thep2 God

ente bpm ) the peopledpb feare the Lorde.
‘Chen Aqgeus the Lozdes aungel fapdein the
Lodes melage pato the peoples am with por toe.»
fapeth the Lorde. : . Sennen
| Do the Lozd waked bp the fprete of soraba: agce.vi.e.
bel the prince of Juda, and Plprete of Yeluathe **-«
fonne of Jofedec bpepze cand thelpecte of
theremnaunte of all the people : that thep came
— in the Doule of the Lode of bolted
P2000.


EC The.ii. Chapter,
e aaa
MA Pon the.xrttit. Daye ofthe. bi. moneth 3
4 inthe feconde pearcof kpnge Darius,
PA Veg the.xci.dap of the feuéth moneth, came

=the wozde of the Lozde bp the prophes
Agageus, lapeng : peake tosozobabel the fonne
of Salathiel, paynce of Juda, and to Felua the


 fonneof Joredech the bpe prette, andto therefp:


due of the ere fap.*tdi bois lefte among em.ttas,

pou, that lawe thps boule in ber fFpzite beitie?

wut what thpucke pe nowebpit? Feit notin

pourepes,cucnas though if were notbynas Re:

uerthelefic, be of goodchere. Ds020babel (fap-

eth the Lozde) * be of qoodcomfozte, D Fetua pease

thoufonne of Jolcdech bpe prette:takegoodber” 7

tes Unto pou allo all pepeople of the lande, Cape .

eth the Lode of hooftes, and doo accozdpnae to Ase... *

the wozde( * fò: Jam Wwpthpou,fapetbpiod l >

of hootes ipkeas Fagreed with pou, when pe
came


The Bropherye.


-geloufpe. And then wpll J clenfe f lpppes of the
people, that thep map cuerpcbhone call ppon the
name of the 1020, and ferue bpm with one Mul-
Der. Suche as Ff baue fubbued,and mp chplozen
alfo whom F baue {catred abzode, Hall bapnge
me paelentes beponde the waters of Ethiopia.
Sutbat tyme Halte thou nomoze be confoun
ded, bycaule of all thy pmagpnacpons , where
Bread thorotoc thou badodelt ottended me:for x F wpll
take awap the ppoude boafters of thpne bonour
from the, to that thou Halte nomoze trpumphe,
bycaule of mp bolp bpll. Jn the allo wpl J leaue
a mall pooze {pmple people, whicbe pall trut
in the name of the Lorde. Che remnaunt of 3i-
_ taell (pall Dono wpckedncfle, noz (peake Ipes :
€ neptber ball ther anp oifceatfulltunge be foñde
inthepzmoutbes. jfoz chep hall be fedde, and
take thep2 ref, and no man (hall make them a-
ofrapde. Gpue thankies, D doughter Spon, be
topfull,D jlraeil: retopce and ganne from
top wbole Verte, Ddoughter Jerufalem, foz the
Lot bath taken awape thp punpibment, and
turned acne topar enempes. Thekpnae of Fle
tacll,cuen che Lozbde bpm felfe ig witd the: fe
tbat thou ncdeft nomoze to fear anp miffo2ztune.

= Jntpattpmceit all be fapd to Jerufalem :
< feare not,and to Spon: let not thpne bandes be
Gacke, foz the Lozbde top Godis with the; itis
be that bath power to faue : be bath. a Fpecpall
pleature in the, and a maruelous loue towarde

the : pee, be retopicth ouer the with gladneffe.
Suche as baue ben in beupneffe, wpil J aqather
toapthcr,and take out of thp congregacion: as

fo? the ame and repzofe that bath ben lapde
pponthe,it all be farre from the. And lo, in

that tpme wpll J weftrope all thole that were
epic, the: * J wpll belpe the lame, and gather vp the
| > caffawape: pee, 4 wopil get them prapleand bo-
noure inall landeg, where thep baue ben put to
pame. Lt che fame tpme wpll J bepnge pou in,

andat the fame tyme wll 9 gather pou. 9 pll

get poua name and a good reporte amonge all
people of the erth, when 4 turnebacke pour cap:

tiuttebefoze pour epes, lapth tbe logde.


C The ende of tbe prophecpe `-
P of opbonp.


 Thebooke of the


P2ophete Agaeusg.


a


~ CThe fpr Chapter.
natal on of tbe propbecpe of Agaeus. An erboztarpouto


Lembe elvan


modia NA] (eae Dape ofthe moneth, came p wozd
z; [ere nea OL the Lozbde( bp the zopbet Ag
ute a S°us) vnto*soz0babelithe fonne


r; g to etua re fomne of ole the bpe paet:
f bolteg,


fapeth. This people doth ape. Thetpmeis not
a come to buplode yet des boule. Thes
akethe Lozde bp the pzo bete Aggeus, and 5
apde. * Pe pour felueg can tpnde tpme to divell Heve.frit.e
in {pled boufeg, and thall this boulelpe wate?
Cülpdze nowe pour owne wapesin pour perteg
(fapeth the 1 020 of boftes)* Pefowe much, but xLeu.rror. o
pe vapng litle in:pe eat, but pe bauenot pnougb mikes
e dpnecke but pearenot fplled: pe decke pour maala lib
elues but pe be not warme :and he thþatearneth
anp Wages, putteth itina bzoken purfe.
Thusfapetbthe Lorde of botes. Conlpdze €
pour owne wapes in pour berteg, get pou vp te
themountapne,fetche wood, andbuplbebpthe —
houfe that tt mape be acceptable vnto me,and ire bute
that Jmap Hhewe mine honour, fapeth the Lo2d
Ve lokedfoz muche andlo,itis cometolptle,and
thougbe pe bepnac it bome, pet do J blows ita-
wap. And why fo fapetbthe Lozde.0F pooltes:
* @uen becaute that mp boule lieth fo wat, and itoz..
petunrecuerp mandnte his owne houle.Wiher strc
oze P beaué ig foz bpdden to qeue pou anp dewe “s?
andthe eartbisfozbpdden togene pou encreale
*3 baue called fo: adzouth, both vponthe land we.srosis
and bpd the moñtapneg, ppb cozne, ppon wpne,
bpon ople, bponeuerp thyng that the qrounde
bepngeth a Dpon men and bponcattell,pee,
and bpon all bandp labour.

Mowe when so20babel the fome of Hala: I
thiel,« Jclua the fonne of Joledech the hye pret
withtberemnaunt of the people, berd the vopre
of the Lozde thep2 God, andthe wozdes of the

ophete Aggeus(lpke ag the Lode thep2 God

ente bpm ) the peopledpb feare the Lorde.
‘Chen Aqgeus the Lozdes aungel fapdein the
Lodes melage pato the peoples am with por toe.»
fapeth the Lorde. : . Sennen
| Do the Lozd waked bp the fprete of soraba: agce.vi.e.
bel the prince of Juda, and Plprete of Yeluathe **-«
fonne of Jofedec bpepze cand thelpecte of
theremnaunte of all the people : that thep came
— in the Doule of the Lode of bolted
P2000.


EC The.ii. Chapter,
e aaa
MA Pon the.xrttit. Daye ofthe. bi. moneth 3
4 inthe feconde pearcof kpnge Darius,
PA Veg the.xci.dap of the feuéth moneth, came

=the wozde of the Lozde bp the prophes
Agageus, lapeng : peake tosozobabel the fonne
of Salathiel, paynce of Juda, and to Felua the


 fonneof Joredech the bpe prette, andto therefp:


due of the ere fap.*tdi bois lefte among em.ttas,

pou, that lawe thps boule in ber fFpzite beitie?

wut what thpucke pe nowebpit? Feit notin

pourepes,cucnas though if were notbynas Re:

uerthelefic, be of goodchere. Ds020babel (fap-

eth the Lozde) * be of qoodcomfozte, D Fetua pease

thoufonne of Jolcdech bpe prette:takegoodber” 7

tes Unto pou allo all pepeople of the lande, Cape .

eth the Lode of hooftes, and doo accozdpnae to Ase... *

the wozde( * fò: Jam Wwpthpou,fapetbpiod l >

of hootes ipkeas Fagreed with pou, when pe
came


= EO oo — = -- _
à


 ggeta


- ofsacharye.


eame out of the land: of Eqppte: and mp fyapte


apapa AND the develande; pee, + F wpll moticall Pea-
lap. ira l tbe p fali eatben wall come,


And note (4 pape pou) confpore from thig


dape fo2th,and bow it bath gone withbpouafore Dg


02 euer there was lapde one tone bpon another
in the temple of the 2.0 de:tBat whenpe cameto
acozne Deape of rx, bultbelles,there were (carce
tein: «and toat when pe came to the wpne pzeffe
Eo? to powzre out.l.pottes of wpne, there were
{carce.cr. Eo: ¥fmote pou With beate, blaking
~ @ndbaple toneg in all the labours of pout ban:
_ Deg: pet was there none of poun that wold turne
D Ynto me lapth the Loze. Confpoze a from

tbis dape forth afoze:namelp, from t e.rriiti.

dape ot thenpnth moneth, nto the dap that the

Foundacpon of the Lozdes temple was lapbe:


- sabii b Marke it well,xignot the fede pet intbe barner the what


baue not the vpnes, the fpgtreeg, the pomgras
nates, ¢ olpue trees ben pee vnfrutfnl, but from
thts dap forth, Mallmake them to pzofpere.

„ SHozcouer the.retitt dap of the moncth came
the wozde of the Lode vato agens agapne,
faving: Speake to sozobabell t e pepnce of Ju-
da, and lape: F wpl Hake bothe beauen earth,
ano ouerthzotwe theleate of the kpngdomes,pee
and delrope the mpabtp kyngdome of the Hea-
oF A WPil ouerthzowe pcharettes, and thole
¢ ve bpon them.fo that both bozfe and man
Hall fall Downe,cuerp man thozowe bis nepgb:
boures fwearbe, and ag Fos the, D so2zobabell
. (Capt tbe #1 ozde of booftes) thou fone of Ha-
latiiell mp feruaunte : F wpil take the (fapth
the Lozde) at the fame tpme, and make theasa
ale 4 3 baue chofen the, faptb the Lo0zde of
boofes.


The ende of the prophecpe
ofSggcus.


> Noki:
 CTHeBookeotthe —


prophete sacharpe °
©The fpe Chapter,


“tnont ede propre eo returne tothe Lorde, and etehetwe.
<P the wpcheonetie of hep: athens, Ee pretps ii AE
: Grech Chipi and bis Aporties,


tberg. And faye thou Lute thent: thus fapey the
Lorde of bootteg :x Cuene pe brito me (Tapeth ere.rrrie
the Lode of poottes) and aoe tirne me b= D
to pou, faptb the Lozde of boottes, x E PEROC gee suiz.g
lpke poure forefathers, vuto whome the pró- Pram.i
pbhetes crped afore tpme, fapinee. ‘Thus fapep Hua
the Lozde Gad of poottes: x Tutne pou from
Pour cupl wapes and from pour ipcked pula Tob. pti. b
Kinacpons. + Wut thep wolde noe PALE NO? CEE oe cusses g
Garde me,layeh the Lorde. bat ts nowe bes
come of youre forefathers, and the propbetess ~
ate they pet RPH alpuer 2Sut dpd not my woes
bes and Matutes (whtche Y comannded bp mp
frtuauntes the prophetes) touche pour forefa =
thers: thes ehis.thep gaue anfwere and fapo:
Iplse ag the Lozde of beoftes deupred todo unto

S, iccozbpnge to our owne wapes and pmagi-
nacions enen Co hath ve delt with vs.
pon tbe. rriiii.dap of the.xi.moncth, which 5


Dreri a


te the moneth Sebab,in the feconde pete of ma


ris, caine the wozde of the Lozve ynto sacbarp
the fonne of Barachias, the fonne of Addo the


ef And the aunge that


€


= EO oo — = -- _
à


 ggeta


- ofsacharye.


eame out of the land: of Eqppte: and mp fyapte


apapa AND the develande; pee, + F wpll moticall Pea-
lap. ira l tbe p fali eatben wall come,


And note (4 pape pou) confpore from thig


dape fo2th,and bow it bath gone withbpouafore Dg


02 euer there was lapde one tone bpon another
in the temple of the 2.0 de:tBat whenpe cameto
acozne Deape of rx, bultbelles,there were (carce
tein: «and toat when pe came to the wpne pzeffe
Eo? to powzre out.l.pottes of wpne, there were
{carce.cr. Eo: ¥fmote pou With beate, blaking
~ @ndbaple toneg in all the labours of pout ban:
_ Deg: pet was there none of poun that wold turne
D Ynto me lapth the Loze. Confpoze a from

tbis dape forth afoze:namelp, from t e.rriiti.

dape ot thenpnth moneth, nto the dap that the

Foundacpon of the Lozdes temple was lapbe:


- sabii b Marke it well,xignot the fede pet intbe barner the what


baue not the vpnes, the fpgtreeg, the pomgras
nates, ¢ olpue trees ben pee vnfrutfnl, but from
thts dap forth, Mallmake them to pzofpere.

„ SHozcouer the.retitt dap of the moncth came
the wozde of the Lode vato agens agapne,
faving: Speake to sozobabell t e pepnce of Ju-
da, and lape: F wpl Hake bothe beauen earth,
ano ouerthzotwe theleate of the kpngdomes,pee
and delrope the mpabtp kyngdome of the Hea-
oF A WPil ouerthzowe pcharettes, and thole
¢ ve bpon them.fo that both bozfe and man
Hall fall Downe,cuerp man thozowe bis nepgb:
boures fwearbe, and ag Fos the, D so2zobabell
. (Capt tbe #1 ozde of booftes) thou fone of Ha-
latiiell mp feruaunte : F wpil take the (fapth
the Lozde) at the fame tpme, and make theasa
ale 4 3 baue chofen the, faptb the Lo0zde of
boofes.


The ende of the prophecpe
ofSggcus.


> Noki:
 CTHeBookeotthe —


prophete sacharpe °
©The fpe Chapter,


“tnont ede propre eo returne tothe Lorde, and etehetwe.
<P the wpcheonetie of hep: athens, Ee pretps ii AE
: Grech Chipi and bis Aporties,


tberg. And faye thou Lute thent: thus fapey the
Lorde of bootteg :x Cuene pe brito me (Tapeth ere.rrrie
the Lode of poottes) and aoe tirne me b= D
to pou, faptb the Lozde of boottes, x E PEROC gee suiz.g
lpke poure forefathers, vuto whome the pró- Pram.i
pbhetes crped afore tpme, fapinee. ‘Thus fapep Hua
the Lozde Gad of poottes: x Tutne pou from
Pour cupl wapes and from pour ipcked pula Tob. pti. b
Kinacpons. + Wut thep wolde noe PALE NO? CEE oe cusses g
Garde me,layeh the Lorde. bat ts nowe bes
come of youre forefathers, and the propbetess ~
ate they pet RPH alpuer 2Sut dpd not my woes
bes and Matutes (whtche Y comannded bp mp
frtuauntes the prophetes) touche pour forefa =
thers: thes ehis.thep gaue anfwere and fapo:
Iplse ag the Lozde of beoftes deupred todo unto

S, iccozbpnge to our owne wapes and pmagi-
nacions enen Co hath ve delt with vs.
pon tbe. rriiii.dap of the.xi.moncth, which 5


Dreri a


te the moneth Sebab,in the feconde pete of ma


ris, caine the wozde of the Lozve ynto sacbarp
the fonne of Barachias, the fonne of Addo the


ef And the aunge that


€


= EO oo — = -- _
à


 ggeta


- ofsacharye.


eame out of the land: of Eqppte: and mp fyapte


apapa AND the develande; pee, + F wpll moticall Pea-
lap. ira l tbe p fali eatben wall come,


And note (4 pape pou) confpore from thig


dape fo2th,and bow it bath gone withbpouafore Dg


02 euer there was lapde one tone bpon another
in the temple of the 2.0 de:tBat whenpe cameto
acozne Deape of rx, bultbelles,there were (carce
tein: «and toat when pe came to the wpne pzeffe
Eo? to powzre out.l.pottes of wpne, there were
{carce.cr. Eo: ¥fmote pou With beate, blaking
~ @ndbaple toneg in all the labours of pout ban:
_ Deg: pet was there none of poun that wold turne
D Ynto me lapth the Loze. Confpoze a from

tbis dape forth afoze:namelp, from t e.rriiti.

dape ot thenpnth moneth, nto the dap that the

Foundacpon of the Lozdes temple was lapbe:


- sabii b Marke it well,xignot the fede pet intbe barner the what


baue not the vpnes, the fpgtreeg, the pomgras
nates, ¢ olpue trees ben pee vnfrutfnl, but from
thts dap forth, Mallmake them to pzofpere.

„ SHozcouer the.retitt dap of the moncth came
the wozde of the Lode vato agens agapne,
faving: Speake to sozobabell t e pepnce of Ju-
da, and lape: F wpl Hake bothe beauen earth,
ano ouerthzotwe theleate of the kpngdomes,pee
and delrope the mpabtp kyngdome of the Hea-
oF A WPil ouerthzowe pcharettes, and thole
¢ ve bpon them.fo that both bozfe and man
Hall fall Downe,cuerp man thozowe bis nepgb:
boures fwearbe, and ag Fos the, D so2zobabell
. (Capt tbe #1 ozde of booftes) thou fone of Ha-
latiiell mp feruaunte : F wpil take the (fapth
the Lozde) at the fame tpme, and make theasa
ale 4 3 baue chofen the, faptb the Lo0zde of
boofes.


The ende of the prophecpe
ofSggcus.


> Noki:
 CTHeBookeotthe —


prophete sacharpe °
©The fpe Chapter,


“tnont ede propre eo returne tothe Lorde, and etehetwe.
<P the wpcheonetie of hep: athens, Ee pretps ii AE
: Grech Chipi and bis Aporties,


tberg. And faye thou Lute thent: thus fapey the
Lorde of bootteg :x Cuene pe brito me (Tapeth ere.rrrie
the Lode of poottes) and aoe tirne me b= D
to pou, faptb the Lozde of boottes, x E PEROC gee suiz.g
lpke poure forefathers, vuto whome the pró- Pram.i
pbhetes crped afore tpme, fapinee. ‘Thus fapep Hua
the Lozde Gad of poottes: x Tutne pou from
Pour cupl wapes and from pour ipcked pula Tob. pti. b
Kinacpons. + Wut thep wolde noe PALE NO? CEE oe cusses g
Garde me,layeh the Lorde. bat ts nowe bes
come of youre forefathers, and the propbetess ~
ate they pet RPH alpuer 2Sut dpd not my woes
bes and Matutes (whtche Y comannded bp mp
frtuauntes the prophetes) touche pour forefa =
thers: thes ehis.thep gaue anfwere and fapo:
Iplse ag the Lozde of beoftes deupred todo unto

S, iccozbpnge to our owne wapes and pmagi-
nacions enen Co hath ve delt with vs.
pon tbe. rriiii.dap of the.xi.moncth, which 5


Dreri a


te the moneth Sebab,in the feconde pete of ma


ris, caine the wozde of the Lozve ynto sacbarp
the fonne of Barachias, the fonne of Addo the


ef And the aunge that


€


1 sf
he Fy g


$acb,biil, a xJ wpitturne me agape in mercy towarde Fe


rulalem fo tbat mp poulethallbebuyldedinit, |


fapth the Lozde of bookes, pee, and the plum:
etal Pb aoe in Jerufalem, tapetD
. the Lozde of booltes. TE e

D . Erve alfo and {peake, thus fapth the Lode
of poofteg, Wp cptics pall be in good pzofpr-
ritcagapne, the Lode Mall ay cotorzte Spon:
--andcbole Jerulalé > Shen lpite J vp mpne epes
** and Catoe,and beholde toure hoznes. And J lapd
.... onto theanngell that talked with me, what be
Dan vil. thele be antwered me.* hele are theboanes
whiche baue (catered Juda, sfracl,and Ferula-
lem abzode. And the Lozde the wed me foure car:
penters. ‘Chen fapd J: what wyll theledos He
au(weredanalapd. Chole are the hognes which
saue(o fErotved Juda abzode.that noman dur
ipfte vp bis beade : wut thele arecometo frape
them awape:andto cak out the boznes of the
Gentples: whiche lpEte bp thepz pozne ouer the

__ Jande of Juda,to (cate it abgode. l

C Tbe.ii Chapter.


C Ebrrenctopage of Zerulalem and Juda,


eze ritiit.s Eai Dee
apoc.pr, È ar a a E


= b vid
saranda OF cople € catell that (hal be therin:* Pec, J mp


ptal.poit.b
ic Cte...


tt fa piinia


grounde,and thal chofe Ferulalem pet agapne.
Sophotea * etall fele be Epil betoze the Lozde, Foz be


 C€Tde.tit. Chapter:
© CoOottbe lawe and pe eftateokchzpl,bndere
| Car petue bepitt, racopbece ot Lbreae. be fegure


ye Prop


Herpe:
JA ; +
may M18 be thetoed me Yelua the bye J
x pmet (Landpng before the aungell
ABZ of the Lozberand Satan Mode at Keler a

(ea bisepabtbandtorelpi bhim. And gui.
š eye h fapde bnto Satan. The —.
7e “ely eg Lorde reproue the (thou Datan)
pec, the Lozdetbat bathe cholen Jerufalem, res
pou snot thisa brande taken ont of the a
pe owe Jelua Was clothed tn bucleanerap-
ment,and Code before the rane Set at anfwe=
redandfapde onto thole that Fode befoze bpm,
tabeawap the fonle clothes from bim. And wn-
tobim belapde. Sebolde, J baue take atoap thp
fpnne from the and wpll Dechetbhe with cbatige —
of rapment. pe fapde mozeouer, let a fapze mp-
ter bponpps beade. So and § emptet
bpon bps bead, and put on er we aa Hand .
theangelot the Lozbde Kode there. Chen thean- €
gelofthe Lorde teltefied unto Felua,andlpake
thus fapeth the Lozde of hooftes. FE thon wplte
walke inmp wapres, and kepe mp watcde:thow
Walt cule cap boule and kepe mp courtes, and F
twopll geue the place amonge thele ý tande bere.
Weare (D Felua) chou hype pzefke, thouandthp
frendes that dwel befoze the, Foz thep are wonde zy |
rous people. Webolde, J wplibypngefozth* the erap.tiii.s
bzaunche of mp (eruannt:foz lo, the fone that J hig ad
bauelapbe befoze Felua: vpontone Fone Halbe zacy.vt.d
feuenepes. Weholde F wpll hewe him out(fap- are
eth the Lozd of hoftes) and take atap the fpnne Fierta
of the lande inone dap. Then (hal eucrp man cal
fo: bis neiqbbour under the vpne and bnder the
fpatre fapetbtbe Lozrdeof holtes.

€ The.itt.chapter.

C Thre bifpon of Che golden canbeltprkr and
tye erpofpcpon thero€. à

nyae Rd the aungell that talked withme, ag
kay KAY ya came againne and waked me Dp,ava
‘4 =P winanthatisrapledouteok bps fepe,
Bas, Wand fapde nto me: topat fee tbou!
ninaa And F lapd J baue loked,andbepold
acandelftpcke all of golde with a boule wpon it
and bis leué lampes therin, ¢ upon euerp lampe
feuen falkes.Andxtwo olpuc trees therbp,one


a
= mmm oe i a


ne ee
"d e


the wpontherpabte fpde of the boule, and the otber F"
oue bhpontheletgetpde. Ho J an{Wwered,and{pake
e totheaungell that talked Mpth melapinge,(D


inp Lozd¢e what are thele ‘the aungell that tal- zz

bed ith me anfiwered and fapde wntome:kno-

well thou not what thele be ¢ and Japie: Qo

mp Lo2de. He anfwered elapde vnto me: Thpg

13 the wozde of the Lozde Duto s0z0babell, fap,

inge:* Nether thozotoe an hoffe of men, no: tho erap.pi. a
rowe ffrength, but thozotwe mp (prete,faptb the

Lozde of boites. Wi bat art thou $ great moun-

tapn, before 3020babel/ thoumult be made euen €

And be hall bapnge vp the Fp2tt * fone, fo that eter.


|} menthalceye unto bpm goodlucke good luche. FSF .


MH azeouer,the wode of the Lorde came We
tome- lapinge. x Che handes of sozobabel'paue


lapbe the foundacponot this boufe : bpsbandes PS.


hall aio fpnplipe it, + that pe map knotwe DoW pe roiiin, -


that the 2o20e of booftes bath Cente me puto
pou. fto: he chat path ben delpifcd a lptle frafon
thall revopse, when be feeth the typnne wepghtin

_ x02 0La els


1 sf
he Fy g


$acb,biil, a xJ wpitturne me agape in mercy towarde Fe


rulalem fo tbat mp poulethallbebuyldedinit, |


fapth the Lozde of bookes, pee, and the plum:
etal Pb aoe in Jerufalem, tapetD
. the Lozde of booltes. TE e

D . Erve alfo and {peake, thus fapth the Lode
of poofteg, Wp cptics pall be in good pzofpr-
ritcagapne, the Lode Mall ay cotorzte Spon:
--andcbole Jerulalé > Shen lpite J vp mpne epes
** and Catoe,and beholde toure hoznes. And J lapd
.... onto theanngell that talked with me, what be
Dan vil. thele be antwered me.* hele are theboanes
whiche baue (catered Juda, sfracl,and Ferula-
lem abzode. And the Lozde the wed me foure car:
penters. ‘Chen fapd J: what wyll theledos He
au(weredanalapd. Chole are the hognes which
saue(o fErotved Juda abzode.that noman dur
ipfte vp bis beade : wut thele arecometo frape
them awape:andto cak out the boznes of the
Gentples: whiche lpEte bp thepz pozne ouer the

__ Jande of Juda,to (cate it abgode. l

C Tbe.ii Chapter.


C Ebrrenctopage of Zerulalem and Juda,


eze ritiit.s Eai Dee
apoc.pr, È ar a a E


= b vid
saranda OF cople € catell that (hal be therin:* Pec, J mp


ptal.poit.b
ic Cte...


tt fa piinia


grounde,and thal chofe Ferulalem pet agapne.
Sophotea * etall fele be Epil betoze the Lozde, Foz be


 C€Tde.tit. Chapter:
© CoOottbe lawe and pe eftateokchzpl,bndere
| Car petue bepitt, racopbece ot Lbreae. be fegure


ye Prop


Herpe:
JA ; +
may M18 be thetoed me Yelua the bye J
x pmet (Landpng before the aungell
ABZ of the Lozberand Satan Mode at Keler a

(ea bisepabtbandtorelpi bhim. And gui.
š eye h fapde bnto Satan. The —.
7e “ely eg Lorde reproue the (thou Datan)
pec, the Lozdetbat bathe cholen Jerufalem, res
pou snot thisa brande taken ont of the a
pe owe Jelua Was clothed tn bucleanerap-
ment,and Code before the rane Set at anfwe=
redandfapde onto thole that Fode befoze bpm,
tabeawap the fonle clothes from bim. And wn-
tobim belapde. Sebolde, J baue take atoap thp
fpnne from the and wpll Dechetbhe with cbatige —
of rapment. pe fapde mozeouer, let a fapze mp-
ter bponpps beade. So and § emptet
bpon bps bead, and put on er we aa Hand .
theangelot the Lozbde Kode there. Chen thean- €
gelofthe Lorde teltefied unto Felua,andlpake
thus fapeth the Lozde of hooftes. FE thon wplte
walke inmp wapres, and kepe mp watcde:thow
Walt cule cap boule and kepe mp courtes, and F
twopll geue the place amonge thele ý tande bere.
Weare (D Felua) chou hype pzefke, thouandthp
frendes that dwel befoze the, Foz thep are wonde zy |
rous people. Webolde, J wplibypngefozth* the erap.tiii.s
bzaunche of mp (eruannt:foz lo, the fone that J hig ad
bauelapbe befoze Felua: vpontone Fone Halbe zacy.vt.d
feuenepes. Weholde F wpll hewe him out(fap- are
eth the Lozd of hoftes) and take atap the fpnne Fierta
of the lande inone dap. Then (hal eucrp man cal
fo: bis neiqbbour under the vpne and bnder the
fpatre fapetbtbe Lozrdeof holtes.

€ The.itt.chapter.

C Thre bifpon of Che golden canbeltprkr and
tye erpofpcpon thero€. à

nyae Rd the aungell that talked withme, ag
kay KAY ya came againne and waked me Dp,ava
‘4 =P winanthatisrapledouteok bps fepe,
Bas, Wand fapde nto me: topat fee tbou!
ninaa And F lapd J baue loked,andbepold
acandelftpcke all of golde with a boule wpon it
and bis leué lampes therin, ¢ upon euerp lampe
feuen falkes.Andxtwo olpuc trees therbp,one


a
= mmm oe i a


ne ee
"d e


the wpontherpabte fpde of the boule, and the otber F"
oue bhpontheletgetpde. Ho J an{Wwered,and{pake
e totheaungell that talked Mpth melapinge,(D


inp Lozd¢e what are thele ‘the aungell that tal- zz

bed ith me anfiwered and fapde wntome:kno-

well thou not what thele be ¢ and Japie: Qo

mp Lo2de. He anfwered elapde vnto me: Thpg

13 the wozde of the Lozde Duto s0z0babell, fap,

inge:* Nether thozotoe an hoffe of men, no: tho erap.pi. a
rowe ffrength, but thozotwe mp (prete,faptb the

Lozde of boites. Wi bat art thou $ great moun-

tapn, before 3020babel/ thoumult be made euen €

And be hall bapnge vp the Fp2tt * fone, fo that eter.


|} menthalceye unto bpm goodlucke good luche. FSF .


MH azeouer,the wode of the Lorde came We
tome- lapinge. x Che handes of sozobabel'paue


lapbe the foundacponot this boufe : bpsbandes PS.


hall aio fpnplipe it, + that pe map knotwe DoW pe roiiin, -


that the 2o20e of booftes bath Cente me puto
pou. fto: he chat path ben delpifcd a lptle frafon
thall revopse, when be feeth the typnne wepghtin

_ x02 0La els


ofsachary.


D s020babels hand. She feuenepes are the lozdes
which qotbozowe the whole wore. Ten an-
fwered 3, and fapde vnto bym: what ate thele
twoolpue trees bpon the rpqhtanbdleft {poe of
the candieftpche ¢ ¥ {pake mozeoucr,andfapde
vutobym: what be thele two olpue bzaunches,
(which thozowe the two golden pppes emptpe
then feluesinto the goldestoe anfweredmeand
fapde:knowelk thou not whatthefebes Andy
fapd:no,mp Lorde. Then lapde he: x Thele are
tie two olpue braunches, that ande befoze the
ruler of the whole carth. :


CTi. v.Chapter:


Tpo.fia -


Mone, bb


The. vt. Chapter.
Sr the foure charettes he Leterpheth the prolpervive
of fòure kpugboemes,


tobpte bozies , in the fourth charet were borie
ofdpurrs colours, and frronge, | S


. toweout the wo2lde.Chencrped be bpon me,


SEol.critj. |

Then lpake J, and fapde onto the Aungell 5
that talked with me: Dlozde, what are thefe? :
The Aungell aunlwered, and fapde wnto me: |
* Thefe are the.iitt. wpndes of f beauč, wbpih > A
become foz to Mande befoze the ruler of all tpe Iiia. |
earth. Chat wyth theblacke bofe went intop |
lande of the nozth,and the whptfolowed them, |
and the fpekled hozles wente forth towarde the |
fouth. T befe hozles were verp tronge, went
out, andloughbt toqgoand take thep2 iournepe
ouer the wholecarth. And he fapd:-get pou héce
and go thozowe the wo2lde.Sothep went tho-


fpake nto me,fapeng:bebolbde,theletbat goto
warde the nozthe, Mall pll mp watbe in the
nothcountre, | i
And the worde of the Lozdecame wntome ©

fapenge: Cake ofthe prefoners that are come
from abplon:naimelp, Heldat, Tobiath,g J-
daa:and come thou the fame dape,and go vuto
the bouie of Joliab, the fine of Sophonp . The
take gold andfpluer, and make crotonestherof
and fet ppon the peade of Jelua,the fonne of Jo
fedech the bye preat, e (peake punto pim. pus
fapett) the Lozve of bootkes : Wepolde, the man ache. ttl
whole name tsxtbe bzaunche: and bethat pall 2°"
fprpnge vp atter bpm, xfbal buplde vp the tem pt.crroit. a
ple oft pe Lozde, pea, cuen be al buploe yp the 5
temple of the Lorde. xpe thal beare tbe pzayle, #8 >>
be al ipt pon the Lopdes trone and paue tpe
Dominion,

* & preal hal bebealfo upon bps trone and
& peaceable coticell halbe betwoprte them both. eCal.er.b
And thecrowwnes thalbetu p temple of P1020, wedz, v,at |
foza remembzaunce onto Helem, Tobiah, J- '
daiah,and Hen, the fone of Sophonp,andluche
as be farce of, tall comeand buplde thetemple
of the Lozde.that pe mape knowebow thatthe
Loade of boottesbath (cn¢me pntopou. And
thys thal come to patie, pf pe mpl berkendiligée
lye Unto the bopce of the Logde pour God.

CE aE Shen afe ees lercpe, |

the detppipnge ef ch Siege, aan tee ob GnAce ob


thepeeple.
cy. at Dappened allo inthe fourth peare %


=, Oral te ee
iar @ Se


as Saratar and Rogomelech and the men that
were topth them fent wnto Bethel foz topzave
befoze the Lozde,and that thep (bulbde {ape Vn-
to the preattes.wbhpcbe were in the boufe of the
Lozbe of hooftes,andtotbeppopbetes.buld
A wepe in thexfpith moneth, and abftapne ag *tte-rrb.b
J baue Done nowe certapne peares:Chencame
the wozde of the Lorde of boottes wntome fap-
enge: Speake ynto all the people of thelanve «
tothe ppeattes,and Cape:xobé pe faiked g mour-
ned in the fpftpxand. vit. moneeh(norw this. ler vene ja
peareg)dpope faffe unto me when penyd iate 7
alfa and dapnke dpd pe noteateand dzpnke Foz ;
pour owne (clues: Are not thele the wozdes,
wbpcbhe the Leade fpakebp bys pzophetesafe2e
tyme pen Jerufalem was pet enbabpted and

| PHY welthre


j k,
T,
|


The prophecye.


welthp,heandthe cptics rotide about hers tose
there dwelt men, both towarde the fouthandin
fhe plapne countrees:

C€C Andthe wowe of the Lorde came onto så-
charpe fayinge: Thus fapeth the Lozde of hoo=
jar viiia fhes:< recuce true udgement:thew mercy and

dmiri. a loupnge kpndenele: eucrp man tobis beotber.
zob.rriiöa Do the wpodotve, the fatherlelie, the Erannger
ITee and pooze no WroNge:andlet to man pmagyue
gere biie CUPLLAGapnt bis bzotherin his berte. «Meuer=
7 theleffe,thep wolde not take bede, but tourned
toep: backes, and topped thep: eares,thatthep
{houlde not beare: pea , they made thep2 bertes
asanadamant tone lef thep houlde heare the
‘.prtri.id Lae and wWo2des * which the Lorde of hoottes
fentin bps polpe fppzite bp the Dzophetes afore


me.
CUberfoze, the Lode ofhoolkes was verpe
D wotbatthë. And thisis it come to pafle xthat
ATED Ibe ag he pakeand thep wolde not beare, enen
fotbry crped, and J wolde not Heare ( fapth tbe
Lozde of bootees): but {rattered them amonge
all Gentples, whom thep kucwe not. Thus the
lanbe was made fo Delolate that there trauap=
led nomantuit nepther tonoz fro:fo2 that pleg-

faunt lande was btterlplapedwatte.


C Tbe. vii. Chapter:
@ Dthe retourne of the people bnto Ferulalem,and
afthemercpe of God towarde them: Of good workes
Dhecallpage of the Gentples,


oy ES D the wo2de of the Lozde came wnto

eve eae, fapinge : Thug fapth the Lorde of

Pep ja boolkes. J wasin great geloulpe ower

SSS Spon: fea, Jhane bene werpe gelous

ouer berina greate difplealure, thusfapeth the

Lode of hoottes. F wyll turne me agapne vn=

to Spon, and wpll wellin the mpovdett of Fe-

grapi.» Tulalem:*fo that Jerufalem thall be called a

fapthfulland truecptte, the bpll of the Lorde of

hooltes.Pea.anbolphpil.

‘Thus lapth the Lode of hooftes. Chere thal

pet olde men and women Dwell agapne, inthe

Gretes of Jerufalem: Pea and fuche as go toith

anes tn tbeir bandes fo: verp age. The fretes

of the cytie alfo fballbe full of ponge bopes and
damlels, plapinge Ypon the reteg.

‘Thus laptbtheLozde of hootes:pftbe refp-

25 Due ofthis people thpnkeit to be wnpofipble in

oyat. pip. d hele dapeg : *

inmp (pabt.fapcithe Lozde of booftess Thug

fapti the Lozde of boottes:2Bcholde,¥ wpll ve-

Ipuce mp people fromthe lande of the eafte and

weit,and wll bepnge them agapne :- that thep

yere. tiit Mapedwell at Jerutalem. x Chey wali be mp

pews bure People, and J wpll be tiep? God, tntrutheand

~~ tpgbtoutefie. |

Thus lapeth the Lorde of hooftes: let poure

handes be pe ie pe that now beare thefe-woz

des by the mouth of the prophetes whiche be in


thete dapes, that the foundation islaped vpon
tie Lozve of Doofteshoule that the temple map
be bupl0cd. oz why? *befoze thele dapes, nep-
töer men noz Cattell coulde wypnne any thpnae,
nepthce mpg tanp man come in and out inrett
foz trouble: but J let curry man goagapntt big


agge la


oulde it tbherfoze be vnpoflpble


nepgbboure. “Gi |
Hreuerthele tle, J wpll now intreate therelp-

due of this people nomozeasafozetpmne, fapth

the Lorde ofhooltes:* but thep Hall bea {eed of asgetia

peace, the bpneparde wall gyue becfcute, the

gtounde thal gyue ber encreate,and the beanens
thallapue thep2 dewe:and J thall caufe the rem

naunt ofthis people „to Bane all thele in poffel-

ipon. Bnd it thall come to paffe, that lykeas pe

wWereacurleamonge the Deptben ( D pe boute

of Juda, and pe boule of Ffrael)Euenflo wpl F

Delpuer pou, that pe Halbe a blefipna: fearenot

but let pour bandes be tronge.

_ Foz thus fapth the Lod ofboofkes:Ipkeas €

7 deupled to punpih you, what tyme as pour fa

thers pzouokedme bute wath, fapth the Lord

of boottes,and {pared not. €uen foam Jeter: `

mpneduowe in there dapes for to do well wito

the boule of Juda and Jerulalem,therfoze feare

pe not. Ow the thiges that ye thal Do are thefe: |

+ peake euerp man the truthe onto bis nepah epbe.ti.c

bour, erecutetudgementtrulpeand peaceadlpe 3a bbid,

within pour poztes , none ofpou pmagin euyll ~~
iubisherte af put big nepgbbour, and lone no

falle otbeg : fo2 all thefe are the thpnges that J

bate, fapth the Lo2zde.Andthe wozd ofthe Lord

ofhooftes camebnto me, faptnge-thuslapth the

Lozbde of bookes: Che fakk of the fourth moneth

the falte ofthe fpfth, the fat ofthe feuentbe,and

the fal of the tenth, all be iope and qladnefie,

and protperous byefeattes vnto the boule of Fu

Da-onelp loue the trutb and peace.

Thus lapeth the Lozde of hoolkes: There s

fhall pet come people, andthe tnbabptours of

inanpe cepties, and they that Dwell imonecptpe,

{hall go toan other, faping: ae VSTOAND Erap. tia
tape befoze the Lozde, let vs feke the Lozde of rra. crit. a
ooftes, F wplgo with you:yea, moche people 2°#FFF*

and mpabtpe Bepthen (hall come and feke the

L02de of hooftes at Jerufalem, and to prave be

fozethe Lozde. huslapeththe Lozde of hoo-

tes: Jntbhat tyme thal tenmen(out of al maner

ot language of the Genttles) take one ewr bp

the bemme of bisgqarment, and fape:we pll go

with pou, foz we baue bearde , that God isa-


monge pon.
C The.tr. Chapter.
€ Zberonueripon of the Sentpies. The compas
of Chpt tpetpngs onan alle, ,


peces De wode ofthe Lozde Halbe recep- y

ey Pa uedat Aache, and Damafcusthall

SEN EON be bis offrpnare:fo2 the epes of all nent
== AND OF the ttpbes of {lracl , Hall loke


i.


Eo ene


‘pp bntothe Lode. The borders of bemab hal


be barde therbp: Tirus allo and Sidon, for they

are berp wrie: x Tirus Hal make ber felf friar Joet. titia
Heape wp (ptuct asthe fande, andgolde asthe

clape of the ftretes. webolde,theLozd haltake —
Herin,and paue ber in poflefipon: xhe thal {mite ero, rig c
Downe her power into the fee, and the balbe c-


fumed with fpze: This Hall Aicalon fe, andbe Sev rite
atvaped.* Basa thalbe herp fo2p, fo ball Acca= Gines.i.b


tonalfo, bpcaufe ber bope ts cometo confulton.
I 02 Chekynge of Sasa thall perp: andat AL
ralon Hall no man dwell, ie |

Straungers


4,


ofsachary,


mpne epes. |
*Reiople thou greatly, O doughter Spon,


fap.tril.e
o2lo,p beng


soac.rrie be qlad,D doughter Jerufalem:


Peet ss 5 commetb nto the, eucntherpgbtous and Sa"


upour: lowlpyeand fpmple is be, berpdeth pon
anaffe,and Dpon the foole ofan affc.¥ wplrote
- gutthe charcttes from Ephraim, and the pozfe
from Jerufalem, the battaplebowes{halbe de=
roped. peall gpue the doctrpne of peace Vi
otarrrirs £0 the Depthen, xand bis dominion thalbe from
the one {ee to the otber , and from the foudesto
the ende of the wolde.
€  Thouallothozowe thebloude of thpcouc-
ecap.ritia nannt, Walt let* the petfoners out of the + pytte
Fhocwiie Wherein igno water. Tourne pou nowe tothe
ftronge bolde pe that be inpetfon, and long oze
tobe delynered. And this dape F wrlbzpng the
wode, that J wrlrewarde the double agapne.
$€02 Juda baue F bent out asa botwe fog me, €
Ephzaim baue FZ fplled. Chp founes,D Spon.
wpll Jraple bp agapnit the Grekeg, and make
the as aqpauntes werde, the Lozbe God hal
be {ene aboue them, and bis dartes thal qo forth
asthe lpgbtnpnge. Toe Lozde God thal blowe
the trompette,and ihall come foztheas a mkome
out ofthe fouth. Cee
D he Lorde of hoofkes Hal defend them, the
~ fbalconfume and deuoure,and fubdue thé wit
sapatia *Mpnge Rones. Thep tall dzpnke and rageas
irepoit. ¢ it were thorowe wpne. Thep albe fplledlphe
balensandtbe hones of the aulter. The Lorde
thep2 Godthall dclpuce them inthe dave asthe
flocke of bis people. Eor the pzecious ones of a
piademe thep thall be lct vp over bts lande. D
pow prelperous and qood!y a thpng tall tbat
be! The come thal make the ponge men chertul,
andthe newe wpne the mapdens.
€ he.x. Chapter. 3
(The propleis mowed to requpze the Dortrpne of


eruche ofthe Loree: The Lozb promprety to bprit
atd comfozte the boufe of HIrael.


y 3 | Rap the Lozd then bptpmes togpue
i E9 the Latter capne , xfo fhall the Lorde

LS BSc) make bopabtecloudes,and gpue pou
(C Se el rapte pnough fog all the encreate of p
Felde. Eo varne istheanfwereofpbols. Che
fotbfapers Te lpes, and tell but bapne deeames,

the comfozt that thep gpuc ts notbpnge worth.
Therfore qo they atrape lykea flocke of (Hepe,

ezen ptis andare troubled, bpcaule thep baueno *ihepe-
berde, )p wpatbfull difpleafare ismoucd at p
thepberdes,and J wpll bplpte the qootes. Foz
the Lorde of booftes wpil gractoufip enn


I flocke theboufe of Juda , and bolde themes a
soe goonlp fapze bozle inthebattaple. x Dut of fu=
da (hall come the belmetsthe naple, the battapl-


LI


Jal eriti,
bowe andallthe princes togpther. Thep palve

as tbe gpauntes , whiche tn tbe battayle treade

Downe the mpze bpon the fEretes. af pall
fpgbte,. foz the Lozde pall be with them, fotbat

the bozfemen balbe confounded. TEE

A wpllcomfozt the boule of Juda, and pre-


feruc the boule of Jofeph. ¥ wpll turne themal- €


fo,fo2 Ey tk art they thalbelikeasthep
were, When Jbadnotcalt themof. soz ¥the
Lozbe ain they: Gov, and wll beare them:
Ephzaim Halbe ag a apañt, andthep: bert thal
be chearefull as thozowe wpne:pea,thepe cbpl-
dzen {hall fe it and be qlad:and thep2 berte all
retople inthe Lozde. 3 topll blote foz them and
gather them togpther:foz Jwpllredeme them. .
Thep hallincreafe,asthep inerealedafore. F
toyllfowe themamonge the people, thattbey
mape thpnie Dponmeinfarre countrpes: thep
fhallpue with thep2 chpldzen,and turne agapne

J wil beypngetbem agapne alfo out of p lande
of Egipt,and gather them out of Niria, Fiil
carp them intothe lande of Gilead, anbto Liba
nus,and thep Hall want notbpnae. He all go
bpon the iee of trouble,andimptetheleewaues
fotbat allthe fondes thallbe dzpedop. The
proude botpng of Aiur halbecalk Doone, and
the fceptce of xe gpptethallbetakenawape. erprg
3 wll comfozte them in the Lorde , that tbep secre


mape walke in big name:lapth the Zoe.


ECThe.ri ter.
€ hc vena ten DoE ET raada
is commpé ted to Ch;pt bp the lather. 2 greuous bplion

Es agapnt Ferulalem and Juba. ;
Gi Wen thp dozes, D Libanus, $ tbefire $.
mayecolume thp Cedzetrees. Houle
Ne fpzretrees, foz the cede ts falle:pea
Nall p proudeare wacd away. poule
ketrees of alan for the mpghtp trög
wood is cut Downie. Ben mape heare the bep»
berdes mourne, fo: thep2 glozpets deftroped.
en maye care tpe lp ons whelpes roze,foz the
pryde of Jordan ig walkedawape.

Thus lapeth the Lorde mp God: fede the
epe of the laughter, whiche Hall be flapue of
thole that pollee them: pet tbep take itfoz no
fpnne, but they that fell tbem,fape: Che Lorde
be thanked, gamrpche: pea, thepz owne tpepe=
Heroes (pare them Hot. Therfoze wri nomoze
{pare thofetbat dwellinthe lande, ( fapetbtbe
L02de) but lo, 3 wplldclyuer the people, eucrpe
nianinto bisnepgbbours pande, andin tothe
bande of bis &pnge: that thep mape fmpte the
lande, and out of thepz bandes 3 top ll noe delp=


Her them. | |
J my felfe fedde the laughter epe (ap e 15
flocise verelp jand toke ynto me tivo ftaueg, the

onc is called loupnge kpndnefle,the otberiscal

led deftroper and fo kepte the epe. CThze Hep»

Derdes J put ont of off pce in one monet), for J
mypgbe not awape with tbem, nepther had they

anp delpteinme. Then fapde 3:3 wpli fede pou |
nomoze x thetbpngetbat dpeth letit dpe: and porpre
that that wpllperpih, letit pecptte: andletthe —
remnaunteeate , euerpe one the fieltbe of bps
nepgbbour.4 tokealfomp sae aa -


(@ peo


Che Breophecpe


| and brake it that 3 mpabe difanulltbe * couez
Dweiie ngunt wbiche J made withall people. Bnd lott
thas broken in that dape.


€ Chenthepooze fpinple Hepephadarelpecte.


puto me, knewe thevebp thatit was the worde

ofthe Lo:d. Arid Flapd yutothem:pf pe thinke

it good, binge byther mp p2ice:pfno,then leue.

mat.rrbiic x Syochen thep weped Downe ehp2tye (pluerc

pens, the balue that J wag p2pledat. And the

Lode fayde punto me: caf it vnto the potter (a

goodly price tor me to be palnedat of them)and

J tobe p rre.fpluer pens and caf them tof got-

ter inthe boule ofthe 102d. Then brake J mpne

other Cate alfo, ( nametype deftroper: ) that ¥

might looletie beotherbred bet wprt Juda and

Atracl. And the Lode fapde unto me: Cake the

allothe tafe ofa folpth tepherd: foz 10, 7 whl

D rapie vpahepherdeintbelande, woiche Wall

not (che after the thynges that be lofte , noz care

fo: {ucbeas goaftrap, be al not beale the wot

Ord He Hall not nozpib the thyng thar is whole:

but be thal cate the fielthe of luche ag be fat, and
fearethep2 clawesin peces.

D pdols Hepeberde that leaucth the locke:

Che ferde thali come dpon his arme,and på

bistyghtepe.wis arme fhalbe cleane dp vp,

p anddiscpghtope albe loze blpnded.


CThe.rtt. Chapter:
q Ofthbederruction and boplapnge agapne
ef s\erufalem,


FEMS Tye heupeburthen whiche the Lore [RP
gna AS hath denifedfo2 Ffracl. Chusflapth Ikan


fapta © Puthe Lozdexwhich {paedthebeauens jay
ee bed e wexs) Abz0de , layed the foundacponof the :


=e rtbrandgpuetb man the bzeathbof
Ipfe.25ebo!ne, J wylimake Ferulalemacuppe

of furfette, vnto all the peo pie that are rounda-
gach pitte. VOUE Der -x Pea Juda bpm {elf alfo Halbe inthe


wpi J make Ferufalem an heup fone foz al peo
ple, fo that allfuche as lyft bp. Halbe tozne and
tent: andall tbe people of the carth thall be ga-
theredtogyptheragaputtit. |

aiie x Gnthat dave, lapth the Lorde: F pil make
amoria alt hoziesabahed,and thofe that rpde vpo them
tobeonteoftheyz wpttes. ¥wpll openmypne
epesvponthe boufe of Juda, and{mpteall the
Hozies oF the people with blpndnefie. And the
pruices of Juda (all {ape in thep2 pertes: Che
inbabpters of Ferufalem {hal qpue meconfola=
cponin the Lorde ofpooltes thep2 God. Inthat
tyme vopil J make the princes of Juda lphean
... bote burnpuge ouen with wood,and Ipke acref
< Teeorfpze amonge the ftrawe,fo that they hall
confume all the peoplerounde about them, both
bpontherpgbt bande andthelefte. Ferufalem
alio tall be inbabpted agapne : nanielpcinthe

fame place wobere Jerulalem ftandetp.
€. Whe Lozde thall preferue the tentes of Ju-
| Dalpkeasafozetpme, fotbatthe glozpe of the
tunic Honfe of Pani’, andthegloape of thecptisins
of Zerufalem Halbe but lptle regarded, incom-
parpfon paed k rt Futhatdaygwal
the Lozve defende thecptising of FeruialeM, fo


thatthe weake amonge themfpalbe alk Da- tres roii?
uy: and the boule of Dmaupd thallbe lpke as
Gods houle andas the Jungell ofthe Lorde
before them.

At the fame tpme wpl y go about toveffrop
all fuche people as comeagapnite Jerufalem.
Hozeouer, ppon the boule of Daud, and ypor AETR
the cptistns of Jerufalem wpll 4 poure out the oeie
fppzite of grace and compaflis,fo that they Mal actes.11.b
loke bpd me, whom thep baue pearled and thep 20
hall bewepe bpm as men mourne for thep2 on-
Ipe begotten fonne: pea and be fozpe foz bpm as
menare lozpefo:tbep? fp: chyplde: D

* Then pallthere bea greate mournypnge at rove cre
Ferulalem:slphe as the lamentation at Adem: to.sarrpp
noninthefelde of Haggadon. And the lande!
{pal bewaple cuerp &ynred bp them felues alone -
and thepr wpues bp them felues. The tinecd of y ve rera;
the boule of * Pathanthem flues. Che kpnred 3
of the boule of Danid them felucs alone, æ their
wpucs by them felues. Che bpnred of the boule
of Leni them felues alone , and thep2 wpucs bp
them felues. Che kpured of the boule of Semei
them feluesalone,and thep2 wpues bp them Cel
ues. Fnlphe maner alltheothcr gencracyons,
euerp one bp them lelucs alone and thepz wiucs
by them felues. eee

CTbe.riii.Chavter.

CDE he well of graccandtruthe. of thecleanerpo.

Daunce ofpbdelatrpeand of falfe prophetes. i

= 2 that tyme all the boule of Då- W
FS Aut and the cptizing of Jerufalë hane Servis
Saan open x well, to wamp of me Pp Fob. fip.a


o
Lel Of booftes.)x 3 xwoplldetrope thena. Ster-ti.e
mes of the pdolles out ofthe lande : fo that thep F"

{pall nomoze be put in remembzaunce.


* 49 fo2 the falle prophetes alfo, andthe tn- 28


. | cleane (pp2tte, J thalltake them out of theland Berit. s
cge agapnite yerulalem. Atebe fametpme ©


othat pEanp of them prophecpe anye moze,
«bis owne father and mother that begat bpm, weu, riti.s
fhailfape butobpm. Chou thalte dpe, foztbou
ipsalsett lyes pnder the name of the Lorde: pea,
pis owne father and mother that begat bim thal
woundehym, when be propheepeth. And then
{pail thole prophetes be confounded, every one
of hts vpitonwhenbhe prophecyceth: neither hal
thep weare fakclothesanp moze,to difcepue mé
withall. Wut be Hall be fapne tolape: x Jam amos.vite
noproppete : Jaman hulbande man,fozfo am
J taught by x Adam fro mppouth vp, Aad pf Seneti. d
it be fayde vnto bpm: bot came thefe woundes
then tuthpne bandes: He halanfwer.Chusam
J wWounted in the boule of mpneowne frendes:
arple,D thou fwerde, bponmp thepberde, C
and po the prince of mp people, fapth the Loade


ofboottes.x<ompte the Mepherd,and the thepe Wat rie


tball be fcattredabzode: andfo J wpll tourne VPA?
mpne bande to the lptle ones. And it hallcome
topaffe(fapeth the Lode: that in all thelande
tivo partes pall be rooted out,’ but thethyzde ames. tr.
parte fhallremapne therin. And the fame tbird i ie
parte tepll¥ bzpnge thozotbe the fpzeand wl jora oia
clentfethem as thelpluer ts clenfed:pea, and trp Age |e
them lp&easgoldcistrpen. sitet a
Then hall


of Malachy,


— Santis ye Chet hall thep call wvoniny nameg ¥ wlll


Eiu biia Beare them: J wpli fapeitig mp people. And
tbep Hall tape: Lozde mp Good.
Che. ciiu.Chapter.
€ Whe waltpnge ntthe chuccye bnder the fp:
m 4 ot gJjerulalem DE Che Erogtome ofthe


708,
amar € bolbe, the Daye of the Lozdcommeth


13 Chen Hal bps fete Lande dpon the mount Dli


the north, aud tiie other cowarde thefouth. And

pe (pal fle vito the alep of niy Dplies.fo2 p vas

lepe of the bplies al reache tnta Alal.Pea,fle

fmos.t.a (pal pexlpke as pe fled Foz the earthquake inthe

tapes of Dia kpnge of Juda, And the Lorde

mp Godiball come, andall fayntes Hypth bpm.

Sutbat dape dal tenor belpabt other cleare oz

rat rpaitic opmnme. xpp (hal be that lpectal dape Which

is knowWwe unto the 102, nether dape a npabt

but abouts the eucnpngetpme it malbe lygite.

Goo trie’ k au tbattpme thal there waters of lpfe runne

out from Jerufalem:the halfe parte of tbem to=

wardethecalklec, andthe other balfe towarde

the vtterntott iee, and thall continue both omer

Kbofato andwpnter. x And the 1 ode bpm felfe Hallbe
Kpnge ourc all the carth.

At that tyme Hal there be one Lorde onlp, €
by sname Halbe but one. en all go adonte
the whole carth,as pon a felbe from Gtbea to
Renng and from thefouth to Ferulalem. Sbe
fhalbe let bp, andinbabptcd in her place:fr we
Samins porte, onto the place of the fpatt nogte,

_ and Untotie cozner porte: and from the tow2e
Sarries OEX Mananecl, wna the bynces wpne pzefes.

"~ Chere Hall men dwel and there Halbenomore
curipnge, but Jerufalem Halbe tafelp inbabp-
ted. Thys Hhalbe the plage, where with p Lod
topli fmpte all people, that baue fought agapntt
Serulalem. Qanrely,theve epe thall confuine
awape though thep tande wpa thepe fete,thep2
eped aibe coprupe in tiepr doles, ethep2 tonge
Shal conlunte m thep2 mouth. y

_ Anthatdape hall the Lorde makea greate

fedtcion amonge them,fo that one ma thal tage

| another bp the bande, and lapehpsbandes vps
sacha. rir, a tDe Pades of bys nepgbboure.x zuda thal fpabt
allo aqapnit zerufalem, and f goodes oF alithe
heathen thalbe gathered together roiide about:
goldcand Cplucr,and a Verp great multitude of
clothes. And fo hall thps plage go ouer bozfeg,
mules, camels, affes, and all the beattes pihall

be ithe book, lpkeas ponder plage was, Euc-

rp one p Temapneth then ofal the people, whpch
camcagapnil Jerufalem, Hall go ppearipe,to


Fleri.
worlbyp thekpnige(enen the Lode of booties)

* and Kepe the feakoftabernacics. Anvlotie Lerri e
what generacpon bpon the earth mocth not to fue":


Jerufalem foz to wortopp the kpnee (euenthe it. gacio


Lozde of booltes) ppon the fame Mall comeno
rayne. Pe thekpnres of Egypt gonot wp; and
come not it (hal not rayne ypon them nether,
_ hysthalbe the plage there wpth p Lore D
fopl inpte al the Meathen,tbat come not üpto
kepe ¥ feat of tabernacles:pea, tbps halve the
fynne plage of Egypte and the (pune plage of
alpcople that qo not yp to kepe the feafk of ta-
MTS r

st tpat tyme Hal thberpdpnge gereof fhor-
les bebolp vntop Lozde, e thekettelsin R02:
des boufe thalbelpke the baleng befoze the anla

ter:pea,al the Bettelsin Ferulalemand Fu
da, Halbe bolp vnto the Lorde of boites
and al thep that flape offcpnees, thal
come and take of then, edpabe
them therein. And atthat
tpme there thalbe no
mo Cananites tr
phonfe of the
zs Lode of
boftes.


€ The ende of the prophe-
cpe ofsacbary.


The bonke of the mo-
T ; donne of the pen:
C The fpei Chapter:


4 complapnt agapn® irati and bp? pretes.


CS oA Hebeupe burthen wobpyche the 8
gen A a LODE (hewethagaypntt Wrael
ie) d bp alachy. ¥baueloued pou
Nae Dex fapeth the Lozde, ¢ pet pe lap:
De) S E set ned stant Me
RS) pees * Was not Elan Jacobs b20= pone ery,
Di Ziemann ther. fapeth p Lo2b/ x pet baue ne x
toned Jacob, andbated Clan: ¥ pea, Bae goers a
made bps bplles waft and bps beritagea wp: s
derne ile foz agong. And though Evom fayd:
Well, toe are detroped, we p buplde pp a=
Capuctie places that be walked, pet (Capeh the
Lodot bottes)*ibyat thep buploed that bzake
¥Jdoone:fo that it was calleda curledlade,and Teta
a ao — the Lozbe batbeucr ben anaep
wyth al.
Dourepeshauefene it, € pe pour felucsmulk
contette.that the Le2zde bath brought thelande
of Ffraelto great honoure. xSpuloenot atone Foti
Donoure bps father, and a feruatit hismaptters :
* PE J benowa father, whereis mpne honour! peayrpiie
Pt JZ be p Lowe, whcream F feared: fapeth the
iL02d¢ of booftes.
Row to pou prettes, that defpple mp name
and ye pe fape: wherin baue we delppled thp
name? Fu thpes, ý pe offre pncleane bzead Dpon
impueaulter. And pf pe tpl fape:wherin pave
Tee ofred anp bucleane thinge pnto thes Fn this
B Ut that


ce


of Malachy,


— Santis ye Chet hall thep call wvoniny nameg ¥ wlll


Eiu biia Beare them: J wpli fapeitig mp people. And
tbep Hall tape: Lozde mp Good.
Che. ciiu.Chapter.
€ Whe waltpnge ntthe chuccye bnder the fp:
m 4 ot gJjerulalem DE Che Erogtome ofthe


708,
amar € bolbe, the Daye of the Lozdcommeth


13 Chen Hal bps fete Lande dpon the mount Dli


the north, aud tiie other cowarde thefouth. And

pe (pal fle vito the alep of niy Dplies.fo2 p vas

lepe of the bplies al reache tnta Alal.Pea,fle

fmos.t.a (pal pexlpke as pe fled Foz the earthquake inthe

tapes of Dia kpnge of Juda, And the Lorde

mp Godiball come, andall fayntes Hypth bpm.

Sutbat dape dal tenor belpabt other cleare oz

rat rpaitic opmnme. xpp (hal be that lpectal dape Which

is knowWwe unto the 102, nether dape a npabt

but abouts the eucnpngetpme it malbe lygite.

Goo trie’ k au tbattpme thal there waters of lpfe runne

out from Jerufalem:the halfe parte of tbem to=

wardethecalklec, andthe other balfe towarde

the vtterntott iee, and thall continue both omer

Kbofato andwpnter. x And the 1 ode bpm felfe Hallbe
Kpnge ourc all the carth.

At that tyme Hal there be one Lorde onlp, €
by sname Halbe but one. en all go adonte
the whole carth,as pon a felbe from Gtbea to
Renng and from thefouth to Ferulalem. Sbe
fhalbe let bp, andinbabptcd in her place:fr we
Samins porte, onto the place of the fpatt nogte,

_ and Untotie cozner porte: and from the tow2e
Sarries OEX Mananecl, wna the bynces wpne pzefes.

"~ Chere Hall men dwel and there Halbenomore
curipnge, but Jerufalem Halbe tafelp inbabp-
ted. Thys Hhalbe the plage, where with p Lod
topli fmpte all people, that baue fought agapntt
Serulalem. Qanrely,theve epe thall confuine
awape though thep tande wpa thepe fete,thep2
eped aibe coprupe in tiepr doles, ethep2 tonge
Shal conlunte m thep2 mouth. y

_ Anthatdape hall the Lorde makea greate

fedtcion amonge them,fo that one ma thal tage

| another bp the bande, and lapehpsbandes vps
sacha. rir, a tDe Pades of bys nepgbboure.x zuda thal fpabt
allo aqapnit zerufalem, and f goodes oF alithe
heathen thalbe gathered together roiide about:
goldcand Cplucr,and a Verp great multitude of
clothes. And fo hall thps plage go ouer bozfeg,
mules, camels, affes, and all the beattes pihall

be ithe book, lpkeas ponder plage was, Euc-

rp one p Temapneth then ofal the people, whpch
camcagapnil Jerufalem, Hall go ppearipe,to


Fleri.
worlbyp thekpnige(enen the Lode of booties)

* and Kepe the feakoftabernacics. Anvlotie Lerri e
what generacpon bpon the earth mocth not to fue":


Jerufalem foz to wortopp the kpnee (euenthe it. gacio


Lozde of booltes) ppon the fame Mall comeno
rayne. Pe thekpnres of Egypt gonot wp; and
come not it (hal not rayne ypon them nether,
_ hysthalbe the plage there wpth p Lore D
fopl inpte al the Meathen,tbat come not üpto
kepe ¥ feat of tabernacles:pea, tbps halve the
fynne plage of Egypte and the (pune plage of
alpcople that qo not yp to kepe the feafk of ta-
MTS r

st tpat tyme Hal thberpdpnge gereof fhor-
les bebolp vntop Lozde, e thekettelsin R02:
des boufe thalbelpke the baleng befoze the anla

ter:pea,al the Bettelsin Ferulalemand Fu
da, Halbe bolp vnto the Lorde of boites
and al thep that flape offcpnees, thal
come and take of then, edpabe
them therein. And atthat
tpme there thalbe no
mo Cananites tr
phonfe of the
zs Lode of
boftes.


€ The ende of the prophe-
cpe ofsacbary.


The bonke of the mo-
T ; donne of the pen:
C The fpei Chapter:


4 complapnt agapn® irati and bp? pretes.


CS oA Hebeupe burthen wobpyche the 8
gen A a LODE (hewethagaypntt Wrael
ie) d bp alachy. ¥baueloued pou
Nae Dex fapeth the Lozde, ¢ pet pe lap:
De) S E set ned stant Me
RS) pees * Was not Elan Jacobs b20= pone ery,
Di Ziemann ther. fapeth p Lo2b/ x pet baue ne x
toned Jacob, andbated Clan: ¥ pea, Bae goers a
made bps bplles waft and bps beritagea wp: s
derne ile foz agong. And though Evom fayd:
Well, toe are detroped, we p buplde pp a=
Capuctie places that be walked, pet (Capeh the
Lodot bottes)*ibyat thep buploed that bzake
¥Jdoone:fo that it was calleda curledlade,and Teta
a ao — the Lozbe batbeucr ben anaep
wyth al.
Dourepeshauefene it, € pe pour felucsmulk
contette.that the Le2zde bath brought thelande
of Ffraelto great honoure. xSpuloenot atone Foti
Donoure bps father, and a feruatit hismaptters :
* PE J benowa father, whereis mpne honour! peayrpiie
Pt JZ be p Lowe, whcream F feared: fapeth the
iL02d¢ of booftes.
Row to pou prettes, that defpple mp name
and ye pe fape: wherin baue we delppled thp
name? Fu thpes, ý pe offre pncleane bzead Dpon
impueaulter. And pf pe tpl fape:wherin pave
Tee ofred anp bucleane thinge pnto thes Fn this
B Ut that


ce


The Prophecype


that pefape the aulter of the Lodis not to be re
ie cd. Pf pe offerthe blpnide.ts not that cuel?
nd pf pe offer the lame and {pcke, is not that
cucli * Dea, offer it puto the prpnee, Mall be be
contente wpth the,og accept thy perlone, fapth
theZogdeotboottess _ |
And nowe make pour paper before God,
that bemape bauemercp vpon vs:fo2 fuch thin
ges Dane pe done. Sball be regarde pour perlo-
nes,tbpnise pe,fapeth the Lozde of hooftessPea
what is be amonge pou, that wplLbofomuche
_ agto thut thedozes : 02 tokpnbdle the fpre upon
Seneta mone aulter foz noughbt:xg baueno plealure in
caib you, fapeth > Lozbe of hooftes: x and as fo2 the
_- neatoffrynge, 3 wpl not accept it at pour bade.
Pracia + Foz From the rpfpng yp ofthe lunne nto the
qopnge Dofone of the laine, mp nameis greata
monge the GEtpls:pea ineuctp place Hal there
facrifpce bedone,andacleane meatofferpng of-
Fred bp tonto mp name: foz mp name is great as
monge the Heathen lapeth the Lozve of bookies
ut y baue unbalowed it in that yelape,p aul
tetot the Lorde isnot to be regarded, and the
thynge that is lef there ppon not teoztbpe to be


eaten. |

D “Now lape pe: FE is but laboure and trauaple
and thus baue Jthought {cozne of it, (fapth the
LoD of hoftes )oftrpnge robbery, pea, the lame
and the fycke. pe baue bought me ina meatof-
ferpnere, Huld FJ accepte it of pour bande, fapt
the 1.020/Curted be the dpflembler, whpch bat
in bps locke one that ig amale, gwpen be ma-
keth a vote, offeretha {potted one nto f Lod
for J am a qreate kpnge (fapeth the Lorde
of hooftes and mp name ts Fearful amonge the
Ieathen,


Eerie
epee FLL


© The.ft. chapter.


C Sbreateupnoce acapuk the pretes bepnee eduz
cers oF the people.


epee) 120 nowe( D pe pretes) thpscomait
oa Yarra Dement toucheth pou : pf pe wpll not

ual Deare itno: reqarde it,to qpue p glo-
eS) pe pnfomp name, lapeth the Lozde


SeuFFPIMY sopll curfe pour dleflpnges:pea,curte them wpl


F, pt pe donottakebede. Webolde, J Mallco

rupte pourlede,andcaft Donge in pour faces, t=

uehthe donge of pourefolempne feattes , and it
fhallcleauc fall bpon pou, And pethal knowe,

that J baue lente thps commaundemente ynto
pou:that mp*couenaunt whpch J made wyth

purre Leutmpght Rande fayeth the Lode of boottes
3 madea couenaunt of Ipfe and peace wpth

%5 bym:tbhps 3 gauebpm, oet empagbt fandein

awe of me:andfo be dyd feare me and baddemp

nate tn reucrence. Che law of truth was in bis
mourh,and there was no wpckednes founde in
byslpppes.He walked wpth mein peace equi

tie and dpd turne many one atvape frym thep2
Cpnneg. * Jo? in the peeftes ipppes (ould be fure

oteeli. b knowlege, that men mapelekethelawe at bys
mouth, fo: be is ameflenger of the Lozde of hoo

ftes. Sutas fog pou, pe are goneclene out of the


= `


a


ewe 4 w


fb oltegs.* 3 wpll fende a curle bponpou,and eS


waye and baue canted the multitude tobe offe-
bevatthelawe:xpe baue broken the couenaunt
of Leut,fapeth the Lorde of hooftes. Cherfoze

topil J alfo make pou to bedefppled, and to be FFF
of no reputacion amonge all the people:becaufe
pe baue not kepte mp apes, but haue bene par
cpallin the lawe.

x Daue we not all one fathers Path not one
God made bsrxwhp doth p one of Ys then
defpple bps otne brother and To bzeake the co
uenaunt of our fathers: Rowe bath Juda offen
ded: pea,theabbominacié ig bone in Flraeland
in Ferufalem * foz Juda bath defpled the San-
ctuarp of the £020, whych be loued, € bath kept
the Doughter of a ftraunge God. Wut the LoD ieror.tr.a
pall deftrope the ma that doth thps: (pea, both Leu.rri.c
the malter and the fcoler) out of the tabernacle
of Jacob , wrth bpm that offreth pp meatofe=
rpnge wnto the Lozde of hooffes. Nowe haue pe
bzougbt if to thys popnte agapne, that the aul=
ter of the Lozdis coueredD wpth teares, weping
and mournpnge:fo that 3 tpl nomoze regarde
the meatofferpnge,neptber topl F receaue 02 at
cepte anp thine at pour hades. And pet pe fap:
tbberfozer Guien becautethat ibbere as p Lode
madea couenaiit betwoprte the anid thp wopte of
thy pouth,thou batt deippled. «Pet is the thpne
obnecompanionandimarpedDiopie.

0 DpDnot the one,andpet had bean ercel- Seneta
lent{peete. Whatdpd then theonesHe fought
the feed pzomypledof God. Cherfozeloke well D
fopourfprete, andlet nomandelpple the wpe
of bps pouth. PE thou batet ber,*put ber away
fapeth the Lorde God of Ffraell,¢ qeue ber clo-
thpnge foz thelcozne,fapeth the Losdeof hotkes oen.sris¢,e
Loke well then to pour {pzete,¢ delpple her not Ares
Pe greue the Lode wopth pour wozdes, and pet
pe lape: where wpthall paue we greued bpm’
‘4utbps that pelape. All that do encl are good
inthefpabt of God,andtuche pleafebpm. D3
els wbere isthe Godthat punpipeth.


The.tii.chapter.
E ofthe mellenger ofthe Lorde Jobn Baptpl
of the dape OF the Lode and of elah. A
ey Cholde, x3 bpl lende mp meflaun-
a) ager, wbhpche Wall prepare the wape a ta
sA befoze me: andthe Logde + wobome Turr biic


pbe.fitia


jatha. Diib


Se


We bac) D re toolde:thall foone cometo bps të: ano.0. >.
Llanos ple pea enen the meflengerottheco ©-ruttts
venaunt whome pe longe fo


wWebolde, be commeth fapeth the Lo2de of
hooftes. Wut who maye abpdethedapeokprps e
cOmpna/ Cibo thalbe able to endure, whë be ap
peareth?sto2 beis lpke a gola{mpthes fpze and
Ipke waltbersfope. Hetpallfet hpm downeto
trpe gto clenfet i martiana poit the cpp
Den of Leut g purifpethemlpke as golde gip
uer:p they map bapnge meatofirpnges vnto the
Lozdeinrpabteoulnes. Chen aip offryng of
Juda g Jerufalem be acceptable bunto the Lod
lpkeas from the beg pnnpnge ginthepeares a-
fore tyme, 3 wpll come and punppe pou, and F
mp felfe topll be a fwpfte wptnelle agapnit the
weptcbes :againtt the apne Pua Ss
bearer:


i.


The Prophecype


that pefape the aulter of the Lodis not to be re
ie cd. Pf pe offerthe blpnide.ts not that cuel?
nd pf pe offer the lame and {pcke, is not that
cucli * Dea, offer it puto the prpnee, Mall be be
contente wpth the,og accept thy perlone, fapth
theZogdeotboottess _ |
And nowe make pour paper before God,
that bemape bauemercp vpon vs:fo2 fuch thin
ges Dane pe done. Sball be regarde pour perlo-
nes,tbpnise pe,fapeth the Lozde of hooftessPea
what is be amonge pou, that wplLbofomuche
_ agto thut thedozes : 02 tokpnbdle the fpre upon
Seneta mone aulter foz noughbt:xg baueno plealure in
caib you, fapeth > Lozbe of hooftes: x and as fo2 the
_- neatoffrynge, 3 wpl not accept it at pour bade.
Pracia + Foz From the rpfpng yp ofthe lunne nto the
qopnge Dofone of the laine, mp nameis greata
monge the GEtpls:pea ineuctp place Hal there
facrifpce bedone,andacleane meatofferpng of-
Fred bp tonto mp name: foz mp name is great as
monge the Heathen lapeth the Lozve of bookies
ut y baue unbalowed it in that yelape,p aul
tetot the Lorde isnot to be regarded, and the
thynge that is lef there ppon not teoztbpe to be


eaten. |

D “Now lape pe: FE is but laboure and trauaple
and thus baue Jthought {cozne of it, (fapth the
LoD of hoftes )oftrpnge robbery, pea, the lame
and the fycke. pe baue bought me ina meatof-
ferpnere, Huld FJ accepte it of pour bande, fapt
the 1.020/Curted be the dpflembler, whpch bat
in bps locke one that ig amale, gwpen be ma-
keth a vote, offeretha {potted one nto f Lod
for J am a qreate kpnge (fapeth the Lorde
of hooftes and mp name ts Fearful amonge the
Ieathen,


Eerie
epee FLL


© The.ft. chapter.


C Sbreateupnoce acapuk the pretes bepnee eduz
cers oF the people.


epee) 120 nowe( D pe pretes) thpscomait
oa Yarra Dement toucheth pou : pf pe wpll not

ual Deare itno: reqarde it,to qpue p glo-
eS) pe pnfomp name, lapeth the Lozde


SeuFFPIMY sopll curfe pour dleflpnges:pea,curte them wpl


F, pt pe donottakebede. Webolde, J Mallco

rupte pourlede,andcaft Donge in pour faces, t=

uehthe donge of pourefolempne feattes , and it
fhallcleauc fall bpon pou, And pethal knowe,

that J baue lente thps commaundemente ynto
pou:that mp*couenaunt whpch J made wyth

purre Leutmpght Rande fayeth the Lode of boottes
3 madea couenaunt of Ipfe and peace wpth

%5 bym:tbhps 3 gauebpm, oet empagbt fandein

awe of me:andfo be dyd feare me and baddemp

nate tn reucrence. Che law of truth was in bis
mourh,and there was no wpckednes founde in
byslpppes.He walked wpth mein peace equi

tie and dpd turne many one atvape frym thep2
Cpnneg. * Jo? in the peeftes ipppes (ould be fure

oteeli. b knowlege, that men mapelekethelawe at bys
mouth, fo: be is ameflenger of the Lozde of hoo

ftes. Sutas fog pou, pe are goneclene out of the


= `


a


ewe 4 w


fb oltegs.* 3 wpll fende a curle bponpou,and eS


waye and baue canted the multitude tobe offe-
bevatthelawe:xpe baue broken the couenaunt
of Leut,fapeth the Lorde of hooftes. Cherfoze

topil J alfo make pou to bedefppled, and to be FFF
of no reputacion amonge all the people:becaufe
pe baue not kepte mp apes, but haue bene par
cpallin the lawe.

x Daue we not all one fathers Path not one
God made bsrxwhp doth p one of Ys then
defpple bps otne brother and To bzeake the co
uenaunt of our fathers: Rowe bath Juda offen
ded: pea,theabbominacié ig bone in Flraeland
in Ferufalem * foz Juda bath defpled the San-
ctuarp of the £020, whych be loued, € bath kept
the Doughter of a ftraunge God. Wut the LoD ieror.tr.a
pall deftrope the ma that doth thps: (pea, both Leu.rri.c
the malter and the fcoler) out of the tabernacle
of Jacob , wrth bpm that offreth pp meatofe=
rpnge wnto the Lozde of hooffes. Nowe haue pe
bzougbt if to thys popnte agapne, that the aul=
ter of the Lozdis coueredD wpth teares, weping
and mournpnge:fo that 3 tpl nomoze regarde
the meatofferpnge,neptber topl F receaue 02 at
cepte anp thine at pour hades. And pet pe fap:
tbberfozer Guien becautethat ibbere as p Lode
madea couenaiit betwoprte the anid thp wopte of
thy pouth,thou batt deippled. «Pet is the thpne
obnecompanionandimarpedDiopie.

0 DpDnot the one,andpet had bean ercel- Seneta
lent{peete. Whatdpd then theonesHe fought
the feed pzomypledof God. Cherfozeloke well D
fopourfprete, andlet nomandelpple the wpe
of bps pouth. PE thou batet ber,*put ber away
fapeth the Lorde God of Ffraell,¢ qeue ber clo-
thpnge foz thelcozne,fapeth the Losdeof hotkes oen.sris¢,e
Loke well then to pour {pzete,¢ delpple her not Ares
Pe greue the Lode wopth pour wozdes, and pet
pe lape: where wpthall paue we greued bpm’
‘4utbps that pelape. All that do encl are good
inthefpabt of God,andtuche pleafebpm. D3
els wbere isthe Godthat punpipeth.


The.tii.chapter.
E ofthe mellenger ofthe Lorde Jobn Baptpl
of the dape OF the Lode and of elah. A
ey Cholde, x3 bpl lende mp meflaun-
a) ager, wbhpche Wall prepare the wape a ta
sA befoze me: andthe Logde + wobome Turr biic


pbe.fitia


jatha. Diib


Se


We bac) D re toolde:thall foone cometo bps të: ano.0. >.
Llanos ple pea enen the meflengerottheco ©-ruttts
venaunt whome pe longe fo


wWebolde, be commeth fapeth the Lo2de of
hooftes. Wut who maye abpdethedapeokprps e
cOmpna/ Cibo thalbe able to endure, whë be ap
peareth?sto2 beis lpke a gola{mpthes fpze and
Ipke waltbersfope. Hetpallfet hpm downeto
trpe gto clenfet i martiana poit the cpp
Den of Leut g purifpethemlpke as golde gip
uer:p they map bapnge meatofirpnges vnto the
Lozdeinrpabteoulnes. Chen aip offryng of
Juda g Jerufalem be acceptable bunto the Lod
lpkeas from the beg pnnpnge ginthepeares a-
fore tyme, 3 wpll come and punppe pou, and F
mp felfe topll be a fwpfte wptnelle agapnit the
weptcbes :againtt the apne Pua Ss
bearer:


i.


“o Sige¢e.t.a.b qe3.* Th


oi alacly.


| {wearers:pea,and agaynt thore that wzonge-


outlp kepe backe the bpzelpnges dewtp: whpch f


‘bere the wpbdowes € the fatberleffe, ¢ oppmene
the fraunger,andfeare not me fapeth p Lorde
of booftes.4€o2 J am the Lozde that chatigenot
and pe,( Dchplozen of Jacob ) topll not leaue of

ers *peare gone awape from st ee o2dpnaunces,
vad fence the tpme of poure fozfathers baue pe

not kepte them.

= © *Turnepenot bntome.and 3 wpll turne
sachat.a me Dito pou,lapeth the Lord of booftes,pelap:
woberin thal te turne:puldeama vlefalthed
and Dpicept fopth God as pe vie faled g dpl-
DU se sis cepte pth mes pet pe lape wherin wie wedpl-
Er “cepte wpth herran Tptpes and paneer:
ettoze are pe curled wpto penutp, be-

caule pe bpllemble pth me,al thelozte of pou.

_ & Bapnge cuerp Speh into my barne, that
there mape be meate tnmp boufe’ and pone me
pthal(fapeth the Lorde of hooftes) piy wpll
not open the wopndo bes of beaué nto pou,and
pone pou outabletipnge wpth plenteoulnef{e.


Broutiib.


ea, J all repzoue the cifumer foz pour fakes


fo p be (hal not cate vp the frute of pour qroiide
hepthcrthall the ppneparde bebareninthe Feld
fapeth the Lozde of bookes: jnfo much thatall
people hal lape,that pe be bleffed,fo2 pe balbe

a plefaunt lande fapcth the Lozde of pooftes.
Ve peake barde wordes agaynit me,lapeth
the Lozde. And pet pe Cape:Wi bat bane Wwe fpa-
Kenagapnit thes De bane aye:
2 D Fisbutlolt laboure, tolerue Goorxtibat
r p protpre baue we foz keppuge bps commaunde=
~~ Mentes , and fo: thalkpnge bumblye befoze the
job.rei,a Lode of pooitess+Cherfoze mape toe fap, that
Hera ehen2ondearehapppe, ¢tbattbep whbyehdrale
wycth ongodipneile,are (et wp: fo: thep teimpte

— God, ab pet efcape.


Mut thep that feare Sod lape thus one to -


another: Che Lorde conf pdereth and bearet hit.
Pea, itis before bpm a memoziall booke w2pt-
tenfoz {uch asfeare the Logde,and remébze pps
name: Lud inthe dape that 3 pl make(fapety


SEoi.cryt.
the Lode of hoffes they Halbe mpne owne pof
effion:anb 3 wpll fauoure them, lpkeasaman
fauourcth bps owne Connie, that docth bym fer-
upce. Turne pou therfoze,¢ confpdze what dpf-
ference ig betwprte the rpabteous and wngodlp
betwoprte bpm that feructh God, and ppm that
feructbbpmnot. —
@ The. titi. Chapter.
peee «D2 marke,the dapecommeth X
A (Aan tbat pall burne as an oucniand P!-rotta
val all the poude, pea and all fuche
as Do topcbednes, kalbe ftrawe
and the dap that is Foe tocome,
Ba (hal burne them bp (tapeth the
Lozde of hooftes fo tbat it thalleane them nei-
therroote noz bgaunche : . 7 :
Wut onto pou that feare mp name, Hal that
Sunne of rpabtcoufnefle arple,and bealth thal
be wnder bys wpnyes:pe al qo fozth,andinul=
tiplpe ag p fat calucs. pe Hall treade Downe the eb
pngodlp:*foz thep Halbe lpke the affbes buder
the foleg of pour fete in p Dape that J foal make
fapethtbe Lozdeofboottes. ——
Remember the lawe of Moles mp feruaunt
x tebpch FJ comptted buto hym in Deb foz all veu,titi.v.a
Feacl, wpth the Fatutes and ozdpnaunces.25e a
bolde, 3 wpll fendepou* Eliagthe prophet: Lr?
before the commpnge of the tape of the |
greatand fearful Lorde. * He hall
turne the pertes of the fathers


tothepechplbdzen,¢
4 ta of
thep,


Cet ee


f eia a ;
J Foe — A a


ee a tars


Luke.t.a


c
a>


C The ende of the provbecpe of Palachy,
and confequentlp of all the
Hrophetes.


‘ x sË


Fi


vE bhh a- Ga
4>


ada


toe ja


Fi a» reins


‘hPa E wing
i f
a a meee J


ete a
psa


a>” 2 4c;
Agnaty ati rift


a i G


$e) as


RE tE aadi

arr aie: Ei ai i sano
- . = ee
i “eet E TE E sE =
feast he E a A


sIr


TTE ae T Siea
piee ii


y Sar RETA


popr =m apt ATK-
kelmi


kd


pEi US Sees gis EIGENES:

Soba ip ago au peters)

saath GEADA 20

s, anitis = ve a 33 WI

$i RTEGSGIN HHN SE ES
a a ae ti


IPT


i ici os neat <i. ği-


mpi


tiA al! Be ai i joe Sosa ie ae


> ipo
E eo pegiki, aay petra |
itt, ra f SSL IIR Sg TODAY Har
~ mA fs p A


S E taa
Guat 163265 bs! *
=A ERSEN vs att terrae


ER sw nic bit


Al | CREPIDO MALORS~5~ < Ter —
I C EEPIDO MINORS- E | BIORA =" —
SS N ———


|
z |
| a
5 (Ez ’
q T =
TJ Ee È
‘


f: J heiii, E ; ee Lp ‘ i OTE # o] f \ | a
of PISpble, contapnpngethele PSIE XAK we Fa Neo
booties. E 7 A J T z on aes mA i fi E - y é
qabe mept booke of Esd2as.


F [i i
ae oe F
Pore] | jE
Es gy a
: |
vila W
TT


aire)
mh, SR ee


=
Os Bie" ae | ibe


The fourth booke of Elas.
eboo


See ai ah
Aes


of Tobiah. ex


ebooke of Judith. ps i aN
eoan t AAE of Defer. r a AIR
Chebooke of wyfedome, ———


cclefiafticus. ow


| cane soe PRP Ebe thee Chplozen | N Q
| inthe ouen. :


egg Sen |
pu He emgan 5


TE AE T


i £ EDA] rer =>,


a oh eS a pai


= (re
coy | ees ee
i ry kW) bt ii. urs i
n Mtl Bo KEA asa à
= tie 5 ATE


|


Urs, .
a a ee ee) i ed s


eS ENE


Al | CREPIDO MALORS~5~ < Ter —
I C EEPIDO MINORS- E | BIORA =" —
SS N ———


|
z |
| a
5 (Ez ’
q T =
TJ Ee È
‘


f: J heiii, E ; ee Lp ‘ i OTE # o] f \ | a
of PISpble, contapnpngethele PSIE XAK we Fa Neo
booties. E 7 A J T z on aes mA i fi E - y é
qabe mept booke of Esd2as.


F [i i
ae oe F
Pore] | jE
Es gy a
: |
vila W
TT


aire)
mh, SR ee


=
Os Bie" ae | ibe


The fourth booke of Elas.
eboo


See ai ah
Aes


of Tobiah. ex


ebooke of Judith. ps i aN
eoan t AAE of Defer. r a AIR
Chebooke of wyfedome, ———


cclefiafticus. ow


| cane soe PRP Ebe thee Chplozen | N Q
| inthe ouen. :


egg Sen |
pu He emgan 5


TE AE T


i £ EDA] rer =>,


a oh eS a pai


= (re
coy | ees ee
i ry kW) bt ii. urs i
n Mtl Bo KEA asa à
= tie 5 ATE


|


Urs, .
a a ee ee) i ed s


eS ENE


- — A A
l ee a
a - y a x peronas a f = ee F


¢


g
t
TAN RA x lead E;
Y i > è - — i 7% . 4 ~o eee EET RA X
> “ P - i A : ns A $ 4
á : 7 pws | Ga: nf
(S f
l 5 4 nll «
A a s 4 UR
| i
Ì Cad
l 1h TATI
4 ' ie a E é
H o Ja re: a4 a N i i
ahi = : a
eij 4 r i è + iT. * i w da, ts a's p x "
S S a6 a , . { À F >
eee te a ~ ep ae e J J. t TISA 4 edie 5 s € i 4 ‘mee! etli,
ô y i > ‘ oe f i -oy MNI i tee + i * we E oe
] it A ve Bis i ir yy ’ : issà aa T, $ ` r ~s f ghi
aa ETTE TER S : aL Mie of
+ ‘ È = tà J \ tt Fey, ‘ , we à
y à


Y
<-
+
k
=p
=
iy


+
*
:
4
A
+
:
okt
vii
=,
,
i


|
-i
>
>
‘Te
.
$
mp
s
=
3 Pw A
X
&
=
me


®
©
m
=
a
=
a,
mn
*
T
=
=
a
.
d
‘
.
sac


"is
PaF


<- >


in


=.) w =
} «
à
ii ry
k
p
-B
Y
T en
o2 4
»
d
€
TEI!
~~ aha
pine
=


Iy


-= h
Y
*
a
a
is


=)


renin i
——
«
$.


Pa
q 4 Ph l P neni | { f
p M LAPTA AT 7 { wal va è
N $+ qr -0 yap te ee : Val Ri m
a ; Ana Bos Pry e eal, paw, met eee vo
r i i * tæ i ]
h ú bioa. j fe > K
. oF
re


Friite


Erow. riid D2en of Jlrael. HAxpll the Dafleoner,


26


|
;


\


Erod.piid KAS IF is wzptten inthe booke of


fi.pa.trb.a (Earp A ie T
MO.cegUitt, [MEERTEN CE


PIMNAS,


The thprde booke of


02
ouife


take p charge of bis people of Jfrael after pour
bpllages and pour trpbes:acozdpnge askynge
Dauid the kpnere of Alrael bath odepned, and
accozbpnge as Salomon Poesia bath bono
tablp prepared: pee: loke ý pea ldo ferupce inp
temple accozdpnge to thepz ozd2pnae g dplrp=
bucpon of the papneppall men whpchare appo-
tinted ont of thetrpbes,todoferupce to? thecbpl
prepare
ofitinges foz poure bretzen and do accozdpnq
to fhe commaundemente of the Lozbde, wobpcbe
wag gae onto Woles. And onto thepeople p
was tounde, Jolias gaue.rre.thoulade of epe
lambes,kpddes,and qoates,and thre thoufand
oren. Chele the kynge( ofbps kynalvelpberas
lpte)qaue vnto the “o's e, acco2Dpng as he bad
piompfed:¢ to the pzealtes foz the Paflconer,be
gane two fhoulande thepe, and an bundgcd orë
WHozeouer Fechoniag, and Semeias, and Paz
ehanaell,bysb zethzen, and Halabias, Febiel,¢
J ofabab gaue them to the paffeoucr,fyue thou:
Cande Hhepe.and fpue pundzed bullockes.
And when thefe thynges were brought to
paile, the preaftes and the Leuptes ode good:
lp in thep2 ordze,¢ bad the onleuened bzead tho
rowe out thetrpbes. And after p ordapnere of p
prpneppall men inthe tepbes, they offered unto
the Lode in thelpabte of thepeo leaccozdinge
: Moles, e foo
thep rotted the Calter lambeas accozding was
As foz the thanckeofferpnges æ the other,t ep
ight tn the kettelles epottes,e let them b ore
ý people wpth good wyll, ¢ afterwarde vig
them (clues the preatkes.s€o2 the preaftes offe
rede the fat Dntpll the tpme was exppe but p
aLeuttes prepared foz them felues €fo2 thep2 bze
thzen the chplozen of Aaron. The bolp (pngers
alfo,the chpldzen of Alaph Kode in they2 ower,
accodpnge as Dauid deupleo.Hodpo Afapb,
sacharp,¢ Jouthum, which were appointed bp
the kpnge. Hozeouer the porters ¢ doze hepers
fodebp the Doozes and that dpligently, fo that
none Went out of bys Fandpnee ad ferupce:fo2


thep2 breth2€( rhe Leuttes \pzepared for them,


Thug were all hynges perfourined,that belon
Sed to the offerpnge of the Lede. Jn that dape
they belde the Pafleouer and offered thanckeot:
Ferpnges belpde the facrpfpce of the Lozd acco
bpngeto thecommaundement of kpng Zolias.
So the chplozen of Jfrael which were thë
1efent belde an honourable Pafleoue
cate of fwcte bzeadeleuén dapeslonce . Dee
fuche a Pafleouer was not kept in Fleaell from
tbe tpime of theprophete Samuel. Andall the
Epnges of Flrael, belde not fusbean Eafteras
thys whyche kpnge Jolias held and the peettes
the Leuptes, the Jewes, and all Firaell, ofal!
tbem that were at Jerufalem. And in the evade
tencpeareoftherapgne of Joltas was this Dal
feouer kepte. And tò a perfecte berte dpd kpnge
Joliag ozder all bps worckes, before the Lode
and the thypnges that were weptten of ppm in
fpimes pafe,concernpnge thole that finned and
Were ungodly agapnlk the Lozde before al peos
pie oat foughte not È wode of p Lozdevpor
Afrael. x Afterall thee
Pbaraop kı g j
arde Carmis bp Euphrates, g Jolias wente to
mete bpm. Thenlent ý kpngof Egipte to Joli-
a9,faping-what baue ¥ to dowith the, D king
of Juda?Z amnot Cent of f Lord to Foabtagap
tutte the, foz mp warre ig bpon Euphrates qo
Ÿ thy wap bomeagapneinalp bat. And Jati-
as wolde not turne acaine bpon his charet but
Dndettoke tofiqbtéarapntbi,g berkened not
onto pworde of the prophet, which be told bpnt
Out of the mouth of God, but pptcbed battayle
agapnit bym tn tbe Felde of Hageddo.And the
perne peated to kpnge Joliag. Then fapd ep
nge Dnto his feruauntes.Carp me away out
Ob the battaple,fo2 J amore wounded. And im
mediatlp bis feruauntes toke bpm awap ont of
the fronte of the battaple. Chen lathe bp bpon
the feconde charet,cameto Jernfalem, dped. ad
Was burpedin his fathers lepulchze, Andin all
Surpthep mourned foz Jolas, pee, p rulers aifo
w theirt wpues madelamentacpo fo: bpm nto
tbis dap, And tbig was done euer Epl in Fracl.
‘Thefe tppnges ate w2ptten in the booke of
the fortes of the hinges of Zuda,namelp all the
actes € Worckes of kpnore Jolias, bps kyneipe
power € mately, bys onderfandpng inp lawe
of God, E what he dpd, yee, thpnees whiche are
hot weptten in the boke of the kpnges of Ffrael


and Juda,” Bnd the peopletoke Fechonias the rate, eed
q made Dp kpige ii eade of t-va,rrvia


fonne of Yofias, |
Jottas bis Father, when be was.-rrrtif.pere olde
And be of Mi ouer Zftael. fit. monethes. And
p kyna of Egypte put bym downe,> be hulde
notrapgne th Ferulatem, erapfed ppatare of
the people :namelp, anbundzed talentes of fpl-
uer and one talent of golde . The kynge of E-
gppte alfo made Joachim pre bzotber kpnge of
Juda and Jerufalem. Ag 02 them of the kyng:
Tes councell wpth the kpnee bpm felfe and a=
raceleg Dpsbzother , betoke them and carped
them awape prefoners into €agppte.

Sipue and twentpe pere olde Was Joachim
when be wag made kynge in thelande of Ju-

aaatt


rand the E


ba,


SEL. fi,


actes ofkpnge Foltag, cst. regars
cok Egipt went vp came fow FE
ITED D,


The, tif. booke


dA aNd Jerufalem, g Hedpd euel befoze the 1020

üti. zegum After thisxMabuchodonofog the kpnge of a:
rritia  bploncame bp, bond bpm wpth bades of pon
€ caried pm bnto Babilon. Nabuchovonoloz

allo toke al the veffels $ were halowed in the té

ple ofthe Lozbe,¢all thr iewelg, carped theni

nto abilo,¢ bzought them into pis owne te-

pleat Wabilő.DEhig vnclennes g Dngodlines,

itis wyttten intheboke ofthe actes of the kpn-

ees. And Joachim his line rapgned inbis Kead

F ye was made kynge bepnge. rviii. peare olde,
erapgned but. iii.monethes ¢.r.Dapes in gern-
falé,¢dpd euel before p Lorde. So aftera peare
PLabuchodonolor fét €cauted hbimto be brought

; wntoWabilon w ý bolpvellels of p Lozd emade
Sedechias bis brother kig of Juda g Jerulale,
whë he was.rri pere olde: eherapgned.rt.pere

And be dpd euel alfo inthe fiqhte ofthe L020

| and cared not fo: the wozdes that were poken
Fet-FFet.a yneo hymx bp the peophetegeremp at p mouth
ofthe Lode. And where be bad made an oth vit

to king Nabuchodonoloz,be forlwoze him felfe
g fell frombpm baupngea Epfnecke ta berte,
traniqreficd allthe atutes g ozdDpnaunces of p

Lode God of Fracl. Che rulers alfo and the

beades of the peopleof the Lozde did much euel
¢ became bugodlpe,moze then the Heathen. be-

pnae defpled inall maner of abbompnacpons:
Vee, edefpled the holy temple of the Lozde at Fe
rulalem. And the Gob of thep2 fathers lent bys
ineffaunnaers Lnto them, to turne them backe:¢
tocaltbe agapne from thep2 fpnnes:fo2 be wol-
_. befapne baue pared them fo2 bps holy taberna
© cles fake . Neuertheles, they bad bys meflaun-
rersin derplpen:eloke what God fpake vnto

themby bps propbhetes, thep made but afpozte

of if. Chps Diewe onlo longe tpl the Lo2d was

woth with bys people fo: tbey: bnqodlpnes,¢
tpl becauled the kpnges of the Chaloestocome

Dp, Which ewe their poe men w the wearde,

pee, cueninpcompafle of they2 bolp temple, ad

[pared nobody, nether pig no? olde,nether map
dennozpong ma,but thep were al delinercd in-

to the powze of the hinges of the Chaldces, tal

Pp bolp veflels of the Lozd ethekinges treafures

gerempe, toke they ecaried them vnto Mabtlo.+As fop
rreic-b  ponfeoftbe Lozde.thep went bp into tt,ebzent
and. f+ « brake Downe p walles of Jerulal€, fet Epre


pps ber towers, detroied alber noblebuildigs M


gbzongbt thë to naught, p people p were Rap-
new thefwearde,thep carped nto Wabplon.
 Thusbecame thep prefoners and bondmë
of the kpng of Wabplo,tpll thep were deliucred
Fererrb.c erapaned fo2 themfelues, + whe the wordes of
andre §F% 920 were fulfplled, wobpch be promilped thé
pthemouthofp prophet Jeremp, till thelan
pebad ber refte:namelp all the tpme tbatit lape
walte pad it refte and quyetnes Ire vtt.peares.
C The.ti. Chapter.
EcCirve geneth licence tothe gewese Coreturne fo Fe
rafalemt,end reftozeth them the beleles of the
temple. After that arethere letters fent ta
Artharerfes:whpeb accule th: Fez
ives Fo? buplopng of the cptic:
and fo iethe buplopnge
. Brpurnofbntplp
feconds prare of Datius.


aa Divextohen kpng Cprnsrapqned X


(eA Jouer the Perfians,s whe the Lorde a
/ wey” olde perfourme the worde thathe ”
ASG bad paompled bp the monthe ofthe
caw prophet Jeremp:p Lode rapled vp
the ipzete of Cirus,p kpnge of the Perlias:to p


be caufed this wzitig tobe proclapmed thozow
oute bps whole realme, faping: Chustapeth p
kpng of Perltis: Che Lozde of Flrael that bye
Lowe bath made me kpng off lande, comma
unted me tobuilde bpm an boule at Jerulale in
Few.p. PE there be anp nowe of poute people, p
Lorde be wpth bhim, and qo bp wrth bpm to Fe
rufalem. And all thep that owel rounde abonte
that place thal belpe them, whether it be dgold
wpthipluer,wpth qpftes, wpth bozfes and ne
cellary catel,¢ al other thingesp are brought w
a frewpl tothe boute of the L020 at Jerufaient.
- Chen the Pepneypall men out of the tribes 15
€ Dpllages of Juda, and Wen Jamin ode vp:
fo bpd the prealtes allo æ the Leuttes(wobomep
102d bad moued)to govp,e tobuyld p poule of
ofthe Lozde at Jerufalem. And thep that were
aboute them helped them with al maner of gol-
de,*{pluer,and catel allo, with many lpberal
gpfies,and thys dpd manpe one, wobofe mpnde
Was ered bp therto.xkynge Cpzug allo b20- i rosa fc
ugbt forth the veflels,¢ oznamentes, that were
Halowed bnto the Lozde( which Mabuchodona
{oz kpng of Babplon bad caried awaye from
Jerufalem and confecrated them topps Zvoll,
and pinage( tdelpuered them to Wethzdatug,
bystrealurer,and bp bpmtbep were delpuered
to Salamanalar f oebite in Few2p. And thps
was p nombze of thé. f.).¢.t01.€. fluer bon-
les.rex.filuct bafens.cer.batens of ee:
tti. d. veels of fplucr,¢a.@). befpde. Al the
veflels of cold ¢ fpluer were. v.42). viti. C. and
It. Chele were nombzed onto Halamanafar,
and Fie Werecome agapne wh bpm to Fez |
rufalé out of f captinite of Sabil. Powe ah Lei.
time ofkig Artharerfes f kpne of erlia,thele
mé: alemus g Githrdatus, Habellius, Ra-
thimus Daltbemus,Demelius p {eribe,¢ other
ý dwelte in Samaria ¢ in other places pnd erp
Dominto therof,wzote a letter vntokpnge Ar-
thareries ,woberin they coplapned vnto p kinge
of them in Fewey q Jerufalem. The letter was
adeafterthys maner. Sp2thpleruauntes ©
Rathimus, TOME ego eran abelling thetcep.
be.t other iutges of thecourteinCelofiria,and
3p Aee it knowengmanifet to our lode
thebing,p the ZJewegwhpeharecome vp from
pou onto vs into therebellpous & wpcked citie
begpnne fo buplde it agapne,and the walles ac
bout tf,and to let vp the templeanewe. Powe
pitbiscitiee the walls therofbefet bp agapne
thep Hall not onelp refule to genetrybutcs and
fares but alforebell btterly agapnite the kpng
And foz Comoche as thep take thys in bandeng
we aboute the temple, we thought itreafon, to
thpncke no {come of if but to Merwe it pnto oue
Lozde the kpnage, and fo certpfpe bpm thereof:
fo the intente that pf pt pleafe the kpnge. be
mape caufe it to be foughte in the Bookeg
of clde


—_— ==


=a.


az T _ =
ne a


Of olde: thon Hálte fyndefuch warnpnge wp
ten,¢ fhaltconderffade p thts cptic path altwwa
bene rebellyous and dplobedpente, that it bat
Cubbued kpnges ecpties,¢ that p Jewes which


dwell therin,baue bene a rebellious , obffpnate.


tnfaptbful æ fpabtinge people, fo: the whyche
caulethiscitie ig wafted. Wiberfoze nowe we
certpfpe oure lode tbekpnae tbat pftbps citie
be buplòcdand occupped agapne, and the wale
les thereof let pp anewe,thou cant baucno pa
fageinto Celoliziaand Pbheniccs. -
‘Then wrote the kynge to Rathimug, the
D Eorp w2pter,to Walthemug,to Sabelliug, the
fcrpbe,¢ tothe other offpcers ¢dwellersin Di-
ria and Dhenices after thps maner: J bauered
the eppitle whpch thon lentet vnto me, baue
. commaundedtomakedplpgent fearche,¢ baue
Found, ý thecitic bath ener refifted kpuges,that
the fame people are dpfobedpente,and bauecau
fed muche toarre,s thatmpabtpe kpnges paue
tapgnedin Jerufalem, wbpeh alfo baucrapfed
Dp tares of Siria and Whenices. Wherefore y
pane commaunded thole people f thep thal not
upldethecptie, pthep make nomoze init, and
that thep procead no fortper wpth the buplding
Foz fo mucheas it mpabte be the caule of warre
and bpipleature puto kpnges.


Rowe when Ratopmuz ¢ Aabellins ehe b


fcrpbe g the rulergin the lande bad red the wp:
tpnge ofkpnge Artharerles, thep yat them to-
geather, and came mall the batte to Ferulalent
wrth an hootte of hozfemen, and-wpth muche
people of foote, and forbade themto buplode.
And lo they lefte of from buylopnge of the tem:
ple, onto the leconde peare of kpnge Daring,
€ The.tii.Chapter.


Carins maketh a feat. The thse fentences of thechze
. ponge men, ofthe whpch the fpztis declares.
(ate Onge Darius made a great feat onto
A) Cea bys feruanntes, Dntoallbpscourte,¢
bY AU ltoallthe offpcers of @)edea and Per-
easter (la,pee,toalltbedebptes and rulers p
were boer bpm, from India nto Ethopia,
an Hundzed e.revit.coltrees.o whé thep had
eaten tdzonken being Catilfped, and were gone
Dome agatne. Darius pking went into bps cha


bie,lapdDebpmdownetoflepe,andfo awaked. E


5 Then p thre ponge men, p &epte thekigesper
fone,¢ watched pps body ,commonedamonge
the felues,¢ {patie one to another: let enerp one
of vs fap fome thige loke whofe fentence ig
wpler ¢ moze ercellent then tbe other, nto him
thal kpng Darius qeue great apftes,a cloth bi
w purple. He thal geue binrveflels of yold, ¢ to
dzik t,clothes of gold ¢couctiges:he thal make
Dima cofflp charet ¢b2idle of gold, be thal qene

int a bonet of wobpte (plke,¢.a chapne of gold a
out bis necke:pee,be thalbe p feconde ¢ pzpnep
alnerte bntokpnge Darius,¢ that becaule of

ig wifdome,ethalbe called thekinges kinfma
Ca Hocuerp one wrote bis meanpna fealed it
and lapde it vnderthebpnaes velowe,elapode:
when the kynge arpleth, we will gene bpm our
waptpnges, andloke whole wordethe bpnee g
bps chefe Lozdes tudge to be the moofte wyielp


breke Downe:pf be cOmaund to plant thep plat.
Aaa tit E


poken, the fame Hall hauethe bpctorpe One
wzote:delpne is a Fronge thpnge. Cheleconde
wote: The kpnge is roger. Che thpade wot
Women hom pet moze frength, butaboue all
thpnges ptruthebeareth awape h ctezpe.
Howe woen the kynge was eplen bp, thep toke
corp? Westpnates gdelpuered thé bntobym.efo
be red the. Chen lent be forth to call al bps chefe
lozdeg g all the debptes grulergof p coutreesof
)ediae Perlia. And whe they were fet dawne
in the counfaple the weptpnges was red before
them. And becommaunded to call foz the ponge
menè thep mpgbt declare thep2 meaninges thé
felues bp mout Do when thep were lent fo2,¢
came in, tbekpngelapde wntotbem:thewe bes
make bs Dndecftande what the opnaesarep
Pebauewzitten. Then beyan thefirtwbich —
bad fpoken of the Erengthof wpne) efapde:D -D
pe men+ Wine ig merueloug tronge g ouercont


micth them ý dapneke ít: it deceaueth the mpnide Pio.


Ebzpngeth bothe the pooze mangey kpngeto


t


iE Likt apoiada Fop king amope reape


de to fmite, they (mpte:Pfbebpddpueawape,
thep Depucawap:pt he cOmaundfo bupld , thep
buplde: Vibe commatide to breake Downe, they


Che


The, iij baoke


dabell.the fonnes of sapheus,thefonnes of Ag»
gia the fonnes of Sacharet, the founes of a=
bathent, the fonnes of Saroneth, the fonnes of
*Hallit, the formes of Anta, the fonnes of a-
fus,thefennes of Modus, thefonnesof Suba,
thefonnes of Enra , thefonnes of Rabotig,the
fonnes of balphat, the fonnes of Walmon.
All thefempnplred inthe Hanctuarpe, ¢ Were
fernauntes of HSalomon:euen.tiit.€. Werte.
Thele folowpnge are thep, that wente bp
from Cbhelmelat Chelarfa( whole Prices were
Carmelamand Careth)and myghtenot ewe
forth thepzcptpes¢ kpnredes,bowe thep were
of Jfracl:the fones of Dalarus, pfonnesot Cu
benthe fonnes of Mechodaicus.sDéthe preattes:
thaterecuted p offpce of the preattnone.6 were
notfounde: The lonnes of Obia,the fonnes of
Achitog,the fines of Addin, whych marped one
of the daughters of Pharlegé, and were named
afterbpm. Che weptpnge ofthefame kpnred
was fought inthe regefter of thep2 generacpor
butit was not founde: and therefore were thep
fozbpdden to erecute the offpce of the pzeatthod
Tinto them (apd Mebemias, and Afthbaras that
they hulde baue no pozcpon inthe Sanctuarp,
tpil there rofe bpan bpe pzeatte, that were well
infEructe in the plaineclearenefleand truth. DE
al Brael(belpde feruauntes and mapdés )éhere
were.rlif. @).ti. C.e. rl. Powe were there offer
tlatites g mapdés. vit.) 1. ¢.rrr01. DE lpn:
pnge men and fpngpnge women there were. ft
unded g lev. Foure hundzed g. rrvv.camcls,
Syeuen thoufande,and.crrvi.po2les. Two hu-
| Dzed.@). tl. Mules. fepue.&).and.rxrv. alles.
E ` Chepz beadesg allo and the rulersin the trp
bes, when thep came to Jerufalem ,and wolde
bupldeand fet vp the temple of Godagapnein
bps place,thep gaue(after thepzbabplitejunto
temple,to tbe trealure, and tothe ferupce ofthe
Hanctuarpe.rii.).poudes of golde, fpue thou
[ande offpluer, and anbundzed preattes garme
ted. And fo dwelte the preattes and the Leuptes
q the people that wente oute to Jerufalem, and
inthe countrpe there aboute, thefpngersalto g
ý pozters,euerp one of Ffrael in bps owne lade.
semira . * Dowhenthe feuenth moneth came-and
bps bulpnefiethep came all wpth one affente it
tothe courte whpcbe was before the Calldoze.
And there ode Jelua p Conne of Foledec, bps
bzetbzen the prealtes,and so2z0babell, the fonne
of Salathpel,and bys brethzen, lettpnge bp an
aulter,to offre burntelacrifices bpon it as it ig
waptten inthe lawwe of Boles.
Sherecame people allo of other cotitries ad
the Heathen out of alllandes, tofet vp p aulter
in bis place and offred facrpfices and burntcof-


ferpnges onto the Lozde inthe moznpnge. and.
fo thep belde the feafte of tabernacles, x asitis.


eee > commaunded in the lawe. And dailp offced thep


ii.macd.i-¢ ag accozdpnae was and made the lacrifices âp-
popnted, the offerpnges allo of the Saboties,
Late iiib AND OF Che newe moones,and all bolpe fealtes.x
And all thep that vowed offerpnges wnto the
Lo2d, beqanne at the newe moone of the feucth


when the chpldzen of Firael were euerp manat


moneth to offre unto God, for the temple ot the
02d Was not pet builded. And thep gaue vnto
malong € carpenters,monye,meate,ed2pube.
with cbeatfulnefle.cintotbemcf Sidon, allog
Tire, thep gauecarres, $ thep thuldcarp Cedze
trees from Lpbanus tobe topftes, and beames
and that they hulde make thpppesinthe bauen
of Joppe accozdpngeag it was appopnted and
ozdepnedbp Cpiuskpnge ofthe Perlpans. | iF
And inthe feconde peare, thep cameintop
temple of God, at Jerufalem, * Autheleconve ec.rrir.b.c
monetd began so20babel the fonne of Salatht-
el, Jelua thelonne of Joledec,e their brethzen
thepzealtes and Leuptes:andal thep that were
come vnto Jerufalem out ofp captinite of 15a-
bylon,¢laped peur of the temple,t §
newe mone of the feconde moneth in the feconde. |
pere,p thep were come intoxewey g Jerufalem.
And thepa pointed ý Leuttes( that were aboue,
re.percold)wuto the Cerupce of the Lordelo Je-
fuaand bps fonnes,and bps beche ali the Le
uptes tode together,and perfourmed the lawe
and odpnaunce in the boule of the Lorde.
And the preaftes ode, and had thep2 gar-
mentes and trompettes and the Leuites, the ld.
nes of ALaph, bad cpmbales, geupngethankes '
and pzaples nto the Lorde, accozding *as Da ipar.rbi.b
uidtbekpnae of Flraclhad ozdepned. |
And tbelonge that thepdpd{pnge buntothe
Lo2de, was after this maner.* D fpnaetntop Hr hin
Lo2de,fo2 be ig gracious, bps goodnefie bpon 7
Ffrael endureth fo: cuer. And al p people blewe
out wpth trompettes lange wpth lowde bop
ce prapipnge the Lozdetogetber.in thereaving. ©
up of the boulcofp Lorde. Cherecame allo fro 1.co, it.
amonge the preattes g Lenites therulers and el
derg accowdingetothetrpbes ekpnredes (fuche
as bad fene the boule afoze)tothe buplopnge of
this teinple with great erp, greaf moucnpng
many allo wpth trompettes egreattope: Zn fo
muche,that the trompettes mpgbte not well be
berde for the wepinge g mournpnge. Foz the co
mune peopleblewe goodly bponp trompettes.
x Then came the enempes ofthe trpbes of tns
Juda ¢ Ben Jani,to knowe what that trompe
tpnge enople of hawimes mpghtbe. And thep
percepucd p ifwasthep which were come agap
neout of captinite,¢ wolbebupld the temple bp
a newe dntothe Lowe God of Frael. Sothep
went tosozobabel,and Jelua,and therulers of
the bpllages, efapde vntothem. Hballwe bu:
ide wopth pou alfossto2 we likewile bane beard.
pone 102d, and we walke after the fame maner
romtbe dapegof Asbalareth the kpnge of Af-
{pria,wobhpch brought bs bpther. Chen soz0ba=
belg Jefta and the rulers ofthe vpllages of FL
rael,fapde bnto thent: tis not mete, p pemula
bupld p temple of our God w vg, we our felucs ;
alone wpl bupld puto p Lozde,lphe * ag Cirug i erts
p kpnee of the Werlians bathcommaunded vs.
Wut the Heathen tn thelandlapde them fel:
ries agapnf thole that were in Jew2p,beldevp -
the buplopnae from them, laped wapte vps the
pzcuplpe {topped fuch as bzoughteanp tppnge
tothent,fo2bad them to buplde, g bpndzed pate
that


that made them paflage,} thebuployng mulde
not befpnpiped:and toys contpnued fo longas
kpnge Cyprus lpued:and fo thep put of the bupl-
bpng, for thefpale of two pereg, wntpl p ratgne
of kpnge Darius.
C The. vi. Chapter.
C Aggcus andzacharp propbecte.zhep buploe the


temple without eto? bpndereunce,bp the
_____ eoinmaunbemente of j


Darpus.

sway oy Dtwpthtandpnge, inthe leconde
A |apere of the raigne of Darius.* Ag
M Ben sets esacharpetbefonne of Addo,
Hy EV 44a Wpopbecied bpd the in Jew2y,¢ Fe
14 NE sy }tufalem, tithe name of the God of
. Eee) Firael: x Chen sozobabel, p fonne
Salathiel,¢ Jelua the fonne of Foledec od vp
€ beqanne to builde the Doule of p Lo2zde at Je-
rulalem, when p prophetes ofthe Lozde helped
them. At plametpmecame Ditennes p wnder
thzeuein Dirta,¢Wbenices, with the lanlordes
€ bps companians,and fayde onto them: Who
batb bydden and commaunded pou to buplo the
Houle.to make theroofe and all otberthpngesa
gapne! And who are f woke men that buplde
them? Neuerthelefie, the eldersofp Jewes had
fuch grace of the Lorde, $ they wolde not be let
(fhoughe thep were pronoked therto)but bupl-
ded on (Epil, ontpll the tyme that kyng Darius
wWerecertpEped therof, and an anlwere receiued
from bpm. he letter that thefe men fente vnto

Kpnge Darius was afterthys maner. i
sPifennes the onder Sbzeue in Hiria and.
Pbenices,and fr landlozdes wopth thepz com-
panpons,wbhpch are hedrulers in Siria, Phe:
npeeg; fende dil ikini a vnto Darius the
kynge.Wlecertifpethelowethe kyng,that we
came info thelande of Jewap and wentto Jern
x5 falem:wbere we folide them bupldinge p great
boule of God, and the temple, wpth great cot-
ly fre tone and with goodlp tymbze fo: p wal-
les:pee,thep make great batt wptb the woke,
and Delpe one anotber,and it qoeth forth prolpe
routlp in thepz bandes,and with great dilpaeéce
g worlhip ig it made. Then alkebd we the elders
Who bad commañded thent,to makevp p boule
and the buyldpngesand thps we dpd , tothe en=
tent that we mpgbtecertpfpe the perfectlp,and
wepte bnto the,the names of thole that were p
rulers of the woke. otep raue bs thpsan
fwere:we are the feruauntes of p Logde, which
fixe, bia, MADE Heauen and earth,¢as fo2 thys boule, xpet
bath bene buplded and fet © afoze tpme bp the
great and mpabey kenge of Ffrael. Wut when
our fathers pzouoked God wnto wath, lined
agapntt the God of Flrael,+he aue them ouer
into the powe of Qabuchodonoso2 king of wa
bplontbekpnge of the Chaldees,whyche brake
Downe the boufe and bzent it,andcarped awap
the people preloners nto Babplo.x Neverthe
leffe,in the fp2tte peare that kpnge Cyrus rape:
nedat Dabplon, Cirus the kpnge wote com:
maunded,to buplde bp the bonte againe:and al
the oznamentes that Mabuchodono3zo2 caricd a
wapefrom Jerulalem nto Wabild,and appro
p2pated nto bys owne temple:thefe bzougbte


a


aoot.ie


iii eegun.
riii erb
FEFEFE
«lit.


EEDD


Cprusfothagapne and delpuered themtoso: SY


Df Clhras,


JEol. b,


2obabel and to Salinanalar, the under zeuc,
commaundpnge them, that thep Mulde bapnae
thole fame onamentes agapne to Ferufale, it
to the temple and begpn from} tyme forth, to
buplbde the temple agapne,in bys owne place.
Then Halmanalar lapde the foundacion of the
Lozbdes boufe at Jerulalé: euer feng thep dane
buplocd,and pet isnot ended. And therfore, D
ipnge,pl thou thpnkelt tt good, let (t be fought
in the Lybzarpes and rolles of kpnge Cirus. PE
it be founde then, that itis done wytbpcouncel —
and conlent of kpnge Cpzus,epé oure Lorde the
kige be fo minded, let him write pntovs therof.

_ *Chencommaundedkpng Darius tofeke č
inthe L pbraries:and fo at Eqbathanis ina lp- i E-6s4
tle cptie in edea there was found fuch a wip.
by Ma the Ey2i peare of therapane of Cirug
thelame king Ciruscommaunded that p boule
of the Lozde at Jerufalem thulde be buplocd a-
gapne and odoures there tobe madecontinual
lp bito p Lozde whole hepah thalbe.r.cubites
€ the bzedth thee lcozecubttes,and foure (quare
with the bewen ones, with alofte of tpmb2e
of thefamecountrpe: pea, witha new lofte and
the expences therof to be geuen of the boufe of p
kpnge Citug:and the oxnamentes of goldeg [pl
uer that Nabuchodonoso2 toke out of the boufe
ofthe Lorde at Jerufalem, albe fet agapne in
the temple at Jerufalem, wher thep were afore
Hilennes allo f vndertreue in priat Phe-
niceg, ppzpnices and tbep:companiong, and the
ofherp bebeadrulers in Siria g Pbhenices hal
not medle no? baucanp thig todo with p place.

4 Citrus baue commaunded allo.) thep wal z
buplde the boufe of the Lorde hole bp,and pauc ~
o2depned them,tobelpethote that be come onte
of captpupte-tpll the boule of the Lozde be finy
Ched:and out of the trpbuteand tarpnge that is
pearelp rapled bp in Dpzia e Phenices,diligen
tly to gene them acertapne lime of the offering
Of the Lozde:and the fameto be delpuercd tnte
3020babel the offpcer tbat hetherewithal mape
oepneoren,cammes,lambes, andcozne, falte
wpne , and ople, and thatcontpnuallpeenerpe —
peare:after theerpencesxtwhpeh thepreattes p #2 %*

eat Jerufalem, bewe tobe made daplp e,thps
halbe genn Dito them wpthoute delay, ý thep
map offer facrifices daplp to bighe Gop foz
the kpnge and fo: bps feruaunteg and to pape
foztbepzlpucs.Letitbepzoclapmed alfo on cue
tp fpde,p wholoeuerbzeakethozdpippieth thig
commaundemente oftbekpnge, Halbe banged
bpon a galowes(made of bys owne good) and
al bis eones halbefeafoned ynto p king. The
Lozb thertoze( whole name is there called vps)
roote out and deftrop althekpnaes and people
that pndertake bp biolenceto Dindzep fame,o2
to deale Dncurteouflp wpth the boule of p Loz
at Jerufalem, J Darius pkyng baue ozdepued
Ý thelethpnges Halbe done wpe all dpligéce..

The. vit. Chapter


Tbe templets fpuphed and dedicate:
| ofthe buleuened biran is ans 9 eman


Eoen Spitennes the vndertozeuein Celo- a


mi litta,and ~benices, gf otberlandlordeg
Aaa v wrth


X5


The.itt.booke


wth thep2companpons, obeped the thynges,
that kpnge Darius had o2zdepned, and were dp-
Ipgent in the nolp wozkes,and were felowebel:
ners wpth the old rulers of the ewes. And lop
woke ofthe Sanctuarp went forth and pol:
ered, when Agqgeus,and sacharp prophecped.
notbep perfourmrcd all thpnges thozowe the
commaundemente of the Lo2de God of Ffracl,
and after the deupee of C pine marma anp Ar-
tbarerfegkpnges of Peripa.
And thus wag dure boule fpnithed nto p
Lriti.Dape of the moneth Adderin the. vt. peare


. ofkpnge Darius. Bnd thechplozen of Flrael,p


¢


D


LEMOND a


preattes and Leuptes, aud the other that were
come out ofcaptiuptic:and {uch as were iopned
wntothem. dpa accozdpnge agit is waptten inp
booke of oles. Andinp dedpeacton of the tem
ple:thep oftred an bidze oren, two bundzedra
meg, foure hundred labes, and twelue qoates,
forthe (pnnes of all the people of Ff{rael after
p nombz2e of thetrpbe of Ffracll. Che Pzeaties
alfoand the Leuptes rode araped in thep2 prea
ftlp qarmenteg after the trpbes,ouer al $ wst-
kes ofp 102d God of Frael: accozpnae tothe
toke of G)oles, e the porters by all the dones.
And the childzen of Jlracl( with thofe that
Were come oute of captpuptte helde p paffeouer
the fourtencth dape of the fpzfte moneth , when
the preaftes and the Lenites were fanctpfped.
Ehep that cane out of caprpuptpe were not all
fanctifyed together. wut the Leuttes were fan:
ctifped to geather and foall thep that cemeout
ofcaptpuptic,kylled the Calter lambe foz their
bzethzen, forthe preaftes * fo: themfelues. and
thechplizen of Enki came out of captiup
tic and efcaped from all the abbompnacpons of
the Peathen,fought the Lozde, and keptethe fe
alte of the bnlenened bacade feucn dapes longe,
eatpnae and Dapnckpnge and were metp before
the Lod, P the Lozde bad turned thedeupee of
{kpng of Aeria, and comforted thep2 bandeg
tothe worckes of the Lorde God of ffracl.
fhe. wit. Chapter.
Cemas caufeth the people to atvemble anbromefo


getber,and then reabeth them the latwe. Zhi p
Bepe the Ecate ofthe tabernacle.


rs Md after bom when Artharerles
KETAST p bpng of) Perlasrapgned,there
PY RAW wente nto bpm Cldzas the fonne
Ise saat of Saratas, the Conne of Azarias,
Eee thefonne of Pelcbiach,thefonne of
Sallum,the fonne of Haddoch.thefonne of A:
chitob, Coe fonne of Amaries, Che fonne of X
sariag.tpetonne of Bocus, the fonneot bifu
the fonne of Phineas,the fonne of Eleazar , the
fanne of Jaron the tpatte preatte. Chis Eldzas
wente bp from Wabplon ( for he had good Vn-
Derftandprae inthelawe of Soles, that was
qeuenof the Lorde Govot Flracl,tobetaughte
and done in dede.) And the kyngefauored bpm,
and dpd bym great wortbpppe and honoure, af
ter all bps dpipzes. Chere wente by wrth bym
alfo certapne of the chpld2€ of Flrael,of the pre-
altes ofthe Leuptes,ofthefpnacrs, pozters,¢
mpurtters ofthetempleat Jerufalem.
Jnthe feuenth peare ot the rapgne ofking


Artharerfes, inthe. v.moneth, that (s tn he fe-
tenth peare cftherapgne,thep wente from wa
bplon inthe newe mone ofp. v.mmoneth,3 came
the bpgb wape toYernfalem after biscommau
dement,lpke asthe Lorde hath prolpered thep2
tourney. fEozinthele Efd2as gat great inilruc«
cpon, tbat be buld leaue none of the thpnges be
bpnde,whypchare inthelawe and commaunde-


mentes of God. And be taught pole Zfraclall >


rpabteont{neffe and jutgementes.
Chencamethe Secretaries of kynege Ar=
tharerfes, anddelpuered the waptpnaes (that
were come from Artbharerfes the kynge)to EF
das the preat andreader ofthe lawe ofp Lod
And thps is the coppe of p letter:-kpng Arthar-
erfesfendethbpsaretpng tnto Cld2as the pre-
aftea reader of thelawe ofthe Lorde Dffrend
thpppe æ good wpll F banc o2depned and char=
ged pt therebeanpeofthe Jewes,of the pretties
and Lenites inmprealme, whiche delprcth and
(S content togo withthe vnto Jerufalem, that
bemap dott . Cherfore,pfanpebempndidta
beare p company, let them come to gether, go
With the(lpkeas Jamcontente emp Ceuenfren
Des,mpcouncelers)tofe what thep Do at Feri-
falem and ingemw:p and kepe the thinges acro:
bpnge ag thou hafte,inthelawe of the Lozbde,e
tobspng the apftes nto God the L020 of Fira
el,that 3 emp frendes bauepzompled to Feru-
falem,# all the fplurr golde that isin the coun
trpe of Babylon, unto the Lode to Jerufalem
with the tbpnge that is geuen foz the people in
the Lodes templeat Jerufalem: Pea that the
fame fplucrand golde mape be gathered and or
en rãmes pepeg goates,and other that beliy
to thefetbynges:and that they may offre facrp=
pees tntothe Lode, vponthe aulter of thep2
Lode whpch is at Jerufalem.

And whatfocuer thou tby brethren wplt
do wpthtbefplucr and golde, that do after thy
mpnde,accozdDpngetothe commaundemente of
the Lorde thp God,¢lpkewpfe wpth the bolpe
veflels that areqenenthe , forthe ferupce of the
boufeof f Led thp God g other thpnges what
foeuer is neceffarp foz the wozcke of the temple
that thalbe geuen of the kpnges trealure,elote
what thou wyth thy bretbzen wpltedo wyth p
colde#fpluer.that doafter the wil of the Lo20
And J kpnge Artharerles baue commanndedp
kepers of the trealures in Spria and Phenices
that whatfocuer Eld2a8 the preatteand reader
of thelawe of the Lode doth wapte, it Halbe
geuen bpm:tpllan.€.talenteg of {plucr. and of

oldcin lpkemaner . DF comealfo an.C€.mea:


fures tpi an.€. veffels of wine other plente ¢


ous thinges wout nobze.Let al thinges bedone
after plawwe cf p bye God, prbe wath of God
artfenotitbercalme of the kpng e of bys fines
J commaunde pou alfotbat perequp2e notare
no? trpbute of the pzealfes, Leuptes,fyngers.¢
mpnpftres of thetemple,noz of tbe wpters: ad
that no man baue autporiteto medle anp thing
agapnite them. Xs fo? the( D Efdzas let thou
iudges y arbiterers inthe holelande of Siria ¢
Whenices, alter the wploome of God: ad a

a |


i m O


i.cfo.bii,a.


Ler bilb


LT


Df Eldeas,


àl fuch ag ateiqnorantein the laweof God thp
Lo:de, ãdletallthem that ofende agapnit the
lawe, be punpthen:whetber pt be with death, w
paiite,to becodepned tnmonp,oz te be hanithed

Thenfapde Eldiasthe wepter:~ wWielled
be the God of oure fathers, that bathe geuen fo
good ampPnde and wl into the pert oftdeking
to magnyfp bps boule that is at Jerufalem, ad
bath made me to be accepted int belpabte of p
kpne,of big counfaple,of bis frendes tof bisno
bles. And fo¥ was Tedfalt in mp mpnde acco-
opng ag p Lo mp God helped me, + ses men


p
Ler biib out of giracl to go with me.+ And thete are the


beabes, (after thep2 kinreds and boules of their
fathers )that wente vp wpth me from Wabpli
out of thekpnadome wh hs olin deakartd Py
nes of Dhares:Gerfoning.<DE the fonnes of Si
emarith, Amenus.Dfthefonnes of Dauid: Fe
cug, the fonne of Cecpipa.

—-s- MEthe fines of Whares.sacharp: ¢wpeth
bpm there turned agapne an. C.and.l.men. DF
the fonnes of the caprapnie of Woabplõ:şaraei,
e wpthhpm.two.C.gfpftpe men. DF thelones
of sacbnes: Jechonias,secholf,e wpth bym two
bundzed qfpftpe men. DEthe ones of Halama
alias, Gotbolpe,irx wpth bpm. DF the fonnes
of sapbacta,sartas, E belie:¢ wopth bim foure
fcore. DE the onnes of Job: Abdiag, Febelp,ad
wyth bpm two pund andtwelueme. Df the
Connes of waanta, Salpmoth,the lines of Jo-
fapbia,z wpth him an hundzed e thze (coze men
Of the fonnes of Weer, sacharie, Webet, ¢ with
bpm two hundred ecpabte men. Df the fonnes
of &fead, Johannes, Esecham, ewythbpman
C.a ten men Ofthelonnes of Adonicam,thole
that were the latte:e thefe arethepz names. €lt
phalam, the fone of Gebel, SHemetas,t wpth
ppm lcr.inen.Al thele called J together by the
water T hia, where we pptched ouretentethze
Dapes:and there Imufred them.

¥AS fo2 the Lonnes of the preatkes g aap
teg, Y foundenorte there. Chen lente F vnto €-
leasar,¢ Eccelomt,and Malmam, Palobam,
and Eanaathan,and Samea, Jorphimatha,
unaga,sachary, ) ofolamun (thele were the
eldcrg and men of erperpence)and 3 Cente them
q02De,P they Ghulde come nto Loddus, which
was bp the place of the treafurp,and commaun
ded them that thep Mulde peake ynto Loddug
and fo bps beetbzen, €to thofe that were inthe
treafurpe to fende vs luche menas mpadte er-
ecutetbe preattes offpce inthe boule of the Lo2-
de oure God, ewpebthe mpghtpe bande of our

Lode Gov,thep broughte vnto vs më of gond
erperpence,from amonge the fonnes of Hoolp
us,thefonne of Leut,the fonne of Flracl, Sebe:
beiam,# the fonnes and ppsbeethzen Albin, ad
Anin of whome there were.rviii. From amog


the chplozen of the Connes of Cananens, æ their


fonnes were tiwentismé. And of them pferucd
in the temple, whom Danid had ordepned, and
the pzpneppall men $ mpnpftred fo: the worke
puto the Lenitcs inthe temple two.€.¢.rr.mé


-gobofe names ave all tokened Dp tn weptpnge.


Lempa. * Shencommaunded F afaltynae onto the


ponge men befoze the Lorde, that 3 nivabtede-
tp2e of bima pzofperous tournep ga good wap
fo? bs: pea,foz bs:fo2 ourecbpldzen and fo2 the
catell bp caule ofthe lapenges awapte,and ¥
burl not requp2e of the kprigemenefporfeand
of Foote, toconuep v3 fafelpagapnit our enemp
e9,fo2 we badfapde bnfo the kynge,that thevo
wet of the Lode our God Mulde be wypth then
that feke bpm with thep2 whole perte. And chev
fo2ze, we befoughte God oureLozdeecarnetipe
becaufe of thefe thpnges,and pewag mercpfuil
Vnto DS, and bearde ovre praper.And F {eperaz
ted fromameong the rulers of the people,g from
the preattes of the temple.rif.men, and Sebeia
and Afanta,ad ten men of thep2 brethaen wprh
them. And J wepedthem the golde and the lpi-
ver €all the pzeafflp oznamentes of theboufe of
oure God, whpche the kinge bps counfaple, t
bps papnces,and whole Jfracl bad genen. ud
when J bad weped pt, F gauctbem,an bundzea
@fpfptpe talentes in (pluerveiel,an bundet ta
lentes of golde, eof golden telel feucn tpmes
twentpe, g veflels of otber metall( pea, of good
metall twelue glyering ag tbe colde, g lapre
pnto them:pe are folpe nto the Lorde and the
veffels are polp athe gold ethefpinuer is promp
fed vito the Lode Godofoure fathers.

- Be dplygentenowe,and kepeit, vutpll p
tpme that pedelpueritto therulers ofthe peo


SE OL tt


ple,totbepreaftes,totheLeuptes, tto tie prt


cppall men of the cpties of Ffrael in Jerufalem,
and inthechambze of the boule of oure God.

x Hote preattes and the Leuptes whpche
teceaued of me the golde,thefpluer,and the vel:
fell, b2ougbte it unto Jerufalem into the temple
ofthe Lowe . Andfromtherpuer of Thia, we
brake bp the twelue dape of the fp2fte moneth,
tpll we came to Jerufalem. Bnd when pthyzde
dape was palf,the weped qoldcandfpluce was
Delpucred tn the boufe of the Lozde the fourthe
dape, unto Barinoth the fonne of Foz the pze
afte, twpth bpm was Eleasar tie (One of thi:
neag, and wyth them were folabdus the lones
of Jatnet, Dedias,ethefonne of Wanus,scer-
tapne of the Leuptes totbe nomb2eandtothe
wepabte:¢ the wepgbte of them was weptten
pp the fame tyme. As for thotethat werecome
out of captpuptpe,thep ofred facryfpce tnta p
Lode the God of Flracll:cuen twelue oren for
all pi distdir lie pee e.rti.qoas
tes for Cpnne:twelue kynefo2 athankeofering
all to the facrifpce of the Lode. And the kines
commpflion Delpuered thep wnto the ewardes
and deputpes of the kpng:andto the vnderihze
nesinCelofpata,and Phentecs.

Mowe, when thole thinges were done the
rulers came vuto me and fapde:‘Che generacp-
on of Flracll,the prpnees,the preattes, ant Le-
uites the fraunge pa and indwellers of the
lande, baue not put awape they? onclennefie,
fromthe Cananttes Hetpites Pherelites,.from
the oabites Sxipcians.and Edomites.ffo2
both tbep and thep2fonnes baue mpnqled tient
felues wpth the daughters of them, ethebolpe
ferde igmprte wpth the outlandibe eather

Ja aiii and,


fa ENDIL


Lemi


LCi a.


Thei booke


æ lpna the beginning of thep2 rapgue haucp ru
lerg Ebceds Dene partakers of their wickedues

x Me loone agg bad berde thelethinges, tm
medpatly 3 rentemp bolp qarmentes, ¢ pulled
out thebecre of mp Headeand mp bearde ¢ fate
medowne fozowfull and benp, So alt hep that
were mourd thozowe the wode of p God of Fi-
racl,came onto me, 3 fat Epll:full of beupnes
pntpll the euenpngelacrifpce. Chen Mode J vp
fromfaltpneae,baupnae rente clothes ¢ the bo-
ipeqarmét,{sneled Downe dpon mp knees, beld
out mp bandes Ynto the Lorde, fapde: D Lor
de, Famconfoundede ahamed be petbp face
fo? oure (pninesare become manye vpon our be:
abeg : and oure wpekedneegarereralted Vato
the beaucn:fozfpngthetpme of our fathers, we
are in greate (pune wnto thys dape. And foz the
Cynnes of bs and oure fathers, We with cur bze
thzen and wpeh ourepreattes bauebencdelpuc:
red Dritothe kpnaes of fhecarth:into thetwerd
and into captpuptpe:* became a fpople with co
fulpon and wame vntotbpsdape . And nowe
D Lowe God : howe greate ig themercye that
we haue gotten ofthertnthat thou batt left vs
a name ard a rootein the place of thp Sanctus:
rpe, to Dpfcouer ourelpabte inthe boufe of the
Lode cure God, and balte gent vs meate at ail
cymesofourempnpltracpon. And when we
were incaptpuptie we were not forfaken ofthe
2 o2de our God: but be made the kpnges of Per
fia graciousand fauorable vntovs:fo that they


: gauc bs vptaples g meate:pea gleaune fo bupld


bp the temple of oure Lorde God agapne,tare-
papze the watked places of pon:and to dwell
in Fewozpeand Jerufalem. And nowe D Love
what Hall we Cape: baupnge allthelethpnges
in poficilponsJfo2 we haue broken thy comma-
undementes, vobpcbe thou gauel ynto vs by p
Dandes of thp feruauntes the pzopheics faping
@Thelande that pe go vutostiat ts genet pou
for anberptage to baue tn poffettpon,ts defpled
wpthtbe puclennefte and filrbpnefic of the pea
then g wpth thep2 abbompnacpon paue thep po


=


luted it altogether. @ berfo2e,tpall pe not topne


1. fr, fle


youre daughters Dnto thep2fonnes, no? marpe
youre fontes nto thep2daugbt ers. %4)o2eouer
petal not feeketo make peace withtbem, that
pe mape inerefe and cate the befteinthclande.¢
thatpe mape Deupdetbhe inberptaunce of tbe la=
de, onto poure chplozen for ener moje. Ag fop
thiqetpat nowe bappened wuto vs itcommeth
all foroare wopched worckesand great {pnnes,
pethat thou geu vs fuche a voote that we are
come acapne into ourelande,and we are fo wp
cked that we baue broken thy Matutes adcom-
maundementes agapne: smypngled ourefelucs
wpth the wnclennefie of the outlandpth tpcathe
D Lode arte thou angrye with vs-wylt thou
roote wa cleane outerthat ourereote and name
remapue romoze’D Lorde Good of Flrael thou
arte truc:fo2 oureroote endurethe pet onto this
prefer dap. And behold, nowe ate we befozepin
our lineg nowe ca Wenot Fade before the in thé

xAnd when Eras wythbps mape: had
nowleaed the fpnne,weppnge and lpinge Hat


Dponthe ground before the temple,there gathe
red unto bpm from Jerufalem agreate multpe .
tude of men and weinten,of pong men, and map-
Deng:fo2 there was a verp great Weppnge,and
mournpuge inthe congregacpon. So when Fe
choniasthefonne of Febelp one of thechplbzer
of ¥{raclcrped,belapde vnto Eld2a8:we paue
{pnned agapntte the Lo2d,bpcante we bane ma
rped outiandpih wemen of the Heathen. Mowe
art thou oueral Jiracl. We wpl fweare an othe
therfore bnto the Lezd,that we thal put awap
all oure wopnes wobpcbe we baue taken of f Hea
thei: wpthtbep2 chpldzen:lpKe as itis appopne
ted the bp onre fore elders. atandevp then, ope
thou itand declare ft plapnelp Dnto VS, acco»
Dpngetothelaweckthe Lode : fo: tbe matter
beldgeth wnto the,and we wyll belpe te,quypte
thp felfe manipe.>0 Etdzas arole and toke qn
othe of p rulers ofthe preatkes,¢ of the Lenites
€ OF Airael,to do after thele thiges:¢thep {ware
C The.w. Chapter.
Taite ECdzashadred the latwe,the people put atbap (heir
raunge wp oet thenreturned cuecp man merelpe onto
bis owane bivellpna:.
e i en Cforas kode dp from the court
vl ito the chambze of Jonathas toe fon:
C7 =A ne of Malabus, and remapned there
T: ‘and dpd cate no meate , no? droncke
dipneke: forthe multptude ofthe wpekedneffe
of the people. And there was madea proclama-
cpaninall Jew2p eat Jerufalem, for alluch as
were gathered at Jerufalem ont of captpuytpe
that whofoeuercamenot to Jerufalem wptpin
fio o2thzedapes(accozdpng to the iudgement
of the olde Lodes of thecountapie bps qeodes
fbulde betaken from bpm,and beercluded Front
the conaregacpon of the captiuptic. And inthe
dapes were all thep ofthe trpbe of Juba ¢ Wen
Jami cathered togeather at Jerusalem, therr
Dapeofthenynthbmoneth. And the bole multp=
tudelattrpmblpnge inthe courte of the temple
foz it was wpnter. 0 Eldrasrole vp, efapde .
tntotbem:pe baue done vnevpghtecullp,in that
pehaue taken outlandpihe Wpucs tomarpage,
gfo toencreafe thefpnnes of S{racl. And nowe
knowlece the lame, qeuepaple vnfo the Loz
de God of ourefathers,and performe bps wpll,
Departynge fromthe Heathen of thelande, and ~
fromthe outlandpibe wpucs. The crped p hole
multptude wyth londe Vopee and fapd:lpke ag
thou balt fpoxen, fo wplwe do:but fo2 fa much
asthe people are manpe, and the wpnter heare,
we map not (Conde without the poule: Agapne
thps woacke ts nota thpng thatca befpnpiped
iia Dapeortwo: Joz we bemanye,that bane
fpnnicd in thefe thynges.Dadepne therfore that
the rulers of the mulrptude, and thep that dwel
wpth ws, and as manpe as bauc outelandpiihe
wpues theprcafbes allo tindges of cuerp place
mape ande in the tpme appopneed, tplithep
wage the wrath of the L020 in thps butpneffe.
ben jonathas the Conne of Eselp and D
siage ThecamreceauedD the charge of this maf
ter,and Bosozamus,and Leius, ¢ SHabatheus
belpeth them therto. After thps,all thep i |
Dp


ee a


ofthetemple wpthout,and went tne i e¢rap.y,


Wf Efh2as,


bp that were come out of captpuptpe. And El-
b2as thepzeatte chofe unto bpm the pzpneppall
men from amonge p fathers accozdpng to they?
ames, Fin the new mone of the.r.moneth thep
fat togetber,toerampnetbps matter. And fo
matter wag a Determpnpnge ( concernpuge the


C men that pad outlandpihe wpues) pntpl the ne


we mone of the fFp2ft moueth.And of the pretes
that bad mprte them felues wpth outelandpihe


Lemet, pues there were founde.x Df the fonnes of fe


fu:thelones of Jofedec and bps bzetbhzen, Wa-
stag, Eleasar, Jozibus, g Joadens,whpch ofe:
tedthemfeluesto put awape thep2 wpues and
tooftrearammefo2 thepzianoraunce . And of
the lones of Semmerp,@aliras, Efes t Fee
lech, Asarias. DF the fonnes of Solera, Limolt-


- as, Htlmaen, Ratbanca, Julio, Jeddus & Call


fas. And of the Leuptes: Jofabdus, Scmets,é
Colnis,Caletas, Facteas, Colnag, ¢ Elionag.
DF the ge fee of the Hanctuarp: Eltartb,5a-
ckarus. DE the pozters, Sallumus and Tolba
neg. And of Flrael-of the chpldzen of Foz0, Dfi
and Remiag t Geddias,and Gelchias, Wiche
lus,Eleasarus, Jemmebias,¢ wonnas. And
thechplozen of Zolama.Chantas,sacharp, Jets
relug,, Joddius, Erimoth, and Elias. And of p
Connes of Jathoim,Eliadas, Liafamus,and 30
chias,Larimoth,,Sabdis,e Chebedias. And
of thef6nes of sebes, Jobannes, Amantas,sab-


D diag, and Emimeus . And of the {ones of Wan-


nus, Dldmus,Paluchus, Jeddus, Jalub, Ala
bug,¢ Jerimoth. And of the fines of Addi, Aa-
atus,¢ <)oofias,« Caleus,¢ Raanas,<)aali:
us, Pathathias, Welel. Hanus, Hanafies.
And of thefones of Naue: Hones, Afeag,
WMelehias, Hameas, imo, BWenJamin, al:
chus and Garras. And of the fonnes of Afom:
Watiancus, Hathathias, Manuus, Elipba-
lach, Danatles, Semei. Df the fonnes of a-
nts, Jeremp,<) oodias, Abzamas, Jobel, Ba


_ heag, Peliaas, Jona, Parimoth,, Elialib, Ba


thaneus, Elialis, Dspas, Dielus, Semedinsg,
sambzis,and Jofeph. DF the fonnes of Qobeug
Sdelus,Bathathias, Sabadus,sebeda, ed:
mi, Jeffeus,¢ Waneas. All thele had taken out-
landpthbe wemen to mariage. thep putthbema
wapewpth thep2chpldzen. The preaftes t Le-
uptes,and all thep that were of 3lraell, dwelte
at Jerufalem and thozcwout all the lande,in p
newe moone of the feucnth moneth, and the chil
Dre oF Flracl were in thep2dwellpnges: And
the whole multptude came together, bpon the
flooze atthe Gafkelpde of the bolpe porte of the
femple.And they (pake vnto Efdzas l ppe pze-
alte æreader that be wolde bevnge the lawe of
Poles, whych was gruen ofthe Lorde God of
Sleael.So Elmas the bye peatke brought the
lawe tnto the whole multptude, to man two-
mantoalltheprealtes, tbat thep mpabte beare


i.er.tiiyn CHelawe,xinthe newe mone of the. vtt-moneth
€€taitia Bnd Hered intbe florethat ts before p holy port


of the temple.from the mozmpnge earlpe onto p
eucnpnge,befoze men and Wemen. And they ap
plpedthep2 mpnde all onto thelawe.


JE AndEldzagthe preafte reader of thelawe


Mode bp bpon a pulpet of woode, whyche was
made therfore.  bpon bps rpgbte bandethere
tode bp byin Watdathiag; Samus, Ananias,
Asatias,irias, Dsechias,zBalfamus,Cipor


p byslefte band ode faldens,)ilacl,<Palacht


as, Bbulchas, Sabus, Rabadiag, ad sacharp.
Chentoke Eas the booke before the whole
multptude, fo: be was the pypneipal and bad tit
mooftehonoureoftbemall. Andwhenbe bad
red oute the lawe,thep fodeall frapabie vpo
thep2 fete. po Eld2a8 praifed the Lorde p niot
byelf God, the almpabtpe God of bolfes. And
alp pe ople anfwered: Amen:and belde wp they:

andes, feldDowne flat bpon the earthe,¢ pray

ed the Lode. And Felus, Weneas, Harebias,
Jaddimus, Accubus, Sabbatheus, Calithes,
Azarias, Jozradus, Ananias, and Phrlias , thé
Leuites lpfte tbeir bandes Dpwarde,dd bowed
thep2 faces tothe qrounde, and pzapled f L020


Thole werethey whpch taughte thelawe of p G


Lode gred the lawe of the Lo20,in the congre:
gacpon:and enerp man (et them before that wn
derkode the lawe. Chen pake Atharates onto
Efdras the bpe peateand reader, tothe Le-
uptes p taugbte the multptude,fapinge: Thys
dape isbolpe punto the Lozde, and alltpep that


SEol Ltt


J


had berde the lawe, wepte. Do Eldzaslapde:* Entié


Departe poure Wape tpen and eate the bet, ad
dapneke the fwetelte,andfende gpftes nto thë
P bauenotbpnge :fo2 tope dapeigbholp vntotbe
102zde,¥ be pe not fo2p,fo2z the Lozde wpl bring
potto bonoure. Chen wente thep thep2 wape
euerpcbone,and dpd eate and dpneke, and wer
merpe , and fenterewardes unto them that had
nothing, thep alfo mpg bt eate wpth qladnetle
foz thep were erceadpnge retopted tho2zowe the
qo2bes that were red dno them inthe lawe.
And fo thep were al gathered together at Feru-
falem to bolde the feat, accozdpnacto thecoue
jaunt of the Lorde God of Flrael.


The endeokthe thyrde


booke of €fdzas.


The.itti.booke of
Efdzag.
ache fprtte Chapter.
(The people fs repoucd fo? thep; bnfapth full


nes, i500 tpl! fpnbe another people
fecbete topl net berefozmed.


ramen De Teconde boke of the prophet X
prEN pede «Cl02a9( the fonne of Saarai catoab


Wf Efh2as,


bp that were come out of captpuptpe. And El-
b2as thepzeatte chofe unto bpm the pzpneppall
men from amonge p fathers accozdpng to they?
ames, Fin the new mone of the.r.moneth thep
fat togetber,toerampnetbps matter. And fo
matter wag a Determpnpnge ( concernpuge the


C men that pad outlandpihe wpues) pntpl the ne


we mone of the fFp2ft moueth.And of the pretes
that bad mprte them felues wpth outelandpihe


Lemet, pues there were founde.x Df the fonnes of fe


fu:thelones of Jofedec and bps bzetbhzen, Wa-
stag, Eleasar, Jozibus, g Joadens,whpch ofe:
tedthemfeluesto put awape thep2 wpues and
tooftrearammefo2 thepzianoraunce . And of
the lones of Semmerp,@aliras, Efes t Fee
lech, Asarias. DF the fonnes of Solera, Limolt-


- as, Htlmaen, Ratbanca, Julio, Jeddus & Call


fas. And of the Leuptes: Jofabdus, Scmets,é
Colnis,Caletas, Facteas, Colnag, ¢ Elionag.
DF the ge fee of the Hanctuarp: Eltartb,5a-
ckarus. DE the pozters, Sallumus and Tolba
neg. And of Flrael-of the chpldzen of Foz0, Dfi
and Remiag t Geddias,and Gelchias, Wiche
lus,Eleasarus, Jemmebias,¢ wonnas. And
thechplozen of Zolama.Chantas,sacharp, Jets
relug,, Joddius, Erimoth, and Elias. And of p
Connes of Jathoim,Eliadas, Liafamus,and 30
chias,Larimoth,,Sabdis,e Chebedias. And
of thef6nes of sebes, Jobannes, Amantas,sab-


D diag, and Emimeus . And of the {ones of Wan-


nus, Dldmus,Paluchus, Jeddus, Jalub, Ala
bug,¢ Jerimoth. And of the fines of Addi, Aa-
atus,¢ <)oofias,« Caleus,¢ Raanas,<)aali:
us, Pathathias, Welel. Hanus, Hanafies.
And of thefones of Naue: Hones, Afeag,
WMelehias, Hameas, imo, BWenJamin, al:
chus and Garras. And of the fonnes of Afom:
Watiancus, Hathathias, Manuus, Elipba-
lach, Danatles, Semei. Df the fonnes of a-
nts, Jeremp,<) oodias, Abzamas, Jobel, Ba


_ heag, Peliaas, Jona, Parimoth,, Elialib, Ba


thaneus, Elialis, Dspas, Dielus, Semedinsg,
sambzis,and Jofeph. DF the fonnes of Qobeug
Sdelus,Bathathias, Sabadus,sebeda, ed:
mi, Jeffeus,¢ Waneas. All thele had taken out-
landpthbe wemen to mariage. thep putthbema
wapewpth thep2chpldzen. The preaftes t Le-
uptes,and all thep that were of 3lraell, dwelte
at Jerufalem and thozcwout all the lande,in p
newe moone of the feucnth moneth, and the chil
Dre oF Flracl were in thep2dwellpnges: And
the whole multptude came together, bpon the
flooze atthe Gafkelpde of the bolpe porte of the
femple.And they (pake vnto Efdzas l ppe pze-
alte æreader that be wolde bevnge the lawe of
Poles, whych was gruen ofthe Lorde God of
Sleael.So Elmas the bye peatke brought the
lawe tnto the whole multptude, to man two-
mantoalltheprealtes, tbat thep mpabte beare


i.er.tiiyn CHelawe,xinthe newe mone of the. vtt-moneth
€€taitia Bnd Hered intbe florethat ts before p holy port


of the temple.from the mozmpnge earlpe onto p
eucnpnge,befoze men and Wemen. And they ap
plpedthep2 mpnde all onto thelawe.


JE AndEldzagthe preafte reader of thelawe


Mode bp bpon a pulpet of woode, whyche was
made therfore.  bpon bps rpgbte bandethere
tode bp byin Watdathiag; Samus, Ananias,
Asatias,irias, Dsechias,zBalfamus,Cipor


p byslefte band ode faldens,)ilacl,<Palacht


as, Bbulchas, Sabus, Rabadiag, ad sacharp.
Chentoke Eas the booke before the whole
multptude, fo: be was the pypneipal and bad tit
mooftehonoureoftbemall. Andwhenbe bad
red oute the lawe,thep fodeall frapabie vpo
thep2 fete. po Eld2a8 praifed the Lorde p niot
byelf God, the almpabtpe God of bolfes. And
alp pe ople anfwered: Amen:and belde wp they:

andes, feldDowne flat bpon the earthe,¢ pray

ed the Lode. And Felus, Weneas, Harebias,
Jaddimus, Accubus, Sabbatheus, Calithes,
Azarias, Jozradus, Ananias, and Phrlias , thé
Leuites lpfte tbeir bandes Dpwarde,dd bowed
thep2 faces tothe qrounde, and pzapled f L020


Thole werethey whpch taughte thelawe of p G


Lode gred the lawe of the Lo20,in the congre:
gacpon:and enerp man (et them before that wn
derkode the lawe. Chen pake Atharates onto
Efdras the bpe peateand reader, tothe Le-
uptes p taugbte the multptude,fapinge: Thys
dape isbolpe punto the Lozde, and alltpep that


SEol Ltt


J


had berde the lawe, wepte. Do Eldzaslapde:* Entié


Departe poure Wape tpen and eate the bet, ad
dapneke the fwetelte,andfende gpftes nto thë
P bauenotbpnge :fo2 tope dapeigbholp vntotbe
102zde,¥ be pe not fo2p,fo2z the Lozde wpl bring
potto bonoure. Chen wente thep thep2 wape
euerpcbone,and dpd eate and dpneke, and wer
merpe , and fenterewardes unto them that had
nothing, thep alfo mpg bt eate wpth qladnetle
foz thep were erceadpnge retopted tho2zowe the
qo2bes that were red dno them inthe lawe.
And fo thep were al gathered together at Feru-
falem to bolde the feat, accozdpnacto thecoue
jaunt of the Lorde God of Flrael.


The endeokthe thyrde


booke of €fdzas.


The.itti.booke of
Efdzag.
ache fprtte Chapter.
(The people fs repoucd fo? thep; bnfapth full


nes, i500 tpl! fpnbe another people
fecbete topl net berefozmed.


ramen De Teconde boke of the prophet X
prEN pede «Cl02a9( the fonne of Saarai catoab


Tye iii booke
eradviis  *Andthe wode oftheLordcamedutome not foxlaken mel inamaner )but poure owne
fapinge:gothp wap and (hewe mp people their felucs,fapeth the Lorre.
{pnfull dedes,and tep? chplozentbhep2 wpcbed Thus lapeththe Almpahtie Lozde:baue F
nefles, whpcb thep paue Done a apniteme,that not praped pou as a father bys fonnes, agamo
thep mape tell thep? chplbzes chplozen tbe fame ther ber dDangbhters,¢as anutfe ber pong babes
~ For the (primes oftheir Fathers areincreatedein that pe wolde be mppeople,t 3 Mulde be poure


them. and whprtbep eee, ga me,¢baue od:that pe wold bemp chpldzen,¢ 3 Mulde be ejatvetve.


es. aAmnot Jeuenbe poure owne father fx F aatbered pou together ri»
chat broughte them out of thelandeo Egrpte agan Penne gatbhereth ber chekens pnder Her,
from tbe boufe of bondage’ Wut thep paur pio” wpnges. Wut nowe what Mall J do vunte pour


uil thou oute than thebeare of thy beade and offre brite me, J hall turne mp face from pou:
cafte all euelloner them,foz thep paue notbene fozpourefolempne fealte dapes pour newe mo
obedpente vuto mp lawe. neg, pourcpecucitios baue 3 foraké. J let on=
‘xt ig a people wpthout learnpng anditour to pon my feruatites P prophetes, whõepebaue
foure. Hows longe (hall 4 forbeare them, Dnto také¢ flaine,¢ tome their odiesinpeces wpole

PUA D whome J paue done fo moche goods * Manype blondy wil require of pour Hades faptbp Low- -
fom aa Bpnges bane Foelkroped for thep2lakes.+: ba husfapeththe Almpaghtic Lo2de:poure
ex. rittng. EIO with bps feruauntes and al Dis powze paue boufe mut be defolate. 3 wll caf pou cut asp
a {mrrten dowone eflapne: Al the nactons haue wpnrdedoth the frawwe,poure chplozen thal not
4 deftroped and roofed out befozetbem andin befruptfull,forthep baue difppled mp commas
the Eate baue 3b? oughte two landesandpeo undement, and tone the thpnge that is euel be
letonaugbt,enen Cire and Spdon,andbaue foze me.Poure houfes wpl 3 genevnto apeople


niels. Jpallcat pou oute from mp facers Upan pou sous


pneallthep? enemies. Speake thou therfoze that thallcome,¢* thep that neuer hearde me ctat.rv a
eroriig. e Dtothem,fapinge : Thus tapeththeLozde:* all beleuc inme:and they bnto whom F neuce ROMA. F.C


Fied pou thorowe the fee, andbauegeuenpou tpewed token, thalldo thethpng that Jcomma

erodat.b Ture retes fence the vegpnnpnge.* 3 gaue pou undeth,. Thep baue fene no propbetes,pet Hal

———»-: Poles tobe poutre captapne, and Aaron tobe thep call tbep2 fpnnestoremebzaunce.¢ know:

surbuta the eate: x J gaue pou Ipabteinappllerof ledg thé. J report me vntothe gract, J wpldo

EOD Fore and greate wonders paue 3 Doneamonge fozthe people whpcheiscome, whole chpldzen

pou:pet bane pe forgotten me, apethp Lode. retopfeingladucs:¢ thougbe thep bauenot fene

Thug lapeththe almpagodtic Loide:Jgaue mer bodelpe epes,pet infprite thep beleuc the

pouquaples to eate,¢ tentes fo2 poute fuccoure thpna p J lap. And nowe b zother,b ebold braun
s2reucrtheleffe pe murmered,andalcrpbednotp great worhpppe, t fetbepeople that commet

Bictorp of pour enemics onto mp name:vee,the fromthe Ealte, onto whome F wpll genethe


fame Day Do pe pet murmure Wiherearepbene dukedome + of Abraham, Jfadac, and Jacob, etav.rtin
fytes.that J baucdone forpour When pewere of Dicas, Amog.and Bicheas, of Joel, Abop, Zuber.


bongrpe in the wpldernefie,xdpd pe notcrpdn Jonas, Paum,and *bacuc,of Hophonye, Ag-
tome. Wibpbattethou bzoughte vsintothps gens zachary , anv Palachy-whpcbhe scaled
to haneferued the Eappeiãs then todpeinthis The ti.Chapter.
wildernefle. Cher bady petie Dpon pout mour- CTbe Spnacoge Epndeth faute twpth ber owne
Sani rbe npnges. And gaue pou annato eate.xDedid chplozen, = be gentples are called.
‘onmrted cate angels foode. When pe were thziftie, bpd 3
not 7 vewe the bearde tone, andcaulcd water ENA Beas
C tofowetherout: so2the peate Fcoucredpon e EME commaundementeg, bp mp ferua
rth the bie of the tree 5 ; agoe abi
at lande gaue J pou: Feat oul the Anantte ,
the aabeferites a belt inesbeforepou.xwpat that bare them,fapth onto them:@o pour wap
pA Chall 3 do moze for pou fapetb the Lorde: echplozen,fo2 3 ama wopdd owe and fo2rfaken:
sic aah hus fapeth the AlmypqbtpeLowde* whe - brought pou pp wrth gladneffe,but with fo-
gro rod pe poere in the wploernefie, in the water ofthe roweand peupnefie baue 3 loft pou:fo2 pe Daue
Amoziteg beinge a thpatte, and blafpbempnge fpnned before the Lobe poure God, ¢donethe
mp name, 3 gane pou not fp2e foz pour blafpbe thpnaetbhatis curell befoze bym. Wut what thal
mpeg but catlatree into the water,and madep 3 nowedovnto pou: Jamawpovow and fofa
rpuer Ceorte. What {hall 3 do vnto tbe, © Fa- Een:qo pour wap D mp chpldien,and afke met
beu.rerii cobs Thou Juda wold efknotobepme.xsropll epeo the Lome. As for me, D father, J call vp-
turne me to another people, tanto tholewpl J pd the foz a witnes otter the motber of thefe chil
genemp name,that thep map kepemp ftatutes Den. which wolde not apene couenaunt,that
Seing pe baut forlaken me, 3 wl forlake pou thou bapnge themtocon ufpon, and thep2 mo-
Rihenpe Dely2e meto begracpous pnts pou, 3 ther toa {pople,tbat the bear nomoze. Let thep2
grapeid Oalbauenomercpe pponpou. * Wiban pecall namesbe (catered abzoadamongetheeathen
5 ponme, J wpll not heare pou. Eozpebauede- Letthembeputont of the earthe, fo2 (hep Dauc
foiled poure bandeg wptbh blonde, and pourtete thougbtefcomeofmpcouenaunte. |
arefwopfte to commpte manflaugbter. Bebaue aio be bnto the Aflur,thou arpg


Au, riis


Mat, bitia


— =p


— E


Tye iii booke
eradviis  *Andthe wode oftheLordcamedutome not foxlaken mel inamaner )but poure owne
fapinge:gothp wap and (hewe mp people their felucs,fapeth the Lorre.
{pnfull dedes,and tep? chplozentbhep2 wpcbed Thus lapeththe Almpahtie Lozde:baue F
nefles, whpcb thep paue Done a apniteme,that not praped pou as a father bys fonnes, agamo
thep mape tell thep? chplbzes chplozen tbe fame ther ber dDangbhters,¢as anutfe ber pong babes
~ For the (primes oftheir Fathers areincreatedein that pe wolde be mppeople,t 3 Mulde be poure


them. and whprtbep eee, ga me,¢baue od:that pe wold bemp chpldzen,¢ 3 Mulde be ejatvetve.


es. aAmnot Jeuenbe poure owne father fx F aatbered pou together ri»
chat broughte them out of thelandeo Egrpte agan Penne gatbhereth ber chekens pnder Her,
from tbe boufe of bondage’ Wut thep paur pio” wpnges. Wut nowe what Mall J do vunte pour


uil thou oute than thebeare of thy beade and offre brite me, J hall turne mp face from pou:
cafte all euelloner them,foz thep paue notbene fozpourefolempne fealte dapes pour newe mo
obedpente vuto mp lawe. neg, pourcpecucitios baue 3 foraké. J let on=
‘xt ig a people wpthout learnpng anditour to pon my feruatites P prophetes, whõepebaue
foure. Hows longe (hall 4 forbeare them, Dnto také¢ flaine,¢ tome their odiesinpeces wpole

PUA D whome J paue done fo moche goods * Manype blondy wil require of pour Hades faptbp Low- -
fom aa Bpnges bane Foelkroped for thep2lakes.+: ba husfapeththe Almpaghtic Lo2de:poure
ex. rittng. EIO with bps feruauntes and al Dis powze paue boufe mut be defolate. 3 wll caf pou cut asp
a {mrrten dowone eflapne: Al the nactons haue wpnrdedoth the frawwe,poure chplozen thal not
4 deftroped and roofed out befozetbem andin befruptfull,forthep baue difppled mp commas
the Eate baue 3b? oughte two landesandpeo undement, and tone the thpnge that is euel be
letonaugbt,enen Cire and Spdon,andbaue foze me.Poure houfes wpl 3 genevnto apeople


niels. Jpallcat pou oute from mp facers Upan pou sous


pneallthep? enemies. Speake thou therfoze that thallcome,¢* thep that neuer hearde me ctat.rv a
eroriig. e Dtothem,fapinge : Thus tapeththeLozde:* all beleuc inme:and they bnto whom F neuce ROMA. F.C


Fied pou thorowe the fee, andbauegeuenpou tpewed token, thalldo thethpng that Jcomma

erodat.b Ture retes fence the vegpnnpnge.* 3 gaue pou undeth,. Thep baue fene no propbetes,pet Hal

———»-: Poles tobe poutre captapne, and Aaron tobe thep call tbep2 fpnnestoremebzaunce.¢ know:

surbuta the eate: x J gaue pou Ipabteinappllerof ledg thé. J report me vntothe gract, J wpldo

EOD Fore and greate wonders paue 3 Doneamonge fozthe people whpcheiscome, whole chpldzen

pou:pet bane pe forgotten me, apethp Lode. retopfeingladucs:¢ thougbe thep bauenot fene

Thug lapeththe almpagodtic Loide:Jgaue mer bodelpe epes,pet infprite thep beleuc the

pouquaples to eate,¢ tentes fo2 poute fuccoure thpna p J lap. And nowe b zother,b ebold braun
s2reucrtheleffe pe murmered,andalcrpbednotp great worhpppe, t fetbepeople that commet

Bictorp of pour enemics onto mp name:vee,the fromthe Ealte, onto whome F wpll genethe


fame Day Do pe pet murmure Wiherearepbene dukedome + of Abraham, Jfadac, and Jacob, etav.rtin
fytes.that J baucdone forpour When pewere of Dicas, Amog.and Bicheas, of Joel, Abop, Zuber.


bongrpe in the wpldernefie,xdpd pe notcrpdn Jonas, Paum,and *bacuc,of Hophonye, Ag-
tome. Wibpbattethou bzoughte vsintothps gens zachary , anv Palachy-whpcbhe scaled
to haneferued the Eappeiãs then todpeinthis The ti.Chapter.
wildernefle. Cher bady petie Dpon pout mour- CTbe Spnacoge Epndeth faute twpth ber owne
Sani rbe npnges. And gaue pou annato eate.xDedid chplozen, = be gentples are called.
‘onmrted cate angels foode. When pe were thziftie, bpd 3
not 7 vewe the bearde tone, andcaulcd water ENA Beas
C tofowetherout: so2the peate Fcoucredpon e EME commaundementeg, bp mp ferua
rth the bie of the tree 5 ; agoe abi
at lande gaue J pou: Feat oul the Anantte ,
the aabeferites a belt inesbeforepou.xwpat that bare them,fapth onto them:@o pour wap
pA Chall 3 do moze for pou fapetb the Lorde: echplozen,fo2 3 ama wopdd owe and fo2rfaken:
sic aah hus fapeth the AlmypqbtpeLowde* whe - brought pou pp wrth gladneffe,but with fo-
gro rod pe poere in the wploernefie, in the water ofthe roweand peupnefie baue 3 loft pou:fo2 pe Daue
Amoziteg beinge a thpatte, and blafpbempnge fpnned before the Lobe poure God, ¢donethe
mp name, 3 gane pou not fp2e foz pour blafpbe thpnaetbhatis curell befoze bym. Wut what thal
mpeg but catlatree into the water,and madep 3 nowedovnto pou: Jamawpovow and fofa
rpuer Ceorte. What {hall 3 do vnto tbe, © Fa- Een:qo pour wap D mp chpldien,and afke met
beu.rerii cobs Thou Juda wold efknotobepme.xsropll epeo the Lome. As for me, D father, J call vp-
turne me to another people, tanto tholewpl J pd the foz a witnes otter the motber of thefe chil
genemp name,that thep map kepemp ftatutes Den. which wolde not apene couenaunt,that
Seing pe baut forlaken me, 3 wl forlake pou thou bapnge themtocon ufpon, and thep2 mo-
Rihenpe Dely2e meto begracpous pnts pou, 3 ther toa {pople,tbat the bear nomoze. Let thep2
grapeid Oalbauenomercpe pponpou. * Wiban pecall namesbe (catered abzoadamongetheeathen
5 ponme, J wpll not heare pou. Eozpebauede- Letthembeputont of the earthe, fo2 (hep Dauc
foiled poure bandeg wptbh blonde, and pourtete thougbtefcomeofmpcouenaunte. |
arefwopfte to commpte manflaugbter. Bebaue aio be bnto the Aflur,thou arpg


Au, riis


Mat, bitia


— =p


— E


-—— —— -a


 BEnas,


birpabteoutnes bp the. Chon wpcked people


Sentire remembre* what ¥dpd dinto Sodome, ãd Go-


more, whole lande is turned to pptch talthes.
€Eucn fo wpll J do nto all them,that heare me
not lapeth the Almpahtic Lorde. Thus fapeth
the Lozde vnto Cldzas:tell mp people, ý 3 wpl
geue them the kpngedome of Jerufalem, which
J wolde bane geuen nto Fracl.Cheit glorye
allo wpl3 take vnto me, yene thé p euerlaftig
tabernacles, wbyche Fbad pzeparcò fo: thole.

‘Che tree of lpfe thalbe bnto thema fwete
finelipnge opntemente:thep thall nether labour


15 no: be Weerp.Go pe poure wape and pe thal re-


Toby id


ceaucit . Prape fozrpoureleluecgafewe dapes,
that they mape dwell therin. |
-Rowe is the kpngoome prepared fo: pon
therfore watche. Take heauen g earth towpt:
nes for J baue broken the euel inpeccsz,and cere:
ated the good, fo: Flpuelapeth the Lorde. Wo0-
ther embzace tpp cbpldzen,and bapnge them vp
with gladnefle:make tbep: fete as falte aga pil
ler,fo2z J baucchotenthelapethtbhe Lorde.
And thole that be Dead wpll J rapfe tpa-
gapne from thep2 places and bapnge them oute
ofthe granes, for Jhaue knowne mp name in
in Flracl.sfeare not thou mother of the childzen
foz J baue cholen the fapeth the Lozde. And for
thp Delpe J thal fende the mp feruauntes Efap
and Jeremp,atter wholecouxcel J baue fanctp
Eped & prepared foz p twelue trees with bpuers
frutes, sas manp welles, flowinae with mplke
and ponpe, and feuen mountapnes where vpon
there qrowe Rofes and Lplpes, wherein J wl
Fpll mp chplozen wpth tope.Erecute tuftpce foz
the wpddowe, be tudae for the fatherles: qene
fo the pooze:Detend the cofoztelefle:cloth thena
ked:Deale pwonnded g ficke, laugh nota lame
mā tofcogne:defende the crepell,¢let the blpnd
come intop lpabte of my clearenes : x where fo
cuct P findet the Dead take the bury them.ay
(hal qeue p, the firfte place in my refurrecepon.
Wolde Fpi Dmp people and take thy reft,


C for thp qupetneg igcome. fede thp chploien,<D


thou good nozle, tablpthe thep2 fete. Xs fo: the
feruauntes whome Ft ue gewen the, there thal
not one of them perpihe, fo2 F wll feeke them
from thp nombze, vere not thy felfe,

Jo: when the dape of trouble and beupneg
commeth, other all wepe gbe forzowefull, but


thou thaltebemerp plenteous. The Deatben fy)


albe gelous,but they fyalbe able to do notbig


agapnite the,fapeth the Lo20.@)p bandes hall F: F ;


couer the.fo that thp chpldzen Chall not fe the fp
reeuerlattpng.we topful,D thou mother with
thy chpldzen,for J wpl deliner thefapeh Lod
Remember thp deade chploze, for F thal bainge
Een out of the carth,¢ Mewe mercp vnto them
fo: Jam merepfull,fapeth the Lod Almighep.

Embzace thp chpldzen, vntpll Fcome and
bewe mercpe vnto them, for2mp wellesrunne
over, and my grace pall not faple.

Edas receaueda charge ofthe Lorde
pon the mounte Deeb, that Y Hulde go bnto
Slrael. Wut when J came onto Frael thep fet
meat naughte, anddplppled the commannde-


menteoktheLozde, Andtherfose Flape vned
You; D pe Heathen that peareand onderfande
Loke fo? poure (hepharde, be thal geue pou ener
laffpnae refte , for bets npe at bande; that Hall
come in the ende of the wozlde: Beredp to the te
Warde of the kynadome , for the cu erlaltpnge
lpabte ball bpne upon pou fot euicritote . le
the hhadowe ofthps woalde,receaue the fopfull
nes Of poure glozpe, J teftifpe mp faupoure ope
lp:Oreceaue the gpite that is cenenpou,ad be
glad, geupnge thanckes wnto bpm, tbat hathe
called pou tothe beauenlpe kpn gedome:


Xrpie vp,and tande fafte:bebolde the iiom- D


be of thofe that befealedintbe fealt ofthe Lo?
de, Whyche are departed fromthe Madowre of
the wolde, and bane receaued glo2zpous garmë
tesoftheLozde. Takethpnombze D pon,
& (hut vp the purpfped, which baue fulfilled the
lawe ofthe Lozde. Che nombze of thp chylo zen
whom thou longel foz, is fulfplled,befeche the
powe ofp Lozd,¢ the people wphiche baue bene
called from the begpnninge, mapebe halowen,


— foli


F a #
a ae ae


Ut,


*3 Czas fawe vpon the mounte Sion a Apoc bilt


Great people, whome J coulde notno mbze,and
thep al pzapled the Lozd with longes of thakes
Teupnge. And in the middetk of them there wag
aponge mad ofan bpe Eature,mozecrcellent thé
all they, bpon enerp one of thep2 beades belet
acrowne,and was euer higher ehpgber, which
J merueled at qreatipe. So Yalked the angell,
and fapde: Hp, what are thele: He aunlwered
etflapdevnto me: Thefebe thep, that baue put of
the moztalclothpnee,«¢ puton the immortal ap
baue teftifped andknowleged the name of God
Mowe are thep crowned, ereceauethe rewatde
Then fapde J nto the angel:what pon qe
perfoncigit that crowneththem -4 Keneth thë
the Palmes in they? bandes: So beanfwered,
€fapde vnto me:it isthe fonne of God, whome
thep baue knowleged in the world. Chenbeqa
J greatly tocommend Hem, that (Codelo ftpfip
fo? the name of the Lod. Andfo the angeifapp
unto me:Go thy wap, and tell mp people, what
maner of thpnges : andbowe greate wonders
of the Lozdetby God,thou hattefene,
Che.ut-Chapter. |
The wonserous workes ty iche Hob oph fos the people
arerelited.iOsas marucleto $ God futereth the Babploniae
to Date rule over his pecple,whpch pet are (pnners alto,


j GY crepe, 3 wasat Wabpld, tlapetrou
eda ce bled bpd mp bed, and mp thoughtes
coy Came Dp once mp herte:foz F lawe p

~ Defolacts of Ston,and theplenteous


1


b wealth of themthat dwelte at Wabplon, emp


{pecte was loze moucd,fo that ¥ becanne tof pe
ake fearful wozdes tothe moft bpelt, andfapde
sD Lopde Lo2zde,thou paketat the begpnnin
when thou plantedfe the cart g that thp felfe
alone) and qaueltecommanndemente vntothe
People, and a body ynto Adam, whpche waga
creature of top hades, andhafkebyethea in bint
the becth of lyfe:and fo belpucd before the, and
thou leddelt bpm into Daradpce, which garden
of pleafure tby rpabte band bad planted, o2ener
the earth wag made: Hyd ynto bimthou manel
commange


732 the thyetpepeare of the fall of the x


The iij booke


comatndement tolouethp wape which be trål
grefled,¢ immediatlpe thou app opntedit death
in bpra,and in bps generacpons. DE bpmcame
SN. nacpons,trpbeg people, and kpnredes oute of
Senerol.bo nombre. And eucrp people walked afterthep?
owne wpll,and dpd npcethyngeg before the:ad

y5 ag fortbp cõmaundemetes thep dplppied the.
genebtib  x*MGutinproceffe of tyme thou bzoughtell
the water Houde, pon thofe that bwelte in the
wo2lde,anddeffropedE them. Andlpkeasthe
deathe was in Adam, fo was the water floude
alfo in thefe. enertbelefle one of the p Ieftette
namelpe foe, wpth his houthald, of whome cå
al righteous men. And it happened when they
dwelt bpon the earth, beganne fo multiply,
abtrotten many chpldzen,¢ were agreate peo:
plethep begato be moze vngodlp thenp firfe.
lowe when they all lpucd fo wpckedlye
gen.piiro, Defo2e the,xthou dpadeft chofe theaman frome

amonge them, whofe name was Abrabam.
Pym thou louedet , and vnto pym onelpe thou
exocdit thy wpll,and madeff an euerlaftpnge
coucnaunte wopth bpm, promplynae bpm that
sentria. thou wolvelte neuer forlake bps feed. And vn
sen. prb tabpm thou gauelt #labac, + bnto Flabac allo


thou ganet Jacob and Elau. Asfor Jacob, |
gen.piFioe Chou Dpdelecbole bymi,andputbacke Elau. + Be


Xnbd{o Facob became a greate multptude.
And it beppencd that when thou leddelte
gronina, ppg feed out of Egvptexthou bzoughtett them
yptothemount Sion, bowmpnge Downe the be
uceng letting falt the earth,moupng the ground
makpnae the Depthesto (hake, and troublpnge
the wolde: And thy glozp wente thozowe four
poztes of fp2e , and carthequakes: and wpndes
andcolde: thatthou mpabtete geue the lawe
pnto thelecd of Jacob,anddplygence Ynto the
greneracponof Jiracl.And pet toket thou nota
wape fromithem that wpcked berte ý thp lawe
mpaptebzpngefurthfrutein them. soz the
fy2ite Adam barea wpcked herte,trantaretled:
and was onuercome, andlobe allthep that are
nom.bitia BOE OF ppm. * Chus remapned weakenes w
-a Pplawe-inthe bertes ofthe people, wpth p vwopc-
Se benneg of the roote:fo thatthe good departed a
“gpapcandtheeucltabobde Epl. Spothetpmes
ed awapesand the peares were broughte to
cece rpc An elide «Chen dpoette thou rapfe the bpa fer-
dres tbit taunte called Dauid, +whome thou commaun:
peo{keto bupldea cptpe Dnto thy same:and to
offre bp incenfe and facrpfpce onto th e therein.
Thys was donenowe manp peares . Then the
inhabpters of the cptpe fo2loketbhe,¢inall thyn
ges bpd enen agAdam and all bps generacions

hab Done:fo2thep alfo bad awpcked berte.
*ndfothou cauelt thy cptye oucr into the
p bandes of thpne enempes. Are thep of Babilon
then better and moze righteous then thy people
that ther (pall therfore baue the Dompnyon of
Spon: soz when Fcame there andlawe theps
Dngodlpnefie,and fo qreate wpekednelle: that
itcoulbenot be nombeede: pee, when mp foule
fawe fo manpe euell BDooers(in the thy2ztp pear)
mp bertefapled me, for 3 fawe, bowe thou fuf-
fered thentinfuch unqodlpnefic, and (paredit


tag


the wicked boers:but thpneowone people bat?
roted out, pzreferuedtbpne enempeg, and thps
balte i not (bewedme. wsi b

cannot perceaue howe thps Dappeneth
wothep of Wabplon then better, th Ebe of
&ponssD2 is there anpe otherpeople.that kno-
wetbtbe,faupngethat people of #lraclls D2
what generacpon Dath to beleucd thp couenaut
tes, as Jacobs And pet theprrewarde appereth
nof,and thepzlabour bath no frute. £o? 4 bane
cone beare and there thozowe the Heathen, and
$lethat they be rpebe and welthp and thpncke
not bponthpcommaundementes. lepe thou
therfore our wpckedneffe nowe in the balaunce
and thep2s alfo that dwel inthe wolde , and fo
ball thp name be no tobere founde but ingfracl


M2 where is therea people bponearthe, p hatd -


not fprned before the: D: what peoplebathelo
kepte thy commaundementess Chan Malte fir
dethat Plrael bp name bathe kepte thy precep=
tes but not the other people and Heathen.
— - The.tiit. Chapter.
q whe Aengel reproucth Erdzas, beraufe he femed to tt
ter intothe profeunde (ubgemenics oF Geb.
ew Ces Nd the Auugell thatwastet vnto
DAW &me(Wwhele name was Citpel) gaue
at Aw mean aunlwere,andfapd:thp bert
. Ke Sa WS hathtakentomuchevponit in this
TA es


3
fa i


wherfoze. He antwered me and fapde: F wente
ina woode


Ot Cideas,

28 tn awood,antd*thetreestoke uch a denpee ¢

amitb:irb Capa: Come let vs go andfpabte againtt ple,

POHD shat it mape Departe awape before WS, g that
We mape make Vs pet moze woodes.

The floudes of p fee alfo in lpise maner toke


olit, ~


Hae not thou to muche wpokthebpet,fo:thp
Daltpnes to be aboue pim is but vaine thonima
tet tomocheado. Dpd not tiie foules alfo of f
rpahrcous alie quello of thele thinges intheit
Dolpneffe,tapinge:* Powelonge Hall ¥h rope oath


thpsdeupcee,andfapd: Come let vs qo bp,and
fpabtagapnite the trees of the teoode that we
~ mape make oure labe the wpber. Chethoughet
and Deupce of the Wood wag but tapre and no
thyng wozth, fo the fpze came ¢ confumed the
Woove: Che thouaghte of the houdes of thefee:
camelphetople to nougbte allo, foz the Cande
fodebpandoppedthem, . `- 1110

Pf thou were iudge nowe betwirt there tivo,
Whom wolvet thou iuftifie; oz whom woldeft
thou condempnes¥ anfwercd q fapd: Clerelp it
_— wafolph thought that thep both baue deup-

fed. oz the qrounde ts genen wnto the woode,
@ the fee alfo bath pps place to beare bps fott-
bes. Chen antwered heme, elapde: Chou hall
geucna trpabeiudgemét, why tudgett thou not
thp felfe allo: or lphe as the qrounde is qeu€
butothewood,and thelee tobis Loudes, cuen


-ap.tip,c LO * thep that Dwell vpon earthe mape wnder-
Soon die andenotbing, but thacwobich is bpocarth: g.
. LEELLE. he hat Divelletbaboue the heneng, mape onlpe


Driderfand the tppugesp are aboue the pents,
Thenånfwered I.q lapd:¥ belech f, Dlozdlet
me baucvndertãdmg:fo: tt hag not mp mind
tobecurpousof thy bye thinges, but offuch as
toe Daply medle ttt bal. namelp wherfore that
Firaclis blafpbemed of thebeatht,¢ fo: what
catife the people( who thou baffeeuer loucd) ts
geuen ouct, tobe punpihed of bngodlyp nacios:
q twbp the latwe of oure fathers ts bzoughte to
nought and the Doaptien coucnauntes come to
none effecte,and palie awape out of the wozlde
asthe qretboppers.¢ oure life iga verp feart, E
Woe are not Wwoppeto optapne mercpe. What
wpll be do then puto bps name, Wobpche tg cals
led upon ouer vs ¢ DE thele thynges baue J
alked queiipon. | |
Then ant wered be meand lapde: Che more
€ thou fearcheft,the moze thou palt maruell,toz
the wolde paiteth falt to paffe atbap,¢ cannot
compacbhende the thypnges, that are prompted
| : yteous in tpmetocomefo2 * thps


cog t veg
é-jobn.b.c W02lde 1S ful of Ynrpabteoulfnes € weakenes.


Wut as concernpnge the thynges Mbhereof
thouatkefte me, FJ wplltell the. Cheeuellts
owen , but the deftruccyon thereof isnot pet
come. PE theeucllnowethatis fotben, be not
turned bplpde Downe, and pf the place where
theencell ts fotoen paffe not awap, thencannot
the thynge come that ig fowen pth good.
$02 the cogne of encll fede bath bene fowen in
the bert of man from the beqinnpng, and howe
muche wngodlpnes bath be brougpte Dp vnto
thystpmerand hote much thall be pet bepnge
forth, vitpll be come tuto the barne.

Pondze now bp thy felfe, whe p come of evel
fede is cut done, pole greatea barne pall it
foll? Zanfweced andfapoe: Howe g when Hal
thele thinges come to palle’ WA perfoze are our
pereg fem geuel And peanlweres me faping:


ofthis fatbion/ibencommet) the frute of mp
barne and mp rewarderAnd bpon this Jeremi»
elthe Archangeltqaue them aunfwere, g lapag
Enen toben the nombze of the leedes is fplled in
pon, fo: bebath weped the wozld in p balaunce:
ininealure g nombze bath be mealured the time
and moueth itnot yntil the lame mealure be ful
Eplled. Then aunlwered Jand lapde: D Lorde
Lozde,nowe are toe fal offpnne, g for oure fake
paraduenture if is not,that thebarne of tbe rps
Thtcous Hal not be fulfplled, becaule of fipnne
of them that dwel bponearth.

Do beaunfwered me ¢fapd: Gothp wape
to a woman wopeh chpld,¢ alke of ber, b
bath fulfylled ber npne monethes, pE Der chyloe=
bed may kepe the bp2th ane ponge wpthin per:
Then lapde 3:0 Lorde that can the not .
And be fapde buto me: Fn hell the fecret places
of foules are fae the peupe chambze ofa wo
mat > trauapleth,¢mak he whé thetpme
€ neceMpte of the bp2th is at band: Euenfodoth
the balt to Deliner tt thatis committed vnto ber
Loke what thou delpzelt to fe, it halbe pewa
the from the beqpnnpnge. Then aunlwered 7,
elapde: PEF bane foundegracein thy (pabtes
pE it be poffible,s pF 3 be mete therfore, pew me
thé whether there be mo to come tben is patt,oz
moze paltthentsfoztocome. Wibatis pat, J
Knowe, but what is for tocome, %knowe not.

‘And he fapde nto me: Stand vpbpon the
tight pde % thal expounde f fimilitude onto
the. J Pode ebebolde, an whote burnpnge
ouen Went over before me: it happened $ whe
i flame was gone bp. tbe finoke had the bpper

ande. After thps there went ouer before me a

waterp cloud, g fent Downe much raine Wa ftoz
me:¢ when the Eomp rapne was pa pdropca
remained tpl. Chen lapde be unto me:ipkeasp


rapne ig moze thenthedroppes,¢as per etcea= —


dethý (moke, cuento the mealure of thethinged
Pp are pall hath the voer pand. Then went the’
Droppes andthe fmooke aboue:and J prapde ¢
fapde:mape ¥lpue(thpuckelt thon )pntpll that
tyme: what Wall pappen in tholedapessHe
aunlwered me,andlapbe: Asforthe tokens
wheroftpor athett me. gmape tell thea parte:
butas touchpnge thp Ipfe, mape not ipewe
tbe fo: Jam not fent therfoze.


he.n. Chapter.
Q ebte and the Aungellcommen togethers


fae Yl aens,uiarcke thps :

275, ©) Dapes (pall come,that thep whyche

ze) Alowell upon carth, thalbe taken in a

A5 DL So ea A the wape of the
elande thalbe barrett


trutbe balbe bpd, and


from fapth:butxiniquitpe Hall haue the Dppee wat prat


bande, phe ag thou bat fene nowe, and astpou
E Eae onge nn AANDE ED ATS
eptenowe fobaue rule, Malte thon (hoztlpe:
: aeea ED wate


enipe tp


x Euertheleffe,asconcernpngetheto |
Webolve,the 3


wate. Wut pf God graunt ptolpue,thou thalt
fe after the thprde trompet p the funne Mall fo-
Denlp pine agapnein the npabt,t the mone. tit.
times iuthe dape, t bloude fpall dzop out of the
wood, tthe Fone all geuebpsvopce,s the peo
ple Halbe puqupet:¢ eut be fhalrule,wbhozthep
bopenot, ý dwell vpon earth, ¢ the foules (hall
ipt ý Sodomptith tee halcatt out bis fithe,¢
makeanopte inp neghi whpch manp pall not
Enowe,but thep tha tall þearetbe wopce therof
There balbe a confufpon alfoinmanp pla
ces, ¢ tbe fpze balbe oft fent agqapne,t the wpld
beaites (thal qo thep2 wap and monfireous we
men (ball bare monfires, and falte waters thal
be founde in the fwete:one frende pall fpgbt a-
gapntanother:then thal wpt ebnderfandpng
be bpd and put alpde into thepe fecret places, g
Malbe fought of many, ¢pet not be found: then
{yal unrpgbteoutnes g volupteonfnes baue the
bpper bande vponearth. <Dnelandealfo mall
alkeanotber,andfape: Jsrpabtcoutnes gone
thorowetberAndit thal lape:j200,At the tame
time thal menbope,but notbyng optapne: thep
(ballaboure,but thep2 wapes Hal not profpere
, Co hewe the luch tokens J bane lene and
pF thou wplt papeagapne,t wepe ag nowe,ad
talte feuendapes, thou Halte beare pet areater
thpnges. Chen J awaked,¢ a fearfulnes went
thozowe all mp bodpe,¢ mp mpnde wasfeble g
25 cavefull,fothat J almot Councd wopthall. Sop
Aungel that was come totalke wpth mebelde
me,comfozted me, and fet me bp bpon mp fete.
And inthe feconde! gbt tt bappened, tbat
S/alatbpel the captapne of the peoplecame Vne
to me, fapinge: Where baft thou benerand whp
is tpp apse rasa beupsiknoweff thou not
that Sfracligcommptted wnto the inthe lande
of thep2 captpuitier Up then and eate, a fo2rlake
bs notas the Mepherde that leaueth bys flocke
in the pades of the wicked Wolues. Chen fapde
J onto ppm : Go thp wapes from me and come
not hye me: pe perde it and asy {apde:fo went
be bis wapefrome. And F falted leuen dapes,
mournpnge and wepynge, lyke as Cirpell the
aungel commaunded me. And after fent dapes
it happened that the thoughtes ofmp bert were
verp grenous bnfomeagapne,and mp foulere
ceaucd the {pete of bnderffandpnge, and F be-
ganne Co talke with the moot Hygbelt agapne
g fapbe:D Lorde Lorde of enerpe woode of the
earth ofall the treegtherof , thou bafkechofen
tde one onelp bpneparde-and of al landes of the
- whole wolde, thou bal chofen the one pit,¢ of
floures of f qroude,P balk cholép one lilpe:and
of all the depthes of the fee:thou þaltefplled the
one tprer: and ofall bupldcd cytpes thou hatte
balowed Spon onto thp Celfe:¢ of al the fouled
p arecreated thou pat named the one done, g of
allthe cattel that aremade thou halk proupded
the one (hepe:§ amonge all the multptude of fol
kes:thon paffe gotten the one people, and bnto
thps people whome thou louedi, thou qauefte
alawe that fg pzoncd of all.
And nows,OL ode, why Halk ther yenen
pps one people oner intomanpe: And bpon the


- and J all tell the moze. And


One roote thou balte preparedother , andwby
baf thou {catered the one onely people amonge
manpe ¢ whpche treade them Downe pee, which
baue euer wpthaudethy promptes, and nener
beleued thp couenauntes. | |
And thoughe thou were enempe onto thp
people, pet thulde Pp punyth themwpebtbyne
oWnedandes. Nowe when Fhad lpokenthele C
worbes,the Aungelthatcame tome the npabt
afo2e, was lente Dnto meand fapde bunto me:
Heare me and berken tothe area tbat Jape
fapde: Speake
onmp Lode. Chenlapdebe vutome: Chou
atteloze vered and troubled fo: Fleaels fake,
Louelk thou that people better then bym that
made them: And Zlapde : PoLogde:but of ve
tp arete and compafiion baue 3 fpoken. Fo: mp
tepnes payne me euerp boure, becaule ¥ wolde `
daue experpence of the wape of the moot bpgh
eft,and to {eke out parte of bps Gudaémente.
And be fapde vntome:that thou mapef not,
And Jlapde: wherforeLorde? Wibere vnto
Was Jbomethens D2wbhy wasnetmp mo-
thers chploebed then mp raucs So pad Jnot
fene the mplerpeand trouble of Jacob, andthe.
trauaple of mp people of Jfrael,
And be fapde vuto me : Rombee ede tbpn-
Tes pare not pet come: gatberme together the
broppes:that are catered abzode, make me the
flouves qrene agapne,that ate wpthered, open
me the thpug that is clofed:and bzpng me fozth
fhe votndes,that are thut vp, bewe mep pmage
of a opce and then (hall 7 declare the thpnge,
that thou labouret to knowe.And F fapde: D
Lorde Lozde, who mape hnowe thete thynaes,
but be that bath not bys dwellpnge wyebmen
Asfozme, Yam vnwple:howe mape Zhen
fpeake of thefe thinges wherof thou alketme.
Then Capde be vnto ed as thoucant
do tone of thele thynges that ‘bane feptten of
cuentocét thou not fpnde out mp Judgenent
oz in tbe end e,theloucthat 3 Dane prompted vn
tomp pecely andy fapbde:Bebolde, D Lozde,
pet arte thbounpe vuto them thathauenoende:
and what Mall thep doo, that baue bene before D
ine,02 wethat benowe, oz they that ball come
after bs: Andbelapde vuto me: J wplllpken
mp Judgemente wntoarpnge. Lyke as there
is no flackenefle of thelatte , euenfois thereno
Ciwpfteneffe of thefpatte . Ho FJ aunlwered
and fapde: couldefte thou not make thole (that
bawe benemade,and benowe , andthat ate foz
to come in one,that thou mpabtette thewethp
Judgementethefooners Then aunlwered be
meand lapde: Checreature mape not batea
botte the maker, nepther mape the wozlde holde
themat once tbat thalbe created,
and Zz pei ka batt thou fapd then wuz
to thp feruaunt,p thou lining maker, baft made
the creature lpupng at once, the creaturebare
itr euen fo mpabte it nowe alfo beare themp be
pzefent,at once. And be fay vntome:Afkethe
chilbede of a woma,s fap nfo ber: PE p bring
eft forthe chplozen, wobp doel thou it nortoe
ther, but one after another / zape ber ther 02
tobzpnge


wt Cid,


fobapngeforth.r.chiidsert at once: Andy fapde
pecannoot, but mutt do if one after another.

Then lapde be vuntome: Euen fo paue F ge
nena chpldebed vnto the earth:fo2 thole that be
fowen bpd it bp procefle of tyme. Fo: lyke asa
pougechyldemape not bzpnge forth the thpng:
res that belonge to the aged:euen fo paur 403-
dDepned the pears 3 made.

And Jalked and fapde:Hepnee thou palt
nowegcueumeawap, 3 wyll fpeake befoze the
foz our mother of whom thou pate tolde me, ig
pet ponge and nowe the dzawetbnpe vntoage

caunlwered meand fapde: Alke a woman
bearethchplozen,¢ pe Hall tell tbe. Sape vnto
ber:wperefoze are not thep ( whome thou date
nowe brought fozth)Ipke thole $ were before p
but leffe of fature ¢ And the thal aunlwere the:
- Thep that bebo2netuthe pouth offtrength, are
of one fatbpon,éthep p are borne in the tpnie of
age, (when the iy bed fapleth are otberwple
. Contpoer nowe thy Celfe,bowe that pe are lefe
of fature,then thofe that were before pou, and
fo are thep that come after pou,leffetben pe: as
the creatures wbpch nowe brapn tobe olde,ad
hauepafied over the frengtbhe of poutbe. Chen
fapbe J: Lozde ¥ beleche the.pl 3 baue founde
fauourein thp fpabte,thewe thp feruaunte, bp
whome doc thou vplet thy creature?

€ The. vi.Chapter.
a Tbe dungel intructeth Erdgas, and geneth bem
auntinece Co bps quefions,


oF eee $20 Helapde bute me: Jn the begin
fahipnge when p qrounde was made
3 2d befoze the worlde frode, 0 euer the
Lad dopndes blewe, before tt thondzed,
Rie alpabtened o2 ener the foundactis
of waradife were lapd,befoze the fapze floures


wetefene,ozeuct p moneable powers were ta:


bipthed , befozethe innumerable multptude of
Angels were gathered together,o2 euer p bpgh
nefies of theapze werelpfted bp, afozethemea
{ures of the firmant were named, oz? euer pchim
neps in Ston were bote, ¢ 02 the prelent peares
sere fought out,¢ 02 ener the inuenciong of thé
ý nowe finne were put alpde,befoze they were
fealed ý now gather fapth fo: a trealure:th2d0d
Fconlpder g ponder al theletbpnges, all thep
were made thozowe me, t thozowe none other:
bp mealfothep be ended, ¢ bp none other. Ther
aunfwered Jg fapde-wbpcb Halbe the parting
afunder of the tpmess 2 when Halbe the ende
of the fp2fte, tbe beqpnnpnge of it $ foloweth
-And pe fapde bntome: From Abzabam onto
Jfabac wpen Jacob ¢ Efan, werebozne of pim
Jacobs hande belve fpzte the belcof Efau : foz
Efau is the ende of thps worde , and Jacob is
the beginnpnge of it that foloweth. Che bande
of man bet wprt the bele andthe pande. Other
ia Efdzas)alkethounct.
aunfwered theng lapd:D 1020¢ Lorde,
pf J bane founde fauonre inthy (pabt, 3 belech
the Mewe thp ernannte the ende of thp tokens,
wberof thou hewedf me parte the laf npabte
Sobe aunhweredandfapde vntome: Stande
vp vpon thp fete, andbeare the perfect vopce g


Pp fodsawenpe; eto vpletthemt


founde. Chere (hall conte a greate macpoir, buf
the place wher thou Mandet hall not be moued
And therfore when thou bearelt the wo2des be
not afraped,fo: of the ende Wall the wode and
foundacpon of the earthbe pnderftande. And
whp:the wo2de therof trembleth and quakethe
Fo: ttknoweth,p tt male becbaunged at the end
And it bappened,p when ZF bad berdett,F Code
bp bpon mp Fete:and berkenedD,¢ bebolbde,there
was a bopce,that (pake, g the fonnde of it wag
Ipke the founde of manp waters,and it fapde:
Webolde,the dapes come, that FZ wpll beqpnne
Jat dwell Ypo
earth, ¢ wll begpnnetomake inqupfpepono
thé, wbat the be that bane burnt equpte wpth
wnrpabteoulnes,¢ when f lowe etate of Spa
(halbe fulfilled:¢ whé the wozld,p thalvanith a
wWap:thalbe onerfealed, thé wily do thele toktg
@ he bookes Halbe opened before thefpzma 15
ment, etbep pall fe all together, y the chplozen
ofa peare olde Wall pone forth they2 bopces:
the wemen wythchplde thal bapnge toth ntp
melp chpldzen of thze 02 foure monefbes olde, €
they pall lpue:% berapfed bp:andfodenlp hall
thefowen places appereas p bnfowwne,tie full
ftoze boules (hall fodenlp be founde emptpe, ad
the trompete hall qeue afounde,whpcbe when


enerpe ma beareth.thep (halbe bafkelp afrapde. at


xAe that tyme Mall frendes fpabte one again *
another lpke enempes,and the carthe thall fan
beinfeare wpth them.

Thelpringes of the wells (hal tand fpl, ë
fit.ttf. poures thep hal notrenne. WU pofcuer re=
mapneth fromall thefe thpnaes > F hauctolde
f (bal efcape,and fe my faluacpon, the ende of
poure Wo2lde. And the men tbat bauereceaned
thal fe it they ý baue not tated death from their
bp:th:¥ the bert of the indwellers Halbe chaun

ed, €turtted toanother meanpne, fozenel thal
je put out,¢dpfceatethalbe quenched. Ma foz
faptb.it thal flozith,cozrupcio thalbe ouct come
ethe truth, which bath bene lo leng wont frut,
fhalbe declared. Andithappened whe he talked
tö me, ý J loked demuerlp Ypõ bim befo2e wha
¥ kode, g thele wordes fapde be nto me: Jam
cometo thewep, thetimeof p night fotocome.
Pftbou wplte prape p et moare, and fafte
feuendapes agapne, 3 hall tell the moare thy
qes and greater then orne : wags toyceis
bearde befoze the Dpabet:to: whprthe mpaht-
tpe bath lene thy rpadteousdealpnge, be bathe
enealfotbpchattitte, which thou bat bad ener
fence thy pouthe:% therfore bathe befente meto
bewe the all thefetbpnaes.t tofape vnto the.
wWe of good comfozte,and feare not , ¢ balke not
wptb thetpmes that are pafteto thincke baine
thpnacs,¢ make not hate of the latter tpmes.
And pt happened after thys that 3 wepte
agapne,? fated lenendapes inlpke maner, that
3 mpabe fulfpl the thze wekes:whyche Deroldeg
me. gnthe viit.npabt was mp bert Vered witi
inmeagapne. And Fbeqan to lpeake before p
AippelE:foz mp fpzete was greatly (et onfper,ao
mp E ehe M Ditbrefle, ga DET ASE
pakek pnto thp creature from the begpnnpn
. Wh ti (eneh


JUOL.As’


CUCU ONURE =


(enenthe fp2tdape)andflapot : * Let Hraun The. vli.¢bapter.
Sedia and cartbbe made, and thp wo2d was a perfect The Angel Heweth etozas manp thpnges to come.
woke. Andthenwasthereplprete,andthe Kruz
darckneffes were pet oneuerp ipoe, andfcilece: PEASE |)
there wasnomans vopceaspetfromp. Then kea iente vnto me an Jungell, whpcbe
commaundeft thou afapzelpgbtetocomefosth PEA
outeofthp trealares,that thp worcke mpghte pee Be .
appeare and be fene. das and deare p wWoidespJamcometotel the
Ciponthelecond dap thou madet thelfprete Ano J fapdefpeakeon Lozde mp God. Chen —
of the fpunamente and commaundelt itto patt fapdepe wntome. Che Tee is fet ina wpld place
a funder gtomake adpuplpon betwprtpwa- thatit mpgbtebedeape and greate, but theen-
fers,p tbeonepartempgbt remapneaboue, a0 traunceisnarowe añdfmall lpke arpuer.
the otber beneth.dipon p.iii. dap thou bough: Fo: who woldegointothelee , tolooke bpon .
te to pate. ý the waters were gatberedinthe it,andtoruleitrDfbe went not thozowe p na-
vit.part of pearth.vi.partes ball thoud2icd vp rome,bowe mpgbte he come into the broder
and kepte them, tothpntente that menmypgbte Fteman other: Acptpets bupided and let
few z occupp bufbandzp therin. Asfoncasthy pponabzoade felde , and ig full of all goodnetie
word went fo2th.the worckewasmade. For theentraunceisnarroweandfodapne, lpheas -
immedpatlp there was greatinnumerablefrut pfthere wereafpzeattherpabtebande, anda
and manp dpucrle plealuresanddefpzesoftem depe water at the lefte and as it were onelp one
peacyon , floures of chaungeablecoloureand ftraptpathebetwprte them both tolmale rhat
fmell,and thys was done the.ttt.dape __- therecoulde but one mango there.
*@ipon p iiti. dape thou commaundft that Pfthpscptpe nowe were geuen Yntoan
Bene. she funne Mulde geuechyshyne,andthemoone Hep2e and be neuer wente thorowe theparious
berlpabt: p ftarces dpdEthouletinozdze+and wape, bowe wold be reccaue bpsinderptaunce
Deutitt.c, auek théacharge,todolcrupceeuenvdntoma And ylapdeJrisloLosde. Chenlapde a
yoasfo2rtobe made.Cipdp.v.dapPlapditon- uenlo iszrael alfoa pozcyon. And wppr toz
„qe TOtDe. vit. parte ( wher é Waters weregathe thep: fakes paue ¥mave the worlde: and when
Senne  red)p they (uldcbryngefozth dpuersbeates, Adam trantgrefled mp atutes, then was the
foulesefyWes Andflottcameto pafe, thatthe thpnge Judged that wasdone. Chen were the
Dome Waters:and without foulebzoughtforrh entraunces of the wozlde made narowe, full of
liupna beattes,at thecommaundementofGod forowcandtrauaple. Chep are but fewe and
that all people mpgbtepraple thowonderoule ewell, full of parellcsandlaboure. oz tbe en-
worckes. Chen dpf thou pneu two foul- traunces of the foze wozld were Wpde and iure,
les:the onetbou caldi Enor and potberLent and brougbteimmoztall frupte.
atban, and utdi feperate the one from tie other Pf they nowe whpche arecntredinto thps
forthe. vfi.parte (namelpe where f water was worlde , mape not i Nae thele ffrapt and
gee together )mpabtnotholdethembot) bapnethinges,muchleflemap they compzebčd
inte Enoch thou gauek one part, whichwas avd vnderftand p fecret thpnges bP dpfquie
dped vp iudape.p bethulbdwellintbefame te@thou tbp felfe tpen Ging thou arte but aco2:
_ parte, whyertn area. @).bplles.But wnto Leni- ruptpblemans And what woldelt thou knowe
atha thou auet tye. vit.partenamelp{ mop obere as thou art but mortally And why bak
andbaftkept bymtedenoure what thou wple thounot receaued into thyne berte thetbynae p
and when.dipon the. vi.dap thou qauefFcoms isfo2rocome,but that is prealent:
maundenent vntop earth,p befo2e the,tt Muld CThenlapde 3: D Lorde Lorde, « thon 25 =e
bepng forth bealtes, catell, anDallpcrepe,andD afte o2depned intbp lawe , that tberpgbte= =T"
(befposthys) Adam alfo,whomep madft lod ous thuldeinperetetbele thpuges, but that the
ofall thpcreatures.Dfbypmtcome weall,andp ‘onfapethfulland ongodlpe wulde perpe. He
peoplealfo,wpometbhou paftechofen {pecpally uertbelefle , the ryabteous thall {uffer trapte
wntothy felfe. Ali thps baue J fapdenoweand thprqes,and bope fo: wpde: foz: they that baue
fpokenbeforethe,that ampgbtethewebowep lpued vngodlpeand fuffered Mrapte thpnaes ,
the worldeiSmadeforzourelakes. Asforthe hallnotletbe wyde.
otber people whyche allo come of Jdam p hatte And be fapde duto me: Shere is no tudge
fapde p thep arenotbpnge, but belpkeatpptle, aboue God,and none that hath vnderftanding
and batt Ipkened ý a bundaunce of them unto a woh pabet. Eo: there be manp p perpthe,
dz0p $ falleth from the rofe of the Doufe. becaufe thep dplppfe the lawe of God is{et be
- Andnowe,D Lorde: the Heathen whiche fozetbem. Jeo: God bath geuen trapt comma
pauc ener benereputedasnothing,bauebeqon dementto fuchascome,that they knowe what
tobe Lozdes ouer tg andtodeuour Ye:but we thepbo,and bowethep Huldelpue : andifthep
thp people ( whome thou balte called thefpifte keptetbps.thep hulde notbe punye.,
bozne,thy onip begotten, andttpferuttloner) §  Meuerthelee,thep were not obedpent onto
are geucn into thepsbandes and power. Pithe bym,but {pate rn Se bym: pmagined apne
wozld nowebe madefo2rourfabes, whphaue thpnges,and purpofed tofpnne, andfapde mo:
wenot the inberptaunceinpofleflpon wpththe oucr.p there was no God,andp Godregarded
wolde. Howe longe all thps endures itnot.Dps wapes bauethep not hnowne, bps
awe


VY SOT Claas,


lawe bauetbep dpfppfed, and dDenped bps pro-
niples -inbps ffatutes and ozdpnaunces baug
thep not bene fapetbfull and eadfak, and baue
not perfourmed bps worckes. 7

_ And therfore Efdzas: vntotbe full,plentp
andtotbeemtp,emptynefle. Webolde,the tyme
thallcome,tbat thetetokens whpch J haue told
the, hall come to paffe and theb2pde thal apere
and the earth thatnowe paffeth awape, thalbe
thewed:and whofocuer ts delpucred from p eue
leg, all femp wonders, Fo: mp onne Zelus
albe openlp declared, with thole that be with
bymand thep that remapne : halbe merp info-
pri aire yer aoe Bae

After thete fame peares (hall mp Cine Chif


.. Dpe,and allmen that bane lpfe, and the wolde


albe turned into the oldelplence feuen dDapes,


 Ipkeas inthe fore Judgementes fo rhat nomar


all remapne. And after feuen dapes,p worlde
that petawaked not,hhalberapled Yp, and (hal
dpe corrupt. And the earth, thallreffooze thore
that bane ept inper:and fo tall tbeduft thofe
thatdwellin{plence,and the fecret places Mall
Delpnerthole that becommptted wnto them.

And the mool Ppabet Halbe openty declared
bpon the feate of Judgemente,and allmplerpe
pall banpth awape andlonge Cufferpnae thal=
be gathered togetber.25ut the Judgement Hal


C contpnue,p truth Hallremapne,and faptb hal


ware trong, p worcke thal folowe,« preward
thalbe fhewed:p rpqbteaulnes Mall watch, ad
the vnrpgbteoufnesiballbearenorule. —

Then lapde J:*+Abzabam pzaped fpr for


crrr a he Sodomites, tand oles fo2 pfathers that


{ypnned inp wpldernefle,and be that came after
Dpm foz Jirael inp tyme of Achas and Samu


but we all that come of the. Eor what pzofpt ig
if onto bg, pf there be pzompfed an imunoztall
tpine: where as we meddle wpth Deadlp worc-
kes: And p there is promifed vg an enerlafing
Hope, where ag ourelelues are euell and vapne
and hat there are lapde bp for bs Dwellpnires
of helthe and fredome, whereas we bauelpuen
evtell and that the wozthpppe of the Mpabellig
kepte to defende them wobpebe paue led a pacp-
entelpfe, whereas we paue walcked in the mo
fe wpched wayes of alls And that there balbe
(heweda Paradpre , whofe frupteindureth for
cuer, wherein is fredome andmedpepne, where
48 we (hall not goo in; for webaue walckedin
Dnpleataunte places: And that the faces of
them tobpch bane abftapned, (all hyne abone
the farves, where as oureFaces ball beblacke
and darche? Jo Wobyle we lpucd anddpd dn-
tyabteoutlp,
luttre Deatbe.


Thenaunlwered he me,andlapde: This D


is the confpderacponand thoughte ofthe bat-
faple , wbhpcheman bathe wp AE ba Abut pe
be be ouer come, be Wall {uffre ag thou hatte
rae terbpage tpat lape. or st

Pccaue Chethpuge that Blape. fFo2rthys isthe
lpfe, whereof )ofes [pake ‘ynto ade ha


whplepelpued,fapinge:x Chule thelpfethat Denrrr:


thon mapefte lpue: Penerthelefic,they beleucd
Dpiinotneptherthe Brophetes afterbym.
#2.0,1107 me whpch baue fpoken trto then,


that benpneffetbuldenotreache onto tbem, to


thep2 Ddeftruccpon , lpke ag iope is for tocome
ouerthole that baue {ufferedthem felt be
fnfourmed in faluacpon. ones

J aunfwered then andfapde: Fknowe


otti,


weconfpd2ed not, that te thulde-


ii.teaum, eland Danid Foz pdelteuccpontandSalomd Lozde thatthe tig mer nthi
tir pe.b.e, E2 tbemthat cameinto thefanctuarp,*«eWeli- bathmercpe ee Sided tes et at be
‘itt. regum 88 Foz thole that cectaucd rayne, andfo2p Dead the wozlde, and bponthotealfo that walkein
Baco,b.e. P Dempabeel ue, and Csechiag, for the people prelawe:m that * Deispacpente andlonge
| inthetpmeot Sennacherib:anddpuerteatber fufferynge towarde thofe that haue {ynned in BO
inlpke maner, wbpchbaueprapedformanp. — tbeps wozrckes and that be ig Ipberall to gene
` Euenfonowe,Lepng the coruptisqrewe whereas it requyzeth: andtbat beis of greate
Dp,and wpckednes increafed,and the rpabte 0 m trep, fo tpe mul tppled bys loupnae kpnonette
us bane pzaped fo: the vngodlp,wherfoze Hall towarde thole that ate prealente, and tbatare
it not be fo nowe alfo? Bias paft,and to them whpcb arefo2 to come.
 Heaunlweredme,andfapd:Chps prefent Sto2 pE be multpply not bps merepes the
wozlde ignot theende,thereremapnethmuche wozldethallnot be made lpupnge , wpth thole
bononretn it,therfoze baue thep prapedforthe thatoweltherin. De genet) alfo,fo2 pt be gaue
weake. But the dape of domethallbe pende of not ofbps goodnes thatthep whych banc done
thpstpme,andp begpnnyngoftheemmoztalpy enell,mpabtebe eaten, from they topchepned, |
tefortocome,woberinalcozrupcpoisbanpihed the ten thoufand part of men thuldnot be made |
all voluptoufnesislowfed al mplbeleuetaken Ipupng. And pfp Judge forgauenot thote that
awap,righteoufnes qrowen,¢ the veritelpzig bebealed with bps worde, pf be wold deltrop |
bp. Chen thallnomanbeabletotauehbpmtbat themultptud that EEepueth, tbere Duld be verp
rig ert Chad gc ph fewe left in an onnumerablemultptude. |
Ç 0P. aunlmete EN, FLaAPUE: ; i it. : 4 |
firft and laftfaping:p it bad bene better, not to € Che. biit. Chapter |
~ pattie genentheearth onto Adam: 0z els when _ __—* 7 pe :
it was geuenbpm ,tokepebpmtbatbetpulde [ava D be anfwered me, fapinge: X
not{pnie. Woz what profptisitforzmennowe PANAR =A .
in thyspeelentetpmetolpue inbeupnefie, and Fra eh
alter death tolokefozpunpthemente: Dthou lve Yel
Adam, what hakketvoudone / Sozthouqhit PY, C


j
a a
l. re A -F
HS 7 al H
S e -


was thou that fpnned thou artnot fallenatone besa


THe, Wi. VOORE


all lape onto the, that it geneth much moulbe

wberof carthen veflelles are made, but tptte of

ae it that galt pened om = eien has

FFD mmorche cEtbps wolde. * Cperevemanp creas

SHED Ced but ewe halbe pacterucdD. Chenantwered

Jalapde: Then {walowe vp the wptte( thou

foule)and denoure the pnderftandpng.toz thou

arteagreed to berken ¢ to gene care,¢ wplipng.

to prophecy : foz thoubatteno longer (pace ge-

uentbe,but onelpe to lpue,D Lo2de, wplt thou

not geue thp feruaunte leaue, that be map prap

before the,and that thon mapette qene feed vn-

to oure berte,and buplde oure Dnderffandpuge

that there mape come frupte of it: and that ene:

rpe one wobpcbe iscozrupte, ¢beareththe tate
andplaceofaman,mapelpues |

J€02 thou art alone,# weal are one worke

matbpp of thy bandeg,lpkeas thou bat faye,

¢ Ipkeas the bodp is fatpponed nowe tn the mo-

thers wombe,¢ qeuelt the membres thp creas

ture ig preferned in fpze g water: gnpne moone:

thes doth thp wozckefufferthy creature wobpcd

is fathponed in ber: but the thpnge that peler-

ueth,and it that is preferucd thall bothe be kept

togetber:and when tpme ig the wombe delpue

cetp the thpna that is kepte and growenin ber.

Jeor thou bate commaunded the bzeftes to

| geuemilke pnto tbe frute thatthe thyng which

| te created and fatbponed, mape be nozpthed foz

| atpme:+ when thou Dpfpolett ¢ ordzeft it wpth

3 thy mercpe,bapnaett it bp wpth thp ryghtcous

| neffe:nurtureft ft inthy lawe,and refourmett it

with tbp wnderftddpng, moztifielt (tas thy cre

| ature, maket itlpuyng asthp worke.<pcing

| then p thou delropeft him, wbich with lo great

labours tg created g fatpponed thozowe thp co-

matidement, # couldet lpgbtlp ozdapne alfo,p

thethpng wobpeb is made mpgbt be pzeferned.

and tbps Blpakenowe of all men in gene

~ 2 rall agp bnowelte:but otop people, foz whofe

(akez am fop: of thpne inberitatice for whofe

caufe ¥mourne:# of Firael, foz whom J am wo

ful:¢fo2 Jacob:fo2 whole fake Jam greucd ther

fore beqpn J to} ay befozcthe,for mp felfe and

for thé,for 3 fete al of bs:euenof bs, f dwell

ppd erth. Buty baue hecdp lwiftnes of f tudge

whichis to come:therfore beare mp bopce,t Dn

Derftandemyp wo2des:¢ 3 (hall fpeake befo? the

bps isthe begpnnpng of the wordes of

€fozas,befoze be was receaued:DLo2de thou

that dwelleft ineucctlafpngencile , whole epes

ace lyfte vpintbe apze, whole Hoole is excea-

bpng Dye sapere glopenn gh map not

be compzebended, befoze wbome the Hoofkes of

Heauen tande wpth tremblpng, whole keping

ig turned in wopne and fpr, whofe wo2d'is true

rovofe talkpnge is Feadfafk, whole commaun-

demente is fronge , whofe ozdpnaunce ig fear:

ful, whofe lookes bepeth bp the bepthes, whofe

wath maketh the mountapnes tomelteawap

and whofe truth beareth wrtnelle: D beare the

prayer of thy feruaunt,and marche wptd thpne

cares thepetpcpon of thp creature.
f€o2 whpte Jlpue J wpll (peake, ¢ fo lounge
as J paue vndeltandpnge, I wpllaunfwere D


lookenot bpon the fpnnes of thp people wbpeh
ferucinthetruth. auenorelpecte vntotbe
wpcked ftudpes of the Peathen, but totheDp-
fy2eof thofe that keptethp teftpmonpes wptp
fozowes. Thpneke not vpontholethat baue
walked Fapnedlpe befozethe, but vpon them,
Whpch wpth wpllbaueknownethpteare. —

Let it not be thp wpl todefFrop them, which
haue bad beatlp maners,but to looke vom thë
that baueclearlp taught thbplawe. Case thou
no indpgnacpon at them, whpch are whole thé
beattes:but louethent,p alwap put thep? trul
intbp rpabteoufnes and glozp: fo2 we and oure
Fathers baue all the fame fpcknes ¢ dilcale, but
becaule of our finneg Ë halt becalled mercpful.

$€02 if thoubatt mercpbpon vs, thou palt €
be called mercpfull, whereas we baue nowo-
ches ofrpabteoufnes:foztherpgbteous whych `
bauelapde bp manpe mood worckes together,
pall out of thepzdedesreceauerewerde. Foz
what isman, p thou Mulde take opfpleature
at bpm’ dD: what isp co:wuptpblemo:tal gene
apr thou Wnidetbeforougbtoward pint
* f€o2z of atruth there ignomanamong thé ean E

thatbebo:ne but bebath dealt wpckedlp and “IT 7
among tbe faprbfull there ig none whpeh bath 8
not doneamp ie. Forintbps(D Lozde)thprp-
qbteoufnefe and thp goodneffe thalbe prapled
and declared, pfthou bemercpfull vntothem,
whpeharenotrpehingoodtwo:rkes.

Then aunlwered he me,andfapb: Some
thypnaes bat thoulpoké arpabt.and accozding
unto thp foo2des it Halbe.Fo2 F pil not vere
Ip coutpbder the Yoozckes of thenr, whpch haue
{pnned befo2e the death. before piudgement, be
foze deftruccpon:but * J topli rciople over the pon. tiita
wortke € thought of the rpabtcous. Fwypll re- ne
membze alfo: sured?) boly MARON AnD
preward.Lpke as ¥ haue (pokennowe,fo thal
if come to patie. oz asthe bulband ma fowetp
much feedypon the ground and planteth manp
trees, and pet altwape the thynge that is lower
0} planted is not all kept fafe,nepther doth it al
take roofe: uen fo ig tt of them that are lowe-
enintbe wo2ld,thep thallnot all be preferued.

Jaunlweredthenandlapde: PFFhaue
founde grace,then let me fpeake:Lrkeas p bul:
bande maneg Leede perpiheth, pf ttreceaue not
tapne indue leafon,o2 pe there conimeto much
raynedpontt : Cuenfo bho man alfo
whpcb is created wpth thp bandes, andislpke
onto thpne owne Jmage, and to thplelfe,for
whote fake thou halt made all thpnges, and Ip-
kened bpm vnto the bulbandemansfeede. We
not wrothbat bs, D Lozd: but (pare the people
and baue mercp bpon thpne owneinberitaunce
sD be mtercpfull dntotbp creature.

Thenauntwered be meand fapde: Thpn- q
ges zelent are fo: p prefent,etbpnaes tocome ~
for fuchas beto com. Eo: thou lackelt pet moch
feing thou mapeft loue mp creature aboue me.

J baue ofttimes drawen np dnto the, but neuer
to p burighteous. jn this allo p art marueloug
betoze the bpelt in tbat thou balte humbled thy
felfe,as tt be conmeth the, ¢ pale not ace
tbpne


LOT CDAS,


thpneowne felfe that thou arte had in Cacbebo
noureamonge therpabteous . Cherfore pall
Greate wzetchednefleand mpferpe come vpor
them pinthelattectpme all dwel in P w902Id,
becaufe thep baue walked in great pzpoe.
wut onderLande thou for thp Celfe,efeke
oufe glorp fo? fuch ag be Ipke the: for nto pou
ts paradple opened: the tree of lpfe ig planted, p
tpme to comets prepared, plenteousnefle made
teadpe,a cptiets builded Foz pou and retis pee
pareoper, erfecte goodnefle and wpledome.
berote of euel is marcked from pou,tbe wea-
Keneffe and moth is ppd from pou, € into bel fip
eth Cozrupeponin bie en Doro wes are
vanpthed away: zi the ende fs (pewed the treas
fur ofimmogtalite. And therforeathe p nomoze
queftiosconferning ý multitude of thé that pe-
tith. Fo: thep haue také liberte, d ee p biet
thought fcozne ofhislaw, g fozfakë bis wapeg.
Pozeouer, thep paue ttodendowne bps


bral riita tpg hteous, € x fapbe in thep2 berte, that there


is no God:pea,and that wpttiglp ‘For thep dp.
For lpke asthe thynge that J haue fpoken of.
iš made readpe fo2 pou : Cuenloistpy2tte and
DSH nat fo2 thé. Fozit was not bys wyl
tbat men ibuld cometonaugbte:but thep wich
becreated, baue defpled the name of bym tbat
made them, and are vnthbanckefull ynto bpm,
wipche prepared lyfe for them. nd therfozcis
mp tuogemente noweat bande. Chele thynaes
baue J not Hewed ynto al men, but bute fewe

Hamelpe yntothe and lucheasbelpkethe .
Chen anlwered J ¢lapde: Webold, D Lov
nowe hak p thewed me the multptude of the to
Kens, which thou wplt berpn todo attbe latte:
but at what tyme when batt not fhewed me

‘Che.ir.Chapter. |
CL fbzae hath bpipons Hewed banto hpm.,

(ak ee C auntwered me then, and fapde:
Ki ASS? Gelurethou the tyme dplpgentip
deat IN it (elfe, when thou feet that one
uw) parte of the tokens come to paffe,


Dwellinpapnes.
Fo Cache asintbhep2 Ipfe bauereceancd be


Daue abbozred mp lawe,


Hol. fit.


nefpted. 40 hatte not knownte meand thep that


dome and wien thep had pet open lepfure ofa-
niendemente econuerlpon, and Yndertode not


but dpfpyfed it : thefame mufte knowe it after
Deatbinpapne. And therfozebe hou nomore


carefull, bowe the ungodly albe punpibed,ad


bow thervghtcous malbe laned and tobolethe
wolde igand whenitis Thénánfwerd F:ãd
fayde: x3 baue talked befoze nowe : 3 (peake 18
# Wpllpeake allo hereafter,


mo of them whpche perpthe, then thalbefaued,
ipieas the floudets greater then the dzoppes. |
a. And beantwered me,fapinge:Ipke as the
felde is,fo ig alfothefeede: ag the Routes be, fo
ave the coloures alfo : fuche as the wo2ckemar
is fucbe ig the worcke:and as the ulbandema
is hpmfelfe.fots bys bulbadzy allo, Foz it was
thetpme of the worlde.


And when F prepared for them that are:


howe, o? ener the worlde was made > Whereis
thep thulde dwell, then was there noman that
wWpthitode me. Mowe when euerp onewas, ad


the maker allo inthe wozlde which fs nowe pze


parean themoneth that ceafeth not, and the


awe whpebe is vnlerarcheable:


Were corupte . So Jconlpdered the wolde
bebolde,tbere was perpl,becaute o the though
tes tbat were come into it. Andy lawe and pa
red them qreatelpe,and baue kepteme a wpne-
berpe of the grape »¢ plante from amonge maz
npe generacpons. Let the multptude perplihe
then, whpch are crowen vp in vapne: ad let mp


grape andw pneberpe be kepte:eucn


fo: wrth great laboure baue 3 madeit pp,


enertheleile,pFth
pet iiba I
pfe


otbp wap tbeninto:


Houle is buplded:andea
the felde, tat no AcM, dink
Pape vnto the pele


come and talke wpth the.


Do J wente mp Wape andcame intothe €
Felde whpcbe is called Ardath (Ipkeas becom-
ntaunded meand there F fat amonge the fiot-
tes dpd cate of je berbeg
atitfpeds


meate of thefame


ne. After feuen dap


cs J fat bpon the grafle,¢ mp perte was vered
wpthinmelpkeas afo2ze:% fab mp mouth


and began totalke befoze the
DLa20de,thou that bewet tby !
tbou afte declared ¢ opened, thp felfe wnto our rhs!


peite and fapde


fathers. in the wpldernefe, ina place whereno
ind Dwelleth,ina barren place when thep came
onte of Eqppte,and thou {pakelt faping: Beare
ine DYiracl and marke mp wozdes thou leede
of Jacob. Webolde,¥ lowe mp latwe inpou,¢it
(ball bzing frutein pou,e pe thalbe honoured its


it fo: euer: foz oure fathers whychreceaned the


lawe kepte it not, obferucdnót thp ozdpnauit
ces ¢ fatutes, and tbe frute of tbp law was not
decla pei ttmigbt not:fo, wby-it was thine


¥*FFo2 thep


receauedit


kepte not the thpnge that was fowen inthe.


Stisaculkome when


P Ground receaucthfeed
Æbb fit othe


whple thep had pet fre


they? manera


mp planté


Ou wplte take bpon the
fhalt not faft in them)
1D of floutes, where no
feonlp of the loures of
eno wpne, but eate
confpnuallpe:fo wipll ¥


of the felne, and the


that there be manp wit et.oiiti


felfe unto Vg, * ero. rir..


b


»perptbed becaufe thep deu,rresi.¢


=a - én Se —


)


The, titi. booke


ortheltec a thpp,ozavetfel meate tdpnke that
when it perpliheth 02 ts bzoken wbherin a thing
is Cowen, o2 wherin any thpnge isput: p thyn-
meg alfo pery pe and are bgoken: which are fow
en ozput therin. wut wnto vs it path not pap-
ned o, foz we f baue receaucd thelawe perpe
infpnne: and oure berte whpehe alfo receaned


erpa thelawe:notwythfandpnge,* thelawe perp=
ass (hethnot:butremapneth indps laboure.


And vohert F confpoered thelethpnges in
mp berte after thps maner, J loked aboute me
topthmpne epeg and wpon the rpgbte {pee, * 3


iEnd Fare a woman, wWhycbe mourned fooze, made


greate lamentacpon, and wepte wpth lowde
‘pope i ae Lada w es peu in peaces,and (pe
pad afthes pon her Heade. | |
t Ehenlet Imp thoughtes go, that F was
in and turned me onto per and apde:wbherfore
wepelt thoustbp arte thou fo forp and difcom
forted/ And the fapde Dntome: Splet me be-
‘waple my felfe, and take pet mozefozowe: foz
J amfoze bered inmp mpnde, and bzoughte ve
tpelowe. And Jfapde Dnto her: What apleth
the: D: who hath Done anp thpnge to thes tell
me: phe fapde: F paue bene Ynfruptful and ba
ren and baue bad anbulbande thpztye peares.
And thele thpztpe peares F000 nothpnae elles
dape and npgdec , and all houres: but make mp
paper tothe bye . Biter thprtpepeares God
berde metbp handmapden, and lobed pon mp
‘mpferpe,con{pdered mp trouble, and gaue me a
fonne, and J was glad of bpm, fo was mp puf-
band alfo and all mp nepgbbours,and we gaue
qreatebonoure vuto the mpgbtpe. And Jno-
rpfthed bimwpth greate trauaple.®o when de
qrewe bp andcametotbhe fpme, that be hulde
baue a wpe, J madea frate., |
C ef Bsn ü Aaa ömune ¢ogether
ae PS AD it happend, that when mp fö-
OA Ene wente into bps chambze be fe
: VA vA Downe, and dped:then ouer thzewe


teg Fall that J was in,and fpake tober in di


thep walke almoffe all into deffruccion,andima
np of them albe rooted oute. | ad
Who hulde then (bp reafon make moare
mournynge then the,that bath lotelogreate a
multptudesand not thou wbpebe arte fo2p: but
foz one. But pf thou woldelt fape vnto me:<t)p
mournpnge is not Ipketbe mournpnae of the
earthe: fo? J haue lofethe frupte ot mp bobdpe,
whiche F bare wpe heupnefle:but the eartheis
according tothe maner of the earth, and the pre
fente multptude qoetbagapne into ber agitis
cometopatie. Chen {ape 3 vnto the:-lpkeas
bafte bo2zne,wopth trauaple and fozowe,cuenio
the cartbalfofrom the beapnnpnge geucthber
frupte onto man,fozbpmtbat made ber . And
therfore wptholde thpforowe and beaupnetfe


bp thy (clf,xandloke what bappeneth wnlo the sens.rii.g
t


beare it tronglp. Jo} if thou ndgeft the mark
andende of God,toberightcous and good,and
receauelte bys counfaple intpme thou Malte be
commendedtherein. Goothpwapetbeninte
thecyrpetothp bulbande.

And the fayde vnto me:that wypllF notdo:


Fwpll not gointotpecptic: butberewpl Joye 95 ,


Dod commuted moze wopth ber,and fapde: do
not fo,but becounlapled,¢ folowe me,foz powe
manpe Falles bath Spon: 8e of goodcomforte
becaule of the fozowe of Jerufalem. Forthon
feeft that oure Hanctuarpe is taped wall, oure
aulter broken, oure temple deftroped our plap-
inge of inffrumentes and fin Saeed lapd Downe
the thanckefaeupnae put to filence ouremp2tp
is banplihed a wape,thelpadte of ourecandel-
ftpeke is quenched,the Areke of theconenaunte
istakenfrom b3s,all onre polpe Ehpnges are de
fyled,and thename that is calledvpon ouct vs,
is Dpfhonoured: oure cbplo2zen are put to pame
oure preattes are baente:oure Leuptes are carp
edDawapeintocaptpuptpe: oure pp2qins are ve
fpled and oure pues rauplhed:ourerpabteo-
usmenf{popled:and our chpld2zen Deftroped:our
ponge menare bzoughte in bondage, and oure
ftronge woathyes ate become weate:and Sp-
on(wbpcbefeale is the greate ofall )islooted
vp from ber wo2tbpppe: for the tsdelpucred in
to the bandes of themthat bate bs.

And therefore hake of thy qreate heauy-
neffeand put awape the multptnde of fozowes:
that the mpgbtpe mape be mercpfull wntotbe:
and that the bpett mape geue the refe from thp
laboureandtrauaple. Andit bappened,that
when J was talkpnge wyth ber, Der Face bpd
(bpueand glyfter, fothat J was afraped of her
and muled what itmpabte be. Andtmmedpa=
tly pecat out agreat vopce, verp Fearfull,fo p
the earthe boke at the nopfe cf the woman:
loked, ad bebolde, the wonan appered ynto me
nomoze:but there was acptie builded, ¢ a place
was ewed fromthe qrounde and foundacion.


Then was J afraped.andcrped. with loude E
popce, and fapde:@ai bere is Urpel the Angell it.croza.
mbpcbe cametome at thefp2ft:ffo2 be batbcau es
E


meto come inmanp confiùcracpons t bpgh
thougbtes,and mine ende ts turned into coup
cpon:and my peaper torebube . And as 3 was
fpeakpnge


Of EMAS,


fpeakpnere thefe worded, be came bntome, and
loked bpon me:and J lapeas one that bad bene
Dead, and mpne YnderfLandDpnge was altered,
and be toke me bptherpabte bande,and como?
ted me,and fet me Dpon mp fete, and fapde Wn-
to me:what apletbtperand whpts thine pnder
ffandpige vered ¢ and the vnderftandpnge of
thp bertccand wherfore artethoulozpes And Y
fapde: WBecaule thou hatte foefaken me:and F


‘iletira banedone * accodpnge Yntothp wordes, 7


wenteinto the felde and there haur Fiene thp
gestbat Jamnot able to erp2efle He lapte Yn-
tome: Stande vp, and bemanlpe, and 3 (pall
qeuethe erbo2tacpon.

‘Tien fapde F:{pcake bntome mp Lorde:
foWakeme not teit 3 ope in vapne : for J bane


_ fene that Jknewe not and bearde that 3 donot


knowe.<D2 hall my vnderftandpngebedp{cea-
ued and mpmpnde’ Wut nowe J beleche the,
that thou wyplte thewe thp feruaunte of thys
wondze. Pe aunfwezed me then and {apd beare
me,and J pall enfourme the and tell the wher:
Fozethouarteafraped, for the bpefte bathe ope-
ned manpe lecret thpnaes puto the.

He hathelene that thp wapes arerpahte,


- and that thon takete fo2zowe contpnuallpe foz


thp people:and makeft greate lamentacpon foz
von: andtherefoze onderfkande the vpipon,
whpci thou lawet a litle whplea go after this
maner. Thou fawelk a woman mournpng, and
thou bate comforted ber:  seuerthetbeleffe
nowe feet thou the lpkeneffe of that woman no


, moare, but thou thoughtelt there was acptpe


buplded : and lpke as the tolde the of the fall of
ber fonne:fo thps ts the aunfwere. Che woman
whome thou fawell is Spon:and where as the
tolde the tbat the bath bene thpztpe peares Vn:
fruptefull and barren, thole are the thp2tpe pea
res wherin there was no offeringe made in ber.

Eut after thp2tpe peares Salomon bupl-
ded ber and offred,ethen bare the barren a fone
And where as {he tolde the : that he nozplthed
bpm wpth laboure,that was the dwellpnge of
Jerufalem. ut where as Me tolde that ber fon
ne Died when the came into ber chambie,that ts
the fal of Jerufalem. And eke ber lpkenes
powe the mourned for ber fone :¢ what els pap
pened vnto ber, x bane hewed the. Andnowe
God teeth, that thou art fozp inthp mpnde, and
furet fr6 thp bert for ber, gfo bathe he brewed
the brr cleareneffe,¢ the fap2reneffe of ber beautp

And therfore J bad the remapne in the felde
whereno houleisbuylded. or Jknewethat
the bpelte wolde fhewe thps vntothe:therefoze
3 commaunded the to goo into the felde, where


no foundacion no? buplding is. feo: in the place


where the byelt wpll (hewe bys cptic there wal
be tio mans bupldpnge. And therfore feare not,
and let not thpne perte be afraped, but goo thy
wapein, and fetbe glozpous fapze buylopnge
and howe greateit is and bowe great thouthin
cheftit, afterthemealure of thyneepes,etien
halte thou þrare as muche as thpne cares map
compzebherid. ffo2 thou arte bleed aboue manp
otber and art called wpth the bpeft as the fewe


Tukkie i there came vp fromtbelee an egle


~~ De (prede bps wpnges ouer all the
earth,and all the wpndes of the apze blewe in
them, and fo thep were put together acapue.
And J bebelde and oute of bys fethers there
grewe out other lptle contrarie fetbers,p beves
reed, the beades tn the mpddefte was areater
then the other, pet vetted it wpth the re(poue.
{Pozcoucr Jfawe , that the Peaqle fewe
wyth bps wpnges, andray gred vpon eartie
and ouce all them that Dweite vpon the carthe:
And F fawe that altbpngrs under beaué were
fubtecte unto ppm, and no man {pake agaynite
bpm:no not one creature dpon earth. 3 faweals
fo that the Argle tode vp vpon bys clawes,ao
auca Counde wyth bps featbers,and a vovce
apinge after thps maner:watche not alltoqea
ther, Nepe eurcp man in bis owne place,z watch
fozatime,but let the beades be prelerued at the
late. Renertbelele, J fewe. that the vopce wet
not oute of bps beades , but from the mpododefte
of bys bodpe. And Jnombzed byscontrarpe fe
thers,anb behold there were. viii.oftkem. X no
J looked and bepolde Ypon therpgbt {yde there
arofe onc fetber:and rapaned ouer all the carth
And it happened, that when it rapqned.the end
of it came, and the place therof appered nomo2e
So the nerte folowpnge ftodevp,andrapyanen
and bad a greate tyme : and it bappened . that
when itrapgned, the ende of pt camealfolpke
asthe fpztte,fo that ttapperednomoeze.


 -S€ol.


titi,


>


Then there came a vopee vntotandfapde —


abe thou that bate kepre tn the earth fo long
thys Jfape onto the:before thou begpnnetteto
appeare nomoze. Chere pall none after the at:
fapne Drtothp tpme.Chenarole the thpzde aa
tapaned as the other afoze, tapprearednomore
alfo. So wentcit wptbal therefpducone after
another , fo that cuerpe onerapqned ,andt jen
appered nomoze. Chen J loked, and beboldein
2ocefle of tpme the fethers that folowed were
et Dp bpon the rpabte pde, that they mpahte
rulealic: and fome of them ruled, but wpthina
whple they appered nomoare: foz fome of them
were let vp, butenlednot After thps Floid
and behold, tbe twelue fethers appered nomo2e
andthe two wpnges, andthere wasnemoaré
bpon the Acgles bodp, but tw heades that ree
fted,and {pre fetbers. Then faw FJ alfotbat the
{pre fethers were parted intwo.andremapned
bnder the beade that was bpon thericbhtelyde
fo: the fourecontpnued inthep2 place Sn Flo-
ked and bebolde,thep that were vnder the wpr
res, thoughte toletvp them Celucs,and to hane
Gbb  therule:


The, ti. booke


Herule. Chen wag there one fet vp, but (ozrtip
pk omen ndthefeconde was fonera
wape then the fp2te.And J bebeld,and loo, the
a se alto by eian feluegto rapgne, g
o thought,


eb MS Soy the proude tpmes: g beholde thep are
ended


p: poe bntotbhempabtie. Che bpelt alfe bath la


ovneresappeare anp moze,that cametobpm¢
eect veto rapgue: ¢thepzkpngbome was
{mall ant full of Dpzoure. And J lawe g behold
thep appered nomogze, aud the whole bodpe of p


Arqle was brente,and the earth was in qreate
frare. hen F awaked oute of the traunce of
mp mpnde,tfrom greate feare, and fapde Dnto
mp {pirite:Loo,this paft thou geuen me in that
thou fearcheffe oute the wapes of the byelt:loo,
petam 4 wWerpin mp mpnde,and Lerpe weake


f inmp(pp2ite,and Iptle tfrengthis therein me,


foatbe greate feare that Jrecepucd thys npabt
@Therforzenowe J wpl befeche the byret. thar be
wrllcomfozte me DRto the ende:4 J lapde Lor-


de Lorde, pf Y baue founde gracebeforethplp- -


bte and pf Jamiultpfped wpth the Lefoze ma
npe other, and pimp paper become bp before
thy face, comfozte methen, and Mewe me thp
feruaunte the interpzetacyon and plapne dpife-
rence oftbps borpble fpabte.that thou mapelte


perfectly comfozte mp Coule:foz thou bafe iud- —


ged me wpzthp,to Mewe me the lalt of tpmes.
And be fapde vuto me: fhysis the interpre-
tacponof thysl{pabte.CheAegle whome thou


Cawet come vp from the lee is the kyngdomex sani vite
whpcbe was fenein the vplpon pf tbp brother 25


Daniel, butit was not erpounded onto him, foz
nowe 4 Declare it vnto the. Weholde, the dapes
come, that there ball ryle ppakpngedome Yp-
ponearth,and it albe feared aboue all&pnge-
Domes that were befoze it. Jnthelame kynge-
Dome Chall twotluekpnges rapgne one after ano
ther .ffoz the feconde Hall begynne torapgne €
Mall baue moare tyme then the other twelue:¢
thpsdo thetwelue wpnaes lpqnpfpe,whpcbe
thou lawet. Xs for the vopee ee ake, & that
thou fawfte coo oute fromthe beacdes, but not
from the bodp:it betokeneth. that after the time
ofthe kpngedome there Mall arpte qreate {trp
upnges and it pall tande in parpil of fallpnge
Peuertbelefle,it Hall not pet fall,but thaibe tet
intobysbeapnnpnge. Andtheepabte onder
wpnges wWhpebe thou aweke hange vnto the
wynges of bpm, betoken,thatin him there Hal
arple epabte kpnges, whole tpme thalbebut
fmall.anbd thep2 peares fuopft,and two ef them
thalbcare. ut when tbe mpododele tyme com-
meth.there Walbe Foure kepte inthe tyme, whé
bys tpmebeapnneth tocome,that it mapebcen
bed Lut two fhalbe kepte trto the ende.

- And whereas thou lawefle thre heades re
ftpnge:thpsis the interpretacpon. Jn pps latte
thall the byeltraple vp theebpnadomes, æ call
marp agapne into themt,and thep thal baue the
Dompnpon of the earth, and of thofe that dwell
therein, xopth moche laboure aboue all thofe
that were befoze them. Cherfoze are thep called
the beades of the Acqle: for itis thep that Mall
bapnqe fogthe bps wpckednefle agapne,¢ that
(hall perfourme ¢fpnpthe bps late. And where
as thou faweite,that the greate peadeappered
nomoare,tt (panpfpeth, that one of them Wall
dpe bpon bps bead and pet wyth papne,fo2 the
two premapne thalbe laine w thelwerd. Forf
fwerrde ofthe one fal denour ý other but atthe
laft hal be fall thozowe the fwearde bpm felfe.

And where as thou fawelk two wnder wit
ges bponthebeade that isthep, whome the bp-
efte bath kepte wntothep2 ende : thysis afmall

kpngdome,


bes, ni


= i ee = ee = ane
o]


I
d
he


a


 fenendapes werepa


rT Cld2as,


kpngdome ¢ full of trouble. Che Lyon whome
thou fawelte rpfpnge bp, oute ofthe waode,¢
roarpnge and (peakpnge nto the Aegle, re-
bukpnge bpm for bps vurpgbtcoulnetie,is the
wpnde whycbe the bpgbelt bathkepte fo2 them
ETO? thep2 wpckednetle bnto the ende: be (hall
rep2oucthem,ecentetbem alundze befoze them
Fo: he pall fet themlpupnge before the Jude
mente , 4d Mall rebuke them: foz the refpoue of


zp inp people Hall be delpuer wpth trouble, thele


that bepreferned ouet mpne endeg: and be ball
make them fopefull, wntpl the commpng of the
dap of iundDgement:wherof FJ bane {poken wuto
from p beginning. Chps is thedzeame p thou
awell: ¢ this ta the interpretacpon. Chou onlp
ball bene mete to knowe thelecret of the bpeft.
Therfoze wapte all thele thpnges that
` thoubalte fene fn a booke and ppbetbem, and
teacbethem the wpe in ope tee , whole þer-
tes thou krowell mape compzehende andkepe
thefetecrettes. wut wapte thou beare thp felfe
pet feuendapes nio,that itmayebe thewed the
whatfoeuer pt pleafeth the bpgbeffe todeclare
bnto the:¢ wpth that þe wente bps wape. —
And wpenal the pon: perceaued,tbat the
»* Jnotcomeagane into
thecptpe,thep gathered them al togetper,from
the lecit pnto the moolte, came Dinto me, and
lapde: what baue we offended there what encll
baue we Done agapnite the,that thou fo2fakeft
bs, and {pttell bere intbps places f€o2 of all the
people, thou onelpe arte lefte vs.as a grape of
the vpne zas acandleina darcke place,z ag an
hauens Wippe pzeferued fromthe tempi. Haue
we not elles aducrlptpe pnough, but thou mu


` Folake vss Were tt not better fo: bs, that we


badbenebjentewpth Sion ffo2 weare not
better then thep that dped there: Ad thep wepte
wyptbhloud vopre. Chen aunlwered 3 them, and
fapde:26e of qoodcomfozte,D Frael, tbe not


ouinremembgaunce, ¢ arae E AR oa ~~
oz me, ¥ har


Samar an ta a

ea Vie cs. p 3 DzcmedD a Dzeame by npabte
Ses Wats and beholde, there arofe a wpnde
ey. SA wa fromtbelee, thatit moued all the
VOSs Sas loudestherof. And Floked gbe:
balde, the ma was Merong, ¢increated wpth the
cloudes of heaven: ¢ when heturned bps coun-
tpnaunce tocontpder, all the thinges trpmbled
that were fene bnder bpm: and when the vopce
went ont of pps mouth, all tbep brent ¢ bearde


bpm, Ipke as the earth when tt feleth the fp2e.

After thele ¥lawe,and bebolde,there was
gathered togeatber a muleptude of menoute of
nombze,fromthe foure wpndesefthe beauen,
tofpabte agapnite the mantbat came out from
the fee. And J loked and bebolde, be graned bim
felfea great mountapne,and fewe vpvpon it.
Xut 3J wold baue fene the bozder oz place. wher
outetbe byl was grauen, and Fcouldenct.

3 fawe after thele,that all thep whiche came
tofpgbt a yapnite bpm, wereloze afrayed aret
thep durite fpght. Peucrebeleffe, when be latwe
the fearceneffe & polence of the peole benetber
lpfte Vp bys bande noz beldea {weardenoz anp
Weapon-but onelp (as FZ fawe)be lente outeof
bys mouthas tt had beneablatte of fpze oute
of bpslpppes the wpnde of the flame : oute of
bis tong be calte out fparckes + ftozmes,ethep
Were all mprte together: the blate of fpze.the
wpnde of the flammeg, g the greate tome, and
fell wptba rute wpon the people, whpche wag
prepares fo fpgbt.¢ bzent them vp enerp chone
fo that of the innumerable multptud there was
notbpnge fene, but onelpe dufte and finooke.
tben Fiame tbros, 3 wasafcaped .

Afterwarde {awe F thefame man come
bowne from tbhemountapne, and callpnge tn-
to bpm another peaceableprople, ¢ therecame
mucbe people bnto bpm : fome were mlad fome
were fozpe,fome of thé were bonde,fo that thep
wWerecarped and broughte forthe.

Chen was Flpcke thozowe greatefeare,
€ J awaked,and Capde: thou bafke ewed thp
teruaunte al thp wonders, from the beapuning

and baflecounted ine wo2thp,that thou mprbt
telte reccaue mp pzaper:pewe me nowe pet the
interpzetacpon oftbps deeame . ffortbusy
confpdze in mp wnderfkandpnee:wo unto them
tbat thalbe lefte in thofe dapes, and much moze
wo vnto them Pp arenot lefte behpnde,fo2 tbey
that were not lefte were tn beupnes.

Nowe wnder Lande F the thynges that are
laped bp inthe latter dapes whpche thal! bap-
pa write them,and to tholethat are not leftebe

pide. Cherfore are they come intogreate pa


` rplles and inanp neceffptyes Ipke ag thele drea-


mes declare. Vet is it calper, that be wbhyebe fut
fereth burte,come inthele,then to pafe awape
asa cloudeoute of the wo:lde, andnowetole -
the thpnges that Hall pappen inthelatte. i
— Thenaunlwered he me and layde:T be in-
terpzetacpon of the fpgbte Hall F thewe the ãd
J topll opento the,the thpnee that thou baftre
qupred. o? thou hatte poken of themthat are
lefte bebpnde,¢ thpsis theinterpactacpon . De
that taketh atoape the parell in that tpme, bath
kepte bym felfe. Chep that be fallen into harme
are luche as baue wozckes and fapthe onto the
mooempabtpe. tanowe thps therefore, that
thep wbhpcbe belettebebpnde are moare bleffed
ther they that be deade. Chps isthe meanpnere
of the vplpon. Wi bere as thou tawet a manc-
mpng Dp trom the depe of the fee, the fame ts he
whome God the byghelt hath kepte a great fea
fon:wbpcbe bp pps owne felfe all delpuer hvs

criature


Sol. tut,


The, ty, VIoKe


 greatureand be pall ozdze them that are left be
ppnde. And whereasthou lawette,that oute of

psmouthtberecame a blat of wopnd,fpreand
froume:and powe that belpft vp neptber fwerd
no2z weapon, but that therutpnge not bpm de
ffroped the bolemultptude.that came to fpagbte
agapnit bpm:it fignifpeth,that the Dapescome
when God wll delpuer them p are upon earth
€inatraunceofmpnde thalbecome bpontbem
that dwel in the earth. And one (pall vndertake
to fpabt agapnit another, onecptpeagapni an


mat.rritia nother one place agapnit anotper,* @ one peo-


pleagain€ another onerealme agatil another.
dbe this cometh to pafle,then thal p tokenscd
P Fthewed pbefore:¢ then thal mp fonne be de=
claredD, whome thou lawet clpme bp as aman.
And when all the people beare hpsvopce,cuerp
man thal in thepzownelandleaue the battaple
that thep baue, oneagapnft another, andantn
numerable multptud thalbe gathered together
as thep that be wpllpng to come, fo outcome
bpin bp fpabtpnere. wut be thal tande bponthe


toppeofthe mounte Syon.euecthelelie,p-= [E
ontballcome,andfhalbe Fhewed,bepngeprepa |


red and buplded fo2 al men, lpbe as thon fawelt
- thebpl grauen forth wptbout anp bandes. Wut
- my fonne Hall rebuke the people, that arecome


Foz tbep: wpckednefle, wptb the tempefte: and-


foz they2 euell pmagpnacpong: and thep2 pap-
nes whermpth thep thalbe punpibed, arelpke-
ned vnto the Ramme:and woptbout anp laboure
Wall he deffrope them, enuen bp thelawe,wpbpch
igcompared bute thefpze.

And where as thou fawelf, that be qathe
red an other peacpable people vntobym: thofe
are thetentrpbes which were carped awap pre


ii ii.vegam, foners oute of thep2 owne land, inthe tyme of


Dieastheking, whom Halmanafar the hyng
of Afferpa toke pzefoner and carped them ouer
the water, and fo came thep into an other lade.

Wut they yane them thys counfaple tbat
thep fhulde leaue the multptude of the Heathen
and to goo fo2th intoa farther countrpe, where
neuer mann Dwelte-that they mpabt there
kepe thep2 Matutes , wbpch thep neuer kepte in
theprownelande. And lo thep entred tnattbe
narowe paflages of the waterof Cuphzates,


sae and fo God ewed tokensFoz them, + andbeld


fEpll the Aoud tpllthep were paficd oner.fo2 tho
_ qowethe countrpe,there was a great wap: na-
mely of apear,and a balfe tourney Fo: the fame
reqtonigcalled Afaretp. se dwelt they there
Dutpli the latter tyme: € when thep come forth
agapne.the Hepabelt hal hold kpl thelp2ings
of the ffreame agapne , that thep map go thoz0
we,therefozefawelt thou the multptude wpth
peace. And thep that belefte bebpnd of fbp peo
ple,are thole that befounde toptbin mp border
Mowe whe bedeftropeththe multptudepisga
thered together, be thal defende bps people ý re-
mapne, tben albe Mewe great wonders.
Thenfapde J: D Lorde Lorde, thewe me
thps.wberfozebaue 3fene the man commpnae
pp from the Deape of the fees And be fapde wnto
me: Lpheasthoucannelt neptber feke out nog


knowe thelethpnies that are in thedepedtthe `


fee euen fo mapt thou not femyp fenne,o2 thofe
that be wypth bpm, butinthe tyme of thedape
Thps ig the interpretacps ofthe dreame which
thou fawelt,therfore thou onelp arte lightened.
foztbhou baft forfaken thyne ovonelaw,and ap
piped thy dplpgence bntompne, andfougheic.


È
C7


xThp ipfe balte thou o2d2ed in wpledome,and #ii-re.tii.s


t hate called bnderfFandpnge thp mother, and #iovtia.


aaa baue J thewed the, the treature of the
Jpabelt. After thzedapes, J wyl Hewe f more
and talke wptb p mozeat large: pea, Deuy and
Wonderous thynaes wpll J declare yuto the.
Eben wente ¥ forth unto the feld,qeupn
fa and thanckes greatlp nto God,becaute
of thys wonders whych be dpd in tpme,and be-


caule be qouerncththe fame, andlucheasisint —


tyme and there Flat thee dapes .
| Che. rtf. Chapter.
eth to <lojasin pbuh, e Heweth bi what behaldo


Ce Mg an Dke tree, then came there a-
MAN epee tnta me out ofthe bue
DN y and fapd:Elbd2as Efdzas And-
awe . R Ylapde:Hpeare am J Lorde and
e. Phe aa ar Then
fpake be bntome:*int

to Poles, andtalked wpthbpm when mp peo-
plefernedDin€gppte. And F fent bpm, and led
mp people out of Eqppt,and brought bom bp-
pon the mount Spon, where Jbel bpm bp me
a longe feafon, and tolde bym mp wonderoug
workes and ewed pym the lecretes ofthe tp
mes andthe ende,and commaunded him faping
hele wordes Walt thou declare, and not hpre


them: And noweg iape butotbhe:thatthoulape —


ppinthpne bertethe dzeamesP thou halt fene,
and the intrepzetacporns wiped F baue Mewrd
the,fo2 thou thalte bereceaucd of all,thsu Halt
be turned, and remapne wpth mp counfaple, ad
wptbhluchas belpke the, vntplithetpmes be en
Ded. Eo: the wozlde hath lote pps pouth,and p
tpmes-begpnneto waxeolde. Mozthetpyme
fg deuided into twelve partes, and ten partes of
itare gone all redp , and balfe of the tenth parts
petremapneth there ý whpcbe ig after the palfe.
ofthetentheparte.


@Mherfo2re,prepare and Tat tbp boule, ad 25
0


refozmethp people:comfort fuche of thentas be
introuble:anbd tellnoweot the deffruccpon :let
ro frome the, mogtall thougbhtes:cafteawape f
burthens of man-put of the weake nature: lape
vp infome places the thoughtes} are mooft be
up into tbe and balte the to fipe from thefe tp-
mes:fo2 luch cuel and wpckednefle as thou batt
fenenowe happen, hall thep do muche worle.


t
enit ý dwell bponearthe. orf trutbhe is fled
i Paeh pron eara Ea Eaa
patter pide vpron to come t thon baftefene. -
benaunfiwered FZ before the,and fapde:
Webolde Lode, J wpll goo as thou hate com=
maunded me, and refoutme p people wbpchare
prefent. Wut thep $ all be boone geist
woo


Z| Pon thethpzde dap 4 {at wnder z


¥J€02 the weaker ý the worlde and thetpme is rri


e bup bpd J appere DN gro, ita.


hl
5 moze thal fpnne and wickedneffe increate in ionit.


(97 EMAS, SEol.ch,
_ And tt bappened whenthe fourtpedapes
were fulfpiled,» tbe Ippqocit (pake,fapinge:
Chetpatte p thou hatte weptten {patie openly $
the woztbp and vnwortpp mape reade it. Gut
Kepetbe-Ire.lafl,p thou mapet thewe it onelpe
fo fuch as be toile among thp peo ple. Foz tn thé
isp (pzpng of ynderanodpng the fouritapne of
wpliome,e p roune pl knowleg. Jnd 3 dit fo
C Tbe punphenent that et A athauestobpcp Sod
rommaninbdeth Æ[t7as to Ditor bute them,
- [Ri gaceen Ebolde, peake thouinthe cares of &
a ON mp people the wo2des of propbecpe,
x5 WHpch J wpil put in thp mouth, fap
y D ethths Lozbde: audcauletbemtobe
Est Witten th aletter,foziti¢ the truth
SEeave not the pmagpnacpons agapne the. Let
not the wrfapthfulneffe of them troubletbe , p
{pake agapnt the.fo2 all the vufapthfu | tail
dpe inthep: onfapthfulneffe. webold, Capththe
Lode ¥ well bepnge plages pon the wylde,
the cen bat tbeopperb DefFruccton,foz


aA


wopchednefie bath thevpperpandein al pf earth,

and thep; Hamefull worckes are fulfpl cd,
Therfozelapeth the Lorde: ¥ wpll hold mp

tonge nomoze nto thep2 wpckedneffe,whprhe

thep Dolo vngodlp: nepther wplt 3 lufirethem

intbe Eoynges. tbat thep deale wpthall (0 wpe-

Kedlp. Wepolde,*tde innocent bloud PEP epah. Apocà i.b

feous complapne contpnuallp:¢ therfo2ze(fapth 8-FFs

f Lode) J pi {uerlp auenge:andreceane vnto

me all theinnocent blonde from amongethem.

* ebolde,mp people is led aga locke of captriiiet
thepe to be flapne. Jwplinot (uffrethemnowe Cat Bilt
todwellin €gppte but wpll bapnge them oute itoni
topth ampgbtpe band and a ftretched out arme
and fmpte it wpth plagesas afoze and wylldes
fropeall ý lande of tt. appt allmonrneand
pfoundactons of it thalbe fmitten with f plage
aud seg bebe God (hall bepnge vpon tt:

Thep that tpil the grounde Hall mourne
fo? thep2feedes Halbe deltroped thozowe f bla
fing and bapte,¢ an bozpble tarre. Go worth
f worlde and them $ dwel therin,fo2 p fwoerd q
thep2 deftruccid dratoethnype, g one people thall
tand bptofpabt agapné an otber ¢fweardes
intbep2 bandes. oz men balbe wnkeadefatte
fome fhalldo bpolence Ynto other: they hall
not regard thepy2 kynge and princes, the wapes
of thep: Doingegand handlpngesin their pow-
er. aman ree sinha co the ae te thal
: not be able. soz becaule of thep2 p2pd the eitics
Apochtsb: fhe, Chen opened Jmp mouth, and beholde: pe thalbebzougbt tn feare.the hontes al pake,

reached me afull cuppe whpcbe was full ag it q men halbe afrapde:A man pall bane no pitie
were wyth water, but thbecolour of it on lpke bpon bys nepabt raph sel vo a pronoke an

otber vnto battaple tofpople thep: qoodes.be«
bad ùzoncke it mp bert badunderftandpng and. eof the bonger of bzeade , i |
wplDomie grewe in mp bre:fo: mp fpecte was neg ponge eeade , and becanfeof


| : : Webolde, 7 gatherand call tomether all the |
ned and but nomoze Che Hegbelbgauevndce pons of the earth, whychare front he ty 15


Deu, filid


ffandpnge dntothefpuemen, p they wrote the fynge,from the South,from the Eat and Lp:
bye thpnges of the npabte, whrche they under= ery f apart vuto thane rettoxe the ra
| esp thep hauegeuentbem.Likeasthep do pet
~-asfo2zme Zlpakein the dave andbeldenotmp thes dape onto mp choten tomas pete aa |
| tonge bpnpsbhte. In fourtpe dapeg,thep wzote recompente themin theft bofome. Thug fapeth |
two hundzed and foure bookes, the Lod God:)p rpgbte band hall not ar |
toe |


|
iy, : z |


=


€


ft


The, tit) booke


thefpnnerg,and mp Cweard thal not ceate ouet
them that hed innocent bloud bpon earth. The
fper ig qone out from bps weathe, ¥ bath contu
med the foundacpons,oftberarty,€ the {inners
ipke the frame that is kpnoled. Wo worth.tbe
ý (pnne, and kepenot mp commatndementes,
fapeb tbe 1020: 3 wpilnot {pare them.Oo pour
mapepe cbplozen from bpotence,D efplenot my
Syanctuarpe:foz the Lozde bnoweth alltbem
fpnneagapntt bpm, and therfoze delpnercth be
thembntobeathanddeftruccpon: Foznowe
are tbeplages comebpon the Wold, and pe foal
remapne in them. £0} God Chal not deliner pou
becaufe pe baue(pnned agaputte ppm.

Hehold,anbozpble vilponcommeth from
the Galt, where generacpons of Dragons Wal
come out,¢ the people of p Arabies wyth manp
charetes, aud themultptude of them thalbeas
che wpnde vpontie earth that all thep tobpcbe
braretbemragpngein thep2 watb, mape feare
andbe afrapbde, and as the wplde Woo2cs oute
of the woode, Co (all they goo oute, and wpth
greate power Mall they come,and tande fpgbt
tpnge wytb them: and Mall wate the pozcpon
of tbe lande of the Aflerpans. |

And then pall the Dzagons hane the bp

per band, and not remembze foep2 bp2tb.¢ all
turne about {wearing together in great power
to perlecutetbem. Wut thelr fhalbeafraped, ad
kepefplenceatthep? power, ¥ fhall flee:ab one
outofthelande ofthe Aflicians thalbe fege ja
econtume one of them, in tpepa poon albe
feare and D2eve,  Arpfeamonge they? i She

wWebolde,cloudes from the Cafte,andtrom
the Rorth, wnto the South, and thep are Derpe
bozrpbieto loke bpon, full of wrath and tome
Thep Chall fmpte one wpon anotbher:¢ thep thal
finpte at the great tarre bpon earthe and they?
ffarre,¢ the blond thalbe fromthefweardbnto
the belpe:and the fmoke of man vnito the Came
les Iptter: And there Halbe et fearfulnes ab
trembling Dpon erth.¢ thepp fe tbe wath, thal


be afrapde,gatrymblpng tall come ppon thé.


And the there fall come great rapnes From
the Spouth,¢ fromthe Porth , e parte omthe
atelte, and trom the tomp wpnvde fromthe €
ate and (pall (hut them bp agapue,* thecloud
whych berapled bp in wath and the tarre to
caule feare towarbde the Cate and Wick wpnd
tpalbedeftroped: and the areatecloudes Halbe


fte bp, and the mpgbtye cloudes ful of wath 7
antes tbepmapemakealltheeattha |i
fraped and them $ dwel therin and f thepmap Bs:


anbd the tarre


poure out ouer all places an Dozpble tarre fper
and baple.and fipingefweardes, and many wa
ters:tbatallfeldes mape be full,and allepuers,
and thep thall bzeake Downe the cptyes t wall-
leg mountapneg ¢bplles,all trees, Woor, and
the graffe ofthe medowes, gal rben? frute. And
thep (pall go {tedfatte buto Wabplon, emake


her afrapde, they (hall come to ber ebeleqeber: #


ý farce? al wath thal eber pour’ out tpi ber.
the Deanen,g all thep that be abouteber: Mall
bewaple bersand ther remaine Bnoder per thal


‘ppontbe ,


da ferupce onto them that bane put her infeate:


And ope Aipa , that comfostette thp felfe alto
ppon Phope of Wabplon,¢ arte a worhyppe ot
Her perfonne:tio bevntothe p w2etch,becaule
thou balte made thp feifelpke vnto ber, ¢ hatte


dect thp Daughters in wbozdome,p they mpght.


triumph g pleate th loucrs, wbich bane alwap
delpzedtocommpt fohozdome wpth the : thou
bate folowed theabhompnable cptye inal Der
wo2ckes and inuencpons. |

Therfore lapth God: J wyll fende plages
Dowhod,pouerte, hunger warres
and peftplence,to watt thp boules wprb deffruc
cpong death and the qlozpe oftbp power Mal-
bedzped vpasa foure, vabenthebeatecpletbhe
that ig fente ouer the: Thou Malte be fpcheas a
poore wpe that is plaged tbeaten of wemen :


fotbat thempabtpe ¢ loner thallnotbeableto `


receaue the Wolde J bate the fapth the Lode!
Pf thon haddelte not alwape flapnemp chofen,
eraltpuge the ftroke of thy bandes, fapde ouer
thep2 death, when thou watt proncken:fet forth
the bewetpe of thp countpnaunce.

be rewarde of thp whozdome Halbe re:
compenced the inthp bofome , therefoze Halte
thou receauerewarde .

Lpkcas thou halt donebuto mp chofent, (Cap
eth the Lorde )euen fo hall God do vnto the,ad
hall delpuertheintotbeplage. Ebychplozen
palldpe of hunger, and thouthalt fal thozowe
thefwearde. Tip cpetpes thalbe bzokes bowne
gall tornge pall perpfoe wpth thefweardein
the felde. Thep that be inthe mountapnes (pal
dpe of bunger,¢ eat thep2 owne ae Depncke
add So bloudefor verp hunger ofbzeade ¥
thuit of water. Thou vnbappp thalt come tho
rowe tbe iee and receaue plages agapite.

Fn the palage thep Wall calte Downe the
flapnecptye and hall roote out one part of tpp
lande and confume the pozcpon of thp glozpe.
‘Thep (hall treade the dorone Ipkhettubble, and
thep “albe thpfy2e, and Wall contumethe-thp
cptpes a iD thr lande,thy woobcand thp trupt«
fultrees thal thep burne wpth ffp2e.Cby chpl-
dzen Chall thep carpe awape captine and looke
mbat thou balte, thep Hall fpople it, and marre
the bewtpe oftbp face.

The.rvi. Chapter..
C The Heathen Halbe punpHhed,


2


EA D be onto the Wabplon and Alia, y


PES G wo be onto the Egypte and Siria
1 p groe youre lelucs wyth clorbes of
By Mag che AnD beare, and mourne poure
eee chpldzen,belorpe foz poure derut-
cponisatbande. A fwearde íg let bpon pou, ãd
whovspllturneit backe: & fpze ig hpndled a-
monge pou,€ who twopll quench it: Plagesare
fente puto pou, ¢ what is be that wyldzpue the
awape: Sap anp man Dpue awap an yongep
ET e woode. Dı mape anpe man gero


1e ín ubble when tt bath begunne foburne
apeoneturne agapne the arowe, p ts thot of
a tronge archer: Thempabtpe Lore fendethe
the plages and what is be that wil dzpue them
awape’ Thefpzeiskpndled and gore om z
p


|  DEEldeas, Mal.che
- bys wrathe, and what isbetbatwpllquenche butbandes qhatt betpthe of bung :
i it: Depall cat lpgotenpnges, emo ballnot uauntegoftpe Lozdedeare thefethynges, ana
1 Fearer tc hall tponder,and who fpall notea: marche them.®eholp ethe wozde of the Lorne
| Frapde: Che Lozde (hall thzcaten,aud tho thal © receanett:bepold the plages dhawe npe,anid,
not vtterip be beatento poulder at bys pretence manot Hacke intarpinge.Lpkeagetraucly nge
‘The earth quaketh,and the foundacpons thers woman whych after thenpne monetbbingerp -
of the fee arpteth bp with w auestromtbedepe foztha (one, when the hour of the bpztb is come
the floudes of it are vugqupet g tbe Fptbes thers an boure two 02 tize afoze the papnes come Vps
~ — prallo beforethe Lozde, and before tbealozp of ponberbodpe ano we, poe cbplde cometh ta
Dpspower, for Crongeishpystpabte bande the wh iad tarp not the twpncklpuge of an
that holbdeth the bowe,bys arowes tbat beo- epe: —Euenlo halt not tbe plages be flacke tg
teth are arpe and pall not mpfie, whenthep come bpon earch, and the wozlde thall mourne
ns begpnne to be thotcinto the endesofp worlde. andforowes fall come vpon it on euerplpde
Webolde, the planes are fent,and thall not D mp people, beare Mp wode. make pou
furne agapne,tpll they come bponearth. The readp to tbe battaple:and in all euel becuenag , tokba
fper ig Rpndled and thal not be put out,tpll it co pelgremesy Onearth +e that felleth,lethin “44
fume the foundacpons of the earth. Lpkeagan beasghe that ipeth bps wape:and De that byety
PAE eth ee cde ts ote ofampgbtpearchar, rea ag onetbat wpll leal
rurneth notbackeward:enenfotbeplagesthat boto occuppeth marchaundyee, ag bep
| Thalbe fente bpon earth ball not turne agapne Twpnnefb not-¢ be that builoetb,ag be ý thal not
po Woo is me, wo is me, who Wplldelpuermetn dwel tderi be p foweth,ag one p pal not reapes
tholedapess Che begpnnpnae offozowes and Dey twpfteth the bineparde as be ptball not ga
greate mournpnge: the begpnnpnee of Derthe ther fib nee E Matyas thep p thal cet
Greate death, the begpnnpnge of warreg, Ethe nochildzé¢thep pmarp NOE:AS P WPDDOWLS, E preron.
powers tall tande tn feare:tbe begpnnyne of therforextbhep tbat laboure, laboure in vavne. ees
cuele gtbep al tremble euerp one. What thal Foz fraungere iy scape thep2 Frutes,« (porte "Fb
3 doin tpele thynges, when the plages come: thep2 goodes, ouertborome thep2 boutes, take
Webolde,bunger.¢ plage.teouble,s angupthe, tbhepzcbplozen captiue fo? incaptiuiteabunger
are lët as (courges ozamedement.2Sutfo2 all thal thep Ae beast And they $ occupp thep2
thetethinges thep thal not turne fro tbeir wpe- marchandpfe tobberp, bowe ong beche thep
Gednes,noz be alwap mindful of the {courges. tbep2cptpes,thep2 boufe fbep2 poliefipons, ¢
Webold vptaples tha lbefo good cheape vp poor be moze wypll J p
€ pon earth, tbat thep thai thincke them felues to prunes, fapeth the Lorde.) pike as an whore ene
cin good cafe, ¢ euen then pal miichefe sir upeth an bonete woman, fo {hall rPgbteoufn eg
upon earth, warres dearth, g greate dp qupet- bate iniquitie, when the Decketh ber |
nes. Foz manp of them that dwell bponearthe accule berto ber face:when be commeth that de:
(all peepthe of burger, and the ofberpelcape fendeth,whpch Hallmate inqupticpon For all
the bunger, (ball thefwearde Deffrope: andthe Cene pan earth. And therfo2e be pe not ipke
dcabe Halbe caout ag dongeetheretalbeno t et unto no: to the wozckes therof:fo2 o2 ener
man Co confoate thent.fo2 the earth balbe wa it belonge iniquitie balbe takenawape out of
fed and the pties balbecatoowne:there Wal the eatth:€ rigbteoulies thal taigne amõg pou
beno man lefte to tpl the earth and tofowe it. Let not the fpnner fape,that be bath not fin
Che trees thall geue frute,and who Malplucke ned:fozcoles offper hall burne upon bps beade F
them ofand gatherthem? Thegrapes balbe wbpehelapeth before the Lorde Good and byg
evpe,ewbolhalltreadetbem: Fozall place plop: baue not fpnned, Webolde,the Lorde
{palbedefolate of men,fo that one man pallos- b&nowetball the worckes of men,thep2 pmagys
{yze to feanother,oz to beare bps vopce. Foro haPons, tbep2 thoughtes, and thep2 hertea.
one Whole cptpe there halbe ten lefte,andtwo * For belpake but the wozde:let the earth be Gentit
in the Felde, whpeh ball byde them felues inthe made tit was made: let thebeauen be made, ¢
thpcke buhes, ein the clpfes of ffoneg, phe ag it Was made. Fn hps worde were tarreg made
twben there remapne thre 02 foure olpues bpon € beknoweth the nonbze of them. De fearcheth
theolpue tree , 02 as when a Dpneparde ts gaz the qrounde of the deepe,and the treatures ther
thered, there are lefte fome grapes of them tbat of:bebath mefured the fee,« what itcontaineth
dplpgentlp fougbtethorotve the vpn rpatbe. —_Hebath cut tbelee, inthe mpodetke of the wa-
? ters and wyth bps wowe bathe be banged the
O earth up the waters. He (predeth out; beau€
> lpkea vawte,upon tbe waters bath be found ig
an thedelerte edaye wploernefic bath be made
prenges ofwater and poles upon the toppe of


— Sy t


cpeù


5


B


hA Me al


The. tij, booke


ched the gronnde of all the fecretes of the earth.
He knowrth poure pmagpnacpons andine
učcpong, what pe thyncke when petpnneand
wolde byde ponrelelues, Cherforzg hath p Lo:
fearcbed and Cougbte oute all poure wozckes,¢
He (hall bewzape pou all. And when poure fpr-
nesarebrougbtefortbe, pe palbe a Hamed br-
fo2e men and pourcownefpnnes Walbe poure
acculersintbatdape. Ubat wpll pedo?
howe wpll pe bpdepoure (pnnes eb Gov,
bys Aungelles) Webolde, Godhpmtelfeisthe
Judge, feare bpm, leaneof from oe fpnnes,
and forget youre vnrighteoutnefics,¢ medle no
moze wpthtbem:fo pall God leade pou foztbe,
and delpuer pou from all trouble. Fo? beholde,
the beate ofa qreate multptude is kpndled oier
ong they Mal takeawap certapne of pou,and
ede the pole wpth Fols, and ther that confent
wnto them, Malbe bad indpzpfpon, laughed to
fcomne,andtrodendnderfoote.

Fop onto the places there Halbe a place,
inthenertecptyes agreate infurreccpon, bpon
tholethat fearethe Lode. Thep tpalbelpie
mad men,thep hal fpareno ma:thep thal fpoile
¢ watt fuch as feare the Lo2d,tbetr goodes thal
thep take from them,and Wut them out oftheir

oufes. Chen Hal (tbe knowe who are my cho
en, ¢thep (halbetrped as the goldcin the fer.
eare, © pe mp beioued, faith the Lozd:bebold
the dapes of trouble are at bande, but 3 wpilde
lvuecpoufromtbefame. Wenot peafraped,
bifpapze not, fo: Godis pourecaptapne.
(lbo fo kepetbmp commaundementes g
recepres(lapeth the Lozbe God ) let not poure
Pon nes wape pou Downe, and let not poure Dns
rpebteoulnetfe belpfte vp. Wiobe Dnto them
that acefubdued bnto thep2(pnnes, ad tangled
intbep2 wpchedenefle:lpkeasafcldeis bedged
in wpe) butbes,¢ the path therof conered wpth
tho2znes , andthatno manmape trauapletho-
towe:¢ (ois betaken,¢caft in the fper ¢bzente.


The ende of the fourth booke
vole of EMAS.


pe Epatte Chapter.
Tobias Tbe Epete Chapter keth not the latwe


RESA eaa (n tbe byecountrpes of Galple


hoethzen,that were of bpskpnred. And though
be were ponger then allin thetrpbe of Nepbta-
Ip-petdpd not be bebaue bpm felfechplicthelpe
in bps wozckes. And when ail the other wente
tothe golden calues,wbhpeh teroboamp kpnge
of $frael bad made, be bpm felfe atone Aled all
thepzcompanpes,and gat bypmtojerufalembn
totbetemple of the Lozde,and there worthpp-
pedtbe Lod God ipet oy aajn offering
of all bys Fp2fte frutes and tpthes,fo that inthe
thpzde peare be mipny tired allthe tytbes vnto ý
fraungers and conuertes. (hele and fuch lpke
thynges dpd be obferue accozdpnge to the lawe
of God, when be was pet but ponge.


Wut when he waga mart, be tokeoute of 8.


brsownetrpbea wpfecalled Anna, ¢ of berbe
begat afonne , whomebecalled after bis owne -
name and cannot from bys poutbe bp,to
feare God, and to vefrapne from all fpnne.
-Howe when be wptphps wpe, bys fonne
and topth all bys kpnred was come into captp-
nite onto the citie of Miniue, what timeastbhep
aldideate of the meates of the Heathen, bekept
bps loule and wag neuer defpled intbep2 mea-
tes. Ano foz fo muche ag be Was mpndefull of ğ
Lode inall bps berte, Gob gaue bpm fauoure
intbelfpgbte of SDalmanafar the kynge,whych

aue bpm power tego where be wolde, andfo

ad Peipbertpe to Do what foener bpm pie.

40 went Tobias vuto all themthat were C
inp2pfon,andcomfozted them, and qauetbem
wholfomeerboztacpons. And when ecameto
to Rages.acptpe of the Wedes, baupng tenta
lentes of [pluer(of thinges wherwith the kpng
bad honoured bpm )e lawe among a great com:
panpe of people of bys kpnved , one Gabelus
(whpch wasofbys ownetrpbe)bepnge nnes
cefiptpe.be gaue bym the fapde wepabte of fpl-
uer binder an banbew2ptpneae.
After alongefeafon when Halmanafar f

kpnge was deade and Sennacherph his fonne


_ repqned in bys Feade,whpch hated the chpio2é


of Jirael. Cobias wente dapl pe thozowont all
bys kpnred, and comforted them.and gaue bps
‘goodestocuerpe one of them, asmucheas be
mypabte-be fed the hungry, clothed the naked, g
burped the Deade and flapne g that dplpgentipe
And when Hennacherib the kpng came a
gapne ¢ Aed out of ¥ewey (what tpmeas God D
punpihed bpm fo: ppsblafpbempe ) and mbps
wath flewe many of the childzen of Firari. To


~ bpasburpedthep2 bodpes . wutwbhenit was


told ¢ kpna, be cOmaunded to faye dym,etobke
awapceall bys goodes Meuerthelefle, Cobpas
wpth bysfonne e wyth bps wpfe fied bps wap
and was bpd naked, fo2 there were manpe that


` loved bint. Sut after fpueand fourtie dapes the


kpnage was flapne ofbpsownefonnes. Then


came Tabpas agapne to bps boule and all pps
Goodes Were rellozed onto py. i


7 The.ti. Chapter.
 @wobpss brbdrth Cuche of bps frenbdes as feare Hod fo
a banqnet o; feaft. Deis repzeucd of bps frédrs. Be teareth
mon maze then the kpnge, etecommeth bipna bp tte per.
miis and Culeraunces Sod, Bre kin(olkes mocke bim,


After


5


B


hA Me al


The. tij, booke


ched the gronnde of all the fecretes of the earth.
He knowrth poure pmagpnacpons andine
učcpong, what pe thyncke when petpnneand
wolde byde ponrelelues, Cherforzg hath p Lo:
fearcbed and Cougbte oute all poure wozckes,¢
He (hall bewzape pou all. And when poure fpr-
nesarebrougbtefortbe, pe palbe a Hamed br-
fo2e men and pourcownefpnnes Walbe poure
acculersintbatdape. Ubat wpll pedo?
howe wpll pe bpdepoure (pnnes eb Gov,
bys Aungelles) Webolde, Godhpmtelfeisthe
Judge, feare bpm, leaneof from oe fpnnes,
and forget youre vnrighteoutnefics,¢ medle no
moze wpthtbem:fo pall God leade pou foztbe,
and delpuer pou from all trouble. Fo? beholde,
the beate ofa qreate multptude is kpndled oier
ong they Mal takeawap certapne of pou,and
ede the pole wpth Fols, and ther that confent
wnto them, Malbe bad indpzpfpon, laughed to
fcomne,andtrodendnderfoote.

Fop onto the places there Halbe a place,
inthenertecptyes agreate infurreccpon, bpon
tholethat fearethe Lode. Thep tpalbelpie
mad men,thep hal fpareno ma:thep thal fpoile
¢ watt fuch as feare the Lo2d,tbetr goodes thal
thep take from them,and Wut them out oftheir

oufes. Chen Hal (tbe knowe who are my cho
en, ¢thep (halbetrped as the goldcin the fer.
eare, © pe mp beioued, faith the Lozd:bebold
the dapes of trouble are at bande, but 3 wpilde
lvuecpoufromtbefame. Wenot peafraped,
bifpapze not, fo: Godis pourecaptapne.
(lbo fo kepetbmp commaundementes g
recepres(lapeth the Lozbe God ) let not poure
Pon nes wape pou Downe, and let not poure Dns
rpebteoulnetfe belpfte vp. Wiobe Dnto them
that acefubdued bnto thep2(pnnes, ad tangled
intbep2 wpchedenefle:lpkeasafcldeis bedged
in wpe) butbes,¢ the path therof conered wpth
tho2znes , andthatno manmape trauapletho-
towe:¢ (ois betaken,¢caft in the fper ¢bzente.


The ende of the fourth booke
vole of EMAS.


pe Epatte Chapter.
Tobias Tbe Epete Chapter keth not the latwe


RESA eaa (n tbe byecountrpes of Galple


hoethzen,that were of bpskpnred. And though
be were ponger then allin thetrpbe of Nepbta-
Ip-petdpd not be bebaue bpm felfechplicthelpe
in bps wozckes. And when ail the other wente
tothe golden calues,wbhpeh teroboamp kpnge
of $frael bad made, be bpm felfe atone Aled all
thepzcompanpes,and gat bypmtojerufalembn
totbetemple of the Lozde,and there worthpp-
pedtbe Lod God ipet oy aajn offering
of all bys Fp2fte frutes and tpthes,fo that inthe
thpzde peare be mipny tired allthe tytbes vnto ý
fraungers and conuertes. (hele and fuch lpke
thynges dpd be obferue accozdpnge to the lawe
of God, when be was pet but ponge.


Wut when he waga mart, be tokeoute of 8.


brsownetrpbea wpfecalled Anna, ¢ of berbe
begat afonne , whomebecalled after bis owne -
name and cannot from bys poutbe bp,to
feare God, and to vefrapne from all fpnne.
-Howe when be wptphps wpe, bys fonne
and topth all bys kpnred was come into captp-
nite onto the citie of Miniue, what timeastbhep
aldideate of the meates of the Heathen, bekept
bps loule and wag neuer defpled intbep2 mea-
tes. Ano foz fo muche ag be Was mpndefull of ğ
Lode inall bps berte, Gob gaue bpm fauoure
intbelfpgbte of SDalmanafar the kynge,whych

aue bpm power tego where be wolde, andfo

ad Peipbertpe to Do what foener bpm pie.

40 went Tobias vuto all themthat were C
inp2pfon,andcomfozted them, and qauetbem
wholfomeerboztacpons. And when ecameto
to Rages.acptpe of the Wedes, baupng tenta
lentes of [pluer(of thinges wherwith the kpng
bad honoured bpm )e lawe among a great com:
panpe of people of bys kpnved , one Gabelus
(whpch wasofbys ownetrpbe)bepnge nnes
cefiptpe.be gaue bym the fapde wepabte of fpl-
uer binder an banbew2ptpneae.
After alongefeafon when Halmanafar f

kpnge was deade and Sennacherph his fonne


_ repqned in bys Feade,whpch hated the chpio2é


of Jirael. Cobias wente dapl pe thozowont all
bys kpnred, and comforted them.and gaue bps
‘goodestocuerpe one of them, asmucheas be
mypabte-be fed the hungry, clothed the naked, g
burped the Deade and flapne g that dplpgentipe
And when Hennacherib the kpng came a
gapne ¢ Aed out of ¥ewey (what tpmeas God D
punpihed bpm fo: ppsblafpbempe ) and mbps
wath flewe many of the childzen of Firari. To


~ bpasburpedthep2 bodpes . wutwbhenit was


told ¢ kpna, be cOmaunded to faye dym,etobke
awapceall bys goodes Meuerthelefle, Cobpas
wpth bysfonne e wyth bps wpfe fied bps wap
and was bpd naked, fo2 there were manpe that


` loved bint. Sut after fpueand fourtie dapes the


kpnage was flapne ofbpsownefonnes. Then


came Tabpas agapne to bps boule and all pps
Goodes Were rellozed onto py. i


7 The.ti. Chapter.
 @wobpss brbdrth Cuche of bps frenbdes as feare Hod fo
a banqnet o; feaft. Deis repzeucd of bps frédrs. Be teareth
mon maze then the kpnge, etecommeth bipna bp tte per.
miis and Culeraunces Sod, Bre kin(olkes mocke bim,


After


Of Tobyas,


Ea Kter thole thpnges vpon afolem-
VANS pucdapeof the Lom, Cobpas ma:
CEN E ca goode fealte in bps boule, and

a épbe dito bis lonne:Go thy wap
= bapng bether Come of ouretrpbe,


2cutlpeintobps boule, ý when plunne wasda
one », Dempaghtefafelp burp ppm. And when be
bad bpd the coarfe,be dpd cate bys meate wpth
mourning ¢ feare,remembzing p wordes,p the
Lode lapde bp the Brophete Amos:poure bpe


- feaftes thalbeturned tofo20% and beupnefle .


Wut when the Sunne was dowrie, be went


25 bys wapeand buryed him. Chen allbpsnepgp


boures tepzoned bym, fapinge: Ft ignotlonge
fencest was commaundedto flape the: becaul e
of thys matter and balte {carte efcaped the dati
of death, t burpet thou the deadeagapne? e-
uertheletie, Cobpas fearpnge God moare then
the kpnge,tooke the bodpes of theflapne, 4 bpd
tpeminbps houle,e burped themat mponprbt

St happened vpon a dape,that be bad Diu-
tped the decade, Was werpe came bome, g lap-
de bpm dawne bp the wall and flepte.And whp
le bewasz a flepe,therefell Downe vpon bps ep-
e8 Warme dunge oute of the fwalowes nefte.fo
that De was bipnbe. Chps temptacpd dpd God
lu Fer to bappen vnto bpm, that ne whpchca:
meafter mpabte bane an example of pps pacp-
‘encelpkeas of bolpe Job. Forin fo mucheas be
curr feared God from bys pouch vp, g kept bps
comntaundementes , he grudged not agapnite
ou, that the plage of blpndencs chaunfed vn-
fobpm,butremapned ffcadfalte inthe feare of


D God, and thanked Godalthe dayes of bys Ipfe


Jio? ipke ag bleed Fob wag had indirplp-
fpon of kpnges, enen lo was belangbed to fco:
ne of by sclders and kipntfolkes, whpcbe fayde:
bnto bym:where is thy bope, fo? p whpch thou
baftedoncalmes,andburpedthedeade ? Wut
Tobpas rebuked them, and (pake: Say not fo
fo: we are thechplozen of holpe men, and looke
Foz the lyfe whyche God pall gene vntotbem
that neuer turne thepz beleue frombpm. Anna
bps wypte wente daplpe to the weaupngre wo-
ke: and looke what lpupne the conlde gerry
the laboure of ber bandeg, He bzougbte it. And
it vin pibetokeakpd g brought it home

nd when ber hufbande pearde tt crpe,be
fapDde:looke that it be not olen,reftoze it agap
ne tothe owners:fo2 tt isnot latefull for bs to
eateo2 to touche anpe tbenge ofthefte. Thet
was bps wpfe angrye anbfayde: Qoweis thp
boope become vapne openlpe, and thp almefie
dedes are manpfete. Wipth thefe and fuche [p=
ke Wozbesdpod the cate byminthetetbe,

| ‘The. ttf. Chapter.


The praperne Tobpss. Sera the vangheer of ttaguet
n Cclaundged ef ber fathers Ceruauute, Theprapir and
fpnge of Sara. And alfo the innocen cpeandhatptie


oher Tbe pzapersol Tobias snd Sara are bearbe,


ree A


nee eit Tobpas toke pt heuilp,ewypih B
eae. teares:beganneto make bys paper
(Gj lapinge:DxL opde, thou artexpabte:
s Seas} OUD, F All thp indDaementes are true
_, . = bee all thy wapesare merepe.fapth
fulnefle etudgemente . And nowe OLo2de:be
mpudefullofine, Jd tabeno vénceaunce of mp
fpnneg nether remember mp mitd cades nether
themploeades of mp elders. Fo: webhaue rot
bene obedpente Vnto thy commanundementes ,
therfore are we {popled,brougbte into captiu ps
tte, into Death, into derifton,e bame bntoalna
cions amonge whome thou hate (catered veg.
And nowe DiLo20,thp ludqementes are great
fo: We bane not done acco2dpnae to thp comma
undementes,netber paue we walked innocent-
Ipe befozethe. Bnd nowe Dx orde, deale wrth
me acco2Dpnge to thpwpl,and commaunde mp
{preteto be receaued inpeace, foz moze expedp=
ente Were tt foz me to Dpe,thentolpue.
At the fame tpme it happened that Hara the 2
Daughter of Raquel at Rages acitp ofthe We
des was iclaundzed of one OF her fathers band=
mapdens:namelpe,that the Mulde bane had fe=
uen bulbandes, wbych ag fone as thep were go
he in vnto ber , were flapne of the denell called
Afmodeus. Therefore, when the repzouedD
Che maiden fo? ber faute,the aunfwercd per fap
tnge:God let bs neuer fefonne noz dan qhter of
the moze bpon earth thon kpller of thy butbane
des.Wiplé thou flap me alfo as thou halk Naine
feuen menr Atthys vopce wente Dara into an
bpe chamber óf ber boule, andthze dapes thre
npabtes the nepthereate nozdzancke , but cons
tpnued in paper ebcfouabte God wptb teareg
that be wolde delpuer þer from thys rebuke.
pon the thpzde dape it chaunftd, ý when €
the bad madeanendecofpzaper, Me prapfed the
Lozdefapinge: 8leffed be thy name, D God of
oure fathers, whych when thou arte w2oth:the
welt mercy,¢ in tpine of trouble thou forenet
tbe finneg of thent,p call bpon the-Cintothe D
Lode turne Jmp ace, Vito the ipte bp mp-
ne epes, ¥beteche the OLo2de,lole me onte of p
bondeg of this rebule,o2 elles take me btterlpe
swe from of the earth. Chou knowelt Lorde
that J netter had delire vnto man,¢ that 3 baue
keptemp foule cleane from all gral lufte,
J bauenot keptecompanpe wpth tholed pafe
Ebep2 time intpozt,nether bane made mp felfe
partake with them Proalke inlight bebanour
Aeucrtbeleffe an bufbande bate ¥confented to
take,not for mp pleature, but in fbp feare. |
fOwe parauenture ether paue ¥bene vn- Ù
wWoz2thp of them, o2elles were thep onimete foz
me,fo2 thou bapplp batt ke fimeto another bul
bande. o: whprtby countell is not inthe pom:
et of ma But wholoeuer loucth the and feructh


tiearpabte,tsfure oftbys , that pf bysipfebe .


tempted and proucd , it fandethinthetrpinge
and pf De endure in pacvence, be (pall pane a re-
warde and be hygblve crowned: andpEbe be in
trouble,that God(no donbee)thalldelpuce hint
and pë bps ipfe be inchattenpnie , that be Mall
baneleauetocomevntothpmercpe. |
Ece Forthon


Sfol.cbfi,


Of Tobyas,


Ea Kter thole thpnges vpon afolem-
VANS pucdapeof the Lom, Cobpas ma:
CEN E ca goode fealte in bps boule, and

a épbe dito bis lonne:Go thy wap
= bapng bether Come of ouretrpbe,


2cutlpeintobps boule, ý when plunne wasda
one », Dempaghtefafelp burp ppm. And when be
bad bpd the coarfe,be dpd cate bys meate wpth
mourning ¢ feare,remembzing p wordes,p the
Lode lapde bp the Brophete Amos:poure bpe


- feaftes thalbeturned tofo20% and beupnefle .


Wut when the Sunne was dowrie, be went


25 bys wapeand buryed him. Chen allbpsnepgp


boures tepzoned bym, fapinge: Ft ignotlonge
fencest was commaundedto flape the: becaul e
of thys matter and balte {carte efcaped the dati
of death, t burpet thou the deadeagapne? e-
uertheletie, Cobpas fearpnge God moare then
the kpnge,tooke the bodpes of theflapne, 4 bpd
tpeminbps houle,e burped themat mponprbt

St happened vpon a dape,that be bad Diu-
tped the decade, Was werpe came bome, g lap-
de bpm dawne bp the wall and flepte.And whp
le bewasz a flepe,therefell Downe vpon bps ep-
e8 Warme dunge oute of the fwalowes nefte.fo
that De was bipnbe. Chps temptacpd dpd God
lu Fer to bappen vnto bpm, that ne whpchca:
meafter mpabte bane an example of pps pacp-
‘encelpkeas of bolpe Job. Forin fo mucheas be
curr feared God from bys pouch vp, g kept bps
comntaundementes , he grudged not agapnite
ou, that the plage of blpndencs chaunfed vn-
fobpm,butremapned ffcadfalte inthe feare of


D God, and thanked Godalthe dayes of bys Ipfe


Jio? ipke ag bleed Fob wag had indirplp-
fpon of kpnges, enen lo was belangbed to fco:
ne of by sclders and kipntfolkes, whpcbe fayde:
bnto bym:where is thy bope, fo? p whpch thou
baftedoncalmes,andburpedthedeade ? Wut
Tobpas rebuked them, and (pake: Say not fo
fo: we are thechplozen of holpe men, and looke
Foz the lyfe whyche God pall gene vntotbem
that neuer turne thepz beleue frombpm. Anna
bps wypte wente daplpe to the weaupngre wo-
ke: and looke what lpupne the conlde gerry
the laboure of ber bandeg, He bzougbte it. And
it vin pibetokeakpd g brought it home

nd when ber hufbande pearde tt crpe,be
fapDde:looke that it be not olen,reftoze it agap
ne tothe owners:fo2 tt isnot latefull for bs to
eateo2 to touche anpe tbenge ofthefte. Thet
was bps wpfe angrye anbfayde: Qoweis thp
boope become vapne openlpe, and thp almefie
dedes are manpfete. Wipth thefe and fuche [p=
ke Wozbesdpod the cate byminthetetbe,

| ‘The. ttf. Chapter.


The praperne Tobpss. Sera the vangheer of ttaguet
n Cclaundged ef ber fathers Ceruauute, Theprapir and
fpnge of Sara. And alfo the innocen cpeandhatptie


oher Tbe pzapersol Tobias snd Sara are bearbe,


ree A


nee eit Tobpas toke pt heuilp,ewypih B
eae. teares:beganneto make bys paper
(Gj lapinge:DxL opde, thou artexpabte:
s Seas} OUD, F All thp indDaementes are true
_, . = bee all thy wapesare merepe.fapth
fulnefle etudgemente . And nowe OLo2de:be
mpudefullofine, Jd tabeno vénceaunce of mp
fpnneg nether remember mp mitd cades nether
themploeades of mp elders. Fo: webhaue rot
bene obedpente Vnto thy commanundementes ,
therfore are we {popled,brougbte into captiu ps
tte, into Death, into derifton,e bame bntoalna
cions amonge whome thou hate (catered veg.
And nowe DiLo20,thp ludqementes are great
fo: We bane not done acco2dpnae to thp comma
undementes,netber paue we walked innocent-
Ipe befozethe. Bnd nowe Dx orde, deale wrth
me acco2Dpnge to thpwpl,and commaunde mp
{preteto be receaued inpeace, foz moze expedp=
ente Were tt foz me to Dpe,thentolpue.
At the fame tpme it happened that Hara the 2
Daughter of Raquel at Rages acitp ofthe We
des was iclaundzed of one OF her fathers band=
mapdens:namelpe,that the Mulde bane had fe=
uen bulbandes, wbych ag fone as thep were go
he in vnto ber , were flapne of the denell called
Afmodeus. Therefore, when the repzouedD
Che maiden fo? ber faute,the aunfwercd per fap
tnge:God let bs neuer fefonne noz dan qhter of
the moze bpon earth thon kpller of thy butbane
des.Wiplé thou flap me alfo as thou halk Naine
feuen menr Atthys vopce wente Dara into an
bpe chamber óf ber boule, andthze dapes thre
npabtes the nepthereate nozdzancke , but cons
tpnued in paper ebcfouabte God wptb teareg
that be wolde delpuer þer from thys rebuke.
pon the thpzde dape it chaunftd, ý when €
the bad madeanendecofpzaper, Me prapfed the
Lozdefapinge: 8leffed be thy name, D God of
oure fathers, whych when thou arte w2oth:the
welt mercy,¢ in tpine of trouble thou forenet
tbe finneg of thent,p call bpon the-Cintothe D
Lode turne Jmp ace, Vito the ipte bp mp-
ne epes, ¥beteche the OLo2de,lole me onte of p
bondeg of this rebule,o2 elles take me btterlpe
swe from of the earth. Chou knowelt Lorde
that J netter had delire vnto man,¢ that 3 baue
keptemp foule cleane from all gral lufte,
J bauenot keptecompanpe wpth tholed pafe
Ebep2 time intpozt,nether bane made mp felfe
partake with them Proalke inlight bebanour
Aeucrtbeleffe an bufbande bate ¥confented to
take,not for mp pleature, but in fbp feare. |
fOwe parauenture ether paue ¥bene vn- Ù
wWoz2thp of them, o2elles were thep onimete foz
me,fo2 thou bapplp batt ke fimeto another bul
bande. o: whprtby countell is not inthe pom:
et of ma But wholoeuer loucth the and feructh


tiearpabte,tsfure oftbys , that pf bysipfebe .


tempted and proucd , it fandethinthetrpinge
and pf De endure in pacvence, be (pall pane a re-
warde and be hygblve crowned: andpEbe be in
trouble,that God(no donbee)thalldelpuce hint
and pë bps ipfe be inchattenpnie , that be Mall
baneleauetocomevntothpmercpe. |
Ece Forthon


Sfol.cbfi,


Cyc booke


£02 thou bafknopleafureinouredampna: -


cion: xobpraftera torme thou matselt the we-
ther faper q ftpll:after wepinge s benpnes thot
geuelt great iope. Tbp name D God of Fraell
be prapfedfo2euer. Bt p fame tpme were botbe
tbey: papers berde tn the lpabt of themateltye
of tbe bpelt God. And Raphaelthe holy Angel
of the Lozd was fent to pelpe themboth, who fe
p2aperscame at onc tpme together befoze God
E The itit.Chapter. .
C Tobpasthincking to ope, geucth agod!p cfhostacpon
anbdironpipon fo brs fonnet,


z1 D when Cobpas thought bis
(ops praper tobe Hearde.p be might
CS Dpe be called unto bpm bps ii-
yene Tobias ad fapde ynto bpm
Nel p Conne, beare the wo2desot
XG mp mouth,¢lape them in thine
= === hberteag a foundacpon. Wiben
od taketh awape mp foule, burp thou mp bo-
Dpeand holde thy mother in bonoure al thedap
es of bet lyfe. Foz thou ougbtefte to remember
what ¢ howe creat parels the (uffred foz the in
ber Wombe. And whe the bath alfo fulfilled the
tyme of ber lpfe, burp ber belpde me. Haue God
ty thp thought all p dapes of thy lpfe,¢ beware
left at anp tyme p conlent onto finne,¢ left thou
let flpp the comaundemétes of f L020 our God
Gene almes of thp qoodes,t turneneuce
thp face from the poze: ¢ fo pallit come to paffe
the face of the Lozde thal not beturned away
tom p.25e merciful after thp be er. PEP paue
75 Much gene plétcoullp:pf thou bauelptic,do thp
dplygence gladly to gene of p lptle. o? fo ga-
therelt thou thp felfe a qood rewarde in the Dap
of necellpte. f€o2 mercy deltuereti fro all fynne
q from Death, fuffereth rot the fouletocome in
Darcknes.% greate comfoztets mercpe befoze f
brabe God, vntoall them that ewe it.

Dp fonne,kepe the wel from al who2dome
and (belpde thp wpfe fe that no faute be know
en ofthe. Lect neuer p2pde bane ruleinthp mpn=
denor in thp wo20¢,fo2 in prpdebeqanne all de
ffruccpon . Wbofoeuer worcketh anpe thynee
fo? the,inimedpatlpe gene bpm bys bp2e,* ike
that thy bpzed feruanntes wages remapne not
bptheouernpgbte. Lookethat thouneuerdo
pnto another man , the thpnge that thou wol-
deff not another man hulde do wntothe. Gate
thp bzeade wpth the bonarpe and POO, aud co
uertbenaked wpth thy clothes. Set thp bead

g 200 wpne Dpon the burpall of therpabtcous,s
~~ Donot thou eateand drpncke thereof wprh the
(pnners. Afke ener countell at the wypfe.

We alwape thanckefull ynfo God, andbe-
feche bom that be wpll oder thp wapes, ¢ that
wpatfocuct thou deuplett o: takeffe in bande,
it maperemapne inbpm. J certpfpe tbeallomp
fonne that when thou walte petbutababe) 3
Delpucred ten talentes offvluer punto ®abelus,
at ages acptpe ofthe Deedes, and bps hand
wWiyryngepauezJbpme. And therefore leeke
fome meanes.bowetbou mapelf come ap prr
and teceaue oF bym the fapde wepghtoffpinee
and gene bym bys pandewzptpuge agapne.


- @)pfonne,benotafrapede:trutbe tt is, we
leade Deare apoozelpfe: but qreate good wall
we paue, pfwe feare God, and Oeparte fromall
fpitie: anddo well.

The.. Chapter.
Che of chicuere ofponge To. pasto bps father, whrrh is


finte into Mages.dn Aungell accompanpeth wprh bpw in
Hpstournep,

maa Den anlwered Cobpas hpsfather X
Kees ey) and fapde:father:all that thou bat
Lee commanded me, wpllZooetbat `
IS | Bii Dplpgentlpe. But howe 3 MWallre-
eS G| qupze tbis monep FJ cannot tell. Re
ther doth be Rnowe me.no: J ppm. bat tok?
(hall J qcue bpm? And as fo: the wape thether
FJ neueckneweit. Then bpsfather aunlwered
bpm, ¢fapde:J baue bps pandeww2ptpng bp me
whych whenthou Hewetppmimmedpatlp he. -
thal pape vbe.2Sut go thy wapenowe,¢ get the
Come fapytbfull man to mo ri the fo2 an bp2e,
that thou mapel€e receaue the monpe,whbple 3
am pet ipn pnge. Chen went Cobpas out, g z
pon the trete De founde a fapze ponge man Rã-
dpa, gp ded Vp, € as tt were onereadp totake
bps tournep. And be knewe not that it was an
Aungell of God, but faluted bpmandfapde:
From whence arte thou, thou good pongeman
pe auntwered: DE thechplodzen of Ffrael.

And Tobpas fapde Unto bym:knowelte
P thewape p leadeth unto the countrie of f We
Des: He auntwered J knowe it well, all thole


tretes haue Y gone ofttpmes,and paue lodged 2


with cur bother Gabelus,p dwelletpitkages
acitie of the Aedes, whych lpeth vpod p mount
€gbathanis: Cobpasfapde wnto bpm: pray
the tarp foz me,tpll 3 baue told mp father thele
topnges. Chen wente Tobpasinand tolde pig
father all. At the wbhpcbe bys father meruapled
q prapde,that be wolde come in vnto bpm.
Howe when the Jungell came tn, be falu-
bym,elapde: Jope be pth the foz euer moare
and olde Cobpagslapde: what fopecan 4 bane
that (pt bere in Barckenefle,¢ fe nct thelpght of
beanen:Che vonge manfapde onto him: Be of
qood chere, God Mall belpethe hortipe . And
‘Cobpasiapde dnto bpm : Cante thou bapnge
my tonneto Gabelug, onto the cptye of Rages
in cèrca: And when thou commeft agapne, J
(hall pape thethy bpze. And the Aungellfapde
bnto bpm: J thallleade thp fonne ¢ bapngebim
fo the agapne. Chen Cobpas aunfwered bpm:
tell me 3 pap the, of wbat boule o2 of what try
be art thou: The Jungell Rapbhaellapde vuto
bpm: £lhelk p after p kinred of anbpzeipnge,oz
fekelt Pa gupbe fo: thp fonneto go ropth ym:
Wut $ F make p not careful, Jam Asarias tbe
fone of aret Pananpas.And Cobias anfwered
P arte come ofa qreat kpured:but 3 pzap thebe
not difpleated,p Jdelpre to kuowe thp kpnred.
‘Che Angel fapd onto him:thp fone thal¥ leade
fozthfatelpe .¢ bopnge bpm bole tothe agapne.
 Chenanfwered Cobpaselapde-welgoon


poure wape, and Godbempoure iournep thys m
Angel bear pou cõpanp So when thep had pze
pared altbingeg, t thep wolde take wpth them
dnthep2 tournpe , Cobyagbad bps father and
Dis mother


Of Tobyas,


bps mother farewell, and thép wWéente on Ehep2
Wapebothtogetber. Mowe whenthep were
fone, bys mother beganneto wepe, and fa pde:
‘Che tafe of oure age hafte thou takenawape,
tientebpmfrombs, lolde God that mony
bad neuer bene, fo: the whpche thou pafte fente
bem awape. YE we bad bene contente wpth our
eta babdbeneqreaterpcbes yntons


we fawe ourefonne here. Chen lave Tobias
bnto ber: wepe not, ourefonne all come to ve
agapne lafe and founde and thpne epes thall fe
bpm. o? J trute that the good An gel of God
hall beare bpm companye , and ozer well all
the thpnges that be doth:fothat be bal cometo
bs agapne with iope. At thefe wordes bys mo-
ther lefte of from weppynge,« belve ber tonge.

i DEE va Enie fp bpebe Ingel

Tie ih rie To biasto take Sata ta bps topie,
Peay D Tobias wente on bys wape,ad
i Ceres yi|a Dogaefolowed ppm,ad the pite


le fpi todeuoure pym. DF
w obpas was afrapde:and crped wpth a
lowde Sopen ip ge:Lo2de,becommeth vpon
me. And the Aungell fapde vnto bym: Cake
bpm bp the gpl, and drawe bpm tothe. Andhe
òpd fo and Dwe bpm bponthelande . And the
Fpthe beganne toleape at bys feete. |
l Then lapde p Angell vnto bpm: takeoute
t f bowels of thps fh the.tas forthe berte, beaut
and the lpuer, kepe them bp tbe. Fo: thele tbpn:
nes are neceflarp g qood fo: medpepne. Tobiag
dpd (o,¢ rotted thefpih:,¢ thep toke bem wpth
therm tn thep2 tournep:p refpouethep Caled, ag
much ag was fufpcpentefortbem.tplithep cas
me to Rages a citie of f Heede. Che Tobiag
atked p Angel, tlapde vntobpm: F prap p bzo-
ther Asarpa tell me Whereto arethelethpnges
ae. good of the fpthep thou hatte bpoven me kepe.
OT The Jungel aunlwered bym, t layde. PE
oe thou lapett a pece of the herte Dpon thecoales.p
{iobe therof depucth awape all mantr of euell
rpzetes whether ít be from man o: from womã
HS to that from thenceforth the lame all comeno
! i moze Unto them. The gaullig good to annoint
02 tO Hrpke tbe epes wpthalt where as there ig
anp blempth in them, fo that thep palbe whole
oc And Cobpaslapde nto bpm, where writ
€ Bass P Weremapnes The Au ngel suntwered g
apoe:
i- Raguel bp name which hatha daughter called
ji Hara, g bathnether löne noz Dauchter but er,
f All i ed Se belongeth onto the + thou muffe
| marp ber æ therfore delp2e ber ofberfather the
| (al gene ber the to wpe. Thé anlwered Tobp
bog as tlapbe: Xs J vuderfad, the bath bene marp
k cdonto. vit bulbandes,gthep al are dead:and 4
a baue berde fap p the evel lewethé. Fam afra
. therfore let fuchethiges Dappen vutomealfo:
|


which pfit came to patle(feing Fam Ponlp fon


ne of mp father 4d mp mətder) J Hulde bpuge de


them in their age with lorowes to their qraucs


. fel k — ‘area a


Deve ig anpe kpnfman ofthyne,one 3


P accozDpnaetothelawe of


Then fapde the nytti Raphel vnéo bpitt: w
pus me ¥ J wpil tell the what thep be of whi
thedeupl bath Wer. Namelpe,thep that recra
uemarpage of luchea Fathpa,p thep Mute God
out fró them, from thep2 beet q gene thë felucs
to thep2 owne luf, enenagit were an porte and
mule, wbpcbe Daue no Underftandpnge: pon
fuche bath the deupll power. But whentbouta
belt ber t arte come into the chamb er, wpthol-
de thy felfe trom berthze dapes and qeue thy op
Ipgence Dnto nothpnee but nto paper w ber,

And in thefp2tenpabee, rot the lpuet of
Epthe,e the Beupll halbe dynen awape. Che le
conde npgbt (alte thou be receanpd into theca

anp of the bolp patrparkes. The thyzdnpabe

palte thou optapne the blefipng of God fo that
wholechplozen balbe borne ofpou. Affer the
thpzbenpabte takethe mapden in the feare oF
God:and moze Foz the defpre of children,thé foz
anp flethlp lutte:that inthe feed of Absabamp
mapettoptapne the bléfynee in chplozen,

De. vil. Chapter. |
C Youse Tabias and the Anaet cone to the boufe of itagael,
He rewu'reth gules ocughter to topfe,andobtepneth ber, <
a eet ch went thep into Raguel, whych rece $
| PS ued them topili . And whe Raguel lg

=t ked bpd Tobpasbefapd wnto tina big
tpfe. Bowe like is thig ponge mã vnto mp {p=

8 löne: And when be had {pokéthts befapa
whence be pe qood beetbzens Thep lapde DFP
trpbe of Nephtalp, oute of the captpupticof Ae
neue. Chen fapdakaguel unto them: knowe pe
mp brother Tobias: Thep fatd:pee, toe hnowe
bpm wel. And when thep had fpoké much goon
of bim, f Angel fapde yuto Raguel Tobias of
whome thou alkekk ig thps ponte mans father.

elfe Downe: and


. . n necke,# kpied bpm, g
fapde:Gods blelfpng baue P mp fonne,foz thon
arte fhe fonne ofa goedvertuons ma naAndan
na bps wyfe,¢ Hara pps Daughter wepte alto. _
Mowe when thep hadtalken to getber, Raguel 2
badbpll a wether, ¢ romakea feat: And wrn
be pzaped them to {pet downe to Opner, Cobpag
fapbe: ¥ wpl nether cate noz drike bere this dap
exceptp fpr qraunt me mp peticion; t pomp-
femetogeueme thp Daughter Hara. Wbt iia
guel berde this, be waga onped:Fo2 be krewe,
WHat had happened vuto the otber . Lif. men,p
Went in wnto ber, bebeqanto feare,p it bulbe
chaunce onto bpm alto in Ivke maner.
And whple be fode foin doubte g gauethe pon
He mannoanfwere the Angel fapde vnto brm
cetenotto qenebpmtbhp daughter , foz bnta
tops manp feareth God, belongeth tüp bangh:
ter to wopte, therfore might none other bauc ber
Then fapde Raquel: Fdoubtnot but Gov
bathe accepted mp papers and teares in bys €
fpabte:and F truke he cay fed poun to come Ynto
mefo: thbefameintente, that thps Daugbter of
mpne, mpgbtebe marpen D pet owne tpnred,
oles. -
And nowe doubte thou not , but F wll
fete ber ynto the: oo he tooke the tpebteban
de Of brs daughter, and gaue her inte the rpahe
DandecfCobpas,andfapoe. =
| Ceci TheGadok


Eolthi


Thebooke


cod of Abraham, the God of Ilahar, theod
acob, be wptb pou, topne pou together, and
l€pl bps bleflpnge in pou. And thep toke alet-
ter and made a weptynge of the marpage: nd
then made thep merpe,and prapled God.

And Raguel , called Anna bps wpfe onto
bymt,and Dad her prepare another chambz2e, ad
thetber be bzougbte para pps daughter, ¢ be
wepte. Then fapde be onto her: eof goed che
remp daughter, the Lozde of ipeauen gene the
iope , for the beaupnefie that thou hatte fuffred.

ee be. viii. Chapter.
Cede Gungellbpndeth cheveupll. Tobpas erboytethe
bps tupfe to,pzaper:and chep prape thre bapes betozethep


Dwe, after that thep had fupped,
Zo N they brougbte the ponge man into
Agee, Saher. Thenthoughte Cobpas vpon
KA gtbe wo2des of the Aungell: ¢tooke
gaciese4! oute of bps bagg,a pece of theleuee
of the fpe and lapd it upon the botecoles. 0
the Aungell Raphael tote bolde of the deupll,
fente bpm awape, bounde bpm inthe wplder-


neffe of the bper Eqrpte. Chen pake Tobpas - |


puto the bpzgpn,s fapde: Up Sara,let bs ma-
ke oure paper onto God fo dape,tomozowe, F
onuermo2ows : foz thefe thzenpabetes wpll we
rccontple ourefelues wopth God, and when the
thpzde bolpenpabteis patie, we (hall iopne to-
gether inthe dutpe oF marpage. For we are the
chpldzcn of bolpe men, and we map not conic te


B getber,asthe Deatben, tbat knowe not Good.


ene, iia


Then floode thep vp bothe together, and
befoughte God carneflype, that he wolde prefer
uethem. And Tobpas lapde: D Lode God of
oure fathers,pzapled be thou of Deauengearth
ofthe fee weleg g fleudes,and of allthpcreatu
regthat be therein. Thou madet Adam of the
xmoulde ofthe carth,¢ qauell bym Cuafo2 an
belper. And nowe Lo2d thou knowelt that itis
not becaule of poltptuoulneffetbatZ taketbps
{yfter of mpne to tpfe but onelpe fer theloue of
ehplozen,in whome thp name be bleffed foz ener
And Saralapde bane mercpe vpon vs (D102
bde)haue meccpe bpon bs:and letus bothecome
pole andfounde together toa good aege.

Bnd aboute the corke crowpuee it pappe-
ned, that Raquell called bys (eruauntes,¢thep
wonte wpth bim to make a grane. or he fapde
it ischaunfed nowe bnto bpm paraducture, as
it din puto the other feuen men, that wernt in vn
tober. Rewe when they bad made the graue,
Raguel came agapne fo bps wpfe,and ef pit
to ber:fende one of thp matdeng,toloke pe bebe
deade, that J mape burpe bymafoze the lpabte
pape: So thelente amapoden tole:whpch when
{he came into thechamb2e,founde them bole ad
founde,fleppnaetogetber. And fo the came a-


 gapne,and bzonghte good tibpnges. Chen Ra


guel and Aina bps wpfe prapled the Lo2zd, and
faye: W2ailed be thou, Lode God of Ffrael
foz it isnot happened bnto bs,as we thoughte.


f£02 thou hatte dealtemerepfullpwopth vs, and ka F


put awape from vs the enempe that perfecuted
s.g halte erwed mercpe Dnto ponder two be-


loucd.D Lozdecauletbemto magnifpe p moze ` y


perfectlpe,and offer the facryfyce cf thy papie,
and of thep2 bealth:tbat al people mape nowe
that tbou onelpe arte Godin all the carth.


And tmmedpatipe, Raquel commaunded D


pis feruauntes to fpltbe grane $ they had made
wtb earth afozcit was lpabte,¢ bad bis wpte
preparea feaftc,andtomakereadp all thpnges
that were neceflarpe foz meate,to fuch as went
bp the wape.Wecautedtwofathpnealfo, and
Foure wetbers to be fiapne and meates tobe pre
pared forall bps epspboues and frendes. And
Waguelcharged Tobias toremapne with pin


two wekes. As fo2 al the good ý pe had.begaue
Tobyasth: balfeofir, € made thps w:prtpn
qe tbat the balfe whpcheremapned,(pulde fall
nto Tobias after thep2 deathe.

» € The.ir.Chapter.


ges had happened, ¢cauled bpm tocome wpth
bpm to the marpage.owe when became into
the boule of Raguell,befound Cobpas fptting
atthe table:¢ be leaped dp, gq thep kpffed onean-
other and Gabelus wepte, ep2apled God and
fapde:the bleffpnae ofthe God of Ffraell, paue
thou fo: thou arte the fonneofa rpgbhte vertuo-
us and infte man, FoF one that feareth God, ad
cuetbareate almes. and blefling Dauethp wp
ce pourcelders,that pemapele pourechildzen
epourechylderscipldzen, Dnto tbe these and
fourth qeneracton, ¢ poure feed be Dlefied of the
God of Uracil, wbhpehe rapgneth worde with
oute ende. And when thep all badlapde Amen:
they wente tothe feafte , but wpth the feare of

the Lorde beldetbhep the feafke of thémarpage.
hex. Chapter. ; |

@ Tobias and bis wpfe are Cab fo? the Carpinge of ther:

feune.Maguel fendeth agapne T0 bpas wpth bps wpfe,
yo. * eu Dwe whple ponge @obpas ma:

delongetarping b)


\ | Rumarpage . bps atber was full of
ay) EF ccarcand beaupnetle,and thought

AVG BE what thuldbethecaule, that mp
tonne tarpeth fo longe


a , Sw


D


4


preafonofthe .


ri


-i
b
T


i Mf Cobypas, SFol.tir.


; ' ; D: toby Hulde De be keptefolongetbere/ Par: Melokedafarreof andanone the petceaued per
rh aduencure Gabelusis dead , andDnoman wpll pling bo tanne g fold perbufband
4 geue bym the monpe. Tbug begannebetobebe fapinge:Xebolde thp fonne commeth. Aud Ra


tp fozoweful,be and Annabps topfewpthhim, pbhaelfapd vnto Tobias :Asfooneasthou cont
x3 and beganne to weepebothe together, becaule melte into the boufe, immedpatlp rity the
: ~ thepz tonne wag not come agapnentothemat Lozdethp God, and geue thanckes Vnto bpm:
| the dape appopnted.Asfozbysmother,tbewe: tbengototbp father and kiffe bim, and rpcke
7 pte wyth dpicomfortable tearesandfapd:Wia bpsepes ouer wpththe call of the fpthe,p thou
P ts me mp fonne: DY what apled vstofendethe batbzougbt wyth the.fEozbefure that bps ep:
| awape into affraungecountrpe, thoulpgbteof esthall frepahte wapebe opened, thp father
1 oure epes thou afe ofoureage, thoucomfot Mallie thelpgbteofbeauen and thal reiopce at
of oute lyfe thou Dope of oure generacpon:S®e: thelpabte ofthe. Then thedog p bad bene with
ingeallthethpngesthatwebaucareonlpeinp tbeminthep2 tourny, ranne be Ode, CAME aS a
we Hulde not bauc fentethbeawape from yg.  meflenger,ewagred bps taple fo: gladneffe.
Then Cobpascomfoztedper,andfapde:  Sotbe blpnde father arofe,and beranneto
Holdethp tonge,and benot dpleomfogted, oure tunneand fombled wpth bys feete land mauca
. Lonnets bole and founde:the manthat wefente feruaunte bps bande, rannetomete bpstonne,
bym twptball is fapthfullpnonghe. Reuerthe- teceauecd bpm, and kpled hym,be and bps wpfe
letle,Chemight inno wplebecomfozted but dap andthep beganneto wepefo2 Jope,
lpe wente oute,loked aboute, and wentaboute fowe when they had wozlbppped g than-
alleDcftretes , wherebp the thougbtebetulde Eed od, thep fat downe. Chen tote Cobtag of
come agapne: that (pFitwerepofipble the mp- tbefithes gal, ¢annotnted is fathers epes:¢ta
qhte le bpincommpnge afarre of. Sut Raguel tPedbvalfeanboure,s then began p blempi to
€ apde dnto bps fonne inlawe:D tarp beare, t3 go out ofbiseieg,IPkeas ft bad bene the whpte
oh, thaltendea meffenger bntotpp father Tobiag Tern
Abies to fell bpm p thou arte in good bealth.Tobpag fr biseies:¢ immediatlp be receaued big fpybt
fapd onto bim: Jamfure, ý my fatber,emp mo Chen thep prapled God, beand ppg wpfe D
ther count enerp dap, tý thep2 bertesareforpe. andallthepthatknewebpm. And Tobpag
Do when Raguell prayed Cobpaswrth layde:DLowde Gor of Flraell, J qeuetheprap
Manpe wodes and Wold innowpfebearehim feand thanckes,fo2 thou baft chattened me and
be delpueved Hara wntohpm, ethehalfeparte mademebole. And loo nowe Fdo fe mpfonne
of allbps good.tuferuauntes,andbandemap- Cobpas. Bfterfeuendapescame Sara bps tas
dens, in eepe in Camels, and inkine, muche nes wpfe allo bole ¢founde wpth all the houfe-
, monp,¢ fofente bpm away from bym wprh pe- bolde catell, wpth Camelg g muche monpe of
| - ace giope, and fapde: Che holpe Aungellofthe bis Wpucs,€ Wpeh the monep thathe had recrea
Lozde be wpth pou inpouretournepe,ebapnge ued of Gabelus,+ , |
pou forth fafe and founde,thatpemapefindeal therallth: benefptes, whpch God bad Done foz
tbinges in good cafe wpth youre elders, ethat bpm.bp the man tbat led bpm. Acbpozalfo and
mpneepes mapele poure chplozenafoze J dpe. Mabath, Cobpas (ptterfonnescame,and were
Hev,andlet ber goo, exhortpngebertohonoure the qoodthat Godbadthewed bntobpm. And
ber father and mother nlawe, toloucherbut- Foforthefpace offenendapes tbep made merpe,
bade,torule welberbouthold,tokepeberboule andwere Von. fopfullcuerpchone.
in good o2der, and to Mewe her felfe fawtleffe. Cye.rtt. Chapter.
| e. ri. Chapter. nieee dy tb ean gelb opp bon, He id aiie pe dant
ay E p ipei dal soreo bps twpfe ant houfholvein the halfe toe gondes that he brousee wrth bre ia
bis mochet loking after ber fonar Derna a E DN Tobpas called bps Tonne vnto Æ
| m EDPS Father © mother. Sara commeth feuen dapes after, U G Er j bpmand apde:tUbat mape We fea
(omen > tbep werenowe gopnge bome SA g(a Ue ths bolpe man,tpat went wpth
AGA paro rcagapne Dpontbe. ridape, [Gay Quel the Cobpas auntinered bys father
| veers CDe cameto Charra, whychipeth ECAA and fapde: Father, what rewarde
2g aA Gin the balfe wape towarde Ninine thallwe geue bom: D: what thypngecandeler=
i? eee And the Aungellfapde : Weother uc bys benptrtes? We bath bene mp qupde,and
$ Tobpas, thou knowelt howe thou batt lett thy bzougbtemefafe agapne-hereceaued themonp
f Father:therfoze pit plealethe, wetwowplao from Gabelug,becauled meto et mp wpfe, he
| befo2e,* let theboutboldewpth thp wpfeand} dzone p euel fp2pte from ber, bebath bene an oc
i cattell come Tofte t faperafterbs. And when cacponofgtadneffe to her fathere motber:be de
eae Tobias was contentep thep Mulde yobefóze, lpuered me,tbat J was not denonred of tbe fi
Rapbarl fapde vnto him: Cake ofthe gauleof he bath made tbe to fetheipabt ofbeauen, pea,
i the fpthe wpth the,fozitthalbeneceflarpe.So weal paue veceaued great good of bpm. Howe
_ W Toblastoke ofp gaule,ethep went tbepzway chulde we woztbelp delerue theletbpnaes onto
a Sut Lina the mother of Cobpas fat daplp bp bpm: wut 7 prape the mp father, » thou wylte
pes the wapefpde bpon the toppe of an bpi s from defirebpm.pfbaplpe be wpl vouchlafe,to take
7, whence he might le farreabout her. And while wptbbim the balfe of all that we bauebzoughbt
He was waptpnae there, foz byscommpnge, Do the father andthe ‘i er bpm ‘
ce tit ftoke


Che vowke


toke bpm alpde and beganne fo pzap bym, tbat
bewalde becontenteto takeingood woth the
%5 halfe parte of all that thep bad bzougbte .
‘Chen lapdebelecretelp vntothem. Pzraplepe
the God of beauen,and gene thankes vnto pim
before all menlpupnege, foz be bath ewed pps
inercpe Dnto DS. Ft is good tobpde the kpnges
fecrete, but to tpewe and pzaple the worckes of
0D, ít is an honourable thpng. Pzateris good
with fakpnge and mercpe ts better thento hoz
de Dp trealures of golde. Formercpe deliucreth
fromdeath,clenfeth (pnne,ecauleth to fpnde e-
uerlaftpng lpfe. ut thep p do linne g burpahe-
teoulneffe,are the enempes of thep2 owne toule.
Ciiberfore FJ fell pouthe truthe,and wyll
E bydenotbpnge frompou Celbenthou prapedelt
wpth teares and burpedeft the dead, and leftelt
tdp dpner and bpddelt the deadin thy boule vp
pontbe dDapetpme,that thoumightelt burp the
tn thenpabt:3 offredthp prore befoze the Lo2=
de. And becauflethou walk accepte and beloued
of God, it was neceflarpe,that temptacio thuld
trpethe. And nowe hath the Lorde fentemeto
bealef and to Delpuer Hara thp (ores wpfe fro
the cucll {prete.fto2 | Baphaclan Jungel,
one of the fenen that tande before God.
edibenthep bearde thys,thep were fore a=
fraped,andtrembled,audfel Downe bpon their
faces vnto the qrounde. Then lapde the Angell
Deace be wtp pou,feare not Where asy baue
ene wpth pou itis the wpll of God:geue pap
fe and thanckes putoppmnt.
Gerding Louthougpt thatZdpoxeate and drpucke
Zudt.pine wpeh pou, but 3 bie meatetbat is inup{pble, g
dapncke that cannot be feneof men. Mowe ther
fore is the tpme that J muffe turne agapne Un”
tobpm,that Cent me:but be petbanckefuli vnto
od. and tell oute all bps wo2derous worckes
And when be bad fpokenthofe wo2des,be
was taken awape oute of thep2 {padte, fo that
thep fawe bym nomoare. Chenfell thep done
fiat po they: faces, by the {pace of thze boures,
¢papled God, whentbep arole vpthep tolde
all bps Wonderous worckes.
© E The.xiit. Chapter.
[Sot pasthe eloer geueththanckes bnfo Geb.
Rae Den olde Tobias opened his mou
aa ail B lde Tobias d bis mouth
E Bead and : prapled the Lo:deandflapde:
lA] (Gq) Greate arte thou D Lode fo: euer-


Coxnlpder then, howehe hath dealte wpth
pou.and praple ppm wpth frareand d2ede, and
magnupfpe the cuerlattpng kpngein pour we-


kes. Jwylpeaple hynteucn inthelande of mp
captpuptpe,foz be bath hewed bys mateitp bn
toalpnfull people. Turne pou therefoze D pe
finners,¢dorighteoutnelic before God, 4 be i-
er ý be wpll ewe bys merep vpon pou. As foz
me emp foule, we wil reiopce in God. D praife
the Lozdeall pe bps cholen , bolde thevapesgof
gladnefle,e be thanckefull pntobpm, D Jerus
falem P citie of God, the Lorde bathe punpibed
the fo2 the worckes of thpne owne bandeg . D
zaile the Lozd inthy good thpnges,¢ gene tha
eg tothe cuerlattpnge Good, p be mapebuplde
bp bis tabernacle agqapne inthe, ý be mapecala
gapne vnto the. all fuch ag be tncaptiuptte,and
p thou mapeltehaue iope fo euermoze. With a
aperlpabt Malt thou hpne andal the cndes of
the wo:ld Mall honour p. The people pal come —
tunto the from farre, thep Hall bipngegpttes,
and wothpppe the Lozdeinthe, aud thy lande
hall they baue fo2 a Sanctuacpe,fo2 toep pall
call bpon the greate name inthe. ; :
Curfed Hall thep bethat dplppretbe,and C
all tbat blafpbeme the, Halbe condempned:but
bieffed tball thep be tbat bupldetbe bp. As for
the thou walte retopcein thp chpldzen, foz thep
all thaibe bleffed , and gathered together bnto
the Lorde. Wleficd are thep all that lone the and
that be glad of thp peace. D2aplethou the £o
de, D mp foule,fo2 the Lozde onre God dath de
Ipuered bpscptpe ferufalem from all ber tron-
bleg. 3 wpllcounte mp felfe bapppe, pf mp feed
remapnete fe the clearneffe of Jerufalem. Che
gates of Jernfalem thalbe buplded wpth a=
phpze,¢ Smaragde,andall thecompafleofher *
walles w precious ones. Bl ber fkretes Halbe
pauedw whpte marble tene and inal p firetes
{hall Lilclupabefonge. PDzapfedbethelozde,
tobpcobatheralted ber, f hys kpngdome mape
be pon ber foz enermoze.Smen. And lo Tobp
ag made anende of bps talkpnee.


anh Che.ruit. Chapter.
(Tot ias proobecicth the detruccion of Minine. Histine
returneth to ie guri after Che becele cis father mother


ey 10 after Pp Cobpas hadgottenbis x

a APEA obragapne,beliucd.clii.peares,e
RAY «(awe byschplders childzen. Rowe
J Jeane When be was, €.¢.ii.peare olde, be
mints) dped: Was buried honourablycin
fLuiue. ffo: whe he was.l vi. peares of aege be
loft thelpabt of bps epes,¢ whe be was.lr.pere
olde,be qat bps tyghte agapne. Che relpoue of
bps tpfe led be in iope. ¢increaled well inthe fe-
areofGod,¢departedinpeace.  %Wutintbe
boure of bps death be called vnto bpm bys fone

Tobias, Œ. vit. ponge{prpnqaldes bps tonnes ©
chpldzen,tfapde vntothem: The deltruccpon
of Minineis at bande, for the wo2rde of the Lor
becannot faple:¢ our bzethzé ý are {catered out
of theland of Flract ball come thetber agapne
A nv p hole lade of it p hath ben watt, thalbe fpl
led:¢ the boule of God p was brent in tt balbe
buplded agapne:¢ all {uch as feare God, thalre
turne thether:p ieathen alfo thal forlake they2
polies and come to Jerufalem, ed wel there,s


all tbe kpngeg of theearthe Halbe glad of per,
AnD wozrlbpppe the Lorde God of Flracll.


and therfore


a


2:


"za


A:


k $
= i i


Of Judith,
,.. Mnd therfore mp chylozen, beare poure fa-
ther:ferue the Lozdetn the truth, feke after bps
wpll and do the thpnge that pleafethbpm. —
‘Commaunde poure chpldzen that thep Do right
eue almes:be mpndeful of God, andeuerto be


SEol rr.


byim,and fentethe metlaungers agapneemptie
and put them awape wythouthonoure. Cer
Pabuchodonoloz the kpnge tokeindpgnacyon
at all thofelande3,and {ware bp bis trone,and
bp bps kpngdome,tbat be woldebe anuenged of


` €


Si tdanckefuil unto bpmintruth, ¢wptpaltbey2 all thofecountrpes.

f; pui 2 eare pe Heati DEON- iki mape it Chapter. ‘gi

| dren, and abpde not heare:but im what dape fo- althe Worle, she wee ee obono fo: to fubz

| ; ener pe bauc bu rped pour mother befpo me, ret sia hin E Dorlbe, Zhepreparacpan and perfute of

| poufrom bence. Eo: Flethatthe wpckednetle p Fa) 2 tbe tbpeteneth peare ofkpnge Da A

y of it Hall bzpnge it ta detruccpon and ende. = aad" LA bucbodonofoz , wpon thetwelue dap

After the death of bys mother, Cobpas de- eer ae ofthe fpafte moneth, it wasdeupfen

D patted awape from Ainiue, wth bys wpfead fey/P Alin tbe courtof Mabuchodonofloz the


chpldzen.¢ wopth bps chplderschyibien,'ecame ESSA

agapne tobps fathers motherinlawe,efound dedefer

them bole 7 in good age, toke the care of them

* . Bnd beclofed thep2 epes,e mas bhepzevnto Ra-

gules qoodes, Y latwe the fpfte qeneracpon.and

bys chplderschpldzen. And when be was .xcir.

i peate of age, bebped inthefeare of the Lo2de,¢

bys kpinftolkes burped bym. And allbps pofte
tptecotinued ina good pte, dolp cOuettacpon captapne of prs warres, and fapde vnto bpm:

Co f thep were loued ¥ accepted both of God ad Gothp wapefortbagapnttali the kpngdom

man:anò ofall the people of thelande. ofthe Ulete and ipecpallp agapnitethofet

baue dpippred mp commaundemente. Thou
CTheende of the booke of Tobpasg. Waite fparenorealme,all trongecptpeg thalte
: TE ee fa f | - thou beynge tn fabteccpon nto me.

The booke of Judyth, capta et Dolofernes callen together all the 25
| be forte Chanter, nes, anB culces oF allthe power in Affe-
ees e EEEE C Sheopctospeot ma: EPA 4nd mulkred the fouldpers onto the bootte

| bucboBonofoz agapnit Arpbarat. She mellengers of Qa (Ilpheas thekpnge commatinded bpm ) name=
ai buchobonoforarcopippiet, ~ lp an bund:cd and twentpe tboufande fighting
a Rpharatthekpngeofthe We men vpon Foote and twelue thoufande archers
bay UPA destubo ucdDmanpe people yx pon Dozlebacke. All bps ozdDpnauncefente bea
ASA eae tobpsdominion, andbuploed fore wytb an innumerable multitude of camels
pe £4 YE a noble firongecptpe,wbpcbe fotbat the hoofte was well proupded foz wpth
sa Bea E Decalled Egbatbhanis: The oren,and Fmall cattel and that wpthout nom-
Jea Ga wi wWallesofitmadebeoffrefto- ber,  Pecaufed come to be prepared onte of

aa Y all Spia for bps beofke. Buche golde and fpl
uer allo toke be onte of thekynaes houte. Ho
be tooke bys tournep.be and all bys boon With
charettes boalement,¢ archars, of whome there
weretomanp,that thep coucred the qrounde of
thelanbde, lpke the qrethopers .

_ And when he was gonepattetheborderg €
of the Aflirians,becametowardethe great tno
untapnes of Ange , whpche lye vpon the lefte
fpde of Celicpa:and fo he wente vp intoal their
caftels,and wanne euerp ronge bolde. Xs foz
the welthpecptpe of Delothug, be brake it do-
wne and tpopled all the chpldzen of Charfis, x
the Jlmalptes,whpche lapetowarde the wyll-
dernefle,and Dponthe Sonthfpdeofthelande
of Chelow.Hewente oner Eupheates allo, and


=a ipuge of the Afferpans, that he wol:
ide bym felfe.Sobe called vnto bymall
the elders, sil bys captapnes,and men of warre
and Hewedthem bps fecrete counlaple,ztolde
them that bys purpole was, to bzpnge the bole
earth nder bys Dompnpon. Nowe whenthep
were all contente wyth ths lapinge Mabncba
Donofoz the kyngecalled Polofernes, fhe chefe


" im


the Jilervans(whpcherapaned inthe areat ep-
tie ofRininefougbte agapnite Arpharat,and
ouercame pym in the great Felde called Rarau,
belpde Cuphzatest Cyarys, and Fadafanin
the felde of Erpoth the kpnge ofthe Elpkes

` Chen was the kpngedome of Pabuchodo


| tt happened that Pabuchodonolo2 the kynae of


k
| 4


nofo? eralted, and bps bert was lifte bp:and he
Cente ynto all them p dwelte in Celpeia in Da-


¢ matcus,in Libdnus, ad bntotbe Heathen that


Dweite in Carmel g Cedar,z to Cucne as Dwelte
in Galile inthe qreate felde of Efdzelon, to all
themtpatotoeltein Samarpa,and beyond the
water of Jo2zdane vnto Jerufalem and the hole
landt of Feffe, vuto the mountapnes of Ethio-

pa. Untoallthele dpd Pabuchodonolosthe
köie of the JAp:pans lende meilencers Wut


thep allwopth oneconfent exvolde not aqre vata -


came into )efopotampa,and brake downe all
the bygbecptpes that were there,from the bzo-
ke of Hambze tplaman come tothe fee:and be
tooke the bozders infrom Celpcpa , ynto the
coaftes of Japhet towarde the Houth:Decary
eDawape all the adpanptes, and [popled all
thep2 goodes,and whofoencr wpthitoode bynt
eflewe them wpththefwearde. |

fter this be wet Downe into ý Feld of Damat:
cus inthe tyme of bacuett,and beente vp all the
copneand all the trees, andcauled the ypres to

ce tiii becut


Of Judith,
,.. Mnd therfore mp chylozen, beare poure fa-
ther:ferue the Lozdetn the truth, feke after bps
wpll and do the thpnge that pleafethbpm. —
‘Commaunde poure chpldzen that thep Do right
eue almes:be mpndeful of God, andeuerto be


SEol rr.


byim,and fentethe metlaungers agapneemptie
and put them awape wythouthonoure. Cer
Pabuchodonoloz the kpnge tokeindpgnacyon
at all thofelande3,and {ware bp bis trone,and
bp bps kpngdome,tbat be woldebe anuenged of


` €


Si tdanckefuil unto bpmintruth, ¢wptpaltbey2 all thofecountrpes.

f; pui 2 eare pe Heati DEON- iki mape it Chapter. ‘gi

| dren, and abpde not heare:but im what dape fo- althe Worle, she wee ee obono fo: to fubz

| ; ener pe bauc bu rped pour mother befpo me, ret sia hin E Dorlbe, Zhepreparacpan and perfute of

| poufrom bence. Eo: Flethatthe wpckednetle p Fa) 2 tbe tbpeteneth peare ofkpnge Da A

y of it Hall bzpnge it ta detruccpon and ende. = aad" LA bucbodonofoz , wpon thetwelue dap

After the death of bys mother, Cobpas de- eer ae ofthe fpafte moneth, it wasdeupfen

D patted awape from Ainiue, wth bys wpfead fey/P Alin tbe courtof Mabuchodonofloz the


chpldzen.¢ wopth bps chplderschyibien,'ecame ESSA

agapne tobps fathers motherinlawe,efound dedefer

them bole 7 in good age, toke the care of them

* . Bnd beclofed thep2 epes,e mas bhepzevnto Ra-

gules qoodes, Y latwe the fpfte qeneracpon.and

bys chplderschpldzen. And when be was .xcir.

i peate of age, bebped inthefeare of the Lo2de,¢

bys kpinftolkes burped bym. And allbps pofte
tptecotinued ina good pte, dolp cOuettacpon captapne of prs warres, and fapde vnto bpm:

Co f thep were loued ¥ accepted both of God ad Gothp wapefortbagapnttali the kpngdom

man:anò ofall the people of thelande. ofthe Ulete and ipecpallp agapnitethofet

baue dpippred mp commaundemente. Thou
CTheende of the booke of Tobpasg. Waite fparenorealme,all trongecptpeg thalte
: TE ee fa f | - thou beynge tn fabteccpon nto me.

The booke of Judyth, capta et Dolofernes callen together all the 25
| be forte Chanter, nes, anB culces oF allthe power in Affe-
ees e EEEE C Sheopctospeot ma: EPA 4nd mulkred the fouldpers onto the bootte

| bucboBonofoz agapnit Arpbarat. She mellengers of Qa (Ilpheas thekpnge commatinded bpm ) name=
ai buchobonoforarcopippiet, ~ lp an bund:cd and twentpe tboufande fighting
a Rpharatthekpngeofthe We men vpon Foote and twelue thoufande archers
bay UPA destubo ucdDmanpe people yx pon Dozlebacke. All bps ozdDpnauncefente bea
ASA eae tobpsdominion, andbuploed fore wytb an innumerable multitude of camels
pe £4 YE a noble firongecptpe,wbpcbe fotbat the hoofte was well proupded foz wpth
sa Bea E Decalled Egbatbhanis: The oren,and Fmall cattel and that wpthout nom-
Jea Ga wi wWallesofitmadebeoffrefto- ber,  Pecaufed come to be prepared onte of

aa Y all Spia for bps beofke. Buche golde and fpl
uer allo toke be onte of thekynaes houte. Ho
be tooke bys tournep.be and all bys boon With
charettes boalement,¢ archars, of whome there
weretomanp,that thep coucred the qrounde of
thelanbde, lpke the qrethopers .

_ And when he was gonepattetheborderg €
of the Aflirians,becametowardethe great tno
untapnes of Ange , whpche lye vpon the lefte
fpde of Celicpa:and fo he wente vp intoal their
caftels,and wanne euerp ronge bolde. Xs foz
the welthpecptpe of Delothug, be brake it do-
wne and tpopled all the chpldzen of Charfis, x
the Jlmalptes,whpche lapetowarde the wyll-
dernefle,and Dponthe Sonthfpdeofthelande
of Chelow.Hewente oner Eupheates allo, and


=a ipuge of the Afferpans, that he wol:
ide bym felfe.Sobe called vnto bymall
the elders, sil bys captapnes,and men of warre
and Hewedthem bps fecrete counlaple,ztolde
them that bys purpole was, to bzpnge the bole
earth nder bys Dompnpon. Nowe whenthep
were all contente wyth ths lapinge Mabncba
Donofoz the kyngecalled Polofernes, fhe chefe


" im


the Jilervans(whpcherapaned inthe areat ep-
tie ofRininefougbte agapnite Arpharat,and
ouercame pym in the great Felde called Rarau,
belpde Cuphzatest Cyarys, and Fadafanin
the felde of Erpoth the kpnge ofthe Elpkes

` Chen was the kpngedome of Pabuchodo


| tt happened that Pabuchodonolo2 the kynae of


k
| 4


nofo? eralted, and bps bert was lifte bp:and he
Cente ynto all them p dwelte in Celpeia in Da-


¢ matcus,in Libdnus, ad bntotbe Heathen that


Dweite in Carmel g Cedar,z to Cucne as Dwelte
in Galile inthe qreate felde of Efdzelon, to all
themtpatotoeltein Samarpa,and beyond the
water of Jo2zdane vnto Jerufalem and the hole
landt of Feffe, vuto the mountapnes of Ethio-

pa. Untoallthele dpd Pabuchodonolosthe
köie of the JAp:pans lende meilencers Wut


thep allwopth oneconfent exvolde not aqre vata -


came into )efopotampa,and brake downe all
the bygbecptpes that were there,from the bzo-
ke of Hambze tplaman come tothe fee:and be
tooke the bozders infrom Celpcpa , ynto the
coaftes of Japhet towarde the Houth:Decary
eDawape all the adpanptes, and [popled all
thep2 goodes,and whofoencr wpthitoode bynt
eflewe them wpththefwearde. |

fter this be wet Downe into ý Feld of Damat:
cus inthe tyme of bacuett,and beente vp all the
copneand all the trees, andcauled the ypres to

ce tiii becut


9g erand conquered all ronge Defenced cptpes ¥
all that Dwelte in the land andout of alcptpes
betooke tronge men, andfocheas were mete


€ Penertheletle , thoug


Che booke


becut Downe. And the Fare of bpm fell upon al
them tbat dwelt vpon tbe earth.
. The. iii. Chapter.
qr itpnges become wplpn gip tubiecteto Holofernes,


tand cruelipe of bpm.


(Ei,
poloferneg, and fapde:Let thp wath ceafle to:
warde bs Ft isbetter for vs toferuc the greate
kynge Mabuchodonofoz wpth ourelpues , and
fobelubiecte nto the,then that we Mulde dpe
æ be apne:and receane greate burte. Alloure
cytpes and poflefipons,al mountapnes and ppl
leg feldes areat and {mall catell, pepe goates
bozfeg and camelg.all oure qoodeg,and boule-
holdes,be in thp power, pnder thp fubteccionbe
ft altogether. Hle onre felues allo, ¢ ourecbpl-
Dren wplbethpne owne come Onto dsa pecea-
ble lozde,and ble oureferupce at thp pleature.
‘Cyencame olofernes , Dovone from the
rfountapnes wythbozlemen, and greate pow-


foztbewarreto blpebym. Therecamefuche
afeate allo bpon thole countries, thath iudwel
lerg of all the cptpeg the papnces and rulers,a0
thepeopletogetber wente forth to mete bimas
be came g receaued bpm honourably wyptb gar
landeg € torches. w Daunces,tabzettes Epppes.
hthep dpd thps.yet
mpabe they not wage bys tigozous fomacise:
buthe deftroped thep2 cptpes, € pewed Downe

thep2 woodes.ffoz Mabuchodonofoz the kinge

had commaunded bym that be hulde roote out

all the coddes of theland: to the intente that be

onelpempabt be called and taken foztbe yod of

puron which Holofernes wpth bys power

rougbee dnder pim. S0 went be thozowe Sp

rpa Sobal, and thozowe all Appamia,and al

-Pefopotamia,andcame to the DuMmcans , in
the lande of Gabaa and Scptopolpe,and toke

thepyzcptpes and remapned there thpztpe dapes


wherein pecaufed alltbebolemultptudcotbys t


booli to be gathered together.
Le C The. iiit. Chapter.
M Hfracirequireth helpe ot Bod, agapt Holoternes.
Zbepfateandprape, |
penae pen thechplozen of Flrael ý dwelt
7 9/0 | in Jewep berd thys.thep were fo2e
I Gee | ee 4 afrapde of bpm. There came luche
ASS), 6 tremblpnge allog earebpor. then
Soon that thy fozomed he Mulde do Vn-
t checptye of Jerulalem, andthe temple of the
A o2rde,a8 be bad done to othercptyes aud they?
temples. Do thep Cent into all Samaria round
ahoute onto Jerpeho, tokein and occuppedall
i a ofthe mountapnes , and made falte
the townes wyth walles, and prepared corne,
fo: themagapnite the battaple.
Eliachpmalfo the peeatte, wote ufo alt
them that dwvelte tomarde Cfdzelon(whpch lp
efboucr agapnite the great felve Dp Dothaim)


and onto all thote bp whome menmpadt baue
paflage bito thent, that ther (bulde taketn tbe
wapegof y mountapnes, wherbp there mpagbe
be any wapeand patlageto Jerufalem, ãd that
thep tpulde holde dplpgent watche where anpe

raptewas betwprt the mountapnes. and the
chplozen of Zfracldpd as Eliachpm the prea fte
ofthe Lozd bad commaunded them. And al tbe

coplecrped earneftlp, and humbled thep2fou-
les wpth faltpnares and peayers,thep and thep2
wpues. Che preatles put on ecrp clothes, and
lapde the yonge babes before the temple of tbe
Lorde, and couered the aulter of the 102 wpth
anbeerpecloth.and wpth one accozde thep erp:
ed onto the 1020 Gov of Hracl,that they? chpl
deen Hulde not be qeuenintoaprave, and their
wpuesintoalpople, thatthep2cptyes Mulde
not belaped wate, and that thep, Sanctuarpe
{puldenotbe onbalowed , and fo they to bea
(hame and rebuke brite the Heathen.

Then Elpacbim thebpe preal of the L020
wenterounde aboute al F{racl:and (pake Dnto
thé faping:Wepelure,that the L020 wyl beare
poure petpepons, pepe contpnue fedfatte infa-

pnges and pzapers in thefpabte of the Lode
Remembre oles the feruaunte of the Loz20e,
wobpcbe ouertizewe the Amelechites (thattru=
{ted in thepzmpgbte and power, in they? poofte
inthep2 Cypldes,in thep2 charettes and pozfem?
not wpth weapons, but wpth belp pravers.
Enenfo (hall all the encmpes of Frael be,pt pe
sontpnie in thps worcke that pe bane beqonne
So bpon thps erbortacpon, thep contpnued in
praperbefozetheLozbde: Fulomuch that thep
pe pe offered burnte facepfices nto the Lord
ofred the offerpnages vnto the Lorde, bepnge a
raped inbeerpe clothes , ¢ had ahes pon thep2
heades. And they al befougbte Godfrom they2
pole perte, $ be woldevilet bps people of Ziracl
= The.. Chapter.
s €Delefernesisdifcantente wyth the Fetes. Ichra:
fhemeth Bolofernes the merucles of God Bone buto the
ë Fewessfe: the which thpngethe rulers bnder Holotcrnes
torre berr angrpe wpthbpa.


Feary Cee fd wode came to Holoternes the
Be ee Ge ; PER the warre ofthe Aaa
era Coa DAt thechpldzt of Ffrael prepared


LA etbem felues to make refpitaunce,¢
pape cop powe thep bad ffopped the wapes
betworrte the mountapnes. Chen was he errea
Dprge woth and called all the papnces of <3) 0-
ab,and thecaptapres of Ammon and fapde vit
to them: ell me, what peoplets thyg, that ke-


‘petbinthe mountapnes D2 what maner of cp-


tpesare thep Ubat is thep2 power’? what
maner ofbooftebauethep: bois thep2cap-
tapne/Aud wbp do thep AH bs (moze then
all thote that dwell inthe Cale ) andcome not
forth tomecte v8,that thep mpabte receauc vs
with peace’ Chen Achioz thecaptaine of al the
Ammonptesanfwered,andfapde: Syp2.pl pe
pleale theto beare, 3 vopiltelthe truth befo2ze p
conferning thps people p dwel i the mountap:
ties, and there (hall nolpe qo out of mp month.


25


€


4


Thps people ig of the generacys of p Chal: 5


Dees, thep dwelt firt in Melopotamia,fo2 thep
wolde


ins n


9g erand conquered all ronge Defenced cptpes ¥
all that Dwelte in the land andout of alcptpes
betooke tronge men, andfocheas were mete


€ Penertheletle , thoug


Che booke


becut Downe. And the Fare of bpm fell upon al
them tbat dwelt vpon tbe earth.
. The. iii. Chapter.
qr itpnges become wplpn gip tubiecteto Holofernes,


tand cruelipe of bpm.


(Ei,
poloferneg, and fapde:Let thp wath ceafle to:
warde bs Ft isbetter for vs toferuc the greate
kynge Mabuchodonofoz wpth ourelpues , and
fobelubiecte nto the,then that we Mulde dpe
æ be apne:and receane greate burte. Alloure
cytpes and poflefipons,al mountapnes and ppl
leg feldes areat and {mall catell, pepe goates
bozfeg and camelg.all oure qoodeg,and boule-
holdes,be in thp power, pnder thp fubteccionbe
ft altogether. Hle onre felues allo, ¢ ourecbpl-
Dren wplbethpne owne come Onto dsa pecea-
ble lozde,and ble oureferupce at thp pleature.
‘Cyencame olofernes , Dovone from the
rfountapnes wythbozlemen, and greate pow-


foztbewarreto blpebym. Therecamefuche
afeate allo bpon thole countries, thath iudwel
lerg of all the cptpeg the papnces and rulers,a0
thepeopletogetber wente forth to mete bimas
be came g receaued bpm honourably wyptb gar
landeg € torches. w Daunces,tabzettes Epppes.
hthep dpd thps.yet
mpabe they not wage bys tigozous fomacise:
buthe deftroped thep2 cptpes, € pewed Downe

thep2 woodes.ffoz Mabuchodonofoz the kinge

had commaunded bym that be hulde roote out

all the coddes of theland: to the intente that be

onelpempabt be called and taken foztbe yod of

puron which Holofernes wpth bys power

rougbee dnder pim. S0 went be thozowe Sp

rpa Sobal, and thozowe all Appamia,and al

-Pefopotamia,andcame to the DuMmcans , in
the lande of Gabaa and Scptopolpe,and toke

thepyzcptpes and remapned there thpztpe dapes


wherein pecaufed alltbebolemultptudcotbys t


booli to be gathered together.
Le C The. iiit. Chapter.
M Hfracirequireth helpe ot Bod, agapt Holoternes.
Zbepfateandprape, |
penae pen thechplozen of Flrael ý dwelt
7 9/0 | in Jewep berd thys.thep were fo2e
I Gee | ee 4 afrapde of bpm. There came luche
ASS), 6 tremblpnge allog earebpor. then
Soon that thy fozomed he Mulde do Vn-
t checptye of Jerulalem, andthe temple of the
A o2rde,a8 be bad done to othercptyes aud they?
temples. Do thep Cent into all Samaria round
ahoute onto Jerpeho, tokein and occuppedall
i a ofthe mountapnes , and made falte
the townes wyth walles, and prepared corne,
fo: themagapnite the battaple.
Eliachpmalfo the peeatte, wote ufo alt
them that dwvelte tomarde Cfdzelon(whpch lp
efboucr agapnite the great felve Dp Dothaim)


and onto all thote bp whome menmpadt baue
paflage bito thent, that ther (bulde taketn tbe
wapegof y mountapnes, wherbp there mpagbe
be any wapeand patlageto Jerufalem, ãd that
thep tpulde holde dplpgent watche where anpe

raptewas betwprt the mountapnes. and the
chplozen of Zfracldpd as Eliachpm the prea fte
ofthe Lozd bad commaunded them. And al tbe

coplecrped earneftlp, and humbled thep2fou-
les wpth faltpnares and peayers,thep and thep2
wpues. Che preatles put on ecrp clothes, and
lapde the yonge babes before the temple of tbe
Lorde, and couered the aulter of the 102 wpth
anbeerpecloth.and wpth one accozde thep erp:
ed onto the 1020 Gov of Hracl,that they? chpl
deen Hulde not be qeuenintoaprave, and their
wpuesintoalpople, thatthep2cptyes Mulde
not belaped wate, and that thep, Sanctuarpe
{puldenotbe onbalowed , and fo they to bea
(hame and rebuke brite the Heathen.

Then Elpacbim thebpe preal of the L020
wenterounde aboute al F{racl:and (pake Dnto
thé faping:Wepelure,that the L020 wyl beare
poure petpepons, pepe contpnue fedfatte infa-

pnges and pzapers in thefpabte of the Lode
Remembre oles the feruaunte of the Loz20e,
wobpcbe ouertizewe the Amelechites (thattru=
{ted in thepzmpgbte and power, in they? poofte
inthep2 Cypldes,in thep2 charettes and pozfem?
not wpth weapons, but wpth belp pravers.
Enenfo (hall all the encmpes of Frael be,pt pe
sontpnie in thps worcke that pe bane beqonne
So bpon thps erbortacpon, thep contpnued in
praperbefozetheLozbde: Fulomuch that thep
pe pe offered burnte facepfices nto the Lord
ofred the offerpnages vnto the Lorde, bepnge a
raped inbeerpe clothes , ¢ had ahes pon thep2
heades. And they al befougbte Godfrom they2
pole perte, $ be woldevilet bps people of Ziracl
= The.. Chapter.
s €Delefernesisdifcantente wyth the Fetes. Ichra:
fhemeth Bolofernes the merucles of God Bone buto the
ë Fewessfe: the which thpngethe rulers bnder Holotcrnes
torre berr angrpe wpthbpa.


Feary Cee fd wode came to Holoternes the
Be ee Ge ; PER the warre ofthe Aaa
era Coa DAt thechpldzt of Ffrael prepared


LA etbem felues to make refpitaunce,¢
pape cop powe thep bad ffopped the wapes
betworrte the mountapnes. Chen was he errea
Dprge woth and called all the papnces of <3) 0-
ab,and thecaptapres of Ammon and fapde vit
to them: ell me, what peoplets thyg, that ke-


‘petbinthe mountapnes D2 what maner of cp-


tpesare thep Ubat is thep2 power’? what
maner ofbooftebauethep: bois thep2cap-
tapne/Aud wbp do thep AH bs (moze then
all thote that dwell inthe Cale ) andcome not
forth tomecte v8,that thep mpabte receauc vs
with peace’ Chen Achioz thecaptaine of al the
Ammonptesanfwered,andfapde: Syp2.pl pe
pleale theto beare, 3 vopiltelthe truth befo2ze p
conferning thps people p dwel i the mountap:
ties, and there (hall nolpe qo out of mp month.


25


€


4


Thps people ig of the generacys of p Chal: 5


Dees, thep dwelt firt in Melopotamia,fo2 thep
wolde


ins n


Of Judith, Sal. tee,


` wolde not Folowe the qoddeg of thepzfathersp asfoz Jerufalem tober the Sanctuard is, thep
oi Were in the lande oftheCaldéeg and fo fo: foke baucit agapnein poffeilpon. Eib ETAn RAN
b thep thecultome of thbep: fore fathers (wbpche _ And therfore mp Lode make dplpgent tte
bad manpe geddes)and wozlhppped one God, guplicion,pithps people hanedone wykednetle
that made beaucn eearth:whpch alfocommai in thefyghte of thep2 ©od,thenlet veqoo tpa
y ded them thatthep thulde goofromtbence,and gapitte Hem,fo2 doubtlefle thep2 Gov haloes
F dwel at Wara.mowe, whenthercamea dearth lpuer them into thp bandes , efubducthemvn |
) into theboleland,thep wente Downe to Egipt Dleakeb eye ak eee proplepa a
— Seerbe and there thep dwelte x foure hundzed peares, plealedthep: God, weal not behableto with
- zronrit.t Mthe wbich thep multiplped greatlp,that their tande them, foz thepz? God thall defende them:
o Saladg.a, Dooltempgbtenotbenombzd. And when the and to (all webe a pameto alltbe wolde. _
kpnge of Eaqypte oppzeffed them, and fubdued Nowe when Achior had fpoken onte thefe
thbeminbuplopnae o bps cptpes wptb making 10020¢9,all the create men of Holofernes were
of clape and bzpcke, thep ceped wnto Godthepz weotd,and thought to lape bpm and faide one
Lade , whpebepunphed tbe polelandeof È- to anotder:Clbat is pe this thatdarelap,that
) Gppte wpthdpuers plages. fhe chpldzen o€ Jiraellare bable to withitanbe
| Powe when thekpngeokEgpptetetthem Mabuchodonofoz thekpnge.e bie booftrwhere
| otbepz wape, andtheplageceafled,anothen astbeparear Dnweapened people, w thoute
| folowed after them, to take them ad to bapnee ffrengthe , Beppe Of the feates of
them agapne intobpslerupce,whilethep were Warrer Th at Achpoz ther :
i fipingeawap,theGodofbheauenopencdthelee bebath dplcteaued bs, werwpll go vptothemo:
| fo that the waters Code fatte tupon bothe the fp untapnes: when the mpabtpe menoftbem are
i desasawall,and hele wente thozowethebo- taken, bealfo fbalbe tyckte wpth thelweard,
tome of the fee dzpethod. nee whpcde place that all people mape knowe, that Pabuchodo-
when aninnumerable people ofthe Eqppeiag. nofozisthe God of the earthe, and that there ts
folowed bpd them. thep were lo ouerwbeimea notte otber wWptboute bpm.
poral bel ey er ez] itbe ees Gchtoz Tbe. vt. Cha 2a Ethe Felwes bp Bo
fo tell them tbat came after, howe it bappene Apelar ea Ap lh peated dy
Ha whenthys people was patied thorowe the Deeper fo tbepeupte aetna eee ak Setora, T n


red fee thep came into tbe wildcrnefleofmount Be mines D when thep pad lefte of fpeakpnere %4
= Dinap, where neuer man mpgbte dwell afore, FERES Holofernes toke lore indpgnacpon,
i and where thefonne ofmanneuer refted. Chere | ees and fapde nto Achpo2:4Fo2 fomuch


Were the bptter waters made fwete foz them ,


that thep mpabte dzpnke,and foztie peares had = Mmge:tbattbe people of Flraell pall-
e thep meat from beanen.Wiberfoeuerthepwent be defended oftbepz Gov, 3 wpl Mewe the, that
| (wpthout bowe and arowe, wpthoutebuckler theretg no God but Pabuchodonoloz. Pee,
i o2fiwwearde thep2 God fougbte Eo: them, cau- whenwe flapethem allas oneman , thon alto
o oa fed them to bauethe bpctozp. Pea, noman was pai pereur wpth them thozowe thefwearde
A bable toburtethps peo le,exceptettwere,that of the #Merpans, tall Zlraell halbedefroped
D thep MED vnfaptbtullp from the worhpp: wypththe,and then tpou alte fele,that Rabu-
ppng of theLozd their God. But as oft ag thep chodenole2 is the lozde of the whole earth. The
Wwortbpppedanye other belpde thep2 God, be Hall the fweard of mp knighthode qo thorowe
gate them ouertobefpopled,tobeflayne, and thy fpdes and thou (alte fall downe pekte a-
fo be put to confulpon.Menerthelefle,as oft ag mouge the wounded of Flrael, ¢thaltnotcome

thep werelorpe for they? departyngefromthe totbp felfe ogane but bebtterlp deftroted with 5
ino2zthpp of thep2 God, the lame God of beanen them. ut pfthau thynekelt thy prophecy tobe
gaue them power and frengthetowpthttande trew e wpp doetethou tbenchangethp coloure
thep2 enempes.. whpartetbouafrayder Thpnekelk thou that
Dozeouer,thep flue the kyng oftheCana mp wordesare not abletobe perfourmed: wut
nites, Jebulptes, Pherelptes,Hetbhptes, Cup- Pthoumaplknowe that thou halte fele thefe
tes and Amozptes,¢ allthe mpahticinHelebd thpnees wpth them,bebolde, fromtbyshoure
and toke thep2 landeg and cptpes in pofleffpon: forth wplld fendetheto ponder people,p when
-~ andfolonge as thep fpnned not inthe (pebte of the punpihemente of my fwearde( wpe ethep
thep2 God, it wente well wyththem, foz thep2 hauewortbilp deferued)falleth vps them, thou

God hateth onerpghteoutnetle. sor intymes mapebepunphhedwpthtbem. —

pate when thep wente onte of the wape which S0 Holoternescommaunded bps ferttaurt
God bad geuen them, that they huldewalke tes totake Achior, € carpe bpm fo Wetbulpa,e
rt init tbep were deftropedindiuersbattaplesof to delpucerbpminto the bandes ofthe chpldzen
; manp nacpons:and manp of them werecarped ofsfrael. Thenpoloferneg feruauntegtoke
awape prploners bntoa raungecountrpe. _ bym, and twentetbozowe the plapne felde. But
a us nowe latelp they haucturnedthemfelucs. toben thep dewe npg nto the ntountapnes,
x agapne nto the Lopdethep2 God, ¢arecome theflpneecafkers came outagapne tbem. Mes
i together agiane out of the countries wher they wertbeleile,thep gat them awape bp thefpne of
were [catered abzoade:and thus bane thep con= themountapne, andbounde Achio2 bandeand
quered thele mountapnes , anddwell therein: footeto atree,and {olett bpm crea ee
i CE p’ 34


Thcbooke


thes and turned aqapne dno thep2 lorde.
fLotwpthFandpnge,the chpldzen of Zlrael
wWente Downe from Bethulia, came onto bpm
loofed ppm, bzougote bpm into wWethulia , fet
bpminthempodelte of p people and afhed ppm
__ What the matter wag, thatthe Aflerpans had
~


ite bpm bounde.
} Diyas, thefonne of Sicha , of the trpbe
Spmeon,t Charmin wbpceh is alfocalled Ga
thontel) were the papneppal rulers at the fame
tyme. Mowe when Achioz tode tn the mpodelk
of the Sennatonres,¢ before themall, pe tolde
them, what aunlwere be qaue Holofernesto p
thpng that be alked bpm, and howe Holofernes
people welde baue apne bymfo2lotapinge:
bow Holofernes bpm telfe was wothe, y com=
maunded bpm fo? the fame caule tobe deliuercd
bntothbe Zlraclites:that when be ouercame the
chp!dzen of Flrael, hempghte commaunde A-
chpozalfo to be ge todeathe wpth fold tol-
. menteg, becantle be fapde the God of brauenig
thev: defender. And when Achpoz had plapne-
lpe tolde outeall thefe thpnges , all the people
fell Downe vpon thep2 faces,praplyng the 102:
de and poured onte thep2 prapers together vn-
to the Lo2e,wpth a generall complapnte, and
weappnge, andfapbe: DLowde God of heauers
and of earth, bebolbde thep2 pzpde: looke bpon
ourelowlpnefie,econ{pder boweit Fandethw
tbp fainctes,¢ makeit to beknowne,p thou fog
p lakelt not thofle, whpch holde them fafte bp the
and howe that thou bzpnget themlowe p pze-
fume of them Celues, € make thep2 botin thep2
owne Trength.4o when the weppnae prap:
er of the people/tobpche thep bad made the bole
dape longce was ended, thep comforted Achpoz
_Tapinge: Che God of oure fathers, whole pow:
er and frengtbe thou balte prapfed, hall fore-
warde the , tbat thou thalteratber fe thep2 de-
Mruccpon. ben tbe Lode oure God tben al
cue bps leruauntesthps lpbertpe : God beal-


o wth the amonge vs: fo that pf it pleate the, *


thou wptb all tbpne mapeft divell wpth ve. °
Rowe when Dirias had ended thecounfap
le be toke bpm into bps poule,and made a great
fupper.called the elders tott:¢fothep reftethed
them felues afterthefaftpng . And afterwarde
was al the people called together whyche made
thep2 prapersal thenpabe longe inp congrega-
cpon,and befougbte the God of Flrael fo: helpe

| C The. vti.Chapter.

a ethulfais beteged of Holoternes. The people requereth
belpe of Sob. Dhep of Bethuliawold geut ouer che cpttefo:
twan of water. Dheppaper of $ people tò teares æ lamétacto
Page De nerte Dap ipolofernes commaun
a Bp) Ded bys holt to go vp agents 1e-
sea i Chulta. There wasan. C.and.rr. si)
9,6] fpabtpngemenon foote,s.rrit.).
SSE No2rfe men, belpde the preparpnge of
foemp Were wonne: Ecameto them oneuerpe
pde out of the countryes ecptpes which he bad
‘taken. Ail thele pern them felues wnto the
battaple agapnite toe Jlraclptes, and came on
by p bviftde, onto the toppep loketh ouer agap
int Dothatin, from ý place which is called Wel


Tae,
el


ma, bnto Chelmon Plpeth towarde Eldzelon.


Nowe, when thechplozcen of Flracil awe 5


fo great amultptude of the Afferiang , they fell
Downe flat Dpon the qround.firowed apes d

ponthep2 beades,¢ praped wpth one accozde,

the God. of Frael wolde thewe bys mercpe Yp-
põ bys people. Bnd fo thep toke thep2 weapens
adfatbetwene the mountapnes inthenarowe
place,t hepte the woape, bape andnypabte Wut
whple Holofernes was going about, be founde
the water fprpng, wbpci fromthe South {poe
thas conueped intothecptye bp acondpte:thps
commanded be to dprecte another wape, and
tocut thep2codptein fonder. Chere were wels
alfo not far from} walleg, whee thep wled fe-
cretlpe, moze fog plealure then for neceflptye .


Then wente the Amonpteg, andthe Woa- g


bites vntoolofernes,elapbe: Chechplozen
of Frac trute nether infpeare noz arowe, but
baue taken in and kepe the mountapnes ¢ bpl-
les. Chat thou maplt ouercome them, therfore
roptbhout the ftryckyng of anp battatle,fet men
to kepe the welles, p thep dawe no water cute
oftpem:fo alte thou delfrope them wpthoute
fwerarde,o2 at the leet they halbe fo feble, that
thep muf be fapne to gene oner thecitie, which
thep thincke not bableto be wonne: Foz fo much
asitipethinthemountapnes. There worded
pleated Holofernes well andal bysmen of war
g be fet an bund2eth at enerp well rounde about


And when thps watchbad endured twen= m


tyedapes,the € pitcrns and al p had water, fa
led them ý dwelte inthecytpeof wWetbhulia,fo
infbebolecptve thep bad not dapneke pn oungbe
foz one vape. foz: the peop bad water qenen the
Daplpeinameafure. CThencametbemenand
Wein, ponge perfonues,s chplozenal unto D
(ias,¢fapbde all wpth one vopce : God be indye
betwyrte bs and the,fo2 thou baft delte ewell w
bs:thou woldeff not peake peceablp wpth the
kpnge of p Hflerpans, therefore bath God folde
bs inthep2 bandeg, t there is no mato belpe bs
where as we are broughtedowne before thepe
epesinthep tte and greate defteuccpon. There-
fore gather nowe tegetber all the people p bein
thecptie, p we mapeall pelde ourefeines wpl-
lpngelp onto the people of Holofernes, fozbet-
terit is that we becaptpuc and praple the Lord
wrth oure lpues,then to be layne and perpe,
and tobe laughed to {cozne 4d thamed of euerpe
man, when we feoure wpues echplodzen dpe bee
foze oure epes. Wetake beauenand earth thpe
Dap torecozde:* the Good of one fathers (which
punpibeth vs accozdpnaeto the deferuynae of
ouretpnnes) and gpue pou warnpnge, that pe
qrue vp thecptp nowe into the power of Holp=

ernes Doffe, that our endemape be porte with
thefwearde, whiche els thall endure longe, foz
want of water and for thprfte.


CA ben thet bad fpokë out thefe wordes, there E
€


wasa Treat weppng * bowipnye inthe whol
congregacpon,and that of enerp man:and thep
crped an whole boure longe vnto god with one
vopee, taping: we paue finned with our father¢g
we


F


4 '


=~


Of Judypth;
We haue doneampile, we hare delte woyekedly.
‘Chou parte gracpous, baue mercpe tpon vs,


punpibe our varpabreoulnelle wrth thyne ow
ne [courge and geue not thole oucr p knowlege
the unto a people whpch knowe fnot, lef thep
apeamonge the peathen:wiecre isthep: Gov.
And when thep were lo werpe wpth thys
crpinge and weppnge,that thep belde thep2 t=
ges, Olas, Code bp wpth watry eyes, efapde
sD take gon Dertestnto pou, (deare bzethzen)
andbeofgoodcheare,t let bs wapt pet thele fp
ue dapes foz merepe of the Lode paraduenture
be (all put awape bpgindpgnacpon, and gene
glozpeontobpsnanie. But phe belpe vs noe
when thete fpuedapes are patte, we Mallda ag
pe Dauefapde. l
The. viii. Chapter. —
«_ Othe bertuous woman Funpth:whp a repzoneth the
atinepentes becaule thep tempted the Lobe. She allo moz
ucth themto encozage and berten the people, and hetweth
ber counfell agapntte the enempes of the Jewess,
Cee CAN dit happened when there wordes
l: P, ‘pacame to the cares of Judpth a wpd
Ty enn Cra VOW! WHPCh Was the Daughter of


ated all the dapes of bet lpfe ercepte the Sab:
bothes,and newe mones:and the folempnedap


25 es that the people of Flraelkepte. Sbe was a-


terp faper ebewtpful perlon er bulband dl-
fo bad lefte ber qreate rpches,a plenteous bout:
holde,qreate vnmoneable pofletipons and ma=
ny catel. Chps Judith was a woman ofa verp
qood reporte wpth enery one, fo: he feared the
Lozdeqreatlpe , andthere was no bodpe that
fpake an euell wo2de of ber.
Wiben thps Judptb hearde,bowe Diyas,
bad pzompledtbhepeople, p after the fpfte dapè
. be wolde geue bp thecptie vnto the Afferpans,
the fente foz the elders Chambzp, andCbarmp,
€wohen thep came to Her, (helapde what thpng


isthps, wherein Dipas hathconfented, that pf


God Helpe not wpthinfpuedapes, be wll yene
oner Dewey to the Afferpans:(Ubat are ped
petempt the Lozder Chis deupce optapneth no
mercp of God, but prouoketh bym towzathee
bdifpiealure. Cpl pe fet the merce of the Lozde
atpine,tappopnte bpm adape after pour wpl?


€ Peuertielefle,fo2 fo muche as the Lowe is


_ pacpente,let bs rather repente, pourpnae oute
aan he beflechpnae bpmofarace. Ee: God


threataneth not ag aman, nether wpll bebe pro
uokeD Mito Wrath as thechylozen of men. And
fetfozelet vs hertelp Fall Downe before bpm,¢
feruebpym myth ameke fpzete and woth wea:
penge epestap unto the Lordep be deale wptp
DS accordpnge to hysowne wll and mercpe:p
lpe ag oure berte ig nowe vered and bzoughte
lowe thozowe the ppreofthem , it mape befo
confozted thozowe bps qrace:info muchas we
folowe not the fyrneg of ourefathers, wbycbe
forfoke thep2 Godan wo2lhppped other god=
deg fo: the whpch (ynnethep perpthed withthe
wearde, were (popled and broughte tothame ,
of all thep2 enempes.As fo: ve we kuowe none
otber God but onelpe bpm, foz whofe comforte
let vg tarp wythmekenefle. Ie hallrequpze
and mate tnqupfpcponfo2 oure bloude, from p
veracpons of oure HERRE ag fhall bapngedo
vone all the Heathen,that rple bp aqapnite us,
€ put them todphonourc enen p Lod our God
. ‘Cherfore deare breathzen, fepna pe are the
bonourble and elders inthe people of G od, bit
to whome all the people bane refpect,and pon
whome thelpfe of the people andeth , lvfte bp
thep2 bertes wopth poure erboztacpon that thep
mape call to remiembzaunce,bowe oure fathers
alfo in cymes paft were tempted, $ thep mpabe


bep2oued, pEthep worthpppedthep2 God atp- wen, reina


ghte. Thep ongbtetoremembze, bower our fa

ther Abzabam bepnge tempted, and tryed tho-
towe manpe trpbulacpons, was founde a loner
and frende of God.o was Fabac, fo was Ya
cob, {owas )ofes,¢ al thep that pleated Goo

bepnge trped thozowe manp tro ubles, were fo-
unde eadfatte in fapth.Agapne, thep that rece
aucdnot thep2 temptacpons wpth thefeare of
God but put them felneg forth wopth pnpacpen
cpe and murmurpuge aqapnke God, perpthed
of the Deftroper,e were flapne of ferpentes. And
therffe huldenotwe wndertake tabea uenged
forthethpucep isdone brato vs, bufconfpder,

tatal thele punppementes are farre lefe then
oure {pres andmplDdedes. Welcupne alfo that
thys cozreccyoncommeth vnto vs(ag tothe fer
uiauntes of God)fozamendemente, and not foz

cure Ddeffruccpon.


Then fayde Diag, andthe elders vntogu ©


dpth: Bl that thou fpakelk, ig true, andnoman
ca repzoue thp wo2des Pap p forvsnowe thee
fore unto God, fo2 thou arte an bolp woman, €
foarelt God. And Judpth fapde nto them: He
ing pe Bnowe p mp woades are of God,the : go
uemp counceland Deupte , pEpt be of God:abe
fechGodp be wplbzigmp councelto qoodend

Thus baue F deupled: Ye wall tande thig
npabte beforetbe porte, and J wpll goo forthe
wyth Bb2a mp mapden. Hape petberefore vn:
to God:that be wpll qracyouflp remember bys
people of firael whithin fpue dapes, ag pe baue
fapde. As foz the thyny thatZ goin bande with
all, atke peno queftyons of pttpll J oven tt tn-


pou mp telfe:do penothpngeelies but prave vr.


tothe Lorde poure God forme. Then Dliag,
the Pepnce of the people of Juda, fapd vnto her
Gooebp wape in peace, the Lozdebe with a

= thae


| Eol tri,


The booke


that wemapyebe anenged ofourenempes. And
(o thep wente frome ber agapne.


that thy boule mape contpnue Epil in holpnefle
and that al the Beatben mape knowe that thou


Tbpr.ir. Chapter. arte God, and ee ae isnoneother but tLou

A _ CEbepraper of Judpth foz thebpretorps, ee er.cpapter. ir

AEE Dwe when thep were gone thep2 «Judith decketh ber felfe to go to Dolofernes The z

N PVA Awape, Judpth wenteintoberclo- rar lr od a alsa ea

MM Poet dlet put onanbeariefmocke,firaw Er AD when the bad lefte of erpinge &
w SN edathesvponherheade,felbowne PENA
NAG \Xbefozetbe Lode, €cryed bnto bim hen -ae us|
pS bree faping: D 1020 God of mp Father È i Sthe Lozde, and called ber mapden,
gerria Simeon, wbreh gaurtebymalwearde fora PE wente vowne into ber poule lapde
the bearpe cloth from ber, put of the garmentes
of her wpodowbode,wathed her bobpe,anopne


uct thep2 wopues intoa prape,and thepzdaughb uoure,bzopded g platted her beare , fetan poue
tersintocaptpuptpe , andallebepzpzapefoza põ ber bcad.t put on fuch apparel ag pelogeth


pon the bootte of the std he taal thepbe wwelfauouredinallmensepes. de gaure bee


Darchkenefle before them: ¢whentbhey came in- ticwaptpnge there. eibpcbe when thep fawe

tothe depe.the waters overwhelmed them. }

, x3 Eucnfo Lore let t¢ qo wptbhthele,p trulke ber bewtpe. Meuertbhelelie,thep atked no quettp !

| © inthe power multitude of thep2 men of warre onatber,butlet ber go,fapinge: he God of ot
|


thou lobedett bpon thep2 booft,catting atbyke tpe,the founde Diyas, and the eldergofthecp= =


inthepzcharettes,arowcs,and{peares, #kno- ourefatpers qeue the bys grace, and wpth bps
we not Pp thou onlpearte oure God, whpchede- power perfourme all the denice of bp bert, that
| ftropeft warres fromthe begpnnpige, € that p Beru falem mape reiopce oner the, and that thp
| arte the Lo2de.D lyfte vp thpne arme nowe.lp name mapebein tbe nombre of fhe bolp andrp=
| keas euer fromthe begpnnpnge, tintbppow: gbteous . And all they that were there. fapde
| cr bapnge thep2 powertonan bte: caulethep2 wrth one bopce:fobett,fo bett . Judith made
mpgbte tofallintby wath .Chepmakethep2 berpzaper yntothe Lode , and wente onte at
poott.that they wpll vnhalowe and defple thp the porte,theand ber ma de. }
| Sanctuarpe,tto watt the tabernacle of hp na And as (he was qoinge Downe the mouns
| me, atocatedownetbe borme ofthpneaulter, tapne.it happened that aboute thefpapnge of ý
l! wpththepz wearde . Wpnaectopale(DLoz- dape thefppeg of the Aferpangmet wpth ber,
| de that the pepde ofthe enempe becuttedowne andtooke er,fapinge:wobence commete thous
wpth bys ovwnefwearde, that be map betaken Dy wherber gos ‘thous Sbeaunfwered: Jant
wytb rhe {nares ofbpsepesinme , ethatthou abdaugbtero a e jt ien fled from them
mapette impte Dean wor spel ppesofmploue for ¥knowetbatt ep Halbe geuentnto pou ta
D gene mea Fedfalt mpnde, ò Jmapedpf yle befpoiled:becaufethepthoug tfcozne to pelde ¥ A
| C bypmebps frength,ethat Jmape delrophpm them Celues onto pou, that thep mpghte fpnde
| Thys hall bapngetbp name aneuctlat- mercpe in poure (parbte. Cherfoze bane J deup:
| | tpngeremembzaunce, pf the pande ofawoman fed bp mp felfe after thys maner : J wpll qo be-
ouertbzowebpm. Jo: thy power (OLo2de) fore the Papnce Holofernes, tell bym all thep2
| ftandethnot inthe power ofmen,neptberbatte fecretes,and wpll (hewebpm , bewebemape
thou anpe pleafure in the arent ye ofhorfes. comebp tbem and wpnne then, that not one
| There was neuer proude parfonethat pleated man of bps booke hall perpthe.
f the but inthe praper of the bumble and meeke, And when thele men had hearde Her to02- €
bathe thy pleaturebenecuermoze. des, econlpd2ed Her faper face thep were affop-
D thou Sod of the beauens , thou maker ned(fo2 thep wonded at ber excellente pee
| ofthe waters,and Lozde of allcreatures,beare @fapde nto ber: Thou batte faucdthp Ipfe by
| | me poore woman, callynge wponthe , and put- fpndpnge out thys deupce , that thou woldelte
tpnge mp trute intbp mercpe. Remembre thp comedownetooure Lozde:# be thou fure, that
coucnaunte.<DLo2de,and mpnplEer wordesin when thou commeft Dnto bpm, be pall intreate
mp moutbe,¢ftablpihe thps beupce mi mp berte the wetl,andtboutpalte pleate bpm at edt
| Do ther


So thep brouchte bér into Holofernes pauply
| į on, and tolde ppm e . Powe when (became

' in before bpm, immedpatlpe be was ouercome,
and taken wpth ber bewtpe. Chen lapd bysice
uauntes: who wold dpipple the people of the Fe


$- wes, tbat baue fo fapte wemens Shuld we not


bp realon fpabte agapnitetbhbemfortpefe: Sa

when Judpth awe Holofernes, {pttpngeina
canappe,that wag wzougbte of purple, (piecke,
E old, Smaragre, a precpous kones, Melooked

fae vponbpmand ell Downe Hpontheeacthe
And Holofernes Ceruauntes toke ber dp againe
at tDep2 lozdes commanundemente.

The. ri.Chapter.


| @ Dolofernes requpreth of Zuvpth the caute of ber com

mnpuge:twhprb geneth bpm a luttel an(were.

E pge Hen fapde Holofernes ynto her :

) fe Be of good chere, andfeare not in

Hage. thpne perte, foy neuer hurte man

7 ei that wold ferue Mabuchodonolor
i GA > kypnge.aAsfo2 tbp people, pf thep


— n


bauelpfte vp mp {peare agapnite thé, Wut tell

me Howe, What is thecaute p thou art departed

from them,¢ wherefore art thou come unto vs.

o And Judpeblapdewnto bpm: Hp2, wnder=

- Fande the wozdes of tby pandemapden , for pf

thou wpit do after the wo2des of thp handmap

ben,the Lozde ball bringe thy matter toa pros

{perousefecte. Ag truly as Pabuchodonolo2 a

lozde of the lande lpueth, as trulp ag bps pow

cc lpueth, whichis in tbe top punpthemente of
all men that go wonge, allmen {hall not one-

{ ~ lpebefubducd vnfo bpm thozowe the, but all p

| bealtes alfo of the Feld. oz all the people fpake

| of thp paudente actiuptie : anditbath eucr bene
teported bowe thou cnelpe art good andimpah
tpeinall bys kpngedome,and thp dpicrecponis

„+ COMMenDED inall landes.

35 Thethenge is manpfek allo that Xchpo:
[pake and itis wel knowen, what thoucomma
undeit todo tnto bpm. fo: thys is plapneand
ofa furetpe.tbat our Good ig fo wrathe wpthys
(bp theceafon of oure (pnnes) that be bath Me-
wed bp bys Prophetes vnto the people, bowep
Eo: thep2 (ynnes be wrll delpucr them ouer Yn-


eS te a aaa
- = F
-


of Zfcacll , knowe that they baue lo dpfplealed
thep2 Govd,thep ave loze afraped of the.

Thep fuer great hunger alfo, ¢fo2 want

© of water,they are dead nowe inamaner. Wore


that tbep map e dapnckethe bloude ofthem.and
are purpoted to (pende all the bolp oznamentes
of thep2 God( which be bath forbpddren tbem to
touch )fo2 come, topne, and ople. Sevnge nowe
that thep do thele thynges itiga plapnecale,p
thep mullenedesbedeftroped. Wibpch when 4
thp handemapden perceaued, 7 Aed from tbem
and the Lo:debath Cente me vnto the, to Mewe
the tbefethynges. Fo: Jtbp handmapden wor
(byppedGodeuen now bere belpde the andthp
handemapden pall go forth, and J wpll make
my paver unto Gon, the thall tell me when be
top ll cewarde them thep2fpane-thenthall 3 co-


| Of Judypth,


had not dplppfedime, Ftbuldenot |


to tbeenempe. Jnd fo: fo mucbeas therbploren f


ouer, thep are appopnted fo flapeall thep2catel -


meand Hebt the and apg feposowe the mpd
def of Jerufalem, fo chat thou balte hancall p
people of Flraeil, ag the pepe wpthont a Mep-
REK oe: (palnotfo mucdasoncdonge bari
agaynite the, fo: thele thpnacs are hewed me,
bp p proupdence of God:a for fomuchasGodie
biipleated tÒ thé,be bath létmeto tel the fame
 Cyele wordes pleated Wolofernes and all W
bis feruauntes, which merucled at the wifdont
of berst fapde one to another : thereis not fucie
a Woman dpon earth,in bewtie edplcrecpon of
wo2des. And Holofernes Capde vntoher : God
parh dore well, tbat be bath lente the betber be
tozetbp people that thou mapefte qeue them tn-
to oure bandes. Bnd fo? Comucheas thy promp
Fe i3 good, pf God perfourme it Ynto me. be thal
be mp God alfo, and thou thalte de ercelicnte z
greatein tie courte of Mabuchodonoloz , etpp
name thalbelpoken of tall thelande.
: Ce. vii. Chapter. oo
CHorloternes commatnae’h chat savpeh be wells hfreat
teb.bebelpgeth Iprenceca goo oute in the npabte ceafon
to prape,ane optapnethit. tacan is fent pnto ber,to move
bertorome into Bulofecnestoa banchet,and (he ce Mmmeth
_Holoternes iz bron. ken, i
arme “ | en commaunded be ber to gooin &
ee


h © there, anbappopnted what thulde
| ~ , Ue geuenher from bps table. Judith
anftoered bpm and lapde: Xs for the meate that
thou batt commanndedtogeue me, F mape not
cate Of it ag notor Ic g dilpleate mp God but
wpli eate of fuche as F baue bzougbte wrth me
Then lapde Holafernes wnto hee: PE thele thprt
ges p thou balte brought wpti the faple, what
Hallwedowvntothe t And Judpth apde: Xg
trulp as thou lpuett mp Lozdethy bandmapdert
{hall not fpend alltbygs tpl! God baue brought


were bps trealurelape, echaraed
that e pulde bane ber dwellpn qe


fo patie inmp bade,the thingesp¥ hanedeuiten


0 bpsferuauntes brouchte ber into the 28
tent, wher as be bad appointed Bnd as fhe was
gopuge tithe delpzed that he mpabte bane lea
ueto go forth by npgbte, and before bapetohee
paper and fo make interceflion vnto the Lorde
‘Then commaunded Holofernes bys chambers
lapnes tbat he yide go out and mat per pleas

ure.toprápe unto God tholetbhze dapes .

And foin the nygbtefealon he wente forth
info the vallpe of Wetbulpa.and wathed her Cel
fein the well water. Chen wente the vp and be
foughte the Loge God of Firaell. That hewold
{profpere ber wape.fe2 the dilpueraunce of ips
people And foe wentein, eremapnedeleane C
inber tente, tph the toke ber meate in f cuenis

Gipon the fourth dap it bappened, that 130
lofernes made a {upper wntobps (cruauntes ,€
fapde Dnto rie bischamberlapne : Gothp
Wap, andcountellthps Hebzuefle,that the map
be wopilpngetocontente tokepe company with
me. ffo: it were ahame ditoall the Xfferpang
that a woman Mulde folaugbeamantofcome -
$ the were come frombpm brinedled wopthall,
Then wenteeta agao Dito Fudpth,elapde:
Let not the qood Daughter be afra poe. tocome
into mp £030, that Me map be honoured before

l bpm, tbat


SE ol. riii


i a
— Pad 4
E P E ot E
i


Thebooke


bpm, that dhe mape eateand daprcke wine and
emerpe wpth bpm. into whome Judith aun:
fwered: bo am J,that J thulvelape mp Loz
de nape: whatloeuer is good before bysepes, FJ
{Hall do it:and looke what is bys plealure, that
all J tbpneke well done,aslongeas Flpue.
So the Fove vp and deckte her leife wpth
ber apparell,and wente in and (ode befo2e bim
Aud Holofernes herte was whole moued, fop
be bzente tn delp2etowarde per. And Pao»
nes fapde vnto ber:dpnecke nowe and (pt dow:
nie, and be merpe,fo2 thou bafte founde fauoure
befozeme. Chenlapde Judpth: p2, 7 whpll
dıpneke, for mp mpndeis merper to dap,thene-
ucriéwasinallmplpfe And hetoke,addpoea
te and Mäcke before ppn epe thynges that ber
mapDden bad prepared foz ber. And Wolofcrnes
Was merpe wptp ber, anddzancke moze wpne,
then ener be dpd af oze in all bps lipfe.
. The.riii. Chapter.
@ Holofernes feapeth fo: berp bronckennes, and gubpth cat:
tethof bps beade : an’ gorth theretepth te ber one people of
tuhom He isteccaued pth iope, Tbep geuethankes bute Gob
For thep2 Deliueraunce. Zurich (peaketh bonto AchpoziWbphe


meruapleth at ber Feate bone to Boloferses


AAT Dwe when pt was late in thenigdt
G baH Ebys leruauntes made bat enerp ma
“em eB tobpslodapuge. And Clagqao ute
wae the chamberdoozes , and wente bys
Wape, foz thep were all oucrladenw
wpne. owas Judith alone inthe chamber.
Xs fo: Holofernes he lape pponthe bed al dion
ben, and of terpe Dzonckennes fella flepe .

‘Chen commaunded Judith ber mapden to
Tande wpthoute before the doze, andto wapte
And Judpth tode befoze the bed, makpnge ber
paper with teares,and moned per lpppes fecre
tipe,and fapde:ptrengtben me, D Lorde God
of Zfraell,and bane arefpecte onto the workes
of mp bandeg in thys oure,that thou mapet fet
vp thecptpe of Jerufalem, like ag thou balk p2o
mpfed:<D qrauntetbat bp the J mape perfours
me thethpnge, wbhpcbe¥ bauedeupled thozowe
the belene, tbat F pane inthe.

Ano when the badfpoken thps, the wente
to the bebdffeade, andlowled the wearde that
banged npon it and dewe if onte. Then tooke
foe bolde of the bearpelockes of bps beade and
fapd frengthen me, O Lod Godintbishoure
and wpth that (be gaue bpm two frokes upon
thenecke,anbd finote of bys bead. Chentoke the
thecanappe awape, and rolled the dDeade bodpe


alpe . tirocenatts Hegar ber forthe, and


delpuered the bead of Holofernes vnto her map
den and bad Her putit in ber wallet.

And fo thele two wente forth tomether af-
fer thep2 cuftome, as though they wolde prape
and fo paffed bp the bolt, and came thozowe the
vallep bntothe poste of thecptpe. And Fudpih
crped a farre Dnto the watchmen vpon the wal
les:<Dpen the gates(favbde fhe) foz Cod is wrth
bs.whpcbe bath he wed pps power pon Fira
el. and when thep bearde ber vovce.thep called
theelders ofthe cptpe together. Bad tpepcame


. all tometeber: lotle and greate , pone ¢ olde,


Foz thep thougbtenot that the pule baue come


fo fone. Do they tyabted candelg, and gathered
about ber euerpcbone:but the wente vp into an
bye place t canted (plence to be proclapmed.


fei beneuerpe mannowe pelde bps tonge, €


Judpth lapie: D praple the Lode our God foz
be bathe not dpfppfed , noz Forfaken tbem, that
put thep2 truttein pym, and in me bis bandmap
den he bath performed byg merep,whpch be pro
mifed onto i boufe of gfrael:pee nmp bad thig
fame night bath be laine p enemp of pigpeople
And wpth ý the toke forth the heade aay
lofernes out of the wallet,e Metod it them fap
inge:ebolde the heade of Holofernes the cap=
taine of the Afliriag,e this istbhecanapy, wher
tn be lape in bis dzonckennefle: where the Logde
our God bath llapne bym bp p hand ofa woma
Wut astrulp asthe Lorde lpueth,bps An
gell bath Ecepte me gopnge thetber,cemapnpng
there,tcommpnae bether aapne from thence.
And the Lorde bath not fuffered me bps bande-
mapbdentobe defpled, but wpthoute anpfplthp
nes of fpnne hath be brougbte me agapne vnte
pou:and that topth qreate bpcto2pe, foo that J
amefcaped, and delpucred. D gene thankes vn
fo pym euerpechone, forbeiggrarpoug and big
mercpe endureth fo: euer.
Sothep prapled the Lorde alltogether , €
ue thanckes wnto him. And tober thep fapde
pe £020 hath bleie the inbis powerr,fo2tho
rowe Bt de bzougbt oure enempestonan
abt. And Dlias the chefe ruler of people ot Mt
rael, fapde bunto her: Blefled art thou of the Loz
de the bpe God, abcuc all wemen vpon earth.


Wieken be the Lode, the maker of beauen D


andearthe, twobpche bathe qupded thearpabte
to woundeand fmpte ofthe beade of thecaprap
ne of oureenempes.sfo2thys dap bebath made
tbpnamefobonourable , that sji papie pall
heuer come outeofthemouthe of men, wphpebe
thallalwape remember the power of the Lowe
fepnge thou pafe not {paved thpne owe felfe,
but pub tbe inieoperdpe,conlpderpnge the aun=
garne and trouble cftbp people , and flo bate
elped thep2 fall before God oure Loze. And
all the people fapyde: Amen, Amen.
Achpo2 allo was called and became. Then


fapde Judpeh onto hym: Tbe Godof Jiraci on &


to wbome thou anete wptnes, that be wolde
be aducnged of bps enempes, euen be bath thpg
npabte thozowe mp hande:fmptten of the bead
of alithe vnfapthfull. And that thou mapette
fe that it is fo,bebolde,thps is the brade of Do-
lofernes , wbyche in bys paclumtuouspapde,
bdplppled the God of the people of Frael,¢ thre:
atened the wpth defkruccpon,fapinge:when the
people of Jfrarl is taben, Fihallcaufethe allo
tobe ftpcehte wpth the fwearde. When Achpoz
fator Holofernes beade be fell Downe bpon big
face tothe qrounbde foz verpe anguypthe and fea
re,fo that hefouned woptball.

Mut after that he was come agapne tobpm
feife,be fell Doone before ber, and pzapled her,


fapinge: Bleed arte P of thp God, inaltbetas


bernaclesof Jacob: forall the people p beareok
thp name, tal praile p god of gis Soar i p
E Che


a a


qpa =


pe a >


Offudyth, Hol. tits,
The.ettti, ; Dpon them that they wndertoke ta beferid tent’

ibe seit z be eee Pr ingan [5] ua iy man fan es x a q Piri sidak hj ake
Terrace Ubprh lapor buto allbepropie:bze bueDageD Downe thépz beades, lefte al bebpnd
Ete y ZS then beate me Dtpeke vp tbps bea them:and made bafteto elcape from tbe Hebzu:
Fart oe ppon oure walles, and when the &Sfozthep bearde, tbat they were baltpnge to
BVA BAI tinearpfeth takeeuerp manbpswe COMeafterwpth roep? Weapés,andfo thep fe
eked LS apon,and fall out vp olentlpe:not as bp the Wapes of the eldes, ano rbo2ome all the
though pe wolde gobelpdetbem, butto runne eee of esate of Heal farwe rat
bpon them wpth vpolence. When thelppesin hep fied fe ‘eh plozen of Jirar shack
the fentesfethis,thep hall of neceflitte becom- name sorts rab i pe Ai veal sie L
pelled to Ape back ward,¢ to raple bp thep2 cap | hal D aera res, te A a oar
faynetothe battaple. So wbenthep2 captap- aoe e Sah se them. Eni pa fas
nes come into Holofernes pauplion, efpndetbe ane.) Pha y: an nda Lai E,
bead bodp wrapped inthe bloude, fearfulneffe T Seather,but Aed thepz wape . fre tthe-
tall fall pon them € when pe perceaue p thep leffe,the chyldzen of Firal ‘ell Dpon them wits
fipe,folaw them wpthout alcare,fox God thal Mecompanpe and o2der,¢ opicomtptch ag ma-
delpuer them vnto pon to be deftroper, up as thep es a Get. And Dfias lent mefañ

Chen Achpoz feing ý power of God, which LEES Vuto allthecptpes¢e countrpes of Firael: |
be bad thewed onto the people of Frael, fell of 0 alltberegpons enerp cptie {ent oute x5
from bys Deatbenptbe belefe and put bpstente fev? belt menafter tbem in barnes, g Gnor toe
in God,andlet bpm felfe becpzeumepfed:andro PED di Wearde,tpll thep came to the vtmo


| eof FMraell, Patte otthey2 bozders. And the ofber p were in
poas penombred amongethe people ot Jfraell, Seo y caine inte the tentes oftbe at pag,


De and all bps pofterpte unto tbps dape. | e tole al, that they w ar
| | at he ; P wbych led had lefte beppno
By Soeas rae DION Che walle a mate them,# fo thepfoundegreat good. And thepp
p Holofernes beade bpon the walleg and e came agapne to Wethulpa fromthe battaple ,
Fpeman toolte bps weapen, and fo roep spente fooke w them fuchethypnaesaghad bene thep?s
oute wpth an bozpble crpe. Coben the pres there wasne nombze of thecatell,and of theca:
fawe that,thep rannevnto Holofernestente. - Qpe Jewelles,fothat from thelowett onto the
And they that were wpthin che tente, came be- byabette,they were all made rpche ofthe (pop-
Fore bps chamber, and made a greate CPD les of them. ¥nd Joachpm hebpabepreatte at
to wake bpm vp,becaule thep thought wptb Jerufalem, cameta Wethulpa wptb al p elders
novletobaueraplen bpm. oz there dure not that thep mpabte fe Judpetp. 3
one of the ofl nt rtp TONO? ODEN.. d , Moweswben tecame out onto them,thep
„Sut when tbe captapnes and princes: an beganne alto pzaple ber wpth one vopee, fap
alt fhe chefe in tbe kpnge of the Afleryans boot inge: P wortbpppe of thecptpe Of Jerufatem.p
came togetber,thep fapde wnto the chambe MAP tope of Meacl.# bonourcot onre people, $ balte q
nes: Oo poute wape in,and wake bpm vp foz Done malp,# thy berte ig cõfozted, becaute thou
tbe mpfe are crepte oute of thep2 pooleg, and da balt loned clentpneffe ¢ chattpte,e balt khowen
te p2ouoke vs ynto sata et ischamber fone H0 uta but thpne owne hulbad: therfo2e bath p
C pe CDE went Clagao into discham ae ki © handofSxzo comfozted tbe: bleffed thalte
before the bed, clapped wpth bps bandes, foz efo: cuer. Bnd all people fapde fo be it.f0 be it.
be thought be bad bene fleppnge pty aubp ed. _ _ Fnthpatpe dapes coulde the people of Fi-
-Wut whenbe had einai hd pertecty te tael {carce gather vp the (poples of the Aiiri-
bps cares , and coulde oe ant te tue > x ang. 2ontall that belonged nto Holofernes, ¢
wentenpaber tothe bedde, and lp $ pand had ben bps (peciallp (whether it were of gold,
then lawe be the deade bodpe of Wolofernes ip- of ipliter,precpous kones,clothpnge andalloz
- fngethere without ahead, welterd in bis blound hainontes)thep gauett unto Judpth. And all
cee topb weppnge tense bys cote, E Wwente cbe veopleretopted, bothe wemen,mapdens, ¢
into Judptbs tente and founde ber not: And lo Pounge people. wp ee be beares.


: heat ad EN ThHe.rvi.
belept oute onto the people ¢fapde: one woma : bo Bi
ofthe Fewes,bathbeourhteallPabuchovona ` F,Zperonseat sunvep A Concrete oe
a ronto Mame. a ice Ag Ip heppe and prate gon, i r
et) Dpon the qrounde and þathe no beade. Carta penfonge ubdpth thps fonge vn 4 —
~~ ipen thechefeofthe Afferpane Doofte chy A to the Lorde : weapiue ones the o
Dearded .thep rentetbep2 clothes, and there fell a es 7 Lode vponptabzettes, fyng bit
_ Antntollerable fearoand trembling vponthem P Wty | tothe Lozbde wponthe cpmbales,


lo $ thep2 mpndes werelozeafrapde.andthere |psee SS D (ynge vato bym anewe fons
Was anerceadpna great on ectnthe whole bolt of thanckelqeupnge, be fopefulle
eS bee £ a iiid zhe ei Cateartacter CAllVPONDpPS name. Fis theLozd p béeftropetb
them "ateael becorameth rpeh:bp thetp 0 MEOT ë Aiep: warreg: cuen the Lod Isis name. Wibich bath
Sat aera peaeten of Sicachim:and ofthepeople,  pptched bis tentesinthemyppdclt of his people,
QM Owe when all the bootkebcardtpat Ho p hempaht delpuet v¢from the bande ofal one


= AN Wlofernes wag Deaded,thep2 mynde rco tnempes. Aflur came out of the mountapnes of
eacee Fel From them, and luche a fearecame P nogtb inthe mulepeud mee Oe

pie hoppep
¢


=e


T


Thebooke


ple topped the water brokes, and thep2 bortes
conered ý walles.He purpoted to Daue brent vp
my lade, a flape mp ponge menw the fwearde.
De wolde hauecarped awape mp children g
pyzapns intocaptpuptpe, but the Almpgptpe
Lowe hyndzed bpm , ¢delpueced bpm into the
panyen ofa weman, wbpeh brought bym tocõ
ifpon. £02 thep2 mpabtpe was not delfropcd
oftheponae men. Jt was not the fonnesof Cp
tan $ fine bym,netber baue the greate Gpaun=
‘teslet them felusgsagapnEe bpm: but Judpth
thedaugbter of Serarp wpth ber fapze bewtp
bath dpicõfited bpm, brought bpm tonaughe
ffo: the lapde awape her wypddowes qarmente
eput onthe parell of glabdenefle to the retopfin =
cof thechiidzen of 4fracl. She annopnted per
ace, bounde vp ber peare inan Dour to begple
bpm. er flpppers raupthed bis epes, ber bewe-
tpecaptpuated bys mpnde, topth the wearde
{mateteofbpsnecke. The Wercpans were a-
Fonped at ber edfaftenes,ethe erdes at ber
boldenes. Chen bowled the armpes of the Ait:


q tpans.wobenmy (pmpleappered, dape ofthat A e
Tie Cones of the daughtershauepearledthbem ese


tho2zowe ¢lapnethbenvas fugptinechbtldzt:thep


nerpibed inthe battaple , foztheverpefeare oF |


the Lowdemyp God.Let vs lpngea fong of that
geuinge vito the Lorde, a newe long of prapfe
wll we fpnge unto oure God: Lowe Lo2bde,p
artca great God, mpabtictn power, whomna
man mape ouercome. All thp creatures Mulde
ferue the: for thou lpabelt but the wozde,ethep
were made:thou lentet thy (p2ete, ethep were
created, enomancan wprhtande thp vopce.
be mountapnes Mall moue from the founda-
cpons wpth the waters,the Fonperockes (hall
meite before thelpke ware. Wut thep that feare
the:(balbe great wpth the tn all thpnges.dlioo
unto the peoplep rpfe bp agapnite my genera-
cyon,forthe Almpagbtpe Lode wyll aduenge
bpm felfe of them,and in the dape of Judgemen
tewpllbe wplettpem. Sor bethallaeucfper
and wo2nes into thep2 hepe , that thep mape
burne and fele it Foz euer moare. |

After thpsit happenced,that after the tpe-


D torpe all the people came to Jerufalem, to qene


praifeand thanckes Dnto the Lode. And when
thep were purpfped,thep ofred all thep2 burnt
facrpfpces, € thep: prompledofferpnges. And
“Judith offered all Holofernes weapens,and all
the Jewels that the people bad qeuenber,andp
canappe that the toke from bis bed and hanged
thembpbtno the 1020 Che people was iopful,


a3 the wleis:ethpstove bp reafon oft be vpctes -


rpe wpth Judpeh.endurccd thee monethes .
So after thele dapes enerp man wente bo

meagapne,t Judpth wasin qreatereputacpd

at wWethulia, erpabte honourablp taken inall


thelandeof Zfracl, Cintobervertucalfowas Estar
chaftytietopned,fothat after berbufbande a | ie
nalieg He neuer knewe man al thedapes of her. Pat
Ipfe Apon thebpefolempne dates Me went out |
Hhedweltetn her |


wyth greate wo:mMypppe.
bufbandes bouleanhundzedand fpuepeare, ¢


lefte ber banbemayden fre, and dped:and Wag
burped befpde ber bulbanve tn Wetbulpa. And


âll tbe people mourned foz ber. vii. Dapes. So)


long as (be lined, there was none that troubled
Jiraell, and many peares alfo after per Deatbe.

Thedape wherin thps vpctozpe was got
ten, wasg folemplye polven , andrekened of the
Fewes inthe nombre of the holpeDapes,andit
ig pet greatlpe bolden of the Fewes ener fence
nto thys dape.


C Theendeoftdebookeof Judpth.


The reall of the Lhap


ters of thebooke of Ealtherwhpchearencther
founde in the Meb2ue,noz tn the Cpalde. |
CTbe.ri.Chapter afterthe Latpn.
Ebr irean of ejardocheus
- z Ardocheus p Cone of Fair, the
Yi f Conneof Semet , thefonne of
ve | Ciletot the trpbe of wen Fa -=
Gi o min, a Zewe:-woppepe had bys
es pe Dwellpnge in thecptpe of Su
= slig a man of greate reputacyo
iy ea Aces Eandercellent amongealthem
Se that were inthbekpnaes court
(feuertheles, he was oneok p preloners, whos
fLabuchodonoloz the kpnae of Wabilon bad ca
rped awapefrom Jerulalem dnto Wabplonw
Jechonias the hinge of Juda. ) Jn the.ti.pere of
therapqne of great Artarerfesin the fprtdap
ofthemoneth . Ailanbad this Bardocheug
fuche a Decame: He thoughtehe beardeaarcate
tempelte,bozcpble thonderclappes, earthqua
keg, agreat Dprourc inthelande, g p belawe.té
great bragosredp to fight one againitanotber
Theyzcrpe Was greate. At the whpch roa-
rpnge ecrpeall the Heathen were Dpto Frabte
agapnire te Epa bLeons people. And the fame
dape was tull of Darcikenes, and berpe Dnclear
full of trouble and anguppe pec agreate fears
Fulnefte was thereinalltbelande. @herpah-
teous were amaled,foz thep Feared the plage ad
enell tbat Was Deupfed ouer them, and wereat
apopnte wpth them felues to dpe. othep erp:
ed dnte Ood:and whple thep werecrpinge: the
Iptle wel qreweinto agreat rpuer and intoma
np waters. And wpth that it was Daye andthe
fonne role bp agapne-And the lowlpe were er
alfed, and Deuoured the qlozpous and proude.
Powe when ardvocheous bad fene thps
deame,De awoke, and muled ftedfatlpein bys
‘gale yA er nr d ea fo be mae to
oweall tper er, €OPSmpnoe wWastpere
bpon Dntplltpenpaghte. ‘


% "$ $: g


ca
the Kpnge.and istherfore retarded af bpm


giua tea
Cm ys


gpnacpons,


4


25


i ee eee aa


T


Thebooke


ple topped the water brokes, and thep2 bortes
conered ý walles.He purpoted to Daue brent vp
my lade, a flape mp ponge menw the fwearde.
De wolde hauecarped awape mp children g
pyzapns intocaptpuptpe, but the Almpgptpe
Lowe hyndzed bpm , ¢delpueced bpm into the
panyen ofa weman, wbpeh brought bym tocõ
ifpon. £02 thep2 mpabtpe was not delfropcd
oftheponae men. Jt was not the fonnesof Cp
tan $ fine bym,netber baue the greate Gpaun=
‘teslet them felusgsagapnEe bpm: but Judpth
thedaugbter of Serarp wpth ber fapze bewtp
bath dpicõfited bpm, brought bpm tonaughe
ffo: the lapde awape her wypddowes qarmente
eput onthe parell of glabdenefle to the retopfin =
cof thechiidzen of 4fracl. She annopnted per
ace, bounde vp ber peare inan Dour to begple
bpm. er flpppers raupthed bis epes, ber bewe-
tpecaptpuated bys mpnde, topth the wearde
{mateteofbpsnecke. The Wercpans were a-
Fonped at ber edfaftenes,ethe erdes at ber
boldenes. Chen bowled the armpes of the Ait:


q tpans.wobenmy (pmpleappered, dape ofthat A e
Tie Cones of the daughtershauepearledthbem ese


tho2zowe ¢lapnethbenvas fugptinechbtldzt:thep


nerpibed inthe battaple , foztheverpefeare oF |


the Lowdemyp God.Let vs lpngea fong of that
geuinge vito the Lorde, a newe long of prapfe
wll we fpnge unto oure God: Lowe Lo2bde,p
artca great God, mpabtictn power, whomna
man mape ouercome. All thp creatures Mulde
ferue the: for thou lpabelt but the wozde,ethep
were made:thou lentet thy (p2ete, ethep were
created, enomancan wprhtande thp vopce.
be mountapnes Mall moue from the founda-
cpons wpth the waters,the Fonperockes (hall
meite before thelpke ware. Wut thep that feare
the:(balbe great wpth the tn all thpnges.dlioo
unto the peoplep rpfe bp agapnite my genera-
cyon,forthe Almpagbtpe Lode wyll aduenge
bpm felfe of them,and in the dape of Judgemen
tewpllbe wplettpem. Sor bethallaeucfper
and wo2nes into thep2 hepe , that thep mape
burne and fele it Foz euer moare. |

After thpsit happenced,that after the tpe-


D torpe all the people came to Jerufalem, to qene


praifeand thanckes Dnto the Lode. And when
thep were purpfped,thep ofred all thep2 burnt
facrpfpces, € thep: prompledofferpnges. And
“Judith offered all Holofernes weapens,and all
the Jewels that the people bad qeuenber,andp
canappe that the toke from bis bed and hanged
thembpbtno the 1020 Che people was iopful,


a3 the wleis:ethpstove bp reafon oft be vpctes -


rpe wpth Judpeh.endurccd thee monethes .
So after thele dapes enerp man wente bo

meagapne,t Judpth wasin qreatereputacpd

at wWethulia, erpabte honourablp taken inall


thelandeof Zfracl, Cintobervertucalfowas Estar
chaftytietopned,fothat after berbufbande a | ie
nalieg He neuer knewe man al thedapes of her. Pat
Ipfe Apon thebpefolempne dates Me went out |
Hhedweltetn her |


wyth greate wo:mMypppe.
bufbandes bouleanhundzedand fpuepeare, ¢


lefte ber banbemayden fre, and dped:and Wag
burped befpde ber bulbanve tn Wetbulpa. And


âll tbe people mourned foz ber. vii. Dapes. So)


long as (be lined, there was none that troubled
Jiraell, and many peares alfo after per Deatbe.

Thedape wherin thps vpctozpe was got
ten, wasg folemplye polven , andrekened of the
Fewes inthe nombre of the holpeDapes,andit
ig pet greatlpe bolden of the Fewes ener fence
nto thys dape.


C Theendeoftdebookeof Judpth.


The reall of the Lhap


ters of thebooke of Ealtherwhpchearencther
founde in the Meb2ue,noz tn the Cpalde. |
CTbe.ri.Chapter afterthe Latpn.
Ebr irean of ejardocheus
- z Ardocheus p Cone of Fair, the
Yi f Conneof Semet , thefonne of
ve | Ciletot the trpbe of wen Fa -=
Gi o min, a Zewe:-woppepe had bys
es pe Dwellpnge in thecptpe of Su
= slig a man of greate reputacyo
iy ea Aces Eandercellent amongealthem
Se that were inthbekpnaes court
(feuertheles, he was oneok p preloners, whos
fLabuchodonoloz the kpnae of Wabilon bad ca
rped awapefrom Jerulalem dnto Wabplonw
Jechonias the hinge of Juda. ) Jn the.ti.pere of
therapqne of great Artarerfesin the fprtdap
ofthemoneth . Ailanbad this Bardocheug
fuche a Decame: He thoughtehe beardeaarcate
tempelte,bozcpble thonderclappes, earthqua
keg, agreat Dprourc inthelande, g p belawe.té
great bragosredp to fight one againitanotber
Theyzcrpe Was greate. At the whpch roa-
rpnge ecrpeall the Heathen were Dpto Frabte
agapnire te Epa bLeons people. And the fame
dape was tull of Darcikenes, and berpe Dnclear
full of trouble and anguppe pec agreate fears
Fulnefte was thereinalltbelande. @herpah-
teous were amaled,foz thep Feared the plage ad
enell tbat Was Deupfed ouer them, and wereat
apopnte wpth them felues to dpe. othep erp:
ed dnte Ood:and whple thep werecrpinge: the
Iptle wel qreweinto agreat rpuer and intoma
np waters. And wpth that it was Daye andthe
fonne role bp agapne-And the lowlpe were er
alfed, and Deuoured the qlozpous and proude.
Powe when ardvocheous bad fene thps
deame,De awoke, and muled ftedfatlpein bys
‘gale yA er nr d ea fo be mae to
oweall tper er, €OPSmpnoe wWastpere
bpon Dntplltpenpaghte. ‘


% "$ $: g


ca
the Kpnge.and istherfore retarded af bpm


giua tea
Cm ys


gpnacpons,


4


25


i ee eee aa


E


- neraga


D


Of Eftyer,


ginaci6s be perceaucd ý thep wet abotittelaye
rhepzcruel hades bpothebpnee Artharerles:¢
Cobe certifped f kpngetherof. Then canledthe
king to eramenthe tt.gelded tò rozmetes. And
whéethep bad qratited tt thep wer put fodeatp.
This f king cauledto beputin p Cronteles for
an enerlaftpnge rememb2atice, ¢ Pardochens
wote vp p fame matter. Sop kpng commaun
ded PL) ardocheus Hulderemapneinp court, g
fo. this faptbfulnes of bis, be maue Dia reward
Wut Aman pfonne of Amadathu the Agagite,
which was holden in great pbonour ¢reputacio
inp hinges court pndertoke to hurt )ardoche
usebis people becaufle of p. (t.chamberlapnes p

wereputtodeath. @¢ The.riii. Chapter.
A Lbecoppe oF the letters of Artarertes agapnlt the Fe:

tes. tbe pjaper of pyardocbeus.

== e great kpng Artarerles whychrapg-
4 tsa net from sndia nto Ethiopta,ouet an
eae’ T .€.rrvil.landes, fendeth bis frendlp fa
lutacion nto al p pipnees æ Debites of p conn-
tres which b¢elubiect bntobisdominis. Gipey
Was madelozd oner manp people, ¢ bad lubdu-
ed f wholeearth onto mp dDompnis, mp mpndg
was not wWcrucltp g wrong to erbalte mp felfe


bp preafon of mp power:but purpofed t equy:
tealway ¢gentelnes,to qouerne thole p benn-
der mp iurildicctd,¢ Whole to fet thé ina perea:
ble Ipfe a therbp to bring mp kiqvomevnto tra
quillite,p men mpabtfatelp qo thozowe on eue
tp [pde qto renew peace agapne, which almen
delire. Mowe when F alked mp coticelers howe
thelethpnaes mpabte be bzoughte toa good en
de there was one bp bs, creellente nwopldoime
whofe qood wil truth ¢ fapthfulnes bath oft be
ne fbewed ¢proued(whpch was allo p pricipal
¢nertetothe kpng) Aman bp name: whpch cer
tpfped vs howe f inalllandes there was {cate:
redDabzoadearcbellpous folke,that made tatu
tes g lawes agqapnifcall other people: ¢baue al
wapedplppled p proclapmed commaundenient
tegofkpnges:+ how that for thys caule it were
nottobefuffered that fucberule (puldecontp=
nue bp pou and not to be put Downe. :
Seinge nowe we perceaue the fame, Pp this
cople alone ar contrarpynto euerp ma, vipng
aung other matter of lawes, € wpthtande
our fatutes ¢dopnges,¢ goaboute to ably
ewed matters, ý our kingdome Hulde neuer
cometo good etate g tedfalteneNe: Cherfore
baue we commaunded, ý allthep p are appoin-
tedinwptpnye etpewed dnto pou bp Aman,
(wohpche ts ozdepned giet oner all ourlandes)¢
the moft papnet palnert bntothe Epua, tina
atber, (ball w thep2 wpucs echplozen
be deftroped erootedoute wpth the fwearde of
thep2 enempes g aduerfarpes,and p there pal-
be no mercp Hewed, tno manl{pared. And this
fhalbe done the.rtifi, dape of the moneth(called
Adar)of thpsypeare,that they wypche of olde, s
nowealfo ) bate ener betterebellpous mapein
onedape wpth vpolence be thzutte Downe into
the bell to thintente that after thps maner oure
emppze mape baue peace and tranquylipte.
wut Gardocheus thoughbte vpon all the
wozckes and noble actes of tbe Lowe , made
bps pzaper onto bpm, fapinge:sDLo2be Lozbe,


thou valeaunte and Ximipahive tety (for atl


thpnges are in thp power)¢ pFthou wplt peipe .


tDelpuce Zlracl,there igno man that can wry
Tandeoz let the:fo2 thou bat made heaven and
arth, what wondecroas thyngelocueris tn:
der the beanen:thou arte Lozde of all thonges,
€ there isro manthatcan refpfte thy maiettreé
(<DiLoab.) Thou knowelf allthynges thon tod
tel Lode that it was nether of malpee, ne2 pie
fumpevon,no2z for any Defpreof qlozpe that Y
wolde not bowe Downe my felfe, na? worlbrp
older proud? prefumpteous Aman(foz F wal
e Daue bene contente, ¢ that wpth goti wyll,
£ itmpabt paue done Flracl anp qood.tohaue
pite euen bys footelteppeg)butthat J apo tt,
becanle J wolde not fet the bonoure of amantn
the tede ofthe glozpof Gap:+ a wolde
wo:ppp none but onlp the mp Lord, And thps
Dane J donetnne ppde no2 prefumpepon.
nd tberefoze SDLozde thou God thpnee
Daue mercpe bpon thy people, fo: thep pmagpn
howe thep map bapng bs tonangbe:pea, thep2
mynde ¢delpre isto Deltrope, gto ouerfhzowe


thy people,p bath beneeuertbyneenberptaurcee


Of olde.<D dpfpple not the pozcyon, whpcb thou
balte Delpuered g bgouahte onte of Œ qppte for
tbpne owne felfe.dyeare mp praper, t be merep=
Full vnto thy people whom thou balk chofenfoz
anbeeptage ynto thp felfe. Tutne our compla-
inte g lozowe into fope,p wemape lpuc, D1 07
de and praile thp name. OLozde,{uffer not the
moutbes of them p praplethetobedeiroped.
Al the people of Zrael inlpke mancr cepen
as catneltlpe astbhep coulde wnto the Lo2d: Foz
thepz death # deltruccpo Lobe befoze they: eves
CChe.ritiidhapter. — — —
Ibe praprot ether fos the delpueranncé of ber è bet people.


RASA Death,relosted onto p Lord, lapac away
=‘Herqlortous apparel, ¢ puton p garnien
tes plerued for fpqbing emournpng. 3nd ted
of prectousopntimct te lcatered alpes t donge
wpo her pead:¢az for ber bodpe the bitbled it w
faiting ,ebzrougbtitverplow. Xp places wher
fhe was wont to pane iope afore thole filled he
ib the beerep the plucte of ber felfe. be prayed
alfownto f lo:d God of Hraci w thefewozdes.
Dmp 1.020,y onlp arte our Ging, belpe mie defo
late Womä which baue no helper but p, fozmp
miferp edelEruccid ig hard at mp band Fro mp
pouthvp 3 baue bard out of f kpnred of mp fa-
ther,p thou toket $fraell fro amõg al people(z
fo baue Gar fathers of their fozeiders that thep

wuld be thy perpetualenberttaiice gloke what

didelt promile tbém, halk made it yoodynta
he. owe lord, we haue lined beforep, therfore


balt ý geuen vs into p andes ofoureenempes x3


becaule we worthipprd their rods. Lod, Part
rigbtous. Meuertheles,tt fatifficd them not, p
weareinbitter benp captinuites oppzeffeda
mõgetbem, but P hat lapde their bades bponf
bandes of their gods:fo p thep beqynto take a-
way f tbpng Pthou rd thy mouth patt osdened
tappopnted, to defFropthyneenberptaunce,to
fhutand Top the moutbes of themý pratle p,to
quéchyglozy and wozppppe ofthp poule, and
topne alter,¢ fo open the mouthes of p Heathé.

Dod = that they


Eol eee


Wene Eker alfo being inp battaple of X


=


E


- neraga


D


Of Eftyer,


ginaci6s be perceaucd ý thep wet abotittelaye
rhepzcruel hades bpothebpnee Artharerles:¢
Cobe certifped f kpngetherof. Then canledthe
king to eramenthe tt.gelded tò rozmetes. And
whéethep bad qratited tt thep wer put fodeatp.
This f king cauledto beputin p Cronteles for
an enerlaftpnge rememb2atice, ¢ Pardochens
wote vp p fame matter. Sop kpng commaun
ded PL) ardocheus Hulderemapneinp court, g
fo. this faptbfulnes of bis, be maue Dia reward
Wut Aman pfonne of Amadathu the Agagite,
which was holden in great pbonour ¢reputacio
inp hinges court pndertoke to hurt )ardoche
usebis people becaufle of p. (t.chamberlapnes p

wereputtodeath. @¢ The.riii. Chapter.
A Lbecoppe oF the letters of Artarertes agapnlt the Fe:

tes. tbe pjaper of pyardocbeus.

== e great kpng Artarerles whychrapg-
4 tsa net from sndia nto Ethiopta,ouet an
eae’ T .€.rrvil.landes, fendeth bis frendlp fa
lutacion nto al p pipnees æ Debites of p conn-
tres which b¢elubiect bntobisdominis. Gipey
Was madelozd oner manp people, ¢ bad lubdu-
ed f wholeearth onto mp dDompnis, mp mpndg
was not wWcrucltp g wrong to erbalte mp felfe


bp preafon of mp power:but purpofed t equy:
tealway ¢gentelnes,to qouerne thole p benn-
der mp iurildicctd,¢ Whole to fet thé ina perea:
ble Ipfe a therbp to bring mp kiqvomevnto tra
quillite,p men mpabtfatelp qo thozowe on eue
tp [pde qto renew peace agapne, which almen
delire. Mowe when F alked mp coticelers howe
thelethpnaes mpabte be bzoughte toa good en
de there was one bp bs, creellente nwopldoime
whofe qood wil truth ¢ fapthfulnes bath oft be
ne fbewed ¢proued(whpch was allo p pricipal
¢nertetothe kpng) Aman bp name: whpch cer
tpfped vs howe f inalllandes there was {cate:
redDabzoadearcbellpous folke,that made tatu
tes g lawes agqapnifcall other people: ¢baue al
wapedplppled p proclapmed commaundenient
tegofkpnges:+ how that for thys caule it were
nottobefuffered that fucberule (puldecontp=
nue bp pou and not to be put Downe. :
Seinge nowe we perceaue the fame, Pp this
cople alone ar contrarpynto euerp ma, vipng
aung other matter of lawes, € wpthtande
our fatutes ¢dopnges,¢ goaboute to ably
ewed matters, ý our kingdome Hulde neuer
cometo good etate g tedfalteneNe: Cherfore
baue we commaunded, ý allthep p are appoin-
tedinwptpnye etpewed dnto pou bp Aman,
(wohpche ts ozdepned giet oner all ourlandes)¢
the moft papnet palnert bntothe Epua, tina
atber, (ball w thep2 wpucs echplozen
be deftroped erootedoute wpth the fwearde of
thep2 enempes g aduerfarpes,and p there pal-
be no mercp Hewed, tno manl{pared. And this
fhalbe done the.rtifi, dape of the moneth(called
Adar)of thpsypeare,that they wypche of olde, s
nowealfo ) bate ener betterebellpous mapein
onedape wpth vpolence be thzutte Downe into
the bell to thintente that after thps maner oure
emppze mape baue peace and tranquylipte.
wut Gardocheus thoughbte vpon all the
wozckes and noble actes of tbe Lowe , made
bps pzaper onto bpm, fapinge:sDLo2be Lozbe,


thou valeaunte and Ximipahive tety (for atl


thpnges are in thp power)¢ pFthou wplt peipe .


tDelpuce Zlracl,there igno man that can wry
Tandeoz let the:fo2 thou bat made heaven and
arth, what wondecroas thyngelocueris tn:
der the beanen:thou arte Lozde of all thonges,
€ there isro manthatcan refpfte thy maiettreé
(<DiLoab.) Thou knowelf allthynges thon tod
tel Lode that it was nether of malpee, ne2 pie
fumpevon,no2z for any Defpreof qlozpe that Y
wolde not bowe Downe my felfe, na? worlbrp
older proud? prefumpteous Aman(foz F wal
e Daue bene contente, ¢ that wpth goti wyll,
£ itmpabt paue done Flracl anp qood.tohaue
pite euen bys footelteppeg)butthat J apo tt,
becanle J wolde not fet the bonoure of amantn
the tede ofthe glozpof Gap:+ a wolde
wo:ppp none but onlp the mp Lord, And thps
Dane J donetnne ppde no2 prefumpepon.
nd tberefoze SDLozde thou God thpnee
Daue mercpe bpon thy people, fo: thep pmagpn
howe thep map bapng bs tonangbe:pea, thep2
mynde ¢delpre isto Deltrope, gto ouerfhzowe


thy people,p bath beneeuertbyneenberptaurcee


Of olde.<D dpfpple not the pozcyon, whpcb thou
balte Delpuered g bgouahte onte of Œ qppte for
tbpne owne felfe.dyeare mp praper, t be merep=
Full vnto thy people whom thou balk chofenfoz
anbeeptage ynto thp felfe. Tutne our compla-
inte g lozowe into fope,p wemape lpuc, D1 07
de and praile thp name. OLozde,{uffer not the
moutbes of them p praplethetobedeiroped.
Al the people of Zrael inlpke mancr cepen
as catneltlpe astbhep coulde wnto the Lo2d: Foz
thepz death # deltruccpo Lobe befoze they: eves
CChe.ritiidhapter. — — —
Ibe praprot ether fos the delpueranncé of ber è bet people.


RASA Death,relosted onto p Lord, lapac away
=‘Herqlortous apparel, ¢ puton p garnien
tes plerued for fpqbing emournpng. 3nd ted
of prectousopntimct te lcatered alpes t donge
wpo her pead:¢az for ber bodpe the bitbled it w
faiting ,ebzrougbtitverplow. Xp places wher
fhe was wont to pane iope afore thole filled he
ib the beerep the plucte of ber felfe. be prayed
alfownto f lo:d God of Hraci w thefewozdes.
Dmp 1.020,y onlp arte our Ging, belpe mie defo
late Womä which baue no helper but p, fozmp
miferp edelEruccid ig hard at mp band Fro mp
pouthvp 3 baue bard out of f kpnred of mp fa-
ther,p thou toket $fraell fro amõg al people(z
fo baue Gar fathers of their fozeiders that thep

wuld be thy perpetualenberttaiice gloke what

didelt promile tbém, halk made it yoodynta
he. owe lord, we haue lined beforep, therfore


balt ý geuen vs into p andes ofoureenempes x3


becaule we worthipprd their rods. Lod, Part
rigbtous. Meuertheles,tt fatifficd them not, p
weareinbitter benp captinuites oppzeffeda
mõgetbem, but P hat lapde their bades bponf
bandes of their gods:fo p thep beqynto take a-
way f tbpng Pthou rd thy mouth patt osdened
tappopnted, to defFropthyneenberptaunce,to
fhutand Top the moutbes of themý pratle p,to
quéchyglozy and wozppppe ofthp poule, and
topne alter,¢ fo open the mouthes of p Heathé.

Dod = that they


Eol eee


Wene Eker alfo being inp battaple of X


=


‘Thebaooke
eprapletbepomcrand vertue of ble. Helpite by ppgface that hone tn theclear-
pee pecan ad fpr kpngfozeuce nefle,andlooked grpmipe vpon ber. Then fell
OLowe genue nottyp Cepter vntothbemP P Quene Downe, Was paleandfapnte t leancd ;
benotbpnge.leittbep laugh vsto tcorneinour Hertel po the bead of themapd, ý went w her 25-
mpferpe and fall : but turnethep2 Deuple bpon Meuvertheles, God turned the kpnges mpn
them felueg, and punpHe bpm, p batbvegonne de phe was gentyle, $ be leaped oute of bps fe=
tbe fame ouer vs,andfetbpmtoancrample.. ate forfeare , and gat ber in bps armes, and
Thpncke vpon vs D Lorde, ¢thewethplelfe helde per vpepil the came to her felfeagapne.
vntovsinthetpme of oure deltree, and otour ie gaueber loutnge wo2rdes alfo,and lapde vn
trouble. Strengthme Othoukpng ofgods,P tober:Efther,what isthe matters Jamtppb20
Lozde of all power,geuemeaneloquente anda ther,be of goodcheare,thou Halte not bye : Foz
leafaunte {peachinmp mouthbefozetheLton ourecommaundemente toucheth the comons g
urne bps bert intbebateofourcecnempeg,to notthe.Comenpe. And wpth ý bebelde vp bps
deffrop Pim, ¢alluchascontent vnto pim: Wut golden red,andlapdit upon ber necke, and em
delpuer bg wpthtbpnehande,andbelpemethp bzafedherfrendelpe, and fapdetalke wpth me.
hadmapde, which hbaucnodeféce nozpelperbut Chenlapde the: ¥Flawe the DLo:we)as an an
onelp the Lorde, knowelf allthpnges, pwo- gell of God, mp berte was tronbled, foz frare _
tetp J loue notthe glozpeand worthppotthe oftppmatettpeandclearnelle. Worercellente g
Durpgbhteous,and p 4 bate and abborre thebed wonderfüllartethoui DLorde)and thp face is
w ofthe vnepacumncpled, and of all Heathen. full cof mpte. Sut ag the was thusl cakpnge
Chou bnowelle mp neceflptethat Jhate onto bpm, dhe fell dowone aapne fo: fapntnetie
the token ofpzebempnenceand worlhpp which forthe wbpch caule the kpnee was afrapde, a0
‘Abeare bpponmp beade,whattpmeas Jmull all ppsferuauntes comforted ber. :


ewe mp felfe and be ugan that 4 een bk Poke eae AI
OneleaneclotH and 4 wereitn € Tbe coppe ofthe letters of Artharerfes,wberbp he ye:
a ey er eaka Ath bp mp felfe. Thou kno- uoteth chote whpeh be fprite fente forth,


we alto,that {thy bandemapdenpauenotea pa
tenat Amang table and that 4 baue pad no ple te
afureno2 delpte inthe kpnges feafte,p Fbaue pee
not Droncke the wpne of the dpnekeofteringes ina
and that Jtbpbandemapdenbauenoiopelence SAG cog and rulers of thelamelande n
thebapethat J wasbzougbt berber, bntpltbis fucy agiourbpm, bps frendlp Calutacion. Ther
dape,butonelpeintheLorde. OthouGodol hemanye that for the fondape frpndefbpppes g
Abzabam,D thoumyghtye Godaboueall,be benpfptes whpche aredpuerlp done wnto then
ave the vopce of them.that baue none other boo fo: thep: wo 2(bppps be euer thc moze proude au
pe,and delpuct vs oute of theanDe ofthe wpe: hye mpnded,and yndertake not onelpe to burte
ted and delpuer me oute of mp Feare. _ theyz fubiectes ( fo2 plenteous benptptes mape
« EP ano nomics rhb Ns tbeRpnge ard tbey not esha Gees ; ee nee
ake inter ‘ber peoplesand Geperfourmerh bes. TCAGaynfee thole that dothem good, andtake
a = alee pad in EN a not onetpeall vnthanckefulnefeawape from
: re g AtDochevs allo bad Eber gooin: men)butinprpdeand pectumpeyen ( asthepý `
i ay Ontothebpnge, epzapeforberpeo be pnmpndefulland vnthanckfull foz the good
ple,and fo? bercountrpe. Remem= deades)they


sag Pe Greateking Artharerles, which g
A rapgneth from jndiawnt o Ethiopi
24) 3 Uer an Dundzed and feuern etwe-
gva tpe landeg, fendetbe vntothe pn-


Ao deftate, how thou wat nozp ved dn mentebateth and punpietbe all wyeisednefie :
der mp bande: ffopA bychignertevnto Ft happeneth ofteal otbat they whpche be fet


two bandemapdes wth ber : 4 fheonethe `  Howeigitpofptableg good, Pwr take
leaned er felfe agone $ wastender : tbe other pede, make fearch therafter,econfider,not onlp


 folowed ppened Dnto vg of old: but f ham
Theb adi {t,¢nopfome thpnges, tbatthede-
loured. ier f bptpes baue nowe taken tn bande before our ep
fulland am es, and therbp to beware intpme to come,p we
for greatefeare. & | pe make the spngoome qup and peaceable
doo: Sand oode befozet Fozall men:and ý we mpabtelometyme dawe
fat bpon tbethzoneof bys „€ wag itto achaunge:and as fo2 thetbpna tbatnowe
clothed inbps goodlyearape,al of gold presente befoze oureepeg to wpthftande it,¢


. topth ppecpous ones, and be wag verve terp. fö pit i Downe, after the mool frenvip Wabi
~ i | Wat


k


“a


fT Wypliedome


Ubat tpme nowwe ag Aman, the fonne of

Amadathu the Macedonian a lraunger vere

Ipe of the Perlpans blonde, and farre from our

E goodnefe)wascomeinamongvgaganaleant
| and bad optapned the frendethpppe that webe
ate towarde all the people, fo that be was cal-
led oure fatper ‘and bad inbpabe bonoure ofe-
uerp mân, as thenerte and pzpncpall wnto the
Bpuge,be could not fozbeare ppm felfe frombts

p2pde,bath bndertaken,not onel
of the kyngedome,but of oure pte. = |

Wprpmanpfolded plceate alfo hath bede:

fpredtodeltroye Dardocheus oure helper and


preleruer,wbhych path done bs good inalltbpn |


ges:and innocente Ether thelpke partaker of
oure Kpngebome, vopth all ber people. Foz bp
mpnde was wpen bebad taken them ante of
` wape, and robbed vs of them) bp thps meanes
totranflate the bpnqdome of the Bercpans bn
totbem of Macedonia , but we fyndetbat the
Sewes(wbpche were accules of the wpcked,p
_ thepmpagbtebe deftroped) arenoeuell doers ,
but bfe relonable and rpg be Lawes, and f thep
be thechylodzen of the moolte byahlyupng Ged
bp whome the Bpngedome of vs and our proge
enpfoures paue bene well o2d2¢0 betberto.
Uli berefoze,as fo2 the letters and commaunde-
mentes that were put foztbe bp Aman the fone
neofAmabdathu , pethallbo well , pfpepolde
j them of none efecte-fo2 be that fettbembpand
x inuented them , bangeth at Sulig before t
pee allbps bpnred:and God, (wobpebe
atb pr tt inbps power) bathrewarded
bpm after ppg deferupnge. |
5 And vponthbps pe thall publpipe and fet
vp thecoppe of thys letter inall places,tbat the
Jewes mape frelpeand wptboute bpndzaunce
bold thembelues after thep2 owne Fatutes and
that thepmape be helped and p bpon the thze g
fweutye Dave of the tweluemoneth Adar, thep
mape be aduenged of them, whpcbe inthe tpme
of thep2 anqupthe and trouble, wolde bane op-
prelledthem. jfo2 the God that gouerneth all
thpnges, bath turned to iope the dape, wherein
the cbofen people Mulde bane perpiped .
{ozcouer, amonge the byabe folempne
dapes that pe thal baue,pe hall bolde thys allo
| wptball gladneffe,thatnowe and intpmetoco
me this Dapemape bearememb2aunce ta good
fo2 all fuche as louethe profperptye of the Der-
ipang: but aremembzaunce ofdefEruccponto
thole that befedpcpous Dnto vg.
|a Allcptpesand landes that do not this, Hal hoz
| tpblpe proe and be defroped wptp
the wearde andfpze and thal
notonelpebe nomoze inba-
byted of më, bnt be ab
bozred alfo of the &
| wplde bea-
H ies and foules.


— Cheendeokthereatt of


the booke of Ether,


a ~ a =
i &
it


F


eforobbevs ig


“ pniteluch as put


—.  Koltthj,
The booke of
Pon


Chit e we ot Ghee to earch andénquireatter God,any
who be thofe that fpavehpm. eth: bolp cho. Moe augue
Co fipe Froth bakbptpng and mutmurpnge.€ce


Jaq Dret poureateccion bponrp. X
Ni gbteoulnefe pep be Judges,
a W Of the earth. Iaue a good opp
| Npon of the Lozbe, ¢ teke bpm
A CN & Hebel th piat Foz
D SAF & be wpllbe found oftbemthat
7 da tempte bimnot and appereth
thep2truftin bim. Æg foz frons
ard theughtes,thep leperat from God: but beg
tue(ific be alowed )refourmeth the vnwpfe.
And whprropledome hall not enter into afro.
Warde loule,noz dwell tn the boop pis fubdued
bntofpnne. o? the bolp Ghooft abbozrethfap -
ned nurtour,and wpthdrarweth pym elfe from
thetboughtes ý are wpthout bnietãdpnge g
were wpckednefle bath the bpperbande,be ip
eth from thence,fo2 the (prete of wyldome ig lo
uphge, Tentle ¢ qracpous,¢ wpll baueno plea-
fure inbpmý Cpeaketh enell woptp pps lpppes.
Jo: God (sa wptnes of bpsraynes,atruefear
cher out of pps bert, ¢ an bearer of bis tong. foz
the lpzete of $ Lode fplleth the round compatie
of gon wedi thefamep vpboldeth al tbpy 5
ges bath knowlege alfoof the vopce
Therefore, bethat (peaketb ynerpghteous
thpnges,cannot be bpd:nepther mapepe elcape
the iudgement of repzofe.And why-inqupipep:
on fhalbe made Foz the thougbtes of the ngote
ipe,and the repozte of bys wo:des thal come on
to Sod,fotbhat thp bed A led ea
ibed. Eor the careo ncibuize beara alltbhpns
pee ad the nopfe of the grudapnges pall not
ebpd: Cherefore bewareot murmerpnee,
wbpch ig nothynge wezth:and refrayne poure
tunge from flaunder. Fo: there is no wozcke fo
darcke and fecrete,that it (all go fo: nou bte,
g the mouth that (peaketh lpes.fapeth ffoute.
D fekenot pour owne death in theerrour
of pourelpfe:deftrope not pourfelues thozowe
the wo2ckes of poutcownebandes . Ho: Gov E
Bip deen oma shepther Dathe be plealure
nthe Deflruccpon of the lpupng.sfo2 becreated
allthbpnges.p they mpabte bane thep2 bepnge:
pea,althe people of the earth bath be madethat
tbep Hulde baue bealth,p there Mulde be no de:
ffruccpontnthent , and that the pte Stee of
Hell hulde not be vpon earth( for epabteoutnes
is enerlaftpnge and fmmoztall.but bnepabeeo:
ufnetle bepngeth death.) Meuertheleffe, the Yna
gobdlpe call ber unto them both wpth worded
and tworckes:and wbple they tbpneke to bauea
frende of per thep come to nougbte: For the wn
goblpethatare confederate wpth ber and take
ber parte,are woztbpe of death. -
The.tt. Chapter .
Ddd fi


a


he pia gy-


fT Wypliedome


Ubat tpme nowwe ag Aman, the fonne of

Amadathu the Macedonian a lraunger vere

Ipe of the Perlpans blonde, and farre from our

E goodnefe)wascomeinamongvgaganaleant
| and bad optapned the frendethpppe that webe
ate towarde all the people, fo that be was cal-
led oure fatper ‘and bad inbpabe bonoure ofe-
uerp mân, as thenerte and pzpncpall wnto the
Bpuge,be could not fozbeare ppm felfe frombts

p2pde,bath bndertaken,not onel
of the kyngedome,but of oure pte. = |

Wprpmanpfolded plceate alfo hath bede:

fpredtodeltroye Dardocheus oure helper and


preleruer,wbhych path done bs good inalltbpn |


ges:and innocente Ether thelpke partaker of
oure Kpngebome, vopth all ber people. Foz bp
mpnde was wpen bebad taken them ante of
` wape, and robbed vs of them) bp thps meanes
totranflate the bpnqdome of the Bercpans bn
totbem of Macedonia , but we fyndetbat the
Sewes(wbpche were accules of the wpcked,p
_ thepmpagbtebe deftroped) arenoeuell doers ,
but bfe relonable and rpg be Lawes, and f thep
be thechylodzen of the moolte byahlyupng Ged
bp whome the Bpngedome of vs and our proge
enpfoures paue bene well o2d2¢0 betberto.
Uli berefoze,as fo2 the letters and commaunde-
mentes that were put foztbe bp Aman the fone
neofAmabdathu , pethallbo well , pfpepolde
j them of none efecte-fo2 be that fettbembpand
x inuented them , bangeth at Sulig before t
pee allbps bpnred:and God, (wobpebe
atb pr tt inbps power) bathrewarded
bpm after ppg deferupnge. |
5 And vponthbps pe thall publpipe and fet
vp thecoppe of thys letter inall places,tbat the
Jewes mape frelpeand wptboute bpndzaunce
bold thembelues after thep2 owne Fatutes and
that thepmape be helped and p bpon the thze g
fweutye Dave of the tweluemoneth Adar, thep
mape be aduenged of them, whpcbe inthe tpme
of thep2 anqupthe and trouble, wolde bane op-
prelledthem. jfo2 the God that gouerneth all
thpnges, bath turned to iope the dape, wherein
the cbofen people Mulde bane perpiped .
{ozcouer, amonge the byabe folempne
dapes that pe thal baue,pe hall bolde thys allo
| wptball gladneffe,thatnowe and intpmetoco
me this Dapemape bearememb2aunce ta good
fo2 all fuche as louethe profperptye of the Der-
ipang: but aremembzaunce ofdefEruccponto
thole that befedpcpous Dnto vg.
|a Allcptpesand landes that do not this, Hal hoz
| tpblpe proe and be defroped wptp
the wearde andfpze and thal
notonelpebe nomoze inba-
byted of më, bnt be ab
bozred alfo of the &
| wplde bea-
H ies and foules.


— Cheendeokthereatt of


the booke of Ether,


a ~ a =
i &
it


F


eforobbevs ig


“ pniteluch as put


—.  Koltthj,
The booke of
Pon


Chit e we ot Ghee to earch andénquireatter God,any
who be thofe that fpavehpm. eth: bolp cho. Moe augue
Co fipe Froth bakbptpng and mutmurpnge.€ce


Jaq Dret poureateccion bponrp. X
Ni gbteoulnefe pep be Judges,
a W Of the earth. Iaue a good opp
| Npon of the Lozbe, ¢ teke bpm
A CN & Hebel th piat Foz
D SAF & be wpllbe found oftbemthat
7 da tempte bimnot and appereth
thep2truftin bim. Æg foz frons
ard theughtes,thep leperat from God: but beg
tue(ific be alowed )refourmeth the vnwpfe.
And whprropledome hall not enter into afro.
Warde loule,noz dwell tn the boop pis fubdued
bntofpnne. o? the bolp Ghooft abbozrethfap -
ned nurtour,and wpthdrarweth pym elfe from
thetboughtes ý are wpthout bnietãdpnge g
were wpckednefle bath the bpperbande,be ip
eth from thence,fo2 the (prete of wyldome ig lo
uphge, Tentle ¢ qracpous,¢ wpll baueno plea-
fure inbpmý Cpeaketh enell woptp pps lpppes.
Jo: God (sa wptnes of bpsraynes,atruefear
cher out of pps bert, ¢ an bearer of bis tong. foz
the lpzete of $ Lode fplleth the round compatie
of gon wedi thefamep vpboldeth al tbpy 5
ges bath knowlege alfoof the vopce
Therefore, bethat (peaketb ynerpghteous
thpnges,cannot be bpd:nepther mapepe elcape
the iudgement of repzofe.And why-inqupipep:
on fhalbe made Foz the thougbtes of the ngote
ipe,and the repozte of bys wo:des thal come on
to Sod,fotbhat thp bed A led ea
ibed. Eor the careo ncibuize beara alltbhpns
pee ad the nopfe of the grudapnges pall not
ebpd: Cherefore bewareot murmerpnee,
wbpch ig nothynge wezth:and refrayne poure
tunge from flaunder. Fo: there is no wozcke fo
darcke and fecrete,that it (all go fo: nou bte,
g the mouth that (peaketh lpes.fapeth ffoute.
D fekenot pour owne death in theerrour
of pourelpfe:deftrope not pourfelues thozowe
the wo2ckes of poutcownebandes . Ho: Gov E
Bip deen oma shepther Dathe be plealure
nthe Deflruccpon of the lpupng.sfo2 becreated
allthbpnges.p they mpabte bane thep2 bepnge:
pea,althe people of the earth bath be madethat
tbep Hulde baue bealth,p there Mulde be no de:
ffruccpontnthent , and that the pte Stee of
Hell hulde not be vpon earth( for epabteoutnes
is enerlaftpnge and fmmoztall.but bnepabeeo:
ufnetle bepngeth death.) Meuertheleffe, the Yna
gobdlpe call ber unto them both wpth worded
and tworckes:and wbple they tbpneke to bauea
frende of per thep come to nougbte: For the wn
goblpethatare confederate wpth ber and take
ber parte,are woztbpe of death. -
The.tt. Chapter .
Ddd fi


a


he pia gy-


Cie vooke


erm cpome and defpies of (be wicked, and.

See ers ie agapnite the tapebtull.
mmm D2 the bugodlpe talke and pma-
sig st Me gyn thus amonge themfelues(but
Maara not rpgbt:) Ehetpme of oure Ipfe
tAE R +X íg but Mote g tedpoug: and when
Lab. KA ama ts once gone, be bath nomoze
loyendzpleature.netber knotwe weanp manP
turnetbagayne from Deatb:fo2 weare bogne of
nougbt,¢ we thalbe berafter ag though we bad
neuer bene.f€o2 our breath igas fpokrin oure
noftrels,* the wo2des as alparke to


i) a
1


quenched, ¢ curefoule Hal vanpihe as the foft
ayze.Dure lpfe (pal pale away as the trace ofa
cloude ¢ccmetonaughbt as the mpi pis dapuen
awape with tbe beames ofthe ounne,and put
bowne wpth the beate thereof. Dure name allo
albe forgotten by pele aie Iptle, and no man
{pall baue oure wozckes inrememb2aunice.
Joz ouretpmieis a berpe Matowe p paf-
fefh awape:and aftér oureende thereignoretur
npnoge,fo2 itis fat Cealed:fo p no man commeth
agayne.€ ome on therfoze,let bs eniope tbe ple
aluresp there are, andlet vs Cone ble thecrea=
turelpkeag tnpouth. Let vg fpll oure Celues wd
good wyne and opntmente,é let thereno foure
ofthetpme goby vs. Let vs crovwne our felnes
wpth roles afozetbep be wethered. Let there be
no fapze medowe, but oure lute qo thozowett.
Eet euerp one of pou bepartaber of oure bolup
teoufnefle. Let vs euefome token of our plea-
furetitenerp eee is oure pozcpon,els get
we notbpng.Let bs oppzefle the poozerpabtco
ug,let bs not (pare the wpabowe noz olde man
letts not reqarde the beades $ are grap forane
Let f lawe of vncpgbteoutneficbe oure auctho
rpte,fo2 the ebpnige fs Feble ignotbpng wo2th
Therefore let ve defraude therpabteous : and
wobp/bets not foz oure profpte:pea, Detscleane
contrarpetoouredopnges. Hechecketh vs foz
offendpnaeagapnitethelawe , and flaundzeth
peas tran(greffoures of allnurtoure. Hema-
keth bps boofte tobaue the knowlege of God:
pea becalleth bpmitelfe gods fonne. He ig thebe
go2aper of our thoughees: J greurth vs alfoto
looke bpon bpm , foz bys lyfe is not lpke other
meng bps wapesare of another fathpon. Heco
unteth vs but bapne perfons,be wpthozaweth
bpm felfe from oure wapes as from fplthpnes
be Ea merb hea bont the latter ende of the
fuff,and maketh bpsbook $ Gobis bys father
Let voletben pl bps wozdes be true, let ws p20:
ue what endebe (Pall baue. stor pf be be thetrue
fonne of God,be wll receaue bym:and delpuer
bpm from tbebandeg of bysenempes. Let vs
erampn bpm wrth dplpptefull rebuke andto:
WD mentpnge, tbat we mape knowe bps dpgnytpe
and pone bis pacpence.Let bs condempne bint
wyth moot hamfull death:foz lyke as be path
(poken, fo pall bebe rewarded. i
Suche topnges do the bngodlye pmagin
and goo aAltrape , foz thep2 owne wpckedneffe
bath bipnded them. As Foz $ mpfterpes of God
thep onderfEande them not:thep neptber Doope


moueoure S
bert. Ag foz our body. it balbe verp alpes p are NY IED


foz the reward of rpgbteoutnetfe,t02 regarde f
wozthpp p bolp Coules thall paue. Lo God cere"
ated man tobe yndeltroped:pea, alter px pma:


theleffe,thozowe enup of the deuell,camedeath
into the wo2lde:and thep that poldcof pps tpbe
do agbedoth. g

€ The.tti. Chapter.


KO GBS) thepz ende is taken Foz verp de"
= ffruccpon. The wape of the rp-
gbteous is tubged tobe btterdetruccpon, but
thepareinrefte. And though thep tuffer payne
befoze men, pet is thep2 boope ful of immoztalp
tpe. Thep are punpibed but in fewe thynges,
neuertbelefle , tnmanpe thpnges thall thep be
well rewarded. Eo: God proueth them, and fin
beth them mete for bpm lelfe:pea, as the golde
fnthefoznace Doth bhetrpe thea: anDreceaueth
them as a burncteofferpnae,and when tbe tyme
commeth.thep halbe loked bpon.


ge of bps ownelpkenefle made be bpm euer: G


Prota i oy are in the band of od, and the


Cherpabteous pall Hpne as thelparkes 25


thatrunne thozowe the red butbe . Thep Mall
Judge thenacpons , and baue Dompnpon ouer
the people,and thep2 Lozbe (hal rapqnefoz ever
Thep that put thepz trute inbpm, (pall ynder-
tande the truth and fuche as be faptbfull,wpll
agre puto ppm inloue:fo2 bps chofen thal paue
gpftes and peace. Sut the vngodlpe Halbe pu-
npthed accozbpng to thep2 pmagp nae ong, for
thep bauc dilpifen f righteoug:4 fozfakë f loz.

whoflo oplppleth wifedome and nurtour


be is vnbapppe:and as fo: the boope of Cuche, it C


ig but bapne: thepz laboures wnfrutefull, and
thep2 worckes Te Lir winesare
pndpicrete, and’ thep2cbpldzen mooffe bngod-
lipe. Thep: creaturets curled. Wiefledis rather
the barren and bndefpled, wppch bath not kno-
wne the fpnfull bed: the Wall haue fruptein tbe
rewardofthebolpfoules. AndDlefledis the
gelded, whpc he wpth bps bandeg Dathe wzou-

bteno vurpabteoutnefle,no2 imagpned wpe-
ked thpnges agapnite God.ffo2 puto bpm (hal
be geuen the {pecpall gpfte of fapth,* the motte
acceptablepozcponintbetempleofGod. Fo?


/ ù


glozpóus is the frupteofqood laboure, andthe D


roote of wpiecdome (hall neuer fade awape.

24.8 fo2 the chpldzen of aduonterers, thep
(pall come toan ende and the feed of an vurpg
t cons bedd (halberooted out. And though thep
lpuclong,pet hall they be notbpngereqarded,
g tbep: late age (albe wpthoute bonoure PE
thep dpe baltelp they Daue no bope nether thal
thep be lpoken to inthedapeofknowlege. oz
poprible is the death ¢ ende of the bnriqbteous.

€ The.titi. Chapter.
€ Ol che chatte gencracpor of the fapthfull,ant of


thers €elpcpte. pe the death oftherpghteous,antet
thecontempnacion ofthe bufapthful, —
- Dbhowe


titi.b


==


= ok-


Er a ad ii


Cie vooke


erm cpome and defpies of (be wicked, and.

See ers ie agapnite the tapebtull.
mmm D2 the bugodlpe talke and pma-
sig st Me gyn thus amonge themfelues(but
Maara not rpgbt:) Ehetpme of oure Ipfe
tAE R +X íg but Mote g tedpoug: and when
Lab. KA ama ts once gone, be bath nomoze
loyendzpleature.netber knotwe weanp manP
turnetbagayne from Deatb:fo2 weare bogne of
nougbt,¢ we thalbe berafter ag though we bad
neuer bene.f€o2 our breath igas fpokrin oure
noftrels,* the wo2des as alparke to


i) a
1


quenched, ¢ curefoule Hal vanpihe as the foft
ayze.Dure lpfe (pal pale away as the trace ofa
cloude ¢ccmetonaughbt as the mpi pis dapuen
awape with tbe beames ofthe ounne,and put
bowne wpth the beate thereof. Dure name allo
albe forgotten by pele aie Iptle, and no man
{pall baue oure wozckes inrememb2aunice.
Joz ouretpmieis a berpe Matowe p paf-
fefh awape:and aftér oureende thereignoretur
npnoge,fo2 itis fat Cealed:fo p no man commeth
agayne.€ ome on therfoze,let bs eniope tbe ple
aluresp there are, andlet vs Cone ble thecrea=
turelpkeag tnpouth. Let vg fpll oure Celues wd
good wyne and opntmente,é let thereno foure
ofthetpme goby vs. Let vs crovwne our felnes
wpth roles afozetbep be wethered. Let there be
no fapze medowe, but oure lute qo thozowett.
Eet euerp one of pou bepartaber of oure bolup
teoufnefle. Let vs euefome token of our plea-
furetitenerp eee is oure pozcpon,els get
we notbpng.Let bs oppzefle the poozerpabtco
ug,let bs not (pare the wpabowe noz olde man
letts not reqarde the beades $ are grap forane
Let f lawe of vncpgbteoutneficbe oure auctho
rpte,fo2 the ebpnige fs Feble ignotbpng wo2th
Therefore let ve defraude therpabteous : and
wobp/bets not foz oure profpte:pea, Detscleane
contrarpetoouredopnges. Hechecketh vs foz
offendpnaeagapnitethelawe , and flaundzeth
peas tran(greffoures of allnurtoure. Hema-
keth bps boofte tobaue the knowlege of God:
pea becalleth bpmitelfe gods fonne. He ig thebe
go2aper of our thoughees: J greurth vs alfoto
looke bpon bpm , foz bys lyfe is not lpke other
meng bps wapesare of another fathpon. Heco
unteth vs but bapne perfons,be wpthozaweth
bpm felfe from oure wapes as from fplthpnes
be Ea merb hea bont the latter ende of the
fuff,and maketh bpsbook $ Gobis bys father
Let voletben pl bps wozdes be true, let ws p20:
ue what endebe (Pall baue. stor pf be be thetrue
fonne of God,be wll receaue bym:and delpuer
bpm from tbebandeg of bysenempes. Let vs
erampn bpm wrth dplpptefull rebuke andto:
WD mentpnge, tbat we mape knowe bps dpgnytpe
and pone bis pacpence.Let bs condempne bint
wyth moot hamfull death:foz lyke as be path
(poken, fo pall bebe rewarded. i
Suche topnges do the bngodlye pmagin
and goo aAltrape , foz thep2 owne wpckedneffe
bath bipnded them. As Foz $ mpfterpes of God
thep onderfEande them not:thep neptber Doope


moueoure S
bert. Ag foz our body. it balbe verp alpes p are NY IED


foz the reward of rpgbteoutnetfe,t02 regarde f
wozthpp p bolp Coules thall paue. Lo God cere"
ated man tobe yndeltroped:pea, alter px pma:


theleffe,thozowe enup of the deuell,camedeath
into the wo2lde:and thep that poldcof pps tpbe
do agbedoth. g

€ The.tti. Chapter.


KO GBS) thepz ende is taken Foz verp de"
= ffruccpon. The wape of the rp-
gbteous is tubged tobe btterdetruccpon, but
thepareinrefte. And though thep tuffer payne
befoze men, pet is thep2 boope ful of immoztalp
tpe. Thep are punpibed but in fewe thynges,
neuertbelefle , tnmanpe thpnges thall thep be
well rewarded. Eo: God proueth them, and fin
beth them mete for bpm lelfe:pea, as the golde
fnthefoznace Doth bhetrpe thea: anDreceaueth
them as a burncteofferpnae,and when tbe tyme
commeth.thep halbe loked bpon.


ge of bps ownelpkenefle made be bpm euer: G


Prota i oy are in the band of od, and the


Cherpabteous pall Hpne as thelparkes 25


thatrunne thozowe the red butbe . Thep Mall
Judge thenacpons , and baue Dompnpon ouer
the people,and thep2 Lozbe (hal rapqnefoz ever
Thep that put thepz trute inbpm, (pall ynder-
tande the truth and fuche as be faptbfull,wpll
agre puto ppm inloue:fo2 bps chofen thal paue
gpftes and peace. Sut the vngodlpe Halbe pu-
npthed accozbpng to thep2 pmagp nae ong, for
thep bauc dilpifen f righteoug:4 fozfakë f loz.

whoflo oplppleth wifedome and nurtour


be is vnbapppe:and as fo: the boope of Cuche, it C


ig but bapne: thepz laboures wnfrutefull, and
thep2 worckes Te Lir winesare
pndpicrete, and’ thep2cbpldzen mooffe bngod-
lipe. Thep: creaturets curled. Wiefledis rather
the barren and bndefpled, wppch bath not kno-
wne the fpnfull bed: the Wall haue fruptein tbe
rewardofthebolpfoules. AndDlefledis the
gelded, whpc he wpth bps bandeg Dathe wzou-

bteno vurpabteoutnefle,no2 imagpned wpe-
ked thpnges agapnite God.ffo2 puto bpm (hal
be geuen the {pecpall gpfte of fapth,* the motte
acceptablepozcponintbetempleofGod. Fo?


/ ù


glozpóus is the frupteofqood laboure, andthe D


roote of wpiecdome (hall neuer fade awape.

24.8 fo2 the chpldzen of aduonterers, thep
(pall come toan ende and the feed of an vurpg
t cons bedd (halberooted out. And though thep
lpuclong,pet hall they be notbpngereqarded,
g tbep: late age (albe wpthoute bonoure PE
thep dpe baltelp they Daue no bope nether thal
thep be lpoken to inthedapeofknowlege. oz
poprible is the death ¢ ende of the bnriqbteous.

€ The.titi. Chapter.
€ Ol che chatte gencracpor of the fapthfull,ant of


thers €elpcpte. pe the death oftherpghteous,antet
thecontempnacion ofthe bufapthful, —
- Dbhowe


titi.b


==


= ok-


Er a ad ii


“


Rie owe fapre ig acbafte ancracp
Cf eons) On topth vertuer Che memozp=


N (agave D all chercot fg tmmogtall,foz tt ts


Eyes È Haben ft fo pretente,mentake ex
Aoa ample therat, and pfita awap
(pre tt. Jt is alwap crowned and hol


pet thep de


- Denin ponoure,and winneth the réwarde of the


bndefpled battaple. Wut the multitude of wn-
govlp “oplbpen ig bnp2ofitable:¢ the thypngesp
are planted w whozedome Wall take Wp Depero
te,no2lape aup fat foundacton. Ehoughe thep


beqrene tn branches For ageme pet toep hal b


be baken the wpnd:fo2 thép and not falt,
aE: pebemecp of p wpndethep albero
ted out. foz p onperfect bzaücheg albe broke
thep2frute albe vnpzofptable g lawer tocat:


; pena foznotbpng. and whpr al thechplozé


arebozme of p wpcked, mult bearerecozbe of ý
wpckednelle agapnite thep2 Fathers ¢ mothers
when tbep be alked. Hut thoughe there gpteo-
us be overtaken Death, pet pall bebe inrelte

Age igan honourable thyng: neuertheleg


25 it Fandyth not onelpe inthe length oftpme, no:


eur, Bc


intbemultptnde of peareg:but a mans wpledo
me is the rave heare, andan Dndefpled lpfcis
the oldeage, He pleated God, and was beloued
of ppm: fo that where as be lpued amonge fpn-
ners, be tranilated bym.*P ca, fodenlpe was be
taken iwape, totbeintente that wpckedneffe
fhuldenot alterbypsvuderftandpg and that pp-
pocrpfpe (puldenotbeqplehpstonle. forthe
craftpebewyptchpnge ot lpes make qooathpn-
ges darke the wnitedfattnele alfo and wpcked
nele of volupteousdefpze, turne alpde tie Vn-
derlandpnge ofthelymple. Choug pewa
Coone dead, pet fulfplled he much tpme.JFo: bis
foule pleated God : therefoze baked beto take
bp aipay from amionge wicked bps $ peo
ple le g onder kande it rot:thep lap not bp luc
thpnges intpep? bertegs:bowe that the loupnge
fauoure and mercpe of God ig wpon bps lapn-
ctes and that be bath refpecte onto bys chofen.

Chustherpahteous that ig deade,condemp


C neth the bngodlp whypche arelpuynge: andthe


pouth that ts foone bzougbtetoanende tbe lon
gelpfe of the Dnrvgbtcous.ffo2thep fe tbe ende
of ý wple, but they vnderikande not what Gob
pap Deupled for bpm, and wherefozethe Lorde

ath taken bpm awape. and why: thep fe bpm
and Dplpple bpm, therfore hal Eod alfo lan gü
themtolcozne: 20 that thepthemfelurs all
bye beareafter(but wpthoute bonoure)pea. in
fhameamonge thedeadefozenermoare. fo2
wpthoute anpe vopce thall be burte thole that
be pufte vp, and remoue them from the founda«


cpons,fotbat thep thalbe lapde walte wnto the p


bpabefe. Thep hall mourne,andthep2 memo:
tpall pall perpe . Sotbhep bepnee afrapoe,
Hallremember thep2 fpnnes: andthep2 owse
wpckedneffe hall bewzape them.

The.v. Chapter,


'C The confauntne le of rpshteous belope thepspertecuz
tera. Zhe hope ofthe bufapthfull is a TARD bapur,
Se dlelennele ot the fapnctes and gopipe,


tel Mie hd


ay A knowen wpth God ewitbmen bey


fama ey en thal the tra +

KEN Eat Ceabdfaltencile agapnitefucheas

Raa Dane dealt extreamelp vd then ta=
Y, wee Genawapetbepzlaboures. ipen

ssas they {eit,thep albe vered with bo


inthe wape of wyckednefie and deftruccyon.
‘Tedpous wapes haue we gone : but agfortpe


WapeottheLodewebauenotknownelt. 6


Ubat good hath oure pryd done bnto tg’
2 what profpte bath the pompe of richefle b20
ugbte ver All thole thpnaes arc pafled awape
ipke a Hadowe,¢ ag a meflengerrunnpnee be-
foze:a8 a (byppe that pafietp ouer the wanes of
the water. wobych whenit is goneby, the trace
therof cannot be founde,nethes the path of it in


tbe Aoudes.Dzag a bpzde that Apeth thozowe-


intbeap:e gno mancante anp token where he
is Rowen, but onelp pearetbhe nople of ber wpun
ues beatpnge p lyabt wpnde,partpnge the ap:
rethorowe the bebemencp of bergopnae,¢ fips
eth on aking ber wiges.robereag afterward
no token of ber wape can be founde.D2 Ipkeag
WHE an aroweis thot at amarke it parteth f ap
er, wbich fmmedpatly commeth together agap
ne,fo $ amancan not knowe where tt went the
rowe. Cuen fo nowe inlpke maner as f{oone ag
we were bo2ne, beganne tmmedpatly to drawe
to ore ende,and Daue (hewedno tokenof urre
tue, but arecontumed in ousewwne wyckedneffe

Suche wozdes thall thep that hauelpn=
ned fpeake inthe Dell : foz tbe boope of the wn-
gadlpe islpkeadpe Thptle floure(ozdufke)


that isblowneawaye wpth the wphde :Ipkea D


tbpnefcome that ig fcatered abzoade wrth the
tome, lpkeasthe fmooke whpcheisdifperted
beare and there wpeh the wpnor and asthe ree
membzaunce of a fraunger,that tarpethe fo2 a
Dape,andtbendeparteth. Wut therpabteoug
mall N foz enermoare: thep2 rewardealfoig
with the Lo:de:and thep2 remembzaunce with
theyabelte.. Therefore (hall thep receauca
glozpous kyngedome anda heel Ge crows
neot the Lozdes bande : for wythbysrpabte
ande pall be coner them:and wth bys owne
olpe arme, pall be defende them bps geloulpe
alfo (pall take awape the barneffe, and be tall
weapon the cretaucto be ae! oe ofp oane

es. Hethal putoneyabteoutnelie fora bre
pee and take ture Judgemente in teade of an
elmete. Che tnupnepble Hyplde of equypte thall
He take, bys cruell wratbe Hall be Harpen toz
alpeare,and the Mopole oo aged of the wolde,
bo ut ipali frahe


Fedtig hand in gis A


2 eee


a | OY VOU


ben hall the thonderboltes go oute of f
n ont ofthe rapqne bowe


i D all foghte wwpthbpm agapnite the vnwpfe.


of 6 cloudes to the place appopnted:out of f bar
be ffonp indDpqnacpon,there thal fal thpcke pap:
les, ¢ the water of the fee Halbe woth agapntt
them, €fbefloudes Mall runne rongblpetoge-
ther.Pca,a mpabty wopnde thal ftandebp agap
init them, a o2me Mall fcater them a b2oade.
Thus p vurighteous dealing of them thal brin-
ge r a toa arende ae hita en
(ball ouerthzowe the diwellpnges of ý mpabtpe
| The. bi. Chapter.
The callpnge of kpages, Princes and Juvges:whieh
ate allo cpbozteb to earch wptbome.
a Proome is better then Frength, ad
Y by (eon E aman of Dnderftandpnge ts moze
i tee || Bees I woth then onep ts ftronge. Heare
Eo) za, E Cherfo2e(<D pekpnges and wnder=


eect Se ftande:Dlearnepetbatbe Judges | F


of che endes oF the earth. Geue eare pe that rule
the multptudeg and delpteinimuch people. ffo:
ppower is geuë Se of the Loz, ¢ tpe ftrengtb
comtbe Pyabelt:wbycs Mall trpe pour woe.
keg and fearche oute poure pmagpnacpons :
Inowe that pe bepng offpcers of bps kyngdome
pour not erecuted true Judgemente , pane not
epte the lawe of rpgbteoutneffe , noz walked
g after the wpllotf God. Hozrpblpe, andtpatrp=
abte fone (pall be appeare tnta pou:fo2 an bard
fudgemente Hall thep bane that beare tule .
WMercpeisqraunnted yntothe fpmple, but thep
that be tn auctozpte por: toye ant dels . o?
God whpcbis Lozve over all, Mall ercepte nee
mans perfon , nepther wall be Rande tn awe of


anpe mans areatenefle. s€orbebath made tbe


malle greate and careth fo2 alalpke. Mut the
mapabtpe hall bauethelozer punpihemente.

— Gnto pou therfoze(D pekiqes)no F{peake
that pemape learne wpledome,¢ not peau fe
Fo: thep that kepebys tpqbteonfnetic, thalbe
rpabteculpe Judged, and thep that arelearned
in epgbteous thpnges, Wall fynde tomake ans
fwere. iberefoze,tet poure iuit bpon mp wa-
drg and lowe them,fo pall pecome bp nurtoure

(ipledome iga noble thpnge and never
fabctheawape :pea, the iscalelpetene of them
floue ber, and fonnde of fuch as {eke her, the pre
uenteth them p detpze ber $ he mape fp2fte tpe:
we ber felfe vnfothem. Wi bolo awaketh vnto
ber bp deer Daue no greate trauaple, fo:
be thall fpnde ber{pttypngereadpe at bps doeg
‘o thpucke bpon her, is perfect pnderftandpn:
tre:and wobole watcheth fo: ber, malbe fafe: ad
that fone. Fo: he qoeth about, fekpnge fuch ag
are mete fo? ber, eweth ber felfecherfullp Yn
totbenttn thep: qopnges, € meteth them wpth
all bplpgence.sfo2 the onfapned delp2e of refor
macpon is ber begpnupnge:to care for nurtour
íg lone, loune fs the keppng of ber lawes. Row
the keppng of flaw is perfeccpo,eanvucozrupt
ivf:¢anvucorrnpet lpfe maketh aman famplper
wGod. And [o p delpre of wpledome leadethto
D the kynceDome euerlaffpng. PE poure delptebe
then in ropall feates and fepters( sD pe bpnges


of the people) fet poure Iute bpon wyledome,
that pe mape rapqne fozeuermoze. sD loue the
lpabte of pfedome, all pethat be rulers of the
people. As fo: wpldome, what fhe is and howe
the came vp, 43 wll tell pou :and wpll not bpde
the mp fterpes of God from pou: but wpll feeke
ber oute fromtbe begynnpnge of the natpuptie
and baynge the knowlege of her intolpabte, ab


wWpll not kepe backe the truthe: Peptberwpll .


3 baue todo wpthcontumpnae enupe,fozfuche
aman pall not be partaker of wpledome. Wut
the multptude of the wple, is the welfare of the
wolde, and awple kinge isthe ppbolbpnae of
thepeople. Dreceaucnurtoure then-thozowe
mp Wo20es and it Hall do pou good .
~- C Chbe.vii.chapter. -
EC VNOpledome oughteto be ppefereredatourallthpn gee,
Ta G a SDP felfe am alfoamoztall man,ipke
a &’dagal other,¢am come of the eartope
3 zaigeneracpon of bpm that was fp2ite


modions ees pte of llepe.ti ben J was bo2ne
J receaucd


ces ort


a


C


ee


il


fr Wypleoome,


| ces ofthe Marreg: thenature and kyndes ofbea
fe ies:the furpoulnelie ofbeattes: the power of p
p wprndes:p pmagpnacpés of men:p dpuerlitieg
i of pong plantts: the vertucs of rootes, andall
fiche typnges as ave fecrete and not loked foz,
baue ¥ learned: o0: p worckemafter of all thprt
5 D ges hath taught me wploome. suber isthe ty 2e
| te of bndertandpnge whych is polpe, manptol:
de one onelp,fubtpl,curteous,dilerete,qupcke,
vndetpled,plapne,fwete , loupng that ig good,
arpe, wypche fozbpddeth not todo well, gen-
tple,kpnde, tedfalt,fure,fre,paupnee all vertu
es, Cpacumipcte inall thpnges: receaupnacall
fpy2ptes of ynderffandpnae, beingecleane and
arpe. Fo: wploome is npmbler then allnpm-=
blethbpnges : Me goeth thozowe and attapneth
to all ehpnges.becaufe of ber cleanneffe. ff 02 the
ig the bzeth of the power of God, anda pure cle-
| ane erpzelipnge of theclearnefle of Almpabtpe
> God, Therfoze canno vndefpled thpnge come
‘ unto ber-fo2 the is f bapadteneffe of the enerla-
ftynge labte,p bndefpled mpzroure of the ma:
telfpe of Godandp pmage of bys qoodnefte.
E And foz fo muche asthe is one, the mapedoall
E thpnges,¢ bepnge edfalt ber felfe perenueth
7% all:and among p people conuapeth ber felfe, in=
top bolpefoules. She maketh Gods frendes g
ot apie : fo? God loueth noman,but bpm in
whome wpledome dwelleth. o: the ts moare
| bewtpfull then the Sunne and geueth more lp
ghtethenthe Marreg , and thedapeisnottobe
compared nts her:fo2 pon the dapecommeth
npghet. Wut wpckednefle cannot ouercome wpf
dome:and folptheneffe mape not be wpth ber
 & be. viti.Chapter.
@Pbechectes of twoplepome.
Exe Pledome reacheth frome one ende
(gaa E toanotber mpabtetp and loupnage
H ees | E Elp Doth (he ozderall thpnaes. 3 ba:
SS bz, te loued Her,and laboured fo: ber,
See from mp pouth bp: Jdpd mp
dplpgencetomarpe mp felfe wpth ber,fuchelo=
ue bad F tnto her bewtie.dipolobath thecom
panpe of God commendeth bernobplptype:pea,
‘the Lozbde of all thynges bym felfe loueth ber .
Fo: the ig the tcolemaftreffe of the nourtoure
of God, and the choler onte of bps worckes , VE
aman wolde belpzerpcbefle in thpsipfe, what
igrpcber then wpltome, that worcketh all thin
u ges: Thou wpltefape;: vnderfFandpnee wo
25 ketb. Ubat is it amonge alltbpnges,that woz


T a


—


7 = _——


fue and riabtcoutneffe,let bym laboure fo2 wpf
bome,foz the hath greate bertucs. And wbhp?
fhe teachech foberneffe and prudence, rpabteouf
nefe and Crength,whpcbe are {uch thpnges ag
men can baue nothpng moze ed tr tbeir
Ipfe . Pfa mandelpze muche knowlege,thecan
tell tbe thbpnges $ are pate, and dpleerne thpn-
aes Fo: to come : the knowetbe thelubtpltes of
wo:des, and Can erpounde Datckelentences.
Dhe can tell offokens, €wonderous thpnges
Oz cuerthep come topatle , andthe endes ofall
f times: gages. po J purpoled afterthpsmaner


ketbmoarethben wpledome PEamanloue ver Y


Sols cits,


A Will take her bito mp company atd cone
loupngelp with per:ncdoubte, the thal geneme
good counfaple,¢ {peake comfortably wnto me
nmp carefulnetle ¢ qreefe. Eor ber late Hall y
be well ehoneltly taken amonge the commeng
€lozdes of pcounfaple. Though 3 bepong, pet
bal Jbaue Marpe vndertandpnye, lop F al
be merneloug in p fpgbte of great men,¢ the fa-
ces of pzpneesthall wideratme, when Y bolde
mp tonge,thep ballabpdemp leplure : when F
cake, tbep thal loke bp mé, ¥if J talke much
tbep pal lape tþep: bandes vpothep2 month.
ozeouer , bp the meanes of pery pall
obtapneimmoztalpte, andleaue bebynd me ar
cuerlaftpnae Stace edt them that cos
me after me. F pall fet the people inorder, and
thenacpous thalbefubbdued vnto me. Hozrphle
tprauntes albe afrapde when thep do but be-
ave of me,amonge the multptude Y albecoun
fed good, and mpabtpe inbattaple. ben F co:
mie heme , Ball fpnde refte wpth per:fo bee
companpe Dati no bptterneffe, and ber felowe-


(buld bauexdomypnpon ouer thecreature which Seuects


execute tudgemerte rf dp deta So me
cate, a0

put me not oute from amongethp E RAA: foz
Oemapden


ple, the tudge of thy onnes and daughters.
Thou balk commaundedmetobupld å tf:
ple bpon thp bolp mount,¢ analter inthecptpe
whertn thou dwellek:a lickenefle of thy holy ta
bernacle whych thou batt prepared from the be
Fpunpnge,and thp wploome wpth the, whpe
_ Woo tit b&nokwet


|
|


CYC OOOKE


yg knoweth thp worked which alfo was with the,


when tbou madeft the world, and knewe what
Was acceptable intbplpghte, and righte in thp
commaundementes.D lende per oute of thy bo
en eng and from tbe thzone of thp mateftpe
that the map be wpth me, laboure wpth me:p
J mape knowe what is acceptable in thy (pabe
Fo: (he knowethandynderftandeth al thinges:
and fhe pal leade nie foberlpe in mp wo2ckes,¢
peeteene me inber power .So hall mp workes
e acceptable, then {pall 3 qouonrne thy peo-
pletpabteonfipe,¢ be worthyetofptinmyp fa-
thers (cate. Eo: what mantis be that mape ino
we tie counfaple of God: D2 whocan thpucke
what the wpll of God is/ffo2 the thougbtes of
€ mo:tall men are melurable, gour fozecaltes are
but yncertapne. And whp: a moztall econp:
tpble bodpe is beupe bnto the foule, the earth
ipe manfton kepeth Downe that bnderTanding
that mufeth bpon manp thpnges. Ulerpe bard=
lpe canne We decerne the thinges that are ppon
eartbe,¢ qreate laboure baue we, 02 wecan fpr
be the thbpnges whiche are before our epes:who
wrylitbenleke oute the qrounde of the thpnges
par doneinbeanenr Db Lorde who canbaue
nowlege of thy tnòertandpynge ¢meanpnge
ercepte thou geuc bpm wpldome,stendethp ho
lye chooft from aboues that the wapes of them
whichare bpon earth,mape be refourmed: that
men mape learne the thypnges fare pleafaunte
Ynto the,and be prelerued thozowe wpfedome.
@ Che.r.Chapter.

he belpuctaunce of (be rpebteous cimeth tho;owe wpthome
aeee Plbome preferucd the fp2fte man ,
Aichi: Whome Eod made a father of the


| a | ees wode, When he was created alo-
AUS) E |G ne.bzongbte bpm out of big offence
oer toke bim out ofthe-xmouldectthe
earth, gaue bpm power toruleall thpnges.
Gen. iiid sti penthe Ynrygbteous wente awape in bps
watb from the wpledome, thé bzothered perp-
med thozowe the mathofmurther. Agapne,
when thexwater deftraped the whole wolde,
Smbe yppfenome prelerued the rpabteous thozowea
poze tree, where of (he was goucrnour ber felfe
ozcouer, whe wickednelle had gottenthe vp
perbandefo $ the nacpons twere pufte bp wpth


Gen.tia


1pde (he knewe therpabteous, preferued bpm
auteleffe unto God, andlapde Yp lure mercpe
ofpyscbpldzen. Sbe preferucd therpabteous,
xwben be fled from the bngodlpe that perifhed
wea what tpmeastbefperfel Downe dpon the fpue
cyptpes: Lpke as pet thps dap the vnfruptefull
watte,and fmokpnge lande geucth teftpmonpe
of thep2 wyckebnes:pee, the Dntppe and wnt p-
melpe frutes tbat qrowe bpon the trecs.
 -Mndfoza token of aremembzaunce of the
pnfapthful foule, there Fandeth a piller of falte
oz all {uch as regarded not wopfdome gat not
onelpetbps burte, tbat thep knewe not the thpn
ces whpcbhe were good , but alfolettebebpnde


them vntomen,amemo2pall of thep2foolpthe- p


nes:fo p inthe thinges wherin thep finned, thep
coulde not be bid. ut as foz fucheas take licor
bato wildome, the (pal Deliner themft 6 foz0we


*iiben the rypghteous fied becaule of bps C
brothers wath, wyledome led ppm tde ryabte Freie
wape, pewed bpm the kingdome of God, gane
Drm knotblege of bolpe thpnaes,made bpm rp-
chein bpslaboures,¢ brought to pafle the thpn
ges that be wente aboute. Fn difceatfulnefle of

ucbeas Defrauded bpm, the toode bp bpm and
made bpm rpehe. Sbelaned bym from the ene=
mpes, EDefended bym from thedeceaners be
madebpm tronge inbattaple, ¢qaue bpm the
tpeto:pe that bempaht knowe howe that wil
Dome ig Tronger then alltbpnaes. x Uhen the ge.rrrdti.¢
tpgbteous was folde, the fo2foke bpm not, but 32t
Deliuered sik From fpnners. be went downe -
wrthbpmintotbe dongeon, ¢fapledbpmnot
in the bandes, * tpll he bad broughte bpm the pon rig,
fcepter oftherealme, and powe agapnit thole = =
that oppzetted bpm. As foz them that bad accu
fed bpm, the Declared them to be lperg, and bzos
ugbtebpmtoperpetuallworhpppe. D

* be Delpuered therpabteous people ad eronad.»

fantles fede from thenacions ý oppzefled them 4.4" 119
be entred into the fouleof ý feruaunt of Gov
g tode bp bpmiin wonders ¢ tokens agapnite p
poarpble kpnae. Dbe gaue the righteous there
warde of they2laboures,¢ led them fozth a mer
uelous Wap:onthe dap time he was a Madow

vnéo them, ga lygbt of karreg intbenpabdt fea is.
(5.x Sbe brought themtpezowe p redfee,ecas~"
tied them thozowe pareate water.obedz0w-
ned they? enempes ng fee, € brought them out

off Depe.Sotheryghteous toke p (poples of p
ungodly, xg pzapled thp polpe name, 20200 eror, rv.
g maqnifped thp victozioug band w oneaccozd
xffo: wpiedome openeth the mouth of the Dom wc. iii.
me,maketbtbetonaesofbabestolpeake,  —«Y AED

Che. ri. Chapter.


rhe mpzacies bone fo? Hiracl. Shebengeaunce of fia
Kets. he gteate power and mcrcpeef mob,


a eg ipe O2D2ed thep2 Workes inthe ban- J

i eee Des of thy holpe Hrophete:*lo that Eroria.
ez tbp weente thozowe the wploernes

ga Ly tbat Was not inbabpted, ¢pptched

Ltn et! tepa Contes in the wate delerte.

Thep odeagapnfte thep2 enempes, and were
aduenged ofthep2aduerlarpes.* UWibenthep Erres
Werethzpftpe,thep called tpi thes water wag” e


b geuenthem oute of the moot bperocke,g thepz


thzpite was quenched oute of the bearbde {foone.
Jfo2 bp Ftbpnges were thorowe theps enempes


ee a uae


|


were punp hed, were thechpldzen of Flracl hel = |


ped in thep2 nede,to thep2 comfogte. Ko: vnto
cnempes thon qaucthe mans bloude in teade ci

of lpupnge water. And where as thep hàd fear
neficin the rebuke, oben the chpldzen were flap
ne, thou qaueffe vnto thpne owne aplenteous
water vnloked fo2:declarpnge bp the thpilkep
Was at ý tpme howe thou wolde beyng thpne
owne Dito honoure,t lape thep2 aduerlarpes. 35


*ffor wohenthep were tryed and nogturned Deu.vsite


wyth fatherlpem ercpe.thep kuowledged bow
the ungodly were tudged, epunpihed thozowe
wrath of God. Thele hattthou exboztedasa
father,e p2oued them: but bnto the otber thou
hafte benea bopiterouskpnge, lapdebardeta
thep2 charge, conDempned thé. Ceibetber thep
| ` Wereablente


a -


Of wyldonie,


Were ablente oz prefente, they2 punpiemente
Was alpke. Forthep: grefe was double:name-
lp, mournpnge,€ the rememb2aunce of thpnaes
pat. Wut when chep perceaued tpat thep2 pus
np(bementes opd them qood,thep thou ahte v

Jon the Lozde g wondered at the ende. Forat h
alt ¢hep belde much of bpm, of wbomein y outs
capna thep thought {cozne,as ofan abiect.Ae
uertbelele the rpg bteous dpd not fo when thep
Were thzpitp:but euentpbe as the thourhtes of
the folpthe were, fo was allo thep2 wyckednes
* Ulbere ascertapne men nowe (thorowe er-


oma ie COUre bpd worthpp dome ferpentes* bapnebe


altes thou fendet amultptude ofdome beaftes

upon them fo: a vengeaunce,tbat thep myahte
kuowe,that loke where whithalaman fynneth

Leu revit bp thefame alfo (hall bebe punpthed.+4€o2 Yita
Sanoue 62 ¢DPAlmpabtpe bande,that made the wolde
~~" ofnougbe,it was not vnpofipble,to fend ami


them an beape of beeres,o2 wood Ipong, ocru.


ell beattes ofa fraungekpnde, fuchasare Yn-
- Knowen,o2 fpoute fpze,o2 calte outa fmoking-
breth,o2 ote bozphletparkes onte of thep2 eps
es, w)pch mpagbte not onely deftrop them with
buctpnge,but alto to kpll them wpth thep2 po-
tpble fight. Yee, whitbout thele bealtesmpahe
thep baue bene dayne wrth one wpnde , beinge
perlecuted ofthep2owne worckes,and (catered
abzoade thorowcthe bzethe of thy power .
Meuerthelefle thou halk o2d20d al thypnees
in meafure,nombze ¢ wepghte. Eo: thou balte
euer Dad great trength empabte,¢ who maype
with and the power of thpne arme: And why?
lpie as thelinall thpnae that the balaunce wep
eth, fois the wo2lde before the: pee, agadzoppe
of the moznpnge dewe, that fallethdowne Yp-
pontbeeartbh . Thou halk mercp vponall,for
oma tia SHOU bate power of all thpnaes:*¢ maket the
asthough thou fawelke not the Cypnnes of men,
becaufe thep thulde amende. Fo: thou louet all
thethinges that ave,z batet none of them who
thou balt made: nepther dpdelk thou ozdepne 02
make anp thpnge, of euei! wpll . Howe mpabe
anpe thpuge endure pf ie twere not thp wpll D
Howe coulde anpe thynae be preferued, area
tt werecalledofthes Wut thou paret all,foz
all ace thpne(D Lozde)thou louer of {eules.
C Tbe. rti. Chapter.


fF eae tben concernpnee the thynges
aS ermis Wherein they ofende: thoufpea-
felt puto them(<D Lo2d)eerportelEtbemtolea
uethep2 wockedneffe, to put thep2 truf inthe


O WDent.tr.a xÆsfozthofe olde inbabpters of the bolpe land


Foro thon mpebtelt notawape wpib them , foztbep
commytted abbominable wor:ckes agapnit the
as wptchrafteforcerpe, ¢ Joolatrpe,thep lwe
thep2 ownechplozen Topthoute mercpe:thep did
cate bp mens bowels, ad dDeuoured the blounds:
pea,becaule of fuch abbompnacpons,mp(bele-


f
ues, EORinges thou Rewe the fathers of the
delolate foules bythe bandes of oure fathers: p
thelande whpche thou lotefte aboue all otber,
mpgbt be a dwellpnge for the ch ldzen of God.

PMeuertheles thou {pared off them alfo(as
iitenefendedekE the forerunners of tbpne boot —
euen-Hoznettes to derope them out bp Iptiead 25
lptle. Not that thou walt ynabletofubduc tiie
ungodlp vito $ rpghteous in battaile:o2 wpth
cruel beattes, 02 wpth one rough worde tode-
(rope them togetber:<28ut thp mpude was to oe daly
Dpue themoute bp lptle tytle, ceupnae them >t
tpme¥ placeto amende:knowinge well thatit
Was an vrighteous nacion, wycked of nature
€that thep2 thougbte rif ead neuer bealtered.

Jo? it was acurfed fede from the begpnupnee
@feared noman. Det hak thou pardoned tbepe
{pnines.$E02 who wpll fape bnito the: whp hatte
thou done that ¢ D2 who wll tande pe fees
tby iudgementes D2 who wpl come before thp
face,an aduencer of onrpabteous më D? wha
Wl blame the,vf the people perpthe, whome p
batemader ffo2tberetsnone other Godbut C
thoutp care fo2 all Chpnges:p thou mapeft de= iete, ts
clarebowe that thp iudgementis not ynright.
‘There dare nether pugn) firatit (ntbp fighe
require accomtes of the whom P hate deltroped
Foz fo muchethenas then arterpabteons
thp felfe thou o2d2¢(€ allebpngestpabteoufipe _— i
xand punptbete euen bpm that bath not Defer- 3°
ued to be punithed,etakett him 02 a fraunqer
and alt aleaunte in the lahde of thp power .
Foz thy power is the beg punynge ofrparbteos
ufneffe:and becaufe thou arte 02de ofall thpy
Ses,therfore arte thou gracyous yntoall.
a iben men tbpneke thenottobeofa fuli
Trengtbe thou declaret thp power : and bololp
delpueret thou them onerthat knowe the not.
ut thou Lode of power indef quietlpe and
ozdzelte DS Wpth greate wortbppne > foz thor
mapel Do as thou wplete. |
25p fuch wozckes nowe baffe thou tau bte
thy people, thata manalfo fhulbe bsiutteand y
loupnge: and batte made thp chyldzen to be of
a good bope:fo2 euen when thou iudgelte, thou
Tcuell rowme fo amende from fpnnes,
fto: info much as thou palt punpihed, and
wpth {uch dplpgence delpuered the chempes of
tdp {eruauntes, whpche were Wo2tbye to dpe,
(where thozowethou gauelt them tpine ¢ place
of amendement ý thep mpabt turne fromtbep2
wyckednes wpt Howe greate Oplpgence ther
punpibeft thou thpne owne childzé vnto whofe
athers thou batte Swo2ne and made couenaun:
tes of good pzomples/So whereas thou doef
but chaften 08, thou puny beft oure enemies ùp
uetle wates,to the intent that when te punpty
we huld remember thp goodnes:¢ whé we our
felies are punithed to put our truftintby mercp
CU berfoze, where ag men banel pued igno —
tauntlp ¢ vnrigbteoufiy thou bak punifped thë ©
foze, euentbozowetbe fame thpnges that thep
wozlbppped.x Eo: thep went akrape verp lon Sare as
ge ín the wape of crroure, and belde the beatkeg °°™


(wobpcb cuen thep2 enempes dpfapten)fo2 gond


Ddd Y Ipupng


Chcbooke —


ipupne as chplozé ofna buderandpng. Ther-
fore batt port fentafcoznefull punpibemente a
monge thechplozen of ignozaunce. As fo? fuch
as wold not berefourmed bp thofe (comes and
rebukes. thep felt the wozthp punpipemente of
Gov. Kozthethypngesthat thep luitered thep
bare them wnpacpentlp, beingenot contentetn
them but onwplipnge. And whe they perithed
by p lamethynges ý they tokefoz goddes, thep
Lnowileged then, pthere was,but onetrue Gov
whomie afore thep wolde not kuowe : therefore
came theende of thep2 sin ea on bpon them
<- C Tbe-riii. Chapter.
C All thpnges be Bapnr,treeptethebnowiege of Gon. y
dolatres ani Abols are mockery.


=| Apne are all men, whpche baue


AA FOE thev that out of tbe good then
oss \ Ch Aer aes wobpcharelene, knewe not
bym, that of bpm felfe is euerla
Ting. ether toke thep fomuch


made,ag to knotwe. who was the craftefinan of


tbem, but lometoke the Epze,fome the wpnd o? N AR


ap2e,fome thecourfeofthe tareres fome the wa
ter fometoke Sunne and Bone, o2p lpghtes
of Deauen whychernle the earth, fo: gods. Wut
though thep had fuch pleafure inthep2 bewtpe,
that thep thoughte them tohaue bene goddes:
pet hulde thep paucknowen,bowe muache mo
ve fapzer be is that made them. ss
25 o: the maker of bewtp bath ozdepned al thefe
thpnges.<D2 pf thep meruapled at the power g
wWorkes of them, they Huld baue perceaued ther
bp. be whpch made chelethinges,igmygbtver
then thep.sfo2 bp $ qreatneffe and bewte of the
creature, tbe maker thereof mape plapnelpe be-
knowen. Notwpth fandpnge they are the leffe
tobe blamed, that feke God, wolde fpnd ppm
and pet mpi. And why: foz fo much as they qo
aboutein bys wozckes aud feeke after them ,
ft is a token, $ thep regarde and olde muche of
brs worckesp are lene, bowebeittheparenot
wholp tabeerculed. 0: pf thep2 pnderftand-
Dpnge thnowlece befo qreate: Pthepcandeler
nethe worlde ¢ the creatures, whe do thep not
rather fpndeoute the Lorde thereof:

Wut onbappe are thep,¢ amonge the dead
is thep2 bope,that cal them gods wbich are but
the wo2ckes of menshandes:golde,{pluer, and
tbetbpnae that is founde out bp connynge, the
fpmylptude ofbeattes, 02 any vapne ftone that

er.riitit.e Dathebene made by the bande of olde -x D2 ag

Fereira woheracarpentercutteth downeatre out of the
woode, and pareth ofthe barcke of it connpng-
lp:andfo wytbhthe one parte maketh a veffelta
be bled and dreffeth meat wpth the relpaue.As
forthe other parte p islefte, whych is p2ofpta-
ble foznotbpna( foritisacroked peace of wod
and full ofinobbes ) be caruethit dplpaentipe
fho2diwebps banpte and accozdpng top knoto
lege Of bps connpnabe ceueth it fome propozcy
on,fatbponeth it after $lpmplptud ofa man,oz
maketh tt lpke fome beat fraketh it ouer wpth
red.and papnteth it,and loke what foule fpotte
is init becatethfomecoloute bponit.


Anot knowleqeofGod:tag were


————"'regardeot the workesthatare SRN Cee


€ Lhe vetetacpon ppt fey Pome pes, z enet


SANE aple andbegpnnpngetotake bps X


TO e E


PEEM debir ar the tee wptbout th ppe
evertbelefic.that the wo:ckes of thp wpfodo- 5
me Huld not be bapne,*p balk canted an Arke Senn.vis
to be made: and therfoze dq. mencommpt thep?
Ipues toa lmale peace of woobe, paffpnge ouer
the fee ina fbpppe,and are faned.
x Jfo2z in fhe old tyme allo when the p2oud gene. vit.v,
gpauntes periihed, be(tn whomethe pope was
lefte to increafe the wozlde)wente into the hip
tobpch was qouerned thozowe thp bande,and
folefte leede bebpnde bpm tntothe wolde .
Joz bappye ig the tree where thozoweryghte-
onfures commeth:but curled is the pool that ig
made with bandes,xpea both it g be that made _
it.ipe becaule be made it:¢ it becanfe it wascal- P&ltb-8


led cod, whereas it is but afraple thyna .t f€02 pace vie


i Dngobly € bps dng odlpnesarebothe phe ab prar vua,


ompuable onto Go . Euf fo f worke and bef
made italo malbe punpihed together. Chere=
Fore (hallthere aplage come pon the pdolles
of the Heathen :fo2 out of the creatures of God
thep are become abbompnacpon,a temptacpon
tonto the foules of men, and a finare foz p fete of
p onwple. And whys Pp fekpnge out of pooles ig
the begpnnpnge of wobozedome , and the bzpn=
gpng op of themis the deftruccpon of Ipfe. foz
they were not from the beapnnpng, nether thal
thep contynue fo2 euer. The welthp poelneso€
men bath founde them out dpon earth, therfore
fhall thep come fhoztipe to an ende. pena fà-
thet meurned fo: bys flonne Pp was takcn atoape


| from bpm, be made bpm anpmace(inal $ batt)


ofbpsdead


re = ra y —
+ == ę


—


Of wyldome ?


of bps dead fonne:and fo beganne to wozthppe
bpm as a god, wpych was butadead man, and
Ozdepned bps feruauntes to offer pntobym.
hus bp proces of tpme and thozow an bugra
pous cultome, thps erronr was kept as alawe
Ftpzauntescompelled menbp bpolenceto bo-
honre pmages . As foz thofe that werefofarre
of that men A ip de A Se prefen
Ip, thep2 ppcture was brought fromfarre (Ipke
the pmage ofa kpnge whome thepwolde bono
ure)to the intentethat wpth gr eate dp lpaence
thep mpagbte worthyppebpm whpchwas far
re of, as though be bad bene prelente
Agapne the fpnguler connpng of pcraftefman
Gaue thetqnozaunte allog create occalpon te
Wworbpppepmages. €or the workentan wy!
Ipnge to da byma pleafure p fet byma wozcke,
- laboured wpth all bps conupnge to make the
D pmage of the belt fathpon.Anvd (fo thozowe the
bewtpe of the wozcke)the commen people was
deceaued, info much thep toke bpm nowe fora
God, wopcha lptle afore wasg but honozedas a
mã. And tops was the erroure of mas life whe
men (ether fo: toferue thep2 owne affeccyon,e2
to do fome pleature unto tbe kpn es Jalerpbed
unto Fones ¢ fLockes the name of God > WDpch
ougbte tobeqeuen bntono man.
4 ozeouer, thys was not pnough fo: them
Ý thep erred inthe knowlege of God:but where
asthep Ipuedin greate warteg ofignozaunce,
tholemanp and great plages called thep peace
O2ether *tbep flue thep2 ownechpldzen,# of
cred them,oz bpd facepfpce intbenyarbtfeaton
` o2 els belde vnreafona le watches:fo that thep
Kepte nether lpfe no: marpage cleane:but ether
One lue another ta Death malpcpouflpe,oz elles
greued bpsnepghboure wyth aduoutrye. And
tus were ali th ogee rte together, bloude,
manflangbter.tbe e,bptpuimlacpon,cozruptp
on, bnfap perAned’e,fedyep au. perturp, dpiqup
etpnge of good men, Dnthanckfulnefle,defpiyn:
qe offoules,chaungpuace of bpzthe, ynfkedfatk =
nefle of marpage,mpfozder o aduoutrpe g vh-
clennetle. And whyrthe bonouringe of abbomp
nable pmages isthe cawe, the beqpnnpneae and
endeoFall cuell. f€oz they that wo2thpppe Fdo-
les:ether thep be mad whe thep be merp, o2 p20
Dhecpelpes,ozipue bngodlpe, 02 elleslpabtipe
toz fweare them (elues:f€02 in fo muchas thep2


bruchi, b


trufve is in the pooles(whpch baue netberfoule 2%
: no? DnderfLandpnge though thep fweare falle-


lpe pet tbey thyncke it hall not burte tbem.
Therfozecommetbagreat plage Vp them
and ý wo2tbely,fo2 bey banean euell openpon
of God, geupngebedevnto pdolles {wearpnge
ontulflpe to Deceaue,anddp pleng rypgbteonl
nes. So2ther2 Cwearpngeisne vertu e,buta
plage of them tbat fpnne, and coetheuer wrth
the offence of the ungodlpe.
Whe bopee of the Fapthfull, prartpnee the mercpe of gop
€o: whole graces (ake hep ferue nce Pooles.


A say Ut thon oure God)arte Cwete longe
aS yluferpnge,end true,einmercye o2d2¢f¢ ¢


SA thou all thpnges. Though we (pune, pet
} P


»
|
k

7


4
}
$


È


Fol.ttr,
are we thine, fo: weknotwe thp Erength. YE we
{pune not,tbenare we fu te that thou regardeft
09. Fo: to knowe the, ig perfecte rpgbteoutned
Pea,to knowe thp rpgbteoutnes and power is
tbe rote of tmmoztalite. As foz the thpnge that
men baue founde out thozowe thep? cucll icien-
ce, it batbnot bpfeeaucd vs:asthe parntpng
of the ppcture(an Onprofitablelabour) and car
ued pmage, t dpuers coloures, whole fight en-
tylethp ignozaunte:fo pbe bonoureth ¢loucth —
tbe pycture ofadeade pmagep pathbnofoule. 35
Feuertheletle, thep f loue fuch cuell tbpn
ges are wozthpe of the death:thep that trulin
tbem, thep ý make thent, they plone them, and |
tbep $ bonoure them. Che potter allo taketh ¢
tempereth fofte earth, laboureth it and qeueth
ít thefathpo of a befell, whatlocuer ferueth foz
onre ufe : and fo of one pece of clape be maketh-
fomecleane veffel foz fecupce , and lomecontra
tp, Wut whereto ae Velie ferueth. ý know-=
eth the potter bpm felfe. 0 wyth bps apnela
bourebemabketh a God of the lame clape;:tbps
doth euen be, whych a lptle afoze Was made of
earth bpm felfe and wptbin a lytle whyle after
(Moder be dpeth turnethto the eartbe agapne.
Notwpthlandpuae, hecareth not f moze
becaule be ball laboure,noz becaul ebpslpte is y
thozte:but Erpueth to ercell goloctmpthes, the
foluerfnpthes and coperfmpthes and taketh it
foz an bonoureto make vapne thinges. oz bis
bee is atbes, bps bope is but 9 eatth,and
02 fomuchag
b gaue bpm
pm i beth
pine ,


ae opnar monar nto thepz owne lonles:foz
thepiudgea


He bpm felfe ig better then thep whome be woz


fodpò neuerthep. Dea, they Wor(bppped beg-
ftes alfo,wbyche aremoolke mpferabte forcon
pare thpnacs, that re oag fele vntothbem, and


Vet is there not one ofthefebeafteg, that
wpth bps fpgbte can bebolde anp good thpnge
heptber baue tpep genen prapte no? thanckes
tntto god. ;

The. rvi. Chapter.


The punpHhmente rers anb (he beng
DOE Dnr Che nee OF Mbolateers ee ey
Foz thefe


—— ee


Gmi g.


Gumppiid


25


Tae. EFrit.e
i, begu.ti,b


‘SUC OOORE


meee | D? thefe and fuch other thpng-
Baa ces hauetpep futtercd worthpe
AFAA punpdpemente and thozowe the
LETA multptude of beattes are they
SFe roted out. gu ead of the which
EA] punithementes thou balk gracp


r
—=


fe feb thpne owne people wrth Auncels fo-
de and fente them beade redp from peauen( w=
ounte thep2 laboure)bepnge verp pleafaunt and


agood of talte. And to ewe thprpches t Cwet
nefe vnto thy chpldzen, thouqauelfe euerp one
thep2 defp2e,fo p euerp man mpgbte take what
ipked ppm bet. But the mowe and ple above p
wypolence of the fpzeand melted not:p thep mp-
gbte knowe,p the fpze burnpnge in the baples
rapne,deltroped the frute of the enempes,tbhe tp
er alfo forgat bps ftrengthbagapne:p the rpgh-
teousmpabtebe nozpibed. flor thecreature p
ferueth tbe(wbpcbe arte the maker ) is fearlein


punpibpnge the burpgbteous, butitiscatpese €


gentpletodo good, pnto uch as put thep2 tru
inthe- Cherfoze dpd all thypnges alter atf fame
time, g Were al obedpent wnto thy grace, which
isthe nurfe of aiLepp nates. accoa ngeto the de


Cpzeof them p hadneade thereot:p thp chplbzen Hinge


(DLo2de) whom thou loucke, mpgbteknowe
xthat it tg not the nature and the growpnge o
frutes that feadeth men, but that itis thpmwo02-


de, wbhych prelerneth them that put thep2 trute-


inthe. oz loke what might not be deffroped w
the fp2e,asfoone ag it was warmed wpthalp-
tle Sunnebeame, it melted: $ allmenmpgbte
knowe Pthankes ought to be qenennto the be
foretbe Saunnerple,t ý thou ought tobe woz
foppped before f Dap poing . f€02 p boope of the
buthankefull pall melteawape as the wynter
pleand perpibe as water , that is not neceflarp.
C The. roti Chapter.


—— |


lapi
ia i


put tobo2rpblefeare and wonderoullpe bered:
ozthecozner where thep mypgbt not kepetbem


papi entotbema


fo2cerp andenchauntement ptbep tied, it came
toderplpon, etbe proude wpldome wasb20u=
gbhtetotbame.  fforthepPpozmpledtodzp
vie awape the fearfulnes and d2ede fromthe we
ake fouled werefiche fo: feare them felues and
Pwpthfcome . Andthouqbe none of the won-
bers feared them , pet were thep afraped at the
beaffes whpch came be them,¢ at the bpfipn
ge ofthe lerpentes. Info much that wpth trem:
bipnge they fowned,and fapde they fawe not p
ap? mhochnoman pet mape elcape.
ke Gees Stop tt tg


a
Bomeusi.e


~


ig


| Or luy(Dome, SFol. cert
| € Foritiganbeupetbpng,whenamagowne Ipkeas thou balte burte oure enempes, fo batt
contcpence beareti recozde of Dpswwpckednes$ thou promoted vs whometbou calledette afore
f condempneth bpm. And wbpra vered and wo: jor therighteouschplozen of the food men dis
| unded confpence, taketh euer cruell thpnaes in fered fectetlp,and o2d2¢ the late of righteous
$ PL Flbit.a DandexFearcfulneleig nothpngels.butadccla neg onto vnpte:p the tutte nulde receane good
| ringe pat amantekethbelpeand defence,toan andeuell tr lpkemaner,fpngpnge praplesynto
Were
| the Doopeis wpthin the moare is the wncer bnconuenpente vopce of the enempeg anda pp:
tapnte of thematter,foz the wobpeh bets punp- teouscrpe foz the chpldzentbat werebewapled
(Hed . Wut thep $ came in tbe mpabtpenpgbte, The mater andthe Ceruaunte were punpibed
flepte the flepe p fel vpon them from vnder and inlpke maner..s€o2 they altogether bad innume
from aboue:fometime were they afcapdetboro rable that dped one death. af
we ý feare of $ wonders, fometime thep were *PLeptbher were the Ipupnge Cupcienteto C
fo weakep thep owned wptball:fozanbattpe bu rpe the Dead, foz in the twpneklpng of anepe <rov.tit.¢
andfodapnefearfulnefiecame bponthbem. thenobleft nacponof them wasdettroped. Xs
D Afterwarde, pEanpe ofthembad fallen, ofteas Godbelped them afoze pet wolde it not
be was kepteand put inpzeafon but wpthout make thembeleue:But inthe de ruccpon of the
chapnes.. ut pf anp dwelte ina vpllage pf be fp2tte bozne thep knowleged , that itt was the
bad ben anbearde oz hulbandeman, pe luftered people of God. 302 whple all thpnges were fil
intollorable neceflpte:foz'thep wereallbounde and when thenpabte was inthe middeft of ber
wpth one chapne of darckeneffe. courle,thy Almpabtpe wo2de (DLo2vde) leape
Whether tt were a blafpnge wpndt oa dDownefrom heauen oute of thpropall th2cone,
fwetefonge ofthe byzdegamongepthyckebza aga rougbeman of warre inthe mpododelt of the
unches of the trees o? Puebemencp ofbattyrun lande that was defroped:and the arpefwear
npnge water,or greatenopleotthefallpngedo deperfourmedt P? frapte commaundemente
one of Cones,o3 the plapinge € runnpnge of be fandpnge and fpllpnge all thpnges wpth de =
ates whom thep fawe not, o: p mygbtie nople atbe:pea, it toode bponthe carthe and reached
ofroarpnge bealbes,oz thefoundp aunfwereth Dnfothebeauen. Thentbefpgbte i a
| | agapne ng bpemauntapnes: it made them fo- dzeames Yeredthemlodenlpe and fearfulnefe


0? bpm felfe. And looke howe much lefe p father ofal men Ayaphe thre wag beard an


wne fo: verp Feare. fozalltbeearththpnedws came b on them bnawares.
clearelpabte,and no man was byndered inbps benlave there one here,another there,
laboure.sDnelpe vponthemtbere fellan peupe balfedead, balfequycke , and fhewedtbecaule
npg bt,an pmage of darckenefle ý was tocome of bys death. For: the bplpons that vered then
bpon them ..Pea,thep were onto them feluesp Chewedthemtbelethynaes afore : fo thattbep
moofke beaupe and bozrpble Darckenefie. were not tgnozaunte, wbherfore thep perpiyeo.
Ebene eae xtanchin cet am apapon aspon oe toncbebthe
e pze lpgbte that the Aitachites bad in tgppt typgpteousalto, and amonge themultptude in
ome ot Espot wbe prne ofthe people mege wiiocews. De wpldecnesthere toas iniurceccyon. buttbp
A pee Sith ove bectopreetbe pue ethe dead with biscentonre wath endured not longe. feo: the blamelefma
A Adee Aacuerthelelic, thy fapnetesbada Wentetm atl the baf and tookethe battaple yp
AS paver qreatlpghte(and theenemp pon bpm, brought fozthe the tecapen of bys mp
KN kaes bearde thep2 vopce but thep fa npfEracpon:euen prayer andthe cenfoures of re
J gawe not thefpgure ofthent. ) And confplpnge:fet bpmfelfe agapnite the wath,
HAG Wabdecautetbeplufferednotthefame fo bzoughte the mpferpe to an ende:declarynge
tat Saas SACbpnges they magnpéied the:and thereby that be was thy feruaunte.s€o2 be oucr
thep p were vered afore(becautethep werenot camenot the multytude wyth bodelpe power,
burte nowe thanked the and befought the ( D no2zwpth Weapens of mpabte:but w the wo
ero,siitiy CË there mpabtebe a difterencex Cherfoze be fubdued bym ý bered bpm, puttinge thems
ea bad thep a burnpng ppller of fpretoleade them remembzaunce of p othe  couenaunt made bry-
inthe bubnowen wape, ethougauekthemthe to thc fathers. Foz when thedeade were fallen
unne foz a fre qpfte wpthout anp burte. Rea downebp heapesone bpon another, be tode
onit wagy thep Mulde wantelpghte, and be inthe mpddef,pacifped the wath, parted the
putin f prefon of Darckenefle, whycbe Keptetby wape vnto plpupnge. «And whrrinbpg longe Sro.srbus
chplozen in captiupte,bp whome the yncozrupt garment was all the bewtp,g inp foureromeg *
x5 WPabte of the lawe ofthe wolde was foztobe of the toneg was the glozpe of the fathers cra:
érod.t.p, Teuen.xCilpen thep thought to flape the babes ten,and thy maietpe was w2ptten inthe crow
| of the rpagbteous(onebepnge lapde out,and PE neofbpsheade. nto thele the defFroper rane
L. ra.ctig.c ferued to be leader onto the other, ) thou bzon: lace and was afraped of them:foz it was ones
| gh fete oute the whole multitude of the chplozé Pe atemptacpon woztbhpe of watpe,


and dDefkropedette tyele in the mpgbtie water. e. rit. Chapter.
PimeinaMewaconelaewcn ae. Gouda gc tren
o2e, fat türer Bnowpng bnto what otbes thep nes ede meate that iwas Bedetpzeo
: þad qeuencredence, mpgbtebeofgoodcheare. gan vataicace terranes ferue not onelpe to the topi of
d Tbus thp people receauedthe bealthboftherp- P AES foz the ongodipe.the Wath caine Dn- 2


myipontben wptboute mercy vntotheende ”


a Shtsous,but the ongodlp were delFroped. Foz HA
Aedia for be knewe


q deotte


The bake


Fo: be knewe beforewhat hulde happen vnto
them, bow that(wpenthep bad conlented tolet
them go,and bad fente oute wpth areate dplp -
Serice thbep wolde cepente and folowe vponthë
*J€o2 woben thep were pet mournpnge and ma-
Epnge lamentacpon bp the qraues of thedeed,
thep dDeupled another folptheneffe: fo tbat thep
aE pie cio intbep2fipinge, whometbep

ad cafe oute afoze tw peb pzaper.UWortbpe ne-
cepte alfo bzougbte them nntotbpsende, foz
thep bþadcleane forgotten tbe tbpnges that bap
penrd bntothbematoze. Wut tbhetbpngethat


_ Was wantpngeofthep: punpihemente, was re


qupfptelfoto be fulfplled Dpon them wpth to2-
menteg tbat thp people mpabte bauca marue=
lous palage thozowe , and that thefempabte
fpnde a ffraunge Deathe.


3B hen was euerptreature fathponed arap


ne of newe,accozdpnge to the wpll of thep2 ma-
ker, obepinge thp comummaundementes that thp
chpldzen mpabte be kepte wpthouteburte. o?
the cloude ouer Hadowed thep2tentes, andthe
Dipeeartheappered , where afore wag water :
fotbhatin theredfce, therewag a wapewpth =
Gute unpedpmente:and the qreate bepe became
agreane felde : where thozowe alltbe people
twente that were defended wpth tbp bande fe-
inge tdp wonderoug andmeruelous worckes.
ffo2 as thebozles fo were thep fed and lea-
Puttin 102d which
abdeftdelpueredthem:)  Andbwbyp: thep
were ver mypndefull ofthp thpnges that pappe-
ned wople thep Divelte in the lande : howe me
grounde brought forthe Apes in ead of catell:
and bowe the rpuer fcrauled wpth tbe multptu
omgesin teade of fpes.
* Wut atthe latke thepLawe anewe erca-


Aum. E cpon of bp2des, what typmeas thep were decea«


nedtwptbluffe,anddefpred delpcatemestes .

$fo2 when thep were fpeakpnge of thep2 appe=
tpte, the quaplescame bp bnto them from the
fee,and punpibementes came bpon the fpnners
not wpthoutethe tokens whpcbecame to pale
afore bp the vebemencpe of the reamees, fog
thep Cuffered wo2thelp accordpnge to thep2 wic
kedneffes,thep dealt fo abbompnablp and chur
lpipelpe topth Eraungers . Some receaucd no
vnbnotven getes fomebzoucbte pitraungers
into bondage Pp dpd them good. Welpde all thele
thpnges there were lome , p not onlpereceaned
no ftraungers wpththep2 wplles, but perlecu=


ted thofe alfo,xand dpd them muche evell that i-Ibou.ti.e


teceauedthemgladlpe. herefoze werethep
punptbed woth: |
Werecoucred wpth fodayne Darckenefle at the
Doo2es of therpabteous,fo that enerye one lou-
gbte the entraunce of bps booze.


Thus the elementes turned into them Tel- ©


ueg , lpke as when one tune is chaunged bpon
antnffrumente of mulpke, and pet all the relp=
due kepetheps melodpe , whpche mape ealelpe
be perccaued, by thelpgbte of the thpnges that
are come to patie.

Thedzpelandcwasturned intoa waterp
andthe thpnge tbat afoze fwamme in the wa-


- ter, wente nowe bpon Dipegrounde. Chefpre


bad power in the water(contrarp bnto bps ow
ne vertue)and rp water sey fi ps owne kpr
detoquenché. Aqapne,the lames of nopfome
beaffes burtenot the fete of them that wente
with tbem,neptber melted thep the ple, wbiche
elles meltethblpabtelp. jn all thpugces balk thou
promoted tby people( sDLozde)and bzonghte
théto bonour:thou paffenotd “pa tbem but
alwape,and inall places bate? debp them.


€ The ende of the booke of wpledome.


The boke of Fetus, the fonne of Strach/wbhich
iscalled in Latin Ecclettaficus.
€ The prologue of Jelusthelonne of Sprach onto bps booke.


xblpndenefie, lpbeas tbep that "FF


+


ke


q deotte


The bake


Fo: be knewe beforewhat hulde happen vnto
them, bow that(wpenthep bad conlented tolet
them go,and bad fente oute wpth areate dplp -
Serice thbep wolde cepente and folowe vponthë
*J€o2 woben thep were pet mournpnge and ma-
Epnge lamentacpon bp the qraues of thedeed,
thep dDeupled another folptheneffe: fo tbat thep
aE pie cio intbep2fipinge, whometbep

ad cafe oute afoze tw peb pzaper.UWortbpe ne-
cepte alfo bzougbte them nntotbpsende, foz
thep bþadcleane forgotten tbe tbpnges that bap
penrd bntothbematoze. Wut tbhetbpngethat


_ Was wantpngeofthep: punpihemente, was re


qupfptelfoto be fulfplled Dpon them wpth to2-
menteg tbat thp people mpabte bauca marue=
lous palage thozowe , and that thefempabte
fpnde a ffraunge Deathe.


3B hen was euerptreature fathponed arap


ne of newe,accozdpnge to the wpll of thep2 ma-
ker, obepinge thp comummaundementes that thp
chpldzen mpabte be kepte wpthouteburte. o?
the cloude ouer Hadowed thep2tentes, andthe
Dipeeartheappered , where afore wag water :
fotbhatin theredfce, therewag a wapewpth =
Gute unpedpmente:and the qreate bepe became
agreane felde : where thozowe alltbe people
twente that were defended wpth tbp bande fe-
inge tdp wonderoug andmeruelous worckes.
ffo2 as thebozles fo were thep fed and lea-
Puttin 102d which
abdeftdelpueredthem:)  Andbwbyp: thep
were ver mypndefull ofthp thpnges that pappe-
ned wople thep Divelte in the lande : howe me
grounde brought forthe Apes in ead of catell:
and bowe the rpuer fcrauled wpth tbe multptu
omgesin teade of fpes.
* Wut atthe latke thepLawe anewe erca-


Aum. E cpon of bp2des, what typmeas thep were decea«


nedtwptbluffe,anddefpred delpcatemestes .

$fo2 when thep were fpeakpnge of thep2 appe=
tpte, the quaplescame bp bnto them from the
fee,and punpibementes came bpon the fpnners
not wpthoutethe tokens whpcbecame to pale
afore bp the vebemencpe of the reamees, fog
thep Cuffered wo2thelp accordpnge to thep2 wic
kedneffes,thep dealt fo abbompnablp and chur
lpipelpe topth Eraungers . Some receaucd no
vnbnotven getes fomebzoucbte pitraungers
into bondage Pp dpd them good. Welpde all thele
thpnges there were lome , p not onlpereceaned
no ftraungers wpththep2 wplles, but perlecu=


ted thofe alfo,xand dpd them muche evell that i-Ibou.ti.e


teceauedthemgladlpe. herefoze werethep
punptbed woth: |
Werecoucred wpth fodayne Darckenefle at the
Doo2es of therpabteous,fo that enerye one lou-
gbte the entraunce of bps booze.


Thus the elementes turned into them Tel- ©


ueg , lpke as when one tune is chaunged bpon
antnffrumente of mulpke, and pet all the relp=
due kepetheps melodpe , whpche mape ealelpe
be perccaued, by thelpgbte of the thpnges that
are come to patie.

Thedzpelandcwasturned intoa waterp
andthe thpnge tbat afoze fwamme in the wa-


- ter, wente nowe bpon Dipegrounde. Chefpre


bad power in the water(contrarp bnto bps ow
ne vertue)and rp water sey fi ps owne kpr
detoquenché. Aqapne,the lames of nopfome
beaffes burtenot the fete of them that wente
with tbem,neptber melted thep the ple, wbiche
elles meltethblpabtelp. jn all thpugces balk thou
promoted tby people( sDLozde)and bzonghte
théto bonour:thou paffenotd “pa tbem but
alwape,and inall places bate? debp them.


€ The ende of the booke of wpledome.


The boke of Fetus, the fonne of Strach/wbhich
iscalled in Latin Ecclettaficus.
€ The prologue of Jelusthelonne of Sprach onto bps booke.


xblpndenefie, lpbeas tbep that "FF


+


ke


m n


(ii. re.tit.b [Per enne


OF Fetus the fore of Sprach,


Eccleltatticus,


— Chebp2ke chapter.
(Wr Mome proceadeth anv commeth of wov.a papri
ofthe frare of Gob. Mpghteoulneffe tga degreto iome
bp wpledome,


an ee r.


| LA Be 2 sel

and iind, HE aay A ee > pal od the Lo2d¢,and bathben

| | eh bihi EDA AG NERA cuer Wpeh Him, aind is befoze
O 7 )\ |=, altyme. Wibo bath ombzed


Hral. erib
- rouer


f D


- hedeofromfo:t, be thalbe bl


FAWSDI|tbe fandeofthe fee, the dzop
DA es BES OF the raigne,¢thedapes


tD tbe roote of wpfedome
bene declared; D? epo pach ikowe ber wyt?
octrpne of wifdome ben


tbe bolp gboat- pe bath fene ber; nomb2ed per,
and meatured ber be batb pou ed ber out vport


all bps worckes,and vpon all fletbe,accozdpug


fpes gpfte-be geueth ber epcbelp bitotbenp PENA
eareoftbeLozdeigs wo:ppppe Ea


loue bpm: fhe
and tpn mpbe, gladnefle and a fopfullcrovone:
‘The fcare of the Lozde maketh amerpe berte,
eueth gladnefie iope and longe lyfe. Mibofo
earethtbe Lozde,tt Hall go well wrth hpmat
thelafte,p in p dap of bis deth he albe blefien.
Theloucof Godis honorable wplerame


€ looke bnto whome it appearcth,tbep loue tt foz


tbep te what wõderous thpnges itdoth.x The
feare ofthe Lozde ig tbebegpnnpnge ofwpfe-
dome, and was made topeh the fapthfullinthe
mothers wombe:it hal go wrebtbechoten we
men and (halbeknowne of therpabteous and
fapthfull . Chefeare of the Lozdeis the tpgbt
Godves lernple that pzeferueth and iuEpfpeti
tbe bert, qeueth mpzth and gladneffe.@aiho fo
feareth the Lozde albe bappp whan be bath
td. To feare god
ig wilddep makethrpch and bopngeth al goon
ope) ber. Sbe filleth the whole boufe wither
pites and the garners witb ber treatu re. The
eare of the Lozde ts thecrowne of wpfedome,
and geueth plenteous peace ad health . Ie bath
feneber¢nombzed ber:(bothetbefcare the gpf-
teg of God knowlege, and bnderftandpnge of
wp fedome hath bene poured out asrapne, and
them tbat belde ber fate bathe be bzougbte bn
fobonoure. .
Thelcare ofthe Lozdeis the roote of wit-


p of n.
Sol. terii,
dome and bec braunchesarelontelpfe. hehe
trealures of wyplesomeigs wnderitandpyng and
Deuocpon of knowlege, but wpledome is abo?
ted of fpnners. Che feare of the Lobe depueth
oute [pune fo: bep is wpthout feare cannot be
made tpgbteous,¢ bps wplfull boldenes ishps
owne deifruccpon.a pacpente man wyll luffer
onto thetpme,¢ then thal! be bane therewarde
of fope.A good dnderftanvpnge wpil byde bps
wozbesfozatpme , €manpy mens lpppes pall
fprak of bys wpledome. Inthe trealuces of wal
dome ts tbhedeclaracion of doctrpne,but thefin
ner abbozretpthe ese oE od. Wp lonnè
Pf toon delpze wpledeme, tepetbecommaunde
mente, God Wall qeue ber wntothe:fo2 thefec
are ofthe Lorde is wiledome € nurtour,be bath
pasture infapth ¢loupnae mekenes, abe (pall

pli the treatures therof. we not obftpnates vn
faytbfull to the feare of the Lo, tcome not vn
to bpm wptha double bert. 2e not an ppocrite
in thefpabte of men , atake qood bede what 3
{peakelt. Darke well theletbpnres, leeke thou
Happen to fall¢ bzpnge thy foule todpthoncur
€fo God difcouer thy lecretes, caf thedowne —
ihtbe mpddelte of the co ngregacpon:becaule p
wolde not receane the feare ofGod,andbecau
fe thp berte ET hehe fc bi and Dpiceate.

ter.


È: J i r a
q_Becrhoztech the feruauntes of Bonto rpebtecutnette,
loue bnderfantpngc,and bacpence, € eybezteth hpm that
Feareth Sod, to beleue,to be prandra laur becaute ond ne
ther confoundeth nos fo2faketh them Chattrufinobpm. a

Curie bponthe Cotle, fcarce,anbdimpacpent of berte,


Ree ania L onne, *pftbou wpltcomeinto t a Ku
AEA pe erupce of Gob, ande falt in Pai: EE ,
mNoeeiteoutnelie and feare , and atime thp
¥en coule to temptacpon : lettle thone
vain Dette awd be pacpent, bowe Downe
tbpne care receaue the wozdes of vnderftandin
ge,and Mapneke nct awape, whan thou arte en
tyled. olde the fake bpon God, iopne thp felfe
onto bpm, and lufre that thp lyfe mape enceea-
feat p lafe.Clbatlocuer bappeneth vnto the.re-
ceaue tt {utter inbeupnefle, ¢bepacpente inthp
frouble.* Fofipae as qold and {plucr are trped Sapi.iti.a,
inthe fpze,eucnfoarcacceptable menin the fop FOF etch
hace of aduerlpte. Welcuein God, and pe (hall
belpe the:ozder thy wape arpabte, and put tby
frutte inbym. olde faite bps feare and growe
therein. sD pep feare the Lozde take lure bolde
of bps mercpe:fhapnche not awape from bim,p
petallnot.© pe tbat feare the Lozd, beleue bpm
and pouretewarde (hall not beemptpe. D pe
that feare the Lobe, put youre trutte tn bpm,¢
mercpe (hall come wnto pou fozpleature. D pe
that feare the Lorde, Cet'poure loue vpon ppm,
and pour bhertes (halbelpabtenen. 3
Confpder the olde generacpons of men
pecbpldzen and marke them well:xwas there Piartit:a
cuer anpe oneconfounded, P put bpstrufte in p Esa-rrbiv
LozberWU bo euer contpnued inbpsfeare . and
twas forlaken: D2 whome dpd he euer Dpfppfe,
ý called fapebfull hay: pins o: God is gra-
cpous and mercptul, be forgeucth (pnnes in the
tpmeot trouble, and ig a defender fozallthem p
feeke bym in the trutbe . Goo be vnto raie Ý
atha


m n


(ii. re.tit.b [Per enne


OF Fetus the fore of Sprach,


Eccleltatticus,


— Chebp2ke chapter.
(Wr Mome proceadeth anv commeth of wov.a papri
ofthe frare of Gob. Mpghteoulneffe tga degreto iome
bp wpledome,


an ee r.


| LA Be 2 sel

and iind, HE aay A ee > pal od the Lo2d¢,and bathben

| | eh bihi EDA AG NERA cuer Wpeh Him, aind is befoze
O 7 )\ |=, altyme. Wibo bath ombzed


Hral. erib
- rouer


f D


- hedeofromfo:t, be thalbe bl


FAWSDI|tbe fandeofthe fee, the dzop
DA es BES OF the raigne,¢thedapes


tD tbe roote of wpfedome
bene declared; D? epo pach ikowe ber wyt?
octrpne of wifdome ben


tbe bolp gboat- pe bath fene ber; nomb2ed per,
and meatured ber be batb pou ed ber out vport


all bps worckes,and vpon all fletbe,accozdpug


fpes gpfte-be geueth ber epcbelp bitotbenp PENA
eareoftbeLozdeigs wo:ppppe Ea


loue bpm: fhe
and tpn mpbe, gladnefle and a fopfullcrovone:
‘The fcare of the Lozde maketh amerpe berte,
eueth gladnefie iope and longe lyfe. Mibofo
earethtbe Lozde,tt Hall go well wrth hpmat
thelafte,p in p dap of bis deth he albe blefien.
Theloucof Godis honorable wplerame


€ looke bnto whome it appearcth,tbep loue tt foz


tbep te what wõderous thpnges itdoth.x The
feare ofthe Lozde ig tbebegpnnpnge ofwpfe-
dome, and was made topeh the fapthfullinthe
mothers wombe:it hal go wrebtbechoten we
men and (halbeknowne of therpabteous and
fapthfull . Chefeare of the Lozdeis the tpgbt
Godves lernple that pzeferueth and iuEpfpeti
tbe bert, qeueth mpzth and gladneffe.@aiho fo
feareth the Lozde albe bappp whan be bath
td. To feare god
ig wilddep makethrpch and bopngeth al goon
ope) ber. Sbe filleth the whole boufe wither
pites and the garners witb ber treatu re. The
eare of the Lozde ts thecrowne of wpfedome,
and geueth plenteous peace ad health . Ie bath
feneber¢nombzed ber:(bothetbefcare the gpf-
teg of God knowlege, and bnderftandpnge of
wp fedome hath bene poured out asrapne, and
them tbat belde ber fate bathe be bzougbte bn
fobonoure. .
Thelcare ofthe Lozdeis the roote of wit-


p of n.
Sol. terii,
dome and bec braunchesarelontelpfe. hehe
trealures of wyplesomeigs wnderitandpyng and
Deuocpon of knowlege, but wpledome is abo?
ted of fpnners. Che feare of the Lobe depueth
oute [pune fo: bep is wpthout feare cannot be
made tpgbteous,¢ bps wplfull boldenes ishps
owne deifruccpon.a pacpente man wyll luffer
onto thetpme,¢ then thal! be bane therewarde
of fope.A good dnderftanvpnge wpil byde bps
wozbesfozatpme , €manpy mens lpppes pall
fprak of bys wpledome. Inthe trealuces of wal
dome ts tbhedeclaracion of doctrpne,but thefin
ner abbozretpthe ese oE od. Wp lonnè
Pf toon delpze wpledeme, tepetbecommaunde
mente, God Wall qeue ber wntothe:fo2 thefec
are ofthe Lorde is wiledome € nurtour,be bath
pasture infapth ¢loupnae mekenes, abe (pall

pli the treatures therof. we not obftpnates vn
faytbfull to the feare of the Lo, tcome not vn
to bpm wptha double bert. 2e not an ppocrite
in thefpabte of men , atake qood bede what 3
{peakelt. Darke well theletbpnres, leeke thou
Happen to fall¢ bzpnge thy foule todpthoncur
€fo God difcouer thy lecretes, caf thedowne —
ihtbe mpddelte of the co ngregacpon:becaule p
wolde not receane the feare ofGod,andbecau
fe thp berte ET hehe fc bi and Dpiceate.

ter.


È: J i r a
q_Becrhoztech the feruauntes of Bonto rpebtecutnette,
loue bnderfantpngc,and bacpence, € eybezteth hpm that
Feareth Sod, to beleue,to be prandra laur becaute ond ne
ther confoundeth nos fo2faketh them Chattrufinobpm. a

Curie bponthe Cotle, fcarce,anbdimpacpent of berte,


Ree ania L onne, *pftbou wpltcomeinto t a Ku
AEA pe erupce of Gob, ande falt in Pai: EE ,
mNoeeiteoutnelie and feare , and atime thp
¥en coule to temptacpon : lettle thone
vain Dette awd be pacpent, bowe Downe
tbpne care receaue the wozdes of vnderftandin
ge,and Mapneke nct awape, whan thou arte en
tyled. olde the fake bpon God, iopne thp felfe
onto bpm, and lufre that thp lyfe mape enceea-
feat p lafe.Clbatlocuer bappeneth vnto the.re-
ceaue tt {utter inbeupnefle, ¢bepacpente inthp
frouble.* Fofipae as qold and {plucr are trped Sapi.iti.a,
inthe fpze,eucnfoarcacceptable menin the fop FOF etch
hace of aduerlpte. Welcuein God, and pe (hall
belpe the:ozder thy wape arpabte, and put tby
frutte inbym. olde faite bps feare and growe
therein. sD pep feare the Lozde take lure bolde
of bps mercpe:fhapnche not awape from bim,p
petallnot.© pe tbat feare the Lozd, beleue bpm
and pouretewarde (hall not beemptpe. D pe
that feare the Lobe, put youre trutte tn bpm,¢
mercpe (hall come wnto pou fozpleature. D pe
that feare the Lorde, Cet'poure loue vpon ppm,
and pour bhertes (halbelpabtenen. 3
Confpder the olde generacpons of men
pecbpldzen and marke them well:xwas there Piartit:a
cuer anpe oneconfounded, P put bpstrufte in p Esa-rrbiv
LozberWU bo euer contpnued inbpsfeare . and
twas forlaken: D2 whome dpd he euer Dpfppfe,
ý called fapebfull hay: pins o: God is gra-
cpous and mercptul, be forgeucth (pnnes in the
tpmeot trouble, and ig a defender fozallthem p
feeke bym in the trutbe . Goo be vnto raie Ý
atha


-Chebooke


hath adoubleberte,wpcked lpppes and evel oc
cupped Dandes.g to the fpnner that goethetwo
maner of wWaies. Woo be punto them ý are loote
of perte w)pch put not thep2 trute in God,and
therefoze tall they not be defended of pym.
Woo be vnto them that baue lost pacpence, foz
fakentherighte wapes,¢ are turned backeinto
froward wapes. Wihat wpll they do whanthe
— Lozde hall beqpnne to vplet them? |
4 Thep that feare the Lorde wpll not mpl-
Fob riti.e trufte bps wo2de,ethep that « loue ieee pll
kepe bps commaundemente. Thep
Lowe, wll leke oute the thpnaes pare pleala-
xo, pitic, UNE Dito hym,*ethep plone bpm, Hall fulfpl
bps lawe. Chey p feare the Lorde wpll prepare
thep2 bartes bumble their foulesinbpsl{pabt
Thep ý feare the Lorde, kepe bys commaunde-
mentes æ wpll be pacpente tpl thep fe bpm felfe
fapinge:-xbetter it ig foz vs tofall into the ban-
des of the Lozd.then into the bandes of men:fo2
bpsmercpeisas qeeare as bpm felfe.
Co oure father K mott pita nh pad poublebono-


ure. ofthe birtipnge and curte of the father andmocker 0 ma
suse fitpoutlp to Cearche out the fecretes of od.


x TE dpe chpldzen of wplevome area con-
i, (Gy execteple ig obedpencet lont. Weare
De? » a mepour father (D mp deare cbild2é)
crore — . @dothercafter that pe mape be fafe
wente.b.b *Fortbe Lode wpll pauc the father honoured
<pbe.va of he chploz€: ¢looke what a mother comaun:

deth ber child? to bo, be wyl pane it kept. ipa


fi.re.criii,e
Sulan d


fo bonoureth bps father, bysfpnnestalbe for -


epbe:pia CUEN Dpm:*é he that honoureth bps mother ig
~ lpke one p cathereth trealuce tonetber. ti bol


olo-


hono2eth bps father, thal bave fope ofbps owne
chplozen,t when be maketh bys praper be Mal-
be berde. He p honoureth bys father, thal hanea
longe lpfe: ehe that ts cbebpent forthe Lo2des
fake, bps mother mall baue tope of bpm.
x3. . MetbatfeareththeXorde, bonoureth bps
Father and motber and doth themferupce, agit
were dnto the Lozde hpi felfe.onoure thp fa
therindede,in worde and inallpacpence, that
thou mapefte baueqoddcs blefipnge, and pps
mfeA abpoe wpth theat thelatte.
TALLAN ¥ The blefipnge of the father bupldethop
the boules of the children, but the mothers cucle
roteth out the found rj Magrath he not when
tby father is repzoued,fo2 itis not bonoure vn-


tothe,but thame.ffo2 the wortbyppe ofamans |


father is bys owne woztbpppe, where the fa-
ther iswptbouthanoure , itis the dpthoneftpe

. ofthe fonne. pfonne, make muche oftbhp fa-
therinbpsage, g qrevue bpmnot aslongeagshe
Ipueth.and pf bys bnderfandpnae faple,baue
pacpence wpthbppin , ¢defpple bym not in thp
frenath.sfo2 the good dede p thou ewet tn-
tothp fatber,thall not befozyotten , t whan p
thp felfe wanteffe it albe rewarded tine efor
tby motheres offence thou Malthe recompenced
wpth good, pee, it balbe founded fo2 p inrparb-
feoutnes)= inthe Dape of froubletbou thalte be
rememb2ed:thp fpnnes alfothall melre awape,
Ipke as the pleinthe fapze warme wether.


fearetbe ©


gregacponoftbhecrpabteous,ethep2 —


ie that forlaketh bps father thall comete
fhatie:and be that defpetb bps mother, ig cur-
fedof God. Dp fonne perfourme tip weozckes
w pti loupnea mekenefie,fo hhaltetbau be belo


e fubpe of tepfoome
anb her frute. g iutge ought tabemercpfull, Anerboztacpon
g è 1


"Ss . i, 7


P lone, x Defraude not the pore
of bys almes , and turne not a«


aor kE > Pi a
cs SO ve tirbis neceflite:qrene not the


T


x


Depia


HfFelus thefonneo’Sirach o.veriti
_xeipuerbpmebatluticcth wrongefromt audtemptaciort. )Folowe not the lufke of thpne
sen. Hitt. the Dade of theoppzefiour,andbenot fapnther swonebertein thp rength,aud faye not:tutbe,
ted whan thou (yctell tn tudgentent.Wemercp- howe pane ¥bhan frength,o2 who wpll bepng
ful nto the fatberlesasafather,andbeinftea me onder becaule of mp worckes:fo2 doubteles
` Beofanbufbande yntothep: mother:fothalt¥ God hall abuenge it. And Cape not: 3 bauelpr
be as an obedpenite fonne ofthe Hpelt:s be tall ned, and what cuel bathe happened me sFo2 the
loue the moze then thy motberdoth.daiifedome Almpabtpeis apacpenterewarder. — — cu
bzetbeth Ipfe into ber chpldzen,receauethbetbem * Wecaute thy linne ig forgeuen the,betiot Semtiiè
that feke per, twpllgobefozetbem intbewape therefore wpthoute fcate,nepther beape onefin ,. dirn
ofrpgbteoulnes. Hep loucthPer,loueth lpfe,z ne Dpon another.xAnd fape iot: tutbe,the mer
tbep that (tekeber dplygentive,thal baucareat cpeof the 1020 iS greate be thal fozqeneme my ecet,ro8
top. Thep that kepe ber, fhalbauctbeberptage finnes,bet prietier Co manp.«jo2 Iphe as beig
of [pfe:foz where tyeentreth in thereis the blef: merepfull,fogoeth wath,from bpm alfo,e pis
fpnge ofod. Chepthathononreber,thalbe indpanacpon commeth dower bpon fpnhers :
the feruaunteg of thebolpe one : andthep that Wake no farping to turne wuto the Low
loue ber, are beloucd of Good. Chofogeueth «put hot of frombdape to Dape:foz fodentpe thal
` eare onto ber, ball iudgethe Heathen , andhe bps wiathcome,ein thetimectbengeauncebe =
that bath relpecte unto ber, (hall orwell arare (all deftcop the. x Trut notin topeked rpéheg Pioiè.t:i
€  Betbat belencth a Daueberinpollel foz they thallnot helpe the tu thedape of pünpih seb pid
[pon and bps generacpon allendure:foz wba menteand wath. Be not carped abouteto cue: Sapho. ie
befalleth te gocth wpthbym,andcholethhim rp wpnde,< conot inte cuerp Wape:fo2 fo doth 25
amonge the bell. Feare,dzede,and temptacyon the fpnner that batbadouble tong. Stand falt
ball hebzpnge pon bym and trepe bpm inber inthe wape of the Lorde, be ftedfalke inthp ün-
doctrpne,tpll pe paue pzoued bym in Dpg thon- derflandinge, abpde bp the o20e,¢ folowethe
btes.thatbecommptbistoule vntober.Then wozdeof peace trpgbreontnes. We gentle tobe
all the fablpthebpm,bzyngetberpabtewap are the wode of Good, that thou mavek pnder-
bntobym,make bima gladman, hewbpmber fEande it,.anD make a true aun{were wpth wel;
fecretes,¢ beape bpon Bintbe treafuresofkno Dome.*26elwyfteto Deare but lowe and pacp Aaities.t.é.
welege, bndertandpnge of rypahteoutnes. But ent th geupngeantwere. Ff thou balte bndertka
pibe qoo wronge, the Hall forlake bym, g gene Dpnge,thape thy nepghbouran antwere:3f no,
sp DPM ouer intothe bandeg of bps enempe. — lapetbppand Weer mouth lef thou be trap
p fonne,makemucheoftbetpme,etchue pedin an tndpicrete wode,g focofounded. Ho
thetbpnge that is cuell , and fozthplpfethame noure and Wozhyp isina mans wpfe telkpnge
not to fape the truth. f€oztheretsathamethat but tbe tonge of the bndpicrete is owne deftruc rà
bepngetbfpnne,andthereiSathametbatbipn cp. * We not a peup acculer aglong as thou lp =H
Zeutt.tir.c qeth woztbpp g fauoure: x Acceptuoperfonne uelk,and vre no flaunder wpth thptonge. Ffo}
after tipne owne wpll,p thou be notconfoun= Mame andfozowe goeth Ouctthechefe, andan
ded tothineawnedecap.We not athamed ofthp evellnameouer bpm that ts double tonged: but
nepgbboure inbpsabuerlitpe,¢kepenot backe bethat iga peupe acculer ofother men , balbe
top councell whan it mape do good, neptyer pp bated enuped and confounded. e that thou tu
dethp wpledomeinber bewtp. ffozintbetoner (€pFyethefmalland Greate alpke.
is wpldome knowen,fols bnderliding know Chapter.
lege and Lear aise in the aurt of the wple


and fedfaftnetie tn the workes of rigbteoutnes Shy talk al

Anno wplelpeake agapnite the wozdeof truth at gan went C Not thy nep bboures enempe tor S

but be atbamed of the lyes of thpne owne iguo- fh Ice) a Foz who fo ig enel,

taunce.Dbame not toconfefle thpne erroure,e E bree bepłe ofrebukteand dipo

Cubmpt not thy felfe vntoeuery man becaufe of A Vey Brnonre , ewholoener beareth enu © trots, rih

fpnie-Wptbhitandenot thefaceofthempabtpe ESS Dadoubletonge offendeth. x We bphitia
ri and frpue thou not agapntte the Ereame. But ude inthe deupee ofthyne owne dudere

for rpg bteoutneffe take papne with al thy foule Pee Ee thp ttrengthe be hurte bp foo:

and fo: the truth (ryue thou wnto death, God Ipfhenetie, and) leate thp leanes wptber,'and


thall fpabhte fo2 the agapnfte thyne encinpes. thy fcupte be delfroped,and fo thou belefte asa
we not baltpe in thy tounge.n eptberflacke AnD dape tree(intbhe Whplderneffe. ) ge orien
heglpgente tn thp worckes. wWenotasaLpon Foule deftropeth hym that bathe it,maketh bynt
in thyne owne boule , deftropuge the houtholde tobe laughed tolcome of bps enempes , ( and
folkes, and oppre yng chen that are bnder the bapnetb bpm fo the porcpon of the yngodlye.)
actes.re.g *Let not thpne pande be ftretched oute to recea * A fwete woz2de,multpplpeth frendes and pas Sect.rib
ue,and utte whan thou Mulde geue. cpfpeth them thatbhe at varpaunce,and a thank
garmin menaip one ionnroenrrmoe | {llfONGe wyll be plenteons tna goodman. »
“‘Reaeaunce of God pughteco be feared one a ee Polde frende Pppe Wyth manpeneuerthelefle
maemae ROE late, Ss os PAEA pab eapentanris aA DAE One ceee. ofatboutande, 3°
a Ea eet Hutte not vnto thp riches, xand Cape not PE tbou ettek a frende,proue bpi fpi, a deuri
duneoritc, Pa ey uVe I baue pnoughfozmplpfe.(Wozit benot balp to genehinteredence Woz Come nma move pad
eccetc me (all not pelpeinthe tpme of vengeaunce iga rede, but foza time, g “See ane Baath. Pa
a | 6 = Bapeo


Athi ries


Tbe booke of ; bi


Daproftrouble. Andtbere is Come frende that
turneth taenemptye,andtaketh parte agapni
? tbe: pf be hnowe anp burte bp the, betelletpit
Sersrdis one. * Ayapne lome frende ig buta companyon
at tbe table, inthe vape of nede Peconrpnucth
not. But alurefrende wpllbe vntothecumag
thpne ownelelfcand dealefapthfullpe wptb tdp
houtpolde folke. DE thou luffer troble and abduct
fytpe,beis wptbthe, and bpdethnot ppm felfe
fromtbe. Departefromeppne enempes,pea,

and beware of thpfrendes.

A fayrbfull frende iga Frongedefence,
whofofpndetbfuche one, fpndetha trealure. a
fapthfull frende bath ne peare , the wepabte of
molde æ filuer ig not to be comparedto the good
nes of bys fapth.a Aier rendeisamedicp
ne of lyfe ¢thep that feare the i foal fpnde
bpm. (Ubo To feareth the Lorde thall {pzolpere
worth Frendes:and ag bets bpm felfe, (o Hal bps
frende be alfo.@)p fonne.receaue doctrpnefrom
thy poutbe vp, {oo Malte thou fpnde wpledome
trlithoubeoide. Gotoberagsone that pio-
wet) andfowrtb, and wapte pacpentlp for ber

rood frutes . f€oz thou Malte haue but tptiela-
boure inber worcke, but thou thaltecate of her
frutes rpgbtefoone.D howe erccadpnge thar
pe ig wpledometo vnlearncd méan onkedfall
xodpe WPL not remapne in ber. Cinto luche, Me
igas it wereatouchftonc, ebecafteth ber from
bym in all the bafe, for wpledemets wyth him
but inname, there be but fee that paur inot:
lege of ber. (Wut wpth them that know ber, fe
abpdetl enen vntotbcappcarpng of God.)
Seue care(myp tone)receaue my doctrpne,
æ refulenot mp counfell. ut thy foote into Per
Meth. H.0 iynied xg take her pocke vpon thp necke-bowwe
Downe thp chulder nto her,beare per pacpent-
ipe and be not werpe of ber bandes Come vnto
Her wpeth tbp whole berte, andkepe per wayes
‘wpthaitby power Speke after ber,and fhe thal
be Gewed the:and when thou hatte ber folair
— ber not.sfo2 at the latte thou thaltefynde ret in
D per,andthat (halbe turned to thp greatetope,
Then tall her Fetters be a tronge defence fo?
the and her pocke aglozyousrapment. oz the
bewtpe of lpfeis tn per, and ber bandeg are the
couplpnge together of faluacpon. Yea,a glozy-
ougrapmente (s it thou galt put iton, andthe
famecrowneofiopetbaltetbouweare.
<})p fonne, yEtbou wpltetakebeade,thou
chalte baue wnverftandpuge,and pt thou write
appipe thy mpnde, thou thalte berople. aftbou
wyltebowe Downe tbpue eare , thou Malte re-
teane doctrpne,and pe thou Delpte in bearpnge,
thou alte bewple.Sotande wptb the multptu
‘Deo luche elders ag baue vnderMandpnge, and
confente onto thep2 wpledome with tbpne bert
ecte.biit.a xtbattbou mapet beare all godly fermons and
that rhe wozthpe fentences efcape the not. ano
pfthou lept aman of dpfcrete bnderftandpnge
get the foone onto bpm, andlet thp foote treabe
Pramea pon the pad ab of bis dDoozes.+iLetthp mpnde
be bpo the comaundéentes of God, be earnelt
Ip occupped in pps lawes:fo thal be ftablptbthp
Hert, ggeuethe woploome at thpneowne delpze,


C The. vii. Chapter.


(© We mud fez fake eucii and pet noe wt fe cure Celues.Ehe be i


bauoure ofthe topie towaroe hps opi brs eead: bp achel

tzen, bps teruaunces, bis father and moth ette pealt. gr . t
rerema D no enell, fo all tbereno barme Æ
urA bappen Duto the. Drparte awape
ifromthetbpngethatig wpcked, €

no mpffoztune Mal medle with tbe :
Fan Gp fonne, fowe no cucll thpnges ”
owes ofenrpabteou(nes,fo malt thou
notreapetbemCcnenfolde. Labvourenotonto

man fozanpe Lozvetbpppe , nepther yntathe

apung forthe feate of bonour.+jubpfpe not thy ocerstts

(elfe before God, (fo: be knoweth thp bert and fcc. Sana
Defprenot tobe reputed wple inthe pretence of gui oui b

the kpng.@ake no labour to be made a Judge

exceptett were lo that thou condet mpcbtely

put dowr: wpckednes foz pithos Hulde ftan

Dein awe ofthe pzetence ofthe mpabtpe, thou


aj


in the fo:


(huldett faple in geupnge fenterce.ffende not


iu the multptude of the cptpe, put not thy felfe
amonge the people. Opnde not two {pnnesto eesriie
getber,fo2 in onc fpnne Halte thounot be vnpu :
npthed Baye riot: tulpe, E wplilooke bpon d
tbemultytude of mp oblacpong , and whan F
offer tothe Byabete Godhewyllacceptett. ‘

We not fapnte berted woban thou makelte 5 ,
thy paper ,nepther flackein geupnge of almes
Langbnomanto {come inthe peuancite of bys >
foule fo God(whych fepth all thpngeg)is hex treur d
thatcan bypnge downe and fet bpagapne.ac-
cepte not leafpnge agapnite thp brother nerber
bo tbe fame agapnilte thy frende. Cifenot toma
ke anp manet of lpc,fo2 the cufBomestberof are
not good. Wake not manpe wordes when thou
arteamonge the elders:x when p pzapelt,ma satb.bt.s
frenot much bablpng.*Letno laborious Work xom. siib
be tedious vnto the. nether the bulbadzp which ‘
the Almpgbtve bath created. G)ake not thp bo- “a
aftintbe multitude of thy wpckednes, but pun i,
ble thp felfe eucn from thpne perte: and remem


=


berthatthe weatbe hhallnotbe longein tating


and that the bengeaunce of the fietbe of the yn

gobdliciga terp fpreand wozme.Genenot ouer

thy frende foz anp good, no? thy fapepfill bzo- $

ther forthe bete rolde. i
Depatte not fromadpferete and good wa C t

man , tpat isfallen onto tbe fo: thy pozcponin

qa of tie £020,fo2 the qpft of ber bonefip

iS aboue golde. xU bereag thpferuaunte wore Leber,”

kethtrulp(ntreatcbpm not encll, no? thebpze- |

Ipnge that isfapth full onto the. Louca dpleret

fernaunt as thbpne owne foule:defraud bymnot

of bys lpbertpe.netbher leaue bpma pooze man.

KF thou baue catel loke votl totem: epFthep Deusr.d

befo:thp pzopfpte,kepetbem.* Fftpou bhane mcr ppa

fonnes,bepnae them bp in nourtonr ¥ learnini i

g bolde tbem in awe from tbep? ponte bp. Iip

haue daughters, kepethep:bodpe,  Wewernot

thy facecherfultoward then. Warp thp daugh

ter,¢(o palt thou perfomne a wepabtie matter

but geue ber toa manof vnbderftandpnge. JF Pp

bane a wrfeafter thpne owne mpnde , fo: lane

ber not, (but compet nottpp [elfe to the hateful) "i

xPnour thp father frothy wholePert: g forget eresia  ”

nottbefozoméul trauaple tbat thy yar Tabpiige |

wperp tbe


i
EE
A E


Loved ehe-vementber that thou walk bazne tho:

tow: them, and howe cante thou recompence

them the thpnges that they hauedone fo2 the ¢

D Heasetje Lo: wpthallthp loule and bonoure

bra mpnpiers. Louethp makertwopthalthp

Dente rte Peongeh, +g fortake not bys leruanntes. eare
the L ozde wpthallthy toule , and boxoure bps

Aurore. preatted.xGeue chem thepe porcpo of the Fpatke
trutes ¢ (neceale of the earth, lpke ag it ig com-
nlaunded tie :(and reconfple thy felfe of thp ne:
Tipgence wyehthe iytle hockePRene chemthe
Poulders,and thep2 appopnted offerpnees and
Fo2fipnges: Reach thyne bande nta the pore

that God mape bleffe the wrth plenteoninefe.


Fesbp ie. Se lpberall nto allmen lpuinge,tpet let not


rom. rib DUEDO good euen vntothemepat aredecd.xLet | a


tejarrhs NOE tbem that wepe, be wptbout comforte, but
-~ mourne With fnch as monurne.+ Let it not greue
theto vplet thetpcke, foz ý all niake the to be
beloued, whatfocuet thou taket inbande,remé

ber the ende and thou Malte neuer do amplie.

The. viii. Chapter. |

à C Agapne chp better is notrpupnge.Dftbedeathef

tbpneenempe marettbau not retopre,mo? tprppre thp

_hepghbours, noz the twozres ofthe wpe.


sa Trpue not wpthampgbtp må, Ief
NRA | thou chaunce to falinto bis handes

b ba, Eia 1
Ba aa Man,lett be happen to bapngedplan


Pry Tr


CS parde quarell agapnite the. x Hoy
, Qold €lpluce bath budone manpaman, pee,eu

Shei tes Of kpnaes bath itmadetofall. Strpuc

not wptD a man p ts full of wozdeg:and lape no

Gickes bpon pig fpze. epe no companpe wptp

tbe Dulearned, left be genetbp kpnredancuclre

Sattai. PO2te.*Dilpple not a man ý turneth him felfe a

utopi iib Wap from ipn e caffe bim notin tecth opthall,
but remember that we are fraple: cuerpchone.

ATU. S sO hyncite icome of noman in bps olde age,fo2

We Ware olde allo.2Se not glad of the deathe of

thpneencmp.but remember p we multedye all

fie forte of vs, (F fapne wold we come tntoiop)

ceste-bs..d ADilpylenot the fermogs offuch eloersav baue

buberilandypng, but acquaput thy felfe wpri p

wpe fentences of them, foz of them P thalt lear

ne wpldome ethe doctrpne of nder andpiee,

€ howe toferie great men wpthout co mplaine.

Go not from the doctrpue ofthe elders:for thep

bane learned it of thep2 fathers. SE02 of the thou

5 thaltlearne ynderftandpn e,fop thou maypelte

> makeanfwerein p time of nede. Hindlenot the

coalcs af finners, (whan P rebubelt them) ick p

De brentin the fpape flammes of tbepzfpnnesg.

Relpite not the Face of the blafybemer, ýbelap

Ecd Fries not wapte forthp mouth.*Lende not nto bim

Pp ismpabtlertben thy felfe:3E thou lendet him

countit but lof.2Se not fuertpe aboue thp pow

ev:pE thou be:then thyncke fucelp to papeit.Goa

lof folawethe Judge:Fo2 be wyl tudee acco?


Pii Lert)


Sen, id Bonge to bps owne honour.* Trau all not by
t


the Wave wyth bpm that is beapnelefie, lefte be
bo thceucii:fo2 be Foloweth bys owne wylfull:
neg and fo Walt thou perpte thorowe bps folp
pow. rif. * Strpue not wyth bpm that igan gqrpe
Sarina and crucit, and qo not wpth byminto wplder-

nefle:fop bloude is nothpagein bps tpabte, and


i


Fetus the fonneof Stach


SE + Make not varpaunce witha peb b


, EFA
Ho Keriitt
were there ig no belpe be Chall thuicther the. Areca
* ‘Cake nocouncell at fooles, for theploue nd"?
fhpnge but thetbynges that pleafetbem felucs
Hakeno councel before a Rraunger , for thou
cantke not teli what wpli come of tt. Dpeh not
thpne bertebnto euecp man, leat be be pnthbank
full to the,and put theto rep2ofe.

Y‘be.e. Chapter, = |
C Ebe feopardpes of rhaitenes are to cerchac’. Anbinefren
ders to bs preferred before a neme, The glozpe and epebelte of


(punters. kpgbteous men ulbe be bpdden to ret; Zabourcis
the chefethpage ina Wozckenian,and wpledoine ina pipnee.


ata, wa E nof geleous ouer thp wyFfe

H9 pee) OF thp bolome, that he fhewe
wm, “A NOt Conte thzewed popnt of wil ,
oe Pi Bed boctrpne bpon the. x Geue ®20.10.b, 6
seo de) lot the power of thplpfe ynta **#?-P9.4


me el et


a Woman, leak the come tn thp
fothou beconfounded.Lokenot pps
a woman f isdelpz6ug of manp men, leftethou
fallinto Der {nares. Qile not the companye ofa
woman p (sa player anda dauncer, g heare ber
nof,lelte thou perpihe thozowe ber entplpnee.
Sebolde not a mapden , that thou be vot burte
in ber bewtpe.* Catt not thy mpnde bpon pat-
leottesinany maner of tipna, left thou deftrop
bothethplelfeandtbyneberptage. Gonot a
oute galpnge in cucrp lane of thecptpe nether
Wander tbou abzoade inthe ttretes thereof. x s;
Turne awape thp face froma bewtpful woma
and looke not bpon the fapzenefie of other: 25

+ Manp a manbatbperphed thozowe the ae TEILA
bewtpe of wemen, foz thozowe it thebelpze is marcy
kpndled as it were afpie. Au aduouterous wo-
man albetrodden vnder fote as mpze,of enz-
tp one that goethebp the wape. Wanpea man
wonderpnae at theb ewtpe of araung woma
bath benecafke oute , for her woades kpnbleag
afpze. Dpt not wpth anotber mans wpe bp a:
npe menes, Ipe not voptp ber bpon the bed, ma
fie tio woes Wyeth der at the wpne. leat thyne
berteconlentonto ber fo thou wpth tby bloud
fall into detruccpon. Foakenotanoldefrend
foz tpe newer allnot be lyke pym.

newe frende is newe wpne : lét bym be

olbe and thou Malte dpucke bym wpih vlea-
fure. Delprenot the lionoure and tpcbetic of a
{pnner,fog thou kuowefte not what deftruccp-
Onis fo? te come bponbpit. Delpte not thou
the thpage that the bugodlpe bane pleafure in,
bepnge fure that the tngodlpe Hall not be ace
cepted vntplltpep: grane.

tiepe thefrom the mantbathathpowee to
flape,fonedeft thon not to be afraped of deathe.
And pfehou cOmeEe vuto bpm, mahe no faute
letbe bappen to takeawsape tby Ipfe. Remen-
ber that thou goet in thempddett of fnares, ab
bpon the bulwozckes of thpcytye. weware of etel bill 6
thp nepgbboureasnpeas thoucan bo MEDIC anorrrviva
pth fuchas be wpfe and pane vnderffandpng
Let tufte men bethp getes, let thy mpathe bein
the feare of God, let the remembraunce of ad dete. bibs
be (ntby mynde, «let all thy taikpna bein tie andris
commaundementes ofthe Hyahel. En tpe bans -
des ofthe craftclmen thall the wozckeMe corms titel oh
mended, x06 thal the princes of the people tn the :


Eee ii wyledoing


roue. ba


Matbe.b.¢


- Khe booke of


wpledome wf Ap a man ful of woz
beg ig parlous inbpscptpe-and be that is rate
inbps talkpnae.thalbe abpogred.
(be. r. Chapter.
COFRpnges and Judges. ;poeand couctcoutnes arc
to be abbozed.Laboure is pzapied,


ECS S opleis bpm felfe enen fo arebps of
f oke what maner of man the ruler of
thecptie ig, fuchare ge Dwell therin alfo.

ropetb bys peoplesbut


betranflated from one ee fo another.
@ bere is nothing wole thé acouetons ma
, ubp art P proude, D thou earth ¢ apeg: Cher
(gs riota moare wpcked thpnge,then to lowe mo:
npe. And why: fucheone bathe bys fouleto tell,
pet is be but fpltbpe Dounge whple belpueth.
And thoughe the Pbplpcpon thewe pps
belpe neuer folonge, petinconclufpon it goeth
after thys mane, to Dapea kpnge, to mo2zowe
deede. orban àa mandpeth, bets the bepre
of ferpentes,bealkes,and wormes. The begyn
nynge of mannes pryde, istofallawape from
(Sob: And why-bys berte tg gone From bys ma:
ker,fo2 Dzpdels the ozpgpnall of all fpnne.
(bo fo taketh bolde thereof, malbe filled with
curfpnaes, andat the late it (pall onerthbzowe
bpm. Therefore bathe the Lorde bzoughte the
congregacpons of the xopcked to dpthonoure ,
_ and deltroped them fo tbe ende. |
aapie bre .,..... *Ood bath deffreped the feates of proude
Sanie bid nopnces, eet vp the meke in thep2 teade:God
riin. e. and Dath wethered therootes of the pzoude Heatbhe
Foiit.b  gplanted'thelowlp amonge them.* God bathe
Senreir.€ oyerthzowen the landeg of the Heathen, ant de:
troped them onto the grounde. be hath caufed
them to wether awap,be bath bought them to
naugbte, made the memozial of them toceafle
from oute of the earth.(God Path deftroped the
name of the pzoude,elefte the name of the bum:
bleofmpnde.) apse was not made fo: man,
nether wrotbfulnes fo: meng chpldz¢. Che feed
of men that feare God, Halbe brongt to bonen


re, but tbe fecd whpchtrantareffetb the comma- -


undemétes of the Lozdethalbe (harmed. He that
istheruler amonge bzethren,ts holden tn bono:
ure anonge them , and pethat regardeth fuche
asfeare the Lozde. The glozp of the rych of the
bonourable,and of the poze ig the feare of Gad.


Dpfppre not thou the (uk poore man,end D
magnpEpenot the rpcbe vngodlp.Greateis the
fudge andmpabtie in honoure,pet is tpere none ;
greaten tomb tbat feareth God. x Cintothe P70-Foss
eruaunte tbat isdplcrete , Wallthe free dolet: vi
upce.*He thatis wple and welnurtoured, wel”
not grudge when be is refourmed, and an igno-
raunte bodpe ball not come to bonoure. toe nol
proude todo thp worcke , and dpfpapzenotinp
time of aduerfptc.«ietter ish: that labouret) prou, pib
andbatb plentcoufneffe of allthynges, then pe
tbat is gozqgeous,and wanteth beade. |

Wyp lonne, kepe thp foule inmekenes; and
ga ber, ber due bonour. Wbo thall tuftifp bim
p{pnneth agapnit bpm felte: Cibo wpl honour
bym,p dpthonoureth bps owne foule’ Che poo


-re ig honoured fo: pps fapthfulnes g trutbe but


therych is hbadinreputactd becaule of pig good
des .ethat ogdzeth bpm felfe bonefilp tr pounce
tpe, powe much moze hall be bebaue bym felfe
ponete in rpebessAnd who lo ord2eth bpm fel
e onbonefElp inrpcpes,powe muche moze Hall
be bebane bpm felfe bnboneflp ingouettpe ¢


The.xi.Chapter.

(The praple ofbumpipte.atter the outewarde appeara:
unce oughte we not te iutge- Di beadpeand talvciudbarmentc.
Sberpebe isnot wpthout offence, Ail thpnarscomeofGob,
Allmen are notto be byoughte intotypne boufe,


Vy er z% 7:


m A De wpledome of bpm $ ig brought a


lowe, fhalllpfte vp bys beadcand


ne Dpo the erth,xe the bulpkelp bath wozne the pcre s


ucttpe,and Hoos epeloketh bpon bpm to good Job. pliis
=


rolperpte ead nite ipte anb beAtb
*ye20lperpte eaduerfite.lpfe and deathe,pouer
teand rpcheffe come all of the Lo; ve Wipioome Bor €


Sod,


Deu, riii


-ap —
=


o that manpe men maruell A


TI
nurtoure, and knowlege of thelawr, are wpth © FFotta


H(PJelumhe fonnt of Sirach, ol eri
3 Gob loneant the wapes of godare wyth him genenottothe brigodlpe. Lee not the bicade b?
Crroure and darchenefleare madefertynners geuen bym, ý bebenot mpebtper then thp Celfe
(and ebep that eralte toem felues incuell ware therin. Eo: fo Halt thon receatte trsple as much
olde in eucll.) Che gpfteofGodremapnethfoz euell inallthegood that thou doefte bito bpm
the rpghteous , and the good wpll Mall geue And why thebpabett bateth fpnners,and that
pofperptefozeuce. Homemanis rpche bp lp» tewarbde Dengeaunce puto the vurodly. Fn p20
| upnge npgarodlp,and chat ig bps pozcpon of bis ipecpte,a frende thal not be knowne ein aduer:
Aube Fhe rewarde in that belapeth: xnowe Jbauegot- f{pteanenempe thal not be bpd. for whan ama
tenreke, andnowe wpll Jeate and dzpnckeof {sin wealth, it greucth bps enempes but ines
mp goodes mp felfealone. Andpethecoufpde=- upnes strouble aman thall knawe bys frende:
teth mot, tbat thetpmedrawethbnpe anddeath Cruftnener thyne thempe, fozlpke as enpon
approcheth that be multe leauealltheletbpn= rufteth,fodothpyps wWpckednes. And though be
ges onto other men,and dpebimlelfe. Stande make muchecrouchynge ad knelpnge.pet kepe 73
thou fafte intpp couenaunte ,andexcercpfetbp well thp mynde and beware ofbpm. Set bpm
felfe therein’, and ‘remapne inthe wozcke unto not bp thenetber let bpmipe at thy rpghte have
tbp age. Cotpnue not inthe worckesoflinners lett he furne bpm, wet inte thp place,take thy ra
: but puttbytruft in God,:¢ bpdein thpneettate wmeelekethp feat efo thou attbelat remem
| Defo: ít is butan ealpetbpng inthe lfyghtiofGon bermp wo:de3, and be papcked at mp fapinaes
i tomakea ie man tpch,and ý federlpe. Che * pnd not two lpnnes together, fó? there eccie.d11e
blefipng of Godbhatketh tothe rewarde ofp rp thal not one hy 'onpunpwhed.eabo wyil bane pp suv...
Thtcous,e maketh byg frutegfoneto flopie tye ofthe charmer, that ig tinged of the ferpent
4 pzofpere.Dapenot what helpetbitmese what o2 of allfucheas come npethebeaftess Euenfó
al Fbauethe whplerAqapne.tap not:¥baue igit wpthbym  kepeth company topth a tope=
| Eer pnongd, hewecan 3 wanter x Wiben thou arte rei ci hi 5 in pm felfe in bist) imen. ot
a in welfare, forget not aduerlpte t whe it xort afeafon wplbebpde wpthtbe,but pithou fom € :
| not wel wptbtbe,baueaqoodbope,thatitthal ble,betarpethnot.+ Bn enempeisfwetetnpbps Rere.rit.b.


a


k


4 CUinto whom we oughtetodageod, enempesongyte EDY felfe:-Poweagre the ketelland'the pottoge
¥ sto beetehuen, APA add the one be Cmittenagapné the other
i it balbe zoken. Tberpehedealeth vnryadtc.
| ouflpe,and yey wpth all: but the poore
bepnge oppzeficd and wzongeoullpe dealt with
all, {uffereth icarcenefle,and genet fapze wo,-

bes. VF thou be for bys protpte.be vfetbtbe:but -
pf thou bauenothynge.be ball forfake the. As
bpmictfethallrewardethe . Heanvethenot longeas thou hatte anpe typnize of chpne owne
ina good cale that is alwaye sccuppedinenell bethalbea good felowe wptbtbe: pea, beall

€ geuctbnoalmes, foztbebpet hatcthtbefpn- maketbeabareman,andnotbe fozpefoztbe.

x ners and bath mercpe bpon them that thewe p Ptbhe bauenede ofthe , be Hall defraude
$ weorchigs of repentaunce. Geuetbou wntotuche the:and(wpthapzeupe mocke) Wali he putthe


be better.


oz itis buta fmallthpnge tnta
Gon, inthe dape of death torewardeeuerp ma
accompnge to bps wapes. Che aduerlptpe of
a re maketh one to fozget all pleafuce:and
when aman bpeth bs Wozckes are Dpicouered
apie no bodpe before Hysdeathe’, fozaman


(balbeknowentn bps chplodzen.


wWzpnge not euerpe man intothpne boufe,
fo2 the dpiceatful lapetb wapte ope ipke
asa partrpchin amaunde, fois the berte of the
poude:tltke ag a (pye that loketh bpon the fal
of bys neygbboure.. 10? be turneth good nto
euet and Gaunbereth thecboten. OF onefparke
is madea great fpze(and of one Dpiceatfull ma
ig bloude increafed) and an bngodlpe man lap-
cth waptefo2 bloude. Beware ofthe ditceatful
fo? be pmagyneth wpcked thynges, tobzpnge
the into a perpetual hame. PF thou takeftana
leaunt Onto the, be haloeffrope the in vnquiet
nes, andod2pue the fromtbhpne owne wapes .

‘The.xti. Chapter.


wath. Geuethouvnto p qood,and receaue not
thefpnner:d0 well unto bpm that is lowlp, but


ipppes,be ca makemanp good wordes e(peake
map gooo tbpngeg: Dee becã weape with bis
eves , but inbps berte bepmagyneth, howe t
tpbzowe tbe into the ppt :q pfbe mape fynd opoz
tunptpe, be wpll not be fatpifped wpthbloude.
Jt aduerfptpe come vpé the, thou thalte fynde
bpm there fpr and though be pzetend todo the
elpe,vet (hal be vndermpnethe. Pe thal hake
bps beade, and clappe bps bandes ouer ithe foz
E i : br | ae maketh manpe
spe! fguplebpscountenaunce.
The. xiii. Chaba.


p inanboope and geuetheall good toozdes, and


fape-what wanteft thou r Thus Hall be Hamé
the in bps meate, bntpl be bane fupte thecleané

vp twple o2 thepfe,and at the late tall belau«

ethetotcopne. Biterwarde, whem helepeye

i €ce iii thatthou


5


“Theboskeof `


that thou þafenotDpnge, be (hall forfake the,
Make bys beade at the.(aubmpt thp teifevnto
God, and wapte bponbys pande.) . P
Beware thatthou be not dplccaucdand
beoughtedovouein thy fpmplenetle. We not to
bumbicinthp wptedome:leclte whan thou arte
b2oughte lowe, thou be dpleeaucd thozowe feo
Iptpenes. Ze thou becalied ofampagbtpe mã, ad
fente thy felfe fo thal becal theta hym:the moze


onrpgrhteoniip, cathereth fo2 other folaes and
anotherma Mall make qoed cheare wpthors
goodes. Heptsrpopceked unto bymlelfe,bowe
ibuldbe be qeod bute other mért owecan {ich
one bane anp pleafure of bps qoodes: Chereis
nothynge worle;then whe one dpffanoreth him


felfe ethisisa rewarbde of bis wphcdnes. PeEbe —
do anp good pedothitnot knowprg therof,ad


agapnite bps wpll,¢ at thelafe bedeclarch bps


ofte. Dreallenotthouwntohpym,pthboubenot yngracpouines. Anpaarde hatha wpcked epe
Gut oute:butgonotpfacreof.leeHheforgetp beturnethawapbis faces difpplerbhpsowne
iiprhdzawe not thy telfefrom bpstpeach,but foulex X couctousmasepe bath newer pnough. #zr.roi.e
beleucnot bps manp. wode s. For wpthmuche inthe pozcpo of wpckedneffe, vntpll thetpime p t
comunpeacpa thalbetemptethe.e(wptbapre- pewptherawape,ebhathlolte bps omnefoule.
up mock) al be queftiothe of thy tccretes.Che A wicked epe (pareth brad e there to feat 8
wnmercpiuli mpnde ot pis thalmarckethby W0? cenes vpó bpgtable. p (oncdogoodtothy tcl “
des.be thal not{paretodop burt,etoputthein feofpehoupatt,eqeucthe Lobe bpsducowe-
pid: de ware andfakeqood ede totbpielfe, rpngesaRememberthatoeathtarpetbnotjand <
02 Pwalkefteinparell of thy ouccipzowinge. powe pebecousnaunt of pqraueis Gewed un
. KowetehenP hearelhys wozdes, make to p.forh couctaunt ofthisworlde Malopethe Ecetia
fheastpough thou wereftinabdseame, twake dcath.+Do good vnto thy frend befow Pope, & cave rvie
wp.Loue God all tby ipfclonge,ecall ppd bym accozdpngtothrabelptercachoutthpnebande
fu thp nede.Guerpe beafteloucthbpslpse,euctt ggeuentothepozr. Senot vplapopnted of p
q foleteuerymanlonebysnepgbboure. alee qooddaps letnotp porpdofpgeoddayoner- = >
< Sopllrefozte to thep2zipke, andeuerpmanwwpll paspSHhalt pnuctleauctbptrauapls tlabours | t-
- Bepecompanpe wpthfuche agheigbpm felfe. ‘ynro other mene Fnthedeupopnae of che herp:
wut asthe wolfeagreeth wptbthelambe.foo tage gene stake efanctyfpethp foule.@lozcke
Acon bic dDotpthe vngodlpwpthtbherpgbteous.~Cibat =P rpghteon{nes before thp death, for inthe bell ters e


/


felowefbpppe (hulde an holpe man baur witha
dagger Powe cantherpebe tthe poor agreto=
ether The wylde Afe ig the lyons pzape tn p
wploernefiz,euen foarepozemen p meat of the
rypche.Lpheas the proude mape not awap with


lowlpues,cuentodotherpcbe abboze the poore
¥f arpch man fal, bps frendes fet bpm bp agap
ne: but when the poorefalleth, bys acquapnta=
nnee roirangpem- a arpebe man fall intoanct
roure,be hath manp helpers: pefpeaketh proud
wordes,andpetmeniuitpfpebpm. >

. ut pfa poor man go wonge, be (3 puny
hed: pea thougbe be peake wplelpe,pet can it
Date wo place, pan the rpch man Cpeaketh, e-
nerp ma holveth bps tonge: looke what belay
eth, thep praple it nto tbecloudes. Wut pithe
pooze man {peake, thre tape : What felowe ts
thps/e pf beno ample, thep Mall delrope bym
Wpches are good vuto bpm that bath no l{pnne
in bys confepence,antd pouerte (Sa wopched thin
geinthe mouthe of the pngodlpe: Che berte of
aimancbaunacth pyscountenaunce, whether it
Dein goodoz cuell.a& chearfull countenaunce ig
atolenofaqood berte, for clics itigan pearde
thpngetoknowethethougbtc.

@ The. riii Chapter.


@ Theokkence of the tonge. janis buta batne thpnge.


thereignomeate to fpnde.s Ail eth (hallfave a Lerter
wapelike gratle,elphea flozptppnge leafeina "77


grenetrec. Some growe, fomearecafkedowne
‘euenlois p generacpõ of all fefbe ¢ bloude:one
commeth to an ende, another is bone. All tran-


{ytozp thypnaes (hal fapicatplatte,etbeworc- `


ker therof (hal go wptbal.€uerp chofen woke
malbe tuftified,* be ý medied wopthal, thal beuc
ponour therin. Bleticdis the man pkepetd him
inwpledome, tercercpfeth bpm felfem wnder=
‘fandpnge , ¢vopthopiereiipo pall be thpncke
wpon the fozehnowlege of God, whpchconfp-
Dereth the wapes of wpledome inbys Hert bath
vynderfandpnecinbyp2 fecretes,qocth after ber
(as one ý {ekheth ber oute)anbdcontpnuethinper
wWapes.eloteth in at her wpntowes, and bar
kenetbat ber doores. He taketbbysrelbefpde
ber boule and fafteneth bps fake inbp2 walles
He (hall pptche bys tentenpe wnto her hande, g
iihpstente hall good thpnaes reff fo2 euer mo


arepe thal let hpschpldzen vnderherconcrin= —
ge and hall dwell onder ber baaunches.ainder .
ber coucrpnoare (hall be be defended from tbe bea


te and fn Der glozpe Hall bere fic.
@ Che.ry.Chapter.
E Zhe gootnesthat falometh bpm which feareth Gan.
Sodreiecteth and catteth of the (puncr. Godisnoatthe


r
s
j
|
j
j
j
jt
i
.
ë
'
r


s, | Dapppe is bethat contpnueth in wpledome,- .
nET Hy ae


autbez e€ctel, 4a


cewri Gy Ses sol Letedis theman x $ hath not SW ea E $ feareth God, wylldo good
catia. (Sa P Zea fallen wb the wod of pis mouth EA siano wbo fo kepeth the law, Mal


T ; eq optapne wiledome. As an bono


i lew 24 poms bee table mother Mall the mete pint Yi


We aot P (cienceo ynne. Dapppe is be p


toberpehe:# what thuldeanpgarde dow gold’ bpm ,segeuebpmtbe water of wholfome wpie
Hep wprball bps carefulnes Deapeth together dome tobdzpnke, Pi debeconfiante in per, bch


OEFeluF the Conne of Sirach, Holrrr he


. nót Se moued:and pf bebolbehpmfelfefattebp amon Qe whom Lorp whpeh wag ax irain Ser sene.ririe;
n Der, be Wall not come toconfulpon. be Wall er, but mot them ¢ abborred them:becaute of
+ bepngebpmtobonoureamongebpsnepabbou pypppoeot they worbes e had no prtpe ppor


} tes and inthe mpadett ofthe congregacpi thal tüem, but deftroped all the people, that werclo o riiti.e
‘ He open bys mouth.wapep rpete ot wple- fonteinfpnne. x And fofo mucd ag be oner- NRA
hetplippm.¢ fawenotthe tyre þundzetp thoulanve, that qa-
cloth bpm wpth the garmenteofglozye. Sbe thered them felucs together inthe bardenefte of
ü pall beape thetreafure ofmp2thandtope spon thep:berte:it Were meruell plone bepnee bard:
bpm and geue bpm anenerlaltpnge name te be necked, tpulde be free. xoz merepe and wrarhe Ecele, ba
tptage. Foolphe men wll nottake bolde bpd fs wpthhym: Deis bothe mpgbtyetofozrene
ber : but fuchbeashane Dederlandpnge , wpll andto powe oatedpiplealure. Lykeas bra
| mete Ber.(oolpthe men (hal not fe ber, forthe mercpe is greate, enen fo is byg punpthemente
DA isfarre from pzpdeanddpiceate. Wenthatgo alfo, be iudgeth amanaccozdpnaete bps wor,
aboute wptbhipes,wyllnotremembeber: but kes. The wugodlipe tall not efcape in bps {pop
men of truth albe founde in ber,and hall p20: le,andthelongepacpence of bpm that heweth
i fpereeuen vntothebeboldpn cofGod.~raple merepe;thall not bpde bebpnde. Al merepethak
(Snot lemelp inthe mouth ofthe vngodiye,foz make place Onto euerpman accozdpnee to the
f> bets not fente ofthe Lozde.ozof Godcometh wozthpnesothig wazckes,anb after the Dunder
| Mp Faudpnge of bps ppigremace. €
y Domeof God , ethalbeplentcoug inafapetbfull apenovipou:'¥ wll hyde mp lelte from
#3 gis om the Lozbe thallgeneberoutobpmt. od, fo? who wl thyncke bps me from abore
ape notthou,itistheLogbesfautethat Fthallnotbe knowen info greate anpeapeof
Jam gone bp,foz thou thalte not dothethpnye people,fozwmpat is mp foule amongefomanpe
| that God pateth.Syap not thou:he bath caufed creatures’ wWepolde, the heaven, pee, the peauen
E- me to do wonge, fo: he þathnonede of the tn- of beauens,p depe, the earth, and all p therin ig
| godlp.Sod patetballabbompnacponoferrour Chalbe insucd at brs p2elence.themountapnes,
S Senel.t.d Ad thep p feare God wpll lone none fuch.tGov P pplles, andthe oundacpons of the earth hall
| imade man fromthe begpnnpnge eleftebpmin hate for Feare, wht Gon bilpteth them. Thefe
| tbe bande of byg councell. He gaue bpscomma- fhpuges dothno berte vnderande, but be n=
| undementes ¢preceptes:pEP wplt obferue the derfkandeth euer bert, who vnderladeth pig
| cominaundementes,¢kepeacceptablefaptbful wwapes-Aoman eptbbis formes, x themoolte
jp» -Soxe.rri.te neg for enerebep Chall pzeferue px Be path (et part ofbig Workes are fecret. tho Wpl declare
water ¢ fp2e before the, reach outetbpnebanbe the wozkes of bys tygbteoulnes ¢2 who thal
| Dnto whch f wplt.2eforemanislpfexdeath beabletoabide them: Foz ý couenaunt ig farre
good e euell:loke wohathimlpketh,albeqené from fome, etrping onte ofmen is theende.be
bim. Wozthe wiledomeof Godisgreatempgh that te bumble of berte, thyncketh pon foche
tpe in power ¢beboldeth allmencontpnualipe thpnges: butan wnwpfe anderronpons man


= ‘Che epes ofthe Lorde are bpon themthatfea- calkethbpsmpnde bpon foolpihe thpnaes.
äre bpm ¢ be hnowetballtbe wozckes af mat. p fonne,berken thou bnto meand leat


ge hathcommaundednomantodo vngodlpe: ne Dnbecftandpnge,¢ marke mp wozdes wtp
nepther hath be qeuenanp man{pacetofpnne. thpneperte,¥ wwpli gene the aluredoctrpne,an W

t Chapter. plapnelp thal Jin itruct thecmarke mp wo2des

Cor onbappp and peken chpidzen. No mancanoydedim Ebenint Look p mora egbteoutes of Plpret


angry Clytenotthoutnthemultitude amon DPS wozckes from f begpnnpnge. And
ne \ of biigodlpe chyldzenandpaue fn teuthbo 3 hewetbemnew eee


entoleaue bebpndebypintuche woo2des. Aftect PS Godloked bront eeart

b aende pp be and Fplledit wt noe cache 8 iat p :
pe a whole cptpe bewphol Neroflpupnge beattes ha

tngodlyebemanp petibal De etbep all Tee en earth agapue.


barne,tamonge Ped made mafter bys ow :
bletHallthe wrath bekpndled: je Sacer land Aant m as carthagapns sb bees
* The olde gpauntes optapned nograce $ Essay j toni wpth bps owne
hep2fpunes, wppch were detroped, truftin ‘teeters (Krenathe, e gaue bpm thenoi =
[pared pe thé bze ofdapeg andcertentpme , pea , and qare +
Cee tit bympow


í


FTbhebooke ob,


hyn power of the thpnaes that are bpon earth
He makeall Aee te tande inawe of ppm: lop
be bad the dompnyon ofallthebeaftes and fou
eS. ne made out of bpm an belperlpbe tnta
bym felfe and gane them dpfcrecponand tonge
cpes and careg, and abert to pnberftande, and
z fplled them wpth inffcuccpon t vnderFandpng
He created for them allo the knowlege of the
forete,fylled thepz pertes wpth vnderlandpng

and (hewed them good and euel. He let pps epe

won thep2 hertes, dcclarpnge wnto them bps

greate and noble workes:that thep thlubde p2ap

Ce bps bolp name together: reiopee of bys won-

erov.rr.a Derg and be tellpnae of bys noble actes. x 25e-
Deu. tt Code thps be gaue them inftruccpon,¢ thelawe
> oflpfefo2 anberptage. af |

ie made an euerlattinge couenaunte with

tbem and ewed them bps erpghteoutnes and

iudgementes. Thep lawe bis glozp with thepe

epes,adtbhep2 eares bearde the mateftpe ot bys

vopce. Andbelapde vutothem-beware of all

ynrpabtcous tbpnges. De gaue every man allo

acommaundement concernyng bpsnepghbour

Thep: wapes are ener before bim andare

mom.titia NOt Eom bps epesxipe bath (et aruler Dpon cue

sent. tiie t? people, t but Jlraellts the Lores pozcpon.

and .F.e bep2 worckes are as the funne inthe (page

of God,and bps epes areal wapelokpng bpon

thep2 wapes. All they: vnrpghtcoulnetie

ate manpfefte onto bpm, and all thep2 wpcked:
nefles areopenin bps (pabte. aagi

xTbhemercpe that aman thetacth ts as it

wereapurle wpth bim, and the qrace thatis ge

, uentoaman preferueth ppm as tbheappleofan

Hat? oye x Ae the latte hail be awake,and rewarde

cuerp man bpon bpsheade,¢ thal turne them to

gether into tpenethermofte partes of the earth

actes tti, c * But nto them that wpll repente be bath ge-

: uenthe wape of oF Speen? As foz fuch as

be weake, be comfozteth thent,fufereth them,¢

fendeth them the pozcion of the verite.D turne

then puto the Lozde-foztake thy fpnnes, make

thp paper before the Lo2de,do the lee offence,

turne agapne nto the Lozde,fozlake thpne bn

rpabteoutnes,bean vtter enempe to abbomp-

nacpO,learnetoknowe prpgbteoulnes and (ud

gementes of God, Lande in the pozcpon that ts

fet forthe forthe and in the paper of the moptite

brabe God. Gointhe porcponof the Holp wo:

Dewfluch asbelpupng tqeuethakes vata god

€ xtlbo wpll praple the Lorde in the bell?

proia Abpdenot thou tn the erroure of the yngodlpe,

ef rrrviid but genebpmtbanckes befoze death. As fo: the

deed, thankfulnefle perpiheth from ppm agno-

tbpnge. Geuetbou thanckes tn thp Ipfe:pea,

whple thou artelpupnge , and whole Malte p

qeue thanckes, and praple God, and retopee in

hysmercpe. <Dhowe qreateistheloupnge

kpndnefle of the Lo2de,and bps mercpfull good

Aiete vnto fuchas turne tnto ppm: ozal tbpn

qeg mapenot be inman:and why ¢ thelonne of

man is notimmoztal and be bath plealur in the

panpte of wpckednes. cd bat is mo2ecleare the

the SunnerPet thall it faple. D: what ís moze

wpckedthenthe thpnge that fletbeand blonde


McD,


Ec.pytr.b


bath pmagined/and that fame halberepzoncd
The Lorde lepth the power of the bypghe beaut
and all are but carthand athes ..
The.rvtit. Chapter ._
(The meruelons wozckes of Gon, themplp2pe and mzet
chenes of man. 2 capnk Hod oughte we not Co eomplap:
ne.tapemul we contpnuallp. —


eE thatlpueth foz enermoare, + A
£a 5 S made al thpnges together. GoD Senne. ia
d eA El onelpe istpabtcous,and remap
x e Ke netha vpctozpous kpngt fo2e-
Cc Fe iner.x@ibothalbe able toerpzel prarcv. a
D Cee ZA fethe workes of bimstlibowpl <r.
er = feke oute the g2ounde of bps no:
bleactes ¢ Who tall declare the power of bys
greatenes: D2 who wplltake bpon bpmtotell
oute bps mercp:Asfo2 the wonderous workes
of the Lode there mapenothpnge be taken fro
them,notiipngemape be put onto them, nether
mape thegrounde ofthembe founde oute. Wut
wbhenamamhath done bps bethe mute beqpn
agane:and woHen be thpnckethto come to anen
de,bemufte qo agapne to bps laboure. Abat ig
mans Wberto ts he worth: What qood,o2 enel
canbedo:* PFthenombze ofa mang dapes be È
almofte an þpundzed peare,ftigmuch.. e A
Lpkeag Doypep ofrapne are nto the fee
and as a qrauell toone ig incomparpfon of the ©
fande:xfo avethele fewe peareg to tpe Dapeset= «a, carp
ucrlaftpnge. Therfoze is the Logbepacpentew
them,and poureth out bys mercpe bpon them.
Pe lawe and perceaned the thougbtes and pma
gpnacpons of thep2 berte, thatthep were evel,
therefore beaped be bp bps mercpfull goodnefle
ppon them, and Hhewed them the wape of rpgp
teoulnes. Che mercy that aman bath, reachetb
to bpsnepabboure -but the mercp of Godis yp
poral fethe.bechattencth.beteacheth andnur |
tourcth:pee, euenas a thepbherde turneth agap-
ne bps flocke,fo doth be al them that receauccha ;
Cenpng,nourtour ¢ doctrpnex.Qercpfulis he etastols
wntotbem,p ande tirawe of bps tudgementes
Wp fonne, when thou doelt qood, make no ©
grup gpng at it:¢ what Corner thou genet, ipea
enodpi{comfostable wo2des . Spal not the
newecoolethe betereuenlois a word better thé
agpfte.« 35 not afrendlpe woda mood honell Hzou.rt.s
gptterbut a gracpous man geuethtpem botbe. and.FFb.¢
xA Foole hall catte a man inthe teeth, and that weere, r.b
rougbip,and a gpft ofthe npaarde putteth out
theepes. Get prpgbteoulnes before thoucome m
to fubgemente.Learne before thou fpeake, ano
qo to phplpke o2 ener thou be {pcke:x eramen g i.coz1.ri.
iudge thp telfe,beFoze the tudgementecome,ad
fo (halte thou fpnde grace in the fpahte of God.
Jumble thp felfe before thou belpcke,and in tp
mp of thp Deleate (hewe thy conuerfacpon.
+ Letnot to pape alwape,s fandenot in.


fearetoberefourmed nto death, fo: the rewar nec a


de of God endureth fo: euer.25e forze thou pray:
eff, prepare tbp foule and be not as one p temp-
teth God. Chpncke bpon the weathfull indpq-
nacpon that thalbe at the ende, andthe boure of
Dengeaunce, wher be thallturne awape bps fa


ce. x Wi ben p þat pnough remembrethe tyme eras, ri.b
of bunger:and when thou art rpcbe,tbpucke yp


ponthe


Di
{a
T
i
>


$ T.
= ee a T o s


Fetus the fone of Syrach,


pon the tyme of pouertpe and (carceneffe.

rom the morpnee tntplltheeuenpnge
the tpme is chaunged,and all fuche thypnaes are
func Done inthe lpghte ofo. X wple man fea
tet) Godin all thpnges,and in pdapes of trani
greilponbe Kepeth bym felfe from fpnne A dpf-
crete man path peeaire in wpledome,and be p
fpndcth ber, miaketh much of ber. Thep p Daue
bad vnòrrtandpng pane dealte wrfely inwo?
deg baue vnderitande the truth and rpgbteoul-


Des g baue Loughte out wylelfentencesandtud: fi
Nabe ntb ementes. + Solo we not thp lufes, but turne:


morio from EDpreowne wpll . oz if thou geuelkethp
foule per defpzes it (palmakethpne enempes to


laugbethetolcomne. Cake not thp plealure in


greate voluptuolneg g medle not fomuchwall
SHakenotto great chere of the thinge that thon
bate wonne bp aduauntage, left thou faleinta
pouertpe, aid Pane notbpnge intby purfe.

Che. rix.Chapter. -

'  WOpne ant wWhozvome bzpnge men to pouerterin thp wozdes
mut thon ble dplcreffpon. She bpferenceofthe wplevome of
450d and matt, Wherbp thou mapene knowe what is in man,
Cozrecepon mul be bied topthout anger.


QA Laboutpnge man that is genendn


\ We fo Dponchenneffe, tall not be rpche
maw Yat: ahd be that maketh not muche of
yh omy eq (Nall thpnges, Chall fall bpiptle «
Generics VOSS S iptie.* Wipne and wemens make
HiRes tpfe men rennagates, tput men of vndertan-
opngeto repzofe:¢ be that companpeth aduou-
terers all become a wycked man.@othes ad
wormes Hal haur bpm to herptage,per,be thal
be fet pp to agreateerample,ebpsfoule thalbe
Yot.rrie e rooted out of the nombze-* He that is haltye to
Seuc credence, islyght mpnded,and doth agap
inffe bpm felfe. . {bolo reiopfeth in
wpckednefle, Halbe punpthed: bethat bateth
to be cefourmed, bps Ipfe Dalbe (hogtened, and
be that abbozeth bablpng of wo2des,quenchet)
wpckednefle. He that offendeth agapnite bys
owne foule, thal repent it:and be that refopleth

in wpceked nefle,thalbe punpihed.
ARebearle not a wypcked and churlpthe woz
25 de Ewople,and thou alt not be bpndzed. Sewe
thp fecrettes nepther te frende no: foo: pf thou
balte offended, tell it not. ozbe hal berken vn
tothe and marke the and when be fpndeth opoz
tunpte. be pal Date theandfo thalbe bealwap
ecct.rri-o about p.)*DE thou batt. beard a wowe agapnit


(GHD By ney bboure: let it be deed wpthin theand


i F 7 i D 3 Z Taa L] ! N
i -— E o a oe = 5
¢ Š i P J "y


belure.p alte baue no barmetherebp. A foole
frauapleth wpth a wo:de, Ipkeasa woman p
ig papned wpth bearpngeofachplde. Lpkeas
an arrowe Hot in adogges thpgh, foisa word
ent rig.» #3 Fooles bert.« Cel thp frende bys faute leet


| set Da be be iqnozaunte,and Cape: Ybaue not dore it,


02 pfbe baue{poken, that pedo ttnomoare. Re-
pzoue thy nephbourethat be kepebpstonge , g
pf bebauelpoken, that be Cape it nomoze.
€ Cell thy nepghboure bys fante, foz ofte tp
mes anoffenceis made , and qeue not credence
to cuerp wode. A man falleth fometpme wpth
bpstonge,but not wpth bps wpll.« Eo: what
cist, is pe that bath not offended in bys tonge, gene
Fame, sc thp nepgbboure warnpnge , before pthzeaten


Hol.ecevet,


Dpm,and geueplaceontothelawe of the Lod;
‘Che teare of Godig all wpledome and he that
igarpgptewpleman,kepeth thelawe. As for
the doctrpne of wpckednefle,it isno wpleaome
and the prudence of fpnners tg no good wnder »
fandpnge:itis but wpckednes and abpbompna
cpon and blafpbempnge of wpledom.A (pmple
man of finall pnderLandpnge,that feareth god
is better then one that bath much wpledome, ¥
trantgrefleththelawe of the byabelt.& craftye —
totle man canbe topie, but be i8 bnryabteous,« *


p wth apfeeshe wratteth f ope g mantfctt lawe


#wypckedmancan bebaue bpm felfe bumbipe
and canducke wpth bps bead, and petig be bue
a dplceauer wptbin. we bpoeth bys face, x and mach atl
oplgupleth it:and becaufle be huldenot be kno "I
Wer, Depreuenteththe. — |
And though be be fo wocake that be cando
the no barme, pet when be mape fpnde opportu-
npte, be Hall do fome euell.¥ man mape be kno
wen bp bps face, and one that bath wnbderttan-
opnge, mange Detceaued bp the looke of bps
countenaunce.+ A mans garmente, laughter, er, rrtie
gopnge declareth what peig. —
@ The. re.Chapter.
q DE correccpon and tepentaunce.| Ethe gptte of the
lopleman:and oF the fosle, pE Ipinge,
Ss, oy Vine man x reprourthbysnepgh- A
aor boure ofte tpmes, but not induc lea Serre.
4 fon: Agqapne,fome man boldcth his
| gy tonge and bets wple and dpierete,
Ean Ft ig much better to gene Warnpng
arid to tepzoue, then to beare euell wpll:fo2 be p
knowlegeth bpm felfe openly balbe 'preferucn
tomburteand deftruccpon . ipkeaswhena
gelded man thozowe delpze and lufte defpleth a
niapden,euen fo ts tt wptbh bpm that biceth Ypo-
lence:and Dnrightcoulnes in the lawe. D howe
goodathpnge igit a mantbat is reproncd to
thewe openly bps repentaunce:fo2 fo thalt thou
elcapevoplfullfpnne, |
Some mankepeth {eplence,and íg founde
wple:but bethatisnot apamed what hefapep
is batefull. Some man poldeth bps tonge, be=
caule be batb net the ynderttand puge of tielan
guage:and fome man kepeth {cilence, wa peing
& conuenpente tpine.> A wople man wll bolde
bps tong tpl bete opoztunite , but a wanton ad ph a
ondplcretebodpe hallregardenotpme. Pe grant
ofeth many wordes, hall burte bys owne foule
and bethat takethe auctozpte bpon bpm Yury


P gbteoullye,thalbehated. Some man bath ofte


tpmes prolperpte in wpcked thpnaes: agapne
fome man getteth much,and bath harme loffe
There ig fome qpfte tbat is nothpnge wothe:
Agapne,theretg fome qpfte wbolerewa rde ig
double. Home man gettetha fallfoz bepnaeto
zoude,andfomecommeth to worthpype From
owecfate. Some manbpeth muche aye [p=
tle prpce and mule pape fo? it fenen folde.
_ * A wple man wpth bps wordes maketh s
bpm felfe to be loned, but the fauoure offooleg, Seest
(balbe poured out. Che qpft atthe vnwpfetbal .
bo the no good, foz bys epes are fenenfold.- De wert.
Hall gene Iptle and fape be ga ue much: be ope-
ee V peneth


neth bps mouth and crpeth oute, as tt were one
thatcrpethb oute wpne. Codapedbe lendeth,to
mozowealkethbeagapne and fuchamanig to
bebated. The foolelapth 3 baue nofrende, 3
pane nothancke forall mp qood dedes: pea ené
tbep that eate my bzeade,{peakeno good of me
Ohowe ofte,¢ of how many thal be be laughed
tofcomerde taketh a moze acme fall bp fuch
wodes then pe befel vpon the qrounde:enen fo
tall the falles of the wpcked menceme patelp
Zn the mouthe ofbpmtbatis Dntaughte , are
many buconuenpente and Dnmete wo2des a
wpfefentence (hall not be alowed at the mouth
q ofthe foole,for be fpeaketh not it tn buefeafon.
i Somemanlynneth not , becaulebe bath
not wherewpthall, and inbpsreatte be Halbe
tinged. Some man thereis tbat etropet bis
owne fonle wpth thame.and for an buwple bo-
opea fake DefFropeth beit , ¢ wpthacceptpuge
of perfors all 7 pndo bpm felfe. Some man
pompleth pps frende a gpfte fo2 werp Hame,
and gettethanenemp of bpm fornougbt. 4 lpe
i3 a wpched pame inaman reba it be ener
inthe mouth ofthe vnwyle. Achefets better,
thena man that igaccutomed tolpe, but they
botbe pall baue deftrncepon toberptage. The
condpepons of lpars are wnbonel , and thepe

„~ Hames ener wpth them.
ent 2 wpleman hall bapnge bpm {elfetoho-
Dante dg toure wpty bps wordes, xand be that bath wn-
derandpnge,palbe fet bpamonac greate me
Prow.rit * Ie thattplleth bys lande Hall encreate bys
ano. FFF a Heane of come: be that wozcketh rpgbteoutnes
_ fhalbeerbalted, bethat pleateth qreate men,
ecrrtt-a- fall efcapemuch evel. xAkewardes and giftes
=" blpnde the epes of the wpte, and make bym do-
~ me that becannot tell men thep2 fautes.*Ulipt
Eckerle nome that ig bpd, etreafure that is hooded vp
what profpteisinthem boths Wetter ts be shee
kepeth bys (qnozaunce fecrete,then aman that

pyoeth bys wpledome. —
@ Che.xrrt. Chapter.


ceete.b.a, Hae NWA ve eomoate:* but pzape fo? tbp foze
bilam fit. A
As T g be
fahrli Sul i
Luke. pD. E g


SAPEN
Nyaa Yi tbe. sele fromfpnne,euenasfrom
ney aferpente:fo2 pf thou commest to
cre su npe perhe wplbptep. Cheteeth
thereof areas theteetbeofa Lyon, to flape the
foulegofmen.  Whewyckednefle ofmanisa


fharpetwo edgedfwearde, which makerbluch
woundes that thep cannot bepealed. =


Strpfe and wrongeous dealpnge Hall
waft awap amans qosdes, and thozowe p2pde
acpche boule malbe broughte to noughte fo the

graniti. b TPEDES ofthe proude thalbe rooted oute. * Che


andr « praperofthe poore goethoutcofthemouth,ad Ke)
commeth bntotbe cares, andbyswengeaunce pre
(ordefence halcomeandp batelp. lpo fopa F


teth fo berefourmed,it is a token of an buged-
ly perfone,but be f feareth God, wyll rement-
ber bpm felfe. A mpabtpe maniskuewen afar


4 Wel (pnnesthat thep mape be forgent.


ri} ye booke


of bp hps tong : but bethat bath onder Tandpr
xe perceaueth that be Mall baue a fall.

abolo bupldeth bys boule with other mens 15
colte ig lpkeonep gatbereth Monesinwpnter.
* The cogreqacia ofthe vngoedlp ig lpke lube <c!¢.r 0%
ble gathered together their ende isa famme of
fpre. Che wape ofthe vngodlpe ts fet wpth to
nes, but in thep2 endeis bel, varkenefle,and pa!
nes. De that kepeth the lawe, wpll holde fatte p
wnderandprae thereof, andthe cnde of thefea
re of God ig wypledome and wnderfkandpnge.
ie that is not wyle,wpl not be taught in good
but tbe pnwpfe manabounbeth tn Wpckednes:
and where bptternefie is,there (sno vndertan=
bynge. The knowlege of the wple Hall lowe
Ipke water that renneth ouer, and bps countfell
is lpkea fountapne of lyfe. . 7

The herte ofa foole is tykea broken belel €

Pecan Kepe no wpldome.tibena man of onder
ftandpnaebearethba wple wowe, be (hall coms
mende it and make much of if.25ut pla volup-
tous man beare it, etal baueno pleature thee
in but caffe it bebpnde bys backe. Tbetalipng
of afeole is lpkeanbeupe burthen bp the wape
bufto beare a wple manfpeake,it isa plealure.
iWihere a doubte fs inthe conqregacpon,it igal
ed at the mouth of the wple, and they thal por
derbps wordesinthepzpertes. Lyke asiga
boule p isdeftroped, cuento ig wpirdome Vrta
to a fole. Xa fo: the knowlere of p vn wile, tt ig


but darcke wo2des. Dortrpne is unto bpm that


aot rag EE ee bod waters

bys fete, andlpkemanpcles bpon pps tpgpte- l

bande. A foole lpfteth bp bys bopce w laugh- are

ter but a waplfeman Mal fearle laugh fecretipe
Learnpnge is puto a wple man a Jewel of

golde,andlpke anarmelet bpon bps rpabtear=

me. X foolthe mans foteis foone in bps nepbou

res boule but one that bath erperpence, malbe

atbamed at theperfonne ofthe mpabtpe .

X foole wll pepe tt at the wpndowe infothe

boufe but he that is well nourtered, wpll Fand


` wpthoute.A foolpihe man ftandeth berbening


at the doze, but be that is wple wpl be amamen

Thelpppes of the vniwople wA be tellpng
foolpthe thpnaes, but f wo2des offuchas baue
bnderftandpnge, Malbe wapedin the balaunce
The hert of foigs ig inthetr mouth, butpmouth
of p wpleis inthep2 bert. When p ungodly cues


feth the blafpbemer becurfeth bys owne foule. aarre


xY% pzeupeacculer of otbermenthalbdefplebps
ownefoule,ebe pated of enerpma:(butpepke- `
peth bis toge eis difcrete, thalcometo honour)
C Thepurgacpenof the fleutheull. ofthe foolphe Tenne
atid Daughter, we mut baue Dpfcrerpen howe and te woe
‘me we oughteto preach, of fora twenge dped the dred, T fo
leis noc to bemuch Calked withal. Fnturpes, and WjOUGEs ag.
bo breake renveBrp ! a


fanbdampte,
aE a Slothful bodpe ig moulded of a
JA OIRE (tone ofclape and euerp man wpill
WE peake toppsdplpapie. Xflouth-
a full body ig mabe of the dong of or
obits, tas cnt, and cuerpe one $ toucheth bpm
mult wath bps bandeg agapne. A mpinurtered,
fonneis the oplponoure of the father. X fo nf
au


be


a
5


Fetus the fonne of Syprach,


boughter Hhalbelptle regarded. A wple daugh-
terig anberptage unto ber bulbande: but the p
commieth tabpianeitye,bringeth ber fatberin
| beupnetic. ¥ Daughter that is pate pame, dDpl=
ig bonoureth both bee father andjhee bulband,the
: i l virgodlp thalregard ber, but thep both Haldpl
pice ber Che plapig of muflikets not mete wher
peuineg is,euen fois the cozreccponand doctep
tie of wopleDome cuer Vupleafaunte Dnto fooles
T S _ Wb polo teacheth a toole igentagonetpat
glewmetha potcherde together: agone that tel-
letbataletobpm that beareth bymnot, andag
one that rapicthamanoute ofakbeupeflepe.
Wiha fo telleth a foole of wopledome, iseuenag


amanwwbpebipeatsetdtoone pigaflepetdpen My peat
bebath toldebystale,belapeth:whatispmat Hi ES


terre penone opeth, lamentacpon ig marfo:


mrn mourne oucea foole:fo2 be Wanteth vader
fandpnge. Bake but lytte weappnge becaule
of thedecd:fo2 be is come torct;but thelifeot p
fooleiswoafe then the death. Seucn dapesdoo
menmourne for bim that is decd, but thelamen
tacpon ouer the bnvwple and Dungodlpethulde
endureall the Dapes of thep2 lyfe.
- alkenotmuch wpth a foole,and qo not
wptbbym that bath no bnderfandpnge . We-
ware of bym leeteitturne the to trauaple, and
thou sattenst he netted wye ps lpnne.De-
parte from bpm,and thou Malte fpnde rete and
thalt not be awen backe into bis foolpipenes
Chat isheuperthenleade And what (huldea
i:r, rbd Foole Lecalledelles but leabesx Sande, falte, g
a lumpe of pronisealper to beare, thenan vn-
wple,foolyibe,and bnugodlpeman.Lpke as the

bande of woode bounde together nthe founda

cron of the boule cannot belowled, euenfotsit
wptbtbe bert thatis Cablphhed inthe thought

of councell. Che thougbte of the wyle fhallnep

ther feare,noz be offended atanp tpme.

= Lpke ag afap2eplafercd wal ina wpnter
boule,andanbpebuplopnge, mapenot abpde

the wpnde and tome : enenlois afooles berte
afrapdetnbys pmagpnacpon, befcareth at eve

rp thpnge,andcannotendure. (A wauerpnge

‘ berte inthe pmagpnacpon of a foole wpll not
euerftandin awe, but pethat abpdetbin the ci-
maunbBementes of God, well amar feare. )ipe
thatnpppetbamanscpe bipngeth forth tearcs

° and be that pepcketh the herte, bapnaeth forthe
; meanpuge and thought. bolo caffeth a Kone


€


thoucbe thou dzetwelte alwearde at thy frende
petdplpapicnot,fo2 thou mapef come agapne
fothy frend. PE be (yeake fowerlp, feare not fo2
pe mape be agreed togethcragapne, exceptett
ve that thon blafpbemte bpm, dprdapne bpm, o=
Ben bps fecretes and wounde bpm traytoroutlp
ozall fuch hinges (halldzpue awapeafrende.
€ 2efapthfull ontotby nepabboure inppg
ponerte,that thou mapeft retopfe wptb bpm al-
fo inbps prolpezpte. Sbpde Ledfalte vnto ppm
inp tyme of bts trouble, ý thoumapett be bepze
wpthbhim in bps berptage. Lpkeas the vapour


pym:becautetbelvapte fapleth bym,euersfolet (ADA


at thebp2dcs.frapetbtbematbape :andpetbat fu
blafpbemeth bps frend, bzeaketh the frendethip.


Hol. ccrivit
and{noke qoeth ont attheouenbeforethefee
enen fo eurl wozdes,rebukes.and thzeatenpns
ges gobefore piguaepeubynge * Wenot alha=
nied fo defende thy frende:ag fo: me; wll noe
byde mp facetrombimtbough pe tulde do me PMl-crt.a.
Darme. Wipoloeuer heaceth it thall beware cf c :
bpm. +i hs Malfeta watch beforempmouthe | —
and a fure frale bponmplpppes that 3 fall not
wpth them, and that mp tonge dettrop me nots
‘E The-rriii: Chapter. 23
aa eM nra ecbarp a plotonp iw Fathes.bialbe
mp ,Ebawplecommunicacps. of thethze kinhes of enneg Zt’
Azanp panes proceadeofabuoutrpe, Of the frarcofmon. © *”*
Peay Lorde, father and qoucrnoureo€
ie (ex eos MY IpFe;leateme not th theps ps
wea H Magpnacyoandcouncell. Oblet
Eeay tite not fall infuch vepiofe: Wibe


Y de) Wpll kepe mp thougpte withthe
misses OUT TE, andthedoctepneof npl
TENT dome in mpne Herterthathelpas
renot mpne panoraunce,p ¥ Fal not wprh then
leftempneignozauncesincreale; thatmpneofe
fécesbenot many innomber, andthat mp pria °°
nes erceadenot leete Zfallbefoze mpnecnemp
es andfomp aduerlarperetople, DLozde:thon
Sather * Godofmp Ipfe, leane menot in siepi
pPmagpnacpon.Dlet me not pauea piondeloke
but turne awaype all volupteoutneffe from me


-Cakefcomme flutes of the body, let rot pde


fp2e8 of buclénes take polde tp me, ¢aeuc me
not oncrintoan ynthamefatt ¢obitinatmpnde 28

eavesne(Dpechpldzen)¥ wpll yene pou
a doctrpne bowe pou (hall ozder poure mouthe
whofe kepeth tt,thaltnotperpiyetpozowe bps
Ipppes,noz be burte thozowe wycked modes.
As fo? thefpnner,be Halbe taken inbysowne
vanptpe: bethat is proude and cutfed, atl fall roo. rs.
therin.xLet not thp mouth beaccuomed with Eer oti. s
fwearpnge, for inittherearemanpfalles. ue"
not thenampnge of Godbecontynaallyintyy —
niouth:(and medlenot wpth the names of fapn
ctes, foz thou thalte not be ercufed often) fo
lpke as eferuaunt whpcbis ofte punpthed tan-
not be wpthoute fome looge, cuenlo what ior-
uerbe be that fweareth enameth Gov, thal not
be cleane pourgedfromipnne: A ma chat vierh
muchefwearpnge,thalbe fplled wpth wycken-
nes, and the plage (hal never co from bys boule
Pfbebegple bysbzother, bys fante thalbe vps
bin, pf de knowledc not his fpnne, be maketh a
double offence, t pf be Cweareinvayne, bethall
no a ak oe tygbtcous ; foz bpghoule halbe or
llofplaresg. ERDIRA
_ * The wordes of the lwearer bapneeth de- eee
eth( God graunt it benot founde inthe boufe
of Facob. ) žut they that feare God, cfchewe al
{ucbe,and lye not welterpnere in finnex Tile nog ephe. v.a
tbp mouth to pnbonelt and fyltbyp talkin ¢,fo2
ín it (8 P wode of fpitne. Remember thp father
€fhp mother whenthouartefet amonge great
men-leelle God forget the inthep2(yahte, len
thou dotpnge in thp cu ome lufterrebuke, and
wpibe not to pauebeneborne gfo curfethedap _
of thynatpupte.«@he man that isaccultemed titse.tvi &
wpth the wo2des of blalphempe, wll nenerbe
vefourmed all thedayesofbpsipfe. Tofynne

fwple


Thebooke


twpteistomuch. but the thp: detngeth wrath
edeftruccpon. An pote Fomake cannot be quent

ched: (enen pke a burnpng Fpze)tplit pauc twa

lowed vp fome tbpnge:euen foan wnchat man

‘path noreft in bps Aew, tplhbepaunekidled a fire

D Al breade ig fwete toan whozemonger, be
Start a wpllnot leaue of tpl be baue bps purpofe. X må
that bzeaketh wedlocke and regardeth not bis
foule,but fapetb:*utbe, who lepth mes Jam
compafled aboute wyth dDarckeneffe the walles

couer ine,no bodpe feith me: wobom nede Fto fe

_ ares Chebpabelt wpllnot cememb2e mp fpn=

nes. He vnderflanbdeth not that bps epes leal
tbpngeg, fo: al Cuchfeareof men ap awap

the feare of God from bpm:forpe feareth onlpe
the epes of men, and confpDdereth not that the ep
es of the Lorde areclearer then the funne, bepol


dpngeall the wapes of men and the grounde of


thedeepe, andlokpng euch to meng bertesin fe

tret places . Che Lode God knewe al thynges

oz euer eyen made. after thep be brought

to paffe allo beloketbvpon themal.*« Che lame

man albe opentp punitped in the tretes of the

cptpe: and albe chaled abzoadelpke aponge

bozle foale:and when be thp nckethleatte tpon

it be albe taken. hus hall be be put toMa-

mie ofeuerpman , becaufe be wolde not yuder-

tande the feare of the Lozde. Andthus Hallie

go allo wpth euerp wpfe, tbat leaucth ber puf

T bande ånd qettetbenberptauncebp a ftraunge

FREF marpage. + ipite the bath bene vnfapthful vn

to tbe lawe of the byghelt. Secondly, we bathe

forfaken þer owne pulbande. ppp the bath

plapde the whore in aduouterie and gotten per

chpldzen bp an other man. be halbe bronght

oute of the conqregacpon,and ber chplozen thal

. beloked bpon. der chpldzen thal not take roote

and as foz frute, berbzaunches thal bapng forth

€ nene. X pamefull repozte Hall heleauebebpn

deher.and her dpMhonoure Hall notbe put oute

And they that remapnic, Hall knowe,that ther

tsnotbynge better thenthe feare of God:and f

there (snothynge fweter then to take bede bn =

tothe commanndementes of the 1020. Æ qreat

worthpppcis tt to folowe the Lode, foz longe
Ipfe (Halbereceaued of bpur.

CThe.rrilii. Chapter.
A plaple of teproome pzoreabpnge forth of (he mouth
of Mod.Ofher woesckes and place where He retteth,


ee Dledome Wall praple het felfe, and


5 ri
fi an


Tea'tt.crb
Deu. FF b


geisaboucin the bepgth,and mp feate is tn the
pplice of thecloude. F mp felfe alonebaue gone


were of Rolen,Galbanum,of


roundeaboute thecompaffe of beauen and peat .
fedtbe grounde of the deepe: J paue walked in
the Roudes of the fee,and bane Rande inalllan
dcs:mp Dompnpdigineverp peopleandincuerp
nacpon and wpth mp power paue FJ troden do-
wne the bertes of all,bothepDpeandlowe.
Jn all thefe thypngesalfo Jloughte rete,
anda dwellinge in (ome enberptaunce. Sothe
creatoz of all thpnges gaue me acommaunde-
mente:and be that made me,appopnted me ata
bernacle,and lape onto me: Let thp divelipng
bein Jacob and thyne enberptaunce in Flrael,
and roote thp felfe amonge mp cholen.x J was wre. viie
created from the beapnnpnge , and befoze the
wolde, and all not leaue of Dnto the wolde
tocome.* Jn thebolpye babptacpon baue Fier-
ued before bpm, and fo was 3 Cablpthed tn Sop
on.* gn the holpecptpe refked F inlpke maner:
and inFerufalem was mp power: ¥F tookeroote
titan bonozable people euenin the porcpon ofp
Lode and (nbypsberptage,and kepte me tn the
fulnes of the Datnctes. Fam fet bp an bpelpke
aCeber dpon Lpbanus,and asa Cppers trer,
pponthe mounte hermon. Jam exalted lpkeag
apalmetreein Cades , aud as a iRooke pan
in Jericho, a fapze Dlpue tree in thetelde,g
ameralted Ipke asa plantapne tree bp the wa
ter{pde. Jbaue qenen afmellinthe Fretes, ag
the Cynamon and Walme,that hathfoqooda
faucure:pea, a Swete odoure paue J qeuenagit
were Wp ofthe bete. | €
Ybauc made mp nh (melas it
Cloneg, and Fi-
cenfe,and a8 Lpbanus when it isnot bewen do
wne, and mp odonre ig as the pure Walme .
As the Terpbpnte baue F ftretched out mp bra
unches,and my bzaunches are the bzaunches of
bonoure andloupngefauonre. f= AG thewpPne x onu 15.6
baue J broucbee forth frupte of (wetelaucure
and my floures are the fruteofhonoure and rpe
ches. J amtbe mother of bewtpe, of lone of fea
re,of knowlege,and of polpe boope. * Junie is zon. rttie
all grace and lpfeand truth. Fn mets all bocpe
of lpfe and vertue.
come bntome all pethat be defp2ous of
me and Fpl pour Celucs wptd mp Frutes:fo2 mp
fp2eteis fweter then ponpe and fo is mpne enbe
rpfauncemoze then the bonpe combe:theremem
bzaunce of meendureth fo: euermoare. hep
that eate me, ball Baue the moare bunger , and
ont that dzpncke me,(balltbapftetbemoare. —
lho fo berkeneth vnto me (hall not come to co
fufpon and thep that worcke in me (hall not of»
fende. Thep that make me tobe knowne, tall
Dane cuctlatprgelpfe. J
Allthele thinges are the booke of Ipfe, the
conenaunte ofthe bpgbelb, and the knowleme of
thetruth.« Goes commaundedthelaw inthe crop. rra
preceptes of taroh, (neffe foz an berptage Vit ans priista


16


pO. EFF


pl-tFrFit.a


tothe boufe of Jacob, and commited the pzomp

fes wnto Frael.» Dutof Dauid hpsferuaunt wr.errri.s

be o2Dened to raple bp a moolte mpabtpe kyng Bes -t.».

Cpttpnaeinthe leate of bononre foz euer moare

of Phplon,and asthe Houde of T
| the news


i 4
kH.
“F s pe i


A
f.
t'Thpsfplleth wpth wildome Ipkeasthefloud Detia. |


parps, when and.rrir.b `


a


—-Jelus the fonneok Sprat),


- thenewe frutes aregrowpnae.


$F o Lett if.


boue all thpnges.wlelled is the man, unto wba


+ THps bapngeth a plentcous bnderMan-


D
Joueinc dpng lpke Cupheates:ano fplleth it pp, as Jor


dapne inthe tpme of heruck. Chps maketh nur
ture to bzeake forth asthe lpabt,andasrbhe wa
ter Gphonin the baruette. Che fp2tte bathe not
knowen ber perfectlpe, nomoare mall the latte
Ceke onte toe qrounde of ber. o? ber thouqbte
is fuller then the fee and ber councellis profoun
Der then the greate deepe.

J wyledome bauc cal oute floudes. Zam
as a great Waterd200ke oute of therpuer. Jam
astperpuer Dorpr andasa wWaterconditeam
Acome oute ofthe gardenofpleafure. ¥flapde


it to be euer p clearer 3 wpl pearie thorow alp
lower partes of the carth. J wylllooke pponal
fuch as bea flepe,andlygbtenall them that put
thep2 true inthe Lorde. 3 hal pet pow2ze oute
dactrpne.lpkeas p20 phecpe tleaue tt onto fuch
as (eke after wpledome, andtheps qetieracpog
{hal 3 neuer faple, nto the polpe enerlaftpnge


ecreritic woozlbe.*  Webolde howe that Jbauenotla-


itis qraunted to bauethefeareof God. Unto
whom thal be be lpkened,p kep eth it fat The
feave of Godig the beqpnnpnge of bys tone, ão
the begynpnge of fapthisto cleaue fat unto it
‘Che beupnette of the barte ts all the punphmét
and the wpckedues of a woman gocth aboue al
Alpunpihemente ¢ plagets nothingeincomva
tplon ofthe plage of the berte, euen foal wphken
nests nothpnae,to the wpckednefle of a wima

Wi batloencr happeneth vntoa manisno
fhpnge incomparpfon oF it, that pps enell wil
lersdo bnto bpm:andal pengeaunce IS noting
tothe vengeaunce of thpne nempe.


chaungeth ber face, pe thall muffle percounte-
haunce agit were a beare,gas alacke thall te


pinto reg A
po


ip as § Wypll water the arden of mp ponge plantes, Chere ts not amore wycked beadtbentbe Č
TIR" and fpl the frute of my bpzth:Somp Waterbzo beade of thelerpente,and there igno Weathe a= Hrou.rria
a Ke became erceadpnge great, mp rpuer app20 boue the weath of a woma.* 3 wyl rather dwel
z cied Dntop fee. for Jmakedoctrinctobevnto wythaLpons Dags, thentoke eboule with

ô almé aslight:as pfap: morning. s3 balmake awpckedwpfe. Che wopchednetie of a woman


bp a fandpe wape isto
boured formy felfeonelpe, but for alltbemtbat thefecteoftbe aged, euen fo iga MLA brdo cle. pini.b
Veske after thetruthe, des toa pll qupete man. +X oke not to narow: “3Sa


CTbe.rccv.dhapter. —
TOF thzethpnees wpch pleafety 50d, and ofthze whe
be bateth. Dt npnethpnges that be notte be Culpectezano
ofthe teath,chefelp of tye malpeeofa woman,
Coad en es pee


il,
== ire thprces there are,p mp (prete


a any
=a


St


ies. * amaiand wpfe that aqre


+ pu


=. Well together.
Thre thypnges there be wbpch mp fouleha
teth, utterly abbozre the life of them. a poze


grnrbiigh MaNtYAt iS poude. Arpeh man that ig alper,


tandan olde bodpe that dete) and is puchalte.

- Pithon balte gathered nothyneeinthp
pouth, what wplte thou fpndethé intbpneage.
<D howe plealauntea thpngets it when grap e=
beaded men are dilerete, and wkentheeldrrscã


There be npne thpnges, whych¥Fhaue ind
gedinmyne Herte tobebapppe, and the tenthe
wll F tell forth unto men wpeth mp tounge. A
man that whple be lpueth,bath (ope of bys chp!
dren, andfepth the fall ofbpsenempes. Well ig


eccte.rir.c DVM that dwelleth wyth an houlwwpee of onder
and.tridia (Fandyngexend that bath not fallen wpth big
Faas tong and that hath not bene fapne to ferue fuch


as are bnmete for bpm. Well ig bpm, tbat fpn=
deth a fapt full feende:and well is bpm.whpch
falketh of wifdome to aneare that peareth him
D howe qreate is be, that fpndeth wopledome g


knowleg: Pet is henot aboue bpm, that feareth


the Lode. Thefeare of Godhathelet it Celfea


gpfte whpche Halbe geuenfo: agqood sipon
berpeh

02 poore be mape bane ener a merpe perte, Sia
achearfullcountenaunce. There bethrethpns
ges tbat mp berte feareth, and mp face $ afrap
de of the fourth. Creafoninacpep.alenyepoug
people,and nopfome tonges,all thefe are penp-
er then death. Bue when one ig gelong onerbig

O20We Dito the


afcourge of tbe tonge. Wiben one bath anew
vopte, it i bashan a


SCH ER fauouretb,whpebebealloalowed tytoherbulbande. A wpcked wpfemakctha
Kore S abelo Godandmen.« Che wnpte lo2rpeherte,an beanie countenaunce,and a deed gene. t.a
2. tli sed LAr of bzethrenstheloue ofnepabbou wounde. +(leake bandesand feble knees fs a t,xrmit.b


gene qoodcounfell: D howecomelpeathpnge otor goftbe ebrie wipe moueth wrath, A

ig wyied ome vnto ag ev men:peg »onderftand in ppp č ig the man tbat bath a Yers
 geandcouncelligaglopous thpnae. Checro- teous wpfe , fozthenomberofipg

wne ofolde menis tobanenuch erperpence ad peres albe double. An honet wos


The booke i


erria mufte dawetogttber, bethat getteth ber get
fetha Sco:ppon. J dzonken woman iga great
plage. fo: becannotcouer ber owne Mame.
| The whordome ofa woman mape vekno
X weninebe papde of ber epesand epelivoes. x PE
Seh ey daugbter be not thamefatte, bold ber rapt
lpe lelte (heabule per felfe thozowe ouer muche
lpbertpe. Weware of all the dphonctype of her
cpes:and matuaple not pf be do agapntte the.
Lptte as one that goetbbp the wap, andisthzp
fEpe:fo pal he open ber mouth, and dapneke of
euerpenerte Water that (he mape act.
Xp euerpe bedaee Hall elpt downe,and
open Dec quyuer agapnite enerpearowe. Xlo-
~ Lpnge wpferetopleth ber bulbande, and fedeth
bps bones wpth ber wpfedome. Awomanot
Fewe wodes isagpfte of God, Fto all wel nur
tered mpndes mapenotppuae be compared.
€ _ Anpþonckand manerlp womanisagifte
aboueothergpfteg, and there igno wepgbte to
becompared vntoampndetbatcan rule tt letfe
phe as the Sunne when it arpfeth is an oma
menteinthe bpabe Deauenof the Lorde, foiga
uertcous wpfe the bewtpe of all ber boule. Lp-
Ke as theclearelpabte ts Spin tbe bolpe candel-
_ fpcke, Foig the bewtpe of theface vponanpoa-
canti.bd nee bodpe.xLphkeasthe golden ppllers arevp
pon thelockettes off{piuce : fo are the fapze leg-
ges Dpon awoman that hath aconant mpnde
Perpetuall arethefoundacpons thatbelapde
upon an pole fonpe rocke:fo are the comman
Demétes of God wpo the bert ofanholp wom.
There be two thpnges that qreue my bert
D andthe thyrdeis adplpleafurecome bpor me.
cUiben an experte man of warre luffereth fcarce
nefe and pouertp.cibenmen of onder Landing
and wopfedome arenot fet bp: And when one de:
pape oer obteoutnetle vnte fpnne. Tipo
o both luche,the Lo: path prepared bpm wnto
thefwearde. Cherebetwomaner of thynges,
whpche me thpncke to be bearde and patlous.
Amarchaunte cannot lpabtlpe kepehymfrom
wonge neptbher a tauerner bpm felfe from fpn.
| © The.rrvii. Chapter.
oethe poogetbat wolbeberpebe.ebeprobacpon oftheman
that feareth Gob. The bneontentnelle of a fool Ehe feeretes
of frende,arenat te be bttrredD, She whpckedpmagpueth curil
x twhpchturneth bpon ppm fel,


—


gon on O caule of pouertpe baucmanpe one
A (ER) Fe offended:¢ be that feketh to berpebe
X Wen e Curnetbbysepesalpde. Lyke asa
Ps bay 2) naple inthe wall fpcketh fate be-
e Opte two Rones euen Co doth lpr
Preke betwprtetbe bper ethe feller. PEbe holde
bym not dplpgentlpe inthe feare of the Lowe,
bys boule pal foone be onerthzowen. Lypkeas
when one {pfteth, the fplebpnefieremapneth in
thefpue: Soremapnetbtherefome vucleane
thpucre inthe thoughte ofman. The ouen pro-
Gaol. itia neth ppotters vefell, «fo dothe temptacpon of
‘et. tild trouble trperpabteous më. «The tre of the Fel
egat, b§.b Deis knowen bp bys frute, fois the thouabte of


mang bertelnowen bp bps wordes. Pzapleno EF


man ercepte thou baue heardebypm, fo: aman
is knoweé bp bis wozbes Pithou foloweftrpah
feoutnes, thon alte get ber, and put ber bpon


the as afap2e garmente. And Halte dwel wpth
ber,and the (hall defende the forener: and inthe
dape of knowlege thou Halte fpnde hedfaines
be bprdes relorte nto thep2 lpke:fo both the
truth turne puto them that be occupped wpth-
all. Che Lpon wapteth thep2rape:fo do the fpn-
ners lutke bpon the worckers of wpckednefle .
The talkpnae of bpm that feareth God, igno-
thynge but wpledome: as fo2 a foole be chaun=
gethas the Doone. Pethou be amonge the tn:
Dpicrete kepe thp wo2des wntpll aconucupente
tyme, butamonge fucheas be wple , fpeake on
hardelpe. Che talkpnae of fooles ig abpompna
cpon, andthep2 {porters volupteon{neffe and
mpfnurtoure.* Muchelwearprge maketh thy <cct.rrit.p
beereto tande vp:audto flrpue wpth fuch op
petbtbeeares. — hed
‘Che lirpfe of the proude ig bloudhedding
€ thepz blafpbempnge ts heupe to heare +a po C
fo dpiconereth fecretes,lefeth bps credence and seh ig
Fyndeth nofrendeafter bys wyll.Louetby fren
de,and bpnd thp felfe infapthfulnes wpth bpm
but pf thou bew2apette bps tecretes, thou palt
notgethpmagapne. ffozlpkeasthemanisp
Deftropeth bps enempe fois be alfo that dealeth
falfelpein the frendefhpppe of bys nepqbbour.
Lyke as one that lettethb abpzbde qo oute D
ofbps bande cannot take ber agapne: €uenfo
thou pf thou qeue oner thp frende tboucannete
not get bpmagapne
Yea, P canttnot comebp bym:fozbe igtofarof
de is Dnto the aga oo elcaped oute of f finare
for bis foule is wounded. As fo: woundes,thep
mape beboundebp agayne, gan cuel wo:d map
berecofited:but whoio bewzapeth p Cecretes of
a feéde, there ts nomoze hope to be badynto bim
xe that wyncheth wrth the eres. pnay Proue.tr.b-
neth fome evel, noman Wall take bpm trom tt.
Cai pen thou art prefent be thalbyabip commen
deand peapte thy wozdes:but at thelat he thal
turne bps tale and flaunder thpfapinge.<panp
thpnges baue ¥ bated, but nothpng fo eucll, foz
the Lobe bpnafelfe allo abbozect fucha one.
*GAbo fo cafteth a tone on bpe, it hall fall g
Dpon dps owne heade:dd he that fmrteth Wpth erev.rzi.b
gple, woundeth him felfe:whofodpaceth a ppt
(all fall therin ( $ be that lapetha fone indpg
nepgbboures wape mall tomble thera and he
thatlapeth afnare fo2 another (halbe také init


he
É


Dpmfelfe.* Wihofo gencth a wpecked nopfome eresas”


countapil,tt Halcome vpon bpm felfe, be thal Prato.
not bnowe from whence: The proude blatphe= Rie-tbHe
ine and arefcoznefull,but bengeaunce lurkethe |
forthemasaLpon hep p ceiopleat the fal
ofthe tpapecous.thalbe taken intpe (rare: ane
tupe of berte thailconfume them befor thep
dpe. Angre andrpgozmlnefie are two abbomp=
nablethpnges,ethe vngodipe bath thembothe
bpon bpm. @ he. rrviil. Chapter.

€ We oughtenot to depre vengeaunce,but to forgeue
theoffence.metbe bpces ofthe tonge, and of tke baunz
gerstbhereoe,


=m


F k 1. : a
E = E


|

i Baca EC xthatlekethvengeennce.thalfpn a
E Peed De Dengeaunce ofthe Lore, whpchee-trria
patie Bas Mallfurclpeepebpmbps fpnnes.x 0 Her
HOF TUE vis.rindb


6


clita


FelusthefonneofHyach


ffozqeue thp nepabbour the burte that he bath
Done to the, andfo (hall thp [punes be forgenen
thealfo,wben thou papell. man that bereth
batred agapnite another, bowe dare be Delpre
fozqeueneffe of Gods He that Heweth no mer-
cpe toaman wppch is lpke bpm elf, powe dare
beaféefezrrettencieofbpsfpnnes: Pibethat
py is but fethe.beareth hatred and kepeit, who
wpllintreate fo: bys tynnessiRemember the en
de and let enemprpe paffe whpche feketh death
and DefEruccpon,and abpde thou inthe comma-
undementes. Remember thecommaundemen=
tes fo (halt thou not be riqozous ouer thp neigh
boure. @hpncke pon thecouenaunte of tye
ypapelke,and fo: gene tbp nepabbours ignora
nnce.* Beware of Erpfe and chou alte make


` tbpfynnes fewer. ozan angrp man kpndleth


varpaunce, andthe bngodipe Dpiquypeth fren-
deg and putteth bpfcomdeamonge them that be


z0-Frbia at peace.x The moze wWoodthereis the moar


ecLeypt,.D


webemente ig the fpze and the mpahtier that
menbe.the greater isthe wrathe, andthe lon-
ger tbe ttrpfe endureth,the moare it burneth.
An patty braulpnge kpudletd afp2c, and
an baltpe frpfetpeddethblonde- Atongealfo
that beareth falie wytnelle bapnaeth death. PE
thou blowethefparke,itthallbuine, Pfthou
{ppt ponit it wal qo fozth:and both thele ont
of the mouth.« Che tlaunderer and Double ton
ged ig curled, foz: manpeone that be frendes fet:
tethbcat barpaunce. Che tbpadetonge bathe
bpiqupeted manpe one, and Dpuen them from
one landtoanotbher. Strongecpties oftherpep
bathe it bzokendowne , and oucrfhowenthe
boufes of greate men. (The rengt of the peo
plebatbit bzoughtedowne,and bene the Decap
of mpabtyenacpons.) Tbe thp2de tonge bathe
cafte oute manp an bore woman, and robbed
themof thep2 labours. bolo berkenetp vnto
{uche pall neuer fpnde rete, and neuer dwel fa
felpe . Che ltroke of therodde maketh adders,
but the troke of the tonge finpteth the bonesin
fonder. Therebe manye $ baueperpihed wpth
the (weardz, but manpe moo tho2zowe the tong
» Wellis bpm pis kept from an evell tonge
andcommeth not inthe angre thereof,wbycbe
dDzaweth not the pocke of fuche,andis not boun
de inthe bandeg of it. fFo2 the pocke thereof is of
prom, the bande of it of keele. Che death there
of isa verp enelldeath:Dell Were better io: one


 thenfuche atonge. Wutthe fyze of ft mape not


oppstie them that feare God, andthe flamme
thereof mape not burne them. Such as fortake
the Lobe , (hall fall therein: and it Hall burne
them.andnomanthalbecabletoquenchit. Fé
{hall fall bpon them as aLpou,¢ Deuoure them
aga leopard. hon hedgelk thp qoodes w tpo:
nes:why doeftenot thourather maketoozes g
barres fo: thp mouth: Thou wepelte thp golde
and fpluer,wbp doele thou not wepe the wo2-
bes alfo vpon the balaunces Seware that thou
fipde not tntbp tonge,¢ fo fall beforethpne ene


_ myped,thatlape wapte forthe , (and thp fall be


incurable euen vnto death. )
E The.rrir. Chapter.


C Dowetor oughte Colende oure menep ane to alme Me
fa fapth Pullman antwerpnge fo? bps frenoe.Ot lpbe
gels ralpteand betpptalptpe,

ong AXP Holo wpll hewe mercpex let bpm
aon a lenbe bnto pps nepqhboure:and pe
<a Eitbatigable, let bpm kepe thecom=
A iy Wy, aitaundemet.Lendonto thp nepap:
pees bourein tpme of bps rede, and pap
thoutby nepgbboure agapne in due (eald.hepe
thp wozde and dealefaptbfullp wpth ppm, and
thou alte alwape Fpnde the thbynge that is ne:
cefarpe fo: tbe. Tberebane bene manye, that
whenathbpnae was lente them,rekened it tobe
founde, and made themtrapuaple and laboure
that bad belped tbem. pple thep receaue anpe
thpnge,tbep kpfletbebandes of fucheas gene
them, fo: thep2 nepabboures good thep bumble
thep2 bopce. Sut when thep Mulde pape agap=-
ne,thep kepeit backe and geucenell worbes, €
makemanpe ercules bp reafonofthetpme:and
tbougb be beable pet qeueth be fcarfethebalfe
agapne,t rekeneththeother tobefounde. And
pi be wptbholdenot bysmonpe, pet bathe be an

enenmwe of bpm,andthat pndelerued.


Foll, ©


A
Deu, rÈ fs
Luke, Vi Ds


De papeth brm with curfpnge and rebuke l


and geucth bpm euel woes fo2 bps gooddede
@ here be manpe one Whypch arenot glad fozto
lende,not becaule of enell,but thep feare to leas
fe the thynae that thep lende. Pet bauethou pa-
cvence wpth the fpmple, and wptholde not mer
cpe from bym Helpe the pooze fo? thé comman
dementes fake, F let bym not goemptpe, from p
becaufe of pps necefltte. Lele thp monpe foz thp
brother and nepgbbours fake, and burpeit not
bnder atone, Where ttrufteth and cozrupteth.

Gather thp trealure after the commauns
demente ofthe Byahette and Cothall itbipnge
the moare profpte then qolde:+Lape bp thp all:


ath. Dra


Euke.ra.d.
1.2m. bi.D


mefle inthe bande of the pooze,'and it Hall kepe t= 9.1001. v


the from all enell, .
+A mans almeffe (Sasa purle wpthbpm,g
(hal kepea mans fauoureas the apple of an eve


mani iit
Lube. pihg


and afterwarde Hall it arple and papeenerpe actcs.r,s


man bpsrewarde bpon bps bead. Zt fat frabe
for theagaputte thpne enempes, better then the

fhyloe ofa gpaunte,o? {peace of thempabtye.
A goon honet man is furetp for bisnepgh
bour,butawpcked perlonletteth bpmcometo
Mame. Forget not the frendetbyppeort v fure
tpe for be bathe yenen bys loule fo: the. Chev
godipedpipple the good dede oF bpsturetie and
the pntbanckefull and ignozaunte leaucth bps
furetpeindaunger. Somemanpzompleth fos
bys nepabboure:and when pe bath lotte bps ha
neftpebethallfozfakebpm. Suretpeppppe
bathe deftroped manpearpcbe man,and remo:
ued themas the wanes of the lee. ypaghtye peo
ple bathe tt Dapuen awape, and canfed tbem to
wander in frapng cunteyes. An Dngodlp man
tranfareffing the contmaundement of the L0:
ball Fall into tie furetpetbpppe: and though be
force bpm felfeto get oute , pet hall befall into
the (udqemente. Helpe typ nepabbouc cut after
thp power:and beware’, that thou thy felfe fall
notin fuch dette. Chechefethpng thatkepeth
intbp Ipfe is water, andbzeade,clothbpnge,and
lobgpnge


€


Thebooke


lodapnge,toconerthpihame. !
D - toetteritistobauca poze lpupng namans
owne houle, thendelpcate fare amonge the ftra
pr.reror-b UNge-« Ie tt lptle oz much that thou balt, bold
Sao ehecontente woptball,and thou Malte not be bla
"med asa Dagabounde:fo2 a mpferable lpfe is it
togofrombouletoboule: and where a man ig
fre mde, beDarenotopenbpsmouth. Though
onebe lodged. and baue meate and depucke,pet
hall be be taken as brwozthpe.and beare ma-
npe bptter roughbe wo2des,namelpe,thus: Oo
thy wape,tbou ffraunger, and prepare a table
fo: thp felfe, and feede me alfo of that thou bat
Away, thou traunger(fo that hereqardeth bis
bonoure nomoze mp bzother commet) intomp
boufe,and fo be telletb bpm the necefiptic of bis
boule. Chele thynges are beup to amanp bath
wnDderandpnge:namelp,the forbpodpnae of p


boule, etbatthelendercattetbbym inthetccth =


@Mbhe.rrr .Ch


E ig beag though be were not deed:fo2 be bath
efte one bebpndebpmtbatislpke bpm. gn bps
Ipfe be fawe bpm and bad iope inbim,and was
not fope in bis Death, nepther was pe ahamed
before bpsenempes. oz beleftebebpnde bpm
anauenger agapnite bps enempes and a good
doer wntethefrendes. Wo? thelpfeofchplozen
be hall bpnde the woundes together , and bys
hert isqreued at euerp erpe. An yntamed bofe
wpll be bearde,and a wantd chplde wpl be wp
full. PE thou bapnge vp thy fonne delpcatelp be
{pall make the afraped:and pf thou plape wpth
bym,be pall bapng the to peupnetle. Laugh not
wpth bpm,leatte thou toeape wpth bpmalto,¢
— leatke tp teeth be let oncdae at the latte.

¥@euebpmnolpbertp inbps pouth,and
Eccl. biic pxenfenot bpsfolpe. Wowedowne bys necke
whple be is pong, byt bym vpon p fpdes, whyle
be is pet but achploe,leatte be ware fubburne,
and gene nomoze force of tbe,and fo Malte thou
hauc beuprefle of foule. Ceache thp chpldeand

be dplpaente therein leat it be tothp Mame.
Wetter is the poozre bepnge hole anditronge thé
aman toberpebes not to paue bps Helth:dpelth
and welfare isabeucall golte,and a whole bo
dpeaboucalltrealure. Chereisnorpcpetle a-
boucafonnde bodpe,and no tope abouc the iope
‘of the bert.Death is better then a wactched pf
¢ etarnall refte better then cotpnual fpckenelie
The qood thpuges pare put ina clofe mouthe
are lpke as when meateislapd Dponthe graue
(hat rood dothe the offerpnge nto an


+da  pdollrxfo becanneptbher eate,tatte,nozfmell


Euen lois be that is chaled ofthe Lode and be
areththerewarbde of inpquptpe. Heleptp wptp
bysepes:and groncthlpkeagelbedDman, that
lpeth wpthba bpigpnandlpabeth. ~ Geuenol Gro. rrita
ouer thp mynde into beupnefie,andvere not thp *-2.F6.b
felfeintbpne ovonecounfaple.* Cheiopeand se si,
chearfulneffe of the perte ig the lpfe Eman, and iz0.ruii.b
a mans qladnefie is the prolongpnge of bis dap
es. Loue thpne owne foule and comfozte thpne 4

erte:as fo2fo2z0we and beupneffe, dpueitfar

om the, x ffo? beupnefle bathe apne manpe å i co, vii.
man, and bzpngeth no pofpte, sele, andanger
(hozten the dapes of the lpfe:carefulnefle and fo
rowe bzpngeage before the tpme.Cinto a metp
berte cuerp thpnae bath a qood taft $ be eateth

ss |Cbe.xeci. Chapter.

Mde ought to geue dilpgent beneto honchpe.Dtthemthattake `


papneto gatherrpebes. Che prapt: afarpehbe man wpthoute a
Faute. Woe to flpedzonkennes and folowe fobernes.


Sea ot Raple and carefulneficfozxtp- X.

wee poo cepele taketh awape the flepe, and Timo.bib
EECA A maketh p feH to confume. ben
pees Fea one lieth etaketh care he awaketh
Pa o acre euct bp,lpke as a greate {pckenes
—— _ Daeaketh the fepe. Che rpch bath
greatelabourein gatierpnge bysrpcbefle to-
gether,« then wth the plealure of pps rpcbefle
betaketh bps ret, and is refrethed.25ut who fo
tongi De leane oE peri bea beger Petot la


though be leaue of, pet is bea begger.He that lo
ucthrpcbelle, hal not be iu tifped:¢ who fo folo
wetbcozrupcio, thal bauepnongh therol.+Wa eect. vitia
np one arecome in great mplfoztune bp f reals |
of golde and baue founde thep2 beltruce pon be
fo2ze them. Jt isa tree of fallpng bnto them that
offre it bp,and all fuche ag be folpthe fall therin
Wilelled is the rpche whych is founde wpthoute
blempibe and bath not gone after golde, no: fo
ped inmonp and treafures Where is therefuch
aonesand we fhallcommendehbym,and cal him
bleffed:fo2 great thypnaed dothe be amonge bps
cople. Cibolo is tryed and founde perfecte in
ucbe thpnaes,(balbe commended and prapfed.
lbo mpabte ofende, and bathe not offended/
¢2lho could Do euell,and Path not Bone tts Cher
‘o2e (hall bys good be Fablpthed and the holecd
regacpon hall declare bpsalmefies. DFtbou
pt ata greate mans table, open not thp mouth
topde bpor if and make not manp Wo2des.2ke
membze that an enucllepeisathrewe.
Ubat thpngecreatedis wore thena wpe yw e
Keb epetberefose wepethitbefozeeuerpemang  ~
face: Lapenot thyne bande bpon euerp thpnge
that tbpne epe fepthe and frpue not wpth bpm
intheaph.*«pPondze bp thy lelfe, what thp nep ggat.bita,
gbboure woldefapne baue and be dpicrete in e-
Herp popnte.eate the thinge that te tet befoze
the manetlpe,as it becommetpa man, and eate
notto muche, lef thou be abpozredD.Leanethou
of fp2fteofal,becaufe of nourtour, lea thou be
be whome no manmape fatplfpe, whpch mape
turneto thp decape.Wiben thoulpttelt among
manpe mé,veache not thpne bande oute fpzffeo
all.zD bowe well contente is a wile man With sc.errotre
alptle wpne: fo that in fleepe thou thaltenot be
{pckethereof,noz fele anp payne. A fwete wa
me


OfPelus the fonne of Sirach Sfol.rit,


fome Nepe Hal fuchbaone baue,and felenoiwar whenaneldet {peakech, make not thon manpe


ju nie WPckednefle.«Benotthoua wynebpbber,for of otber in bps purpote . Æ man of onderttan-
S20 an lpfeofman.PEtboudapneke it meafurably,p ne,do nofhpnge wpthoute adupfement,fo Mall


Teit cs (alte be temperate. bat ipfeisitt thatmape ttnotrepentethe after thedede > Gonot inthe


sci FA Lpipe opti bame €rutnempnitheth p rength commaundementes:and he Pputteth bps trut
ra iraia D ieS ne geld ide inthe the Lozde, ball wantnothpnee.


boureat the wpne, anddpipplebymnot in bps e.rrritt. Cha ter.
mpatpe. Geue brmnodptpptetult wordee, 270 bptisecpon ote fooie. went
pzeatienot bpon bpm wpthcontrarp fapinges. isin the bande of the potter. vie


T ERE AD, praple ofthe preacher, and of the Pas ‘Bis ipere hall no euptl bappen Unto br
E: fi (thas! Hane that feareth God: but when beig 4


rarer. DE the feare,fapth end confpbencein od,


Pek e th tttation, the Lozd tall delpuer


bonefflp,fo2 wopfedome becommeth the rpabte
ecit a, Well. Ppndzenotmulpke. Speake not, where


endera tDereigno audpence:xand poure not forth wp ne about Ipke an arel tree. Lpke
‘= Dome outeoftpme,at an inpoztunpte. Lpkeag Hozle that neieth onder euerp one that
the Carbuncle Mone Hyneth that is fet in golde fopsit wrth a fcomnefy Lfrert
fodothea fonge garnpthe tie wpne fcafte: and day excell an other fepngeall

asthe Sinaragde that islet in golde, fois the eate come of the Sunner Che
fwetenefie of S)ulphe bp the mpath of wpne; ozdebath lo parted themafon


(@eue care aud be Epll,and fo hp good beha- Cowepned thetpmes, andfolé
5 uoure thou thaltebeloucd.) |
Thou ponge nian {peake that becommeth lowed befoze other dapes. And al menare made
the,and that is pzofptable and petfcariewben ofthex grounde, and out ofthe earth OF Adam. Senn gia
thou art tuple alted. Compzehende muchwith Jnthe multitude offcience bathtbe Lowdefons —
fewe wozdes. Jn manpe fDingegbe agonetbat dred them,and made thep2 wayes of dpuerg faf 2S
(signeraunte:qeuceare and Holbetbytongers {pos ome of them bath hebleflen, made much
all. Dithou be amonge men of yer auctozptic, ofthent, balowed them,¢ clapmied them topim
delpze not to compare thp felfe ynto them: and felfe, wut foe of the path be be brougbrthe
z bl Die,


Thebokeof ih.


Koma.tF-¢ lowe, andput them oute of threp2 eftate. x Lpke
astheclapetsinthe potters bande , andalithe
opdzprge therof at bps pleafure:fo are men alto
intbe bande of bpm that made them, fo that de

{C0701 may genetbemaslpbeth bpm be. a gapntte
enelis good, g agapnt death is lpfe-fo1s theon
codlpagainft {uch as feare God. Webold,thele
are the wo2ckes of the bpabeft,« there are cuce
twoagapnittwo.and one let agapnt another.
Jam awaked vp lak of all,as one that gathe-
retb after in barnett. jntbeqpftesof God and
in bys bleffpng Jam increaled, and paue fpiled

cerrig. mp wpneprefie lphea grape qatberer . ` + We-
polde. howe 3 haue not laboured onelpe fo2 mp

~ Celfe but foz al fuch aglouenourtour ¢ wilbom
Hearemeopegreat men ofthe people, and
barken wpth pour eares pe rulers of the conagre
gacion.@eue not thp fonne and wpfe, thp bzo-
ther ¢ frende,power ouerthe wobple thou lpuck
and qeuenot awape thp fubfaunce s good toa
nother,letk it ad the: thou be fapne to beg
therfoze thp felfe.Aslonge as thou lpuctte and


baftbzeth,letnomanchaungethe:ffozbetterit —


isthat thy cbplozen to pzape the, thenithat thou
(bulbdeft be fapne tolokeintbeir bandes. Fn all

top wozkes be ercellente that thynebonoure be

neuer tapned. Attbetyme when thou Malte

ende thy Dapes,and fpnpth thy Ipfe,opfirpbute
thpneenberptaunce. Che fodder,the whpppe,t

the burtben belongeth unto the ale: Meat, cor

reccion g worcke wnto thy feruaunt.PFthoulet

D thpferuaunt to labour,p thalt fpnde ret. Wut
pftboulet bim gopodle.bethallekeliberte. Che

pocke ¢ the whpp bowe Downe thebarde necke

but tame p thp evel feruaunt wpth bondes and
cozreccid. end pim to laboure p pe qo not poie

Sor pdienes, bzpnaethmuche enel.et brm to
worcke,fo2rp belongerh bnto bpm, anabecom=

meth bpm well. Vf be be not obedient, bpnd bis

rerep t Be at to nes ait bpm in hia Foe

scere bite Y WPthoutdplerecyon doo nothbpnge.x«PFthou
eee bau a faptbful feruaunt, let bpm be bntothe


as tbpne ovonefoulgaintreat bpm aga brother
as in blond bat thomgotten bpm. PEthou haue
a feruaunt,bolde bym as thp felfe:fo2 thou batt


nede of bym,as ofrbp felfePE thou intreat bpm
eucil,and kepeff bpm bearde, and makete bpm
to be pzoudeand torunneawapefromthe,thou
Cant not tell what wape thou thaltefeke bpm.
~ €Tbe-reviiit. Chapter.
q_Ofbdfcames,opupnacponsand cnebauntmentes. Wwe
ought Coconfute bapne bope, lpinor S be prapfe of them
that frare Had. lopucrile workes of men. God doth not
alowe the woickes of an bnfapth full man,
=A wile people begile them felues with
£4 vapne and dplceatful bope,and fooles
A ‘24 trutleindreames . Utpoforegardeth
-——— = Dzeames,is phe bpm p topll take hold
ofa hadowe,and folowe after the wpnde Eug
foisit with theapperp ngeg of dD2eames. efo:
. the face,istbelpkenes ofa face. Ubo canbeclé
fed of the vncleanes Dz what truth can be fpo-
- Benoa lpers Sotihlapng, wptcheafteforcerpe
and dDreampngets but banptpe:lpke as whena
woman traneleth wythchplde,and bath many
fantafpes in ber berte. bere ag (uch wplpong


come not of God. fet not tbpne berte bponthent
Tto: dDreames bane dpfceaucd manp aman, and
fapledthem that put thep2 ting therein.

The lawe halbe fulfplied wptboutelpes, 25
and wploome is {uffpcient to afapthful mouth
What knowledg bath be p isnot trpeo: A wile
manpis welingract, wnderftandeth much ehe
that path qcoberpertéce can talke of wpldome
Hethat bath io erperpence knoweth lptic,and
he thaterreth,cauleth much wpckednefic. He p
is not trped, whatthpuges knoweth be: Who
fo folowetbnorule igfullofwpckednefie.

tbt mas pet in errour, 3 learned ma
allo:pee, J was folearnedp J could not erpre
it all and came ofte in perall of death therefore,
tpl 3 was Delpucred fromit(thozome the grace
of God.) Mowe Fle,thatthep whpchfearegod |
baue the rygbt fpzete:fozthep2 hope Mandeth in
bpm, ý can belpe them And the epes of the Lo
are onthem;tbat loue bpm. Wi bolo feareth the
Lozbeftandety inawe ofnoman, andisnota
fraped, fo: the Lozdeig bps boope andcomfozt.

Wlelled is the se of bimtbatfeareth the q
Lozde: Jn whom putteth be bps trute Whois


r


bpsitrength?*ffo2 p epesof the L020 hauerel ipar.rvip -


pectontotbem,that loue bpm. He is their mpap
ticpoteccpon,¢ fronge qrounde. A defence fo2
the beat,a refuge foz the bote noone Dape,a fuc-
courcfo2 fomblpnge,and an belpe foz fallpnge
Heletteth vp the foule andlpahteneth the epes
He geueth lpfe,and blelpng. He that geuethan
off crpnaof burpgbteous goodes, bps oferpng
is refuled:¢ the fco2nefull bealpnge ofthe vntp
gbtcoug pleafenot Gon(the Lozdeis thep23 on
Ip, that pacpentlpeabpbde bim tn the wap of the
truthe,and ofrpabteoutnefle. The Dpef dothe
not lowe t gpftes of the pcked. And, God Brou.rd.s
bath no Delptein the oferpnaes of tbe bucobdlp
neptber mapefpnne be reconf{pled in the multp:
tude of oblacions. Wlbolo b2ingeth an ofterin
out of he qoodes of p poore doth euenas one {
bplleth the lonne before the fathers epes. |
The bread-of the nedefull is tbelpfe ofthe D
poore:be p defraudeth bpnrteereof, isa man of
bloude. pofo robbeth bys nepqhboure of bps
Ipupng, both as great fpnas though be flew bi
todcath.* ie pdefrapdeth the labourer of bps RETENE
bpic iga blonde (pedder.Cihenonebuploethe =
another beekethdowne, what vrofpt bane thep
thé but labours Wi bé one prapeth ¢ another cur i
feth, whole bopce wpl f Lod bear/xbep wal eim.rtd
betb bim elf becaule ofa Deed bodp,¢ toucheth
the decd aqapne, what doethhys walhynae + w:o.rrecp
Ho ig it wyth aman? fatteth fo: bps {pnned,¢ tBrtiib
doeth them aga bo wll þeare bis praper
D2 wpat dorth bpstatpnae belpe bpm:
€ fhe.rrry.Chaprer.
Cis twba | i ]
T r A r aa tym A poms (ete


a


yi, oto kepeth thelawesrbepneth offe-
HV Ì rpngeg pnough. De p olbetb fatk tbe + ile
AV Adcommaundemente, ofterethtberigbt
SeN pealthofring. je that is tbanckful € asp; rrite
recompenteth, offereth fpne floure.x (A bolois pi. iit.c
mercpful and qenetbalmes,that is tbe vpabte

thancke


4


a.
ne


thanckofferpnge.God bathe pleafure when one
beparreth from (pnne,and to forlake bnrpgbte
oufnes,reconcpleth vs wpth bpm.

* Thou thalte not appeare emptpe before
the Lozd,fo2 all fuch isdone becaule of thecom
| manndemente of God.« The offerpnae ofthe

‘tpg bteous makethe the aulter fat , anda fwete
Gen. 10.4. fel ig it before the Mighelt. Che oferynge ofp
tpg bteous is acceptable unto God:and (hall ne

ter be fozmotten.Gpue Gadbps bonoure wpth
achearfal berte,and kepenot backethe fp2ilin
Contr) qesofthp handes.* Jn allthy qpltsambewea
mercpfulcountenaunce, and balowe thy tithes

buto God wpth qladnefle. Geue wuto God ac


fy. Fertil


wove tip SO2BPNGE AS He hath enrpched andprofpered the


|


i
a «


AD


*and loote what thpne hand isable,qeue with

_ achearfullepe:fo2 the Lozderecompenteth,and
Geueththelenentpmesagsmucheagapne. —

Geueno vnrpahtcons giftes,fo2fuch wil

De not receaue. Beware of wrongful offerpng

§es,fo2 the Lozdeis arpabteous Judge-and re

Gardeth nomang pertowe accepteth not the per

"zune siti HON OF tHE pooze:but he beareth the paper of the

| opprefled.«Hedilppleth not the delpzeof the fa

tierles,no2 the wpodow, when the pourcth out

ber pzaper befoze bpm. Deth not God lethe tea

res, that rune Downe the chekes of the widdow

<D2 Deareth be not the complatnte ouer {ucheag

make ber to wepe? Woz from ber chekesdothe

teares go bp Dntobeaucn,and the Lode which

Deareth chem doth accept them: Caboloferucth

God after bps pleafur,(balbe accepted:and his


mbil. paper reacheth onto thecloudes.* Che papet


Ates. rA


of him tbat pumbleth bym felfe,qoeth thozowe

. thecioudes,tpll he come npe. She wpll not be
comfozted,no2 goo ber wape, tpll the Pyghelke

` God baue relpecte unto her, eue true lentence
and perfourme the iudgemente.And the Lozve

© wpll not be lacke incommpnge.no2 tary longe
‘tpl bebath {mptten tufounder the backes of the
Dumercpful, and aduenged Hpmfelfe of the Hea
then-tplibebaue taken away the multptude of
thecruell,and broken the Scepter of the nrp-
gbteous, tph he gene euerpe man after bis wo

Res and rewarde themafter thep2doinges:tpll

- bebauedelpuercd big people, mapntained thepe
caule and reiopfed them in bys imercp. <D howe
fay2ea thpnge ismercpe inthe time of angupth
troubles Jt ig lpbe acloude of rapne,that comy

meth th the tpme ofa drouth.


| The.rervi.Chapter .
— C Apraper to Goa ineheparlone of all fapthtull men:
Tope the praple of a good woman.


a l


4 \va God of all thynges , Pane retpecte
pow A“ Dnto ws, peewee vs thelpght of thy
Ws se mercpes, elende thp feare amonge


ee ANE SH the eathé and Hraungees, whych
' feaen


beade ouer the outlandpthe Heathen, that thep
mavelearne fobnowethy mpgbt, andpower
Lykeas thouarte balowedin vs befoze them,
ke bepngeto pafle, that thon mapet be magnp-


s LrHelus tye lonneo’ Sirach —


<r] Aucmercy bpon vs DLO, thou s


fexe-not after the.tbatthep mapeknowebowe Pex
that there i¢ no God but thou, thattbepmape fi
Hewethpwonderous worches.Liftebpthpne P


Sol rift,


fped alfo tn them befoze vg:that thep mape lio
we the,lpkeas weknoweth. sor therisione
otber God but onelpe thou, Lord. Renucthe
tokens, andcbaunge the wonderous workes.
Dbewe thpne bande and thy rpabte acme glo-
tpoutlpe. Rapte vp thy indpanacponsand pow
croutethp wath . Cake awap the abuerlarpe
andfmpte the enempe. Dake the tyme (porte,
remember thy coucnaunt, that thy wonderoug
Worches mape be prapled.Let the wrath of the
fy2econfusne them that lpue fo carelefte: and lee
them perpe that doth the people purte.<amve
tn fonder the beade of the prpnees that be oure
enempes and lape theres none other but we.
Sather all the trpbes of Jacob together x3
agapne,tbat thep mape knowe howe that there ~
te none otber God but onelpethou , that thep
map Chewe thpwmaderous wozrckes, and bethou
thy peoples berptage, lpke as from the begpn:
lipnge.sDLozbde, Daue mercpe bpon the people,
that bath thp name,and bpon Firael,x whome @rod.liti.e
tbou balte lphened toa fp2fkebonefonne. D :
be mercpfull vntp Jerufalem the cptpe ofthp


Saunctuarpe. xthecptye of thy rete. Epl Sy: tipar, dis


onwpth tdp onfpeakable vertues,and thp peo


. ple wpth thp glozp.Geue wptnefle vnto thy cre


ature, wbome thou madeft fromthe begpnning
and rapfe bp the weap 3 Be baue bene:
wedinthpname. Rewardethemtbat wapte
for the, that thp pzopbetes mate be Found fapth
full. DLozde,beare the prape: ofthp feruauna
fes,accozdpnge tothe blplpnge of Aaron ouer
tbr people(andgupd thou vsin the wape of rp:
ghtcouthetie)*that all thep whych dwell ppon saum.v1. b
theecarthmape knowe,thattbou arte the Lo2d
the etarnall God, whicheisfromeuerlattpnge.
Thedbelp denoureth all meates, pet (s one
meate better than another. Lyke as thetounge C
taftetbh venpfonne,xfodotbe anherte of Under: roco
fLandpnge marche falfewozdes. X frowarde
berte qeucth beupneffe,buta man of experpence
lpfteth bpm bp agapne. Che womanreceaucth
euery man,pet is one Daughter better then ano:
ther. Afapze wpfe reiopleth bee bulbande, and
aman loueth nothprge better. PF toe be loupng
and Derteous wytball,then isnot ber bulband
like otber men.de that bath qotten.a vertcous
woman, Dath agoodlpe pofleflpon: the fs vnto
bpmabelpe, and ppller wherevpon be cefkethe,
CU ere no hedge is,therethe goodes are fpop-
led: and where no bulwpfe ig, there the Frendles
mourneth.Lpke as there isno'credéce qeuenta
avobber,that goeth from onecptpeto another:
O1Snot the manbeleued,p bath no nefke:and
mul turne in, wbere bemape abpoe inp upghe


C The.xrevti. Chapter.
q Bowe aman Gulbe krotne frendzs anb councellers:
anb fearch the company ofa polpe man,


turned toanencmp: D mot wicked pzeliipepa
From whence act p iprong pte couer p earth


Tie YOKE OF 1 > 3


RE ccl.b.b vopth faldved and difceates> There is fomecom


panpon wbpcbe in profperptye reiopteth wrth
bys frende:but inthetpme of trouble, Defaketh
parte agapnite bpm. here is Come companion
that mourneth wpth bps frende Foz rhe belp fa-
ke: but tobétroublecommeth be taketh hold of
tbe (bploe. f€o2 get nct thpfrynde inthy mynde
and thpncke bpon bym in thp rpchetle.ackeno
counfatl at thp &pniman, and pde thy countail


evit. From Cuche as beare theno good wpll-«Cuctpe


counteler bapngethe forthe bis counfapl. ence
theleffe, there is Comme that counfelet),but fog
bys owne profpt: Beware of thecounceler,and
be adupled afoze wberetothou wylte vicbpm ,
for be wplicounlapl foz bym felée. Let be cafke
the lot bpon tpe andfape bnto the: pp wape


and purpofeis good, andafterwarde pe Fande S


% agapnit the,and loke what all become of tbe.
Alke no counfapleat pym. tbat (ulpecteth
the fozanenempe,and bpdetbp counfapie front
fuche as bate the. Afkenocounfail ata woman
concernpngetbe thynges tbat thelongetbe fo:
nozat afearfull and fapnte berted bobp,tn mat
ters of warre:o2 ata marchaunt bowe deare pe
wplcbeape thp wares towarde pis:02 at a bper
of fellpnge: 2 at anenupous man,of thanckes
geupng:D? at the pnmercpfull,ofloupng kind
nes:(02 at an Dnbonet man of beneftp .) Dz at
the floutbfull,of wozchpng. D2 at an bpzelpng
whichbath no boufe,oz pzofpte,of welthe.(an
pole bodp wold not gladly beare {peak of much
labour. )@akeno luche folkes tocounfapl:but
bedelpqente tolcke counfapl ata Yerteous ma
thatfeareth God,fuch oneasthou bnowelt to
‘be akeper of thecomaundementes, wbycb bath
© ampnodc after thine owne mpnde,¢ ts lorpe foz
the when thou fumblett. And bold thy counfail
falt in thpne bert:fo2 there ig noman moze faith
fullto kepe it:then thou thp felfe. ozamancs
mypnbde (3 (ome tpme moze Dpl{poled fo fell onte,
then Ceuen watchmen that (pt aboueinanbygh
placelokpnge aboute them. And aboue al thps
rapetbe Dpef that be wpll leade thy wape in
aptbfulnes ¢truth.2Sefoze al thp workes alke
counfapl fp2tt: o2 ener thou doelt anp tipnee,
be wel adupled. Cher be four thynacs p declare
achaunged bert, wherout there(pzpnaeth eucil
and qood-deathe €lpfe, anda mafterfull tonge
that bableth much.Some manig apte and wel
inftructein many thinges,and pet verp Ynpro
Fptable vnto bpm fell. Some man there(s,tiat
cangeue wple ¢ prudent counfapl,g petis beba
ted, ¢contimict) a beqger:for p grace isnot ac
tien bpm of Godtobe accepted. Anotherisrob-
bed ofal wifbome,pet is be wple bro bpm frit
e thefrute of ynberffandynge is commendable
p “brs month. |
A wile man maketh bis people wpie and
the frutes of bps wifdome faplenst. A wyle må
(balbe plentecuflye blefled of God: and ail they
that le bym thall{peake good of bpm. The Ipfe
of man, ftandeth in the nomber of daies, bus the
dapes of Afracllare innumerable.
A wple man Hall optapne fapthfulneffe
and credence amonge bpsprople,and bps name


balbe perpetuall. Wp fonne.preue thp (culein
thy lpfe:and pitbcufleanye cucltbpnge.geue tt
not bate ber. Foz alltbpnges are not profpta '.cor.b/.c,
blefoz al men, nether batpeuerp foule pleafure “E=
incuerp tbpng.wenot qredpineuerp eating,
benot to balp ponal meatcs.JEo2 ercefic OF eect rer.
meates bapngethlpcknes, ¢glotonpcommeth
atthelalt toan ynmefurable peate. Chorzowe
furfet paue manp one perpthed: but be that dp-
cteth bymlel€ temperatlp,prolongeth bys ipte-
 The.rrroiii. Chapter. |
E 2 Pbplecionin (pckenes ought weteprap,andto fend


abbefrepon whpcbe bealeth bp praper. Lhe beiwepprege
ofthe dred. Sadnes,wploome. Artitpcers 0} craftetiren


fae 2 a Dour the Phpplpcion,ponourhim F
: i, k y? becaule of neceffpte.God Datherea


FSF cra
Re ute bpm(fo2ofthe Hpelkcommeth -
a medpepne and be (hallreceaue gpf
bea 5 tes of the kinge. Che wpledome of
the Pbylpcyon bapngeth bim to great wozhip !
and in tbe (pabt of the great men ofthps world
pe halbe honourably taken. Che Lorde bathe
created meDecpne of the earth gbe that is wpie
wpl not abbozre it. Was not the bitter water cron. rbo
made fwete wWpthatree, that menmpabte lear: tiices.uic »
neto knowe the wertue therofe Che Loz path
geut men wpldome.and wnderffandpng,that

empabte be bonouredin bps wonderous wor
kes.celithCuche dotbhe be beale men, and taketh
awape thep2 papnes:Df tuche doth the Apote-
carpe make aconfeccpon pet cannoman perfor
me all bys wo2ckes. o: of the Lorde commerh
profperoys wealth over alltbeearth.. m á

HPtonne optppfle not thys in thp fpeknes i504 rvi

but t pape vnto the Lozde, and pe Mall make et-rryoiii.a
the whole. Leaue offromfpnne,and o2der thp
bandes arpabte.clenfe thpneberte from al wis
kepnefle Geucalwetefauoured offerpna, and
the fptre foure foza tokén of remembzaunce :
make tie offerpnae fatte,as onethat geneth tbe
Fp2fte frutes, and qeuerowme to the Dhplpcps
Eo: the 1028 bathcreated bpm, let prmnot yo
frem the,fo2z thon bafte nete of bpm. The boure
mapecome: tbat tbe lpeke mape be belped tho-
rowe them, when thep prape vntotbhe Lorde, ý
be mape recouer and get belth tolpue longer.
De that (pnneth before bys maker, Hall fall in-
tothe bandes of the Pbyplpcpon €

Hp fonne,srbapnge forthe thytearegouer selre =
the Decb:and beginne to moucne,as pf thou bad È
delt fuffercd greate barnic thp felfe:and then co
uer bps bodp after aconuenpent maner and dpf T
fpplenot bys burpall. Enfozce thp felfeto wepe 7
and pzouoke thp felfe fo mourne, xand make la t.rel.tdit,2
inentacponerpedpentlpe,s that adape o? two,
let thotbe eucli{petenof :andthencomforte
thpfelfebecanle ofthebeaupneffe. * o:
of heupnescommeth death, the bcapnette of tpe Sei
berte breaketh (trength.eupnes and pouertie ecct.rrr.c.
greueththebert intemptacpon ¢ offence. Cake
no beupneffe to berte,dzpue itawape,and remé
ber the la&etbpnaes. Forget it not,fo2 there ig d}
nofturnpngeagapne. Chou Maltedobprnoa
good. but burtethp Celfe. Remember bys fubce |
mente.thpne alfo balbe lpkewple: onto me pe
fier dape Yntorbetodape.

Let the


a,


5
1h


Ea


Lor Helus tye ionnt ot Sirach


i,ceg-rita *Let the remembzaunce of the deede ceafle
ih bps relte,and comfoate thy felfeagapne ouer
bpin,fepnae bys tact ig departed from bpm.
‘Che wpledome of thelerpbe is at conuenpente
tpme of ceffe:and be that ceafleth from ercercp=
fe and laboure Halbe wple. ess
He that holveth the plough,and bath plea-
D fure tn proddpiige,and Dapupnae the oren, and
goeth about wpth fuch nace oe canfpeake
ofoxen: Heletteth bys herte to make fozowes,
andis dplpgente to gene the hyne fodder. ois
enerp carpenter alfo and wo2ckemafter that la:
boureth tpllnpabteanddape:becarueth gra-
ueth,cutteth oute, and bps delpze is infondape
connpnge thynges, bys berte pniagpneth howe
be mape connpnalyp cat an pmage, bps dilpgen
cealfoand watchpnae perfourmeth the woke
The pzontmptbe, tnlpkemaner bydeth bp bps
fpthe, and dotbebps oplpgenceto laboure the
pron. Che vapour of the fyze burneth bys Ach
gbe mufte fpabte roptp the brate ofthe formace
The nople of the bammer foundeth euerinbps
cares, bis epes loke Epll bponthetbpnge that
be maketh.be bath fet big mpndetbereupon, p
be wp! ey bis wozke, ¢ thertoze be wat-
cheth,how bemap fet it out,¢ bring itto anend
Ee so doth the potter lpt by bps woke, be
turneth the wbhele about wpth bps fete beis dp
Ipgent and carefullin al dopnges, bps labour
and woche ig Without nombze.He ethponeth
the clape wpth bps arme, wy th bys feetc be të
pereth tt. ps perte priagpneth powe be mape
make it pleafaunte,¢ bpsdplpagence is to clente
the ouen. All thele hope tn thep2 bandes,¢ euerp
one thyncketh to be connprgein bps worcke.
iWdipthout thele map not the citpes be mapntap
ned, indabpted.no2 occupied:and thep come not
bye inthe condvegacpon,nether {pt thep bponp
tudgemente feates:thep bnderffande not theco:
uenaunte of the lawe:thep cannot decleareequy
te € fuqemense:thep cannot fynde out the darcke
fentences, but tpozow them thal the creature of
the worldebe mapntapned,thep2 paper concer
neth onelp the wo2cke andlaboure of connpng.
- The. crrir. Chapter.


iN 1 : c| glo ehem of ¢ olde fpme,and ercer
| ps niia |

be Kepeth the lapinges of famous men, and pze

-alleth to the onderfandpnee of darcke fenten -

ces of wopfedome.ieleketh out the mpfKerpe of

feceete fapinges.¢ excercplech ppm felfe therein

K contpnuallp. e doth lerupceamonge greatmé

tappereth before the Ppnee. Hegoethintoa

fraungecountrpe,s trauapleth thozowe it:lo-

ke what good 02 enel is among men, be proucth

it anbleketh it oute. ioe purpoletiin bps perte,

torcfozte carlpe onto the Lobe that made him

eto pape before the bret God. He openeth big

outhin praper,* prapeth fo2 bis fpnnes Wa bé

De great Lozde vopl, he Halbe fpiled wpth tbe


E . ae ee
Sol cli
fpzete of underftandpng that he tay then pour
out wilelentences,¢ qenetbankes nto p Low 5
inbispzaper. Ie Hall order bys deupce g leade
bis knowledge a cpgbt:# gene bpm bndertan:
dyng of fectete thinges.we thal ewe forthbthe
(cience of bys learnpnge, and reiopee fn the coue
naunt of the law of the Lord. The whole cdgre
gacpon Hal commend bys wildome git tal ne
ucr be put out. Cperemembraunce of him thall
neuer be forgotten, ¢ big name falcontinue fro
one generacpon to anothers Bis wpldome Hal ected
be (poken of among the people, the whole con |
gregacton thal opentp declare bis pratle. whple
De liucth be batha qreatername thenathoulao
belpde:¢ after bys death, the fame nameremap
netd unto bpm. Pet vopll Z{peake ofmoomen
of Duderfkandpnae,ffo2z Fam fullastbemone:

Derken onto me(pe bolp vetcous chpldzé) €
bepnae forthe frupte, as the Roletbatis plan-

ted by the bzokes of the feldc, eqgenepealwete
{melas Lpbanus.fflowpth asthe Rofe (ardepr
tyngeafonge of prapfe. D geuethanckes vnto
God overall bps worckes.Geue glozpe and bo
noure DHto the Lode, thewebysp2aple wrth
pourelpppes. Vee, euen wepth the fonge of pour
lpppes, Wpth barpes, and plapnge, andin ge-
upngethanckeg vnto ppm, ape after thps ma-
ner. x All the workes of the Lod areexceadpney Gennes.
good, and all ppscommaundementes are mete
and conuenpente in Due feafon. *

Æ man nede not tofape:what ts prwhat is

that: Foz at tpmeconuenpent they tallall be =
fought. At bps comanndement the water was
asawall,tattbewordofhismouthtbewater —
ikode fpll« Jn bys commaundemente isenerp Smitt:
tbpnge acceptabics veconcpled,and bps pealth
cannot be mpnpihed. The worckes of all Aethe
are before bym, g thereis nothpng bpd frombis
epes.ipelepth from oe or er to enerlaftpng
e there is notbpngefowonderfull , oz bye nto
bym. A mannede not tolape then, what is thig
02 that: foz be bath made altbinges todo good

vnto man. Hpg bleiipng Hall renne ouer ag the
dreame,and mopfure the cacthelpkea fioude.

of water. Like as he maketh water fo: drouth
{o pall bps wath fall vpon the eathen.

+)pswapesare plapne ¢ right onto the tute gerist
but thewngodlp Fomble at thent. Eo: the qaod

are good thpnges created fromthe begynnpag
g euel thynges forthe pngodly.*Al hinges ne erretra
cellarpe fo2 the lyfe of man arecreated fromthe


: beginning: water,fyze p20,¢ falt,meale, where


and bony mplke, and wpne,ople, and clothyng |
*Al tbele thpnges are created for the bel to the Hrita
fapthtull. ZSut tothe pngodlpe Wall all thefe
thpnges beturned to burt and barme. Chere be

le that arecreated fo: bengeaunce, and in

thep2 cigonroufnes hauethep fattened their to2
mentes.t Jn the tpme of theendethep thal pour eat.ird.o
out they? frength,¢ pacptp the w2ath of bpm p

made them.* pie, baple,bunger, anddeathe: teter
alltbefle thpnges arecreatedfoz vengeaunce.

The teeth of wyldenoplome beatkes,thelco2py E

ons, ferpentes,and thelwearde arccreatedalto


fo bengqeaunce,to the ee of pyngodlp


F tit Ehepwalbe >


to


|
|


|
r -


— AYlCULGKE OF


They Halbe glad to dobpscommaunde-
mentes:and when nedeis,thep Halbe redp vpo
eattp:and when thep2 boureis come, thep Hall
not onerpafic the commaundement of the 1020

‘Therfoze baue F taken.a good courage vn:
tome from tpe begynnpnge, ¢tboughte to put
thefe thpngesin waptpnge, ¢toleaue them be-

a€en.bi.> ppnde me.xAllp worckes of the Lord are qood
gde geueth enerp onein duelealon, g when nede
is lo paman nedenot tofap:thisis wo2le then
p.J€9? induefeafon thep are all pleafaunte and
here : And therfore paple p Lozde with whole
ert g mouth, and genue thankes vntc his name
C Che.rl. Chapter. |
C AJanpe mplerpes(poht ina mans ipfe.alithpngcs palle
atvape, duta fpime g a fable fepth remapneth: ofthe biclpags
ofthe rpghteo UF and prerogatpue oF the fereare of Hod.


Pace tie Greate trauaple iscreatcd forall
E \ men , andan peupe pockevponall
Yee A einenchpldzen, from thedape that
4 Sas Ga thep coo out of thep2 mothers wi:
OSs a She,tpl they be burped tn(the earth)
the mother ofall tuinges-namelp thep2 though
tes and pmagpnacpons,feare of the berte coun-
cell medptacpons, longpng,and Delpze the dap
of beath:from the probet thatlptteth ppontbe
mimpous teate, unto thelowmeft and moot {pm
ple vpon the carth:frombimetbat ts gozgiouflp
araped,and wearetbacrowne, Vntobym that
ts but homely, and (pmplyp clothed. There is no
topnge but weathe,seale,fearfulneffe, ynqupets
nelle, tfeare of Death, tpaorous,anger, trpe
Bud in the npgbht, when one Hhulderell efeape
ppon bys bed, the lepe chaungeth bis vndertta
bpaget knowlege. Alptleaz notbpnge ishpa
rcft,in the fieapeas welas inthe Day of labour.
5 be fearcth ¢ igopiqupeted inthe vpfpon
of bis bert agone that renneth out of a battatle
andin thetpme of health be awaketh and mar-
uclerh that the feare Was nothpnge. uch chin
ges bappen vito all fleme, both man and beat:
but leuen Folde to the vngodlp.Q)ozouer,deat
blondetpedpuge, firpfe,and fwearde,cppzeffp
ecrprir.c. Hunger, Dediruccyont,and punpihemente:+tbele
thyraes are all created agapnite the bngodlpe
ve bile & a thep2 fakes came the Aonde alfo.xAil that
ig of tie earth, Mhallturne to earth aapne: and
al waters cbbeagapne into thetce. Albapbhes¢
wnrpabteoulnefie albe put awape, but faptp-
fulnes and truth hall endure foz ener. Che fub-
ftaunce ¢ qoodes ae yrs ps ae driedyp
and {pnkcawape as the water floude, and thep
(hal make afofidelitea great thiderin ý rayne
Lpke as the rpg bteousretopleth toben he
© openeth bps bande, to pall the traungreffoures
be fapnte, whenthep2 goodes vany he and con:
fume awape.x Chechpldzenof the tngodlpe


Ecard: fall not obtapne manp bzaunches and tbe vna:


cleanerootes bponthebperockes , thalbereo-
fed outebefozethe graflebp the water {pde and
pon the rpuer banckes. S
ffrpndipneffe and pberalite in the increate
and biefipnae of God,islpke a paradpfe a gar-
Det of pleature:fucbe mercye allo and kpndnes,
carm bib CHDULCtH fo? euer-* To labour and to becétent
pb.tg.bib WIth thata man path, ig a fwete pleafaunt Ipfe


lt te i


and thatistofpndea trealure aboue all freafu-
tes. Co beget chpldzen and to repapee the cptpe
maketh a perpetuallname, but an bonefike wo-
mans moze worth then them bothe.Cincand
mpnitrelpfp reiopce the bert, but the loue of wil
dome ig aboue them both.

Ppppnge and barpyngemake a fwete nop D
fe buta frendlp tonge gorth bepondthem both
Thpne epedelpzethfanoure and bewtype, but a
grenelede tpme,ratber then them both. J frend
and companpon come together at oppo2tunpte
but aboue them botbe iga wpfe that agrecth w
ber bufbande. Dne bzother brlpetb another in
the time of trouble, but almes thaldeliner moze
thenthem both. Gold aud filuer fatten the feete
buta good councelis moze pleafaunte the them
bothe. Tempozal fubfaunce and firength, ipft
bp the mynde: but the feare of the Lorde wan
fethnothynge,and nedeth no delpe.

The feare of the Lo2d ts apleafaunte car:
den of bleflpnge,and notbynae fo bewtpfull as
itis. Hp fonneleade not a beqgers lpfe,fo2 bet
terit weretodpe thentobegge. Wibololoketh
fo another mans table, taketh notbougbte foz
bis ownelpupnge bowe to vpholde bis lyfe, foz
be feadeth bym felfe wpth other mennes meate.
Wut a vwople and well nurtered ma wl be ware
therof. Beqgpng is {were in the month of f bu
fhamefatt, but inbps bellp there burnetp a fpze.


C The.rli. Chapter. zi


thpuges aman oughttobeahamen, a


<H Deth. bowe bptteristheremem %4
PA Wy bzaunce ofthe toa man that fee-
Ze fe ketbrelt and comfozt in pps fub=
av A Faunce and rpches, vutotbema
2 one e P bath notbpng tovere him, and
[aS ake that hath pofperpte in all tbpn=
geg, pee, Onto bpm ý pet is able toreceaue meat
sD Death, pote acceptable and good is thp iud-
"Vata bntotbe nedefull,and bute bpm whole

tength fapleth,ethatisnoweinthelatage ,
and tbat all thpnges (sfullofcareand fearful:
nefie:bntobpm alto $ is indpfpapze,e batheno
Dope noz paciences2e not thou afrapd of deaths
remember them tbat baue benebefozethe: and
that come after the:tbps is the tubaemente of p
Lobe ouct all Aee, x And why woldette thou senvi D
beagain( the plealure of the Dyelte: Whether 7
ít beten bundzeth, oza thoufandepeareg: death
&iketbnotbowelonge onebathlpued.

‘Chechplozen of the vngodlpare abbomyp 18
nablechpidzeti,ard fo are they that kepecompa
np topeh the ungodly, * Che inberitaunce ofwn eecteyrt,c,
goblpchpldzen ipali cometo naugdtc,and their
pofterpte Hal baue perpetuall ame and confu
{yon. Chechplozen complapne of an vngodlpe
fatber.and whp r for bys fake they arerebuked
anb dp{pplcd.Wdio be bnto pou( pe wngodiy )
whpcbe bane forlaken the lawe of the Hyabhett
God: pf pe bebo2ne, pe thalbe bozneto curipng
pFpe dve,the curfe thalbe youre pozcyon.
All that is of the earth, alturnetoearth eecte.ri.d

agapne


=


HC Helus the tone of


agapne:fo go the vngodlp alfo oute of the curfe
intodeftruccpon. The (ozowe of menisintbepz
bodpe:but the name of tbe bngodlpe Halbe put
secelirriha one, + Laboure to get tbe a good name,fo2 that
thallcontpynue Cuerer bp the , thenatboulande
greatctrealucesof golde. A good ipte batie a
nõb:eofdapes, but agood name endureth euer
xWp chplozen kepe wiledome in peace Fo?
wpfoomethbat is bpD:and atrealure tpat isnot
fene, what poper iginthem both‘ Aman that
bpdeth bps foolpihenciie.is bettecthben aman ý
€ bpdetb bys wpledome. Therefore be pe turned
at inp wo2des: foz it is not good in allthpnges
and alwapetobeatbamed. Crue fapth mufe
2oueemealurett. We athamed of whozdome
before father mother: We ahamed of leafpng
befozethe papnce qmen of aucthbozpte: DF tinne
befozetbe Judge andruler. Df offence before
the congregacton  people:O£ ynriqhtcoulnes
befozcacompanponandfrende. sf thefte,be-
fore thy nepqbbours.* Xs foz the truth of God

toma. ib, ¢ Hpscouernaunte,be not ahamed thereof.
we athamed tolpe wpth thpneclbowesbp
pon the breade: He atbanied to looke vpon þar-
foetes: We albamed totucne awapethy face frå
thy frende. Seathamed fotake and not to geie
We afhamed alfo to looke bpon another manes
wrpfe , ¢tomakeanpetrpiipnge woldeswptb
ber mapden,02 to and bp ber bedlpde. Be aha


Eir


med to bpbzapde thy frende when thou geucite


anpetbpnge cate ppm not inthe teeth wptbal.
€ The.clii.Chapter.

@ Stctetes mape not be opened. The lawe OF Ged mate

be taughte.a baughtct.4 woman, Sod kno werd al thin
gt s:Pea,cued the Cecretes of thp berte.


sa Cbearle not athpuqe twple, and

4 ee) Dpiclofe not the we2des , thatthcu
eee) Dat beard infecrete . Bethamefalt
GSES Sand wel mancred indede. fo (hall e-
Loe Sx cuerp ma fauoure the. Df thele thits
esbenottpou ahamed, ¢ accepte noperfone
tooffende. Mamelpe,or thele thpnacsbe nota
Mamed: OE thelawe of God. of the couecnaunte
of Judgement to bapnge the bug odlp from hig
bngobdlpnes vntorpabtcou{nes:¢ tomake bun

a good man:to dealefaptbfulip with tbp neyah
 -bourescompanpon:to dpftrybute the bervtage


Dntothp frendes: tobedplpgentetokepetrwe age be)


mealure and wepgbte: tobecontente whether
thou gette& much oz lptle:to deale trulpe wpth
tempozal goodes:inbpinge g fellpng,to binge
bpchpibien wrtbodyplpgence tocoirecte ar enel
feruaunte, tokepep thpne is from an euel wpfe
tofct alockewher many bandes are: what thou
Delpuerelt and qeuet outetobe Gepte,totell it,
€fo wepe it:to Wwpte bp all tbp oute qeupnges
teceaupnge:to enfourmethbe vnlearncd and vn-
wife: Of thraged.that are Judged. of thepige
Pithon be diligent in thelethpnges, frulp thou
alte be learned g wple and accepte of allmen.

The daughter maketh the father to watch
fecretip:¢ the carefulnes that be bath for ber, ta
kethawapebys llepe:pea,intbe pouth: leite the
hulde ouce growe bpm: And when Me bathan
bulbande lett (he Hulde be hated:left the hulde
be defpled oz raupihed in ber bp2gynypte,o2 got


>)


fen wpep chploe in her fathers foule:Dz(wheir
fhecommethtothbeman)leftMebebaueberfel-
fe not rpgbht,ozcontpnie vefruptefull.« De tbp Et Fo
daughter be wanton kepe her ftraprelp; lett the

caule (hpne enemies to laugh tbetofrozne,e the

whole citie to geue theaneuel repopte,efotbou —

be fapneto beare thy pame of euerpe man, be
confounded befoze all the people. Beholde not rei: rö.
eucrpe bodpes bewtpe and paue not fo muche
Dwellyngeamongewemen. Forlpkeastte
Wo2me t nothe commeth outeoftheclothbynge
*{0 Doth wyckednefle come of wemen.

St is better tobe vopth anewell màn, then
wpth a frendlie wpfe that putteth one to bame
andrebube. 3 wyll remember the wo2ckes of
the Lozde , anddeclarethe thypnage that 3 Daue
Cene. 3n the wozdesof the Lozde are bys wore-
kes. Che Sunne ouerlokethall thypnges wpth
bys bpne and all bps wozckesiare ful of thecle
arnel{ethereok. bath not the Lozde bought te
pafle that bys Hapncetes thulde tell oute al pps
Wonderots worckes , whpche the Almpabtpe
L020 bath fablpthed- Al thinges endure tn hts
glory. Heleketh out the grounde of the decpe,g
the berte of men,# be knowetpall tbepz pmagp
hacpon and wiledome.jfoz the Lode knowerp
allfcpence, and be looketh into the token of the
tpme. e Declarethtbhethyuges that are paket
fozfocome,¢ dplcloletbthpnaesp are (ecrete .

+ flo acy mape elcape bym.neptbher pp
map anp wo2de be bid from bpm. He bathe qar= 1H0b. rir}
npthed the bpeercellente worckes of bys wple- Earr
dome, t bets from euerlafinge toeuer latpnee
Tinto bpmmapenothpnae be added nepther ca ~
be be mpnpfhed. be bath nonede ofanpimansco
uncell.D , howe ampableare all bps worckes,
and as a {parke to looke ppon. Thep lpueall,¢
endure fozeuer : and when foeuer nedeis,thep
areallabebpenté onto bim. Thép are doubble,

One agavnile another:be batbe made notbynge
that hath fauteo2zblempthe.x He bath ablp- EEN
Wed the qoodes ofeuerpeone:and who mape be I>
fatpfiped 7 bps cloape. when De lepeb it: |
Che.rltt Chapter. |
(She Sumnic of the creacpen ofthe wosckes of Ged,

pena Fapre inca: tiia

peot


tad —


ene, tit


it a maruelousg worke of the Hpelk. At noone it
burneththe earth ¢ who mape abpoe fory beat
tberofr ibo fo kepeth an ouen when itis hoore
thre tpmes moze Doth the funne burne vpon the
mountapes, toben it beetbeth out the fpzpe bea=
mesé Hhpneth w the brpgbtnes of it, it blindeth
theepes. Great isthe Lore ý made it, ¢inbps
commaundement be caulethit torunne pattelp.

* The Hoone alfois inal and at conuenp Gennes,
ente ealon it heweth the tymes gisa token of S
thetpme.x The tokt td» folempne fealk is ta Eredriia
ken of tbe Bone, alpybt ý mpnpth etb * (ricrea=
fetbagatine. The moneth iscalled after é mone
it gro weth Wondrronflpe in ber chaungpnge. 6

‘Che arutp of peuen allo is intbebpabtin the -


FEF iii  Eppmament


SEO. iii |


The booke of hee od


fprmamente of beaucn rit genethe acleare and
glozpous(ppne. Thpsisthe clearenefle of the
itarres, the bewtpefullapparell of heanen,the
apperel that the Lozdeliqhteneth in the bepgth
3nbps bolpe wogckethep contpnue inthep? oz
der and not one of them faplethbin bps warche.
wgn iro *LOke Dpontherapne bowe,and praplebpm ý
madeit: verp bewtpfullisitinbystpne. He
compafleth the beauen.aboute wpth byscleare
nefleand glozpe,the bandes of the brabe bath
bendedit. Chozowe bpscommaundemente he
maketh the fnowe tofal,and the thunder of bis
iudgemente to fmpte bakelp. Chozowe bps co
maundemente the trealures are opened, and the
cloudesfeasthefoules. Jnbhps power path
be trengtbned thecloudes, and broken the bap
¢ le toneg. Chentauntapnes melte at thelpgbte
of bpm the wpnde blowethe accozdpnge to pps
wpl. The loundeof his thider beatcth the carth
and fo doth the torme of the Pozth: the whozle
wopnde allo lpahtcth Downe as afetbered foule
cafteth out and (p2edeth thefnowe ab ‘ship and
ag the grethoppers that deftroy al,fotalieth i
Downe. Theepe marueleth at thebewtpe ofthe
wbptenefle thereof, and the berte is aftaped at
p rapne of it. He poureth out the frot wpa earth
Ipke falte, and when it ts trofen,tt is as parpe

asthe ppckeofatbphle.
When thecolde Mozth wpnde bloweth, barde
ChaplEallcommeth ofthe water. Welpabtech
Downe vps allthe gatberpnges together of wa
ter,and puttetbon the waters asa beat plate
Hedeuoureththe mountaines,and burneth the
wplocrnes:¢ looke What is grene, De puttcsg ie
outlpke fpze. Che medpepne of all thefeis whe
a cloude commeth baffelp:¢ when a Dewe com-
methbvpon the beate tt haibe refrefthed aapne
D Fn bps worde he plleth the wpnde: Fn bys co-
unecll be Ceteth thedepe,and (the Lozde ) Icfus
planted it. hep that faple ouer the lee, tell of
the parellegand parmeg thereof, and when we
beare it wpth oure cares, we maruaple thereat.
for there be ftraunge wonderous wozckes, dp
uerfe manet of npce beattes ¢ whalfpibes. Tho
rowe bpmare altbiges {et in good oder, g par-
fourmed,and inbps worde allthpnges endure.
¥ (peake muche.but FJ cannot tuffpcpente
ly attapne nto tt,foz bebpmifelfe onelpeis the
perfeccpon of all wozdes.Wle Mulde praple tie
Lowe after all our power, foz bets qreate inal
bps worckes. Che Lowe ts to be feared, pee, ve
aerga PP Steatets De, and matuclous is bps power.
Pra.crbi.® > apfe the 1o2de,and magnpfpe bym as much
ota 22 Ve map, pet doth pe farre excead al pratfe.<D
pakora magnpfp bpm wpth al pour power,and labour
carneftlpe,pet are ve innowple able fuffpcpent
lp to pzaplebpm.Wipo bathe lene bpm, that be

mpgbtc tell bss
x Dent. b.e x Wibo can magnpfpe bpm fo creatipeas
zohn ib Hers.ffozthereare bpd pet qreater thypnges thé
thefe be:asfo2 vs, we Daue lene but fewe of bps
porches. Eo: the Lozde bath made all thpnges
and geucn wpleoome tolucheas feate God.
C Whe. rliiii. Chapter.
@hiprapteot certen holp men, Henoch, oe, Fa bpaba,
Plabac andzacob.


h ovata) Ct bs commende the noble famons A
lel Pe, Sosy tien, andthe generacpon of our fore
Ky (ee seyelders andtathers. Qanp moze glo
Boo tpousactes bath the Lord done,and

~ Pewed bps greate power enerfence

tie beginnpng. The noble famous mërapgned
inthep2bpngedomes, andbareercellenterule.

3n thep2 wpiedome and vnderftandpnge,thep Eror bitte
folowed the conncell (hewed inthe propbhetes.*

Thep led the fol&e thezowe the councell ¢ wple

dome of thelerpbes of the people. Wipfefenten=

ces are Found intbep2 inffruccton. Chep fought

the fwetnes and melody of mulpke, ¢ brougbte

foztb the pleafauntefonges inferppture. Thep
wererpche alfo,and conlbecomfozte and pacifp
thofethatdwelte wpth them. All thele were ve

tp noble and honourable men in thep2 generacp

ong and were well reported ofintbep2 tpmes.

‘Thele bane leftea name bebpnde them, fo that

thep2 pzaple (pallalwape be fpoken of. Afters

warde, there were fome, wholeremembaunce Sen. tiiv
is gone .* hep came to naughte and perp hed
as though thep bad never bene: andbecameas -
thougbe thep bad neuer bene bozne:pea, ¢ thep2
chpldzen alfo wpth them. 15

Penectbeletic,thele are the lonpnge men,

whofe rpg bteoulnefle hall never be forgotten
butcontpnue bp thep2 profperpte. Chep2cppl-

Dien are anbolpe qood berptage: Thep: teed er

dureth Falk in thecouenaunte. feos thep? fakes

{hall thep2 chyldzen and feed contpnne fo: euer,

etbhep2 prapte thall never be put Downe. Chepz
bodpes are burped in peace, but thep2 name lp«
ucthfozeuermoare: Che people can {peake of
they: wpledome,andthe congregacponcantal —

ke ofthep2 praple.x Enoch walkedrpabte and
acceptably befoze the Lorde: therefore was be eccosc
tranflated foz anerample of amendementeto O°" >“
the qeneracpons.+ foc, was a Fedia and rp- cenne.vi a
gbteous man, in the time of wath be became +t 4
areconfplpnge. Therefore was be lefte a rem-
naunte onto the earthe , when the floudecame.
An cuctlatpnge chucnaunte was made wrth
bpm, that all Aemme Hulde perpthenomoare w Semne-tr c-
tbe water. Abrabam wasaxcreate father of S*-Fo4-s
manpe peor singlorp was therenone lpke bn
tobpin.e kepte the lawe of the Hepgheff, and
came inte acouenaunte wpth bpn. De let the co
nienaunte in bps fete, and when bexwas pro- _
ued, be was Foundefaptbfull, Therefore fwo2e OO
God vutobym,wpthanothe,pbewoldeblefie S
allpeopicinbpsfeede.thathewolbemultiplpe 7
and increale bpm ag the dulte of the earthbe,and
toerbalte brs lecdeas the ftarres:pee, and that
bps leede Wride baue the pofleflpon, an inberp=
taunce of thelande from fee to fee,and from the
er
* CU pty slabacdpd be fablpthe the fame

couenaunt, fo: Abrabam pps AT aA Doe ere
that qracyousblefipnge, and belth ofall men g
concnaunte dpd be Lablpthe wpth Flabac, and
madeit reft i fe the beade of Facob.hebnewe |. rore
bymxin that be pzrolpered bpm fo wel and rpeh pirrer.
lp,and gaue fem an berptage and {und2ed bps


pozcyen bp tt felfe, * and parted it rei il gl
twelue


== eet


Fels the fonne ot Hyprach


tiwelne trpbes.dHercpfull men broughte be out
of pim, which found fauour in p fight of al help
The.xrlv. Chapter.
(Tbe prapte of egofes, Zaron:aun Pbinches,
a Cisse We D es * beloued of God and mei
Se Nees E} @ whole remembzaticeis inppepzap
tiie Vs ate bpm that the Lozdemadelpkein
WEAN aNa the gloze of thefapnetes,andmag
ina anptped bpm , fo that theenempes
foodcinawe of bpm , thozowe bps wo2des he
dpù greate wonders. He made Dim agreat inthe
tpabe ofkpnges, gaue bpm commaundemente
befoze bps people ann ETE bpm baqira
=e neffeand mekenefle , and chofe bymoute ofall
men. Fo: be berde bps vopce, and peled bpm in
ered gind thedarckecloude, x and there be gaue bpm the
commaundementes , pea, the latwe ef lyfe and
wpledome that be mpabte teache Jacob theco-
ucnaunteand Jlraell bpslawes.

15 — Hechole Zaron bps brother alfo out of the

= tepbeof Leup.ecbaltcd bim, and made him furci

er-rrvitls pke. x An enerlaltpnge couenaunte made pe
bym,anbd gaue bpm tbe pzrealthode inthe people
De made bpm glozpous inbewtpfularape,and
clothed bpm wpth the garmente of onoure.be
a perfecte iope Dpon bpm,and gp2ded bym w
rength.Hedectebpm web lpde clothes,anda
tuupele,wpeb an ouerbodpe cote alfo and a gp?
| Ble. Rounde about made he him belles of gar
CrTOIE and that manp:xp when be wente in, the found
mpabs bebeard,that they mpabt make a nopfe
inthe Saunctuarve, and qeue the people war-
npuge. Che hbolpe garment was wrought and
b2od2ed wpth qolde,pelowe fpleke and purple.
And inthe breklappe there was a goodlpe wo?
ke, wherin was faftened lpgbte eperfectenefic.
te E ¥Cipon the fame allo there was a wo2rcke
Croit fattened, and let wpth coftlpe precpous tones,
all bounde wpth golde:and this hbe bsoughte in
bpsmpnpttracpon . The Tones were faltencd
fozarememb2annce,after the nomb2e of the.rit
trpbesof Flracll.Gpon bps mpter there wasa
plate of pure golde,agrauenpmage ofbolpnes
a famous and noble woacke, carnitped, and ple
afaunte to looke vpon. Before bpm were there
fene no fuchefap2e oznamentes, and thele it be=
boucd bym alwape to bie: Chere mpgbfe none
other put them on but onelpe bps chpldzen and
byschploderschplozen perpetullpe. Daplp per


4 fourmed be bps burnteofterpnacstwo tpmes.


*Moles fplicd bys dande sand anopnted ppm
wpthbolve ople. : |

bhys was noweconfprmed bpm wythan
~ enerlattpnge couenaunte,and to bps feeder, as p
dapes of heauen,namelpe Phys chpldzen hulde

alwape mpupfter before bpm, and perfourme
offpce of the Pzealkhode, and wpe the people
oovinhpsname . Scfore al melpupnge chofe
ebym that be hulde offer incence beforep Lod
be, and make odoures Foz a Nocte fanoure and
remembzannce, that be hulde reconfple the peo
Seacntt.c Pleofthe Low woypthbpmagapne.+ 3e gaue
andria. bpmancthorptpe alfo tnbps commaundemen-


Leulbili,a


.. Malacyit-s beg ann in tbecoucnaunte that he Mulde teache


Sfol.clb,


Jacob the fatutes and tefipitonpes, ant toen
fourme Firaell in bps lawe. yar

_ _&Chereforetbhere toode bpcertapneagap È
inte bynt,and bad enupe at bpm inthe wplber= Aen rele
nefe nameip thep that were at Dathan, anda

bp2ams {pde,and the furpoug congreqacpon oF

Chore. Chys the Lorde fawe and tt dplpleated
bym, andinpps wzothefull indpanacpon were
thepcontumed. Agreate wonder dpdhevpon
them, econfumed them wopth the fpzex Welpde Be rbit.e
thps, De made Aaron pet moze hHonourableand
qlo:wous. Hre gaue bim an beritage,and parted |
the fpzite frutes unto bpm ea (peacp= Fenris
allpe be appopnted the bzeade fo2tuffenaunce,
(Fo2zthe reales dpd cate of the offerpnges of
the Lozde)tbys qaue be bnto bpm and bps fecd
#* Elleshad Deno herptage noz pozcpon tn the euce.riy
lande and wopeb the people. E0? the Lowe ppm ano.rbie.»
felfe fs bys pozcpon and enberptaunces sa

Che thprde nobleand ercellente man {sx Jt
Pbhpnebes thefonne of Eleasar,whpch pleated P4
the God of Flracll, becaule be had the scele and
feare of the 1020. F0: whé the people were tur-
nedbacke, be put ppm felfe forztherpabte (cone
and that wpth a good wpl,to pacytp the wath
efthe Lorde towarde Flrael. Therefore was
therea couenaunte of peace made wpth bym $
be thulde be theppneppall amonae the tabt =
teous andthe people, that beant bys potterpte
fhulde bane the office of the Preathode fo euer
(Lpkeas there was made acouenaunte wpth
Dauypd of the trpbe of zuda, that from amonge
bye fonnes onelpethere Hulde be akpng.)And
that Aaron allo and his feedethulde bethe herp
tage, to gene vs wpledomein our Dert toiudge
bpspeopleinrpabteoutnelle , that bys qoodes
fhulde not comeinto fozgetfulnefle,and ý thep2
bonoure mpabte endure fo2 ever.
€The.rlvt. Chapter.
a whe praple of Hofer, Caleb, and Samuel

paren slp and frong in battaple twag a rite
U Yan "eal aclusthelonne of Maue, whych in Ru crip
Keil) ) tead of G)otestbhe prophet was ge Dersrtinb
Pa Soe Valuen tobeaCaptapne of the people, 2°"
Betania Wych accozdpng nto bps name,
waa greate faupourwnto the clecte of Godto
punpthe the enempes that rofe bp agapnite Fi-
racl tiat Zlracl mpaghte optapne thep2 enberp
taunce. D howe greate noble, g ercellente was
he, when beleft vp bps band, and Dawe out pps
{wearte agapnie thecptpeg: Ubo todo man
ly befoze bym: Jëo: the Lorde bim felfe brought
ín the enempes.xDtodenotthe Sunne (pl at ornp, ve,
bpscommaundementetoncdape wasaslong™ =
astwo/Decalled bponthe Hpgbet and moolt
mpgbtie when the enempes preafrd wpon bpm
on cuerp (pde,anDd the Lorde bearde bpm wpth
thebaple tones. Thep tmote the Heathenpioe

cople mpabtelp,and inthe falling Downe thep
flewe alltbe aduerfarpes , fo that the Peatheit
knewe bps bool€e ,and all bys defence, that the
Lore bpm felfe foughte agapntt them foz be fo
lowedbpontbempgbtpemenofthem. aus |
-¥Fntdetime of Holes alfo, be and Caleb Aurii: a
fhefonne of Jephune,opd a good wozke, which

ft a Modea


Cie vooke


ffoode agapnit the enempes, wobithbeld the peo

2 ple from fynne and fplled the wpcked murmu:

PUL FFOLS ppnge.*And of (pre bundzeth thoutande people

| of foote,thep two were p2relerucd to bepnge thé

into the berptage,namelp.a lande that floweth
wpth mplke and bonpe. PYY

*'The Lozde gaue fFrength allo nto Cå-

leb wbpcbe remapned wyth bpm vuto bys age

fo that be wente bp into the brab placeg ofthe

lande and pyg feed conquered the fame fozan be

` tptage,that all thecbplozenof Jiracll mpgbte


Zof.citii. c


Ce bowe good athpnae ttis,tabeobedpente vn `


totþe Lorde. Andebeiunges o2 rulers(euerpe
oncafter bis name) whole bert wente notawho
PRA 102 Departed fromthe Lorde, and that foz
foke notthe Lode pnfaptbfullp, wpoferemem
h bzaunce hath a good reporte. | |
ae Vea thep2 bones flozpthe out of thepzplace
¥ and thep2 names (hall neuer be chaunged, (but
Donoureremapneth Epil wyth the chpldzen of
. thote bolpe men.
€ amuel the prophete beloucd of the Lo:d
ee bys Godxo2depned a kpnae,and anopnted the
aBPFBiD  povnced ouct the people. jn thelawe of the Los
de De Judged the conqregacpon, andthe Logde
badretpecte bnto Jacob: Che Prophete was
Founbde bplpgenteinbps Faptbfulnefle:pea,and
be ts knowen fapthfull in bps wordes : becaule
‘.xeg-btis,g UE lame the God of lyghte.Ade called vpon the
Lode Ampghtpe , when the enempes preated
Dpon bpm on eucepe (pde, what tyme as be ofe
ted the luckpngelambes. Andthe Lozdethon=
dered from Heauen, and made bps vopce tobe
bearde wptha great nople.e dplcomfpted the
wwhices of Tpre,and all the rulers of the Php-
itegu.ptéa Wipnes.% Wefore bps lafteende be made p20-
: feitacyon inthe fygbte of the Lode, and bys an
nopnted that be tooke neyther (ubftaunce noz
{00d of anpe man , nonot fomuche as a boo,
and noman mpghte accnfe ym. After thysbe
tolde that bps ende was at bande, and ewed
the tipnae alfo bps ende, anddeathe, and from
iy cartbelpfte be bp bps vopce in the pzophecp
at the vngobdlpe people thulde perpthe .


€ The.rlvii. Chapter. A

The Praple of Mathan,Daupv,and Salomon,
x ay Saal Teter warde in fpi tyme of Rpnge
< AN) Danyi thererotevpa Prophet cal
Eaa (bled Nathan : f€02 Iphe as the fatig
Pe vom Wea taken awape fromthe oferpnac,
Koo ealo Was Dauid chofenont of the chil
dzen ot Fracll ie tooke bps pattpme wpth the
1 pons,and wpth kpbdes and wpth beares lp-
,reg.rog.e BE AS wpth lambesxDlewe be nota Gpaunte
when be was petbut ponge and tookeawape
the rebuke frd bis peoplerwhat time ag be toke
the fooneinbpsbande, and {note downe pron
de Golvab wpth the pnge.sFoz be called vpon
the Dpabet Lozde whpcbe gaue bpm Erength
inbystpyabte bande, lotbat he ouerthzetrethe


myghfy Gpaunte in the battayl thatbempabe
#5 fet Dp the borne ofp


fit. rerbinh


Speopleagapne.
*T bus broug te De pym to worthppne a:
Houeall Papnees,and made pim to hanea qod


reporte inthe praple of the Lorde thate bulb
Were acrowne of glorie. x fFoz be deltroped the *-regu.v.b
enempes on euerpe fpde rooted oute the Pbplp-
fpnes bys aduerfarpeg and bzake thep2 bozne.
in funder, lphe agit is bzokenit thpsdap.gnall
bys worckes be pzapled the Hpagbelt and holp-
elt, alcrpbed the bonoure ynto bpm. X |
Wi peb bys whole berte dpd be praple the |
1 02de,and loued God that made bpm. * De fet |
{pngersalfobefozethe aulter,andintbhep2 tune Y.pa.rroia
be madelwete fonges.
__ Heorwepned tokepe the holpe dapes wo:
fbppfullp,andthat the folempnefeatte thozowe
the wholepeare Mulde be honozablye bolden,
wyth paplpnge the name ofthe Lozde,¢ wpth
(pngpng bp times inp moznpng in the Cactuarp
Che Loze tooke away bystynnes,and C
erbalted bys bozne foz ener. de qaue pym the co “teg.'rg.0
uenaunte ofthe Rpngedome, andthe thzone of
moubrppe in Jlrael.x After bpm there rofe vp narr
tbe wptetonecalled Salomon, and foz bis fake “restis
be dzoue theenempes awape farre of. Chis Sa she
lomonrapned wopth peace in bpstpime( fo: Gon
waue Dpmrel from bps enempes oneuerp {poe
that be mpghte buplse bpm an boufe inpps na oe
me, prepare the Sanctury Foz ever )iphe as he :
Was wel inftruct in bys pouth, and filled wptp `
wifedome and Ynderftandpng,agit were with :
a water foude.econered and fplled the whole
lande wÙ fpmplptudes ¢ wple prudent fétences.
Hpsnanie wente abzoade in the Fleg he- 2 A
caule of bys peace be was beloued. All landeg |
marucled at bps Songes, Wzouerbes, (pmplp- 7
tudes andat bps peace, andat the name of the u
Lozde God, topyche is called the God of Frael a]
xDe gathered oldas tpnne and behad ag |
muche (pluce ag leade.x He was moued in inoz- enasi
Dpnate lone towarde wemen and was ouerco: “hts-F-a.
me inaffeccpon.e Mapnedbpshonoure z wo: n |
bpppe:pea, bps pofteritedefpled be allo in bzin |
apnae tbe wath ofthe Lorde bpon hpschiloz¢


iii regu.y b


@fozowe after bps iope : x fop bpskpngedome _ 44
Was Deupded,¢ Ephzaim became an vnfapth- Hirss e
ful, vnconftante kypngedome.« Meuvertheles,
Godforloke not bps mercpe nether was be pee 9-6°S- bite
terip deftroped becaule of bys wo2ckes,that be
fuldeleauchymno poterpte. Ag for the feed p |
came pon bpm, whpch be loued, be bzoushte tt e 4
not vfterlp to naught but gaue petatemnaunt
onto Jacob, z aroote ynto Danid oute of bpm. = ee
Tbusreted Salomon wpth bps fathers, and om ee
oute Of bps leede be lefte bebpnde byma verve
foolpthenes of the: eople, gluche one as badno $
noha p ahoen ee nir
eo aWap the people tbozowebpscouncell, g Je i
toboam thefonne of Pabat, +wbpeh cauled He erat `
racl to ipn æ hewed Ephzaim the wapeok Dns treerd v
godlpnes: Fn to much that thep2 fpnneg mpfi- i
dedeg had the vpperbande fo loze, $ at the lalke
thep were dzeuen out of the lande for the fame:
Pea, be fougqbteouteand brcugbte bp all wpe-
Kednes,tpl the venqeaunce came bpon them.
C Che.rlytit. Chapter.
=e prapleofe<ipab »LTPseUs, Bezebiaband cape,


Then oode


Helus the fonne of Sypirach


5 27 Den ode vp Elyah the prophet
| beg a9 a fpze,and pps wode bzenclp-
omer Ke actetbet. ebrougbte an bun-
Ae ger Dppontbem, and inbpsseale

| a be made them few in nomber. JE
T — Ebepmpapte not awape wpthebe
commaundementes ofthe Lode. Chozowe the


titere, point WODE OF the Lorde He hut the beauen,xand. tii NES
Fe


times brought be the fire Downe. Chus became
Cliabh ponozable inbys woderous dedes.Caiho
Mceorbiic map make bys boat to belpke bimx-Dnethat
was decd rapled pe vp from death, ¢ inthe wor
de of the Hyekk be brought bym out of the crane
agapne. He call Downe kpnges a defkropea thé,
and she bonéurable from they; feate .Tipon the
moant Spnå he bearde the punythemente, and
| -pon Hozeb the Judgement ofthe venqeaunce.
METeGEE-€ Dye prophecped recompencpnge vntokpnges, x
uneg oD APHED Propbetes after him.+He was taken
wp inthe frome of fp2e, inacharet of pozfesof
the Lo:0. He wasozdepned inthe reproupnees
*iuke, ia In tpme to pacpfye the wrath of the Lozde,* to
turné the bertes of the fatders vntothe chpldzé
and to let bp thetrpbes of Jacob agapne.wWlef
feo were thepthattawethe , and were garny-
{rd in louc:foz we lpuc tn Ipfe:(but after death
15 We pall bane no luche nant.) |

fiitreg tic *« Cipas was coucred in the torme, but De
me lyfougs was Eplled woptb bys (pete.cdibple be ip
hed be was afraped of no Pepnee , and noman
myqhet cuercome bpm. There couide no worde
titi.ve pito OPECane ppm, xand after bps deathe bys bodye
nirre b bi B2OPecped tHe dpo woders in bps lpfe,and in
bit aua bist D2ACh Were bys workes maruclous.so2 al this
the propie amended not, nepther Departed thep
iiiregum. from tDep: Lanes :xtpl thep werecarped awap
„ouid  pretoners out of fhelande,and were {catered a=
bz2cade th allcountrpes fo that of them there re:
mapited, but a erp lptie people, $a papnee n-
to the boufe of Danpa.Howebelt lome of them

~ bpd typgbte,andfome heaped bp bugodlpnes.
_S * esekpas made hpscptve tronge, con:
‘PFU eped bpm water intoit , paged fOazowe the
fFonpe rocks wpth p2on,and made bpa well by
iff. regum 9E Water [pde.x Zn bys tpmecame Sennache-
rouire VPO Dp andient Rablakes, lyfte bp bys bande
ChaFeeblc agaynite Spon,and defpled tjem wpth greate
2pde. Chen trembled thep2 bertes and bandeg
ofbat chp fozomwed Ipkea womantranelpnge
wprpebplde. Hothepcalled pponthe Lorde
_-waychismercpfull, andlpfte bp thep2 bandeg
befoze ppm. Jmmedpatlp the Lorde heard them
oute of beaucn:(be thought nemore vpontheps
-_ nnes, no: gauetheouerto thp2enempes:) but
METS Delinered chem by the band of Clay .«ielmote
tie Doofte of the Blerpang, and bps Aungel de
roped then. Eo: Hezekias bad done thetoyng
that pleated the Lo:de, andremapned Medfaft=
Ipintpe wape of Dauyd bps faiber.. A3 Elave
the create and faprbfull peophetein thelpahte


mal


tive.cr.s OE Gadhadcommaundedhpm.* Jnbpstpme E


errr Che lOnne wente backward: and be lengthened
the kpngrs lyfe. yeh a rpabte lpzete propbe=
coed be, what thuldecometo palle at thelatte,¢
to fuche ag were fozowful in Sion:be qauecon


(Olacpon, wherwpth thep mpaht comfort thent
{eiues fo2 eucrmtoze. De thewed thpnges $ were
Foz to come, fecrete, oz ener thep came to paffe.
Che.tlic. Chapter.
aor afpab, Dczecniah,Daupo, grimp. Æzechpel,
Furobabel, Jefus, Mroempah,Enoch,and Joiepd.


Tee Ipc remembraunce of x golpasislp a
ag Egy) lic as whentbeApotpcarpemaketh #  ,
Cua many precpouslwete (melling thin ann.rriii.t


ee ee


Te TF
(ws, | ra
SOE aes together. Iysremembzaunce fi.Paralpp
l: Se albe fweteas honp inalmouthes F-
and ag tbe plapnge of Mulpeke at a bancket of
wpne e was appopnted to turne the peoplea
GTapne,andtotake avwape all abbompnacpond
c£thbewngodlye.dedpzected bps berte vnto the
Lo2De,andintbetpme ofthebn obdlpe.be fet vp
the worthpppe of God agapne. All kpnges( er-
cepte Daupd, Hesechias and Folvah \commpt=
ted Wopckeduetie: fo: euenthe kpnaesof Juda,
alfofe.fookethbelaweof God. ffo2 they qaue
thep2 bozne onto other,thep2 bonoure and woz
fbyppeallotoa Grange people: :

Therfoze was the elect cptpe ofthe Sanc.
tuarp bzente with fpze, xand the fretes thereof iuveiris
lap delolateg waft in the bande of Jerempe, foz
tbep tntreated bpmeuell, wobycbe neuertbeletie
Wasa Pzophete ozdepned frome bps motheres
wormbe, tbat hempgbteroote onte breake of, X zereimp.t.a
and Deffrope:and that be mpabe buplde Yp and |
plane agapne. + Escchiel faw the qlozp of the Sseebt.1.a

028 in a ppfion, wbych was thewed ppm dpa
the chatet of the cherubins o? be thought vpa


the enemies in therapne, todDoomood vntofuch


46 bad o2dzed thep2 Wapes arpght.And the bo-
nes of the twelue prophetes flozi{thed from out
of thep2 place Fo: they ganecomfo2te and confo
lacton nto Jacob, ¢ delpuered thé faytbfullpe
* How Wall we praplesozobabel which was kattia
asa tngeintherpabthande: — itor tite
x Do was Jelusalfo the lonne of Foleder:thete ti.cie. va
men.inthep2tpmebuploed the boufe and fet vp ©

the Sanctuarpe ofthe Lorde agayue
was prepared foz ancuerlaftynge wo2thyppe.

*And Nebemtasisalwape to becommended, sremw.ta
+wbich (ct bp foz bs the walles that wereb20- sicro.nia
ken Downe,mabe the portes and barres agapne

and buplded the houles of the newe. xBut Y po

tbe eartbe ig there nomancreatcd Ipke Enach, xeen t.s
foz be was taken bpfromthecarth. + And Jo- Hones
feph whiche was lozde of pis bzthen , andthe ogee: /
bpholder of bis people : bis bones were couered SH’.
andkepte. Scthand cm were in greatepo-

noure amonge the people:and fo was Adena:
boue all the bealkes toben be was created.

C The.l. Chapter.
@ Di Spmonthe foune of onias, i

m Pmon x tdefoune of Oniasthehpe Ñ |
Peers Peeke, whiche in his lyfe fet vp the att jad
: g| Doule agapne , ginbig daped made "M
i Fak the temple. Thebepath of the
qe temple alfo wag founded of bpm,
tbedoublebu lopnge and the bpe walles of the

temple. In bis dapes the wels of water lowed

out and wercercedpnae full astbefec. Detokz
cave for Dis people, and delpucred them frombes

ryction,


SFol.tlht,


Pe


: whiche dga


Thebooke


firuccyon. te kepte bps cptye,and made it Eri-
qe that it Hulvenot beleaged.Wedwelte inpo
noure and wo2ppppe amonge bps people, and
enlarged theentraunce of the poule, tthe court
De gauclpabte as the mournpnge tarre inthe
mpodett of the cloudes,and as the Boone whe
itis full. De (hpned asthe Sunne inthe temple
of Gon. Hetsas bapghbte astherapnebowein


‘thefapze cloudes, and tlorptheth as the floures


anbdroles inthe fpzpnge of the peare, and aslp-
Ives bp therpuers of water. Lpke as tbe braun:
ches Dpon the mounte Lpbanug, inthe tyme of
Eyomer:as a fpre and incence thatis kpnodled.
Lpke ag an wopole ornamente of pure golde, tet
wptb ali maner of precpousfoones, and asan
Dipuetreatbat is Fruptcfullandas aCpprefle
tree, whycb rower vponbpe. — |

Wlpen be put on the qarmente of honoure
€ Wag clothed wrth all bewtpe:when De wente
to tbe holpe aultcrto qarnpiie the coneringe of
the Sanctuarve : when be tooke the pozcpons
outeof the Pgealtes bande, De bymleife ftacde
bp the beartbe of the aulter,and bps bzetbzen to
undeabout ino2der.As the bzaunches of Cedre
tree. bponthe mounte Lpbanus fo Foode they
rounde about bym. And as the brzaunches of the
Dlypuctree,fo Coode all the fonnes of Xaronin
thep2 qloape,and the oblacpons of the Lorde its
thep2 pano es befozeall the congregqacponof 3f
racll. Bnd that be mpgbtc fuffpcpentlp perfour
me bps leruvrce bpon the aulter, and qatnpipe
theoffrpng ofthe Hpelte God, be firetched oute


bps band. t tooke of the drpnckofferpnge,t pou:


red in of f wpne fo be poured vpo tbe botome of
the aulter a vood fmell vonto tpe bpete 2pnce.


€ Then berantbelonnes of Aaron to (png


and to blowe wpth trompettes, and tomakea
great nople fo: aremembiaunce and praple bn
totbe Lorde. Then were all the peopleafrapbe
and felldowne totbe earth bpon thep2 faces to
worbyppe the Lo:dethep: God g to gene than
Bes to the Almpabep Sod, Thep fonge qoadlp
allo wpth thep: vopces, fo that there wag aple
afaunte nople iathegreate poule of the Lode .
Andthe people inthep2 Praper , befoughte the
Lorde the Hyabell, that be wotbe be mercpfull
tplitbe bonoure of the Lozde were perfourmed,
thus ended thep thep2 mintitracpon and lerupce
Taen wenthe downe and wretched out bysha
Hes ourrthe whoole multptude of the people of
Firaell, that thep Hulde qeue prapte and than-
kes oute of thep2lpppes wnto the Lozde,and to
reiopccinbpsname. Hebeqanmne pet once allo
to prape,that be mpabte openly bewe tpe than
kei geupnge befoze the Hpghelf, namelpe thus:
sD qeucpzaple etbanckes (peal) vntothe Lo
beour God whpch bath ence done nobles great
thpnges:wbpch path increaled our dapres from
our mothers wombe,and dealte wpth weaccoz
byngetobps mercpe:p be wpll gene vs tic iop-
fulnefle of berte and peace foz our tpmein Jira
cl.cé1bpch fapthfullp kepetb bps mercpe for vs
euermo2e,é alwap Delpuercth bs in due feafon.

There be two maner of people that Jab-
bore fromp berte : ag foz the thpzde whome J.


bate, it (81.0 people. Chep that (yt bpon the wo
untapne of Samaria, the Phylppnes,and the
foolpthepcople that dwell in Sichpmps.

— J Felusthe fonne of Sprach Eleasarus,
of Ferulalem,paue tokenedD vp thefe tnfourmact


ong and Documentes of wopldome and onder |


bpnae in thys booke,and poured out the wple«
Dome of mp berte. Bleed ts he that ercercpteth
bpm felfe therin:and whofotaketh fuchto pert
fhalbewpiefozeuer.  YEbevothelethpnges
bethalbeftrongeinall . S€ozthelpabreof the
Lozdeleadeth bpm.
C The.li. Chapter.
GI ptaper of Jefus the ronne of Hprach.

yes CU piltbancke the DLode and kyns
re’ Pt ae and praple the ) God, mp faup-
S) 7 EA me:fo: thou art mp defender andhel
ohms PE AND bal prelerued mp bodpe fro
Deitruction,from the nare of traptenroug ton-
geg and from the lippes that are occupicd with
lives. Chou balte bene mp belper, from fucbeas
Koode op agapn& me, and batt delpuered me af
ter the multptude of thp mercpe,and fo2thp Lo
Ip names fake. Thou bake delpucred me from f
roozpnge of them that prepared tbem Telues to
Deuoure me out ofthe bandes of {uch asfouqbe
after mp Ipfe:from the multptude cf them that
troubled me and wente aboute to let fpze bpon
meoneuerptpde, fo that J amnot beente inthe
mpdbdes of the fp2e: fromthe beepe of bel, from
an bucleane tonge,fiontlpinge wo2des,from p
wpcked kpnge and from an Derpgbteous tong
Wp foule hal prapfe the Loze unto death, foz
mp Ipfe dDrewe npgbe vnto þelldowneward
-Thep compalled merounde abouteon cue
tp ipoe and there was no man to belpe me. 3 fo
ked aboute me,pf there were anp manthat wol
be focour me:but there was none. The thoucht
3 Dpon thy mercp Lod, and vpon thpnc ac:
teg that thou balte done euer of olde:namelye:
thou delpuereft fuche as put thepztrufte tn the,
andrpodell them oute of thebandes of the Hea
then. Thus lifte J bp mp paper from the carech
and praped fo2 delinerauncefromdrathe. Feall
led Dpon fhe Lorde the father of mp Lozve, that
De wolde not tcaue me without belpe,inthedap
ofmptrouble andin thetpme of the pzoude : F
wll peapfe thp name contpnualipe, peldpnge,
honoure and thanckes nto it:and fo mp paper
was heard. Thou fauedelt me from deftruccton
and Delpucredeft me fromthe bnrpabteous tp-
me. Cherefoze, wpll ¥ acknowlege and praple


4


j our. 3 wll pelde prapte Dntothpna -


the,and magqnpfpe the name of the Lode. €


hen FJ was pet but porge,oz euer 3 went
aftrape, J delp2ed wifed ERIEN in n p pap
er. J came therefozebefoze the temple, fought

bet vnto thelafte. Then flozptied the vnto me,
aga grapethatisfoonerppe. Wp bertreiopled
inber, then went mp foote therpabte wape:pee
from pouthe vp, fongbte J after ber. F bowed
Downe mpne care and receaued ber. 3 found me
muche wiledome:and prolpered greatelp in ber
Therefore wpll Jalcrpbethe glorye trte tpn
that geucth me wpledome:fo2 Jam adupfedto
do ther


ZAL,


do therafter. J wplbe gelong tocleate bnto the
thpnge thatis good, fo hall J not be coufoun-
bed. )pfoute path weelteled wpth ber,and y
Daue bene dplygent to be occupyed tuber, y left
nipne bandeg on bpe, then was inp foule Ipgbt-
tened thozowe wpledome,that Fknowledaged
mp Folpipnefie, J ozd2eD mp foule after ber, the
and J were one berte fromthe begpnnyng,and
3 founde ber in clennefle. And therefore hall y
yp Not be fozlaken. |
| Sp bertelonged after ber, and J gata
good trealuce.. Chozowe her the Loadepathe
euenme anewe tonge, wherwpth 7 wpl pray


efape.ty.a be DPm.*<D come unto me pe Dnlearned edwel


inthe boule of wpfedome:withdzawe not pour
Í felties fromber , but tale and comune of thete
tbynges,fo2 poureloules are bery thapftye. J
opened mp mouth ¢{pake:D come and bp wpf
Dome wout anp mony, bowe Downe pournecke
binder ber pocke,¢ pourefoule hall receaue wpl
‘Dome. Sheisbeardeat hand, andiscontent to


zcete.bi.c, befounde. Behold wpth your epes, *howe that


3 bane bad but Iptle laboure, ¢ pet paue founde
mucherelte.D reccaue vopledome, and pe (hall
baue plenteoufnes of fpluerg qoldeinpofleiip-
on. Let poure mpnde retopleinhys mercpe, and
benotatbamedofbypspzaple . Wilozcke bys
worckebptpmes, and þe all qeuepoupoure
tewarde inducteafon. a |


CA- The ende of the bookeof Jefus the fonne of
Hp2ach:wbpcbe igealled inLatpne,
ccletpattpcus.


The boke of


Depzape fo? them,
ay nae SLD thele are the wozdes of
Aen oa the booke,whpch were writ


saj fpag,thelõne of Sedechias,
A\ CA the forne of Sedetag.thelo-


2 ;
Tee Pe ee
[i me TF


ii.dape o


penay befoie all tbe nable kpnges fonneg, be-
Fo2e the Lones of thecounflapl.¢ clderg:and be


tufalem onto Joachim the fonne of Helchia the
fonhes FDalon preat wpth the otber preaftes


and toall the people webych were wytbhpin at
Acrufatem, whattpme as thep had gotten the
o2namentes of the temple of fhe Lorde, p were
talen away out of thetemple that thep mpabe
bzinge them agape into the lande of Juda tbe
tenth Daye of the moneth Sphan:namelpe,fyl-


uer velfellest which Sedechiah the Connie of zo


fiad kypnge of Juda had made)after that Mabu
chodono3o2 png of Wabplon bad tåken echo
niab tò all bps paynces.lo2zdes e all the ad be


WALK


ai
j
f.


4 led themcaptpue from Jerufalë puto Wabi €
And thepfapde: Webold, we haue lent pou orinter. e
mony, *to bp pou burnteoffer fnges and tncence Serre rib


wptbhalt:make pou ynleuencd beade and offre
fo: fpnne bpon the aulter of the Lode ont God


=P


g4


Wy
E


TEF
T


+And pzape for the prolperite of Mabuchodone +T.


302,kpnge of Babplon , and fos the welfareof
Walthasar bps (onne:that thep: dates mape be
vponeatthe, asthe dapes of heauen:that Gov
allo mape gene vg ftrengthslyabten our epes,
that we mape lpue vnder thedefence of Pabu-
chodonolo2 kypnge of Wabplon, ¢ vuder the peo
teccion of Dalthbasar bis fonne:p we map long
do them Cerupce,and fpnde fanour in thp: ipabt

Pape fo: vs alfo onto the Lode our God


fo: we baue fpnnedagapnite the Lo2d our God


and ynto thp bape, is not bps wratheturned
petawapefrom ts. Andle that pereadetpys
booke(wbpcb we Daue fente puto pontobere-
Hearted inthe temple of theXo2de)ppon the bye.
dapes and at tpmeconnenpente.

Thus thall pe lape.: Che Lorde oure Sod
is rpabteous,but we are wo2tbp of confulpon,
and thame:lpke ag it ig come to palle thyg dape
bnfo all Juda, and fo euerpe one that owelieth
at Jerufalém:to oure pnges,}2pnces , prea-
es, pzophetes and ourefathers. Wie baue fin
ned befoze the Lozde our God, we haue not pur
our truf inbim,nozgeuen him credéce,we paue
not obeied him, we paus not berkened vrito the


— opee of the Lozde our God,to walkie in the co


maundementes that he cane be.


2» /
tarti h
Danie.tr.a


png the dap that be bzoudhé our tone faa i


thersout ofthe land ot Egiptynto this pref
bape we bane bene cucramplbeleupnge an,
bnfapthfull people onto the Lozte our God:ve
ftropnge ourefelues vtterlp, and fhzpnckpnae
backe, that we thulde not beare bys vopce.

+i berfoze, there arecome pon vs great


plagesanddpucrscurtes. Lpkeasthe Lorde sreu.rb


Deutfed bp Mofes bis feruatt:s which bought Dea rrii
riii


oure fathers oute of thelande of Egipt, to geue
bsa lande that foweth wpth mplk and ponpe,
lpheasitistofetbpsdape. Peuertbeleffe, we


_ baue not barkened ynto thevopce of pLozd our


God, accowdynae to all the wozdes of the 3820-
ihe tes, wbom he lente putovs g to our rulers:
ut cuerp md folowed bys owne mpnde g wpe

ked pmagpnacion:to offer Duta Fraung rods

todo cuellintbelpghte of the Lozde oure Gad.
€ Tbe. ii. Chapter.

C Tbe Jewes contefle that thep Cutter iu telp foz thepz finnes

ZbhetrucconteCionofthe-hzpiten. Zhe sete es betpreto baug

the wach of co turned frem them. Phe Lode pl that tor o

bepe brito pipnees all(beugh thep be evel. Be prompleth that

be wpll callagapnethepeople from captpuite anb getie titen a

neweand aneurcrlatpnge ietamint, `

forthe


te:
ant


ci rrbiii


ZAL,


do therafter. J wplbe gelong tocleate bnto the
thpnge thatis good, fo hall J not be coufoun-
bed. )pfoute path weelteled wpth ber,and y
Daue bene dplygent to be occupyed tuber, y left
nipne bandeg on bpe, then was inp foule Ipgbt-
tened thozowe wpledome,that Fknowledaged
mp Folpipnefie, J ozd2eD mp foule after ber, the
and J were one berte fromthe begpnnyng,and
3 founde ber in clennefle. And therefore hall y
yp Not be fozlaken. |
| Sp bertelonged after ber, and J gata
good trealuce.. Chozowe her the Loadepathe
euenme anewe tonge, wherwpth 7 wpl pray


efape.ty.a be DPm.*<D come unto me pe Dnlearned edwel


inthe boule of wpfedome:withdzawe not pour
Í felties fromber , but tale and comune of thete
tbynges,fo2 poureloules are bery thapftye. J
opened mp mouth ¢{pake:D come and bp wpf
Dome wout anp mony, bowe Downe pournecke
binder ber pocke,¢ pourefoule hall receaue wpl
‘Dome. Sheisbeardeat hand, andiscontent to


zcete.bi.c, befounde. Behold wpth your epes, *howe that


3 bane bad but Iptle laboure, ¢ pet paue founde
mucherelte.D reccaue vopledome, and pe (hall
baue plenteoufnes of fpluerg qoldeinpofleiip-
on. Let poure mpnde retopleinhys mercpe, and
benotatbamedofbypspzaple . Wilozcke bys
worckebptpmes, and þe all qeuepoupoure
tewarde inducteafon. a |


CA- The ende of the bookeof Jefus the fonne of
Hp2ach:wbpcbe igealled inLatpne,
ccletpattpcus.


The boke of


Depzape fo? them,
ay nae SLD thele are the wozdes of
Aen oa the booke,whpch were writ


saj fpag,thelõne of Sedechias,
A\ CA the forne of Sedetag.thelo-


2 ;
Tee Pe ee
[i me TF


ii.dape o


penay befoie all tbe nable kpnges fonneg, be-
Fo2e the Lones of thecounflapl.¢ clderg:and be


tufalem onto Joachim the fonne of Helchia the
fonhes FDalon preat wpth the otber preaftes


and toall the people webych were wytbhpin at
Acrufatem, whattpme as thep had gotten the
o2namentes of the temple of fhe Lorde, p were
talen away out of thetemple that thep mpabe
bzinge them agape into the lande of Juda tbe
tenth Daye of the moneth Sphan:namelpe,fyl-


uer velfellest which Sedechiah the Connie of zo


fiad kypnge of Juda had made)after that Mabu
chodono3o2 png of Wabplon bad tåken echo
niab tò all bps paynces.lo2zdes e all the ad be


WALK


ai
j
f.


4 led themcaptpue from Jerufalë puto Wabi €
And thepfapde: Webold, we haue lent pou orinter. e
mony, *to bp pou burnteoffer fnges and tncence Serre rib


wptbhalt:make pou ynleuencd beade and offre
fo: fpnne bpon the aulter of the Lode ont God


=P


g4


Wy
E


TEF
T


+And pzape for the prolperite of Mabuchodone +T.


302,kpnge of Babplon , and fos the welfareof
Walthasar bps (onne:that thep: dates mape be
vponeatthe, asthe dapes of heauen:that Gov
allo mape gene vg ftrengthslyabten our epes,
that we mape lpue vnder thedefence of Pabu-
chodonolo2 kypnge of Wabplon, ¢ vuder the peo
teccion of Dalthbasar bis fonne:p we map long
do them Cerupce,and fpnde fanour in thp: ipabt

Pape fo: vs alfo onto the Lode our God


fo: we baue fpnnedagapnite the Lo2d our God


and ynto thp bape, is not bps wratheturned
petawapefrom ts. Andle that pereadetpys
booke(wbpcb we Daue fente puto pontobere-
Hearted inthe temple of theXo2de)ppon the bye.
dapes and at tpmeconnenpente.

Thus thall pe lape.: Che Lorde oure Sod
is rpabteous,but we are wo2tbp of confulpon,
and thame:lpke ag it ig come to palle thyg dape
bnfo all Juda, and fo euerpe one that owelieth
at Jerufalém:to oure pnges,}2pnces , prea-
es, pzophetes and ourefathers. Wie baue fin
ned befoze the Lozde our God, we haue not pur
our truf inbim,nozgeuen him credéce,we paue
not obeied him, we paus not berkened vrito the


— opee of the Lozde our God,to walkie in the co


maundementes that he cane be.


2» /
tarti h
Danie.tr.a


png the dap that be bzoudhé our tone faa i


thersout ofthe land ot Egiptynto this pref
bape we bane bene cucramplbeleupnge an,
bnfapthfull people onto the Lozte our God:ve
ftropnge ourefelues vtterlp, and fhzpnckpnae
backe, that we thulde not beare bys vopce.

+i berfoze, there arecome pon vs great


plagesanddpucrscurtes. Lpkeasthe Lorde sreu.rb


Deutfed bp Mofes bis feruatt:s which bought Dea rrii
riii


oure fathers oute of thelande of Egipt, to geue
bsa lande that foweth wpth mplk and ponpe,
lpheasitistofetbpsdape. Peuertbeleffe, we


_ baue not barkened ynto thevopce of pLozd our


God, accowdynae to all the wozdes of the 3820-
ihe tes, wbom he lente putovs g to our rulers:
ut cuerp md folowed bys owne mpnde g wpe

ked pmagpnacion:to offer Duta Fraung rods

todo cuellintbelpghte of the Lozde oure Gad.
€ Tbe. ii. Chapter.

C Tbe Jewes contefle that thep Cutter iu telp foz thepz finnes

ZbhetrucconteCionofthe-hzpiten. Zhe sete es betpreto baug

the wach of co turned frem them. Phe Lode pl that tor o

bepe brito pipnees all(beugh thep be evel. Be prompleth that

be wpll callagapnethepeople from captpuite anb getie titen a

neweand aneurcrlatpnge ietamint, `

forthe


te:
ant


ci rrbiii


‘CYCVOORE


o A nee OR the whpchex caule the Lowe
+Danipbd RNS ons Been oure God bath perfourmed bpsde


E Ys


tto.te.b 4 the lawe of Mofes: thata man thuldecatethe


+maru.to PPS vopce .* Therefore the Loze oure Godis
rpabteous,and we wpth oure fathers(asreato

ig)are brought to open Hamre, ag it ig tofe tbps

dape. Xd as for thele plages that arecomebps
tgalredp,the Lozde hath deupfed them fo2 vs:

pet wolde we not peaie vito the Lod our God

that we mpgbte turne eucrp manfrom bps vn-

godip wapes. Ho the Lorde bathe canted fuche

plages to come bpon vs: foz betstpghteous in

all bps wozckes, wobych be bathe commanded

vs: whpeb we allo paue not Bone, no: barkencd

nto bps vopee:fo2 to walke inthe commaun-
dementes Of the L020, Pp bebath geuen wnto vs

B x And nowe, DLorde God of Firael,thou
pidant,4.c pep ey broughie thp people out of the lande
haaie of pte wpth ampabtp bande, with tokens
rit pid puri AND Wonders, wptp thp greate power,and oute
ftretchedarme: $ bate gotten thp felfea name,
asitigcometopafletbps bape, <D Lorde onre

God, we bane fpnned, we baue Done wpckedlp,

we baue bebaued oure {elues vngodlie inal thp
rigbtcoufneties. Curnethp wath from vs(we

belecbe the )foz we are but a fewe leftea monge
ipart the Peathen, where thou balte fratered wg . *
Weare oure prayers(sDLogde and oure petpep=
ons:bapng vs out of captpupte,fo2 thpne owne
fake:geue vs fanoure inp Cygbt of them, which

baue led bSawape:that allandes map knowe

that thou arte the Lorde oure God:and that FC

racland bps generacponcalletb bpon thp name
DLordelooke downefrom thp bolpe boufe

merio bpon bg:enclpne thpne care heare tg. x Jto2
far hee E Deed that be gone Downe tothep: graues and
pra, citie WHOle foules are out of thep2 bodpes,*« alcrpbe
vnto the Lorde,nepther praple , nozrpghteous
makpna:butthefoule thattsvered fo: the mul

tptude of ber {pines whpebe goethbon beuplpe ,

and weakelp, whole epes begpnne tofaple-pee,

{uch afoule aferpbeth praple erpabteoutneson

tothe Lozde:D Lode we powe out our prap-

ers befo2ze the,and requyp2ze mercpe in thy tpabte
sDLozde oure God:not foz anp godlines of our
forefathers , but becaule thou daftefente oute

thy wratbe and indpgnacpon bpon bs: accor-

yp Dpngeas thou dpodette threaten vs, bp thp fer
ger.rrbaa LaUntes the propbhetes,fapinge.« Thus lapeth
the Lozde:bowe dowone pour fhulders g neckes


L


and feruethekpngeof Babylon, fo fhall pe ree
mapne Fpllintbelande,that F gave vnto pour
fathers. Pfpewpll not bothps.noz beare the
popce of the Lorde pour God,tolernethekpng

of SGabplon: Fall deltrope pon tn thecptpes

of Juda: wepthin Jerufalem g wpthout, J wplt
alfo take pou fromthe vopce ofmpathe,and the —
vopce of iope,the vopce of the bzpdegrome and
the vopee of the brie, there Halno mandwel
moze intbelande.2ut thep wolde not bearker
nto thy vopce.to do the kpnae of Babilon fer
upce:¢ therfoze baft thou perfourmed the Woz-
des that thou paket bp tbp leruauntes the p2o
pbetes:namelye.that the bones of oure kpnges
and the bones of our fathers pule be trantla-
tedoutofthepzplaces. Andlo,nowearetbey €
lapedouteintbebeateoftbefunne,zinthecold
of thenpabt,¢ deed ingreatmplerp, wpth bur
ger, pth weard wpth peftplence, gare cleane
catt foath. As foz the temple wherein thp name
wascalled bpon, thou patlapde it wafte,as it
istoletbps dape: that fortde wpckedncs ofp .
boule of Jirael the boule of Judg-<D1070 our
God,thou bal intreated vs after all thp good-=
nes, g accozdpnq fo al that great loupng meccp

of thyne, lpke as thou pakeite bp the feruaunte
Wolrs,inthe dap when thou dpdet commaun
de bym, to wept or lawe befoze the chplozen of
Frael, faping:xPE pe wpl not berken nfo mp meut.tire
vopee,then Hall toys qreatemultptude be ture 49%1 ts
ned into a verpe finall people, for ¥ vwopll catet
themabzode. Notwptbandpnage, Fz am {ure p
thps folke wpll not beare me:Ffo2 tt ig an parde-


‘necked people,but in thelanbde of thep2 captpup I


te,thep (ballremember themfclueg, and learne
toknow,that 3 amtbe Lozb thei: Gov, whe J
geuethem an derte to vnderftand,and cares to

beare. Chen hall thep pzaple mein the lande of

thep2 captpupte:4 thpnckevpon mp name.

Then Chall thep turne them fromtbep2 barde
backes,andfromthep2 vngodlpnefle . Chen

thal thep remember the thinges,that pappened

wnto thep2 forefathers, wbpcb fpnned agapnE
me.0 4 wll bzpng them agapne into thelad
whpch F prompled wpthanoth wntotbep2 fa-

thers: Abrabam, Jlabac,¢ Jacob, and thep (hal Se.rv#i.r.
be lozdes of it:pee. J wl increalethem,andnot yer
mpnpthethem.« And F wpll make another co: :
uenannt wrth them:fuch ontas thal endure Foz
cucr,namelp, that 3 wpll betbep2 God, thep


fhatbe mp people:and 3 wll nomoze Dpue mp >


people the chpldzenof Jfracll oute of thelande =
that 3 baue genen them. 3
= € The.itt. Chapter.
Eye peepieconteen sty in (het praier begin Fo? thei? belfvera:
tie. Be ppaplech wplebo me bnto che people, Hewpng: th et fo
great ebuer(ptics came bnto them foz thedp(pifing therof.oa
ip Hob was the fpnber of wifdome. DF p incapias ton of chit
Pee, pag N D nvwe, O Lode Almpghtpe,

RN Wk thou God of Frael, our foule that
pyre We (8 introuble, and our (prete that


foz theu arte a mercpfull God, be gracpous on:
to v9. fo2 we baue finned before the. Thou endu
refi for ener, ulde we then btterlp perpe: D

Lozbealmpgbtp


mis pa aL


-
$


së My,

y Z L
i j

= Sie


‘CYCVOORE


o A nee OR the whpchex caule the Lowe
+Danipbd RNS ons Been oure God bath perfourmed bpsde


E Ys


tto.te.b 4 the lawe of Mofes: thata man thuldecatethe


+maru.to PPS vopce .* Therefore the Loze oure Godis
rpabteous,and we wpth oure fathers(asreato

ig)are brought to open Hamre, ag it ig tofe tbps

dape. Xd as for thele plages that arecomebps
tgalredp,the Lozde hath deupfed them fo2 vs:

pet wolde we not peaie vito the Lod our God

that we mpgbte turne eucrp manfrom bps vn-

godip wapes. Ho the Lorde bathe canted fuche

plages to come bpon vs: foz betstpghteous in

all bps wozckes, wobych be bathe commanded

vs: whpeb we allo paue not Bone, no: barkencd

nto bps vopee:fo2 to walke inthe commaun-
dementes Of the L020, Pp bebath geuen wnto vs

B x And nowe, DLorde God of Firael,thou
pidant,4.c pep ey broughie thp people out of the lande
haaie of pte wpth ampabtp bande, with tokens
rit pid puri AND Wonders, wptp thp greate power,and oute
ftretchedarme: $ bate gotten thp felfea name,
asitigcometopafletbps bape, <D Lorde onre

God, we bane fpnned, we baue Done wpckedlp,

we baue bebaued oure {elues vngodlie inal thp
rigbtcoufneties. Curnethp wath from vs(we

belecbe the )foz we are but a fewe leftea monge
ipart the Peathen, where thou balte fratered wg . *
Weare oure prayers(sDLogde and oure petpep=
ons:bapng vs out of captpupte,fo2 thpne owne
fake:geue vs fanoure inp Cygbt of them, which

baue led bSawape:that allandes map knowe

that thou arte the Lorde oure God:and that FC

racland bps generacponcalletb bpon thp name
DLordelooke downefrom thp bolpe boufe

merio bpon bg:enclpne thpne care heare tg. x Jto2
far hee E Deed that be gone Downe tothep: graues and
pra, citie WHOle foules are out of thep2 bodpes,*« alcrpbe
vnto the Lorde,nepther praple , nozrpghteous
makpna:butthefoule thattsvered fo: the mul

tptude of ber {pines whpebe goethbon beuplpe ,

and weakelp, whole epes begpnne tofaple-pee,

{uch afoule aferpbeth praple erpabteoutneson

tothe Lozde:D Lode we powe out our prap-

ers befo2ze the,and requyp2ze mercpe in thy tpabte
sDLozde oure God:not foz anp godlines of our
forefathers , but becaule thou daftefente oute

thy wratbe and indpgnacpon bpon bs: accor-

yp Dpngeas thou dpodette threaten vs, bp thp fer
ger.rrbaa LaUntes the propbhetes,fapinge.« Thus lapeth
the Lozde:bowe dowone pour fhulders g neckes


L


and feruethekpngeof Babylon, fo fhall pe ree
mapne Fpllintbelande,that F gave vnto pour
fathers. Pfpewpll not bothps.noz beare the
popce of the Lorde pour God,tolernethekpng

of SGabplon: Fall deltrope pon tn thecptpes

of Juda: wepthin Jerufalem g wpthout, J wplt
alfo take pou fromthe vopce ofmpathe,and the —
vopce of iope,the vopce of the bzpdegrome and
the vopee of the brie, there Halno mandwel
moze intbelande.2ut thep wolde not bearker
nto thy vopce.to do the kpnae of Babilon fer
upce:¢ therfoze baft thou perfourmed the Woz-
des that thou paket bp tbp leruauntes the p2o
pbetes:namelye.that the bones of oure kpnges
and the bones of our fathers pule be trantla-
tedoutofthepzplaces. Andlo,nowearetbey €
lapedouteintbebeateoftbefunne,zinthecold
of thenpabt,¢ deed ingreatmplerp, wpth bur
ger, pth weard wpth peftplence, gare cleane
catt foath. As foz the temple wherein thp name
wascalled bpon, thou patlapde it wafte,as it
istoletbps dape: that fortde wpckedncs ofp .
boule of Jirael the boule of Judg-<D1070 our
God,thou bal intreated vs after all thp good-=
nes, g accozdpnq fo al that great loupng meccp

of thyne, lpke as thou pakeite bp the feruaunte
Wolrs,inthe dap when thou dpdet commaun
de bym, to wept or lawe befoze the chplozen of
Frael, faping:xPE pe wpl not berken nfo mp meut.tire
vopee,then Hall toys qreatemultptude be ture 49%1 ts
ned into a verpe finall people, for ¥ vwopll catet
themabzode. Notwptbandpnage, Fz am {ure p
thps folke wpll not beare me:Ffo2 tt ig an parde-


‘necked people,but in thelanbde of thep2 captpup I


te,thep (ballremember themfclueg, and learne
toknow,that 3 amtbe Lozb thei: Gov, whe J
geuethem an derte to vnderftand,and cares to

beare. Chen hall thep pzaple mein the lande of

thep2 captpupte:4 thpnckevpon mp name.

Then Chall thep turne them fromtbep2 barde
backes,andfromthep2 vngodlpnefle . Chen

thal thep remember the thinges,that pappened

wnto thep2 forefathers, wbpcb fpnned agapnE
me.0 4 wll bzpng them agapne into thelad
whpch F prompled wpthanoth wntotbep2 fa-

thers: Abrabam, Jlabac,¢ Jacob, and thep (hal Se.rv#i.r.
be lozdes of it:pee. J wl increalethem,andnot yer
mpnpthethem.« And F wpll make another co: :
uenannt wrth them:fuch ontas thal endure Foz
cucr,namelp, that 3 wpll betbep2 God, thep


fhatbe mp people:and 3 wll nomoze Dpue mp >


people the chpldzenof Jfracll oute of thelande =
that 3 baue genen them. 3
= € The.itt. Chapter.
Eye peepieconteen sty in (het praier begin Fo? thei? belfvera:
tie. Be ppaplech wplebo me bnto che people, Hewpng: th et fo
great ebuer(ptics came bnto them foz thedp(pifing therof.oa
ip Hob was the fpnber of wifdome. DF p incapias ton of chit
Pee, pag N D nvwe, O Lode Almpghtpe,

RN Wk thou God of Frael, our foule that
pyre We (8 introuble, and our (prete that


foz theu arte a mercpfull God, be gracpous on:
to v9. fo2 we baue finned before the. Thou endu
refi for ener, ulde we then btterlp perpe: D

Lozbealmpgbtp


mis pa aL


-
$


së My,

y Z L
i j

= Sie


f


|


Haru,


- Lode Blmpabdtye, thot God of Fleael .


x Spbe-tt 8 Hearenowe thepapecx ofthedeed Flraclptes
amd. c ANd Of thep2z chpldzen, whpch baue fpnned befo?
uie ando e the and not herkened wnto the wopce of the Lo?


De thep2 God, forthe whych caule thele plages


23 hangenowe vpon b3:<D Lorde , remember not


the wpckednes of care forefathers, but thpncke
bpon thp power and name nowe at thpstpute:
fo? thou artetbe Lozde oure God: the( PD Lor
on ritit a De) wpl we peaile.4J€02 thon halt put thp feare
DLICFbUA ip oure hertes,to the intente that we dulde call
pon thp name,and praple the in oure captpup
| teandthat wempabt turne from the wpcked=
neffle of our forefathers,that fpnned befoze the.
Webolde, we are pet thps dape tn onre cap:
ss Epupte, where as thou bak (catered vs,tobean
Sfatcriea gphompnacpon,curle, and fpn:xlpke as it path
bappened vnto our fozefatbhers alfo,becautle of

they2 wpckeduefle, andDdepartpnge from the.
| D Frael,bearetbe commaundementes of
lyfe:ponder them well wpththpne cares,thatp
mapeft learne wpledome. Wut how bappenceth
it Blracll,thatthou art in thpne enempes lande
thou arte waren olde ina Eraungecounttpe, €
defpled wytbthedeed. Wpp artethou become
phe them, that godowne to thep2 qranes:Eué


Jeremih d Wecanfethou batt xforfaken tbe welof wylote T


do: pf thou baddcf walked inthe wap of God
trulpe.thou tulbdelt baue remapned pll Tafe in


prone.rt.s thpneowneland.*+D learne then wheredplcre:- fF
ans.s9. epon ts, where bertue ig where vnderfandpng igs


` ig, thou mapt knowe alfo from whence com
ara. rir.b meth* Longe lyfe,a nectMarpelpuinge,tbelpgbt
andri a pfthpeepes qqupetneg. po ever found out ber
places<D2 who cuer came tuto Der treafureg
Wibere are the pypnces of the Heathen be =
come and fuch as ruledp beafteasbpé the erth?
C hepthathadthey2 pattyme wprbhtbe foules
of the apze.that boozded bp {plucr € gold va
inmentruft fo much and made no ende of thep2
catberpngertaibat is become of them p copned
fpluer, and were fo carefull, ¢couldnotbzpnge
thep2 wozckes topaties Thep be rofed out, and
one Downete bell,and othermenare come Dp
in thep2fteades. Pong men pauelenelpgbt,and
Dwelte vpon carth:but the wape of refourma =
cpon baue thep not knowen, noz wnderftande p
pathes thereof:nether baue tbhep2 cbildzen recea
ued tf:peesepabte fare ig it from them. Jt bath
not bene earde of inthelande of Canaan,nepe
ther batbitbenfene at Tpeman. ~


D The Aqarencs fouchte after wpledome,


but that whichis carthlp.lpeeas the marchait
- tegofthelande do. Thep of Cheman are con-
npnge alfo,and thep laboure foz wyledome and
puderfandpng:but the wap of true wpledome
they huowe xot:nepther Do thep thprcke vpon
the pathes thereof. D Flracl howe greate ts the
bow of Gob/and bow large isthe place of bps
spent. HLT pol Mion *Great is be and hath noende:pec,¢
Jevrrie* pumeluvable.célbat is become of thote famous
Gpauntes,that were fogreateafbovpes, and
fo wo2zthp me of warres Chole had not theLo2:
pecholen,neptbher bauethep founde the wape of
refourmacpon,tierefore weretbep deltroped:¢


< SOLID
foz lo muchas they bad no wpledome, they pe- €
rpibed becaule of thep2 foolpibeneffle.

bo bath gone vp into beauen,take wt
dome there and broughte ber Downe fromthe
cloudes: Ui bo bath qone ouer the fee, to fpnbde
ber,¢batbcbofenber aboue golde,s fo brought
ber betber: oman knoweth the wapes of wpt
dome nether is there any that canleke out Der
pathes. But be that wotteth althbynges,bnow
eth ber, and be batbefounde ber oute wyth bps
fore knoweledaqe.+ Thps lame is be waran pre- Gentit.its
pared the earth at the begpnnpnge and fplled it
wrth all maner of fFoulesand bealkes. x Ui pen Fotue..t.c,
be fendeth ont the lyabte,tt qoetb:and when be or iyi a
calletbitagapneit obeyetbbpmwpthfeare. = =
The Farres kepe thep2 watche,and qeucthep2 `
Ipabt:pea,e that qladlp.cdiben be calleth them
tbep fap:bere we be. And fo wpth chearfulnefle
thep thewe lpgbe vnto bymtbat made them.

+@bhpsis oure God and there Mall none o aed rae
ther becompared onto bpm. Ft is be that bathe 7
founde oute all wpledome,and bathe qeuen Der
vnto Jacob pps leruaunte,andto Jlracl bps be
loucd.xAlfterwarbde dpd be Mewe bym lelfe Op iyon. i.á
pon carth and dwelt amonge men. i. Jobn. id


The.itii. Chapter.


Therewarde ofthem that Kepeche latve, #the punphement
ofthem that dplppre it. A camfoztpnge of the people beinge in
captiupte,d complapnt of Ferufalem,« bnoder the fpgureth er:
of the chur: be. g confolacion and comfo}(pnge ofthe fame.
nge ps isthe booke of thecommaun A
my Eea dementeso God, ethelawetbat
Zomae-scndureth Foz eucr. All tbep that ke
reg OEV it hall cometolpte-buttuch as
Raby o eS forlake it, fhallcome todeathe.
aoe Turne the D Jacob, take holve of
it:walkebp thps wap thozewe bps bypgbtnes
and (pne. Gene not thpne bonoure to another,
and thy wortbpppetoa arenon people, DJi-
raell + bowe bapppe are we, tepnagethat God
bath bewed vs luche thypnges agare pleafaunt Ptarctii.t
ynto bpm We of good cheare, p people af God
D thou auncpente xlraell,* Rowe arepe folde .. _. it
amonge the Heathen, bowarit not for poure VE enz.rro.0
ter deftruccpon,: butbecaulepe prouokeD God
the Lozdeto wathe and dplpleature , therefoz
were pe Delpuered Dntoapoure enempes : forpe
oplplealed the eutrlafpng God that made pou
offerpige Dnto deupls and not te Gcd. Ve bane
forgotten bpm that bzoughte pou bp, and pour
nourte baue peqrened, O Ferutalem. 8
ben the fawe thatthe wrathe of God
was commpnge Dpom pou, fhe fapde berken D
pep diwellabout Spon, fo Govbath brought
mie into greate beautnefle,and why 3 fe thecap
tpuptpe of mp people, ofmp fonneg and dDaugh-
ters, wobpch the euerlaftpnge God wpll bepnge
ypon them (Clith Jopedpd F nozpth them, but
nowe muk Fleane them with weping e [010w
-Let noman refopce ouer me wpddowe, and
foofaken:wppche fo: thefpnnes of mp chplozen
am delolate of euerpeman. So wpprthep de-
paa frome the lawe of God : thp wolde not
owe bps righteoulneffe,no2z walke in the wap
of bps commaundemétes:4 as fo the pathes of
p truth ¢ godlpnes, thep bad no lutto go pe


fiteg. roth


T D pe dwellergabonte Spon come , and
lef vg call toremembzaunce thecaptpupte,that
the eucrlaftpnge God bath bzougbte vpon mp


De rrosite Conneg and mp daughters.» Pebatbbzougbta H Er
erea. -d people vpon themfromfarre,an tneurteougpe A


ople and of a fraunge language whpehnether
regarde tbe olde no: pptpe the ponge.

bele bauecarped awape thedeare belo =
ued of mp wpddowes. leaupnee me alone,both
defolate andcbhpldeleffe. wut alas what can
belpe poun! Mowe be that bathe broughte thefe
plages bpon pou,delpuer pou allo fromthe ba-

Des of poure enemypes.


| Oo poure wap(D mp chpldzen)gopoure wap
Deut itie foz Yam delolatet forfaken.x¥ baue putof the
rpy.a Clotbpnge of peace, and put vponme the lacke-


cloth of pzaper , foz mp tpme J wll cal pon
the moft petke. Ge of good cheare D my chpl-
Dren.crye onto the Lode, and be thall Delpuer
poufcom the power of fpzpneeg pour enemies
Wo? verlp, 3 baue cuera good hope of pour
tofperous bealth:pea,a verp gladnesis come
pou me from the bolp one, becaule of the mere


cp È pe pall baue of oure cuerlatpnge faupour. f


Wipth mournpng g weppng dpd Jletpoun
D Qofrome but wpth iope perpetual gladnefle
{hal the Lorde bepnae pou agapne yntome. ip
ke asthe nepgbboures of Sponfawe pourcap
ttuite from GodE€ué lo thal thep alfo fe tho2tip
poure bealthin God, whpeche Hall come in Pou
Wpth greate honour and enerlattpnee wortbpp
O mp chpldzen, x fuffer pacpentelpe the
wrathetbatthalicome bponpou. foz theene
mpe Dath perlecuted the, but Woztelp thou balt
febpsdeltruccpon , and thaltetreade bpon bps
necke. Wp dearlpnges baue gone rough bearde
Wapres, fozthepareled awapeaga locke that
is [catered abzode wpth the enemypes. But be of
qood comfozte( D mp chyldzen, andeepe vnto


the 2 o2d: Foz pe that ledpou awape,bathpou |


petinremembzaunce: ¢lpkeaspe bane bempn


¥2fa.1b.b Ded to (warue from pour Godxto pal pe nowe


endenoure poure felues tentpmes moze, totur=


Neagapne ttoleke bpm.4fo2 bep bath bought A


thefe plages bpon pou (hall baynae pou euerla=
fipnge iopeagapne, wypth pourebealth. Take
a Good bert nto the D Ferulalem:fo2 he which
Gauethe that name,erbortcth thefo todo. |

* Tbe wycked doers that nowe puttbeto
trouble, pall perpthe, and fucheas bane rrop
fed at thp fall, Halbe punpHed. Tpecptp
whome thp chylozen erue, and thatbauecarp-
ed awape tbp lóneg, balbecozrect. Fo: lIpke ag
thep be nowe glade of thp decap(g tetopce at thp
fal fo thaltbep mutne in thepz owne detruccis
‘The tope of thepz multitud thallbetaken awap
and thep? cheare Halbe turned to fozowe. ora
Fp2e pall fall vpon them from the cuerlattynge
Sod longe to endure:and it Halbe inbabpted of
Denelsfo2 a areate feafon.


C Che.v. Chapter.


€ Fertlatemis moued vote gladnee fo? Chereturne of
-*‘Derpeople,and bnbder the fogute thereof, thechurche,


doke my ees,


cg ee Icrulalem,looke aboute the to-
1G gene Warde the Eafte,and behold the
ayes ¥\tope thatcommeth vnto the fro
=) A GOD. soz lo0,thplines( whome
7 ay thou batt fozfaken,and that wer
"nace (Catered aboade)com gathered
togetpered,from fhe eats wete,reiopfpnacin
P word of the bolp one, Dnto the honour of god
Put of chp mournpnge clothes(D Ferufla-
lem and sbp fozowe,* deckethe wpth the wo”
fhyppe and bonoure,that commeth onto tbhefri
God, wpth eucrlattynge glo? e God hall put
the garmente oftpabteoutnetle bpon the, and
fette acrovone of eucrlaftpng woztbpppe on
thynebeade for bpon the wpll Goddeclare bps
bayaqbtenes,p ts wnder the beauen. Pee, an euer
laftpng name balbe geuen the of God, w peace
ofrpabtcoufnefle,s the bonouré of Gods feare.
Sapte. OFerufalem,Fande vp anbpe:le-
ke aboute p towardethe Catt: and beholde thp
chpldzen gathered from the Eate, ontop wef
wbpchereiopfeintbp holpe word, baning God
inremembzaunce. Thep departed from the one
oote and wWereled awap of thep2 encmpes:but
nowe thal ý Lo: bzpng themcarped w honour
as chplozen ofthe kpngedome.ffo2 God is pur-
poled to bzpnge downe all toute mountapneg:
pee and all bpe rockes,to Fpl theballepes and fo
to make them euen wpth the grounde: that Jf-
raell mape be Dplpgent tolpue Dntothe honour
of God. The woovdes andall pleafaunte trees
fhalloucr thaddowe Flrael, at the commaunde
mete of God. Hoz bether thal God bring Feael
wpth Fopfull mpathe, andinthelpabteofhps
maieftpe: wpth the mercpe andrpabteoutneffe
that commeth of bpm felfe.
Che. vi.


bapter.


Py}
a hi


to Wabplon, peall remapne there manpe pea:
res, ad fo2 alongefeafon:namely fenen generà-


care fo: poure foules. 4s fo: the timber of thofe
godbes, the carpenter bath polpthed thent:pea,
gplted be thep,andlapde ouer wth {pluer, pet
aretbhep but po thynges.and cannot {peake
ipkeas a wench ý loueth paramouresistrym
lp dect euenfo are thele made and banged with
golde.Crownes of golde verelp haue mes gon

eS DPOK


a


F


ë


25


á i & $
Se


AERE


ü


D


Sap.rtitie X


Bf .crilit,e


of Haruch,


godds opon thep2 beades:[o the pestes them
telues take gold and Cpluer from them: and put
it to tbep? owne vles:pea, they genue of f fame
nto parlottes and trimme thep? who2es with
al:agapne,thep take it fromtbep2 whores and
decke thep2 gods there wpth.* Petcannot thefe
gods Delpuer them felnes from ruf and motbeg
CU pen thep bane conered them wptbclothpnge
of purple,thep wppe thep2 facesfo2 thedufte of
the temple, wberof thereismuche among them
One bathe a Septet in bpshandeas thouch be
were Juge of thecountrpe: pet can henot fiape
fucbe as ofende ppm. note bath afwearde
oz altare inbps bande, foz all that be is nepther
bable to defede bpm felfe from battaple,no2 fro


€T murtherers.25p thps pe ran, nett no


thep bena gods:therfozefethat pe nepther wo?
bpp them,noz fearetbent. ffo? lpke aga vellel
that aman bleth,isnotbpnge wozth when tt ig
bzoken,cuen fo ts tt with tbep2 gods. Wibéthep
belet bp inthe temple, thep2 epes be full of du
thozowe the fete of thofe Pp comein.Andiphe ag
the Doozes are ut inronnde aboute bpon bpm
that bath offendedthekpnge. Deasit werea
dead bodpekepte befpde the qrauc-Euen Co the
pecaltes Kepe the dozes wpth barres and lockes
cait thep2 gods befpopled withrobb ers. Thep
fet vp candels befoze them(pee,verelp and that
manpe) whereof thep cannot fe one but enenag
blockeg, lo fandethepinthe temple. Ft tsfapde
that theferpentes aud wozmes , whichcome of
the earth, knawe oute thep? bertes,eatpnae thé
and thepe clothes alfo and pet thep Feele tt not,
Thep: faces are black thozowe the moke that
isin tbe temple. The oules fwalowes and bp}:
des, fp bpon them, pee, ¢ thecattesrunneouce
thep2 beabes.25p tbps pemap beflure,that thep
ate not cods,therfoze feare them not. The cold
that thep baue, ts to make them bewepfull: =
allebat, ercepte fome bodpe dpabt of thera rn
thep woyll geueno bpne: ¢ wobentbhep were cal
into a fourme.thep felt itnot. Chey are bought
pe en and Daueno beeth of ipfe within them
bep mue be bozne bpon meng hulders ag
tbole that baue nofeete:toberbp thep declaren
tomen, that thep be nothpug wozth.*Confoñ-
bed be fhep then that wozthpp them, fo? pFthep
fall to the grounde,tbep cannot rpfe b agapne
ofthem felues Yee though onebelpe them wp g
fet themrpabte, pet avethep not able to ftande
alone-but mutt baue proppes fet onder them lp
&edead men. As foz the thpnge that is ofredon
to them, thep2 prealtes fell it, andabufe it:pee,


- the Pzeafkes wpues take thereof: but wnto the


{pce and poze, thep geue notbpne of tt:the wo-
men Foe cbein anD tbe menfruoug lape ban
des ofthep: olferpnges: 5p this pe map befure
that thep areno gods, therfore be not pe afrapd
Of thems. From whence commeth tt then, Ptbep
avecalled gods? Che women {pt befoze the god
desotlplucr.qolde,¢ woode ethe preftes {pt in
thep2 teples, baupng apenclothes, whole bedes
& beerdes are Wauen ¢ bauenothpnge vps their
beadeg:roogpng. and crpinge bpouthep2 gog
Ag Men do at chefeate when one ig aeade,


The heleg allo take awape the catmétes €
of the ymages, and decke thep2 wpuegg hpl-
ozen wpthall. Whether tt be good ozeucil that
anp man do bnto thé.thep are notable toretõ:
penfeit: thep cannepther fette vpakpn genog
put bpmdowne, Jn lpke maner thep map iep-


ther geuerpedes,noz retoarde euell.* Though eeci.v.2


amanmakea boive bnto thé andkepe it nor,
they wrll notrequypzeit. Thep canfauenoma
from deathe , nepther delpuerthe weake from
the wit al tri Sis not teftoze ablyndema
to bps ipgbte nog belpe anpemanatbpenede.
‘Chep can fete no mercy to the wpddowe,noz
do Food to the fatberleiic. Thep? covdes of
thodde, fone, golde, andipluer,are buteuenag
otber toneg, that be bewen of the mountayne.
hep that worthpp them, thalbeconfounded.
Dote thulde they than be taken fo; qoddes?
Pee , bowe dare mencalltbemqoddes? And


though the Caldecs woztbppped them not, bea


tinge ptbep were but dome € coulonot{peake.
Let thep thé felues offre onto Well, and wolde
fayne baue bpm tofpeake : as tbo faye, epep
couldefele,that map not moue. Wut whe tele
mencome to vndertandpng,thep thal fozfake
thé.foz their goddeshaueno felpnge. X greate
foete of wemé qpzde Wwpthcoardes ,fptteinthe
reteg, burne oliue berieg. Pow pf one of thé
be coueped awape, g lye xd any fuchascome by:
the caeth ber nepabboursin the teth, becaule
the has not fo woztbelp reputed, nog Ver coard
bok. Wihatloeuerigoone fo2 thé, tt is but in
vapne glot. Potwe mapeit the belapd o? thou
gbte, thatthep are qoddeg: Carpenters ¢qol«
delinpthes make the, nether be they anp other —
tbpnge but euen tobat the woackemen wpll ;

make OF tbem. Pee, the coldelnpthice them fel
uesthat make them, are ofnolonge contpnu
aunce. Howe Hulde then the thynges that are
made of them, begoddes/ Clapne therfore are
the thpnges( pee, verpe hameistt) that thep
leauebebpnde themfo2 thep2 prolperptic. T02
atfoone ag there commeth any twarre o2 plage”
bponthem, then the pzeftes pmagyne, where
thep marebpde - a felues topth them, Howe
canmen thpnie then, ptbhep be qoddes, whpcbe
nepeber may defende them felueg from warre,
noz delpuer them from mpfiortune/ Koz fepn y
they be but of wood, of tone, of fplner and of
golde:all people and kypngesthall knowe bercs
aftev.that thep be but apne thpnaces : pee.it
{halbe openlp declared, that they be no goddreg:
but cuen the berp wozkeg of meng bandeg, and
that God bathnotbpng to do wyth them . (¥e
ismanptette then that thep are no qoddes, but
thewozckes of mens hades, andno worcke of
God in them. ) Thep can (et nokpnacin the
lande,noz geucrapne dntomeé. Shep can geté
notentence ofa matter,nether defende the lave
from fozonge. Æo? they are notabletondo fo
moche ag actowe, that fipeth bettoprte bea-


uchandearthe:

CUiban there bappeneth a fpze into the boule
of thole goddes of Yoodde , and fpluer , and
Of golde, the preftes Wyll efcapeandlauc theit


Gggg felneg


Sol tlie,


——— Thelongeofthe.ti,chyloeen.
Lee ees oribtanvanpeonsecter QC Ye longe ofthe thee


tell:bowe mapit then bethoughte op gratiteds -chyldzen, wohpche were put tntotheh z
that thepbe gonw ia A ag pepe npnge ouen. Che commen rrantlatyon geig
of wodde, of {tone ,of golde,andlpiuer mar thpsfonge in the thpzde Chapter of Danpel


Riek tm verp wpcked are onger the ther.
cle |

Or be clothed withall, thele take thep2 golde
lp


e Dra x 4 oo iS
F


athen , neptber bpne areant w ckedD pmagpnatpons, andtoan
tpgbteous kpnge pee tbe mot frowarde vp


thbep fo: thepcanget them nder the rote.
do them felucs good. Ho can pe becectt
nomaticr of meancs,that thep be godes: the
fore fearetbem not. 02 lpkeasa (carcrowe


whpcbe thalbe agreat confutpon of icence, no? Sanctuarp befoze the.

thelanbe.Wlefledis the godly < _ Peuethelefle,inacontrpte herte gan bunt-
matt, that bathnopma = ble{pzete,let vs bereceaued, that we mape op:
ges and woribpp- - tapnetbp mercpe. Lpke as inthe burnte ena
petbnone,fog of Rammesand bullockes,¢ lpke ag inthoufã-
e albe des of fat lambes fo let our offerpnagesbe in thp

farre (pabi tbps dap. that it map plealethe. xio: ther Bitak ne

from repzoue. ig no confufpon bnto Fat pit there trutte zirrin

| inthe. And nowe we folowe the wth all oure wom r.


@ The ende of the Bzophete berte,we feare the efpbe thp face.ut bs not fo
#5 a Baruch F (pame, but deale withvsea fter thy loupng bp
neg and accozdpng to the multptudeofthyier

cpes. Delpuerys bp thp mpzacles(<D1020 and

fhe gettbp cede! EEan a

Do thp feruauntes evell,map be ui


a gi


L]
Taa


i


L
#*
ie


——— Thelongeofthe.ti,chyloeen.
Lee ees oribtanvanpeonsecter QC Ye longe ofthe thee


tell:bowe mapit then bethoughte op gratiteds -chyldzen, wohpche were put tntotheh z
that thepbe gonw ia A ag pepe npnge ouen. Che commen rrantlatyon geig
of wodde, of {tone ,of golde,andlpiuer mar thpsfonge in the thpzde Chapter of Danpel


Riek tm verp wpcked are onger the ther.
cle |

Or be clothed withall, thele take thep2 golde
lp


e Dra x 4 oo iS
F


athen , neptber bpne areant w ckedD pmagpnatpons, andtoan
tpgbteous kpnge pee tbe mot frowarde vp


thbep fo: thepcanget them nder the rote.
do them felucs good. Ho can pe becectt
nomaticr of meancs,that thep be godes: the
fore fearetbem not. 02 lpkeasa (carcrowe


whpcbe thalbe agreat confutpon of icence, no? Sanctuarp befoze the.

thelanbe.Wlefledis the godly < _ Peuethelefle,inacontrpte herte gan bunt-
matt, that bathnopma = ble{pzete,let vs bereceaued, that we mape op:
ges and woribpp- - tapnetbp mercpe. Lpke as inthe burnte ena
petbnone,fog of Rammesand bullockes,¢ lpke ag inthoufã-
e albe des of fat lambes fo let our offerpnagesbe in thp

farre (pabi tbps dap. that it map plealethe. xio: ther Bitak ne

from repzoue. ig no confufpon bnto Fat pit there trutte zirrin

| inthe. And nowe we folowe the wth all oure wom r.


@ The ende of the Bzophete berte,we feare the efpbe thp face.ut bs not fo
#5 a Baruch F (pame, but deale withvsea fter thy loupng bp
neg and accozdpng to the multptudeofthyier

cpes. Delpuerys bp thp mpzacles(<D1020 and

fhe gettbp cede! EEan a

Do thp feruauntes evell,map be ui


a gi


L]
Taa


i


L
#*
ie


a _ ale a i
a ee = he
th a + d Pu
i=


> PUAPEFeLs


CYC LUTICU UELUT LUCE Lyin,


Let them be athamed thozowe thy Almpabtpe
power, and thep2 Erength be b2oken : that thep
. mapeBnowe howe f thou ontipe art the Lorde
God, tDononr worthy thozowout althe wold
And the binges fernauntes that put them
{1r,ceafled not to make the ouen Dote with wpld
fyze,d2pe frawe,pptch and faggottes’, {cthat
the famme wente oute of the ouen wpona.rlir.
cubptes:pee,it tooke awapeand bzent bp thole
Caldes, tpat it gat bolde pon belpde the onen.
Mut the Jungel of the Lorde came Downe into
the ouen to Bileriag andppsfelowes,and imot
the flame of the Epze oute of the ouen , and made
the mpoff of tbe ouen agit bad ben a cold wpnd
blowpng:fo that the fpze nepther touched them
greued them,nozdpothemburte. ‘Chem thele
thze(ag out of one moutbe)pzapled, ponoured ,
and bleffed God inthefoznacelapinge .
-¥2Bleffed be thon, OLode God of oure fa
thers:fozthou art pzapfe and bonoure woztbpe


t.cja.itit.o


_ BPtalrrite pee and to bemaguptped fo2eucrimoze.x Sle-


fed bethe bolp name of thp glozpe,fo2 itis wo:
thp tobe pzapled and magnpfied inal wozldes
lefed be thou inthe bolie temple of thp glozp
fozaboueall thpnaesthou arteto be pzapled,
pee € moze thé worthy fo be rp 3 Sate foz ever
Wlefled be thou inthe trone of tbp kpngedome,
for aboue all thou arte nod tobe wellfpoké
of, ¢ to be moze then magnpfped foz ever. Wiel
fed be thou that loket thozowe the depe and {pt
teft bpon the Cherubpnes foz thou arte wozthpe
to be pzapied and aboue al tobe magnpfped foz
guer Eneo be thou in the fpmament of beaue
02 thou arte pzaple g bonoure ea fo? euer.
- Dal pe wogckes of the Lozd, {peake coodok
the Loz epraple bynt,and fet bpm bp foz euer.
eiotanie xD pe Jungels of tbe Loze, (peake vaod of
andr: d the Lorde, pzrapfe bpm , and fet bym bp foz euer
D pe heanens {peake good of f L020, praple
bpm, and fet bpm Yp foz ever.
D pe waters  beaboue f fpemament,fpeak
good of p Lo:d:pzraple him ¢ fet bimbp Fo2ener.
D all pe powers of the Lo20:(peake good of
pra erii a (OC Lowe, pzaple bym, and fet Hpi vp foz ever.
S. Æ Ope Sunneand Hoone, peake good of
the Lo:de:pzaple bpm, and fet bym bp foz ener.
D pe Starres of heauen, fpeake good ofthe
Lozde,praplebpm,andfetbpmbpfozener. -
xD pe powers and dewe: (peake qood of p
Lopde:praple bpm:and fet bym bp Foz ever.
z D alpe wpudes of God, fpeake good of the
- Logde-praple bpm, and fet bpm dp Foz ever .


=
I


D pe fpeand beate, peakegoodoftheLo, VON OAN


be, praplebpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener.


D pe Wwpnter and Commer, fpeake qoodof oe!


theLo:de: paplfebpm, and fet bpm Dp foz euer,
D pedewes and frokes, fpeake ooon ofthe
Lo:be:pzaple bpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener:


D pe frot andcolbe,fpeake qood of the Lo;
- depaple brmand fet pnt) fo) ener. chy
D peple and {nowe,(pea e good of tbe Lo?
be: praple bpmt,and let bpm vp fo2 ever.
wih oft ably a re aa i
Lorde: praple bym and Cet bpm bp foz ever.
D pelpteand darcknes, (peake good of the


ae heb
Lozde:pzaple bpm,andfct bpm bp fap ener.
D pe lpabteninges and Lhe cake ro0
of the L020, pzapfe bim:and fet bit bp foz ener.
= Olet the earth tpeake goo of tbe Lorbe:pee
let it pzaple bpm, and fet bpm bp foz euer.
D pe ea el rab and Dplies, fpeake good
of tbe L02d:pzaile bpm and fet pim wp Foz ener.
_Dalpegrenethiges opi ferth, peake good
of the Lozde:pzaple bpm, g fet bym wp foz ener.
_ Dpemwelleg,ipeake good ofthe Lod, praile
bpmandlet bym bp forener. +
_ D pe Sees and flondes, fpeake goed ofthe
Loade:praple bpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener’.
D pe Whales andall that moue inthe wa-
ters (peake good of the Lo:de:prapfe bpm, and
we 35 T tan, b , <a
 Malpefoules of the apre, fpeake qood of the
Lozbe prapte bpm and fet pym vp foz eucr. ,
D all pe beattes and catell Cpeake moon off
Lozde,praple bpm and fet bpm vp Foz cuer.
D pe chpldzen of men,fpeake good of § Loze
venar er a ben vr 2 Ma
| raclipeake qood of the 1.020: sraphi
bemanb be Dym forener. : pb: pzapfe
_ Dpepreltes ofthe Lorde, peake goodofthe |
Lozbde,paple bpm and fet bym v renee >
_ *D peleruatites of p Lode (peake good of Hrs.ertit,a
the Lozbe: pzaple bpm and fet bpm bp foz ener. Ssd
 Dpelpretessloulesofp righteous, fpeake spo..
good of p L020: pzaile bimg fet bim vp foz euer.
D pe bolp € bible mé of bert, {peak pe good
of p Lozd.paplepe bpr, fet bpm vp for ener,
D Ananias, Alarpag and B)plaell, peake
pe goon of the L020, pzapte pe ppm, and fet bpm
vp Foz ener:*delbpcbhe bath delpuered vs frome
the bel,kepte vs from tbe bande of death,rpode arere
vg from thempoodef of the burnpnee | pth er
and faued Ds eueninthe mpbbelt off efpre . x Plarbite
D gene thanckes therefore puto thel o2de: fot
beigkpndeberted and bps mercpe endureth for
cuet.d all Deuoutemen, (peake pe geod of the
Pisin omens DaT
anO Teue ppm thanckes fo: bys mercpe er
Dureth wozlbe wptpoute ende. ENR


The tory of Sufanna
wpche isthe thpztene Chapter of
: Danpelatter the Latpn.


T joe Weel

Oc Canna,thedangbeer ofIelchp
Dee) egies o> a Derpe fap2e woman and
ve Bet Me C0 @00. Het
nei a made fathere Der mother allo twere
goblp people, and taugbt thep2 doughter atco2-


pO (peabeth of: Bll thewpekeones of Wabpe —
| © lon


m pp


a _ ale a i
a ee = he
th a + d Pu
i=


> PUAPEFeLs


CYC LUTICU UELUT LUCE Lyin,


Let them be athamed thozowe thy Almpabtpe
power, and thep2 Erength be b2oken : that thep
. mapeBnowe howe f thou ontipe art the Lorde
God, tDononr worthy thozowout althe wold
And the binges fernauntes that put them
{1r,ceafled not to make the ouen Dote with wpld
fyze,d2pe frawe,pptch and faggottes’, {cthat
the famme wente oute of the ouen wpona.rlir.
cubptes:pee,it tooke awapeand bzent bp thole
Caldes, tpat it gat bolde pon belpde the onen.
Mut the Jungel of the Lorde came Downe into
the ouen to Bileriag andppsfelowes,and imot
the flame of the Epze oute of the ouen , and made
the mpoff of tbe ouen agit bad ben a cold wpnd
blowpng:fo that the fpze nepther touched them
greued them,nozdpothemburte. ‘Chem thele
thze(ag out of one moutbe)pzapled, ponoured ,
and bleffed God inthefoznacelapinge .
-¥2Bleffed be thon, OLode God of oure fa
thers:fozthou art pzapfe and bonoure woztbpe


t.cja.itit.o


_ BPtalrrite pee and to bemaguptped fo2eucrimoze.x Sle-


fed bethe bolp name of thp glozpe,fo2 itis wo:
thp tobe pzapled and magnpfied inal wozldes
lefed be thou inthe bolie temple of thp glozp
fozaboueall thpnaesthou arteto be pzapled,
pee € moze thé worthy fo be rp 3 Sate foz ever
Wlefled be thou inthe trone of tbp kpngedome,
for aboue all thou arte nod tobe wellfpoké
of, ¢ to be moze then magnpfped foz ever. Wiel
fed be thou that loket thozowe the depe and {pt
teft bpon the Cherubpnes foz thou arte wozthpe
to be pzapied and aboue al tobe magnpfped foz
guer Eneo be thou in the fpmament of beaue
02 thou arte pzaple g bonoure ea fo? euer.
- Dal pe wogckes of the Lozd, {peake coodok
the Loz epraple bynt,and fet bpm bp foz euer.
eiotanie xD pe Jungels of tbe Loze, (peake vaod of
andr: d the Lorde, pzrapfe bpm , and fet bym bp foz euer
D pe heanens {peake good of f L020, praple
bpm, and fet bpm Yp foz ever.
D pe waters  beaboue f fpemament,fpeak
good of p Lo:d:pzraple him ¢ fet bimbp Fo2ener.
D all pe powers of the Lo20:(peake good of
pra erii a (OC Lowe, pzaple bym, and fet Hpi vp foz ever.
S. Æ Ope Sunneand Hoone, peake good of
the Lo:de:pzaple bpm, and fet bym bp foz ener.
D pe Starres of heauen, fpeake good ofthe
Lozde,praplebpm,andfetbpmbpfozener. -
xD pe powers and dewe: (peake qood of p
Lopde:praple bpm:and fet bym bp Foz ever.
z D alpe wpudes of God, fpeake good of the
- Logde-praple bpm, and fet bpm dp Foz ever .


=
I


D pe fpeand beate, peakegoodoftheLo, VON OAN


be, praplebpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener.


D pe Wwpnter and Commer, fpeake qoodof oe!


theLo:de: paplfebpm, and fet bpm Dp foz euer,
D pedewes and frokes, fpeake ooon ofthe
Lo:be:pzaple bpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener:


D pe frot andcolbe,fpeake qood of the Lo;
- depaple brmand fet pnt) fo) ener. chy
D peple and {nowe,(pea e good of tbe Lo?
be: praple bpmt,and let bpm vp fo2 ever.
wih oft ably a re aa i
Lorde: praple bym and Cet bpm bp foz ever.
D pelpteand darcknes, (peake good of the


ae heb
Lozde:pzaple bpm,andfct bpm bp fap ener.
D pe lpabteninges and Lhe cake ro0
of the L020, pzapfe bim:and fet bit bp foz ener.
= Olet the earth tpeake goo of tbe Lorbe:pee
let it pzaple bpm, and fet bpm bp foz euer.
D pe ea el rab and Dplies, fpeake good
of tbe L02d:pzaile bpm and fet pim wp Foz ener.
_Dalpegrenethiges opi ferth, peake good
of the Lozde:pzaple bpm, g fet bym wp foz ener.
_ Dpemwelleg,ipeake good ofthe Lod, praile
bpmandlet bym bp forener. +
_ D pe Sees and flondes, fpeake goed ofthe
Loade:praple bpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener’.
D pe Whales andall that moue inthe wa-
ters (peake good of the Lo:de:prapfe bpm, and
we 35 T tan, b , <a
 Malpefoules of the apre, fpeake qood of the
Lozbe prapte bpm and fet pym vp foz eucr. ,
D all pe beattes and catell Cpeake moon off
Lozde,praple bpm and fet bpm vp Foz cuer.
D pe chpldzen of men,fpeake good of § Loze
venar er a ben vr 2 Ma
| raclipeake qood of the 1.020: sraphi
bemanb be Dym forener. : pb: pzapfe
_ Dpepreltes ofthe Lorde, peake goodofthe |
Lozbde,paple bpm and fet bym v renee >
_ *D peleruatites of p Lode (peake good of Hrs.ertit,a
the Lozbe: pzaple bpm and fet bpm bp foz ener. Ssd
 Dpelpretessloulesofp righteous, fpeake spo..
good of p L020: pzaile bimg fet bim vp foz euer.
D pe bolp € bible mé of bert, {peak pe good
of p Lozd.paplepe bpr, fet bpm vp for ener,
D Ananias, Alarpag and B)plaell, peake
pe goon of the L020, pzapte pe ppm, and fet bpm
vp Foz ener:*delbpcbhe bath delpuered vs frome
the bel,kepte vs from tbe bande of death,rpode arere
vg from thempoodef of the burnpnee | pth er
and faued Ds eueninthe mpbbelt off efpre . x Plarbite
D gene thanckes therefore puto thel o2de: fot
beigkpndeberted and bps mercpe endureth for
cuet.d all Deuoutemen, (peake pe geod of the
Pisin omens DaT
anO Teue ppm thanckes fo: bys mercpe er
Dureth wozlbe wptpoute ende. ENR


The tory of Sufanna
wpche isthe thpztene Chapter of
: Danpelatter the Latpn.


T joe Weel

Oc Canna,thedangbeer ofIelchp
Dee) egies o> a Derpe fap2e woman and
ve Bet Me C0 @00. Het
nei a made fathere Der mother allo twere
goblp people, and taugbt thep2 doughter atco2-


pO (peabeth of: Bll thewpekeones of Wabpe —
| © lon


m pp


a _ ale a i
a ee = he
th a + d Pu
i=


> PUAPEFeLs


CYC LUTICU UELUT LUCE Lyin,


Let them be athamed thozowe thy Almpabtpe
power, and thep2 Erength be b2oken : that thep
. mapeBnowe howe f thou ontipe art the Lorde
God, tDononr worthy thozowout althe wold
And the binges fernauntes that put them
{1r,ceafled not to make the ouen Dote with wpld
fyze,d2pe frawe,pptch and faggottes’, {cthat
the famme wente oute of the ouen wpona.rlir.
cubptes:pee,it tooke awapeand bzent bp thole
Caldes, tpat it gat bolde pon belpde the onen.
Mut the Jungel of the Lorde came Downe into
the ouen to Bileriag andppsfelowes,and imot
the flame of the Epze oute of the ouen , and made
the mpoff of tbe ouen agit bad ben a cold wpnd
blowpng:fo that the fpze nepther touched them
greued them,nozdpothemburte. ‘Chem thele
thze(ag out of one moutbe)pzapled, ponoured ,
and bleffed God inthefoznacelapinge .
-¥2Bleffed be thon, OLode God of oure fa
thers:fozthou art pzapfe and bonoure woztbpe


t.cja.itit.o


_ BPtalrrite pee and to bemaguptped fo2eucrimoze.x Sle-


fed bethe bolp name of thp glozpe,fo2 itis wo:
thp tobe pzapled and magnpfied inal wozldes
lefed be thou inthe bolie temple of thp glozp
fozaboueall thpnaesthou arteto be pzapled,
pee € moze thé worthy fo be rp 3 Sate foz ever
Wlefled be thou inthe trone of tbp kpngedome,
for aboue all thou arte nod tobe wellfpoké
of, ¢ to be moze then magnpfped foz ever. Wiel
fed be thou that loket thozowe the depe and {pt
teft bpon the Cherubpnes foz thou arte wozthpe
to be pzapied and aboue al tobe magnpfped foz
guer Eneo be thou in the fpmament of beaue
02 thou arte pzaple g bonoure ea fo? euer.
- Dal pe wogckes of the Lozd, {peake coodok
the Loz epraple bynt,and fet bpm bp foz euer.
eiotanie xD pe Jungels of tbe Loze, (peake vaod of
andr: d the Lorde, pzrapfe bpm , and fet bym bp foz euer
D pe heanens {peake good of f L020, praple
bpm, and fet bpm Yp foz ever.
D pe waters  beaboue f fpemament,fpeak
good of p Lo:d:pzraple him ¢ fet bimbp Fo2ener.
D all pe powers of the Lo20:(peake good of
pra erii a (OC Lowe, pzaple bym, and fet Hpi vp foz ever.
S. Æ Ope Sunneand Hoone, peake good of
the Lo:de:pzaple bpm, and fet bym bp foz ener.
D pe Starres of heauen, fpeake good ofthe
Lozde,praplebpm,andfetbpmbpfozener. -
xD pe powers and dewe: (peake qood of p
Lopde:praple bpm:and fet bym bp Foz ever.
z D alpe wpudes of God, fpeake good of the
- Logde-praple bpm, and fet bpm dp Foz ever .


=
I


D pe fpeand beate, peakegoodoftheLo, VON OAN


be, praplebpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener.


D pe Wwpnter and Commer, fpeake qoodof oe!


theLo:de: paplfebpm, and fet bpm Dp foz euer,
D pedewes and frokes, fpeake ooon ofthe
Lo:be:pzaple bpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener:


D pe frot andcolbe,fpeake qood of the Lo;
- depaple brmand fet pnt) fo) ener. chy
D peple and {nowe,(pea e good of tbe Lo?
be: praple bpmt,and let bpm vp fo2 ever.
wih oft ably a re aa i
Lorde: praple bym and Cet bpm bp foz ever.
D pelpteand darcknes, (peake good of the


ae heb
Lozde:pzaple bpm,andfct bpm bp fap ener.
D pe lpabteninges and Lhe cake ro0
of the L020, pzapfe bim:and fet bit bp foz ener.
= Olet the earth tpeake goo of tbe Lorbe:pee
let it pzaple bpm, and fet bpm bp foz euer.
D pe ea el rab and Dplies, fpeake good
of tbe L02d:pzaile bpm and fet pim wp Foz ener.
_Dalpegrenethiges opi ferth, peake good
of the Lozde:pzaple bpm, g fet bym wp foz ener.
_ Dpemwelleg,ipeake good ofthe Lod, praile
bpmandlet bym bp forener. +
_ D pe Sees and flondes, fpeake goed ofthe
Loade:praple bpm, and fet bpm vp foz ener’.
D pe Whales andall that moue inthe wa-
ters (peake good of the Lo:de:prapfe bpm, and
we 35 T tan, b , <a
 Malpefoules of the apre, fpeake qood of the
Lozbe prapte bpm and fet pym vp foz eucr. ,
D all pe beattes and catell Cpeake moon off
Lozde,praple bpm and fet bpm vp Foz cuer.
D pe chpldzen of men,fpeake good of § Loze
venar er a ben vr 2 Ma
| raclipeake qood of the 1.020: sraphi
bemanb be Dym forener. : pb: pzapfe
_ Dpepreltes ofthe Lorde, peake goodofthe |
Lozbde,paple bpm and fet bym v renee >
_ *D peleruatites of p Lode (peake good of Hrs.ertit,a
the Lozbe: pzaple bpm and fet bpm bp foz ener. Ssd
 Dpelpretessloulesofp righteous, fpeake spo..
good of p L020: pzaile bimg fet bim vp foz euer.
D pe bolp € bible mé of bert, {peak pe good
of p Lozd.paplepe bpr, fet bpm vp for ener,
D Ananias, Alarpag and B)plaell, peake
pe goon of the L020, pzapte pe ppm, and fet bpm
vp Foz ener:*delbpcbhe bath delpuered vs frome
the bel,kepte vs from tbe bande of death,rpode arere
vg from thempoodef of the burnpnee | pth er
and faued Ds eueninthe mpbbelt off efpre . x Plarbite
D gene thanckes therefore puto thel o2de: fot
beigkpndeberted and bps mercpe endureth for
cuet.d all Deuoutemen, (peake pe geod of the
Pisin omens DaT
anO Teue ppm thanckes fo: bys mercpe er
Dureth wozlbe wptpoute ende. ENR


The tory of Sufanna
wpche isthe thpztene Chapter of
: Danpelatter the Latpn.


T joe Weel

Oc Canna,thedangbeer ofIelchp
Dee) egies o> a Derpe fap2e woman and
ve Bet Me C0 @00. Het
nei a made fathere Der mother allo twere
goblp people, and taugbt thep2 doughter atco2-


pO (peabeth of: Bll thewpekeones of Wabpe —
| © lon


m pp


Cheoryof Suflanna .


lon commeth from the elders (that ig) from the
iudges, which lemetorule p people. Chelecam
oft to Zoachpme boule, and alluchas bad anpe
thing todo inp lawcame thep thetber wnto the

Powe when the people came agapne at at


15 ter none, Sulanna went into ber bulbandes o?


charde,to walke. .Gbe elders leinge thps that
the wente indaplpe;and walked, thep burned
Foz lutt to ber:pee,thep were almof out of their


wittes,ecalkdowne thepz epes,thattbep ald:


not fe beauen,noz remember that òd is a righ
teous Judge. for thep were bothe wounded wÙ
the loue of her,nepther durt one Mewe another
bys grefe. And Foz bame, thep burk not tel bet
thep2 inozdpnat luft,that thep weld fapne baue
todo with ber. Det they lapde wapte foz Der ear
neftlp from Dape todape; that they mpgbte (at
thelett)bauea lpabte ofber. And the onelapde
to the other: @ip,let vs qo home, foz it is pner


tyme. otbep wentethepz wape from pee.


Wiben thep returned agapne , thep came
together ,enqupzpnqe out the matter betwprte
themfelues: pee, the onetolde the other of brs
wpcked lut: Chen ap sa thepatpme whe
thep mpgbte take Sutanna alone. L

Jt þappened alfo that thep fpped oute a co
uenpente tpme, when the wente fothto walke
(as be maner was )and nobodpe wpth ber, but


drobtett.e fio mapdeng and thoughtxto wathe ber felfe


1 tepi A


inthe qardë, foz it was an pote fealon: And ther
was not one patfone there,erceptp two elders
P bad bpd them felucs te bepold ber. So Mre ifad
tober mapdens:qo fet me oples fope,t Hut tpe
orcharde doze, that J mape watbe me. And thep
Dpd as the bad them, and Hut the ozcharde doze


- and weate oute them felues at abackedooze,to


fet p thpnge that the padcommaunded:but Su


.. fanna knewre not, thatthe elders lape there bpt


qE


wytbin. Potwe when the mapdeng were gone
foztbe, the two Elders gat them bpandcame
vpon ber, fapinge:nowe the ozchatde Doresare
fut, that no man canfe vs:we baune alut nto
the therfoze confente vntovs,andlpe wpth vs
Pithon wplte not we wpll bapnge a tetp
monpallagapnftethe, that there Wasa ponge
felowe wpth the,andtbhatthou pat fente away
thy mapdens from the fos the Came caule.goula
na {pabed,and fapbe: Alas. Jamin trouble on
enuerp ipoe. Though Jfolowe pourempnode,tt
wpllbemyp deathe, and pf F confente not tnta
pou, J cannot efcape pour pandes. Wiel, it ts bet
ter foz me,tofa linto poure bandes without the
bededopnge, thentolpnne inthe (pabte of the
ZLozd:and wpth that,dhecrped out wyth aloud
vopee:the elders alfocrped oute agapnite ber.
Then rannetbhere one tothe o2charve dote
and finote it open. Rowe when the feruauntes
ofthe boule beardethe crpein tbe ozchardethep
tufhed tn at the backe daore, tole what the mat
fer was. Do when theclderstolde them, theler
Haunted were greatelp atbamed,fez whp-there
wadneuerfuche arepozte made of Syufanna .
“Du tbe mozowe after, camethe people to Joa-
chpm her bufbande, and the twoelderscame al
fo, fall of impichcuous pmaganacpon agapntte


nfanna,to bapnge ber vntodeath, and fpake
thus befoze the people: Sende forzsufanna the
Daughter of Helcbtas, Joacbyms wpfe. And im
medpatlp thep Cente foz ber. So He came wytd
ber father and mother, ber chpldzenand all ber
kynred. Nowe Soufanna was atendet perfone
and mertieloug fayze of face. Cherfore the wre


ked mencommaunded totake of the clothes fro


ber face(fo2 fhe wag couered ) that at p lett ther

mpgbt fo be fatiffied inher bewtp. Then per fr

deg:pee gall thep $ knewe Der, began to wepe-
@bele twoelders tode Vp in tbe mpddeT


ofthe people, xand lapdethep: pandes Voi Syn ze. prit. e


fanna,wbpcbh wepte and loked bp towarde bea
nen.foz ber berte pad a lure truffe inthe Lorde .
And theelderstapbe: As we were talkpngein
the orcharde alone thps womancamein wptp


ber two mapdens whome thelenteawapefrom —


ber, efpared the ozchardedozes:with p aponge
felowe(wbhpchethere was bpd came tnta ber,
and lape wpth ber. 4s fo: bs, we ffoodc in acoz
neroftbe oscbarbe. And when we lawethps
wpckednefle, weranne to ber: and perceaucd,
that thep badimedeled together. Wut we coulde
not hold bpm, foz be was ftroger then we:thus
be opened the Dooze anv gat bpmawape.


Nowe when we had taken thbps woman, A


we afked ber what ponge Felowe this was:but
(he Woldenottcll vs. Chpsigtbe matter,and
we be wptnelles ofthe lame. Checomenlozte
beleuedthem: as thole that were the elders and
judges of thepeople, and fo thep condempned
ber toBeath.coufannaccped oute wpth aloude


popceand fapde:D evetlaftpnge God, Æ Chow wedz.tia, « 4 :


fercher of fecretes,thou that knowelf all thpn-


i afoze thep come to pafle:thou wottet, that
t


ep baue bozne falfe toptnefie agaprit me anb
bebelde, multope whereas F neuer dpd luch
thpnges,as thefemen Daue malpepoullpe inuen
tedagapnit me. And the Lozde beard ber vopee
Jo: when the was led forth todtath the Lode
rapled pp the (pzete of a ponge chplde, whole na


me was Danvpell, whpche crped wpth aloude 6
vopee:* Jam cleane from thpsbloud. Chen al it-res-itit
thepeople turned themtowardebpm , efapde: 2t
What meane thele wors, that thou bat fpo -


ken ¢ Danpel Lode inthe mpodette of them and
Capde: Are peluche fooles, D pechpldzen of 3f-
rael ý pecannot dplcernenoz &uowe thetrnth:
Pe baue bear condempned a daughter of Ffrael
nuto eatp ann Paena te aeeoe
‘ofpton Judgaemente agapne , Foz they paue
(poken falie voptieffe aqapnite ber. ee


Wiberfoze the people turned aqapneinalt |


the bate. And the elders that isthe prpncppal
beabdes )fapbe ontodpm:cometpt downs | ha
monge vs, and (ewe bsthps metter, fepnge
Eod bath qeucn the as greate bonoureasan el


der. And Danpel lapde vntothem:* Put thee ü.res:tii,»


two alpdcone from another, then pala beare
thent.Wibenthep were put afonder one frome a
nother, be called one of tpem andfapd nto pin
M thou cankercd carle,that bafe vied thp wpe


Kednes folong:thpne bngracpous bedes which
thou batt done afoze, arenowe come tr ibe:
| Sto; thon


rs -
: PF ğ


7.


Cheoryof Suflanna .


lon commeth from the elders (that ig) from the
iudges, which lemetorule p people. Chelecam
oft to Zoachpme boule, and alluchas bad anpe
thing todo inp lawcame thep thetber wnto the

Powe when the people came agapne at at


15 ter none, Sulanna went into ber bulbandes o?


charde,to walke. .Gbe elders leinge thps that
the wente indaplpe;and walked, thep burned
Foz lutt to ber:pee,thep were almof out of their


wittes,ecalkdowne thepz epes,thattbep ald:


not fe beauen,noz remember that òd is a righ
teous Judge. for thep were bothe wounded wÙ
the loue of her,nepther durt one Mewe another
bys grefe. And Foz bame, thep burk not tel bet
thep2 inozdpnat luft,that thep weld fapne baue
todo with ber. Det they lapde wapte foz Der ear
neftlp from Dape todape; that they mpgbte (at
thelett)bauea lpabte ofber. And the onelapde
to the other: @ip,let vs qo home, foz it is pner


tyme. otbep wentethepz wape from pee.


Wiben thep returned agapne , thep came
together ,enqupzpnqe out the matter betwprte
themfelues: pee, the onetolde the other of brs
wpcked lut: Chen ap sa thepatpme whe
thep mpgbte take Sutanna alone. L

Jt þappened alfo that thep fpped oute a co
uenpente tpme, when the wente fothto walke
(as be maner was )and nobodpe wpth ber, but


drobtett.e fio mapdeng and thoughtxto wathe ber felfe


1 tepi A


inthe qardë, foz it was an pote fealon: And ther
was not one patfone there,erceptp two elders
P bad bpd them felucs te bepold ber. So Mre ifad
tober mapdens:qo fet me oples fope,t Hut tpe
orcharde doze, that J mape watbe me. And thep
Dpd as the bad them, and Hut the ozcharde doze


- and weate oute them felues at abackedooze,to


fet p thpnge that the padcommaunded:but Su


.. fanna knewre not, thatthe elders lape there bpt


qE


wytbin. Potwe when the mapdeng were gone
foztbe, the two Elders gat them bpandcame
vpon ber, fapinge:nowe the ozchatde Doresare
fut, that no man canfe vs:we baune alut nto
the therfoze confente vntovs,andlpe wpth vs
Pithon wplte not we wpll bapnge a tetp
monpallagapnftethe, that there Wasa ponge
felowe wpth the,andtbhatthou pat fente away
thy mapdens from the fos the Came caule.goula
na {pabed,and fapbe: Alas. Jamin trouble on
enuerp ipoe. Though Jfolowe pourempnode,tt
wpllbemyp deathe, and pf F confente not tnta
pou, J cannot efcape pour pandes. Wiel, it ts bet
ter foz me,tofa linto poure bandes without the
bededopnge, thentolpnne inthe (pabte of the
ZLozd:and wpth that,dhecrped out wyth aloud
vopee:the elders alfocrped oute agapnite ber.
Then rannetbhere one tothe o2charve dote
and finote it open. Rowe when the feruauntes
ofthe boule beardethe crpein tbe ozchardethep
tufhed tn at the backe daore, tole what the mat
fer was. Do when theclderstolde them, theler
Haunted were greatelp atbamed,fez whp-there
wadneuerfuche arepozte made of Syufanna .
“Du tbe mozowe after, camethe people to Joa-
chpm her bufbande, and the twoelderscame al
fo, fall of impichcuous pmaganacpon agapntte


nfanna,to bapnge ber vntodeath, and fpake
thus befoze the people: Sende forzsufanna the
Daughter of Helcbtas, Joacbyms wpfe. And im
medpatlp thep Cente foz ber. So He came wytd
ber father and mother, ber chpldzenand all ber
kynred. Nowe Soufanna was atendet perfone
and mertieloug fayze of face. Cherfore the wre


ked mencommaunded totake of the clothes fro


ber face(fo2 fhe wag couered ) that at p lett ther

mpgbt fo be fatiffied inher bewtp. Then per fr

deg:pee gall thep $ knewe Der, began to wepe-
@bele twoelders tode Vp in tbe mpddeT


ofthe people, xand lapdethep: pandes Voi Syn ze. prit. e


fanna,wbpcbh wepte and loked bp towarde bea
nen.foz ber berte pad a lure truffe inthe Lorde .
And theelderstapbe: As we were talkpngein
the orcharde alone thps womancamein wptp


ber two mapdens whome thelenteawapefrom —


ber, efpared the ozchardedozes:with p aponge
felowe(wbhpchethere was bpd came tnta ber,
and lape wpth ber. 4s fo: bs, we ffoodc in acoz
neroftbe oscbarbe. And when we lawethps
wpckednefle, weranne to ber: and perceaucd,
that thep badimedeled together. Wut we coulde
not hold bpm, foz be was ftroger then we:thus
be opened the Dooze anv gat bpmawape.


Nowe when we had taken thbps woman, A


we afked ber what ponge Felowe this was:but
(he Woldenottcll vs. Chpsigtbe matter,and
we be wptnelles ofthe lame. Checomenlozte
beleuedthem: as thole that were the elders and
judges of thepeople, and fo thep condempned
ber toBeath.coufannaccped oute wpth aloude


popceand fapde:D evetlaftpnge God, Æ Chow wedz.tia, « 4 :


fercher of fecretes,thou that knowelf all thpn-


i afoze thep come to pafle:thou wottet, that
t


ep baue bozne falfe toptnefie agaprit me anb
bebelde, multope whereas F neuer dpd luch
thpnges,as thefemen Daue malpepoullpe inuen
tedagapnit me. And the Lozde beard ber vopee
Jo: when the was led forth todtath the Lode
rapled pp the (pzete of a ponge chplde, whole na


me was Danvpell, whpche crped wpth aloude 6
vopee:* Jam cleane from thpsbloud. Chen al it-res-itit
thepeople turned themtowardebpm , efapde: 2t
What meane thele wors, that thou bat fpo -


ken ¢ Danpel Lode inthe mpodette of them and
Capde: Are peluche fooles, D pechpldzen of 3f-
rael ý pecannot dplcernenoz &uowe thetrnth:
Pe baue bear condempned a daughter of Ffrael
nuto eatp ann Paena te aeeoe
‘ofpton Judgaemente agapne , Foz they paue
(poken falie voptieffe aqapnite ber. ee


Wiberfoze the people turned aqapneinalt |


the bate. And the elders that isthe prpncppal
beabdes )fapbe ontodpm:cometpt downs | ha
monge vs, and (ewe bsthps metter, fepnge
Eod bath qeucn the as greate bonoureasan el


der. And Danpel lapde vntothem:* Put thee ü.res:tii,»


two alpdcone from another, then pala beare
thent.Wibenthep were put afonder one frome a
nother, be called one of tpem andfapd nto pin
M thou cankercd carle,that bafe vied thp wpe


Kednes folong:thpne bngracpous bedes which
thou batt done afoze, arenowe come tr ibe:
| Sto; thon


rs -
: PF ğ


7.


CUCU Ory oiei anv OT the Dragon, Folli


Hor thou alle genen falle Judqemen- God, whyehimade beauenand earth, andhathe seure.vie
| tes thou bal opprelled thetnnocent, andletten power vponallflethe. Thek ngefapde vuto eather
R -tbe gpltpe gofree whereas pet the Lozdelapth bym:tbpneket thou noe thot 2elligalpuynae “

prew.bice * Che fnnocenteand righteous te thou flay not God D: feet thou not bowe muche he cateth¢
Well, than pFtbou bate fene ber, telme onder Ozpnebethenerp dape Danpel {mplen and fapd
what tree lawet thou them talipnge together D kpn e,dplccaue not thp felfe, fo? thysisbut
De aunlwered:vndera WMolberp tree. Jnd Da madeof clape wythin,and of metall WPEJONTE ecte rie
npe! fapde: verp well,nowethoulpeteuentp *nepther cateth he euer anpe thynge.
pon tbyne otne peade.Loo,themeffaungerof  Thentbe Epnge was woth, called for big
the Lo2de bath receaued the lenterce of bpm, to preltes.¢fapb onto them: DE pe tel me not who
cut tbe intwo. Then put he bpmalpde,ecallen isthps,p eateth vp thee erpences, pe tall dpe:
fo: the otber,efapd onto bim: PleedeokCa- but pfpecan certptpe mep 2Seleateththem,thé
naã, but not of Juda: fFapzenes bath dplceaned Danpel thal dpe, for be hath porter blafpbemp
f tbe and luf path fubuerted thyne be te. hus agapnfke Bell: And Danpel fa
T Dealte pe afoze wpth the daugpters of Firaell, letitfo be accozdpngeas thou baft fapde: The
¿l ' and thep (Foz fearejconfented vntopou:but the prealtes of Bell were: Irr. belpòe thep: wpnes
i, ` Daugbterof Juda wolde not abpde youre wpe- FcHpldzen.Andthekpnee wene wrth Danpel
~ kedneke. Mowe tell metban wnderwhattree tntothetempleof wel. go Wels petes fapde:
dpdef thou take them (prakpnae togethers Pe Lvo,we wll goonte, and fette thon themeate
auntwered:Gindera Pomegranatetree,Tbhen there( Obkpng) andponrein the wpne, thé hue
fapde Danpell vntehpm: verp wel,nowe thou the Doze falt, and feale it wi thtbpne olone fpr-
ipet allo euen bpon thpne owne bead. Chemel net:and fomozowe when thou comme ff in, pE
fenger ofthe Lordeandeth waptpnge wpthý thou FPneiE niot that Welbatheaten vpal, we
fwearde,tocut thein fwoaudtoflapponboth. will fff :
Wipth that allthe whole multitude ane wpon D8. The pretes thought them felues fure
Pra Foia Agreatepoute and prapled God, x whpcheal- Pnoughe, fo: puderthe anleare tbep bad madea


bd
f ; =
re Tr
i-
a a ss C


é| : mave delpuered them $ put thepztruteinbpm. Pinpeeytraunce, andthere went thepineucr,
Fs And thep came vpé the twdelders(whomeDa anddp ate bp what there wag. €
ie nvelbadconupet wpthtbep2owne moutbtbat Do poen thep were gone forth, thekpng tet
2 tbep bad geuen falfe wptnefie,and dealte wrt nie faes before Wel. Pow Daniel padcommair
eut.rir.» Dem euenlpkwpleagthep woldebauedoners Ded Dis feruaunteg fo bepnge afibes , and thefe


Biou rir.a EDEP? nepapbours:pee,thep dpdraccozdpngto belpftedtho2owont alltbe temple, that p kpng
Sei tbe lawe of Holes, tput tbem todeath. Thug mpabt fe. Then went they out, and fparred the
els the innocente bloude wastaucd the famedape. doze, fealpnae it with the kpnges fignet, and fo
$ Then Delchia and big wpfe prapied God Departed. Jn the npgbtcame the preelkes , with
forth p? daughter Sufanna, wytb Joachym thep2 wpuesandchplozen (a8 hep were wonte
‘ ber bu andeandall the kpnrcd:that there wag todo jand Dpd eate anddzypnke vp all, Jntbhe
a a nodphoneftpe founde inher. From that dape monpng bptpmes atthe becake ofthe da e,the
b fo:tb was Danpel bad oqreare teputacponin &pnge arofe,and maniel with bym. And Sng
a chelpqite ofthe people. ( ndkpngeAttpages fapde:Daniel,are the feales whole pets Ie ant-
$ was lapde wpeh bis fathers and Cpzug of er wered: Peel Dkpnye) tbep be whole. Qoweas
a: {pa rapgned inbps ftead.) | easel :
Ja CTheendeofthe Storp of Sufanng. wntotheaultare, and crped witha londe popce


CThe ory of Bel and ikore tronar


ofthe Dragon, whychig | the pauement, mar e well whole foote fteppes
aei om of "g are theler'Che kpnge fayd: X fe the Foote teppes
PER, Danpell after of men, women and chplozen.
: the Laten. Therfore the kynge wasangrye andtoke
7. = | tpe prefteg, with thepe wpues anc Den and D -
[a 216 pS pdeate atthekpnaes they thewedbym the tupe dozes , wherethep .


— a Cakes.tortpe Sbepe, and fyre Dagon, whiche thep of Babylon worthy ped, af
greate pottes of wpne Dym dpd the singe wes. And the kpng ayoe Dnro mao, faret oe |
opppebpnr felfe, and Wentedapipeto honcure Baie is buta god of metallalforlo,belpucth, |

bpm:bne Danpel wortyypped bys owne Gob. Hecatethanddzpnketh : fotbat thoucan ftenot.

E And he kynge fapde wnto bym:whp dock not faye, that be is nolpupnge god, therfo

L meute tte DOU Wo2tpyppe Welle aniweredandfapde: fopppe byrn. Danpel pde onto the kynge :% wan vic

A amare. | kBecaule J map not woplbpppe thnaes tbat wpll worhpppe the Lozdemp God, xbeisthe 74e

J Erodi rra be made wpth bandeg, Æuttþelpupnge Crue tPUENS DoD: ap toe this. beistiot godof


L]
ieee


CUCU Ory oiei anv OT the Dragon, Folli


Hor thou alle genen falle Judqemen- God, whyehimade beauenand earth, andhathe seure.vie
| tes thou bal opprelled thetnnocent, andletten power vponallflethe. Thek ngefapde vuto eather
R -tbe gpltpe gofree whereas pet the Lozdelapth bym:tbpneket thou noe thot 2elligalpuynae “

prew.bice * Che fnnocenteand righteous te thou flay not God D: feet thou not bowe muche he cateth¢
Well, than pFtbou bate fene ber, telme onder Ozpnebethenerp dape Danpel {mplen and fapd
what tree lawet thou them talipnge together D kpn e,dplccaue not thp felfe, fo? thysisbut
De aunlwered:vndera WMolberp tree. Jnd Da madeof clape wythin,and of metall WPEJONTE ecte rie
npe! fapde: verp well,nowethoulpeteuentp *nepther cateth he euer anpe thynge.
pon tbyne otne peade.Loo,themeffaungerof  Thentbe Epnge was woth, called for big
the Lo2de bath receaued the lenterce of bpm, to preltes.¢fapb onto them: DE pe tel me not who
cut tbe intwo. Then put he bpmalpde,ecallen isthps,p eateth vp thee erpences, pe tall dpe:
fo: the otber,efapd onto bim: PleedeokCa- but pfpecan certptpe mep 2Seleateththem,thé
naã, but not of Juda: fFapzenes bath dplceaned Danpel thal dpe, for be hath porter blafpbemp
f tbe and luf path fubuerted thyne be te. hus agapnfke Bell: And Danpel fa
T Dealte pe afoze wpth the daugpters of Firaell, letitfo be accozdpngeas thou baft fapde: The
¿l ' and thep (Foz fearejconfented vntopou:but the prealtes of Bell were: Irr. belpòe thep: wpnes
i, ` Daugbterof Juda wolde not abpde youre wpe- FcHpldzen.Andthekpnee wene wrth Danpel
~ kedneke. Mowe tell metban wnderwhattree tntothetempleof wel. go Wels petes fapde:
dpdef thou take them (prakpnae togethers Pe Lvo,we wll goonte, and fette thon themeate
auntwered:Gindera Pomegranatetree,Tbhen there( Obkpng) andponrein the wpne, thé hue
fapde Danpell vntehpm: verp wel,nowe thou the Doze falt, and feale it wi thtbpne olone fpr-
ipet allo euen bpon thpne owne bead. Chemel net:and fomozowe when thou comme ff in, pE
fenger ofthe Lordeandeth waptpnge wpthý thou FPneiE niot that Welbatheaten vpal, we
fwearde,tocut thein fwoaudtoflapponboth. will fff :
Wipth that allthe whole multitude ane wpon D8. The pretes thought them felues fure
Pra Foia Agreatepoute and prapled God, x whpcheal- Pnoughe, fo: puderthe anleare tbep bad madea


bd
f ; =
re Tr
i-
a a ss C


é| : mave delpuered them $ put thepztruteinbpm. Pinpeeytraunce, andthere went thepineucr,
Fs And thep came vpé the twdelders(whomeDa anddp ate bp what there wag. €
ie nvelbadconupet wpthtbep2owne moutbtbat Do poen thep were gone forth, thekpng tet
2 tbep bad geuen falfe wptnefie,and dealte wrt nie faes before Wel. Pow Daniel padcommair
eut.rir.» Dem euenlpkwpleagthep woldebauedoners Ded Dis feruaunteg fo bepnge afibes , and thefe


Biou rir.a EDEP? nepapbours:pee,thep dpdraccozdpngto belpftedtho2owont alltbe temple, that p kpng
Sei tbe lawe of Holes, tput tbem todeath. Thug mpabt fe. Then went they out, and fparred the
els the innocente bloude wastaucd the famedape. doze, fealpnae it with the kpnges fignet, and fo
$ Then Delchia and big wpfe prapied God Departed. Jn the npgbtcame the preelkes , with
forth p? daughter Sufanna, wytb Joachym thep2 wpuesandchplozen (a8 hep were wonte
‘ ber bu andeandall the kpnrcd:that there wag todo jand Dpd eate anddzypnke vp all, Jntbhe
a a nodphoneftpe founde inher. From that dape monpng bptpmes atthe becake ofthe da e,the
b fo:tb was Danpel bad oqreare teputacponin &pnge arofe,and maniel with bym. And Sng
a chelpqite ofthe people. ( ndkpngeAttpages fapde:Daniel,are the feales whole pets Ie ant-
$ was lapde wpeh bis fathers and Cpzug of er wered: Peel Dkpnye) tbep be whole. Qoweas
a: {pa rapgned inbps ftead.) | easel :
Ja CTheendeofthe Storp of Sufanng. wntotheaultare, and crped witha londe popce


CThe ory of Bel and ikore tronar


ofthe Dragon, whychig | the pauement, mar e well whole foote fteppes
aei om of "g are theler'Che kpnge fayd: X fe the Foote teppes
PER, Danpell after of men, women and chplozen.
: the Laten. Therfore the kynge wasangrye andtoke
7. = | tpe prefteg, with thepe wpues anc Den and D -
[a 216 pS pdeate atthekpnaes they thewedbym the tupe dozes , wherethep .


— a Cakes.tortpe Sbepe, and fyre Dagon, whiche thep of Babylon worthy ped, af
greate pottes of wpne Dym dpd the singe wes. And the kpng ayoe Dnro mao, faret oe |
opppebpnr felfe, and Wentedapipeto honcure Baie is buta god of metallalforlo,belpucth, |

bpm:bne Danpel wortyypped bys owne Gob. Hecatethanddzpnketh : fotbat thoucan ftenot.

E And he kynge fapde wnto bym:whp dock not faye, that be is nolpupnge god, therfo

L meute tte DOU Wo2tpyppe Welle aniweredandfapde: fopppe byrn. Danpel pde onto the kynge :% wan vic

A amare. | kBecaule J map not woplbpppe thnaes tbat wpll worhpppe the Lozdemp God, xbeisthe 74e

J Erodi rra be made wpth bandeg, Æuttþelpupnge Crue tPUENS DoD: ap toe this. beistiot godof


L]
ieee


Theip booke


Ipfe Wut mene me leaue(D tapnge) andy Hall
Deftropethps dragon wpthont weard o? Kate

Tbe kpnaelapde: J qeue the leauc. Chen
Daniel toke pitch fat and bearp wol,¢ B10 teth
thé togethers made lopes tperof:thps he putu
pdragongsmouth,¢lfotbe dragon bull in tuber:
& Danyellapd-lo,there fs be:-whom pe worthip
ped. Ciibenthep of Wabplon bearvde that, they
tohegreateindpgnactonandgathered themto
gcther agapnite the bpnge,fapinge: Che kpng
is become a Few, and he bathaelkroped Wel, he
hath layne thedragd,e put tbe pretes todeath


So thep cametothbekpng,etapde:letvsbaue | } Se : 3 JAK ozdepned the fee, bp the- |


Danicl,o2 els we wpl deltroy thes thyne boufe

Powe whenthebpnaefawe,that they cul

"bed info foze vpon bpm, ¢ that neceliptyecon-
paute.bie Lrapned hpnt,xbe Deliuered Daniel onto them
which cal bintintothe lions den, wher pe was
pi.dDapes. {nthe denne there were feuen Lpons
andthep bad geuen them euerp dap two bodies

and two thepe:wbpcb then werenot geuen the,
totbeintentetbat they mpabte devour Daniel.

SE There was in Fewzpe a Pzrophetecalled
Abacuc,wppch bad made pottage, and bzoken

bzeade in a decpe platter,and was gopnge into

the felde, foz to bapnere it totherepers. Wut the
Angelofthe Lozdelapde vnto Abacuc,qocarp

the meate that thou baftcinto abplon , nta
Danpel, whyche is inthe Lyons denne. And A-

bacuc lapte: 02d, 3 never {awe Wadplon: and

ezee bitia 28 foz the denne, J knoweit not. Chen the an
elof the Lozd toke him bp the toppe, and bare

im bp the beare of the bead e(thozowea mpagd


tre wpnde fet bem in Wabilon vpon the denne


ifi,cerbita And Abacucerpes,fapnge: DO Dantelxthou ler
naunte of Gad, baue,tate the breakefatte, that
@Godhathe lente the. ad Danyel lapd:OGod
batt P thought ppon mer wel, thou neuer faplell
themtbatloucthbe. So Danpelarofe,anddyd
eate:and the Jungel of the Lo2de let Abacuc in
pps owne placeagapne immedpative.

© Upo the feuenth dape, thekpnge wenteto
bewepe Daniel:and when be came to the denne
Heloked in:and behbolde,Danpel latinthe mpd-
Delt ofthe Lpons. Chencrpedthebynge wyth
alonde bopce,fapinge:great art thon DLorde
zer. Frrvit God of Danpel:xe bedrewe ppm out ofthe Lp
snette.bit,, Cn Sdenne. + Aa for thole that were thecaule of
panie.bi,c bis deftrucctd, be dpd call them into thedenne,€
thep meredeuouredina moment befo: bis face
After thys, wrote the kpnge unto all peo-
ple.kpnredes and tonges, that dwelte inallcou
trpes,fapinge:peace be multpplped wpth pou .
Hp commaundementeis inall the Dompnpon
> of mp realme:that men feare and ffande tnawe
wanie. vie OF Danpels Godxfor be bps thelpupnge God,
iube.t.c. Whpche endureth ence: bys kpngdomeabydeth
eames bar i Nee bys power ig eucrlaftpnge. Ft

Danp. tiit f betbatcandelpuerg faue:be doth won:

-  Dersandmaruelous worckes in Heaué
and in earth,fo2 be bathe faud Da:
npelfromtbe power of the
Lyons. :


Mbeende of the Stozpe of 5A.


The prayer of Manat
fes kpngeot Juda,whenbewasbols -
den captpue in Wabplon. °
LOD Almpabty, Godot
~<a out fathers, Xbzahå, J-
Eaa, P laac, y Jacob, and of the
Raa Pa Varpabteous fede ofthem:
Sada ats E wbich bat made beauen
e S pT eatth, withal the ona
satene f A menttherof, wbpch hat


ci gas 10020 oF thy cOmaunde=
(st ae oe ment wich bat hutyp
p depe, g balk fected tt fo: thp fearful and lauda-
blename, wbych all men feare, and tremble be-
fore the face oftbp Vertue, and fo: the anger of
thy thzeatenpnge, the wbpche is importable to
finners.28ut the mercp of thp promple is great
and Dncearcheable,fo2 thou arte the Lo: Goo
mott bye aboue all the earth, longelufterpnge,¢
erceadpnge mercpfull , and repentaunte fo: the
malpce of men. Chou Lorde after thp qoodnes
balt pzompfed repentannce of the remp flpon of
fpnnes:and thou p art rbeGod of the righteous
batt not put repétaunce of the rpabteous Aba
bam, Jlabac,and Jacob : nto tbem that paue
fpnned agapnit the-25ut becaule J haue fpnned
abouetbe nomber of the fandes of the fee, that
mpue fniqupties are multiplicd, 3J am bumbled
wpth manpe bandes of p2on, and tbere is inme
nob:catbpnge. J haue prouoked thpne anger, g
haue Done cnell befo2e the, incommpttpnge ab-
bompnacpon and multpplpenge offences. And
nowe ¥% bowetheknees of mp herte,requp2png
coodnes ofthe Diszde, F hauelpnned , Lorde

j baue (pruned and knowe mpre iniqupte. Jde-

pre the bp prayer, DLo2d forgene me:forqeue
meand deltrope me not wpth mpneiniquptices
nether do fhou alwapes remember mpne cuels,
topi np them, but fane me(wobycb am bnwo2z
thp after thy greate mercpe:and J wll pzaple
the euetlaffpngipe.all the Dayes of mp lyfe: for
allthevertue of feauenpzapfeththe, and pnto
the belongeth qlozp wozld without ende.Amé.


-C The fyrtte booke of
Cria,


T Titer the Death of Ateranver the bpuge of agaredonpa.datp —
ochustaketh the kpngebome. Ay anp ofthe chplozen of Firactt.
make couenaunte th the entries. aatporbus (nbbucth Egppt
and Ferulalem bito bps dompnpon. yerafalembepnge burnt
maketh lames of ber otone e fozbpibrth to kepe ods lawes,
Gntpochus tettcth bp an Zdoll suce the aulter of God,


i Sx of Cethim, and fewe Dareus
(A ws kpnge ofthe Perlians and We .
aS Des: Ft happened that de toke
drae (reate Warres in hande, Wana


ia bee
ce a EP aina
age W a: Pi
| e A


=


ne perémanye fironge Cptpes and Mewe ma-
- npekpngegofthetarthe , gopnge thozowre to
ta Kaai = mi
j ? f f Ú : à
A Z.
The f; ce i
mo pe RP= Wip


Theip booke


Ipfe Wut mene me leaue(D tapnge) andy Hall
Deftropethps dragon wpthont weard o? Kate

Tbe kpnaelapde: J qeue the leauc. Chen
Daniel toke pitch fat and bearp wol,¢ B10 teth
thé togethers made lopes tperof:thps he putu
pdragongsmouth,¢lfotbe dragon bull in tuber:
& Danyellapd-lo,there fs be:-whom pe worthip
ped. Ciibenthep of Wabplon bearvde that, they
tohegreateindpgnactonandgathered themto
gcther agapnite the bpnge,fapinge: Che kpng
is become a Few, and he bathaelkroped Wel, he
hath layne thedragd,e put tbe pretes todeath


So thep cametothbekpng,etapde:letvsbaue | } Se : 3 JAK ozdepned the fee, bp the- |


Danicl,o2 els we wpl deltroy thes thyne boufe

Powe whenthebpnaefawe,that they cul

"bed info foze vpon bpm, ¢ that neceliptyecon-
paute.bie Lrapned hpnt,xbe Deliuered Daniel onto them
which cal bintintothe lions den, wher pe was
pi.dDapes. {nthe denne there were feuen Lpons
andthep bad geuen them euerp dap two bodies

and two thepe:wbpcb then werenot geuen the,
totbeintentetbat they mpabte devour Daniel.

SE There was in Fewzpe a Pzrophetecalled
Abacuc,wppch bad made pottage, and bzoken

bzeade in a decpe platter,and was gopnge into

the felde, foz to bapnere it totherepers. Wut the
Angelofthe Lozdelapde vnto Abacuc,qocarp

the meate that thou baftcinto abplon , nta
Danpel, whyche is inthe Lyons denne. And A-

bacuc lapte: 02d, 3 never {awe Wadplon: and

ezee bitia 28 foz the denne, J knoweit not. Chen the an
elof the Lozd toke him bp the toppe, and bare

im bp the beare of the bead e(thozowea mpagd


tre wpnde fet bem in Wabilon vpon the denne


ifi,cerbita And Abacucerpes,fapnge: DO Dantelxthou ler
naunte of Gad, baue,tate the breakefatte, that
@Godhathe lente the. ad Danyel lapd:OGod
batt P thought ppon mer wel, thou neuer faplell
themtbatloucthbe. So Danpelarofe,anddyd
eate:and the Jungel of the Lo2de let Abacuc in
pps owne placeagapne immedpative.

© Upo the feuenth dape, thekpnge wenteto
bewepe Daniel:and when be came to the denne
Heloked in:and behbolde,Danpel latinthe mpd-
Delt ofthe Lpons. Chencrpedthebynge wyth
alonde bopce,fapinge:great art thon DLorde
zer. Frrvit God of Danpel:xe bedrewe ppm out ofthe Lp
snette.bit,, Cn Sdenne. + Aa for thole that were thecaule of
panie.bi,c bis deftrucctd, be dpd call them into thedenne,€
thep meredeuouredina moment befo: bis face
After thys, wrote the kpnge unto all peo-
ple.kpnredes and tonges, that dwelte inallcou
trpes,fapinge:peace be multpplped wpth pou .
Hp commaundementeis inall the Dompnpon
> of mp realme:that men feare and ffande tnawe
wanie. vie OF Danpels Godxfor be bps thelpupnge God,
iube.t.c. Whpche endureth ence: bys kpngdomeabydeth
eames bar i Nee bys power ig eucrlaftpnge. Ft

Danp. tiit f betbatcandelpuerg faue:be doth won:

-  Dersandmaruelous worckes in Heaué
and in earth,fo2 be bathe faud Da:
npelfromtbe power of the
Lyons. :


Mbeende of the Stozpe of 5A.


The prayer of Manat
fes kpngeot Juda,whenbewasbols -
den captpue in Wabplon. °
LOD Almpabty, Godot
~<a out fathers, Xbzahå, J-
Eaa, P laac, y Jacob, and of the
Raa Pa Varpabteous fede ofthem:
Sada ats E wbich bat made beauen
e S pT eatth, withal the ona
satene f A menttherof, wbpch hat


ci gas 10020 oF thy cOmaunde=
(st ae oe ment wich bat hutyp
p depe, g balk fected tt fo: thp fearful and lauda-
blename, wbych all men feare, and tremble be-
fore the face oftbp Vertue, and fo: the anger of
thy thzeatenpnge, the wbpche is importable to
finners.28ut the mercp of thp promple is great
and Dncearcheable,fo2 thou arte the Lo: Goo
mott bye aboue all the earth, longelufterpnge,¢
erceadpnge mercpfull , and repentaunte fo: the
malpce of men. Chou Lorde after thp qoodnes
balt pzompfed repentannce of the remp flpon of
fpnnes:and thou p art rbeGod of the righteous
batt not put repétaunce of the rpabteous Aba
bam, Jlabac,and Jacob : nto tbem that paue
fpnned agapnit the-25ut becaule J haue fpnned
abouetbe nomber of the fandes of the fee, that
mpue fniqupties are multiplicd, 3J am bumbled
wpth manpe bandes of p2on, and tbere is inme
nob:catbpnge. J haue prouoked thpne anger, g
haue Done cnell befo2e the, incommpttpnge ab-
bompnacpon and multpplpenge offences. And
nowe ¥% bowetheknees of mp herte,requp2png
coodnes ofthe Diszde, F hauelpnned , Lorde

j baue (pruned and knowe mpre iniqupte. Jde-

pre the bp prayer, DLo2d forgene me:forqeue
meand deltrope me not wpth mpneiniquptices
nether do fhou alwapes remember mpne cuels,
topi np them, but fane me(wobycb am bnwo2z
thp after thy greate mercpe:and J wll pzaple
the euetlaffpngipe.all the Dayes of mp lyfe: for
allthevertue of feauenpzapfeththe, and pnto
the belongeth qlozp wozld without ende.Amé.


-C The fyrtte booke of
Cria,


T Titer the Death of Ateranver the bpuge of agaredonpa.datp —
ochustaketh the kpngebome. Ay anp ofthe chplozen of Firactt.
make couenaunte th the entries. aatporbus (nbbucth Egppt
and Ferulalem bito bps dompnpon. yerafalembepnge burnt
maketh lames of ber otone e fozbpibrth to kepe ods lawes,
Gntpochus tettcth bp an Zdoll suce the aulter of God,


i Sx of Cethim, and fewe Dareus
(A ws kpnge ofthe Perlians and We .
aS Des: Ft happened that de toke
drae (reate Warres in hande, Wana


ia bee
ce a EP aina
age W a: Pi
| e A


=


ne perémanye fironge Cptpes and Mewe ma-
- npekpngegofthetarthe , gopnge thozowre to
ta Kaai = mi
j ? f f Ú : à
A Z.
The f; ce i
mo pe RP= Wip


Theip booke


Ipfe Wut mene me leaue(D tapnge) andy Hall
Deftropethps dragon wpthont weard o? Kate

Tbe kpnaelapde: J qeue the leauc. Chen
Daniel toke pitch fat and bearp wol,¢ B10 teth
thé togethers made lopes tperof:thps he putu
pdragongsmouth,¢lfotbe dragon bull in tuber:
& Danyellapd-lo,there fs be:-whom pe worthip
ped. Ciibenthep of Wabplon bearvde that, they
tohegreateindpgnactonandgathered themto
gcther agapnite the bpnge,fapinge: Che kpng
is become a Few, and he bathaelkroped Wel, he
hath layne thedragd,e put tbe pretes todeath


So thep cametothbekpng,etapde:letvsbaue | } Se : 3 JAK ozdepned the fee, bp the- |


Danicl,o2 els we wpl deltroy thes thyne boufe

Powe whenthebpnaefawe,that they cul

"bed info foze vpon bpm, ¢ that neceliptyecon-
paute.bie Lrapned hpnt,xbe Deliuered Daniel onto them
which cal bintintothe lions den, wher pe was
pi.dDapes. {nthe denne there were feuen Lpons
andthep bad geuen them euerp dap two bodies

and two thepe:wbpcb then werenot geuen the,
totbeintentetbat they mpabte devour Daniel.

SE There was in Fewzpe a Pzrophetecalled
Abacuc,wppch bad made pottage, and bzoken

bzeade in a decpe platter,and was gopnge into

the felde, foz to bapnere it totherepers. Wut the
Angelofthe Lozdelapde vnto Abacuc,qocarp

the meate that thou baftcinto abplon , nta
Danpel, whyche is inthe Lyons denne. And A-

bacuc lapte: 02d, 3 never {awe Wadplon: and

ezee bitia 28 foz the denne, J knoweit not. Chen the an
elof the Lozd toke him bp the toppe, and bare

im bp the beare of the bead e(thozowea mpagd


tre wpnde fet bem in Wabilon vpon the denne


ifi,cerbita And Abacucerpes,fapnge: DO Dantelxthou ler
naunte of Gad, baue,tate the breakefatte, that
@Godhathe lente the. ad Danyel lapd:OGod
batt P thought ppon mer wel, thou neuer faplell
themtbatloucthbe. So Danpelarofe,anddyd
eate:and the Jungel of the Lo2de let Abacuc in
pps owne placeagapne immedpative.

© Upo the feuenth dape, thekpnge wenteto
bewepe Daniel:and when be came to the denne
Heloked in:and behbolde,Danpel latinthe mpd-
Delt ofthe Lpons. Chencrpedthebynge wyth
alonde bopce,fapinge:great art thon DLorde
zer. Frrvit God of Danpel:xe bedrewe ppm out ofthe Lp
snette.bit,, Cn Sdenne. + Aa for thole that were thecaule of
panie.bi,c bis deftrucctd, be dpd call them into thedenne,€
thep meredeuouredina moment befo: bis face
After thys, wrote the kpnge unto all peo-
ple.kpnredes and tonges, that dwelte inallcou
trpes,fapinge:peace be multpplped wpth pou .
Hp commaundementeis inall the Dompnpon
> of mp realme:that men feare and ffande tnawe
wanie. vie OF Danpels Godxfor be bps thelpupnge God,
iube.t.c. Whpche endureth ence: bys kpngdomeabydeth
eames bar i Nee bys power ig eucrlaftpnge. Ft

Danp. tiit f betbatcandelpuerg faue:be doth won:

-  Dersandmaruelous worckes in Heaué
and in earth,fo2 be bathe faud Da:
npelfromtbe power of the
Lyons. :


Mbeende of the Stozpe of 5A.


The prayer of Manat
fes kpngeot Juda,whenbewasbols -
den captpue in Wabplon. °
LOD Almpabty, Godot
~<a out fathers, Xbzahå, J-
Eaa, P laac, y Jacob, and of the
Raa Pa Varpabteous fede ofthem:
Sada ats E wbich bat made beauen
e S pT eatth, withal the ona
satene f A menttherof, wbpch hat


ci gas 10020 oF thy cOmaunde=
(st ae oe ment wich bat hutyp
p depe, g balk fected tt fo: thp fearful and lauda-
blename, wbych all men feare, and tremble be-
fore the face oftbp Vertue, and fo: the anger of
thy thzeatenpnge, the wbpche is importable to
finners.28ut the mercp of thp promple is great
and Dncearcheable,fo2 thou arte the Lo: Goo
mott bye aboue all the earth, longelufterpnge,¢
erceadpnge mercpfull , and repentaunte fo: the
malpce of men. Chou Lorde after thp qoodnes
balt pzompfed repentannce of the remp flpon of
fpnnes:and thou p art rbeGod of the righteous
batt not put repétaunce of the rpabteous Aba
bam, Jlabac,and Jacob : nto tbem that paue
fpnned agapnit the-25ut becaule J haue fpnned
abouetbe nomber of the fandes of the fee, that
mpue fniqupties are multiplicd, 3J am bumbled
wpth manpe bandes of p2on, and tbere is inme
nob:catbpnge. J haue prouoked thpne anger, g
haue Done cnell befo2e the, incommpttpnge ab-
bompnacpon and multpplpenge offences. And
nowe ¥% bowetheknees of mp herte,requp2png
coodnes ofthe Diszde, F hauelpnned , Lorde

j baue (pruned and knowe mpre iniqupte. Jde-

pre the bp prayer, DLo2d forgene me:forqeue
meand deltrope me not wpth mpneiniquptices
nether do fhou alwapes remember mpne cuels,
topi np them, but fane me(wobycb am bnwo2z
thp after thy greate mercpe:and J wll pzaple
the euetlaffpngipe.all the Dayes of mp lyfe: for
allthevertue of feauenpzapfeththe, and pnto
the belongeth qlozp wozld without ende.Amé.


-C The fyrtte booke of
Cria,


T Titer the Death of Ateranver the bpuge of agaredonpa.datp —
ochustaketh the kpngebome. Ay anp ofthe chplozen of Firactt.
make couenaunte th the entries. aatporbus (nbbucth Egppt
and Ferulalem bito bps dompnpon. yerafalembepnge burnt
maketh lames of ber otone e fozbpibrth to kepe ods lawes,
Gntpochus tettcth bp an Zdoll suce the aulter of God,


i Sx of Cethim, and fewe Dareus
(A ws kpnge ofthe Perlians and We .
aS Des: Ft happened that de toke
drae (reate Warres in hande, Wana


ia bee
ce a EP aina
age W a: Pi
| e A


=


ne perémanye fironge Cptpes and Mewe ma-
- npekpngegofthetarthe , gopnge thozowre to
ta Kaai = mi
j ? f f Ú : à
A Z.
The f; ce i
mo pe RP= Wip


Theip booke


Ipfe Wut mene me leaue(D tapnge) andy Hall
Deftropethps dragon wpthont weard o? Kate

Tbe kpnaelapde: J qeue the leauc. Chen
Daniel toke pitch fat and bearp wol,¢ B10 teth
thé togethers made lopes tperof:thps he putu
pdragongsmouth,¢lfotbe dragon bull in tuber:
& Danyellapd-lo,there fs be:-whom pe worthip
ped. Ciibenthep of Wabplon bearvde that, they
tohegreateindpgnactonandgathered themto
gcther agapnite the bpnge,fapinge: Che kpng
is become a Few, and he bathaelkroped Wel, he
hath layne thedragd,e put tbe pretes todeath


So thep cametothbekpng,etapde:letvsbaue | } Se : 3 JAK ozdepned the fee, bp the- |


Danicl,o2 els we wpl deltroy thes thyne boufe

Powe whenthebpnaefawe,that they cul

"bed info foze vpon bpm, ¢ that neceliptyecon-
paute.bie Lrapned hpnt,xbe Deliuered Daniel onto them
which cal bintintothe lions den, wher pe was
pi.dDapes. {nthe denne there were feuen Lpons
andthep bad geuen them euerp dap two bodies

and two thepe:wbpcb then werenot geuen the,
totbeintentetbat they mpabte devour Daniel.

SE There was in Fewzpe a Pzrophetecalled
Abacuc,wppch bad made pottage, and bzoken

bzeade in a decpe platter,and was gopnge into

the felde, foz to bapnere it totherepers. Wut the
Angelofthe Lozdelapde vnto Abacuc,qocarp

the meate that thou baftcinto abplon , nta
Danpel, whyche is inthe Lyons denne. And A-

bacuc lapte: 02d, 3 never {awe Wadplon: and

ezee bitia 28 foz the denne, J knoweit not. Chen the an
elof the Lozd toke him bp the toppe, and bare

im bp the beare of the bead e(thozowea mpagd


tre wpnde fet bem in Wabilon vpon the denne


ifi,cerbita And Abacucerpes,fapnge: DO Dantelxthou ler
naunte of Gad, baue,tate the breakefatte, that
@Godhathe lente the. ad Danyel lapd:OGod
batt P thought ppon mer wel, thou neuer faplell
themtbatloucthbe. So Danpelarofe,anddyd
eate:and the Jungel of the Lo2de let Abacuc in
pps owne placeagapne immedpative.

© Upo the feuenth dape, thekpnge wenteto
bewepe Daniel:and when be came to the denne
Heloked in:and behbolde,Danpel latinthe mpd-
Delt ofthe Lpons. Chencrpedthebynge wyth
alonde bopce,fapinge:great art thon DLorde
zer. Frrvit God of Danpel:xe bedrewe ppm out ofthe Lp
snette.bit,, Cn Sdenne. + Aa for thole that were thecaule of
panie.bi,c bis deftrucctd, be dpd call them into thedenne,€
thep meredeuouredina moment befo: bis face
After thys, wrote the kpnge unto all peo-
ple.kpnredes and tonges, that dwelte inallcou
trpes,fapinge:peace be multpplped wpth pou .
Hp commaundementeis inall the Dompnpon
> of mp realme:that men feare and ffande tnawe
wanie. vie OF Danpels Godxfor be bps thelpupnge God,
iube.t.c. Whpche endureth ence: bys kpngdomeabydeth
eames bar i Nee bys power ig eucrlaftpnge. Ft

Danp. tiit f betbatcandelpuerg faue:be doth won:

-  Dersandmaruelous worckes in Heaué
and in earth,fo2 be bathe faud Da:
npelfromtbe power of the
Lyons. :


Mbeende of the Stozpe of 5A.


The prayer of Manat
fes kpngeot Juda,whenbewasbols -
den captpue in Wabplon. °
LOD Almpabty, Godot
~<a out fathers, Xbzahå, J-
Eaa, P laac, y Jacob, and of the
Raa Pa Varpabteous fede ofthem:
Sada ats E wbich bat made beauen
e S pT eatth, withal the ona
satene f A menttherof, wbpch hat


ci gas 10020 oF thy cOmaunde=
(st ae oe ment wich bat hutyp
p depe, g balk fected tt fo: thp fearful and lauda-
blename, wbych all men feare, and tremble be-
fore the face oftbp Vertue, and fo: the anger of
thy thzeatenpnge, the wbpche is importable to
finners.28ut the mercp of thp promple is great
and Dncearcheable,fo2 thou arte the Lo: Goo
mott bye aboue all the earth, longelufterpnge,¢
erceadpnge mercpfull , and repentaunte fo: the
malpce of men. Chou Lorde after thp qoodnes
balt pzompfed repentannce of the remp flpon of
fpnnes:and thou p art rbeGod of the righteous
batt not put repétaunce of the rpabteous Aba
bam, Jlabac,and Jacob : nto tbem that paue
fpnned agapnit the-25ut becaule J haue fpnned
abouetbe nomber of the fandes of the fee, that
mpue fniqupties are multiplicd, 3J am bumbled
wpth manpe bandes of p2on, and tbere is inme
nob:catbpnge. J haue prouoked thpne anger, g
haue Done cnell befo2e the, incommpttpnge ab-
bompnacpon and multpplpenge offences. And
nowe ¥% bowetheknees of mp herte,requp2png
coodnes ofthe Diszde, F hauelpnned , Lorde

j baue (pruned and knowe mpre iniqupte. Jde-

pre the bp prayer, DLo2d forgene me:forqeue
meand deltrope me not wpth mpneiniquptices
nether do fhou alwapes remember mpne cuels,
topi np them, but fane me(wobycb am bnwo2z
thp after thy greate mercpe:and J wll pzaple
the euetlaffpngipe.all the Dayes of mp lyfe: for
allthevertue of feauenpzapfeththe, and pnto
the belongeth qlozp wozld without ende.Amé.


-C The fyrtte booke of
Cria,


T Titer the Death of Ateranver the bpuge of agaredonpa.datp —
ochustaketh the kpngebome. Ay anp ofthe chplozen of Firactt.
make couenaunte th the entries. aatporbus (nbbucth Egppt
and Ferulalem bito bps dompnpon. yerafalembepnge burnt
maketh lames of ber otone e fozbpibrth to kepe ods lawes,
Gntpochus tettcth bp an Zdoll suce the aulter of God,


i Sx of Cethim, and fewe Dareus
(A ws kpnge ofthe Perlians and We .
aS Des: Ft happened that de toke
drae (reate Warres in hande, Wana


ia bee
ce a EP aina
age W a: Pi
| e A


=


ne perémanye fironge Cptpes and Mewe ma-
- npekpngegofthetarthe , gopnge thozowre to
ta Kaai = mi
j ? f f Ú : à
A Z.
The f; ce i
mo pe RP= Wip


tofheendes of the waozlde,and gettpngemanve
tpoples ofthe people:tn fo much thatthe world

Pode in Greate awe of bpm, +t therfore was he
poudein bys berte. Nowe when he had qathe-

| red a mpg htp trong bof, efubdaed the landeg
al and people wpth they? pepnces,to that they be-
: | | came trpbutarpes onto bpm:be fell fpcke. Bnd


| | «Sore Machabees _


| Favit.t,b,


whé be perceaued'p be mult nedes dpe, becalled

__ fo2 pis noble eftates (which bad bene bzougbte

Sam biia Dp with bim of childzen)xand parted bps kpna
| ne 09.3. Home amonce them, whple be was pet alpue.

| Do Aleranderrapaned.rit.yere andthendyed

‘Aftecbps death fell the kpugedome Ynto

bys papnees,and they optapned it enerpe one in

bys rowme and canfed them feluesto be crow.


‘hed as bpnges: andfodpotbhepechplazen after


tbem manp peareg and much wickednes increa
feb tn the wozlde. Dute of thefecame the ungra
_,, POUSs rote noble Antiochus the fomie of Antp-
| ‘mardi ochus the kpnge(-xiwhych had bene a pledge at
|" Romejand he rapgned inthe . C. andfeuen and

K tDztpe pearc of the emppze ofthe Grekes.
Sn thole dapes wente there out of Frael
| Wrecked men, whieh moned muche people wpth
- pebg,a, thepeconnfaell fapinge: * Let Ys goand make
i a conenannt withthe Heathen, thatarerounde
zer. puig e About- DS: for fence we Departed from them we
baue bad much fozowe. Sothys deupee pleated
' them wel and certapne of the people toke pon
them fo2te go vnto the kynge,whpch raue thé
lpcence to bo after the ozdinaunce of thebeathe
i.oga. tiie * Then fet they vp an open fcole(atFernfalem)
of the lawes of the Meathen,and werenomoare
cpacumcpfed:but fozlokethepolpe teftament, g
O taenga, EOPNED them Celues tothe Heathen, xand were
| _tleane fold to do mpichefe.o whe Antpochus
| beganne fobempabtye in bpakpngedome, be
bj Wwentabout to optapne the lande of Egypte al-
f ; - Cof bempabte baucthe dompnponoftwo real
ines, x Upon thps entred be into Egypt wptha


eae: ronge hot wth charettes elephantes, pozte .


men, and a great nomber of hpppes ebeganne
fo watreagapnit Ptolomp the kyng of Egppt
ji Sut Ptolompe was afrayed of hpm:and fied: F
E manye of bps people were wounded to Deathe.
Thus Antiochus wanne many fronge cities

m toke away qreat qood ont of the land of Ẹgipt
fimac.oc,-  XAndafter p Antpochugbadfmptrten E-
we gppt.beturneda apnetnthe.Crltii.peare,and
T ie Went Cowarde Jiraci, g cane vp to Jerufalem
as wpthampabty people: tentred proudly into p
a Hanctuarp, ¢ tole awap thegoldenaulter,the
1 candelftpcke and all the oznamentes therof the
table of the herwbzead, the powzpng velet, the

| chargers, the golden Cpones,the vapl.thecrow
AN nes;andp golden apparel ofthe temple,z bzake

R a . downeal. Ie toke allo the {iluer and gold, pze
es: _ Cpaus Zewels andthe fecret trealurs be Fou
Audwmben be bad taken awap altogether, cau-

fev a great muctber of men,¢fo fulfilled bis ma

Ipcpous pzpde, be Departed into bis owne lande

D ‘Thus there arale greate beupnefle mpre
ft.ega.b.a, CP ÉNALEDE land of JiraelxTpepzpneess theel
bers ofthepeople mourned, the pong mengthe
mapdeng Were defpled, and the fapzebewtte of


«Sol Lit


Wemnen Was chaunged:thebspdegromeand the
bzpde tobe themto mourning. eline thote
that dwelte therin, was moned:fo2 al the boufe
of Jacob wag broughte to confulyon.

* After two peares the kynge fentehys
chefe trealurer into the cptpes of zuda, whpche
came fo Jerufalem wyth agveatemultytude of
people, fpeakpna peacpable wordes unto them

ut all was dpiceate : Foz when thep bad etter
bym credence; be fell fodenip bponthecptp and
Emote itfooze and deltroped much people of Ff-
raell.x And when he bad «tha tbecptie helet i actin
fyzeontt,cattyna dowone oules and Walles on
euerp {pde. Che wemen and thep2 childzentoke
they captpue and ied awape thep? catell.Tpen
buplded thep thecptpe of Daupd wpthaqreate
and thpcke wall,and wpth mpabtye towares,
and madeit a fronge holdefo: them.Belpdeal
thps,tbep fet wpeked people and vngodlp men
to kepe tt, foared ttwyth Weapens and vptap=
les:gatbered the qoodes of erulalem and lates
tbem bp there:thus became tt atbenpthe caftel.

And thus was doneto lape Wapte for the
people that wente into the Danctuarp, and foz
rhectueldettruccpon of Jirael. Thusthep then
innocente bloude oneuerp{pde of the Sanctua
rpc.and defpled it: Anfomuchep the cptespns
were fapne to Departe,and the eyepe became an
babptacpon of fraungers,bepnadelolat of ber
owne leede, foz ber ovone natiues were fapneto
leaue ber.x per Hanctuaryp was cleanewalted trobp.tt,
ber bolpdapes were turned into mournpng, ber amo. vite
Dabbothes were bad in bpzplpon, and ber bo-
noure brought, tonauabte. Looke howe great
ber qlozpe was afoze fo greate Was Hercon fu-

(pon and ber Jope turned intel ouwe:
xAntiochusg alfo the kpng tent out acom €
mpflpon vntoallbyskpngedome, that all the "mac.bia

people (huldebe one. Chen they lefte euerp ima

pslawe,and al thedeatben agreed to the com

matindement of kpnae Bntpockus: Pee, manp

of the Z{raclptes contented therebnto offerpng
unto Jools, and defplyng the Saboth. othe
bpnge Antpochus lent bys mefeaungerg with
bps commpfiyon wnto Fer ufalem,andtoall the
cytpes of Zuda:that thep hulde folowe thela-
wes of theieathenandfozrbad ether burnteo’
ferpnge,meatofterpng:o2 peace offerpngeto be
made tn thetemple of God, ¢ that there Hulde
no Dabboth noz hye fealk dap bekeve: but com
maundedehat the Sanctuary andthe polp peo:
ple of Ffrael hulde be defiled. decommaunded
alfo that there Guldebe fet vp other aulters,£é
pies,and Jdols:to offer bpfwpnes fletbe,ande
ther Ducleane beatfes, p men Mulde leane thep2
chpldzen bnepzcumfpied, to befple thep2foules
witb al manes Poalen al tabhompnacions
P thep mpabte forget the lawe,andcbaunge all
the bolpe oedpnaunces of God: and that whofe
cuer wolde not De accozdpngeto the commauns
dement of kpng Antiochus:duldefuffer death
Jnlpke maner commaunded pe thorowont all
bisrealme,g fet culers oner the people, foto co
pellthem todo thelethpnges, commaundpnge
thecptpesof Juda todo faccpfpce vnto Fools.
Gag mii Then


i: mart. As


tofheendes of the waozlde,and gettpngemanve
tpoples ofthe people:tn fo much thatthe world

Pode in Greate awe of bpm, +t therfore was he
poudein bys berte. Nowe when he had qathe-

| red a mpg htp trong bof, efubdaed the landeg
al and people wpth they? pepnces,to that they be-
: | | came trpbutarpes onto bpm:be fell fpcke. Bnd


| | «Sore Machabees _


| Favit.t,b,


whé be perceaued'p be mult nedes dpe, becalled

__ fo2 pis noble eftates (which bad bene bzougbte

Sam biia Dp with bim of childzen)xand parted bps kpna
| ne 09.3. Home amonce them, whple be was pet alpue.

| Do Aleranderrapaned.rit.yere andthendyed

‘Aftecbps death fell the kpugedome Ynto

bys papnees,and they optapned it enerpe one in

bys rowme and canfed them feluesto be crow.


‘hed as bpnges: andfodpotbhepechplazen after


tbem manp peareg and much wickednes increa
feb tn the wozlde. Dute of thefecame the ungra
_,, POUSs rote noble Antiochus the fomie of Antp-
| ‘mardi ochus the kpnge(-xiwhych had bene a pledge at
|" Romejand he rapgned inthe . C. andfeuen and

K tDztpe pearc of the emppze ofthe Grekes.
Sn thole dapes wente there out of Frael
| Wrecked men, whieh moned muche people wpth
- pebg,a, thepeconnfaell fapinge: * Let Ys goand make
i a conenannt withthe Heathen, thatarerounde
zer. puig e About- DS: for fence we Departed from them we
baue bad much fozowe. Sothys deupee pleated
' them wel and certapne of the people toke pon
them fo2te go vnto the kynge,whpch raue thé
lpcence to bo after the ozdinaunce of thebeathe
i.oga. tiie * Then fet they vp an open fcole(atFernfalem)
of the lawes of the Meathen,and werenomoare
cpacumcpfed:but fozlokethepolpe teftament, g
O taenga, EOPNED them Celues tothe Heathen, xand were
| _tleane fold to do mpichefe.o whe Antpochus
| beganne fobempabtye in bpakpngedome, be
bj Wwentabout to optapne the lande of Egypte al-
f ; - Cof bempabte baucthe dompnponoftwo real
ines, x Upon thps entred be into Egypt wptha


eae: ronge hot wth charettes elephantes, pozte .


men, and a great nomber of hpppes ebeganne
fo watreagapnit Ptolomp the kyng of Egppt
ji Sut Ptolompe was afrayed of hpm:and fied: F
E manye of bps people were wounded to Deathe.
Thus Antiochus wanne many fronge cities

m toke away qreat qood ont of the land of Ẹgipt
fimac.oc,-  XAndafter p Antpochugbadfmptrten E-
we gppt.beturneda apnetnthe.Crltii.peare,and
T ie Went Cowarde Jiraci, g cane vp to Jerufalem
as wpthampabty people: tentred proudly into p
a Hanctuarp, ¢ tole awap thegoldenaulter,the
1 candelftpcke and all the oznamentes therof the
table of the herwbzead, the powzpng velet, the

| chargers, the golden Cpones,the vapl.thecrow
AN nes;andp golden apparel ofthe temple,z bzake

R a . downeal. Ie toke allo the {iluer and gold, pze
es: _ Cpaus Zewels andthe fecret trealurs be Fou
Audwmben be bad taken awap altogether, cau-

fev a great muctber of men,¢fo fulfilled bis ma

Ipcpous pzpde, be Departed into bis owne lande

D ‘Thus there arale greate beupnefle mpre
ft.ega.b.a, CP ÉNALEDE land of JiraelxTpepzpneess theel
bers ofthepeople mourned, the pong mengthe
mapdeng Were defpled, and the fapzebewtte of


«Sol Lit


Wemnen Was chaunged:thebspdegromeand the
bzpde tobe themto mourning. eline thote
that dwelte therin, was moned:fo2 al the boufe
of Jacob wag broughte to confulyon.

* After two peares the kynge fentehys
chefe trealurer into the cptpes of zuda, whpche
came fo Jerufalem wyth agveatemultytude of
people, fpeakpna peacpable wordes unto them

ut all was dpiceate : Foz when thep bad etter
bym credence; be fell fodenip bponthecptp and
Emote itfooze and deltroped much people of Ff-
raell.x And when he bad «tha tbecptie helet i actin
fyzeontt,cattyna dowone oules and Walles on
euerp {pde. Che wemen and thep2 childzentoke
they captpue and ied awape thep? catell.Tpen
buplded thep thecptpe of Daupd wpthaqreate
and thpcke wall,and wpth mpabtye towares,
and madeit a fronge holdefo: them.Belpdeal
thps,tbep fet wpeked people and vngodlp men
to kepe tt, foared ttwyth Weapens and vptap=
les:gatbered the qoodes of erulalem and lates
tbem bp there:thus became tt atbenpthe caftel.

And thus was doneto lape Wapte for the
people that wente into the Danctuarp, and foz
rhectueldettruccpon of Jirael. Thusthep then
innocente bloude oneuerp{pde of the Sanctua
rpc.and defpled it: Anfomuchep the cptespns
were fapne to Departe,and the eyepe became an
babptacpon of fraungers,bepnadelolat of ber
owne leede, foz ber ovone natiues were fapneto
leaue ber.x per Hanctuaryp was cleanewalted trobp.tt,
ber bolpdapes were turned into mournpng, ber amo. vite
Dabbothes were bad in bpzplpon, and ber bo-
noure brought, tonauabte. Looke howe great
ber qlozpe was afoze fo greate Was Hercon fu-

(pon and ber Jope turned intel ouwe:
xAntiochusg alfo the kpng tent out acom €
mpflpon vntoallbyskpngedome, that all the "mac.bia

people (huldebe one. Chen they lefte euerp ima

pslawe,and al thedeatben agreed to the com

matindement of kpnae Bntpockus: Pee, manp

of the Z{raclptes contented therebnto offerpng
unto Jools, and defplyng the Saboth. othe
bpnge Antpochus lent bys mefeaungerg with
bps commpfiyon wnto Fer ufalem,andtoall the
cytpes of Zuda:that thep hulde folowe thela-
wes of theieathenandfozrbad ether burnteo’
ferpnge,meatofterpng:o2 peace offerpngeto be
made tn thetemple of God, ¢ that there Hulde
no Dabboth noz hye fealk dap bekeve: but com
maundedehat the Sanctuary andthe polp peo:
ple of Ffrael hulde be defiled. decommaunded
alfo that there Guldebe fet vp other aulters,£é
pies,and Jdols:to offer bpfwpnes fletbe,ande
ther Ducleane beatfes, p men Mulde leane thep2
chpldzen bnepzcumfpied, to befple thep2foules
witb al manes Poalen al tabhompnacions
P thep mpabte forget the lawe,andcbaunge all
the bolpe oedpnaunces of God: and that whofe
cuer wolde not De accozdpngeto the commauns
dement of kpng Antiochus:duldefuffer death
Jnlpke maner commaunded pe thorowont all
bisrealme,g fet culers oner the people, foto co
pellthem todo thelethpnges, commaundpnge
thecptpesof Juda todo faccpfpce vnto Fools.
Gag mii Then


i: mart. As


tofheendes of the waozlde,and gettpngemanve
tpoples ofthe people:tn fo much thatthe world

Pode in Greate awe of bpm, +t therfore was he
poudein bys berte. Nowe when he had qathe-

| red a mpg htp trong bof, efubdaed the landeg
al and people wpth they? pepnces,to that they be-
: | | came trpbutarpes onto bpm:be fell fpcke. Bnd


| | «Sore Machabees _


| Favit.t,b,


whé be perceaued'p be mult nedes dpe, becalled

__ fo2 pis noble eftates (which bad bene bzougbte

Sam biia Dp with bim of childzen)xand parted bps kpna
| ne 09.3. Home amonce them, whple be was pet alpue.

| Do Aleranderrapaned.rit.yere andthendyed

‘Aftecbps death fell the kpugedome Ynto

bys papnees,and they optapned it enerpe one in

bys rowme and canfed them feluesto be crow.


‘hed as bpnges: andfodpotbhepechplazen after


tbem manp peareg and much wickednes increa
feb tn the wozlde. Dute of thefecame the ungra
_,, POUSs rote noble Antiochus the fomie of Antp-
| ‘mardi ochus the kpnge(-xiwhych had bene a pledge at
|" Romejand he rapgned inthe . C. andfeuen and

K tDztpe pearc of the emppze ofthe Grekes.
Sn thole dapes wente there out of Frael
| Wrecked men, whieh moned muche people wpth
- pebg,a, thepeconnfaell fapinge: * Let Ys goand make
i a conenannt withthe Heathen, thatarerounde
zer. puig e About- DS: for fence we Departed from them we
baue bad much fozowe. Sothys deupee pleated
' them wel and certapne of the people toke pon
them fo2te go vnto the kynge,whpch raue thé
lpcence to bo after the ozdinaunce of thebeathe
i.oga. tiie * Then fet they vp an open fcole(atFernfalem)
of the lawes of the Meathen,and werenomoare
cpacumcpfed:but fozlokethepolpe teftament, g
O taenga, EOPNED them Celues tothe Heathen, xand were
| _tleane fold to do mpichefe.o whe Antpochus
| beganne fobempabtye in bpakpngedome, be
bj Wwentabout to optapne the lande of Egypte al-
f ; - Cof bempabte baucthe dompnponoftwo real
ines, x Upon thps entred be into Egypt wptha


eae: ronge hot wth charettes elephantes, pozte .


men, and a great nomber of hpppes ebeganne
fo watreagapnit Ptolomp the kyng of Egppt
ji Sut Ptolompe was afrayed of hpm:and fied: F
E manye of bps people were wounded to Deathe.
Thus Antiochus wanne many fronge cities

m toke away qreat qood ont of the land of Ẹgipt
fimac.oc,-  XAndafter p Antpochugbadfmptrten E-
we gppt.beturneda apnetnthe.Crltii.peare,and
T ie Went Cowarde Jiraci, g cane vp to Jerufalem
as wpthampabty people: tentred proudly into p
a Hanctuarp, ¢ tole awap thegoldenaulter,the
1 candelftpcke and all the oznamentes therof the
table of the herwbzead, the powzpng velet, the

| chargers, the golden Cpones,the vapl.thecrow
AN nes;andp golden apparel ofthe temple,z bzake

R a . downeal. Ie toke allo the {iluer and gold, pze
es: _ Cpaus Zewels andthe fecret trealurs be Fou
Audwmben be bad taken awap altogether, cau-

fev a great muctber of men,¢fo fulfilled bis ma

Ipcpous pzpde, be Departed into bis owne lande

D ‘Thus there arale greate beupnefle mpre
ft.ega.b.a, CP ÉNALEDE land of JiraelxTpepzpneess theel
bers ofthepeople mourned, the pong mengthe
mapdeng Were defpled, and the fapzebewtte of


«Sol Lit


Wemnen Was chaunged:thebspdegromeand the
bzpde tobe themto mourning. eline thote
that dwelte therin, was moned:fo2 al the boufe
of Jacob wag broughte to confulyon.

* After two peares the kynge fentehys
chefe trealurer into the cptpes of zuda, whpche
came fo Jerufalem wyth agveatemultytude of
people, fpeakpna peacpable wordes unto them

ut all was dpiceate : Foz when thep bad etter
bym credence; be fell fodenip bponthecptp and
Emote itfooze and deltroped much people of Ff-
raell.x And when he bad «tha tbecptie helet i actin
fyzeontt,cattyna dowone oules and Walles on
euerp {pde. Che wemen and thep2 childzentoke
they captpue and ied awape thep? catell.Tpen
buplded thep thecptpe of Daupd wpthaqreate
and thpcke wall,and wpth mpabtye towares,
and madeit a fronge holdefo: them.Belpdeal
thps,tbep fet wpeked people and vngodlp men
to kepe tt, foared ttwyth Weapens and vptap=
les:gatbered the qoodes of erulalem and lates
tbem bp there:thus became tt atbenpthe caftel.

And thus was doneto lape Wapte for the
people that wente into the Danctuarp, and foz
rhectueldettruccpon of Jirael. Thusthep then
innocente bloude oneuerp{pde of the Sanctua
rpc.and defpled it: Anfomuchep the cptespns
were fapne to Departe,and the eyepe became an
babptacpon of fraungers,bepnadelolat of ber
owne leede, foz ber ovone natiues were fapneto
leaue ber.x per Hanctuaryp was cleanewalted trobp.tt,
ber bolpdapes were turned into mournpng, ber amo. vite
Dabbothes were bad in bpzplpon, and ber bo-
noure brought, tonauabte. Looke howe great
ber qlozpe was afoze fo greate Was Hercon fu-

(pon and ber Jope turned intel ouwe:
xAntiochusg alfo the kpng tent out acom €
mpflpon vntoallbyskpngedome, that all the "mac.bia

people (huldebe one. Chen they lefte euerp ima

pslawe,and al thedeatben agreed to the com

matindement of kpnae Bntpockus: Pee, manp

of the Z{raclptes contented therebnto offerpng
unto Jools, and defplyng the Saboth. othe
bpnge Antpochus lent bys mefeaungerg with
bps commpfiyon wnto Fer ufalem,andtoall the
cytpes of Zuda:that thep hulde folowe thela-
wes of theieathenandfozrbad ether burnteo’
ferpnge,meatofterpng:o2 peace offerpngeto be
made tn thetemple of God, ¢ that there Hulde
no Dabboth noz hye fealk dap bekeve: but com
maundedehat the Sanctuary andthe polp peo:
ple of Ffrael hulde be defiled. decommaunded
alfo that there Guldebe fet vp other aulters,£é
pies,and Jdols:to offer bpfwpnes fletbe,ande
ther Ducleane beatfes, p men Mulde leane thep2
chpldzen bnepzcumfpied, to befple thep2foules
witb al manes Poalen al tabhompnacions
P thep mpabte forget the lawe,andcbaunge all
the bolpe oedpnaunces of God: and that whofe
cuer wolde not De accozdpngeto the commauns
dement of kpng Antiochus:duldefuffer death
Jnlpke maner commaunded pe thorowont all
bisrealme,g fet culers oner the people, foto co
pellthem todo thelethpnges, commaundpnge
thecptpesof Juda todo faccpfpce vnto Fools.
Gag mii Then


i: mart. As


Zier.rrrbt


a D ‘ a
ees) ES
I k-


The fyrtte booke =


Then wentetbhe people bnto theHeathen
by beapes , forloke thelawe of the Lode, and
‘commptted muche euell inthelande: Bec,and
chaunged oute the lecretZlrarlpteg, wbhpch pad
bpd then Celueg incoznerg and pzpupe places.
She Epftene dape of the mooneth Caleu, inthe
Dundzedandfpue and foztpe peare,fet kpng an
tyochug anabbompnable Fdollofdefolacpovp
pontheaulter of God, andtbhep buploed alters
thozowoute all the Cptpes of Juba oneuerpe
(poe before the Doozes of the bouteg, and inthe

etes: where thep brent incenfe,and dpo factp

, fpce.x And ag foz the bokesof the law of God,
hep bzentetbemintbefpze, andrente them in
peces. Wibattoeuer be was that hada booke of
the elkamente ofthe Lozde founde by bpm,
yee, whofoeuer endeuoured bimlelfeto kepe the
lawe of the Lod, the kngescommaundemente
was,tbat they Huld put bpm todeath. Xud tho
roweppsauctorptethep erecuted thelethinges
euerp ooneth bpon the people of Flracl that


ia ww were founde inthe cptpes.


~ x Thefpueandtwentpe dape of the G)o-
neth, what tyme as thep dpt (actpfpcebpon the
aulter(whyche Moode inthe teade of the aulter
of the Lozde)accozdingetop commaundement
ofkpnge Antpocbus,thep put cerfapne women
to death, whpch bad cauted thepzchpldzen to be
cprcumlpd: Mot onlpe that, but thep banged vp
the chyldzen bp the neckes thozowoute al they?
boules, and flewe thecpzcumcpfers of them.

Pet were there manp of the people of 3fra
el,wobich Determapred intbem {elues, that thep
woalde not cate vneleane thpnges:but chote ra=
ther tofuffer death, then to bedefpled wpth vn
cleanemeates: So becaule thep woldenot brea


ke the bleed lawe of God, thep were cruellpe


flayne.Andtbpsqreatetpzannpe increated ves
rpefoze vponthe people of Zfraell.
ETbe.fi.chapter *
a Tbe mournpree of Qpatbathpas and bps (onnes Foz thebe:
truccponofthe bolp cptpe. xhep refule te botacrptpce bute 3
bola. Zbesele of PRathathiasfo: thelaweofGed. Bbhep are
(lapneand plot Epgbteagapre becaute ofthe Habboth bap
¢Hathathias bpinge commaunbeth bps fonnesta Epckhs bp the
tonde of od after the erample ofthe fathers.
mes cya 2 thore dapes there dpd flande bp
1 Egy one Dathathpasthe fonne of Jobn
Hai the fonne of Simeon the prealk( out
hd a oxy Of Che kpneed of Joarps trom Yeru-
em falem,and dwelte dpon the mounte
of Modin,and bad. v.fonnes, Jhon called God
bps, pineon called Thalp: Judas, otherwple
called Sachabeus:Elealer, otberwtfe called A
baron:and Jonathas whole fpzname was A p=
pus. Thefefawe the evel that was toneamong
the people of Juda and Jerufalem. And Wata
thpag fapde:@iools me alas that euer J was
bozne,tole this mplerp of my people,and the pe
teous Deftruccpon of the bolp cptp: and tbus to
{pt fo tpl, ft bepng Delpuered into the bandes of


+


|
w


ents the enempeg. xer sanctuary ig come into tbe


power of Fraungers:berCemple ts, ag if were
aman ý patbloft bps good name: er precpous
o¢namentes are carped awapecaptpue. Ber old
men are flapnein the liretes,and Der ponge men
are fallentbozowe the fwearde of the enempes.


_- WU bat people (8 tt,that bath not fome pof _
feffvon in per hpnqdomersD2 who bath not got
ten Comme of ber {poples: All ber giozp istaken
awape. She wasa free woman and nowe we
is become an bande mapde. 3
* Webolde oure Hanctuarpe,oure bewtpe
and bonoure is wafted awape, and defpled bp
Gentiles. What helpeth itvs then tolpueraAn
Watbatbtasrente pypsclothes,betbystinese
put fackecloth bpon them, mourned verp foze

—- Then came thementhpther whpche were
fente of kpnge Antpochus , tocompell fucheas
were fled into the cptpeof )odpn, fo: to do fa-
crpfpce,and to burnetncenfe onto Zdolles, and
to fozfakethelaw of God. o0,manp ofthe peo +
ple of Jfraellconfented and enclined Dnto them

ut ®athathias and his tonnes remapned hed
falte. Then {pake the commpHyoners ofkpnge
Antpochus,andfapd ynto athathias: Thou
arte a noble man,ofbpereputacion and greate
inthbyscptpe, baupnge fayze chpldzen and bye
thee. Come thon thercfoze fpztte,and ful€pl tpe
kpnges commaundemente,lpbe as all the Hea-
then bauedone,peeand the men of Juba, ¢ luch
asremapne at Jerulalem: fo Malt thou andtpp |
chplozen be inthe kpngres fauour andenrpched
wyth gold, fpluer and greaterewardes.

Wathathiagsanfwered and ipae wptha

loude vopce.Thoughalnaciong ooep thekpng
Antiochus, ¢ fall awap euerp ma frombeppng
the lawe of thep: fatbers:thougbe thp con lente
tobpscommaundementes, pet wpll FJ andmp
fonnes ¢ bzethzen,not fall fromthe lawe of our
fathers. God fozbpd we Mulde , that werenot
good fez psxthat we Mulde fozlake thelawe € girs...
o2dpnaunces of God,and to agre vntothecom |


-maundemente of kyngeAntpocbus. Therefore


we typlidonoluchelacrpfpce , nepther breake
the tatutesof ourelawextogoo another Wap Prou.tiie
And when be bad (poken thele wordes, there ca
me one of the Fewes, which openly intbefpabe
ofall,ppdfacrpfpce brito the Fdolles Dpon the
aulter inthecptpe of G)odpn,accozdpng tothe
kpnges commaundemente.
When Mathathiaslawe thyps,ttqrened
bpm at the berte,Co that bps rapnes Woke with C
all and bps wath bpndled fo: very seale ofthe -
lawe.Wipth f be Tarte vp, and billed the gewe
befpdethe alter:Dee,and Newe the bpnges com
mpflponer,that compelicd bym todo facrpfpce, .
and deffroped the aulter at the fame tyme: fuch >
azcalebadbe vntothelaweof God + Lphe ag 24.1F0.de
Pbinehesdyd vntosambep the fonne of Dalo-
mp. And Bathathias crped wpth alombevop
cetho2zowe thecptpe fapinge. Caibolo is feruent
inthbelawe, and wpll kepe the coucnaunte,let
bpm folowe me.* So beand bps fonnes fled in timar b.t,
tothe mountapnes, andlefte all tbat ener thep
bad in thecptpe. Danpeother godlpe men alla
Departed into the wplbdernefle wpth thep2 hpl-
dren, thep2 wpues and thep2 cafell,and remap-
ned tpere:fo: the tpzannp increaledfozevpo the

Mowe when the kpngesfernauntes, and
theboct, whpch was at Jerufalem inthe cptpe
of Daupd parde ý certapne men pad we ro

nge


—


k


iag


ae
7


- —_
=


-a


- Bow iiit


 Oitpe Machabees,


kpngescommaundement and were gone thep
wape tothe wpldernes into fecret placeg and
tbere were many departed after them:thep folo
Wed bpon them, tofpght agapnite them onthe
sabboth dap g fapde wplpe pet rebel’ Get pou
bence and do the commaundement of kpnge Att
tvocbus,t pe pal lpue. Thep aunlwered:+ Wie
wll not qofozth nether wpl wedothekynaes


*olue.t.e


commatundement,tobefplethe Dabbothdape. -


‘Chen beganne thep to fyaghte agapnite them,
neuerthelefle, thep gaue themnone otber aunt:
were, nepther calte they one Fone at them, noz
made falte thep2 preup placeg, but fapd:twoe wl


dpe all in our innocencp, beauenandearth all f


‘ tetette with vs, that pe put vs to Death wrong
fully. Thus thep fought agapné them vpo the
fabboth,* fewe both men  cattel,thep2 wyues
$ thete childzë to the ndbze of atboulade people.

Cen Dathatbias and bys frendes bearde
tbys, tbep mourned foz them rpgbht fore efapde
anctoanotber : Jf fo bep we alldoas our bze-
thzen baue Done,and fight not fo? ourlpues and
Foz out lawes agapnit the betben, then (haltbep
the foner rote Yg out of the earth.’ So they con-
cluded sinong them felues at the fame time:fap
eng, what foeuer be bethat cometh tomate bat
faple with bs bpon the Sabboth dap, we wyll
fygbt agapntte bpt and not dpe all, as our bze-
tpzen that were murthered fo bapnoufly. Upon
this came the Sinagoge of ns Jewes vntothe
ronge men of Ffrael, all Cache ag were Fernent
inthe lawe. Bnd all thep that were fled foz pers
Tecucpon, came to belpe them, andtoftandebp
them: Jn lomuche that thep gathered an bott of
men and flue the wycked Doers inthep2 gelonfp
andthe yngodlp men in thep2 watb. Dome of
the wicked fied vuto the heathen, and efcaped.

_ Tbug Dathathias and bis frendes went a
boute and déleroped paulters, andcircumcifen
tbe chpld2en, that bad not pet recpued circumct=


Sol lit
fage.*Daupd alfo in bis merciful kpndnes op: heer tG.0
fapned the troneof an euetlaltpnge kpnadome.

+ Elias bepng geleous and feruent inthe lawr,

Was taken Yp into beauen. Pananiag, Alariag tit.revt c
and &)ifael remapned edfatt in fapthe,g were Pameto
delpuered out of the fpze. Fn lyke manet xDa- Danite.bie
ntel bepng vngpltie, was faued fromthe mouth

of the Lyons.

And thus pe mape conlpdze thorowout all
agesipna the worlde began, xp whofoeucr put wedse.rt,b
thep2 trutin God, were not ouercome. x Scare Bath, F.d,
not pethen the wozdes ofan vngodlp mant 402 +erar si.0
bis glozp is but donge and wozmes:to dap ig be Pali,

et Dp, to mozowe ig be qone : foz bets turned Hacab. i.b,
into earth and bismemozial ig come to nougbe. eel rst b
Wiberfoze,( D mp fonncs take good pertes yn POF
topou, and quite pour felueglpkemen inp lawe
fo? pE pe do the thpnges that are commaunded
pou inthe latwe of the Lozde pour God, pethall
obfapne eate honour therin.

And beholde , J knowe that pour brother
Spmon tg aman of wpfenome : fe that pegpue
eare Unto bymalwape, be Halbe a father brito
pou. gfo: Judas Machabeng, be bathe eier
bene mpgbtp ¢ ftronge fré bis pouth vp:let hini
be pour captapne, ¢ ordze the battaple of ŷ peo-
ple:thus pall pe bypng vnto pou all thote? fa-
uour thelawe, ele that pe auenge the wrong of
pour people and recompence the beptben agcapn
and applye pour felues whole to the commatins-
dement of thelawe. Sohe caue the bis blefing
and was lapde bp bps fathers : and dped inthe
Hundzeth.rl vt pereat Modin, where bys fines
burped bpm in bps fathers Cepulchze,and all Ji-
raelmade greate lamentacion fo} bpm.

| The.iti. Chapter.: ;
Judas ie made ruler oner the Fetes. Be killeth Appolonpuse
Srronthe pipnes of Sitia The contpben:e of Jubas toward


ob. Judas determpnech to ght egapnit 1 ifias.tobom anti
othus bab mad captapn ouer bis boRDhe prater of} abtainerg


ane Hey Habe be Judag Sacbabeusin y


fion:as many as thep founde within thecoattes Paces (me bis fathers {tede,and al bis breth2¢ Fotu. biti,
of ¥lcael:and folowed mi telp bpd thechiloié pars D gee Delped bom and [o dpd all thep that irsri.riuan
of prpde,and this acte pzofpered intbepzbades: Keren D> Helbe wpth bps father and fought
Sn fo muche, thattbepkeptetbelaweagapnite eons aoa Olt cherefulnes foz Flrael. So gu


the poter of the Gentples andthekpngrs : and
gaue not ouer their domini onto wicked doers
After this, whé the tyme due on fall, that
Pathathias wule dpe,helayd nto his (ones:
FLO We is p2pde and perfecucion increated,nowe
isthe tpmeofdeltruccion and wiatbful bdifplea=
Cure : wherfo2ze (D mp fonnes) bepeferuentein
the lawe and teoparde pourlpues forthe Tefta
ment of the fathers, cal toremembzaunce what
actes our fatbers bpd inthepz tyme lo thal pere
cepue greate Ponourand aneucrlaftpng name.
* Remembze Abzapam, was not be founde
Sen, Fri. à fapthfull in temptacion.¢ it wasreckened unto
See pid cDPm for rpgbteoulnes ¢+ Jofeph intpme of bys
taen.pui.e trouble keptetbe cOmaundemét, was made a
Hu.crotie L0 of Cgppte. x Whinebes our father was fo
@ccle-Fib-€ Fernent foz tbe honour of God, that beoptapned
puro DE Couenait of an euerlattpny prethode. 47o-
Joues, e {ua fo? falfplipng the wozde of God, was made
the captapne of Flrael. + Caleb bare reco2de
Hu, Hite befoze thecongreqacpon and receptied an berp-


Fam. ii.p.


das gat his people greate honour. eputona
beefiplate as a Gpaunte, and araped bpm felfe
wyth bys barnelfe , and defended the Hooke
withbpstwearde. Inbpsactes be was lphea
Lpon,¢ aga Lpons whelperoarpng at bis pzap Blalws.ci.b
xDe Was an enemie tothe wycked, and hunted tma- tiia
thé out:*andbzent vpthole tbat vered bis peo-
ple: So that bys encmpes fled fo2 feare of ppm,
and alltbe wozkers of yngodipnes were putto
trouble :fucheluckeand profperitie was inhps
bande. This greueddpuerskpnges, but Jacob
was greatlp retopled thozowe bis actes,and he
gatbpmfelfeagreatnamefozeucr. `

He went thorowe the cities of Juda, deltrop-
eng the vngodlp out of them, turning away the
wrath from Jlrael, and recepuing {uch as were
oppzefled:and the fameof him went ynto the vt


_ termo parte of the carth. Chen Appolonine(a


pepnee of Sp2ia) gathered ampabty agreat pork
of the bepthen,and out of Samaria,to fyabe a:
garn Fracl.celpich whe Judas perceyu eb, be

| Ogg b went


Tyr itive voaoke


bym and agreat multitude with dpm, the rem-

naunt fled.and be toke thep2 (ubftaunce. Judas

allo toke Appolloning omnelwearde,¢ fought
witbitallbpsipfelonge. = .

Nowe whe Hevon(anotherpzince of Spia)

18 berde Lape, that Judas had gathered vnto bym

the congreqacion andcburche of the fapthful, be

fapde:¥ wpll get mea name ga praple thozow-

out the realme:foz 3J wpll gofpabt with Judas

and thé tbat are wptb bim,as many as baue de=

Copied the hpngescOmanndement.Sobe made

bimreadp, and there wente wpth bpma geeate

mpabep book of the bngodly, to Fandebp him,

etobe auenged ofthe childze of Flracl Andwhe

thep came np vuto Betho: judas went forth

agapnit them with afmalcompany. And when

pis people fawe luche a great Poo befozethem

they Capdeto Judas : Howe are we able(bepng

fo fewe)to fpabt agapnite fo great a multitude

and fo ftronge, fepna webelo werp, and patie

fated alltbpsdapes

- But Judas fapde: Ft is afmall matter foz

.te.riid.a. manp to be ouercome with fewe:pea,thereis no

difference tothe Godof beauen, to delpuer bpa

' great multitude oz bp a final companyp:*fozthe

{i,p8,TF0. Yictorp of the battaple Fandeth not in themul-

titude of the bot, but the Erength cometh from

beauen.Webolde, thep come agapnt bs wptha

p2efumtionfe and pzoude multitude,to deftrope

bs our wpues gour chyldzen, and torebbe vs.

Wut we wypll fpgbt foz ourlpues, ¢ our lawes,

and tbe Lozde ppm felfe Hall deftrope them be-

€ fozeourface:therfozebenot pe afrapdcof them.

Asfoone as he had lpoken thele wordes, he

leapte fodapnip vponthem. Thus was Stron

fmptten,and bis boot put to fipgbt.and Judas

folowed bpon them beponde Wethozon vito

the plapne felde : wopere there were flapne epght

punozed men of them , andthe relpdue fed into

the lande of the hiliffines. Chenalltbe Pea-

| then cneuerp (poe were afrapde of Judas and

| : bis baetbzen:fo that the rumour of Pimcame bn

| totbekpnaes cares. fo2 allthe Gentplescoulde
tellofthe warteg of judas. =

So when kpnge Antiochus beardethele tp-

| D dpnges, be was angry in his mpnve: whetfo2 he

` fente forth, e qatbered an boot of his whole re-

i alme, verp rong armies:¢ opened hig treafurp

| and qaue his boota peares wages in bande,co-
| maundpng themtobereabdp at alltpmes. —

 -Peuerthelefle, when befawe,that there was

| not monep pnoughinbis trealurpes.and ý tho-

rowe thedilcorde g perfecucion, whpch be made

| inthelande(to put Downe f lawes ý had bene of

i oldetpmes bis cuffomes g tributes of thelande

| were minithed: be feared p he was not Dable foz

| to beare thecoftes ¢charges any longer, no? to

| baue luche qpfteg to gpueloliberallp ag beapd

‘Dis | afoze,mozethentbekpnges p were before bpm.

| | CU berefoze, be was heup inbpsmpnoe, and

| ss toughtxto qo into Perlldes,to2 to take tribu-

| ‘.mac.oi.a te of theland, efoto gather muche monep. So

helefte Lpfias(a noble man of p kpnges bloud)

toonerfep&ynges bulpneffes from the water

Eupbhates ynto the boers of Egppte:andto


kepe wel hig tine Antiochus, tpl became agapn
WPor2ecouert,be qaue him palfe of bis hoott and

Elephantes,comptted vnto Pim euerp thpng of

bpsmpnbde, concernpngetbhole whpcbedipell in €

Judaand Ferulalem:that be Huld fende out an

army agapnil them,to def rope and rote out the

power of 4frael and theremnaunt of Jerulale:

to put out their memorial from that place, to fet

frauncers fo2 toenbabpte all thep2 quarters,

and parte thep2lande amonge them: Thug the

kpnge toke the other parte of thex hoof, and de-

parted fro Anti i (acptie of bis realme) ouer Fotcb.ca.r

the water of Euphrates,intbebundzede.rivii. 2°

pere and went thozowe the bpgbecountrpes. i

xAnd Lpliaschole bnto bpm Ptolomte the

fon of Doziminns, Picano2 and Gorgias MIAD i ma.ttitd

tpe men and the kpnaes frendes. hele be lent

wyth fortve thoufande Foote men, ¢feuen thou:

fande bozlemen,fo2to qo (nto thelanbeofguda

and to dDeftrope (tas thekpngecommaunded.

So thep wente forth wopth althep2 power, ard |

came to Emaus into the plapne feid. pen the i

warchauntes barde the rumoure of them,tbep, f

and thep2feruauntes,toke verpe muchelpluer, j

and golde forto by thecbplozenof Ffrael to be

‘thp2 bond men: Theretame onto them alfopet

mo men of warre on enerpe{pde,outof Sp2pa

g fromtbe bplppnes.

Mowe when Judas and bps brethren +
faw that trouble increated and that the Poof
Drewenpe wito fhep2 Borders conlpdapnge the
apuges wo2des woppchebe commaunded Vn =
tothe people-:namelpe thatthep Hulde btterlp
walt and Deftrope them: hep fapde one toana 4
ther: Let vs redzefle the Becape of our people, let
vs fpabte foz ure folkeaudfo2oure Sanctua
rpe. Then thecongreqacpon werefoonereadype
gathered to fpabt,topzape and tomakelupplp
cacpon bute God fo2zmercye and grace.

) * As for Zerulatem,it lape vopdeand , __,. |
wasasithadbenearopidernelle., There wente M
noman in O2 out atit andthe Sanctuarp wasg
frobendowne. Che aleauntes kepte thecatal,
there was the babptacpon of the Heathen. Che


ors ]


path of Jacob was taken awap,the pppe and


the harpe was gone fromamongethem .

= phe Flraelptes qatheredt em together € gy

came to alpha befozeZerufalem:fo2 in Dal |

pha was the placexwheretbep prayed afore tp |

mein Fltacl.o thep faled that dape and put ireg.o ib |
f
!


fackeclothas bpon them , and caffe apes vpon

thep2 beadeg rente thbepzclotheg,glapde forthe

the booties of thelawe(whereoute the Heathen

fought the lpkenes of thep2 pmages)¢ brought

the preaftes oznamentes, the fp2ftlpnages and nan
tithes. Thep tet ther alfopxabfapners(whicl |
badfulfplled thep2 dapes before God,andcrp: seum.vi. b


‘ed wpthaloude opce,towarde beauen,laping


What Hal we do wrth theferand tobetber i
thallwe carpe thbemawape? Fo: thp Sanc- i
tuarp ig troden dowone and defiled, thy preaftes
are cometo beupnefie and dpthonoure:.and be- l
bolde, the Heathen arecome together fo2 tode- G
{tropeds. Thou knoweft whatthprecstbep |
Pmagpneagapnite bs-Howemap weltandDbe ———— %)

fore them |


- of the Machabees, Sol. [titi
Fore them,erceptethou(sDGod)beourehelper So Judas turned agapne Wt hps hook and
- - Thep blewe outethetrompet alfo wytba [apde vntothe people: Se not grr of the fpoy
erroia LOWDe voce. Then Judas osdepned <captap= leg wwe bauepeta battapleto pabt,fo2 Gorgp
nes ouet the people-oner thoufandes,ouerhun= ase bps bot are bere bp vsin tbe mountapnes
| but tande pefatt agqapnt pour enempes gouer
a3 Duploed them houfes,marped wpues, plan: comethem ‘Ebert map pe faflp tate the [poples
ted tbem bpdepardes,and thole that were fear- As Judas was {peakpn gethelewo2des C
ful:pecommaunded them euecp ma to qo bome beholde, there appered one parte of them spon
tds i agapne,accozdingextathelawe.HDothe botre themount. Sut when Gorqpas {awe that they
Poe moued,€ pptched Y Otbhelouth{pdeofEmans: of bps partye were fled, and the tentes brent vp
___ And Judas lapde:Armepourefelues, be ( for bp thetmoke they mpabtwnderftand what
ffrong( D mp childzen)make pou redpagapn— was done)thep petceaupnge thps, were terpe
fomozowe in themoznpna.that pe mapefpahe fo2cafcapde:and when thep fawe allo that Ju-
wpththele people ,whpch are agreed together Dasandbys Poolte were in tbe Felde readpeto
| todcitrope bs and our Sanctuary. Better is it rpk battaple,thep fed cuerychone intotbhela:
|i uaa foz Ys todpeinbattaple, thentofe ourepeopie DdDeok the Heathen. EY
i a a, EOut Sanctuary in lucha mplerablecale:x se So Judas turned agapne to fpoplethe ten
) nertbelcNe as thp wopll is beauen,fopeit, tes wobecethp gat muchegolde and fpluer, pze-
7 Deft. Chapter. cpous ones, purple and greate rpchefle. Thus
Iudas gorth agapnite orgias whpch Ipeth in wapt thep wente bome anù fonge a falme of thane: )
 kelgeupng and prapfed God in beanen:*foz be pth
is {tacpous,and bps mercpe endnrethe Foz euer 2"
And fo Fraell had a greate vpctorpe inp daye.
NRoweall the Heathen that elcaped, came
and tolde Lpfias cuerpe thynge ag it happened
! Wi berfoze Lpliag was Core afraped, € qrened
SEA AS} Pe, i | inbpsmpnd,becauie Firal bad not gottentuch
ea. enpe. Rowethbementhatkept mplfeztune,ag he woldethep Muld, nevtberas
the caffell, were the conuepers of them. Chena tbekpnge commannded. Che nerte veare folo-
rofe Judas to linpeethe chefe andp2pncppallof wpnge gathered Lplpas threlcoze thoulande
the kpnges Doofte at Emmaus, fo2the atmpe chofenmen of foote, and fpue thoufande bozfe-
4 Wasnot pet come together. Inthemeaneleald mento fpgbte agapnite them.
_ came Sorgpasby npgbte into Judastentes:¢ — Sothep came into Jew.p.andpptchedthep2 D
| when be founde no man there , befoughte tbem tentes at Wetho2on, wher Judas came againt


ee S
©
in
TẸ
E
To
wm
=i
as
La
=:
=
=
=)
=
cr
=]
—
Li
"=
=
ro
m
=
=
=
e
2
“in
5


inthe S)ountapnes., and thoughte thep bad them wptbtentbonfandemen. And wherbe
‘ben fled awape, becaufe of bpm. Dut whenit fawelogreateand mpabtpe an boote, pe made
was dape, Judas ewed dpm felfe inthe felde bps pzaper and lapde: I effed bethou( D laup
í ia wpth the thoulande men onelpe wbpebbadne oure of fraell) x wbyehe deddefte deftrope t € tre.rbit.c;
E ` ther berneffe no2fweardes to thepzmpndeg . polente powere ofthe Gpaunte, inthe ban e
Hut ontheother {pde,thep lawe that the of thp feruaunte Daupd and vanel the book frerritit,b
sentir pe & ti and wel barneffed anda ofthe Ipeathenintotbebande o Jonathag(the
t) } aboute them, and alltpele well fonne of Saull) and of pps weapon bearer.
erperte in feates of warre . Then lapde Judas put thys bootk nowe into the bande of thp
to themen that were wptb bpm:seare pe not p people of Firael,andlet them be confounded, tn
. multptude of them, be not afrapde of thep2 vpo thep2 multptude and boalemen. ake them a-
lenterunnpnge:remember., powe oure fathers frayed, and dplcomfozte the boldneffe of thep2
ero riitt Were delpuccedsxinthered lee, when Whargo fo firength that thep map bemoued thozow there
lowed bpon them wpth a great boofte. | beftruccion. Cat them Downe thozot the {ter
Cuen folet vsallocrynowe towardehea de of tbp louers, then (hall all thep that knowe
nen: and the Lorde pall bauemercy pon ds, thp name,peapte the fopth thankefqpupnae.
remember the conenaunte of oure fathers: pea, Do thep Croke the battaple and there wer
E Deltope thys bolt befoze poureface thpsdape flapne of Lpfpas boote, fpue thoulande men.
And al the deathen (halknowe,thatitisGod Then Littas feing the difcomfpting of big men
bom Celfe, whych delpuereth and faucth Ffraell and the manlineffe of the Jewes, bow they there
3 Chenthe Heathenlpfte vpthepzepes: and teadp, eptber tolpucoz dpelvke men: Pe went
when thep fawe that thep Werecommpnge az nto Antioch,andchofe out menof wWarre:that
» gapnite them, thep wente oute ofthep2 tented toben thep were gathered to cether,thep miahe
i into the battaple :and they that were wpth Ju come agapne into Fewny. Thenlapd Judas g
iega bid dag blewe up the trompettes. x0 they buck- bps bzethen bebolde, oure enempes are dpicom-
led together, and the igeathé wWeredpicomfpted fited: Lee ys now go bp, to clenfeandtorepare E
end fed ouer the plapne felde:but tbebpnmofte the Santuarpe. ,
ofthem were flapne . f€o2thep folowed bpon  *Uponthys, all the boot gathered themes w.eganpa
them buto Aflaremoth, and intothefeldegofy ther and went vp into mounte Spon.
dDumea fowarde Asot and Janta: Cothatthere Powe when thep lawe the Sanctuarpe layed
Were fapne of them vponathetboufande men nnn eee na ore E H
Hubbe


The fyz boke of


Hubbes growpnge in the courted, lpkeagina
woode o? bpon mountapnes: pea, and that the
preattes Ceiles were bzoken Downe: Thep rent
thep2 clothes, mabe great lamentation, catte af-
Wes Dpon thep2 beedes,fell Downe flatteto the
grounde, madeagreate nople wpth the trom:
pettes,andcrped towarde beauen.

Then Judas appopntedcectapne mento
fpabte agapnitt thole whpcb were inthecafell
tplithbep badclenfed the Sanctuarpe. )
chofe preaftes that were vndefpled, luchag bad
pleatuce inthe lawe of God: and thepclenfed f
Sanctuarpe: and bare outethedefpled tones
into an Dncleane place. And foz fo muche as the
aulter of burnteotitpnges was Dnpalowed, be
tooke aduplemente, tobat be mpabe dowypthall
fo be tbougbte it wag bet to deftrope it(lefte it
Mulde bappen to de themany (hame)fo2ztbe be
atben þad defpled it, and therefoze thy brake it
bowne. As forthe ones, they layed them bp
yponthemountapne bp the poufein aconue =
npente place-tpl there came a proppet,to hewe

fe What Hulde be done wpth them.
TOD.TF.D. *Dothep tooke whole toneg accozdpnge
Jota onig CO CDE lawe, and buplded anew aulter fuch one
`  agwag befoze, and made dpthe Sanctuarpe
wptbhinand wpthoute, and balowedthe boule
anbdfhecourtes. Thepmadencweomamen
teg and broughtc the candelfticke,the auiter cl
incence,and the table intotbetemple. Whe in=
cence laped thep bpon the aulter,and Ipgbted p
lampes whpch were bpon the candelftpek, tbat
tbep mpgbteburneintpetemple. Chey Cetthe
dhewebzead bpon the€able, andbanged vp the
ti.egacg.e DVle and fet vp the fthple,astt was afore . +
4nd vpon the fpue and tthentpe dape of the
npathe moneti, wbpcbe (scalled the monetbof
Caflue, tn the bundzed and epabtes fo2tp peare
tbep role bp bp tpmes iu the moznpna fo: todo
facrpfpce(accozdpng top lawe) vpon the newe
burnteoferpnae aulter that De bear made:af-


ter the time and fealonthat the Heathen had de
Fpledit. Chelamedape was itict vp agapne,
 wpthfonges, pypes.barpes,andcpmbales

G And all tpe people fel vps thepz faces, woz
fbyppynge and thanckpnge the God of beauen
‘t.pa.vi.p, WDICde Dad geuen them the vpctogp.x So thep
Bepte tbe Dedbpcacpon of the alter epabtedapes
offerpnge burnte factpfpces and thanckeofe-
tynges wth glabnefle. Thep decte the temple

alto with crowones and thpldes of golde and ba
lowed thepoztes and celles and banged do oeg
bponthem. hus there was verpe greate glad


neffe amonge the people,becauletheblafpbemp f


of the Heathen was put wape. So Judas and

` bps bretbaenwprb te wholecongrgacpone

+zebnr e Taek oibepned xt at thetpme ofdedpcacron

of the aulter thuldebe kepteinbps feafon from

peare topeare,bp the {pace of epabte dapes.fri

the fpue and twentp dape of the moneth Callen
wpthmprtbeandgladneffe. —

«a: Andatthelametymebuploedthep vp the
mounte Spon wpth bpe walles and ftrongete
wers round about-left theGentples uld come
and treade it dowone ag they dpd afoze. There-


Hobe , mat


Foze Judas fet men of warre in it,tokepe it and
made tt fronge,foz to defendexWeblura: $ the ima, on d.¢
people might bauea refuge againft f edomites
q Judas cee vd aa that go abouttobefraop
*fraellzand is bolpen ofbpsbrethzen Spmonand Jons
thas.Beouerthzoteeththe cptpe of phzon becaurethep
benped bpm palage thozote if.


"E ‘fed them verp loze, wherefore thep
thoughte todeftrope the qeneracpon of Jacob
that was amonge them: Jnfomuche that thep
beganue toflap and to perfecute Hiat 4 ofthe-
people. * Then Judas foughteagapnlt thechpl Bee. rrb.c
b2€ of Elau in Foumea,e agapni thole wbpch ant-rrro.s
were at Arabathane( foz they dwelterounde a= #-macdy,c
bout the Firaclptes) where pe flew and (popled
agrteatemultptudeotthem. Hetboughte alfa
bpon the malice and onfapthfulneffe of thechpl
Dzen of Wean, howe they were a finare ta opp
Dato the people, howe thep lapd wapte fo2 thé
in the bpe wap. W berfoze be putte bp them in-
totowereg, Ecame Vntothem, delkropedthem
vtterlpe aud burnte bp thep2 towers, wpthall
that were intbem.
Afterwarde, wente be agapnfte the chpl-

den of Ammon, whereof be founde ampabtpe
power anda greate multptude of people, wpth
‘Tpmothp thep2 captapne. Do be roke manpe
battaples wpthtbem , whpcbe were deftroped
befoyebpm. And whenbe bad flapne them, pe
wanne Gazer the cptp, wopth the townes belon
gen etbherto , @ lo turned agapne into Jewzpe

Tbe Heathen allo in Galaad qatberedthemta
Getheragapnite the Ziraeclpteg $ were in thepz
quarters, to flay them:but tbep fled to the caltel
of Datheman and fenteletters to Judas e bps
bzethzen fapinge: Che Heathen are gathered a
gapnite bs on euerp {pde,to deftrope bs, ¢ now
thep make them readpe for tocome,¢ lape feere
totbhecaftell,wherebnto we are fled, ¢ pmo:
thpe is captapne of they beofte:come therefore
and Delpuer bs oute of thepz pandes:foz there is
a Greate multptude of bs flapne alredpe. Deas
ourebzetbzen that were at Cubpn,are Napne «
Deftroped(wellnpe athoufande men)andthep2
wpues,thepschpldzen:, and thep2 goodes haue
theenempes ledDawape captpue.


#


Uilpple thefe letters were pet aredpnge, © ar


bebolde, there came other meflengers from Ga
Iple wpth renteclothes:wbpche toldeeuen the
ame tpopnges,andfapde: that thep of @tclos
maps, of Cp2us and of Spdon were gathered
pe lain nr ove IATA Lo

Pto ecwempes to Deltrope Flracll. n Ju- e

bagand the people bearde thys,thep came toge: "n"
tber(agreat congregacton)to deuile, what thep
mpgbte dofo: thep2 bzetþren, tbat werein tro
ble and befeeged of thepz enempes. And jubags
fapde vnto Spmon bys brotber:chole the oute
certapne men, qo Delpuer thp brethaenin@a-
lplee: Jafo: me and mp brother Jonathas, we
wpll go into Galaadptppm. So a peri
pbhustbe


of the Machabees,


phug thefonne ofsacharpe; and Asarpastobe ansto belpe them, «bauepytched they tétes be


Captapnes of the people , andto kepetherem-
naunte of the boofte in Jewrpe,and commaun=
Dedthemlapinge: Cake the ouerlpabte of this
people,andlethat pe make no warre agapnite
the Heathen, vntpll tbetypme wecome agapne
And vnto Spmeon he gaue thre thoulande më
fo: to go ints Galple, but Judas bymlelef had


Fonde the water and are redp to come ¢ fpgbte
agapnit ibe. DoJudas wente onto mete them.
And Tpmothp fapde vnto the captapnes
of bps boofte:wohen Fudag and bys hoottecome
npe the rpuer:pf pe go oner fpzite, we fpall not
be able to wpthitande pym, foz why: de wyll be
to tronge foz vs. But pf he dare not come ouer


epgbtetboufandetn Galaadptbym. ~ fo that bepptche bys tente beponde the water :


Cc  CChenwent Spmeoninto Galvle, g froke


bpuers battaples withthe Heathen: whome be
dplcomfpted and folowed bpon them wnto the
pozteof Ptalomays. And there were flapne of
the Heathen almootke thzethoufandemen. So
be tobe the {poples of them, andcaryed awape
the Flraelites that were in Galileand Arbatis
wWptbh thep2 wpues, thepz chpldzen, and all tbat


` tbep gad, and bought them into Jeyw2p wpth


great gladnefle. Judas Bachabcus alfo and
bps brother Jonathas wenteoucr Jordan, and
frauapled.ttt.Dapes iournep inthe wplderneffe:
Wiberethe Nebuthpes met them, and receaucd
them loupnglye,and tolde themeuecp thpnge p
bad bappened onto thep2 brethren in Galeadp:
thpm,and howe that manp of them were befe-
ged in Barala, 265030: Xlpmps, Cafpho, Wa-
geth and Carnaim(all tbefe are ronge walled


-&migbtie greatecitieg)and that thep were kept


tHother cpties of Galaad alfo:¢ tomozow thep
are appopntedto byynge thep2 hook unto thele
Cpttes, to take them, eto wpnne thé in one dape.

_ So Judas andbps boot turned in allthe
bale inthe wildernefie ni De ofo? t wan:


ne thecptie,flewe al the nrag with the fwerde,
toke altbeir qoobes,and let tpe bpon the cptie.
And in the night thep tooke thep2 tournep from
thence,and came tothe cattell. And bytpmesin
the mozning when they loked bp, bebolde,there
wasan innumerable people bearpneare ladders
and otber inffrumentes of warre, to take the
caftell and to ouercome them. TE Gh
Ci pen Judas fawe thatthe battapleberan
ne and that the nople therof went bp, and rang
into heauen,and that there was lo greate acrye
in the cptie:elapde bunto bps beott:fyabe this
dape foz ponure brethaen. Andfocame bebpnve
thep2 enewmpes in theecompanies, andbicw vp
the trompettes,and criedin their prater to God.
wut as loone as Cpmothes hook perca-
ued that Dachabeus was there,thep hed from
pin,e the other flewe them Downe rpabte fore:
fothat there was kplied of them the fame dape,
almoofepghte thoufande men. Chen departed
Judas onto alpha, lapte leere nto it; and


` Wanneit: Cleweall the males init , fpopled it,


and fet fpze bpon it: From thence wente beant
tooke Cafbon, Wageth, wofloz, and the other
cptpesin Galaad. l TEL

* After thps gathered Tpmothp another


D
H egac Fd boote whpche pptebedtbep: tentes before Ra


phonbeponde the water. Judas allo lente to ef=


- -ppetbe boote, and thepbrougptebpm wordea-


apne, lapinge: ALi the Beathen that berounde
aboute b8,are gathered unto bym, and the bok
is verpe greate. Peethep bauebpzed the Acabp


then wpll we go ouer, fo: we balbe tronge p=
nougbe agapnite bpm. owe as fone as Judas
came to therpuer, beappopnted certapne fcrp-


bes of tbe people, and commaunded tbem ; fapa


inge : fethat peleaue none bebpnde vpontprg
Cpòe of the rpuer, but let enery man come to tbe
battaple. Sobewente fake ouer pntothbem,
and pps people after pym. f |
And all theHeathen were dpfcomépted be
fozebpm,andlet thep2 weapons fall,andranne
(nto the temple that was at Carnpm. Wibpche
cptpe Judas wanne, eburntethe temple wpth
al that were init: Do was Carnaim fubdued,¢
mpabte not wpthitande Judas .. Chen Judas


gathered all the {{raelptes that were ingala:


Dathpm,from theleafte ontothe mooie, topth
thep2 wpues andthep2 chpldzen( a verpeqreat
hootle)fo2 tocometntothelande of Zlraell.


*Do thep came vnto Eph26, whpch was æ -
a mpabtpe great and tronge cptpe, andlape in i ayare


tbep: wape. Jo: thep could not go bp it, nether
ofthe rpabt bande noj ofthelefte.but mufte go
thozowe it. Peuerthelefle thep that were inthe
cptpe wolde not let them go tho2owe, but wal-
led bp the poztes wpth ones. And Judas lent
bntotbem wpth peaceable wo2des (aping: Let


vs paflethosowe pourelande,that wemapego ~


into oute owne countree:there (hal nobodpe da
pou parme, we wpll but onelpe go thozowe on
foote. Wut thep wolde not let tbem in.

CH berefo2re Judagcommaunded å p20cla:
macpontobe made thozowoutethbeboolte,that
cuerp man Huld kepe bys ozder:andfotbepdpo
thepzbeffelpkebaleauntemen. —

aud Sodas belecaed the cptpe al that Dap
and all that npabt,and fo wanne tt,wbere thep
flew as many as were maleg and deltroped the
cptpe,and (popled it,and wente tho2zoweall the
opie ouer themtpat were flapne. Chen wente


ep otter Jo2rdapne inte the plapne felde befoze -
. Bethlam. And Fudag pelped thole forwarde —
that camebebinde, and gane the people good er.


-Dotacional the wape thozowe , tpli fbep were


Come into the lande of Juda. Chustbepy wente


bp dntothe mount Spon, where thep offred w


mp2th*é thanfreupne:becaulether Were none ipar rpe


of thé flapne but came home agapne peaceablp

| owe what tpme as Judas g fovathas
Were in the lande of Galaad, and Simeg thepe
brother in Galple befoze Prolamays: Chen Jo
fepbustbhefine of sacharp and Afarpastbhecap


tapnes, bearpngeof the actes that were Done ge.


of the battaples that were frpchen.fapbde: Let
bs get DS anameallo,and qo fypahteagapnite


thedeatbentbatareroundeabonte vs. p


Ho they gaue thepz boote acommaunde.


mente —


Jol, Ih,


The fyett boke of


ment, ¢ wet towardJamnpa. Then came Gor

gpas and bps men oute ef the cp te totpabtes

gapni them: Jolephus alfo and Alarpas were

chaced vonto the bozderg of Jew:p, ether were

flapne that bape of the people of ¥rael,two.&)

men:fo that there waga guate mplerp among
gadd, Che peoplexand all becaule they werenoto bedp
ente onto Zubdas and his bzethzen but thought

tbep thulbe qupte themfelues manfullp. Hener

thelefie thep cam not of the feed of thefe men, bp
whome Ffrael was helped. Wut the menthat

Were Wpth Judas were qreatelpe commended

inthe fpgbt of al Jirael,gal the Heathen, were

_ foeuer thepzname was beard bpon, ¢ the pco-
plecanie vntotbem, byddynge them welcome.

After thps wente Judas forthe wptdbhps
bzethzeu aud fougbteagapnite the chyldzen of
€fau,in the lande that Iyeth towarde thefouth

where be wanne the cptpe of Ebzon,¢ the tow-

nes that Ipe belpde it:and as foz the walles and

towe rounde abonte it de brente them vp.

‘Then remoued be to goo into the lande of

the PbplpHpnes, and wente thozowe Sama-
tpa. At the lame tpme werethere manpe S

tes flapne inthe battaple , wbpche wplfullpe

and wpthoute aduplemente wente oute foz to
fpgbte,to get them bonoure. Bnd when Judas

Deuie. bia CAME tO Asot inthe Pbplyitpnes ladex,be bza-
Kedowne thep2aulters, brente the Images of

‘thep2 Folles,fpopled thecptpege came agapne

into the lande of Juda. |

,., CEhe.vi.Cbhapter,

@ Antpochus wpllpage te take the cptpe of @ipmas log
A prape ts B3ptien awape oF the cptezpns. Be fallety inte
Opckenefe and dpeth.Bpafonne Antfochns is mane Epa
Bt. be befeege of thetewer of SPo.cupato; commeth
toto Hetwpp id a greate armpe. whe bolonetle OF <leazat,


Ig n Dwe when Rpnge Antpochug


Far.ca.tii ra Tis
iph niian DSi k


ASA Ka ttpes, Debeardethat Elpmas in
2A Wuscptpe infpluer and golde, and
nple:where as were clothes, cotearmoures
and y eidg Fa pede Alerandze the fon
ne of Pbplpp, bene o @acedonea(that rapg


tofpople it but be was not able:fo2 the cit ing
Were Warned olit and foughte woptb bpm, And

De fed and Departed wpth great beupnefic, and

Gat hon ak ria b n arotpere

came one Wwhpche bzougbte bpm tpopnaes in

t.mac tie, Petlpde,xthat bps poottes wbycbe were in tbe
awit Jande of Subs. ere Depuet awape, €bow pri
fpas wente forthe Fpate wrth agreate power,

and was dpumawap of the Jewes:Howe that

they bad wonne the bpctoppe,and gotten great

cqoovdes oute ofthe bookes that peryibed. howe

-eena de UCP DAD bzobE Downe the abbominacióxtwbich
fmachast.e be et spire the aulter at Jerufalem, and fen
eb the Danctuarpe wyth bye walle , lpbe ag

it Wasafoze:pee, and Wethlura a cptpealfo.

_ Hott chaunled, that when thekpnge bad

5 herde thele wordes, be wagafraped and greued

verp loze. Wi perefoze be lapde bpm Bowne bps


qetauapledthbozowetbebpecoun: ce
Petlpa wasanobleandplentes i
Sthat there was inita Derperpche Ni


ned fpl in Gerke lande pad lett bora hoes t
reset 2 wente aboute to take thecptpee.


bps bed, and fell fpcke for berpefozowve:and all
becaute it bad not happened aspe bad deupfen.
And therecontpnued belong, foz bps grefe was
euer. mozeand moze, fo that be tawe be muf ne-
bes dpe. Therefore he fente fo: bps frendes and
fapbe Ynto them : the epe ig gone from mpne
epes, fo: the berpefozowe and weracpon of pert
that 3 baue. Eo: when FJ conlpder inmp mpnd
tbe greate abuerfptie that 3am come vnto,and
the floudes of beupnefle whpche J amcomein,
myer 49 afoze tyme J was fo merp, efo great
lp fet bp( bp reafonof mp power.) Agayne,con
fpdepnge the enell that 3 aue Done at

lem, from whence ¥ tooke all the rychefle of got
be and fpluer that were init, and fente to fetche
awape the inbabptours of Jewe2pe wpthoute
anpereafon whp:7 bebe that thefe troubles
arecome pponme fozthelamecaule. And be-
bold, J mu PPE HA geraten afraiig
lande. Chen called be foz one Wbplipp a frende
of bps, whome be maderuler ofall bpsrealme ,
and gane bpm the Crowne ,bpsroobe and bps
tpnge-that pe thulbdetakebps' mo Anttochus
onto bpm. and bapngebpm bp > tpllbempapte
tapgne bpm felfe. * Do the kpnge Antpocbus .ega.tra
dpedthere, inthe buriozed and foztpe and npne >-«.2.e
peace When Lilias knewe thatthe kingewas €

deed, be ozdepned Antpocbus pislone(+wbor , ERE
be bad bzougbte vp, ) to rapgnein bps fathers Aor.
teade and called pim Eutapo2r.nowe thep that wee, ist,
Were inthe caltel(at Jerulalem bkepte inthe Fe

Wes counde aboute the ihe toytic hein

cuer Epl todo them barme Foz the Erengtbes
npnge of the eatben.

‘ Wherefore, Judas thoughte to deftrope
them, ¢ called all tbe people together, that thep

mps te lape leege butotbem.Sotbep cameto


fege theit,laping forth tbep2 o2d{naunceand
nitr


alfo jand wente bnto the kpnge fapinge : bow


peoplefell from be, ¢ wbherefoeuer thep founde


| anpeof vg thep dewe them:and (popled onre in


berptaunceandthep baue not onelpemedlen w
08,but topth all oure countrpes : and beholde, j
tDps dape are thep beleegpnge the caftell at Je .
tufalem, xand bauemade bp the Frongebolde ¢ mee.ség.g
in Wethlura. Rnd pe thon doct not peeuentethe

pane forte, thep wopll do moare then thele,and

thou alte not be able to oucrcometbem. ,

* Ci pen thekpnge berde thysbe was be- D
Fao iors calleB all ppsfrendes , the cap- is.ma.ptiin
tapnes of bps fote men, and of all bys bozfemen
togetber.dpe bpzed men of warre alfo oute of o=
thet realemes gout of the Jlegof the fee, Mbiche
came vnto bpm. Andebe nombze of by shootte
Was an bundzed thoufandefoote men, g fwen
tpetbonfande bosfemen,s two and thpztpe Ele ima.titi.g;
) a ag a ne

thozowe


erula. Pri


_


a a S, a!


ee =a = = m-


|


EO oe
" i


ofthe Machabees,


thozowe Fdumea onto Wethlnra,g befeeged it
alonge leafon , and madedpuers iInffrumentes
of watre agapnite it. ut the Jewes came out
and bzente tbem, and fougbtelpkemen . Chen
Departed Judas fromthe caftell at Jerufalem,
and remoued the Hook tomarde Wethsacaran
oneragapnethekpnaes armpe.

othe kpnge arole befoze thedape, and
b2ougbte the power of bps boote into the wap
to Wetbsacaran, where the bootees madethem
OSI battaple,blowpnge the trompet-
teg. Andto ponokethe Elephatesfo2 tofpgbt
thep ewed them the lap of red grapes g molbe
rpes, and deupdecdtte Elephantes ier the
booft:(o that bp euerpe Elephant there tooda
thoufande men well barnefled, and belmettes
of fele bpon thep2 beades Pée, pntoeuerp one
ofthe Clepbantes alfo were ozdDepned fpue bur
dred hozlemé of the be, whpcbe wapted onthe
Elephant qopnge wherfoeuer be went, and de
parted not frombpm. Cuerpe Elephante Was
conered wrth a ftronge towar of wood, where
bpon Were two and thpztp valeannt men with
weapons tofpabte, and wpthin wagaman of
‘aude to cule the beate,

As fo: the remnaunte of the horfemen,be
fet bpon both the (poes in two partes wrebhtri
pettes,to prouoke p Poll, and toftpzre vp fuche
as were flow inthe armp. And when the funne
thone bpontbep2 hyloes hea and ftele.the


mountapnes qlpfered a at them, ¢ were
asbzpabt asthecreflettes of fp2e. Chekynges
booffe allo wad Deupded, one part bponthe bpe
mountapnes the other lowe bencth:fothep wet
on ftakpnge good hede:andkeppng thep2 order
And all thep that dwelt inthe land, were afrap
ed atthe nople of thep2 boote when the multp-
tude wente forth, and when tbe weapons {mot
together, forthe boolte was bathe greateand
mpabtpe : Judas alfo and bps boote entred in
to the battaple, and (lewe fpre bund2ed men of
the kypnges armpe. Powe when EClealar thel
of Saura; bpd fe oneofthe Elepbantes deckte
wpth th kpnges badge and was a moze good
Ipe bealte then the other: betbougbhtethbekpnae


ulde be vpon ppn, 4nd teopardc hpmfelfeto ee


delpuer-hys people,ant fo ret pm aperpetuall
name. bherefore De ranne Wpthacazace vnto
the Elephante in the mpodett of the host, imp
tynge them Downe ofboth ifpdes and Arwe ina
nye aboute bpm. So wente pe to the Elephan-
tes fete,and vat bpm brider bpm and flew bpm
theu fell¢be Elepbante Downe bpon bpm, and
there be dped. Judas alfó and bps menfepnge
power of the kypnge and the mpabtpe Ypolence
of bps hoofke departed fromg bem. And the kpn

eSarmye wente Dy agapnite them towarde


y Aerufalemaud pptched thep2 tentes in Jerzy


wple . bere he made all maner oxdpnaunce,
bandebowes,fp2edartes,rackettes tocat {too
nes, fcozppons to tote arowes,and flpnges.
Che Jewes alfo made opdpnaunce agapute
thep2s,and foughte alonge feafon.

| Wut tn the cptpe there were no vptayles,
for (t wasthetenenth peare of the warres and
thole beathen that remapned in Jew2p, badea:
ten bp alltbep2 ooze. And inthe Sanctuarpe
were fewe men lefte,foz thebungrecamelovps
them, that thep were catered abode encry ma
to bps owne place.


HowhenLplpag hearde f Dbhilpp(xwhs aabb


Antpochus the kyng whple be was pet lpupng
had o2depredtobzpnge vp Antpochusbhps fon
ne, that be mpabte be kpnge wwascome agapne
oute of Perlpa, and edea', wpth thekpnges
boolfe,and thouqbteto optapne the kpnadome
egat bpm to thekpnae in all the pate, and to
thecaptapnes of the boofe,and fapbe we decre
ale Dapipe,and oure vptaplesarebut{mall:A> ©
gapne tbe place that we lap feege bntois verp
ronge andit were oure parte tole fozthereal-
me. Let bs agre wopeb thele men, and take truce
wyth them,and wpth al thep2 people, ¢ qraunt
them to lpue after thepz latwe, as thep dpd afoze
For thep be qreued, and do all thele thynacs a-
apnite bs , becaule we baue Dpfppicd thep2
awe. Do thekpnge and the p2pnees were cons
tente, and fente onto them tomake peace, and
thep receaued it. Rowe when the kinge and the
p2pnces bad made an othevnto them, they came
oute of the Catell and the izynee wente vpto.
mount Spon. Wut when he fawe thatthe place
was wel Defenced.be brake bps oth that he bad
madeg commaunded to deltrop the wal round
aboute. Chen departed bein al the bafe, andre
turned Buto Antyoch, where be founde pbpltp
haupnge Dompnyon of the cptye. ope fought
againtt bint, g toke the citicagaine inpis hades
C The. vit, Chapter. r
Demetrpus rapgned after he þad kpiled Antiochus,
and i p(pas.Betroblech the chpinzen of Jicael thazow
the counfaple of certapie topcked perfons, Zbhepzaper


ofthe prettes agapnite Aprhanozgudas kplicth sapiba
oe _ HO}, after be bad mabe bps praper,


win. S| cleucus from the cptpe of Rome-
og Ae wpb almall companpe of men, un
= toacptye of the leecoatte andthere
be bare ruleAnd tt chaunfed that when became
fo Sutpochthecptpe of bps. progenptoures, dis
booffe fooke Autpochus and Ayplpas, to bapng
them nto ppr: ssf when i¢ was told bpi, be


P fapd:let menot {ec thep2faces: Hothe hookput


them todeath. ow when Demetrpus was fet
bpon fhe throne of bps kpngedome, therecame
Dntobypm wycked and bngodlpe men of Frael


SEol Ibi,


| whofe captapne was Diets that wold hang
tegac.titis belpbe mounte Spon. Hozeouer,thekpnge benemade bye prealte;. Chele memacciled the
riaabehiyi, COOKE truce wpththemtbat weretn+Wethlura people of Peacilwnto the aye, fapinge: Jus
rbd Hut when thepcameoute ofthecptpe(be: dagandbpsbzethen baue: apne thy feendes,
F caufetbep bad no vpttaples wptbhin,etbeland and d2puen vs oute of oures wre lande-Wibers

lape bntplled the bpngetvoke Wethlura, fet fore fendenowefome man( toxbomethou mes


- = |


mentokepe (f,and turned bis boteto the place
of the Sanctuarpe,andlapoleegetoita treat


neff credence) that be mape go and leallthedes
Krnccyou, wdpche be batydone vnto Mp ane >
g


The fyrtte booke


the kynaes land and let bimbe punyihed with
all bps frendes andfauourers. Aard
Then thebpnge chole Wachpdes afrende

15 of bys. whbpch was amanof great power in the
realime(beponde the ate water) and fapthful
wvntotbebpnge,andlente bpm to fethe veltruc-
cpon that Judas bad done. And ag foz that wpe
ked Alcimus.be made bim bpe preake,and com
maunded bpm tobe abuenged of the chpldzen of
Jirael. o thep Lode bp,¢ came wopth a greate
pool into the lande of Juda,fendpnge meflaun
gerstd Judas and bps beethzen,and (peakinge
vnto them wpth peaceable wozdes : but onder
i.merh 1d Dplceate.«@bertfoze Judas and bps people be-


leued not thepzlapinge.foztbeplawetbattbep |


wecrecome wptha qreate poole

After thps came the Sycephes together bn

to Alcimus and aih apa s trultpnge the bette
bntothem. And fp2tte the Affibeans requyp2ed
peace of them,fapinge:Alcimus thepzeakkisco
ane ofthefecde of Aaron, bowe can be difceaue
ts: So tbep gaue them loutny hordes, efeooze
wntothem,and lapde:we wpill do pou noberme

neptbher poure frendes:and thep beleued them .
wut the verpe fame dape toke thep.tit.{coze më
of them, and flewe them accozdpnge tothe woz
Hfa.lrrita Desthat were witen, + Tbep bauccallthe fichh
© of thbp fapntes,and ted thep2 blouderounde a=
boute Jerufalem, and there wag nomanyp wold
burpe thent.: Do0 therecame a greate feare and
Dzeade amonge te pople, Care: theretsnes
ther truth no? rpabtcoutneffe in (hem, Fo: thep


made. And Wachpdesremoned bys boott from
Jerufalem, and Aehy bpstente at Wetseka:
where belent forth and toke manp of them that
bad fozfatien bpm. De flewe many of the people
alfoand cak theints aqreat ppt The comptted
Hetbelande onto Alcimnusg, eleft men of warre


w himtobelpebym, And Wachidesbpm felfe A


wentebdnto the lie Neto thus Alcpmug defen
ded bps bypabe P2ealkehode, andall (ucheas ver

ed Jiraci refogted vnto bpm: nfo much that
thep optapned thelande of Juda and dpd much
euel unto the Jiraelptes- ` |

Howe when Judas latwe all the mplchefe

that Alcimus and pps companp had Done ( pee,
moze thenthe Heather themfelues )wntothe Fi
eg wentefortherounde abouteail the
boers of Jempe and punithed thofe vnfapth
fullrennagates,to that thepcamenormoze oute
infotbe countre. eo when Alcimus, fawe that
Sudas and bis people bad gottentbevpper ban
be, and that be wasg not bable toabpde them, be
went agapnete the kpng and {apd al f wot of

thé ý be coulde. Then the kpnge tent Ngchanoy
one GE pps chefe princes( wobpch beare euel topll

to Zlrael.) and commaunded bpm, that pe huld

D vtterlpe Defrope the people.

guarha,  *D0 Npchanozcame te Ferulalem wpth
 &Gteat boot, and (ent unto Judas and ppsbze
then wpth frendlp wo2des(but onder defceat)
faptnge:there albe no warre betwprt me and
pou: 3 wpli come wpth feme men,to le howe pe

bo, wpth frendetppppe. gipon tbysbecame DH


pauebzobentbeappopntementeandothp thep .


te Judas, andtbhep faluted one another peaceas
blip but the enempes were appointed totakegu
dag bp vpolence. Menertbelet{e,it wag tolde Fu
Das,tbat became bntobpmbue onder dpiecate
wobherefoze,be gat bym awape from ppm, y wol
defe bps face nomoze.Wiben Michanoz perceas
ued that re councellwasbewzaped, pewente _
out to fpabtagapn Judas, belpde Capharla- €
mala: wher there were flapne of Aichanozs bok
fpuetboufandemen: andtherefpoue fled wnto
thecattellofDanid. _ |
 Afterthpgcame Ntchanoz vp onto mount
Spon:and the Wzeatkes wpth the eldersof the
people went forth to falute bpm peaceably and
to ewe bpm tbebutntelacrpfpceg that were
ofred fos the kpnge.wut be laughed them and
the peopletofcozne,mockedthem,defpledthep2
offerpnges,and {pakebdpidapnefullpe: pee, and
{wore in bis wath faping,xDF Judag and big H.mastite
boolt be not delpuered nowinto mp bandeg, ag
fone ag ener J comeagapne(¢ fare well) Y tall
burne bp tps boufe.iptbtbat, went be oute
inagreateanger. Ghenthe preakes came in,
and foode betoze the aulter of thetemple, we"
ppnge,anbd fapinge. cae
* Jf 02 fo much ag thon (DLo0wde) bacho: it.par. ri.e
fer thps boule,thatthp name mpabte be called te. wigte
bpon therett,and that ft fhulde be xan boule of ani
paper and petpepon foz thp people. Be aduen: Kar prb
Qed of ee man and bpsbooft, andlet thembe
flapne xb the Sweard, remeber $ blatphemtes of
et pees focontpnue anpelonger.
CU ben Mtchanoz was cone from Ferufas
lem,be bptcbed bpstente at etbozon € there
an boofte met bpmoute of Siria. And Judas
came to Adarlawpththzethoulande men, and
mabe bps paper bute God,fapinge: Dz ode,
xbecaulethbemeflengers of kpnge HSenacherth errerhite
blatpHemed the,the Aungell wente forthe and fr" bhit
ewe an bundzed fours fcoze and fpue thouland t9,ver5 9
ofthem,Cuenlo derop thou this boofte before
bs to dape, that our people mape knowebowe
that be bath blatpemed tp DPanctuarp,and pw
npibebpm accozdpngtopps malpcpontnes,
At the booftes roke the felbe,thethp2-
fenedape of the mioneth, x Adarand Apcanors |
bocni wasdifconfpted,t and be bpm lelfe was Fidar.
pat flapneintbebattapyll. WibenPichanozg mast,
mien of warrefatve that be Was billed, thep cat
awape they? weapons and fled, but the Jewes
folowed bpon them an wholedapes tourney frd
Adazar dnto Gasara,blowinge with the trom
pettes and makpng tokens after them. othe
ewes came forth of al the towwnes there about
and blewwe out thep2 bomes bpon them, andtue
ned agapnfte them. Thus were tbep all layne,
and not one of them lefte. s
Then tbep toke thep: fubfauncefor a prap £
and (mote of Michanozs beadeand bps rpabte


pand(xwwbpcb De beld bp fo proudly )¢ bzongbt mariti


fe witb them, and panged ft bp afore Yerufalem
UWiperefozre the people were exceadprialp reiops `-
-ARO pao ouer that dape ingreate qlaones
And Fudagozdepned, that thefame dap( name
Ive the theteneth vape of the mooncthe Adar)


pule .


rT


ofthe Machabes,


Q9 EQ) and agreable toalltppnges È atere
eamaid guped ofthem make peace wprthall
nicn,wobpch come onto them, € bowe thep were
Doumbepe men of Ftength.2elides that, tt was
told bpm ofthep2 battatles,enoble actes which
thep dpd in Galacpa bowe thep had conquered
thé, brought them wndet tribute:¢ topat great
thpnaes they haddone in Spane:howe p topth
thep2 wpfepome and fobetr behauoure thep bad
` wonnethe mpnes of fpluer ¢ gold, ý are there,
obtapned all the lande,woptb otber places farre
From thé:howe thep bad dpiconfitcd and flapne
Downe the kpnges p came Dpon thë, From theve
termoft patte of the catth, ¢ howe other peopte
rane them trpbute euerp peare. Dott thep bad
lapne ¢ oner come Philippea eres bpnges of
Cethi, g other molin batt el which bad broughe
¢hepz oxdpnaunce agapn& them:-howe thep dpi-
confpted creat Antiochus kpnge of Astacthat
molde nedes fyg ht wpth them) baupngean €.
and.tr.Elephantes, wpth bo:fmen, charetteg.g
a berp qreat batk:bowne thep tooke bypmielfe a3
ue,z Odepnedhpm(w luch as thulbe rapgneat=

yg terbpm)topapetbema qreatetrpbute.
xPee and tofpndethem good furetyesand


Leach “p edge : befpdesallthps, bowetbep had taken


rombimgndta, Weda, g Lidfa his belt lades)


and qeucntpemtokpnge Eumenus. Agapne, :


bowe thep petceaupngetbatp qrekes were ci-
mpngeto vere tbem: fente agapnite them a cap-
tapne of an poolte, whyche gaue them battaple
fictoc many of them, led awape thep2 wpues,¢


asgach, t.a cbplozen captpue,tpopled them tobe poftellpon


of thepzlande,deltroped they: Hronge bolbes,¢
{ubdued them to betbepz bondemen, Dntothys
dape.G)ozecuer, bowe that as foz other kpnge-
Domesand Fes tohpche fometpme wpthitoode
them,thep defEropedthem, and bzougdte them
wndertbhep2dompnyon. Wut helpedeuer thepz
otne frendeg and tbofe that were confederate
wpth them, and conquered kpngedomeg, bothe
Earreandnpe,and that wholoener beard of their
renotone was afraped of them: foz whome thep
 fPooldhelpeto thepz bpngedomes,thole rapaned
and fobome it ipked not theétorapane, thep put
- ppm dotone. And bowe thep werecome to geent
pebenpnence:baupnge nokpngeamonget


a patlyment,toberintherefat, it. C. rr Denna-
touregdaplp vponthecouneell todpfpatchener
the bulinegof the people,andtokepe gond oDe
And boive that euerp pearee vey chofea Mape
tobaue the qouernaunce ofall thepze lande to
Sohomecuerpe man was obedpent,and ther twas


tepther euel toplnozdpfeencponamongethem. P


Then Judas chole Eupolemus ý Cone of Jha


= the fonneof Jacobs Jaton the fonne of Eleazer


nether anpmanclothedinpurple, tobemagnp> Faas yoa)
fpedtberthorotve,buthadobdepnedthbemictlues Kis Ag


and fent them onto Rome fozto make frendihip
¢abondcoflonew them,that thep mpgbte take
fromthem the bondage of the Geekes, forthe Je
ives fawe thatthe Gzekeswoldefubdue p pna
dome of Firacl. So thep went vnto Rome (ave
tp qreate fournep: )ecame into the parlamente,
and fapde: Judas achabeus withbbys bzerh:ë
and thepeople ofthe Jetoes hatbe lente ve wnto
pou,to make a bonde of frendefpp and peace w
pou,andpe tonote vs ag poure loners and fren=
Dra OAE ehh pipet noc Ie ght
well, wherfozeit was weptten dp:o' tbe bre
the apra Soi Dea Weptpnge in tableg of
bzafie,and te KEO cao pr re ZOREY ed
bauc bp themamemozpal of thefame peace: and
Bonde of frendibpp after thpsmaner.Goodfaue
the Romapnes ¢the people ofthe Jewes both,
bp fee and by lande and kepe the Cwearde ¢ ene-
mp from them fo2 ener moze. PE there come fp2F
anp warre pponthe Romapnes o7 anpe of thepz
frendes thozoipout all thep2 Dompnpon,the peo
ple ofthe Jewes hall helpe them (as thetpme re
qupzeth andthat withal th:p2 bertes. Allo thep


‘(hallnether qene noz fende bnfothep2 enempes


bptaples, weapens,moncp,noz pppes:but ful
ic bdo eh Sete ancl A anta
take nothtnac from them therfore. Agapne,pf f
people of the Fewes bappenfpstttobane warre
the Romaprs Hall tande bp them with a mood
foypll,accozdpnge asthetpme wpllufkre.Acther
fhallehep geue vnto the Jetwes enempes, vptap
les, weapens,monp.noz ppppes. hus are the
Romapnes contentto doart (hall fFul€pll thepz
charge wptboute anyedpiceate.
Accordpngetotbele artyctes;the Romap=


nes made the bonde pth the Jewes. Mowe af- D


tertheleartpceles(fapbde thep)pfanpe wih ei
tyes wpll put to them,oz take anp thpngefrom
them:thep thal do tt wpth the conlente of both:¢
whatlocuer thep adde Unto them, op takefrome
themit Hall kande faite. And ag touchpnge the
evtell that wemetrpus bath done wnto the Jews
es, we baue waptten nto bpm fapinge:-wheres
foe lapet thon thp beup potke bpon the Fewes
oure Frendesand louers;PEthep make anp com=
plapnte of theagapne pnto bs, we (hall defende
them,and Pabe wey a bp feeand bp lande.


Sol lott.


a
Limachi t
E j

LATA Sir


Theyre booke


thoufatids footemett,andtw0o.4).bo2femen.


Mowe Judas badprtched his tenteat Laila;
topeh thaethoulande cholenmen. And when the
faive the multptude of tbeother armpe p if wag
fo great, thep were fore afraped,and manp con?


_ naped them felucs oute of the boot. Jn fo mach


that there abode no moo of them but epght bun-
ded men, Cel bent Judas fawe that bps hott fay-
led bpm, and thathe mute nedes fpabt:it brake
bps Derte.that be badro time to gather themto
gether:foberefore the man wag inertreme trou-
bie. Meuertebletle, hefapde yntothem: thatre-
mapned wpth bym.cip,let ps qoagapntte oure
chempes,peraduenturetoe thalbe ableto fpabt
wptDtbem. Wut thep wolde baue topped bpm,
faping: we thalnot be able, therfoz let vg now
Tanc oure Pueg and tarneagapneto oure b2ea-
thzen and then wpll wefpapteagapnitethem,


1 Fo2 toe are bere but fewe:


And Judas fapt: God foabpd that we Mulde
fle feo them. Giberfoze, pf our tyme be come: let
Ds mantuilp dpe foz our bretheen, andlet vs not
apne our ponour. Then th: holt remoued oute
of the tenteg and ffobeagapntt tbém, The bol
menareDenpded int wo partes,the Opngcalters
and archers went befoze the boft:and alp mpgh
tiemen were formott in the Felde. Baches him
felfe was in therpgbt wpnge ofthe battcl,andp
hott drewe nye in two partes,and blewep trom
pets. Chep of Judas {pode blewe the trompetes
alfo and thbeearth Hoke at the nople of the boa:
ftes and thep ftrokeafeloe from the mo20w tpl
snp ghee no when Judas awe that Wachpoes
Holt was rongett ofthe rpabtelpne, be toke w
bymalithe herdp men,and beakeprpadt winre


- Of thep2 ordre, and folowed yponthem bntotve
- mount Asot. Powe when thep whpche ere of


thelptte wpnge,fawe thattherpabtelpbe was
dptcamfpted the pperfecuted Judas æ them that
were wpih brm. Chen wasthere afore battapl
fo: manp were flapne and toounded of both the
partpes. Judas alfo bpm felfe wag kplled,and f
remnaunt hep. 0 Jonatbas gud Symon toke
judas thepa bzotber and burped ppm inbps fa
tDerglepulchze inthecptpe of Podin. Andal
the people of Jfraelmade gret lamentacpon fo?
bpm.ard mourned anoa Pinge: Alag ý thys
wozthpe Quldebeflapne, whpche delpuercd the
people of Zfracll. Astoz other thpnges partap-
tipng tothe battaples of Judas, thenobleactes
that hedpd and of bps wosthpneffe:thep are net
toptien fo they were verp manpe.

* And after the death of Judas, wyeked men


Foteph.ca, CAME Dp inallthe coalkes of Flracl, and there az
uncpite rofcalllucheagivotcke vnaodlpnefe. Fn thole
-, Dapes Wastbherea qreate Dearthe nthelande,z

all the countec qaue ouer them felueg and theirg


Emabethem Lopes tnthelande, fought
Out ¢ made fearch for Judas frendes, e brought
them Dnto Wachides: which abuenged bpm flf
Dpoitthem Wyth areatedplppte. Aid there ca-
melo greate trouble in Fracl,ag iag not fence
thetpinetbatnopzophetewastenetbere.

Then came all Judagtrendeg together , and


Suto Bachibes,o Wacbhides sgl me
Thele


fapdbtito Jonathas:Fo2 fo much as thp brothet
Judas ig dead ther is nonelpke bpm to go Forth
agaynét our enempes,agapnit Wachpdes, and
fuch as areaduerlaries puro oure people. Uber
fore, thys Daye we chole the foz: bpm,to beoure
»price:and captapne toore oure battapl.and
Sonathastoker gouernaunce bponbpmatp -`
ametpme andruled in teade of bys bother fu
dag. Uben Wachp des gat knowlege therof, bz
foughte fozto fe bpm. Wut Jonatbagand p> —
mottbps bzother,perceaupngetbat, fleddeinta
the wplaernes of Ehecua fopthallth:pzcompa
hee ; ne pptched thep2 tentes bp the toater pole “
of alpber. , aifi
q peed when Bachpdes buderflode, became
ouer Jorvapne pth all bps pot bponthe Hab
bothdap. Mowe bad Jonathas Cent his brother
Jbon(acaplaine of the people)to prape his fren
des the Mabuthites.that thep Molde lende them
thep2 odpnaunce,forthep bad muche: po f chil
dren of Jambzy came oute of adaba, tooke
Jhon eallthat be bade went they2 wape wpth
all. Then came wode bnto Jonathas ard Sp-
monbps brother, that thechplozen of Jamb2ye
madea great marpare, and bzouqhtethe bzpode
from Gadaba ot areate pompe:fo2 Ihe ibas
Daughter toone ofthe nobleft pzynces.of Cana-
an-Gl herfoze thep remembzed fhe bloud of Fpi
tbey? brother, and wente vp, and hpd them fel-
ueg Onder the hadowe of the mountapne.
Do thep lptt bp thepzepes,andloked,and be -
bolde there was much ado, and greate repapze:
fo: the bzpdeqromecame fozth and pps frendes
and bps becthrémetetpem wrth typmpanyes,in
ffrumentes of mulpke,¢ manp weapons. Thar
Jonathas andthep that were wpth bpm, roole
out of thep2 luckpnae places arapnt them, and
fiewe many ofthem. Ag forthe remnannt, thep
fled into the mounfapnes.and they tokeal their
fubfaunce. Thus the Darpage as turned to
mouthpnge , and thenopfe of fhep2 melodpe itt
tolamentacpon. And lo when thep had aduen-
gedftbhebloud ofthetebzother.thep turnedagap —_
ne tnta Fordane. | a ahs €
Wachpdes bearpnae thps, came wnto'tbe ve
rp border of Fordane topeth a greate power vpi
the Sabborhdaye. And Jonathas lapdetobys
companpe, let bs get bp, and fpaht agapntt our
enempes:Fo2 it Lanbeth not iopth vs to bapeas
in tpmes pat: Meholde, our encmpes arein our
wape, the water of gua ota theonelyde
of vg, wpth banckes,fennes and twodes of thea
ther [pde To p there is no place fo2 veto departe


onto.x i berefoze cepe nowe bnito beanen, that fma, rinks


pe map bedelpuercd from the poter of pour ene
mypes. Hothep froketbe battel. And Fonathag .
firetched onte bps bandeg to finpty Wachpdes ,
but be hed backewarde. Chen Jonathas gtbep
that oere wpthbpm,leapte into Jordane , and
fwymmed. ouer Jordane onto bpm ethere tere
flapne of achpdes {pde that dapea.<).men.
Therfore Wachydes with bys hote turned a
gapne to Jerufalem andbuplte vp the calklese¢


- and (trorige boldes that were itt Jem2pe, Ferp=


tho Ema HS, ethozon, wetbell, T ua


ofthe Machabees; Sol. [tit
Phara,and Topo, wythbpah walles,withpoz bps wape into bys ownelande, nepther procea-
teg and ioptblockes: andletmentokepetbem, ded any further tocome bnto the boderes of Ju i
tbat thep mpabt blethep2 malpce bpon Flrael. ta. Tbus Flrael had nomoze warre. And Jona:
` Dewalled vp thecptpe Wethlurath, Gasarab, thas Dipelt at @)achemas,¢ beqanne there to go
andthecaftel,andprouidedthemwpthmenand -uerne the people and deltroped thewnaodlpmen
bptaples.tetoke allothechefette mens fonnes outof Firad.
. es comrpe EDDIE re and ppt theminthe |
ee opt EAs een es cd emete COD., Chapter ERE :
Se TOATE N FUC SUNDAE HPLEDE AND EDIE >. onm euE pete seth to baue peace tooth sions dante
peare inthefeconde moneth, Alcpmus commatt Clapne. whe fernbelbrne of Belem sto E a
‘Ded, tbat the toalles of the inmotte Sanctuarpe Pe PE CORSE CP aS Clb Alerander,
thuldebe deffroped, andthe buplopnges ofthe pra A. thebundzedand threfcore peare, A
prophettsallo.And whe bebeqannetodeftrope fox af came Alerander : the fonne of noble 310feph.re.
them, thethingesthathe went aboute,werebin (Cea Cei Antiochus and tooke Dtolomaps, HH
Dae) foe be tons Cap teen Pep apally cand ppg ERE Je Wbolecptyspns receaued bpm, and
mouth but, fothathecouldno moze tpeake,noz Lacs ther he rapaned.ediben Demetrius
at iy eth doer pnge bps Deade thero be gathered an erceadpnge great
gp Uipneg. Thugs dped Alcpmusingycaremplerp hook aud wenteforthcacapnitebpm totpabte.
Jt atip fametpme.And when Wachpoestatoethat Wiherfore Demetrpus lente letters onto gona
| Alepmusioas dead; beturned againeto Pkyng thag wythloupne wordes,¢ papledbimarcat


and fo thelande wasin rete twopeares. Chen
allthe vngodlpemenbeldeacouncell , fapinge:
Webold Jonathbas and bys companp are atcale
€ dwel without care.Wihertoz, let vs brpng wa
chides betder g be thal tekeché all itt onenpabe.

So thep went and gaue Wachpodes thys coi
cel isbpch arofe tocome toptha creat hook:and
fentletters pzeuclpe to bys adberentes,tobpch
Were in Jempe, totake Jonathas and thore p
‘were withbym:-but thep mpabt not. foz f otber
‘bad gotten knowlege of thepz deupce, And Fo-
nathastokefpftpe menof thecountrpe (wbpch
were the rpugleaders of them Jand lewe them.
Then Jonathas and Spmon wptb thep2 com-
panp departed vnto thecptpe Wethbelle whpch
ipeth in the plDernes,and repapzed thedecape


- thereof and made it tronge. ben Wachpdes


knewe thps, begathered al bys hooft,and fente
wWozde to them that were of Jew2zy. Chen came
beand lapde lege to Wethbelien,and foughte a=
gapnttitalonqefeafon, and made inffrumétes
of warre. owe Jonathas leftehys brother SDi:
mon intbecptpe.and wente forth bym felfeinto
the countrpe,andcame wpth a certapne nombze
and flewexDdares and bys beethzen and thechil
dzen of baleron in thepze tentes:fo ý hebeqan
tobe tronge, and to increafeinpowrr:
Asto: Spmon andbps companp.thep weint
dute of the cifie,andbzente Dp the inffrumentes
of warre,and fougbte agapntt Bachpdes, and
dplcontpted bpm. And Wachpdes was fore ver
6d, becaulebps councell ¢frauell toas in vapne.
‘Wiberfoze be was thzoth atthe wycked menih
gauebput councellto come into thepzlande)and
ewe manp of them. Then purpoled hewith bis
companpe togo awape into bys owne|countrp
iohercof when Jonathas Dad knowlege, be Tent
ambafidours bntobim,fo2to make peace with
Dpmand thathe thuldedelpucrdpm bys pepio-
nets agapne. To the toppche Wachpdes conten-
ted gladlp and dpd accozdpng to bps delpze:pee
and made an othe,that pe fhulde neuer do bpm
Harme al the dates of bps life. So hereitozed bn
tobym allthepzpfonerg that be bad taken oute
of thelande of Juda,and tben turned and went


lp.Sto2 He fapde:we top li Fp2t make peace wpth
bpm, befoze he bpnde bpm felfe with Alerandee
agapnél bs:elles be hal remembze theeuel ý we
baue done agayntt bim, big beotber and pps peo
le. And Cobe gaueZonathagleaue to gather an
ool to make weapons , andtobe confederate
‘wpthbbym,.and commannded the pledges that


were n thecakelltobedelpuerd vntobpm. —


Thencame Jonathas to Jerufalem, andred
the letters in the audpence of all t people:and
of them that were in the caftle. d therefore


Were tbep foze afraped, becaule they bearde that


thekpnge badgqeuenthemlpcence to gatberan
boolte. Thus were the pledgesdelpucred onto
hee sp wbpch rettozed themtotheyzeloers

onathas alfo,divelte at Jerufalem, eberanne
tobuplde bp,andtorepapzethe cptpe:comman
bynge the woke mento wall it:andthe monnt


Spon roundabout wptb fre fone,to be a frig


bole,andlothepdpd. As fo2 the Heathen that
Wereinthe caelstohpch Wachpdes had made
Dp, Hep fled:fothat euerp man lefte the place,
Went into bps owne countre. Dnelpe at Weth=
furaremapned certapne ofthe Fewes, whpche
Had forlakenthelawe atid commaundementes
of God,foz Wetblura was thep2 refuge. |

Howe when kynge Alerander hearde ofthe
pomples that Demetepus padde made bntozo
nathas and tobi it was toldchym of the båt-
faples and nobleactes, Mobpcbeheandhps bies
tizenbad done ano of the great trauailes $ thep
bab taken, be fapde:wobere tall toc fpndefucha


man Well Woe wll make bym ourefrende.and


be confederate wpth bym.Cipon thys belweore
aletter bute hpm:wwpth thefe wozdes: yng A
lerander faluteth bys brother Jonathas: Ge


haue bearde of the,thatthou arta baleaunt ma


and mete tobe our frend: wher Fore tbpsbap.we
odapne the tobe our bpgh Becatt of thp people


andtobecaliedthekpngestrend. (Cipontbys


befent bpm a purple clotbpng, anda crowne of

of golde)p thou mapet confider what isfo2 our
pzofpt and kepefréothpptowardeys.

D0 in the feuenth monethof thzpundzed and

i Hp if the


Thefypelte booke


tije [core peate bpon the folempne featke dap of
of the tabetiacles. Jonathas put the bolp rape-
ment bponhpm. Then gatheredhe an Hoot and
made matip Weapons. Celbpch when Demetrp-
us pearde, be was marucloug lorpe, and layde:


Alag bhat baue we done,that Alerander bath


zeuented bs itt gettpnegethe Frenibedhpppe of f
ewes fore otne beienee ON $
Pet wpli J weptcloupngely vito themi alfo
pec and promple them dpanpties and rewardeg
_ pebep mape be of mp fpre.ttherupon be wzote
ynto them thele wo:des. pnge Demetepug fë
betharetpnge yntothe people of the J ewes.
dere as pe baue keptepourcouenatittoward
bs and contpnued in ourefrendethpp,not encp
hipnge to onre enempes, we toere glad, when we
bearde therof.Wiberfore remapne ttpll, andbe
fapthfull to vg: we Hal wel recompéce pou foz
Ptbpuges f pehaucdonconour partp:we hall
releafe you of manp charges, ¢ qeue pou rewar-
des: And nowe F oplcharac pou all the Jewes
Frome trpbutes: 3 fozqeucpou thecnffomes of
falt,and releate pou of thecrownetares, of the
Ð thp2d part of thelede,¢ halte ofthe frute of trees
whbpcbe is myne Otone dutpe, hele Fleane fo2
pou fró tips dape eet fotbat they tball not be
taken of thelandeot Juda,noz of the threcptics
Lohpch areadded therunto out of Samarpaand
Galple from thps dape fort pefo? eucrmoze. Fe-
tufalem alfo wpth alltbpnges belongynee ther


to, albe poly and fre:peetbetptheSandtrpbu- fed and Merander folowed after fand fell bpon


tes pall pertapnebnto pou .As fo: the power of
the catelli whpche fs at Jerufalem, J rempt and
geue it unto the pealt that be mape (et in tt fuch
met aghe pallchofeto kepe it. J |
all the Jewes that are peplonersthozowante al
mp realme fotbatenerp oneofthem thalbef ree
from paving any tribute pee eucnoEthepzrcattel

Ali the Colempne Feattes, Sabotheg, new mo
ines,the Dapes oy hee tbe thze dapes before
and after the Feat albe fre foralthe Jewes in
mp cealine,fo that intpemnoman thal baue po
War.to Doanpe thpnge,orto moueanp bufpnes
agapntt anpe of them inanpe mancer of caufe.
‘There thal thp2tp thoulande allo of the Jewes
be wptten bp inthe binges bot and bane there
Wages papedasalt othermenne of warreot tt
kpnges Huld haue,and of them thalbe ozdepned
certapue to bepethe kpnges fronge holdes:pee
and fomeof them thalbe let ouerthekynges bu:
{yneffe,tDat thep map fapthfullpe deale wpth p
fame. Che Fewes allo hal baue princes of the
owne,andwalke in thep2 owne lawesag pking
bath commaunded inthelande of Juda:

_ And the thee eptpes that arefalict unto Few
tp Frö the countre of Samarpa andGalile:(thalt
betaken as Jempe, and be vnder one:nether be
fubiccte to anpe fraunge Lorde, but tothehpe
prceaas for ptolomaps andthe lande pertap-


hpnge therto, ¥ qpue it ynto the ‘Sanctuarp at
Jerufalem, foz theneceflarpe expences of the bo
€ ipthynges.


eS. <P ozeouer, J wopll qeueeuerpe pear
fpftene thoufande fpcles of fpluce outoftheb it
ges checker(wbpch partapnet) onto me)to the
woke ofthe remple:pee,andlobe what remap


lpe Delpuce |


rieth(tobpebe thep Chat had ouie tatters in band
in cme batt baue not popes , ) the fame thalt
tbep qeuc onto themallo. And belpdesallthps,
the fpacthoufande (pcles whpcb they toke peat
Ip of therentes of the Sanctuarptpall belonge
wntotbepreafiesthattolerupee. = = 5

Stem wboloeuer thep bethat fle pnto p tem
pleat Jerulalem o2 wpthin the lpbertpes therot
whereasthep art fallen into the kpnges dauna
ger foz anye måner of bulpnes,thep halbe paca
Doned and all the qoodes tbat they have inmpe
tealme,thalbefre. Eo: the buplopnae alfoand
tepaprpnge of the wozeke ofthe SHanctuarpe ,
etpentesthalbe qeuen oute of the Epnges Checa
ker : Pee andfo: themakpnae of the walles ro=
unde aboute Jerufalem, fo: the bacakpnacdow
n¢ of he olde, andfoz plettpng vp of the tronge
bolts in Fewepe, (hall thecotfes andcharges,
begenen oute ofthe kpnaes Checker.


x But whet Jonathasand the people bearde imastg.a


thele Doozdes, thep aneno credence ontothenr,
nepther teceaued them, for thep remembzeo the
gredte wpckednelethat be bad Boone unto Fi-
racli and potwelozehe bad vered them. Where-
foze,thep agreed vntoAleratider , for be waga

epnce that pad bealte frendlp wptb them and
oO thep toode bp bpm alwape.x hen gathered
kpr Alerandera great hooff,and bzought bis
armp agapne Demetrpus. o the tiookpnges
ftroke battaple together, but Demetrpus bote


them.Ampabtpe looz Felde was tt ,contpnuing
tll the Sunne woentedowne, and Demetrpus
was flapne thefamedape. l
And Alerander fente Ambafadoures tnta
Ptolomp the kynee of Egypte topth thele w02
Des, fapinge: Sortomuch as J amcomeagapne
tomp iealme,and amflettein the thaone of mp
p2ogenptoures, and baue gotten tbedompnpon
Guctcommed Demetcpus, conquered thelande
and frpckenfelde topth him, lo tbhat we baue dif
confpted both bpm and bps hoolt and {pt inthe
thzone ofps kpugedome:Lette he nowe make
feenbetbpppetogetbet ; g metbp daughter
to topfe:lo ball J be thp fonne imlatwe, ebotbe
geue the retpardes, and het qreate dpguytye.


be Site the kpnge gane auntivere, fapinge:


apppe bethe dape wherein thou artecome a-
eect thelande of thy progenptours,and
etie in the throne of thep2 bpngdome. Asnow
fop ll F ful€pl thp wzptpng:but mete me at Pto
lomaps,thatioe mape fe oneanother, and that
3 mape marp mp daughter bnto the according
to fhp delye. ©o Ptolomp went out of Egypt
wptbbpsdaugbter Cleopatra, andcame vnto
tolomaps intbe.Clrii.peare:mberekynge A
erandermettebppm, and begane dlerander bis
Daughter Cleopatra and marped them at Pto-
lomaps toith great worthpppe.ipkeas the ma-


neris of kpnges tobe. Thienot kpna Aeran G


Det bnto Fonathasg , that be (huldecome mete
brm. So beiwente bonozablp tnta Ptolomaps
and there be mette the tiwo Rpnges , and qaue
them greate prealenteg of goldeand fyluer,and
foundefanoure hither: fpabte. Ano th
OTe


`


Fotenbica,
bli pii _,


oe


ofthe Machabees,
and there caine togethberagapnit Jonathas cer
tapne wpcked men € DHgractous perfons of Ff
racl,makpng complatntes of bpm, but f kpnge
tegardcd them not. As foz Jonathas,the hpnae
funded to take ofbpsgarmentes : andto


comm |
clothe bym in purple:and fo thep dpb. Then the


kpngeappopntedhpm to {pt bp bpm, and fapde


bnto bps Pzepnces:Go wpth bpm intothe mpd
deff of thecytpe,and make a pzoclamacion, that
no mancoplapne agapntt bim in anp matter, %
that noman trouble bpm fo: anp matter of caufe


So it happened :that hen his accufers fatwe


thethozthypetoppche was proclapmed of bpm,
and that be was clothed inpurple,thep fled cue=
trpcone. Andthe kpnqgemademuche of bpm,
wrote bimamong hischefe frendes, madebpm


ca. A Duke,and partaker of bis dominion.« Thug


Foteph.c


anion.” AOtathas went agapneto Jernfalë wyth peace


antiqu,


and qladnes qn tbe bundzed. Irv. perecame De
metrpug, p fonne of Demetrpus, from Creta in
to bps fatberg lande:wbereof when Alerander
Heard tell, be wasrpabte (mpe and returned yn


imanit a to Antioch. And Demetringchofe*xAppolonp=


us, (wbpchhad the gouernaunce of Celolpzpa)
tobebpscaptapne.  "


Hohegathercd a greate boot, andcamevn —


to Jamnia, and fent w0zde nto Jonathag, the
bpe Pref, faping: Daretthou wpthande vs,
thy felfealone: As foz me, Fambut laughed ta
frome and Hamed, becaufe thon pzoucdetetbp
Grengtharapnt vginthemountapneg. Pote
therfore, pi thou trutett inthpne owne trength
come Downe to vsintheplapne felde, and there


let vg proneour Mrength together : thouthalte |


fynde,that J haue valeaunt men of warre topth

meand palt kinowe whom FJ am,and theotbher
that fandebp me. — .

WW bpebefape:that pourefoote isnotablets

. Tande before our Face,fo2 thp fathers banebrne


? tpfe chaled into thep2 owne Lande. And nowe,


bowe wpltethou be ableto abpde (oo greate an
Holt of hozfinen and fotemen, inthe fede where
a is nepther rocke, fone, noz place to fle pnto?
When Jonathas bearde the wozdes of Ap-
Joiloníiug. be was moucdinhbpsmpnde:where-
orehecboletent oufand men, and went ont of
Jerufalem and Sims bps bother met pym for
tobelpe bpm. Jnd thep pptched thep2 tentcs at
Joppa, but thecityekept bymfozth fo: Joppa
tas an bolde of Appolloniug: Chen Fonathas
lapde leege to it and thep that were inthe cptp:
foz verp feare let bpm in,and foFonathas wane
Joppa. Appolonius hearpnge of thys,toke.tit.
thoufande boztemen, whth a great hoot of fote
and went as though be wold go to Asctus,and
cametmmedvatlp intothe playnefelde: becaufe
He bad fo many po2lemen,and put bps trufe in
the. So Jonathas folowedypon him tc Asotus
and there they flroke the battayl. Note had Ap
amide athoufande bozlemen : bebpude
Dem pzeuelp tnthetentes.And when Jonathas

' Enewe that fuch wapte was lapde Bebpnd them
thep went rounde aboute the enempes poft,and
thotteDartcs atthe people from themoutnpn
tothe enenpnae. Astor Jonathas people, thep


kepte thepe oder as be had comma unded them,
and the cnempes bogles wereeuec labourpnee.

CH TRE puron ESED Dis boot anD
fet tbenragapnitthefoote men. sto2 the bozlemë
Bee Ae a ae bepptcontptch them, and
thep fled. And thep that were fcatered inthe Feld


Gat them to otus, and came into thetempleot


Dagon tbep: {dol.that thep mpghte there laue
thepzlpues. But Jonathas let bee ppon Asot?
and al the cptpes round about it and toket ey?
goodes and*bzente vp the temple of Dagon, t
alltbemthatwereflevintoit; = = =
Thus were fllapne and bzent wel pe. wiii. a)
men. So Fonathas remoued f pork From thence
and brought them to Atcolon:where the men of
aula came fo2tD, and met bpm topth areate
0
boofteagapne to Jerufalem, wpth greate fub-
faunceof qood. And when kpnge Alerander


beardethele thpnges, betboughtetobo Jona-


thas moare worppppe and fente bpm a colar of
golde,asthe ble ig to begenen tnta üh asare
of the kpngeg nert blonde. De aue bpm allo the


| So llit.


a


(mach; tie


pppe. ffter thys went Jonathas and bis


cptpe of Accaron(whpep the landves belongpng


Ehereto)inpofiefipon: —

C The.ré. Chapter.
_ CEbeditcencpon betwprt Ptolomeus and Alerander bps
forine in lawe. Zhe death of Alerander. Demetrius cap gneth af
tet the death of Ptolomeus. Spon is befeged of Jonathas. De


metrpus teinge that no man refpted bpm, fendeth bie armpe az
Tapne.Zepp D


N D z


Ssa Y to optapne the kpngedeme of Aier
nder and tò iOpne if onto ppg ofpnerealme.cip
pon thpshetoke his iournep into Diria, ¢ was
letten into p cities, ¢ mé came forth tomete bim
fo: kpnge Alerander had commaunded them fo
todo becante De was bys father inlawe Nowe
when Ptolompe entered into ahpe cptpe,belefte
men of warreto kepeit,¢tbpsbe dpo thozowe:
outallthecptpes. And when became to Asotus


ar


YA , a *tibent aboute thozotve Dpiceate De pMe


xtljep themed bym the temple of Dagon and 2 y nisip


30tus Chat wag bzent bp, wpth the otber thpn-
gestohych wer deltroped, the deade bodpes catt
abzoade and the graues that thep bad made bp
the wape {pde,fo2 uch as were flapne inthe feld
And tolde thekpnae that Jonathas baddoneal
thele thpnges, tothe intentethep mpabte qette
bpm euell wpll.utthekpneefapd nota word
thereto. And Jonathag mettethe Aprige wth
bial at Joppa, wobere they faluted one
anotDersand toke thep2rette. 40 when Jong:
thas bad gone vy the kpnge vntothe water.
that wag called Cleuthberug he turned agapne
to Jerulalem. 2, if k
Mowe Ptolompe had gotten thedomypriyon
of tbe cptpes vito Selucpa wpo f fee coaftpma
gpnynge wpeked conncelg agapntte Alerander
and fente Ambafladourg bnto Demetrpus,fap


q inge: Come let vs make a bondebetwprte vs,


fo (hall J gpue the mp doughter that Alerader
. 7 ibb iii path


O


imach TAA *xtbe kpn


Thefpatte booke


Dath andthou fhalt raven intbp Fathers kpng


Dome. J repentthat ZT gauc Alerander mp dgu-
Obter foz be orth aboute toflape me. And thus
hetlaundrzcd Alexander, becaule he wolde paue
badbysikealme: :

Thus tie toke bpsbouabtes from bpi, aue
ber nto Demetrpus,andtorloke Alerander, lò
that bps malpcp was opetlp krioweri. And pte
lomp came fe Antpoch, tobere pe fet tivo crow=
nes bigs bps owne peeve ree Cotan Os ppt
andof Aiia. Inthe means Ceafon as bpnige 4
Icranber in Cpcila,fo2 thep that dwelte in thole
places bad rebelled agapnit bpm. wut when A
leranderDearde ofthps, became to warre agap
inftebpm.So kpnae Ptolomp bzoughte forthe
brs hookand met hymwptha mpagbepe power
and chaled bpm awape. Chen fled Alerander in
to Arabp-there tobe Defended, and kpnge ito-
lomapes bononceencrealed. And sabdyei p Ara
bpan {mote of Alerandersheade, and lent it Yn-
toptolomp. MWButthetbpsdedapeatter, dped
kpnge Ptolomy bpm felfe:¢ehep whom behav
fet inp ftronge holes, were Napne of thole that
Were Wwpthin the cptpeg. And Demetrpusrapg
nedin tpe bundzed and feuenand fprtpe peare.

At the fametpme gathered Jonathas them p
were in Jeiep.tolap vy trntothe catel which
was at Jerutalem and fo thep made manpe in-
ftrumentes of warreagapntit. Then wet ther
cerfapite pngodlp perfons(wbpebe bated thep2
owne peopic nto kenge Demetring:and tolde
bpm that Jonathas befeged the cafkel, So when
be bearde it be was angep,and immedpatlp ca-


-~ mento eie ony wot nto Jonathas


that be Huld lapeno fege tothe catel but come
and peake wptbbpminall the bate. Reuerthe
tefe ben Jonathashrardethps, becommaune
ded to belege tt Hechole alfe certapne of the cl-
dirgand pPrealkes of Flraell, and put bpm felfe
tuthepacell andtoke twpth bpm golde, {pluer,
clotbpnge, and dpuerfe prelentes, and tente to
Ptolomaps ynto p kpng,¢ foundbpm gracious

. And thougbe certapne bngodlpe men ofbys
owne people made complapntes bpon bpm, pet
entreated bpm a8 bps predeceflours


Wiberfore we ordapne all the coalkesok Tew:
rpe w thee cptpes,Lpdda and Ramatha(whpcd
are added nto Jew:pe from Samarpa)and al
the landeg pertapnpnaetbereunto,' to be feelpe
feperated foz luche ag do facrpfpce in Fetulalens
bothe concernpnge ‘the papmentes whpcbe the
kpnge toke pearlpe afozetpme, andthe truptes
allo of the carthe and trees. As foz other tprbes
ahd trpbuteg that belongethe bitte bs, wedpl-
charge them thercoffrome thps tpme forthe. 3r
ipke maner toe graunte puto them all the coto-
meg of falte , andcrownetares : whyche torre
bzoughte vite bs. And thpe'fredome Mallthep -
bauetpameand fteadefaft,trom thps tpme fo2tb
foz enermoze. Cherefozele that pe make acopp
of thele oure letters: and delpuer it pnto Jona-
thas, that it mape be kepte bpon the polpe mo-
unteina conuenpent place. | €

After thps when Demetepus thekpng fawe
tbat bps lande wag inreft,;and that noreiphat
ce thas made bpm:be fente awape all bys boote
etletpemanto bps owe place,ercepte an armpe
of fraungers, whome be broughtefrome the’
les of the eathen tnberforeallbystathersbo


hadde euellwpilat byns. x Rowe wagitheré one mcr


‘Ctppbon(that badbde bene of Xleranders parte
afoze )Mobpche when he fawe that all the boofte
murmured aapne Demetrpus he foenteto E-
malcuel the Arabian(p brought vp Antiochus
the fonne of Alerander jand lape fo2e bpon bpne
fodelpuer bymtpps ponge Antpochus that be
mpabterapgne in bps fathers teade. Hetolde
bpm allo what greatecuell Demetrpus bad da
ne, and Dowe pps men of warre loued pom not
andio temapned there alonge leafon.
And Jonathas fentoutokpnge Demcetrpus
fod? pue themoute whpche werein the Catell
at Jerufalem,einthe other refugpes, fortyep
dpd Farell greate barme. S0 Demctrpus lene
howe tnte Jonathas, lapinge: J wpl not onlp
bo thefe thpnags forthe and thy people butat tp
me cOnuenpente °F wpill bo both the and thp pea-
ple greate woztbpppe. Wut nowetbou palto
me a pleafture, pf thou wple lende me men to bel:
peme,fo2all mpite armpeis qooucfrome. So


had none e 2omotedbypmiinthelpght Jonathas lent ppm. tit. 49. trong men vnto An _
ofal big frendes,confpzmedbpm in thebpepzet Bie sa thep came bntothe kpnge: wherfoze Æ
bod, wrth all thetoozthppthathebadatozcand thekynage was verpe ladbe at thep2 comm png
madeHimHischefefrend. Jonathas allodelircd Wutthep Chat ivere of thecptpe(cucnan.€.¢.rr
émach.r.c, Eebpng that be wolde make Jewrpefrexwith <).men)qatheredthem together, ewolbebaue
anaid), Pthre heave cpties of Samaria ¢ the landes per flapnetiekpnge,wbych fledintabpscourt.and |


pettapnyngethersto:bpontbpsdpd Jonathas thecptpspnskeptetbhe Eretesofthecpepe’, and


10mpie bymthze hundeedtalentes Cdiberunto
he byngeconfented and gane Jonathas wrpte
tyne ofthe fame , contepnpnere thele wo2des:
ipng Demetepus fendeth qreatpnge vnto bys
bother Jonathas, and to the people ofthe Jew
es. iUe fend pou here acoppp of theletter whych
Wedpd ibzpte vnto ourcelder Lakbenug, ct-


„p CHPNge Pou that pe fhulde knowe if.


iipnge Demetrpus (endeth qreatpnee nto
Lathenushis elder. Worth fapetbfulneMethat
ourfrendesthepeaple of p Jetes kepe yutoys:
and forthe loupnge kpnones wbpchethep beare
folpardes ta: MWearedtermpRed todo fhe qood


begannetofpabt. Chenthe kpnge called for the
Gewes belpe.wohpch came to bpmaltorether, E
Went abzoade thorowe the cptpe,and fewe the
fame dapean. C. ea pr aik citp
Scale (poples tn that dape: and delpucrtd p
pnge.Dowbhenthe cptpspnsfawe thatthe Je-
Wes had qottentpp2 wpil of thecptpe,and thep
them felues dpfapopnted of thep2 purpole, thep
made they? (upplpcacyon wntothe kpnae,fape«
inge: Gaunt Ys peace .anDletthe Jewescealle .
fromtroublpnge bg and thecitp.and vpontpig
they caff away thep2 weapés. Tbus they made
Boece ere eee rene nn te
| Poote


a ——


ofthe Machabees,


fyabte ofthekpnie,and inthe fpabte ofall that
were inbps realme and toere fpoken of thozow
out the kpngedDome:and Co thep came agapneto
Jerufalem yeh areat qooves. l
Sothe kynge Demetrpus fat inthethzone of
bys kpnaedome,and bad peace in bpslande.Ne


cd uerthelefie,be dp fembled tn all that euer be (pak


and toithdzeloe bpmifelfefrome Jonathas, nep-
ther rewarded bpm accodpnere to the benefp=
tes whpche be baddoone fo: bym, but troubled
bpm verpelooze. After thyps came Crpphona-
gapue wprh ponge Antiochus: whpch rapaned
and was crowned kpnge. Chen there gathered
nhrtobpm all the men of toarre: whome Deme-
trpug bad put awape,thele foughte agapnit De
metrpus,whych fled and turned bps backe. So


. Sripbontoke the Elephantes, etoanneAntioch


And ponge Antpochus wote bnto Fonathas,
fapinge. 3 confpme the in thp zeakkehode, and
make the ruler ouer fourecountepes, thatthon
mapeft bea frende ofthe kpnges.

- Uponthps be lent bym golden bheflelles tobe
ferued in:and gaue bpm leaue todzpneke ingol-
de,to beclotbedinpurple,and to toeare acolarof
golde. Hemadebps brother Spmon alfo cap-
tapne,from the coaftes of Tpzus bntotheboz=
ders of Egypte. Chen Jonathastoke bps tour
nep, and wente thozothe the cptyes bepondethe
watcrof Jordane , andall the menof toarre of
pra gathered them ontobimfo: tobelpehim
So hecame Bnto Afcalon,and thep of the cptpe
receaued bpm honourably,and from thence wet
be vinto Gasa, but thep wolde not lette bpm in,
wherfoze belapde lege bntoit, burnpng dpand
fpoplpngethe placesthat were aboute thecptye

And thecptising of Gasa fubmptted them fel
neg bnto Jonatbas, whpche made peace wypth
them, but toke of their fonnes to pledge, fent thé
to Jerufalem, and went thozowe the countrevn
toDamalcus. Powe when Jonathas bearde
thatDemetrpus prpnces were come into Cades
(woDpch isin Galple)wpthagreate boote, pur-

ofpnge to put Demetepus outfrom malpure


~ antbecealme,became agapnitetbem, and lefte


ymon bps bzother inthe lande whpche came
to Betblura,and lapd leege to ita longefeafon
and bpiconfpted thent.othep delp2ed to bane
peace wyth bpm, tobpcbe be qraunted them, and
afterwarbe put them outefcome thence, tooke
thecptpe and fet men to k pon . And Jonathas
wptbh bpsbooftecameto thetwaterof Genelar,
and betpmes inthe moznpuge gatte themto the
ee of X302. 17%:

And beholde, the hoolkes of the Heathen met


=e ee andlapbe watche foz them in


mountapnes:fothat when Fonatbas came
agapnit them, the otber(whbpcbe werelaped to
‘watch rote onte oftheir placesand fougbt,and
fhep that were of Jonathasfpde fled, euery må


. and there was not one seminte ercepte Wa
fo


thathpas the fonne of Abfolomus and Judag p
fonne of Calpbp thecaptapneoftheboolte.
Thë Jonathas tent bysclothes lapde carte


~_Sppon ps beade,made bys praper ¢turnedagap


nexuta the inthe felde-wobere they foughte foge:


ther and be put them totlpahte Mowe when his
owne men:that vere fled lawe this:thep turned
agapne onto bpm and helped bpm tofolowe vp
ponallthep2 cnempes vntotbep2 tentes at Ca-
Des. So there were llapne of the Heathen the fa:
me Dape, fit.).men:¢ Zonathas turned agapne
to Jerufalem. | (Chbe.rit.Chapter
q[ J onathas fendeth Amballabours ta womg and fa the


` peopleof parta to renue thep2 cournauntotfrepiippp `


Jonathas putteth to fipght the pipnces of Demetrpus.
Srpphontaketh g onathes bp bpiceate. ii

Ran t a Dhåthas lepngetbhat the tpme wag

bre be mete to bpm,choleccetapne men and


w


S Aand torenuexthe frendihpppe pebhe
=t hem. Pe tét letters alfo nto Spar
taand to otber placesinipkemancr. SHothep
Went vnto Rome, and centred into tpe COME
fapde: Jonathasthebpe peeatt and the people o


the Jeweslente vs yntopou:fo2 torenue folde -
frendethpppeandbonde oflone: Cipontbystbe


Rom~apnes gauethem fre pal opten, tbat men
hulde leade the gome into the lande of Juva
peacpablpe. And thps is thecoppe of the letters
that Jonathas wote wnto the Spartiang.


Jonathas the bpe preat wopth the elders,pze


ffes,¢ the other people ofthe Fewes, fende grea
tpnge Dntothe Sypartpas thepz bzetheen. Ther
were letters fente longe agoa Ynfo sDniag the
bpe pzeatte,from Arrua: whpehe than rapgned
amonge pou: that pe are our beethen asthe
weptpnge made thereupon {pecpfpeth. And D-
filasentreated the ambafladoure that was tent
Houourablpe, andreceaucdtheletters: wherein
there thas leg A made of the bonde oflouee
frendthpppe : Mut as foz vs, wemdenofuche
waptpnges:fo2 whprwehauetbe bolpe bookes


of fcrppture in ourepandes td ourecomfort. Re 15


uerthelefle webad rather fente unto pon, fo: the
renupnge of the bzotberbed efrendfppppe: Let
we Mulde be fraunge bnto pou , foz it ig longe
fyrice the time that pelent woe untovg. ber
Foze:in the facrptpees that we offer and other ce
temonpes Dponthe bpe folempne dapeg and o=
ther we alwape temember pou topthoute ceal-
fpng(ipke ag realon ig andas it becommeth vg
to thpncke bpon oure bzethzen pea g arerpabt
glad of boute pzofperous bonour.

_ Anbdthough tee bane had great troubles and
Wwarreg,fo p the kpnges about vs baucfougpte
tenagapniths:pet wolde wenot be geeuous vn
topou, 103 to other of oure lovers and frendes
inthele warres. Eo: tor bauebadhelpe from he-
uen,fo $ we are Delpuered, and our enempes {ub
dued. Ciherfoze we chole Mumentus thefonne.
‘of Antpochus,t Antppater thefonne of Jalon,
‘efente them nto the Romans, Foz torenue the
olde bonde of frendihpps lone w tbem. We com
maunded them allo tocome bntopon, to falute
pou,¢todelpuer pou our letters,conceinpna the


renauactonofour bzotberbod. And no pe ball ¢
Dorpabt welltoqgeuevsan anlwertbherennto.


Anothps isthe coppe ofthe wzptpng,wobich
Arpusthebpnae of Aperi eti tnta Dniag


Aring prepir Uye SAA Sare peitinge


yntoDupasthebpg unde it


zeate. Jt ist
Pot


Tolle.


yj lent thé vnto Rome Foz to Lablytpe s.mac. vt. a


piit Mepipng -


- The ipite booke


wptpnye that the Spartpans aid Fewes are
DESH ai come out ofthe generacponof A-
brabam Andnow for fo muchas thpsig come to
oure knowlege, pe (hall Do well, to wpte nto
beg of Youre protperpte. Ag fo? bs, tebane weit
ten oure mpnde brite pou. Dure catch aiid good
Desgare poures and poursours. Thelethpnges
Eb onarpe fearn) Genes p
ibet Jonathas bearde Pp Demetrpug ppr:
ceg Were come forth to fpagbtagapit bpm with
gateste piai epetiafopr te weit tron JE
lem: mete them fnthelande of Pemathe, foz be
gaue tyemtot (pace to come into ps ownecoil-
Po ced E E te
cameaqapue and tolde bpm,that thep peyote
pore tocome vponbpmin thenpabte feafon
Miberctoe when the Sunne wag gonedotbne,
Jonatbascommaunded bps mento watche all
the npabte,and to be reabpe wpth tecapons toe
to tpabterand (et watche men roundeabonte the
oote, Wut whenthe adpecfarpes beardethat
“Foriathas was readpe wpth bps men ta the bat
tel-thep Feared and were afraped tn tbep2 bertes
and &pndled Ep2es in thepe tentes, brake bp,and
rat them atape Meuertbelefle, Jonathas g big
company bueioe ff not tpl the moming, Fog thep
fate thefp2es oes Se PA Pea IRIN
Then Jonathas folotwed bpon them, but he
impo bee not ouertake thent.to2 thep were goone
Oner fhe water Eleutherus’. So Jonathas de-
parted into the Arabpans (fobpcbe werecalled


zabader)flewe them andtooke thep: qoodes. He


proccaded further allo, andcame vnto Damal-
cus, a Wente thozowe allthecountre. ut Dp-
monbps bzother tooke bps tourney and cameto
Aicalon andto the nerte Fronge boldes, Depar-
tpnge vnto Joppa,and wanne it. Fo: peDearde
f tpep wolde Mande of Demetrpus parte, wher


| roy sh ei of thatre inthe cptpetokepeit


tter thpscame Jonathas bome agapne’, and
called the elders of the people together, aud deut
fed wpth them foz to buplde bp the Fronge pol-


des itt Jewepe,andthewallesof Jerufalem, to f
fet bp an bpe wall betwprtethe caffellandthe f


cptpe,for to feperate it frome the Cptpe, that it
@ MP bte be alone and that men Huld neptber bp


uplde bp the cytpe , andforfomucheas the
wall ypon the bjoke of the welk (pde( ralle Ca
phetalh woisfallen Dotone .theprepapzedit:
nd Spmon fet vp Abtadah in ate peer
madeit frongefertrnge'portes andlockes bpd
ft. owe whex Triphon purpoted torapane in
Alia,to be crowned, and to flape the khpnge An-


FFL ¢pochus:De was afraped that Jonathas wolde


not (uffre bpm:butfpghteagapnitbpm:dibere

02e he wente aboute to take Jonathas to kpll
bpm. So be Departed and came onto wWeetbhlan,
‘Chen wente Jonathas forthagapnite bymto p
battell wpth-rl.<).chofen men, and came Dnto
Wethlanallo. Wut when Crpphon awe that
Jonathascame wpth lo qreate anboofte to de-
{trope bym, be was afraped and therfoze be rece
avedbymbonourablpe , commendcd bpm wnta
all bpa frendeg and gauchbpm rewardeg and co


nog ell int. Ciponthpstbhep cametogetherfor [9 A
to AR


mauidcdhpsmeioF warreto beag obedpente
pnto bpm as to bpm felfe.
And fapd onto Jonathas, whp haf thou car
feb fhpg people to take fuch trauaple.feing ther S
(sno warre betwprte tgr T herfor fende them
bomeagapne and cholecerfapne mento wapte
bponthe,and come thou wth me to wtolomats
foz J wll gene tt the, wtpeother trong holdes
men of warre gthep: offprers:As foz me 3 mult
Departe,thys ts ondip the cauleof mp comming
Jonathas beleucd bpm,and bpd as helapd,put
tpnere atwape bps boote, wbpche went into the
lande of Juda. de keptebutthzethoufandebp
bym, wberof pe fent two thoufande into Galple
and one thoufande went wpth bpm felfe. |
 fotde affone as Jonathas entredinto Pto-
lomaps,thecptpspne(paredthe gates ofthecp= .
tpe, and toke bpm, and fletve allthem wpth the
Cwearde that came wpth bpm. Then fente Ttp
phonan bolt of fote menand poxlemenintoGa> -
Iple ekaia lapne,todetrope Jona
thagcompany. Wut when thep kneiwethat Joa
nathas was taken:and althep Gapnethat wap
ted bpon bpm.tbep tokecouncelltogetber, end
camefozthreabdp tothe battell. Sotopentbhep
whych folowed bpon them, fatve that it was a
matter of lpfe,thep turned backagapne. As foz
theotherthep went into the land of Juda pecea
bip,and bewapledFJonathag, and them ý were
wpthbpmetpabt fore. And Firael made greate
lamentacion. Chenall peathen p were round
aboute them fought to delfrope them. ffo2tbep
fapbe:nowe bauethep nocaptapne,noz anp må
to'belpe them. Therfoze, let vs ouercome them,
and roote outethep2 name fromamonge mm:
C Che.rtit. Chapter.


q aiir Fonathas was taken. Spmon is chofen captapne
oftwhome Prpphontakpngebps chplorenand monpe for
the rebempepon of Jonathas kplleth bpm ant bis chilbjes
She graue f Jonathas. Erpphon killeth Antpochus,ane
poleticth the realme. Demetrius taketh truce wpth Spmõ
Simon wpnneth Saza, Depoleleth thetower of Spon,
He maketh his onne Jhon captapne,
sues AA Dwe when Spmon hearde that æ
WA % ‘epphon gathered agreate pot 4
ave Fe cocome into theland of guda, and
icy Eto Deftropett , and fate that the
K people was ín greate fearfulnetfe
2s jens Se care: Decam bpto Jerufalem, g
gatbercbd the people together and gaue them er:
joztacpon,lapinge:Peknowe what great bat-
taples Jand mp bzethenand mp fathers boufe


bane fougbtefozthelaweand the Danctuarpe,


and what maner of troubles we pate fene:t


‘rotseoccafpor whrrof,xal mp brethren inhi po s , .
nefo? fracta fake and Jamleftealoone. And esie.


nowe letmenotfpare mpneotone lpfe inanpe
maner of trouble, fo? J am not better then mp
bretbzen,but wpll abuenge mp peopleandthe
HSHanctuatpe,oure childzen and oure Mopues:foz
althe eathen are gathered togetprr fodeftrop
vg of verpemalpee. `
Atthelewowestheherteg ofthepeople were


kpnoled together, fo that thep crped wptpalon: 8


de bopce fapinge: Thou Malte be our captapne
in tead of Judas, and Jonatbasthp bethan,
O202¢


— a


\


ofthe Machabees,


02de thou our battaple and whatfocucr thou
coimmaundef vs, we pall doit. Dope cathe-
ted all the men of arre,inabpng batt to fini
allthe walles of Jerufalem , whpche bemade


ffronge round aboute.€.jen fent be Jonathas


the fonne of Jblalomegwypth a fret hoof yn
to Joppa, whpcb droue them oute that were in
the cattell,and remapned there bpmilelfe. Trp-
pbo alfo remoucdfrd Ptolomais toptha great
ariipe,to come tuto the land of Juda , and Jo-
nathas tpthhbpmin twarde. And Spmonppt-
ched bis tentes at Bddus before theplapne feld

Wut when Cepphon kuetwe that Spmon
Gode bp i feade of his brother Jonathas, and
that be wolde'warrea gapnite bpm, be tent mef


Fengers Unto bpm Capence: Whereas we baue ges


kept Jonothasthp dzorher,itis for monp that
be ig otinge inthe binges accoilpt concernin
the bulpnes that be banin bande. Wherfoze,
de nowe an bundzed talentes of fpluer, and his
two fonnestoz {uretpe, that when bets letten
Fozth, be ali not folate vg, and we thal fende
magqapne. Neucrtbhelefle, Spmon kneiwe, p
edehembled in bps wozde, pet commaunded
ethe monpe an’ chtlosnto be Delpucred dnto
bpm, let hethuld be the greater enem aga ni
the people of afcael,andtap-becautebe t bite
not the monpand the chpldgen,tberefore ig Jo


€ nathas dead.
Do pman fent bpm thechplosenandan *


bundzed talentes but be opiembled,and wold
. hot ict Jonathas go Aftertvard came Triphs
into the landeto deffrope it, and wente roun be
aboute bp the wape that leadeth ynto Adoz.
Wut whereloenert
mo and bps bool allo. Rowe thep that were
in fhe caftell,tente meffengers into Tryphon,
that be huld make batt to come bpebe woplDder
fies, and to fendetbem bptaples And Cripho
mabereadp all bps bozfemento come the fame
Hyade. Mceuectbelelle it was averp areat inot
fo that be came notin Gaaladithi And ibbé be
pete? npe Walchama, be lewe. Jonathag and
bps fonnes ther,andtbenturnedtoz to co bome
into bys owne land. |
Chentente Symon to fet bys brothers
dead coate and buriedit in Bodin bis fathers
cptpe. Soal Fracl bewapled bpm swith great
lamentacpon,and mourned forbpm cif Aha
And Dpmon made vpon che fepulehze of his fa
ter and prs phe the buplopnge bpetoloke
tuto, of fre Fone ehpnd and befo2e,and fet vp
feuen pplicrs.one a gapni another (foz bps fa-
ther.bpsmother,¢ foure beeathien) g fet great
Lees round aboute wptharmes vpon them
D2 & perpetnal memozpe, and carued thpppes
beivoe the armes that t ep mpabt befene of më
faplpnginthetce. Ehps {epulchze wbpche be
madeat odin: Tanderh pet onto thpsdave.
+ foto as Trpphon went forth to walke


a conte wptbthe ponge Benge Antiochus, He lew bim
F MDE, Fii, i i! Fla rap


ed indig teade, croto
ned bymielfe kynge of Afa and dpd much euel
in tbe lande. Spmon alfo buplte vp the cafteig
in Jemzpe makpng them tronge topth bpe to


went tdether went St be


jene we receancd andare readp to makea fied
alt peace topth pon:pee,and to wzpt nto our
offpcers,foz to relate pou, concernpng the tbpn

fes tbere in wempde pou fre,and the appoint


ble. Che trong boldes whpcb pebaue buplded
{halbepoureotone. Asfoz; anpe ouerlprbt o2


faute commptted bnto thps dap; we fozceueit «


and f crotone tare that pe ought bs allo. And


among pou tobe tn our court,let them be wept
ten bp,that ther


8
from tien inthe bundzethe and feuententhe
peare. And the people of the Fewes beganne to
nepte in thep2 letters and actes on thig mane


much
pleofthe cptperente thepa Be theg


but begractous Dnto bg,and we baldo the {er
upre,
ut put thent oute of the
oufeg(wperein the pma=
ges Were tobeclenled,and{ocntredthe cptpe
WwithPlalmeg of papie, geupug thankes vni
to the £020.20 toben be badcat al abbomina
cions oute of the cptpe, be fet fuche men in itag
keptthe lato of Godandmadethe citie ftr og E
buplded a dwellpna place foz bymielfe. |
Mow, wben|tbepin the caftell at Ferulalé
Toere kepte fo Rraptelpe,that thep could not co
me foar into tbe countrpe,and mpobtnepther
opno; fone! al were berpe bungrp,andmanp
Ot thé fampiped todeath, Fn fo much that th
beflought Himé tobe at one wyeyt stoic
be graunted them. pole pne epen oute from
thenceand clenfedthe cattell from fplthpnefie.
And upon the thze and ttoentpedape of the fez
conde moneth in the.Clret.peare they entred in
to if with thankeigeupnge and beaunches of
Palme trees, opthParpes,Lroudes ,Sopmba
ripen: i onthe ater
Apte DEO od: fos thatthe qreat enempe o
aii iii a raed alracil


JE ol,


lri


Ẹ
in thetp2ft peare of Spmonthebpe pzeatte, secrtid


Symon tos Verve p P wolbdfpghbt Ë


Che fpelte booke


fraell twag ouercomte. 7
4 And Spmon ozdapned thatthe lathe dap
Mulde be kept euerp peare tn gladnefle,and ma
de tronge the byl of the temple that was belp
De the cafell, where be Dthelte bpmfelfe wyth
bps companp: &Spmonallo perceaupng that
bon bps fonne was aura man of armeg
made pnt captapne of all the hooftes and can-
fed bpm to Dwell at Gaza.

: The.ritit.cChapter.

ements W arapeence a Cati ze courant
pr prada gat bed topth the Romas; and wprh the people of
Sparta is renewed,
ræs 72 the.Cirri.peare athered Ring
E A 64 Demetrius hishoo ,anddeparted
WA a im pnto Gedia to get him helpe fo2 to

(eo Je fiabt againte Cripbon. Powe

pa 2 hen Arlaces the king of Derlia g
Media heard, that Demetrius wag entred wD
in bps bozdersbhelente one of hpspzpuces , to
take bpmalpue:¢to bıpngbpm onto brm. So
be wenteand flew Demetriushoot, tobe ppm
{clfe,bzought bym to Arfaceg whpch kept bim
in twarde. Andal the lande of Juda was in rete
fo longe ag Simi lpucd,for be fought p twelth


=—


——


>» gf bps people,tbherfoze, were thep glad to baue


him fo? theivruler,¢ to Do bim wo:Hip alipap
éymon teanne the cptp of Joppa alto for


15 anbauen totone and made tt an entraunce into


Zeu.trbf.a


_ pps beotbher thas made bpe pzeafte in


wh
ma na


aw iia


C red


the Jleg ofthelee. Peenlargcd the bozderg of
bps prople,and conquered them moze land. be
gathered bp many of toep mop were Af
foners:be had the bompntoof Gasa. Wethiura
andthe caftel, whpcb be clented from ed Aa
and there was no man that refpited bpm, Sop
cucrp man tplled bps grounde in peate,the lad
of guda andthe trees qaucthepefrute anden:
creace. Che elders lat all in Judgement g toke
thep2 deupce Foz the wealth of the lande the pig
men put on ozthpp q barne Ne pon them. He
y2oupded vptaples foz the cptics.¢ made good
lp Eronge holdes of label da fame of brs
wo2tbpppe was {poken of vnto thecnde of the
{hoz lde.* Sfoz be made peace thozotve oute the
lande,¢ Ziraell was ful of mp2th and Jope.
Euerpeman fat vudee bps vpne andtpage
tres,and there wasnomanto frap them atoap
There basnonc inthe land to fyabt agapnite
them fory the bpnges were ouercome . Ie
belped thofe p therein aduerfite among bps peo
le, be thas Dpligent to fe the latoekepte,as fo
ucbas were wngodlp and wicked be toke thë
awape. Deret bp the Hatictuarpe,and cucrea-
{cd the bolpe ve HMA A he a
~~ Bihen the Romans ¢ the Spertpang had
gotten wo2d,p Jonathas was dead thep were
epabte tipe Eur vyen tper Dearne f a mis
3 teade
g howe be badwonne the lande agapne wea 4
cptpesin it tbep tezote bnto bpm in tablego
b2afle,torenue thefrendetbpp,¢ bonde ofloue,
pch thep hadmade afore ith, Judas y Jo
pe bpsbeetbacn.Wabpebe weptinges were
befoze the congregacpon at Jerulalem.
wud thpsis the copp of the lettcrs that the


Eparipanstente. Che Senators ecptesinsoe
partalende atetpng vnto Spmonthe great
preatte, pth thee bers, P2eales, ethe other
people of the Je wes thep: beethzé Wihan pour
ambaflppours tbat were ente wnto our people
cettifped bs of poure ozthpype honour æ pza
{perous weltb, we were glad of thepz cominge
g bane tWapttenthe errande wbpch ipep fpake
before the coilatl of f people namlp p uments
ugthe fonneof Antiochus € Antipater the fone
of Jald the Jewes amballidours are come Vna
to vs. foztorenue the oldefrendclhpppe wpth
Ds. Upon thps the peoplecomtented,p the men
{hulde bebonozablp interrate thart copp
of thep? errand hulde be Written tn the fpecial


bokes of the people,foza perpetuall memozpe m


puto pSpartpans.per.¢ that toe Hulde fende
acopp of thefame bnto Spmd the great prealk
After thps dpd Spmå fende Numenius vnto
Rome,wopthagoldenthplacofa thoufandpo
unde oepabt,to confpzme the frendihpp hptd
them which when the Romas Dnderitove,chep
fapde:what thankes pall we recompéce agap
ne onto Spmon € bys chpldzen “oz be bathe
ftablpthed bysbeethect,ouercome the enempe
es of Jiraci Wiherfoze thep qraunted bpm to
befree.Andal thys wote tbe Fetwes tn tables
ofbzafle,g nailed it puto f pillers bpd p moűt
Spon. The coppe ofthe wiptpngets thps.


Theevabtce tioentpe dape of the Bonethe


*Elulinthe bundzed.lrriipeareinthe thpzde augut,


peare of Spmon the bpe peale, inthe greate
conaregacpo of the pzefteg.tulers of the people
g elders of thecountry at Alaram, were thele
49020¢8 openlp Declared.


ffo Co mucheasthere was much warrein €


oure lande therefore Symon the Tonne of Wa
tathias(come ofthe chplozenof Jarebjandhig
bzetbhaeni put themfelues in parel ,ærefpftedthe
enempesg of thep2 people: p thep2 Sanctuarp €
law mpabt bemapntapned,¢dpd thepz people
arcate oz(bpppe: Jonathas inlpke maner af
igh badqouerncdbis people ¢ bene thep2bp
p:ealte:dped g lpeth burped befpde bps cloders.
After $ wolde thepe encmpeg daue troden
thep2 bolp thinges noer Foote, deffroped tbeir
tind P RERE pocagy thep2 Sanctuary. Che
Simon withitoode them,¢ fought for bys peo
plefpentmuch of bis owne monpe, weapened
Lolpaepetr-apiinly i. Seip hr enpecr tag
pes, mnade trong thecitics of Juda, with Seth
ta Plpeth bpon the bozders of Jew:p! where
the osdpnaiice of thep2 enemies lape Lom time)
and iet the Fewes therefor to kepeit.,


He made falkJoppaallo, which lpeth bpon $ a


fec g Gasa pbo2rdreth bpd Asotus,(wherthe
enemics Dwele aforedetpere be fet- eet +
peit:¢ wbatfoeuer was mete foz the fubdut
of the aduerfarpes,p lapd be therin, Mow w


fhe peoplefawe thenoble actes of Simon, and  -


what wo2hippe he was purpofed to do fo, the
bps godly bebauoure, ¢ fapthfulne Ne tobich he
kept bnto them, g bowe pe fougbt bp alwapes
the welth of bys people,becaule be ppdall thps
therfoze thep chofe bpm to bethep2 princet bP

peatle


A


T = == ——— * a - F
h È


of the Machabttg,


piealte. And inhistprte they prolpercd well bp
bomo thatp ieatben were také oute oF thep?
and: t cbep allo whpeb were Mi the cptpeof Da
uid at Jerufalem inthecattel (where thep hwent
ont andDdefpled all thpnges that were aboute p
Hatictuarpe,and dpd greate barme wntoclenlp
tieffe and Spmon put men of the Fewes in it,
fozthedefence of the lande and cptpe,and fer by
the walles of Zerufalem. |
And kynge Demetrius confpzmed bpm in
Psbvepzealthode,madebym his frende,¢ dpd
m great worp ozbe barde that the R0-
mans called the Pewees thep2 frendeg, loners F
bactpren.powebonagaulpethcp receaucd Sp-
mons ambalabourg: howe the Fewes ad prea
ftes contented that be tpuld be thep2 papnee and
- ppe preafkeperpetuallp(tpll Godrapted vp the
true prophet )e that be Hulbebethey2captapne
focate for the Manctuarpe,ttolet oitpeers wp
pon the wozkes therof, ouerthelande, ouer the
Weapons,ouce the houles of Defence, to make
prouplpon fo2 the poly thpnges, eto be obeped
of enecp man, ¢allthe waptynges of the lande
to be madeinbpgname that be Muld be clothrd
inpurple ¢ volde, q thatit bulbe be latotull foz


none ofthe peoptenozpzealtestobzeake anp of


thefe tbpnges, to wpthtande bps wordes, noz
tocali anp congregacpon inthe lande wpthout
bym, that be Mulde beclothed in purple,and we
ateacolat ofgolde. And pithere were anpe
iobpche dpfobeped 0t brake thys ozdpnaunce
that be hulde be punpiped. ;
Soalthe people confentedfo alow Sims
and todo accozdinge vntothele wows: Sp-
mon alfo bpm felfe toke pon bpm, and twas cb:


tente tobe the bye zealte,the Captapne , and
Prpnce pPtbe Jowes aud preatkes,¢ to goucrne
< -And thepcommaunbded to make thys


Wiptyng intables of ballt and fallen itto fje
compafle of the Sanctuarpe itt ant open place, ¢
lape vpacopp otcbefame inthetreturpe , that
Symon and pps polterpte mpahte haue it.

| Che.rv Chapter. _ |

@ Antiochus maketh a cournaunt ot frendthpp tb Simor
Hriphs ts pertecuted The Momas wit letters onto hinges
Enacpis inthe defence of the Hewes. dntpochus refutpnge

the belpe that Simon fent bpm, bzeaketh his coucnaune,
4, i Drouet kpnge Antpochous the fon
dae of Demetriusfentelettters from

Nithe gles ofthefee, tunto Spmott the

UAW hype peafte and papnce of the Jetors
and toall thepeople,contapnyng thele woes
Antyochus the king lewt y qeeatpng vntoSi

mon the bye prealf, and tothe people of the Fe-

_- ‘wes. E02 fomuche , as certapne topched men

“‘ ‘Hane gottenthe kpngpome of our peogenitours

Zam purpoled tochalengethe realme agapne,

and toreltorett tothe olde eltate. .

Wiberefore J haue gathered a create hoolke
and made (hpppes of warre that J map qd tho
rowe thecountrp,¢ be wy ei of them which
hauedeftroyed ourlande,and waed manyecp=
tyes in mp realme. And therfore, note J make
the fre alfo from alltbe trubutes , whereof all
kpnaes mp progenptourshaue dilcharged the:
andtrons otbercutomes( wher from thep Haue


= Sol.lrit,
releated the )wbatlorkerthep be:pee;Jacticthe =
leaue to mpte monp of thpne otone wpthin tb
lande-Ap for Jerulalem, J wpll that it bebolp
and fre :andallthe beapons and houles of de-
ferice, whpch thou hatte buplded, and kepette in
thpne bandes, thalbe thpne. Where asany thin
ge 18 02 thalbe opnge wito the kpnge, 7 fo
geuctt the, from thps tpine fozth foz euermoze:
And then the paue obtapned oute kyngdome
we thal do thesthp people, and the temple great
wozpp:fo that pour houour Halbe knowe tho
tow out tbe wholetwold. i — X

Inthe. Cirrtitt peare went Aiitpochus into
bysfatherslande.ardaltbemenoftvarrecame
together bnto bpm, fo that fewe were left with
a a's Sothekpng Antyochus folotwed vp
ponbpmt,buthe fed unto Dota, which lpeth bp
the tee {pde:for belawe thatither was mplibete
commpnge vrito bpm, and that bys pootte had
forfakenbim.@ben came Antiocpns nto Do: -
tawpthan.C.¢tiwentpe thoufande meh of ar-
mes Dpontoote,¢ rem Spemeaube porle men:
SHobecompafled the cptperounde abonte; anv
the Mhippescame by thelee, [Thus thep vered
thecptpebp land and bp water,info much that
thep Cuffred noman to goinoz oute. ieee
_ Mi the meaneleatoncamerMuinenits (and €

ep that bad bene with bpm from the cvtpe of matii
Rome baupnaeletiers waptten brito the kpr
gesand proupnces , therein twere contapned
thefewoozde8: Lucius the Wapze of Rome fen:
detb qreatpnge vito Stolomp the kpnge. Thig
ambafladours of the Jewes dute frendes being
fentfrom Spmon the bye pecatk, and from the
people ofthe Fewes, came vnto vg fo2torehue
the oldefrendibpp aud bondeof lone; broughté
a pld of golde wepinge a thoufande pounde:
fohpch we iwere contente to receaue of then.
Wiherfore we thoughtit good to wpte titi
the&pnges and proupnees todo them no par-
me.no: fo take parteagapnit them,thep: cptes
e8,n02 countrpe neptbher tó mapntapnethep2 e-
nempes agapntt tbem. DE there be anp topcked
perfonstherfozre fled frometbepzcountrp ori
topou,delpuer thembnto Spmonthe preatte
that be map punpthetpesn accozdpnege to thep2
owne lative.

The lame wordes torote the Romans alfo x5


‘onto Demetrius thekpng,toAttalus, Arava,


Arfaces,and to all the regyons.as SHamflane
totbem of Sparta, Delo, ids, Didon, en
tia, Sathog, Pamppilia, Licia, Alicarnaflum
andto the ikbobdes,to Hallis, Coo, Hida, Ara
do, Gortina, Gnuibu.to Cipres aiid Cireh And
of euerpeletter they tent a coppe to Esyinon thé
bpe preatte ot tothe people of thedewes: Sa
Antpachus the kpnge brought bys poofte vnta
Wozathe fecondtpme to take it:tohere he made
Diners ozdpitaunce of fearre , and kepte tp:
phortin,that be pulte not come forth. Chen fee
Spmonto Antpochus two thoufande cholo


‘mento belpe bym wpth gelde,fpluer,and other


plenteous gere :-Meucethelés,be wold not teeea

nethem,but bake all the couenaunt nee be

made to Sims afore, to dzew Himfelf pun
ije fsi


The feconde booke


Iefente Vepenobius alfo a frend of his vn
to Spmon,fo2 torcalon wopth bpm, fapinge:Pe
wptholdc from me Joppa and Gasa (wpth the


cattell thatigat Jerufalem ) wbpebearecpties -


of mp realme, whole bozders pe Dane delkroped
and one great euell inthelande, baupnge the
dompnacion in manp other places of mp kpng-
Dome.Wdiberfozenowe delpuer the cpties which
pe bauctaken, wopth the trpbutes of the places


thatpe baue rule pon toptbout thebozvers of ©


Jempe: D2 els yene me fpue hundzcd talentes
of [piner:pee,¢ foz the barme that pe baue done
inthecpties:and foz thetributes of the fame o-
ther fpue bundzedtalentes. PEno,we thalcome
and fpght agapnit pou.


E Ho Athenobiugs the hpnaes frende came to


Jerufalem , and when he lawe the qreate Woz-
{bpppe and bonoure of Spmon in golde,fpluce
and fo great plentpe of oznamentes, be maruap
led, and tode Spmonas the kynge commaun
ded bpm: Chen anlwered Spmonandfapd bn:


quoi pl. ce to bim: As fo: vs, we bane nether taken other


mens landeg, nezMoptbolden them, but onelpe
onre fathers berptage, wobpcb our enempes had
pnrpabteoufipein poflefiponacertapnetpme :
Tbhpsberptage ofoure fathers baue we chalets
ged inp2ocefle of tpme. And where ag thou com
plapneftconcernpnge Joppat Saza, thep dpd
greate barmetooure people and inourelande,
pet wll we gene an bundzed talentesfo2 them:

 Penerthelefle, Athenobiugsantwered bpm
not one fwo2de, but turned agapne wzothfullpe
wiitothe png andtold bimall thele woes, €
the creat diqnitpe of Spmon, wopebalthat he
badiene,g the kpnge was berpeangrpe. Inthe
meanetpme fled Crpphon bp thpppe nto D2-
thofadia. Then the emae made Cendebeug


captavne of the fee coaft,and gaue bim an bool
M tn and bozfemen, commaundinge bp


toremouetbeboolfetowarde Jew:pe, and to
buplde bp thecptie of Cidzon, tomake vp the
portes,tto warreagapnt the people ofthe Je-
wes. As forthe kpnae himlelfe-befolowed vp:
pon Trpphon.o Cendebeus came dnto Fam
nia, beganto vere the neople, totread Downe
“Jew2p,to take the people pzploners,to flap the


Caachi d €xf0 buplde bp Cedzon, where he Cet horlemen


and otber men of warre:that they mpgbt come
fozth,and co thozowe the irctes of Jewp; like
asthe bpngebadcommaunded, — )
| e.ri. Chapter.

q cenvebeus the captapne of Antiochus boot (s put

(ofipabt of pfounes of Spmon. Ptolomeus the Conne

of dbobus kplieth:Spmon and bps two onnes at abaz

ket Ibon kplleth them that Ipein wapte Foz bps ipie,


see et came Bhd vp from x Gasa, and


4 ez : ; zis) tolde épmon bys father, what Cë-


Pa rs debeus had Done amonce thep2 peo
I o- sw ple.Tipon thps called Spmon two
Be Of hig cldette fonnes, Judas g gbon
and apd Unto Chem: J and mp beethzenand mp
Fathers Doufe,baueeuerfrom oure pouth bp bn
totbps dapefougbten agapntt the encmpes of
Blracl, €Godgauevs good fortune to delpuer
Sicael ofte tpmes. And nowefo2 fomucheas FJ
am olde,be pein ead of mee mp brethee teno


forthandfpabt for ourpeople andthe helpe of


Pe plane yidan contorted ootemen and


them. And when be law that the people was a
frapedto Gone Che aimee cate went oner


— Chen Fhon fet bps boz el
ino2d2¢,the one bythe otper,fo2thepe enceps
Hozfemen were bverpemanpe. Sut whentbep
blew vp p pzealtestrompettes.Cendebeus fled
topth bps boote, whereof manp were flapne,¢
the remnaunt et vehebgth tronge bolde
Judas alfo Jobngbzotber was wounded at the
fame tpme.and Jhon folowed Epil bponthe e-


nempes,tpll became to Ced20n which be bupl: macro.:


ded. The enempes fiedalfo wntotbe towers
that were inthefclbes of ASotus,andthole did
Sbhonburnebp. Thug werethere flapnetivo
thoufande men of them,and Jhonturned again
peacpablp to Jewape. - | |

Aud inthe Felde of Jericho wag: Ptolompe
the fonne of Abobus made captapne, whych be:
caule be bad aboundaunce of fpluer and golde:
(Foz be babdemarped the Daughter of Spmon
thebpe preat wared proude mbps mpnde,and
thought to conquere thelande,pmagenpneg fal-
hed agapnit Spmon and bps tones, todeltrop
them. Moweas Spmon was qoingeaboute
thozotve thecptpes.that were inthe countrp of
Jcw2pe,and carpngefoz them became downe
to Ferpchotopth Gatbathias and Judas bys
fonnes,injtde. Clervii.peare in the.ri. moneth


calledD* Sabat. Chen Ptolomp the fonne of A -.
bobugreceaued them(but wpthoptceate ) inton e"


a trög boule of ppg called Doch,fohpch be bad
buplded where he madet dt tag :


Do whe Hpuio and bys lõnes itere merpe q


and bad dronken well solomp ode bp myth
bpsmen(wbombe ba pb ther jand toke tiep
wreapong,mtred into fe banket ponfe, ¢ Newe
Spmon wpth bps two fonnes,and certapne of
bps leruauntes.Sucbe greate vnfapthfuinefe
dpd Ptolomp iu Flracl,erecompenced cuel fes


- good. Then wotethys Ptolomp the fame vn-


totbekpnge Antpochug, requpzpng bpm'that
be uld fendebym an boote to felpe Dom e
o ulde be delpuer bymthe land, wpththe cp-
tpesand tributes ofthe fame. Pelente other
men alfo bnto Gaza, Foz to take Fhon , and
wote Dnfo thecaptapnes tocometo bpm, and
be Wulde qene them {plucr,qold,and reivardeg
And to Ferufalem pe fente other totake it, and
the Sanctuarpe. ae
Then ranne there one before, and told Fh


in Ga3za.that bys father and bis bzethzen were D


flapne,and bowe that Btolomp bad Tent to flap:
bym alfo. ben Fhon beardethps bewag fore
abakhcd,and lapde bandeg of them that fere

come


feing thig folowed him —
femen and footemé 23


ee Bs


-E Se eg aa =


ofthe Mathabers; | Sol lr iii,
come CodelFrop him, = lletwethemt,fozbeknewe, npintotbecomipaffeokthetemple: andio thep `
that thepwenteabouttokpilbpm.  .. .. hut thetemple. ti A3 ji

Asafo: other thpngeg concernpnge Jhon: oF — Nowe when Antpochus entred bp opening
bps warres, of bps noble actes (whereinbebe theppreupe tntraunce of the temple the preattes €
baucd bpmifelfemanfullpe) ofthebuplopngeot Ronedthecaptapne todeath , beooed the inpcas
walles whpch be made, and otber of bps beabeg cesthat were with bim, mote of thep2 beades ,
Kgs Apel a ee e peat andtheewethemoute: Jnallebynges Gov be
ftode, from the time forth epat betas madeppe PAIR ee ere the wecken into

andes.


peeafteattes bps father: oure pa | ` :
13° Se re ate - - Where ag we are nowe purpofed to kepe the
@ Thecnide of thefp2Eboke |, purpftcacpon o€ thetemple ppon the fpue and
of the Hachabees . Fwentpedape ofthe moncth Caflu, wetpought
TAME .. . ., heceflarp to certifpe poutherof, ý peatrompabt
a { | D be oke of *bepe the tabernacles, feat bape, ethedape of
i CiecCondDe Vo + the tpe wbich was geuen be, when Pebhemtag ter.rriii.e
-tbe Bachabees. offered , after that be = fet bptbe temple and sure.
! Sop seedling the aulter.j€o2 what timeasourefathers were "7
CEbefpit Chapter. . ito Perli s (inline
nnn E it ty e e o toate LevaWape tnta Perlis, theprealtes (wobpch the
Cen er Oe ee anionini SOUGDEEDE poise bE Gob ) tobe the tyre pre
to geue thanckes foz theveath of Antpochus . OftYefeie help trom theaulterandbpd itina vallep, wher
that was bpd inthe pret. Zhe prarer oF Mehemiag, — ag Wag a d2ye pptte and therein they kept it, fo
pr Iebeethunoftheyewestobpch that tbe place was bubnowne vito eueep man.
id peard beat Jerufalem, and intbeland  ——- f2owe after manpe peaves whenit plealed<


the ditto. thofe bze bed Pepen hulde be fente from the king
toes thataretho- of Perlia,xbelcnttpechilberschildzenofthote.. _.
té:qoodfostune, preattes( which had bpd the fpze to feke tt: Ano He.ot-s.5 4
- _____,_ astheptoldeos,thep foundenofpze bue thpcke $
andthpnekeppd water. Che cOmaundedhethemtovrawe tt vp
scouenaunte that be pete A Abraham, to ide it bím and the offerpnges wopthall .
acob bpsfapthfulleruauntes:* E Rowe whe the facrifpces were lapd on ¢ 920200
chanbert ,thatpemapeloueand the pecalt Mebemtagcommaundedtolp:pnkcle
eruebim:pee, audperforme bpsiopllinpth an theme tbe wood wpeh water. When this was
iobole perf and of awplipngempnde. He open Done, andthe timecome $ the funne pone which
pourbertesinbpslawe andinbpscommanttde afore was ppd inthe cloude, there waga greate
oka race Dear POLRES, bet one Fpze kphdled. Fn fomuch p euerp man maruap=
wptbyou,andieuerfogtakepouintpmeocttrou led. Nowe allebe preattes praped, whple theta
ble.Cbhysisheareourepraperfozpou.  .  erifpee Wasantakpnae. Jonatdas prayed firt
(Mibattpmeas Demetrius rapgned,ththe andtheother gaue aunlwere. ieee
Ciric.peare, we Jetes Wzote dhtopouinthe | And Mebemias praper was after thys mas
trouble æ bpolencethbatcamebntobs.gnthole ner: £020 God maker of all thinges,thon fee
peres, after $ Jalondeparted outeot thebolpe artull¢ Erog,thon rpabteous emercpful, thou
landeand kpngedome, thepbzent bpthepoetes Pp artonelpagracioustkpnge,onelplpberall, on
and {ped innocente bloude.Chenmade weoure lpefutke.'Almpghtie and enerlattpnge, thou f
zaper Duto the Lowe, and iwerehearde:weof delinerek Zlrael fromal trouble,thou that batt
fered and lpabted thecandels.fetyngeforthca- tholen tbe fathers .andbalored theni, reccaue
xeatrug.¢ BCS and beeade: x And Hote come pe vite the roe o Te piae ele emnc people o: Hirael pze:
Saourmber-featt of tabernacles inthe monetht Canu.  lernethpne oteie pozcpon, and balote it , qa-
Jnthe, Cirrrvtit.peare,thepeoplep was therthotc together, thataretcatercd abzode fra
| atFJerulalent ein Jewzp, thecouttlaplegudas bs: delpuer them thatare wnder the cathens
' bpmCelfefent bis whollomefålutaciondnto B bondage;loke bpon them whpcharé dplpptrna
ritobolug king Piolomaismafter,whichbtame abbozred,p the Heathé map khowe gfe botes
of the yencracponof the anopnted preaftesand part our God: Punih them $ oppzefie g proud
tothe Jewesthat wereitrEqppte:jnfomoche tp put vstodithononr. Set by people agapne
_ a8 Godhathdelpucred vs fromagreatparelles inthp help place likeas Mofes hath poke,
~~‘ wetbancke bim brablp. Fn that toeretpfted fo nd the Prealtes fonge plalmes of thanc- NFFS
mpapty akong. And ioppsbebrourhe merout kefgeupnge,(o longeasthelacrpfice endured, |
of Perlis by heapes.to fight agaynite bs and p Powe when thefacrifpce was hent , Pebemt-
bolp cptic.ffoz ashe wasin Perfisiiamelp,che ascommaunded the greate fonestobe fpzpnc-
captapne withibeqreatbotbeperpiedinthe kled wpth therclpoueofthewwater: x Wibpehe
templeof Mancag,bepngedpleeaucdtporowe woben it wagdone thet waskpndled a flamme Saha
the Denpee of Maneas preakes. Wo: asbetvas ofthemallo-but it wag coniumen, thozoive the cce.rivig.a
urpofedtobaue dwelt there. Antpochuselps legbte, that @pned fromtheaulter. So whey
Frenioes came therber,to receatem hmonpfo, thysitatter was knomne,itinas told the kinge
adowep. Sohn Naneas preattes badlayde of Perlta,that inthe place wherin the preafeg
Fozthebe money, be entro wpthafmall compas pich Weie ted atvape,bad bpd Fpze, there ape:
< = red


ofthe Mathabers; | Sol lr iii,
come CodelFrop him, = lletwethemt,fozbeknewe, npintotbecomipaffeokthetemple: andio thep `
that thepwenteabouttokpilbpm.  .. .. hut thetemple. ti A3 ji

Asafo: other thpngeg concernpnge Jhon: oF — Nowe when Antpochus entred bp opening
bps warres, of bps noble actes (whereinbebe theppreupe tntraunce of the temple the preattes €
baucd bpmifelfemanfullpe) ofthebuplopngeot Ronedthecaptapne todeath , beooed the inpcas
walles whpch be made, and otber of bps beabeg cesthat were with bim, mote of thep2 beades ,
Kgs Apel a ee e peat andtheewethemoute: Jnallebynges Gov be
ftode, from the time forth epat betas madeppe PAIR ee ere the wecken into

andes.


peeafteattes bps father: oure pa | ` :
13° Se re ate - - Where ag we are nowe purpofed to kepe the
@ Thecnide of thefp2Eboke |, purpftcacpon o€ thetemple ppon the fpue and
of the Hachabees . Fwentpedape ofthe moncth Caflu, wetpought
TAME .. . ., heceflarp to certifpe poutherof, ý peatrompabt
a { | D be oke of *bepe the tabernacles, feat bape, ethedape of
i CiecCondDe Vo + the tpe wbich was geuen be, when Pebhemtag ter.rriii.e
-tbe Bachabees. offered , after that be = fet bptbe temple and sure.
! Sop seedling the aulter.j€o2 what timeasourefathers were "7
CEbefpit Chapter. . ito Perli s (inline
nnn E it ty e e o toate LevaWape tnta Perlis, theprealtes (wobpch the
Cen er Oe ee anionini SOUGDEEDE poise bE Gob ) tobe the tyre pre
to geue thanckes foz theveath of Antpochus . OftYefeie help trom theaulterandbpd itina vallep, wher
that was bpd inthe pret. Zhe prarer oF Mehemiag, — ag Wag a d2ye pptte and therein they kept it, fo
pr Iebeethunoftheyewestobpch that tbe place was bubnowne vito eueep man.
id peard beat Jerufalem, and intbeland  ——- f2owe after manpe peaves whenit plealed<


the ditto. thofe bze bed Pepen hulde be fente from the king
toes thataretho- of Perlia,xbelcnttpechilberschildzenofthote.. _.
té:qoodfostune, preattes( which had bpd the fpze to feke tt: Ano He.ot-s.5 4
- _____,_ astheptoldeos,thep foundenofpze bue thpcke $
andthpnekeppd water. Che cOmaundedhethemtovrawe tt vp
scouenaunte that be pete A Abraham, to ide it bím and the offerpnges wopthall .
acob bpsfapthfulleruauntes:* E Rowe whe the facrifpces were lapd on ¢ 920200
chanbert ,thatpemapeloueand the pecalt Mebemtagcommaundedtolp:pnkcle
eruebim:pee, audperforme bpsiopllinpth an theme tbe wood wpeh water. When this was
iobole perf and of awplipngempnde. He open Done, andthe timecome $ the funne pone which
pourbertesinbpslawe andinbpscommanttde afore was ppd inthe cloude, there waga greate
oka race Dear POLRES, bet one Fpze kphdled. Fn fomuch p euerp man maruap=
wptbyou,andieuerfogtakepouintpmeocttrou led. Nowe allebe preattes praped, whple theta
ble.Cbhysisheareourepraperfozpou.  .  erifpee Wasantakpnae. Jonatdas prayed firt
(Mibattpmeas Demetrius rapgned,ththe andtheother gaue aunlwere. ieee
Ciric.peare, we Jetes Wzote dhtopouinthe | And Mebemias praper was after thys mas
trouble æ bpolencethbatcamebntobs.gnthole ner: £020 God maker of all thinges,thon fee
peres, after $ Jalondeparted outeot thebolpe artull¢ Erog,thon rpabteous emercpful, thou
landeand kpngedome, thepbzent bpthepoetes Pp artonelpagracioustkpnge,onelplpberall, on
and {ped innocente bloude.Chenmade weoure lpefutke.'Almpghtie and enerlattpnge, thou f
zaper Duto the Lowe, and iwerehearde:weof delinerek Zlrael fromal trouble,thou that batt
fered and lpabted thecandels.fetyngeforthca- tholen tbe fathers .andbalored theni, reccaue
xeatrug.¢ BCS and beeade: x And Hote come pe vite the roe o Te piae ele emnc people o: Hirael pze:
Saourmber-featt of tabernacles inthe monetht Canu.  lernethpne oteie pozcpon, and balote it , qa-
Jnthe, Cirrrvtit.peare,thepeoplep was therthotc together, thataretcatercd abzode fra
| atFJerulalent ein Jewzp, thecouttlaplegudas bs: delpuer them thatare wnder the cathens
' bpmCelfefent bis whollomefålutaciondnto B bondage;loke bpon them whpcharé dplpptrna
ritobolug king Piolomaismafter,whichbtame abbozred,p the Heathé map khowe gfe botes
of the yencracponof the anopnted preaftesand part our God: Punih them $ oppzefie g proud
tothe Jewesthat wereitrEqppte:jnfomoche tp put vstodithononr. Set by people agapne
_ a8 Godhathdelpucred vs fromagreatparelles inthp help place likeas Mofes hath poke,
~~‘ wetbancke bim brablp. Fn that toeretpfted fo nd the Prealtes fonge plalmes of thanc- NFFS
mpapty akong. And ioppsbebrourhe merout kefgeupnge,(o longeasthelacrpfice endured, |
of Perlis by heapes.to fight agaynite bs and p Powe when thefacrifpce was hent , Pebemt-
bolp cptic.ffoz ashe wasin Perfisiiamelp,che ascommaunded the greate fonestobe fpzpnc-
captapne withibeqreatbotbeperpiedinthe kled wpth therclpoueofthewwater: x Wibpehe
templeof Mancag,bepngedpleeaucdtporowe woben it wagdone thet waskpndled a flamme Saha
the Denpee of Maneas preakes. Wo: asbetvas ofthemallo-but it wag coniumen, thozoive the cce.rivig.a
urpofedtobaue dwelt there. Antpochuselps legbte, that @pned fromtheaulter. So whey
Frenioes came therber,to receatem hmonpfo, thysitatter was knomne,itinas told the kinge
adowep. Sohn Naneas preattes badlayde of Perlta,that inthe place wherin the preafeg
Fozthebe money, be entro wpthafmall compas pich Weie ted atvape,bad bpd Fpze, there ape:
< = red


Theleconde booke —


ed water in the Meade of fpze:and that Nebemt
ae and bpscompanpe , had purpfped the facrp=
Epces wpthall.. Chenthekpngecontpderprige
and pondzpng the matter dilpgentlp.fmade din

- atempleco prone the thyng that wag done. And


whé be founde itfoindede, he gaue the pretties
manp gpftes anddpuers rewardes:pec.petoke
them wptbbps owne bandeand gaue the . And
Jrebemtas called pilame place Repbtar whiche
isag mochetolape,asactenipnge : but manpe
mencallfit Nepbt.


25 trllthetpmetbat God ather bps peopletoge .


onih a Ipke as it wag pewed bnto oles:andlpbeas


thefpze came downe from beauen, æ confumed
burntoferpnge: Cuen fo, poape Salomon als
fro beaué,andcontu


fowebhaucthbembyp bs. PE pe nowedelpreto
Dane tpe fame,fend fome boop totetch them tn-


‘Cherfo2e,pe (hall do well. p


- fhem:pee.¢tbatw


to Satnpih it wpthall. Euen fo d00 we inlpke


to pou. Wiper as we then are about fo celebrate

the TERI OH iets pou.
pekepe the fame

Daves.Webope alfo thatthe God(whpch delp-

uered bps veople, eqane them all theberptage,

kyngbdome.pzeltbode, ¢ Sanctuarpe,x that he Derr.

prompted them inthe lawe )fhall Hotely baue

metcp bpon bs,and gather bs together fro un-

det the beaten into bis holy place:foz he bath fa

ued bsfrd great parels, g bath clenfed p place.

As concerupng Judas achabeus andhps D
bzetbzen, the puritpcacton ot the greate temple,
thededpcacion of the aulter : pea, eof the war-
tes that cocerne noble Antiochus,s * Eupatoz 4™4%-bie
bystonne,ofthetbinpngesp came Downefrom -
Deauen bpon thole whpche manfullpedefended
the Jewes.ffo2 though thep were Dut feiw, pet
defended they the whole lande , dDrzoueawape
the enemies booff.vecoucred agapnethe temple
that was tpoken of thozowoute all the world,
Delpuercd thecptie,dDopnge thep2 befte, thatthe
laiwe of he L020 wbich was put downe,mpade
topthall tranquplipte be reftozed aapne vnto
the 1020, that twas fo mercpfull ynto them As
touchpnge Jafon allo of Cpzen, webaue bnder
taken compendeofipe to bzpnae into one booke
‘thethpnges that were compzepended of bpm in
fpue.jtoz weconlpderpnge the multitude of the
bookes, andhowe barde tt uld be forthé that
Woldemcble wyth ozpes and actes (andthat -
becaufe of fodiuers matters) baue Undertaken
foto compzebende the fozpes: that lucheagare
bplpoted toread, might hauepleafur e pattime
therein: and that thep tobpebe are dpligente in
fuch thpnaes, red eid better thyncke bpon

joloeuer reade them mpagbte
Daue p2ofpt therbp. : | E

Neucrtheleffe, we onre {elucs that bane med
ld topth thyg matter fo? the thoztenpneeof it
Dauctakennoftnall laboure, but qreate dplp=
Mr piopc Nara ani ach -Pkeas.thep
that make a feaft-toolde fapnedo otber mé plea
fure: Enen fo we alfo (Forzmanpe mens fabes )
ate Dery well contente to take the labour, wher
as toe mape thoztlpe compzchende, thethpngce
that Moer markay; trulp wptten.. =

Eor bethat bupldeth an boufe a newe, mut: 7
pzoupdefor manpe thynaes,to the whole bupl-
png, but be tbat papnteth it afterward, fekerh
but onelp tobat (s compe, mete and conuznpent


maner. And whp: He that begpnnerh to wapte
a tozp foz the fp: , multe wth big bnverftan«
dpnge gather thematter together. {ct bys woz-
deg in oder and dpliqentlpefeke oute of euerpe
pat ut he tbat afterwarhe topl portë it, vs
eth feive wo2bes, and toucheth nos the mattec
attbelargett. Let thps be fufficpent foz a 320-
loge. ow wpll he begpnne to hewe the mat-
tet,foz itis buta foolpth thpngetomake alice
Prologe,¢ to be Wot, inthe Cozy itlelfe .
The. tit. Chapter. Baiia
C Oftbehonourdone onto thetemple bp the kpngee of the
Belonojusie lento ake ht aap Bris trptenst be
tt bealrbatthepzeperofontasy > TP
What


7


a =


——$$— a


Theleconde booke —


ed water in the Meade of fpze:and that Nebemt
ae and bpscompanpe , had purpfped the facrp=
Epces wpthall.. Chenthekpngecontpderprige
and pondzpng the matter dilpgentlp.fmade din

- atempleco prone the thyng that wag done. And


whé be founde itfoindede, he gaue the pretties
manp gpftes anddpuers rewardes:pec.petoke
them wptbbps owne bandeand gaue the . And
Jrebemtas called pilame place Repbtar whiche
isag mochetolape,asactenipnge : but manpe
mencallfit Nepbt.


25 trllthetpmetbat God ather bps peopletoge .


onih a Ipke as it wag pewed bnto oles:andlpbeas


thefpze came downe from beauen, æ confumed
burntoferpnge: Cuen fo, poape Salomon als
fro beaué,andcontu


fowebhaucthbembyp bs. PE pe nowedelpreto
Dane tpe fame,fend fome boop totetch them tn-


‘Cherfo2e,pe (hall do well. p


- fhem:pee.¢tbatw


to Satnpih it wpthall. Euen fo d00 we inlpke


to pou. Wiper as we then are about fo celebrate

the TERI OH iets pou.
pekepe the fame

Daves.Webope alfo thatthe God(whpch delp-

uered bps veople, eqane them all theberptage,

kyngbdome.pzeltbode, ¢ Sanctuarpe,x that he Derr.

prompted them inthe lawe )fhall Hotely baue

metcp bpon bs,and gather bs together fro un-

det the beaten into bis holy place:foz he bath fa

ued bsfrd great parels, g bath clenfed p place.

As concerupng Judas achabeus andhps D
bzetbzen, the puritpcacton ot the greate temple,
thededpcacion of the aulter : pea, eof the war-
tes that cocerne noble Antiochus,s * Eupatoz 4™4%-bie
bystonne,ofthetbinpngesp came Downefrom -
Deauen bpon thole whpche manfullpedefended
the Jewes.ffo2 though thep were Dut feiw, pet
defended they the whole lande , dDrzoueawape
the enemies booff.vecoucred agapnethe temple
that was tpoken of thozowoute all the world,
Delpuercd thecptie,dDopnge thep2 befte, thatthe
laiwe of he L020 wbich was put downe,mpade
topthall tranquplipte be reftozed aapne vnto
the 1020, that twas fo mercpfull ynto them As
touchpnge Jafon allo of Cpzen, webaue bnder
taken compendeofipe to bzpnae into one booke
‘thethpnges that were compzepended of bpm in
fpue.jtoz weconlpderpnge the multitude of the
bookes, andhowe barde tt uld be forthé that
Woldemcble wyth ozpes and actes (andthat -
becaufe of fodiuers matters) baue Undertaken
foto compzebende the fozpes: that lucheagare
bplpoted toread, might hauepleafur e pattime
therein: and that thep tobpebe are dpligente in
fuch thpnaes, red eid better thyncke bpon

joloeuer reade them mpagbte
Daue p2ofpt therbp. : | E

Neucrtheleffe, we onre {elucs that bane med
ld topth thyg matter fo? the thoztenpneeof it
Dauctakennoftnall laboure, but qreate dplp=
Mr piopc Nara ani ach -Pkeas.thep
that make a feaft-toolde fapnedo otber mé plea
fure: Enen fo we alfo (Forzmanpe mens fabes )
ate Dery well contente to take the labour, wher
as toe mape thoztlpe compzchende, thethpngce
that Moer markay; trulp wptten.. =

Eor bethat bupldeth an boufe a newe, mut: 7
pzoupdefor manpe thynaes,to the whole bupl-
png, but be tbat papnteth it afterward, fekerh
but onelp tobat (s compe, mete and conuznpent


maner. And whp: He that begpnnerh to wapte
a tozp foz the fp: , multe wth big bnverftan«
dpnge gather thematter together. {ct bys woz-
deg in oder and dpliqentlpefeke oute of euerpe
pat ut he tbat afterwarhe topl portë it, vs
eth feive wo2bes, and toucheth nos the mattec
attbelargett. Let thps be fufficpent foz a 320-
loge. ow wpll he begpnne to hewe the mat-
tet,foz itis buta foolpth thpngetomake alice
Prologe,¢ to be Wot, inthe Cozy itlelfe .
The. tit. Chapter. Baiia
C Oftbehonourdone onto thetemple bp the kpngee of the
Belonojusie lento ake ht aap Bris trptenst be
tt bealrbatthepzeperofontasy > TP
What


7


a =


——$$— a


soyni Pat tpme as thebolp cptic wasin- bythep that toked bpan bpm.thpabteperceane
(xs E babpted inal peace ¢ welth s when the grefe of bps berte,the other people came out
L Ge | eal the Lawes twerepet verp wellkepe of thep2houtcs bp beapes vnto fhe comen prap:
AAP, a (Eolo was (tordeyned bp Dnias er, becaufethe place was lpketo come intocon-
Eases the bpe peate and,other godly me fuipon. The wemen came together thozo% the
that were enempes to wmpckednes) stcametpee reteg w berp clothes aboute thepz bzeafteg,
(.mach-t.¢ fo,*that euentiekpnges and p2pncesthemfel - he vprgpng alfe that were kepte tn, ranne
rip fo Ontas,fomein the wales, otberfome loked
(ped the temple wpth great gpftes:Infomoche out of the wWpidotoes:pee,thep ali beld vp their
that Spelucus kpnge of Alia of bps owne ren: bandes towarbde beauen,and prayed, A mileraa
tes , bare all the coateg belongpnae tothe ler- bletbpnge wag it to lobe bponthecomen peoa
simacitia Upce of the oferpnges, Then » Spmon of the ple,andtheh epeal bepnae infuche trouble.
trpbe of en Jamin, arulerofthetéple, labon: ut thep b ougbtalmpabtp Godthatthegs:-
ted to Wozckelome mplchefeintbecptie, but deg wbpehwerecominptted vntothem, might
bpe preatte refpted bpm. be kept whole, fo2 thofe that bad Deipuered thë
Meuertheleile , when he eh ie ouer- ‘nto thep2 keppng.Meuertheielle,the thping p
ppolontusthe Weliodozug twas detecampned to bo, that perfo2=
fenne of Therla( which then was chee Lorin med hein heretic? Debpmfelfe perfonal
Celocpziaand Pbenypces ) and tolde bpm that lyebepngeaboute tye treafuepe wyth bys men
treaturpe in Jerufalem was fall of innumera of warre. But the (pecte of almighty God pew
blemonyp,¢ bow that the comé qoobdes(whpche ebDimfelfe opemlp,to p al thep wich prefumcd
belonged not wnto the offeringes) were ercea= toobepe Heltodozns, fell thozoiwe the power of
ding Creat alfo:yer,s howe (tiverepotliblepal God intoagreatfearfulnesanddzede, :
thelempabt come bnver tie kpnaes powe. + Storthere appeared bnto thé an'bozle, with t.mach:re


ofthe Machabees; =" Fol. Leis.


%5 owe when Apprloniug bad thewedthe atercpblemant{ptty e Yp Dym, deckt fn goo: Fb
ipn ge of the monep, ag it wastolde bpm: the dlpearape, @the bozle {mote at Heitodozugs w
kpnge calledifoz Pelidonus bps fEemarde, and bps fozefete. Powe be that fat spon the porte.

fente bym wpthacommaundement, to bzpnge ao ars of golde bpon ppm. . liei je
bpmtbe fame monep, Jmmediatly Heliodo2e owouer, there apeared two fapie tbem-

toke bps iournep but ynder acolour,as though tpfull pon emenin goodlp arrave, which tode

be Molde go thozowe Celocpzia and Pompes bp bpm ¢ fcourged bim on both p fpùcs , tgaue

to bpfet the cpties, but bis purpofe was te ful- bpm manpe frppes wpthoute ceallpige. |
fpll the kpnges pleafure. So when be cameto +Wipth that fell Heliopozs fobetilpe untothe iimaih bè
Jerufalem, and ivag loupnglpe receaned of the gevunne. othep toke bim bp(bepnge compal D
bpe preal intotbecptie:betolbewbat wag de- fed aboute wptb greate barchnefe) e bare bpm
fermpned concernpnae themonep,andthewed ont npo a bare. Tbus he thatcame with io mils
thecaufeotbpscommpnge, he alked alfo piit § nprunnerg and men oF warre into the fapde tue:
were fo mde. Then the bpepecatttolde bpom a urpe wag bozne out,tobere ag nomaninpahe

that there was fuch monpelaped vp forthe vp- helpedpm:and fo they OWet of God was manp
boldpnge of oppdowes and Fatheries chpldzert Eeandknowen.be ape Mpi bomme alfo bpp

and howe that a certapne of it belonged nto power of Goddeftptutectallpopes Ipfe. Xno

panus Cobfasa nobleman, and that of all toep prapted the Lome that bad hewed bis po:

fhe monpe(wbhpch the opcked Spmon bad be- Wee bponhps place and temple, whpchalptle a
 Mpaped) There were. tic .talentes offplucr, fo2rewas full tteare and trouble: and that tho=

and two C.ofgold:pee,and that it were npo rowe thereuelacpon of the Aimpybtye Lowe

{phic fo: thofe mens meanpngeto bedyleeaucd ff was fplicd wpthtope and qlabieg.

that Had layed bp thep2 money in the place and ‘hen certapne of elidborns Fertides panpen
temple wobpch ts bad tn worthpppe thozow the Onias.that inallba ‘He woldecall bpon Gon
whole worlde )fo2 the mapntenaunce € ponoure fo graunt bpm bps Ipfe which was geupny bp

| _ Of the fame. Wibecunto Heliovozusantwered, theghoolt. So the epzealtconfpderpng the

: that the Bpnge pad commaunded hpm in anpe matter,and leat thekpnge thulde Culpect that


Wple,tobzpngebyminthemonep. the Fewes bad done Helisto2usfome eucil . De
€ Soatthedapeappopnted, Heliodomsen Fence an begithoferpnae fo? bpm . Joi wpe
fred intothe temple co ozder thys matter. Wut tbe bpe prea bad obtapned bps petpcpou, the
there wasnolmal fearethorowbute thewhole fame pence imé inthefame clothpuge appearen
cptic. Che preattes fell dowone before the aniter and tode beipde eliopo2us,faping: Zhancke
in tbep2 vellpmétes,ecalled vutoheaucnyeon MOniagthebpe Papert Tas + bps fake bat) the dict. rrbter
Erorr d pimxwpicb bad made alawe concermpug Mufe Lod qraunted the thy Ip e:therforelepiig that Œ
geuen to kepe,thatthep thuldebelafelp prefer- dod bath (courged the,qeue bpm prapte etba-
| ued fo? fuch as commpt them buto keppnge’. keg, and Chewe enerp man bisinygbte and pow.
| Chen whold had lobed the hfe preat tthe face cr. And when they had lpoké there woes thep
ít wolde Daue creued bys berte. oz byscoun» appered nomoze. | ang
! - tenaunce and thechaunapngeof his coloure.des So Helpodortg offered thid God , made
~ «+  Garedtheinwardelozowe of bys mpnde. The great owes Dato bpin, whyche had graunten
| iia Sas alin brupies,s pis bed in feate,wber bpinbislpte.tbanchep Oniag , toke bps pono
' i ' ' n


The feconde booke


aiid wentagapneto thekpnae. Thentetpfped
bento meP San of the great worckes oe od
that heban fene wpthpigepes . Ans when the
kpnae allied Ieliodozus who twere mete to be
fente pet once agapne to Jerufalem, be fayd e:pE


thou batkeanpeenempe o} aduerfarye vntothp


realme,fende bpm tbpther,and thou thalte baue
bpm D. pf be efcape wpth bps lpfe : foz
intbat place(no Doubte there ig. afpeciall pow-
er and toozckpnge of God. Sor he that divelleth
inbeauct , vpliteth and defendeth that place, F
alltbatcometo doit harme , he punpipeth and


laceththem. Chis ig nowe the matter concer:
Snie PODOS, and tbekeppihgecofthetrea:
furpe at Jerufalem.


TChe.ttit.chapter. |
g Spmon oe ciel of Ontas. yaron betp ngethe
offpee of the bpe prcalte co rrupteth the Rpnge wet tewar


«Bes. Zhe wpcked intente of Fatow.


it. matdlies Ware


m


jii
Pps Spmen noid, «(of whom toe
tore ig ae idini of
g owne natural


therréted Inrr.talétes: Welpies thys be promt:
ý icole of


es È


ather


thenpthe and Fraunge conuerfacpon, bzougbte
inthozowe the bngracpous g wndeard wpcked


f nenastothemakpnges


nes of Jalon, whpch Hhuld not be called apret,
but an vinoblpe perfonne. Info mochithat the
cates werenowe to moze occupped aboute p
feruice of theaulter,but dpippled the temple, re
garded not the offrpnges:pee, qaue thep2 delp-
gence tolearne to fpgbt.to wattle, toleape,to
Daunce „andto put at the fone, not lettyng bp
the ponoure of thep2 fathers! but lpked the glo-
tp of the Grekes bett of all: forthe wbpche thep
ftroueparlouflp, + were gredp te folowe thep2
ffatutes: pe, thep2 lufe wasin all thpuges to
belpbethem,whpcbh afoze were their enemies,
adeftropers. Howebcit toda wickedlp again
thelawe of God, Mall not efcape Dnpunptped,
but of thps we Hall {peake bereafter. :


Wibat tpmeas thex Dlimpiades portes D
were plapde at Tpeus(thekynge bim felfe be- Tvete wer
ince p2efente)thps pngracpons Jafon fent wic ep


4


ked mé,bearpng from tbem of Ferufalë which
now {here called Antiochias. uii. C dagmara
of (pluer fozan wsdl di cg Hercules . Chele
adthep that carped them defpzed them bude
‘uch a fafppon as though thep pulte not be of:
fered but betowed to other vies. Menertheleffe
be tbat fent them,fentethbem tothe intente that
thep puide be ofred bnt Hercules . Wut be-
caule ofthofe that were pnn > thep were ge
. thpppes, And Appo-
lontus thefonne of Aetus was fent into Egipt
becaule of the noblemen of &pug Ptolomp pi
lometoz. Nowe when Antpochus perceaued, p
betoas put oute from medlpnge inthe realme,
be foughte bps ownepzofpte , Departed from
thence came to Joppa : and then to Jerufalent,
where be was honourablp receaucd of Fafon,¢
of thecptie,and thas bzonagbt in toith torch light
and wptd greate pzapfe , and fobeturncd bps
boote bnto Whenices. — $
After.iti.peare Jafon fente Wenelaug , the


foxfapd Spmons brother, xto beare the monep inact


wntorhe it once NA dere ere of
other neceffarp matters. Wut be (when he wag
piapled of the kpnge Ae magnifpinge of bps
power turned the pzcafthod wnto phim felfelap-
inge wp. iti. C. talentes of fpluct for Jalon. So
sober be had gotten the commaundemetttes fro
the Se ane on tt be-
commeth a pzeafte but bearpnge the omacke
of a cruell tpzaunte , and wratbhe of a wrylde


bute beafkex Chen Jafon(whppchehaddpleca= tmacitp, .


ned bps owne bother) fepnge be bpm felii teas
begpledalfo ; was fapneto fie into the lande of


theAmmonptes,€ enclaug gat the bompnp-=


On. Wut as foz the money that he had prompled
pntothe kpnage,bedpod notbpnge therein, woben
Hoftratus the Rulerof the Catkellrequpzed it
of hpm . Eo: Hokratus tas the man that ya-
thered theculkomes, wherefore thep were both
called beforetbebpnge. Thus was Wenclaug


| oe out ofthe geet a Lplimacpus bps


rether came in bps fkead. Soffratus alfotoag


‘made lo2de of the Cpzians.
Ft bappened inthe meane featon that the $


Tharlians ¢Aalacians made infurreccponbe-
caufetbep foere qeué fo2 apreatant Dntobpng
‘Antpochbus


rg 1


rere


eg ei E —


P a a =


T. m aa Hu {e — —


Bynge Antiochus concubpne. Chercamethe Thus where thep foone punpthed, whpebfo
kynge tnall the batt,to ftpll tbe agapne,¢to pa Lam uea tie matter fo? the cpty,fo2 the peo
cifp themattcr,leauinge Mndzonicus thertobe ple,and o2tbeholpe vellell. Ca beréoze thep of
pis debpteas oncmete therfore, Row Mencia: “Cprus tobe wdignacton,and bu red thé bono |
us fuppofpnge A clang eta fh conucnp rablp.aAndlotbozow thecouctontnesof them ,
ent tpme, {tole certapn veliels of gold outot ý that toerein potae entans Fenema pil:

téple,eqauetbeto Andzonicug fozapzefent:€  inauctozitei
fome de folde at Titus andinthecitiestberbp ofthecptesing, = =.

Gibpeh when Dntas knew ofa fuertp Here .., CThe.v.Cbapter. . -

proud Him:but de kept bpmin a Sactuarp be To Ahad mp tobrns fene m zerufalem Ofthe end
ie Daphnisplicth bp Antioch. berf Me — Froese etpovipngottoecempie. tiocbusagapntf


helauggat Him to Andronicus papd bimp -e E plametpme Antiochus made M
he wold flape Dntas:ombéhecame to Dni eA WES bimreadpetogoagapneinto €:
as becounceledhintcraftelp tocomeoutoftbe ye A Vea cipt. Chen were there lene at Fe
Hactuarp geupna himbpshandwythanotbe jar gaie yw culalem.rl.dapes longe,bozliné


(botbeithe fulpect him ethenbeflew Dntas [ye eo VS! tunnpngcto and fromthe apze,
. goptboutanp regard ofryghteoutnes. Enë S 2) eA hes De apar,
whichcanfenotonlp the Jetesbutothernact Sears, There tere(eneallo
~ ongallotoke indignadd, and Were dt lcat whole hoottes of men weapened, eborles run=
for ponvighteousdeathoffogoodlpaman.  npnginanozdze,bowthep came together hot
“And whe the kynge wag come agapne from thep belde foreh thepz theldes,hotve the barnet.
Cyeilia,the Jewesandcertapneotthe Gekes {ey men dpetwe out they Mocrdess¢ Mote thepe
went wntobpm,complapnpngefor the weigh partes. Che thpne of p goldé weapos was {ene
tcousdeath of Dniag: Pee, Antiochugdimiel? ¢ of allmaner of armure.Wberfore cuerp man
wag loey inbps mpndfgz Dniag,fotharte pie prapde,pthole tokens mpghtturneto good-
tped bpm, andhe eptremembuinge bisfobct Mowerwbenthere was gone forthe a falfe rt-
neg emanerlp bebaucony.Wiberfozehe wasto mouras though Antiochus had bene dead: Fa
kpnotebinhpa mpu Pherae e Ando- fontokea. M).men, came fovenlp pif cptp: -
nicug tobe ftrpppedoutofhispurple clothing, Tpecitezing came dnto Pivalles,at plat was
andfote beledthozowoutthecptpe:pee, € tbe thecptietaken z Menelaus Aed, into pcaftell.
Hngratious manto be flaynetn the fame place ~ Agfor Jafon, be (pared not hps owne cpte- 15
wher ecomptted thps topckhedies bpon Dui- singinthe laughter,neptber colideredpe what
ag. Thus the lopderewarded bpm bps puny): greatecucll tt were,to dettropethe prolperpte
ment,aghe bad delerued. Mowe when Lpipma ofbpsomne bpn{men:but dpdasone that bad
chug bad done many wpeked dedes in  téple gotten the bpetozp of bps enempes,and not of
thozowethe counfelof Benclaug,andp bopce bps frendes: JEoz al thisgate be hot the fupcrto
 caneabgoade:the multptude gathered the to- rite,butattbelafkereceanedcontulionfor bps.
getheragapntte Lplpmachus:fozpebadcary: malpce,* ¢fedagapnetpke a bagabounde im- fi.mmantt§ ,¢
edoutnowimucbgold. | tothe land of the Ammonyptes.
S0 when the people arofe,and tere ful of dt Sinellp. tor a tewarde of his wyckednes be
fpleafure, i pfpmac ugarined.fii.@).vntheyl wasaccuted before Aretha the kpnae of the Æ
ted to defende bpm-acevtaphe tpzaunt bepnge rabians.3n fo much that pe was taynto fletra
thepzcaptapne,whpch wasgrowe botbinage cptte tocptic,bepnaedelppled of euerpman as
and oodnelle. But when f people Dnderflode a Fenner othe Tote ny an abbompnable |
the purpofe of Lplpmachug, fome gat toneg, pertonne, And at the lait(as an open enemp of
fome good fronge clubbes .efomecatte abes his ownenatural countre and ofthe cpteztns)
bpon Lplpmachus.Chus there weremany Of He was depueninto Egypte. . |
thé wounded lome bepngeflapne,andal theo-  Thugbethatafoze put manpe oute ofthepz
therchaced away. But ag fog p wotcbed ch uech ownenatpue land, perpihed fri home bymilelte.
cobber bimiclée,thepbylled bpm befpde p trea: He tent to Lacedemd,thinckyng thereto haue
fury Dé thefe matters ther orctberewaskept cottenfoccourebpreafon of Bpared. And be f
acourtt againite Denclaus. Motoewhenthe afore hadcaften manp one out wnburyed, as |
kpuae came to Cp2us, thep madea complapnt theowen out bpmielfe, noman mournpuge for
Y Dito bym of Wenelaus.concernpnget isbulp hpmnoz puttpngbpminbis graue :fo that he
neg and p ambafhidours were. fit. ut: Hencla netherenioped the burpall of a fraunger, nep=
us WEE CB pmifed Ptolomp fo geuebim much ther was be partaker of bps fathers lepulchze
> monep.P Ke wold perlwadeppnge.o Pto — Nowe when thes wasdone,the bpnae ful- €
tomp went tothe lipng into a courte ipherebe pecte,that the Fetoes wolde baue fallentrome
was tettocolebpm )ebzoughtbpmoutoktbat hpm:-woberfore be came agreate dpfpleafure
mynde. gn fomuche that be ST asian out of Egppt,*e toke the cytp by vpolence. te “macht.
laugtrom paccufacpos,thattiot bithitanding comimaunded bps men of warre allo: that thep - -
wascaute of al mptebefe:and thole pooze men, fpuld kpl and not (pare, but fap dotonefuch ag,
Mhpch pt they padde tolde theps caute-pec, be: withftodethé,ozclpmed bp bpontheboutes.
fo2e tbe &cithians,thep thulde baue bene ind- Thus was there a greate Laughter of
Ered innocent, them be condempned fodcach. clade ene Tic
: t antpre


Y fe 8y VI A Pe ps Ti n


b


zubi, b.:a


imac iii t


€


fwata a


+imech, te CED a Create nombzex


Che feconde booke


‘gntheedapes toere there Napne:lrrr:&).font=


tye thoutaride put tn p2pfor, and no lefe folde.
Pet waghenot content wpth thys, but dari go
into the mott bolp temple( <t)enclaus that trap-
toure tothe latoeg and tobis ofonenatural coun
tre,being bps qupde)and wrth bps rch hã-
des toke the bolpvelel, tobpch other binges and
cptyes bad aeuenthetber forthe garnpibpnget
bonoure ofthe place:them tobe be in pps pandreg
wn wortbhelpe,and defyled them.

So mad was Antiochus, that Hecontpdered
not, hotve that Godwasalptle wothe foz the
{ynnes ofthbentthat dwelte inthe cptpe fo: the
whpche luche confulponcame vpon that place.
kAnD pels & it bad not bappened them to pane
bene lapped inmanyp linnes,thps Anttochus(as
Concas be bad come )bad fodenlp bene punpihed
and (hut ont forbps pzefumpcpon,xlpkeas ie
liodo2ug Paap be Selucus the bpnge kinte
torobbe the trealurpe. Meuertheles, God hatbe
not chofinthepeopletoz the places fabe , but tbe
place forthe peoples fake: therfore isthe place
become partaker of the peoples trouble, but af-
terivarde Wall it enfope the welthof them. and
Ipkeas it ig nowefogtaken inthe warhe of Jl-
mpahtpe God, fo when the greate God is recor
cpled, it thalbe fet opin Hpeworbipagapne _

So toben Antiochus had taken a.&).and. biii
Huriozed talentes oute of the tem ple.he gat bpm
to Antioch inal the balt.thpnckpng in dis papde
that De mpabt make me fs le bpon the Dap land
and to qo vponthelee ,fucheanbpe mpndeHad
be de lefte vebptes there,to were the propie: Bt
Jerufalem lettebe Pripppe apPbepgian,in ma
hers moze crneltben bpm telfe that fet him there
At Garilpm belefte Andronpeus and )enela-
ug wbhpche were moze greuous tothe cptpspn3
then otber* Powe ashe wes thus Cetin malpce
agapnét the Jewes, befente Appoloniug an ba-
ted papuce, wth. rrit.thoufand, commaundpng
bimto Nape thole that were of pertecteage.and
tofellthe wemen,mapdens and childzen. Waben
becamenowe to Jerufalem, befapned peace, ¢
Repte bpm (tpll wntpll the SabotheDape. And
thenbe commaunded bps men to take them to
thep2 weapong(fo2 the Sctoes kepte Holpe bap )
and fo be flewe all themthat there gone forthe to
the open papera eee anp pae A
thecptpe wpth bps menieapened, and murtoe-
ce x Wut Judas Machabens
byped was the tenthe, ficd into the wploertics,
ledde bps lp fe there topth byscompany amonge
woplde bealtes,and wpon tHe mountapnes:dipel
Iprige there and catpnae graffe,lealt thep Hulde
bepartakrg eet a bat va"

C The. vi Chapter.


Tbe Hewes ave competed Coleane the latie oT Eod.
ahetemple to defpled. he readers atemouplheo that
chev ball natabbozretbe aducrfite whermmich the Zo7d
afipcteth them,2 he greuous papne of Cleatacua,
ge =aeg Dtlonge after thps, tent Hhebpnge
fea Vamiefienger of Antpoch,foz to com-
Le Aes, ©; pell the Jewes,to altce theordpnau
ind zed A ces ot the fathers,ethelawme of God
Bees to defple thetemple thattoag at Fe


AE


rufalemandtocallitthetempleot Juppter Da
lpmppus: and that thep thulde bein Gasarpm,
ag (bofe whyche Dwel atp place of Zuppter the
berherons, Gbps wyckcd (ebpcponof the wr:
goblpe was beaup vpon alltbe pope for the të
ple was full of volupteoufnes, bpbbpnge tbol-
ipnge of the Heathen, of rpbbandes and barlota
together. he toemen went into the holy place,
ebareitt, that wasnotlanful . The aulteralfa
wagfullof vnlauful thpiigeg, wbiche the lawe
forzbpodrthtolapebponit. The Sabbothes
were not kept.the otber folempnefea Res of the
lad were not regarded: To be plapne,ther dur k
no manbeknowenthatheiwasa Jewe. “Inthe
dape of the kynges bpztbetbep were compelled
perforce to offre:and when the Feafte of Waccug
was kept.thep wereconfrapned tutberegarla
Des of Jup, and Co to go about tothe Donoure of

Waccus.ct)ozeoner thozowe the courrcel of jt yz
lomp,tbere went ont acommaundemente inthe
next cptpes of the Heathen, that they Hulde in-
treate the Jewesinlpke maner, namelp to com
pelthem fozto do facritice after the lawecs of the
Gentples:and wha fo wolde not,to put them to
Death. ppteons thpnae wasit tole. Cher wer
two Yemen acculedtopaue cpzcumfpled thep2
Connes, hom when thep babledrounde aboute
the cptpe(the babes bangpng at theprbicakes)
thep cai themdowne headlpnges ouer the wal-
les. Howe that werecreptindennes,¢ had kept
the Sabboth, were acculed onto pbilpp,¢ bree
inthe fpzebecaule thatfor p feareol Godthep
kept the commaundement [o fptelp, and wolde
not defende thems felues.owe F befcch al thole
whpchreadetbps booke, thatthep cefuleitnot
foztbele falleg ababuerytve, and (udgep thpnis
ges(that are happened )fo2 no Delteuccpon but
foracbaltenynge of one people: And why: Ibë
God {usereth not fynners longeto folowe thep2


owne mpnde, but thostelpe punpiheth them. Prove, b


is atoken of bps greate loupnae kyndenes.sfo2 €
thps grace Daue toe of God moze then other pea
ple tbat be (ufferethnot bs longe fofpnne vnpu
npibeb lpke as other nactons,tpat when the dap
oftudgemenecommeth, De mape punpihethent
inthe fulnesofthep2[pnnes Pt we (pune, be caz
recterh bs, but be neuer wpth deatoeth bys mer.
cp from bs,and thoucd be pun fh topth aduer-
fptie,pet borh be nener foz ake bpapcople. Sue


lett tops thattve bane fpokennowe topth Ewe


worbes befoza warnpnge and exboztacpon ct


the Heathen.

Mowe rll wecome fo the declarpnee of the
matter.€leasar one of Che pzpucppall Scrpbes
anagedDman ¢oF a tell fauozed countenaunce,
wasconffrapnedto gape toptb anopenmouth,
wand to eate fwpnes Aeh, But het elpayng rae
tbertodpeglozpoullp thentelIpue wprh Mame
offered bpmfelfetoplipnalp to the martpzdome
Howe when Helawethathe mufe nedes go to
it peteoke paren e:foz be Peas ata popnte
Wwptbbpm felfe that De wolde confent todo no
bnlatoful thpngefoz anp pleafure oflpfe. hep
that tode bp beingmoucd with pitie(but nota
tpabt for the olde frendihip of the mã, toke aca

alpbe


wT cal fia


ofthe Machabees:. Fol.lrbi,


afpde prpnelpe and prayed bymthat petwolde theremasanpebzcatheinbpm)tobefrpedinthe. *
Tet fuch flethe be hzougthe bpitas were lawfull ‘auldzon, 3n tbe whpche whenbe bavde ei
tocat,ethentomakeacountenaunceasthough longe papned:theotberbzethzenwpthtbepz mo

D bebadeatcnotthefetbeotthefaccpipcelpbeas thererbozted bimtodpemantullpe, faping: The
LAD AL ila tbe aptly ohe mpabhtebede- LogveGodhallreqarde the truthe:and cofozte
Ipueredfromdcath,andfofoztheolotrendipp vs.lpheas<Holes tefpfpethxand declareth i > rrr!

sfthemansthephetoeddpm thysipnones.  bpsionge fapinge and betopll baue compatipe

Buthe begannctocontiderHpsdplcrcteand onbpsleruanntes, Hj si
gat pedi SELAWAT g aii sia S +, Do wbenthe fpetke wagdead atter thysma ,
bowep from bys pouth bp behad beneofanho ner,thep brougbtetheteconde,tohanebim inde 25
net y good conuerlacpon,pee, ehorveconttant -xpfpon;pulled thefapnneswopth p beare oucr bis
ly be ba keptetheosdpnaunceslatoescomaun- Heade, andalkeddpmpihewolde eatelwynes
bedby God, wherforehe gancthethysantwere fehe, oz be were papned in theotbermembzes
_ andfapde: Pethadgratherfpaitbelapdeinmp -allothozowonthys

i Teab. rane: Sozit becommeth tot mpne age(fapoe Dierainn fapbe: topll not Dott. And fowashe>
be in anp mete tobpttemble, herby many pag
pertosmpabe fhpnckr.chat Sarara beta rrer
peareolde @.x:tbernowegonetoafreaunglyft, -moolt
and fothozoibe mpneppocrifpe/foza Iptletyime death. butth
ofatranfprozyiyt)thep mpadt bedplccaued,bp op(wmbpchdpe
thps meanesalfo Mulde Zoefplempneage,and onof cueclattpngelpte. . J toetaia tee
make ttabbompnable. soz though Jwerenew --: Afterbpm,wasthethprdebad indecylpon g

n not efcapetpeDandtot Almpghtye Godnether andthat rable oone, ho

+Amosta si onencrdeade,wwherfoae J wpll Dpemantully -desmantullpe,and{pabe
and doas tt becommeth mpne age, Wi berebp ‘Atbelehaue |
mape peraduenture leaueanerample of teade- God. Aoelppcethem:fozmptr
Eaffnes for uch as beporige, vi wptharcadpe sreceauethem,ofbpmagapne. Fnfomuch that f
myndeand manfullpdpeanbonelldeath,fozthbe kpnae and thep wb)
molt tozthp and bolp lawes. | uiepled at theponge mannes boldneg, that bena:

Wihenhebadfapde there wozdes,fmmedpa- thpuge regarded the papnes.

tlp be wag Deawentothetozmente. Poteethep -Rowe tohenhe wasdeadallo,thep veredthe C
thatledbpmetocremplde alptle afore begane fourthe wpththetozmentes inipkemaner. So. `
to take oplpleafure:becaule ofthe wozdesthat whenbe as noweat bysdeathe,belapde dtig
be Capbe: for thep thougbte bebad {poken them priate Dene put Eoneath of men, baue

eo- of anbpempnde. Wut whende wasinhys mar- dure boopeandtrult
tyzdome,bemourned and fapd: Thou (DLozd) vs vpagapne.* As forthe, thouthaltehaucnio *29°"
wbpch bat the bolp knowlege-knoweltopenlp telurreccpontolpte. | ain )
that wher ag Impabtbedelpuered from death .. And when they badfpokento the fpfthe, thep
J iuferthelefoepapnesofmp bodp butin mp tozmented bpm. Chen loked be onto the kpnge,
mypnde Jam Well contente to ultretbembecau ahd fapde:thoubalt oweramong men fo2rtboy -
fe J feace tbe. Chusthpsman dped leaupng attamoztal manallothp felfe todo what thon
the mozpall ofbpsdeathfozanerample, noton wplte but thyncke not, that God hath fozfaken
ipe onto ponge met, but nto alltHepeople,to oure qeneracpon.Abpdethe,tarp pli awhple,
be Meadfall Laat .


bii.Cbhbapter
| x (The punpthement of the euen bzethzen,andoe ther: mother


areas T happenedalfothat therewerefe- ingeattbepopnte ofdcath,fapde: we not dpice-
SA (FAS uenbeethen(wpebthep2 mother)ta aued( Dkpnge)fo2thys welufkerfo2 our owne
at. eiken, andcompelledbpthekpnaecxa- fakes, becaule we baue offended oure God, and
SeupesFla IP  ozicapntt thelawe,tocatelwynes let therefore meruclons thpnges are Gewed bpon
Eooneeanamelpe wrth courges and lethaen De. %Sutthpnckenotthou,whpych takelt inband
WIPRA Andontofthemwbpchiwasthbechefe toitrpue aqapnte God, that thou thaltcefcape
fayd:Citbat feket thou andighat require thou Dnpunphed.
of vsr Als foz ws, weare readperathertotuficc  - Chysercellentemother( wozrthpe tobe well D
death, thento ofendethelawes of God andthe tepoztedof and Had inremembzaunce)fawe per
fathers. Ghenwasthekpnageanarpeandbad feuenfonnesdpein onedape,and lufreditpacp
beatecauld2ons and beaten pottes. - entlpe,becaufe ofthe boope that the bad in God
Wibpchtobenthep weremadebote.inmedya Pee, Hheerhorted.eucrpe one of them thelpecpall
tly Cronan De ae and that boldlp and feabdfaflp with perfect worl
Fp2lttobecut out.topulthelkinne ouerbishead dome,toakpnge vp her fopupihe thought wpth
topareoftbheedaesofbpsbandes and fete:pee, amanlpettomacke,andfapbe vntothbem: Jcan
athatinthefpabteofbysmother andtheother mot tellhotve pecame inmp wpdbe,toz¥ nether
of his hethen. Mowe whenbewascleanemars gauepoubzethno2loule,nonozlpfe.Feisnot J
eed, Dechmanded afpze tobe made and fo(iobp] ptopned the membres of poured mr toger
u


m ail L =P


but the måker ofthe toorlBe, i
the bpatpof man, g begane all
he allDofbps ownemeccpe Hall geut pou bretb
tlpfe ngari lpkeaspe noibe réeqarde tot pour
owne felues fo: bps lawes fake.

cike thoughte Antiochus that the hadde-
lppled bpm, therfore Delet ber go with ber repz0
ucs and begante to crpozte the poget fonne,
{whpche pet was lefte) not topth wo2rdes


be Fafponed


0 pas
butfwore nto bpm wpthanothethat betuld pA
r PAn k tede d ars aA pA dea IE
ofhistathers)pee,andthatbe tery
fbuld: gevuehpm whatloener were neceffarie for Pé


fozfake thela
bpm. Wut whesthe pounge man wolde not be
‘moued,fog allthefethpnaes , becalled bpemo-
thet ard counfapled bertofane bee fonnes Ipfe.
“AnD topen He had exhorted Her with manp wor-
bes, the prompted bym that the Hulde fpeake vn
fo Der fonne. So We turned per hto bym(lau-
qbprige the ceuciltpzaunte to fcozne jand (pake
wpth abolbde bopce.<D mp fenne, haue pptie by
pon me.that barethe npne monethesinmp toi
that gaue the fucke, nopped the and bzoughte
fhe vp nto thps age ,

3 belech the(mp Corine)loke ppon beauenand
earthe and all that ts therein, and conlpder that
God madethemand mans cheese et
fo alte thou not frare thp bangmatt, but fuf-
fredeath fteabfaftipe,lpkeas thp brethren taue
doone:that J mape receauethe árapneinthela
me mercpe Wpththp bectbecti.

CUipple the was pettpeakpuee thele worded,


a


the ponge man lapde:wphome loke pefor.cdiber |


Lenpt.ri.a-Loze00 petarp: 3 wopll not obepe the kpnwes co
Danta maunemente,* but thelawe that God gane vs

bp Soles. As foz thou that pmagpneft al mpi-
chefe arapni the Fetes, thou thaltenotefcave
the bande of God, foz tue luffre thelechynges,be
caule of onre {pnnes.

And thoughe God beanagrpe wpth ve a lptle
whyle(foz oure chaftenpnge and refozmacpon)
Aa in had di Merde Sak A ernan:
teg. 25utthou(D thamefull and moot abbomp
nableperfonne.) P2pde not thy felfe thorowe
vapne boope, wb ag a malpcpous bponthe
feruatites of God:fo2 thou haftenot pet elcaped
theiudgement of the God whpchis Simypaghtpe
andfepthalltbpnges. @pbeethzentbathaue

{uffcred alptlepapne,arenowe wonder the cones
naunt of cuerlaftpnge Ipfe : but thozowe the tud
gement of God,thou patte be punpihed rpabte
suilpefozthppapde.

As for me(tpheasmp brethrenbauedone)y
offre mp foule and mp bodp foz the lawes of out
fatbers,callpnge bpon God, that be wpll foone

_, bemercpfull onto dure people: pee, g with papne
se9ac-< and punpibement*tomake the graunte,that be
onelpis God. Jn menotoe and inmp beethren
meat h of Pimpadtpe God ig at anende, why
tpgbteouflpe ig fallen bpon oure people.
. Thenthekpng bepnge kindled in ancer was
mozecruell ypon bpm then bpon all the other: g
toke Sd on, that be foas lo tyarbtelpe re-
garded. Do thys ponge mandpedynde led,¢
put bps truite (tyl inthe 20:e. Lafe of all af:


=i


piges. Guen fo


CUE NDE VOORE


a. MP Cane
Loe pane put Chep? eniempes to Eipybte veupopnge the (pop
les buto te fathertes and bute thewpboowes, pehano,
_ Flpeth buto Aneipchus, wp Japchanog


ch Juday A eyt ähdthep T


mpeg allo ŭóne vnto
farebne papri ee
tulfptude torrthèr, astompabtpe foztbe
Peathen(fo2 the wath ofthe 102d tbagturned
ittto mercp )be fell pon the towneg andcptpeg
Dntwares,bzent them, toke the mof commodp-
Ous places: Rewe manpe of the enempes. wut
fpecpallpebemade luche chales b abeie fo
lipid athps manipneffe was po of eue
tpe e
i So when Philippe fatwe that themanincrea
feb by Iptleand Iptle.iand that the matter pzof: %5
pered tot) ppm fo2 the mot parte: be tozote bn
to Ptolomp(whpch toas'a captapne in Celocp-
tpa and Pbenpces) tobelpe pym inthe kynaes mach. tie
bulpnes. Chen fent beMycanoz Vatroclye aipe” 7
cpall frende of bps tnall thebateand gauebpm
of fhe commen fozte of the Deatben no lefe tden
rr.&).parnefied men,toroote outthe wholege
neracpon of the Jewes,bauing to belpebim one
Oorgpaga man of warre, whpeb in mattersca
cerlipnae battaples, bad greateerperpence.Qp
cano? ozdepned allo the trpbute(whpch the Ro
mapnes Huld baue habd)to be genentnto king
out of the captpupte of tbe Jeweg 'namelp tio
thoufandetalcntes. Bnd immedpatipe befente
tothe cptpes ofthe fee coalt,requypzing them foz
to bpe Jewesto bethep: leruannteg andbende
men pzomplpnge tofellthem. irre. and ten fo2
one talente: but e confpderednot the warhe oF q
Almpabtpe God,that toas tocome bpon bpm.
When Judas knewe ofthys, be toldethe Fe-
toes that there with bimokp cano2s comming
Mowe Were there flomme of them fearefull, not
eruffpnge vnto the tpgpteoutnetie of God, and
ficdt avr a ‘ |
| WE tDe other that remapned, cametore=
ther,and onbre tbe Lore, todelpuce t ma :
frome that topcked Mpcanoz, tobyche had lolde |
them oz ence becamenpethem: andthougbe be !
wolde Hof do tt foz Chep2 lakes pet fo2 the couec |
haute thatibe made wpththepze fatbergand z
caule |


“i.


i!
í


- iin ii -æ


ofthe Machabees:


becaufe tbep called Hpon bys bolp and glozpous
«mach, bb, hame. * And fo achabeus called bys métoge-
ther,namelp about. vt. 4%). erbo2tpng them not
to agree, bnto thep2 enempes, xneptber to be a-
weut.sra. fraped forthe muleptube of thep2 aduerfarpes
a,Pare-FFe commpngeagapnitetbem wnrpabtcouflpe,but
tofpabte manfullp,conlpderpnge the reprone ý
they pabddoné to tbe bolp place topthbeute caute,
botoe thep bad dp[ppled ando it thecptpe
syere.rbu.b PECE Deftroped the latveg of thelathers.x Foz


wral.rir.b. thep(fapdebe )trakin thep2 weapons ¢ boldnes:


butouccontpdence isinthe Almpgbtpe Lode
Wwhpch in thetwpnelpnge of an epe map bothpde
ftropthemp come agapnit bs,¢ all the wozlbe,

Ipe erbozted them alfo'to callto remébzaunce

— the belve.tkat Godthewed dnto thep2 fathers,

. “SD xag when ther perpihed an.C.and.Irrry.). of
fiit.cerir? ESyennacherpbs people: And of the battapl that


‘mee bit. e tbephad in Babplonagapnt the Galpansbot Pg
all the WHacedonpang that cametobelpetbem, KEA
toode in feare:and boive thep beinge butonelp Boe
bi.@).fleitoe an.C.and.rr.).thozowtheDelpe =
thatwas qeuentbemfrombrauen,toberbpthep E


allo bad receaued manp benpfytes.
Thorowe thele worteg p men toke good her


tes vntotpem,readyp to dpe fo2thelaweandthe th


ptah c Dohe fet vponenerypcompanpeacap
tapnà one of bys owne brethren: Spmon, Jo
feph and Jonathas,qeupnge eche one.rv.€ më
Wecauled Eldzas allo toreadep bolp boke tn-
tothem.eto a ly Coen of ; Helpe of god
* phen bebom elfe beinge Captapne inthe
foze Front ofthebattaple, bukle withApcanoz
And Eod was thep2 helpe infe much that thep
flewe about.iz.d).men and compelled the moze
` parte of Mpcanozs boot to fe:thep wer fo wot
ded g Feble Thug thep tokethemonp from thole
that came tobpthem , and Folowed bpon them
E on euerplpde. But when thetime came vpon thë
thep turned, fo? it was the Spabboth-and there-
thep Folotweù nomoze dpontbem. So tbep toke
thep2 weapons and lpopleg and kepte the Sab
bot), geupnge tbanckes bnto the Lozde,tuppcb
Had delpuered them that dape and Hewed them
prs mercp. After the Sabboth,xthey dpfirpbu
gaum. pi > ted the (poplesto thelpcke,to the fatperles:and
ices-rrF-b- to mpboowes,anv the relpoue bad thep them fel
nes tviththey2s. Wiben thys was done,and thep
had made a generall pzaper,thep befoughte the
merciful L020 to be at one wptb bps feruauntes
DF thole allo that were wyth Cymotheus g
wBacbydes, whpch foughte agapnit them they
Se Pec E NAAMA pa
Deupded mo es:euer Tenpnugeane

vit pnte the Teche tothe fatberleg, to wopddo:

weg and toaced perfong. i

JE And when they had dplpgétly cathered thet
weapons tometber.thep lapde them allinconue

npente places, and eheremnaunteof thefpoples
bougbte they to Jerufalem. hep Newe allo
Pbplaccoes that wpcked perforinetobpche was

pth Cpmothens, and had vercd manp Jewes

And when hep peldethethankelgeaynge at Je

rufalem to: the vpetorpe they beente thole that

Dad {et Fpze onthe poztes of thetemple-namelpe


é.mac.iiti,d


Sol. lehtit,
Calpthenes, whpch was fled into anhoute:and
fotbep gata woetbperetparbe for they? wpcked
nes. Asto? themoofte pngracpous Apcanog,
whpch bad bought a,&).marchauntes, tobpe
the Jewes,be was thorowetbe helpe of p Low
bzougbte dowe eneno€ them whom thep regar:
dednot,inlomuch, Pp heput of his glozo rapmet
fled bp lee and came alone to Antpoch, Ò great
Mame and dphonoue which pe gat thozotve the
deftruccpon of bys hots. Thug be that promplen
the Romans to pape them thep2trpbute, when
betoke Jerulalen:begannenoweto fapeplapn
lp:that God was the defender of the Jetweg and
tb:refoze not poflpble totpounde them, becaufe
tyep folowmed the lawes whych Geo hadmade.

q Antiochus wellpnge to fpople Perfepolis, is brpuento
fight. 48 Seperiecuteth the sewes,be is drpcken of the
Zz The fap eket oFAnttachus.Gedpeth,
ga T thefame time,camexAntiochug x
Ra agapne pth diponour ont of Wer faih org


ASe S temple:and fubduethecptpe,thepe
opl Ae and defended them felues in
fomuche that be and Dpsivere faynetofle wpey


~ And (o after that flpabe,t¢ bappetied that ay
fiochuscame agapne fs eet ni a aedi, Ser
when be came to Egbatbang, be gat knowlege
tobat was þappened Dhto Mpcanozand pmo
Eheus:Mowe,as be was anauncpnge bpm lelfe
in bis wrath.be thought be was able to adung
the iniurpetbat wag done to them, bpon the Fe


“wees, and therfore commannded tü makereadpe


bps charette batpnge on bys tournep,tprbout
ceaffpnge, the fudgemente of God prouokpnae
bpm, becaufe be padt akenio proudelve, that be
woldecome to Jerulalem ahd make ita graue
ofthe Fewes. Wut the Lord God of Hrael,that


fepthall thpnges,fmote bpm wrtban xnuplp=


ble plage, tobpcheno man couldepeale.

402 affoone as be bad (pokenthele moeg;
there came bpon hyn an bozepble papne'of pps 5
bowels anda {ore greteotthearmes: Andthat
was but rpgbte,foz be pad martpied other mene
nes botoelg wpthdpuerte and ftraunge tozmen=
tes, howebeit hb: wolde inno wple ceafletrome
bps malpce. Dee, be was pet the pouder and mo
remalpcpous agapuite the Jewes: wut tobple
be was commaundpngetomake balk inth: mat
ter,itbappencd that be felDowne vpolentip fr å
thecbarette.fothat itbgoted bys bodpe ahd dyd
bpm greate papne.
uid fo be that thought bempabt command
rp Roudes ofthe Tee, (fo proud was be beponde
tbe condpcionof man and totoepethe bpe moun >
tapnes ina papze ofbalaŭce wag now bought -
downe tothe Sila jepan a bofe -
Iptter , Enowl qpnge eke tnanpfeite poiver of
Gon dpon ppm:lo that the opcbed bodpe of his desta,
wag * full of woormes wbpcbe m bps payrie fell
qupcheout of bpsfleth:3n fo much that bishott
Boas cent rep tbe aR an Gyewte OF be
- MBhusbe that alptleafozetboughe bempabe -
reache tothe Farres of Drane, a ropena

ie ae . Aff man


€


The feconde boske


mannoweabpdcnorbeare Coz the veihemencpe
of ftynche: Cherfore,he bepnge bzougbte frome
bys greate pypde,begannetocometothe know:
lenge of Dpr Celfe: fog the punpibementeof God
warhed pym, and bys papneencreased moze and
moz. when be bpm irlfempgbte notabpde
bps owne ttpncke, helapdethete toordes: Ftig
realon tobe obedpent onto God, and that ama
defpzenot tobelpke bntobpm. Chpswpcked


perfoune — alfo Dito the Lode of whome


be pulir


ucoptapned nomere: |
thecptpetbat became vuto fopattelp


for deabde men:nowe be delpzeth to Delpuct it fre
. And as touchpnge the Fewes, whome He Pad
dudged not woztbpeto be burpcd, but wold paue
caft them oute foz to be Deuoured of the foules g
wpld bealtes,{aping:that he wold baue deftrop


-_ gd botheolde andponge Motwebe prompleth.to


D


` Derafter. (heroes:
€


makethemlpbe p ct
as be bad (poplen the ples 7
maketh prompte to garnptpe tt wpth great ape
teg to ericreale the bolp onnamentes and of ps
awnerentes to beare thecoltes andcbarges be:
longing tothe often S:pee and phe wold alfo
become a Jewe him felfe ‘to go thozowe eucrpe
place of $ wogld,tto preache the wozde of God.

Wut when bps papnes woldenot ceafle, (Foz

ficetcoug iudacment of God was come be


mig of Athens. And wher


posan of a verp dpfpapze De wote vnto pge
wes, letter of interceffpon,contepnpnge tpele
modes, The king and pzpnce Antiochus wpl-
fheth onto the verteouscptpspns of the Jees
niuch peleh and good prolperpte Pepe and pour


chilozen fare well,¢ pt al thynges go after pour.


mpd, we mene qreatthanckes. gn mp fpckcnes
alto do J remember pou loupnglp:fo2 as Fcam
outof Perflia,e was taken wpth atoze dpleate
FJeboughte tt neceflarpe to careto: the commen
focalth.Mether dplpap2e J in mp felfe,but baue
a good hoope to efcape this {pckencs. :
_ Buteontpderpng that mp father led anboolk
fomtime inthe pper places,¢ (petoed who Muld
rapgne after bpm, Ehat( pl tbere|bappened anpe
cOtrauerfpe.o2 anp bearbtbpng weredeclared )
thep intbelandempabt knowe thep2 chetelorde
that there tpulde be no infurreccpon: Aqapne,
when.4 ponder bp mp felfe bow pall the mpab
fpemcn.andnepabbours roundabout ,arelap:
inge wapte,and loke but fo: opostunpte to boa
Darme: 4 hauecozdepned that mp fone Antpo:
chus tpallrapane after me, whom 7 offecomen
ded to manp of pou:tobt F was inthe bper king
Domes, and hauetozptté vnto bpias folowerp
i Spy pouand requy2e pow;
toreméber the benefptes that F baue done Vr-
to pou generallp, g inelpecpall and that enerpe
man wil be fapetbfullto me and to mp fonne.)
o: Jhoope that he balbe of fobzeandloupn
bebauoure,and pf pe folowe mpdenpee,be Mal


Sent.tis.c be indpferent onto pou.» Thus that murthe-


ter and blafpbemer of God was foore fmptten
and seag bead intreated other më, lo be dped
à mpferabledeathinaftraunge countrpe ppon
à mouhtapne. Anobpabodpe dyd PHylyp (that


ndagfo: p
stobzpnge py:
fthowneto theqrounde,andDtomakeifagraue i


olptempleafore now ye |


went wyth bym rary awape: tobpchetcarprge
the fonie of Antiochus, Wwente Mto Eappteto
Ptelomp Pbplometoz.

E CThe.r. Chapter.
Ehrh mi aaki dis arh aar e
acarnit the Jbumeans. Timotheusinuatcth Fewip, wich
whome Judas iopneth battapte. Fpue men appeare in the
apte tothe helpe of the jewes,Tpmotheusisflapne


Saliba (thozowe f helpe of the Logde twan


roped thealtecs and chapels that


fPretes,cléfedp temple, * måde an other aulter of
bzicke tone ánd after tivo peares thep offred fa
crifices, fet Eozth the incence,the lpgbtcs¢ thew
bzcad. Wilben that was done thep fel Downe flat
pponthe qrounde, and befougbt the Lo2d,that
they mpahtcomenomze into tuche trouble-but
p tbep fpnned anp moze agapnite bpm, be bpn
elfe to chaiten them wpth mercp,andnot to co:


us men. Zowe vponthelamedape that p Trai
gers poluted thetemple, it bappencd that onthe
erp fame tapeit wasclenled agapne namelpe


xtbe.rrit.bap of (he moneth called Callen. Chet t.mac.tig.c


kept. viii.dDapes in gladneslike asin the Eca of
the tabernacles.cemembz2pnge,that notlonge a
fozetbep belde the fealt of the tabernacles: vpon
the mountapnes and in Denes Ipke bealtes.
Andto the lame tokentbep bare qreane botweg,
bzauncheg and palmeg, before bpm that had ges
uenthens qoodfogtune to clenfebps lace. T bep
agreedallotogether , and madea Fatute that
enerpy pearetholedapes Huld be folemplpe kept
ofailtbe people ofthe Jewes. —

Howe Antiochusthen (that was called the
noblejùped:itig fuffpepentlp tolde.Mowe wpll
we{pcake of Eupato? thefonne of that wpekd
Antiochus, boweit happened wpthbpm.and fo
Toph Sewe worded tocompzebende the aducrip
fetbat chaunied in the Soarres. abr be bad ta
kenintbekpngbdom.be made one Lifias( which
bad bene captapme of the boot tm henpees and
Siria ruler over the matters of tDerealme. Foz


tolomp that was called Dacron, beingeara.


ler foz the Jewes(and {pecpallp,totptintheiud
gementfoz (uch wong as ivasdonebnto them)
vndertoketo Deale peacpablpe fopth tbem. oz
the whpche caute be thas accufed otte frondes
before Eupato2:and whenpe wag fulpect tobe
atraptoz(becautehebadleft,Cppres, that php
lometozbad comimptted vnto Hpi: ebecaufe be
departed from noble Antiochus, that be was co
mP pened adel O
Rowe w
fame places, be toke fraungers and vndertoke


ofte tpmes to warre wth the Jeweg. 4020: E


uer,thezdumeans ý Helde the feonge holdes,re
ceaued thole that wert Dzpucnfrom Zerulaleme


töke in band to warre allo. * Wut they that were Lagata.


vb Gachabe? befought g prapediontotbe Lode
be wolde be thep:delper, g lo thep Feilbpon the


ong boloes of the Fumecans,. g wan RURKA
ae -te


wi the temple and thecptie agapne, de=- ~


en Gorgias was goucknour ofthe


Acabensnoweandbys company Æ, e


“the Heathen bad bupld thozowe the erop.rr,v,


me inthe bandeg of thole aledtes and blalphemo x3


ofthe Machabees, SEol. Irviit.


> cesbp fréngth: Suche as came agapni them
thep flewe,and&pllednooleffe of all together
Hi Fr. 4). Pevertheles fome, no lefe then. tr
ct) - Were fled intotwo fronge towers, baupng
all maner of oxdpnaunce to withitande them.
D Then Dachabeus leaning Simd,Jolephus,
sacheus,€ thole f were thith them (which were
verp manp) went to befeege them,¢ to fpqbte
where molt nede has, Now thep ý Were w i-
mG, beig led w couctoulnes, were tntreated foz
nionep,thozow certain of thofe sap in
ers toke.lrr.m.dDzagmars:g leti of the eftape
Dut whe it was told PHachabeus what bad ba
pened,becalled Se ana of p people together
acculpng thófe perlines,p thep bad fold bbe
thecnfoz monep, € let thep2 enemies yo.
` flewe thole traptours,¢ immediatlp Det in dad
Iith.p.it. towers. And wht they hav orzedthe


feluesmanlp, w thep2 weapons g bandeg thep `


P » fletwe in p.tt.caffels moo then:rr.&H. x Powe
39 aa. Timotbeus* ho ý Jewes bad overcome afoze
gathered a multitude of ftratig people, brought

an bof alfo of bogfmen of $ Alians, to wpnne

~ Fetv2pe bp firengthe. But when he dewe npe,

E Wachabeus g thep $ wore w bpm * fel to their


feqece.o prater,{peinkled albes po thep2 heades being


gp2ded w bearp clotyabout their lopnes, fel Do
‘one befo: pauiter, g befoughtp Lozdp be wold
be mercpful to them, butan enemp onto thepz


enempes,€ to take part again thepzaducrfa- -


rrbitt.a TPES, * accozdpng as tt ispeompfledimp latve.
gas 0 after p piater,thep went on further frō the
citie:€ wben thep camenpe penempes,thép pze-

pared themlelues againt tbem. And bp tpmeg


in p mozning atthe breake ofthe dap bothetbe J


Herron poftes buckledtogether.* Che one part bad the
tpa Fid A oon fo? thepzretuge, which ts p qeuer of prof:


perite frigth ¢victorp.Che other pada målp twbp


tfomacke, which ts a caprain of warre. Che bat
iti.ce,bi.a CALE HOW being great, * there appeared onto
é,mac.ty.d, the enempes fro beauen.d ep the bo2fbackes
and. Sith bepdels of golve,leadpng the Jetes, gii.


of them baning Wachabeus betwprt thé, that D


he pt bpm lafe on euerp (poe webep
burt (hotedartes g i fatah bpon p enemies,


Ihere thozowethep wereconfounded w blind: —


— neg,¢lotozeattaped.pthep fell Dotone. There
were flatn of fotme.rr.<2).¢.0.C.¢.v1.€.bozf-
ment. Ags foz Timotheus bpm felfe be led buto
@azscra verp rége hold, wherin Cereas wag
captapne. But Machabeng andhis companie
laped leege to it cherefullpe foure dapes. |

Fi Rowe thep that were within truftpng to the

oo" fEvength of the place, curled ee erceading
V pars Meny i Sa j wpcked wozdes.
jenertheles tpon p.v. dap in p moznpng.rr.
pong men of Bachabeus company, bepnee fet
on fpze in thep; mindes( becaufe of the blatpbe:
mp came manfullie Dnto the wal, e with bolde

-. flomakes.thep g thep2 other companpons clp=
med Dp bpon p towers, vndertaking to fer Fpze

Lae A bik das declbl de gh tiny tore aet
fons quiche. Two dates Wer thep Oekroing the
catel which whe thep fode Cimotbhens (that

Mas crept into a coger ebep Billed him, filer


tow: {i


obe 3


2 Weapons,


Cereas his bzotber trlpbe manerwopth Appo-
lopbatics.Caibenthis was don, thep fon pial
mes: w papies g thakes gpupng nto p Lord
which bad done fo great thigesto? Firacl.¢qe
ucntbemp victory. CThe.rt. Chapter.


Ictwes. Lhe letter ofking Antiochus nto Ztrias. @ teeter of x


1 RAPE Nt


all the boffe


Dobe came into Jewry ¢ thento Wethlira 5


teoperde themfelues,¢ to belpe thep2 bzethzert.
nd toben they were ropna forth

togetbrt witha ready ¢ twilling mpude * there
arnetle of molde, habpnge


‘bis Cpere. gia A patted p 102d altogethet


p
and fo to efcape. Rcuertheles, $ mã was not w
out HiderLandpug,but confpderedbp bimfelfe
that bis potoer was mpntthed,¢ pondzed howe
the Jewes being deféded by p helpe of Almigh=
tpe God, Were not able tobe oucrcome, wheres
foge be fent them tozbe,¢ prompfcd, p be wold
contee foal thinges which were reafonable and
tomakep &pngethepe frende, To the whpche
prayer of Liltas, Hacha beus agreed. fekpng itt
all tbpngtg f comen wealth what focuer a
chabeus waote unto Lplpas concernpng ý 3e
wes,the kpnge qeanted it Eo: there were let-
fers weptten ito Tewes from Lplpas cot
tapning thefe wo2des.Lpfiag fendeth areting
Duto the prople of the Fetoes. Ipong Abfoton

Fit. tit. which


there takë * thep Fel to thep2 mai itamac, pic


Berulaleris d diiit


Theleconde booke


| which there fente from pou, delpueredme Wp-


cernptige thepzerrande. Cherfoze loke what
mpght be graunted,¥ certptped p kyna therot
and tbat foeuer tag chuenitt Jagreed therta
Pipe now wpll be fapthfulin p matters J pal
sndeuermplelfe therafter alfo todo pou good.
As concernpng other thpnges by euerp artpele
-therof: 3 baue commpttedtbhem to pour meten
gers, Cotbole whom q lent wnto pon, tocon-
mune w pou of f lame, farepe well. Jnp.C.and
rl vili.peare,p tiiit. dap of the moneth Diofco-
tinthius. Now phihgesletter cotapned thefe
wozdrs: Ring Antiochus {endethgreatpng vn
tobis bzotber Liftas. oz fo much as our father


(0-645 xig not Dead, Our topll isp thep whiche ate in


ourrealme, lpue without anp infurreccion,and
everyman to be diligent indig owne matters.
Wie wnder fave allo p the Jetoes wold not con
fent to our fatber,fo2 to be baought puto the cu-
fome of f Gétples, but tiflip tokepe thep2 oton
ffatutes,fo2 p wbiche caule thep requpzeof bs
E alfo tolet thé cemaine tpl bp thep2 own latoes
Wi berfo2e our mpndeis $ thts people thalbe

in reft-webaue concluded ¢ Deferimpned alfo,to
rektore thé thepz téple agapne è thep map lpue
accozdpng to the ble g cuitome of thep2 Fozia-
thers. Chou halt do vs a plealure therfore, pe
thou léd wnto théeagre with them, p he thep
are certified of our mpnde, thep map be of good
chere, looke to thepz otpnewealthe. And thig
was theletter,p the png weote vnto f eweg
Kiynge Antiochus fendeth qreatpng onto the
‘coüfelltheother people } Fetes: VE pe Fare
well, we Dane onre delp2e:as for vs, we are in
good health. <)enelauscame g tolde bs howe
that poure delpze was to come Downe to poure
people which are with bs.Wberfoz, thole chat
Wp! come, the qeue thé freltbertp, wnto tbe.rrr
dap of the moneth of Appl, $ thep map Die the
meates of the Zcives € thep2 owne lates, lpke
as afoze and none of thé bp anp maner of hates
to baue barme foz thinges done in ignozaunce.
Penclaus whome we haue lent pute pou, Mal
comen With pouatlarge:farepe well. inthe.C
1I eee tee Dae of the moneth of Apztl.
E The Romans alto fentaletter contapnpnge
oer wozdes: Quintus Koeman ana Titus
antling embafladours of the 1 omas, fende
greatpng onto the people of the Fetes. Loke
iwhat Lilias the bpuges Ryniman Hath graun-
ted pou, toe graunte the fame alfo. 25ut as con-
cernpna ye thbynges wbyebe bereferred dnto
the kpng {endebether fome with pede and på-
der the matferdiligentlp amonge pour felues,
that wemapecaft the beft to poure profpte, fog
we mutt depart now buto Antioch. And ther-


pourempnde Fare tell, inthe.C.lout.peare,
the.cv.dape ahs ney of Apzpll. |
r, Pa a A fer.
CTbpmothcus troubleth the Hewes. The wpched teade of (he
teth fpzeontbe gate dt :
gaini Timothp.Timethp istaken and let goo buburte Jutas
uefucth Gorgpas. Judas offeringe Cactitice for the Dead, He
eth the boope of che returgeceion,


tpafu


PEA E Lifias wee vnto the king, and the
| (eee | (8s E Fewoes tplled thepz qrounde. ut
AS Cimotheus, Appolonius the fone
pecan of Hemet, sercine g Demopho the


poude pehano: pcaptaine of Cppees,e thep


that lap in thofe places, wold not let thé line tt
velt peace SP of Joppaalfo dpd eué fuch a

loede. Thep praped p Jetes $ Divelt as
mig thé,to goo wthep2 wpues echplozen into
the thippes wbich thep bad prepared ¢ Did with
théas thoughtbep bad ought thé none evel tol
Foz fo woch thenas ther was gone foztha gene:
alpzoclamaci6 thozow f citie becaule of peace
thep colented therto,¢ {ufpect nothing, but whe
thep twere qone Forth into p depe,thep drowned
no lele then.tt. C.o€ them. ben Judas kbnewe
of this crueltp thetoed nto bis people.ve com-
matided thole $ were w ppm to make thë readp,
exboztpng them to call pon God p righteous
Judge: went forth agapnite thofe murtherars
of his bzetdzen, fet fpzetn phau€ bp night, beet
vp Ehina tbofe p efcaped frå the fpze.beflew
with the fieeard.Aud whé hebad Done this, be
Departed as though be woldecome agapn, and
rote out al the of Joppa. Wut whe be bad gotté
twozd ý the Janites were minded fo do in lpke
maner Dnto p Jetes which diwlet ama the.be
came Dpd f Jamniteg benigbee fet fpze on the
bauen w the thips.fo ý the light of the fpze wag


fene at Jecufalé, ppponait. C.g.rl.furlongeg.


Nowe when thep were qone Fro thence.tr. tur-
longe intbep: pci totvarde Tpmotheug. V
4¥).men of fote,¢.v.@.pozlmen of p Arabiang
Fong) w bpm. So twh f battaple wag earnet
and pzolpered Judas thozot phelp of God:
the refidue of ý Arabians bepng ouercome,be-
fought Judasto be at one withthe pzompled
togeuc himcertapn palkures,¢to Dobpm goon
in other thinges. qudastbincbing ptbep Huld |
in Dede be profitable cocernpng many thinges,
pzomiled the peace:toherupo tpep thoke babes,
and fo tbep pied their tentes Judas wet
alfo onto a citie, bich was beri faft kept with
befdges.fenced round about p walles, ¢ dpucrs
hindes of peopled ivelling therin called Calpins


Bg Yaa aye wWinit,puttuchtruftin p fréqth e


alles, in oze of vittaples: ý thep were
the {lackerintbepz voingesruripng € tentling
Judas w blatphenucs,¢ {peaking luch wozdes
agit becommeth not. But Machabeng calling
ppon the great prince of f world which woute


anp battell tames,o2 odinaunce of Warre, dpd _
*calt Downe the walles of Jerpcho,in the tyme jotae,1,¢


of Jofue fel mafullp bpon the walles,toke the
citie thozoth the Help of Lozde mape an erceas


dig great laughter: Jn fomoch p alake of twe
ore t opeelpagayitDat wemarknowe Foi eDane A T coe tee ee nae


rloges bzode which lap therbpfemed to flow
wren man oles Citas

i. C.F.L turlonges, neto‘Caracha wnto
che Jetes p arecalled Eubtanet.But as for Ti


 motbeug,thep could not get bpm ther, foz (not


one Inatter Difpatched he as Departed frome
Phentce-e bablett ue


‘al


IME W? wee pen thele couenatites were made y
tpngc8.€ requpzedmetofulfplthetbinges co- Pø


pie


ft certapne menina verp trong .
hold. 26ut Dolithens,¢ Spotipater which mere :
= ph i -taptapnes ©


d


D


€
Emach-b,¢
|
|
|
j \
$


ofthe Machabees,


captapries with Machabeng, few thole p Cp cleten theinfeltes(ast
 motbeug bad left tn the boufe of defence cüen.r. the Cabboth int


Xt). men. Bnd Gachabens prepared bpm vd tirè folotoitire ,¥


wb. &). men p were about h mlettheminezdze tp the bobpes dft
by companies, ¢ went Forth agqapnit Timothe them itbep2 fa
ve wbich bad w bim an.€.¢. ry. &).mé of fote tes of certaprie Je
and and fpue Dundzed boslmen. foundieweis pth

qi ben Timotheus had knowledge of Judas € from the poolsot
commpng. be fent f iwomen,chplozen, g p other isforbpodé $ Jew
baggage vntoacattell called Carni Koz tt Caw, ý this was p
could not be nine, gwag hard tocome nto And foeuer |
ivapegof p fame places were fo narow)¢ whe defot bys tighteoustudgement, which ba


Sol,


Decuffome was) tept
be fameplace And vps the dap

udas bis company came totake

bem twere apne, ¢ to burp

thers aranes. Pow vnder P cos i
wes Dobpch were flapne,thep i
bad takë out of the temple

the* Janitars-wbich thing Devt,btie

es bp thelat. Tht cucrp ma 70rttne
caule toherfoze they wer fain

p man Gane thanckes ynto p loz


rite


Dope


errante rth hae ned the thyna > was hpd.,Chep fel done alfa ©


' peetéce of Yutathep2 prapers.a belought God. pPthe faut
God: wbich lecth al chynaes: Info much pebep wHpch bas made.mpabte
fi Nnge one here, another there, were rather dpt braunce.Welpdes p, Juda
Jutt. dg. eCOLtteD of thepz owne people, xg wounded with acnettlp,to kepetbemfelues fro fi
p frokes of tbep2 owne {weardes. udag alfo fo muchas thep fame bes
as verp earnett infolowpng ppithem punp; met Were lapne for thelameo


be put out of remeng
ozted p people e
b tpnine: fog
bepecpes, p thele
ence. So beca


thing thote vngodip,¢ fet. rre.a).men of the theredof euery onca cerfapne, in fo muche ý be °


I
‘Timothensg alto bun felfe fel nto the bandes of brougbt together two.


|.D2aginarcs of fpiner


Dolptheus,¢ SHoltpater,whome pe : ope which be Cent vnto Jeru ale pthere mpabt afa


| crpfpce be offered forthe
caufe aes manp of $ Jetwestathers ebzetbeé place he dpd well ¢ tpgbt:
tbich( pt thep out bite peal i Deracpon € pondzpnge of the Ipfe pas after this
: . aith tpme.f€o2 pi be hadnor thought
fully to Delpuerthemagapne acco Ding to the wer flaine,did Pet lpne it had bene fu


(oede. Yn the which
02 be bad fome conti


: thep, which
perfluoug


cOvicionmade,thep let htm go without barme € Lapne,to makeanp botoe o2facrpfice fos the


Foz tbe bealth of the bactyen, And when udag Phere dead. Wut for


fo much ag be faw, ý thep


bad flapne.rey.). be went from Carmo. Which Dyein thefauour ¢ belefe of 60d arein

frow after Phe bad chaledatoap, glaine hig food rethe € top. he thboughtit to be goods bono

enentpes.beremoued p bot towarde* Eph a urable foz avecontiling,to dothefame foz thotë

Flee ppd eda many Diners people twhpeh were flapne,p the Offence minbt be forge
ue


€ the rong ponge men kept twal


off Death n.


„Agacbabeus goinge to pgh


Chapter.


apni tupatog


les Defendpng them mpabtelp. 5 this cptpe Cbe austen of Cupatas into Fewzpe.Thedeathe of
utli otd


ibas much ozdinaüce g p20


fteeghtot penemtes )thep Wå $ city.¢ few.rrv ae §
atthe p were win. Teo thece wenttbep top fsx A icc
citp of p citbiãs which lpethb.ni.C.tourlis | Cea im
fr Jerulale, Wut whe ý Fetes which were in BS enn pa

P citptefifped.pthecitisins dealteloupngipys Ree bpsm


them:pee.g intreated them kpndlp in p tpmeot T.a. r.m:meé of fo
thep2 aducrlptpe, Judas € bis cOpanp qaue thé testi. C charettes Hene
tbankes defpzpng them to be frendlp Gpl onto felfe tvith them but with gre


thent,¢ fo thep came to Jerufalë the bpefeatte fa


Wolitheus one ofthe


artes. Wut akeri foubiers bnto
tobe Judas ehiscompanyp hadcalled vponal- fande me in che tentes of Anepechus,sxbobocus th
nighty ged wbich w bis poter beeaketh the Eep ors staken.antpochus recon

eee 2 P,C rlirpereqat * Fuvaskhow A


Peater.Be kpileth


etothek
of the theabes bepng at hand. And after f feat - EEPE DGD ceaule
of penticottt went forth again Gozgiasp fome great mio
Gonernour of Joumta w ti. &).më of fotee.ttit eg moned Antic
© .hoetmen. Which when thep metitogetber, it godly perfon, eL
ch Buren a feme ofthe ewes to beflaine.Xnd fhig enclaus Wad p ca
achenoz8 a mighty boz Ptbebpngecommaunded


fourtene thou


sihe betrap


eth frenbeiipp


'nttochus Cupatoz was ch
{With a gteat power ito Few
ig tC. € Liftas the Ketarde ruler of
afters wpth bpm baupng alt
finé.rxt,€lephas _
ang alfo topned hi
at dpiceat)afpake
not foz anp godd of the, court
ethought to bane bene made
Guctopite, Out the king of ki
ndagapnit thps pn:
ourmed the kpna xp ¢,ma.09.0,
ufe ofal mpfchete: fo
to take bit


imac, bia,


„(asthe


fa toke bold of Gozgiasg woldbaetake bi manerof them ig) toput ppmbntodeathinthé


quyche. But anbortma of Cheacia felupõ bi fame place: There wasallotn thefam
g mote of big arme fo f Gozgiasetcapedeficd tomer of. L.cubites bpe beaped witha


e plarea
ihes: bug


into )ozela, when thep note f twere of Gorgt abouc,it was fo made,p men might loke Down


ag{pbe,badfoughtentong ¢ were werp: Judas on enerpef de. Wberunto the kpng commautt
called upon t toD, P be wola be thepa belper.g Ded p thameful S he

rgan w ama fhes,a8 one pw
eap, In Bndrealoit was p the wnt zpft
fomucbý be madetheenempes afraped, Goz a Death, ¢ not to beburted:
apas me of warretokethep2 hight So Judag mypcbefe tnto the aulter of
gathered bis holk,¢ came thtatbecpep o Doul atbes were holp)tbherfoze wa
al. And when the. vit. dapecame bpõthem,thep Celfealfo pulde be deftroped


captapne of the feld: topth fbe be
ca totake bpa fong “1 pap


erfone tobecateamong the af
ationf{neffe,
uld dpe luth
be had done much
OD (whole fpre¢ .
ora
~ Wut


imade’ es panelpon,fetve of f bo
a


tima Ffi a hig bot*bnto'


Cheleconde booke


%® Butthekynrewas wWoodtn bpsmpnd. gta
me to pew bpmlelfc moze crucll wntotje Few .


es.thenbysfather was,Cabpebe when Judas


dimac.ripp percealled, * be commatidedD peopleto cal Dpo


the Lo2deniaht edap: be wold now belpe the
-alfo,lpkeas hbo a eel y thep were
afraped to be put from thep2 låte, from thepz
natural couutrp,¢ from f dolp temple: enotto


ROY i Wine med bot that


The.xtiti. Chapter:

Bp the mocpon of the Loze. Demetrius fendeth pta:
tot to kpli the Fewes, Micanoz maketh a cipact with the ziw
es, whpcd be pet breaketh through the mocpon of thebpng. P
canog cimaund eth asiate betaken. She bolones of Razia.
Bia Gs Keer thre nadie Zudagenfour 4

emetriustbhe fon-
4% neof Seleucusivas come vp toith
i Agreatpotoce EMhpppes,thozoive _


{uffre the people (wobpch alptle tobple afore be VSS SS rhe banen of Crapolps,totakecer
gan torecoucr)to be lubdued againe blaf - ta e commodions places ecoñttyes, agate


phemoust
together e belought Sa pe oz mercp, with
Wweping æ fafking ti Dapes long flat vpon t
ground. Judas echopted t
ueg readp. uthe & the elders together deupied
to gofozth fp2tt w thep2 people,atore tpe aa
bought bys boot into Jewp:tatote be belee
qed the cptp,¢ commpt the matter bute God;
tbe peN afcepbed the power ofalthin
C ges puto God p maker of f orld.erhoztig bis
pons tofpabt mafully (pee,cucn-Duto death)
oz the latwes,the temple, the cptpethepz otme
natiuccountrpe,¢ todefendp citesins-¢ let his
boueo GIEN oped Lop WCE KD
ima token, off ppctorp of God,choling outp
manlpefk pong men, went bpnoabt intop bin:
eff. rtiti. 4) men * €
eateft Elephantes wtbole p fat vpothem
bus then they bad baought a qreatfearce
rumour among ptentes of thep2 encempes,¢ all
thinges went peofperowllp w them, thep depar
tcdin the bzeake of thedape, God bepngethepz
helper g defender. Nowe when the King perrea
. ued the manlpnes of the Jetoes, be went about
to tabe the tronge places bp c remoted
Mra which has awel kept
boufe of defence of ý Fewes:butthey were cha-
fed atbap. burt edpfcomfpted. And Juras fent
pnto them $ toere init {uch thinges as Were nie
cellarp.3n the Jewes bote alfo there was one
Bbodochus which told the enenites their ferre
tes:butthep fought bpm oute when they had
gotté bpm. thep put ppm in preafon, After this
Dpd the kpng comme with them ý oer tn eti
(ura toke truce with them, departed and firoke
battaple pth Judas Mbyche overcame bpm.
€ But whenbe onvderitode,that Php pope
‘ (wbome be badleft to be ouer {ear of His.bult-
negat Anttoche )beqantorebel agapnt bpm
be was aftopned indps mpnd:fo that he pelded
bpmielfero the Jetes, and made them anothe
to Do whatlocuer fhep thougbt rpagbt.

Nowe tohen he twas recon{pled topth them.
be offered,made much of the temple, gaue great
apftes vnto it,embzaled Hachabens, making
ppm acptapne and goucrnoure fromBtoloma
ps wnt the Gerrenes. Neucrtheletic, when be
came to Ptolomaps,the people of thecitp were
not content wptd the bonde of Frendihpppe.toz
thep were afraped,that be wolde beeake the co
ucnaunt Then wente Lplias Dp into the leate
andenfourmed the people, ewed them the cau
fe tohp:and pacptped them. Do De came againe
onto Antioch. Chis ig nowe the matter concer
npngthebpnges tournepandbpsreturne,


nacions So tobenthep haddonethis .


Antiochus andbps captapne Lilias. Now Al
cimus(twbpcb bad bene bpepreafe and wplful
lp defpled bpmtelfe,inthetime of the mirting )
einge, $ bp nomeanes be couldebe helped, noz
bane any mogeentraunce to theaulter:became
to kpng Demetriusin the. C.¢,li.peare,peefen


by, nntobrin oping ero eerste eye
an :


lpw tree: wbich (ap métbought beloged


- tothetemple,and that dape beheldebps tonge


Wut toben he had corte opoztunitefoz hig mad -
sep bpm ipbateopnges o? counta plcg tbe Jew
c i qes orcounfapleg the Few
eg leaned onto. Peanltoered: Che Fetwes that
becalled Affpde( wpole captaine is zutas Ha
chabeus)mapntapne Marres;make tnfurcectt
ong, and wyllnotict therealmebe tn peace.
Eor F beinge deprpued of mp fathers honoure 25
(Ymeane the bpe preafthode amcome betber:
partipbecaule J was fapthfull onto the kpng
and partelp becaule Jflought theprofiteotthe .


¢ptpsings. And whisal oure people,thozom the


topcbednes of them. arenot.alptletroubled.
Wiberefoze, ¥belechehe(D kynge)coutpder al
thelethpnaes diligetlp,¢ tbe fome pout:
fionfo2 the lande andetbe people, accozdpnge to
‘thebpnones that thou bate offered vnto them.
Sfozaslongeas Judas hath the bpperhand,tt
isnotpofipblethbatmencanlpueinpeace. `
benbebad Cpoken thete oozdes, other
frendesalfo baupncre euell pl at Judas, iet


hpna Demetrius ot again? Dinu:* sch iega biie


immeDdiatlp fent Ppchanoz( ruler of p Elepha
tes)a captapne into Jetbep, comaundpng Him
totake Judas bpmlelf alpu, but tofiap them
that were hth bpm.and to make Blcimus bp
peat of the qreat Temple.

‘Then the eatben which fled out of Jew
from Judas, came to Pypcan
kpnge the barme and oecapof the Feiwes to be
thep2 welfare. Mowe when ý Jewes Hearde of
pot staple Lara atberpng toge
ther of ý Heathen.thep sng ed the felues w
earth* befought bpm w
eupoent tokens, be wolde peelerue them tpl
S oatthbecommaundement of f captaine,thep
remoucd from thence, and came fo a towne cal-
led Deflafan And Simon Judas brother fel in
band wpth Npcanoz, but thezowe p fodaine ci
mpngeotthe enempes.be was afraped. ;

Sienetbelee, Licanoz hearpng the manlp
neffe of them that twere wpth Judas, and p bol
de fomackes that thep babdtofight foztbepzna
tuvall countrie, Duritenot proucthe matter wh
SPS Or ee

heodociug


4


bp flockes,thpn © |


pm Wwhiche mabe them ppg Smach-r.e
~peopleand ener Defeded his owne pogcion with


— eee”
1


ofthe Machabeés,


‘CTheodocius,and Mathias befoze;to gene and
to take peace. So then thep bad taken long ab
uifemét thereupon andtbhecaptapne Shewea it
bite pmultitude,thep were agreed in one min
deto baue peace. Bnd thep epnepnted adapeto
Eptte bpon thele matters quictlp among them


felues the foolcs alfo were brought efet forth,
Reuertheles, Judas commaundedcertapne më
of armes to wapte tn conueniente places, leatt


there pult fodapnlp arpfeanpe eucll thozowe
the enemies, And lotbep commauned reafona
blptogetber.


D fMpcanoz, whpleheabode at Jerufalem, 02


dzed him {elfnot ynreafonablp.but {ent aap
the people p Were gathered together. Peloucd
Judag euer topth bps herte,and fauozed ppm.
De prayed Yi allo totakea tnife,eto bzig forth
childzen. „Sope maricd lpucd in resta thep
led a comen Ipfe, 25ut Alcpmus perceaupng
louc that thas bettoprte them, and bowe thep
were agreed together,came to. Demetrius and
toldbpm that peano: badtatien ftraiige mat
tersin band, and ozdepned Judas(an enemp of
the realme)to be the kpngeg fucceflour. The p
iynge was fozcdp{pleafed,and thozow p ape
ked accufacpons, wipeh Alcimug made of F p
cano? be twag fo pies obed, p he wrote vito Ri
catio2z.fapenge:that be has berpanarp Foz the
Erendpippe q agrement, which be bad made vb
Hachabeus. Acucrtheles,hecommatided him
thalthebatt,that be thulde take Wachabeug
p2ploner,andfendcebpm to Antpoche.

Wipch letters when Apchanoz bad fene, he
vas at bis wittes end,andfoze greucd,tbat be
fhulbde bzeake $ thiges toherin they bad agreed
fpecpallp feing Dachabeus was the man that
ncuer dyd bpm barme.wwut becaufe be mpabte
not wpthtande thekpnge be fougbt opoztunp
te tofulfpll bps commandement. Notwithita
Opig when 4Hachabeus lathe that Nicanor be
gan to be churlptb nto bpm and that be intre


ated bpm moze roughlpe then be was wont. be i


perceaued p fuch Dntpndnes came not of good
and therfoze pe garbes eda fewe of bis men,and
inpthdzewe bpmilelfe from Mpcanoz.Wbpcbe


whe bebnew that Bachabeus bad manfullp i


acuented bpm, becameintothegreatandmolt
bal temple:¢ commatided the pzeattes( tobhich


noz ote Raszts an alderman of Jerulalema lo:
uct of the bolp cptpe,and.a man of go oD report
Whpch Foz the kpnde bert that be bare vito the
people, was calleda father of the Fees. Thig
man oftpmes, when the Fetes were mpnded
to Bepe chemfelues bndefpled, defended and de
lpuered them, beinge content ffedfaltip to {pen
de bps bodpe aid bps lpfe foz bps people. —
So peano wylipnge todeclare the bate p ©
be bare to the Fetes, fent.v: C.mé of warreta
taise bpm:fo2 be thougbt,t€ be gat bim, be huld
bzpnge ý Jeloesingreate decaye. Now whenp
people began torut in at bis boule, to beate
the Dozesand to fet fpze on tt: pe beinge now ta
ben wold paue defended bimfeltc w bps (wearn
chofpngeratber to dpe manfullpe,thento peld
bilelf totbofe wicked doerg:¢ becaule ofhisno
ble tocke, be bad rather tobaue bene put to per
treme crueltp. Rottopthtandpng what tpme
as be mpiled of bps troke Foz pait, and the mul
tptude felin vpolentlp bet wprt f dozes be ran
boldip tof wall and café bpmfeifevotone man
fullp among f beape of them, wbpeb gaue fone
place tobpsfall,fothat befell opon bps belipe.
Neuertdelele whple there was pet bzeth with
in was bpndicoin bps mpnd,¢ whple
bps bloud qued out exceadpnglp(fo2 be wag
werpe [oze oiided) be ranthozow the mpddetk
of the people andgathbimn to thetoppe of arocts
So when his bloude was gonc.be toke out his
DWwne bowels pth both bts bandeg andthe
them bpon thepeople,callpnge bpontbe £02
ofipfe and{pzete toretoarde bpm thps agapne
andfobedped.
 ECbherv.Chapter. — ———

€ AIcanoz goeth adoute to come bpon Judas on the Sabboth
bape.Zbheblatphempe of Micannz. MHachabeus ergourdpnge
bato the Fjetwes the bition bolteneth thep? bertee. She prapee
of G2achabeus After the hooor eicanof is ones ourrcome.. .

achabeus commaundech bps heed anb hps hander to be cut
Of and bps Congto be geuen brifo the fotles.


‘ aay U when Aprang bers that X
GIL


Pree lA maria be thought wpthal ipg po
i i, p d oer totepcie a bela top


to
bnkpndlp,but palotve the Sabbothdape; and


— Solr.


ibe 1
Judas has in the countrpe of a (mae, bii


were Doinge thepz v{ualofferpnges)to delpuce thps,pet po the bngractous petfon:* 3g ther iite tre
bim the man. And topbëthep {pare peher could a MPEP one in beaucn,that commaunded the rk


not telipheretheman wag, wbhombe foughte, abbot
é,wocoite be Erecched ont bps band xand made an othe, pea,thelpupng God, tbe mpghtpe Loz inbea
faping: PE pe tofl not deliuer me Judas captine yen commaunded the feuenth dapto be kepte Eror-
ae remone thts temple of Godintoaplapn pe fapd: aind Aam mpgbty vponeartbe to com
elde, 3 thal bzeake Downe the aulter, and con- maund them
pig dih el Unto Waccus. After thele fourmes binges bufinedie. Rot wpebitandpng
102 D¢8 De Departed.
IE Then the prealkes lpyfte vp thep2 bandes to
" Warde Deauenandbelought him that wageuer onercome Sudag.andtobepngeawape the bye
the defender of eepe Deo ela inge:!€houD tory:%ut acheus had euerfat concpoence
| oD oF all wbpey balk nede ofnotbpnge wol- anda perfectebopein God, phe wold belpe pin
delt thatthe temple of tbp babptacionthuldbe and eth |
amonge vs.Cherfore nowe Dmofk holp lozd commpig of the Heathen: but alwapetoreme:
imactitie SCPE tps boufe euer bndefpled* whrchlately berebebelpe p had bene ewed onto them fes
~~" tag clented, Now wasthereaccuied ynto Ap heaucn:pea,¢to be furenow allo, ý alnysbty
: | BOD


i
A r


Theleconde booke


15 Sod wolde qeue them the victozp.pelpake pnt »


tothem out of the laive gpro Hetes:putting tHE

invemembzaficcof the battels p thep bad Erpe-

ken afore and made them to be ofa good corage

— Ho wbenthep2 bertes toere lukte bp, be pre-

wedthem the difceattulnes of the Heathen, and
howe thep wolde kepe no coucnaunt uo? othe.

Thus thep weaponed them,not w thearmoure

of (ppld,and {peare, but wpth wholfom woes

and exboztactons.pe (ered them a deme allo

{ohertho2ow he made them all glad, which was

thps:bethounbe that belawDnitas(whpcb had

bene bpe prealke,a vertcoug and a loupnge man

fad, and of bonet conuierfacion,twel fpoken, and

one that pad beneercercpledin. godlpnes frome

achplde bolopnge vp bys bandeg toward hea=

uen and peaping for bps people. Atter thps ther

appered bnto bpm another man tobpche was a:

ge -honozable,and glozpous. And Oniasfapd

‘pps isa loner of thebzethzen,and of the peo:

ple of Bracll. Chps ishethat peapeth mucho?

the people and foz al the boly cptpe:erempe the

propheteof God. He thoughtcalfo that Feremp

| cibe our bps rpa st band, aht ganronto ee

alwetde of gold,faping: Takethys holp fwerd

a gpfte from God, wheretopth thou Walt fnpte

Downe the enempes of the people of Firal.

£ And lo tbep were well conforted thozoweé the

wWe2desof Jubagandtobke courage bnto them

h fo that La ae de pe tg determpned in tbete

mpndestotpabte., andtobpdeftpfipeatit:3n

fo muche that nc Sen wbpch thrp tooke it

bande,thep2 bolonetfe (hemmed the fame,becaule

the holpe cptpe,and the temple tere fn perel-fo2

the whpcb thep tookemoare cave, then for thepe

wpnes,chplozen.bzethecn,awdbpnlfolkes,

- Aqapnethep that were in thecttic, were mof

carcfull foz thole whpche were tofpabte. owe

| ivben thep were all maboope , that the Judge-

mentcofthe matter was at bande, andthe ene=

mypesdrewenpe,the polte beinge frette ina rape,

the €lephantes ¢ bozfemenenerp one fandypge

| in bps place: Machabeng confpberpnge thecom

| mpnac of the multptude, the ozdpnaunce ofdp-=

uerg weapons,,the crnelnes of the beates, and

) belde Dp hps bandes totvarde beauen, callpnge

Dponthe Lode that Both toonders, + tobpcd Bee

D nethnott thevpetozpeatter the multptude of the

Een Weapons and power of the hook (but to thé tbat

in lea e bin; actordprgeto bps otone wells Cher


o2zcinbpspeaperbelapdethelewordes.
j ‘ice. DO LoWe,*thon that opdelt fende thpne An-
Pi ELAUN f, qell inepmeot Csebpabkpnge of Juda, andin


theboofteof Sennacherph Aewelkean.c-{rre.
and fpue thonfande fende row alfo thy good
Aungell before vs(DLorde of hrauens) méhe
fearfulneffe and dpeve of thp mpg te arme, that
thep whychecome atrapnite thp bolpepeopleta
blafpbemethem,mapebe atraped ode made
anende oF bps woes: 3 |
hen Mycanorandthep ý were twithbim, dei
pe wpth hawmes:andtonges:but Judas and
bys company with pzaper and calling vpo God
Wipth thep2 handes thep{moote, but wpth


thepzbertestbep prayed vntothe Lorde,eiicive


no lefle then.crrv. $4).men: Wo thozowe the pee
(ent belpe of Godthep-weregloriontlp cofosted

Lowe when they lefte of,and were turnpige
agapne Mopth topethep wnderftoode that pea.
nozbpmfelfewasflapne wpththe other. Cher -
sey gate greate houte and acrpe.pzapipnge
the Alinpabtpe Loe wpth aloude vopee. And
Judag(awbpcbe wags ener ceadpe to (pendDebys e
bobye and Ipfe Foz byscptpspns) commaunded
fofinpte of Mpcanorshead, wpthhpsarmeand

ande and tobe brongbteto Jerufalem. Wert
came there,be called al the people, andthe pre
eStotheaulter wpththole that were in the ca=
ftell,and hewed them Mpchanozs head, and dis
topched bande whpebe be b ad pzefumpteoutipe
holden bp agapntt the Cempleof God-pecau~
fed thetonge allo of the ungodly Apcand tobe
cut in lptlepeces,and fo be calte bunto thefoulcs
and the cruell mang hande to be hanged vp bee
fozethe temple. } .

Dp euerp man gane thankes dnto the Lozde
fapinge:bleficd be he, that bath kepte Dpsplace
ionbel ie. 8 fo7 apean obean tbe banged it
pponthe bpecafkell,fo2 aneupoente and plapne
token ofthe belpeof God. Ano fo tbey agradat —

sogether,tokepethatdapebotpe.namelpe ©

the thpztene dape of the moneth Adar
wppeh inthe Spepans language
| ig called the nertedap before
Mardocheus day. Thug
Was Mpcanoz flap
ae,and frome
that time
| forth
the Fewes aed city fit po:
fieflpon.And bere wp ll 3
nowe makean
Bc ende,

€ The ende of the feconde bookeot-

the Hachabees.
- 0% (oid to


m a pA EN., k-


|
i
a
RN nea EET "i l
i pr 4 il i, i We g |
à ye a Tir We i i

1 bg a F ERREI TUIA ' ki | tae yi L3 h
Ain A ar] ! |

— =,
: ; "a


trånflated
Greke;


The Gofpelits.
uk


Sarker.
Tbe Actes,
The epites of


ER IN Xo Che Romapnes, dog!
te ty i edi ete
N | The.G.Lozinthians, Hhellalonians
The.tt.Zimothe,


To the Cpberians,

i To theLolloftians To Philemon, —
KEETA coer e
AIN] Tbt poate of Jude. YEO, John:


AT ieuelation


aes


en
Tia “, p, le = Js
: = aah $
r Cee ee Eea


pariti Seri


|
i
a
RN nea EET "i l
i pr 4 il i, i We g |
à ye a Tir We i i

1 bg a F ERREI TUIA ' ki | tae yi L3 h
Ain A ar] ! |

— =,
: ; "a


trånflated
Greke;


The Gofpelits.
uk


Sarker.
Tbe Actes,
The epites of


ER IN Xo Che Romapnes, dog!
te ty i edi ete
N | The.G.Lozinthians, Hhellalonians
The.tt.Zimothe,


To the Cpberians,

i To theLolloftians To Philemon, —
KEETA coer e
AIN] Tbt poate of Jude. YEO, John:


AT ieuelation


aes


en
Tia “, p, le = Js
: = aah $
r Cee ee Eea


pariti Seri


an $ E
“(SSS e a + a ea
ALENEN mez LO ie» a

+ ar ——— aru z æ
ilk Re RL gee ae

‘ e Ba at ere r

i sed 4 ]


bi => Ås tea


e 1


[dyn y


ah tla pA


A a oe ATES =


Aiha a
ey EA 4208


yy


i oo R Wi S,Platheww: Sol tf,


. The Golpell'nk


| zi | S.MDathewe.


oy =p oe El
è E jae ;
' aa l
à ——
r ~~ ' y Ñ
; Le z
ee Nyt
if ———_— |
4 CTbefpzt Chapter. >i


Cbe Fencalogpe of chrift,and marpage of bps moz
ther egat. be Angell Catilepeth Jotcphs mpnde,


Disig the boke
of the qeneratið
} -of Fetus Chk
thefonne of Da:
uid, the fone of
Abzabam. xJ-
buahbam betate


begat Jacob.


TeAm. $ * | 3
turii D veg and saram of Thamar. * Phares begat


| “vrot.titin Eltom. + Efrom begat Aram. x Arambegat


$rutbiirio Aminadab.+ 4 minadab begat Raaffon. * fa:
Hitch. talon begat Salmon. -palmon begat 15008


kitPara, Gat Roboam. FRoboam begat Abia. *Abia


id ea Chag begat Ezechias. + echiag berat Sanat
b


es begat Amon. + Amon begat


Fliti,a

' si.tes0-¢ her that was the wpe o
Re

|

! rrovio feg. * Hana


aitb Achin begat Eliud. Eliud berat Elealar .
*agoe.i.a Eleafar begat Watthan. Hattbhan begat Ja-
icewita coh, Jacoh begat Jofeph the hulbande of Ha-


f T Chebpeth of Jefus Chit was on this topfe.
i PRUDE bis mother arp wag marped to Jo-


“Slaac. * Flaac
4\} x Jacob begat |


feph (befoze thep catie to diell tòrtatheri the
twas founde iv tbebploebp the bonas ate
Joteph berbutbande(becaulehe was a ryghte-
ous Mian, and wolde not put her to wame) be
was mpnded , preauelpe to departe from Her.
Wut whple hethus thought : bebolde,the Aun-
qell of the Lozbde appearcod vnto bpm in a flepe,
apeng: Jofeph.tbou fonne of Dauta: feare not
to take bnto the Sarpe thp wpfe. Eo: that
whyche ts conceaued in ber,commeth of the Ho-
Ipe qoot. Sbe Wall bepnge fozthea fonne,and n
thou thalt calbis name x Fefug. foz he thal tane P28
Dpg fon thep2 {pnnes. ~
All this was done that itmpabt befulfplled m


| fepe;
dpd as the angell ofthe Lode bad bpdden bet


Be Aad ctrl telus was boeneat Wetbhle: B
AVF Bent a cptieot Fetoope, nthe tyme of
WAY pA Derode the Bpnge : Beholde, there
PAVAS ame wple men from the calf to Je-
~~~ tuflalé,fapenge:Wibere ishe that is
borne kpnge of Jetweg” Fo? we baue fenehps
¥arre in the eaft,e are come to wo2tbpp bpn. Serra
When Herodethe kyngebadherdethete typ
yes be was troubled, anv all the cptie of Fert-
alem with hpm. And whan he had gathered at
thechefe pacttes and ae of the people toge-
ther, bedemaunded of them, where Chait buld
be bozne. And thep fapd vnto bpm : At Wethleé
akies Fo: thus itis to2ptten bythe 3820-
phete:* And thou Wethleem inthelande of Juz Hd. v.4
da art not the leet amoae the princes of Juda.
FFozxout of the hall there come pntome the ca: 10:06:
ptapne,that {hall gouerne mp people Feral.
Chen Herode hen be bad pzeuelp called the
fopfe më) be enqupzed of them diligently what
time the tarre appeared, and be bad them goto
Wretbleem and fapde : Gopoure wape tbptber
andleatche dilpgentlp foz the chpld. And when
pe baue founde bpm, bapnge me worde a gapne
that {mapecome and wo2rthpppebpmalfo.
_EeUiben they bad bearde the kpnge, thep 25
departed: andlo, the Marre whpche they fawe
in the calte, wente befozethem,tyll it came,and
ode ouer the place , wherein the chyloe twag,
CAben thep lawe the ttarre, they were excea=
dpnge glad : and went into thehoute,andfound
e chplbe topth Marp bys mother, xand fell Si-ttt00
Downe flat and tnoztbppped bpm, and opened “eY
tbep: trcatures, andoffered nto bom gpftes,
golde,frankpnfenle,and mpre. And after thep
were warned of Godin Nepe (that thep toulde a
noft qo agapne to Herode )thep returned into
thep2 otonecountreanotberwaye. H
Aa ti Wiben


i


ee es


Tea


p R
.
z
E a et r kakla 2


i Ee ————<— Cl ll Se aa ~~ =
4


Cie ®olpeit 3


_ Ube thep Were departed, beholde the angell
ofp Lode appearedte Jolephin Nepe, fapeng:
avple,ttaketbe chplde g bis mother,and fipe tn-
to Eqy pee bechou there tyll J mpng f worde.

€ Forit wylicometo patie that Heroveiballieke

tye chylde to deltrope bpm. So when he awoke

be toke thechildeand bis mother bp npgbht,and

Departed into Egypte, and was there vnto the

death of Herode,p it mypgit be fulfplled, whych

_— Wuas tpoken of the Lorde bp p prophet fapinge:
Operes Nout of Egypte baue Jealleo mp tonne.

Bj Then Herode when he Tawe that be was moc
Ked of the topfe men, be was exrceadpnee to20th,
and lent forztb men of warre,and flue al the chpl
Den tbat were in Wetbleem , and tall the toa-

es(ag many as were flo peare olde o? ynder)

accozdpnge to the tyme, whych be had dilpaent-
ly knotone of the topfe men.

Then was tulfplled that, Dich was fpoken

bp the prophete Jcrempe: where ashe lapde: in

ama was there a vopce Derde xlamentation,

tweppnge t great moucnpuge. rachel wepyng

foz ber chpldzen, and olde not be confozted be-

D> caule they werenot. E Mut when Herode was

Deade:beholde,-an angel of the Lozde appea=

redina flepe to Yofeph,in Eqrpt,fapeng:arple,

+. andtakethecbplde andbis mother and ge into

harib the landeof jlrael, * foz thep arcdead whpcbe

Sopi a fought the chploes lyfe. And be arofe, and toke

ee” the chplde and bys mother, and came into the

+  landeofgiracl. ut when be berde that Ar-

chelaus opdrapgne in JeWwzpe,in the rowme of

bis father Herode, be was afrapde to go thp-

ther. Notwithitandpnae, after he was warned

of Godina fepe. be turned afpde into the pat-

ties of Galile, and hente and Diveltcin acptie


Bite. frric


sobrchis called anti thatttmpabtbeful 25


fplled whpche was poken bp the jazophetes:be
Malbecalledva Maszarpte. H
o €The.tt.Chapter. a
_ ©The baptpme,preachpnge and effpce of Jhon and
bowe Cheit was bapipico of bpmin Fozvane,


aa A) tholedapes came zhon the * was


Sas eon Ei ptpit.peeachpnce nthe wypldernes
gube.tiia. fie 1S of jewipe and fapenge: t Repente
serie EAG i of the lpte that is pati,foz the png
gopr ib === Donte of heauen is at bande. * Sop


thys is be of whome the prophete Elape (pake,

erha Doppchetapeth: * Che vopcee of a ceperin the

wpldernes prepare the wape of the Lozde: and

make bis patbes ftrapabt.'Chps Jhon had bps

fiifaxegt. rapmentof Camels beer. * Anda gpzdell of &

rou a bupnne aboute bis lopnes.*yps meate was lo-

iea e a WE anp Er oer outtobim

Jerufalem and ail Jeto2pe, and all edad Sal

rounde aboute Joudane, and were baptpiedof
ppm in Jo2dane,confellpnage thep2{punes.

5.5 >y<25ut when be fawe many of the Pharpfes

and Saduces come tobis baptpme.bhe fapd tn-

xukeaib tothe: * D generaron of bppers , wbo bath

taught pou to flee Ero the pengeaunce to comer

wWapngefoeththerfoze the frutes that beloge to

repentaunce. And be not of {uch mpnde that pe

wolde lape win pour {elucs:tve baue Abzabam

toonrefatber. jfo2 J fave topon, that Godis


xi- Hegu
piini


thy God,and bpm onelp fhalt thou tenie,


apen
Selus bad berd*ý hon wastaken pedeparted *4-t.b,


fapeng:* Chelade of sabulon eQeptalim,vp p ©


abletobepiyze to pafe that of thete ones ther
thallrple bp child2é nto Abrabam. Ené note
isthearealfoputvntotheroteofthetcees:fop |
xeuerp tree which beingeth not forth good érute etve
is bewen downe,and caft into thefpze. sis yf


Jbaptpie pou in tater x nto repentaunce: © F
but be that thal come after me.is mpabtper the Pis E
J. whole Moes Fam not worthytobeare. He Ind + |-
{bal baptpic pou wpth the bolp goof, and with. >


fpze:* whole fannets inbys bande, andbe toplt te | © |
purge bps flooze,and gather bys wheat into p |
barne but wpi burne tie chatte with puquéche-

ablefpze. Bk oe Chen commeth Jelug from
Galile to Jordane nto Fhon, xto be baptplen Arb #
ofbpm. Sut Jbonfozbad bim, fapenge: J baue fi
nede to be baptpled of the:and commelf thou to Shae |
mer Jelug an{iheredDandfapde Vntchpm: Let ‘oa
it be fo note. Fo? thus it becommeth vs to ful: |
Fpll all rpqyoteoutneffe. Chen be fuffred bpm. Ai


ftrapgbht wape oute of the water. Andlo,*hea= apart.
uen as open tnta bym:and be fate the fprete prin
of God, delcendingelpbea Doue,andlyabepnae 2 "*
bpon bp. And lo there came a voycefrohed= sg. i
markio D,


And Jefus, then he has baptplied, came ; ;


nen fapenqe: x Thps is mp beleued [onne int m
Whom Jam Well pleatia. fa .


3 @ Tbe.titt. Chapter. .
Chit fatteth and is tempted: he calleth Peter gaz
Biche, James, and-Whontand healeth the Cocke,
Rea (eo | Den was Jelus*led away of plpzete A
i] fy yy ntomapl dernefle:to be tempted of the saarke.t.b - $
V Ne peneli. Bnd when be bad fatted four- a oe
Sitpe daves and fourtp nigbtes,be wae
at fyelattean pongreD. Vno whet tbe tempter f:
came to bpnès bel em tbou be the fonne of 4
God comatide,that thele Tones be made bread. |
ut be anfwered g fapde: itis wzptten, xman Drn-bita y
thal not lpue bp bzead only, but bp euerp Worde Sapi.rvi.e
that procedeth out of the mouth of God,
Then the devell takethhym vp intothe bolp


cytie,and fetteth bpni ona pynacle o€ the téple,
and fapth bntobpm:pë thou be the fone of Gon
cai thp telfe Downe beadlpng. oz it is wozittë:
xDe Ball geue dps angels charge ouer the,and Pta.rctt.e,
wyth thep2 bandes thep Wall bolde the wp, lefe
at anp tyme thou dai thp footeagainta fone
And Fetus lapde to ppm:ttis wezpeten agapne:
* Chou thalt nottempte the LorderhpGad, . Pett iti
Agape, the deuel taketh pom vpintoaner: w =| Ck.
ceabpnge bpe mountapne,andthewerbbypmall — o
the Bprqbdoines of the wozlde and the alozye of |
them,¢tapeth onto bpm:althele tpl Fagene p,
thou be fe fall Dotone,¢ wozthyppe me. The
apeth Fetus onto him: Auopde Satan. Fozit
ig weptten: * Chou balt wozthppype the Lozde Deut. bie,
nO F


The thedenellleanetbbpm,toebold, tp ans ete.
gels cam and minired Viso bpm, Foe Den Sear.
into Daltle,¢ left Pasareth,¢ went and dwelt
in Capernat:whichisa citie po p feecoaft, in
thebozders ofsabulon ¢Neptalim, ý it mpgbt
befulfilicd which was (poke bp Elap $ mophet
wape of the lee beponde Joane, Galileof the EOT

gentpls:


| a DiS, slatyew: Foli


| Henitpls:the people whprh fat indsrknefeand falt baue loft thefaltnes , what Halbe feafoned
k? in the anote of Death awe greatlpgbht:and therwptdb: yt is thence forth good foz nothpnge

fotbem wbpchfatintheregionand thadoweot butto becatounand tobe troden Downe of mé
| / death, is the lpabt fpronge vp. -o Deare the tpb ofthe wozloe. Æ cptie that ig


| saatttt.a  romtbat tyme Jefus beqanne tox preach, fet onanbpleanot be bpd, *nefher Do melpght Mar.iiit.s
a faa at AND £0 Lape:*repente,fortbe ipratotie ofhea- acandell,andputit onder a bultpell, but ona ty”
= awila . nenisathande. 3 PF x As gelus toalkedbp candelftpcke,anditqeuethlpabt dnto all tbat
a “T > thefee of Galile, be fatwettwo betien: Spmon arein the boule. Letpoure lpg bt fo bpne befoze
a whych was called PBeter,and Andrew pis dzo- men, «that thep mpe le poure good toozkes t.Bet.ii.e
and gloepfpe poure father awbpehe is in bea-


s 3 uen. Ix > Thpnke not thd: ¥ am come tode- €
3 oe and J wpl ma ftrope the laiwe, oz the Pzophetes : no Jamnot
| apem, b come to deftrope.but*to fultpll. JEoz truelpe J sseth.i.0


} fape unto pou:* tpil beauen andeartbe palie, iite?
D And when de was gone forthe Feo thence, be Ell all ee tpe ot the Lavoe fal nor elcape tarme
ulfplled.

CUbofoener therfore beeaketh * one of thefe 32-1?
lect commaundementesjand a on fo, pss i
be Halbe called the leet in the kpngdome of pea
uč. Sut whofocuerdoth and teacheth,tbe fame
fpalbe called greate in the kpngdome of pea- $
uct. Ix rf ffoz J lape bntopow:ercepte poure
tpgbhtcouinetic exceadethe righteoutneic of the

crpbes and Pbatples, pe cannot entreinta
the kpnadome of beauen. |

Pe baue berde that it twas {apd onto them of D

. theoldetpme.*+ Thou hale not kpl:wbofoeuer bh ia
&plleth,thalbe tndaunger of iudgement.But J eac,s.b
fape vnto pou: that tobofoeuer is angepe wpth

i bps bzotber(bnaduifedlp) thalbe indaunger of

` aganti Bnet mgreate mulfitudcs of iudgement. And tboloeucr fape vnto pps bzo-

Tea | ther Racha, Halbe in daunger of a councel. rut
tholocuer fapeth thou foole,thalbein dauncer

of hellfpze. herfoze pe thou ofret thy gpfte

at the aultate, and there remembzelke that thp

brother bathe ought agapnite the :leaue there

tbyne offerpnge befoze the âultare xand go thp Hob. rit.

Tape fpzite , and be reconcpled to thp brother,

and then come lai thp gpfte.

- D tbpne aduerfarpe Luke.ritg.

loue, enentotvardea mansencmpes. . fohples thou arte tebe mapemaaa ee l

See penbe latwe the people, he tente anp tyme the aducelatp delpucr theto the iudge

Sy (ia | vpintoamountapne,and whenbe and the tudge delpuer the to the mpnpiter, and

| ees Ep wastct, bisdiicpplescametobim thentbhou be cat into pecfon. Clerelp, J fape wn

| oy), {and after that be bad opened bys to the:thou Walt not come out thence, tpll tho

-EA mouthe, betaught them,fapenge: paue paped the vtmoott farthpnac, |

- ankevro *Wlefled ave the poze in {pecte forthepzsisp — Vehauebherde that itwas fayd onto them of
teta.irvia bpngdome of beauen. * WDlefled are theptbat olde tpme.* Chou alt not cOmpt abuoutrpe. ¢rov.rr.e
ano drbiib mourne: Fo thep pall receauecomfozte. le- Wut Flay nto pou that whofocuer loketh on 2em-Fitt.c
Ced are tbe meke:fo2 thep hall receauetbeenbe- another mang wpfeto Ind after ber,bath come ics
i vitaunceoftheearth. Dlelledarethepwbpche mptted aduoutrpe with ber alreadp in Dis bert.
f Teverrehe xhoger andthprtt afterrpgbteoulneg:fozthep  *Pftbprpabt cepe bpnder the plucke bim ont €
‘ae thallbe fatiltpes.2ictied are the mercpfull:foz andcaft bpm trom the. soz better itis wntothe OF?
ee Gal optenec nice leden ate thepure that one of thy members perptye,t en that thp
jall fe God. Wlefledarethe - hole bodp thulde becaite into baT AndpFthp
peacemakers: fozthep thalbecalledtbhechpld2é rpghte bande moe the, cut bpmof,and cafte

25 of God. welled are thep whpche fuffre perfecu- Dom OMi Oz better it is onto the that one

y i “cepon fo? rygbteoulnes fake : foz thepzg is the ottbp members perptbe then that all thp bodpe

| Epeei kpngdome ofeauent.x Weled are petohenme thuldebecafkintopell. H Fis fapde whofoes
k eiee tenple poma perlecute pou, and thall pont he uct putteth atvape bis wpte,xlet bpm geue ber dea.rettit a

_ fapeal 02 aletterofdeuozceiment. + But Jfape vnto pou: AEA
actes..s mpfake. * Reiopfeand beglad,fozgreateis thatwhpofocucr doth put awape bps wpfe ( er- esarcr.b
ae pourcrewardeinbeauen. Je Sozfoperfecutcs it befo2foznycacpon)caufeth bet to bacake ma-

_. Sete thopshe propbetes, whych were before pou. trpmonpe. And whofoener marpeth ber thatis
Fete’ PeDeave the falt of theearth: x 2utptthe deuogled commpttethaduontry. Pap

: aa tit Agapne


t


*  ‘Zuke, bb


j


rs


pos


" Reu.pir.p


The Golpell


rayne pe auc herde howe it was {apdeto
Luk,tir.e een of olde tyme : «thou Halt not foettocare


thy Celfe, but thalte perfourme vntothe Lode Pp


Farob. ba ghofe tbpnges that thou {ieareff. * Wut FZ lap
pnto pou: Meare notat al: nether by heaven,


_ Stalrbina Eg? it is Gondes leate, nog bp the a fo2 it


ishpsfoteftole: nether bp Jerulalem, foz tt ts
ehecptic of the great kpnae : nether Halte thou
fiweare bp shy brane becaufe P canit not make
one heer whpte o2 blacke. Hut pour comunteca
cio thalbe pea pea nape nape. soz whatloeuer
added moze then thele, it commeth ot euel.
eee ehane berde thatitigfapd :* anepefozan
Deut-Ft-> epesanda Coeh fo2 a toth.25ut J lape vnto pou,
diuke.in that pe retptt not euell. wut +dofoeuer mene
thea blowe onp a abt cheke, turne to bpm the
otheralfo. And plany man DP fue theat the
lawe, etake atwape thp coote let bpm baue thp
© coke alfo. And wholoeuce tpl copel the togoa
mple, go pth bym twvapne.Geue to bymtbat
4 fheth the, and from pym that wolde bozowe ;
turnenotthouatbape.

Fx Pebane herdechat itis fapd, *thou alt
loue thpne nepabboure, and bate thpne pais
ut Fiap dnto pou:loue pour enemies-
wtoma.riic Chem that curte pou. + Do good to them that


Laat. rri.d


Herita Hage pou. wWzape For them whyred burte pouand


erfecute pou,ppe map be the chpldzen of pour
father whpcbe is inbeauen, Eo? be maketh bps
Sunnie to arpfe on the encll, g on p good, g fens
iakebie Dethrapneonp tuft onthe wmiuit. For pt pe
lone them tobpch loue pou: what retoarde haur

pe? Do not the publicans alfo euen the fame?
nopf pe make much of poure bzeth2en onelp,
| what fprguler thpngedo enen not allo p pu:
Leui.rit,a. blicanglpkewople; *pe thall therfore be pertpte
ené ag pour father whichis inbeutis perfpt i


The. vi.cbapter. +f


q Ofalimes,pzaper and fatpnge Be forbpovrth the careful
tekpige OF ozIDlp thpnges.


Fj She hede p pe gene not pourealmote


in beauen. Chertoze, when thou genet thpne at
mes, let not tropettes be blowt befoze the , as
the ppocrites doin pfpnagoges Ad Arete
foz tobe pzapied of me.Cierelp Flap nto pou:
thep bane tbep2 rewarde. Wut whe thou ple
geucatmes, let not thp lefte band Knotwe what
thp rpabt bade doeth, that thpne almote mape
ial revar epep, Ee in lecrete,


e


pall rewarde the openly. |
nemega Ano WE thon prapel*t oufpalt not be as
sonis — the ppoccitesare. soz thep wie to ande prap-
cta.srir.d enge in the fpnagoges,and in the cozners of the
reteg that thep mape be fene of men. Ceres
Ipe, Jilape unpa ponpe baue theptrewarde
oils ait DUE Wen thou prape *entre into thpcham-=
MENGES Hee and when thou balk Hut thp doze prape to
thp oe wbpcheisin fecrete, and thp father
whpcb eeth in fecrete, Hal reward the openly.
naD , Sutraben ve prape*bable not much, ag the
HPP Heathe do:fo2 thep thpntbe tt wpl come to pave


thattbepthalbeherd fo: they: much bablinges
fake. enot pe therfozelpke nto them. xffog Sobi.
poute father knoweth what thpnges pe bane
7 A efoze pealke of bpm: after thps ma- ;
nec therfoze prape pe. : |

x Ductarher oh rch arte mbeané, haloes 2°"
betbpname. Let thykpngdome come. THp .
wpll befulfplied, ag wel inearth as itis in bea


ucn.Geue vsthysdapeourdaplp beeade. And ss


p 7
|
Lb


fozgeuc vg oure dettes as toe forqeuc oure dete
terg. And leade vg not into temptacion but dé
sph ict th edan pae kyr pus
and the power, and the glorpe fog euer. i 3
CTherfore * pt pe fo te other men thep2 trel- Soma
pafles.pourebeauenlp fatber thall fozgeue pou.
cacpont tretpattes) ut pipe wpll not fozgeue men es
thep2 trefpatfes nomoze Hall poure father foz-
gpue poupour tretpatfies. E :
rW ozeouerx ben pe fak, be not lad asthe raios
ppocriteg are. jto2 thep dilfpgure theps faces,P cgath.ip.
it mape appeare bnto men, bowe thatthep falt. Iererty b
Gere hi Goce cuir paor foarren i
Wut thou when thou fatet anopnt thpne bead
and watbe thp face thatit appeare not onto më
How that thou faltef:but vito thy father, whi-
che ts infecret,anbdtbp father whpch fecth tn tee
cret, pall retoarde the opentp. |
Lapenot vpfoz pourtelues trealure bpõerth
toberetbe ruft € moth doth cogrupt.and where |
theues bzeake theoughand feale.x25ut lap Dp Zuber.
Foz pou, treatures in heaue,tobernetbher rule nog 2:
moth toth corrupt, æ tober theues donot beeake
ogee 1102 teate. Æo: where pour trealure ig,
theretoplyourbertebealfo. a |
xeber tof inane te the eve erone pE tener
thpne epe be fpnale, all thp bodpe thalbe full of
lpgbt. Suta pethpne epe be pched,all thp bo-
bp halbe ful of Darknelle.Wiberfoze, pff lpgbt
that isin tbe,be darknes, howe great ts p dark: D
nes? > *Pomancan {crue ttoo matters. oz Lute.rore
etherbethall batethe oneandlouetheotber,o2
elsleane tothe one,¢delpple the other:pe ca not `
ferue Godand Mammon. Therfoze FZ lape Yn-


thal eate op Depnke,noz pet for pour bodp, What t.1e1.0.c ;
rapmeét pe thal put on. 3s not p life moze worth
then meat:and the bopp more of value, thé rap-
ment! Webolde, the foulesof the apre:fortbep -
fowe not, nether do thep “ail ozcarp into the
batnes:and pour beauenlp father fedeth them.
Ave ye not much better then thep?
UU bich of pon( by takpng careful thought) 20era
canadde one cubpte Dnto bis ature’ And wip
care pefo2 rapment ¢ Contpbder the lplies of the
felde,howe thep grote. Eheplaboure not,ne=
ther dothep{ppnne. Rndpet ¥lape vnto pou, p
euen Salomon in all hisropalte wasnot arap:
edl phe one of there. berto pt Godlo cloth ë
raffle of p fclde(wobpch though it faude to dape
sto mo2owe call into the fognaffe) Hall be not
much mozedo p fame foz pou,o pe of litlefapth:
Therfore, take no theught,fayeng: tbat thal
foe eate,02 what (hall toe Deynhe,o2 wherwpth


to pou: *be notcarefull foz poure lpfe, what pe Rat Fie


hall we be clothed ¢ After all thee thpnges do Fe


the qentplg feke. oz youre gase ta aoe


w
a i
s i
ræ oy a at 4
= 2 : pe ee SEN =
o r n ' = ; row e


E


|


f
Å


E


i


LIL SD, yoy,


knoweth, that pe hatic itede of al thefet puges,

Sut rather leke pefpzite the kyngvome of God

and the righteoutnetie therof andal thele thpa-

ges Malbe mpniftred bntopou. F |

7 Carenot tbëfozthe mozotve,fo2 the mozotve

dape thall care fo2 it felfe .fuffpcpent onto the

: _ dape,is the trauaple therof.

; Tbe. vit. Chapter. |

: i CDe forbpodeth foolpth and rathe iudgiment repo?
ueth ppocrptpe,erbozterh bute praper,warneth to be


tare of falie prophetes: and wplicth the hearers of
bpe wozdeto be doers of the Came,


EURDE fe Ae 5 aCiogenot., that pe benottidged,
= Pie: Kae e ned.) x Fo? as pe indge lo all pe be
ilukebi.€ Deca Ba indged. + And w wpat mealure pe
open ren pNP tthe fame thal otber më
Luke.bi.€ mealure to pou. * bp teet thou a moatein
‘thy beotbersepe.but confpderett not the beame
- , _ thatigin thpne owne epe! D2 bowelapeft thou
t °P to thp bzotper:oxcorotber )fuftre me, zw Ipinets
oute aimoate oute of thpneepe, and bebo dea
beamcisin thine owne epe. Thon ppocrite firit
cat oute the beame oute of thpne otne cpe, and
then thalte thou fe clearlpe to plucke oute the

moate out of thp brothers epe.
@cue tot petbat whichis bolo pnto doggeg
ucther cafte pe poure pearles before fwpne,lealk


thep treadethem under thepz fete andtbeother .


turne agapnit pou,and all to rent pou.

% Afke, and ithalbegeuenpou: * Sekeand
Jentre pe pall Epude:danocke, and it palbe opened vn
uberis topou.stoz wholoeneratketh receaucth,¢ who
focuer febeth. fyndeth: and tobpm thar knoc-
ketbh.tt albe opened. Js there anp man amze

ou,wobpeb( pf ips fonne alike bzead) wpll offer
ym a tone: VE be alke fpe, pll be profer
bymaferpent: PE ve tben whan pe are cuell)ca
gene pourechplbzen' Good gpftes, howe muche
moje pall pour fatiwt whee ig in Deauen.gpue
goodthpnges,pipeatseothpm. —
: Cherfore, * wharlnever pve wolde that men
tLe hulde doto pou:dDope ewr: [0 to them alfo. JEO
thygis the late and thepzopbeteg.
xEntre in at the trapte wate: fo? wyde (8p
ate and bzoadets the wape that leabdeth tode-
ccpon:and many there be whpid go in thers
at. But Hrapte isthegate, and narotoe ts the
wape, obych leadeth Dnto lpfe, and fewe there
peu. rtit.a bethat fpnde it. > * Weare of falle pzopbhetes
„ IDni mbych come to pou tn thepesclothbpnge, bust im-
wardlpe thep are ranenpnge toolucs. Pealt
kuowe them bp thep2 wozkes. |
*pomengather grapes of thoanes/o2 fpg-
eg Of thpftles: Cnélocuerp good tree bringeth
tortb qoodfrutes.%5ut acozrupt tree bepnaeth
ggath.r6.c forth cucllfrutes. * X qoodtree cannot bypnge
forthe bad frute: nether cana bad tree bypnge
esath.1iv fozthgoodfrutes. * Cuerp treethat bypngeth
Luksi d. not Forth good frufe.tsbetoen Dotone, and cafte
into the fp2e.iberfore,bp thep2 Spe i pall
knowethem. Mot eos one that fapeth bnto
ggat. rrb.b me, * Lorde, Lorde, hall enter into the &png-
Lube.ot.s nome ofheaucn:but be that doth the wpllofmp
and FH father, wbpcbe ts in Peaucn.cx ae that enter mto the
| = kpngdeme ofpeanen) 34 GHanp wpll fapetomein


į


guke. rije


auke.bi.g.


SCOLII,

that dape: Lorde Lorde bate we not peopherv: -

ecothozowe chp name: xAndthozotwe thp name 1D

Daue call outdeupls: epee mpracles artesi

fHozotwe thy names And then wyll J know-

lege vnfotbem: FJ neuer knetoe pou. * Departe Pral.vi.b

frome,pe that worke mtquyte. DOT aiti
~ E0 Wholocucr heareth of me thele hordes,


and docth thefame , Jwplllpken bpm ontoa
topie man, whpch* buplt bys boule vps a rocke 208er
 Gda (hotver of rapne defcended, and the Roud-


Des came, and the wphdes blewe, and bet bpor

that houle and it fel not, becaule it as grown

dcd onthetocke. Andenerpone tbat beame? .

of me tbere hordes *and docth them not, Halbe Jb-t.b
lpkened butoafoolpthe man, whpebe buyplt his

boufe bpon lande : and a thoerxof rapne defcen: Ere riiid
Bed, and the flouddes came, tbe twopndes bletwe

and beate bpon that boufe,andit fell,andqreat

was the fall of if, ,

And it came to paffe, that when Jefus had
endedthelelapenges,the people were aftonnps
ou bya boctrpne.* op etaugbt hens one pple

All no fh (0 He
Rent beara nn NOF ane Soerpbeaea e
be.viii.chapter. ry
het any ig ate Neneh teeta


lator, Oplieth the fer andthe wmpnde , and Dtpurth the dec
uris out oF the potleled into the fiwpne, ten bi aca


tee Den he was comedowne from the q
TETA | mountapne muche people Folowed

(Ea | eee ie Dm. And bebolde,* therecame a ruke.v.e

LSD a) epee , and worthppped bpm fap- Satta
[eu nge: Haptter, pf thou wplte thou
cant mate me cleane. And Jelus put forth bps
bande,and touched bpm.fapeng: 3 wpl, be thou
cleane,and immediatlp bis wir a ihasclented.

And Jefus fapeth wnto bpm:fe thou tellnoma

xbut go and thewe thptelfeto the Pzealke,and teoritis
offre the gpfte ( that Boles commaundedto be
sal roa woptnes bnto them. F |

And when Jefus was entredxinto Caper xur.vi.a

naum , tbere came vntobpma Centurion, and othe.
befought bpm, fapenge: after mp feruaunte
lpcthat bome {pcke of the pallp.andis greuont-
lpepapned. and Fetus fapth, when Y come on
tobpm, J wil beale bym. The Centurion an-
fwered, and lapde:Sp2, Jam not worthy. that

thou ulbdelt come pnder my roofe:butxtpeake pra, cos.
the wode onlye, and mp fernaunt halbe bea- 15

led. fto? 3 allo mp felfe ama man fubiecte to

the authoztte of another,and haucfoudpers wi-
der meg Jlape nto thps mã:qo,a mt goeth:
and to another come, andhe commeth, andto
mpf{eruaunt dothps.and be doethit. üben Je-
fus berde thefe wozdes,be marucled: and fapde
to them that folowedbhpm: Gerelpe, J fape vn-
to pou: 3J bane not founde fo qreatefaptbhe in


pital. fape wnto pou-tbat xmanp Hall come zux.cii.¢


om the Call; and Ueit, and pall reft topth Ererig
Ababam and Flabac and Yacob in the kpng-
Dome of heauen:butthe chpldzen off kingdome
fhalbe catt ounte into vtter darknefle:there pal-


-be heppnge and qnathpnge of teth. And Fetus 4


fapbe bnto the ¢ enturion:qothp ape, andas
thou beleuett,to be it tunto the. And bis fernañt
Senn Aa itii wag


1


wasbealedinthe felfe fame houre. F
peaks xAnd when Jefus was come into Peters
ere boule, be Taine bps wpuesmorber pengi nep
and {peke of a fener. And be touched her bande,
andthe feuer left ber:andHearote , and mpup=-
- ftred onto them. When the enendzuc on, thep
“prouaht vito bym manpe that were pofleticd
wptbh deucls. And becat oute the fpzeteg wpth
a wode and healed all that werefpcke, that tt
mpabt be fulfplled, which was fpoken bp fat
erase tepeophet,whenbelaper: * He toke onbpm
(Det..0 Ouvintpznitics,and bare ourfpchues.

! ben Fclus fawe much people about hpm
hecommaunded that they Mulde go vnto the
other fyde of the water. Anda certapne ipoe

Luketr.s (When be was come lapd butobpm:* Malter,

_ ¥Bxopll folowe the wptherfoeuce thou qoet.

And Felusfapeth puto byanste Ears ganr po:

ies,and the bpzdesof the apze baue nefkes: but

the fonne of ma hath not where toreftbysbead

And another of the nomber of hts difciplesfatd

Lokera MNtobpm:xGpalter ufer me fpi to gog burp

‘mp fatber.2But Jefus fapde Dnto bpm: folotee
me, and let the dead burp thepz dead. as

«And when he entred intoa hyppe, his dt-

egar.itib Cciples Folotved bym. And beholde, *tde carole

Lut, biic 9 rveate tempek tn the Tee, in Comuche that the

(hpppe was couered wth toaues , but he wag

aflepe.and pes bpfciples came to bpm anda-

woke bpm, fapenge : Watter, faue vs , Wwe pee

—_.- epibe.Andbelapeth wntothe: by are efear-

Zob.sret Full, D pe of lytle fapth: ben be arole * and

VD rebuked the twopndes and the fee, and there folo-

Moedacgreate calme. Wutthe menmaruepled,

fapenge:wobat maner of manis thps.tbat bot)

wpndes and fet obep bpm?

makoa  *And when he was come to the other fpde,

Luk, bilt,d into the coiitre of the Geraelites, ther met bpm

two pofleffen of deuplleg, whychcam out of p

graucs,and were out of mealure fearce.fo that

Homan mpabtgo bp that wape. And bepoloe,


ogath.v.a. thep crped out fapinge:* D Felu thou fonne of


Laroo Govt what baue woe ovo wpth the: Arte thou
come bptherto tozmente bë before our tpmer
mat. vig. And there as a good wape of from them * a
beerdofmanplwpne, fedpnae. Ho, the deupls
hefougbt bym. fapinge:pë thou catt bs out tuf-
fre bg togooure wape intotbe heerd offwpne.
And he fapde vntothem:yopoure apes. Che
went thep oute,and departed into the beerde of
Cyopne. And beholde, the whole heerd of fiopne
was catpedbeadlpnge into the tec,and perpl=
edin the waters. Chen chep that kepte thent
ficdd,and went thep2 apes into the cptie,and
toldeeucrp Aya A eles tobat bad foztuned Dn-
tothe poffetied of the deupls. And beholde, the
whole cptie came out tomete Jefus, and oben
acterot. s thep atoe bpm, *thep befought bpm p be toold
departe out of thepz coattes.


€ The.ty. Chapter.


qe bealeth the palpe, calleth cyathetwe from the cu:
fome,anfinereth foz bpe pprepplec , bealeth the woman
ofthe bloubp piut: helpeth Fatrus daughter, geucth.it.
bipnde men thep; fpghte,maketh a bomme man to (peake
and bjpueth out a druri,


BEE- pim


Fae
ae


Fete a4 cptie and bebolde, xthep brought sgarke.fi a
ab ‘el p E pal “CS n


Jelug 7 >"


apde wpthinthemfelucs : thys man


Scrpbes .
blato bemeth. Aud when Felus fawe tbep?
thougbteg,befapo:Wiberfoze thpnckepeeupll ©


fapeth be vnto the fpcke of the nd te Karple, actes.ti.b
take bp thp bed and go buto thpne cia a p
be arole Departed to bps boule. Mut the ped gure.v.c
plethat fator it maruepled, © glizpfped God, Fopu.b.b
whpch bad geuenfuch poter nto men. u

And as Jelug patted forth from thence be
fatoea man (named Mathew) fpttpn catthe
receate of cultome,andbe fapeth onto bpm,to=
lotweme. And he arole.andfoloted bpm. And
itcam topafie as Jefus fat at meatin bis boufe
pehold,many publpcangalfo and Cpnners that
camie,fat Downe with Jelugand his ditciples.

And when the phariles late tt, thep fapde w5
onto bis difciples: top eateth poure matter
publicans and fpnners: But whe Jefus beard
that,hbefapde onto them: Thep that be trong
nedenot the phpti meng a that are ficke-
®ooperather andlearne at tbat meaneth.
xJ wpll hauemercpe ¢ not facrifpce. Fo Jam rira
notcometocallthe rypabteoug, butfpnnersto™™ "`
repentannce. J Pfi bencame the difciples of
Abon vnto pe Be x obp Do toe and the pyat.ri.p
Pharifes fa for the moot parte:but thp difci- arie
ples fat not And Jefus fayde Dutothem:can””
the bepdeqtomes chplozen mourne as longe as:
the bepdegrome is pebthem s Wut thedapes
wopll come, when the bepdeqrome Halbe ta
from them,and then pall thep fat. Romã put:
tetbapece of netoe cloth in an olde garmét. For
then taketh beatbape the pecefrom thegarmet
and the rentis made wozie. Nether do menput
newe wpne inte olde bottels : els the bottels
beeake, andthe wpnerunneth out and the bot-
telg perpihe.25ut thep put newe wpne into neo
bottels and botbare faucd together. Je €

FeUUbple bethusfpake vntothé,*bebolde, srarx.s.c.


there came a cettapne ruler and ntti ae Luk. bist -
e


ppm, fapinge:mp Daughter is cuen now dplea-

{ed,butcomeandlapethp bande bponber, and

the hall lpuc.And Jelug arofe,¢folowed bpm,

anb({o bpd bps dilcpples.* And bebolde,a two- Sark he

man whpcbe teas Dplealed w an piue oF bloude Leuit, rv.

twelue peares,camebebpndebpm,andtoucheo

the bemme of ps beture. soz the fayd wpebin

her telfe:pE J mape touche, but cuenbps vetture

onelpe, J thalbelate. Hut Zelustournedhpm

anb whan be fatoe ber,be fapde: Donghter be of
odcomfogte,thp fapthe bathe madethe late. -
ndthe woman was made whole euen pfame |

tpme. Fe * Andioben Jelug came into theru- Sarke.bo

lers Zouk. biji, ii


ufe. And anv.tr.f. i


——


%


M@ar.bi.b


a g Machel, which
ton


LOT SS ITAY,


lers boufe and latwe the mpnffrels.&nd the peo-
plemakpngea nople, befapde onto them: get
zoyn.rib, Poubéce,foz the mapdeis notdead*but flepeth
"And thep lauched bpm to fcogne. Hut wha the
cople twere put forth, be wente in,andtoke per
ow PP the Hand, c#and faprr: paméell,arpfe, pand f vått-
- fellarofe, And thpsnople wenteabzoad intoal
Dthatlande. And than Jefus departed thence
tiwo bipnde menfolotwed bpm crpenge and laps
enge: Dthoufonne of Dauid haue mercy on DS
And when be was come intop houte,the blpnd
came to bim. And Jefus fapeth vntothem:6e-
leuepe,that Jam able to do thys ¢ Cheplapde
‘nto bpm: Lorde, we beleue. Then touched he
ejat.big.d thep2 epes,fapinge:* Accozdpige to pour fapth
beit pnto pou. And their eyes were opened. And
Jefus charged tbem lapenge : ee thatno man
knowe of it. Wutthep, whanthbep were depar-
ted, fpzeed abzoad bis name inall that lande.
As they went oute,behalde, xthep beoughe
tobpm a bvomme ma polled of a Deupll. And
whan the deupll thas calte out the dome (PERT:
Andthe people meruepled, faping:it wag heuer
snat.rtib folencin Jirael. Sut the pharites lapd:* peca-
s@arut-b. feth out deupls,thozovec the prince of deupls.
taani + And Jefus wenteabout all cpties Etownes
teachpnaetnthep: (pnagoges,and peeachpnge
the glad tpopnges of tbe kpngdome, and pea-
Ipnge euerp {pckines and cucrp Dpleate amonge
the people. 25ut when be lawe the people: * be
was moucd wpth compaflpon ov them,becaule
thep were deftitute,andtcattered abzoad; cuen
ag tbepe hauvnge no (hepherde. Chen lapeth be
Dito bps oplcpples.the *herueff truelp-is plen-
teous, but p labourers are fewe.Pzape pe ther-
fore the Lozde of the peruel’, that be ropil fende
labourers into bps baruett.
qChe.xr. Chapter.
qrchritt Cendeth out bis,rit,dpettles to pieache im geio:
cp, geueth them charge,ten them, anv comfozteth thE
 agapntt pertecucpenand trouble. i i
<== Anwb bis ioe pore?
bib Od Agee led bntobpit, be gaue t em power
TOREDAD, IRT, Ri ee jagain& wucleanetp2etes.to cafttbe
PY, ESA \Slout, eto beale all manct of (pc&netle
Leese and all naner of Dpfeate.
@henames of p.rit. Apoltles.are thele. Che
Epeft,2opmon whichis called jocter:¢ Andrew
bps brother: James the Conne of sebede,¢ Jobn
bys bother: bil E Bartholomew: Thomaz
had bene a Publican. James
the fonne of Alphe.¢ Lebbeus ( whofe fpzname
was Taddeus) Sitnon of Canaan, and Judas
Hcarioth,wpychallobetrapcdDhpm. == *
eqark bib «Fels fentetoztbe thelc tweluc innombze
PLD ohom becommaunded,lapenge:Oonot into
iwape of the Gentpls , and info the cptie of the
SPamarivangenter penot.wut goratherto the
loft thepe of the boule of Alrael.Oo and pecache
op fapenge: @be byngoome of heaucisat bande.
peale the fycke, clenfe p lepers, raple the dead,
acte.btita Catt out Deupls.*«sirelpe pe haue receaued:geue
toner.bi.b frelp.+Potleile not gold nog {pluer no? bzatie m
AubetF® poyre purleg,noz pet (cript totwardes poure 103-
nep:nepthertwocotes, nepthber Mors, no? peta
ixim.b.c TOV Itz the wozchma ts wozthp of bps meat.


agar bil.b
Zute.pi.b


Zukef.a


Ju, Ue ,


Wut to whatfoeucr cptie 02 towne pe thal come
enqupzewhotsworthpinitandtberabpdetpl
pego thence. * And tohen pe come into a boute, Cus"!
falutetbe tame And pete boute be Moorthy gt Pap
poure peace come bpd it but pfit benot WortHp
let poure peace retournetopouagapne.
And wholocuer Wall not receaue pou ne 4
Spl beare poure prcachpnae: when pe departe Fee rite
out of that houle o2 that cptie*thake of the duft
of Ja fete. erelpe Jlape pnto pou: it Halbe
ealper foztheland of sodoma and Gomozra in
the dape of tudqement,then fo2 that cptic.
xSebolde, J lende pou Forth,ag (hepe amoge
wolues. Ze petherfore wple agferpentes and eae
innocent as Doues, * Wut beware of men Foz Job.ro
thep thalldelpuer pou wp to the councels, ¢ Mal
{courge pouinthepefpnagoges. And pe thal be
Dzought tothe bead rulers,and bpnges, foz imp ©
fake. Dpenestothemandtothegentpls. Saskia
wut x when thep delpuer pou vp, take pe gero.iit
io thought,bowe 0? what pe Wall fpeake:* for - |
it (palbe qeué pou, enë inthat fame houre what
pe thal fpeake. Eo it isnot pe that tpeake, but
the (pzete of poure father tobpcbe fpeaketh tit sgich.bit B
pou.* Che beotber Wall delpuer bp the brother
todeath,andthe father thefonne. And the chpl-
deenthall arpleagapnt thepz fathers and mo=
thers and pall put them todeath:and pe {halbe mat.rriiga
hated ofall men foz mpnamesfake. *2uthe i
that endureth to the ende, albe faucd. myn ie
_ But * when the perfecute ponin thps cp- and.rii.as
tie,fipe pe into another. oz verelp iape vnto
pou:pe tall not go thozotveal the cepties of Ji LubeDit
tacltpl the fonne of manbe come. *Che dtict-
plets not aboue the mafter:noz the feruaunt a-
boue bps Lozde. Jt is pnough Foz thedpiepple,
that be be as bps matter ig and that tie ier-
uaunt be as bis Lozdeis. Pétbey baue called p -
Lozde of the boule, Welsebub: how much moze |
all thep call them ofbps boutbolde fo: Scare Sae Me
then not therfore. * o? thercisnotbpng clotle anvorita
that all not be opened: and nothynge bpd,
that thall not be knotwne.
- bat F tell pou tndarknes, that fpeake pe
inlpgbte. And that pe hearetn the care, that
preache pc on the poule toppes.
- And feare penot them which kyll the bodp
but are not able to kpl'p foule. But ratherfeare
Him, which is able todetrope both foule g boop
into bell.Are not twolptieiparowes fold foz &
farthpng? And one of thé Hall not lpqht on the
counde wpthoutpoure father. Veeenenal the
cares of pour head arenombzed. Weare penot
therfoze:pe are of moze Value thenmanp iparo: Matyt
weg. x Euery one therfore that Hall knot- farid
ledge me befoze men bpm wpl 3 knowledge al: D
fo before mp father whpeheis in beauen. Wut
pata oe ide (Haldenp me befoze men, bim wpl E
alfo denpe befoze mp father,whpch ig in beaut. Laker.
Chpnke not* that Jamcometofende peace
into the earthe.¥ came not tofende peace,buta
{tocarde. oz J am come tolet a manat Dari- Mich. dil 4
auncexagapnit bpsfather,and the doughter a=
gapnit ber mother and thedoughtcr in laire a=
gapnit her mother inlate. Anda mannesfocs
Aa w malbe


IURE FA


Luke,rit.a j


fhalbethep that arg oF bis otrie houtpolde. The fone af mart cart eatprg and Dpruckpng
dok,riitie x Ie that louet father, o? mother moze then and Hd a i re glutton, and an wiinicd-
me isnot worthp of me. And be p louethfonne furable dzpticker of wpne:and a fred pnto pub-
oz vaugbter moze then mc,t8 not worthy ofme. licangandfpnners. And mptoome ig iutpiped
 Anobethat takerbnothpscroficandftolometh of ber chplozen. Hex Ebecrathe to pbaayd Teese
mat.roid me isnot wo:tbp of me. * Hethat fyndethbps thecptics wbyche moo of bys mpractes Were
mat Litt Ipfe, pall lole i : andhe thatloteth bys Ipfefoz Ddonetn-becaule thep repentconot of enea 4
Keri” np fake pall fpnoeit. Cpozalin:-Wo wntop Seth:
Luke.ir.c ghe that receancth pou,reccaucth me-and be Fa(ba:for pf thempzacles which were Mewat
Jobn- riie ppatreceaueth me teceaucth bym thatfentme poubadben ore inthe cptte of Tpze 0} Ston
iit. egum {9C that xreceauetD a Pzropbet m thename ofa tbepbadrepented of thép: fpnues longe g
rbiti.be gArophete, Hall receauc a Pzophetesrewarde. infackeclorpand ates. Acuertheletie J lape
Andhe that veceanet ary gv aucs inthe bntopou:it albe ealper for Cyze and Spot
name of arpabteous ma, tallrcceaucatpab- at the bape of tudgrement.tbe foz pou. And thou
soarir.e COUS mag reward: * And wholocuer fpalgenc Capernaum, whpcheart lyft vp nto peauct,
onto one of thete lptle ones to dyni, a cuppe of halt bebzoughtdowne tobell. Stor pE the mp- D>
cold water onelp( inp name ofaditciple)verelp racles whpebe baue penevoncinthy badbene ,
“4 {ape Dnto pou be tpall not lofe bigretoarde. fpctocd tn sod0:thep bad remapned Dutplthps
CTbe.ri. chapter. dape. Meucrtbeletic , 3 fave pnto pou:tbat it
gaptitt fendeth bps difcipies buto Cbritt. man calper foree of zobom inthe dape
een Md it cameto afe tbat tobé Je- = judgement, then to? tbe.
A CSN (ug had made Po eofcomaut- ma At tbat tpme Jefus anfwoercd and layne:
A ESN opng chis treclucdifcpples, be De: FB thanke the @ father, Lode of beaut g earth.
Td eaea WAI parted thence , to teacye anoto vecaute thou bait ppd thete thpnge
GPE VA preache mtbepecptics. pie and pudent, and balt Mewed bem bunto


je sue of C hritte, he tent two of pleature.* All thpnges avega omer Dnto me plete
bys Dplcpples,andfapde puto pym: Art thou be of mp father. * Andnoman


ewe Joon agape, wpat ehaue beardeand fontie wpllopendym. i
Ba Deive Oh eto the? fp ebelarne Come wneomeall ye that laboure and arelas .
walke.the lepers are cléten : and the deefheare, den and J whyll eale pou. * ake mp pock wpa Ecae.tt.y
grap. tri.a fhedead are rapted opa pe poze * eeceane ou.€ learne of me, fo am melee and Lowy a

Ethe Sotpell. And bappp ts berte:¢ (pall fpndereit onto pour foule. 10%


pe tpat ts not offended bp me, mp pockets calp, xand mp burden islppht. Fx izopnta
aukeria x Ana ag thep departed, Jelug begarne to EC The.cit. chapter. |
fape bute the people concernprge sopr t C rhenifelp! ae baits rene cure pine beat eth vs pe

went peouteimtot e wpldernes to fer Aredep tobe is bes brother, (piter and mother. ?


ig pasen wpththe wpnde: Oz what Met peont Teng mr & that tyme Jefus wet onf Dab- Æ
stan PE note eapmet Sebo . HA tyme Jelug f Sab
bouteg Sue bate Pe ani ep oe PRATER began toxpluckethe cares ofcozne vee rit.
phete : Cievelp 3 fape Onto pou: anomiozetbers KS Sand tocate. But whentb ear
yg a Prophet. oz thpsts beo whomitis testes: tes she iether fapde nto bpm : Beholde, thp
gaaladia * Beholde] fend mp mefenger befoze thp face diftpò o that tobich is not latoful pater) c
pothdape.Buthefapdon= "


Jobn the baptift. Motwithtandpnag pe thatis Hote he entreninfo the boule of Cod, andy i arepe F.


dape,the kpngdom of beauen rethwpolence bpmbut onelp For the prealtes/ D2 bauepenot
zaroto. and the opolent plucte tt pnto then. Jfoz all ceadint law, pow #( onthe Sabboth dayes)
the Prophetes,and thelaweit (elfepzopbefped theprea esinthe temple bzeake the Sabboth
jaket.b, DATO Jobn. Aud pé pe woplt receane itxthpsis and are blameletie; Sut 3 lap vntoppu-that in
gaie Apelpag, Whpche was for to come. Hethathath tbisplaceis one greater fhen the temple. Cai ber-
cares tobeare:leebpm beare. F fore, pf pe wpi whatthysme Aneth x J requyze sree rt.
Luke bite. xut wphervnto hall 3 lpben thps genera mercpand not facritpee: e wolde not baue con- 280.040
cpons Jt islpke vito chplozen.wobich pt in the Demned innocentes-
market places,andcal wuto thepetelowes, and fo, ig Lo2de een of the Sabboth vape. pah
fape: toe haue ppped bnto pou, and pe baue not And he departed thece + and went into thepz
© daunted: Ge bane mourned bntopouandpe fpnagoge:and bebolde,ther was mae whproe
paue not fozotved. IO? Jobucamnethercating had pis bade dped bp. And thep afked bim, lap»
no? depnkpnig.and thep tape bebath the dcupl. enge:xig it lawful to beale bpon the SHabboth xuv.risits
daped


Ataria
Luke, bib


De: ERTA Ed bothdapesxtbozow the cozne.and pyak i


ki


S


z


ee Unto thé: tbich of pou wpllit


re


cit. bf. t F nia


qobi.b.@


tiid
rake bib


mpabt accule hin. and befapd
be, that pal bate
a pptte on the Sab-
topl be not take tt æ lpft tt outs owe
de thents aman better thena Heper
eitislefultodoa good dede on Sab
)dapes. Chen lapth he to P ma:ftretch forth
tbp bande. And he tretched it forth. And te was
L ~ marita CORED Dnto health, phe as the other.
OO Dong rix Then che Whariles went out, andbhelde
DHE  acounfellagapnit bpm, howe thep mpabte de-
trope pin, Wut when Felus kuewe it be depar
ted thence and muche people folowed ppm, & pe
dealedthbem al, charged them that tbep hulde
not make bpm knotwen: pit mpabt befulfplled
whpc) was fpoken bp fap p Dzopbet,whpch
fapetiy:x25cholve,my chplo, whom F baue cho-
fen,mp beloned,in whome mp foule delpteth. ¥
-Wwpl put mp fpzete vpon bymand be ival thetoe
iudgemétto the gentpls.de tall not tryne ner
| crpe , nether thal | i
f the ftretes.a bzofed rede pall benot dzeake and
| _ finokpnge flare thal be not quenche,t yl De fende
fatbiudgemët puto bictozpe and in bis name
Hall tbe gentpls trute.. Fo
* Thé thas brought to him a blpnd anddome
man p was vered wptha denpll, andhe bealed
bun,infomuch,that the blpnd and domme, both
pake fa twe, Andall the people wWereamafed,«
pde: Fs not this the fonne of Dantd + «Wut
tober the Phariles heard it.thep (apd: Chis fe-
lowe d2pucth p deuplsno norberwple out, but
bp the belpe of 2Selsebub the chefe of the deuelg.
Wut whan Jefus knewe thepz thoughtes be
fapd bnto them: €ucrp kingdome deutded aga-
puittt (clfe, halbe bzought tonougbt. And eue
tp cptie 02 boule deupded agapnite it felfe thal
C not tande. And pf Satan cat out Satan,then
~ ts be deupded agapntt him felfe: awe thal thë
bis &pngdome endures Alfo,pEF bp the hel pe of
Welsebubcafte oute deupls , bp whofe belpedo
ourchypldzencall thé out? Cherfoze they thal.
= pour tudges. Wut pf J cat out the acupls bp
the lppete of God,thenisthebpngdome of God
come wnto pon, |
D2 els * howe can one enter into a ak
manes boule, andfpople his Jewels excepte he
Ep2tt binde the ronge man, and then {pople big
bouler> He that isnot withme, ig againt me.
And be that gathereth not wpeb me; Ccattercth
abzode. Wiberfoze,¥ fape vnto pou,all maner
; of Hierk- blafphbemp Halbe fozgeuen vnto men
egardiid *L


i Zuke.rii. b )
Jurg iie be


dapes’ that thep


Deuria xa fbepe and pfit fall ito
-~ both dape,
, uche mo
Uberto:


apliit a


Lube.rt.be


i=


fej at.rii.b
He) af. TE
Luke,ri.c


Luke.ti.e


_ gapnitthepolpe goofte, it hall not be forgeuen

| pin,netber tn thps wozlde,nether inthe wold

- Hat. bic, tO come:* Ether make the tree good, and ppg

. frute qood: 02 els make the treeenyll,and bys
| Aukebif frutecupll.* ifor tece

a D generacpon of bppers, hotve can pe fpeake

: good thpnges, when pe pour felues areeupll:
Piare xoz out ofthe aboundance of thebcarte , the
zukebhs south fpeaker). A good man out of themood


lanp man beare bps vopcein


ut the blatppempagapntt thelpecte,talnot
Fo2getuen bufomen.* And wpofoeuer fpeas
ketha wode ayapnit thefonne of man, it Mal- $
be fozgeuen bpm. Wut Wwbhofoeuerfpeaketha:


isknotone bp bis frute “h


So, bi,

treafure of the bert, bepnareth fozth good thpn-

| gesan aneupll man, out of the cupl treafure,

bepngeth forth eupl thynges.wWue 7 faye punto

pou, ofeuctp poell ozde pmen thal baue {poke

thep ball gene acountes inp dape of iudgemet. W

* Ito) out of thp = 7 ty Malt be tufttfped:and it.1e¢.t,¢

out of thy wozdes thou thalebecondemned, Ja Athe.18.2
>i Then cectapne of the cepbesandof the”

pbaritesatbeo bpm, fapen y:* 4Ha fter, toe topl 1uke.ria

ea {pane of the. But he anfwered and fapdeto —

them.*€ be eucll and aduouterous generacpon eaaa

+lebetha fpgne and ther thal no {panebe GENUEN Luke.ri.d

tothem, butsbe fpgne ofthe Pzophete Jonag, Joda.vi.:

*jto2 aS Jonas was thee dapesandthee npgb= *3on.tt, «

tes tn the whales bellp,fo thal the fonne of man

be thie dapes and thre npgbtes in the bert of the

earth: Che men of Mintue Halleple in theiud=

gement Lopththpsnacpon,and condemne it, be-

caufe * thep amended atthe preacbpnge of Jo- Ionstiie

nas. eholde bereis one greater then Jonas.

* Che quene of the South pall ryle in the iud- papi

gement With this generacion, hall condemne EEs Fs

tt:£02 the came fro the btmoft partes of f woale

to beare tbe toploome of Salom. And ebolde

tn this place ig one greater then Salomon.

*Ciiben the onclenne {pepte is mone ont of a zoe |
man, be toalketh thzougboute Dye places fes
Bpuge ret and fyndeth none. Thenbe fapeth:¥
wpll retourne into mp boule, fro whence F cam
oute. And when beis come, befpudeth itemptp
andfivepte, and garnpithed. T en moeth be,
and taketh bntobpm feuen other (pretes iwole
then bpm felfe, and fo entreth bein anddwel-
letb tbere. And * theendeofthatman is wozie
then the begpnnpnge. Cuen fo Wall it be allo,
Vato thps frowarde gencracpon. îr

Cdibple be pet talked to the people: *bebolde, egarsit.n
dis mother and bis bzethzé tove without Defps 24%. biit.c,

Ofpeake pth bpm. Thone Tapd vnto

bpm:bebolde,xtbp mother ¢ thp beethze fande sgar, tit.»
wpthout, delpepnac to {peake wpth the. |

Sut be anlwered, and fapoe ynto bpm that
bad toldebpm. bois mp mother ‘92 Who are
mp beetheen: And be feretchen forth bps bande
towarde bys dplepples,and fapd, * beholde, mp xopu,ro.b
motberand my bzethzen. $Fo2 Wwbhofoeuer doth
the wpllofmp father wbichigin beauen p fame
is mp beother,{pier,and mother. 1


ii Heti.
Heb. bia


a paat
Tee wl
a ub |. ia

a ae:
5 i k pr k ti i


pe
tbpnges


earth,andanone they fpronge bp, becaulethep
Had no depnefle of carthe : and when the


thas bp thep caught heat and becaule they bad
no rote,thep topdd2ed awape.Aqapne,tome fel
amonce thoztes , andthe thoznes (pzonge bp
 €choated tht. Æut fome fellinto good ground,
and brought forth frute:fome an Dundzed folde,
fome {prtpefolde, fome thp2tpe folde. holo-

euer bathearesto beatelethpmbeare.
% = Andehedifcpples came,andfapde dntobim:
' bp fpeakert thou to thé bp parables? Dean-
Spar. tiita {ypeved and fapde onto them: * itis geuen vnto
~" pou to knoe the fecretes of the kpnadome of
patro. heaven, but onto thenr tt ig not geuen. * oz
Luk vit» wholocuer Dath. to bpm hall beqeuen: and de
andra, {pall pauc aboundaunce. Wut Mbolocuer bathe
not:frombput Halbe taken atbape euen that al
fo whpch be bath. Cherforefpeake J tothe bp
{pmilitudes:-fo2 thep lepna, fe not:and bearpng
thep beare not-nother do thep wnderftand. and
~ intbem istul€plled the Wrophecpe of Clapas,
rapot Yohpch fapeth:*topeh the cares pe hall beare, €
soar ute! tall not wnderftande:and Cepnge pe thal fe,and
Fobu.ri.h (allnot perceaue.feor thele peoples heartes ts
owen Wired grotic.¢ thepz caves are Dull of bearpnge
and thep2 epes bane thep clofed,lett at anp time
thep{huldc fe pth thep2 epes, and beare wptd
thep2 cares, y Oul wnderitand with thepz hert
and be conucttcd, that alfo ranee thé.
zuera ~ %Sut bleffedare poure epes for thep fe: and
C poure cares,fo2 thep beare. Gerelp 3 fape punto
Lectin pou,*that man p Poria? and rpateoug më
Haue ‘hind ih to tetbofe thpnges,tobpcbe pe fe g
paur not fene them:and to beare thole thpnges
sartis Which pe drareand baue not beard thë. * Heare
Aub, bid pe therfore the fpmplptude of the fower.iban
ohe Heare cent the kpngvome, and yn
Decitandeth it nor,thencom the enpll man
and taketh awape that tohpche was foten in
bysberte:thps is he, whpcbe was lowen bp the
iwape (poe. Wut he that receaued the fede Which
- was cak into fonpe places, thefame is be that
Deareth the wWo2de,and anone pth iope recca-
ucthit,pet bath pe no roote inbpm felfe, but du-
rethfo2 a feafon:Fo2 whan frpbulacpon og per-
fecucpou bappeneth becaule of the wod, bp and
py befalleth. Heallo that receaucth fede into p
hopes. is he that beaveth the toozde:and p care
of thps wolde and the Dpfaptiulnes of tpches
choke bythe ho2d¢,and lois he made yntrute-
full. Wut de that receaueth fede into the good
groundets he that Dearetd the worde, and Dn-
deritandeth it: Whpche allo beareth tute, and
brypngeth forthe, fome an bundzeth folde, fome

fprtpe Colder fome thpetpe folde.

q Jnother ipmilptude put be fozth onto them,
spar. tiine lapinge: ix Che bpugoome of heauen is lpke:
ned Ditto a man, hpcp flowed good feedin bps
Felde. But topple men lepte, bpsenempe came,
and towed tares amonge the wheate,and went
bps wape. Dut when the blade wasfprong bp
and ad brought forth trute,there appeared the
tares allo. po the feruauntes of the boutbolder
came,andfapd vnto bim.<p2 dpddetnot thou
foe good feed in thp felde from Whence then
e a fap onto thë, tbe enutous ma
th done this. Che leruatites fapd Ynto ppm:


The Golpell


topli chou fhett that toe qo, and tede them Dp!
Sut be ldo, Sapna te iwhple pe gather vpthe
tares peplucke bpallotbe theate roptd them,
letboth qrowetogetbher bntpll thedarticti,and .
in tyme of baruelt,3 wplfapeto the reper! ya-
ther pe fp2ft the tares,and bpnde them together
in theues to be beent: but gatberthe wheaten
to mp barne. F > Another paradle put be
forth vito them, fapinge: * Che kpngdome of eed
Heucislpketoagrapne of muttard feed wbhpch
amantoke and fotved in bis felte wbprh is the
lect of all the feebes.25ut when tt ts qrotone,tt
isthe greate amonge berbes, andis a tree : fo
that the bpades of paper come, andmakethbepe:
neftes tn the bzaunches therof, E
— Anotherfimilitude Ta be ntp thë: x Che govertiy
kpnyoome of heaucn ig lpke Dntoicucn, whypch
a woman taketh and bpoeth in thee peckes oF |
meale , tpil allbeleucned. x Allebele thpnges Harith
[pake Jefus wnto the people bp fpmplptudes €
wpthouta parablelpake Denothpnae vuto the:
that it mpabt be fulfplicd,wbpcbhe was poken
bp the Pzopbdet.thatfapeth : «FZ topll openmp Bratr,
mouthin parables: 3J topll (peake forth chinges 1%
whbpcb baue bene keptelecrete from the begpns
npnae of the ozlde. f+ Wiben the people were
Ea nE VAIETA

‘*And bps difcpples came tnta bpm, fap- ,
inge: Declare nto bs the parable atthe tai ate
ofthe felbe. De anfwered , and fapde vuto
them. He that foteth the good feed is the fonne
of man. The felde is the toozlde. And biked be ;
deen of the khingdome thep are the qood fecd:the
taresare the chpldzen of the wpcked,the enemp
that fotweth them,ts the deupll. Che baruettig
tiiccnde of the wo2ld:the reapers be the angels.
Cuen as the tares therfore are gathered tb. ne
in the fpze:fo Mallit bein fende of thys wozlde,
x Tbe fonne of man Mall fende forthe bps An- +
ap anaf capt oof outof bps kpnqdome Apo:riita
allthpngesthat ottende and them whichpdoini ©
quite : and Mall ca them into a furnez oftpze.
Chere Halbe pt rh quaftbynge of teth.


*Chen thal the rpgbtcous ppne ag the Sunne Dan.riis
inthe kpngdome of thepfatber. Wiholoeuer Para
bath cares tobeare,let bpm beare. $


x Agapne, phpngdome of peant iglpke Wn-
toatreafure bpd tm the Felde the whpchea man
hath founde andhpd: and fo2 iope therof goeth
audfelletiyall that be bath,andbpetb the felde. 7

Agapne the kynqodome of braunen islpke vtt-
toa marchaunt man fekpnge goodlp pearles,
tobpche (when be founde one p2ecpous pearle)
tent and olde all that be bad, and bougbe it.

Agapne thekyngodome of heauenis ipke wn-
toarict,p was cal into p lee and gathered of al
bpndeox(ot Hes wobpche when tt wads Full, men gs
dtetoe to lad, ¢ fat DO tone g gathered f good tn-
to deficls.but catf badatwape. Ho (hal tt be at
the cnde of the wozlde. Che angels Hall come € ¢&
fever the bad fro amonge p good, ¢ thal catt thé 3
intoa furnace offpae:*there (halbe toaplpng € eqat.criis
qnaping of teth. Jelug fapth wnto thé: hane pe anv.rrb.c
pnderitande all chelethpnges:Chep tape unto
bpm:pee Lorde, Chen lapoe he duro sea

02


Ea


$
m L


bi r
a M es


- a


dO SD Solatthew, Fo bik


foge ettetp Syerphe Whichets taughie DNtothé epes cowarde heaticit and bleien. And whan he


| kpngdonie of Heauen, is lpke vutoaman that dad broken them, be yaue the loauesto bpl dp-
aa isanbouthelder, whiche beyngethfozeh out of (ciples, and bis dilciples gaue them to Ade bo
a | His trealure, thpngesnewe and olde, P And thepdpdal eate æ were {ufkpfed.: nd thep


Andit came to paffe that when Jefus had fp gathered vp (of the fragmétes that remapned)
| mardis nyhed thele {pmtlptudes, «be departed thence: rit.batisettes full. And thep that dpd eate, were
= And then became intobps oWne countrep, he about. ».&).men,befpde Wwemenandchyldzen. —
| taught them inthep2 'pnagoges, info muche, = -¥ And Hrepahe wape Jelug made ppg dilep- pieni
«Rake tific ¥thep were atonped and apde:wobence comet ples toget bpintoa {hyppe, ¢ to go before ppm 2°"
Joon.bi.c, (is Wwpldon € powers dntobpms sisnotthis ‘ontop other {pde ttle be fent f people awape. iini
`" thbecarpentersionne?. Ys not bis mother called And when the people were fentawape,bexmet Te
Aarprand his brethzen, James and Jolesand ppintoa motitapne to prape alone. And when
Simon and Judas? Andare nor all bistptters npght was come,be was there bim felfe alone.
| With ys Wbence bath be then all thelethinges Sut thethyp was nowe tn the mpodes of f fee,
And thep there offended at him. Zeluslapde bn: and was totte With wanes. to? it asa cotrarp
ee to them: x Æ propbete ts not without henoure, inpude, Phd in the fourth watche ofthe npabte,
aopn, b, £, AUE iN bis obne countre,and ints one boule Jefus went vntothë walkpnge onthe fee. And
f ~ Andbe bydnotmany mpzacles there, becaute whe the difciples fawe him walkpnge on p fec,
-Of thepze vnbelefe. thep Were troubled, fapinge: tt ts lome fprete Æ
| ase and heaved, Cipi Fenech fpu dope (UB lpake Dntothé,faping: be of cone care ig
Brita bis oiteppies boom chara anbapoeretbhpnigbe is ¥:benot afraped. Peter anfioeredbym,and


A fe aes C that tpme x erodethe Getrar- fayd: Lozde,pfit be thou, bpd me come wntothe
goer vi b. MaA cba bearde of thefame of Jefu and onthe water.And befapd:come. And when Se
Lukeit.a, [Ps Ni oy Capde Yuto hyg feruauntes:thpsis tet teas come Downe ont of Pb thpppe,be walked

Fabeo \a| Jobnthe baptit. Pe istpfentrom onthe watcr,to goto Jefus. Wut wye befawe


ROTO a tbedeade, Aud Eherforeare miracles ampghtpe tpude,be thas afraped. and whé pe
egark.bi.c W20UGHE bp bpm. Foz erodexhadtakenJobn veganneto fpncke,be crped,fapitin: Lorde faue
Lukea. AND boande bym, and put bpm inp2ifon becaule me. Andimmediatlp Fetus reechep fo2th'bps
| ot Herodias, bis bzother Whilpppes wpfe. fo bande, caught bym,¢lapd wntobpm. D thou
Leu.roisie Jobulapde ynto bpm: xitisnotlatofullforthe of lptell fapth, Wherefore dpddet thou doubter
fobaucder. And wbhenbewoldehbaueputbýym xAndwbhanthep were come into the tbpppe , p
eget. prib todeath, be feared p people, xbecaule thep coun: wpnde ceafed. Chen thep that were in ? tbpppe
tedbpm aga Bzophete. Wut when Herodes came and woribpp ed Dim, fapinge: of a trutie
Genero *bp2tp)dape was kepte, tbe dougbterof Hero- thou artthefonneo God. And when thep were
Dias daunted befozetbem, andpleafed erode. qone ouer,thep cainetnto pland of Genelareth
saardi c, ¥ Ui berfozre he prompted wptd an othe, thathe And wen themen of the place bad knowledge
A wolde geue ber whatlocucr the wolde afte. of bim,thep fent outmeffaungers into al pioi-
And Hebeinge inftructofpermother befoze treprounde about pcooft,¢ brought unto bpn
fapde :geue inebeve Jobn Waptptesheadeina alltbattvere fpcke, € befought bpm, that thep
atter. And the kpnge was tory. Menertheles, mpkbttouchethe bemmeof bys Veture onipe.
i 0} the othestake,andthemwhpche (atalfoat Andasmanpastouched tt were made fate,
the table, becommaundedit to be geuë ber: and @'Che.rv.chapter. >
fent fomen = rS, et oie opn < p on Cathie rente bist rcpples. @ rebut) the Scerbes
fon, and bis bead was beought ina platter,ant owe tbepe otoneteadpcpotie, incre munoeInet,
genen to f pawei andthe Jene i vc ate pe mouta bt nf Be n a ora tgorth
ther. And his difciplescam and toke vp his bo- omat g Reece bealeth the mulipiude , e
y5 DP-and burped it: went, and tolde Fetus. men betone memen and aaa a D SS Det. 63,
mavi  UWiben Jefus bearde of tt, bexdepartedthence pr Hen * came to Jelug Sycrpbes and A
+ iukedr.b ina fbyppe onto a defert place ount ot the wape. CD Jerufalem fapingeswbpooriy se egar biha
C


Mark. Dig
D


qo SHHNS And woven the people bad berde therof,thepfo- Ps evufalem fapinge:wohp do thp dp-

lowed bpm onfote andleft the cpties. And Je- | ay , Wie pples trantqrefle the tradpepon of
fus went fozth,andfatwe muchpeople,and hag Meee tbe elders:foz thep wathe not thep2
moucd wpthmercpe comardetpent.andbehea: bandes whe they cate bzead. Wut be anfwered
ledof then thofe that were peke. And whe the andfapd onto sibel he pealfo tranfarefie


=
m A o
= ad = =
a agate = z
™ G F + 3 D


a; cuen deeWe on, Dis dpicpplescame tobym, fap- the commaundemente of God, becante bf poure

ae enge:tbys ts a deferte place,andp bourcisnow owne trabdpcios ffo: God eomaundeth,fapinee:
wi Be patt.let the people depart, that thep mape qoin * Honoure father t motber,and bethat curferh pen fan
uf ferhe fotmnes,and bye the vptaplies. wut Je- father oz mother:let bom dpe thedeath. But pe Hetit


g tastapde Dnto the. Chey hauenonedetogoa: fape:enerp one hall lapetobis fatherandmo: — __
bape. Gene pethetocate.Cheplapd nto bim ther:xwbat apie foeuer Hulde haue came of me kirt pib


ea Wwe Dauic Here but .v.loucs and two fplibes. We the fameis turned vnto thp profpte:and fo thal Shuni
fapd: bepug thé bpther tome. Andhe comaune be nothonourehpsfatheroz bys mother: And
i) ded the people to {pt dowone óh the graffe hé thus báue pe made the commaundemet of God
| solcthe. v.loucs € thei fplibessanblift vpbig af none cffecte, becaufeof pour ovone tradition:


Lpotrptess


The Golpell d


Ppoceptes.full toell bpd Efap prophecy ofpou departefatipnge, lett thep mpicarp bp p toaye.

claret fapenge: x Thps people dzaivety npe vntome Andbpsdplepples fapde buto bpm: Whence

sain wis with thep2 mouth,and honourcth mewitblpp- Mulde toe metto muche beeade inthe wplicrnes |
pes hotobeit,thep2 hertes avefarrefrdme:but as tofuftpce fo greate amultptudes And Jelug r i
in vapne do thep ferue me,teacbpnae the doctri- fapeth vnto them: bowe manp loaucs baue pes 4 “|
nes and peeceptes of men. Andthey Cape: *feuen, and a fete lptlefpthes. egat-ret-p

3 Andbecalled the cople to bpm, €fapd buto And be commaunded the people to {pt Doone
thé, beare and vnde ‘ande.Chatwhibegoct) on the qrounde-and toke the leuen loaucs, and
into p mouth, defpleth not the ma:butp wbpeh thefptes:and after that be bad geuen thankes b
commeth out of the mouth, dDefpletd the man. bebzrake them, and gaue tobpsdplcpples, and SES |
Then came dis ditciples,and {apd wnto him: the dilepples gaucthemto the people. And they |

knowelt thounot,that the Pbarptes were okë: Dpdalleate, and werefulfpced. Andthep toke
dedat thys fapenge’ Wut be anfweredgfapde: wp (of the broken meate that toas lefte ) fener
Enerp plante toppche mp heauenlp fatberbath batkettesfull.And pet thep that DpDeate were
not planted, thalbe plucked bp bp the rootes. 1iit.).men, befpde wemen and chplozen. And
Letthemalone,tbep be the blpwo leadergofthe belentawape the people,andtoke tppppe, and
blpnde. Pf the blpnde leade the bipnde,votbe cameintothe partes of Magdala."


fhallfall into thedptche. Cdenant cred je- : be
Ermia be araegareUMOWSEDSRY, ow rrangnnoh etme
cable. elus fapd:are pe alfo pet Without norr ache Wharples regure a eaen Aen an
ftandpngedonot pe pet wnderftand,that what SO o Pee eae eauence be capepeall MUM beate
focuerentrethinattbemouthe, gocthintothe tpe crol after £pi
Delp ig caft oute into the Draught: Butthole E per Pharpis alfowpth the Sadi- T

2 thpnaes whpch procede out ofthe mouth, come ENA pee ces, came andtempted bpm, and Delp: guet.biits


Fozth from the berte,and thep defple p man. Fo Kea G
out ofp bert peocedecuell thoughtes,murders, Eads pi
beeaking of wedloc ke tobozdome,theftes,falfe fapte vnto them : whan it begpnneth fo Deatve
wytnefic,blafpbempes. Chele arc the thynges totvarde-xcueit,pefape:it woplt befap2e tether, Luke ris
wppch defple aman. aButtotake meatewopth fot e{kpeisrcads Andin the mo:npnye: Fe an
pnwafibenbandes,defpletpnotaman. M topl be foule wether to dape,foz plkpye is glow:
E And elus went thence departed mta p mpngeread. Dpeppocriteg pe can difcernethe
E. coattes of Tpze and Spdon, and bepolde a wo- outtoarde appearaunce of the fkpe : but can |
man of Canaan (wobpebe came oute ofthefame penotdplcerne the {panes of thetpmes’‘x The MANTA
coattes) crped onto bpm fapeng-Daue merep on frowarde and aduoUtcrous nacpon requyzeth |
me D Lozde,thou fonne of Dauid: Bp dough= *a fpgne and there pall nofpane be geucn Dh- Soa A
| terig pptcoutlp bered witha deuell. Zut de an to it, butthbefpane of the +zrophet Jonas. And John. bi.d.
fwered ber nothpngeatal,g bis Difcpplescame be leftthem,and departed. tIona.iia
and befougbt bim, fapenge:fende berawa Fo  Andiohenhps Dplciples were come tothe o- 2%
(he crpeth after vs: 25ut he anfwered, and lapd: ther lpde of P water,thep badforqottento take
4 Zokeriz,b Jam not fent*but wuto p loffe pepe off boufe becad pth them. Then ictus fapd brtothem
ot Jiraci. Chencam the,and wozWppped him, «Cake pede and beware of the leuen of the pa Lube ry.
fapenq:iLozde,belpe me. 4pe anfivercd and fapd: i andof the Saduces. And thep thought in
itis not mete.to take the chpldzens bade and themfelucs, apenge: we bauetakenno bzeade
tocaltittodogges. Sbe anfwocredand fapde: topth ds. Cibpehewban Jelug Dndertode he
truthe Lozde ,f02 the dogges eate of thecrom- fapde bntotbem:sD pe of lptell fapth, bp jake
mies, which fal from tycp2 mafterstable. Zhen petbought prbhin pour felues,becaufe pe baue
4elusanfwered and apd wnto her: woman, brought no baecads Dope not pet perceaue,ne-
greatcis thy fapth, be tt unto the, eucnas thou therremembze thofe.v.loaucs, when there were
Wplt. And herdoughter fas made Whole cuen *D. men, and bote manp balbettestokepe mirtis.. |
atthat fame tpme. x | pst Neter the. vit. loaues whe there toere. titi. Ird-
> And Aelus toentawaye ro thence,and came £%).men,and bowe manp balkettes toke pe bp? }
npe vito the fec of Galile, and wente ppintoa botvebappencth it that pe donot vndertande,
mountapne, and fat dDotone there. Andmuche $ slpakett not yuo pouconcernpnge bread, ý
peo lecatne tnta bym, bepngpnge topth them pe hulde beware of the leuen of the 3barpfes,
thote that were lame, blpnde, beate, mapmed, and ofthe Haduces: Then vnderlfode thep,
andothermanp:and caft them dawne at Jelug howetbat be bad not them beware of the leuen
etary Fete. * And be healed them:tn fomuche, thatthe of bgeade: but of thedoctrpncot tie Pparyies
people mounde aota be whole, the lame to aeaa meiri i
peake, the mapmed to be wypole, the ame to eben Jelug came into the coalkes of
walke and the bipnde tole. And thep glozpfp- citierwbichis called a claves Philippi be ater $ i
enthe Govot Ffrae. — ps bpfepples fapenge:xtoho do men Cape that fgarbilie `
garbita xThen Fetus called hig dile) plesbutobpm, 3 tbhefonné of manams Thep lapde:fome fape Lube .iF.e
andfapd:3 paue compatlto on p people,becaule that part Fhon the baptit lome Helpas,fome
tbep contpnue pth me nowe thze Dapes, and do tapers oot of thenombze of p prophetes. -
jaucnotýpngetorcate:and J Wwpllnotlet tbem Pefapeth unto the: but whom fapepe pz ame
i pmon


_ MBath.r.d


, gob. bio


Lot SD, VATY W,


Sra Himon Peter anfwered and fapde:~ Chou are
WHO" S Chit the fonne of the lpuynge God. And Je-
fusanlwered and fapte wnto bpm: Pappp art
Simon the fonne of Jonas, foz llefbeand blou
Jobu.d1,d hath not openedthat onto the, x but mp father
whpcbisinbeauen. And Flape vntothe that p
i.cor.t.a itt Peter: and pon this xrotke 4 Wpll buploe
terap.


tbe the kepes of the Rpnqdome of beauen: And


- tnat.rbid.c * fohatfoeuer thou bpndett tn earthe, all be


bounde in beauen: and whatfloeuer thou loofett
in carthipalbe lowled in beauen.
Then charged he bis dilciples, pthep Hulde
ejar.biiin tellnoman,that De was Yelus Chzite.x strom


s Tutere thar tyme forthe beranne Felus to thee vnto


bps dilcpples.bowe that be mult qo punto Feru:
falem,aud fuffer manp topnges of the elders , g
ppe Prealtes,and Scrpbes,and mull be kplled
and be rapfedagapne the thpddape. And whe
Peter bad taken bym alpode, be beqantorebube
bpm,fapinge:ma fter,fauer thp felfe, thps pall
not happen vutothe:but be turned bpm about,
g faid pnto Peter:go after me Satã, thoubpn:
dreit me:fo2 thou Cauouret not p thpnages that
be of God, but thole that be of men.
D Then lapde Felus onto bis wipro ALS
man Wpll folome me, let bpynifozfake bpm felfe
fukeice aNDtake bp his crofie, and folowe me. * ffo?
eger.viiid Who fo pllfauebislpfe, thalllooteit. Aga-
me who Co doth loole bps lpfefo? mplake, pal
fpnde it. o: tobat doth it profeta man, pf be
wpnneallthe whole wo:lde:-and lofe bpsowne
foule’ D? what thall a man gene to redeme bis
foule agapne wpthall? Eo? the fonne of man
og aig pallcome th the glozpe of bps father, wpth bps
Koma. tb Angelg:and x then hall je rewarde euecp man
"ss Acozdpuge tohpsdedes : Verelpe aia ¢ puto
| aac. biitD pou,xthere be fondprge bere, whi Ait ‘pall not
> tat ofdeath,tpll thep fe the fonne of mancome
indpsipngdome.
ECbe.rvii. Chapter. re
@ The tranifp quraticn of Chri. Be bealeth the
tunat ig ant papeth trpbute,
a Geary Rafter. vt. dapeg, Fetus taketh


garira IN, T N ï


Lubesnc EUY Ria Wa ther,and bpngeththem bpintoan
Fes 4d ava bye mountapne out of the wape, €

+ ApodD onana WaS COATEL auren DELON EDE and
: bps facedpd hyne asthe fonne,andhps clothes


neve as whpteas thelpabt. And bebolde, there
appered wnto them Wolesand Elias talkpnge
topth bpm. Then anlwered Peter, and fapd vn:
to Jefus : Lode, bereis good bepnge Foz vs. Pf
thou tilt,let vs mate here.tu.tabernacles:one
fozthe, and onefo2 oles, and one fo: Elias.
Wibple he pet fpake , bebolde, a bzpght cloude


25 thadotwed thé. And beholde, therecameabopce w


saath 9: out ofp cloude tbich fapd:-«thts ig mp beloucd


sera tria Conne*in whom 3 delptexbeare him.and whe PPLA


*Dute. thedplcpples bearde thele thynges,thep fellon
EHE  thepzfaceg and tere loze afraped. And Fetus
oppen spies Bi ie say he ge
notafrayd. And oben thep had lpfte vp thep2
epes thep fawe no man faune Jelug onlp.


7 mp congregacpon. And the gates +of helltpall fp
FOG. not preuaple agapntt it. And F wyllgeue nto


SEOL DUL
_ kAnd toben thep came dotone fromthe moii- Mark f.s
tapne, Jefus chargedthem fapinge : etve the
uption tono man, vntpll che fonne of ma be rp-
fen agapne from thedead, fa end is dilcp-
pee alkedbpm, fapinge: Wbp thenfape f feri-
es, that Delias muf fpett comer Jefusanfiwve-
red,and fapde vnto them: x Pelias trulpe Hall Waati.
aftcome,andreftoze all thpnges. But J fape
nto pou,that x Peliagiscome alreadp Ethep atrib


ble aaa thpnbeft thon Simon? of who
bothe l


aee (et bpm inthe mpddetof thë, g fapa
tertip F pe Dntopou:xercepte pe turne, and Sarker,d
become ae chplozen. pe fhallnotenterinto the ere”
BPngdomes ee


Che Galpell


bleth bpnt felfe as thps chplde, the fame ig the
eatcl inthe kpngdome of heauen. And who
oreceaueth [uch achpldin mp name,receaucth
mark f me xut Moho lo doth offende one of thetelptle
“ms oues vobich beleuc tn me: tt were better fo: ppm
that amplitone toere bangedabout bps necke,
-= and that he wered2otoned in p depth of the fec.
icord Tlo vito the wozldebecaufe of offences. x Re-
cellarp itis that off€ces come. ut wo ynto the
nan bp whomthe offence commeth. —

ogane e ., eetberfoze-« pi thp bande o? thp fote bpnder
ejack.tr t Cbe,cuthpm of and catt it from the. Ft is better
foz the toenterintolpfe halt oz mapmed,rather
then thou thuldeft ( baupng tivo bandes 02 two
fete)be caft into euerlaftpngefp2c.and pf ag
epe offende the,plucke it out, andcaft it feo the.
St is betterfoz the to enter intolpfe wpth one
epe,tather then ( haupnae tibocpes ) tobecafte
~ into Delfpze. Cake bede that pe delpple not one
of thetelptellones. Jo} 3 faye vnto pou,that
inbeauen they: angels do alivayes beholde the

Eaccotmyp father,wbpche tgindeauen. H
© S€o2 the fonne of ma ig come tofane f Whpch
Lube. rob Qoasloff. Potve thynkeyes *Pfamanbauean
~ bund2zed HHhepe,and one of them be gone atrape
Doth be not leauenpntpe and npne tn the moun-
tapnes, and roethanbdleketh it that has cone
affrapes 2nd pf it happen that be fpndett, verc:


then ofthe nputy irw
Enen fo ttignot the pl
wen that one of thelelptleones Hulde perpe.


Ip J fape ERE i mozcofpthepe | oN


Doreouce * pe thybeothertretpatleaga- wedbhpma


SUR. rbi a l 4 w | PE ros
Fone? putt the, qoand tell bpm bpstaut betiene pini
Eccle- tice andthe alone. DEbeheare the, thou bak wonne
-= thp brother: Wut pébe beare the not,then take
Deut risd pet wpeh the one 02 fio, that * tn the mouth of
Seb LE £100 02 thze Ww tnethes. euerpe matter mape be
-> ftablpthed. Pf be beare not thent,tel it bnto the
congregacion. PE be beare not the congregacto,
letbpm be vntothe aganbeathen man, andag
egar role ayublican.Cievelp Jlape Onto pou: *iopatio-
net pe bpnde on earth, Halbe boundein Deauen.
And whatfoeucr pe lofe on carthe , halbe lofted
in beaucn Agapia are onto poutbatpf tivo
of pouaccec inearth bpon any maner of thing,
Mhatfoener thep defpze:thep thal Hane tt of mp
father wyycbe ts in Yeauen, foz vobere tivo oz
the avegatheredtogeather inmp name, there

ain yin the mpddes of them. l
. Thencameeter to bpm, and fapde: Lorde,
Do oft hall J fozapue mp brother, vf be fynne
agapntt me:tpll ienen tpmes: Fetus lapeth vn-
to bpm: fapenot Dnto the sad fouentpmes:
butleuétptpmesleuentpmes. fe h Therfore
isthe kpngbdome of Heaucnipkened vntoa rcer-
fapne man thatwasakpnge,whpch wold take
~ acountes of bps leruauntes. And ben debad
begonne toreken, one was brought W o
He ought bpm ten thoulande talentes,bu
muchas pe was not able topape,bis Loz:
decommaundedbym to be folde , andhys topte
< andchpldzen,andall that pebad: and payment
to be made. The leruaunt fell dotone, and be-
fought bym, fapenge:>p2 bane pacpence wpth


ch tent notaitrape, Ese
poutfatherin peas PANAY


meand FJ lopll paye the al. Chen had the Lorde
pptie on the {eruaunte and lofed bpm andfo2-
gaue bpm the dette. -
Hothe lame leruaune,wentout,andfoundy- «
one of bps felotees whpche ought bym an bun-
Ded pence:andhelapde bandeg onbpm, toke -
bpm bp the thzote, fapenge : pape that thou or
wet. And bys felotocfelldowne, and befought
bpm lapenge:baue pacpeéce wopth me,and FJwpl
pape the all. Andhe wolde not, but went, ¢ call
bim into pzefon,tpll hethulde pape the det. So
when bps felotwes fawe what wag done, thep
tere erp fozp,and came, andtolde wntothepz
Lode all thathadbappencd. Chenhps Lorde
called bym and fapd pntobpm:® thou vngra-
cpous lercuaunt. 4 forqaue the alltpat det, wha
thou delpredeft ime: huldeftnot thouallo baue .
had compationon thp felowe, cu€é as Ahad pr-
ticon thes And his Lorde was woth and delp-
ucredppm tothe taplers,tpll be hulde papeall —
that wag due Duto bpm. spo *Iphetople Wall Faot. tie
mp beanélpfatber do alfo puto pou pE pe from wanri o.
poure beartes,fozgene not ( eucrp one bps bzo-
ther) thep2 trefpatles. x
— &Cbe.rir. Chapter.

q chet gpucth anfwere concerupnge mariage and trac
rheth not to be carefull mo: to loug wozlbip rpchee,
vy {us hadtpnpthed the fapenges, be eaark.r.e
Ke gat bpm from Galile,and came in-


The Phariles allo came onto ppm te ting
ora


totbem:PHauepe not read, bow that he whpche


Wopues: Büt from the begpunpneit agnorfo Ieee”


+4 {ap vito pou: wbholoeuer putteth amap hig Psi
Life (except tt be forf aarioita derri k mech
0


ther, bzeaketh wedlocke. And whofomaryeth 2? `


ber whichis deuozled, dothcommpt aduontrp.

Pis dilciptesfapd nto bpm : pf the mater be y
fo betivene manand wopfe,then is it vot good to
marp. Helapde vnto them:al men cannot com«
paebende this fapengerfanc they to whom it ig savig.
gypue:for there arefome chat which are fo bozne


t outofthep2 mothers wibe. Andtberare fome -


chaff, which be made chaftofmen. And there be

i a rd baue made them felues chattfo2 f

Kpngdome of beauens fake. We that can cdpze-

Dende tt letbimcoprebende it. * ChE were there mark. r b

bzought pntobpm POTAGE FOAL De Sbalbe i eat
] put bis


Ger ol. oe = paa i : , i
ERGO a Sa


ae


-5 7 a a o —


iS, Matted,


PUEBPS bandes on them and pape And the di-

fcpples rebuked them. Mut Jefus fapde wnto

tiein:fuffee the childzenand fozbpd them not to

» «. come vuto me: fo2 of Cache is thekpngdome of

a" beauen. And when he bad puttedpshandes on
» them, be departed thence. |

And bebolde, one came, and fapde onto bpm:
garb xoodDmafter, hat good thyng thal F do,that
Lus.rbili? | mape hauc eternall Ipfe: Pe fapde wnto bpm:
prar crii e Wp callefe thou me goods + there is none good

C but one,and that is God. ut pfthou wyleen-

-treintolpfe,kepethe comaundementes. Delap-

erorir.c eth onto him:Wbich:Felus fapd.* Chou Halt

Deut.v.b yotcommpemantlaughter. Chou thalt not co-

mit aduoutrp. Chou pali not fteale:thou thalt

not beare falfe wptnes:bonoure father and mo-

xomriie ther: * € thou palt loue thp See poe ag thp

Galade felfe, Theponge manfapth unto hpm:Al thele

thpnges paue 3 keptefrom mp pouty vp: what

lacke 3 pets Zetus (apd nto bpm:pfthou wplt

ære beperfpte * goandfellall that thou hatte, and

Zanti c Geucto the pooze, andthon Malt baue trealure

7 inbeauen,andcome and folotve me. Wut when

the ponge manberde plapenge, be went awape
fozpe.sfo2 bebadareat pofieilions.

‘Chen Jefus apo tnta bps opie les: Derelp
mare Jfap wntopou:*it halbe hardtop tpcb tocn-
zuk roiie For into the hpngDd of deant. And agapne Fiap

wnto pou:itis eafper fora camel togo through
he epeofancdle,thenfoz tie tpche to enter into
the kpngdome of Gon.Wdihenthe diltpples herd
tbpe.thep were erceadpnglype amaled,tapenge:
who thencan be faucd Wut Felus bedel them
andfapd onto them:topth men this ıs Dupotlp-

sach.viii.b blexbut wpth Godall thpngesare pollpble,
D 1 hen antvocred weter and fapde Duto bpm.
math.iiiio Webolde xwe Haue Fozlaken al and folotwed the
oe Eire WVA Mall we bane therfore! Jefus lapde nto
MEAE hem, berelp 3 lave Dito pon: p when the fonne
of man pall {pein thefeat of bis matettpe, pep
zuk.rrit.c Dane folotoecd mec,tn the regeneracton xfhall tpt
alfo ppon. rit. feates, andiudge the. rit.trpbes
bon errito OF Flcacl.xAnDdencrp one p fozlaketh houle, o?
Dethzen,o? fpiters,oz father 0} mother, o? wpFe
ob riie; 02 chpldzen, oz landes fo? mp names take, *thal
receauc anhundeed folde,and Hallinberete cuer
enath.rr.o laftpnge lpfe, Fxbut many that are fpett, pal-

duke. iE he lat, andthe laff thalbefpett.
C The.re. Chapter


ee qcahzitteacheth by atpnuticutethar mda is detter bnz


pyneparde, And he went out aboute the thy2de
houwe favor other Fandpnae poellin the mar-


freuepou. And thep wente thep2 ape. Agape


he wentcout aboute thefprteand npnth Doure,
cab DyDlpeetopte. ano aboute eleucnth boure


He went out,audfounde other Fandpnge poell,


Eolit,


and fapde btito them:tobp tande pe here all the
dape piel Thep fape unto bym:becanfe noma
batb bpzcd vs. Delapeth bnto them : gape alfa
into the ppneparde:and batfoeucrisrpabt, p
{pall peteceane, Do, oben euen wag come the
lozde of the bpnepardelapth vnto bis reward:
cal the labourers and qeue them thep2 bper,ve-
gpnnpnge at thelaft ontpl the fpi. and wher
thep dpd come prame about theclenenth poure
hep receaued cucrp man a penp. 25ut toben the %
fp: came alfo,thep fuppoted that thep Mulde
Haucreceaved moze,and theplpke totle receaucd
cuerp mana penp. And whenthep Had receaucd
it,thep murmured agapnit the goodman of the
ife,fapeng: There lat baue Mzouqbet but one


bo
` botse and thou Da made them equall puto bs


Which paue bone p burthenand beat of f daye.
Wut be anlwered nto one of thé and fapde:
frend, ¥ do the no foronge:dpdelk thou not are
wpth me fota penp Cake that thpneigandgo
thy wape : 3 pli gene pntotbys lafte,cuen ag
tnto the. Jott not lawful foz me to doas me lp:
fteth pth mpne owne qoodes! Fs tbpneepe —
rel pe gi aoe ee Beate bal aati
je Fpatt,and thefpzit balbe lat. Foz many be SEEE
called, but fewe be choten. F ge i
x And Felus gopnge bp to Ferufalem,toke C
the tWwelue dpicpples alpde in the toape , and
fapde po apie el mba go bp to Fern- martre
falem and the fonne of man thalbe betraped yn feo
tothe chefe Prefles and wuto the Scrpbhes, and
thep (pallcondemne bpm todeath,and Mall de-
Ipucr bpm totbe Gentpls,tobe mocked , andto
be fcourged and to be crucpfped: and the thpzde
dape be thallrple agapne.re* Che cam to hint marre
the mother ofsebedes childze,w ber fones,fooz=
thypppng him ¢ delpzpnae a certapne chinge of
pin. Andbe tapth Ynta her:what wplt PprSbe
fapd vufobpm: Graunt,ptbelemp tivo fonnes
map fpt,the one on thy tyabt bande,etbe other
onthe left.tn thy Byngdom.2ut Jefus anfiwee zp
rede fapd:Ve wote not what pe alke. Arepea- `
ble to Dzpnike of the cup that J hall dapniee of, E
fobebaptpicd w the baptpme p Jam bapeplen
witb: Thep lape wnto bpmt:toe are.efapd Yn-
to thé petpall Dzpnke in dede of mp cup: g be bas
ptifed toith the baptyine } J am baptplen wtth.
Hut tolpt on mp rpabt hande,and on my lefte,
isnot mpnetogene-but tt hal chatice vuto thé,
*thatitis prepared Foz of mp father. F Mat.rrb e
¥And when f tenberdethis,they opidapned aarre
atthetto boethacn. ut Jefus calledthévnto "7
bpm, and fapd:xpe bnowe that the ppnees ofp Luke.rrie
nacions haue dominion ouer thë. And thep that
are great men,erercple auctborpte vpon theni.
Ft tall not be foamonge pou. Wut whofoeuer
topll begreatamige pou. lethpm be pour mpni=
ter g whoto toll be chefeamongepon, let ppur
be pourleruaunt:cuen asxthelonne of macame agar.
nottobempnylired onto, but to mpnp iker, and
togeucbpsipfearedemptionfoz many. J
*Andas fies departed frå Hierico,much peo dyar.r.g
plefolotoed bint. And behold, two blind më [pte Zub.rbute
tpnge by the apelpde, tobenthep berde p Fe-
fug patled bp, thepcrped mroaes rigs ag
| : foun


ae


>=" >= =e, ee eee eee


=»
et


ChyeGotpll ~


fine of Danid, baue mercy on bs. And Pf people
rebuked them, becaufe thep hhoulde bolde thepz
peace. Wut they ccped the moze , fapenqe : bane
mercp on Yg, D Lorde, thou fonne of Dauid.
And Jcfus Code ftpll,and called them, ¢fapde:
what wpll pep J paldo vnto pour Thep lape
bnto bpm: Lopde.tbat our epes mape be opened
So Jelug had compaflid on them, and touched
thep2 A T P A apa thepzepeg reccaucd
fpgbt.and 9 fb egheng-s Laer
C'The.rri.Chapter. )
CHerpdech into Herulalem, dzpucth the marchauntes
out ofthe téple,curteth the Epage tre,erebuketh $ pha:
epfes wpth the (pmulptube of thetwo fonnes and of the
bufbandmen,that Cicwe fuch ac were fent bnto them.

w peers MD when thep*dzewe npe onto Fe
marria RATATA culalem, and were come to Weth-
Luberiree PyR wa Dbage, onto mount <Dipucte : then

Fe eg 4 lent Jefus two dpicpples fapenge

Eae unto tbem: cointo the totone that

Ipetb ouer agapnit pou,and anone pe thal fpnde

anaffe bounde,andacolte pth ber:loofe them,

and bepnge them vnto me. And pf anp ma fape

ought onto pou,fape pe: the Lozbde bath nede of

the:« firepabt wape de topll let thé go. All tbps

erai p, WaS Done, $ it mpgdE be fulfplled, Dbycbe wag

cr haunt’ (poke by the propbet,fapeng: * Cel pe p dougy-

Joppie terof Hpon:behold, thy kyng cometh vuto tye,

incke,{pttpng pon an affeanda colte, tie fole

of the alle wied to the pocke. Che dttcpples wet

and dpd as Jeluscommatded them, ¢ brought

the affe and the colte, put on thé thep2 clothes,

and fet bim theron. And manp of p people {pzed

thep2 qarmentes in the wape. Dehet cut owne

inatiches from p trees,¢ trawed thé in the Wwa)

Gozeouer,the people that wete before thep

y5 came after,crped fapeng : ofanna tothe fonne

tuke. rire Of Danid. * Wlefled is de that commeth inthe
gob-rit- name of the Lozde,*Holanna tn the bpelt. F

‘2 arrio «© >a And when he as cometo Jerufalem, all

the cptie was mouet fapeng: whois this And

mat.rtiti.a the people faph:this is Jelusxthe Prophete of

xuk nix g Mazareth(a cpticjof Galtle.*And Jefus went

into the temple of God,andcaft out all the that

folde and bought m the temple,and oucrthzewe

the tables of he monp chatigers,and theleates

of them that folde Doues,and apd bnto the: Jt


fit.aregt. is to2ptten:xmp boufe thalbe calledehe boute of


rhri.n.e€


taioe praper.2ut pe bauemadett ta Denne of Cheucs.
taer, bic And the blpndeand the halte came to bpm inthe
temple,and be healed then.

Wiben thechefe Pzealkes and Socepbes fawe
the wonders that be bpd. and thecbrldz€ crpeng
in the temple(and fapenqe: dofanna to p fonne
of Dauid thepdploapned,andfapd wnto bpm:
bearett p what thele apes Wut Jeluslapth wn

pal. vita to thé: Wbhp nots baue pe never read. * Dut of
moutbof babes aud luckelpnges thou hatte oz-
_- DepneD p2aple. Andde lefte them, and went out
Foh.-vilf.e ofthe cpticxbuto Wethanpe, and had bps abp-
pyarrie Dpngetiere. E * Inthe moznpng age retur-
—- nedintothecptte agapne be bongred:and when
Luke.rif,b he had fppeda xfpgae tree inthe waye, Decame
toit «founde notbpnge theron, but leaues onlp
and fapd ynto it: Zener feute grote onp hence
forbade. And anone the fpgge tree ptbhered


fapde vnto them:


atoape. Anu when bys dptcpples fate it, thep
marueled, fapeng: Powe Loone ts the fpage tree
topthered awape: fetus anfwered and fapd vn C
totbem: Uerelp 3 lape vntopou : * PE pe baue h BA he
fapth and doubt not, pe pall not onelp Dothps™ “7
that isbappened Onto the fpqgetree:butalfo
pf ype pall lape Duto thps mountapne : remoue,
anbdcaft thp felfe into p feeit thalbe done. x And poar.re.n
all thpnges wbhatloeuerpealke in pzraper(pfpe zoh piile b
beleue pe pallreccaue them. — EATE ERE
| pax ändwipenbe was come into the téple the poar.ria
chefe peeaftes andthe elders of the people came Lube.rr.a,
yntobpm(asbe was teachpng and lapd:* yp cron sce
what aucthozpte dock thou thefe dy das sided Actes. iti b
who raue the thps poter? Jelus antwered and"?
alfo topll alke of pou a cer-
tapne topna, wbich pE pe tell me, J in Ipketopfe
wpl tel pou bp whataucthozite Fdo thele thpn-
ges. The baptpme of Jhon:whence wag it ‘fro
Deauen o2 of més And thep thoughtamonge thé
felues.fapenge:PE toe faye from beauen, be wl
fape vnto bs : bp dpd pe not then beleuc ppm’
Wut pF we hall ape of men, then feare we the
cople. x J0: all menbolde {hon as a prophet. mrii 4
nod they anliwered ynto Jefus , andlapde : we
cannot tell. And be fapd wnto them: nether tell
J pou,bp what authoepte ¥ do thelethinges F
tbat fape pe tothps: yx A man bad two fon-
nes and came to the fpatte ,andlapde: fonne,go
and wozke todape ininp bpneparde. He anline:
red and fapde: J wpll not, but afterwarde,be re
ented and thent. Chen came be to the lecode,€
apd Ipketople. And be anfwered e lapd: 9 wypl
{p2,and twente ot Bate aldo of thé twapnedpd
the wopll of the father: And thep lape punto bpm:
the fp:t. Jeius fapeth onto them: verelp F lape
pinto pou,thepublpcansand harlottes gointo
the kyngdome of God befo
caine Dito pou bp the wape of rpgbteoutnedie,
and pe beleued bim not:but publpcans and pat-
Lottes belened hpm. And pe( when pe bad fene it)
toere not moued afteribarve with repentaunce,
thatpempabtbhauebeleucdbpm. Fe
> Perken another {pmilituve.x Cher aga D
certapn mã anboutbolder, which plated a vine Sere
parde g bedgedit roundabout, € made a topne: Fere.rit.c
pres i itt buplta tower, letit out tobulbad: Fake rr b
men, Wet into a Eratige colitre.Andwhenthe =
tyme of p frute Deetwe neare,be fent bis feruaun


testo the bufbandmeé,p thep mpgbt receaue the a


frutes of it. And phulbadmé caught bis lervait
tesy beat one, kplled anofber,¢ Toned another.
Agapne he lent other feruañteg mo then p firt
¢thepdpd bnto thé lpbewple. Sut lat of al,be

fent onto tbe bis owne fonne,fapeng:thep wpll
tand in awe of mp fonne. Wut wpe hu ãdmë
fawe f Conne, thep faiwamg thë felues:x Thig se.erviib
is p bepze:come,let vskyll bpm, glet vgeniope

his inheritaunce. And thep caught bim, g theulk

bim out of p vpneparde,¢ fletwe bim. When the
lozde therfoze of p bynepardcometh,whatwpl —
beno puto tal bulbandme: Thep fapde tnta
bpm: 0z afmuch as tbep beeucl,be wyl cruclip
Deftrope thé and wpl let out bys bpneparde on


to other bufbandmen, Wbpch Hall delpuer bpm


the frute


2e pou. SO? + Jhon pattie *


$,
_ wu


PES, Matthew.


the frute induefeaforis. Jefus fapeth onto thë:
seie rts, DPD pencuer reade tn tpetceiptures: * Che Tone
duke. tric, Whpchtbebuyplders refuled, the fame is become
fiest-t.d the Deade of the corner:thists p Lozdes bopnge
eee nwd and itis marvelous in pourepes. CTherfore lap
J vuto pou:the kyngodoine of God thalbe taken
a from pou, and gon toa nacpon tobpebe Mall
zacha.riia DePug fosth the frutes therof. Andsawholoeuce
| falleth on this tonc Halbe broken inpeces:but
Danitie onxibbomntocuer it falletbitthallall to qrpnde
ppm. and when the chefe Pzealkes and harp-
fes bad herde bis parables, they percepued that
jeb.viin Helpake of tht.x Andtpep tent aboute to lape
tegar.ric DADS ONHyma,+but thep feared the people, be-
sire. caule thep tobe bpm asa prophete. And Fe-
"o fusantivered,andfpake nto them agapne bp
parablesandfapde.
CThexcrit. Chapter. _
«Tbe mariage ofthe kpnecs fonne. Tribute to be ge:
uen to the fimperoure Chit confuteth the opinpon of
the Saduces,cicernpnge the velurreccion,e anfwereth
the Scrpbe bute bps queftpon.
4 ees He rk byngdoine of beauen is lpke
Lukin kaea Beas VNto*Xa man that wasa kpuge, Whi:
Ride Sef che made a marpage fo2 bps tonne g
- B> W Sent forth bpsleruauntes,tocal the
sommes that were bpddento the weddpnae,
and thep wolde notcome.Agapne,be fent forth
otberferuauntes fapenge: Cell them Which are
bpdden: bebolde , Fhaue prepared mp dpnner,
mipne orenand mp fatlpnges are kplicd,andall
thpugesarereadp, come bntop marpage. wut
¢hep madelpaht of it, wt thep2 waps:one to
bps ferme place,anotbher foz bis marchaundple,
and theremnaunt tobe bps feruauntes, and in-
treatedtbem thamefullp and lewe them. But
* Sohen the kpnge berd therof,be was woth, and
fent forth bps me of warre and delkropes thole
murtberers and ee thepz cptic. |
Chenlapd heto bys eruauntes: p marpage
in Deve is prepared. Wut thep whych tere bpt-
Den were not wo2thp.Go pe therfore out tuto p
bpe apes:andas many as pe fpnde, bpd them
tothe mariage. And the feruauntes wente oute
into tbe bpe apes, and el sete togeatber all
as manp ag they coulde fpnde, bothe good and
bad, and the icdbpnge aan arne wpth
geftes. Then the kpnge came in to tethe getes,
and toben be fpped there a man, whpch had not


7


. gtfap.ri.d ona *Doeddpnge garmente,belapde Dnto bpm:
“ie ish frende,botoe camet thou inbptber, not baupng


a Weddpnge garments And he was cuen {pech-

leffe. eben fapoe the kpnge tothempnpiiers:

25 take andbynde bym bande and fote, and catte

marins. pin into Deter darkenefle * there thalbe We-

ANDES Sonecand qnatbpnge of teth-sfoz many becal=
led but fete arecholen. BO

rex Cyen went the pharples and toke cout:

fell bot thep mpabt tangle bim in bis wozdes.

Andtbep lët out butohimehep2 difctples with

Zuker Ieroves leruauntesfapenge: * Batter, we


gyan riia


Enowwe tbat tbouartetruc,andteachett p wape |e ;
of Godtruelpe, nether care thoufozanpman kéj
fozthou reqardelt nottbeoutihardappearauce jay


of men.Tell bs therfore : hotwe thynbell thous
Feit latefullepat trybute begeucn buto Cefar


a . |
Folt,
0? tot: ut Felus perceanpnee they wpekti- C
nes, fapde: Wbp tempte pe me, pe ppocrptes?
Hbewe me the trpbute monp. And thep toke
bema penp. And be fapd tothem: bole ts this
pmage and fuperferipciã Thep Cape ynto him:
pellet fapde be onto them: * Geue ther: saatriiid
foze bnto Cefar the thynges which are Cefars, “°F”
and puto Hod, thole thpnges thatare Gods H
ben they bad berd thefewozdes,thepmaruel _
led, andleft bpm,and went thepz wape. * Che Meer
fame Dape came tobpm the Habuces( whpche setrcui.b
fap that ther is no refurreccion and alked ppm,
fapenge:<palter, Boles lapde: that*pfaman Deutrrob ’
dpe, haupnge no chplde,bys brother Mulde mas
ty bps wpfe,andraple vp fede vnto bis brother
Chere were topth ves leuen beeth2en, ¢thefp2t
matped a wypte,andDdecealed without plue and
left bps wpfe bnto bpsbhzotbher. Lpkhewple, the
feconde andthe thp2de, onto the feuenth. Lat of
all the woman dDpedallo. Cherfoze,in the refur
reccpon, whole wpe Mall the be of the euen!
Fo: thep all bad her. Jefus anfweredand fapd:
puto them:pe Do cerre, not knowpuege the fcrpp=
tures no? the potverof God. Foz in the relur=
reccpon,tbhep nether marpe no2 are marped, but
areas the Angels in beaucn.

Wut as touchynge the refurreccpon of the
dead:-baue pe not rede that whpchis{poken Yn- i
to pou of God, wipch fapth: +3 am the God of Erro ii-b
Abzaba andthe God of {abac,andthe God of Luke. re.
Zacob/Godis not a God of dead, but of lpuing
And when the people perde thys, they were a=
ffonnpedat bps doctepne > But when f Pija- D
rples bad berde tbat pe bad put the Saduces to
fplence, thep came togeatber, and one of them
(hich as a Doctour of latwe) afkeD dun a que
ffion,temptpngebim,¢ fapenge: Batter, wpich
isthe qreatcommaundemetin the la we: Jefus
fapd vnto bpm: bon Walt +loue the Lord thp Deut. vi. b
God pth all typ berte,andtopth all chy foule,
and wpthall thp mpnde. Chyps isthefprtte and
greate commaundemeét. And the leconde is lpke
prtote.* Thou halt loue thine nepqoboure ag Levt.rir.o,
thy (elf. 3n tbele tiwo comaundementes pange rec
all the latwe and the Bzopbhetes. Gala.b.b

UWibplethe Phariies were gathered together Hri-
Jefus alked toem,lapenge:Wibatthpnke peof ~~
Chit: whofe tine is ber Thep fapd nto bpm:
the Coune of Dauid. De lapde vntothem:xhotve ajzar.rii, v
then docth Danid infpzete cal bpm Lozde,fap-
enge : Che Logdefapde vntomp Lorde: xf pte pralcp.a
thou onmp rpaht bande, tpl J make thpne enc-
mpes thp Foote Toles PE Daud then call hpm
Lode, bowe is be then bps onne’ And noman
was able to anftber bpm anp thynge, neptbher
durt anp man( from that dapefozth) alge bpnr
anpmoquettpons. F


(pake Jefus to the prople,and to
ciples. fapena:* be Scribes coer ;


a M


E fap. A
Lule.rie.


thep2 workes:fo2thep (ape, and donot. Vee,
thep bynde together beup burthés,and qreuous
to be bozne,andlapethem onmennes thoulderg
but thep them felues topl not beane at thé with
one of thep2fpngers. All thepz wozkes dothcp
for theintente, that thep mape be fence of men.

Thep fetabzoade thep2 phplaterpes,andmake
large the bolders of thep2 garmentes, and loue
the pppermoofte feates at feattes.and tofptin
the chefeplace incounfels,and gretpngesin tbe


43 market and to be called of men Rabbi,


Jaco.ti.a


Luk.riifi.c poure feruaunt. *


# But be not pe called Rabbi, foz one ts pour
mafter euen Chit, andal pe are beetbzen. And
call noman pour father ppon the carth, fozone
is pour father whychisindeauen. Methcr be pe
called maters, foz one is poure maficr, euen
Chaifte. pe chatis cape ade amonge pou halbe

ut whofocuer eralteth bun


and.Fbill.¢ felfe : halbe bzought lowe. And be that bum-


Lube.rhg


#gath.b.b


bleth pym felfe,thalbe cralted. KU Yuto pon
&crphesand Pbarples, + ppoceptes , Foz pe
fhutte vp the kpngdome of heaven before men,
xpeneptber go tu poure felues,neptbher fuiter pe
them thatcome toenter in. |

-lo nto pou Scrpbes € Pharples,pe ppo-
erpres:foz pe druoure Wpddowes boules ¢ that
ndera pretence o£ lone peaper: thetFoze fball
pe be p fozer punpihed. Wo be pnto pou Scip.
bes and Bbharpleg, pe ppocrites:foz pe compauc
fec andlanbde,to make one p:ofelpte, g when be
ig become one,pemake bpm tio folde moze the
chploe of bell,then pe pour felues are.

“Gio be vito poupe blpnd gupdes, fo? pe fap:
yoyofocucr Doth fweare bp the temple , ttisno-
thpnae: but wholocuer fweareth bp the gold of
the temple, bets gpltpe. De fooles and blpnde:
foz wbherher is greater:the golde 02 the temple ý
fanctifpeth the gold? And wholoeuer fweareth
bythe aultare,itis notbynge, but whofoeucr
Cwcareth bp the gpftethat ts wpon tt.betsqpl-
tpe:pe Fooles and blynde,foz whether ts greater
the pft.czthcaltare that fanctitpeth the gpft:
wholotberfozelweareth by the alter, foeareth
by it,and bp alltbpnges that are thereon. And
wholo {teareth bp the temple, fweareth bp it,
andby bpm that Dwelleth therin. * And bethat


C Ctoeareth bp beaué,tweareth bp theleat of God


Luke. tit,


, Huke.ti.e


and bp bpm thar fptteth theron. !

Wio puto pou Scribes and pea iaiea ppo
crites.* Jfo2 pe tpthe mpnt and anpie,and com:
mpn,andbaue lefte the wapgytper matters of
the latoe:1udgement mercpe and faptbhe. Chele
ought pe to bauedone,and not to leauethe other
pndone:pe dlpnde guydes , obpch Frapne oute
agnat,andfwalomeaCamell.

Wio vnto pou Hcepbes g Pharples, pe ppo-
crptes : foz pe make cleane tbe tter {pde of the
cup,€ of the platter:but wpthin thep are full of
bapbery ¢ exceile. Thou blpnvde Pharple, clenfe
fy2ft ý whpcb is hithin the cuppe and platter,p
theoutfpdc of them mape be cleanc alto,

xilo vnto pou Scribes g Phatpes,peppo-
ceptes:fo2 pe are lpke Dnto pore epulchzes,
wbhpcbeappeare beautpfull outtoarde, but ave
win full of dead meng bones ¢ of all Fyltbpnes-


=


: olde, 3 fende wnto pou p20: Satb.. b. |
phetes and wple mé,and Scrpbes, and fome of peer
them pe (yall apll and crucpfpe:and fome of thé Actes.b.c


hall pe fcousgein pour fpnagoges , eperfecute 2s


fhed vponp earth,from the bloude oberg Pec uns
«Abell, onto the bloude of sacharp thetonne of Gene. ii.b
wWarachias;* whom pe ewe bet wene f temple ti Para.
and the altare.dierelp Jfape wnto pou-alltbete i
tbynges pall come Dpon thps generacton.* D gun.riig .
Jerufalem, Jerufalë, thou chat spltett the pro-


The rrii Chapter.
{cpples po


eltruction ofthe temple,p


$ SEA


ai De pe not altbelethynges:Cerelp.
fape unto pou*there Wal not be dere left one varer
one bpon another,that all not bedetroped. renes
And as he fat bpon mout Oliuete bis oifcp:
les că onto him lecretlp,fapeng: Cel vs: when
hall thelethpnges be:¢€ what Wall be the token
of thy cmpnge ¢ of the ende of the Mozld/ And
Felusanfwered,andlapd wnto thé:xtake hede, ere
that no man deceaue pou. Jeo? manp hall come Epbe.b.b 4
inmpnamy,fapege:3 am C paitk-¢ thal beceaue :
manp. Pe mall beare of toarres, € tpopnges of
arres:benot troubled, Hozall-xccoete typages) 2
mut come to paffe but the cnde ts not pet.* Pa itiietrite
cion hallrpfeagapnfnacpon,andtcalmeaga:
pu rcalme:and there Halbe petttlence,and bon
ger and carthquakes tn all places. Ail thele ave
thei paar jr of fozoibes.
* Then thall thep put pou to trouble ,¢ Mall
kpll pou and pe albe bated of al nactis hg np mar. il b
names fake. And then ball manp beotfended,& opita
fhall betrape one another, all bate one ano- ?
ther. And manp falfe prophetes thal arpfe, and
(palldeccauemanyp.* And co ai thal bane f ttt.crvze.


ppperband,the loue of many thall abate. *25ut Yo.
hetbat endureth top ende,thbefame thalbe ate toaat.p.e,
*AND


— =


4
3


PES, Matthew.


egari Wynd his Golpel of the kng Halbe prea:


chedinall the ozlbde,fo2 a wptnes wntoallna:-
cions and then hall theende come. di
parrits xUahen pe therfoze thal fe the abhbompnacio
facie Of defolacton(that was {poken of by * Daniel
~ prophet) tandein the boly place, whole readeth
> itlet bim Dnderfande. Chenlet them which be
' in Jep fipe into the motttapnes. And let Him
wwohpch is on the boule toppe,not come dotone to
fet anp thpnee out of bis boule, Aether let hym
which isin the felde.returne backe tofetche his
clothes.Uio albe tn tholedayes to them pare
witb chiloe,¢ to the that qeue tucke. Aut pave
pe tbat pout Apabt benot in the wynter,netber
on the Sabboth dape. Foz then Halbe greate
Dant.rit.a tribulacions x fuchas,toas not fens the begpn-
npnere of the old to this tyme, no: malbe. Pee
and except thofe yi oy si aa tened ther
{hulde no feh be faued, but fo2 the chotens fake
© thofedapes thalbe thoztened. |
sgarciite *Chenpfanp manfape bntopon:lo,bere is
ukile Chrift, o? there:beleue it not. E0? there balla-
dzerti.b tpfe falle Chrtttes,¢ falle prophetes xand iall
Deut.riita feye oen my2acles,¢ wonders. Junio muche
(that ptit twere pofipble)p terp electe thulde be
Deceaued:behold, J haue told pou before. Wher
fore, pe thep fape Dutopou-:bebglde, De isin the
delerte, qo not re forthe: beholde, be tsin thefe-
crete places, beleue tt not. Eor as plyabtenpng
cometh out of the catt,¢ appeareth into p twel:
fofball thecommpnae of the fonne of man be.
fobrrrird = «4Fo2 toherlocucc a dead karkas ig, eut there
LUE WHS oil the Egles allo be gathered together. 3m-
mar. rifi.c. mediatlpxatter the tribulactons of tholedapes
so ite: pallthe Sunne be darkened,and the mone thal
7 plot gene ber lpgbt,and the farres thall fall fro
beauen,and the power of Heauen halbemoucd.
And then thal appeare the token of the fonne of
maninbeauen. And then Hallall the wpuredes
actes.i.b of the carthmourne,andtbhep thal fexthe fonne
ofmancommpnaein the cloubdes of pheant with
paniri a poter and greate glozpe.xand be Hall fend bis
Epen SY nrels with the qreat i ofatrompet,and
they hall qatbertogether bps chofen, from the
_ bpabelt partes of beant, bntpll p endes therof.
sgar.ritt.c dLearne a fpmilpeude of the fpage tree“ whe
LubcrHhh Hie hraunches is pet fender, the leaues {prong
peknowe thatfommerts npe. 5e lpkewpiepr,
when pete al thefe thpnges.be pelure that itis


oh, nere cuen at the Do2es.Cierelp F ar bntopou


thys reneracið tal not pafle,tplall thete thpn:
aCap.li.b ae pe Eultptleb. *Peauenand earth Hall vafe
tetari.c *butmp wWwo2des Mall not palle. Wut of p Lav
satd-c | and poure*knoweth noman,nonot theangels
Te ofpeauen,vut mp fatheronlp.
Be But ag the dapes of Moe were, fo Hall alfo
run cbi,e, the commpnge of p onne of man be. Foz asin p
Dapes(thatwent before the loud thep opdeate
anddzpnke,marp,¢ were marped,cuc yutpll p
dap that Noe entredintothe pp, knewe nce
tplithe floude came andtokethe all atbape.So
Wall alfo the commpnge cf the fonne of man be.
@ hen thal tivo be in inthe feld,theonereceaucd
iuk,rbii.g andthe other refuted * two foeme Halbe gryn-


Dpugeatthe mpl, cheone reccancdand potber


olti,


tifuled.op Two ina bedsthe one Galberereaued, andtheos gs
ther refute. * Ulatche therfoze,Fot pe Bnote not eat.rro.b
Wwhbàthoure pour Lorde tpl come. DE this pet ae toe
befure,that pf the good man of the boufe knew e"
tbat houre* the thefe wold come:be wold fure: Apo.rot,c
lpe watche,andnot fufferbis houle to bebzoken
bp. Cherforc, bepealforeadpe,fo2 in fuche ar
boure as pethbpnbe not, wpll the fonne of mate
come.Wiboisafapthfull and wple feruaunte,
whome bps Lozde bathe made ruler ouer hpa
Houleholde,to meure them meat infeafon. Wlel-
fed is that fernaunte, home bps Lozde (whan
ecommeth) Hall fpnbe ppg : Gierelpe 3
ape puto pou, that be Hallmake bpm ruler o=
ueralldps goodes. Wut andpf that euell fera
naunt lape tn Dig berte, mp Lorde iwplbe longe
a commypnge (and fo begpnne to fmpte bps fe-
lowes, pee and fo cat € Dapnke with f dronken)
thelame teruauntes Lozde thallcome itt adape
When he loketp not foz bpm, ein an Doure that
Hetg not arc of, ¢ Hall bewe pim th peces, and
geur him bis pozcton pth ppocrites:there thal
be weppnge and gate eof teth.
@Che.rrv.Chapter.


C Dheten bprapns, The talences pelpuered to the fers
uauntes and ofthe generalliubgement


> en thal the kpntrdome of beaué A
mp LEl pie Dnto ten bpzapns , whpche
wee, Coke thepzlapes,and mente tomete
A) Ay bzpdgromcan the dzpoe) Wut Epue
eae Of them Were folpHe and fpuc there
topte. hep that were folpihe,toke thep2 laped
but toke none ople topth thé. But the wple toke
ople pth theminthep2 vellels,wpeh the lam=
pesallo.Wapple the bzpdgrome tarped, thep at
flombzed and flepte. And euen at mpdnpgite,
there has acrpe made: beboldc,the bzpdarome
commeth:go oute to mete ppm. Chen all thole
birgpns arole and prepared thep2lampes. So
the folpthe fapd bntothe wple:qeue vs of pour
pple:foz our lampes are gone out. ut the wile
anfivered, fapég:not fo left there be not pnouch
fo? bg and pou, but go pe rather to thé that fell
and bye ior pour felues. And Wwbplethep wente
to bpe, the bzpdqrome came:andthep that were
readp, wente in pth bpm to the marpage,and
the gate was put vp. afterward came allo the
other birgpns,fapenge: *Lozdc, Lorde, ope to Mat.bit.e
ps. 2Sutheanfivoered and fapde: vercipe Ffape
wnto pou:F bnotee pounot, <Watche therfoze marei.
forpe knotoe nether the dape, noe pet the poure Tarii d.
wberin thbefonne ofmanMallcome. Ja n
Pir Lphetople as acevtapne man Teadpe tO mar. riti.a
take bps ioznep intoa ftraunge countre, called Luke.rir.b
bps feruaunteg, and delpucred vnto them ppa
goodes. And bnto one he gaue fpuetalentes,to
another fioo,and to another one:toeuerp maak
terdps Dabplpte and feapaht wapedeparted.
Then pe that had receaucd thefpuetalenteg,
went t occupped pth the fame, g wanneother
fpuetalentes. Lpketopie alfo be that receaued
two,qapned otber two. uthe that receaucdp
one, went ¢ dpaged in the carth.and hyd bislo-
des monep. After a longe feafon the Lozde of
thoteleruaiites came,and rekened topth them.
And lobe that hadreccaucd yang talentes came


————a |


b itt and


and brought other fpuc talentes fapenge: Sp?

thou delpuecedtt vito me fpuc talentes:bebold

§ baue gapned wyth thé fpuc talentes mo. HPS

fo2defapde Dito hym: tel thou ood and fapth

full feruaunte. Chou hatte bene fapthfull ouce

fetoe thpnaes, J topl make the rulet ouer many

chynges:enter thou into the tope of chp lord. He

alto that badreceaucd two falentes, came at

fapd: Sap? P delpuccedit puto metwotalentes:

beholde, y baue wonne two other talétes top th

the:bislozde fapd wnto pim:well good ¢ fapth-

full Ceruatit. Chou batt ben faptbfull ouerrewe

e tbynges. d wpl make theruler ouer manp thpn
yes:Entretbonintotheiope ofthp lorde. Bs

C Whewbetobpych hathreccaucd the one talent,

cam andfapd: p23 knetve the, tbat thou are

anbacde man,reappng where thou balt not fo-

wen,and gatherpnge where thou batt not ira-

ied, g therfore was J afraped, and went g bpa

thy talent in the earth: lo,therethou bafe that

thpneis. pps lozdcanfwercd € fayde onto him

thou cuelandfloutbtull fervant, thouknewelf,

thas J reape where 3 lowed nor, € gather wher

4 bauenot ftrawed, thou ougbtelke therfoze to

Daue Delpucred mp money tothe erchaungers, €

thenatmpcommypnee thoulde J bane reccaued

nipne stone wpth vauntage. Cake therfore the

talente from bpmt,and geue it onto bun tobpcbe

lt aie hathbtentalentes.*fto2z onto encrp one phatve

Sarie halbe geuen, and De thall baue aboundaunce:

Wut he that hath not, from bym thalbe taken

aatri g MALE CEN that which be bath. And cat p vn-

arbari., Peotptable feruaunt into otter darknes, xthere
palve weppn uno gnaopngen HAA |

x Ui ben the fonne of man commeth inbps

glozpe,andall the bolp angels wpth bpm , ther

ibal be {pt bpon thefeate of bis qlozpe , and be=

exe.rrrtitie Foze bpm thalbeqathbered all nactons. * And be

mal feparate them one from another.as a thep=-

Herd deupdeth the Hepe from the gootes:and be

fall fet tbe epe onbistpgbe bande but p god-

tes onthe left. Chen thall the bpnge fapeto the

that thalbeon bpsrygbthande. Come pe blefied

matro Of mp father,tnderet the kpngbdome,xpzepared
foz pou from the begpunpnge of the wozlde.


i.zetio


2fa.lbitib kFEo2 ¥ was anhongred,and pe qavueme meat. .


SOOLA qiyas thpeftpe, and pe gaue me depnke. J was

herbourlefic,and pe toke mein. Rated, peca-

qe thed me.*Spche, and pe bplited me.* FZ was in

fh preton.epecame onto me. ‘Chen thal therpgh-

’ teous antitwere Dim fapeng: L020 when faw we

the an bogred,and fedtheroz thpzitp , andgaue

the dzpnke:toben fatoe te the berbourlefle,and

toke the ins o2naked, and cloted the ¢ 02 when

fare we the [pche,o2 in alte , and came ynto

ther And the kpnge thall anfwere,and faye Wn-

tothem verelp 3 lape onto pou,inagsmucheas

pe bauc Bone it nto one of the leat of thele mp
p,ethzen.pebaucdonett vnto me. |

| Shen thal be fape alfo vnto them, that Hal:

Dial. bib he on theleftbande:-xdeparte frome pe cured

oe ence Tinto cucrlattpneae fp2e: whpche is prepared foz

gata sre the Devel and bis angels. Fo: J wasan hogred

anene and pe gauc mend meat. 3 was thai and pe

gang me nodzpnke.7 was Parbourietie, and pe


~ Che Golpell


tokemenot i. J hag nakedand pe clothed me

not. 3 was (pcke and in pzelon and pe bptpted

menot. Chen hall they alfo antivere bpm lap-

enge:Lozde, When latwe wetheanbhongred.oa |. .

thyztte,ozbarbourlefie,oz naked, 02 fpcke,o2 in *. 7
for, anodpd not mpnpiter wutother Thn / _

ibali beanfioere them.fapenge:Gerelpe,sfape ~


nd MNtopou,nasnuchx as pe DpD it not to One of Pio.tifl co


the leat of thele,peapdit not tome. And*tbele tyoh.0.e


{hall co intoencrlattpng payne, the rpgbteous
intolpfecternall. `


The.xrcvr.Chaveer. | .
@ arp sjagdalenc anopntet chritt. Shep eate (he
Galterlambe, Cb? pzapeth in the garden, judas be-
trapeeh bpm, Peter (mpteth of Ajakus cate, Chrutis
accuted bp Calle wptnefles, Peter enpeth bpm.


peat Which was called Capppas and delde a
coifell that thep mpgit take Jefus bp fubtelte


pl
benx Jefus was tn Wethany, inthe poule marris
of Eapmeon the leper ther came onto byma wo 7"


* WE theené was come, be fat Downe wpth wat Hits. e
LSet eager tea Mes bance hak Yee RUbFEAL €


and began cuerp one of them to lape vnto bpm:
Lo2de.is tt $e anlioered and fapde : He that
bpppeth bys bande wpth me inthe opie, , the

| ame


s


fy '
$
f


J


i gohmyii.d peup,


PiS Mathew,


SalpHid. fame all betrape mex The fonmesf man trua
€ lp goeth ag it ig torptten of bpm: but wo pnto

that man, bp whom the fone of man is betrape

_ eD St bad ben good fo: that man, pf be bad not
“bene bozne. Chen Judas whpch) betraped bpm
anfivered andfapde:mafter,isit I Pefapd bn
,tobpm:thou batt fapd. Wibé thep toereeatpnge

‘Jefus toke bzcad,and whan be bad geuen than:

kes, be brake it and gaue itto the dptepples, g

Coors faid: * Take eatethis is mp boop. and be toke


_ manfiiiic. the cuppe and thanked; and gaue it them, fap-


ene: Dzpnke pe al of this,fo2z thps is mp bloud
(whychets of che newe teffamente that ts Med
foz manp,foz the remih of fynneg. ut F lape
Dnto pou: 3 Wpll not D2 pe Hence forth of thes
Frute of ý bpne tree, vntpll p Daye when F Wall
dzpnke itnew with pouinmyp fathers bpugos.
* And when thep had fapde grace, thep wente
7 out yntomout Dliuete.Chen lapeth Jcfus wn
— tothé:allpe albe offended becaufe of me thys
aose UGE. Foz tt ts weptten:x¥ tpl fmpte p pep-
 petde,and the thepe of the flocke balbe {cattred
abode. Sut after Jam rpfenagapn, 3 wylgo
befoze pou into Galile.eterantwered,¢ apd
mar. ritit.c Vinto bpm: *tbougbalmen be offended becaufe
iub.rrii.d ofthe, pet wpl weet hes ciended. Jefus fapd vn
tobpm:Cierelp, 3 tape dnto the, pintbps fame
npgbt,befoze the cocke crotwe,thou alte denp
me chzple.peter fapde onto pim: Pee,though
poulde vr pth the, pet wpll Junot denpe the:
Lykewpie alfo lapde all the dpicppleg.
D ¥Thencame Jelug wpththem yntoa farme
mats Hit a1 ace(wphich is called Gethlemane)¢ fapde vn-
tothe difcpples : {pt pe bere whple J gog prape
ponder. And be toke with bpm Peter the two
onnes of sebede,¢ began to ware fozowfuland
mar, ritii.d peup. Toen fapd Jefus nto thë:+ 4p foule ig
ee unto tbedeath. Carp pe bere g watch
wptb me. And be wenta lptell farther, and fell
fiat on bis face and pzaped,fapenge: D mp fa-
xuk.rrii.o ther, pf it be poflible,xlet tbis cuppe paffefrom
eari me:neuerthclele, not as 3 wpll but asp tplte.
And became wnto the dpiepples and founde thë
a flepe.and fapeth vnto Peter:-WaAbhat coulde pe
not watch wptb me one boure watche g prape,
gaave that pe entre notinto temptacion. * Che fpzete
is topllpnge, but the fledbe is weake. 7
marfilie *«ipewentcawape once agapne and prayed,
fayenge:D mpfatber,pf thys cuppe mape not
pafeawape fromme ercept Jozprke ofit thp
wll be fulfplicd.And be came andf ound pre
a fe cagapne. Eo: thep2 epes were peup. And
be left them went tagapne,g praped the thyzde
Cen a eptopules. an faperd bnearye.<Dlepe
etobpsdpicpples,ano! : $
nn owe and takepoure ret. Schold, the boure
igat hanze,and thefonne of man is betraped in
tothe banves offpnnerg. Rpfe,let vs be gopng
bebolde,beis at bande, that doeth betrape me.
mar riiit e x bple be pet fpake:lo, Judas one of the nom:
Lube.Frte hae of che tweiue came,and pth hpma greate
multptude,topth fweardes and ftaues, fent frå
the chefe prealtes and elders of thepeople. Wut
be that betraped bym, qauetbem a token, lap-


enge: home focuce 3 kple that fame ig pe


holdebpm fate. Ahdfortbtopthhecanieto Fes
fus and fapde: Haple Hatter and kpiled bpm.
And Jefus fapde Vnto bpm: frende, wherfore
art thou comes Chen came thep,andlaped pan-
des on Jefus and toke bpm.

And beholde, one of them twohpche were tpth
Jelus,fretched out bis band, ¢ due pis weard
and robe a fernaunte of thebpe pzeattes, and
{mote of bis eare. Chenfapde Jefus tnta bpm:
put bp thp fwearde into bis theath.

* to} althep that take thefwearde: thal pe- cené.ir.a;
rpthe wp th the fucarde. Chpnkett thou that F Sab rout
can not note prapeto mp Father, and be Mall esech.ri.u

peue meceuen nowe) moze then fwelue Legions of E
Angels” Wut hotwe then Wall the (ceppturesbe
fulfpilcds fo2*thusmufteitbe: Jn that fame HEFid
boure fapd Jelug to tbe multitude:+Pe become ERA
outas it were bntoa theft, wpthiweardeg and T"
ttauecs.foztotakeme. Flat daplpe wyth pou;
teachpnge inthe temple, and pe tobkeme not. .
xButall thps tg done thatthe ferpptures of P ycatna.ctt:
Wrophetes mpabt be fulfplled. +Tbhen all the sei A
dplcpplesfortoke bym,and fled. And thep toke Fuke trie
Jelug, andledppm to Capphasthebpe pecatte sob.rvire
Where the Scrpbes and the elders were alem-
bled. Wut Peter folowed Hym afarre of, nto p
bpe parantes palace and went in, and fate witt
the leruauntes, tole the ende. !

*Chechefe Pzeaftes and the clders, andall Meer |
the counfel,foughtfalletoptnesagapnit zelus
(forto A, mto death) but founde none:pe
tobe manp falle optnefles came, pet foñde they
none. At p latt came tivo falfe witnefles, + ther
fapd: Chis telowe fapd:* J am able to deltrope mar. rtiit.e
thetempleof God, and to buplde itagapnein 4°"
thre Dapes.x And the chefe preat arofe, ¢ lapde mar. riiit.
wntobpm:Antwereft thou nothpnge: Wibpdo
thete beare wptneleagapnte the: But Jelug ;
belde bps peace. * Andthechefe pzeatteanfime- VIr ritii è
redand fapde Dntohym: Fcbarge the bp the lp-
upnge God, that thou tell vs, wbetberthoube
Chite the fonne of God. Felus fapeth vnte
bpm:thou halt lapd. Neuerthelefle, J Cape wnta |
pou:* dere after thall pele the fonne of man {pt qk frit
tynge ontherpabt bande of powerss commpng S


intde cloudes ot thefkpe. 5 E
xThen ev pee beeattecentbys clothes, fap mar.citte
enge:bebatb{poken blalpheinp: whatnedewe. =
of enp moowwptuefles e Webolde,noiwe pe haue
erde his blatphemp. what thinke per Thep at-
wered, and fapde: bets worthy to dpe. x Chen Serie;
dpd thep (ppt ints Face,and buffeted bpm wpth
Epites. and other (mote bym on bys face, vb the
paline of thep2 bandes, fapenge: Tell vg thou
Chek, whois bethat motethe? |
Peter fat topthout in the palace. Anda valet


came to bim,fapeng: Chou allo walk wpth Fe-


{us of Galile:but he denied beforcevé al,faping
J tote not what thoulaptt. WH de was gone
out into the pozche, another wenche faroe bpm;
andfapDde nto them that toere there: Chis fe=
lowe hagalfo with Jelug of Masareth.Anda- -
gapn be ee tithan othe fapeng:) J donot
nowe ý mã. Andaftera whrlecame Ynto yim ar.rii. g
thep(tbat kode bp )¢laya bute Peter: *furelp Sets
| | b {iii tpo


Wam


‘The Golpeu


thou arte cuen oneofthem, foz thp {peache be-
Weapeth the. Chet beganne he tocurleandto

___ fweare,thatheknewe notthe man. And imines
Sree Dia tlpxthe cocke cretwe. And Peter remembyed
the too2de of Felu,wbpche fapte yuto bpm, be-

foze the cocke crotye,thon thaltpenp me theple:

and He Went ont and hepte bptterlyp. :


C The. revii. Chapter.


€_Chittits peipucred tnta plate. Judas hangtth bem
felfs.Chzihis crucpfpcd amongetheues, Be bpeth antis
burped, watchmen tepe the Grane.
EPEAN ar Hen the mowpnge was come, «all
ETTE i tye Defe preattes and the elders of


4B the people, belde a counfaple aga-


Dfal.fiea iB
iarba. ff Ee
Lukri A ieee ie 3
ASA S S pnt Jefus, to put ppm todeath, €
ua Cea DOUCHE Hypmbounde*and delpuc=
PON'S cea ppm vnro Poncius Dplate the debpte.

Then Fudas(Wbhpchehadbetraped bpm) [e=
pngetbathe tascondepned,repented ppm felfe
and bzou gue agapne the thpztp plates of filuer
to the chcfe preattes andelocrs,tapeng : Fbaue
{piined, betrapenge the innocent bloude. And
thep Capo: what is that to bse thou to that.
, And becat botone the fpluce plates tn the tem:
mer EO ple g departed xand went g banged ppm felfe.
And the chefe preattes toke the fpluer plates
and fapde:tt ts not lawful fo to putthem into
the tecafure, becautettis the price of bloyd. And
thep toke councel: and bought wptb them a pot
_ tersfclde,toburp ftraungersin. Wiberfoze the
ot feldeig calleDox(Bacclocma,thatts)theteld of bloud
putplithpsdape. Then wasfulfplled,p whpch
was {poken bp Jeremp the Wzopbhete,tapenge:
mbari ann ebep tobe thpatpe {pluer plates, the pzpee
of bpm that as valued. whom tüep bought of
the chplozen of Fivael,and gaue them foz: f pot:

yg TEES felde,as the Lozde appopntcd me.
aaron. *Selus (ode before the dcbpte,and the debite
zusrriia Alhed bpm, fapenge: arte thou the kypnge of the
Hobbit E Yetweg Felus Capeth wnto ppm apon fapeftc.
And when be teas acculed of p chefe preattes €
elders,beanfwered nothpnge. Then lapth 3p-
late Dnte Hpm: beare thou not, Dowwe manp


ae


flap hiie pties thep lapeagapnife the? * andDbe an-


fweredbypm to never a worde:infomuche that

the dDebpte maruapled qreatip.
sargia: * Achat fealf,the Debpte was wonte to delp:
ner nto the peoplea pzefoner, Who thep wolde
defpze. He had then a notable prefoncrcalled
Warrabas.Cherfoze When thep were gathered
cat.rbh.a. fogeather, Pplate lapo:xwhether wpl pe that
Fors | iene loole Vito pon? Barrabas, o2 Fetus,
whpche is called Chit: Foz he Rnetwe that foz

chupe thep baddelpucced hpm.

Ui ben he has {et Downe to gene tudgemente
bys wptefent ynte bpm fapenge:baue thou no-
thpnge to Do ipththattutte man. Fo: F haue
fuffercd manp thpnges thps dapein mp fepe be

oe tine CoULe Of bpm. * Wut the chefe preatkes ¢€ elders
€ perluaded the people,thatthep thuld afke War:
rabas,anddeitrope Jelug. Che debpte anfwe-
- ted andfapde Bnto them: whether o€  tioapne
wpll pe,that 3 let loofe bute pou: Chep fapoe:


aati ¥ Barrabas. Bplatelapde nto them:* what


imat, po. a halZ bo the with Fetus which ig called Char


Thep $ patied bp reup!
thep2 peades and faping:thou that deftropenett `
thetcmple of God, ar
bapes, laue thp tel
©od,coinedown


gauchbpm todzpnke, Dtber fapde: let be let ve
. fe tobether


Sete


OFS Matthew,


fe whether Helpas topil come and selpuer pim:
Zelus, ban he had crped aqapne wpth a louve
popece pelded bp the goofle.
_ Andbebolde,the*vapleof the tepledpd rent
into tivo partes from the toppe tothe bottome
andthe carth opd quake and the fones rent, «
., Gtaucs Dpd open:and many bodpes of fapnetes
"wbich lepte.arofe,and went ont of the graues,
after bps relurveccyon, and came into the bolpe
cptie and appeared bato manp.* benp Cen
turyonandthep that were ith bim watchpug
Jefus latwe the earthquake, and thofetbpnges
whpchhappened;thep feared Se i i da
Crulpe,thps was the fonne of God.
sMarerb.d. LAND Many wemen werethere ( beboldpnge
JOM FHUS Hom afarce of) Dobpch folotocd Jelus from Ga-
lple,mpnptepnge bnto bpm. A monge whpebe
was “arp Magdalene and Harp the mother
© of samesand Zoles,and the motherofsebedes
eaar.rb.d chplozen. Mien the cuen has comextherecam
Sobre & rpeje mă of Arimathia named Jofeph, which
alfo as Jefus dpicpple. He went wnto Pplate
and beggedthebodp of Feius: Then Pilate c-
maunded the bodpeto be delpucred. And tohan
Jofeph had taken the bodpe, be wrapped it ina
cleanelpnnen cloth,¢ lay cd it in bisnew tombe,
twhpch be bad bewen oute cuen in therocke,and
rolled a greate fone to the doze of thefepulchre
anddeparted. And there was xarp aqda-
lene and p other Harp, fpttpng oucragapntt p
fepulchae. Che next dap of ë folotwed f dap peee
rpna,p bpe peettes €Pbarifes came together
nto Bplate lapenge: Sp? beremëbze pthps
saat. roic Deceauct fapde tobple be thas pet alpuc.* After
and.rbit->- thze dapes 3 wpll arple agapne. Commaunde
Hot,poitte therfoze that the fepulchze be made fure vntpll
the thpzde dape,let bys dpfciples come, ¢ fteale
ppm away andfape vnto the people:he igrpien
from the dead and thelat erroure thalbe wozie
then the fp2tt. plate layde dnto them: Ye bane
the teatche, go pour wape make tt as (ureas pe
cant. 0 thep went and made the fepulchze Cure
topth watchmen,andfealed the tone. H
CTbe-crviti.Chaptec.
CMherelucrecepon of Chzik.phebpepzeattes geur the
foubpers monep to fap that Chr was tollen out of his
gratie.Chzife appeareth to bps tpicppies , and fendeth
them Coth to peache and Co baptpfe.


g@qyar.Fo.b
LUE reste


@yar.cb.b°
Lub. Foie


fj ar.Fb.D,


— = = i


r
n-


And beholde.ther was a greate carthquake
fo2 the ancrell tthe Lorde detcended from bea-
uen, and came androulied backe the tone from
the doze, and fat Ypon tt. His countenatice thas
Ipke lypabtenpnge,and bys rapmente wbpte as
how ¢. Afo: feare of bpm the kepers were a=
fonnped.and became ag decad men.


ejarcvi.b  * Theangell anfioeredD , and fapde bnto the


Aurriiit.a Wemen,tearc penot.jtor Fkuolwe.thatpefeke F


eis whpche was crucptped: be is not bere: be
etn ashefapd. Comele p place toberethat
25 the Lozde was lapde:and go qupckiy, etel bps
difciples.p be iseplenagapne from p dead. And
bebold, be qocth before pouinto Galple,there pe


Ponatteuenprgeotthe «Sabbothes PF


Fori,

{hall fe bym. Lo Jhåuttoldépoi. R |

ax And they departedgupekly frot the fe. War.tort
pulchze wyth feare great iope áno dpd runner, 2°
tobzpnge bps dyfcpples wode. And as thep
wente to tell bps bdpicpples: bebolde, Fetus met
them, fapeng: All baple. Ind thep came æ helde
bpm tbe A eand Wo2thipped hint. ThE fap
Jefus vntothë:benot afrapde.Go tell mp bee-
tizen tbat thepqointo Galple and therefball -
thep fe me.iben they were gone, bebolve fome É
of the kepers caine into thecptie, and the wed vn
tothe pe preattes,al the thynges that bad bap-
pened. And they gathered them together wth
the elders and toke counfel,and gaue large mo-
nep onto the foudpers,fapenge : Sape pe, that
bps dplcpples came by npght and tole bpm az
wape whple pe lepte. and yf this come to p ru-
lerg careg, we topll perfuade bpm, and faune pou
Harmeles. So thep toke the monep, and dpdas
thep were taught. And thps fapenge tsnopled
dee k the Fclves bntorbis dape. Fa
_ > Chen the.ri.dplepples wenteawape into D
Galple intoa mountapne, whereas Felushad
appopnted them. ð nòd wbëtbep lawe pim, thep
wo2tbppped bpm Wut fomedoubted. And Fe-
fus came and fpake puto tbem, fapenge:* Jil Ayath.ri. b
power is geuen onto mein beané,and inearth. Iob.rbina
*Gope therfore,andteache all nacpons,bapti- Par. rbi,e
fynge themintbename oftbefather,andof the =
fonne,and of the bolp goot: Ceachpng them to
pest 4 thpnges, CAR DAD 3 baue com-
maunoded pou. Aid lo, x3 am With pou altwape wor es;
cuen Dittpll the ende of the tozlde, te HE gost


C Here endeth the Galpell of
S. Matthee. .


The Golpell of


S.Qarke.
C Theft Chapter, E


@ The okkpce oF Hhon the waptpte. rhe bapepmeo

Lozie bis Fallpnge, bps picacbpn eink ree rpi

Bi np iv red le Sabie end FIhon. chat heaterhp
an tor e Olicleane (pcre, heipeth i et ‘Oo

in late, and clenteth befall Heth #9 steve tnatoee


gav.rb.a. A WA WDpcbe Dawneth the fpr dapeofthe jis sa OF Felu Cihzpte the Conne of
3 Tunica AVZ perapi Aei shir n APY ARA lee God, agit is piten in p20
mopar a Ede and the other Warp to fep tepulchee. pbetes: x Gebolde Ficndemp ayara.tit.a


np and preached, fapenge:*ie thatis troncer iube..


Bp


Sete


OFS Matthew,


fe whether Helpas topil come and selpuer pim:
Zelus, ban he had crped aqapne wpth a louve
popece pelded bp the goofle.
_ Andbebolde,the*vapleof the tepledpd rent
into tivo partes from the toppe tothe bottome
andthe carth opd quake and the fones rent, «
., Gtaucs Dpd open:and many bodpes of fapnetes
"wbich lepte.arofe,and went ont of the graues,
after bps relurveccyon, and came into the bolpe
cptie and appeared bato manp.* benp Cen
turyonandthep that were ith bim watchpug
Jefus latwe the earthquake, and thofetbpnges
whpchhappened;thep feared Se i i da
Crulpe,thps was the fonne of God.
sMarerb.d. LAND Many wemen werethere ( beboldpnge
JOM FHUS Hom afarce of) Dobpch folotocd Jelus from Ga-
lple,mpnptepnge bnto bpm. A monge whpebe
was “arp Magdalene and Harp the mother
© of samesand Zoles,and the motherofsebedes
eaar.rb.d chplozen. Mien the cuen has comextherecam
Sobre & rpeje mă of Arimathia named Jofeph, which
alfo as Jefus dpicpple. He went wnto Pplate
and beggedthebodp of Feius: Then Pilate c-
maunded the bodpeto be delpucred. And tohan
Jofeph had taken the bodpe, be wrapped it ina
cleanelpnnen cloth,¢ lay cd it in bisnew tombe,
twhpch be bad bewen oute cuen in therocke,and
rolled a greate fone to the doze of thefepulchre
anddeparted. And there was xarp aqda-
lene and p other Harp, fpttpng oucragapntt p
fepulchae. Che next dap of ë folotwed f dap peee
rpna,p bpe peettes €Pbarifes came together
nto Bplate lapenge: Sp? beremëbze pthps
saat. roic Deceauct fapde tobple be thas pet alpuc.* After
and.rbit->- thze dapes 3 wpll arple agapne. Commaunde
Hot,poitte therfoze that the fepulchze be made fure vntpll
the thpzde dape,let bys dpfciples come, ¢ fteale
ppm away andfape vnto the people:he igrpien
from the dead and thelat erroure thalbe wozie
then the fp2tt. plate layde dnto them: Ye bane
the teatche, go pour wape make tt as (ureas pe
cant. 0 thep went and made the fepulchze Cure
topth watchmen,andfealed the tone. H
CTbe-crviti.Chaptec.
CMherelucrecepon of Chzik.phebpepzeattes geur the
foubpers monep to fap that Chr was tollen out of his
gratie.Chzife appeareth to bps tpicppies , and fendeth
them Coth to peache and Co baptpfe.


g@qyar.Fo.b
LUE reste


@yar.cb.b°
Lub. Foie


fj ar.Fb.D,


— = = i


r
n-


And beholde.ther was a greate carthquake
fo2 the ancrell tthe Lorde detcended from bea-
uen, and came androulied backe the tone from
the doze, and fat Ypon tt. His countenatice thas
Ipke lypabtenpnge,and bys rapmente wbpte as
how ¢. Afo: feare of bpm the kepers were a=
fonnped.and became ag decad men.


ejarcvi.b  * Theangell anfioeredD , and fapde bnto the


Aurriiit.a Wemen,tearc penot.jtor Fkuolwe.thatpefeke F


eis whpche was crucptped: be is not bere: be
etn ashefapd. Comele p place toberethat
25 the Lozde was lapde:and go qupckiy, etel bps
difciples.p be iseplenagapne from p dead. And
bebold, be qocth before pouinto Galple,there pe


Ponatteuenprgeotthe «Sabbothes PF


Fori,

{hall fe bym. Lo Jhåuttoldépoi. R |

ax And they departedgupekly frot the fe. War.tort
pulchze wyth feare great iope áno dpd runner, 2°
tobzpnge bps dyfcpples wode. And as thep
wente to tell bps bdpicpples: bebolde, Fetus met
them, fapeng: All baple. Ind thep came æ helde
bpm tbe A eand Wo2thipped hint. ThE fap
Jefus vntothë:benot afrapde.Go tell mp bee-
tizen tbat thepqointo Galple and therefball -
thep fe me.iben they were gone, bebolve fome É
of the kepers caine into thecptie, and the wed vn
tothe pe preattes,al the thynges that bad bap-
pened. And they gathered them together wth
the elders and toke counfel,and gaue large mo-
nep onto the foudpers,fapenge : Sape pe, that
bps dplcpples came by npght and tole bpm az
wape whple pe lepte. and yf this come to p ru-
lerg careg, we topll perfuade bpm, and faune pou
Harmeles. So thep toke the monep, and dpdas
thep were taught. And thps fapenge tsnopled
dee k the Fclves bntorbis dape. Fa
_ > Chen the.ri.dplepples wenteawape into D
Galple intoa mountapne, whereas Felushad
appopnted them. ð nòd wbëtbep lawe pim, thep
wo2tbppped bpm Wut fomedoubted. And Fe-
fus came and fpake puto tbem, fapenge:* Jil Ayath.ri. b
power is geuen onto mein beané,and inearth. Iob.rbina
*Gope therfore,andteache all nacpons,bapti- Par. rbi,e
fynge themintbename oftbefather,andof the =
fonne,and of the bolp goot: Ceachpng them to
pest 4 thpnges, CAR DAD 3 baue com-
maunoded pou. Aid lo, x3 am With pou altwape wor es;
cuen Dittpll the ende of the tozlde, te HE gost


C Here endeth the Galpell of
S. Matthee. .


The Golpell of


S.Qarke.
C Theft Chapter, E


@ The okkpce oF Hhon the waptpte. rhe bapepmeo

Lozie bis Fallpnge, bps picacbpn eink ree rpi

Bi np iv red le Sabie end FIhon. chat heaterhp
an tor e Olicleane (pcre, heipeth i et ‘Oo

in late, and clenteth befall Heth #9 steve tnatoee


gav.rb.a. A WA WDpcbe Dawneth the fpr dapeofthe jis sa OF Felu Cihzpte the Conne of
3 Tunica AVZ perapi Aei shir n APY ARA lee God, agit is piten in p20
mopar a Ede and the other Warp to fep tepulchee. pbetes: x Gebolde Ficndemp ayara.tit.a


np and preached, fapenge:*ie thatis troncer iube..


Bp


P ommeth ater me, whotetpoclatchet'A weve fpcke ofopuerfe dpleates,and * caffe oute Lube! 9.
ple ortbP - ffoupe oe and wrilofe. 3 pact Aon ore ie aeuelstotpeate, P
OE E: tbe polp goo T nitin ond carbemomnpnge DEEP earlp, géfus when
tplepouwrpthtiepolpgoou. S at pee aul ppl ert ist
P noit cane to paffeinthofe dapes that Je- be tasty e AO
egetiii ce fug camefrom Razareth, of Galile, xand has Te cher that Were W DD m “folow after 4
paptpied of abonin Jovane. And alfoneas pe ana Cr e tep bad foundebim, tiep {apd
paati.» Wacome bp out of fhe waterxbe fatoebranen HEM aL amen tebe op the. And belap vn-
| pen,setbe tprete detcendpnge wpon bpm lphe a Pno bet ig go into tbenerretownes that
ejat.iti.d. Doue: and ther cam a wopee fro Heauen. hou tofhem:let vs go fo:to chert in caine
Fibroid seemp dearefonneinsobom J delpte. mapep ead nyren the FA aorta in all
esatia ~—Andtmmediatlp-xthetpeete dzouchyminto And pe Sd iati nt fe KOT
AET yoploernefie:and be was therein the wplderncs Galile,and ca ethe me g y E
bars Tapes, and wag tempted of Sathan e wag _ *Andtherecamea leper toby DEDENEE aat wit
egat. tiib wopey woploe beateg. * And the angels MPP ben ep | Pate: a it Aili i LURE, D, C,
teeb onto bem, After that Jhon was (SS Pe Yefusbavcompafion onbpmeput foztb
pgatiiti.c. x Jefus came into Galiletpzeachpngethe Gol- And Jefus ba bed p nof. p dee, ODL
TLub.tiiid pell ofthe byngbome of God, and fapenge:the bps bande tour 3 igo oe ot el
tpine txcome, and the kpngdome of God ts ae J topl, be Mette ie a pte be vas po
gH at. iiii,b pandextepent,andbeleue the Golpell. : Ben,unine Lore abi bog agi i
maria *Agve walked bp thelee of Galile, hefawe Lash be ten we de apia diy
satie opmonand AndzeWwe is beother,cattpngnet- faperhvnto bpm : x aeryon ld toe addaa
tes intothe tcc,foz thep were Fpityers. And Fe- mass he el a jå ee r etop
fug fapde puto the:folowe me,and J tpl make 7zealte,an rim bade enfpnge tho des
zere.rbi.c pon to become fplthers of men. And trapat ah Ae m eg coramaunded,toz a Wwptneue
wapethep Fozfoke thepz nettes folotwed bpm. wuto ther. pia aigein rii hiin steed
And when be badgonealytelfurthertbence,be beganneto te lmanp thpnges,¢topublptp the
tawe James the Conte of sebede, and Jhon bps fapeng:info much ý Jefus could nomoze ol
bother which allo were in the pppe, médpng entretitetbe cptic,but was rid in deterte
thepznettes. And anone de called rhe. And thep pince aaepe pene euerp quarter.


left thep2 fatbersebede inthe pppe wpth the OC The.it. ter. }
eaferuauntes,and folowed bpm. CHedealety the manofthepaltpe,calleth Henithe
Vee ino thep cam into Capernaum: œ frrapabt ii Pamir ea SET fenners, ano ercuteth


egat tit. wane onthe Sabboth Dapes,hecntred into the
fpnagoge,andtaught.andtbep wereaffonnicd asi tas
Puke dike that bad auctogpte,and not as the Scrpbes. CAS? lhe
marbi * And there was inthep? Spnagogeu man 12) | Mowe cher
“uke aie DCred with an Dneleane (pzete,and Decrpedf{ap: no roume to receaue them, no,not fo muche ag
| enge: Alas, what haue we todo wptbthethou aboute thedoze, and be preached the worde Wr- l
elung of Nazareth: Arte thou come to detrope tothem.*Andtbhep came wnto bpm apna tg eath. ir.a
ps Fknowe ewbatthouart,euencbathelp one {pcke ofthe pallp,tobich was bozneof foure Luke.v.»
one ofod. And FelusrebukedD bpm, fapenge: men. And when thep coulde notcome ie
polde thy peace, and come oute of the man. And Dpin,foz peeate,thep Mucoucred theroote of the
whan the vucleanefpzete bad tone bpm, and poulethat be was in.And when thep bad broke
cepet toptha loude vopee, pecameouteofbpm. bp tbherofe,thepdpd( with cozdes )let downethe
Sno they wereallamated, mn fomuch that thep, bed wbertn the + pina palfp lape.<aipe Je-
demaunved one ofanother amonge themfelues” fug fae they2 fayth.belapd onto the fpeke of
fapenge:(ci bat thpnge 1s thissWR bat newe do- thepalfpe:*fonne,thp fpnnes beforgenenthe. orate.
ctrpne isthps: Eo? with auctozite commanded Wut there Werecertayne of the Spcrpbesipt= a.r. -
he te fouletpgetes,andthep obeped bpm, And tpnge there,and thypnbyng in thep2 bartes: toby 520%
immediatly bis Famelpeedabzodethzougbout Doth be fpeake thele blafphempeswobo can foz- 5
all theregpon, bozderpnge on Galple. gece lpnnes, but God onelyr And iinmedtatlpe
HAndforthwped whanthep were come out of when Jelug perceauedin bis (prete that thep fo
caat.vitin fbe opnagoge, * thep entered nto the boute of thought wpthin themfelues,belapth vntothë:
Eurei € gpmon and Ande Wwe, with James and Jhon, Wip tbpnke petuche thpnges in poure bertes?
aut gpmong mother in lawe lape fpcke ofa Wibetber ts tt cafper tofapeto the <peke of the
feuer. Aio anonetbep tell bom of ber. Andde palipe:thp Cpnnes be fozgeuen the,o2 to lape:a-
camie,and coke ber by the band: andlpft ber vp: rpfe,tate vp thy bed, and walke? Wut that pe
anudimimedpatipe the feuer fozloke Her, and the mape knowe, that thefonne of ma bath power
mypnptred butotbem. Andat euen Mbhanthe inearthtofozgcuc finnes, befpake vnto pfpcke
éunne was dotone,thep brought puto bpmall ofthe pallpe: {fape vntothe-xarpce, and take
pat were Dpreated, andthemthat there vered pth beddandget tde bente vntotbpne owne Fareoe”
m wpthdeucls.Andail the cptie wag gatberedto- boule. And unmedtatlpe bearole, toke o
geatier at thedooze, and be healed manp that bed, and Went Forth before them all-in fo "O .


=a ic afewebapes alfo, be entredit ag


%
(i


è


P ommeth ater me, whotetpoclatchet'A weve fpcke ofopuerfe dpleates,and * caffe oute Lube! 9.
ple ortbP - ffoupe oe and wrilofe. 3 pact Aon ore ie aeuelstotpeate, P
OE E: tbe polp goo T nitin ond carbemomnpnge DEEP earlp, géfus when
tplepouwrpthtiepolpgoou. S at pee aul ppl ert ist
P noit cane to paffeinthofe dapes that Je- be tasty e AO
egetiii ce fug camefrom Razareth, of Galile, xand has Te cher that Were W DD m “folow after 4
paptpied of abonin Jovane. And alfoneas pe ana Cr e tep bad foundebim, tiep {apd
paati.» Wacome bp out of fhe waterxbe fatoebranen HEM aL amen tebe op the. And belap vn-
| pen,setbe tprete detcendpnge wpon bpm lphe a Pno bet ig go into tbenerretownes that
ejat.iti.d. Doue: and ther cam a wopee fro Heauen. hou tofhem:let vs go fo:to chert in caine
Fibroid seemp dearefonneinsobom J delpte. mapep ead nyren the FA aorta in all
esatia ~—Andtmmediatlp-xthetpeete dzouchyminto And pe Sd iati nt fe KOT
AET yoploernefie:and be was therein the wplderncs Galile,and ca ethe me g y E
bars Tapes, and wag tempted of Sathan e wag _ *Andtherecamea leper toby DEDENEE aat wit
egat. tiib wopey woploe beateg. * And the angels MPP ben ep | Pate: a it Aili i LURE, D, C,
teeb onto bem, After that Jhon was (SS Pe Yefusbavcompafion onbpmeput foztb
pgatiiti.c. x Jefus came into Galiletpzeachpngethe Gol- And Jefus ba bed p nof. p dee, ODL
TLub.tiiid pell ofthe byngbome of God, and fapenge:the bps bande tour 3 igo oe ot el
tpine txcome, and the kpngdome of God ts ae J topl, be Mette ie a pte be vas po
gH at. iiii,b pandextepent,andbeleue the Golpell. : Ben,unine Lore abi bog agi i
maria *Agve walked bp thelee of Galile, hefawe Lash be ten we de apia diy
satie opmonand AndzeWwe is beother,cattpngnet- faperhvnto bpm : x aeryon ld toe addaa
tes intothe tcc,foz thep were Fpityers. And Fe- mass he el a jå ee r etop
fug fapde puto the:folowe me,and J tpl make 7zealte,an rim bade enfpnge tho des
zere.rbi.c pon to become fplthers of men. And trapat ah Ae m eg coramaunded,toz a Wwptneue
wapethep Fozfoke thepz nettes folotwed bpm. wuto ther. pia aigein rii hiin steed
And when be badgonealytelfurthertbence,be beganneto te lmanp thpnges,¢topublptp the
tawe James the Conte of sebede, and Jhon bps fapeng:info much ý Jefus could nomoze ol
bother which allo were in the pppe, médpng entretitetbe cptic,but was rid in deterte
thepznettes. And anone de called rhe. And thep pince aaepe pene euerp quarter.


left thep2 fatbersebede inthe pppe wpth the OC The.it. ter. }
eaferuauntes,and folowed bpm. CHedealety the manofthepaltpe,calleth Henithe
Vee ino thep cam into Capernaum: œ frrapabt ii Pamir ea SET fenners, ano ercuteth


egat tit. wane onthe Sabboth Dapes,hecntred into the
fpnagoge,andtaught.andtbep wereaffonnicd asi tas
Puke dike that bad auctogpte,and not as the Scrpbes. CAS? lhe
marbi * And there was inthep? Spnagogeu man 12) | Mowe cher
“uke aie DCred with an Dneleane (pzete,and Decrpedf{ap: no roume to receaue them, no,not fo muche ag
| enge: Alas, what haue we todo wptbthethou aboute thedoze, and be preached the worde Wr- l
elung of Nazareth: Arte thou come to detrope tothem.*Andtbhep came wnto bpm apna tg eath. ir.a
ps Fknowe ewbatthouart,euencbathelp one {pcke ofthe pallp,tobich was bozneof foure Luke.v.»
one ofod. And FelusrebukedD bpm, fapenge: men. And when thep coulde notcome ie
polde thy peace, and come oute of the man. And Dpin,foz peeate,thep Mucoucred theroote of the
whan the vucleanefpzete bad tone bpm, and poulethat be was in.And when thep bad broke
cepet toptha loude vopee, pecameouteofbpm. bp tbherofe,thepdpd( with cozdes )let downethe
Sno they wereallamated, mn fomuch that thep, bed wbertn the + pina palfp lape.<aipe Je-
demaunved one ofanother amonge themfelues” fug fae they2 fayth.belapd onto the fpeke of
fapenge:(ci bat thpnge 1s thissWR bat newe do- thepalfpe:*fonne,thp fpnnes beforgenenthe. orate.
ctrpne isthps: Eo? with auctozite commanded Wut there Werecertayne of the Spcrpbesipt= a.r. -
he te fouletpgetes,andthep obeped bpm, And tpnge there,and thypnbyng in thep2 bartes: toby 520%
immediatly bis Famelpeedabzodethzougbout Doth be fpeake thele blafphempeswobo can foz- 5
all theregpon, bozderpnge on Galple. gece lpnnes, but God onelyr And iinmedtatlpe
HAndforthwped whanthep were come out of when Jelug perceauedin bis (prete that thep fo
caat.vitin fbe opnagoge, * thep entered nto the boute of thought wpthin themfelues,belapth vntothë:
Eurei € gpmon and Ande Wwe, with James and Jhon, Wip tbpnke petuche thpnges in poure bertes?
aut gpmong mother in lawe lape fpcke ofa Wibetber ts tt cafper tofapeto the <peke of the
feuer. Aio anonetbep tell bom of ber. Andde palipe:thp Cpnnes be fozgeuen the,o2 to lape:a-
camie,and coke ber by the band: andlpft ber vp: rpfe,tate vp thy bed, and walke? Wut that pe
anudimimedpatipe the feuer fozloke Her, and the mape knowe, that thefonne of ma bath power
mypnptred butotbem. Andat euen Mbhanthe inearthtofozgcuc finnes, befpake vnto pfpcke
éunne was dotone,thep brought puto bpmall ofthe pallpe: {fape vntothe-xarpce, and take
pat were Dpreated, andthemthat there vered pth beddandget tde bente vntotbpne owne Fareoe”
m wpthdeucls.Andail the cptie wag gatberedto- boule. And unmedtatlpe bearole, toke o
geatier at thedooze, and be healed manp that bed, and Went Forth before them all-in fo "O .


=a ic afewebapes alfo, be entredit ag


%
(i


è


lapenge:we neuer fawe tt on this fatbpon.
C *Andbe went agayn vnto the fee,and all the
Serta people reforted punto bpm,and beta ught them.
| ndas Jefus paled bp, be lawe Leni the fonne
of Alphe, fpttpngattherecepte ofcuftome and
{apd unto bpm:folotoe me.And be arole and fo
Poibed bym. And it came to paffe that ban Je
(us fate at meate inbpg boule, manp publpcans
and fpnnerg fat alfo together at meate with Fe
{us and his difciples. Wo? ther were manp, that
folotecd bpm. And tobé the Srcrpbes and Pha-
rplesfatoe bpm cate pth publpcans andfpn-
ners,thep fapd wnto bps dpfepples: hotwe pap-
penetbit,thathe eatcth,edzpnketh wpth pub-
Lycans andf{pnners: When Jefus beavdechat,
_ belapde onto them: Thep that be whole, baue
no nede of the Pbylpcpon , but thep that are


Pearl fpche. + Jcame not tocall the typgbfrous, but .


——s Huke,b.e " Cpnners tovepentaunce. |
Le And the bpicpples of Jhon and the Dharples
dpd fat and thep comeefape nto bpm: wer
do the dpicyples of Jhon andthe Pharplesfa
- but tbp oplcpples fatt not:And Fetus fapd Yn-
tothem:can thecbplozen of the weddpnae fatte
whple the bepdeqrome ió wpth them:Aslonge
as thep baue the beydeqrome wpth them, thep
cannot fat. ut the dapes pl come, when the
bepdgrome Halbe taken awap from them, and
then thall tbep falt tn thofe dapes.
D Nomanallolotwetha pece of netve cloth vn
ftoan olde garment eig taketbbeatvape f netwe
ce therot from the old, fois the rent worle.
n nD no man potzethnewe wpne into olde bot
tels,els the netoe wpne doth burite the bottels
aud the wpneriineth out, the bottels are mat-
red. Butnew wpne muit be put intonewe bot-
ov telg. *«Andit chaunfledoxcagarne that he wente
Strika thozotwe the coznefeldes onthe Sabbothdapes
LukeoLe sna bpsaplciples beganbp the wape to plucke
theeares of cozne. And the Pbarpleslapd ynto
bym:bebolde, why do they on the Sabboth da-
pes, that tobpch ig not lawiulls Andhe fayd on
to them:Daue peneuer reade hat Dauid dpd,
a . woban be badnede, ¢ has anbungred, both pe, €
ixerrib thepcthat were topth bpm: * Howe he wente in-


totbe boufe of God,in the dapes of Abiathar p

` ppe preaft,and dpdeate the hewbeead( tobhpche

a. is not lawful to cate, but foz the pzeaftes only)

i and gauc alfo to them Mobpche tere ropth ppm!

And he fapd nto me : the Sabboth was made

foz man, not manto? the Sabboth. Cherfore

is the fonne of man. 102d alfo of the Sabbuth.
=- Chet. Chapter.


E
——
9 A | AN we

ie z a L
H: a mi
| Br tas f

; (Atcha Wea

F.


tajat tii a F ea
z Luke.bia


A Waline wolde beale bpm onthe Sab-
jee DOCH Daye, that they mpabte ac-
bpm. And be fapde nto the man whyche


Pia. F


that thep there all ainafed; andgloz fpi Gon,


hadthe Mpthered hande:arple,and Fande inthe


jarke, Foriti,
mpddeés. Andhe fapth bits thein: whether itis
lawful to do good on the Sabboth dayes,o2 ta
Bocuell’to tauelpfe.oz to bpll/ Wut thep belde
thep2 peace.And Dobe be had loked roñde about
onthem, wpthanger mournpuge on theblpnds |
nes of thep hertes,be fapth to the man: *firetch Eas
fo2th thpne hand. And he Eretched itout. t And Til. itegits
bps bande was reftozed, eucnaswholeag the tt.0,
otber. Je * And the Pharples departed, and saat. rii ù
ftrepgbt have gathered a counfell (wopeh them
that belonged to erode Jagapnte bpm, that
tiep mpgbt delrope dym. Wut Jefus auopded
inyth bps dpiepplesg tothe fee. x Anda greate tiii d
multptudefolowed hypm from Galile:and from
Jewepe,andfrom Jerufalem and fro Joumea,
and trom beponde Jordane, x Andthep pd wel= wiat. ri
lcdDaboute Cpe and Spdon, agreate multp- a Apacs
tude of men: htche( when thep had berde what eo!
thynges be dpd came vnto bpm.

And Felus commanded bps dplepples, that
a pp fulde wapte onbpm,becaule of the peo-
ple:lett they thuld thzonge bpm.4€o2 be bad bea:
led inanp,in fo much that thep peeficd bpo bini
foz totouche bym.asmanp as had plages. And
when tbe wneleane fpzetes fawe bpm, thep fell
done before hpm,andcrped fapenge: thouact
thelonne of God. {nd be Eraptly charged their
that thep thulde not make Dpm inewne.

And be went vp inte a moñtapne and called
bntobpm whom he wolde, and thep came Ynto
bym. +And be ozdepned the ttwelue, that thep math. 1.4:
{poulde be wptbhbpm , and that be mpahtfende €
the fozth to preache-and that thep mpght baue

ower to beale fpknefles,andtocaft out deuels
Andbegaue pnto Spmothe name Peter. And
be called James theionne of sebede and Jhon
James brother, and qaue them tonames Bos
narges, whpche is tolape:the fonnes of thonder
And And2reoc,and Pbhplpppe, and Wartpola-
mewe and PHatthewe,and Thomas, and Ja-
meg the fonne of Alphe, and Thaddeus, and
pineon of Canaan, and Judas Fearioth:
wWwhpchallobetrapedhypm. |

And thep came into the boule andthe people
affembled together againe,{o that thep bad not
lepfer fo muche as to cate becade. And when
thep that belonged pntobpm, bearde of tt, thep
toenfe onte tolape bandes bpon bpm. Wo: tep
fapde:þe is madde. And the HScrpbes wbpehe
camedotone from Jerufalem , fapde: He bathe
Welsebub, and * by “he chefe deuell, cafketh he coat. tt.
oute euels. And he called them wntohpm,and suber
fapd wuto them inparables.

Dowe can Sathandgpuc out Hathan/ And ip
pfarcalme be deupdedagaint i¢felft,p realme
can not endure: And pfa boule be deupved aga-
pit itfelfe that boule cannot continve.And pf
Sathan make tnfurrection agapné hpm felfe,
and bedDeupded,be ca not contpnue,but bath an


- ende. Roman can entreintoa ronge mannes


poule, takeawape his qoodes.ercepte he Fprtk
bpnde the frongeman,and the fpople bis boule
Uerelp J fape vnto pou_al fpniesival be forge:
nen Dnto mens chplozé.and blafpbhempes wher ERRET
Wpthloeuerthep baue blatphenied, x aat Luke. pit


p
jj


The Golpell | Si


that Cocaketh blatphéempe agapnite the bolpe
goot bath neuct orgenenes, butis in Daunger
: ofeternall pamnation.féoz thep fapde-He bathe
cee tries anvucleane (pete. * Chere came alfobps mo-
Lubi shor and his beetbeen,and Rode wythoute, and
fent vntobpmtocallbpm oute. and the people
fat aboute bpm,andfapde vnto bym: beboloe,
thp mother and thp beethzen {elke foz the topth-
oute. Bnd be anfwercd them, lapenge: (bot
mp mother and mp brethren? And whan be bad
lokedrounde aboute on bps dpiepples, why che
fat in compalic aboute bym, be fa de: Webolde,
mpmother and mp brethren. 02 whotocuce
doth the topl of God, the fame isp bz other and
mp fp Eer and mother,
CTbe.iiti.Chapter. —
Zhe parable ofthe rower. Chit tpileth che Ceumpette
ofthe fee.wbpch obepet hrm.


—_—__


e N people, fo greatlpe , that be en-


noma Fi d ys omepenot thps parable? and hote the tpl
peknotweall other parables.

eqat.ritc  * Tbe foter fotoeth the foo2de. And thep

Zuk,bin.b (Pobherot fome berchearled to be bp p wap fpde)
are thole, where the wode is lowen: And when
thep beare, Satha cometh tminediatlp,and ta-
eth awape the wo2de,that was lowen in their
portes. Andlyketople f otber thatreceaue fede
into the onpe qreunde,arc thep: whpehe when
thep beare the worde, at once reccaue if wpth
glances, pet baue norote tn them felucs and fo
endure butatpme:and atone when trouble and
perlecucponarpleth foz the mozdes fake, thep


fallimmrcdiatlpe. Chere be othee allo p receaue Re
fede into thoznes,and thofe are fuche as beare p =
frozde,andthe cares of this foozld, andthe dpl-
feptfulnes of vyches,¢ the luftes of other thpn= - -
ges,enterin g choke the wode and it ta made /
pnfruteful:and otber therebe, $ hane reccaned /
fede intoa qood groñde:thep are fuch p beare p
w02zde €receauctt,{othat one cozne Doth bring


3 forth thpztp.fomefprtyfomeanbundged.


And helapde vuco then: *is the candel Ipah: saath.b.v.
ted, tobe put ynder a buelo? nder the table! tose
Ysttnotipghtedtobe putonacandeftpche! C
kffo2 there ig nothpnge fo prety, that thal not ssath.r.e
be opened:netBer hath it vene fo fecret, but that toes
it hallcome abzode. PEany manhaucearesto `
beare, let him heare.Andhefapd ontotpe:take
pede hat peheare: * Wyth what mealure pe py ae
meate, wpth the fame thall other men meature ~~
Dntopounqaine. And ynto pou that baue Mal
moze be geuen. Eor * Dnto bpm that bath, pall eaat.riti.b
ít be qeuen,¢ From Dim JA bath not, halbe ta: Fux vitic
kenatvape, cuenthat wbpeh be Dath. and.fir.o

And he fapd:fo is the Rpugdome of God, eué


ý askpfamanthuldefowe fede inthe qrounde,€ atrii


niqhfand dape:and the
fede houldelp2ptige dhd qeotwe bp,whple peis
tlotaibare. JtEorthe earth bzpnaeth forth trute
of ber felfe:fpette the blade, then thecare, after
that the full cone inp eare. ut when the frute


fbulde flepe,and rpfe


- ig brought forthe, anon be thautketh in the {pkel


becaufe the berueft is come.

And belapde : where onto Mall the lpken the
kpngdome of Gods oz wpth what comparplor
alwe compare it Zt ts lpbe a grapne omu- egat.rétta
ftarde fede: tobpr itis lowen in the earth TIE FHD,
ig leie then all feedeg,that be in the earth: when
it ig fomen, it qrotweth bp, and is greater then
ah "oad pelda great ee a wa

efowles ofthe apze mape make t nete
pnider the adote of tt. i j '

xAm with manp fuch parables fpake he the 4t.Fitt.e
worde nto themt,afterags thepmpgbt beareit.
wut wpthout parable [pake be nothynge wnto
spear toben thep were alone, *beerpounsed I4.riike
allthpnges tobisdifepples. And the lame dape
when cuen was come, de lapde Dnto the :let vs
pafe oner bnto the other fpde. And thep lefte p
cee toke bpm, euen ashe wasin the Mpp. -

nd there tere alfo pth bym other Hhpppes. :

xAnd there arofeagreate ome of wpro, g D -`
the toanes dathedinto the hippe,fo that it hag mt. dit. e
nowefull. Andhe twas in the ferne a flepeona es
pelowe. And they awaked bpm and fapde vuto
bpm: Mater caret thounot ,that we perpihes

ndberofe bppe,and rebuked the wpndr, and
fapd butotbelee: Ea | tial aa
ceaffed,and there folotweda greatecaline. And
eens vito them: Wbp are pe fo fearefull:

ote happeneth it that pebaue nofapth: And
they feared exceadpnglpe, and fapde one to an=
ce Ain is thps ¢ fEo2bothe wpnde and fee

CThe.rv.Chapter. >
C Chritt delpuercth the poleen from $ pncleane
Cprete:thbe woma From che bioudpe plug, aud rap:
feth Che caplepues beugbter, And
vn


a


DES. Marke, SFOtV. a
Sal (2d thep caie*ouce tothe other KAnD there has a certapne Woman, whyche Satd-trc
SA. es ofthefec,intothecountreof Dad bene dpfealedofan piine of blonde, reine apse
SNithe Gaderenptes. And when he peares,andhadluffeed many thynges of maup
d y) wascome onte of thebpppe im- pbhpipcpons,and bad{penteal that webad,and
Besra Vai mediatlp there met bpm oute of feltenone amendemente at all, butrather was
Cine Hegrancs,amanpoflelled ofan wozle,andivozle. When the had herd of Jefus
pnicleanefpzete, wbychebad bys abyopngea- hecamcin the preatlebebpnd bim, and touched
mongethegraues.Andnomacouldebpnd him dis garment. Moz the fap: pf 4 map but couche
nonotwpthchepnes, becautethatwhebewas dps clothes, J malbe whole. And firepaht wap
often boude tytbhfettersandchepnes,bepluc- thefountapne of ber bloude wag dzped wp, the
ked the chepnes alunder, andbrake thefetters felt inher bodpe,p he was healed ot that plage.
in peces.Mether couldanp man tame bpm. And And Jelug tmmedtatlp felpngein bpm felfe
alivapes,npgbtanddape betas in themouns that Vertue pzoceadcd from ppm, tourned bpm
fapnes and inthe graues, crpengeandbeatpng aboutinthe pzeafle and fard: who touchedmp
ppm felfe wpth tones. Wut whenbhe badlpped clothes And bps dplcpplesfapd wnto bim:thou
Jelug afarre of,beranncandworhppped bpm feetthe people thzut the, andalfket thou who
sjat.bitid andcrped Wwpth aloude vopce,andlapde:*iwhat dpd touche mer And he loked roundeaboute foz 4
Acteerdit paue Ytodowpedthe ¢ Felusthoutonncoktie toicherthathad done thys thyna. ut the wo- |
moofte bpeft Gods Frequyzethe ntbename of imanfearpng and tremblpnge(knowpng what |
God,thatthoutozmente menat. Hozbefapde eas done wptbin her)came, and fell dowone be-
piutobpm:come out ofthe ma thoufoulefpzete: forehym,etoldebim allehetruth. And be Tapi |
Andbealkedhym, whatisebynenamesandhe Dntoher: Doughter * thp faptb bath faued the: TIAN
anftoeredand lapde Dutobpm:mpnameisie: goin peace,and be whole of thp plage. | |
| on,fo2 tee ate many. And be praped bpm in- *UWbple be pet lpake.therecamefrétheru: D
ee! , that be wolde not fende themawape ler ofthe fpnagoges voucher sy as agat. i.t
ma
|
|
|


ee s, <.
P


oute o the countre. ; thy dou bter 13 Dead: wip dpfea ch thou = Lub. bui.g
% w¢*Wutrherwastbherenye vutothe mountap- fteranpfurthers Alone as Fetus berd the wozd
manis nega great beara of fwmpnefenpnge,andall that was poken be faybe onto the vuler of the
ra ” neuelsbefoughthpmfapenge-fende vsinto the fpnagoge:benotafraped, onelp beleuc. Andhe
eerdDoffwpne, that we mapeenterintothem. fuffred noman tofolowe bpm,faue Peter, and
: Andanone Jelug caucthemleauc.Andthe vn» YJames,and Jhon the bzotber of James. * And Met-tt-c
cleane fetes wente oute and entered into the hecame vntotheboule of theruler of the Spna: "S |
fropne. Andthe heerd was catpedhcadlonge tn: goge,andlawe the toondzpnge, and them that |
totbelee.Chep werealmottwo. W. and were wepteand Wwapledgreatlp andwent in, lapa |
Drowned in the fee. And the fwpnebeerdcg fled, wntothem:Dbp make pe thys ado, and wepe: |
and tolde itinthecptic,andintbe feloes. And Che pam(cll isnot Dead, but flepeth. Andthep |
chep went out foz tole what had bappened:and laughebpm tofcozne. Wut de put themall out, |
=. came to Jelug, and fatoe bpm that was bered andtaketh the father and the mother of f dam- )
topth the fende andbhadtbhelegion,(prboth clo- fell,and themtbat were wpth bpmr.and cntreth :
thedandinpbpsrpabt mpnde, andtbep werea- intobere thedamfelllape,and taketh the dam- |
fraped.Andthep thatfaweitcoldetbem,howe fellbp the hande,andfapeth onto ber: Tabita,
it bad happened to bpm that wag pollefied with cumi:wbpch is(pe one Do tnterpeete tt )Damfell,
thedeucll:andalfooftbelwpne. —— — Blaye vnto the:arple. And trapabt wape the |
xurevtite xandthepbegantopzape mfhathewold damfellarofe,andwalked. ffo: the twas of the, |
twat bid Departe out ofthepscoatt. K*Andwhehewas age of tivelucpeares. And thep were aftonpen
-*  ggmeintotbe pppe, be pibad the dDeucll prayed out of mealure.Andbe charged them fraptelp,
m. tbat bempabt be topth bpm. Hotwbeit, Fe thatno man hulde knowe of it,and commauns
Fis wolde nottudrebpm,but fapde vntobpm: ded,foqeue her meate. |


| ; Hes And ofthe walkpage outhe fee,
the. And be departed, andbeqanto publpibe in aes

A see cptieg, howe greate thpnges Jeius had eK ModhexDeparted thence, and came A |
Doneto2 hpin,andall men dpdmaruaple, pan CA infobps ownecountreandypgdp= rtig

. € Andwhen Jefuswascome ouer agapne bp SE a cag Cr plesfolotoed bpm. And whet ae
| fhyppe pntothe otherfpde,muchpeoplegathe: iy JVA Sabboth dapewas come, he bega |
red bnto bym, and be wasnpe wnto the free. eeoa toteacheinthe Spaoge. And ma- |

|


gotothpne owne boule and to thp frendes, and Che. ti. Chanter
bewe thé bowe greate thyngeg the Lorde hath Cope be aay Chapter. TAERE
done fo? the. ¢ howe bebath bad compattyon on ppfeafed. DE Fbon e Herode. Df ehe.v.loucs gii. fpi


| D ggath.te.e ~=*Mndbeholde,tbere came one of the rulersof np that beard bpm were aftonnped, andfapde:
LUBDULE the Sypnacroge, whole name was Jairug:and from whence hath hetbele thynges’ And what
r when he fawe bom, befeldowneatbisfete and Wwpledome ig thpstbatts qeucn unto bpm: and
Defoughthpm greatlpe,fayenge: mpdoughtcr fuche vertues that arc wrought bp bps bandeg |
ipeth at popnte of death , 4 prape thecome and *¥3snotthysthecarpenter Harpes onne, the gratis |
| lapethp bande on ber that the mape be fafeand bzotber of James and Foles and of Juda and
K: Ipuc. Andbe went wpthbpm,and much people Spmon/andarenotbps {pfters bere topth vs: |
folowed bpm, and theonged ppm. Andthep Mere offended at bpm. Jefus faya yn |
. to
i


a H


Tye Gope — D


mar tits. to them:* a prophet (snot defppled,but in bis
Job.d.€ One countre,andamadgebis owne kpnne, and
inbps owne houtbolde. And he coulde there
fhetoe no mpzacle,butlapde bis bandes bpon a
fewe fpeketolke and bealedthem,andmarue-

led becaule of thep2 vnbelenc. T
205 *Andbewentaboutbp thetownesthatlape
ERED oneuecrp fpde teachpnae. * And be called the
SWEN emelueand begannetofende them forth two g
tivo,and gaue them power agapnite wnecleane
fpectes. Andcommaundedehe, that thep thulde
take notbpnge in thepetoznep laue a rodde on-
lpe:noferpp.no bread, no monep intbhep2 purie,
but thoulde be (hood pth fandals. And p thep
fhulde not put on tivo cootes. And belapde Vn-


to them:therloencr pe entveinto an boufe, ther


oarra Mbpdetpll pe departethence. x And Wwholoener
iukeira (halnotreceaue pou 02 heare pou, when pede-
patte thencesthake otp ouff chat is pnder poure

math.ri. a Eete,foza toptnelle putothem. * berelpe J fape
cuker.a pntapou-itthalbe eafper foz sodom g Gomo:
ejath.r.a tthe dape of udgement,thenfo2 Pcptie.xAnd
they went out ¢ preached, that ime thulde repent

and thep cat out manp Deuels:¢ anopnted ma-

up that were fpcke, ith ople,and bealea them.

mat.riiia *Andkpnge erode pearde of hpnr( foz bys
AUK name twas [pred abzode and he fapd: Fon bap:
tpftisrplenagapne from the dead, and therfore

C mypzacles are wrought bp bpm. Deber fapde:it

is Helpasfomelapde-itts a prophete,as one of

the propbhetes. Sut toben Herode Derde of bpm


efapd: 4 is Jhon Mobo J beheaded, beisrpten
trom Deathagapne. > Eo? Perode bym felfe
bad fent foztbe men


E warre and ianea bandes
bpon Jbon and bounde bpm and cait bym into
p:clon, to? Herodias fake bps beother Pbplpp:
pes wopfe( becaule be bad marped ber.) Eor Bhs
xeu.rbit è LAPD Vnto Perode:* Ftis not lawfullfoz the to
andr d hanetbp bzothers wpfe.Herodtas lapde wapte
D for bpm, and wolde bane kplleabpm, but the
coulde not. Fo: HersdefearedD Fhon,knowpng
that he was atuite man andan polp : and gane
bym veuerence:and when he Heardehbpm,beopod
many thpnges,and hearde bpm gladly.

Bnd When a conuententdaye was come,that
- geme rd erode onbps * bpzthdape, mapdea Tupper to
thelozdes , Dye captapnes,and chefe efFates of
Galile:and when thedoughter of the fame ie-
rodias cam in and baunted,and plealed Herode
andthé that fat at bourde alfo:the kynge fapde
pito the damlell:alke of me what thou twplte,
mat. rit, a and J Wwypll genue tt the. xAnd helware nto ber
 gobarloener thou fhaltatke of me, J pl oencit

tbe enen Dnto the one halfe of mp kyngtome.
And the went forth,andfapd vnto her mother:
tobat thall Jalke ¢ the fapde : Jon Waptiftes
bead. And the came th Erapabt wape with batt
‘pnto the kpnge andalked,fapenge: 7 wyl, that
thou qeue me bpand oP inacharger , the peame
of Jhon Whaptypl. Andthekpnge was fozrpe:
bowbeit fozbps othes fake,and fo: thep2 fakes
tobpch fat at upper alfo,be wolde not cate ber
of.a stdaairenimats tA i fent the hangman
andcommaunbded Dps heade to be bzougite in.
E And dewlte and bepeadedhpm inp pecton,and


oy,


fozetbem,and thetivo


brought bys beadein acharger,¢ gaueitto the
Damiel,z the Damfel qauett tobermother.And
whan bys dplepples bearde ofit,thep came and
toke bp bys bodp,andlapeditinagraue. Fx -
And the Apoftles gathered them {elues toge:
ther onto Jelus,and told we altbyngeg, both |
What they bad done and tobat they had taught.“ |
And he lapde punto thent:xcome pe alone ont of mat.riiti.
the wape into the toploernefie,and reta whple ZRD
Jor there were manp commers and goers, and |
thep bad nolealure fo much ag tocate. x And be matriie
went bp fhpppe oute of the twapeintoa delerte |
place. And the people fpped tbem, when thep de -
parted:and manp knewe bim,andrannea foote i
thpther oute of all cpties, and came thpther be- |
fozethé,and came together vntobpm. And Je-
fus went outand fate muchepeople,xand bad fst p
compafipon on them ,becaufe*thep were Ipke + esechier,
hepe,nor baupng a thepberde. And pe beqanne Frriiiia
foteachetbemmanptipnges. — |
_ And wbhentde dape was note farre (pent, F itib
bysdpicyyles came vntobpm,fapenge:thpsis rar Tii
adefert place,and now the tpme is farre pafled xobu.bi.a
lettþem departe that they mapero into pcoun
tre rounde aboute, andinto the townes,and bye |
them beead:fos thep Saue nothpnge toeate. He
anfwered and {apd Ynto them, gqeue pe them to
eate. And thep lapde onto bpm:thall we go and
pe two hundscd penpioagth of bead, and reune i
them to cates De lapde puto them:* Howe ma- marvitia
np loues baue pe’ Goandloke. And when thep |
ad fearchcd,thep fapde: fpue and tivo pies. “il
nd be conmaunded them, to make them all
{ptdovone bp companies vpon the grene graffe
Aud thep fatedowne, here aroweandthere a
rowr by bundzedes and bp Fpfties.And twobhé be
bad takë thefpucloues and the ttoofpihes.and
lobed Dp tobeauets, be bleed and brake the lo-
tes and gaur them to bps dplcppleg, to fet be=
Ou pibes deupded beamig
themall.Andthep al dpd eate,¢ were f atifped.
And thep toke vp twelue balkettes full therof,
and of the fplibes. And thep thatdpd cate, were
about fpue thoufande men.
_xAndftrepahtwapebecauledbys opleppies ©
to gointo the hyppe,and to qo ouer the fee be- 94 Fiii
fore Dnto Wrth oe Wbplebelenteatape the
eee And aflone as be bad fente the AWAPE opat.ritit e
ebeparted intoa mountapne to prape, Job, bI.b
He Andwwben enen wag come,tbe bpp wasin
the mpddes of thelee,and be alone onthe lande,
and befatoc them troubled inrotpnge, for the
toy ude Has cOtratp Dnto them. Andaboute the
fourth watche of thenpabt became ynto them
foalkpnge vpon the fee and wolde bane paed
bp them. Wut when they fawe bpm qe g!
bpon thelee,thep Up BORD Eps bene aitete g t
crped out:foz thep al fawe bim, g there atraped. i
And atone he talked topth them, efapoe vnto De
them:be of goodcheare, itis J, benotafraped.
* And he went op vntotheminto the thyppe,e aeris
the wpnde ceatled, and thep were foreamaten in ia i
tbem telues bepondemealure,and maruapled.
Fo? m tememb2cd not of theloues, becaute
thep berte was blpnded,
r And


m n
B
Fy


. *
D


And when thep twere ouerthe toater, thep
tame into the lande of Genesareth anddzue vp
into the bauen. And affone as thep were come
oute of the fhyppe, frapaht wape thep knee
bpm andranne forth thzough oute al the region
counde aboute , andDbeganne tocarpcaboutein
beddes thofe that were [pcke, ben thep pearde
thathe ad there. AnDwhptbher foeuer been-
teed into tovones,cptics,o2 wpllages,thep lapd
the {pcke fol&es inthe ftreates,andprapedbpm
that they mpgbte touche, and it were but the
bemme of bis vefture. and as manp as touched
bpin,werefafe. F |

The. vit. Chapter. is
Che vifepples cate wpth bnwafhen hanier,
The: ommaundement of Govistrantgrelfea bp —
mennes trabpeions. D> fthe woman of Spropbhe-z
| niffa.ofrhbe Sabboth.
A Ee e Athe Bharifescame together


A ESA onto ppm,anddpuerg ot p Scri-


G BA Şi | bes wbich came from Jerufalem
(el ea Ya And when thep lawe certapne of
LS VA vps dplcpples cate becade,topth
mii ees) COMME (thatistofape, wih bu
talihen hades, thep complaned. wo? the ha-
rplesandal the Jewes,ereeptrhep wame thep2
bandes ofte eate not, obferupnacthe trabtcpos
of the clders. And whe thep come from the mar-
Ket.crcepte thep watbe.thep cate not. Andma-
ny other thpnges there be, wbich thep haue takë
pon thé to obferuc,as the Wathpnge of cuppes

andcrufes,and baien deffels,and of tables.
Then albed bpm the Pharples and Scribes
why walke not thp dpfeiples accozdpnae tothe
cuffome,ozdepned bp the elders,but cate breade
wopth puwafiben bandes- ie anfwercd g fapoe
puto then: Wjellpzopbecped Efape of pou,p-
eta.rrir.b pocrptes.as itis weptten: * Chps people bo-
eatp nonreth mewpthtpep2 lpppes, but thep2 pare
is farre fró me: Howdeit,in vapne do thep ferue
me,teacbpnge the doctrpnes and commaunde-
mentes of men. JFoz pelape the commaundemet
of God apart,and obferue the confEptucions of
men asthe talthpnge of crufcs , and of cuppes

and manp other fuchipke thpnges pe do.

And be lapo vnto them: wel, pe caltafpde the
comimaundement of Gob, to mapntapne poure
emyro ovone coftitucions, xoz Boles fapd:honoure


Deut b-> thp fatberand thy motber: and + yhefocurteth


- ferorr.b father oz mother, lethpm dpe the Death. wut pe
- Meidb fape:a man Hall fape to father o} morber, Coz-


EAA i - z ie ae i
ban:whpcb ig, what gpftefoeuce commethfre
me, albe fo: thy poeu And fo pe lufre bym
nomoze todo ought fo: bis Father oz his mother
and make p w020 of God of nonc efect through
pour owne conftitucton, whpche pe paue ogdep=
ned. And manp fuchethpnges do pe.

C And when be badcalledall the people nto
ppmbe fapd onto them : perken pntome,cuerp

#gat.F0.b] one of pou, vnderftande.* There ts nothpnge

topthout aiman,that can defple bpm, whet en-

trethintobym:but the thpnges wobpch procede


outofaman,tbole ave thep that defplethe man. -


PFanp man baue carcs to beare , let ppm beare.
_ Bnd wben be cameinto the boule,awap from p
e people, bpgdpicppleg afkcd bpm of the fpmplp-


orui.
tude. nd be fáapd Dito thë: are pe alfo fo great-
lp topthout onderfFandpnges Dåpenot pet per
ceauc, that whatloeuer thpngefrom wptbout,
entretbinto a man, it ca notdefple bim, becaule
itentreth not into bps bert, butinto the belpe: €
goeth out into the daught,pourgpuge outeall
meates/ And helapd: that whpcb commeth out
of man deFplech the man. Fo: from wptbhin euë
out of the berte of men proceade eucll chougbtes
abuoutrpe, foznpcacion, murther, theft coucte-
oulneg fraude, decepte, Duclennes,a wpekedepe
blafpbempes ,.pzpde, Folpipnes: all thefe cuclt
thpnges come from wpthin,and defple a man.

*xAnd from thence he rofe, and went into the athro s
boders of Tp:e and Sidon, and entered mtoan
houle,and wolde that no man Mulde bane kuo=
wen. Wut becouldenot behpd. Foza certapne
woman (whole Doughter bada fouletpzete) as
foonr as tpe berde of ppm ,came,andfell at pps
fete. The woman waga Greke out of the naci
of Spzropbenicia, andthe befougbte bpm, that
bewolde ca out the deuell from ber Doughter.

Hut Jefus lapde onto her:let the chplozen fpr
befed. Sforttis not mete, to take the chpldzens
bread andto calte it unto the tohelpes. be an- gp
fwered andfapde puto bym:euen fo Lorde, *ne: sgacp.rd.c
urrthcles the whelpesaifocate vnderthe table
of the chpldzens cromes. And be lapde wnto ber:
for this lapenge qothp wape, the deuell ts gone
oute of hp Dougbter. And when the was come
bome to ber boule, pe found tpat the deuell bas
Departed, and Der Doughter lpenge onthe bedde.
p< x And he DepartedDagapnetrom the cofkes 94‘d.F0.¢

of Cp2e and Spdon, came wnto the lee of Ga-
lile thozotbe the mpddeg of the coa Eeg of the ten
cptieg.x And thep bzougbt onto bpn one p wag Aath.. d
deaffe and bad an impediment in bis (peche, and
they pzaped bpm , to put bys bande vpon bpm.
Andwhen be bad taken bpm alpde From p peo-
ihn put bys fpngers into bps eares, and dpd

pyt and touched bps tonge,and loked bp to
heauen,and(pgbhed,and fapde vnto him: pha-
ta, tbat is to fape:be opencd. And frrapgbt wap
bps eares Were opened, and the firpnge of bys
tonge was lowled, and be fpake plapne. * And egar.t.o
hecommaunbded them, that thep thulde tellno
man. But the moze befozbadthem,fo much the
moc a great Dealethep publpihed,fapenge: He
bath done all fhpuges well,be bath made borpe
thedeaffetobeare,andtpcdometofpeake. J

The. vitt.Chapter.
@ She mpracle ofthe feucntoucs, She Hbharpfes

afkea (pane. Tbe leué ofthe Phacifes. he bipnd

recesueth bre (rghe.
ey J) thole pra when pei al
mf) Gi verp greatecompanp,andpadno-: +
Aac eNi thpnge to eate. Jelus called hps op: 7.
èa Pa (cpples tobpm.and lapde vnto the: |


Rian G pane compafipon onthe people,be
caule thep bane nowe bene topth me thee dapes
and baue nothpnae to eate: and pt3 fend them
awapefaftpng to thepz otone boules, thep Hall
fapnfe bp the wape.*ffoz dpuerle of them came cpap fr.¢
fromfatre. And bps odpicpplesanf{wered ppm: ob piii’


p voberethulde aman baue decade irre in the vopl


dernes,tolatilfpe theler And he alked the-howe
manp


CyHeooipeu


many loneshate pe: hep fapde:feucn. And be

commaundedthe peopleto {ptte Downe on the

qrounde. And de toke thefeuen loues, and whe

Had geuen thankes, be brake, andgaue it tobis

dyicpples,tofet before them. AndEhep dpd lee

thé before the people. And thep bad a fetoc {mal

fpibes. And when he badblefled, be commaun-

dcd them allo to be fet befosetbem. And they

dpd eate and Where fuftiled.Andetbey toke op of

the bzoken meate, that was lefte,feuen balket:

tes ful. Andthep that dpd eat: were about foure
thoufande. Aud be fent themawape. T

25 Andanoneheentredintoa hyp pth hisdp-

- feppleg, and came into the partpes of Dalma-

poet rola nutha.* andthe pbarpics came fozth, and be-

Fob.btd ga nne todplpute wprh bpm’, fekpnye of Hpnra

pane from beauen,temptynge dpm. And when

pe padlpghredtn bye Sparten faptb:wbp doth

thps generacpå fehea fpane: Cerelp 3 fape Yn-

topou tbere fall no (pane De geuen vnto thps

cheracion. And helefe them, and went into the

pppeagapne and Departed ouer the water.

nd tiep bad forgotten to take bzcade with

them nether bad thep in the Mpppe wpih them

moze then oneloofe.andbe charged them, lap-

sHat.rbt.b enge: Take bede, betware of the leuen of tie

aube.ci.s pbarriea.and the leut of Herode. And thep rea

onedamonge them felues.fapeng:Webaueno

Deade. And Felus knetoe it, and fapeth puto

them: tobp take pe thought becaule pe baue no

b2cad:perceaue pe not,pet nether vuderitandes

paue pe pour pertes pet blpndeds Haue pecpes

andie not/and paue peeares,andbheare not: Do


rat. Fit? pe notalforemiembeesxtaiben Bbeakefpuclo- É


ueg amonne fpuc thoufande men, bote many
balkettes tull of bzoké meate toke pe bp: Thep
athro d fape Dntobpm:tiveluc. * When J brake feucn
amongefoure thoufand, hole manp balkettes


of the leaupnaes of p bzoken meate toke ye vps


Thep Capd:feuen. And he fapd wnto them howe
bappencthit that pedo not ynderitandes
€ And be cam to rethlapda, g tbep brought


toucbebym. Andpe caughte theblpnde bp the
Hande and led bpm out of the totone: and when
p bad a indis epes andput bis bandes tp
bpin be alket bpm pibe faivwe ought. And belo-
Bed vp.and faphe : Blethe men: foz F perceaue
then walke as thep were trees. After that be
put bps pabesagapne bpon bps epes and made
bhymie. And be Mas retord, and fate cucrve
manclearlp. And be fent hp home to his poule
fapence:nepther qe into the rowne, no: felit to
anpinibetotone. Js
* And Jefus tent oute,and bps dplepplesin
tothe townes that longe tothecptte called Ces-
farca PDylyppl. And bp the wape he afkedhps
dpicpples,tapenge nto tiem: Wibome da men
fape that J ams And they anlwered:fome fape.
that tho ve pesca tan oy fome lape, He-
las. Jas ome fay:that thou art ont of the
~ nombze of fe prophetes. And be apd wnto the:
| but whom iape pe that Jams Peter anfwereth
Spares anbfapeth bute bpm: xtbouart werpe Chrifte.
Sohn vi. g aero be charged them, that thep thouldetelina


Ghat.rbl, ¢
Fuke ipe


ablpnde man nto bpm, and defpzed bpm to fi


man of byin. Andhe began to teache thé, *have D
thatthe fonneofman mut {uifer manp t
geg and be reproucdof the elders, and of phype
Prates and Socribes and bekplled, andatter
thre dapes arple againe. And be {yake that fay:
engeopenlp, And Peter tokebpmalpde,andbe /
ganne tochpde bpm. But he turned about, and~
loked on bpsbifcpples,andrebuked Beter fap-
enge:Oo after me Sathan. Foz thou fauerette
not the tbpnges that be of God, but the thpn-
ges that be of men.

KAD Dobe he Had called the people yuto hint saat.roto
meters dylcpples allo, be fapde onto them: Aue tte

Abotocucr Dopll folowe me, let bpm forfake ~ *
bym felfe,and take bp bis croffc,andfolote me.
fo: toholoeucr wpll fauebpslpfe, thalllofeit.
Wu wholoerer tall loleppslpfetoz mp fake |
and the Golpels ,the fame all faue it. Foz
what hdllit profptea man, pf be wynneall the
Wozlde,andloole bps otone foule‘o2 What Hall
ama geue toredeme bps foule pth al agapne?
xUAbdoloener therfore thalbe athbamed of me g mat.r.c
of mp Yoozde8,in thys aduoutcous and fpnfull 288*F D
generacion:of bpm alfo Hall the Conne of man
be ahamed, when be commeth in the qlozpe of
pps father, fopeb the golp angels.
E Che.ir.Chapter.

@ The trantiiguraciou.Tbe lunatpke is heelen,


Bhe ditputacton who Multe be areatek, Oenz
Ces are forbpoeen.


rang (20 he fapde Ynto them: Uerelpe, J A


i
anuDd..r.¢
Lube F.C


> gp


fo thze tabernacles, one fo? $, and one fo2 Sho-

feg and one fog Helias. Foz pe wy lke not what

befapde:fo2 thep were afraped. And there wag

acloude that Hadowed them. Anda vopcecam

out of the clonde,fapeng: *Chists mp beloued aset.tii.o

fonte:heate bom. Andlodenlpe when thephad

lokcd tounde aboute,thep fawe no man:moze

togn ath cule weeh pn. i
and wen thep came Downe frå the bil, De tmaccou

charged them, that ther maare n a ae marie

thpnges thatthep badfene, tpll the fonne of ma

toererpfen from deathagapne. And, thep kepte

that fapenge with them, anddenrauhded one of

another, what therplprge frombdeathagapne

fhulde meane? And thep afked bpn, fa penge: 6

r pelpas muite


Lube, iiia
AnD iE
gar ib


ar.
Erap. Hig


r


come? de anftocred andlapde vnto them:

*pelpas verelp when becommeth fpatte, treto- mata.

ret) all thpnges. And the fonne of manag ittig teratitia

wzptten of hpm)ihall fure many thpngesand

be {et at naugbt.25ut J fave wnto sas He-
pag


Pi= Aatron


N
1s


and.rbii,b ©


DES, Markt


liag ig come,¢ thep baue done bnto bpm what-
foeucr thep wolde,as it has weptten of bpm.
And when be came to bps dplepples, defawe
p* much people about them,and thefcrpbes difpu
©-  tpngetoptbtbem. And ftrapgbt wape all t
people( then thep bebelde bpm) were amaled,¢
q rantobpm,.andfaluted bpm. And be albed the
‘wat.rvii.c, {erpbes:twbhat dplpute pe amonge thé:> et And
Lubete.€ one ofthe companpe anfioered,andlapde.@)a=
iter, J bauc brought ynto the mp pany wbpcbe
hatha ddmefpzete. And whenloener he taket
bym, be teareth bpm, and befometh, and gnal-
betb wrth bys teth,and ppnethatwape. And J
{pake to thp dpiciples that thep Hulde cat bim
out, and tbep coulde not.

He anfiwereth bpm, and fapeth:D fapthleg
nacion, bote longe thall J betwpth pour Howe
longe Mall J fuer pour Dzpngehin yntome.
And thep bzougbt bym nto bpm. Andas fone
as the fyrete laine bem, be tare bpm. And be fell

dDowne on the qrounde, walowpnge g fompnge

Andhe alketh bps father: powe ongen itago

fens thps bappened ppm? And be lapde:ofa

chplde: and ofte tpmestt bath cate bpmin the

te andinto the aterLo deltropebim. Wut pE

thou cant doanp thpng, haue metcp on vs,and

i : ws. aprilie peas pereon caul

| elt belcuc*al thpnaes are poflpble to bim tba

matroid veleucth. And trapabe wave the father of the

chplde crped wopth teares,fapenge:Lozde, ¥ be-
leue,belpe thou mpne vnbelefe. 4

Wiben Jefus fawe f the people cameriinpne

together nto bpm, be rebuked thefoule (pete,

fapeng vntobpm: Chou dome and deate tprete

Fcharge the come out of him, entre nomoze in

cobpm.Andthe prete he be badcrped,¢€ rent

bpm foze came out of bim,¢ be wasas one that

had bene Deade,in fo muche that onelapde:beis

dead. Wut Felus caught his bande, andlptt him

Dp, and be rofe. And whenbe was come into the


vag


goat.rotn DOULe,xbis dplcpples afked bpm fecretlpe:wbp Far


couldenot we call bpm oute: And be fapde tnta
thent:thpshpnde can come fo2tbe bp nothpnge
but, bp prayer andfaftpnge. F


E rHAndebey departed thence, andtokethepz É


ioznep thoz0ibe Galile, he wolde not, thatanp

man (bulde knote it. Eo? be taught bps dplep-
ggat.roiie pleg andfapd vntothem:xthe fonne of ma thal
, LubetF «He yelpuered into the bandes of men, and thep
ill thal kpl bpm:an t tbat De ig kpiled, bepal
arple agapne the tide dape. Wut thep wpe
not what he fapde,¢ were afraped to afke bem
And he came to Capernaum. And when be was
come into the boule, pe alkedthem: what wasit
that pe dp[puted amonge poure felues bp the


toape: AnD they belde thep? peace: fo: bp ivap m


ep haddercalonedamongethem felues, who

fouibe be the chefeft. And he be was fet dowone
hecalled thettoelue tobpm and fapde unto thé:

: pfanp mandefpre tobe fprie, the fame thalbe
latte of all, andferuaunteto all. x And betoke

mat.rbfita 4 chplde, and fet bpm in the mpddes of them,
FubetFf ony oben be bad taken bpmin bps atmes, be
fapde dnto them: whbofoeuerreceauetbanp fuch
chpldetnmp name, receaucth me. And wholo=


cuer receaueth me, teceaneth not ne, but bom
sag da | b ‘i, P

onantiberedbypin,tapenae: after we
fate one caft out denelsin tbe ste Sr be fo» z
loweth not Ys: and we forbad bpm , becaufe pe
foloiveth vs not. ut Jelug lapde: fozbpd bpn
not. Foz*tberisno man whpcb (pf be do amp- iLorrii a
racle nmp name ) canlpgbtelpe fpeake enell of
me. for be pis not agapnit ugis on oure parte.
* UW boloeuer thal in mp name gene pou a cuppe ath. r.d.
of water to Dayne, becaule pe velige to Chak
verelp J fape wnto pou:be Hal not loofe pig re=
warde.x And Mhofoeuer Hal offend one of thele mat.rviti a
Iptleones, that beleue inme, it Were better foz
bpm, pf a mplitene were banged aboute PES
necke,and be were calte into the feec.xUlhberfore matroiiro
pithy band bpnder the,cutit of. Jt is better for
tbe toenter intolpfe mapmed,then ( baupnge
tivo bandeg )fogotnto bell,into fpzethat neuer
{balbe quenched, wbher*thep2 worme dpeth not Error g
and the fp2e qoeth not oute. Andpf thp fotebea `
hpnderaunce nto the,cut it of. Jtig better Foz
the to go balt intolpfe,then(baupnae two fete)
to be caffe into Dell, into fpze that neuer Halbe,

uenched:wber thep2 worme dpeth not, and thë à
fpzegocthnot out. x And pe thpne epebpnder p Oe
plucke it out. Ft is betterfoz the toqointo the
&pngdom of God w one epe,then(paupnge tio
epes to be cat into bell fpze: tober thep2 worme
dpeth not,and the fp2e goeth not out.

Cucrp ma thalbe falted wWfpre.xAndeuerpfa Leut.
crifpce Halbe feafoned with falt.+ Salt is qood tat. v.b
wut pf thefalt be ynfauerp , what Chall pe leas HOF s
fon therwopth: Haue fale in pourefelues: baue
peace amonge pour felues: one topth another.


CThe.x.Chapter. Ii
Tito CHADE che tonnes o€ sebrae Barioa
Spebipnibe man,
Teena s20 when be rofe from thence, be %
Pi yA * went intothecoaftes of “Jeto2pe, asat.rir.e.
rA ta tbough the regyon that is beyond


wonte,betauchttbemagapne. And the Pha-


rpetbanother,becaket) toedlocke tober warde. and.rir.a
And pfa woma fozlake ber bulbad,¢ ben marien EF.
¢ to


TheGolpell -


to another, Hecommptteth aduoutrye. K
— *And thep brought chplozento bpm, that be
fpulde touche oem. no bps opeiles rebuked
thole that bzougbt them. Gut whe Jefus late
it, be wag dpiplealed and fapde wuto them:
Spulfce the chplozen to come Dnto me, forbpd
them not. Eo? of luche ts the vs of God
— Gerelpe FJ fape vnto pou, wholocuer doeth not
mat.rofiia receaue the kbpngvome of God, #48 a chplde, pe
"n pallnotentretherein. And then be hadtaken
them bpinbps armeg, be put Dyg handes Wpon
tbem, and biefled tbem.
>i And then be was gone forth into the wap
tbercame onc runnpnge and&neledtobpm,and
get a atked bpm: * good after, what thal Fbo,tbat
WK FDULD | nape enberct eternalllpfer Jelug lapde ynto
bpm: wbp callelt thou me good: Chere ts noma
good butone, whichis Gop. Chou knowett the
commaundementes: breake not matrpmonp-
Gpli not:ffeale not : beare no falle woptnelte : de-
fraude noman:bonoure chp father and mother.
He'anlweredand fapde onto bpm: Watter, all
thefe 3 baue obferued from mp pouth. Jefus be-
belde brm, and fauoured bpm, and tapde nto
ggat. rir.b hpm:one thpuge thoulackelt. x Gotbhp wape:
Lub.roittd Sell that thou bafe, and qeue to the pooze,and
thou (halt haue treafure in Peauen,and come,fo-
lowe ine, Hand take bp mp crofle Dpon thp
fhoulders. Sut be was dplconfozted becaule of
that lapenge,and entawape moznpng, Fo be
badgreatepofleffpons.
And when Fetus bad lokedDrounde aboute,
Po aie Delapde vnto bys dpfepples. # Howe vnealpe
i ADACDrP DAPHNE REY Ene into the bpng:-
Dome of God. And the dpicpples were afton-
- MpeDat bys wozdes. Wut Jefus anfweret)a-
gapne,tfapeth onto them :chuldzen, howe hard
ig it Foz them that trulinmonep, to cntreinto
<p the bpngadome of God. Ft iscalper for acamell
toxo thozote the epe of an needle, then foz the
tpche toentre into the kyngdome of God. And
they were affonnped out of meafure,fapenge be
twene them felues:wobe thé can be faueds Fetus
loked bponthé ,andfapde : wyth menit ts wn-
, F48ch.dfib poffpble,but notwpth God:foz *wpth Godal
thpngesare pofipble. 1 PER
< And Peter beqanne tolape dnto him:Lo we
Boat. rire haug fozfaké all and baue folotwed the. Jefus
ER an a nto pon ther


ggat.rip. b
zuk, poitid


ig noman tba tbfofakenboufe, 0? bzethzen

Dip kers, o: father, 02 mother, oz: wpte,o2 chpl-

dzen, o? landes fo: mp fake andthe Gofpels but

be fhallreceaue an bundzed folde note inthps

Ipfe, bonfes and bzethzen, and fp Eers and mo-

thers,andcbpldzen,and landes pth periecuct=

sjeth.rr.b ong: inthe hozldeto come,eternall lpfe.*25ut

duke-rt.F many that are fpatt, Malbelatt:and p laft firt.

And thep were inthe wape Hel Dp to Jeru-

falé.And Jefus wente before them, g thep tere
amafed,andfolowed,and wereafrapde. —

And Felus toke the tioclue agapne , and be-

- fanneto tell them what thpnges huld happen

AMat.rbi.c puto bpm.* Webolde, wego ypto Jerulal€,and

rocan the fonne of mantpalve delpuered vnto the bye

cere preattes and into the Scrpbes: andthep Mall


conbdempne bpm fo death, and Hall delpuer Dim
torpe denpa aipe maran pin,and
fcourge bpm, {ppt vpon bpm ant &pl bpm. And
the thpade dape be Wall rpleagapne.

XAnd James and Jhon the fonnes of sebede 9: Fret
came Duto bim, lfapeng: Water, toe wolde that
thou thouldeff dofo? vs tohatlocuer toe defpee.
pe fapd into them: what wolde pe that Jmuld
dofo: pour Thep fapde dntobpm:graunt vnto
tsthat we mape fptte one ontbp tpabt bande
and the otber on tby lefte bande, intbp qlozpe.
wut Jefus fapde Dnto them:Pe ote not what
pealke:Can pedepnke of the cup, that 3 dinke
of‘andbebaptpted pth the baptpme, that 3J
am baptpfed wptb: andtbep fapde Dntobpm:
that we cat Jefus fapte vnto then, pe hall in E
Dede Dzpnke of the cup that F dzpuke of: wpth
thebaprpme that Jam baptpfed wpthal, Hall
pe be baptpfed in:but to fpt onmp rpgbt bande, |
andon mp left bande isnot mpneto geue, butte Ww
{pall happen vnto thë fo: whom itis prepared.

xAnd wbhenthetenbeard tt,thep beganne to ayath.rr.d
difoapne at James and Fbon. Wut Felus when
bebadcalled tbë to bim, fapd unto thë: peknot
thatatbey wbich are fene to beare rule amonge Eron 3 ae
the people, rapane as lozdes ouerthem. And “7 eF
they that beqreat amonge thet, erercpfe auctha:
rpte bpon them. Neuertheletic, fo thalltt not be
amonge pou:but whofoenuer of pou wplbe great
amouge pou thalbe pourempnpitecr. And who
focuer of pou wplbe chefe Halbe feruaunt of al.
ffozxthe fonneof ma alfocame not tobe miny= poacy.ry.p
{tredonto:but to so lag togeuebpsipfe —
foz the redempcpon of manp.

And thep came to Piertco: * And ashe went G :
out of the cptieot Hietico wrth bysdplepples, eaathrro
andagreate nombze of people: blpnde Wartps Fos
mens the fonne of Cimeus,latebp p bye apes '

{pde beagpnge. And when He beard that it was
Jelug of Maszareth,be beqanne to crpe,and fap:
efus,thou fonne of Dautd,baue mercpe on me
nd manp rebuked bpm, that he houlde bolde
bys peace.25ut becrped the mozea great deale:
thou fonne of Dauid Dave mercpe onme. And
Fetus ode pll, and commaunded bym to be
called: And thep called the blpnde, fapenge tne
tobpm:25e of good comfozte:rpfe,be calleth the
And he thzewe atwape byg clobe, and rofe, and
came to Jeius. And Felus anfwered, andlapde
puto bpm: what wplt thou that Jodo wnto the?
@heblpnde fapde tnta bom : Water, that J
mpabt fe. Jelustapde nto pym: gothp wape,
thp raptbe bath fauedthe. And immediatlpebe j
receaucd bps fpabte, andfolotved Jefug in the
wape. ri} i
CThe.ri. Chapter.
Cchritrpacth to Jerufalem. Tbe gge ireedipeth
bp. Dhe bpers and iellers are cat oute ofthe temple,
Tbe Pharpies quetion pth chzitt.
c 2D Wen thep camenpe to Jernia-
TAG lem Dnto Wetbphage and Wethas mat. rria
y À K e\ainp,belpdes mount Dlpuete be fen- Lube pip.e


Big Kajoeth foztbe two of bps dpicpples,
wapeintothbetowne that is oueragapntt pon.
n


+


W204 and fapeth vnto them: Goo poure


i S Parke,


Aud alloite as pe be enitred into oa 4 thal fpnde
a colte bounde, oberon neuce man fate: Lofe bin
and bepnge bem bether. And pf anp man Cape
~~ Wntopou:tobp do pelos Hapepe,that the Low
a  Dathnede of bpm:¢ frapaht wape pe wpl fende
' bpmbetber. And thep wente thep2 wape, and
founde the coitetped bp the doze toprboute ina
place where too wapes mette, andthep loofed
dym. And dpuers of them that ode there, fapd
Foh.rii.b Dutothem:* Clibat do pe loofpnge the colte?
Andthepfapde wntothem, ceuen as Jelug had
commaundcd. And thepletthemago. Andthep
brought the colteto $clus andcaite thep2 gar-
25 mentes on bpm:and pelate vpon bpm. and ma-
np {pede thep2 qarmentesin tie wape. Other
cut Downe bzaunches of the trees, and frrawed
>. . them inthe wape. Andetyep that wente before €
parbi ehep that rolowed ci ped, fapeg: ofanna,* biel:
Menr fedishe that commet) inthe name of the Lozde
Fop.rid lefed be tbe kpngdome.that commeth tn the
name of bpm that 19 Lo2be of oure father Da-

utd: ofanna inthe ppr. .

And the Lozdeentred into Jerufalem andin-
to the temple. And when be bad loked rounde az
bout vponall thynges, andnotve the cnentyde
Wwascome, be Went out vito Wethanp with the

what. Fri.b telur. + And on the mozowe when they were
come out from Wetbany, de hongred. And whe
de padlppedatpgae tree afarre of baupnge lea:
ues, became tole,pibe mpaht fpnde anp thinge
thercon. Ind than de came to it, he founde no-
thpngebutleaues : foz thetpme of fpages was
not pet. And Jelusanlwercd,andfapoe ynto
the fpage tree : neuer man eate frute of the bere
after Wwbple the wozlbde fandeth. And bys dp-
{cpples bearde tf. |

Andthep came to Ferulalé.And Jelug went


fast. Lb into thetemple,and beganne toxcafte out then


, Sabu that folde and boughtinthe temple, and ouct


thacihe the tables of the monep chaungers, and

the ffoles of them that folde Doncs: andwolde

not fuffer, tbat any man thoulde carpe a vefiell

i thozowe the temple. And be taught fapenge vn

ffalt-c to thë: ig it not Wzptten: mp boule thalve cal-

zere.biic led the boule of praper vntoalnactons: But pe
baue made it a Denne of theues.

Andthe Scrpbes and bpe prealkes bearde it,
mat. rria AND ought howe to deltrope ppm. * Eo: thep
: feared bpm , becaufeall the people marueled at

bps doctrpne. And when euen was come, Jefus


kS rrid. tent out of the cptie. * Ind inthe moznpngasg


Zuke.cri.g ‘ a Che ed
igre tbeppatled by.thep latoethe fpqgetre d:ped vp
vo = tbe rotes. Dud Peter rememb2cd, andlapoe
pnto bpm: Walker, beboldthe fyqae tre whpch
thou curledffe,is pdded awape. And Jefus
-anfweredand fapde vnto them:baue confitence
in God.rhCerelp 3fape yntoypou,that whofo-
euer (pall fape yuto thys mountapne : remoure,
and caftthpfelfc into the fee and (hal not doubt


è tn bps berte, but pall beleue that tpofetbpnacs


hpch be fapetb Malcome to palle whatfocuer

D belapeth hethallpaue. Cherfore J faye vuto

mnt rs pou: *wpat thpnges focucr pe Defpee, when pe
< THEE Sp ape, beleuc that pereceaue them, and pe Wall
daue them. Mud wen pe Lande and prape,


Fol riii,
*forgeue,pEpe bane ótybt agapne anp mart, watt-vi.t
tbat poure fatheralfo whbpchig inbeauen, map F9
sorgen ponyo teefpa eS. :

nd thep came agapne to Jerulalemt.* And Late. rr.a
as be walkedin the temple, therecaimetohpm Ss
the bpe Pzeattes,and the Scrpbes, and the el
ders, and lape vnto bpm: bp what auctbozpte
doet thou thele thpngesrand whogaue the this
aucthozpte,to do thetethpnacss Jefus anfiwes
red,andfapd wnto them:% wpll alfoalie of pou
acectapne thpnge and aniwere peme, g ¥wpll
tel pou bp What aucthozpte J do thele chynages,
Che baptpme of Jhon, whether was it frö jea-
uen o? of mens Anfwere me. And thep thought
in them {elues,fapenqe: pf we lape frombeanert
He wyll faye: whp thendpd pe not beleuc bpm?
but pf thep bad fapde:of men,thep feared p peo-
ple. ffoz all men counted Jhon, that be wasa
verp Prophet. And thep anfwered and fapd vn
to Jelu:wecan not tell. And Jcfus anlwered,t
fapde vntothem:nether wpl ¥ tel you bp what
aucthozpte J do thelethpnacs. K

@ The.tit.Cpapter.
a) The bpaepate is let out. Weucto delar (hat elon:
getheo elat: Of the Saduces, ofthe dortoz of latwe:


pporrptre mute be elebewed:the offrpuge of the pooze
__—« epobotwe. s


ams (OD pe beganne tolpeake bntothé J
naarat es) Dp parables. A certapne man plane
iy AY 2 ted Xa wpneparde,and compaliedit oat. rrid
Sei aboute wprbanbedge, and ozdep- Rte rF o

omandina NCD A WPNepactle, ¢ bupite a tow2e Fob.ir.c
eC lt oute to Hpze wntobulbandmen, ang HeFt e, |
went ino a ttraunge countrepe. And when the
tyme was come,be fent to the bulbandmé a fer:
uaunt that be mpabt receaue of the bulvandes”
men of the frute of the bpneparde. And thep
caught bpn, and bet hym , and Cent bpm awape
agapheemptpe. And mozcouer be lente vnta
them another feruaunte and at bpm thep caite
tonces and bzake bys bead.andfent bpm awap
agapne,all torcupled. And agapne be fent ano:
thev,and bpm thep kplled:and manp otber, bea:
tpngelome and &plipnge fome.

And fo whe he pad pet but one beloucd fonne
belent bpmaifo atthe lat ynto them, fapenge:
tbep wpll feare mp onne. * But the pufvand- Mat.cyi.s
menfapd amongef thé felucs: thtsis the bepze:
come, “let Us Kpll dpm, the tnbecitaunce (hal: eee
be oureg. And thep tokebym and bylied bpm, € Frese
cat bym out of the bpneparde.WU bat thal thers
foze the Lozde of the bpnepard dose (bal come
and deftrope the bufbandmen, andlet oute the
Dpnhepatde neo other. Haue penot reade thps
iceppturer* The fone whpch the buplderg DPD pre.eroitte
refule, ig become the chefe toone ofthe cozuer: at.rri o
thys isthe Lozdes dopnge, and itigmerueloug Airit
in ourepes. Chep wentaboutallo totake bim,
and feared the people. Eo: thep knew, be bad
fpokenthe parable agapnit them, And thep left
Dpmand went thep2 waye,


*Andtbhep fent vutobpmeertapne of f Pha- matera.


rples and Herodcg feruauntes, to take bpm in Luke fp b
bis wors. Jndaloneas thep werecone,thep 25
fapd vntoiipm: Walter, we knoe ý thou arte
truc,¢ carell fozno man: foz thou conf{po2f not
Cc tt the


ors


The Golpell


theoutwarde appearaunce of mien, but teachefl

the wape of God truclpe : Jg it latofull to pape
trpbuteto Celar,o2 nots Ought te to gpuc, 02

ought toe not togpuer Wut he vuderflode their
fpmulacion and fayd Dnto thé: Wbp temptepe

mer Wapngentea penp.that mape feit. And

they bzougbtit:And befapth wuto thé:Wibofe

is thispmage,¢luperlerppcion’ Andthep fapd

puto bpm: Celarg. and Jelusantiwercd,¢ fapod

xomritib Dntothe:*Geueto Celar the thynges that be-
macebiic Tonge to Cefarand to God the thynges wobiche
FELE vertepneto God. And thep maruapled at bpm.
There came allo vnto bpm the Haduces,

mat.rri.a *tobpch fape that there ts no vefurveccton. and
detrei. b thep alked bp are clavate iea wote


zuene nto vs pfanp mãsbzother dpe, andleane bys


tpfe bebpnde bpm, and leaue nochplozen: that
bys bother thulde takebps wpfe,aud rapte bp
fede Duto bps brother.

There were teuen bzethzen, andthe fpf toke
a topfe,and when be dped,lefte no fede bebpude
Hym. And the feconde toke her, and dped, nether
left be anp feco. And the thpzdelpkewple. And
feuen bad ber,and left no fede bebpnde thé. Laft
ofalltbe wpfe dped alfo. Jn the refurreccpon
therfore wbëthep al rple agatne, whole wpfe
{pall the be of them: Fo fenen had ber to wpfe.
And Jefus anfwered, and fayd vnto them: Do


penot therfozcerre becaufe pe dnderftandenot —


€ thefcrppturesnepther the potwer of God! Fog
soben they thallepfe agapne from deathe , they
nether marp, nozare marped:but are as thean-
gels, wohych arein peauen. As touchpng p dead,
that they rpie agapne : bane pe not reade in the
= ©“ boke of Mofes pow inthe bue, God fpake vn
ERE OO bym, fapenge: 3 amthe God of Abzabam t
Lutenet tbe Godot Jlahac,andthe God of Jacob‘ peig
no Godot dead, but the God of lpupnge. Peare
therfore greatly deceaued. i
and wbhanthere came one of the é cepbes,
andbad berde them difputpuge togeather (and
perceaucdthathe bad anfwered them tell ) be
atkeo bpm:-wbyeb ts the fpi of all the comaun
dementes’ Jelus anfwered him, the fpzfte of all
opens the comaundementes ts: deare D Frael.x+ The
matr d g Orde oure God ts Lode onclp: And thon palt
loue the Lozbe thy God wyth all thy berte, and
wpthall thpfoule,and wpthall thy mpnde,and
Myth all thp Hrengthe. Chys ts thefpatte com-
maunvemente. And the feconde ts lpke Dnto
Heui.rir.v. Eby: * Chou thalt loue thy nepgboure as thp
ejac.rrib felfe. Where to none other commaundemente
tom.rid-€ greater then thete.
Srub And tbe Socrpbe Capd puto bpm: tell matter
wmatd.b.s thou halt apd the truth, foz therets one Sod, &
there tg none but be.Andtoloue bym wpth al p
3 pean wpthall the mprde, and wpth allthe
ule, and opth all theftrengthe, and tolouca
mas nepghbour as hun lelfets a qreaterthpng
~. thenall buentofferpnges and faccpfpces . and
when Jefus late that be anfwered opleretelp,
be fapde vntobim: Thou art not farce fromthe
Bvyngvom of God. And no man after that, durf
afachpni anp queffpon. ee ans
And Felug anfwered andlayde, teachpnacin


mag, Fri D


the temple:notve fap the Scrpbes> Chif ts p o
onne of Dauid: oz Dauid bym felfe nfppzed D Ny
toptb the bolp coolk fapd:* Che Lozdeflapbe to ek a

mp Lode, {pt on mp rpgbt bande tpll 3 make. m F
thpneenempes thy foote ftole. Dautd bym felfe ii

calleth pim Lo2de-¢ bowe ts be then bps fonnes '
And much people pearde bpm gladly:

And y fapd onto them in bys doctrpne : be- |
fare of f Scrpbes,wobpch * lone togo tn longe mierea
clothpnge : and loue falutacpong in themarket S
places, and the chefe feates inthe congregacp=
ong and the wppermoofte roumes at feattes:
wbpche deuonre wydowes poules, and Dudera
pretence, makelonge papers. Chele thall re-
ccatie greater Dampnacpon,

Fe And when Jelug fat ouer agapntl the trea
furp, be bebelde, * bowe the people put money in Lube.Frt, a
tothe treafurp.and manp that were rpche,cal 3
íin muche. And ther came a certapne pooze tp- i
dewet We thzewe in twomptes, whprhe make T
afarthpnge. And be called vonto ppm bps dpticp- 4
ples,andfapeth pntothem.erelpe J fape vr I
to pou:that thys pooze wpdolwe datb cait moze |
in, then all thep tobpcbe baue cal into the trea=
furp.f€o2 they all opisat in ofthey? fuperiinp- i.
te:but the of ber pouerte,dpdcatte in all that He i
Had,enenall beripupuge. F |
C The.rut.Chapter. +i.
C Theende ofthe woot, Whe dape and the poure
is bnknowen,
SAE Ad as esi nes ae 4 sae
Mal A Veen ple, x one of bps Dplcpplestapde mires
AO Voy Untobpm : Water, íi that ito- AUR”
MAS eee US ie s ita hrak buy pee are ' +
MU een Wal bere. And Jefus antwered g fapd |
P Sale 4 onto bin: Heel thou thefeg cat f
buplopnges: There Hall notbe lefte one tone »
pponanother,that thal not be thzotvendowne.
Andas he fate onmounte Olpucte, ouer anad-
pnt thetemple,Beter,and James and Zhon, € =
Andete alke pym fecreatelpe: tell vs, when F
bali thefetbpngesbe: And what is thefpqne ai
whenaltbhefe ehpnacs halbe fulfplled/ And Fe |
fusanlweredthem,and began to Tape: * Tale mat.rriiiia
bedele anp mandeceaue pou. Jo? manp pall Lukerri,b |
comeinmp name, fapenge: Jam Chzifte, and |
{ball deceaue manp.

Uhen pe Wall beare of oarres, andtpopn-
tres of warres, be pe not troubled. Foz fuchebin
ges mult edes be. Wut the ende isnot pet. Koz
there Hall tpfe nacpon agapnite nacpon, and
kyngdome agapnit kyngdome. And there Hal-
be carthquakestnallquacters,andfampihmee
all thee be,andtroubles. Thele are the begpn: 25
npnge offozowes. x Wut tate pe brueto poure Fob.rbi.8,
felues. * ffo2 thep Hall bopnge poy Vp to the ronat.re, `
counftels,and into the Spnagoges,and pe thal: Lehre
pebeaten,pee,andthalve bzougbt beforerulerg *
and kynges,foz mp fake, fo2 a tetimonpall vn
{ocd amonge all nacpons. 4

" <2But wbenthep leade pouandpectent pon, egatyr.c `
take penothougbt.netbet pmagin afozebande |
what pe pall fape : but tobatfocuer is gené pou
inthe fame boure, that fpeake. Foz it i8 not pe

that


T


I matrrihiie


i
D "i
tS "i


3


6 PIS Marke,


that fpeake but the bolpe gootke, She baother
thal delpucr bp the brother to death, and tie fa:
‘thee tiefonne, andthe chpldzen thallrpleaqa-
putt thep2 fathersand mothers,¢ ball put thé
to death. And petpalbe dated ofall men.fo2 mp
names fake. Sut wholo endureth vnto the cnde
the fame tpalbefafe.


matrriitib xd )ozeouer, whe pe fethe abbompnacpon of


Dani ipo, Delolacion( tbherotisfpoken bp Daniel the pza
phet and where tt ought notilet bpm that rea
deth buderfiande. Then let them p be in Jew-
tye, fpe to the mountapnes, And let him that is
on the Doule toppe not go dotone into the boule
heptier entre therin tofetche anp thpnae out of
bpsboute, And lethpmthatisinthefelde, not
turne backe agapne vnto the thpnaes tobycb be
left bebpnve bym fo? to take bps clothes wrth
bpm. uo thalbe then tothem that are w chploe
and to them tbat qeue luck in thole dapes. But
prape pethat poureflpgbt be not inthe puter.
Woz there Halbe nthofedapes (uch tribulacion
as Was not fromthe begpnnpnge of creatures,
(whpche Godcreated) pntothbps tpme,neptber
thalbe. Andercepte that the Lozde Mulde Woz-
ten thofedapes,no fepe uld be faned. Wut foz
the clectes fake, whomeyebatd cholen, be bath
fpoztened thofe dapes. :

- € _*And then, pEanp man fape to pou:lo, berets
tats pitit, Ch2ift-10 he is there, belene not, J0? falle Chai-
Luk.rog,¢ Les and falle prophetes allrple,¢ Hall ewe
|  mpzaclegg onders,todeceauc, pe it were pof-
{pble,cuenthe electe.2ut take pe hede:bebold F
baue thetoed pon all thpnges befoze.
mat CP *)ozeouer,in thole dapes,afeer that tribu-
Take pri e lacpon tbe funnethal ware darke, and pmoone

` Gall a e berlpgbt, and the Garreg of bea-

è  nenipallfall:and the powers wbpeh are in bea:
‘Dsal.bii.c nen (pall moue: And then pall thep fe pConne
ss pf mancommpnge inthecloudes, wopth greate
power and glozpe. And then thallbe fende bps

angelg and thall gather together bis elect from


thefo pndeg, from tbe ende of the earth, to
i „a DeD parte of peauen. —
mat rrii. "59 emetea (pmplitude of the fpaae tree. Ca be


ute, sre ps beaunche is pet tender, and bath beoughte
D forthleaues,ve knot $ Commer ts neare. ope

in lye maner:when pele thele thinges come to
paffe:onderttande, tat be ig npe euenat the do-

res. Gerelp Jfape vnto pou:that this generacio


£ Wall not paffe tpll thefe thypnges bedone. Pea-


uen andearth pall pafe, but mp wozdes Mall

not palle. But of that dape gtpme knowethno

man, ,nonottbeangels whpehare inbeauen:ne-

` ther the fonne bpm felfe:faue the father onlp.

egat. Friii xT ake hede,watchc and prape,fo2 pe knotoe
b. ; 3 l i aia iM ' dg

Luke, rrie NOt WIE the tpme is. As aman bhychis gone

tniat.rrbb into a fraunge contrep,and bath left bis boufe,

AUKHED ana cenenbistubitaunce to bis {eruauntes,and

to cuerp man bps wozke, and commannded the

porter to tatche. Wiatche pe therfore, foz pe

owe not when the maker of the boule wpll

come at cuen,o2 at mpoupaht, whether atthe

cockecrowpnage,ozinthe Datynpnee: leat pf be

come fodenip,ve fpnde pou fleppng.Andthat J


faye Ynto pon, FZ lape Dntoall, watche,


Glad, and pro rp
monep. And hefoughte, bowepe mpgbtconue=


Wol. cit,


CCbe.ritii.Chapter. pR ù
@ harp wagbalene anopnteth Chit. £he water labe
is eaten. Chzitis taken. eter benpeth bpm, twpth manp
Otbecchpnges that weredemgunèrd of Chrit,


iter two dapeg was after and f A
S AEA Dapes of fwete bzead.x And the bpe matrror.a
Thay AVA CA Beatesand the Drrpbesg fought, 7s
Fy 353 +4 boty thep might take bpm bp craft,
aiae € put bim to death. wut thep fapde:
notin p feait dap, letanp bulpnes arpfe amõre
tbe people.x And whan be was at Werbanta, in t.ri s
the boule of Simon the leperseuen ag be fate at 2°
meat theecama woman baupng an Alabafter
bore of opntmét,called Marde, $ twas pure and
coftlp:and the boakethe bore, potwzed it onbig
bead. nd ther were fome that were not contet
within the tclues,¢ lapd: what nede this watte
of opntmenter soz it mpgbe haue bene folde foz
moze then thee bundzed pens,¢ hane bene geuen
nto the poore. Andthep grudgedagaynttber.

And Jelug lapd:let her alone, wbp trouble pe
ber: be hath done a good thozke on me. * $02 weut.rd.«.
pe Daue p pooze wopth pou alwapes,and when
focuer pe wp, pe mape do them good, but me
baue penotaltoapes. Sbe bathe done that the
coulbde:(be caine afozehande.toanopnt mpbodp
to the burpenge.Cierelp J fap vnto pou: tober:
foeuerthps Golpel thalbe preached thozow out
the whole wozlde:thps alfo that the bathdone, 2S
thalbe rebearfed in remembeauntce of per.
o * And Judas Jicarioth, one of the twelue merrer
foentatape uta thebpe Pacaltes, to betrape seers
bpm bnto pias a? hah that,thep were

pled thattbhep wolde geue bpm


PEE E 2 sal PEDET
XAND DCTP DAP otiwete bead ( whë thep mat-rror.d
ofred Palleoucr bisdifcpples (apd dnto p) “i KEEFER
wherwplt thouthat we qo € prepare, that thou
mapelt cat the Pafleouers And be fendeth forth
tio ofbpsodplcpples,e fapth vnto thé:Go pein
tothe cptie.t ther tpall mete pou ama beatpnge
a pptcber of water,folombpm. And whpther fo
euer be goeth in, fape peto the goodmanof the
boule, tbe matter fapth: where is thegeelt cham
bze where F thall cate pafleouer with my dilep-
ples: And De topll Hewe pou a greate parloure,
aued eye pearen. there mate readp fo: be.
DDpsdilcpples went forth, andcame intop
cptic,and founde as bebadlapd butothem:and
thep made readp the Bafleouer. | m
* And when it was nowe cuentpde, became © , ois
wpththe.rii. Andas thep lateat boadeanddyd Fur wit
cate, Jelug lapde:Qlerelp J lape nto pou:tone +p rite
of pou (that eateth wyth me ) thall betrape me,
And they beganne tobe fop andto fape to pim
one bp one:is it 3 And another lapd-igtt Fr be
anfweredandfapde unto them: Ft is one of the
trweluc,euéhe that dpppeth with me inthe plat
ter. Che fonne of man trulp qoeth ag it is wpe:
ten of bpm:but too tothat man, bp whome the
fotine of manis betraped. Good were tt fo: that
man,pE he bad neuer bene bazne. |
AND AS they dpd cate, Felustoke beead:and mat.rrot. e
wba he bad ene thankesbe brake tt, g gaue Pte
totbemand ROE ARE AAS eee
ciii And


| And he toke the cup, g when he bad geuen than-
| hea, be tole it tothem,*thep al drank of tt, and
| | betapde butothem: Chps is mp bloude of the
| newe teLament, whpchis thed foz manp.Tiere=
| Ive J fave vnto pou: J wyll Dapncke nomoze of
| tbefruteoftbe vpne: wntpll that dape, that F
mafrroi.c Dynke ttnewetn the kpngdome of God. And
pen ahi eric grace :thep wente oute to
mounte Dituete.
And Jeluslapeth onto thé : All pe Halbe of-
fended becaufe ofme thig npg bt. Eor it is tzit-
| sacha riii tE: y 3 wopll finpte the thepherd,¢ the pepe Wal-
| Zuke.reod Befcattercd. Wut after that Jamrplenagapn
| Fehr, J wpll go tito Galile before pou. ‘peter apde
hi prito bpm: And though all men be offended, pet
i wpll not J-And Jclus fapth pntobym: Cerelp
| Fave Vato the, p this dape euen in thys npghe
| before thecocke crowe twrple, thou thalt denpe
me thee tpmes. Dut he fvake moze wehementlp
no pf J iulode dpe wpth the, J wpll not oenpe
= the. Lphemplealfolapotbep all. —
matoia T Ano ebep came tntoa place wbich was na-
| vw med Gethtemant. And pe lapth to Disdifeiples.
gA Spt pe bere whple FJ goalpoe,andpzape. And
He taketh wpth bpm Beter g James and Jhon,
a matron p EUD Bega to Ware abalibed,¢ to bein an agony
| | mob. anodlapeth nto thé: *)p foule ig peup eut vir
- toğdeth tarp pe bere and watche. And pe went
| fozthalptle and fel Downeflat onthe qrounde
Í and payed: that pfit were poftpble, the boure
H | mat.rrbts mypabt pale from him. And be fapd:* Abba fa-
ii LUKFH.D. eher all tdpngesare pollpble wnto the, takea-
wape tbpscup fromme. Meuertheles,not that
3 wpl, but that thou wplt, bedone.
€ Andbecameandfoundethem fleppnge, and
fapeth to eter: Simon, lepett thou: ouldelt
ii not thou watche one houresatche pe, prape
4 - leatpeentre into temptacion:the [pete trulpe
| ss MAL FFRLD fg regdp, but the ficthers weake.xAnd agapne
| be wente afpoe,and praped,and (pake the fame
widz. And he returned: and founde theatlepe
agapne. #0? tdep2 epes Were peup: nether wp
they, wobat to anfivere bpm. And be came the
tipzdetpme and fapde wnto them : Nepe pence
fozth,¢ take pour eale itis pnough. The poure
is come , beholde,the fonne of man ts betraped
into the bandes of (prmers. ple wp, let vs go.


inserts 1 epatlpe wbplebepet pake, commeth Judas
(wbich was one of thetwelve)and wpthbbpma
create nombze of people wpth fweardes and
ftaucs fromthe bye Pecaftes and SHecrpbes and
elders. And bethat betraped bim, bad geuen thé
aqenerall coben,fapeng: whofoeucr 3 do kpe


me tot: but rhele thpnees come topatle,that the


\


_— CyeoGoipe c S


fcepptures (hulve be fulfplled.x And thep al fog wt. ND |
Coke byit,andranncawape.Andtherefolotwed zop.roiiib Y


prima certapne poungeman, clothed inlpnnen =
tpontbebare andthe poungemen caugbt bpm” ~
and beleftebps lpnien garment,andficdftom = /
them naked.* And thep led Jelug atoape fo the mat. Frbi E
bpelt preatte ofall, and wptbbym came all the Foy tus
bpe preatkes, and the elders , andthe Svcrpbes. :
And Peter folotecd pm a great wape of (enen

tpl be has come into Spala ce of the bpe preatt)

and be fat pth theferuauntes, and warmed

ppm felfe at the fp2e.


*And the bye petes €allebecouncel fought marrone `


fo? wptnes agapntt Jetu,to put bim to death,y 4% tte
found none:foz manp bare falle witnes againtt

bombut thepz wptnelegagrpednor together.

And ther arole certapne,and bzougbt falfe topt

nes agapni bpm, fapenge: We berde bpm fape: 4
* J tpl deftrope thps teple that ig made wpth Foernt’
bandes, and wptbin thee dapes J twpll buplos~
another,made hithoute bandes. Wut pet tep?
foptnefies agrped not together.

*And thebpe peat tode vp amongelk them mat. rrote
and alked Fetus, lapenge: antwereft thou no-
thynger owe is it that thefe beare ptues a-
gapni the‘ Wut de belde hyg peaceandanf ioes —
red notbpnge. Aqapne*the ppett preat alked rede
bym,andfapde onto bpm: Arte thou Chik the
fonne of the blefled: And Jelus fapde: J am.

x And pe thall fe the fonne of man fpttpnge on p Faire r
pane bane of poiver,and ita br g intheclou= zop.b1,c.
Des of beauen. Chen the bye peeatt cent bys clo-
thes, andflapde:-whbat nede toe anp further topt=
neleg: Pe baue beard blafpbhemp, what thyncke
peretbep all condempned bpm to be ozebp of
death. And fome beqanne tolppt at bim, andto
couer bys face,andto beate bpm wpth fpftes , «
tofape onto bpm: Areade. And the feruauntes
boffetedhpin on the face.

Andas Peter wag beneth in the palace there
came one of the enches of the bpett peat and
xiwhen the fawe Peter Warmpnge bpm felfe, mat.rroi.g
{ye loketo on bpm,andfapeth:waft not thou al Sserr4 €
fo with Jefus of Masareth: And he denyed lap:
enge: Jknotbe bpinnot ,nepther wote J what
thou lapet. And be wente oute into the porche,
andthbecockecrewe. Anda damlell ( whan the
fawe bpm) beganne a to fape totbé that
todebp,tbraigone of them. And hedenyed it
agapne. And anone after, thep that ffode bp,
fapde agapne to Peter: furelpe thou arte one of
theni,foz thou arte of Galile,andtbpfpeachea:
gperth tberto. Wut be beganne to curie andto


>
es


f
i
| mat. rroie 3o bethatbetrapetbme isat band. * Jndim
i
| | that fameis be: takebpmandleadbpmatvape fyweare.fapenge: 39 Bnowe not this manof t
| : mandleadhpmatoape fyweare.ti : 3 BOWE Not thig manof hs
| toarelpe. Andas fone as he as come,be gx pefpeake. And agapnextbhecocke cre t Dee sane eae
| fray hte wapetobpni,andfapeth bntobpm: terremembzed the Wozdethat Jefus lupo ynto e
| Maer, Mater tipid bpm. Andtheplapbe ppm: before thecocke crotwe tiple, thou thalte
it thep2 bandeson dim, tobe him. And oneokthe penpemethee typmes. And he beganneto wepe.
| » thattodebp-due onta lwecarde,efmoteaters — CTbe.cv.Chapter
| uamtoftbebpe preat and cut of hiseare. Henk keea A
eostcrote kpebecomeoutas dntoathefe wptdfiweardes mye RDanoncin p datonpnge,*the ppeprea- aat.
| Lukesrrite and wpth taueg fo: totakeme. Jiasdaylpe ANE ftes Delbea comnretlotpebe clteree ria Fb
| Mythpou mithetemple, teachpnge,andpetoke ESAS Scrpbes, andthe whole congregacpon, Sopro
| and


p


t


pea | DOr SS, 191A HC,


andbounde Jelug arioledsehbpmiewape, and
Delpuered pimto Pilate. And Pilate afwed him
att thou the kpnae of the ewes: And he anlwe
red, and fapde Dntobpm:thou lapel it. And the
brepreattes accufed bpm ofmanp thpnges.0
mat.crdith plate alked bpm agapne fapége:x Antwerett


o KRR phon nothpnges Webolde, bote many thynges


they lape Dutotby charge. Jelus pet anttecred
notbpnee,fo that plate meruepled.
Atthat fealte Bylate dpd delpuer vnto them
a peefoner: obomfoeuer thep wolde delpze. And
ther twas one that as named Warrabas, whi-
chelaye bounde pth them that made infurrec:
cpon:bebadcommptted murther. And the pro-
ple called buto bpm : and began to defpze bpm,
that be woldedo,accozdpng as be badcuer done
vito them: plate anfiered them , fapenge:
Wipll pe that 3 letlofe nto pou the kynge ot p
Jewess: Ffor be knetwe that the bye preattes had
DelpucredD bpm pat ee the bye pretes ino:
uedthe people, that be Houlde rather delpuce
Barrabas wnto them, -
vlateanfwered agapne and fapd nto the:


gaat. rroi xUGHat wplpethbentbat Jdovntohbpm,wpont .
© aukyriiie


pecall the kpnge ofthe gones And pe crped
agapn:cructfic pim. pilute lapd nto the: wehat
eucil bath be dones And they crped the moze fer-
nentlp:Crucifpe bpm. Andlo Pplate wpllpnge
mat,proii e ÉO content the people,-let thole Barabas vnto
oa them, delpucred vp Felus( when he had fcour-
ged bpm )foz to be crucpfped.

#3 «And the foudpers lead bpm atvape into the
i commen bal,and called together the whole mul:
| ite thep clothed bpm tpt) purple, and
3 tbhep platted a crotone of thoznes, and crowned
prus Sepals see beg sites (9 alite nin Maple
kpng of toe Jeweg. And thepfinotehpm,on the


+: bead wpthatede and dpdlpptte bpon bpmand


bowed ed pnp mc n.
And when thep had mocked i seta o, toke

thepurple of bpm, and put bis otne clothes on

sat. proli ikea as 3 bpni oer ate Galle a
i tbep comperit one at cd bP, Called Dp
a maa of Cpzene ( the Father of Blerander and


: ; a Rufus) wbpcbe came oute of the felde,to beare


| d,


sgat. roii hpg crofle. x And they bzougbte bym to a place

n named, Golgatha ( whpcheis,pfaman inter»

preteit: the place of Dead mennes fculles ) and

i thep gaue bpm todzpnke,wopne mpngled wpth
> mypace, but be receaucditnot,

And twobhen thep had crucifped hym-xthep par
tedbps arenes ayy ae ppon them,
tobat cucrp man pulde take. And it was avout
the thpade boure and thep crucpfped bym. Aud
thetytleofbpscaule was to2zptten : Che bpnge

mat.rrbtin Of the Jewes. *And thep crucpfyed wopth bpm
xuk.rrtiio piwo theties,theone on the cp abe bande, and the
other on bps lefte. And the fcrppture was ful-

gtasiin fplled wbtchelapeth:*he was counted amonge
miat.FroGd pije wpcked. *Andthep that wente bp, rapled
rei onbpm:waggpnae thep2 beades, and fapenge:
Lub,rrith A Wzetche, thou that deftropett the temple and
buplocft it in thee dapes: faue thy felfe, ecome
pownefromtbecrofle. Lpketpte allo mocked


jat. Trbit
a.
Pial,fritd


‘ bymithe ppe wecatesamoge them {clues with


JUOL ER.
the Scrpbes and fapd:be faned otber men, bpm
felfebecannot faune. Let Chzifte the kynge of
Jfraell defcende nove from the croffe, that we
mapele,and beleue.aAnd they that were crucp=
Fred wypth bpm, checked bpmalfo.

xAnd whe the (prte houre ag come, darek met.trbire
neffearofe ouer all theearth, vaty the npnthe YF“
houre.Andatthe nputh Doure Felus ceped with
aloude vopce, fapenge : Clot, Eloi, lamafaba-
thani‘wbpchets( pt one interprete it)xmp God wat-rrose
mp God, whp bat chou forlaken merAndfome e”
of them that ode bp, when thep bearde that
fay de:bebolde,be callethfo2 Helpas. * And one mat rroi €
ranne and fplleda fponge full of bpheger, and
put it on arede,andqauebpmto depneke, fapa
enge : let bpm alone, let vs fe whppther Helpas
fpll come and take bpm dDotone.

Mut Jelus crped wyth aloude vopee,s qane |
vp the goofte. «And the vaple of the temple mat.rrvitt
Dpdrente in two peces, from the toppe to the FS
bottome.* And when then Centurpon( whpcbe mat.rroti t
frode befoze hpm ) fave, that be focrped, and “F's
gaue bp the goote , be fapoe:Crulpethps man
wasthefonneof Goo. * Chere were allo wee mst.rrvit f
mena good wape of bebolopnge bpm : amonge *°°""'5
whome was* WMarpeHagdalene, and Aarpe mat.rrosis
the mother of James thelitic:and of Jofes and

Jarpe Salome, ¥(whpcbe allo when he was Lub. biti. a
in Galile bad folowed ppm andmpniltred vata
byin)and many other wemen,wppcbe came vp
topthbpm vnto Jerufalem.

And nowe when the cuen was come (becaule

it teas the dape of preparpnae, that qoct) be-
fozethe Sabboth)x Joleph ofthe cptre of Aras mat.rrvife
mathia a noble councelour , tobpche alfo lobed Soio
forthe kypngdome of God, came q wetinbolde-
lye Dito Pplate , and begged of bpm the bodpe
of Jefu. And Pilatemecucled that be was alre-
DP Dead, andcalled bnto bpm the Centurpon, €
alked bpm whether be bad ben anp while dead,
Bnb then he knetwe the trueth of the Centuri,
be gaue tbe bodpto Jofeph. And he boughte a
lpnnen clothe, toke bpm dotwne,and wapped
Him in Plpnne cloth, ¢ laped btm ina fepulchze,
that was bever out ofa rocke, rouled a ftone
before f Doze of p (epulchze. And Warp Magda
len & arp Joles,bebeld were he was lapd. FK
€ The.rvi.Chapter.


Chit is rpten agapne,andapprareth to the Apotties

to whom be commptteth the preachpnge oF the Golpel,
we 2D when the Sabboth was patte, +
™ Warp Gagdalene, and arp Ja-


oe


laps? fa
Pee } cob, and Salome , boughte lwete
E RA Sel odoures,that thep mightcome,and
CaheteJ|anopnt him.<anbeatlp in the mog mat. rot
npngetbe fp2ft dape ofthe Sabboth thep came ya rritsia
unto the fepulch2c.toben the Sunne was rplen. Ip-
And thep fapdeamongethemfelues:who Mall
rolle atwape the tone from the ooze of the fe=
pulchzes And when theploked, they fawe bot
that the fone was rolicd awap,foz it as a e=
rpareat one. And thep went into the f{epulch2e,
andfatec a pounge man fpttpnae on therpape
{pde,clathedin alonge Mhptegarmet, andthep that. rrbttt,
weve afraped. * Bnd helapeh onto them, be noe zu crs
a ee wb Wit afrapoe


pea | DOr SS, 191A HC,


andbounde Jelug arioledsehbpmiewape, and
Delpuered pimto Pilate. And Pilate afwed him
att thou the kpnae of the ewes: And he anlwe
red, and fapde Dntobpm:thou lapel it. And the
brepreattes accufed bpm ofmanp thpnges.0
mat.crdith plate alked bpm agapne fapége:x Antwerett


o KRR phon nothpnges Webolde, bote many thynges


they lape Dutotby charge. Jelus pet anttecred
notbpnee,fo that plate meruepled.
Atthat fealte Bylate dpd delpuer vnto them
a peefoner: obomfoeuer thep wolde delpze. And
ther twas one that as named Warrabas, whi-
chelaye bounde pth them that made infurrec:
cpon:bebadcommptted murther. And the pro-
ple called buto bpm : and began to defpze bpm,
that be woldedo,accozdpng as be badcuer done
vito them: plate anfiered them , fapenge:
Wipll pe that 3 letlofe nto pou the kynge ot p
Jewess: Ffor be knetwe that the bye preattes had
DelpucredD bpm pat ee the bye pretes ino:
uedthe people, that be Houlde rather delpuce
Barrabas wnto them, -
vlateanfwered agapne and fapd nto the:


gaat. rroi xUGHat wplpethbentbat Jdovntohbpm,wpont .
© aukyriiie


pecall the kpnge ofthe gones And pe crped
agapn:cructfic pim. pilute lapd nto the: wehat
eucil bath be dones And they crped the moze fer-
nentlp:Crucifpe bpm. Andlo Pplate wpllpnge
mat,proii e ÉO content the people,-let thole Barabas vnto
oa them, delpucred vp Felus( when he had fcour-
ged bpm )foz to be crucpfped.

#3 «And the foudpers lead bpm atvape into the
i commen bal,and called together the whole mul:
| ite thep clothed bpm tpt) purple, and
3 tbhep platted a crotone of thoznes, and crowned
prus Sepals see beg sites (9 alite nin Maple
kpng of toe Jeweg. And thepfinotehpm,on the


+: bead wpthatede and dpdlpptte bpon bpmand


bowed ed pnp mc n.
And when thep had mocked i seta o, toke

thepurple of bpm, and put bis otne clothes on

sat. proli ikea as 3 bpni oer ate Galle a
i tbep comperit one at cd bP, Called Dp
a maa of Cpzene ( the Father of Blerander and


: ; a Rufus) wbpcbe came oute of the felde,to beare


| d,


sgat. roii hpg crofle. x And they bzougbte bym to a place

n named, Golgatha ( whpcheis,pfaman inter»

preteit: the place of Dead mennes fculles ) and

i thep gaue bpm todzpnke,wopne mpngled wpth
> mypace, but be receaucditnot,

And twobhen thep had crucifped hym-xthep par
tedbps arenes ayy ae ppon them,
tobat cucrp man pulde take. And it was avout
the thpade boure and thep crucpfped bym. Aud
thetytleofbpscaule was to2zptten : Che bpnge

mat.rrbtin Of the Jewes. *And thep crucpfyed wopth bpm
xuk.rrtiio piwo theties,theone on the cp abe bande, and the
other on bps lefte. And the fcrppture was ful-

gtasiin fplled wbtchelapeth:*he was counted amonge
miat.FroGd pije wpcked. *Andthep that wente bp, rapled
rei onbpm:waggpnae thep2 beades, and fapenge:
Lub,rrith A Wzetche, thou that deftropett the temple and
buplocft it in thee dapes: faue thy felfe, ecome
pownefromtbecrofle. Lpketpte allo mocked


jat. Trbit
a.
Pial,fritd


‘ bymithe ppe wecatesamoge them {clues with


JUOL ER.
the Scrpbes and fapd:be faned otber men, bpm
felfebecannot faune. Let Chzifte the kynge of
Jfraell defcende nove from the croffe, that we
mapele,and beleue.aAnd they that were crucp=
Fred wypth bpm, checked bpmalfo.

xAnd whe the (prte houre ag come, darek met.trbire
neffearofe ouer all theearth, vaty the npnthe YF“
houre.Andatthe nputh Doure Felus ceped with
aloude vopce, fapenge : Clot, Eloi, lamafaba-
thani‘wbpchets( pt one interprete it)xmp God wat-rrose
mp God, whp bat chou forlaken merAndfome e”
of them that ode bp, when thep bearde that
fay de:bebolde,be callethfo2 Helpas. * And one mat rroi €
ranne and fplleda fponge full of bpheger, and
put it on arede,andqauebpmto depneke, fapa
enge : let bpm alone, let vs fe whppther Helpas
fpll come and take bpm dDotone.

Mut Jelus crped wyth aloude vopee,s qane |
vp the goofte. «And the vaple of the temple mat.rrvitt
Dpdrente in two peces, from the toppe to the FS
bottome.* And when then Centurpon( whpcbe mat.rroti t
frode befoze hpm ) fave, that be focrped, and “F's
gaue bp the goote , be fapoe:Crulpethps man
wasthefonneof Goo. * Chere were allo wee mst.rrvit f
mena good wape of bebolopnge bpm : amonge *°°""'5
whome was* WMarpeHagdalene, and Aarpe mat.rrosis
the mother of James thelitic:and of Jofes and

Jarpe Salome, ¥(whpcbe allo when he was Lub. biti. a
in Galile bad folowed ppm andmpniltred vata
byin)and many other wemen,wppcbe came vp
topthbpm vnto Jerufalem.

And nowe when the cuen was come (becaule

it teas the dape of preparpnae, that qoct) be-
fozethe Sabboth)x Joleph ofthe cptre of Aras mat.rrvife
mathia a noble councelour , tobpche alfo lobed Soio
forthe kypngdome of God, came q wetinbolde-
lye Dito Pplate , and begged of bpm the bodpe
of Jefu. And Pilatemecucled that be was alre-
DP Dead, andcalled bnto bpm the Centurpon, €
alked bpm whether be bad ben anp while dead,
Bnb then he knetwe the trueth of the Centuri,
be gaue tbe bodpto Jofeph. And he boughte a
lpnnen clothe, toke bpm dotwne,and wapped
Him in Plpnne cloth, ¢ laped btm ina fepulchze,
that was bever out ofa rocke, rouled a ftone
before f Doze of p (epulchze. And Warp Magda
len & arp Joles,bebeld were he was lapd. FK
€ The.rvi.Chapter.


Chit is rpten agapne,andapprareth to the Apotties

to whom be commptteth the preachpnge oF the Golpel,
we 2D when the Sabboth was patte, +
™ Warp Gagdalene, and arp Ja-


oe


laps? fa
Pee } cob, and Salome , boughte lwete
E RA Sel odoures,that thep mightcome,and
CaheteJ|anopnt him.<anbeatlp in the mog mat. rot
npngetbe fp2ft dape ofthe Sabboth thep came ya rritsia
unto the fepulch2c.toben the Sunne was rplen. Ip-
And thep fapdeamongethemfelues:who Mall
rolle atwape the tone from the ooze of the fe=
pulchzes And when theploked, they fawe bot
that the fone was rolicd awap,foz it as a e=
rpareat one. And thep went into the f{epulch2e,
andfatec a pounge man fpttpnae on therpape
{pde,clathedin alonge Mhptegarmet, andthep that. rrbttt,
weve afraped. * Bnd helapeh onto them, be noe zu crs
a ee wb Wit afrapoe


a.


TUe ODW


afraped peleke Yelus of Masareth, twhpeh has

5 crucpfped. He isrplen,he is not bere. Beholde p

place tober thep bad put him. Sut qo pour wap

and tell dyg bifcpples,and PBeter:thathe goeth

befo2e pouinto Galile, theretball pele bpm ag

‘, Delapd ontopou. «And thep wet out quyck-

and were amaled. Pether lapd thep anp thpnge
foany man,fo2 tiep tocre afraped. i

C rPRidiben Yeius was rpfen earlp pfp vap

After the Sabbotb, be appeared fp2tt to Marp

MHMagdalene out of Whs be badcak fenuendenecls

- Andibe wente, and tolde them that twere wpth

bpym.as thepmourned ¢ wepte. And thep, when

___ they Derde that be was alpuc,and bad appeared

Lukreiith puto Der, beleuedit¢ not. * Aftertbatappeared

be Unto tive of them, ina ftraunge fpqure,as

thep walked and went into the counttpe. Jnd

they went andtoldcit tothe rénaunt. Andthep

beleued not thefe alfo.

Pe Bterwarde he appeared yntothe elenen
ag thep fateat meat:and cat in thep2 techthepz
tnbelefe and bardnes of herte:becaufethep be-
leucd not them tbpch had fene that be twas rp-
fenagapne frö the dead. And be fapde vnto the:
*Go pe into al the MozlDand preach the gofpel
D toall creatures, De that belcueth and ig baptp-

fed, halbe laned. Wut he that beleueth not, thal
be bampned. And thele tokens pall folotoc thë
rahe that beleue. + Jn mp name thep Wall cate oute
actes.t a Dencls,thep* Hal fpeake topth newe tges,thep
saree, Wall * Depue awape ferpentes. And pE P
and.crit.b VPNKEaNp Deadly thpnge.tt Hal not burte the.
hep Call lapethep2 bandes on the fpcke, and
thep alleecouer.

Hotbhen, when the Lode pad fpoken nto
lsrriifig fhem, xpe was receaned ito beauen, andis on
Teshib  therpabt bande of God. A nd thep wente
fozth and preached euerp tbere: the

Lode ozrkpuge wptd them,

xand confortpnge p Doozde
iwpeh mpacles fo:
x lotopnge.
The evde of the Golpell of
S. Marke.


S.Luke.
aa) D AS muche as many baue tas
aes Ken in bande tolet forth the de=
Sees a|clavacté of thofe thinges tohich
) ea eee Se ave moolt furelpeto bebeleued
eres N aMonge WS euen as thep delp=
en 2 z\uered them tnta peel te i fro
SBI e begpnnpng fatoe them thé
——-—-— felues pth thepzepes, € were
mpnptters of the thpuges that thep declared:
(Fdetermpnedalf{o) asfoneas FJ had learched
out dplpgentipe all thynges from the begpn-
nynge,that then FZ wolde vee unto the, good


“mat rrbiit,


Heb, iia’


Cheophilus:that thou mpgptet kuome the cer
he et thpnges, whereof thon halt bene


in ë dapes wperets be bath lobed on me,to take


QL The fpr chapter. ‘
q The concepcisn and brzih of Zhonthe wantit,
rhe concepcion oF chit, She (hankfull fonges
DE Ajarp and zacharp.
ee Dere was in thedapesofe>A <
a\vove the Hipnge of Fetyzpe,a `
aal Certapne peeaiie nainedsacha A
JA tpag, * of the courleot Abia. t.par.rrb.
| deve a AND his pte was of f dough
a tes ters of Aaron: and ber name
a| Was Clisabeth:thep werboth
Se rpabteous before God. wal-
edin all the lawes æ ozdpnaunces ofthe Lord
that no man coulde fpnde faute wpth thé. And
thep hadno ther sce Mi bane vas ba-
ten, ethep both tocrenow well Prpcken in age.
Andit came to palle, that whansachary er-
ecuted the Peattes opre before God, as bps
courfle cane ( accozdpnge to the cufome of the
Preatkes offpce)bpslotteiltoburneincenfe.
Andbex Went intothe temple of the Lorde, Et?
and the whole multitude of f ae ere with `
outitn.praper,tobple the incente as a burnpng
And there appeared bnto ppm an Angell of the
1L02d¢,fFandpnae on therpabs tpde of the anl-


tare ofincente. And wiensacharias fate bpm, = -~


$


be iwas abathed, and feare came on ppm.

Wut theangelfaps Dntobpm:fearenotsa: 35
charpe,foz tby peaper isbcarde. And tbp topfe
Elisabet) hal berare the afoune,and thou Malt
call bps name Zhon,andthou Walt Haue iope æ
gladnefie, and many thallectopceathysbpzth. `
fo? be Halbe qreatein the tygbte of the Lorde,
and (pal nether depnke wpne nec trge dinke,
and be albe fplled wpth the dolpe qoofte, cuen
from bps mothers thombe:and manp of f chpl-
dzen of Jlrael thall turne to thepz Lozde Goo,

nd be pall go before bpm tn the (pete and pos

tcr of * Helpyag to turnethe beartes of the faz egae.rip
thers tothe Avec tie Dubeleuersto the
wopledome of thetntt men,tomake ready a pers
fectepeoplefozthe Lozde. ait
nd sacharpas fapDde Dnto theaungell : bp


tbat token ha k nowe this: o+ Fam oly, Serote -


and mp wpe well Mrpcken in peares. And the TO?
angell anfwerebund fapd puto bpm: an Ga:
bricl that tande inthe peclence of God andam
fente tofpcake nto the: andte pete the thefe
glad tpdpnges. And bebold it thal come to pafe


that thou (alte be domme, and not be bable to a


peake tntpl f dape that thele thynees be pera’
itis wees ethou beleuedi not tip Opes,
whpcd albefulfplled in thep2 feafon. |

And the people thapted fo? sacharpas, and
merucpledthat he tarpcd in the temple. Jnd
tohen Decame onte, be coulde not {peake nto
tbem. And thep perceaued that be bad nea bp
fpon in EHAA a beckened bnto them
bi oer eee ‘

_ pera ndittortuned,that ag fone asthe dapes €
of bis office were out,be departed into nies ğ
boufe. And after thole dapes, bps wpke Elia-
beth conceaucd,and bpd her felfe fpue monetheg
fapenge: Chys wplehath Goddealte with me,


froni


+


al


a.


TUe ODW


afraped peleke Yelus of Masareth, twhpeh has

5 crucpfped. He isrplen,he is not bere. Beholde p

place tober thep bad put him. Sut qo pour wap

and tell dyg bifcpples,and PBeter:thathe goeth

befo2e pouinto Galile, theretball pele bpm ag

‘, Delapd ontopou. «And thep wet out quyck-

and were amaled. Pether lapd thep anp thpnge
foany man,fo2 tiep tocre afraped. i

C rPRidiben Yeius was rpfen earlp pfp vap

After the Sabbotb, be appeared fp2tt to Marp

MHMagdalene out of Whs be badcak fenuendenecls

- Andibe wente, and tolde them that twere wpth

bpym.as thepmourned ¢ wepte. And thep, when

___ they Derde that be was alpuc,and bad appeared

Lukreiith puto Der, beleuedit¢ not. * Aftertbatappeared

be Unto tive of them, ina ftraunge fpqure,as

thep walked and went into the counttpe. Jnd

they went andtoldcit tothe rénaunt. Andthep

beleued not thefe alfo.

Pe Bterwarde he appeared yntothe elenen
ag thep fateat meat:and cat in thep2 techthepz
tnbelefe and bardnes of herte:becaufethep be-
leucd not them tbpch had fene that be twas rp-
fenagapne frö the dead. And be fapde vnto the:
*Go pe into al the MozlDand preach the gofpel
D toall creatures, De that belcueth and ig baptp-

fed, halbe laned. Wut he that beleueth not, thal
be bampned. And thele tokens pall folotoc thë
rahe that beleue. + Jn mp name thep Wall cate oute
actes.t a Dencls,thep* Hal fpeake topth newe tges,thep
saree, Wall * Depue awape ferpentes. And pE P
and.crit.b VPNKEaNp Deadly thpnge.tt Hal not burte the.
hep Call lapethep2 bandes on the fpcke, and
thep alleecouer.

Hotbhen, when the Lode pad fpoken nto
lsrriifig fhem, xpe was receaned ito beauen, andis on
Teshib  therpabt bande of God. A nd thep wente
fozth and preached euerp tbere: the

Lode ozrkpuge wptd them,

xand confortpnge p Doozde
iwpeh mpacles fo:
x lotopnge.
The evde of the Golpell of
S. Marke.


S.Luke.
aa) D AS muche as many baue tas
aes Ken in bande tolet forth the de=
Sees a|clavacté of thofe thinges tohich
) ea eee Se ave moolt furelpeto bebeleued
eres N aMonge WS euen as thep delp=
en 2 z\uered them tnta peel te i fro
SBI e begpnnpng fatoe them thé
——-—-— felues pth thepzepes, € were
mpnptters of the thpuges that thep declared:
(Fdetermpnedalf{o) asfoneas FJ had learched
out dplpgentipe all thynges from the begpn-
nynge,that then FZ wolde vee unto the, good


“mat rrbiit,


Heb, iia’


Cheophilus:that thou mpgptet kuome the cer
he et thpnges, whereof thon halt bene


in ë dapes wperets be bath lobed on me,to take


QL The fpr chapter. ‘
q The concepcisn and brzih of Zhonthe wantit,
rhe concepcion oF chit, She (hankfull fonges
DE Ajarp and zacharp.
ee Dere was in thedapesofe>A <
a\vove the Hipnge of Fetyzpe,a `
aal Certapne peeaiie nainedsacha A
JA tpag, * of the courleot Abia. t.par.rrb.
| deve a AND his pte was of f dough
a tes ters of Aaron: and ber name
a| Was Clisabeth:thep werboth
Se rpabteous before God. wal-
edin all the lawes æ ozdpnaunces ofthe Lord
that no man coulde fpnde faute wpth thé. And
thep hadno ther sce Mi bane vas ba-
ten, ethep both tocrenow well Prpcken in age.
Andit came to palle, that whansachary er-
ecuted the Peattes opre before God, as bps
courfle cane ( accozdpnge to the cufome of the
Preatkes offpce)bpslotteiltoburneincenfe.
Andbex Went intothe temple of the Lorde, Et?
and the whole multitude of f ae ere with `
outitn.praper,tobple the incente as a burnpng
And there appeared bnto ppm an Angell of the
1L02d¢,fFandpnae on therpabs tpde of the anl-


tare ofincente. And wiensacharias fate bpm, = -~


$


be iwas abathed, and feare came on ppm.

Wut theangelfaps Dntobpm:fearenotsa: 35
charpe,foz tby peaper isbcarde. And tbp topfe
Elisabet) hal berare the afoune,and thou Malt
call bps name Zhon,andthou Walt Haue iope æ
gladnefie, and many thallectopceathysbpzth. `
fo? be Halbe qreatein the tygbte of the Lorde,
and (pal nether depnke wpne nec trge dinke,
and be albe fplled wpth the dolpe qoofte, cuen
from bps mothers thombe:and manp of f chpl-
dzen of Jlrael thall turne to thepz Lozde Goo,

nd be pall go before bpm tn the (pete and pos

tcr of * Helpyag to turnethe beartes of the faz egae.rip
thers tothe Avec tie Dubeleuersto the
wopledome of thetntt men,tomake ready a pers
fectepeoplefozthe Lozde. ait
nd sacharpas fapDde Dnto theaungell : bp


tbat token ha k nowe this: o+ Fam oly, Serote -


and mp wpe well Mrpcken in peares. And the TO?
angell anfwerebund fapd puto bpm: an Ga:
bricl that tande inthe peclence of God andam
fente tofpcake nto the: andte pete the thefe
glad tpdpnges. And bebold it thal come to pafe


that thou (alte be domme, and not be bable to a


peake tntpl f dape that thele thynees be pera’
itis wees ethou beleuedi not tip Opes,
whpcd albefulfplled in thep2 feafon. |

And the people thapted fo? sacharpas, and
merucpledthat he tarpcd in the temple. Jnd
tohen Decame onte, be coulde not {peake nto
tbem. And thep perceaued that be bad nea bp
fpon in EHAA a beckened bnto them
bi oer eee ‘

_ pera ndittortuned,that ag fone asthe dapes €
of bis office were out,be departed into nies ğ
boufe. And after thole dapes, bps wpke Elia-
beth conceaucd,and bpd her felfe fpue monetheg
fapenge: Chys wplehath Goddealte with me,


froni


+


al


ʻ


Mich. d ¢


the angell fapde nto her: feare oes rae


— PTS. Luke,


olde,


`- $Dan. dif a of Jacob foz ener,andtofHys kyngds
D.  Chenlapd Marp onto the angel:wowe thal


gell antwered g fapde dnto ber. Che holy ool
>. all come pate and the pater ofthe bpeft
tfo


Hath alto conceaueda fine in per age. And thys
at? 13 ber fert moneth, Ybich twas called barren:fo2
” zach bliid kyppeh wah lt hhi EB


gat. Eir E


ater. arp fapd:bebold the
Orit nee nto me accozdpngeto thp toozde
Eto


gz Mange inber wombe. nd El
wopce,and bape: Wietled art t


men, and ble
~ pfmp Lode thu


ndmapden of f Lozde
De. eat


$ Soares (palve pertormed. which were tolde the
Erom the Lozde. And Warp fapde:


Tikina Hp loule magnpfyetbthe Lozde. And mp


ba i fylled the bongty wpth good thpnges:and
èn


feruaunt Ffrae
Sea.rrite *Euenag he p?


frael


bam, and to bis fede fozeiter. And Darpeavode
wypth ber aboutea thee monethes,andretournea
agqapne to ber owne foute:

Cliusabeths tpinecame that the thuldebe
Oelpucred,and thebzought fozthe afonne, And
ber nepabboures andber colpns beard bowe the
Lo2bde bad (hewed greate mercp Ypon berand
they reiopfep wpthber.

And tt fortuncd that inthe epahedape, thep 4f
came * fo circumepte thechploe: and called ys wen.rsct.d
Haine sachavias, attecthe name of pps father, aarte
And his mother anfwered andfapdemot fo but T
be albe called Jhon. Andtheyfayde onto ber:

Chere is nonein thp kpnred, pis named wpth
fhps name. And thep made {panes to bis father
Hote be wolde bauchpim called: And he afked
fo2 wzptpnge tables and wote, fapenge: ppg
name ts Jhon. Andtbep maruelledall. And his
mouth was opencd immediatlp , and bys tonge


 alto,and befpake,andpzapien God. And feare


came onall them that dwelt npe yntothe. Ana
all thefe fapenges were nopfed abzode through:
out all the bpll contre of Fewzype: andail they p
berde them, lapd thé wp in thepe bþertes fapeng:
bat maner of chplde Mall thps ber Andthe
bande of the Lozde was topth bpm.

And dystathersacharpas wasfipllea wyth GS
tde bolp goott,and propbecped, fapenge: raps
fed be rhe Lozde God of Frael, fo: he path vi p-
tedand redeemed bis people: K Andbathrapied pla.crrttts
vpxan hozne of faluacpon bute vs mthe boufe


nd of bisleruauntDauid.éuen asbepzompiedbp


the mouth of bps bolp Pzopdetes. wbpcb tere
fens the Wwozlde beganne. Chat we bulde be fa-
uedfrom ourenempeg and from the bande of al
that bate vs. Chat be wolde deale mercpfullpe
opti oure fathers, and remembze bps holy co-
uenaŭt:* And that pe wolde performe tye othe,


Evl which be fwware to ouretather bzabam, foo to TeS


wene bs. * Chat te delpucred out of thehandes ... - Toii
of out enempes, mpabe fertic hin without feare ste
all the dapes of our ipfe in fuch holpnes g tpgb-
teouthes agave accepte before bpm. And thou
chptacthalt becalled the Pzopbhete of the peit:
fo? thou thalt go before tie Face of the Lo20¢, to
prepare Dis Wapes:to geue knowledge of falua
cion wnto bis people fo? the remuflton of fynnes,
Through the tender mercy of our Gov, where-
bp tie dap {pepng from anbpe bath bitite ve.

— *Co gene lpgheto them that fate indarck- fan tt.
nefle,and inthe adowe of death, to Quypde our Apat.ti.c,
fete into the tape of peace. Andthechpid qrewe
and wered ronge infpzete and was inwplder
nes, tpllthe dape came, when he Mulde beive
bpm felfe onto the Jiraclpteg,

~ CTbe.it.Chapter.
The bpeth and circumepiron of Chri. Doibe he wag
receaucd into Che cemple , howe Spmeon and Anuap202
phecpe oF bpat,and howe be was founde in the temples? m
monge Che docdtoures, ;
nr (20 (t chautced inthole dapes:that -
P27 /Ay ey tere went out a commaundement <
AAV Erö Suquitus the Emperoure,taat
ed ka allthe wolde Hulde betared. And


!


AEAN tuys tarpnge wasthetyatander


ected W a parning was leftcnaut in Spia
Feuked whe D paening wag A i


Fa,tt f. ae


i


ʻ


Mich. d ¢


the angell fapde nto her: feare oes rae


— PTS. Luke,


olde,


`- $Dan. dif a of Jacob foz ener,andtofHys kyngds
D.  Chenlapd Marp onto the angel:wowe thal


gell antwered g fapde dnto ber. Che holy ool
>. all come pate and the pater ofthe bpeft
tfo


Hath alto conceaueda fine in per age. And thys
at? 13 ber fert moneth, Ybich twas called barren:fo2
” zach bliid kyppeh wah lt hhi EB


gat. Eir E


ater. arp fapd:bebold the
Orit nee nto me accozdpngeto thp toozde
Eto


gz Mange inber wombe. nd El
wopce,and bape: Wietled art t


men, and ble
~ pfmp Lode thu


ndmapden of f Lozde
De. eat


$ Soares (palve pertormed. which were tolde the
Erom the Lozde. And Warp fapde:


Tikina Hp loule magnpfyetbthe Lozde. And mp


ba i fylled the bongty wpth good thpnges:and
èn


feruaunt Ffrae
Sea.rrite *Euenag he p?


frael


bam, and to bis fede fozeiter. And Darpeavode
wypth ber aboutea thee monethes,andretournea
agqapne to ber owne foute:

Cliusabeths tpinecame that the thuldebe
Oelpucred,and thebzought fozthe afonne, And
ber nepabboures andber colpns beard bowe the
Lo2bde bad (hewed greate mercp Ypon berand
they reiopfep wpthber.

And tt fortuncd that inthe epahedape, thep 4f
came * fo circumepte thechploe: and called ys wen.rsct.d
Haine sachavias, attecthe name of pps father, aarte
And his mother anfwered andfapdemot fo but T
be albe called Jhon. Andtheyfayde onto ber:

Chere is nonein thp kpnred, pis named wpth
fhps name. And thep made {panes to bis father
Hote be wolde bauchpim called: And he afked
fo2 wzptpnge tables and wote, fapenge: ppg
name ts Jhon. Andtbep maruelledall. And his
mouth was opencd immediatlp , and bys tonge


 alto,and befpake,andpzapien God. And feare


came onall them that dwelt npe yntothe. Ana
all thefe fapenges were nopfed abzode through:
out all the bpll contre of Fewzype: andail they p
berde them, lapd thé wp in thepe bþertes fapeng:
bat maner of chplde Mall thps ber Andthe
bande of the Lozde was topth bpm.

And dystathersacharpas wasfipllea wyth GS
tde bolp goott,and propbecped, fapenge: raps
fed be rhe Lozde God of Frael, fo: he path vi p-
tedand redeemed bis people: K Andbathrapied pla.crrttts
vpxan hozne of faluacpon bute vs mthe boufe


nd of bisleruauntDauid.éuen asbepzompiedbp


the mouth of bps bolp Pzopdetes. wbpcb tere
fens the Wwozlde beganne. Chat we bulde be fa-
uedfrom ourenempeg and from the bande of al
that bate vs. Chat be wolde deale mercpfullpe
opti oure fathers, and remembze bps holy co-
uenaŭt:* And that pe wolde performe tye othe,


Evl which be fwware to ouretather bzabam, foo to TeS


wene bs. * Chat te delpucred out of thehandes ... - Toii
of out enempes, mpabe fertic hin without feare ste
all the dapes of our ipfe in fuch holpnes g tpgb-
teouthes agave accepte before bpm. And thou
chptacthalt becalled the Pzopbhete of the peit:
fo? thou thalt go before tie Face of the Lo20¢, to
prepare Dis Wapes:to geue knowledge of falua
cion wnto bis people fo? the remuflton of fynnes,
Through the tender mercy of our Gov, where-
bp tie dap {pepng from anbpe bath bitite ve.

— *Co gene lpgheto them that fate indarck- fan tt.
nefle,and inthe adowe of death, to Quypde our Apat.ti.c,
fete into the tape of peace. Andthechpid qrewe
and wered ronge infpzete and was inwplder
nes, tpllthe dape came, when he Mulde beive
bpm felfe onto the Jiraclpteg,

~ CTbe.it.Chapter.
The bpeth and circumepiron of Chri. Doibe he wag
receaucd into Che cemple , howe Spmeon and Anuap202
phecpe oF bpat,and howe be was founde in the temples? m
monge Che docdtoures, ;
nr (20 (t chautced inthole dapes:that -
P27 /Ay ey tere went out a commaundement <
AAV Erö Suquitus the Emperoure,taat
ed ka allthe wolde Hulde betared. And


!


AEAN tuys tarpnge wasthetyatander


ected W a parning was leftcnaut in Spia
Feuked whe D paening wag A i


Fa,tt f. ae


i


| ; The Golpru


: Bud encep man toent brito bps otone cptte to be
tared. And Joleph alfoalcendedfrd Galtle, out

ofa cpticcalled Paszareth, into Ede dat pee
i.uaeg.tr.b -x¢he cptic of Dauid, whpehe ts called thiebe
becaute he was of the boule andlpnageof Da-

utd,to be taxed wpth Warp byst nae ta


|


whpch thas yt chplde, And it o2ztuned that

Whplethep were there, ber tyme wastometyat

Che fbulde be delpuered. And He brought forthe

ber fy2ite begotten fonne, and tozapped bpm tt

fwadlpnge clothes,anblapd bpmina maunger
becaufetber was no roume fo? tbe in the pane.

And cher were in the fanae vegron,thepherdes
toatcbpngand Kepynige thep2 flocke by npgbe.

And lo,the auncell of the Lorde Code barde bp

them, the bapa btries of the Lozbde Mone roud

about them,andthep werefoze aftaped. Bnd

angelfapd vnto them: We notatraped.JFo2 bes

hold, y bapnge po tyopnares of great iope that

fhallcometoall people :fo2 puto pou ig borne
- thpsdape inp cptic of Dautd,a faupour, which
ig Chaitt the Lode. And take thpsfo2a fpane:
pe (pall fpnde che childe Weapped in fwadlpnae
clothes, and layed ina maunger. And Frapge
wape there wag topth the angel a multptude of
heauenilpe foudpers’, peaplpnge God, and fap-
ence: Glozp te God on hpe,and peace on p earth
and bntomena good fopll. fs

Andit foztuned,as foone as the angels were

gone awape from them into beauen. ye Ede
fhepherdes fapde one toanother:let bs qonowe
cuen bnto Bethlehem, and fe thys thynge that
we beare lape is happened, whpche the Lozde
Hath ewed dnto ws. And thep came with bak
andfounde Warp and Joleph and p babelapde
inamaunger. And when hep hadlene te, t
publpfiped abzode the fapeng:which was tolde
them of that chplde. And all thep that Drarde it,
wonbd2ed at thole thynges tobpch were told tbe
of the hepherdes.2But Warp kept al thole fap-
enges, e pondered them inber bert. And p wep:

erdesretourned, pzapfpnge andlaudpng God

ozall the tbynges that thep bad berd and fene,
cuenag it was tolde vntothem.

rx And whe the epabt dape thas come p the

gene.pbit-b ae Mulde be ¥ circumcpfed,*hys name was
toaatd.i.c called Jelus*wbpch was named of the Angel,
*LUBELC Hof ore He wasconceaucd inthe wombe.

_ > PR And When the tpme of thep2 purpficacion
Zeuria + (After the lawe of )ofes, ) was come,thep
zieg to throught ppm to Jerufalem, to prelent ppm to

the Lode (ag it is fozpttenin the lawe of the
fro.riii.a, Lozvexeuctp man chplde that fpi opencth the
ano Fru-d. matric halbe called bolpe to the Loze Jand to
ow offer (agit is fapde in the latoc of the Lozde) a
papze of turtle Doucs,02 tivo ponge pygpons.
And bebolde there was amanin Jerufalem,
whofe name wes Spmeon. Aud the fame man
was iufte and godlp, andloked fo2 theconfola-
cpon of Blrael,and the bolp gootte © 18 mir
And an anfwere had he receauc df the polpe
qoot, that he (hulde not le death,crcept he fpi
fawo: the Lozbes Chzilte. And became bp inipp:
racponinebetem pie:
And wbentpefather and mother beougdte


€


€


inthe chploeJelus : todo Fox byt after the cu .
fome of the lawe, then tobe bebpm bpin ppg Levi rerio,
arines,and fapde: Lode, nowe lettet thon thp
fernaunt depart in peace,accozdpnge to thp po
meple. Wor mpneepes pane lene the faluacpon: *
whbpch thou baf prepared befoze the face of all
people.* Alpabtto ly gbte the gentpls, and the ¢t.riir.t.
glozpofthppeople Jirael. f fey ne S

re And bys father and mother meruapled at
thole thpnges, obpch were fpoken of him. And
Simeon blefled them, and fayd ynto Warp bis
mother: behold, this chplde is fet to bethe fall €
ppzplpnae agapne of manp in Firacl,andfo2 a a
pane whpchis{pokenagapnl.Andinozeouer :
the fivearde thall pearce thp foule,p the tbougb-
tes of many Derteg mape be opened.

And there waga Pzophetpile, one Anna, the F
dougbter of Phanuel,of p trpbe of Aler:twhiche
tas of a qteatage,andbabdlpuedwpth an pul-
bande. vit.peares from er Virgpnpte. And the
babbene a wedotve about.ttit.{coze €.uutt.peare,
which departed not from the temple, but terued
God with a, and parne npabe dape.
Andthe came tozth that famehoute, and pzap=
fed the Lozde,and Cpake of bim,to al them that
loked fo: redempcion i Jerufalem.

And wben thep had perfourmed all thpngeg
accozdpug tothe lawe of the Lozde,thep retur-


a
3


aA g


. ned into Galile totbepr owne cptie Nasareth.


And æ the chploe qretoe, and wared rongerues.itc °

in{pzete,and thas fplled with wploome and tpe

grace of God twas vponbpm. F
And pps father and mother went to Ferulas Eron, pie o`

Mea si DSi gc pe of mi a das ig
hen be thas. rit.peare olde,thep wet vp to Pes gee crite |

eri A fea after the cuftome of the Fealk Dave. And aang

iwhanthep bad fulfplled the dapes, as they rea

turned home,the chplbde Felus abode tpl tn Fe-

rufalem,and bps father and mother knewe not

nf it: but thep fuppofpnge bpm tobane bene it

the company, came a pares lomnep and fougbte i

bpm amonge thep2 kpnltolke € acquapntaunce

And when thep founde him not,thep wet backe

agapne to Jerulalem, andfoughthym. Jnd it

foztuned that after thre dapes tbep founde dim

inthe tentple,{pttypnge in the mpodes of the do-

ctoures, Dearpnge them , and polpnae them.

*And all that bearde bpm, tere aftonnped at aset.vit.r

bps under pola ite anfiveres. eee g
And tohen they fae bpm, thep maruepled. Luketiing `

And bys motberlapde onto bpm: Sonne, whp ;

baff- thou thus dealt pth vss Webholde,thp fa-

ther and J haue fought thp fozotopnae. And be

fapde Dufo them: howe is tt that pe fought mer

Cpt pe not,that J mull go abonteimyp tathers

bufpnes! *Andthep ouderftode not that fapég Lure.tr.e


=>


Tobpchbefpake puto tbem. And he went domne 1 Ft:


wptd them, and came to Nasareth, and was da
bedient unto them. Wut bps mother kepte all


. thefefapenges togeatberm her berte. And Fe-


fus pzolpered in wpiedome and age, and infa-
uoure,wptbGodandmen. F
CTbe.iii. Chapter:
Gee peada er e go sranmenie of
the geucraciou o€the fathers, sities ee aonb
Jn


i. m
p


m
s à
£
= @
| Ta
RE


i
a
* I
i
i Í


Wie
|


}


|
2


J

£

‘+
f


naif


Maria rapa.


Zatia VE tbe wape of the Lozde , make bys pathes

THe. Guerp valley thalbefplled,andeuerp
mountapne and hpll halbe brought lowe. And
thpnges that be croked thalbe made firapgbt:¢


the roughbe tapes halve made plapne sandall .


‘fete thall fecbefaluacionof Gon. H
% - Tbenfapd be tothe people, that were come
eaatb.iilb Forth to be baptpfed of hym.* D Pe genevacpo
. OF dppers, oho bath taught poutofipefromebe
wath to comes Wzpnage forth therfore due fru-
tes of repnfannie ane brgpn not to faye wpth
inpout ielucs:we baue Abzahamtoour father.
Jto? J lape unto pou:godis able of thefe tones
____ toraple vp chplozen onto Ababa. Mowe allo
weath.ftib ts the are lapde Dnto the rote of the treeg,xeue=
“ep tree therEoze which bepngeth not foztb good
frute ig betwen dowone andcatt into the fpze.

actene  Andehepeoplealked bpm, fapenge : * what
thall wedo then:teanlwereth and fapeth Dn-
to them: De that bath twocoates, let him parte
Yopth bym that patbrione, € be that bath meate

_ letbpmdolpketopfe, | |

Chencamtbe fo da tobe baptpfed
and tapa bnto bpm: Waker, what tall we dor
And he fapde nto them:requyze no moze, then
that whycb is appopnted nto pon.

The loudpers lpketople demaunded of bpm,
fapeng:€ tbat Hall we dor And he fapde dnte
the:Durte no ma:netber trouble anp ma wong-
fullp:and be content pth pour wapges.

As the people were in a doubte, and all men
muled in thep2 bertes of Jhon, whether be were

_ Derp Chziit: Jbonanliwvercdandfapd vnto the
saat. tit. b All:* J baptple pou twpth water, but one ftron-
Sobndo ger then J thal come after me, twbholeipolatchet
a Jam NOE Worthy to Dulofe:he pall baptife pou
sath t.b Lolth the bolp goot and with fpze:xwbtch bath
bys fanne inbps bayneparid Wwpll pourge ypg

flooze,and yatberth ntobt |
“the chatte toptl be burne topth fpze neuer thal-
be quenched. And manp otber tbpnges in biger

_ hoztacpon preached be wnto the people.

o> Then erode the Cetrach, when be waste:
a Te of bym , fo? Perodias bys bother bp-
Sgarbi
dp


®


i1 opes topte,and foz al theeuels tobpch erode

‘added this aboucal,¢ lapd Jhon in peefon,

Andit foztuned that when all the people re-

sgat. tii b ceaued haptpme(and* then Jefug was baptp-
hipp fed and dpd prape tbe beauen wag opened, and
hF thebolpe gootte came vownein abodelp ape


J
=i ad


thas the fonne of sozobabel : yw pe è was the


the


tonne of eliachim:whpch was the fonne of


Helcha:wobpch was the fonne of Wena:wbich


fonne of Habac:whpch toas the fonne of Abra
beabam: wppch thas p fonne of Thatra:whpch


Hem: wbhpch was the fonne of Moe:which wag
the fonne of Lameth : tohyche was the fonne


‘come intobisbarne:but tobp


\


i
` the Fewes veipple bpm, the neuris Knotwlege bpm, be


C The iii. Chapter.
Fetus is led into the wploernette, ine fatteth all(be”
teme of bps temptacion, be ourrcdmeth the devel goeth
into Galple ; preachethat Mazarethand Capernaum,
cometh into eters houte,healety bps mother in latwe,
any doth greate mpzacies,
Jelug


onne of Reri: É,


riti. i
a


Cir Goipeu


gree Efus bepnge fullof the bolp goofte,

boa! Paes returned fro Jordane and x Wasled

ik, Subp thefpretcinto p topldcrneffe, and

SHE Awas rl.Dapegtempted of the deuel,

Kems And in thole Dapes dpd be eate n0=

thpnge. Bnd when they were ended, be afters

Marde hongred. And the deuell fapd onto pprt:

pf thou be thefonne of God, commaunde thps

oent.viia TONE EDA it be bzead. And Fetus anfwered pim

pjat. Mi. a fapenge:Jtis wptten,* man all not lpue bp
bead only, but bp enerp Yoozde of God.

And the deuell toke ppm into anbpe moun-

tapneand (hetocd bpm all the kpngdoms of the

Toode euen in the twpucblynge of anepe. And

the vevell Capde vntobpm:all thps power fopll

yg J qeuc the euerp whpte, andthe glory of them:

foz thep are delpucred Yntome,andto wpom fo

cuer J opll, ¥ geucit. PEthoutberfoze wplt fal

powne befoze meandi worthpp me, thep thalbe


a
fat.titt.a
Sgar ib


` allthpne.3cius anfweredand fapde vnto bpm: .


_ hence from me Sathan. Æo? it is toapttem :
Seut.oic * Thou halt worlbpp the Lorde thp God, and
soa nib DVI onelp Walt thou lerue.
| ~ Andbe carped bpm to Jerulalem,and fet him

ona pynacle of the temple,andfapd ynto bpm:

pfthou bep fonne of God, cafte thp felfe dotone

prac from beng. fo? it is toeptten:«be thall geuc his
ezatti a angels charge ouce the,tokepe the,andin thepe
Dandes they Wall beare the pp, that thou dafe

not thy fote agapnit a ftone. And Jelug anftoe-

Dent.bie ped, and fapde vuto bpm,ttis fapde:+tbou palt
ejat.uld wot tempte the Lode thy God. Andas foneas
all the téptacpon was ended, the dewell Depar-
re Sa nie i api

and Jelug returne jower of the

€ fpete into Galile, there wente Stine ofbpm
thozotwe out all theregpon. Andhe taughte itt

thep2 Spnagoges,¢ as commended of al me.

eqatrittg *~ &ND became to srasateth , where be wag
ajar. bia. nourted and(as bps cuftome was) be went into
the Spnagogeon the Sabboth dape, and ode
wpfoztoreade. And there was delpuered onto
‘.er.viid bpm the booke of the Pzophete Clape. « And
ivben he had opened the booke, be founde the

tetai a place,where it has Waptten.* Che lpeete of the
A onde pon me, vecaule De bath anopnted me:
topzeache the Golpell to the pooze,be bath Cent

me:to deale the bzoken berted,to preach delpue:

raunce tothe captpue,and (pabte to the blpnde:


A frelp to fet at lpbertp tbem tbat are beuled,and


to peache the acceptable peare of the Logde.

D  Andbhecloledehe booke, and gaue tt agapne

to the mpnpfter,and fat Dotone. And the epes of

al them that were in the sSpnagoge were ‘afte:

ncd on bim. And be beganne to faye Vnto them:

__ Thps dapets thysterppture fulfplled in poure

egat bid pares. And all bare bpm wptnes*and wondzed


-Aac atthe qeacpous wordes wbpebe pzoceded oute


of bys mouthe. F Andthep lapde: Fs not thps

ofephs. rome And Papi vnto them De
topll vtterlpe fape thys pzouerbe:: Pbplption,
Healethp felfe. i Mihatlocucr we baue berde
done Capernaum, dA the fame Dere lpkewpfe


inthpne owne countre. And he fapde : Uerelpe
pattie (ape vito pou: * Ro Dzophete ig accepted in


tp one of them,and pealed them pe
alfocame out ofmanp,crpége and fapeng:thou an., d


bps owne chtintre.


wut J tell pouofa truth: many hypdoes €E
tere in Firael, inthe dapes of elias, when hea tire nii h
ué was Dut thze pereg and fpre monetheg, whe 72


teate fFampipmente was thzouqhe oute all ti

ande and Dnto none of them was Helias lente
taue into Sarepta belpdes Spdon, vntoa wo-
man that asa wpdowe. x And sto lepers


were in Blracl inthe tpme of Helileus the 20- UH-HRe. b.a


phete: andnone of them was clenfed, faupnge
jRaaman tbe Spotan.

Andall thep in the Spnagote (when they
berde thefe thpnges) Were fplled pth wrath,
rofe bp,andthzuft bpm oute of the cptte,andled
bypmcué onto the edge of the bpll( theron thepe
eptie has buplt)p thep mpagbt cat him Downe


beabdlpnae. Wut be Departed,¢ wente bps shed .
n


euen thozotwe thbempddes of them. K Hi3
came dDotvne to Capernaum acptieof Galile )E
there taught them onthe Saboth tapes. * And
thep were aftonnped at bps Doctrpne : fot bps
Preachpnge was pth power. And inthe Sp-
nagege ther was a man, wbhpeh dad an onclene
a of a Devell,andcrped pth a londe dopre,
‘apeng:let me alone, what balk thou todo with
03, thou Jefus of Masareth: Arte thou come to
deftrope vor J hnowe tbe What thou arte , euen
the bolp of God. And Jelug rebuked bymtap=
enge:bolbde thp peace,and come out of bun. And
whetihe devel hadthzowen bpm in the mpbdes,
be cam out of bpm, and hurt bpm not. And feare
came onthem all,and thep fpake amonge thent
felues,fapenge: what maner of thpngets thys:
ro Aa th aucthozpte € power De comaundeth
the foule {pretes,¢ thep come out. And the fame
of bpm was{pzed abzode thozowwe oute euerpe
place of thecountreprounde about. F


tuk And toben be was Gas come -= saat. bill


of the Spnagoge beentred into
And Simons mother in lawe was taken with
agreatfener,and thep made seri ten pim
foz ber. And be tode duer ber, and rebuked the
feuer and the feuer left ber. And immediatlp the
arole and mpnpfitred tntto them.

tben the Sunne tas downe, all thep that


bad fpcke taken topth opuers dpleates,broughe G


them vnto bpm:and be lapd bps banbdes on ene-


art Chriftethefonne of God. And he rebuked
them, and fuffred them not tofpeake : for thep
knewe that be was Chat. ——

As loneas it wag dape, be departed, wente
imtoa Delerte place-and the people fought bym
andcame to bpm.and a bpm that be Mulde
not departe from them. And be fapd ynto them
FJmuftpreache the kpngdome of Gé to other
cptiegallo: F fog therfore am F fent. nohe
preached inthe Spnagoges of Galple.

C The. d. Chapter.
e a eita


per, bealeth the man ofthepallpe, calleth egat
ebetbe the cutomer , and pe eater) wept open


$ i


=
~ —


ajat. bid,
anbpiii g
AE. ic ‘ a 7 i
t egar. tie


. * And deuela ayara


;


r va oat:


DiS. Luke,


A rams T came tò patie that(woen the peo:
Roa gy f plepzcatled ppon bpm, todearethe

=H Wo02De OF God ) pe tode bp thelake
° of Genesareth: x ¢fawe two thpp-
Te SSN yes tande bp the lake poe, but the
Eptheriné were gone out of them, and were waf-
topngethepznettes. And be entred intoone of p
{hp ppes( Mbhpch pertapned to Spmon) pap-
 edbpm that be wolde thzufte oute a lptell from
thelande. And he fat downe andtaughe p peo-


Par. tii.a


E
, d


hatira
pyar. ti,a


oute of the (hpppe. Wibenbebadlefte {pea- apito the:arpfe,


besand the Pharples begant thpnke,farerig:
(hat felotoets thys, which fpeaketh bla phe-
mpe: xwbo canforgene fynnesbut God onips Aartié

ut when Jelug perceauedehep2 thoughtes zami
be anfwered, and {apd onto thë: Ubat chynke
pe inpourebertes* Wibether is calper tolape:
thy fpnneg be fozgenen the, ozto fape : rpfe vp, l
and walker * Wut that pe mape knowe that the sat. it .@
fonne of man bath power to foreuetpnneson Ee,
carth, belapdetothe {pc Be of the pallpe: ¥fape anwe
take Dp thp bedde and go wnto
p boufe. Andimimedpatipe he role bp before
them and toke bp bysbed(foberon be lape and
Departed to bys otne boule, praplpnae Gon,
And thep were all amafed,zthep Ass ucthe glo-
tp onto God. And were Fplled w feare, fapeng:
Ge baue fene fraungethpnges todape. F

* And atter thys, be went forthe,andfawea I

Publpcanenamed Leui, fptepng at the recepte Pet
of cuftome,and be fapde nto bpm: folowe me.
And be lefte all,androfe vp , andfolowed bpm:
And Leup made bpm a great feat in bis owne
Houle. And thercwaga great compa np of ub:
lpcans and of other that Cate at meate with the.
* Andy SDerpbes and Pharples murmured as M.T.
gapni bpsdplcpples.fapenge: Upp do peeate ruke.vit.¢
and dDzpnke with Publpcans and fpnners? And and-r.a
Actus anfwered efapd wnto them: Thep that
ave whole,nede not the Pbalicion: but thep that
are fpcke. J came not to call the rpabteous, but
Epnners to repentaunce.

And thep fapd vntohbpm: «Why do the vitep Be th
ples of Jhon fatt often and pape and the dilep agaraicc
ples of p Pbharpfesalfo, but thpne cate bepnke
Helapde Muto them:*Can pe make the chplozé saatd.1.b
of the weddpnge fall, whple the bzpdegrome ig S"
wpthtbes Che dapes wpl come, WHE the bzpde-

vomne alto Halbe taken awape from rye: then
alltbepfatintbofedapes,

Helpate alfo vnto thé alimilitude. Roman
putteth a pece ofa newegarmente,intoanoloe
beture, fo? pf bc do,then breaketh be the newe,
and the pece that wag taken out ofthe netbe, a=
greethnot withthe olde. And no man. poiwzeth
newe wpneinto olde bottels. foz pf he do, the
newe wpne wpll burke the bottels, grunne out
ít felfe and the bottels (hall perpihe. But newe
wpne muf be putinto newe bottels and botbe
ate preterucd. Mo man alfo that dzpnketh olde
wpne, trapght ape canawap iopth newe:foz
be fapeth: the oldeis better.

Che. vi. Chapter.
‘Be ercuteth bps op [cpples,cpat piucke the tates of
cozne,be bealeth the man tlh the topib? Ramp, tbo-


feth bps twelue Apolties, maketh afwete firman |
teacheth to vo Good forcucli, [i ex


= a) a
CH. $


i


i
a


BS t—Nand robbed them in tiep: bandeg.
And certapne of the harpflesfapde wnto thé:


| Gibp do pethat whpch is not latofull todo on


the Sabboth dapes: And Felus anltwered thz,

and fapbe: * Dau Cpe not teade what Taid DPD Lites .rpte

whe de bim felfe wasan Dungred,¢ thep whvch
| were


The Golpell


twere topth him: howe be went into che houle of
{.uerr.a God andodpa take andcate the thewe * beeade,
and gaue alfo to them that were wyth bpm:
€ro.rrb.r. yphicharenotia wiulltocate, but for thexpsea-
ftes only Andbelapd vnto them: Thefonne of
manis Lorde alfo ofthe Sabboth dape.
iat: cd rex Bud it forztuned in another Sabboth al
Aa £0,that be entred inte the Spnagoge,t taugde
And there was aman, whole rpabt bande was
dped vp. And the Spertbes and jbarples wat=
ched bpm, whether he wolde beale onthe Sal-
both dape tbat thep mpgbte fynde bowe toat-
cufe bym. But be knee thep2 thoughtcs , and
fapdeto the man wobpch bad the wprhzed band:
Rp le vp and fandforthiwuthe mpddes. And be
arofe and {Lode forthe. Chen fayde Jefus nto
them: 3 wpl afke pou a quettion:Wibetber is it
lawful onthe HSabboth oapes toda qood,02t0
docucllstofaue ones lyfe, 02 fo Deltrope thE
And be bebelve them all m compatle,and fapde
. putotbe man:Stretche forth thy band. And be
fit.revitt.b Dpd Co: *and bys bande thas rekord agapne as
marid wpole ag the other. And they werefplled wpe
~~ manche and communed togetberamonge the
feluca what they mpgbt do to Jelu. H
i © Anditfoztunedin thole dapes*that he went
e9st.riiuc Out into amountapne fo? fo prape, Econtpnucd
allnpabt in paaper to God. And alone agit
ggath.r.a Wag Dape,be called bis dpicpples, *and of them
Marti.’ hechole. rii. whom allo he called Apoltles: 5p-
mon whom be alfonamed Peter,and Andewe
bis bother, James and Jhon, Pbplpp and war
tholomewe, Matthewe t Thomas, James the
fonne of Alpheus and Spmon wbpcheiscaticd
sclotes,and Judas James fonne,¢ Judas Jira
tioth,thefame that was the traytoure.
rie And be came Downe pth them,and tode
inthe plapne felde,¢ the companp of bis dpicp=
eqat.fiit > plegxand a great multptube of people(out ofal
saat. i" a ewp e Jerufalem, and fromthe fee coate * of
Fob.ti.a CpzeandSpdon)wbpch came to beare bpm, €
to be bealed of thep2 Dpleates, æ thep that were
tered with foule fpzctes,and thep torre Healed.
And al p people peca Ned rotouche bpm, fog ther
went vertuc out of bput,and dealed them all.
=m Andhelpft vp bpscves vpon the dplciples¢
epath.v,afapde: * Bleed be pe poore fo2 poures is the
kpngdome of God. Wleffed are pe that honger
now, fo: pe fpalbe fatiffped. le ledare pe that
wene nowe, foz pe Hall laugbe. wleficd Wall pe
be when men bate pou, and ¢hzulte pou oute of
thep2 companpe, andraple on pou and abbogre
pour names avaneuell thpnge,foz the fonne of
mang fake. Reiopce pein that dape,andbe glad
for bebolbde, pour retard is great in beauen. K
Eo thusdpd their fathers vnto the prophetes.
xut wo wnto pou that aterpcbe:fo2 pe Daue
pour confolacion.t@o bute pou that are ful:foz
e al honger. Wo vnto pou that nowe laugh:
E: ye bal waple and wepe. Wo wnto pou whe
alimen pzapfe pou: foz fo dpd thepz fathersto
thefalle propbcres.
15ut 3 fape vunto pou which heare: Loue pour
enempes. Do goud to them which bate pou.
Wicie them that curfle pou. And pape Foz the


Amos bia


tohpch w2ditgfullp tronbie pou. And bnto bpm ey,
that fmpteth the onthe one cheke, offer alfo the SS.
other.* And bym that taketh aap thp qowne Heth, t.E
forzbpdnot to takethp cotealfo.Genetoeuerp =.
manthat afketh oftbe.Andothpmtbattaketh `
aap thy goodcs,albe themnot agapne.*And set. bti
aspewalde thatmen Houlde Do topon, do pe dapo
Su tothemlpkewpfie. | |
xAnd pf peloue them wbhiche loue pou, bat Œ
rhanke bane per ftoztpnnersalfoloucthep2lo- aarts
ucrs. And p£ pe Bo good fo: them Which do good - |
Foz pou, bat thanke paue pe: foz fpnnersalfo i
do cuenthefame. and pfpelend to them of who oi
pe bopeto receaue:tobat thake bauc pe-foz ipn:
ners alio lende to [pnners,to receaue fuchelphe
agapne. 25ut loue pe poure enempes, and do
roov.andlende,lokpnge for nothpiige agapne:
and poure rewarde balbe greate, and pe thalbe
the chilbzen of the bpeft:fo2 be is Kpnde vnto the
pnkpnde and to thecuell. ‘ |
riae petherfozemercpfull, as poure father .


-a g-


alfoig mercpful + Judgenot and pe pal not be ayar. vtr.s
tudged: Condempne not and pe Wall not be con-
Dempned: ffozqeue,¢ pe thalbe fo2qeué. x Gene pori,
and tt (halbe geuen ynto pou:good meafure and ~Y
and prefled Downe, atid thaken together , eru- .
nypnge oucr,(alimen qeue into pour bofomes. '
* f0? with the fame meafure that pemete with S:t-0i s
allail otber men meteto pouagapne. ami
And be put foztbea fymplptude Ynto them: £ :

*Canu the blpndeleade the blpnde: Do thep not sat.ro.p
both fall into tbe dptcher* Che dplepplets not tayath.re -
aboue bps mafter.Cuerp man thalbe perfpght Fob-rit.o
cuenas bps mafter i3.*CU bp Celt thou a moat mabig r
intbp beothersepe, but conlpodzeft not p beame }
that isin thpne owneepe ¢ Epther howe cante
tbou fape to thp brother: Wzother, let me pull
out the moate that ts tn thpue cpe,woben thou
fech not the veame that isintbpne owne cpe.
Thon ppocrpte,catt out the beame out of thpne
owne epe fpeft.¢ then Halt thou fe pecfptelp,to
pullout p moate thatisinthp beothersepe. x

¥ fFo2 (tisnotagoodtree,that bzingeth forth ©
cuell frute:netberts that aneuel tree that bzpn: e Fhe
getbfozth qoodfrute. Eo: cuerp treisknowne
bp bps frute, Eo? of thoznesdo not men gather
fpgges no? of bulpes gather ehep grapes. æ :
good man out of the good trealure of bps perte, |
bepngeth forth that whichis good. And an euel a
man, out ofthe cuell treafure of bps bert, bepn- ..
get forth that whichis euel. xoz of the aboii: Srat. rit. e
Daunce of the berte, bis mouth{peaketh. Dfa.r.b, `

Mbp call pe me x Lorde Lozde,and donot eat. vit.
as J bpodde pou: Wholoeuer commet) tome and 3 F.d
beareth mp fapenges,anddoth the lame, J wpl
ewe pouto bombeisipke.xHeislpkeama opat.ow.y
whpcbe buplte an boule, andbdpgged vepe, and Iaoi,
lapde the foundacton ona rocke. Wben the wa-
tersarofle, the floudebette bponthat boule and
coulde not mouc it. ffo2 it as grounded pon
avocke. Sut bethat Deareth anddocth not,is
Ipke a man that Mpthout foundacponbuplt an
boule bpon the cacth,agapntt wbped the fioude
DpDd beate:and itfcll immediatly. And the fal of
that boule was arcate, i

The


7


-~ fii.repbiid i
` Hiiretiiif bead,
ce,


i


:
p -
= ee es M
~
+a à F
h a


|


DiS, Luke,


CTe. vit. Chapter.


ggat blii a F Sg a e" ce
Fob. itit.F i | Pee s i ;


3 lap Dntopon, J baue not foude fo aizat fapth
no,notinglracl. And they ý were fente, turned
backe bome agapne,and founde the feruaunte

whole that bad bene fpeke. |
Fe And it foztuned after thps, that be wente
into acptic,whpch iscalled Raim, and many of
bps dilcpples went with bim, and much people.
Uiben be came npe to the gate of the cptte:be=
bolde,tbere as adead man carped out, whpch
iwas the only fonne of bps mother, andthe was
awydowe, and muche people of thecptie was
witb ber. Andwhenthe Lorde latwe her, he bad
compafiion on ber,andfapd vnto ber: wepe not
And be came npe and touched the coffpn: ¢ thep
that barebpm ffode tpll. And be fapde: Ponge
| man, J lape onto the:arple. And be that wag
) at bp,and began tofpeake.* And he delp
actes ir.o UcreD DPM tobis mother. And ther came afeare
adic onthemal. And thep gaue the glozp!.nto God,
yobn.tiit.c Lapeng:* A great Prophetcisrpien bpamige
ant.bib bgg Oodhath vplpted bps people. f ry And
thpsrumogze of bpm went foztb thozowe out all
geneman thozowe out all the regiong whbpeh

lve rounde about.

- Andthedplepples of Jhon thewedhym of all
gaath. ria thelethpnges.* And Jhon called wnto bim two
- of bps bpicpples,and tent thé to Jelus,fapence
Art thou be that oulde comè: o? Hall we loke
foz another: Ui ben the më twere come vnto bim
thep fapde: Jhon wWapttt fent vs wntotbe,fap-
enge: Arte Chou he that Mulde come:o2 Mall we
Wwapt fozanothersAndinthatlame boure becu
redmanp oftbep2infpzmpties and plages, and
of evel (pretes,and puto manp that were blpud


T


Forrit,
be yane (yght. Andheanfwered, andfapde un-
to 2 ae pour wape and bopnge wod agapr
to Jhon what thpnges pe baue feneandbearde, D
botve that «the bipnde fe the balt go, the lepers <ta-rrrd a
are clenfed,p deafe beare,tbe dead rpfe agapne: 1e
to the pooze tothe glad tpopnges preached, and
bappy is bethat ts not offended at me.

xAnd when the meflengers of Jhon tere des esath.ri. e
patted, bebegan tolpeake onto the people con:
cernpng Jbon.cibat went pe out into the wpl-
dernefle fo? tofer A rede paken opth the wpnd
Wut what went pe out foz tofe! Amanclothed
infofte rapment: ebolde,thep Ora are qor-
gpoullip appareled, and lpue delpcatelpe.are in
kpngescourtes. Eut what went peforthto fer.
X Pzrophete ‘Vee, Flape to pou, and mozethen
à Wophete. Tbps ts he of whom tt ig wzptten:
xWebholde, J fende mpne angell before thp ace Sirin
whbpch Hall prepare thp tape before the. ffo2 F onaia.itia
fape Dnto pou amonge wemens chpldzé, is ther Č
nofagreaterpropbete then Jhon Waptikk.Ne-
uertheles, be that ig lefe, in the Benadome of


gairit,


Godis greater then be. F


Andall the people, and tbe Dublpcans that
berde bym, iuftifped God, and where baptpled w
the baptpme of Jhon. Wut the Wbarplesand
latwers defppled the counfell of Godagapntte
them felueg and were not baptpled of bpm. |
And the Lozdelapde:* Wbhervnto hall Flp: 9 +F!.t
ken the men of this qeneraci:and what thpnge
are thep lpke Thep are lpke wnto childzen lpt-
epageintbe market place,¢ crpenge onetoano-
ther,and fapeng: ie baue ppped Ynto pou,and
pe hauenot datiled : we paue mourned topou,s
pe bauenot wepte. Fo: Jhon wWaptilk came,ne-
ther *catpnge bzeadnozdzpnkpnge wpne, and Aat. iis.
pe fape he bath the Deuell, Che fonne of manis
comte,and cateth and dpnketh , and pe Cape:be-
poldea gloutonous mam andan oumealurable
dzpnker of wpne å frend of Publpcang and lpn
ners. And wpldo ig iuftifped ofal Der chpldzen.
> And one of the Pharifeg defpzed bymtbat
He wolde eate wpth dyni. And be Ment into the
epee nea Downe ek adis * ~ met. prbis
olde a woma tn Cat cptie( Which was a fpr mar-ri.
ner) affone as the bnewe that Jefus fat at meat AOUNELA
inthe Ppariles boufe he wrought an alabatter
bore of opntment,and tode at bys fete behpnde
bpm weppnge,and beganne to walthe bysfecte
Yopthteares, and dpd wepe them wpth the bees
tes of ber Dead, and kpfled bysfete, and anopn=
tedthem toptbh the opntment.
Mben( the Pharple whpch had bpodé bpm)
fate pbe fpake within him felfe fapég: PE thie
man were a Pzophete,be wolde furelpe bnowe
who, and what maner of woman thys is that
touched bpm, fo: (pets afpnner.And sefug ans
Cwered, g fapde bnto bym:Simon J haue fom-
wbpattofape Dnto tbe. And be lapde: Walter,
fapeon. There wag acertapnelender whpcbe
badtwo detters , tbe one oughte fpue bundzed
pence and the other Epftpe. then tbep badno-
thynge to pape, be fozgaue them botbe. Cell me
therfoze,wbpch of them wpllloue bym moott?
Spmion anlwered and fapde: 3 tuppote pte
0 YON


The Golpell


to whome he forgaue moot. And de fapde wuto

bpm: Chou bat truclp tudged.
E Andhe turned tothe woman, andfapde Du-
to Spmon: Seet thouthps woman: Jenteed
intotbpneboule, thou gaucfke me no water foz
mp fete, but he hath waltheth my fete with tea-
res,and Dopped thé wpth the heaves of Der pead.
Thou gauek me nokpiie:but thetence the time
4cam in,bathnot cealedto kifle mp fete, Apne

ad with ople thou Dpddelk not anopnt:but the
bath anopnted mp fete wpth opntment. Uher
toze Jlape vnto the:manp fpnnes are iy iy
ber,fo2 Hheloucdmuch.Co wbom lefe istorge-
uch, the fame doth leffeloue. And be fapde vnto
her:thp fpnnes aveforzqeuenthe. Andthep that
fatat meat wrth bpm, begannetofape wpthin
them felues:i po is thps which fozgeucth fpr-
nesalfor And be fapde to the woman: * Thp
fapth bath faucd the. Goin peace. Ji


 C The. viii. Chapter.
LHR wpth bys Apottes gorth From totwne to totone
anv preacheth, hetweth the parable of the fede, trilech
toho is bps mether and bys brother, Mplleth theragpnge
oftbefec, Delpuereth the poflefled , and ozpueth thebez
ucis into che bearbeotfwpne,belpeth the fpeke Woman,
and Falrus boug ber.
per Vit foztuned afterwarde that be
how Ate, bpmitelte alfo went throughout p=
Poy Ray? tles anDfowncs: peeachpnae Me
- Eeka ES wopnge the kpngdome of God, and
Hub pity liu the twelve with dim. Andallor cer:
tapne women, wbpch were healed of euell [pre
ted, andinfpzmpries: Darpe tohpcheis called
Maqdalene(out of Hhome went fevendeucls, )
and Joanna p wpfe of Chula Herodes fleward
and ulanne,and manp otber, whpcbe mpnp-
fired onto bpm ofthep: fubitaunce. ri ben
much people roere gathered together, and were
come to bpm out of al cpties,befpate bp a fimi-
eoat.stit.b Iptude.x Che lower went out to fowe bys fede:
jar. tia andas belowed,fome fel bp the wape pde and
it was troben dotone, and the foules of the apze
Devoured it vp. And Comefellona Mone aandag
fone asit ee eee vp tt so i atvape be
caule itlacked mopffnes. And fome fellamonge
thoznes, and the ouae prongs vp topthit,¢e
chokedit. Andlome fell on good qrounde, and
{prange bp, andbare frute, an bundzed folve.
And as be fapdcbele thpnaes he crped: He that
path.cares to beare, letbpm berare.
sz ¥ Andbhigdilcpplegalked bym, fapeng:what
oyatni MANETOEfpmplptude is thyg: And be fapd: Yn-
sjac.itit.a tO pou ig it geuen to knowe the lecretes ofthe
kpnadå of God:but to other bp parableg: that
efar.oi.c When they le the hulbe not le: x and when thep
saac-rilt.D heave theptpuldenot wndertande.
Jonnie  ‘Cheparableis thys.* The lede is the hozde
Atesti: pf God. Thole that are befpde the wape, are
vomar b thep that beare , then commeth the deucll, and
tmat.riic taketh awape the wozde ontepf thep2 bertes,
spars. year chep oulde beleucand be faued. Thep on
the Rones are thep wbhpcbe when thep heare re-
ccane the wo2d wpth tope,and thele paue no ro:
teg: whypche foz a tobple beleue, and in tyme of
temptacion yo awape. And that whpcbe fell a=-
monge thognes,ave thep which when thep haue


@ar.b.c¢


berde go Fosthe,and are choked thyth cares and


tpches,and Voluy teous|pupnge.s bapnge forth /


hofrute. Chat tobpch fell in the good qrounde,
ave thep,whpch wpth a pure ¢ good berte beare
the foozde,and kepett, andbzpnge forthe frute as
thozowe pacpence. : | €
xRoman when he lpghteth a candell, Cone- ayath.v.b
reth tt pth a veffel,o2 putteth it pnder a table Sar.iiii. b
but {etteth tt ona candelfticke,that thep which * **
entre in,mapefe thelpabt.* Rot uae in fe: enath.r.c
crete, that pall not come abzode.Mepther anp Trek"
thpnge bpd,thathhalnotbeknotbéandcometo ` ”
Ipght. Cake bede therfore , bowe pe beare. Foz
Whofocucr Hath,to him thalbe qeué:* Snd who Merit .b


Tocuer bath not.frd bim albe taken:euen that egar, iie `
UR, Fip: D


fame wbpeb be fuppoteth that bebatp.
xThen came to bpm pps mother, andbhps oyat. ri.n
brethzen,and could not comeat bpm fo preale. aarti.
Andit tas tolde bym, and fapoe: Chp mother
andtbp beethzen tande wpthout, and wolde fe
the.e anfwered andlapde nto them:mp mo:
ther and my bzethzenarethele,whpch bearetbe
wode of Codanddoit.
phAnditchaunced onacerfapnedape, that ,
he went into athyp,and bys dpicpples alfo,and
befapde vutothent: Let vs go ouer ynto the o-
ther (pdeof thelake. And thep ee fo2tbe.
wut as thep fapled be fell aflepe.* And there a: saat. viii.
tolea ftozme of wpnd in the lake, andtbep toere HAt
plied opth water and Were in leopardDpe. And D
thep came to bpm, gawoke bpm, fapenge: Wa-
er, Walter, toe arelote. Thenbearole andre-
bubed the wpnde and the tempett of ivater, and
epep cealed qit wared calme. And be lapd nto
them:tobere is pour fapth:Cbep feared ¢ toon:
ded amonge thé felues.fapenge:Wipat(thynke
pe) íis this‘fo2 be commaundeth both we ibp-
mep apio unto tpe tslat Ne aes Ste
tbep fapled onto the region of the Gaderenites. earba.
obpchie oucragapnt Galile. —
_ And then de went oute tolande, there met
bim out of the cptieacertapne man, whych bad
a deuclllonge tyme and ware no clothes nether
abode in anp boufe:but in graues. Wibé be faw
Jefus and had crped,be fell dawne before hpm,


and topth aloude bopce fapde: * Wipat hane J mtns.


.


t


. E
- = § @


todo Wwpth the pemo- thon fonne ofthe Gon "4 ©


moott bpetts A belech the tozment me not: for he
commaunded the foule{prete to comme out of the
man. ffof often tpmeshehadcaughtbpm,and ?
peta an De AE O AS anwar
fetters:and be b; ebades,and was car
pak mete kel chit
nd Felus alked bpm fapenge:Wi bat te ¢
name And be fapde:Legion, becaufe pia z
uels were entred into bym. And they befoughe
bpm thathe woldenot commaunoe bento go
outinto the depe. And ther was there anberde
mat ee ee enan gpl: an ebep be
fought bpm, that be wolde fuffer them to enter z
into them. And pe luffered thé. Chen wente the
denels out of the ma and entredinto the wpne
And the beardran beadlpnage wopth vpolence in
to the lake,and were choked. Wibenthe berdmé
fatoe what bad chaunced,thep fed, ann Cola ‘es
1tpe


2


f


P|


——


T gaath.tr.v De


oe fter. ut oben Fetus herde


a’


gath ire
i Sgarb, e


PES, Luke,


in the eptic,andin the Spllaces. | ]

And thbep came out te fe what was done, and

came to Jeius,andfounde the man (out of whi

_~ the Deviels were departed )fittinge at the fete of

d Jelug clothed and is bis rpabt mpnd, and thep

Were afraped. Thep alfo whpchelatwe it, tolde

them bp tobat meanes be ( that thas poffe fed of

thedeucll) was healed. And al the multptudeokt

the Gaderenptes,befoughe bym, that be wolde

departe frå thé,fo2 thep weretaken wpeb great

spat. vito feare.* And be gat him vpinto the hpp,and re:

Sard. enened backeagapne. CHE the man (out of hd

_ *" the deucls were Departed /befought dim that be

mygbt be topth bin. wut Fetus tent him away,

fapenge-Go home agapneto thpne owne boule,

and peve what thpnges focuct God hath done

forthe. And de wente bps wape and pzeached

thozowe out all the cptie, whatthpnges foeuct
Felus had done Yntobpm,


And it foztuned that whan Jefus was come -


agayne,tbe people,receaued bpm. Joz thep all


goath.ir.p Wap ted fo? Dpm.* Bnd beholde, ther came ama
e Amb


named Jairus ( and be wag a ruler of the-p-
nagoge jand be felldowne at Jelug fete prap-
enge bpm, that bewolbecome inte bps boufe,
Foz be had but one Boughter onlpe, Vps a tivelue
peare ofage,andibe lape a dpenge, Butas bhe
went, the peoplethronged bpm.
xanda oman! ee Piue of bloude
twelue peares( which bad {pent al ber fubftatice
bpon Phpipcpong, neptber coulde be bolpen of
atp)caine bebpnde bpm, and touched the bem of
bps rapment:¢ tmmicdpatlp der piue of bloude
faiichedD. And Jefuslapde: Who sit that tou-
cheme’ Wiben euerp man denped, Peter (and
thep that were oypth bym ) fapoe: after, the
people thue the and vere the, and fapelt thou
who touched me: And Fetus fapd: Some boodpe
batb touched me. Foz 3 perceaue that vertue
is gone out of me.Cdiben the woman fate that
fhe as nothpd, We came tremblpnge, and fell
at bpsfete,and tolde bpm befoze all the people,
fo2 what caulethebad touched bpm, and howe
the thas healed immediatly. And de fapde nto
er: Doughter, be of coodcomfozte*thp tapthe
sgar be path fauedthe.qoin peace.
g Wibpledepettpabe,therecame onefrom the
rulers ofthe Spnagoges boule, which fapdeto
bpm:tbp doughbter wohl iy tela, gil
F at wowe, be aft=


_ saath. ire MMoered the father of the Damofell: * Fearenot,


hs ;
=e aes


Haro. Hheleye onlp,¢ He Halbe made whole. And when
be came to the boule be {uffredno manto goin
© topthbpm,faue Peter, James and Jhon, and p


father and the mother ofthemapden.Cuerp bo:


Dp wwepte €fozowed foz ber. And he fapdD:Mlepe
gobu, pid met. eet Damofel tg not dead, xbut flepeth: And
. they laugbedbpm tofcozne,knowpnae that fhe
was dead. And be theulk them all gute, caught
ber bp the bande and crpedfapenge: apode, d-
tpfe, And her Bi sb came agapne,and pe rofe
trapgbt wape. And he commanded to yeueher
meate. And the father ¢ the mother of her were
affonped. ut be warned them that thep Hulde

tellne man, what wasdone, |


Sol.rrh,


CThbe.ic.Chapter, PE
je fendeth out the twelue ApoRles to presti ig
Cori tell of bpm. De fen a abd A le id
and tio pibes, $ bittpples cofelle him to be the tonne pf
God, he tranlpgureth bpm fette bpon thé mount,veipues
teth che pofletled,and teacheth bps aptcpples to be lowip
Shep delpre bengeaunce,but berepzoueth them,
oe aan Clug called the xtwelue together, € J
nays (hee gauethe potber and aucthoppte ouer ssetd.r.c
Gh sey all devels.and that thep mpgbt heale Feng’
| i eed emtopzcathe Luke.vi.c


Ag i CA opleates. And be fent


La
"a


eate kpngbome of God, xand tobeale ggar.vrb
be fpeke and be fapd vntothé: Cake nothpug
to pout toznepe:nepther tafe noz ieepppe ncp-
thet bzcade, *neptbhermonep,neptber baue two Apake
coates:*¢ whatloener boule reenter into there faathro
abpde,and thence departe. And wbhofoeucr wyll
not receaue pou , when pe go oute of the cptic,
Mbake of the berp dufte from poure fete, fo2 a te:
fimony agapnite them. And thep departed and
went thozowe the touones,pzeachinge the Gols
pell,andbealpngeeuerp where. $

* And erode the Tetrarche heard ofal that aath:tr.d
wagdone by bpm, and doubted, becaule that it Os
Was fapd of fome,tbat Jhon was rpfen agapne
ftom death:¢ of fome, that Hellas bad apearcd,
¢ of fome, that one of the olde pzophetes ag rp
fen omer ee a erode lapde: Fhe nbane 3 be-
beaded:but whois 2 di Da J beare luche


thpnges: And pe defpzed tofe bpn.
And the Apollegreturned:and toloebpmal 5 _
that thep baddone. * Andhe toke them,q went BATS
alpde intoa oe tatpplace.npe Onto thecptie,p Fob. bta
iscalled WDethlaida. Wibpche when the people
Hinewe,thep folotbed bpm. and bereceaued thé,
and {pake bnto them of the kpngdome of God,
and healed them that had nede to be healed. And
wien the dape beganne to torre awape, then
cametbe twelucand fapde dnto bpm: iendethe
people awape,that they mape go into the tot-
nes and nerte bpllageg and lod eae get meat
Fo? we ate here in a place of wpldernes. Wuthe
fapd Dnto them: Geuc pe them to eate.Andthep
fayde:Wie baue no mo but fpucloaues and tivo
fpthes,ercepte we thouldeqo and bye meate fog
all thps people.Andthep were about Fpue. <3),
ment.and hefapd to bps dpfciples: Caufe them
tolptdotone bp fpftieg ina company. Andthep
bpd fo,and made them all to fptdowne. Hndbhe
toke thefpucloaues andthe twofpthes, and lo-
ked Dpto beauen:and blefled them and bzake , g
aue to the dpicpples,tofet peu the people.
Andthep all dpd cat, werelatilfped. AnD ther
was take bp of thatremapnedto them, ticluc
batkettes full of broken meate.
— *And tt foztuned ag Fane €
ps difcpples Were With pim and bealked them sat. roie
apenge:*Uiho fape ppeople that Jam: Thep Stb.
antiocred and (apd: Abon Waptilt: Somefape: arbi.
Heliag,andfome fape:that one of the olde 320-
phetesis rpfen.ipefapde ynto them: But who gnat.rbl.c
ap pethat Jam ‘Sopmon Peter anlioercd and Fob.bus
fapbe:*thou art the Chit of God. And be war terra a ai
ned and commaunded them that thep Mulde tel agar.tiii a
no man that thpnge,fapenge: * the fonne of ma -d.e r.c
mulkeiuttce many thpnges, and betepzourd $ miae a
. the


SS = aa


The Golvel


of the clorrg, andofp bie preaffes.e (erphes,and


‘gy at.rbti E :
gares. actor ehele fapenges , betoke Deter and Fbone


D
mea Preter fapde wnto Felus:-Watter.tt is good bez


é nac


irb pelas thep came downefrom the hpll)muche


daio Sutthep wph not what that word ment and
and.rbid.€ te WAS DPI from them, that toep onderkode it


i

jl +

rT Fa Ti r
eS ie ee
io met ll as

la a j

TAT ge le :

H l Per mal


fa


not. And thep fearedto alke bpm ofthat fapeee
Aud ther entreda thought amonge them which
of them Hulde beebravcatett. tu hen Jefus per- + a
ceaued the thought of thep2 beartes, De tobe a eS
chplde and fet bpm barde bp bpm,andfapde on: Lukerhis
to tbem:Wholocucr receaueth this chpldin mp ©
name teceaucthme.* And toholocucr receaueth pence, ;
me,teceauethbpmebatfent mez. JEozbetbatig Foy
leat amonge pou all,the fame thalbe qreat. |
And Zhou anfwered,and fapde: Baer, we
fawe one caltynge outedenels tn thp name, and
bey endr , becaule be foloteeth not wrth ee
bg. Jnd Feluslapd yntobym:*fozbpd pe bpm sume.s °
Not. 02 Hethatis notagapnite bs, is with ys:
Anb it foztuned when thetpme wascome, p
be Moulde be receaucd vp, be fet his facetogoto e
sctulalem,andfente meffengersbefore bpm.  -
And tiep wort and entredinto a cptic of the Då-
marptanes,to make readpe For bpm. And thep
wolde not receate bpm, becaule big face wasas
thousrhe be wolde goto Jerufalem. When bys
byitpples, Jamese Abon fate this, thep fapde: i
Lozbe,wyplte thou that toe commaundefpze to ip
conte Dotone from beaucnand confume thé euen |
asx Helias bpo defend about, and rebu= (iturg.te >
kedtpem,fapengqe: De wote not what maner i
[p2cte peare of. Jo? the fonne of ma ig not come
to deftrope mens Ipueg,but to faune them. Bnd
thep thent toanother towne.» And tt chaiiced aa
that as thep were halkpnaein pe vape, a cers
a epee onl on I folowe the sqat.biti,e
iwhetberfoeucr thou toplte qo. Jefus {apd buts
brm :foresipaue holes, and bp2des of the ape o


Daue nefesibuc the fonne of man path not tober


tolape bps beade. f
nd pe lapde vito another: folotwe me. nd ze

thcfarne fapde:Lozde,{uffre me fpf to ao and

bury imp fatber.3efus fapde dnto bim.* Let the Le rri d

Dead butpe thep2 cad: but qothou and peeache

the kpngdom of Gov. And another fapde: Lod

x J Wpli folotec the-but let mefpet cro DPDEDE AGF

face Well, whpcheareatbome at mp boule. Jea |


fusfapde bntobpm. No man that putteth bps |
bandes tothe plotoe,and loketh backe,is apt ta .
the ipngoome of God. F . &
CTbe.x.Chapter. fF oe

«He fendeth the.trr.befoze bpm to preache, eruet) them |


acjat IME lit \
fatber au oceeth tbe Beeive Conk temon sa Tao eae k
burs ata enueh gerne ins Beeta BEEBI
@7egvaline is bplpgent im bearpage bps Bate *, Sharpe A
au eA fter theletbpnges the Lorcan: A
PEG s opnted xe Irr. ieee too alto, we
ee gq and fent the two g two before hpn
LEANA (nto cucrp cptie and place. whyeber
aioe Ye bpm felfe wolde come. Cherfore
pòde be Bnto them:* Che baruetis great but eoath.tr.v
the labourers are fctoe. zape pve therfore the
Lode of tbe baruelt,to fend foztblabourergins
tobis batueft.qo ere: * Behold, F lend atr
pou foztheaslambes amõge wolues: care no tit
wallet nether {crpp,noz thors, ¢ * falute noma Ms
bp the wape.* Junto whHatloencr honfe peenter, teaet.c.b
fpe lape : PBeacebetothyshoule. Ano ve eren
onne G


j : Y


m


Te fonue of peace be therespont peace ipallret vpõ
byrm:pfnot, it hal turne to pou agapne. Andin
the fame boufe tarpe tpll, catpnye anddzpyn-
&pngeluche asthep geuc. Eo: tbhe labourer ig
Wo2thp of Dis rewarde. f

25 Gonot from boufe to boufe, and intowbhat-
Coeuer cptie peentre,and thep receane pou, cate
{uch thingesasare fet befozepou,and heale the
[peche that are therein, andfape Dnto them : the

hra Kpngdom of God is come npe dpow pou. xut

into whatfoeuer cptiepeenter,and thep receaue
pou nof,go pour Wapes oute into the reteg of
thefame,and fape:euen the berp dufte of poure
cptie, obpcbe cleaucth on bs) do we Loype of a-
gapnitepou: Rotwpthtandpnge, bepe {ure of
this,that the kyngdome of God wag come npe
bpon pou. Flap wntopou: that itthalbeealper
in that Dapefozsodome, then for that cptic.

* Wo vnto the Chozasin: wo puto the Weth


., OEE faina. Fozpit empzacles bad benedonein Tp:


_ teand Sidon, tobich haue ben done in pou, thep

had(a Greate whple ago)repented of theps ipn-

¢ nes {pttpng in peer cloth and alpes. Neuerthe=
J” leg it patbe calper foz Tpreand Dpdon, at the
$ tndgement,then foz pou.ind thou Capernaum
he (whpche art eralteptobeauen) Malt bethzutte
mbord Downe to bel.xdpe that beareth pou,heareth me
” - andbet tDeippieth pou velop eth me: and be
that delppleth me, delppleeh bpm that fent me.

T gp iene gan gan Ape e, lap-

enge Aane seupihe sie rsa aretubdued

to vs thozotve thy name. Andbelapd puto thë:

" ete rtit.c * J fawe SHathban(ag tt had bene spb tenprige )
Soe: Hie Eallpnge Downe from heauch.* Hebold, ¥ qeue

| actarouid DUO pou power,totreadonferpentes and {co2-
| . Piong, and oucrall maner power of the encmpe,


andnothpnge thallhurte pou. Peuertheleffe in ADartba, thou art carefull,and troubled about


‘Many thpnges, verelpe one is nedefull. Harpe


this vetopce not.that the {pectes.are fubdued yn

Bhil titta Sopon-butretopee,that* pour nameg arewzpt-
apo ree ten mbeauen. |

D BU TREE y rh S r SA cen
tprb QOOK,andfapd:F thanke the, Dfather,* Lor

ai i ‘ Sfheauen and catth, f tboubat ppd thefetbpn-


Rt ges from the wpie and peudét, and baft opened
$ a inta babei, Euen! father, foz lo pleated l
© eat roio it the. All thpngeg are geuen me of mp father:


and.Fotit.> $99 man bnotoeth tho the fonneig, but the fa-


| Sthnwete ther:and who the father ts but thefonne, and be
a .


nabe ¢Hrpbomtbhe fonne wpll wewe ppm-
ane be reine tobig dilctples,¢ fapd fecretlp:
| Mattie reap p are the epes, tobpche fe the thpnges
. . tbat pele.foz Ftell pou,that many Prophstes
anid Bynges baue Defpzed to fe thole thpnges,
iwbpebe pe fe,and haue not fene them, eto beare
thole thpnges whpcb pe beare baue not beard
_. ge them.Andbebolde, acertapne latoper tode bp
gyat.cri and tempted bym fapenge:* afer, what hal
: 73 do,to inberet etertialllpte: He apd wnto him:
Ubat is woeptten in the lathe /Hotve readelte
patita thoucand be aunfwered ae fapde:* Loue the
soured T sanethp God, topth all thp berte,and wpthal
| thy foule, and fopth all thy itrength, and wptp
alltbp mpnie:and thp nepahboure as thp felfe,
And be lape oniohpm: Chou hafke anlwered
spgbt.Cbyps dog thou Halt lpue. Mut be wpl-


Lol.crbij,
lpngetoiuttptpebyin felfe, fapde nto Tefug:
And who imp nepebbouces s z Aeus
clus antihered,andfapde: J cerfapne man
detcended from Ferulalemto Iterico, and fell
amonge theues whpche robbed bpm of bys rap=


ment and hounded bpm, andbdeparted, cupng


bpm ale deade: And it chauticed, that there
came Dotne a certapne pzeafte that lame way,
and tohen be latwe bym, be patted bp, And lpke-
wple a Leupte, when be wentenye to the place, .
came, and loked onbpm, andpaffenby. Wuta ft
cerfapne Samacptane, ag be tourneped, came
wiito bpm: and when befawe bpm, be bad con-
patlps onbpm, and went to,and bounde bt te fe
woundeg, and pored tn ople andiwpne, andfet
bpm on bps owne beate and brought ppm toa
comen nove teen s Siia: 0? bpm. And
on the mozowe, toben be departed, he toke oute


_ fwo pence, and aaue them tothe book, and fapù


bnto bpm : Cakecure of bpm : and-whatfoeuce
thou tpendett moze, wht 3 come agapne, 3J till
recopente the. Wibpcbe nowe of thefe thie, thpn-
kefte thou, twag otee onea bym that fell
amonge the theues:And befapde: be that the -
wed mercy on dpm. Chen fapd Fetus onto him:
©0,and do thoulpketopfe. |
__ Ye St foztuned that as thep tente,be entred
intoa certapne totone. Anda certayne woman
named Bartha, receaued bpm into bet boufe.
And thys woman dad a fpffer , called Harpe,
whpche alfofateat Jefugfete , and bearde bps


‘Wo020. But Martha was combed about much


ferupnge,and ode and fapde: Lozde dock thor
Hot care, that me fpiterhatbe lefte meto fcrue
alone? yd her tbertoee.tbat thebelpe me,aAnd
Aetus anftered, and fapde Ynfo ber: @artha,


ath chofen the: parte, bye Inot b
baken awape prom ber, fe sais not be
€The.xi. Chapter,


q Heteacheth bps opleppies to prape, dipu outa de:
tell, atid cebubech the blatphein ae Ph wear Thep x


qupze (panics and tokens, De eateth topth the Pharpre
and repzoueth the ppoceptpe of the @barptea in
amb ppoceptes, ef OF DE Pharpfes , Scrpbes,


Fe Ey dit fortued ashe wag pap- X
EVA ee lige tn acertapne place: whe he
BREZON Pe cealed, one of hts difciples fayo
pE TA eA Unto bpm: Lorde, teache bs to
S RA pmape.as Zon alto taught big
pe aa. jj diiciples. And befapd Dnto the:
ben pe prape,fape: * D oure father whpche s4t.vt.b
€


art in beaut balotwed be thp name. bp kpn-
dome come. Cp wpl be fulfplled, euenin earth
alfo agit ig inbeauen. Durdaplye breade geue
b8 thps Dape. And fozgene bs our {panes, Eo:
cuen Wwe fozgeucenerp man that tretpatteth vs.
and leave vs not into temptation. Wut delp-
apt wh (oe ddi |
Ano De Lapo nto them ep any of pou thal
bauca frpnde,andthal gotobpmat mponpabe
and fape wnto bpm:frpnde,lendine theeloaues, 23
foz a frpndeofmpnetscome outeofthe tapeto. -
meand F pane icia bpm, zo
DD tt é


The Golpell


he thpthitt anhere and fape: trouble me not,
the Doze ig nowe fhut,and my chplozen are with
me inthe chambze, J can not eple, and qeue the.
3 lape unto pou:tbough be topll not acpfe, and
gene bpm : pet becaule of bys impoztunptpe be
Wwpll tpfe,and geuebpmas manp ashe nedeth.
And J ape wnto pou:xalke,and it halve geuen
pou. Sebe,and pe pall fpnde. iinocke, andit
balbe opened vnto pou. JFoz cuerp one that af-
Eetb,receaucth:-and bethat tcheth,fpndeth: and
Unto bpm that knocketh pallit be opened. vi
the fonne thal afke beeade,of any ofpou,that ig
a father, wpl be gene dim a ones D2 pE pe atke
fptbe, topli be Foz fohe acue bpm a ferpent/ D2
Ebeatkeanegae, tpl pe otter bym a {cozpion?
Fpetben bepnge enell,ca geuk good ayetes bn
to pourchplozen,botbe muche moze tall poure
father of beauen senetbe bolp fpacte to the that
defpze it ofbym., F
eqathir.o Px AnD be was calkpnge ontea denell,and
Baar via the tame as domme. And whe De badcat oute
© the sping a domme fpake andthe people wi-
eit ik dDzed. ut fome of them fapde : x be cafteth oute
=. Deuels thozotoe Weelzebub the chefe of theve-
uels. And other tempted ppm and tequp2ed of
byinafpgne from beauen. Wut he Bnowpnee
thepe thought.tapde onto them: Enerye kpng-
Dome Deupded agapnitte it felfe, isdefolate : and
one Houle doth fall ypon another. PE Sathanal
fo bedcupded agapnitt bym felfe Dowe fhallbps
kpngoome endure Becaule pe tape, that catt
out deuclles thozowe Werlsebub. PFX bp the
belpe of Weelsebuy cafte oute deuels, by whofe
belpe do pour chplozencatt them out:‘Cherfo2re
{halt thep be poure indges. But pf F topeh the
Finger of God caft out deuels,no Doubte Pkpng
dome Of God ig come Dpon pou. l
rgat.rite. * Uban a ronge man armed, watcheth bis
D boufe.tbe thinges that be poffeficrh are in peace
Wut wpen a tronger thé be commeth vpo bpm,
and ouctcommeth bpm, be taketh from ppm all
bps barnes ( Wherein betrutted ) and deupdeth
dps goodes: He that is not wpth me, ig se R
me. Andde that gathercthnot wpth me teatte-
tetDabzoade. —

*UUben the oncleane Cprete is gone onte of
& man, be walketh though d2pe places, palis
teft. And wbë be fpndeth none, be fapeth: 3 wpll
refurne agapne Dnto mp boufe, whence Jcame
out. And when hecommeth,befpndeth it (wept
andgatnpthed. Che goeth be and taketh to him
feuen otber fpzeteg wozfe then bpm felfe, g thep
enterin and dirl there. And the ende of thatma
is wozie thenthe begpnnpnae.

Andit foztuned, that agde pake thefe tbpn-
nesa certapne woman ofthe companp Ipft bp
ber Vopce, andfapde ynto bpm: Happpe is the
wonibe that bare the „andthe pa ppes tobpcbe
gaue tbe fucke. ut be fatd: Pes, happy are thep
that heare the twozde of God, and kepeit. ya

Wihen the people were athered thpcke to-
gether, be beqanne to fape:Chigisan cuell naz
natrite cton, *thep feie a fpaneand there thal no [pane
Soboto De geuct them, but the fpane of Jonas the 20-


qona iig Phete.JTozag+t Jonag was a {patie to the Pip:


mt. os


3)ob.r 1.
gact, ia


Gairid


body thalbe full of lpgbt. But pf


ninetes fo thall alfo the fonne ofthanbetothis —
nacton.* Che quence of the Southethall tpfe at if MeB.P.a
the tudgement, with the më of thpsnacion, and whaa
cõdempne them : foz the came from the ptmootk K,
partes ofthe carthe tobeare the wpledome of
Salomon. Andbebholde, agreater then Dalo
mon is here. Che men of fintue (hall epte at the
tudgenicute wpth thps nacpon,and mall con-
dempne them:fo2 thep twere bzoughte to repen- 2
taunce,bp the peeachbpng of Jonas. Andbepold .
a greater then Jonas tg bere. E
ixo man lpabtetha candel and putteth E e . 5
tt ina peupe place nepther onder a butpell,but ariii, b
ona candeltpeke , that thep whpcbhe come in a
map fe the lpaht.* The lpg he of the body, isthe a.
cpe. Gherfore when thpne it tpn pe thp


Fa
ti]


eepe be e=
nell, thp body alfo thalbe fullof darknes. Cake
Hedetherfore,that the lpght tobpche isin the, be
not Darkenes.PEall tbp bodptberforebe cleare
Daupnge nopavte darke, then allit all be full
of BE ae as toben acandelldoty lyg ht the
topthbepgbtnes. J | as

-And ag be fpake , acertapne harpie bes
fought bym to dpnetopth bpm, and Fetus went
in and fate Downe tomeate.Waben the Pharple _
fawe if, De maruapled,that be bad not fp2tt wa `
(bed before dpner. And p Lorde fapdvntobpm: æ.
*owedo pe Phårpies, make cleane the ou
{pde ofthe cuppe,andthe platter but poure in-
Warde parteis full of rauenpnae æ wpckednes.
Pefooleg dpd not he(thatmade that ral ig


wpthout)makethat whpeh is wpthinal


uerthcletfe, * geuc almoote of that peba D Era dbitb


bebolde,al thpnges are cleane Dito pou.* Wut matrite!


wo Yntopou Pbarples, foz pe tythimputcand
rete,andall maner berbes, and palie oueriud:
ement and thelouc of God. hele ought pe to
Daucboneanbpetna to leur mee costa
Cao Buto pou Pdarptes:foz pe loue the Vp: mae. ta
perimoolteates inthefpnago 8,€ gretpnaes =
inthe market. Wo nto pou Serpbes Pha
tples:pe ppocrptes,fo2 pe areas graues Wbpech
appeare not , and the men that walke ouer
them, arenot warcofthem. Ehenaunfwered
one of the lawper
thus fapenge,thou purtette vs to rebuke alfo.
Andpefapd:*Wwo ynto pou alfo pe lawiers:fo2 £rap.r.s


pelade men worth burthens , wobpche thep benot co K


able to beare and pe pourefelues touche not the
packes Worth one of pour fpngers.Wio vntopon
xpebuplde the mi ch2es of the pze
pouretathers kplled them,trulpe pe beare tope-
neg that pealowe the dedes of pour fathers,toz
thep &plted thé,and pebuplde thepz fepulcbacs,
Therfoze fapdethe topledome of Got: * F wll mat.rstit»
fende them Prophets and Apottles, and fome
of them thep Hall fape,and perfecute: that the
bloude of all Bzopbeteg whi |
begpnnpnge of the wo2ld)mape be “rad of
thps generacion from the bloude of* bell, wns gene.urry
to pbloude of sacharp, which perptbrd betwene ti Coe
the aulter¢ the teple. Uerelye ¥ {ape yntopou:
it balbe requyp2cd of thysnacion.

Ho bnto pou latopers : fo? pebaue takenga .

Wape |


x À


And fa pd Dnto bpm: Wafer Vee


ve


=
f
4


EE OUTE iraccrritices ©


g


b
!


teS, and mat.rrig.w. » =


bistbed fromthe , > l:


GfS.Luke, Kol.cebij.
Wap p kepe of knowledge, peettrednotinpour *«Chouhalke muche roones layed Vp in ooze <ecte.ri.c
{clues.anbd them that camein,yefosbad. When fozmanp peares ,takethpne cale eate, dzpnke,
be thus tpabe yntothem, thelatopers andthe and bemerp.2But Godfapd bntobpm: * Choy Ier.rbii b
Pdarples egpne to were bufpe aboute bpm, foole,tpis npght topll thep fetch atvap thp foule
and capcpoutlpe to alke bym manp thynges, agapnefrom the.* Then wbolepaltholethpn: erri»
layenge Wwapte fo? bym and fekynge to catche ges be, which thoubatt pzouided. H0 ig if with
fometbpnge oute of bps mouthe,wherebpthep bpm that ratbereth epee Stobpmlelfe and ig


- mpgbtaccufe bpm. aA he ser ona na “eevee
The.rit. Chapter. no De pace Duto His Oplepples : Cherfoze
bccn EE ge Aflape ynto pou:*Cakeno thoughte Fo? poure ME
bis uifciples agapntt perfecucið warneth thé ta Ipte, tobat pe thall eate: neptber foz the bodpe “
tape core ma De wit ior pate cbeto hange bps twbat pe thal put on. Che lpfé ig moze then meat
earthip tbpnges,but to twatche and to bereadpe and the bodpe tg moze then rapmente. Con {pder
. SERENE DUE TOPUN, F _ theraués,foz tbepnepther fotwenozrepe, which
A paag > tbere gatheredtogether an imu- neptherbaue ftooze houtenoz barne, and God fe


FALA Mmerable multptude of people(tnfo Deth them. f Hove much are pe better then fe-
Wy LN Y in Anise i OOM 13 as a
BY Ave ceganne FO Lape VUTO Ypg dpicp-. «Li bpch of pou(foithbis tak thought) agaty.vin
sgat.roi.b CROSS ples: Epke ofall x betareoftbhele: can adde to bps ftature one cubrter BEDLI
Poatie Welt OF Che barpies,whpchis ppocrpfye. oz- he not able todo that thinge whichis leatt:tobp
Par tii. Ebere ia nothynae couered, that ball not be wi- take pethought fo? theremnafit ? Confpder the
zuke puto coucced:nepehce bpdthat Hallnot be knowen. pies how thep qrowe. Thep laboure not,thep
~ Lae via g #102 Moat chpnges pehauefpokenin darknes fypnne hot:and pet F fape vntopou,that Salo:
Lub, biti. b D pp p p
- Halbe hearde th the lpgbte. And that wbprhepe mon tn all begropaltpe, was not clothed Ipke
Daue ee run infecrete places ene of thele. PEGodfo cloth the graffe (wwbpcbe
' gaath.r.03 albe preached on the toppe ofthe boufes.* 3I toto bavetn the feldc,and to mozotwe fs caite tn:
’ Soave? Tope pnta pou mp frendeg,benotafrapedof the tothe anace )botoe muche more wpll he clothe
tbat kpll the bodpe and afterthathauc homoze poy, D peoflptlefapthi And alke not pe what
x8 that thep can do. Wut Jwpll Wewe pou whom peall cate, 02 What pe Hall dapnke, nepther
pe ball feare:Fearebpm whpche after bebathe clypmme pe bp an bpe: foz all fuchethpnges do
Gplled, bath power tacatte intobell. Vee, 3 fape the jeathen people of the wozlbde feke foz. Pour
7 Lutopou:feare bom. Are not fpue fparowes father knotoeth,that pebauenede of fuch thpn-
bought fo: two eag Ht Bed ong notoneof thë ges Waberfore*feke pe after the kpngdome of Matb.nr, e
isfozgotten of God. Alfocué the Verp beeres of Ood,andal thelethynges balbe myntin ‘32/2!
pour beadareallnombeed. Weare not therfore, to pou.>« scare not lptell flocke,fo2 tt is poOure Pzo.rrtit a
l pe are moze of balue then manp {parotocs. fathers plealure to genue pou the kpnadome.
mre Alape bnto pouæeuerp one:wbofoeuercon: x Hell that pe baue, and geue aimes. And ae
felleth me before men bpm allthefonneofma prepare pou bagges,whych ware not oloe,cucn S7
knowledge alfobefoze theangels of God. And a trealure,that fapleth uot tn Heauen, where no
bethat denpethmebetoze men, thalbedenpedbe thee commeth,nep Det mothe cozrupteth. Eo?
satrli, Fore the angels of God. x And wholocuer{pea- where poure trealure ts, there twpll pour hearte E
mald kethatwozdeagapritthefonneofman it Walbe be alfo. x Let pou lopnes beqpzde aboute, and ephe. vre
eyath.riie fozgenenhpm. * Wut onto bpm that blafphe- poure tpabtes DNNPNAC® (in pour handves, ) and Pethe
| BGKGPHD meth the dolyegoofteitthall not befozqeuen. pepoure felues lyke Dnto men, that tvapte foz *°
ben they bepng pou vntothe Spnagoges,€ thep2 Lozde,tobenbe wplreturne from the wed
bitop rulers,and offpcers, take penothought opnge: that whan be commeth and knocketh
bowe, 0: what thpngepethalanfwere, oz wbat thep mape open butobpmimmedtatly. Happp
pe pall peake. Eor the holpe qoott thall teache ave thole feruauntes, whome the Lorde (when
pouinthe lame boure,what pe ought tofape. be commeth ) pall fpnde wakpnge. Cerel pe ¥
re Dne of the company fapd Durobpm:4)a- {ape vntopou,that he thal gpzde bpm felfe and
€ ffer,fpeabetompbeother,thatbedeutdetheen- makethem tofptte dotonetomeate , and walke
berptaunce wpthme.and be fayde Dntobpm: bp,andmynpiter pntothem.Andpédecome in
Pan, wbomademeaindge, ozadeupder,ouce the erone Matche. pee ptbe come inthe thpzde
pour Andbefapde Dutothetakebedee beware twatche,andfpnde them o,bapppe are thofe fer-
of couetcoutnes.sfozno mans lpfe Tandethinp nauntes. Chis onderade, that pf the rood ma
aboundaunce off thypnges whch be pofletfeth. ofthe houfe Knewe what boure the thete olde
ante oe Je tacdebisis $ iene bnto them, fap- come, bewolbde furclpe wat , and not luffer
enge: Che qrounde of a cevtapne rpche man his boufe tobe ve soo FE epetherfoze reas nat.ttii
brought forth plentpful frutes,and he thoughte dpe alfo , foz the fonne of man wpll comeat an and-rro.a
foptbin bpm felfe,fapenge-what thall dobes houre then pe thyntenot. Elica ete
caule A baue no rowme, where tobetowemp Peter fapde onto bim:* Batter, tellef thot mat.rriitt®
frutes: Andpelapde:Chuswylh Jodo. J wyil ehpstpmplptude bntobs.oztoall men? And p Marple
deftrope mp barnes,andbuplde greater ether- Lozgde fapd: whois afapthfuland wife temaro
fate J gather allany goces par are owe wmbomebislozde hal makeruler ouer bis houf-
pnto me, and J wplifapetomptonle: Soule, bolde togene them thepz gaai it fee
it = featcn


Che Golpeil


pot. fbit [eq tongi apie’ is that leruaunte, whome bys

Lozde whan becommeth, pall fpnde lo dopnge.

Dfa truthe Ffape Wntopou that he wpl make

_ Æ bymrulerouerall that be hath. Wut and pf the

mat.Frou? Ternaunte Tape in bis herte:* Sp lode wyl de=

ferreDps commpnge ( and Hall begpn tofmpte

the (cruauntes and mapdens,and tocate and

Depnike,andto be Dzonken the lozde of that fer-

uaunte wpll come ina dape whan be thynketh

not,andaftan boure, whan be is not ware,and

wplibewe bpm in peces, andacuchym bpsre-
warde wyththe ynbeleuers. |

«Che leruaunt that knewe his matters topl
and preparednot pm felfe neptper Dpd accoz=
ppnge to ‘uy pl, Halbe beaté toith manp trp-
pes. ut he that buewe not anddpd commpite
thynges worthy of trppes, Halbe beaten wpth
fewe itrppes. Æo? unto whom focuer muche ig
genen, of Dim Halbe much requyp2ed,and to whi
men baue commptted muche, of bpm wplltbhep
afke the moze. Jamcometofende fpzeon the
carth and what isimp delp2e, but that it were al
ready Lpndled: Notythilandpnee J multe be
math.rr.c xbaptpled pth a baptpme : e howe am J pap-
tegar.ra ned tpll itt be ended: t Suppole pe pF amcome

© tofende peace on the carther 3 tell pou nape, but
rather deupfion. Faz from bece forth there thal:
be fpue in one boule penpe, thee agapnite tivo
anbdtmoagapntt thre. Che father thalbe deup-
dedagapnt thefonne, and pfonne agapntte the
father. be mothetagapnite thedoughter, and
the dougbter aps pa oe motber. The mother
inlawe asap e Der Doughter in latz andthe
doughter im lawe agapniteber mother inlatoe.
Ape fapde allo to the people: * whan pe fe a
cloud rpfe out ofthe welk,trapghe wap pefape:
there commeth atbower.and fott is. And ban
cfe the fouthe wyndeblowe, pe fape-it wll be
Jote ttt commeth to palle. Pe ppocrptes,pe can
opfcecne the outioarde appearaunce of thefkepe
and of tbe earth:but home bappenetbit, that pe
cannot [&pll of thps tpn ? Pee and whp mye
pe not of pour felues whatisrpabt:

*Uilhen thou goet with thyne aduerfary to
therulet,as thou artin the wape, gene dplgéce
thatithou mapelte be delpuered from btm, leatt
he bzpnge the to the indge,and theiudge delpuer
the tothe tapler, and the taplar catt the intopee
fort. 4 tell the, thou thalt not departe thence, tpl
thou bait made good the vtmook mpte,


@ Che. réit. Chapter,


Jaco. titi


teat. Pola


fjath.b.d
3; O.FFD, p


pary Ver twere welent at the fame feafon
KE Gay) certapne men that themed bpm of
Rea. AEA CDE Oalpleans, whole bloude pp-


A 7
yee pa A
jy fig a

+ =
EE r i.


f eel Ta
Ls


ented factpEpee. Jud Jelug antwered.and
actest.e fapd vutothem: uppofe pe that thefe* Galp-
cans were greater {pnners thé al the other Ga


Ltleans,becaufe thep fuffredfuche punpthment’ k


A tell pou nape:but excepte perepent:pe thal all


the firapath gate:fog many ( Jfape anto pou)


| Late DaDmpngled toptb they2 owne- Gute, and to finocke at the Doze,fapenge: Lode, w 3


løkewpie perpihe. D2 thofe.rbiit. vpon tobpche
the fotze tn SDiloefel and fletoe then, thpnke
pe that thep were fynners aboue allmen that |
Diveltin Jerufalem: F tel pounape:Aut except og
perepent pe Hallall lpketople perpe.

ripe tolde alfo this fpmplptube : a certapne 15
man bada*fpqae tree planted in bis ppnepardD Satri,
and be came andfought frute theron, and found
none. Chen fapde he to the dzefler ofhps vpne-
parde:bebolde, this thze peare paue 3 come, and
fought frute on this fpage tree, and fpnde none:
cut tt Dowtte, bhp combzethit the qroundesand
be aunlwoered and fapde unto ppm: Lozde,let it
alone thyg peare alfo,tpll 3 dpggeround about
it and donge it tofe whether it wpll beare frute
and pfit bearenottben, after that Halte thou
cutit Downe. And he taugbt tn one of thep2 fp-
nagoges on the Habbothdapes. And beholde, |
there wasa oma hpch had alprete of infpz= i
mptpe. rdi. pearces and has bowed togea :
and coulde inno wple lpfte bp ber beade. ben C 2
Jefus fawe ber, De called ber tobpm, and fapte |
bntoher:woman, thou arte Delpuered fromthp
opleale. And be lapt bis bandeg on Der, and im= (i
mediatlp, pe was made rapabt, ad glorpfped ae
God. Andtheruler of 2 tered
withindighacton (becaufe that Jelus bad pea- ?
led onthe Sabbothdape)g lapde wuto the peo- :
ple: Chere arelyre dapes,in wbich men oughte Ph
to wozke,in them come that pe mape be bealed,
and noton the abbothodape. Aip

Wut the Lorde anfivered Papapa an z E
ponerse not eche one of pou onthe Sab- g So

oth Daye, * loole bys ore o? bis affe fro thé Hall aoar-rt.c.
andleade dpm top woater-And ought not thys 2" Hits |
Dougbrer of Abzaham, whome Sathan bathe PT
bounde( lo. rout. peares ) be loofed from thps
bonde on the Sabboth dape And whe be thus
fapde,al bps aduerlarpes were atbamed,and al
the people reiopfed on al the excellét dedeg that
Were done bp bpm. | .
_ Chen faph be:what is the kpngdome of Gov €
Ipberoz toberto hall F compare tte * tis lyke pag
a grapne of muflftarde fede, obych a mantoke, g” oe
folved in bys garden:and it yrewe and wared ag
pene rroa tonie pape made nettes
otit.


2
ae ie ct tie


iG eae $

_ anvagapne be fapde, thereunto Hal Flp- :
Hen the bpngdome of God! x Hislphe me ee E
whpche a*womantcke, and hyd in thee peckeg Werte
of meele,tpll all was leuened. And be went tho- =
roweallcpties andrownes , teachpnge andio2= M,
neplige totvardeg Jerufalem. Chen lapde one ;
bntobpm:Lozde, are there fewe that be faned?

And belapd vuto bpm: ftrpuetoxenter in at the tviib


po |


topll {eke to enter in, g pali not be able. it
the good man of thehoulets rpfen bp, inoia
thut to the doze,and pe begpnne to tande with-


Lo2zde,open nto ve and be thall anfwere, and
fape vnto pou:(¥ knowe pou hot topéce peare)
Coe thal pe begynte fape,we hauceaté e drons
enin thp peefence,and thou batt taught nour
Tretes. Bnohe Hall fave : Ftellpon, ¥knowe
pounot


. Marrs


p" mae priiid


a ~ gnaftppnge of teth, whenpe thall fe


PIS, Luke,


ss pour not tobence peare:departe from me all pe ğ


woo2ke iniquptie. There Halbe eppngeand
babam
and Jfapac and Jacob andallthe prophetes in
a the &pngdom of God, and pe pour felues thant
spat.) out, xAndthep allcometrom the calte from
the weft and fromthe noztbandfrom the fouth
and {hall Cpt downe in the bpngdome of God.
oo And bebolde,*ther are lat, which Halbe fpr.
Andtherearefp2,wbpebthalbelat. |
The fame dapecame there certapneof p Pha
rifes,andfapd onto hym:get the out of the ap
andDeparte bence:Fo2 Herode wl kpllthe. And
be fapde nto them:Go peand tell that fore,be
bolde, 3 cat ont deuelg and Heale the people, to
Dapeandto mozovoe, and the thp2d Dap F make
anende. Meuerthelefle, J mute walke to dape
and to mozotoe, and the dape folompuge : foz tt
cannot be that a Popbhete perpipe anp other
where- laue at Jerufalem.
x D Jerufalem, Jerufalem, whpehkpllet the
Dropbhetes, and tonet them that are lente Wn-
to the: hotoe oft wolde J baue qathered thp chpl
Deen fogether,asa bpzde doth Cather ber ponge
Dnder Her wpngespand pe wolde not-AWepolde,
pourehabptacpon ig lefte pntopoudelolate. 3
tell pou pe pall not fe me wntpll the tpme come
gat. rri.b that pe tall Lape: * blefledis he that commetD
serie tpe name of Lode.
pracrbttte CThe.riiii. Chapter. rR


qc ztlus cateth wpth the Sbarple,beateth the dropfpe
pponthe Sabboth,teacheth to be lowilpe, telleth of the
great (upper and warneth them that wll folcwe bms
to lape thep; accomptes befoze, whatit mpl cot thems
he (att oF the earth.


G


Le

=) i = ie

i ‘oul p y a i
Vel


e: Wibpebe of you pall


bpoden of anp ma toa ripe hd fi “tee


llenintoa ppt,and til


Sol ce biit,


Then Capde he alfotobpym,that haddefpecd

bpm to dpner:>aCiben thou maket a dpner oz
a upper call not thp frendes, nog thy beetheen,
nether thy kpnimen, no: tbp epede nepabbours
leftethep allo bpd theagapn, anda recompentfe
bemade the. Wut when thou makeft a featte,
call the pooze,tbhe feble the lame,and the blpnd
and thou Walt be happy, fo: thep cannot recont
pente the. Hut thou Malt be recompented at the
refurteccpon ofthe iute men. —

ben one of them (tbat fat at meate alfo)
bearde thefe thpnges.be fapd bnto bpm: bappp
is be tbat catethb2cead in the kyngda of God &

‘Then fapde be vutohim.»K*q certapnema D
odepneda great {upper,andbad manp, ¢ fente sat.rrit.«
Dis feruaunt at {upper tpme;to fay totbem that Mor
were bpdDdcn,come:foz all thpnges are no rea-
dpe. And thep allat once beganto make ercule,
The fprike fapde butobpm: Y baue boughta
farme,and mull nedes qoandle it, Jpzape the
bane me erculed. And another fapde: F bane
bought fpue pocke of oren and J go to prone
thé, prape the.baue me ercuied. And another
{apde: 3 baue marpeda tpfe, and therfore F ca
not come. And the feruaunt returned brought
bys map tier toozde agapne thero.

Then was the qood manof the boule dpt Æ


qian tobisieruaűt:Gooutqupek: ~


pinto the ftretes and quarters of the cptie, and
bapnge in bpther the pooze,and the feble; and ġ
balte and the blpnde. Bud the Ceruaunte fapde:
aLozbde,1f ig Done,as thou halt commañded, and

et there igromme.Andthe Lozdefapdetothe gË

eruaunt:Goout yntothe bpe wapes ¢ hedges,
anb*compell ebé to cometn,that mp boule map generira
be fplleb. £0? J lape Ynto pou,p none of thofe
mé which tere bpdde, (hal tat of mp lupper. F

@her went a Sebel eee dad rs

He returned, and fapd onto them: ye *PE a matt op ary, r.o;
come to me, and pate not bistather and mother Lute, ipe
and wpfe, andchpidien,andbzetheen, andip- Ñ >
fters,pee,¢ bis owne iptealfo, becau not be mp


The Golpell


aia EThe.r.Chapter. rie a Ware: foe a eie : ae arp ane

«The loupnge mercpe of ow ts openly fet Forth dwewenpetothe boule, bebeardDmpnifrelfpand +

te heed pr able ofthe büdzcd Hepe,and ofthe tonne MIMET and called one of bps feruaumtes,€ ~ 7
A mar Denrelorted pntobpmxalthepub: alked, what thole thpnges mente.Andbefapde fE

bind aS Bao pcancs €lpnners.foztobearebpm. wntobpm:thp bzotheris come, and 4i father

Lute,b.t ee) andthe Pbharplesandi{crpbesmur Hath kplled the fat caulfe, becaute pe hath re-


tothem: Reiople ere meaa bauefoñdemp bym:onne,thouart euer wpthme,andal tbat
olte. J lape butopou,that 3 baue, isthpne:itwas mete that weeulde


and feke Dilpgentlp tpll the fpnde it: And Dhan


the bath founde it ecalletb ber louers and ber jpm
nepgbboures togetber-lapenge :Reiopce pth ESITATE s4
STNA |


me


. lat befenthbpmtobpsfarme,tokepe bundzed tonnes of
' fiopne.7


and goto mp father, and wyll tape unto ate
0


thep mape reccaue pou into euerlattpnge habp-
tacio ; whiche €


anbdput arpuge onbypsdande,and (hoes cnbps Sangu pou that tobpcb is pour oine? x90 Marbe

refi i cuait can ferue tivo mafters:fo2 ether be Hall

if,andlet Vs eat andbemerp:foztbigmpfonne bhatethe one,andlouethe other, oz elles he pall
Hewoaslofand leanctotheone,and defpple the other, Pecan


All


= o


= BD Alltbele thpnees bearde the Pourptes alfo,
— Which were couctcous.¢ thep mocked bpm. And
iT PA belapd nto them: Pearcthep whpcbhe iutifpe
ee hes felues befoze mé-but God knoweth poure
== Dertes.J€oz Pp which is bygbly eftemed amonge

| inen,isabbompnable inthe lpght of God. F
sath.rid xThelaweandthe W2ophetes rapgned wn
trl Zhou, and fence that tyme,thekpngodome of
Govis preached, and euerp man firpuethto qo
tara. in.x€alper ts it for Deauettandearth to perp
- Frat.rir.a ten one tptle of thelawetofaple.t@bolocuer
mart.b foraketbbps wpie,and marpeth anotber,com:
mptteth aduoutrpe. And be Mhpch marpeth her
$y thatis Deuozced from Her Dulbande, commpt=
tetbabduoutrpealto. |
GE Chere was acertapnerpehe man, whyche
was clothco in purple and fpne whpte., and fa-
red Delpcioufilp euerp dape. And ther was a ier-
tapne begger named pi A þe lape at
bps gate full of Tozeg, delpapnge to be refretbed
R pth the cromes, wbhych fell fra the rpche mans
og DOLDE Hand no man gaue buto bem.) Che dogge ca
alfo, and lpcked bis fozes. And itfoztuned that


in into Abzahbams bofome. The rpche man allo
f" _ Dped, and twag burped. °

? "gE AnD bepngeinbell in tozmentes, be lyfte op

. ` bpsepesandfatve Abzabam afacre of,and La-


sarus in bps bofome,and be crped andfapde:fa=
E: ther Abrabam, bauc mercp on meand fend La
sarug, that be mapedpppe the tpppe ofbps fpn-
i ger in water, andcole mp tonge: foz Jam toz-
sat meted is thys fame. But Abzabamfapd:fonne
Sala bia Kremebzetbat thou mthp lpfetpme receauedt
thy pleafure,and confearpwple, Lasarusrecea
ned papne. ut nove ts be comfozted, andtpou
arte punpiped. Beponde all thps.betwene vs g
poutbercisa great {pace let,fothat thep which
foolde go from hence to pou, can not: nepther
mapecomefromthencetovs. — rant
©  @henbhelapde: 3 pape the therfore father,
fend bim to mp fathers boule. (Woz J paue fpue
brethren )fo2 cowarne them, left thep alfo come
into tbisplace of tozment.Abzabam {apd nto
, . bpm:thbep haue Doles andthe Pzopbhetes, tet
them beare thë. And be fapd:nape father Abza-
pant, but pf one come vnto them from the dead,
thep wylreptt.efapd bnto him: PE thep heare
not Woles and the p20 hetes.nepther wil thep
. beleuetbough one rotetrom deathagapne. ix
ee C The. rvii. Chapter.
Chite teacheth bps opfepples to atopde occatpons
ofeuell,oneto fozgeuc another, fepfattipe to trite it
ob,andno man te prelume in bps clone wozkes. Be
bealeth the ten lepers fpraketh of the latter bapes aud
of the ende of (he wozloe.
wearer È lapde vnto the dpfcpples : it can
He (Ate New not be, but offences wpll come. Re-
mat.rbliia ( $ > 4 ag
gar. ipl | | a fp


=


i ed sant és necke,¢ becatt into the fee, then p
| Hetpoulde enoe one of thefe lptleones. Cake
| > matro e Dede to pour felues.*PEthp beother trelpalle a-

À Leui nrd gapni the,rebuke bpm:and pf be repet,torgeue
í Ecer Dom Andtbougbe be ynne agapnit the teuen


b ;


tS, Luke,


tpmes ita Dape,andfenétpmes ina dap tourne
agapne to the, fapenge: tt repentethbme,thou
fhalt fozgeue bpm. 3
AndthbeApoftleslaphebntothe Lozde:in= —
cereale oure fapth. And the Lozde fapde: x VE pe matroid
bad Wa lpkea grapne of muftarde feede, and yg
thoulde tape vntothys Speampnetree:plucke ~-
thy felfe bp bp the rootes : and plante thp felfe
inthe fee,tt Hulde obepe pou.
Ui ho isit nt yon. tiie ban aferuaunte plow-
prige o2fedpnge catel,that wpll fape punto bpm
wbenbe commeth fromthe felde:Go quyckipe,
and {pt dowe to meat, andlaprbnotrather vn
to bymt:deelle, wherwpth 3 mapelup,and gpd
vp thp felfe and lerne me, tpll 3 paue catenand
donken:and after warde eate thou, anddzpnbe
thou’ Doth be thankctbhat feruaunt,becaule de g
dpd the thpnges that were commaunded ppm
Jtrowe not. Ho lpkewple pe, whan pe paue
done all thole thynges hpch arecomimaunded
pou,fape: toe are Dnpzofptable (eruauntes. Ge
baue done that whprh tas ourduetptodo.
re and it chaunced as be went to Jerufalent,
that be paled thozowe HSamarpa and Galile.
Andas be entred into a certapne totene , there
met bpm ten mé tbat tere lepers. Wbpceh Mode
afarve of and put fozthtbep: vopees, and apd:
Felumafer, paue mercpe on bs.Ca ben he fame
them,belapde vutothe: xGo tetoe pour felues Aer a
puto the preattes. Bnd it came to palie,that ag Be"
they went,thep were clenfed. And one of them,
When be lawe that be was clenled, turned backe
agapne,and wpth aloude dopre prapled God,
and Fell Dotone on bps face at dis fete, and gaue
bymtbankes. And thelame was a Samarp=
tane. And Jelug anfiwered and fapde, arethere
not ten clenfed?’ Wut where are thole apne?
‘@ here are not founde that returned arapne, to
gevue God praple faune onlp this raunger. And
be fapd Dnto bpm:arple,go thy wape,shp fapth
batb made the tohole. &
Wihen be has Demaunded of the Pharp- €
{es oben the Rpngdome of God thulde come,be
anfwered thé,and fapd: Che kpnagdome of God
{hall not come wpth waptpnge foz, nether pall
thepCape:iLo bere,o2 lo there. Fo: beholde, the
ide bt of Godis wptbin pon.
nd be fapde vnto the dpicpples : the Daped
wpll come, when pe thal defpze to fe one dapt of
the forme of man,and pe hall not fe it.
*And thep thal fap to pou: He here, He there Mah
Gonot after them,nozfolowe them: fozas the saar.riii,c
lpgbtenpng that appeareth out of the one parte
that is vnder beauen, ¢ hpneth onto the other
parte which is vnder beauen, fo thal the fonne of |
man be ibis Dapes. + Out fp2tt multe be lufre Bat.rvt.c
many thpnges andberetuledoftbisnacvon. fat cous f
And asit happened in thet dapes of foe : fo taath.
Hallit bealfoin thedapes of the tonne of man. Sene bab
Chey dpdcate anddzpnke,thep marped wpues 4 |
and Were marped euen Duto that fame dape $
Hoe wente into the Arke: and the floude came,
and dDeffroped thé all. Lyketopfie alfo as it chañ-
ced in the dapes of Lot. Thep dpdeate,thep
danke, thep bought, thep folde. they planted,
Dd Y thep


‘


|


- Sp


Cye ONPE


thep buplded. Wut euch the fame dape that Lot
wente oute ofsodom, itrapgned wypth fpre and
Seret Dep tone from heauen, xand deftroped them
all.éuenthug thallitbe inthe dape, when the

onne of man fall appeare.
mat.rriub «et eBat Dave be that is on the boufe top, and
C pps ftuffeintbe boute:let bpm not come Downe
torate tt out. And let not bymthatisin p felde
turne backe agapne to the thynges that be left
Sene.ric.¢ bebpnde.* Remembze Lottes wpfe. + Mi bofo-
tuanroid euer typll qo aboute tofaue bys lpfe pall loofe
iukeir-c tf:andwholoener thallloofe bys ireal faue
*oaeth. tf. 9 tel pou-intbat npgbt,*there thalbe tivo in
+ one bed, the one tpalvereceaucd,the other pal-
mat.rrtifd he fo2fake.* Two halbe agrpndynge together
the one albe veceaned,and the other fozfaken.
OB oyi Tiwa inthe fclde,the one malbe receaucd , athe other tora:
ken.) AND thep anfwered, and fapde to bpm:
mat.rrifftc Iphere Looe: He fayd bntothem:xwherfocuer


‘ODHFFE the body thalbe,thptbher wpll alfo the Eales be


gathered together.


0.0 ad Pay ey (panifpeng p men oughtx<alwapes
ey: Vis to pzape,and not to be weerp,fap-
cy sree ey enge: Cher was tna certapne cptie

Kaaa a indge,whych feared not God, ne-

thetreqardedman. And there waga certapne

Wwpdowe in the lame cptie,ethe came tnta bym

fapenge:auetige me of mpne aduerlarpe. And he

Wolde not Foz atohple. Dut afterwarde be fapa

inpehin bpm felfe: though J fearenot Gov, noz

careto man, pet becaule thps wpdotve tg ims
poztune.vpo me J wpl aucnere her. left He come
at thelat andraple on me. And the Loade fapd:
95 beare tobat the vurpabteous tudgelapeth.And
Hall not Godauenge his elect,whpch crpe dape
and ipght vnto him: pee though be deferre thé
A tellpou,that be wplauengethe,¢ that quick:
lp. RNeucethelefle, whé the fonne of man com-

meti pall be jay fapth onthe earth?

- Pi ànd be tolde tbps parable Ynto certapne
tobich trutled in thé felues, that thep were pera
fpte,and delppled other. Two men went yp in-
tothe temple to pwe the one a harpie, tbe

¢ other a Publicane. cpe @barple tone ¢ prayed
thus wpthin bpm felfe: Gov, 7 thanke the,that


bbe fanden men ouge alia thë


Jamnotas othermenareertozcionerg vnin pa


aduouterers, 0 a9 thysPublpcan.g ai Sy

Deu.prbie inthe weke, * 3 geur tpthe of all that 3 poffelfe,

Ereta a And the Wublpcane Landpnge afarre of, wolde

not lpft bp bps epestobeauen, but {mote ppon

bys wet tapenge: God be mercpful tome afpn

niet, ¥tcll pou, thps man departed bome to bps

mat.rriftta Douletuflifped, moze Heia the otber, * Fozener

Kuk riie one peralteth bym felfe, albe bought love.
` A bef bibleth ym felfe,thalbecralten, ik

“> Thep brought onto bpmalfo ponge chp:

o Den, that be Hulde touche them. chen bis dp-

(cpples {awe it thep rebuked them. But Jelug

(ban pead called thë wntobpm)fapd: Suf-


telp 3 fape vntopou: topolocucr receaueth not ae
the kpngdome of God*aga chplde,fbal nog en- matroiita =%


frechpldgen rocome bntome, and fo2rbpd them oe
not. $F 02 of luche is the kyngdome of God. Qe- cs


tertherein. + Anda certapneculeralked bpm, Sse? y
fapenge:Good matter: what ought Fto do,to
obtapne cternalllpfer Jelug fayde nto pem
CUbp calle thou me qood Poneis qood, fave
Cod onelp, Chou kno welt thecommaundemé=
tes.+ Chou halt not commpte aduoutrpe,thou £rov, rr:e
fhalt not kpll,thouthalte not fteale, thon thalte £09. c
notbearefalie Witnelle, bonoure thy fatber and
tbp mother. And be fapde:all thelehaue F che
from mp pouty vp. Wbë Felus hearde that, be
fayde onto bpm: Pet thou lackeft one tbpnee. ;
*ellall that thou baite and dpftrpbute vnto mat. rir. ¢
the pooze,and thou Walt bauetreafare in peang wre,
and come,folothe me. Wipenbe bearde thpsbe
wasfozp foz be was very rpcbe.
tben Fels fate that be thas orp, helapo: œ

*toith vhat difficultte thal they that Haue Mo- esath.riim
np enter into the kingdome of Godrit is ealper Mater.
foz acamel fo go thozotwea nedelgepe, then foz
arpche ma to enter tntotbe typngdome of God,
And thep that berde it. fapd: And wbocanthen
befaueds And befapo
pinpotipble ne men, are poflpble are Good

ben Peter fapd:«Lo,we banc foztaken all 4


and folowed the. He lapde vnto them:Cerelp J Weth.rire


fap vito pou:there is noman that bath footage Be
boule ether father oz mother etier bzetizen, o2 y
wpfe, o? chyldzen(fo2 the Eyngdone of Goddeg |
fake )wobpch Hal not receaue much moze in thig
wozld,¢ inthe wozld to come, lpfe cucriatk ny.


Thethingez WHICH ALE sehen 6


eig toke Dntobpm the twelue, g poe E


wntothem:*Bebolve, we go by to Jerufalem, í
andall thalbe fulfplled, thatarewpttenbp the mae DN
Pzropbetes ofthelonne of man. Foz be balbe cae
delpucted nto the Gentpls,and thalbe mocked antie
and{pptcfullp entreated , and {ppttedon: and
wober thep ane fcourged bpm, they wil putte
dpm to death. x And the thpade dape be hall = Goat.rbi.b
pees sare thep nder Lode none of the fe erti. b
tb pnges. Su toys fapenge was bpode from fluke id's
t, Dep perceaucd not the thpneeg and.ir.e

Wwbpch were fpoken,. bpngeg

* And tt came to paffe, thatag be was come
npe wnto Hterico, a certapne blpnd man fat DP egat.rr.h;
the wape fpe begapnge. And when be berd the marta’


people palle tp, bealked whatitmeante. Any Cece


theplapde wnto bpm: that Fetus of Masaret
is bp. snd be crped lapen Alu thou tne

of DAuid,bave mercpe on me. Andthep whpche

went befoze,rebuked pm, that he thule bolde

bys peace. But ‘9 crped fo much p moze: * thon

Lonne of Dauid baue mercpe onme. Any Fefug Bers

{tode Epl and commaunded bpm tobebzought

vito pm. And whéhe Was come nere, heathen


tp bpm, Lig ed e Wwplte tbou that Fdo nto


the‘ Andbelapo:Lo2d, that J mape récean
fpabt. And Jefus fapde Dnro bpm :veceane thy
PEDE thp faptbbatdfaucdtbe. Andimmediata
acca al a paninin ae
e God. Andal cople, when the:
it gauepraple vuto SoD. K epee
The


i
r z Eh
eR ee


- €Tpe.riv.Chapttr..

@ Ofsacheus, and thetenferuauntes , to wyome

the talentes were delpucred.iCb3 1 rpoeth to Jerus
falem,anbd wepcth ouerif.

_— Ade entredin,e wet thozow
Hierico. And beholdther was
aman named sacbeus,wbhpcbe
wasa ruler amonce p Publi-
cang and was rpcbeallo. And
befoughte meancs to fe Jefus


:
3


À
i


i


i SSP yx Ta
Eel hat he Mulde be: € coulde not
foz prea Me becaule be as litle of ature. And
beranne befo2e,¢ clpmed vp intoa toplde fpaqe

‘tree, tofe bpm foz be wastocome fwape. Bnd

Whe Jelug came to p place, he lobed vp q fawe

bim,¢ fapo nto bim:såche come done atonce

foz to daye ¥mutte abpde at thp boufe. And be
athe Downe haftelp:¢*reccaucd bim topfullp.
¥aerbiLS And whe thep fate it, thep al grudged,fapeng:
2 De is qone in,totarpewamantbat fs aftnner


A Lozgde: bebolde Lod. the balfe of mp goodes J
qene to the pooze, andpt J bane Done anp man
wonge, Jreftoze bym Fourefolde. Jeluslapde
nto bpm :thps dape ts health happened vnfo
thes boufe, becaufe that be alfoig become the


3 _-#mat.rb,e Chplbe of Abzaham . * foz the fonne of manis
: c


J
j+

ai
{


——— ee
i T;


ome to feke g to fauetbat wbpeh teas loft. &
Andasthep berde thele thpnges he added

thertoa parable, becaufebewas npe to Jerufa
lemand becaule thep thought.that the Bpnge=

Dome of God Hhuldethogtlp appeare. He fapde
wmatcr.b thero ogixa certapne noble man tent ito a


Boar.viltd Farre countre, toreceauchpm a kpugdome,and


tocome agapne. And be called bps ten feruaun:
È teg and delwered them ten pounde,fapeng Di-
« totbem: Decuppetpl Jcome: Wut dis citelpns
Dated bym, g fent a meflage after bym,fapeng:
Wwe topli not baue thys manto rapgne oner vs.
And tt came to pafe, that toben de had recea-
ued bis kpngdome.be returned, g commannded
thele feruauntes to be called vutobpm(to who
he had geuen the monep)to wpt howe muche e-
uerpman had done. Che came the fp2tt.fapeng
Lo2d, thy pound bath gapnedt.n pounde. And
xmatth.b he fapde buto bpm:+tbel thou good feruaunte:
ecanletbou baft bene fapthfull tna berplptel

thpnge pauc thou aurhozite ouet ten cptics.
ndanother came fapenge : Lozde,thp pounde
hathmadefpue potide. Andto the lame De faid

bethou alfo ruler ouer fpuccpties.

‘> Andanotbercamelapeng:Lo02d,beDolde here
ig thp poutide, wbpeh 3 baue kept ina napkin:
foz J fcared the, becaule thouarta fraytema:
thou taket bp that thou lapbdette not Downe,¢
reapelt that thoudpddel notfotve. Hefapeth

x ixete Yuto Hpi: * Dfthpne otone mouth, wpl Fiud-
Mat Frid ve the tpoueunil feruatit. knewet thoup Jam
a trapt mã takpng vp tbat Flapd not Downe
etcappng that spp not fowe ‘And therfore
gauelte not thou mp money into the bancke, ¢
atmpcommpng J night haue cequpzed mpue

owne wpth vauntages |
And befapde vnto thé that Lode bp:take fro


T


bin that pounde, andgpuctt dimebathathten HA
pounde. And thep lapde watoppni: Love; pe ES


ndsache Kode foztbe and fapde yntothe |


Hath ten pound. Eo? F lape wintopou,that* on *matnii?
tocuerp one whpcbebhathethalbe eunoe (aid ayar, riit
be hall baue aboundaunce) Eftombpm thathathnot £e8.bin,c
albe taken atvape cuen that which be bathe. +-
Pozcouer,thole mpneencmpes, ( Hbpch wold E,

not that 3 hulderapane ouer them) bypng bp-.

ther, fice them befoze me. * And whe he HADDE x mat.rré.c
thus {poken,be pzoceded forth, taking big tour sarria
nep,togo vpto Serufalem. fe A

x Andit foztuned when be wascome npeto Ar Ha
Wethphage ¢ Bethanp,belpdes p moñt which
is called Dliuct, De fent tot of bis bdilciples;tap
gr: go pe into thetotone, tobpche is ouer aga-
putt pou tntothe wbpcb, alone as pe are come,
pefpal fpnde an alles colte typed, wheron petne-
uer man lat. Loofebpmt, ebzpnge bpm berber.
And pF anp manatke pou, whip do pe locie him
tbus Mall pe fape bntobpm: Che Lozde bathe
nede therof. OG Sd ASET

Thep that were fent- ttt thep2 way, ¢ fode
euenas bebaddefapde bntothem. Andas they
were alolpng the colte the owners tieroffapd
puto the:wbp lofe pe the colte: And thep fapde
for p Load bath nede of him. And thep brought
bpm to Jelus and cafketbeps rapmente on the
colte.¢ {et Jefus theron. Andas be wente,thep
{pzedde thep2 clothes inthe wape,

And when he was nowe come npe to the yo-
puge Dotone of themouunte Dpucte, the whole
multitude of the difciples begantoretopce,t to
papie God with aloude vopce foz al the mpra
cles that they hadfene,fapeng: * blefled be the sinae.reib
kpnge that commeth tn the name of the Lorde: TuE-rii, g
peace in beauen e glogp inthe bpeft, And fome syari.
of the barifes of the companpfapd nto him Jebu.rit-b
after rebuke thp dilciples.3e la pd wnta thë Por?
Ftel pou, that pfthefe bolde thepz peace, then xavasie
{pall the ones erpe: DRR 8:

> And when he was come neare bebebelde
thecptic,and* teeptonit fapenqe: PE thou Dad: x z0b.ti.4
nek knotoen tholethpnges wopich belonge Yn-
tothp peace,eucn in this thy dap, thou woldeit
take bede. Xut nowe are thep bydde from thine
hapa the bapesfhall come nto the, that « zoia
thy encmpes allo thal cath a babe aboute tirg Stb.,
copafic the round, and bepethein onenerpfpde pe
einaketbe enë wpebthe grounde g thp chploze
whbpebcare tithe. Andxthep Hall not leauc ut » mics
the one fone bpon another becaulethou kino: mac.tttt.a.
wet nottbe tyme of thy vifitacion. fee

+ Andhe went into the temple, g begane to tmat. rrid
cate out them that folde therin, andebemtbat Fiane
bought fapenge vutothem:3ttd witten? Mp xiit.mess
boufe ig the poule of paper:Dut pe hauctinade ihyk.
ita denne of thenes:And be taught daplp in the rze.01.c
temple. Ja * But the bpeprettese the (eribes x30. titt
and the cbefeot the people wenteaboute tode Fave. tr i
ffropebpm:and couldenorfpnde whattodo. andrè
$€oz al the people Hacke bp him wbe thep berde
pin. OC Cbe.re.Chapter.
ar Zbep aike Cipt one quetion, $ ye afketh them atothes


Tbe parable ofthe bpnrparse . Deerphuteto be geuren bnto
Telar. how Chip Moppeth the mouthes of the Sadures,


7-6) eoit fortuncdinone of thofedapes (as B
ala he taugbte the people in the temple and
S pzcached p Golpel) thebpe Perales ie
f


I


E


A


The Golpell


__ the feephes came together wopth the elders , and
zmatrite Cpake prito bim fapenge:* Tel vs bp what au-
OF ehorite dock thou thele thinges: Ether whois

be Pqaaue the this authoriter Jefus anlwocreds
fapd vntotbem, Jallo topl atke pou one thing,
and anlivere me. be baptpme of Fhon:wasit
From heaven 02 of mé. And thep thougdte w in
them felues fapenge : Pf we fape from beauen,
be topll (ape : wbp then beleued pebpmnot ¢
But and pF we fape:of men,all the people pl
tone bs. Æo: thep be perlthaded, that John is
a P2opbhete. And thep anlwered, Prbep coulde
not tell wbenceit was. And Felus fapde Unto
them:netber tel J pou,bp what authozpte 4 de
theletbpnges.

5 When beqganne beto pnt foetheto thepeople
amat.rrid thys paråble.+ 2 certapne man planted a vpne
mR Aa parde, @ let itfozthe to bulbandinen, and wente
ene,tr.c Dp felfe nto a trañge countre fo: a qreattea


Fece.by.c Con. And when thetpmewas come be fentaler-.,


vaunt to the bulbandmé so Lag Stes geue
bpm of the Fcute of the binéparde. And thep bet
bim,and Cent bim awape emptpe. And agqapne
be Cent pet another fernaunt. And bim thep dpd
beate,and entreatedDbpm hamfullp, and fente
bpm awape emptpe. Andagaptie, he fente the
thpzde alfo, and bpm tbhbep wounded, and caffe
Him out. Chen fapd the 1020 of the bpneparde:
Joh teb what Hall zvo x J ll fende mp deare fonne
k t asa ~ thep wpll tande tn atve of bpm:
when theplebpm.
— But when the hulbandmen fatoe pm, thep
thought within them felues, fapena: this is the
ge.rrrbil.c hepee,*come lette bs Kpll him, that the enberts
# x. FELD tauncemape be oures. And thep cate bim oute
` c&the ppneparde,aud &plled bpm . Ci bat pall
the Lo2de of the bpneparde therfore Do bnto
thems ie thal come and deftrope thefe bulband
menan hall let out bps ypneparde to other:
tben thep beard thps,thep apd: God fozbpd.
And be bebelde them ang fapde:what is thps
pt. erbtite Chen that ig weptten: * the fone that the bupl-
matre d Hers tefuled, the fame ts become the head of the
PEP Corner ¢ Mboloeuer dDothe flomble bpontbat
fone, (palbe bzoké: but on whom focuce it fal-
leth.it wpl grpndehim to powder. Andthebpe
zettes and the (erpbes the fame boure wente a
inath. ri» DOUteto lape bandeg on bim, * And thep feared
egare thepeople.stozthep pein So that pe bad fpo
Lube res kenthpgfimilitude agapnit tbem.
5» Andtbep watched bpm, and fent forehlppes
whpeb thulde fapne them felues rpabteous mé,


mets s *totake bpm it bps wo toeg gtodelpuerbpm SESE
Fid nto the powers autborite of thedebite. And KEA


thep alkedbym , fapenge. Haker, we knowe p


ehoufapette ano teacbett epabte,nctbercontp> EY


beret thou the outwarde appearaunce of an
iman, but teacheft the wape of Godtrulp . Fit
lavefull fop bs to qeuetrpbute Duto Celar, og
Se Msi tea Pe Moe
sa atreitse EDEM: temptepemes Shewemea penp,
Pieris wholepmageand {uperteription bath ite bev
anlwered and lapde: Celars. Andhelapd unto
Hemt:geue then onto € efar, the thinges whic
elonge nto Celar, andto God the thpngrs)


=


ceg, t wibpcbebenpe that there ig anp refurrece sgat.rett.c
cpon. Andthepa Fil.


thep arecquall Dntotheangels ,and are * the “3 ob ig č
agapn: SH) ofes alfo Hetweth belpdes the bue: `


þe is not a God of dead, but poy FEozalipue markerte *
Eben atapir 0


ad
&
£
=
=f
(=g
Z
:
g
Š
3
3
mh
:


say Dhe bebele, x be fate thers

YO me, wobpch cat in bids ofrpnges res
Sinto f trealurp . He latwe alloacer )
ee tayne pooze wyddotve, which caf |


wpoowe bath put inmozethéthey al. Jf Oth ls teore a


i


wels,belapd:* Che dapes wil come in f Which mat.eriiii c


of marpiina


"|

Í
fl

E:


=


(of thefe thprges tobich pete )there Mall tot be
lefte one tone bpon another, that thall not be
thzoweé doine. And thep al&edhimfapeg: Wa
er, tohen {hall thete thpnaes be, ¢ wobat{pqne
wyll ther be whenluche thpnges tall come to
yg paller And helatd:xtake bede.that pe be not de
* Col.tt-b. saperh i ett t man My he xy te Bappi

phe. Cape that tbep are C Hztic:and p tpme dpa wet
HOM S teare. sEolLowe pe not them therfore . wnt whe
pe beare of tharres and {edicios be not aftaped.
feo2z thefe thpnges mutt Ep2it come to patie, but
> the ende folotrthnotbp and bp. Chen fapde be
erap rire MNO thent:*Pacion hall rple agapnnacpor
dite pil cand ie rp pe Ryngdome,and qreate
earthquakes halbe tn all place, and honger, €
pettilence ¢fearful thpnaes. And great fpgnes

` ball thee be front peauen. ¥

But befoze altbhete, x thep thalllavehandes
xeqat.c on pou,and pertecute pou, raat eal pou bp
vga to thefinaqoges €into pefons, ¢fpall bzynge
je pou unto kpnaeg e rulers fo: mp names take:
ndtbps (hall chaunce pou Foe ateftimoniall.
we at a (ure popnt therfozcin pour pertes, not


Zotin. tO tuipe before, tbat pe thall ant toere : fo2 * F


math.rc (ppllapuepoua mouthe = topledome, where a-
tät. bic


x minbib fprabenozrelpt.Hozeouet pethalbexbetrap- PON Fe
chofpourfathers€ mothersandbecthzen,and PA Be


kpnifolke and frendes,¢fome of pou (hall thep
put todeath And hated Hall pebe of almentoz
mpnameslake ¢ therfbalnot oneheare of pout


beade perpfthe, Pollefle pour foule by pacience.
abet D no open pete Aerutatem beget
Sub anhoolt.then befure that the defolacpou of the


ejaz.ttit.o fameisnpe. Chenlet them whpc) arein Jew-


Dates eye fipe tothe mofitapues.anod let them wbich


aveinthempodef? of it,departe out. Andlet not
them that are in other countries enter therein.
£02 thele be the Dapes of Ree etl all
thpnaes whichare weptten mape be fulfplled.
But wo vnto them that be wythchplde,and to


thent that apue fucke intbofedapes:fogthere pe


apent» Halbe great trouble in the lande, and * wzrathe
overall thes people . And thep hal fal thozotve
the edae of the wearde, and thalbe led awape
captpue into all nactons. And Jerufalem tall
be tropendotone of the gentpls, vntpl thetpme

_ of thegentpls be fulfpiled. |
: * And there albe {pqnes in the Source,


an mat prt ¢ andin the Soone, and in the Tarres:and inthe
© AIE rob Wiad people “ete d be! Aaa


mei TeCY


Frrbiit,f pape. The fee and the tater Hall


thozowe dp i |
roare,and mennes bertes Wall faple them foz
feare,and fo2 loking after thofe thinges tobich
- fhallcome onthe earth.s€o2 the powers of bea-
uch hal moune. And then Hall thep fe the fonne
of man comeinacloude pth poter and great
Glogpe. When thele thpnges begpnneto come
topafle:then loke bp, and lpfte Dp pour heades
foz pour phate ae dratveth nye. |
„And ve ciwed them alimilttude : beholde
mat rriin c the Fpgge tree andal the trees when thep Hote
esar iike Forth thev budDdes pe Ce € know of poure owne
feluestpat fommer ig tbennpe at band. olp-
kewplealfo( when pe le thele thpnges come to


a,
=


Sol lerti.
panic tare NTD Ot ‘of God ig nye
Cicrelp J fape witto pou : thyg generacio tt thall
not pafle, tpl all be fulfplied. Heauenand earth
thal paffe but mp we2des (hal not patie, F
 -e* Cakebedetopourefelucsletteatanp ©
tyme pour Dertes be ouercome with aad Scere
anddzonkennes and cares of thps Ipfe, andfo iso. Hild
the ee come bpon pou Ynitwares. Foras a fna
re pallit come onal them that divcl on the face
of the whole earthes watch pe therfore continu mat.rriira
allpe and pzape, that pe mape efcape all thee SFS?
are ges that thal come, and that pe map and
beforetbe fonneof man, H . l

3n the dap tyme, be taughte in the temple:
andatnpabte, be wente oute,andabovemmtpe . -
mount thatis called Dlpuet.*Andall the pro Its
ple came in themoznpnge to bpm intothe tens
ple, fo? to gis 24k iatt faites
@ chit is Chere Dot falerlatbewehe


apntt,al pour aduerfaries: Mal not be able to Peed Feces


x Andhe toke beade di when he haddewe= mesic
nen thankes, de bake it, andgaue wire ae fy CO}.F Es
apenge


iat. rit.


D


q æ.


fapenge: Th gig mp body, tobpcb ig reuen fo? *Wibple be pet (pake:beholde,therecame a mat.rehi.e
you, his boa tpe tcmemb:aunrce of E N companp, andbe that wasg called Judagone of "FP


wple allo whe be bad Cupped,be toke the cuppe the tibelue, went before them, and peeaffed npe
fapinge:Cppscupisthe nete telkamentinmp onto Felus,to kile bpm. But Fetus fapde tn-
bloude,whpcheisthedfozpou. tobpin: Judas, betrapet thou the fonne of ma £

Let bebolde,the bande ofbpm that betrapeth toptha kple: Wben thep Mbpcbe wereaboute
meig wpthme onthe table.Andtrulpethefon dpmfawe what wolde folowe,thep fapd bute
he of nia goeth.asitis appopntcd:26ut wo Vn- bpm: Lozd, (hall the finpte With fweard:* And mat.rrot,e
fo that man bp topom be is betraped. And they one of them {mote a Ceruaunt a pe bre pelte, Mat. rinse
begar e toenqupzeamong them felneg, which and froke of hi Srpabte care. Jelug, e
Of them tt as,that thulde doit. _ andfapde-Luftce pe thus farce fozth. And when

_ se And there was a trpfe amonge them, betouched bps eare,bebealed bpm
ibbpcbe of them hulde feme tobe the areatette. Th [ug
And befapd wntothem:thekpngesofnacpons rulers of the temple andéde elders which were
tapane oner them: andthep thathaueauctozie cometobpm. Pe become oute,aswntoathefe .
te ar them are called qractoug Logdes. Wut wpth {iheardes and ftaued. When J wag dapa
pe Dalnot be fo.* But he pis grenset among lpe pth pouin tbe repie spe ttretchedfoztbe
pou, Halbe as thëponger : and be thatiscbefe, no Dandes agapné me.25
thalbeas be that doth mintiter.sto2 wbetberis erp houre,and the potwer of Datckenes. Chen
greater.bethat (pttethat meatesozbetbatter> tokethep bpm, andled bpm and yeaugbe bpm
neth: Fs nothe pipttethatmeate’ wWutyam tothebpe pattes boule. Wut Beter foloiwed
amonge pouas be that minireth, Pearethep afarre af. tnd When thep had kpndleda fpze in
Wbypehhaue byddentoypth me inmptemptacp- the thpobdes of the palace, and were fet doneto-


ponos it were wheat: but FJ bauepzrapedfo2 p fapde:tbouarte alfo of them. And Peterfapde:
nected,


inat. rror¢ CO bpm:* Lode, gam readye toqo withthe in- other affpzmed,fapeng: verelp this felowe wag


maretie
zop- pilin


&
* Matte,


mae BRB


nat. rrbfic
mat. Filli.c


enat. bf, b,
Luke. ria


‘thatrbi.b
Fobi. bhp


them fleppng for beupnetie,andfapde nto the


thou balt thzpledenped that thouknetoetme. immebdiatlp pple ‘pet ipake, the cocke creto
k And be apor onto them -a then vie, And PLosdeturnedbacke atha Coie creto


foptbout iwvalletand fcerpppeand boes lacked xAnd eter remébzed pivozd of the Lozd,bot turre. e


peanptbpnge And thep fapd, no: Ché be fapd be dadlapde wnto bpm: befoze thecocte (rote, mat.rrbi.c


bnto them: but note be that bathe a wallet.let thou thaltc benpe me thaple . And Peter wente Trie
F


bpm take t vp andlpkewple bis ferpppe. and oute and Wepte bptterlp.

bpe one Sop Aap wiro pou, bat perroedame ano tmote ppn a eotea ee eee eR G
cone. sto? d neopot, tpat pet tbefame . mote bpm: € when bipndefolden

pated gitintha AS G ai anda ae ‘pr tbe eos bpm thet : irid

reuen among the twopched was be reputed. Eo Cg aveoe, Who igit $ {motcthe.Annmany

thole thynaes tobpcbe are wrtten oF mie pate oth P .Andmanp


E A A ake essa

ougy. * no pecameoute, and wente(ashe bescame toget band led bpm into thepe coü-

Plomehber dene cabe inland egal fapde vito the ! f HENS

alowed bpm . Audwhenbe came tothe place, belapde vntot ra: pr J tell pous pe wpl not

befapbe ontothem: * peape,teaftepetallinte leue. Andpf ¥alkepou, pe wpl! not aniere |

temptacton.*And he gate bim felfe omthe,a- me,ozletmeqo.* Perea et (hall the fonne of mat.rrve-e

bout a oneg cat and knelleddotone,epzapen man {pt onthe tpagbt bande ofp power of Gon varru s

fapen ue: Father pep wplt remoue this cup fro Then lapyde they all: act thou then thefonne of

ine. Meucrthelefle, + not mp topll, but thynebe Gods helapd, pe fap that Jam. 3nd thepfapd

fulfplicd. Bnd there appeared an aungell ynto ambat nede we anp further toptnes ¢ FEO? WE mat. reor
im from Deauenconfoztpng bim.andbewas ourlelues hauederde of bpsotonemoutbe. marrits
hanagonpe sand praped the longer. Andbps © Cbe.rriti Chapter. |

{eat was lpke Droppy of bloube, trpcklpnge Ficus is brought before plate and erode. The ez

EOE Co roe grounder And when be role Dp ico pee os amattarton Cr btn. Pe prepeth fo bis ene

i zapet and wag come tobisdifcyples.befound - vpet ontheceotranois roong E TODE bande, and

EEI * Md the whole multitudeofthem arofe A
Y Gand ledppm nto Pplate. And Hep be- mat rrbii s
meeiganncto accute bim, fapenge: toe founde £40..
thps |


ny oe
a.


lbp lepep: Rple, and pape, lelt pefall into
temptacion ,


t


ij


l
1


™ HF
ons. ee bare bnto pouakpngdome, ag gether, * Peter al o fate Downe amongethem. maf, primak.


|
a


"i


l


« tbig felow peructtpng the people, and forbpd-
Dpng to pape trpbute to Cefar: fapenge that he
18 Chua king. And Pplate appofed bim, fap
cny Beep the kpng of the Fetes: He anltwercd
byin and fapde:thon lapel it. Then fade Pi-
late to the Dpe zealkes, and to the people: J
Fpndenofaute inthis man, And thep were the
moze fearce fapeng:i9e mourth the peonle,tea-
chpitg thozowe oute all Jetogp, and beqante at
Galple,cuente this place.

--- Uben Pplate berde mencpon of Galple be
aked, whether the man were of Galple. And
nukia, aflone ashe Krewe that be belonged vnto xe
ss godess turéfdicct6, De fente Dim to Herode which

2 wasalioat ¥Jerifalem atthattpme.
AnD hen erode lawe Fetus, he was ercea:
Dpuge glad. Foz de was delpzous tofehpm of
a lenge feafon,becaufe be bad perde many thin-
ges of bym, and be tufted to bauc fene fome
miracle Done bp bim. Chen pe quettioncd with
bym manp wo2des.Ont he anfwered bpm no-
thynge. Che bpe pzeeteg gfeepbesg,ftode forth
and acculed bpm iravtelp, And Herode with
bis men of warre, defppled Dpm : and when be
; Hab mocked bpm, bearaienbpmin whpteclo-
Stiltia thpnge, and fent hym agatne to plate. * And
the famedap Pilate g erode were made fren-
destogether: Fo? befo: thep were at variaiice
© And pplate calledtogerhere the bye Wzefteg
and p people. fapd nto thé:pe pauz beougbt
this man Vito meas one that peruerteth the
people, ind beholde, J crampn bim befoze pou
i and fpnde no faut in this mã, of trofe piy
wher of peaccule him: fo, no: pet Herode o
"3 fent pou to bpnr:and lo, norben e worthy of
trroiin Death 1s Done to bpm. J topll therfoze chatene
matoa Dpttand let bpm looie. * $Eo2 of necefittie, be
Hob.roitia mutt paue let oneloole vnto them atthe feat.
l ‘And all the people crpedatonce, fapenge a-
Sape With bpm.and delpuerto bs Warrabas:
(febich for a certapn tnfurreccpon madein the
citie and fo: murther was caffe in pzcfon)Sp-
late {pate agapne to them wpllpng to let Je-
fusloofe.utthep crped, fapenge: Crucptpe
bpm. Cructipe bpm. He fapde vnto them the


=


| aa thp2de tpine: Wohat cupll bath be done? 3 fpnde


uocaule ofdeathinbpm: Jwpll therfore chas

merele ften him andlet bim go. + And thep cried with

Job.Fir.a. londe bopeesrequpzmea that be mpabt be cru-

cpfped. And the Vopces oF them and of the bye
preelkes preuapled. he

And plate gaue fentence, that it Hulde be


- mit-rebiie ag thep requpecd * and belet loote onto eben


mar-F0-3 hpm that(fo2 infurreccion and murther) was
- caftinto preton, whome thep bad vepred and
Dedelpuered vuto them Fefus,todo with bpm
mat.rroiic What thep wold.* Andastbhep led bim aap,
Macrd.b. EHep caught one Spmonof Sypzen, commpng
outer the fclde:and on bimlapd thep the croffe,

that be mpabt brareit after Zefug.
And therefolowed bpm a greate companye
Luk tiia. pf people and tbemen x whiche bewapled and
lamented? ym: Wut Felis turned backe vnto
thettt,and isid: Be Dougbters of Ferulal€,wepe
not fo? me :but Wepe toz ponure felues,and foz


+


calottes. Anvede ee ftode,and bepelde.
l bim toith thé, faynee: D
Hefaued other menlet bim Tane pim felfe, pfi he
be verp Chit, the cholé of Gon. Che foudpers .
alfo mocked him,and came,and offered pin bp


* And the vaple of the templedpd vent enë tho: merri é
rowe the mpodes. And when Jelug had crped F
toptha lou Ao Aids ha fa thpba

bes “J commenbe mp Cprete. And when he


fusion fate what had happencd, be glozpfped

Godlapinge : Clevelpe thys waga tpobteond

man.and palir haare came together to

that fpgbt and faw thethinges whpch bad pep

peicd.tmote thep2 breefies andecturned. And

al bps aquauntaunce*andthe wemen that fox materont

lowed bpm from Galile, tode afarre of, behol TIF-

dpnae thele thpnges. :

4ndbeboldexther has a man(named Jo- È

feph) acofiteilour,and be was aqood manand mt-rrots

atufte,che fame pad not conlentedto thecoun- JPOP. d

{cl anid Dede of them, Wwhych was of Jramathia |

& citie of the Zewes, wobpche fame allo wapted |

fo? the kpngdom of God:be went wnto Pplate

and begged ja bodpof Jefusand toke it dotone

and wappeditina linencloth.g laped it ina fe

pulchze that was bewen tn fone, wherin neuce

ian before Waglaped. E Andthatdape wag

pecparpnge of the Sabboth, and the Saboth

Dewe ont: Che wemë that folotoed after, which

Had come pth bpm fro Galile, bebelde the Te-

pulchze,and how bis bodp was lated. And th

returned g prepared {verte odours and opntm , ee
teg


21 >i o ieheg
badfapa be gaue vp te qoott*taipeurhe on eet


-za -


Folrrri


‘The Golpel


teg but vetted the HSabbothdape,accozdpng fo
the commaundement, __
The. rriti- Chapter. l
4 Tbe twemen come to the graue. Chpt apereth bnto the
cwo Dpfciples that gotowarbde Emaus, tandeth inthe mits
tetotal pis dDifcepples openeththep: bnoertandpngein the
oa terppturas “gpuech chem a charge ¢alcendeth bp to beuen.
E Sy Ut vpa p firt dat of the; Sabotbes,
ca Ai DELP cat pinrpenoamnr hep cant
A W vito thelepulchze,and bzought the
Fou. Fra EL a loete odours thpch thep Haur pe-
- “pared,and other wemen pth them. Andthey
Fouridetbe fone rouled awape from the fepul-
che andthep toenteit,but found not the bedp
of the Lo2zd Jelu. Andit happened as thep were
__. amafed there at.2echolde two men tode bp thë
matri it Copnpnire qatmentes. x And as they were a-
spat.rdi.a frapde,t bowed Dotone thep2 faces to ie earth
Y theplapd dntothem:Wibp feke pethe pupnge
amonge the deade’ Peis not here:but He ig tilen
\ Remembze howe he fpake vuto pou, mhenbe
 Woas pet in Galile,faping:that the Tonne of ma
mull de delpuered into the Dandes of finful men
and be crucified,¢ the thpzde dape rple againe.

And thep rememb2ed bps thordes,¢ returned
From the fepulchze,and tolde all thele thpnges

tiat.rrotit. Dnto Chole cleucn,¢ toalltberemnaunte.* Ft
carri WAS Savy Dagvalene.s Joana, and Marpe
~~ Jacobiandother that were wpth them, wbiche
told thete thinges bntotbeapofftels . And their
woozdesfemed Dnto them fapned thpngeg, nes
ther beleucdthep them . Chen arole Peter € ra
wnto plepulchze,¢ lobed in € awe theliné clo-
thes lated bp thé lelues,¢ Departed, wonderpng

inbpmlelfe at that whpche bad happened. `
W,  exAndbeboldetwo of them toente that
ar, roi. c Latte dape toa towne (called Emaus ) whpebe
ivag from Jerusalem about a.lr,foslonges,and
thep talked togetber ofall thet thinges phad
. þappened. Andit chaunced that twbplethep co
muned together andreafoned, Jefus bymilelfe
mat .roiit c Deewe neare, xand went with chem, Wut thepz
ss epes were Dolden , thattbep thuldenot knowe
bpm: And he fapde vnto them: tbat maner of
communications aretbefe that pe paue one to
another,as pe walke €arelad! Andthe one of
them ( whole name was Cleophas) anftwered,
andfapde to bym: Arte thou onelp a ffrannger
in Jerufalem and bat not knowen thethpnges
inbiche baue chaunced there in theledapes? De

fapde bnto them: what thynges:

And thep tapd nto bpm:of Fetus of Naza-
teth,twhiche was a peop etempgbtpe indede,€
ww02De,before Godandall the people:and bow
the ppe pretes and oure rulers delpucred dpm
tobe condemned todeath,¢ baue ceucifped bpm
Wut we frulled that tt bad ben he ý ulve daue

>  tedemed Flraell. Andas touching al tbere thin


gesto dap ig enë p.iit.dap, thattbep weredone b


-  . *Peegcertapne women alfo of or companp
Eurritite made ks alfonped, Whichecame carlp onto the

CORFF 8 Fepnlchze,andfound not bis bodp and cam,fap
‘engetbat thep badlenea vplpon of Aungels,
iwhpche fapde that be as alpue.Andcertapne
of them tobpche vere wyth bs, wente to the fe-
pulchze,and founucit even foasthe Memen bad


+


fapde,buepnpm thep fatoe not. i tote

And be fapde buto them: D fooles and lowe C
of berte.to beleueall pthe Pzophetes bauc{po=
ben.xDughtenst Chattetohanetuttred thefe __, D
thpnges, toenter into bis glozp And be begå srar niie
at Mofes.g all the Prophetes.and interpected
wntothem tn all {criptures which tere weitté
of Dim. And thep dzetv nie vnto p totone, wbich
thet er onto. And be made,as though be wold
baue gone further. And thep*conftrained Dim: sene.rip.a
fateng:abpde with ve, foz it beaweth toarde Lub,rrite
npgbt.¢ the dape is farre paled. And he wente
ti, to tarp with thé .*And tt cameto pafle,ag egar.rv.b,°
x fate at meate with thé,be tobe bzeade blef
ed tf, ¢ brake and gaue to them. And thep2 eies
Were opened and thep knewe bpm:¢ be vanpfa
hed out of thep2fpabt.Andthepthpobetwene .
thé {clues:Dpd not oure bertes burne thithin bs,


Were witbtbem, fapeng: the Lozdets rpfen in f


tnto pou, whple 3 was pet with pou:f al muft

nedeg be fulfglled wbich were witten of me in

the law of oles ¢ tn the Pzophetes, yin the
pfalmes.« Chen opened he thep2 wittes that Œ

thep mpght vnderitande the lcriptures,¢ fapd ace.rvii.e
nto them: Chus igit weitten:¢ thus it beho-

ued Chat to fuftce,¢ torple agapne fro death


tothem:* Chele are f wozdes wohiche J {pake egat.rbt.e


the thpedbapetbat repentaiice ¢ remifion of =


fpnnes:(houlbe be preached in bigname amõge
allnactons: F ¢mufk begpn at Jerulalé. and
penre witnelle nf pad Sh ae And be-
bolde, J wpll {ede p pzompile of mptather vps
pou. ut tarp pe mp citie of Jerulalé, wntpl qetesi..
pe be endued with power fron ppe. And be led
them out ito Wethanp, elpft op his hades,and
leled tht. + And it cam to patie, ag be blefled actes.i. b `
the be departed fró thé g was carted Dpito beg: F.i»
uê. And thep ot al bim, ¢ returned to Fe
rufale with great iope g were cotinually in the
temple peaplpng¢ laudpng God. Amen..
Here endeth the
Golpel of faincet
Luke.
The


=k


a eee EEE eee m


C The Golpell of
HSapncte Jbon.
CTbefpee Chapter. rh


A he enerlattpnge byrth of Chzift,and bowe hebe-
came man. he tettpmonp cf Jhon. The calipnge of
Andzewe, Peter. i


A eee È the begpnnpnge was the
ECHR) (yee wode, and the worde was

seen) ewe with God : and God was the

E lees oode. The fame was in the

Geneia (Eza Kena begpunpnge wpth God.* Al
Pro. DID eg) Aa thpnges were made bpit:and


tet S iopthoutit Masnothpnae, p
gobriigb —— was made. * Fnit thas Ipfe,
xo. b AND tbe Ipfe was thetlpght of men, tbe tpabte
andes fhpneth tn Darkenefle:and the Darkerielle copze-
bended tf not. Chere was lent aman from God
wholename was Jhon. The fame cameasa
| Yptnefle of the lpabt that all men theough bim
_ Fobn.b.d Prape hears one uot tbat ipgof-b as
\ tent tobcare toptnes of the oe bat Ipgbte
: thas the truelpgbt why lps teth cuerp man
that commetbhinto the Wolde, be was in the
Woozlde, and the wo2lde was made bp bhypm:and

the wozloe Rnewe bpm not.
pe came amonce bis owne and bis owne re-
ceaucd bpm not. Xut as manp as receaucd bpm
prvi. b * £0 Che ganc be power to be the fonnes of God:
fee. itt.b cd afeh deg ih Rip aor

0


Bolattite bozne,not of bloude,noz of the top flefbe,
| 25 no? pet of the wpll of man:but of God.
_ Baruk. x And the fame word became fehe, ¢ dwelte
| mat.rroria AMONGE bS:*anDd we lawe the glozp of tt,as the


ternie glozpe of the onelp begotten fonneot the father,
fJob.8 Fyll of graceandtrutbe. PS
ganth.titsb e x Jbon bearcth wptnetie of bpm, anderp-


eth,tapenge: Tops was be of whome Jipate,
whpcbe though he came after me, wente before
zono. me:Eoz be was befozeme. * And of bps fulneife
ee” Hauc all toe receaned-cuen grace foz grace. Fo?
tbelawe thas geuen bp <Holess but graceand
tro. Frit pany cee pa hed brite: x Mo man bathe
OWNS fone Godatan P,
Theonelp begotten fone which ts in the bo:
fome of the fatber.be bath beclarcd bpm. H
Mex and thys is therecozde of Jhon : when p
Jnd veies fent pzreattes and Leuptes trom Jeru-
falem, to alfkebpm:wpat art thous And pecon-
fefledand denped not, and fapde plapnlpe: Jam
not Chite. Ahd they alked bpm: what tens
goath,ri.b *art thou elpas? Andhelapeth:Jamnot. —
teurbiite FAET thou that Pzopbetes And he an{ioered:
| no. Chen lapdethep wuto bpm: tobat art thou,
that te tfiape qeuc an anfwere Dnto them that
fent »8.Uibat tapel thou of thy felfer Pe lapd:
uira *Jamp vopee ofa crper in p wyldernes,matke
arta ffrapgbt the wape of the Lozde, * ag Tapde the
akei sonhete Efapas. Andthep wbpehe were fente
EDT gere of the pbarples. Ano thep atked bpm, and


pgaria


agat itti b CapDe ontobpm: Wibp baptplet thou tben, pE
atka thou benot Chzitno? Delpas,netberthat 20


Stea pip g Phete Adon auntwered them,lapenge: * F bas


$ "i
— Wolereiy,
ptyle with water, but there Fahdeth oneamige
pou , whome pe knoe not, be tt is wbprhe
though & came after me, was before me, whole
tho latchet, J amnot wozthp to bnlofe. Thefe
tipnges were done in Wethabara beponde 702
Dane, * where Jhon dpd baptple. a _ Fobn.tii b
>t Lhe nexte dape, Bhonleeth Jefus conr Fe
mpnge dutohim,and fapth*bebolde the lambe Erri b
of God, tobhpche taketh atbape the fpnne of the +t
wozlde. Chis is he of home J fapde: After me
commeth a man,wbpcbe went befoze me, for be
wasg befoze meand 4 knetoe bpm not : but that
be thoulde be declared to Flrael , therfore am F
come bapt ipnige topth hater. |
xAnd Jhon barerecorde lapenge: Flawethe ayat. tita
Cpzete delcende from beaué,Ipke wntoa Doue , g Market.
abode vpon bpm, and ¥ bnetoe him not. But he 2"
that fent me to baptple in water,the fame fapde 7
nto me: Dpon whome thou thalte fe thefpzcte
 Defcende,andtarpe tpl on bpm, thefameis pe
toprcb baptpleth w the Holp goot. And J latwe
and bare tecozde that be isthefonne of God. F
Thenerte dape after, Jhon tode agapne, m
and two of bps dpiepples , andhe bebelde Jelug
as be walked bp,and fapeth : beholde the lambe
of God.And f two dilciples bearde him {peake
@thep folowed Felus.And Jefus turned about
and fawe themfolowe bim, andfapth onto thé:
Wibat feke pe” Cheplapde nto bpm: Rabbp
(Wbpch ts to lape pfone tite acd Matter)
Yober Divellett thourdpe fapth onto them : come
and fe, Thep came andfatwe where he divelte: €
abode with bpm that dape. orit was aboute
the tenthe boure.
Dne of the tivo toppche heard Jhon (peake,
and folowed him, was Andrew Simon Peterg
bzotber. Che fame founde bys brother Spmón
fp2ft.and fapetb bntobim: we bane founde Mef
fiag(wbpch ts bp sds ipa annopnted) &
brought bim to Jefus. And Jefus bebeloe bim,
and tapd:thou artx Simon the fonne of Jonas, sgat reie
thou Halt be called Cephag:wbpche ts bp inter-
peetacpon a tone. The dape folotopnge, Felus œ
woldgo into Oalile,and founde Philip, <€lapth
wnto Dim-folow me*btlip was of Wethlaina Fob-riise,
the cptie of Andzew and Peter. bplppfounde~
Nathanael andflapth nto hym:iwe baune foude
Hun, of whom* Soles in the latwe and thet B20 ss cine-c1t.c,
phetes dpd thepte, Jelug thefonne of Jofeph of anv.rrit.-
asareth.And Nathanael fapd onto him *can Let ee


thereanp goodthynae come oute of Masareths amio
Pbrlpplapeth ontohymcome andfe. Fob. bii é


Jelug latwe Nathanael compngto bpm and
fapth of bim.2Bebolde a veghe Airaelite, in tha
isnogple. Nathanael fapth onto bpm :twhence
knowet thou mer Fetus anfwered and fapd bn
tobpm. Wefoze that Wbplpp called the, when
thou waft ynder thefpgac tre, A fatoe the. Ra-
thanacl an{toered and lapde nto bpm: Rabbi,


thou art even the verpefonne of God, thou arte
the kpuge of Firacl. Jelug anfwered and fapde
wntobpm : Decaule Jlapde vnto the , J fawe
the wnder thefpaagetrec, thou beleuette. Thou
alte fe greater thpnges then there. And be
fapeth vnto bpm:diecelpe, veretpe. 3 fape onto

Ce pou:


C The Golpell of
HSapncte Jbon.
CTbefpee Chapter. rh


A he enerlattpnge byrth of Chzift,and bowe hebe-
came man. he tettpmonp cf Jhon. The calipnge of
Andzewe, Peter. i


A eee È the begpnnpnge was the
ECHR) (yee wode, and the worde was

seen) ewe with God : and God was the

E lees oode. The fame was in the

Geneia (Eza Kena begpunpnge wpth God.* Al
Pro. DID eg) Aa thpnges were made bpit:and


tet S iopthoutit Masnothpnae, p
gobriigb —— was made. * Fnit thas Ipfe,
xo. b AND tbe Ipfe was thetlpght of men, tbe tpabte
andes fhpneth tn Darkenefle:and the Darkerielle copze-
bended tf not. Chere was lent aman from God
wholename was Jhon. The fame cameasa
| Yptnefle of the lpabt that all men theough bim
_ Fobn.b.d Prape hears one uot tbat ipgof-b as
\ tent tobcare toptnes of the oe bat Ipgbte
: thas the truelpgbt why lps teth cuerp man
that commetbhinto the Wolde, be was in the
Woozlde, and the wo2lde was made bp bhypm:and

the wozloe Rnewe bpm not.
pe came amonce bis owne and bis owne re-
ceaucd bpm not. Xut as manp as receaucd bpm
prvi. b * £0 Che ganc be power to be the fonnes of God:
fee. itt.b cd afeh deg ih Rip aor

0


Bolattite bozne,not of bloude,noz of the top flefbe,
| 25 no? pet of the wpll of man:but of God.
_ Baruk. x And the fame word became fehe, ¢ dwelte
| mat.rroria AMONGE bS:*anDd we lawe the glozp of tt,as the


ternie glozpe of the onelp begotten fonneot the father,
fJob.8 Fyll of graceandtrutbe. PS
ganth.titsb e x Jbon bearcth wptnetie of bpm, anderp-


eth,tapenge: Tops was be of whome Jipate,
whpcbe though he came after me, wente before
zono. me:Eoz be was befozeme. * And of bps fulneife
ee” Hauc all toe receaned-cuen grace foz grace. Fo?
tbelawe thas geuen bp <Holess but graceand
tro. Frit pany cee pa hed brite: x Mo man bathe
OWNS fone Godatan P,
Theonelp begotten fone which ts in the bo:
fome of the fatber.be bath beclarcd bpm. H
Mex and thys is therecozde of Jhon : when p
Jnd veies fent pzreattes and Leuptes trom Jeru-
falem, to alfkebpm:wpat art thous And pecon-
fefledand denped not, and fapde plapnlpe: Jam
not Chite. Ahd they alked bpm: what tens
goath,ri.b *art thou elpas? Andhelapeth:Jamnot. —
teurbiite FAET thou that Pzopbetes And he an{ioered:
| no. Chen lapdethep wuto bpm: tobat art thou,
that te tfiape qeuc an anfwere Dnto them that
fent »8.Uibat tapel thou of thy felfer Pe lapd:
uira *Jamp vopee ofa crper in p wyldernes,matke
arta ffrapgbt the wape of the Lozde, * ag Tapde the
akei sonhete Efapas. Andthep wbpehe were fente
EDT gere of the pbarples. Ano thep atked bpm, and


pgaria


agat itti b CapDe ontobpm: Wibp baptplet thou tben, pE
atka thou benot Chzitno? Delpas,netberthat 20


Stea pip g Phete Adon auntwered them,lapenge: * F bas


$ "i
— Wolereiy,
ptyle with water, but there Fahdeth oneamige
pou , whome pe knoe not, be tt is wbprhe
though & came after me, was before me, whole
tho latchet, J amnot wozthp to bnlofe. Thefe
tipnges were done in Wethabara beponde 702
Dane, * where Jhon dpd baptple. a _ Fobn.tii b
>t Lhe nexte dape, Bhonleeth Jefus conr Fe
mpnge dutohim,and fapth*bebolde the lambe Erri b
of God, tobhpche taketh atbape the fpnne of the +t
wozlde. Chis is he of home J fapde: After me
commeth a man,wbpcbe went befoze me, for be
wasg befoze meand 4 knetoe bpm not : but that
be thoulde be declared to Flrael , therfore am F
come bapt ipnige topth hater. |
xAnd Jhon barerecorde lapenge: Flawethe ayat. tita
Cpzete delcende from beaué,Ipke wntoa Doue , g Market.
abode vpon bpm, and ¥ bnetoe him not. But he 2"
that fent me to baptple in water,the fame fapde 7
nto me: Dpon whome thou thalte fe thefpzcte
 Defcende,andtarpe tpl on bpm, thefameis pe
toprcb baptpleth w the Holp goot. And J latwe
and bare tecozde that be isthefonne of God. F
Thenerte dape after, Jhon tode agapne, m
and two of bps dpiepples , andhe bebelde Jelug
as be walked bp,and fapeth : beholde the lambe
of God.And f two dilciples bearde him {peake
@thep folowed Felus.And Jefus turned about
and fawe themfolowe bim, andfapth onto thé:
Wibat feke pe” Cheplapde nto bpm: Rabbp
(Wbpch ts to lape pfone tite acd Matter)
Yober Divellett thourdpe fapth onto them : come
and fe, Thep came andfatwe where he divelte: €
abode with bpm that dape. orit was aboute
the tenthe boure.
Dne of the tivo toppche heard Jhon (peake,
and folowed him, was Andrew Simon Peterg
bzotber. Che fame founde bys brother Spmón
fp2ft.and fapetb bntobim: we bane founde Mef
fiag(wbpch ts bp sds ipa annopnted) &
brought bim to Jefus. And Jefus bebeloe bim,
and tapd:thou artx Simon the fonne of Jonas, sgat reie
thou Halt be called Cephag:wbpche ts bp inter-
peetacpon a tone. The dape folotopnge, Felus œ
woldgo into Oalile,and founde Philip, <€lapth
wnto Dim-folow me*btlip was of Wethlaina Fob-riise,
the cptie of Andzew and Peter. bplppfounde~
Nathanael andflapth nto hym:iwe baune foude
Hun, of whom* Soles in the latwe and thet B20 ss cine-c1t.c,
phetes dpd thepte, Jelug thefonne of Jofeph of anv.rrit.-
asareth.And Nathanael fapd onto him *can Let ee


thereanp goodthynae come oute of Masareths amio
Pbrlpplapeth ontohymcome andfe. Fob. bii é


Jelug latwe Nathanael compngto bpm and
fapth of bim.2Bebolde a veghe Airaelite, in tha
isnogple. Nathanael fapth onto bpm :twhence
knowet thou mer Fetus anfwered and fapd bn
tobpm. Wefoze that Wbplpp called the, when
thou waft ynder thefpgac tre, A fatoe the. Ra-
thanacl an{toered and lapde nto bpm: Rabbi,


thou art even the verpefonne of God, thou arte
the kpuge of Firacl. Jelug anfwered and fapde
wntobpm : Decaule Jlapde vnto the , J fawe
the wnder thefpaagetrec, thou beleuette. Thou
alte fe greater thpnges then there. And be
fapeth vnto bpm:diecelpe, veretpe. 3 fape onto

Ce pou:


THe Golpeu


pou:bereat ter Hall pe fe heauen opets and the an=
gels of God alcendpuge and defcendpnge ouer
the fonne of man.
C The. tt. Chapter. ye
Ebit turneth the water into mpue,and bipucth
the bpers and fellers out afthe tempie,


eae aan, Jey the Chpade dape was there a
SA eee mariage in Cana acptiein Ga
yas Gey lile,and p mother of Jeng wag
fit aaa Waa there. And Fclus wascalled (€
arana Wa bis opiciples) wnto p mariage.
Coes; AND When the wpnefapled, the
~ nother of Fefuslapetd onto bpm:tbep hauena
žukeiis wpne. Jelug Tapth onto her: oma * what haue
Ftodo wpthp.mpne boureisnotpet come. Pis

mother fapeth tnto the mpnifters:whatfoeuet

pe fapth butopou,do tt. Bnd ther were Landing

there, fpre waterpottes of fone after the maner

ofthe purpfpenge of p Jewes, cdtapnyngetwo

15 or thee Fy,kpns a pece. defug fapth puto them:

fplehe aterpottes wrth water. And thep fpl-

ico tbe by to the bepme.Andbelapth pnto che:

Datoe out now, and beare vnto the gouerner of

the feat. And thep bare it. benthe ruler of the

feat bad tated the water that was turnedinto

wpne and linewe not whece it as) but the mi-

npfters hpch Dzethe the water knewe.) pe cal

ieth the bzpoegrom,¢ fapeth bntobim. Euerp

man at p begpunpng Doth fet foztb good wpne,

and the men ve dzonte then ý whpch ts wozie.

Wut thou bate kepte the good wpne wnepll

T nowe. Chis begypnnpng of mpzacles dpd Fetus

ba tn Caana of Galile and ewed bps glozpe, and
matiit Hpsdplepples beleued on bym. H * Afterthps


Zube. tit.


be ent Downe to Capernaum , beand pps mo-
tocr and bps bactbh2en, and bps difciples,< there
— contpuued manp dapes.

saatide rex andthe Jewmes Calter thas eucnat bade
Lube, rip g AND elus wente Dpto Ferufalem,and founde
{yttpnge inthe temple, tholetbat foldeoré,and
hepe and doues and chaungers of monep. And
when be badde made ( asit Were )a (courge of
{niall coardes.be Dzone them all out of the tem-
ple,voprh tie Hepe and oren,and potozed oute)
chaungets monepe, and onerthzue the tables.


fapbe Dntothemtpatfolde doues: Haue thefe


thpnges bence,and make not mp Fathers poufe,
an Doufe of marchaundpfe. Aud bis bifcpples re
pfa.trrir.b membzcd tf,that ts Wo2zprten: *tbe sele of thpne
boule bath cueneaten me. Ate
Then aunfwered the ¥cwes,andfapde dnto
bpm: ibbat token the welt thou punto bs, fepnae
| that thou dock thele thpnges ¢ Fetus anlwered
air aud fapDd Dntothem:*deitrope this temple, and
inthze dapes J Wwpll reare it wp. Chen fapde the
Jeteg. rl vt: peares was thps temple abupl -
Dpnge,andwplte thou reareit vpinthredapes?
Sut he fpake of the temple of pps bodpe, As
fone therfozeas he was rplen frodeath agapne
bps dDylcpples remembecd that be thus badde
fapde: Andthep beleucd thefcrpprure,andthe
Wo2des hpch Jefus hadfapode. |
Wibende was in Jerufalem at EafFer in the
feaftedape: manp beleucd on bps name , whan
they {awe bys mpzacles wbyche he Dpd, Wut


-ppm : boive cana man be bome when be ig olde


P ofmantobpch isin beauen.


. gaue bps onlpe begotten fonne,that whofocuer €


Yclus dpd not commpt bøm felfe vneto thent,be-
caule be knetve all men,and neded not , that anp
man (ould teftify of ppm. * Eor be bnewe what Ferrol b
agin man. f AEIR


CThe.tii. Chapter. E


w EOE R] we a, =
oe oea]


tke aji } Ce ; |
i Ls r, i oe +e, .
bii h ETATY


A Ee Rabbi we knowe that thouart nE,
taha teachercome from God: foz no
man coulde do fuche mpzacles ag thou doek, er-
cept God were wpth ppm. Jelus anfwered and
fapd Ynto bim:Gierelp, verelp, 3 lape Dnto the,
excepte a man be bognefrom aboue, De cannot Te
the Byngdome of God. Micobemusfapeth tnta


canbe enterinto bis mothers wombe g be borme
agapn?Jelas anliteered:* Cierelp, werelp, ¥ lap Fobu.citio
witothe,ercept aman be bome of water and of Friis»
the {pzete ,becan not enter into the Kpngdome
of God. * Chat whyprhe is bogne of the Aee, ig xomviiia >..
flefbe,and that tebpche is bone of the fpzete, ig .
fpzete. Garuaple not thou that FJ lapode to the :
pe multe be bonne from aboue. Che wpne blo-
weth where tt lpteth and thou Dearete plotide 25 -
tbercof*but canit not tell whence it commethg 1era *
vein 4 goecth.Soigeucrp one that igbo:me
OLEDE tprcte:
Nicodemus anfwered and Capde bufo bym:

olve can thefe thpnges be? Fetus an{toered and
fapd bntobpm:art thou a matter in Flrael,and
knotbel€ not thele thynges/Cierelpe, berelpe,F i
fape bnto the, we Cpeake that the Do knowe,and
teltifp that twe baue fene:and pe receaue not our
wptnes. PE J baue tolde pou,earthipe thpnges,
and pe beleue not:bowe hall pe belene. pt F tell
pou of beauenlp thpnges:

¥Andno man alcendeth vp to Deauen, but Spbe.ttit.e

he that came do wne from heanen, even the fonne


* And ag Moles lpfte vp the lerpent in the Pam.eri«
twylbernetie, cuen fo mufte the fonne of man be
iptt vp, that whofoener beleucth inbpm,perpth -
not, but bauecternalllpfe. J+

4 ¥ ffo God fo loued the wolde, that he xxom.d.8.

je

beleucthin bpm, ouldenot perpthe, but bane )
eueclatpnge Ipfe. x0} God fent not bps fonne Luke.riresa
into tie wozlde, to condempne the wotloe : but
that the wozlde throughe bpm mpgbt be faucd:
He that beleucthon bpm is not condépned. Wut |
be that beleucth not ts condempned alceadp, be= i
caulebebath not beleucoin the name of the on- -3j


lp begottenfonneof God. And thys isthe con- Jobata
Dempnation:xthat lpgbtis comeinto p wozloe E ~
andmen loued darckenetle mozethenlpgbht, bea epyes.b” N
caule thep2 dedeg were euell. Fo: *enerpeone |
that eucll doeth,bateth thelpaht:nepther conta
inetbto eget „lete bps dedes fhoulde bere- à
proned.25Kehe that deeth truthe,comethto the «|
lapt P dis bedesmape beknowen,botve p thep | i
are


_ —e
= =


WIT SD. FYROM.


are toz0ught in God. R iiep
D Bfterthelethingescam Jefus g bis dilciples
into tbe lande of Jewozpeg there be tarped with
Job.titt.a them, xg baptpled. And Adon allo baptpled tn
sJathitla Enon belpaes Salim,becaule there was much
Luk.tia pater there,andthep came and were baptrled.
Par list, b ¥JEO2 Bhon was not pet cat into peefon.
ri And there arole a quettio betiocne Jhong
dplcpples andthe Jewes, aboute purpfpenge.
And thep came vnto Jbon and lapd vnto bpm:
Rabbi,be that was wpth the bepode Jordan(to
— wobome thou bearefte wptnes )bebolie the lame
, Iob-iiiia Hantp(eth*and all men come to bpm, Jhon an=
{wered,andfapde : a mancan receaue nothpnge
except it be genen bpm frombeauen. Pe pour tel
Johni neg arewpptnefies* howe that A lapd:¥ am not
Chul, but am fent befozehpm. He that hath the
 bapde 8 the bepdegrome. wut the frpnde of the
bapdeqrome,tobpcbh Tandeth and heareth bpm,
retopfeth greatlpe becaule of the boraegromea
popre. Tope my iope therfoze is fulfplled, He
mut encreale, but 3 mutt decreale. .
He that cometh from beauen,ts aboue all: He
y that ig of thecarth,is earthlpe,¢ (peaketh of the
= earth, De that cometh from beauen, ig abou all
and what be bath lene antdeard, that be teltptp
. eth: noman teceaueth bps teftemonpe. He that
' xom, ttt, Dath receaued bps teftpmonpe, xbath tet to bys
— . feale, p God igtrue.ffoz be wbi God hath tent,
, Stata fpeaketh the wozdes of Ood.* or God genet
not the et bp meature nto bpm. The father
apid louethtbefonne, xand bathe geuen all tbpnaes
weet. into bpsbanve. + He that beleueth on the fonne
d Gob. bb pan euerlaitpngelyte pe toteu not the
ne pall not felpfe,buttbe wrathe of Goda


] bydeth on bpm. F
C The. tiii. Chapter.


The loupage communpracron of Chi wpth be
a “std OFS aMstDs bp the toelies pir: Howe ve


| fo ak


pes Nc i =,
fie cers 4


and ther came a woman of Samatpa to Dratbe
water. Jefus fapeth onto her: geue me dDepncke.

or bps dplepples were gone awape nto the

towne tebpe meate. Thenfapth the woman of
Syamarpa bntobpm:bowe istt,p thon bepnae

a Jewe alkeet depncke ofme,wbhpcbama Da-

Mei esl. warptane.*Ito2 the Feioes medle not pth the
Sob ‘tg.b amarptanes. Jelug anftoeredandfapd nto
45 her:PEthou Kretvelé the gpfte of God, and who

itis thatfapeth tothe, geue me daprcke, thou

woldeft bane aftedof bpm,and bemold haue ge

gered | nexehe mater of lyfe. Che woman taperd wuts


SUQUIT EY,
bim:p2,thou bate nothpnge to dzawe wth,
andthe welts Depe:from thence then bat thou
tbat water oflpfer Arte thou greater then oure
father Jacob wbpche gaue wstbhe well, andbe
pen LA oandie tberof and bps chyplozen, and
pscatell? |
Jelusanltered and fapde dito her:tobofoe:
uetdapnbeth of this ater, pall thp: t agapne.
Wut wholoever Depncketh of the waterthbatF
thal ceuebpm thal neuer be moze atbprite: but
toe ater tpat de eue bpm, tbalbeinbpm
a wel of water (pepngpng Dp intoenerlatpng
Ipfe. The woman lapeth wnto bpm: Sp2.geue
me of that water that 3 thp2tnot.nether come
bpther to dzawe. Jefus fapth tntto her.Go, call
thy bulband,¢ come bpther. Che woma anfwe-
red and fapd bnto bpm: F bane no bulbande. Fe
fug fapd nto bec: Chou batt well fapde, J have
no bulband. Jo: thou balk bad fpue bulbandes,
and betohom thou notve batt isnottbhp bulbade


` Jnitbat lapoek thou trulp. Che woman fapeth E


pnto bpm: «Sp2, J perceaue p thou arta P20- ause.vit.0
phete. Dur fathers ozhpppedinthps moun:
tapne,*and pe fape that in Jerufalčis the place donate
fohere men ought to wozppp. Jefus fapeth tn: ~~
to ber: woman beleue me, the boure cimeth, whe

pe thal (nether in thismountapne,no2 petat se
tufalem) wo2pp the father. Ve worthpppe ve

wote not what: be knowe what toe ozthpp.

x Jt 02 lalwacion commeth of the Fewes: Aut erov.sri.é
the boure commethandnowe ts, twben the true
foozthpppers Mall wozmppppe the father * in Koma.t.a
ip:ete andin tbe truth. Eo? fuchthe fatheralfo
requypzeth to woztbpppebpm.* Godiga prete, Lor tite
and thep that worthy ppe bpm, mull wortppppe
bpm in iprete and in the trutbe.

The woma fapth onto bpym:F ote, p Mel-

fiag thal come, which is called Chet. dibenbe
iscome.be wplltell bsal thpnges. Jefus tape 2 a
nto ber: x9 that fpeakebnto the,ambe. And martre, f
immediatlp cam bps dplepples and marnapled Luke.rrite
that betalked v the woman. Pet no man fapde: Foor?
what meaneft thou,o2 toby talhelte thou pth `

Hers Che oman then lefte ber Woaterpot, and

wente Der wape into a ap fapeth to the
mé:Come.fe a matt hpep tolde me al thpnaes

that euce 3 dpd. Jg not be Chut: Chenthep

went out ofthe cptieand came butobpm. —

Jn the meane whple Dig ditciples pzaped pins
fapence: Walter, cate. He fapde wnto tbem : J
bauc meat tocat,thatpe bnownot of. Tbherfoze
fapde the dpfrpplesamonge them felués: bathe
anp ma bought bym ougbt toeater Jefus lap-
eth tntotbem:mpnicatig, tobo the wpl of bins
that fent me,¢ tofpnpibe bps worke. ape not

perhere ate p! fouremonetheg, andthencom-

meth baruelts Webolde, J lape vito pou: lpfte

bp pour epes, andlokeontheregpons :fotthep dè

are whpte alreadptntobharneft. x And be p reas ayath.m ò

pa receaucth rewatde, and qatbereth frute Tuker:
ntolpfeeternall:that both he that lotbeth,and

be that reapeth, mpabt retopfe conreber. And


another reapeth. 3 lent pou toreape that, tober
on pe beffoxed no aad sabre kee
e re


eye ONP


red, AND pe arecntredintothepslaboures.
{Dany of the Samaritans of that cptic be
levred on pim, fo: the fapeng of the oma, which
telfcfped that be tolde her all that cuer fhe dpd.
Ho, when f Hamaritans were come vnto Him
thep befoughte bpm, that he wolde tarpe wpty
tiem. And be abode there ttwo dapes. And ma-
np mo beleucd becaule of ps otne toozdes, and
[apd Untothe oman. 4i2o0twe we beleue.not be-
Fob.rbii b caule of thy fapengfoz we bauehard bpm oure
felues,and Broloethat thys is euen Chaiftc, the
Haupoure of the worlde. H
= After tivo dapes he departed thence,and wet
Bata aivapeinto Galile.* soz Jefus him felfe telttfi
Tukeiii ¢ ed, PA ea bath none hbonoure in bps optic
F countre. Chen,as fone as he was come into Ga
lile tbe Galtleans receaued bim:tbanthep bad
fene all the thypnges that bedpdat Jerufalem at
the dape of the feat. sto: thep went alfo vnto P
Feat dape. So Fetus cam agapne into Cana of
adat bite p And ther was acertapn ruler, * whole fonne
ute OHA shag Cpcheat Capernaum. Bs fone as the fame
berde tbat zelus was come oute of Few2pcinto
@altle, be went nto bpm,and befi ought bpm, ý
be wolde come dowone and deale bys tonne. Jeo}
He wasg euen at the popnte ofdeath. Chen lapde
Selus onto bpm:ercepte pe fe fpqnes and won-
ders, pe pli not beleue. T pe ruler fapetb vuto
bpm: p2, come Downe ozeuer that mp fonne
dpe. Felus fapeth bntobpm:Gotbp wape thp
fonne | pba man beleued the toozde that
Jelug bad poken buto bpm. And be wente bps
wape, And as he was gopngedowne,the fer=
wnat Smethpm,andtolde bpm, Capenge: Chp
tonne lpucth. Cha enquypzed be of thé the boure
Dohen be beganneto amende. And thep fapd vn-
fo bpm: Vetterdape,at thefeuenthboure, the fe-
uer left bpm. othe father knewe, that it was
l the fame poure,in the tobpche Jelusfapde vnto
 Sebrolte Him: Thy Conne lpucth.* nd be beleued andal
bis boutholte. kK Chisis agapnepleconde mp
racle,that Jelus Dpd,wha he was come oute of


Feweve tuto Gaitle,
‘The. d. Chapter. ye


_Dehealeth the man that was peke epabe æ thpt:

Dhan feite anp epinar tee eres fop
sip CAN ter tbps was therafeaffedape of
ga Aa Save he Jeteg and Jelug wee vp to Te
a ae ufalem, And theris at Jerufalem


Fo) bp Plaughter bouie a pole wppcd
wacorean als called in the Debzue tage, reth-
feda ) baupnae fpue porches , in obpcbe lape a
great multptude of fpcke folke,of blpnde, balte
and wpthered,waptpnge fo2 the moupnge of p
‘water. jfoz an angel ent Downe at a certapne
 ceafontnto the people.and {tered f water. tho
focurr then fpatte (after the nge ofthe Wwa-
tet) feppedin.was made whole,of whatfoeucr
dpleate be Dad. Andacertapne man twas there,
DMbhpcb bad bene dplealed.xcreviit. peares. Wade
Zelus fave bpm lyet knewe that be note log
tpme hadde bene dpleated,be fapeth wnto bpm:
Wiplt thou be made whole: Che fpcke man an=


a a ee


fwered bpm. p2, Y baue no man when the wa-
tevistroubled,to rete into the pole: Xut in p ;
meanetpine, whple Fam avoute to come,ato-

tier teppeth dowone before me.

Jefus fapth yntopim:*rpie take vp thy bedattras
and walke. And immediatlpe the ma Was MADE zuke.. e
wholeandtoke Dp dys bed and walked. And p Artes.tii. b
fame vape was the Sabboth. Che Jewes ther: 1
fozefapde unto bpm, tbat wag made whole: Ft
is the Sabbotb dape,itis not lawfullfozthe ta
carpe tae He anfwered them : he that made
ine whole,fapde bntome: Cake bpthbyp bed,and
walie. Chenalked thep bym: What manis
pando e fapde vnto the: take bp thp bedde
and walke.and be that thas healed, wpe not
tho it was. 02 Felus had gotten pym felfe a=
fape,becaule that ther was peeale of people tt
that place. a ear

x Biterwarde, Jefus founde bpm in f temple, Wo. oti.


| 7 -anbdfapde yntobpm:bebolde.p art made whole
Ioma Galile, x bere he turned the water into wpne. `


fpnnenomoze,lett a tozfe thpnge pappen Dito
tie. Che ma departed andtolbe the Jewes that
it was jefus whpche bad made bpm whole. f
And therfoze the Jetoes dpd perflecute Jefus,


andfouxbte the meanes to fechpm,becanfe be ng


bad done thele thpng:s on the Sabboth dapes.


And Fetugaunfweredebem: yh * Bp father carka |


wozketh bytherto,and J thozke. Cherfoze the

Jetwes fought the moze tobpli bpm, not onelpe

becaulebedadbzokenthe Sabboth:butfapoe —

alfo that Cod was bps father, and made ppm ee

felfe equall pth Good. E goke. erie
Then antwocred FJelusandfapde bntothem: |

mee ati A = bnro pou: *thefonnecan Fob.tr.a-

donothbpng of bpmlelfe,but that be lecth tbe fa-

therdo. o: whatlocuer be doety,that doeth the

fonne allo, Fo: the father loucth the fonne, and

fhetoeth bpmalltbpnges that be bpm felfe doth

And be topll thetoe dpm greater teogckes then

thefe,becaule pe huld maruaple. E0? lypketopfe

as the father rapteth vp the dead, quycheneth

them, cuen fo the fonne quyckeneth whome be

Topll.x« Nether tudgeth the father anpman:but myath.rte

hathcommptted all indgement nto the fonne, £386"

becaute that all men fhoulde boncure the fonne,

euenas thep honourc the father, He that bonous

tethnot the fonne tbe fame bonoureth not the

farber, mbycoe tars lent bpm.dlerelp, verelp, I €

a

belenetd ondpin that fent me, bath cuerlaitpng


Crevelp, verelpe, ¥ faye vito you * the oure Satni,
{hall come, and notor it (8, tobenthe deade hall” **"
Heare the vopce of the fonne of God. And they p
beare Hall lpue.*Itoz as the father bath lpfein xopnt:
bpm felfe,fotpketople bath be por tothe lonng #oriiis,
to baue lpfe m bpm felfe: and bathe geuen bpm
potver alfo to iudge, becaufe be ts thefonne of
man. Haruaple not at thys:fo2 the * houre thal ayat,rrow
comie,tn the whpchal that are th the graues thal
beare bps vopcc,and (hall come fozth:thep that
baue done good, vito the cefurreccpon of lpfe:
and they that baue Donceuell, ynto the refurrec
cponofdampnatpon. Ja 4

can


e vito pou:* ec that bearethbmp word, and jobn.vic


lpfe,and pail notxcome into dampnation: but zukrrine |
‘is f{capedfrom death tnta lpfe. '


fr s. ‘Hho,


YF can of mpne otne felfe dt Rothpnae. As
AS Zheare, 3 fudge annd mp tudgement ig iut be-


caule ¥lekenot mpne otne wpll, but tbe twpll -


gop.biii d of the father whpeh bathe fent me. * PE J thulde


" ‘beare wptnes of mp felfe, mp wptneg were not
i true. Chere is another that beareth wptnes of
g _ me:and Jam Cure, that the wptneswhpche be

| Beareth of nets true. |
Fobutb Pe Cent wnto Jhon, he bare wptnes tnto


| the truth. But ¥ receaue not therecozde of man
3 euertheletfe,thele thpnges J lape p pe mpabt
| be lafe. ipe hag a burnpng anda rl Se glpabt
e and pe wolde foza fealon baue reiopfed in bps
' Fobu.v.e Ipghte. x Wut Jbaue greater ptnes.then the
/ -$3job-Fr-c. Daptnes of Jhon. + Foz the workes whpche the
father bath qeuenme tofpnpibe.the fame wo2-

bes that Fdo, beare wptnes of me, that the fa-

ther bath Cent me: And thefather htm felf which

sgatiti.n Hathe lente me,*hathe bozne wptnes ofme. Ve
o aee bauenot beard bis vopceat anp tyme, noz fene,
(+, Aukea. ppg Wape, bps worde Daucpe not abpopnge in

LPL Hou, Fo: whom be bath fent bym pebelene not.
7 Search the feriptures,fo? in them pe thpnke

Y acte.rpu.p Pe Daue eternall Ipfe + and tbep arethep whpche

“Dnpbitic Ceftifpe of me. And pet wpll pe not come tome
E.. pe mpabt baue lpfe. Frcceaue not pzapfe of m

= Wut 4 knotve pou, that pe bauenot tbelouc of
| Godin pou. Jam comein mp fathers name and
gointe pereccuemenot.xPF another come th bps owne

© izbie pame, bpm wplipe receaue: Howe can pe beleue
- gobiche receaue bonoure one of anotber.and {eke

not the bonoure that cimeth of God onlpesDo
not thpncke that J wpl accufe pouto mp father.
Therets one that acculeth pou: enen <)ofesin
whome pe truite. JF 02 bad pe belened Holes, pe
orw. roti, e wolde baue beleued me*foz he wote of me. ut
| ppe beleue not bys wepttpnges: botwe thall pe


È
m ae


clene mp wowes: F |
elus fedeth fpurthoutande men, departeth atape-
che dip bearera ot Des iwode, ADE carnal art oE
fended at ppi. A i
e Kter theletbynges* Jelug wentbpg
a AA Hina sues thet of Galile, Mbpebis
Maathe lee of Cpberias xand a great mul
uke phe, ESES titude folotped him, becaule thep lato
~ Bpsmpzacles tobpebe bedyd on them that were
difeated. And Fetus went vptntoa mountapne
and Mae iH day bifciples. Andeafter,
feattoftheJewes wasnype. F °
mat. riltt,b z pte *Udi hen Jefus then lpfte Dphyps epes and
Fue.) Aea


-am ee


reat companp come bnto ppr, be Tapth
pntoPbdplyp: ents (pall twe bpe beats that
thetemape cates Chys be fap topzoue bpm foz
bebpmlelfebnetoc,wwhathewolbedo. =
Pbplpppeanfwered himxt wo hundzed pen
worthe vf byeade arcnot {uffictét Foz them that
cuicrp manmape tabealptell.Dne of bpsdplcp
ples(Andrew, Spmon Peters beotbher) sapei
9 puto bim: There is a lad bere, Whiche hath tpue
Darlp loaves and tivofpihes: but what are thep


Ti. Begum
iiig


. people ipt Deatone. ‘Chere was muche graik in
| -that place. So the men fat Downe in nombze,a-
boutefpuethoulanbe. And Jelug toke the bzead


from beauen tocate. Ché 3
amongefomanp! And Jelug fapde: Make the


JE Q Ut k k p +

And when be had qeuen thankes,be qaue to the

dpicppleg , and the Dplcpples to them that were

{ct Dotone. And lpkewwpte of the Epthes as much

as Ae atai |
Gi den thep bad eaten prough,belapeth wni- 9

tobpsdpicpples: gather bp the bzoken meate

wbhpchremapneth,that notypnae belote. And

thep gathered tt together , efplled twelue baf-

bettes w the bzokë meat of pfpue batlp loaues,

wbpch broken meate remapned pntothem that

ad eaten. Chen thofe men( when thep had fene

the mpzacle that Jelusdpd ) fapde : thps tg of a

truth*the fame Pzophete, that Huld come into Luke. vrie

the Wozldec, HUiben Jelug therfore perceaued 30b.tii.b

that thep woldcome,and take dpin vy tomake |

bpma bpnge, «be departedagapne intoa moi zune.di.a.

tapne dpm felfe alone. * And when euen tas aae tittie

nowe come,bps dplciples went Downe Vnt the pyar. vit

fee andgat bpintoa g Eee came ouer the

fee Dnto Capernaum. Andit was note darcke,

and fii wagnotcometotbem. And the lee

arole toptha great wpnde that blewe. So whe

they badrotven abouta.rry.o2.rxr. furlonges

tbep latve Jefus walkpnge on the Cee and dras

Wwpng nye Vnto the thpppe.¢ thep were afraped.

Wut ve fapth wnto them: Fis J be notafraped

Then wolde thep baue tec¢aucd bpm into the

thpppe,andimmedpatlp the thpppe was at the

lande, betber thep went. |
Che dape folotopng, when the people, which È

iode onthe other fpde of thefee) fate tbat ther

was none other (bpp there, faue that one wher

into bys dpicpples were entred, andthat Fetus

wente not wpth bps dpicpples into the Wpppes

but that bys dpicpples were goné awape alone

(owbeit,there came other pppes from Tp-

beriag npe onto the place, where thep dpdeate


- -bpeade,atter that the Lozde hadde geuen than-


kes when the people therfoze latwe that Jelug
wasnotthere,hepther bps dpfcyples, tbey alfo
toke fhppppnge and came to Capernaum, fe-
&pnge for Jefus. And when thep hadde foundé
bpm on the otber fpde of the (ee, thep fapde vnto
bpm: Rabbi when camette thou ppther ¢ Jefus
anfioered them, and fapde:berelp, verelp, Fiap
Dnto pou: pe feke me, not becaule pefatwe the
mp2acles, but becaufle pe dpd eate of the loaucs
and were fplled. > Laboure not fo: the meate
toppch perplipeth, dut fo: that whpch endureth
wnto cuerlattpngelpfe, wbhpch meate the fonne
of man pall gene bute pou. sfo2 him bath Gon
thefather fealed. Then fapde thep onto ppm:
what tall we Do that we mpghte wozcke the
wo2kes of God! Fetus anfwered and fapde vn- =
to tbem :tbps ts the toozke of Gon:that pe be:


p lene on bpm, whome be bathe fente. Thep lapde
E


tberfoze bnto bpm, * tobat {pane thetwette thou Mat. rit è,

then, that we mape fe,¢ beleuc ther Uhat Dock ano.rvra.

thou wozke: Dur fathers dpa cate anna inp pelos iy

belerte,ag it is weptten.be rat *b2eade xero.pet.b
: clus fapde bto thé

verelp, verelp, J fap onto pou: Boles qauepou


not pbzeadtrd beu€ «but mp father geucth pou Mt. Foie


true bread fro beauë. Foz the becade of Godig
De Motch commeth done from beauen,and qe:
Ce itt ueth


Li


u ig sae nto the foozlde.

Chen lapde they ynto him : Lorde,cnermoze
geue ba thps bread. And Yelus fapd ynto them
` Jam the bread of lpfe. De that commeth tome,
* thalnot biger:anb be that beleucth on me Mall
neuertburit. Eut A flape bnto pou:that peal
fopaucfeneme,and pet pe belene not. All that
the father geneth me Hall come tome: andhym
pcommethtome,¥ calvenot atwape. Eo: 3am
tuke. rrie COME downe from heaue: knot todo that J wpl
but that be pl, whch bath (ent me.aAndthps
is the fathers wpll wobpcbe hathe fente me,
that of all obpcb be bath qeuen me, 3 thalloofe
nothpnge:bucraple them wp agapne,at the lat
dape. And thysis the wpl ot bim ¢ fent me: that
cuerp one wbpehe ieeththe onne xandbeleucth
onbpm,baueecuerlafpng lyfe. And J topl raple
bpm pat the lal dape.’Che Jewes then mur-
muredat dim, becaufe bela pd: J am the bzeade
cotio which came Dotone from beau: And thep
m irie fapbe:* 38 not thys Jefus thefoune of Jofeph,
" @ whole fatherand mother weknowes Powe igit
then chat befapth, ¥ cam dotone fro peauens Fe
{us anfwered and fapde Dnto thé-murmure not

alae pour felues. i
*j20 Man Ca Come fo me,except the father
wipch hath tet me, dawe him: Ano toil rapfe


Zohn be


Jop big


bpm bpatthelaffedape. Ftis wpttenin the


erario PzopHetes: *andthep fhalbe all taught of God
iadi Coerpmantherfore that bath bearde,and bath
Er.rrriiin Learned ofthe father, commeth ynto me. x Pot
Survie eat anpma bath {ene the father, faue be wbych
jobuic ig of God, the lame bath iene the father.
tsi0bstt? Uerelp, verelp, F Cape vito pou:be $ puttetd
His truffeinme, po cucrlattpngelpfe. Jam p
bzcad of lpfc, Poure fathers opd eate Hanna in
the pldernes,and are dead. Chps isp bzeade,
Which commeth Downe from beauen,thata man
map cate thcrof,andDuot ope, J am that leupne
~ bread, wbpch came Downe from beauen. PE anp
mancate of thps bzeade: be fhalilpue foz ever.
uteri e * And the bead that F topll eue is mp fete,
tohich J wyll qenefor the Ipfe of the wolde.
s Che Jetwes therfoze ftroueamonge them fel-
ucs,faping: pote can this felome gene vs that
ficipe of bis to cate: The Feluslapde nto thé:
>< Clevelp, verelpe, 4 lape tunto pou: ercepte pe
cate the flethe of the fonne of man anddzpncbe
his blowd:pe Daue nolpfeinpou. (bolo eateth
my fletbe and Dzpnckethmyp bloude, bathe etcr=
nalllpfe, and J wpllrapfe bpm pat thelatte
dape. Sozmy feteis meatemdede: andmp
. bloude tg dzpnche indede. He peateth mp flee
s and Dypncketh mp bloudedwellethinme, and J
inbpm.As thelpupng father bath lent meand
J lpue foz thefather: Cuen lobe that catethme
{hall lpue by ý meancs of me. Chis is the bead,
which came Downe from beauen:not as pour fa
~ thers dpd cate Manna and are dcad. De thatea
teth of this bead, fhalllpueeuer. fa i
befethbpnges fapa be inthe Spnagoge as
DHetaught in Capernaum.anp therfore of his
bpicpples( oben they hav herdethps)fapd: thy
is anbardelapeng-Wwho can abpde the bearpn


| The Golpell


ples murmured atit:and be fapde onto them: G
Doth tbys offende pons Mihat and pf pe pall fe

that fonne of manafcende bp thptbher where be

was before: Ft is the {prete that qupckencthy, p

fletbe profpteth nothypnge. Che wo2des that 4-

(peake bntopouarefpeeteandlpte. Wut there

are fome of pou pbheleue not. Foz Jelus newe

from tbe begpnnpng, hich they were that bele

ucd not, who thulbde betrape bpm. And be fapt

therfore fapdeF onto pou:that*noma ca come 3ob-bit.s
nto me,ercept tf ere geué onto him of mp faz

ther. fErd that tpme many of bis difciples went
backe,andfozloke ppm, and walked nomoze w

him. Chen fapde Felus to the twelue:wylil pe al

fo goawape:Chen Spimon Peter auntwered:
banner whome {hall we gor Chou hatte

the woo2de8 of eternalllpfe,*and webeleucand caat.rbl. e
ave Ture tbat thpouart Chzif thefonne of thelp- zaree.
upnge Got. Jelug anlweredthem : Paue not J Hoon.ri-c


_cholen pou tivelue, and + one of pouis a Dpuells xuk.rrita `


dpe {pake of Judas Flcarpoth the fonne of Sp- I0% Fh
m0. £02 bett was,p Huld betrape bpm, bepnge
one of the twelue.


= CThe. bit. Chapter.


@ Fetus commeth te Yerulem at the Feat, Ceacheth the
Hewes and repioucth them: here are Dpuerle opintis
ofbpmambge the people. he pharpies rebube the otp
cero becaufethep hane net bzougbte bpm, € echpiewpth
Sricobemus foz takpnge bis parte,


Nt ae, Seter thele thpnges, Jelug whet 4
oy a ee aboute in Oalple-foz he wolde
Bag AVA not qo about ingetog becaufe


tpnie is

not pet come: batpoure tpme ig alwapereadpe.

The woslde cannot hatepou. * Wut me it DA- opn, rp.a
teth:becanfe 3 tetifpe ofit,that p workers ther

of are cuell:go pe vp bnto this feat, 3 wpll not,

go bp pet vato this fealt,foz mp time is not pet
fullcome.tUben bebadfapd thele wo2des dntg

them, beabodeEplin Galile. Wut astone as bis


brethzé tbere come then weet hebpalfovntotbe . . —


feaffe,not openlp, butas it were preuelp. Then ys

fought P Jetwes him at P fealk,¢fapd:xtoherets Hasa.r1.e
er nd much murmurig was ther of himamig
people. Eo? Fome fapd:*be is good, other faid eae

nay, but be nce Apen le. Howbelt*noman anv.oie

fpake openlp of bpm, fozfeare of the Jeweg.: Fa F3Hob-rit.c,

— Mowe whan halfe of thefeatte mas done,

Jens wente Dpinto ptemple,andtaught.and-

SE Alaa micas eng: Pole knoweth

be the {criptures,tepnee p beneuer learned: Fe =

{us anfivered them, lapd: Bp doctrpne is not

mpne:but his plent me. PEanp ma wll be obg-


- dient ynto bis wpL be thal bnotve of p doctrpne


of it? Jelug netoeinbpmfelfe,thatbpsdpicp- whether it be of God; 03 whether 3 {peake of


mp
»


Da


——y
ae


7 O


r.
mer bea Deis:but when Chzitecõmeth,no må knoweth
"a w


T


LDI SD. IYAN


mypfclfe. Hethat Cpeaketh of bps felfe; febeth

bps cwne pzapfe. But be tbat lekcth bis peapte

that fente bym, tbe fame is true and no Virpa-

teoutnelictsinbpm.

OD. IF. a. id be not Doles qeue poualawe, and pet

Detd none of pou kepeth the lawer pmo pe aboute

tokpl me: Che people anliered elapde: Chou

balte the Denell: who qoeth aboutetokpll the?

gobn.b.a Jelug anfivered,and fapde Dito them:* F baue

Done one woecke,and pe all maruaple. oles

therfoze qaue puto poutbe cpzcucptpon not be-

senroit bd caulertis of oles:butxot the fathers. And pet

_ peonthe Sabboth dape,cpzcumcpfea man. DF

aman on the Sabborhdape receaue cp2cumcp-

Tpon, without becakpnge of thelatwe of Moles

- ppfoapne peat me, becaufe J bane made aman

Pore , euerp whpt whole on the Daboth dap: Judge

Lai Me notafter the beter appeataunce, but indge with
arpgbteous indgement. LENE

@ ben fapd Come of them of Jerufalem:ts not


thys de, whome thep go abouteto kpll:Butlo,


be {peaketh boldlpe,and thep faye nothpnge to
D bpm. Do the rulers knowe in dede,p this is ve-
at.ritt. tp Chgitt/ ow beit*we knowe thps ma whéce


hence be is. Chen cerper-Jelus in the téple (as

be taught fapenq:pe both knowe me, ¢ whence
Jam,pe know. And J amnot come of mp felfe

but be that fent mets truc, whom pe Bnowe not

oe Wut. J Bnotwe hpmiex and pe ¥ Cape that 3) knowe bpm

not,3i thalbe a Iper ipke bntopou,but 3) knowe bpm.) for Y

earrie amofbpm,and be bathe fenteme. * Chen they


Lube-F-S Conght to take bpm,but no må lapde bandeg on


- $q0.bid o ppm, becaule bps boure was not pet come.* aa


np of the people beleucd ondpm, F andfapde:
when Chit comineth, wpl be do anp mo mpza:

cles then thele that tbps man bath done?
E Cie Pbacpies bearde that the people mur-
— gnuredfuchtbpnaes concernpnge bpm. ri And
gartrrit phe Wharples and bye Prelles *fent mpnyplers
Eaters totakebpm. Then opoe deng vntothem: Pet
am ja lpttell pple pth pou:¢ then go F vn-
to bpm that fente me. Ve Mall feke me, and fhall
Hob. diiic pot Fpude me: * and topere Fam, thpther can pe
artio Hoe come. hen lapde the Jetves amonge them
 felues: Whether wyll bego, that we pall not
* Fpnde bpm Giipll bego amonge the Gentples,
(wbpche are {cattered abzoade) andteache the
@entyples/Wi bat maner of fapinge is thys that
- pefapd:pe Wall leke me and (pall not fpndeme:

and there Jam thpther can pe not come.
‘ etap. to. a Zetus ftodeandceped,fapenge: x PE any man
ae A r{te,let bpm come nto me, and dzpocke. ie
O aaien t sine(aslapeh the {crppture) out
of bps bellp Hall flowe rpuers of water of Ipfe.
.. But this tpabe he of the tpzete, bich thep that
belenc on bpm, Hulde receaue.  s€02 the holpe
SAOS NOE TFE DESC VEAN Aelug wag not

et glozprped. |

j ý anp of the people therfoze( when thep
Zeb.ite Hearoethis fapeng )fapde:xof a trutbetbysisa
Luke. bii. è pio shete:but other fapoc*thps is Chath. ut
tmat.rrt-b (ome fapDde:fpall Chritke come oute of Galple?


ntbelaftdape,that greate dapeoftthefcalt


each tia Dapth not the (crppture,that Chit Hhalcome.


SOLTTTDS,
of the fede of Dauid:¢ out of the totone of Weth
leem, where Dauid was! So thas theredpilen:
{pon amonge the people becaule of bpm. And
fonic of thent olde bane taken bpm, but noma
laped bades onbpm. Chen came the mpnptters
to the bpe pecites and PBbarples. Andthep {apd
Lntothem:whp baue penot bzought bpm: Che
mpnp ters anfwered : neuer man fon astbps
mandocth. Then antioered them the Whacpies:
are pe alfo dpiccaueds Doth any of the rulers oz
of the pbarpfes belene on bpm’ Wut thyg come
people whpcbe Bnowe not the lawe, are curfed.
icodemus fapeth wnto them(xbe that came to Jobn, tis
Jelug bp npghbte,and thas one of them: ) Doeth
our lawe tudge anp man, before it beare bym,¢
knotve what ie bathdone: Thep anliveredand
fapde nto bpm: Arte thou alfo of Galple?
Searcheandloke. Foz oute of Galple arplerh
no Pzophete. Andcuerpe man wente yutobps
otone boule. fs ree
@ Che. biit.Chapter, rf
q4 woman is taken inabuoutrpe. Cbzit belpurreth hee
Ahe freth of fuch as folotwe Chzit, whem thip aceiteta
baur che deucll wpthin hpm,and go about to tone bpm. -
Ria? ae Clus went *ontomount Dlpuete, A
W Ea andearlp inthe mo:mpnge be cama- eee
i= (O| sarneinto thetemple,andal the peo fuse rite
4p ple caine Dito bpm, gbe fatdoine
—ew and taugbt tbem. And the Scrpbes
and Pbharpfes brought punto bpm a woman ta-
kentnaduoutrpe: and tobenthep bad fet perin
the mpddeft,thep Cape nto bym: Aafter, thps
woman was taken in aduoutrpe , euéas pdede
toas adopng.* Boles is the lathe commaided Luse.rr.b
ps, that fucbe Hulde be Moned. Wut what lapet
thourCbps they. fapde totempt ppm that thep
mpgbt accule bpm. But Fetus fouped downe,
and pth bis fpngert2ote on the qrounde.So
then thep contpnuedalhpnge bpm, belpfrbim
{clfe vp,andfapde Dutothem:let bpm that isa-
monge pou wptbout fpune,catte the faite fone
at her. Andagapne be Cowped downe, wote
onthe grounde. And alone as thep pearde thys
tbep went out one bp one,begpnupnge atthe el-
det. And Jelug was lft alone, andthe woman '
ftandpnge in the mpddes. Wi hen Felus had lyfe
vp bpm felfe,and fawe noman,but the woman
be fapd Dnto her:woman, where are tholethpne
acculars/ Hathenoman condempnedther he
fapd:Mo ma, Lode. And Jefus fapde. Nepther
do Jcondempne the.Geandxfpnnenomoze F Hopi..c
re Coben tpake tig lt vntothem, fap:
enge:* Jam thelpabt of the ozlde. He that fo- Iobn.t.a
Lowetl) me, dorbnot walketndarknes, but thal Faris
aue the lyghte of lpfe. The stipe! tidy therfore
apd Dntohim: Pp beareff recozde of thy lelfe thp
recozbde ts nof true. Jelusanfivered, g aves ie
to them:though J beare recotde of mp felfe, pet
mp recozde ig tru ore Zbnowe whence J came
and tohptber J go. Wut pe cannot tel thence Jg
come,and tbpther Igo. Pe tudge after p fepe, au.rrrd.b
Atudgeno man. And pf J iudge, mp indgement Pee-rbt-s
ig true. Sfo? Jam not alone: but J andthe fa- mat.rwiii.e
therthat fent me. * Je ig alfo weptten in poure " gria
latwe; that the tetpmonpeof two men ig true Seirere
Ce iii Jam


ee.


‘CHC OPL


Fam one that bearcth opthefle of mp felfe, and
thefather that fent me, beareth toptnefle of me.
‘Then lapd thep vntohpm: where is thy fathers
“gelus anfivercd: penepther Rnowe me: nO2 pet
mp father. Df ye bad knowne me,pe fhuldebaue
Rnotbne mp father alfo. There wo2rdes{pake
Jelug in the trealurp,as he taught inthe téple,
mMat.ti.c andhomanlapdehandeg on him*fo2 bis boure
Wasnot petcome. fe | |
‘Then lapde Jelus agapne onto thé: > Fao
jobs. bite Mp wape and *pe Mall feke me,andthaldpem
andrut.> pour fpnneg. Whether ¥ go,thptber can penot
- come. ben fapde the Jewres: wyll be kpll bpm
_—~ felfe:becaule befapeth:wbptbher J go , thytbher
can pe not comes Andbelapde pntothem:pe are
from beneth, Jam from aboue. Peare of thys
wozlde, Jam not of thps wozlde. F fapde ther-
Fore bnito pou, that pe thalldpe in pour fpnnes.
eaan rocd Fozæpfpe belenc not that 3 anbe, pe pall dpc
FUN inpourelpuneg. Chen lapde thep vuto bpm:
whoarte thou’ And Fefug fapeth Ynto chem:
“Cuen the verpe fame thpnae that Ffpeake wn-
topou. 3 baue manpthpnges tofaye,t to tudge
zob ptib OF pOu.Vee,and be that feneme,istrue.*and F
| [peake in the toozlde,thele thpnges, whpche J
baue hearde of bpm. owbeit, thep wnverftode
not that Belpake of bps father. Chen laypde Je-
+ tus Duto them: toben pe baue lpfte vpanbpe the
| fonne of man,then thal pe bnowe, that Jam be
zobati d AnNdthat J oonothbpnge of mplelfe,but * ag mp
snort d Father bathe taughte me, cuen lo J (peaketbe
thpnges:and be that {ét me,is wpthme. Che fa:
Poat Denpr iare me aein | oF pal
i Dole thpnges that pleale bpm. + As belpake
Sobn.vitn thefe Wozdes,kmanp belened on hyn.
Chen lapd Jelug to thole Jewes, whyche
beleucb ondpm: DE pe contynue in mp twozrde,
thcitare penp vecp dpicpples,¢ pe hall hnowe
the truthe, and the trutbe thall make pou free.
hep anlwered ppm: We be Abrabamealeed,¢
there neuce bonde to anp man, boive Tapet thou
itom.bid then:petbalbemadexfrees ey
mooni Jelusanfweredthem:Uerely, verely, 3 fave
troma.tie DNtO pou,that* wholoeuer commptteth fpnne
4,041.0. 8 tbe leruaante of (pnne, And the feruaunt abp
Det h not inthe boule fox ener: Wut the fonneabp
detheuer. PE thefonne therfore ball make pou
fretbenarepefreindede. J bnowe that pe are
» Abzahamsiced:but pelekemeancs to &yll me,


notabpode thepearprere of mp worde. iis

Pe arc of pour father the deuel,and the lutes SE
of pour father wpl pe ferue.* He was a murthe- Dene tti. a
terfrom the begynnpnae abode not in p truth “Sod.
becaufe thereis no truthe in bpm. tbt be fpea-
betha lpe, befpeaketh of bys owne: Eo? beisa
Ipat,¢ the father of f fame thpnge. and becanfe
4 tell pou the truth, therfore pe beleue me not .

> CU bp che of pou rebuketh me of fpnne?
Pf Flape the truthe, whp do not pebelene me?
* He that ts of God, heareth Goddes Wo2des. Iobn.r.t
Petherfoze heare them not, becaule pe are not of
God. Chen anlwered the Jewes, and fapde v=
tobpm: Sape Wwe not well, that thou art a Sas
matptane,and*Dalke the deuell ¢ Jefus anlioe= zopn.r.a
red: 4 Daue not the deuell : but F bonoure mp fa=
ther, and pe baue bpthonoure me. 4 feakenot
mpne owne pzaple,there is one that leketh, and
tudgeth.Cicrelpe, pevelpe, J lape tnta pou: pha ©
man kepe mp fapenge: be Mall neuer fedeath:
‘Chen lapdthe Jewess ontobpm: Powe knoe
Wwe that p balk the Deucll. Abzaha s dead, g the
Prophetes,and thon fayette: pf aman kepe mp
fayenge,be thall nener talte of death. Artethou
greater then our father Abzaba, whichis deade
and the Propbhetes arsdeade: WU homemakette
thou tby felfe: Fetus aunfiwered : PEJ bonoure
my felfe,mpne honoure is nothbpnge. Ftis mp
father,tdat honoureth me wbich pe fap.is pour
od, and pet pe baue not knowne bpm:but F
knotbe bpm, And pf F (ape: J knowe bym not
J Halbe alpar Ipke buto pou. Wut Jknowe
bpni,and kepe bys fapenqe.

"oure father Abrabam was glad to femp |
Dape:*and he faweit,andreiopced. Chen lapie Sen shite
the Jewes ontobpn: thou arte not yet.l.peare FF *
olde,and bat thou fene Abzabam ¢ Fetus faphe
bnto them: Gerelp, verelp, 3 faye vnto pou: pee
Abzaham was borme, * Fam. Chen
bp ffones,tocatte at bpm: Wut Jefus bpd bpm izon rE
felfe and * went out of the temple. F Hube tite


CThe.ir.Chapter. yi


becaufe mp Doozd pathno place in pou. 4 fpeake By Renee VA


that thbpch J baue fene wpth mp fatber:and pe

Do, that wbhpeb pe baue fene topth poure father,

| ' Tpepanfivered andfayd ontohpm: Abrabam
1 x ig oure father. Jefus fapth ynto the: PE pe were
abzabdams chyldzen,pe wold do the dedeg ofA:
) beabait, Wut nowe pe goaboutetokplime,a
| man that Dathe tolde pou thetruthe,whpche F
baue beardeof God:tbpgdponot Abzabam:Pe
Othe dedegofpour father. Chen Tapde thep to

-` bimwe there not bozne of fornication.Wehane
_ onefather cuen God. Jelug fapde onto them: pf
God there poure fatdcr,tiulp pe woldloue me,
Sor Jproceaded forth,andcamefrom God. Ne
thercame J of mp felfe, but be fent me: bp do
penot Kolbe mp peaches Cucn becaule pecan


came agapne,fepnge. Hothenepghboures and
thep thath :


abegaer


Sa


* as i


COKLEDED eron.ti.a,


|


a ka
+ ar a P i
a ee ee ae :


3


PiS. Jom.


€ å bergatjiapde: Fs not thps he rbet lat ebeq-
ged? Home fapde : thpsishe. Agapne, other
pde-x( Ao,but hetslpke bpm.
Pebpm felfe fapde:¥ am enen be. Therfoze
_ ‘fapdethep bnto bpm : Howe arethpneepes o-
pened ¢ Heanlweredandlapde: Che man that
iscalled Jefus , made clape,etannopntes mpne
epes and lapd vnto me:Go to the poole Siloe,
andivathe.And when J went and waed, Jre-
ceauedDmplpabte. Chenlapde ap bntobpm
Ibercishe: De fapde. Jeannot tell, l
Tbep brought tothe pharpiegs. bpm thata li=


7 egat.rit.a, Eel befoze Was blpnde: and it was the * Håb-


martio bothdDape, when Jeng madeclape, andopened
arth ti bide epee: Che agapne the pbarples alfoathed
and.bii.c ppm, bowebehadreceaucd bpslpaht. ie lapde
nto thems be put clape mae inpne epes,and F
waliped anddole . Chertoze fapde fome ofthe
_  Pbariles: thys man isnot of God , dpcaule be
Hob. tig. kepeth not the Sabboth dape. Dther fapde, *
vrd howecana man thatis afpnnerdo fuche mpra
~ cles‘ And there thas a i eamonge the. Ch
[pake unto the blpndma
thou of by whyche bathe opened thpne cpes?
e Pe fapde :* Peisa propbete.
Wut ë Jetbes DpdOnot oelenc of the ma(hots
- that be bad ben blpnde,and receaued bis fpabt)
tntpllthep called the father and mother of him
that badde receaued big lpgbhte. And thep alked
them fapengqe: Fe tbys pourfonne whome pou
Tape as bozne blpndes Hote doth He nowe fe
then’ Hpstather and mother aunftwered them,
and fapde: we knotwe that thpsis ourefonne,¢
ond ae E poo ok ed in
be note feeth, the can not tell. D: tho bathe o-
` @& petted bis epes,canot wetel. Heis olde pnough
 alhedpm,let him anfwere foz Dim felfe. Suche
wozdes{pake bis father g mother, becaule thep
fered the Jewes. For the ewes hadcon(pp2cd
allred oo pf anp man dpd confelle that be
+50}: „e as dhe t, * be thulde be exrcommunicat out of
sia oe ENS eben clot patarena
mother:beisolde pnougbe.atke bpm.
Whenagapnecalled thep the man that was
blpnd,andfapd bnto bpm:Gpue God pop
the knotoe that this maniga fpnner. Deanfwe
red therfoze,andlapde: Wbpther he be afpnner
ono, Jeannot tell. One thpnge FJ am (ure of
that whereas FJ was blpndenote Fle. Chen


LELARA


-.  fapotheptobymagapne. bat dpd beto the:


Dowe opened be thpne epes: ie aunlwercd thé
J tolde pou perwbple, pe Dpdnot beare wher-
fore wolde pe 'Deate it agapnes pllpe ako be
4 bys pplepples? Chen rate thep hym,and fapde:
Be thoubps pS l te are Boles dilciples
Wicarelure,that Godlpeake ynto Mofes. As
fo? rs flow, we know not from whence Heig
The man aunftered , and lapie tnta them

tbig ig a marueloug thing,that pe wote not fro
wobëce beig, and fe be bath opened mpne epeg.

$€ 02 we belure, that God beareth notfpnners.
ut pranp man bea worbppper of God, and
obediente puto bis wpll bim bearethbe Hence
the wolde began, was it not hearde, that anp
mä Opened the epes OF ove that was Vozne bliin


againe.tUbat tapeit


Hol, rer bit.
be. Di thys man tere HOt of Sod, he could paue
bone hothpug Thep anfwered, andfapd pnto
him:thou arte all together bogzneinfpane, and
bolt thonteache bs! And thep cat bpm ont.
Jefus bearde that thep hadercommunicate
bpm:and wban he badde founde him, he fapd yn
tobim:doeft thou belene on f forne of Gods He G
anttoered g fapde:who ig it Lo: that J might
beleucon bim. Jnd Felus fapd yntohim. Thon
bat fenebpm, * andbe ptis that talketh wyth
the. Andhelapde : Lorde FJ beleuc,and be woz- Fov-titi.e
thepedbpin. > And Zeluslapde ynto bpm: F 7
am come Dnto tudgement into this wozld:that
thep Dodpcbele not. mpabt fe, and thep whpche
fe,mpabt be made blpnd. And fome of the Wha
rples tobpche were pth bpm, berde thele taz-
des and fapd Duto hpm:are weblinde alfa ¢ Fe-
fusfapd tnta thé:* FE pe were blpnde,ve Muld 3ob,rb,0
baucnolpnne.ut notve pe fap:we fe,therfo2e


_ pout fpnne remapneth.


€ The.x.Chapter. yR
C_cChrilicthe trur Hepherd.and the doze of the Hepe be telleth
(oe Cruthe , and therfore the ste take bp tones to catat bpm
and rall bps preacbpnge blafpbemp and go aboute to take bpn
RTA Crelp verelp, Jfape vntopouw:bethat X
A wadi entreth not in bp the dozeinto the Mep
SN EA ean pct D CON EDERT
sre fhe fame isa thefeand a murtherer.
wut bhethat entreth in bp the doze, is the Hep-
berbde of the thepe, tobpmthe poster opencth, g
the epe here bys vopce , and * he calleth bys ws:ours.¢a
Owne pepe bphame,andledeth them out. And :
ben De hath fent forth bps owne hepe, be qoa
eth befoze them : and the thepe folotee bym: foz
they knotbe bps wopce . A fraunger wpll thep
not folotve,but wyl flpe fro pim:foz thep know
not P vopccof fratigers.Cbys pzouerbe [pake
Jelus onto thé. Wutthep vnderitoonot whar
aes thep were:tobpchbefpake butothem —
‘Chen fapde Fetus onto them agapne:Cerelpe 2
vetelpe, {lape bnto pou:* ¥ amthedoe Cot the Hop.ritia
ibepe. Bil ( euen as many as come beforeme )
ave theucs and miurtherers : but the thepe pd
notherethem. Jamthedoze:bp me pfanpema
enter itt, be albefafe, and tallgo tnand out,
and fpnde patture, A thefe commeth not bnt
Foz to feale,kpl and todeftrop. ¥amcome that
thepmpabt hauelpie. ethat thep mpabthaue
te spine F toeeticd
| Jam * the good (hepeherde . B Good kE.
a abi qpucth bis lpfefo2 the thepe Bn bp; ae
ted feruaunt and be whichis not the thepeberde c"
(nether the Mepe are bps owne){eeth the wolfe ~
comimpnge, and leaucth the pepe, andfipeth,¢
the wolfe catched and {catrereth the thepe, Che
bpzed feruaunt Apeth ; becaule be ig an bpzed
feruaunt,and careth not for the epe, Jam the
good Hepherde,and,* knotve mp Hepe and ant i enini.
knowen of mpne. * As mp father knotheth me, Tmat.r.
cuen fo knowe Jalfo mp father. And* Fgpue E? ,
mp Ipfe foz the thepe: and other fbepe 4 baug pari
whpche are notof thysfolve. Chem alfo mutte-
Sbepnge, and thep tall bea temp bopee ant
there balbe one folde arid one Ta i
Thérfoze doth mp father louemesbecaute
Gey A put


TUE ONHE


Jputmp lpfefrom me, that Imprbt take tt a-
apne. Noman takethitfromme:but J put it
awape of mp lelfe, J baue power to put it from
ine, and 3 bhbaue power totake ttagapne. Chis
commaundement baue Jreceaned of mp father
There wag a diflentid therfore agapne among
the Fetves Foz thele fapenqes,and manpe oF th
mat. \F d fapde:* dpe thab the bpucll,and ig made: whpbe
arti atepedim:* Deber fapd:thele are not the woz:
ZLuke.risb des of Him that bath the deupll.Canthe deuplt
FJo).otig OPN the epes of the blpndes
 & Fe Andit was at Jerufalem the featke of the
Dedpcatpon, and it was wpnter: ¢ Fetus wal-
dire bia Redin thetemple,eucnin* Salomons pozche.
Actes itid hen came the Jewesrounde aboute bpm, and


nDe fapde vntobpm : Howe longe doef thou make
vs doute ” PEthou be Chzpite tell bs plapnelp.

Jelug aunftwered them: 3 toldepou, aud pe be-

-lcue not. Che wozkes that Yootnmp fathers

í name tbep beare wptneffe of me. Wut pe beleue


not, becaule pearenotof mp wepe. As Jlapde |


Jop.biie VNEO pou * mp pepe heremp Vopce :. Andy
fE Bnow them, and thep Folowe me,¢ J qeue onto

them eternall lpfe and thep thal nener perpthe,

nether Hall anp man plucke thé out of mp bad


Hp father wbpch gaue thé me, ts greater tbem


all, andDnomanis able to take them out of mp
Sob-riiia fathers bandet Jand mp fatherareone,
aro biic . * eben the Jewesagapne toke bp tones,to
 fonebpmwptball. Jefug antwered thé: many
- good wozkes haue 4 (ewed pou from mp faz
ther.fo2 mopede or dal do pou fone mes ‘Che
ewes auntwered bpm fapenge. fFo2 thp qood
+zobn.bp WO2kes fake toe one the not*but fozthp blaf:
“+ pbhempe, andbpcaufe that thou bepngea man,
- mabet thpfelfe God. Jefus aunfwered theme
prasprrita A8 it not Wepttcn in poure lawer x3 fapte, pe
Ero. FF i.b Are goddess. VE be callen thé qoddes, vnto who
© the toozde of god was {poken( and the {erpp-
ture can not be bzokenconcernpnge pim whom
the fatber bathe fanctpfped, andfente intothe
mat. proie Wolde). wa pelap that J blalphemexbecaule
Fak rye A lapde J am the fonne of Gods + FEF donot
zobra EDC WOPKES OT MP ratYer,veleneme not. Wut yp!
b kes of mp fatber,bel Wut pl
anood “9Do,and pf pe beleuenot me,beleuc the ozkes
that pe mape knowe,and beleue that the father
ig in meand Jinbpm. F
PEE x Agapne thep twente abouteto take bpm:g
Fob. bing, Veelcaped out of thep2 bande, and wente atvap
+ Jobu.i.d aga pne beponde Jordane into the place* where


D


a ee UR iCectapne man twas {pcke, named


Te
Fd


vain re ' pe i pirn ba a iah a. Pt wag
SEa Swpthopntment e wpped bys fete


ber Beare, tobofe beother Lasarug twag
€Sherfore. bys (piers fent onto him, fai-


(peke. Wi ban Jelug berde that, belapde thisin 2


Foba.bila
ne


Z
o
E
Š
:
=
‘a

=y
=
kat
z
<
>
Tr
2
f ==
=
Ti
=
[=x
=]
=
=


gapnein therelurrectponat


TFZob. ti. b
Homais
Abaiia
B tbf. g


Ip fapeng: Che Malkeris come, and callethfoz
the. A Rone asthe berde that, be arofequyckly,
and came Dato him. Jefus wasnot pet come ts
tothe totone:25ut was tn the place wher Hat-
tha mette bpm. Che Jewes then whythe were
wth berin the boule and comfozted ber, (whe
thep latwe Warp that the role vp baffelpe and
went out)folowed perfapenge: be goeth yns
to the qraucto toepe there.

Then when Warp was come there Feing
thas, and fatvebyim, the cometh npe wnrobps Fobu.rt,c
fete,and fapth puto bpm:Lozde, + pfthoa bad |
Delt bene here, mp bzother badde not rae

LAA DEI


ę


a
a
l |


D a


nen = puin


BOT SD. PIY


+


; e opce: Kanani ane forte. AnD


went their ayes tothe Phariles,and told the
_- wobat Jelug | |
mat.rrbf.a PN * When gathered the ppe poclkesand the


mar riita pharefega countell,and fapde:* What do toe!


rac inte doz thpsman both manp pjate . Pf welet


bpm icape thug, all men Wwpll beleuc on dpm, €

the Romapnes Wal come, and take atap both

oure rowmeandthe people. Andoncofthem

naa S TE E EE hele ada

pere )fapde vnto them: P erenuenofopuny At

all, nozconfpder, that *itigerpedpent foz vs,

Fo.rviit.b that one man dpe foz the people, and not that

al the people perpe. Thys fpake be not of bim

felfe but bepnge bpe preitetbat fame pere, be

propbhelied that Jelus thuldedpe foz the people

andnot foz the people onlpe , but that he Hulde

gather together tn one, thechpldzen of God, P
woerefcattercd abzoade: * CHE frzp dape fort


` “ mat.rrota thep toke cofifel together foz to put btm todet


wapiga “ Zelus therfore walked no moze opelp amig
the Jewes: but wente bys wape thence vito a
countrp npetoa woploernes, into acpte whiche
-iscalled Ephzaim, aud there contpuued pth
mat-srois hig Difciples x AnD the Jewes Calter was nye
zuk: rria at Dante,and manp tent ont ofthe countre wp
puto Jerufalem before the Cater to purpfpe
themfclues. Chenfoughte thep for Fefugand
fyake amonge them clues as they trode inthe


| tyob.viid temple: @dibat + tbpnke pe,fepnge be commeth


not to the feaft bape ¢ Che bye pzeltes and pha-

+ job.fr.e Tiles * hadde gpucna commaundement.that pE

any man Bnewe where be were, be Mulde Mewe
it,that thepmpabt take bpm. F


` that wobpcebe thas


JUDE ULI be
| CThe.rii Chapter, rR
opnteth Chipttestcte. Jutis murmureth. hipte
ercufeth ber and rpoeth am. Zerufalem,
Ea miie pm eun fpredaicsbefoic Ca %4
Eana PEE ue aeecedetes 4h Bee egat rba
iesta borage zarus bad bilie dead, who herap Pires
Ee Wal eA ien fro peathe. Chere they mane ™*
Senay feos) Dini a (upper, t Martha lerued,
abut Lazarus was one of themp
teat f table with bym.* Chen toke Marpa ruken
pounde of opntment(called Nardus, perfecte g
p oufe and anopnted Felus fete,and wiped
psfeatetbith ber beare,and the boule as tpl=
led wptbthe odoure of the opntement. * Chen mat.rror. a
fo one re tebe i eas (euen Judas Jfrari- marrits
oth Spmons lionne, ppc) afterivarde betrap:
cdbrm)whp was not thps opritment folde foz
thze hund2ed pence and qwen tothe pore This
be fapde not that be cated fo2 the poore, but be-
caule be has a thefeand*bad the bagge, bare sob. riko
uen. Then fapde Jelus:let
bet alone :agapnit the dap of mp burpeng bath
fhe keptethps. Fo: the poozealwapes Mall pe
bauc With pou, but me bauc pe nota ey
och people of f Fewes therfore bad not-
ledare that be was there. Andtdep came not fog
Jefus fake onlp, but p4 pmpabte fe Lasarus
alfox whome be rapied Fro deathe. Wut the ppe Ibn. ri.
zeltes beldea counfell, that thep mpgbte put 5
asātng to deathallo,becaule that foz bistake
wins s aiia went aloap and beleued on
Jefus: F
* Dnthe nertedape moche people that were esat.rrt. a
come tothe featte, wbenthepbearde that jelus ©"
hulde come to Jerufalem, toke bzaunches of
palme trees,and tent forthe tomcteHpim, and


crped. Holanna, * blefledis he that inthe name T


of the Lode, cometbkpnge of Jiraclt. dnd ge TA


{us qot apongcalie telat theron,asitis wept=

Fe stabil Ere e sash phe ps AAY A fav .irtio
Kpngecommeth (ptting onanalfe colte. Chele Fopma rihs
thpnges Dnderftode not bps dpicpples atthe G
fy2{te:but tohban Felus thas qlozpfped, then re=-
memb2ed thep that fuche thpnges were w2ptté
of bpm, andthatfuche thpnges thep bad done
bnto bpm, The people p has pth bpm when
hecalled Lasarus out of bps araue and raped
bpm fro death bare recozde. Cherfoze met bine
the people alto, becaule thep bearde that he bad
done lucha mitacle-Che phariles therfore faid
amonge them felnes : perceane pe, Dot we pre-
So Na Deap( altede bere) WODE Go ys
ethafterbpnt,

* Chere there certapne qrekes amonge them ii.ce. ora.
that came to toogtbpppe at the featke :the fame aeni g
camtberfoze to PHuUpp(wbpcbe was of Weth: “"
faida acpteof@altle anddefpzed bpm faping:

Sp2, we woldefapnefe Jefus . Phplppcame
and tolde Andzetoe. And againe Andzewe and
philip tolde Jelug. And Feins aunlwered thé
apeng + the bourcigcome, ptbelonne of matt zob.ritt v
muit be qlozpfped. anb.Fbt,a
rk Ciecelp verelp,% {ape onto poutercepte Do. us
the wheate coznefal into the qroiide,anddpe.tt j.¢0;.r0.2

bpodethalone. Veit dpe,tt bepugeth Toth be

> fryt


a


|


-QUL GORLE


ED frupte.x He that loueth bys Ipfe hall deftrope
carbid Pe:and be thathateth bpslpte, nthps wolde,
Lube. Filed (hal kepeit puto lpfe eternall. PEanp man mp-
npiter onto me, let bpm folowe me and + wher
3am, tbere hall alfo mp mpnpfter be. PE anp


see eee man minifter onto me, bim wpllmypfatber bos


Drbil.
SEDES Toute


glozpfpetbpname . Then came therea vopce
from heauen,fapenge:¥ haue both gloaptped tt
| pponberlere Ves A Ata Lk ABS tad people er-
fo2ze that ode bp and berdit,fapde that it thir
deed. Other lapde, an Jungell fpake to bpm:
Jefus anfweredandlapde: this bopce camnot
* zop ri.c Decatfe of me, * but Foz pour fakes.
= Œ ve Nowe is the fudgement ofthps wolde:
zoh rbd *nowe Hall the pzpnce of thps wolde be catte


android ont. And F (ply were lpfte bpfrometbecarth) .


wpll pawe allmen onto me. Chps be layve:
fpnanifpeng what death be Huld dpe. Che peo-
se Fe EC the
pt Ma ato* that Chrift bpdeth foz euer:and hotoe fas
Danii. Pell thou tbe fonne of man mue be lpfte pp:
eich. b.a. hoistbat fome oman: Chen Jelug fapde


Dte lettt


bnto them: petalptle whpleis ipah ee p


barkneffe comeon pou. De that walteth alfoin


*epheve pou. * Walke topple pou haue lp
the ineft omeonpou erpat water aloin
betbechpldzenof thelpabt. F

bad ie paled lus and departed,
andppobpmilelfefromthem: wut though be
baddonelomanp mpzacles befoze them, pet be

leued not thep on bim, tbat the lapeng of Efap-
asthe PropHete mpghe be fulfplied, wohpche pe
eCap.itit.s fpake:* Lozve, wbo Hall beleue oure fapenge?

“omare And eto wobom ts the arme of the lozd declared?
‘Cherfoze could thep not beleuc, becaufe that €

terar. bie fapas fapetD : agapne + be Dathe blpnded thepz

Batre. epess€ Dardened thep2 bert, that thep thuld not

iuk.brit.b Ce vopth thepz epes,andleattc thep Hulde nier

Sc Frou? Cande Dopey edep2 berte, and Mulde be conuer-
ted,and J Mulde Heale the. Ate tence fapd
Efatas, when betawe bps gloze, and

im. Menertheleffe,amonge the chefe rulers al-

fo, many belened on bpm. But ( becaule ofthe

_ _. Bbartles ( thep wolde not be acknowen of it,
ae, oh Aa ah al pM ed
"" & loued the pore of men moze then the praple

_ of god. Fetus crped,and fapde: be that beleueth

on ime, beleucth not on me, but onbpmtbat fent

me. and pe that feeth me,feeth bpm that fet me

Jobta rs FJarttcome* alpgbt into the ozlde Ppwhs-

iicbd [oeuer beleucth onme, Mulde not bpdein darke

and-F-8 Hog Bnd pf any man heare my wozdes,and be-

+ Wob.tt.b lenenot, 3 (udfebpmnot.so2 + Jcamenotto
iudge the woz2ld but tofaue p wozld. De that re-
fufeth meand receaucth not mp wozdes , bathe
one pindgeth bpm. The too2d that F baue fpo-
ken thefame thalliudge bym in thelafte dape.
Foz 4 baue not {pobé of mp fel€: but the father
whpche tnt me:be gaue me a commaundement

what J huloe fape and what 3 Mulde lpeake.


` pebauelpabte,beleue on ia that pe map


Powe ps mp fouletroubled,and what (hall 4 E22 |
J lape: ather, delpuer me from thps boure: Fy ps
but therfozecame Zintotbypshoure, Father


(seh
whpc


walipe thedifcpples Fete, eto toppe them wrt
the towel, wherivpth be hag ps hy ‘Aig


fetes Jefus anfivered g fapbe nto pin RA d


be neuerwalpemp fete, Jelusanftoered bpm: PE


J walthe tbe not , thou palt uo parte twpth me.
Spmon Peter lapeth vuto bpm Lorna mp
eade. ge-


pe,pEpedotbé. 3 tpeabe not of pou all, J knot C 3
HOM J paue cdoten . Wut that thelcripture ~

mape betulfplled:* be that eateth bzeade with * pta,rit.b

me bath lefte bphpsbheleagapntt me, Powe Hod.ritt.c

tell peu befoze tt come: that then it is come FS?"

fo paile,pe mpabt belene that Jam be.tierelpe

berelpe , J lave onto pou: * He that receaneth Mate,

whomfoener J fend,receaueth me. And be that Loker.

receauethme,teceanet bpm tbattentine, Par.tp,c

 Wben Jelug bad thus fapd, be toastroublen

in {ppzite,and teltpfpedand fapde : ierelp pe-

telp, Jfape Dnto pou:that*one of pou pall be-

trape me. Che the dpicpples lobed one on ano- mae mE

ther Doubtpnge of whom befpake. Chere wae martine

one of Jefus dplepples, (which leanedon bpm) 248-Frit.b

xeuenbe whome Jefus loned. Tobim bectined oyu. ci.

Symon Preter therfore Phe Hulde atke, pe : T


a


p Jie | Ds PIY


of tohome helpake . ye thet whei Heleancd on
Jefus beelt fapd onto him: 102d, who ts tts Fe
D lugs anfwered Se itis whom Jgpuecafop. And
be wet the beeade,and gauce it to Judas 4irari-=
oth Spmosfonne. Aud after the loppe, Satan
entredintobpm . Then fapde Jefus wnto him:
that thou doelt,do quypcklp. Chat whiff no man
atthe table foz what intent belpake bnfobim

Fobu.rit,a ome of then rouge becaule x Judas had
| bagge, Ppa Dad lapie Dnto bpm: bpe 9o €
5 Her ioe Dauc nede of agapntt the feaft
2 that be hulde qpue fome thinge tothe pooze
Alene then as he hadde recepued the fop be
went immedtatlp out andit was npabdt. Ther-
xlorid foge Phen be has gone out, Jelus fapd:* Pow
and, hits fg the fonne of man glogifped. And God is glo-
tifpedbphym. PEGodbe glozpfped bp hym.
Godhallalfo glozpfpe bym bp hym felfe : and

(pall frapght wap qloufphpm. |

He Lptlechbplozen,pet alptle pbple am J


*Fob.biic pth pou. xpe thal ieke me,andas FJ lapde wn-


tothe Jetves, thither J go, thpther can pe not
*job.rba COME. Allo fo pou Lape J nowe: x Anewecom-
maundement gpue 7 Duto pou tbat pe loueto=
gether, a8 J bane loued pou, tbat cue lo pe loue
L.Johiia One anotper.* Bp thys Mal al men know that
peare mp difciples, pë pe bane loue one to ano-
ther. Spinon Peter fapd vnto him: Lode, whi
ther goett thous Zetus anlWoeredhpm: whether


+ gobusi.t Jgd thou cant not folotve me now, but thou


tia fyaltefolowe me afterivardes. Peter fapde
nto him: Lod, whp ca not 3 folow the noto’
mat. rrote +3 opl icoperde mp ipfefo thp fake: Fclus an-


an a Luoered ppm : Wilt thou icoperde thp lyfe foz mp


tao.rbiite Taker Cierelp verelp, Flap wnto the:*thecocke
thal not crow, tpll thou baue Denpedme theple.
The.ritit. Chapter. 44
CBearmeth pis difepples wpth confolacpon agapntte
crouble, ano prompteth them the bolp ghoolt.
ssm JD He fapde vuto bys difcpples : le¢
fay AES not pourchertebetroubled. Pebe-
Y SA Oy leueingod,belene alfoin me. jnimp
a Ska ag) atbers boule are many mantyong:
seS pf itwere not fo J woldehauctolde
pou. J goto prepare a placefo2 pou: And pf 3J
go to peepare a placefo2 pou, 4 wWyllcome az
gaypne,and tecepuepou, ceuen wnto mp felf that


‘Sobrio *ibpersam,thermap pe bealfo. And whither


AnD FbiLD! Y ro, pe bnowe andthe eelt reap
Thomas lapth vntobim: Lorre, we knotve
not tohpther thou goet. And how igit pofli ble
fo? bstoknowetbhe wape’ Feluslapth unto


“-*zobn.La hpm: Jam the wap and thetraued,and the xlpte


ent y +Romancommeth wneo the father but by me
maryin | Hes
Jopu Pact PE pebad kno we me, pe his bith mp father
‘allo. And note pe know hpm daue fene hyn.

W pbptiliplaptb onto him: Lode, Mewe vs the fa
-ther and itfuffpleth be. Jelug lapth yuto hint

aue J bene fo longe tpme pth pou and pet

att thou not knothen me DAD that bath

ne me,bath lene mp father. And bot fapeft p

_ thé:thet bs the fathers Weleuct thou not that
Foire E, aminthefatbhir aid the fatberin ine ” The
o2des that J fpeake bnto pou, F tau Hot

ofmp felfe: but the father that bivel eth inne


IVR ASK 6
is be tbat doth p tazkes. Weleueme that Jan
tn the father, tthe father in me: els beleuc Fod-rvi. g
ine fo2 the thozkes fake. te ft

Cierelp beretp, ¥ Cape buto pou:be that be-
leneth onine,the wozkes p 3 do, the fame thall
be doalloand qreaterWozkes then thefethall
be do, becaufe J goontomp fathers And what wat. vit. a
Coeuer peatkein mpname,tbat wyl J do, that many
thefather map be glogifpedbp the fonne. PESE aate.ci.6_
thal atic any thing inmpname.Z wpl doit. fe Ipm: d
PEPE pe lone me, Repemp commaundementes,


and. rii.
zacala,
€ 3 wyl pape p fathers be thal gpue pouano: 679%. tiit
thercomtozter, that be map brie coped pon fog >"
ever:cuen the {pete of truth, whome the world
can not receaue, becaule the tozldefeeth bpm
not.nctDer inotweth bpm. But pe knowe bpm.
JEo? he Divelleth pth pou, and Halbe tn pou,
¥ J wpll not leaue pou comfoztles, but wpll matois
come to pon.
Pet a Iptle tobple and the worlde feeth me

no moze : but pefe me . f€o2 J lpue and pethall
lpuc. That dap thal pe bnowetbat Jaminmp
father,and pouin me and J in pou. K

* de that bathmpcommaundementes,eke- C
petb the : the fame is be that loueth me. And be +50¥.rb.2
that loucth me, balbe loued of mp father, za igh lle
topl louedpin, and wpll ewe mpne otone felfe
to bym. x judas fapthe buts bpm:( not Judas actes.rv.0
Jlcarioth) Lozde,what ts done that thou wple
pew thp felfe onto bg andnot bHto the twwozld
Jeus anfwoered andfapd bnto them: pfaman
loue me be topll kepe mp fapinges, and mp fa-
ther tpl loue bpm.and we wpl come vntobpm
and dwell pth bpm. De that loueth menot, ke


ctd notmp fapenges And the toozde whteh ve
cate,iSnotmpne but pfathers which fent me.
Thele thpnges baue J lpoken nto pou, be: D


prigepet peent with pou. Wut the comfozter I.F
wbychis the bolp ghottxtbhom mp fatbet wpl actes.ic, a
feude tn inp name, be thal teache poual thinges
andbepnge al thpnges to poureremembzaunce
Ivpattocuer Fbauc lapd dntopou,

Peace Fleane pth pou, mp peace Zapue
DNLO pou. Noe as the hozldgpueth.qpue 3 on
topou. Let not pourchertes be greucd,nepthee
Feare. De baue berde bowe F fapoe Ynto pou: Y
goana comeagapne Dintopou. PE pe loucdine,
pe wold Yerelp reiopce, becaule ¥lapd ¥ go vie
tothe father forthe father ig greater then F. !
* And now haue J hetwed pou befoze tt come, P Jobui
whet ifis come to pafle,pempabt deleue. and.7bt.a
Hereafter wpl ZF not talke manp woes bnto
pou . Foz the pepuce of thps wozlde commeth
and * bathe nought in me. Wut that the wolde sobs. rit
map knot that J loue the father. And asthe fa mron
thet gaueme commaundement.cucnfodo J, FE
Rpie let Ys qo hence,
Chapter. E


TI AAS E ane
i t bpne , the bulbanoman and the bwadnchég
a a — pfloue and a fwete Sania Laoni hans


roth irure WPI bepourge, that itimape bop
eT


j F0H.Fbi a


QC UCORPU


E aars fo2timoze frute. * Aowwearepe clenethozotve
ew" the toozdes tobpebe 3 baue fpoken wut pou.
pode in me, and Jinpou, ag tbe bzaunche can


notbeare frutcofttfelfe, excepte tt bpdein the


bpne:no moze canpesercepte peabpdeinine.F pa See


am the vpne,peare the bzaunches. He that abp-
Detbe inme, aud J inbpm, the lame bepng
foztb much frute. Fo? Without me can pe dono
be py E a de not inime beis cafte forth
asa bzaűcbe and is typthered: and men gather
__.. them: andcafte thé into the fpze,and thep burne
atirar se Epebpde inme and myp wozdes abtoe in pou
obid athe wobat pe wpll , git halbedonefoz pou. K
Jobn. rbt Pere nis mp father glozifped: p pe bear muche
Fiaco.t.a  fruteand become mp difciples.
| As the father bathe loued me, euen fo baue
FJalloloued pou. Continus pein mp love. Pf pe
bepe mpcommaundementes, pe pall abpde in
mp loue euenas J baue kepte mp fathers com-
maundementes, andbpdein bps loue. Tphefe
thpngesbaue J ipoken bnto pou, tbat mpiope
mpgbte remapne in pou, and tbat poute tope
mpabte befull, À
ALAT x Thisig mp commaundemente,that pe
zobi. loue together, ag Fbaue loued pou, Greater
loue bath no man,thentbis:that a man beftow
bis Ipfe foz big Frendes. Pe aremp frendes, pf pe
do tobatloeucr Jcommaunde pou. Henceforth
cal FJ pou not ronda hg feruaunt bno-
wethnot what islozde doeth. Wut poubaue F
called frendes:fo2 al thinges that J bane beard
of mp fatber.baue J opened fo pou.
Pebaue not chofenme , but a bane chofen
ou and ozdepned pon to qo, and bzpnge fozth
rute and that poure frute huld remapne,that
whatlocuer pealke of the father tnimp name be
mape gpucitpou. fa
Thps commaunde J pou, that pe lone
tocretber. PE the toozlbde bate pou, pe know that
it hatcd me tba itbatedD pou. Pf pe were of f
wolde, tbe Wo2ld wold louc his owne. Howbe-
it, becaufe pearenot of the wozlde, but 3 baue
Fob. rbite chofen pou out of p twosld:therfore « the world
bateth pou. Remember the worde that Jlapde
pito pou: pfleruatitis not greater thé thelozd.
¥DE thep baue perlecutedD me thep wplalfo per-


xaT e
Juke. Fit. E


-Mape Tecute pou. PEtbep baue kept mp lapenge:thep


y WPN beraa D.
D  *Wutalltbhbele thynges wpll they do nto
eo names fake , becaule thep baue not
owen Hin that fent me. DEF haddenot come
and{poken bnto them, thep Mulde baue bad no
' {pnne:butnowe paue thep notbpngeto cloke
_ 4 thepzfipnne tptball. Hethat bateth me,bateth
. imptatber allo: 4 bad not bone among them
Bae log ich none other ma dpd, thep Hula
aue bad no {pnne. Wut nowe baue thep bothe
fene,and bated: not onlp mebut alfo mp father
esos emp a EAs

‘trib. Euleplle iS Ibepttentnthepes latve : *¢
sa HEY batedme without acaule. $ oP
tao rdia . pfa Aut when the comfoster ig come* whome
j A mpl i nto pou from the fathee(euen the
pzete of trufbe wbich pzocedeth of the father)
be thal teltifp of me. And petpall beare topenes


alio, becaule pe bane ben w me fro $hecinine.
‘The.rvt. Chapter. Bbegining


q Confolacpon agapnt trouble. zap:
ets are beards thozowe chit,


so ‘pets chinges bane 3 fapde onto


pea


me, andnohe st Tad se me whether J go.
aue fapde luche thpnace unto


go to mp fatberand pe thal fe meno-
featbe Prince ofthps sobu,rit.e


fapthe . Jelug bercepued that thep toolde afke
bpm, and fapde nto them . Pe enquyze of
beten a lapeeatens


towe, becaule ber boure tg come - butaffone ag


fhe ts delpuered of t | i
T SE p be chploe, theremembgeth


{nto f toozld.
but J wpll fe pouagapne and pour bertes thall


pou, Jt


i


7 OFS. Jobn Foli,
F pou. RAndin that dap pal pealke meno que- name tbe tobpch thou batt gener ie, thatthep
xmatbiia (Tion.»hClerelp verelp, 4 fap vuto pou:*Wbat alfomap beone,as ive ate, Wa bple F was ith |
} Zuker. b, Locuer pe Mal atke p father in mp name,bewpll tiem in the toozlde J kept them in thpname.
i ®arb.rid eue it pou. Mpthertohaue pealkeduotbpnae x Chole that thou ganct me, Daue J bept, and Fo-rbiit, b
"3 pa b mp name. Atke,¢ pe thall receaue: that pour none of then Is loft, but that lofte chplac,t that SEENEN
= ana.rb.b. fopemapebe full. | | thefccipture mpabht be fulfplicn: i S
atte Cheletbpnageshaue J tpoken bntopouby — Mowcome 7 tothe and thelewozdes (peatte .. -
| imatcitr.a Proucrbes. Che tpmewpll come, when Shall Finthe world,that they mpgdte hauc mpiope |
$ no mOzeLpeake Dntopoutbp proucrbes:but¥ Follin them. Jbaue geuentiemthp wode ane
bd ball Hewe pou plapnlp from mp father. Atp *the wolde bath bated them, becaufe thep ave zobn.ro.e
; bape mall pe afke in mpname. And F fapenot notofthe wolde, cuen as Jalloam not of the Sapiu
3 _ bntopouthat 3 wil{peake puto mp Father foz World. 3 defpzenottbat thou thuldett tate tič
ES pou. o? the father him felfeloucthpou,becau: out of the wozlde:but*that thon Kepethemfra pip ie
fe pebaue loued me anv baune beleucd,p J came euctl. Theparenotofthe wolde :ag J alfo am 2"
~ outirom God. J went out from tbefather,and not of the wolde. Hanctifpe themthozowe
cameintothewo:d Agapne, Fleane f wolde thp truth. Tip wordeisthe truth. Aa thou dpd
*zop ern AND * Koto the father. i : delte fende me into the wozld,euen fo bane Jab
G  Dps dileyples fapde vnto bpn: Lo,nowe foflentetbemintothe Wozlbe, and fo? thep2fa-
- oe talkelt thou plainly,audfpeakcitenupaoucebe keg fanctpfpe J mptelfethat thep alio iInpgbte
|... Fob re. fle are we fure,thatxthou knotbettalthin- belanctifpedthozotve the truthe.
B. Ses and nedeftnot that anp manfbuldeafke p Mcuertheles, Jpzapenotfo: themalone bus -
My anp queition. Cherfoze velene we, that thoucas fozthem alfo wbtchthall bele UC On methozotwe
| =, ‘melt frö God. H Felusantweredthem: Powe thepz pzeachynge:tbat thep al map be*one ag 244i.
f


_  \ dace-rtttr. pe Do Deleue.* Webholde the houre biawetbupe thoufather art inme,and Jinp, andthat thep
-mappini e OND tS alredy come,that ye thalbe fcattercdene alfomap be one in ug: that the wozld mape bes
Lo gee ppmantobys one, anotallleauemealone. leue,tbat Phat fent me:And the glozp whpche
1 7 Jobritjo And pet am F not alone, Foz * tbefatberig thou gaue teme, Jbauegpuent em,thbattbep
i -  Wpth me. jii mape be one, a8 we allo are one. 3 inthem, and
a _ Chele wordes haue Yipoken bntopou,that thouin me, P hep map be made perfecte in one
is inme pe mparbt baue peace. fEo2 inp wozld thal and that the wold map know, that thou batte
TOR pe baue tribulacion:butbeofgoodthere Jpaue Lent mee haftlouedthtag tboubatlouecdme. :
E: a ouercometbe wozlde, Sather, J wpll that tpep wbpebethbouhate D
cae  The.cvit.Chapter. ye °”  gpuenme* be topth me where Jam , that thep rig rie
Tbe moot bartp and toupng praper of shzttt onto map temp glozy,whichthoubatt qiu me. JEoz nee
| i bes father, Foz atl furhe as receaue thecruth Plouedelt me before the makeng of the wolde.


amama pele woedes (pakke Fetus and lyfe *D rpgbteous fatber.the worldcaltohat NOE + agat.rid
fad Boye UP Dps epes to beauen, and fapde: tnowen the ‘but 4 bane bomen gee eae ae Zuke,s.0
V(qy\ father, * the bouretscome: lozitpe phaueknowé:that thou batt lét me. And J baue
tbe onne that thp fonne alfo mape“ Declared wuto them tbp name and wil declare
= glozifpe the:as thou batt gpuen dün ít tbat the lone toper pt thou batt louedine,
p ier at Beibe, that be Huld qpyuc eternal map beimtbhem,and J inthem. Fe
riptecreenal Pee Dat gpnen bpm, This CThe.rbiii. Chapter
„3ob.ta S *tpteeternal pthep might know the the on a EER i l
eS" fne Gode Jelug Chozi whom “poubatkfent. — eogiersro tbe geena were eee Oth tote
Hobusir.e Bhauc qlozifpedtie on the carth.*¥ baue fp: eare, Jefus ts brought before Anna: cenphas ¥ iSilate
npibed the wozke, whpebthou ganef me to do. Pras agta Den Jelug bad fpokt thee woms A
ano now glozifp thou me(ofatberwitbthine PAPAA Nbe went forth wpb bps ataie exe it
owne felfc,wpth theglozp, whpche J had with C pouer p beoke of Cedi, where was Serene
49 aa garden, into the wppeh


the, per the twozlde wag, F bauc declared thpna: ib AN i centred
me Ynto the men, whycbtbou ga came outof [eerste aaa DISDiciples. judas allo whpche
the wole. Thpnethey were andthon aauck bet aped bpm, knewe the place: fo2 Jefus ofte


=


.  themme,andthep bane epte thp Word. Zowe tpmesreforted tbptber topth bys difcpples u
in they baue knctwen pall $ thynges what fouer bas then after he badderecepucda ponte of a
thou bat geuen me, are of the.jtoz 3 baue eug (and minpfterg of the bpe peftesg Pbarpfeg )
onto them the twozdeg whiche thou maue me, came thpther wp planternes, ¢fperbzandes
and thep Daue receaned thé, and Daucknowen Wweapong. And Fetus tnowpnge all thpnees }
furelp, tL at J cam out fromebe: and thepbaue foulo come on bpm, went fozch,and fapode Yntro
| beleucd, that thou dpddelt fende me. them:tobom feke ee Thep anlwercd bpm: Ye-
r 95  Fprapfozthem, ey not foz * the wozlde fug of Pasaveth. Jelug fapth onto them Jam

„~ “3de. but for them + whpeb p balke menen me, forthep be. Judagalfo which betraped him, tode topth 23
eta bth? ore thyne. Andall nipnearethpne,etbpuejare them. Atfone then ag behad fapde vito them J

mpneand Zam glozpfpedin them.Andnowe am be,thep went backteard eek roğdg

~ | am Junot inthe wozlde, and they are inp wozld Then alked he them agapne: whome be ce

and Fcdme tothe. Fe Sire hep lapde: Fetus of Asaveth. Jefus an{wes

4 Holp father, kepe thozotethpneowne red : A baue tolde pou, that Jambe, Rtvetehe

in


\


: ime therfore,letthele qothep2 wap ChatpPlap- npfpenge,twobatdeath be thulbde dpe.
Feb-Fbiid inge mpgbt be fulfplicd whpcbehe fpake:* of  * Chen Pplateentred into the iudqgementhal m at.rrvitd
the:tebpch thou gaue me,haue §notloft one. agapn, called Jelug, efapd Dntoht-att thou Mres
ben SpmoPeterhaupngalweard,odwue theking ofthe Jewess Jelug anfwered:fapt p
it,and {mote the becpe ce feruaunt,andcut that oftbp felfe,oz bpo other telit § of mes p=:
of bpsrpabte care. Cheleruauntesnametas late anfwered:Am Ja Jewe! Thpne one na-
_ Dalcehus, Cherforelapeth Jefus vnto peter: ctonandbhpe pretkes bane deliuerc’ the puto me
mat-rrbi ¢ «But Dpthp {weardintothetheath,thal jnot CWihathatt pdone ¢ Jelus anlwered mp kinge-
SEEE pepnheot thecuppe,wbpch mp father bath ge= dome isnot of this thozld.DEmp kpngdie were
ueninesChenthecompanpeandthecaptapne, of this wolde : then old mp minifters furelpe
and minifters of the Jewes tote Jelug, bold fpabhe, that J Muldenot be delpueredto the Fe-
bpm, andledbpmawape to Anna fpelte:fozbe weg, butnowis* mp kpngdome not frombece 4 <z0b.v1
was father in late Dnte Capphas, which ele priar therfoze fapde bnto bpm: Arte thou a ‘©
tbe bpe zef that fame pear. Capphag wàgbe kpngethen’ Jelusanlwered-thoulapette that
aqod.ri.e WHpch gaue eet a to the Jewesrthatit was Jamakpng: Foz this caufle was F vone and
expedtet, that onean wuld dpe for thepeople. foz this caule came J tnto the wogldc,p J thule
strep A And Spmon Peter folowed Jefus, fop beare wptnes vnto p truth. And al pare of the:
Mac aie AOtber dilciple:thatdilciple was knowe nto truth heare mp vopce . Pilate fapde yuto bpm,
dub cra, the dpe pzelte and wente in witb Felusintothe tbat thpiigcistrueth: And whan bebadlapoe
palace of the bye rel . Wut Peter ode atthe. thps, he went out agapne wnto the Jewes, and
Doze pthoute. Chen went ourcthat other dil> fapeth onto them:*¥ fpndein bpm nocaule at meet erbite
ciple (tobpch was knowen wnto tbe bpeprette) . all. Pehaucacultome,that ¥mhulddelpucr pou Tas rice
and{paketotbhedamefell thatkeptethe Doze, oneloofeat Efter,wil pe that 3 loole ynto pow


;
+
i -e
f 3


tA


4


beoughtin Peter. Chen fapdethedameleltbat the kenge of the Fetes? Then ceped thep alli ? |
kepte tbe Doze, Yntro Peter. Artenocthoualfo agapnefaping: * a bpm but Werrabag:tbe: jt,
one of thps mannes dilcpples? Hela be: Jam fame Warrabas was a murtherer. Actes, iile
not. Che feruauntes and mpnpiters ffode ther,  Che.ric Chapte


Wbichbadmadeafperofcooles:fozit wascolD  CLbzitiscrucifpeo. De aele i mother bnto
and they warmedthem felues. Peteralfo tope __ Hob*ovethandisburped. | |
amonge them,and warmed bpm: org Den Pplate toke Felustberfor,.e A
-D xThebpeprefttbenalked Jefus of pps dit Se (courged bym. x And thefouldpers mer.rrvite
inar. rie cintes and Of ps Doctrine. Jefus anfweredhim PA aes WOUNDED Crowne of thoznes, and TF»
"eE q fpake opentptn the world. J euertaugbtein RENA itonbpsbeade. Andthepopd
the Sinagoge,andinthetemple whitheraltbe PESES onbpm a purple garment., >»( erame
Jeteg refozte andin fecrete baue F fapdenos  vnto bym) and lapde-baple kpnae of the Jetoes,t
hinge. Wbp alketthoumerAtkethemwmbich they fmote bpm on theface. Pplate Went forth
Herd me, what 3 baue fapd vnto tbem. wWebold agapne,andlapde dnto them, behold, Jbzpnge
thepcantelwpat Flap. Upebebadthus{po bpm forthetopou,that pemapeknowse, that 3
ken, one of the mintfers whypch ftode bp, {mote fpndenofauteinbim. Then came Fetus fozthe
Acrid. Jefus onp face,lapingranlwerelt thouthebpe wearpngeacrotone of thogne,and atcobe of pur
gpvette fos setae cule bra Ee 3 baue cuel ple. And efapeth bnto thers: vehol de the man Fo.rrvit.c
poken, beare tithes of theeuel.2ut pf Jhaue +* Wihenthe bpe pecttes thertoze aniy mintiers marre-
wel ipoken, bhp imptet tbou me AndAnnag faw bim,thep crpcd faping ceucify hiim, crucifp i
fent bpm bounde vnto Capphasg the bpe Pek. Dim. Pplatelsptd Vntothë. Take pebim eru
— Spmon Peter Lode,and warmedbpm felfe cifp bpm, foz J fpnde not caufein bim. Che Je-
€ Then lapdtbeponto bim:artnotthoualfoone es anfwered bpm: Wie haue*xalalbe ¢ bp our zew.rritt.c
of bys dilcpples‘ Hedenpedit,andlapde: Jam late he ought todpe, becanfethe mide pim felf #19).b.b.
tiot. Dne ofthe feruaiites of the bpe pzetesihis. the fonne of God. Wiben Pplate ber d that lap-

_ sofpn Wwbofe eare Beter fmot of)fapd vntobim inge, de was the moze afrapde and usent again
gorii Hppnot 3 fe theim the gardentopthbpm:* Pe- intotheidgementbdal, and fapeth nto Fetus —
matrroja ter therfoze denprd agapne: and immediatlpe whence arte thou” Wut Jefus raue bymnone 25
Vuk cia the cocke crew Then led thep Jefus from Cap ee TURSE Dau nto bhim: Hpea-

phasinto the ball ofiudgiment. Jtwasintbe kel thounot úntome’Rnowel thou not, that

moznpnge, and tbep tbem felues wentnotinto Jhane power tocrucifpthe, and bame power to

tbe iudgement bal, left thep Huld be defied, but loole ther Jefus anfivered: Thou cou left baue

that thep mpabte cate Palleouce. Pplatethben nopoweratallagainit me xerceptit were ge- x sapta:

foente oute nto the audfayde:what accufacp= uenthefrdaboue. Terre pe tpar ueipueseD Joh.tid

onbzpnae peagapntthps man: Thepanfwe- mevnto p baththemozelpnne.* And fro thence Be". &
_ yedandfapde ontobiin:Vibe were notancuell fozthfoughte Pplatemeanes to loole bpm, but sgark.rv.c
~ DoerWoe wold not hauedelpuered him onto the esd bal tc emar E prac i 0, AU Frte,

FE Then fapde Pplate wntothem:takepehpm,€ artnot Celars frend. Horxwholoeuce mabecy are cog, by


B


indyehpm after pour ownelatwe. The Jzewes bpm felfeakpnge ig agapnfte Cefar. i
` therfoze fapde bnto bpm. Ft ig not la wtull foz ben plate bearde plapeng,be bzougbte C.
wstoputanpmatodeath.Chatthewozdesof Felusforty ,andlatdowne togeue fentencein ~
tiat.rr.ée Jelug mpabt befulfplledxwpich be fpate, ipn-


place pig called the paucment, but in thee- STAN
2ue


BOE SD. HOME


seer fyed Jefus, toke bps
oe tite CPiveD Jefus, tob

, AUSF Foure pactes.toeucrpfould
bis cote. Che cote was wit |

ppon thozotve out. Chep apd therfore amonge
themfelues:Let vs not Denpde it, but caite lot-

a tes fo2 tt; tbo thall baucit. That the ferpprure
~ Palris mypohe be fulfplled,fapéege:*Chep pane depar:
k. ted mp rapment amonge them, andfoz mp cote
dpd they calt lottes. And thefoulpers dpd uche

thpnaes indede. Lott Ah

There Kode bp the crofle of Jefag his mother

è ~ and bis mothers fpter,Marp the wptc of Cleo
pag and Harp Pagdalene.Waben Fetus ther

Fone fatvehps mother and the dpicpple vt
xbomebeloucd, De fapeth Yntobps mother:
woman, beholde thy fonne. iae beat
bpfciple:bebold thy mother. Andfro that houre
the opicpple tobe Der fog bis owne. :
SE Afterthele thpngeg-zelusknotwpnge that al
Pradere thpnges were nowe performed, tiat*the ad 8
- - ture mpabt be fulfpiled,be faptb: F thpatte.

mat.rrbit t there Lode q velell bp, full of bpneger. *Cher-
#90t-FD0: Fore thep fplled afponge wpth vpneger ¢ wotld
itaboute wpth plope,and putitto bys mouthe

A A {fone as Jefus then veceaued of the vpneger,
‘pep .roit.s Defapd:* Ft is Epnp ed, and bowed bps peade,
and qaue vp the goolt. Che Fetocs therfoze, be-

3 canfeit was the preparpnge of the Sabboth,p
the bodpes huldenot remapne vpon thecroie,
onthe Sabboth dape (fo? that Sabboth dape
fas anbpedape)befoughte plate, that thep2
leqgayes mpage be bzoken and that they mpgbte
Hetaken Dowie. Chen came the fouldpers, and
T brake the legges of the fpatt.z of p otber whpeh


FJwptten: .
@ ben the fouldpers, x when thep hadde cru-


i goy.rilis


E G; wmagerucpfped wyth bym. Wut when thep cam

A N to Jefus and fawe that he was dDeadealreadye,

they zake not bys leqges:but one of the fould-

| pers with alpeare theult bpm tuto the {pde,and
oathwpthcame there out bloudeand Loafer.


© Andbethatlatettbarerecogde andhpsree


nentes, and mad?
opéra parie anD alfo if
outfeme,wought ag


banebozne dpm bencestelme where ba


SUL,

cowdeis true. Arid he kno terhrbat he lapth true

thatpempabtebeleue allo. sfozthele thynges

tere done, thatthe terppture Muld be fultplico.

*Pethall not beeakea bone of him. Andagapne ¢r00.rii.s

another {cripturefapth: *thep ball lobe onbpm Suri?

whom they pearfed.* After this, Joleph of Ara *eaato.

mathia( wbhpch thas a Opicpple of Felus:butle- TN". a

cteatlpfoz feare of the Jewes)befought Pilate Lut.rrii g

tbatbemighbt take Downe p body of Jelus. And

Pyplate rane bpm lpcencejcececame thertore , tobe ao

the bon of Fetus.) AND there camealflo Nicodemus

(fohichat p beapnning came to Jelus bp night)

and bzougbt of mp2re and aloes mpngled toge-

ther,about an bundzed pounde toapabte. Chen

toketbep the boopeot Jelug, and wounde it tn

Ipnnen clothes wprb the odoures , asthe maner

of the Jewes is to burpe.And tn the place wher.

he has crucpfped,ther was agarden , andin the

gerdena neve fepulchze, wherin was neuer ma

lapde. Chere lavde thep Jefus therfoze, becaule

efthe preparpng of the Sabboth of the Jewes.

fo? the fepulchze eas npe at bande. 1 co

CThe.re.Chapter. >

a Dheretirrercponof Chzif,whpche appeareth to

arp Chqgdalene and to all bps bplepples, to thepz

Greate conforté

am ipe*fprtte dape of the Sabbothes. A  -

i Bs cam <Darpe Magdalene earlp( whe ier babe

+ Vj tt has pet darche ) nto plepulebze fas. rrii a
and fate the tone taken awape fro

~~ the graue. Che the ranne,andcame

to Spmon Peter, e to the other dplepple * who sob.riit-c

Jclusloucd,andlapeth onto them: Thep baue HEEF

taken awape the Lozd out of the grane, and toe |

can not tell where thep hauelapde bom. Beter

therfore went fozth,and that other difciple, and

came unto thefepulchze. Thep ranne both toge

ther, and the otber difcpple dpd outrunne Peter,

andcameftp2 to the epulchec. And wha be had

ffouped dotone, hefatoc thelpnné clothes lpeng 15

Se tent henotin.* Chencame Spmon Peter Lurrina
olotopng bim,ewent into the fepulchee, lanw

thelpnne clothes lpe,¢ the napken that was ab-

out ips head,not lpeng wpth plpnnen clothes,

but weappedtogether tna place bp it felfe. The


O twerteinalfothat other dplepple, wbhbpebe came


fp2fteto P tepulebee.s he fate, belened.ffo2 a8:
pet thep inewe not the*{crppture,tbat be Mhuld Hrabi .b
rpleagapnetrom death. & Chen the dpicpples rie poe
Went atbapeagapne yuto thep2 ovone home. |
Pr arp tode topthout at p fepulchze we- xu. rrtiif.d
ponge. Soas the wepte , he bowed ber felfe in: €
tothe fepulchze,¢ feeth tivo aungels clothed in
whypte,{pttpnee the one at the bead, e the other
at thefete,wobere thep hadde lapde the bodpe of
Aelus. Thep faye vnto per : Woman, whp we-
pelt thous Sbefaperh vnto them:foz thep baue
a fone mhe iper deti dag
ep Daue lapde bpm. Caiben the bad thus fapde,
fhe turned ber felfe backe,andfawe Fetus i
dpnge,and inelwe not that it was Fetus. Felus
fapeth nto ber: Woman; whp wepelke thous
(Ohotekett thous Sbe fuppolpnge that he had
bene a gardencr,fapeth wnto bim: p2 pf thou D
lapde


FE bpm


p


{


-


—— = a


7 = The Galpell


bpm, and Jil fet bpm. Jefus fapeth wut her:

Harp. Sbe turned her felfe, fayde wnto bpm:

Babboni whypchis to fap:mafter. Jelug fapeth

- Yntober: Touche menot, forF amnot petatcé-

dod pe ded to mp father. wut qotoxmp beethzé,¢ tape

Prob rone VItO the:* ZF alcende wnto my Father ¢ poureta-

xiuKe. thers¢tomp God, epour God, *itarpe Mag-

reiia Dalene came ¢ tolde the dpiepples,p the badtene

aoe the Loade,andtbat he bad fpoken luch thpnges

aie pntober. Kix Chelame dap at night whicbe

“was theip i apa f Sabothes, when the do:

res twere put wher thedpleyples tere aflebied

togeather fo: feare ofthe Jewes)came Felius, g

{todein the mpddes,and fapth onto them :peace

___ be bate pou. And whe be had fo fapd, de {petro

Fob. rod one thent his hadeg,and bistpde. Chen * were
the dpfcpples glad when thep tawe the Lorde.

ss - Thenfapd Jelusto themagapi: peace be wnto

eran rit. a pou. as my father xtent me euen fofende J pou

Tne tite allo. and whe be had fapde thole toozdes, he bre

Job. Fotie Chedon them and fapth wnto them: Receaue p?

F the holpeqootte.Wipotceueratpnnesype rempt,

thepareremptted butotbem. And whofocucts
{pnnes peretapne,thep are retapned. - |

re ut* Chomasg one of the twoelue( which is

called Didimus ) has not with thé when Jefus


Jobm-pib


was Jefug, Jefus faptb onto thé:chplozé,baue
peanp meate: Thep anfweredbpm:no. Andhe


gr


fapeth vrifo them: * caft oute theneton Hepat Luseo.o
(poe of the Dpppe and pe {pallfpnde. Thep cat
oute therfore and anone thep there not able te |
Bate it fo? the multptudeotipiihes. € i
Then fapd p dilciple*tohd Jelusloucd Nto y, pitie
Peter: Feisp Lorde: WHE SHpms Peter berd Ý inv.pire
it was p LO, He gpd bis cote onto him(fo2 be
was nated)e (prangetnto p fec. The other dp=
{ciples came bp thpp.foz thep terenottarre fra
land, but as it Were fio Hud2ed ubptes, ethep
Dewe pret w fplthes. Alone then as thep were
come tolade,thep lathe bote coles, ¢ fptpelapde
therott,¢ bzead. Jeluslapeth onto thë:xbrpnge merrie
of tbe fytbe which pe baue nowe caught. Spms D
Peter went bp, Mewe p netto thelande full of
great fpiyes.an bundzed ¢.Uit. and fo all there
were fo manp,yet tas not the net broke. Fetus
fapth bnto the:come,¢ Dpne.Andnone ofthedp -
feppies burk alke him:wobat art thour ffo2thep
fete toe pit was p Lord. Jelug then came, € coke
bread, gaue them,andfpthe lpbetople. THisis
note pthpapetpme that Jelug appeared to bis
ppfepplesjafter that de was rpfenagapne from
death, So wha thep haddpned, Jelug fapeth €
to Simi Peter: Hpmå Joanna, louct thou me
moze then thefe/ 1r Capd bntobim:pee Lorde, P
knotty 3 loue p. De lapth nto hun-fedemp
labes. Helapth to bemagapne p leconde tyme:
imã Joanna, louet p merbefapth vutobpm:
Pee Lozd,thouknowell $ Jloue P. He fapd wna
to bim:fede mp epe. He fapd wnto him p tHpd
La} boots ee rena pme’ Peter has


Fob.rid.o.


Shall pede the,andlead the whptber thon wol- Actes piia
defenot. That (pate be, fpgn ba


(wbiche alfoleaned on pps beette at. fuppet,and srr
fayde: Lozde, tobpebe ig be that betrapetd the:) 67
Wihen Peter therforefawehpm, belapthto fe
{ug:ozde, what (pall bebere dos Fetus lapeth
Dntobypm: VF Jwpllhauebpm to tapety d
come wbatis that tothe, folowethoume. TH
went this fapenge abzode amonge the brethren
that, thatdifciple (huldnot dpe.Det gelustapd —
not tobpm, be thallnot dpe, but pf J wpll that
be tarpe tpll 3 come, tobat ig tbat tothe? Che

amedpicpple is be, tobpcbe tettpfpetd ofthefe
thynges.¢ wote thefe thpnges. And we knotwe
that bysteftimonpeis true. fx Chere are allo xopu.rr.¢
many other thynges, wbich Jelug dpd. ý whic
pfthep thulde be wepttécuerp one, J fuppole, p
neces nar contapne the bokes pipulde

ewp tten.

Lixreendeth the Golpell of
Sapuct Jhon.


CTh


BOUTYE apoltles. z ee SF, =


hho Veter ptb vs,and had obtapnedfelowthpypein this -.
CTheAttes of —_edvs.anopado the tame bathe bis


Wvoltles. {cd a plat ofgrounde wpth the telbarbe of inp-
| RDEREBOIERCS ie auo pen pe an al DnE nD bunite aa tees
efpet Chapter. under th the mpddeg,and al bis bowels quihed “Fu,
C The Fpett Chapter. out. And itis knoten tuto all the inbabpters
Tbe atcencionok Chit, cpathias is choten tn of Jerufalem, in fo muche that the fame felde ig
fteade of Judas, called in thep2 mother tonge, Acheldama, that


pa) D the former treatple (deate isto fay, the bloudp elde. Joz it ig twapttenin
a Theophilus webauetpoken the booke of Plalmes : * ops babptacpon te Pie. irinte
ZA esas) of alltbat Jelug beganto do vopde,andnomanbe divellpn therein, xand Pral, cira
PY E and teache,wntpll the dapein his Wpthopepke let another take: Abertore of D
I ese) wbich be was taken vp,aftee thefemen whch bauecompanped wpth vs (all
| Wen! thatbetbozowe pbolp goot the tyme that the Lozde Jelug bad all bps con-
Cf axon, Dad geuen commaundemen: uerlacionamoae vs, begpnnpnge at Sbaptpme
` | = tes bntothe Apotties, whom of Jhon. vnto that lamedape that be as take
+ Sobu.rtea be badchoten, to tobomealto be * thewed bpm vp from ‘ys)mutt one be o2depned,tobe a wpta
more’ felfe alpucafter bis paflpon(and that bpmanp nes topth vs of bps refurreccion.
tokens )appearpnge onto them fourtpe dapes,  Andtbepapopnted tivo, Jofeph Noe istal
and fpeakynge of the kpngdome of God, and led Barlabas whole fpzname was Juftug JE
| «ROU S tathered them togcather, xand commaunded Dathiag, And when thep prayed, thep fapbe
hem, that they tuldenot departe from Ferula- thou Lo2bde which*knowelt the bertes of al me rane
k lem:but to Yoapte fog the promes of the Father, _hewe whether of tbee ttoo ou balte chofen: p
Bobtitisn *tpbereot(fapeth he pe baue bearde of me.Jtoz “be mapetake the ro wonie OF thps mynpftracpon
asoba.t.c *Zbon truelp baptpled wpth Water, but peipal and A pottletbpppe,from which Judag bp traf:
: tone be baptpled wpth the bol e goolte after thete greffponfell, that be mpabte qe to bys owne
, ee Eee daves. bent rioze Were cometo- place. And thcp qauefozth thep: lotteg andthe
getber,thepalked of bpm, fapenge:Lozde wplt toffell on Hathbtag, and be Was counted Iopth
tbou atthis tpmeceltorcagapne thekpngdom theeleuen Apottles. fa
mat.Frittic a youcabusie rene riy foi oto ett comme HC Dap rae AALS
. 02 pou to knotoe p tpmes,oz pfeafong, twh ex betoze the congregacpon at gera an MON Of poez
tbefatberbatb put h bpsotene pomes butepe o tttateoCtpetapeani o AePDfalemn, ano (peins
{Hall receauepowwer,aftcr thatthe holygootis I BPRS etx the fpttie dapes were cometo A
Ed p attende,thep were all WpeD one ace Dee. rhib


alo. rritit.g
| Actes.u,a


aeii come bpon pou. And* pe albe wytuellcs puto


SODUFP.D se vot onelp in Jerulalé,butalfoinal Jewzpe | A | Ss Bcozdetogether inone place. And fo 2° Frit.
< and in Samarp,¢ enen ynto the worldesende. LOH). 29, Goenlp therecame a founde frd brea-
And when be bade (poken theletbpnges, kene Hen, 88 tt bad bene thecommpnge


* g9a0.11.0 y le thep bebelde, * be has taken ypanbpe ofa mpabtpe Dpnode, and itfplicd all the bon
E i | * at : Mp oor | ule
Kurig wp! cloudreceaucd bpm bp out of thep: fpgbt where tbep fate, and there appeared a 8 a
And wbple thep loked fedfaftlpe vp totarde clouétonges , lpkeas thep bad bene of fpze, and
Heauen,as be wente, beholde, two men tode bp itfate bpon eche one of them, xandthepwere al ddai
tbem in wbpte yap alfo fapbd: pe më fplled with the bolp woot and began to [peake amori
of Galile, twbp tande pega rge vp into bea- ivpth other tongeg, eng a8 thelame (pete gaue
f santbiin VEN TOPS fame Jefus tobpc eistaben vp fro them vtteraunce. | f
Sic YOU into beauen,*thall fo come, caen as pe pane Chee weredivelipnee at Jerufalem, Yetvey
and.Frd-€ fene bpm go into Deauen. E Then teturnedD Deuoute men oute ofeuerpnacpon of themthat
Sunroute thep wnto Jerufalem,from themounte(thatis are Dnbet beauen. Cpe thps was nopten about
grr ¢ Called Dipuete ) whpepe ts from Jerufalem a the multitude came togetber,« were aftonnpey
Shoe @abboth dapes toznepe. And when thep there becaule that euerp man bearde thé fpeake wpth
Hg come m,thep thet Dp intoa parler,where abode big owne language. Thep thondzed al,and Mar _.
Biers, Both* Peter and James, and zhong Andzcwe, uapled,fapen camonge them felueg : beholde; 25
iukebic hplpp and Thomas, Warthelmetoc e Dat- ave notall thele whpebe (peake,of Galile? And
ee thetoe, Janes the fonne of Alpheus and Sp- bote beare Wwe euctp man bps owne tge wher
. mon sclofes,anid Judas the brother of Jari.cs. im te were borne” Parthians,and @edes, ang
—CThelcall continued wpth one accozde in prayer Elamttes,and the indabiterg of Wefopotamig
and fupplpcacton topth the wemen,and Harpe andof Aew pe, and of Capadoria, of Pontbus;
the mother of Felu,andtopthbysbeetbeen. anda ia, JÐ gaand Bampbilia, of Egppte
C- Ano intholedapes Peter fode vp it the andofthe bartpesof Lybia, tobpche ig belpde - .
impddes of the dplcpples and fapde( the nomb: Sp2en,and ffraungers of Rome, Jewesany
of names that were together, were about anbit x j20ltlptes. Gzekes and Arabpane : toe Daue mat.prisily
| Dedandtwentpe.) Pe men and brethzen,thys beard them Cp ake tnour otonet es theareate
mat.cr!.b frrinenre mutt nedes baue bene fulfpiled, tobpch woz2kes of Gop, i Thep twereall amafled, and
Func crite toehalpe goofte,thozowe themoutbe of Daud wonded, fayenge one £0 anotbec: tohatinca:
ieat tea “fpabe befoze of Judas, x Wwhpebe Was qupdeta heth SAE, thermocked, fapenge: thefe meri
iuketwe themthat toke Jefus: * soz he was noibi are FUlt oF newe wpne, yo R S tte
Luke iiie p * Ff if We


il


BOUTYE apoltles. z ee SF, =


hho Veter ptb vs,and had obtapnedfelowthpypein this -.
CTheAttes of —_edvs.anopado the tame bathe bis


Wvoltles. {cd a plat ofgrounde wpth the telbarbe of inp-
| RDEREBOIERCS ie auo pen pe an al DnE nD bunite aa tees
efpet Chapter. under th the mpddeg,and al bis bowels quihed “Fu,
C The Fpett Chapter. out. And itis knoten tuto all the inbabpters
Tbe atcencionok Chit, cpathias is choten tn of Jerufalem, in fo muche that the fame felde ig
fteade of Judas, called in thep2 mother tonge, Acheldama, that


pa) D the former treatple (deate isto fay, the bloudp elde. Joz it ig twapttenin
a Theophilus webauetpoken the booke of Plalmes : * ops babptacpon te Pie. irinte
ZA esas) of alltbat Jelug beganto do vopde,andnomanbe divellpn therein, xand Pral, cira
PY E and teache,wntpll the dapein his Wpthopepke let another take: Abertore of D
I ese) wbich be was taken vp,aftee thefemen whch bauecompanped wpth vs (all
| Wen! thatbetbozowe pbolp goot the tyme that the Lozde Jelug bad all bps con-
Cf axon, Dad geuen commaundemen: uerlacionamoae vs, begpnnpnge at Sbaptpme
` | = tes bntothe Apotties, whom of Jhon. vnto that lamedape that be as take
+ Sobu.rtea be badchoten, to tobomealto be * thewed bpm vp from ‘ys)mutt one be o2depned,tobe a wpta
more’ felfe alpucafter bis paflpon(and that bpmanp nes topth vs of bps refurreccion.
tokens )appearpnge onto them fourtpe dapes,  Andtbepapopnted tivo, Jofeph Noe istal
and fpeakynge of the kpngdome of God, and led Barlabas whole fpzname was Juftug JE
| «ROU S tathered them togcather, xand commaunded Dathiag, And when thep prayed, thep fapbe
hem, that they tuldenot departe from Ferula- thou Lo2bde which*knowelt the bertes of al me rane
k lem:but to Yoapte fog the promes of the Father, _hewe whether of tbee ttoo ou balte chofen: p
Bobtitisn *tpbereot(fapeth he pe baue bearde of me.Jtoz “be mapetake the ro wonie OF thps mynpftracpon
asoba.t.c *Zbon truelp baptpled wpth Water, but peipal and A pottletbpppe,from which Judag bp traf:
: tone be baptpled wpth the bol e goolte after thete greffponfell, that be mpabte qe to bys owne
, ee Eee daves. bent rioze Were cometo- place. And thcp qauefozth thep: lotteg andthe
getber,thepalked of bpm, fapenge:Lozde wplt toffell on Hathbtag, and be Was counted Iopth
tbou atthis tpmeceltorcagapne thekpngdom theeleuen Apottles. fa
mat.Frittic a youcabusie rene riy foi oto ett comme HC Dap rae AALS
. 02 pou to knotoe p tpmes,oz pfeafong, twh ex betoze the congregacpon at gera an MON Of poez
tbefatberbatb put h bpsotene pomes butepe o tttateoCtpetapeani o AePDfalemn, ano (peins
{Hall receauepowwer,aftcr thatthe holygootis I BPRS etx the fpttie dapes were cometo A
Ed p attende,thep were all WpeD one ace Dee. rhib


alo. rritit.g
| Actes.u,a


aeii come bpon pou. And* pe albe wytuellcs puto


SODUFP.D se vot onelp in Jerulalé,butalfoinal Jewzpe | A | Ss Bcozdetogether inone place. And fo 2° Frit.
< and in Samarp,¢ enen ynto the worldesende. LOH). 29, Goenlp therecame a founde frd brea-
And when be bade (poken theletbpnges, kene Hen, 88 tt bad bene thecommpnge


* g9a0.11.0 y le thep bebelde, * be has taken ypanbpe ofa mpabtpe Dpnode, and itfplicd all the bon
E i | * at : Mp oor | ule
Kurig wp! cloudreceaucd bpm bp out of thep: fpgbt where tbep fate, and there appeared a 8 a
And wbple thep loked fedfaftlpe vp totarde clouétonges , lpkeas thep bad bene of fpze, and
Heauen,as be wente, beholde, two men tode bp itfate bpon eche one of them, xandthepwere al ddai
tbem in wbpte yap alfo fapbd: pe më fplled with the bolp woot and began to [peake amori
of Galile, twbp tande pega rge vp into bea- ivpth other tongeg, eng a8 thelame (pete gaue
f santbiin VEN TOPS fame Jefus tobpc eistaben vp fro them vtteraunce. | f
Sic YOU into beauen,*thall fo come, caen as pe pane Chee weredivelipnee at Jerufalem, Yetvey
and.Frd-€ fene bpm go into Deauen. E Then teturnedD Deuoute men oute ofeuerpnacpon of themthat
Sunroute thep wnto Jerufalem,from themounte(thatis are Dnbet beauen. Cpe thps was nopten about
grr ¢ Called Dipuete ) whpepe ts from Jerufalem a the multitude came togetber,« were aftonnpey
Shoe @abboth dapes toznepe. And when thep there becaule that euerp man bearde thé fpeake wpth
Hg come m,thep thet Dp intoa parler,where abode big owne language. Thep thondzed al,and Mar _.
Biers, Both* Peter and James, and zhong Andzcwe, uapled,fapen camonge them felueg : beholde; 25
iukebic hplpp and Thomas, Warthelmetoc e Dat- ave notall thele whpebe (peake,of Galile? And
ee thetoe, Janes the fonne of Alpheus and Sp- bote beare Wwe euctp man bps owne tge wher
. mon sclofes,anid Judas the brother of Jari.cs. im te were borne” Parthians,and @edes, ang
—CThelcall continued wpth one accozde in prayer Elamttes,and the indabiterg of Wefopotamig
and fupplpcacton topth the wemen,and Harpe andof Aew pe, and of Capadoria, of Pontbus;
the mother of Felu,andtopthbysbeetbeen. anda ia, JÐ gaand Bampbilia, of Egppte
C- Ano intholedapes Peter fode vp it the andofthe bartpesof Lybia, tobpche ig belpde - .
impddes of the dplcpples and fapde( the nomb: Sp2en,and ffraungers of Rome, Jewesany
of names that were together, were about anbit x j20ltlptes. Gzekes and Arabpane : toe Daue mat.prisily
| Dedandtwentpe.) Pe men and brethzen,thys beard them Cp ake tnour otonet es theareate
mat.cr!.b frrinenre mutt nedes baue bene fulfpiled, tobpch woz2kes of Gop, i Thep twereall amafled, and
Func crite toehalpe goofte,thozowe themoutbe of Daud wonded, fayenge one £0 anotbec: tohatinca:
ieat tea “fpabe befoze of Judas, x Wwhpebe Was qupdeta heth SAE, thermocked, fapenge: thefe meri
iuketwe themthat toke Jefus: * soz he was noibi are FUlt oF newe wpne, yo R S tte
Luke iiie p * Ff if We


il


‘Cie Actes a


C rut Peter fkepped forth topth thecleucn,
and lpfte Dp bps vopee,and fapde Dntothem:

Pe men of Jeto2p,andall pe that dwell at Feru

falem,be this knowen bnto pou,and with pour

careg beare mp Woozdes. Eor tbele are not Dzon-

ké,a38 pe luppofe,fepng it is but thethp2d boure

ofthe dape. Wut thpsis tbat whpche was fpo-

ken bp tbe sie tc i Andit balbe in the

_ ___ laftdapes,fapth Gov, of mp fpzete 3 wil pote

Jolis goyteyponall fletbe.xAndpourefonnes g poure

Doughtets Hall prophelpe,t poure pounce men

allie vplions,¢ pour old men hall dreme dre-

mes. And onmp leruauntes, and onmy bande


mat.crbiie MAVENS J pl poure ont of mp fpzete tn thofe


ZLuk.rruite DAES, AND tHep pall propbelpe. And * F topll


fheloe wonders in Heaven aboue and tokens in

the earth bencth,bloud and fpze and the vapour

of fmobe. Che lonne thalbe turned into darkee

nes.and te mone into bloude befoze that arcat

and notable dape of the Lozde come. And it hal

woma.t.c cometo oTe ram ofoener thall call on the
name of the Lozde,halbe faned. F

- Pe men of Aeael,heare thife worded: Fe-

fus of Masaretha man aproned of Godamong

pou wytb mpzacles, widers andfpanes, which

God dpd by dym in f mpddes of poulas pe pour

iclues Gnowe bym baue pe taken bp the bandeg

of burpghteous perfonnes. after be was delpue

red bp thedetermpnate councell and fozknotv=

ledge of od, andbhaue crucyfped ¢ lapnebpm:

whome Godhathrapled vp, andloofed the fo-

roles oi Death, becaule tt was pnpoflpble that

__ be thuive be olden of it. Foz Dautd{peaketh of

Parole ppm. * A fore hande J fawe G odal wapes before


me,fozbeisonmyp pge bande,that fhoulbe pee
2e


not be moned. Cherfoze bpd mp bertereiople, €
mp tonge was glad. <Hozeouer alfo mp flethe


fhal retin bope,becaufletbou toplt not lene mp


foule inbel neptber wplt thou fuffretbpnebolp |


tofe corupcion. Chou bak Hewrd me the Wwa-
pes of lofe, thou alt make me full of iope pth
thy countenaunce. . | |
= © Pemenandbzthzren, let me frelpe (peake vn
tiete £9 pou of the patriarke Dauid: * fFo2 be is bot
Deadand burped, and hpslepulchaeremapneth
pt) vs wnto this day. Cherfore fepn Pope
a prophete and Bnewe that God hadde vorne
twpth an oth toim, that Chut (as cicernpnge
the flethe oulde come of thc frutes of bps lep-
nes and thulde jda bis feate, De knowpn
thps befoze,fpake of therefurreccion of Chil:
tbat bps foule Huldenot be lefteinpell:nepther
His hletye fhulde fe cozruption. Chis Fclus hath
Actest.e- Godrapted vp,*woperot we all are toptnefics.
J Sence nowe that be bp therpabthande of
Godiseralted,and hathereceauedof the father
the pzomple of the bolp gooft,he hath ted forth


og thys-#(srtembpche pe notve fe and heare. toz
Dantd 18 not afcended into heaué, but be lapetb:
prat.cr.a * The Logdelapdto mp Lozde:{petbou on mp
Hat ppahthande, ontpll 3 make thpfooes thy foote
~ + ffoole.Dotherfoze,let all the boule of Bracil
uote for a {uertpe,that God bathe made that
fame Jelug ( whome pe pane crucpfped) Lozde

and Chik.


Wibhenthep hearde thys.thep were prpeked
inthep2bertes,andfapde vnto Peter, and wnto
the other Apofkles: Pe menand breth2e, *what Lube. ti.b.
fall we Dor Peter lapde ynto them: repente of
poure{pnnes, andbe baptpied enerponc of pou
inthe name of Jefus Charite, foz the rempilpon
of fpnnes,and pe Mall teceane the apfte of the
Dolpe coofte. oz the promple was made vnto
pouandto pourcbpldzen,¢ to al that are afarre
of,cuctiag manpas the Lode our God thal cal.
And wpthmanp other too2des bare be ei
anderboated them,fapenge:pauepouretelues =,
fromthps bntowarde generacpon. Chen thep
that gladlp receaned bps preachpnge tere ba-
ptpled:andtbe fame dape ther twere added duto
them abouttbzethoufandefoules.
And thep cotinued tn the Apofkles doctepne ¢ G
felomfbpp,tinbzeakpng of bzead, and inpzrapa .
crs. And feare came oner enerpfoule.Andmanp
wondersand {pqnes worre ewedbpthbe pos —
fElegow(ae Jerufalem. Auv greateteare came bpon all men.) ga
And alltbat beleued, kept them Celues together
and babdde all thpnges commen, and Folde chepe |
pofteffyonsand goodes ,andDpartedthemtoall
menas euerp man hadnede. and thep continua
eddaplp witb one accozdcin the temple.g beake
becade from oufe to Houle, and dpdcate thep2
meate together topth qladnes and {pnglenes of
berte, praplpnge God, ¢ had fauoure wptb all
the people. And the Lode added tothe congre=
gacpondalp.tuch as Hulde be faued.
[The.tit.Chapter, Hee °
Eae Aiea Se EON
© Chit bnto che people.
=gq Cter and Jhon went op together tir ay
+ ` tothe temple at the npnthbe Doure of
colle ‘paper. Anda cectapne na that was
oy © 4 bale feom bps mothers hombe, tag
fasted 2 ougpte, whome theplapode daplpe
at the gate of the temple(wbpcbe g called bet-
tpfull) to afke ales of them that entred into
the temple. WU ben befawe Peter and Fbon that
thep olde qo intothe temple, be delpredtore<
ceancanalmes.anbd Peterfa Pian oo egon
bpmwpth Jhon and fapde:Loke on vs.andbe +.
gaue bede Dntothem trultpng toreceaue fome
thpnee ofthbem. Then fapde Peter: Hpluer and
golde baue Jnone , fucheag Jhaue,geue J the. 45
snthename of Jeus Chet of Nasarcth *eple atipe
tp.and walke. And be toke dpm bp tbe rpabte
bande,and Lpfte bpm bp. And immed ae ps
fetcand anclebones receaued ftrenatye. nd be
pange, Mode, and walked, and cntredwpth
them into the temple, walkpngeandleappnae,
andpaplpngeGod. <
- And all the people lawe bpm walke,¢ prapfe
God. And Dement opm, that it has be Which
fat and beqgedat the betotpful gate of the tems
ple. And thep tondzed,and were fore aftonyped,
at that whpch Dad happened vntobpm. Andas
the balte which was healed, belde Peter g Jhon
all the people ranneamafed Dnto them inm* the ti.rte.vr.a
pore that is called Salomons. Jobn.t.c
Wben Peter fatwe that be aunftweered onto g
the people: ye Pemen of Alracl,whbp re o
pea


| ew. rbiif.¢
es. bile


LITLU Apoltles. uw.


peattbps,o2 why loke pelo on be, ag th onghe
bp oure otone power oz frength te Hadde made
thys man go: Che God of Abzabam, and of J-
faac,and of Jacob,the God of our fathers hath
glozifped bis Lonne Jelug, Mhome pe Delpuered
mat.protia and Denped inthe prefence of plate; whan be
Lax. riuta Dad tudged bpm to be looted. Wut pe denped the


tma,rroite Dolpe and inite, tand defpeed a murtherer to be i


Jonroiiig Keuen pou and kplicd*the Lozde of lpfe, topo
God bath rapled from death-of the thpebe we
are wptnelles. And bis name thozowe thefapth
of big name, bath made thys man found, tobom
pefe and know. And the fapth which ig bp bpm
bath genet to hym this health inthe pretence of
poual,And nowe beethzé,¥ wote that thozotve
PoNo,aunce pedpdit.as bpd alfo pour rulers.


wut God( Which before had thewwed, bp P mouth faluacpon in any other.*Fo2am onge men bn- Seis,


æD of albis Pzophetes, howe $ Cheek sould fufet


ajatctit.¢ hath chug wp e fulfplled. Let it xrepét pou ther i


foze,andconuert,tbat pour fpnneg mip be done
atbape, OF re .
tobpch toe thal baue of the pzefence of the Lozde
aie God thal fend him, whichbefòze wag
preached bnto pou,thatisto wpt Fetus Cheitt
wmbpch mult receaue heauen, bntil the tyme that
allebpuges , bpche Godhathe f i
monthotal big bolp P2ophetes, fence the woz
began, be reffozed agapne.
oles truelpe fapde bnto the fathers: xa
Propbhete Hall the Lozde poure God taple bp
Milo pou euen oF poure peetbzen,lpke nto me:
pm thall-ve beares in all th nges whatfocuer
e pall fape nto pou. Jo: the tyme wyllcome
that enerploule wbich wpl not beare that fame
Pzopbete , albe deltroped from amonge the
people. All the zopbetes alfo from Samuel
and thence foptb( as manp ag baue [poken)baue
inlphewp!e tolde of theledapes:
Pe are the chpldzen of the Pzophetes, andof
the coucnaunt,whpche God made vito our fas
geri a Chers,fapeng to Abeaba:~Eué in thy fede hall


_ admi al thekpnredes of pearth bebleffen. Ep:t wha


odbadrapled bp dps fonne Jefus punto pou,
petente ppn to bletie pou,tbateuerpòne of pou
~ hulde turne ftom bys wyckednes. F


 The.titt. Chapter.


F
+


i
=


EAN E taughte f people and


peofthemenwasaboutefpuetboufande.

ne ye it chaunced on the mozowe, that thep2

* — culergand elders, and SHerpbes, (and Annas
the chefe Peate and Capphas.and Fhon,and


- Slevander,and as many ag Were ok the bynzen.


rE Dopen the tyme of refrethpne cometh -


athe fpoken bp we itb


Din Fetus the relurrec- meg :
oy | aae together agapnf the Logde anda-


of the bpe ¢2ca bes gathered tometber at Jeru:
faleni. And then tbep bad fet them befoze them
thep afked xbp tobat potwer, og in what name #rov.(f.¢


Math prir


PH Then Peter Eull of the polpe gootte, lapag


ath euen bp bym docth thys man anode Pere mee ose prio


become the chefe of the cozner. Repther is there |
der heauenther te geuen none otber name wher


t butcommaunded them to go afpde ont the
countell.and counceled among them felues,faps
enge: What Mall the doto thete men Ior a sobne
manpfeftefpaneis done bp them, andis openly
bnotven to all them that dtwell in Jerufalem 5€
We cannot denpe it? Wut that tE be nopfed no
farther amonge the people,let bs thzeaten and
charge them,that thep i cabe bence fozthe to no
manin thps name, |

And thep calicd them,xandcommaunded thé D
thatinno toplethep thulbdefpeake noz ae in S408. bug
the name of Jelu. Wnt Peter and Jbon anwe-
ved and fapde wnto them: whether it be tpabtin
the fygbt of God,to berken wnto pou moze ther
to God iudae pe. Eo: the ca not but{peake,that
whyred we paue fene and bearde. Do thzeatened
thep them, and let them $0,and founde notbpng
How to punpth them, becaule of tbe people. fog — —
al më peapted God becaufeof*that which wag Tte.tii
dotie:Foz tbe man Was abouefourtpe peare olde
on Wwb thps mpzacle of bealpnre wag {hetbed. _.
__ Affone as thep Were let go,thep came to their <
felotwes, and themed all tbat the bye 2ealtes
and elders hadfapd.And when thep berd $,thep
Lyft wp thepz bopees to Gon Withone accord, €
fapd:Lo2de,thou art God, which halk made pea
ven and earth the fee, al that in them ts, tobtchy
c# (in the boty soot) bp the mouthe of ep eetuaunt a
DAaittDon oure father) Hake fapde : UW bp dpdthe ...
Heathen rage;¢ the people pmagen Vapne thpn Praktis
ges: Che kpriges of the earth ove vp, and the


pi aah sph ot thy bolp chpive Yes
0? Ola tructh.agapntt thp holp chploe Ye-
fus( bé thoubattanopntey bone Deana
Poncius Pplate, wpth the Gentples and p peo- .
ple of Fftael, gathered them felueg togeatber, JE
cu(inthpscptie)fo2ztodo whatfocuer thp bande ga
tbp counfell determpned befoze to be done., l
And nowe Lozde bepolde thepz Poentenpnges
mu and


Molt,


EE a ee ee eee


—— i e e e aer


e


z eee
be m


Che Actes


and qraunt onto thy feruauntes, that wpthall

contpdente thep mape [peake thp wode. So

palt thou ftretche forthe so a banbe, that bea-

lpngeand [panes and wonders be done bp the

name of thp bolpe chplde Jelug. Andafloneas

aetes.rof€ thep bad pzaped, x the place moucd, where thep

tactica yoereafiemblcd togetber,+and thep were al fyl=

anarie Led pth the bolpe qoofte, and thep fpake the
twozde of God boldelpe.

©  pRAndthe multitude of chem that belened,

ae > were of one bearte,andof onefoule: Nopther

— — fapdeanpe ofthem, that ougbte of the thynges

Dobpchde pofleiied thas pps owne:buttbep had

allthbpngescommen. And wpeb greate potver

gaue the Xpotkies toptuefle of the vefurreccpon

ofthe Lozbe Jelu. And qreate grace was wpth

theitall. Mepther was ther anp gmonge tbem,

that lacked. Eo: as many as were poficllers of

landes,o2 Douleg, folde them, and breughte the

epee of the thynges that were folde, andlapde

Atboune at the poleg fete. Anddpirpbucps

acies WIS Made tntocuerpe man accozdpnge as be

vv badnede. f And * Joles, whch was alfocal-

ledotthe Jpoffles, Warnabas ( thatisthe fap:

the fonne of confolacpon)bepnge a Leupte, and

of the countre of Cppers , han de padde lande,

foi teed Ianas the pepce Downe atthe Apo-


C The. v. Chapter,
(The dpKembipnge of Ananias , and Saphprats
puop hed. Mi) pracles are bone bp $ apoties which
até taken, but the Angell of God bypageth thé oute
a Lipid apip st npg AU ah the soun a
29E Leritence of Gamaliel he Apotles are beat
tbep retoptein trouble,


Ded vp the goote. Andthe poncemencame in
and founde ber dead, andcarped irc out,and bus
tped ber bp bet bulbande. And greate feare


‘came on all epe congregacpon,andon as many
as bearde it. RENE pA:

Wy thehandes of the Apotles* were many C
fpqnes and wonders themed amonge the peo: eatrvi.o
ple. And thep Were altogether wpth one Accorde ai renia
uton And of other burte no Jobn.r. d
man topne bpm felfe to them ,nenerthelefletbhe actesati, b.
people magqnptped them. The nombre of them
that belencdin the L DR ME bothe of men
and weiten,qretoe moze aud moze: it fo muche
that thep bzougbt the (pckeinto the Aretes, and
lapbde them on beddes and contches, that at the
leat wape the hadowe of Peter,wdanhecame
by, mpgbt padoe fome of them,ow cand that ther wa
mpabe all be delpucred Fromthep? infpzmptpes.) ‘Chere cam
alfo a multptude ont of the cpties roundeabout
bnto Jerufalem, bepnapnae fpcke folkes, g thë
wobpch were vexed wpth vucleanefpectes.and
thep toerehealedDeuerpone. — EGER:

* Then the chefe Pealt rote vp, andall thep D. jas
that were topth him( whichis the lecteof p a= Ae" a
duces) and Were full ofindpynacpon, and laped
bandes on the Apoftles, and put them tn the cO- ee
mune prefon. * Wut the angell atthe Lode by cece es
npabt opened the pzefon dozes, and bzougbt the :
fo2th,andfapbe:go,-"d Land and fpeake in the
temple to the people.al the wozdes of thps pte.
UAhen thep derd that, thep entred into the tem=
ple carlp in the moznpnge,andtaught. Wut the
chefe preat came and thep that were pth bpm,
and called a councell togetber,and all the elders
ofthe chpldzen of Ffrael,and fent mento the pre
fon,to fet tbem. i ben the mpnpiters came, and
fouiid them not inthe prefon, thep returned and
tolde: fapenae:the pzcion truelp founde toe Mut
wpth ali bplpgence,anbd the kepers (fandpnge
iopthout befoze the Dozes. Wut when te Had o=
pened, toe founde no man wpthin.cdiben Sher
preatte and the ruler of the temple, andthe bpe
peites berde thelethpnges.thep doubted of thé
wherunto thys wolde growe.

Then came one and thetocdthem:bebolve, the E

men that pe putin prefon, tande inthe temple,
and teache the neople, Chen went theruler of
tenipie,wpth mpuptters and brought thé tope
out upolence. Eo thep feared p people, lett thep
fpoulde baue bene Foned. And when thep hadde
brought them, thep let them before tbe councel.
And the chefe peal afkedthem fapenae: * opp Atesti
not toe ffra*telp commaunde pou,tbat pe puld
not teache in thpsname? And bebolde, pe baue
Fplicd Jerufalem with pour doctrpne, intende
to beonge*thps mans bloube ppon bg. mat.Fr bic
 Peterand the other Apofkles anlioered, and FE
fapd:* ic ought mezeta obepe God then men aetes,tuen
The God of ourefathers rapled vp Jefus, wha
peficty,and baged ontree.ppm bath Goo lpfte
Dp wpe bysrpabte bande, tobea ruler anda
faupoure.forto gene repentaunce to Zfrael,and
fozgeucnetic of ipnnes. And we are recozdes of
theie Ehpnaes, wbpeh we fape,andfotsalfothe
bolp goolk , whome God hath geuen tothe that
obepe byin.CUiben thep berde that,thep claue az
funder, and fouqhte meanes ta fice them. Then
{tode ther bp one inthe counfell,a Dhyarple, =

| me


dates. ty se ehop shulbenot peake tn thename of Jefu


a
—=


el
T
pyan —— =
ia


‘poat.b, b


BATU APU Ss


acte.trit.a med* Gamraliell,a dDoctonre oflatve ( had inre


pufatton amonge al the people jg commaunded
the Apollestogoaipoea lytle pace, andlapd
pntorbem:Pemen of Zitacl,tate Dede to poure
felues.Yohat pe entend todo as touchypnae thefe
men. JE oz before thefe Dapes roofe pone Theu-
vaston knoe bpm felie, to whome refozteda
© nombze of men,aboute a foure bundzed, whpch
twas apne : and thbep all whpcbe belened bpm,
were {cateredDab200c,and brought tonongbt:
Lube rilis After thps man, was there one Judas of xGa-
lile in the dapes of the tribute andrete awap
much people after bpm. pe allo perpihed and al
euen (as many as barkened to bpm ) were fca-
tred abzoade .And nove F {ape vnto pou: re-
frapne pourfelues from thefe men,and let them


alone. 4€o2 pf tbps counfell,o2 thys toozke be of


_ iment wyllvome tonougbte. But andpf it be


of God, pe cannot deftropeit, left bapplpe pe be -y


founde toitrpue aqapnite God. And co bpma-


greed che otber:and whencbep badcalleatbeð PAN


poltles ,thep beate them,.* and commaunded


andlet them go. Kei :
And thep departed from the counfell , «re=
fop{phae, thattbep toere counted wothe- to
fuffre rebukefoz brs nami: Anddayelpe inthe
temple in cuerp boufe thep ceated not, to teach
and peache Jefus Chzitt.
C The. vi. Chapter:

 pnplters (07 Beacons) ore ozdepned in the congres

Gacpon,to bo ferupcemneceflarpe thpnges ofthe boop,

that ý dpofties mape wapte onip vpon the wozd of Good

- Steuen is accuica.

s R thole Dapes (when the nombz of
T the oplepples grewe ) there avofe a
~*4 grudgeamonge the Grekes agapnlt

(E ithe Pebzewes, becaule thep? wpa-

tE ies were De(ppled inthe daplpe mp:
nptracpon. Chen the twelue called the multp-
tude ofthe dyfepples together, andfapde: Ftig
not mete, tbat we fhulde laue the wozde of God
and Terne tables. Wirerfoze bzethzë lobe peoute
igimiie ANON epou, fenen men*of Donel reporte and
full of theboip gooft and wyfedome, to whome
25 we mape commptte this bulpnes: Aut we topll
geue oure felues contpnuallpe to praper,andto
the mpnpftracton of the toozde. And the fapen g

pleated the whole multptude. And thep cho
Sreucna man full of fapth andfullofthe bolye
goot, and PHilip,and Pocos and Nichanoz


'. gpocab.b and Tpmon, and Permenag, and + Ricolas a


conuerte of Antioche. Chele they let befoge the
surraa Apottles:and when they had prayed thep *lapd


temid ¢hepz bandes ontem.


ti, Timid And the worde of God encrealed, and the


nombzeof theaplcpples multtplpedin Jerufa-

© Jemareatlp,and a great company of the pzettes
twere obeticnttotbefapth. —

i ria And Steuen, full of fapte and power,

DPD qEcate wonders and mpzacles amonge the

people. Then there arofe certen of the Spna-

oge, tobych is called the Synagoge of the Lp-

wrtines and Sprenptes,and ot Picrandzia ,€

of Celpcia,and of Alta, opiputpnge pth Dtr-


‘the


gate. rrit WEN UD Ehep coutve not refpll the ioyfepome,


=.


andthe fpzete, xtobpebfpake. E


Jacob berdethat there thas cozne in Ei


— SOLU.
Then tent they t bpcb ta ms
ententthep in men, b)pch (apd: ive hane

bearde ppm Leta 6 lee wWoazdes ei
pnt Poics,and agapnit Got. And ipep moucd
the people and the elders andthe Serpbes: and
came Dpon bpm and caught bpm, and broughte
bpm to the counfel,andbzought forth falfe wpt .
nefles, whpche fapde: Chps man cealeth not to D
fpeake blafpbemous thozdes agapnk this holp
place and the latwe:foz the berde bpm faye: thys
Jelug of Masareth thal deltrope this place,and
pall chaunge the ozdpnaunces, tobpche Boles
gaue bs. Andall that late inthe counfell,leked
ftedfaftlpe onbpm, and fawebps face agit bad
bene thetace ofan angell.
The. vit. Chapter.
T Steven maketh antwere ta bisacccufetion,rebaketh
the barbnecked Fjclwes, and is toned bonto wrath,

me pen {apd the chefe preal : igit euen g

A Hoe for And he fapd: pe men, byethzen,¢ ‘on
li (cp fathers, berken. Che God of glozpe
Road a Nae Appeared Ynto our father Abzaham

[=e MObenhe tas tn )elopotamia, be-
fore be Divelt in Charran, andfapde ynto bpm:
* Get the out of thp countre,and from thp bpn- gen.rtit
red, and come into the lande whych 3 thal thetve
the.Cben came be onte ofthe lande of Chaine, g
Dweltein Charran.aAndfrom thence, when bps
father Was deade, be beoughte bpm into thyg
landein whpebh pe nowe dwell,and begane bpm
none tnhcrptaunce init, nonot the bzedth ofa
eek 5; pet: mEn ht peo geue itto ene.rit b

pm to pollee and tobps fede after him when i erou

as pet bebadnocbploe. UTNE on riba

God verelp {pate on this wplexthat his lede wen.rv,c
{puldefogeourne ina fraunge lanve, and that
thep Hulde kepe them in bondage,andxentreat £rov. rii. t
tbem eunell.iiit. C. peares. And thenacpon(to fae
Mbome thep thalbein bondage) wyll Jiudac, W
fapd God. And after that tball thep come fozthe
andirur mein tbps place.*Andbe qauchpm p wen rott.c
couenaunt ofcpacumcpfpon. +And he begat J- tSenrria
faac,and cpucumcpted bpm the epabé dape, and
* jlaachegat Jacob.¢* Jacob begat the twelue Serro e
pateparkes.*Andthe patrparkes baupnge M- sence
dignacpon, fold Jofeph into Egppte. Xnd God raul
has wpth bym, andodelpuered Hym oute of all sapie.r.c
bis aduerfpites,and gaue bim fauoure and wpf
dome im the (pght of Pharaokpnge of Egppte,

And dex made bym gouernoure oner Egypte, generice
and ouer all bps bouibolde.

* Wut therecame a derth oucr all the land of Seneri.o
Cgppte and Canaan and great afilpceponthat
ourefathers foundeno fuftenaunce. But when

te,be
fent our fathers fpa. * And at the feconi pan BANED. A
potepd thas Known of bis bacthzen,¢ Zolephs io
prited has made Knowen vito harao.chen
fent Jolephameflage, and caufedhyps father to k
be bzougut,¢ allbps kpnne.lrry-foules * And wen rte
Sacobdelcendcd ito Egypte, tand dped bothe tocar
be and oure fathers, and were carped over into |
- ichem and lapte tn the fepulchze, * that Abra: gerri
am bougbte iog monep of the fonnes of Enog,
the fonne of Sichem. F


FE fiti But


‘Cie Actes


Wut when f tpine oF the promete newe npe
(whpch God had fwoneto Abraham) *thepeo
ple gre we and multiplied in Egypt tel another

pnge arote tobpcbe knee not of Jofeph, Che
fame dealt fubtellp with our kynred.andenelin
treated our fathers,and made thé cat out thep2
potnacbplnzes tat thep Huld not remapne a=
lpue.* The lame tpme twag Boles bozne, and
was acceptable bnto God, andnourplipcd vp
tn bpstathers boule thre Donethes. Wiben be


Pron ita
Plabevve


'grob.ft.a
Belshi


wascall out, Pbaraosdoughtertokepm ype f


nourpltbed him vp foz ber otyne fone. And Wo-
{cs was learned in all manet topfedome off E-
GP pciang,€ Has mpaghtieindedes gin woz0cs.
And when he was fullfourtpe peare olde,it
came in bps berte; to vpletbps bzethzen p chpl-
Den of Jiracl. And when he fawe one of them
fufire wong, be defended bym, and auenged his
quatel that bad the barme done to ppm, {mote
the Caoppcia. Fo: be fuppoledhis baeth2é wold
paue vnderitande,ho the that God by bps bande
ipulde delpuer tbem. Wut thep wnderitode not.
D  Andtüenerte dapebe hewedhpm felfe vnta
them as thep froue,andwolvde Dane fet them at
oneagapne,fapeng: Spes,pe are bzetbeen, why
burt pe one another: Wut he that opabis nepad
sen.cirh boure wonge tizuit Dim atbape.fapeng:* who
eroi et made the aruleranda iunge ouer verte thou
acesi. BPUme,as thou opdoet the Egppepan petter-
eron.ii, e Dapes* Then Acd G)olesat that fapenge s was
a ftvaunger in tie lande of Wadian wiere bebe
gat two tonnes.

Erodtia  *xAnD when fourtp peares wereerppeed,ther
appeared to pym inthe wpldernefle of mounte
ina an angell of the Looe ina flambe of fpze
in a bultpe. ihe Boles fawe tt, be wondzed at
thelpgbte. And as de Dpewe neareto behold, the

eimie DOPCe of the Lozde came ynto pym.x*¥ amtbe

mork.riic OOD Of thp fathers, the Gov ot Ababam, the

Zuk God of taac,andthe Godot Jacob. S) oles tré
bicd,¢ dur not beholde. Thenfapde the Lode

to bpm. * But of thp thoes from thp fete , Foz the

place here thou andete, is holpe grounde. F

baue perfectty fene the atlpecpon of mp people,

witch tg in Egppte and J baue heard their gro
npnge and am come dotone todelpuer thé. And
nowe comc,and 4 topll fende the iuto Eappte.

> Chps Aoles whome thep fozloise ( fapenge

gronie * oho made the a ruler anda indge: )the fame
dpd God fende tobe a ruler anda delpuceer bp
the bandes of the angel tehych appeared tobpm
in the bulbe. And the fame bouche them onte,
Hewpnae wonders and (pgues in Egppte,g in

- the redfee,and inthe wpldernesfourtye peares.
‘Chis is that Moles, whpch fapd wuto the chpl=
pew. rbiit.e DUEN OF Fltacll: * A Pzrophete thall the Lode

Actes.iit.d pout Godraple vp vutopou of poure breth2en,
lyke nto me, bpm pall pe beare.

ero rirse. Thpsigbetthatwas in the congregacið inp

Saaie fopldernes w the angel tobpch {pate to bymin
the mount Sitnat)and wptbontfathres Chon
man receaued the twozde of lpfeto gene vnto be,
to whome oure fathers woldenot ob tp, but cat
itfrom them.and m thep2 Dattes turned backe
agayne into Cgypte , lapenge wnto Haron è


_ tabernacle allo oure fathers that cam


xmake bs godbes tomo before BS. Moz as foz Erorrriia
thps oles that bzought bs out of the land of
Cappte, we wote not what is become of bpm.
And they made a calfeinthole dapes and offred
facerpfpce Dnto the pmage and retopfed ouer the
wozkes of thepz ownebanves. |
Chen Godturned bpm felfe,and*qaue them I
bp, that thep Hulde ozpppe the poolte of the *om-.t.c
fapeasitis weptten inthe bokes of the prophe aces
tc3.«D peofthe houle of Flracll,qaue pe to Me Fere,ii,c
facrpfpces and meatecoffrpnges, by the {pace of
fourtp peares tn the wilderness: And pe tobe vn
to pou the tabernacle of Moloch, and the tarre :
of poure God Rempham, Fpaureg whprhe pe °
made to hozthpppe them. Jnd J wpli tranflate
pou brponde Babplon.
Dure fathers bad the tabernacle of wytnefle
inthe wpidernele, as bebad appopnted tbem, . _
:Cpeakpnae wnto WHoles:+that pe Muld make it ihig
accozopnye totbefabpon phebadlene, a a
alter,
xbzougbt tn tpth Jofue into the pollellps ofp 4".


, Centples whom GodDdzaue out before theface _
of out fathers, onto the tyme of Danid: * which Ors


foundefauoure before God, g toolde fapne baue
found a tabernacle io: the God of Jacob. * But
Salomon buplt bym an boule, :
*PHowbeit he that is bpett ofall, dtwelleth not Iteron.e
in sig made with bandes,as fapeth the po
phet:*deauenis mp (eate,and earth is mp fote
‘ole. bat boule wpllpebuploe foz mefapeth
the Lozbero2 whpcb is the place of mp relt:hath
not mp bande made all thele thpnages?
Ve ttpitenecked and of yncpgcuincpfed hertes &
and L ei : pe baue altbapes refptted the polpe
gool: *ag pourfathers dpd, fo do pe. Wibpch of Desti.»
the propbetes baue not pour fathers perfecuted à
And thep baue lapne thé wbpche Mewed before
of the compnge of that tuft, whom pebaucnowe
betrapcb,e murtheed. And pe allo baue receas
ucd the latoe*bp the mpnpitration of aungelg, 30b-v11.
and*bauenot keptit. Actes pbb
+E Wben thep berde thefe thynges, thepe ber-
tes claue afunder,¢ thep qnathed on bpm wpeth
tiep? tetbe. Sut be bepnge ful of the Holp qoott
lobed bp ftedfatlye wpth bis epes into peauen,
and fatoe the glozp of God, and Acts Fandpng
on therpabt bande of Gov, andfapoe: 2Scbolve,
Ale the beauens open.and the fonne of ma tana
bpnge on Che tpghte bande of Gov. Chenthep
gaue a toute with aloude vopce,and*ftoppep Piaibitis .
thep2 cares,andratne ypon Hpi al at once,and $
cat bpm out of the cptic,and* toned bpm. And iiser d
thewytnes lapeddownethepz cloth atapoge
mansfete,wbole name was Saule. And thep
toned Steucn,callpnge on,andfapenc: Lozde
Jelu, *receaue mp fpzete. And be Eneled Dotone Brarrrt,a
and crpcd topth aloude wopce:Lozbe; x lape not Lus, rrie
thps ipnie to thep2 charge. And whenbe hadde


t
itie bis ,


ffa.Irbi.e
i.ax,bic


thug [poten befellaflepe. fe
C The. viii. Chapter. i


« Saul perlecuteth the Chriften. Tbe Apoftles are iea
fered abjobe.@bilpp cemmeth into Samaria, S6pmon
Magus is baptplep, be dpMembleth, hp Ipp bapeplsth
the chamberlapue, |
Saul


BOLLE AAP


4 p= == a Aulxcofented nto bis deeth. And
Acter i Sireeng at thattpme there asa qreat per
ee Cecucpon agapnél the congregació
Gvra ye which was at Jerufalem and thep
xegat.r.¢ ses! (here all*(cattered abzode thozow
actes tis outethe regions of Few2pe and Samaria, er
cepte theapoffles. ut benout më dzeiled Ste

nen and made greate lamentacpon ouer bpm.
vager: aS fo: Haul he + made bauocke of the congre-
t coz.rb.b qacponandentred into cuerp boule, and dzetwe
Galaic outeboth men and womenand theult them in-
to melő. Therfoze tiep p were {catered abzode
went eucrp where prcacbpng the wo: of Gov.
be Then came ade ene acptp of Sama-
ria ,and pecached Charite vntothem . And the
pepi gaue bede nto thore thiges which Pit
tp tpake with one accozde,beatpng and fepnge
goat.rdio EMempzaclys Which he dpd. o2* yucleane [pee
-~ tegcrpenge Dith loude bopce, came onte of ma=
nye that were poffelied of them. And manp ta-
ken pth pallipes, and manp that halted, toere
healed. Andthere was great topeinpcptpe. F
Wut there tad a certapne man called Sp-
mon,whpch befoze tpmein thefamecptie vied
wptchzafte, and betoptched the people of Sas
maria, fapenge that be asa man that coulde
prs pale pare hos rg oe thep tegardcd.from
the leait tothe qreateft faping:thps man ts the


25


\ power of god. bpcbhe is called qreate.Andbim


thep fet much bp, becaufe that of Longetpme,be
N had bewptched them with fozceries.
`C *Wutafloneasthep pane ee i Philip:
` pes peeachynge of the Rynqbdome of God, and
eee Jefus Cheitte:thep were bantp«
ed both men and women. Chen Spmon Hpm-
felfe beleneDalfe . And tohen be Has ba ptpfied,
be continued with philip, wonded, bebolopng
the mpzacles and fpgnes, whiche were thetoed.
benthe pc martina Mine Jo Je-
— -gufalem parde lap,that Samaria pad receaucd
the wode of Godthep lent nto them Peter
and Jhon. ci bich when thep were come doione
prapedfoz them, that they mpahte receauethe
olp ghoff : foz as pet De twag come on none of
them but thep were baptpfed onelp in the name
Getes.bt.b of Chp Felux Chen lapedthep thepz bandeg
riii-s.FF-* on them, thepreceaucd the bolp apolt. f
and.b,b tben Spmonfatoe that thozowelapenge
eee LD ONOE w oleg bandes , the bolp ghoft twas
genen, deo
si alfo this power,that on whbomfoc..ze 3 oe the
handes,be mape receaue that bolp chotte.25ut
Deter fapde duto him:-thp monep perpe with


EATS the, becaule thou balte thought*t vida” :


of God mape be obtepned wpthmonpe.
aah Ab dd parene eon ppinthps bulp
neg. Co: thy berte is not rpahe in thelpghte of
God. trcpent therfore of thys thp wpckednes
and pape God, that the thought of tppne berte
mape be fozgeué the. Woz J percepue that thou
arte full of bptter gal,and wzapped tn tniquite.
gro.vii.b, | Then anlioered Simonandfapde:+prape
10.015 peto thelozdefozme that none of thelethingrs
dutako Wbpch ye hauc{poken,fal on me. And thep whe
thep badteltificd and preached the food of god


ered them monep,lapenge:geucme


JUNEAU o
returnedtoward Jerulalem and preached the
Oolpellinimanp cepties of the Samaritans.

a3 Che angel of the Lozd {pake ynto Phi: €

lip, lapenge: arpfleand go towardethe fouthe

ito the wape that coeth Downe From Je rulas

lem bnito the cptie of Gasa, tobpebis in the de-

ferte. And be arole, and Went on, And beholdes

aman of Ethiopta(a chaberlapne,andof great
aucthozite: With Candace quene ofthe Etheops
ang,and pad the cule of al bectrealurexcameto tirei.
Jerufalem foz to w orlhpp. And ashe returned Fobn.ri.<


home agapne tyityngem byscharet, bered E-


lape tbe Bzopbete.

Chen the eranan POEN parti
andiopne tbp felfe to ponder charret. And Pht
lip ranto Dim, and berde bpm red the prophete
Efap and fapde:Undertãdet thou what thou
reade? And be fapd:Howcan J ercept Jbad JE
aguyde And he delpzed Pbilip, that he wolde
come bp,and [pet with bpm. Che tenoure of the
{cripture whiche be red, was this:* Pe wasled rap iie
aga epe to be lapne: andlike a lambe Domme
befoze Dis Wearer, fo opened he not bps mouthe
wWecaule of bys bumblenes be was noteftemed
Wut tho thall declare his generacpon:foz bps
Ipfeis taken fromthe earth Chechamberlapne


anfwered bilip,andflapd: J pzape the of Wha
Benet ethep2opbete thps ¢ of bpm felfe, 02 of
oie other man:


Philip openedhys mouthe,and began at the
Canne tory ure, and preached vnto bpm Fetus.
And as thep went on they? wape.thep came vit
to acerteniwater.¢ the chaberlapnelapde: Be,
here is water * topat dothlet me to be baptpled actes. ps
Dbyplpplapde bnta bpm: PEthou belene wpth G
all thpne barte thou mapette. And beanftbered
& foye: A belene that Jefus Chif ts the fonne
of Sod. And he cOmaunded the charret to ade
fipll. And thep thentdotone bothe wm the water:
both Dbilip and alfo the chamberlapne, and he
baptiled him, And alfone ag thep were com out
of the water the lprete of the Lode caughte a-
wape Philip andthe chamberlapne fawe bpm
nomoze. And he ent onbps wape teioplpuge:
but Pbiltp was founde at Asotus, And he wal
Keb thozowe oute the con tre,pzeachng inall f
cpttes,tpll be came to Celarea. Fe |

Pauli TORIR SIR. etu

HAULS COMBETIEO, AM ; ; s
Geter tapreth wabptha, aen. Sahl ake


mmc 520 HAul pet brethpie out threat A
TAGA npngesand P aie i m ar


pesara: wnat artetbou Lozbdes Andthe Lozde
apbde: Jam Jelug whome thou righ EJ A


NOY AVA


ig havbefo2the to kyche agapnite the pepckes:

| And he bothe tremblpnge,and altonped fapve:.
Luke iib Lorde, what wplt thou baue metodo’ And
Ano Frb: e the Lopdefapd yntobim:arpfe,and go into the
15 tptie,and tt thalbe told the what thou muff do.

The men Wbpche tozneped wpth bpm, tode

amated, bearpnge a opec, butfepnge no man


And Sanllarole from theearth, and wpenbe.
opened be epeg, be fate no man. Dutthepled.
e


bpm bpt


ffoz FJ wypll Mewe bpm howe td thpnges
actes.rric hemut Cuftre foz mpnames fake.

iacpuie $ AND Ananias went his ape,andentered

intothe boufe,and put bpsbanbdes on bym,and

fapbe. Bother Santl,the Lozde tbat appered

wnito the in tye ape as thou camet, bathe fent

me, that thou mpgbeelk receane thpfpabt, and

-e fpilen witb the poly gooit. And immcopatly

D there fel from ppsepesasit bad ben {cales,and

he receaued {pght: and arole,and thas baptp-

fed, and receaucdDiicate ,and wag comforted:

Then was Daull certapndapes withthe difci

ples wppchewereat Damalco . And rapahe

tape be preached Chrphre inthe Spnagoges,

hots that he thas the Lonne of God but all that

derde bpm, wereamated, elapde : Fs not thys

be tbatfpoiled them tbich called on thisname

in Zerufalem,andcamebpther fo: that entent,

thathe myagbt bepnge the bounde nto the bye

prekes: Wut Saul enceelcd p moze in {tréqeh,


æ cofounded the Fewes which dwelt at Dama: - re


fco, affprmpng that this was verp Chpt, H

` Andaftera good whple, the Fetes toke

eourifell together, tobpll bpm. wut thepzlap-

enge awapte thas Bnowen of Saull. And thep
Matched the qates Dap and npghte to kpll him.

‘(cos tte e @ he p diicuples toke bpm bp nya bt g put bim
“© ox thozot p wall,and let bpm dotone ina bafket.
— Jind whe Saulwas come to Jerufalem, be af-

fapdto couple bpm felfe top difciples: but thep

Mere allafrayodc of bpm and belenednoet that be

was a Dilcppie Wut Barnabas toke bpm, and
brought bim to p Apoftleg, g declared to them,

hot he bad fene p Lozde in Se and Pp be bad

tpoken to bins, and howe he hadde done boldelp


at Dama icp (tt the name of Yeli. And be hadde
big conucclacpd wpththem at Jerufalem ipea -
kpnge boldlp inthename ofthe Lozde Jefu.
And he fpake anddilputed againtt the Grekeg
but thep wente aboute to flee bpm. WU bpeh whe
the bzetbzen knetoe, * thep bzougbtbimto Cez
farea, and fent bym fozthe to Chartus . Chen gctes.rrs.c
bad the congregacpons ret thozotwe all Jew-
rpe and Galile and Damaria and tere edified
and walked in the feare of the Lorde and mul-
tpplyed bp the comfosteof the poly ghofte.
Andit chauncedas Perce walkedehozotve 4E

outeall quarters : became alfoto the fapnetes,
Yohpche diveltat Lpdda . And there be founde a
certen man named Eneas, twobpcbe badde kepte

ys bedepght peares,and waslicke of the pal-

pe. And Peter fapde vntobpm: Eneas + Che
Lozde JeluChzittemakethewbolearp{e,and |
make thp bed,* And he arofeimmediatlp, And * esatird
all that dtelt at oe da and Aflarion faw pin Sst.
androurned tothe Lorde. -> Flobn.b.6

There Was at Joppa acertepne tooman q Trtestii b


difciple named Cabitiia (whvch bp inter pita.
of good


‘¢ionts called Dogcas ip fame twas full c

wozkes and almes Dedrs,eobpche (heopd, And
it chaunced tn thole dapes that the was (pche,¢
dped. hom when tis:y hadde walibed,thep ia.
ped ber ina chamber. Sut foz afmuch as Lidda


- Was npeto Joppa,and the dileppleshad bearde


that Peter was there, thep fent onto bim, defp-
ringe ide De wolde not be greued to come
nfo then. | 3
peter arole andcame topth them. Bnd when g
he mascome,thep bzougbt bpm into the cham= ©
ber . And all the wpdowes Lode roundeaboute
bim tecppnge, and thetpng the coategand gar
mentes whpcbe Dozcas made, whple the wag
wyththbem. Jnd Peter put them all fozthe and
kneled Downe , and praped: and turned ppm to
the bodpe, and fapde: Tabitha * arple,andihe
opened ber epeg g when fbe lawe Beter the fat titt rota
bp. And De gaue der the bande, and lpft her vp, Luke, bye
And when be hadde Talled the fapntes and wp-
dowes, be Metwedbher aline. And tt was knowée
thozowout all Joppa, and many beleucd inthe
Lozde:-And tt foztuned,p hetarped many dapeg
in Joppa with one S)pimon a tanner.
__ CE he.r.Cbapter. ye
qc Tbe bplpon Coat Peter awe. Bowe he was tent to
£o onus - The heathen allo receauethetpeete Æ are
Pa were Was acertepne manin Cefa-
ay) teacalled Coznelins,acaptapne of
by aed P Coudters of Jtalp a deuont mag
AF. ees One p feared god w al bis boutbolne
Bees) DDiche qane muche alines to peo:
ple, ¢ alba godalwap. Thefame fa by a ve
{po eutdetlp(about $ ninth bour of p dapan an
gel of god chiming into bi, g faping pnte bi. 02
nelins: Gabe beloked on him, be bas afrapo,<
faid:wohatts tt lod: Ie fad vnto hi "THp prap
evs ExtDp almelesarecome bp itoremébzaiice _
befo2e god. And now le meto Joppa, cal for T?
one Sim whole lpznatmeis Peter. Ie lodgeth-
w one Simo a taner , whole poule is bp the (ee
fpde. pe alltel the, what thou oucieet gn do.
ind


SS


BILLY APIU II


And what the angell whpehe fpake Dnfobpm
wasg Depatted,be called tivo of bps houtbols fer
- yauntes ,and a Denote foudper of them that
toapred on bpm,and tolde them all the matter,

and fent them to Joppa. i
` nthe mozow as thep went on thep2 to2+
C nep,and beewe npe vito the cptpe, Peter twente
vp bpon the toppe of the bouleto pzap abaut
$ naana toe fprtboure, And when be wered an bongred
LECEN S he tolde paue eaten. Wut whple thep made rea-
dpebefellintoa traunce,and fawe heauen ope
ned, anda certapn veffel come Done unto him
asithbabbenea arn (bet knpt at the foure coz
nerg and was let Dotone tothe cartie, wherti
wete* all maner of fourfotcd beaftes ofp earth
sxato ann berméand toozmes andfoules of the ope
Deuda Any cher came a vopce to bpm rpe Peter, bpl
and cate . Xut Peter lapde :not fo lozde, fo? J
baue neuer eaten anpe thpnge thatis commen
o vincleane. Andthe vopce fpake Viitohpma
xagatrdd capne the feconde tpme:*wobat Godbathe cles


= omit fonthatcall not thou commen. Chps was done
thaple, and the veflel was recepucd bp agapne .


35 into beauen . Gabple Peterallo muled in bpn-
~ felfe what this vilion (which be bad fene meat
bebolde, the men tobpch were fent from Corne-
lius bad made inquiraunce foz Spmons boule
and fode befoze the Booze: and called oute one,
and afked whether Simon wbhpche was {pena
med Peter were lodged there. Tibple Peter
thouqbt onthe vilton,tbe tpt fapd vntobpm
beholde, men feke the : arple peatore onnare f
bDowne.andgo with them,and doubte not.toz 4
Dauelentthem . Peter wente Dotone to the men
fobpcbe there fente outobimfrom Cozneliuse
fapde:%ebholde, Jambe whome pe feke, what
isthe caule whertoze pe arecome: Thep lapde
Cozneliusthe captapne a iufeman, andone

Ecareth God, and of good repozteamongeall;
people of the Jetoes was warned bp an bolpe
—- angelto fendfoztheinto bis poule and to heare
Set, HE. 8 yogades ofthe. Chen calledhe them tnx and lod
atest, d gepthem, And on the mozowe , Peter wente a=
“" pape wpth them,and * certepne bzethzen from
‘Joppa accompanped bpm. Ant the thpzde dap
entered thep into Celavea. nd Cornelius wap-
ted fozthem,and had called togeather bps bint:
men and fpectal frédes . Andasit channced pe
ter to come in: Coznelius met hpm. fell Downe
at bystete, and wo: pppped bpm . Wut Pe
acerie tobebym vp fapinge: Rande bp, xy mp felfe al
av i foamaiman. Andas be talked wpthhpm, be
5 cametn, and founde manp that were come toge


ther. Bndbelapdevntothem:Peknowebowe |


peuti a that * itigan ynlatefull thpnge foz a man that
ig a Jewe,to company o? come vuto analiente
45ut Godbhathhewed me, that J Huldnot cal
anp man commen o? Vacleane: therfore came J
nto pou withoute Delape,alfone as J was fet
€ for. Jalke therfore, for what intent haue petee
fozme.aAnd Cozneliustapde:' Chis dape nowe
fourcdbapes aboute thys boure, latte faftyng
‘and at the npnthe boure J pzapde inmp boufe,
andbebolde, a man flode befoze mein bapgite
clothbpnge,and pde: Cozncliug, thp paaperis


SUN ALU le


bearde, ethpne alines dedes are bad inremems
bzaunce in the fpghtcof God. Sende men thea:
fore to goto Joppa,and call foz Simon whol

fp2namets Peter. He is lodged in the boule of
one Spmon a tanner bp the feelpde whiche af-
foneas bets come, Wall (peake pnto the . Chen
fent 3 foz the tmmebdtatlye, and thou paffe well
done,thatthbouartecome. Powetherfore are


-weallbere p2efent before God,to Deareal tyin-


ges thatare commaunded Wnto the of Gov.
Then Peter mt a mouthe,andfapde
Dfa truth J percepuc thatx there is norelpect *!i a rir.
of perfones With Godt but inall people, be that spy 1.6
fearethbbim,and o2ketberpabtewplencile, ig colo. tid
accepted wpthbpm. FA
- Peknowethe preachpnge that God fente +
onto the chpldzen of Jfraell: preachpnge peace
bp Felu Chel, which is Lozd ouer all hinges
Wibpche peeacbpug was publpihed thozoto
all Jew2p(andebeganin Galile, after the bap eat.tiii.b
tpmewbpch Jobn preached hots*Godanopn to
ted Jelug aiie With tde dolp goot and
with power. Wypych Jefus went aboute Dopng
good, and bealpng al that were oppzefled of the
denel! fog God has bith him. And we are wit:
nefies of al thinges which de dpd in the lande of
the Jewes andat Jerufalem : whom ther fle
and haged on tree. Him Godrapled vp ob
dape and thewed bpm openlp not to al the peo:
e,but unto bs woptnelies ( chofé before of god
02 tbat lame intente) tobpchdpdeate s DAPHNE yarri
wò ppm after bearole* from deathe.yeAnd* he Fzob.rrib
cõmañded bs to preach onto f peoples to teffi- Pat rout
fpe ptt to De, toppch was ozdepned of Oodto be mar.rvi.e
tude of qupcheand Dead Toppi geue xall crap sin
the propbetes wptnes, that thozome bys name
tobotocucr belenethinbym Mall recepucrempel


fion of fpnnes. K )
Uiir Festa et pake thele toozdes, * the 4.8
bolp goof fel on al them whych beard the pzea-
chpuge. And thep of the cpzcumcpfion whtch be
leucd, toereaffonnped, as manp ag came topth
Peter, becaule that onthe Gentples alfo wag
ibed out the gpfte of thebolp abote. so: they
bearde them tpeake pth tonges , and maqnyp-

p Sod. Chen anlwered Peter * ca anp ma fog sebit
bpd tater that thele thoulde not be bapt pied,
whpcbebauerecepued the bolp goof as wellag
we! And de cOmaunded them to be baptpfed in
the name ofthe 10:0. F Chen pratedthep him


toftarpeafewe Dapes.
The.ri Chapter.
a7 Deter Heweth Che caue wherfoze be wente to the heathen
Barnabas Æ Paule preache buto the heathen , Agabus prez
phecpeth berthtocome, _ F
WINN Nothe Apofkels € bzethzë that were B
EAA wey in Jelozpe, berd that the heathen had
YETA YI allorecepucd the wode of God. And
patios We Preter wagcome vp to Ferulalé,
thep that were of the ciccumcplpon contended
againt bpm fapeng:* Chou wente into men Dbia
pncepzcumcepled,and DpDdelk cate ith them.
_ Wut Peterreherledthemater from thebe-
ginning, € erpoñdedit bp oDer Ynto thé faieng
* Fas inthe cptye of Joppa, prapenge and in Ites.F-b
a traunce, J fatra vpipona certapne veficll
ocleende
t


‘Cyeales


befCende as ithad beh agreate Hete, let Downe

from beauen bp the fourecozners and prcame

tome. Jito p which when J bad fattened mine

stin ria. epes, gconlpozed and {aoc * fourfoted beattes

Deuria of heearthand hermes of woozmes, and foules

A> of the aper. And J Derd a wopee faing bnto me

acple Peter, dape, and eate. Hut J fapdesnot

fo Lo2d,foznothpng commen oz Vneleane bath

at tpymeentredintompimothe . ut the vopce

anfwerednteagapne from beant: coñtnot thou

thofethphges commen whpebe Dod bathclene

fed. And ehis was donetheetpmes. And al wee
taken bp agapne nto Deauen.

And bebolde,tmmicdiafl ype there were thee
men alredp come onto the boufe where 3 was,
fent fro Celarea bntome . Andthe (pectelapde
bpntome,that J thulde go with them wpthoute

Afctes.r> DOUtpNG. st) ozcouer, *thele (pre byethzen acco
panied me, and we entredinto the manshoufe.
Paid be pewed vg, Howebe badfeneanangell
inbps boule,wobich ode and fapde to bim:tend
mento Joppa and call foz Spmon, whole fp2-
hameis Peter:be hall tell the toozdes, wherbp
both thou and all thpneboule thalbe fauck:
© Andas J began to preache, the boly qootte Fell
‘Acta ontbem, xasbe dpi on Vg at the beapnnpnge
Chen came it tomp remebzgaunce , bote that
azobni» the Love fapde:xAhon baptifed w tater, but
auesdia pethalbe baptifedw p bolp goot . Foz almuch
then as God maue them Ipke gpftes as be bpd
puto Vs, when we beleued onthe Lozde Jelug
Chevtte: what thas F that 3J Hulde auc wpth
tanti 60d Wibentbep bearde thps,thep deld
thep2 peace; and glozpfped Godlapinge : then
hath Godallo tothe Gentples qraunted repen
taunce bntolpfe, SURE
x They allo hpche Were {cattered abzove
thozaw the afflpccpon that arofeaboute Ste
uen, walked thozotve out wnto Pbentces ¢ Ci-
pers and Anctioche, preachpng the wozde tono
man but tntotothe Jewes onlp, Some of thë
were men sf Cppersand Sp2en, whpcbhe when
thep tere cottie to Antioche,fpake wnto p Gre-
keg and preached p Lord Jelug. andthe bandé
of the Lode was with them, and a great noms
bee beleued and turned wnfothe Lorde.
Cpbphiges of thelethpnges came vuto the eas
res of f congregacpõ which was in Jerufalem
andthep fent forthe Darnabas, that be Mulde
| go Dnto Antioche.Wibpcbe when be came, and
Actrttie paddelenethe qrace of God. was glad,and*er=
hoztéd themall,that wpth purpole of bert thep
volde contittuallp cleaue Dnto the lozd Eo be


act. pia.


ivag a rood man, atid ful ofthe holy qhofte and.


offatth:¢ much people was added punto f Lod

Then departed Warnabas to Charlus, Foz to

{eke Saul. And toden be hadde founde bym he

brought bim wnto Anttoche.

nd it chaunced that a whole peare thep

bab thep2 conueclacpon with the, congregation

there; and taught muche people in fo muche,

` that the ne of Anttoche Were the Fpzite
that were called Chziften. |

x Jn thole dapes came propbetes from the

eptpeot Jerufalem bnto Antioche. Andthere


*Gct.ppl.D


tode bpone offhein named gabus; and fpg-

npfped bp tite fpeete, that tberetpulde be reat

Devth thozotw out all the toozld Mhpch came to

patie inthe Emperour Claudtus dapes Then

the difcipleseucrp manaccozdpnge to bps abp> ieorrora
litie, purpoted to fende* Locont nto the breth- t.co biia
ren iobpche dwelt in Few2pe. Wibpche thynge 11
thep alfodpd, and fent itto theelbders by the ba

deg of Barnabas and Haul,


€ The,xti.Chapter. yE
C Berove perfecuteth the Cbhipiten. pleth names, and
putteth eter in pzpfon . whome the Lozie Belpucteth bp
ån angell.zbhe Hamefull death of erode,
FEA T the fatne tyme Herode the y
PIN kpnge fretched Forth bys ban-
R714 des to vere certen of thecongre
a Way gacion. And be tplledxJameg pat. titie
A we the brother of Jobn pep the amrriis
- S k i — ar dA aeh aries e fame |
atit pleated the Jewes he proceded further,
andtoke Peteralfo . Then were the bapepor
fivete beade. And toben he had caught hpm.be
put bimin prefon alfo.¢ deltucred bpm to foure
quateznions of foudpers to be kept entendpug 0i
after Eafker to bapnge him Forth to the people. E
And Peter as keptein pelon . Wut paper
twag made without cealing ofthe congeegacid,
nto Godfoz ppm . And when Herode wolde
Haue bzought bpm out ynto p people, the fame
npabt flept eter betwene tivofoudpers, bond
wpthtwir dein nA che 2 befoze the doze
Beptethe preron. And cet be, * the angell of getey 5.
the Lorde was theteprelent, calpahe (oiei |
inthe babitacpon. Andde fmote Peter onthe
pde, efteved bpm vp, fapenge : arple bp quyc- 75
Kelp. Andbps chapnes fell of from bps Dandes.
And pancell fapde nto bym: gpyzde thp felfe, b|
and bynòe on tbp fandales. And fo bi dpo. And
befapeth bnto bpm : caffe tbp garment ábonte
the.andfclotve me . And be came outeandfolo=
hed bpm, € op not that tt was truth woppcbe
twag done bp the epee badbde


a>


‘|


fenea bilion When thep were pat p fpafte and

the feconde watrh, thep came bnto p pron gate,

that leadeth vnrotbe cptie,* whpche opened to zts pa
them bp the owne accozde . And thep went out, anv.roe
and patted thozotve one rete and fozthwpth,

the angell departed from bpm,

And when Peter was come to bym felfe, be
fapd:now Finotbe of a {uertpe, thatthe Lod 5
hath fent bys angell, batbedelpuercd me ont ;
of the bade of Herode,¢ from all the waptpnge
£02 sp the people of the Jewes. J > Andas €
be conlpozed the tbynge became to the boufe of
Warp the mother of one Jobir, whofe fpaname
was Hatke, where manp were gathered to-
geather * in praper . As Brtir knocked at the xactes.ti
entrpe Doze, adamfell came forthe to berken,
named Rhoda. And ban the knewe Peters
wopce the opened tot the entrp fo: gladneg, but
ran inmand tolde bow peter tode before the en -
trp. And thep fapd bnto her: thou arte madde:

Wut the affpzmed pit was euenfo. Cben {ayde
thep :tt is bps aungell. Wut Peter continued
Bnockpug: and when thep bad opened the doze,

: and


BAIL UY AUP UE Qs


De delcended from Fetoep to Cefarea, and there
| abode erone was vilpleated wpb them of
mo. TChprcand Sidon, ut they came all toith one


i {ann fet pim in bis feate,g made an opacpon
pnto thé. And the people gauea (howte,fapeg:
ee itis p bop


|

|

fei, pename was Darie.

4 € Paull and Barnabas are called to preasbe among? (he
- ‘Heather, of Sergius Paulus € Pipmas the forceret Paule

| g preacheth at Antioch


“HE

i s Dere toerein thecongregacpon that sat
KIRN anciocbe, certapne prophetes, aud tea=
- hese hers: ag Barnabas and Symon that
Wwascalled Riger, and Lucius of Cprene,and
Manahen . Herode the Cetrarkes noz{telotwe,
and Saull.As thep mintitecd to the Lozdeand
fated the bolp goot fapd:feparate me Warna-
bag and Saul,toz thetwozke wherunto Fhaue
 calledthé. And wht papar oi fg prayed,
au.rrbti.o. and*lapoe thepzbandes,on thent,thep let ther
actes.bi b eo, AND thep after thep toerefente foztbe of the
izimno.io holp qoot, Departed Dnto Helcucia, and from
anv... thence thep fapledtodpp2us . Anditoben they
Tidd ove at spalamine they fhetoed the woozde of
Godinthelpnagoges of the Fetes. And thep

vactsitohadxgopntotbepemintiier.
Æ wWibentbey adde gone thozowethe ple buto
Paphos.thep founde a certatnfozcerce, ( afalg
propbete a Jewe ) whofename wag Wartelu,
whpche was wrth the ruler of the countrie one
Hrerqius Paulus a prudent man: Che ame
euler called Duto bpm Warnabas and Saul
and defpacd to beare the wozde of God, Wut
Ero bita Elimag-xthe Cozcerer fo? fois bps name bp in-
Oae a terpzetacpon)wpthtode them, and toughte to
turne the ruler awap frö tbe fapth. Then Saul
tobycbe (alfo ig called Paul) bepngefull of the
| bolp goot, {et bysepesonbym ,andfapde : D
| ful of all fubteltp OnO DEFER D ee cbplò
| of thedeuell, thoucnemp of all rpgbteoutnette:
| _ poplt thou not ceafe to perucete the frapgbte
| wapeg of the Rozder


_-medtatlp pangel of p 2020 fmote bim,becaufe tbe peop
E the landeof Eqppte, and topth anbpe arme ero.riitt.e


i: Sitesi a fatplled thep2 opce, tobe with them.x John
whole fp, |


ov Mie ht Vibe


Arid now beholde, the bande of che Lorde is Dp:
pontheandthou thalt be blpnde , and not fe the
unnefo2a fealon.Andtinmediatipe , therefcll
onbpma mpite anda barkenes , and be wente
aboute, fckpnge them that uldeleade bpm bp
the bande . Chen the ruler when he latwe what
bad vata A tlie ct inhi the doc-
Te ation pani sik | anb
ben Paul Departed from Paphos, th
that were wpth bpm, came to Perga in hes |
pbilfa:and * Fbon departed fromtpem. andres Ates-rb.g
turned to Jerufalem . Wut thep wanded tho- |
rowetde countrpes, and camefrom Perga to
Anttoche in PiliBia,and went into the fpnaqo:-
geontbe Sabbothdape and fatedowne. And
after tbe lecture ofthe latweand the ppopbetes
the rulers of thefpnagoge lente vnto them, fap-
inge:pemen and mp ee pe baune enp ferma.
to erbozte tbe people, tape on. | :
Chen Paule ode Yp and beckened With Actes.rt.e
the band fo? fplence. and fapde: en of Flraclt
and pe thatfeare God, geucaudience. Cheqod
ofthps people chofe oure fathers, anderalted
when thep ùtbelt as (Traungers in


Joh- dtid


bzougbte bethem out ofit, and about the tpme

of fourtpe peares,fufred be their maners in the
opldernes. And he defkroped feučnacpongin p

lande of Canaan,* and Deupded thepzlande to Zore.rits
them bp lot. And afterward,* be gaue vntothë 3
iudges aboute the (pace of foure Hhundzed and

“fpftpe peares, vnto the tpme of Samuell the
prophete. And aftertoard,thep*delpred a kung iiei. a
and God gaue bnto them * Saulethefonne oF tiregas
Cis,a men of the tepbe of Wen Jamin bp tie

{pace of Fourtpe peares, And whan de thas put

powne, be fet bp mauid to be thep2 bpnge, of

Dobont he reported fapinge:* A banc founde Da trse.rvi.a
uid the lonne of Jelle, amanafter mpne otne PEFFE?
Hert, twobpch Mall fulfplallmp wpl-

* Dfthps mannes feedebathe God (accoz= PAra e
dpngeagbebad apee poy kan a fozthbto Ji *
raela fauiour:one Fetus, when Jhon had fpei
preached before bys commpnge* the baptpme ryark.t.a
of repentaunce to Siracll. And when pon had Lab-tc
fulfplled bps courte, he fapb:* whome pe thput REDE
that Jam,the fame am 3 not.2Sut behold,ther ****
commeth one after me, whofe thoes of bpstete
Jamnotiwo:thp to loole.

rie Pe menand beethzert, chpldzen of the qe-
neracpon of Abzabam,and tobhoforuce amonge
pou feareth GoD, * to pou isthps worde of fal- Patra
uacpon fente. Eo? the inbabiters of Jerufalem
and thep2 culers,becaule*thep Enei bpm tof, tLotib
noz pet the vopces oF the prophetes whpcbhe are
reddecucrp Sabbothdape, thep bane fulfplled
openi t EE bpm:x And whenthep S ur
found no caule otdeathinbim, pet defp2ed thep Pok pane
pra tobplibpm.Andwhanthephadfulfpl |
ledall that were tozitten of bim,thep tobe bum
powne frå the tree, and purhymina fepulcdze,

Gut Sodrapled hin againe from death,-~w(ebe as

ebede vap ) AND * he tons Cenemanp Dapes of them * Fob-tr.t

wig het pp wrth bpm from Galileto Fe anoe

rulalem: whpcbhe * are bps toptnelics ynte ay Fopnsv.d
people


t


_ = =


See a a i


gisele, RANNIE  -


And wedeclare onto pow bow that the pzo-
inele wbich wag made wnto the fathers) God
bathe fulfplled vito thep2 chpldzen (euen vinta

ps.) inebathe arpfed vp Aelusagapne, jareu

Brali a agit is wepeten inthe feconde plalme: * Thou

erie) aremp fonne,this dape paue J begottenthe. As

concernpnge that bearpled bim wp from death,

ss MoD Nomoze to returte to corrupeps befapd on

x £talv.b thps wple: * Che bolp p omples made to Da-

| upd, wyillF qeuefaptbtullp to pou. Wberfore

irartdid hefapeth alto in another place. x Chou thalte

Ucc6.10 noe (yffer thpne holp to fe coxrupcpon. Fo Da:

nid (affer be badinebps tyme fultylled the wpl

tiit.re,tt.b OF God) *F fellon flepe,and was lapde vuto bps

fatbérg; and fawe coprupepon , But be whome
Godrapledagapnelawe nycozrupcpon. |

i We it kbnowen Ynto pou therfore pe men and

Ln.rrli.5 Heetheen)ebat *thozotbe thys mants preached

pRtopou p forgiucnes of finneg, ¢ that bp bim,


all that beleue , aretuftifped fromall thynges


frome wbhpcb poucouldenot be tuftifped bp the
N  laweof Soles. Beware therfoze,lctt that fail
abacue.t.4 on pou, which is Cpoken of in p pzophctes:* 25e
bolde, pedelpplers., € wonder , and perpe pe:
foz Fdoa toozbe in ponure Dapes,Wbpcd pe Mall

fot belene, thought a-man Declate it pou.
Wihenthe Jewes were gone oute of the con-


treqacpots; the Gentyls befought thep wold


preache the wozdethe nerte Saboth, when the


- congregacpon was broken bp, manp of the P


| FJewes and vertuons p2olelitcs folotwed Paule
actes rid and Warnabas, woppebe [pake to them : € * ex=
Hosted them to continue im the grace of God,
 pRAnd p nert Saboth dape came almo the
whole citpe together.to beare p wozde of God.
Wut whe the Jeweslawe the people,thep were
full of indiqnacpon and {pake agapnite thofe
thinges, twbpeh were fpoben af panic (prbyns
arapntttt,and raplinge ontt:@hen Paule and
wWarnabas wered bolde and lapde-it was mete
gaty.. b x ehat the tozde of Gon thulde fpzite paue bene
preached to pou. Wut lepng ye put tt from pou,
and thpnke peure felues pnwozthp of cucrla-
ftpnge Ipfe:to, we turne to the Gentpls: Eo? lo
sefat.cvit.b pathethe Lorde chmaunded Vs. * J baue made
Luke;  ghealpgbtot the Gentvls, that. thou be the fal-

nacpon vito theende of the wozlde.
i pan the Gêtple herde this thep were glad

anda

leued, cue as manp ag Were o2depned Vuto eter:
nall lpfe . And the worde of the Lozde was pus
biplthed thogowe out allthe reqton : Wut the
Fewes moued thedeuoute anddoncf wemen,


ana the chefemen oftbecptie:andreafed peries -


eucpon agapnite Paul and Barnabas, aud er-
xenat.r.b. pelled them out of thepe coottes : * Wut thep
Gen boke of the butte of thep2 fete agapnife them,
anpa andcam Onto Aconium. And the oilciples wcre

Fplled Mithiope and withthebolpgeott. J


© The.ritit. Chapter:
d Baule and Barnabas preache at Feomtum , fome beleue,
{ome tere bp fediepon , At pitra thep wolbedo facrifice to
Barnabec and Paule,whpcbercfule it and erhozte the peo;
leto wozhpppethe true God. Paules Moned after that
cotumieth beto Drtba, Litra, Fcontum, snd to Antioche,


‘pad walked. Che fame


o2pfped the worde of the Lorde, and bes -


fey Lea Adit fortunedin Feontii chat thep ;
Mae ty as wet bothtogetber TRE ATALA i
eana riof the Jewes ,andfolpakic, thata
abe a Sigreate multitude botbhe of the Fe-
ees Ni toes and allo of the Grekes bele-
ued. Wut the onbelening Fetves, erpa vp,and
wuqupeted the mpnodes of the gentplsagapnt
the bzetbeen: Longe time abode thep there, and
dupt them felueg boldelp topth the belpe of the
Lode, whpch gane teftimonpe bnto the horde
of bps grace, and * qraunted {panes and won- mat. pbt,
des to be Done bp thep2 Dandes Wut the multi-
tude of the citic twas Deutded:and parte heldew
the Jetoes,and parte prhtdeApoltles..
When there teas an alaute made bothe of 25


. thegentpls gallo of the Fetwes wpth thepzru-.


lers todo them violence,and to fone them thep-

were toare Of it,and« fled Dnto Litia and Dee pgarra
ba, cptpesof Lpcaonta,and yntothereqpon .
Ipeth rounde about and there preached the gol

pel | on (and all the multitude was moucd atthep: boctrene,

a certen mavat Litra weake tn bis fete bepng


| ne hearde Paule preache,
sabyebebebolbpuc Hpnt.and yetceaupaie that


«a crepel from bps mothers wombe, andneuctxgcttita: >. |


be haddefapth to betsoole,fapthe with aloude


popee tande vpepabt on thp fete:Andherltert erarrrep `


pand walked. And whe the people fat what mat.rv,o
aule e o babii? i$
cngeinthe {peacbe of Lpcaonia : + Goddes are

come Doone to DS inthe lykenes of men. And ee
thep called Barnabas Jupiter and Paul Mer
curing becaute be toas the preacher. Then Jus --
piters prell,p Divelt beforethep2 cptic,bzougbt `
oxen and garlandes vnto the pozebe, a nd wold
Daue Done faceptpte wpth the people. ’

- WA bpche when the Apowles.Warnabag and C
Paule berde of, theprente thep2 clotheg and ra —
inamonge the people,crpenge andtaping, fp2s
whp Dope thys: * Weare moztall men gat ÜN Actes.r.b
topon and pzcach bnto pou, that pe Mall turne 370- rir-
from thele vanpties vito the Ipupnge God, ae
typpiche made beauenandcarth andthelecand senet.c
all thinges tha ace therin: the bpch tn tpmeg pa.crivt.s
palt {uftred alnacpons to tvalke in thepe otone sre
Mapes.* Meucrtheletle,be lefte not him felfe wW xrom.4.6
oute toptnes,in that betbetocd bps benefptes `
from beauen, in geupnge bsrapne and fruteful
feafons fpllpnge dute bertes pth foode and
gladnes. Ad withthelefatenges,tcracerefrap `
ned thep the people,that thep bad not done facri
fyce puto them. |

 “Ebpther came certapne Fetes from An- wp
tioch ¢ Jcontum:wbpcb (whan thep had obtap
ned the peoples content xand bad foned Baul) iore
Dewe hpi out ofthe cytpe, fuppolpnaebebad
bene dead, Howdeit as the dilcpples ode roid
aboute pim, be arole Dp, and came into the citie
And the nert dap be vibes ta wptb Warnabag
to Derba. And whan thep bad preached to that
citie g bad taught manp, thep retutned agapne
to Lpftra, andto Jcontum and Antioche, and
ftrengthed the dplcpples foules agapne, and
xerboztedthem to continue inthe faptpeaffir- Sctes.r tt

mpnge


e vp tbhep2 bopces ap lutei |


BILLY ANU


ti miite mpnee that we multe * thozorw moche trtbula-
cpon entre into the KPngdome of God . And
whan thep bad ozdepned them elders bp electpo
ineuerp conqregacpon,and bad prayed and fa-
ited, thep comendzd them to p Lozde on whom
thep belened. And an thep hadde gone tHo-


rowe out Philida, thep came to Pamphilia, g-


— whan ther hadde preached the wode in Perga
thep delcededintothecitie Attalia, and thence
departed bp Hypype to Anttoche From whence
thep Mere comnutted Yntotbhe grace of Godto
the toozcke wbpche they tulfplled. When they
were come, and bad gathered the congreqactott
together, thep reberfedall that God bad done
bp them andbowe be badde opened the doze of
fapth onto tbe Gentypls. Andehere thep abone
longe tyme with thedrictples.

. C€Tbe.rv.Chapter,

a Clarfaunce aboute tpzcumcplpen, Zhe Apolles paci:

tpe Abby ee Sat at Jerufalem, Paul and Barrabas pieath

a pare, Pd certapn men bpch came Dowie

orate from tewepe, thaughte the brethren

*Galabs Mea Wix ercepte pebecircumcpied after the

SoS) maner of Poleg pe can not be auct

& 0 when there was rpfenbdifcencpon and dl-

Btn dete Ipttell buf Baule and arna-

agagapuitt them,thep determpned that paul


gala ita, AND x Warnabag, and certapne other of them


fhulde go vpto Jerufalem nto the Apofkles
andelders about this quefkpon.aAndafterthep
were brought onthep2 wap bp thecongregact-
on, thep paled ouer Whenpcesand Samaria,
peclarpnge the conuerfpon of the Gentpls, and
they brought greate tope nto all the byethen.
And when thep toerecome to Ferulalerr, thep
were receaucd of the congreqacpon and of the
Apoltles € elders . And thep declarcd all tbpn=
__ gesthat Godhad Done dye . Then role vp
28 certapne ofthe fecteof the Pharpieg, whpche
dpdbeleuefapenge that ts was nedefull to cir
cumepfe them and to commaunde them to Bepe
thelawe of Soles. And f Apottlesand elders
came togethcr.to reafon of thps matter:
And when there was mochedtputpnge, Peter
role bp,andfapde bunto them: Lemen andbze -
thzen, Dc note Dow thata good whple a goo,
od dpoholcamige vs, pthe peel gM
- moutbe thulde beare the worde of the Golpell,
eactes.(.b and beleue. And God wbich knoweth the hers
i pa Spui tes bare them wptnefle, and gave wnto them
the bolp qooft,euenas be bpd bnto vg and put
no Difference betwene Ys andthem fepngethat
sob-riti.b yopth Fapth be * purtfpedtbhepz bertes. Rowe
anoda therfore, twbp tempte pe Sond, to put on tbe dii-
tact.dit.s ciplegneckes the poke * whpcbe nether oure fa-


thers noz te there able to beare ? Wut twe bele-


ne, that tbozotwe the grace of the 102De Jern
Cheplte , we (halbelaued, as thep do. Then all
the multitude was peated andgaucaudtenceto
Barnabas and Paul, vobpcbhe tolde what lig-
neg and wondes God hadiheoedamonge the
Gentplsbpthem —— —

C Andwhen they beldethepy2 peace, James an=
wered, fapinge:<Hen and betzen, derken Dr-
tome. Simcon tolde, powe God at p begpning


t


O AVDA Wo


dpd bifpt the actples, to reccane ofthe a people

inbps name, nd to this agree the Mo2des of p
propbhetes.as it ig Waptten:+ After thys J top! amos.tr.p
retutne, and wpll buplde agapne the taberna-

cle of Dauid, whpche is fallen Downe and that

twbpch is fallen tn Decape of it, wpll J bupldea-

gapne, and J wll fet tt vp, that the refpdue of

men mpgbhte (eke atter the Lozde and alto the
Gentples bp whom mp nameis named, fapth

the Lorde, whpch doth al thelcthpnges: knowe

tntto Godareall bys workesfrom the begpn=.

npnge ofthe toozlde. Ciberfore mp [entenceis

that toc troublenot them:ibpcbefrom among

the Gentples, are turned to God: but that we

wepte onto them, that thep abfapne them fel-

ues * fromfpltppnes of pmages, and from fo2- wero. rrp
nicacpon,and from fraungled.andzfrb bloude tSen,ir. s
Joz Soles of olde tpme hathineuccp cptp the Ais
that pacache bpm, tn the fpnagogeg when bets D,

red euerp Sabboth dape. >

‘Then pleated it the Apoftles and elderg with i
the whole congregacion, to fende chofenmen of
thep2 ownecompanpe to Anttoche wpth Paul
and Barnabas. Thep lent* Judas( whole fpr- Norita
naime was Barlabas and plas, which were
chefe menamonge the bethzen,and gaue then
letters in thep2 bandes after thps maner.

Che Apoftles,and elders and bzethzen fende
gretinges onto the beethzen whpebe are of the
Gentplesin Anttoche,ypzia and Cilicia. for
ag moche as we paue beard, p certapne whpcbe Æ
departed from Wg baue troubled pou with woz
des,and combed pour mindeg, faping: Pe mut
be circumcifed, and kepe the latwe,to whom we
aueno {uche commaundement: Jt femed ther
02e to Ysa Tovdthinge. when we were cometo
gether wpth one accozde, tofende chefen men
Vito pou , pth oure beloutd Warnabas and
Paule, men that pauc icoparded their liues fog
thename of our Lorde Jerus Chap. Wie hane
fent therfoze Judas and plas, which thall al
fo tell pou the famethpnaes bp moutic. forit
femed goodto the bolp qoot to vs, to charge
pou with nemoze. ene neceflarpe thinges
thatis tolape tbat peabitapne from thpnged
offered to pmages and from bloude, and from
firagled,¢ fro fogntcacid. Erö Mohpch pf pekepe
pour (clues, pe pall Do well.4pofeare pe wel.

ee thep therfoze were departed, they ft
came to Anttoche and gathered the multitude ~
together, aud deliuercd the eppitle. Which the
thy babdde red, thep retopied of the confolacpon.
And Judas and re bepnge zophetes,er=
Doztcd the beethzé w much preaching,and Kreg
thed them. Jnd after thep Dadde tarped there a
{pace , thep were let goin peace of the beethzen
wnito the Apofles. Motwptandpnaeit plea-
fed Splas toabpode there pleat hae e itn a4
aloneto Jerufalem) Paul and Warnabagcotinuch -~
in Antioche, teachpnge and preachpng p word
of the Lod With other manp.

Wut after a certapnelpace, Baule fapte tit es
to Barna bas:let Ys Go agapue,and write our
bcthzen in cuerp cptpe where we Daucthetbed
the foozde of the 1 ozde, and febotve thep i


Ciye ates


And Barnabás caue countell to take wyth
ss them FJobn wholelpename was Aarcke. And
‘cte-rittc. Baule wolde not take ppm wuto thepz com-
panpe * whycbedepartesfrom themat Pam-
philia, and went not with them tothe toozcke.
And the contencpon was fo tharp betwene tht,
that thep Departed afundet one from the other
and fo Warnabas toke Marcke, €fapled vnto
Cppers.And Paul chofe Silas; and departed
bepnge committed of p beethzen ynto the grace
of God. And pe went thorow Ciria and Cilicta
c fablpthpna the congregacpons:-x( commaunspng

to Eepe the preceptes of the Apotties andeloers.) —

Stef CTpe.cvi.Chapter.

C Timothy is circumcpled, Paul preacheth at Whmippos,
and there is he put ttrprecom. ~ k - i
Fwy Hert came be to Derba andto Liffra
Wai And beholde, acevtapndilepple bas


eka
A ea there named Cimotheus a womang
2 Si elfonne which was a Fetoclle and beler-
but bys father wasa Greke. DF ibhome
reported tocll fhe beethzenthat wereat Lpitra

and Font. Hpm olde Paul that be hulde

go fozth wptbhynt,andtoke and circumcpfed

bpm, becanfe of the Fe wes hich were in thole
quarters: foz thep knetheall, that bps father:

wasa Grele. AS thep went thorowe the cittes

thep Delpuered them p decrees foz tobepe, that
detes.ro.c Were x Odepned of the Apoftles and elders,
whycbe were at Ferulalé. X ndfo were the cone
geegacpons ftablptibed in the fapth , and en-

created tinnombze Daply. Boeg

25 -bithep hit gone thozow out Phrigia:and
momat.c the region of Galacia, áno * tere forzbpdden
ofthe Holp goof to preache the worde in Alia,

thep came to plpa, andfoughte to goo into

- BSethinta. Wut che lpgpte luffred them not:but

todan thep had gone thorow Wifpa,thep came

act tbiii,e DOUNE tO ¥ Troada. Anda vilion appeared to
pauicinthenpadt. Cher fovea man of a=

cedonta and prayed bpm , fapenge: come into

C Macedonta,and belpe vo. After be had fene the

` pifion,imimedtatlp toe prepared to qo tuto Ga
cedonia , bepnge certifped that the Lordebadde

called ns.fo2 to pzsache the Goipell ontatbem.
Wibhan we lowled forthe then from Troada,

Wwe came witha traite courfeto Samothzacia

æ the nextedapto Aeapolin,and from thence to
Philippos wp)pche ts j) chefe cptie in the partes

of Pacedonta,andafre cptie. le were intbat

citie abpdpng certapuedapes. Andonthe Sa-
bothdapes toe went oute of the cptie befpoes a

rpuer, where men Were Wopnt to prape. And te

fate Downe, aud To o the wemen twhiche
refozrenthpther. Andacertapn oma ( named

Lidia) a feller of purple, of the cyptpe of Chpa-

tria, wbpch wo2thppped God, gaue bs audiece.

Chole bert the Lode opened, that the attéded

nto tbe topas, Wwhpcbe Paul (pake.ciben

the was bapiiled,€ ber houtholde, the befougbt

zp vefapinge: Pipe thpncke that F belenc onthe
Love come into mp boufe, and abpde there.

mene.rirg AMO the * conitrapned bs . Andit fortuned as
vk ruye We Went to praper.a cettapne dDamfell pofletled
tc aegum Vityka fprete that prophetped, met vs, wbiche
iroig.a  bzougbt Der mater, Ematters moche vatttage


=


=


. bad dene Acd, But Paul cried with aloud voice


wpth Propheipinge. Che famefolotoed Hantle
and bs and crped, fapenge: * thelemenare the syarke.b.c.
feruauntesot the moolte bpe God, wbpch thew
vnto bs the ape of faluacpon. Andthpsopd
fhe manpdapes , Wut Paule not contét,turned.,
abdute , andfapd tothe (pete. 3J cOmaunde the
¥in'pnatne of Jefu Chaitl,that thou come oute esat.rbi.o
of Der-And he came out the fame boure. |
And whether matter and mattres fawe that
¥p hope of thew qapnes was gone, thep caught +444. e
Paule and plag,and deetoe the into themar=
ket place onto the rulers and brought themto:
the offpcersfapenge. Chelemen trouble oure € |
cptiefepnge thep are Jetwes and preache ozdina :
unces wobpcbare not latefull for vs toreceaue,
nepther to obfecue, fepnge toe are Romapnes.
And the people ranneagapntt themand the of-
Fycersrentetbep2 clothes, andcommañdedthë - .
tox be beaten withroddes. And when thep had ii corrie
beaten thetn Coze,thepcatt théintopzpion,com
emaundpnge the iapler of the peefonto kepetbé
bDiligentlp:Wibpehe when be dadreceaued fuch
maundemtnt thut them into thetnner pre-
fon, and made thepzfcte fat inthe ttockes. fe
Atmponpgbe Paule and Splas praped.and E
lauded God. And the vzefonersheardetpem.
And fodenlp ther was aqreateea See te ke, fo
that the foundacio of the prefon was thaken,€
ximmediatlpal the does opench Ecuerp MANS getes b.b
bandes were looted. When the keper ofthe pees anv.rii,b `
fontaked out of bps Repe and fatve the pzefon
Does Ope, bedreiwe out bys {werd tivold paue
kplled bim felfe fuppofpnge thatthe prefoners


fapttigabo thp felfe no barme,fo2 we are al bere
Then he called foz alyabt.¢ foeang in.and cam
tremblpng vunto Paule, ¢ fellDotwne at the fete è
of Paul, and Splas e bzonugbt thé out, a fapde
Sp7zs* what mute J do to beland Ande
fapd:*beleue onthe 102d Fetus and thou Malt
be faued thp Doulbold, Andtbhep preached on
to fae the wozdoftbe Lozde, ¢to.al that toere
in bpg boufe. And be tokethem thefLamehoure
of the npgbte , and walihed thep2 wondes,
andwas bapepled and altbep of bys bouthold
pag ha nen And when be bad bzonghte thé
into bps boule, beiet meate before them, and
pie be l bewptpallhpsboutholde, beleued 5-1 g
te nit was dape,the officers lent the 6

míiniters lapenge:let thofemen So he kete si,"
of the pzefon toldcthps fapinge ro Paule, the wee
offprers baue fent ode toloolepou . Mowe ne
therefoze, get poubence and goin peace. Chen
fapd Paule vuto them: thep Haue beaten vs o-
penlpe Dncondemned, Foz all that Loe are Ro-
maphes and Danie call HS into prcfon.andnow
wolde thep fende vs atvap prenelp? Pape vere
Ip, but let them come them felues.e fet ve oute
When the mpnpkerg tolde thelr trodes tnta
the offpeers, thep feared when tiep verde, chat
thep were Romatnes*they cam and befougne gya¢.oitio
them:and b2oughfe them cute, anddcfpaed thé
todepatte onfe of the cptpe. 3
And thep went out of the pecfon,and entred in-

to


*ToORA La =
getes.ii E
Andira

toh. bid


G


| ae


Tbe. rhii Chapter: fapenge:mape Wwenot knowe what n |


l Thefaloiticä; where the Fetes Cet th too r wold |
€ ian cömetb tombe pia aeee ein] nae geit ftra on tpbpnaes to our eares. We olde
be preacheth the true and bnknowen Hoo, snow th


. EV paule (asbpsmane: was) wente thyngeg pearefuperitpepoug: Joras 3 palico


panped topth Pauleand Splas,æ of thedeudte FDWwelleth not in temples made with handes, ne Apo rna. b


ther ig wozlbppped wpth menneg bandeg, ag tarte. biie
we. | __ tbough beneded of any thpng,fepng be bimfelfe fire. bi0 1c
.« © ntthe Jetoes whch beleucd not, badin- *qeuethlpfe and bzethe toatl men enerp where ipata.v.e


j des of the cpticcrpenge : t ects trouble the Por te bern toe Pas. Mie Dae EEP


ty


= ges. And whé thep were fu core cponof man.


d |
Dohen'tbep were come thptbher, thepentred mto inthe pte back Ptoctaeen hee te ie |


-= Zobu.e.s ann fearched*p tert) tutesDaplyswbetherthbole  Wibenthep bearde of the refurreccpon from


cached of Waulat Werrea-thepcameemodued Dyponyplpusalenatoure, anda woman named
tne were aif then immebiatip |
en fent away Tpmotheus abodethere Epil € The.xviti. Chapter.


1g @ teceauled a comaundement Hutoa plas Taute preacheth at cozinthum wth nupnethere a prate
and Eimotbeus fot come tobpı mart -Hraveaand AONDE DE Spokes Bulla and wztata,
came thep2 Wap.Ciipple pant Waprco ro? tp | | : ears
at athe, sfpretewasmouedinbpm,whthe maer Ter this, aul departedteo Athens A
fawe the cptie qeuéto toozthippingofpmages. MAT jü, foundè a cet PANA
P Then dylputed he inthefpnagogewpththe Je- HEPA 4) tavne Jewe namedx Aquila, bogne in etait
S wes and wpth the denout perfonnes:andinthe ERSS potpus,latelpcomefro Ftalte,wpth "7"


|
|
|
AM andcametoCozinthi,efoundeacees |
|
|
|
|
l


The Actes


And he preached in the fpnagoge euety Saboth
of Dapow(fettpnge forth in Che meane whpte the name of the lozd
ezesusand exbozted the Fetoes andthe gentples.
acterbii.n  Gibenxplas and Timotheug were come

from Wacedonia, Paule was confrapned bp p
{prete.to tetpfpe tothe Jewes that Jefus was
very Chal. And whe they fapde contrarpeand
mrd blatphemed*he thobebysrapmentandfapd vn
Gcte ziti, g LOCHem:poure bloude be bpon poure otone Hea-
des:from hence forth wyl 4 goblamelefle vnto
the gentyles. And he departed thence,and entred
intoa cectapne mannes Doule, named Jultus,a
rear tg St ie of God, whofe houfe topne) barde
tothe fastens Howeveit,one Crilpus f chefe
Fov-iis rylerof the fpnagogexbeleucd onthe Lozd with
all bys boutbolde,andmanpe of the Cozpnthp-
ang whan thep gaucaudience beleucd,and were


baptpfed.
5 E benfpakethe Lozdeto Paul inthe npabe
Sctés.rbib x hy a pplpon: be not afrapde,but Cpeake, and
bolde not thp peace:fo2 Jam topth the, and no
matt (hall tnuade the:that thal burte the. Fo F
pane muche people tn this cptie. And he cotinued
there a peate andfpre monetbeg and taught thé
the wo2de of God.

Wibeu Gallio wag ruler of the countre of
Acata,the Jeteg made tnlurrecepon wpth one
accozdeagapntl Paule,and bzought ppm tothe
iudgentente feate,fapenge: thps felotee counce-
lethbmen to wobpp Godcontrarp tothelatoe.
And when Paulenotoc was aboute to opendis
mouth, Gallio fapde vntothe Jewes, pe it were
amiatter of wonge, oganeupll dede (D pe Fez
ines realon wolde that ¥ thuldebeare pou , but
pt it bea queftpon of wozdes oz of names, 02 of

ourlawe,loke pe toit pour felues. Eog J wpl
je no tadge of fuche matters, andbe Dpaue theni


From the feate. Chenall the Grekestoke S0- .


ftencs the chefe ruler of tbe g fe, [mote
bpm befoze the iudges feate. And Gallio cared

foznoneofthofe thpnges. :
Pauleafterthps, tarpedthere pet a good
iobple,and then tobe bps leaue of the beethzen g
fapled thence into Cpzia, Papfeplla and Aquil-
pume tid la accompanpnge bpm. And *pe thoze bps bead
in Cench2ca,foz be hada bowe: And became to
€Cphelus and lett them there, but he bpm felfeen
tredinto the Spnagoge,and reafoncd with the
Jewes.Ciben thep delpred bpm to tarp longer
tyme with them,be contented not,but bande thé
fave well, fapenge: J mufte nedes(at thpsfeatte
that commeth)be tn Jerufalem : but J wpll te=
Peet ut ¢ UCNE Agape BLO pouxpf God tpl. And he de
" partedfrom Ephetug: and whan be was come
nto Cefarea, and alcended bp and faluted the
congteqacton, De departed bnto Antioche: and
tohen be bad tarped there a topple,bedeparted:¢
twent oner all the countre of Galaciat Dhepata

bp opder, frengtbpnge al the dpfepples.

(.tot1.b) And a certapne Jewe named * Apollos,
tiari hore at Alerandzta,cameto Ephefus,an elos
M tanap mpabtp in thelcrpptures. The
ame wasg infozmed in the wapeofthe Lorde, g
fpake feruentlpe in the {pzete,and taught dplp-
gently the thpnges oF the Lozde and kuewe but


€


the baptpme of Jhon onelp. X nd fhe fame begå
to {peake boldelp inthe Sinagoge. Ubi when
aplcplla and Aquilla hadde bearde, thep toie
pin vnto them, andDerpounded bntobpm the
wape of God moze perfectly. And when he wag
pplpoledtogointo Acata , the bzethzen wrote,
exboztpnge p dpicpples toreceaue bpm. abtch
when be was come helped them muche wbhpche
bad belened thozorw grace. soz be ouercame the
Fetes mpghtel cia ate ,fewpngebp
the {crpptures,that Jetus was Cizí


C The. rir. Chapter, i


@ ofthe twetwe méthat were baptpled at ephefus
and what mpzacies were Done bp Paul. Demetrius
moueth febicpon in the cptte,


hat acia C foztunedthat whple Apollo thas B
ed As. at Conpntpi, Paule pafled thozowe
Y Feithe vppercoattesg and came to phe
NS fug andfounde certapne dpicpples,
= and faphe wiito them: bane pe receas
ued the bolpe qoolte,fencepe belened: Andtbhep
{apd Dnte bpm:no. the bauenot bearde wpetder
there be anp bolp qoolt oz no. And belayd bnte
them, wberewpt) were pethbenbaptpled: And
thep fapde: pth Fhons baptpme. Chen fapde
aule: * Jhon verelpe baprpfed wpeb the bap= egath. ti.


tyme ofrepentaunce,fapenge nto the people p Sati" °


thep thulde belene on bpm, tobpche Hulde come 3jopn.t.o
after bpm: that ts on Chzifte Jelus.eiben thep 25
be-dtbps.thep there baptpled tn the name of the |
Lozde Jelu. And when Paule + laphebpshan= fete. wee
des Dpon them, xtbhe bolpe qooffe came onthem iD


DEM sau.rrbii
andthep*(pate topth tonges, and pzophefped, tintib,


and all tbe men tere about tweltuc. if. 2tm.1.b.

And be wentetnto the Spnagoge,and beha- *acte. tt 2
ued bpm felfe boldelpe fo? the fpace of thzemo= faon tis
nethes, bp{putpnge and geupnge them erboz= actes.iia
tacpons of the Bpngdomeof God. & Wiban
Dpuers wered barde berted and belened not,
butfpake euell ofthe tape of the 1 DR DE
(and that beloze the multptude ) be Departed
from and feparated the dpictpples.Andbe
dplputeddaplpeinthefcole of one called Tp-
rannus. And thps contpnued bp the {pace of
two peares :fo tbat all thep tobpche dwelte in
Afia,bearde the wozde of the Lozde Felu,bothe C
Fees ano G pana ®od* thou
allmpzacles'
bps bodpe, Were bzoughte onto the fpcke, nap-

p.s and partelettes,and the upfeates depar-
ee cucli{peetes wente out pyat.roin
OL tpem.

Then certapne ofthe bagabounde Fewes
exozcpites, toke bppon them to caluouer them
fetes badde euell {pzetes ) the name of the
LORD E Jelus.fapenge : We adioure pou
bp * Jelu whome Paule preacheth. And there srat, ow ;
were feuen fonnes of one Sceuaa Febe, and
chefe of the oap Pd fo. Andtbeeuctl D
fpzete auntiwered and fapde : Jelug J knowe,
and Panle J knott : but who are per And
the man inwobome the enel (pzete as, ranne

on them,


HElvecp: Saroia
the bandeg of Baule: o tbat te3 een ae


|


* fh at.ia


Mlthe Apottles.


on them and overcame them, and preuapleda-
gapni them, fo that thep ited out of that oufe
naked and woided. And this was knowe to al
the Jewesand Srekes allo Mhtch dwelt at €-
phefus and feare came on them all, ¢ the name
of the Lozde Jefus has magnifpcd.,

And manp that beleucd,came,and*confef-
{cd and fhetoed thep2 wozckes . any of them
tobpcbhe vledcurpous craftes:brought thep2 bo
Kes, and burned them befoze allmen, andtbep
counted the payee of chem, and founde it fpftye
thoufande fplucclinges.o0 myghtelpe grewe
the wo2de of Dodandpzeuapled. Aftertyele
thin geg were ended, Paule purpolcd in p (pete
(Dba be dad paffed ouer<acedonia se Achaia)
to goto Jerufalem , fapinge: after J haur bene
ther J mult allo fe Rome. So fent be into Ma
cedonta tivo of them that mpniftred puto bpm
cuen Cimotheus and Eraus:but bè bim felfe
remapnedin Fiia fora feafon.


foz pe baue brought bytherthele men: whpche
arencther robbers of churches no? pet del pilerg
of pour goddelle.iberfo2e, pf Demetrius and
the craftes men wbpcbe are wpth bpm, baue a
matter agapnt anp man, the latoe is open, and
tberearerulerg, lette them accufe one another.
Wut pfpe goaboute anp otber thpnge,tt Halbe
determined ina lawful ae A So a -J€ 02 ine
arein teopardp tobe accufed of thyg dapes Ypa
roure,fozas moche asthercis no caule, wherbp
tve mape geura reckenpngeofthps concourte
ofpeople. And oben be padde thug fpoken , pe
let the congregacpon depatte. |
@'Cbe.rr. Chapter.


C Pavle gorth into ezacevonta Æ into Giece. At Troag he
rapfeth bpa bead bobp . At Ephelus oe calieth the elders oë
the congregacpon to Gether cümitteth the keppuge of Gods
Flocke bntothem, twarneth them of fals teachers, maketh bie
paper with (hem,and peparteth to thpppe.


TA wart Jeet that Prage wasceated, Paule 4


i. TChelametpmetverearofenolpteladooa: 17
| € bout that wap. sfo2 acertapnemannamed De:., TA
Lae metrius ,a fpluer fmpth( Dbpche made fpluer È
pneg, Eo} Diana) has not alptelbeneftciall E
bas wuto the craftes më. Wham be called together
| With the toozkcmen of lpke occupacid,and faid
Spg pe knot that bp thps crafts toe paue ad-
+Hcyoid Ualtage. Dorcoucr pelcandbeare pnot alone was aboutto faple into Spa, he purpoted te
| at Epbetus, but almoofte thozot oute al Alia, returne thozot )acedonta. Cher accopanicd —
thps PaulehatheperluadedandturncdDawape himinto A ta, Dopater of Werrea, of hella -
mochepeople,fapinge:that*thep benotgoddes lonia, Ariftarcus and SHecidugs and Gaius of
PILCE-® Sobpch ave made with bandes. Sotbatnotone Perba, and Timotheus : ¢ out of Alia Cichi- yz
: -Ipthps ouccrafte cometh into parel to be fetat cugand* Crophpmus.€ hele gopnge before ta anes..
| - nought: but allo tbat the temple of the greate rped vgat Troas. And we fa led atbape from 1i.xituin
i goddele Diana thuld be delpp fed, and perma-


1 gnifpcence Hulde be deftroped, whom all Alia
and the ozlde wozhpppeth.

_ Wibentbep bearde thele fapenges thep twere
$E aio anatoano cuyta out fapinge-Greateis
Diana of the Ephelians: And all the cptie was
‘ona toze ,andthep ruled into the comen ball
wyth oneaflent, and caught Gaws ¢ Aciftar=

cus men of Macedonia, Pauleg compantons.
When Paule old baue entred fh onto the peo
F ple,theditcpples ufred bim not. Wut certapne
| of the chefe of Alta( which were pis frendes fet
i tnto bpm  Delpepnge bpm, that be wolde not
) prealic to the come ball. Sometberfozecrped
onetbpag and fome anotber,and theconarega:
Tae cpon Was all out of qupete, andthe moze parte
or : Bnewe not wherfozethep were cometogether.
Homme of the companp aan ipe Aliri
der. the Jewesthzutpuge bpm fozwardes A-
._Fegander*beckened wpth the bande and wolde
RACE g pouegopn the peoplean anfwere . When thep
new that be was a Jewe, there arofe athoute
almofte foz the {pace of two boures, of al men,

crpenge:greate is Diana of the E phefiansg.,

— Tden the totone clarke bad cated the péo-
ple,befapde: pe men of Cphefus, what manig
| a U that sno weth not thattbhecptie of the Eppes

© fans iga worthy pper of theareat qoddelie mi
ana, ofthe pmage wobpcbe came from beauen.
soeinge then that io man faith here agant, pe
ought to be content ;andsodo nothpngetawly


vay JA od called the difcpples wnto bpm, and

A (i toke his leaue of them,anbddcparted
bt HSE fad (02 to Go into Hacedonta. And whe
~ =e De Dadde gone oner thole partyes,

nd Da dde geuen them a longe erboztacpon, be
came into Oacce andtbere abode. tii.monethes,
And toben the Jetwes lapd wapt for bpmaghe


>


Philippos after the dapes of {wet bzeade, and

caine onto them to Troas in fpue dapes, there

we H bole feuen eg ; boaii

_, wud vpon one of the Sabboth dapes, whan

the difciples caine pom De fo to bene bread

Paul preached ynto them(ready to departe or

the mozowe and contpnued the preachpng vn-

to miùnpabt. And there were inanplpabtesin

the cbaber , where toe were Gathered together,

and there fatein a wpndotwe acectapne ponge
man (named Cuticus ) bepng fallen into a depe

lepe. Andas Baule was pzcachpng betas the

moze ouercome wpth fepe and fell Downe from
the thp2de lofte,and was taken vp deabe. But
ipban Paule went dotene, befell ONnDpMxand i1, segues
embzaled bpm andfapde : make notbpnge ado, rot...
foz bys tpfe ig in bpm. o thé be wascome pp “freire
agapn,and had b2oke the breade and eaten, and dctes.t7.¢
talkicd a longe whple (even tpll the moznpnge) ane
at the laftebe departed. And they baoughte the
ponge ma alpuece werenotalpttel comforted.

-And we wente afore to hpppe, andlowler

bnto Affontbereto reccaue Paule. o: fo bat
be appopnted, wold bim felfegoa fote. tben
we Were come togetherat BHO we toke bim itt,
and came to Mitilénes; And we fapledehen ce,
€ came the nerte dap ouer agapnit Chios. And
thenert dap we arciued at Samog, tarpedat D
Trogplő, Thenerte dape we came to Wiletã:
fo? Paul had determinedtofaple ouerbp Epbe

sus, becaule be toolde not tpende f time tn Alia

— OG. Fog


)


d Peuls fernep by Grppe. OF Philip (he cuangelife, and ”
Agabus the Pzophcte, which warned Paul not fo goto Fe

culalem. Beremapacd Kedfakin bps purpole andis taken

iii the temple,


ffo2 be halted ( pfit were poffpble foz bpm ) to
Repeat Jerufalé the dape of Wenthecotte . And
fro Gileton befent melaungersto Ephelus,
e called the elders of the congregacpon. W btch
tohenthep were come to ppm, he fapt onto the.
eknowefrom p fp2ft dap that 3 cam into A=
la: after what maner J baue bene wpth pouat


all fatong,ferupng $Lozdwithalbumblenes [A7 AAN
of mpnde, ¢tithmanptearcsandtcmptactis KG ANGA


wbpche bappencd vntome bp the lapinges a |


apt of the Jeteg, becaule J wold kepe backe

notppnge that was profitable puto pou: but

to pete pou and teache pouopenlp,¢thozowe

out cuerpe boufe: ptneflpnge both to the Je-

zouk. pitte WES ANd alfoto the Grekeg, the* repentaunce,

that is totvarde God, andthe fapth whpche ts

towarde oure Lozde Jelug. And nowe beholde

3 go bounde in the {pete nto Jerufalem, not

bnowenge the tbpnges that pall come on me

actes.rrt a there, but tbat *the bolp qhooft toptneffeth in

_ euerpe cptie, fapinge : tbat bandes and trouble

E abpde me. Gut none of thele thynges moue me

Tim ttd xnepther ts mp lpfe deare ynto mp felfe,that J

mpabt fulfpll mp courle with iope, and themi-

_ nifftacponcx( of the word) wbich ¥ hauereceaucd

= of the Lozbde Jefu, to teftifye the Golpell of the

grace of God. And now behold, 3 am fure,that

bencefozth pe all(thozome whome J daue cone

peeachpn ge the Bengdome of God ) allie mp

JE face no moze. Wiberfo2re, Ftake poutorecozde

this dape that Jam pure frome the bloude of al

men . Fo: J bauelpared no laboure, but baue

fhetoed pou all the counfell of eh pod pac

therfoze punto pourefelues and fo all the flocke

amonge whom the bolp qhooft bath made pou

oucrfears, torule the cogregacpo of God which
Hehathe purchafed wy tD bpe bloude.

amiina . * fo? Jam lure of thps,that after mp depars

igati Epnge Hall greuoug Wolueg entre in amonge

sa pou not fparpng the locke. Wozeouer, of pour

Judie oxonefelucs thall men arple, {peaking peruerle

thpnges to Dpatoe difcpples after them. Ther-

fore atbake, and remember, that bythe {pace

of .1ti.peres: J ceafed not to warne everp one of

pounpgbtanddape bith teares. .

© Andnotve beethzen, FJ commende pouto God

and to the wozde of bis grace, whiche is able to

buplbefartber,andto qpue pou aninberitaunce

ecer among al tbë wbhpch are fanctifped* Jhane de-

aie econo mans {pluct,qolde,oz veture. Peepe

and.riib youre felues knoto p *thele bandes baue mini-

temui fred vuto mp necellptes, æ tothë p were wpth

fi.zheintd Me. g paue Mewed pou all thpnaes, bowe that

[o labourpnae pe oughte toreceane the weake,

andtoremember the wozdes of the Lord Jefu,


hots that be fapd:itig moze bleficd to geuetben


toreccaue.
And when be hadde thus {poken, he kneled
+detrrlb potonexand payed with tbemall.and they al
toepte loze and fell on Pare necke and hpiled
bpm fozotwopnge mootte of all iy the woes
iwhiche he {paket hat thep thulde fe bis face noz
moze. And thep conuaped him wnto the ppppe.


"  CUherri Chapter. rE


—m


abab P tvolde faple ynto Phenices,wetwente . -


ihe there come oute ofthetptpe. And webneled [Foye °”:
Fpraped. And when we acteert.g

bad také our leaue “ne of anotber, we toke (ppp 23 í
and tpe ari akesi SA ea

(ben we bade fullended tde courfe from.
@ypre, we went downe to Ptolomaiba, and fa- i
luted the bzethzen, g abode with them onedape. oe.
Tbe nerte dape, toe that were of Pauls compa J
npe dDeparted,andcame dnto Celarear. And toe
entred into the boule of * Pbilip the CudgelilE aetec.vi.n :
which wag one of the feug, and abode with him and.viie, =,
@hefameman bad fouredoughters birapns, C
whiche dio*pzopbecp. And as the tarped there #zocl.ti.g
a good manp of Dapes, ther camea ie ida `
phet fro Jewzie, named Aqabus. thë be has
come bnto Ys, he toke Pauls gerdell, g bounde
bps feteandbhandes andfapde: Thus lapth the
bolpe goft*fo Mall the Fetwes at Ferulalé bpnd acte.tr.e
the man that owethtbps gerbel,and fhaldelp=corrtct
uetbpmintothe bandesofthbeGentpls.

Haben toe hearde Fbys,botbe we and other ;
whpcbe were of the fame place befougbte bpm
that be wolde not go tp to Jerufalem, Che
paul anftocred,andfapd:fopat dop: tveppnge r
and veringempne beste Aam redpe not to be
bounde onelp , but alfo to dye at Jerufalem for : |
the name of the lode Jefu. When we couldnot A
turne bis mpnd, we ceafed, faping:*the topll of asat.niy > ‘|
the Lorde befulfplled . After thole dapes tve D 4”
toke bp oure burthens, andwent bp to Ferufa
lem * Chere went wptd vs allo certapne of the acces. pre
dilcpples of Celarca,and brought wpththem - -
one gona mafon of Cppeus.an olde difcpple, wpth
whomewethuldclodge. And when we were
come to Jerulalem, the bzethzen receaued vs |
gladlp. And onthe mozotve Haule wétinwith . Lr
be “nto James. | ) |
Anbdal the elders came together. And when be |
hadfalutedthem, be tolde bp ozder all thpnges
epee marae ete le ge ach Mal
les bp bis mintiracion. And toben thep bear
it ,thep glozpfped the Lode, and fapde ‘wnto |
ee a i


.-"*


a _ al
3 :


8 teke Art not thou that


Mfthe Apottles.


SZewes there are tohpche beleuc,and they are all

erneft folowers ouer the latwe. Andtbep are in-

fozmed of the.that thou teacheft all the Zetwes,
whpchareamonge the gentyles,toforlake Wo

fes:and fapelt.that thep ought not to cpzcucple
thepzcbpldzen,nether tolpue after the cuftomes
What ts it therfozerChe multitude mut nedeg
cometogetber. for thep hall beare Prpou arte
fum.bi.a come. Do therforethis, that welap tothe *We
baue.vité. men, which bauca wote on the. Chem

take e purpfpe thp lelfe with them,¢ docofte on

them, that thep map (hauetbhep2 heaves: and all

E hal know, that thofethpnges which thep paue
pearde concernpnge the are nothpnge: but that

thou tbp felfe alfo walkeft and kepet the late.

Actes. rb. € W5nf as touchynge the getpls which beleue* ihe
baue tozpttcn concluded, that thep obferue no

fuche thpnge:faue onlp pebep kepe them felucs

from thynages offered topdoles,and fro bloupde

and from ftrangled,¢ from foznicacion. Then f
Acte.Filld pert Dap Paule toke the men, * purpfped ppm
felfe wopth them € entred into the temple, decla-

rpnge that be obferucd the dapes of the purifpca

cion, wntpll ý an offrpnge thulde be ofred Foz e-

uetp one of the. ¥nd whan the feucn dapes were

niote almooft ended , the Fetes which were of
Afia(Mben thep lawe him inthe temple) moued

all the people, ¢lapde bandes on bpm cepenge:

JE mé of racl,belpe. Chpsts te man, P teacheth
almenenerp where agapntt p people- thelaw

and this place. De bath alfo brought Gzekes m:

to tbetemple, and batb polluted this holp place,

actes.rr.b FEoz thep had fene w bpm one in the cptiex Tro:
uwi ning an Ephelian: whom thep (uppoted that
faule badbzougbtintotbhe temple. Andall the

cptic was moued,and the people {warmed toge

ther. Andtbey tote Paul anddzewwe him out of

j têple, and foethiopth the dozes were (hut.as

thep hent about to kpllbpm.tpopnges came wn

tothe bpecaptapne of the foudyers, thatall Fe-
rufalem was moued.Wbich immedpatipe toke
foudpers and Dndercaptapnes, € ranne done

_ to them. tdiben thep fawe the bpper captapne s

G thefoudpers:thep leftimptpngeot Paul. Then

tie captapne came nere and toke bpm,and com:
maunded bpm tobe bounde withtwo chaynes,

and Demaunded what He wag and what be had

Dont. And fome crpedone thpnae, lome another

amõge p people: And rage couldgnot Knotve


Fa the certapntic for the rage.be commaunded bim


-tobe carpedinto the caftelt. And when be came
prito a ftapee, it foztuned tod was bone of
the foudpers fd? the bpolence of the people. Woz
the multptude of thelpeoplefolowed after, trp:
en g:atoape wpe) bpm. eee
- And wohan Paul begantobecarped into the
caftell,be tapde bntotbebpe Captapne:mape J

cake bnto thet bich S ite prte (peake
Cappepat, wbich be-

fozethofe dapes madet an vpzoure: and ledde
out into the wpldernes. tiii. thoufand men that
tere muttherers/Mut Paul fapd: Fam a man

gctes.ir:b Sopnchama Jewe ofe Cparlus a cptte in Cpeil,

a utph ofna upie yei Eaters her ie

tofpeabe yntothe people. And when he had gez


Fol.lt.


nen bpm lpcenice. Baul (ode on the tepes, xand Aste. rrie +
beckencd withtbe band wnto the people: when
there was made a greate fplence, be pake Yuta
them tn the pebzuctonge,fapenge:
C Paule anfwereth the Zewes. Ge is (courged and lapte
in pielon agapne, la- À
maya En, beetheenandfathers, beare pe mpre B
AAVA Wantwere wobpch Fmakenotve wnto pou.
ae (bE thep Derde, that he pake in the He-
posh tothem,tbep kept the moze fplence.
fapeth): Jam verelpeamaniopichbeam __ .
a Jetoe bozne in* Chariug a cpticin Cpcile:ne- Zeid


of* Gamaltel,¢ tfozmed dpligently in flaw of 7


go into Damatco, and there tt albe told the of
all thpnges, bbpch are appopnted foz the todo.
And twben J latwe nothpnge Foz the bepgpencs
of that lpgbt, J was leade bp the bande of them
that were pth me,andcame tnto Damaleo.

x And one Anantas a perfect mã and (asper Ty 4
tapnpnge to the latwe paupng a good repozt of ~*~
al the Jewes tohpch there Dwelt) came nto me
and tode and fapd bunto me. Mother Haul, re
ceauethp {pgbt. And the fame boure J receaued
mp lygt and latwe bpm. And be fapde:the God
of oure fathers bathe ozdepned tbe befoze, that
thou Muldetknowe bps wpll,andfe the tbyng.
that isrpabtfull,and thuldett heare the bopce o
bys mouth, fo: thou Halt be his toptnes onto al
men of tholetbpnges, wbpch thou bait fene and
bearde. Andnowe, whp tarpelke thou ” Arpie
be baptpled and wape atvap thp {pnnes+in cal monst
Ipnge on the name of the Lozbe. And t¢fogtuncd
that when J thas come agapne to Ferulalem,


‘and p2aped inthetemple, J asina traunce, ¢


tawe bpm, fapeng onto me: Wake batt and get

the quicklp out of Zerulalé:foz thep wyl not re

ceaue thp toptues,that thou beareft of me. ve

— And Flapd:Logde, they bnowe $ J prefoned W

ånd bet ineuerp Spnagoge thë ý beleuedon tpe . —-

x Ahd when the bloud of thp + Abi e Steuen Ates. tita

twas (hed, J alfo tode bp ant cofented wnto bis

death and kept therapment of them that flete 5 i. j à

bpin: Aid he fapd Dnto me depacte,foz*¥ wpll Garer
Sg tit fende


The Actes


{cide the fatre hence buto the Gentples.

Thep gaue bpmaudpence onto thps wodr,
and then lpft bp thep2 bopces andfapbe-abare
with fuchea fclowe fram the earthe:fozitis no
reafon that be fhuldlpue: Andas thep crped, ¥
cal of their clothes,and thzueduft intotbhe apze
thecaptapne comaunded bpm to be beoughtin
tothe caffell,¢ bad that be fhulbde be {courged, ¢
to be exranipned, that be mpg bt knot, wherfore
they crped fo on bpm. And when thep boudhpm
iwpththonges, Paulefapd wnto the Centurton
that ftode bp btm: 3s tt latoful foz pou to fcour-
gcea man that isa Romapre € pucondempned.
ben the Centurion heardethat,be wente and
tolde the bpper captapn, faptg:Wabatintendelt

aa thou todos f£o2 this ma ts-wea cptesen) oF Rome.
Then the bppet captapne came, and fapd Vn-
tobypm:tellme art thou.a Romapne: de fapte:
Dee. Andthecaptapne anlwered, wpth a greate
iumme obtapned J thps fredome. And Paule
fapde: 9 was fre borne. Chen trayght tap de-
parted from bpm, thep which Huld pauceramp=
ned bpm. And p bpe captapne allo wag afrapd,
aftecbe knewe that be waga Romapne,andbe
ċaufe bebadbdounde bym.
_ Dn f mozo we(becaufe he wolde baue knowe
the certapntie, wherefore he was accufed of the
zeweg)he lofed bpmifro bps bades¢ comatided
the bpe n2eftes ¢ all p counfelto come together g
acte rrid *D2OUgHE Paulefozth and fet him before them.
@ The. rrut.Chapter.
dT Gaule commeth afozethe countel.Debapte arpleth


amonacthe people,the captapic Delpucreth hpm. o0
comfuzteth bpm.


See, Jul bebelde the countel,efapde: men
errin o Ya Bay \ and beth? * 3 baue lpued in al good

ae Yak i confepence befoze God vntpll thps
U7 tact ia dape. And the bye prefe Ananias ci-


coils maundeo the that Rode by, to {mpte
bpm on the moth.


Then fapd Paul onto bpm: God hall fmpte


curbia tbe thoupapntcd wall.*Spttelk thou and ind-

tat eft me after the latoe,andcommaundeit me to

efmptten contrarp to thc lawe’ And tiep that

gopro {rode bp,fapd*reuplef thou © oddes dpr pacatt

Thenlapd Paule: jtoplte not brethren, that he

tro. rrio Was P bpe preat. oz tt 8 wzptten:* thou whale

not cure the ruler ofthy people. be Paul per-

a5 ceaued that the one parte were Saduces , and

otber Pbarples.be crped out in the counfel:

itina and beethzen, x Jama Pbarplei, thefonne ofa

a piar DE thebope and refureeccpon from

cath, 3 am iudged,

And whe be bad fo fapd, therarofe adebapte

betwene the Pharples and the Saduces and p

piat irti multptude wag Deupded. * Foz the Saduces

er HeD Sapetbattberets norelurreccpon,netberangell

mr nog {prete:Wut the Pbharplesgrauntboth.

€ _ Andehere arole agreate ctpe: and whan the

crpbes tobpcbe were of the harpes parte

arole,thep ftroue fapenge: we fpnde none ewell

inthps man, Though alprete oz anangell bath

apeatcth tobpm,let ba not frpue agapnit God

And tehen there arole a great debate the caps

tapne(fearpnge.left Paul pul haue ben pluta

Ket afondze of them)commaunded the foudpers


5
k


fo codotone,andtotakebpmtfromamonge thë
androbepnge bpm intothe caftell. |
*@bhenpabt folotoynge, God ode by hpm Rigdon!

andfaypde: be of good cheare Paule: Foras thou —
batt teftpfped of mein Jerufalem tfo mult thou treut
beare witnefie alfo at Rome. And tohantt wasg
dape, certapne ofthe Jewes qatheredtbem fel-
ues together,andmadea wowe, fapenge: ptbep
wolde nethcreatenog dzpnke,tpllthey bab kpl-
led Baule:thep were mo then fourty meé,wbpcp
had made thysconfppzacion. and thep came to D
tbe chefepzetegandelders,andfapoe : we baue
boundour {elues toptha vowr,that we pl eat
notbpnge, wntpll we baue lapne Paul.

* “Powe therfore qeue pe knowledge to the
pppercaptapne andto the coŭlel that pe bepng
bpm forthe Wnto Vs to mozowe,as thougbe the
wold knowe fometbpnge moze perfectly of hint
a we( o euer become neare)arereadpto kpl
bpm. When Pauls {piers fonne heard of thep2
lapenge alvapte, be wente, andentred into the
caftcll,and told Paule. And Panle called one of
the vader captapnes Dnto-himand Sy ig
thpspounge man wntotbe bpe captapne, foz be
hathe acertapne thyngetotbemebpm. Anope
toke bym,and bgougbt bim to the bpe captapne
andfapde : Paule the pzefoner called me Ynte
ppin,and pzapedme tobzpnge thps ponge man
pela , whpcbe bathe a certapne matter to


fpeive the. 6 37 :

The hye captapne toke bpm bp the bande ©
and wente tepth bym oute of the ape, andal-
kedbpm : what isit that thou batte to tell mes
And he fapd: Che Fetoes are Determpned to des
{pzethe,that thou woldef bepngefoztbhe Paule
tomozoweintothe coilel,asthough thep wold
enquyze fomwmbat of bpm moze perfectlp, Aut
folowenot thou theps mpndes :foz there lpe int


- feapte foz bpm of them ,mo then fourtpe mess


which bane bounde them felues wpth a Dowe, ý
thep topl nepther cate no? depniketypl they baue
hplled bpm. Bnd note are they teadp, andloke
thattboutbuldefipeomes. — -

The ppr capear then let the pounge £
man Departe,and charged him, fapenge: fe thou
telit out tono man, that thou baft ewed thele
thpnges tome. And be called puto bpm tivo bn
der captapnes{apenge : make readpet too hun:
Dd Loudpers to goto Cefarca, and hozlemen |
thze {coze and ten:and{peare men twohundzed ee
at the tonar pys of thenpabte. And delpuer
them beattes, that thep mape fette Paule on, €
bapnge bpmfafe onto Selix the bpedebpte.ce aa
(foz be Dpo fereare leat bappelp the Jicwes hhuloetake him awap
and kpil bpm , and be bpm felfe Huloe be abtermarbde blamed, as
though be wolbetakemonep, and De Wrote a letter ats
terthps maner. F

Claudius Lpfias bnto the moolte mpahtpe '
ruler feliz, fendeth gretynges. * Chpsman Ates.rr.€
twas takenofthe Jewes, and (houlde bane bene )
kplled of them. Chen came Fw foudpers, and
refaued bpm,and perceaucd that be was a Ros
mapne. And when F olde baue knowenebe
caute, berfoze thep accufed bpm, *Fbroughte Mesrt.6
bpm fozth into thepe countell: There persranco

at


Mfthe Apottles.


_---Fehathe was acculed of quettions of fheir latwe
aterro YIBut was notapltpe of anp thyng woethp of
© pyeath 02 ofbondes. And when tt was tered

me howe that the Jeweslapoe apt fo: bpm, 3

{ent bpm ftrapabte tape to the,and gaue com-
maundemente to his acculars, that tie thinges

thich thep bauc agapntt bym,tbep Woule tell

before the:fare well. Then cheloudpers (as it

was commaunded thé)toke Baul, and brought

bym bpnpabt to Antipatars. Dn the mozowe

thep leftetie bozle mento qo wpth bpm,andte-

turned onto the caftell.Wbich when thep came

to Celarea,(and Delpuered the eppitle to the de-
bpte)pzefented Baul alfo betoze bpm. When ý

Debpte hadredthe letter be albed of what coun?

s tre he wag. And whe be vnderftode that ye was
meu.rbti.a Of Celiciaxg wpl beare p(fapde be robentbine

; accularsave come alfo: and be comaunded Hym
to be kept in Herodes iudgement Halls


GY PA En Preatt defccndev pth the clders , €
CIRA 2 wrth accttapne opatoute, named
ea Re sya Cartullus, which entormed the De:
CLAES pyteagapnit Paul. And whe Paul
wag called forth Cartullus beganne to accufe
bpm, fapenge: Sepnge that welpuc tn greate
. qupernes the bp meancs of the, andthat manye
good fhpugesare done bnto thps nacpon tho-


rowe thp pourdence, that alowe we ever Andit
all PRI ooft noble elir wpthall thanes.
Notwpthbtandpnage, that J benot tedious VH-
tothe, 3 paye tbe tbat thou wolbdcfite beare vs
` ofthpcurtefpa fewe wozdes. - |

402 we baue founde thps mana peftplente
felotve., and vd Enpa ipa — all the Ste

foes inthe whole wozlde, ¢ 4 mapntapner oxo
= enpo) Of thetecte of the Maszarites, which hath
actes,rr4.¢ alfo enforced to pollute the temple.xtibom we
: toke and wolde bauc tudgeDaccezdpnge to our
latwe : butthebpe captapne Lplias came ppon
ps and wrth greate violence toke bpm awape
out of our bandes,commaundpng bps acculars


the. Df whome thoumapefte (pi ==
tocome bntothe. Df who eerigri a WAA
hefe tbpnges whereof tee acculebpm. Cpe se- PAY \\
e aa Spieatpmed:fapeng, that thetcthin PEAN


thou toplte enqup e) knotoe the cert


€ geg abe ser
Then
Had beckencd vnto ppm that be fhoulde {peake)
antwered:Witha moze quyete mpnde do Jan-
{were formy felfe,foz as muchas J vndertand
that thou hatte bene of manp pearcsa tudge Vi:
to this people, becaule that thou ma} eff knotte
 thatthere are pet but twelve ayes tence FZ wet
qete. rrd b pp to Jerufalem foz to worthpp.and *thep ne-
errbitt.d shor foundeme inthe temple Dpfputpnge wyth
anpman,ether rapona vp the people, nether in
the Eppnagoges, nozintbhecptic. Mepeher can

thep prone thethpnges toherot thep accufcme.
xt thps a conteile vutotbe, thatatter the


alil(after that the debpte bpnrtelte TAN i


Solty.


fhave(fobiche thep call berefpe fo wo2hpppe F

the God ofmp fathers , beleapnge alltppngces D
whpch are wapttenintbelawe and the prophe-

teg, g baue hope towards God, thatthe fame r st.rri c
refurreccton ofthedead( wbichthep thentfelucs: `
lokefoz alfo)thatbe,botbe of uffe and bututte.

And therfo2e* fudpe 3 tobaucalwapea cleare act priti. a
con{cpencetotvard God,andtowardmen. Hut *
after manp peares, J came*and bought almes Zonet? y
to mp people and offerpngescx(andbowes) inthe, *
Wwhiche thep founde me purpfped tn the temple,

nether Wpthmultptude noz pet wpth wnquyet= s
Nefleos land thep tokeme,and cepen fapengesawap wpch our

enempe:) 40 WDelt there ere certapne sees out
of Alia, whpch ought to be bere prelent befoze p
and accute me,pe thep bad ought agapntt me: o
els let thefe fame bere fape, pft peau founde
any cucll Dopngein me, whyple 3 fande here in p
counfell:ercepte tt'befozthps one bopee that J,


a: cepedtandpngeamonge them *oftberefucree= S


cion from deatham J iudgedofpon thig dape. œ
Wiben Helix heard thele thpnges, De deferred
othem,fo2 be knetoe Derpe tell of that wape,and
fapd: oben Lifpas the cantan ig come Downe, |
¥ wll bnowethe vttermoolk of poure matter. Jerrerire
Anbd* be cOmaunded an pndee captapncto kepe Ftrrbtis
ul, andto let Dim baue reft:and that be Muld
ozbpdnone of bps acquapntaunce tompnpher
Vito bpm,o2 focometobpm.
And after a certapn dayes, when Helix came
with bis topfe Dufilla(tbich wasa Feivelle)
be called forthe aule,and heard bpm of f fapth I
wWhicheis towarde Chrifte. Andas he preached


in Oftpabtcoufnette,temperaunce,and tudgement


tocomie, felix trembled and anfiwered: Gothp

toape fo: thps tpinc: when | bane a conuenpent
fealon, 3 pl fende foz the. dpe hoped alfo, that
monep wuld baue ben geuen bpm of aul, that

he mpat loofe bpm: wherfoze becalleo bpm the

oftener andDcomened wptb bpm. But after two
peare,Stettus Porcius came into Felix rowme. Acte.rrb.d
And felirxwyllpng to thewe the Feiwesa plea
Ture, left Paule tn pzefon bounde,


@ The.rrv.Chavter.
CC Dhe Hewes accuie Haule befoze Fetus, he appealeth
tntto the <mperoure,and is fent bute Rome,


mesma) Den Feltus bad receaued the
HE) Aa oRoce, after thee dapes, beal-
der e cendcd from Cefarea puto že

“9 keea)cutalem. Tpenenfozmed bpm
woe ithebpe preattes, ¢ the chefe of


A iaa tbe ewes, of Baul. And thep —
eee | befoughtbpm,and delpzed fa-
~~ oure agapn bim, phe wold _

fende foz bim to Jerulalem:¢ theplapdawapte
for bpminthe wape,tokpl bpm. Fetus anfiwe-
red, that Paule houlde be kepte at Cefarea, but
that be bpmfelfe olde thoztelp depart thptbhee

Let them therfoze(fapd he) whpch amonge pou
areable,come dowr e With bs, and accufe bpm,
pf there beanp faute tn the man,

- WAben be hadde tarpedthereamonge them 2
moze then ten dayes;betene dowone vnto Celas
rea and rhe neve day lardotone inthe tudge met |

Ogiut trace


i


Che Actes —
feate,andcommaunded Pauleto be baougdte. pnge that Hebathappealedto Cefar, Rhaue de-
Wibiche when he Has ae ee wohpcbe termpnedtofendebpm. DOfwhome F hauena
were come from Jerufalem, ode abouthypm,€ certen thynget Wwepte Dnto mp Lode. Wiet-
lapde manp andgrecuous complapntes agapnil foze, 3 baue pouor bym nicl bl anhi cp-
Paul which thep coulbenot pzoue,ag longeag allp unto the, D bpnge Agrpppa tbat afterer
dct-rriitic he an{Doeredfoz ppm felfe, *that he bad neptber ampnacton bad, 3 mpgbt bane lotobat fo wite


; i1.0
FF DI a


pe empiemo p ofthe Jetwes neptberagapnt Stor methpnketh it bnreafonable Fo? to fenda


the temple,noz pet agapnit Cefar offended anp pzefoner,and not to Mewe the caules whtthare

thypnae atall. lapdeagapnite bpm.

> ak ‘4Ecltusxwpllpng todo the Jewes a pleafure

Jae rit fs atwpered Paule,and lapde: wpltthouqo vpto
Jerufalem, and there be tudged of thefe thpnges
befoze me? EChenlapoe Paule: J Hande at Ce-
fars indgementfeate, where J ougbttobeiud:
ged. Totbe Jewes paue F no harme done,ag
thou bérp tell knowet: Pf Jhauebhurte them,
o2commyptted any thpngewoztbp of deathe , 3
refule nottobdpe.Pfnone of thefe thpnqesare, Ey eae
therofthepacculeme,womanmap delpuerme Gas Ge ditb
to tbem. 3 appeale bnto Cefar. Then fpake Fe:
{tus wyth delpberacpon,and aunf vered: Chou
Date appealed bntoCelar: onto Cefar Malte _ |
thouqo. =

D Andaftera certapne dapes kpngeAartppa at


CThe.xrvt. Chapter.


@ tkenge Agrpppa heareth Paul, which ceileth bpm bes
callpnge from the begpunpnge.


tigen Pee
ae ar Saou the
: culed of the Fewes:namelp becaule thou arte
| and Bernice cam wntoCelareato lalute Fetus expert trallcuttomes and quefttons whpch are
And when thep hadde bene there a good ccafon, amouge the Jewe. Cabertore 3 befeche the, to
| 4feftusrebearled Paulegcanfe vntothe kynge peareme pacpentlyp. |
Get.rriie fapeng:* there isa certen man leftein preion of &)plpupnae that J bauc leabde of achploe 95
fteltr,about whom when Zcameto Jerufalem (wbpchwasatt i ib mypneotone na
act.triis *the ppe Pzecalkes and elders of the Jewesen> cponat Ferufalem)knotveall the Jetocs topic)
fourmed meand defpzed to baue iudgementa- knetwe me fromthe berpnnpnge, prebep wolde
apni him. Totwhom Janfvered:itignot the teltifpe. xoz after the moot Eraptefte fecte of pyrute:
maner of the Romapneg.fozfauoure to delpner owerelpgpon, J lpued ep xo ge ted mae dhs .
anp man,tbat betpoulde perpe, before thathe ftandeanbdxam tudged foz the Hope of the pros IET r
whichis acculed,hane the accufers befoze bpm, mes madeof God nto ourfathers: onto Which proite `
and paue lpcenceto anftocre foz bpm felfe con- proms our twelue trpbes (inftantlp ferupnge
0 bree
the


| € cernpnge thecrpmelapdeagapnttebpm. There Goddapandnpagbt bopeto come. Forw

j Fore ben they were come Pether wpthouteanp popes fake kpnge Agrippa, J amaccufedo

i dDelape onthe mozotwe Flat togene iudgement Fewes. Wbp Wulde it be thoughte a thpnge it- €

f =. qndcommanndedtbemantobebgougbtforth. credpble vnto pou,that God Muld rap eaga e

i Agapnfte whom, when theacculers lode vp the dead’ alto verelp thought inmp fel that

arterie xtbep bzoughtnoneacculacton of fuch thpnacs Joughttobomanp contrarpe thpnges, cleane

ag J {uppoled:but badcertapne queftponsaga- agapni thename of Jelug of Maszareeh*iwpich acte.viit.e
nit bpm of thep2 owne {aperfticion,andofone thpngeJalfoopdtn Jerulale. Anvmany of the ee" rs%,
befus tobich was dead, whom aule affpzmed fapntes dpd J Mut wp in prefon, and bad recea= gasie


F cobcalpue. And becaule F doubted of fuch ma-


ner of queftions, 3 alked bpm, whether be weld
qo to Ferulalé andthere be tudged of thefemat-
ters. Bit when Paule bad appealed to be Kepte
pnto the knowledge of Cefar, J commaunded
bpmito be kept.tpll Jmpghte lende bpm to Ce-
far.Aqrippafapde Ynto Keftus : 3J wolde alfo
beare the man mp felfe. Tomozowe,(fapde be)
thou thalt Deare him: And on the mozowe then
Agrippa thas come and Weenpee, wpthgreate


© pompe,and wercentred into the councell boufe,


mep the captapnes and chefemenof the cptie at
etus commaundement thas Paule baoughte
orth. And Feltus fapde: Kpnge Agrippa, and
all pe men which are pere pepe vs, pe fee
this man about whom all the multptude of the
{etors hauc entreatedDme, bothe at Jerufalem


- andalfo bere,crpenge:that he ought not tolpue


anp lenger. Pet founde J nothpnge toozthp of


death, that bebad commptted. Qeuertheles, fez


ucd auctbozite of tbe dpe pretes. And when thep
were put to Death, J gave the fentéce. And J pus
npftbed them oft ineuerp Spnagoge,and com:
pelled the to blafpheme and was pet moze mad
ppon ther , and perfecuted them , euen nto
ffraunge cpties. Aboute whpehe thpnaesas J
tent to Damatco, With auctbozpte andlpcence
of toe bpe peeaftes:eucn at mpovar. D kpnge)
Jfawein the aye a lpghte from heauen aboue
the beightnesof the Sunne Mpne roundeabout
me, and them which tourneped topthme. When
twe were all fallen to the earthe , J bearde a
popce fpeakpnge Dnto me, and fapenge in the


Mebzewe tonge : x Saull, Haull,tobp perlecus actes.tr.c'
tet thou mes Jt ts barde Foz the to Bpcke a= eF


gapni the pepches. and Jlapde:Wipoart thou
Lo2de. And be fapde: Jam Felus whome thon
perfecutett,butrpfe and fande vppon thp fete.
o: J baue appeared unto the fo2 this purpofe
tomake thea mpupiter anda wptnes "E of
0


Mthe Apolieis.


| thote thinged tebich thou bat feneand of chore
thpnges inthe wobpcb 3 toll appeare bntothe,
Delpuerpnge the from the people ,andfrom the
Gentples, pnto whome note F fende the,to o-
‘pen thep2 epes, that thep mape beturncd ftom
i barkenes tolpabt, andfrom the potoct of Das
. tan bite od, that thep mape receauc fozgeue
negof prunes, andinberttaunce amonge them
robicharefanctifped bp fapth p is towarde me.
Waberfoze ( D Rpnae Agrippa ) J was not
ppfobedpent vnto the Heauenlpe vpfpon: but
E thetwed tp2lt vuto them of Damafco,and at Fe
rufalent,and thozow out all the coaftcs of Few
tpe andthen tothe Gentples that tbep Hulde
repent and curneto God, and dofuche workers
as become them that repent. Jo? this caute the
““Aetoes catighte me in the temple, and wente a-
outeto &pll me. Soepnge therfore that 3 baue
| obtapned belpe of God: J continue vntothps
dape, Woptneflpnge both to tmall and togtrtate,,
fl +s fapeng none otber thinges, tha thofe which the
i prophetes and Moles dpd fap Huld come: that
~ Chp ite thulde luffer, and that be Dultebe the
Epult that tpuld epfe from death and Muld hew

lpgbte onto the people,and tothe Gentples,
As be thus pake fo? bpmielte, Fetus fapbew
aloude vopce:Paule,thou arte befpde thp felfe
ad much learnpng doth make the made. And Paul
E fapde: Jam not mad (mooft deare Fetug) but
x peake forth the ozdes of tructpandfobernes
Forthekpn knoweth of thele thinges,befoze
whom alfo 4 lpeate frelp: neptder thpnte Fp
anp ofthele thpnaes are broden from bpm, fto?
7 sys thpngetasnot done ima comer. Tkpnge
7 Agrippa beleuel® thou the Pzopbhetes Fwote
wel ý thou beleuet. Agrippa fapde nto Paul:
E Somewhat thou bzpngelte me in mpnde fog to
become Chziften. And Paule fapde: J wolde to
- God pnot onelp thou: but alfo al that heare me
G tobdape were, not fommbat onelp but all toge-
See eee aE aam took: tbe aynge cote Up,
meni Sa Ss ee A
wptbtbem. An i thep torre gone aparte,
thep talked bettwenethem felues.fa inge. Thig
age it dandy (dele os neat 502 of bon
des, Chin lapie Agrippa onto Fetus: Chps
manmpgbt baue bene let loole, pipe hadde not

i appealed vnto Cefar. °


CThe.rrvit. Chapter,


{Saul Hpprcthtotwardé tome. Julius (ht captanne
tees teco bema courteoutip anbat the late thep Caite
ppwate


aa Denit ascocluded,that the Muld
sypiaple into Ftalpe, thep delpucred
iboth Paul, and certaphe other pre-
iifonets, bnto one named Jultus, an


V/s
x LAA! ynder captapne of Celars Coudpers
And weentredinto athpp of Adzamictum,and

> loofedfrom iande,apointed to faple by the coa-
collsiia ites of Afia one x Arif-arcus oute of Macedo-
nta of the countre of Cheflalonta tarpenge tpl
wprhbbe, Andee nexte dape We cae to Sidi,


STOLL.
And Fulius* courteoullpeentreated Paul and Fc 0i
qauebhimlpbertpe,to go butobpsircndes,and e
to refre dim felfe. And when We bad launched
from tbence, Wwe fapled barde bp Spinor
fethe pubes werecontrarpe. And when toe
hab fapled ouer the fee of Celicia and agonal
lia, oe cameto B)p2a which isin Lpeia,
Andtberethe ynder captapne foundeafhbpp B
of Aleranbdzta readp, that fapled into Ztalpe,¢
be put betherin. AndDiwben we badlapled flow
lp manp Dates, efcarce were come ouce againit
©Gupdon(becaufe the pnde topthftode vs) toe
fapledbard bp the coatt of Canbdp,oncragaintt
Salino,and with muche wozrkelapled beponde
it, and came tuntoa place hich tg called p faire
hauens. Ape Wherunte thasthecptpe of Lalea
Ul ben much tpme was (pent, and thé fapling
was noweteopardus,becaule alfo pthep padbe
ouetlong fated, aul put them in remébzatice,
elapde vnto them: p28 F perceauc, that thig
bpage wyl be with hurteand damage, not ofp
lapding and ppp onelp, but alfo oF pone lpues.
Peuertheles the pndercaptapne beleucd the qo
werner andthe mapltce ofthe hpppe moze then
thofethinges wbich werefpoken of Baul.And
becaufe ý be auen wasnotcomodious sage fa
terin, manp toke counfel to depart théce, ptbp
anpmeanesthep mpgbteattapne to phentces
and thereto God deeb a Heauen of Cas
dp,and Ipetbtowarde thefouthbwef andnowb
wete wpnde. Wi ben f fouthtopnde bletwe,chep
fuppofpnee to cn aa thep2 purpofe, looted.
nto Affon,and fapled pafte all Candpe.
‘Butnot longe after,therearole agapntte D
their purpofe a flame of wpnd out of thenoztp
ceait. And whenthe pp was caught anid colde
not refpit the wpnde , welet ber go, and dzaue
fopth the wether. Wut we Were carped into an
ple which is named Clanda,¢ badmuch thoske
to come bp a bote, which thep toke ppand bled
belpe,and made falte p pp, fearpnge, left they
Muld fallintop Sp2tes Bnd lo thep ber bowing
a befel and were carped. Che nerte Dape( wh
ibe were tolled w anerceadpnge tempett ) thep
lygbtened the Wpppe, and the thpade dape we
cait out wpth our otone andes the taklpng of
the bpppe. When at the lafte,nether the Süne í
no? tarresin manp Dapes appeared g no {mall
tempefte lape bpon vg all bope pato, fpulde
efcape,was then takenatwape. But after long
abftinence, Baule ode forth in the mpddes of
them and fapde : p28.pe uld bane berkencd
tome, not tobaue locked from Candpe,nethet
tobaue brought bnto bs thpsbarme and lofie
And nowe J erbozte pou to be of good chere.
JEn? there Halbe no looffe of anp mans Ipfe a=
mog pou,faue of the hyp onelp. Eo: there (tore
bp me thps npabt pangel of God, whole Fam
and tbbome Alecue , fapenge : feare not Paule
* thou multe be beought befoze Celar. Andlo aeve.tr.<
God bath genen the al them that laple wpth ý
(i berfoze (pes be of qoodchere :fo2 y beleue
God,p it Halbceuen agit was told me. Howbe
ittoe mult becaintox a certapne plande. aria
SOTO EPEAT DRDO oe pa
à a


» |


) Pe ,

The Actes

(ag we were faplpnge in Aria aboute mpd- the Fraungers latoethe beat bance on bis hid
npabt)tbefbyppmendemed,thattbercappeared they fapde amonge them felucs: nodoutethps

fome countre nto them:andfounded,€founde manisa murticrer: bome ( though be baue
it.rr.faddoms.And whethep badgoncalptell efcapedthetee ) pet venqgeaunce {uffrethnotto
further, they foundedagapne, andfounde. rv. Ipue. And be Hottie of the bpper into thefpze t 23
faddoms. Chen fearpnacletthepthoulobaue xfcltnobarme. Hotbbet thep wapt when be Spat rhib
fallen on fome tockesthep cat foureancres out fhuld paue wolne, 02 fallen Downe dead fodélp +F
of the terne, and toplihedfozthedape. Asthe Wut after thep hadlokedDagreate whple,and
{hppmen were about to fice out ofthethip(mye fatoenobarme come tobim, thep chatgend their

thep bad let Dotone the bote into the fee, nder
a couloute, as though thep wolde bane calf an-
creg ont of the foztppppe) Baul fapd bnto p on


mpndes,andfapbexthathewasaGov.  -  qeteriiid
3n tbefame quarters were landeg of f chefe
mã of the ple(whole name was Bublius)whp, >


dercaptapne gto the foudpers : ercepte thete as
bpde inthe ppp pe cannot be fafe. Chen proud
pers cut oftbherope of p bote, g let ttfallawap.


che receaued bS,and lodged Ys thze Dapes curte
ouflp. Andit foztuned that the father of Publi-
ug, lape fpcke ofa feuer,and of a bloudpefipre.


Fa And when the dape began toappeare,Paule
e


To whom Paule entred inand pared, glapde
tought them allto take meate, fapenge thps w


bis handeg on bym æ bealed bpm. So whé thps

is tbe fourtentbdape,that pebauctarped, and was done, otheralfo whych bad difeales inthe
continued fatpnge receaupngenothpngeatal ple,cameandwerepealed: wppchealfonpoys -

Ciberfore J prapepoutotake meate:foztbps reat bonoure. And when toe departed thep la=

s enat rip NO DOUTE iS foz poure bealth:fozxthere halnot ded vs wythluche thpnges ag were neceflarp.

zak. piia anbearfallfrothebeadofanp of poun.Andwhe After thzemonethes we pea ilda Oi

pie,


og ar. bt,¢ be hadtbus poken, be toke beead* gauethan- iid crc) Bide ay hadswpnteredinthe
and.biiLa Keg to Sodin pretence of them all,and when he


‘Zilina ibe whofe badge was Cafto2 and Bollur. And whe
cae“ had bpoken it, be beqantoeate.Chen werethep wecame to Spracula , wetarpedtheretheeda
alof good cheare,and thep allo tobe meate.We


i pes. And from thence we feta compafle,¢ came
wercaltogetherin the orae sthohudzedthze to Regium . And after onedap the fouth wpnd
fcoze and[prtenefoules. And when thep badie


blewe,and we came the nert dape to Putiolus: —
eaten pnough,thep tyabtencdtbethpp.andcall where we founde bzetheen,and were dDelpzed ta
out the wheate taro thelee. pee tarp wpth them feuendapes,and focame toe to
(Wi ben tt as dap, thep knetoe not the land


E Rome. Andro thence, when the bzethzen berde
but thepCpped acercapne bauen wpth a banke,


| of bs, thep came to mete bs at Apipho2um,and
into the which thep were minded (pfit were pol- at the thee tanernes. When Paullawe them be
thankep God, and ered bolde. And when we
came fo Rome, the vader captapne delpuered
the p2tfoners to the chefecaptapne of the poof:
but Baule was fuffred to dwell bp bpm felfe
toptha foudper that kept ppm.


fpble)to tými in the pp: And wben thep had
taken bp the ancres, thep commyptted them fel-
ues Dntothelee , andloofed the rudder bondes
and hopfea by the mapne faple to the opnde, ¢
d2etoetolande. Andwhenthepchaunced ona


place, wbpche badde thelee on both lpdes ,thep
thulte tu the fbyppe, And the fore parte Mucke
fatkand moued not, but the bprder parte bzake
wpth the ppolence of the waues.

Che Coudpars countell was to kyll the pze-
foners, left anp of them, thé he badl ome out
fhulderuine awape . Wut the Dndercaprapne,
toplipnge to fauc Paule, kepte them fro thep2
purpofe,andDcommaunded that thep whpcbe
couldefimopmme,thuldecatte them feluestp2tte
into thefee,and {cape to land. And the other he
commaunded to go, fome on bo2zdes , and fome
on bzoken ce ofthe pyp. Andloitcame to
pafle,thatt of Sag od fafe to lande.

The. rrii. Chapter.


Aud after thee dapes. Baule called the chefe yy
of p Jewestogetder.And wha thep werecome, ~
Be fapde duto them : Den and bretheen though
ple oz lawes of the elders, * Pet wag Zodelpues and.rrd.b
red peefoner from Jerufalem into the handeg eF"
ofthe Romapnes.Cippebiobenthepbaderas
mpned me, wolde baue let mego, becaufe there
was Hocaule of death inme. Ænt when the Jes
wes{pake contrarpe J thas conffrapned to ap
peale onto Celar:not pF bad oughte to accule


fo? pou,cuen tole pou,and totpea ke teith pou:

*becaule that for the bope of Blcacl Fam Void getrei. s

wptd thys chepne. : rriitie anb

Andthepfayd onto bpm: tencther receaued ">

Hi | letters out of Jewep pertapnpnae vntothe, ne _

T PESO SG No whethep were aped, then ther anp of the bzetbzen that came ewed oz-

Setrpbiic (Rae Ae eae thep knetoe,p* the plewascal fpakeanpbarmeotthe. Wut twe twplibeareof

ANY FA led Milete. Andthe raigers tobat thou thpnikelt.jto2a8 cocernpng this tect

aA Vere prewed Ds nolitelkindnes:foz Wwe knoe px euerp wher itis (pokenagapnlk. «zure.ctc l
Ke theptpndledafpze,ercceaucd Andwpenthep baddeappopnted bpm a dape,

Ea Sawer YS rucrp one, becanfeofppre= thercame manp to bpmintobislodgpuge. Ca

{ent rapne,atid becaule ofthe colde. AndDwhan whom he erpoundedandteflifted the kpngdom-

Baule hadde gathereda bondel of kpckes,and of Godand preached Dntothem of Jelus:borhe

lapdethem on the fp2e,therecameabpperoute outof thelaw of Mofes and out of the pzophe

ofthe beate,andcaughtbim bp theband. ibe tes,eucn frommoznpngetonpagbe. spac iter dite

| peleu


Pai


mp people ot. Eo: this caule then baue J called si


To the Romaynes.


beleucd the thynged tobpebe wete fioken, arid
€ fome beleucdnot. Andiwobhen they agreednot
amonce them (elues, thep departed, after that
Saule bad fpoken one wozde:wellpake the bo
pgooftebp €fape the pap bate unto oure fas

atts bie thers,fapenge:*Go Vntot


makitid pnderftande :and wyth pour epes ball pele, ¢


Jobn. rite not perceauc. oz the bert of this people ig we-


Y “etetetyb our Lozde rofeagapnetto death*bp hom we


F redqvolle and wpth thep2 cares paue thep bad
not lut tobcare,andthetr epes baue thep clofed
Iefte thep poule fe wpth thep2 epes, andbeare

 wopeb thepz cares, and yndecitande wprh they?
pertes and hulde be converted, ¢ 3 Huld peale
tbt. 18e it knowen tberfoze vnto pou, that this
faluacpon of GodiSlentto the Gentples, and
tbep thal beare it. And when he had fapde thefe
worded, the Jees departed from him and Had
great delppcions amonge them felues.

And Paule dwelt two pearestull in bys d=
apnge,and receaued all that came in vnto bim,
preachpuge the kpngdome of God, g teachbpng


tholethpnges wbhichconcerne the Lorde Jelug”


Dith all confpodence, noman fozbpddpnae him.


Chere endeth the actes of
A ` the Xpofies.


C The Epyitle of the
si nae lve ihe


: Cc


Chefs Chapter E


@ Paule declareth bps lourtetarpetbe tromapnes , fhe:
weth what the Gompel te, wpth che erute therof,and rebus


beth che beattipnes of the Heathew
| 3 eres] ule the feruaunte of Fefug
G Pads Weal Cipke, calledto the offpce of
Gete.riit, a { i Eca an Apottle, * puta partefoz p
beu.rbiit, e |e jes Oolpel of God, * which be bad


Sevag P2ompled afore by bys 20-
yer: <a pbetes inthe Delpe fcrpprures
pore a Ot bis fonne,tobych was bo2ne

a 2B bata bpm) ¥ OF the fede of Da-


imriid. nid after fhe fledye:and hath bene declared to be


the fonne of God wpth power after the {prete
that fanctifieth.fence p time ebat Jefus Emit


baue receaued grace and Apoltletbyp,that obe:
Dpence mpabte be gevenonto the faptbein hpg
name amonge all beathen, of whole ndbzepou

eerie ne elu Chut. os
call poutdat beat Rome, beloued of God
+ t.co}. t.a and fapntes bp election. Grace be wpth pou g
Galata peace fron God oure father,and from the Lord
Actus Cheptte. fpr verelp Jtbanke mp God
thozowe Jems Chzpite Eo pou all, that poure
` -fapth1s (poten of in all the wozld. W0? God ig
Hobu.tti,c mip Wptnes( bom Flerue,*wpth mp ({pretein
Gceztit-c the Golpel of hysfonne) that Without cealpng
spia A makbemencpon of pou, peapengaliapes+in
Collo.i,a Mmpprapers,that bp fome meane, at plafke( one
tpme oz other a peolperougiournep(bp f wpll

A


is people, and fap: |
egat.rid.b tiptb ante cares thall pe beare and fhall not.


Sol, lii,
of God) mpabte fortune me, tocome vutopou,
Stor Jlong tole pou, that Fmypghebeltowea- -
monge pou lome {ppzituall gpfte, to ftrenathe
pou topth all, that i8,that Jinpabebaue conta
lacion together with pou, though the commen
fapti, wbich both pe and F baue. :

4 wolde that pe huld Bnotwe( breth howe
that Jhaue ofté tpmes purpoled tocome vuto
pount baue bene lette betherto,tobauclome Act.rröi b

ute alfo amonge pou, agamonge-other ofthe
Gentples, Jam Detter both to the Grekesand .
tothe dngrekeg, to thelcarnedand tothe vn-
learned. 0 that(as muchas inmeis) Jamre
dpe to peeache the Golpell topou that are at
Rome alfo.*sfoz Jam not ahamed of p Gols tecie.rit«
pelof C hz, becaule* itis p power of God wns porie
tofaluacpon to euerpe one that beleucth, to the
Jc we fpzt andalio tothe Gentyll.
- Æo wp is the rpabteoutneife of God ope-.
nied from fapth to fapth. As itis w2ptren:* the ¢
tulle tballlpucbpfapth, Hhact.ft.4

forthe wrath of Godappeareth from bea- Saar?

uen againt all pngodlpnes and yurpabteoul: ~
nes of men, w E wptbolde the truthe in Vin-
rpghtcoufnes:fepnge* that it wbpche mape be ace.rvit.e
Knowwen of God, is manpfcl amonge them, be-
caule God bath ewed it unto them.* Eo? his acte.rtit.e
inuplpble thbpnaes (thatis to fapebpseternall Berra
power e godhed) aretene, fo: ag mucheag thep
are Dnderflandex bp the hozkes, from thecrea Pialrip 4
cponof the wozlde:o that thep are topthoute
ercule, becaufe that tobé thep knetbe God, thep
Lozpfpced bimnot ag God, nether tere thanb=

ul, but wared full of vanities tn their pmagp:
nacions.* And theirt folpthe hert was blpnbded, D«.rbit.e.
When hep counted them Celues wple, thep br-
came Fooleg, * andturned the glozpe ofthe tmz © fal. cvit
moztall God, vntoan pmage,made not onelpe It?
after the fpmilitude of a moztall man: but alfo
of bp2des,and foure foted*beaftes.and of crea: Eye piiiib
ppng bealles. Wiberfope, God gaue them vp to
bnclénes, thozotoe theluttes of their owneber-
tes todefple thepz owne bodpes amonce them
felues : wbpche chaunged bps tructi foz alpe.¢ x
worthepped andferued p thinges that he made
moze then bim that made them, whpcbe isto be
peapled Foz cuer.Amen. Wi perfore, God gané
them vp onto Hameful lutes: * €o2 ené thep2 renro.
ihemen dpd chaunge thenaturall vie intothat
tobpch is agapnit nature. Jndlpkewple allo p
men, lefte the naturall yfe ofthe oman, and
bente in tbhbep: lutes one wyth attother, * men Zarate
wpthmen wrought fyltbpnes,andreceaucd to
them felucs the rewarde of thep2erroure,asit
hag accozdpnge. |

And as thep rewarded not to knotbe God
* cuen lo God delpucredthem bp into a lewe + snot
mpnde, that thep Hulddotbole thpnges which
Wwerenot comenlp,bepnge full of all ynrpabtes
outneffe,forntcacton, wopckednes,couctoulnes,
malpcpoutnes, fullof enupe,murtber debapte
Dilcepte,cuel codicioned, Mhylperers,backebp=
ters,batcrs of God, difdainful, proud boaters
bzpngers vp of cuel thinges, dilobedient to fae
thet and mother, wpthout pioerttanbe tite
ucnalin


`


To the Romaynes.


beleucd the thynged tobpebe wete fioken, arid
€ fome beleucdnot. Andiwobhen they agreednot
amonce them (elues, thep departed, after that
Saule bad fpoken one wozde:wellpake the bo
pgooftebp €fape the pap bate unto oure fas

atts bie thers,fapenge:*Go Vntot


makitid pnderftande :and wyth pour epes ball pele, ¢


Jobn. rite not perceauc. oz the bert of this people ig we-


Y “etetetyb our Lozde rofeagapnetto death*bp hom we


F redqvolle and wpth thep2 cares paue thep bad
not lut tobcare,andthetr epes baue thep clofed
Iefte thep poule fe wpth thep2 epes, andbeare

 wopeb thepz cares, and yndecitande wprh they?
pertes and hulde be converted, ¢ 3 Huld peale
tbt. 18e it knowen tberfoze vnto pou, that this
faluacpon of GodiSlentto the Gentples, and
tbep thal beare it. And when he had fapde thefe
worded, the Jees departed from him and Had
great delppcions amonge them felues.

And Paule dwelt two pearestull in bys d=
apnge,and receaued all that came in vnto bim,
preachpuge the kpngdome of God, g teachbpng


tholethpnges wbhichconcerne the Lorde Jelug”


Dith all confpodence, noman fozbpddpnae him.


Chere endeth the actes of
A ` the Xpofies.


C The Epyitle of the
si nae lve ihe


: Cc


Chefs Chapter E


@ Paule declareth bps lourtetarpetbe tromapnes , fhe:
weth what the Gompel te, wpth che erute therof,and rebus


beth che beattipnes of the Heathew
| 3 eres] ule the feruaunte of Fefug
G Pads Weal Cipke, calledto the offpce of
Gete.riit, a { i Eca an Apottle, * puta partefoz p
beu.rbiit, e |e jes Oolpel of God, * which be bad


Sevag P2ompled afore by bys 20-
yer: <a pbetes inthe Delpe fcrpprures
pore a Ot bis fonne,tobych was bo2ne

a 2B bata bpm) ¥ OF the fede of Da-


imriid. nid after fhe fledye:and hath bene declared to be


the fonne of God wpth power after the {prete
that fanctifieth.fence p time ebat Jefus Emit


baue receaued grace and Apoltletbyp,that obe:
Dpence mpabte be gevenonto the faptbein hpg
name amonge all beathen, of whole ndbzepou

eerie ne elu Chut. os
call poutdat beat Rome, beloued of God
+ t.co}. t.a and fapntes bp election. Grace be wpth pou g
Galata peace fron God oure father,and from the Lord
Actus Cheptte. fpr verelp Jtbanke mp God
thozowe Jems Chzpite Eo pou all, that poure
` -fapth1s (poten of in all the wozld. W0? God ig
Hobu.tti,c mip Wptnes( bom Flerue,*wpth mp ({pretein
Gceztit-c the Golpel of hysfonne) that Without cealpng
spia A makbemencpon of pou, peapengaliapes+in
Collo.i,a Mmpprapers,that bp fome meane, at plafke( one
tpme oz other a peolperougiournep(bp f wpll

A


is people, and fap: |
egat.rid.b tiptb ante cares thall pe beare and fhall not.


Sol, lii,
of God) mpabte fortune me, tocome vutopou,
Stor Jlong tole pou, that Fmypghebeltowea- -
monge pou lome {ppzituall gpfte, to ftrenathe
pou topth all, that i8,that Jinpabebaue conta
lacion together with pou, though the commen
fapti, wbich both pe and F baue. :

4 wolde that pe huld Bnotwe( breth howe
that Jhaue ofté tpmes purpoled tocome vuto
pount baue bene lette betherto,tobauclome Act.rröi b

ute alfo amonge pou, agamonge-other ofthe
Gentples, Jam Detter both to the Grekesand .
tothe dngrekeg, to thelcarnedand tothe vn-
learned. 0 that(as muchas inmeis) Jamre
dpe to peeache the Golpell topou that are at
Rome alfo.*sfoz Jam not ahamed of p Gols tecie.rit«
pelof C hz, becaule* itis p power of God wns porie
tofaluacpon to euerpe one that beleucth, to the
Jc we fpzt andalio tothe Gentyll.
- Æo wp is the rpabteoutneife of God ope-.
nied from fapth to fapth. As itis w2ptren:* the ¢
tulle tballlpucbpfapth, Hhact.ft.4

forthe wrath of Godappeareth from bea- Saar?

uen againt all pngodlpnes and yurpabteoul: ~
nes of men, w E wptbolde the truthe in Vin-
rpghtcoufnes:fepnge* that it wbpche mape be ace.rvit.e
Knowwen of God, is manpfcl amonge them, be-
caule God bath ewed it unto them.* Eo? his acte.rtit.e
inuplpble thbpnaes (thatis to fapebpseternall Berra
power e godhed) aretene, fo: ag mucheag thep
are Dnderflandex bp the hozkes, from thecrea Pialrip 4
cponof the wozlde:o that thep are topthoute
ercule, becaufe that tobé thep knetbe God, thep
Lozpfpced bimnot ag God, nether tere thanb=

ul, but wared full of vanities tn their pmagp:
nacions.* And theirt folpthe hert was blpnbded, D«.rbit.e.
When hep counted them Celues wple, thep br-
came Fooleg, * andturned the glozpe ofthe tmz © fal. cvit
moztall God, vntoan pmage,made not onelpe It?
after the fpmilitude of a moztall man: but alfo
of bp2des,and foure foted*beaftes.and of crea: Eye piiiib
ppng bealles. Wiberfope, God gaue them vp to
bnclénes, thozotoe theluttes of their owneber-
tes todefple thepz owne bodpes amonce them
felues : wbpche chaunged bps tructi foz alpe.¢ x
worthepped andferued p thinges that he made
moze then bim that made them, whpcbe isto be
peapled Foz cuer.Amen. Wi perfore, God gané
them vp onto Hameful lutes: * €o2 ené thep2 renro.
ihemen dpd chaunge thenaturall vie intothat
tobpch is agapnit nature. Jndlpkewple allo p
men, lefte the naturall yfe ofthe oman, and
bente in tbhbep: lutes one wyth attother, * men Zarate
wpthmen wrought fyltbpnes,andreceaucd to
them felucs the rewarde of thep2erroure,asit
hag accozdpnge. |

And as thep rewarded not to knotbe God
* cuen lo God delpucredthem bp into a lewe + snot
mpnde, that thep Hulddotbole thpnges which
Wwerenot comenlp,bepnge full of all ynrpabtes
outneffe,forntcacton, wopckednes,couctoulnes,
malpcpoutnes, fullof enupe,murtber debapte
Dilcepte,cuel codicioned, Mhylperers,backebp=
ters,batcrs of God, difdainful, proud boaters
bzpngers vp of cuel thinges, dilobedient to fae
thet and mother, wpthout pioerttanbe tite
ucnalin


`


The Epittle


hiehawiite breakers, tuloupng. truce bzeabers,
Dimercpfull Wibpch men though thep knewwe,
om therprbtcoulnes of God-x(contyocred not pow p
thep whpeh commpt fuche thingeg are worthy
Osetia ofocathnoronlp-»ctyer that)d0 the fame*but al
C» Coon ther wea paue pleafure ih them poo them.

l € The.it.£hapter. Sak

A De redubeth the Fewes, whpche as touchpage

(pane are Ipke the Heathen,

arma Perfore act p inercufable, Oman
J) whofocucr thou be that * tudgefte.
d £02 in that fame where in thou iud


ah


i y pes) gett another, x thou cidemnett thp


Bites Eb For tobofoeuer bath (pnned withounte law, pal
 Tono.nid alfo perpfibe wpthoute latiore. Andag many as


paue fprined in the latve, halbe tudged bp the

x Faco.4d [aive . ozin thelpabte of Godthep « arenot

-  tpabteous wbhych beare thetawe:but the Docrs

€ oe tbe latve (halbe tnfified. Fo? whan the Gen

tyles tobych bane not the lawe,do of nature the

thinges cotepned in the latve:then thep Haupng

not the lawe,atea latwe bnto the felues, tobpch

fhewe the dede of (he latwe Hogptten in thep2 ber

tes tobyle thepa confepence beareth wptnes wn

to theit,and alto their thouqhtes, accufing one

agat.erb.c another, of excufpnge. at the Daye x toben the

- Lozde hall iudge the fecretes of men, bp Jelug
Chul, accozdpnge to my Golpell. piz

 eboldexthouartecalleda Jete, and trul-

teft in the latbe,and makel thp boat of God, E

-knowelt bps wpl and alowelt-thetbynges that

be erecllent,and art infourmed bp the lato: and

beleuette that thou chp felfearte a gupde ofthe

blpnde.alpgbt oftbem whpchateindarckenes

an infozmer of them whych lacke dpfcrecpon, a

teacherof thevnlearned, which batt p enfampi e

of bnotoledae.¢ of the truth bp thelaw. Chou

therfoze whpebe teachell another; teacheft not


i


Fob. biit, ¢


ý rpmaalpar,asit is tozpteé:* that thoumpg


thy felfe. x Chou preachelf, aman Houldenot at.vii2.
feale :pet thou ftealelt, Chouthatlapett,ama D ~
{pulde not commpt aduoutrpe beeakefte wed-
locke Chou abbozreft pmages, and pet robbeft
God of bps honoure. Chou f maket thp boa
ofthe Since oats tf thelawedptho-
noureft God. wo? the name of God ig evel [po-
ken of amonge the Gentples, thozowe pou* ag Err.ii.s
ít ig to2ptten. by ataa iite verelpquap- “°FFFEGD
letb.pE thon kepe p lawe. Dutit p bea breaker
ofthe latoe,tbp citcumcitponis turnedto vncir
cumcifpon. Therfozre, pf the vneircäcpfed kepe —
therpgbt thynges contapned in the late , thall 6
nothps oncircucplpon be cot ted fog circitcitto:
And thallnot pncpeciicilio which bp nature( pe
it kepe the latve )iudae f, which mie on ht
letter andcpeciicplpo,doef tranigrefie p lawe’
cig not a Jewe,whpche is a Jewe out warde.
Lerber igit ciecumcifion wbich is ontwarde in


» the leipe. Wut* heisa Jewe which is bpd with soy, vrir.


in,and*tbhe cpzcumcpfpon of the bert is thetrue omic.


irb
sprcumcpipon, whpehe confpiteth in the fpzete #2


and notin the letter, wbofs pzaple ig not of men
butof God. - | ete
© The, fii. Chapter.


Be Hewelh what preterment the Hewes haur, and thal
both the Hewes and Hentples are baber (pune, g areiuls
tifped onip bp the Grace of Godin Chpt


=e pat peeferment thenbathp Jewe: F
A Veer 02 what aduauntagcth cpzcumep-
A seep {pons Surelpe verp muche, Epzite
AVAVAN *becaule that bunto them were com rompa
oe eS mptted the wozdes of God. What
then thougbfome of them dpdnot beleuesxthal a, xrim,tid
eper onnea nabr scene oes ut
etfect: God forbpd.* Let Godbe true, andteue: +40.


it tg E b
tet be inltpfped in thy fapenges. andouercome *Praha:
when thou art tudged.

Wut pl oure vurpgbhteoulnes make the rpab- $
feoulnes of God moze ercellent : tpat Dali ine
faper Js God Durpaghteous, whpchtaketh wen
geaunce | Nie ter the maner of men)Ged

ozbpd. to: howe then hal God indge f wozld
E02 pE the truth of God appeare moze ercellent
thozowe mplpe, onto bys praple, wpp am F
bence forth tudged aga fpnner : and not rather
(ag men f{peakeeuel of bg andas lomeaftpzme
that wefage)lette pedo cuell, that good mape
cor etherot.G@ipofe dampnacponisi ff.

tbat then‘ Are the better then thep: Rong
no wple. Fog We hauealreadpe proued, bowe p
boty Jewegand Gentplegare all onder (pune,
ag itis oaptten.* Chere is none epabteous.ne sea.rtitie
not one:therets none that onbderfkandeth, there aeia
is none that (ebeth after God: they ate all cone
out of the toape,thep are al vnpzofitable, there
ig none f Doth qood, nonot one.« Thep: thaot


dplceaucd : the popfon ofalpes is wnderthep z
ipppes.* Whale mouthets ful of curipnge and yaran.
bptterneg.+ Tbeir fete are (topkt to Hedblom. + 0,4.
* Deliructio and topetchednes are tn thepz Wa = yra ipb
peg, € the wapeofpeace baue thepnotknoweit
There aaee a pfa.rFrbia


“
9


|


-igan ope fepulchze, with thep2 tiges thep bau e hice


—


=


The Epittle


hiehawiite breakers, tuloupng. truce bzeabers,
Dimercpfull Wibpch men though thep knewwe,
om therprbtcoulnes of God-x(contyocred not pow p
thep whpeh commpt fuche thingeg are worthy
Osetia ofocathnoronlp-»ctyer that)d0 the fame*but al
C» Coon ther wea paue pleafure ih them poo them.

l € The.it.£hapter. Sak

A De redubeth the Fewes, whpche as touchpage

(pane are Ipke the Heathen,

arma Perfore act p inercufable, Oman
J) whofocucr thou be that * tudgefte.
d £02 in that fame where in thou iud


ah


i y pes) gett another, x thou cidemnett thp


Bites Eb For tobofoeuer bath (pnned withounte law, pal
 Tono.nid alfo perpfibe wpthoute latiore. Andag many as


paue fprined in the latve, halbe tudged bp the

x Faco.4d [aive . ozin thelpabte of Godthep « arenot

-  tpabteous wbhych beare thetawe:but the Docrs

€ oe tbe latve (halbe tnfified. Fo? whan the Gen

tyles tobych bane not the lawe,do of nature the

thinges cotepned in the latve:then thep Haupng

not the lawe,atea latwe bnto the felues, tobpch

fhewe the dede of (he latwe Hogptten in thep2 ber

tes tobyle thepa confepence beareth wptnes wn

to theit,and alto their thouqhtes, accufing one

agat.erb.c another, of excufpnge. at the Daye x toben the

- Lozde hall iudge the fecretes of men, bp Jelug
Chul, accozdpnge to my Golpell. piz

 eboldexthouartecalleda Jete, and trul-

teft in the latbe,and makel thp boat of God, E

-knowelt bps wpl and alowelt-thetbynges that

be erecllent,and art infourmed bp the lato: and

beleuette that thou chp felfearte a gupde ofthe

blpnde.alpgbt oftbem whpchateindarckenes

an infozmer of them whych lacke dpfcrecpon, a

teacherof thevnlearned, which batt p enfampi e

of bnotoledae.¢ of the truth bp thelaw. Chou

therfoze whpebe teachell another; teacheft not


i


Fob. biit, ¢


ý rpmaalpar,asit is tozpteé:* that thoumpg


thy felfe. x Chou preachelf, aman Houldenot at.vii2.
feale :pet thou ftealelt, Chouthatlapett,ama D ~
{pulde not commpt aduoutrpe beeakefte wed-
locke Chou abbozreft pmages, and pet robbeft
God of bps honoure. Chou f maket thp boa
ofthe Since oats tf thelawedptho-
noureft God. wo? the name of God ig evel [po-
ken of amonge the Gentples, thozowe pou* ag Err.ii.s
ít ig to2ptten. by ataa iite verelpquap- “°FFFEGD
letb.pE thon kepe p lawe. Dutit p bea breaker
ofthe latoe,tbp citcumcitponis turnedto vncir
cumcifpon. Therfozre, pf the vneircäcpfed kepe —
therpgbt thynges contapned in the late , thall 6
nothps oncircucplpon be cot ted fog circitcitto:
And thallnot pncpeciicilio which bp nature( pe
it kepe the latve )iudae f, which mie on ht
letter andcpeciicplpo,doef tranigrefie p lawe’
cig not a Jewe,whpche is a Jewe out warde.
Lerber igit ciecumcifion wbich is ontwarde in


» the leipe. Wut* heisa Jewe which is bpd with soy, vrir.


in,and*tbhe cpzcumcpfpon of the bert is thetrue omic.


irb
sprcumcpipon, whpehe confpiteth in the fpzete #2


and notin the letter, wbofs pzaple ig not of men
butof God. - | ete
© The, fii. Chapter.


Be Hewelh what preterment the Hewes haur, and thal
both the Hewes and Hentples are baber (pune, g areiuls
tifped onip bp the Grace of Godin Chpt


=e pat peeferment thenbathp Jewe: F
A Veer 02 what aduauntagcth cpzcumep-
A seep {pons Surelpe verp muche, Epzite
AVAVAN *becaule that bunto them were com rompa
oe eS mptted the wozdes of God. What
then thougbfome of them dpdnot beleuesxthal a, xrim,tid
eper onnea nabr scene oes ut
etfect: God forbpd.* Let Godbe true, andteue: +40.


it tg E b
tet be inltpfped in thy fapenges. andouercome *Praha:
when thou art tudged.

Wut pl oure vurpgbhteoulnes make the rpab- $
feoulnes of God moze ercellent : tpat Dali ine
faper Js God Durpaghteous, whpchtaketh wen
geaunce | Nie ter the maner of men)Ged

ozbpd. to: howe then hal God indge f wozld
E02 pE the truth of God appeare moze ercellent
thozowe mplpe, onto bys praple, wpp am F
bence forth tudged aga fpnner : and not rather
(ag men f{peakeeuel of bg andas lomeaftpzme
that wefage)lette pedo cuell, that good mape
cor etherot.G@ipofe dampnacponisi ff.

tbat then‘ Are the better then thep: Rong
no wple. Fog We hauealreadpe proued, bowe p
boty Jewegand Gentplegare all onder (pune,
ag itis oaptten.* Chere is none epabteous.ne sea.rtitie
not one:therets none that onbderfkandeth, there aeia
is none that (ebeth after God: they ate all cone
out of the toape,thep are al vnpzofitable, there
ig none f Doth qood, nonot one.« Thep: thaot


dplceaucd : the popfon ofalpes is wnderthep z
ipppes.* Whale mouthets ful of curipnge and yaran.
bptterneg.+ Tbeir fete are (topkt to Hedblom. + 0,4.
* Deliructio and topetchednes are tn thepz Wa = yra ipb
peg, € the wapeofpeace baue thepnotknoweit
There aaee a pfa.rFrbia


“
9


|


-igan ope fepulchze, with thep2 tiges thep bau e hice


—


=


fo the Roinaynes. oll, >

Attie knotwe that tobatfoeuer thpnges the teoufnesg offaptb.twbpchbehadvetbeynee tne |

wwe tare it lapthit to them whpch are wonder. Amir in dy Sipes aipe eigi

the lawe. Thatallmouthes mape be ftopped, € themthat belene,tbough thep be not cpzcumep:

hat all the wozlbemapebefubducdto@od, be fed,thatrpghteoutnes mpabe be imputed to thé

Galette. caulethat*bp thededes of thelatoc ther pal no. alfo:andthat he mpabt be father of cpzcumcp-


| | aC mepfpon, |
Foz the poun tbat bethuld be thebepze of ¢ |


rb the deade :
iche benot |
as though thep were. |


Wibich Abzabam,contrarpe to hope, beleticd
inbope,that be thouldebe the * father of manp Seu,f bile
ire" D : nacions,accozdpnyetothat whpchwas {poke:

— God ofthe Gentples ‘Yes, euéofthe Gentples xeuenlotpall thp fede be,cecasthetarres of peauen, Bene.sb. d


Pe declareth bp the erample of Abzabam,that fapeh
dutptpeth, and not the latwe no; the wozkes therof,
semen Dat (pall helape then, p* Abza
a bamour father (as partapnpng
tothe flethe )dpdfpnod:PEAbza-
4 hain were (ulttfied bp dedes, thé
e Dathe be herein toretople : but
Anot pth God. For what fapth
f the rt Na at belenen


fap. lia iN a :


Men. tb b
mala.ti.a


Ioud og. Cohpin pworketd,is the reward notreke


Li


> then vponthe pncpecumcplpon,o2 vpon the cir-
MAy cumepipon alfo fog Wwe ape, that fapthe wag
rekened to Abraham fo: tyghteoutnes. Howe
bedi inh sleek aA Sg


' —-spfponfozwbenbe tas inthe oucpecumepipar -
Senerh.b x Mot inthe tpme Ly sy wg bop b


was yet Dnepecumepled, And be receaued th
menrvitd xipgne of cpecumcplyon,as a feale of the rygh-


x


nozpetconfpdercd bys owne bodpe whpch was |


nowe dead cué when be was almot anbudzed
pearold:netber pet ý Dara was pall chpldbea-
puge. ie flackerednotat the pzomes of Gon
thozotve vubelefe:but became tronge in fapthe
py wep nent Sa e ae certifped,
that be whpcb bad prompted the fame was able
alfo fomakeit qood. And therfore asit reke-
nedtobpmfozrpabtcoufnes, = =—=s_—

* freuertheletic it ig not tozptten fog byitt uoina.the
onelp,that tt was rekened to DiRe to; rpgbteour- go
nes, but alto fo? b8,f0 Whomett thalbe counted
on(foz rpgbteou tnes)(O that toe beleuc on bpm that a»
rapled bp Jefus our woe from the dead: wbich
was wy Sey foz ontetpnnes,and wag rapfed
agapne foz our inftifpcacpon,

The. Y. Chapter,


~ | Ecaufe therfore tbat we are tit: 3
a) Ete, tified bp fapth, we are at* peace Sohal
<e A WPth God, thozotve our Logde
yon Vea) elas Chailt:bp whome allore
wae” gq) haunted Dnto bs to be brought


nate 4


ce,wberin toe (tande,andareiopce th Dope OF a,
re oftbe chplbyen o£ God. yao toes pats Bsa à


louc of Godts theed absobe in our berteg,bp the
a0


epbeit.s f€o2r* tober the there pet toeake,accozdpnge xivealfo Huld talkeinanewelpfe. Ff 02 pF we che.
coiote so ehe tpme,Cbeplt oped for bs which were on begraftein death l kento bpm, cuen fo Wall


tom
iala
Eri
JELE


eg of fpnne, pe bane pet obcped D


| of be bpoughtebnto. * Peare thenmadefrefrom aop. |
rpabteoutnes hallrapane oy lpfebp meang. {pnne,andate become the feruauntes of rpahte Homi


dalade np be maderpghteous. Wut * the lawe itn the PATA pria maa iapa badpethen -
incanetpmeentred in,that finne Huld encreafe int
Meuerthelater Mohereaboundafice of fpnne was. forf nde d


i there was moze plenteoufneg of grace. Thatag arepe delpuered from (pnne,andmade the fers
| _ fpnnebadrapanedbntodeath, cuen fompgbte uañtég of God,and baue pour frutetobe fanctt |
| gracerapane thozowe Epabteoutuelic, wuto g=
| ternall lpi bp the belpe of Jeu Chik. fK
Che. vt.Chapter.


Efor Co much as we de delpucced chezowe Chr from

{prine,twc mut fath ion our (eiues to Ipue as the feruaun:
æ N tes of God, and not after our otwne lutes.Zhe bulpkelp

ritwarde ofrpgbtroulnes and pone.
mamma bat thal we fape then? Spal tee cd
ETEA tyne tn fpnne, tbat there mape be


Hino
Cold peofopinte Jelu Chattte are bap dyer
bpm: Wie ate burped thë worth pim bpbaptyme fró

fox todpe:tbatipkcwpieag Chrifte wasrapled ma lpueth the couple her felfe wptpanother ma

‘vp from death bp the glop ofthefather,eucnfo Me thalbe counteda webdlocke beaker. ut yf

+ | the


Pee chpnae tae Ape anp lengerthet=
wepeno a


ad Ta the Romaes ARO. ibi


ull theman be deade, the is freFrom the lawe ofthe (ers Herc is then no Dampnacton to them à

ng bulbande , fothat thetsno wedlocke breaker, | Sy ea wbpche arcin Chepite Fett , wobpebe `

m | though the couple ber felfe wpe another man. E2 P walk notafrer the fled but aftce the

be ; - Cuenlo pe allo (mp becthee) avedveadconcers al {pacte. oz thelawwe of the {pacte, of

e neng tbe lawe, bp thedadp of Chritt:p pethuld ipfe thozowe efus Ehipt, hath made mextre e
I: 15 be coupled toanother ( ¥ meane to dün pis tP: fromthe lawe offpnne,and Deathe.*fFo. What Ram ud
De 4,200. fenagapnefrd death) ý we hould bepugfosth the tawe coulde notdo (Inas muche as it wag 9° vu."
nd Erute unto God. for whawe were tathefich weake becaute oftbeiledy) that pecformedgod ~
J= the lutes of (pnne whic biwere Mered bp bp the and *fent bisfennein the fpintittude of ee “uil ta re
10 Fpoca,i _ lawe, rapnedin our membzeg,tobzpagfoztde A ee, and by fpane damned (pune in the heme, 2°"

t y3 trute bntodeathe. But nowe ate we delinered thartherpehtcoufnes ofthe tato, night he ful

apia froin the lawe, and dead vnto it, wberunto we FpHed in Vg, whych allie not after the Flefthe,

ae were in bondage, thar wr Huld ferne ina newe but after the Nete. ;

3 conuctiacto of the {yzcte, and noc inthe olde ci- fF 02 Hcp that arc calnal, arecarnallpmpn- 25

* ucrfacton ofthe letter. ; | ded. Wut thep that are {pprituall,are abottelp

fc Chat Mall wr fape then isthe lawefpune? mpnded.Co be carnallp minded, iS Death. Wut


e omv.c Oodfozbpd,ncucrtheles,* ¥ knewe not pane, to befppzptually mpnded,is ipfeanDpeace. fe
ç jalacuth butbp plavoc. Eo: 3 badnot knawé Whariutk wWecaufe chat the flethip mpndeisencinpea-
a grod.ree DAD Mcante,excevte the lawe haboelapasthou gapntte God, forit isnot ovcdicnt tothe lame
e web {haltnor inh, Sut pnr tostan Hccalponvpp 5 God, nethercan be. Sothen they chatare in
4 meanes ofthe commaundemente and wrouge the flefhe,can not pleafe Goo.
Bs, inmeall mance ef concuppt(cence. Fo: Vercel Iut pearcnotintheflethe, butin the fyete
= g wprHhoute fhelawe,{pnne was deade. F once li- ptfobe that the (pete of God divellin pou.
Hed wyptpoutlaw: at when the comimaundes DEanp ma bauenot the {prete of Chrit, pfame
Ps ment caine, (Pune reupucd, and wag deade. isnone of hig. PEC hep be in pou, the bodpeig
i ` qœ oud the Deepe fame commaundemente, wbpey dead decaule of (pine, but tbe Tezeteig Ipfe foz
/ E asaerepaed vito Ipfe, was found tobe pute righteoutnes fakr. Uberto, pitbelppepte of
: ran | mean occafpon ofdcath. Fo (pune tore occa- bpm that rapicd vp Fetus from death, dwellin
ptt REE, ipon bp the meanes of the commanndemente, g pou:euen be tbat capied vp Chzilte from death
: Laimo t p PVD ne, bp the fame tiewe me.Cdiber> fpallqupeken pour moztall bodpes, becaufe of
j Saanut fOzexthe lawe ig holp,and tie TOrINAUNDEMEE Hes Cprete chat owellee} in pou.
D Holy and mi z qood. Wiagtiat che wbich wag Hit Tierfozebeetheen, we aredettces, not Ë
i good made death vuto me ¢ Govfogbpd. A ape tothe flety toliue ager tie ficly.f€o2 pE Wweitue
it boas ipine:that ipnne mpg breappeare (bp it after the ficthe.pe Hat dpe: Wut pf Pe thozotve
nob. biti Which was good )to woke death in mehine Fhe Cpyete ) Do inoztifpe the dedes of the bodpe,
Rombi -bp thecomimaundrment might be oute of meas pe Mal lpúe: ffo2 ag many agare led bp Pfpecte
-> faeefpnfal.sfo2 we nowe that ede law ip fyr- of God, they arethefoncs of God, or pe baue
Efa. uha ritual out Yam carnal * [olde vader (pune, be- not teccaued the lozeteof ey to feare anp |
WEAR canfe 3 alow not that whicd Fo o. Fo what ZI m 0e butxpe bauereceauedthe {pecte OF adop- Galati g
: w910,tbat da F not:but what y Date,thatdoy cion theehp woecrpe: ¥ bba father. + Cheflame Timo Ly
Er Ydo nowe fiat which J woidnot, Feofent fpretecertifpeth ou fpacte that te are the fone t tor-t0
D yntothe lawethat itis FOOD. Dotdennow, it neg of God. PE we be fonnes, thenare weallo epbe.t.e
iS not Sthacoort, burlpane powelicchinme, pecs 3 meane of Ood, Hetres annexed with
. Jo? A hnovee, that tnime(thatis folapetninp Chud.rflobe that we luffer with br, that toe
o eilethe Owelleth no good thing. ozto wplis mape be aifo Glozifped Tee vane bpm. Fe
os peefent wptpine:but ¥ fpnd no meanes to per: pioto: 4 iuppote thatthe afflpctpons of D
rome chat whichis good. JEo2the qoodtbat 3 thislpfe, arenot mozthpeofthe glozpe, whiche
l wolde, d0 F not:but theeuel whicb {wold N albe (ewed vpon ve x Io: the Fernét DIP Ze i tobi
Seneti tbat do F.DEAdothat J wolde not, tüenisit oftheceeature abpdetdlokpnge wienthe fom-
pama b not 3 that Doit, but fpnnethat dwclletdtnme. neg ofod thal appere, becanfe thecreature is
Ke J fpnvd tien by the lawe, that when J Wolbedo {usdued to banptpe, agapntt rhe wopll thereof,
good enclis pretent tome For F dcipteiný bytfozbig wpil whith barh Lubdewed the fame
lawe of God, after the inwarde man: Sul Ble in hope. ffo? tbe fame creature halbe delpuered
% guotheriawe in mp mebees, rebeilpag arani from the bondage of coprupeton into the glozp=
a." — thelawe of my mpnde, and fubdupng me Dit) ous lpberty of the fines of Gon. jt 02 We Know
= theiave of{pune, whpch is inimp memes. dD ehateucrpe creature Sroncth with vsalfo, and
A wetea manthat Fan: who tpatiocituce me trauapleth inpapne euen bntothistpme.
coe from thyg bodp fubducd vnto death 3 thanke Pot onelp it, but we alfowhpcochaue the
| God thozowe Jefus C pall our Lord. So then fpafte frutesoftbefpeete, mozne inoure {elucs
~~. Bopebt be mpnde y ferye thclawcot God, but alfo, and Wapte forthe adopctonexcof the cyplorce gg
WitH tbe Flee the lawe vf pine. of Sod.) Cuen the delineraunce ofourbodp. ja
Hi CS _ pst Sto2 We arefaued by hope. But bope that
She the nie Selec n of God f- E aa. ee, seer sae neues
in uibice ehcitey Gite eee eee that: uptcue pe leetbs Wurand pf woe hope for p
Bethbusm@ots alites -Thc abo = sich Paget at a elt ahs
DaUnSlOucotBedieasnoe senate TO o enot, then do te with pacience abide OH


lath, b


a F = n a ee T = Ss ace ag z ,
i JER ee O A i rh Thre. + =


| The Cpittle -
Lylsecople, thetpecte alfa helpeth our PUPA thechpldzen of tht flebre are not the chitneen of
mntties. Fo: wore know not Wdattodefpreas te CGod.25ut thei wh: ch be “he chilozen of pzomicg
© ouggt:bar cde Cozete maketbintercelts for 08 are counted the fede. For this isa wod of pro- geu.Kbits, b
para ha) Teonpnites Whpchecan not be expelled. meg *aboutthis TRUE ey Fcome, an Sarg STFS:
Ee? nd «be that {earchethebebea reessinoweth,  allpauca fanne. ot onip thys,but alto Re-
Sive  Whatte chemeanpnge ofthefpzpte, Foz he ma becca wag wth chplie bp one euen bp ote fae
{Saco BeEbunterceflpon fo2 ebeCapnees, accozvpngto ther Glace Hop pet the childze wer borne, whé e
> thepleature of God. fe toep bad netber Done gooonceber bad that the $
Wie kuowe ebatal thpnges twozkefoz the purpoteof Gop bp electio, might tand) it wag
bet vite themthatlouc Sod, whpcbealloare fap Pa renot bp the reafon oF workers, but sige
called of purpole for thate whicyycknewbe- bp ebecaller. xebelter Wal feructhe ponger, ag 28
Fore, be alto erdepned before, thatebep Qulave iris pepité. Jacob baue 4 loucd, but Efau Danc
lyke fa broned vata the Gape of pis fonne,tbat 3 bated. bat thal we tay thé? is ther anp vn- -
be mpadre be tive fpzfte begotten fonne among readteoufenetle with God Godfozs, ozbe x
manp breti? sor oucr, whom be appointed Ce Ee x J wil bewe mercpro whom SET :
before them alio ne called. Jnd whom pe Dati Corner Jewe meccp:¢ wpil Hane compattion
called, toen alfo beim Gifted:and wyom beinki on Wwhomfoeuer Jbauecompatio . So lpethit
fred, ches be aiM glonfped. not tben ina mag wpllo: runnpnge, but in the
Sijat Hali we then lape totbele thpngeg? mercpeof God. forthe fcripturefa th vnto
HHCUUS *F FoO0 be on our lpye, who canbeagapnt ys Wharao: x Enen fo? tbig fame purpolehaue J kgton.tet
Entectb Whpehe fparcd notis ow ue lonn, y butgaue iteredthe Yp, to Mewe mp power onthe ethat i =
etima Dinfo Dealt-bowecaritbe that witb binbe mpnamempayebere ee t ON ciples \
{hontde not geue Bo ai thynges allor petal yyoaloe: So bath be mercp on whom be wplil, g Y
lape anp ropnae to the charge of G ods cholet! whom be wpil be mabethbeardperted. E:
tt is God thar u itfped-myois De pean condês Thou wpltfape then Ynto mewhp the bla: m A
neritisd pR tobpeb dpedspe: rather whichis rmethbe vg pees 4 02 who bath beable to relit abate |
tyfon agapne, whicbisalfoontberpaybt bande pig WPI Sut D man, what arty which dp- eteme |
of God, and materh uiterces lonfo2 vs, (putctt with GodsSbhalj the ozkelape tothe Jeroma on
Cibo Hal parat: vs from the loue of God! workeman:whp yah thou made me on this fa- |
hati rey bulactonsoz angupiyero; perfecvepo: thor arhnot P potter power oner p clap, euen |
epider bongercepthernakeduesrcpipee parell? of tbe fame lompetomate one veffell vuto ag
pfa.gliitin CPtDCe EmDeAL Oc! <i ptt ig wepttens fos thy fake nou roan) another vito bpthonoure’ Eucnto,
ate we kpiled ai tape longe, ano are counfedag God willing totpew hig Wath, gto make big
forpeapopntcd tovettapne Menertheles. nalt power Knowen: fuffeed with long pacience the
tbele thpnges we oucresme thozowe bim that effets of weath, opdepned to damnacté, and to
loucd vs. Moz Janafure,tharneptheedeath, declare therpcbesof bis glozp onthe veficls of
hepther Ipfe ncptber aungels,nozrulc,nepther Alto ie tee be bad prepared bntoglozp wbom
polver,nepther thpnges pecicnt, neptderthpn: alfo be called. not of the Yewes onelpe, butalfo ©
ges to come, neptber b-pabte. nepeberloweth, ofthe Gentpicg. Asbelaperhalfoto Dire: xy Dieetin
netberanp otber ceeaturethalbeableta depart  topil call them mp people whpche were not mp 9-0:
bs from the lone of God,wpichigin Eat Je peopiccanp ver beloncd wbich wasnot beloucd
fuourhode H (and berto daue optaynedmerepe, that had nat
C Ebe.ir.Thappter. arinen mercp. ) Andit Halicome to pafe, p
T Pante complainety b


utie Yarde Dectes ofthe Jelves, sc ete, aite . f T Dp:
that molpe nol ceccaug Eie akt bAa Hof hedged tn tbe place wher it wagfapd vnto them: care


Yolen im Cir Meade not mp people, there balltbep be called rchpl=
IT Tas Dape thetruthe in Chepfte,andlpe d:en of the liupng Goo. Í
+ PY 2 lm (Moe mpconfeencealfo bearpng me Mut Clap cepeth cocernpne 7 Frael, xthongh


D elap
ANA Otnes bp the bolp hot) p Fhbaune the nombze of the childzë of Jfracl be as p fano =i
rs gan) Teeatebeupnes, anv contpnuall fo- ofthelee,pet the temnaut albe faued. j€o2 be
graig a OWL in mip perte. Eor F haue wpf- fpnpetd the twozd verelp, andmakethit hort
pete WWeo mp feifto be curfen frö but, fozmpbre- in ryadteoutnes. Foza Mozte wozde wpl Goo
tizen (mp kpn fmen és perfampng to ğflepe) make on carth.Andas Elapfapd befoze:+ er ERPS
Wopcbe are the Jiraclites. To wyi Bettaineth ceptthe Lozd of Habboth had lefte yg fede, toe
ay EDe adopcion, s- Cottbe coore ana the glozp,and pad bene made as Sodoma, and bad bene like- FE
womaiia thecoucnauntes*e fbe latoe that was geuen,¢ nev to Gomorra .Wpat thal we fap then? Ule ~
tde lerutce of God,andtheprom pits:whofeal- fape,thattbe Gentils Wich Folowed not righ- ‘
to acerbe fathers and thep ofwhom(asconcee teoutnes bane Oucrfaben tightcoulnes: eué the
25 nypnge tbe fletbe bsilkcane, whichis God m rpgbteoulnes which com etdoffapth, Cotra rp
all topngesto ve praplcd for cuer, Imen, wple, Ifrael wbich folowed the lai of righte:
Flpeate not thete rbinges, as though Pwo: outnes,could notateapn ty the lawe of rightes


- Moma.1i-d. Des Of Godbadde taken none elect. Foz xthep outties. Wi herfoze reuen becaute t fought i¢

| arenotall Jfraclptes, whichare of altact.neps not bp fapth : butasg it were bp tDemapbenees
ene.. ÉD ave thep ali cpplosen Grapgbt wape, that lawe. Joz tbep baue fombledat ee tõblpnge

 gbowue ppo noe Uedect Ybzabam, Wut xin Flaacthall one. Xs it ig vepren. xB ebolde, F putin Ders uvira
om.i.. top fede becalled: His tolaye, ‘they wppbeare ona tombling tone,¢ a rocke that men haty gee


i


c


l + ô
: a) Ss Ee eee n a on Ap m]
| i i faa ir!
> N - s E Er


Tp the Romapnes.


offendedvat. And whofoener beleucth on bpm;
{pall not beconfounded,
C€Thbe.r.Chapter. re
@ Ebe vufapchfulnes of Che yews:
Tiwo maner oftpehteoulnelles.
Arthen, mp hertesdelpze g peaper
pay Pato Eod Fo? Jiraclig that tbep mpabe
Swa Wibe faued. Eo: J beare them recozde, ý
eda they baue a feruente mpnde to God-
warde but notacco:dpnae to knowledge. Wor
thep bepnge iqnozaunt of Sods rpghteoulnes,
and gopng about to fablpihe thep2 ownerpgd-
| feoulnes,baue not bene obedient brito the at
ggety.v.c teoutnes of God. & Kor Chpiftets thefultpl
` = [pnore of the lawwe,to iuftifpe all that belene.
a sea.rotits Joz * Poles wyptieth of the rpyabteoufneg
Salatid soHychcommeth of te latwe bowe that the man
fohych doth p thpnages of p la we, pall lpue ther:
m by. Aut the rygbtcoutnes whpche cometh, of
fapth,(peaketh on thps wple: pape not thou in
thpne berte, who thall afcende into beauër (that
ig euen to fetch Chet dotone from aboue. )Cp-
a ther who Wall defcende into the depe: (that ig
euen tofetche bp Chzifte agapne from death.)
- peut prec Pout what lapth be! * Che wozdig npe the eun
Ge inthpmouthbandinthpneberte. |
| hps tame ts the worde of fapth, whpcb we
preach. Eo? pf thou knowledge With tdp mouth
that Jelug is the Lozd, and beleue in thpne pert


L]


FolIhbij,


cyan Dave then bath Goo caft atbape bis A


hard’ Pac: people Sod fozrbpd. Foz even ¥ alfo

S iaman Jfracipteof peed of Abpabia

SA , O41 of the trpbe of WenZamin God bath
eae NOt call awape bps people bych be

Knewe befoze. Wote penot, what the {erppture

fapth of deliagshotve be maketh intercerceflion

to Godagainit Alrael,fayég:* Lozde,thep haue t.1e.rir.b
Kplled thy pzophetes,and dpgged dowone thpne,

alters: and J am lefte alone, andthep fekemp
lpfe. ut what lapeth the anfiwere of God Ynfo tirera
bpm: *Zbaue relerucd bnto mp felfefeué thous

fande men, whpch bauenot bowedtheknectos


l- pmageof Baal. Cuen fo alfo at thps tyme is


there a remnaunt left,accozdpnge to the eleccps

of grace. DEit be of grace, then igit not note of
wozkes:Jtoz then grace ts nomoze grace. Wut _.

pE it be of wozkes,then ts it note no grace. Toz 5
then were Delerupng nomoze delerupng. Wibat

then? 3frael bath not obtapned that whpche be
feketh-but the eleccion bathe obtapnedit. Che
remnatite are blpndeD,accozdpnge agitigwozit —
ten. *God bath geuen them the lpeete of vngui- grr tit
etnes:epes that they Hulde notte, € cares tbat zopn.cit.¢
thep thulde not beare euen bnto this dap.tand ap eth
Dauid fapeth: Let thep: table be made a (nave PFF
to take them wythall,andan occafpon tofal, ¢
areward Dito them. Let thep2 epes be blpnded
that thep fe not:¢ bowe thou Dotone thep2 backe


that God raple bpm wp from death,thoutbalt aliwa


be aje i tobeleue with the berte iuftpfp-

; eth:¢ to knowledgewpth the mouth maketh a

eta rroitto man Cafe. Jeo? the terppture fapth: *tbofocucr
beleueth on bpm, Hall not be confounded.

- @hereis no diferente betivene the Jewe and

: the gentpl.J€oz one ig Lozd of al, whpchistpcd

oits- ontoal that cal pd bim. orx whofoeuer doth

dctes.tt.¢ call onthename ot the Lozbe,thalbe lafe. owe

anorrit hon pall thep call on bpm,on tobom thep baue

not belened/ Bowe thall thep beleue on bpm, of


wha they baucnot heard bowe Hall the Heare,


wpthouta preachers And howe thal they preach

sere epep be fent as itis weytté:botve beau-

tpfull are the fete of them whch bepnge tpdpn-

tres of peace,and bepng tpdpnges of good thyna

D aes But they hauenotal obepedto the Golpel

tiap. a E0} lap fapth:* Lorde, wbo bath beleucd our

Fova.rii.a Capencres: Soo then fapthconimeth bp Hearpug

and bearprge cometh bp the wod of God, Wut

' “Wtalrip.a 7 afke:haue thep not bearde! Modoubte*thepe

. founde went out inte all landes and thepz wor-

pesinto the endes of the wozlie. F si

Wut Foematde, whether Frael dpd bnotve

eu.rrrite 0L NOES prte Boles fapeth: *F tepli pzoucke

| pou to enup,bp them that are no people:bp a fo:

Ippe nacton 3 wpll anger pou: Clap after that

#{ap.ti.d, ig bolde andlapeth:* Fam founde of them, that

yida Conahteme not: 3am manpfett nto them.chat

afken not after me. ut agapntt Zlracl be fap:

eta ippa eth: * all Dapelongebaue J ftretched forthe mp

ve’ panes pita people that beleuethnot, but ipea:
gethagapnitme.  — .
Beasa E The ti. Caper:


qT althe Fewesarenot cal awape therfore Paul ivarnéth,
the gentpies $ be called motto bebpe mpnbed no? Co defppre
the jerwes, foe thetungenentes of Bop abe bepe € Feceetes


ware. |
Alape then:bane thep therfoze fombled, that
thep thulde vtterlp fal atwap togethers God fo:
bpd:but th ozotve thep2 fallis faluacpon happe-
ned Dnto the Gentples,foz to prouoke the wyth
all.UWdiberfoze pf the fall of thé be the rpebes of
the toozlde ethe mpnpippnge of thé prpches of
the Sentples: Hote muche moze thep2 perfect-
nefles J lpeaketopouGentples,inasmucheas
xJam the Apoftle of the Gentpleg, J topl ma- arty
gnpfpe mpne offpce,pEbp anp meane J map p70 ticima.e,
uoke them which are mp Rebe and mpabt lane
fome of them. Foz pf the caltpnge awape of thé
be the reconcplpnge of the wo:lde:twbat al the
teceaupngeof them be, but lpfe agapne fromde-
ath? oz pf one pece be holpe, the whole heape
is bolp: And pt theroote be polpe, the bzaunches
fhalbebolp alfo.

Though fome of the baaunches be beoken of, C
and thou bepnge a wplde olpuetree, watt graft
in amonge them,and made partaker of the rote —
and fatnes of the*olpue tree,boatt norehp felfe sere.ti.c:
agapnffe the bzaunches. Jo? pi thou boalte thp
felfe thou bearefte not therote,but therote the.
‘Chou whlt tape then:the braunches are bioken
ofthat 3 mpght be grafte tn. Thou lapet well
becaute of wnbeleuc thep were bzoken of,¢ thou
todet tledfatte infapthe. Wenot byempnoded.
but feare:foz fcpnge that God {pared not thena
tuvall beaunches,take bede.teft tt come to patie
thatbetparcnotthbealfo, e
- Webolde therfore fhe kpådhes andrpaozoul- D
hes of God:on them thpebe fell, rypqozoutnes:
but totvarbe Fae owe pE thou contpnue in
bis tpndnes. D2 els thou alt be betwen of,and


thep agapne «pt thep byde not fipll in ynbeleue, {i.hog.201.0 -.
Db tha


lbe


The Epittle


malbe gest inagapne: Jo: Gods of power
togra
out of anatural wplde olpue trecand was graf
fed contrarp to nature tna true olpuetree Dote
much moze hall thenatural baaunches be araf
fedintbhep2 owne olpue treeagapne. :
z wolde not that thpsfecrete houlde bebpd
from pou mp beetbzen ( left pe (hulde be plein
pour oivne conceptes that partipe blyndnes ig
happened in #eacl, vntpll the fulnes of the gen-
tyles becomcin.andfoall Ffracl thalbe faucd.
ervid BS te is wptten:= Chere thal come out of p5
Peni be that doth delpucr,and tall turne awape Vn-
~ godlpnes fro Jacob. And this is mp couenaunt
ynto them, when J Hall rake awape thep2 fpn-
nes. Asconcernpnge the Golpell thep are ene-
mpes fog poure lakes: but as touchpnae the eles
ction thep arcloued fo: thep2 fathers fakes.
Jo Derelye, the qpttes andcallpnae of God
ave fuch that tt can not repente bpm of them:foz
loke,as pe intpme palied Daue not beleucd God
pit baucuotve obtapned mercpe thozowe thepz
wnbelcte:euenfo nowe baue thep not belened the
mercpe whpch ishappened poro pon : that thep
alfo mape obtapne mercp. Eo: God bath wrap-
pedallnactonsin ynbelefe that be mpabt pane
inercp onall. Tag
D the depnes of the rpches both of the wple-
Domcandknowledge of God:bowe vufearchea
ble are bps indgementes, and bys apes patte
Sapit.ir.b fpndpuge outs fto2* wbo bath Bowne pmpnd
toaa tbe Lorde’ Dz who bath bene his counceller?
epther whobath geuen vntobpm fp2tte, and be
aloe recompented agapties Jor of bpm. tho-


rote bpm and fozbpmareall thpnaes:Co bpm


be glozpefo2 ewer. Amen.
@ Che. rit.Chapter.


C The Cwete conuerlacion,louc,ano workis of fach
as beleucin Chat.


aA Dceiech pou therfoze bzethzen,bptbe |


“ai mercptulneg of God, that pemake
pour bodpes a qupck facrpfpee,bolp
and acceptable unto God: whpche
— is pout realonableferupnge of God
and fafppon not poure felucs lpke Dnto thps
tozlbde,but be pe chaungedin pour pape, bythe
renewpnge of poure mpnde, that pemape proue

what ehpnge that good,and acceptable,and per
fectewpll of God ts. For ¥lape( thozoiwe the

grace p Dutome geuenis)fto euerpmanamong

eee. tiic pou tDatxno man Cade dpe tn bps otone cocerte
rom, Fula moze then it becommeth bpm to eftpme ofbym
felfe:but fo tudge of bpmfelfe, that de be gentle

and fover,accozdpng as Gad hat dealt toene-

_ kp manthe meafure of fapth..

25 fozas the are manp members in one bodpe,
and all mébers baue not one offpce:fo we bepng
manp are one bodpe in Chatie,andencrpe man
amonge ourfelues, oncanothersmembers. Fa
rie * Srepnge that we paue dpuers gpftes accoz
Dpige tothe qrace that is geué nto vs: pf anp
f.corrit.a MAN Daue the gpfte ofpzopbecpe, let bym baue
tertii e Itthatit be agrepnge vuto thefapth.x«Let bpm

tbat bathe an offpce, wapte on bps offpce. Let
pym that teacheth take bedeto bis doctrine. Let


A at
j ©
LZ =i |
= = |
z +


f.oz.til. b
pyc.uisb


etheininagapne.sforpfthouwatiecnt H


bymthat erbozteth menue attendaunce to biger-
oxtacpon. PE any man geue,let bpm do tt wyth
fynglenes. Let hpmtbatruleth,doit with oplp=
gence. PE anp man hetwe mercpe , let bpm doit

iwpth cherfulnes.Let loue be wpthout dpilpme

lation. Pate Pipbtch is cuell,ecleaue buto that

whpche 8 good. Be kpnde oneto another wped g
botherlp loue.* Jn geupnae bonoure,qo one be ipet..
fore another.* Wenot Aouthfullin the bulpnes ecc orcs
Dbpch pe haucin bande. we feruentinthe {pete

Apply pour felues tothe tpme. Retople in hope

we aed tribulacion. Continue mn paper:
Dpitrpbute onto theneceffpeie of the fapuctes:
*bereadp toberboure.*Blefle thé tobich perfe- wev.riri.«,
cute pou:blette (A fape)and curte not. we metp tatt.
tpth them that are merpe.Wepe alfo topth the
thatwepe. 15coflpkeaffeccpon one towardes
anotber.25e not bpe mpnded:but make pout fel
uesequal. to tbem of the lower fozte. F rfi 25r D

not wpfein pour oxone oppnions, Recopenceto

no man euclifozenctl.Woupde afozehad thpn-

qes Doneft o& (not oneip befoze Go, butaro in p(pgbt ea

of allmen.Pfitbe poflpbtz, (as muche asisin

pou ipue peaceably wpth all men. Dearlp belo:

ued, avenge not pourefelucs, but rather genue


iiij


=z- —


place vnto wath. jfo2 it is rittt: * pengeaice menrrrio


ig mpne, J wpll retarde,fapeth the Lorde.

Toeka reshpne enempe bonger fede bpm,
pfbe thp2ft.qeue bpm bdzpncke.jfo2 in fo Dopng
thou thalte berape coleg offpze on bpsbeade.25e
not ouercome of cuiell, but ouercome eucll wpth
goonnes. x {PN ee ae
CeTbe.rti.chapterr °

«Zhe obeopence of men bato thep rulers. Lote falfpl
lech the latwe. zitis note uo tpme to Folowe the woz:

` Kes of barknes. hai
meee Ct cucrp foulefubmypt bim felfe bit: gy
A Ber! tothe aucthozite of the bper potverg
“be T3 ffo2z*thereisno Spgs but of God. sapié.fa
ey OGYI the powers that be, are ozdepned of Ie peri
= Gop. Cbofacucr therfore vetyteeth
power, refpficth the ozdpnaunce of God. Wut
they thatrefpft,thalreceauctothéfelues bama `
nacpon. Wo: rulers are not Fearefull to thétbat
Do good, bnt to themthat bo euel.Wiplt thou be
topthoute feare of the der br well then:and
fo (halte thou be ppapled of the fame. oz beig 5
the mpnitter of Ood,foz thp welth. Wut and pf
thou ho that tobpch ts euel, thenfeave-foz he bea
reth not the "weard foz nougbt:fo2 be isthe mps


npter of God, to take vengeaunce on bpm that my


doth encil. therfore pe mute nedes obepe, not
onelv fo? feare of vengeaunce : but alfo becaufe
ofconfcpence. And euen foz thpscaule papepe
trpbutc. Jeo? thep are Goddes mpuptters fer-
a thefame purpole. F

Dene tu cuecp man therfore his durtp: *trp-


buteto whotrpbute belongetD:cuftome, to wh ons
cuffome ig Due:feare fo whome feare bel


Ë,


on

bonoure,to whohonoure pertapneth. yh Dive
nothpnge toany man: buttbps, tbat pouloue
one another. Fo? bethat loueth another bathe
Fulfplledthelawe. Eo: thefe conmmaundemenz


teg:* Thou Halt not commptte aduoutrp:thon erov.rr.c


{halt not kpll:thou Malte not fteale:thou Malte Drut-v.a


not beare falfe wptnefie:thoutpalt notlutls fo Lak toiin
s oth


eth: € r


a


: l
|


j
|


forthe pi ther beanp otbercommanundement it

is all compzcbended in thps fapenge, namelpe:

Leut.rir.d xLoue thp nepghboure ag thy felfe. Louehur=

ae i etetD not Ops rk org Thertorcisloue the
Gatav.o fulfpllpngeofthbelatve. F

Faco.ti,d. pis allo we knowe the tealon hotve pit

ig tyme tbat we fhuld notwe awake out of fepe.

f€02 nowe ig ourfaluacpon nercethen when we

beleued. Che nyghtispatled, pdap ts come npe.

Let vs therfozecalt away the dedes of darknes

| andlet bs put onthe armoure of lpghtc, Lee ys

Zube.rri. f walkeboneftlp.as tt wercin p dape lpght:xnot

ssid  tMeatpnge € Depnbpnge, nepther inchabspng g

| fhantonnes,neptber in firpfe and enupenge, but

on put peon the Lozde Felus Chit. kK Ano make

i not pouptid foztbe fepe to fulfpl pluttes of tt.

eS CTbe.riiii. Chapter.
d ibe weake ought not to begettippred. mo man Houlde


; ogende anothers cont¢pence,agapne fo; ouvwaroe then:
M ges (huldenomanconDemncanother, -


sac ee blpnge bis cifcpence.Dne beleucth
Boa. Da that be mape eat al thpng: Another
a Eo wh pch 1s weake eateth herbes. Let
7 not hintrbat eateth,defppieyim that eatcth not
` nomia Andletnot bpm whpchbeateth not,xiudge bpm
tyacitg, b that eateih. tor God hath ceceucd him.* Wipat
art thou that iudgefte another mans feruaunte
fobetber be tande o: fal,p pertapneth vntobys
owne mater pee, he thalbepolden Yp, ý he map
|. tande: Fo: Godigsabletomaki bpm ftande.
i % kysmanputteth dpfference betwcne tape
and Dape. Another man cotitcthal dapegalpke.
i Let cucrpe mang mpndelatplfpe bym felfe. he
that obferucth thedape,dothtt bnto the Lode.
d Andbethatdocth not oblerye the dape, docth it
fo? panar allo. pethat catethdothit to pleafe
the 102de:foz he qeueth Godthankes. And he
cateth not, eateth not to pleate the Lozde wpt
all,and aoa od thankes. Fo? none cf ys lp
neth fo: bpm felfe,¢noman dpeth foz bpm felfe.
sfor pitoe lpuc,welpue duto the Lowe. And pf
| foe Dye, we dpe Dito the 1029. We yetbher twe lpue
x  therfoze 02 dpe, toe arethe Lozdes. For Chzilte
therfozedped, and roleagapn,and reupued,that
actes.6.€ je mpahtbe* Lorde of dead and quypcke.
eng < Mut top dock y then indge thp brother’ Ep-
‘ther, why doet p defp forby ozotber’Ge tha
i be all brought befoge p tudgemet feat of Chat.
‘ fEozitisterpree:as trucipe as Flpuefapethtbhe
erp ro.e O2De:xall Knees Mall bote to megal tenges
Pyilub {pallqene papile to God So fhall euerp oke of
ps geue accomptes.of ppm felfeto God. Let vs
not therfore tudge one anotberanp meze. __
aeapsange ee tather,that noma put a ió-
blpngeblocke otan occalpon to fall in bps bzo-
| thers wape. story J bnotee,and am full certp=
Yjgath.rob fpa bp the Lozde felus,that*theris nothbpnge
acest. b commune of it felfe:but Dito bpm that inogeth
gat. biy it to be comune:to bpm (sit comune. VE thy b20:
thet begreued Mopth thy meate , nowe walkete
thounotcbarptablpe. Detiropenothpmwthp
meate,foz whom Cbgifte dyed. Caufe not poure
treature to becncll Fpoken of jog tbe Ryngdom


=


—-,


‘ —CTothe Romaynes.


Pm that is weakein thefapthe,re-
ceane:not in difputpnage andtrou=_


Sol Mbiij,

of God fg not meatahddzpnke:but rpabteout

nieg and peace and iopeintbebolp qofte. o: he

tbat iti thefetbpnges ferueth Chrite, plealeth

Godandigcommendedofmen. |
Let bs therfoze folowethole thpnges which wp

makefo2 peace, ethpnges wheriypth one mape

enefpe another. Deltrope not the worte of Gon

Foz alptlemeates fake. x All thpnges are pure: Titum.i, t

but it tg eucil Fo: that man, whych eateth wpth

burte of cofcpence. 3t tg good nether tocat fete

nepther to Dzpnke ee 3 hepthctanp thpage

toberbp thp brother Fombletb eptber talleth, oz

fs made weake. Halfte thou fapth baue tt wpth

thp felfe befoze God. Dappp ts be, that condem-

neth not bpm felfe,inthe tbpnge tbpebe be alo-

wetb. ozbe that maketh confcience ig Damned

pf be cat:becaute be cath not of fapth.sto2 what

foeuer ignotoffapth,thefameistpnne. R


C The.rv.Chapter,


Ragas € whpcheate ronge *ougbte to
PAF (gaa E beare the fraplies of them whypche Bis hues
i || es E are tocake, and not to ftande tn our
oy. gowne conceptes. Let euerpe man
enna pleak bys nepgbboure ynto bys
toralthe and edefpenge. Fo: Chettte pleated not
bpm felfe-but agit ts to2ttten: * Che rebukes of #fa.trir,b
them tobpch rebubedthe,fellonme. |
> * Ci batfoeuer thpnges are weptten afore wom, titi
tyme thep are to2pttenfoz our learning.that we
thozowe pacpence and comfozte of the fcrpptu-
res,mpabt baue hope. :
Whe God of pacience andconfolacpis,qraiit 15
pou,to be ee mpnoed one towardes another,
after theenlample of Chztite Jeu: + that pe all zeuri»
agrepng together map wpth one mouthpzaple
od, the father of oure Lorde Jefus Chzitte,
Uitbherfoze,receaue pe one another,as Chrift re-
ceaued b3,to the praple of God. Andthps 3 lap
that Jefus Chzilte as a mpnpffer ot thecp2-
cumcpfponfoz the truth of God to confyzmethe
promptes made dnto the fathers:xthat the gë meute.rr,t
gples mpabt praple Godfoz bys mercp,agitis
weprten. * Fo? tbps caule 3 wyll prapferhea- wien
monge the gentples,and{phge vnto thp name, "©
And agapne be eee : * Retopce pegentples meurrrit#
topth bps people. And agapne:xpeaple p Lowe prascrvita
al pe gentples,and laude bpm all pe náciong to-
A a agoe cfapeth: there thalbe C
the roote of Jelle, € pethat thalrptetorapgne Erirre
ouer the qentples:in him thal the gentylestrutt. —
Che God of hopefpll pou wpth altope,e peace
in beleupnge:that pemape be epcbe in bope tho:
ad a EBS etre o T
t |


- ¥myp felfe am Cull cectptped of pou (mp bze-
thren)that pe alfo are full of goodness , g fplted
tpt) all knowledge , wpllpnae to erhozte one _
another. Meucrébelefle(beethren)¥F pane fome: D
what moze boldlp heptten bntopou,partlpeto `

utpoutnremembraunce, tpozotwe theqracep `

8 geuen me of God, that J Hulde be f mpnifter
of Jelu Chik amonge the gentples,and Muld
mpntitcr the Golpellof Goo,p ad. :
; it t


be


The Epiftle


the gentples mpaht be acceptable, ¢ fanctpfped
bp the bolp goke, 3 baue therfoze wheroft 4 map
retopce thozotoe Cheilke Jefu in thore topnges
wbpch pertayne to God. o0? F dare not peake
of any of thofetbpnages, ohpch Chik bathnot
wzought bp me,to make the Gentiles obedient
with worde anddede,1n mpabtp (panes won-
ders, bp the potoce of the {pecte of God: lo that
- from Jerufalem and the coates rounde aboute
tnta Bltcpeit, J baue fplled allcontrepes with
the Gofpell of Chzift. Het
€ ‘So baue Jenfozcedmyp felfe to preach § Gol
pell,not wher Chit was named, leat J ihulde
bauc buplt on another mãsfoundact: but agit
Etapid, ig Weptten:* Co who be bas not dave of, thep
Romane wall epo ah hat berde not, thal vnderftãde
cæ I0? this caule J baune bene oft letox:« amtetas pet)
that F coulde not come vnto pou : but note, fe-
puge J haue nomozc fo doin tbelecountrepes,g
alto baue bene defpzoug manp peares to come
JE Ynto pou, whenlocuer J take mp iournepe into
Spapne, J iwpll come to pou: sFu2 F tenfte to fe
pouinmp tourney, ¢ tobe brought onmp wape
thetierwwarbe bp pou, afterp J baucfome what
cnioped pour acquapntaunce:
acter — Howe go J Ynto Ferulalem,and*mpnyplker
iconroia VYEO the fapnites, foe tt path pleaten the of a-
íi.co; biia CCDOMIA E Achaia to makea certapne dpltcpbu-
amra cion pon the pooze fapntes, which are at Jeru-
falem. Jt Hath plealeh them verelp,¢ thep2 det-
ters are thep. Eo? pEtbe gentples be made par-
takers of tbep2 (ppzituall thpnges, thep2 dutye
isto mintiter Dnto ché in bodelp thpnaes. Wiben
J baue perfourmed this.¢ baue brought thé this
frute fealeb, 3 wpll come backeagapne bp pou
into Spapne, Jam fure that whe Jcome wnto
pou, J Hall come wyth aboundautice of the blef
© fpnge of the Golpell of Chzit. ye J befeche pou
bzethzen fo oure Lozde Fetus Chzittes fake, ¢
Fo? tic Lone of the (pete, that pebelpe mein mp
bulpucs with pour papers to God foz me,that
3 maye bedelpuercd fromthem whpche beleue
not in Zetbape:¢ that thts mp ferupce, whypch F
ane todo at Jerufalem, map be accepted of the
aputes,p ¥maye come Yntopou with tope, bp
the wpl of Godandmap with pou be refeethen.
icoz.riit.e Che God* o£ peace be with pouall. Amen,
-C CThe.rvi.Chapter.
è @ a chapter of falutacpons.ige warneth them to betvare of
mens doctrpne,and Commendeth bnto them certapne godlpe
men,that were loucrs and brethzenin the trathe,
mee ao, Commende Vnto pou Phebe oure fp;
A E Met(wbtche is a mpnpfter of the con-
ily say Stegacpon of Cencha) pye reccaue
aig yz Devin Chatite,as it becommeth fapne
nede (¢8,¢ that pe allit ber in whatfocuce
bufpnes he nedeth of poure apne. Eo? tbe bathe
._..,,  tuckereDmanp, mpne otone felfe alfo. Grete
Heada Deed sie ulla mp Delpers in Chritte Jelu,
Wbp banc onp lpfe lapd Dotone thep2 done
aea tanfo wbhonot J onelp geue thakes, but:
alto all the congregaciós of the gentples. Lyte:
tupte.grete the congregacton pig intbeir boufe.
Salute mp welbcloued Ephenetes,whpeh is Dp.
fyeite frute of Achata in Chite. Grete Warpe.
whpchbettotwed muche laboure on bs.Salute


Andronicus ¢ Funia mp cofpugs, and prefoners
wpth me allo, wbpch are wel takenamonge the
A pottles,and were in Chzifte befoze me. Grete
Amplias mp beloued in the Lozde. Salute Ur-
ban our belper in Chait and: Sptachis mp belo-
ucd. Salute fen ee pe open in Cbeilt: Sa-
areo


Iozotethps
Cpiftlein andthe

: y ‘eqacpon faluteth pou.
Craflus the treaturer of thecptic faluteth pou.
And shuattus a brother faluteth pou. The
grace ofoure Lozde Jefu Chzitebe wrth pon
all. amen. |


Co bpm thatis of potorr to fablpihe pou,
accozbpnge to mp Oofpell, and peeachpnare of
zelus Chak in vtterpnge of the mpttcrp which
was keptefecrete fence the tozld beqanne, but
nove is opened bp the ferpptures of the Pzophe
tegat the comtaundement of the enerlattynge

Godto fere vp obedience to thefaptd pu=
ee allnacpons. To the
ame God, whpebalone is tpfe
Deo#(bonoure anv) prapfe tho:
rowe Jefus Chut, foz
euer. men,


CTbps Epiltle toas lent tothe Romapne
from Coxiutbam bp Phebe,the ital |
thas the mpnpfter ynto the con:
SregactonatCenchzea, |
| CTbe.


6


=


W o-


Artes pir. ;


Cothe Lorinthpans.


CThe fyrtte Epiltle of


fapnet Baule the potle to
ka the Cozintbians.


CThe fps Chapter.


THe cotmmendeth the Cozpnthpans, erbozteth thé to be of
one mpnde,and rebuketh the bpupfpon $ was amonge them
WOozlolp wploome's Foolphnes befoze God: peetherisno
iwpfoome but iit the belppied crol of Gov.


ae Chit thozotve p topll of God
l ERIE and bzotber Sottencs. i
r a ee Untothecongreqacpon of

Poa er Gon tobpch is at Cozinthum.

AC ‘Co the that are fanctpfpedbp


nd ae Ch rtf Jelu called faintes with
all Peal on the name of our Lode Jaus Cha

toma. i.a in euerp place,epeberoftbep2soz of oureg.

* Saala  *xGrate be bnto pou and peace frd God oure

father,and from the Lozde Fetus Cpi.

it Le thanke mp God alwapes on poute bee

lfe,fo2 p arace of God Whpch ts geuen pou bp

efus Chik, pin al thpnges pe are maderpehe

bp bpm, in all veteraunce andinall knowledge

bp the whichetbpnaes tbe tetpmonpe of Jelug

: Chit was confpzmed in pou lothat pe are be-

: b nbeqano gy tte, wnprynie tortor appearpng

of oure Lorde Jefus Chzitte, whpche tall alto

aB ftrengtb pou tnta the ende,that pe map be bla-

ow melele in the Dapece cofthecommpnge)of our Lozde


_ are petn Chalk zein, w


Godthozowe folptpnes of preachpnee,tolaue

them that belene. s€o2 «the Jetes requyze a esat.vitt d
fyqne,and p Grekes {eke after topfedome. But obot d
we pecache Chziltecrucpfped, nto the Jeweg
anoccatpa of fallpnge.and wntothe Geekes fo-
Ipihnes:but onto them which are called both of
the Jebes and Orekes, Wepreache Chzifte the
power of Godandthe wpfedome of God. Foz
the folpthnes of 60d ig topler then më, and the
toeaknes of Godis ronger then men. Tinh
pe fe poure callpnge, bowe that not manp topte
men after the fepe, not manp mpgitpenotma
np ot pe pol E called: Wut God hath cho-
fen the folpive thypnges of the twozld, to confoud
faa fe And God bath chofen the weake thpn
Ges of the world, to confound the thpnges to
cheare mpgbtp. And yple thpnaes of the world
andthpnges whpeb are delppled, hath God cho
fen, pee, and thpnges of no reputacpon, fo3 ta


-bapng tonought thpnges poder crite Bn Dong


flethe thulde rctopce in bps pretence. And of bym
th of Godis made bn
tovs tploome,andrpabteon{nes,and fanctp.
fpenge,and redempcion. Chat accozdpnge as it
ah which reiopieth, Hulde reiopfe in
FHS nE Tbe. Chapter, ted te of
ete Ae parr that can ebpfp aiai iainta


iff, but the plapne twožoes of the (eri
ther make mencpon of bpm ano bps ceoite. PERETI


gurine Jelug Chite. kxGodisfapthfull,bytohboume E i i


icore pearecalled bnto the felowtpppe of pps tonne

Jefus Chit our Lode. Jbefeche pou bzethen

> bp thename of our Lozde Jelus Chzitt , that pe

all {peate one thpnge.and that there be hodil-

cponamonge pou:but that pemape be a tobole

" bodp:of one mpnde and of one meanpna. Fo it

is fhetoed winto me(mp bzethz€) of pou, bp them

which are of the boufe of Cloc.that theristtrpfe

amoae pou. J {peate of the fame that ei 1 one

Het.rdtii.d yf you fact): 7 bolde of Paule: 3 polde of* J-

Stee yollo:3 bolde of Cephas: J boldé of Chatite. Fs

~ Chr deupded‘ Was Paule crucifped foz pou’

ther wece pe baptpfedin the name of aul “F

| thonte God. ý J baptplednone of pou, but Cri-

{pug and Gapus:lelt anp buld fape.tbat 4 pad

P.  baptifeinmpne owne name. 3 bapspíen alfo p

E ee kbanpinaiasronorn.
a, , ther Jbå atinicofpou 0.

; € vg 0 + ba fente me not to baptpre, butto

preache P Golpell.not wpth wptedome of wo-

Des, lett the croffe of Chait uld baue ben made

of none efecte. 1o: the preachpnge of the croffe,

isto ther pot ibe folpipnes: but bnto bs

ss sobpeb are faued*itis the poter of God. soz it

s Momet.b io wapttcn:+ 3 wopll Dettrope the wpledome of f

iets FHF.» sooty and wpll cat awape tbe wnderitandpnae

eti rrie OF the Prudente. Waberets the pte: * Whereis

the icrpbe Wi here is the Dprpnter of this world

Hathnot God made the wploom of this world

tpipnes: f AEE E ee

: Por after that the thozlde thofotie sayt

Enewe not God, inthe wpleds of God té pleated


| 4 the teftpmonp of God. He
anib ted deg Bas Erai tote co
thpnge amonge pou,


JEo? bad thep had knowledge, chep wolde not
haue crutpfpen the Lozde of irre But (a8 it
i8 toeptten : ) * Che epe bathe not fene and the eraris
eate Dath not barde,nether baue entred titot
berte of man, the thpnges ppc) God path pze-
paredfozthemtbatlouebpm.
. But Gor te ay Ski bntobs bpbhys g -
2ete. Koz the (pzete fearcherh al thpnges.pee moun ditt,g
the bottome of Gobbeslecretes.o2 hat man
knoweth the thpnges ofa man-fanethe {peete
of man ppch is wptbhin bpm: Ené fo the thpn=
80! God knowethno man, but the fpzete of
0d; AND we bane not receaucd the fpzete of the
jozlde: but the {pzete wobpeh commeth of Good.
0; Cobiowe the thpnges that are geuen to bd
Dp i of Gop


Cothe Lorinthpans.


CThe fyrtte Epiltle of


fapnet Baule the potle to
ka the Cozintbians.


CThe fps Chapter.


THe cotmmendeth the Cozpnthpans, erbozteth thé to be of
one mpnde,and rebuketh the bpupfpon $ was amonge them
WOozlolp wploome's Foolphnes befoze God: peetherisno
iwpfoome but iit the belppied crol of Gov.


ae Chit thozotve p topll of God
l ERIE and bzotber Sottencs. i
r a ee Untothecongreqacpon of

Poa er Gon tobpch is at Cozinthum.

AC ‘Co the that are fanctpfpedbp


nd ae Ch rtf Jelu called faintes with
all Peal on the name of our Lode Jaus Cha

toma. i.a in euerp place,epeberoftbep2soz of oureg.

* Saala  *xGrate be bnto pou and peace frd God oure

father,and from the Lozde Fetus Cpi.

it Le thanke mp God alwapes on poute bee

lfe,fo2 p arace of God Whpch ts geuen pou bp

efus Chik, pin al thpnges pe are maderpehe

bp bpm, in all veteraunce andinall knowledge

bp the whichetbpnaes tbe tetpmonpe of Jelug

: Chit was confpzmed in pou lothat pe are be-

: b nbeqano gy tte, wnprynie tortor appearpng

of oure Lorde Jefus Chzitte, whpche tall alto

aB ftrengtb pou tnta the ende,that pe map be bla-

ow melele in the Dapece cofthecommpnge)of our Lozde


_ are petn Chalk zein, w


Godthozowe folptpnes of preachpnee,tolaue

them that belene. s€o2 «the Jetes requyze a esat.vitt d
fyqne,and p Grekes {eke after topfedome. But obot d
we pecache Chziltecrucpfped, nto the Jeweg
anoccatpa of fallpnge.and wntothe Geekes fo-
Ipihnes:but onto them which are called both of
the Jebes and Orekes, Wepreache Chzifte the
power of Godandthe wpfedome of God. Foz
the folpthnes of 60d ig topler then më, and the
toeaknes of Godis ronger then men. Tinh
pe fe poure callpnge, bowe that not manp topte
men after the fepe, not manp mpgitpenotma
np ot pe pol E called: Wut God hath cho-
fen the folpive thypnges of the twozld, to confoud
faa fe And God bath chofen the weake thpn
Ges of the world, to confound the thpnges to
cheare mpgbtp. And yple thpnaes of the world
andthpnges whpeb are delppled, hath God cho
fen, pee, and thpnges of no reputacpon, fo3 ta


-bapng tonought thpnges poder crite Bn Dong


flethe thulde rctopce in bps pretence. And of bym
th of Godis made bn
tovs tploome,andrpabteon{nes,and fanctp.
fpenge,and redempcion. Chat accozdpnge as it
ah which reiopieth, Hulde reiopfe in
FHS nE Tbe. Chapter, ted te of
ete Ae parr that can ebpfp aiai iainta


iff, but the plapne twožoes of the (eri
ther make mencpon of bpm ano bps ceoite. PERETI


gurine Jelug Chite. kxGodisfapthfull,bytohboume E i i


icore pearecalled bnto the felowtpppe of pps tonne

Jefus Chit our Lode. Jbefeche pou bzethen

> bp thename of our Lozde Jelus Chzitt , that pe

all {peate one thpnge.and that there be hodil-

cponamonge pou:but that pemape be a tobole

" bodp:of one mpnde and of one meanpna. Fo it

is fhetoed winto me(mp bzethz€) of pou, bp them

which are of the boufe of Cloc.that theristtrpfe

amoae pou. J {peate of the fame that ei 1 one

Het.rdtii.d yf you fact): 7 bolde of Paule: 3 polde of* J-

Stee yollo:3 bolde of Cephas: J boldé of Chatite. Fs

~ Chr deupded‘ Was Paule crucifped foz pou’

ther wece pe baptpfedin the name of aul “F

| thonte God. ý J baptplednone of pou, but Cri-

{pug and Gapus:lelt anp buld fape.tbat 4 pad

P.  baptifeinmpne owne name. 3 bapspíen alfo p

E ee kbanpinaiasronorn.
a, , ther Jbå atinicofpou 0.

; € vg 0 + ba fente me not to baptpre, butto

preache P Golpell.not wpth wptedome of wo-

Des, lett the croffe of Chait uld baue ben made

of none efecte. 1o: the preachpnge of the croffe,

isto ther pot ibe folpipnes: but bnto bs

ss sobpeb are faued*itis the poter of God. soz it

s Momet.b io wapttcn:+ 3 wopll Dettrope the wpledome of f

iets FHF.» sooty and wpll cat awape tbe wnderitandpnae

eti rrie OF the Prudente. Waberets the pte: * Whereis

the icrpbe Wi here is the Dprpnter of this world

Hathnot God made the wploom of this world

tpipnes: f AEE E ee

: Por after that the thozlde thofotie sayt

Enewe not God, inthe wpleds of God té pleated


| 4 the teftpmonp of God. He
anib ted deg Bas Erai tote co
thpnge amonge pou,


JEo? bad thep had knowledge, chep wolde not
haue crutpfpen the Lozde of irre But (a8 it
i8 toeptten : ) * Che epe bathe not fene and the eraris
eate Dath not barde,nether baue entred titot
berte of man, the thpnges ppc) God path pze-
paredfozthemtbatlouebpm.
. But Gor te ay Ski bntobs bpbhys g -
2ete. Koz the (pzete fearcherh al thpnges.pee moun ditt,g
the bottome of Gobbeslecretes.o2 hat man
knoweth the thpnges ofa man-fanethe {peete
of man ppch is wptbhin bpm: Ené fo the thpn=
80! God knowethno man, but the fpzete of
0d; AND we bane not receaucd the fpzete of the
jozlde: but the {pzete wobpeh commeth of Good.
0; Cobiowe the thpnges that are geuen to bd
Dp i of Gop


R E S E

The fyrt Epittle
of God: whicht Salfotvelpeake(notwith therit be Paul, ther Apollo ether Cephas, whe
alibi oy titi Gouden teachetb, but therit betbe wolde, ether lpfc,cther Death, w ,
with wo2des obpch the bolp goolkdothteache) ther thep be peclét thpnges,o7 thinges to come:
makpnae (pirituallcomparpton of fppeptuall allare poures: andpeate Chaiftes,and Chite

| sp tbpnges. Chenaturallman perccaucthnotthe ig Ooddes. F

| thpnaesthat belonge tothelpecteof God. Wo? C Thetti. Chapter-

| they are but folpthnes onto bym. epther can C The preachers are but mpapters Judgement belonz

he peeceaue the,becaute they are fppzitnallp ex-

ampned. wut be thatis{ppaituall, oifculleth all


grib onip buto oD.


nthis topfeefteme bs, e A


thpnges : pet be bym felfe is tudged ofno man. i Ny i be mpnifiers of Chp ke and
ataprie $602 Who bath knoteé the mpnde of the Lome h Pete ward ofthe *fecretes of Gov, Deu-Frir.d
nomie epther whotball re} Sy in Parae ynder: ey AA sCurthermoze it is requypzed of pite-
Tande the mpnde of Chit. 2 ibardeg.thata man be founde fapth-
qr Baul D Penne oo see (perot; cheittete i f Ea n aat
p atl rebuketh the fectes œ auchours therof, Chre uld be iudercd of pou, ether of ma emê
| 3 fher rat get ofbts church, Roman oughttoreiopee Ao quabqenotmene owne felfe. Foy Junone
F x sy CE Pd Fcouldenotfpeake(wntopoubse- gougdt bp mp felfe:petam 3 not ther piuttifp-


i) X hats aca theen jas Dato fppzituall: butas pute cd. Fr isthe Lowdpiubdgeth me. Cherfore iude
i vy = Vilcarnalleuenas nto babeg in Chettte. nothing Vefore ý tpme Dntpl ý logd come, Wobich
i} UVES) J crane pou mplke to Depnke,and not toylllyghten thpnges thatare ppd indarcknes,
| meate. Jo? pethen tere not Fronge, netberave andopen the coutels ofthe bertes. And thë Mall
| pe ag pet. Joz peare pet carnall.Bslonge vere: , eucrpman daue pra feof God. F

lp as there ig amortge pou enupenge , and ftrpfe befetbpnges (bzetbzen) Jhane for anen= 15
lf and fecteg:are pe not carnall,andwalke afterp fample deferpbed inmpne owne perfon,and tt
| manec of mens f€o02 wbple onclapeth: 3 bolde o Apollog,foz pourefakes, that pe mpabt learne
| | act.rbiit.d Paul,and another: Jam of * Apollo,arepenot by vs,pnoman count of bimfelfbepõd p, wbich
|
|
|


Beh. i.d


I| coid. carnal Gbat ig pauleWbat thpnae is Apol isaboue weptté:that one {well notagapnttean
| loconelp miniftersaretbep bp whom pebelcued otherfor enpmanscante. Sfozwbhopeetcreetbe
\ cucn as the 1020 qaueeuerp man grace. 3 haue the?x Ubat batt thou, that p batt not receaued: gaobi ae
if planted, Apollo watred: but Godgauetbeen- PYEthou baue receaued it, why reiopcelt thou,es
| cereale. Dothen,neptberis be that planteth anp thoughtboubaddeff not receaucdit: Mowe pe
| tbyngc neptberbethat watreth, but God tbat arefull:nowe peare made rpebe : perapgned as
geucthp encreafe. He that planteth andbe that kpages without g.and J woldto God pedpd
‘watretb.are one. Euerpe manpet tballreccaue rapgre that wem gbt rapgne toptb pou.
| his rewarde,accordpnae to his laboure. Eo} we Eo methpnketh,tbat Godhathierfortbe ay
| are Gondes labourers, peare Goddes pufban= ps(whicharet elat Apoftles)*ag it were me Kon oie ©
| ies” bipe*peare Goddess buplopnge: accowpnae to appopnted to death. wo? weareagalpna Fock i
| the grace of God geuen vntoime,asawylebupl nto the wolde and to p aungels, andto men.
i der haueJlapodethefoundacpon. Andanother We are fooles fo? Chziftes fake, but pe are wile
| duplo theron. Sut let euerp mã takebedebowe thozowe Chepite. Wie are weake, but pe are
| he buploeth Von. oz anotherfoundacponcan tronge: Peare bonozable, but we are df{ppfed.
i eqat.rbin no manlape.tbhen it thatislapde xwbpehis Jez Cuen wntothps tpme we bouger g thpette, and |
| fus Chit Pe anp man buplde on thys founda: arenatcd,andare boffeted toith fiftes,and haue
cpõ goloe, fpluer precious toneg tpmber, bape nocertapn Dweilpnee place ,and laboure, xto? actre.rr. a
Aa ibi mannes wozke Wall appeare. Rpnge with oure otone bandes. Weare reupled Lied
Eor the dape Hall declare, Which halbe thewed anope ene oil eke pa
I infpze. And the fprethall trpeeucrpe mannes it. Weare euel fpoken sa ano
i woke, wbatit is. Dianp mannesworke that made as ft were p fpltbpnes of the wolde,
W be Dath buylde bpon,bpde, be thallreceaue are- the offcompynge ofall thynges, euen onto thys
warde-Pfany mannes thozke burne,be Mal iuf: Daye. |
-fre lofle, but be Halbe Cafe him felfe: neuerthele Jweptenotthele thpnges,tohamepou:~ ž . ~
pet agit werethozowe fpe. / but ag mp beloved fonnes J warne pou. Foz.
wo ye *dtnowe pe not that peare the temple of thouqb pe bauc ten thoufande tnitrouctoures in
i C07. bid ieas t alarh pate Tpzeteof Gov dwellethin Chzilt:pethaue penot manp fathers: 3n Chak
pou’ Pf anp man defple the temple of God, bym Jelu FZ aue beron pou thozote the Gofpell
ball God detrope. Wor thetëple of God, ig o: Uberfoze, J del pze pou tofolotwe meqmx(as g to ga
Peete eare. Let noma deceauebpm lowe chet.) oz tDpscante baue 3 fent vnto pou |
- ~ felfe. PEanp ma feme wpletopimiclfeamonge T inotbeus,tebpchis mp deare fonne, efapth P
-pou,lethpm become a foolein this wozlde, that ful in f Lo2d, wbpcb Hal putpou inremébgatice
c mape be tple. Jo} the wpledome of thys ofmpwapes,that J bauein Chzpttc.cucnas F
wolde is folppnes with God:FEozit is wyttë teacheeuerp where inal congregaciong. Some
gob.. *becópalleth the wpleinthep2craftynes: And Cwell,as thougpe J woldecome nomoze at pou
pca.criif.b AQapne, * God knoweth the thoughtcs of the Dut F Wwpll come to pou Moztelpe , * pE God act. rvid.c `
topte tbattbep be bapne. Therfoze, letnoman be fopll knotwe, not the wordes of them Bts
relopce imen. jtoz althpngesarepoures,whe W pepfivell, but the power :fo? se ico


|,
|
i


|
|


=


Heu.rbitta |


5
+


mat. rbili.c
LZimo,t, b


25


Tothe Lorinthyans.


of GOd is not tt tho2rdes but in power. tbat
wpll pe: Shall J come Ynto pou toptha rodde,
orelginloue andinthe {pete of foftneiic.
L The. t. Chapter.
C åtter what maner Haule curleth the man
that bad comnnptteo foznpration wpth pps
mother in lawe.
raemes ere goeth a commen fapenge that
eq E there is foznpcacponamonge pon, €
“4 P/ | (uch fosnpcacion,asts not nameda
D wamonge p gctples:«p one Hulde baue
SSeS fathers pte. And pe iwel, and
Daue not rather fozotwed,p be whpehe bathdone
thps dede,mpghbt be put from amonge pon. oz
J vetelpe ag ablente in bodpe, but prefente tn
(prete baue determpned alreadpe(as though-¥
there prefente)concernpnge bpm that bath done
fhpsdede,tn the name of our Lozde Jefu Chat
then pe are gathered togeather, and mp (pete
ath ye: PD the power of the Lozde Feng
beftruccpon of tbe fepe, that the (prete mape be
fanedin the dape of the Lorde Fetus.

- Poure retoplpnge is not good: Knotve pe not;
that a lptle leuen fotozethbthe whole lompe of
Dote’ seapourge therfoze the eldeleuen that pe
mape be newedowe,as pe sre liete bread. Wo?
Chzift our palleouer is offered bp fo? vs. Ther-
foze,let bs Kepe bolp Daye, not pth olde leuen,
nepther thpth theleuen of malpcpoutneile and
iwpckednetie:but with the fwete bzead of pure=


` negandtruthe. f J iezote wnto poutnappéle,


Dea pitt b


$ math Tia i


that pe puldnotcompanp pth foznpcatours.
And A meantenot af all of the foznpcatcures of
thys-wozlde,epther of the coneteoute, o2 ettoz-
tioners,epther the pdolatrers:foz then rute pe
nedeg baue gone out of the world. Butnowe J


> “g6tpersts Dpdiapte bntopouxtbat pe companpenot to:


gether,pf anp thatis calleda bzotber, be a foz-
npcatoure o} coucteous , 02 a wozthppper ofp-
mages, epther arapler, eptber a DzonBarde, oz
an ertozcponer: wpth bim that ts fuch,fe that pe
eatenot. stoz what baue todo, to tudge them
thatare wptbout’ Do pe not tudge thé that are
wrptbin: Chem that are without, © odindgeth
xPutawape the cuell from amonge pou.
CUbe. vi.€


) bapter. . Ji
@ Herebuketh them fo; gopngeto taw postther beforethe Bue


Beathen,and reproucth thepz bactennell


Siento
PEATA a


A CAbpth another, gotolawe Vnderthe
Pre J wpched,€ notcather wnder p fapn-
Ey A tes! x Dopenotknowe, fthefapn-
eelte (hall uoge the wozlbe: YE the
wolde albe tudged bp pou:are penot qoodp-
nough to tudge final trpfies‘knotwve penot bow
that we thallindge the Jungels? Howe muche
pine indDgetbpnges that pertapneta
Df pe bane tudgementes of thozldlpe
ABe them wobpche are Defppfedin the
racio, ¢ make the dges. T dps Flap to
patie. 4s there vtterlp not one wpfeman
nde pous What not oneat all, that ca tudge
tibene bzotber and bother, but one brother
goethtolatec pth anotbheriand that Yrder the
pnbeleucrss


uer bpm onto Sathan.fo; the


| ey ae
\Arve one of pou banpnge befpnes Ean : |
ict cuerye woman baue ber bulbande. Let the.


_ Pow therfore, thereis veterlpa faut améce
pou,becaule pe go tolawe one w another. th
tatbherfutfre pe not wonge! twbp rather fufre
pe not pourfelues to bane parme'napepepounre
clues do thzonge,androbbe,¢ that the beeth2é.


Soller,


Do pe not knotve, hotbe thatthe ynrpahteous `


hall not enderet the peng ome of Gods Be not
deccaued. o2x nepther foznpcatoures,neptber
thozhpppers of pmages, nepther aduouterers,
neptbet Deaklpnges.neptber abulers of thé fel-
ues wpth mankpnde, nepther theues , nepther
couetous, nepther Deonkardes, nepther curfed
{peakers.nepther pp llers, hal inbetet the kpne
dome of God, And luche were fome of pou, but
p e ahaaa a pe si Saria peare
ifped | ame of the 1020 Jelug, a

tbe fpzete of our God. eae rile

J map do al thpnges, but*al thinges ate not


Bala. b.d
Ephe b a.


€


pzofptable. J mapedoall thpnges,but J wpll eceaprrbite


be brought ynder nomans power. Deates are
O2depned foz the bellp,andt EDE Nai
but Godall detrope bothe it and thë. Letnot
tby bodp be applped bnto foznpcacion, but unto
bathraptod opebe Lave ana eee
hrapte ~020e,and pall rapie vs
AA A pheniad fpont
odpesare the members of Chit: Wall Jnotwe
take the members of Chzit and mate them the
rA A noone bpd. Do penot
4 oF VAT DE DODPCD Cou Lieire Th
ed hi become one bob aes d
pe aloe one Nee. Wut be that is topned nti
the pts mmda 4 PREIS PE NEN ned
Hie toznicacton.Cuerp fpnne that ama dot
is wpthout thebodpe. But he he iga Dar
toz,tpnneth agapntt bps owne bodpe. Eptbher
kinowe penot, bowethat youre bodpesare the
temple of the Holp goof, bich divelleth inpow
whom pe baue of God, and botwe that pe are not
Klonie oath pe eo nate: berfo2re
Qi É HT pour bODPpes, and i Dae
tes, wbich are Goddes. nu wt oa


-CTh ter,
@ Df matpage, bp; gpuptic.and wpodotwheade,
E ze = ; Of pe toz0fe to me: Ft ig ood for


bulbande gene vnto the wpfe dewe bencuoléce.


ther bnowe pe not,ppoure Lente


po intii. ù
o2 twolfapth at rir a
Cyarke.t.a
fpbe,b.g


power of his owne bodp:but the topfe. * 3 bite tie:
Datoe not pour felucs one from RA Banba Mode,


Thys Flape of fauonre, andnot ofcéinaun-
Eh p oute, and hot of céinaun- 485


Cye tyre Cprltie


bowes:if is qood fo2 them.pf they abpde eué ag
Timbe do. utand*pfthep can notabfapne,lct tbe
marp. Fo? it íg better to marp then to burne.

- Untothe marped commaunde, not F,but the
math.v.e Lozde:* Let not the wpte be leperated from the
SHER Hulban. DE the Ceperate ber felfe let hereemapne

vnmarped , 02 be reconcpled bnto Her hulvande
agapne. And let not the bulbande put away Dig

wpfe front bpm, .

€ ‘Cotheremnannt{peake Janot the Lode. PE
anp bother baue a wpfe that beleueth not, pf
{pe be cOtent fo Dwell wyth him, let bim not put
Herawape. Dud the woman whyche hath tober
D ie antnfpocle,¢ confente te dvoell wpth
ber,let het not puthpm awaye. for the pubele=
upuge hulbande ts fancttfped bp the topfe.t the
wnbeleupnge wyfe is fanctifped bp the hulbade
Dzels torre pourchyldzen vucleane : but nowe
ate tbep Dolpe.2ut and pf the onbeleupn ae de
parte, let bpm departe. Æ bzorber oz a lptter ts
notin {ubtecciontofuch. But Godbathecallea
WB in peace. Eo: hotve Knotek thou(o oman)
whether thou (halt faucthp pulband o2 nor Ep:
ther bowe knowelte thon (oman) whetherthou
{halt laue thp wpfeo2 no/but eucnas Godhath
dpitrpbuted rocucrp man. mats
xÆ the Lov bath called euerpma,folet bim
foalie:¢ [0 ozdepne Finall congreracpong. PE
anp man be called bepnae cpecumcpfed,let bpm
not adde Dncircacplto. PEanp ma nbe called Vn-
civcticticd, let bpm not becpzcücpied.Circücpliő


“pbettiia


ignotbpuge,and wncirciici{ton is pepe ate T
oO, `-


thekeponge of the comaundementes of
D: Let eucep man abpbdeintbefamecallpnge


tzm. oia Wherein be was called. * Artetbou calleda fer-


uaunt‘care not fo2 tt. Meuertheles yf thou ma-
pel be fre, ole it rather. Æo: be thatis called in
the Lorde- bepnae aferuaunt,ts the Lordes free
nian Lpkewpie betbat tg called bepnge freig
Chiles Ceruant. Ve are dearelp bought, be not
ye tie (eruauntes of men, 25zethzen, let eucrpe
nian tohercia be ts called, therein abpde topth
God. K AS concernpnge virgpns, ¥baue no ri:
maundement of the Lozde:pet genue 4 councell,
> 48 one tbat bath obtapned mercpe of the Lozde,
~ tobefaptbfull. J fuppole therfore p itis good
Eo the pzefent necefipte. foz it is good for ama
foto be. arte thou bounde bntoawpferfeke not
tobelooled. Arte thou loofcd from a wpfe- feke
g nota Wwpfe. Mut and pfthou marp a wpfe, thon
bhatt not (pnned.L phewyic.pfa vyzepnemarp,
ak batb not fpuned. Neucredcles fuch hal paue

* trouble in thep2 flethe: but F fauoure pou.
ptarea - This fape J bzethz€, * thetpyme is borte. Ft
H,ecuib remapneth,that thep whpch bane pues, beas
Lie they bad none, g thep that wepe,beas
though thep wept hot,and thep that reiopre, be
as thoughthepretoplednot : andtbep that bye,
. beas thougbe thep polleiea not: tyep that vle
thys wo2lbe,be as though thep vfedit not. Joz
stay. tib, *the falthyon of thps wozlde cocthawape. + 3
Mnt Wolde bane pou wpthout cde. He thatis ynna
Luie,b.o tyedcarethtoz thethpnges whych belonge ta
SH Lozdebowe be mapepleate the Lorde. Wut be
that bath marped a topfe caret) fog the thpnaes


that ave of tye wozlde bowe be mape pleate bis
wpfe. Cher ig difference betwenca bpegpnand
atopfe. The fpngle woman careth fo2 the thpn-
gesthat are of the Lorde that the mape be polpe
bothin bodp andalfoinfpzete:Agapne,the that
is marped,careth fo: the thpnaes that pertapne
to the wold, bowe the map pleate ber bulbande
Chpslpeake Jio? poure profpte, not totangle
pou ina {nare:but that pe map folowe it tobpcb
18 hone andcomelpe, and that pemapecieaue
nto the Lorde without leperacton.

Pfanpman thpnbe that itis pncomlp for bis d5
by2gpn,pf the palle the tpme of marpage. And
pt fo nede rcquyze,let him do what be lpitetb.be
fpaneth not:letthem becoupledin marpage.
Peucrthelette bethat purpoleth furelpe m bys
bite peeves nonede-but bath power ouechis
owne wpl:and hath lo decreedin bys berte,that
be wpll kepe bys vpagpn, doth well. Hothenbe
thatiopneth bis bpagpnin marpage doeth wel.
Wut bethattopnet) not bis birgpn (hn marpage
doth better.x Che pets bounde tothe mary= som.viie
age,as longe as her bulband Ilpucth.PE per bul- *


band dpe, fhe sat lpbertic tomarpe wrth wha Hi


fhe wplLonelp in the Lorde. Wut the is bappper
pf thefoabpode, after np imdgemét. And 3 thinke
verelp that 3 baue the (pete of God,
C Che.viu.Chapter.
@ ie rebuseth them that bfelpbertpe to the Mhlaunder
of other, and Gemeth howemen ought to bebauetbem
s Celies towarog turh as be wrake.


m  touchpnge thpnges x ofred on- A
AES topmages, We are lure that we all 4ste
ha iv, 3 Daue Bnowelcdge. Rnowledge ma-
9 Sees Kotha man fwell-but loue opty
E Thi 4 anp


manise PE ANP MÄ tbinke p be know
tbhpnge be a NnF etne beonThe to
knot. Wut pfanpma loue Oc |
wenofbpm. As conceenpnae f eatpnge ofthofe
typnges pare offred bntopdoles, tbe arefure,p
*the pmage isnot penge inthe wozlde and that t.cozs,e:
thereisnone other God, but one. And ehoughe
there be that are called Goddes, whether indea
uen ofberin ertb(as ther be Goddes manp,and
Loves esas hasar es vg ig there but one Goy W
wbich is thetat PERR storys puges, E the
fo? bym:and one Lozde Jelus Chk, bp who
areal thpnges,and We bp ppur. Wut eticep man
Hedda SSB al baupnge colepece t,coz.niitg
ccaute of lst Sige tel pll thps boure, eate
aga thpnge effered vuto pmages: and fo thep2
confcience bepnge toeake is np. Sut meate
maicth vs not acceptableto God. Mepet
We cote, are the the better. Nether pf we cat not,
avetoetbetoorfe. =
Mut takebede, Let by anp meanes thpslp- €
bertyeot pourcs be an occafpon of fallpnae to
them that areweake. Eorp fome meant the
which halt knowledge.{pt andeate of meat of-
fred onto pinages, (hall not the cdfcience of him
whpch is weabe;be boldcned tocatethofethyns
ges wbhpche are offered topmages! And lo tho:
rowe th a pall the weake brother.
erpibe,foz whom Chit oped. Uhen pefpnne D
Oagapnite the beetbzen , and wounde thepre
Weake contcpence, petpune agapnite Chaitte.
CU berfoze


fucptherpE = =. ° |


|


ov,pfame istno- o|


eee ee a
a
-
ii
a


ks Da


‘Cotye Lownthyans.


prxogititn CU berfore ¥ pF meate burtmyp bzotijér, J wpll
SE” nener cate feilet fuld offende mp beotber


ots tere eN ieas the mape do bp the
lawr. Dè erhostech thëto tunne on forth inthecourle
__ that thep patie begonne.


rey kD | not an potle nto other,pet
a ewes aint F nto pou . Eor the {eale
of mpne Apofkletpp are pe inthe Lord, Mpne


pet
Sala.b1.b. (owe puto pou lpirituall thynges.is it a great
ie tea: Ap thpnges PE


roor Aa hed aboute holp thpnges Lpue
ofti


Cierelp that when pets Acoma Jmake
the Gofpel of Chztttre, that J

auctozite inthe Gofpell. a |

orebougD be Fre From all men, pet bane

made mp fel A pele nue oe i i Het 3

*aet.rbi.a mypabt wpnne the nio:* cin e ices, 4 be-

Daha oe aga ZFewe,to wpnne the Jebes. To then

were wnder thelawe,toas J made asthough

nt Aea bette bnder the laters (when z wasnot bns

 ‘Devthelawe) fo Wwpnnethem that tere wnder the

lawe. To them that were pthoute latve , be-

came Bas though A babdve bene wpthout latwe


ol, [ri.
ivben F( was not toptbhoute late as pertry-
npnge to God, but ynder the lawe of Ch2yptt)ro
topnne them that were wpthoute lawe. To the
weake became Jas weake,totoinne the weabe
Sn all thynges «3 fathponed mp felfe to all më i. cora
fofaucat the leatte tape fome. Andthps 3 vo
Fo? the gofpels fake, that J mpgbte bauc mp
parte thereof,

> Perceaue pe not, bowethàt thep wbpehe
runneth a courfe,ranne all, but onerecea Betb:
rewarde’SDorunnethatpe mape obtapne.
Cucrp ma that proueth mattertes, abitapneth
fromalltbpnges . Andtdep doit toobtapnea
crotone that thal perpihe:but eetoobtapnean
*euctlattpng crotone, 3 therfore foriine,not ag t Ziitinb
atan Dneertapne thing. ofpaht ¥notagone "e"
that beateththeaper : but J tame mp bodp and
bapnge itintofnbiection, let bp anp meanesit
come to pafe, that whan Ypaue preached too-
ther, 3 mp felfe pulde bea catatwape. Js

C The. r. Chapter. rR


sees Rethzen, Jwoldnot that pe Mulde x
A) Re beIgno2ait, bot that oure fathers
Ny fee Garg Wire al bunder the cloude, andal paf


ai fed thozot the fee,and were al bap-


eee ES


- icohbitia Ehpnere og that it whpcbhe is o


o» are partakers of one beeade -# (an of one cuppe.) ueredelefle.ttetber ts the man toithoute the wo- í
Webolo Blerael after ficth.Arenottbep which man,nether the wWoind thithout the man, inthe: $
cate of the facrpfpce,partakers of thetemples 102d. fozas.the womanis ofthe man, euen lo
Ubat fave J then! xtbatthegmage is np igtbeman: bp the woman:butallof God.
etedDto pmages, Judge tnpourefelues, Whether it becom-
is anp thynge’ Pape, but thys ZF lape : that the lIpethata oman pape nto God bareheaded
thinges which the gentpls offer.thepoffcrtode Dothenot nature tt {elfeteache pou, that itis
ucls,andnot to God. ~ 093 a fame fozaman,pfbe bauelongedcareand a
as awae not that pe Wulde baue felomihpp perkt a woman:pf the baue long beare’ St 02
ith the deuelg. Pecannotozpnke of thecuppe er beareis genen ber tocouerber wptball. DE
ofthe Lod, ofthe cuppeofdencls.Qecannot any manly to trpue, we haucno foch cuftom
ve the partakers of the Lozdes table,and ofthe nether the congregacpons of God, :
table ofdencls.E thet do we prouokethbe Logo! This Jwarne pou of,and commend not,thbat t
4€ Are we ftronger then beJ mapdoaltbpnges, pe come not together after a better maner, but | |
ece pron d put ¥ all thpnges arenot erpedtent . J mape Do afera twoe. Stor tpatte of all when pe come =
si.co, piii d all tphpn eS, but all thpngescdifpenot.* Lette together inthe congregacpon, 3 pere that there m Š
no man fete p tobiche ts his owne:butleteuerp isviffencpon among pou: and F partelp beleue
matlebe P Dobichbelongerbtoanother.abat it. o: there mufte befectesamonge pon that mst roig.e
foeuerigtoldeintheflelthe market peate,and thep WOPO tabi ai hd te mipabtebe
ofarrtit.a algeno queftion Foz confepence fake . Stoz * the bnowen.RUibenpecometogetbertberfoein
carth (3 Lozbes, anball p theein Pfanpof tooneplace, the Lo2des (upper ca not be eaten |
them tbpcbhe beleuenot, bpd pou to a featt,and 4Eo2 cuerp ma beginnetd afeze tocatebig atone |
ye be dilpoted to go, whattocuer ig lette before Supper ANID OME IMS pagr and anor Der igbo ; E
pou,cate,alkpng no. ucttionfogedtciencefake. ken. Daue penot houles to cate and to depnke ie
. Wutandplanpman ap pntopou:thpsisofie- in: Welpple pe tbe congregacpon of God, and ;
veo vntopmageg,catenot OO for eae ONE mame the p baue net’ WA pat Hall J fape onto
fhewed it,andfoz con(cpence fake. Che eatthis pourthall fpaple pour Gntbps praple J pou -
the Lozdes andal that there in is.Confctence J not. Fri Chat whpche 4 delpuered unto pou E
i.co.big.b ape, Hot thpne, * but of the otber.ffoztobpts “sreceauco of the Lorde. For the Lorde Jelug ee)
my lpbertpe tudged of anotber mantics conicp= thefamenpgpt,in tohich be was betraped,toke oll
inrita ence? Wot pF take mp parte wpth thankes, bzeade:and whan be bad geut thakes, be brake
`~ gobp am Jeupli fpoken ,foxPtbpngewher> it andfapde:* Take pe,and cate:thypsis mp OO mat.pror.e
cono.. e FORE J Geuctbabes: *WAbether therfore ve cate bpe,whiche ig Broken for pou. This do pein the mar.ritib
oz dapiike , 02 that focuct pedo, doall to the remembzaunce of me. Biter p fame maneralfo Sree
prapieof God. j Sethatyegeuenoneoccaltd hetoke the cup, oben fupper was done, fapinge
ofeupll,nether tothe Jetoes,noz pet to the Gen Tiao es Dinan conenbiate
tpls,nepther to the congregacpon of God-euen Whpsdo asoftas pe dpincke itintremembzatl= “s
icontro a8* J pleate all meninall thynges.notickpna ce ot nic. J¥02 ag oftenas pethal cate thisbzecd ye
| mpnie one: zofpt but thepzofpte of manp, that anddepncke thpscup:*pe thall Hete the L02- Peti.
thepmygbtbefaucd. Des Death*tpll be come. Wi berfoze, hofoeucr, +4*-1-5-
pera eT etter settee DEEDE Lorde DINDOREDEDE, Dale apie of te
| itame Echt ; > :
pan about he Saranen anty prk mtieupon,  bodpandbloudeotthe å ORDE: * XBUELCE AMMAN y rt y
A cease Epe the folowersofme as Jam the eraméebin elf, andtolet bim eate of the beead Ge, FoI, c
H © )Afolotwer of Chepite.gcommende pou and Depneke of the cup. soz be p eateth oz dzinc
Mee )lbacthzen, $ pe remember metnalltbin- keth wntooztbelp.cateth € Oepncketh bps owne
E S G ceg,andbepetheosdinaunces.cuenas Ddamnacpon, becaule be maketh no difference of


“7 oclpucred the to pou. ut J wolde haue pou the Lezdesbodpe. Fo? thpscaute manye are
- foknote p Chzifk isthe bead of euetrp mã. And weate and fpcheamong you, and manpe fepe t
gaed thbemãigthexwomãshead. And Godig Chp- Fto? piwoe bad iudged oure felueg, tve tbuldnot g |
epee ftes head, Cuerpman prapeng o? paophetpeng bane bene iudged. E a an Dar ag DeD of l
paupnge anp topnge Oe berat Dae ieS the Lozve, toe are chaftened, that we Muldenot 1
yg Dead. uerpe woman p prapethozpzopbefieth bed=mpned wpththe* wolde . Wdihertoze MP kigoda |
X bare beaded diponeketh ber bead. Fo? thatis bzetbeen whenpe come together tocate, tarpe
-  euenalone,as pf the were bauen, DEtbe oma onefozanother.Pfanp man ponger,let dim eat m ?
Deuria He not couered.lette ber alfo bethozen.*Veitbe at DOme tive tepals ool aaron {= |
fhame foza woman tobe fpozen op Hauen, let napon: Other thpnages wopll y {er in o2der |
per cone ber penae eases ppmage eae wen FLOM oie CChe rii Chapter. F A
ppsbead fozasmocheas bets p pmage Fqrorp E Lhebiueripht oF See dpets otte oolp goon geuen to che f
l of Gon wut p woman te thegloapeottbe matt.  ttaustooptetueonesnorher. 7s oe mempEe ofa
#Geiekd 4 o2*5 manignotofthe woman:but pwomd -p= D Meernpnge fpzetual thinges( bze- 2g
- pe tbeman. Aether teas the mancreatedfoz the 17 £F Dy thaen ) wolde not baue pouigno-”
womang fake : but the Womanfozthemannes | pee a raunte. > Peknotve that pe were
fake. Sozthis cauleoughtthewomantobaue Ih Caso Ocntples,, and wente poute wapeg |
power on er beade,foztpcaungelsfakes:j2es barmi


TEF,


To the Lorinthyans.


Fol irit,


azom-fif.a Ys bythe bolp ue noloue: 3 au
‘otgptteg,' afle;oz as atink=
ferences or lpngcpmball. And*though F coule 2s4t-dil.c


ephe iigb in al:* Che apete of che (pretets aeucn to eucrp p?
æ pet hate no loue, J amnothpng: And though

Jbetowreall mp goodes to fede thepooge, and

though J geue mp mph cuen that FJ burned, ¢

pet baue noloue,tt proftterh me notbpnge.

Loue fuffreth longe,¢is courteous. Loueen= 185

upetbnot, Loue doth not frotardlp , (iwelleth

not, dealeth not difbonettlpe + feketh nother * '.co7-r-¢

owne, (snot prouoked toanger, thpnketh not PIE


w @jal.r.a
Fuk. ria
Eppe iiij


č


in the boùpe: but that the membzeg Huld indif-
: e p AE fiera ana stone rena


be badin honour,all memb2es be glad allo.
Peare the bodpe of Chzptte, andDinembzes
one of another. And God hathallo ogdepnedin
the congregacpon,fpatte * Apoftles, fecondare
lp propbetes.thpzdlpe teachers, then them that
dompzacles:atter tbat tbe gpftes of bealpnae,
Helpers, qouerners, dpuerfptie of fonges.

Are all Apoftles‘ Are all rophetes: Are
al teachers: Areal Doers of mpzaciesHaue all
the ypftes of bea Leng? Wo al {peake w tonges?
Doalinterpzet/Couct after j belt giftes. And
pet bewe J vito pou amoze excellente Wape,


eupll, tetopfeth not ininiqupte but reroplethin
thetrueth, tuffereth all thpnges ; belcueth all
ehpnges.Dopesd all topages.enburecy allthptt:
ges. Chough that prophelpenges faple, ether
tonges ceale, o? Knowledge banplihe awape;
pet loue fallethuencrawap,foz ourknowledge
is Dnperfect , g oure prophelpinge te wnperfect.
Wut whe ý ohicheisperfect.is come,then that .
whichis vnperfect,thal be done atwap.Ciiben F
was a child, J fpabe ag a child, J pnderftopeas
achploe; 3 pmagpned asachplde. ut affone |
as J was ama, J put awapchplbdelbnes. Now
we ie ina glasjcuenin a darkefpeakpnge: but
then pall we fe facetoface . Rowe J know pn-
etfectlp : butthen hall Jhnotwe cucnas Zam
nowen.f2owe abpdeth eet te , and loues
euch thelethze: but the chefe of thele islouc. fs
The.rtiii. Chapter.
@ Paule Hewrth that the gptte o€ piophecpe,interpretpng


o} preachpnge, ercelleth the optte of tonges and bowethep
) PA a fop loue, andcouet [pzetuall 2%
Rion loue, etua
pi SS apfteg : but moot cheflp that pemap
3) (Ges peopbelp oz be that {peaketh with
=the tonge (peaketh not puto më, but
banto God. Forno man heareth hym.Hotwbri¢
in the fpeete be fpeaketh miferics, wut be that
zophelpeth , {peaketh ynto men foz thep2 cdp-
pitige,fo2 thep2 exdoztacpon and Foz tbep? con:
fozte. De that fpeakethwpth p tonge profeteth


bim felfe:*he that propbelicth,cdi at aa ras Motiti. b
IEO FON EUFL


gregacion. +3 woldcthat peailipa
ges: but rather ppe propbefped. Fo: areathee
ts he that prophelpeth , thenbe that tpeaketh
With tonges ercepte be erpounde tt: that thecd:
gregacion map baue edifpenge, Pow byethacn, 25
pf {com bnto pon i. With tiges: that
thal J profet pou ercept J tperaketopou, ether
bp reuclacpon o? bp Bnowledge , 02 bp prophe-
fpenge,oz bp doctrines Pozeouer, when thpne
ges without lyfe geuefound? (whether it be a
pppe ozan barpe jercept thep make a diftinecid
inthe foundes,botv pallit be knotven what ig
pyped o2 barped. Soa p£ the trompe qenean wn
certapne Dopce , Hho thall preparehpm felfeta
the warrer Cuen lo lykewpie when pe fpeake
thith toges,ercept petprake wo2des that daug
fpgnpfpcacpon , hotve Wall tt be yndertandé
whatis poktor pe halbutlpcakein $ apep
an


The feconde Epyitle


€  Wanpbpudes of Hopees arc iti the wolde,
and none of them are without fignificacion. PE
F knowenot what the nopee meaneth. J halve
wnto bim p{peaketh,ah aliét: and be that pea-
ketb, Halbe an alient nto me.€uen fo pe, (fog
ag muche ds pecouet fpzetual qpftes) feke that
pe map ercel, nto the edifpeng of Ae onteg
Wiberfoz, let him plpeaketh with toge,pzaps
that pe map interpret alfo. Fo: pf J pap with
tong, mp (pzet papetb but mp vnderfandpng
Dothe no good. Wahatisit then «FZ wpll prape
with thefpzete,¢ wpl prap witb the bnderftan
hae es Shy iA Nope ed ruge
wyptithe wnderitandpnce. Woz elg when thou
bl thithtbhe fpzcte,bowe hall
pietbtberowmeot the bulearned fap: Amenat
thy geupng of thankes,fepng be Dnderftandeth
not whattbou lapet: Thou verelp genek than
bes well, but the otber 1s not edifped. F thanke
mp God pF {peake wpth tonges moze then pe
al:Pet bad J lener inthe congregacph tofpeake
fpue hozde8 With mp ouderifandpng to the tn-
fourmacion of otber.cather then ten thoutande
_ Yogdes with the tonge. |
 —Wzetheeti, be not pechpldzenin toptte. How
pein end et op erty ep Ahn hay
‘but in toptte be perfect. jn thelawe itis w2itté
tfa,rrbitie rt Soe tonges, €topthlondzpelppprs
fopll J lpeake vntothps people, and pet toz all
that, wpll thep not beareme,fapeth the Lozde.
Wiberfoze tonges are foz a Cygne not tothe
that beleue:but to them p belenenot.Contrarp
tople , prophefpenge ferneth not fo2 them ý be-
leuenot:but fos themtobich beleue PE rherfoze,
foben all the congregacpon is come together, €
all{peake topth tonges,thetecome tn thep that
are Dulearned, 02 thep iebpebe beleue not:fopll
thep not lape, that pe are out of poure topttes’
Wnt and p£all pophelpe, andthere come in one
that beleucth not, 02 one Dnlearned,be is rebu-
E hed ofall men,¢ is tudged of euerp man, andio
are the fecretes of bps berte opened, ¢ fo falleth
be Downe on bis face, e wortbyppetd Eod, and
pth: that Gopisin pou of a tructh. Powis it
then bzeth:ë ¢ As oft aspecome togetber,cuctp
one of pou batha fonge, hatha doctrine,bath å
reuclacpon aninterpzetacpon.
Let all chpngesbedone onto cdpfpeng. PF anp
ma {peake torth tonge,let it be bp tivo oz atthe
moft bp tbhze,¢ that bp courte,¢ let another in-
fë tetpacte it. Wut pftbere be no interpzeter.lette
bpm bepefpléce inp cigregacpon, and let bpm
{pcake tobpmlelf eto God. Let the prophetes
t.zob.dita fpeake tio, 02 thze,€ let p other tudge. Pfanp
reuclacpon be mad toanother p (prteth by, lette
the fpatte bolde his peace. Jfo2 pe mapeall p20-
befpe one bp one,p al map lerne, that al map
aS pane comforte. Aub thefpzeteg of the Bzropbe-
ae fegare intbepotver of the Pzrophetes. Jo God
3 isnot cauleot Erife:* but of peace,ag-«( 3 tea)
(.ximitd inallcongregacpons of the lapntes.* Let pour
Sre memenkepe fplence inthe congregacpons. Jeo?
” ifignotpermitted vnto them totpeake : but to
he winder obedience, as fapththelawe . PEthe


thatoccus | ED yy)


bandeg at home. Foz it isa bame fo2 wemen
tolpeakeintbecongregacpon. Spzongetbe
wozbe of Godfrom pou ethercame tt pntopou
onelpe. DE any mantbinke dim felfe to bea pro:
phete,cther(piritual let him Bnotve, what thin-
aes J th2pte oe . Eo} atethe com-
inaundementes of the Lozbe - Wut andpfanp
man beiqnozaunt,let bpm beiqnozait Uber-
foze bzethzen come to propbelp,and fozbpd not
to fpeake withtonges . Let all thpnges be done


CChe.rv.Chap
| @ Hobe celurrecepon of the bead,


Bl the which pecontinue, bp the which
EAallovpe are faucd : Joo pou = s
basmaner Jpzeached Onto pou, pf pe


after w


Bepe tt,excepte pe baue beleued in vapne.


Hoz fpr of ald J dDelpuered onto pou,that
whpch J receaued:bow that*Chzpite dped fo? erap.tiiid
vure fpnnes,agrepng to the {criptures: * And P mat.rpoiit.
be twag burped, and that be arole agapnetpe> >
thp2dedapeaccozdpng totbhelcriptures : and p 2°" FF
be was fene* of Cepyas.then of the tiveluc. AE: ga rrii,»
tev that teas be leneof mo then fpue biidzed bees |
thzets atonce : of \obpcbhe manperemapne bnto
thps wre n pranine, amen
appeared pe to James, oal the les.
Aid latt of all be was fene of me, as of one ori
ivag mae out of due tyme. Fo: Jam the leat
of the Apoltles,which am not wo2thp tokecal
ledan Apottle , becaule * J pe d theron- .


gregacpon of God: Wut by the grace of Gon, ¥ irarria


am that Jam. And bps grace whpebe is in me, a0.Frbi.b

thas not in bapne: P But J abaa

boundauntelpe then thep all, petnot J, but the

grace of God whpche is withme, therfoze whe-

ther it were 3,02 thep fo the preach and fo baue

pe beleued. > DEG hzitt be petacbed howethat

be rolefrom the dead: bot tap fome amia pou

that thereignorelurreccpdo thedead Dit e

be norifpnge agapne of the dead thenis Chit E

notrplenagapne.DEC butt benottplenagapn

thents our preachpng in bapne, and yourtarth

ig alfo in apne, Pe and weare foade falfe wita

nefles of God. Fo: we hauetettyfpedcf Gop,

howe thatherapled bp Chritt-wpomberapfen

not vp, pf is belo that the dead pte not agapne

Sfo2z pEthe Dead rple not agqapne thenis Chip

not rplenagapn. Prit belo that Chzift rofenot

agapne,then ts pourfapth in bayue,and pe are

faday desta penguin arefal

ches Oh Lage dr Sr tnthbps

Ipfe onelp twe belete on Chait, then are toe otal

prap a EN ;
ut nowe is Cheap en trom thedeade,

g become* the fpr tefrutes of them that epte £ollo.t.¢

$fo2 by Aman came death, andb ae

refurreceps of p bead. Eoas bp Ad{§j al pe:eu

fobp Chepfte,thal al be made alpuc,but euerpe

maninbdps owne oder, f


€ Fy2tte is Cheptte,thenthep that are


wylilerneanp thpnge,let them afke thep2 pul- Chephes at bpscommpng. Chen commeth tbe
ende


ozed moze az ©"


8


t


a z
i n
ee a
+ =


$e EA auii


ende when be bath delpuered, vp the kyngqdome
to God the father, when be bath put dowone all
cule andallauctozitpe and potoer. Po? bemull
a Pta.cr.a TAPANE* tpll be baur put all bis enemics Dunder
mat.iri.d histete. Che laft enempe that thalbedeltroped,
tera ig death: * S€o2 be bathe putall thpnges wonder
pra bitb big fete. Hut when he laprh all thynges are put
| nder bpm, itis manpfefethatpe is excepted,
| Wbhpcbe dpd put all thpnges onder bpm. WUpen
| all thpnaes are fubdued vnto ppm , then pall


D


thefonne alfo bpm felfe be fubiecte vntoipm,
-that put all thpnges onder bim, p God map be
allinall.Els whatdo thep, whpcbeare baptp=
{rbd oucr the Dead, pftbe dead epte notall ubp
arc they then baptifed ouerthem: Pee, and why
Gandi toe altbape then in icopardpe ¢ 25yp oure

| reioplpnge whyche Jhaucin Chp tke Jelu oure
| Lozde,¥ ope daply. Chat J bauc fought wpth
beattes at Ephelus after the maneret menne,

i oz What aduauntageth tt me, pfthedeadrpleuot
> gtaxsiin, ATapNe: * Let os cate € deprke fo: fo mozowe


2 To the Lorinthyans.
|


Hol, leit.
tpfeincogruptible, and we thalbe chaunged.
ff 02 this cozruptible muit put on incozruption
and thps moztall muff put on immortalite.

When this cozruptible bath put onincoz:
rupepon, and this moztall bath put onimmog-
talite: then thalbe brought to palle the fapinge
thatis wettten:+ Deaths (toalowed vpin bic Erar.rrb.e
to2p:* Death where igthp ipnges Hel Whereis ozee.ttii.c
thp victozp: The ftyng of deathis fpnne:and p
ftrenath of {pnneisthelatve: wuttbankes be
pnto Gon whrch bath qeuen bs* bictozp,tho= *1.Zo.b.a
row our Lord Je Chk. g herfoze mp deare
bzethzë,be pe itedfat and bnmouable, alwap-
esrpchein the worzke of the Lorde, fozas moch
aspe knowe, bow that poure laboute,ts notin
papnein the Lod.


@The.rbi. Chapter.
@ Be puttech theminremembzauace ofthe gatherpnge for
the pooze Chriften at Jerufalem, and conciubeth bie pile
wptb the falutacpons of certapneloupng brethien.


Sanib wethall dpe. Genotype deccaued:eucl wozdes [yA Dy Capnetes, as 3 daucozdepned inthe kaer
| corrupte good maners . Awake trulyoute of (e pa congr AEA a ERTE ape A Mear bia
| * — flepe,¢ fpnnenot: Jo} fome bauenot the know: ey Pope .dipon Come Sabothdape let 1.


ledge of God :¥ (peake this to poure Hame.
Wut Come man pl fape:how arpfe p dead, w


` yob.cii.v What bodpe Hall thep comes Thou foole,*that


tohich p fotvett,is not quickened, ercept it dpe.
et And what fowett p/ Chon fowelk not that bo-
© bp that (albe:but bare cozneas of wheat,o2 of
= fome other, Godgeueth ita bodype at bps plea=
F fure, to euerpfeene big owoneboop H Alae is
1 not ose maner of flety:but ther ig one mane” of
fiethof men, another maner of ich of beafteg,
Je another of fpiipes another of bpzdes. ‘Chere
E. ave alfocelettpall bodpes and there are bodpcs
ab ge terveltrtall. ut ‘glozy of the celetttallig one,
T andthe qlogp of p tereftriallis anorber. There
| ig onemaner glozp of thefine, another glozp
7 ' of themoone, andan other glozp of the ffarres.
l! So one tarre differeth mamotier ngin
É ois tbherefurreccpon of the Dead. Ftis
ui coazcupcpon,tt rilethbagapne tnincozrupcion.
Şt is Cowen in difponour; ttrplothagapn inbo
| nour. Jtis fowenin toeabues,ttrpieth oe oe
| in power, Jt is foven a natural bope itrpieth
agapne:a tp2etuall bobpe. Chere isa natural
bobp,andtbhercisa (pectual bodye:agitis alio
Lo gameti p Waitten:tbe fp2it man t Adam wag madealy-
| upnge foule g thelat 2d4 was made a quyck-
4 npng {pete , Hotwbeit.pisnot fp2it whpcheis
p fpirituall,but p whychisnaturall, ethen that
T wbpcbe is fprtuall. H Tbe fp manic. the
erth ertbp pteconie mä is Lode fróbeauen
ay om(Deaucnly Ag ig thecarthptuchearethep that
G are carthy.Andagis p beucnlp,tucheare they
are heautlp. And as we baue borne p pmage ot
| beet hal toe beare p pmage of p beauélp.
; Thislape J bactheenthat Achre and blonde
cannot inberet the kpnqdome of God. Nether
i dotbcozrupciõinberet vncozrupcyon. ebold,
jl streti a J (ewe pou a mpiterp. * We thal not all Nepe:
La - Pd Hutswe all all echatiged, ethat ina momer,
| inthe twpnckling of an cpe by thelat trompe,
; 4£o2 the trompe Hall blows and the dead Wall


OWE:


peremo me x there aremanp aduerfarpes. i, torro.


ag 4 do:lette no man therfore delppfle ym: but
conuape bpm forth in peace, that be mape come
nto me.jfo2 FZ lowe foz bpm wpth the bacthre. ¢
Tolpeake of brotherx Apollo( gy cectitpepourhat) act. rvitic
4 aqreatlp defpeedDbpm, to come nto pou toyth tEh’
thebzetbzé,but bis mpndwasnotataltocome =
at tbps tpme: Howbeit be wplicome, when de
fhall baveconuentent tpme.tGatcbe pe, tande
fatt inthe fapth,quyte pou lpbe men, be trong
Letall pour bulpnes be donc wpthloue. ,
Weethzen,pe knot thehoute of * Stephac xi.co;,c0

11478 (€ Of Foztunatus € Achaicus) Hotvethattheyarcoe —
thefpatte frutes of Achaica,andthatthephauc
apopnted them felues to miftce nto thelapn-
ctes: J belech pou that pe be obedient pntoluch
andtoall that belpe¢ labour. Jam glad of the
commpnge of Stephana and Fortunatus and
Achatcus:fo2 that tobpcbe was lackpnge tnta
ime on poure part thep hanefupplped. soz they

jaue comforted mpfpretanDpoures Loke ther

oge that pe bnotoe them that arefuche,

. -Checongregacpons of Afia falute pou, Ae
quila and Parlctllatalute pou much abe

an


ende when be bath delpuered, vp the kyngqdome
to God the father, when be bath put dowone all
cule andallauctozitpe and potoer. Po? bemull
a Pta.cr.a TAPANE* tpll be baur put all bis enemics Dunder
mat.iri.d histete. Che laft enempe that thalbedeltroped,
tera ig death: * S€o2 be bathe putall thpnges wonder
pra bitb big fete. Hut when he laprh all thynges are put
| nder bpm, itis manpfefethatpe is excepted,
| Wbhpcbe dpd put all thpnges onder bpm. WUpen
| all thpnaes are fubdued vnto ppm , then pall


D


thefonne alfo bpm felfe be fubiecte vntoipm,
-that put all thpnges onder bim, p God map be
allinall.Els whatdo thep, whpcbeare baptp=
{rbd oucr the Dead, pftbe dead epte notall ubp
arc they then baptifed ouerthem: Pee, and why
Gandi toe altbape then in icopardpe ¢ 25yp oure

| reioplpnge whyche Jhaucin Chp tke Jelu oure
| Lozde,¥ ope daply. Chat J bauc fought wpth
beattes at Ephelus after the maneret menne,

i oz What aduauntageth tt me, pfthedeadrpleuot
> gtaxsiin, ATapNe: * Let os cate € deprke fo: fo mozowe


2 To the Lorinthyans.
|


Hol, leit.
tpfeincogruptible, and we thalbe chaunged.
ff 02 this cozruptible muit put on incozruption
and thps moztall muff put on immortalite.

When this cozruptible bath put onincoz:
rupepon, and this moztall bath put onimmog-
talite: then thalbe brought to palle the fapinge
thatis wettten:+ Deaths (toalowed vpin bic Erar.rrb.e
to2p:* Death where igthp ipnges Hel Whereis ozee.ttii.c
thp victozp: The ftyng of deathis fpnne:and p
ftrenath of {pnneisthelatve: wuttbankes be
pnto Gon whrch bath qeuen bs* bictozp,tho= *1.Zo.b.a
row our Lord Je Chk. g herfoze mp deare
bzethzë,be pe itedfat and bnmouable, alwap-
esrpchein the worzke of the Lorde, fozas moch
aspe knowe, bow that poure laboute,ts notin
papnein the Lod.


@The.rbi. Chapter.
@ Be puttech theminremembzauace ofthe gatherpnge for
the pooze Chriften at Jerufalem, and conciubeth bie pile
wptb the falutacpons of certapneloupng brethien.


Sanib wethall dpe. Genotype deccaued:eucl wozdes [yA Dy Capnetes, as 3 daucozdepned inthe kaer
| corrupte good maners . Awake trulyoute of (e pa congr AEA a ERTE ape A Mear bia
| * — flepe,¢ fpnnenot: Jo} fome bauenot the know: ey Pope .dipon Come Sabothdape let 1.


ledge of God :¥ (peake this to poure Hame.
Wut Come man pl fape:how arpfe p dead, w


` yob.cii.v What bodpe Hall thep comes Thou foole,*that


tohich p fotvett,is not quickened, ercept it dpe.
et And what fowett p/ Chon fowelk not that bo-
© bp that (albe:but bare cozneas of wheat,o2 of
= fome other, Godgeueth ita bodype at bps plea=
F fure, to euerpfeene big owoneboop H Alae is
1 not ose maner of flety:but ther ig one mane” of
fiethof men, another maner of ich of beafteg,
Je another of fpiipes another of bpzdes. ‘Chere
E. ave alfocelettpall bodpes and there are bodpcs
ab ge terveltrtall. ut ‘glozy of the celetttallig one,
T andthe qlogp of p tereftriallis anorber. There
| ig onemaner glozp of thefine, another glozp
7 ' of themoone, andan other glozp of the ffarres.
l! So one tarre differeth mamotier ngin
É ois tbherefurreccpon of the Dead. Ftis
ui coazcupcpon,tt rilethbagapne tnincozrupcion.
Şt is Cowen in difponour; ttrplothagapn inbo
| nour. Jtis fowenin toeabues,ttrpieth oe oe
| in power, Jt is foven a natural bope itrpieth
agapne:a tp2etuall bobpe. Chere isa natural
bobp,andtbhercisa (pectual bodye:agitis alio
Lo gameti p Waitten:tbe fp2it man t Adam wag madealy-
| upnge foule g thelat 2d4 was made a quyck-
4 npng {pete , Hotwbeit.pisnot fp2it whpcheis
p fpirituall,but p whychisnaturall, ethen that
T wbpcbe is fprtuall. H Tbe fp manic. the
erth ertbp pteconie mä is Lode fróbeauen
ay om(Deaucnly Ag ig thecarthptuchearethep that
G are carthy.Andagis p beucnlp,tucheare they
are heautlp. And as we baue borne p pmage ot
| beet hal toe beare p pmage of p beauélp.
; Thislape J bactheenthat Achre and blonde
cannot inberet the kpnqdome of God. Nether
i dotbcozrupciõinberet vncozrupcyon. ebold,
jl streti a J (ewe pou a mpiterp. * We thal not all Nepe:
La - Pd Hutswe all all echatiged, ethat ina momer,
| inthe twpnckling of an cpe by thelat trompe,
; 4£o2 the trompe Hall blows and the dead Wall


OWE:


peremo me x there aremanp aduerfarpes. i, torro.


ag 4 do:lette no man therfore delppfle ym: but
conuape bpm forth in peace, that be mape come
nto me.jfo2 FZ lowe foz bpm wpth the bacthre. ¢
Tolpeake of brotherx Apollo( gy cectitpepourhat) act. rvitic
4 aqreatlp defpeedDbpm, to come nto pou toyth tEh’
thebzetbzé,but bis mpndwasnotataltocome =
at tbps tpme: Howbeit be wplicome, when de
fhall baveconuentent tpme.tGatcbe pe, tande
fatt inthe fapth,quyte pou lpbe men, be trong
Letall pour bulpnes be donc wpthloue. ,
Weethzen,pe knot thehoute of * Stephac xi.co;,c0

11478 (€ Of Foztunatus € Achaicus) Hotvethattheyarcoe —
thefpatte frutes of Achaica,andthatthephauc
apopnted them felues to miftce nto thelapn-
ctes: J belech pou that pe be obedient pntoluch
andtoall that belpe¢ labour. Jam glad of the
commpnge of Stephana and Fortunatus and
Achatcus:fo2 that tobpcbe was lackpnge tnta
ime on poure part thep hanefupplped. soz they

jaue comforted mpfpretanDpoures Loke ther

oge that pe bnotoe them that arefuche,

. -Checongregacpons of Afia falute pou, Ae
quila and Parlctllatalute pou much abe

an


The feconde Cpyitle


and fodocth the congregactd pis inthep2 boule
om om ( toptb whome alfo Zamlongen ) All the baeth2en
nom rbe Arete pou:* Grete peone another ith andolp
tpile. Thefalutacpon of me Paule with mpne
owne bande. Pfanp man loue not the 1020 Fe-
fus Chit, thefame be Anathema Waranatba
Che grace of the Lorde Felus Chzpite be wpth

pou: &)p loue be tpth pou allin

swe Depite Jefu Amen.
C The fpzte Epitle to the Cozpnthpang wag
fent from Philippos, bp Stephana
and Fortunatus, and Achaicug,
and Timotheus.


CThelecond Epittleof
Sapnt Paule the Apottleto .
the Cozpnthpans


The pet Chapter.


«rhe confolacponof Gobintrouble. rhelouc of Haule
e Chon o:putbpans and pps ercule that be camenot
nto CHEM,


A AULE an Apottle of Jefu
a Pras Wa Chik bpthe wpl of Gon, and
A Mesa) a bother Cimotheus, -

E es Ae  Untothecongregacponot
G eria God, whycheisat Connthi,
A CEE 2 wpth all thefapntes wbypcbe
$iromias ey eeu, ateinall Achata. x Geacebe
Baia  .  _woithbpou,and peacefrom God
sabett oure f


ather and fromebe Lozde Jefus Chzptte.
+75 letied be God( the Father of our 1020 Je-


ti; Pet, ta =
" {us Chapt ) twbpchets the father of mercp,and
the Godof all comfort, tobpchecomfozteth vg
in all ourtrpbulacpon,in fo moche that toe are
able to cofozt them tobpcpe are inanp mance of
trouble, topth thefame comfoste, wheretoepth
we ourefelues are cifozted of God. fozas the


x colss.c Xaftlpctpons of Chap ke are plenteousin bs, ff


euen fo is oure cofolacion plenteous bp Chait,

iR Wibether twe be troubled foz pour confola=
oy CPON AND Health:ow De whetber we de comforted, it 19 fog
her power, in that petufire thefameafilictions
whpche we alfofutfre : 02 whether we be cfo-
tedfo2 pour confolacpon ¢ faluacpon:oure hope
alfo is tedfat fo? pou:inas moch as toe know,
hotve that as peare partakers of the afflpctiig
fotball pebepartakers alto of the confolacion.
Wretheen, J wolvenot haue pouigqnozaunt of
aep eg Oure trouble, wbpcbe happened puto vs inxa-
fia. Eo? We Were greuedoutofmealure paling
frengbe : lo greatlpe that we difpap2ed euen oF
Ipfe. Allo eereceaned ananulwwer of death roure
felues , that we fhouldenot put our trut inour

#1. 10.1.0 felnes: * but in Gon wbpcbe rapleth the dead to
Deu diid Ipfe agapne, and whpebe delpucred bs fromfa
great a death:and doth deltuer. Dn whome we

- trute that pet hereafter be topll delpuce bp the

belpe of pour paper fo? vs,tbat bp the mecaneg

of manp perfones,tbakes map be giuen of ma-

itoj ini, TPO oure bebalfe for p gpfte genen onto vs.
f€oz oure retoplpnge is thyg, cuen the tetp=


pour comfozt and falta cron) obpch faluacpon thevord-


monp of ourconfcpence,thatinfpynglencgox(or C
bert) AND Od p purenes, notin flethlp wplds cw
but by the qrace of God, toe paue bad oure con-
uerfacponin the oozlde,and moffe of all to pou
Wardes. Wie h2pte none otberthpnacs unta
pou, tben that pereadand allo knotwe. Pee, and

trult pe thal fpnde vg onto the ende,cuéas pe
ucfound vs partlp:Fo2 oe are pourreiopling
cuenxag peare ouresin podap ofp Lord Fetus.

_ _ * Andinehps confpdence was Jmpnded t.rher,ti,c
Fir to baue come nto pou, that Jmigbt haue t.coz.1b1,4
badde one pleafure moze wpth pon and to paffe
bp poutnto 2)accdoma,¢ to baue comearaine
oute of Sacedonta onto pou, gto belede forth
of pou towarde Jewry. Tha 3 thus wple was
mpnded:dpd F vlelpghtenes:D2 thinke J car
nally tholethpngeswbhpche Fthypnkesthatwm .
mefpulde be * pee, pee, andnape , nap.Godig D
Faptbfull: sf oz our preachpnge topou, thas not x asat.b.e

pee andnap Foz Gods (One Jefu Chpt which It

was preached amouge pou bp vs(euen byme g
Hiluanus and Timotheus ) was not pecand
nape,out bp bpm tt was pre: ozal the promps
{es of God,bp bimare pee:and are in bim Amë,
unto the lande of God thozotve vg. for itis
God, whpch tablpripeth vs with poutn che
hath altotcalen be an pare nee

) tealed bs,and*bhathqeuéthe ernek of
the {pete in oure bertes. e Mr


< Jcal God foz a recozd wnto mp foule that Epbtutee


foz to fanoure pou rd all , ¥ camenot anp moze
wnto Corpntha.* Not that we de Lodes mee
pourefapth
bpfapth pe


AL Be Hetoeth the caute ot bps abfeuce ano erbozteth them
sari at twas fallen, co receauebpma
mrp E Ut J Oeterinpned thys in mp felfe
d (9 tbat J wolde not come IEEE my
koz <j POUIN beutnes: Fozpf 7 make pou
Nei) J) ope wbo is ttthat ould make me
~~ T1ad; but the fame whichis made fo
tpe bp mer And J wzotethps fame vnto pou,
le pf 3J came wato pou, Fthulde take beupnzg
c#(btpen beupnes) Of them, of fobome 7 ought tare: o
opce. Thpa confpdence baue J towarde you al
that imp tope ts the iope of pou all... E02 oute of
great afflpccpon and angupth of berte. 3 wrote
vntopou ivth many teares:not that pe hulde
bemade Corp, but that pe might perceaue plone
which Fdaue,moft {pecialp vnto pow. = `
Pfanp manbathecauled Cozowe,the fame 15
batirnot made ime fozp but partilp:left ¥ ibulo
greue pouall. * Itig luffpeiente onto the fame
man that be was tebuked ofmanp . Sothat
now cõtrarp wpfe,pe ougbteratiert ifozapue
bpm , and confozte bymylett that fame perfone
fpulde be fwalowed vp wpth ouer muche peup-
nes . Ulberfoze, Jerboztepoi, that lone mape
baue ftrengtb ouer bim. Eo: this caule verelpe
dpd J wpte HI mpahte knots the pzofe ofpow
whether pe Mulde be obediente in all thynaes.
Sows Pe fozgoueanp thpnge. dfo? euealfo. —
Stor pt Jforgaucanp tbpna to wha Fozganë
atop oure (abeg fozgane 4, in the f paber of
Mpi


(Co: b,b


LT


‘but are pelperg of pouretoperst
fanne. pers of p vetoper or ki PADS.


ee


a


The feconde Cpyitle


and fodocth the congregactd pis inthep2 boule
om om ( toptb whome alfo Zamlongen ) All the baeth2en
nom rbe Arete pou:* Grete peone another ith andolp
tpile. Thefalutacpon of me Paule with mpne
owne bande. Pfanp man loue not the 1020 Fe-
fus Chit, thefame be Anathema Waranatba
Che grace of the Lorde Felus Chzpite be wpth

pou: &)p loue be tpth pou allin

swe Depite Jefu Amen.
C The fpzte Epitle to the Cozpnthpang wag
fent from Philippos, bp Stephana
and Fortunatus, and Achaicug,
and Timotheus.


CThelecond Epittleof
Sapnt Paule the Apottleto .
the Cozpnthpans


The pet Chapter.


«rhe confolacponof Gobintrouble. rhelouc of Haule
e Chon o:putbpans and pps ercule that be camenot
nto CHEM,


A AULE an Apottle of Jefu
a Pras Wa Chik bpthe wpl of Gon, and
A Mesa) a bother Cimotheus, -

E es Ae  Untothecongregacponot
G eria God, whycheisat Connthi,
A CEE 2 wpth all thefapntes wbypcbe
$iromias ey eeu, ateinall Achata. x Geacebe
Baia  .  _woithbpou,and peacefrom God
sabett oure f


ather and fromebe Lozde Jefus Chzptte.
+75 letied be God( the Father of our 1020 Je-


ti; Pet, ta =
" {us Chapt ) twbpchets the father of mercp,and
the Godof all comfort, tobpchecomfozteth vg
in all ourtrpbulacpon,in fo moche that toe are
able to cofozt them tobpcpe are inanp mance of
trouble, topth thefame comfoste, wheretoepth
we ourefelues are cifozted of God. fozas the


x colss.c Xaftlpctpons of Chap ke are plenteousin bs, ff


euen fo is oure cofolacion plenteous bp Chait,

iR Wibether twe be troubled foz pour confola=
oy CPON AND Health:ow De whetber we de comforted, it 19 fog
her power, in that petufire thefameafilictions
whpche we alfofutfre : 02 whether we be cfo-
tedfo2 pour confolacpon ¢ faluacpon:oure hope
alfo is tedfat fo? pou:inas moch as toe know,
hotve that as peare partakers of the afflpctiig
fotball pebepartakers alto of the confolacion.
Wretheen, J wolvenot haue pouigqnozaunt of
aep eg Oure trouble, wbpcbe happened puto vs inxa-
fia. Eo? We Were greuedoutofmealure paling
frengbe : lo greatlpe that we difpap2ed euen oF
Ipfe. Allo eereceaned ananulwwer of death roure
felues , that we fhouldenot put our trut inour

#1. 10.1.0 felnes: * but in Gon wbpcbe rapleth the dead to
Deu diid Ipfe agapne, and whpebe delpucred bs fromfa
great a death:and doth deltuer. Dn whome we

- trute that pet hereafter be topll delpuce bp the

belpe of pour paper fo? vs,tbat bp the mecaneg

of manp perfones,tbakes map be giuen of ma-

itoj ini, TPO oure bebalfe for p gpfte genen onto vs.
f€oz oure retoplpnge is thyg, cuen the tetp=


pour comfozt and falta cron) obpch faluacpon thevord-


monp of ourconfcpence,thatinfpynglencgox(or C
bert) AND Od p purenes, notin flethlp wplds cw
but by the qrace of God, toe paue bad oure con-
uerfacponin the oozlde,and moffe of all to pou
Wardes. Wie h2pte none otberthpnacs unta
pou, tben that pereadand allo knotwe. Pee, and

trult pe thal fpnde vg onto the ende,cuéas pe
ucfound vs partlp:Fo2 oe are pourreiopling
cuenxag peare ouresin podap ofp Lord Fetus.

_ _ * Andinehps confpdence was Jmpnded t.rher,ti,c
Fir to baue come nto pou, that Jmigbt haue t.coz.1b1,4
badde one pleafure moze wpth pon and to paffe
bp poutnto 2)accdoma,¢ to baue comearaine
oute of Sacedonta onto pou, gto belede forth
of pou towarde Jewry. Tha 3 thus wple was
mpnded:dpd F vlelpghtenes:D2 thinke J car
nally tholethpngeswbhpche Fthypnkesthatwm .
mefpulde be * pee, pee, andnape , nap.Godig D
Faptbfull: sf oz our preachpnge topou, thas not x asat.b.e

pee andnap Foz Gods (One Jefu Chpt which It

was preached amouge pou bp vs(euen byme g
Hiluanus and Timotheus ) was not pecand
nape,out bp bpm tt was pre: ozal the promps
{es of God,bp bimare pee:and are in bim Amë,
unto the lande of God thozotve vg. for itis
God, whpch tablpripeth vs with poutn che
hath altotcalen be an pare nee

) tealed bs,and*bhathqeuéthe ernek of
the {pete in oure bertes. e Mr


< Jcal God foz a recozd wnto mp foule that Epbtutee


foz to fanoure pou rd all , ¥ camenot anp moze
wnto Corpntha.* Not that we de Lodes mee
pourefapth
bpfapth pe


AL Be Hetoeth the caute ot bps abfeuce ano erbozteth them
sari at twas fallen, co receauebpma
mrp E Ut J Oeterinpned thys in mp felfe
d (9 tbat J wolde not come IEEE my
koz <j POUIN beutnes: Fozpf 7 make pou
Nei) J) ope wbo is ttthat ould make me
~~ T1ad; but the fame whichis made fo
tpe bp mer And J wzotethps fame vnto pou,
le pf 3J came wato pou, Fthulde take beupnzg
c#(btpen beupnes) Of them, of fobome 7 ought tare: o
opce. Thpa confpdence baue J towarde you al
that imp tope ts the iope of pou all... E02 oute of
great afflpccpon and angupth of berte. 3 wrote
vntopou ivth many teares:not that pe hulde
bemade Corp, but that pe might perceaue plone
which Fdaue,moft {pecialp vnto pow. = `
Pfanp manbathecauled Cozowe,the fame 15
batirnot made ime fozp but partilp:left ¥ ibulo
greue pouall. * Itig luffpeiente onto the fame
man that be was tebuked ofmanp . Sothat
now cõtrarp wpfe,pe ougbteratiert ifozapue
bpm , and confozte bymylett that fame perfone
fpulde be fwalowed vp wpth ouer muche peup-
nes . Ulberfoze, Jerboztepoi, that lone mape
baue ftrengtb ouer bim. Eo: this caule verelpe
dpd J wpte HI mpahte knots the pzofe ofpow
whether pe Mulde be obediente in all thynaes.
Sows Pe fozgoueanp thpnge. dfo? euealfo. —
Stor pt Jforgaucanp tbpna to wha Fozganë
atop oure (abeg fozgane 4, in the f paber of
Mpi


(Co: b,b


LT


‘but are pelperg of pouretoperst
fanne. pers of p vetoper or ki PADS.


ee


a


eee


q

(|

T

i

i
q

|

|


Co the Lorinthyans.


€ hysthougdtcs arenot onknowen pntovs. F
iben Jas cometo Croada for Chzpltes
ofpels fake ( andDadoze was opencd Dnto me

of the Lo2d)¥ banno ret in the tprete, becaufe
4founde not Citus mp bother, but tokemp
icane of them, and went atvape into Maced-
nia: Chankes be Dnto God, whpchealwapes
gpuct) bs the victozpe in Chzpiteand openeth
 thefauer of bis knowledge bp vs in euerp place
qp Ffo We are wnto God the fwete fauoure of
Chapt among them thatarefaucd,andamong
+xutetie them wbpcbe perptibe . x Co the one parteare
we the {auoure of Death wuto Death. And vnto
the otber parte are we thefauoure of lyfe tnta
Ipfe. Ando whois mete bnto thelethinges: Wot
We are not asthe molte parte are, Mhpche chop
and 1 se wopeb the worde of God : but euen


out of purenes andoy the power of God, inthe |


{yabt of God,folpeake wein Cheaply, FH
hes _The.ut.Chapter.
Be prapleth the preacupng of lye H ofpe aboue
thepreacbpngeot the awe,


aeea E bzapn to papie ourtelucs
= q >) Se) ea agapne. ede tee as fome o-
\GEZiEN thee , of beppitles of recom
aea mendatpon onto pou o? let=

os UNG ae | ters of recomendacpon frome
ea AYR AA pou! De ave out eptttle w2ttté
Bh ae Ut out hertes, whichis under:
SSS ftande ered of all men foz af-
moche aspe declare ppeare pepiltle of Cipt,


( wbpche lope is Done alvane ) hp thall not
€ the mpnp


sepnge then that toc bauefuche trufke, toe
boldnes and donot as doles whtche


Lub-bii,b Des Were blpnded. Fo: Dntpll this eel
¢


. Aetrroitt neghtpelame couerpnge Dntaken awape int


ona riy Lecture of the olde teftament, whpch vaple thal


E fapth(accozdpngeag tt is wrptten:* J


Hol lri,

dape when {Popfles is redex the baple hangeth Errriiti-v
befoze thep2 bertes. Menuertheleile* when they gron.ro
tourne tothe Lozde, the vaple albe atvape.

* Tbe Lozdenodoutisalprete.Andwherethe yoy .tit.c
poe of the Lozdcis.thereislpbertpe. Wut we
allbeholdeina mpzroure the glozp of the 1020

vopth bps face open andare chaunged vnto the

fame fimilitude, from glozp to glozpe, ewen ag

of thelpzete of the Lorde


C The.ttit. Chapter.
a A true preacher ts diligent, he cozrupteth not ébe wozdE
of Goo, but Ceketh the honour of Chrete peethoughe it be
lopebtheparciiotbpsipfe,


PRESEN perfore ,fepnge that we baue luche B
is ya bean office, euenas God pati bad mer-
AE > CP on bs, we go not out of kypnde: bug
ede AA paue calte from bs the clokes of Yra
boneftpe,and walke not in craftines nether ba
Dle toe the wode of Goddpiteptfuilp.vut open
the truetband repozte oure felues to eucrp man
nies confcpentce in the fpabte of God rfs VEoure
Gotpell be pet bpd, itis bpd amonge them that Ibu rte
are loftin wbx the God of this wozlde* bathe karmis
bipnded the mpndes of them twobpeh beleuc noe, mark. ists
lefte the Ipgbte of the Gofpell of the glozpe of Zorr tiie.
goe x ( jp dea is the pmaqe of God ) Muldé ace. rous.e
netnto them. f

- Plato: we preach not our felueg,but ot 25
Jelug to be the lozde, and oure Telueg poure ter-
uaunteg foz Jelug lake . ffozttis Cod, that
xcommaunded thelpghte to Hpne out ofdarch + wene.s2
ries, whbiche bathe* opne in oure bertes, Corto tu.yct.iv
geue thelpabt of the knoweledge of the glorye
of cod, in the face of Felus Chzpite. |

ner bert bef- #1(.¢07.0 a


Wut toe have this treatures
felg ,that tbe excelencpe of the potre mpabt be
Gods andnot oures. We are troubled on cuetp
{pde,pet are toe not without tbpit die arei po-
uertpe, butnot vtterlpe wpthoute fome what
Wie fuffre perfecucpon : but afre not forfaken
therin te acecalt dobne: neucethelefie the pe-
rpibenot. Wie all wapes Fbeareaboute tn thè wara.bi.0,
bodpe , thedpenge ofthe Lorde Felus, that the
Ipf of Felumpadt allo appeare in out bodp:
* Sfo? we whpcbe lpue, arcalwapes delp- momoiite
uered puto Death fo: Jelug fabe,that the lpfe al
fo of Jelu mpabt apeare in oure moztall fepe
&otbhédeath workethin dg, but Ipfeinpon. |
Pi Xut fepnge that we baue the fame Cpzete of
) cn: * J deleted wtacrbib
and therfoac baue 3 {poken.) Wic alfo beleue,¢
therfoze (peake. o: we knowe,that Pe wppch
rapicd bp the Lozde Jefus Mall raple bp vs al $
foby the meancs of Jefug,g thall {et be wÙ pou.
4€02 al thypnges Do ¥ fog poure fabes x that the +i tinta
plentecoug grace bp thankelgpupnge of many,
nape redounde Co the praple of God.
- Wiberfoze, we are not toeried. Wut thougys
our outward man perpibe,pet piniharde ma ig
renetocd dape bp Dape.* Eo: oure trpbulacpon Hrat.rrr b
Wwbpcieigmomentanp and lpabt, pzeparcthan Fmt»
crcedpra gan eternal Wapahte of glozpe Wnta
‘vs, whpie we lokenot onthe thyna whpche
are lene, but ot tbe thpnaes whitch ave hot ye
o


—_ = ——
m ian a


eee


q

(|

T

i

i
q

|

|


Co the Lorinthyans.


€ hysthougdtcs arenot onknowen pntovs. F
iben Jas cometo Croada for Chzpltes
ofpels fake ( andDadoze was opencd Dnto me

of the Lo2d)¥ banno ret in the tprete, becaufe
4founde not Citus mp bother, but tokemp
icane of them, and went atvape into Maced-
nia: Chankes be Dnto God, whpchealwapes
gpuct) bs the victozpe in Chzpiteand openeth
 thefauer of bis knowledge bp vs in euerp place
qp Ffo We are wnto God the fwete fauoure of
Chapt among them thatarefaucd,andamong
+xutetie them wbpcbe perptibe . x Co the one parteare
we the {auoure of Death wuto Death. And vnto
the otber parte are we thefauoure of lyfe tnta
Ipfe. Ando whois mete bnto thelethinges: Wot
We are not asthe molte parte are, Mhpche chop
and 1 se wopeb the worde of God : but euen


out of purenes andoy the power of God, inthe |


{yabt of God,folpeake wein Cheaply, FH
hes _The.ut.Chapter.
Be prapleth the preacupng of lye H ofpe aboue
thepreacbpngeot the awe,


aeea E bzapn to papie ourtelucs
= q >) Se) ea agapne. ede tee as fome o-
\GEZiEN thee , of beppitles of recom
aea mendatpon onto pou o? let=

os UNG ae | ters of recomendacpon frome
ea AYR AA pou! De ave out eptttle w2ttté
Bh ae Ut out hertes, whichis under:
SSS ftande ered of all men foz af-
moche aspe declare ppeare pepiltle of Cipt,


( wbpche lope is Done alvane ) hp thall not
€ the mpnp


sepnge then that toc bauefuche trufke, toe
boldnes and donot as doles whtche


Lub-bii,b Des Were blpnded. Fo: Dntpll this eel
¢


. Aetrroitt neghtpelame couerpnge Dntaken awape int


ona riy Lecture of the olde teftament, whpch vaple thal


E fapth(accozdpngeag tt is wrptten:* J


Hol lri,

dape when {Popfles is redex the baple hangeth Errriiti-v
befoze thep2 bertes. Menuertheleile* when they gron.ro
tourne tothe Lozde, the vaple albe atvape.

* Tbe Lozdenodoutisalprete.Andwherethe yoy .tit.c
poe of the Lozdcis.thereislpbertpe. Wut we
allbeholdeina mpzroure the glozp of the 1020

vopth bps face open andare chaunged vnto the

fame fimilitude, from glozp to glozpe, ewen ag

of thelpzete of the Lorde


C The.ttit. Chapter.
a A true preacher ts diligent, he cozrupteth not ébe wozdE
of Goo, but Ceketh the honour of Chrete peethoughe it be
lopebtheparciiotbpsipfe,


PRESEN perfore ,fepnge that we baue luche B
is ya bean office, euenas God pati bad mer-
AE > CP on bs, we go not out of kypnde: bug
ede AA paue calte from bs the clokes of Yra
boneftpe,and walke not in craftines nether ba
Dle toe the wode of Goddpiteptfuilp.vut open
the truetband repozte oure felues to eucrp man
nies confcpentce in the fpabte of God rfs VEoure
Gotpell be pet bpd, itis bpd amonge them that Ibu rte
are loftin wbx the God of this wozlde* bathe karmis
bipnded the mpndes of them twobpeh beleuc noe, mark. ists
lefte the Ipgbte of the Gofpell of the glozpe of Zorr tiie.
goe x ( jp dea is the pmaqe of God ) Muldé ace. rous.e
netnto them. f

- Plato: we preach not our felueg,but ot 25
Jelug to be the lozde, and oure Telueg poure ter-
uaunteg foz Jelug lake . ffozttis Cod, that
xcommaunded thelpghte to Hpne out ofdarch + wene.s2
ries, whbiche bathe* opne in oure bertes, Corto tu.yct.iv
geue thelpabt of the knoweledge of the glorye
of cod, in the face of Felus Chzpite. |

ner bert bef- #1(.¢07.0 a


Wut toe have this treatures
felg ,that tbe excelencpe of the potre mpabt be
Gods andnot oures. We are troubled on cuetp
{pde,pet are toe not without tbpit die arei po-
uertpe, butnot vtterlpe wpthoute fome what
Wie fuffre perfecucpon : but afre not forfaken
therin te acecalt dobne: neucethelefie the pe-
rpibenot. Wie all wapes Fbeareaboute tn thè wara.bi.0,
bodpe , thedpenge ofthe Lorde Felus, that the
Ipf of Felumpadt allo appeare in out bodp:
* Sfo? we whpcbe lpue, arcalwapes delp- momoiite
uered puto Death fo: Jelug fabe,that the lpfe al
fo of Jelu mpabt apeare in oure moztall fepe
&otbhédeath workethin dg, but Ipfeinpon. |
Pi Xut fepnge that we baue the fame Cpzete of
) cn: * J deleted wtacrbib
and therfoac baue 3 {poken.) Wic alfo beleue,¢
therfoze (peake. o: we knowe,that Pe wppch
rapicd bp the Lozde Jefus Mall raple bp vs al $
foby the meancs of Jefug,g thall {et be wÙ pou.
4€02 al thypnges Do ¥ fog poure fabes x that the +i tinta
plentecoug grace bp thankelgpupnge of many,
nape redounde Co the praple of God.
- Wiberfoze, we are not toeried. Wut thougys
our outward man perpibe,pet piniharde ma ig
renetocd dape bp Dape.* Eo: oure trpbulacpon Hrat.rrr b
Wwbpcieigmomentanp and lpabt, pzeparcthan Fmt»
crcedpra gan eternal Wapahte of glozpe Wnta
‘vs, whpie we lokenot onthe thyna whpche
are lene, but ot tbe thpnaes whitch ave hot ye
o


—_ = ——
m ian a


| The feconde Epyitle


402 the thpnges which are fete, ave tempozall:
but thinges tohich arenotfene,aveeternal. i
— ETde.v. Chapter.
CTerewarde fo; taerpng trouble,


d mi eN 2 we knotvetbat pf oure xerthpe
me Ed alae mancpon of thps dwellpnae tere de-
E SH roped, we baue a bupliprg of God,


xuo.viii? buteternaltinbeauen.* Foz therfore tpgbe we

defpzpna to be clothed toith our macion which

is from beauen: fo pet, pf that the be founde

clothed, and not naked. Wo: ee that are inthps

xitet.tc * tabernacle, (pqbe and are qreued becaule we

4 apo.dtio Wolde not be pnclothed, but wolde be * clothed

por, that moztalitie mpabt be fwalowed vp

D | pi tbat bath o2dcpned vs foz thps thing

«ize.bitic 18 Bod: x Mhpcbe Verp fame bathe geuen ynto
ii,cor.t.0 yg theerneft of the {pzete. |

Cherfore, te arealwape of qood clieare,and

 ‘knowe, thatas longe ag we are at bome inthe

15 bodpe, we ate ablent from God. o? we walke

infaprb,not after oufioarde appearaunce:Re-

uertbhelefle we are of good comfozte, and hadde

lener to be abfent from the bodpe and tobe pze«

fent wpth God. Wiberfoze, whether we be at

$ bome 02 from pome, we endenoure oure felucs,

dsat.cro.c topleafe bpm. * Foz foe muteallappeare be-

orite Foe the indgement feateof Chpike, that euetp


man maye receaue the wozkes of bis bodpe ac- '


cozding to that be bath Done, wether it be good


o2 bad. Hx Sepngethenthat we knowe, howe P


the Lozde is to be feared, toe farefapze wpth
men. 0: we are kuoten Well pnought vnto
God. FW truleallo that oc are knotoen inpour
confcpences . Eo: we prapfe not onre felues a-


Gapne vnto pou, but gene pou anoccafpontore `


iopce of bg, $ pemape hauclomewhat agapntt
them wbpche retopce in the face , and notin the

C ierte. Wo: pf te be to feruent,to Godareweto
feruent;<D2 bar fe meafure,foz poure caule
kepe toe mealure . £02 the loue of Chepite con-
ftraineth bo, becaule we thus iudge that pt one
dped Eo? all,then were al dead, and* be dyed foz
nahero all, that thep tobich lpue, huldenot hence forty
Ipue bute them felues, but bntohpm wbpche
=p Dpedfoz them,and rofeagapne. F Wi berfoze,
henceforth knowe toe noman after the felme.


Jn fomoche though Wwe baue Bnotoen Chp te


astee rye Beatin, HOWE Per Uei Corto EN oTo Ne
yim Co Nomoze. Tberfoze tfanp ma bein Chak
eis ancwe creature. Dive thpngesarepatled

eta piii e awape, beholde all thpniges are becomexnewe.
wth enertheleffe,all thpnages are of God, thbpche
rine bathe? reconcpled bs onto bpm felfebp Jelug
Chpt g bath xeuento vs theoffpce to preache

cotto.tie the attonement. W0: * Gop wasin Chif and
mabdeagrement betwenethe toozloe bpm felfe
andimpured not Dep? tpunes tnto them, and

bathe committedte vst peeachyng of the at-
fonemepe ow then are toe meflengers inthe

rowme of Chap ,euenas though God dpt be-

feche pou thoz0t bs. So prap we pou th Chri-

eta Unib thes peices t be recicpled pnto God:fo2 * be
nomota mage bpm tobe pune foz tg, oppebebnet no


S24 anhabptacionotmadewpthbandes,


fynne,that we bp bpsinicanes Mulde be ë rypah-
tivefnes, wbpcbe befoze Godis alowed. 3
© Che. vi.Chapter. F

q Anerhoztacpon to receaue the wozde of God toith thanke
FulneMe and ameubement of Ipfe. Zhe diligence of Bauler
the Golpel,and how he watneth them to efcewe the compàs

üp ofthe Heathen.

TAs, © allo ag helpers erboztepou that y
AUAA ve receaue not the grace of Godin


ticg in ange p (hes. in frppes.tn pefonmenteg


“gegin putencs,in Bro toledge,in long fuffring,
in &pndnes,tn the Bolp qhott, in loue ynfapnen,
in the wozdeof tructb, inthe power of God, bp
the armoure of tighteoulies of the rpabt bande
and on the lefte bp bonouranddpthonour:bp es y
upll reporte and good repot : as dpfceauers, €
pet truc and Duknowen and pet notwen:as dp
inge and behold, we lpue:ag chaltened,and not
Kplled,as fozowpng and pet alwape merpe:ag
pooze,and pet mabemanp vpche:as baupng no
thpnge.and pet pollefipnge all thpnges. F

D pe Cozinepi Soure mouthig open onto g
ou. Durbpert ig made large pe are inno traite
in DS, but are ina ftraite i pour otne bothelleg
J promple Duto pou lpke reward,as ynto chil:
Dë. Het poure felued at large Erh * beare not Deut.bie
pe the poke w the onbelencrs. sto that felow- oe
fbpp bathtpabtwelnes w vnrightivcines Dez


what companp hath lygh with darknes? ¥ D? sarite


what concorde bathe Chaike wpth Breliall E-
sper ONAE Steed a t beleucthtopthat
esta tis Pea le of God wÙ
Jmagegi foz * peare the temple ofthe lpnpnee ; ea ;
God ag fapde God) +F wopll dwell teieni ald.
them, and waicke amonge them and wll b errs
thep2 Gob: and thepthalbemp people. Waber. es. FI DtiAg
fore * come oute ftom amonge themand fepas x eta.tii.e
tate poure {clues from them (fapeth the Lode)
andtouche none vncleane thynge : fo ipl Fre-
ceatie pou,asd wplbe a father nto pou, and pe
{pall bemp fonnes and daughters fapetbe the
Lode almpabty. *
ety ‘The, vit. Chapter

are erborteth tbEto veceaue che promeites of Godthanke

-_soliatoogaie ne
any Cpnge that we baueluche pomp-
ETN feg( Dearelpe beloucd ) HAN elerte
lara e ~ oure felues from all fplthyues of
SO Dy be flebe and feet and growe bp
Ent ful holpnes wopth the feare of gop
Gnderiland bs, te haue hurt no man: we haue
corupte ho man: the paue defrauded no man. %
{peabenot thps to condempne pon : foz have
ewed pou befoze, that pe are in oure bertesto
Dye Andi pue wpth pau: Jam verpe bolve oner
pou: J retopeegreattp in pou. 3 am Fplied with
comfort


g2 |


`
— =.
~ k iad


ee e


=


— ee oe A
i = = ~ r ii
i n


To the Lozinthbpans,


comfozte,and am erceadpnige ioponfe in all our
trpbulacpon.jfoz when we were come into Ha


cone cedonia*oure fetbe badde no ree, but toe were


troubled on cuerpe {pde. Dutwarde thas fygh-
Actes.potc Epnere,inwarde tas feare. Meucrtheleilex God
that comfozteth the abiccte,confozted vs bp the
commpnge of Titus. Rn
Andnot by hiscommpnge onelp-but alfo bp
25 the confolacto wbhpcb wereceancd of pou: when
be tolde vs pour Delp2e, pour weppng pout fer-
uent mpnde fozme:fo that Fretopeed the moze
Eo: though J made pou fozp nitha tetter re:
pente nottbough J dypd repent.j op F perceaue
that thelame €pittle made pou fozpe, thoughe
it were butfoza feafon. Wut Juotve retopce,
not thatpe-twere eee that pe Cofozowed
that pe repented. ftoz pe fozotved qodlp,to that
iti notbpnge pe were burte bp v8. oz godly fo-
rotwecauleth ee ao puto faluacpon. not
Eecher fo be repented of, contrarpwple, *worldlpe fo
C rowe caufeth death. Wo: beholde, what dplp-
gence thpsgodlpe fozowe that pe toke, bath
wzougbtin pon:pee,tt cauled pou to cleare pour
*  felues. Fecauled ndpgnacpon,(t canted feare,
itcaufed dDelp2e,itcauled punpihmente. Foz tn
perc es. pe baue thetved pourefelucs, that
pe Werecleate in that mater. Uberto, though
Y wote nto pou, J dpd it not for bys caule
that was bhurte:butppoure good mpnde foz vs
at Late peate amonge pou tn p (pabt of God.
Ti ibob dem dae peal A cü
Forted:pee,€erccadinglp the moze toped we,fog
the ibpe p Citus had: becaule his (prete was re-
Frefibed of poual. Jam therfore not note ama-
med,though J boafted mp felfe to bpm of pou.
4fo2 as alltbpnges tebpebe we pake puto pou
ave tene,eucn fo oure boattpng that J made Dn
to Titus, ig founde true. And bys tntoarde af-
fection is moze aboundDaunt totbard pou, when
hereméebeeth the obedience of pou all:bow with
Ecare € trembl pra pe receceaued him. J reiopre
that J mape be bolde mpl inalltbpnges.
AA eA Rt Ee rebel tbe
TS i pnt at 3ierutalemaccopopng asthe Gace
bonpans è
amas Certifpe pou brethren, ofthe grace
xi E of God, which was geuenin the c6-
Coc e2 gregactons of Macedonia , botve ý
PCEN a the aboundañce oftherzreiopfpnge
m ig that thep are tryed wpth muche
trpbulacion. And though thep Wereerceadpnge
pooze, pet bane thep qeuenerceadpnge tpcbelpe
and that in{pngleneiic. Eo to thep2 potvers ; 3
Dearethem recorde pee, bepond thepzpowers,
thep were wpllpnge of thep2 oone accozde,and
praped hs topth great inffaunce,p te wolde re:
ceaue their benefite,¢ tuffre the to be partakers


Ñ. oithotherxinmpnitryngetotbefapnteg. And
actes.ro With OCV pN twe lobed fot: but gane -


L CoLTrOIA | ii ! l Ò Ù, .
coea oen onne ielneg fpa totbe Lozd,¢ after bnto
Komaro se bp the wpllof Ood:fo p the could not but de-
“fp2re Citus,teaccomplpMe the fame benenoléce
ainonge pou alfo euen as bebadbegonne.
y. Mowetherfore, as pe are rpchein all partics,
in fapth,in tozde,in knotoledge. inal feruémnes


JEol.Irb,


andinloue,wbpceb pe hatte to bs, cten fo, fe that
e be plenteous in thps bencuolence alfo. Chyps
tape J,vot commaundpnee , but becaufe offer-
uentnes. 3 do alote the bnfapnednes of poure
loue totwarde ofbermen. Fo? peknowe the lp-
beralptpe of oure Lozde Fe iai IAN cai i
though be was rpebhe,pet fo: pourelakes he be ionapa
came pooze, that pe thozotve bys pouertye,
mpaht be maderpebe. |
_ And J geue counfell hereto. or thys ig erpe C
dpent foz pou,wohpchbegannenot to do onelpe, —
but alfo to topl a peare ago. Mowe therfoze,p
forme the thpnge tobpch pe beqanne todo : that
as there wasg in pou a readpnes to wll, cuen fo |
pe mape perfozme p dede*of that which pe pate Lpit tills |
Foz *pf there be fp2tte a topllpnge mpnde,itis sarang A
accepted accozdpna to that a man bath, and nop Luberri s E


accozdpugetothbathebathnot. Í

Jtisnot mp mpnde that other befet at cafe, |
and pe brought into combzaunce:but that there |
be egalnesnowe at thps tpmic: and that poure |
aboundaunce mape fuckerthep: lacke,andthat |


thep2 aboundaunce mape fupplpe poure lacke:
that there mape be equalpte , agrepnere to that É
whpch is wptten:* Pe that hadde much, hadde *F°-FO!. |
not the mozeaboundaunce : and be that haddea |
Iptle,bad neuer the lefle. Chankes be pnto God |
Mat bi ek oe oh ld oodmpnde foz pou inthe |
berte of ‘Citus, whpch accepted the requett: yee, |
rather be toas fo well wpllpnge , pofbps otne |
accozde, Decame bnto pon- LE ie , |
Wichauefent wpth pem the brother whofe D |
laude ig in the Gofpell thozowout all the core:
gactong:and not that onelpe, but ig alfochofen |
of p congregaci6s,to be a felot wÙ D8 in our iog |
nepe,concernpngethis beneuolence that tg mp- |
niffred bp vs wnto the praple ofthe fame Lode |
andto ftere bppourpzomptempnde. —
Ho: thps toe efchetwe,p anp man uld rebuke
bs intbps plenteous dilfribucton,xthatis mp- Hom.rit,c
npitred Dp VS» (to the glozp ofthe Lope) and make ao |
| roupfiontoz Donel thpnges: not onelpe in the Bri
padt of the Lozde:but alfoin the fpgbt of men.
Wie paue fente wpthtbem a bzother of oureg: à
tohd we baue ofttpmes proucddpligent in ai ASN


Tur
k


np chpnges:burnowe muchemoze dili
veat confpdéce wbhpch 3 baue inpou,ba
ed me thps todo:partlyp foz Titus fake,


thcatte
ismp felot € belper ag ae parf ) l
becaufe of other tohpch are oure bzethzen, and p |
meflengers of the congregacpons, æ the glozp of |
Chl. berfore, thetoe pe onto thé the profe
of poure loue, and of oure *boattpnge of Ponin sapera
thefpabt ofthe congregaciong. Me aes

| Tbe. ir. Chapter.

cy thes coeater borth nr tbe Famethat bebpp inthe

siapa mbam a acacia a BEDRE
meq It p* miniftrpng tothe lantes it ig B
*, = ane
EA but fuperfiuous foz eth tests A Pe prag
N EEE |] to pon:foz knot p redines of pour serrtis
ACEN A mpnde, twberof J boat mp felfe bre Kompot
raad £0 thé of Pacedonta,p Achata was |
zepareda peareago:¢ pourenfample bathpzo
uoked manp.Reuertheleg, pet haue Jlent there |

| | At bethem


|


The feconde Cptttle


_ -bactheettlett oure boaftpnge tobiche I make of


you, Muld be in bapne,
(ag 3 baucfapd map prepare pour felues : le
peraduenture pt thep of St)acedonia come mw me
and fpnd pou Dnpzepared, we( F ttl not fap pe)
(ould be afbamed tntbys mater of boattpng.


intbps bebalfe, that ge
e


25 Uberfoze, J tbongbtit neceflarp toexhozte the


rou. ri.d
wala bi b


erortea of necelipte.* o} Godloucth a chea
eccl.[PPb,a


Ofa.crii, b


biethzen,to come befoze hand bnto pou, and to
prepare pour goo bleffpnge prompted afore,
that it mpabtbereadp,fothat it bea bleffpnge.
and not adefraudpnge. i Chis pet J fape:he
which foveth lptel, thal reapelptel:e* be that
foweth(ingeupng)largelp andfrely, thal reape
plentcouflp. And iet euerp man,do according ag
be bath purpoledin bis berte not qreudgpalp.o2

i ul gener
Godisabletomake pourpeh inal grace p
peinalthpnaes baupnge (ufficient onto the Bt


T mooft,map be rpcbe bnto al maner of good wo?


kes,astt is weprten: * We bath (parfed abzode,
ano bath euen to the pooze, bys rpgbteoulnes
remapneth foz euer. ie that mpnyitteth {ede vir
to the fower,mpupfter becad allofor fode :and
multpplpe pouref{ede,and encreale the frutes of
poure rpgbteoutneile, J that onall partes, pe
imaye be made epcheintoall (pynaglenes, whpcde
Fite? ic Yg, that thankes are geuen
but: >


D f€o2 the offpce of thps mpnpftracpo,nof one:


- aboundaunt berein, that


15
phe. bi .c


€ Pfanp man tenit in bpm felfe


Lyfupplpeth the nede of fpe Caenia: but alfois

ot thys laudable mp=
npirpnge,thankes mpagbte be geuento God of
manp, whpche pzaple God foz the obedpence of


‘poure conlentpnae tothe Gofpel of Chari, and


oppoure fpnglenefic indy trpbutpnge to them
andtoallmen, in thep: pzapers for pou wbpeh
longe after pou fo2 the aboundaunte grace of
@odit pou. Thankes be wnto God,foz bis Wn-
fpcakeable gpfte. :
C The.r. Chapter.
\C He toucheth the falle Apotties and befendeth hes
aucthozite and callpng.
ST aul my felfe befeche pou bp the me-
Ne] Haak Bnet and foftenes of Chart, wbich
EDI lex when Zam peefent amonge pou, am
rigs bibs) of no reputacion : but am bolde to-
warde pou bepnge ablent.3 befeche pou, that 3
nede tot to be
that fame boldneffe,wbheretopth Jam fuppoted
to baue bene bali aiope? fome,tobtch repute
tsas though we walked carnallp. Jeo? though
we walke inthe flee, pet we Do not warre AeH
lp.* SEoz the Wweapengof oure toarrefare arenot
carnali thpnaes, but thpnges mpghtpe in God,
to calte Downe ronge bolbes, wherewpth we
ouerthzotve countels,and eucrp bpe thyna that
exalteth tt {elfeagapnit the knotoledge of God,
and bzpnge into captpupte all pmagpnacpon
to the obebpence of Charice, and are readpe to
take bengeautice on all dpfobedpence, when
poure obedpence isfulfplled. Lote pe on thpn:
ges after the vttcrappeataunce:
beis Ch2itkes


let bym confpder thps agapne ha felfe tbat
ag De is Chzittes, enen foare we Chiteg. Fog


tbough J boat my felfe fomtwbat


olde ben Jam pzelente, wpth :


: he moe vn mice
aucthozite(wbich the Lorde bath genet Y xto
enpfpe,enotte deftrope pou) tt Wall not be to
mp hame:lett 3 hulde feme as though F went,
aboute to make pou afrapde Wwpth letters. S02
the eppitles(fapth be)are fore æ ftrong: but bys
podely paclencets weake tbig {peache rude. Let
bpm p ts luche thpnte ontbis wple:Pas weart
in, toozdes bp letters, when we area fent, luche
are toe in dedeg, when we are peelent.

4€o2 toe cannot fpndein ourehartes to make
out felues of thenombze of them, 02 to compare
ourfelues tothem,wbichpzapte the flues. e=
uertheles, wopple the meaturetbe felucs, with
thé felues,ecoparet em felues with thé telues,
thep wnderffande nought. Wut toe topll not re-
fopce abone meature:butaccozdpnge to p med
fure of therule,wohpch God ath diltributed or
to v9,a mealure toreacheeue pritopou. sto; we
{tretche not out our felues beponde meafure ag
though toe reached not tnta you. Eorenëtto pou
al(o baue toe tome w tbe Golpel of Chartk, ¢ we
poaft not ourfelues out of neafure of other më-
nes labours. Pecs webopeit w Lcome topatle
that toben pourefaptd ig encrea ed among pou
we fhalbe magnpfped accozdpnge to oure mea:
{ure moze largelp, aud Lees pall pzeache the
Gofpell m thole regpons wbhpehe are beponde
pou:and not to boalt of thole pngeg which bp
anotbermannes mealureare pre red alreadp
Sut let him that retopletp,retopte m the Lode
Eo? be that peapteth bpm felfe , ig not alowed,


but ye whom the Lode praptetp.-
x EThe.ri. bapter.
@ aulecbnder fueraunce)commendeth bpm felfe, and
Defcubeth bps aucthopite agapntt the talie prophetes.
amg] Dle to God, pe coulde have luffred
\V/Jaime a Iptell inmp foolptpnes : pee, pe
Weal no alto fozbeare me. F0? J amgelous
Pn LALA] ouct pou wrth goblpe arlene.
fE 0; ue coupled pou to one man, pe
bone make pourefeluesachatte bpagpn Vi-
to Chattt. But J feare let tt cometo patie that
as the ferpentebegpled Eue thozow bys fub-
teltp euen fo poure wpttes puldebe corrupte
frötbe {pnglenes that pe badtowarde Chzitte.
4£02 pf be p cõmeth peeache another Jelug then
ppm whom we Pra


ed: 0 pf pereceaue ano-
ther (pzete then p which pe Daue receaucd, ether
another Gotpell then that pe Daue receaued, pe
mpabht right wel paue ben content. ft 02 J fup-
pote that J was not bebpnd the chefe 4 pofkles.
Wm though Jberudein (peabpuge, pet J ant
not fo inknotolege.Potobett amonge pou, we
paue bene tel knowen to the vimo tbat we
areinallthpnges. ppd J tbherin fpnne, becaus
fe Jlubmyptted mp felfe, harpe mpgbtebe er-
aléed:and becaule F preat
pel of God frer Jrobbed other coy J root
and toke tages oftbem,to do pou terupee.
And when J was peclent vw pong hadnede* F


was chargeable tonoman : foz p whicbe was'


lackpnge Yuto me,the biethen whiche came
from < Staiger a in all thpnqes i
Repte mp felfe fo tpat J tuldnot be chargeable


fi,cor,Filt.t


D


Sine iii a


15


topou the Gol- ©


Actes. FF. g
£03.40


Tothe Lointhyans,


to anpman,andfotopll J kepemplelfe.
€  Péthe truthe of Chritte betnme, thpsretops
fpnae thall not be taken from mein the tepong
of Achata.Uberfozes Wecanle F lone pou nots
God kuotveth. Meuerthelefle, what Fdo, that
wpll J do,to cut awape occalpon fro thé whiche
Detpze occalpon:that thep mpabt be founde lpke
vnto b38,in that wberinthep reiopfe. Foz fuche
falle Apottles ate dpicteatiul wo2kers, and faf-
ipon eg felues ipke bnto the Apoftles of
. Ch2eitt.and no maruaple:foz Hathan him felfe
_ is chaungedinto p faltpton of an angel of lpgbt
Therfore itis no great thpnge though)is mp-
npiters oes tbem (clues, as thougbe thep
were p mypnp fers of cypqhteoufnes: whofe etide
fhalbe accozDpnge tothep2dedes.
9 lape agapne.leattanp man thpnke > Jam
folptbe:02 els cucnnowe take pe me aga foole,p
Jallo map boa my felfalptle. Chat J fprake
FZlpeake tt not after the Lo2d:but agit werefo-
Ipthlp,in this mater of boafipnge.Sepnaethat
manp retopce after the flethe,¥ wll reiopee al-
fo. «S02 pe {uffre feoles gladly fepng pe pour
, felues are tople. ffo2 pe futtre , pfa man bepnge
pou into bidage, pfa mã deuoure,pfama take
pfa man eralt bpm felfe pf a manimpte pou on
p face. J fpeakecag cõcernpng rebuke, ag though
-x ga We þad bene weake, Cnthps tebatte) ag
' neta Dowbeit, wherinorner anp M4 dare be bold
ippititis (Bipeake folpthlp)¥ dare be bole alfo. x Thep
are Hebues,euen foam 3. Cbep are Fraclices
enenfoam yJ. Thep are the feed of Abraham,
eneirio am J. Thep are the mtn piers of Chif
(A tpeakeasafoole) Jam moze. Jn laboures
moze aboundaunte:3n irppes abone meafure.
Deut.crb a Jn preton moze plenteoullp: jn Death ofte.* DF
jet fpuc times receaued F,cucrpe tpme.rl.
 Actu.rot. c feeppes fauc one. *Cbeple was J beaté wrod-
acte risit.e DES,X A Was once ftoned,* J {uffred theple pp-
tacrroti g wache. Mpabe and dap baue J bene in the depe
F fee. Jn iomnepence offen:in parels of waters: in
parels of robbetg:in icopardpeg of mpne owne
actesr.» - NACION:iN teopardpes amonge the Heathen: xin
—- parelg in the cptie:in parclstn Bplodernes: in pa
rel in the lea: in parels amonge falfe beethzen:
inlaboute and trauaple-in watchpuges ofté: in
bonger ¢ thp2ff:in faffpnges often-incolde and
nakeones: belpde the thpnges whpch outward-
ly bappen bnto me. J amcombzep daplpe,and
ocare fo2 all conqregacpons.* (ipo is weake


= r ] d D | ?
x2 ae and Jam not weaker who ts off€ded,¢ J burne


not PE Jmuk nedes boak, J wll boat of the
thpnqes thafconcerne mpne tnfpzmptpes.
CThe.rii. Chapter.


Saule is taken into the chpzbe heauen, and heareth
£ ace notto be poken, À


downeinabalketthorotwe the thall,¢ fofcaped
FJbis bandes. Doutles,tt is not expedite Foz me


toboatt,¥ Spi come to bifions and reuclacids
of p Lozde. Jhnotwe ama in Epit aboue fours -
tene peates ago ( whether be weretnthe bodpe,

J cannot tell,oz whether he twere out of the bo-
dpe, J cannot tell, Godknotoeth )hotwethathe
was taken Vp jinto thethpzde heaven. Andy +
knotoe the fame mã(twbetherin the bodp o2 out
of the boùp, 3 can not tell, God knoteth howe
that be hastaken bpinte paradpfe,and bearde
fecrete wozdes, hich no ma can otter. DF this
man Ypll 3 boafte,but of mp felfe wypil 3 not
boate ercepte it be of mpne infpzmptypes. -4F02
though 3 wold boat, 3 thal not be a foole:fo2 F
fold (ape the trutbe. Neuertheles, 3 (pare pou:
letanp ma huid thpnke of me, aboue P whpche
be (eeth me to be,oz that be bearetbof me,

And*let J thulde be epolteD out of mealure Jobn: irt
thozowe theercellencp ofthe renclacions: there
thas geuen Duto me Ynqupetnes thozowe the
fletbe,ené the meflengers of Satan to buffet me
becaute J thulde not beeralted out of meafure:
No? thps thynge befought 3 the Lozde thzpfe,
that it mpabt departe from me. And pe fapd on .
tome: mp grace is Cuffpepent foz the. Formp C
ffrengtbe1s made perfecte thozotwe weakencs.
Ciecpe qladlpe therfoze wph J refopce of mp
Weatines, that the frength of Chit map dwell
inme. F‘Cherfoze, baue J delectacion in infp2-
mpties,inrebubes,tn neccilpties,in perfecucids
in angupthes Foz Cheiftes fake. Eo: when Jam
Weake,then am J tronge. eae

3J am become a foole in boatpngemp felfe:
Vebaue compelled me:fo2 Jougbtto haucbene
commended of pou. xoz innotbpna was Fine (-Co2tr.a
ferto2 bnto the coer Apoftles,thougbe F be no-
thpng.pet p tokes ofan Apoftle were wzought
amonge pou topth all pattence,and {pqnes and
wonders, and mmpa pene Denes. JF oz that is tt,
wherein pe were inferiozs bnto other congrega
clons,ercepteit be berein, that J was not char-
eee vito pou. Formene me thys toonce,be-
bolde nowe the thpzdtpme Jamreadp to come
‘nto pou, æ pet topll J not be chargeable onto
pou. Soz* Flee not poures, but pou. s€o2 Actés.tr. g
the chplozé ought not to lape wp foz the fathers Sree
ry Poissy > but the fathers and mothers fog t.ites.rit.e
the chplozen.

4 topll bery gladlpe beftowe, and wplbe bes
ftowed foz youre foules though the moze ¥ loud
pou, theleiic Jam louedagapne. Wut be it.that
J was not chargeable vnto pou : neuertbeleffe,
when J thas crafty, J toke pou bith ape. pd
J ppll pou by any of them, whome ¥lente ynt
pe A delpred Titus, and wpth bpm Yientea

zotber.Dpd Citus deftaude pou of anp thyng
walked te not in one fpzete? walked we not tn
lpke eppes? Agapne, thpnke pouthat meer-
čufe oure felues nto pours toe fpeake in Chaitte
in the fpgbt of God:but we doalt esi dear-
lp belouecd)foz pour edefpenge.sf02 3 feare , leit
it come to paffe tbat pf J come, Jtballnot fynd
pou fucheag J wolde:and that 3 thalbe founde
haded oot fuch rere: not: 4 feare left Ati
irpfes ba ebptpnges wppiperpnyeg, wel-
gi ti Ipnges


|
|


Tothe Lointhyans,


to anpman,andfotopll J kepemplelfe.
€  Péthe truthe of Chritte betnme, thpsretops
fpnae thall not be taken from mein the tepong
of Achata.Uberfozes Wecanle F lone pou nots
God kuotveth. Meuerthelefle, what Fdo, that
wpll J do,to cut awape occalpon fro thé whiche
Detpze occalpon:that thep mpabt be founde lpke
vnto b38,in that wberinthep reiopfe. Foz fuche
falle Apottles ate dpicteatiul wo2kers, and faf-
ipon eg felues ipke bnto the Apoftles of
. Ch2eitt.and no maruaple:foz Hathan him felfe
_ is chaungedinto p faltpton of an angel of lpgbt
Therfore itis no great thpnge though)is mp-
npiters oes tbem (clues, as thougbe thep
were p mypnp fers of cypqhteoufnes: whofe etide
fhalbe accozDpnge tothep2dedes.
9 lape agapne.leattanp man thpnke > Jam
folptbe:02 els cucnnowe take pe me aga foole,p
Jallo map boa my felfalptle. Chat J fprake
FZlpeake tt not after the Lo2d:but agit werefo-
Ipthlp,in this mater of boafipnge.Sepnaethat
manp retopce after the flethe,¥ wll reiopee al-
fo. «S02 pe {uffre feoles gladly fepng pe pour
, felues are tople. ffo2 pe futtre , pfa man bepnge
pou into bidage, pfa mã deuoure,pfama take
pfa man eralt bpm felfe pf a manimpte pou on
p face. J fpeakecag cõcernpng rebuke, ag though
-x ga We þad bene weake, Cnthps tebatte) ag
' neta Dowbeit, wherinorner anp M4 dare be bold
ippititis (Bipeake folpthlp)¥ dare be bole alfo. x Thep
are Hebues,euen foam 3. Cbep are Fraclices
enenfoam yJ. Thep are the feed of Abraham,
eneirio am J. Thep are the mtn piers of Chif
(A tpeakeasafoole) Jam moze. Jn laboures
moze aboundaunte:3n irppes abone meafure.
Deut.crb a Jn preton moze plenteoullp: jn Death ofte.* DF
jet fpuc times receaued F,cucrpe tpme.rl.
 Actu.rot. c feeppes fauc one. *Cbeple was J beaté wrod-
acte risit.e DES,X A Was once ftoned,* J {uffred theple pp-
tacrroti g wache. Mpabe and dap baue J bene in the depe
F fee. Jn iomnepence offen:in parels of waters: in
parels of robbetg:in icopardpeg of mpne owne
actesr.» - NACION:iN teopardpes amonge the Heathen: xin
—- parelg in the cptie:in parclstn Bplodernes: in pa
rel in the lea: in parels amonge falfe beethzen:
inlaboute and trauaple-in watchpuges ofté: in
bonger ¢ thp2ff:in faffpnges often-incolde and
nakeones: belpde the thpnges whpch outward-
ly bappen bnto me. J amcombzep daplpe,and
ocare fo2 all conqregacpons.* (ipo is weake


= r ] d D | ?
x2 ae and Jam not weaker who ts off€ded,¢ J burne


not PE Jmuk nedes boak, J wll boat of the
thpnqes thafconcerne mpne tnfpzmptpes.
CThe.rii. Chapter.


Saule is taken into the chpzbe heauen, and heareth
£ ace notto be poken, À


downeinabalketthorotwe the thall,¢ fofcaped
FJbis bandes. Doutles,tt is not expedite Foz me


toboatt,¥ Spi come to bifions and reuclacids
of p Lozde. Jhnotwe ama in Epit aboue fours -
tene peates ago ( whether be weretnthe bodpe,

J cannot tell,oz whether he twere out of the bo-
dpe, J cannot tell, Godknotoeth )hotwethathe
was taken Vp jinto thethpzde heaven. Andy +
knotoe the fame mã(twbetherin the bodp o2 out
of the boùp, 3 can not tell, God knoteth howe
that be hastaken bpinte paradpfe,and bearde
fecrete wozdes, hich no ma can otter. DF this
man Ypll 3 boafte,but of mp felfe wypil 3 not
boate ercepte it be of mpne infpzmptypes. -4F02
though 3 wold boat, 3 thal not be a foole:fo2 F
fold (ape the trutbe. Neuertheles, 3 (pare pou:
letanp ma huid thpnke of me, aboue P whpche
be (eeth me to be,oz that be bearetbof me,

And*let J thulde be epolteD out of mealure Jobn: irt
thozowe theercellencp ofthe renclacions: there
thas geuen Duto me Ynqupetnes thozowe the
fletbe,ené the meflengers of Satan to buffet me
becaute J thulde not beeralted out of meafure:
No? thps thynge befought 3 the Lozde thzpfe,
that it mpabt departe from me. And pe fapd on .
tome: mp grace is Cuffpepent foz the. Formp C
ffrengtbe1s made perfecte thozotwe weakencs.
Ciecpe qladlpe therfoze wph J refopce of mp
Weatines, that the frength of Chit map dwell
inme. F‘Cherfoze, baue J delectacion in infp2-
mpties,inrebubes,tn neccilpties,in perfecucids
in angupthes Foz Cheiftes fake. Eo: when Jam
Weake,then am J tronge. eae

3J am become a foole in boatpngemp felfe:
Vebaue compelled me:fo2 Jougbtto haucbene
commended of pou. xoz innotbpna was Fine (-Co2tr.a
ferto2 bnto the coer Apoftles,thougbe F be no-
thpng.pet p tokes ofan Apoftle were wzought
amonge pou topth all pattence,and {pqnes and
wonders, and mmpa pene Denes. JF oz that is tt,
wherein pe were inferiozs bnto other congrega
clons,ercepteit be berein, that J was not char-
eee vito pou. Formene me thys toonce,be-
bolde nowe the thpzdtpme Jamreadp to come
‘nto pou, æ pet topll J not be chargeable onto
pou. Soz* Flee not poures, but pou. s€o2 Actés.tr. g
the chplozé ought not to lape wp foz the fathers Sree
ry Poissy > but the fathers and mothers fog t.ites.rit.e
the chplozen.

4 topll bery gladlpe beftowe, and wplbe bes
ftowed foz youre foules though the moze ¥ loud
pou, theleiic Jam louedagapne. Wut be it.that
J was not chargeable vnto pou : neuertbeleffe,
when J thas crafty, J toke pou bith ape. pd
J ppll pou by any of them, whome ¥lente ynt
pe A delpred Titus, and wpth bpm Yientea

zotber.Dpd Citus deftaude pou of anp thyng
walked te not in one fpzete? walked we not tn
lpke eppes? Agapne, thpnke pouthat meer-
čufe oure felues nto pours toe fpeake in Chaitte
in the fpgbt of God:but we doalt esi dear-
lp belouecd)foz pour edefpenge.sf02 3 feare , leit
it come to paffe tbat pf J come, Jtballnot fynd
pou fucheag J wolde:and that 3 thalbe founde
haded oot fuch rere: not: 4 feare left Ati
irpfes ba ebptpnges wppiperpnyeg, wel-
gi ti Ipnges


|
|


eee


—


hy


ri


Ee i oe


m poeeun ge ee


Iynged,andfeopciong:and that when 3 conte ©
apne, Oodbepnae me Lowe amon


Dwe come J the thprde tyme prto
5 mouth of two 02 thz¢ Wyt-
alencrp wode be ftablp {heb
oubefoze,andtel pou before:
when J was pectent with pouthe

wyte 3 nowe bepnge abfente,


the mpavt of Govamongte pou. |
#3  *€ramen pouretelu g whether pe arcit the
(cor fapthe o? not. proue poure owne felucs. Knowe
FREES ye not pout owne felucs.bow that 3clus Chui
igtnpou excepte pe be caftatwapes , 9 trulle pe

{yall Bnotbe that We are not ca

fpze befoze God that pe donone euell, not that

spe tbulde femecommendable-but that pe uld

do that whpeb ishonelt:and let vg becotted ag
€ catawapes. We can ponotbpnac agapntte the

truthe:but for the truth. Weare glad when we
are weake and pe tronge. Thysallo we woptye
foz, cuen poutre perfe-tnes. Cherfore wia J
thefe thynges.bepnge abfente.tette when fam
p2efent, J fulde vie fharpenefie, accordpnge to
the powcr xwbpche the Lozde bath geuen me to
enpt c,and not to de rope. fEpnallpe beetbzen,
fare pe well,be perfect,be of good confozte,be of
one mpnde , pue in peace, and the Godot loue
and peace albe wpth pou-

«ete one an ah inandolp kpe. All the
fayntes falute pou. Che jeg of our Lozde See
{us Cit, thelouc of Ood, the felowthbpppe
ofthebey ook be te all. Amen.

C The ende of the feconde Epifle to
the Corinthians.
C dent from Philippos a cptie in accdo=
nia,bp Cptug and Lucas.


Paule the pofle to the
Galathpansg. .
The fpei Chapter
q paul tebuteth them, becaule thep were faHen atwap fro
theo fpel,beteth bps owne conucrfacid magnitpeth bis
offpceand apotichpppe, and peclareth him felito be equal


ii. co È Fat


d.coz.pot.c


F 5 j | Oonthe father, whpehe rapicd ppn


the,whpel From oure Lobe:


The Epittle


Tinto the congeeqactons of Galacia.* Grace Mak ?
be topth pou, and pan fro Good the father, and atonia
efug Chrifte, wbpcbegauc
pym felfe fog oure {pnnes to delpuer DS frome
tops pzefente eucll wolde! accozdpiige tothe
wypl of God oure father,to whom be praple fog
eucrandeuer. Amen. | 3
Jmeruaple that pe are fofoone turned ( fro
Charbwhcp called pou by grace) wto another
Golpell wbpchisnothpnge elleg but that ther
De fome Wwhiche trouble pou, and * intende to act-r.a
perucrte the Golpell of Chatte Nencrtheletie,
thougbe we oure telues,o2 an Angell from Hea-
uen,pacacheany ¢ other Gotpell vntopou, thers
that whpch wehaue preached bnto you,let pim
3 tocfapoe before, fo fave Juowe |
agaphe,plany man preacheanp other Golpell
pntapouthep Pye Daue veceaned,let bpm be a-
curried. Dc Fnowe perlwadenen, 0? God" D- l
„therdo y feketo pleale men: * £02 pé 3 had De- gob-Fria
therto fudped to sleale men, Bivere not the
feruaunte of Ahile. 3 E y
Jcertefpe poubgethzen, thatthe Golpell ~
Hhyche was pzeached ofme,was not after the
Sfor 3J nepther reccaucd Pate
ğa


Apottles fa we 3 none, faue James the Lozdes
protber.Thethpuges therfore wppch, J wepte


CThe.fi. Chapter.

qr De wpthitandeth Peter in # face,ann proueth Ghat the late

anb eprcumeptpon are not neceflarp te fatuacpon,
ws inenvfourtencpeates thereafter, J wente y
Baw) Dp agapne to Jerufalem * topth War- a
Eo.ed nabag,andtobke Titus wpthme went 2
yp alfo bp renelacpon, and commened topth
tpemof the Golpell whpcbe J prcache amonge
the Gentples:but fpecpallp wpth them which
werecounted chefe,leatte 3 (ulderunne oz bad
runnein vapne. Allo Titus wbhpcbe was with
me


eee


—


hy


ri


Ee i oe


m poeeun ge ee


Iynged,andfeopciong:and that when 3 conte ©
apne, Oodbepnae me Lowe amon


Dwe come J the thprde tyme prto
5 mouth of two 02 thz¢ Wyt-
alencrp wode be ftablp {heb
oubefoze,andtel pou before:
when J was pectent with pouthe

wyte 3 nowe bepnge abfente,


the mpavt of Govamongte pou. |
#3  *€ramen pouretelu g whether pe arcit the
(cor fapthe o? not. proue poure owne felucs. Knowe
FREES ye not pout owne felucs.bow that 3clus Chui
igtnpou excepte pe be caftatwapes , 9 trulle pe

{yall Bnotbe that We are not ca

fpze befoze God that pe donone euell, not that

spe tbulde femecommendable-but that pe uld

do that whpeb ishonelt:and let vg becotted ag
€ catawapes. We can ponotbpnac agapntte the

truthe:but for the truth. Weare glad when we
are weake and pe tronge. Thysallo we woptye
foz, cuen poutre perfe-tnes. Cherfore wia J
thefe thynges.bepnge abfente.tette when fam
p2efent, J fulde vie fharpenefie, accordpnge to
the powcr xwbpche the Lozde bath geuen me to
enpt c,and not to de rope. fEpnallpe beetbzen,
fare pe well,be perfect,be of good confozte,be of
one mpnde , pue in peace, and the Godot loue
and peace albe wpth pou-

«ete one an ah inandolp kpe. All the
fayntes falute pou. Che jeg of our Lozde See
{us Cit, thelouc of Ood, the felowthbpppe
ofthebey ook be te all. Amen.

C The ende of the feconde Epifle to
the Corinthians.
C dent from Philippos a cptie in accdo=
nia,bp Cptug and Lucas.


Paule the pofle to the
Galathpansg. .
The fpei Chapter
q paul tebuteth them, becaule thep were faHen atwap fro
theo fpel,beteth bps owne conucrfacid magnitpeth bis
offpceand apotichpppe, and peclareth him felito be equal


ii. co È Fat


d.coz.pot.c


F 5 j | Oonthe father, whpehe rapicd ppn


the,whpel From oure Lobe:


The Epittle


Tinto the congeeqactons of Galacia.* Grace Mak ?
be topth pou, and pan fro Good the father, and atonia
efug Chrifte, wbpcbegauc
pym felfe fog oure {pnnes to delpuer DS frome
tops pzefente eucll wolde! accozdpiige tothe
wypl of God oure father,to whom be praple fog
eucrandeuer. Amen. | 3
Jmeruaple that pe are fofoone turned ( fro
Charbwhcp called pou by grace) wto another
Golpell wbpchisnothpnge elleg but that ther
De fome Wwhiche trouble pou, and * intende to act-r.a
perucrte the Golpell of Chatte Nencrtheletie,
thougbe we oure telues,o2 an Angell from Hea-
uen,pacacheany ¢ other Gotpell vntopou, thers
that whpch wehaue preached bnto you,let pim
3 tocfapoe before, fo fave Juowe |
agaphe,plany man preacheanp other Golpell
pntapouthep Pye Daue veceaned,let bpm be a-
curried. Dc Fnowe perlwadenen, 0? God" D- l
„therdo y feketo pleale men: * £02 pé 3 had De- gob-Fria
therto fudped to sleale men, Bivere not the
feruaunte of Ahile. 3 E y
Jcertefpe poubgethzen, thatthe Golpell ~
Hhyche was pzeached ofme,was not after the
Sfor 3J nepther reccaucd Pate
ğa


Apottles fa we 3 none, faue James the Lozdes
protber.Thethpuges therfore wppch, J wepte


CThe.fi. Chapter.

qr De wpthitandeth Peter in # face,ann proueth Ghat the late

anb eprcumeptpon are not neceflarp te fatuacpon,
ws inenvfourtencpeates thereafter, J wente y
Baw) Dp agapne to Jerufalem * topth War- a
Eo.ed nabag,andtobke Titus wpthme went 2
yp alfo bp renelacpon, and commened topth
tpemof the Golpell whpcbe J prcache amonge
the Gentples:but fpecpallp wpth them which
werecounted chefe,leatte 3 (ulderunne oz bad
runnein vapne. Allo Titus wbhpcbe was with
me


| me,though be were a Greke, pet as not cipel-
| led fo be cpecticpfed:¢ that becaufe ofincõmerg
| bepnge falle bectheen, wipch cain in pzenelp to

{ype out our lpbertpe wbhpch te haue in Cit

Jeu tbat thep mpaght bapnge Ds into bondage
| ‘€o whi te gaue no rotme,no not fo2 the time
| (bp wape of lubieccpon) becaule that the trutbe
| of the Oolpell mpgbt contpnue wpth pou.

25


Df them webpch femed to be fomwhat, what
thep therein time pafled tf maketh no matter to

iara me.*@odloketh on the out tarde appearaunce

_ Hoe ua Onom. Meuertheles thep wobpchfemed great,

~ ‘Qetesp.c’ ADDED notppnge fo me. Zut contrarpwple, whe
pee, airg DEP Gawe p the Gofpell ouer the vncpacticpfpo

> Secugreb,b Das commptted onto meas the Gotpell ouer p
E cpeeumepipon wascõmptted onto Peter. Fo?
- þepwasmpabtpein Peterin the Apottletbyp

| ouer the cpzcumepfpon,the fame was mpgbtpe


inme amonge the Gentples.Cibenthep percea:

| ued the grace that was geuen vntome ther Fa
-f> mes, Cephas and Jhon, which lemed tobe ppl:
| lers gaue to meg Barnabas therpaht bandeg
de of that felobhyppe,that we Mulde be Avottles


f amonge the Heathen,¢thep in the cpzcumcepipå
_. Actes ri d ONelp p we Hulde remember the poore.* Tiber =

.. “Loira: iy al(o Jia Dplpgentto to the fame.
gis Wut then Peter was cometo Anttoche, F
| T wy thtode bpm openlp, becaule be was worthy
i tobe blamed. $02 per pcertapne came from Ja-
mies, bedpd cate with the Gentples. Wut wher
thep there come, be withdzetve, ¢ feparated bpm
| felfe fro thé, fearpnge thé Dbpch were of the cpz
| cumcplton. And the other Jewess dpfiembledas
Well as he:infomuch that Warnabas alfo thas
| b:ougbteinto thep: fpmulacpon. But whan J
fate that thep went nottherpabte wape after
y _ theteuthe of the Golpell, J apd onto Peter be-
| fore them all:pftbou bepnge a Zetwc, lpuell af-
tec ý maner of the Gentples,enotas do the Je-
| thes: whp cauletfe thou tn Gentples tolpue ag
«PPIs Do the Fetes: Joz He which are + Jewess byna
ss fure, andnot fpnners of the Oentples, bnowe
mom.tite. thata man*ig not indptped bp the dedes of the
| latwe, but by the fapth of Fetus Che: And toe
| haue beleucd on Zelus Chettt.chat wempgdt be
iuftpfped bp the tapth of Cheifte,and not bp the
dedeg of the latwe: becaufle bp the dedeg of the

p latweno fletpetbalbeiuttpfped. =
> PFwbple toe feke to be made rpgbtcous bp
Chr, toe our felues are founde fynners,is Di
_ Chrittthe mpnyp er of fpnties God fozbpd. oz
pE J buplocagapnethe thpnges whypche 3de-
Teoped.ther ma ta felfe a tre{pafler. Foz


A(thozotve the latwe /bauc ben dead fo thelawe
ehat 3mpabe pue nto Chik. am crucpfped
Wpth Chel. Nenertheles FZ lpuc:pet nowe not
Jbut Thit lpueth in me, Chelpte pa BE
L fotelpue inthe fetbe, J lpue bp the faptbe of 5
epped.e fonne of Hod,* whpch loucd me, and gaue bpm
{elfe fo2 me. J Delppce not thearace of God. oz
-| Hrom.itit.c spf eee comeofthelawe.then Chik
| > igdeadin vape.
tg Deadin SAP Etpe iii Epaptéee:
C Hrrebuketh the buledfaknes of the Galathiae hetopng
the bnperfectnes ofthe latwe, aud teclareth newertheles that
it was not geuen Foz nought:


ja


To the Galathyans,


{Fe | fafat
: fi olit bij.
Pre naa Petolpthe Galathypans:hhohathe 4
Rio | betyptched pou,that pe thuld notbe
poop) leue the truthe*@o whome Jefug
ey A Cift was delcrpbed before p eves
jie AND ANLONge pou crucpFped. ‘Chps
only wold Flearne of pou,wbether pe receaucd
thelpzete bp thededes of thelawe o? bp thepzea
chynge ot $ fapth: Are pe fuch fooles.thatafter
pe baue begonne in the {prete,penowe ende in p
fiche r Somanpe thpnges pe paue fufred in
bapne, pfit bealfo in vapne. Dozeoucr he that
mpnpltreth topou the {peete,¢ worketh mpza-

cles amige pou, doeth he it thozot thededes of

the lathe ,o2 bp pzeachpnae of thefapth: * Euf enero. 6
as Abzabam belened God,¢ it was alcribed to pes ura


bim fozrighteoulnes. Ve know therfore, pthep 0?
hich are offapth, p famearepehildz? of Abza
bám. Fo? the fcrppture fepna afoze bande; that 35
Godwoldiuttitpethe Heathen thozoiwe fath, |
fhewed before band glad tyopnges wnto Abza-
m, fapenge:* 3n the Mall alnactons be blef- generira
ed. So then,thep which be of fapth,are blefed ano.rrii.b
With faithful Abrabam. o: as many as are of
pega of the latwe are fubiecte to the curfle
Foz itis Mo2ptten:* curled beenerp one that cå wu.rrvit.y
tinueth not in all thynges tobpch are thapeté in
the boke of the lat to fulfpl them. Chat noma
isiuttpiped bp the latoe inthe fpghte of God,it
is eupDent. xf 02 the tutte hallipuchy fapthe. averii. v
The lawe is not of fapth:* but the man that ful Bom".
Fplleth the thypnees ox ( contapnen in the awe ) (hall Herronté
lpue in them. Cheti bath delpucred bes from the £zech.rr.t
cure of thelawe,in almuch ag be was made ac- £o"**
curled fo? vs: JF o2 itis oeptté:xcurfed iseuerp oeut.rri.v
onethat bangeth onitree , that the bleffpnae of
Abraham mpght come on p Gentples thozowe
Fetus Cit that we mpghe receaue p promeg
of thefpzete thozowe fapth.
Wzethzen, 3 {peake after the maner of men. €
‘Choughe it be but a mans teftamente. pet pf it
be alowed ,noman pia aia :02 adDdeth anp
thyngetherto. >To Abzabamandbhps {eeve
twere the peomples made. De faptbnot in thy fe
degas manp-but in thp {ede as of one, Wbpchis
Chik. Chps F lape,p the latwe which beganne
afterivacde, bepondxfoure bundzed and thpetp Genesrd. e
peares,docth not dpfanull the teftamente, that £12% f
Was confpzmed afoze of God nto Chr ward Setes. vit a
tomake the pzomes of none effecte. * f€o2 pf the rowsiii,e
fnberptaunce come of the lawe, it commeth not
nowe of pzomes.25ut God gaue it ynto Abza=
aah ty p? pni ieran l
Cihertoze then leructh the latwe? * Ft asad 2om.,».c
ded becaufe of tranfqreffion(tpll the fede came, "eS
to whom the promes was made )¢ it wag oep
ned*by angels inthe band of a mediator. X mez aces, vii 4
Diato? ts not a medtatoz of one,but Godig one. |
* $8 the lawe thenagaing the promeg of God? om. vii. c
Cod fozbpd. Eor pf ther had bencalawe geuen “=”
Mhpche coulde baue geuen Ipfe: then no doubte
tpgbteoutnes Hulde come bp the lawe. But the
ferppture cõcluded al thpnges ynder {pnne,that
the pomes bp the fapth of Jelus Chaitte Hhulde
be geuen bnto them that belenc. Je Wut before
that faptb came, we ere kept ynder thelawe
At ut and


| me,though be were a Greke, pet as not cipel-
| led fo be cpecticpfed:¢ that becaufe ofincõmerg
| bepnge falle bectheen, wipch cain in pzenelp to

{ype out our lpbertpe wbhpch te haue in Cit

Jeu tbat thep mpaght bapnge Ds into bondage
| ‘€o whi te gaue no rotme,no not fo2 the time
| (bp wape of lubieccpon) becaule that the trutbe
| of the Oolpell mpgbt contpnue wpth pou.

25


Df them webpch femed to be fomwhat, what
thep therein time pafled tf maketh no matter to

iara me.*@odloketh on the out tarde appearaunce

_ Hoe ua Onom. Meuertheles thep wobpchfemed great,

~ ‘Qetesp.c’ ADDED notppnge fo me. Zut contrarpwple, whe
pee, airg DEP Gawe p the Gofpell ouer the vncpacticpfpo

> Secugreb,b Das commptted onto meas the Gotpell ouer p
E cpeeumepipon wascõmptted onto Peter. Fo?
- þepwasmpabtpein Peterin the Apottletbyp

| ouer the cpzcumepfpon,the fame was mpgbtpe


inme amonge the Gentples.Cibenthep percea:

| ued the grace that was geuen vntome ther Fa
-f> mes, Cephas and Jhon, which lemed tobe ppl:
| lers gaue to meg Barnabas therpaht bandeg
de of that felobhyppe,that we Mulde be Avottles


f amonge the Heathen,¢thep in the cpzcumcepipå
_. Actes ri d ONelp p we Hulde remember the poore.* Tiber =

.. “Loira: iy al(o Jia Dplpgentto to the fame.
gis Wut then Peter was cometo Anttoche, F
| T wy thtode bpm openlp, becaule be was worthy
i tobe blamed. $02 per pcertapne came from Ja-
mies, bedpd cate with the Gentples. Wut wher
thep there come, be withdzetve, ¢ feparated bpm
| felfe fro thé, fearpnge thé Dbpch were of the cpz
| cumcplton. And the other Jewess dpfiembledas
Well as he:infomuch that Warnabas alfo thas
| b:ougbteinto thep: fpmulacpon. But whan J
fate that thep went nottherpabte wape after
y _ theteuthe of the Golpell, J apd onto Peter be-
| fore them all:pftbou bepnge a Zetwc, lpuell af-
tec ý maner of the Gentples,enotas do the Je-
| thes: whp cauletfe thou tn Gentples tolpue ag
«PPIs Do the Fetes: Joz He which are + Jewess byna
ss fure, andnot fpnners of the Oentples, bnowe
mom.tite. thata man*ig not indptped bp the dedes of the
| latwe, but by the fapth of Fetus Che: And toe
| haue beleucd on Zelus Chettt.chat wempgdt be
iuftpfped bp the tapth of Cheifte,and not bp the
dedeg of the latwe: becaufle bp the dedeg of the

p latweno fletpetbalbeiuttpfped. =
> PFwbple toe feke to be made rpgbtcous bp
Chr, toe our felues are founde fynners,is Di
_ Chrittthe mpnyp er of fpnties God fozbpd. oz
pE J buplocagapnethe thpnges whypche 3de-
Teoped.ther ma ta felfe a tre{pafler. Foz


A(thozotve the latwe /bauc ben dead fo thelawe
ehat 3mpabe pue nto Chik. am crucpfped
Wpth Chel. Nenertheles FZ lpuc:pet nowe not
Jbut Thit lpueth in me, Chelpte pa BE
L fotelpue inthe fetbe, J lpue bp the faptbe of 5
epped.e fonne of Hod,* whpch loucd me, and gaue bpm
{elfe fo2 me. J Delppce not thearace of God. oz
-| Hrom.itit.c spf eee comeofthelawe.then Chik
| > igdeadin vape.
tg Deadin SAP Etpe iii Epaptéee:
C Hrrebuketh the buledfaknes of the Galathiae hetopng
the bnperfectnes ofthe latwe, aud teclareth newertheles that
it was not geuen Foz nought:


ja


To the Galathyans,


{Fe | fafat
: fi olit bij.
Pre naa Petolpthe Galathypans:hhohathe 4
Rio | betyptched pou,that pe thuld notbe
poop) leue the truthe*@o whome Jefug
ey A Cift was delcrpbed before p eves
jie AND ANLONge pou crucpFped. ‘Chps
only wold Flearne of pou,wbether pe receaucd
thelpzete bp thededes of thelawe o? bp thepzea
chynge ot $ fapth: Are pe fuch fooles.thatafter
pe baue begonne in the {prete,penowe ende in p
fiche r Somanpe thpnges pe paue fufred in
bapne, pfit bealfo in vapne. Dozeoucr he that
mpnpltreth topou the {peete,¢ worketh mpza-

cles amige pou, doeth he it thozot thededes of

the lathe ,o2 bp pzeachpnae of thefapth: * Euf enero. 6
as Abzabam belened God,¢ it was alcribed to pes ura


bim fozrighteoulnes. Ve know therfore, pthep 0?
hich are offapth, p famearepehildz? of Abza
bám. Fo? the fcrppture fepna afoze bande; that 35
Godwoldiuttitpethe Heathen thozoiwe fath, |
fhewed before band glad tyopnges wnto Abza-
m, fapenge:* 3n the Mall alnactons be blef- generira
ed. So then,thep which be of fapth,are blefed ano.rrii.b
With faithful Abrabam. o: as many as are of
pega of the latwe are fubiecte to the curfle
Foz itis Mo2ptten:* curled beenerp one that cå wu.rrvit.y
tinueth not in all thynges tobpch are thapeté in
the boke of the lat to fulfpl them. Chat noma
isiuttpiped bp the latoe inthe fpghte of God,it
is eupDent. xf 02 the tutte hallipuchy fapthe. averii. v
The lawe is not of fapth:* but the man that ful Bom".
Fplleth the thypnees ox ( contapnen in the awe ) (hall Herronté
lpue in them. Cheti bath delpucred bes from the £zech.rr.t
cure of thelawe,in almuch ag be was made ac- £o"**
curled fo? vs: JF o2 itis oeptté:xcurfed iseuerp oeut.rri.v
onethat bangeth onitree , that the bleffpnae of
Abraham mpght come on p Gentples thozowe
Fetus Cit that we mpghe receaue p promeg
of thefpzete thozowe fapth.
Wzethzen, 3 {peake after the maner of men. €
‘Choughe it be but a mans teftamente. pet pf it
be alowed ,noman pia aia :02 adDdeth anp
thyngetherto. >To Abzabamandbhps {eeve
twere the peomples made. De faptbnot in thy fe
degas manp-but in thp {ede as of one, Wbpchis
Chik. Chps F lape,p the latwe which beganne
afterivacde, bepondxfoure bundzed and thpetp Genesrd. e
peares,docth not dpfanull the teftamente, that £12% f
Was confpzmed afoze of God nto Chr ward Setes. vit a
tomake the pzomes of none effecte. * f€o2 pf the rowsiii,e
fnberptaunce come of the lawe, it commeth not
nowe of pzomes.25ut God gaue it ynto Abza=
aah ty p? pni ieran l
Cihertoze then leructh the latwe? * Ft asad 2om.,».c
ded becaufe of tranfqreffion(tpll the fede came, "eS
to whom the promes was made )¢ it wag oep
ned*by angels inthe band of a mediator. X mez aces, vii 4
Diato? ts not a medtatoz of one,but Godig one. |
* $8 the lawe thenagaing the promeg of God? om. vii. c
Cod fozbpd. Eor pf ther had bencalawe geuen “=”
Mhpche coulde baue geuen Ipfe: then no doubte
tpgbteoutnes Hulde come bp the lawe. But the
ferppture cõcluded al thpnges ynder {pnne,that
the pomes bp the fapth of Jelus Chaitte Hhulde
be geuen bnto them that belenc. Je Wut before
that faptb came, we ere kept ynder thelawe
At ut and


ee ee E


and there hut hp bute the fapth hpche Hulde
afterwarde bedeclared. Wiberfoze plate thas
yp our fcolemafter Muto Chat, that we thoulde be
iuftifped bp fapth. Wut aftertbat fapth ig come
Loe are nolenger wnder thefcolematler. Eo? pe
are alchildzé of god, becaute pe beleucin Chit
nomba Je Fozrallpe that are baptpied haue put on
Chri. Theretgno Fewe.ncther Gentpll:there
is netber bonde no? fre:there isnether man, no?
oh.rbrie woman. Jeo: peare all xone in Chzifte Jelu. DE
pe be Chziteg, then are pe Abzadathg fede, and

epres or er, promes.

e. tit. s
qPaule hewmech aig tinted tie IR, belpuered


from the lame an rebuketh the buthanke tthe
malathvans. thar torneo pat


Stee 20 3 lape thatthe pepe (as longe
we tea ag beisa chpld Opferethnotirs a
agg eruaunt,tl ough bebe Logde ofal,
i ee es Gq but is ‘onder tuters and qouerners
G24 vntpll the tpme $ the father bathe


+the other spa fre woman. Pee be whic) toas Serres,
bozne of the bondewoman:was borzne after the
Aeth:but he which wag ofthe fretooman , as

Downe by peomefic.Wibpch thpnaes are {poker

bp analleqozpe.s€oz thele are tivo teftamentes

the onefromtbhe mount Spna, wbich gendzeth

nts bondage, whichis A gat . fFormount Sp

naig Agar in Arabta,and bozdzetb vpon thecp
senen ies ols Jerufalem , andis tit

ondage with berchplozen. ER]

Wut* erufalë, whichis aboue,is fre:wbich > prsa
ig the motbet of vg all. Sozitiswzptten:* We ra iita
fopce thou baren,pbearelt nochplozen :bzake ~ > >
forrb and crp,thou thattrauapleft not. #02 the
defolate bath manp mo childzen,then pe Ww ich l;
pathan bulbande.Wzethzen we are alter taar ya ta
thechyldzenofpromefle. Wut acthenbethat |
was boane after theflethe,perfecuted bpm,that
wasg bozneafter f (prete,cuen fo ig itnotee. Re
uerthelefic, what apeth thelerppture:xputte & gen pria

„wape the bondewomanandherfonne. Fozthe
Tonne of the bondivoma thal not be bepze with
thefonneofthefrewoma.Sotbenbectheenwe 4
avenot chpldzen of the boridetpoman:but of the gë


free. F
- CThy. v. Chapter. ma

qHelaboureth to dzatwe them awape from rpzeumepipon

fhemeth them the battaple bettwprt the fpeete and the aeie .

ant the frutes ofthembeth. 3
ey Tande fal therfore inthe lpbertpe # d
IE A toherwpth Tht bath made vs € i
SS and uate not poure felnes again
LER inthe pocke of bondage. Webolde, etap.tr.2

[Km ve! 3 Baule Lape Dutopou,p * pipe be acte.rre.e
cpeciimepfed, Chit hal profpte pou nothynge |
at all. telkifpe agapne toeuerp man twdtch ig
ciceumncpted. that bets boundto kepe the whole |
latbe. Chzttte is become but in Dapne wnto pou. T
Asmanp of pouas are tuftifpedbyptbhe late are
fallen from crace.taieloke fot, andbope in the
{peetetobetuttifpedthozowe fapth. * Foz in Seledia *
Jelu Chit, nether is cpzcumepipon anp thing

worth, netber pet bicirciicilis butfapthsbbich .
worketh bp loue. Pedpd tunne wel:who was a “Fa
let onto pou, that pe fhuldnot belenethe truth?

ri ot olap pst Signe whpcbe ps
camenot of bpm that callethpou.* A lptelleué ice

doth leuen tbe tobolelompe of dowe, © < dailia

Jbhauetrot toward pou tn the Lod, tbat 15

pe (palhenone othertopfempnded. Wutbhe that
troubleth por. all beare bis iudgement, what

focucr be be. Weethzen,pl F pet preach cpecum=
cpiponwppao droen pente preteeucyon! |
Shes the launder of pcroffeceafed.¥ wolde

to Go0,thep were feparatedfrom pou, whpcbe

trouble pou. etigen pe were called intolpber |
tpe:onlp*let not pourelpbertpe be anoccalpon xomrittia
nto the fletbe : but bp loue» coftvetpees ferye 102-ditta
one another.sto2 al the latve ig fulfplledin one *° `
iwode, hpche is tops: * Thou falte lone thp Bstrrs.D |
nepabbourcas thp felfe.Pfpe bpte and deuoure zeu.rir.o
one another:take dede,lett pe be lpketople cog- Bom.tiit
fumed one of another. F arene

ee in the {peete,¢ fulfpl not the
lut of the fepe. Fo? the hethe luftcth contrarpe 3
to the {peete,and «the prete contrarp to Are mat.rebf.
ele


=a
a a] -


=
_—
il
~~


——


CotyeCphelpans. Wollrvij, —
| arto wtationeremmbemerriremiact Che EPELE &Saynet
p {pzete.then are penot under plaw.Chededes . Pante e eee ate j
| ppelpans.


of p ietbe ave maupfett, wbtch are thefe:aduou=
trpe,foznicacts, Duclennes, watonnes, wo2(hip-


ppnge of pmages, witchcraft, hatred varpatce, T aii
| sele,twzath, ittrpfe,fedpcpong,tectes, enupenae, CChefyelt Chapter nari
k ape 5 i g apa ah Lamae ane (ucblpke:0F er abtineriotpngeompnaunce and ciection oF od tifa:
ie D the which F tell you before,as J baue tolde pou upnge of all men,thozome chr Fetus bis fonne, we arc 02


toz. vtd in tpme palt,p*thep S compttuch thpnges _- RRR RE goab WEIR OE tappate Enh;
Eea thal not be indetptoures of the kpngdo of God. pecan 7 dogs RESET
Contrarelp,the frute of the {pete 19, louc tope, SN Cnt beaa goie ot Sets 4
_.- peace, longluffrpnge, cétpines ,goodnes,fapth: SAS) VM Cotbefapnte swhicharcat
Timi. b. ulnes,mekenes, téperatice. * gapni fuchther ieee’ em Ephelusand to them wbpehe
ig nò latwe. Thep truelpe that are Cheties, paue KE beleucon Jefus Chit,
crucpfped the tletbe wptb patiecctoselittes E S PADRE 4 Grace be ith pou, peace nont
PF we lyue in the {prete let vs walkein the E 7) A from Sodoutefather and frg #2224
pcte. Ler vsnot benefprousof apne gloppe, MGI the 0. Jeng Eia tia E
promonya fy orbit eanet. i
1 c p et. =


fed be God the father of our Lozd Fetus Chif 21ta

CHeerhozeeth ris ft toue, eonetobrare > OPC) Hath bleled vs Lad he allmaner Lipa oo
With another. nthe ende be warneth them tobeware FUA l bleflpnge tn beauen p thpnge sbp C itre
Lh) Noes 4s appa ; accozdpnge ashe badcholen bs in bpm, before p
py) Reth pf ama alfo be takë many fart foundacpons of the thozlde were la pde tbat toe
Oy Pewhpch are fpirituall belpetoamende fhulve be bolp and topthout blame before brm,
apn in p prete of mekeneg:cfpderpnge thozotweloue. Wi bpche ozdepned vs befoze tho-
Kom.ro.e. thp Cele lefte pallobetenspted. * Wearepeone rove Jefus Chrctt to be hepres puto bpm felfe,
anothers burthen,¢fofulfpl thelawe of Chet accordpnge to theqood pleature of bps wpll, to
Jo? pf anp må feme to bim felt Pheigfomwbat the praple of the glozy of bis grace, beretopth
Wwpen in dededeisnothpnge,tbhe fame deceaueth Hpehath made vs accepred tbozotve the beloucd,
his one mpnode. Let cuerp ma prouc pig ofone *25p whome the paue redeem cponthozotoe

worke,a nd then all be paue rteopfpnge onelpe bps bloude enë the fozgeu enes ol fpnnes, acco t= ollo.t.b

fom.ridiie th His otonefelfc,and notinanotber. Eozxeue- dpngeto the rpchesof big grace:wberof be bath
f.s00;.i¢.b fo bpm Pp teacbeth bpm inal good tD nges. We the mp fterp of bps wpl acco zDpnere to bis ood
Fob. itti. b not deceaued. God isnot mocked. foz* tbhatlo plealure,whochhebad purpofed in pim felfe, to

25 euer a må foweth,p thall bealfo tcape.ftozbep baue it declared* when the tyme was full come galt å
- Coweth in big Aee Wall ofthe fice reape fop tpat be mpabe fet up all thpnges perfectlpe bp

, tupcion.2ut bethat fowethin the fpzte, Wall Cpritt(both the thynges whicy arem beaucn,¢ |

SORE? ofthe fpzetereape lpfe euerlatpng.* Let vsnct the thpnges wbpcbaretn earth eucn bp bpm bp |


be werp of tort Doptige. ffo? mbes tpmeiscome Mbome we are made bepzeg, and Were thereto
toe (hall reape wout werpnes. Wibple we baue | pzcdeftpnate accozdpnge to the purpofe of ppm
therfozetpme,let bgd geod vntoall men and bp whole power allth nges are wzougbte acz |
Cpecpallp buto the whpcb are.of the houtboldof cozdpngeto the purpofe of bys otwne to pll: that |
fapth. F Pe fe bowelargealetter baue toapt we (tobpche before belencvin€ baile )houldebe
- ten vntopoummpneotonehande.Asmanpas punto the praple of bys qlogpe. l E
. delpze with outwardappearaŭcetopleafecar- Jn whom alfowebveleue, fozafmu eas we |
nallp,the fame conttrapne poutobecpechepttd baue berde the wozde of truth.cucn the Gofpell
pets A lie caked sd wale oi pd Parole cipy (aluacton:toberin, when pe bad beleued |
of Chí. Kor they thë telues tobpch are cepec- xpe were fealed wpe tbe bolp fpzete of pomes ombi
cyfe kepe notthelatoe, but delpec tobauepou Which is the carnett of our enberptaunce, fo? the £94
civcücpled $ thep mpgdterctopee in pour Ae. recoucrpnae of thepureyated pottellpon,, nto z”
C Godfoabpd pJohuldtciopce, but irPcrofie the prapfe ofhys qio? vet ) |
| ofourLozde Jelu Chit wherbp the worlocis — Wiberfoze J alfo(atter p Iberdeofthefapth |
Salada crucpfped vnto meand J onto p wo02d.ozxin tobpch pe haucin the Lozde Jefu andlouc tnta
Chzifte Jefu nepther red eo! ft auapleth anp all the tapnetes)xceafe not to gene thankes foz tomata
thpngeatal:noz wncirchcplion:butanewecrea pou,matpnge mencion of pouinmp mapces:p Solos.
ture. Andas manp ag walkeaccozdpngtothie the God of oure Lozde Jelug Chatte,thetather ieyra
rule peace be on them ¢ mercy bpon sfracl,p ofglozpe,map geue wnto pou the fpzete of wpf- |
pertapnethto Ged. Krohencefosth,teeo man dome andreuclacpon,by the knowledge of bpm og
| putmetobulpnes.«jo2 Jbeateinmyp bodpep felfe,andipatten tie epes of pour mpndeg,t |
bortib cates of the Lorde zelu. Wretheen, thegrace pemape knotwe what the x bopeig , tobercunto som r « |
of our Lord Jelu Chet be nf se fpzete. Amë. he bathe calledpou, andhowerpcbe the glorpe
C The Cpittle vnto the Galathpans 19 Of bps enberptaunce Dpon thefapnetes.an 4
wag lent from Rome, What is theerccadpnge greatnes of bps power j
|
i
|
f


Ji iii = ta


CotyeCphelpans. Wollrvij, —
| arto wtationeremmbemerriremiact Che EPELE &Saynet
p {pzete.then are penot under plaw.Chededes . Pante e eee ate j
| ppelpans.


of p ietbe ave maupfett, wbtch are thefe:aduou=
trpe,foznicacts, Duclennes, watonnes, wo2(hip-


ppnge of pmages, witchcraft, hatred varpatce, T aii
| sele,twzath, ittrpfe,fedpcpong,tectes, enupenae, CChefyelt Chapter nari
k ape 5 i g apa ah Lamae ane (ucblpke:0F er abtineriotpngeompnaunce and ciection oF od tifa:
ie D the which F tell you before,as J baue tolde pou upnge of all men,thozome chr Fetus bis fonne, we arc 02


toz. vtd in tpme palt,p*thep S compttuch thpnges _- RRR RE goab WEIR OE tappate Enh;
Eea thal not be indetptoures of the kpngdo of God. pecan 7 dogs RESET
Contrarelp,the frute of the {pete 19, louc tope, SN Cnt beaa goie ot Sets 4
_.- peace, longluffrpnge, cétpines ,goodnes,fapth: SAS) VM Cotbefapnte swhicharcat
Timi. b. ulnes,mekenes, téperatice. * gapni fuchther ieee’ em Ephelusand to them wbpehe
ig nò latwe. Thep truelpe that are Cheties, paue KE beleucon Jefus Chit,
crucpfped the tletbe wptb patiecctoselittes E S PADRE 4 Grace be ith pou, peace nont
PF we lyue in the {prete let vs walkein the E 7) A from Sodoutefather and frg #2224
pcte. Ler vsnot benefprousof apne gloppe, MGI the 0. Jeng Eia tia E
promonya fy orbit eanet. i
1 c p et. =


fed be God the father of our Lozd Fetus Chif 21ta

CHeerhozeeth ris ft toue, eonetobrare > OPC) Hath bleled vs Lad he allmaner Lipa oo
With another. nthe ende be warneth them tobeware FUA l bleflpnge tn beauen p thpnge sbp C itre
Lh) Noes 4s appa ; accozdpnge ashe badcholen bs in bpm, before p
py) Reth pf ama alfo be takë many fart foundacpons of the thozlde were la pde tbat toe
Oy Pewhpch are fpirituall belpetoamende fhulve be bolp and topthout blame before brm,
apn in p prete of mekeneg:cfpderpnge thozotweloue. Wi bpche ozdepned vs befoze tho-
Kom.ro.e. thp Cele lefte pallobetenspted. * Wearepeone rove Jefus Chrctt to be hepres puto bpm felfe,
anothers burthen,¢fofulfpl thelawe of Chet accordpnge to theqood pleature of bps wpll, to
Jo? pf anp må feme to bim felt Pheigfomwbat the praple of the glozy of bis grace, beretopth
Wwpen in dededeisnothpnge,tbhe fame deceaueth Hpehath made vs accepred tbozotve the beloucd,
his one mpnode. Let cuerp ma prouc pig ofone *25p whome the paue redeem cponthozotoe

worke,a nd then all be paue rteopfpnge onelpe bps bloude enë the fozgeu enes ol fpnnes, acco t= ollo.t.b

fom.ridiie th His otonefelfc,and notinanotber. Eozxeue- dpngeto the rpchesof big grace:wberof be bath
f.s00;.i¢.b fo bpm Pp teacbeth bpm inal good tD nges. We the mp fterp of bps wpl acco zDpnere to bis ood
Fob. itti. b not deceaued. God isnot mocked. foz* tbhatlo plealure,whochhebad purpofed in pim felfe, to

25 euer a må foweth,p thall bealfo tcape.ftozbep baue it declared* when the tyme was full come galt å
- Coweth in big Aee Wall ofthe fice reape fop tpat be mpabe fet up all thpnges perfectlpe bp

, tupcion.2ut bethat fowethin the fpzte, Wall Cpritt(both the thynges whicy arem beaucn,¢ |

SORE? ofthe fpzetereape lpfe euerlatpng.* Let vsnct the thpnges wbpcbaretn earth eucn bp bpm bp |


be werp of tort Doptige. ffo? mbes tpmeiscome Mbome we are made bepzeg, and Were thereto
toe (hall reape wout werpnes. Wibple we baue | pzcdeftpnate accozdpnge to the purpofe of ppm
therfozetpme,let bgd geod vntoall men and bp whole power allth nges are wzougbte acz |
Cpecpallp buto the whpcb are.of the houtboldof cozdpngeto the purpofe of bys otwne to pll: that |
fapth. F Pe fe bowelargealetter baue toapt we (tobpche before belencvin€ baile )houldebe
- ten vntopoummpneotonehande.Asmanpas punto the praple of bys qlogpe. l E
. delpze with outwardappearaŭcetopleafecar- Jn whom alfowebveleue, fozafmu eas we |
nallp,the fame conttrapne poutobecpechepttd baue berde the wozde of truth.cucn the Gofpell
pets A lie caked sd wale oi pd Parole cipy (aluacton:toberin, when pe bad beleued |
of Chí. Kor they thë telues tobpch are cepec- xpe were fealed wpe tbe bolp fpzete of pomes ombi
cyfe kepe notthelatoe, but delpec tobauepou Which is the carnett of our enberptaunce, fo? the £94
civcücpled $ thep mpgdterctopee in pour Ae. recoucrpnae of thepureyated pottellpon,, nto z”
C Godfoabpd pJohuldtciopce, but irPcrofie the prapfe ofhys qio? vet ) |
| ofourLozde Jelu Chit wherbp the worlocis — Wiberfoze J alfo(atter p Iberdeofthefapth |
Salada crucpfped vnto meand J onto p wo02d.ozxin tobpch pe haucin the Lozde Jefu andlouc tnta
Chzifte Jefu nepther red eo! ft auapleth anp all the tapnetes)xceafe not to gene thankes foz tomata
thpngeatal:noz wncirchcplion:butanewecrea pou,matpnge mencion of pouinmp mapces:p Solos.
ture. Andas manp ag walkeaccozdpngtothie the God of oure Lozde Jelug Chatte,thetather ieyra
rule peace be on them ¢ mercy bpon sfracl,p ofglozpe,map geue wnto pou the fpzete of wpf- |
pertapnethto Ged. Krohencefosth,teeo man dome andreuclacpon,by the knowledge of bpm og
| putmetobulpnes.«jo2 Jbeateinmyp bodpep felfe,andipatten tie epes of pour mpndeg,t |
bortib cates of the Lorde zelu. Wretheen, thegrace pemape knotwe what the x bopeig , tobercunto som r « |
of our Lord Jelu Chet be nf se fpzete. Amë. he bathe calledpou, andhowerpcbe the glorpe
C The Cpittle vnto the Galathpans 19 Of bps enberptaunce Dpon thefapnetes.an 4
wag lent from Rome, What is theerccadpnge greatnes of bps power j
|
i
|
f


Ji iii = ta


to viwarbde thhpch beleuc accordpig tothe woe:

lipnge ofthat bys mpabtpe potver , bpche be

woughtin Chit, whan fe rapled bym fro the

pracra Dead, * efet bpm onhysrypshte bandem pea-

uenlpthpnges avoncxall rule and power, and

DSani.vi.d mpage, and dominion,and abouceuerp name Pp

is named not inthis tho2ld onlp but alfo inthe

Bratia. Wolde to came: and * bath put alltbpnges Yn-

pee ego Der bis Fete, hathmade bpm aboue all thpnges

tepbe. v.e *eDe Bead of the congregacpon. wbich is dig Vo-

couot: dp andthe fulnes of bym,that fplleth all inall.
€ Theat.Chapter.

r Paule hetvech them what manec of people ther were bez

fore thep? cenuerfacion,and what ther ate nowe inchzitt.


nme £20 Pou bath be quyckened wher as


nomad. a PA Gah WY
pep A i e


or YAm the wobich*in tpmepatied pe wal-
z AY og Hed, accozdpnaetotbecourle of thps
“fom WOLD chen after the qouerncr that
tuleth inthe apze,the {yzete that notwe twozketh
coite.ti.a Mtbechplozen of pirbelefe, xamonge whom we
ali had our conucrfactonalfontpme paft inthe
yles of oure Lethe, and fulfplled the wpl of the
fete and ofthe mpnde:and were by nature the
` chpldzen of Matbe,encnaswellas other. Wut
Gov whichis cpehe inmercp(foz bps great loue
wHeribith he loued ys, euen when we were dead
bpipnnes ) quyckened bs together in Chrifte
Staprrhn (*by grace ate pelaued)andrapled bs vp toge
. ther wpthbpm.and made vs fpt together wyth
Dom amonge them of Deayen in Chaifte Jet.
‘Chat tnepmes to come,be mpabt ewe the er-
ccadpnge rpches of bps qrace,in kpndnes to vg
Ward thozowe Chit Jefu. o: by qrace are pe
made lafe thozotve faptie,and that not of poure
felues. Ft is the qpfte of God,and commeth not
of wozkes.leatt anp man hulde boat bpm felfe
| Jo? we are his ozkema hip created in Chak
, Titusid Jefu vnto*qood wozkes, which God ozdepned
that toe (pulde thalke in them.

Ciiherfoze.remember that pebepngeintpme
suc ce, PAND Gentples in the feie, were called wnep2-
Eorna eumeptpon trom that whpcheis called * cpeci-
—- tpfponin the fietbe,whpch cp2zcumepfidis made
bp Dandes:remember( ZF lape that at thattpme
pe were toptbout Chzikt, bepnge alpauntes fri
the commen tWwealtbhe of Zrael, and traungers
from the teamentes of the pzomes, banpnge
. no bope , and bepnge wpthoute God in thps
Yoozlde.25ut nowe bp the meanes of Chzift ee
fu,ye tobpchelomtpme were farre of,are made

npe, bp the bloude of Chzift. |
oz he is oure peace, wbpehe bathe made of
both one,and hath bzokendowne the wall that
was aftoppe betwene vs, and bathe allo puta-
wape thozowe bys flethe.the caule of patred,e-
uen tie late of commaundemcentes contepned
tn the lawe thzptten,foz tomate of tieapneone


newe manindpm felfe, fo makonge peace and


torecõcple both Ynto Godin one body thozotve
the croile,and fetve hatred therbp:andcam,and
preached peace topou Which were afarreof,and
to them that were npe. oz thozowe bpm we
bothe baue an entraunce , none fppepte puto
the father.


ipe Weredeadinerelpafles.etpnnes, Pare


The Eptttle


eee auleama pres 4
tig oot et ilte, foz pou eas
is ey een then: DEpe baue fete of the mpnp=


a) eaen (teacpon oF thc qrace of God* Mohi- 4tes.ritts
pera che is geuen me to pouwarde. Foz
*by reuclacpon Hewend he the mptterp vntome, Salat. s
as J tozote afozeinfetve hozdes,wherbp ban
pereade pe mape Dnderandmp knowledge in
rhe mpiterpof Chart, whpch mpfterp intpmes
pafled has not opened Onto the fonnes of men,
23 itisnowe declared vntoppsbholye Apotleg
and Pzophetes bp the lprete: thatthe Gentpleg
fulde be inberptoures alfo,and of the fame bo-
Dpe,and partakers of bys promes in Chite, bp
the meanes of the Gofpell, whereof 3J am made
a yay {fer accozdpnge to the qpfte of the grace
of God wbpch is genen onto me after the w02-
pnge of bps power.

nto me thexleatt of al fapntesis thigarace 25 e:
geuen} J thulde pzeacheamonge the Gentples +r
the bnirarchablerpebes of Chatit, and to make
allmen fe, what the felowdbpp of the mpferpe
is, tobpeve fromthe begpnnpnge of the woelde
hath bene bydin God, whbpche made all thpnges
thozowe Fetus Chzift to the intent, that nowe
vntotherulers andpowers in beauélp thpnges
mpabt be knowenb Sub accorbmge fo ere


T


npfolde wyfoome of God, accozdpnge top eter:

nall purpofe,whpch Kiaat ribet Jefu

pur apon pie pel do Shear 5 s en-

traunce wpth the contpdence twobpehe isbp the

fapth of bpm. >it tbher ie e ste

not becaute of mp tribulactos xthat J tuire for —01.0. >.

pourlakes:tbbpcbispourpraple. ~~
Fo? this caule 3 botwemp knees wnto thefa: g

ther of our Lozde Zelus Chak. whpchisfather

oucral that ig called father in beauen g in earth


‘ that he wolde graunt pou accozdpnge totherp-


ches of bys glozp.that ye mape be ftrengthed we
mpgbte bp bps aein theinner man, that
Chiff mape Dwelltn pour bertes by fapth.that
pe bepnge rote’ and grounded in lone, mpght be
abie to compeebende wpth all fapntes, whatig
the bzedth andlength,odeptbandbepath.andto
kinowe p excellent loneof Penomet asor E pett D
Ppempabe be fulfpiled with all fulnes, whpehe
commetbof God. Gintobymthatisableto do
exceadpnge aboundauntipe aboue all that te
alke o2thpnbe accozdpnge to the polverp wog-
Kethin ys, be peaple in the congregacpon a
Chit Jefus thozoweontallagres wold wpt
outende, Amen. p jne

- EThe.iiti. Chapter. ri D

e


to viwarbde thhpch beleuc accordpig tothe woe:

lipnge ofthat bys mpabtpe potver , bpche be

woughtin Chit, whan fe rapled bym fro the

pracra Dead, * efet bpm onhysrypshte bandem pea-

uenlpthpnges avoncxall rule and power, and

DSani.vi.d mpage, and dominion,and abouceuerp name Pp

is named not inthis tho2ld onlp but alfo inthe

Bratia. Wolde to came: and * bath put alltbpnges Yn-

pee ego Der bis Fete, hathmade bpm aboue all thpnges

tepbe. v.e *eDe Bead of the congregacpon. wbich is dig Vo-

couot: dp andthe fulnes of bym,that fplleth all inall.
€ Theat.Chapter.

r Paule hetvech them what manec of people ther were bez

fore thep? cenuerfacion,and what ther ate nowe inchzitt.


nme £20 Pou bath be quyckened wher as


nomad. a PA Gah WY
pep A i e


or YAm the wobich*in tpmepatied pe wal-
z AY og Hed, accozdpnaetotbecourle of thps
“fom WOLD chen after the qouerncr that
tuleth inthe apze,the {yzete that notwe twozketh
coite.ti.a Mtbechplozen of pirbelefe, xamonge whom we
ali had our conucrfactonalfontpme paft inthe
yles of oure Lethe, and fulfplled the wpl of the
fete and ofthe mpnde:and were by nature the
` chpldzen of Matbe,encnaswellas other. Wut
Gov whichis cpehe inmercp(foz bps great loue
wHeribith he loued ys, euen when we were dead
bpipnnes ) quyckened bs together in Chrifte
Staprrhn (*by grace ate pelaued)andrapled bs vp toge
. ther wpthbpm.and made vs fpt together wyth
Dom amonge them of Deayen in Chaifte Jet.
‘Chat tnepmes to come,be mpabt ewe the er-
ccadpnge rpches of bps qrace,in kpndnes to vg
Ward thozowe Chit Jefu. o: by qrace are pe
made lafe thozotve faptie,and that not of poure
felues. Ft is the qpfte of God,and commeth not
of wozkes.leatt anp man hulde boat bpm felfe
| Jo? we are his ozkema hip created in Chak
, Titusid Jefu vnto*qood wozkes, which God ozdepned
that toe (pulde thalke in them.

Ciiherfoze.remember that pebepngeintpme
suc ce, PAND Gentples in the feie, were called wnep2-
Eorna eumeptpon trom that whpcheis called * cpeci-
—- tpfponin the fietbe,whpch cp2zcumepfidis made
bp Dandes:remember( ZF lape that at thattpme
pe were toptbout Chzikt, bepnge alpauntes fri
the commen tWwealtbhe of Zrael, and traungers
from the teamentes of the pzomes, banpnge
. no bope , and bepnge wpthoute God in thps
Yoozlde.25ut nowe bp the meanes of Chzift ee
fu,ye tobpchelomtpme were farre of,are made

npe, bp the bloude of Chzift. |
oz he is oure peace, wbpehe bathe made of
both one,and hath bzokendowne the wall that
was aftoppe betwene vs, and bathe allo puta-
wape thozowe bys flethe.the caule of patred,e-
uen tie late of commaundemcentes contepned
tn the lawe thzptten,foz tomate of tieapneone


newe manindpm felfe, fo makonge peace and


torecõcple both Ynto Godin one body thozotve
the croile,and fetve hatred therbp:andcam,and
preached peace topou Which were afarreof,and
to them that were npe. oz thozowe bpm we
bothe baue an entraunce , none fppepte puto
the father.


ipe Weredeadinerelpafles.etpnnes, Pare


The Eptttle


eee auleama pres 4
tig oot et ilte, foz pou eas
is ey een then: DEpe baue fete of the mpnp=


a) eaen (teacpon oF thc qrace of God* Mohi- 4tes.ritts
pera che is geuen me to pouwarde. Foz
*by reuclacpon Hewend he the mptterp vntome, Salat. s
as J tozote afozeinfetve hozdes,wherbp ban
pereade pe mape Dnderandmp knowledge in
rhe mpiterpof Chart, whpch mpfterp intpmes
pafled has not opened Onto the fonnes of men,
23 itisnowe declared vntoppsbholye Apotleg
and Pzophetes bp the lprete: thatthe Gentpleg
fulde be inberptoures alfo,and of the fame bo-
Dpe,and partakers of bys promes in Chite, bp
the meanes of the Gofpell, whereof 3J am made
a yay {fer accozdpnge to the qpfte of the grace
of God wbpch is genen onto me after the w02-
pnge of bps power.

nto me thexleatt of al fapntesis thigarace 25 e:
geuen} J thulde pzeacheamonge the Gentples +r
the bnirarchablerpebes of Chatit, and to make
allmen fe, what the felowdbpp of the mpferpe
is, tobpeve fromthe begpnnpnge of the woelde
hath bene bydin God, whbpche made all thpnges
thozowe Fetus Chzift to the intent, that nowe
vntotherulers andpowers in beauélp thpnges
mpabt be knowenb Sub accorbmge fo ere


T


npfolde wyfoome of God, accozdpnge top eter:

nall purpofe,whpch Kiaat ribet Jefu

pur apon pie pel do Shear 5 s en-

traunce wpth the contpdence twobpehe isbp the

fapth of bpm. >it tbher ie e ste

not becaute of mp tribulactos xthat J tuire for —01.0. >.

pourlakes:tbbpcbispourpraple. ~~
Fo? this caule 3 botwemp knees wnto thefa: g

ther of our Lozde Zelus Chak. whpchisfather

oucral that ig called father in beauen g in earth


‘ that he wolde graunt pou accozdpnge totherp-


ches of bys glozp.that ye mape be ftrengthed we
mpgbte bp bps aein theinner man, that
Chiff mape Dwelltn pour bertes by fapth.that
pe bepnge rote’ and grounded in lone, mpght be
abie to compeebende wpth all fapntes, whatig
the bzedth andlength,odeptbandbepath.andto
kinowe p excellent loneof Penomet asor E pett D
Ppempabe be fulfpiled with all fulnes, whpehe
commetbof God. Gintobymthatisableto do
exceadpnge aboundauntipe aboue all that te
alke o2thpnbe accozdpnge to the polverp wog-
Kethin ys, be peaple in the congregacpon a
Chit Jefus thozoweontallagres wold wpt
outende, Amen. p jne

- EThe.iiti. Chapter. ri D

e


COTY CPUUYyaNs.
d He erborttth them bnito hiekenes,to lave alpde the


Dide conugriacpom of gredp tes; and to walle ina
netwe Ipfe


men. Chat be alcended, what meancthit: but
that be alfodefcendedfirt into plowelt partes
* Fob t4.d OF P erth? * He pdelcéded, ts enethe fame allo $
f -gfcéded bp, aboue all henés,to fulfplalthiges.
”  Andthe verpfame made * fomeApokkles,
cor tid fome Weophetes fome Cuangelpttes, fome
Aokap.a Shepherdess g teachers :*o the edifpeng, ofthe
fapntes,totbe wozke andDminifftracpon,eué to
theedifpeng of the bodp of Chzpite, tpll wwe all
come to the wnitpe of fapth.¢ knowledge of the
fonne of God, wnto a perfecte man, vntot
mealure of the full pertecteage of Chaptite
That webenceforth Hulde be nomoze chpiodz¢,
xcoliie X Mauerphge andcarped aboutewpth) cucrpe
wynde of doctrpne, bp the toplencs ofsacnne,
thozotve craftpnes, wherbp thep layr atoapte
D for vs todeceaue vs. Wut lette vs tolowe the
zpbetd truethin louc andin al thinges gaon in bim,
anbe xtwbpeheis thebeade euen Chzitt in wpome pt
all the bodp be coupled Rnet together thozow
itets.b. ont cuerpetopnte noberibith * one mpnpitredto
Lco Fid another ( accopbphge to the operacpon as cucrp
partebatb bis mealure) be tncreateth thebobdp,
ynto the edifpenge of it felfe thozowe loue.
x This sapethcrfoze, and teftpEpe thozow
the Lozbde. that pe bence fozrbe walke not, ag
mom, a XOtDEr Géetils,toalke, tn banpte of theit mind,
1.Bettif.a Whplétbep are blpndedin thep2 ynderflading,
bepnge farre froma godly Ipfe, bp the meanes
of pcan that isin them, and becaute of
the blpndnes of thep2 bertes: wyich bepng pait
repentaunice, baue geuen them feluecs ouct vnte
wantontcs, to wo2zke all maner of Ducleancs,
. euentopebaredpnes. wutye bane not folear-
ned Ch2ift. VE lo be that pe Dane bearde of btm,
~ andbaue ben thaugbtinbpm, ag thetruethets
in Jelu: (asconcernpnge p conuertactd intpimne
pa }tolape fri pou f olde man, Wwbpche ts cop.
rupte accozdpnge to the deceauable luftes. fa
> Toberenued allo in the fpzcte of poure
kio. bia spn TEDATA S E uh tine
Solo, ifia f ter wit is fbapen incpabteouineile and true
Olpnefle. — |
aneu. e . wdbderfoze, * put awapelpenge, and eu
FE? eucrp man truthe onto bps nepgdboure, foz a8
xoriga Muchas weare mbeg one OF art opper, * we


| JUD LET o
angrpe,and{pnucnot :lette not the Sonnego

Downe Dpon pour wath, nether qeue place Wr-

tothe backbpter.* Let him that tole, eale to kieu.rir.e
moze*but let bpm rather laboure with bis han: titheu


puto bpn that nedeth. fy be |
Let no fplthbp communicacpott procede outeot
poure mouth: but that wbpcb ts coon te ebitpe
with allas oftas nede is:that it mape minter
grace batotbebearers.Andgenenotpetbedo
lye (pret of Godxbp Mbome pe arefealed vito obrie
the Dape of redemption. Let all bptternes and ©!"
fearfnes,and wrath, g rozpna, and curfen {pea-
kpnge,be put awape from pou, withal malict-
oufnes. Ae pe courteous one to anotber,mercy
full, fozgeupnere one another , eucnag God fed
Chetes fake hath fozgeucn pou,
@ The. v.Chapter. > .
@ eerborteth thembnto lout warneth chem to be ware oF


al buclennee, ie te Cheth how wemen Huld abep theip huts
bandes, bow louingip men ought to intreate (heir wpuce.


k bDestbetbpng wbpip Stine?


ON gaue bpm felfe foz vs an ofe-

fay) tpnig a facctfpce of a fwete fa-
I AEA uct to God. * Ag foz fognicacpo érosinid
aaa € al onclenneg, 02 couetoufneg
let it not be once namedamong pou, ag tt bech-
meth fapntes,o3 fpltbines,o2foolpipe talking,
0? felting whiche are not comlp:but rather gee
ning of thakes. Eo? this pe knot pxho Wwhot= wata.o.0
mõger ether wcleane perfone,oz conetoug per: t20
fone,( whichis a peg pleated tear DSR
anp enberitaüce in pkingbdofChulteof God |

Let nomandeceaue pou witb bapnewor- W5
Ded. Foz becaule of fuche thpnges commeth the mat-critita
wath of God, upon the chplozé of bpfobedi¢ce Sorah
Genot pe therfoze companions of thé. Pe were cuturrid
fomtpmedarkenes, but not åte pe light in the {2007-6
1L0:d.* Walke as child: of light. (Stoz p frute
of the fpzete conliffeth tnallgoodnes, erpabte
oulnes andtructh,) k&carchpage what is ac
ceptable bntothe L020. And hauetiofclowibip
wpth the onfrutctull woskes of Darkenes : bug
rather rcbube thé. Foz tt is ame ené to name
thoictbinges which are done of them in fecreté
but all thpnges, when thep are baoughte forthe
bp the ligbte are mamfe fte. Eo? whatfoencr ig
manifeite,that fame is lpabt.tberfoze be fap
eth:awake thou that lepek, ànd tand Dp from
deatb and Chri Mall pu thelpgbt. |
Take hede therEoze bote pe walke cpi- D

cum{pectlpe:notas vnwplebutas wpfe men:
redenpnge thetpme, becanle the Dapes are ce
upll. Wberfore, be penot vnwple, but wider-
tande Dobat the wpl of the Lorde igand be not
dronkewpth wptine wherein is ercefle :but be
fplled with the (pzete,fpeakpng vnto pour fel-
ues+inplalmes and bpmines, and {piritual fon pf.rrrtii: a
gea.fpngphge and mabpng melodpeto f Lord Toloi, è
in poure bertes, cpupnge thankes alwapes foz
allebinges, bnto God the father in the name of
oure Lozde Jefus Cheitte fubmpttpage poure
(clues onetaanotber tn eli i is *
s i Ma ER


=


COTY CPUUYyaNs.
d He erborttth them bnito hiekenes,to lave alpde the


Dide conugriacpom of gredp tes; and to walle ina
netwe Ipfe


men. Chat be alcended, what meancthit: but
that be alfodefcendedfirt into plowelt partes
* Fob t4.d OF P erth? * He pdelcéded, ts enethe fame allo $
f -gfcéded bp, aboue all henés,to fulfplalthiges.
”  Andthe verpfame made * fomeApokkles,
cor tid fome Weophetes fome Cuangelpttes, fome
Aokap.a Shepherdess g teachers :*o the edifpeng, ofthe
fapntes,totbe wozke andDminifftracpon,eué to
theedifpeng of the bodp of Chzpite, tpll wwe all
come to the wnitpe of fapth.¢ knowledge of the
fonne of God, wnto a perfecte man, vntot
mealure of the full pertecteage of Chaptite
That webenceforth Hulde be nomoze chpiodz¢,
xcoliie X Mauerphge andcarped aboutewpth) cucrpe
wynde of doctrpne, bp the toplencs ofsacnne,
thozotve craftpnes, wherbp thep layr atoapte
D for vs todeceaue vs. Wut lette vs tolowe the
zpbetd truethin louc andin al thinges gaon in bim,
anbe xtwbpeheis thebeade euen Chzitt in wpome pt
all the bodp be coupled Rnet together thozow
itets.b. ont cuerpetopnte noberibith * one mpnpitredto
Lco Fid another ( accopbphge to the operacpon as cucrp
partebatb bis mealure) be tncreateth thebobdp,
ynto the edifpenge of it felfe thozowe loue.
x This sapethcrfoze, and teftpEpe thozow
the Lozbde. that pe bence fozrbe walke not, ag
mom, a XOtDEr Géetils,toalke, tn banpte of theit mind,
1.Bettif.a Whplétbep are blpndedin thep2 ynderflading,
bepnge farre froma godly Ipfe, bp the meanes
of pcan that isin them, and becaute of
the blpndnes of thep2 bertes: wyich bepng pait
repentaunice, baue geuen them feluecs ouct vnte
wantontcs, to wo2zke all maner of Ducleancs,
. euentopebaredpnes. wutye bane not folear-
ned Ch2ift. VE lo be that pe Dane bearde of btm,
~ andbaue ben thaugbtinbpm, ag thetruethets
in Jelu: (asconcernpnge p conuertactd intpimne
pa }tolape fri pou f olde man, Wwbpche ts cop.
rupte accozdpnge to the deceauable luftes. fa
> Toberenued allo in the fpzcte of poure
kio. bia spn TEDATA S E uh tine
Solo, ifia f ter wit is fbapen incpabteouineile and true
Olpnefle. — |
aneu. e . wdbderfoze, * put awapelpenge, and eu
FE? eucrp man truthe onto bps nepgdboure, foz a8
xoriga Muchas weare mbeg one OF art opper, * we


| JUD LET o
angrpe,and{pnucnot :lette not the Sonnego

Downe Dpon pour wath, nether qeue place Wr-

tothe backbpter.* Let him that tole, eale to kieu.rir.e
moze*but let bpm rather laboure with bis han: titheu


puto bpn that nedeth. fy be |
Let no fplthbp communicacpott procede outeot
poure mouth: but that wbpcb ts coon te ebitpe
with allas oftas nede is:that it mape minter
grace batotbebearers.Andgenenotpetbedo
lye (pret of Godxbp Mbome pe arefealed vito obrie
the Dape of redemption. Let all bptternes and ©!"
fearfnes,and wrath, g rozpna, and curfen {pea-
kpnge,be put awape from pou, withal malict-
oufnes. Ae pe courteous one to anotber,mercy
full, fozgeupnere one another , eucnag God fed
Chetes fake hath fozgeucn pou,
@ The. v.Chapter. > .
@ eerborteth thembnto lout warneth chem to be ware oF


al buclennee, ie te Cheth how wemen Huld abep theip huts
bandes, bow louingip men ought to intreate (heir wpuce.


k bDestbetbpng wbpip Stine?


ON gaue bpm felfe foz vs an ofe-

fay) tpnig a facctfpce of a fwete fa-
I AEA uct to God. * Ag foz fognicacpo érosinid
aaa € al onclenneg, 02 couetoufneg
let it not be once namedamong pou, ag tt bech-
meth fapntes,o3 fpltbines,o2foolpipe talking,
0? felting whiche are not comlp:but rather gee
ning of thakes. Eo? this pe knot pxho Wwhot= wata.o.0
mõger ether wcleane perfone,oz conetoug per: t20
fone,( whichis a peg pleated tear DSR
anp enberitaüce in pkingbdofChulteof God |

Let nomandeceaue pou witb bapnewor- W5
Ded. Foz becaule of fuche thpnges commeth the mat-critita
wath of God, upon the chplozé of bpfobedi¢ce Sorah
Genot pe therfoze companions of thé. Pe were cuturrid
fomtpmedarkenes, but not åte pe light in the {2007-6
1L0:d.* Walke as child: of light. (Stoz p frute
of the fpzete conliffeth tnallgoodnes, erpabte
oulnes andtructh,) k&carchpage what is ac
ceptable bntothe L020. And hauetiofclowibip
wpth the onfrutctull woskes of Darkenes : bug
rather rcbube thé. Foz tt is ame ené to name
thoictbinges which are done of them in fecreté
but all thpnges, when thep are baoughte forthe
bp the ligbte are mamfe fte. Eo? whatfoencr ig
manifeite,that fame is lpabt.tberfoze be fap
eth:awake thou that lepek, ànd tand Dp from
deatb and Chri Mall pu thelpgbt. |
Take hede therEoze bote pe walke cpi- D

cum{pectlpe:notas vnwplebutas wpfe men:
redenpnge thetpme, becanle the Dapes are ce
upll. Wberfore, be penot vnwple, but wider-
tande Dobat the wpl of the Lorde igand be not
dronkewpth wptine wherein is ercefle :but be
fplled with the (pzete,fpeakpng vnto pour fel-
ues+inplalmes and bpmines, and {piritual fon pf.rrrtii: a
gea.fpngphge and mabpng melodpeto f Lord Toloi, è
in poure bertes, cpupnge thankes alwapes foz
allebinges, bnto God the father in the name of
oure Lozde Jefus Cheitte fubmpttpage poure
(clues onetaanotber tn eli i is *
s i Ma ER


=


7
|


Denstit.d


Pe wermert-fubmpt potre felues vto poure
-€ owne bulbandes ,as pnto the Lorde. ffo? + the
xg iid Hutbandets the wpues bead, euen as Chrttteis
tepbeo. * Ebe bead of the ay She id ees and the famets
bethat minitreth faluacpon wnto the bodpe.
‘Therfoze,as the congregacpon is intubtection
to Chzift, |lpketwplelet the pues alfo bein tub
iectponto thep2 bulbandes inallthpnges . Pe
_ bulbandeg, loue pour bpues,cucnas Chrif al-
af fo loued tbecongregacpon, and waue bpm felfe
foz itto fanctifpett , and clenfed it inthe foun-
tapne of Water thozot the wo2d,to make it Yn
to him felfe a qlozious congregacpon, thithoute
{pot 02 wzpnkle, o2 anp fuche thpnge : but that
if buld be bolp,and without blame, 40 ought
men fo loue their wpuesg, as their owne bodpes
Pe that loueth his wpfe,loueth bem felfe. fF oz
no man euce pet hated bps otoneflefihe: but no-
tpltheth andcherpltherb it, enenag the Lozde
doththecongregacpon . Fo? the ave members
ofhps bobdp, of bps flelthe, and of bps boneg. —
agenito  *Jtoz this caule pala man leane father and
Sat FIF a motber,and fhalbe topned bnto bis tpfeand of
t vi, two (halbemade one te. Chis isa greate ies
repbe.b.g cUCte, but ¥lpeake of Chapite and of the congre
gacion. Meuertheleffe, do Bee teat euetpe one
loue Ada euen as bin felfe,andlet the wpfe
reuerence ber bulbande.
€ The. vi. Chapter.
Bow chplozen hule bebaue them felues totvaroe thep?
patentes Seruauntes Cowarbde thep; mapiers, an erhosta
Cponte the (pirituall battapil.
y ees x yldzen, obepe pour fathersand
s fil ada mothers in the Lozbe: fo? that is


k tonio Bir are ere ! | |
gana tp abt.* Honour thy father andmo
ENSIS. ther.(t efame is the firit comaiide
aae Met in p promes ) that thou mapt
ofpere,e Ipue long on earth, Pe fathers mone
ot poure chpldzento Wwzáth: but x bepng them
vp thozotwc the doctrine andinfozmacpo of the
1020. Deferuauntes,obepe them that are pour
. bodelp mapfters, wpth teare andtremblpnge.
euen with the fpnglenes of pourberte, ag bnto
€ baift:notdopnage ferutce Dnto theepe.as thep


T F
E | ear Ei


that qoabout toplealemen: butastheferuañ= —


tes of C hap te dopnge the wl of God from the
I8 berte wpth good tpl, ferupnge the Lozdeand
not men noting this, that whatfoener good
-- thpnge anp man doth, the fame Mall he receane
praia pisk nein all A ahd gaas
pe mapfters,bo cuen P fame thinges puto them
puttpngeatapethzeatenpnges . tinotopnge,
iisariec tat youre mater alto tg in beauen, x nether ig
acesse theranp retpecte of perfone toith bpm. |
omacty pia Sepnallp mp beethzen,be tronge thozotve
colle. tue the Lo2d and thozowe the potver of bys might
Put onal fp armour of God,thatpemaype fand
againft spon tantee pome, 02 foe weettle
nog eeepnlt blondDandtlelh:but again rule, a
— gapatt power agapni wozldlp rulers, enë go-
Becuece OF toeDarieaen or tbr mostoa qarnit
'pivitual cattynre in beapenipt pnges,
berfoze, oped oe P tohole armoure of
god, that pe map beable torelptein p cuel dap

wake. rihé and tande perfectetnall thpnges,


EEDAN]


~ The Eppttle


with ptruett,baupng on the bret plate ofrigh
teouines, and haupnge thoes on pour fete that

pemape be prepared fo: the Golpell of peace:
boucal take to you the hpld of fapth, wher-

iopth pe m quencheall the fp2pe dartegof -

the wprked. And take the helmet of faluacpon,

tbe lwearde of the fpzete,wbiche tg tbe wode

of God, hx And pzape alwapes With allmas= auk.rvi6 4
ter of praper and lupplpcacpon inthe fprete: +70t.o
andwatche thereunto withallinfafice and fup
plicacpon foz all fapntes and fo2 me + that bt- niita
terautice mape begeuen bntometbhat 3 mape” "`


open me — trelp to btter the fecretes of


mp Oolpell ( wherof Jama meflengerinbon-
des that thertn J map (peake oe Joughet
tolpeake. Wut that pemape allo knowe what
condDpcpon Jamin. and what Jdo,"Cichicug
the deare bzother and faptbfull minifter in tbe
Lode, Hall ewe pouall thpnges, whome J
bauc “ent bnto poufoz the fame purpote, that
pe mpgbt knotwe what cafe We ftandein, and
that be mpght comfoste poure hertes,Weace be
bntotbebzetbië and loue withfapth, fri Goo


thefatber and fromthe Loade Jelug Chzpte.  »


Grace be with all them toppcbe lounc our Lorde
Jefus Chzpitelpncerelp. Amen.


CHent fromBRome yntothe Eppe-
liang bp Tichicus,


CThe Epyttleoftaynt


aid anlethe Apottle tothe
ae j hilippiang


‘Chef prt Chapter.


* @ Deethozteth them to tncreafeintoue,in knowsen
erperpence OF Govip thpuges. : len se, g


me aule and Timothe the fere q
| eA Wee Nauntes of Jeu Chzpite, To +
| Res) |eee all thefapnetes in Chapt Je-
my Le tu, Whpche are at Phillippos
Rees With the Difthops g Dearg
1 [eco ees Ozace be onto pou and peace
Te {Ss ie Lao SAS See
Vara m Lowe Jelus Chopite.

s Jthanke mp God withallremembzaunce
ofpouxalwapesinall mp praperg fo? Por and , eon. 1p
prape wpth qi dnes : becaufe Peate COMEINES colls.ta
thefelowthpppe of the Gofpell from the fpzite
dape LHtpll note Fand am furelp certyfped
of thps,thathe whpcbe bathe begohne a good
wozke in pou,thall perfourme it Dutpll the dap
of Jefus Chif : as is becommeth me:fo int
A Of poual,becaufe 3 Daue poutnmp berte: foz
as mocbe ag peallare companpons enracets
me, cuen in mp bondes andinthe defendpnae
and ftablpihpnae of the G ofpell. |

Woz Godis mp recozde, bote greatly long 15
after pouall, fromthe verp bert rotein Jelug
Chit.» And this 7 prape that pourloue Map x ephea
encreale pet moze and niozein knowledge, and


‘


. _ tn all Dnbderftandpnge , that pe mape accepte
SStandetherFore,xand pourclopnesgpebe thetbpnges that are mote excellente, that pe


mape


+


7
|


Denstit.d


Pe wermert-fubmpt potre felues vto poure
-€ owne bulbandes ,as pnto the Lorde. ffo? + the
xg iid Hutbandets the wpues bead, euen as Chrttteis
tepbeo. * Ebe bead of the ay She id ees and the famets
bethat minitreth faluacpon wnto the bodpe.
‘Therfoze,as the congregacpon is intubtection
to Chzift, |lpketwplelet the pues alfo bein tub
iectponto thep2 bulbandes inallthpnges . Pe
_ bulbandeg, loue pour bpues,cucnas Chrif al-
af fo loued tbecongregacpon, and waue bpm felfe
foz itto fanctifpett , and clenfed it inthe foun-
tapne of Water thozot the wo2d,to make it Yn
to him felfe a qlozious congregacpon, thithoute
{pot 02 wzpnkle, o2 anp fuche thpnge : but that
if buld be bolp,and without blame, 40 ought
men fo loue their wpuesg, as their owne bodpes
Pe that loueth his wpfe,loueth bem felfe. fF oz
no man euce pet hated bps otoneflefihe: but no-
tpltheth andcherpltherb it, enenag the Lozde
doththecongregacpon . Fo? the ave members
ofhps bobdp, of bps flelthe, and of bps boneg. —
agenito  *Jtoz this caule pala man leane father and
Sat FIF a motber,and fhalbe topned bnto bis tpfeand of
t vi, two (halbemade one te. Chis isa greate ies
repbe.b.g cUCte, but ¥lpeake of Chapite and of the congre
gacion. Meuertheleffe, do Bee teat euetpe one
loue Ada euen as bin felfe,andlet the wpfe
reuerence ber bulbande.
€ The. vi. Chapter.
Bow chplozen hule bebaue them felues totvaroe thep?
patentes Seruauntes Cowarbde thep; mapiers, an erhosta
Cponte the (pirituall battapil.
y ees x yldzen, obepe pour fathersand
s fil ada mothers in the Lozbe: fo? that is


k tonio Bir are ere ! | |
gana tp abt.* Honour thy father andmo
ENSIS. ther.(t efame is the firit comaiide
aae Met in p promes ) that thou mapt
ofpere,e Ipue long on earth, Pe fathers mone
ot poure chpldzento Wwzáth: but x bepng them
vp thozotwc the doctrine andinfozmacpo of the
1020. Deferuauntes,obepe them that are pour
. bodelp mapfters, wpth teare andtremblpnge.
euen with the fpnglenes of pourberte, ag bnto
€ baift:notdopnage ferutce Dnto theepe.as thep


T F
E | ear Ei


that qoabout toplealemen: butastheferuañ= —


tes of C hap te dopnge the wl of God from the
I8 berte wpth good tpl, ferupnge the Lozdeand
not men noting this, that whatfoener good
-- thpnge anp man doth, the fame Mall he receane
praia pisk nein all A ahd gaas
pe mapfters,bo cuen P fame thinges puto them
puttpngeatapethzeatenpnges . tinotopnge,
iisariec tat youre mater alto tg in beauen, x nether ig
acesse theranp retpecte of perfone toith bpm. |
omacty pia Sepnallp mp beethzen,be tronge thozotve
colle. tue the Lo2d and thozowe the potver of bys might
Put onal fp armour of God,thatpemaype fand
againft spon tantee pome, 02 foe weettle
nog eeepnlt blondDandtlelh:but again rule, a
— gapatt power agapni wozldlp rulers, enë go-
Becuece OF toeDarieaen or tbr mostoa qarnit
'pivitual cattynre in beapenipt pnges,
berfoze, oped oe P tohole armoure of
god, that pe map beable torelptein p cuel dap

wake. rihé and tande perfectetnall thpnges,


EEDAN]


~ The Eppttle


with ptruett,baupng on the bret plate ofrigh
teouines, and haupnge thoes on pour fete that

pemape be prepared fo: the Golpell of peace:
boucal take to you the hpld of fapth, wher-

iopth pe m quencheall the fp2pe dartegof -

the wprked. And take the helmet of faluacpon,

tbe lwearde of the fpzete,wbiche tg tbe wode

of God, hx And pzape alwapes With allmas= auk.rvi6 4
ter of praper and lupplpcacpon inthe fprete: +70t.o
andwatche thereunto withallinfafice and fup
plicacpon foz all fapntes and fo2 me + that bt- niita
terautice mape begeuen bntometbhat 3 mape” "`


open me — trelp to btter the fecretes of


mp Oolpell ( wherof Jama meflengerinbon-
des that thertn J map (peake oe Joughet
tolpeake. Wut that pemape allo knowe what
condDpcpon Jamin. and what Jdo,"Cichicug
the deare bzother and faptbfull minifter in tbe
Lode, Hall ewe pouall thpnges, whome J
bauc “ent bnto poufoz the fame purpote, that
pe mpgbt knotwe what cafe We ftandein, and
that be mpght comfoste poure hertes,Weace be
bntotbebzetbië and loue withfapth, fri Goo


thefatber and fromthe Loade Jelug Chzpte.  »


Grace be with all them toppcbe lounc our Lorde
Jefus Chzpitelpncerelp. Amen.


CHent fromBRome yntothe Eppe-
liang bp Tichicus,


CThe Epyttleoftaynt


aid anlethe Apottle tothe
ae j hilippiang


‘Chef prt Chapter.


* @ Deethozteth them to tncreafeintoue,in knowsen
erperpence OF Govip thpuges. : len se, g


me aule and Timothe the fere q
| eA Wee Nauntes of Jeu Chzpite, To +
| Res) |eee all thefapnetes in Chapt Je-
my Le tu, Whpche are at Phillippos
Rees With the Difthops g Dearg
1 [eco ees Ozace be onto pou and peace
Te {Ss ie Lao SAS See
Vara m Lowe Jelus Chopite.

s Jthanke mp God withallremembzaunce
ofpouxalwapesinall mp praperg fo? Por and , eon. 1p
prape wpth qi dnes : becaufe Peate COMEINES colls.ta
thefelowthpppe of the Gofpell from the fpzite
dape LHtpll note Fand am furelp certyfped
of thps,thathe whpcbe bathe begohne a good
wozke in pou,thall perfourme it Dutpll the dap
of Jefus Chif : as is becommeth me:fo int
A Of poual,becaufe 3 Daue poutnmp berte: foz
as mocbe ag peallare companpons enracets
me, cuen in mp bondes andinthe defendpnae
and ftablpihpnae of the G ofpell. |

Woz Godis mp recozde, bote greatly long 15
after pouall, fromthe verp bert rotein Jelug
Chit.» And this 7 prape that pourloue Map x ephea
encreale pet moze and niozein knowledge, and


‘


. _ tn all Dnbderftandpnge , that pe mape accepte
SStandetherFore,xand pourclopnesgpebe thetbpnges that are mote excellente, that pe


mape


+


COLUL FSYUIP Pais «


ma pe be pure, ahd fuch as offendi no man Wi-

tpll the dape of Chztfte: bepnae Fplicd with the

frute of rpqbteoulnes , whych commeth bp Je-

fus Chalk wnto p glozp aud pari of God. fh

tolde pe hulde bnderftande(bzethen)

that the thpnges whpche Dappened bnto me
chaunced nto the greate furtheraunce of the

ofpell : Sotbat mp bandes in Chztife, are

manpeelt thozowe oute all the iudgement ball

andin all ae places : Fn fo moche that ma-

np of the byethzen inthe Lozde bepnge encoza=

cd thozowe mp bandeg , Dare moze boldelp

Sap the tho2d without feare. Some pzeache

Chit of enupe and tirpfc, ¢ lome of good toyl.

eas Cheone parte preache Chk of Trple and not
al fpncerelp,{uppolpne to adde moze aduerlptpe
tontp bande. agayne the otber parte preache

" ofloue becaufe twy not that Jam fet tode-
= fende the Golpell. What then? Ho that Chii
_ be preached anp maner of iwape, whether tt be

7 Senet phan of true nveanpnge, Jam glad

£ rof.pe and pli be glad. F0: J knotve, that
itonib DS {hall chaunce tomp faluacpon,xtho2z0ve
r pour paper g miniftryng of the fpzete of Jelu
Chapitejaccozdpnge to mp expectacpon , and

bope, thatin nothbpnge 3 thalbe atpamed : but

that wrth all boldnefle, (a8 altpapes enenfo

nowe alfo) Chaphe thalbe magupfped in mp


bodp : whether it be thozowelpfe,oztbozowe |


death. ffo2 Chap is to melpfe, and death is to
meauauntage. Pf itchaunce me tolpuein a
ficlthe tbat thpnae is to me Erutefull fo? the
wozke,and what 3 thall chofe 3 wote not. Foz
FJ am conftrapned of tbofe tivo tbynges.
* 7 pefpze to be Looted, and tobe topty Chritte
which is mucheand farre better. Neuertheleiie
toabpbde inthe flelipeis moze nedefull foz pou-
Aud thisam J lure of, that J pall abpde and
| continue with pouall, fog poure furtderaunce
ža  andiopeofpourcfapth, that pourereiopipnge
mape be fhe moze aboundaunt thozotwe Fetus
Chil in me, bp mp commpnage to pouagapne.
Dnelp let poure conuerlacpon be,*as it De-
commeth the Gofpell aitei e: that whether
J come and fe pou, oz elg be abfent, J mape pet
eare of pour condicion that pe continue in one
pete, and (one foule, ppg Se ap We do,
tomapntapne the fapth of the Gotpell, andin
notbpng fear ngpour aduetlarpes, tbprhe is
tothe acaufe of perdpcpon, bi.tto pou offal-
~ uacpon and that of God :foz Duto pou itis
gpuen fo: Chit that not onlp pe Hulde beleue
onbpm: but allo that pe thulde Cuffre-foz bys
fake, baupngeeuen luche afpgbt. ag pe lawe in
me, and nowe beare of me.'
| @ The.tt. Chapter.
dbe erborteth them te brite and bzotherip lone and
to beware of Mrpte and bapne glo;pe. and Cog ature
enfample,belapeth Chipi betoze them,
prea dt there be therforeanp confolacpon
pe” cofo2t of loue,


IRAAN A


phe tiii a


Vie ag NEE Hees uy |
- pither beanp felowthpp of ptpzete,
S/F) (Sar pitber be anp copaflion ¢ mercp.ful:
[nomiaceatpllpemp top, Pye be lye mpnded,
hauing one loue,bepnge of one accogde,¢ Of one
mpnde,pnotbpig be done thozotve krpic ogof


bapne glozp butininekenesofinindelefenerp =
maneficme another better the him elf. * Loke *!-cc?-r.£
not pe cuerpe manonbps owne thpnges, but e?
cuerp man ontbethinges that are other mens,

Let the fame mpnode bein pou hbycp wag
in Chzitte Jelu: whyche when he was tn the
Mape of God, tho ny it not robberpe to be c=
quall MpthGod. Meuerthelefiehemadebypm -

(elfe of no reputacion,takpng on bpmethe pape
of a feruaunt,and* became phe vnto men and sieb, b.g
was foundein bps apparellas a man. e Dum-
bled bpm felfe,and became obedient vntodrath |
evienthe death ofthecrofie. Wiherfoze,qod alfo 25
bathe exalted himon hp and geuen him a name
tohpche igaboue allnames:that in xthename xegat.i.c.
of Jefugteuerpe knee thulde bow,both of thpn: Fon):
ges inbeauen and thinges in earth and thinges )
wnder the earth, and that all tonges thuld con-
feile that Jefus Cht ts the * Lozde, onto the xactes.tt¢
porie of god f tather. Filperfoze, (mp dear= 1eritiib,
p beloucd)as pebaucalwapegobeped not whe
J twas pefente onlp, but nowe muche moze in
mpne abfence ceuen fo wozke onte poure owne |
faluacpou wth feave and tremblpnge.* $02 iË itoz ittd
18 God wppche wozketh inpou,bothe the wpll
and alfo tbe Dede euen of good wpll.
Riiat pge tbat” wpthout murmurpngeand tir.iii.b
utp
cancompla ind Dnfapned fonnes of God
vopthout rebuke, in the mpdbdes of acrobed and
peruerfe nacpon: amoge whom fe that pe Hpne
asipabtes in p toozlde, boldpng falt the wode
ofl Se Ainare rc Ea Danann & ff,c02.f.¢
bowe p 3 bate notrunne in vapne nether have t.cvetaui-c,
ere opm “abe offered by tpai
ec,andthoughe Ibe offered bp bponthe
neari ea t of poure fapth: 3 reiopce a
andreiopcetopthpou al. Fo? thelame caule ale
fodo perefopce,andreiopce with me.

Jtrutinthe Lorde Jelug, for toxfende TP» kaerra,
motheus ptr a pou,*that Zalto map be tiTheiib
of qood comtozte, when J knowe what cate pe
{rade in. 02 F bauctio mantbat tsfolpke min
ded fo me, which with lo pureaffeccion wil care
for pour matters. Coral otber leke thep2 owne
and not the thpnges whichare Jefus Chziltes.

Pe know the prote of bym, bow thatas atonne
wpeb the tatber, fo bathe be wpth me beftowed
His ferupce inthe Gofpell, Him therfor ed bope
tofende, alonc ag J knotwe bote it wpll qo w
me. J trut in the Lozde,that q alfo mp felt thal
come Hoztlpe. wW

But 2 fuppoled itnecellarpetofendebz0-

ther Epaphroditus Vnto pou, mp companion
inlaboure andfelotve fouldper,poure Apoftell
whyrchealfo mpppfireth bnto me at nede. Fir

be longed afterpou all, and was full ofheup-
nes, becaule that pehadve bearde Tape, that be
badde bene {pche. And no doute he as peke itt
fo much $ be was np dnto death. But god bad
mercpe on Hpm:and mron bpm onlp but on mé
alfo let 3 fhuld paue foot wpon fozow. Fle
bin pea the moze diligentlpe:p hen pe


bin.pe map retopceagapne g p Jmap be fiele
ozowsull  zAcceauc bpm thertope inthe L
i


ethat * pe mape be fuche asno man *-P et.


i E


= a.
I m aM aM Á m Im


COLUL FSYUIP Pais «


ma pe be pure, ahd fuch as offendi no man Wi-

tpll the dape of Chztfte: bepnae Fplicd with the

frute of rpqbteoulnes , whych commeth bp Je-

fus Chalk wnto p glozp aud pari of God. fh

tolde pe hulde bnderftande(bzethen)

that the thpnges whpche Dappened bnto me
chaunced nto the greate furtheraunce of the

ofpell : Sotbat mp bandes in Chztife, are

manpeelt thozowe oute all the iudgement ball

andin all ae places : Fn fo moche that ma-

np of the byethzen inthe Lozde bepnge encoza=

cd thozowe mp bandeg , Dare moze boldelp

Sap the tho2d without feare. Some pzeache

Chit of enupe and tirpfc, ¢ lome of good toyl.

eas Cheone parte preache Chk of Trple and not
al fpncerelp,{uppolpne to adde moze aduerlptpe
tontp bande. agayne the otber parte preache

" ofloue becaufe twy not that Jam fet tode-
= fende the Golpell. What then? Ho that Chii
_ be preached anp maner of iwape, whether tt be

7 Senet phan of true nveanpnge, Jam glad

£ rof.pe and pli be glad. F0: J knotve, that
itonib DS {hall chaunce tomp faluacpon,xtho2z0ve
r pour paper g miniftryng of the fpzete of Jelu
Chapitejaccozdpnge to mp expectacpon , and

bope, thatin nothbpnge 3 thalbe atpamed : but

that wrth all boldnefle, (a8 altpapes enenfo

nowe alfo) Chaphe thalbe magupfped in mp


bodp : whether it be thozowelpfe,oztbozowe |


death. ffo2 Chap is to melpfe, and death is to
meauauntage. Pf itchaunce me tolpuein a
ficlthe tbat thpnae is to me Erutefull fo? the
wozke,and what 3 thall chofe 3 wote not. Foz
FJ am conftrapned of tbofe tivo tbynges.
* 7 pefpze to be Looted, and tobe topty Chritte
which is mucheand farre better. Neuertheleiie
toabpbde inthe flelipeis moze nedefull foz pou-
Aud thisam J lure of, that J pall abpde and
| continue with pouall, fog poure furtderaunce
ža  andiopeofpourcfapth, that pourereiopipnge
mape be fhe moze aboundaunt thozotwe Fetus
Chil in me, bp mp commpnage to pouagapne.
Dnelp let poure conuerlacpon be,*as it De-
commeth the Gofpell aitei e: that whether
J come and fe pou, oz elg be abfent, J mape pet
eare of pour condicion that pe continue in one
pete, and (one foule, ppg Se ap We do,
tomapntapne the fapth of the Gotpell, andin
notbpng fear ngpour aduetlarpes, tbprhe is
tothe acaufe of perdpcpon, bi.tto pou offal-
~ uacpon and that of God :foz Duto pou itis
gpuen fo: Chit that not onlp pe Hulde beleue
onbpm: but allo that pe thulde Cuffre-foz bys
fake, baupngeeuen luche afpgbt. ag pe lawe in
me, and nowe beare of me.'
| @ The.tt. Chapter.
dbe erborteth them te brite and bzotherip lone and
to beware of Mrpte and bapne glo;pe. and Cog ature
enfample,belapeth Chipi betoze them,
prea dt there be therforeanp confolacpon
pe” cofo2t of loue,


IRAAN A


phe tiii a


Vie ag NEE Hees uy |
- pither beanp felowthpp of ptpzete,
S/F) (Sar pitber be anp copaflion ¢ mercp.ful:
[nomiaceatpllpemp top, Pye be lye mpnded,
hauing one loue,bepnge of one accogde,¢ Of one
mpnde,pnotbpig be done thozotve krpic ogof


bapne glozp butininekenesofinindelefenerp =
maneficme another better the him elf. * Loke *!-cc?-r.£
not pe cuerpe manonbps owne thpnges, but e?
cuerp man ontbethinges that are other mens,

Let the fame mpnode bein pou hbycp wag
in Chzitte Jelu: whyche when he was tn the
Mape of God, tho ny it not robberpe to be c=
quall MpthGod. Meuerthelefiehemadebypm -

(elfe of no reputacion,takpng on bpmethe pape
of a feruaunt,and* became phe vnto men and sieb, b.g
was foundein bps apparellas a man. e Dum-
bled bpm felfe,and became obedient vntodrath |
evienthe death ofthecrofie. Wiherfoze,qod alfo 25
bathe exalted himon hp and geuen him a name
tohpche igaboue allnames:that in xthename xegat.i.c.
of Jefugteuerpe knee thulde bow,both of thpn: Fon):
ges inbeauen and thinges in earth and thinges )
wnder the earth, and that all tonges thuld con-
feile that Jefus Cht ts the * Lozde, onto the xactes.tt¢
porie of god f tather. Filperfoze, (mp dear= 1eritiib,
p beloucd)as pebaucalwapegobeped not whe
J twas pefente onlp, but nowe muche moze in
mpne abfence ceuen fo wozke onte poure owne |
faluacpou wth feave and tremblpnge.* $02 iË itoz ittd
18 God wppche wozketh inpou,bothe the wpll
and alfo tbe Dede euen of good wpll.
Riiat pge tbat” wpthout murmurpngeand tir.iii.b
utp
cancompla ind Dnfapned fonnes of God
vopthout rebuke, in the mpdbdes of acrobed and
peruerfe nacpon: amoge whom fe that pe Hpne
asipabtes in p toozlde, boldpng falt the wode
ofl Se Ainare rc Ea Danann & ff,c02.f.¢
bowe p 3 bate notrunne in vapne nether have t.cvetaui-c,
ere opm “abe offered by tpai
ec,andthoughe Ibe offered bp bponthe
neari ea t of poure fapth: 3 reiopce a
andreiopcetopthpou al. Fo? thelame caule ale
fodo perefopce,andreiopce with me.

Jtrutinthe Lorde Jelug, for toxfende TP» kaerra,
motheus ptr a pou,*that Zalto map be tiTheiib
of qood comtozte, when J knowe what cate pe
{rade in. 02 F bauctio mantbat tsfolpke min
ded fo me, which with lo pureaffeccion wil care
for pour matters. Coral otber leke thep2 owne
and not the thpnges whichare Jefus Chziltes.

Pe know the prote of bym, bow thatas atonne
wpeb the tatber, fo bathe be wpth me beftowed
His ferupce inthe Gofpell, Him therfor ed bope
tofende, alonc ag J knotwe bote it wpll qo w
me. J trut in the Lozde,that q alfo mp felt thal
come Hoztlpe. wW

But 2 fuppoled itnecellarpetofendebz0-

ther Epaphroditus Vnto pou, mp companion
inlaboure andfelotve fouldper,poure Apoftell
whyrchealfo mpppfireth bnto me at nede. Fir

be longed afterpou all, and was full ofheup-
nes, becaule that pehadve bearde Tape, that be
badde bene {pche. And no doute he as peke itt
fo much $ be was np dnto death. But god bad
mercpe on Hpm:and mron bpm onlp but on mé
alfo let 3 fhuld paue foot wpon fozow. Fle
bin pea the moze diligentlpe:p hen pe


bin.pe map retopceagapne g p Jmap be fiele
ozowsull  zAcceauc bpm thertope inthe L
i


ethat * pe mape be fuche asno man *-P et.


i E


= a.
I m aM aM Á m Im


Tye Epyre


trom. rb. HBith all qladrieffe, and * make moche of luche:
LEWE: Hecaute that Foz the toorke of Chzite he wente
fo farre thatbe twag npe Yunta deatde, andre-
arded not bis lpfe:tofulfpll that whpcbhe was
achpng on pour parte towarde me.
C Thbe.tii. Chapter.
qhe twatneth them to beware of falle teachers, whombe


lieth bogaes and enempes of Chjitjandrepzoueth mans
___ tes otonerpghteoufnes


hy W [l
il AETA J!


and. Frbid. ppfe:ag concernpnge feruentnelfe, J perfecuted
thecongregacion, ag touchpnge the rpabteoul-
nes whpcbis in the late, J was Dnrebukable.


befo2e, and accozdpnge to the marke ate)


wut onre conuerlacpon ts in beauen frome
where weloke fo plaucour, eut p Lozd Fetus


Chit whycy mål» chaunge our wple bodye, p 4-<07.rb.5
be mape make it lpke bnto bps gloztous badpe
accozdpnacto the workpnge pecbp be is able

alfo to fubdue all thpnges Yntobpm felfe F


CThe.titt. Chapter.


a ie faluteth certapne of them, erhosteth them ta be ofhoz
net conuécfacpon,anubdthanketh them becaule of the prout:
fion,thattbep made foz bpm bepnge in pzeton,


tang perfore mp Beetbeen(dearlp beloued B
A EZ e longed foz) mptope ¢crovone,focott
inucin p 1o2d pe beloned. 3 prap Euo

py Cun dias, t beleche Sintiches,p thep be of
oneaccozd inthe Lorde: Pea, and J beieche the
fapthful pock felowe, betpe the wemen whpehe
laboured with mein the Golpell,and with Cle
ment alfo, and topth other mp labour felotves
x whofenames are in the boke of lpfe.p t Re- zut.r.e
fopcesnthe Lozde alwap and agapne 4 fape re orig
iopce. Let pour foftenes be Bnoweé puto almen zg
The lorde ig cuen at Pande. 25e carefull Foz no-
thynge-butinall praper and fupplicacton lette
poure peticions be manifet pnto God ph ge
upnae oftbankes And the peace of Sod which
paficth all bnderftanupnge)kepe pour pertes &
mpndes thozotbe mt os Jefu.

SEurthermoze,b2eth2en, whatloener eg
åre true, whatioeuerthinges are boneff, what-
focuer thynges are inite, whatlocuer thpungeg
are pure , whbatfoeuer thpnges are conuenit
whatfoeuer tinges are of boneltrepoze:pt ther =
beanpe vertuc,pitbere beanpe praple,oa(octeat go a
nens )thote fame baue pe tn pourmpnbde-Whpebe `
pe baue both learned and receaued; bearde alto


$ andfencinme: thole comae do: and the God


of peace halbe topth pou. F refopce in the L0:Dd
qreatlpe tbat notoe at the late pour cares re=
nued agapne Foz mein that therin pe there al-
fo carefull, but pelacked opogtunite. J f{peake
not becaule of neceflite . Eo: 3 baue learned it
whatfoeucr etate J am,* theriopth tobe con= iiv
tente . 3 Bnowe bowe fo be love and FZ knoe
how toercede.Euerp wher and tn alt binges J
am infftucted, both to be full and to be bongrp
botbe tobaue plentpe and to fuffrenede, J cat
doall thpnaes thozowe Chik which rengbe-
nethme. Notwithfandpnge pehaue tell done
that pe bare parte with me in mp trpbulacion.
eof Phuippos knotve allo that in the be-
nnpug of the Golpel, when FZ departed fron
acedonla , no congqregacpon bare parte with
iNe,asooncernpnge qeupngand receaupng, but
Src or wben 4 was in Theflalontca,pe
nte once and aftertbarde agapne nto mp nes
ceflptpe :not that J delpze gpftes but Belpre D;
aboundaunt frute on poure parte, Reuertheleg
Yreceaucd all, and baue plentpe.¥ was enen
Iled after that Breceaucd of Epaphzoditus
the tbinges fobpche were fente from pon, an o=
poure of afivete {mel ax facrifice accepted and om, riia
pleafaunt to God. Wp God thall fupplpe all Bet, riii, c
pout nede thozo bis glozyons rpches bp Jerin er
Chzifte . Unto God g oure father be prapte fo
cuerimoze, Amë. Daluteall plaputes in mg
cfu


—__- - wo "-


To the Lollofpans.


Set. She brethren wp che ate ity me, grete
pou. All the fapntes falute pou, moofte of all
thep bbpch are of the Emperoures houlebolve
The grace of oure Lorde Jelu Chrpite be with
pouall.amen,


FEDA
C Thyps Epillle twas tozpeten from Rome bp
y €paphzoditus.


C The ECpyltleatlapnt


aulethe Apoffle tothe
P Colloifiang


CTbefp2k Chapter.
die geueth thankes bnto God for thep; Fapthe , nue and
tope, prapech Foptbep? tncreafe and themeth howe we are
the kpngoom of Sodoptapnen bp Chzik whpebisthe bead
of Che congregaron,


mene ies ofFic of Jefu cbeit
a Fara Wed ewpl of God, g brother
Ha Rae) EAE) Timotheus —- of Up0tbe
a tae La To thelapntes whpche are


miSale.tete (Ne eae at Coloffa g bzethzen ý beleue
apbaia E: | .


2 in Chit. * Grace be ynto pou
a SA any: che spd frö God our father,
wu uu nd froni the lozde Jeln chat.


TPbi..a
he


fobii ot: Eog we haueberde of pour fapth in €


| fo2 pou in beau, of whpcb bope pe perde tfoze


i ziobro pleafe * bepngefrutefull inall ood twozrkts, g


t


<%


«Sol, Ure.
bpm and fo2 bpm, and He fs befoze all chpnges,
and bp bpmall thinges baue they: bepnac.

And ¥ bets d bead of tbe bodpe, cuen ofthe Erbeta
congregacpon: beig the beapnnpng andtfpatte firo rse
begotten of the Dead, pin all thinges be mpahte
baue the prcempnence . Horit pleated p father,
that in bpm Hule all fulnes divell,and bp him
foxreconcple al thinges pnto bpm telfe,¢ to lee womatiii.o
at peace bp bim thozow the blonde of his croffe, 20t?
both thpnges in beauen and thpngesincarth.

and PEA ADER vere Lomtpme farre of satani. bos
andenempes, becaule pour mpndes tere ietin Epbe-v.a"
cuell ozkes hath he now pet reconcpled inthe soete
bodpe of bps fletihe thozot death, tomate pou
dolp and vhlamcable, an without faute mbis
owne fight;pfpecdtinue grounded and ftablpt>
fhedin the fapth,andbenot moucdatvape from
the Dope of the Gofpell, wherof pe baue hearde,
Powe that itis preached amonge all creatures
Whpche are Dnder beauen, wherof¥ Baul am xz
matea minifter. Rote iope Y* inmp lufferpn: icons
ges+fo2 pou, and fulfpll that which ig bebpnde +Eredie
of the pa liong of Chzift in mp Aee, fo? bis bo
dpes lake, tobich is athe congreqacpon, wher-
of J aim made amunifter, accozdpnae to the o2-
dinaunce of God , Mhpche osdinaunce was ges
uenme Dnto pou warde to Fulfpll the wo2de of
God,that * mitkerp tobpehe bath ben hypo fence epbeyittsb
P Wozlde began,andfence thebeqpnnyng ofge: 7n
netactons:* but notes opened to bis fapntes, + agat.ri.n
to whome God holdemake knotorn what the age
glorpous riches of thys mtfterpe ig amonge the *°9**
Gentyls, whpcherpebes is Chaitin pou , the
hope of qlozp,whons We peade, warnpnge all
men,and teachpng all met in all topfedonte, to
mate all men perfecte in Cheitte kets ble
Jallo labour and rpue etien as farrefostbas
bis frengbt wozketbinme mpabtelp.:
€ The.tt. Chapter.
Adhat greztecate Paule toke fog all congrégacpons.ie
Erhozteth chéto be Genta tt tm hpi i. to beware of falle teat
chers ¢ wozdip twpidðe, and welerp beth the faire prophetes,
S D J wolde f peknewe howe greate 4
AAA cars that 3 baue oz pou andfo: them
iq) tDat are at Laodicpa q fog ag manp
= Jasbaue not fcne mp perfone in p ich,
that thepz bertes mpabte becomforred when
thep are knpt together tuloue,andinall rpcbes
of full vnderftandpnge, foz to knowe the mp-
{terpe of God the father g of Chit, in wboare
bpdall the trealures of oploom ¢ knowledge. epbe.d.o.
* This ZF lape, let anp man Malde begple p ou


ya za
a 4,


: pA a ofmen, € after top o2bpnannces TPED D


of the wozldeand not after Cpt.


DivelietD


—


—__- - wo "-


To the Lollofpans.


Set. She brethren wp che ate ity me, grete
pou. All the fapntes falute pou, moofte of all
thep bbpch are of the Emperoures houlebolve
The grace of oure Lorde Jelu Chrpite be with
pouall.amen,


FEDA
C Thyps Epillle twas tozpeten from Rome bp
y €paphzoditus.


C The ECpyltleatlapnt


aulethe Apoffle tothe
P Colloifiang


CTbefp2k Chapter.
die geueth thankes bnto God for thep; Fapthe , nue and
tope, prapech Foptbep? tncreafe and themeth howe we are
the kpngoom of Sodoptapnen bp Chzik whpebisthe bead
of Che congregaron,


mene ies ofFic of Jefu cbeit
a Fara Wed ewpl of God, g brother
Ha Rae) EAE) Timotheus —- of Up0tbe
a tae La To thelapntes whpche are


miSale.tete (Ne eae at Coloffa g bzethzen ý beleue
apbaia E: | .


2 in Chit. * Grace be ynto pou
a SA any: che spd frö God our father,
wu uu nd froni the lozde Jeln chat.


TPbi..a
he


fobii ot: Eog we haueberde of pour fapth in €


| fo2 pou in beau, of whpcb bope pe perde tfoze


i ziobro pleafe * bepngefrutefull inall ood twozrkts, g


t


<%


«Sol, Ure.
bpm and fo2 bpm, and He fs befoze all chpnges,
and bp bpmall thinges baue they: bepnac.

And ¥ bets d bead of tbe bodpe, cuen ofthe Erbeta
congregacpon: beig the beapnnpng andtfpatte firo rse
begotten of the Dead, pin all thinges be mpahte
baue the prcempnence . Horit pleated p father,
that in bpm Hule all fulnes divell,and bp him
foxreconcple al thinges pnto bpm telfe,¢ to lee womatiii.o
at peace bp bim thozow the blonde of his croffe, 20t?
both thpnges in beauen and thpngesincarth.

and PEA ADER vere Lomtpme farre of satani. bos
andenempes, becaule pour mpndes tere ietin Epbe-v.a"
cuell ozkes hath he now pet reconcpled inthe soete
bodpe of bps fletihe thozot death, tomate pou
dolp and vhlamcable, an without faute mbis
owne fight;pfpecdtinue grounded and ftablpt>
fhedin the fapth,andbenot moucdatvape from
the Dope of the Gofpell, wherof pe baue hearde,
Powe that itis preached amonge all creatures
Whpche are Dnder beauen, wherof¥ Baul am xz
matea minifter. Rote iope Y* inmp lufferpn: icons
ges+fo2 pou, and fulfpll that which ig bebpnde +Eredie
of the pa liong of Chzift in mp Aee, fo? bis bo
dpes lake, tobich is athe congreqacpon, wher-
of J aim made amunifter, accozdpnae to the o2-
dinaunce of God , Mhpche osdinaunce was ges
uenme Dnto pou warde to Fulfpll the wo2de of
God,that * mitkerp tobpehe bath ben hypo fence epbeyittsb
P Wozlde began,andfence thebeqpnnyng ofge: 7n
netactons:* but notes opened to bis fapntes, + agat.ri.n
to whome God holdemake knotorn what the age
glorpous riches of thys mtfterpe ig amonge the *°9**
Gentyls, whpcherpebes is Chaitin pou , the
hope of qlozp,whons We peade, warnpnge all
men,and teachpng all met in all topfedonte, to
mate all men perfecte in Cheitte kets ble
Jallo labour and rpue etien as farrefostbas
bis frengbt wozketbinme mpabtelp.:
€ The.tt. Chapter.
Adhat greztecate Paule toke fog all congrégacpons.ie
Erhozteth chéto be Genta tt tm hpi i. to beware of falle teat
chers ¢ wozdip twpidðe, and welerp beth the faire prophetes,
S D J wolde f peknewe howe greate 4
AAA cars that 3 baue oz pou andfo: them
iq) tDat are at Laodicpa q fog ag manp
= Jasbaue not fcne mp perfone in p ich,
that thepz bertes mpabte becomforred when
thep are knpt together tuloue,andinall rpcbes
of full vnderftandpnge, foz to knowe the mp-
{terpe of God the father g of Chit, in wboare
bpdall the trealures of oploom ¢ knowledge. epbe.d.o.
* This ZF lape, let anp man Malde begple p ou


ya za
a 4,


: pA a ofmen, € after top o2bpnannces TPED D


of the wozldeand not after Cpt.


DivelietD


—


: a
divelleth al the fulnes of the qooddead boldely,
andpeare completin bim: which is the bead of

-  allrule and power, bp whomeallo pe ate * rir-

xomai, o, cucpled With circicifpo whichis Done without

Sate ee panes £01 ne muche as pe baue put of the fpr-

"full boop of the fe thozowe the circumcifpon

titom.vt.a thatisin Chit, imthat + peare buried with

Salsii.d. hpmtbozote baptime,in tohome pe are alfo =

© fen agapn thozowfapth, pis tezoughte bpth

Operacionof God, which rapied bim fro death.

` x Andye when pe were dead thozowe fpnne

pbe tia andtbozow the wncircumctlpon of poure fleth,
collot.c pathbe qupckened with bpm,andbath fozgeué
pealloure trefpalies,, f andbathe put outthe

bande wzptpuge that wasagaputt bs, cotap=

nedin the late wette, and that bathe be taken

out ofthe wape, ¢ bath fattened it to bis crofle,

Smee and bathe x {popled rule and power, and bathe

Zob.ri.e mabeatbetoeot them openly and bathe trtum-

ADD ouer them in bis owne perfonne.

. ©" act nomantherioze trouble pour conicpence
aboutemcate and dzpulie o} for a pece of an bo:
lp dap:02 of the new moone, 02 of the Sabboth

teb:.bij.e Dapes , * whpche are thadowes of thpnges to

andra come : but the bodp is in Chetite. Lette no man
make pou Wote at a wronge marke bp the bum

‘blenes and bolpnes of aungels , inthe thpnges

h twbpche be neuer lawe, bepngecauleles puft Yp
f © Soith bps fefpipe mynde, and poldeth not the
d bead, toberof all the bodp bp topntes g couples

{} receaueth nozplihment and ts bnet together,
and encrealeth with the tacreafpnge that com-
meth of Eod.. Wiberfore: pfpebe dead with

Batata.» CHEE from the x ozdinaunces of the wolde,
why as though pe pet lpuedin the wozlde, are
pe led With tradicponss Chouchenot, tat not,
handell not: which all perphh thozowe the perp
abule : after the commaundementes and D0-
ctepnes ofmeti. Tbpche thpnges outwardly
baue thelimtlitude of the wpldome bp tuperttt


- pon and bumblenes of mpnde,andbp burtpng:


ofthe bodpe, andin that thep Dotbhe elbe no
Wwozibpp vnto the nede therot.
priate C Che.iit. Chapter.
qr He putteth them inremembzaunce of the fpirituz
alrefurreccpon, to lap alpe all maner of cozrupte
ipupnge, to be frutfull in all gobipnes and bertut,
ano ®cweth all degrees ther: butpe,


a2 => ame IE pe be then tpien aapne topth f


bo ' edi C bapite (eke thofethpnges whpehe

wis an lare aboue , bere Chrift fiterh 5 on

S PAtherpgbt bande of God. Set poure

Esoenaoe—eaaffeccpon on beauenlp thypnges and

not onearthp thpnges . Woz peare dead, and

polire lpfe is bpd wtth Chill in God. Wibé fo-

ener Chapt whichis ourelpfe) mall thew bim

felfe,then Mall peallo appeare with-bpm in

glozpe. Fx Aoztifpe therfore poure erthpe

imembers:foznicacpon, onclennes, vnnaturall

luft euell concupitcence:¢ couctoufnes, whiche

is wozlhppryng of pooles , for tebyche thynges

| fake the wath of God bleth tocome on she dp:

ebbetta fobedpent chpldzen * amonge whome pe toal-
x kebfonityme, when pelpuedintbem.

Wut nowe put pe állo awape fr pou all {uche

thpnges:tozath,fearines, malictoulnes,curled


, — The Epyle


{peabpnge, fylthy comunicacion outeof youre
moutbe. Lpenotone toanotberfepnge that pe
baue put of the oldeman thith bps workes,and
haue*put on the newe man Dbichisrenuedin: Noma.vi.
tothe knowledge g pmage of bymthat made *°>* “i
hym,* where ts nether Gentpll noz Jewe, cit- saavin
cumcifpon no? ducircumcifpon, Barbarousoz =
Sptbhian, bond o2 fre but Coe is al inal thin
Ges. rx Ther fore ag electe of gov:bolp and be=

oued put on tender metcpe, Bpndnes ; bumble- C
nes of mpnde,mekenes,longe fuffrynge forbea
rpnge one another, and forzgeupng oneanother

fanp bauc a quatclagapnit another: as chiit
forgauc pou:enenfodo pe. Xboue all thele thin
ges put on* loue whpch is thebonbde of perfecte mat.rrii, w
neg And the peace of Godrule in pour pertes to
the whpcbe peacepeare called in one bodp. and
fe that pe be thankfull. Let the wozde of Chzit
divellinpou plentcoullp with all Mpledome.
Teach andexrhozte pour otone felues* in Pial- wr. rrrig.a
mesandbpmnes,aud (piritual oe pba ap ring fpbeb,n,
xopth grace in pour berteg to the Lozde : And
t tphatloeuer pe Do ( in torde o? Dede ) Do allin 4.<o2.F.¢
the name of the 102d Jelu geupng thankes to
God thefather bp bpm. F

x Pe wpuesg, fubmptte poure felues onto

poure owne bulbandes, asit iscomelpe inthe tpde.b.v
Logde : Pe bufbaudes, loue pour topues and be Letia


not better Duto them.* De chilbzen,cbep poure ope ora


fathers and mothers tnall thpnges, fo2 that is
well pleafpnge ontothe Lode, Pe fathers,p20
uoke tot pour childzen>*(to anger lett tber be of


a bdebierate mpnde. * Peleruauntes be obeditt epb.vi.n


unto them that are poure bodelp matters in all Tiusiis
thpnges:not toithepeferupceas men pleafers, “~ "*
but in finglenes of bert fearing God And what

foeuer pedo, do tt hertelpe, as though pedpd it

tothe 1020,and not bntoimen, knowpna,that

ofthe Lorde pe thal reccaue the retoarde of inbe
ritaunce, Fog pelerue the Lozde Chizi, Wut he

pooth fpnne:thal receaue foz bps {pnne.x Mep= i.9a.rir.e
ther ts ther anp refpect of perlonegox (wpth Gon ) act.r.c

| E The.tiit. Chapter. AA

C Be erbozteth them to be feruent in pzaper to walke tate Tohii


Ip bntothem that are not pet cometo the atviri
chrifttand faluteth them, be tue knowlege oF #3


“I pat tado nto poure feruzuntes $ a

\ pya b4| Dobpch is tuff and equall, Bnotopnge teph.vrs
AVA |) that pe alfo bauca matter inbeauen.
ERIL * Continuein paper, and toatche tpd-dt.c
in the fame with thankes geupnge, peapenge
alfofo2 vst that God mape open onto vs the
Doze of tteraunce, that we map (peake the mi i sher'y z.
fterp SF Chath (woberfo2e Jam alto in bondeg)

PJ mape vtterit, asit becometh me to fpeake

x (alke wpfelpe toward them that ate With- xephe.n,a
out,¢lofeno opoztuntte Let pourfpeatch be al


wapes wel fanozede powdzed w+ falt, that pe x tentia ,


map know, bow pe ought to anlibere enerp ma sate
_ Dfallmp bulpnes hall pe be certifped bp
Tichicus, the beloued bzother and fapthful mp
nifter ¢ felow feruauntein the £020, whome F
Dave lent wntopoufoz the famepurpoletbatbe °
mighte Bnotoe what pe Doandthat he mpgbte
comfozte poure bettes wpth one Onelimusa
faptbful and beloued bzotber:ebpcheis one of
pou


t<pb eb ig .


.


: a
divelleth al the fulnes of the qooddead boldely,
andpeare completin bim: which is the bead of

-  allrule and power, bp whomeallo pe ate * rir-

xomai, o, cucpled With circicifpo whichis Done without

Sate ee panes £01 ne muche as pe baue put of the fpr-

"full boop of the fe thozowe the circumcifpon

titom.vt.a thatisin Chit, imthat + peare buried with

Salsii.d. hpmtbozote baptime,in tohome pe are alfo =

© fen agapn thozowfapth, pis tezoughte bpth

Operacionof God, which rapied bim fro death.

` x Andye when pe were dead thozowe fpnne

pbe tia andtbozow the wncircumctlpon of poure fleth,
collot.c pathbe qupckened with bpm,andbath fozgeué
pealloure trefpalies,, f andbathe put outthe

bande wzptpuge that wasagaputt bs, cotap=

nedin the late wette, and that bathe be taken

out ofthe wape, ¢ bath fattened it to bis crofle,

Smee and bathe x {popled rule and power, and bathe

Zob.ri.e mabeatbetoeot them openly and bathe trtum-

ADD ouer them in bis owne perfonne.

. ©" act nomantherioze trouble pour conicpence
aboutemcate and dzpulie o} for a pece of an bo:
lp dap:02 of the new moone, 02 of the Sabboth

teb:.bij.e Dapes , * whpche are thadowes of thpnges to

andra come : but the bodp is in Chetite. Lette no man
make pou Wote at a wronge marke bp the bum

‘blenes and bolpnes of aungels , inthe thpnges

h twbpche be neuer lawe, bepngecauleles puft Yp
f © Soith bps fefpipe mynde, and poldeth not the
d bead, toberof all the bodp bp topntes g couples

{} receaueth nozplihment and ts bnet together,
and encrealeth with the tacreafpnge that com-
meth of Eod.. Wiberfore: pfpebe dead with

Batata.» CHEE from the x ozdinaunces of the wolde,
why as though pe pet lpuedin the wozlde, are
pe led With tradicponss Chouchenot, tat not,
handell not: which all perphh thozowe the perp
abule : after the commaundementes and D0-
ctepnes ofmeti. Tbpche thpnges outwardly
baue thelimtlitude of the wpldome bp tuperttt


- pon and bumblenes of mpnde,andbp burtpng:


ofthe bodpe, andin that thep Dotbhe elbe no
Wwozibpp vnto the nede therot.
priate C Che.iit. Chapter.
qr He putteth them inremembzaunce of the fpirituz
alrefurreccpon, to lap alpe all maner of cozrupte
ipupnge, to be frutfull in all gobipnes and bertut,
ano ®cweth all degrees ther: butpe,


a2 => ame IE pe be then tpien aapne topth f


bo ' edi C bapite (eke thofethpnges whpehe

wis an lare aboue , bere Chrift fiterh 5 on

S PAtherpgbt bande of God. Set poure

Esoenaoe—eaaffeccpon on beauenlp thypnges and

not onearthp thpnges . Woz peare dead, and

polire lpfe is bpd wtth Chill in God. Wibé fo-

ener Chapt whichis ourelpfe) mall thew bim

felfe,then Mall peallo appeare with-bpm in

glozpe. Fx Aoztifpe therfore poure erthpe

imembers:foznicacpon, onclennes, vnnaturall

luft euell concupitcence:¢ couctoufnes, whiche

is wozlhppryng of pooles , for tebyche thynges

| fake the wath of God bleth tocome on she dp:

ebbetta fobedpent chpldzen * amonge whome pe toal-
x kebfonityme, when pelpuedintbem.

Wut nowe put pe állo awape fr pou all {uche

thpnges:tozath,fearines, malictoulnes,curled


, — The Epyle


{peabpnge, fylthy comunicacion outeof youre
moutbe. Lpenotone toanotberfepnge that pe
baue put of the oldeman thith bps workes,and
haue*put on the newe man Dbichisrenuedin: Noma.vi.
tothe knowledge g pmage of bymthat made *°>* “i
hym,* where ts nether Gentpll noz Jewe, cit- saavin
cumcifpon no? ducircumcifpon, Barbarousoz =
Sptbhian, bond o2 fre but Coe is al inal thin
Ges. rx Ther fore ag electe of gov:bolp and be=

oued put on tender metcpe, Bpndnes ; bumble- C
nes of mpnde,mekenes,longe fuffrynge forbea
rpnge one another, and forzgeupng oneanother

fanp bauc a quatclagapnit another: as chiit
forgauc pou:enenfodo pe. Xboue all thele thin
ges put on* loue whpch is thebonbde of perfecte mat.rrii, w
neg And the peace of Godrule in pour pertes to
the whpcbe peacepeare called in one bodp. and
fe that pe be thankfull. Let the wozde of Chzit
divellinpou plentcoullp with all Mpledome.
Teach andexrhozte pour otone felues* in Pial- wr. rrrig.a
mesandbpmnes,aud (piritual oe pba ap ring fpbeb,n,
xopth grace in pour berteg to the Lozde : And
t tphatloeuer pe Do ( in torde o? Dede ) Do allin 4.<o2.F.¢
the name of the 102d Jelu geupng thankes to
God thefather bp bpm. F

x Pe wpuesg, fubmptte poure felues onto

poure owne bulbandes, asit iscomelpe inthe tpde.b.v
Logde : Pe bufbaudes, loue pour topues and be Letia


not better Duto them.* De chilbzen,cbep poure ope ora


fathers and mothers tnall thpnges, fo2 that is
well pleafpnge ontothe Lode, Pe fathers,p20
uoke tot pour childzen>*(to anger lett tber be of


a bdebierate mpnde. * Peleruauntes be obeditt epb.vi.n


unto them that are poure bodelp matters in all Tiusiis
thpnges:not toithepeferupceas men pleafers, “~ "*
but in finglenes of bert fearing God And what

foeuer pedo, do tt hertelpe, as though pedpd it

tothe 1020,and not bntoimen, knowpna,that

ofthe Lorde pe thal reccaue the retoarde of inbe
ritaunce, Fog pelerue the Lozde Chizi, Wut he

pooth fpnne:thal receaue foz bps {pnne.x Mep= i.9a.rir.e
ther ts ther anp refpect of perlonegox (wpth Gon ) act.r.c

| E The.tiit. Chapter. AA

C Be erbozteth them to be feruent in pzaper to walke tate Tohii


Ip bntothem that are not pet cometo the atviri
chrifttand faluteth them, be tue knowlege oF #3


“I pat tado nto poure feruzuntes $ a

\ pya b4| Dobpch is tuff and equall, Bnotopnge teph.vrs
AVA |) that pe alfo bauca matter inbeauen.
ERIL * Continuein paper, and toatche tpd-dt.c
in the fame with thankes geupnge, peapenge
alfofo2 vst that God mape open onto vs the
Doze of tteraunce, that we map (peake the mi i sher'y z.
fterp SF Chath (woberfo2e Jam alto in bondeg)

PJ mape vtterit, asit becometh me to fpeake

x (alke wpfelpe toward them that ate With- xephe.n,a
out,¢lofeno opoztuntte Let pourfpeatch be al


wapes wel fanozede powdzed w+ falt, that pe x tentia ,


map know, bow pe ought to anlibere enerp ma sate
_ Dfallmp bulpnes hall pe be certifped bp
Tichicus, the beloued bzother and fapthful mp
nifter ¢ felow feruauntein the £020, whome F
Dave lent wntopoufoz the famepurpoletbatbe °
mighte Bnotoe what pe Doandthat he mpgbte
comfozte poure bettes wpth one Onelimusa
faptbful and beloued bzotber:ebpcheis one of
pou


t<pb eb ig .


.


Act. trbit.a ip
€ peton felowe faluteth pou, and +


To the Chellalonpans.


pou. Thep thall Mewe pou of all thpnges,
cheare adopnge bere. * Artiarchus =
arcu


ġiiti iiti. b Warnabas fpiters fonne toucbhpnge wponic,


pe receaucd commaundementes . PE be come
bitoyou,teceaue bpm: and Fetus whpcheis
called Juftus,wbhpcbe are of the circumcity on.
hele onelp are mp Wwozke felowes vnto the
kpngdome of Sod which baueben butomp co-


collo.fit.a. folacpon. * Epa phras theferuaunt of Cipi,


prii and * Demas. Salutethebzetheen whpche i


doz. ta


(tobpebe is one of pou) faluteth pou, andal:
wapeslaboureth feruentlp for pou in papers,


thatpe mape Mande pecfecteand full, mall tbe


D tpyll of God. fFo2 Jbearehpmeccogde that he Fe


batbea feruent mpnde Foz pou and them tha:


are of Laodicia and them that are of Hierapo- F


lig . meare Lucas the Dbilicton qreteth pou,


are of Laoditia,and falute Ppmpbhac, and the
congregacpon, whpcbers in bpsboufe , 2nd
when the Eppitlers read of pou, make that tt
be read allo inthe conqregacpon of the Laodt-
ciang : andthat pe lpbewpfe reade the Cppitie
of Laovicia . Andlapeto Archippustake eve
tothe offyce that thoubattreceaucd tn p Lozde
that thou fulfpllit . @bhvfalutacpon bp the
pande of ne Paule: remember mp bondes the
Graceoe(otour Lore Rete cbir )be with pou. Amë
CHent frome Rome bp Tichicus
and Dnefimus.


CTdefprtte Epiftle of
S.Paule the apoftle wnto the
‘FT heflaloniang.
C The fpf cyapter
Ca ae ian od Con deceaur rye worpel Wie)


fucbe ernetn | sF
er Aul and Spluanugand Tt-
A E Bess A mothe. Cinto the congrega-
| A EA on of tbe Cheflalontans tn
pony) pen Dov thefatber,¢ inthe Lorde

mA actus Chit.
x ree x Grace ve bntopou, and
i. Loia dba! peace frome God our father,
07.1.8 PSS) and fro f Loyd Fetus Chztke.
henge Whe gene Godthankes + alwapes fog pou
ġno.ib all mabpnde mencpon of pou in oure prapers
«BMS without ceafpnge, andcall pou tarem braiice
` goltoia becawle of the toozbe of pour fapth:and laton
éthetaiit.d in * jloue, and becaute pe paue continued itt
st. zim 1 the hope + of oure Lozde Jefus Cite, inthe
regor of God ourefather. yy Wie Bnowe bze-
tizen (beloued of God )botwe that ye are electe.


4€o2 oure Gofpel came not vnto pou bes woe
onelp,tut allo bp power,and by the bolt goo,
and bp mochecettapntpe, as * pe knowe-after


experia what maner we behaucd out felues amog pou,


P,


fozpourcfakes. F Anope became folowerg
g of vgand of the Lozbereceaupnge the wozde
with muche affliccpon With tope of the bolpe
ee :fotbat pe toerean enfample toall that
beleuein S)acedonta and Achaia. Foz frome
pou foided out f wode of p Lozde,not in Wa-
cedonia andin Achaia onelp : but pourefapthe


-fobaue thep perlecufe


ol leit.


alfo whichepebauednto God,tpzedperlclfea= y
Doade inal quacters,forbat se nedet) not vs 8
tofpeake anp thing atall.sfoz thep themlelucs E
thew of pou what manerofentrpng in, we had
Dito pou and bowe pe tourned to God frome
imanes fo: toferue the lpupng and true God,
andfoztolote foz bis fonne * from Deauen, getecs.t
fobome be rapled from Death: F even Jefus;
whichdelpuereth vs fedt the Wwzathto come. +7.14.:
= €Tbe.ti. Chapter. SAIRE

Be puttech them iampnve of the godip conterfacpon
that be led amonge them (when be preached the opel


bnto them) thanbeth Hood that thep rectaue pis worde fo
frutefullp:and epculech bis abtence,


anpa VA D2 pe poure felucs( * beethzen) a

je ya knoe of oure entraunce in vnto kLEDALG
S75 Any bot that it teas not in vaine

eats but cuen after that we bad fufred


te Sa Saad
treatedat Dbilippos(aspeknotbe) then were —

foe bolde in our God, to {peake wnto pou the
Gofpell of God, tn * Byes trpupng.jEoz our *-Fotl.b
echoztacion was not to bapnge pou tocrroure,

no2z pet to Duclennes nether toag it wp ple:

but as we were alowed of God, tbat ý Colpell

{hulde be comitted nto vs:euen Co the {peake,

tot as tbep that x pleafe men, but God trpeth * oat.
oure bertes. Aether led we oure cOucrfacton at

anp time ith hatering wozdes,as pe Bnote:

nether bp oan of couetoufnes.x God is *Ptt.ta
tecoade:ttetber fought we pzapie of men nether

of pou, noz pet of enp otber, when toe mpgbte

baue ben in auctozitic.as p Apoltles of Chit,

t foe were tender sna pou,cuenasa noite
cheritheth ber chyldzen,fo were we affeccponed
toward pou,our good topll wasg to baue dealte
wnito pow not $ Golpell of God onelp: butalfo
our owne foules becaule pe tere deare vnto bs
- Pfa Devemeber bzethzen our labour, and tra- €
uaple. * $€02 welaboured dap and npabt be- acterr.¢
caute we twoldenot be chargeable onto enp of Aoi?
pou preached bito pou the Golpel of God. Pe
ave toitnefies,andfois Sod, bow polilp and tu
ftelp and onblameablp we behaucd oure (elucs
amog pou that beleued as pe knotwe, bot that
we bare {ucbeaffeccpon bntocucrp ote of pou,
aga father Doth wnto bis chplozen, erbeztpug,
confoztpng,and belechpna pou, that pe tolbde
Walke wozthp of God, whiche bath called pou
witobiskpnadome and glozpe.

4€02 thig caule thanke we Gob alfo without
ceatpnge, becanfe that when pereceaued of Ds
the too2d(wober pith pelecned to know @ od)
pereceaucd it notasthe tworde of man: but chë
agit asin dede,the wode of God, thpyche
wo2kethalfotnpouthatbeleve. F

4fo2 ye bacthzen became folowers of the con-
gregacpons of God whiche in Jetoepe are in
Chite Jelu: foz pe baue lured lpke tbpngeg
of pourckpnimen, ag the oure felues baue nis

fered of the Jewes.Ubicbeas thep kplled the D
Lode Jelug.and thepe otone Properes, een

} ! bg, + God thep pleafe
not and are contrarpe to all men and bpi-
Der that we thuldenot Meake vnto the gencpls
that they mpgbt belaucd to fulfplt (pep? ba


abefoze,andDwerex thamfullp en- actes.pbtie


Act. trbit.a ip
€ peton felowe faluteth pou, and +


To the Chellalonpans.


pou. Thep thall Mewe pou of all thpnges,
cheare adopnge bere. * Artiarchus =
arcu


ġiiti iiti. b Warnabas fpiters fonne toucbhpnge wponic,


pe receaucd commaundementes . PE be come
bitoyou,teceaue bpm: and Fetus whpcheis
called Juftus,wbhpcbe are of the circumcity on.
hele onelp are mp Wwozke felowes vnto the
kpngdome of Sod which baueben butomp co-


collo.fit.a. folacpon. * Epa phras theferuaunt of Cipi,


prii and * Demas. Salutethebzetheen whpche i


doz. ta


(tobpebe is one of pou) faluteth pou, andal:
wapeslaboureth feruentlp for pou in papers,


thatpe mape Mande pecfecteand full, mall tbe


D tpyll of God. fFo2 Jbearehpmeccogde that he Fe


batbea feruent mpnde Foz pou and them tha:


are of Laodicia and them that are of Hierapo- F


lig . meare Lucas the Dbilicton qreteth pou,


are of Laoditia,and falute Ppmpbhac, and the
congregacpon, whpcbers in bpsboufe , 2nd
when the Eppitlers read of pou, make that tt
be read allo inthe conqregacpon of the Laodt-
ciang : andthat pe lpbewpfe reade the Cppitie
of Laovicia . Andlapeto Archippustake eve
tothe offyce that thoubattreceaucd tn p Lozde
that thou fulfpllit . @bhvfalutacpon bp the
pande of ne Paule: remember mp bondes the
Graceoe(otour Lore Rete cbir )be with pou. Amë
CHent frome Rome bp Tichicus
and Dnefimus.


CTdefprtte Epiftle of
S.Paule the apoftle wnto the
‘FT heflaloniang.
C The fpf cyapter
Ca ae ian od Con deceaur rye worpel Wie)


fucbe ernetn | sF
er Aul and Spluanugand Tt-
A E Bess A mothe. Cinto the congrega-
| A EA on of tbe Cheflalontans tn
pony) pen Dov thefatber,¢ inthe Lorde

mA actus Chit.
x ree x Grace ve bntopou, and
i. Loia dba! peace frome God our father,
07.1.8 PSS) and fro f Loyd Fetus Chztke.
henge Whe gene Godthankes + alwapes fog pou
ġno.ib all mabpnde mencpon of pou in oure prapers
«BMS without ceafpnge, andcall pou tarem braiice
` goltoia becawle of the toozbe of pour fapth:and laton
éthetaiit.d in * jloue, and becaute pe paue continued itt
st. zim 1 the hope + of oure Lozde Jefus Cite, inthe
regor of God ourefather. yy Wie Bnowe bze-
tizen (beloued of God )botwe that ye are electe.


4€o2 oure Gofpel came not vnto pou bes woe
onelp,tut allo bp power,and by the bolt goo,
and bp mochecettapntpe, as * pe knowe-after


experia what maner we behaucd out felues amog pou,


P,


fozpourcfakes. F Anope became folowerg
g of vgand of the Lozbereceaupnge the wozde
with muche affliccpon With tope of the bolpe
ee :fotbat pe toerean enfample toall that
beleuein S)acedonta and Achaia. Foz frome
pou foided out f wode of p Lozde,not in Wa-
cedonia andin Achaia onelp : but pourefapthe


-fobaue thep perlecufe


ol leit.


alfo whichepebauednto God,tpzedperlclfea= y
Doade inal quacters,forbat se nedet) not vs 8
tofpeake anp thing atall.sfoz thep themlelucs E
thew of pou what manerofentrpng in, we had
Dito pou and bowe pe tourned to God frome
imanes fo: toferue the lpupng and true God,
andfoztolote foz bis fonne * from Deauen, getecs.t
fobome be rapled from Death: F even Jefus;
whichdelpuereth vs fedt the Wwzathto come. +7.14.:
= €Tbe.ti. Chapter. SAIRE

Be puttech them iampnve of the godip conterfacpon
that be led amonge them (when be preached the opel


bnto them) thanbeth Hood that thep rectaue pis worde fo
frutefullp:and epculech bis abtence,


anpa VA D2 pe poure felucs( * beethzen) a

je ya knoe of oure entraunce in vnto kLEDALG
S75 Any bot that it teas not in vaine

eats but cuen after that we bad fufred


te Sa Saad
treatedat Dbilippos(aspeknotbe) then were —

foe bolde in our God, to {peake wnto pou the
Gofpell of God, tn * Byes trpupng.jEoz our *-Fotl.b
echoztacion was not to bapnge pou tocrroure,

no2z pet to Duclennes nether toag it wp ple:

but as we were alowed of God, tbat ý Colpell

{hulde be comitted nto vs:euen Co the {peake,

tot as tbep that x pleafe men, but God trpeth * oat.
oure bertes. Aether led we oure cOucrfacton at

anp time ith hatering wozdes,as pe Bnote:

nether bp oan of couetoufnes.x God is *Ptt.ta
tecoade:ttetber fought we pzapie of men nether

of pou, noz pet of enp otber, when toe mpgbte

baue ben in auctozitic.as p Apoltles of Chit,

t foe were tender sna pou,cuenasa noite
cheritheth ber chyldzen,fo were we affeccponed
toward pou,our good topll wasg to baue dealte
wnito pow not $ Golpell of God onelp: butalfo
our owne foules becaule pe tere deare vnto bs
- Pfa Devemeber bzethzen our labour, and tra- €
uaple. * $€02 welaboured dap and npabt be- acterr.¢
caute we twoldenot be chargeable onto enp of Aoi?
pou preached bito pou the Golpel of God. Pe
ave toitnefies,andfois Sod, bow polilp and tu
ftelp and onblameablp we behaucd oure (elucs
amog pou that beleued as pe knotwe, bot that
we bare {ucbeaffeccpon bntocucrp ote of pou,
aga father Doth wnto bis chplozen, erbeztpug,
confoztpng,and belechpna pou, that pe tolbde
Walke wozthp of God, whiche bath called pou
witobiskpnadome and glozpe.

4€02 thig caule thanke we Gob alfo without
ceatpnge, becanfe that when pereceaued of Ds
the too2d(wober pith pelecned to know @ od)
pereceaucd it notasthe tworde of man: but chë
agit asin dede,the wode of God, thpyche
wo2kethalfotnpouthatbeleve. F

4fo2 ye bacthzen became folowers of the con-
gregacpons of God whiche in Jetoepe are in
Chite Jelu: foz pe baue lured lpke tbpngeg
of pourckpnimen, ag the oure felues baue nis

fered of the Jewes.Ubicbeas thep kplled the D
Lode Jelug.and thepe otone Properes, een

} ! bg, + God thep pleafe
not and are contrarpe to all men and bpi-
Der that we thuldenot Meake vnto the gencpls
that they mpgbt belaucd to fulfplt (pep? ba


abefoze,andDwerex thamfullp en- actes.pbtie


CHe Cpy tle


Eukert fpnnesalivap. ozp * fo2ath of God ig come
on them, cucnto the, vttermot. oz ag moche
bzetbzen as we are kept from pou Foz a feafon,
as concernpng the bodelp pzetence (but not in
the herte ive enfozted the moze to fe pou perlo-
nallp With great defp2e, And therfore we wold
. bauecome Yntopou bant ones and agapne:
dette i but Sathan with one bs:fo? what is oure
toz.t.c DOPeotiopeogcrotone of reioplpngs* areno

penis pe ttin tbe peefence of our Lozde Jelug Chl

at his commpng' pes, pe are our glogp and tope


i a : mapne atx Athens alonc,andfent
G, Cimothe oure beotber and mint:


ii timate ee pou, wetoldepoubefoze, that we Mulde


litt. Chapter.


ce erbozteth them to ftedfattnes,


_ comaundedDpou


ab apne ftom Foznicacion,@ that enetp one of |
ou thulde Bnowe*hotve to kepe bys Veffell in ticoz.biis
olpnes and bonoure,and not inthe lufte of èg-
cupilcence*ag do the Hethen whtche knowe not *rom.ie
Ood,thatnoma oppeelle and defraudebis b202 25
ther in bargapnpnea: becaufe thatthe Lode ig
tbe auenger ofal fuche thingeg ag te tolde pou
befo2ze,and oni typ Stoz Godhathe not called
bs vntoclenneg but Dntobolines. Faxiyether Lere
foze that defppleth,defpp fethnotman,but mod
Wwpich bath fent*bhis bolpfpzete amonge POU na -
rh Butas touchinge beotherlpe * lone > PE and.04, 5 me!
nede nottpat 3 hy he Untopou. + forpeare t-Zbe.i,s
taugbteof God to loue one another. Deeg that E
thing berelp pedo bntoal the bzthzen whprhe 172 Ftb
ave inal @acedonia.wWe befeche poubzethzen, Iona <
that peencreace mozeandmoze,etbat pe udp -
tobe qupct,¢to medle with pour owne bufines
andxto moke pth pourotone handes, ag we |
| t pe mape bebane poure fel: 22-77 |
ues honettlp totvard them that are wWptboute € i. Thri
that notbpnge be lackpng wnto pon.
e >EeJj Woldenot beethrenthat ve thuldbe |: en
hozaunte cocernpuge them whpehe are fallena
flepe,tbat pe fozotoe not ag other do, whpebe
*haueno pope. orpt we beleue,p Jelug dped, Sap. iab
€ role agapne:cuen fo themalfo whpch flepe bp
Jcus, wpll God bzpng agapne topth bum, ffoz |
thys fap te unto pon in the wozde of the Lod, S.
that we tobpcbe thall*lpuc,¢ thall remapne in ttorro.g |
ecommpnge of the Lozde, ball notcome per |
thep whpcb tlepe. Loz the Lorde hprafelfe pall |
defcende from beauen i Houte ard the 3
vopce of the* Archaungell and i oF od mat criti?
And the deadein Chettte all arplefpatte: then Donita |
we whpcbe thalllpue(euen twe whyche hall res s


mapne)palbe caughte vp wpth thé alfa inthe


clondeg,tomete the Logdeintbe aper: Any fo
{hall we euer be with P Lorde W erfoze, coma |
fozt pour lclues one another x thefetwozdeg. ie


TD entour ae: D. Chapter, mmpngeo
the 1ozd0/erbozteth themta atchezano to regard tucpe 4
peach G ads med among them, .
== "allp ofthe times andfeatons (bie $ |
| y aF A A


a
F
Pi


| (cape. Wutxpe bze- Wov.rie
thzen are not in darkenes, ti ttbat bape als okt
come Onpouasatbefe. Ve are al the chpl-
dzen of IPabt, andthe chylozen of the dape ae
ave noe of thentghe nether ofdarkenes. af

__ _ * Cherfoze let ve not ficpeas do other: 25 p
but let bg toatche,anp be fober. Eo? thep that korito |
fepe, Repe intbenpgbte: andthep p be dponken


- Atedzonkenintbenigbt, Wut let bs whichare


of the dap, be fober,xarmed w the eltt lateof °
fapthe loue,e with bope of faluaci fey an bel <pbe.bi.b
met {oz godbath not apointes veto peouoke

watb onto our felueg ut to obtapnefaluacia


bp à


CHe Cpy tle


Eukert fpnnesalivap. ozp * fo2ath of God ig come
on them, cucnto the, vttermot. oz ag moche
bzetbzen as we are kept from pou Foz a feafon,
as concernpng the bodelp pzetence (but not in
the herte ive enfozted the moze to fe pou perlo-
nallp With great defp2e, And therfore we wold
. bauecome Yntopou bant ones and agapne:
dette i but Sathan with one bs:fo? what is oure
toz.t.c DOPeotiopeogcrotone of reioplpngs* areno

penis pe ttin tbe peefence of our Lozde Jelug Chl

at his commpng' pes, pe are our glogp and tope


i a : mapne atx Athens alonc,andfent
G, Cimothe oure beotber and mint:


ii timate ee pou, wetoldepoubefoze, that we Mulde


litt. Chapter.


ce erbozteth them to ftedfattnes,


_ comaundedDpou


ab apne ftom Foznicacion,@ that enetp one of |
ou thulde Bnowe*hotve to kepe bys Veffell in ticoz.biis
olpnes and bonoure,and not inthe lufte of èg-
cupilcence*ag do the Hethen whtche knowe not *rom.ie
Ood,thatnoma oppeelle and defraudebis b202 25
ther in bargapnpnea: becaufe thatthe Lode ig
tbe auenger ofal fuche thingeg ag te tolde pou
befo2ze,and oni typ Stoz Godhathe not called
bs vntoclenneg but Dntobolines. Faxiyether Lere
foze that defppleth,defpp fethnotman,but mod
Wwpich bath fent*bhis bolpfpzete amonge POU na -
rh Butas touchinge beotherlpe * lone > PE and.04, 5 me!
nede nottpat 3 hy he Untopou. + forpeare t-Zbe.i,s
taugbteof God to loue one another. Deeg that E
thing berelp pedo bntoal the bzthzen whprhe 172 Ftb
ave inal @acedonia.wWe befeche poubzethzen, Iona <
that peencreace mozeandmoze,etbat pe udp -
tobe qupct,¢to medle with pour owne bufines
andxto moke pth pourotone handes, ag we |
| t pe mape bebane poure fel: 22-77 |
ues honettlp totvard them that are wWptboute € i. Thri
that notbpnge be lackpng wnto pon.
e >EeJj Woldenot beethrenthat ve thuldbe |: en
hozaunte cocernpuge them whpehe are fallena
flepe,tbat pe fozotoe not ag other do, whpebe
*haueno pope. orpt we beleue,p Jelug dped, Sap. iab
€ role agapne:cuen fo themalfo whpch flepe bp
Jcus, wpll God bzpng agapne topth bum, ffoz |
thys fap te unto pon in the wozde of the Lod, S.
that we tobpcbe thall*lpuc,¢ thall remapne in ttorro.g |
ecommpnge of the Lozde, ball notcome per |
thep whpcb tlepe. Loz the Lorde hprafelfe pall |
defcende from beauen i Houte ard the 3
vopce of the* Archaungell and i oF od mat criti?
And the deadein Chettte all arplefpatte: then Donita |
we whpcbe thalllpue(euen twe whyche hall res s


mapne)palbe caughte vp wpth thé alfa inthe


clondeg,tomete the Logdeintbe aper: Any fo
{hall we euer be with P Lorde W erfoze, coma |
fozt pour lclues one another x thefetwozdeg. ie


TD entour ae: D. Chapter, mmpngeo
the 1ozd0/erbozteth themta atchezano to regard tucpe 4
peach G ads med among them, .
== "allp ofthe times andfeatons (bie $ |
| y aF A A


a
F
Pi


| (cape. Wutxpe bze- Wov.rie
thzen are not in darkenes, ti ttbat bape als okt
come Onpouasatbefe. Ve are al the chpl-
dzen of IPabt, andthe chylozen of the dape ae
ave noe of thentghe nether ofdarkenes. af

__ _ * Cherfoze let ve not ficpeas do other: 25 p
but let bg toatche,anp be fober. Eo? thep that korito |
fepe, Repe intbenpgbte: andthep p be dponken


- Atedzonkenintbenigbt, Wut let bs whichare


of the dap, be fober,xarmed w the eltt lateof °
fapthe loue,e with bope of faluaci fey an bel <pbe.bi.b
met {oz godbath not apointes veto peouoke

watb onto our felueg ut to obtapnefaluacia


bp à


twe


Tothe Chellalonyans.


f.cor.be bp thename of our Lorde Fela Chit *whyche
dped fo? bS:that whether we wake oz fepe, we
{buldelpue together pth bpm.
~ Cberfo2re, comforte pour {elues together and
C copfpeenerp one anotber,eucn ag pedo. fx Wie
Puimoe Deleche pou beethzen,that pe knotee thé* whpch
ebitiio Laboureamdge poung baue the ouerlpaht of pou
inthe Lozde,and geuc pou exboztacion, that pe
baue themin bpereputacpon thozotve loue, fog
there wozkes fake and beat peace topth them.
PRUE Delpze pou( bzethz¢) warne them that
are burulp,comfozte thefeble mpnded, lpfte t
epath.b.c the tocake,be pacpent totvarde allmen.* Hct
note recompence evel foz euel puto anp ma:but
p cuer folotve that whpcbe is ood, both amonge


P ‘pnit.tia a pour felucs,¢ to al men.* Retopee eucr.+P2ape


FLurotie contpnuallp. Jn all thpnges qeue thankes. Fog
thigis the pl of God thozote Chizi Jefu to-
(cozritt s warde pou. Duche not the {pzet.* Delpilenot


peophecpenges. Cramenall thpnges, kepethat -


\Wwbpeb is good. Abitapne from alieucll appea-

aunce. The verpe God of peace fanctpfye pou,
thozowe out And J prape Godthat poure bole
1 aah lta cecal rib be Bree fo
that innotbpnge pe ma blamed tn the com:
mpnee of our Lorde Jelug Chat


" eusie x sFapebful is be tobich called pou, which wp!


» fort a
— gpheda


and.r.c alfodo tt. Hetheé,pzape fo? vs.* Grete al; bre
Peony » then wpth an bolpe byile. y charge pou ti the
ti.coz.riti c Lozde,that thps Eppitle be rede onto the bolpe


di,chet.iiia bzetbzen. * Che qrace of the Lozd Jelug Chak
be wytb pou.Amen.


ü. en
5 C The fpi Epiftle dntothe Thefalonisng
Pe AD TSP hta SITAR, i


C The ierde Epiftle of


fapnet Paule the Bpottle to
i tye tbe alonians.


C The fpett Chapter.


*
Shenae aaar -i
== Aul and Spluanus and Timo-
DS Yy theng. Unto the congregacpoi
| [SA Ny) oF the Thellalontastn Godour

Gi k Wien
| RRC ou and


2


Romai


Itom a,f.b
hilib ,


__ €topou whichare troubled, reft with vs, when
the Apes Jefus hal Hetoedypim felfe Frå beanen


Sol lrrit.


with A Angels of bis power with flampng fpze

wbpch pall rendre vengeaunce nto them that

notor not God, x andthat obepe not the Gof- nomai. t

pell of our Lozde Jelug Chzifte, *twbpeh balbe D a

punpihed wyth everlaltpngedamnacpo,from p 2°?!”

pretence of the Lozde, andfrom the glogp of bys |

pompe * when be Hall come to be glozpfped in ssat.trt.c

pslapntes,ttobecome maruelous inallthem _

that beleuc:becaule our teftimonpe that we bad

to pou, tas beleued euen the fame dap. *(C ber cotto.t.a

Foze,alfo we pzape altoapes foz pou,p oure God Pi?

wpll make pou woetbp of thyscallpng and ful

fpllall delectacpon of qocdnes and the wozcke

of fapth, with potver:that the name of ourlozde

Jelug Chattte mape be glozptped by pou,and pe

bp bpm accozbpnge to the grace of our God, and

of the Lozde Jefus Chet.
The.u.Chapter, ya

q Be Hetweth them, that the dape of the Zozde

the bepartpnge from the fapth come fpr, andt


teth them not to be dpiceaued but to Lande
ges that be hath taught them,


| caveman € befech pou(beetheen) bp the com #
ie i xf


al not come tph
erfoze be erbos
Tedfate inthe thpuz


e mpnge of our Lorde Jelu Chailt, €
fe p in that we pall aflemble pntobim
@ a tbat pebe not fodenlp moued from

ze /pourempnde,noz be troubled, neps


ther bp Cpeete,ne ther bp wozdes, noz pet bplet


come except thet comexa dDepartprgefpztte,and Dente.tr.s
fuliman be opened, the loune of perdyp: ms
cion, wbpeb ts anaduerlarpe:¢€ 1s exalted abone
all,tDatts called God,og that ig tho2ztbppped:fo
that be doth fpe*in the téple of God, boaltpnge 202. tiit
bpm felfe to be Gop. | atb, bÒ
Remember pe not that wh J thas pet with 15
pou, J tolde pou thele thpnges’ And notwe pe
nowe what witholdeth:cuen that bem abt
btteted at bys tpme.*fo2 p mpfterp of $ iqui ¢ jobstt.<
tpe dothalreadp wozke:tpl MAEA Aio a
lye Letteth,be taken oute of the wape. And then
(all that wpcked be vetered,*tobomtbe Lozde etep-ti.0
thal confume wpth tbe fpzete ofbysmouthand
{hall deltrope pth the apperaunce of bpscom:
mpnge: F euen yia whole commpnge is after
the workpnacof Sathan, woprhall ipenige po=
werxtpgnes and wonders and with al deccaua: wateru¢
blenes of ynrpabteoutnelle , amonge themrbat
perptp:becaule thep receaued not the lone of the
truth.thatthep mpgbt be faued. x Andtherfoze somate
God thall fende them Erdqedelufion, that thep ©
Mulde beleuc lpes:that ali thep mpabt be Dam=
ned-twhicd beleucd not the trutbe:but had plea
furein onepgbteoulnes.
Hut we are bounde to geae thankes alwape
to Godfo2 pou (bzethzen belowed of the Lozde)
for becaulethat God bathfrom the begpnnpnee
choten pou to faluacpon, thozowe fanctifpence
of the {pzete,and thozowebeleupng of p teuria,
wobereuntobde called pou bp oure Golpell toobs
fapnetheglozpeof our Lozde Jelu Chri, i
Pi Therfore bzethzen Lande fatte, and kepe p Da
ozdpnaunces whichpe bane learned: whether it
Were bp oure preachynge, o2bp ss ta oO
6206


twe


Tothe Chellalonyans.


f.cor.be bp thename of our Lorde Fela Chit *whyche
dped fo? bS:that whether we wake oz fepe, we
{buldelpue together pth bpm.
~ Cberfo2re, comforte pour {elues together and
C copfpeenerp one anotber,eucn ag pedo. fx Wie
Puimoe Deleche pou beethzen,that pe knotee thé* whpch
ebitiio Laboureamdge poung baue the ouerlpaht of pou
inthe Lozde,and geuc pou exboztacion, that pe
baue themin bpereputacpon thozotve loue, fog
there wozkes fake and beat peace topth them.
PRUE Delpze pou( bzethz¢) warne them that
are burulp,comfozte thefeble mpnded, lpfte t
epath.b.c the tocake,be pacpent totvarde allmen.* Hct
note recompence evel foz euel puto anp ma:but
p cuer folotve that whpcbe is ood, both amonge


P ‘pnit.tia a pour felucs,¢ to al men.* Retopee eucr.+P2ape


FLurotie contpnuallp. Jn all thpnges qeue thankes. Fog
thigis the pl of God thozote Chizi Jefu to-
(cozritt s warde pou. Duche not the {pzet.* Delpilenot


peophecpenges. Cramenall thpnges, kepethat -


\Wwbpeb is good. Abitapne from alieucll appea-

aunce. The verpe God of peace fanctpfye pou,
thozowe out And J prape Godthat poure bole
1 aah lta cecal rib be Bree fo
that innotbpnge pe ma blamed tn the com:
mpnee of our Lorde Jelug Chat


" eusie x sFapebful is be tobich called pou, which wp!


» fort a
— gpheda


and.r.c alfodo tt. Hetheé,pzape fo? vs.* Grete al; bre
Peony » then wpth an bolpe byile. y charge pou ti the
ti.coz.riti c Lozde,that thps Eppitle be rede onto the bolpe


di,chet.iiia bzetbzen. * Che qrace of the Lozd Jelug Chak
be wytb pou.Amen.


ü. en
5 C The fpi Epiftle dntothe Thefalonisng
Pe AD TSP hta SITAR, i


C The ierde Epiftle of


fapnet Paule the Bpottle to
i tye tbe alonians.


C The fpett Chapter.


*
Shenae aaar -i
== Aul and Spluanus and Timo-
DS Yy theng. Unto the congregacpoi
| [SA Ny) oF the Thellalontastn Godour

Gi k Wien
| RRC ou and


2


Romai


Itom a,f.b
hilib ,


__ €topou whichare troubled, reft with vs, when
the Apes Jefus hal Hetoedypim felfe Frå beanen


Sol lrrit.


with A Angels of bis power with flampng fpze

wbpch pall rendre vengeaunce nto them that

notor not God, x andthat obepe not the Gof- nomai. t

pell of our Lozde Jelug Chzifte, *twbpeh balbe D a

punpihed wyth everlaltpngedamnacpo,from p 2°?!”

pretence of the Lozde, andfrom the glogp of bys |

pompe * when be Hall come to be glozpfped in ssat.trt.c

pslapntes,ttobecome maruelous inallthem _

that beleuc:becaule our teftimonpe that we bad

to pou, tas beleued euen the fame dap. *(C ber cotto.t.a

Foze,alfo we pzape altoapes foz pou,p oure God Pi?

wpll make pou woetbp of thyscallpng and ful

fpllall delectacpon of qocdnes and the wozcke

of fapth, with potver:that the name of ourlozde

Jelug Chattte mape be glozptped by pou,and pe

bp bpm accozbpnge to the grace of our God, and

of the Lozde Jefus Chet.
The.u.Chapter, ya

q Be Hetweth them, that the dape of the Zozde

the bepartpnge from the fapth come fpr, andt


teth them not to be dpiceaued but to Lande
ges that be hath taught them,


| caveman € befech pou(beetheen) bp the com #
ie i xf


al not come tph
erfoze be erbos
Tedfate inthe thpuz


e mpnge of our Lorde Jelu Chailt, €
fe p in that we pall aflemble pntobim
@ a tbat pebe not fodenlp moued from

ze /pourempnde,noz be troubled, neps


ther bp Cpeete,ne ther bp wozdes, noz pet bplet


come except thet comexa dDepartprgefpztte,and Dente.tr.s
fuliman be opened, the loune of perdyp: ms
cion, wbpeb ts anaduerlarpe:¢€ 1s exalted abone
all,tDatts called God,og that ig tho2ztbppped:fo
that be doth fpe*in the téple of God, boaltpnge 202. tiit
bpm felfe to be Gop. | atb, bÒ
Remember pe not that wh J thas pet with 15
pou, J tolde pou thele thpnges’ And notwe pe
nowe what witholdeth:cuen that bem abt
btteted at bys tpme.*fo2 p mpfterp of $ iqui ¢ jobstt.<
tpe dothalreadp wozke:tpl MAEA Aio a
lye Letteth,be taken oute of the wape. And then
(all that wpcked be vetered,*tobomtbe Lozde etep-ti.0
thal confume wpth tbe fpzete ofbysmouthand
{hall deltrope pth the apperaunce of bpscom:
mpnge: F euen yia whole commpnge is after
the workpnacof Sathan, woprhall ipenige po=
werxtpgnes and wonders and with al deccaua: wateru¢
blenes of ynrpabteoutnelle , amonge themrbat
perptp:becaule thep receaued not the lone of the
truth.thatthep mpgbt be faued. x Andtherfoze somate
God thall fende them Erdqedelufion, that thep ©
Mulde beleuc lpes:that ali thep mpabt be Dam=
ned-twhicd beleucd not the trutbe:but had plea
furein onepgbteoulnes.
Hut we are bounde to geae thankes alwape
to Godfo2 pou (bzethzen belowed of the Lozde)
for becaulethat God bathfrom the begpnnpnee
choten pou to faluacpon, thozowe fanctifpence
of the {pzete,and thozowebeleupng of p teuria,
wobereuntobde called pou bp oure Golpell toobs
fapnetheglozpeof our Lozde Jelu Chri, i
Pi Therfore bzethzen Lande fatte, and kepe p Da
ozdpnaunces whichpe bane learned: whether it
Were bp oure preachynge, o2bp ss ta oO
6206


twe


Tothe Chellalonyans.


f.cor.be bp thename of our Lorde Fela Chit *whyche
dped fo? bS:that whether we wake oz fepe, we
{buldelpue together pth bpm.
~ Cberfo2re, comforte pour {elues together and
C copfpeenerp one anotber,eucn ag pedo. fx Wie
Puimoe Deleche pou beethzen,that pe knotee thé* whpch
ebitiio Laboureamdge poung baue the ouerlpaht of pou
inthe Lozde,and geuc pou exboztacion, that pe
baue themin bpereputacpon thozotve loue, fog
there wozkes fake and beat peace topth them.
PRUE Delpze pou( bzethz¢) warne them that
are burulp,comfozte thefeble mpnded, lpfte t
epath.b.c the tocake,be pacpent totvarde allmen.* Hct
note recompence evel foz euel puto anp ma:but
p cuer folotve that whpcbe is ood, both amonge


P ‘pnit.tia a pour felucs,¢ to al men.* Retopee eucr.+P2ape


FLurotie contpnuallp. Jn all thpnges qeue thankes. Fog
thigis the pl of God thozote Chizi Jefu to-
(cozritt s warde pou. Duche not the {pzet.* Delpilenot


peophecpenges. Cramenall thpnges, kepethat -


\Wwbpeb is good. Abitapne from alieucll appea-

aunce. The verpe God of peace fanctpfye pou,
thozowe out And J prape Godthat poure bole
1 aah lta cecal rib be Bree fo
that innotbpnge pe ma blamed tn the com:
mpnee of our Lorde Jelug Chat


" eusie x sFapebful is be tobich called pou, which wp!


» fort a
— gpheda


and.r.c alfodo tt. Hetheé,pzape fo? vs.* Grete al; bre
Peony » then wpth an bolpe byile. y charge pou ti the
ti.coz.riti c Lozde,that thps Eppitle be rede onto the bolpe


di,chet.iiia bzetbzen. * Che qrace of the Lozd Jelug Chak
be wytb pou.Amen.


ü. en
5 C The fpi Epiftle dntothe Thefalonisng
Pe AD TSP hta SITAR, i


C The ierde Epiftle of


fapnet Paule the Bpottle to
i tye tbe alonians.


C The fpett Chapter.


*
Shenae aaar -i
== Aul and Spluanus and Timo-
DS Yy theng. Unto the congregacpoi
| [SA Ny) oF the Thellalontastn Godour

Gi k Wien
| RRC ou and


2


Romai


Itom a,f.b
hilib ,


__ €topou whichare troubled, reft with vs, when
the Apes Jefus hal Hetoedypim felfe Frå beanen


Sol lrrit.


with A Angels of bis power with flampng fpze

wbpch pall rendre vengeaunce nto them that

notor not God, x andthat obepe not the Gof- nomai. t

pell of our Lozde Jelug Chzifte, *twbpeh balbe D a

punpihed wyth everlaltpngedamnacpo,from p 2°?!”

pretence of the Lozde, andfrom the glogp of bys |

pompe * when be Hall come to be glozpfped in ssat.trt.c

pslapntes,ttobecome maruelous inallthem _

that beleuc:becaule our teftimonpe that we bad

to pou, tas beleued euen the fame dap. *(C ber cotto.t.a

Foze,alfo we pzape altoapes foz pou,p oure God Pi?

wpll make pou woetbp of thyscallpng and ful

fpllall delectacpon of qocdnes and the wozcke

of fapth, with potver:that the name of ourlozde

Jelug Chattte mape be glozptped by pou,and pe

bp bpm accozbpnge to the grace of our God, and

of the Lozde Jefus Chet.
The.u.Chapter, ya

q Be Hetweth them, that the dape of the Zozde

the bepartpnge from the fapth come fpr, andt


teth them not to be dpiceaued but to Lande
ges that be hath taught them,


| caveman € befech pou(beetheen) bp the com #
ie i xf


al not come tph
erfoze be erbos
Tedfate inthe thpuz


e mpnge of our Lorde Jelu Chailt, €
fe p in that we pall aflemble pntobim
@ a tbat pebe not fodenlp moued from

ze /pourempnde,noz be troubled, neps


ther bp Cpeete,ne ther bp wozdes, noz pet bplet


come except thet comexa dDepartprgefpztte,and Dente.tr.s
fuliman be opened, the loune of perdyp: ms
cion, wbpeb ts anaduerlarpe:¢€ 1s exalted abone
all,tDatts called God,og that ig tho2ztbppped:fo
that be doth fpe*in the téple of God, boaltpnge 202. tiit
bpm felfe to be Gop. | atb, bÒ
Remember pe not that wh J thas pet with 15
pou, J tolde pou thele thpnges’ And notwe pe
nowe what witholdeth:cuen that bem abt
btteted at bys tpme.*fo2 p mpfterp of $ iqui ¢ jobstt.<
tpe dothalreadp wozke:tpl MAEA Aio a
lye Letteth,be taken oute of the wape. And then
(all that wpcked be vetered,*tobomtbe Lozde etep-ti.0
thal confume wpth tbe fpzete ofbysmouthand
{hall deltrope pth the apperaunce of bpscom:
mpnge: F euen yia whole commpnge is after
the workpnacof Sathan, woprhall ipenige po=
werxtpgnes and wonders and with al deccaua: wateru¢
blenes of ynrpabteoutnelle , amonge themrbat
perptp:becaule thep receaued not the lone of the
truth.thatthep mpgbt be faued. x Andtherfoze somate
God thall fende them Erdqedelufion, that thep ©
Mulde beleuc lpes:that ali thep mpabt be Dam=
ned-twhicd beleucd not the trutbe:but had plea
furein onepgbteoulnes.
Hut we are bounde to geae thankes alwape
to Godfo2 pou (bzethzen belowed of the Lozde)
for becaulethat God bathfrom the begpnnpnee
choten pou to faluacpon, thozowe fanctifpence
of the {pzete,and thozowebeleupng of p teuria,
wobereuntobde called pou bp oure Golpell toobs
fapnetheglozpeof our Lozde Jelu Chri, i
Pi Therfore bzethzen Lande fatte, and kepe p Da
ozdpnaunces whichpe bane learned: whether it
Were bp oure preachynge, o2bp ss ta oO
6206


The fyrt piffle


Lorde Jelu Chrift bym felfe, and God and oure
father(wbpch bath loued vg, and bathegeut vs
euerlattpnae confolacpon, and good bope tho-
rowe grace conforte pour bertes and ftablptve
pou in all good fapenge and Dopnge.
C Tpe.iti. Chapter,

q fe detpreth them to prape Fo: tpm, thatthe Golpe! mape
pro(pere,and geucth thë warnpngeto reprouc the pork æ pe


thep wpl not labour with ther: hades $ thep for not cate,
A pe Cicehermoze, brethren prape pe 02 08,*P
re E the toozbe of Gopmape baue paflage,and


be qlozpfped,as itis alfo with pou,andp

wemap be delpuered from wnveafonable ¢ fro-

warde men. Fozrall men daue not fapth: but the

Lozde is fapthfull, whych thall Cablyihe pou,

preferuc pou frå encll. Wie Daue confpdence tho-

rowe the Lozdeto pouwarde,that pebothdo,¢

tpl do thetbpngcs thpch we commaude pou.

And the Lozde qupde poure hertes to the loue of

Godandtothe pacient waptpnge for Chet. FK

Wie requpze pou bzethzen bp the name ot

cone onee Logde Jefu Chettt-xp pe withozatwepoure

Conde Folyes from euctp bzotber, p bebaueth bpm felfe

inozinatly,and not after the inftituttó, whych

be receaucd of vg. Eor pe poure {clues kinowe,

hote pc oughte tofolowe vs. Foz we bebaucd

not out felues inogbpnatlpe amonge pou. Rep-

ther toke we bead of anp man foz nought: but

xyzougbe with laboure ¢ fiveatc npabt t dape

actes.sr. g Decaule We Wolde not be chargeable foanpe of

conire pou: not but Pp webhad auctbozpte : but to make

Laiene oure (eluesanentample vnto pou to foloiwe vs.

C Eo: when toe were pth pou, thys toe warned

~~ pouof,that pf anp woldenot toozke, the fame
{pulbe not cate.

ffo2 we baue bearde fape,that there ave fome

wobpcbe walke amonge pou tnozdpnatlpe,wo2-

kpngcatnotall, but bepnaebulpbodpes. Che

that are fuche , we commaunde and erbozte, by

oure Lozde Jelu Chek, that thep wozke wpth

qupetnes,¢ cate thers otne ge Hpfanpman


walabib benotpe werpe in welldopnge. AEranp man
D obep not out fapenge: fende vs tooze of ppm by
aletter:andxbaue nocõpanp wpth bpm, that De
(i, he.b1d tet be athamed: And count bpm not as anene-
imp but warnebpm asa bother.
‘Che verpe Lozbde of peace gene pou | raceals
wapes,by al meanes.Cbe Lozd be with pou al.
: The falutacpon otme Paule Met mpne owne
bande. Chps is thetokeninall Epptles.&®0 3
wapte.* Che grace of oure Lozde Jelug Chzitke
cepet.o.b De wpthpouall.Amen. —
sciatic CHcntfrom Athens.


Saynct Paule nto T aupen |
The pz Chapter.
@ Heerhorteth Timothe to wapte bpon bps offpce:mamelp,
Wheto tele i goo CAD baie Setar abe
to tbe fuoylbe to faur fp st telleth $ Chrite elus cament


ners.
peg Aulan Apotile of Jefus Chzitebp


ee È VAA, the commmiflis of God our faupoure

ia OS REE and Lozde Jelug Chaite, x whichis
roberta Ay e afa our hope.dinto* Timothe bys natu-
icoa C= pall fonne inthe fapth.


and ee at Lorde Zelfos Chet our Lorde.


yGtracemercp and peace frd Godonr father, 59t.


As F befought the to abpode ftpllat Epbhefus _.
(eoben 3 Departed into *<)acedonia) cut fo Do. orae
that thou commaunde Tome, that thep folowe
no traunge Doctrpne.neptber gene bede *to fä- pi- ie
bles andendles encalogpes, wbpc) brede DOU= 5 timtitia
btes moze then Godlpeedptpenge whpchets bp 25
fapthe:foz the ende of the conmmaundemente iii
*loue oute of a*pure barte, and of a = CON- {rit pb,b
fcepence and of fapth vnfapned:From the wbypch
thpnges, becaufe fome pauc ereed, thep are tut-
ned onto vapne tangelpnge,becanfe thep wolde
be doctours of plawee pet bnder (bad not what
thep {peake,nepther wherof hep affpzme.

4 We knowe, that xthe lawes good, pE roma. sird
man vie itlatefullpe: knowpnge thys,*bowep tag
the lawe ig not geuen bute a rpghete ousman,“~" " *
but vuto the Durpgbtcous and dpfobedtente,te


E the pngodlpandtofpnners.to pnbolp and vit


cleane : to murtherers of fathers, ¢ murtherers es
of mothees,tomanfiears, to * Mhoremongers: oma. id
to them that defple them flues with mantpnd:
tomanttelars:tolpars:to pertured, and pf ther
be any other thpnae that is cdtvary to the wbol-
fomne doctrpne,accozopnge tothe Golpell of the
tlozp ofthe bleed God, wbyc) Golpell ts com-
mptted Dnto me.

And Irbacke Chet Jefus our Lord whpch E
hath made me fronge:foz he counted mc true, €
put me tn offpce, where as before J Was ablat-
phemet, xand a perlecuter,andatpeuunt. Aut actes.tr.a
peta obtapned mercpe, becaule 4 bpd tgno- SoTa
raűflpthozowe bnbelefe, Meucrtbeles, P grace alate
of our Lozde was ereaopng aboundaunt wpth
faptb and loue, wbich ig in Chait Jefu. F

re This tga truclapenge(and bp all meanes
two2tby fo be receaued of vgt 7
came into the wozlde,totaue ape 13,0 the J Pee
am chefe. Qotwithfandpnge toz this caufe ob- Fobiite
tapned 3 mercp,that Jefus Thit thulde fpe
bewe onmealllonge pacpencetodeclare anen:
fample nto thé whpeh thulde beleuc on dpm vn
tocternalllpfe.o then bnto God kpnge euer-
lattpng,(mmoztal,*tutfpble, topfe onelp,be bo couc.t.c
noure and praple foz ener andeuct. Armen.

This commaundement commpt J vnto the
fonne Cimotheusaccozdpnge to the prophecp=
es, which ir tpme patt torre pzophelped of the, p


thou tnebem thuldette fFpgbt a good fpqdte , pa- o


upngefapth g good confctence-wobich fome bane

putawape from tbem, andas cõternpnae fapth ]

baue made ppptack. DE Whore nobre iS * Ip irim tie

mencug and *+Alerander, whome * 3 baue delp= t. ta

uered nto Spatban,that thep mape leame nwt 1c0;.0.s

toblafpbeme. l |
C Thet. Chapter, ris


C we erbhorteth to prape fo? all men. Be wp not hate we-
mento be ouer coftlp apparcled.noz to teache inthe congres
gacion, but to be infcplence,aridto obepe thers butbandes,


Pa Crbortetherfoze,that aboucal thyn- y
NE Fag See beavers fupplpcacpons intercet
ge) a (pons ~ and geupnge of thancbesbe . rrire
a SES padde Fog all men: * foz bpnges.anb wie
o3


r4


thit Jelug satb


al


The fyrt piffle


Lorde Jelu Chrift bym felfe, and God and oure
father(wbpch bath loued vg, and bathegeut vs
euerlattpnae confolacpon, and good bope tho-
rowe grace conforte pour bertes and ftablptve
pou in all good fapenge and Dopnge.
C Tpe.iti. Chapter,

q fe detpreth them to prape Fo: tpm, thatthe Golpe! mape
pro(pere,and geucth thë warnpngeto reprouc the pork æ pe


thep wpl not labour with ther: hades $ thep for not cate,
A pe Cicehermoze, brethren prape pe 02 08,*P
re E the toozbe of Gopmape baue paflage,and


be qlozpfped,as itis alfo with pou,andp

wemap be delpuered from wnveafonable ¢ fro-

warde men. Fozrall men daue not fapth: but the

Lozde is fapthfull, whych thall Cablyihe pou,

preferuc pou frå encll. Wie Daue confpdence tho-

rowe the Lozdeto pouwarde,that pebothdo,¢

tpl do thetbpngcs thpch we commaude pou.

And the Lozde qupde poure hertes to the loue of

Godandtothe pacient waptpnge for Chet. FK

Wie requpze pou bzethzen bp the name ot

cone onee Logde Jefu Chettt-xp pe withozatwepoure

Conde Folyes from euctp bzotber, p bebaueth bpm felfe

inozinatly,and not after the inftituttó, whych

be receaucd of vg. Eor pe poure {clues kinowe,

hote pc oughte tofolowe vs. Foz we bebaucd

not out felues inogbpnatlpe amonge pou. Rep-

ther toke we bead of anp man foz nought: but

xyzougbe with laboure ¢ fiveatc npabt t dape

actes.sr. g Decaule We Wolde not be chargeable foanpe of

conire pou: not but Pp webhad auctbozpte : but to make

Laiene oure (eluesanentample vnto pou to foloiwe vs.

C Eo: when toe were pth pou, thys toe warned

~~ pouof,that pf anp woldenot toozke, the fame
{pulbe not cate.

ffo2 we baue bearde fape,that there ave fome

wobpcbe walke amonge pou tnozdpnatlpe,wo2-

kpngcatnotall, but bepnaebulpbodpes. Che

that are fuche , we commaunde and erbozte, by

oure Lozde Jelu Chek, that thep wozke wpth

qupetnes,¢ cate thers otne ge Hpfanpman


walabib benotpe werpe in welldopnge. AEranp man
D obep not out fapenge: fende vs tooze of ppm by
aletter:andxbaue nocõpanp wpth bpm, that De
(i, he.b1d tet be athamed: And count bpm not as anene-
imp but warnebpm asa bother.
‘Che verpe Lozbde of peace gene pou | raceals
wapes,by al meanes.Cbe Lozd be with pou al.
: The falutacpon otme Paule Met mpne owne
bande. Chps is thetokeninall Epptles.&®0 3
wapte.* Che grace of oure Lozde Jelug Chzitke
cepet.o.b De wpthpouall.Amen. —
sciatic CHcntfrom Athens.


Saynct Paule nto T aupen |
The pz Chapter.
@ Heerhorteth Timothe to wapte bpon bps offpce:mamelp,
Wheto tele i goo CAD baie Setar abe
to tbe fuoylbe to faur fp st telleth $ Chrite elus cament


ners.
peg Aulan Apotile of Jefus Chzitebp


ee È VAA, the commmiflis of God our faupoure

ia OS REE and Lozde Jelug Chaite, x whichis
roberta Ay e afa our hope.dinto* Timothe bys natu-
icoa C= pall fonne inthe fapth.


and ee at Lorde Zelfos Chet our Lorde.


yGtracemercp and peace frd Godonr father, 59t.


As F befought the to abpode ftpllat Epbhefus _.
(eoben 3 Departed into *<)acedonia) cut fo Do. orae
that thou commaunde Tome, that thep folowe
no traunge Doctrpne.neptber gene bede *to fä- pi- ie
bles andendles encalogpes, wbpc) brede DOU= 5 timtitia
btes moze then Godlpeedptpenge whpchets bp 25
fapthe:foz the ende of the conmmaundemente iii
*loue oute of a*pure barte, and of a = CON- {rit pb,b
fcepence and of fapth vnfapned:From the wbypch
thpnges, becaufe fome pauc ereed, thep are tut-
ned onto vapne tangelpnge,becanfe thep wolde
be doctours of plawee pet bnder (bad not what
thep {peake,nepther wherof hep affpzme.

4 We knowe, that xthe lawes good, pE roma. sird
man vie itlatefullpe: knowpnge thys,*bowep tag
the lawe ig not geuen bute a rpghete ousman,“~" " *
but vuto the Durpgbtcous and dpfobedtente,te


E the pngodlpandtofpnners.to pnbolp and vit


cleane : to murtherers of fathers, ¢ murtherers es
of mothees,tomanfiears, to * Mhoremongers: oma. id
to them that defple them flues with mantpnd:
tomanttelars:tolpars:to pertured, and pf ther
be any other thpnae that is cdtvary to the wbol-
fomne doctrpne,accozopnge tothe Golpell of the
tlozp ofthe bleed God, wbyc) Golpell ts com-
mptted Dnto me.

And Irbacke Chet Jefus our Lord whpch E
hath made me fronge:foz he counted mc true, €
put me tn offpce, where as before J Was ablat-
phemet, xand a perlecuter,andatpeuunt. Aut actes.tr.a
peta obtapned mercpe, becaule 4 bpd tgno- SoTa
raűflpthozowe bnbelefe, Meucrtbeles, P grace alate
of our Lozde was ereaopng aboundaunt wpth
faptb and loue, wbich ig in Chait Jefu. F

re This tga truclapenge(and bp all meanes
two2tby fo be receaued of vgt 7
came into the wozlde,totaue ape 13,0 the J Pee
am chefe. Qotwithfandpnge toz this caufe ob- Fobiite
tapned 3 mercp,that Jefus Thit thulde fpe
bewe onmealllonge pacpencetodeclare anen:
fample nto thé whpeh thulde beleuc on dpm vn
tocternalllpfe.o then bnto God kpnge euer-
lattpng,(mmoztal,*tutfpble, topfe onelp,be bo couc.t.c
noure and praple foz ener andeuct. Armen.

This commaundement commpt J vnto the
fonne Cimotheusaccozdpnge to the prophecp=
es, which ir tpme patt torre pzophelped of the, p


thou tnebem thuldette fFpgbt a good fpqdte , pa- o


upngefapth g good confctence-wobich fome bane

putawape from tbem, andas cõternpnae fapth ]

baue made ppptack. DE Whore nobre iS * Ip irim tie

mencug and *+Alerander, whome * 3 baue delp= t. ta

uered nto Spatban,that thep mape leame nwt 1c0;.0.s

toblafpbeme. l |
C Thet. Chapter, ris


C we erbhorteth to prape fo? all men. Be wp not hate we-
mento be ouer coftlp apparcled.noz to teache inthe congres
gacion, but to be infcplence,aridto obepe thers butbandes,


Pa Crbortetherfoze,that aboucal thyn- y
NE Fag See beavers fupplpcacpons intercet
ge) a (pons ~ and geupnge of thancbesbe . rrire
a SES padde Fog all men: * foz bpnges.anb wie
o3


r4


thit Jelug satb


al


The fyrt piffle


Lorde Jelu Chrift bym felfe, and God and oure
father(wbpch bath loued vg, and bathegeut vs
euerlattpnae confolacpon, and good bope tho-
rowe grace conforte pour bertes and ftablptve
pou in all good fapenge and Dopnge.
C Tpe.iti. Chapter,

q fe detpreth them to prape Fo: tpm, thatthe Golpe! mape
pro(pere,and geucth thë warnpngeto reprouc the pork æ pe


thep wpl not labour with ther: hades $ thep for not cate,
A pe Cicehermoze, brethren prape pe 02 08,*P
re E the toozbe of Gopmape baue paflage,and


be qlozpfped,as itis alfo with pou,andp

wemap be delpuered from wnveafonable ¢ fro-

warde men. Fozrall men daue not fapth: but the

Lozde is fapthfull, whych thall Cablyihe pou,

preferuc pou frå encll. Wie Daue confpdence tho-

rowe the Lozdeto pouwarde,that pebothdo,¢

tpl do thetbpngcs thpch we commaude pou.

And the Lozde qupde poure hertes to the loue of

Godandtothe pacient waptpnge for Chet. FK

Wie requpze pou bzethzen bp the name ot

cone onee Logde Jefu Chettt-xp pe withozatwepoure

Conde Folyes from euctp bzotber, p bebaueth bpm felfe

inozinatly,and not after the inftituttó, whych

be receaucd of vg. Eor pe poure {clues kinowe,

hote pc oughte tofolowe vs. Foz we bebaucd

not out felues inogbpnatlpe amonge pou. Rep-

ther toke we bead of anp man foz nought: but

xyzougbe with laboure ¢ fiveatc npabt t dape

actes.sr. g Decaule We Wolde not be chargeable foanpe of

conire pou: not but Pp webhad auctbozpte : but to make

Laiene oure (eluesanentample vnto pou to foloiwe vs.

C Eo: when toe were pth pou, thys toe warned

~~ pouof,that pf anp woldenot toozke, the fame
{pulbe not cate.

ffo2 we baue bearde fape,that there ave fome

wobpcbe walke amonge pou tnozdpnatlpe,wo2-

kpngcatnotall, but bepnaebulpbodpes. Che

that are fuche , we commaunde and erbozte, by

oure Lozde Jelu Chek, that thep wozke wpth

qupetnes,¢ cate thers otne ge Hpfanpman


walabib benotpe werpe in welldopnge. AEranp man
D obep not out fapenge: fende vs tooze of ppm by
aletter:andxbaue nocõpanp wpth bpm, that De
(i, he.b1d tet be athamed: And count bpm not as anene-
imp but warnebpm asa bother.
‘Che verpe Lozbde of peace gene pou | raceals
wapes,by al meanes.Cbe Lozd be with pou al.
: The falutacpon otme Paule Met mpne owne
bande. Chps is thetokeninall Epptles.&®0 3
wapte.* Che grace of oure Lozde Jelug Chzitke
cepet.o.b De wpthpouall.Amen. —
sciatic CHcntfrom Athens.


Saynct Paule nto T aupen |
The pz Chapter.
@ Heerhorteth Timothe to wapte bpon bps offpce:mamelp,
Wheto tele i goo CAD baie Setar abe
to tbe fuoylbe to faur fp st telleth $ Chrite elus cament


ners.
peg Aulan Apotile of Jefus Chzitebp


ee È VAA, the commmiflis of God our faupoure

ia OS REE and Lozde Jelug Chaite, x whichis
roberta Ay e afa our hope.dinto* Timothe bys natu-
icoa C= pall fonne inthe fapth.


and ee at Lorde Zelfos Chet our Lorde.


yGtracemercp and peace frd Godonr father, 59t.


As F befought the to abpode ftpllat Epbhefus _.
(eoben 3 Departed into *<)acedonia) cut fo Do. orae
that thou commaunde Tome, that thep folowe
no traunge Doctrpne.neptber gene bede *to fä- pi- ie
bles andendles encalogpes, wbpc) brede DOU= 5 timtitia
btes moze then Godlpeedptpenge whpchets bp 25
fapthe:foz the ende of the conmmaundemente iii
*loue oute of a*pure barte, and of a = CON- {rit pb,b
fcepence and of fapth vnfapned:From the wbypch
thpnges, becaufe fome pauc ereed, thep are tut-
ned onto vapne tangelpnge,becanfe thep wolde
be doctours of plawee pet bnder (bad not what
thep {peake,nepther wherof hep affpzme.

4 We knowe, that xthe lawes good, pE roma. sird
man vie itlatefullpe: knowpnge thys,*bowep tag
the lawe ig not geuen bute a rpghete ousman,“~" " *
but vuto the Durpgbtcous and dpfobedtente,te


E the pngodlpandtofpnners.to pnbolp and vit


cleane : to murtherers of fathers, ¢ murtherers es
of mothees,tomanfiears, to * Mhoremongers: oma. id
to them that defple them flues with mantpnd:
tomanttelars:tolpars:to pertured, and pf ther
be any other thpnae that is cdtvary to the wbol-
fomne doctrpne,accozopnge tothe Golpell of the
tlozp ofthe bleed God, wbyc) Golpell ts com-
mptted Dnto me.

And Irbacke Chet Jefus our Lord whpch E
hath made me fronge:foz he counted mc true, €
put me tn offpce, where as before J Was ablat-
phemet, xand a perlecuter,andatpeuunt. Aut actes.tr.a
peta obtapned mercpe, becaule 4 bpd tgno- SoTa
raűflpthozowe bnbelefe, Meucrtbeles, P grace alate
of our Lozde was ereaopng aboundaunt wpth
faptb and loue, wbich ig in Chait Jefu. F

re This tga truclapenge(and bp all meanes
two2tby fo be receaued of vgt 7
came into the wozlde,totaue ape 13,0 the J Pee
am chefe. Qotwithfandpnge toz this caufe ob- Fobiite
tapned 3 mercp,that Jefus Thit thulde fpe
bewe onmealllonge pacpencetodeclare anen:
fample nto thé whpeh thulde beleuc on dpm vn
tocternalllpfe.o then bnto God kpnge euer-
lattpng,(mmoztal,*tutfpble, topfe onelp,be bo couc.t.c
noure and praple foz ener andeuct. Armen.

This commaundement commpt J vnto the
fonne Cimotheusaccozdpnge to the prophecp=
es, which ir tpme patt torre pzophelped of the, p


thou tnebem thuldette fFpgbt a good fpqdte , pa- o


upngefapth g good confctence-wobich fome bane

putawape from tbem, andas cõternpnae fapth ]

baue made ppptack. DE Whore nobre iS * Ip irim tie

mencug and *+Alerander, whome * 3 baue delp= t. ta

uered nto Spatban,that thep mape leame nwt 1c0;.0.s

toblafpbeme. l |
C Thet. Chapter, ris


C we erbhorteth to prape fo? all men. Be wp not hate we-
mento be ouer coftlp apparcled.noz to teache inthe congres
gacion, but to be infcplence,aridto obepe thers butbandes,


Pa Crbortetherfoze,that aboucal thyn- y
NE Fag See beavers fupplpcacpons intercet
ge) a (pons ~ and geupnge of thancbesbe . rrire
a SES padde Fog all men: * foz bpnges.anb wie
o3


r4


thit Jelug satb


al


SESE —— =
%
4


a


To TCimothje.


and for all that áreinaucthozptie fat we map

Ipue aquyete ¢ peaceable lpfe,wyptb all Godlp-

neg andhonettp. Eor pts good and accepted in

tpe {pabtof God our faupoure, which wyl paur

 _ allmétobefauecd,and to come Vntothe know-
Job.roit.a ledge of the trueth. soz there is x one God, and
+beb.tr< onetmedpatoz.bettocne Oodandman, euen the
ee" man Chpt Jefus wbich gaue ppm felfe arai-
Come foz all men,p it hulde be tetpfped at bys
tyme, *wbereunto Jam ozdapned a preacher g
an Apofle. J tel the truthin Chzitandlpenot:


azoma,{.4
andrie


MEA mic. bepnge the teacher ofthe Gentples wrth fapth


and Gerptic. hk ait lizi
25 — Jwplltherfoze that the men*prape euerpe

goyr. iiig pobere lpftpng vp pure hades wpthout wari
D} Doubtpng
thepavape them felucsin comlpeapparell pth
(hamefattnes and dpicrete bebaucoure, not w
Dropd2ed beare.ether- golde oz pearles, oz coftlp
arape:but as bectimeth woemen, $ profelle yod
a coprite pnelle thozotve good workes. * Let the woma
deatne infplence wpthal (ubsectio.26nt 3 {ufre
nota woman to teache nether to plurpe aucthu
'  rpteouerthe man-but to be in ipee. flor 4da

was fp2ite fourmed,¢ thé Cue. Ad

not Deceaued, but the womi tas Deceaued, and
twas {ubdued tothetranf{greflion. Notwptbhita:
dpnae thozotve bearpnae of chyldzen the thalbe


_ Ipnes,topth opicrecpor.

cwbat seen Coen preat ought to be.

cThe propertpes alfe requpzed in a Deacon of mpnp ter.
ms Dpsis atrucfapenge: Praman de-
Rae] ER (pec tbe offpce of a poppe, bede-
a P7—<(p2etbh anbonette wozke. a pop
KO A therfore muft be blameles ; tbe bul=
= abandeof one pte, dplpgent, tober,
dpferete,a keper of hofprtalpte : apte to teache:
not qeu€é to ouer mue wpne, no fpghter.not gre
ut gentell,abbozrpnge Epoh:
tpnge, abbozrpnge couctoutnes,one that ruleth


aictes.bf.a.


nether aredy of fplebp lucre:but boldpngep mp-
fterpe of ti y
tet them Epatt be pzoued,g thenletthe mpnytter
fo that noman be abletorepzoue them.

Euen fo muf their pues be honeff, not euel
{peakers:but foberandfapthfull inal thpnges


Actthedeaconsbe thehulbandes of one wyfe, p=
and {uche agrule thepz chpldzen well, andthep? |e Bs


gaat trop Stone houtholdes.JEog*tep that mpnp ter wel


get them felucs a good degre € great Ipbertp in [Sux


the fapth,wbhpebisin Chzit jelu.
C. Thel thinges wipte J vnto the teuflpng to
come (hoztlp wnto the:-butand pe J tatye longe


e.Lpketopic alfothe wemen, that |


damallo wag |


faucd, pi tbep contpnucinfapth and louc,andho s


SEOUL TY,
that tben tbou mapt pet baue bnowledge, bow
thou ougbteft to bebane thp felfein the bonte of
God, twhpchets the congregacion ofthe lpupnge
God,the ppller ¢ grounde of truthe. And wpth-
outdoubte great ts thatmpfterp of Godlpnes:
* God was thetoed tn the AeH, was tuflpipedin + zp.
the fpzete was lene amonge theaungels , was
preached bnto the Gentples , was belened on tn
the wozlde,and receaued wpin glozpe.
-~ CThe.iit. Chapter. .
Che propbherpeth ofthe latter dapesjand erhorteth
Fem te be bpipgente inrcappnge of the halpe


aay Ie (pecte(peake


==


ood doctepne , wbhpeh thou bafte contpnuailpe
folotwed ut R


wpues fables, Witus.tiie
rercpletbp lelferather onto govlpnes.ff02 25

+hodelp exereple p2ofpteth lptell:but godlpnes Lotia

ig profptable bnto al thpnges.as a thpng whi-

che bathe promples of thelpfe that is notwe and

ofthe Ipfe to come. Thpgis alurelapenge,and

bpallmeaneg Wozthp tobe alotoed. For ther-

foze we both laboure and fuffre rebuke, becaule

we bauea ttedfalk boope in the lpupnge God,

tobpcbe ts the fancoureof all men, {pecpallpe of

thofe that belene. Such thpnges commaunde g

teache.x Letno mandelpple thp pouthe * but be witus.tre.

Ynto them that beleue an enfample,tn toed, in tius

chuerlactd,in Lone,tnfprete.infatth, mpurenes. i Timir
Cpl Jcome,qeue attenDauncetoreadpnge, €

to erboztacion,todoctrpne.Delpple not p gptte

that tg tn the, wbich was qeuen the thozotwe p20

phecpe,wpth the lapeng* on of handes bp p aus actes.v1.b

cthozite ot pzefthode. Chelethpnageserercple, g bt-c.rita

geuethp felfe bntothem,p it mape be fene howe peal D

thou pzofptett in all thpnges. Cake pede Dito .zimt. b

thy felfe,and yntolearnpnae,¢ continue therin.

fto2 pf thou Walt lo do, thou Walt fauc thp felfe

and them that beare tpe.

-= CThev. Chapter. _

€_Heteacheth bpm bowe be hall pebaué bpmtelfe
in rebukpnge ofall Degrees. an ober concernpng

| iep ae


may Ebuke notan elder, rpqgozoullpexbut X


d ps Saccboete bpm as afather: the ponger Levit sito
3 D Saaiinen,as bzetbzen' the elder weinen, ag
fumes) motl ers: the pengeras (piers, wpeh
al putrenes. Honoure wypddoiwes, whpch aretrue
wpddowes. Pfany topoowes baug chplazen 07
neuctocs, let thé, learne fp2tt to ruleiebey2 owne
Rh tt honles


— m S


SESE —— =
%
4


a


To TCimothje.


and for all that áreinaucthozptie fat we map

Ipue aquyete ¢ peaceable lpfe,wyptb all Godlp-

neg andhonettp. Eor pts good and accepted in

tpe {pabtof God our faupoure, which wyl paur

 _ allmétobefauecd,and to come Vntothe know-
Job.roit.a ledge of the trueth. soz there is x one God, and
+beb.tr< onetmedpatoz.bettocne Oodandman, euen the
ee" man Chpt Jefus wbich gaue ppm felfe arai-
Come foz all men,p it hulde be tetpfped at bys
tyme, *wbereunto Jam ozdapned a preacher g
an Apofle. J tel the truthin Chzitandlpenot:


azoma,{.4
andrie


MEA mic. bepnge the teacher ofthe Gentples wrth fapth


and Gerptic. hk ait lizi
25 — Jwplltherfoze that the men*prape euerpe

goyr. iiig pobere lpftpng vp pure hades wpthout wari
D} Doubtpng
thepavape them felucsin comlpeapparell pth
(hamefattnes and dpicrete bebaucoure, not w
Dropd2ed beare.ether- golde oz pearles, oz coftlp
arape:but as bectimeth woemen, $ profelle yod
a coprite pnelle thozotve good workes. * Let the woma
deatne infplence wpthal (ubsectio.26nt 3 {ufre
nota woman to teache nether to plurpe aucthu
'  rpteouerthe man-but to be in ipee. flor 4da

was fp2ite fourmed,¢ thé Cue. Ad

not Deceaued, but the womi tas Deceaued, and
twas {ubdued tothetranf{greflion. Notwptbhita:
dpnae thozotve bearpnae of chyldzen the thalbe


_ Ipnes,topth opicrecpor.

cwbat seen Coen preat ought to be.

cThe propertpes alfe requpzed in a Deacon of mpnp ter.
ms Dpsis atrucfapenge: Praman de-
Rae] ER (pec tbe offpce of a poppe, bede-
a P7—<(p2etbh anbonette wozke. a pop
KO A therfore muft be blameles ; tbe bul=
= abandeof one pte, dplpgent, tober,
dpferete,a keper of hofprtalpte : apte to teache:
not qeu€é to ouer mue wpne, no fpghter.not gre
ut gentell,abbozrpnge Epoh:
tpnge, abbozrpnge couctoutnes,one that ruleth


aictes.bf.a.


nether aredy of fplebp lucre:but boldpngep mp-
fterpe of ti y
tet them Epatt be pzoued,g thenletthe mpnytter
fo that noman be abletorepzoue them.

Euen fo muf their pues be honeff, not euel
{peakers:but foberandfapthfull inal thpnges


Actthedeaconsbe thehulbandes of one wyfe, p=
and {uche agrule thepz chpldzen well, andthep? |e Bs


gaat trop Stone houtholdes.JEog*tep that mpnp ter wel


get them felucs a good degre € great Ipbertp in [Sux


the fapth,wbhpebisin Chzit jelu.
C. Thel thinges wipte J vnto the teuflpng to
come (hoztlp wnto the:-butand pe J tatye longe


e.Lpketopic alfothe wemen, that |


damallo wag |


faucd, pi tbep contpnucinfapth and louc,andho s


SEOUL TY,
that tben tbou mapt pet baue bnowledge, bow
thou ougbteft to bebane thp felfein the bonte of
God, twhpchets the congregacion ofthe lpupnge
God,the ppller ¢ grounde of truthe. And wpth-
outdoubte great ts thatmpfterp of Godlpnes:
* God was thetoed tn the AeH, was tuflpipedin + zp.
the fpzete was lene amonge theaungels , was
preached bnto the Gentples , was belened on tn
the wozlde,and receaued wpin glozpe.
-~ CThe.iit. Chapter. .
Che propbherpeth ofthe latter dapesjand erhorteth
Fem te be bpipgente inrcappnge of the halpe


aay Ie (pecte(peake


==


ood doctepne , wbhpeh thou bafte contpnuailpe
folotwed ut R


wpues fables, Witus.tiie
rercpletbp lelferather onto govlpnes.ff02 25

+hodelp exereple p2ofpteth lptell:but godlpnes Lotia

ig profptable bnto al thpnges.as a thpng whi-

che bathe promples of thelpfe that is notwe and

ofthe Ipfe to come. Thpgis alurelapenge,and

bpallmeaneg Wozthp tobe alotoed. For ther-

foze we both laboure and fuffre rebuke, becaule

we bauea ttedfalk boope in the lpupnge God,

tobpcbe ts the fancoureof all men, {pecpallpe of

thofe that belene. Such thpnges commaunde g

teache.x Letno mandelpple thp pouthe * but be witus.tre.

Ynto them that beleue an enfample,tn toed, in tius

chuerlactd,in Lone,tnfprete.infatth, mpurenes. i Timir
Cpl Jcome,qeue attenDauncetoreadpnge, €

to erboztacion,todoctrpne.Delpple not p gptte

that tg tn the, wbich was qeuen the thozotwe p20

phecpe,wpth the lapeng* on of handes bp p aus actes.v1.b

cthozite ot pzefthode. Chelethpnageserercple, g bt-c.rita

geuethp felfe bntothem,p it mape be fene howe peal D

thou pzofptett in all thpnges. Cake pede Dito .zimt. b

thy felfe,and yntolearnpnae,¢ continue therin.

fto2 pf thou Walt lo do, thou Walt fauc thp felfe

and them that beare tpe.

-= CThev. Chapter. _

€_Heteacheth bpm bowe be hall pebaué bpmtelfe
in rebukpnge ofall Degrees. an ober concernpng

| iep ae


may Ebuke notan elder, rpqgozoullpexbut X


d ps Saccboete bpm as afather: the ponger Levit sito
3 D Saaiinen,as bzetbzen' the elder weinen, ag
fumes) motl ers: the pengeras (piers, wpeh
al putrenes. Honoure wypddoiwes, whpch aretrue
wpddowes. Pfany topoowes baug chplazen 07
neuctocs, let thé, learne fp2tt to ruleiebey2 owne
Rh tt honles


— m S


The fyrk Eprtle


recte.ig.b.¢ Houles godlpxand torecompente thep: clders,
Joz that is good and acceptable before God.
Sbethatisa truc*wypddowe and frendles put
teth Der teuit in God,andcontpnucth infupplp-
cations and papers npght and dape.Wutihe ý
lpuctbin pleafure,is Deade,cucnprtalpue. And
thele rbpnacscémanunde,p thep maye te wpth=
outerebulte. Wut pfanpe proupde not for her
owne andfpecpallp foz rhenvof ber boutholde)
the fame Dathedenped the fapthe, and ts wozie
thenan infpdell. sae |
Letno topodowe be chofen nder thre froze
peare olde,¢fachea oticas was the topfe of one
man, and ell reported of men, ingot wakes
gereis pi(pehane broughte wp chpldzen, * pf the baue


Gites. Fe


Loc riy.b Lodged ftraungers,pfibebane wathed the fapn-


ube tte


25


Romie ctestete,pithbepane mpmired vutothe wbpche —


Deb, rita wove in aouer(ptic.pf he bauc bene contpnual-
lp geuen Dutoallimaner of qood wozckeg. Che
ponger bpddowers refule. jfo2r when thep haue
begontoware wantoragapnte Chzpite tbep
wpll marpe,baupnge bamnacpon, becaule thep

. haue cat awap thep2 tp2ttfapth. andalfothep
_learne to gofrom boufe to poate pole: not pole
onelp-butalf{otatiers ¢bulpbodpes,fpeakpnge
tbpnges whpch are not comip. |

Lcoz.vi.h ad wPlithertoze that the ponger toenen*ina

« ty,tobcare chpldzen, to gupde the boule gueur
none occafponto the aduerfarpe tolpeate encll.
o many of them are altcadpe turned backe, t
are cone after Sathan.aAnd pfanp man o: ho
man that beleucth paue wpodowes, let the mp=
nyter wnfothem,and let not the congregacpon
becharged:that there mape be fuffpcient foz thé
thatarcwpddotwesindede, = |

Thecldecs P rule welare worthy of double

boncure,moott Cpecpallp thep whyche laboure
tuthe wozdeand Segoe fo? the ferppture

Seu.rro.b fapth,xtbou Halt not motell pmouthe of p ore

tale ird chat treadeth out pcozne. And * thelabourerts

BLE sorehp of bpsrcwvarde. Agapnite anelocr,re-
Deusic.n Cave noneacculacpon: but* ynder tivo o2 thee
¥ witnefics. Them p fpnnerebutke openlp,thato-=
theralfo mape feare. J teftifpe before God, the
Lorde Jefus Chinta che elect atiqels.that p ob:
ferue thele thynges without dafipnefle of udge
putro Ment, Donothing parciallp.* Lap hades {ove:
actebi t lp on noma, nether ve partaker of other més Cin
rig. nes:hepe thy elf pure. Dpnke no lenger water
itm tid but pica lptle wpne fo: tbp tomackeg lake,
uzi © thpneoftendpleafes. Dome memes fpnneg are
ope befoze bande ¢ go befoze Wntotubgement : 4
fome mens fpnnegfolowe after. Lpketepieallo
good wozkesaremanpfelt before bande , ethep

that are otherwpfe,can not be bpd.

€ The. vi.Chapter.

The dewtpe of (eruauntes coward ther: mafters. Agape


fuch as ate not fatiffped pth the ozo of Bod, Agapn
couctoufner.d goob leon fo rpch men, see geet


itos. bie i wy VSI i
(cor. tte P DES
i i AT


Vaz


ithp of all bonoure „that the name of
si, b L= A GoD bps doctrpne benot euell fpo-
Leedi Ken of. Detdattbep whpchbhaue beleapng ma-
‘fters,defpple them not becaulethe p are baethzé:
but rather do ferupee,foz ag muche as thep are


Ct as manp*feruatitesasare bnder
the pocke,countethep2 matters woz: -


beleupng sbelouede¢ partakers of the beitefpte.
` Cpelethpngesteache t exbozte.*Pfany må Salata 7
folotwe other Doctrine,and enclpne not dnto the |
Dholfome wodes of our Loge Felu Cite, %
tothe doctrpne whpcb is accozdpngeto qodlp- |
ncs beis pufte bp, andbnotocthnotppnge-but `
Malteth bps beapnes about queftions *¢ arpe irona, |
of too2zbes, wheroffprpnge enupe.ttrpte, ralpn="
geg euellfurmpipnges, vapne dpfputacpon of
iment that bauc cozrupte mpndes , andthat * are
robbed of thetructh: which thynbe,thatluccets |
godlpnes.Jerdtbemtbatareluche feparatetby -5AN
elfe.Godipnes ts great rpches, * pfa ma be CO Hen. rita
tent wptb that be bathe. * Eor we brougdte no= tio.»
thpnae tntothe woglde, nepther mape Wecarpe SS >
anp thpnge out. ; Hi a
Wut when wepaue foodeand rapmente we
muft ther with be content. Thep that wilberich
fall into remptacyon € laates cw ot chenenelt) ant & |
intomanpe Faolptbe € nopfome luftes , wbhpche
datne meri into pecdtcio,edeltruction.sFo2 0;
nictoulnes-ofmonep ts the rote of al cucl: whictk t
whple fome luted after thep erred from p fapth
andtangleo them felucs pth many fozowes.
Wat thou man of Goo, Aye fuche thpnges. Fo-
lotverpgiteouines,godlpnes,fapth,loue,pacp=
ence, ncabenes. sepgbt the good typghet of fapth.
Lape bande on eternal lyfe, whereunto thou art
alfo called,and Daft pzofefled a qood pactelipon
befoze manp wptnenesg. iun .
Ageue the chargein plpght of God,*whiche C
quyckenetial thinges,and befoze Felu Chite TF
(which Duder Pocius Pplate titnetled a‘qood s
wptnefpnge) that thon kepe the commatndes-
ment and be Wwpthbout {porte and wnrebukeable
pntpl the appearing of our Lozde Felus Chak ,
xwbpeh appearpnag (tn bigtime )be ball thewe, se g"
tbat ts bleiled andmyrgbtpy onelp.bpngeofkpn= `
qeg and Lozde of Lordes, wbpehe onelpe bathe
immoztalpte,and Divelleth in the lpahtthatno
man canatiapne:* wponi no man bath iene, ne: Errio |
ther can fe, onto whom be bonoure and tule euer 2090-4-¢
laftpnge. Amen. (Jobi b
Cparge then? twobhich are rpche inthps wode D
that thep benot bpe minded, nor*truft th wneer: Matb, bie
tapnerpches,but tn thelpupnge Gor tobpebe terrre
geneth bs aboundauntlpe alltbpngces to eniope
thé) that thep do qo ob workeg:thatthep derea-
dpe to geue and glad todpirphute*lapenge yp Math.oi.¢
in ooze fo? them felues a good foundacpona- °
gapni the tpmetocome,that thep map obtatne
Gis AS |
D Timothe fave that tobiche is geuen the to
Kepc,and auopde Dugoofllp vanities of bopees
and chats fl be {cpence,falfipe fo called:
wohpch tcpence whple Come profeflerthep
erred as concernpnge the fapth. mF
—- Grace be with the.
amen.


ESLL.


e3, : on


C€Scntfrom Laodicta,wbpeb Í
pe cpeteterti of hzi- f
- gia Pacaciana,

l C The


+ S


- to Timotye.
The feconde Cptitieat lea


the Bpoftlefapnt Paule unto
Timothe.


EC Thefpsk Chapter.
qrPaule erhorteth Timothe to Medfatnete and pacience tre
_pefecution,# Co continut in the bostrine that bebabdtaught
‘bpm, 2 commendacion of Dnetiphozus.


cae apt of God which ts in the,xbp the putting on


¢pbe.tit.a


ritus.tit.b Gov, whpey
2pbets 4 Tp cailing.not accozdpng to our dedig but zeco?
òpni tobis owne pur
greuc vs thozow CHi |
beqane) but is now declared openly bp the ap-
econ. thy peacpnge of our fautoute Jefu Chal, xwbpcde
Debz ii. d hath putawape death, g hath bzougbtlpfe and
immożtalite onto lpg bte thozotve the Gofpell:
amala yoperunto J am appointed a pzeacher g Apo-
andi y Mle andateacher ofthe,
caute J allo lufre thele thpuges: Prencrtbelefle,
¥ ‘yamnotatpamed. Wo3 i
that becin whome J ave put mp trutte)is able
to kepe that wbich 3 baue commpttcd fo bis ka
ppnzeagapntl that Dape.
w xc that thou baue p enfample of f bolfom
LZiiiti.d yyordes, Which P balk beroe of me wopth fapthe


al. Epenve louethat igin Chuil Jefu. That. good thynge


wbich was comptted tothp Keppnge, bold fat
thozowe the boly goot, tebpch dwelleth in vs.
This ë ee show that al they which are in
Afia,betnrnedlrome:of which forte are bige
lug & Permogenes. The Lord spur inercp bnto
‘the poutbolde of Dnuelpphosus Foz be oft refre-
at.o. e (ed me, xE was not atamed of mp chatue:but
Liomatb yobenbe was at Rome,be fought me out verpe
Diligentlp.€foundeme. Che Lo2d graunt tnta
him that be map Epnde mercp with p Lodat È
Dap. And in bow many thinges be minitred On
- tomeat Ephefus, thou knotocts verp wcll.
CTbe.ti.Chapter. ri
capt asin the rite Chapter fo bere beerbosteth bem fo


be cottant in trouble,to Ere manip, and abpoe faltin the
polfome boctrpne Of Our agor Jerus Chri.


JEDLI U,


Ml tyou therfore mp föne , be trge W


WE (OO in the


Gc) Gace elles. The fame compete thon


gees. Ro
Remember that Jefus Chetexofthe fede of 5


Dauid, roleagapne from death accozbpnge to ejathi.a -
- mp Gotpell, wherin 3 (ufkretroubleagancuell 7


Doer euen unto bondes. Wut the wozde of God
wasnotbounde. Gherfore*3 lufire al thyn- actarre
ges fo: theelectes fakes, that thep mpabt alfo
obtapne thefaluacton wbpchisin Cpl Jelu,

wth eternal qlezpe. Ft isa true fapingexfoz pf nom,bi.b
we beDeade wpth bpm, we thal alle Ipue wpth

bym. * PE we be pactent, toe thalallo raygue som.viti.c
wopth bym. * Pf we denpe bym, De allo Wall Bee gute. ri.s
npe Ys. PE webeleue not, *pet abpdeth be fapth- trom.tii.a
full. e cannot denpe bym felfe. Df thefethpna 246s.
eS put them in remembzaunce,and teftifpe bea
ope the Lozd, that thep Folote no contenctous
woz2des: WHpch arero no p2otpte, but to the per
uertpnac of the hearers.

Study to thew thp felfelaudable vito God, a

a workman pnedeth notte beatbamed ppitrp- Too
butpnge the wozde of truth fuftlpe.*ASfO2 OH i eines
qotip vanities of vopces pafe thou ouer them ano. aay
Ftor thep topll encreale nto greater Dngodly-

nes,¢ thep2 wozdes (hal fret eu€as doth the dil-

eafeof acancre:o0f whole nombze ts + Hpmene=tTimo.i.d
us æ pbiletug, wbich (as cócernpynge the truth)

hauc erred, fapeng: that the refurreccionis paft
already,and do deltrope the fapth of fome. Wut

the fure grounde of God tandeth Epl, and bath

pig feale: «the Lozd knotweth them that are DiS Jopn.p.g
*ndleteuerpeman that calleth on the name of

Chit departe from miquitte. Motwprbitan-

Dynge * Ina great houle are not onlp veflels OF om.i.
gax, and of (pluct,but alfo of woot g of earth:

‘ome foz bonoure,andfome onto dpihonoure.

Pfa man therfore pourge bpm felfe from {ache

men, be albea velel fanctifped wuto Donoute

mete forthe nies of the Lorde and prepared bit

to all qood toozkes.

- Lukes of pouth auopode, but Folow rpabtwpl D
nes.fatth,loue,and peace, withtpem thatcalon

the Lozdwptbapure berte. * Foolphand W irimia
learned quettions put from the, knowpn „that ana.vt.o
thep do but gédze ttrpfe. Che feruant of p 1020

mufte not frrpuc : but be gentle puto all men

x apteto teache,and one thatcan fure the euel .
sopth meaknes,¢ can*xinfourme the chat refpit §='™'"
oxcthe truth) pithat God atanptpnic w yll gpue atc ga
them repentaunce , fogto was” tbe ae


and


z.


+ S


- to Timotye.
The feconde Cptitieat lea


the Bpoftlefapnt Paule unto
Timothe.


EC Thefpsk Chapter.
qrPaule erhorteth Timothe to Medfatnete and pacience tre
_pefecution,# Co continut in the bostrine that bebabdtaught
‘bpm, 2 commendacion of Dnetiphozus.


cae apt of God which ts in the,xbp the putting on


¢pbe.tit.a


ritus.tit.b Gov, whpey
2pbets 4 Tp cailing.not accozdpng to our dedig but zeco?
òpni tobis owne pur
greuc vs thozow CHi |
beqane) but is now declared openly bp the ap-
econ. thy peacpnge of our fautoute Jefu Chal, xwbpcde
Debz ii. d hath putawape death, g hath bzougbtlpfe and
immożtalite onto lpg bte thozotve the Gofpell:
amala yoperunto J am appointed a pzeacher g Apo-
andi y Mle andateacher ofthe,
caute J allo lufre thele thpuges: Prencrtbelefle,
¥ ‘yamnotatpamed. Wo3 i
that becin whome J ave put mp trutte)is able
to kepe that wbich 3 baue commpttcd fo bis ka
ppnzeagapntl that Dape.
w xc that thou baue p enfample of f bolfom
LZiiiti.d yyordes, Which P balk beroe of me wopth fapthe


al. Epenve louethat igin Chuil Jefu. That. good thynge


wbich was comptted tothp Keppnge, bold fat
thozowe the boly goot, tebpch dwelleth in vs.
This ë ee show that al they which are in
Afia,betnrnedlrome:of which forte are bige
lug & Permogenes. The Lord spur inercp bnto
‘the poutbolde of Dnuelpphosus Foz be oft refre-
at.o. e (ed me, xE was not atamed of mp chatue:but
Liomatb yobenbe was at Rome,be fought me out verpe
Diligentlp.€foundeme. Che Lo2d graunt tnta
him that be map Epnde mercp with p Lodat È
Dap. And in bow many thinges be minitred On
- tomeat Ephefus, thou knotocts verp wcll.
CTbe.ti.Chapter. ri
capt asin the rite Chapter fo bere beerbosteth bem fo


be cottant in trouble,to Ere manip, and abpoe faltin the
polfome boctrpne Of Our agor Jerus Chri.


JEDLI U,


Ml tyou therfore mp föne , be trge W


WE (OO in the


Gc) Gace elles. The fame compete thon


gees. Ro
Remember that Jefus Chetexofthe fede of 5


Dauid, roleagapne from death accozbpnge to ejathi.a -
- mp Gotpell, wherin 3 (ufkretroubleagancuell 7


Doer euen unto bondes. Wut the wozde of God
wasnotbounde. Gherfore*3 lufire al thyn- actarre
ges fo: theelectes fakes, that thep mpabt alfo
obtapne thefaluacton wbpchisin Cpl Jelu,

wth eternal qlezpe. Ft isa true fapingexfoz pf nom,bi.b
we beDeade wpth bpm, we thal alle Ipue wpth

bym. * PE we be pactent, toe thalallo raygue som.viti.c
wopth bym. * Pf we denpe bym, De allo Wall Bee gute. ri.s
npe Ys. PE webeleue not, *pet abpdeth be fapth- trom.tii.a
full. e cannot denpe bym felfe. Df thefethpna 246s.
eS put them in remembzaunce,and teftifpe bea
ope the Lozd, that thep Folote no contenctous
woz2des: WHpch arero no p2otpte, but to the per
uertpnac of the hearers.

Study to thew thp felfelaudable vito God, a

a workman pnedeth notte beatbamed ppitrp- Too
butpnge the wozde of truth fuftlpe.*ASfO2 OH i eines
qotip vanities of vopces pafe thou ouer them ano. aay
Ftor thep topll encreale nto greater Dngodly-

nes,¢ thep2 wozdes (hal fret eu€as doth the dil-

eafeof acancre:o0f whole nombze ts + Hpmene=tTimo.i.d
us æ pbiletug, wbich (as cócernpynge the truth)

hauc erred, fapeng: that the refurreccionis paft
already,and do deltrope the fapth of fome. Wut

the fure grounde of God tandeth Epl, and bath

pig feale: «the Lozd knotweth them that are DiS Jopn.p.g
*ndleteuerpeman that calleth on the name of

Chit departe from miquitte. Motwprbitan-

Dynge * Ina great houle are not onlp veflels OF om.i.
gax, and of (pluct,but alfo of woot g of earth:

‘ome foz bonoure,andfome onto dpihonoure.

Pfa man therfore pourge bpm felfe from {ache

men, be albea velel fanctifped wuto Donoute

mete forthe nies of the Lorde and prepared bit

to all qood toozkes.

- Lukes of pouth auopode, but Folow rpabtwpl D
nes.fatth,loue,and peace, withtpem thatcalon

the Lozdwptbapure berte. * Foolphand W irimia
learned quettions put from the, knowpn „that ana.vt.o
thep do but gédze ttrpfe. Che feruant of p 1020

mufte not frrpuc : but be gentle puto all men

x apteto teache,and one thatcan fure the euel .
sopth meaknes,¢ can*xinfourme the chat refpit §='™'"
oxcthe truth) pithat God atanptpnic w yll gpue atc ga
them repentaunce , fogto was” tbe ae


and


z.


+ S


- to Timotye.
The feconde Cptitieat lea


the Bpoftlefapnt Paule unto
Timothe.


EC Thefpsk Chapter.
qrPaule erhorteth Timothe to Medfatnete and pacience tre
_pefecution,# Co continut in the bostrine that bebabdtaught
‘bpm, 2 commendacion of Dnetiphozus.


cae apt of God which ts in the,xbp the putting on


¢pbe.tit.a


ritus.tit.b Gov, whpey
2pbets 4 Tp cailing.not accozdpng to our dedig but zeco?
òpni tobis owne pur
greuc vs thozow CHi |
beqane) but is now declared openly bp the ap-
econ. thy peacpnge of our fautoute Jefu Chal, xwbpcde
Debz ii. d hath putawape death, g hath bzougbtlpfe and
immożtalite onto lpg bte thozotve the Gofpell:
amala yoperunto J am appointed a pzeacher g Apo-
andi y Mle andateacher ofthe,
caute J allo lufre thele thpuges: Prencrtbelefle,
¥ ‘yamnotatpamed. Wo3 i
that becin whome J ave put mp trutte)is able
to kepe that wbich 3 baue commpttcd fo bis ka
ppnzeagapntl that Dape.
w xc that thou baue p enfample of f bolfom
LZiiiti.d yyordes, Which P balk beroe of me wopth fapthe


al. Epenve louethat igin Chuil Jefu. That. good thynge


wbich was comptted tothp Keppnge, bold fat
thozowe the boly goot, tebpch dwelleth in vs.
This ë ee show that al they which are in
Afia,betnrnedlrome:of which forte are bige
lug & Permogenes. The Lord spur inercp bnto
‘the poutbolde of Dnuelpphosus Foz be oft refre-
at.o. e (ed me, xE was not atamed of mp chatue:but
Liomatb yobenbe was at Rome,be fought me out verpe
Diligentlp.€foundeme. Che Lo2d graunt tnta
him that be map Epnde mercp with p Lodat È
Dap. And in bow many thinges be minitred On
- tomeat Ephefus, thou knotocts verp wcll.
CTbe.ti.Chapter. ri
capt asin the rite Chapter fo bere beerbosteth bem fo


be cottant in trouble,to Ere manip, and abpoe faltin the
polfome boctrpne Of Our agor Jerus Chri.


JEDLI U,


Ml tyou therfore mp föne , be trge W


WE (OO in the


Gc) Gace elles. The fame compete thon


gees. Ro
Remember that Jefus Chetexofthe fede of 5


Dauid, roleagapne from death accozbpnge to ejathi.a -
- mp Gotpell, wherin 3 (ufkretroubleagancuell 7


Doer euen unto bondes. Wut the wozde of God
wasnotbounde. Gherfore*3 lufire al thyn- actarre
ges fo: theelectes fakes, that thep mpabt alfo
obtapne thefaluacton wbpchisin Cpl Jelu,

wth eternal qlezpe. Ft isa true fapingexfoz pf nom,bi.b
we beDeade wpth bpm, we thal alle Ipue wpth

bym. * PE we be pactent, toe thalallo raygue som.viti.c
wopth bym. * Pf we denpe bym, De allo Wall Bee gute. ri.s
npe Ys. PE webeleue not, *pet abpdeth be fapth- trom.tii.a
full. e cannot denpe bym felfe. Df thefethpna 246s.
eS put them in remembzaunce,and teftifpe bea
ope the Lozd, that thep Folote no contenctous
woz2des: WHpch arero no p2otpte, but to the per
uertpnac of the hearers.

Study to thew thp felfelaudable vito God, a

a workman pnedeth notte beatbamed ppitrp- Too
butpnge the wozde of truth fuftlpe.*ASfO2 OH i eines
qotip vanities of vopces pafe thou ouer them ano. aay
Ftor thep topll encreale nto greater Dngodly-

nes,¢ thep2 wozdes (hal fret eu€as doth the dil-

eafeof acancre:o0f whole nombze ts + Hpmene=tTimo.i.d
us æ pbiletug, wbich (as cócernpynge the truth)

hauc erred, fapeng: that the refurreccionis paft
already,and do deltrope the fapth of fome. Wut

the fure grounde of God tandeth Epl, and bath

pig feale: «the Lozd knotweth them that are DiS Jopn.p.g
*ndleteuerpeman that calleth on the name of

Chit departe from miquitte. Motwprbitan-

Dynge * Ina great houle are not onlp veflels OF om.i.
gax, and of (pluct,but alfo of woot g of earth:

‘ome foz bonoure,andfome onto dpihonoure.

Pfa man therfore pourge bpm felfe from {ache

men, be albea velel fanctifped wuto Donoute

mete forthe nies of the Lorde and prepared bit

to all qood toozkes.

- Lukes of pouth auopode, but Folow rpabtwpl D
nes.fatth,loue,and peace, withtpem thatcalon

the Lozdwptbapure berte. * Foolphand W irimia
learned quettions put from the, knowpn „that ana.vt.o
thep do but gédze ttrpfe. Che feruant of p 1020

mufte not frrpuc : but be gentle puto all men

x apteto teache,and one thatcan fure the euel .
sopth meaknes,¢ can*xinfourme the chat refpit §='™'"
oxcthe truth) pithat God atanptpnic w yll gpue atc ga
them repentaunce , fogto was” tbe ae


and


z.


_andthat they mapecometotbemfeluesagaine rowlpe of an Cuangelifte,fulfpll thyneottpce
out of the fnare of the Deuell, wbpcharebolden, nto the vtmnoff.ex we cater.) xo
captpue of bpm at bps wll. és odi 7 note Peg to be offered, m the =

ti. Chanter, ne ormyp Otpartpnae isathande . aue I
abe WEE eee be At gal out fought a goodfp rhe, 3 baue fulfplled mp courte


| . Che Cpilile


E 4 Fpoceptes,Pcriccution forthe Soipell. ELi t tbe fapth. 4from béce fozth there ig ‘
corre SR Dv know, that * inthelaftedapes lapde vp foz mex a crotone of rpabteoutuetie , nn as
| temuica REN Pee Dai come PAIAS tees Stozmen Which the Lozd(thatigariabtcous indge)mart “Pe”
| bet Ga 4 Pre balbe louersofthepzownelelues.co {ewe me at the Dape:not tome onlp,but vutoall
|


Yate Uctous,boatters,proude,curtedfpea: themalfo that loue bys commypnae. Do thy dp-
kers, Difobediente tofathers and mothers, y= gence that thoumapt come {hoztlp wnte me.
thankEull,vngodlye, onipnde, trucebreakers, Stor Demasbathforlakenme, andloucth e =
falfe acculers,rpatours,fearce, defpplersofebe tbys pzelent wopld,and ig departed vnto Chel 4
i = wobpch are good, traptours,beadp,bpempnded falontca. Crefcensis gone to Galacia, Titus ee
| grebpe bppon boluptuoulnesmogethentbelo= nto Dalmacia. Dnelp Lucasis wine. ake i
l uerg of God, Daupnge afimilitudeofgodlpnes, * Parke, and bzpnge bpm wpth the, for Collie = q
45 but baue denped the power therof:and fucheab- Pzotptable ontomefoztheminiftracion. Jnd ` |
mitasi. Dozre.ffo2 oftbpsloztearetbepxwhpcheentre ‘Cicbpcus baue 3 lente to €pbhetus. Checloke i |
into boules,andbeprge bnto bondage wemen that Flefteat Troada wpth Carpus, (when ğ
laden wpthfpnne, wbpche wemenareledwpth tonnek)Dpnge wyth the, andthe bokes , but
bpucrslultes, ener learnpuge,and neuerableto aeran the parchement. Alerander the copers-
come nto theknotolege of the truth. mypthdpd me much suel:the Lorde reward pin ` |
| C x an games and Jambzes twptbhtode Bo accozdong tohps dedeg, of whom bre thou tare ol
| rav.v1i-b feg, euen iodothele allo refptthe trueth :men alo. Jeo? be bath greatly wWithtãde our Wwozdeg a f
| thep areot cozcuptempndes,andlende agcon- At mp fpr aunliwerpnge : no man aflpited »
| cernpnae thefapth: but thep ball pzenaple no Me-butallfozlokewe. J prap God, that it map
| lenger. Æo: thepzmadnes thalbe vttered pnto Notbelapdeto thep? charges: Qotwptbitan
f almen ceuenag thep2s wag, but thoubattefene Drugethe Lordafipited meand ftrengthed me,
| theerperience of mp doctrine,fathisofipupnge, tDat bp me the preachpng thulde be fulfplledto T
papau orong Cufferpnge, loue, pacience, tbe Dtmool, andtbatall the Gentpleg thulde .
erlecuciong, andafiliccions ppchebappencd beare. And F was delpuered out of the mouthe


L
i


| nto meat Antioche, at Jconium, eatLpftra: ofthe Lpon. And the Lozdethalldelpyer me fra
itta, DdPCDe pertecucions J {uftred pacientipe. And alleucll dopnge,and thal kepe me vnto bps hea
seri.» tothe al,the Lozde Delpuercdme.Pea,ex all uenly bpngoome: To whome bepeapleforeuce ~
| pro.rrittid thep that wpl lpucgodlpe in Chzifte Jelu, hal aNdDeue. Amen. ~ . 7 é
it ecles Cuffcepertecucton. Wuttheeuctmenand dpl- _ Salute PzilcaandxAquila,andtbeboutes ae.rvitia ©
į ceaucrs hal ware wozie and teozle,wwbplethep olde af + Dnelippozug: Erattus abode at Co- Mom.Fbt.8 o
rt p Oplcepucandaredpiccaucdtbemiclues.  tinthum. * Crophimus baue F left at Bpletii xacu.st.o. —
_ Wut continue thou inthe thinges whpch thou {pcke. Do thp diligence, that thou mapett come snv.rrs.e
batt learned, wbpchalforwcrecommptten ynta befoze Wynter. Cubolus qreteth the,¢lo doeth
: the,knowwpnge of homethoubattlearnedthé, Pzudengand Linug:Clavdia, ¢ alltbe beethze,
| izimttiia andforasmuche alloasxofachplde,thoubatte CheLozbe Jelug Chart be wpth thp lpecte.
knotoenthebolpetcriptures whpcheareableto Oracebe wptbpou. Amen.
O Dicota Mabe the learned vnto faluacion thozowe the


l l fapehwbpch isin Chzift Jefu. x Alitcripture CThelecondé Epiffle into Timothe, wag A
| : geuen bp infpicacton of God, is peofptable to wzptten from Rome, then Paul wag

ii teache,toimpzoue, to amende, and to inftruct in pzefented the feconde tpme ynto

i tyghtcoutnes, that tbeman of God map be per- the Emperoure Nero.

| | fectand preparcd tntoal good toozkes.


~ CThe.ttit. Chapter. = } ni S 4
E ee dt a The Epiltle of ait 4
EES Eetitptertoxebrtoxe Gon, ado reine

pitoe p Lorde Jefu Chatt, whpche thal |  _ C TheF pele Chapter:


A aes) be weannrds C Waule erborteth Titust ne pert |
Es ene edeaar DPS appa: =- (pate cue’ Eanna tenesten Aone


i


Eoi at are chorento ti ce and chat tus t

wode, be feruent in fealon, E out of fcafon. Jin- EEE EE AS TOECY eee Tre eee charged Titus to

proue rebuke erbozte wpthal longe fuferpng se Aule t feruaunte of od, and Æ

and doctrpne. eon tyme twpllcome, when je ER Sea Apoltle of Jelu Cheitte ACCO ;
tbep bal not luier Wholfome doctrine:butaf- (OA Reg Sa opnge tothe fapthe of Goddeg |
ter theyz owne luftes Mall thep (tobofe cares Ne (ee Ag clecte , and accordpnge to the
ptche) get them an beape of teachers, andthall HS) EREA knowledge of the teuet, why- |
wpthdratb iadi careg from tbe trutbhandpal EIJ GS debe is after godlines inthe bope woma is -
be turned Datofables, Dut watchetbouina AE of eternall lyfe: tobyche x co, |
thynges lufre afflicctong, do the wozke tho- (that cannotlpe) peormpled befoze the wozlde.


beqaune


Teme


_andthat they mapecometotbemfeluesagaine rowlpe of an Cuangelifte,fulfpll thyneottpce
out of the fnare of the Deuell, wbpcharebolden, nto the vtmnoff.ex we cater.) xo
captpue of bpm at bps wll. és odi 7 note Peg to be offered, m the =

ti. Chanter, ne ormyp Otpartpnae isathande . aue I
abe WEE eee be At gal out fought a goodfp rhe, 3 baue fulfplled mp courte


| . Che Cpilile


E 4 Fpoceptes,Pcriccution forthe Soipell. ELi t tbe fapth. 4from béce fozth there ig ‘
corre SR Dv know, that * inthelaftedapes lapde vp foz mex a crotone of rpabteoutuetie , nn as
| temuica REN Pee Dai come PAIAS tees Stozmen Which the Lozd(thatigariabtcous indge)mart “Pe”
| bet Ga 4 Pre balbe louersofthepzownelelues.co {ewe me at the Dape:not tome onlp,but vutoall
|


Yate Uctous,boatters,proude,curtedfpea: themalfo that loue bys commypnae. Do thy dp-
kers, Difobediente tofathers and mothers, y= gence that thoumapt come {hoztlp wnte me.
thankEull,vngodlye, onipnde, trucebreakers, Stor Demasbathforlakenme, andloucth e =
falfe acculers,rpatours,fearce, defpplersofebe tbys pzelent wopld,and ig departed vnto Chel 4
i = wobpch are good, traptours,beadp,bpempnded falontca. Crefcensis gone to Galacia, Titus ee
| grebpe bppon boluptuoulnesmogethentbelo= nto Dalmacia. Dnelp Lucasis wine. ake i
l uerg of God, Daupnge afimilitudeofgodlpnes, * Parke, and bzpnge bpm wpth the, for Collie = q
45 but baue denped the power therof:and fucheab- Pzotptable ontomefoztheminiftracion. Jnd ` |
mitasi. Dozre.ffo2 oftbpsloztearetbepxwhpcheentre ‘Cicbpcus baue 3 lente to €pbhetus. Checloke i |
into boules,andbeprge bnto bondage wemen that Flefteat Troada wpth Carpus, (when ğ
laden wpthfpnne, wbpche wemenareledwpth tonnek)Dpnge wyth the, andthe bokes , but
bpucrslultes, ener learnpuge,and neuerableto aeran the parchement. Alerander the copers-
come nto theknotolege of the truth. mypthdpd me much suel:the Lorde reward pin ` |
| C x an games and Jambzes twptbhtode Bo accozdong tohps dedeg, of whom bre thou tare ol
| rav.v1i-b feg, euen iodothele allo refptthe trueth :men alo. Jeo? be bath greatly wWithtãde our Wwozdeg a f
| thep areot cozcuptempndes,andlende agcon- At mp fpr aunliwerpnge : no man aflpited »
| cernpnae thefapth: but thep ball pzenaple no Me-butallfozlokewe. J prap God, that it map
| lenger. Æo: thepzmadnes thalbe vttered pnto Notbelapdeto thep? charges: Qotwptbitan
f almen ceuenag thep2s wag, but thoubattefene Drugethe Lordafipited meand ftrengthed me,
| theerperience of mp doctrine,fathisofipupnge, tDat bp me the preachpng thulde be fulfplledto T
papau orong Cufferpnge, loue, pacience, tbe Dtmool, andtbatall the Gentpleg thulde .
erlecuciong, andafiliccions ppchebappencd beare. And F was delpuered out of the mouthe


L
i


| nto meat Antioche, at Jconium, eatLpftra: ofthe Lpon. And the Lozdethalldelpyer me fra
itta, DdPCDe pertecucions J {uftred pacientipe. And alleucll dopnge,and thal kepe me vnto bps hea
seri.» tothe al,the Lozde Delpuercdme.Pea,ex all uenly bpngoome: To whome bepeapleforeuce ~
| pro.rrittid thep that wpl lpucgodlpe in Chzifte Jelu, hal aNdDeue. Amen. ~ . 7 é
it ecles Cuffcepertecucton. Wuttheeuctmenand dpl- _ Salute PzilcaandxAquila,andtbeboutes ae.rvitia ©
į ceaucrs hal ware wozie and teozle,wwbplethep olde af + Dnelippozug: Erattus abode at Co- Mom.Fbt.8 o
rt p Oplcepucandaredpiccaucdtbemiclues.  tinthum. * Crophimus baue F left at Bpletii xacu.st.o. —
_ Wut continue thou inthe thinges whpch thou {pcke. Do thp diligence, that thou mapett come snv.rrs.e
batt learned, wbpchalforwcrecommptten ynta befoze Wynter. Cubolus qreteth the,¢lo doeth
: the,knowwpnge of homethoubattlearnedthé, Pzudengand Linug:Clavdia, ¢ alltbe beethze,
| izimttiia andforasmuche alloasxofachplde,thoubatte CheLozbe Jelug Chart be wpth thp lpecte.
knotoenthebolpetcriptures whpcheareableto Oracebe wptbpou. Amen.
O Dicota Mabe the learned vnto faluacion thozowe the


l l fapehwbpch isin Chzift Jefu. x Alitcripture CThelecondé Epiffle into Timothe, wag A
| : geuen bp infpicacton of God, is peofptable to wzptten from Rome, then Paul wag

ii teache,toimpzoue, to amende, and to inftruct in pzefented the feconde tpme ynto

i tyghtcoutnes, that tbeman of God map be per- the Emperoure Nero.

| | fectand preparcd tntoal good toozkes.


~ CThe.ttit. Chapter. = } ni S 4
E ee dt a The Epiltle of ait 4
EES Eetitptertoxebrtoxe Gon, ado reine

pitoe p Lorde Jefu Chatt, whpche thal |  _ C TheF pele Chapter:


A aes) be weannrds C Waule erborteth Titust ne pert |
Es ene edeaar DPS appa: =- (pate cue’ Eanna tenesten Aone


i


Eoi at are chorento ti ce and chat tus t

wode, be feruent in fealon, E out of fcafon. Jin- EEE EE AS TOECY eee Tre eee charged Titus to

proue rebuke erbozte wpthal longe fuferpng se Aule t feruaunte of od, and Æ

and doctrpne. eon tyme twpllcome, when je ER Sea Apoltle of Jelu Cheitte ACCO ;
tbep bal not luier Wholfome doctrine:butaf- (OA Reg Sa opnge tothe fapthe of Goddeg |
ter theyz owne luftes Mall thep (tobofe cares Ne (ee Ag clecte , and accordpnge to the
ptche) get them an beape of teachers, andthall HS) EREA knowledge of the teuet, why- |
wpthdratb iadi careg from tbe trutbhandpal EIJ GS debe is after godlines inthe bope woma is -
be turned Datofables, Dut watchetbouina AE of eternall lyfe: tobyche x co, |
thynges lufre afflicctong, do the wozke tho- (that cannotlpe) peormpled befoze the wozlde.


beqaune


Teme


beran:but be hath opened bis worbe at the time


brto me, accozbing to thecomimaundement of
fi.cor.bite Gop our SHauiour tox Titus his natural fone
“aftertbecommenfaith. —
izimta  +Orace, mercp.¢peace,from Good the father
i Zinta andfrom the Lorde Fern Chik our fautour.
fto: this caule left Zthe sabia et ranh
5 deft refozmethe thingcs that ave Dnpertect,ana
ti.zim tia Couldeltxozdeine elders incuerp citie, as Ibad
pe the. #fanp be blameles,tbebulband
of one wife, bawing faithful chilozen, which are


Lamia noe laundzed of rtote, netther aredifobedient.*«


for a bitop muft be blaincles , asthe Ketvard


Leuf.r.b. ` of cod: not ubbozne,not anarie knot geucrto


_ FPdeb.% meh wine,no fighter, not geuen to filehplucee:


=


_butakeper of bolpitalite,onethat loucth good-

| “8 neg ~wcpzunent fobze, righteous, godlp, temperat
and fuche as clenet® to the true wgzde of doc-
trine that be map be able alfotoerbozt bp whol


-fomelearning and totimpzoucthem that tapea: PAPAE


Pi gapnite tt, e
- _ witpe, anddifcepuerg of mindes,(pcciallp thep ý
are ofthe circumcifpon, whofe mouthes muf be

iwiiiia ftoppedx which peruert whole poules,teaching
thinges which thep ought not, becauleot filthy

lucre. Muneokthemfelues (euena propbete of

thep2 ovwne)fapd: Che Cretias ace altoapes Ip-

avs, cucll beaftes,llotoe belpes . Chis witnes ig

true, woberfo2 rebuke thou thé harplp that thep

mape befounde in f fapth, not takpnge bedeto

D FJewes fableg andcomatidementes of men that


-Xoyi Farne aap the trueth* nto p pure , areal thpn


ges pure:but vnto themtbhat aredefplet and vn
beleupnge, is nothinge pure:but euen the minde
and conf{crence of them is defpled. The p contelle
that thep kuowe God: but wpth che dedes the
Denp bymlepnge thep are abbominable and dit-
obedient and Dna pte Dntocuerp Good worker,
C Che.ti.Chaptec.
C Betelleth opm bowe be Hall tcache all begrers
' to vebaucthem (clus, ’


cert ha nb! , (ood, obedient vntetbep?


` kenof. Pounge men lphewpfe exborte,that thep
_. befobzempnded. A
3 Fir alebpriges Wewe thy (elf anenfample of
‘ee ESen a, C000 Wopkes in the Doctrine, withbonetty,qra-
| nitie, and topth the toholfome wozve which can
not berebuked: that be whpcbe wprhandetbe,


‘2 l.tii.b.


epbe.ot.a mape be atbamed, baupng noeucll thyna to fap
tpe be. of pou .*Exbostelecuauntes,to be obedient yn


«Feta bie t0 thepzowne mafters, andto pleate them malt


thpnges snot aunfiverpnge agapne,neptierta
be ppcbers sbutrhatthep priwe all good faptp=


to Titus.


appointed thozototcaching, whichis chmttted trpne of God oure Haniourcitia


Fortherearemanp wneulp andtalkersofes ANN


~— Sol.Urrbi.
fulnes, that thep tape bo wozhpppe to the dot-
auiouce eppnges F
ffoz the qrace of God, that bapnaeth faluacion
vntoalmen, batbapeared and teacheth vs that
we Mulde denpe dngodlpnes and*wopldipe lur LID.
{teg, and that we fpulde lpuefoberlp, andepgb=
teoully, and godlpe inthps p2efente wozlde, los
kpnge for that bleed boope and appearpnge of
the qlozpe of the greate Gov, and of oure Saut tes anv:
oure Jelu Chzilte, whpche x gaue bpm felfe for saints.
bS, toredeme Ds fromall vnepyghteoulneg, and + cone». ¢,
+to pourge Ysa peculiar people vutobpmilelfe. cpbde.ti.b,
xferuentlp qeuenvnto good wozkes. Thele
thypnges fpeake and erbazte, Fandrebube, we igni,
all feruentneg and commaunding .*Se that no |
nian delpice the. |
- CThe.itt.chapter. 7
C Hfobedpence to (ach av be in auctoppte. Be war?
no J ie: to belwate of foolpihe and bupzofptable
Powis Arne them that thep{ubmittetbé _
/E G {elucs toruleandpower : that thep A
Z alle obepe the officers : that thep bercas Merits
pa) a G Dye Dito cucrp good wozke : Pthep
Stecka peake euel of roman : that thep be
nofpabters, but gentle, hetopnge all mekenes
tnts almen. Toz we oure felues were allo lom-
tyme foolpthe, difobedient , deccaued ,ferupnge
dinerfe luftes, g balapan nes lpupng tnmalict
oulnes g cnupe, Ful of bate,batyng one another.
re Hut after tbat the kpndnes and loue of yg
ourefautour God to man Warde appeared, not 9. Timid,
bp tbe dedeg of righteoutnes which we wrought
but accozDpng to bps Inercp be faued bs+bp the txob.t6.¢
fountapne of thenewe bpztbe, and renuenge of ‘
thebolp goofte , which be Hed on bs Aboundant
lp, thozotbe Jefus Chek out Sautour, that we
tultifiedbp bis grace, Mulde be made bep2es al acte.ry.p,
cozdpuge to the pope of cternallpfe. Ja Cbhyps ig pd-1ti..
atrue peng f
Df thelechynges J tpl that thou certifpe, T
that thep whyche beleve in GOD, mpagbt be delp=
gentetoqoofozwardein good worckes. for
thele thinges are goodanDdpzofitable Dntomen ag
*foolpihe queftions, and gencologpes, bras i mmie
Ipnge , thozowe itrpupnges aboute thelawe,a-
nopoe: foz thep are Dnp2ofitable and fuperfius mat.rdiit.c
ons. A ma that is an auctoz of fectes, after*the
fp2fFe and the feconde admonicion auopDde:bno-
topnge, thatbe (that is luche >is peeuertedand |
fpnneth cuen damned gA aes felfe. D
when J Hall fende Artemas ynto the 02 Ti |
chpcus be deligente,to come, tome bnto Micho- |
polls: 5032 haue Oetermpued thereto wpnter,' -
Hapnge senas the latoper and Apollos on theps
{O2ilep diligentlpe, that nothpnge be lackpnge.
nto them. And let ouresallolearne toercell it. eee
good worckes, asfarfozth as nede requi= |
sethe, that thep benot bnfrutefull. |
All thatare wpth me,falute the, - d
i


Grete themtbatloue Dsin
thefapth. Grace be
wpthpeuall,


men.
CU sptten from Richopoliga
citpeof acedonta,


RE iit. The


beran:but be hath opened bis worbe at the time


brto me, accozbing to thecomimaundement of
fi.cor.bite Gop our SHauiour tox Titus his natural fone
“aftertbecommenfaith. —
izimta  +Orace, mercp.¢peace,from Good the father
i Zinta andfrom the Lorde Fern Chik our fautour.
fto: this caule left Zthe sabia et ranh
5 deft refozmethe thingcs that ave Dnpertect,ana
ti.zim tia Couldeltxozdeine elders incuerp citie, as Ibad
pe the. #fanp be blameles,tbebulband
of one wife, bawing faithful chilozen, which are


Lamia noe laundzed of rtote, netther aredifobedient.*«


for a bitop muft be blaincles , asthe Ketvard


Leuf.r.b. ` of cod: not ubbozne,not anarie knot geucrto


_ FPdeb.% meh wine,no fighter, not geuen to filehplucee:


=


_butakeper of bolpitalite,onethat loucth good-

| “8 neg ~wcpzunent fobze, righteous, godlp, temperat
and fuche as clenet® to the true wgzde of doc-
trine that be map be able alfotoerbozt bp whol


-fomelearning and totimpzoucthem that tapea: PAPAE


Pi gapnite tt, e
- _ witpe, anddifcepuerg of mindes,(pcciallp thep ý
are ofthe circumcifpon, whofe mouthes muf be

iwiiiia ftoppedx which peruert whole poules,teaching
thinges which thep ought not, becauleot filthy

lucre. Muneokthemfelues (euena propbete of

thep2 ovwne)fapd: Che Cretias ace altoapes Ip-

avs, cucll beaftes,llotoe belpes . Chis witnes ig

true, woberfo2 rebuke thou thé harplp that thep

mape befounde in f fapth, not takpnge bedeto

D FJewes fableg andcomatidementes of men that


-Xoyi Farne aap the trueth* nto p pure , areal thpn


ges pure:but vnto themtbhat aredefplet and vn
beleupnge, is nothinge pure:but euen the minde
and conf{crence of them is defpled. The p contelle
that thep kuowe God: but wpth che dedes the
Denp bymlepnge thep are abbominable and dit-
obedient and Dna pte Dntocuerp Good worker,
C Che.ti.Chaptec.
C Betelleth opm bowe be Hall tcache all begrers
' to vebaucthem (clus, ’


cert ha nb! , (ood, obedient vntetbep?


` kenof. Pounge men lphewpfe exborte,that thep
_. befobzempnded. A
3 Fir alebpriges Wewe thy (elf anenfample of
‘ee ESen a, C000 Wopkes in the Doctrine, withbonetty,qra-
| nitie, and topth the toholfome wozve which can
not berebuked: that be whpcbe wprhandetbe,


‘2 l.tii.b.


epbe.ot.a mape be atbamed, baupng noeucll thyna to fap
tpe be. of pou .*Exbostelecuauntes,to be obedient yn


«Feta bie t0 thepzowne mafters, andto pleate them malt


thpnges snot aunfiverpnge agapne,neptierta
be ppcbers sbutrhatthep priwe all good faptp=


to Titus.


appointed thozototcaching, whichis chmttted trpne of God oure Haniourcitia


Fortherearemanp wneulp andtalkersofes ANN


~— Sol.Urrbi.
fulnes, that thep tape bo wozhpppe to the dot-
auiouce eppnges F
ffoz the qrace of God, that bapnaeth faluacion
vntoalmen, batbapeared and teacheth vs that
we Mulde denpe dngodlpnes and*wopldipe lur LID.
{teg, and that we fpulde lpuefoberlp, andepgb=
teoully, and godlpe inthps p2efente wozlde, los
kpnge for that bleed boope and appearpnge of
the qlozpe of the greate Gov, and of oure Saut tes anv:
oure Jelu Chzilte, whpche x gaue bpm felfe for saints.
bS, toredeme Ds fromall vnepyghteoulneg, and + cone». ¢,
+to pourge Ysa peculiar people vutobpmilelfe. cpbde.ti.b,
xferuentlp qeuenvnto good wozkes. Thele
thypnges fpeake and erbazte, Fandrebube, we igni,
all feruentneg and commaunding .*Se that no |
nian delpice the. |
- CThe.itt.chapter. 7
C Hfobedpence to (ach av be in auctoppte. Be war?
no J ie: to belwate of foolpihe and bupzofptable
Powis Arne them that thep{ubmittetbé _
/E G {elucs toruleandpower : that thep A
Z alle obepe the officers : that thep bercas Merits
pa) a G Dye Dito cucrp good wozke : Pthep
Stecka peake euel of roman : that thep be
nofpabters, but gentle, hetopnge all mekenes
tnts almen. Toz we oure felues were allo lom-
tyme foolpthe, difobedient , deccaued ,ferupnge
dinerfe luftes, g balapan nes lpupng tnmalict
oulnes g cnupe, Ful of bate,batyng one another.
re Hut after tbat the kpndnes and loue of yg
ourefautour God to man Warde appeared, not 9. Timid,
bp tbe dedeg of righteoutnes which we wrought
but accozDpng to bps Inercp be faued bs+bp the txob.t6.¢
fountapne of thenewe bpztbe, and renuenge of ‘
thebolp goofte , which be Hed on bs Aboundant
lp, thozotbe Jefus Chek out Sautour, that we
tultifiedbp bis grace, Mulde be made bep2es al acte.ry.p,
cozdpuge to the pope of cternallpfe. Ja Cbhyps ig pd-1ti..
atrue peng f
Df thelechynges J tpl that thou certifpe, T
that thep whyche beleve in GOD, mpagbt be delp=
gentetoqoofozwardein good worckes. for
thele thinges are goodanDdpzofitable Dntomen ag
*foolpihe queftions, and gencologpes, bras i mmie
Ipnge , thozowe itrpupnges aboute thelawe,a-
nopoe: foz thep are Dnp2ofitable and fuperfius mat.rdiit.c
ons. A ma that is an auctoz of fectes, after*the
fp2fFe and the feconde admonicion auopDde:bno-
topnge, thatbe (that is luche >is peeuertedand |
fpnneth cuen damned gA aes felfe. D
when J Hall fende Artemas ynto the 02 Ti |
chpcus be deligente,to come, tome bnto Micho- |
polls: 5032 haue Oetermpued thereto wpnter,' -
Hapnge senas the latoper and Apollos on theps
{O2ilep diligentlpe, that nothpnge be lackpnge.
nto them. And let ouresallolearne toercell it. eee
good worckes, asfarfozth as nede requi= |
sethe, that thep benot bnfrutefull. |
All thatare wpth me,falute the, - d
i


Grete themtbatloue Dsin
thefapth. Grace be
wpthpeuall,


men.
CU sptten from Richopoliga
citpeof acedonta,


RE iit. The


beran:but be hath opened bis worbe at the time


brto me, accozbing to thecomimaundement of
fi.cor.bite Gop our SHauiour tox Titus his natural fone
“aftertbecommenfaith. —
izimta  +Orace, mercp.¢peace,from Good the father
i Zinta andfrom the Lorde Fern Chik our fautour.
fto: this caule left Zthe sabia et ranh
5 deft refozmethe thingcs that ave Dnpertect,ana
ti.zim tia Couldeltxozdeine elders incuerp citie, as Ibad
pe the. #fanp be blameles,tbebulband
of one wife, bawing faithful chilozen, which are


Lamia noe laundzed of rtote, netther aredifobedient.*«


for a bitop muft be blaincles , asthe Ketvard


Leuf.r.b. ` of cod: not ubbozne,not anarie knot geucrto


_ FPdeb.% meh wine,no fighter, not geuen to filehplucee:


=


_butakeper of bolpitalite,onethat loucth good-

| “8 neg ~wcpzunent fobze, righteous, godlp, temperat
and fuche as clenet® to the true wgzde of doc-
trine that be map be able alfotoerbozt bp whol


-fomelearning and totimpzoucthem that tapea: PAPAE


Pi gapnite tt, e
- _ witpe, anddifcepuerg of mindes,(pcciallp thep ý
are ofthe circumcifpon, whofe mouthes muf be

iwiiiia ftoppedx which peruert whole poules,teaching
thinges which thep ought not, becauleot filthy

lucre. Muneokthemfelues (euena propbete of

thep2 ovwne)fapd: Che Cretias ace altoapes Ip-

avs, cucll beaftes,llotoe belpes . Chis witnes ig

true, woberfo2 rebuke thou thé harplp that thep

mape befounde in f fapth, not takpnge bedeto

D FJewes fableg andcomatidementes of men that


-Xoyi Farne aap the trueth* nto p pure , areal thpn


ges pure:but vnto themtbhat aredefplet and vn
beleupnge, is nothinge pure:but euen the minde
and conf{crence of them is defpled. The p contelle
that thep kuowe God: but wpth che dedes the
Denp bymlepnge thep are abbominable and dit-
obedient and Dna pte Dntocuerp Good worker,
C Che.ti.Chaptec.
C Betelleth opm bowe be Hall tcache all begrers
' to vebaucthem (clus, ’


cert ha nb! , (ood, obedient vntetbep?


` kenof. Pounge men lphewpfe exborte,that thep
_. befobzempnded. A
3 Fir alebpriges Wewe thy (elf anenfample of
‘ee ESen a, C000 Wopkes in the Doctrine, withbonetty,qra-
| nitie, and topth the toholfome wozve which can
not berebuked: that be whpcbe wprhandetbe,


‘2 l.tii.b.


epbe.ot.a mape be atbamed, baupng noeucll thyna to fap
tpe be. of pou .*Exbostelecuauntes,to be obedient yn


«Feta bie t0 thepzowne mafters, andto pleate them malt


thpnges snot aunfiverpnge agapne,neptierta
be ppcbers sbutrhatthep priwe all good faptp=


to Titus.


appointed thozototcaching, whichis chmttted trpne of God oure Haniourcitia


Fortherearemanp wneulp andtalkersofes ANN


~— Sol.Urrbi.
fulnes, that thep tape bo wozhpppe to the dot-
auiouce eppnges F
ffoz the qrace of God, that bapnaeth faluacion
vntoalmen, batbapeared and teacheth vs that
we Mulde denpe dngodlpnes and*wopldipe lur LID.
{teg, and that we fpulde lpuefoberlp, andepgb=
teoully, and godlpe inthps p2efente wozlde, los
kpnge for that bleed boope and appearpnge of
the qlozpe of the greate Gov, and of oure Saut tes anv:
oure Jelu Chzilte, whpche x gaue bpm felfe for saints.
bS, toredeme Ds fromall vnepyghteoulneg, and + cone». ¢,
+to pourge Ysa peculiar people vutobpmilelfe. cpbde.ti.b,
xferuentlp qeuenvnto good wozkes. Thele
thypnges fpeake and erbazte, Fandrebube, we igni,
all feruentneg and commaunding .*Se that no |
nian delpice the. |
- CThe.itt.chapter. 7
C Hfobedpence to (ach av be in auctoppte. Be war?
no J ie: to belwate of foolpihe and bupzofptable
Powis Arne them that thep{ubmittetbé _
/E G {elucs toruleandpower : that thep A
Z alle obepe the officers : that thep bercas Merits
pa) a G Dye Dito cucrp good wozke : Pthep
Stecka peake euel of roman : that thep be
nofpabters, but gentle, hetopnge all mekenes
tnts almen. Toz we oure felues were allo lom-
tyme foolpthe, difobedient , deccaued ,ferupnge
dinerfe luftes, g balapan nes lpupng tnmalict
oulnes g cnupe, Ful of bate,batyng one another.
re Hut after tbat the kpndnes and loue of yg
ourefautour God to man Warde appeared, not 9. Timid,
bp tbe dedeg of righteoutnes which we wrought
but accozDpng to bps Inercp be faued bs+bp the txob.t6.¢
fountapne of thenewe bpztbe, and renuenge of ‘
thebolp goofte , which be Hed on bs Aboundant
lp, thozotbe Jefus Chek out Sautour, that we
tultifiedbp bis grace, Mulde be made bep2es al acte.ry.p,
cozdpuge to the pope of cternallpfe. Ja Cbhyps ig pd-1ti..
atrue peng f
Df thelechynges J tpl that thou certifpe, T
that thep whyche beleve in GOD, mpagbt be delp=
gentetoqoofozwardein good worckes. for
thele thinges are goodanDdpzofitable Dntomen ag
*foolpihe queftions, and gencologpes, bras i mmie
Ipnge , thozowe itrpupnges aboute thelawe,a-
nopoe: foz thep are Dnp2ofitable and fuperfius mat.rdiit.c
ons. A ma that is an auctoz of fectes, after*the
fp2fFe and the feconde admonicion auopDde:bno-
topnge, thatbe (that is luche >is peeuertedand |
fpnneth cuen damned gA aes felfe. D
when J Hall fende Artemas ynto the 02 Ti |
chpcus be deligente,to come, tome bnto Micho- |
polls: 5032 haue Oetermpued thereto wpnter,' -
Hapnge senas the latoper and Apollos on theps
{O2ilep diligentlpe, that nothpnge be lackpnge.
nto them. And let ouresallolearne toercell it. eee
good worckes, asfarfozth as nede requi= |
sethe, that thep benot bnfrutefull. |
All thatare wpth me,falute the, - d
i


Grete themtbatloue Dsin
thefapth. Grace be
wpthpeuall,


men.
CU sptten from Richopoliga
citpeof acedonta,


RE iit. The


beran:but be hath opened bis worbe at the time


brto me, accozbing to thecomimaundement of
fi.cor.bite Gop our SHauiour tox Titus his natural fone
“aftertbecommenfaith. —
izimta  +Orace, mercp.¢peace,from Good the father
i Zinta andfrom the Lorde Fern Chik our fautour.
fto: this caule left Zthe sabia et ranh
5 deft refozmethe thingcs that ave Dnpertect,ana
ti.zim tia Couldeltxozdeine elders incuerp citie, as Ibad
pe the. #fanp be blameles,tbebulband
of one wife, bawing faithful chilozen, which are


Lamia noe laundzed of rtote, netther aredifobedient.*«


for a bitop muft be blaincles , asthe Ketvard


Leuf.r.b. ` of cod: not ubbozne,not anarie knot geucrto


_ FPdeb.% meh wine,no fighter, not geuen to filehplucee:


=


_butakeper of bolpitalite,onethat loucth good-

| “8 neg ~wcpzunent fobze, righteous, godlp, temperat
and fuche as clenet® to the true wgzde of doc-
trine that be map be able alfotoerbozt bp whol


-fomelearning and totimpzoucthem that tapea: PAPAE


Pi gapnite tt, e
- _ witpe, anddifcepuerg of mindes,(pcciallp thep ý
are ofthe circumcifpon, whofe mouthes muf be

iwiiiia ftoppedx which peruert whole poules,teaching
thinges which thep ought not, becauleot filthy

lucre. Muneokthemfelues (euena propbete of

thep2 ovwne)fapd: Che Cretias ace altoapes Ip-

avs, cucll beaftes,llotoe belpes . Chis witnes ig

true, woberfo2 rebuke thou thé harplp that thep

mape befounde in f fapth, not takpnge bedeto

D FJewes fableg andcomatidementes of men that


-Xoyi Farne aap the trueth* nto p pure , areal thpn


ges pure:but vnto themtbhat aredefplet and vn
beleupnge, is nothinge pure:but euen the minde
and conf{crence of them is defpled. The p contelle
that thep kuowe God: but wpth che dedes the
Denp bymlepnge thep are abbominable and dit-
obedient and Dna pte Dntocuerp Good worker,
C Che.ti.Chaptec.
C Betelleth opm bowe be Hall tcache all begrers
' to vebaucthem (clus, ’


cert ha nb! , (ood, obedient vntetbep?


` kenof. Pounge men lphewpfe exborte,that thep
_. befobzempnded. A
3 Fir alebpriges Wewe thy (elf anenfample of
‘ee ESen a, C000 Wopkes in the Doctrine, withbonetty,qra-
| nitie, and topth the toholfome wozve which can
not berebuked: that be whpcbe wprhandetbe,


‘2 l.tii.b.


epbe.ot.a mape be atbamed, baupng noeucll thyna to fap
tpe be. of pou .*Exbostelecuauntes,to be obedient yn


«Feta bie t0 thepzowne mafters, andto pleate them malt


thpnges snot aunfiverpnge agapne,neptierta
be ppcbers sbutrhatthep priwe all good faptp=


to Titus.


appointed thozototcaching, whichis chmttted trpne of God oure Haniourcitia


Fortherearemanp wneulp andtalkersofes ANN


~— Sol.Urrbi.
fulnes, that thep tape bo wozhpppe to the dot-
auiouce eppnges F
ffoz the qrace of God, that bapnaeth faluacion
vntoalmen, batbapeared and teacheth vs that
we Mulde denpe dngodlpnes and*wopldipe lur LID.
{teg, and that we fpulde lpuefoberlp, andepgb=
teoully, and godlpe inthps p2efente wozlde, los
kpnge for that bleed boope and appearpnge of
the qlozpe of the greate Gov, and of oure Saut tes anv:
oure Jelu Chzilte, whpche x gaue bpm felfe for saints.
bS, toredeme Ds fromall vnepyghteoulneg, and + cone». ¢,
+to pourge Ysa peculiar people vutobpmilelfe. cpbde.ti.b,
xferuentlp qeuenvnto good wozkes. Thele
thypnges fpeake and erbazte, Fandrebube, we igni,
all feruentneg and commaunding .*Se that no |
nian delpice the. |
- CThe.itt.chapter. 7
C Hfobedpence to (ach av be in auctoppte. Be war?
no J ie: to belwate of foolpihe and bupzofptable
Powis Arne them that thep{ubmittetbé _
/E G {elucs toruleandpower : that thep A
Z alle obepe the officers : that thep bercas Merits
pa) a G Dye Dito cucrp good wozke : Pthep
Stecka peake euel of roman : that thep be
nofpabters, but gentle, hetopnge all mekenes
tnts almen. Toz we oure felues were allo lom-
tyme foolpthe, difobedient , deccaued ,ferupnge
dinerfe luftes, g balapan nes lpupng tnmalict
oulnes g cnupe, Ful of bate,batyng one another.
re Hut after tbat the kpndnes and loue of yg
ourefautour God to man Warde appeared, not 9. Timid,
bp tbe dedeg of righteoutnes which we wrought
but accozDpng to bps Inercp be faued bs+bp the txob.t6.¢
fountapne of thenewe bpztbe, and renuenge of ‘
thebolp goofte , which be Hed on bs Aboundant
lp, thozotbe Jefus Chek out Sautour, that we
tultifiedbp bis grace, Mulde be made bep2es al acte.ry.p,
cozdpuge to the pope of cternallpfe. Ja Cbhyps ig pd-1ti..
atrue peng f
Df thelechynges J tpl that thou certifpe, T
that thep whyche beleve in GOD, mpagbt be delp=
gentetoqoofozwardein good worckes. for
thele thinges are goodanDdpzofitable Dntomen ag
*foolpihe queftions, and gencologpes, bras i mmie
Ipnge , thozowe itrpupnges aboute thelawe,a-
nopoe: foz thep are Dnp2ofitable and fuperfius mat.rdiit.c
ons. A ma that is an auctoz of fectes, after*the
fp2fFe and the feconde admonicion auopDde:bno-
topnge, thatbe (that is luche >is peeuertedand |
fpnneth cuen damned gA aes felfe. D
when J Hall fende Artemas ynto the 02 Ti |
chpcus be deligente,to come, tome bnto Micho- |
polls: 5032 haue Oetermpued thereto wpnter,' -
Hapnge senas the latoper and Apollos on theps
{O2ilep diligentlpe, that nothpnge be lackpnge.
nto them. And let ouresallolearne toercell it. eee
good worckes, asfarfozth as nede requi= |
sethe, that thep benot bnfrutefull. |
All thatare wpth me,falute the, - d
i


Grete themtbatloue Dsin
thefapth. Grace be
wpthpeuall,


men.
CU sptten from Richopoliga
citpeof acedonta,


RE iit. The


The Epiltle of fayncte
Paul Dnto Philemon.


3 he.s.chapter.

PREET = mọ,
oerein Eea bo torscer brs (eeuabe dacivaas, AnD
loupngip to recepue bpm agapue. he

a a Tul p prefoner of Felu Chzitt
B faa rA and bzother Timothe.

| D Wh nto Dbilemd the beloucd

E and our helper, and to the belo

one ued Appia, andto Archippus

IEM ougfelotve foudiour eto thec

i Eora aroacion that ts oftbp boute.

f.Cop.t.a. ee) xOrace be vnto pou € peace

ti.cor.a, Pr God our Father, ¢ fro the Lozp Fetus CMI.

Galatea Bthanke mp God, makinge mencionalwap

eg of the inmp peapers, whe ¥ beare of thy loue

¢fapth, Which ebon baff toward the Lord Felu,

_ €towarde al f pncteg.Cop the Felowibpp of thy

5 faptb is feutefull inp knowledge of euerp qood

ea ox(wozcke epbich is in pou towarde Jefus Ch.

for we baue qreate topeand confolactoninthp

loue: becaule that bp the (Bother) thelapuctes

bartes are comfozted.


Miberfore, though Ympabt be bolde in Chit


focOmaunde the p, whpche twas thy Deutp todo
pet fozloues lake Frater belecherbe, thoughe
_- Bbeas Fam,euenolbe Baule nowe a De
conid Hep of Felu Chaift . Fbefeche the foz mp ronne X
Onefinwus tobo J baue begotten in mp bondes,
€ (wbpchin tyme pafled waste the pnpzofytable
but now pzofptable both tothe andto me ) opi
Jhane {ent homeagapne. Thou therfore receine
bim, thatts tofap mpne otne bowels, whom F
{pulode fapne bane retained w me, $ inebp teade
be mpabt baue mintifred ynto mein the bondes
of the Golpel. Neucrtbheles, without thy mpnve
wold 7 do nothing, Pthe good which thou doei
thuldnot be ag it were of neceffite but willinglp
foz bapelp be therfore departed foz a featon
Pthou (huldelk receane him foz ener not note ag
aferuaunt:but abouca feruaunt, euena bother
_ peloued, fpecpallye to me, but Dowe muche moze
D pntothe,bothin the fe, ¢alfointhe Lozdec gt
thou count metberfoze a felowe,receane bim as
my felfe. $f be baue done the anp hurt, 02 oweth
the ought,that lap to mp charge. (3 Paull bane
tozpttenit Lopthmpne owne dande ) J topll re-
compenceit. 5o that J donot faye to the, howe
that thou oweft unto me euenthpne owne felfe
allo. Guéfobzother, letme entop the inp Lozd:
Comfozte mp botvelsinp Lorde. Cruttpnge in
ne obedience : J wote vuto tbe, knowpnce,
that P wylt allo do moze then Flape:@Wozeouer
prepare melopapnge, foz Ftrute chat thozowe
the belpeof pour prayers , J fbalbe genen vnto
pou. There falutethe,Epaph2as mp Felowe pre
foner tn chif Felu , Harccus, Ariftarcus, De-
mag, Lucas,mp helpers, Che grace of our 1020
Jelin Chak be wpth pour {prete, Amen.


€ Sent from Rome bp Dnefi-
musaferuannte.


~The Eppite; `
The Epiitle of faynete


-J a


Paule the Apoftle ynto
the Hebzues. i


Thefpzte Chapter. at


@ i ow God dealt loupngly wpth them of the olbe pme,
dufendpnge them bes propbhetes, but murhe moze merce)
hatbebe Hemed bs in that be fente bs bps owne onne.


PF the mot ercelicnt glopp of Telus Chzit, whpcehin al
thpuges is phe Co ppe father,


| n Dd intpme palkdpuerfip g må-
a =e np wapres, (rake nto fathers Æ
Caray i| bp W20pbetes : but inthete latte
a| Dales De Dathlpoken buto vs bp


NG madilepi of allthpngeg,* by fart»,


as be bathbp inberptaunce obfapned amore et-
cellent nametbhen op. i
for vnto wbich of theaungels fapdebe at a= Para..
np tpme:* Chouart mpfonne, thps dape ba rb
bag Ha thes Andagapne, +3 wll be bps fa-
tber.and be Halbe mp fonne. And agapne, when
be bapnacetb inthe yh begottenfonne into the
Wwo2lde,be lapth:*Andlet all Ë aungels of Gad erati a
wo: Gpppe biin. And onto theaungels be ldpeh
ae oes bps a Tig gan s
ersaflamme of fpe. - Xut VntotHetonne
faith* Tbp feate( Deed) halbe foz euer gener ”™!"” ®
The {ceptre of thy kingdomeisa rygbtfeepter.
Thou hakeloucd rrghteoutnes,¢ Dated iniqui-
tpe. Wiherfore, God, euen thp Ged bathanopn-
tcd the w the ople of gladnes aboue thpfelowes praen
x And thou 1020 in the begpuning bat lapd C
the foundacion of the earth,andthe heauens are
the wo2ckes eter bast es. Thep hall perpibhe,
but thou endurefre, and they all all ware olde
alfo as dothe a garinent,and asa veture thalte
thou chaunce them,¢ thep thalbe chatiged, Wut
on arteuen the fame, ¢ thy peres thal not faile
Unto whpche of the aungels fapbe beat anp Stat.cr.«
time: Sit ox mp tight band, tpl J make thine rapar
enempes thp Eoteltoles Are thep notall minj- `
{tring pretes that are fent fomintier,fo2 their
fakes Ioppche Halbe beyers of faluation.
See E Theli. Chapter.
@ Dre erhoiteth vs fo be obribirnt buto the tetor lato tbprh
ChE bath geuen be ana not to be alkerbed at the infpzmp -
tpe and lowe degre OF Chite, becaute it was neceflarp that


Cor oure fakes be Mulde take fur an bumble tate bpon hpi
_ that bempaght be ipke.buto bps bethem,


aie Derfoze toe ought fo gene themoze

YBa (ton a cenelte Dede to the thpnges that are

E || Geel E Tpoken bnto be, lealte at anp tpme

BOS Zs, we perpibe. soz pf p wozde wohych

meate Was (poke bp afigels was fedtatt

Andencerpe traitgretiion € difobedicice hii
* ai


WE tiite biii i


Ig fpeetes,and bysimint- tbet
¢


/


— a
ee a


Tres


The Epiltle of fayncte
Paul Dnto Philemon.


3 he.s.chapter.

PREET = mọ,
oerein Eea bo torscer brs (eeuabe dacivaas, AnD
loupngip to recepue bpm agapue. he

a a Tul p prefoner of Felu Chzitt
B faa rA and bzother Timothe.

| D Wh nto Dbilemd the beloucd

E and our helper, and to the belo

one ued Appia, andto Archippus

IEM ougfelotve foudiour eto thec

i Eora aroacion that ts oftbp boute.

f.Cop.t.a. ee) xOrace be vnto pou € peace

ti.cor.a, Pr God our Father, ¢ fro the Lozp Fetus CMI.

Galatea Bthanke mp God, makinge mencionalwap

eg of the inmp peapers, whe ¥ beare of thy loue

¢fapth, Which ebon baff toward the Lord Felu,

_ €towarde al f pncteg.Cop the Felowibpp of thy

5 faptb is feutefull inp knowledge of euerp qood

ea ox(wozcke epbich is in pou towarde Jefus Ch.

for we baue qreate topeand confolactoninthp

loue: becaule that bp the (Bother) thelapuctes

bartes are comfozted.


Miberfore, though Ympabt be bolde in Chit


focOmaunde the p, whpche twas thy Deutp todo
pet fozloues lake Frater belecherbe, thoughe
_- Bbeas Fam,euenolbe Baule nowe a De
conid Hep of Felu Chaift . Fbefeche the foz mp ronne X
Onefinwus tobo J baue begotten in mp bondes,
€ (wbpchin tyme pafled waste the pnpzofytable
but now pzofptable both tothe andto me ) opi
Jhane {ent homeagapne. Thou therfore receine
bim, thatts tofap mpne otne bowels, whom F
{pulode fapne bane retained w me, $ inebp teade
be mpabt baue mintifred ynto mein the bondes
of the Golpel. Neucrtbheles, without thy mpnve
wold 7 do nothing, Pthe good which thou doei
thuldnot be ag it were of neceffite but willinglp
foz bapelp be therfore departed foz a featon
Pthou (huldelk receane him foz ener not note ag
aferuaunt:but abouca feruaunt, euena bother
_ peloued, fpecpallye to me, but Dowe muche moze
D pntothe,bothin the fe, ¢alfointhe Lozdec gt
thou count metberfoze a felowe,receane bim as
my felfe. $f be baue done the anp hurt, 02 oweth
the ought,that lap to mp charge. (3 Paull bane
tozpttenit Lopthmpne owne dande ) J topll re-
compenceit. 5o that J donot faye to the, howe
that thou oweft unto me euenthpne owne felfe
allo. Guéfobzother, letme entop the inp Lozd:
Comfozte mp botvelsinp Lorde. Cruttpnge in
ne obedience : J wote vuto tbe, knowpnce,
that P wylt allo do moze then Flape:@Wozeouer
prepare melopapnge, foz Ftrute chat thozowe
the belpeof pour prayers , J fbalbe genen vnto
pou. There falutethe,Epaph2as mp Felowe pre
foner tn chif Felu , Harccus, Ariftarcus, De-
mag, Lucas,mp helpers, Che grace of our 1020
Jelin Chak be wpth pour {prete, Amen.


€ Sent from Rome bp Dnefi-
musaferuannte.


~The Eppite; `
The Epiitle of faynete


-J a


Paule the Apoftle ynto
the Hebzues. i


Thefpzte Chapter. at


@ i ow God dealt loupngly wpth them of the olbe pme,
dufendpnge them bes propbhetes, but murhe moze merce)
hatbebe Hemed bs in that be fente bs bps owne onne.


PF the mot ercelicnt glopp of Telus Chzit, whpcehin al
thpuges is phe Co ppe father,


| n Dd intpme palkdpuerfip g må-
a =e np wapres, (rake nto fathers Æ
Caray i| bp W20pbetes : but inthete latte
a| Dales De Dathlpoken buto vs bp


NG madilepi of allthpngeg,* by fart»,


as be bathbp inberptaunce obfapned amore et-
cellent nametbhen op. i
for vnto wbich of theaungels fapdebe at a= Para..
np tpme:* Chouart mpfonne, thps dape ba rb
bag Ha thes Andagapne, +3 wll be bps fa-
tber.and be Halbe mp fonne. And agapne, when
be bapnacetb inthe yh begottenfonne into the
Wwo2lde,be lapth:*Andlet all Ë aungels of Gad erati a
wo: Gpppe biin. And onto theaungels be ldpeh
ae oes bps a Tig gan s
ersaflamme of fpe. - Xut VntotHetonne
faith* Tbp feate( Deed) halbe foz euer gener ”™!"” ®
The {ceptre of thy kingdomeisa rygbtfeepter.
Thou hakeloucd rrghteoutnes,¢ Dated iniqui-
tpe. Wiherfore, God, euen thp Ged bathanopn-
tcd the w the ople of gladnes aboue thpfelowes praen
x And thou 1020 in the begpuning bat lapd C
the foundacion of the earth,andthe heauens are
the wo2ckes eter bast es. Thep hall perpibhe,
but thou endurefre, and they all all ware olde
alfo as dothe a garinent,and asa veture thalte
thou chaunce them,¢ thep thalbe chatiged, Wut
on arteuen the fame, ¢ thy peres thal not faile
Unto whpche of the aungels fapbe beat anp Stat.cr.«
time: Sit ox mp tight band, tpl J make thine rapar
enempes thp Eoteltoles Are thep notall minj- `
{tring pretes that are fent fomintier,fo2 their
fakes Ioppche Halbe beyers of faluation.
See E Theli. Chapter.
@ Dre erhoiteth vs fo be obribirnt buto the tetor lato tbprh
ChE bath geuen be ana not to be alkerbed at the infpzmp -
tpe and lowe degre OF Chite, becaute it was neceflarp that


Cor oure fakes be Mulde take fur an bumble tate bpon hpi
_ that bempaght be ipke.buto bps bethem,


aie Derfoze toe ought fo gene themoze

YBa (ton a cenelte Dede to the thpnges that are

E || Geel E Tpoken bnto be, lealte at anp tpme

BOS Zs, we perpibe. soz pf p wozde wohych

meate Was (poke bp afigels was fedtatt

Andencerpe traitgretiion € difobedicice hii
* ai


WE tiite biii i


Ig fpeetes,and bysimint- tbet
¢


/


— a
ee a


Tres


The Epiltle of fayncte
Paul Dnto Philemon.


3 he.s.chapter.

PREET = mọ,
oerein Eea bo torscer brs (eeuabe dacivaas, AnD
loupngip to recepue bpm agapue. he

a a Tul p prefoner of Felu Chzitt
B faa rA and bzother Timothe.

| D Wh nto Dbilemd the beloucd

E and our helper, and to the belo

one ued Appia, andto Archippus

IEM ougfelotve foudiour eto thec

i Eora aroacion that ts oftbp boute.

f.Cop.t.a. ee) xOrace be vnto pou € peace

ti.cor.a, Pr God our Father, ¢ fro the Lozp Fetus CMI.

Galatea Bthanke mp God, makinge mencionalwap

eg of the inmp peapers, whe ¥ beare of thy loue

¢fapth, Which ebon baff toward the Lord Felu,

_ €towarde al f pncteg.Cop the Felowibpp of thy

5 faptb is feutefull inp knowledge of euerp qood

ea ox(wozcke epbich is in pou towarde Jefus Ch.

for we baue qreate topeand confolactoninthp

loue: becaule that bp the (Bother) thelapuctes

bartes are comfozted.


Miberfore, though Ympabt be bolde in Chit


focOmaunde the p, whpche twas thy Deutp todo
pet fozloues lake Frater belecherbe, thoughe
_- Bbeas Fam,euenolbe Baule nowe a De
conid Hep of Felu Chaift . Fbefeche the foz mp ronne X
Onefinwus tobo J baue begotten in mp bondes,
€ (wbpchin tyme pafled waste the pnpzofytable
but now pzofptable both tothe andto me ) opi
Jhane {ent homeagapne. Thou therfore receine
bim, thatts tofap mpne otne bowels, whom F
{pulode fapne bane retained w me, $ inebp teade
be mpabt baue mintifred ynto mein the bondes
of the Golpel. Neucrtbheles, without thy mpnve
wold 7 do nothing, Pthe good which thou doei
thuldnot be ag it were of neceffite but willinglp
foz bapelp be therfore departed foz a featon
Pthou (huldelk receane him foz ener not note ag
aferuaunt:but abouca feruaunt, euena bother
_ peloued, fpecpallye to me, but Dowe muche moze
D pntothe,bothin the fe, ¢alfointhe Lozdec gt
thou count metberfoze a felowe,receane bim as
my felfe. $f be baue done the anp hurt, 02 oweth
the ought,that lap to mp charge. (3 Paull bane
tozpttenit Lopthmpne owne dande ) J topll re-
compenceit. 5o that J donot faye to the, howe
that thou oweft unto me euenthpne owne felfe
allo. Guéfobzother, letme entop the inp Lozd:
Comfozte mp botvelsinp Lorde. Cruttpnge in
ne obedience : J wote vuto tbe, knowpnce,
that P wylt allo do moze then Flape:@Wozeouer
prepare melopapnge, foz Ftrute chat thozowe
the belpeof pour prayers , J fbalbe genen vnto
pou. There falutethe,Epaph2as mp Felowe pre
foner tn chif Felu , Harccus, Ariftarcus, De-
mag, Lucas,mp helpers, Che grace of our 1020
Jelin Chak be wpth pour {prete, Amen.


€ Sent from Rome bp Dnefi-
musaferuannte.


~The Eppite; `
The Epiitle of faynete


-J a


Paule the Apoftle ynto
the Hebzues. i


Thefpzte Chapter. at


@ i ow God dealt loupngly wpth them of the olbe pme,
dufendpnge them bes propbhetes, but murhe moze merce)
hatbebe Hemed bs in that be fente bs bps owne onne.


PF the mot ercelicnt glopp of Telus Chzit, whpcehin al
thpuges is phe Co ppe father,


| n Dd intpme palkdpuerfip g må-
a =e np wapres, (rake nto fathers Æ
Caray i| bp W20pbetes : but inthete latte
a| Dales De Dathlpoken buto vs bp


NG madilepi of allthpngeg,* by fart»,


as be bathbp inberptaunce obfapned amore et-
cellent nametbhen op. i
for vnto wbich of theaungels fapdebe at a= Para..
np tpme:* Chouart mpfonne, thps dape ba rb
bag Ha thes Andagapne, +3 wll be bps fa-
tber.and be Halbe mp fonne. And agapne, when
be bapnacetb inthe yh begottenfonne into the
Wwo2lde,be lapth:*Andlet all Ë aungels of Gad erati a
wo: Gpppe biin. And onto theaungels be ldpeh
ae oes bps a Tig gan s
ersaflamme of fpe. - Xut VntotHetonne
faith* Tbp feate( Deed) halbe foz euer gener ”™!"” ®
The {ceptre of thy kingdomeisa rygbtfeepter.
Thou hakeloucd rrghteoutnes,¢ Dated iniqui-
tpe. Wiherfore, God, euen thp Ged bathanopn-
tcd the w the ople of gladnes aboue thpfelowes praen
x And thou 1020 in the begpuning bat lapd C
the foundacion of the earth,andthe heauens are
the wo2ckes eter bast es. Thep hall perpibhe,
but thou endurefre, and they all all ware olde
alfo as dothe a garinent,and asa veture thalte
thou chaunce them,¢ thep thalbe chatiged, Wut
on arteuen the fame, ¢ thy peres thal not faile
Unto whpche of the aungels fapbe beat anp Stat.cr.«
time: Sit ox mp tight band, tpl J make thine rapar
enempes thp Eoteltoles Are thep notall minj- `
{tring pretes that are fent fomintier,fo2 their
fakes Ioppche Halbe beyers of faluation.
See E Theli. Chapter.
@ Dre erhoiteth vs fo be obribirnt buto the tetor lato tbprh
ChE bath geuen be ana not to be alkerbed at the infpzmp -
tpe and lowe degre OF Chite, becaute it was neceflarp that


Cor oure fakes be Mulde take fur an bumble tate bpon hpi
_ that bempaght be ipke.buto bps bethem,


aie Derfoze toe ought fo gene themoze

YBa (ton a cenelte Dede to the thpnges that are

E || Geel E Tpoken bnto be, lealte at anp tpme

BOS Zs, we perpibe. soz pf p wozde wohych

meate Was (poke bp afigels was fedtatt

Andencerpe traitgretiion € difobedicice hii
* ai


WE tiite biii i


Ig fpeetes,and bysimint- tbet
¢


/


— a
ee a


Tres


To lhe Heboues:


a tutte recompence of rewarde, porce thal we ef

cape, pf we defpple fo great alaluacpon, whpch

at the Epatte beqanne to be preached of the 1020

bpm felfe, and thas confpamed onto Ys warde,

sjat.rbie-Dp them that bearde its * God bearpng wptnes

therto,voth with (panes and wonders allo and

topthodpuerfe mpzacies, and gpttes of the bolp
qbooll,accozdpng tobis owne wpil.

- Koz vnto the Aungels bath be not fubdued

the wozldeto come, whereof toe lpeake, but one

Bie. bile Ina cecéapne place Wptnelled fapinge:* Ubat


s Serta ig man: that thouart mpndefull ofbym/ D2 the


conne ofman, that tbou ppfptett bpm: Chou
madet bpm a lptlelower then the Angels thou
__. baftecrowned pm pth bonoureand glorye,
Pe iit anbxbaltefet bpmaboue the workes of thy ban
"pes. Thor hatte putte all thpnges is fabteccp=
on onder bis fecte, Jn that he putte allebpnges
pnder bpm, be lefte notbpng that is not put yn
Derbyin. Menerthelefie, we fe noe pee all tapn-
ges {ubdued vnto ppm, but him that was made
| lelle thenthe Xungelg, wele that it was Jelug
whtch is crotoned pe glozpe ard honaure fos
 thefufierpnge of dearbe: that hebp the qraceof
God Mulde tate ofdeath Foz all men.
oz it became bpm,fozmwbome ace alltppn
~ ges and bp whomtare all chpnges( after that be
bad bzought manp fonnes to qloppe)> be Hulde
_maketbe Lorde of thep2 faluacpon perfect tho-
rowe affli¢cpons.ffo2z both bep fanctifpeth and
thep whiche are lanctifped, areallofone. soz
Which caules lake he is notathamed tocal them
b2ethzen,lapinge: J wpl declare thp name vuto
-6ta.rrtic, MP Deethzen,* in the mpbdes of thp congregacp
Jobard on wply pzaple the.Andagqapne: 3 wpt putinp
truff in bpm. And agapne:bebolde, bere am F,¢
thechplogen whome God hath geuen me.
ozas muchetbenas the copien ate pas
_ takers of the fetbe and blonde, bealfo]
ipkewple toke patte wp th them that(thozowe
D death) be mpgdte ernel bpm that had lozathyp
ouer death, that ts tolape the Deuel andthat he
- mpgbtedtlpuertpem, whiche thozowe feare.of
Deathe were allfbepre lyfe tpmefubdued punto
` bondage. Sfoz be tno place taketh onbpm the
Angels, but the leede of Abzabam taketh be on
© ppm. thyerefoze,inall thpngesit became hpi
to be made Ipke onto bis bzetbzen, phe mpabte
be mercpfull,and a fapthfull bpe peat ir thpn:
gos concernpng God, fo? to pourg: pie peoples
pnneg. Jeo? inp it fogtuned pim felfe to be temp
ted, pe ig able to lucker them alfop ave tempted.
| | Chet. Chapter. |
Berequireth be to beobedpenc bnto (hc worne of cbeitt


. thich is moze worth then the ceremonpall lator of aj olre,
. Bbepunpihment of fuch as wpl nebes barocn their betes.


vance ECTO Holy bzeåtbzen, partakers
on py we OF be E A fic EDN tD
Di


ih


obtmfelfe pa


Hol. lercbhif:
Wut be that ozdepred all thyngests Gov. And
Doles verelp was fapthfulinall bps boule ag
ampnp ter, to beare wptnefle of thote thynges
which were to belpeken afterward. Wut Chit
as a lone, bath rule ouer the boufe, whole boule
ave the, pf wr bolde Eate the confpdence and the
xteioplpng of that bope, nto theende. Koma. bjs
— Wiberfoze(as the holy goottfaptp:)to dape
pf pe wpll beare bis vopce, harden not pour bar
teg âs in the pronokpna,tn the dape of temptas
cpon ing wploerncs, where pour fathers temp-
ted oA (ae me and fawe mp workes.fortpe 2
peare.Uiherfore J was greucd with that gene:
tacpon,¢lapbe : Chep bo altoape cere mthep2e
ertes:thep verelp paue not knowé mp wapes,
0 that J livare inmyp tozathe:thep thallnot ens
ter intompeette: Cake hedebzeathzen, leet at
any tyme there beinanp of pou a frowarde bert
fubiect tnta wnbelefe, phe thulbedeparte front
tie vam God:but erbozte pe one another dap
lp, while it is called to Dap, lelE enp of pou were
hard berted thozow the deceptiulnefleoffpnne .
We ate made partakers of Cheptte, pi we
kepe fure (onto the ende)the beqinnpnge of the C ;
{ubftaunce,folongeagitigfapde:todapepfpe `
wpll beare bis vopce, barden not poure partes,
asin tbe prouoking, £o} fome when thep bearde
ua prouoke:bowebeit not all that came oute of
Cgppte by oles. Hut with whom washe vit
pleatedfoztpepearess Was benotdpf{pleateo
wpth chem that Hadde fpnned, whole carkales
Were ouerthzowen inthe defert: Co who {ware
he that thep Houlde vot enter intobpsrefte,but
Yufothem that were not obedpents And wee
that tbcp could not enter in,becaule of wnbelef,

C Che .ttit, Chapter.
AA aaa
See Ct be fearetherfore,leftenpe of pou %

À 4 Sall aa Kakyngerbe promes of cntrpnge


ee Kars into bisrett thuldleme at anp tyme
ey, ben (0 Dave bene Dpfapopneted. f£02 onto


See YS it ig declared, ag welasvntothe. +
Wut it profpted not them , that thep bearde the
wozbe:becaule thep whiche hearde it, coupled it
not topth fapth.s€o2 toc whiche baune belened da
enter into bis vefte,as be fapde: Euenas Fhaue
fwozte in mp tozath thep thal not entre into mp
rete. And that [pake he verelp longe after that
the toozkes tere made: and the foundacpons of
the wolo lapbe. Fo? befpake tn acertapn place


of the feucnth dap onthys wplex. And God did Senei;


rel the. vit. Bay fro all bys wozkes. And in thig 5
place agapne: Thep Hall not entreintomp reft.
SHepng therfoze tt foloweth:thatlome mule
cntre cherinto,andthep (to tobomett was fp2tt
fea ched entred not therein fo? bnbeleucs fake


th ceated from all bys owne wo2kes, as Gon
| ki.. Dp


To lhe Heboues:


a tutte recompence of rewarde, porce thal we ef

cape, pf we defpple fo great alaluacpon, whpch

at the Epatte beqanne to be preached of the 1020

bpm felfe, and thas confpamed onto Ys warde,

sjat.rbie-Dp them that bearde its * God bearpng wptnes

therto,voth with (panes and wonders allo and

topthodpuerfe mpzacies, and gpttes of the bolp
qbooll,accozdpng tobis owne wpil.

- Koz vnto the Aungels bath be not fubdued

the wozldeto come, whereof toe lpeake, but one

Bie. bile Ina cecéapne place Wptnelled fapinge:* Ubat


s Serta ig man: that thouart mpndefull ofbym/ D2 the


conne ofman, that tbou ppfptett bpm: Chou
madet bpm a lptlelower then the Angels thou
__. baftecrowned pm pth bonoureand glorye,
Pe iit anbxbaltefet bpmaboue the workes of thy ban
"pes. Thor hatte putte all thpnges is fabteccp=
on onder bis fecte, Jn that he putte allebpnges
pnder bpm, be lefte notbpng that is not put yn
Derbyin. Menerthelefie, we fe noe pee all tapn-
ges {ubdued vnto ppm, but him that was made
| lelle thenthe Xungelg, wele that it was Jelug
whtch is crotoned pe glozpe ard honaure fos
 thefufierpnge of dearbe: that hebp the qraceof
God Mulde tate ofdeath Foz all men.
oz it became bpm,fozmwbome ace alltppn
~ ges and bp whomtare all chpnges( after that be
bad bzought manp fonnes to qloppe)> be Hulde
_maketbe Lorde of thep2 faluacpon perfect tho-
rowe affli¢cpons.ffo2z both bep fanctifpeth and
thep whiche are lanctifped, areallofone. soz
Which caules lake he is notathamed tocal them
b2ethzen,lapinge: J wpl declare thp name vuto
-6ta.rrtic, MP Deethzen,* in the mpbdes of thp congregacp
Jobard on wply pzaple the.Andagqapne: 3 wpt putinp
truff in bpm. And agapne:bebolde, bere am F,¢
thechplogen whome God hath geuen me.
ozas muchetbenas the copien ate pas
_ takers of the fetbe and blonde, bealfo]
ipkewple toke patte wp th them that(thozowe
D death) be mpgdte ernel bpm that had lozathyp
ouer death, that ts tolape the Deuel andthat he
- mpgbtedtlpuertpem, whiche thozowe feare.of
Deathe were allfbepre lyfe tpmefubdued punto
` bondage. Sfoz be tno place taketh onbpm the
Angels, but the leede of Abzabam taketh be on
© ppm. thyerefoze,inall thpngesit became hpi
to be made Ipke onto bis bzetbzen, phe mpabte
be mercpfull,and a fapthfull bpe peat ir thpn:
gos concernpng God, fo? to pourg: pie peoples
pnneg. Jeo? inp it fogtuned pim felfe to be temp
ted, pe ig able to lucker them alfop ave tempted.
| | Chet. Chapter. |
Berequireth be to beobedpenc bnto (hc worne of cbeitt


. thich is moze worth then the ceremonpall lator of aj olre,
. Bbepunpihment of fuch as wpl nebes barocn their betes.


vance ECTO Holy bzeåtbzen, partakers
on py we OF be E A fic EDN tD
Di


ih


obtmfelfe pa


Hol. lercbhif:
Wut be that ozdepred all thyngests Gov. And
Doles verelp was fapthfulinall bps boule ag
ampnp ter, to beare wptnefle of thote thynges
which were to belpeken afterward. Wut Chit
as a lone, bath rule ouer the boufe, whole boule
ave the, pf wr bolde Eate the confpdence and the
xteioplpng of that bope, nto theende. Koma. bjs
— Wiberfoze(as the holy goottfaptp:)to dape
pf pe wpll beare bis vopce, harden not pour bar
teg âs in the pronokpna,tn the dape of temptas
cpon ing wploerncs, where pour fathers temp-
ted oA (ae me and fawe mp workes.fortpe 2
peare.Uiherfore J was greucd with that gene:
tacpon,¢lapbe : Chep bo altoape cere mthep2e
ertes:thep verelp paue not knowé mp wapes,
0 that J livare inmyp tozathe:thep thallnot ens
ter intompeette: Cake hedebzeathzen, leet at
any tyme there beinanp of pou a frowarde bert
fubiect tnta wnbelefe, phe thulbedeparte front
tie vam God:but erbozte pe one another dap
lp, while it is called to Dap, lelE enp of pou were
hard berted thozow the deceptiulnefleoffpnne .
We ate made partakers of Cheptte, pi we
kepe fure (onto the ende)the beqinnpnge of the C ;
{ubftaunce,folongeagitigfapde:todapepfpe `
wpll beare bis vopce, barden not poure partes,
asin tbe prouoking, £o} fome when thep bearde
ua prouoke:bowebeit not all that came oute of
Cgppte by oles. Hut with whom washe vit
pleatedfoztpepearess Was benotdpf{pleateo
wpth chem that Hadde fpnned, whole carkales
Were ouerthzowen inthe defert: Co who {ware
he that thep Houlde vot enter intobpsrefte,but
Yufothem that were not obedpents And wee
that tbcp could not enter in,becaule of wnbelef,

C Che .ttit, Chapter.
AA aaa
See Ct be fearetherfore,leftenpe of pou %

À 4 Sall aa Kakyngerbe promes of cntrpnge


ee Kars into bisrett thuldleme at anp tyme
ey, ben (0 Dave bene Dpfapopneted. f£02 onto


See YS it ig declared, ag welasvntothe. +
Wut it profpted not them , that thep bearde the
wozbe:becaule thep whiche hearde it, coupled it
not topth fapth.s€o2 toc whiche baune belened da
enter into bis vefte,as be fapde: Euenas Fhaue
fwozte in mp tozath thep thal not entre into mp
rete. And that [pake he verelp longe after that
the toozkes tere made: and the foundacpons of
the wolo lapbe. Fo? befpake tn acertapn place


of the feucnth dap onthys wplex. And God did Senei;


rel the. vit. Bay fro all bys wozkes. And in thig 5
place agapne: Thep Hall not entreintomp reft.
SHepng therfoze tt foloweth:thatlome mule
cntre cherinto,andthep (to tobomett was fp2tt
fea ched entred not therein fo? bnbeleucs fake


th ceated from all bys owne wo2kes, as Gon
| ki.. Dp


The Eppie.


ppafrome bis.

Let v9 ftudp therfoze to entre into that reff,

letanp manfallafter the fame example of wn-
belefe,f€o2 the woade of Godigqupcke,¢ migh
tyein operacpon, and ibarper then anp two ed-
ged fweard:andentreth though,enen vntop de
nibpng afonder of the foule and the fpzete,and p
fopntes and the marp:¢is a difcerner of though
teg and of the intentes ofthe hert:netberis there
anp creature that isnot manpfelt in p Cyqbt of
bpm: Wut all thinges arenaked and ope Dato p
epes of bpm of whome welpeake.

D> — Sepng then,thatwebaucagreathygbe
peat whiche isentred into heauen( euen gelus
the fonne of God) lette vs olde the potettpon:

o o(ofoure bope.) JE 02 We Pane not anbpgd pealt
which cannot bauc compa fipon on our infirmp:
pdiip.tia tpes, but wag in all popntes tempted, lpheas
| - - weare:but pet witboutipnne. Let vs therfoze
fro.Frd.b- eg boldip vito the feate of grace, that te map
pes Spat and fpnde grace to elpetn tyme

of nede. |
C Tbhe.v.Chapter. >R
Ebri our bre preat, and irat of grace:¢ mozeercelient

then the bpe prettes of the cloelawe.

A peewee D2 cucrp bpe Pereak that istaken
Ore A Frome among men, is ozdepned fog
DA mé,in tbinges pertapipng to Gov,


CTAN FED
PAS (prune, wbichcan paue compafipon


€


SY Se

on tbe icnozaunte,and on tbem that arre out of
the ee 02 ag much as be bim felfe alfo ts com
paficd wprbinfpzmptpe. And foz the fame infir
mptpes ake be ig bounde to offer fo: fpnneg,as
wel foz him felfe as Fog the people. AndDno man
taney honour una om Fon bethat is cal

led of God, a8 Was Aaron. |
% War fo Cheap ft alfo glozifped not bpm felfe
to bemabde the pre prcalt:but be that {apd unto
ocamacs PPM, * thou act mp lonne, thps dave baue J be-
adteric. gotten the, glozifped bpm. As belaperballoin
proje. ib a nother place: + thouart a Preah foz cucr after
~ theozder of Helchiledech I which inthe dapes
of big felt, whan be bad ofred vp pzapecs and
fupplicacpons,wpth Eronge crping and teareg
(vntobim that was able to fauc bium fro death)
and was beard becaule of bis reuerence,though
be were the fonne-*of Sov pet learned be obedp
** ence, bp theletbpnges whiche be ufred: and be
bepnge parfect, was tbe caule of eternallfalua
cpon nto all thé that obeped Dpm:ets called of
Sodanbye prele,atter Pozder of SHelchrfedech,
Wi bercof we wolde fpeake manp thpnges,
buttbep arebatde tobe vettered:lepngepe are
pull of bearpnere. o: when as concernpng the
tyme, peougbt tobe teachers, pet Daue pe nedea
gapne,that weteache pou the tpatte pzpnepples
ofthe wode of God:¢ are become lucheas baue
{.cop.iti.a, nede ofxmplke:and not of rongemcat:fo2 euc-
rp man tbat is fedde witb mplbe, ig therpert in
the woad of rpgbtuoulnes. oz bets but a babe
i Wut Krange meate belongethto thepm
that are parfecte,cucn thote, whicbe( bp reafon


of ple) baue thepz wpttesexcecpleatodpfcerne .


bothere good and enelt,


x


TThe vi.Chapter.


C te goeth forthe with the chpnge that hebeganhe (athe
latter ende of (he fptte chapter, g erbejtech thé not to fapnt
but to be ftedfall and pacpent , to; (o muche as Gob is Cure
mbpe promele.


y
pay Herfoze leaupigeihe doctryne, $ B
260 Bay avertapueth tothe begpnnpnge of
em See) chepiten men, let bs qofozth vito
S pee che perfeccpon,not laying agapne
red 2 Sa the founDdacpon epeta 6


beauenlp gpfte, and were eb off good on a. ee ee


thep fallavoape(andag concerning them felues
stucitpe the fonne of Goda frete. and make a €
moche of bpm )tbat thep Huld be renuedagapn'
a een bieb l

_ _- Seor the earth which dipnketh in the rapne, :
that commeth ofte vpon it,and bzpugetb foztbe %
berbes mete fo: themthat dacilert receiueth blef
fpnge of God. Wut chat qrounde which beareth
thoes and biers,is repzroued and is npe tnta
curfpnige: whofe endeis to be burned. Meuerthe«
les( Deare frendes) we teutte tole better of pou,
and thynges whpche accompanpeth (aluacpon


though we thus lpeake.jfoz Gods not pnrighb


tcous * that be (hulbdefozgette pour Wo2ke and goes. proe


laboure that proceadeth of loue, wobpcbe lotic pe C
ele ty bps name, whpche baue minpitred yn-

tothe lapntes and pet minpiter. Pec,and wede

{pre that euerpe one Hf ewe the fame dilp=

Gence tothe full tablplapnee of bope euen vns
totheende that pe fapnt not, butbe flowers of

them, which thozow faptb and pacpence tecetue

the inberptaunce of the pzompte.

Fo: When God made pzomes to Abzabam,

bicaule be hadno greater tolwearebyrbelwate teen.rite
bp bpm felfe, fapinge. Surelp J wpll blefle the

and multiply pin Dede. And{o after that be pad

tarted pactentlp, pe entoped the prom es Ifo më

verelp forare by him thatis greater then them D
(elues,andxan othe toconfp2me tbetbpng:isto erov.tr.c.
them an enbde of all trpfe. o God wpillinge ve

tpabo gra jd to ewe nto the bepzes of pzo

mes,tbe (tablenes of bpscouncel,added an othe:

that bp two immutable thpnges (in whpebe tt.

was wnpollpble that God thuldelpe) toe mpght

baueá trong confolacion, which bptberto baue

fied, for to bolde fat the boope that is fet befoze
b8:tobich Hoope we bolde asan ancre of p foulé

both lure and (hedfatt, wbyche bopealfaentreth

in,titto thofe thpnges which are within p vaple

where the foze runner is foz vs entred euen Je

Tus that ig made an * bpe pre ft foz euer after the pep. vcit.s


o2d¢r OF Delchpledech.
C Tbe. vii. Chapter,


 (Decompareth the pzeethone of Chipi bnto apelebore:
cih butte be fartemoze ercellent, ae ei
Tors


~v’)


ee


j
|


$


|


aaa


tothe Heboues.


- Bureth ener) hathanenerlattpnae preatthove.


Sen.ritit.D Ge
Palae E ee bpe God, met Abrabam asherctur
Payee


is milled bp interpretation, kypng of rpabtcouf:
nelle-after that yng of Salem(thatistolape:
kynge of peace Without father, without mother
without kpnne, and pathneptbher begpunynae
Of bapes no? pet ende of lpfe:butis likened bnto
the [onne of God and continucth a pze fe2eucr
Confpdze whata man this was , vnto whome
l alfo the Patriarke Abzabam gaue tptbes of the
vis Doyles. Bud verelpextholechplozenof Lest,
whpche recepuethe otfpce ofthe preaftes , baue
«a commaundemente fo tabe (accozdpngeto the
latve )tpthes of the people, thatistolap,oftbeir
beethzen:pea tbough they fozonee out of the lop
nes of Ababa. Sut be whole kpnredisnot
“counted amonge them, recepued tpties of Poza
Ham, ¢€ bletled him that hat thepzompiies. And
oman Denypeth, but that be tobich is leffe,recey-
ueth blefipng of bim wbich is qreater.Aind bere
men that dpe recepue tpthes.25ut there be recep
uethtpthes,of whom itis tvptnefied that help-
uct). Bnd to lape the truthe, Leutbpm lelfallo
which wlethbtorecepuetptbhes , papedtytbesto
25 Abraham. Wo? he was pet inthe lopnes of bps

father, when elchifedech met Abzabam,
somatie æ Vinowe therfore perfectioncame bp the
SaaS meatthoneofthe Leuptes (for pnder that preft-
y Dobethe peopte cetepuenebe lawe) what netet |
it forthermoze, that an other peeatt (hulde rple
to be called after the o2d2e of Selchifed.ch,anv
not aftcr the 0202¢ of Aaron? {oz pF the preatt-
bode be tranflated, then of neceffptpe multe the

latwe be tranflated alfo.

FFozrHe of whom thele thpnees are fpokenper
fapneth Dufoan other tribe, of who neuer man
ferued at the aultare.jfo2 tt is enident that oure

ejatht.a FZ ode lprongex of the trpbe of Juda, of whpche
trpbe pake Woles nothpnge concernpng prett-
bode. Anditis peta moze cupdent thpng, pfaf-
tev the fimilitubde of G)elcbtledech , there arpfe
another pect whichis not madeafter the lawe
of the catnal commaundement, but after the po
wee oftbeendleflelpfe. (J€o2 ,afterthis maner
rab tate DOED De teftifpexthou art a preek fozeues after
the ooze of G)clcbiledech) Chentye commaun-
E dement that tenta foze-ig Oifanulled bpcaule of
' xom bita Weakenelle g vnprofptablenefle.fForxthe lame
Saaie Mougdtnothpnge to perfection: but wagsnin=
troductionto abetterbope , bp the whpeche we
pane npe Unto God: And therfore isita better
Dope, bpcaule the thpnae was not done without
an och. To? thole preattes were made withoute
: an ofp, but this pealt witban oth, bphpm that
prera APV ONtO bpm. x Che Lorde fware, and wll
~- nottepent: Chou artea preakk fo2 ener after the
ordre of Helebiledech. And foz that caufe wag

- Jesa Fablpiher of a better tefkament.
aud amonge them manpe were made prea-
es, bpcaufe thep were not {uffced to endure bp


thersatonof death Out this ma(bicaule peene


Koi lexis.


CUiherfoze, be ts hable aifo cuer to faue them top

ottcrimoft, that come bunto Sod bp hpm: (einge

be cuerlp lcthxtomake intercefipon fo? ps. Tpm. fa
fto? luche an bye pzeeft it became Ys to haue iIohu.t v

whichis holpe,parmeleffe, vndefpled feparated

frö fpnnerg,made bpertben peauen.Wbichene= -

deth not Daplp(as yonder bpe pre ltes) *to offre A

bp lacrifpee, fozi fo? bis otwne fpnnes, and then =e

foz ý peoples fynneg. Woz that opd he ones whe

be offred bp hym felfe: x fto? Plawe maketh mE a eyje.v.a

p2etkes:whpchebaue infyamitic. but the worde

ofthe oth that came fpns thelawe , maketh the

fone preat, whichis perfect foz cucrmoze.


CThbe. viit. Chapter:
C Shrokpee of Chpt is moze worth chenthe ntealtes
ofpce of the olog lawestwbich was birperfect and ther!
fore abrogate, :


Eee E Jt the thinges which we paue fpoké _
QA y thisistheppth:thatxwebaueluch Ft
i baa) | au Dpe peectt as (peteth on theright Detre»
ACA bande ofthe feate of bis maietpein””
Ame! Deane and ts amintiire of bolp tht

Ges, E of the true tabernacle, whiche Gobppahet

aud not man: Eo? euerpe bpe preet isozdepnen

to offre apftesand facctfpces : wherfoze tt igot
neceflitte,that this man Daue fomewhbat allo to

offre. Foz be were not a preet pf be were on the

earth where are metes, that accozdpnae tothe
lawe offre gpftes whichferue puto the example,
and*(hadowe of beauenlp thpnges: enenas the cettor.s.¢
antwer of God was qpuen vnto Boles, when Dera
be was abouttofpnpth the tabernacle. xTake ero, erp.
bede ( fapde be) that thoumakeallthpnees ac- actu. vit. t
cozdDynge tothe patron wobiche is pew fo the
inthe mount.

Wut nove hath he obtapned a preathoone 25

fo moche the moze ercellente,as bets the media.
toure of a better Celta ee ae colts

firmed in better prompfies. Eo? if the fozi teta

mét bad ben fuch, $no faulecould Daue benfoud

init, tben Huld no place baue ben fought Foz the
feconde. Eo inrebukpnge them be fapeth vnto
them: * Sebold the dapes com( fapty the Lozd) zere.rrcie
and J Wyll fynplibe Dpon the poule of Frac,

and vpon the boufe of Zuda,a newe teftament,

not lphe the tefFament that F made with thep2z

fathers in thatdape , when ¥ toke them bp the

bandeg, to leadethem out of the lande of Egypt

Fo? they continued notinmp teftament,and J
regarded them not,fapth the Lode.

So2 thists theeeFament that X wyll make
with the boufe of Fleael: After thole dapeg( fap: €
eth the Lorde) J wyplput mp lawes intheir min
Lesand tithep2 hertes Y wpll wzpte them and
A wpil be they? God, and thep Halbe mp people
And they Hall not teache enerp man bis nepab-
bour,and euerp man bis beotber, faping:know
the Lozde:fo2 they (hall knowe me, from pleat
bntothe moof of them:fEo2 J wpll bemerepEut
ouct thep2 vurpabteoulnetie and thep2 punues g
thep2 intquitics wpll ¥ thpnke Hyon nomozre.
3uthat helapetha newe Ceftament, bebathe
Wopiie out the olde. Foz Chat whiche is woene
out and Weered olde, ts readpe to tanri Gane

i d Ë


|


The Eprlile


dg. chapter,
C Thep: weg Deir. CN ae ölbe tefament, and
bow f arte the newe ercelicth it.


arte A pe olde teftament then bad verely
peo AG 3 odinannces and ferupnges of God
A Teena AND pee ae


Debre. bid
and biit.a


ipetib qootesandcalues: but* bp bis owne bloude, be
centred in onesinto the holp place,and founde e-

_ ternallrcoemption. Fx
Aeuiroic  fEozpfthe* bloudeof oxen and of qootes,¢
| the alipes of a ponge cowe when tt thas {pzpn-
kled,purifpeth the vneleane ag touching the pu
rifping of the flefibe-how moche moze Hall the
bloude of Chzpfte( wbhiche thozowe the efernall
{ppzite offred dpi felfe without {pot to God)to
Jourge pour confcience from Deed wozrkes, forto

rue the lpupnge God?

And foz this caufe ts be the x medpatour of
thenewe teftaihent, that thozow death whiche
chaunced,fo2 the redemption of thole tranlarel=
fours that were Dnder the fpr tetament they
Which are called myghtrecepue the pzomplle of
eternallinheritsunce: Jaor where asisa Te
ffamet,there mutt alfo( of neceflite be thedeath
of him that maketh the Ceftament. soz the Te
ftamet taketh auctozite whe men are deed:For it
is pet of no balue,as longe as pe maketh fte-
famétis alpue:foz which caule alfonepther the
fy2t teffament was o2depned without bloude.
ffc? when oles bab declaredall the cémaun-
€ dementtoall the people accozdpng to the latwe

be toke the bloude ofcalues and of gootes, with
Waterand Purple, woland plope,and [psmnbied


‘2p, fia


both the booneand all the people, faping: x this morri?
ig the bloude of the Ceftament which Godbath 7
appcinted vnto pou:<)ozeoucr, be fpzinkled the
tabernacle ith blonde allo, andallthe mpnp=
ftrpnge telfelis. And almooft all thypnaes ate bp
the latwe pourged whith blonde , and withoute
{peddpnge of bloude igno remy fion.

tis nede then that the fimilitndes of hea-
uenlp thpnges be purifped with fuchethbpnges,
but that the beauenlp thinges them felues be pu
rifped eewin Pann LEIDE DA Wola TA i
x ffo Chul is notentredintothe holy places p acta.roic..
are made With handes(wbpehe are fpmilituyeg e >
of true thinges ) but ts entred into verp branen |
forxto appeare now in the fpabt of God fo? VS i gopn.tia
not to offre bpm felfe oftenxag the bpe preek eniru song -a
trethinto P Dolp place, enerp pere witb Erañge =
bloude, fo? then mult be Daue often fuffred fpns ;
the wozldebegatne. Wut now inthe ende ot the
woe batb be appeared ones,to puttefpnne to A


üpabt by the offepnae bp of bpm felfe. i ‘
Andasttisappopnted dntoall men, that — |
tüep thal ones dpe, and they commeth the iudge © eo!


ment:*cuen fo was Cheptt ones offred.to take noma.b.b
awape the Cynnes ofmany, and vnto them that Pr

loke fos bym, Wall fe appeare agapne without

fyune Dutofaluacpon. |
CThe.r. Chapter. |


t
d


E d verve faflpon ofthe topngep them |
BI a CoA (clues) can nener with thote facrifp-= |
SSA ete S wbich thep offre, pere bp pere'co= |
tpnuallp make the commers there puto perfect. =
Wo? wolde not then thofe facrifpces baue ceafed

to baue bene offered , bpcaisfe that the offerers
ones pourged thouldehauc bad nomoze cõfience |
of{pnness Meuertheleflesimthofle (acrifpces,ig |
there mencpon madeotfynnes cucrp pere. xpo? Louro e f
the blouùe of oxen and of gootes cannot takea .
Wwapelpnnes. »

Wherfoze when He comnicth into the wolde 5
Helapcth: x Sactityce and offtpnge thou wol sear prs
Delt not baue: but a bodp halk thou ozdepnedme
Wurntoffepnges alfo forfynne hak thou not a=
lowed: Then lapd ¥:lo, Jam here. Fn the begin
npng of the boke itis t2itté of me that Ftbulde
do tdp wpl, D God. Absue, when he fapetp:fa-
crifpce and offrpng,¢ burntlacrifices and fpnne
oftrprges thou wolDdeff not baue,acpther batte
thou alowed them ( whiche pet are offred by the
lawe,then fapod be:lo, Jam bere to do thy wll,

D God: he taketh awa pe the Fpzfte to abipth
thelatter,bp the which wpl we are mate polpe,
cuen bp the offrpnge of the bodp of Jelu Chpt
onesfo? all. ? €

Andeucep preci is redp daplp mpniftrpnee
and offepnge often tpines One maner of oblacp-
on, wbyche can neuer takt awapelpnnes. wut
this man after be hath offred one facrpfyce fo? cppe.tv,
fpnnes, is (et Downe foz cuer *ontberpabt bao Etat


of God, and from bence fozthe tarperh epi bys srt
oes


Fooes be made bps Fote t ole. soz with otic offe
rpng bath be mabe perfect for ener, thé that are


Beles,  obleyr,


=z,


> fancttfped. The Holp Ghot him elfeallo bea: Covet fant


reth be recotde,cuen tobe be tolde before. Thys
isthe teftament that J wpll make unto them:


| wpll 3J wipt them, and their fpnues andinigut=


aftecrtbofedapes(fapeth the Lozde) A wplput KEE
‘mplatoesinetbepabertcs , andinthep2 mpnodes 7
L


types pl J remébernomoze. Andivpereromil= 487


{yon of thefethingesis.theris nomoze offering
aro Fox tpnine. Sepng therfore beetheen,that by the
+30 i3  meanes of the bloudeof Jeluxwe baue lpberty
xom dw toentremmto holp place, bp che newe elpuing
HedieD tap whyche be hate preparedfoz vs,thzough

the vaple(thatistofaye by bps fleme ) Andes

ingealfothat toc have anbpe peeat whichis ru
ler otiertheboufe of God, let VS Draw npe with

a truc bert tnfurefapth, tpapnckled tn our per-

tes andthe enclconfcpence put awape and wa-

- Medin oure bodpes with pure water, let vs kë-
j ae eee a
rpng(fo2 bets faythfull that proriufed) andlet
ps confpder one anotper, to the ttente that we
mape prouoke vutoloue, and togood wortkes

not fozlakpna the felototbpppe that toc bane a:

monge oure felues, asthe maner offome is:but

let vs exbozte one another, g fo murhe the moze
becaulepele that theDapedzaivcthnpe. ~~
€ x forpfwelpnne wplfallpatter pwe have
satrio veceaued the bnotblege of ptruth,thereremap-
upein, Neth no moze facrifpcefoz {pnnes but a fearful
loking foz"gudgement,and violent fpze: fm
PA alūeuounr theaduerlaryeg.Dethatdelpplet
Dmi et ores law,dpeth wptbout mercp*pnrer two
ticos pii b O2 thre ptnelies, bow nich fozer (fuppofe:pe)

-fball he be punpihed whpcb treaderh under fote

-~ thefonne of God:and counteth the bloude of the

Ceament, where topth be Waslanctifped, as

-. an vnbolpe thpnge.and doth Dpipononre fo the

fe {prete of grace. For weknowedim p bathfapd
pe.rcrii.o-* Jt belongeth vito me totake vengeance : F
Praa copleeconipence fapeth the Lozd: à nd agapne,
>" the Loade thal Fudge bis people. Ft ig a fearful

thing tofallintotbe bandes of the liupng Gop

: Call to remembzaunce the bayes that are

pafled,inthe which after pe bad veceaucdlpgbhe

‘peendured agreate fpabh of aduerlities, partip

7 whple almé wondzedand waled at pouto? the
' cico fpameand tribulacton that was darne puto pou
pe partlpe, tobplepe became companpons of them

Which fo paled their time. Foz pe becam parta

kergalfo of the afflicctons which happened tho

~ gowemp bondes, ¢ toke in worth thelpoplpng

z of poure goodes, and that with gladues, bnow:
6 wgein pour feiues, hotoe that pe baue inbeau€

~~ abetterandan cnduringe fubffaunce. Caf not
awape therfore poure confpdence,whbpch bathe

â greate recompence of retbarbe. Jfozrpe baue

» nede of pacpence:that after pe baue done p wpl
of God, pe mpabt receaue the promps. Foz pet

a Lerpe lptell wbple,and be that thal come wpl
Abac i a corie ana Ww) dae “alts mtag nente roe lpue
omaia bpfapth, AndpE be wprddza twe bpm felfe mp
Salani? Fonte pal baueno pleartice tn him, Ht is not we

P Withdzatve our [elues ongo Danacion, but Wwe


‘By fapth was* Enoch tratiflated, that be .cmd,0
fhuldenot fe death: nepther teas befounbde, fog Sap.
g Done taken bim atoape. Eor afoge be wag anta

ské


odei- Sahib
chuedebethpnaes whpeh wercas pet not fene, oF"?


thozotve the wbpeh Arke, be x condempned the satrio
wode and became bepreof therpapteoulnes >
whycheigaccozdpnge tofapth.

By fapth «Abraham, when be was called, xoer sts
obeyed, rogo out intoa place, whpche he Hulde 44-9"
aftertwarbe receauc toinberitaunce: g bewente
out,not knowpnge whether be hulde go.

. yp fapth be remoued into the Lande of p20-
meg asinto a Traunge countre, when he hadde
Dibelt in tabernacles: and fodpd Flaacand Ja-
cobhepzes pth bpm of the fame promes. Fo?
be lobed fo2 acptp baupng a foundacpé, whole
buploecand maker is Good.

* Chorotoe fapth Sara alloreceaued «serria
ftrengthe to conceaue and be topthchplde, and
tas Delpucred ofa chplde When the was patte
age, becaule the tudged bpm fapthfull whpche
bad peomplend. i BM
And therfore fpzange therof one(cuen of one

which has as good as Dead) *Loiianp imul- «Be.rb,0
titube as are the ftarrcs in tbefkpegag p fand


= fobpebe ts bp the fee orc unumerable.


hele all dped accozbpnge to fapth, whenethep
babnot receaued the promples:but*faw them zobbi a


-afarre of,and beleved them and faluted them, g


confeffed, + that tbep were raungers and ppl- erivind
gremg on p earth, Foz thep plape fuch thnges i8 a.irwo
declaresthattbep lekeacountee . Allopfthep PEFFE è
badbenmpndfulof the countre, fro whéece they
came oute, thep Dad leafure to bane returned a-

‘apne: but notothep delpre a better (that ts ta

ape a beauenlpe . Wi perfoze God ppm felfe ig
nota ameds* tobecalledthep2godtoz pe bath , ary aie
p epared fot them a cpfie. | i ps
_ *+265pfapth Jbzabam offered bp Flaac, Whe tserrit.a
be twas proucd,¢ be offered bim bepng bis onlp Serre
begottë fonne,in whe be bad receaucd p prom P

f


The Epyitle |
(ee vntodpmit wasfapde, in Jaat fall thy can erboitecpon tobe parpente and Medfatte fn trouble
fede be calle:fo He colpdered,that God Was a aud anurctete: paa R Spent abeuetbealten. L.
pleto rapie bpagapnefrodcath. Cbertore.te- awe aad Perfore, let ws alfo(fepngethat we %
ccauedbebim alfofozanenfample of pretuctec ATYA larecompatied wptb fo great a mul-
Gerrit d cig. * wy faptbdpd Jfaac blefle Jacob ¢ fau D a pi litptude of wptnefles ) «lapeawape epbe.tiis
conceenpnges th gestocome AYN eyalithat pec ethdowne, etbelpnne for
Ben, plir.a * 2p fapth acobwbendewasadpings, HS batbangethfofatt on,lerwsrunne =
J bleffen both the fomes of Jofe b æbowedpm With pacience vntothe battel that ig fet befoze
j Ç Celfe towarde thetoppe of bps tcepter. pg. lokinge vnto Jefus thecaptapne,and finp= i
+i Genet. * Bp fapth Jofeph when be dped remem- (her of al oarfaith, wbhichiforthe tope p was fet
bcd the depattpnae o thechplozenof frac le petore bom abode the Crofle: and dplppled the | k
sero. ita Aane comaundement of bys bencs. 2p fapth pame, andis {ct Dowwnexon the righte handeol y grep) _
«ar bia Soles when he teas bogne Was hyd theemone the thzone of God. Confider therfore how that cono. s 2
thes of bis father and mother becautetpeptaw Heendured {che fpeakpng agapnt pim of fyn- eer
tbathe twasa poper childe:nepther feared they nets left petbulds bewerpedandapnte in pour
the kpnges commaundemente- i mides. Eo? pe bane not petrelifted putobloud ae °
eroti “ISP fapth Moles when he was greate, te- Feiutng againk (pnue. Andhaue forgotte $ ex:
: _ fuled to becalted p tonne of pbataos pauabter pogtacio,wbichfpeabethwnto pouas unto pil
æ choferatherto fuferavueripte withtyepeo: DI „mp fonnede(pplenot the chafienpng ofp
leofGod ,thentoeniopep pleaturesot fpnne ozbe, neptherfapnte when thou arterebuked x
ozafcafon, andeftemedt erebuke of Cheptte of bim:fozmbom typ Lozbeloueth bpmbecha- 25
greaterrpches then p trea ures of Egppt. tos neth:pee,b2 (courgethenerp fonne pbherecea=
7 De bad refpecte nto the retwarde. eth PE pe endure chafengzng,God offrech him i. dig
verore Bp apto be fortobe Cay pet andfeareo felfe ontopouas vnto Tonnes. Wbatlóncizbe
not the fearfenes ofthe Forbeendured bd thefather chafteneth not: Df pe be not wn-
enéas though be bad fenehi whichis tu fible. percogreccpon(whereofallare partakers) ther
‘aaa 3 DS Wwe fapth beozdepnedtbepalicouey arepe ba fterdes,¢ not ones: C berfoz fepng we
andthe effufion of bloube, let be that deltropcd pane bad fathers of our flety wbich corrected vs
the fpafte bone, pulo tutche them. æ tee gaue thérenertce:tpalivenowenotmucd: Fs
ero-pifit.e xp fapth tbep palled thozowe the red fee rather be inlubteccpb wnto the father of fpectes
as bp Dipelande:wbpcbe wben the Egppcyans andipfe? Andthep verelp fora fet dapes nur:
*zotubic padde afla cd todo:thep were Drowned. * Ap tered vs after thep2 otoneplealure:Dut be nurte
fapthp ‘walle? of Yerpchofel dovneatter they retis foz our peofpte,to pintent that bemap
were compa fied aboute {euen dapes. mp ger of bpg bolpnes Ynto bs . Nontanet
ezoratta © * Wpfapththebarlot Raabperpthednot chaftetpnge forthe peelentetpme fesmeth to be
ant.bi,¢ fopth them that were pplobedpent, whe the had topong but qreuous:nevertheles afterward, if eA a
recea ucd thetppestolodgpnge peacpabip. bzpugeththe quyet frute grade pnts g
And what pall Jmoare tape: foz the tyme them wbpch are exercpfed therin. Es
squvp.vi.b Dopl be cofazte Foz me totell of Gebon oft ta: < * Sotvetch fogth therfore the handesiwbpcbe erso
any itsa Tach and of* amplonand ofxJepbthae,x of wWwereletdowne andthe weake knees :andfe p:
jun. pitita AULD alfotand Samuell, €of the popdetes pe banc ftrapgbe feppes bntopoure fete, lefte
sini ria bich thozow faptb(ubduedDkpngedomes anp baltpng turne pou out of the have: pe lette
verbit Pozougnot rpabtcoulies:obtapnedt epomifes itratber bebealedD. Folowe peace wpthall men ;
cuerta xtoppedthemoutbes of Lt0s:*quéched the DP andbolpnes: w-pthoute the tobichno man Gall :
iue rvit a olence of Epze:xetcaped theedge oftbefwearne fethe Lozde. Andloke that noma bedeffitute :
San.bi.t Fouteof weakeneg Were made frig warroba of the qtace of God: letanp roote of bptternes
any «i.e Ipant mepgbee:turned to flpgbtetbe armipes of en eer Legere onanatieis
a alpantes * the toemenveccaucdthepe deade filed:that ther beno fognicatoz,o2 wneleane per
mee" vapled to lyfe agapne. fone, a8 Efau x Wwbpehe foz one mealeof meate Smt?
E Dther were racked, and wolde notbedelp- folde bis byethrpgdt, Hop pe bnotwe howe that ae
nered that thep mpabtenberct a betterrefurcec afterward when be wolde by enberitatice baue
cpon. Againe,otber were trped w mockpnges ¢ opta eb bletipngs.be toas pat bp, foz be fotoe
fcourgpnges.mozcouce Wwpth bonnes €pzefon» nope ce of repentautice,though * pe oughte tf Se.rrvit. E
dticge.rery MEWE toned, where bewena funder, were wpthtearcs.
rc riroig.b tempted were flapne ith Cwearde, balked bp SLorpearenctcome Duto the tmountthat EFF»
nreno and potone in epelbpnncs € Tootes. fapnnes is touched, and nto burnpngefp2e, yor Dnto
tyre FOILC einge Deftitute,troubled and bered: Dhichmé flozme,and darknes,andtempettes of wether. i;
the world thas not worthy of, thepwandzedin andfounde ofa trompe, andthe vopre of wo2- A a
wplderneffeg:and moütapnes, and tn dennes g des :tobichxvopce,tbep (that heard it) wpthed *ero.rr.¢
caues of theearthbe. And thele al thozowe fapth awape ,thatthecommuntcacpon (huldenot be
obtapned good repozte, and receauepniottbe ({pokento them. Æo? thep could notabpoe that
promple,becante Godbaddeprompleda better iobpche was commaunded.
chpnge fo2 ws, that thep wpthout vs fpuld not PE a dealt touche the mountapne,tt hall rd ed
Demadepertecte. —— be Foned,o2 theutl thozow witha darte: Co ter=
€ The-xit. Chapter. rible eas thelpabt whpcbeappearcd . oe
apde


BB Hs


ie” a Ls oe


J


Ta the Hebuies.


fapde Ffeateand quake. Wut pearecome vnto

the mount Sion and to the cptycof the lpuing

Eod. the celetttal Jerulalem:and toaninuume

- gable (pabt of aungels,and buto tie congrega-

cpon of the fpatte bognet onnes, Dobich are wit-
teninbeauen andto god the iudge of all, and to

rhe (peetes of tuft aud perfect men andto Jefus

xi. oet.a tbe mediatoz of the newe tetament, andtothe


| iar the*bloude of brel.


) F ea * {papnblpng of bloud that fpeketh better then
u5
j Spethat pe detpple not bym,thatlpeaketh.


4€o2 if they efcaped not, wbich refuled him that
{pake oncarth:muche moze pall toe not elcape,
o£ oe turne atoape from bpm that (peaketh tro
feanen: whofe bopce then Woke the carthe atd
nowe bathneclaredlapeng: pet once moze wpll
J fbate, not the earth onelp,but alfo beauen.
Whereas be fapeth pet once moze, it (pgupfp-
eth the remoupng atap of thofe chines which
are thaken as of thinges wbich baucended toeir
rourte that the thpnges whvcbe arenot Maken,
map remapne. Wi berfoze pf toe receaue p binge
ey dome tebpebecannot bemoued, We haue grace
wherbp we map fo ferne god, and that toe map
Druitt,» Plealebpm wpth reuctence + anbdaoolpe feare.
fEozv oure god igaconlumpugefpee.
CThe.riti.c bapter. |
qe erhoztcth bs bute loue,to botpptalpte,to thpneke bp
pon fucheas bein aduerfpte:to mapntapne wedlor Reto az
uopde couctoutnellc , to make mache ofthem that pzeache
obs worde, to beware of fraungelearnpnge , to be con:


tent to Cuter rebuke with Chritt,to tethankeful buio Gob
and obebirnte bnto luche as be in auctozpte.
asri Ctbrotherlpe loue contpnue . x He
A bee not forgetful to lodge frauncers.
eee ic ee 4€o2 therbyp baue Dpucrs mé*{odged
eid be ent? | Aungels onwares . Remembze thé
senerir.s === that are in bondes, euen as thougbe
pe there bound w thë pourtelues: Bempnde ful
oftbem whichare tn aduerfpte,as pe tobtch are
- petinthe boop. Wedlocke is to be Dadi honour
amonge all met, and the bed vndefpled. Xa foz
whoze kepers and aduoutercrs God thal indge
them. Let youre conuctiacton be wptbhout coue


eee rriz d, toufnes and*becontente wpthfuche thinges as


forsee pe haueallreabp:Stoz De bath [upd:* F wopl not
raple tbenetberfozfake the, 0# we map boldlp

fap:tbe Lod ig mp belper:and F topl not frare

what mã map do onto me: Remébze thë which

baue the ouer {pg hte of pou, which daue fpoken
biito pou p wod of god. boletoveb fep pefo

low andcon(pder tbe ende of thepz conu erfacio.

3 Jefus Chepite pellerdape andtodape, and

~~ shefame conttnucth fozeuer Frie not carp-
ebaboute wpthbdpuers and fraunge lecnpnae

f€orit ig a good thing thatthe berte be ftablpf-

wed pth grace,andnot pthracates: wbpche

Hane not profeted them that baue pad thep2 pa
fEyincin them. We bauean aulter,wherof they

mape not eate, whpcbe ferue inthe tabernacle.

guppa * S02 the bodpes of thofebeattes tobofebloude
SLNE ig hroucdt intathe holp place bp the bye peale
to pourge{pnne,are burnt toithoute the tentes

. Œ berfoze Jelug alto tolanctifpe f people with
gobn.rire pps otne bloute, tuffred * wptbhoute the gate.
Let bg qo forthe therfoze buto bpm:oute ofthe

tentes, and lufre rebukes wpth bpm . Foz heave


Sol. lryr.


jotur.t.a


D
deathoure Lozd Jelug * the px fhepherde of Serrit. d


thozotoe Jefus Chp te, Co wohome be peaple
foz euer wopple the wode endureth. Amen.

J befech pou beethzen, (ufice the toozde ofera
Hoztacid,foz toe auc weptten vnto pou in few
Wwozdes.Peknotve our bzother ‘Tpmothbe, that
he isat libertie: ith whome (pEhe come Mort-
Ip) J wil le pou, Salute thé that haue the oure
{pabt of pou,and al the fapntes. Chey ot Jtalp

alute pou. © race be wpthall Amen.
CSrentefrom Ftalp bp
@pmotbheus.


of Sapnte Janes.
! C The fpatt Chapter.
ae erhorteth to reropeein troubleans thankfullp to receaue
the mozne of gob, ttur celp gron o; beuorpon what itis,
E CIE ofthe 102d Jefus Cirpi fen
rd Ae deth greatpng tothe twclue

E E trpbes whpcbe are featered á
oi) ea bode. rE p beeth2é,count
Aava it foz an exceadpng iope whe
JAS sori arly tate mt
yi — ons: bnowpnge thps,p * the son. pi.
trpinge of pourefapth, gendzeth pacpence : and Bap.itiae
let pacpence baue ber perfecte wozcke , that pe #™"*
map be pd ade Scag acy Maa è.

PE any of pou lacke wpledoinc,* lethym afie J0b.5iii: a
of bpm that geueth it euen God, whpch aeucth arris
toall menindifterentlp,¢'catter) noman inthe ieait.ri.
teth,andit (pa begen ban, Wut let him athe
in fapth,and waner not. Wor be that doubteth,
is lpke athatic of the Sce,vobpcbe istot of the
topndes,andcarped topth bpolence. Nether let
thatmanthpnke,that be (hal receaueanp thing
of the Lode. :

— Awauerphere mpnded mattis onfablein 15
all bis thapes. Let the bzotber which ts of lotve
degre retopce whe hets eralted Agapne,ler him
thatis rich, reiopte tobe bets made lowe.*3jlo2 xčratib:
eué as the flour of the qratte,thathe patie atwap Serii: i
for ag the anne rpleth with peate,e toeqratte a"
fopverterp


euerlaltpng Te- i,ect,o.a


m O E CUCU


J


Ta the Hebuies.


fapde Ffeateand quake. Wut pearecome vnto

the mount Sion and to the cptycof the lpuing

Eod. the celetttal Jerulalem:and toaninuume

- gable (pabt of aungels,and buto tie congrega-

cpon of the fpatte bognet onnes, Dobich are wit-
teninbeauen andto god the iudge of all, and to

rhe (peetes of tuft aud perfect men andto Jefus

xi. oet.a tbe mediatoz of the newe tetament, andtothe


| iar the*bloude of brel.


) F ea * {papnblpng of bloud that fpeketh better then
u5
j Spethat pe detpple not bym,thatlpeaketh.


4€o2 if they efcaped not, wbich refuled him that
{pake oncarth:muche moze pall toe not elcape,
o£ oe turne atoape from bpm that (peaketh tro
feanen: whofe bopce then Woke the carthe atd
nowe bathneclaredlapeng: pet once moze wpll
J fbate, not the earth onelp,but alfo beauen.
Whereas be fapeth pet once moze, it (pgupfp-
eth the remoupng atap of thofe chines which
are thaken as of thinges wbich baucended toeir
rourte that the thpnges whvcbe arenot Maken,
map remapne. Wi berfoze pf toe receaue p binge
ey dome tebpebecannot bemoued, We haue grace
wherbp we map fo ferne god, and that toe map
Druitt,» Plealebpm wpth reuctence + anbdaoolpe feare.
fEozv oure god igaconlumpugefpee.
CThe.riti.c bapter. |
qe erhoztcth bs bute loue,to botpptalpte,to thpneke bp
pon fucheas bein aduerfpte:to mapntapne wedlor Reto az
uopde couctoutnellc , to make mache ofthem that pzeache
obs worde, to beware of fraungelearnpnge , to be con:


tent to Cuter rebuke with Chritt,to tethankeful buio Gob
and obebirnte bnto luche as be in auctozpte.
asri Ctbrotherlpe loue contpnue . x He
A bee not forgetful to lodge frauncers.
eee ic ee 4€o2 therbyp baue Dpucrs mé*{odged
eid be ent? | Aungels onwares . Remembze thé
senerir.s === that are in bondes, euen as thougbe
pe there bound w thë pourtelues: Bempnde ful
oftbem whichare tn aduerfpte,as pe tobtch are
- petinthe boop. Wedlocke is to be Dadi honour
amonge all met, and the bed vndefpled. Xa foz
whoze kepers and aduoutercrs God thal indge
them. Let youre conuctiacton be wptbhout coue


eee rriz d, toufnes and*becontente wpthfuche thinges as


forsee pe haueallreabp:Stoz De bath [upd:* F wopl not
raple tbenetberfozfake the, 0# we map boldlp

fap:tbe Lod ig mp belper:and F topl not frare

what mã map do onto me: Remébze thë which

baue the ouer {pg hte of pou, which daue fpoken
biito pou p wod of god. boletoveb fep pefo

low andcon(pder tbe ende of thepz conu erfacio.

3 Jefus Chepite pellerdape andtodape, and

~~ shefame conttnucth fozeuer Frie not carp-
ebaboute wpthbdpuers and fraunge lecnpnae

f€orit ig a good thing thatthe berte be ftablpf-

wed pth grace,andnot pthracates: wbpche

Hane not profeted them that baue pad thep2 pa
fEyincin them. We bauean aulter,wherof they

mape not eate, whpcbe ferue inthe tabernacle.

guppa * S02 the bodpes of thofebeattes tobofebloude
SLNE ig hroucdt intathe holp place bp the bye peale
to pourge{pnne,are burnt toithoute the tentes

. Œ berfoze Jelug alto tolanctifpe f people with
gobn.rire pps otne bloute, tuffred * wptbhoute the gate.
Let bg qo forthe therfoze buto bpm:oute ofthe

tentes, and lufre rebukes wpth bpm . Foz heave


Sol. lryr.


jotur.t.a


D
deathoure Lozd Jelug * the px fhepherde of Serrit. d


thozotoe Jefus Chp te, Co wohome be peaple
foz euer wopple the wode endureth. Amen.

J befech pou beethzen, (ufice the toozde ofera
Hoztacid,foz toe auc weptten vnto pou in few
Wwozdes.Peknotve our bzother ‘Tpmothbe, that
he isat libertie: ith whome (pEhe come Mort-
Ip) J wil le pou, Salute thé that haue the oure
{pabt of pou,and al the fapntes. Chey ot Jtalp

alute pou. © race be wpthall Amen.
CSrentefrom Ftalp bp
@pmotbheus.


of Sapnte Janes.
! C The fpatt Chapter.
ae erhorteth to reropeein troubleans thankfullp to receaue
the mozne of gob, ttur celp gron o; beuorpon what itis,
E CIE ofthe 102d Jefus Cirpi fen
rd Ae deth greatpng tothe twclue

E E trpbes whpcbe are featered á
oi) ea bode. rE p beeth2é,count
Aava it foz an exceadpng iope whe
JAS sori arly tate mt
yi — ons: bnowpnge thps,p * the son. pi.
trpinge of pourefapth, gendzeth pacpence : and Bap.itiae
let pacpence baue ber perfecte wozcke , that pe #™"*
map be pd ade Scag acy Maa è.

PE any of pou lacke wpledoinc,* lethym afie J0b.5iii: a
of bpm that geueth it euen God, whpch aeucth arris
toall menindifterentlp,¢'catter) noman inthe ieait.ri.
teth,andit (pa begen ban, Wut let him athe
in fapth,and waner not. Wor be that doubteth,
is lpke athatic of the Sce,vobpcbe istot of the
topndes,andcarped topth bpolence. Nether let
thatmanthpnke,that be (hal receaueanp thing
of the Lode. :

— Awauerphere mpnded mattis onfablein 15
all bis thapes. Let the bzotber which ts of lotve
degre retopce whe hets eralted Agapne,ler him
thatis rich, reiopte tobe bets made lowe.*3jlo2 xčratib:
eué as the flour of the qratte,thathe patie atwap Serii: i
for ag the anne rpleth with peate,e toeqratte a"
fopverterp


euerlaltpng Te- i,ect,o.a


m O E CUCU


The Epyttie


iopdereth,and bis llourefalleth awap, andthe
be wtp of the fatbpon of tt perptheth:ené fo pal
the rpche man perpe in bps wapes. =
Papppeis the mantbatendureth temptacpo:
fo2 oben beis trped,be Hall receaue the crowne
of lpfe,whtchtbe Lozde bath pzompfed tothem

that loue bpm.
* Letnomanfare when be ts tempted, that


Sehe friia he is tempted of God, fo? as God cãhotbetemp


ted wyth enell,fo nepther be Him Telfe tempteth


anpe man: Xut euerp man is tempted, when De
isozàwen awape and o of bis otne con-
cuppicence. Then, when luteis conceaued,the
Depngeth forth (pune: (pnne whe it is Fpnithcd
- baigetd fo2thdeath.donot erte mp dere beethze
i.co?.ft.d «pte denerpe good gpftc.andeuerpe perfect qptt.
is From abone, and commeth dotone from the fa
ther of Ipabtes wpth whom ts no varpablenes
nepther is be chaunged wnto Darckenes.
+zobute æ Df ppg owne wpll begat be vs pth the
ant goede of truth, that We Hulde be the fpztte frus
tes of bps creatures.
pio.roo  Wiberfoze(deare bzethzen) * let euerpe man
ztcleb.a be fyopfte to beare, Nowe to Cpeake, Nowe to
wath. Foz the wrath of ma wozbeth not that
fobpch ts rpghbteous before God. —
$0 ,pilt.b x UWiberfoze lape aparte allfplebpnes and
Collo.ii.3 Canerflutteof malpcpoutnes: and receaue with
mekenes the wod that is qaffred in pou, which
yp Wsableto fane pour foules. 4 |
tuomo rand fe that pe be Doers of the toozde,and
> nof Dearers onelpe, Deceaupnge pout owne fel-
xegat.b.a Hes. Eozxpfanp man beare theod and decla
LubEFLS eethnot the fame bp bis toozckes,beis lpie vn:
toa man beboldpng bys bodelp face ina glaffe.
f€ozaffone as be bathe looked on bpm felfe,
be goeth bps tape, and fozgettethimmedpatlp
twbat bys fafppon was. | :

x {Sut whofe loketh inthe perfect latwe of
Ipbertpe,and continupth therem (pie benot a
Fozgetfull bearer, buta doer of the toogcke ) the
fametbalbehbapppeinbpsdede. ——

Pfanpe man amonge pou feme to be Deuout
and refrapueth not bps tong, but deceaucth his


mjat, biia


owne berte, this mannes deuocpon isin vapne,.
PureDeuocpo and vndefpled before God the fa-


ther, is thys : to piet thefatberletie and wpde
Dowes in thepz aduerlitie, andtokepe bim telfe
pnfpoted of the twozlde. K
€The.tt. Chapter.
(be forbpodveth to baur anpere(pecte of perfons, antnot
to boat offapth myereno Deades are.


P bret h2é, eftemenot the fapth


IA Oy 4 of oure Lorde Jefus Chait the
: ae //9| |A Lozde of glozpe* wp tbh theref=


| pecte ofperfons.

{2 Hoz pf tbere come into poure
| TO (Gi companye aman wearpnge a=
~~ olden tinge,clothed in goodlp
apparell,and there come in alfoa poozemanin
pplerapment,and pe baue arefpect to bim that


ewiti zeA


weareththegápe clotbpng, andfape Ynto bim R Ga
&pt thou beareinagoodplace:andfapebnto E2
thepore:ftandethouthere,ozfpthereondermp i


fote ole :ave pe not parcpalin pour felucs and


have tudaed after cuell thouahtes?
Herken mp deare beloucd beeathzen. athe
hot God cholen the pooze of thyg wozlde, fuche
asarerpcbeinfapth, and bepers of the kypnge- 25
Dome, Which he promtled to them that loue him
Wut pe hauedplppled the pooze. Donotrpche
met erecute tpzannte bpd pou, & Dea the pou be-
foze piudgemeét feates‘ Donot thep lpeak enel
of pgood name whpcb ts called bpon ouer pou,
__ Pfpefulfpll the ropall latwe accozdpngeto )
the {cripture.* (Chou thalteloucthpne nepads: tiev.rir.o


boure as tbp Celfe)pe do twel. Xut pf pe regarde oe pa, P


one perlon moze then attother,pe commpt ipnne ROMME
and are rebuked of the lawe,ag tranfgreffourg. Srt
i bofocuer {hal bepe the whole latwe, xand pet « epat.v.c
faplein one popnte beis qpltpe of all. €

o: bethat fapde: Chou thalt not commptad-
uotrpe:fapde alfo:thou Halt not kpll. Chough

Hg ade primer om bo pl thou art

become atranfareffour ofthe lawr..

Sof ate pean fo doas thep that balbe infi
qed bp the lawe of liberty. Eo? be thal baue iud


fement topthout mercpertbhat thetbethnomer matris © «


cpe, and mercpe reiopteth agapntt iudgement.
-. Wibatanaplethit mp breathzen,thougha
mar: Cape bebatbe tapth, pi be baune no deadess
Can fapth laue him: Pfa bzrotber o2 a {per be
naked anddeftitute of daplp fode, ¢ one of pou
fape bntothem departin peace, Godflendepou
warmnes and fode notwptbhtandpnge pe gene
them not thole thpnges whpch arenedefull top
boodpe, what thall ithelpe ¢ Euen fofapth, pfit
þaut no Deades:is deade init felfe.. =

us Come man wpll fape:thou haft afapeb,
and J baue deades:theto me tby fapth bp thp de D
deg: and Jwpll Hete the mp faptbbp mp dea-
des . Weleuett thou p tdereis one God: Thou
doct well. The devels allo beleue and tremble.

Wut wplte thou onderFande,( D thou Yapa
ne man ) that fapth wpthoute dedesis deade!
Wias not Abzabam oure father tuftpfped tho-
trote thozckes, obenbe had* offered ifabac
fonne vpon the aulter: |

hou feelte,botbe that fapth wzoughte

topth bps dedeg and through the dedes was the
fapth made perfecte:and the fcripturetyas ful-
fplled, wbich Capeth:* Abzabam beleucd God, «cen.rob
and it as reputed bnto him for rightcoufnes, xom.1.8
and be wagealled the frend of God. Pe fe thë 2"
howe that of bcades aman is tuftifped, andnot
of ar


Genprit,b


iuffptped thozowe wozckes,* when the had re- Fotu.ti.e
ceauedthe meflaungers, and badde lente them
oute another wape: fFoz asthe bodpe, twpthout
the {pect is deade,cuen fo fapth tapthope woe
hesigdecadealfo. Fe >
| @ The.tit. Chapter. i
T What good and eucl! commeth thogowethetonge. The
butpeotfucheasbelearned. Whebperence bettwprte the
mpfesome ofthe Gotpetl,and the wprepome of the mozloe,
Brava tal P bectheen* benot euerp ma ama
veka fer. bnotopnge howe that toe pall
WN? veceaue the greater Dampnacia: fog
Kay many t ngestvefpnneall:
> +pia sair #oroiia
the


Recs


race a | fom z
etoplealfo,was not Raab the barlotte i


k


i


|
;
|
|
|
|


o


|


as
f;


l|


The Epyttie


iopdereth,and bis llourefalleth awap, andthe
be wtp of the fatbpon of tt perptheth:ené fo pal
the rpche man perpe in bps wapes. =
Papppeis the mantbatendureth temptacpo:
fo2 oben beis trped,be Hall receaue the crowne
of lpfe,whtchtbe Lozde bath pzompfed tothem

that loue bpm.
* Letnomanfare when be ts tempted, that


Sehe friia he is tempted of God, fo? as God cãhotbetemp


ted wyth enell,fo nepther be Him Telfe tempteth


anpe man: Xut euerp man is tempted, when De
isozàwen awape and o of bis otne con-
cuppicence. Then, when luteis conceaued,the
Depngeth forth (pune: (pnne whe it is Fpnithcd
- baigetd fo2thdeath.donot erte mp dere beethze
i.co?.ft.d «pte denerpe good gpftc.andeuerpe perfect qptt.
is From abone, and commeth dotone from the fa
ther of Ipabtes wpth whom ts no varpablenes
nepther is be chaunged wnto Darckenes.
+zobute æ Df ppg owne wpll begat be vs pth the
ant goede of truth, that We Hulde be the fpztte frus
tes of bps creatures.
pio.roo  Wiberfoze(deare bzethzen) * let euerpe man
ztcleb.a be fyopfte to beare, Nowe to Cpeake, Nowe to
wath. Foz the wrath of ma wozbeth not that
fobpch ts rpghbteous before God. —
$0 ,pilt.b x UWiberfoze lape aparte allfplebpnes and
Collo.ii.3 Canerflutteof malpcpoutnes: and receaue with
mekenes the wod that is qaffred in pou, which
yp Wsableto fane pour foules. 4 |
tuomo rand fe that pe be Doers of the toozde,and
> nof Dearers onelpe, Deceaupnge pout owne fel-
xegat.b.a Hes. Eozxpfanp man beare theod and decla
LubEFLS eethnot the fame bp bis toozckes,beis lpie vn:
toa man beboldpng bys bodelp face ina glaffe.
f€ozaffone as be bathe looked on bpm felfe,
be goeth bps tape, and fozgettethimmedpatlp
twbat bys fafppon was. | :

x {Sut whofe loketh inthe perfect latwe of
Ipbertpe,and continupth therem (pie benot a
Fozgetfull bearer, buta doer of the toogcke ) the
fametbalbehbapppeinbpsdede. ——

Pfanpe man amonge pou feme to be Deuout
and refrapueth not bps tong, but deceaucth his


mjat, biia


owne berte, this mannes deuocpon isin vapne,.
PureDeuocpo and vndefpled before God the fa-


ther, is thys : to piet thefatberletie and wpde
Dowes in thepz aduerlitie, andtokepe bim telfe
pnfpoted of the twozlde. K
€The.tt. Chapter.
(be forbpodveth to baur anpere(pecte of perfons, antnot
to boat offapth myereno Deades are.


P bret h2é, eftemenot the fapth


IA Oy 4 of oure Lorde Jefus Chait the
: ae //9| |A Lozde of glozpe* wp tbh theref=


| pecte ofperfons.

{2 Hoz pf tbere come into poure
| TO (Gi companye aman wearpnge a=
~~ olden tinge,clothed in goodlp
apparell,and there come in alfoa poozemanin
pplerapment,and pe baue arefpect to bim that


ewiti zeA


weareththegápe clotbpng, andfape Ynto bim R Ga
&pt thou beareinagoodplace:andfapebnto E2
thepore:ftandethouthere,ozfpthereondermp i


fote ole :ave pe not parcpalin pour felucs and


have tudaed after cuell thouahtes?
Herken mp deare beloucd beeathzen. athe
hot God cholen the pooze of thyg wozlde, fuche
asarerpcbeinfapth, and bepers of the kypnge- 25
Dome, Which he promtled to them that loue him
Wut pe hauedplppled the pooze. Donotrpche
met erecute tpzannte bpd pou, & Dea the pou be-
foze piudgemeét feates‘ Donot thep lpeak enel
of pgood name whpcb ts called bpon ouer pou,
__ Pfpefulfpll the ropall latwe accozdpngeto )
the {cripture.* (Chou thalteloucthpne nepads: tiev.rir.o


boure as tbp Celfe)pe do twel. Xut pf pe regarde oe pa, P


one perlon moze then attother,pe commpt ipnne ROMME
and are rebuked of the lawe,ag tranfgreffourg. Srt
i bofocuer {hal bepe the whole latwe, xand pet « epat.v.c
faplein one popnte beis qpltpe of all. €

o: bethat fapde: Chou thalt not commptad-
uotrpe:fapde alfo:thou Halt not kpll. Chough

Hg ade primer om bo pl thou art

become atranfareffour ofthe lawr..

Sof ate pean fo doas thep that balbe infi
qed bp the lawe of liberty. Eo? be thal baue iud


fement topthout mercpertbhat thetbethnomer matris © «


cpe, and mercpe reiopteth agapntt iudgement.
-. Wibatanaplethit mp breathzen,thougha
mar: Cape bebatbe tapth, pi be baune no deadess
Can fapth laue him: Pfa bzrotber o2 a {per be
naked anddeftitute of daplp fode, ¢ one of pou
fape bntothem departin peace, Godflendepou
warmnes and fode notwptbhtandpnge pe gene
them not thole thpnges whpch arenedefull top
boodpe, what thall ithelpe ¢ Euen fofapth, pfit
þaut no Deades:is deade init felfe.. =

us Come man wpll fape:thou haft afapeb,
and J baue deades:theto me tby fapth bp thp de D
deg: and Jwpll Hete the mp faptbbp mp dea-
des . Weleuett thou p tdereis one God: Thou
doct well. The devels allo beleue and tremble.

Wut wplte thou onderFande,( D thou Yapa
ne man ) that fapth wpthoute dedesis deade!
Wias not Abzabam oure father tuftpfped tho-
trote thozckes, obenbe had* offered ifabac
fonne vpon the aulter: |

hou feelte,botbe that fapth wzoughte

topth bps dedeg and through the dedes was the
fapth made perfecte:and the fcripturetyas ful-
fplled, wbich Capeth:* Abzabam beleucd God, «cen.rob
and it as reputed bnto him for rightcoufnes, xom.1.8
and be wagealled the frend of God. Pe fe thë 2"
howe that of bcades aman is tuftifped, andnot
of ar


Genprit,b


iuffptped thozowe wozckes,* when the had re- Fotu.ti.e
ceauedthe meflaungers, and badde lente them
oute another wape: fFoz asthe bodpe, twpthout
the {pect is deade,cuen fo fapth tapthope woe
hesigdecadealfo. Fe >
| @ The.tit. Chapter. i
T What good and eucl! commeth thogowethetonge. The
butpeotfucheasbelearned. Whebperence bettwprte the
mpfesome ofthe Gotpetl,and the wprepome of the mozloe,
Brava tal P bectheen* benot euerp ma ama
veka fer. bnotopnge howe that toe pall
WN? veceaue the greater Dampnacia: fog
Kay many t ngestvefpnneall:
> +pia sair #oroiia
the


Recs


race a | fom z
etoplealfo,was not Raab the barlotte i


k


i


|
;
|
|
|
|


o


|


as
f;


l|


the fame ts å perfect mått and able alfoto tame
all the bedp: *eholde, we put bpttes into pho:
feg moutbes, that they maye obepe vs , and the
*turne about all the bobpeottpem t ebold alfo
the bpppesg , tobiche thougbe thep belo greate,
and areDzpuen of fearile wpndes , pet are thep
turned about pth a berp imal belmetobp tier:
foquce the or oleice ot tbe peneriee wel, nen
fotbe tongeis alptell méber alfo, and boalteth
sp id tag i
x, Webolbe, Howe greatea thpnge alptell fpe
kpndlethb,and the tonge ig fp2e, enen a wode of
wpckednes . Ho isthe tonge fet amonge oure
memb2es, that it defpleth the wbole bobp, and
fetteth a fpre all that toe baucofnature , ant ig
-út felfe fet afpze cuen of bell. ,

All the natures of beattes,and of bp:deg and
of ferpentes , and thpuges of thefce aremcked
and tamed of the nature of man. ut the tonge

-catinoman tame. Jt is an bntulpe cuell full of
€ deadly popfon. Cheriwptbhleffe we God the fa
Beneio é ther, and therwpth curte toe men, whpebe are

pe made after the» emase [pmplitude of God.
Dut of one month pzroceadeth bleflingeand cur
fpnge.)p beethaen,thele thynges ought not fo
to be. Doth afountapnefende forth at one place
Cwete water ebpttcr alfo? Can the page tree
(mp bacthzen)beare Dlpue beries: ether a vine
beare fpagess ocat no fountapne gene bothe
falt water and fre alfo. PE anp man be wpe,
andendued Wpth bnowlrdge amonge por, let
bom Hhetebps workes out of good conuerfact-
on Wyth mebenes of opldome. e
® BWutppehauebpttec enupeng and Arife in
pour barte,reiopce not : nether be lpars aqaintt
the trueth: F02 fuch wpldd defcendeth not From
aboue-but is erthp,naturall,and deuelpth. Foz
- Sobereenuteng and Arife ig ther is vnftablencs,
€allmaner of enell workes. Wutthewpldom
that is from aboue,{s firit pure, then peafable,


gentle and ealp tobe entreated ,fullofmerepe |


good frutes wpthout iudgpnge, wpthoutetp-
mulacpon:pee,and the frute of rpgbtetoelines ig
Sowen in peace,of them that maintapne peace.


© Tbe. flit. Chapter .


qr Warre and.fpedtprge cometh of boluptasutnes.
Thefrendhpppeotthe worde ls enmpte before 0d,
a f ah eta la the Sanpteof

pe Ipfe.


voaa Bom topencecommeth warre and
Tm) gbtyn camonge pour come thep
zis Mo bere pencereuen ofpoureluftes,
Ad that Fight in pour mëbregr Pelut,
SE and bane not. Peenupeand baue in
opanacyon,and cannot obtapne. Pefpabt and
ibarre, Pehanenot becaufe pe alkenot.Pealke
and receauenot,becaute peatke amplie :euento
confume it bpon pour lutes. Peaduouterers, g
_ Wemen that breake matrpymonpe:knotwe pe not
gala.t.b Howe tbat t EERIE Be CE DOC (Sciam
. Lyob.ts, tpe wpthe God ¢ wholocuer therfore wplbea
frende of the toozlde,fs made theenemie of gop.
Eptbherdope thpnebe p fhe fcrpptucefapet in-


6
wetricb®


rit. |
tind


that iudgelt another’ Goto ping iy wy re aor
le.


€ The fpfte Chapter.


C He thzeateneth the wpcked rpch men, cehozteth bnto parpenz
ceto betware of fwearpnge. one to kootwlidge bps fautes.to aż
nother,one to pzap fo} another and one te labourto bepng ano
therto the tracth,


——= mE u i


> D tohowi perpche met. wepe and X
ENS boile on poure wzetcbedhes that

Wee ce. Mallcome dpon pou. Pourerpebes
booy A| Btecopupte spoure qarinentes ate
ka em otheaten, Ponure golbe and fpluet
iscankred, and theru of them malbe a witnes
bnto pou, thal eate pour eth as it were fpze .

Pe haneheaped trealure toqethetoxcenen we at zz
e Pee mrikia bes ore DEP. POK bite
urg w é reaped Down pour u; priait

(which bpzeig siren hepebacte bp Feauide(crP« vai
eth andthe crpeg of thé tobpch baue reaped,are
centred intotheeares ofthe Lobe Sabbactp. .
Pe baue lpued in pleafure on the eatthe , and
bene wanton: Pe bauenospihed poure pertes, ag G
inadapeof fanghter De bear conbempned and
plied the tufted:¢ hebathnot reliftedpourfa We -
itek therfozebzethzen wnto the commypnge
ofthe Lorde. wWepoloe, the bulbande man ,
waptethfo2 the precpous fruteofthecarth,and
bathe longe pacpence t s vntpl bere
ceauetheearlpe andthelater rapne . Wepealfo
pacpente therfore, and fetle youre bevtes.toz the
commpnge of the 1 Dik D Edrawetp npe.
Grudgenot one agapnit another beethzen, lee
pe he Damned. Webolve, the moge ge


the fame ts å perfect mått and able alfoto tame
all the bedp: *eholde, we put bpttes into pho:
feg moutbes, that they maye obepe vs , and the
*turne about all the bobpeottpem t ebold alfo
the bpppesg , tobiche thougbe thep belo greate,
and areDzpuen of fearile wpndes , pet are thep
turned about pth a berp imal belmetobp tier:
foquce the or oleice ot tbe peneriee wel, nen
fotbe tongeis alptell méber alfo, and boalteth
sp id tag i
x, Webolbe, Howe greatea thpnge alptell fpe
kpndlethb,and the tonge ig fp2e, enen a wode of
wpckednes . Ho isthe tonge fet amonge oure
memb2es, that it defpleth the wbole bobp, and
fetteth a fpre all that toe baucofnature , ant ig
-út felfe fet afpze cuen of bell. ,

All the natures of beattes,and of bp:deg and
of ferpentes , and thpuges of thefce aremcked
and tamed of the nature of man. ut the tonge

-catinoman tame. Jt is an bntulpe cuell full of
€ deadly popfon. Cheriwptbhleffe we God the fa
Beneio é ther, and therwpth curte toe men, whpebe are

pe made after the» emase [pmplitude of God.
Dut of one month pzroceadeth bleflingeand cur
fpnge.)p beethaen,thele thynges ought not fo
to be. Doth afountapnefende forth at one place
Cwete water ebpttcr alfo? Can the page tree
(mp bacthzen)beare Dlpue beries: ether a vine
beare fpagess ocat no fountapne gene bothe
falt water and fre alfo. PE anp man be wpe,
andendued Wpth bnowlrdge amonge por, let
bom Hhetebps workes out of good conuerfact-
on Wyth mebenes of opldome. e
® BWutppehauebpttec enupeng and Arife in
pour barte,reiopce not : nether be lpars aqaintt
the trueth: F02 fuch wpldd defcendeth not From
aboue-but is erthp,naturall,and deuelpth. Foz
- Sobereenuteng and Arife ig ther is vnftablencs,
€allmaner of enell workes. Wutthewpldom
that is from aboue,{s firit pure, then peafable,


gentle and ealp tobe entreated ,fullofmerepe |


good frutes wpthout iudgpnge, wpthoutetp-
mulacpon:pee,and the frute of rpgbtetoelines ig
Sowen in peace,of them that maintapne peace.


© Tbe. flit. Chapter .


qr Warre and.fpedtprge cometh of boluptasutnes.
Thefrendhpppeotthe worde ls enmpte before 0d,
a f ah eta la the Sanpteof

pe Ipfe.


voaa Bom topencecommeth warre and
Tm) gbtyn camonge pour come thep
zis Mo bere pencereuen ofpoureluftes,
Ad that Fight in pour mëbregr Pelut,
SE and bane not. Peenupeand baue in
opanacyon,and cannot obtapne. Pefpabt and
ibarre, Pehanenot becaufe pe alkenot.Pealke
and receauenot,becaute peatke amplie :euento
confume it bpon pour lutes. Peaduouterers, g
_ Wemen that breake matrpymonpe:knotwe pe not
gala.t.b Howe tbat t EERIE Be CE DOC (Sciam
. Lyob.ts, tpe wpthe God ¢ wholocuer therfore wplbea
frende of the toozlde,fs made theenemie of gop.
Eptbherdope thpnebe p fhe fcrpptucefapet in-


6
wetricb®


rit. |
tind


that iudgelt another’ Goto ping iy wy re aor
le.


€ The fpfte Chapter.


C He thzeateneth the wpcked rpch men, cehozteth bnto parpenz
ceto betware of fwearpnge. one to kootwlidge bps fautes.to aż
nother,one to pzap fo} another and one te labourto bepng ano
therto the tracth,


——= mE u i


> D tohowi perpche met. wepe and X
ENS boile on poure wzetcbedhes that

Wee ce. Mallcome dpon pou. Pourerpebes
booy A| Btecopupte spoure qarinentes ate
ka em otheaten, Ponure golbe and fpluet
iscankred, and theru of them malbe a witnes
bnto pou, thal eate pour eth as it were fpze .

Pe haneheaped trealure toqethetoxcenen we at zz
e Pee mrikia bes ore DEP. POK bite
urg w é reaped Down pour u; priait

(which bpzeig siren hepebacte bp Feauide(crP« vai
eth andthe crpeg of thé tobpch baue reaped,are
centred intotheeares ofthe Lobe Sabbactp. .
Pe baue lpued in pleafure on the eatthe , and
bene wanton: Pe bauenospihed poure pertes, ag G
inadapeof fanghter De bear conbempned and
plied the tufted:¢ hebathnot reliftedpourfa We -
itek therfozebzethzen wnto the commypnge
ofthe Lorde. wWepoloe, the bulbande man ,
waptethfo2 the precpous fruteofthecarth,and
bathe longe pacpence t s vntpl bere
ceauetheearlpe andthelater rapne . Wepealfo
pacpente therfore, and fetle youre bevtes.toz the
commpnge of the 1 Dik D Edrawetp npe.
Grudgenot one agapnit another beethzen, lee
pe he Damned. Webolve, the moge ge


-———— m m - - - d =


before the ddose. Cater mp beethré ) the Propbhe

tesfoz aenfampleoftufferpnge aduerfpte,and

a of pacpence , wobpche (pake in the name of the
matt. |Zorde. Ya Beholde, * dee counte them bappre
whpcle endure. Pe hue hearde of the pacvence

of Job, atid baue Khowen whatende the Lorde

made. forthe Low ig berpe pptiefulkandimnce=


goat & Wut aboue all hpnges rip beethectt, fwocare
"> not nepeber by heaven, neptber bp earth,netber

_ atip other othe. Let pour peebe pee, a poutnape
nape:left petallinto ppocrptpe.. DEanp of pou

be bered „lef bym prape, pf anpe of pou be

mecpe , let nge Plalines. PE anpebedp-

feafed amonge pon, let bym call fo2 the elders

of the conmregacpon,, and let them prape ouer

marke vib DPUt, x angpate bpm topth ople inthe namcot
the Lozde, andthe praper of fapth (pal faue the

fpcke and the Logne Wali raple Dym vp: and if
ehauecommpctedfpnnestpeptpalbe Sorgen?


pm. | |
“sy -ei Txnetoledgepoure fautes oneto another
and prape one foz another, that pe mape be bes-
~ ted, S€ozthe Ferucnt prayperof arpahteons -

-. manauapleth moch.Delpas wasa ma
Onder infpzmitpes euen aswe 8
ate, andDeprapedinbisprapee ->

that tt might not raine:
* and itrapned not


fifre.rbila
Eubiut.e! on the carth bpp
fpace of th


ehepzapdagain, - sa
m q the beauen gaue
— tapne, and the earth —
brougbte forthe her frute .
Wrerh2é pEanpofpou
boo etre from the
~_truethb and ano
thercouerte
bpm, lét l s3
tbe
Tanie knowe


that De tobich con
uerteth thefpnner Erë
gopnee aftrape outeofbps
spar stat faue a loule fro Death
and thal ppde the multitude offpunes .


-ETheende ofthe Cpple
of Sapncte James,


l


_ Chefyatte €pyttle


| Thetvatte Epitte of


Sapncete Peter the
> apoftle-


CThefpatke Chapter.


@ Be Heweth that thofowe fabouin dat mercp of od
toe are begotten agapnetoalpuelp bope:and bow faith
mut betrped , bowetbe Caluacpon in Chere teno new:
es, but atbpnge pzopbhecped of olde. He erhozterh them
to a godip conuerfacpon,fo; lo muche as thre atcnowe >
bogue a newe bp the wozde of Hod. oT


gases) Cter an apottle of Jelu chit y ,
sa wica\tothemtbat dwell * hereand ger, viis
Sa) ca there as ttraungers thozowes
i ee esw oute Pontus, Galacia, Capa-
(a re dotia , Alia,and Wethitia, ee
ss E ESE a lecteaccogzbpnge tothe fozkno
3 te 7a} welege of God thefather tho
SSS riwe thefanctpfpenge of the >
fpacte nto chedpence*andlpeincklpnge of the webse-tep

Dloude of Jefus Chapt. ani aer

t Grace be withpouand peace benmultiplped y om,na
xBlefled be God the father of our Lorde zelus Leoa ~
Chile, whyche accozbpnge to pps abounvate torre
mercp begat vs iy pe og alpuclpehoope xir oria
(bp that that Fef
death) to an mberitaunce immoztal and vndefp
led, and that perphhethnol, referucd inbeanen
fo. pou , whpche are kepte bp the poitwer of Gob 25
thorewe fapth wnfolaluacion, whch (g prena-
red already tebeewed inthelatte tpme.n the

- wwhichve retopce, though nowe foz aleafen (pe
nedc requp2e)peare in beupnes thozewe manp-
foide téprations, $ the trpall of pour faptbe be-
pire muche moze precpous then golde chat pert
tbeth(thoughe itbe* tryed wpthfprc)mpapte Fob-rrtib-
be founde vute laude,glozp,and ponoure atthe Sih e's
apprarpiig of Jefig Chi, whom pe have not Kima.v, s
ferie, and pet loue bpn, in wopome enen nowe,
+thougbpe fe bim not, pet do pou belaune ard re t+. s
iopcewpthiope bulpeateable and glozpoug,re
Cceaupnge the e::de of poure fapepeucn tpe falua
cid of pourefoules.

Pf iobich faluacton bane * the prophetes im- C
qupzed andfearched , tobpche propbecped of the Acre." g
qrace that tpuldcome pnto pou, fearchyng whet Sanic.o,g
02 at \obat time Sed of Cpzttt( ee {has Agceib
(nthem thurde fignttpe , whych {pzete tefipfied
before , the pallpons that Hulde happen puto
Chpt andthe glozpe that Huldefoloiwe after, .-

Ynti tobpcbe prophetes it was aliodeclared, p
not nto tbenfelues , but ynto bg: they Mulde
mpniftecthe thpnges wbpcbe are nowe hewed
wiito pou of them, whyche (bp thebolpe qoofte


1?


. *fentedowne From beaucn) bane inthe Golpel actes.ia


preached bnto pou the thpnges,whpchtie anns
gels dDelpreto beholde. |

Wiherforexqpede vp p lopnes of pour mind, D
befober,and trutte, perfectelp onthe grace that Lube
is brougste wnto pou (bp thedeclarpnae of Je- Se
fns Chip tas obcdpente chpldien,that pe qeue
not poure felucs ouer Dnfo poure olde tutes bp
which pe ware cD, whe ag pet pe toercignozat :

| 0


8 Cheptterole agapne from terbeis


E
— E i ye el Ea
EE oP, Sellen: ec at. n "EEE Me,


-———— m m - - - d =


before the ddose. Cater mp beethré ) the Propbhe

tesfoz aenfampleoftufferpnge aduerfpte,and

a of pacpence , wobpche (pake in the name of the
matt. |Zorde. Ya Beholde, * dee counte them bappre
whpcle endure. Pe hue hearde of the pacvence

of Job, atid baue Khowen whatende the Lorde

made. forthe Low ig berpe pptiefulkandimnce=


goat & Wut aboue all hpnges rip beethectt, fwocare
"> not nepeber by heaven, neptber bp earth,netber

_ atip other othe. Let pour peebe pee, a poutnape
nape:left petallinto ppocrptpe.. DEanp of pou

be bered „lef bym prape, pf anpe of pou be

mecpe , let nge Plalines. PE anpebedp-

feafed amonge pon, let bym call fo2 the elders

of the conmregacpon,, and let them prape ouer

marke vib DPUt, x angpate bpm topth ople inthe namcot
the Lozde, andthe praper of fapth (pal faue the

fpcke and the Logne Wali raple Dym vp: and if
ehauecommpctedfpnnestpeptpalbe Sorgen?


pm. | |
“sy -ei Txnetoledgepoure fautes oneto another
and prape one foz another, that pe mape be bes-
~ ted, S€ozthe Ferucnt prayperof arpahteons -

-. manauapleth moch.Delpas wasa ma
Onder infpzmitpes euen aswe 8
ate, andDeprapedinbisprapee ->

that tt might not raine:
* and itrapned not


fifre.rbila
Eubiut.e! on the carth bpp
fpace of th


ehepzapdagain, - sa
m q the beauen gaue
— tapne, and the earth —
brougbte forthe her frute .
Wrerh2é pEanpofpou
boo etre from the
~_truethb and ano
thercouerte
bpm, lét l s3
tbe
Tanie knowe


that De tobich con
uerteth thefpnner Erë
gopnee aftrape outeofbps
spar stat faue a loule fro Death
and thal ppde the multitude offpunes .


-ETheende ofthe Cpple
of Sapncte James,


l


_ Chefyatte €pyttle


| Thetvatte Epitte of


Sapncete Peter the
> apoftle-


CThefpatke Chapter.


@ Be Heweth that thofowe fabouin dat mercp of od
toe are begotten agapnetoalpuelp bope:and bow faith
mut betrped , bowetbe Caluacpon in Chere teno new:
es, but atbpnge pzopbhecped of olde. He erhozterh them
to a godip conuerfacpon,fo; lo muche as thre atcnowe >
bogue a newe bp the wozde of Hod. oT


gases) Cter an apottle of Jelu chit y ,
sa wica\tothemtbat dwell * hereand ger, viis
Sa) ca there as ttraungers thozowes
i ee esw oute Pontus, Galacia, Capa-
(a re dotia , Alia,and Wethitia, ee
ss E ESE a lecteaccogzbpnge tothe fozkno
3 te 7a} welege of God thefather tho
SSS riwe thefanctpfpenge of the >
fpacte nto chedpence*andlpeincklpnge of the webse-tep

Dloude of Jefus Chapt. ani aer

t Grace be withpouand peace benmultiplped y om,na
xBlefled be God the father of our Lorde zelus Leoa ~
Chile, whyche accozbpnge to pps abounvate torre
mercp begat vs iy pe og alpuclpehoope xir oria
(bp that that Fef
death) to an mberitaunce immoztal and vndefp
led, and that perphhethnol, referucd inbeanen
fo. pou , whpche are kepte bp the poitwer of Gob 25
thorewe fapth wnfolaluacion, whch (g prena-
red already tebeewed inthelatte tpme.n the

- wwhichve retopce, though nowe foz aleafen (pe
nedc requp2e)peare in beupnes thozewe manp-
foide téprations, $ the trpall of pour faptbe be-
pire muche moze precpous then golde chat pert
tbeth(thoughe itbe* tryed wpthfprc)mpapte Fob-rrtib-
be founde vute laude,glozp,and ponoure atthe Sih e's
apprarpiig of Jefig Chi, whom pe have not Kima.v, s
ferie, and pet loue bpn, in wopome enen nowe,
+thougbpe fe bim not, pet do pou belaune ard re t+. s
iopcewpthiope bulpeateable and glozpoug,re
Cceaupnge the e::de of poure fapepeucn tpe falua
cid of pourefoules.

Pf iobich faluacton bane * the prophetes im- C
qupzed andfearched , tobpche propbecped of the Acre." g
qrace that tpuldcome pnto pou, fearchyng whet Sanic.o,g
02 at \obat time Sed of Cpzttt( ee {has Agceib
(nthem thurde fignttpe , whych {pzete tefipfied
before , the pallpons that Hulde happen puto
Chpt andthe glozpe that Huldefoloiwe after, .-

Ynti tobpcbe prophetes it was aliodeclared, p
not nto tbenfelues , but ynto bg: they Mulde
mpniftecthe thpnges wbpcbe are nowe hewed
wiito pou of them, whyche (bp thebolpe qoofte


1?


. *fentedowne From beaucn) bane inthe Golpel actes.ia


preached bnto pou the thpnges,whpchtie anns
gels dDelpreto beholde. |

Wiherforexqpede vp p lopnes of pour mind, D
befober,and trutte, perfectelp onthe grace that Lube
is brougste wnto pou (bp thedeclarpnae of Je- Se
fns Chip tas obcdpente chpldien,that pe qeue
not poure felucs ouer Dnfo poure olde tutes bp
which pe ware cD, whe ag pet pe toercignozat :

| 0


8 Cheptterole agapne from terbeis


E
— E i ye el Ea
EE oP, Sellen: ec at. n "EEE Me,


of, S. Deter —


of cheitt-but ashe which called pou His bolp enë
fo be pe bolp alfo inal maner of conuerfacion,be
Lieut. cauleitiswepeten:* We pe bolp, fo: ¥ am holp,
SoFa  Andpffo bethat pecallon the father, whpch


tmat.roin Wpthout refpecte of perfonne tothe t aCCO2= `


pra.rbiig ce Dpngetocuerp mans worcke, fe that pe paffe
womatt> tome ofpoure pplaremaceinfeare. Ks e
agmochas pe knotve, bowe that pe were not re
Demed withcosruptpble thinges(asfpluer and
golde)from poure vapne conuerfacion,whpche
pereceaned bp the tradicpon of the Fathers: but
‘pedzir.d *With theprecpous bloude of Chipite, agota
toea i.b atibe bndekpled , € without {pot whiche was
"“~ ogdepned before hande, ceuen befozetbe wolde
Was made:butwagdeclared nthe lalketpires
- teta.ie.b *fozpourfakes, whpch bp bis meanesdobelene
aOR, onGoD that rapled bpm wp from death, ¢ * glo
PDL b riEped him,that pempabtehauefapthan boope
, fotbarde God:eué pe which bane purifped pour
_foules thozowethe fpzete, in obepng the trneth
: Wwpth bzotherlpel one vnfapned , fe that peloue
4 One another wpth a pure herte Hf entlpe:Fo2 pe
are boznea néwe,not of moztall ierd, but ofinc
moztal bp the wode af God, whichlpucthand
erepti p ERED Foz ener. Hy
ecib * J€o2all fletheis grafe and all the alozpeof
Jaconb. man igas the foure of grafe. Che qraflewpd-
dereth,ethe flonre fallethawape , but f wode
ofthe Lozdeendurcth cuer. Je Andthpsts the
pi pet eas i the Golpell was preached wn:
ou...


. - CTbe.ti. Chapter.
, Be erbopzteth mento lape afpoe all bpceto abftapne™
from Erihip lutes, and obere woz!blp rulers. Heme
* feruauntes Mulde bebaue them Celuce towarve their
rs aa erbozteth to iure alter the enlaiapie of
O P ie.


e Perfore lape alpde all mêlpepoul


Apes | el and enupe and all backbptpng *:
Wo) (ea Eas newe borne babes , delpre pe


an 13
Le otuve-sbebolne 4 put in Spona Foneto belatd


-` Moma, de € intbechefe comer electeand precpous, and be p


belenethbon bpm hallnot be confounded Anto

_ poutherfoze whiche belene he is pzecpous:: but
seve ar. obnto them wbpcb beleucnog *the Lonetobpebe
" thebupldersrefuled, thefameis begon to be ý
heave oc thechance, and aftonethat men ible

atjand arocke wbereat thep be offended toppch
Fombleat the toozde,and beleue not that wher

i onthep were fet. ut peateacholen qeneracid,
erod-pira Aropall<peetbode,* anholpe nacpon,a people
meu bhea vobpeh are wonne:that pe buld Hete the ver-
_ ftuesofbhim,p called pou out of darknes into bis
maruclous lyabt,xtobichin time palt were not


ofte.ii.b
apeople,butarcnowe the peovle of Gop: which


ttomdr.c


PEFEA E nes and all gple, and fapnednefie’


{trie BP


— Kol. leer.


Come tyme badnot obfapned mercpe but note
baue obtapned merepe. Fe 1b sh hn ey
Pie * Dearly beloned; pres as frat: €
gers and pilgrems,abftapnextro flewplp Ines, Ste ar
iobich fpabtagapnit f foule aud fe that pe baue*~”
Honeite connerfacpon amonge the Gentples;
that wereas thep backbpte pou ag euell Docre
* thep mape fe poure poo worckes, and peaple ayaty.r.p,
God inthe dapeof vilptacpen. 3
+Submpt poure felues therfore bntoall ma- eS
tier OpdDinaunce of man fo2 the lozdes ake, wpe- 7s
ther it be nto the Rpnge.as bnto p.chefepead:
other onto rulers, ag onto them that are {inte
of bpm,foz thepunpipmente of euell doers, but
foz the laude of them,that do well. Foz fois the
wpll of God, f with well bopnge pe map oppe
the mouthes of foolpthe and iqnozaunte minag
fre,and not as þaupnge the libertpe for aclocke
of malicpoutnes,but even asthe fernauntesot -
God. Hongure all mé:Loue bzotherlp felotoe- @*™*-He
pp. Keare God, bonoure the Wpnge.. .
*}eruauntes. obey pour matters topth feare £Pd-v.5
hot only pfthep begood and curteous: but allo 1. Tr. via.
thoughthep befroward.« fo? it isthanck woz nee
tbpe, Fpfa mantot conttpencetoieard God en S
dure grefe and {utter wonge vndeferued. Foz
whai papie igit , pE when pebebufetted for
pout fautes,petabe it pactentlpe.25ut pl when
pe do toelt, pe fuffer weongeand take it pacpent
ipe,thenis there thancke wpth God. |
Foz hereunto verelpe were pe called: fo? zy |
PC hrf alfo tuffred for be x leaupnge D8an Foy.rirb;
enfample $ pe hulde folowe bis feppes.whpch epb.v. a
bpd no fpnne,nepther was there gple founde itt
bys moutbe:wbpcb toben be was reupled, reup
led not againe: whe befuffred, be threatened not
Tet CRDECHME Ma Cte: bowen ate hae ni
thrpabteo wbpcbe pps orne felfe bare mat.vitt c
Sire {prnesin bps bodp on the tree; that toe be- Zer.
prge belpuered fro (pune, Hulde lpue vnto righ
teoufnes . Bp whole rppes pe were healed. -


 JS€02 pewereas Hepe gopnge atrape: but are


nowe turned onto the hepherdeandbpthoppe
ofpourefoules Fe | :

-  Qbe.iti. Chapter. ? |
Bote wrues ought to ogd7e them felues towarde thepg
buftbanbdes and inthep? apparel. The Deutp of men tomarve
thep: wpues. De erborteth ali mento bhite and loue 4 pact


entipete Ere trouble, of baptpme,


of, S. Deter —


of cheitt-but ashe which called pou His bolp enë
fo be pe bolp alfo inal maner of conuerfacion,be
Lieut. cauleitiswepeten:* We pe bolp, fo: ¥ am holp,
SoFa  Andpffo bethat pecallon the father, whpch


tmat.roin Wpthout refpecte of perfonne tothe t aCCO2= `


pra.rbiig ce Dpngetocuerp mans worcke, fe that pe paffe
womatt> tome ofpoure pplaremaceinfeare. Ks e
agmochas pe knotve, bowe that pe were not re
Demed withcosruptpble thinges(asfpluer and
golde)from poure vapne conuerfacion,whpche
pereceaned bp the tradicpon of the Fathers: but
‘pedzir.d *With theprecpous bloude of Chipite, agota
toea i.b atibe bndekpled , € without {pot whiche was
"“~ ogdepned before hande, ceuen befozetbe wolde
Was made:butwagdeclared nthe lalketpires
- teta.ie.b *fozpourfakes, whpch bp bis meanesdobelene
aOR, onGoD that rapled bpm wp from death, ¢ * glo
PDL b riEped him,that pempabtehauefapthan boope
, fotbarde God:eué pe which bane purifped pour
_foules thozowethe fpzete, in obepng the trneth
: Wwpth bzotherlpel one vnfapned , fe that peloue
4 One another wpth a pure herte Hf entlpe:Fo2 pe
are boznea néwe,not of moztall ierd, but ofinc
moztal bp the wode af God, whichlpucthand
erepti p ERED Foz ener. Hy
ecib * J€o2all fletheis grafe and all the alozpeof
Jaconb. man igas the foure of grafe. Che qraflewpd-
dereth,ethe flonre fallethawape , but f wode
ofthe Lozdeendurcth cuer. Je Andthpsts the
pi pet eas i the Golpell was preached wn:
ou...


. - CTbe.ti. Chapter.
, Be erbopzteth mento lape afpoe all bpceto abftapne™
from Erihip lutes, and obere woz!blp rulers. Heme
* feruauntes Mulde bebaue them Celuce towarve their
rs aa erbozteth to iure alter the enlaiapie of
O P ie.


e Perfore lape alpde all mêlpepoul


Apes | el and enupe and all backbptpng *:
Wo) (ea Eas newe borne babes , delpre pe


an 13
Le otuve-sbebolne 4 put in Spona Foneto belatd


-` Moma, de € intbechefe comer electeand precpous, and be p


belenethbon bpm hallnot be confounded Anto

_ poutherfoze whiche belene he is pzecpous:: but
seve ar. obnto them wbpcb beleucnog *the Lonetobpebe
" thebupldersrefuled, thefameis begon to be ý
heave oc thechance, and aftonethat men ible

atjand arocke wbereat thep be offended toppch
Fombleat the toozde,and beleue not that wher

i onthep were fet. ut peateacholen qeneracid,
erod-pira Aropall<peetbode,* anholpe nacpon,a people
meu bhea vobpeh are wonne:that pe buld Hete the ver-
_ ftuesofbhim,p called pou out of darknes into bis
maruclous lyabt,xtobichin time palt were not


ofte.ii.b
apeople,butarcnowe the peovle of Gop: which


ttomdr.c


PEFEA E nes and all gple, and fapnednefie’


{trie BP


— Kol. leer.


Come tyme badnot obfapned mercpe but note
baue obtapned merepe. Fe 1b sh hn ey
Pie * Dearly beloned; pres as frat: €
gers and pilgrems,abftapnextro flewplp Ines, Ste ar
iobich fpabtagapnit f foule aud fe that pe baue*~”
Honeite connerfacpon amonge the Gentples;
that wereas thep backbpte pou ag euell Docre
* thep mape fe poure poo worckes, and peaple ayaty.r.p,
God inthe dapeof vilptacpen. 3
+Submpt poure felues therfore bntoall ma- eS
tier OpdDinaunce of man fo2 the lozdes ake, wpe- 7s
ther it be nto the Rpnge.as bnto p.chefepead:
other onto rulers, ag onto them that are {inte
of bpm,foz thepunpipmente of euell doers, but
foz the laude of them,that do well. Foz fois the
wpll of God, f with well bopnge pe map oppe
the mouthes of foolpthe and iqnozaunte minag
fre,and not as þaupnge the libertpe for aclocke
of malicpoutnes,but even asthe fernauntesot -
God. Hongure all mé:Loue bzotherlp felotoe- @*™*-He
pp. Keare God, bonoure the Wpnge.. .
*}eruauntes. obey pour matters topth feare £Pd-v.5
hot only pfthep begood and curteous: but allo 1. Tr. via.
thoughthep befroward.« fo? it isthanck woz nee
tbpe, Fpfa mantot conttpencetoieard God en S
dure grefe and {utter wonge vndeferued. Foz
whai papie igit , pE when pebebufetted for
pout fautes,petabe it pactentlpe.25ut pl when
pe do toelt, pe fuffer weongeand take it pacpent
ipe,thenis there thancke wpth God. |
Foz hereunto verelpe were pe called: fo? zy |
PC hrf alfo tuffred for be x leaupnge D8an Foy.rirb;
enfample $ pe hulde folowe bis feppes.whpch epb.v. a
bpd no fpnne,nepther was there gple founde itt
bys moutbe:wbpcb toben be was reupled, reup
led not againe: whe befuffred, be threatened not
Tet CRDECHME Ma Cte: bowen ate hae ni
thrpabteo wbpcbe pps orne felfe bare mat.vitt c
Sire {prnesin bps bodp on the tree; that toe be- Zer.
prge belpuered fro (pune, Hulde lpue vnto righ
teoufnes . Bp whole rppes pe were healed. -


 JS€02 pewereas Hepe gopnge atrape: but are


nowe turned onto the hepherdeandbpthoppe
ofpourefoules Fe | :

-  Qbe.iti. Chapter. ? |
Bote wrues ought to ogd7e them felues towarde thepg
buftbanbdes and inthep? apparel. The Deutp of men tomarve
thep: wpues. De erborteth ali mento bhite and loue 4 pact


entipete Ere trouble, of baptpme,


Ticfprtte Epyitle


gare, ag lovige a8 se do foell and arenot afray- hpnggendansdckeues) gin abpoinpitable pdolatt?. a
wD fo? a oie. | | And it lemeth to them an inconuenpentchinge
% Lpkewpte pemen, Dwell topththensaccoz=- that pe cute not alfa wopth chem wntovbe fame
price to knotbledge : Qeupnge y noure bute ercefie ofrpote,and therfore eaketbep enell of
the wpfe.as bunto tpeweaber velfell,and a9 on pou,wbpch tall gene accomptes to bpm , that
to them that are bepres alfo ofthe araceoflpfe, isteabpto iudge quicke ¢ Dead . Ifo? wto thps
that poure papers benothpndeved. i Sn con purpo everelpe was the Golpell preached allo
_ clufpon,be pe allotonem De, of one Herte,loue pinto the bcad,¢ at thep Mulde be inog phe o-
s& ag brethren be ppepefull, ecurtecus,jcx(mekeo ther men inthe fet, but (puldelpuc betore God
not rédepna evel fo euch, ozrebubke for rebuke: in thefpzete. Che ende of all chpnges is at bade.
but contrary wrie, blee: knowpng that pe arc rl 26e pe therfore fober, and watch bnto prap
therenntocalled, cues that pe uldebe hepres er.xut aboue all thpnaeg baue ferncnteloue a-
pr.Frriitt.¢ oF the blefipnae.* Wope that boctplonge after mongepour felues . Jor loue {pall couer f mul- :
lyfe g loueth to fe good Daves, let bpm retrapne titude of fpnnes.* Be pe berherous one to anid- Gers.re
ygtonġe from enell and bys lpppeg thatthep tbrr, wpthout grudapnge. Aseyecp må hathe tehit u.b
peake no'gple-Let bim efepue cuell, g do good: receaucd the gptt, enuen fo mpnpiter tbe fame one .
let bim feke peace and enfue it . $02 thecpes of toanother,ag Seale of the-manpfolde
the Lozd are ouer the rpabtcous, and pps cates qraceof God. aonan piglet talcke C
(areo en) tonto thep2 prayers. Agapne:the face asthe oo) egoi god. x Pt any manmpnifter, som rit è
- of the Lod is ouce them that do evel. let hom Do itag 2oFtbe abplitye, which Goo nage HEE
aivi Hozeoner; wbo ts ft that wpU bare pou, pf a lhe Sy Chat Godin all thynges
BH atb.d-> pe folowe p which is good: Pee bappparepe, mapebe glozrficd thozowe Jefus Chepe, R 5
-_-p£anp trouble pappen onto pouforrpabtcout. fo tohome be prapfe and bominpen fozenetand `
tenbit: nes labe:* We notpeafrapedfoz anpe terroure euer, Ame. eee
oftbem, nether be pe troubled butfanctifpe the earl beloucd,maruaple not that pe arepo
Zoe Godin poure hertes. Ja Wereadpeal- ued bp fpze (whpebs thpnae ts fo trpe poujag
wapes to gene anamifwoere fo cuctpe mantbat thougbe fome Graunge thynge happened Dnto
atketh pou a reafonof the boope tbat iginpou, pou:butreiopce nag moc) as pearepartakers
and that wpth meakenes and feare, Haupnge a of Chzites paffpon : that when bys glo: i
t.oetrt.ib (OOD contcfence, xthat where as thep backbpte peareth,pemapebe mecpe ange. Pipe be wee:
weeds pon a Parl grid Saale: apamed that rapled bpå forthename of Chit bapppeare pe: and. iS
eo A falfelp wernt eh goovconuerfacponinchzpit. stor the glozp andthefprete of God refteth bpa
AAAA + sone ibis bette (pE the wplofGodbelo)p pou.<dn thep2 partebciseucl fpobenof, but on
Moma, b > pefunftre foz well nopnge then fo cucll Dop we. pourparte beis glozifped.
Dat Jax oras moch as Chetlte bath once futte- Sethat none ofpou bepunpihed ag a mur- D
-vedtog (pines, theinttefoz the onintt.te bapage eherer,o2 as a thefe,oz an eucll doer, 02 asa bu-
-bg th God, and was kplled, as pertapnpnge fpbody in other mens matters. DEany ma fuffce 4
the icth:but wasqupckencd inthe {prete. aga hiten man, let bir not be atbamed : but |
“an wbpeb (pete bealfowentand preached on let bpm qlozifpe God on bps bebalte : Foz the
totpelpzetes that were in prefon, wbycbe fore tyme iscome,that udgement muf begpuneat
týme bad bene bpfobedpent, when thelongefué Phouleok God. Veit fpztbeginine at bs, what
ferpng of God was once loked Foz tn the dapes . thallthe ende be Of them whpehe beleue not the
gens vi.a Of froe. * whple the arke was apeepatpnge: Gotpell of God-Andxpl therpabtcous fcacelp PENT
sgen. viie *MODerin fewe,that is tofape.biit.fouieg twere befaucd: whereallthe wngodlpe and the fpn-
jambs fauedbp the water lpkeasbaptime alfo now nerappeare:Wiberfoze, let them that are trou-
faneth vs, not the puttpngeawape oftbefpithe bled accovbpnge to the wyll of God commpet
ofthe Heth,butinebat a good contcpence cofen< thep2foules tobpmtopth weldopnge, as nto


ath. bbe


tethto God bp therefurrectið of Jefus Chap, afapthfullereatounr. |

which ig on therpabt bande of Ged: Fandis É 'be.b. Chapter .
peded, d gone into beanctt,xangels,poioers, and migbe qa tr aoa T as bpfhoppes and pretes r
And tiD fibon eD nto bim i err o2rteth ponge perio ines to fabmpt them feluce e.>.


C The. iiü. Chapter. i ae Hie cutep one to love another.
ar tpeerbonteth mi te teas trom fonar, ana rio man te fut E J (J erbozte whycham atlo an tider,
A E D as A ma pe pan toe st re epee
tA Sawa red for beinthe ne carmepepour Moaes halbe opend. x Fedepe Chapt ae
K = s Caradar i famemindfo? focke,afmuche aslocth inpou, cay ace ree
RN eee Aad be wbich {uftectb inp Heth, ceatieth (pa btof them, notag compelled therto, buttopl oe
HA ee > fro finne 4 bebencefozwarde fhulbde rank c4 (aftera ®obdipe forte NOC foz the defpzeof yo
ipue(asmochtimeasremapnetpinpAetbe not fil ucre:but ofa good mind, not ag though Fi Aint»
after piu ofmen.butaftcrtbewpllofGod. pe were Patrol stan any they E Pe Titus. iid
E Fosaa phe Pa pooto pane fees aranean fr le eerie good top!) ada c
> simep fs patof af ofp: ndtoben.tbe chefe Chepherde tball appeare pe J
opr, ito Foig walkpnge in wantonnes, luftes, inexcette poene epe


of wpneg inerceeofeatpnaeinerceNeotdpn Lpkewplepe ponger fubmpt pout fenes onto VEEN
the


€ E


.} > ©. gloapand dominyonfo2z ener,and cuer Amë.
ee BS


= =


I


the elders. oubmpet pour felucs eneep man, one
toanother-kuet pour felues together in lowlp-
. heg of mpnde. Fo? Godrelpitcththe pronde, g


go racetotbebimble sH Submyptpoure |
c


uegtherfoze Vider thé mighty bande of Gon,
that be mape eralte pou, whe thetpme is come,

matbin Cab alpour cate ypo ht: for becareth fo2 pou.
prs wn fonet and wath, toppen ecto Tarp the
ons Denellaga roarpnge pon, walketh aboute, fe
Fiacika bpn Obani ia deuonre: + whom refpite
i tedfate inthe Fapthe, knotopnaethat the fame
Aflictiongareappopnted vntoponrbzethzen p
areintbe wolde. Wut the Godof all grace
wbpche bath called 08 ynto bpgeternallalozpe
bp Chek Jefus, (hal his ovonefelfe (after that
pe baueluttred a lptleattlpcepd make pou ptr:
fect-fetle, frength and fablpih pou. Co him be
plias a faptbfull bother onto

pou(as 4 (uppofe) baue F waprte bre;


v  Felp,erdoztpnge and feftpfpenge, =~
a’. bowthatthisisthetruearace;
He bs Beh eas tort cng TS
Soe - The cogregacyonoe
iz themwmbpchbeat
Wabplon


aretha a CE,
panongof ge
> in h ponte cieto, -n
> . - falutethpou,efodoth - (.)
_ ,MHarcusmpfonne.xGrete
1, tof FbiD e iute enir he e foe n
o ofloue . Peace be with pouall; which -
-o aren bape ze Amen: °.


ont.rbi.c


=


The feconde Cpittie of
: HE SDapnet Peter.
C The fpte Chapter..
e aiae i e ngr


make ourecallpnge kuowen bp gooù'wozckrsanb
pag fapth. Be maketh mencpon of pps ottone -
' SEACDE 4 :


ou WD to tbem whbpcbe baue pray


S ANS s
pat


m


P


Othe.
” o pite


tue bp thetbpcbe are genen wnto vs excelente
and mooie greatepzomples, that by themea-


obs. Bette


nes thereof pempabtebe + partakers of the
Soniye veh os a PE pe fpe the cozrupepon of
dipe luten i. uk, itp
_. And bereunto geue all dplygence in poure >
_fapthininitter vertne:in vertuebnowlengex in °°"? *
Knowledge temperaunce in temperaunce paci-
Ence:in pactéce godl pnes:in godlpnes beotperl p
. kpndnes in beotberlp kindnes love. Eor pf there
‘thpnges beamonge you,and be plenteous, thep
Appl make pou that penepther thalbe pole noz
‘vntruteful inthe bnowledgeofour 202d Fetus
Chepfte. wut he that lacketh thele thynacs, is
bipndeand gropeth for the wap wpth bis bade,
and athe f:agattn, at bewas pourge front 7
ecupnnes« — vege
_ Wiberfozebzethzen,qene the moze dilpgence, €
fo; to make poure callpnae and eleccpon fure


Jobn. fc
Colo tih


Fon (bp goon worker) fFo2 pE pe Do luche. thpngeg,pe a


(hallneuer fall. De,and bp thys meanes an en-
trpnge in ise eara sete pou aboubat-


Ip into p cuerlattpnge kpngvom of oure Lorde
tayo aoe bees ag


Wberfore, J wpll not beneglpaenteto put
pou altoapes inremembyaiice of luce thpnece,
thengh pe knowe them pour felues, and be fta-
biped tn the pefent trueth Notwoithtanpnae

thinke it mete(aslonge as Jam ity thys tae erba
itary athe ie ee br he ou. fnire-
Memb2aunce,fozas mocheas 3 am fure , that

| thortlp 3 uit put of tps mp tabernacle. tener #4 f08 Fh
ag oure Lod Felus Cheplte thewed me , J wpil
cucealfo gene my Diligence , that pe mape bane
wherwpth to flere Dpthe remebzaunce ok ehele

. thpnaes after mp departpnge. |
bt Eor We bane not folowed deceatfull fa-
bles , when toe opencd ced the power and
commipnge of ure Lode Jelug Chpike, but x Hts
wpth oure epes we lame bps mapettie:euen thé
verelpetoben bereceaued of Eod the father ho- .
poera hay whentherecame fuchea D
vopce to bim tre the excellent glozp. x Thpsig mat.rbiib,
mp dere beloucd fonne, insobom FJ hanedelpte. Lukti
This vopce we berdecomefrombeauen, whan
we Were Wptd bpm in the bolp mount.

We baue allo aright fure wozde of prophecp,
Mobereunto pipe take bede as wnto at Ipabtep
‘Ghpneth ina darcke place,pedo well, vntpll the
dape Dawne,and the dape Farre arple inpoure
pate Serer that pe fpatte knotwe this:that no
propbefpe in tbetceppture bath anp p2puate in-
terpeetacpon. Eo: the lcrppture came neuer bp
the topll of man:but holp men of God fpake, az
they were moued bp the bolpe moolt.

. €ohbe. it. Chapter.
 Eweprophecpeth of falfe teachers and Hewethe
. _ thepz punptbimente.- :
a Dere were fallePzopbetes allo a- X

SS] BBS) mongethe people, euenag x there Pariha,

we area albefalle teachers amonge pou: o.zt.ti1t0

(eee) tech prenelp Chall bepngeindam Fanit e”

ees) nable fectes(eut dinpeng p LNDP =<”

hath boughte thé) bring ppb théfelues wy

Damnacions many thallfolowthey2bamna

wapes, bp whomthewape of tructh Malle e-

nell (poken.of , and thozowe salt ne


tii.co-fiitp


l ries
i EF


Me


IER.


ca A
ee ee ä


€ E


.} > ©. gloapand dominyonfo2z ener,and cuer Amë.
ee BS


= =


I


the elders. oubmpet pour felucs eneep man, one
toanother-kuet pour felues together in lowlp-
. heg of mpnde. Fo? Godrelpitcththe pronde, g


go racetotbebimble sH Submyptpoure |
c


uegtherfoze Vider thé mighty bande of Gon,
that be mape eralte pou, whe thetpme is come,

matbin Cab alpour cate ypo ht: for becareth fo2 pou.
prs wn fonet and wath, toppen ecto Tarp the
ons Denellaga roarpnge pon, walketh aboute, fe
Fiacika bpn Obani ia deuonre: + whom refpite
i tedfate inthe Fapthe, knotopnaethat the fame
Aflictiongareappopnted vntoponrbzethzen p
areintbe wolde. Wut the Godof all grace
wbpche bath called 08 ynto bpgeternallalozpe
bp Chek Jefus, (hal his ovonefelfe (after that
pe baueluttred a lptleattlpcepd make pou ptr:
fect-fetle, frength and fablpih pou. Co him be
plias a faptbfull bother onto

pou(as 4 (uppofe) baue F waprte bre;


v  Felp,erdoztpnge and feftpfpenge, =~
a’. bowthatthisisthetruearace;
He bs Beh eas tort cng TS
Soe - The cogregacyonoe
iz themwmbpchbeat
Wabplon


aretha a CE,
panongof ge
> in h ponte cieto, -n
> . - falutethpou,efodoth - (.)
_ ,MHarcusmpfonne.xGrete
1, tof FbiD e iute enir he e foe n
o ofloue . Peace be with pouall; which -
-o aren bape ze Amen: °.


ont.rbi.c


=


The feconde Cpittie of
: HE SDapnet Peter.
C The fpte Chapter..
e aiae i e ngr


make ourecallpnge kuowen bp gooù'wozckrsanb
pag fapth. Be maketh mencpon of pps ottone -
' SEACDE 4 :


ou WD to tbem whbpcbe baue pray


S ANS s
pat


m


P


Othe.
” o pite


tue bp thetbpcbe are genen wnto vs excelente
and mooie greatepzomples, that by themea-


obs. Bette


nes thereof pempabtebe + partakers of the
Soniye veh os a PE pe fpe the cozrupepon of
dipe luten i. uk, itp
_. And bereunto geue all dplygence in poure >
_fapthininitter vertne:in vertuebnowlengex in °°"? *
Knowledge temperaunce in temperaunce paci-
Ence:in pactéce godl pnes:in godlpnes beotperl p
. kpndnes in beotberlp kindnes love. Eor pf there
‘thpnges beamonge you,and be plenteous, thep
Appl make pou that penepther thalbe pole noz
‘vntruteful inthe bnowledgeofour 202d Fetus
Chepfte. wut he that lacketh thele thynacs, is
bipndeand gropeth for the wap wpth bis bade,
and athe f:agattn, at bewas pourge front 7
ecupnnes« — vege
_ Wiberfozebzethzen,qene the moze dilpgence, €
fo; to make poure callpnae and eleccpon fure


Jobn. fc
Colo tih


Fon (bp goon worker) fFo2 pE pe Do luche. thpngeg,pe a


(hallneuer fall. De,and bp thys meanes an en-
trpnge in ise eara sete pou aboubat-


Ip into p cuerlattpnge kpngvom of oure Lorde
tayo aoe bees ag


Wberfore, J wpll not beneglpaenteto put
pou altoapes inremembyaiice of luce thpnece,
thengh pe knowe them pour felues, and be fta-
biped tn the pefent trueth Notwoithtanpnae

thinke it mete(aslonge as Jam ity thys tae erba
itary athe ie ee br he ou. fnire-
Memb2aunce,fozas mocheas 3 am fure , that

| thortlp 3 uit put of tps mp tabernacle. tener #4 f08 Fh
ag oure Lod Felus Cheplte thewed me , J wpil
cucealfo gene my Diligence , that pe mape bane
wherwpth to flere Dpthe remebzaunce ok ehele

. thpnaes after mp departpnge. |
bt Eor We bane not folowed deceatfull fa-
bles , when toe opencd ced the power and
commipnge of ure Lode Jelug Chpike, but x Hts
wpth oure epes we lame bps mapettie:euen thé
verelpetoben bereceaued of Eod the father ho- .
poera hay whentherecame fuchea D
vopce to bim tre the excellent glozp. x Thpsig mat.rbiib,
mp dere beloucd fonne, insobom FJ hanedelpte. Lukti
This vopce we berdecomefrombeauen, whan
we Were Wptd bpm in the bolp mount.

We baue allo aright fure wozde of prophecp,
Mobereunto pipe take bede as wnto at Ipabtep
‘Ghpneth ina darcke place,pedo well, vntpll the
dape Dawne,and the dape Farre arple inpoure
pate Serer that pe fpatte knotwe this:that no
propbefpe in tbetceppture bath anp p2puate in-
terpeetacpon. Eo: the lcrppture came neuer bp
the topll of man:but holp men of God fpake, az
they were moued bp the bolpe moolt.

. €ohbe. it. Chapter.
 Eweprophecpeth of falfe teachers and Hewethe
. _ thepz punptbimente.- :
a Dere were fallePzopbetes allo a- X

SS] BBS) mongethe people, euenag x there Pariha,

we area albefalle teachers amonge pou: o.zt.ti1t0

(eee) tech prenelp Chall bepngeindam Fanit e”

ees) nable fectes(eut dinpeng p LNDP =<”

hath boughte thé) bring ppb théfelues wy

Damnacions many thallfolowthey2bamna

wapes, bp whomthewape of tructh Malle e-

nell (poken.of , and thozowe salt ne


tii.co-fiitp


l ries
i EF


Me


IER.


ca A
ee ee ä


eS ee ee et


eS) | 2
Genie AND tulk+Lot vered wpththe vnelenlp cuer- foozdes( which tere tolde before of the bolp pro


Chep withfapued woedes makemarchaundple meng bntothem. Wut thefame(s happened tne
ou, whole tudgement is nowenotfarrcof, tothéthatis vfedtobe fyoben bp thetrue pzo- |
+ and thep2 bamnacpon flepeth not. ` ~. _Uerbe.« Che dogg ta turned to bigowze vomet Ptoa.Fri,
Hor pt God {pared not the angels that linned, agapne , and the folve that has wathed istura
butcaltethembdowneintobell, edelpueredibe ned agapne to ber valotbpnge inthe mper, `
o# (nto chapnegofdarckeneg -#(to bepunptheo) to De C The.ffi. Chapter.
kept nfo tndgemente: neptberfparedtbe olde — «OF the bape of the ozbe, whorelonge sarpenge
Senia worde,butlaued . * Goethe epabte preacher hia Beeld i
oftpabteoutnes,and brought int choude bpi fee Dis isthe lecõdecpitlethat Jnow A
the wozlde of the vmgodly,and turned thecpties i JI WwPpte Ynfo pou Dearlpe beloucd,
of Sodom and Gomozintoapeg:ouerthzelve es ted| Wberiith F ere vp poure fincere
thé, dampncdthem,andimabe ontbeman enta | je _ mpnd. bp puttpnge pou in remem- %
ple onto thole that after wule Ipune bngodlpe : bzaiice,p pe map be mindfullof the


facton of the wpcked,delpuered be-S€o2r be being ppt Jand alfo the cOmaundemét of ve wbich


tPabicong and dwellpngeamongetheinfeing be Apottles of the Lozbde and Caupoure.


and Pearpnge, beredbpsepabteousfoule from + Chistpalt onder nde tbat ther thal come inde ah


jceree Dapetodape withtbetr unlawful dedes.x The in the latte dapes , mockerg ox cinvptccattuinemte) ‘PA
EPEE C. 020 knowethbow todelpuer thegodlp outof wbpch wpll walke after thep: owne luftes and anp.te
fempfacpons,and to referue the bniuft onto fape-Uil bereits the promes of bys co MMPHG es ti...
dape of iudgement foz to be punpthed:butchef- <$€02 fence the fathers dped al thynges continue) Time
ip tbem that walcke after the fiecheinthelute inthe fame eftate therein they were at the be- as
of onclennes,and delpple aucthozite.32efump- nnpuge, JEo: this thep knowe notte that wpt'
fous aretbep g fubboine,whpchfearenorte fully howe that the heauensa great whple aro
€ (peake enell of them that ercel! in wo pppe. were and theeartheouto€ the water appearen
cdihen the aungels whpch are greater bothein vp tho2owethe water, bp the word of Good: bp
power and mpgbe,receaue not ot the Lord rap: the tobich thinges the world that then wag, pe-
 ipngeiudgementagapnt théfelues. Sutthete rpthed bepng onerrunned wprh water. x But p rl
as buitbeaftes naturalp bzougbtfozthto beta pbeauése carth which are nowe, bekept bp ppg EAr
en and Deftroped , fpakeeuell of thetbpnaes worde in {Toze.and referued anrop agapnite
that thep wnderitandenot, and ali perphein the bape of iudgement and perdpctono unmod: -
thep2 owne deftruccps , and receauc the reward [pemen .Dearlp beloued, be not iqnozaunte of
of bnrpgbewefnes. | this onethpnge, potvetbat x one dapé is torth Aa ir
Chey coute it pleaturetolpue delpetoutip for ` the Lorde aga thoutandepeare, and athofiare ore .
afeaton. pot Sl thepareetplthpnes: whyche peareagone dare. ‘Che Lorde that bate pro-
Ipue at plealucintheir owne difccauables way- mpfed, ig not flacke,as fomemen counte flack.
es fealting and {conning Aid mtr -s epesfull nes:butis pactenteto tg warde: fo2 almoch ag
of aduoutepe, g that canot ceale frö lpnne:begi bhetolde bane noman lofte , but WP receane
ipnge onitablefoules.iertes thepbaucerercy: allmen totepentaunce. |
{ediopthrobberpe. Ehepare cuckedchploacn Neuertheleflexthe dapeof the Lord wil come € i
wppebdaucfofakë therpgbtware,earegone aga thefe in i night,tn the which dap, the bea pein
Lurid atrape fotowpnaethe x wape of Balaam tbe uens (hall paffe atbape inmanet of a tempelt , € apo.in.a
D fonne of Wolo: whpch loned the rewarhe of rn the clementes pall mele wpth beat:tlfe carth al amoro
tigbtwelnes:but was rebuked steal leg fo the wozkes that aretherin,alburne Se-
‘The tame and domme seal “pero inan= pnge then that dil thele thpnges (hall perrthe,
nes bopce,fozbabde the madnetie of the prophet. what maner perlons ought peto be inbolp con:
Itd  kThefeare welles topthout water :cloudes uerfacpon and fodlpnes:io png foz,¢ bal png
that are carped wptha tempefte, to whom the wntotbecommpnge of the dape of God, bp tho
mpt ofdarcknes ig releruedfo2 euer.sfo2 when the beauts (hall perp with fpze and the clemé
tbep baue fpokčthe greate fwellpng twozdesof tes bail meite wopth beate? y Reuerthelele te Ape FpI a
banitp,thep er fe tho2otbelufesinthesolup: (accopdpneeto bys pzomps )lokefo2 anewebea ais
teoutnes ofthe fet , themthat were cleane e- uen and a newe cartbe , wherein divcliethe
fcapeb:ené thé that nowelpuetnerroure: while tpgbtewelnes. or baat
they promes them libertpe, whereas thep them  — Wiberforedearelpe brlouc’, fepnge that pe D
__ felueg are the bonde feruauntes of cozruption: loke fo2fuch thpnaes,be biligentetbatpemape |
donina x foz oF wobom a man iRouctcome,wntop fame befoundeof bpm iepeace, wt tipotte¢ vn-"
tart.bi.a (Sbe brought in bondage. + SorpEthep after defpied. And fuppofe that the lor ge lutterpnee
snare — thep baucetcapedfromtpe fpltbines of § orld ofthe 1020 {8 faluacpon euen agour derelp be-
tho2owethe knowledge of the Lod and thefa: loued bother Paulealfo(accozdpnge top wpf-
ucour Jelu Chik are pet tangled agapne ther Some qeucn bnto bim)batb w2ptten puto gon,
u


_ FASE? ing and ouercomes then ts the latter ende woe pee,alinooft in eucrp eppitle,(peabinge of che


Wpetbeye then the beqpunpnere. oz it bad bene thynges: amenge tobpcbe are manyethpnuged
betterfoz them, not to baue knowen the wape berde tobe wnderftande » tobpcbe thep tbatare
oftpabteoufnes, thé after thep baue knoweé it > Wnlearncdand vnffable, peruerte, ag thepdoal
to turne from the polpe comanndemente P wag fo the other (ctpptures onto thep2 a dex

i , ruccpon


=-
i


eS ee ee et


eS) | 2
Genie AND tulk+Lot vered wpththe vnelenlp cuer- foozdes( which tere tolde before of the bolp pro


Chep withfapued woedes makemarchaundple meng bntothem. Wut thefame(s happened tne
ou, whole tudgement is nowenotfarrcof, tothéthatis vfedtobe fyoben bp thetrue pzo- |
+ and thep2 bamnacpon flepeth not. ` ~. _Uerbe.« Che dogg ta turned to bigowze vomet Ptoa.Fri,
Hor pt God {pared not the angels that linned, agapne , and the folve that has wathed istura
butcaltethembdowneintobell, edelpueredibe ned agapne to ber valotbpnge inthe mper, `
o# (nto chapnegofdarckeneg -#(to bepunptheo) to De C The.ffi. Chapter.
kept nfo tndgemente: neptberfparedtbe olde — «OF the bape of the ozbe, whorelonge sarpenge
Senia worde,butlaued . * Goethe epabte preacher hia Beeld i
oftpabteoutnes,and brought int choude bpi fee Dis isthe lecõdecpitlethat Jnow A
the wozlde of the vmgodly,and turned thecpties i JI WwPpte Ynfo pou Dearlpe beloucd,
of Sodom and Gomozintoapeg:ouerthzelve es ted| Wberiith F ere vp poure fincere
thé, dampncdthem,andimabe ontbeman enta | je _ mpnd. bp puttpnge pou in remem- %
ple onto thole that after wule Ipune bngodlpe : bzaiice,p pe map be mindfullof the


facton of the wpcked,delpuered be-S€o2r be being ppt Jand alfo the cOmaundemét of ve wbich


tPabicong and dwellpngeamongetheinfeing be Apottles of the Lozbde and Caupoure.


and Pearpnge, beredbpsepabteousfoule from + Chistpalt onder nde tbat ther thal come inde ah


jceree Dapetodape withtbetr unlawful dedes.x The in the latte dapes , mockerg ox cinvptccattuinemte) ‘PA
EPEE C. 020 knowethbow todelpuer thegodlp outof wbpch wpll walke after thep: owne luftes and anp.te
fempfacpons,and to referue the bniuft onto fape-Uil bereits the promes of bys co MMPHG es ti...
dape of iudgement foz to be punpthed:butchef- <$€02 fence the fathers dped al thynges continue) Time
ip tbem that walcke after the fiecheinthelute inthe fame eftate therein they were at the be- as
of onclennes,and delpple aucthozite.32efump- nnpuge, JEo: this thep knowe notte that wpt'
fous aretbep g fubboine,whpchfearenorte fully howe that the heauensa great whple aro
€ (peake enell of them that ercel! in wo pppe. were and theeartheouto€ the water appearen
cdihen the aungels whpch are greater bothein vp tho2owethe water, bp the word of Good: bp
power and mpgbe,receaue not ot the Lord rap: the tobich thinges the world that then wag, pe-
 ipngeiudgementagapnt théfelues. Sutthete rpthed bepng onerrunned wprh water. x But p rl
as buitbeaftes naturalp bzougbtfozthto beta pbeauése carth which are nowe, bekept bp ppg EAr
en and Deftroped , fpakeeuell of thetbpnaes worde in {Toze.and referued anrop agapnite
that thep wnderitandenot, and ali perphein the bape of iudgement and perdpctono unmod: -
thep2 owne deftruccps , and receauc the reward [pemen .Dearlp beloued, be not iqnozaunte of
of bnrpgbewefnes. | this onethpnge, potvetbat x one dapé is torth Aa ir
Chey coute it pleaturetolpue delpetoutip for ` the Lorde aga thoutandepeare, and athofiare ore .
afeaton. pot Sl thepareetplthpnes: whyche peareagone dare. ‘Che Lorde that bate pro-
Ipue at plealucintheir owne difccauables way- mpfed, ig not flacke,as fomemen counte flack.
es fealting and {conning Aid mtr -s epesfull nes:butis pactenteto tg warde: fo2 almoch ag
of aduoutepe, g that canot ceale frö lpnne:begi bhetolde bane noman lofte , but WP receane
ipnge onitablefoules.iertes thepbaucerercy: allmen totepentaunce. |
{ediopthrobberpe. Ehepare cuckedchploacn Neuertheleflexthe dapeof the Lord wil come € i
wppebdaucfofakë therpgbtware,earegone aga thefe in i night,tn the which dap, the bea pein
Lurid atrape fotowpnaethe x wape of Balaam tbe uens (hall paffe atbape inmanet of a tempelt , € apo.in.a
D fonne of Wolo: whpch loned the rewarhe of rn the clementes pall mele wpth beat:tlfe carth al amoro
tigbtwelnes:but was rebuked steal leg fo the wozkes that aretherin,alburne Se-
‘The tame and domme seal “pero inan= pnge then that dil thele thpnges (hall perrthe,
nes bopce,fozbabde the madnetie of the prophet. what maner perlons ought peto be inbolp con:
Itd  kThefeare welles topthout water :cloudes uerfacpon and fodlpnes:io png foz,¢ bal png
that are carped wptha tempefte, to whom the wntotbecommpnge of the dape of God, bp tho
mpt ofdarcknes ig releruedfo2 euer.sfo2 when the beauts (hall perp with fpze and the clemé
tbep baue fpokčthe greate fwellpng twozdesof tes bail meite wopth beate? y Reuerthelele te Ape FpI a
banitp,thep er fe tho2otbelufesinthesolup: (accopdpneeto bys pzomps )lokefo2 anewebea ais
teoutnes ofthe fet , themthat were cleane e- uen and a newe cartbe , wherein divcliethe
fcapeb:ené thé that nowelpuetnerroure: while tpgbtewelnes. or baat
they promes them libertpe, whereas thep them  — Wiberforedearelpe brlouc’, fepnge that pe D
__ felueg are the bonde feruauntes of cozruption: loke fo2fuch thpnaes,be biligentetbatpemape |
donina x foz oF wobom a man iRouctcome,wntop fame befoundeof bpm iepeace, wt tipotte¢ vn-"
tart.bi.a (Sbe brought in bondage. + SorpEthep after defpied. And fuppofe that the lor ge lutterpnee
snare — thep baucetcapedfromtpe fpltbines of § orld ofthe 1020 {8 faluacpon euen agour derelp be-
tho2owethe knowledge of the Lod and thefa: loued bother Paulealfo(accozdpnge top wpf-
ucour Jelu Chik are pet tangled agapne ther Some qeucn bnto bim)batb w2ptten puto gon,
u


_ FASE? ing and ouercomes then ts the latter ende woe pee,alinooft in eucrp eppitle,(peabinge of che


Wpetbeye then the beqpunpnere. oz it bad bene thynges: amenge tobpcbe are manyethpnuged
betterfoz them, not to baue knowen the wape berde tobe wnderftande » tobpcbe thep tbatare
oftpabteoufnes, thé after thep baue knoweé it > Wnlearncdand vnffable, peruerte, ag thepdoal
to turne from the polpe comanndemente P wag fo the other (ctpptures onto thep2 a dex

i , ruccpon


=-
i


pf Saynte John,


fEruccpon. Pe therEozebeloutd, (feing pe be war
ned afozehande) beware left pe, withother men
be alfo piucked awape thozowe the errour of the
wpecked:and fal frome poure owne freadfall nes
but grote in grace,and inthe bnowelege of our
Lozde and faupoure Zelus Cheptte.Co whome
be glozpe both nowe and foz cuer. Amen.


fromthe bea pnnpnge. Agaptic,anewecommas -
undement 3 wepte vntopou,tbatis true nbin
andthe fame is true allo inpou : forthedarckee
nefleis pate, and tbe true lpgbte note thpneth:
He that (apeth.bowe that beisinibelpabre,


and pet bateth bps bzother,ts in darckenes euctt


wntplithbpstpme. ive thatloucth bps brothera-


_bpdetbintbe Ipabt, and thereis no occafponof


The fyrtte Epyftle of
Hapnte pobntbe Apoftle.
C Thefp:t Chapter. —
EMOn E ceabipasloceenmastion tron NAAN
so man is wriheutefpnne,


Hat wbpeh was fromethe begin


;
elie eth ee |
Tee aT Pa ra .


- spat pbtia beare wptnes-and nie Aa a eh et cteinal
i


rp wpth vs and ý our fnowmbiy map be with
_ thefather,andbps fonne Jelug Chi. And thys
z Wzpte we buto pou, thats (pemavereiopce; and that)

“> pour tope mape be fnll .

And thps isthe trdpnyes whpehe we haue
bearbde-of bpm andodcclare onto pou,that Gcd is
ipabte,and inbpm ts nodarckenes at all. PE we
fay “pat we paue felowthpp toptbbpm,ervalte
indarckenes,toelpe:and dO noty truth.2nt and

reira VE we VABE inlpgbt euen as bets inlpgote,thens
aib baue we felompp torth bim, and» tbe biond of
dere vise Jelug Chpt bis tonne clenfeth us from al finne
padi s. xPfwe faye that we bauenofpnne, we deceaue
sob.siti.. OU (clues,¢ the truthis notin bs:+ Jf we know
pee aie lege out (pines, be (s faptbfnll, zult, to fozgeue


Luks rh,d, DS our fpnnes,and tuclenle vs frome alburpah -


teoutnes JF welape we hauenot{ynncd, wema
ke bom alper and bps tode fs net in bg.
C Che.ti. Chapter.

JA cCxchirtis Pi wie OVIDA Deketh eenia is tried
O EETA E PHECDPLON COCLE FOP NIES W2ypet
P Sep "j fe Fwntopou.thatpelpimenct . Ard
4 A dpf anp man [pune foe haue an aduo-
DEN Acatewptbthe father, Jefus Lbzite
lise? JE aLa ba Uniona itisthatobtap
netharacefo2 our |
Ipe, but allo foz the (pnnes of the worlde.


i=
1s
Wi
pi


ria And berbp we are fure that weknowedin


qhon rigo piwe kepebpscommaundemintes: * Hethat

faveth J knowe bym, and kesethnot bis comma

undementes isa lper and the Veriteisnotin Dim

wut wholo kepeth bps word: in bim ts the lone

of God perfect in Dede, berbp tnowe we that we

=  arembpm, hep fapetb:be bydeth mbpm ought
towalkeenenasbe walked. f 3

B wWeetheen, 9 werte nonewecommaundemen-

te onto pou: but p olbe commaundemcnt, whpch

pebaue badfcom the beapr nyonge. Che Ode com

maundement ig the wode wbprhre bane hrarde


_alfojrbat no lpecommet


pres notfozourfpnncscne b


euellinbpm.Hethat+ batrthbps brother ig in Hear stir.

Darckenes:and walketbin darckenefle: and can:

not tell wheiber be goeth , becaule that darche-

nesbathblpndedbpsepes. 7
Wabes J wpe vnto pou , holoe tbat youre ©


_ tpnnegare fozgeuen pou: for bps names fake 4


wepte wntu pou fathers. howe that pe paue ktis-


- Yoon bpm that is from the begpunpnge, 3 wyte


ynto pou poungemen , Potwe that pe baue overs
comethe wycked. 3 wepte vito pou lptlechpl-
been. bow that pe baue knowne p fatter: FJ bane
to:ptten onfopou Fathers, botbe that pe Dane
knotven bpm thatisfromethebegypunpnge. F
baue torptten pnto pou pounge men, bowe that
pe are {trenge,and the ozdc of God abpdeth it
pou,andpe Daue overcome the wrcken. 7
Hethatvelouenotxthe toozlde, nepther the yod.rbii.p


thynacsthat are inthe twozlde.PFanpmanioue € ->


the oorlde,theloue ofthe fatperignotinbypm. —
fozallthatisinthe wolde, (as the uke of the
Helpe and the Inft of tbe epeg athe peeve ert)
isnot of tie father:but of p wold. And p wolde
alfethbatvape,and the lait thevot:butbe that tul
fplletb the torll of God abpdrth for eunte. -
Lptle chrlozen,it ig the latte tpme, and as pe D
haue heard hotve that Sutechep it pali comescué
nowe are there manp begoneto be Antech:p tes
alreabpe : wherbp weknowe,that itis tbelate —.
tpnit.* Thep went oute from ve, but thep were Stes. &


not of vs. ffo: pE thep bed bene ot ve, they wolde


no Donbte, banc continncd wyth bs. Eut that it
mpabtappere,that they wercnetof ys.
freuerthelefle,pebaucan cpntementeofhpm
thatis bolp,andpeknowe altppnges 49 paue
not wzpttn vntopou, asthougbe pe knetor noe
the trutb:butastpou re linewe it(and bnowe
boftruth. Upa is alp-
at but bethat docnpetbthat Jcfus is Ci:pltethe
fameisAntechyl, that denpeth the fatper end
the fonne.Wboloenerdenpety the (onne, the lac
mebatbnot thefatoer. | ef itj-
ox (Be that knowlegeth the Sonne, hath the Father ato) #9
Let thecefoe abpde in pouthatfametobpchepe
carde fromthe beqpnnpnge, Pf tbat tohyche pe
bearde frome the bcqpanpnge Wall remapne ir
pou,pealfo pall contpnue in th: fonte andin the
Father. And thys isthe prompile that bebath pzo ©
mpfed vs:euen eternalilpic.

Chelethyprgeshiuc gs wrptten vutopou,con .
cernpngethem that dplceaue pou. And the anno
pripnge whpche pe Dane ceceaued of bpm that
Divelletyinpou.Andpenede not, that anpe man
teachepou:but as ticannopntinge teacheth pou
of alltbpnges,and ifistrueandnolp.and aspt
Hath taugbe euenlo bpdetherin. And no we ba-
besabpD:inbpimn:that wycen be Wall appere we
mapebe bolde, enottobemade abated ye

arppa


ollecriitt,


.
= a r
i 5 ot -ps e


pf Saynte John,


fEruccpon. Pe therEozebeloutd, (feing pe be war
ned afozehande) beware left pe, withother men
be alfo piucked awape thozowe the errour of the
wpecked:and fal frome poure owne freadfall nes
but grote in grace,and inthe bnowelege of our
Lozde and faupoure Zelus Cheptte.Co whome
be glozpe both nowe and foz cuer. Amen.


fromthe bea pnnpnge. Agaptic,anewecommas -
undement 3 wepte vntopou,tbatis true nbin
andthe fame is true allo inpou : forthedarckee
nefleis pate, and tbe true lpgbte note thpneth:
He that (apeth.bowe that beisinibelpabre,


and pet bateth bps bzother,ts in darckenes euctt


wntplithbpstpme. ive thatloucth bps brothera-


_bpdetbintbe Ipabt, and thereis no occafponof


The fyrtte Epyftle of
Hapnte pobntbe Apoftle.
C Thefp:t Chapter. —
EMOn E ceabipasloceenmastion tron NAAN
so man is wriheutefpnne,


Hat wbpeh was fromethe begin


;
elie eth ee |
Tee aT Pa ra .


- spat pbtia beare wptnes-and nie Aa a eh et cteinal
i


rp wpth vs and ý our fnowmbiy map be with
_ thefather,andbps fonne Jelug Chi. And thys
z Wzpte we buto pou, thats (pemavereiopce; and that)

“> pour tope mape be fnll .

And thps isthe trdpnyes whpehe we haue
bearbde-of bpm andodcclare onto pou,that Gcd is
ipabte,and inbpm ts nodarckenes at all. PE we
fay “pat we paue felowthpp toptbbpm,ervalte
indarckenes,toelpe:and dO noty truth.2nt and

reira VE we VABE inlpgbt euen as bets inlpgote,thens
aib baue we felompp torth bim, and» tbe biond of
dere vise Jelug Chpt bis tonne clenfeth us from al finne
padi s. xPfwe faye that we bauenofpnne, we deceaue
sob.siti.. OU (clues,¢ the truthis notin bs:+ Jf we know
pee aie lege out (pines, be (s faptbfnll, zult, to fozgeue


Luks rh,d, DS our fpnnes,and tuclenle vs frome alburpah -


teoutnes JF welape we hauenot{ynncd, wema
ke bom alper and bps tode fs net in bg.
C Che.ti. Chapter.

JA cCxchirtis Pi wie OVIDA Deketh eenia is tried
O EETA E PHECDPLON COCLE FOP NIES W2ypet
P Sep "j fe Fwntopou.thatpelpimenct . Ard
4 A dpf anp man [pune foe haue an aduo-
DEN Acatewptbthe father, Jefus Lbzite
lise? JE aLa ba Uniona itisthatobtap
netharacefo2 our |
Ipe, but allo foz the (pnnes of the worlde.


i=
1s
Wi
pi


ria And berbp we are fure that weknowedin


qhon rigo piwe kepebpscommaundemintes: * Hethat

faveth J knowe bym, and kesethnot bis comma

undementes isa lper and the Veriteisnotin Dim

wut wholo kepeth bps word: in bim ts the lone

of God perfect in Dede, berbp tnowe we that we

=  arembpm, hep fapetb:be bydeth mbpm ought
towalkeenenasbe walked. f 3

B wWeetheen, 9 werte nonewecommaundemen-

te onto pou: but p olbe commaundemcnt, whpch

pebaue badfcom the beapr nyonge. Che Ode com

maundement ig the wode wbprhre bane hrarde


_alfojrbat no lpecommet


pres notfozourfpnncscne b


euellinbpm.Hethat+ batrthbps brother ig in Hear stir.

Darckenes:and walketbin darckenefle: and can:

not tell wheiber be goeth , becaule that darche-

nesbathblpndedbpsepes. 7
Wabes J wpe vnto pou , holoe tbat youre ©


_ tpnnegare fozgeuen pou: for bps names fake 4


wepte wntu pou fathers. howe that pe paue ktis-


- Yoon bpm that is from the begpunpnge, 3 wyte


ynto pou poungemen , Potwe that pe baue overs
comethe wycked. 3 wepte vito pou lptlechpl-
been. bow that pe baue knowne p fatter: FJ bane
to:ptten onfopou Fathers, botbe that pe Dane
knotven bpm thatisfromethebegypunpnge. F
baue torptten pnto pou pounge men, bowe that
pe are {trenge,and the ozdc of God abpdeth it
pou,andpe Daue overcome the wrcken. 7
Hethatvelouenotxthe toozlde, nepther the yod.rbii.p


thynacsthat are inthe twozlde.PFanpmanioue € ->


the oorlde,theloue ofthe fatperignotinbypm. —
fozallthatisinthe wolde, (as the uke of the
Helpe and the Inft of tbe epeg athe peeve ert)
isnot of tie father:but of p wold. And p wolde
alfethbatvape,and the lait thevot:butbe that tul
fplletb the torll of God abpdrth for eunte. -
Lptle chrlozen,it ig the latte tpme, and as pe D
haue heard hotve that Sutechep it pali comescué
nowe are there manp begoneto be Antech:p tes
alreabpe : wherbp weknowe,that itis tbelate —.
tpnit.* Thep went oute from ve, but thep were Stes. &


not of vs. ffo: pE thep bed bene ot ve, they wolde


no Donbte, banc continncd wyth bs. Eut that it
mpabtappere,that they wercnetof ys.
freuerthelefle,pebaucan cpntementeofhpm
thatis bolp,andpeknowe altppnges 49 paue
not wzpttn vntopou, asthougbe pe knetor noe
the trutb:butastpou re linewe it(and bnowe
boftruth. Upa is alp-
at but bethat docnpetbthat Jcfus is Ci:pltethe
fameisAntechyl, that denpeth the fatper end
the fonne.Wboloenerdenpety the (onne, the lac
mebatbnot thefatoer. | ef itj-
ox (Be that knowlegeth the Sonne, hath the Father ato) #9
Let thecefoe abpde in pouthatfametobpchepe
carde fromthe beqpnnpnge, Pf tbat tohyche pe
bearde frome the bcqpanpnge Wall remapne ir
pou,pealfo pall contpnue in th: fonte andin the
Father. And thys isthe prompile that bebath pzo ©
mpfed vs:euen eternalilpic.

Chelethyprgeshiuc gs wrptten vutopou,con .
cernpngethem that dplceaue pou. And the anno
pripnge whpche pe Dane ceceaued of bpm that
Divelletyinpou.Andpenede not, that anpe man
teachepou:but as ticannopntinge teacheth pou
of alltbpnges,and ifistrueandnolp.and aspt
Hath taugbe euenlo bpdetherin. And no we ba-
besabpD:inbpimn:that wycen be Wall appere we
mapebe bolde, enottobemade abated ye

arppa


ollecriitt,


.
= a r
i 5 ot -ps e


athpscommpn Fe dma ohid Abed
teoug;hnowe alto thateuerpe one obpche dot he
ipgbtcoutnes,isbome ofbpm.
| — CCbe tit. Chapter :
«The Cinguler lave oF 0d towarde bs,andhotwe we az


gapne sug bte to lougone another.


cea Cholde, what loue the Father bathe
pa thewedon be, that we thuldebecal-
Sey ae leD-¥( and be tndene thexfones of God.
yw A Stoztbyscaule the wolde knoweth
Kts PON NOL,becaule it knowth hot bpm
Derlpebeloned hote are toe thelonnes of God
9 pot ICH OED OE See te Woar ME ial be xant we
knowe that when it hall appere: we thalbelpke

pen Paea Pean ig. And enerpma

P bath ths Doope in bym, purgeth bym felfe enë

aghe allots pure. cal pofosner conimiteth fpnne,
commptteth Dnrpabtcoufnes alfo,e(paneis bn

Ht etd hom th debs bd ps aa

take awape oure(pnnes, tin bim is nofpnne.Ag

many asbpde tu bpmfpnue not; but wholoeucr

finneth patbnot fene bypm.nether knoweth bpn.

% Wabes letnomandpleeane pou, bethat doth
rpahteoutnesis rpabteous:cuen as beisrpabe=
Footie teous. He p commptteth tyne, is of thedpucll:*
AHO" Fon the Dpuel fpnnetb centethe beapnnpnee. stor
this purpofe appeared thefone of God,toloiwfe
the wozckes of the puel.Cpolforner ig borne of
God. fprineth not:foz hig feede remapreth in bim
@becanhot fpnne,becaute be is bone of God, Jn
thys are thechplozen of God knowen,¢ the chpl-
d2€ of p Deutl, whofoeuer dothnot rpabteoutes
isnot of God, nepeberbe ploucthnot hisbzother
- _ Storthisistheribynges,that pe beardefrom

au p De begpunpnge,tbhat pe pule loue one another
Benes” not agx C apnwhpehiwas of p topched, and flew
; bys brother. Bnd wherfore Nete he bir Wecaule
bps olone woeckes tere euell,and hps bzotheres

ood.» {taruaple not mp bzethzen though the


A
Zuker, E H
Fhon. ð a


wolde bate pou.deknowe,p toe are tranflaten fi


From Death nntolpfe, becaule toe loue the breth:

xeutt. piro XDE) tloneth not b ot!
hotocuer hateth bps brother, fs a manflear.

And pe knowwe thatne maflear, bath cternal Ipfe

abpdpnge inbpm.erebp petccaue weloue:be-

caufe be gaue bps lpte,fozbs:¢ we oughtt qeue

ourlpues fo? the becthzett.25ut who fo path thig

Deut.ro,b. HoOlDes good E+teeth his brother hauc drde and

fbutteth SD Ups COpaP oy rom Dpmi,botoedwel

_ Leth p loncok God indym: Mp babes: let ns not

louctnworde, nethcrintong:but indede ginte

rpte.erbp we knotve,'that we are ofthe berpte

g cai quyct ourhertesbefoze him. ffo2 pour bert

_condempneds, Godis greater then ourbert,and

knoweth all ebpnges. Derlp beloued, pf our bert

condcmpne Ds not , thenhaucive truite to God

U warde:andDxwhbatfocuer we alke we receaue of

oat.bita. bpm becaute webepe bps commaundementes, ¢


Jhon, ro.» DOthofe thiges whycbarepleatauntinbislight .


aud.rbi.f. 2nd tbig sis commaundement, p we beleue
Poona e M thename of bys fonne getus Chzplt,andloue
zob. piii» One ANOther,as begane acommaundement And


Dpm,a be in bint,¢ berbp we knowep be abide
in vg euen bp EDIPE WDP WOSE GMA


_ TUe €pyltle


(Sbrotber,abpdetbindeth D


bethat kepethbis comanndementes,owellethin AN


CTbe.titi. Chapter
€ Dp Eereince of (pretes andhowe thefpitte of sod mape
bekpowen from the rpete Of erroure.Fche loue of God,
ant of oure nepgh boures.


g Carlpe beloued x beleuenot enerpe A

Sard \ (prete-but poue the fpectes, wether £t

Lee J tbepare of God oz not, Fors manve os sriiia

a Gray A falle prophetes are qoncont intothe eaer.ii0.s

Rimes WODE. Herby Hal pe knotoe p {pect LFF?
of Sop. Euerp tpeete tbat contetiert bat Fetus
nthe feb, ig of God. And cuerp


A


recone An
Pret Chat contelieth not that Jefus Chapt isco
mie in the fleth is not of God. And thys iB p Cinet
of Anticheptt,of whome pe baue bearde, bowep
be buld come: eué nowe alredp is Dein p woz2ld

Lptlechpldzen,peareof Gon, and þaue oner-
come them:foz greatertg be that ig inpoun, then
be that is inthe wozlde. Thep ate ofthe wolde,
tberfoze fpeake thep of the wold andthewo:d
beareth em. ie areo God. He that knoweth
Do E Drapo a bethat ig not of od, bearetbe

0t- ajcrebp Bnawe we the co tper

fig pepe a EE, aa dis
> SDeveipe Veioucd * let bs lone ofte another :fo2 ‘yo.rti.0.
louecommeth fod. Ani ann one haoa ano.
isboznejofG mit geen mak Spay that ioueth "ER
not knowetdnot gor:forke Gon (sloue. Jn thig
appeared the loue of God, te bs tarde: decaufe
that* God lent bys onelp bemottenfonne into f


wolde, that we mpabte pue thozowebpm. Het Ivon.is.r. -


inig loue not that toe loued God, but that be lg- toma,v.o


uedds,and fenthyg fonnetobe |
ourefpines. 7 theagrement foz


atanp tyme. ZF we loue One another, God dwel- eee


leth it vs, and bpsloucis perfecte in ve. Herbp Denti.,


i knowe we that wedrwell inbpm, and pein pg; 2™6 >


anb, bic


De that Cearsth, isnot etfecte inlone.

Wie louebym:forheloucd Yg fpit. Jfaman
Tape Ztoue Gov,and pa bate bys brother, beig
alpar, Lozhowecan tbat loucth not bps bzo
ther whone Hebathelene, lone Gov whome be


,batbnot fene? Bnd tbps comimaundement hane,
toe ofbpm:that be Which loucth Gob. puldlone
id th)


bps bzotber alfa,
The. v.Chapter °


7A Potocuer beleueth that efus ig 7
AVA teig bome ofon. And Aera ene that y
sloueth bpm. wbpcpe begatte , ge
pm


~ 2
=


ee | a


athpscommpn Fe dma ohid Abed
teoug;hnowe alto thateuerpe one obpche dot he
ipgbtcoutnes,isbome ofbpm.
| — CCbe tit. Chapter :
«The Cinguler lave oF 0d towarde bs,andhotwe we az


gapne sug bte to lougone another.


cea Cholde, what loue the Father bathe
pa thewedon be, that we thuldebecal-
Sey ae leD-¥( and be tndene thexfones of God.
yw A Stoztbyscaule the wolde knoweth
Kts PON NOL,becaule it knowth hot bpm
Derlpebeloned hote are toe thelonnes of God
9 pot ICH OED OE See te Woar ME ial be xant we
knowe that when it hall appere: we thalbelpke

pen Paea Pean ig. And enerpma

P bath ths Doope in bym, purgeth bym felfe enë

aghe allots pure. cal pofosner conimiteth fpnne,
commptteth Dnrpabtcoufnes alfo,e(paneis bn

Ht etd hom th debs bd ps aa

take awape oure(pnnes, tin bim is nofpnne.Ag

many asbpde tu bpmfpnue not; but wholoeucr

finneth patbnot fene bypm.nether knoweth bpn.

% Wabes letnomandpleeane pou, bethat doth
rpahteoutnesis rpabteous:cuen as beisrpabe=
Footie teous. He p commptteth tyne, is of thedpucll:*
AHO" Fon the Dpuel fpnnetb centethe beapnnpnee. stor
this purpofe appeared thefone of God,toloiwfe
the wozckes of the puel.Cpolforner ig borne of
God. fprineth not:foz hig feede remapreth in bim
@becanhot fpnne,becaute be is bone of God, Jn
thys are thechplozen of God knowen,¢ the chpl-
d2€ of p Deutl, whofoeuer dothnot rpabteoutes
isnot of God, nepeberbe ploucthnot hisbzother
- _ Storthisistheribynges,that pe beardefrom

au p De begpunpnge,tbhat pe pule loue one another
Benes” not agx C apnwhpehiwas of p topched, and flew
; bys brother. Bnd wherfore Nete he bir Wecaule
bps olone woeckes tere euell,and hps bzotheres

ood.» {taruaple not mp bzethzen though the


A
Zuker, E H
Fhon. ð a


wolde bate pou.deknowe,p toe are tranflaten fi


From Death nntolpfe, becaule toe loue the breth:

xeutt. piro XDE) tloneth not b ot!
hotocuer hateth bps brother, fs a manflear.

And pe knowwe thatne maflear, bath cternal Ipfe

abpdpnge inbpm.erebp petccaue weloue:be-

caufe be gaue bps lpte,fozbs:¢ we oughtt qeue

ourlpues fo? the becthzett.25ut who fo path thig

Deut.ro,b. HoOlDes good E+teeth his brother hauc drde and

fbutteth SD Ups COpaP oy rom Dpmi,botoedwel

_ Leth p loncok God indym: Mp babes: let ns not

louctnworde, nethcrintong:but indede ginte

rpte.erbp we knotve,'that we are ofthe berpte

g cai quyct ourhertesbefoze him. ffo2 pour bert

_condempneds, Godis greater then ourbert,and

knoweth all ebpnges. Derlp beloued, pf our bert

condcmpne Ds not , thenhaucive truite to God

U warde:andDxwhbatfocuer we alke we receaue of

oat.bita. bpm becaute webepe bps commaundementes, ¢


Jhon, ro.» DOthofe thiges whycbarepleatauntinbislight .


aud.rbi.f. 2nd tbig sis commaundement, p we beleue
Poona e M thename of bys fonne getus Chzplt,andloue
zob. piii» One ANOther,as begane acommaundement And


Dpm,a be in bint,¢ berbp we knowep be abide
in vg euen bp EDIPE WDP WOSE GMA


_ TUe €pyltle


(Sbrotber,abpdetbindeth D


bethat kepethbis comanndementes,owellethin AN


CTbe.titi. Chapter
€ Dp Eereince of (pretes andhowe thefpitte of sod mape
bekpowen from the rpete Of erroure.Fche loue of God,
ant of oure nepgh boures.


g Carlpe beloued x beleuenot enerpe A

Sard \ (prete-but poue the fpectes, wether £t

Lee J tbepare of God oz not, Fors manve os sriiia

a Gray A falle prophetes are qoncont intothe eaer.ii0.s

Rimes WODE. Herby Hal pe knotoe p {pect LFF?
of Sop. Euerp tpeete tbat contetiert bat Fetus
nthe feb, ig of God. And cuerp


A


recone An
Pret Chat contelieth not that Jefus Chapt isco
mie in the fleth is not of God. And thys iB p Cinet
of Anticheptt,of whome pe baue bearde, bowep
be buld come: eué nowe alredp is Dein p woz2ld

Lptlechpldzen,peareof Gon, and þaue oner-
come them:foz greatertg be that ig inpoun, then
be that is inthe wozlde. Thep ate ofthe wolde,
tberfoze fpeake thep of the wold andthewo:d
beareth em. ie areo God. He that knoweth
Do E Drapo a bethat ig not of od, bearetbe

0t- ajcrebp Bnawe we the co tper

fig pepe a EE, aa dis
> SDeveipe Veioucd * let bs lone ofte another :fo2 ‘yo.rti.0.
louecommeth fod. Ani ann one haoa ano.
isboznejofG mit geen mak Spay that ioueth "ER
not knowetdnot gor:forke Gon (sloue. Jn thig
appeared the loue of God, te bs tarde: decaufe
that* God lent bys onelp bemottenfonne into f


wolde, that we mpabte pue thozowebpm. Het Ivon.is.r. -


inig loue not that toe loued God, but that be lg- toma,v.o


uedds,and fenthyg fonnetobe |
ourefpines. 7 theagrement foz


atanp tyme. ZF we loue One another, God dwel- eee


leth it vs, and bpsloucis perfecte in ve. Herbp Denti.,


i knowe we that wedrwell inbpm, and pein pg; 2™6 >


anb, bic


De that Cearsth, isnot etfecte inlone.

Wie louebym:forheloucd Yg fpit. Jfaman
Tape Ztoue Gov,and pa bate bys brother, beig
alpar, Lozhowecan tbat loucth not bps bzo
ther whone Hebathelene, lone Gov whome be


,batbnot fene? Bnd tbps comimaundement hane,
toe ofbpm:that be Which loucth Gob. puldlone
id th)


bps bzotber alfa,
The. v.Chapter °


7A Potocuer beleueth that efus ig 7
AVA teig bome ofon. And Aera ene that y
sloueth bpm. wbpcpe begatte , ge
pm


~ 2
=


ee | a


Fob Fie. Hom allo tobpebe was be gotten ofbyin.x Ep
thps we knoto, that we loue the chpldzen of God
ipycnioeldue God, g al debate ato y iaa
tes. ortbpgis the loue of God, that we kepe

ojatrei.d hpg comaundementes,and* bis commaundeme

tes are not qreuous., +f $02 all that is bogne of

God, ouercommeth the wolde. And thpsts the

*ppctompe that ouercommeththe wolde . cuc

ourefapethb. UWibotsitthat ouercommeththe

worlde,but pe which beleneth, that Felusisthe

Fone of Gods Thps Jelug Chap is he that ia:

me bp water and blonde, not bp water onlp-but

bp toater and blonde. And it is the fpacte that be

: areth wptnefie becauletbhefparteistruthe.

Sor thece are thze whpcbe beare recopocinbeauen, the Fa:
| ther,tbemozne,and foe bolpe Shoile.anvthelethzearcone.


ee And thee whpcbe beare recorde cw meartd the
fpzete and water,and blonde: and thefe thze are


3%
-  bCORF Rg,


g tbe recorde, hwe that God atoer ie rade


-— gaath.bita that woe baue in bym:thatxif wealkeanp thing
sarene accozdpng to bps wPil, be beareth vs. Ayp ifte


of Sapnte John.
Ceewiptethtoa dry ZLabpe,reropteth that ber chplz


RA Eyed a onclye, but alfoall that bauebnow-
oo Siar the truth fory teutpes fake whped


Dwellethin bs, and Malbe ints foz cuer.
(pth vs thal be,grace, mevepe, & peace, from
God the father,and from the L020 Felus Chpt
the fonne of the Father, i teuth,and loue.
Fretopled qreatipe that Zfounde ofthy chp:
Dien walkpnacintruthe as webhauercceaueda
commaundement of thetather. And now beiech.
Athe Ladp.not asthough ¥ w20te a netwe con
Maundement onto the,but thatfame woppch we
baue beard frome the begpnnpnge p we Hhulbe* 23
loueone another . Andthpsisthelonz, that Moe soo eres
hulde walke afterbyscommaundemente. S707
Thps commaundemente tgithbat-ag pe bane
bcarde fromthe begpnnpnge)pe Hulde walke in
it. fo many dpfccanersareentecd mto p wold
whpchconfeffe not that Zelus Chpt is come iit
the fiethe: This ts adplecauer g an Antich2pfe.
Lokeonpour felues that welolenot p we bane
pole an at wemapebauca full reward
W3hofocuce tranfgrefictpand bydethnot in the


` poctepne of Chapt bath not God.etbat endus


rethintbe doctrpne of € bapit,bath both f father


 ethelonne. J€therecome anpe buts pou tbzpng


notthpslearnpnge, bpimreceauenot to houte:ne ¢
therbpddebpim god {pede .ffo2 be that bpodeth
bpm, God [pede is partaker of bys eucil dedeg,
(#Bedolve, 3 bauetalde pou befoze.that pe Gulbe mot be athaz
med inthe Dapeottbe Torde.)


¥Bbadmanp thypngesto wapt onto pou,nener


fp theles 3 woldenot thepte wpth paper and pucke


but Jtrutto come onto pou,and (peake w pou


ý mouthto mouth. that oute Jope mape be ful-tpe


Fonnes of thy electefpiter greiethe. mn ath
The thyzde Epyftle of


Cele glad of Gapus,that he walketh in the truth: cf
bazrteth them tobe loupnge buto thepoose Chipiten ir
thep: perfecucpon,Hetweth the bnspndedealpnge of Dpo
trepbhes,and the goad reporte OF Demetrpua, |


aiaa Ie elder Dnfo f beloucd Gaius 4
| a Peds) who Floucinthetruth. Belo-
EA] (edt o, wple in al tbingts thar


Pea Saw
3 peice n +


wpth contente. Rot onlpebebym
wot the bzetbzen: but alfo be fozbpddethe thems


Fob Fie. Hom allo tobpebe was be gotten ofbyin.x Ep
thps we knoto, that we loue the chpldzen of God
ipycnioeldue God, g al debate ato y iaa
tes. ortbpgis the loue of God, that we kepe

ojatrei.d hpg comaundementes,and* bis commaundeme

tes are not qreuous., +f $02 all that is bogne of

God, ouercommeth the wolde. And thpsts the

*ppctompe that ouercommeththe wolde . cuc

ourefapethb. UWibotsitthat ouercommeththe

worlde,but pe which beleneth, that Felusisthe

Fone of Gods Thps Jelug Chap is he that ia:

me bp water and blonde, not bp water onlp-but

bp toater and blonde. And it is the fpacte that be

: areth wptnefie becauletbhefparteistruthe.

Sor thece are thze whpcbe beare recopocinbeauen, the Fa:
| ther,tbemozne,and foe bolpe Shoile.anvthelethzearcone.


ee And thee whpcbe beare recorde cw meartd the
fpzete and water,and blonde: and thefe thze are


3%
-  bCORF Rg,


g tbe recorde, hwe that God atoer ie rade


-— gaath.bita that woe baue in bym:thatxif wealkeanp thing
sarene accozdpng to bps wPil, be beareth vs. Ayp ifte


of Sapnte John.
Ceewiptethtoa dry ZLabpe,reropteth that ber chplz


RA Eyed a onclye, but alfoall that bauebnow-
oo Siar the truth fory teutpes fake whped


Dwellethin bs, and Malbe ints foz cuer.
(pth vs thal be,grace, mevepe, & peace, from
God the father,and from the L020 Felus Chpt
the fonne of the Father, i teuth,and loue.
Fretopled qreatipe that Zfounde ofthy chp:
Dien walkpnacintruthe as webhauercceaueda
commaundement of thetather. And now beiech.
Athe Ladp.not asthough ¥ w20te a netwe con
Maundement onto the,but thatfame woppch we
baue beard frome the begpnnpnge p we Hhulbe* 23
loueone another . Andthpsisthelonz, that Moe soo eres
hulde walke afterbyscommaundemente. S707
Thps commaundemente tgithbat-ag pe bane
bcarde fromthe begpnnpnge)pe Hulde walke in
it. fo many dpfccanersareentecd mto p wold
whpchconfeffe not that Zelus Chpt is come iit
the fiethe: This ts adplecauer g an Antich2pfe.
Lokeonpour felues that welolenot p we bane
pole an at wemapebauca full reward
W3hofocuce tranfgrefictpand bydethnot in the


` poctepne of Chapt bath not God.etbat endus


rethintbe doctrpne of € bapit,bath both f father


 ethelonne. J€therecome anpe buts pou tbzpng


notthpslearnpnge, bpimreceauenot to houte:ne ¢
therbpddebpim god {pede .ffo2 be that bpodeth
bpm, God [pede is partaker of bys eucil dedeg,
(#Bedolve, 3 bauetalde pou befoze.that pe Gulbe mot be athaz
med inthe Dapeottbe Torde.)


¥Bbadmanp thypngesto wapt onto pou,nener


fp theles 3 woldenot thepte wpth paper and pucke


but Jtrutto come onto pou,and (peake w pou


ý mouthto mouth. that oute Jope mape be ful-tpe


Fonnes of thy electefpiter greiethe. mn ath
The thyzde Epyftle of


Cele glad of Gapus,that he walketh in the truth: cf
bazrteth them tobe loupnge buto thepoose Chipiten ir
thep: perfecucpon,Hetweth the bnspndedealpnge of Dpo
trepbhes,and the goad reporte OF Demetrpua, |


aiaa Ie elder Dnfo f beloucd Gaius 4
| a Peds) who Floucinthetruth. Belo-
EA] (edt o, wple in al tbingts thar


Pea Saw
3 peice n +


wpth contente. Rot onlpebebym
wot the bzetbzen: but alfo be fozbpddethe thems


Fob Fie. Hom allo tobpebe was be gotten ofbyin.x Ep
thps we knoto, that we loue the chpldzen of God
ipycnioeldue God, g al debate ato y iaa
tes. ortbpgis the loue of God, that we kepe

ojatrei.d hpg comaundementes,and* bis commaundeme

tes are not qreuous., +f $02 all that is bogne of

God, ouercommeth the wolde. And thpsts the

*ppctompe that ouercommeththe wolde . cuc

ourefapethb. UWibotsitthat ouercommeththe

worlde,but pe which beleneth, that Felusisthe

Fone of Gods Thps Jelug Chap is he that ia:

me bp water and blonde, not bp water onlp-but

bp toater and blonde. And it is the fpacte that be

: areth wptnefie becauletbhefparteistruthe.

Sor thece are thze whpcbe beare recopocinbeauen, the Fa:
| ther,tbemozne,and foe bolpe Shoile.anvthelethzearcone.


ee And thee whpcbe beare recorde cw meartd the
fpzete and water,and blonde: and thefe thze are


3%
-  bCORF Rg,


g tbe recorde, hwe that God atoer ie rade


-— gaath.bita that woe baue in bym:thatxif wealkeanp thing
sarene accozdpng to bps wPil, be beareth vs. Ayp ifte


of Sapnte John.
Ceewiptethtoa dry ZLabpe,reropteth that ber chplz


RA Eyed a onclye, but alfoall that bauebnow-
oo Siar the truth fory teutpes fake whped


Dwellethin bs, and Malbe ints foz cuer.
(pth vs thal be,grace, mevepe, & peace, from
God the father,and from the L020 Felus Chpt
the fonne of the Father, i teuth,and loue.
Fretopled qreatipe that Zfounde ofthy chp:
Dien walkpnacintruthe as webhauercceaueda
commaundement of thetather. And now beiech.
Athe Ladp.not asthough ¥ w20te a netwe con
Maundement onto the,but thatfame woppch we
baue beard frome the begpnnpnge p we Hhulbe* 23
loueone another . Andthpsisthelonz, that Moe soo eres
hulde walke afterbyscommaundemente. S707
Thps commaundemente tgithbat-ag pe bane
bcarde fromthe begpnnpnge)pe Hulde walke in
it. fo many dpfccanersareentecd mto p wold
whpchconfeffe not that Zelus Chpt is come iit
the fiethe: This ts adplecauer g an Antich2pfe.
Lokeonpour felues that welolenot p we bane
pole an at wemapebauca full reward
W3hofocuce tranfgrefictpand bydethnot in the


` poctepne of Chapt bath not God.etbat endus


rethintbe doctrpne of € bapit,bath both f father


 ethelonne. J€therecome anpe buts pou tbzpng


notthpslearnpnge, bpimreceauenot to houte:ne ¢
therbpddebpim god {pede .ffo2 be that bpodeth
bpm, God [pede is partaker of bys eucil dedeg,
(#Bedolve, 3 bauetalde pou befoze.that pe Gulbe mot be athaz
med inthe Dapeottbe Torde.)


¥Bbadmanp thypngesto wapt onto pou,nener


fp theles 3 woldenot thepte wpth paper and pucke


but Jtrutto come onto pou,and (peake w pou


ý mouthto mouth. that oute Jope mape be ful-tpe


Fonnes of thy electefpiter greiethe. mn ath
The thyzde Epyftle of


Cele glad of Gapus,that he walketh in the truth: cf
bazrteth them tobe loupnge buto thepoose Chipiten ir
thep: perfecucpon,Hetweth the bnspndedealpnge of Dpo
trepbhes,and the goad reporte OF Demetrpua, |


aiaa Ie elder Dnfo f beloucd Gaius 4
| a Peds) who Floucinthetruth. Belo-
EA] (edt o, wple in al tbingts thar


Pea Saw
3 peice n +


wpth contente. Rot onlpebebym
wot the bzetbzen: but alfo be fozbpddethe thems


Fob Fie. Hom allo tobpebe was be gotten ofbyin.x Ep
thps we knoto, that we loue the chpldzen of God
ipycnioeldue God, g al debate ato y iaa
tes. ortbpgis the loue of God, that we kepe

ojatrei.d hpg comaundementes,and* bis commaundeme

tes are not qreuous., +f $02 all that is bogne of

God, ouercommeth the wolde. And thpsts the

*ppctompe that ouercommeththe wolde . cuc

ourefapethb. UWibotsitthat ouercommeththe

worlde,but pe which beleneth, that Felusisthe

Fone of Gods Thps Jelug Chap is he that ia:

me bp water and blonde, not bp water onlp-but

bp toater and blonde. And it is the fpacte that be

: areth wptnefie becauletbhefparteistruthe.

Sor thece are thze whpcbe beare recopocinbeauen, the Fa:
| ther,tbemozne,and foe bolpe Shoile.anvthelethzearcone.


ee And thee whpcbe beare recorde cw meartd the
fpzete and water,and blonde: and thefe thze are


3%
-  bCORF Rg,


g tbe recorde, hwe that God atoer ie rade


-— gaath.bita that woe baue in bym:thatxif wealkeanp thing
sarene accozdpng to bps wPil, be beareth vs. Ayp ifte


of Sapnte John.
Ceewiptethtoa dry ZLabpe,reropteth that ber chplz


RA Eyed a onclye, but alfoall that bauebnow-
oo Siar the truth fory teutpes fake whped


Dwellethin bs, and Malbe ints foz cuer.
(pth vs thal be,grace, mevepe, & peace, from
God the father,and from the L020 Felus Chpt
the fonne of the Father, i teuth,and loue.
Fretopled qreatipe that Zfounde ofthy chp:
Dien walkpnacintruthe as webhauercceaueda
commaundement of thetather. And now beiech.
Athe Ladp.not asthough ¥ w20te a netwe con
Maundement onto the,but thatfame woppch we
baue beard frome the begpnnpnge p we Hhulbe* 23
loueone another . Andthpsisthelonz, that Moe soo eres
hulde walke afterbyscommaundemente. S707
Thps commaundemente tgithbat-ag pe bane
bcarde fromthe begpnnpnge)pe Hulde walke in
it. fo many dpfccanersareentecd mto p wold
whpchconfeffe not that Zelus Chpt is come iit
the fiethe: This ts adplecauer g an Antich2pfe.
Lokeonpour felues that welolenot p we bane
pole an at wemapebauca full reward
W3hofocuce tranfgrefictpand bydethnot in the


` poctepne of Chapt bath not God.etbat endus


rethintbe doctrpne of € bapit,bath both f father


 ethelonne. J€therecome anpe buts pou tbzpng


notthpslearnpnge, bpimreceauenot to houte:ne ¢
therbpddebpim god {pede .ffo2 be that bpodeth
bpm, God [pede is partaker of bys eucil dedeg,
(#Bedolve, 3 bauetalde pou befoze.that pe Gulbe mot be athaz
med inthe Dapeottbe Torde.)


¥Bbadmanp thypngesto wapt onto pou,nener


fp theles 3 woldenot thepte wpth paper and pucke


but Jtrutto come onto pou,and (peake w pou


ý mouthto mouth. that oute Jope mape be ful-tpe


Fonnes of thy electefpiter greiethe. mn ath
The thyzde Epyftle of


Cele glad of Gapus,that he walketh in the truth: cf
bazrteth them tobe loupnge buto thepoose Chipiten ir
thep: perfecucpon,Hetweth the bnspndedealpnge of Dpo
trepbhes,and the goad reporte OF Demetrpua, |


aiaa Ie elder Dnfo f beloucd Gaius 4
| a Peds) who Floucinthetruth. Belo-
EA] (edt o, wple in al tbingts thar


Pea Saw
3 peice n +


wpth contente. Rot onlpebebym
wot the bzetbzen: but alfo be fozbpddethe thems


Fob Fie. Hom allo tobpebe was be gotten ofbyin.x Ep
thps we knoto, that we loue the chpldzen of God
ipycnioeldue God, g al debate ato y iaa
tes. ortbpgis the loue of God, that we kepe

ojatrei.d hpg comaundementes,and* bis commaundeme

tes are not qreuous., +f $02 all that is bogne of

God, ouercommeth the wolde. And thpsts the

*ppctompe that ouercommeththe wolde . cuc

ourefapethb. UWibotsitthat ouercommeththe

worlde,but pe which beleneth, that Felusisthe

Fone of Gods Thps Jelug Chap is he that ia:

me bp water and blonde, not bp water onlp-but

bp toater and blonde. And it is the fpacte that be

: areth wptnefie becauletbhefparteistruthe.

Sor thece are thze whpcbe beare recopocinbeauen, the Fa:
| ther,tbemozne,and foe bolpe Shoile.anvthelethzearcone.


ee And thee whpcbe beare recorde cw meartd the
fpzete and water,and blonde: and thefe thze are


3%
-  bCORF Rg,


g tbe recorde, hwe that God atoer ie rade


-— gaath.bita that woe baue in bym:thatxif wealkeanp thing
sarene accozdpng to bps wPil, be beareth vs. Ayp ifte


of Sapnte John.
Ceewiptethtoa dry ZLabpe,reropteth that ber chplz


RA Eyed a onclye, but alfoall that bauebnow-
oo Siar the truth fory teutpes fake whped


Dwellethin bs, and Malbe ints foz cuer.
(pth vs thal be,grace, mevepe, & peace, from
God the father,and from the L020 Felus Chpt
the fonne of the Father, i teuth,and loue.
Fretopled qreatipe that Zfounde ofthy chp:
Dien walkpnacintruthe as webhauercceaueda
commaundement of thetather. And now beiech.
Athe Ladp.not asthough ¥ w20te a netwe con
Maundement onto the,but thatfame woppch we
baue beard frome the begpnnpnge p we Hhulbe* 23
loueone another . Andthpsisthelonz, that Moe soo eres
hulde walke afterbyscommaundemente. S707
Thps commaundemente tgithbat-ag pe bane
bcarde fromthe begpnnpnge)pe Hulde walke in
it. fo many dpfccanersareentecd mto p wold
whpchconfeffe not that Zelus Chpt is come iit
the fiethe: This ts adplecauer g an Antich2pfe.
Lokeonpour felues that welolenot p we bane
pole an at wemapebauca full reward
W3hofocuce tranfgrefictpand bydethnot in the


` poctepne of Chapt bath not God.etbat endus


rethintbe doctrpne of € bapit,bath both f father


 ethelonne. J€therecome anpe buts pou tbzpng


notthpslearnpnge, bpimreceauenot to houte:ne ¢
therbpddebpim god {pede .ffo2 be that bpodeth
bpm, God [pede is partaker of bys eucil dedeg,
(#Bedolve, 3 bauetalde pou befoze.that pe Gulbe mot be athaz
med inthe Dapeottbe Torde.)


¥Bbadmanp thypngesto wapt onto pou,nener


fp theles 3 woldenot thepte wpth paper and pucke


but Jtrutto come onto pou,and (peake w pou


ý mouthto mouth. that oute Jope mape be ful-tpe


Fonnes of thy electefpiter greiethe. mn ath
The thyzde Epyftle of


Cele glad of Gapus,that he walketh in the truth: cf
bazrteth them tobe loupnge buto thepoose Chipiten ir
thep: perfecucpon,Hetweth the bnspndedealpnge of Dpo
trepbhes,and the goad reporte OF Demetrpua, |


aiaa Ie elder Dnfo f beloucd Gaius 4
| a Peds) who Floucinthetruth. Belo-
EA] (edt o, wple in al tbingts thar


Pea Saw
3 peice n +


wpth contente. Rot onlpebebym
wot the bzetbzen: but alfo be fozbpddethe thems


i —
a


Ò wold, a thaufteth them Out ofthe congreaacto
D ~wWcloued,folomendt chat which ig entl, but.
that wbpch is qood. de thatdoth well is of God
but bethar doth euell eeth not God.Demetctus.
bath good reporte of all men ¢ of thetruth it felte
pee,and toc our feluesalfo bearerecozde, and pe
knowe that our reco is teue. 3 bad manp thin
qes to wpte:but3 whl Hot wpthpnekeand pen
forte vntothe. trut g tall hoztly tethbeand
we (hall (peak mouth to month Brace yntop
@heloucrstalute the. Grete theloucrsop name


The €pyetle of faint


dr Berebuketh ruch as being bipuded with Her: ote lutis, té


fritthe truth. Be erbozteth bs to edpfp oneanother, topzapein -


thebolp ghot,to contpnne in lowe,talooke fo; the commpnge of
the Lobe, i
ae Cidas the fernaunte of Jeng
Sy M Chepitthe beother of James.
EA SAN To them whpede arecalled g
yd eae fanctpfped in Gov the father,
S EN and prefernedin Jefu Chapit


A p a, a
IGT +A

J = = La a
a l ul
a : h a

li i Sie ae g
Ba oo i Ti H

A af

i a i. a
yr!

7 a =

ee


ofthem that are in aucto2pte. ;


C Pet pchaclthe archangel when be frone XO: is eS


agapntt the Dpucli,and dpfputed aboutetbebo

ope of holes durt not geuecaplynge fentence
butfapde:the Lorde rebuke the. Wut theletpa-

ke cuelloftbhole thpnges whpch thep knowe not

and what thpngesthep knowe naturalip(as be

ates whpcb are wptboute rcafon)in thole thpn

| gestbep cozrunte rm fèlues. loo bnto them,

Sen, tild. fog thep hauefolowecd the wap of+C ain,andare
biterlp qeué tof erroure of Walamfozlucresfa
kexand perithe inthe treafon of Core. Chelle are
fpottes wppcb of ponre kpndnes feal together


AUM TE


The Reuelacpon ee
-tptbonte feare,lpupng lawleffe, and after they: D
- owne plealure.Cloudes thep are vopthoute wa-


.. fed, and ofall they2 crucll (peakpnaes, whiche


rpe, mateftye, Dominion, and power op (befoze all &9
f wozides) NOWE and ener. Am SIA i


ter carpedaboute of wpndes. trees wiipout frut
at gatberpiige tyme Moptbhered,twople deade and
plucked vp bp the rootes. Thep arethe ragpnge -
waues of thefee,fominge out thep2 otone pame
Thep are wanderpnge terreg to whome igre- .
paarde g by rhen many Sng

———-§- Enoch ebefeucnth frome Adam prophecped *+apora.t b
before of fuch, fapinge.* ebolo the Lozde hal"
come wpth thoulfanbdes of fapintes,to gene iud
gementeagapntt all mien, andto rebuke all that bS
are bagodlpe amonge them ofallthep2 pngod-
lye Deabes, whiche thep Daue bngodlp commpt


$


 Vngodlp {pnners paue fpokenagapntt bpm. - E -a
There are murmurerg, complapnerg, wal- :
kyng? after thep2 owne luftes, whofe moutheg
- {peate p abe rhynges. Thep bauemEin arrat
rewstence bpcaule of aduauntage. Wut pe belg-
"ued emenbaeshewo2Des mpd were po be `
foze of the apoftles'nf our Lozde Je Chapite, Sctes.rr. r-
Howe that they tolde pou xthatcbere houlde de ramina e-
-begplers inthe lat tpme, which thoulde'walke i.Peæs.s
after thepz owne vnaodly lufkes. Chele are ma: ata
Kersoffectes fehlp,baupnge no fppzite.
Wut pedearlp beloued, edefpe pour (elues in
poure moft boly fapth, paying inthe boly gholf ff
and kepe pout felues in the loue of God, loking aa
foz the mercp of out Lorde Jefus Chp ite, unto .
cternalllpfe:Xnd paue copafiton of fome, fepa-
ratpng them,and otber faue with feare, pulling , ;
them out of the alee (and haue compattionon g other) =
andbatethefpltbpe veftureottbefich. .
ciatohym that is able to Bepepou fre from
tine,andto pelet'pou fautlefle before the pre-
ence Of his qlozy With toprox (atthe commpng ofout xo
Lorde Fetus chwt) to God ourlaupourtoe(thorowe go
Jefus Cet our Loses yphich onelp ts wple,beqlo-


 SHapntJbontbediuine,
@ Happpishe pheareth the wozd of Gov and kepeth it. be wip
teth tothe. bit.congregacpons inaipa ferth bi.candelitpikrs, —
andin the mpdbdes of them:onelphe bnto the onne ofman, 23


C Theip. Chapter.
amasa We reuclacpon of Jelug Chpt
ER wbich God gaue vntodim, foz


The Reuelacionot —


i thynaes wobpchemutft po:tlpe
{cometo fe i een e |
aai ed bp bpg an
slg Gel onta ps teruaunte opn, ,
—~—-—>iwbpch bare recù:de of the wo? |
,andotthetetpmonp of Felus Chek ej
|


i —
a


Ò wold, a thaufteth them Out ofthe congreaacto
D ~wWcloued,folomendt chat which ig entl, but.
that wbpch is qood. de thatdoth well is of God
but bethar doth euell eeth not God.Demetctus.
bath good reporte of all men ¢ of thetruth it felte
pee,and toc our feluesalfo bearerecozde, and pe
knowe that our reco is teue. 3 bad manp thin
qes to wpte:but3 whl Hot wpthpnekeand pen
forte vntothe. trut g tall hoztly tethbeand
we (hall (peak mouth to month Brace yntop
@heloucrstalute the. Grete theloucrsop name


The €pyetle of faint


dr Berebuketh ruch as being bipuded with Her: ote lutis, té


fritthe truth. Be erbozteth bs to edpfp oneanother, topzapein -


thebolp ghot,to contpnne in lowe,talooke fo; the commpnge of
the Lobe, i
ae Cidas the fernaunte of Jeng
Sy M Chepitthe beother of James.
EA SAN To them whpede arecalled g
yd eae fanctpfped in Gov the father,
S EN and prefernedin Jefu Chapit


A p a, a
IGT +A

J = = La a
a l ul
a : h a

li i Sie ae g
Ba oo i Ti H

A af

i a i. a
yr!

7 a =

ee


ofthem that are in aucto2pte. ;


C Pet pchaclthe archangel when be frone XO: is eS


agapntt the Dpucli,and dpfputed aboutetbebo

ope of holes durt not geuecaplynge fentence
butfapde:the Lorde rebuke the. Wut theletpa-

ke cuelloftbhole thpnges whpch thep knowe not

and what thpngesthep knowe naturalip(as be

ates whpcb are wptboute rcafon)in thole thpn

| gestbep cozrunte rm fèlues. loo bnto them,

Sen, tild. fog thep hauefolowecd the wap of+C ain,andare
biterlp qeué tof erroure of Walamfozlucresfa
kexand perithe inthe treafon of Core. Chelle are
fpottes wppcb of ponre kpndnes feal together


AUM TE


The Reuelacpon ee
-tptbonte feare,lpupng lawleffe, and after they: D
- owne plealure.Cloudes thep are vopthoute wa-


.. fed, and ofall they2 crucll (peakpnaes, whiche


rpe, mateftye, Dominion, and power op (befoze all &9
f wozides) NOWE and ener. Am SIA i


ter carpedaboute of wpndes. trees wiipout frut
at gatberpiige tyme Moptbhered,twople deade and
plucked vp bp the rootes. Thep arethe ragpnge -
waues of thefee,fominge out thep2 otone pame
Thep are wanderpnge terreg to whome igre- .
paarde g by rhen many Sng

———-§- Enoch ebefeucnth frome Adam prophecped *+apora.t b
before of fuch, fapinge.* ebolo the Lozde hal"
come wpth thoulfanbdes of fapintes,to gene iud
gementeagapntt all mien, andto rebuke all that bS
are bagodlpe amonge them ofallthep2 pngod-
lye Deabes, whiche thep Daue bngodlp commpt


$


 Vngodlp {pnners paue fpokenagapntt bpm. - E -a
There are murmurerg, complapnerg, wal- :
kyng? after thep2 owne luftes, whofe moutheg
- {peate p abe rhynges. Thep bauemEin arrat
rewstence bpcaule of aduauntage. Wut pe belg-
"ued emenbaeshewo2Des mpd were po be `
foze of the apoftles'nf our Lozde Je Chapite, Sctes.rr. r-
Howe that they tolde pou xthatcbere houlde de ramina e-
-begplers inthe lat tpme, which thoulde'walke i.Peæs.s
after thepz owne vnaodly lufkes. Chele are ma: ata
Kersoffectes fehlp,baupnge no fppzite.
Wut pedearlp beloued, edefpe pour (elues in
poure moft boly fapth, paying inthe boly gholf ff
and kepe pout felues in the loue of God, loking aa
foz the mercp of out Lorde Jefus Chp ite, unto .
cternalllpfe:Xnd paue copafiton of fome, fepa-
ratpng them,and otber faue with feare, pulling , ;
them out of the alee (and haue compattionon g other) =
andbatethefpltbpe veftureottbefich. .
ciatohym that is able to Bepepou fre from
tine,andto pelet'pou fautlefle before the pre-
ence Of his qlozy With toprox (atthe commpng ofout xo
Lorde Fetus chwt) to God ourlaupourtoe(thorowe go
Jefus Cet our Loses yphich onelp ts wple,beqlo-


 SHapntJbontbediuine,
@ Happpishe pheareth the wozd of Gov and kepeth it. be wip
teth tothe. bit.congregacpons inaipa ferth bi.candelitpikrs, —
andin the mpdbdes of them:onelphe bnto the onne ofman, 23


C Theip. Chapter.
amasa We reuclacpon of Jelug Chpt
ER wbich God gaue vntodim, foz


The Reuelacionot —


i thynaes wobpchemutft po:tlpe
{cometo fe i een e |
aai ed bp bpg an
slg Gel onta ps teruaunte opn, ,
—~—-—>iwbpch bare recù:de of the wo? |
,andotthetetpmonp of Felus Chek ej
|


i —
a


Ò wold, a thaufteth them Out ofthe congreaacto
D ~wWcloued,folomendt chat which ig entl, but.
that wbpch is qood. de thatdoth well is of God
but bethar doth euell eeth not God.Demetctus.
bath good reporte of all men ¢ of thetruth it felte
pee,and toc our feluesalfo bearerecozde, and pe
knowe that our reco is teue. 3 bad manp thin
qes to wpte:but3 whl Hot wpthpnekeand pen
forte vntothe. trut g tall hoztly tethbeand
we (hall (peak mouth to month Brace yntop
@heloucrstalute the. Grete theloucrsop name


The €pyetle of faint


dr Berebuketh ruch as being bipuded with Her: ote lutis, té


fritthe truth. Be erbozteth bs to edpfp oneanother, topzapein -


thebolp ghot,to contpnne in lowe,talooke fo; the commpnge of
the Lobe, i
ae Cidas the fernaunte of Jeng
Sy M Chepitthe beother of James.
EA SAN To them whpede arecalled g
yd eae fanctpfped in Gov the father,
S EN and prefernedin Jefu Chapit


A p a, a
IGT +A

J = = La a
a l ul
a : h a

li i Sie ae g
Ba oo i Ti H

A af

i a i. a
yr!

7 a =

ee


ofthem that are in aucto2pte. ;


C Pet pchaclthe archangel when be frone XO: is eS


agapntt the Dpucli,and dpfputed aboutetbebo

ope of holes durt not geuecaplynge fentence
butfapde:the Lorde rebuke the. Wut theletpa-

ke cuelloftbhole thpnges whpch thep knowe not

and what thpngesthep knowe naturalip(as be

ates whpcb are wptboute rcafon)in thole thpn

| gestbep cozrunte rm fèlues. loo bnto them,

Sen, tild. fog thep hauefolowecd the wap of+C ain,andare
biterlp qeué tof erroure of Walamfozlucresfa
kexand perithe inthe treafon of Core. Chelle are
fpottes wppcb of ponre kpndnes feal together


AUM TE


The Reuelacpon ee
-tptbonte feare,lpupng lawleffe, and after they: D
- owne plealure.Cloudes thep are vopthoute wa-


.. fed, and ofall they2 crucll (peakpnaes, whiche


rpe, mateftye, Dominion, and power op (befoze all &9
f wozides) NOWE and ener. Am SIA i


ter carpedaboute of wpndes. trees wiipout frut
at gatberpiige tyme Moptbhered,twople deade and
plucked vp bp the rootes. Thep arethe ragpnge -
waues of thefee,fominge out thep2 otone pame
Thep are wanderpnge terreg to whome igre- .
paarde g by rhen many Sng

———-§- Enoch ebefeucnth frome Adam prophecped *+apora.t b
before of fuch, fapinge.* ebolo the Lozde hal"
come wpth thoulfanbdes of fapintes,to gene iud
gementeagapntt all mien, andto rebuke all that bS
are bagodlpe amonge them ofallthep2 pngod-
lye Deabes, whiche thep Daue bngodlp commpt


$


 Vngodlp {pnners paue fpokenagapntt bpm. - E -a
There are murmurerg, complapnerg, wal- :
kyng? after thep2 owne luftes, whofe moutheg
- {peate p abe rhynges. Thep bauemEin arrat
rewstence bpcaule of aduauntage. Wut pe belg-
"ued emenbaeshewo2Des mpd were po be `
foze of the apoftles'nf our Lozde Je Chapite, Sctes.rr. r-
Howe that they tolde pou xthatcbere houlde de ramina e-
-begplers inthe lat tpme, which thoulde'walke i.Peæs.s
after thepz owne vnaodly lufkes. Chele are ma: ata
Kersoffectes fehlp,baupnge no fppzite.
Wut pedearlp beloued, edefpe pour (elues in
poure moft boly fapth, paying inthe boly gholf ff
and kepe pout felues in the loue of God, loking aa
foz the mercp of out Lorde Jefus Chp ite, unto .
cternalllpfe:Xnd paue copafiton of fome, fepa-
ratpng them,and otber faue with feare, pulling , ;
them out of the alee (and haue compattionon g other) =
andbatethefpltbpe veftureottbefich. .
ciatohym that is able to Bepepou fre from
tine,andto pelet'pou fautlefle before the pre-
ence Of his qlozy With toprox (atthe commpng ofout xo
Lorde Fetus chwt) to God ourlaupourtoe(thorowe go
Jefus Cet our Loses yphich onelp ts wple,beqlo-


 SHapntJbontbediuine,
@ Happpishe pheareth the wozd of Gov and kepeth it. be wip
teth tothe. bit.congregacpons inaipa ferth bi.candelitpikrs, —
andin the mpdbdes of them:onelphe bnto the onne ofman, 23


C Theip. Chapter.
amasa We reuclacpon of Jelug Chpt
ER wbich God gaue vntodim, foz


The Reuelacionot —


i thynaes wobpchemutft po:tlpe
{cometo fe i een e |
aai ed bp bpg an
slg Gel onta ps teruaunte opn, ,
—~—-—>iwbpch bare recù:de of the wo? |
,andotthetetpmonp of Felus Chek ej
|


i —
a


Ò wold, a thaufteth them Out ofthe congreaacto
D ~wWcloued,folomendt chat which ig entl, but.
that wbpch is qood. de thatdoth well is of God
but bethar doth euell eeth not God.Demetctus.
bath good reporte of all men ¢ of thetruth it felte
pee,and toc our feluesalfo bearerecozde, and pe
knowe that our reco is teue. 3 bad manp thin
qes to wpte:but3 whl Hot wpthpnekeand pen
forte vntothe. trut g tall hoztly tethbeand
we (hall (peak mouth to month Brace yntop
@heloucrstalute the. Grete theloucrsop name


The €pyetle of faint


dr Berebuketh ruch as being bipuded with Her: ote lutis, té


fritthe truth. Be erbozteth bs to edpfp oneanother, topzapein -


thebolp ghot,to contpnne in lowe,talooke fo; the commpnge of
the Lobe, i
ae Cidas the fernaunte of Jeng
Sy M Chepitthe beother of James.
EA SAN To them whpede arecalled g
yd eae fanctpfped in Gov the father,
S EN and prefernedin Jefu Chapit


A p a, a
IGT +A

J = = La a
a l ul
a : h a

li i Sie ae g
Ba oo i Ti H

A af

i a i. a
yr!

7 a =

ee


ofthem that are in aucto2pte. ;


C Pet pchaclthe archangel when be frone XO: is eS


agapntt the Dpucli,and dpfputed aboutetbebo

ope of holes durt not geuecaplynge fentence
butfapde:the Lorde rebuke the. Wut theletpa-

ke cuelloftbhole thpnges whpch thep knowe not

and what thpngesthep knowe naturalip(as be

ates whpcb are wptboute rcafon)in thole thpn

| gestbep cozrunte rm fèlues. loo bnto them,

Sen, tild. fog thep hauefolowecd the wap of+C ain,andare
biterlp qeué tof erroure of Walamfozlucresfa
kexand perithe inthe treafon of Core. Chelle are
fpottes wppcb of ponre kpndnes feal together


AUM TE


The Reuelacpon ee
-tptbonte feare,lpupng lawleffe, and after they: D
- owne plealure.Cloudes thep are vopthoute wa-


.. fed, and ofall they2 crucll (peakpnaes, whiche


rpe, mateftye, Dominion, and power op (befoze all &9
f wozides) NOWE and ener. Am SIA i


ter carpedaboute of wpndes. trees wiipout frut
at gatberpiige tyme Moptbhered,twople deade and
plucked vp bp the rootes. Thep arethe ragpnge -
waues of thefee,fominge out thep2 otone pame
Thep are wanderpnge terreg to whome igre- .
paarde g by rhen many Sng

———-§- Enoch ebefeucnth frome Adam prophecped *+apora.t b
before of fuch, fapinge.* ebolo the Lozde hal"
come wpth thoulfanbdes of fapintes,to gene iud
gementeagapntt all mien, andto rebuke all that bS
are bagodlpe amonge them ofallthep2 pngod-
lye Deabes, whiche thep Daue bngodlp commpt


$


 Vngodlp {pnners paue fpokenagapntt bpm. - E -a
There are murmurerg, complapnerg, wal- :
kyng? after thep2 owne luftes, whofe moutheg
- {peate p abe rhynges. Thep bauemEin arrat
rewstence bpcaule of aduauntage. Wut pe belg-
"ued emenbaeshewo2Des mpd were po be `
foze of the apoftles'nf our Lozde Je Chapite, Sctes.rr. r-
Howe that they tolde pou xthatcbere houlde de ramina e-
-begplers inthe lat tpme, which thoulde'walke i.Peæs.s
after thepz owne vnaodly lufkes. Chele are ma: ata
Kersoffectes fehlp,baupnge no fppzite.
Wut pedearlp beloued, edefpe pour (elues in
poure moft boly fapth, paying inthe boly gholf ff
and kepe pout felues in the loue of God, loking aa
foz the mercp of out Lorde Jefus Chp ite, unto .
cternalllpfe:Xnd paue copafiton of fome, fepa-
ratpng them,and otber faue with feare, pulling , ;
them out of the alee (and haue compattionon g other) =
andbatethefpltbpe veftureottbefich. .
ciatohym that is able to Bepepou fre from
tine,andto pelet'pou fautlefle before the pre-
ence Of his qlozy With toprox (atthe commpng ofout xo
Lorde Fetus chwt) to God ourlaupourtoe(thorowe go
Jefus Cet our Loses yphich onelp ts wple,beqlo-


 SHapntJbontbediuine,
@ Happpishe pheareth the wozd of Gov and kepeth it. be wip
teth tothe. bit.congregacpons inaipa ferth bi.candelitpikrs, —
andin the mpdbdes of them:onelphe bnto the onne ofman, 23


C Theip. Chapter.
amasa We reuclacpon of Jelug Chpt
ER wbich God gaue vntodim, foz


The Reuelacionot —


i thynaes wobpchemutft po:tlpe
{cometo fe i een e |
aai ed bp bpg an
slg Gel onta ps teruaunte opn, ,
—~—-—>iwbpch bare recù:de of the wo? |
,andotthetetpmonp of Felus Chek ej
|


i —
a


Ò wold, a thaufteth them Out ofthe congreaacto
D ~wWcloued,folomendt chat which ig entl, but.
that wbpch is qood. de thatdoth well is of God
but bethar doth euell eeth not God.Demetctus.
bath good reporte of all men ¢ of thetruth it felte
pee,and toc our feluesalfo bearerecozde, and pe
knowe that our reco is teue. 3 bad manp thin
qes to wpte:but3 whl Hot wpthpnekeand pen
forte vntothe. trut g tall hoztly tethbeand
we (hall (peak mouth to month Brace yntop
@heloucrstalute the. Grete theloucrsop name


The €pyetle of faint


dr Berebuketh ruch as being bipuded with Her: ote lutis, té


fritthe truth. Be erbozteth bs to edpfp oneanother, topzapein -


thebolp ghot,to contpnne in lowe,talooke fo; the commpnge of
the Lobe, i
ae Cidas the fernaunte of Jeng
Sy M Chepitthe beother of James.
EA SAN To them whpede arecalled g
yd eae fanctpfped in Gov the father,
S EN and prefernedin Jefu Chapit


A p a, a
IGT +A

J = = La a
a l ul
a : h a

li i Sie ae g
Ba oo i Ti H

A af

i a i. a
yr!

7 a =

ee


ofthem that are in aucto2pte. ;


C Pet pchaclthe archangel when be frone XO: is eS


agapntt the Dpucli,and dpfputed aboutetbebo

ope of holes durt not geuecaplynge fentence
butfapde:the Lorde rebuke the. Wut theletpa-

ke cuelloftbhole thpnges whpch thep knowe not

and what thpngesthep knowe naturalip(as be

ates whpcb are wptboute rcafon)in thole thpn

| gestbep cozrunte rm fèlues. loo bnto them,

Sen, tild. fog thep hauefolowecd the wap of+C ain,andare
biterlp qeué tof erroure of Walamfozlucresfa
kexand perithe inthe treafon of Core. Chelle are
fpottes wppcb of ponre kpndnes feal together


AUM TE


The Reuelacpon ee
-tptbonte feare,lpupng lawleffe, and after they: D
- owne plealure.Cloudes thep are vopthoute wa-


.. fed, and ofall they2 crucll (peakpnaes, whiche


rpe, mateftye, Dominion, and power op (befoze all &9
f wozides) NOWE and ener. Am SIA i


ter carpedaboute of wpndes. trees wiipout frut
at gatberpiige tyme Moptbhered,twople deade and
plucked vp bp the rootes. Thep arethe ragpnge -
waues of thefee,fominge out thep2 otone pame
Thep are wanderpnge terreg to whome igre- .
paarde g by rhen many Sng

———-§- Enoch ebefeucnth frome Adam prophecped *+apora.t b
before of fuch, fapinge.* ebolo the Lozde hal"
come wpth thoulfanbdes of fapintes,to gene iud
gementeagapntt all mien, andto rebuke all that bS
are bagodlpe amonge them ofallthep2 pngod-
lye Deabes, whiche thep Daue bngodlp commpt


$


 Vngodlp {pnners paue fpokenagapntt bpm. - E -a
There are murmurerg, complapnerg, wal- :
kyng? after thep2 owne luftes, whofe moutheg
- {peate p abe rhynges. Thep bauemEin arrat
rewstence bpcaule of aduauntage. Wut pe belg-
"ued emenbaeshewo2Des mpd were po be `
foze of the apoftles'nf our Lozde Je Chapite, Sctes.rr. r-
Howe that they tolde pou xthatcbere houlde de ramina e-
-begplers inthe lat tpme, which thoulde'walke i.Peæs.s
after thepz owne vnaodly lufkes. Chele are ma: ata
Kersoffectes fehlp,baupnge no fppzite.
Wut pedearlp beloued, edefpe pour (elues in
poure moft boly fapth, paying inthe boly gholf ff
and kepe pout felues in the loue of God, loking aa
foz the mercp of out Lorde Jefus Chp ite, unto .
cternalllpfe:Xnd paue copafiton of fome, fepa-
ratpng them,and otber faue with feare, pulling , ;
them out of the alee (and haue compattionon g other) =
andbatethefpltbpe veftureottbefich. .
ciatohym that is able to Bepepou fre from
tine,andto pelet'pou fautlefle before the pre-
ence Of his qlozy With toprox (atthe commpng ofout xo
Lorde Fetus chwt) to God ourlaupourtoe(thorowe go
Jefus Cet our Loses yphich onelp ts wple,beqlo-


 SHapntJbontbediuine,
@ Happpishe pheareth the wozd of Gov and kepeth it. be wip
teth tothe. bit.congregacpons inaipa ferth bi.candelitpikrs, —
andin the mpdbdes of them:onelphe bnto the onne ofman, 23


C Theip. Chapter.
amasa We reuclacpon of Jelug Chpt
ER wbich God gaue vntodim, foz


The Reuelacionot —


i thynaes wobpchemutft po:tlpe
{cometo fe i een e |
aai ed bp bpg an
slg Gel onta ps teruaunte opn, ,
—~—-—>iwbpch bare recù:de of the wo? |
,andotthetetpmonp of Felus Chek ej
|


ofSaynteFohi. > ollrerbi,


53 feuch (pretes wobpche arebefore bys thronesand -
from Jefus Chip, whpch is afaptbtull witnes
and fp2 begotten ofthedeade: and Lozbe once

Hebz rid CHekyngesof theerth.Cintohin that *loued vs

“octet” and Mathed bs Frome ourefpanesin bps owne

: bloute, Fand made ys kpngesand pzeaftes yn

to Gad ppstatber,beglozpe anddompnyen for

egat pric PUerMOe.Amen,* Beholde, hecommeto wyth
and.Fb.¢- cloudes, and allcpes (pall fepm, and thep alto
see sobpch peared bpm. And al kpnrehes of the erth
oy Shall waple ox(ouerbem Euenfo: Amen. Jaur

Alpha and Omega,tbebeqpnnpuge and the rn

bpnge,fapetbthe Loze Almpabtpe,whpebe ts

andinppeh was,andiwbpchistocome. =

eg. J Ibon paure brotper:and companpon “‘n
trpbulacpon,and inthe kpngedome and pacpen-
ce in Fein Chapfte, wasin the Pietbhat tacalled
Pathmos:For the word of God, and forthe opt:
nefipnee of Zefin Chopite: Fras inthe (pete on
a Sondape,and berdebebpndemea great pupce
agit padbene ofa trompe,fapinges am Alpba
and Omega,thefpatteandtyclatie Chat thou
Feet wwepte in a bookc,and fende it pntotbhe feuc
congregacpons Mppch are ir Aipa, pnto E phe:

' ‘fug and onto Smyrna and kuto Parqamosg,
and unto Thpatp2a,and witosardis,anb Dn-
Philadel biaand vnte Laobpera. SECTS

2. aw tuened backe tote p wopce tbat tpake
pntome. And whin g wasturned: J (aioe lenen
goldencandelftpckes, and inthe mpbdes of the
candelfpches, Onelpke wnto the fonneot man,
clothed wpthalpnnen garment Downe to pfcte
and gyide aboute the pappes toptha golden gp?
dle. » Ipys beade-and bps bears were whpte,as
wipte woll anv ag{notve:and Hpsepes iecre as


L


a fame of fp2e:and bysfeetelphe wnto bafieas ©


thounhethep beente ina foznace, and bps Vopre

ag the ounde of manp waters.And be bad in bis

d tpabt bandeleuen arres. And ont ofhis mouth
mat potira WENE a Harpe two cdged wearde. x And bps fa


ce pone cuenag the fonneinprs @rengtb. =
z And hen Flatwe bpm, J felat bysfeteeuE
ag Deade. And helapde bps rpght bande vpon me
fapinge onto me: feare not.* Jan thefp2tte and
thelat, and Jam alpue,and was dead. Andhe
eruriiitib. bold, JAmalpuefo: euermoze and hare the kep
uom bid eg of Heil and of Death.Udlzptetherefoze the thyn-
ges whpch thou batte fene tthe thynges wppch
are,andthe thpnges tohpch muf be fulfpl'cd ber
after:the mpiterp of p tenen arteo whpcb thou
fawelt inmp rpabte bande, and fpefeucn colon
candelttyches. Che feucn Garrers are thewiellin

gers oftbelerencongregatpons. And toe“euen
candelityches whpche thou tawet are the feucn
congregacpons. wr :
z? z C The .ti. Chapter

Be eth fourero acponsto amenbe,and
oon bnon OF bees that ouéecomm th, He
mien) Mtothe mellenqer ofthe conqregacpo
Is T pos Hapa thefe thpnge s lap-
|

BA Ved cibte.that bolbetbthe leuen Farres in
= Ahysrpgbteband, andthat wWaiketb in
the mpbdes of the feuen coldencandeltyches, F
know thy wo2ckes,and thp laboure,and tippa
cpenice,and bowee thou canneit not forbeave them


congregacpons . To at
wplaapuef tocate of p «tree of lyfe, whichis Se tit


which areeueLand aferran dian beri,
fapethep are Apoltles, andarenot :andbatte
founde them Ipearg and batt {uffced. And daft
! openeerg toe nie aes abe ba Modaren g
ba [not fainted, eucrtheles ¥ haue fomnwhat
agapnit the,becaufetbou batt left fl pfirtloue
Remembze therfo2e From whence bois att fal-
lenrepent,anddothe fp2fte works. Dresd


swpli come buto the hoztlp g wpl reimoue thp


cadeltpchie out of bps place,ercept Prepet wut
this ? batt becaufe p hatelt the dedes of px I2p-
colaifang, wbpcb dedes Falfohate.Lerhpmp |
hath caves, beare what the fprete fapth onto p

‘Tobpm that oucrcomineth,


intbempbdbdes ofp ParadpfeofGoo.
and Dntothea ungene the congreqatpon of
Samyn wpabt: Chele thpnges layctd bep
íis fp2ttc,and the lalt; whych was Deade; and ig
alpue. J knotoe thp Doogkes andirpbulatpon $
pouertpe,butthou arterpebe. And zx knowe


tbheblatpbemp of them,wbpch call thet feluca


Fcwes and ave noe: but arethe congregacion of
Spathan. fearenone of thote binges, onpche
thou palt fuffre. Webolde the deupll thatca ft
Come of pou in pzpfon,to tempt pou, and pe hak
hauetrpbulatpon ten dapes. 2e fapthinl wnta
thedeath,and ¥ wpl gpuc the a crovone of ipie,
Let bpm that path cares, beare,wbat thetp2ce .
faperh to thecongzeqatpons.be that ouercons- -


meth allnot be burteofthe feconde death. —


Bnd tothe meflencer of the congreqatyonin W
Perqamius wipte: Chpslapebhe, which bath


thetbarpefnotarde pth tivo ges: F knowe


thy workes and where thou Dweile®cué prer
ithang feate is,andthoukerett mp name,é
hatte not Uenped mp fapthe. Andtrmp dapes


Antipas was a fapthful wptnes of mpne.wh


che was fllapneamong pou, where Hatha DA


Icth. wut F pauc afewe thyngesagapnlthe:


becaule tbou baft theretbem that mapntapne p


Doctrpne of Balaam which tangbtin Balak rirli


to put occalpon of fpnne befoze the chylozen of
$leael, that they Hulde cate of meatcoedpcate
pwHto pdols,undcommptfomnpcatpon.Cuen{
bak thou them that mapntatne tie doctrpne oi
the Pypcolattans, whpch thpuges Fate. Wut
be conucrted, ozels J wpll come vito the hore
Ipe g pl fight agaputt them ith the (ieeard
of np mouth. Lethpm that bath cares, beare,
what a fppaptelapeth butothe congregatp=. .
ong,to bpm that ouercomimeth,wopll 4 apueta- `
cate Danna that ps bpd, and topl gpue byi d
tobpte Cone, andin the fone anewe man w2pe:
ten, wbpche no man knoweth, faupnee bethat
recepueth pt. And wnto themefienger of the cor
regatpon of Chpatrpa white. This laprh the
onne of God, whpche bathe epes lpke nto
a fiamme of fycr,andbpsfcte are lpke baffle:
bnowe thp wozkes and typ loue,feruice efaith j
atd thp pacpence,and thy as wpprharcimo `
åt thelattthen at thefpztte: f rob Sdelrbey
bauca fete thinges agayntt tbesbecaufe p fut
feret p wontanx Fefabel, whiche called her felf
aPophctple,torced F te Beecaue mp feruates;
3 fs


3.


Acti. bi. E


iiher d
HiLEED.T. D


ofSaynteFohi. > ollrerbi,


53 feuch (pretes wobpche arebefore bys thronesand -
from Jefus Chip, whpch is afaptbtull witnes
and fp2 begotten ofthedeade: and Lozbe once

Hebz rid CHekyngesof theerth.Cintohin that *loued vs

“octet” and Mathed bs Frome ourefpanesin bps owne

: bloute, Fand made ys kpngesand pzeaftes yn

to Gad ppstatber,beglozpe anddompnyen for

egat pric PUerMOe.Amen,* Beholde, hecommeto wyth
and.Fb.¢- cloudes, and allcpes (pall fepm, and thep alto
see sobpch peared bpm. And al kpnrehes of the erth
oy Shall waple ox(ouerbem Euenfo: Amen. Jaur

Alpha and Omega,tbebeqpnnpuge and the rn

bpnge,fapetbthe Loze Almpabtpe,whpebe ts

andinppeh was,andiwbpchistocome. =

eg. J Ibon paure brotper:and companpon “‘n
trpbulacpon,and inthe kpngedome and pacpen-
ce in Fein Chapfte, wasin the Pietbhat tacalled
Pathmos:For the word of God, and forthe opt:
nefipnee of Zefin Chopite: Fras inthe (pete on
a Sondape,and berdebebpndemea great pupce
agit padbene ofa trompe,fapinges am Alpba
and Omega,thefpatteandtyclatie Chat thou
Feet wwepte in a bookc,and fende it pntotbhe feuc
congregacpons Mppch are ir Aipa, pnto E phe:

' ‘fug and onto Smyrna and kuto Parqamosg,
and unto Thpatp2a,and witosardis,anb Dn-
Philadel biaand vnte Laobpera. SECTS

2. aw tuened backe tote p wopce tbat tpake
pntome. And whin g wasturned: J (aioe lenen
goldencandelftpckes, and inthe mpbdes of the
candelfpches, Onelpke wnto the fonneot man,
clothed wpthalpnnen garment Downe to pfcte
and gyide aboute the pappes toptha golden gp?
dle. » Ipys beade-and bps bears were whpte,as
wipte woll anv ag{notve:and Hpsepes iecre as


L


a fame of fp2e:and bysfeetelphe wnto bafieas ©


thounhethep beente ina foznace, and bps Vopre

ag the ounde of manp waters.And be bad in bis

d tpabt bandeleuen arres. And ont ofhis mouth
mat potira WENE a Harpe two cdged wearde. x And bps fa


ce pone cuenag the fonneinprs @rengtb. =
z And hen Flatwe bpm, J felat bysfeteeuE
ag Deade. And helapde bps rpght bande vpon me
fapinge onto me: feare not.* Jan thefp2tte and
thelat, and Jam alpue,and was dead. Andhe
eruriiitib. bold, JAmalpuefo: euermoze and hare the kep
uom bid eg of Heil and of Death.Udlzptetherefoze the thyn-
ges whpch thou batte fene tthe thynges wppch
are,andthe thpnges tohpch muf be fulfpl'cd ber
after:the mpiterp of p tenen arteo whpcb thou
fawelt inmp rpabte bande, and fpefeucn colon
candelttyches. Che feucn Garrers are thewiellin

gers oftbelerencongregatpons. And toe“euen
candelityches whpche thou tawet are the feucn
congregacpons. wr :
z? z C The .ti. Chapter

Be eth fourero acponsto amenbe,and
oon bnon OF bees that ouéecomm th, He
mien) Mtothe mellenqer ofthe conqregacpo
Is T pos Hapa thefe thpnge s lap-
|

BA Ved cibte.that bolbetbthe leuen Farres in
= Ahysrpgbteband, andthat wWaiketb in
the mpbdes of the feuen coldencandeltyches, F
know thy wo2ckes,and thp laboure,and tippa
cpenice,and bowee thou canneit not forbeave them


congregacpons . To at
wplaapuef tocate of p «tree of lyfe, whichis Se tit


which areeueLand aferran dian beri,
fapethep are Apoltles, andarenot :andbatte
founde them Ipearg and batt {uffced. And daft
! openeerg toe nie aes abe ba Modaren g
ba [not fainted, eucrtheles ¥ haue fomnwhat
agapnit the,becaufetbou batt left fl pfirtloue
Remembze therfo2e From whence bois att fal-
lenrepent,anddothe fp2fte works. Dresd


swpli come buto the hoztlp g wpl reimoue thp


cadeltpchie out of bps place,ercept Prepet wut
this ? batt becaufe p hatelt the dedes of px I2p-
colaifang, wbpcb dedes Falfohate.Lerhpmp |
hath caves, beare what the fprete fapth onto p

‘Tobpm that oucrcomineth,


intbempbdbdes ofp ParadpfeofGoo.
and Dntothea ungene the congreqatpon of
Samyn wpabt: Chele thpnges layctd bep
íis fp2ttc,and the lalt; whych was Deade; and ig
alpue. J knotoe thp Doogkes andirpbulatpon $
pouertpe,butthou arterpebe. And zx knowe


tbheblatpbemp of them,wbpch call thet feluca


Fcwes and ave noe: but arethe congregacion of
Spathan. fearenone of thote binges, onpche
thou palt fuffre. Webolde the deupll thatca ft
Come of pou in pzpfon,to tempt pou, and pe hak
hauetrpbulatpon ten dapes. 2e fapthinl wnta
thedeath,and ¥ wpl gpuc the a crovone of ipie,
Let bpm that path cares, beare,wbat thetp2ce .
faperh to thecongzeqatpons.be that ouercons- -


meth allnot be burteofthe feconde death. —


Bnd tothe meflencer of the congreqatyonin W
Perqamius wipte: Chpslapebhe, which bath


thetbarpefnotarde pth tivo ges: F knowe


thy workes and where thou Dweile®cué prer
ithang feate is,andthoukerett mp name,é
hatte not Uenped mp fapthe. Andtrmp dapes


Antipas was a fapthful wptnes of mpne.wh


che was fllapneamong pou, where Hatha DA


Icth. wut F pauc afewe thyngesagapnlthe:


becaule tbou baft theretbem that mapntapne p


Doctrpne of Balaam which tangbtin Balak rirli


to put occalpon of fpnne befoze the chylozen of
$leael, that they Hulde cate of meatcoedpcate
pwHto pdols,undcommptfomnpcatpon.Cuen{
bak thou them that mapntatne tie doctrpne oi
the Pypcolattans, whpch thpuges Fate. Wut
be conucrted, ozels J wpll come vito the hore
Ipe g pl fight agaputt them ith the (ieeard
of np mouth. Lethpm that bath cares, beare,
what a fppaptelapeth butothe congregatp=. .
ong,to bpm that ouercomimeth,wopll 4 apueta- `
cate Danna that ps bpd, and topl gpue byi d
tobpte Cone, andin the fone anewe man w2pe:
ten, wbpche no man knoweth, faupnee bethat
recepueth pt. And wnto themefienger of the cor
regatpon of Chpatrpa white. This laprh the
onne of God, whpche bathe epes lpke nto
a fiamme of fycr,andbpsfcte are lpke baffle:
bnowe thp wozkes and typ loue,feruice efaith j
atd thp pacpence,and thy as wpprharcimo `
åt thelattthen at thefpztte: f rob Sdelrbey
bauca fete thinges agayntt tbesbecaufe p fut
feret p wontanx Fefabel, whiche called her felf
aPophctple,torced F te Beecaue mp feruates;
3 fs


3.


Acti. bi. E


iiher d
HiLEED.T. D


ofSaynteFohi. > ollrerbi,


53 feuch (pretes wobpche arebefore bys thronesand -
from Jefus Chip, whpch is afaptbtull witnes
and fp2 begotten ofthedeade: and Lozbe once

Hebz rid CHekyngesof theerth.Cintohin that *loued vs

“octet” and Mathed bs Frome ourefpanesin bps owne

: bloute, Fand made ys kpngesand pzeaftes yn

to Gad ppstatber,beglozpe anddompnyen for

egat pric PUerMOe.Amen,* Beholde, hecommeto wyth
and.Fb.¢- cloudes, and allcpes (pall fepm, and thep alto
see sobpch peared bpm. And al kpnrehes of the erth
oy Shall waple ox(ouerbem Euenfo: Amen. Jaur

Alpha and Omega,tbebeqpnnpuge and the rn

bpnge,fapetbthe Loze Almpabtpe,whpebe ts

andinppeh was,andiwbpchistocome. =

eg. J Ibon paure brotper:and companpon “‘n
trpbulacpon,and inthe kpngedome and pacpen-
ce in Fein Chapfte, wasin the Pietbhat tacalled
Pathmos:For the word of God, and forthe opt:
nefipnee of Zefin Chopite: Fras inthe (pete on
a Sondape,and berdebebpndemea great pupce
agit padbene ofa trompe,fapinges am Alpba
and Omega,thefpatteandtyclatie Chat thou
Feet wwepte in a bookc,and fende it pntotbhe feuc
congregacpons Mppch are ir Aipa, pnto E phe:

' ‘fug and onto Smyrna and kuto Parqamosg,
and unto Thpatp2a,and witosardis,anb Dn-
Philadel biaand vnte Laobpera. SECTS

2. aw tuened backe tote p wopce tbat tpake
pntome. And whin g wasturned: J (aioe lenen
goldencandelftpckes, and inthe mpbdes of the
candelfpches, Onelpke wnto the fonneot man,
clothed wpthalpnnen garment Downe to pfcte
and gyide aboute the pappes toptha golden gp?
dle. » Ipys beade-and bps bears were whpte,as
wipte woll anv ag{notve:and Hpsepes iecre as


L


a fame of fp2e:and bysfeetelphe wnto bafieas ©


thounhethep beente ina foznace, and bps Vopre

ag the ounde of manp waters.And be bad in bis

d tpabt bandeleuen arres. And ont ofhis mouth
mat potira WENE a Harpe two cdged wearde. x And bps fa


ce pone cuenag the fonneinprs @rengtb. =
z And hen Flatwe bpm, J felat bysfeteeuE
ag Deade. And helapde bps rpght bande vpon me
fapinge onto me: feare not.* Jan thefp2tte and
thelat, and Jam alpue,and was dead. Andhe
eruriiitib. bold, JAmalpuefo: euermoze and hare the kep
uom bid eg of Heil and of Death.Udlzptetherefoze the thyn-
ges whpch thou batte fene tthe thynges wppch
are,andthe thpnges tohpch muf be fulfpl'cd ber
after:the mpiterp of p tenen arteo whpcb thou
fawelt inmp rpabte bande, and fpefeucn colon
candelttyches. Che feucn Garrers are thewiellin

gers oftbelerencongregatpons. And toe“euen
candelityches whpche thou tawet are the feucn
congregacpons. wr :
z? z C The .ti. Chapter

Be eth fourero acponsto amenbe,and
oon bnon OF bees that ouéecomm th, He
mien) Mtothe mellenqer ofthe conqregacpo
Is T pos Hapa thefe thpnge s lap-
|

BA Ved cibte.that bolbetbthe leuen Farres in
= Ahysrpgbteband, andthat wWaiketb in
the mpbdes of the feuen coldencandeltyches, F
know thy wo2ckes,and thp laboure,and tippa
cpenice,and bowee thou canneit not forbeave them


congregacpons . To at
wplaapuef tocate of p «tree of lyfe, whichis Se tit


which areeueLand aferran dian beri,
fapethep are Apoltles, andarenot :andbatte
founde them Ipearg and batt {uffced. And daft
! openeerg toe nie aes abe ba Modaren g
ba [not fainted, eucrtheles ¥ haue fomnwhat
agapnit the,becaufetbou batt left fl pfirtloue
Remembze therfo2e From whence bois att fal-
lenrepent,anddothe fp2fte works. Dresd


swpli come buto the hoztlp g wpl reimoue thp


cadeltpchie out of bps place,ercept Prepet wut
this ? batt becaufe p hatelt the dedes of px I2p-
colaifang, wbpcb dedes Falfohate.Lerhpmp |
hath caves, beare what the fprete fapth onto p

‘Tobpm that oucrcomineth,


intbempbdbdes ofp ParadpfeofGoo.
and Dntothea ungene the congreqatpon of
Samyn wpabt: Chele thpnges layctd bep
íis fp2ttc,and the lalt; whych was Deade; and ig
alpue. J knotoe thp Doogkes andirpbulatpon $
pouertpe,butthou arterpebe. And zx knowe


tbheblatpbemp of them,wbpch call thet feluca


Fcwes and ave noe: but arethe congregacion of
Spathan. fearenone of thote binges, onpche
thou palt fuffre. Webolde the deupll thatca ft
Come of pou in pzpfon,to tempt pou, and pe hak
hauetrpbulatpon ten dapes. 2e fapthinl wnta
thedeath,and ¥ wpl gpuc the a crovone of ipie,
Let bpm that path cares, beare,wbat thetp2ce .
faperh to thecongzeqatpons.be that ouercons- -


meth allnot be burteofthe feconde death. —


Bnd tothe meflencer of the congreqatyonin W
Perqamius wipte: Chpslapebhe, which bath


thetbarpefnotarde pth tivo ges: F knowe


thy workes and where thou Dweile®cué prer
ithang feate is,andthoukerett mp name,é
hatte not Uenped mp fapthe. Andtrmp dapes


Antipas was a fapthful wptnes of mpne.wh


che was fllapneamong pou, where Hatha DA


Icth. wut F pauc afewe thyngesagapnlthe:


becaule tbou baft theretbem that mapntapne p


Doctrpne of Balaam which tangbtin Balak rirli


to put occalpon of fpnne befoze the chylozen of
$leael, that they Hulde cate of meatcoedpcate
pwHto pdols,undcommptfomnpcatpon.Cuen{
bak thou them that mapntatne tie doctrpne oi
the Pypcolattans, whpch thpuges Fate. Wut
be conucrted, ozels J wpll come vito the hore
Ipe g pl fight agaputt them ith the (ieeard
of np mouth. Lethpm that bath cares, beare,
what a fppaptelapeth butothe congregatp=. .
ong,to bpm that ouercomimeth,wopll 4 apueta- `
cate Danna that ps bpd, and topl gpue byi d
tobpte Cone, andin the fone anewe man w2pe:
ten, wbpche no man knoweth, faupnee bethat
recepueth pt. And wnto themefienger of the cor
regatpon of Chpatrpa white. This laprh the
onne of God, whpche bathe epes lpke nto
a fiamme of fycr,andbpsfcte are lpke baffle:
bnowe thp wozkes and typ loue,feruice efaith j
atd thp pacpence,and thy as wpprharcimo `
åt thelattthen at thefpztte: f rob Sdelrbey
bauca fete thinges agayntt tbesbecaufe p fut
feret p wontanx Fefabel, whiche called her felf
aPophctple,torced F te Beecaue mp feruates;
3 fs


3.


Acti. bi. E


iiher d
HiLEED.T. D


to make then commpt Fompeacyon,e to cate me
ateg offered bp bntopdols. And 3J gaue her (pace


to repent of ber fozntcacidn and the repeftted not


Che Renelacyon


pacpence,therefore F top fiepe the from thebour
of temptacyon, whbpcbe wpll
wozlde,totempte themtpat dwell bponp earth


Webold, J wplcall berintoa beD:andthemthat Webolde,¥ come thoztlp.Bolde that which thou
commpt co Avi ttle 4 Aland gteataduce baft,thatno MAn GILE SOIRPT I eD ees


{pte.crcepte thep turne
Di apll ber pte topth death -Andall the


zerroi b. congregacpons hall knowe,p *Jám be whped


Sram, iib to bpm wpll F gene power ouernacpons,* and keg, that


fearcheth f rapyesed tes.And 3 wpl geur ba
fo cuerp one ofp


pever
and whpeh haue not bnowen the deepnes of Sa
than (ag thep lape) J wpll put vportpou none o
ther burtben, but that whpcb pe bane airedp
olde f tyll Jcome, and tobofoener oner-
commetdand kepeth mp worckes nto theende


be Hall rule them wptharodde of pzon:and as f
veffels of a potter,
ners .Cucnas 3 receaued of mpEatber, fotppll
gge bpm themoznpnee Farre. Lethpm that
the cares, bere that the lpzete fapthtothecon
gregacpons .
| ‘The. iti.Chapter.


C He infracteth and enfourmeth the Langéts ofthe con
m—— allo Cherewarbe of ppm that ever:


PE Cia y RD Wite Onto the meffi nger ofthe
AVE congregacpon that (2 at
EAL


wozckes pertecte befozesx (mr )Hod Remember


omtbep2dedes.Andy that


all they bebzoken to e,


Ouercommeth : wpll J make appller inthe
temple of mp God, and be (hall gonomoze oute

J Wil wpte vponbim, the name of mp god
and thename ofthc cptpe of mp God, netve Jeru


ouaccosdpng Dntobps toorckes falem:whpch comimeth dotone out of beauenfrd
_ Unto pou J lap, and onto bros oftbemol mp God:and Jwpll wzpte
© @bpatira , asmanp as banetott


| te bpon bpm mp newe
name. Let hym that bath cares, beare:what the
Fpzete fapetponto the congregacy ons.

And dnto the meflaunger of the congrega-
7on whpch (sin Laodpcpa, wte: C bps fapth
(Amen)thefapthful and true wytyes,the begin
npnge a creatures of God. Fknowe thp wor

ou art nether colbe noz hote.

J tocldethou were conlde 02 booteSpo then
bevaute thou arte b ettwene both,and nether colp
noz pote, 3J wll (pewe the oute of mp mouth, be


caulethboutspelt: 3 amrpeb andencreafed wpth
“gooves , andbauenede sfnothpnge, and kno-


well not, bowe thou arte wretched and myfera-
ble and poze, and blpnde , and naked. Fcounfell
the to bpe of me qolve teped inthefpze that thou
mapet berpche:and whpterapmente,tbat thou
mapele be xclothed :that thp fpltbpenakednes
donot appere,and annopnt thpne epes wpth epe
falue that thou mapei fe.


{pt be me inmp feate, euen as Jouercame,g
bauelptten topth mp Father inbps teate. Let pim


i.rbet.b.a therfore bowethou balt receanedand bearde, that bath cares: beare, what the lpeetelapeth on


Pet, Lebolbe


Ca.rrt
Job


5


f.
Fit.e


sand repent.x PEthou Halt not wath,
wpllcomecon the ag athefe and thou palt not
nowe what boure Fwpl come bponthe. Thou
batt a fewe names in Sardps,toppche daue not
defpled thep: qarmentes, andthep Mall walke
twptd me inwoppte.for hep are wortbpe
 etbhat ouercommetp, Halbe thus clothed
in wbhpte arape,and J wpll not put oute bpsna-
me oute of the booke of ipfe, and 3 wpll confeffe
bpsname befoze mp father and befoze bps Aun-
iia polje geo ie rel alo
pretefap 0 |
j And epte bnto the An gellofthecongte-
acponof Bpiladelpbia:tbps fapth be thatisho


opencth and no man (huttetp,and Hutteth, and
no man openeth.f knowe thp worckes. Wehol=
de, 3 baue (ct befoze the an opendoze,andDnoma
can (hutcit,foz thou bata lptle Erengtb ebate
kep iiy fapinges ae balt not denped mp name
Bebo , amake them of the congregacponot
SHathan,whych cal themfelues Jetes, and are


not, but dolpe:Webolde, Jwpliakethbemthat there was aleeofglafie, lpke vuto Chrpfall


thep hall come and wo2lbpp before thy feete:¢
hall knowe that J baueloucd tbe.
“‘Becaule thou balk hepte the wozdes of mp


to thecongregacpong.

CThe.titi. Chapter
T c LeefG henu nee el the feate, andone fotip nge bport
it and.priiii.feates abatite it pth. priii. elders (pttpnge bpon
theianbd foure bealtespiapipngeGod dereandnpg


yaks teas open inheaucn,and the Fir popce
YEAS whpche J bearde, vagas it-were ofa

' trdpet talbpnge wpth me-whpeh (apd
come Dp hether:and 3 wpll Mewe the thpnages
rite Ng: tsa hath pb erandimmedpa
tip Jibag in p (pete: ebebolbe, a feate wastet
inbeaucn,¢onelat onthefeate. Aud bethat fat
wasto loke bpon, Ipke vnto a Jalper Moneta
Dadapne tone. And there hasarapne bowe


a pæ true whych hath the Beye of Dauid:*wbhich aboute thefeate in fpabtelpketo an Emeralde.


And aboute the leate Moere.xrtitt.feates. And cp
pon theleates.rrittt.€lders fpttonge clothed in
wbprrenpnent oyen on i beades crotones
rab nett detbondepnges and V

enpnges and tbondepnges and bopces,¢ there
vere. Dii.lapes of fpze,burnpn Ae atier i poha
whichar p.vti.{pretes of God. And befozef feat


andin tbempddes of the leate, and round about
thefeate were’ oure beaffes full of epes before
andbeppnde .Andtbr Epe beate was ss a

pon


come bponall the €


D


iico: ARA


poudi b. .
ebzeriib


gbte.
>i Siterthps 3 loked,¢ bebolde,a doze B


Donte ofthelcates proceadedlpght 25


= g]


-_


ë — i
+


_
-


PBS. Fon, Hol lertiy.
alpun, andthe feconde beate lpheavalfe,and thepzfaces,and foozthypped bim that lpucthe
the thpzde beafte badde aface as a man and fozeucrmoze. o pas
thefourthe beafic as ipheafipeng Egle. and — The. Chapter.
the foure beatkes bad eche one oft „Di. Wp: - The lantbe openeth.bi-feales,and manp thynges folate
qesaboutbpm.¢ thep werefullofepes within. —_“deovenenacnerese |

nd thep had no reft vap nethernpabt fapeng. FAR MDF latve, when the lambe opened a
Siap. vib: * Yolp, holp, bolp, Lozde God almpabrpes lie, Say one of the feales,and 3 herde one of the
re tobiche wag, and ig and is tocome. E a Yi foure beaftesfape,as tt were thenople
-Aind when thole bealtes gaue glozpeandho- Le =iof thonder:come and fe:and Zfawe.
nour and thankes to bpm plate onthe feate, And beholde there waga whpte horfe:and be ¢
(which lyucth foz ever and euer) the.critu.el= fat on bimbaddea botor anda croton: was aes.
ders Fell Downe befozehim that fate onptrone ich Dut bpm,€ He tect forth coquerpng and foz
and wozbppped bym that Ipueth fog euer Fx toouercome. And when he badopened the fecod
_ andcatt thepzccotones before thetronefaieug: feale, 3 berde the fecond beat fape:come and fe.
oF thon art Dozthy D Lopdeox our gos toreccaue AndeHer wente out another hozfetbat wagred
glozp, and pononr,and power, for thot bate, poter thas geuëto him platthercon, totake
created all cbynges, and fog thy toplics fake peacefrom thecarth,and that thep ulie kpli
thep are, and were created. one another.*Andther was genen vutohpma Ererrbss
qpete R pnapie Sot ee babe ann thetor the Se sav ber bebad be thpzde feale 3 %
etepth the lambe openpng the ba eand herfor toe — And whch pepa openedthe thyzdeleale 3 ©
ure beaien che [Pin Aaeeea ON ee > Herdethe thpade beatt fape:come æ fe. And F be-
parase (2D J (atvein the rpgbte bande of- belde,andlo,a blacke hosfe-andve that fate on
REVAS bpm that fat in the trone, 2 boke- bpm bada papze of balatices in bps bande And
Py Maye waitten withinandonthebabtide, beroa vopcemn the mpodes ofthe foure bea»
Aaka Cealed worth feuen feales. And ¥ ftes,fape:a meafure of wheatcfo2a penpe and
fawe a tronge ree febiche thzemcalures of barlp fozapeny € ople wpne


be earth
Ipon of p trobe of Juda, proteof Dauti, bath  Andwhebebadopencd thefpft feale, 3 fat Cc

obtapnedto open theboke, andftolofetbefené Wuderthe aultec*thefoules of them that were Hob-Feied
nd Jbebelde,elointhemiddes kplledfoz the wozdot God, ¢foz the tetimonp
of the feate, and of the foure beattes, andin the why ch thep bad,¢ thep crped wpth a loude vop
, : apieng: How longetarpelt thou Lorde, bolp
be bad ben kplled, bauyns feuenhoznes,andie- @ true,totudge € toauenge oure bloud on thein
} c metes of God Ppouwellonthzearth:Andlonge whpte garmin
De came, and tes were geuen nto euerp one of them . And it
toke the boke out of the rpabtbande of pym wasfapd vntothem,that thep ular reke pet
q that fat Jaa tiefeate.andwbenbehadtaken foralptlefeafon vntplithenombdze of thep2 fe=


the boke,p. tit. bealtes g.rridu.cloersfellpoton lLotes,andbecthzen,¢ of them that ipud be bit
before f be, bauitig( cuerp one of thent) bar: ledas thep were, were fulfplled.
pesg golden bialles full of odures,thiche are = And J bebelde, whe he had opened the fprte D
the papers of fainctes.¢ thep loge ancto fige, feale:andlo,ther was a great carthquabe and
fapens:thou art woethp totaketheboke, eto thefunnewas as blackc agfache cloth made of
open pfeales therof:fo2 P watte kiled, g alte Heve.Andthe mooneweredalcucn as bloue,

- redeme bs bp thp bloude out ofall kinreades, and the frarres of beauenfel vnto the carth, c=
and tages, people enacions, ebat made vs ucnasatpagetree caftethfrom ber wntpmelpe
Dito ont God, hinges. ¢ petes, and we {hall fpages, ben the is Maken 7 thee Na iwpnd

Drapgneon pearth. And Abebelde,e Aherde And beauen banpihedateape,asa ferol Ww
ehevopee of manpaungelsabout f trone, a- itisrotled together. Andall mountapnes and
Dont p beat g the elders, ¢ J bearde thoulande pene moued oute of hep places: And the
thou Li aes Hn 0 atone noie aonr ig kpnges of the carth,and the great men, and the
thelabe p was bplied toreceaucpower,andrp- rpchemen,andebe chefe captpncs,and tbe migh
ches a wildd,¢ttrength,ebonour,¢ clozp,and tp men, and cucrp bondman ,andeuerp free man
Dieting. Andal f creatures wbich arein bean, bpd them felues m Dennes,and in roches of the
and on pearth,¢ wnder: ecatth,einthelee,and Dplles:*and fapd to the bpllegandrockes Fall oree.r.b
all pareinthé berde J fateng:dlefling, honour on bg and bpde bs from the pzefence of bpm p253

102p æ poter be vntobpm p iptteth bpon the {ptteth on theteate,and from the wzathe ofthe

eate, ¢ unto f lambe fo: futeni e lambe.foz the great dap of hig Wath ts come,
beafkes laid: Ame. and H.xptitsclocrsfel pon and Ybotgable to endures are

Lm. Che


—"
a Se a z 4 $
- a i ee =


ha


——s- — Fee


y


—_ “> n a, |i a a
=


— The Ren


A Ph ad pe tet.


trouble, pet the lambe fedeth thenisleadech them,to the four: [Lye


tapnes of papng water, and God Mall wppe aware all teaz
res from thep? epes, ) |
Sac] fdatter that, 3 fawe foure aungels
JEN ande onf.iiti.cozners ofthe earth pol-
À bpne pt ,windeg of theearth that the
wpnde Mulde not blowe on the earthe, ig i


on the fee, netber on anp tree - Ifs And
J lawe another aungell afcende fri prplpnge
of È funne, wobiche bad the feale of p lpupnge
God, ebhectped with aloude voice to the foure
aungels (to whome power thas qeué to Durte
the earth the fee) faiehge : burt not p earthe


nether the fee, nether the trecs.tpl we banefea-


led p feruaiites of our Godin thepe fozbeades.


5 And J herdethe nobze of them whiche were


i


aled, and ther were fealedan. C and. rlitii. s
ofall the trpbes of ste chp inne of 3fraell.
SDE the trp be of Juda were fealed. rit. <).
ME the tepbe of Ruben were fealed. rii. a).
We the trpbe of Gad there ealed. rii. 9.
_ DFthetrpbe of A ler were fealed. rii. 4).
Dé thetrpbe of Meptalim were lealed.rif.).
DE the tepbe of Manafles were fealed.rit.@).
Mf thetrpbe of Spmeon were fealed.xii. aD.
fthe trpbe of Leup were fealed.xit.<).
DE the trpbe of Flacar toere fealed. vii. 4.
DF the trpbe of sabulon tere fealed. rii. &).
MF the trpbe of Joleph were fapled.rti.<).
~ Df the tribe of Wen Jamin were fealed.rit.<).
© After this J bebeloe, lo agreate multptude
(which noma coulde nOb2c)of allnacions and
- people,¢ tiges, Mode befoze p feate,  befoz the
lambe clothed with lige whit garinétes,¢ pal:
megin thep2 bandeg, € cried with aloude voice
fapenge: faluacpon be afcrpbed to bpmp fe
teth pon the feate of out Gode Dnto p lambe.
Andail the afiigels tode inthe cipale of p leat,
and of the elders qof the fourebeattes, efell be-
foze pfeat on thepzfaces, and wozthiped Cod,
fapeng: Amen. Wleling ¢ glozp € pido and


thankcs,and honour, and power, and mpgye,
„~ be pnto our 0} )
And one ofp elders anfwered, fapenge dnto yy


od foz euermoze. Amen, >


me, what are thele whiche are araped in longe
whpt garmétes,and tohencecame thep? And F
fapd Ynto bym: Lode thou wotet. And be latd
tome:thele arve thep, which cam out of greate


tribulacpon,andmade thep2 qarmenteslarge, | EN a


and made them white bp the bloud of the lave:
therfozeare thep inthe peetence of the feate of


od é leruehbpmdapandnpabtin bis tenple, t


andbe Pp lptteth in thefeate toll Dwell amoge
thé. Thep hall honger nomoze.nether thpzit,
nether Hall the Sonne lygbt on them, nether
anp beate. o the lambe whiche isinthempd-
des of the feate Mall fedethem, and fall leade
thé, onto fotitapnes of lpuing water,and God
- hall wppe atvapeall teares from thepe epes.


C The. vtit. Chapter. 3
(he Ceauenth feale fs opened, there is Celence in heauen,
the fourzcaungels blomethep? trompettes, and great plaz
gesfolowebpontberarth, . .


th the feruguntesofGoodtealedinthepz fozeheades |
out of all nacpons and people, tubiche though thep uire |


ee rem ermee ee E a—Á


JAS
t {
j


CAA ©) Dit. aungels tandpng befo: wod
Veee and to them were geuen trompet=
teg. And another aungell came and tode before
theaulter,baupnae a golden cenfer and muche
of odoureg wag geuen Yntobpm, that he Mulde
offre of thepzapersg of all fapntes upon the mol
Denaulter,tobpche was before the leate. Jnd p
{moke of the odours which came of P praters of
al faintes,afcéded bp befoze God out of the aun 2
rele hand. And the aungell toke the cenfer,and
Eplicd it with fp2e of the aulter and cafte it ina
te the earth,and Dotces Were made, and thon-
Depnges and lyghtenpnges,andearthquakes.
And thefeuen aungels tobpebe bad the feué
trompettes.pzepared themfeluesto blowe.
The fp2tk aungel biety,¢ there was made'haple
æ fr 2, wbich were mpngledw bloud, and thep
tere caffe into the carthe:and the thpade parte
ow (oftbeerth wasfeton-pze,echethrzdpatte ) oF trees Pa
pag burnt, and al grene rralle wag beent.And q
p fecdde aungel bletoe:¢ ag it wereagreat moñ
tapne burning Wwithfpze was cafk into the fee,
and, the thp2de parte of the {ee turnedto bloude
pilai i of the creatures which bad
Ipfe dped and the thpzd part of (hpppes tere de
rope SEI prdeaungelbletw , g therfel
a great Farre from beauen burnpra ag it were


dped oe the toaters,becaule thep were made
ter. AND thefourthaungell bleiwe. F the riat


ell bletve and Y
y i Deauen oe 4


power. gnd it was comatided thé, pthep Hulde
not buce p calle o€f erth nether any aano


Has agthe pape that cominethe of a {cozpion


@tapti.o whenbe bathe fonge aman. * And in thole,
Tuk priid VAP


all men feke death ¢ Mall not fpnde it,
and hall defpzeto Dpe, beath hal fe Fro tbe.

And the fimilitude of the locuftes was lpke
bnto hozfes prepared nto batapil, on thep?
beades toeare as it toere crotones , Ipke tnta
molde and thep2 faces tere as it had ben tbe fa:
ces of men. And thep bat beere asthe beere of
women. And thep2 teeth there as the teeth of
lpons. And thep bad babbergponsg, as it were
babbergpons of pron. And thefounde of they?
topnges, wag ag p founde of charrettes, when
manp bozlesrunne together Shae ànd
thep bad taples lpke nto reyes 8, € ther were
ftynges inthep2 taples. And ti dh teat was
toburtemé.v.monethes. And they bada king
ouct them tobich is theaugel of p bottoles ppt,
tobhole namein p Hebzeuc tigeis hadd, but in
the Grebe tonge, Spollion, that is to fupe: a
deftroper. One wo ts pati, and beboldc, two
woocscome vet afterthis. And plprte atigell
biewer, J perdea voice from p foure comers If
the golden aulter,tobich is befoze God, fapeng
to f prte aiigel, which bad the trope: Lole the
foure aungels wbich are voundein p great rp-
ner Euphrates. 2 a eerie,
which were prepared foz an hour, foz a vape, foz
amoneth,¢foz a peare, for to flaye piii pact of
men. Ano the nomber of hozline of warre were
rr.thouland tpmes. r.. Bnd J herde p ndbze
of them:¢ thus Aana Pp bozies tna ue
thcm $ fate on them, baupng fpzpe babhergy-
ong of a Jacinct colour, ¢ beimifone,¢the pea-
yp 068 of the bogies toereas the peades vf Ipong.

And out of theg? moutbes tent forth fpzeand
fmoke,z bzimitone. Jnd of thefe thze twas the
thpzdepart of më Bplled:that is to fap, of fp2c,
fmoke,¢ bzimftone:tobich proceded oute ofthe
moutbeg of thé: 0z torra le foagin thepz
mouthes in their tatles,fo2 thep2 tatles were
Ipke brto ferpentes.¢ bad beades,z-Moith them
ibep Dpd burt: And premnatit of ý mer whiche
were not kplled bp thele plages, repented not
of the dedeg Of thep2 bandes p thep Mulvenot
woztbyp dcupls,¢ pmages of gold ¢ {ilner,and
bale, and fone, € of ode, Which neprber can
fe nether beare,nether go. Aio thep repented


net of their murther, ¢ oftbep2 fozcery, nether


of thep2 fozntcacpon, nether of thep2 thefte.
CTbe.r. chapter.
(The Jungell hath the boke openzhe Ctvereth there
fhalbenor oze (pmesbe geucth the boke bate Fobu,
which cateth ic bp.
wama £1 J (awe another mpabtie angel
ry A C come Dotone fro heaue clothed with
KAN fa cloud, therain bot wpa his deed
SAA so And bis faceasit were plane, € bts
sss fete ag it tere ppllers of fpze and
be bad in bis Dande a lpttel boke open, and be
but his rpabe fote bppon the (ec, and his lpfte
ote on the earthe. And crped with a loude
bopce, a8 when alponrozeth.aAnd when be bad
crped;fcuen thonders fpakethep? voices. And
tohen the wit. thopers bad fpake thep? vopees:


a is = Hei a ste yP Th
BiS.


J Wag about to wèpte:And J herd a vo}
beanen, fapeng wntoime, Leale Dp tpofe thiriges
Wwbych the. vii.thonders (pake, = wapte thé not


Joa H ani rr AȘ p CET =-p
* “ ay ee ae ~ t 4 ay = g 1 i - re "a
-5 be epa b. i a Pat à E ae 2: eS
- : + poe i
r -Ba P| ig
i d 2
| |
| $ ! -H E


pce fri


And theaungell whpch Flaw fade yponthe 25


fee,and Dpon the earth, lyft bp bis bande to bea
uen,¢ fiocare bp bpunt that Ipueth fog euctmoze
which created he aué,and the thinges that ther


tbe fee and the thpnges which therin are:p ther
(pulo be no lenger tpme butin the dapes of the
popce of thefeucnthe aungell, when be Hall be-
gph to blotwe,cuen the mpnitterpe of God pal-
be fpnpthed,as he preached bpbps feruauntes
tbe Ot etes. Se

— ‘Andthe vopce wbich F berde from heaven,
tle boke which ts open tr
gell wbpch Landeth vpatbe fee, and pon the
tarth. and J went nto the aungel¢ fapde ta
bim:geueme thelptel boke, andhe fappe nto
me:tabt it,¢ catett Dp, ttipal make thp belly
bpttcr, but tt halbe in thp mouth ag loete ag


IN ACCA and tdeerth:ana the chpnges that therin are) AND xe


t


(pake vntome agapne,¢ lapd:* gog tabethelp €
: Sope inthe K Er epaky HE FCA


Donp.x And J tobketbelptel boke out of bis had D


g eate it bpand itwasin mp mouth as wete Ereti


as ponp:¢asfone ag Jbadeaten it, mp bellpe
was bptter. Andhe fapde tunto me: thou mutte
prophelp agapne among the people,and nactis
and tongeg and to manp Rpngeg.

E Tbhe.ti. Chapter.


C Phe temple is mealured. Lhe fecond wo ispat,


ito arod,¢ it bas fapd nto me. Ryle
ma Ghandimeate the temple of God,4 p gul-
Ssa Seran tbem that wortbpppe therin.¢
the quper which ts within thetéple,catt out and


‘meatettnot,fo2r tt ts geuen puto the Getples, €


the bolp cptpetbal thep trcade bnder foote.rlit.
monethcs. Andy wpll geuepower Vnto mp
two bptneffes,andthep Hall prophecy a thon-
fand,two bundecd¢.lr. Dapes clothed in lacke
cloth. Tbhefe arettoo olpue trees,¢ tivo candel-
pekes tanding before the God ofthe earth.


Md ehen wag geuen me aredelphe vn B |


And pfany man tpll burte the, fpze pall 2
procede cut ofthep2 mouthes,econfume thepe


encmpcs. And pf anp man wpll burt them, thig
wpfe mull bebe hplled. Chelehauc power to
(put beauen,pitrapne not inthe dapes of thepe
piopbelpenge:and hauc power couer waters ta
turne them to blond, ¢ to {mptethe earth pty
almanerplages,agoftenasthep mpll.
And when thep baue Fpnpthed shep? teft
mony,the beatt that came out of the bottõlefe
ppt pal make warreagapni them,¢ Wal once
come them, tkylthem:Andthep? bódpes talk
Ipc intbefiretes of the great cptye, which fpiré
tualp is calledsobdome and gppt, where oure
Lo2de has crucifped. Andthep of the people €
kpnredes t tonges, q thep of p nacions,thalt fe
they? bodpeg.iti.dapes antan palfe ; and talk
not iufretbep: bodpestobeputingraucs: |
Andthep p dwet bpd pearth, that retopce ouct
thé g beqlad.¢ thal (endapftes one to another
foz thefe two proppe veredthé ý dwelt onp
carth. Andafter.iit.dapes gan aif, thé (prete
of Ec front God loins alice toep tas


€


ERE Relatyon


Dp vpon thep2fete,and greatfearecam bppon cpon s firengthe athe Rpngbe meof oure@oo, _
them wbich lawe them. And tbep berdea great andthe power of bys hzi. Eozoscthe accucer of ga
bopce fro beaut, fapeng onto them: Come vp ourdzetbsen)ig caf Downe which accufedtpem be-
bpebev. And they afcendedvpintoheauen ina foze( our)Goddatee night.Andthep overcame `
cloude, and thep2 cnempesfawe them. And the bem bp the bloude of the Labe, bp the Wozde
fame boure toas thereagreatcarthquake,and of thep2teftimenpe, andthep loued not thepze
the tenth parte of the cpttefell, and tn p earth- Ipues vnto p death. Cherfoze retopsehenens,
quake were flapne names of men eué: S). and and ye pdiell in them, tion to the inbabpters
therensunt were feared and gaue glozp tothe of the carth,and of the (ce:fo2zthe deuplis come
God of heaven. The fecondë thoots patte,and dotne ynto pou whiche bathe great wrath, be-
bebolde,thethyzde tooo wpll come anone. caulebe knotweth p be bath but a thozte tpme.

D Andthefencnth aungelblewe,andthertoere  Andiwhe the vipon fat $ be was cate tn- =p
made great boyces tn beauen, Caieng: p binge- tothe earth.be perfecuted the woman , wbiche
bomesof this wolde are oure Lozdeg, and big bzougbtfoztbthemã chploc. And tothe Doma

ov Chziteg g bethalretgnefozeuer mozeocamen) Were geuen two wpnges ofa great Egle, that
And the. rrittt, elderg, whiche fpt before God theritah five into the wpldernes into Her place,
on thep2 fates, fell bpon thep2 faces,andwoz- bere thets nogpthed fo? a tpme,tpmzs.¢ balfe
{hppped Godlapeng:we ceue the thankes <D a tpme,frõ tbe pzelence ofthe ferpente . And the
Lode God alinyghtp : which art ¢ walt,and dzagocaft out of hpsmouth water after the wo
are to come, fo? thou hafke receaucd thp great max asit Dad bene a rpuer,becanfe the Milde
mpabt, and bat rapgned. And thenaciógwere beuebencanght of f fioude. And f earth bolped -
angep,and thy wath is come, andthetpmeof the woma andp earth spencd her mouth ¢ fiwa- |
the deade pebep Hulde be iudged and that thou lowed vptherpuer,whpcb p Deagu caft out of
fhuldeft geueretearde nto thy feruauntes the bismouth.anod thedzagon was wath with p
P2rophctes andfapnctes,and tothe p fearetbp woman, andwente, and made toarre v the rë-
name tmall and great and thuldett kip g > haunt of berfecde, whch kepethe comatidemé
wbich derop pearth. And thetempleof God tes of God,ehaue the teftimony of Fetus chzitt
ivag opened tn heauen, and there were fene in Bnd be ftovde on thefee fand,
lolote Ipibeenynaes ano topes ant pe Danna ei EN Giap n,

O10 PROtenpnges,and Yopces, and thon: e fee mith Ceuen header any

dypnges,and carthquake,and moche hayle. ten bornes, Another beat cSmeth out of $ earth with


€ The. rii. Chapter. ae, eters Rd J latbea beafte rple oute of the F.
Tbr (ewenth aungell bloweth bis trompet. where ap: P Pea eed (ee, baupnge leuen beades, and ten
peareth in Deauen a woman clothed with the Sunne: Agis ear ree


rain FpSbteth withe the Dragon, whpche perfecuteth
the woman,


aCe t Md there apereda great wader in
as H z ji tauen: A womac othed hitb the w,tbas lpkeä catte of the mountap=
koaa ea neand p mone onder ber fete, ne,andhps fetewereastbefeteofabeare, & big


_. uencrotones Dppon His beaded :andbis taple tothe bealt,and thep wozthipped the beaftfap:

>+ Due the thpzd part of the Marreg» corbeau eng:whoiglpke Dnto the beate thats able to

25 andcatte them tothe carth. And the dagon warre wpth bpm’
tode befoze the woman which wag readp tobe And there was genen Wato pei & mouthe, 15
delpucted:foz to Deuoure her chplocasfooneas that {pate qreat thpnges € blatphempes,e po:
ifwere borne. And the broughte forth a man werwas qeut nto bpm, todo.rlit. monetheg,
chplde,tobiche Mulde rule all nacpons with a Andbhe openedhps mouth vnto blafphemypeas

| todofpzon. And berfonne has taken bp wnto gayntt God,to blafpbeme bts name and bys
" God, and tobis feate. And the woman fledde tabernacle,¢ them that dwelt in beenen. And

into Pp Seeing Oe e bada place, pepa- itwasgeuëbntobim to makt varrer the fain
tcd of God, that thep puloefedeher therea.S) teg, to onercome them And potver wag genen
ii.Dundzedand.lr. dapes. And ther was a great bim oueralk Hred, and people, and tonge and
battayllinbeauen, Bichacland bis anngels nacid,and alp divel bponthe earth wozth.pped
fought with ý bag. ¢tbedzagon fought and dim:wbolenames are not wattté ín the boke of
bis augels g pzeuapled not, nether thas thepze Ipfe of labe,wobhpch was kplled fri the beayn
dragon, ý olde lerpent,calledthedeupll € Da- ppm beare.De that leadeth into captiutte tall !
thanags, was call out.Wibich deceaueth althe gointocaptinite: * be that &plleth t a fweard ee

€ wozld:Andbe was cafkintopearthbebisagels mutt be kplled pee Cieard. Berets the pact mane «
incre caf outalfocwitd hem) And Zdeardaloud ence,and the faptbh of the fapntes,
wopcefapenge: inbeauen ig nowe madelaluas = Andy bebeldeanotber beat commpng bp C

out


of Saynte John.


out of the carth,and bad tivo hozneslike alabe,
and be(pake ag bpd the dzagon. And bedpdalp
the fpettbeaftecouldedo in bps peefence, and be
canted the eartbe, them whpch dwelt therin, te
wo2tbpyp the fp2t beate whole debdlpe wounde
wag healed. And he dpd great wonders,fo that
bemade fyzecome Downe frombeaué in p fight
of men. And Deceaucd thé pIwelt onthe earthe,
bp the meanes of thofefpanes whpch be bad po:
wer fodo inthe (pabt of the beak, taping to tbe
p Dwelt onthe carth: that thep Hulde make an
pinage vnto the beak, whpch pad thefpounde
of alwearde,and dpd Ipue.


D Andbebadpotwrr togene a (prete nto the


pmage of the belte athat thepmage of the bealt
(hulde (peake,and uld caule thatas manp as
wolde not wo2lhpppe the pmace of the beafte,
hulde be kplled And be made all, both imal and
great.rpch and poze,fre and bonde:foreceaue a
marke in tbeparpabte banhés o2 inthep2 fore-


Heddes. And that noman might bye oz Cell fave


that bad tbe markeo; the name of thebeatte,
other the nombze of bps name. Dere ig toptoont.
Let bimethat bath wpt count the nombee of the
bealt. 1o: it fsthenombze of aman, and big ne
bre ig fyrehundzed, thzetcoze and fpre.
C The. tiii. Chapter.


wpthbpm . Th
thefeare of © Avy telieth oftbefall of Gabplon,
Toe TAE -


tad Te aie i
EEAS 2 ane |


CSA V ten inebeye Forbedes And 3 berd
EFRON rant fount


15 werrien, for ebee are pp2gpns. Chele felow the


lauibe Sor eee


labe, €intbep2 mouthes was found no qple.
i thep are wout {pot befoze Mati OF God
and s fawe another aungel Ape in the mpd-
Des of beant hauinge ý eucrlaffyng Gofpell,ta
preache onto chem that tpt anddwel on pearth,
and to allnactons,bynvedes , and fonqes ¢ peo-
ple fapitig wpth aloude vopee: y fteare God. F


ocuet pe ares ‘@bele were re:


acte pitie Gene honour to bpm for p poure of bys tudge-


ail ‘


nitt is come:¢smoztbip him p made beauen and
carth the fee, foitapnes of water: And ther fo
lowed att other aungel faping*2abpls ts fallé


fp2e and bzpméEone, before the bolp aungels, ¥
before thelambe.

And the fmoke of thep2 tozment afcendethe
fpeuermoze. Andthephaueno rete dape no?
night, wbpeh thozhpp the beak and bis pmage
and wholocuer receaucth the pzpnt of bis name
Pereis the pacpence of faintes. Here are thep p
ae ecommaundementes and the fapthe of
Jefu. pops nang ne Sef ap apeng
piutome, wepte: Wlelledare the dead, Whiche


beveafter Dpeinthe Lozde,cuenfolaythtbe pi


rite:that thep ref fro theps labours, but ther?
worzkes folowe them. :


And J loked, and beholde a Mbyte cloude x


and vpon the clonde onetpttpnglpke vuto the
fonne ofan, bauinge on bps Heade a golden
ccone and in bis bandea tharpe pëd. Andan
otherangellcame out of the temple, cepenge w


aloud bopceto bim Plat onthe cloud.* THW yor, dr.
map fickle æ repe,fo2 thp tpmeis come torepe sagt
02 3


ecozne of thecarthis rype. And be p fate
onthe cloud thautinbislpckelon the carth, €
theearth Was reped. ita;
And another auncell caine out of the tent
eg haan beauen,baupnge alto atharpe
pchle- And another atigell came oute from the
aulter, tobiche bad power ouer fpze, and crped
rode tartar ep dn that bade the tharpe
fpchle.aud fapd:thzulte inthy arpe tpcble , €
gather the clufters of theeartbe, for ber grapes
et Sadi pees naj ated be arpe
fpcble on p earth cutdoton the grapes of the
ppneparde ofthbecarth:and caffethem into the
greate wpnefat of the tozathe of God, and the
fopnefat has troben thithont the cptype,t bloud
came out of the fatt euen puto phozfe bzpdles,
bp f fpace ofa thouland,and. vi, C. furlonges.
| ‘TChe.cv.Chapter.
C we leeth euen aungels:baupnsg ruen bpalice full of wiathe


iy, ae Rd Flatve another Cpque in pea- E


CAASA uen great and merueplous, euen
L RAV Aungels, pþaupnge the fenen latte
UONs plages,fozin them is fulfplicd the

ages sth hese And Flatoeas it
werea glaffpefee,mpngled myth fyze,¢ them p
bad gotten victozp of the beall,andbpspmace
andofthenombze of bps name, tande on the
glattp ire, panne fee parges of Godand tiep
ange the fong of Woles the feruaunte of Gov
andthelongeoftbe Lambe faping:Great, and


=


marueplousare thp wozkeg: * Lorde God al- z etary:
mpabtpe, infe andtrue are thp hayes, thou Jerem..


kpngeoffapnteg. Ubo thal not feare o Lozdt;
€ glozpfpe thy namer Fo? thou onelparte bolp
Seg ipl RA ibe eS PT
fo? thy tudgementesare made manpfeff.


And after that, Jloked, and beholde, the të ys


Folre.


xerarri:e ig fallen p great cptie, foz pe madeallnacpons ple ofthe tabernacle of teftpmonpe was open ©
Hees + pence the wopne of ber fornicacion. inbeauen,and thefeuen Aungels came otte of
Andchethpzdeataelfolowedthem faping the temple whychebabdetheteucn planes, clo-


beak hps pmage,ercceauebps mark in his fo
Daa oea Pia pab tbet me thal dpnke p Wi»
ne of p Wrath of God,tobich is pow in p cup
of bys weathe, And be Malbe punpiyed in


E


& wpth aloude popece: 7 Fanpemandor0Pp the tbhedit purecand bapabte lpnnen and baupnge


thep2 beeffesqp2ded topthgolden gerdics. And
one of the foure beaftes yane vnto the fenenait
eis feuen golden Dpalles full ofthe wzathe of
od, whpebelpuethefozencrmoze. Anothe

, Wiii temple


eS a eS aa


TheRettelacion


téple was Full of the finoke of the qlozp of God
and oF his polverand iio man was abie to entre
into thetemipte, tpl the fenen plages of the lenë
aungels torre fullpiled. sah
@ The .xrvi.Chaptet.
__ Zhe AunSels poure out hep} vpaltes fullofiviath.
Bee C559 ND I berdea greate voyce out ofp
7 temple fapeng tothe len€é atigels :
Sa A Go pour Wwapes,pourcout pour Vis


nes were not founde. And there Fella greate

baple(agit bad bentalétes outof beauen bpor

tbe mei, and the menblafphemed God : beeaute

of the plageof the baple,toz it wag greate, and

tbe plagcofit foge. =
 CThe.rvit. Chapter.

ed marion the woman fpttpuge bponthe bea


a


Gea a ee ee
Rhee, et


SLEA Salles of wath pon tbe carth.And PESA Vex) wbicb hadp leun vpalles:¢ tal-
ORS S the fot angell wente andpow2ed 1% 7 Hin ern Red worth me , fapinge tnta me:
out bis pall bpontdecarthe,¢ there fella nop: iiaea Ya) come,F wpll hewe vntothe,the


foine,and afoze botch wpon the men whpch Dad
the marke ofthe beatte,¢ bpon thé tobicbe wo-
ibyppcd hes pmage-And thelecddeaungel Ged
ont bis bpall bpon the fee, € it turned ag tt toere
into the blonde of a dead man: and cuerp [puing
thynge bpedinthefee. And p thpadaungel hed
out bps bpall pon the rpuers g fountaphes of


yg Waters, andthep turned to btoude.And 3 perde


materii d that areatdape of Godalm
i, HCl tu.
iTe ba


än aunqeil fap:20:0.whpeheart wate, thou
artepaDtcousand polp,becaufe thou bal gent
Cuche iuogementeg, for thep pedoutthebloude
Of fapnctes,and prophetes,and therfore bake p
geuen tdem blonde to dzpncke:fo2 thep are woz
thp. And F beard another fap:eucn{oLo2Gon
almpabdtp:truc erpqbteous are thpiudgemeéetes

And the fourth aungel pow2ed out bps vpal
onthe funne , g power was geucn bnto Hpmto
bere men wyetp heat offpze, ethemcnragedin
great beat:g {pate euell of p name of God, wht:
the bathe powre ouer thole plages.etbhep repés


teD not of theireueldebes,togeuehim glogpe: .


And} Epiteaungel powecd out bis pall wp p
{cate of the bealt,ebiskpngdd toered darcke,¢
Dep anete their tes ri fo: fozoibe , æ blafphe-
med BSoD of hean€ for fozowe g payne of their
fo2c8,and repented not of thep2Dedeg. |
. And the {prte aungell poured outebrs vpall


€ bpontie greaterpuce Euphrates, the water


d2ped bp, that the toapes ofthe kinges of f ealt
buld be prepared. And Hameen Yneieane
fp2etes Ipkefroggeg come oute of (he mouth of


fbedzagon and out of the the mouth of p beat,


€ out ofthe mouth of p falfe Pzophet . Foz they


ave the petes of Dencls wozkpnge mpzacles


to qo out onto the kpnged of the carth € of the
whole wozlde,to gather themto the battarll of
. dalt panepen ae

J come aga thefe.BWappp is be that watcheth,¢
Kepeth bis garmétes, lelt be walkenaked, ¢ më
fe bps fvithpres. Andbde gathered thë together
into a place called in p Pebsne tige Armageds.
_ ahd the feucntbatigel pow2ed out bps vyall
fntotheapre. And therecame a great vopee out
of Drauë fro the irate, fapinge:itis dove. And
thcrefolowed vopcees,thondzpnges , and lpgh:
tcnpneces, ttpere was agreat carthquake, fuch
ag twas not fence men were bpon tde carthe ; fo
mighty an erthquake and fo qreat.And p great
Cptic was deupDded into thre partes, and thecp-
tics of all nacpons Fel, And great Wabpld came
intememb2atice before God , to gene wnto ber

thecup ofthe wopue of f frarflenes of bis wath

Curry pir aifo hed awape, andthe mountap =


Ane


E Lere K tudgement of the greate whore $
Ea (peteth bp many Waters , with
whom haue commptted formicacion the kinges
of the earthe,¢ the inbabpters of the catthe,ace
Dronke wth the topne ot her fortcacpon. And
the peers ine awape into the wpldernes.

Jlawe awanman {pt vponaroole colozed
beaft full of namesofblafpbempe, whpche bad
feuen beades andten homes. Aud the woman
WAS ataped inpurple androle coloure, andDdec=
ked wpth golde precpous (tone,and pearleg, €


badacupofgoldeinber bande, full ofabhomi-
nacpons an fpltbpued of ber foznpcacion. And 2


in ber fozbead wasaname w2ptten, amifferp,
Treat Wabplonthe mother of wobordomes ab-
Hominactons of the earthe.And Jfawe the wo-
man Droncken yeh the bloude et fapnetes,and


fopth the blonde of the wptnetles of Felu .


And when y fawcher: J wondscd wtp areate
meraaple . -

Anh the aungel {apd onto me:wherfore mat
napleit thou: 4 wyll ewe the thenutterp of p
wom, ofthe beak p beareth her, whpcd hath
feuenbeabes andten bones. Che beatte p thou
cek was and isnot, e tal alcendc out cf p bot
fomlefie ppt and pall qo into perdicpon, etbep
that dwell on the earth hall wondze( whole na
mes are not wapttenin the booke of ipfe frome
the begpnninge ofthe wozld) Mobent yey beheld
the beafte that was and isnot- And here isa
mpnbde that bach wpldome.


Che leuen heades are fenen mountayres.on ¢


wWhpch the woman fptteth, thep are alfofenen
kpnges.Fpucare fallé, and one isand another
isnot petcome.And whenbe commeth,be mulk
contpaue a Hozte (pace. And the beafte p was,
and is not,is euen theepabt.andig one of thefe
uen and (all qo into Deftruccpon . And the ten
beznes wbpch thou {awett aretenkpnaes whi-
He bane receaued no kpngdom ap pet, but pall
receaucpower ashpnges at: one boure wprhp
beat. Chefehauconempnde, g Hall geur tiei-
power and frength onto the beat. T hefe that
Pat vwopth the lambe, and the lambe wal ouer


come them. ffo? be is Lozdoflordeg, e kpng of i Timbr:


kinges and thep that arcon big (poe, are called,
and choten,and faptbfull. |


. And belaid onto me:the waters which thou D


lawet, wher p whore litteth,are people g folch,
aid nactOs,¢ tõges. And the ten hones, whiche
thou fawelt bpon thebeatte,are thep that hall


bate the whore, Wail make ber defolat ena- :


ked, and Hall cate ber ad ete, burne ber ae


SAd ther came one oftheaungels, +


Pi fap. fri.c.
Yeremp,.a,


=


"tae Fae,


of Haynte Jobn,


ffor Gonhath put in theps hertes to fulfptl bys
yopll,4to do tiyth one content, Eo? to gene thep2
ynaenome onto the beat, wntpl the wozdes of
Godbeful€plied.andthe woman whycbe thou
rawit, ig A isl a fh ere mt ouct
thekpagsottbecarty
3 $ I CTh fp ies papes nar ai
Gion but che that be of con paue tauleto reiopce for
he ggg


cr, wobpebepaue com i
a bane ipued wantonipe wpebber, Dela


_ cptie Wabplonbe ca


Solr. )


in vapues and putple, anid{eatlet, ati decked
wyrth golde, and precpous Fones, and pearles:
fozat.i.bour fo great rpches be come tonoughe
Andeuerp Hyppgonernour,and all thep that
occupped hpppes,and fpppmen wbhpche woke
tuthe fee, ode a Farre of, and crped, when thep
faine the fmoke of ber burnpnae,fapenge:wbat
cyptpeislp&e tnta thps greate cpties andthep
calte dufte on thep2 deedes, anderped teppnge derem. ti d
andwaplpng ¢fapde:* Alas, Alag, that great It
cptie; wherm were made tpcbe all chat had (hip
pesintbelcebp thercafon of ber coftlpnes, foz
at one Doureis the made defolate. Reiopee ouce


 beetbou beauen,andpebolp Bpoftels and 20-


phetes: foz Godhath qpucn pour Judgemente
onder.And ampabtpeaungell toke bya fone
Ipkeagreatmplifone,  caltit into the fee fap-
enge : topth fuche aap fball that greate G
ite, ¢ balbe found nomoze
And the bopce of harpers,and mulpepons, and
of pipers, and trompeters (balbeherdenomoze -
inthe: and no craftesman,of tbatfoeuer. craft
be be Halbe founde enp moze in the. And p fod
ofa mpl fpalbe perde nomoze in the,r (ano rande!
Ipghe halbe durnning nomozein pF p Dopee of p bpp:
grome andoftbe bzpde, thalbe berde nomoze tt
tbe, foz thy marchatites twere the great men ofp
ert. And with ehpne inchauntemente were dc-
ccauedall nations: andin ber was founde the
bloude of the Pzophetes, andof thefapnctess
and of all that were (layne bponthe carth,
Atel CCbe.rizchapter. mie
CPiapleisgpucn bnto god fo? iudgpnge the Whoze,and fora
ucngpnge che blond of bie feruauntes. he aungel wpl


not be woslhppped. Xhe foules and bpzürs are
called tothe Maughter. a
Fane 32d after that 3 berde a greate popce of
Jay moch people tt heaucn fapenge: Aleiupa
men DAA and glozp, € Honour,¢ potwer
Je Altephedto the Lod our Goo, for trewe and
tPADtcouvarehps indgementes,for he hath iud
SED the greate whoze bpchedpd cozrupte the
ett with ber fosnpcation,andhathancnaed the
bloude of hpsleruauntes ofberhande. Anda
Gapnethep fapde: Alleluia. And fnoke rofe bp
foz cuerinoze. And the.xrtili.eloers, and the.iitt
bea ftes fel Dotone e woubpopd ‘God that fate
baoipcaipe! Se: Pngrin {llelupa. Anda
wopee came oute ot the feate fapeng: peaple our si
Lozde God,allpe thatare bps feruanntes and ~
pethatfeare bymboth{malland great. And
Shade the vopce of moche propie euen as the
Đopctofmanp waters gas the bopee of tröge
thundepnges fapenge : lelupa, foz the Lobe
our Godomntpotentrapguety.Let Ys be glad
andreiopce,and Gpuc hononre to bpm, for the
matpage ob thclambe ps come, and bps wpte
made Der felfe readp. And fo per thas craunted
that the Mulde be araped tepth pure and gqooalp
rapnies. o? the rapnes ig therpghteweines oF arri à
faynctes. And He fapd nto me, wipte, «happy Luseruits
arc thep tobpcheare callen bnto tie fupper of p
lambcs marpage : And be fayde Vnto me: thete
acep truefapnetcs of God. And Fel at hisfete
foworlhpp him. and hefapd tinto me:feihonda
i(not.JEoz Jam thp felowe ernannt and one oF
tüy


thy beetheen, cuen of them that haucthe tefty-
mony of Jelus.Wozthpppe God. soz the tety
mony of Zelusts the (peete of propbecpe.. And
€ J latoe beauen open, and beholde, a white boate
and be that fat vpon bpm has called fapthfrll
and truc,and intpgbtwelnes be doth iudgeand
make bataple. bis epes were aga flame of fpze;
andon bps beade were manpe crowmnes, and be
Had a name witten that no man knewe but be
bpm felfe. x And be thas clothed toptha veture
Eta, iiie, Opptetn bloude t bps name is called the worde
of God. And the warrparg tobiche were inbea-
uen,folotbed Dym bpon whpte hosfes, clothed
ibpth whpte and pure rapnes, and oute of bys
mouth went atbarpe two edged werde that w
ithe thuldefmpte the heathen. And bewall rule
them With arod of pron,and he trode the wpne
D latt of fearfnesand wrath of almpabtpe God.
Andhath on his beture gon bpstbpah a name
wWeptten: pnge of kpnges,and Lozde of L02-
des. And Jlatbe anaungel ftandcinp fonne
and be crped wpth a loude vopce,fapence: toal
thefoulesthattlpebp the mpodeg of Heauen:
come and gather poure felues together bnto p
tuppe of thegreate God,that pemapecate fi
of kpnges, andtheflethe of the bye a ho eB,
and the flethe of mpgbtp men, and the flethe of
Dozles.and ofthem that {pt onthem,¢ the flethe
ofall free men and bonde men and of finall and
greate. And F late the beafte, and the kynges
of the carth, and thep2 toarriers gathered toge»
tijet tomate batelagapni bini $ fat on f hozfle
andagapnit bis foudpars. And the brat wagta
kent w bpm p falfe po ahetep wrought mpra
cleg befoze bym, wpth whiche be deceaucd theni


that receancd the beafkes marke,andthem that ee ae
meurevbehbys pmagr, Chelebothiwereca FEAA

fpaeburnpng toptbbzim poses
tone :andtheremnaunte tere flapne wyththe PYES


qupcke into apondeo


ararac oF ppm post Cat uyon toetoe, whiche
fwearde pzoceded out of bps mouth,and all the
foules were oy Bat wpth thepz fe the.

_ €Chbe.re. Chapter. -


CThedzaggonisbounde fo; a.09.peares, Tbedeadarpfe,and
Fectauc iubgemente,

paren 320 J fate anauncell come dotone from
Gna beauen, baupnge the kepcof the bottom:
VEE icfle ppt and a great chapne inbps band.
nd be toke thedzagon that olde ferpent wbich
is tbe deueland Satan,g be bounde bpm a thou
fandpereg:and cak bpm intoa bottomleffe ppt
and be put bpm vp, andfet a feale on bpm that
Be huldedeceauet “Popis nomoze,tiltherbou
fanbde peres Woerefulfplicd. Anvafterthat be
muf beloled foz a lptelfeafon. And J fawe fea:
teg andthep fat bpon them, and tudgemét wag
teuen Dnto them: andy lative the foules of the
È were beheaded fo the wptnes of Jeu, efoz
p ozd¢e of God: and whych hadnot wozhyp
pL eE en Enere ook pma e nether bad tå-
enbps marke bpon thep? forbedes , o2 itt their
bandes: and thep lpued,erapgned wpth Chak
a.4%).pere: but the otber of the deed men lpued
hotagapne, bntpll the thoufande pere were fp:
npibed. Chpsis thattpette celurreccpon, Blet


TheReuelacton è


fed gholp is besp bath part inthe fpak relurrecs
cpon. ffo: ontuch thallthefecond death haue no
power but thep thalbe the Pzeafkes of God gos
Chpt, q Hhalrapgne wpth bym athoufand pere q
* And when tbe.) peares arcexpired, Datha et.rrrvitt.e
albe lotofed oute of bps papion, g thal qo oute IFF»
fodifccaue the people, which are in the.titf.quar
Hie liehe bA Jagog,to gather them
together to battel, whofendbzeis.as thefand of
the fee: tbep went in tbhbeplapneoftheerth: ard
corapaffed the tentes of the fapntes aboute, and
thebeloned cptp. And fpzecame dDownefr6 God
out of beauen,¢ denoured them:¢ thedpuel ý dpl
ccaued them, was caft intoalake of fpre ¢ bpm
(Tone, where the beafke ¢ the falle prophetes (hal
befozmenteddape andnpabte foz euermore. .
And J fawe a great whptefeate,ebymp fat
on it frö Pobote Facefled atoap both perth ebraué
€thep2 place wasnomozefounde. And J lawe
the dead, both qreate {mall tande befoze God. wy
And the eee ates OPENED. 0 cea PORE WaR |
„pened, whpchis the boote of ipre, and thedcad
Were Judged of thole thpnges which were w2pt
ten inthe bokes accozdpnge tothep2 dedes, and
the fee gaue Yp the Lead wbpeh were in ber, and
death, ehellDelpuerd bp the dead , wbpch were


e of inthem:and toep were Judged euerp man accoz


dpng to bps dedeg. Anddeath andpell were cat
intothelakeoffpze. Thps isthe feconde death:


‘And wholoeuer agnotfounde wptten inthe


booke oflpfe, was cattintothelake offene.
- C The.xri, Chapter.


Jn tots chapter {e.deCcrpbentbenewe and Colsityal `
Jerufalem,


B TELLE


rut
ared aga bypdegarnpihed foz her bufbande.
And J bearbe agreate vopce out of peauenfap-
ing: beholde the tabernacle of God ts wyth më
and þe wplldivellwopth them. And thzp albe
bps people,and Godbpm felf balbe wptb thet...
allteavesfromfbepzercg. :
And ther thalbenomoze deeth nether fozowe,
nether criég nether thal ther beenp moze pain,
fozthe olde thpngesare gone. Andbethatlate
bpon tbe feate, fapde:* Weholde, make all fta.riiii.n
thingesuewe: F Andbefapd nto me:iweit, HEr
Foz theie wozdes crefaptbfull and true.

Andbhe laid onto me: tt is done, Jam Alpha
and Dmega,the begpnnp ie tthe ende J twyll
meue to ppm that isatbp:it ofthe toell of the
Water of lyfe, fre. De pouercommeth thall en: €
enberct all thpnges, and J wpll be bis God,
and he thalbe mp fonne. Önt the fearfull and
wubeleuing,¢ tbe abbominable, eniurtherers,
and whozmongers,¢ fozcerers,andpodolaters -
audalllpars pall baue thep2 partein the lake
wbich burneth with fpze and bapmfFoue, which
isthefecande death. K

And there


aaier


=-


| AES, Jon.
ant there cam vito meone of the fench aun- twel
gels wbich bad tde feuen bpallegfull of the fe- me
uen latte plages : and talked withmefapen : þealetbepeople wptball. And there halbeno
comebpther, J wpll bewe the the bzpdestbe moze cure but thefeate of God and the lambe
lambes topfe. And de carped me healt fhe thalbetn it:and bps feruauntes pall ferie him. 4
{pete to agreatcandan bpe mountapne,ebe . big face. andbis name albe., 4 |


i ipewed me th: great citie bolp Jerufalem, de- imthepz forb codes.* And ther Halbe nonpahte 15 ği
| fcondpnig out of beauen from God: baupngtbe there,andtbep nedeno candle, netberlpahte of £92?
~ D brpghtencs of God. Andhershpningtasipbe thefonne-for the Lo20 God geueth them ipabe
| bntoa Mone mot precious euen Ipkea Jalper and they {ball repqne foz enermoze | |
cleare as Criffall: and had walles qreate and Andhe fapde onto me : thelefapetiges are |
|


bpe and Had .rit.gates and at the gates. ritan: fapthfull and true. Bnd the Lozd God of the ho
gels : and names Wettten,whicharethenames pe Paopbetes {ent bps Aungell to pete ynto
of p.ci.trpbes of Jiraell: on the Catt part.tit. ps {eruauntes, the thpnaes whpch mutt tort
gates, andonp Nozthpartitt. cates, and to- Ip befulfplled, Webolde FZ come poztlp. * Hap: |
wardes p South. tii. gates and frö the wet.iit ppishe bepetbtbefapeng of the propbhecpe of kapse * |
gates,¢ the wal of f cttie bad.ritfüdaciðgs:and thpsboke Jam 30bn,wbprh fat thele tpn- . |
` Unthe p.xit. names ofthe lambeg.rii.Apotles. ees and berd themt.And whan Jbad herde gien C |
© Andhe that talked withme bada goldenrede xF felldowne to wozthpppe befoze the fete of
to mealure the citie witball and p gates thber3€ the aungell.wppche hetved me thele thynaes: apo.ri.d- =
and f wall Pleat And thecitie was built.tiit. Andbdefapd onto me-fethoudo it not,foz Jam i


fquare,and p légtb was aslavgeasthebgedth, thpfelotferuaunt of thy beethzen thbe38z0pbe
pw adhe meatutet p citie With theox commen) rede -tegand of them wphiche kepe the fapinges of
<` ptt.42).furlonges,and plength andthe beedth,  ox(tyepzopdece of) thps boke. Wut worthbipGod. _
and thebepgtbotit.wwcreequall. Andbemealu- Andhe fapd nto me: feale hot the fapenges #3
redthe Wal therof-an.Crliit-cubpt..: the mea oftbepzopbecp of thps'b oke. Jfo2 the tyme ts at
fure p the aungell bad, was after the mealure bande. He that doetheuell let bpm do euell (tpl:
that man vfcth.Andthebuldpng,of the wallof andhe whpchis Fpltbp, let bpm befplthp tpl:
it was Jalper. And the citie twas puregolde hethatis tpgbteous,let him be mozerpahtcoug
lyke buto (care glafle,and thefoundacpons of -andbe that is bolp, let bpm be moze bolp. And
the wall of the cptieweregarnpithep wpthall beholde, J come Hoetly,and Mp reward is with |
JE maner of vzecpous toneg. Che fpzkfotidacton me,togeueenerp man accozDpugeashis dedeg A oe
was Jalpis.thelecond Saphpze, the thyzdea  thalbe. Zam Al |
Calcedony, the fourthan Emeralde. the fprte andthe ende:the Psi |
SHardonir, the lprt Hardeos,the feutth Chzt- thep thatdohps commaundementes.thatthep2 |
folpte,the epgbt Werall, the.tr.a Copas,the power mape bein the tree of lpfe and mape en=
tentha Crutopzafos,theelenétha Jacpnte.the trein thozotve the gates into the cptie, *ffo2
twelucthan Amatil. Chetioclucgates were wpthoutethalbe dogres and incDaunters,and Serie |
~ ftieluepearles.cuctp gate wag of one pearle, wbozmongers,and murtherere,and poolaters, er Ne |
andthe Grete ofthe cttteaspuregoldastho- and wholoener loueth o: ma keth leafpnges.
rowe thpnpng glafle. Jnd 3 lawe no temple - J Jelug lent mpneaungell, totckpfpevnto
- © therin.sto2 tbe 1 ode God almpabtp and the pouthelethpnges in the congregacpons. Jam x
MPI Labeare p temple ofit.x And the citie bath no theroote and the generacion of Dauw, and the
nede of the Lonnewetber of ë mone to lighten it. Jep gbt monpnge Marre. And the {pete and the
Jeor the HL hilt dot hg pk e ‘poe Lape: come. And let him that beareth,fape
labe wasthelpabt of it. And the people which alfocome. xAndletbpm that is a tbpzft: come;
are faucd Mall walke inthe lpgbt of ppt ia And let whofocuer topl, take of f water of lyfe, eraav.a’


Kpnges of theearth Hall bzpnge thep2 gl
ans cg Dntoit.*« And the qates of tare hasia of the pzopbecpe of thyg boke: * p anp
T Wiki a
he 2, aid. Pil.d,


=ar pot put bp dap. o ther Halbenonggbt ther. man
) CH on( has ai fhau thep ahs stozp and hononreofthe ADDE Ditobpm p plages thatare wepttéint DUS Pio rma
nacions) AND there Mall enter into it none wn- boiie. And pfanp man thal mpnptbe of the wor 5


cleane thing, nether tobatfoeuet wozketh ab- desoftheboke of thps pzophe
awapebps


=


beminacton oz maketh lpes:but thep onelpe epg parte oute of the
whiche are weitten inthe lambes boke of Ipfe. bd thep pp cprieano from the ti
errit, : te Weptten inthys boke. He wht x
TEL. Rta Ear at yA ER andò  tbefething sslapebsbe it.Jcomeq 4
aaeeei otini aasia Eventocame Lowe ety, Chegrare of
topil not be wozthppped. To the wozie of God mape oueLo2de Jefu g 3
notbpnge be added no; mpnpihed. pouall.a re,
A Pane 20 be Hetoed mea pure rpuer of wates beeen |
HN of lyfe, cleare as Crptall : procedpnge CTheende of the newe
Eee oute of the feateofOod, and the lambe. -o CEettament: Gg
Jutbempodes of the rete of itg o£ ether (poe : | Ai table.
- Sttherpuer, was ther wed of pie: whycbhe barg
ta
. aay
\ Pa 4 Ae


pi


hd Mev ent ple Sen
in thechurche,after Salpfburp tfe,
toberofthe fy2tte l EEPE ERIN
and the otber the Gofpell: thofebes
gynnyuge thou palt fpnde inthe
~ boke,marked toptbacrofierf
and the ende topth balfea
croffe Fecontapned with
ig letters.
-€.D.€¢.


| oe the fyattefondape in


Shs ‘an we eS sp ae iit, c
nd whe thep drewe npe Wat.rri.a
On the eer È 44


“a pacient therfoze Pqacob. t.b
c begpnnpng Waria
CDn thefrpdape

si piito me eg It.a


wihattocucr thpnges Roma.ry.a
And ther palbefpgnes Luke.rrie
Dn the wednifoape
 huslapththe Lorde sacha. wee
| Circle ate. e ato pos Dat.ri.v


Jhauetes watches |


avon beareth toptneffi eres
on bear effe
C :Dnthe thpzde fondape
in Abduent
Letaman thigwple  £.€o?.titt.a
Wiban Fbon bepnge {Pat.rt.a
@ On nee
‘Cbhps is the two:de Ehia
nd the fprte moneth Lukic
GDnthefrydape
There thallcomcarod  Efa.ri.a
And@arparofein | Luke.id
@ Dn the fourth fondape
tn Aducnt
Retopcetn the Lozde hil. {itt.a
Andthps isthe recozde . Job.t.b
dn the Docdnpfoape
We gla tban Jerl.ii.f
And thps ee me oF uke. vil.c
Cyn toe frpdape
Se qlad and retopce pacha iic
bi bede beware 4% Ti


COn Cheittmatteenen
aulethe fcruaunt —


cn bps mother Da maia G |
5 ame 6 l


Prr t €:
SoztheqraccofGods Titug.it.b
Andttchaunfedin thofe Luke.tia

€Atthe feconde maffe
TSutafterpebekynones Titu tika
Thethepherdes fpake to Lube.tic


inthe te Si


i


Andz faye Stbetepie par liff.a
andbisfathere mother Luke.ti.e
qn netbepeares dape
S02 the qrace of God Tits. {i.b
ser whan the rae vape Lube.it.¢
(Dn the tweife ene
HorthegraceofGod  Titas.ti.b
Wut whan werobetas Wat.ti.d
CDn the twelfedape
Get the vp bp tymes @fa.lr.a
Wiban Jefus wag bome dat.ti.a
@ On the fp: fondape after


twelfedape.
D Lorde Fwplithbanke Cla lr.a
‘The nerte dave after Job.i.d


EDrthe Peono tondayeafrer
twelue dape
And Jbetcche pouther. Rom.rii.a
Wibante wast tioeclue Lube.ti.c
COnthethprde fondape after -
twelfe dape
Srcpnge that wehane Rom.rii.b
And the thp2de dape Job iia
CDn the fourth fondapeafter —
twelfe dape
Wenotwpteinpour Roma.rii. e
Wihan Felus came WMat.viit.a
ain ae frfthfonPepe after


Surat pig to sr ae
and tba be entred int viie
© CDn the fprte fonda tpe afte
tivelfedape — .
joutpeontherfore — Collo.ité.b


‘Che tae dom ua ar.rit.d


eee


cont a


Joel. it.c
Pat.v.a


Cia. bolita


Dave
P asloude


a


‘
Pehaucherdethatitis Wat.v.g
On thefpett fondape intent


Wicalfo ag belpers ti. Co. bia

Thn mwas Jclusledof Wat.titt.a
CDn the weoniloape

And the Lorde fapd Ero rriii.e

Soneran ofthe Pat. rü.d.
CDnthefrydape


it a fame foule bat sech. eRe c

ter tips wag gob.v
Dn theleconde fondapein ms

| Furtbermoze beethzen t.Chelnia
And $clus wente. at ry.c
TOn the wedntfoape


ss! ut Pardoch thougb. Peiter. rfiið


And Jelug gopnge ppto Bat.rcrt
COnthefrpdape -
Curfed be the man
4 can of mpne owne ae p.0. c
CDn the tpar onnaa ins neoe.
Wc pe therfore t a
And he has cattprge out Da AS
CsDn the webntloape
onoure thp father €ro.rr.b


bencamebnto Jets Mat.rv.a -


-Mi aai


COnthetrpdape ;
And the congregació pad Rum. ir a
Then came be mto Jopn.titt.a

COnthefouctpfondapetnleng —
Horitisweptrenthat Gala.titt.c
Jelug went zob.bi.a

COn the wedaidape |
And Ese.crrvi.e Clay.t.c —
And Fetus gopnge Up Jop.ira


Cn the frp


dape
Andafter fieleactes tii. Beq.rvit.c -


A cettapne man was fpch Fob.rid
CDn e v.fondape inlent
Bat Chik bepnge L,e.fr.¢
wibp DEVON EON rebuke Fob. wiif
3  Onthe tocdnifoape
And tbe 1odepake Leut.rir.a
aps Sorte ehala FJop.r.e


«< ithefrpd
vorbeall bpi tharos dere. rbite
Chen gathered j aly OD.


‘=
= can at :


PO palineton |
t the Ganetontrt a philia —
De knotoetbatafter Gat.rrvi.a .
CsOnthetwennifoape -
Wihobathaeuen Cla. lfii.a
| ‘Chefeatt oflwetebread Luk tia
@ Dn goud frpdape
Whe Lozbefpake puto ` €ro.rii.a


When Felushadlpoké Fob.rviit.a

CDn Eater enen. a

PEpebe therfore rpfcn

Cipian ie ee ofp Wat.rrviit.a
TERE alter dape

c pa rge tberfozetbeolde É Co2.v.b
nbd


ban the Sabboth Par
pipe the monda dape DR at rule
et opened Actes 8.0.0.


an Sspolbertve ofthe Lubrriiti


cin


Coliifa


j , = |


| Pemen,and brethren, pe


y y
1


CDnthetewMápe
b : ACE. riii.d


y Fclus ode inthemyd. Lub. retin


i
j


d


Berii


]


b
T
li


i


EDn the wednifdape
Pemenof srael, wip Act.tit.c
Afterwardedpds clus  Fobrpt.a
E€ Dntbe thurfdape
The sail ofthe Lozde Act. vili.c
{Harp ttode ba hist at 3ob.rr.b
pias apne f.Pet.ti.c
so as muchas Chu i.
| Treni ecleuédifep. Gat.crviti.d
; nthe laterbape


| ihe etherfoze  ipet.iia


apa aacbape ofthe Fob.cr.b -


nse fees SODA egy |
nce

ee eceteaa A ae
befame dape a
gH etre 9 h af-


Epit sito nffeed etii

Jam thec C008 Beo ob.t.b
E y Di the toyzbe fondape at=
ter Gaffer.

E e E 4 r Sn :
ra topple, an 0
ee fourth fondape at=


ter Cafer
> Enerp good gpfte Jacob.t.c


' am note Jgomp wape Job.rvt.b


Dn the fpfte fondape
And ¢ that pe be Doers Jaco.t.0


 Uerelp ec. whatloenerpe Fob. rot £


Munthe mondape
Eenotvledge pour fautes Jaco. bð
Df ar of pou Wall Lube.rta

Dntbetetoeldape
E ertortetberfore i Timo fia


` Andwhen Fetus: oe ouer Se rit.D


 -Bétertwardehe appeared Dar.rvt¢


|


a


g


F
f :


C Dn the wedn
qhe multptude of the Pig titi.g
Shefe wozdes (pake Fe. Jod.rvit.a
CDn the Alcencpoi, dape
The Ept treat ple Actes.t.a


€ On the londave after the
Alcencion bape
etberfoze fobzeand (.3eF.titt.b
Be whanthecomforter Fon.rv.d
CDn Wi ptlondapecucn
at forumen nopi Apol. Act- rira
Pipe lone me kepemp Fob. riitt.b
CDa Wiptlondape
And pede thedapes
. PEamanioue me
COnthemvundape


© Andbe commaunded Vs ane uF


Joz Godfoloucdthe . Jo
CDn the tewefoape _ p”
WibantheApotiles 7
Cicrely, verelp.¢c-r
EDn the tor”


” But Deter tr
Mo mane


4


‘Ther waga certapne


_ kuotwepehot that |


— Tye Table, T


CCathethurldape
Then cane Phplpp into Acte. vili.a
Feluscalledthetwelue Luke.ty.a

CMOnthefcrpdape —

Fomos AE are = Acte.ti.d
nvit cH ee eae adape Ln. wD


dape
‘man e ADDU A Act .xtit.€
And wbhenüe wasrplen Luke.iiti.f
CDn Trinite fondape
D tyedepenelle WRoma.ri.e
Thewágsamanofthe  Fol.tii.a
CDn copus Charli dap
T That w ae e renra ra ii
0 cheis mea 0
EDn the fpzitefondape af-
ter trinite,
God isloue,and bethat t Job.iiii.b
Luke.trvt.e
CMnthelesondefondapeat=
Bat fnrt; ERY £Fob.titc
aruaplenotmp bze. ob.t
Acercvapnemanmade Luke. yiii. d
CDn the thpzde fondape af-
Biagi pot heen ipetv.b
ue.opepour felue
ba lah ey she hint Lube.cv.a


CDn the fourtp fondaype af-
oy luppo thatthe WRom-vitt.a
0 e
Ber therfozemercp. Lube.vil Aft
See eb ionvere at:
Sn conclultorw be pe é. Det. t.b


Ae cametc pale when Duke.v.a
Dn the prte fondaye at=


wy he rh |
J TS pnitop seg conc

02 J fape wito pou .0.¢

COntbeteuenedcomape


[pea Ut.
ancy Bayes watt War. viii.a
ate Ee ate biii,

02e Vre ma. biii.c
wetoareof falfe pet vit.b
€ Dn tbhe.tr. fond
am puleyitelattaceck tea iat
Ee EE
Dn the.r.fondape


ioe. cer |


D Acertapreman bad


, Sonan cana evo no, S VLD
Wiberfore Jelp ne, €pbe.iii.b
| Antiskonuan t Luke. bii.b
COntbe.cvit.fondape
therturetsbich pee
ndit rg hp  Dukeritit.a
€ On the.rviil. fonbape
Atbanke mp God- £02.64
Wut ne ben the Pbarples Watsrrit.o
CDOnthe.riy.ondape
‘To be renewed. Cpbe.titi.a
Heentredalfo atb.ir-a
CHOnthe.crfondape - :
f Gakebedetherfoxe . €pbe.v.d


And Fetus seed | “Hat. rris


CDthe. dapè
SEpnallp mp bethat be pe Epbe. Mt b
avn ORs paaria i Sob.t.€
COn the.crti.fonda


er |

ED eds Py e Philip i.a

The lg Wat.cvitta
~ COND rriit.fondape
uhin be was, pul. iii. d
Then went p Pha Bat.cxit D
C Dntbhe.rriiii Adad son

fo tbpscaufe twe alfo Collofi.b

pple Hap thus fpake  Watb.tr.c


laft fondape after teint. |
zeal tpimecome Piere.rritib


vi.
a A the ebmiMoaye it + Em.


bereke afo elmaffe:
sira 2e Hich
a ye vtietnebage Wariri


oaea: ee "set Mfee.rtiti.a
And one of ee
Dn the faterda
f€02 thet was aoretabe, Ipe aeb.tr.a
eriti. D
nthe dedicacion of the chur
Aa dope later tbe me
p kapakpa Luke. rira


tpmecome Amos.ir.D


barples Lube. oii


epee. A


—_


= f
iy = =i


C epites and Ae `
the $r"


Deb otvethat pe were f.Cor. riia — ~


Andas He wascome Luke”
EMDMntbecleuenthfonr- —
Weethre ag vartapnp”
And be tolde thp”
Dun thet”


|


— CHnfapnete Thomas ro be Patiniteof apnete — CDn D. Mattes dape
fy Bpottlesdape 4bon Baptittes dape Dn ? Thel pienes ae Esch. io
_  Therfozeare pent eid Derken ontomepe Efa.rlir.a Andas Fetus Wath.ira |,
sa S ete e a y.ee.£ apne. lifabetbestpme Aubc.if € nfapnct Bichaels Bape. 4
aE cin 1Candclma fe dape CDn Sapnete Peter and And be (ewe tt Apoca.i.a
a E Bepo c, 3J topll fende Galatia Paules dape. in that boure came the Wat. ria —
| Andwhantherapes  Lubeti.d0 Atthefametpyme  Actes.rii.a COnfapnct Lubesdaye
aate dape n the ie oe Hy roi £ t d anggeni s A € dicts §
Dn Capnete agda- ec thys appopnte u
apes Peter Actu.t.c lenes bape i COnili fapnce Ady MON aD |


aby Jefus ath, xid wbofofpnocth rou.reri.b udeg dape #
ee ae Aata he pe gl and totem aris wii.f Gut te haotee that Rom. bie -


of our Ladp CDn fapnete James the Apo- ChpxcommaundeFJpyou Fop.rv.e.
Mozeouer God {pake vn. Efa. vii.b iles bape i ae 3 PEDA INAL bape goner
Andin pa rtemoneth  Auke.t.e Powetherfoeyearenot € phr. iid Jnd Ffeweanotber Apor. tiis T


-George dare : eee pd py at.cr.c Jeluslepngetbeprople at.ua-

Coumte ieall manestope Jaco.t.a Aum mpcté stone cme: 3 CDn tit fouls dape k 1
l oe ee Job. rub gual beletan Ccvle. ee Satoitienor tyestuen (Chef. tile
On. HYarkesdape. . . Jefoztunedthatagtbep Lukerg Che. Se Jon.ri.c


3 Gut noweeuerp oneal Ephe.iii.a Dns. ark Tiemes dape ER 5
eh ene Dia {9).rV.4 “Powfherforcpearenot CEphe.ti.r i Ste
fats CDn fapnce Philippe and Ja- Andtherewasatrpfe Luke. crit.c C Theende ote aloe


eas, @Onthenat‘upte sfourLadp. — eR Ss
a3 pees toug Sapha Asyevpneyaney Eolea ai
S: Anhe fapbontopis Job.ritit.a Theboke T Satia | |


ae Bett


| | x te i; : j
Re H CTh ende stents Teltainent E
A 3 amd of the whole 2Byble. Svar Gant in onemi, i ; wa
2 eee y PMO- SEAT: CE © ae ie D
“Bie <a = :

è Ny i
gè 3 $ ]
f - “ý : 3 i 2
k oF
KS : 8 as
