Prolegomena to Ethics (T. H. Green, 1883)
==========================================================
British idealism's ethics: the common good against hedonism; shaped welfare liberalism. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (cu31924014673762).

^mtll  mmmii^  f  ihwi 


<!Slo(dti3iu  Smitf) 

1909 

:-^;-^-:^^^-^-- :-..: /.?/jrA 

Undergraduate  ^^~~~^-^— — — — — — ^i^«__«_ 

Library 


Cornell  University  Library 
BJ  1008.G79  1906 


Prolegomena  to  ethics,  by  '"je  late  Thoma 


3  1924  014  673  762 


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/cletails/cu31924014673762 


PROLEGOMENA  TO  ETHICS 


BY  THE  LATE 


THOMAS   HILL   GREEN,   M.A.,   LL.D. 

FELLOW  OF  BALLIOL  COLLEGE 

AND  WHYTe'S   professor  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY 

IN   THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 


EDITED   BY 


A.    C.    BRADLEY,   M.A. 

FORMERLY  FELLOW  OF  BALLIOL  COLLEGE  AND  PROFESSOR  OF  POETRY 
IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 


FIFTH    EDITION 

WITH  A  PREFACE  BY 

E.  CAIRD,  M.A.,  Hon.  D.C.L. 

MASTER  OF  BALLIOL  COLLEGE,  OXFORD 


OXFORD 
AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
1906 


HENRY  FROWDE,  M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 

LONDON,  EDINBURGH 

NEW  YORK  AND  TORONTO 


-PREi^ACE  T(|  THE  FIFTH   EDITION 


I  HAVE  been  asked  to  say  a  few  words  of  Preface  to 
the  new  and  cheaper  edition  of  Green's  Prolegomena,  the 
merits  of  which  as  an  introduction  to  Ethics  are  generally 
recognised.  The  Prolegomena  may  be  described  as  a 
new  treatment  of  the  fundamental  questions  of  Ethics, 
from  an  idealistic  point  of  view,  somewhat  modified  from 
that  of  Kant.  The  problem  from  which  Green,  like 
Kant,  starts  is  the  apparent  opposition  between  the 
ordinary  conception  of  the  world,  as  a  system  of  causally 
connected  objects  in  space  and  time,  which  is  presupposed 
by  physical  science,  and  what  seem  to  be  the  fundamental 
ideas  of  morality  and  religion,  the  ideas  of  God,  freedom, 
and  immortality.  If  man,  like  all  the  other  objects  of 
our  empirical  knowledge,  is  merely  one  part  of  the  world 
of  objects  which  act  and  react  upon  each  other,  according 
to  fixed  general  laws,  what  room  is  left  for  the  assertion 
of  his  moral  freedom,  or  for  any  higher  destiny  which 
distinguishes  him  from  the  other  creatures  ?  and  how  can 
we  regard  him  as  other  than  a  conditioned  finite  being, 
a  link  in  the  chain  of  conditioned  being,  or  as  having 
a  direct  living  relation  to  a  God  who  is  regarded  not  as 
a  part,  but  as  the  principle,  source,  and  end  of  the  whole 
system  ?  Morality  and  religion  seem  to  attribute  to  man 
an  individual  independence,  and  a  relation  to  the  abso- 
lute Being  which  no  merely  finite  object  could  possess. 
If  we  follow  out  the  ordinary  methods  of  physical  science, 
we  seem  reduced  either  te  deny  the  moral  responsibility 
of  man  and  the  existence  ©f  God,  or  to  assert  both  on 
grounds  which  we  should  not  admit  in  any  other  case. 


iv  PREFACE   TO    THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

Now  Green,  like  Kant,  endeavours  to  show  that  in 
ordinary  experience  and  in  physical  science  we  usually 
ignore  or  abstract  from  a  principle  which,  nevertheless, 
is  always  present  in  all  our  knowledge,  and  that  there- 
fore such  science  does  not  deal  with  the  ultimate  reality 
of  things,  but  only  with  phenomena ;  i.  e.  with  things 
partially  understood,  or  not  apprehended  in  their  whole 
reality.  When,  however,  we  detect  this  principle  in  re- 
lation to  which  all  phenomena  exist  and  are  known,  the 
result  is  both  to  vindicate  the  ways  of  knowing  that 
characterise  science  and  ordinary  experience  within  their 
proper  sphere,  and  at  the  same  time  to  establish  our 
right, to  apply  the  principles  of  morality  and  religion 
to  the  absolute  reality.  Hence,  our  ordinary  experience 
and  science  rest  upon  a  principle  which,  when  recognised, 
carries  us  beyond  such  experience  and  science.  Kant, 
indeed,  maintains  that  it  does  not  do  this  in  the  way 
of  knowledge,  but  only  opens  the  way  for  a  faith  which 
may  guide  us  in  practice.  It  can,  in  his  view,  prevent 
us  from  conceiving  our  experience  as  more  than  a  know- 
ledge of  phenomena,  but  cannot  enable  us  to  change 
such  partial  knowledge  into  an  apprehension  of  the  real 
nature  of  things.  Green,  on  the  contrary,  holds  that 
when  we  see  phenomenal  objects  in  relation  to  their 
principles,  we  acquire  a  knowledge  of  what  they  are  in 
themselves.  Both,  however,  agree  that  our  moral  con- 
sciousness does  take  account  of  that  principle,  and  that, 
as  a  consequence,  we  are  entitled  to  postulate  the  moral 
freedom  of  man,  and  the  existence  of  God,  as  primary 
truths  on  which  we  can  base  our  existence  as  spiritual 
beings,  And  Green  endeavours  to  work  out  the  con- 
sequences of  these  principles  in  relation  to  morality. 

In  the  Second  Book  of  the  Prolegomena,  therefore,  he 
treats  man's  practical  life  as  a  realisation  of  freedom,  and 


PREFACE   TO    THE  FIFTH  EDITION  y 

endeavours  to  show  in  what  sense  freedom  is  realised, 
firstly,  in  man's  action  generally ;  and  secondly,  in 
a  narrower  sense,  in  actions  that  are  morally  good. 
What  is  meant  by  saying  that  man  is  free  in  all  his 
practical  activity  ?  and  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  he 
is  free  only  when  his  action  conforms  to  the  moral  ideal  ? 
The  first  question  is  answered  by  showing  that  all  action 
from  motive  is  essentially  free  or  self-determined  action  ; 
the  second,  by  showing  that  man  is  truly  realising  himself 
only  when  the  motive  of  his  action  is  the  moral  ideal. 
The  moral  ideal,  it  is  then  contended,  is  not  truly  re- 
presented by  Hedonism  as  the  sum  of  pleasures,  either 
for  the  individual,  or  '  the  greatest  number '.  It  involves, 
however,  the  complete  realisation  and  satisfaction  of  the 
capacities  of  the  individual,  and  it  involves  also  the  idea 
of  a  common  good,  in  the  attainment  of  which  all  moral 
beings  may  co-operate.  After  a  full  criticism  and  re- 
jection of  Hedonism  in  all  its  forms,  Green  proceeds  to 
show  the  agreement  of  his  own  view  of  the  moral  ideal 
with  that  developed  in  the  philosophy  of  Plato  and  Aris- 
totle, both  in  their  conception  of  virtuous  activity  as  the 
chief  good,  and  in  their  analysis  of  the  special  virtues ; 
pointing  out,  however,  that  the  conception  of  these  virtues 
has  been  enlarged  in  modern  times,  under  the  influence 
of  Christianity,  and  especially  by  the  idea  of  the  brother- 
hood of  men.  The  Fourth  and  last  Book  of  the  Prolego- 
mena discusses  the  practical  value  of  moral  philosophy, 
examining  in  particular  the  question  how  his  own  view 
enables  us  to  deal  with  practical  difficulties ;  how,  in  this 
point  of  view,  it  compares  with  other  theories  ;  and  how, 
especially,  it  enables  us  to  take  account  not  only  of  the 
results,  but  of  the  motives  of  our  action. 

The  difficulty  which  has  been  most  felt  by  readers  of 
the   Prolegomena   is  that  raised  by  the  assertion  that 


vi  PREFACE   TO    THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

man  must  not  be  regarded  merely  as  a  result  of  certain 
previous  conditions,  but  as  a  '  reproduction  of  itself  by 
an  eternal  consciousness ' ;  in  other  words,  that  he  is 
literally  '  made  in  the  image  of  God.'  And  perhaps  there 
are  some  valid  objections  to  this  way  of  stating  the  unity 
of  the  universal  with  the*  particular  element  in  man's 
being;  or,  in  other  words,  maintaining  that  we  are  obliged 
to  think  of  him  not  merely  as  an  object  who  is  a  parti- 
cular part  of  this  partial  world,  but  also  to  regard  him  as 
a  being  in  whom  the  principle  of  unity  that  underlies'  all 
the  differences  of  the  world  becomes  conscious  of  itself. 
But  we  have  to  consider  that  any  valid  theory  of  human 
nature  must  somehow  explain  the  union  of  these  two 
aspects  of  man's  being,  as,  on  the  one  hand,  an  individual 
object  in  the  world,  and  on  the  other  hand,  a  subject  of 
knowledge  and  a  moral  being,  who  is  capable  of  regard- 
ing and  treating  all  objects,  including  himself,  in  relation 
to  the  whole  to  which  he  belongs.  Thus,  in  knowledge 
and  in  fnorality,  his  point  of  view  is  not  anthropocentric, 
but  cosmocentric,  or  theocentric.  For,  in  so  far  as  he 
views  the  world  from  the  point  of  view  of  his  own  indi- 
viduality and  acts  with  sole  regard  to  it,  his  thought  and 
his  action  are  illegitimate.  Hence  those  who  view 
human  life  in  a  comprehensive  way  are  apt  to  describe 
it  antithetically,  alternately  emphasizing  the  different 
aspects  in  which  it  presents  itself.  This  dualistic  way  of 
describing  humanity  is  especially  characteristic  of  Pascal. 
Thus  he  declares,  'it  is  dangerous  to  let  man  see  too 
cleai'ly  how  he  is  on  a  level  with  the  animals,  without 
showing  him  his  greatness.  It  is  dangerous  to  let  him 
see  too  clearly  his  greatness,  without  his  meanness.  If  he 
boasts  himself,  I  abase  him  ;  if  he  abases  himself,  I  exalt 
him.  I  contradict  him  continually,  till  he  comprehends 
what  an  incomprehensible  monster  he  is.' 


PREFACE   TO   THE  FIFTH  EDITION  vii 

Green's  work  may  be  described  as  an  attempt  to 
explain  this  antagonism,  and  especially  to  show  that  the 
conception  of  man,  sub  specie  aeternitatis,  may  be  taken  as 
the  basis  of  our  view  of  him  sub  specie  lemporis.  But  it  is 
by  no  means  easy  to  find  a  fit  mode  of  expression  for 
this  unity  :  a  mode  of  expression  that  does  not  fall  into 
one  of  the  opposite  forms  of  error ;  a  mysticism  which 
loses  man  in  God,  or  an  individualism  which  forgets  his 
relation  both  to  God  and  to  the  world.  Green  at  least 
has  kept  continually  both  of  these  aspects  in  view,  and 
yet  has  been  able  to  rise  above  the  via  media  that  re- 
mains perpetually  '  in  doubt  whether  to  call  him  God  or 
beast.' 

Those  who  have  a  living  remembrance  of  Green's 
personality  will  always  feel  that  he  has  a  special  right 
to  be  heard  on  the  subject  of  ethics,  seeing  that  he  was 
specially  characterised  by  the  intimate  blending  in  him 
of  idealism  and  practicality.  If  there  was  a  third  quality 
by  which  he  was  distinguished,  it  was  by  an  intensely 
democratic  or  Christian  tone  of  feeling  that  could  not 
tolerate  the  thought  of  privilege,  and  constantly  desired 
for  every  class  and  individual  a  full  share  in  all  the 
great  heritage  of  humanity.  Of  this  sentiment  many 
illustrations  may  be  found  in  the  following  pages.  The 
practical  consequences  of  Green's  ethical  principles  are 
further  developed  in  his  Lectures  on  the  Principles  of 
Political  Obligation. 

E.  CAIRD. 

Janitary,  1906. 


EDITOR'S    PREFACE   TO    THE    FIRST 
EDITION 

The  works  by  which  Professor  Green  has  hitherto  been 
chiefly  known  to  the  general  public  are  his  Introdtiction 
to  Messrs.  Longmans'  edition  of  Hume's  Philosophical 
Works,  and  his  articles  in  the  Contemporary  Review  on 
some  doctrines  of  Mr.  Spencer  and  Mr.  Lewes. 

When  in  the  year  1877  Mr.  Green  became  Whyte's  Pro- 
fessor of  Moral  Philosophy,  his  main  desire  was,  both  in  his 
teaching  and  writing,  to  develope  more  fully  and  in  a  more 
constructive  way  the  ideas  which  underlay  his  previous 
critical  writings  and  appeared  in  them.  The  present  trea- 
tise is  the  first  outcome  of  that  desire ;  and  doubtless  it 
would  have  been  only  the  first  but  for  the  premature  and 
unexpected  death  of  the  author  in  March,  1883. 

Even  the  Prolegomena  to  Ethics  (the  title  is  the  author's 
own)  was  left  unfinished.  The  greater  part  of  the  book 
had  been  used,  some  of  it  twice  over,  in  the  Professorial 
lectures ;  and  about  a  quarter  of  it  (the  first  116  pages) 
was  printed  in  the  numbers  of  Mind  for  January,  April, 
and  July,  188a.  But,  according  to  a  letter  of  the  author 
written  not  long  before  his  death,  some  twenty  or  thirty 
pages  remained  to  be  added,  and,  though  with  this  ex- 
ception the  whole  was  written  out  nearly  ready  for  print- 
ing no  part  of  it  can  be  considered  to  have  undergone 
the  final  revision. 

At  his  death  Mr.  Green  left  the  charge  of  the  manuscript 
to  me ;  and  I  have  now  only  to  explain  the  course  I  have 
followed  in  preparing  it  for  publication. 

The  manuscript  was  written  in  paragraphs,  but  other- 
wise was  continuous ;  and  I  may  add  that  it  was  com- 
posed  without   regard   to   arrangement   in   Books   and 


EDITORS   PREFACE  ix 

Chapters.  For  that  arrangement  I  am  responsible,  and 
also  for  the  numbering  and  occasional  re-division  of  the 
sections,  and  for  the  frequent  division  of  a  section  into 
two  or  more  paragraphs.  I  have  also  made  the  few  cor- 
rections in  expression  which  seemed  to  be  necessary,  and 
in  one  case  I  have  ventured,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  to 
transfer  a  passage  from  one  place  to  another.  References 
have  been  verified  and  supplied ;  translations  of  Greek 
quetations  have  been  given,  where  their  meaning  was  not 
obvious  from  the  text ;  and  a  few  notes  have  been  added 
by  way  of  explanation  or  qualification,  for  the  most  part 
only  where  a  mark  in  the  author's  manuscript  showed  that 
he  intended  t©  reconsider  the  passage.  The  Editor's  notes, 
except  where  they  give  merely  a  reference  or  translation, 
are  enclosed  in  square  brackets. 

My  desire  throughout  has  been  to  make  no  changes 
except  in  passages  which  I  felt  sure  Mr.  Green  would  have 
altered  had  his  attention  been  called  to  them.  With  the 
further  object  of  rendering  the  work  as  intelligible  as 
possible  to  the  general  reader  I  have  ventured  to  print  an 
analysis.  Mr.  Green  would  probably  have  followed  the 
plan  he  adopted  in  the  Introduction  to  Hume,  and  have 
placed  a  short  abstract  on  the  margins  of  the  pages.  I 
have  thought  it  better  to  print  my  analysis  as  a  Table  of 
Contents,  as  that  arrangement  clearly  separates  my  work 
from  the  author's,  and  will  also  probably  be  the  most  useful 
to  those  who  care  to  read  an  analysis  at  all.  Perhaps  I 
may  further  suggest  to  any  reader  who  is  unaccustomed 
to  metaphysical  and  psychological  discussions  that  much 
of  the  author's  ethical  views,  though  not  their  scientific 
basis,  may  be  gathered  from  the  Third  and  Fourth  Books 
alone. 

It  has  been  already  explained  that  the  book  was  left 
unfinished.  But  on  the  whole  I  thought  it  best  to  make 
no  attempt  to  add  anything,  especially  as  the  comparison 


X  EDITOR'S  PREFACE 

which  occupies  the  last  chapter  seems  to  have  reached 
a  natural  conclusion.  The  reader  will  also  find  in  the 
text  indications  of  subjects  which  were  to  have  been  dis- 
cussed. In  particular  the  author — at  any  rate  at  one 
time — intended  to  introduce  a  criticism  of  Kant's  ethical 
views  (see  page  177).  But  I  think  this  intention  must 
have  been  abandoned  during  the  composition  of  the  book, 
and,  as  it  is  hoped  that  before  long  Mr.  Green's  published 
writings  will  be  collected  and  edited,  together  with  a  short 
biography  and  selections  from  his  unpublished  manu- 
scripts ^,  it  seemed  best  that  the  materials  on  this  subject 
furnished  by  the  author's  notes  for  lectures  should  be 
reserved  for  a  future  occasion. 

I  have  received  material  assistance  in  preparing  the 
present  work  for  the  press.  Mrs.  Green  has  compared 
the  whole  of  the  book  in  proof  with  the  original  manu- 
script. Professor  Edward  Caird,  of  Glasgow  University, 
and  Mr.  R.  L.  Nettleship,  Fellow  of  Balliol,  read  through 
the  proofs  and  the  analysis  and  sent  me  many  suggestions. 
I  feel,  in  particular,  that  but  for  Professor  Caird's  very 
full  and  valuable  notes  the  analysis  must  have  been  far 
more  imperfect  than  it  remains.  But  it  would  seem  to 
me,  and  to  those  who  have  helped  me,  out  of  place  to 
express  any  gratitude  for  work  given  to  a  book  which, 
more  than  any  writing  of  Mr.  Green's  yet  published,  may 
enable  the  public  outside  Oxford  to  understand  not  only 
the  philosophical  enthusiasm  which  his  teaching  inspired, 
but  the  reverence  and  love  which  are  felt  for  him  by  all 
who  knew  him  well. 

A.  C.  BRADLEY. 

University  College,  Liverpool, 
Ap-il,  1883. 

'  See  Works  of  T.  H.  Green,  edited  with  a  Memoir  by  R.  L.  Nettleship, 
3  vols.,  Longmans,  1885-8.  These  volumes  contain  all  Green's  wiitings 
except  the  Prolegomena  to  Ethics. 


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

THE    IDEA    OF    A    NATURAL    SCIENCE    OF    MORALS 

PAGE 

1.  The  prevalent  distrust  of  Moral  Philosophy,  and  the  substitution 

of  Poetry  for  the  philosophical  discussion  of  moral  problems .       i 

2.  Necessity  of  a  scientific  answer  to  these  problems.     Can  this 

answer  be  given  by  a  natural  science  of  man  ?       .         .         .       3 

3.  Such  a  science,  if  developed  on  the  lines  of  the  traditional  Eng- 

lish ethics,  would  involve  a  physical  theory  (a)  of  conscience, 
(b)  of  free-will.     Hume's  contribution  to  (a)  .         .         .5 

4.  Desiderata  left  by  Hume 6 

5.  Thetheoryof descentandevolutionassupplyingthesedesiderafa       7 

6.  (6)  Physical  theory  of  what  is  commonlyunderstood  as  free-will       8 

7.  The  speculative  part  of  Moral  Philosophy  being  thus  reduced 

to  natural  science,  the  preceptive  part  must,  in  consistency, 
be  abolished,  and  the  unmeaning  idea  of  moral  obligation 
accounted  for 10 

8.  The  idea  of  such  a  science  suggests  the  questions  :  (i)  Does  not 

the  knowledge  of  nature  imply  a  principle  in  man  whicli  is  not 
natural !  And,  if  so,  (2)  does  not  this  principle  appear  also  as 
consciousness  of  a  moral  ideal  ? 11 

BOOK  I.     Metaphysics  of  Knowledge 
CHAPTER  I 

THE   SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE   IN    KNOWLEDGE   AND    IN    NATURE 

9.  Theattemptto  answer  the  first  question  materialistically  involves 

a  '  hystefon  proteron.'  All  mental  functions  may  be  materially 
conditioned  ;  but  the  material  conditions,  being  constituents  of 
the  world  of  experience,  cannot  originate  or  explain  the  con- 
scious principle  which  makes  that  world  possible .         .         .13 

10.  Why  is  this  conclusion,  which  seems  to  be   implied  even  in 

commonly  accepted  doctrines,  not  more  generally  acknow- 
ledged ? 14 

11.  Kant's  dictum  :  '  The  understanding  makes  nature.'  This  may 

be  taken  to  mean,  first  (cf.  §  19),  that  a  spiritual  principle  is 
implied  in  the  consciousness  of  nature  or  a  real  world     .         .     15 

The  Spiritual  Principle  in  Knowledge 

12.  This  statement  is  denied,  because  reality  is  supposed  to  be 

what  is  independent  of  consciousness.  But,  in  fact,  the  ques- 
tion, Is  anything  real  or  not  ?  means,  Is  it,  or  is  it  not,  related 
as  it  seems  to  be  related  ?     ,        .        .        .        ...         .16 


xii  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

13.  The  question  implies,  that  is,  the  conception  of  reality  ornature 
as  a  single  and  unalterable  order  of  relations  ;  and  it  has  no 
meaning  except  to  a  consciousness  possessing  this  conception     17 

14.  This  conception  is  necessary  :  which  does  not  mean  that 
every  one  is  aware  of  it,  but  that  experience  is  only  explicable 
through  its  action 18 

15.  It,  or  the  consciousness  of  which  it  is  the  function,  cannot  be 
the  product  of  experience.     It  is  presupposed  in  experience, 

if  that  means  co«sn'oasHe5s  of  change  ;   .         .         .         .         .19 

16.  and  if  experience  means  merely  a  process  of  change,  or  a 

series  of  events,  it  can  neither  be  nor  produce  the  conscious- 
ness of  that  change  or  those  events        20 

17.  Nor  can   this  consciousness   be  the  effect  of  any  previous 

changes  or  events  ;  for  this  supposition  is  either  a  repetition 

of  the  last,  or  has  no  meaning        .         .         .         .        .         .21 

18.  Thus  the  consciousness  through  which  alone  nature  exists  for 

us,  is  neither  natural  nor  a  result  of  nature    .         .         .         .22 

T/ie  Spiritual  Principle  in  Nature 

19.  Can  we  say,  secondly,  that  nature  /fo«y  implies  a  spiritual  prin- 

ciple ? 23 

20.  As  before,  this  idea  is  resisted  by  the  antithesis  between 
nature,  or  the  real,  and  the  work  of  the  mind.  But  this 
antithesis  is  selfrdestructive,  if  relations  are  the  work  of  the 
mind  and  yet  are  the  essence  of  reality  .         ,         .         -24 

21.  That  it  appears  to  be  an  absolute  antithesis  is  due  to  a  mis- 
interpretation of  the  true  conception  of  reality,  as  a  single 
and  unalterable  system  of  relations        .         .         .         .         -25 

22.  The  real  cannot  be  defined  by  antithesis  to  the  unreal ;  for 
that  is  nothing,  and  even  a  false  idea  is  not  unreal       .         .     26 

23.  But  a  particular  reality,  standing  in  certain  relations,  may 
have  relations  ascribed  to  it  in  which  it  does,  not  stand.  It 
then  seems  to  be  what  it  is  not ;    .         .         .         .         .         -27 

24.  and  this  is  discovered  by  its  showing  itself  to  be  alterable. 
For  what  anything  is  really  it  is  unalterably  .         .         .28 

25.  This  truth  may,  through  confusion,  issue  in  (a)  sensational 

or  (4)  materialistic  atomism  ;  the  reality  (unalterableness)  be- 
longing to  the  relation  between  certain  conditions  and  a  cer- 
tain sensation  being  ascribed  (a)  to  the  sensation  alone,  or  (b) 
to  the  material  conditions  and,  finally,  to  atoms  alone  .         .     29 

26.  If  nature,  then,  means  a  single  and  unalterable  order  of  rela- 
tions, what  is  implied  in  it  as  the  condition  of  its  possibility?     31 

27.  This  question  is  admissible  only  if  the  system  of  relations  is 
essentially  dependent  on  something  else,  which  is  not  related 

to  the  system  as  its  constituents  are  related  to  one  another  .     32 

28.  This  something  is  that  which  holds  plurality  in  unity,  and  so 
constitutes  relation ;........     33 

29.  something  therefore  the  same  as,  or  analogous  to,  our  intel- 
ligence   33 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE    OF  CONTENTS  xiii 

PAGE 

30.  For  (a)  even  if  we  admit,  with  Kant,  that  there  are  unknown 
things-in-themselves,  constituting  a  reality  beyond  '  nature  ' 
and  producing  feelings  in  us,         .,..,.     34 

31.  still  an  action  of  intelligence  is  necessary,  as  Kant  saw,  to 
constitute  an  experience  of  related  objects  out  of  successive 
feelings,  and  so  to  '  make  nature  ' :        .         .         .         .         .35 

32.  and  this  intelligence  must  distinguish  itself  from  the  feelings 
it  unites,  and  must  have  a  unity  correlative  to  the  unity  of  the 
system  of  relations  which  is  its  object  ,        ,         .        ,         .36 

33.  Thus  the  uniform  order  of  nature  and  our  knowledge  of  that 
order  have  a  common  source  in  a  spiritual  principle ;    .         .37 

34.  and,  in  this  sense,  the  dualism  of  nature  and  knowledge  must 
disappear        ..........     38 

35.  Not  that  our  intelligence  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  result  of  nature 
(for  this  were  to  treat  as  a  result  of  nature  that  which  makes 
nature  possible),    .........     39 

36.  or  nature  as  a  result  of  our  intelligence  ;  but  they  are  to  be 
regarded  as  having  a  common  source  and  as  being  com- 
municated to  us  in  inseparable  correlation      ,         ,         .         .40 

37.  Such  an  idealism,  which  interprets  facts  as  relations  and 
affirms  the  reality  of  nature  as  opposed  to  our  transitory  feel- 
ings, is  the  very  reverse  of  the  so-called  idealism  which 
reduces  facts  to  feelings  .         .         .         .         ,        .         .41 

38.  But  (b)  can  we  on  this  view  admit,  with  Kant,  that  there 
are  things-in-themselves,  constitutinga  reality  beyond  'nature' 
or  phenomena  ;  and  that,  while  the  '  form '  of  phenomena  is 
due  to  understanding,  the  '  matter ' — the  affections  produced 

by  things-in-themselves — has  a  character  independent  of  it  ?     4a 

39.  If  so,  there  will  be  no  universe,  but  two  unrelated  worlds, 
each  determining  the  same  sensation  :  and  this  conclusion 
would  be  obvious,  if  things-in-themselves  were  not  confused 
with  the  material  conditions  of  sensation       .         ,        .         -44 

40.  Nor  can  the  difficulty  be  overcome  by  making  the  understand- 
ing a  product  of  things-in-themselves  ;  for  this  view  either 
involves  the  '  hysteron  proteron  '  of  materialism,  or,  at  the 
least,  qualifies  the  independence  of  things-in-themselves  by 
some  relation  to  the  understanding  they  are  supposed  to 
produce  .....         45 

41.  Nor  does  Kant  escape  this  paralogism  :  for  if  phenomena,  in 
respect  of  their  '  matter,'  are  efifects  of  things-in-themselves, 
the  latter  are  causes  and  therefore  phenomena       .         .         .47 

42.  Still  it  may  be  objected  :  Though  it  is  impossible  to  consider 
sensation  as  an  effect  of  things-in-themselves,  it  is  equally 
impossible  to  consider  it  as  a  product  of  understanding ;  it 
forms  therefore  an  unaccountable  residuum,  and  in  this  sense 
dualism  must  hold .48 

43.  Objections  like  this  arise  from  reflection  on  the  process  of 
acquiring  knowledge,  which  seems  to  lead  us  back  to  a 
material  of  mere  sensation,  unqualified  by  thought         .         .     49 


xiv  ANALYTICAL    TABLE    OF   CONTENTS 

PAGE 

44.  But  mere  sensation  could  not  be  even  a  beginning  of  conscious 
experience  to  the  individual   .......     5° 

45.  Nor,  even  if  it  could,  would  this  affect  the  question  :  for  it 
cannot  be  an  element  either  (i)  in  the  world  of  knowable 
facts,  or  (a)  in  the  consciousness  implied  in  that  world  .     5° 

46.  (i)  Not  in  the  world  of  facts  ;  for  a  sensation  unqualified  by 
any  relation  is  no  fact,  and  the  minimum  of  such  qualification, 
that  of  sequence  and  degree,  implies  thought         .         .         •     S'^ 

47.  This  can  be  disputed  only  when  thought  is  wrongly  conceived 

as  a  mere  faculty  of  this  or  that  individual    .         .         .         .52 

48.  No  doubt  sensation  may  exist  without  thought  in  the  animals 
and  in  man  ;  but,  as  merely  felt,  it  is  a  fact  not  for  itself  but 

for  consciousness  .........     53 

49.  (2)  Not  in  the  consciousness  implied  in  the  world  of  facts  :  for, 
just  so  far  as  we  feel  without  thinking,  no  world  of  facts 
exists  for  us   ..........     54 

50.  Alike  in  the  world  of  fact  and  in  the  consciousness  implied  in 

it,  feeling  and  thought  are  inseparable  ;  nor  can  we  account 
for  either  as  the  product  of  the  other,  nor  for  their  unity  as 
the  product  of  anything  outside  of  itself        .         .         .         .55 

51.  Thus  the  unaccountable  residuum,  on  which  the  distinction 
of  nature  from  things-in-themselves  was  based,  is  not  to  be 
found  either  in  the  world  or  in  the  consciousness  to  which 
the  world  is  object         ........     57 

52.  Nature,  then,  implies  a  non-natural  principle,  which  we  may 
call  a  self-distinguishing  consciousness,  and  which  cannot  be 
subject  to  the  relations  it  establishes  between  phenomena, — 
e.g.  cannot  be  in  time  or  space,  cannot  be  material  or  moved     58 

53.  If  it  be  objected  that  matter  is  a  substance,  not  a  relation,  this 
only  means  that  it  is  the  correlatum  of  change  ;  a  determina- 
tion which  can  no  more  be  applied  to  the  spiritual  principle 
than  change  itself 59 

54.  Use  and  necessity  of  the  distinction  between  nature  and  spirit 
employed  in  the  above  discussion  ......     60 

CHAPTER  II 

THE    RELATION    OF    MAN,  AS   INTELLIGENCE,  TO   THE    SPIRITUAL 
PRINCIPLE   IN    NATURE 

55.  Human  experience  is  on  the  one  hand  an  order  of  events,  on 
the  other  a  consciousness  of  this  order.  This  consciousness 
cannot  be  a  part  of  the  process  of  nature       .         .         ,         -63 

56.  This  is  concealed  by  the  ordinary  representation  of  knowledge 
as  a  series  or  succession  of  '  states  of  consciousness  ;'  a  repre- 
sentation which  is  partially  true  of  the  process  whereby 
knowledge  grows  and  decays,     ......     64 

57.  but  not  at  all  true  of  knowledge  itself,  which  may  be  ef 
events  or  phenomena,  but  cannot  be  itself  a  phenomenon  or 
event       ...........     65 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE    OF   CONTENTS  xv 

PAGE 

58.  Confusion  on  this  point  is  due,  in  part,  to  the  error  of 
separating  intellectual  activities,  as  events  in  our  mental 
history,  from  their  objects  or  contents,  and  transferring  the 
latter,  from  consciousness  to  '  external  things '       .         .         .66 

59.  The  error  is  most  easily  committed  in  the  case  of  Perception. 

Sensation  being  necessary  to  perception,  the  perceived  object 
is  confused  with  the  stimulant  of  sensation,  and  thus  extruded 
from  consciousness        ........     67 

60.  But  the  stimulant  of  sensation  is  never  the  perceived  object; 
and  this  cannot  be  '  outside '  consciousness  .         .         .         .68 

61.  And  it  is  implicitly  admitted  that  the  perceiving  consciousness 
is  no  series  of  phenomena,  when  a  perception  is  defined  as 
'the  synthesis  of  all  the  sensations  we  have  had  of  the 
object'  (Lewes) 70 

62.  For  this,  if  true,  must  mean,  not  a  number  of  sensations 
revived,  as  sensations,  on  occasion  of  a  present  sensation 
being  felt ;  but  the  synthesis  of  itiejacts  that  sensations  have 
occurred  with  the  fact  that  a  sensation  now  occurs.  This 
implies  a  self-distinguishing  consciousness,  which  holds  its 
experiences  together  as  related  facts,  and  therefore  cannot 

be  a  series  of  events      ........     70 

63.  And,  though  the  relations  through  which  the  perceiving 
consciousness  determines  the  object  are  not  adequate  to  its 
full  nature,  that  nature  must  consist  in  relations,  which  again 
imply  a  self-distinguishing  consciousness       .         .         .         .73 

64.  This  account  of  perception  does  not  imply  that  we  can  make 
objects  at  will — for  we  cannot  make  consciousness  at  will — 
but  it  implies  that  consciousness,  as  active  even  in  simple 
perception,  is  not  a  series  of  phenomena  :      .         .        .         -     74 

65.  and  thus  shows  the  existence  of  an  eternal  consciousness  in 
man  as  tlie  basis  of  an  act  which  all  admit  that  he  can  perform     75 

66.  But  how  can  the  presence  of  this  eternal  principle  bereconciled 
with  the  apparent  fact  that  our  consciousness  varies  and  grows  ?     76 

67.  Our  consciousness,  as  a  function  of  the  animal  organism,  does 
develope  in  time  :  but  the  consciousness  which  constitutes 
our  knowledge  is  the  eternally  complete  consciousness  as  so 

far  realised  through  that  organism 77 

68.  This  does  not  imply  two  minds  in  man,  but  that  twoconceptions 
are  needed  for  the  understanding  of  the  one  mind ;  as  two  con- 
ceptions are  also  needed  for  the  understanding  of  organic  life .     78 

69.  The  common  notions  of  the  growth  of  knowledge  also  involve 
this  twofold  conception  of  it,  as  the  gradual  development  in 
us  of  the  consciousness  of  an  eternal  order;  and  as  this  order 
cannot  exist  apart  from  the  consciousness  of  it,     .        .         .     80 

70..  an  eternal  consciousness  must  be  operative  in  us  to  produce 

the  gradual  development  of  our  knowledge    .         .         .         .80 

71.  Illustration  of  this  by  the  process  of  reading,  where  a  general 
consciousness  that  sentences  have  a  meaning  operates  in  the 
apprehension  of  the  meaning  of  particular  sentences      .         .     81 


xvi  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

72.  The  self-communication  to  us  of  the  eternal  consciousness  can 
never  be  complete,  because  made  in  time  through  the  series 
of  sensuous  events;  but  it  is  necessary  to  explain  the  simplest 
beginning,  as  well  as  the  growth,  of  knowledge  : .         .         .83 

73.  not  that  this  fore-casting  idea  is  present  to  us  be/ore  the  ex- 
perience in  which  it  realises  itself,  but  that  it  operates  in  that 
experience  without  being  reflected  on  at  first       ,        .        .83 


CHAPTER  III 

THE    FREEDOM    OF   MAN   AS    INTELLIGENCE 

74.  The  subject  in  whom  such  an  eternal  consciousness  repro- 
duces itself  is,  lilte  it,  a  '  free  cause '      .         .         .         .         -85 

75.  It  cannot  be  called  the  '  cause '  of  the  world  in  the  sense  in 
which  one  phenomenon  is  called  the  cause  of  another ;  for 
this  implies  determination  from  without,  whereas  conscious- 
ness and  the  world  from  which  it  distinguishes  itself  are  not 
external  to  each  other,  ........     85 

76.  nor  can  either  be  conceived  as  having  a  nature  of  its  own 
apart  from  the  other.  But  we  may  call  it  a  'free  cause ' 
because  in  determining  the  world  it  is  not  determined  by 
anything  other  than  itself       ,.,....     87 

77.  Nor  does  the  epithet  '  free '  take  away  all  meaning  from  the 
word  '  cause ' :  for  we  have  in  knowledge  the  experience  of 
such  a  causality  in  ourselves.  Though  man's  natural  life  is 
determined  like  other  phenomena  by  the  eternal  conscious- 
ness, as  a  knowing  subject  he  is  not  determined  by  it  but 

a  reproduction  of  it,  and  therefore  a  free  cause     ,         .         .88 

78.  But  does  not  this  imply  that  man  himself  is  in  part  a  mere 
product  of  nature,  and  only  in  part  free  ?       .         .        .         .89 

79.  No  :  for  (i)  even  the  animal  functions  organic  to  knowledge 
cease  by  that  fact  to  be  merely  natural   .....     89 

80.  And  (2)  man  himself  can  mean  only  the  self  which  dis- 
tinguishes itself  from  natural  relations,        .         .         ,         .91 

81.  and  which,  as  consciousness  of  time  and  of  successive  events, 
cannot  itself  be  conditioned  by  time  or  by  anything  in  time  ,     92 

82.  That  the  eternal  consciousness  realises  itself  by  means  of 
organic  functions  which  have  a  natural  history,  is  a  fact  which 
we  cannot  explain,  but  it  does  not  affect  the  freedom  implied 

in  that  consciousness     . 9a 

83.  Nor  will  our  conclusion  be  affected  if  we  suppose  that  the 
human  organism  hasdescended  from  a  merely  animal  organism,    94 

84.  and  that  the  appearance  of  the  distinctively  human  con- 
sciousness may  have  required  as  its  condition  a  certain 
development  of  sensibility,  which  may  be  itself  the  result  of 
a  long  experience  on  the  part  of  beings  gifted  with  sense  but 
not  with  such  consciousness 95 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS  xvii 

BOOK  II.     Th.e  Will 
CHAPTER  I 

THE   FREEDOM    OF   THE   WILL 

85.  As  consciousness  distinguishes  itself  from  impyessions  and 
thus  gradually  becomes  the  apprehension  of  a  world  of 
knowledge,  so  it  distinguishes  itself  from  wants  and  impulses 
to  satisfy  them       ,         .         .         ,         .         ,         .  ,         •  -  97 

Sfi.  The  conception  thence  arising  (even  if  we  confine  our  view  to 
objects  wanted  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  animal  nature)  is 
that  of  a  world  of  practice ;  of  something  which  should  be, 
and  which,  unlike  the  object  of  knowledge,  depends  for  its 
reality  on  our  prior  idea  of  it  .         .         .         .         .         .98 

87.  In  other  words,  in  the  world  of  practice  the  determining 
causes  are  motives.  And  accordingly  the  question  whether 
moral  philosophy  can  be  a  natural  science,  or  whether  the 
will  is  free,  will  be  the  question  whether  motives  are  natural 
phenomena     .         .         .         . 100 

88.  A  mere  want  is  strictly  natural.  But  a  motive  involves  the 
action  of  self-consciousness  on  the  want :      .         .        .         .  100 

89.  and  the  necessity  of  the  want  to  the  existence  of  this  motive 
does  not  make  the  motive  natural,  unless  the  self-conscious- 
ness implied  in  it  is  natural, loi 

90.  i.e.  unless  it  is  an  event,  or  a  series  of  events,  or  a  relation 
between  events  :  and  it  can  be  none  of  these        .         .         .  102 

91.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  motive  is  in  part  an  animal  want 

and  in  part  self-consciousness.  The  motive  is  always  an  idea 
of  personal  good ;  of  which  idea  animal  want  may  be  a  con- 
dition but  cannot  be  a  part 102 

92.  The  existence  of  action  from  such  motives  is  far  more  certain 

than  that  of  the  actions  we  call  instinctive,  and  we  can  only 
represent  the  latter  by  a  negation  of  the  characteristics  which 
we  know  to  belong  to  the  former 103 

93.  This  knowledge,  being  a  knowledge  of  action  from  the  inner 
side,  can  only  be  attaine'd  through  self-reflection,  guarded 
by  constant  reference  to  the  experience  of  mankind  embodied 

in  language,  Kterature,  and  institutions ;         .         .         .         .  104 

94.  and,  as  the  knowledge  so  gained  is  the  presupposition  of  all 
enquiry  into  the  history  of  the  fact,  it  cannot  be  affected  by 
such  enquiry  .   '     .         . 105 

95.  Self-reflection  then  shows  that  the  motive  is  always  an  idea 
of  personal  good.  The  want  that  conditions  it  is  natural ; 
it  itself,  as  constituted  by  self-consciousness,  is  not  so  :  and 
although  its  moral  quality  depends  on  the  concrete  character 
of  the  agent,  in  the  formation  of  that  character  also  self-con- 
sciousness has  been  active  . 106 

96.  When,  for  example,  Esau  sells  his  birthright,  an  animal  want 
conditions  his  motive,  but  the  motive  itself  is  his  idea  of  him- 
self as  finding  his  good  in  the  satisfaction  of  the  animal  want ; 
and  if  it  were  not  so  he  would  not  hold  himself  responsible  .  IC7 

b 


xvlii  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

97.  How  does  this  affect  the  question  of  moral  freedom  •  The 
answer  is  that  the  question  of  freedom  is  the  question  as  to 
the  origin  of  motives     .....         ...   io8 

98.  To  say  that  the  motive  is  the  outcome  of  circumstances  and 
chararacter  is  ambiguous :  for  (i)  the  circumstances  determine 
the  motive  only  through  the  reaction  of  the  character  or  self 
on  them,  and  (2)  the  most  important  of  them  presuppose 
such  reaction  in  the  past ;     .         ■         1        •         •         <         •   108 

99.  and  the  character  or  self,  being  _a  reproduction  of  the  eternal 
self-consciousness  through  organic  processes,  cannot  be  de- 
termined by  circumstances  which  it  has  not  itself  determined  no 

1 00.  This  does  not  imply  that  there  is  a '  mysterious  entity,'  called 
the  self,  apart  from  all  particular  thoughts,  desires,  and  feelings ; 
such  a  self  would  be  an  unreal  abstraction,  but  so  also  are  the 
thoughts,  feelings,  and  desires  apart  from  the  self        ,         .111 

101.  Hence  also  the  self  in  this  aspect  has  a  history  in  the  same 
sense  in  which  the  self  as  intelligence  has  ahistory  (§  66  and 
foil.) ;  the  possibility  of  this  history  depending  on  the  pre- 
sence of  a  pelf-consciousness  which  has  none        ,         .         -IIS 

102.  Thus  the  form  in  which  it  presents  a  good  to  itself  is  con- 
ditioned by  past  presentations  ;  but  these,  like  the  new  pre- 
sentation, are  time-less  acts  in  which  the  self  identifies  itself 
with  some  desire.  This  identification  is  the  motive,  and  the 
resulting  act  is  therefore  free        .         .         .         ,         .         .114 

103.  This  point  is  obscured  when  the  motive  is  confused  with  a 
mere  desire,  as  it  commonly  is  by  indeterminists  when  they 
assert  an  unmotived  choice  between  motives,  and  by  deter- 
minists  when  they  hold  that  the  act  is  necessarily  determined 

by  the  strongest  motive         ,         .         .         ,         ,         .         .115 
304.  It  is  true  that  the  act  does  necessarily  proceed  from  the 
motive  ;  but  the  motive  is  not  one  of  the  desires  which  solicit  a 
man,  but  one  of  these  as  identified  by  the  man  with  himself    n6 

105.  To  call  it  'strongest'  is  misleading,  because  this  would  co- 
ordinate it  with  the  mere  desires  ;  and  'strength  '  has  quite 
different  meanings  as  applied  to  them  and  as  applied  to  the 
will  or  character    .         .         ,         ,         ,         ,         ,         ,         .117 

106.  Thus  the  statement  that  the  motive  is  the  outcome  of  circum- 
stances and  character  is  compatible  with  the  idea  of  freedom, 
if  it  be  understood  that  both  circumstances  and  character, 
though  conditioned,  are  conditioned  only  through  a  self-dis- 
tinguishing and  self-seeking  consciousness    .        •        ,         .118 

107.  But  in  admitting  this  we  must  guard  against  the  misconception 
that  the  character  of  a  man  is  something  other  than  himself, 
which  co-operates  with  an  equally  independent  force  of  cir- 
cumstances to  determine  his  action        ,        .         ,         .         .   120 

108.  For  the  character  is  the  man,  who  is  thus  not  determined 
except  "as  he  determines  himself   ......  120 

109.  And,  though  the  act  is  a  necessary  result  {all  results  are 
necessary  results),  the  agent  is  not  a  necessary,  because  not 

,    .  a  natural,  agent 121 


ANALYTICAL    TABLS' OF  CONTENTS  xix 

PAGE 

110.  Remorse  and  self-reformation  are  intelligible  on  this  view  ; 
which  they  would  not  be,  either  if  action,  present  and  past, 
did  not  proceed  from  self-consciousness,  or  if  it  proceeded 
from  an  unmotived  power  of  choice       »        .        ■        .        .  122 

111.  Still  an  objection  may  be  raised  in  the  form  of  the  question, 
'  If  my  present  depends  on  my  past,  and  my  future  on  my 
present,  why  should  I  try  to  become  better  ? ' — a  question 
arising  from  the  confused  idea  that,  if  the  act  is  a  necessary 
result  of  the  agent,  the  agent  must  be  necessary,  ;.  e.  an  in- 
strument of  natural  forces      124 

112.  But  the  question  itself  implies  that  the  questioner  is  «o^this, 
but  a'self-distinguishing  and  self-seeking  consciousness  ;  that 
his  future  depends  upon  this  consciousness ;  and  that  it  would 

be  absurd  '  to  try  to  become  better  '  unless  it  so  depended     .  125 

113.  If  it  be  rejoined  that  the  agent  tvas,  to  start  with,  a  mere 
natural  result,  and  that  all  his  development,  even  though 
self-consciousness  is  present  in  it,  follows  necessarily  on 
that  beginning ;      .         , 127 

1  li,  the  answer  is  that  from  such  a  beginning  no  self-conscious- 
ness could  possibly  be  developed,  for  there  is  no  identity 
between  that  beginning  and  it        ,         ....         ,  127 


CHAPTER  II 

DESIRE,    INTELLECT,   AND   WILL 

115.  If  a  motive  is  always  the  idea  of  some  personal  good  (§91), 
how  does  the  good  will  differ  from  the  bad  ?  To  answer  this 
question  we  must  consider  the  nature  of  will  in  its  relation  to 
intellect  and  desire 130 

116.  Is  the  unity  implied  in  our  speaking  of  certain  phenomena 
as  desires,  as  acts  of  will,  and  as  acts  of  intellect,  in  each  case 
merely  the  personification  of  an  abstraction  ?         .        .        .  130 

117.  Or  is  it  a  real  unity,  arising  from  the  action  of  a  single  prin- 
ciple in  all  the  phenomena  of  each  group, — or,  rather,  one 
single  principle  in  all  three  groups  ?       ,         ,         .         .        .  132 

Desire 

118.  .Desire,  as  involving.  co«sao«s««ss  of  self  and  of  an  object,  is 
to  be  distinguished  from  instinctive  impulse,  which  implies 
only ^e/m^  of  self 133 

119..  Feeling  of  self  constitutes  individuality  in  a  sense  in  which 
individuality  does  not  belong  to  anything  soul-less  ;  and  with 
feelinj;  of  self  goes  instinctive  impulse  to  pleasure  and  from  pain  134 

120.  But  human  individuality  is  a  consciousness  of  self  which 
supervenes  upon  animal  self-feeling  and  transforms  it  :  and 
this  is  the  basis  of  desire  as  well  as  of  knowledge,  both  of 
them  involving  consciousness  of  objects         ....  135 

121.  For  example,  the  instinctive  impulse  to  obtain  food,  without 
consciousiiess  of  an  object,  falls  short  of  the  desire  for  food, 
involving  that  consciousness  : 13S 

b  2 


XX  ANALYTICA-L    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

122.  and  so  does  an  impulse  arising  from  the  revived  image  of  a 
past  pleasure  ;  for  such  impulse,  observable  in  some  animals, 
does  not  require  consciousness  of  self  and  of  an  object .         .  138 

123.  This — even  if,  as  setms  improbable,  any  animals  share  in  it 
—is  that  vyhich  gives  its  character  to  the  moral  and  intellectual 
experience  of  man  .........  138 

124.  It  is  implied  (i)  even  in  the  '  desire  for  food ' ;  clearly  so,  if 
what  is  desired  is  really  some  ulterior  object,  and  not  less  so, 

if  what  is  desired  is  merely  the  pleasure  of  eating         .        .  139 

125.  And  apart  from  self-consciousness  '  animal '  desire  would 
have  no  moral  character 140 

126.  But  (2)  most  of  our  desires  are  for  objects  which  are  not 
directly  dependent  on  animal  susceptibility  at  all,  or  which, 
even  where  so  dependent,  are  transformed  by  the  addition  of 
new  elements  derived  from  self-consciousness  itself      .         .  141 

127.  And  (3)  the  same  action  of  self-consciousness  is  farther  im- 
plied in  the  qualification  of  desires  by  one  another  and  by  the 
idea  of  a  happiness  on  the  whole  ;         .....   142 

128.  a  qualification  present  even  where  effort  seems  to  be  con- 
centrated on  the  satisfactipn  of  a  single  desire      .         .         .   143 

129.  Thus  there  is  a  real  unity  in  all  our  desires ;  only  it  is  not 
Desire,  but  the  self.  But  this  is  also  the  unity  in  all  acts  of 
intellect ;  how  then  are  we  to  reconcile  this  with  the  obvious 
difierence  of  intellect  from  desire  ? 145 

Desire  and  Intellect 

130.  Neither  is  reducible  to  the  other,  and  each  is  dependent  on 
the  other.  For  (i)  each  involves  the  consciousness  of  self  and 
QfawQrldasopposed,  andthe  effort  to  overcome  this  opposition  146 

131.  Desire,  to  the  consciousness  desiring,  strives  to  remove  the 
opposition  by  giving  reality  in  the  world  to  an  object  which, 

as  desired,  is  only  ideal 147 

132.  Intellect  strives  to  reduce  a  material  apparently  alien  and  ex- 
ternal to  intelligibility  ;  i.  e.  to  make  ideal  an  object  which  at 
first  presents  itself  as  only  real 149 

133.  And  this  unity  in  desire  and  intellect  may  be  expressed  by 
calling  the  soul,  as  desiring,  practical  thought,  and  the  soul, 

as  understanding,  speculative  thought 150 

134.  (2)  Further,  each  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  the  other  : 
for  intellect  would  not  work  unless  the  end  of  its  working 
were  desired  ;  and  desire  involves  intellect,  at  least  in  the  ap- 
prehension of  the  conditions  on  which  the  reality  of  the 
desired  object  depends 151 

136.  And  in  some  cases  there  is  a  still  more  complete  involution 
of  desire  and  intellect ;  an  intellectual  process  {e.g.  that  of 
the  artist)  being  throughout  a  realisation  of  desire,  andadesired 
end  in  practical  life  involving  intellect  in  its  constitution      .  152 

136.  Desire  and  intellect,  then,  are  difi°erent  manifestations  of  one 
self-consciousness,  each  involved  in  every  complete  spiritualact  154 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE    OF  CONTENTS  xxi 

Desire  and  Will 

PAGE 

137.  Will  seems  to  be  distinct  from  desire  and  capable  of  opposing 
it  (as  well  as  intellect).  In  case  of  such  conflict,  where  is 
the  unity  of  self-consciousness  ?    .         .         .         .         .         .     155 

138.  Even  if  it  is  true  that  a  man  desires,  at  the  same  time  and  in 
the  same  sense,  incompatible  objects,  yet  the  conflicting 
desires,  like  the  desire  defeated  but  still  felt,  diff'er  entirely 
from  the  desire  with  which  the  man  identifies  himself .        .   156 

139.  This  latter  desire  is  said  (a)  to  be  simply  the  strongest  of 
the  conflicting  desires,  or  (6)  not  to  be  desire  at  all,  but  will  157 

140.  The  first  view  is  certainly  incorrect :  for  the  relation  of  the 
self  to  the  so-called  strongest  desire  is  diflerent  in  kind  from 

its  relation  to  the  desires  as  still  conflicting  ....   158 

141.  And  this  is  equally  the  case,  whether  the  adopted  desire  is 
good  and  the  defeated  desires  bad,  or  vice  versa    ,         .         .  159 

142.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  accept  the  second  view,  we  must 
understand  that  will  means  the  adoption  of  a  desired  object ; 
and  also  that  will  acts  even  where  it  is  not  preceded  or  accom- 
panied by  any  conflicting  or  defeated  desires         .         .         .  160 

143.  Thus,  while  the  use  of  language  fluctuates,  the  essential  dis- 
tinction is  that  between  the  >n«>'£  solicitations  of  desire  and  the 
identification  of  the  self  with  a  desired  object  (§  103  foil.)     .   161 

144.  To  refuse  to  call  this  identification  'desire'  would  be 
arbitrary ;  and  in  this  sense  of  desire  will  and  desire  are  not 
difierent  nor  in  conflict  . 163 

145.  But  to  call  the  will  '  the  strongest  desire'  is  to  obliterate  the 
distinction  between  the  mere  solicitations  of  desire  and  the 
desire  which  the  self  has  identified  with  itself      .        .        .163 

146.  The  former  act  upon  the  man,  but  in  the  latter  the  man  him- 
self acts : 164 

147.  and  this  equally  whether  he  acts  on  impulse  or  after  a 
conflict  of  '  desires ' 165 

Will  and  Intellect 

148.  In  spite  of  the  involution  of  intellect  and  desire  or  will  (§  134 
foil.),  there  is  a  clear  distmction  between  the  speculative 
and  practical  employments  of  the  mind  ;  and  therefore,  if  the 
former  be  called  thought  and  the  latter  will,  these  may  be 
distinguished  and  even  opposed 166 

149.  But  it  is  misleading  to  say  that  mere  thought  is  not  will,  or 
that  will  is  more  than  thought ;  whether  by  '  thought '  is 
meant  speculative  activity  in  general  (for  this  is  not  an 
element  in  will  but  co-ordinate  with  it) ;       .        .         .         .   168 

150.  or  (2)  the  otiose  contemplation  of  an  action  as  a  possible 
future  event  (for  thinking  in  this  sense  is  not  the  thinking 
involved  in  willing)  ;........  169 

151.  or  (3)  the  thought  which  is  involved  in  willing  (for  such 
thought  is,  like  the  desire  involved  in  willing,  not  a  separable 
part,  but  only  a  distinguishable  aspect,  of  will)    .        .        .  17° 


xxii  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

152.  The  desire  and  thought  which  are  separable  from  will  and 
from  each  other  are  antecedent  conditions  of  will,  but  are  not 
the  desire  and  thought !«  will 171 

153.  The  will  then  is  not  some  distinct  part  of  a  man,  separable 
from  intellect  and  desire,  nor  a  combination  of  them.  It  is 
simply  the  man  himself,  and  only  so  the  source  of  action      .  172 


BOOK  III.     The  Moral  Ideal  and  Moral  Progress 
CHAPTER  I 

GOOD   AND    MORAL   GOOD 

154.  The  distinction  between  the  good  and  the  bad  will  is  the 
basis  of  Ethics.  The  form  of  «//acls  of  will  being  the  identifi- 
cation of  the  self  with  the  idea  of  an  object  in  which  self- 
satisfaction  is  sought,  the  moral  quality  of  the  act  depends 

ou  the  nature  of  this  object .   174 

155.  Different  senses  in  which  these  statements  could  be  accepted 

by  a  Utilitarian  and  by  Kant 175 

Pleasure  and  Desire 

156.  If  the  difference  between  objects  willed  is  a  difference  in 
respect  of  motive,  there  can  be,  according  to  strict  Hedonism, 
no  intrinsic  difference  between  them  ;  the  moral  quality  of 
an  act  depends  on  its  effects,  and  while  these  differ  the  motive 

is  always  the  same,  viz.  pleasure 177 

157.  But  this  theory,  which  offends  the  unsophisticated  mind, 
owes  its  plausibility  to  a  confusion        ,         .         .         .         .179 

158.  For,  although  in  all  desire  self-satisfaction  is  sought,  and 
although  in  all  self-satisfaclion  there  is  pleasure,  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  object  desired  is  pleasure       ....  179 

159.  Not  only  is  self-satisfaction  sought  in  ways  known  to  involve 

a  sacrifice  of  pleasure  certain  never  to  be  made  good ; .         .  180 

160.  but  whatever  object  a  man  seeks  self-satisfaction  in, — 
whether  he  be  a  voluptuary  or  a  saint  or  an  ordinary  man, — 

it  is  not  the  pleasure  q/' self-satisfaclion  that  he  seeks    .         .   181 

161.  For  this  presupposes  direct  desire  for  the  object ;  and  though 
desire  for  the  object  may  be  reinforced  by  desire  for  the 
pleasure  expected  in  it,  yet  if  the  latter  desire  supersede  the 
former  it  tends  to  defeat  itself        ......   i8a 

162.  Owing  to  the  confusion  just  indicated,  Mill  is  unaware  that  in 
holding  some  kinds  of  pleasure  to  be  intrinsically  more  desir- 
able than  others  he  gives  up  the  first  principle  of  Hedonism  183 

163.  For  if  pleasure  alone  is  the  ultimate  good  or  desirable,  on 
what  ground  can  some  pleasures  be  described  as  in  their 
quality  better  than  others  ? 1 84 

164.  On  the  ground,  according -to  Mill,  that  men  knowing  both  do 
prefer  the  former  to  the  latter.  But,  if  tlie  strongest  desire 
is  always  for  the  greatest  pleasure,  this  only  shows  that  the 
former  are,,  for  such  men,  jMawWaftW/y  superior   .        .        ,  185 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS  xxiii 

PAGE 

165.  Mill's  meaning  however  is  not  this,  but  that  (for  example) 
the  sense  of  dignity  is  much  more  essential  to  such  men's 
happiness  than  the  rejected  pleasures 187 

166.  But  the  inconsistency  of  this  position  with  Hedonism  is  not 
perceived,  because  the  desire  for  the  sense  of  dignity  is  con- 
fused with  the  desire  for  the  pleasure  it  may  bring        .         .  188 

167.  Whereas,  in  truth,  to  say  that  the  desired  object  is  essential 
to  happiness  is  not  to  say  that  the  desire  for  it  is  a  desire  for 
pleasure 189 

168.  The  same  confusion  is  present  in  other  arguments  on  which 
Mill  rests  the  proof  of  Utilitarianism 190 

169.  It  is  only  through  it  that  certain  desires,  on  the  reality  of 
which  he  insists,  can  be  considered  desires  for  pleasure ;  e.g. 
the  disinterested  desire  of  virtue,  and  the  desires  of  money, 
power,  and  fame 191 

170.  It  appears  therefore  that  Hedonism  involves  the  denial  of  an 
intrinsic  difference  between  the  good  and  the  bad  will,  and 
that  the  grounds  of  this  denial  will  not  bear  examination      .   193 

The  Intrinsic  Nature  of  Moral  Good 

171.  Good,  then,  being  defined  as  that  which  satisfies  desire,  true 
good  or  moral  good  will  be  that  which  satisfies  a  moral  agent, 

as  such  ...........  194 

172.  What  in  its  fulness  this  true  good  is  we  cannot  tell ;  but  the 
idea  that  it  is  is  the  spring  of  progress  towards  it,  and  we  can 
see  in  what  direction  it  lies  by  this  progress  as  so  far  made   .  196 

173.  The  assumptions  that  it  is,  that  it  is  present  to  a  divine  con- 
sciousness, that  the  idea  of  it  has  been  the  spring  of  progress 
hitherto  and  is  the  condition  of  further  moral  effort,       .         .  197 

174.  rest  in  part  on  future  discussions,  in  part  on  the  conclusions 
arrived  at  already,  that  intellectual  and  moral  activity  neces- 
sarily imply  the  reproduction  in  man  of  an  eternal  conscious- 
ness which  is  object  to  itself  ......  198 

175.  As  being  such  reproduction  under  limitations,  man  is  not 
merely  determined  by  natural  wants,  but  has  the  idea  of  himself 
asdifferentlyor  more  completelyrealisedorsatisfied  than  he  is  199 

176.  Hence  comes  the  search,  and  the  vanity  of  the  search,  for 
satisfaction  in  mere  pleasure  or  other  selfish  ends ;  hence  also 
the  differentia  of  moral  goodness,  search  for  satisfaction  in 
devotion  to  an  end  absolutely  desirable  .....  199 

177.  And  this  implies  the  union  of  developed  will  with  developed 
reason;  i.e.  the  seeking  for  satisfaction  in  that  which  con- 
tributes to  realise  a  true  idea  of  the  end        ....  201 

178.  In  this  definition  a  certain  precedence  is  given  to  reason, 
because  (though  it  is  also  the  condition  of  vice),  as  rightly 
developed,  it  has  the  initiative  of  ail  virtue  ;  .         .         .         .  202 

179.  the  good  actually  pursued  being  in  most  cases  discrepant  from, 
or  inadequate  to,  the  idea  of  true  good  ;  and  this  idea  being 
the  medium  through  which  the  object  of  actual  pursuit  is 
changed  or  developed.  At  the  same  time  this  language  must 
not  be  taken  to'  imply  an  unreal  separation  of  will  and  reason  203 


xxiv  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  II 

CHARACTERISTICS   OF  THE   MORAL   IDEAL 

A.  The  Personal  Character  of  the  Moral  Ideal  page 

180.  If  moral  goodness  then  is  devotion  to  the  moral  end  or  ideal, 
and  if  the  idea  of  this  end  is  a  divine  principle  of  improve- 
ment in  man,  .........  206 

181.  what  is  its  relation  to  the  will  and  reason  of  man  ?  Does  it 
realise  itself  in  individuals,  or  in  a  society  to  which  individuals 
are  only  means,  or  In  '  Humanity '  ? 207 

182.  Inanycase  in/>«>-so«s(personalitymeaningself-consciousness); 
for  it  is  only  because  we  cannot  reduce  this  self-objectifying 
consciousness  to  anything  else  that  we  believe  that  a  divine 
principle  realises  itself  in  man        ......  208 

183.  But  the  development  of  our  personality  depends  on  society, 
and  on  the  other  hand  is  thereby  so  limited  as  to  seem  in- 
capable of  realising  the  ideal  ......  209 

184.  Hence  we  suppose  it  to  be  realised  in  nations,  or  in  the 
progress  of  Humanity  towards  a  perfect  society.  But,  while 
it  is  true  that  apart  from  the  nation  the  individual  is  an 
abstraction,  it  is  also  tru^  that  a  na,tion  or  national  spirit  is 

an  abstraction  unless  it  exists  in  persons       ....  210 

185.  Progress  of  Humanity,  again,  can  mean  only  progress  of 
personal  character  to  personal  character  :  however  we  try  to 
explain  the  imperfection  of  this  progress  on  the  earth,  it 
must  be  personal    .........  212 

186.  Whatever  be  the  difficulties  attending  it,  the  idea  of  human 
progress  or  development,  which,  like  any  idea  of  development, 
does  not  rest  ultimately  on  observation  of  facts  and  cannot  be 
destroyed  by  it,  involves  necessary  presuppositions  :     .         .  213 

187.  (i)  that  the  capacities  gradually  realised  in  time  are  eternally 
realised  for  and  in  the  eternal  mind  ; 214 

188.  (2)  that  the  end  of  the  process  of  development  should  be  a  real 
fulfilment  of  the  capacities  presupposed  by  the  process.  And 
if  it  be  objected  that  our  knowledge  of  these  capacities  is  not 
such  as  to  give  us  an  idea  of  the  end  that  would  fulfil  them,     216 

189.  we  may  answer  that  from  our  knowledge  of  them  we  can  say 
(i)  that  their  development  cannot  be  a  mere  process  to  infinity, 
but  must  have  its  end  in  an  eternal  state  of  being  ;  and  (2) 
that  no  state  of  being  could  be  such  end,  in  which  the  self- 
conscious  personality  presupposed  by  the  process  was  either 
extinguished  or  treated  as  a  mere  means      ....  2x6 

190.  On  the  other  hand,  as  society  implies  persons  regarding 
themselves  and  others  as  persons,  so  also  the  realisation  of 
human  personality  means  its  realisation  in  a  society,      .        .  217 

191.  And  although  this  realisation  would  seem  to  imply  a  diflfer- 
ence  of  functions  in  the  different  members  of  society,  it 
would  imply  in  all  the  fulfilment  of  the  idea  of  humanity, 

('.  I?,  devotion  to  the  perfection  of  man aig 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF   CONTENTS  xxv 

B.  The  Formal  Character  of  the  Moral  Ideal  or  Law        p.nr 

192.  Thus  the  idea  which  the  good  will  seeks  to  realise  is  identical 
in  form  with  the  idea  of  the  end  as  realised  in  the  eternal  mind. 
We  have  now  to  see  how  it  becomes  the  medium  through  which 
the  latter  idea  determines  the  moral  development  of  man       .  220 

193.  It  does  so  by  presenting  to  us  an  unconditional  good,  and 

by  laying  on  us  an  unconditional  law  of  conduct   .         .         .  221 

194.  When  asked  what  this  good  is,  we  can  only  answer  that  it  is 
the  good  will  or  the  object  of  the  good  will ;  which  again  is 
the  will  for  the  unconditional  good  (§§  171,  172).  Hedonism 
avoids  this  circle,  but  only  because  its  ideal  is  not  a  moral  ideal  223 

195.  The  circle  is  inevitable;  for  in  the  account  of  an  agent  whose 
development  is  governed  by  an  ideal  of  his  own  perfection 
the  good  will  must  appear  both  as  end  and  means  .         .  224 

196.  This  ideal,  in  a  being  who  has  other  impulses  than  those 
which  draw  to  it,  must  take  the  form  of  a  law  or  categorical 
imperative :  but  this  again  cannot  enjoin  unconditionally  any- 
thing but  obedience  to  itself  .......  225 

197.  It  does  enjoin,  however,  at  least  all  the  particular  duties  in 
which  progress  is  made  towards  the  realisation  of  man  ;  and 
it  enjoins  them  unconditionally  as  against  everything  except 
some  new  application  of  itself        ......  226 

198.  The  practical  value  of  the  idea  of  good  as  a  criterion  will 
be  considered  later  (Book  iv)  :  the  present  question  is  the 
historical  one,  how  this  idea  can  have  defined  itself  in  the 
formation  of  particular  duties  and  virtues       ....  227 

CHAPTER  III 

THE   ORIGIN   AND   DEVELOPMENT   OF  THE    MORAL   IDEAL 

A.  Reason  as  Source  of  the  Idea  of  a  Common  Good 

199.  The  idea  of  the  end  or  unconditional  good  is  that  of  the  self 
as  realised.    And  this  self  is  social;  i.  e.  its  good  includes  that 

of  others,  who  are  also  conceived  as  ends  in  themselves        .  229 

200.  This  social  interest  is  a  primitive  fact,  and  though  it  may  have 
been  conditioned  by,  it  cannot  have  been  developed  from,  any 
animal  sympathy  in  which  it  is  not  presupposed   .         .         .  229 

201.  It  implies  the  consciousness  of  self  and  others  as  persons, 
and  therefore  the  consciousness  of  a  permanent  well-being 

in  which  the  well-being  of  others  is  included         .        .         .231 

202.  The  idea  of  unconditional  good  then  will  express  itself  in 
some  form  of  general  social  requirement,  irrespective  of  likes 
and  dislikes ;  and  this  is  what  underlies  the  more  developed 
ideas  both  of  moral  and  legal  right 232 

203.  In  this  sense  Reason,  as  necessary  to  the  idea  of  an  absolute 
and  a  common. good,  is  'the  parent  of  Law,'  in  the  wider 
sense  of  law  ; 233 

204.  and  must  have  been  present  in  any  primitive  state  from  which 
our  present  state  has  been,  in  the  strict  sense,  developed ;     .  234 


xxvi  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

205.  for  there  is  no  identity  between  the  developed  state  of  man 
and  any  state  which  has  not  these  characteristics.  What 
then  are  the  movements  into  which  development  from  this 
germ  may  be  analysed !         .......  23^ 

B.  The  extension  of  the  Area  of  Common  Good 

206.  In  the  first  place  (cf.  §  218),  this  development  consists  in 
the  extension  of  the  range  of  persons  whose  common  good 
is  sought.  The  primitive  duty  to  a  narrow  circle  gradually 
widens  into  a  duty  to  man  as  man  .....  237 

207.  This  duty  is  felt  by  the  highest  minds  to  be  morally  as 
binding  as  any  legal  obligation,   and  cannot  be  explained 

as  a  modification  of  self-interest 238 

208.  The  humanitarian  idea  is  no  unreal  extension  of  the  social 
obligations  of  man,  and  must,  as  it  becomes  part  of  recognised 
morality,  greatly  further  the  development  of  human  capa- 
bilities ;  and  that  not  only  for  the  many        ....  240 

209.  Hastened  in  various  ways,  and  especially  through  its  expression 
by  Stoic  philosophers,  Roman  jurists,  and  Christian  teachers,it 
isyet  the  natural  outcomeoftheoriginal  idea  of  a  common  good  :  242 

210.  and  is  now  fixed  to  a  certain  extent  in  law  and  in  social 
requirement  .........  243 

211.  If  we  take  its  abstract  expression  in  the  formula 'suumcuique,' 
whatdoesthis  imply  as  to  the  ideals  of  good  and  hence  of  conduc  t?  243 

212.  It  Implies  a  refinement  of  the  sense  oi  Justice ;  i.e.  that  no 
one  should  seek  the  good,  either  of  himself  or  of  any  one  else, 
by  means  which  hinder  the  good  of  others,  or  should  measure 
the  good  of  different  persons  by  diiferent  standards      .         .  244 

213.  The  recognition  of  this  idea  by  Utilitarianism  in  the  formula, 
'  Every  one  to  count  as  one,  and  no  one  as  more  than  one,' 
has  been  the  main  source  both  cf  its  beneficence  and  of  its 
unpopularity 246 

214.  The  formula  is  however  inferior  to  Kant's  maxim,  'Treat 
humanity  always  as  an  end ' ;  since,  strictly  interpreted  in 
accordance  wilh  Hedonistic  principles,  it  could  only  com- 
mand equality  of  treatment  in  case  that  equality  led  to  greater 
total  pleasure 247 

21-5.  This  idea  of  justice,  and  of  a  duty  to  man  as  man,  is  at  once 
a  priori^  as  an  intuition  of  conscience,  and  a  posteriori^  as 
a  result  of  social  progress  embodied  in  institutions         .         .  249 

216.  For  the  extension  of  the  range  of  duty  to  the  whole  of 
humanity  is  the  work  of  the  same  reason  which  is  implied 
in  the  most  elementary  idea  of  common  good,  aud  the 
immanent  action  of  which  has  overcome  and  utilised  the 
opposition  raised  to  it  by  selfishness  ;.,...  250 

217.  Reason  being  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  process,  and  its 
action  without  the  individual  and  within  him  being  only 
different  aspects  of  the  operation  of  one  and  the  same  principle  253 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS  xxvii 

CHAPTER  IV 

THE    DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE   MORAL   IDEAL — CONTINUED 

C.   The  Determination  of  the  Idea  of  Common  Good 

PAGE 

218.  In  the  second  place,  moral  progress  is  not  only  the  widening 
of  the  range  of  persons  whose  common  good  is  sought,  but 
the  gradual  determination  of  the  content  of  the  idea  of  good    254 

Pleasure  and  Common  Good 

219.  Owing  to  the  presence  of  reason  in  man,  the  self  is  dis- 
tinguished from  particular  desires,  and  their  satisfaction  is 
accompanied  or  followed  by  the  idea  of  something  that  would 
give  full  and  lasting  satisfaction 255 

220.  And  this  idea  of  a  good  on  the  whole,  by  relation  to  which 
the  value  of  a  particular  satisfaction  is  estimated,  is  involved 

in  all  moral  judgment 256 

221.  It  is  supposed,  on  the  ground  that  all  desire  is  for  pleasure, 
to  be  the  idea  of  a  greatest  sum  of  pleasures.  But  if  all 
desire  is  for  pleasure,  it  rather  follows  that  a  sum  of  plea- 
sures cannot  be  desired,  since  it  is  not  a  pleasure  and  can  only 

be  conceived,  not  felt  or  imagined  :.....  257 

222.  so  that,  if  a  sum  of  pleasures  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  desired, 
this  fact  only  shows  that  there  is  in  man  a  desire  wholly 
difiFerent  from  the  desire  for  pleasure,  vis.  a  desire  for  the 
satisfaction  of  a  permanent  self 259 

223.  But  can  the  good  which  satisfies  the  self  be  a  sum  of  pleasures  ? 

No ;  for  tlie  good  is  conceived  as  at  least  relatively  permanent  260 

224.  If,  nevertheless,  many  persons  aCSrm  that  their  idea  of  this 
good  is  the  idea  of  a  sum  of  pleasures,  the  reason  is  that  the 
desire  for  objects  which  will  yield  satisfaction  is  misinter- 
preted as  desire  for  pleasure,  whence  the  conclusion  is  drawn 
that  good  on  the  whole  must  be  a  number  of  pleasures  .  261 

225.  And  even  when  the  misinterpretation  is  rejected  and  a  dis- 
interested desire  for  the  good  of  others  is  asserted,  this  is 
supposed  to  be  a  desire  for  their  pleasure      ....  263 

226.  Such  a  view  however  requires  us  to  suppose  two  co-ordinate 
principles  of  moral  action  and  judgment,  viz.  Reasonable 
Self-l,ove  ^nd  Benevolence  ;  and  this  result  can  be  avoided 
only  by  reducing  Benevolence  to  Self-Love,  or  by  showing 
that  the  object  of  Self-Love  is  not  a  sum  of  pleasures    .         .  263 

227.  That  the  second  alternative  is  the  truth  is  seen  when  we 
consider  that  a  sum  of  pleasures  cannot  be  enjoyed,  and  that 
each  successive  enjoyment  of  pleasure  brings  us  no  nearer  to 
the  good  pursued  .........  264 

228.  And,  though  it  is  true  that  a  man  might  think  of  his  good  or 
happiness  (not  indeed  as  a  sum  of  pleasures,  but)  as  a  con- 
tinuous enjoyable  existence,  still  what  men  really  do  pursue 
is  not  this,  but  a  well-being  consisting  in  the  attainment  of 
desired  objects       .........  266 


xxviii         ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

229.  Such  an  ideal  and  permanent  object,  and  probably  the  most 
generally  prevalent  one,  is  the  welfare  of  a  family  :  and  the 
desire  for  this  is  absolutely  different  from  a  desire  for  pleasure.  268 

230.  Whether  or  no  the  true  good  was  at  first  identified  with 
family  well-being,  it  must  have  had  the  two  characteristics  of 
inspiring  an  interest  and  of  being  permanent  like  the  self  it 
has  to  satisfy 269 

231.  And  the  well-being  of  a  family,  which  is  identified  by  a  man 
with  his  own  well-being  and  outlasts  his  life,  has  these  charac- 
teristics           .         .         .         ,  270 

232.  Thus  the  true  good  is,  and  in  its  earliest  form  was,  a  social 
good,  in  the  idea  of  which  a  man  does  not  distinguish  his  own 
good  from  that  of  others        .         .         .         .         .         .         .271 

233.  Even  if  it  were  conceived  as  a  succession  of  pleasures,  desire 
for  it  would  still  not  be  reducible  to  desire  for  an  imagined 
pleasure  (§  222)  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Self-Love  and 
Benevolence  which  would,  on  this  supposition,  each  be 
directed  to  pleasures,  would  remain  co-ordinate,  not  identical.  273 

234.  But  in  reality  the  good  which  a  man  seeks  for  himself  is  not 
a  succession  of  pleasures,  but  objects  which,  when  realised, 
are  permanent  contributions  to  a  social  good  which  tfius 
satisfies  the  permanent  self  ,.....,  274 

235.  And  this  obviously  involves  the  permanent  good  of  others;  so 
that,  though  a  man  may  also  seek  his  own  pleasure,  or,  again, 
their  pleasure,  his  idea  of  the  true  good  is  not  an  idea  of 
pleasure,  and  in  it  there  is  no  distinction  of  self  and  others   .  275 

236.  The  happiness  he  seeks  for  them  is  the  same  as  that  he  seeks 

for  himself,  viz.  the  satisfaction  of  an  interest  in  objects         .  277 

237.  If  he  nevertheless  supposed  that  he  soOght  pleasures  for 
others,  this  mistake,  though  probably  of  no  great  practical 
moment,  would  still  be  a  mistake 278 

238.  And  this  would  be  seen  if  the  questions  were  considered,  (i) 
whether  he  values  the  pleasures  he  supposes  himself  to  seek 
for  others  by  their  quantity  alone,  and  (2)  whether  what  he 
seeks  for  others  is  not  some  permanent  good  such  as  is  not 

to  be  found  in  experiences  of  pleasure 279 

239.  This  permanent  good  may  be  conceived  in  very  different 
forms  according  to  circumstances,  but  in  any  of  its  forms  it 
consists  not  in  pleasures,  but  in  a  realisation  of  a  good  common 

to  self  and  others 280 

Virtue  as  the  Common  Good 

240.  There  is  a  common  basis  in  the  lowest  form  of  interest  in  the 
continued  '  being '  of  the  family,  and  in  the  highest  form  of 
interest  in  social  '  well-being '  ;  and  the  latter  developes  out 

of  the  former 281 

241.  For  the  former  already  involves  the  idea  of  a  good  which 
consists  in  the  development  of  the  capacities  of  persons  ;  and 
this  idea,  acting  unconsciously,  gradually  creates  institutions 
and  modes  of  life,  reflection  upon  which  shows  what  these 
capacities  really  are 283 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS  xxix 

PAGE 

242.  In  the  early  stages  of  this  progress  the  social  good  may  appear 
to  be  conceived  merely  as  material  well-being ;  but  reflection 
would  show  that  this  was  not  its  whole  content,  and  that  the 
interest  in  it  was  really  an  interest  in  persons  capable  of  a  like 
interest,  i.  e.  an  interest  in  virtue  ......  284 

243.  At  some  time  such  reflection  has  arisen,  and  with  it  a  con- 
scious interest  in  virtue ;  as  is  shown  by  the  distinction  made  in 
the  earliest  literature  between  the  possession  of  external  goods 
and  merit,  or  goods  of  the  soul      ......  286 

244.  The  progress  from  this  beginning  to  the  conviction  that  the 
only  true  good  is  to  be  good  is  complementary  to  the  process 
described  above  (§§  206-217)  j  ^o""  "is  only  good  that  is  really 
common  is  the  good  wUl        .......  287 

245.  And  if  the  idea  of  the  community  of  good  for  all  men  has  even 
now  little  influence,  the  reason  is  that  we  identify  the  good  too 
little  with  good  character  and  too  much  with  good  things     .  288 

CHAPTER  V 

THE    DEVELOPMENT    OF    THE    MORAL    IDEAL— CONTINUED 

JP.  The  Greek  and  the  Modern  Conceptions  of  Virtue 

246.  Thus  progress  with  regard  to  the  standard  and  practice  of 
virtue  means  the  gradual  recognition  that  the  true  end  consists 
not  in  external  goods,  nor  even  in  the  virtues  as  means  to 
these,  but  in  the  virtues  as  ends  in  themselves  :     .         .         .  290 

247.  the  recognition,  that  is,  that  the  true  end  is  the  good  will, 
which  is  to  be  conceived  not  merely  as  determined  by  the  idea 
of  moral  law,  but  as  active  in  the  various  endeavours  to 
promote  human  development         ......  291 

248.  Out  of  the  earUest  conception  of  virtue  as  valour  in  the  struggle 
for  common  good  grows  the  more  complete  Greek  idea  of  it  as 
including  any  eminent  faculty,  but  the  estimation  of  it  has 
always  been  governed  by  an  interest  in  man  himself,  not  in 
what  happens  to  him     ........  293 

249.  At  a  certain  stage  of  reflection  arises  an  effort  to  discover  a 
unity  in  the  virtues  and  the  various  aspects  of  the  good  ;  and 
this  effort,  as  is  clear  in  the  case  of  Socrates  and  his  successors 
(to  whom  we  owe  our  chief  moral  categories),  has  a  great 
practical  importance      ........  294 

250.  By  such  reflection  the  reason  which  had  been  active  in  social 
development  became  aware  of  its  achievement,  and  so  pro- 
duced not  merely  an  ethical  theory  but  a  higher  order  of  virtue  296 

251.  For  the  idea  of  virtue  as  one  and  conscious  is  equivalent  to 
the  idea  of  the  good  will  or  of  purity  of  heart ;      .         .         .297 

252.  and  this  is  what  Plato  and  Aristotle  require,  when  they  insist 
that  the  condition  and  unity  ofall  viHue  lie  in  the  conscious 
direction  of  the  will  to  the  human  good         ....  297 

253.  That  good  was  to  them  not  pleasure  but  the  exercise  of  the 
virtues  themselves.  In  this  respect  their  definition  of  the  good 
is  final ;  artd  if  they  could  only  imperfectly  define  the  content 
of  the  idea,  that  defect  is  due  mainly  to  the  nature  of  morality 
itself 299 


XXX  ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

254.  The  good  was  defined,  to  the  extent  then  possible,  by  the 
actual  pursuit  of  it  in  the  recognised  virtues  :        ,         .         .  3°' 

255.  and  the  philosophers  still  further  defined  it,  and  also  raised 
and  purified  the  idea  of  it,  by  making  men  realise  that  these 
virtues  wrere  different  expressions  of  one  principle        .         •  3°^ 

256.  Thus  we  inherit  from  the  Greek  philosophers  both  the 
principle  of  morality  and  the  general  articulation  of  that 
principle 3°3 

257.  Only  our  idea  of  the  end  has  become  fuller,  because  the  end  is 
more  fully  realised  ;  and  accordingly  the  standards  of  virtue, 
though  identical  in  principle,  are  more  comprehensive  in  their 
demands.  This  will  appear  if  we  examine  the  ideas  of 
Fortitude  and  Temperance    .......  303 

258.  Fortitude  seems  at  first  sight  to  have  changed  its  character 
since  Aristotle's  time.  For,  with  the  recognition  of  human 
capacities  in  all  and  not  merely  in  a  few,       ....  304 

259.  Fortitude  has  come  to  involve,  not  merely  the  self-devotion  of 
the  citizen-soldier  to  his  state,  but  self-devotion  to  the  service 
of  others,  even  of  those  whom  the  Greeks  would  have  re- 
garded as  ignoble  and  useless 306 

260.  But  the  principle  of  unlimited  endurance  for  the  highest  social 
cause  known  remains  the  same,  and  the  motive  is  neither  more 
nor  less  pure  .........  307 

261.  Temperance  and  Self-denial  were  limited  by  Aristotle  to  the 
pleasures  of  animal  appetite 308 

262.  But  the  principle  on  which  these  pleasures  were  to  be  con- 
trolled or  renounced  was  the  same  as  in  our  wider  virtue  of 
self-denial;  even  when  most  ascetically  conceived  .         .  309 

263.  The  motive  of  temperance  was  interest  in  something  wider 
and  higher  than  these  pleasures,  this  higher  object  being  to 

the  Greek  his  state 310 

264.  To  us  also  the  higher  object  is  the  state  or  some  other  asso- 
ciation ;  but  the  requirements  of  this  virtue,  as  of  fortitude, 
have  become  much  more  various  and  comprehensive     .         .311 

265.  Accordingly,  if  we  dismiss,  as  mistaken,  the  idea  that  the 
pleasures  in  question  ought  to  be  rejected  because  they  are 
not  distinctively  human,        ...,,.,  313 

266.  we  find  (i)  that  the  really  tenable  principles  used  by  Aristotle 
did  not  yield  a  standard  adequate  to  the  modern  ideal  of  sexual 
morality.  But  the  fault  lay  not  in  these  principles,  which  are 
the  only  true  ones,  but  in  the  social  conditions  of  the  time  ;  .  315 

267.  just  as  a  further  improvement  now  must  depend  mainly  on  a 
further  improvement  in  social  conditions,  and  especially  in  the 
position  of  women 316 

268.  Further,  (2)  the  range  of  the  actions  which  issue  from  tem- 
perance, as  conceived  by  Aristotle,  is  far  more  limited  than 
that  of  the  actions  in  which  self-denial,  as  now  conceived, 

is  shown ,        .        .         .  317 

269.  For  in  the  highest  formsof  self-denial  the  pleasures  renounced 

are  not  those  of  animal  appetite,  but  the  higher  pleasures  ;  ,  318 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  xxxi 

PAGE 

270.  the  call  for  such  sacrifice  arising  from  that  enfranchisement  of 
all  men  which  implies  a  claim  of  all  upon  each,  necessarily 
unrecognised  by  Aristotle 320 

271.  Thus,  here  again,  progress  is  due  to  the  greater  comprehen- 
siveness of  the  idea  of  social  good  ;  and,  while  the  good  will 
is  the  same  in  the  Greek  and  the  modern  ideals,  it  demands 
now  a  new  and  larger  self-denial  .         .         .         .         .         .321 

272.  It  may  be  objected  that  this  change  is  not  a  progress  but  a 
retrogression,  because  it  involves  a  larger  renunciation  of 
pleasures  not  mischievous  but  valuable  .....  322 

273.  But  this  renunciation,  though  not  in  itself  desirable,  does, 
when  considered  in  its  reality  and  in  relation  to  society  as  a 
whole,  imply  a  fuller  realisation  of  human  nature  .         .  323 

274.  For  the  realisation  described  in  the  Greek  ideal,  and  appar- 
ently so  much  fuller  than  any  attainable  by  the  self-denying 
Christian,  was  possible  only  to  a  few,  and  to  them  only 
through  the  exclusion  of  others  :..,,..  324 

275.  wher.eas  Ijie  end  sought  by  the  modem  ideal  character  is 
sought  for  all,  and  the  activities  called  out  by  the  pursuit  of 
it  are  correspondingly  wider ;  and  of  this  advance  the  larger 
renunciation  of  pleasures  seems  to  be  a  condition  .         .  325 

276.  Further,  while  the  more  developed  state  of  man  certainly 
implies  a  corresponding  pleasure,  it  is  doubtful  whether  it 
implies  a  greater  amqunt  of  pleasure  than  the  less  developed, 
and  whether  even  the  perfection  of  man  may  not  involve 

a  large  renunciation  of  possible  pleasure        ....  326 

277.  In  any  case  it  can  hardly  be  held  that  the  self-denying  man 
obtains,  because  he  follows  his  strongest  desires,  more  plea- 
sure than  he  forgoes  ;  nor  is  it  at  all  clear  even  that  his 
self-denial  increases  the  aggregate  of  human  pleasures  .  327 

278.  So  that  the  superiority  must  be  claimed  for  the  modern  ideal, 
not  on  Hedonistic  grounds,  but  on  those  given  in  §§  273-275  329 

279.  To  sum  up :  the  Platonic  or  Aristotelian  conception  of  virtue 
is  final  in  so  far  as  it  defines  the  good  as  goodness  ;  but  as 
a  concrete  ideal  it  was  conditioned  by  the  moral  progress  then 
achieved,  and  is  therefore  necessarily  inadequate  ;        ,        .  329 

280.  since  the  idea  of  human  brotherhood  leads  to  social  require- 
ments then  unrecognised 331 

281.  On  the  other  hand,  the  social  development  to  which  this 
idea  is  due  was  in  part  the  result  of  the  Greek  conception 
of  the  good  as  something  in  essence  universal :  for  no  good 
except  goodness  is  really  this 332 

282.  It  is  an  illusion  to  suppose  that  the  desires  of  difierent  men 
for  pleasure  would,  if  left  to  themselves,  produce  the  greatest 
possible  general  pleasure  or  a  social  union    ....  333 

283.  On  the  contrary,  interest  in  the  common  good,  in  some  of 
its  various  forms,  is  necessary  to  produce  that  good,  and  to 
ijeutrglise  or  render  useful  other  desires  and  interests  .        ,  335 


xxxii  ANALYTICAL    TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

284.  Now  the  good,  as  defined  by  the  Greek  philosophers,  was  in 
principle  a  universal  good  (though  they  did  not  so  imagine 
it),  and  thus  their  work  prepared  the  way  for  the  idea  of 
human  brotherhood 336 

285.  For  it  provided  the  intellectual  medium  through  which  men, 
influenced  by  Christian  enthusiasm  and  by  the  results  of 
Roman  conquest,  could  definitely  conceive  goodness  as 
realised  in  the  members  of  a  universal  society   .         .         .  337 


286.  Ideal  virtue,  then,  being  defined  as  self-devoted  activity  to 
the  perfection  of  man,  this  perfection  itself  may  be  defined 

as  a  life  of  such  activity  on  the  part  of  all  persons  .         .  339 

287.  Nor  is  the  objection  valid  that  self-devotion,  as  implying  an 
impeded  activity,  cannot  be  an  element  in  ultimate  good,  but 
must  belong  only  to  the  effort  to  attain  that  good  .         .  340 

288.  For  though  the  perfection  of  man  would  mean  such  a  realis- 
ation of  human  possibilities  as  we  cannot  imagine,  it  must 
still  find  its  principle  in  the  same  devoted  will  which  is 
manifested  in  all  effort  to  attain  it  .....  341 

289.  It  may  however  be  objected,  (i)  that  our  definition  of  virtue 
does  not  cover  artistic  and  scientific  excellence,  and  there- 
fore leaves  their  value  unexplained  ; 343 

290.  (2)  that  it  does  not  help  us  to  decide  what  ought  to  be  done, 
and  whether  we  are  doing  it.     With  this  second  objection 

we  have  now  to  deal     ........  343 


BOOK  IV.     The  Application  of  Moral  Philosophy  to  the 
Guidance  of  Conduct 

CHAPTER  I 

THE  PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL 

291.  The  question,  Ought  an  action  to  be  done?  may  refer  (i)  to 
its  effects,  (a)  to  its  motive.    The  latter  question  is  the  wider, 

as  it  includes  the  former        .......  346 

292.  The  answers  to  either  question  must  be  regulated  by  one  and 
the  same  principle.  According  to  Utilitarianism,  relation  to 
pleasure  must  be  the  standard  for  both  effects  and  motive ;  but 
the  goodness  of  the  act  depends  on  the  effects  alone     .        .  347 

293.  According  to  our  theory,  the  act  cannot  be  in  the  full  sense 
good,  unless  the  motive  is  good :  but  we  may  estimate  it  apart 
from  the  motive,  and  we  must  do  so  when  (as  is  commonly  the 
case  with  the  acts  erf  others)  the  motive  is  unknown  to  us     .  348 

294.  Thus  this  theory  differs  from  Utilitarianism  in  holding 
(i)  that  the  effect  to  be  considered  is  contribution  not  to 
pleasure  but  to  the  perfection  of  man,  (a)  that  this  effect  by 
itself  cannot  make  the  act  in  the  full  sense  good    .        .        .  350 

295.  Indeed,  but  for  our  imperfect  knowledge,  we  should  see 
that  in  all  cases  the  character  of  the  effects  really  represents 
accurately  that  of  the  motive         ......  3=3 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS         xxxiii 

PAGE 

296.  But  since  for  practical  purposes  enquiry  into  motive  is  re- 
stricted to  acts  of  our  own,  whether  past- or  future,  the  ques- 
tion is,  Can  such  enquiry  give  a  truer  knowledge  of  what  we 
ought  to  do,  or  a  better  disposition  to  do  it  ? .        .        .        .  354 

^_297.  The  habit  of  such  enquiry  is  cgnscientiousness :  and,  admitting 
that  self-devotion  need  not  imply  this  habit,  and  that,  in  a 
sense,  a  man  may  be  '  over-conscientious,'    .         .         .         .  355 

298.  it  remains  true  that  the  comparison  of  our  actions  with  an 
ideal  of  goodness  is  the  spring  of  moral  progress,  social  as 
well  as  individual 356 

299.  For  there  is  a  real  identity  between  such  self-scrutiny  as  to 
motives,  and  the  reformer's  comparison  of  what  is  actual 
with  a  social  ideal ;  the  social  ideal  of  the  reformer  being  at 
the  same  time  the  idea  of  himself  as  promoting  it  .         .        .  357 

300.  But,  it  may  be  said,  the  effect  in  this  case  is  a  new  kind  of 
action,  whereas  the  acts  of  the  conscientious  man  probably 
do  not  differ  outwardly  from  those  of  the  ordinary  dutiful 
citizen    . 359 

301.  The  latter  statement  is  however  not  entirely  true  :  for  con-  <Xj^ 
ventional  morality,  being  the  result  of  the  past  working  of  an  *^^, 
ideal  consciousness,  will  not  yield  its  highest  meaning  except ;.  ,^», 
to  a  spirit  like  that  which  produced  it 359 

302.  And,  apart  from  this,  such  a  spirit  has  an  intrinsic  value,  which 
(unlike  zeal  for  social  reform)  would  remain  even  if  the  human 
end  were  as  fully  realised  as  is  possible  to  finite  beings         ,  360 

303.  And  under  present  conditions  the  difference  between  the     ), 
social  reformer  and  the  '  saint '  is  one,  not  of  will  or  prin-    ' 
ciple,  but  of  circumstances  and  gifts 362 

304.  But,  if  conscientiousness  has  thus  anjntnnsic  value,  can 
we  furthersaythat  this  enquiry  into  one's  own  motives  may 
(§  296)  give  a  truer  knowledge  of  what  we  ought  to  do  and 

a  better  disposition  to  do  it  ? 364 

305.  It  is  clear  that  mere  honesty  in  such  enquiry  will  not  ensure 

a  correct  judgment  as  to  effects,  and  that,  if  the  effects  are  p 
bad,  the  state  of  mind,  or  motive,  from  which  the  act  pro.-  ■ 
ceeded  cannot  have  been  ideally  good   .....  364 

306.  Butthe  function  of  consr^gnce  is  not  to  estimate  the  precise 
value  of  an  act  (which  is,  strictly  speaking,  impossible  to  us), 
but  to  maintajn_moraT  aspiration  ;  and  this  it  can  do  without 
exhaustive  enquiry  into  the  consequences  of  conduct     .         .  366 

307.  And  thus  conscientiousness,  though  it  does  not  itself  instruct 
us  what  to  do,  suggests  the  search  for  new  instruction  and 
enjoins  the  acting  upon  it  when  found  ......  367 

308.  For  the  ideal,  in  the  conscientious  mind,  is  not  a  mere  de-      y/ 
finition,  but  an  active  idea,  constantly  applying  itself  to  fresh, 
circumstances 369 

309.  And  thus  it  is  the  creator  of  existing  moral  practice,  and,  in 

its  various  forms,  the  condition  of  all  further  progress  .  370 

c 


xxxiv         ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  II 

THE  PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  A  THEORY  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL      p^^^ 

310.  As  the  presence  of  the  moral  ideal  in  the  character  cannot 
always  avert  perplexity,  we  may  ask,  Can  philosophy,  ;.  e.  a 
theory  of  the  moral  ideal,  render  any  service  in  such  cases  ?  .  -372 

311.  It  can  render  a  service,  though  mainly  of  a  negative  kind  ; 
either  by  delivering  us  from  the  perplexity  which  arises  from 
the  conflict  of  rules  or  institutions  believed  to  have  an  absolute 
authority,  or  by  counteracting  inadequate  moral  theories  which 
may  give  an  excuse  for  a  rebellion  of  the  lower  nature  .  373 

312.  For  the  dangers  arising  from  inadequate  theories,  and  from 
the  necessarily  partial  character  of  the  theory  of  any  particular 
time,  can  be  met  only  by  the  further  pursuit  of  philosophy 
itself      ....,.,,...  375 

313.  It  is  not  indeed  the  function  of  philosophy  to  give  directions 
(i)  as  to  the  ordinary  duties  which  form  the  great  mass  of 
morality ; 375 

314.  or  to  remove  perplexity  (a)  regarding  the  exact  circumstances 
or  effects  of  action,  or  (3)  due  in  reality  to  a  concealed  egoistic 
motive  ...........  377 

315.  But  where,  as  in  the  case  of  Jeannie  Deans,  the  perplexity  is  due 
to  a  conflict  between  conscience  and  a  really  noble  impulse,  we 
may  ask  whether  our  theory  of  the  good  could  give  any  help  378 

316.  It  could  not  if  the  conflicting  claims  were  described  in  the 
abstract  :  but  in  a  particular  case  the  philosopher  might 
press  the  question,  whether  the  good  impulse  did  not  imply 

a  shrinking  from  a  higher  but  more  painful  good  .        .        .  379 

317.  Really  however  in  such  a  case  the  philosopher's  judgment 
would,  like  other  men's,  consist  in  a  more  intuitive  application 
of  the  ideal ;  and  philosophy  can  only  be  of  use  in  preparing 
for  such  junctures  by  sustaining  the  ideal  through  an  explan- 
ation of  the  imaginative  forms  in  which  practical  ideas  express 
themselves,. and  which  alone  affect  usdecisively  in  an  emergency  38 1 

318.  For  such  forms  must  be  theoretically  inadequate  to  spiritual 
realities,  and  are  therefore  easily  supposed  to  represent  no 
spiritual  reality ,         ,  38a 

319.  And  against  this  mere  scepticism,  where  it  attacks  those 
creations  of  the  religious  imagination  which  are  ethically 
adequate,  philosophy  has  a  theoretical  work  to  do,  which 
yields  a  practical  result,         ....,.,  383 

320.  by  preventing  the  doubt  which  may  arise  in  a  moment  of 
emergency,  whether  the  demand  of  conscience,  coming  in  an 
imaginative  form,  is  not  illusory 384 

321.  There  remain  the  cases  of  true  perplexity  of  conscience,  in 
which  equal  authorities  seem  to  conflict,  and  conscience  seems 

to  be  divided  against  itself    .        .         ,        .        ;        ,        .  385 

322.  For  these  philosophy  may  prepare  the  mind  by  showing  how 
the  opposed  dicta  of  conscience,  though  both  products  of  the 
idea  of  unconditional  good,  are  not  of  necessity  uncondition- 
ally valid ,  387 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE    OF   CONTENTS 

PAGE 

323.  The  content  of  the  obh'gation  they  assert  is  blended  with 
the  imagination  of  some  authority  imposing  it :  whereas,  in 
fact,  no  really  external  authority  can  impose  a  duty       ,         .  388 

324.  Thus,  though  there  cannot  really  be  more  than  one  duty  in 
a  given  set  of  circumstances,  there  may  be  conflicting  demands 

of  diiTerent  authorities,  both  regarded  as  absolute  .         .  390 

325.  In  such  cases  it  is  certainly  not  for  philosophy  simply  to 
destroy  men's  reverence  for  these  authorities  by  pointing  out 
that  they  are  external ;  .......  391 

326.  but  rather  to  show  that  their  commands  are  at  once  inter- 
preted and  limited  by  the  idea  of  absolute  good  of  which  they 
are  partial  expressions  ........  393 

327.  This  practical  service  will  best  be  rendered,  if  philosophy 
restricts  itself  to  its  theoretical  and  proper  function  of  under- 
standing the  end  or  ideal,  and  its  relation  to  external  autho- 
rities and  to  conscience         .......  393 

328.  Such  enlightenment  however,  to  be  of  practical  value,  presup- 
poses a  well-formed  habitual  morality   .....  395 

CHAPTER  III 

THE  PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  A  HEDONISTIC  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY 

329.  The  moral  theory  which  has  been  of  most  public  service  in 
modern  Europe  is  Utilitarianism  ......  397 

330.  Objections  to  its  appeal  to  expediency  are,  in  the  main,  ill- 
founded  ;  and  though  such  an  appeal  may  cover  an  egoistic 
motive  or  be  superficial,  this  is  also  true  of  appeals  to  principle  398 

331.  The  healthful  influence  of  Utilitarianism  has  arisen  from  its 
giving  a  wider  and  more  impartial  range  to  the  desire  to  do 
good,  not  from  its  stimulating  that  desire,      ....  399 

332.  nor,  again,  from  its  definition  of  good  as  pleasure  :  for  in  the 
public  causes  where  it  has  furthered  progress,  the  important 
question  has  been,  not  as  to  the  nature  of  ultimate  good,  but 

as  to  the  number  of  persons  whose  good  is  to  be  sought        .  400 

333.  At  the  same  time  the  question  may  be  raised,  whether  this 
definition  of  good,  if  logically  carried  out,  would  not  destroy 
the  practical  value  of  Utilitarianism  and  do  harm  ,         .         .  402 

334.  Probably  most  Utilitarians,  even  if  strict  Hedonists,  would  not 
hold  that  private  conduct  either  is  or  should  be  usually  directed 

by  a  calculation  of  consequences  in  the  way  of  pleasure         .  403 

335.  On  the  other  hand,  such  calculation  has  been  becoming  much 
more  common,  and  is  undertaken  with  a  direct  view  to  the 
guidance  of  life 404 

336.  Rejecting  the  idea  that  Hedonism  in  this  way  directly  pro- 
motes immorality,  our  question  will  be  whether  it  may  not 
put  speculative  impediments  in  the  way  of  moral  progress    .  406 

337.  Its  prevalence  may  be  ascribed  (apart  from  theoretical  mis- 
takes) to  the  necessary  indefiniteness  of  the  account  of  the 
good  as  human  perfection,  and  the  apparent  clearness  of  its 
definition  'as  pleasure 407 

C  2 


x,xxvi         ANALYTICAL    TABLE   OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

338.  But  in  reality,  while  either  theory  may  suffice  for  the  ordinary 
cases  where  no  theory  is  needed,  in  the  few  remaining  cases 
.Hedonism  is  intrinsically  unavailable     .         ,         .         ;         •  4°^ 

339.  If,  for  example,  a  man  thinks  of  acting  against  inclination  or 
social  expectation  for  the  sake  of  increasing  the  total  of 
■pleasure,  how  can  he  assure  himself  of  this  result  ?        .         .410 

340.  Any  one  who  puts  such  a  question  must  face  a  preliminary 
difficulty.  For,  if  action  must  follow  the  strongest  desire,  and 
this  is  necessarily  of  what  seems  the  greatest  pleasure,  it 
follows  that  the  aggregate  of  pleasures  at  any  time  enjoyed 
tnusi  be  the  greatest  that  could  be  obtained  for  that  given 
time  through  action 4^1 

341.  Bui,  if  so,  we  cannot  say  that  a  man  ought  to  have  acted  as  he 
did  not.  And  even  where  we  seem  able  to  say  that  a  different 
course,  if  it  had  been  possible,  would  have  produced  more 
■pleasure  to  him,    .        .         .    •    .        .        .        .        .        .  412 

342.  such  ajudgment  cannot  be  generalised  ;  and  any  prediction  of 
the  kind  will  be  subject  to  an  indefinite  number  of  exceptions 
due  to  the  character  or  circumstances  of  individuals       .         .  414 

343.  Again,  if  it  be  maintained  that  a  course  of  action,  ii generally 
pursued,  would  tend  to  diminish  pleasure,  this  has  no  bearing 
on  the  question  whether,  as  pursued  here  and  now,  it  will 
diminish  the  pleasure  of  the  agent :        .         .'        .         .         .  415 

844.  and  if  he  is  told  to  consider  the  total  of  human  pleasure,  it 
seems  impossible  to  decide,  in  the  case  supposed,  whether 
this  will  be  augmented  or  diminished  by  the  act    .         .         .  416 

345.  Nor  can  the  reformer  even  hope  that  by  his  labours  and 
sacrifices  the  sum  of  pleasure  necessarily  obtained  in  the 
future  will  be  greater  than  that  necessarily  obtained  now :  for, 
though  he  may  hope  that  such  increase  may  happen,  he  cannot 
logically  suppose  that  he  has  any  initiative  in  the  matter       .  417 

346.  And  this  speculative  conclusion,  even  if  merely  suspected, 
must  tend  to  weaken  the  good  will,  or  devotion  to  duty        .  419 

347.  For  how  can  the  phraseology  of  duty  be  explained,  when 
nothing  can  be  done  except  from  desire  for  pleasure  or  aver- 
sion to  pain  ? 420 

348.  A  duty  must  be  explained  to  mean,  ultimately,  an  act  pleasing 
to  others,  whose  pleasure  may  produce  results  pleasant  to 
the  agent ;  and  conscience  must  be  explained  as  the  result  of 
association  and  heredity         .        .        .        .        .        .        .421 

349.  By  this  theory  we  may  avoid  some  of  the  perplexities  dis- 
cussed above ;,.....,.,  423 

350.  but  (as  an  illustration  will  show)  the  difficulty  of  explaining 
the  moral  initiative  of  the  individual,  and  the  danger  of 
weakening  it,  are  still  involved 424 

351.  And  this  danger  might  become  real,  if  the  Hedonistic  criterion 
came  to  be  widely  used  by  men  who  did  not,  like  the  leaders 
of  Utilitarianism,  give  a  higher  interpretation  of  their  theory 

in  reference  to  great,schejnes  of  social  reform       .        ,        .  428 


AtiAUyriCAL    TABLE   OF   CONTENTS        xxxvii 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  UTILITARIANISM  COMPARED  WITH  THAT 

OF  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GOOD  AS  HUMAN  PERFECTION  PAGE 

352.  The  theory  of  the  good  as  human  perfection  accounts  for 
the  moral  initiative,  but  can  it  give  any  guidance  as  to  the 
direction  that  initiative  ought  to  take  ?  Can  it,  that  is,  beside 
stimulating  conscientiousness,  help  to  decide  whether  a  new 
course  of  action  (§  339)  will  further  the  human  end?    .         .  430 

.353.  Though  we  cannot  form  a  positive  or  detailed  conception  of 
what-  human  perfection  would-  be,  there  is  no  difficulty,  at 
this  stage  of  human  progress,  in  conceiving  an  idea  of  a  state 
nearer  to  perfection  than  the  existing  state  ....  432 

354.  Hence  though  the  idea  of  human  perfection  cannot  enable  us 
to  calculate  the  effects  of  any  institution  or  action,  it  supplies 
a  measure  of  value  for  these  effects  in  their  relation  to  the 
production  of  personal  excellence  .....  434 

355.  To  this  it  may  be  objected  that  in  almost  all  cases  a  Utilitarian 
could  accept  this  criterion  (though  not  as  ultimate),  and  that 

in  the  few  remaining  cases  it  is  of  no  avail   ....  436 

356.  The  first  part  of  the  objection  may  be,  on  the  whole,  admitted, 
if  the  Utilitarian  theory  is  separated  from  the  Hedonistic  theory 
of  motives,  and  maintains  only  that  the  ultimate  good  and 
criterion  is  the  greatestsum  of  pleasure  to  all  human  or  sentient 
beings.    What  then  can  be  said  in  favour  of  such  a  theory  ? .  437 

The  Good  as  Greatest  Pleasure 

357.  If  the  idea  that  the  only  possible  motive  is  pleasure  is  aban- 
doned, and  it  is  held  that  in  the  actions  most  esteemed  the 
motive  is  not  pleasure,  why  is  the  ultimate  good  and  criterion 
held  to  be  pleasure  ? 439 

358.  Probably  mainly  because  this  criterion  is  supposed  to  be 
definite  and  intelligible,  since  every  one  knows  what  pleasure 
is,  and  in  a  certain  sense  can  compare  a  larger  sum  of  pleasure 
with  a  smaller,  and  a  larger  sum  of  human  or  sentient  beings 
with  a  smaller       ,,...,...  440 

359.  But  the  Chief  Good,  according  to  the  theory,  is  the  greatest 
possible  sura  of  pleasures.  This  strictly  taken  is  a  phrase  with- 
out meaning,  and  cannot  be  used  as  a  criterion  for  approval 
and  disapproval  of  motives  and  actions  .         .        .         .441 

360.  Are  we  £0  suppose"  then  that  the  Chief  Good  contemplated 

by  the  theory  is  a  state  of  general  enjoyable  existence  ?         .  442 

361.  Such  a  conception,  though  not  untrue,  would  be  less  definite 
than  burs, 'which  does  not  define  the  Chief  Good  by  the  single 
and  undistinctive  quality  of  pleasantness       ....  443 

362.  Further,  while  such  practical  guidance  as  this  criterion  seems 
to  afford  depends  on  the  assumption  that  conventional  morality 
is  to  be  followed,  that  morality  owes  its  existence  to  efforts 
not  conventional ;  and  how  could  the  criterion  have  directed 
men  to  these  ? 444 


xsxviii        ANALYTICAL    TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

363.  On  the  other  hand,  the  conception  of  the  good  as  human  per- 
fection does  help  us  to  interpret  this  conventional  morality, 
and  thus  to  see  the  direction  in  which  we  should  sometimes 
go  beyond  it 445 

Mr.  SidgwicKs  view  of  Ultimate  Good 

36i.  According  to  our  theory  the  human  perfection  identified  with 
ultimate  good  is  a  '  state  of  desirable  consciousness,'  though 
not  simply  a  state  of  pleasure ;  and  pleasure  is  anticipated 
in  the  attainment  of  the  desired  end,  though  it  is  not  the  end 
desired 447 

365.  According  to  Mr.  Sidgwick's  theory,  on  the  other  hand,  de- 
sirable consciousness  is  the  same  as  pleasure,  and  his  Univer- 
salistic  Hedonism  (differing  from  the  older  Utilitarianism) 
seems  to  rest  on  the  position  that  reason  pronounces  ultimate 
good  to  be  desirable  consciousness  or  pleasure,  and,  further, 
universal  pleasure  .........  449 

366.  But  'desirable,'  when  it  is  distinguished  from  'desired,' 
seems  to  be  equivalent  to  'reasonably  to  be  desired  ;'  and,  if 
so,  the  doctrine  will  be  that  reason  pronounces  ultimate  good 

to  be  the  kind  of  consciousness  it  is  reasonable  to  seek  ■  450 

367.  And  this  circular  statement  is  true,  in  so  far  as  it  expresses 
the  fact  that,  as  reason  gives  the  idea  of  the  end,  that  end 
must  at  any  rate  be  something  that  will  satisfy  reason  .         .  45a 

368.  The  tautology  is  avoided  where  the  end  is  defined  as  '  plea- 
sure of  all  sentient  beings ; '  but  then  what  ground  is  there 

for  thinking  that  this  end  would  satisfy  reason  ?    .         .         .  453 

369.  Pleasure  is  defined  as  '  desirable  consciousness  : '  but  the 
end  which  a  rational  being  seeksyby  himself,  if  desirable  (not 
desired)  consciousness,  cannot  be  pleasure    ....  454 

370.  And,  as  we  have  seen,  the  rational  soul,  in  seeking  an  end, 
must  seek  it  as  its  own  realisation,  and  this  involves  that  it 
must  seek  also  a  like  realisation  of  others       ....  455 

871.  The  perfection  of  man  then,  or  ultimate  good,  will  be  a  de- 
sirable conscious  life,  pleasant  but  not  pursued  as  pleasure  .  457 

372.  We  return  to  the  comparison  of  the  theories  as  possible 
sources  of  guidance  in  the  exceptional  cases  where  philo- 
sophy may  be  appealed  to     ......        .  458 

373.  In  these  cases  it  appears  that  Universalistic  Hedonism  would 
give  no  answer,  and  would  thus  leave  to  inclination  the 
question  of  a  painful  departure  from  custom  .         .        .        .  459 

374.  For,,  ex  fi^pothesi,  the  Hedonistic  criterion  supposed  to  be 
represented  by  conventional  morality  fails  us ;  and  how  can 
the  effects  of  the  action  on  universal  pleasure  be  theoretically 
estimated? 460 

375.  In  reality  recourse  is  always  had  to  some  such  ideal  as  that 

of  human  perfection.    Can  this  then  yield  any  guidance  ?      .  461 


ANALYTICAL    TABLE    OF  CONTENTS         xxxix 

PAGE 

876.  It  can  at  least  say  that  the  loss  of  pleasure  involved  in  the 
painful  departure  from  custom  is  morally  indifferent,  whereas 
the  will  so  exerted  is  not  only  a  means  to  further  good  but 
itself  a  realisation  of  good  ; 462 

377.  and  that  the  further  good  which  calls  for  the  sacrifice  is  a 
bettering  of  man,  identical  in  principle  with  that  which  is 
involved  in  the  sacrifice .  463 

378.  With  Universalistic  Hedonism  the  presumption  must  be 
against  the  sacrifice  :  for  it  would  ajways  involve  the  loss  of 
a  certain  pleasure  in  the  present  for  the  sake  of  an  uncertain 
gain  of  pleasure  in  the  future         ......  465 

379.  On  the  other  theory  the  presumption  is  in  favour  of  the 
sacrifice ;  and  for  the  particular  case  the  criterion,  though  not 

by  itself  decisive,  is  more  definite  and  easier  to  apply  .         .  466 

380.  For  it  is  harder  to  say  whether  a  particular  course  of  action 
will  increase  universal  pleasure — all  other  effects  being  de- 
sirable only  as  a  means  to  this — than  to  say  whether  it  will 
promote  human  excellence ; .         .         .         .         .         .         ■  4^7 

381.  this  being  conceived  as  a  common  good,  and  the  mode  in 
which  the  individual  can  most  fully  contribute  to  it  depend- 
ing on  circumstances  and  on  his  special  aptitude  .         .         .  469 

882.  Our  conclusion  then  is  that,  in  the  few  cases  where  there  is 
need  or  time  to  apply  to  philosophy  for  guidance,  the  theory 
of  goodness  as  an  end  in  itself  is  more  available  and  less 
dangerous  than  Universalistic  Hedonism      ....  470 


PROLEGOMENA  TO    ETHICS 


INTRODUCTION 

1.  A  WRITER  who  seeks  to  gain  general  confidence  scarcely 
goes  the  right  way  to  work  when  he  begins  with  asking 
whether  there  really  is  such  a  subject  as  that  of  which  he 
proposes  to  treat ;  whether  it  is  one  to  which  enquiry  can 
be  directed  with  any  prospect  of  a  valuable  result.  Yet  to  a 
writer  on  Moral  Philosophy  such  a  mode  of  procedure  is 
prescribed,  not  only  by  the  logical  impulse  to  begin  at  the 
beginning,  but  by  observation  of  the  prevalent  opinions 
around  him.  He  can  scarcely  but  be  aware  that  Moral 
Philosophy  is  a  name  of  somewhat  equivocal  repute ;  that 
it  commands  less  respect  among  us  than  was  probably  the 
case  a  century  ago;  and  that  any  one  who  professes  to  teach 
or  write  upon  a  subject  to  which  this  name  is  in  any  proper 
or  distinctive  sense  applicable,  is  looked  upon  with  some 
suspicion. 

There  is,  indeed,  no  lack  of  utterance  in  regard  to  the 
great  problems  of  life  or  the  rights  and  wrongs  of  human 
conduct.  Nor  does  it  by  any  means  confine  itself  to  what 
are  commonly  counted  secular  or  '  positive '  censideratians. 
Guesses  as  to  some 

sweet  strange  mystery, 
Of  what  beyond  these  things  may  He, 
And  yet  remain  unseen, 

are  announced  with  little  reserve  and  meet  with  ready 
acceptance.  These,  we  may  say,  are  for  the  multitude  of 
the  educated,  who  have  wearied  of  the  formulas  of  a  stereo- 
typed theology,  but  still  demand  free  indulgence  for  the 
appetite  which  that  theology  supplied  with  a  regulation-diet. 
But  the  highest  poetry  of  our  time— that  in  which  the  most 
serious  and  select  spirits  find  their  food — depends  chiefly  for 


2  PROLEGOMENA    TO  ETHICS 

its  interest  on  what  has  been  well  called  '  the  application  of 
ideas  to  life;'  and  the  ideas  so  applied  are  by  no  means 
sensibly  verifiable.  They  belong  as  little  to  the  domain  of 
natural  science,  strictly  so  called,  as  to  that  of  dogmatic 
theology.  A  moral  philosopher  may  be  excused  for  finding 
much  excellent  philosophy,  in  his  special  sense  of  the  word, 
in  such  poems  as  the  'In  Memoriam'  of  Lord  Tennyson  and 
Mr.  Browning's  'Rabbi  ben  Ezra,'  to  say  nothing  of  the  more 
explicitly  ethical  poetry  of  Wordsworth.  Presented  in  the 
rapt  unreasoned  form  of  poetic  utterance,  not  professing  to  do 
more  than  represent  a  mood  of  the  individual  poet,  it  is  wel- 
comed by  reflecting  men  as  expressing  deep  convictions  of 
their  own.  Such  men  seem  little  disturbed  by  the  admission 
to  a  joint  lodgement  in  their  minds  of  inferences  from  popu- 
larised science,  which  do  not  admit  of  being  reconciled  with 
these  deeper  convictions  in  any  logical  system  of  beliefs. 

But  if  any  one,  alarmed  at  this  dangerous  juxtaposition, 
and  unwilling  that  what  seem  to  him  the  deepest  and  truest 
views  of  life  should  be  retamed  merely  on  scientific  suffer- 
ance, seeks  to  find  for  them  some  independent  justification, 
in  the  shape  of  a  philosophy  which  does  not  profess  to  be 
a  branch  either  of  dogmatic  theology  or  of  natural  science, 
he  must  look  for  little  thanks  for  his  trouble.  The  most 
intelligent  critics  had  rather,  it  would  seem,  that  the  ideas 
which  poetry  applies  to  life,  together  with  those  which  form 
the  basis  of  practical  religion,  should  be  left  to  take  their 
chance  alongside  of  seemingly  incompatible  scientific  beliefs, 
than  that  anything  calling  itself  philosophy  should  seek  to 
systematise  them  and  to  ascertain  the  regions  to  which  they 
on  the  one  side,  and  the  truths  of  science  on  the  other,  are 
respectively  applicable.  '  Poetry  we  feel,  science  we  under- 
stand ; ' — such  will  be  the  reflection,  spoken  or  unspoken,  of 
most  cultivated  men; — 'theology  professes  to  found  itself 
on  divine  revelation,  and  has  at  all  events  a  sphere  of  its 
own  in  the  interpretation  of  sacred  writings  which  entitles 
it  at  least  to  respectful  recognition;  but  this  philosophy, 
which  is  neither  poetry  nor  science  nor  theology,  what  is  it 


INTRODUCTION  3 

but  a  confusion  of  all  of  these  in  which  each  of  them  is 
spoilt  ?  Poetry  has  a  truth  of  its  own,  and  so  has  religion — 
a  truth  which  we  feel,  though  from  the  scientific  point  of 
view  we  may  admit  it  to  be  an  illusion.  Philosophy  is  from 
the  scientific  point  of  view  equally  an  illusion,  and  has  no 
truth  that  we  can  feel.  Better  trust  poetry  and  religion  to 
the  hold  which,  however  illusive,  they  will  always  have  on  the 
human  heart,  than  seek  to  explain  and  vindicate  them,  as 
against  science,  by  help  of  a  philosophy  which  is  itself  not 
only  an  illusion  but  a  dull  and  pretentious  one,  with  no 
interest  for  the  imagination  and  no  power  over  the  heart.' 

2.  With  such  opinion  in  the  air  all  around  him,  it  must 
be  with  much  misgiving  that  one  who  has  no  prophetic 
utterance  to  offer  in  regard  to  conduct,  but  who  still  believes 
in  the  necessity  of  a  philosophy  of  morals  which  no  adapta- 
tion of  natural  science  can  supply,  undertakes  to  make  good 
his  position.  He  will  gain  nothing,  however,  by  trying  to 
sail  under  false  colours,  or  by  disguising  his  recognition  of 
an  antithesis  between  the  natural  and  the  moral,  which  can 
alone  justify  his  claim  to  have  something  to  say  that  lies 
beyond  the  limits  of  the  man  of  science.  It  is  better  that 
he  should  make  it  clear  at  the  outset  why  and  in  what  sense 
he  holds  that  there  is  a  subject-matter  of  enquiry  which  does 
not  consist  of  matters  of  fact,  ascertainable  by  experiment 
and  observation,  and  what  place  he  assigns  to  morals  in  this 
subject-matter.  In  other  words,  at  the  risk  of  repelling 
readers  by  presenting  them  first  with  the  most  difficult  and 
least  plausible  part  of  his  doctrine,  he  should  begin  with 
explaining  why  he  holds  a  '  metaphysic  of  morals '  to  be 
possible  and  necessary ;  the  proper  foundation,  though  not 
the  whole,  of  every  system  of  Ethics. 

This  has  not  been  the  method  commonly  pursued  by 
English  writers  on  the  subject,  and,  in  the  face  of  present 
tendencies,  is  likely  to  seem  something  of  an  anachronism. 
To  any  one  who  by  idiosyncrasy,  or  by  the  accident  of  his 
position,  is  led  to  occupy  himself  with  Moral  Philosophy, 
the  temptation  to  treat  his  subject  as  a  part  of  natural  science 

B  2 


4  PROLEGOMENA    TO  ETHICS 

is  certainly  a  strong  one.  In  so  doing  he  can  plead  the 
authority  of  eminent  names  and  is  sure  of  intelligent  accept- 
ance ;  nor  can  he  fail  by  patient  enquiry  to  arrive  at  a  theory 
of  some  phenomena  of  human  life,  which,  though  it  may 
leave  certain  primary  problems  untouched,  shall  be  not  only 
plausible  but  true  so  far  as  it  goes.  He  can  reckon  securely 
on  having  more  to  show  for  his  life's  work,  when  it  comes 
to  an  end,  than  if  he  spent  himself  on  questions  which  he 
may  recognise  as  of  real  interest,  but  to  which  he  will  also 
be  aware  that  experiment  and  observation,  strictly  so  called, 
cannot  aiford  an  answer.  It  thus  would  not  be  wonderful 
that,  with  most  enquirers  and  teachers,  the  interest  once 
taken  in  Moral  Philosophy  should  be  mainly  transferred  to 
the  physical  science  conveniently  called  Anthropology,  even 
if  the  insufficiency  of  the  latter  to  deal  with  the  most 
important  questions  of  Moral  Philosophy  were  admitted. 

This  admission,  however,  has  of  late  been  fast  coming 
to  be  thought  unnecessary.  That  a  physical  science  of 
Ethics  is  not  intrinsically  impossible,  however  difficult  it 
may  be  rendered  by  the  complexity,  and  inaccessibility  to 
direct  experiment,  of  its  subject-matter ;  that  there  are  no 
intelligible  questions — no  questions  worth  asking — as  to 
human  life  which  would  be  beyond  the  reach  of  such  a 
science;  this  would  seem  to  be  the  general  opinion  of 
modern  English  '  culture,'  so  far  as  it  is  independent  of 
theological  prepossessions.  And  it  is  natural  that  it  should 
be  so.  The  questions  raised  for  us  by  the  Moral  Philosophy 
which  in  England  we  have  inherited,  are  just  sueh  as  to 
invite  a  physical  treatment.  If  it  is  the  chief  business  of 
the  moralist  to  distinguish  the  nature  and  origin  of  the 
pleasures  and  pains  which  are  supposed  to  be  the  sole 
objects  of  .human  desire  and  aversion,  to  trace  the  effect 
upon  conduct  of  the  impulses  so  constituted,  and  to  ascer- 
tain the  several  degrees  in  which  different  courses  of  action, 
determined  by  anticipation  of  pleasure  and  pain,  are  actually 
productive  of  the  desired  result;  then  the  sooner  the 
methods  of  scientific  experiment  and  observation  are  sub- 


INTRODUCTION  5 

stituted  for  vague  guessing  and  an  arbitrary  interpretation 
by  each  man  of  his  own  consciousness,  the  better  it  will 
be.  Ethics,  so  understood,  becomes  to  all  intents  and 
purposes  a  science  of  health,  and  the  true  moralist  will  be 
the  physiologist  who,  making  the  human  physique  his 
specialty,  takes  a  sufficiently  wide  view  of  his  subject ;  who 
traces  the  influence  of  historical  and  political  factors,  or  of 
what  it  is  now  the  fashion  to  call  the  'social  medium,'  in 
giving  a  specific  character  to  those  susceptibilities  of  plea- 
sure and  pain  on  which,  according  to  the  theory  supposed, 
the  phenomena  of  human  action  depend. 

3.  There  were  two  elements,  indeed,  in  the  system  of 
popular  ethics  inherited  from  the  last  century,  which  were 
long  thought  incompatible  with  its  complete  reduction  to 
the  form  of  a  physical  science.  These  were  the  doctrines 
of  free-will  and  of  a  moral  sense.  Each,  however,  was 
understood  in  a  way  which  suggested  to  the  naturalist 
a  ready  explanation  of  its  supposed  claim  to  lie  beyond  his 
sphere.  The  moral  sense,  according  to  the  accepted  view, 
was  a  specific  susceptibility  to  pleasure  or  pain  in  the  con- 
templation of  certain  acts.  What  was  the  quality  in  the 
acts  which  excited  this  pleasure  or  pain  in  the  contempla- 
tion of  them  ?  If  it  were  something  in  the  conception  of 
which  any  originative  function  of  the  reason  was  implied, 
then  the  existence  of  the  moral  sense  would  have  meant 
that  there  was  a  determining  agent  in  the  inner  life  of  man, 
of  which  no  natural  history  could  be  given.  But  those 
writers  who  had  made  most  of  the  moral  sense  had  been 
very  indefinite  in  their  account  of  the  quality  in  action  to 
which  it  was  relative.  The  most  consistent  theory  on  the 
subject  was  Hume's.  According  to  him  the  pleasure  of 
moral  sense  is  pleasure  felt  in  the  'mere  survey'  of  an  act, 
independently  of  any  consequences  of  the  act  to  the  person 
contemplating  it;  and  that  which  occasions  this  pleasure 
is  the  tendency  of  the  act  to  bring  pleasure  to  the  agent 
himself  or  to  others'.  Moral  sense,  in  short,  is  a  social 
1  Treatise  on  Human  Nature,  Book  III,  Pt.  i.  §§  1,  -^j  and  Pt.  iii.  §  i. 


6  PROLEGOMENA    TO  ETHICS 

sentiment  either  of  satisfaction  in  the  view  of  such  conduct 
as  has  been  generally  found  to  increase  the  pleasure  or 
diminish  the  pain  of  others,  or  of  uneasiness  in  the  reverse, 
quite  apart  from  Any  expectation  of  personal  advantage  or 
loss.  It  is  thus  properly  not  by  the  action  of  the  person 
feeling  it,  but  by  that  of  others,  that  it  is  excited.  An  act 
of  a  man's  own,  necessarily  proceeding,  according  to  Hume, 
from  some  desire  for  pleasure  which  it  satisfies  or  fails  to 
satisfy,  must  have  personal  consequences  for  him,  incom- 
patible with  that  disinterested  survey  which  alone  yields 
the  pleasure  or  pain  of  moral  sense,  properly  so  called. 
Sympathy,  however,  with  the  effect  which  he  knows  that 
his  act  produces  on  the  moral  sense  of  others,  may  modify 
the  feeling  which  it  causes  to  the  doer  of  it.  An  act,  in 
gratification  of  some  passion,  which  he  would  otherwise  look 
forward  to  as  pleasant,  may  become  so  painful  in  anticipa- 
tion from  sympathy  with  the  general  uneasiness  which  he 
knows  would  arise  upon  the  contemplation  of  it  that,  without 
any  fear  of  punishment,  he  abstains  from  doing  it. 

4.  Thus  moral  sense  and  sympathy  jointly,  as  understood 
by  Hume,  serve  plausibly  to  explain  the  office  ordinarily 
ascribed  to  conscience,  as  the  judge  and  possible  controller 
in  each  man  of  his  own  acts.  At  the  same  time  the  lines 
are  indicated  along  which  a  physical  theory  of  '  conscience ' 
might  be  logically  attempted.  The  problem  which  Hume 
bequeathed  to  a  successor  who  adopted  his  principles  was 
mainly  to  account  for  the  twofold  fact,  that  the  mere  survey 
of  actions  as  tending  to  produce  pleasures  in  which  the 
contemplator  will  have  no  share,  is  yet  a  source  of  pleasure 
to  him ;  and  that,  among  the  pleasures  taken  into  account 
in  that  estimate  of  the  tendency  of  an  action  which  deter- 
mines the  moral  sentiment,  are  such  as  have  no  direct  con- 
nexion with  the  satisfaction  of  animal  wants.  A  theory 
which  will  account  for  this  will  also  account  for  the  affection 
of  the  agent  by  sympathy  with  the  sentiment  which  the 
contemplation  of  his  action  excites  in  others.  Can  we  find 
any  scientific  warrant  for  believing  in  a  process  by  which, 


INTRODUCTION  7 

out  of  susceptibility  to  pleasures  incidental  to  the  merely 
animal  life,  there  have  grown  those  capacities  for  enjoyment 
which  we  consider  essential  to  general  well-being,  and  those 
social  interests  which  not  only  make  the  contemplation  of 
general  well-being  an  independent  source  of  pleasure,  but 
also  make  the  pleasure  of  exciting  this  pleasure — the  pleasure 
of  satisfying  the  moral  sentiment  of  others — an  object  of 
desire  so  strong  as  in  many  cases  to  determine  action  ?  If 
we  can,  it  would  seem  that  we  have  given  to  our  national 
system  of  ethics — the  ethics  of  moral  sentiment — the  solid 
foundation  of  a  natural  science. 

6.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  evolutionists  of  our 
day  should  claim  to  have  given  a  wholly  new  character  to 
ethical  enquiries.  In  Hume's  time  a  philosopher  who  denied 
the  innateness  of  the  moral  sentiments,  and  held  that  they 
must  have  a  natural  history,  had  only  the  limits  of  the  indi- 
vidual life  within  which  to  trace  this  history.  These  limits 
did  not  give  room  enough  for  even  a  plausible  derivation  of 
moral  interests  from  animal  wants.  It  is  otherwise  when  the 
history  may  be  supposed  to  range  over  an  indefinite  number 
of  generations.  The  doctrine  of  hereditary  transmission,  it 
is  held,  explains  to  us  how  susceptibilities  of  pleasure  and 
pain,  of  desire  and  aversion,  of  hope  and  fear,  may  be 
handed  down  with  gradually  accumulated  modiiications 
which  in  time  attain  the  full  measure  of  the  difference  be- 
tween the  moral  man  and  the  greater  ape.  Through  long 
ages  of  interaction  between  the  human  organism  and  the 
social  medium  in  which  it  lives,  there  has  been  developed 
that  'setisibility  of  principle  which  feels  a  stain  like  a  wound;' 
that  faculty  of  moral  intuition  which  not  only  pronounces 
unerringly  on  the  social  tendencies  of  the  commoner  forms 
of  human  action,  but  enables  us  in  some  measure  to  see  our- 
selves as  others  see  us ;  that  civil  spirit  through  which  the 
promptings  of  personal  passion  are  controlled  even  in  the 
individual  by  the  larger  vision  and  calmer  interest  of  society. 

Thus  it  would  seem  that  for  the  barren  speculation  of  the 
old  metaphysical  ethics  we  should  seek  a  substitute  in  a 


8  PROLEGOMENA    TO  ETHICS 

scientific  'Culturgeschichte';  in  a  natural  history  of  man 
conducted  on  the  same  method  as  an  enquiry  into  any 
other  form  of  life  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  operation 
of  strictly  mechanical  laws.  For  the  later  stages  of  this 
history  we  have,  of  course,  abundant  materials  in  the  actual 
monuments  of  human  culture — linguistic,  literary,  and  legal 
— and  these,  the  physiologist  may  say,  have  yet  to  be  con- 
sidered in  connexion  with  the  data  which  his  own  science 
furnishes.  It  is  true  that,  however  far  they  carry  us  back, 
however  great  the  variations  of  moral  sentiment  to  which 
they  testify,  they  do  not  bring  us  to  a  state  of  things  in 
which  the  essential  conditions  of  that  sentiment  were  absent. 
The  most  primitive  man  they  exhibit  to  us  is  already  con- 
scious of  his  own  good  as  conditioned  by  that  of  others, 
already  capable  of  recognising  an  obligation.  But  the 
theory  of  descent  and  evolution  opens  up  a  vista  of  possi- 
bilities beyond  the  facts,  so  far  ascertained,  of  human 
history,  and  suggests  an  enquiry  into  the  antecedents  of 
the  moralised  man  based  on  other  data  than  the  records 
which  he  has  left  of  himself.  Such  enquiry,  it  is  thought, 
will  in  time  give  us  the  means  of  reducing  the  moral  sus- 
ceptibilities of  man  to  the  rank  of  ordinary  physical  facts, 
parts  of  one  system,  and  intelligible  by  the  same  methods, 
with  all  the  natural  phenomena  which  we  are  learning  to 
know.  Man  will  then  have  his  ascertained  place  in  nature, 
as  perhaps  the  noblest  of  the  animals,  but  an  animal  still. 

6.  When  the  moral  sentiment  has  been  explained  on  the 
principles  of  natural  science,  free-will  is  not  likely  to  be 
regarded  as  presenting  any  serious  obstacle  to  the  same 
mode  of  treatment.  By  those  of  our  national  philosophers 
who  have  asserted  its  existence,  it  has  generally  been  under- 
stood as  a  faculty  of  determining  action  apart  from  deter- 
mination by  motives ;  as  a  power,  distinct  alike  from  reason 
and  from  desire,  which  chooses  between  motives  without 
being  itself  dependent  on  any  motive.  So  crude  a  notion 
must  long  ago  have  given  way  before  the  questions  of 
science,  if  there  had  not  been  a  practical  conviction  behind 


INTRODUCTION  9 

it  which  it  failed  fairly  to  interpret.  What  after  all,  it  is 
asked,  is  any  faculty  but  an  hypostatised  abstraction  ?  A 
faculty  is  no  more  than  a  possibility.  Whatever  happens 
implies  no  doubt  a  possibility  of  its  happening.  Voluntary 
action  implies  a  possibility  of  voluntary  action,  just  as  the 
motion  of  a  billiard-ball  implies  a  possibility  of  that  motion  ; 
but  the  possibility  in  each  is  determined  by  definite  con- 
ditions. In  the  case  of  the  billiard-ball  these  conditions,  or 
some  of  them,  are  so  obvious  that  we  do  not  think  of 
treating  the  possibility  of  the  ball's  moving  as  a  faculty 
inherent  in  the  ball,  and  of  ascribing  the  ball's  motion  to 
this  faculty  as  its  cause ;  although,  as  we  know,  when  the 
causes  of  a  motion  are  less  apparent,  the  uninstructed  are 
quite  ready  to  ascribe  it  to  a  faculty  or  power  in  the  moving 
body.  In  ascribing  any  voluntary  action  to  a  faculty  in 
man,  we  are  doing,  it  is  said,  just  the  same  as  in  ascribing 
any  particular  motion  to  a  faculty  in  the  moving  body. 
The  fact  is  the  particular  voluntary  action,  which  must  be 
possible,  no  doubt,  or  it  would  not  be  done,  but  of  which 
the  real  possibility  consists  in  the  assemblage  of  conditions 
which  make  up  its  cause.  To  include  any  faculty  of  action 
among  these  is  merely  to  express  our  ignorance  of  what 
they  are  or  our  unwillingness  to  examine  them.  Among 
them,  it  is  true,  is  the  wish  which  happens  to  be  predomi- 
nant in  the  agent  at  the  moment  of  action ;  but  this,  too, 
has  its  definite  conditions  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case 
and  the  motives  operating  on  the  agent.  It  may  be  owing 
to  the  character  of  the  agent  that  one  of  these  motives  gets 
'  the  upper  hand ;  but  his  character  again  is  only  a  name 
for  an  assemblage  of  conditions,  of  which  it  may  be  scarcely 
possible  for  us  completely  to  trace  the  antecedents,  but 
which  we  are  not  on  that  account  justified  in  assigning  to 
a  cause  that  is  no  cause,  but  merely  a  verbal  substantiation 
of  the  abstraction  of  our  ignorance.  Human  freedom  must 
be  understood  in  some  different  sense  from  that  with  which 
our  anthropologists  are  familiar,  if  it  is  to  stand  in  the  way 
of  the  scientific  impulse  to  naturalise  the  moral  man. 


lo  PROLEGOMENA    TO  ETHICS 

7.  We  will  suppose  then  that  a  theory  has  been  formed 
which  professes  to  explain,  on  the  method  of  a  natural 
history  conducted  according  to  the  principle  of  evolution, 
the  process  by  which  the  human  animal  has  come,  according 
to  the'  terminology  in  vogue,  to  exhibit  the  phenomena  of 
a  moral  life — to  have  a  conscience,  to  feel  remorse,  to  pursue 
ideals,  to  be  capable  of  education  through  appeals  to  the 
sense  of  honour  and  of  shame,  to  be  conscious  of  anta- 
gonism between  the  common  and  private  good,  and  even 
sometimes  to  prefer  the  former.  It  has  generally  been 
expected  of  a  moralist,  however,  that  he  should  explain  not 
only  how  men  do  act,  but  how  they  should  act :  and  as  a 
matter  of  fact  we  find  that  those  who  regard  the  process  of 
man's  natural  development  most  strictly  as  a  merely  natural 
one  are  as  forward  as  any  to  propound  rules  of  living,  to 
which  they  conceive  that,  according  to  their  view  of  the  in- 
fluences which  make  him  what  he  is,  man  ought  to  conform. 
The  natural  science  of  man  is  to  them  the  basis  of  a  practi- 
cal art.  They  seek  to  discover  what  are  the  laws — the 
modes  of  operation  of  natural  forces — under  which  we  have 
come  to  be  what  we  are,  in  order  that  they  may  counsel  us 
how  to  seek  our  happiness  by  living  according  to  those  laws. 

Now  it  is  obvious  that  to  a  being  who  is  simply  a  result 
of  natural  forces  an  injunction  to  conform  to  their  laws 
is  unmeaning.  It  implies  that  there  is  something  in  him 
independent  of  those  forces,  which  may  determine  the  rela- 
tion in  which  he  shall  stand  to  them.  A  philosopher,  then, 
who  would  reconstruct  our  ethical  systems  in  conformity 
with  the  doctrines  of  evolution  and  descent,  if  he  would 
be  consistent,  must  deal  less  scrupulously  with  them  than 
perhaps  any  one  has  yet  been  found  to  do.  If  he  has  the 
courage  of  his  principles,  having  reduced  the  speculative 
part  of  them  to  a  natural  science,  he  must  abolish  the 
practical  or  preceptive  part  altogether.  Instead,  for  instance, 
of  telling  men  of  a  greatest  sum  of  pleasures  which  they 
ought  to  seek,  and  which  by  acting  in  the  light  of  a  true 
insight  into  natural  laws  they  may  attain,  he  will  content 


INTRODUCTION  II 

himself  with  ascertaining,  so  far  as  he  can,  whether  such 
and  such  a  temperament  under  such  and  such  circumstances 
yields  more  frequent,  durable,  and  intense  pleasures  than 
such  another  temperament  under  such  other  circumstances. 
He  will  not  mock  the  misery  of  him  who  fails,  nor  flatter 
the  self-complacency  of  him  who  prospers,  by  speaking  of 
a  happiness  that  is  to  be  obtained  by  conformity  to  the  laws 
of  nature,  when  he  knows  that,  according  to  his  own  prin- 
ciples, it  is  a  struggle  for  existence  determined  by  those  laws 
which  has  brought  the  one  to  his  wretchedness  and  the  other 
to  his  contentment.  He  will  rather  set  himself  to  show  how 
the  phraseology  of  'ought'  and  'ought  not,'  the  belief  in 
a  good  attainable  by  all,  the  consciousness  of  something 
that  should  be  though  it  is  not,  may  according  to  his  philo- 
sophy be  accounted  for.  Nor,  if  he  has  persuaded  himself 
that  the  human  consciousness,  as  it  is,  can  be  physically 
accounted  for,  will  he  find  any  further  difficulty  in  thus  ex- 
plaining that  language  of  moral  injunction  which  forms  so 
large  an  element  in  its  expression.  He  will  probably  trace 
this  language  to  the  joint  action  of  two  factors — to  the  habit 
of  submission  to  the  commands  of  a  physical  or  political 
superior,  surviving  the  commands  themselves  and  the  me- 
mory of  them,  combined  with  that  constant  though  ineffec- 
tual wish  for  a  condition  of  life  other  than  his  own,  which  is 
natural  to  a  being  who  looks  before  and  after  over  perpetual 
alternations  of  pleasure  and  pain. 

8.  The  elimination  of  ethics,  then,  as  a  system  of  precepts, 
involves  no  intrinsic  difficulties  other  than  those  involved 
in  the  admission  of  a  natural  science  that  can  account  for 
the  moralisation  of  man.  The  discovery,  however,  that  our 
assertions  of  moral  obligation  are  merely  the  expression  of 
an  ineffectual  wish  to  be  better  off  than  we  are,  or  are  due 
to  the  survival  of  habits  originally  enforced  by  physical  fear, 
but  of  which  the  origin  is  forgotten,  is  of  a  kind  to  give  us 
pause.  It  logically  carries  with  it  the  conclusion,  however 
the  conclusion  may  be  disguised,  that,  in  inciting  ourselves 
or  others  to  do  anything  because  it  ought  to  be  done,  we 


12  PROLEGOMENA    TO  ETHICS 

are  at  best  making  use  of  a  serviceable  illusion.  And  when 
this  consequence  is  found  to  follow  logically  from  the  con- 
ception of  man  as  in  his  moral  attributes  a  subject  of  natural 
science,  it  may  lead  to  a  reconsideration  of  a  doctrine  which 
would  otherwise  have  been  taken  for  granted  as  the  most 
important  outcome  of  modern  enlightenment.  As  the  first 
charm  of  accounting  for  what  has  previously  seemed  the 
mystery  of  our  moral  nature  passes  away,  and  the  spirit  of 
criticism  returns,  we  cannot  but  enquire  whether  a  being 
that  was  merely  a  result  of  natural  forces  could  form  a  theory 
of  those  forces  as  explaining  himself.  We  have  to  return 
once  more  to  that  analysis  of  the  conditions  of  knowledge, 
which  forms  the  basis  of  all  Critical  Philosophy  whether 
called  by  the  name  of  Kant  or  no,  and  to  ask  whether  the 
experience  of  connected  matters  of  fact,  which  in  its  metho- 
dical expression  we  call  science,  does  not  presuppose  a  prin- 
ciple which  is  not  itself  any  one  or  number  of  such  matters 
of  fact,  or  their  result. 

Can  the  knowledge  of  nature  be  itself  a  part  or  product 
of  nature,  in  that  sense  of  nature  in  which  it  is  said  to  be 
an  object  of  knowledge  ?  This  is  our  first  question.  If  it 
is  answered  in  the  negative,  we  shall  at  least  have  satisfied 
ourselves  that  man,  in  respect  of  the  function  called  know- 
ledge, is  not  merely  a  child  of  nature.  We  shall  have 
ascertained  the  presence  in  him  of  a  principle  not  natural, 
and  a  specific  function  of  this  principle  in  rendering  know- 
ledge possible.  The  way  will  then  be  so  far  cleared  for  the 
further  question  which  leads  us,  in  the  language  of  Kant, 
from  the  Critique  of  Speculative  to  that  of  Practical  Reason  : 
the  question  whether  the  same  principle  has  not  another 
expression  than  that  which  appears  in  the  determination  of 
experience  and  through  it  in  our  knowledge  of  a  world — an 
expression  which  consists  in  the  consciousness  of  a  moral 
ideal  and  the  determination  of  human  action  thereby. 


BOOK    I 

METAPHYSICS    OF    KNOWLEDGE 
CHAPTER  I 

THE   SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  KNOWLEDGE  AND  IN  NATURE 

9.  The  question,  Can  the  knowledge  of  nature  be  itself 
a  part  or  product  of  nature  ?  must  not  be  confused  with  that 
commonly  supposed  to  be  at  issue  between  spiritualists  and 
materialists.  It  is  one  which  equally  remains  to  be  put,  in 
whatever  way  we  understand  the  relation  between  body  and 
mind.  We  may  have  admitted  most  unreservedly  that  all  the 
so-called  functions  of  the  soul  are  materially  conditioned,  but 
the  question  how  there  come  to  be  for  us  those  objects  of 
consciousness,  called  matter  and  motion,  on  which  we  sup- 
pose the  operations  of  sense  and  desire  and  thought  to  be 
dependent,  will  still  remain  to  be  answered.  If  it  could  be 
admitted  that  matter  and  motion  had  an  existence  in  them- 
selves, or  otherwise  than  as  related  to  a  consciousness,  it 
would  still  not  be  by  such  matter  and  motion,  but  by  the 
matter  and  motion  which  we  know,  that  the  functions  of  the 
soul,  or  anything  else,  can  for  us  be  explained.  Nothing  can 
be  known  by  help  of  reference  to  the  unknown.  But  matter 
and  motion,  just  so  far  as  known,  consist  in,  or  are  deter- 
mined by,  relations  between  the  objects  of  that  connected 
consciousness  which  we  call  experience.  If  we  take  any 
definition  of  matter,  any  account  of  its  '  necessary  qualities,' 
and  abstract  from  it  all  that  consists  in  a  statement  of 
relations  between  facts  in  the  way  of  feeling,  or  between 
objects  that  we  present  to  ourselves  as  sources  of  feeling,  we 
shall  find  that  there  is  nothing  left.  Motion,  in  like  manner, 
has  no  meaning  except  such  as  is  derived  from  a  synthesis 
of  the  different  positions  successively  held  by  one  and  the 
same  body ;  and  we  shall  try  in  vain  to  render  an  account  to 


14  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

ourselves  of  position  or  succession,  of  a  body  or  its  identity, 
except  as  expressing  relations  of  what  is  contained  in 
experience,  through  which  alone  that  content  possesses  a 
definite  character  and  becomes  a  connected  whole. 

What  then  is  the  source  of  these  relations,  as  relations  of 
the  experienced,  in  other  words,  of  that  which  exists  for  con- 
sciousness ?  What  is  the  principle  of  union  which  renders 
them  possible  ?  Clearly  it  cannot  itself  be  conditioned  by  any 
of  the  relations  which  result  from  its  combining  and  unifying 
action.  Being  that  which  so  organises  experience  that  the 
relations  expressed  by  our  definitions  of  matter  and  motion 
arise  therein,  it  cannot  itself  be  determined  by  those  rela- 
tions. It  cannot  be  a  matter  or  motion.  However  rigidly, 
therefore,  we  may  exclude  from  our  explanations  of  pheno- 
mena all  causes  that  are  not  reducible  to  matter  and  motion, 
however  fully  we  may  admit  that  the  nature  which  we  know 
or  may  know  is  knowable  only  under  strictly  physical  laws, 
we  are  none  the  less  in  effect  asserting  the  existence  of  some- 
thing which,  as  the  source  of  a  connected  experience,  renders 
both  the  nature  that  we  know  and  our  knowledge  of  it  pos- 
sible, but  is  not  itself  physically  conditioned.  We  may  decide 
all  the  questions  that  have  been  debated  between  materialists 
and  spiritualists  as  to  the  explanation  of  particular  facts  in 
favour  of  the  former,  but  the  possibility  of  explaining  them 
at  all  will  still  remain  to  be  explained.  We  shall  still  be 
logically  bound  to  admit  that  in  a  man  who  can  know 
a  nature — for  whom  there  is  a  '  cosmos  of  experience ' ' — there 
is  a  principle  which  is  not  natural  and  which  cannot  without 
a  varepov  nporepovht  explained  as  we  explain  the  facts  of  nature. 

10.  There  are  certain  accepted  doctrines  of  modern  philo- 
sophy— e.g.,  that  knowledge  is  only  of  phenomena,  not  of 
anything  unrelated  to  consciousness,  and  that  object  and 
subject  are  correlative — from  which  this  conclusion  seems  to 
follow  so  inevitably,  that  any  one  who  has  adopted  it  must 
enquire  anxiously  why  it  is  not  more  generally  recognised. 
If  nothing  can  enter  into  knowledge  that  is  unrelated  to 
'  I  borrow  the  phrase  from  Mr.  G.  H.  Lewes. 


CH.  l]    THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  KNOWLEDGE   15 

consciousness ;  if  relation  to  a  subject  is  necessary  to  make 
an  object,  so  that  an  object  which  no  consciousness  pre- 
sented to  itself  would  not  be  an  object  at  all;  it  is  as 
difficult  to  see  how  the  principle  of  unity,  through  which 
phenomena  become  the  connected  system  called  the  world 
of  experience,  can  be  found  elsewhere  than  in  consciousness, 
as  it  is  to  see  how  the  consciousness  exercising  such  a 
function  can  be  a  part  of -the  world  which  it  thus  at  least 
co-operates  in  making;  how  it  can  be  a  phenomenon  among 
the  phenomena  which  it  unites  into  a  knowledge.  Why  then 
do  our  most  enlightened  interpreters  of  nature  take  it  as  a 
matter  of  course  that  the  principle  of  unity  in  the  world  of  our 
experience  is  something  which,  whatever  else  it  is — and  they 
can  say  nothing  else  of  it — is  at  any  rate  the  negation  of 
consciousness,  and  that  consciousness  itself  is  a  phenomenon 
or  group  of  phenomena  in  which  this  'nature'  exhibits  itself 
or  results?  And  why  is  it  that,  when  we  have  professedly 
discarded  this  doctrine,  we  still  iind  it  to  a  great  extent  con- 
trolling our  ordinary,  thoughts  ?  There  must  be  reasons  for 
this  inconsistency,  which  should  be  duly  considered  if  we 
would  understand  what  we  are  about  in  maintaining  that 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  man  is  related  to  nature  as  its  author, 
as  well  as  one  in  which  he  is  related  to  it  as  its  child. 

11.  The  reader  is  probably  acquainted  with  Kant's  dictum 
that  'the  understanding  makes  nature.'  It  gives  no  doubt 
a  somewhat  startling  expression  to  the  revolution  in  philo- 
sophy which  Kant  believed  himself  to  have  introduced,  and 
which  he  compared  to  the  change  effected  by  the  Copernican 
theory  in  men's  conception  of  the  relative  positions  of  the 
earth  and  the  sun.  When  we  enquire,  however,  into  the 
precise  sense  in  which  Kant  used  the  expression,  we  find 
that  its  meaning  is  subject  to  a  qualification  which  testifies 
to  the  difficulty  experienced  by  Kant  himself  in  carrying  out 
the  doctrine  which  the  words  seemed  to  convey.  'Macht 
zwar  der  Verstand  die  Natur,  aber  er  schafft  sie  nicht.'  The 
understanding  '  makes '  nature,  but  out  of  a  material  which 
it  does  not  make.     That  material,  according  to  Kant,  con- 


l6  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

sists  in  phenomena  or  '  data '  of  sensibility,  given  under  the 
so-called  forms  of  intuition,  space  and  time.  This  apparent 
ascription  of  nature  to  a  twofold  origin — an  origin  in  under- 
standing in  respect  of  its  form  as  a  nature,  as  a  single  system 
of  experience ;  an  origin  elsewhere  in  respect  of  the  'matter' 
which  through  the  action  of  understanding  becomes  a  na- 
ture— cannot  but  strike  us  as  unsatisfactory.  Perhaps  it  may 
not  be  a  doctrine  in  which  we  can  permanently  acquiesce, 
but  meanwhile  it  represents  fairly  enough  on  its  two  sides  the 
considerations  which  on  the  one  hand  lead  us  to  regard 
nature  as  existing  only  in  relation  to  thought,  and  those  on 
the  other  which  seem  obstinately  opposed  to  such  a  view. 

12.  To  say  with  Kant  that  the  understanding  is  the  prin- 
ciple of  objectivity,  that  only  through  understanding  is  there 
for  us  an  objective  world,  is  sure  to  seem  at  first  sight  the 
extreme  of  perversity.  We  have  come  to  think  of  the  under- 
standing as  specially  an  agency  of  our  own,  and  of  the 
objective  world  as  specially  that  which  is  presented  to  us 
independently  of  any  such  agency ;  as  that  which  we  find 
and  do  not  make,  and  by  which  we  have  to  correct  the 
fictions  of  our  own  minds.  When  we  ask,  however,  whether 
any  impression  is  or  represents  anything  'real  and  objective,' 
what  exactly  does  the.  question  mean,  and  how  do  we  set 
about  answering  it?  It  is  not  equivalent  to  a  question 
whether  a  feeling  is  felt.  Some  feeling  must  be  felt  in  order 
to  the  possibility  of  the  question  being  raised  at  all.  It  is 
a  question  whether  a  given  feeling  is  what  it  is  taken  to  be ; 
or,  in  other  words,  whether  it  is  related  as  it  seems  to  be 
related.  It  may  be  objected  indeed  that,  though  some  feeling 
or  other  mlist  be  felt  in  order  to  give  any  meaning  to  the 
question  as  to  the  objectivity  of  the  impression  or  its  cor- 
respondence with  reality,  yet  still  this  question  may  and  often 
does  mean  merely  whether  a  particular  feeling  is  felt.  This 
is  true;  but  a  particular  feeling  is  a  feeling  related  in  a 
certain  way,  and  the  question  whether  a  particular  feeling  is 
really  felt  is  always  translatable  into  the  form  given — Is  a 


C^.  l]   THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  KNOWLEDGE  t^ 

feeling,  which  is  undoubtedly  felt,  really  related  as  some  one 
thinking  about  it  takes  it  to  be  ?  If  an  engine-driver,  under 
certain  conditions,  permanent  with  him  or  temporary,  '  sees 
a  signal  wrong,'  as  we  say,  his  disordered  vision  has  its  own 
reality  just  as  much  as  if  he  saw  right.  There  are  relations 
between  combinations  of  moving  particles  on  the  one  side 
and  his  visual  organs  on  the  other,  between  the  present  state 
of  the  latter  and  certain  determining  conditions,  between 
the  immediate  sensible  effect  and  the  secondary  impressions 
which  it  in  turn  excites,  as  full  and  definite — with  sufficient 
enquiry  and  opportunity,  as  ascertainable — as  in  any  case 
of  normal  vision.  There  is  as  much  reality  in  the  one  case 
as  in  the  other,  but  it  is  not  the  same  reality :  /.  e.,  it  does 
not  consist  in  the  same  relations.  The  engine-driver  mistakes 
the  effect  of  one  set  of  relations  for  that  of  another,  one 
reality  for  another,  and  hence  his  error  in  action.  He  may 
be  quite  innocent  of  a  scientific  theory  of  vision,  but  he 
objectifies  his  sensations.  He  interprets  them  as  related  in 
a  certain  way,  and  as  always  the  same  in  the  same  relations; 
or,  to  use  an  equivalent  but  more  famihar  expression,  as 
signs  of  objects  from  which  he  distinguishes  his  feelings  and 
by  which  he  explains  them.  Were  this  not  the  case,  his 
vision  might  be  normal  or  abnormal,  but  he  would  be  in- 
capable of  mistaking  one  kind  of  reality  for  another,  since 
he  would  have  no  conception  of  reality  at  all. 

13.  The  terms  '  real '  and  '  objective,'  then,  have  no 
meaning  except  for  a  consciousness  which  presents  its 
experiences  to  itself  as  determined  by  relations,  and  at  the 
same  time  conceives  a  single  and  unalterable  order  of 
relations  determining  them,  with  which  its  temporary  pre- 
sentation, as  each  experience  occurs,  of  the  relations 
determining  it  may  be  contrasted.  For  such  a  conscious- 
ness, perpetually  altering  its  views  of  the  relations  deter- 
mining any  experience  under  the  necessity  of  combining 
them  in  one  system  with  other  recognised  relations,  and  for 
such  a  consciousness  only,  there  is  significance  in  the 
judgment  that  any  experience  seems  to  be  so  and  so,  i.e., 

c 


l8  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

to  be  related  in  a  certain  way,  but  really  is  otherwise  related. 
We  shall  have  afterwards  [§19  and  foil.]  to  consider  the 
question  whether  the  consciousness,  for  which  alone  this 
contrast  of  the  real  and  the  apparent  is  possible,  has  any- 
thing to  do  with  the  establishment  of  the  relations  in  which 
it  conceives  reality  to  consist — whether  the  conception  of 
reality  has  any  identity  with  the  act  by  which  reality  is 
constituted.  But  even  if  this  latter  question  is  waived  or 
answered  in  the  negative,  there  will  still  be  an  important 
sense  in  which  understanding,  or  consciousness  as  acting  in 
the  manner  described,  may  be  said  to  be  the  principle  of 
objectivity.  It  will  be  through  it  that  there  is  for  us  an 
objective  world ;  through  it  that  we  conceive  an  order  of 
nature,  with  the  unity  of  which  we  must  reconcile  our 
interpretations  of  phenomena,  if  they  are  to  be  other  than 
'  subjective '  illusions. 

14.  Of  course  it  may  very  well  be  that  many  a  man  would 
disclaim  any  such  conception,  who  is  yet  constantly  acting 
upon  the  distinction  between  what  he  believes  to  be  mere 
appearance  and  what  he  believes  to  be  reality.  But  want 
of  familiarity  with  the  abstract  expression  of  a  conception, 
want  of  ability  to  analyse  it,  is  no  evidence  that  the  con- 
ception is  inoperative  upon  the  experience  of  the  person 
who,  from  this  want  of  familiarity  or  ability,  would  say,  if  he 
were  asked,  that  he  had  it  not  or  knew  not  what  it  meant. 
The  proof  of  the  necessity  of  certain  ideas  has  never  been 
supposed,  by  any  one  who  knew  what  he  was  'about,  to  rest 
upon  the  fact  that  every  one  was  aware  of  having  them. 
Such  a  proof,  to  say  nothing  of  the  well-worked  appeal  to 
savages  or  the  uneducated,  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  every 
lively  gentleman  who  was  pleased  to  say  that  he  searched 
his  breast  for  such  ideas  in  vain.  The  necessity  of  a  con- 
ception, as  distinct  from  the  logical  (or  rather  rhetorical) 
necessity  of  a  conclusion  contained  in  premisses  already 
conceded,  means  that  it  is  necessary  to  the  experience  with- 
out which  there  would  not  for  us  be  a  world  at  all  \  and 
there  can  be  neither  proof  nor  disproof  of  such  necessity  as 


CH.  l]   THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  KNOWLEDGE   19 

is  claimed  for  any  conception,  but  through  analysis  of  the 
conditions  which  render  this  experience  possible.  Unless 
the  accuracy  or  sufficiency  of  the  analysis  can  be  disputed, 
the  necessary  character  of  the  ideas  which  it  exhibits  as 
operative  in  the  formation  of  experience,  is  unaffected  by 
the  inability  of  any  one  to  recognise  them  in  that  abstract 
form  to  which  the  analysis  reduces  them,  but  which,  just 
because  they  are  operative  in  a  concrete  experience,  is  not 
the  form  of  their  familiar  use. 

Thus  a  man  who  is  quite  at  home  with  the  distinction 
between  facts  and  fancies  may  think  it  strange  to  be  told 
that  the  distinction  implies  a  conception  of  the  world  as 
a  single  system  of  relations  ;  that  this  is  the  conception  on 
the  strength  of  which  he  constantly  sets  aside  as  fancy  what 
he  had  taken  to  be  fact,  because  he  finds  that  the  supposed 
relations,  which  for  him  formed  the  nature  of  the  fact,  are 
not  such  as  can  be  combined  with  others  that  he  recognises 
in  one  intelligible  system.  Such  language  may  convey  no 
meaning  to  him,  but  the  question  will  still  remain  whether 
upon  reflection  the  distinction  can  be  otherwise  accounted 
for.  When  we  analyse  our  idea  of  matter  of  fact,  can  we 
express  it  except  as  an  idea  of  a  relation  which  is  always  the 
same  between  the  same  objects ;  or  our  idea  of  an  object 
except  as  that  which  is  always  the  same  in  the  same 
relations  ?  And  does  not  each  expression  imply  the  idea  of 
a  world  as  a  single  and  eternal  system  of  related  elements, 
which  may  be  related  with  endless  diversity  but  must  de 
related  still  ?  If  we  may  properly  call  the  consciousness 
which  yields  this  idea  '  understanding,'  are  we  not  entitled 
to  say  that  understanding  is  the  source  of  there  being  for  us 
an  objective  world,  that  it  is  the  principle  of  objectivity  ? 

15.  So  far  we  have  only  reached  the  conclusion  that 
a  conception,  to  which  understanding  is  related  as  faculty 
to  function,  is  the  condition  of  our  ability  to  distinguish 
areal  from  the  unreal,  matter  of  fact  from  illusion.  It  will 
be  said  perhaps  that  so  much  pains  need  not  have  been 
spent  on  establishing  a  proposition  which  in  effect  merely 

c  2 


20  METAPHYSICS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bK.  I 

tells  us  that  without  a  conception  of  an  order  of  nature  we 
could  not  conceive  an  order  of  nature.  Is  not  this,  it  may 
be  asked,  either  an  identical  proposition  or  untrue — an 
identical  proposition,  if  understood  strictly  as  thus  put; 
untrue,  if  taken  to  mean  that  the  conception  of  an  order  of 
nature  does  not  admit  of  being  generated  out  of  materials 
other  than  itself?  Now  it  is  just  the  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  explaining  the  origin  of  the  conception  in  question  out 
of  anything  else  than  judgments  which  presuppose  it,  that 
we  wish  to  exhibit.  They  are  the  difficulties  which  beset 
any  theory  that  would  treat  the  knowledge  of  nature  as 
itself  the  result  of  natural  processes.  It  is  through  experience 
that  every  such  theory  must  suppose  the  resulting  know- 
ledge to  be  produced.  But  experience,  as  most  students 
of  philosophy  must  now  be  aware,  is  a  term  used  in  very 
different  senses.  In  this  case  an  experience  which  is  to 
yield  the  required  result  must  not  be  merely  an  experience 
in  the  sense  in  which,  for  instance,  a  plant  might  be  said  to 
experience  a  succession  of  atmospheric  or  chemical  changes, 
or  in  which  we  ourselves  pass  through  a  definite  physical 
experience  during  sleep  or  in  respect  of  the  numberless 
events  which  affect  us  but  of  which  we  are  not  aware.  Such 
an  experience  may  no  doubt  gradually  alter  to  any  extent 
the  mode  in  which  the  physical  organism  reacts  upon 
stimulus.  It  may  be  the  condition  of  its  becoming  organic 
to  intellectual  processes,  but  between  it  and  experience  of 
the  kind  which  is  to  yield  a  knowledge  of  nature  there  is 
a  chasm  which  no  one,  except  by  confusion  of  speech,  has 
attempted  to  fill.  Or  to  speak  more  precisely,  between  the 
two  senses  of  experience  there  is  all  the  difference  that  exists 
between  change  and  consciousness  of  change. 

16.  Experience  of  the  latter  kind  must  be  experience  of 
matters  of  fact  recognised  as  such.  It  is  possible,  no  doubt 
to  imagine  a  psychological  history  of  this  experience,  and 
to  trace  it  back  to  a  stage  in  which  the  distinction  between 
fact  and  fancy  is  not  yet  formally  recognised.  But  there  is 
a  limit  to  this  process.     An  experience  which  distinguishes 


CH.l]  THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  KNOWLEDGE  21 

fact  from  fancy  cannot  be  developed  out  of  one  which  is 
not,  in  some  form  or  other,  a  consciousness  of  events  as 
related  or  as  a  series  of  changes.  It  has  commonly,  and 
with  much  probability,  been  held  that  the  occurrence  of  the 
unexpected,  by  exciting  distrust  in  previously  established 
associations  of  ideas,  has  at  any  rate  a  large  share  in  gene- 
.  rating  the  distinction  of  what  seems  from  what  is.  But  the 
shock  of  surprise  is  one  thing,  the  correction  of  a  belief 
quite  another.  Unless  there  were  already  a  consciousness 
alike  of  the  events,  of  which  the  ideas  have  become  as- 
sociated, as  a  related  series,  and  of  the  newly  observed 
event  as  a  member  of  the  same,  the  unfamiliar  event  might 
cause  a  disturbance  of  the  nerves  or  the  '  psychoplasm,'  but 
there  would  neither  be  an  incorrect  belief  as  to  an  order  of 
events  to  be  corrected  by  it,  nor  any  such  correlation  of  the 
newly  observed  event  with  what  had  been  observed  before 
as  could  suggest  a  correction.  But  a  consciousness  of 
events  as  a  related  series — experience  in  the  most  elemen- 
tary form  in  which  it  can  be  the  beginning  of  knowledge — 
has  not  any  element  of  identity  with,  and  therefore  cannot 
properly  be  said  to  be  developed  out  of,  a  mere  series  of 
related  events,  of  successive  modifications  of  body  or  soul, 
such  as  is  experience  in  the  former  of  the  senses  spoken  of. 
No  one  and  no  number  of  a  series  of  related  events  can  be 
the  consciousness  of  the  series  as  related.  Nor  can  any 
product  of  the  series  be  so  either.  Even  if  this  product 
could  be  anything  else  than  a  further  event,  it  could  at  any 
rate  only  be  something  that  supervenes  at  a  certain  stage 
upon  such  of  the  events  as  have  so  far  elapsed.  But  a  con- 
sciousness of  certain  events  cannot  be  anything  that  thus 
succeeds  them.  It  must  be  equally  present  to  all  the  events 
of  which  it  is  the  consciousness.  For  this  reason  an  in- 
telligent experience,  or  experience  as  the  source  of  know- 
ledge, can  neither  be  constituted  by  events  of  which  it  is 
the  experience,  nor  be  a  product  of  them. 

17.  '  Perhaps  not/  it  may  be  replied,  '  but  may  it  not  be 
a  product  oi previous  events  ? '    If  it  is  so,  a  series  of  events 


22  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

of  which  there  is  no  conscious  experience  must  be  supposed 
to  produce  a  consciousness  of  another  series.  On  any- other 
supposition  the  difficulty  is  only  postponed.  For  if  the 
series  of  events  which  produces  a  certain  consciousness  of 
other  events  is  one  of  which  there  is  a  consciousness,  this 
consciousness,  not  being  explicable  as  the  product  of  the 
events  of  which  it  is  the  consciousness,  will  have  in  turn  to 
be  referred  to  a  prior  series  of  events ;  and  ultimately  there 
will  be  no  alternative  between  the  admission  of  a  conscious- 
ness which  is  not  a  product  of  events  at  all  and  the  supposi- 
tion stated — the  supposition  that  the  primary  consciousness 
of  events  results  from  a  series  of  events  of  which  there  is  no 
consciousness.  But  this  supposition,  when  we  think  of  it, 
turns  out  to  be  a  concatenation  of  words  to  which  no 
possible  connexion  of  ideas  corresponds.  It  asserts  a  rela- 
tion of  cause  and  effect,  in  which  the  supposed  cause  lacks 
all  the  characteristics  of  a  cause.  It  may  be  questioned 
whether  we  can  admit  anything  as  a  cause  which  does  not 
explain  its  supposed  effect,  or  is  not  equivalent  to  the  con- 
ditions into  which  the  effect  may  be  analysed.  But  granting 
that  we  may,  a  cause  must  at  least  be  that  to  which  experi- 
ence testifies  as  the  uniform  antecedent  of  the  effect.  Now 
a  series  of  events  of  which  there  is  no  consciousness  is 
certainly  not  a  set  of  conditions  into  which  consciousness 
can  be  analysed.  And  as  little  can  it  be  an  antecedent 
uniformly  associated  with  consciousness  in  experience,  for 
events  of  which  there  is  no  consciousness  cannot  be  within 
experience  at  all. 

18.  It  seems  necessary,  then,  to  admit  that  experience,  in 
the  sense  of  a  consciousness  of  events  as  a  related  series — 
and  in  no  other  sense  can  it  help  to  account  for  the  know- 
ledge of  an  order  of  nature — cannot  be  explained  by  any 
natural  history,  properly  so  called.  It  is  not  a  product  of 
a  series  of  events.  It  does  not  arise  out  of  materials  other 
than  itself.  It  is  not  developed  by  a  natural  process  out  of 
other  forms  of  natural  existence.  Given  such  a  conscious- 
ness, the  scientific  conception  of  nature,  no  less  than  the 


CH.  l]    THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE       23 

every-day  distinction  between  fact  and  fancy,  between  objec- 
tive reality  and  subjective  illusion,  can  be  exhibited  as 
a  development  of  it,  for  there  is  an  assignable  element  of 
identity  between  the  two.  But  between  the  consciousness 
itself  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  anything  determined 
by  the  relations  under  which  a  nature  is  presented  to  con- 
sciousness, no  process  of  development,  because  no  com- 
munity, can  be  really  traced.  JJaturg,  with  all  that  belongs 
to  it,  is  a  process  of  change  :  change  on  a  uniform  method, 
no  doubt,  but  change  still.  All  the  relations  under  which 
we  know  it  are  relations  in  the  way  of  change  or  by  which 
change  is  determined.  But  neither  can  any  process  of  change 
yield  a  consciousness  of  itself,  which,  in  order  to  be  a  con- 
sciousness of  the  change,  must  be  equally  present  to  all  stages 
of  the  change ;  nor  can  any  consciousness  of  change,  since  the 
whole  of  it  must  be  present  at  once,  be  itself  a  process  of 
change.  There  may  be  a  change  into  a  state  of  consciousness 
of  change,  and  a  change  out  of  it,  on  the  part  of  this  man 
or  that ;  but  within  the  consciousness  itself  there  can  be  no 
change,  because  no  relation  of  before  and  after,  of  here  and 
there,  between  its  constituent  members — between  the  pre- 
sentation, for  instance,  of  point  A  and  that  of  point  B  in  the 
process  which  forms  the  object  of  the  consciousness. 

19.  From  the  above  considerations  thus  much  at  any  rate 
would  seem  to  follow  :  that  a  form  of  consciousness,  which 
we  cannot  explain  as  of  natural  origin,  is  necessary  to  our 
conceiving  an  order  of  nature,  an  objective  world  of  fact 
from  which  illusion  may  be  distinguished.  In  other  words, 
an  understanding — for  that  term  seems  as  fit  as  any  other 
to  denote  the  principle  of  consciousness  in  question— irre- 
ducible to  anything  else, '  makes  nature '  for  us,  in  the  sense 
of  enabling  us  to  conceive  that  there  is  such  a  thing.  Now 
that  which  the  understanding  thus  presents  to  itself  consists, 
as  we  have  seen,  in  certain  relations  regarded  as  forming 
a  single  system.  The  next  question,  then,  will  be  whether 
understanding  can  be  held  to  '  make  nature '  in  the  further 


24  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

sense  that  it  is  the  source,  or  at  any  rate  a  condition,  of 
there  being  these  relations.  If  it  cannot,  we  are  left  in  the 
awkward  position  of  having  to  suppose  that,  while  the  con- 
ception of  an  order  of  nature  on  the  one  side,  and  that 
order  itself  on  the  other,  are  of  diiiferent  and  independent 
origin, .  there  is  yet  some  unaccountable  pre-established 
harmony  through  which  there  comes  to  be  such  an  order 
corresponding  to  our  conception  of  it.  This  indeed  might 
be  urged  as  a  reason  for  seeking  some  way  of  escape  from 
the  conclusion  at  which  we  have  just  arrived.  But  before 
we  renew  an  attempt  which  has  often  been  made  and  failed, 
let  us  see  whether  the  objections  to  the  other  alternative — 
to  the  view  that  the  understanding  which  presents  an  order 
of  nature  to  us  is  in  principle  one  with  an  understanding 
which  constitutes  that  order  itself — have  really  the  cogency 
which  common-sense  seems  to  ascribe  to  them. 

20.  The  traditional  philosophy  of  common-sense,  we 
shall  find,  speaks  upon  the  point  with  an  ambiguity  which 
affords  a  presumption  of  its  involving  more  difficulty  than 
might  at  first  sight  appear.  No  one  is  more  emphatic  than 
Locke  in  opposing  what  is  real  to  what  we  '  make  for  our- 
selves,' the  work  of  nature  to  the  work  of  the  mind.  Simple 
ideas  or  sensations  we  certainly  do  not '  make  for  ourselves.' 
They  therefore  and  the  matter  supposed  to  cause  them  are, 
according  to  Locke,  real '.  But  relations  are  neither  simple 
ideas  nor  their  material  archetypes.  They  therefore,  as 
Locke  explicitly  holds,  fall  under  the  head  of  the  work  o£ 
the  mind,  which  is  opposed  to  the  real '.  But  if  we  take  him 
at  his  word  and  exclude  from  what  we"  have  considered  real 
all  qualities  constituted  by  relation,  we  find  that  none  are  left. 
Without  relation  any  simple  idea  would  be  undistinguished 
from  other  simple  ideas,  undetermined  by  its  surroundings 
in  the  cosmos  of  experience.  It  would  thus  be  unqualified 
itself,  and  consequently  could  afford  no  qualification  of  the 
material  archetype,  which  yet  according  to  Locke  we  only 

'  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  II.  xii.  i. 
»  Ibid.  II.  XXV.  8. 


CH.l]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE       25 

know  through  it  or,  if  otherwise,  as  the  subject  of  those 
'  primary  qualities '  which  demonstrably  consist  in  relations  ^. 
In.  short,  the  admission  of  the  antithesis  between  the  real 
and  the  work  of  the  mind,  and  the  admission  that  relation 
is  the  work  of  the  mind,  put  together,  involve  the  conclusion 
that  nothing  is  real  of  which  anything  can  be  said. 

Our  ordinary  way  out  of  the  difficulty  consists  in  keeping 
the  two  admissions  apart,  without,  however,  surrendering 
either.  We  maintain  the  opposition  between  the  real  and 
the  work  of  the  mind  exactly  as  it  was  asserted  by  Locke ; 
and  if  we  are  less  explicit  in  accounting  relations  to  be  the 
work  of  the  mind,  it  is  not  because  we  have  any  theory  of 
the  real  which  more  logically  admits  them  than  does  Locke's. 
Yet  we  have  no  scruple  in  accepting  duly  verified  know- 
ledge as  representing  reality,  though  what  is  known  consists 
in  nothing  else  than  relations.  We  neither  ask  ourselves 
how  it  can  be  that  a  knowledge  of  relations  should  be  a 
knowledge  of  reality,  if  the  real  is  genuinely  simple  sensa- 
tion or  that  which  copies  itself  in  simple  sensation,  nor  what 
other  account  we  can  give  of  the  real  without  qualifying 
the  antithesis  between  the  work  of  the  mind  and  it.  It  is 
in  fact  from  our  adoption  of  this  antithesis  that  we  come  to 
accept  that  identification  of  the  real  with  simple  sensation 
or  its  archetype  which,  as  Locke  was  aware,  implies  the 
unreality  of  relations.  But  when  in  our  processes  of  know- 
ledge we  have  virtually  recognised  relations  as  constituting 
the  very  essence  of  reality,  we  do  not  reconsider  our  defini- 
tion of  the  real  in  the  light  of  this  recognition.  We  do  not 
lay  our  procedure  in  what  we  regard  as  knowledge  of  the 
real  alongside  Locke's  view  of  the  real,  which  is  also  ours, 
so  as  to  ask  whether  they  are  consistent  with  each  other. 
And  hence  we  are  not  led  to  call  in  question  the  antithesis 
on  which  that  view  depends. 

21.  As  it  is  a  serious  matter,  however,  to  accept  a  view 
of  the  real  which  such  a  thinker  as  Locke  could  not 
reconcile  with  the  reality  of  relations,  and  which  logically 

'  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  II.  viii.  15  and  23 ;  xxx.  2. 


26  METAPHYSICS    OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

implies  that  knowledge  is  not  of  the  real ;  and  as  on  the 
other  hand  there  is  something  in  the  opposition  between 
the  real  and  the  work  of  the  mind  which  seems  to  satisfy 
an  imperative  demand  of  common-sense ;  it  becomes  im- 
portant to  enquire  whether  we  interpret  that  demand  aright. 
Is  there  not  a  conception  of  the  real  behind  the  opposition 
in  question,  which  seems  to  require  us  to  accept  it,  but 
which  in  truth  we  misinterpret  in  doing  so  ? 

We  constantly  find  Locke  falling  back  on  the  considera- 
tion that  of  simple  ideas  '  we  cannot  make  one  to  ourselves.' 
They  'force  themselves  upon  us  whether  we  will  or  no.' 
It  is  this  which  entitles  them  in  his  eyes  to  be  accounted 
real.  'The  work  of  the  mind,'  on  the  other  hand,  he 
considers  arbitrary.  A  man  has  but  to  think,  and  he  can 
make  ideas  of  relation  for  himself  as  he  pleases.  Locke 
thus  indicates  what  we  may  call  the  operative  conception — 
operative  as  governing  the  action  of  our  intelligence — which 
underlies  the  opposition  between  the  real  and  the  work  of 
the  mind.  This  is  the  conception  which  we  have  described 
already  as  that  of  a  single  and  unalterable  system  of  rela- 
tions. It  is  not  the  work  of  the  mind,  as  such,  that  we 
instinctively  oppose  to  the  real,  but  the  work  of  the  mind 
as  assumed  to  be  arbitrary  and  irregularly  changeable. 

22.  In  truth,  however,  there  is  no  such  thing.  The  very 
question,  What  is  the  real  ? — which  we  seem  to  answer  by 
help  of  this  opposition— is  a  misleading  one,  so  far  as  it 
implies  that  there  is  something  else  from  which  the  real  can 
be  distinguished.  We  are  apt  to  make  merry  over  the  crude 
logic  of  Plato  in  supposing  that  there  are  objects,  described 
as  iiTj  ovra,  which  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  ignorance  as 
Ta  oi>Ta  to  knowledge,  and  other  objects,  described  as  ra 
lUTa^v,  which  stand  in  a  corresponding  relation  to  mere 
opinion.  Of  this  fallacy,  as  of  most  others  that  are  to  be 
found  in  him,  Plato  himself  supplies  the  correction,  but 
much  of  our  language  about  the  real  implies  that  we  are 
ourselves  its  victims.  If  there  is  a  valid  opposition  between 
the  work  of  the  mind  and  something  else  which  is  not  the 


CH.l]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE       27 

work  of  the  mind,  the  one  must  still  be  just  as  real  as  the 
other.  Of  two  alternatives,  one.  Either  '  the  work  of  the 
mind'  is  a  name  for  nothing,  expressing  a  mere  privation 
or  indeterminateness,  a  mere  absence  of  qualities — in  which 
case  nothing  is  conveyed  by  the  proposition  which  opposes 
the  real  or  anything  else  to  it :  or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  it 
has  qualities  and  relations  of  its  own,  then  it  is  just  as  real 
as  anything  else.  Through  not  understanding  the  relations 
which  determine  the  one  kind  of  object — that  ascribed  to 
the  work  of  the  mind — as  distinct  from  those  which  deter- 
mine the  other — that  ascribed  to  some  other  agency — we 
may  confuse  the  two  kinds  of  object.  We  may  take  what 
is  really  of  the  one  kind  to  be  really  of  the  other.  But  this 
is  not  a  confusion  of  the  real  with  the  unreal.  The  very 
confusion  itself,  the  mistake  of  supposing  what  is  related  in 
one  way  to  be  related  in  another,  has  its  own  reality.  It 
has  its  history,  its  place  in  the  development  of  a  man's 
mind,  its  causes  and  effects ;  and,  as  so  determined,  it  is  as 
real  as  anything  else. 

23.  It  is  thus  in  vain  that  we  seek  to  define  the  real  by 
finding,  either  in  the  work  of  the  mind  or  elsewhere,  an 
unreal  to  which  it  may  be  opposed.  Is  there,  then,  no 
meaning  in  an  opposition  which  is  constantly  on  our 
tongues  ?  Undoubtedly  that  which  any  event  seems  to  us 
to  be  may  be — nay  always  is — more  or  less  different  from 
what  it  really  is.  The  relations  by  which  we  judge  it  to  be 
determined  are  not,  or  at  any  rate  fall  short  of,  those  by 
which  it  is  really  determined.  But  this  is  a  distinction 
between  one  particular  reality  and  another;  not  between 
a  real,  as  such  or  as  a  whole,  and  an  unreal,  as  such  or  as 
a  whole.  The  illusive  appearance,  as  opposed  to  the  reality, 
of  any  event  is  what  that  event  really  is  not ;  but  at  the 
same  time  it  really  is  something.  It  is  real,  not  indeed 
with  the  particular  reality  which  the  subject  of  the  illusion 
ascribes  to  it,  but  with  a  reality  which  a  superior  intelligence 
might  understand.  The  relations  by  which,  in  a  false  belief 
as  to  a  matter  of  fact,  we  suppose  the  event  to  be  determined, 


28  METAPHYSICS    OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

are  not  non-existent.  They  are  really  objects  of  a  con- 
ceiving consciousness.  As  arising  out  of  the  action  of  such 
a  consciousness,  as  constituents  of  a  world  which  it  presents 
to  itself,  they  are  no  less  real  than  are  the  actual  conditions 
of  the  event  which  is  thought  to  be,  but  is  not  really,  deter- 
mined by  them.  It  is  when  we  reflect  on  the  judgments  in 
which  we  are  perpetually  deciding  that  what  has  previously 
been  taken  to  be  the  reality  of  a  particular  event  is  a  mere 
appearance,  i.e.,  not  the  reality  of  that  particular  event — 
or  rather  when  we  reflect  on  the  language  in  which  those 
judgments  have  been  expressed — that  we  come  to  speak  of 
the  real,  as  an  abstract  universal,  in  contrast  with  another 
abstract  universal,  the  unreal.  Thus  for  a  contrast  which  is 
in  truth  a  contrast  between  two  acts  of  judgment — the  act  of 
judging  an  event  to  be  determined  by  certain  relations  which, 
according  to  the  order  of  the  universe,  do  determine  it,  and 
that  of  judging  it  to  be  determined  by  relations  other  than 
these — we  substitute  another,  which  exists  merely  in  words, 
but  to  which  we  fancy  that  we  give  a  meaning  by  identifying 
the  unreal  with  the  work  of  the  mind,  as  opposed  to  a  real 
which  has  some  other  origin,  we  cannot  say  what. 

24.  What  we  have  so  far  sought  to  show  has  been  (i), 
generally,  that  an  attempt  to  define  the  real  by  distinction 
from  anything  else  is  necessarily  futile — the  result  of  a  false 
abstraction  from  the  distinction  between  the  real  nature  of 
one  event  or  object  and  that  of  another — and  (2),  specially, 
that  the  antithesis  between  the  real  and  the  work  of  the 
mind  is  invalid,  not  because  the  real  is  the  work  of  the 
mind — whether  it  is  so  or  not  we  have  yet  to  enquire — but 
because  the  work  of  the  mind  is  real.  The  '  mere  idea  *  of 
a  hundred  thalers,  to  use  the  familiar  instance,  is  no  doubt 
quite  different  from  the  possession  of  them,  not  because  it 
is  unreal,  but  because  the  relations  which  form  the  real 
nature  of  the  idea  are  different  from  those  which  form  the 
real  nature  of  the  possession. 

So  much  it  was  necessary  to  show,  in  order  that  the 
enquiry,  whether  it  is  due  to  'understanding'  not  merely 


CH.i]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE       29 

that  we  are  able  to  conceive  a  nature  but  that  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  nature  at  all,  might  not  be  prejudiced  by  a  precon- 
ception which  would  make  it  seem  equivalent  to  an  enquiry 
whether  the  real  could  be  the  work  of  the  unreal.  If  now 
from  the  futile  question,  What  is  the  real  ?  which  we  can  only 
answer  by  saying  that  the  real  is  everything,  we  pass  to  one 
more  hopeful — How  do  we  decide  whether  any  particular 
event  or  object  is  really  what  it  seems  to  be,  or  whether  our 
belief  about  it  is  true  ? — the  answer  must  be  that  we  do  so  by 
testing  the  unalterableness  of  the  qualities  which  we  ascribe 
to  it,  or  which  form  its  apparent  nature.  A  certain  hill 
appears  to-day  to  be  near :  yesterday  under  different  con- 
ditions of  atmosphere  it  appeared  to  be  remote.  But  the 
real  nature  of  the  event  which  took  place  in  yesterday's  ap- 
pearance cannot,  we  judge,  thus  change.  What  it  was  really, 
it  was  unalterably.  There  may  have  been  a  change  from  that 
appearance  to  another,  but  not  a  change  of  or  in  whatever 
was  the  reality  of  the  appearance.  The  event  of  yesterday's 
appearance,  then,  must  have  been  determined  by  conditions 
other  than  those  which  determine  to-day's.  But  if  both 
appearances  depended  solely  on  the  position  of  the  hill,  they 
would  be  determined  by  the  same  conditions.  Therefore  we 
must  have  been  wrong  in  believing  the  hill  to  be  so  remote 
as  we  believed  it  to  be  yesterday,  or  in  believing  it  to  be  so 
near  as  we  believed  it  to  be  to-day,  or  in  both  beliefs  :  wrong 
in  respect  of  the  relation  which  we  supposed  to  exist  between 
the  several  appearances  and  the  distance  of  the  hill. 

25.  With  sufficient  time  and  command  of  detail  it  would  not 
be  difficult  to  show  how  the  conviction  here  illustrated,  that 
whatever  anything  is  really  it  is  unalterably,  regulates  equally 
our  most  primitive  and  our  most  developed  judgments  of 
reality — the  every-day  supposition  of  there  being  a  multitude 
of  separate  things  which  remain  the  same  in  themselves  while 
their  appearances  to  us  alter,  and  the  scientific  quest  for 
uniformity  or  unalterableness  in  a  law  of  universal  change. 
Through  a  slight  confusion  of  thought  and  expression,  this 
conviction  may  issue  either  in  the  sensational  atomism  of 


30  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bK.  I 

Locke  or  in  the  material  atomism  of  popular  science.  A  sen- 
sation is  the  unalterable  effect  of  its  conditions,  whatever 
those  conditions  may  be.  It  is  unalterably  related  to  other 
sensations.  Our  opinion  about  its  conditions  or  relations 
may  vary,  but  not  the  conditions  or  relations  themselves,  or 
the  sensation  determined  by  them.  Hence  when  a  man 
looks  into  his  breast,  as  Locke  bids  him  do,  simple  feelings — 
feelings  apart  from  intellectual  interpretations  and  combina- 
tions of  them — seem  alone  unalterable  in  contrast  with  our 
judgments  about  them.  In  truth  the  unalterableness  be- 
longs not  to  any  simple  feeling,  for  our  feelings  change  every 
moment  upon  us,  but,  as  we  have  said,  to  the  relation  be- 
tween it  and  its  conditions  or  between  it  and  other  feelings ; 
and  such  a  relation  is  neither  itself  a  feeling  nor  represented 
in  our  consciousness  by  a  feeling.  This  distinction,  how- 
ever, is  overlooked.  The  unalterableness  of  the  fact  that 
a  certain  feeling  is  felt  under  certain  conditions,  is  ascribed  to 
the  simple  feeling,  or  simple  idea,  as  such :  and  unalterable- 
ness being  the  test  by  which  we  ascertain  whether  what  we 
have  believed  to  be  the  nature  of  any  event  is  really  so  or 
not,  the  simple  feeling,  which  by  itself  cannot  properly  be 
said  to  be  really  anything,  comes  to  be  regarded  either  as 
alone  real,  according  to  the  ideal  form  of  sensationalism,  or 
as  alone  representing  an  external  reality,  according  to  the 
materialistic  form  of  the  same  doctrine. 

On  the  other  hand,  reflection  upon  the  '  perpetual  flux '  of 
sensation  suggests  the  view  that  it  is  not  real  in  the  same 
sense  as  its  material  conditions.     The  old  dictum  ascribed 

to  DemOCritUS — voixw  yKvKV  koI  vofia  mKpov,  vofito  depfjiov,  v6na> 

ijruxpov,  vofia  xp°''h'  *"5  ^^  aTojia  Koi  Ktvov^ — expresses  a  way 
of  thinking  into  which  we  often  fall.  The  reality  which  in 
truth  lies  in  the  relations,  according  to  one  law  or  system 
of  relation,  between  feelings  and  their  material  conditions — 
not  in  the  material  conditions  abstracted  from  the  feelings 
any  more  than  in  the  feelings  abstracted  from  their  material 

'  Sweet,  bitter,  hot,  cold,  colour,  are  by  convention ;  only  atoms 
end  void  are  real. 


CH.l]     THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      31 

conditions — we  are  apt  to  ascribe  exclusively  to  the  latter. 
We  think  obscurely  of  matter  and  motion  as  real  in  some 
way  in  which  nothing  else  is.  Nor  do  we  stop  here.  The 
demand  for  unalterableness  in  what  we  believe  to  be  real, 
when  once  we  are  off  the  right  track  of  seeking  it  in  a 
uniform  law  of  change,  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  '  reality 
of  things '  is  only  reached  when  we  have  penetrated  to 
atoms  which  in  all  changes  of  their  motion  and  distribution 
remain  intrinsically  the  same. 

26.  Let  us  consider  now  how  we  stand.  We  have  rejected 
the  question,  What  is  or  constitutes  the  real  ?  as  intrinsically 
unmeaning,  because  it  could  only  be  answered  by  a  distinc- 
tion which  would  imply  that  there  was  something  unreal. 
The  question  arises,  we  have  seen,  out  of  an  abstraction  from 
our  constant  enquiry  into  the  real  nature  of  this  or  that  par- 
ticular appearance  or  event — an  enquiry  in  which  we  always 
seek  for  an  unchanging  relation  between  the  appearance  and 
its  conditions,  or  again  for  an  unchanging  relation  between 
these  and  certain  other  conditions.  The  complete  deter- 
mination of  an  event  it  may  be  impossible  for  our  intelligence 
to  arrive  at.  There  may  always  remain  unascertained  con- 
ditions which  may  render  the  relation  between  an  appearance 
and  such  conditions  of  it  as  we  know,  liable  to  change.  But 
that  there  is  an  unalterable  order  of  relations,  if  we  could 
only  find  it  out,  is  the  presupposition  of  all  our  enquiry  into 
the  real  nature  of  appearances ;  and  such  unalterableness 
implies  their  inclusion  in  one  system  which  leaves  nothing 
outside  itself.  Are  we  then  entitled  to  ask — and  if  so,  are 
we  able  to  answer — the  further  question,  What  is  implied  in 
there  being  such  a  single,  all-inclusive,  system  of  relations  ? 
or,  What  is  the  condition  of  its  possibility  ?  If  this  question 
can  be  answered,  the  condition  ascertained  will  be  the 
condition  of  there  being  a  nature  and  of  anything  being 
real,  in  the  only  intelligible  sense  that  we  can  attach  to  the 
words  '  nature '  and  '  real.'  It  would  no  doubt  still  be  open 
to  the  sceptic,  should  this  result  be  attained,  to  suggest  that 


32  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bK.  I 

the  validity  of  our  conclusion,  upon  our  own  showing, 
depends  upon  there  really  being  such  an  order  of  nature  as 
our  quest  of  knowledge  supposes  there  to  be,  which  remains 
unproven.  But  as  the  sceptic,  in  order  to  give  his  language 
a  meaning,  must  necessarily  make  the  same  supposition — as 
he  can  give  no  meaning  to  reality  but  the  one  explained — 
his  suggestion  that  there  really  may  not  be  such  an  order  of 
nature  is  one  that  conveys  nothing  at  all. 

27.  First,  then,  is  there  any  meaning  in  the  question 
just  put  ?  Having  set  aside  as  unmeaning  the  question, 
What  is  the  real  ?  can  we  be  entitled  to  ask,  What  is  implied 
in  there  being  a  nature  of  things  ?  If  the  former  question 
would  have  been  only  answerable  on  the  self-contradictory 
supposition  of  there  really  being  something  other  than  the 
real  from  which  it  could  be  distinguished,  will  not  the  latter 
in  like  manner  be  only  answerable  on  the  equally  impossible 
supposition  of  there  being  something  outside  the  nature  of 
things,  outside  the  one  all-inclusive  system  of  relations,  by 
reference  to  which  this  nature  or  system  can  be  explained  ? 
To  this  we  reply  that  the  question  stated  is  or  is  not  one 
that  can  be  fitly  asked,  according  as  the  conception  of 
nature,  of  a  single  all-inclusive  system  of  relations,  is  or  is 
not  one  that  can  stand  alone,  is  or  is  not  one  that  requires 
something  else  to  render  it  intelligible.  To  suppose  that 
this  '  something  else,'  if  nature  were  found  unthinkable 
without  it,  is  related  to  those  conditions,  of  which  the 
relation  to  each  other  forms  the  system  of  nature,  in  the 
same  way  in  which  these  are  related  to  each  other,  would 
no  doubt  be  in  contradiction  with  our  account  of  this 
system  as  one  and  all-inclusive.  It  could  not  therefore  be 
held  to  be  related  to  them  as,  for  instance,  an  invariable 
antecedent  to  an  invariable  sequent,  or  as  one  body  to 
another  outside  it.  But  there  would  be  no  contradiction 
in  admitting  a  principle  which  renders  all  relations  possible, 
and  is  itself  determined  by  none  of  them,  if,  on  considera- 
tion of  what  is  needed  to  constitute  a  system  of  relations, 
we  found  such  a  principle  to  be  requisite. 


CH.l]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE       33 

28.  This,  then,  is  the  consideration  which  we  have  now 
to  undertake.  Relation  is  to  us  such  a  familiar  fact  that 
we  are  apt  to  forget  that  it  involves  all  the  mystery,  if  it  be 
a  mystery,  of  the  existence  of  many  in  one.  Whether  we 
say  that  a  related  thing  is  one  in  itself,  manifold  in  respect 
of  its  relations,  or  that  there  is  one  relation  between  mani- 
fold things,  e.g.,  the  relation  of  mutual  attraction  between 
bodies — and  one  expression  or  the  other  we  must  employ 
in  stating  the  simplest  facts — we  are  equally  affirming  the 
unity  of  the  manifold.  Abstract  the  many  relations  from 
the  one  thing,  and  there  is  nothing.  They,  being  many, 
determine  or  constitute  its'  definite  unity.  It  is  not  the  case 
that  it  iirst  exists  in  its  unity,  and  then  is  brought  into  various 
relations.  Without  the  relations  it  would  not  exist  at  all.  In 
like  manner  the  one  relation  is  a  unity  of  the  many  things. 
They,  in  their  manifold  being,  make  the  one  relation.  If 
these  relations  really  exist,  there  is  a  real  unity  of  the  mani- 
fold, a  real  multiplicity  of  that  which  is  one.  But  a  plurality 
of  things  cannot  of  themselves  unite  in  one  relation,  nor  can 
a  single  thing  of  itself  bring  itself  into  a  multitude  of  relations. 
It  is  true,  as  we  have  said,  that  the  single  things  are  nothing 
except  as  determined  by  relations  which  are  the  negation  of 
their  singleness,  but  they  do  not  therefore  cease  to  be  single 
things.  Their  common  being  is  not  something  into  which 
their  several  existences  disappear.  On  the  contrary,  if  they 
did  not  survive  in  their  singleness,  there  could  be  no 
relation  between  them — nothing  but  a  blank  featureless 
identity.  There  must,  then,  be  something  other  than  the 
manifold  things  themselves,  which  combines  them  without 
effacing  their  severalty. 

29.  With  such  a  combining  agency  we  are  familiar  as  our 
intelligence.  It  is  through  it  that  the  sensation  of  the  present 
moment  takes  a  character  from  comparison  with  the  sensation 
of  a  moment  ago,  and  that  the  occurrence,  consisting  in  the 
transition  from  one  to  the  other,  is  presented  to  us.  It  is 
essential  to  the  comparison  and  to  the  character  which  the 
sensations  acquire  from  the  comparison,  essential,  too,  to 

D 


34  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

their  forming  an  observable  event  or  succession,  that  one 
should  not  be  fused  with  the  other,  that  the  distinct  being 
of  each  should  be  maintained.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the 
relation  to  which  their  distinctness  is  thus  necessary  they  are 
at  the  same  time  united.  But  if  it  were  not  for  the  action  of 
something  which  is  not  either  of  them  or  both  together,  there 
would  be  no  alternative  between  their  separateness  and  their 
fusion.  One  might  give  place  to  the  other,  or  both  together 
might  be  combined  into  a  third ;  but  a  unity  in  which  their 
distinctness  is  preserved  could  not  be  constituted  without 
the  relating  act  of  an  intelligence  which  does  not  blend 
with  either. 

The  above  is  an  instance  of  relation  between  sensations 
which,  as  brought  into  relation  by  intelligence,  become  sen- 
sible objects  or  events.  But  the  same  or  an  analogous  action 
is  necessary  to  account  for  any  relation  whatever — for  a 
relation  between  material  atoms  as  much  as  any  other. 
Either  then  we  must  deny  the  reality  of  relations  altogether 
and  treat  them  as  fictions  of  our  combining  intelligence  j 
or  we  must  hold  that,  being  the  product  of  our  combining 
intelligence,  they  are  yet  '  empirically  real '  on  the  ground 
that  our  intelligence  is  a  factor  in  the  real  of  experience ;  or 
if  we  suppose  them  to  be  real  otherwise  than  merely  as  for 
us,  otherwise  than  in  the  'cosmos  of  our  experience,'  we  must 
recognise  as  the  condition  of  this  reality  the  action  of  some 
unifying  principle  analogous  to  that  of  our  understanding. 

30.  As  we  have  seen,  the  first  of  these  alternative  views,  if 
consistently  carried  out,  will  not  allow  us  to  regard  anything 
as  real  of  which  anything  can  be  said,  since  all  predication  is 
founded  on  relation  of  some  kind.  It  therefore  naturally 
leads  to  the  second.  All  that  we  in  fact  count  real  turns  out 
to  be  determined  by  relations.  Feeling  may  be  the  revela- 
tion or  the  test  of  the  real,  but  it  must  be  feeling  in  certain 
relations,  or  it  neither  reveals  nor  tests  anything.  Thus  we 
are  obliged  to  recognise  a  reality,  at  least  of  that  kind  which 
in  our  every-day  knowledge  and  action  we  distinguish  from 
illusion,  in  what  is  yet  the  work  of  the  mind,  or  at  any  rate 


CH.l]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      35 

must  be  held  to  be  so  until  relations  can  be  accounted  for 
without  a  relating  act  or  that  act  referred  to  something  else 
than  the  mind.     Hence  with  those  who  adhere  to  the  oppo- 
sition between  the  real  and  the  work  of  the  mind,  and  who 
at  the  same  time  cannot  ignore  the  work  of  the  mind  in  the 
constitution  of  relations,  there  arises  a  distinction  between 
reality  in  some  absolute  sense — the  reality  of  'things-in-them- 
selves,'  which  are  supposed  to  be  wholly  exempt  from  any 
qualification  through  relating  acts  of  the  mind,  but  of  which, 
for  that  reason,  nothing  can  be  known  or  said — and  the  'em- 
pirical '  reality  of  that  which  we  distinguish  from  illusion,  as 
standing  in  definite  relations  to  the  universe  of  our  experience. 
31.  This  distinction  governs  the  theory  of  Kant.     It  is 
more  easy  to  point  out  the  embarrassments  and  inconsis- 
tencies into  which  it  leads  him,  than  to  get  rid  of  the  dis- 
tinction itself.     Ordinary  criticism  of  Kant,  indeed,  has  not 
taken  much  heed  of  the  distinction  or  of  its  perplexing 
results.     It  has  been  too  busy  in  refuting  his  doctrine  that 
'  laws  of  nature '  are  derived  from  understanding,  to  enquire 
closely  into  his  view  of  the  relation  between  nature,  in  his 
sense  of  the  term,  and  'things-in-themselves.'     It  has  been 
gaining  apparent  triumphs,  due  to  a  misunderstanding  of  the 
question  at  issue,  over  the  strongest  part  of  his  system,  while 
it  has  left  the  weakest  unassailed.    There  have  been  abun- 
dant proofs  of  what  was  not  in  dispute,  that  our  knowledge 
of  laws  of  nature  is  the  result  of  experience ;  but  the  question 
whether  phenomena  could  be  so  related  as  to  constitute  the 
nature  which  is  the  object  of  our  experience  without  the 
unifying  action  of  understanding  is  seldom  even  touched. 
Given  an  experience  of  phenomena  related  to  each  other  in 
one  system — so  related  that,  whatever  an  object  is  really,  or 
according  to  the  fulness  of  its  relations,  it  is  unalterably — it 
is  easy  to  show  that  our  knowledge  of  laws  of  nature  is 
derived  from  it.     Such  experience  in  its  most  elementary 
form  is  already  implicitly  a  knowledge  that  there  are  laws  of 
nature,  and  only  needs  to  be  reflected  on  in  order  to  become 
so  explicitly.    When  it  has  become  so  explicitly,  the  develop - 

o  3 


36  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

ment  of  the  experience — through  cognisance  of  relations  of 
which  there  has  previously  been  no  experience,  or  of  which 
the  experience  has  not  been  reflected  on— becomes  a  grow- 
ing knowledge  of  what  the  laws  of  nature  in  particular  are. 

But  the  derivation  of  knowledge  from  an  experience  of 
unalterably  related  phenomena  is  its  derivation  from  objects 
unalterably  related  in  consciousness.  If  the  relation  of  the 
objects  were  not  a  relation  of  them  in  consciousness,  there 
would  be  no  experience  of  it.  The  question  then  arises  how 
a  succession  of  feelings  becomes  such  a  relation  of  objects  in 
consciousness.  If  a  relation  of  objects  existed  or  could  be 
known  to  exist  otherwise  than  for  consciousness,  this  would 
not  help  to  account  for  what  has  to  be  accounted  for,  which 
is  wholly  a  process  of  consciousness.  The  feelings  which 
succeed  each  other  are  no  doubt  due  to  certain  related  con- 
ditions, which  are  not  feelings.  But  granting  forthe  moment 
that  these  conditions  and  their  relation  exist  independently  of 
consciousness,  in  accounting  for  a  multitude  of  feelings  they 
do  not  account  for  the  experience  of  related  objects.  Of  two 
objects  which  form  the  terms  of  a  relation  one  cannot  exist 
as  so  related  without  the  other,  and  therefore  cannot  exist 
before  or  after  the  other.  For  this  reason  the  objects  between 
which  a  relation  subsists,  even  a  relation  of  succession,  are, 
just  so  far  as  related,  not  successive.  In  other  words,  a 
succession  always  implies  something  else  than  the  terms 
of  the  succession,  and  that  a  'something  else'  which  can 
simultaneously  present  to  itself  objects  as  existing  not  simul- 
taneously but  one  before  the  other. 

32.  Thus,  in  order  that  successive  feelings  may  be  related 
objects  of  experience,  even  objects  related  in  the  way  of 
succession,  there  must  be  in  consciousness  an  agent  which 
distinguishes  itself  from  the  feelings,  uniting  them  in  their 
severalty,  making  them  equally  present  in  their  succession. 
And  so  far  from  this  agent  being  reducible  to,  or  derivable 
from,  a  succession  of  feelings,  it  is  the  condition  of  there 
being  such  a  succession ;  the  condition  of  the  existence  of 
that  relation  between  feelings,  as  also  of  those  other  relations 


CH.l]      THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      37 

which  are  not  indeed  relations  between  feelings,  but  which, 
if  they  are  matter  of  experience,  must  have  their  being  in 
consciousness.  If  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  connected 
experience  of  related  objects,  there  must  be  operative  in 
consciousness  a  unifying  principle,  which  not  only  presents 
related  objects  to  itself,  but  at  once  renders  them  objects 
and  unites  them  in  relation  to  each  other  by  this  act  of 
presentation ;  and  which  is  single  throughout  the  experience. 
The  unity  of  this  principle  must  be  correlative  to  the  unity 
of  the  experience.  If  all  possible  experience  of  related 
objects — the  experience  of  a  thousand  years  ago  and  the 
experience  of  to-day,  the  experience  which  I  have  here  and 
that  which  I  might  have  in  any  other  region  of  space — forms 
a  single  system ;  if  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  an  experi- 
ence of  unrelated  objects ;  then  there  must  be  a  correspond- 
ing singleness  in  that  principle  of  consciousness  which  forms 
the  bond  of  relation  between  the  objects. 

33.  It  is  such  a  principle  that  Kant  speaks  of  sometimes 
as  the  '  synthetic  unity  of  apperception,'  sometimes  simply 
as  '  understanding.'  For  the  reasons  stated  there  seems  no 
way  of  escape  from  the  admission  that  it  is,  as  he  says,  '  the 
basis  of  the  necessary  regularity  of  all  phenomena  in  an 
experience ' : '  the  basis,  that  is  to  say,  not  merely  of  our 
knowledge  of  uniform  relations  between  phenomena,  but  of 
there  being  those  uniform  relations.  The  source  of  the 
relations,  and  the  source  of  our  knowledge  of  them,  is  one 
and  the  same.  The  question,  how  it  is  that  the  order  of 
nature  answers  to  our  conception  of  it — or,  as  it  is  some- 
times put,  the  question,  whether  nature  really  has,  or, 
having,  will  continue  to  have,  the  uniformity  which  belongs 
to  it  in  our  conception — is  answered  by  recognition  of  the 
fact  that  our  conception  of  an  order  of  nature,  and  the  1 
relations  which  form  that  order,  have  a  common  spiritual^ 
squrce^__  TSenuniformity'oT  nature  does  not  mean  that  its 
constituents  are  everywhere  the  same,  but  that  they  are 
•  Kant's  Werke,  ed.  Rosenkranz,  II.  p.  114;  ed.  Hartenstein  (1867), 
III.  p.  585- 


38  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

everywhere  related ;  not  that '  the  thing  which  has  been  is 
that  which  shall  be,'  but  that  whatever  occurs  is  determined 
by  relation  to  all  that  has  occurred,  and  contributes  to 
determine  all  that  will  occur.  If  nature  means  the  system 
of  objects  of  possible  experience,  such  uniformity  neces- 
sarily arises  in  it  from  the  action  of  the  same  principle 
which  is  implied  in  there  being  any  relation  between  the 
objects  of  experience  at  all.  A  relation  not  related  to  all 
other  relations  of  which  there  can  be  experience,  is  an 
impossibility.  It  cannot  exist  except  as  constituted  by  the 
unifying  subject  of  all  experienced  relations,  and  this  con- 
dition of  its  possibility  implies  its  connexion  with  all  other 
relations  that  are,  or  come  to  be,  so  constituted.  Every 
real  relation,  therefore,  that  is  also  knowable,  is  a  necessary 
or  '  objective '  or  unalterable  relation.  It  is  a  fact  of  which 
the  existence  is  due  to  the  action  of  that  single  subject  of 
experience  which  is  equally,  and  in  the  same  way,  the 
condition  of  all  facts  that  can  be  experienced ;  a  fact  which 
thus,  through  that  subject,  stands  in  definite  and  unchange- 
able connexion  with  the  universe  of  those  facts,  at  once 
determining  and  determined  by  them. 

34.  The  result  of  this  view  is  to  overcome  the  separation, 
which  in  our  ordinary  thinking  we  assume,  between  the 
faculty  or  capacity  or  subjective  process  of  experience  on  the 
one  side  and  the  facts  experienced  on  the  other.  In  first 
reflecting  on  our  knowledge  of  a  world,  we  always  regard  the 
facts  known  as  existing  quite  independently  of  the  activity 
by  means  of  which  they  are  known.  Since  it  is  obvious  that 
the  facts  of  the  world  do  not  come  into  existence  when  this 
or  that  person  becomes  acquainted  with  them,  so  long  as  we 
conceive  of  no  intellectual  action  but  that  which  this  or  that 
person  exercises,  we  necessarily  regard  the  existence  or  occur- 
rence of  the  facts  as  independent  of  intellectual  action. 
Hence  arises  the  antithesis  between  the  known  or  knowable 
world  and  the  subject  capable  of  knowing  it,  as  between  two 
existences  independent  of  each  other,  or  of  which  the  former 
is   at  any  rate  independent  of  the  latter.     The  mind  is 


CH.  l]     THE  SPIRITUALPRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      39 

supposed  to  derive  its  materials  from,  and  to  act  only  in 
response  to,  the  action  of  the  world  upon  it ;  but  the  rela- 
tions which  it  establishes  between  the  materials,  so  derived, 
in  its  processes  of  distinction  and  comparison,  of  conception, 
judgment,  and  discourse,  are  supposed  to  be  quite  different, 
and  to  have  a  diiferent  source,  from  the  relations  between 
things  or  matters  of  fact  in  the  world  known.  Upon  further 
reflection,  however,  the  untenableness  of  this  view  becomes 
apparent.  It  renders  knowledge,  as  of  fact  or  reality,  inex- 
plicable. It  leaves  us  without  an  answer  to  the  question, 
how  the  order  of  relations,  which  the  mind  sets  up,  comes  to 
reproduce  those  relations  of  the  material  world  which  are 
assumed  to  be  of  a  wholly  different  origin  and  nature.  Nor, 
as  we  pursue  the  analysis  of  the  operations  involved  in  the 
simplest  perception  of  fact,  are  we  able  to  detect  any  residuary 
phenomenon  amounting  to  a  fact  at  all,  that  can  be  held  to  be 
given  independently  of  a  combining  and  relating  activity, 
which,  if  the  antithesis  between  the  work  of  the  mind  and 
the  work  of  things  be  accepted,  must  be  ascribed  to  the 
former. 

35.  The  necessity,  therefore,  of  getting  rid  of  the  antithesis 
in  question  forces  itself  upon  us  :  and  it  is  natural  that  the 
way  of  doing  so,  which  at  first  sight  most  commends  itself  to 
us,  should  consist  in  treating  the  mind  and  its  work  as  a 
secondary  result  of  what  had  previously  been  opposed  to  it 
as  operations  of  nature.  The  weakness  of  such  a  method  is 
twofold.  In  the  first  place  there  is  the  objection  upon  which 
we  have  already  dwelt  and  which  may  be  put  summarily  thus  : 
that  '  nature '  is  a  process  of  change,  and  that  the  derivation 
of  a  consciousness  of  change  from  such  a  process  is  impossible. 
Secondly,  such  an  explanation  of  the  work  of  the  mind,  if 
nothing  is  known  of  it  otherwise,  is  an  explanation  of  it  by 
the  inexplicable.  It  is  taking  nature  for  granted,  and  at  the 
same  time  treating  that  as  a  result  of  nature  which  is  neces- 
sary to  explain  the  possibility  of  there  being  such  a  thing  as 
nature.  For  nature,  as  a  process  of  continuous  change, 
implies  something  which  is  other  than  the  changes  and  to 


40  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

which  they  aire  relative.  As  a  system  of  related  elements  it 
implies  a  unity,  through  relation  to  which  the  elements  are 
related  to  each  other.  But  with  the  reduction  of  thought  or 
spirit  or  self-consciousness  to  a  result  of  nature,  if  such 
reduction  were  possible,  we  should  be  eliminating  the  only 
agent  that  we  know  as  maintaining  an  identity  with  itself 
throughout  a  series  of  changes,  or  as  a  principle  that  can 
unite  a  manifold  without  cancelling  its  multiplicity.  In  so 
explaining  spirit  we  should  be  rendering  the  basis  of  our 
explanation  itself  inexplicable. 

36.  From  the  Kantian  point  of  view,  the  dualism  of  nature 
and  knowledge  is  disposed  of  in  a  different  way.  They  are 
not  identified  but  treated  as  forming  an  indivisible  whole, 
which  results  from  the  activity  of  a  single  principle.  It  is 
not  that  first  there  is  nature,  and  that  then  there  comes  to 
be  an  experience  and  knowledge  of  it.  Intelligence,  experi- 
ence, knowledge,  are  no  more  a  result  of  nature  than  nature 
of  them.  If  it  is  true  that  there  would  be  no  intelligence 
without  nature,  it  is  equally  true  that  there  would  be  no 
nature  without  intelligence.  Nature  is  the  system  of  related 
appearances,  and  related  appearances  are  impossible  apart 
from  the  action  of  an  intelligence.  They  are  not  indeed  the 
same  as  intelligence ;  it  is  not  reducible  to  them  nor  they  to 
it,  any  more  than  one  of  us  is  reducible  to  the  series  of  his 
actions  or  that  series  to  him  ;  but  without  it  they  would  not 
be,  nor  except  in  the  activity  which  constitutes  them  has  it 
any  real  existence.  Does  this  then  imply  the  absurdity  that 
nature  comes  into  existence  in  the  process  by  which  this 
person  or  that  begins  to  think  ?  Not  at  all,  unless  it  is  neces- 
sary to  suppose  that  intelligence  first  comes  into  existence 
when  this  person  or  that  begins  to  understand — a  supposi- 
tion not  only  not  necessary,  but  which,  on  examination,  will 
be  found  to  involve  impossibilities  analogous  to  those  which 
prevent  us  from  supposing  that  nature  so  comes  into  existence. 

The  difference  between  what  may  be  called  broadly  the 
Kantian  view  and  the  ordinary  view  is  this,  that  whereas, 
according  to  the  latter,  it  is  a  world  in  which  thought  is  no 


CH.  l]      THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      41 

necessary  factor  that  is  prior  to,  and  independent  of,  the 
process  by  which  this  or  that  individual  becomes  acquainted 
with  it,  according  to  the  former  it  is  a  world  already  deter- 
mined by  thought,  and  existing  only  in  relation  to  thought, 
that  is  thus  prior  to,  and  conditions,  our  individual  acquain- 
tance with  it.  The  growth  of  knowledge  on  our  part  is  re- 
garded not  as  a  process  in  which  facts  or  objects,  in  them- 
selves unrelated  to  thought,  by  some  inexplicable  means 
gradually  produce  intelligible  counterparts  of  themselves  in 
thought.  The  true  account  of  it  is  held  to  be  that  the 
concrete  whole,  which  may  be  described  indifferently  as  an 
eternal  intelligence  realised  in  the  related  facts' of  the  world, 
or  as  a  system  of  related  facts  rendered  possible  by  such  an 
intelligence,  partially  and  gradually  reproduces  itself  in  us, 
communicating  piece-meal,  but  in  inseparable  correlation, 
understanding  and  the  facts  understood,  experience  and  the 
experienced  world. 

37.  There  are  difficulties  enough,  no  doubt,  in  the  way 
of  accepting  such  a  form  of  '  idealism,'  but  they  need  not 
be  aggravated  by  misunderstanding.  It  is  simply  misunder- 
stood if  it  is  taken  to  imply  either  the  reduction  of  facts  to 
feelings— impressions  and  ideas,  in  Hume's  terminology — 
or  the  obliteration  of  the  distinction  between  illusion  and 
reality.  The  reduction  of  facts  to  relations  is  the  very 
reverse  of  their  reduction  to  feelings.  No  feeling,  as  such 
or  as  felt,  is  a  relation.  We  can  only  suppose  it  to.be  so 
through  confusion  between  it  and  its  conditions,  or  between 
it  and  that  fact  of  its  occurrence  which  is  no  doubt  related 
to  other  facts,  but,  as  so  related,  is  not  felt.  Even  a  relation 
between  feelings  is  not  itself  a  feehng  or  felt.  A  feeling  can 
only  be  felt  as  successive  to  another  feeling,  but  the  terms 
of  a  relation,  as  we  have  seen,  even  though  the  relation  be 
one  of  succession,  do  not  succeed  one  another.  In  order 
to  constitute  the  relation  they  must  be  present  together ;  so 
that,  to  constitute  a  relation  between  feelings,  there  must  be 
something  other  than  the  feelings  for  which  they  are  equally 
present.  The  relation  between  the  feelings  is  not  felt,  because 


42  METAPHYSICS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

it  is  only  for  something  that  distinguishes  itself  from  the 
feelings  that  it  can  subsist.  It  is  our  cognisance  of  the 
successiveness  or  transitoriness  of  feelings  that  makes  us 
object  intuitively  to  any  idealism  which  is  understood  to 
imply  an  identification  of  the  realities  of  the  world  with  the 
feelings  of  men.  Facts,  we  are  sure,  are  in  some  way  per- 
manent. They  are  not  'like  the  bubble  on  the  fountain,' 
a  moment  here,  then  '  gone,  and  for  ever.'  But  if  they  were 
feelings  as  we  feel  them,  they  would  be  so.  They  would 
not  be  '  stubborn  things ; '  for  as  each  was  felt  it  would  be 
done  with.  They  would  not  form  a  world  to  which  we  have 
to  adapt  ourselves ;  for  in  order  to  make  a  world  they  must 
coexist,  which  feelings,  as  we  feel  them,  do  not. 

But  the  idealism  which  interprets  facts  as  relations,  and  can 
only  understand  relations  as  constituted  by  a  single  spiritual 
principle,  is  chargeable  with  no  such  outrage  on  common- 
sense.  On  the  contrary,  its  very  basis  is  the  consciousness 
of  objectivity.  Its  whole  aim  is  to  articulate  coherently  the 
conviction  of  there  being  a  world  of  abiding  realities  other 
than,  and  determining,  the  endless  flow  of  our  feelings.  The 
source  of  its  differences  from  ordinary  realism  lies  in  its  being 
less  easily  satisfied  in  its  analysis  of  what  the  existence  of 
such  a  world  implies.  The  mere  statement  that  facts  are  not 
feelings,  that  things  are  not  ideas,  that  we  can  neither  feel 
nor  think  except  contingently  upon  certain  functions  of 
matter  and  motion  being  fulfilled,  does  not  help  us  to  under- 
stand what  facts  and  things,  what  matter  and  motion,  are. 
It  does  not  enable  us,  when  we  seek  to  understand  these 
expressions,  to  give  them  any  meaning  except  such  as  is  de- 
rived from  experience,  and,  if  from  experience,  then  from 
relations  that  have  their  being  only  for  an  intelligent  con- 
sciousness. 

38.  So  far  we  have  been  following  the  lead  of  Kant  in 
enquiring  what  is  necessary  to  constitute,  what  is  implied 
in  there  being,  a  world  of  experience — an  objective  world, 
if  by  that  is  meant  a  world  of  ascertainable  laws,  as  distin- 


CH.  0     THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      43 

guished  from  a  world  of  unknowable  '  things-in-themselves.' 
We  have  followed  him  also,  as  we  believe  every  one  must 
who  has  once  faced  the  question,  in  maintaining  that  a 
single  active  self-conscious  principle,  by  whatever  name  it 
be  called,  is  necessary  to  constitute  such  a  world,  as  the 
condition  under  which  alone  phenomena,  i.e.  appearances 
to  consciousness,  can  be  related  to  each  other  in  A  single 
universe.  This  is  the  irrefragable  truth  involved  in  the  pro- 
position that  'the  understanding  makes  nature.'  But  so 
soon  as  we  have  been  brought  to  the  acceptance  of  that 
proposition,  Kant's  leading  fails  us.  We  might  be  forward, 
from  the  work  thus  assigned  to  understanding  in  the  con- 
stitution of  nature,  to  infer  something  as  to  the  spirituality 
of  the  real  world.  But  from  any  such  irjference  Kant  would 
at  once  withhold  us.  He  would  not  only  remind  us  that 
the  work  assigned  to  understanding  is  a  work  merely  among 
and  upon  phenomena ;  that  the  nature  which  it  constitutes 
is  merely  a  unity  in  the  relations  of  phenomena ;  and  that 
any  conclusion  we  arrive  at  in  regard  to  '  nature '  in  this 
sense  has  no  application  to  '  things  in  themselves.'  He  in- 
sists, further,  on  a  distinction  between  the  form  and  matter 
of  'nature'  itself,  and,  having  assigned  to  its  'form'  an 
origin  in  understanding,  ascribes  the  'matter'  to  an  un- 
known but  alien  source,  in  a  way  which  seems  to  cancel 
the  significance  of  his  own  declarations  in  regard  to  the 
intellectual  principle  necessary  to  constitute  its  form.  We 
do  not  essentially  misrepresent  him  in  saying  that  by  the 
'  form '  of  nature  or,  as  he  sometimes  phrases  it,  '  natura 
formaliter  spectata,'  he  means  the  relations  by  which  pheno- 
mena are  connected  in  the  one  world  of  experience ;  by  its 
'matter,'  or  'natura  materialiter  spectata,'  the  mere  phe- 
nomena or  sensations  undetermined  by  those  relations'. 
'  Natura  formaliter  spectata '  is  the  work  of  understanding ; 
but  '  natura  materialiter  spectata '  is  the  work  of  unknown 
things-in-themselves,  acting  in  unknown  ways  upon  us. 

'  Kant's  Werke,  ed.  Rosenkranz,  II.  p.  755 ;  ed.  Hartenstein  (1867), 
III.  p.  133. 


44  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bK.  I 

39.  Now,  if  the  distinction,  thus  drawn,  between  the  form 
and  matter  of  the  world  of  experience  were  necessary  or 
even  admissible,  the  effect  of  tracing  those  relations  between 
phenomena,  which  form  the  laws  of  nature  as  we  know  it,  to 
the  action  of  a  spiritual  principle,  would  simply  have  been 
to  bring  us  to  a  dead-lock.  The  distinction  implies  that 
phenomena  have  a  real  nature  as  effects  of  things-in-them- 
selves  other  than  that  which  they  have  as  related  to  each 
other  in  the  universe  of  our  experience :  and  not  only  so,  it 
puts  the  two  natures  in  a  position  towards  each  other  of 
mere  negation  and  separation,  of  such  a  kind  that  any  cor- 
respondence between  them,  any  dependence  of  one  upon 
the  other,  is  impossible.  As  effects  of  things-in-themselves, 
phenomena  are  supposed  to  have  a  nature  of  their  own,  but 
they  cannot,  according  to  Kant's  doctrine,  be  supposed  to 
carry  any  of  that  nature  with  them  into  experience.  All  the 
nature  which  they  have  in  experience  belongs  to  them  in 
virtue  of  relations  to  each  other  which  the  action  of  the  in- 
tellectual principle,  expressly  opposed  to  the  action  of  things- 
in-themselves,  brings  about.  The  nature  which  a  sensation 
is  supposed  to  possess  '  materialiter  spectata,'  as  the  appear- 
ance of  a  thing-in-itself,  must  not  be  confused  with  its  nature 
as  conditioned  by  a  particular  mode  of  matter  and  motion — 
the  nature  which  the  man  of  science  investigates.  It  is  pro- 
bably from  this  confusion  that  Kant's  doctrine  of  the  rela- 
tion between  phenomena  and  things-in-themselves  derives 
any  plausibility  which  it  may  have  for  most  of  his  readers  : 
but,  after  what  has  been  said  above,  a  moment's  considera- 
tion will  show  how  unwarrantable  according  to  his  principles 
it  is.  The  nature  of  a  sensation,  as  dependent  upon  any 
motion  or  configuration  of  molecules,  is  still  a  nature  deter- 
mined by  its  relation  to  other  data  of  experience — a  relation 
which  (like  every  other  relation  within,  or  capable  of  coming 
within,  experience)  the  single  self-distinguishing  principle, 
which  Kant  calls  understanding,  is  needed  to  constitute. 
It  is  not  such  a  nature,  but  one  to  which  no  experience  or 
interrogation  of  experience  brings  us  any  the  nearer,  that  we 


CH.  l]     THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      45 

must  suppose  to  belong  to  the  phenomenon  as  an  appearance 
of  a  thing-in-itself,  if  Kant's  antithesis  is  to  be  maintained. 

And  if  phenomena,  as  '  materialiter  spectata,'  have  such 
another  nature,  it  will  follow — not  indeed  that  all  our  know- 
ledge is  an  illusion  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  for 
that  implies  a  possibility  of  correction  by  true  knowledge — 
but  that  there  is  no  ground  for  that  conviction  of  there 
being  some  unity  and  totality  in  things,  from  which  the 
quest  for  knowledge  proceeds.  The  '  cosmos  of  our  experi- 
ence,' and  the  order  of  things-in-themselves,  will  be  two 
wholly  unrelated  worlds,  of  which,  however,  each  determines 
the  same  sensations.  All  that  determination  of  a  sensible 
occurrence  which  can  be  the  object  of  possible  experience 
or  inferred  as  an  explanation  of  experience — its  simple 
position  of  antecedence  or  sequence  in  time  to  other  occur- 
rences, as  well  as  its  relation  to  conditions  which  regulate 
that  position  and  determine  its  sensible  nature — will  belong 
to  one  world  of  which  a  unifying  self-consciousness  is  the 
organising  principle  :  while  the  very  same  occurrence,  as  an 
effect  of  things-in-themselves,  will  belong  to  another  world, 
will  be  subject  to  a  wholly  different  order  of  determinations, 
which  may  have — and  indeed,  in  being  so  described,  is 
assumed  to  have — some  principle  of  unity  of  its  own,  but 
of  which,  because  it  is  a  world  of  things-in-themselves,  the 
principle  must  be  taken  to  be  the  pure  negation  of  that 
which  determines  the  world  of  experience.  If  this  be  so, 
the  conception  of  a  universe  is  a  delusive  one.  Man  weaves 
a  web  of  his  own  and  calls  it  a  universe ;  but  if  the  principle 
of  this  universe  is  neither  one  with,  nor  dependent  on,  that 
of  things-in-themselves,  there  is  in  truth  no  universe  at  all, 
nor  does  there  seem  to  be  any  reason  why  there  should  not 
be  any  number  of  such  independent  creations.  We  have 
asserted  the  unity  of  the  world  of  our  experience  only  to 
transfer  that  world  to  a  larger  chaos. 

40.  A  tempting  but  misleading  way  out  of  the  difficulty 
is  to  reduce  the  world  of  experience  to  dependence  on  that 
of- things-in-themselves  by  taking  the  intellectual  principle, 


46  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

which,  in  the  sense  explained,  '  makes '  the  world  of  experi- 
ence, to  be  not,  as  Kant  considered  it,  an  independent 
thing-in-itself,  but  itself  a  product  of  things-in-themselves. 
Our  readiness  to  confuse  things-in-themselves,  as  just  pointed 
out,  with  the  material  conditions  of  sensation,  may  easily 
bring  us  to  put  the  case  in  this  way  to  ourselves.  Certain 
combinations  of  moving  matter,  we  are  ready  to  believe, 
issue,  by  processes  yet  to  be  ascertained,  in  those  living 
organisms  which  again,  in  reaction  upon  certain  modes  of 
motion,  yield  sensation ;  and  the  sensitive  subject,  under  a 
continuance  of  like  physical  influences,  somehow  grows  into 
the  intellectual  subject  of  which  the  action  is  admitted  to 
be  necessary  to  constitute  the  '  cosmos  of  our  experience.' 
But  we  have  learnt  Kant's  lesson  to  very  little  purpose  if 
we  do  not  understand  that  the  terms,  which  in  such  psycho- 
genesis  are  taken  to  stand  for  independent  agents,  are  in 
■  fact  names  for  substantiated  relations  between  phenomena ; 
relations  to  which  an  existence  on  their  own  account  is 
fictitiously  ascribed,  but  which  in  truth  only  exist  for,  or 
through  the  action  of,  the  unifying  and  self-distinguishing 
spiritual  subject  which  they  are  taken  to  account  for.  If 
this  subject  is  to  be  dependent  on  things-in-themselves, 
something  else  must  be  understood  by  these  '  things '  than 
any  objects  that  we  know  or  can  know ;  for  in  the  existence 
of  such  objects  its  action  is  already  implied. 

The  question  then  arises  whether,  when  we  have  excluded 
from  things-in-themselves  every  kind  of  qualification  arising 
from  determination  by,  or  relation  to,  an  intelligent  subject, 
any  meaning  is  left  in  the  assertion  of  a  dependence  of  this 
subject  upon  them.  Does  not  any  significant  assertion  of 
that  dependence,  either  as  a  fact  or  even  as  a  mere  possi- 
bility, imply  a  removal  of  the  things-in-themselves  from  the 
region  of  the  purely  unknowAle,  and  their  qualification  by 
an  understood  relation  to  the  intelligent  subject  said  to  be 
dependent  on  them  ?  But  if  this  is  so,  and  if  it  is  impossible 
for  such  a  relation,  any  more  than  any  other,  to  exist  except 
through  the  unifying  action  of  spirit,  what  becomes  of  the 


CH.l]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      47 

independence  of  the  things-in-themselves  ?  Are  they  not 
being  determined  by  a  spiritual  action  exactly  of  that  kind 
which  is  being  alleged  to  depend  on  them,  and  their  exclusion 
of  which  is  the  one  point  expressed  by  their  designation  as 
things-in-themselves  ? 

41.  These  considerations  seem  to  preclude  us,  when  once 
we  have  recognised  the  ground  of  distinction  between  a  world 
of  experience  and  a  world  of  things-in-themselves,  from  any 
attempt  to  overcome  that  absolute  separation  between  the 
two  worlds,  which  Kant's  doctrine  implies,  by  treating  the 
organising  subject  of  the  world  of  experience  as  in  any  sense 
a  product  of  things-in-themselves.  Kant  himself  lends  no 
countenance  to  any  such  attempt ;  but  on  further  reflection 
we  may  begin  to  question  whether  the  view,  which  Kant 
himself  gives,  of  the  relation  between  things-in-themselves 
and  the  '  matter '  of  experience,  or  '  natura  materialiter  spe- 
ctata ' — the  view  out  of  which  the  whole  difficulty  arises — is 
not  itself  open  to  the  same  charge  of  inconsistency  as  that 
method  of  escape  from  its  consequences  which  we  have 
examined.  When  we  say  that  sensations,  or  phenomena  in 
respect  of  their  mere  'matter,'  are  effects  of  things-in-them- 
selves, we  may  exclude  as  carefully  as  possible  all  confusion 
of  the  things-in-themselves  with  the  ascertainable  material 
conditions,  or  formal  causes,  of  feeling,  but  we  cannot  assert 
such  a  relation  of  cause  and  effect  between  the  things  and 
sensation  without  making  the  former  a  member  of  a  relation 
which,  as  Kant  himself  on  occasion  would  be  ready  to 
remind  us,  we  have  no  warrant  for  extending  beyond  the 
world  of  experience,  or  for  considering  as  independent  of 
the  intellectual  principle  of  unity  which  is  the  condition  of 
there  being  such  a  world.  Causation  has  no  meaning  except 
as  an  unalterable  connexion  between  changes  in  the  world 
of  our  experience — an  unalterableness  of  which  the  basis  is 
the  relation  of  that  world  throughout,  with  all  its  changes, 
to  a  single  subject.  That  sensations  therefore,  the  matter 
of  our  experience,  should  be  connected  as  effects  with 
things-in-themselves,  of  which  all  that  can  be  said  is  that 


48  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE       .    [,BK.  I 

they  belong  to  a  world  other  than  the  world  of  our  experience 
and  are  not  relative  to  the  subject  to  which  it  is  relative,  is 
a  statement  self-contradictory  or  at  best  unmeaning. 

That  Kant  should  not  have  seen  this  merely  goes  to  show 
that  his  own  doctrine,  being  the  gradual  conquest  of  his 
later  years,  had  not  obtained  full  possession  of  his  mind. 
The  antithesis  between  the  real  and  the  work  of  thought 
had  still  such  command  over  him  that,  after  he  had  himself 
traced  the  agency  of  thought  in  all  that  gives  the  world  of 
experience  a  definite  character,  he  still  could  not  help 
ascribing  to  this  world,  in  terms  of  the  knowable,  a  relation 
to  an  unknowable  opposite ;  though  that  very  relation,  if  it 
existed,  would  according  to  his  own  showing  bring  the 
unknowable  opposite  within  that  world  (dependent  on  an 
intelligent  subject)  from  which  it  is  expressly  excluded. 

42.  At  this  point  we  may  probably  anticipate  a  rejoinder 
to  some  such  effect  as  the  foUowihg.  It  appears  to  be  im- 
possible to  take  the  matter  of  experience  to  be  the  effect 
of  things-in-themselves,  since  these  things,  if  they  are  to  be 
things-in-themselves,  cannot  be  supposed  to  exist  in  a  rela- 
tion which  only  holds  for  the  world  of  experience,  as  deterr 
mined  by  an  intelligent  subject.  But  it  must  be  equally 
impossible  to  consider  it  a  product  of  the  intelligent  subject, 
to  which,  when  we  have  allowed  every  function  that  can  be 
claimed  for  it  in  the  way  of  uniting  in  a  related  system  the 
manifold  material  of  sensation,  we  must  still  deny  the  func- 
tion of  generating  that  material.  Yet  we  cannot  ignore  sen- 
sation. We  cannot  reduce  the  world  of  experience  to  a  web 
of  relations  in  which  nothing  is  related,  as  it  would  be  if 
everything  were  erased  from  it  which  we  cannot  refer  to  the 
action  of  a  combining  intelligence.  After  all  our  protests 
against  Dualism,  then,  are  we  not  at  last  left  with  an  unac- 
countable residuum — an  essential  element  of  the  real  world 
of  experience,  which  we  cannot  trace  to  what  we  regard  as 
the  organising  principle  of  that  world,  but  which  is  as  neces- 
sary to  make  the  world  what  it  is  as  that  principle  itself? 
What  do  we  gain  by  excluding  other  ways  of  accounting  for 


CH.  l]      THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      49 

it,  if  it  is  finally  irreducible  to  the  only  agency  by  which  we 
can  explain  the  order  of  the  world?  Does  it  not  remain 
a  thing-in-itself,  alien  and  opposite  to  anything  that  we  can 
explain  as  the  construction  of  intelligence,  just  as  much  as  if 
it  were  admitted  to  be  the  product  of  an  unknowable  power  ? 

43.  The  best  hope  of  answering  these  questions  lies  in 
considering  further  how  they  arise.  They  are  due  to  the 
abstraction  of  the  '  matter '  from  the  '  form '  of  experience. 
This  abstraction  we  inevitably  make  in  reflecting  on  the 
process  by  which  we  obtain  such  knowledge  as  we  have, 
but  it  deceives  us  when  we  make  it  a  ground  for  supposing 
a  like  separation  of  elements  in  the  world  of  experience.  It  is 
true  indeed,  according  to  the  doctrine  previously  stated,  that 
the  principle  which  enables  us  to  know  that  there  is  a  world, 
and  to  set  about  learning  its  nature,  is  identical  with  that 
which  is  the  condition  of  there  being  a  world ;  but  it  is  not 
therefore  to  be  imagined  that  all  the  distinctions  and  relations, 
which  we  present  to  ourselves — and  necessarily  present  to 
ourselves — in  the  process  of  learning  to  know,  have  counter- 
parts in  the  real  world.  Our  presentation  of  them,  as  a  part 
of  our  mental  history,  is  a  fact  definitely  related  and  con- 
ditioned in  the  reality  of  the  world ;  but  the  distinctions 
presented  may  exist  only  for  us,  in  whom  the  intellectual 
principle  realises  itself  under  special  conditions,  not  in  the 
world  as  it  is  in  itself  or  for  a  perfect  intelligence. 

The  distinction  between  the  form  and  matter  of  experience 
is  a  distinction  of  this  kind.  In  reflecting  on  the  process  by 
which  we  have  come  to  know  anything,  we  find  that,  at  any 
stage  we  may  recall,  it  consists  in  a  further  qualification  of 
a  given  material  by  the  consideration  of  the  material  under 
relations  hitherto  unconsidered.  Thus  as  contrasted  with, 
and  abstracted  from,  the  further  formation  which  upon 
continued  observation  and  attention  it  may  acquire,  any 
perception,  any  piece  of  knowledge,  may  be  regarded  as  an 
unformed  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  look  at  what 
the  given  perception  or  piece  of  knowledge  is  in  itself,  we 
find  that  it  is  already  formed,  in  more  complex  ways  than 

£ 


50  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bK.  I 

we  can  disentangle,  by  the  synthesis  of  less  determinate  data. 
But  there  is  a  point  at  which  the  individual's  retrospective 
analysis  of  the  knowledge  which  he  finds  himself  to  possess 
necessarily  stops.  Antecedently  to  any  of  the  formative 
intellectual  processes  which  he  can  trace,  it  would  seem 
that  something  must  have  been  given  for  those  processes  to 
begin  upon.  This  something  is  taken  to  be  feeling,  pure  and 
simple.  When  all  accretions  of  form,  due  to  the  intellectual 
establishment  of  relations,  have  been  stripped  off,  there 
seem  to  remain  the  mere  sensations  without  which  the  in- 
tellectual activity  would  have  had  nothing  to  deal  with  or 
operate  upon.  These  then  must  be  in  an  absolute  sense 
the  matter — the  matter  excluding  all  form — of  experience. 
'  44.  Now  it  is  evident  that  the  ground  on  which  we  make 
this  statement,  that  mere  sensations  form  the  matter  of 
experience,  warrants  us  in  making  it,  if  at  all,  only  as  a  state- 
ment in  regard  to  the  mental  history  of  the  individual. 
Even  in  this  reference  it  can  scarcely  be  accepted.  There 
is  no  positive  basis  for  it  but  the  fact  that,  so  far  as  memory 
goes,  we  always  find  ourselves  manipulating  some  data  of 
consciousness,  themselves  independent  of  any  intellectual 
manipulation  which  we  can  remember  applying  to  them. 
But  on  the  strength  of  this  to  assume  that  there  are  such 
-  data  in  the  history  of  our  experience,  consisting  in  mere 
sensations,  antecedently  to  any  action  of  the  intellect,  is  not 
really  an  intelligible  inference  from  the  fact  stated.  It  is 
an  abstraction  which  may  be  put  into  words,  but  to  which 
no  real  meaning  can  be  attached.  For  a  sensation  can 
only  form  an  object  of  experience  in  being  determined  by 
an  intelligent  subject  which  distinguishes  it  from  itself  and 
contemplates  it  in  relation  to  other  sensations ;  so  that  to 
suppose  a  primary  datum  or  matter  of  the  individual's 
experience,  wholly  void  of  intellectual  determination,  is  to 
suppose  such  experience  to  begin  with  what  could  not 
belong  to  or  be  an  object  of  experience  at  all. 

45.  But  the  question  we  are  here  concerned  with  is  not 
Tvhether  any  such  thing  as  mere  sensation,  a  matter  wholly 


ca.  l]      THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      51 

unformed  by  intelligence,  exists  as  a  stage  in  the  process  by 
which  the  individual  becomes  acquainted  with  the  world ; 
it  is  the  question  whether  there  is  any  such  element  in  the 
world  of  knowable  facts.  Has  nature — the  system  of  con- 
nected phenomena,  or  facts  related  to  consciousness,  which 
forms  the  object  of  experience — a  reality  of  that  kind  which 
Kant  describes  as  '  natura  materialiter  spectata ; '  a  reality 
consisting  of  mere  sensations,  or  sensations  of  which  the 
qualities,  whatever  they  may  be,  are  independent  of  such 
determination  as  arises  from  the  action  of  a  unifying  and 
self-distinguishing  subject?  Or  has  it  in  any  other  sense 
a  'matter'  which  does  not  depend  on  a  combining  intelligence 
for  being  what  it  is,  as  much  as  does  the  relation  between  my 
experience  of  to-day  and  that  of  my  previous  life  ? 

Phenomena  are  facts  related  to  consciousness.  Thus, 
when  we  enquire  whether  there  is  such  a  thing  in  the  world 
of  phenomena  as  sensation  undetermined  by  thought,  the 
question  may  be  considered  in  relation  either  to  the  facts, 
as  such,  or  to  the  consciousness  for  which  the  facts  exist. 
It  may  be  put  either  thus — Among  the  facts  that  form  the 
object  of  possible  experience,  are  there  sensations  which  do 
not  depend  on  thought  for  being  what  they  are  ?  or  thus — 
Is  sensation,  as  unqualified  by  thought,  an  element  in  the 
consciousness  which  is  necessary  to  there  being  such  a  thing 
as  the  world  of  phenomena  ? 

46.  After  what  has  been  already  said,  the  answer  to  these 
questions  need  not  detain  us  long.  If  it  is  admitted  that 
we  know  of  no  other  medium  but  a  thinking  or  self- 
distinguishing  consciousness,  in  and  through  which  that 
unification  of  the  manifold  can  take  place  which  is  necessary 
to  constitute  relation,  it  follows  that  a  sensation  apart  from 
thought — not  determined  or  acted  on  by  thought — would 
be  an  unrelated  sensation ;  and  an  unrelated  sensation 
cannot  amount  to  a  fact.  Mere  sensation  is  in  truth  a  phrase 
that  represents  no  reality.  It  is  the  result  of  a  process  of 
abstraction ;  but  having  ^got  the  phrase  we  give  a  confused 
meaning  to  it,  we  fill  up  the  shell  which  our  abstraction  has 

E  2 


52  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

left,  by  reintroducing  the  qualification  which  we  assumed 
ourselves  to  have  got  rid  of.  We  present  the  mere  sensations 
to  ourselves  as  determined  by  relation  in  a  way  that  would 
be  impossible  in  the  absence  of  that  connecting  action  which 
we  assume  to  be  absent  in  designating  them  mere  sensations. 
The  minimum  of  qualification  which  we  mentally  ascribe  to 
the  sensation  in  thus  speaking  of  it,  is  generally  such  as 
implies  sequence  and  degree.  A  feeling  not  characterised 
either  by  its  connexion  with  previous  feeling  or  by  its  own 
intensity  we  must  admit  to  be  nothing  at  all,  but  at  first 
sight  we  take  it  for  granted  that  the  character  thus  given  to 
a  feeling  would  belong  to  it  just  the  same,  though  there  were 
no  such  thing  as  thought  in  the  world.  It  certainly  does 
not  depend  on  ourselves — on  any  power  which  we  can 
suppose  it  rests  with  our  will  to  exert  or  withhold — whether 
sensations  shall  occur  to  us  in  this  or  that  order  of  succession, 
with  this  or  that  degree  of  intensity.  But  the  question  is 
whether  the  relation  of  time  between  one  sensation  and 
another,  or  that  relation  between  a  sensation  and  other 
possible  modes  of  itself  which  is  implied  in  its  having 
p.  degree,  could  exist  if  there  were  not  a  subject  for  which 
the  several  sensations,  or  modes  of  the  same  sensation,  were 
equally  present  and  equally  distinguished  from  itself.  If  it 
is  granted  that  these  relations,  which  constitute  the  minimum 
determination  of  a  sensible  fact,  only  exist  through  the  action 
of  such  a  subject,  it  follows  that  thought  is  the  necessary 
condition  of  the  existence  of  sensible  facts,  and  that  mere 
sensation,  in  the  sense  supposed,  is  not  a  possible  constituent 
in  the  realm  of  facts. 

47.  Or,  if  the  consequence  be  disputed,  the  dispute  can 
only  turn  on  a  secondary  question  as  to  the  fitness  of  the 
term  '  thought '  to  represent  a  function  of  which  the  essential 
nature  is  admitted.  If  by  thought  is  necessarily  understood 
a  faculty  which  is  born  and  dies  with  each  man;  which 
is  exhausted  by  labour  and  refreshed  by  repose ;  which  is 
exhibited  in  the  construction  of  chains  of  reasoning,  but 
not  in  the  common  ideas  which  make  mankind  and  its 


CH.  l]     THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      53 

experience  one ;  on  which  the  '  great  thinker '  may  plume 
himself  as  the  athlete  on  the  strength  of  his  muscles  ;  then 
to  say  that  the  agency  which  makes  sensible  facts  what  they 
are  can  only  be  that  of  a  thinking  subject,  is  an  absurd 
impropriety.  But  if  it  appears  that  a  function  in  the  way 
of  self-consciousness  is  implied  in  the  existence  of  relations, 
and  therefore  of  determinate  facts — a  function  identical  in 
principle  with  that  which  enables  the  individual  to  look  before 
and  after,  and  which  renders  his  experience  a  connected 
system — then  it  is  more  reasonable  to  modify  some  of  our 
habitual  notions  of  thought  as  exercised  by  ourselves  than, 
on  the  strength  of  these  notions,  to  refuse  to  recognise  an 
essential  identity  between  the  subject  which  forms  the 
unifying  principle  of  the  experienced  world,  and  that  which) 
as  in  us,  qualifies  us  for  an  experience  of  it.  It  becomes  time 
to  consider  whether  the  characteristics  of  thought,  even  as 
exercised  by  us,  are  not  rather  to  be  sought  in  the  unity  of 
its  object  as  presented  to  all  men,  and  in  the  continuity 
of  all  experience  in  regard  to  that  object,  than  in  the 
incidents  of  an  individual  life  which  is  but  for  a  day,  or 
in  abilities  of  which  any  man  can  boast  that  he  has  more 
than  his  neighbour. 

48.  Our  question,  then,  in  the  first  of  the  two  forms  sug- 
gested, must  be  answered  in  the  negative.  A  fact  consisting 
of  mere  feeling,  in  the  sense  supposed,  is  a  contradiction,  an 
impossibility.  This  does  not  of  course  mean  that  no  being 
can  feel  which  does  not  also  think.  We  are  not  called  on 
here  to  enquire  whether  there  are  really  animals  which  feel 
but  have  not  the  capacity  of  thinking.  All  that  the  present 
argument  would  lead  us  to  maintain  would  be  that,  so  far 
as  they  feel  without  thinking,  their  feelings  are  not  facts  for 
them — for  their  consciousness.  Their  feelings  are  facts; 
but  they  are  facts  only  so  far  as  determined  by  relations, 
which  exist  only  for  a  thinking  consciousness  and  otherwise 
could  not  exist.  And,  in  like  manner,  that  large  part  of  our 
own  sensitive  life  which  goes  on  without  being  affected  by 
conceptions,  is  a  series  of  facts  with  the  determination  of 


54  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

which,  indeed,  thought,  as  ours  or  in  us,  has  nothing  to  do, 
but  which  not  the  less  depends  for  its  existence  as  a  series 
of  facts  on  the  action  of  the  same  subject  which,  in  another 
mode  of  its  action,  enables  us  to  know  them.  But  in  saying 
this,  it  may  be  objected,  we  have  already  admitted  that 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  merely  feeling  consciousness ; 
and,  in  the  presence  of  this  admission,  what  becomes  of  the 
denial  to  feeling  of  any  separate  or  independent  reality? 
The  answer  is  that  the  distinction  of  the  merely  feeling 
consciousness  is  just  this,  that  what  it  is  really  it  is  not 
consciously — that  the  relations  by  which  it  is  really  determined 
do  not  exist  for  it,  but  for  the  thinking  consciousness  on 
which  it  and  they  alike  depend  for  being  what  they  are. 
Its  very  characteristics  as  a  merely  feeling  consciousness 
depend  on  conditions,  in  the  universe  of  things,  by  which  it 
would  not  be  conditioned  if  it  were  really  no  more  than  it 
feels  itself  to  be ;  if  it  were  not  relative  to,  and  had  not  its 
existence  for,  another  form  of  consciousness  which  compre- 
hends it  and  its  conditions. 

49.  In  the  second  of  the  forms  in  which  the  question  be- 
fore us  admits  of  being  presented — Can  sensation  exist  as  an 
independent  element  in  a  consciousness  to  which  facts  can 
appear  ? — it  has  been  virtually  answered  in  being  answered 
in  the  first.  To  that  thinking  subject,  whose  action  is  the 
universal  bond  of  relation  that  renders  facts  what  they  are, 
their  existence  and  their  appearance  must  be  one  and  the 
same.  Their  appearance,  their  presence  to  it,  is  their  exis- 
tence. Feeling  can  no  more  be  an  independent  element  in 
that  subject,  as  the  subject  to  which  they  appear,  than  it  can 
be  an  independent  element  in  it,  as  the  subject  through 
whose  action  they  exist.  It  is  true  on  the  one  hand,  as  has 
just,  been  admitted,  that  in  a  great  part  of  our  lives  we  feel 
without  thinking  and  without  any  qualification  of  our  feelings 
by  our  thoughts  ;  while  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  sub- 
jects to  whom  facts  can  appear,  who  are  capable  of  con- 
ceiving a  world  of  phenomena.  But  just  so  far  as  we  feel 
without  thinking,  no  world  of  phenomena  exists  for  us.  The 


CH.  l]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      55 

suspension  of  thought  in  us  means  also  the  suspension  of 
fact  or  reality  for  us.  We  do  not  cease  to  be  facts,  but  facts 
cease  to  exist  for  our  consciousness.  However  then  we  may 
explain  the  merely  temporary  and  interrupted  character  of 
the  action  of  thought  upon  feeling  in  us,  that  temporary 
character  affords  no  reason  why  we  should  hesitate  to  deny 
that  feeling  unqualified  by  thought  can  be  an  element  in  the 
consciousness  which  is  necessary  to  there  being  such  a  thing 
as  a  world  of  phenomena. 

50.  Mere  feeling,  then,  as  a  matter  unformed  by  thought, 
has  no  place  in  the  world  of  facts,  in  the  cosmos  of  possible 
experience.  Any  obstacle  which  it  seemed  to  present  to  a 
monistic  view  of  that  world  may  be  allowed  to  disappear. 
We  may  give  up  the  assumption  that  it  needs  to  be  accounted 
for  as  a  product  of  things-in-themselves ;  or  that,  if  not 
accounted  for  in  this  way,  it  still  remains  an  unaccountable 
opposite  to  thought  and  its  work.  Feeling  and  thought  are 
inseparable  and  mutually  dependent  in  the  consciousness 
for  which  the  world  of  experience  exists,  inseparable  and 
mutually  dependent  in  the  constitution  of  the  facts  which  form 
the  object  of  that  consciousness.  Each  in  its  full  reality 
includes  the  other.  It  is  one  and  the  same  living  world  of  ex- 
perience which,  considered  as  the  manifold  object  presented 
by  a  self-distinguishing  subject  to  itself,  may  be  called  feeling, 
and,  considered  as  the  subject  presenting  such  an  object  to 
itself,  may  be  called  thought.  Neither  is  the  product  of  the 
other.  It  is  only  when  by  a  process  of  abstraction  we  have 
reduced  either  to  something  which  is  not  itself,  that  we  can 
treat  either  as  the  product  of  anything,  or  apply  the  category 
of  cause  and  effect  to  it  at  all.  For  that  category  is  itself  their 
product.  Or  rather,  it  represents  one  form  of  the  activity  of 
the  consciousness  which  in  inseparable  union  they  constitute. 
The  connexion  between  a  phenomenon  and  its  conditions  is 
one  that  only  obtains  in  and  for  that  consciousness.  No 
such  connexion  can  obtain  between  that  consciousness  and 
anything  elsej  which  means  that  the  consciousness  itself, 
whether  considered  as  feeling  or  considered  as  thought, 


56  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

being  that  by  means  of  which  everything  is  accounted  for, 
does  not  in  turn  admit  of  being  accounted  for,  in  the  sense 
that  any  '  whence '  or  '  why '  can  be  assigned  for  it. 

Any  constituent  of  the  world  of  possible  experience  we 
can  account  for  by  exhibiting  its  relation  to  other  consti- 
tuents of  the  same  world ;  but  this  is  not  to  account  for  the 
world  itself.  We  may  and  do  explore  the  conditions  under 
which  a  sentient  organism  is  formed,  and  the  various  forms 
of  molecular  action  by  which  particular  sensations  on  the 
part  of  such  an  organism  are  elicited.  We  may  ascertain 
uniformities  in  the  sequence  of  one  feeling  upon  another. 
In  the  life  of  the  individual  and  the  race  we  may  trace 
regular  histories  of  the  manner  in  which  a  particular  way  of 
thinking  has  been  affected  by  an  earlier,  and  has  in  turn 
affected  a  later  way ;  of  the  determination  of  certain  ideas  by 
certain  emotions,  and  of  certain  emotions  by  certain  ideas. 
But  in  all  this  we  are  connecting  phenomena  with  phenomena 
within  a  world,  not  connecting  the  world  of  phenomena  with 
anything  other  than  itself.  We  are  doing  nothing  to  account 
for  the  all-uniting  consciousness  which  alone  can  render  these 
sequences  and  connexions  possible,  for  which  alone  they 
exist,  and  of  which  the  action  in  us  alone  enables  us  to  know 
them.  We  can  indeed  show  the  contradictions  involved  in 
supposing  a  world  of  phenomena  to  exist  otherwise  than  in 
and  for  consciousness,  and  upon  analysis  can  discern  what 
must  be  the  formal  characteristic  of  a  consciousness  for  which 
a  system  of  related  phenomena  exists.  So  far  we  can  give  an 
account  of  what  the  world  as  a  whole  must  be,  and  of  what 
the  spirit  that  constitutes  it  does.  But  just  because  all  that 
we  can  experience  is  included  in  this  one  world,  and  all  our 
inferences  and  explanations  relate  only  to  its  details,  neither 
it  as  a  whole,  nor  the  one  consciousness  which  constitutes  it, 
can  be  accounted  for  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  They 
cannot  be  accounted  for  by  what  they  include,  and  being  all- 
inclusive — at  any  rate  so  far  as  possible  experience  goes — 
there  remains  nothing  else  by  which  they  can  be  accounted 
for.   And  this  is  equally  true  of  consciousness  as  feeling  and 


CH.  l]     THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      57 

of  consciousness  as  thought,  for  each  in  its  reality  involves 
the  other. 

51.  AVe  are  now  in  a  position  to  reconsider  the  restriction 
which  Kant  puts  on  the  interpretation  of  his  own  dictum 
that  'understanding  makes  nature.'  This  with  him  means 
that  understanding,  as  the  unifying  principle  which  is  the 
source  of  relations,  acts  formatively  upon  feelings  as  upon 
a  material  given  to  it  from  an  opposite  source  called  'things- 
in-themselves/  rendering  them  into  one  system  of  phenomena 
called  '  nature,'  which  is  the  sole  object  of  experience,  and 
to  which  all  judgments  as  to  matters  of  fact  relate.  We 
demur  to  the  independent  reality,  or  reality  as  determined  by 
something  else  than  thought,  which  is  thus  ascribed  to  feeling. 
It  is  not  that  we  would  claim  any  larger  function  for  thought 
than  Kant  claims  for  understanding  as  separate  from  feeling, 
supposing  that  separation  to  be  once  admitted.  It  is  the 
separation  itself  that  is  in  question.  We  do  not  dispute  the 
validity  of  Locke's  challenge  to  a  man  by  any  amount  ot 
thinking  to  produce  a  single  '  simple  idea '  to  himself.  We 
admit  that  mere  thought  can  no  more  produce  the  facts  of 
feeling,  than  mere  feeling  can  generate  thought.  But  we 
deny  that  there  is  really  such  a  thing  as  '  mere  feeling '  or 
'mere  thought.'  We  hold  that  these  phrases  represent 
abstractions  to  which  no  reality  corresponds,  either  in  the 
facts  of  the  world  or  in  the  consciousness  to  which  those 
facts  are  relative.  We  can  attach  no  meaning  to  '  reality,'  as 
applied  to  the  world  of  phenomena,  but  that  of  existence 
under  definite  and  unalterable  relations ;  and  we  find  that  it 
is  only  for  a  thinking  consciousness  that  such  relations  can 
subsist.  Reality  of  feeling,  abstracted  from  thought,  is 
abstracted  from  the  condition  of  its  being  a  reality.  That 
great  part  of  our  sensitive  life  is  not  determined  by  our 
thought,  that  the  sensitive  life  of  innumerable  beings  is 
wholly  undetermined  by  any  thought  of  theirs  or  in  them,  is 
not  in  dispute :  but  this  proves  nothing  as  to  what  that  sensi- 
tive life  really  is  in  nature  or  in  the  cosmos  of  possible  ex- 
perience. It  has  no  place  in  nature,  except  as  determined  by 


58  METAPHYSICS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

relations  which  can  only  exist  for  a  thinking  consciousness. 
For  the  consciousness  which  constitutes  reality  and  makes 
the  world  one  it  exists,  not  in  that  separateness  which  be- 
longs to  it  as  an  attribute  of  beings  that  think  only  at  times 
or  not  at  all,  but  as  conditioned  by  a  whole  which  thought  in 
turn  conditions. 

As  to  what  that  consciousness  in  itself  or  in  its  complete- 
ness is,  we  can  only  make  negative  statements.  That  there 
is  such  a  consciousness  is  implied  in  the  existence  of  the 
world ;  but  what  it  is  we  only  know  through  its  so  far  acting 
in  us  as  to  enable  us,  however  partially  and  interruptedly, 
to  have  knowledge  of  a  world  or  an  intelligent  experience. 
In  such  knowledge  or  experience  there  is  no  mere  thought 
or  mere  feeling.  No  feeling  enters  into  it  except  as  quali- 
fying, and  qualified  by,  an  interrelated  order  of  which  a  self- 
distinguishing  subject  forms  the  unifying  bond.  Thought 
has  no  function  in  it  except  as  constantly  co-ordinating  ever 
new  appearances  in  virtue  of  their  presence  to  that  one 
subject.  And  we  are  warranted  in  holding  that,  as  a  mutual 
independence  of  thought  and  feeling  has  no  place  in  any 
consciousness  on  our  part,  which  is  capable  of  apprehending 
a  world  or  for  which  a  world  exists,  so  it  has  none  in  the 
world-consciousness  of  which  ours  is  a  limited  mode. 

• 

52.  The  purpose  of  this  long  discussion  has  been  to 
arrive  at  some  conclusion  in  regard  to  the  relation  between 
man  and  nature,  a  conclusion  which  must  be  arrived  at 
before  we  can  be  sure  that  any  theory  of  ethics,  in  the 
distinctive  sense  of  the  term,  is  other  than  wasted  labour. 
If  by  nature  we  mean  the  object  of  possible  experience,  the 
connected  order  of  knowable  facts  or  phenomena — and  this 
is  what  our  men  of  science  mean  by  it  when  they  trace  the 
natural  genesis  of  human  character — then  nature  implies 
something  other  than  itself,  as  the  condition  of  its  being 
what  it  is.  Of  that  something  else  we  are  entitled  to  say, 
positively,  that  it  is  a  self-distinguishing  consciousness; 
because  the  function  which  it  must  fulfil  in  order  to  render 


CH.  l]      THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE      59 

the  relations  of  phenomena,  and  with  them  nature,  possible, 
is  one  which,  on  however  limited  a  scale,  we  ourselves 
exercise  in  the  acquisition  of  experience,  and  exercise  only 
by  means  of  such  a  consciousness.  We  are  further  entitled 
to  say  of  it,  negatively,  that  the  relations  by  which,  through 
its  action,  phenomena  are  determined  are  not  relations  of  it 
— not  relations  by  which  it  is  itself  determined.  They  arise 
out  of  its  presence  to  phenomena,  or  the  presence  of  pheno- 
mena to  itj  but  the  very  condition  of  their  thus  arising  is  that 
the  unifying  consciousness  which  constitutes  them  should 
not  itself  be  one  of  the  objects  so  related.  The  relation  of 
events  to  each  other  as  in  time  implies  their  equal  presence 
to  a  subject  which  is  not  in  time.  There  could  be  no  such 
thing  as  time  if  there  were  not  a  self-consciousness  which  is 
not  in  time.  As  little  could  there  be  a  relation  of  objects 
as  outside  each  other,  or  in  space,  if  they  were  not  equally 
related  to  a  subject  which  they  are  not  outside ;  a  subject 
of  which  outsideness  to  anything  is  not  a  possible  attribute  j 
which  by  its  synthetic  action  constitutes  that  relation,  but 
is  not  itself  determined  by  it.  The  same  is  true  of  those 
relations  which  we  are  apt  to  treat  as  independent  entities 
under  the  names  matter  and  motion.  They  are  relations 
existing  for  a  consciousness  which  they  do  not  so  condition 
as  that  it  should  itself  either  move  or  be  material. 

53.  If  objection  is  taken  to  the  interpretation  of  matter 
as  consisting  in  certain  relations,  if  its  character  as  substance 
is  insisted  on,  it  remains  to  ask  what  is  meant  by  substance. 
It  is  not  denied  that  there  are  material  substances,  but  their 
qualification  both  as  substances  and  as  material  will  be 
found  to  depend  on  relations.  By  a  substance  we  mean 
that  which  is  persistent  throughout  certain  appearances.  It 
represents  that  identical  element  throughout  the  appearances, 
that  permanent  element  throughout  the  times  of  their  appear- 
ance, in  virtue  of  which  they  are  not  merely  so  many  differ- 
ent appearances,  but  connected  changes.  A  piaterial  sub- 
stance is  that  which  remains  the  same  with  itself  in  respect 
of  some  of  the  qualities  which  we  include  in  our  definition 


6o  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

of  matter — qualities  all  consisting  in  some  kind  of  relation — 
while  in  other  respects  it  changes.  Its  character  as  a  sub- 
stance depends  on  that  relation  of  appearances  to  each  other 
in  a  single  order  which  renders  them  changes.  It  is  not  that 
first  there  is  a  substance,  and  that  then  certain  changes  of  it 
ensue.  The  substance  is  the  implication  of  the  changes,  and 
has  no  existence  otherwise.  Apart  from  the  changes  no 
substance,  any  more  than  apart  from  effects  a  cause.  If  we 
choose  to  say  then  that  matter  exists  as  a  substance,  we 
merely  substitute  for  the  designation  of  it. as  consisting  in  re- 
lations, a  designation  of  it  as  a  certain  correlatum  of  a  certain 
kind  of  relation.  Its  existence  as  a  substance  depends  on  the 
action  of  the  same  self-consciousness  upon  which  the  con- 
nexion of  phenomena  by  means  of  that  relation  depends. 

And  the  subject,  of  which  the  action  is  impUed  in  the 
connexion  of  phenomena  in  one  system  of  nature  by  means 
of  this  correlatum  of  change,  is  one  that  can  itself  be  as 
little  identified  with  that  correlatum — with  any  kind  of  sub- 
stance— as  with  the  change  to  which  substance  is  relative.  It 
has  already  been  pointed  out  that  a  consciousness,  to  which 
events  are  to  appear  as  changes,  cannot  itself  consist  in  those 
events.  Its  self-distinction  from  them  all  is  necessary  to  its 
holding  them  all  together  as  related  to  each  other  in  the  way 
of  change.  And,  for  the  same  reason,  that  connexion  of  all 
phenomena  as  changes  of  one  world  which  is  implied  in  the 
unity  of  intelligent  experience,  cannot  be  the  work  of  any- 
thing which  is  the  substance  qualified  by  those  changes.  Its 
self-distinction  from  them,  which  is  the  condition  of  their 
appearance  to  it  under  this  relation  of  change,  is  incompati- 
ble with  its  being  so  qualified.  Even  if  we  allow  it  to  be 
possible  that  a  subject,  which  connects  certain  appearances 
as  changes,  should  itself  be  qualified  by — should  be  the 
substance  persistent  in — certain  other  changes,  it  is  plainly 
impossible  that  a  subject  which  so  connects  all  the  appear- 
ances of  nature  should  be  related  in  the  way  of  substance  to 
any  or  all  of  them. 

54.  We  may  express  the  conclusion  to  which  we  are  thus 


CH.  l]      THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE  IN  NAIURE      6l 

brought  by  saying  that  nature  in  its  reality,  or  in  order  to 
be  what  it  is,  implies  a  principle  which  is  not  natural.  By 
calling  the  principle  not  natural  we  mean  that  it  is  neither 
included  among  the  phenomena  which  through  its  presence 
to  them  form  a  nature,  nor  consists  in  their  series,  nor  is 
itself  determined  by  any  of  the  relations  which  it  constitutes 
among  them.  In  saying  more  than  this  of  it  we  must  be 
careful  not  to  fall  into  confusion.  We  are  most  safe  in 
calling  it  spiritual,  because,  for  reasons  given,  we  are  war- 
ranted in  thinking  of  it  as  a  self-distinguishing  consciousness. 
In  calling  it  supernatural  we  run  the  risk  of  misleading  and 
being  misled,  for  we  suggest  a  relation  between  it  and  nature 
of  a  kind  which  has  really  no  place  except  within  nature,  as 
a  relation  of  phenomenon  to  phenomenon.  We  convey  the 
notion  that  it  is  above  or  beyond  or  before  nature,  that  it  is 
a  cause  of  which  nature  is  the  effect,  a  substance  of  which 
the  changing  modes  constitute  nature ;  while  in  truth  all  the 
relations  so  expressed  are  relations  which,  indeed,  but  for 
the  non-natural  self-conscious  subject  would  not  exist,  but 
which  are  not  predicable  of  it.  If  we  employ  language  about 
it  in  which,  strictly  taken,  they  are  implied,  it  must  only  be 
on  a  clear  understanding  of  its  metaphorical  character. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  imperative  reason  why  we 
should  limit  'nature'  to  the  restricted  sense  in  which  we 
have  been  supposing  it  to  be  used,  if  only  the  same  sense 
can  be  covered  by  another  term.  If  we  like,  we  may  employ 
the  term  'nature'  to  represent  the  one  whole  which  includes 
both  the  system  of  related  phenomena  and  the  principle, 
other  than  itself,  which  that  system  implies.  But  in  that 
case,  if  we  would  avoid  confusion,  we  must  find  some  other 
term  than  nature  to  represent  the  system  of  phenomena  as 
such,  or  as  considered  without  inclusion  of  the  spiritual 
principle  which  it  implies,  and  some  other  term  than  'natural' 
to  represent  that  which  this  system  contains.  We  are  pretty 
sure,  however,  to  fail  in  this,  and  '  nature '  in  consequence 
becomes  a  term  that  is  played  fast  and  loose  with  in  philo- 
sophical writing.    It  is  spoken  of  as  an  independent  agent ; 


62  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE 

a  certain  completeness  and  self-containedness  are  ascribed 
to  it;  and  to  this  there  is  no  objection  so  long  as  we  under- 
stand it  to  include  the  spiritual  principle,  neither  in  time  nor 
in  space,  immaterial  and  immovable,  eternally  one  with  itself, 
which  is  necessary  to  the  possibility  of  a  world  of  phenomena. 
But  it  is  otherwise  if  '  nature '  is  at  the  same  time  thought 
of,  as  it  almost  inevitably  is,  under  attributes  only  applicable 
to  the  world  of  phenomena,  and  thus  as  excluding  the  spiri- 
tual principle  which  that  world  indeed  implies,  but  implies 
as  other  than  itself.  In  that  case,  to  ascribe  independence 
or  self-containedness  to  it — if  for  a  moment  the  use  of 
theological  language  may  be  allowed  which  it  is  generally 
desirable  to  avoid — is  to  deify  nature  while  we  cancel  its 
title  to  deification.  It  is  to  speak  of  nature  without  God  in 
a  manner  only  appropriate  to  nature  as  it  is  in  God.  Or — 
to  employ  language  less  liable  to  misleading  associations — it 
is  to  involve  ourselves  in  perpetual  confusion  by  seeking  for 
a  completeness  in  the  world  of  phenomena,  the  world  exist- 
ing under  conditions  of  space  and  time,  which,  just  because 
it  exists  under  those  conditions,  is  not  to  be  found  there. 
The  result  of  the  confusion  will  generally  be  that,  being 
unable  to  discover  any  perfection  or  totality  or  independent 
agency  among  the  matters  of  fact  which  we  know,  and  having 
ignored  the  implication  by  those  facts  of  a  spiritual  principle 
other  than  themselves,  we  come  to  assume  that  no  perfect 
or  self-determined  being  exists  at  all,  or  at  any  rate  in  any 
relation  to  us. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE  RELATION  OF  MAN,  AS  INTELLIGENCE,  TO  THE  SPIRITUAL 
PRINCIPLE  IN  NATURE 

55.  The  conclusion  of  the  preceding  chapter  has  brought 
us  to  the  question  which  lies  at  the  root  of  ethical  enquiry. 
In  what  relation  do  we  ourselves  stand  to  the  one  self- 
distinguishing  subject,  other  than  nature,  which  we  find  to 
be  implied  in  nature  ?  To  a  certain  extent  an  answer  to  this 
question  has  been  involved  in  the  considerations  which  have 
led  to  the  conviction  of  there  being  such  a  subject.  That  if 
we  were  merely  phenomena  among  phenomena  we  could  not 
have  knowledge  of  a  world  of  phenomena,  appears  from 
analysis  of  the  conditions  of  an  intelligent  experience.  Our 
experience,  we  have  seen,  has  two  characteristics,  of  which 
neither  admits  of  being  reduced  to  or  explained  by  the  other. 
On  the  one  hand  it  is  an  order  of  events  in  time,  consisting 
in  modifications  of  our  sensibility.  On  the  other  hand  it  is 
a  consciousness  of  those  events — a  consciousness  of  them  as 
a  related  series,  and  as  determined  in  their  relations  to  each 
other  by  relation  to  something  else,  which  is  from  the  first 
conceived  as  other  than  the  modifications  of  our  sensibility, 
and  which  with  growing  knowledge  comes  to  be  conceived 
as  involving  relations  between  objects  that  are  not  events  at 
all,  and  between  events  that  preceded  or  lie  beyond  the 
range  of  sentient  life.  But,  as  has  been  further  pointed  out, 
a  consciousness  of  related  events,  as  related,  cannot  consist 
in  those  events.  The  modifications  of  our  sensibility  cannot, 
as  successive  events,  rhake  up  our  consciousness  of  them. 
Within  the  consciousness  that  they  are  related  in  the  way  of 
before  and  after  there  is  no  before  and  after.  There  is  no 
such  relation  between  components  of  the  consciousness  as 
there  is  between  the  events  of  which  it  is  the  consciousness. 
They  form  a  process  in  time.    If  it  were  a  process  in  time, 


64  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

it  would  not  be  a  consciousness  of  them  as  forming  such  a 
process. 

58.  Thus  that  man  is  not  merely  a  phenomenon  or 
succession  of  phenomena,  that  he  does  not  consist  in 
a  series  of  natural  events,  is  implied  in  the  fact  that  pheno- 
mena appear  to  him  as  they  do,  that  for  him  or  for  his 
consciousness  there  is  such  a  thing  as  nature.  There  are 
certain  current  phrases  of  modern  psychology,  which  no 
doubt  have  their  warrant  in  facts  to  be  considered  presently, 
but  which,  as  commonly  used,  are  apt  to  blind  us  to  this 
essential  characteristic  of  the  position  in  which  we  stand 
towards  the  world  we  know.  We  use  the  term  '  phenomena 
of  consciousness '  as  if  it  covered  the  whole  range  of  know- 
ledge and  morality — all  our  thought  about  the  world,  all  our 
perceptions  and  conceptions  of  objects,  all  the  ideas  which 
we  seek  to  realise  in  action.  We  speak  of  consciousness 
universally,  without  qualification  9r  distinction,  as  a  suc- 
cession of  states ;  and  the  figure  of  the  stream  is  the  accepted 
one  for  expressing  the  nature  of  our  spiritual  life.  Now  it 
would  be  idle  to  deny  that  there  is  an  appropriateness  in 
a  way  of  speaking  which  none  of  us  can  avoid,  but  it  is 
important  to  call  attention  to  that  kind  of  activity  undoubt- 
edly exercised  by  us,  implied  in  all  distinctively  intelligent  or 
moral  experience,  to  which  it  is  wholly  inappropriate. 

If  we  reflect  on  what  is  contained  in  our  knowledge,  or 
in  any  conception  or  perception  contributory  to  it,  we  shall 
see  that  the  relation  in  which  its  constituents  stand  to  each 
other  is  essentially  different  from  the  relation  between  stages 
of  the  process  by  which  the  knowledge  or  perception  is 
arrived  at.  The  figure  of  the  stream  may  be  applicable  to 
the  latter,  though  the  more  we  think  of  it  the  less  we  shall 
find  it  so,  but  it  is  quite  inapplicable  to  the  former.  Suc- 
cessive states  of  consciousness  may  be  represented  as  waves 
of  which  one  is  for  ever  taking  the  place  of  the  other,  but 
such  successive  states  cannot  make  a  knowledge  even  of  the 
most  elementary  sort.  Knowledge  is  of  related  facts,  and 
it  is  essential  to  every  act  of  knowledge  that  the  related 


CH.ll]     MAN  AND    THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE        65 

facts  should  be  present  together  in  consciousness.  Between 
the  apprehensions  of  those  facts,  so  far  as  they  make  up 
a  certain  piece  of  knowledge,  there  is  no  succession.  I  may 
have  apprehended  some  of  them,  no  doubt,  before  I  appre- 
hend the  rest ;  or,  after  having  apprehended  the  latter,  my 
consciousness  may  lose  its  hold  on  some  apprehended  before. 
In  this  sense  different  states  of  knowledge  succeed  each 
other  in  the  individual,  but  not  so  the  manifold  constituents 
of  that  which  in  any  act  of  knowledge  is  present  to  his  mind 
as  the  object  known ;  not  so  the  determinations  of  conscious- 
ness in  which  those  constituents  are  presented,  and  which 
make  up  the  complex  act  of  knowledge.  For  a  known  object, 
as  known,  is  a  related  whole,  of  which,  as  of  evesy  such  whole, 
the  members  are  necessarily  present  together ;  and  the  acts 
of  consciousness  in  which  the  several  members  are  appre- 
hended, as  forming  a  knowledge,  are  a  many  in  one.  None 
is  before  or  after  another.  This  is  equally  the  case  whether 
the  knowledge  is  of  successive  events  or  of  the  '  uniformities ' 
which  are  said  to  constitute  a  law  of  nature.  For,  as  we  have 
previously  had  occasion  to  point  out,  between  the  constituents 
of  a  knowledge  of  succession  there  can  be  no  succession  :  so 
long  as  certain  events  are  contemplated  as  successive,  no  one 
of  them  is  an  object  to  consciousness  before  or  after  another. 
57.  For  this  reason  no  knowledge,  nor  any  mental  act 
involved  in  knowledge,  can  properly  be  called  a  'pheno- 
menon of  consciousness.'  It  may  be  of  phenomena ;  if  the 
knowledge  is  of  events,  it  is  so.  The  attainment  of  the 
knowledge,  again,  as  an  occurrence  in  the  individual's 
history,  a  transition  from  one  state  of  consciousness  to 
another,  may  properly  be  called  a  phenomenon ;  but  not  so 
the  consciousness  itself  of  relations  or  related  facts — not  so 
the  relations  and  related  facts  present  to  consciousness— in 
which  the  knowledge  consists.  For  a  phenomenon  is  a  sen- 
sible event,  related  in  the  way  of  antecedence  and  conse- 
quence to  other  sensible  events;  but  the  consciousness 
which  constitutes  a  knowledge,  or  (if  we  may  be  allowed 
the  use  of  a  word  which,  though  unfamiliar  in  this  connexion, 

F 


66  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

avoids  some  ambiguity)  the  content  of  such  consciousness, 
is  not  an  event  so  related  nor  made  up  of  Such  events.  We 
cannot  point  to  any  other  events,  as  we  can  in  the  case  of 
a  phenomenon  proper,  from  antecedence  or  consequence  to 
which  it  takes  its  character  as  an  event. 

As  an  instance,  let  us  take  a  man's  knowledge  of  a  propo- 
sition in  Euclid.  This  means  a  relation  in  his  consciousness 
between  certain  parts  of  a  figure,  determined  by  the  relation 
of  those  parts  to  other  parts.  The  knowledge  is  made  up  of 
those  relations  as  in  consciousness.  Now  it  is  obvious  that 
there  is  no  lapse  of  time,  however  minute,  no  antecedence  or 
consequence,  between  the  constituent  relations  of  the  con- 
sciousness S9.  composed,  or  between  the  complex  formed  by 
them  and  anything  else.  To  call  such  knowing  conscious- 
ness a  phenomenon,  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  a  sensible 
event,  is  a  confusion  between  it  and  the  process  of  arriving 
at  or  losing  it.  That  in  the  learning  or  fftrgetting  a  proposi- 
tion of  Euclid,  as  in  the  acquisition  or  loss  of  any  other  piece 
of  knowledge,  a  series  of  events  takes  place,  is  plain  enough  j 
and  such  events  may  legitimately  be  called  '  phenomena  of 
consciousness.'  But  it  must  be  noticed  that  when  these 
events  of  the  mental  history  come  to  be  reviewed  in  intelli- 
gent memory  or  experience — when  we  know  them  as  the 
connected  facts  of  a  history — their  existence  as  in  conscious- 
ness is  no  longer  that  of  events.  They  do  not  succeed  each 
other  in  time,  but  are  present  in  the  unity  of  relation,  as  much 
as  are  the  parts  of  a  geometrical  figure  which  has  been  appre- 
hended by,  or  taken  into,  an  intelligent  consciousness. 

58.  The  discrepancy  here  pointed  out,  between  the  reality 
of  consciousness  as  exhibited  in  knowledge  and  anything 
that  can  properly  be  called  phenomena  or  successive  states 
of  consciousness,  would  be  more  generally  acknowledged  but 
for  two  reasons.  One  of  these  is  the  ambiguity  attending  all 
our  terms  expressive  of  mental  activity — knowledge,  con- 
ception, perception,  &c. — which  may  denote  events  in  our 
mental  history,  the  passing  into  certain  states  of  conscious- 
ness, as  well  as  that  of  which  in  those  states  we  are  conscious, 


CH.n]      MAN  AND    THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE       67 

the  content  and  object  of  consciousness.  At  the  same  time — 
and  this  is  the  second  of  the  reasons  referred  to — this  con- 
tent or  object  is  looked  upon  as  existing  quite  otherwise  than 
in  or  for  consciousness ;  as  independent  of  it,  though  from 
time  to  time  affecting  it  in  a  certain  way  and  producing  a 
certain  state  of  consciousness.  Hence  it  is  only  the  succes- 
sive changes  in  our  apprehensive  attitude  towards  the  objects 
of  our  knowledge  and  experience  that  are  commonly  put  to 
the  account  of  consciousness.  Its  nature  is  not  taken  to  be 
exhibited  in  the  structure  of  those  objects,  any  more  than  it 
would  be  if,  instead  of  being  objects  known  and  experienced, 
they  were  '  things-in-themselves.'  By  perception  is  under- 
stood a  modification  of  our  sensibility  in  which  some  present 
external  object  is  revealed  to  us.  Conception  we  regard 
equally  as  an  occurrence  in  consciousness ;  and,  though  we 
suppose  it  to  take  place  in  the  absence  of  any  object  at  the 
time  affecting  the  senses,  we  practically  separate  in  our 
thoughts  the  conceived  content  or  object  from  the  con- 
ception, and  imagine  it  vaguely  as  residing  elsewhere  than  in 
consciousness.  We  thus  avoid  the  necessity  of  facing  the 
question  how  an  object  determined  by  relations  can  have  its 
being  in  a  consciousness  which  consists  of  a  series  of  occur- 
rences. Even  '  knowledge,'  though  we  often  mean  by  it  a 
system  of  known  facts  or  laws,  is  apt  to  lose  this  sense  when 
we  speak  of  it  as  a  form  of  consciousness.  It  then  becomes 
merely  the  mental  event  of  arriving  at  an  apprehension  of 
related  facts.  It  does  not  represent  the  relation  of  the  facts 
in  consciousness.  That  there  must  be  such  a  relation  of  them 
in  consciousness,  and  that  a  consciousness  consisting  of 
events  cannot  contain  such  a  relation,  is  a  conclusion  which 
we  avoid  by  eviscerating  knowledge  of  its  content,  and  trans- 
ferring this  content  from  consciousness  to  '  external  things.' 
59.  Even  those  who  recognize  the  difficulty  of  extruding 
the  object  conceived  or  known,  an  object  constituted  by 
relations,  from  the  consciousness  which  conceives  or  knows, 
and  in  consequence  of  describing  conception  and  knowledge 
as  mental  events  or  phenomena,  will  be  apt  to  ignore  the 

F  3 


68  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

same  diflSculty  in  regard  to  Perception.  The  externality  of 
the  perceived  object  to  consciousness  seems  to  be  taken  for 
granted,  even  by  those  who  would  be  quite  ready  to  tell  us 
that  the  '  things '  which  we  talk  of  conceiving  are  but '  nomi- 
nal essences.'  This  arises  from  the  connexion  of  percep- 
tion with  sensation,  and  from  the  real  explicability  of  sen- 
sation by  external  impact.  It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that 
there  can  be  no  perception  without  (in  Locke's  phraseology) 
'actual  present  sensation.'  The  difference  between  a  per- 
ception of  the  moon  and  any  mere  conception  of  it  is  that, 
when  it  is  perceived,  although  it  is  only  in  virtue  of  some 
conception  of  relations  that  it  is  perceived  as  a  qualified  ob- 
ject, there  is  necessarily  some  present  sensation  which  those 
relations  are  conceived  as  determining.  From  this  neces- 
sary presence  of  sensation  in  the  act  of  perception,  there 
easily  arises  a  confusion  between  the  perceived  object  and 
the  exciting  cause  of  sensation ;  which  again  leads  to  an 
extrusion  of  the  perceived  object  from  the  consciousness  in 
which  perception  consists,  and  to  the  view  of  it  as  an  exter- 
nal something  to  which  perception  is  related  as  an  occur- 
rence to  its  cause. 

60.  A  little  reflection,  however,  will  show  us  that  the 
exciting  cause,  the  stimulant,  of  the  sensation  involved  in 
a  perception  is  never  the  object  perceived  in  a  perception. 
It  is  necessary  to  a  perception  of  colour  that  there  should 
be  a  sensation,  arising  out  of  a  stimulus  of  the  optic  nerve 
by  a  particular  vibration  of  ether.  That  vibration,  however 
— the  external  exciting  cause  of  the  sensation — is  not  the 
object  perceived  in  the  perception  of  the  colour.  That  ob- 
ject, indeed,  will  not  be  the  same  for  every  percipient.  It 
will  vary  according  to  the  extent  of  his  knowledge  and  to  the 
degree  of  attention  aroused  in  him  in  the  particular  case. 
The  perception  may  be  no  more  than  consciousness  of  the 
fact  that  a  particular  colour  is  presented  to  him — a  fact  to 
be  aware  of  which  is  already  to  be  aware  of  a  certain  rudi- 
mentary relation — or  it  may  be  a  consciousness  of  various 
relations  by  which  this  fact  is  determined.    And  the  rela- 


OH.  II]  PERCEPTION  69- 

tions  thus  apprehended  in  the  perception  may  vary,  again, 
iirom  those  by  which  the  colour  is  connected  with  accom- 
panying appearances  in  superficial  experience,  to  those  less 
obvious  ones  which  science  has  ascertained.  It  may  thus 
come  to  include  a  knowledge  that  the  sensation  of  light 
arises  out  of  a  certain  relation  between  vibrations  of  ether 
and  the  optic  nerve.  If  the  perception  is  that  of  a  man  of 
science,  observing  light  or  colour  for  scientific  purposes,  it 
probably  does  so.  Such  knowledge  is  present  to  his  mind  in 
the  perception.  But  it  is  a  mere  confusion  to  imagine  that, 
in  this  or  any  other  form  of  such  a  perception,  the  vibration 
of  ether  enters  into  the  object  perceived — into  the  content 
of  the  perception — in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  acts  as  the 
exciting  cause  of  the  sensation  ;  or  to  suppose-  that  this  ob- 
ject or  content  is  external  to  the  percipient  consciousness, 
as  the  stimulant  matter  is  to  the  sentient  organism. 

The  sentient  organism  to  which  the  vibratory  ether  may 
be  considered  external  is  not  consciousness,  either  as  exer- 
cised in  perception  or  in  any  other  way,  any  more  than  the 
vibratory  ether,  as  external,  is  the  object  perceived.  Strictly 
speaking,  it  is  not  a  vibratory  ether  but  the  fact  consisting 
in  the  relation  between  this  and  the  optic  nerve— this  fact 
as  existing  for  consciousness — that  enters  into  or  determines 
the  perceived  object,  as  the  scientific  man  perceives  it. 
This  fact,  as  forming  part  of  the  content  of  the  perception, 
is  wholly  within  consciousness ;  or,  to  speak  more  accurately, 
the  opposition  of  without  and  within  has  no  sort  of  ap- 
plication to  it.  A  within  implies  a  without,  and  we  are  not 
entitled  to  say  that  anything  is  without  or  outside  conscious- 
ness ;  for  externality,  being  a  relation  which,  like  any  other 
relation,  exists  only  in  the  medium  of  consciousness,  only 
between  certain  objects  as  they  are  for  consciousness,  cannot 
be  a  relation  between  consciousness  and  anything  else.  An 
affection  of  the  sentient  organism  by  matter  external  to  it 
is  the  condition  of  our  experiencing  the  sort  of  conscious- 
ness called  perception;  a  relation  of  externality  between  ob- 
jects is  often  part  of  that  which  is  perceived ;  but  in  no  case 


70  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

is  there  such  a  relation,  any  more  than  a  relation  of  before 
and  after,  between  the  object  perceived  and  the  conscious- 
ness of  it,  or  between  constituents  of  that  consciousness. 

61.  If,  having  got  rid  of  the  confusion  between  the 
stimulant  of  sensation  and  the  perceived  object,  we  examine 
the  constituents  of  any  perceived  object — not  as  a  '  thing-in- 
itself,'  or  as  we  may  vainly  try  to  imagine  it  to  be  apart  from 
our  perception,  but  as  it  actually  is  perceived — we  shall  find 
alike  that  it  is  only  for  consciousness  that  they  can  exist, 
and  that  the  consciousness  for  which  they  thus  exist  cannot 
be  merely  a  series  of  phenomena  or  a  succession  of  states. 
For  a  justification  of  this  statement  we  may  appeal  to  the 
account  given  of  perception  by  the  accepted  representatives 
of  empirical  psychology.  '  Our  perception  of  an  animal  or 
a  flower,'  says  Mr.  Lewes, '  is  the  synthesis  of  all  the  sensa- 
tions we  have  had  of  the  object  in  relation  to  our  several 
senses  ^.'  This  object  itself,  he  tells  us,  is  a  '  group  of 
sensibles ' ;  which  corresponds  with  Mill's  account  of  it  as 
a  combination  of  '  permanent  possibilities  of  sensation.' 
Such  language  is  no  doubt  susceptible  of  a  double  interpre- 
tation, and  it  is  only  upon  one  of  the  two  possible  interpre- 
tations that  it  justifies  the  conclusion  we  shall  draw  from  it. 
It  is  true  also  that  this  interpretation  is  not  sanctioned  by 
the  writers  mentioned,  who  seem  not  to  distinguish  the  two 
interpretations,  and  avail  themselves  sometimes  of  the  one, 
sometimes  of  the  other.  It  is  the  only  interpretation  of  the 
definition,  however,  that  is  really  suitable  to  it  as  a  definition 
of  perception. 

62.  What  exactly  is  it  that  is  combined  in  the  synthesis 
spoken  of?  Is  it  a  synthesis  of  feelings  as  caused  by  the 
action  of  external  irritants  on  the  nervous  system,  or  is  it 
a  synthesis  of  known  and  remembered  facts  that  such 
feelings  have  occurred  under  certain  conditions  and  rela- 
tions ?  The  two  kinds  of  synthesis  are  perfectly  distinct ; 
and,  though  the  former  may  be  presupposed  in  perception, 
it  is  the  latter  alone  which  constitutes  it  in  the  distinctive 

'  Problems  of  Life  and  Mind,  I.  191. 


CH.  n]  PERCEPTION  71 

sense.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  an  excitement  of  sensation 
by  some  present  irritant  may  revive,  in  a  fainter  degree, 
feelings  that  have  been  previously  associated  with  this 
sensation.  But  such  a  revival  does  not  constitute  a  per- 
ception. It  cannot  result  in  a  synthesis  of  the  feelings  as 
feelings  of  an  object,  or  in  the  apprehension  of  a  sensible 
fact,  recognized  as  a  symbol  of  many  other  related  facts  of 
which  there  would  be  experience  if  certain  conditions  on 
the  part  of  a  sentient  subject  were  fulfilled — in  other  words, 
as  a  symbol  of  possibilities  of  sensation.  If  past  feelings 
were  reinstated  merely  as  feelings,  they  could  not  properly 
be  said  to  be  combined  in  an  object  or  in  consciousness  of 
an  object  at  all,  nor  would  their  reinstatement  be  in  any 
sense  an  inference,  such  as  Mr.  Lewes  rightly  holds  to  be 
involved  in  all  perception  ^.  They  could  only  be  combined, 
either  in  the  way  of  producing  and  giving  place  to  a  further 
feeling,  as  httle  a  consciousness  of  fact  or  object  as  any  of 
them,  or  in  the  sense  that  their  effects  are  accumulated  in 
the  nervous  organism  so  as  to  modify  its  reactions  upon 
stimulus.  Anything  more  than  this — any  combination  of 
the  data  of  feeling  as  qualities  of  an  object,  or  as  facts 
related  to  a  certain  sensation,  which  the  recurrence  of  that 
sensation  may  recall  to  us — implies  the  action  of  a  subject 
which  thinks  of  its  feelings,  which  distinguishes  them  from 
itself  and  can  thus  present  them  to  itself  as  facts. 

Such  action  is  as  necessary  to  the  original  presentation  of 
all  that  is  recalled  in  perception,  as  to  the  incorporation  of 
what  is  recalled  in  the  total  fact  perceived.  As  we  have  seen, 
no  feeling,  as  such  or  as  merely  felt,  enters  into  the  perceived 
object — not  even  the  present  sensation  which  is  admitted  to 
be  a  necessary  condition  of  perception.  It  is  not  the  sensa- 
tion, but  the  fact,  presented  by  the  self-distinguishing  subject 
to  itself,  that  such  a  sensation  is  here  and  now  occurring, 
occurring  under  certain  relations  to  other  experience — it  is 
this  that  is  the  nucleus  on  which  the  recalled  experience 
gathers,  suggesting  other  possibilities  of  sensation,  not  them- 
'  Problems  .of  Life  and  Mind,  I.  257. 


t 

72  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

selves  'actual  present  sensations,'  b^t  no  less  present,  as 
facts,  than  the  fact  that  the  given  sensation  is  here  and  now 
being  felt.  The  knowledge  of  such  possibilities  of  sensation 
is  doubtless  in  every  case  founded  on  actual  sensation 
experienced  in  the  past,  but  on  this  as  on  an  observed  fact, 
determined  by  relation  to  other  hke  facts  through  the  equal 
presence  of  all  to  a  thinking  subject.  Except  to  an  intelli- 
gence which  has  thus  observed  sensations  as  related  facts, 
there  can  be  no  suggestion,  upon  the  recurrence  of  one  of 
them,  that  others  are  possible  upon  certain  conditions  being 
fulfilled. 

The  revival  of  the  past  sensations  themselves,  with  what- 
ever intensity,  is  no  such  suggestion.  It  may  be  that  the 
excitement  of  sensation  by  an  external  stimulant,  which  is 
the  occasion  of  perception,  is  always  followed  by  a  revival, 
with  some  less  intensity,  of  the  sensations  known  to  be 
possible  as  accompaniments  of  the  given  sensation ;  but 
the  knowledge  of  their  possibility — the  apprehension  of  the 
relation  between  their  several  possibilities,  as  facts,  and  the 
fact  of  the  given  sensation  occurring — this,  the  essential 
thing  in  perception,  is  as  different  from  the  revival  of  the 
sensations  themselves  or  their  images  as  is  the  given  sensa- 
tion from  the  presentation  of  its  occurrence  as  a  fact.  And 
on  this  difference  depends  the  susceptibility  of  combination 
in  a  perceived  object,  of  presentation  as  a  many  in  one, 
which  belongs  to  known  possibilities  of  sensation,  to  known 
facts  that  certain  feelings  would  occur  under  certain  con- 
ditions, in  distinction  from  feelings  as  felt.  Manifold  feel- 
ings may  combine,  as  we  have  seen,  in  one  result,  but  in 
that  one  result  their  multiplicity  as  feelings  is  lost.  The 
constituents  of  a  perceived  object,  on  the  contrary,  whether 
we  consider  them  qualities  or  related  facts,  survive  in  their 
multiplicity  at  the  same  time  that  they  constitute  a  single 
object.  The  condition  of  their  doing  so  is  the  self-distinction 
of  the  thinking  subject  from  the  data  of  sensation,  which  it  at 
once  presents  to  itself  in  their  severalty  as  facts,  and  unites 
as  related  facts  in  virtue  of  its  equal  presence  to  them  all. 


CH.  Il]  PERCEPTION  73 

63.  It  thus  appears  that  the  common  objects  of  experi- 
ence— not  those  'things  in  general'  which  are  sometimes 
supposed  to  be  the  object  of  conception,  but  the  particular 
things  we  perceive,  this  flower,  this  apple,  this  dog — in  the 
only  sense  in  which  they  are  objects  to  us  or  are  perceived 
at  all,  have  their  being  only  for,  and  result  from  the  action  of, 
a  self-distinguishing  consciousness.  As  perceived,  they  con- 
sist in  certain  groups  of  facts,  which  again  consist  in  possi- 
bilities of  sensation,  known  to  be  related  in  certain  ways  to 
each  ether  and  to  some  given  fact  of  sensation.  The  extent 
of  the  group  in  the  case  of  each  perception,  and  the  particu- 
lar mode  in  which  the  constituent  facts  are  related,  depend 
on  the  experience  and  training  of  the  percipient,  as  well  as 
on  the  direction  of  his  mind  at  the  time  of  the  perception. 
In  every  case  the  relations  by  which  the  given  sensation  is 
determined  in  the  apprehension  of  the  percipient,  are  but  a 
minute  part  of  those  by  which  it  is  really  determined.  The 
object  which  the  most  practised  botanist  perceives  in  his 
observation  of  a  flower,  is  by  no  means  adequate  to  the  real 
nature  of  the  flower.  That  real  nature,  indeed,  if  our  previous 
conclusions  have  been  true,  must  consist  in  relations  of  which 
consciousness  is  the  medium  or  sustainer,  though  not  con- 
sciousness as  it  is  in  the  botanist.  It  is  not,  however,  with 
the  real  nature  of  the  flower,  but  with  its  nature  as  perceived 
— a  fragment  of  the  real  nature — that  we  are  here  concerned  j 
and  it  is  relations  of  which  the  percipient  consciousness  is 
the  sustainer,  which  exist  only  through  its  action,  that  make 
the  object,  as  in  each  case  the  percipient  perceives  it,  what 
it  is  to  him.  Facts  related  to  those  of  which  the  percipient 
is  aware  in  the  object,  but  not  yet  knovvn  to  him,  can  only 
be  held  to  belong  to  the  perceived  object  potentially  or  in 
some  anticipatory  sense ',  in  so  far  as  upon  a  certain  develop- 
ment of  intelligence,  in  a  direction  which  it  does  not  rest 
with  the  will  of  the  individual  to  follow  or  no,  they  will  be- 
come incorporated  with  it.  But  they  become  so  incorpo- 
rated with  it  only  through  the  same  continued  action  of  a 
'  [See,  however,  §  69.] 


74  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

combining  self-consciousness  upon  data  of  sensation,  through 
which  this  object,  as  the  percipient  already  perceives  it,  has 
come  to  be  there  for  him. 

64.  Common  sense  is  apt  to  repel  such  statements  as 
these,  because  they  are  taken  to  imply  that  we  can  perceive 
what  we  like;  that  the  things  we  see  are  fictions  of  our 
own,  not  determined  by  any  natural  or  necessary  order. 
But  in  truth  it  implies  nothing  of  the  sort,  unless  it  is 
supposed  that  our  whole  consciousness  is  a  fiction  of  our 

.own,  of  which  it  rests  with  ourselves  to  make  what  we  please. 
Objects  do  not  cease  to  be  '  objective,'  facts  do  not  cease  to- 
be  unalterable,  because  we  find  that  a  consciousness  which 
we  cannot  alter  or  escape  from,  beyond  which  we  cannot 
place  ourselves,  for  which  many  things  indeed  are  external 
to  each  other  but  io  which  nothing  Can  be  external,  is  the 
medium  through  which  they  exist  for  us,  or  because  we  can 
analyse  in  some  elementary  way  what  it  must  have  done  in 
order  to  their  thus  being  there  for  us.  It  is  not  the  concep- 
tion of  fact,  but  the  conception  of  the  consciousness  for 

\  which  facts  exist,  that  is  affected  by  such  analysis. 

So  long  as  consciousness  is  thought  to  have  nothing  to 
do  with  the  constitution  of  the  facts  of  which  we  are  con- 
scious, it  is  possible  to  look  upon  it  merely  as  a  succession 
of  events  or  phenomena  '  of  the  inner  sense.'  The  question 
how  these  inner  events  or  successive  phenomena  come  to 
perform  a  synthesis  of  themselves  into  objects  is  not  raised, 
because  no  such  work  of  synthesis  is  thought  to  be  required 
of  consciousness  at  all.  The  objects  we  perceive  are  sup- 
posed to  be  there  for  us  independently  of  any  action  of  our 
minds;  we  have  but  passively  to  let  their  appearances 
follow  each  other  over  the  mental  mirror.  While  this  view 
is  retained,  the  succession  of  such  appearances  and  of  the 
mental  reactions  upon  them — reactions  gradually  modified 
through  accumulated  effects  of  the  appearances — may  fairly 
be  taken  to  constitute  our  spiritual  being.  But  it  is  otherwise 
when  we  have  recognised  the  truth,  that  a  sensation  excited 
by  an  external  irritant  is  not  a  perception  of  the  irritant  or 


CH.  n]  PERCEPTION  75 

(by  itself)  of  anything  at  all ;  that  every  object  we  perceive  is 
a  congeries  of  related  facts,  of  which  the  simplest  component, 
no  less  than  the  composite  whole,  requires  in  order  to  its 
presentation  the  action  of  a  principle  of  consciousness,  not 
itself  subject  to  conditions  of  time,  upon  successive  appear- 
ances, such  action  as  may  hold  the  appearances  together, 
without  fusion,  in  an  apprehended  fact.  It  then  becomes 
clear  that  there  is  a  function  of  consciousness,  as  exercised 
in  the  most  rudimentary  experience,  in  the  simplest  per- 
ception of  sensible  things  or  of  the  appearances  of  objects,- 
which  is  incompatible  with  the  definition  of  consciousness 
as  any  sort  of  succession  of  any  sort  of  phenomena.  Some- 
thing else  than  a  succession  of  phenomena  is  seen  to  be  as 
necessary  in  the  consciousness  that  perceives  facts,  as  it  is 
necessary  to  the  possibility  of  the  world  of  facts  itself. 

65.  We  have  dwelt  at  length  on  this  implication  in  ordinary 
perception  of  a  spiritual  action  irreducible  to  phenomena, 
because  the  question  whether  and  how  far  man  is  a  part  of 
nature,  is  apt  to  be  debated  exclusively  on  what  is  considered 
higher  ground  and,  in  consequence,  without  an  admitted 
issue  being  raised.  The  transcendence  of^  man  is  main- 
tained on  the  ground  of  his  exercising  powers,  which  it  may 
plausibly  be  disputed  whether  he  exercises  at  all.  The  notion 
that  thought  can  originate,  or  that  we  can  freely  will,  is  at 
once  set  down  as  a  transcendental  illusion.  There  is  more 
hope  of  result  if  the  controversy  is  begun  lower  down,  with  the 
analysis  of  an  act  which  it  is  not  doubted  that  we  perform. 

Now,  if  the  foregoing  analysis  be  correct,  the  ordinary 
perception  of  sensible  things  or  matters  of  fact  involves  the 
determination  of  a  sensible  process,  which  is  in  time,  by  an 
agency  that  is  not  in  time, — in  Kant's  language,  a  combina- 
tion of 'empirical  and  intelligible  characters,' — as  essentially 
as  do  any  of  those  '  higher '  mental  operations,  of  which  the 
performance  may  be  disputed.  The  sensation,  of  which  the 
presentation  as  a  fact  is  the  nucleus  of  every  perception,  is  an 
event  in  time.  Its  conditions  again  have  all  of  them  a  history 
in  time.     It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  relation  between  it  and 


^6  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

its  cause,  if  its  cause  is  understood  strictly  as  the  sum  of  its 
conditions,  is  not  one  of  time.  The  assemblage  of  con- 
ditions, '  external '  and  '  internal,'  constitutes  the  sensation. 
There  is  no  sequence  in  time  of  the  sensation  upon  the  assem- 
bled conditions.  But  the  assemblage  itself  is  an  event  that 
has  had  a  determinate  history ;  and  each  of  the  constituent 
conditions  has  come  to  be  what  it  is  through  a  process  in 
time.  So  much  for  the  sensation  proper.  The  presentation 
of  the  sensation,  again,  as  of  a  fact  related  to  other  ex- 
perience, is  in  like  manner  an  event.  A  moment  ago  I  had 
not  so  presented  it :  after  a  brief  interval  the  perception  will 
have  given  place  to  another.  Yet  the  content  of  the  pre- 
sentation, the  perception  of  this  or  that  object,  depends  on 
the  presence  of  that  which  in  occurrence  is  past,  as  a  fact 
united  in  one  consciousness  with  the  fact  of  the  sensation 
now  occurring ;  or  rather,  if  the  perception  is  one  of  what  we 
call  a  developed  mind,  on  numberless  connected  acts  of  such 
uniting  consciousness,  to  which  limits  can  no  more  be  set 
than  they  can  to  the  range  of  experience,  and  which  yield 
the  conception  of  a  world  revealed  in  the  sensation.  The 
agent  of  this  neutralization  of  time  can  as  little,  it  would 
seem,  be  itself  subject  to  conditions  in  time  as  the  con- 
stituents of  the  resulting  whole,  the  facts  united  in  conscious- 
ness into  the  nature  of  the  perceived  object,  are  before  or 
after  each  other. 

ee.  We  are  not,  however,  fully  stating  the  seemingly  para- 
doxical character  of  everyday  perception,  in  merely  saying 
that  it  is  a  determination  of  events  in  time  by  a  principle 
that  is  not  in  time.  That  is  a  description  equally  applicable 
to  fact  and  to  the  perception  of  fact.  For  fact  always  implies 
relation  determined  by  other  relations  in  a  universe  of  facts ; 
and  such  relations,  again,  though  they  be  relations  of  events 
to  each  other  in  time,  imply,  as  has  been  previously  pointed 
out,  something  out  of  time,  for  which  all  the  terms  of  the 
several  relations  are  equally  present,  as  the  principle  of  the 
synthesis  which  unites  them  in  a  single  universe.     But,  in 


CH.  Il]      MAN  AND    THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE       77 

thus  explaining  the  ultimate  conditions  of  the  possibility  ol 
fact,  we  need  not  assign  the  events  themselves,  and  the 
determination  of  them  by  that  which  is  not  an  event — the 
process  of  becoming,  and  the  regulation  of  it  as  an  orderly 
process, — to  one  and  the  same  subject;  as  if  the  events 
happened  to  and  altered  the  subject  that  unites  them,  or  as 
if  the  source  of  order  in  becoming  itself  became.  We  can- 
not indeed  suppose  any  real  separation  between  the  deter- 
minant and  the  determined.  The  order  of  becoming  is  only 
an  order  of  becoming  through  the  action  of  that  which  is 
not  in  becoming ;  nor  can  we  think  of  this  order  as  preceded 
by  anything  that  was  not  an  order  of  becoming.  We  con- 
tradict ourselves,  if  we  say  that  there  was  first  a  chaos  and 
then  came  to  be  an  order ;  for  the  '  first '  and  '  then '  imply 
already  an  order  of  time,  which  is  only  possible  through  an 
action  not  in  time.  As  little,  on  the  other  hand,  can  we 
suppose  that  which  we  only  know  as  a  principle  of  unity  in 
relation,  to  exist  apart  from  a  manifold  through  which  it  is 
related.  But  we  may  avoid  considering  this  principle,  or  the 
subject  of  which  the  presence  and  action  renders  possible 
the  relations  of  the  world  of  becoming,  as  itself  in  becoming, 
or  as  the  result  of  a  process  of  becoming.  It  seems  to  be 
otherwise  with  our  perceiving  consciousness.  The  very  con- 
sciousness, which  holds  together  successive  events  as  equally 
present,  has  itself  apparently  a  history  in  time.  It  seems  to 
vary  from  moment  to  moment.  It  apprehends  processes  of 
becoming  in  a  manner  which  implies  that  past  stages  of  the 
becoming  are  present  to  it  as  known  facts ;  yet  is  it  not 
itself  coming  to  be  what  it  has  not  been  ? 

67.  It  will  be  found,  we  believe,  that  this  apparent  state 
of  the  case  can  only  be  explained  by  supposing  that  in  the 
growth  of  our  experience,  in  the  process  of  our  learning  to 
know  the  world,  an  animal  organism,  which  has  its  history 
in  time,  gradually  becomes  the  vehicle  of  an  eternally  com- 
plete consciousness.  What  we  call  our  mental  history  is 
not  a  history  of  this  consciousness,  which  in  itself  can  have 
no  history,  but  a  history  of  the  process  by  which  the  animal 


78  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bK.  I 

organism  becomes  its  vehicle.  '  Our  consciousness '  may 
mean  either  of  two  things ;  either  a  function  of  the  animal 
organism,  which  is  being  made,  gradually  and  with  interrup- 
tions, a  vehicle  of  the  eternal  consciousness ;  or  that  eternal 
consciousness  itself,  as  making  the  animal  organism  its  vehicle 
and  subject  to  certain  limitations  in  so  doing,  but  retaining 
its  essential  characteristic  as  independent  of  time,  as  the 
determinant  of  becoming,  which  has  not  and  does  not  itself 
become.  The  consciousness  which  varies  from  moment 
to  moment,  which  is  in  succession,  and  of  which  each  suc- 
cessive state  depends  on  a  series  of  '  external  and  internal ' 
events,  is  consciousness  in  the  former  sense.  It  consists  in 
what  may  properly  be  called  phenomena;  in  successive 
modifications  of  the  animal  organism,  which  would  not,  it 
is  true,  be  what  they  are  if  they  were  not  media  for  the 
realisation  of  an  eternal  consciousness,  but  which  are  not 
this  consciousness.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  this  latter 
consciousness,  as  so  far  realised  in  or  communicated  to  us 
through  modification  of  the  animal  organism,  that  constitutes 
our  knowledge,  with  the  relations,  characteristic  of  know- 
ledge, into  which  time  does  not  enter,  which  are  not  in  be- 
coming but  are  once  for  all  what  they  are.  It  is  this  again 
that  enables  us,  by  incorporation  of  any  sensation  to  which 
attention  is  given  into  a  system  of  known  facts,  to  extend 
that  system,  and  by  means  of  fresh  perceptions  to  arrive  at 
further  knowledge. 

68.  For  convenience  sake,  we  state  this  doctrine,  to  beigin 
with,  in  a  bald  dogmatic  way,  though  well  aware  how  un- 
warrantable or  unmeaning,  until  explained  and  justified,  it 
is  likely  to  appear.  Does  it  not,  the  reader  may  ask,  involve 
the  impossible  supposition  that  there  is  a  double  conscious- 
ness in  man  ?  No,  we  reply,  not  that  there  is  a  double  con- 
sciousness, but  that  the  one  indivisible  reality  of  our  conscious- 
ness cannot  be  comprehended  in  a  single  conception.  In 
seeking  to  understand  its  reality  we  have  to  look  at  it  from 
two  different  points  of  view ;  and  the  different  conceptions 
that  we  form  of  it,  as  looked  at  from  these  different  points, 


CH.  Il]      MAN  AND    THE   SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE        79 

do  not  admit  of  being  united,  any  more  than  do  our  im- 
pressions of  opposite  sides  of  the  same  shield ;  and  as  we 
apply  the  same  term  '  consciousness  '  to  it,  from  whichever 
point  of  view  we  contemplate  it,  the  ambiguity  noticed  necesr 
sarily  attends  that  term. 

In  any  case  of  an  end  gradually  realising  itself  through 
a  certain  organism  a  like  difficulty  arises.  If  we  would  state 
the  truth  about  a  living  and  growing  body,  we  can  only  do 
it  by  the  help  of  two  conceptions,  which  we  shall  try  in  vain 
to  reduce  to  a  third.  One  will  be  the  conception  of  the 
end,  the  particular  form  of  life  realised  in  the  body — an  end 
real  and  present,  because  operative,  throughout  the  develop- 
ment of  the  body,  but  which  we  cannot  identify  with  any 
stage  of  that  development.  The  other  will  be  that  of  the 
particular  body,  or  complex  of  material  conditions,  organic 
to  this  end,  as  on  the  one  hand  dependent  on  an  inexhaus- 
tible series  of  other  material  conditions,  on  the  other  pro- 
gressively modified  by  results  of  the  action,  the  life,  to  which 
it  is  organic.  The  particular  living  being  is  not  less  one  and 
indivisible  because  we  cannot  dispense  with  either  of  these 
conceptions,  if  we  would  understand  it  aright,  or  because  it 
is  sometimes  one,  sometimes  the  other,  of  them  that  is  pre- 
dominant in  our  usage  of  the  term  '  living  being.'  In  like 
manner,  so  far  as  we  can  understand  at  all  the  reality  of  con- 
sciousness, one  and  indivisible  as  it  is  in  each  of  us,  it  must 
be  by  conceiving  both  the  end,  in  the  shape  of  a  completed 
knowledge  that  gradually  realises  itself  in  the  organic  process 
of  sentient  life,  and  that  organic  process  itself  with  its  history 
and  conditions.  We  have  not  two  minds,  but  one  mind; 
but  we  can  know  that  one  mind  in  its  reality  only  by  taking 
account,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  process  in  time  by  which 
effects  of  sentient  experience  are  accumulated  in  the  organism, 
yielding  new  modes  of  reaction  upon  stimulus  and  fresh  as- 
sociations of  feeUng  with  feeling;  on  the  other,  of  the  system 
of  thought  and  knowledge  which  realises  or  reproduces  itself 
in  the  individual  through  that  process,  a  system  into  the 
inner  constitution  of  which  no  relations  of  time  enter. 


8o  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

69.  If  we  examine  the  notion  of  intellectual  progress 
common  to  all  educated  men,  we  find  that  it  virtually 
involves  this  twofold  conception  of  the  mind.  We  regard 
it  as  a  progress  towards  the  attainment  of  knowledge  or  true 
ideas.  But  we  cannot  suppose  that  those  relations  of  facts 
or  objects  in  consciousness,  which  constitute  any  piece  of 
knowledge  of  which  a  man  becomes  master,  first  come  into 
being  when  he  attains  that  knowledge ;  that  they  pass 
through  the  process  by  which  he  laboriously  learns,  or 
gradually  cease  to  be  as  he  forgets  or  becomes  confused. 
They  must  exist  as  part  of  an  eternal  universe — and  that 
a  spiritual  universe  or  universe  of  consciousness — during  all 
the  changes  of  the  individual's  attitude  towards  them, 
whether  he  is  asleep  or  awake,  distracted  or  attentive, 
ignorant  or  informed.  It  is  a  common-place  indeed  to 
assert  that  the  order  of  the  universe  remains  the  same, 
however  our  impressions  may  change  in  regard  to  it;  but 
as  the  common-place  is  apt  to  be  understood,  the  universe 
is  conceived  in  abstraction  from  consciousness,  while  con- 
sciousness is  identified  simply  with  the  changing  impressions, 
of  which  the  unchanging  order  is  independent.  But  the 
unchanging  order  is  an  order  of  relations ;  and,  even  if 
relations  of  any  kind  could  be  independent  of  consciousness, 
certainly  those  that  form  the  content  of  knowledge  are  not 
so.  As  known  they  exist  only  for  consciousness ;  and,  if  in 
themselves  they  were  external  to  it,  we  shall  try  in  vain  to 
conceive  any  process  by  which  they  could  find  their  way 
from  without  to  within  it.  They  are  relations  of  facts,  which 
require  a  consciousness  alike  to  present  them  as  facts  and 
to  unite  them  in  relation.  We  must  hold  then  that  there  is 
a  consciousness  for  which  the  relations  of  fact,  that  form  the 
object  of  our  gradually  attained  knowledge,  already  and 
eternally  exist ;  and  that  the  growing  knowledge  of  the 
individual  is  a  progress  towards  this  consciousness. 

70.  It  is  a  consciousness,  further,  which  is  itself  operative 
in  the  progress  towards  its  attainment,  just  as  elsewhere  the 
end  realised  through  a  certain  process  itself  determines  that 


CH.  ll]      MAN  AND    THE  SPIRITUAL   PRINCIPLE       8i 

process;  as  a  particular  kind  of  life,  for  instance,  informs 
the  processes  organic  to  it.  Every  effort  fails  to  trace 
a  genesis  of  knowledge  out  of  anything  which  is  not,  in  form 
and  principle,  knowledge  itself.  The  most  primitive  germ 
from  which  knowledge  can  be  developed  is  already  a  per- 
ception of  fact,  which  implies  the  action  upon  successive 
sensations  of  a  consciousness  which  holds  them  in  relation, 
and  which  therefore  cannot  itself  be  before  or  after  them, 
or  exist  as  a  succession  at  all.  '  And  every  step  forward  in 
real  intelligence,  whether  in  the  way  of  addition  to  what  we 
call  the  stock  of  human  knowledge,  or  of  an  appropriation 
by  the  individual  of  some  part  of  that  stock,  is  only  explicable 
on  supposition  that  successive  reports  of  the  senses,  succes- 
sive efforts  of  attention,  successive  processes  of  observation 
and  experiment,  are  determined  by  the  consciousness  that 
all  things  form  a  related  whole — a  consciousness  which  is 
operative  throughout  their  succession  and  which  at  the  same 
time  realises  itself  through  them. 

71.  A  familiar  illustration  may  help  to  bring  home  that 
view  of  what  is  involved  in  the  attainment  of  knowledge  for 
which  we  are  here  contending.  We  often  talk  of  reading 
the  book  of  nature ;  and  there  is  a  real  analogy  between  the 
process  in  which  we  apprehend  the  import  of  a  sentence, 
and  that  by  which  we  arrive  at  any  piece  of  knowledge.  In 
reading  .the  sentence  we  see  the  words  successively,  we 
attend  to  them  successively,  we  recall  their  meaning  succes- 
sively. But  throughout  that  succession  there  must  be.  present 
continuously  the  consciousness  that  the  sentence  has  a  mean- 
ing as  a  whole;  otherwise  the  successive  vision,  attention  and 
recollection  would  not  end  in  a  comprehension  of  what  the 
meaning  is.  This  consciousness  operates  in  them,  rendering 
them  what  they  are  as  organic  to  the  intelligent  reading  of 
the  sentence.  And  when  the  reading  is  over,  the  con- 
sciousness that  the  sentence  has  a  meaning  has  become  a 
consciousness  of  what  in  particular  the  meaning  is, — a 
consciousness  in  which  the  successive  results  of  the  mental 
operations  involved  in  the  reading  are  held  together,  without 

G 


82  METAPHYSICS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bK.  I 

succession,  as  a  connected  whole.  The  reader  has  then,  so 
far  as  that  sentence  is  concerned,  made  the  mind  of  the 
writer  his  own.  The  thought  which  was  the  writer's  when 
he  composed  the  sentence,  has  so  determined,  has  so  used 
as  organs,  the  successive  operations  of  sense  and  soul  on  the 
part  of  the  reader,  as  to  reproduce  itself  in  him  through 
them;  and  the  first  stage  in  this  reproduction,  the  condition 
under  which  alone  the  processes  mentioned  contribute  to  it, 
is  the  conviction  on  the  reader's  part  that  the  sentence  is  a 
connected  whole,  that  it  has  a  meaning  which  may  be  under- 
stood. This  conviction,  it  is  true,  is  not  wrought  in  him  by 
the  thought  of  the  writer  expressed  in  that  particular  sen- 
tence. He  has  learnt  that  sentences  have  a  meaning  before 
applying  himself  to  that  particular  one.  Before  any  one  can 
read  at  all,  he  must  have  been  accustomed  to  have  the 
thought  of  another  reproduced  in  him  through  signs  of  one 
kind  or  another.  But  the  first  germ  of  this  reproduction, 
the  first  possibility  or  receptivity  of  it,  must  have  consisted 
in  so  much  communication  of  some  one  else's  meaning  as  is 
implied  in  the  apprehension  that  he  has  a  meaning  to  convey. 
It  is  through  this  elementary  apprehension  that  certain  func- 
tions of  one  man's  soul,  the  soul  of  a  listener  or  reader, 
become  so  organic  to  the  thought  of  another,  as  that  this 
thought  gradually  realises  itself  anew  in  the  soul  of  the 
listener. 

May  we  not  take  it  to  be  in  a  similar  way  that  the  system 
of  related  facts,  which  forms  the  objective  world,  reproduces 
itself,  partially  and  gradually,  in  the  soul  of  the  individual 
who  in  part  knows  it  ?  That  this  system  implies  a  mind  or 
consciousness  for  which  it  exists,  as  the  condition  of  the 
union  in  relation  of  the  related  facts,  is  not  an  arbitrary 
guess.  We  have  seen  that  it  is  the  only  answer  which  we 
have  any  ground  for  giving  to  the  question,  how  such  a  union 
of  the  manifold  is  possible.  On  the  other  side,  our  knowledge 
of  any  part  of  the  system  implies  a  like  union  of  the  manifold 
in  relation;  such  a  presentation  of  feelings  as  facts,  and  such 
a  determination  of  the  facts  by  mutual  relation,  as  is  only 


CH.  Il]      MAN  AND    THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE       83 

possible  through  the  action  upon  feelings  of  a  subject  dis- 
tinguishing itself  from  them.  This  being  so,  it  would  seem 
that  the  attainment  of  the  knowledge  is  only  explicable  as 
a  reproduction  of  itself,  in  the  human  soul,  by  the  conscious- 
ness for  which  the  cosmos  of  related  facts  exists — a  repro- 
duction of  itself,  in  which  it  uses  the  sentient  life  of  the  soul 
as  its  organ. 

72.  Because  the  reproduction  has  thus  a  process  in  time 
for  its  organ,  it  is  at  once  progressive  and  incapable  of  com- 
pletion. It  is  '  never  ending,  still  beginning,'  because  of  the 
constant  succession  of  phenomena  in  the  sentient  life,  which 
the  eternal  consciousness,  acting  on  that  life,  has  perpetually 
to  gather  anew  into  the  timeless  unity  of  knowledge.  There 
never  can  be  that  actual  wholeness  of  the  world  for  us,  which 
there  must  be  for  the  mind  that  renders  the  world  one.  But 
though  the  conditions  under  which  the  eternal  consciousness 
reproduces  itself  in  our  knowledge  are  thus  incompatible 
with  finality  in  that  knowledge,  there  is  that  element  of 
identity  between  the  first  stage  of  intelligent  experience — 
between  the  simplest  beginning  of  knowledge— and  the 
eternal  consciousness  reproducing  itself  in  it,  which  consists 
in  the  presentation  of  a  many  in  one,  in  the  apprehension 
of  facts  as  related  in  a  single  system,  in  the  conception  of 
there  being  an  order  of  things,  whatever  that  order  may  turn 
out  to  be.  Just  as  the  conviction  that  a  speaker  or  writer 
has  a  meaning  is  at  once  the  first  step  in  the  communication 
of  his  thought  to  a  listener  or  reader,  and  the  condition 
determining  all  the  organic  processes  of  reading  and  listen- 
ing which  end  in  the  reproduction  of  the  thought,  so  the 
conception  described  is  at  once  the  primary  form  in  which 
that  mind  to  which  the  world  is  relative  communicates  itself 
to  us,  and  the  influence  which  renders  the  processes  of 
sensuous  experience  into  organs  of  its  communication.  It 
is  only  as  governed  by  the  forecast  of  there  being  a  related 
whole  that  these  processes  can  yield  a  growing,  though  for 
ever  incomplete,  knowledge  of  what  in  detail  the  whole  is. 

73.  There  should  by  this  time  be  no  need  of  the  reminder, 

G  2 


84  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE 

that  the  evidence  of  the  action  of  this  fore-casting  idea,  in 
the  several  stages  of  our  learning  to  know,  does  not  depend 
on  any  account  of  it  which  the  learner  may  be  able  to  give. 
Whether  he  is  able  to  give  such  an  account  or  no,  depends 
on  the  development  of  his  powers  of  reflection ;  and  the 
idea  is  at  work  before  it  is  reflected  on.  The  evidence  of 
its  action  lies  in  results  inexplicable  without  it.  Nor  must 
we  imagine  it,  as  the  doctrine  of  innate  ideas  might  lead  us 
to  do,  antecedent  in'  time  to  the  processes  of  learning 
through  which  it  realises  itself,  and  which,  in  so  doing,  it 
makes  what  they  are.  This  would  be  the  same  mistake  as 
to  suppose  the  life  of  a  living  body  antecedent  in  time  to 
the  functions  of  the  living  body.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the 
essential  notion  that  the  consciousness  of  a  related  whole, 
so  far  as  it  is  ours,  is  an  end  realising  itself  in  and  deter 
mining  the  growth  of  intelligence.  Thus  when  the  question 
is  raised,  whether  the  conception  of  the  uniformity  of  nature 
precedes  or  follows  upon  the  inartiiicial  or  unmethodised 
exercise  of  induction,  the  answer  must  be  either  that  it  does 
both  or  that  it  does  neither ;  or,  better,  that  the  question, 
being  improperly  put,  does  not  admit  of  an  answer.  The 
conception  of  the  uniformity  of  nature  is  one  form  of  the 
consciousness  on  which  we  have  been  dwelling;  and  the 
processes  of  experience  are  related  to  it  as  respiration  or 
the  circulation  of  the  blood  is  related  to  life.  It  is  the  end 
to  which  they  are  organic ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  so 
operative  in  them  that  without  it  they  would  not  be  what 
they  are.  It  is  no  more  derivable  from  processes  of  sense, 
as  these  would  be  without  it — from  excitements  and  reactions 
of  the  nervous  system — than  life  is  derivable  from  mechanical 
and  chemical  functions  of  that  which  does  not  live.  Under 
various  expressions,  it  is  the  primary  form  of  the  intellectual 
life  in  which  the  eternal  consciousness,  the  spirit  for  which 
the  relations  of  the  universe  exist,  reproduces  itself  in  us. 
All  particular  knowledge  of  these  relations  is  a  filling  up  of 
this  form,  which  the  continued  action  of  the  eternal  con- 
sciousness in  and  upon  the  sentient  life  renders  possible. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE   FREEDOM   OF   MAN  AS   INTELLIGENCE 

74.  Throughout  the  foregoing  discussion  of  the  condi- 
tions of  knowledge  our  object,  it  will  be  remembered,  has 
been  to  arrive  at  some  conclusion  in  regard  to  the  position 
in  which  man  himself  stands  to  the  system  of  related  pheno- 
mena called  nature — in  other  words,  in  regard  to  the  freedom 
of  man ;  a  conclusion  on  which  the  question  of  the  possibility 
of  Ethics,  as  other  than  a  branch  of  physics,  depends. 
Arguing,  first,  from  the  characteristics  of  his  knowledge, 
postponing  for  the  present  the  consideration  of  his  moral 
achievement,  our  conclusion  is  that,  while  on  the  one  hand 
his  consciousness  is  throughout  empirically  conditioned, — 
in  the  sense  that  it  would  not  be  what  at  any  time  it  is  but 
for  a  series  of  events,  sensible  or  related  to  sensibility,  some 
of  them  events  in  the  past  history  of  consciousness,  others 
of  them  events  affecting  the  animal  system  organic  to  con- 
sciousness,—on  the  other  hand  his  consciousness  would  not 
be  what  it  is,  as  knowing,  or  as  a  subject  of  intelligent  expe- 
rience, but  for  the  self-realisation  or  reproduction  in  it, 
through  processes  thus  empirically  conditioned,  of  an  eternal 
consciousness,  not  existing  in  time  but  the  condition  of 
there  being  an  order  in  time,  not  an  object  of  experience 
but  the  condition  of  there  being  an  intelligent  experience, 
and  in  this  sense  not '  empirical '  but '  intelligible.'  In  virtue 
of  his  character  as  knowing,  therefore,  we  are  entitled  to  say 
that  man  is,  according  to  a  certain  well-defined  meaning  of 
the  term,  a  'free  cause.'  Let  us  reconsider  shortly  what 
that  meaningTsI  " 

75.  By  the  relation  of  effect  to  cause,  unless  the  'cause' 
is  qualified  by  some  such  distinguishing  adjective  as  that 
just  employed,  we  understand  the  relation  of  a  given  event, 
either  to  another  event  invariably  antecedent  to  it  and  upon 


86  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

which  it  is  invariably  sequent,  or  to  an  assemblage  of  con- 
ditions which  together  constitute  the  event — into  which  it 
may  be  analysed.  Such  a  cause  is  not  d.  '  free '  cause.  The 
uniformly  antecedent  event  is  in  turn  dependent  on  other 
events ;  any  particular  sum  of  conditions  is  determined  by 
a  larger  complex,  which  we  at  least  cannot  exhaust.  But 
the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  this  relation  in  either 
of  its  forms — the  condition  of  events  being  connected  in 
one  order  of  becoming,  the  condition  of  facts  being  united 
in  a  single  system  of  mutual  determination — is  the  action  of 
a  single  principle,  to  which  all  events  and  facts  are  equally 
present  and  relative,  but  which  distinguishes  itself  from 
them  all  and  can  thus  unite  them  in  their  severalty.  In 
speaking  of  this  principle  we  can  only  use  the  terms  we 
have  got;  and  these,  being  all  strictly  appropriate  to  the 
relations,  or  objects  determined  by  the  relations,  which  this 
principle  renders  possible  but  under  which  it  does  not  itself 
subsist,  are  strictly  inappropriate  to  it. 

Such  is  the  term  'cause.'  So  far  indeed  as  it  indicates 
the  action  of  something  which  makes  something  else  what 
it  is,  it  might  seem  applicable  to  the  unifying  principle  which 
makes  the  world  what  it  is.  But  we  have  no  sooner  so 
applied  it  than  we  have  to  qualify  our  statement  by  the 
reminder,  that  to  the  unifying  principle  the  world,  which  it 
renders  one,  cannot  be  something  else  than  itself  m  the 
same  way  as,  to  ordinary  apprehension,  a  determined  fact  is 
something  else  than  the  conditions  determining  it,  or  an 
event  caused  something  else  than  the  antecedent  events 
causing  it.  That  the  unifying  principle  should  distinguish 
itself  from  the  manifold  which  it  unifies,  is  indeed  the 
condition  of  the  unification ;  but  it  must  not  be  supposed 
that  the  manifold  has  a  nature  of  its  own  apart  from  the 
unifying  principle,  or  this  principle  another  nature  of  its 
own  apart  from  what  it  does  in  relation  to  the  manifold 
world.  Apart  from  the  unifying  principle  the  manifold 
world  would  be  nothing  at  all,  and  in  its  self-distinction 
from  that  world  the  unifying  principle  takes  its  character 


CH.ni]    THE  FREEDOM  OF  MAN  AS  INTELLIGENCE    87 

from  it;  or,  rather,  it  is  in  distinguishing  itself  from  the 
world  that  it  gives  itself  its  character,  which  therefore  but 
■for  the  world  it  would  not  have. 

76.  It  is  true  indeed  of  anything  related  as  a  cause  to 
anything  else  on  which  it  produces  effects,  that  its  efficiency 
in  the  production  of  those  effects  is  an  essential  part  of  its 
nature,  just  as  susceptibiUty  to  those  effects  is  an  essential 
part  of  the  nature  of  that  in  which  they  take  place.  No 
group  of  conditions  would  be  what  they  are  but  for  the  effect 
which  it  lies  in  them  to  produce,  no  events  what  they  are 
but  for  the  other  events  that  arise  out  of  them ;  any  more 
than,  conversely,  the  conditioned  phenomenon,  or  necessarily 
sequent  event,  has  a  nature  independent  of  its  conditions  or 
antecedents.  •  Still  every  particular  cause,  whether  agent  or 
assemblage  of  conditions  or  antecedent  event,  has  a  nature, 
made  for  it  by  other  agents,  conditions,  or  antecedent  events, 
which  appears  but  partially  in  any  particular  effect;  and 
again  the  patient  or  conditioned  phenomenon  or  sequent 
event,  in  which  that  effect  appears,  has  a  nature  other  than 
that  which  it  derives  from  the  particular  cause.  Therefore 
in  the  determined  world  there  is  a  sense  in  saying  that 
a  cause  is  something  on  which  something  else  depends  for 
being  what  it  is,  which  no  longer  holds  when  the  effect  is 
the  whole  determined  world  itself,  and  the  cause  the  unify- 
ing principle  implied  in  its  determinateness.  There  is 
nothing  to  qualify  the  determined  world  as  a  whole  but  that 
inner  determination  of  all  contained  in  it  by  mutual  relation, 
which  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  unifying  principle ;  nor 
anything  to  qualify  the  unifying  principle  but  this  very 
action,  with  the  self-distinction  necessary  to  it. 

When  we  transfer  the  term  '  cause,'  then,  from  a  relation 
between  one  thing  and  another  within  the  determined 
world  to  the  relation  between  that  world  and  the  agent 
implied  in  its  existence,  we  must  understand  that  there  is 
no  separate  particularity  ifi  the  agent,  on  the  one  side,  and 
the  determined  world  as  a  whole,  on  the  other,  such  as 
characterises  any  agent  and  patient,  any  cause  and  effect, 


88  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

within  the  determined  world.  The  agent  must  act  abso- 
lutely from  itself  in  the  action  through  which  that  world  is 
— not,  as  does  everything  within  the  world,  under  determi- 
nation by  something  else.  The  world  has  no  character  but 
that  given  it  by  this  action ;  the  agent  no  character  but  that 
which  it  gives  itself  in  this  action. 

77.  This  is  what  we  mean  by  calling  the  agent  a  'free 
cause.'  But  the  question  at  once  arises  whether,  when  we 
have  thus  qualified  the  term  'cause'  by  an  epithet  which 
effectually  distinguishes  it  from  any  cause  cognisable  within 
the  world  of  phenomena,  it  still  has  a  meaning  for  us.  The 
answer  is  that  but  for  our  own  exercise  of  such  causality  it 
would  have  none.  But,  in  fact,  our  action  in  knowledge — 
the  action  by  which  we  connect  successive  phenomena  in 
the  unity  of  a  related  whole — is  an  action  as  absolutely  from 
itself,  as  little  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  phenomena  which 
through  it  become  an  intelligent  experience,  or  by  anything 
alien  to  itself,  as  is  that  which  we  have  found  to  be  impUed 
in  the  existence  of  the  universal  order.  This  action  of  our 
own  'mind'  in  knowledge — to  say  nothing  of  any  other 
achievement  of  the  human  spirit — becomes  to  us,  when 
reflected  on,  a  causa  cognoscendi  in  relation  to  the  action 
of  a  self-originating  '  mind '  in  the  universe  j  which  we  then 
learn  to  regard  as  the  causa  essendi  to  the  same  action, 
exercised  under  whatever  limiting  conditions,  by  ourselves. 
We  find  that,  quite  apart  from  the  sense  in  which  all  facts 
and  events,  including  those  of  our  natural  life,  are  determined 
by  that  mind  without  which  nature  would  not  be,  there 
is  another  sense  in  which  we  ourselves  are  not  so  much 
determined  by  it  as  identified  by  it  with  itself,  or  made  the 
subjects  of  its  self-communication.  All  things  in  nature  are 
determined  by  it,  in  the.  sense  that  they  are  determined  by 
each  other  in  a  manner  that  would  be  impossible  but  for 
its  equal,  self-distinguishing  presence  to  them  all.  It  is 
thus  that  the  events  of  our  natural  life  are  determined  by  it ; 
not  merely  the  mechanical  and  chemical  processes  presup- 
posed by  that  life,  but  the  life  itself,  including  all  that  can 


CH.m]    THE  FREEDOM  OF  MAN  AS  INTELLIGENCE    89 

properly  be  called  the  successive  phenomena  of  our  mental 
history.  But  to  say  that  it  is  thus  determined,  though  it  is 
true  of  our  natural  life,  is  not  the  full  account  of  it ;  for  this 
life,  with  its  constituent  events  or  phenomena,  is  organic  to 
a  form  of  consciousness  of  which  knowledge  is  the  develop- 
ment, and  which,  if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  it  conceives 
time,  cannot  itself  be  in  time.  While  the  processes  organic 
to  this  consciousness  are  determined  by  the  mind  to  which 
all  things  are  relative,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  part  of  a 
universe  which  it  renders  possible,  this  consciousness  itself 
is  a  reproduction  of  that  mind,  in  respect,  at  least,  of  its  attri- 
butes of  self-origination  and  unification  of  the  manifold. 

78.  It  may  be  asked  here,  what  after  all  is  the  conclusion 
as  to  the  freedom  of  man  himself  to  be  drawn  from  these 
considerations  in  regard  to  knowledge.  'Granted,'  it  may 
be  said,  'that  the  knowledge  of  nature  is  irreducible  to 
a  natural  process,  that  it  implies  the  action  of  a  principle 
not  in  time,  which  you  may  call,  if  you  please,  an  eternal 
mind ;  still  you  admit  that  man's  attainment  of  knowledge 
is  conditional  on  processes  in  time  and  on  the  fulfilment  of 
strictly  natural  functions.  These  processes  and  functions 
are  as  essential  to  man,  as  much  a  part  of  his  being,  as  his 
knowledge  is.  How  then  can  it  be  said  that  the  being 
itself,  thus  conditioned,  is  not  a  part  of  nature  but  is  free  ? 
Or,  if  this  statement  is  made  and  can  be  justified,  must  it 
not  be  left  alongside  of  an  exactly  contrary  statement  ?  Do 
you  not  after  all  leave  man  still  "  in  doubt  to  deem  himself 
a  God  or  beast ; "  still  perplexed  with  the  "  partly  this,  partly 
that "  conclusion,  for  which  philosophy,  if  good  for  anything, 
should  substitute  one  more  satisfactory,  but  which,  on  the 
contrary,  it  seems  merely  to  restate  in  a  more  prolix  form  ? ' 

79.  We  answer  that,  if  the  foregoing  considerations  have 
any  truth  in  them,  we  are  not  shut  up  in  this  ambiguity. 
To  say  that  man  in  himself  is  in  part  an  animal  or  product 
of  nature,  on  the  ground  that  the  consciousness  which 
distinguishes  him  is  realised  through  natural  processes,  is 
not  more  true  than  to  say  that  an  animal  is  in  part  a  machine, 


90  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

because  the  life  which  distinguishes  it  has  mechanical 
structures  for  its  organs.  If  that  activity  of  knowledge  on 
the  part  of  man,  to  which  functions  provisionally  called 
natural  are  organic,  is  as  absolutely  different  from  any  process 
of  change  or  becoming  as  we  have  endeavoured  to  show 
that  it  is,  then  even  the  functions  organic  to  it  are  not 
described  with  full  truth  when  they  are  said  to  be  natural. 
For  the  constituent  elements  of  an  organism  can  only  be 
truly  and  adequately  conceived  as  rendered  what  they  are 
by  the  end  realised  through  the  organism.  The  mechanical 
structure  organic  to  life  is  not  adequately  conceived  as  a 
machine,  though,  for  the  purpose  of  more  accurate  examina- 
tion of  the  structure  in  detail,  it  may  be  convenient  to  treat 
it  as  such.  And,  for  a  like  reason,  the  state  of  the  case  in 
regard  to  a  man  is  not  fairly  represented  by  saying  that, 
though  not  merely  an  animal  or  natural,  he  is  so  in  respect 
of  the  processes  of  physical  change  through  which  an 
intelligent  consciousness  is  realised  in  him.  In  strict  truth 
the  man  who  knows,  so  far  from  being  an  animal  altogether, 
is  not  an  animal  at  all  or  even  in  part.  The  functions, 
which  would  be  those  of  a  natural  or  animal  life  if  they  were 
not  organic  to  the  end  consisting  in  knowledge,  just  because 
they  are  so  organic,  are  not  in  their  full  reality  natural 
functions,  though  the  purposes  of  detailed  investigation  of 
them^perhaps  the  purpose  of  improving  man's  estate — 
may  be  best  served  by  so  treating  them.  For  one  who 
could  comprehend  the  whole  state  of  the  case,  even  a 
digestion  that  served  to  nourish  a  brain,  which  was  in  turn 
organic  to  knowledge,  would  be  essentially  different  from 
digestion  in  an  animal  incapable  of  knowledge,  even  if  it 
were  not  the  case  that  the  digestive,  process  is  itself  affected 
by  the  end  to  which  it  is  mediately  relative.  And,  if  this  is 
true  of  those  processes  which  are  directly  or  indirectly 
organic  to  knowledge  but  do  not  constitute  or  enter  into  it, 
much  more  is  it  true  of  the  man  capable  of  knowledge,  that 
in  himself  he  is  not  an  animal,  not  a  link  in  the  chain  of 
natural  becoming,  in  part  any  more  than  at  all. 


CH.II1]    THE  FREEDOM  OF  MAN  AS  INTELLIGENCE    91 

80.  The  question  whether  a  man  himself,  or  in  himself, 
is  a  natural  or  animal  being,  can  only  mean  whether  he  is 
so  in  respect  of  that  which  renders  him  conscious  of  himself. 
There  is  no  sense  in  asking  what  anything  in  itself  is,  if  it 
has  no  self  at  all.  That  which  is  made  what  it  is  wholly  by 
relations  to  other  things,  neither  being  anything  but  their 
joint  result  nor  distinguishing  itself  from  them,  has  no  self 
to  be  enquired  about.  Such  is  the  case  with  all  things  in 
inorganic  nature.  Of  them  at  any  rate  the  saying  '  Natur 
hat  weder  Kern  noch  Schale '  is  true  without  qualification. 
The  distinction  between  inner  and  outer,  between  what  they 
are  in  themselves  and  what  they  are  in  relation  to  other 
things,  has  no  application  to  them.  In  an  organism,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  distinction  between  its  relations  and  itself 
does  appear.  The  life  of  a  living  body  is  not,  like  the 
motion  of  a  moving  body,  simply  the  joint  result  of  its 
relations  to  other  things.  It  modifies  those  relations,  and 
modifies  them  through  a  nature  not  reducible  to  them,  not 
constituted  by  their  combination.  Their  bearing  on  it  is 
different  from  what  it  would  be  if  it  did  not  live ;  and  there  is 
so  far  a  meaning  in  saying  that  the  organism  is  something 
in  itself  other  than  what  its  relations  make  it — that,  while  it 
is  related  to  other  things  according  to  mechanical  and 
chemical  laws,  it  has  itself  a  nature  which  is  not  mechanical 
or  chemical.  There  is  a  significance,  accordingly,  in  the 
enquiry  what  this  nature  in  itself  is,  which  there  is  not  in 
the  same  enquiry  as  applied  to  anything  that  does  not  live. 
But  the  living  body  does  not,  as  such,  present  its  nature  to 
itself  in  consciousness.  It  does  not  consciously  distinguish 
itself  from  its  relations.  Man,  on  the  other  hand,  does  so 
distinguish  himself,  and  his  doing  so  is  his  special  distinction. 
The  enquiry,  therefore,  what  he  in  himself  is,  must  refer  not 
merely  to  a  character  which  he  has  as  more,  and  other,  than 
a  joint  result  of  relations  to  other  things — such  a  character 
he  has  as  simply  living, — but  to  the  character  which  he  has 
as  consciously  distinguishing  himself  from  all  that  happens 
to  him. 


92  METAPHYSICS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  1 

81.  Now  this  distinction  by  man  of  himself  from  events 
is  no  less  essentially  different  from  any  process  in  time  or 
any  natural  becoming  than  is  the  activity  of  knowledge, 
which  indeed  depends  upon  it.  It  is  through  it  that  he  is 
conscious  of  time,  of  becoming,  of  a  personal  history ;  and 
the  active  principle  of  this  consciousness  cannot  itself  be 
determined  by  these  relations  in  the  way  of  time  or  becom- 
ing, which  arise  for  consciousness  through  its  action.  The 
'  punctum  stans,'  to  which  an  order  of  time  must  be  relative 
that  it  may  be  an  order  of  time,  cannot  itself  be  a  moment 
or  a  series  of  moments  in  that  order ;  nor  can  the  '  punctum 
stans'  in  consciousness,  necessary  to  the  presentation  of  time, 
be  itself  a  succession  in  consciousness.  And  that  which  is 
true  in  regard  to  the  mere  presentation  of  time  is  true  also 
of  everything  presented  in  time,  of  all  becoming,  of  every 
history.  To  be  conscious  of  it  we  must  unite  its  several 
stages  as  related  to  each  other  in  the  way  of  succession ; 
and  to  do  that  we  must  ourselves  be,  and  distinguish  our- 
selves as  being,  out  of  the  succession.  'hvayKq  Spa  afuy^  nvm 
TOP  vovv,  &<TiTcp  (firjolv    Ava^ayopas,  iva  KpaTJj,  tovto  S'   iariv,  Xva 

ypaplCn  ^.  It  is  only  through  our  holding  ourselves  aloof,  so 
to  speak,  from  the  manifold  affections  of  sense,  as  constant 
throughout  their  variety,  that  they  can  be  presented  to  us  as 
a  connected  series,  and  thus  move  us  to  seek  the  conditions 
of  the  connexion  between  them.  And  again,  when  the  con- 
ception of  such  conditions  has  been  arrived  at,  it  is  only 
through  the  same  detachment  of  self  from  the  succession  of 
its  experiences  that  we  can  conceive  the  conditions  as  united 
in  their  changes  by  an  unchanging  law,  which,  as  determin- 
ing the  order  of  all  events  in  time,  is  itself  unaffected  by  time. 

82.  Thus,  while  still  confining  our  view  to  man's  achieve- 
ment in  knowledge,  we  are  entitled  to  say  that  in  himself, 
i.e.  in  respect  of  that  principle  through  which  he  at  once  is 
a  self  and  distinguishes  himself  as  such,  he  exerts  a  free 

'  Mind,  then,  must  be  unmixed  with  anything  else,  as  Anaxagoras 
says,  in  order  that  it  may  master  things  ;  that  is,  in  order  that  it  may 
know  them.     Arist.  de  anim.  III.  iv.  4. 


CH.III]    THE  FREEDOM  OF  MAN  AS  INTELLIGENCE 


93 


activity, — an  activity  which  is  not  in  time,  not  a  link  in  the 
chain  of  natural  becoming,  which  has  no  antecedents  other 
than  itself  but  is  self-originated.  There  is  no  incompatibility 
between  this  doctrine  and  the  admission  that  all  the  processes 
of  brain  and  nerve  and  tissue,  all  the  functions  of  life  and 
sense,  organic  to  this  activity  (though  even  they,  as  in  the 
thinking  man,  cannot,  for  reasons  given,  properly  be  held  to 
be  merely  natural),  have  a  strictly  natural  history.  There 
would  only  be  such  an  incompatibility,  if  these  processes  and 
functions  actually  constituted  or  made  up  the  self-distinguish- 
ing man,  the  man  capable  of  knowledge.  But  this,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  what  they  cannot  do.  Human  action  is  only 
explicable  by  the  action  of  an  eternal  consciousness,  which 
uses  them  as  its  organs  and  reproduces  itself  through  them. 
The  question  why  there  should  be  this  reproduction,  is 
indeed  as  unanswerable  as  every  form  of  the  question  why 
the  world  as  a  whole  should  be  what  it  is.  Why  any  detail 
of  the  world  is  what  it  is,  we  can  explain  by  reference  to  other 
details  which  determine  \i;  but  why  the  whole  should  be 
what  it  is,  why  the  mind  which  the  world  implies  should 
exhibit  itself  in  a  world  at  all,  why  it  should  make  certain 
processes  of  that  world  organic  to  a  reproduction  of  itself 
under  limitations  which  the  use  of  such  organs  involves — 
these  are  questions  which,  owing  perhaps  to  those  very 
limitations,  we  are  equally  unable  to  avoid  asking  and  to 
answer.  We  have  to  content  ourselves  with  saying  that, 
strange  as  it  may  seem,  it  is  so.  Taking  all  the  facts  of  the 
case  together,  we  cannot  express  them  otherwise.  The 
unification  of  the  manifold  in  the  world  implies  the  presence 
of  the  manifold  to  a  mind,  for  which,  and  through  the  action 
of  which,  it  is  a  related  whole.  The  unification  of  the  mani- 
fold of  sense  in  our  consciousness  of  a  world  implies  a  certain 
self-realisation  of  this  mind  in  us  through  certain  processes  of 
the  world  which,  as  explained,  only  exists  through  it — in  par- 
ticular through  the  processes  of  life  and  feeling.  The  wonder 
in  which  philosophy  is  said  to  begin  will  not  cease  when  this 
conclusion  is  arrived  at ;  but,  till  it  can  be  shown  to  have  left 


94  METAPHYSICS   OF  KNOWLEDGE  [bk.  I 

some  essential  part  of  the  reality  of  the  case  out  of  sight,  and 
another  conclusion  can  be  substituted  for  it  which  remedies 
the  defect,  this  is  no  reason  for  rejecting  it. 

83.  Before  proceeding,  it  may  be  well  to  point  out  that 
it  is  a  conclusion  which  can  in  no  wise  be  affected  by  any 
discovery,  or  (legitimately)  by  any  speculation,  in  regard 
either  to  the  relation  between  the  human  organism  and  other 
forms  of  animal  structure,  or  to  the  development  of  human 
intelligence  and  the  connexion  of  its  lower  stages  with  the 
higher  stages  of  the  intelligence  of  brutes.  Having  admitted 
that  certain  processes  in  time  are  organic  in  man  to  that  con- 
sciousness exercised  in  knowledge  which  we  hold  to  be 
eternal,  we  have  no  interest  in  abridging  those  processes. 
If  there  are  reasons  for  holding  that  man,  in  respect  of  his 
animal  nature,  is  descended  from  '  mere '  animals — animals 
in  whom  the  functions  of  life  and  sense  were  not  organic  to 
the  eternal  or  distinctively  human  consciousness, — this  does 
not  affect  our  conclusion  in  regard  to  the  consciousness  of 
which,  as  he  now  is,  man  is  the  subject;  a  conclusion  founded 
on  analysis  of  what  he  now  is  and  does.  This  conclusion 
could  only  be  shaken  by  showing  either  that  a  consciousness 
of  the  kind  which,  for  reasons  already  set  forth,  we  describe 
as  eternal,  is  not  involved  in  knowledge,  or  that  such  a  con- 
sciousness can  in  some  intelligible  way  be  developed  out  of 
those  successions  of  feeling  which  can  properly  be  treated  as 
functions  of  the  animal  system;  and  this  must  mean  that  it 
has  some  element  of  identity  with  them.  That  countless 
generations  should  have  passed  during  which  a  transmitted 
organism  was  progressively  modified  by  reaction  on  its  sur- 
roundings, by  struggle  for  existence,  or  otherwise,  till  its 
functions  became  such  that  an  eternal  consciousness  could 
realise  or  reproduce  itself  through  them — this  might  add  to 
the  wonder  with  which  the  consideration  of  what  we  do  and 
are  must  always  fill  us,  but  it  could  not  alter  the  results  of 
that  consideration.  If  such  be  discovered  to  be  the  case,  the 
discovery  cannot  affect  the  analysis  of  knowledge — of  what 
is  implied  in  there  being  a  world  to  be  known  and  in  our 


CH.m]    THE  FREEDOM  OF  MAN  AS  INTELLIGENCE    95 

knowing  it, — on  which  we  found  our  theory  of  the  action  of 
a  free  or  self-conditioned  and  eternal  mind  in  man. 

84.  The  question,  however,  of  the  development  of  the 
human  organism  out  of  lower  forms  is  quite  different  from 
that  of  the  relation  between  the  intelligence  exercised  in  our 
knowledge  and  the  mere  succession  of  'impressions  and 
ideas,'  i.e.  of  feelings  in  their  primary,  or  more  lively,  and  in 
their  secondary,  or  less  lively,  stage.  Till  some  flaw  can  be 
shown  in  the  doctrine  previously  urged,  we  must  hold  that 
there  is  an  absolute  difference  between  change  and  the 
intelligent  consciousness  or  knowledge  of  change,  which 
precludes  us  from  tracing  any  development  of  the  one  into 
the  other,  if  development  implies  any  identity  of  principle 
between  the  germ  and  the  developed  outcome.  When  we 
speak  of  a  development  of  higher  from  lower  forms  of  intel- 
ligence, there  should  be  no  mistake  about  what  we  mean, 
and  what  we  do  not  mean.  We  mean  the  development  of  an 
intelligence  which,  in  the  lowest  form  from  which  the  higher 
can  properly  be  said  to  be  developed,  is  already  a  conscious- 
ness of  change,  and  therefore  cannot  be  developed  out  of 
any  succession  of  changes  in  the  sensibility,  contingent  upon 
reactions  of  the  '  psychoplasm '  or  nervous  system,  how- 
ever that  system  may  have  been  modified  by  accumulated 
effects  of  its  reactions  in  the  past. 

To  deny  categorically  on  this  account  that  the  distinctive 
intelligence  of  man^  his  intelligence  as  knowing,  can  be 
developed  from  that  of  '  lower '  animals  would  indeed  be 
more  than  we  should  be  warranted  in  doing.  We  have 
much  surer  ground  for  saying  what,  in  respect  of  our  know- 
ledge, we  are  than  for  saying  what  the  animals  are  not.  The 
analysis  of  what  we  do  and  have  done  in  knowledge,  which 
entitles  us  to  certain  conclusions  as  to  what  we  must  be  in 
order  to  do  it,  is  inapplicable  to  beings  with  whom  we  can- 
not communicate.  If  the  animals  have  a  consciousness  cor- 
responding to  that  which  we  exercise  in  knowledge,  at  any 
rate  we  cannot  enter  into  it.  Their  actions,  as  observed  from 
outside,  would  seem  to  be  explicable  without  it — explicable 


96  METAPHYSICS  OF  KNOWLEDGE 

as  resulting  from  the  determination  of  action  by  feeling  and 
that  of  feeling  by  feeling,  in  other  words  as  resulting  from 
successive  changes  of  the  sensibility, — without  any  need  for 
ascribing  to  them  any  consciousness  of  change,  any  synthesis 
of  the  modifications  they  experience  as  belonging  to  an  inter- 
related world.  We  are  thus  warranted  in  saying  that  we  have 
no  evidence  of  the  presence  in  '  brutes '  of  such  an  intelli- 
gence as  that  which  forms  the  basis  of  our  knowledge  ;  and 
that,  if  it  is  absetit,  there  can,  properly  speaking,  have  been 
no  development  of  our  mind  from  such  a  mind  as  theirs. 
But  this  hypothetical  negation  is  quite  compatible  with  the 
admission  that  there  may  have  been  a  progressive  develop- 
ment, through  hereditary  transmission,  of  the  animal  system 
which  has  become  organic  to  the  distinctive  intelligence  of 
man ;  that  the  particular  modes  of  successive  feeling  upon 
which  a  unifying  intelligence  supervenes  in  man,  rendering 
them  for  him  into  a  related  world,  may  be  the  result  of  a 
past  experience  on  the  part  of  beings  in  whom  such  intelli- 
gence had  not  yet  supervened,  and  who  were  in  that  sense 
not  human ;  and  that  certain  modifications  of  the  sensibility, 
arising  from  this  pre-human  history,  may  have  been  the  con- 
dition, according  to  some  unascertained  law,  of  that  super- 
vention of  intelligence  in  man. 


BOOK   II 

THE  WILL 
CHAPTER   I 

THE    FREEDOM   OF   THE   WILL 

85.  So  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  "what  we  may 
venture  to  call  the  metaphysics  of  experience  or  knowledge, 
as  distinct  from  the  metaphysics  of  moral  action.  We  have 
been  considering  the  action  of  the  self-conditioning  and 
self-distinguishing  mind,  which  the  existence  of  a  connected 
world  implies,  in  determining  a  particular  product  of  that 
world,  viz.  the  animal  system  of  man,  with  the  receptive 
feelings  to  which  that  system  is  organic, — in  so  determining 
it  as  to  reproduce  itself,  under  limitations,  in  the  capacity 
for  knowledge  which  man  possesses.  The  characteristic  of 
this  particular  mode  of  its  reproduction  in  the  human  self  is 
the  apprehension  of  a  world  which  is,  as  distinct  from  one 
which  should  be.  It  constitutes  a  knowledge  of  the  con- 
ditions of  the  feelings  that  occur  to  us,  and  of  uniform 
relations  between  changes  in  those  conditions.  But  the 
animal  system  is  not  organic  merely  to  feeling  of  the  kind 
just  spoken  of  as  receptive,  to  impressions,  according  to  the 
natural  meaning  of  that  term,  conveyed  by  the  nerves  of  the 
several  senses.  It  is  organic  also  to  wants,  and  to  impulses 
for  the  satisfaction  of  those  wants,  which  may  be  in  many 
cases  occasioned  by  impressions  of  the  kind  mentioned,  but 
which  constitute  quite  a  different  function  of  the  animal 
system. 

These  wants,  with  the  sequent  impulses,  must  be  distin- 
guished from  the  consciousness  of  wanted  objects,  and 
from  the  effort  to  give  reality  to  the  objects  thus  present  in 
consciousness  as  wanted,  no  less  than  sensations  of  sight 
and  hearing  have  to  be  distinguished  from  the  consciousness 

H 


98  THE    WILL  [bk.  II 

of  objects  to  which  those  sensations  are  conceived  to  be 
related.  It  has  been  sufficiently  pointed  out  how  the 
presentation  of  sensible  things,  on  occasion  of  sensation, 
implies  the  action  of  a  principle  which  is  not,  like  sensa- 
tion, in  time,  or  an  event  or  a  series  of  events,  but  must 
equally  be  present  to,  and  distinguish  itself  from,  the  several 
stages  of  a  sensation  to  which  attention  is  given,  as  well  as 
the  several  sensations  attended  to  and  referred  to  a  single 
object.  In  like  manner  the  transition  from  mere  want 
to  consciousness  of  a  wanted  object,  from  the  impulse  to 
satisfy  the  want  to  an  effort  for  realisation  of  the  idea  of 
the  wanted  object,  implies  the  presence  of  the  want  to  a 
subject  which  distinguishes  itself  from  it  and  is  constant 
throughout  successive  stages  of  the  want. 

So  much  is  implied  in  the  conversion  of  a  want  into  the 
presentation  of  a  wanted  object,  though  the  want  be  of 
strictly  animal  origin,  and  however  slightly  the  object  may 
be  defined  in  consciousness.  Every  step  in  the  definition 
of  the  wanted  object  irnplies  a  further  action  of  the  same 
subject,  in  the  way  of  comparing  various  wants  that  ■  arise 
in  the  process  of  life,  along  with  the  incidents  of  their 
satisfaction,  as  they  only  can  be  compared  by  a  subject 
which  is  other  than  the  process,  not  itself  a  stage  or  series 
of  stages  in  the  succession  which  it  observes.  At  the  same 
time  as  the  reflecting  subject  traverses  the  series  of  wants, 
which  it  distinguishes  from  itself  while  it  presents  their 
filling  as  its  object,  there  arises  the  idea  of  a  satisfaction  on 
the  whole — an  idea  never  realisable,  but  for  ever  striving  to 
realise  itself  in  the  attainment  of  a  greater  command  over 
means  to  the  satisfaction  of  particular  wants. 

86.  For  the  present  we  take  no  notice  of  any  wanted 
objects  but  such  as  arise  from  the  presentation  by  a  re- 
flecting subject  to  itself  of  wants  that  are  of  a  purely  animal 
origin.  With  the  exception  of  the  object  consisting  in  a 
general  satisfaction  of  such  wants,  we  take  no  account  as, 
yet  of  wants  that  are  of  distinctively  human  origin,  of  wants 
that  arise  out  of  conceptions.    The  form  of  consciousness 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM   OF   THE    WILL  99 

which  we  are  considering  does  indeed  differ  absolutely  from 
the  mere  succession  of  animal  wants ;  but  it  so  differs,  not 
in  respect  of  the  presence  of  such  wants  as  are  not  of 
animal  origin,  but  in  virtue  of  that  distinction  of  self  from 
the  wants,  through  which  there  supervenes  upon  the  succes- 
sion of  wants  a  consciousness — not  a  succession — of  wanted 
objects.  It  is  this  consciousness  which  yields,  in  the  most 
elementary  form,  the  conception  of  something  that  should 
be  as  distinct  from  that  which  is,  of  a  world  of  practice 
as  distinct  from  that  world  of  experience  of  which  the 
conception  arises  from  the  determination  by  the  Ego  of 
the  receptive  senses.  Whereas  in  perceptive  experience  the 
sensible  object  carries  its  reality  with  it — in  being  presented 
at  all,  is  presented  as  real,  though  the  nature  of  its  reality 
may  remain  to  be  discovered, — in  practice  the  wanted 
object  is  one  to  which  real  existence  has  yet  to  be  given. 
This  latter  point,  it  is  true,  is  one  which  language  is  apt  to 
disguise.  The  food  which  I  am  said  to  want,  the  treasure 
on  which  I  have  set  my  heart,  are  already  in  existence. 
But,  strictly  speaking,  the  objects  which  in  these  cases  I 
present  to  myself  as  wanted,  are  the  eating  of  the  food,  the 
acquisition  of  the  treasure ;  and  as  long  as  I  want  them,  these 
exist  for  me  only  as  ideas  which  I  am  striving  to  realise,  as 
something  which  I  would  might  be  but  which  is  not. 

Thus  the  world  of  practice  depends  on  man  in  quite 
a  different  sense  from  that  in  which  nature,  or  the  world  of 
experience,  does  so.  We  have  seen  indeed  that  indepen- 
dence is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  nature,  in  the  sense  either 
that  there  would  be  nature  at  all  without  the  action  of 
a  spiritual  self-distinguishing  subject,  or  that  there  could 
be  a  nature  for  us,  for  our  apprehension,  but  for  a  further 
action  of  this  subject  in  or  as  our  soul.  It  is  independent 
of  us,  however,  in  the  sense  that  it  does  not  depend  on  any 
exercise  of  our  powers  whether  the  sensible  objects,  of 
which  we  are  conscious,  shall  become  real  or  no.  They  are 
already  real.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  characteristic  of  the 
world  of  practice  that  its  constituents  are  objects  of  which 

H  2 


lOO  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

the  existence  in  consciousness,  as  wanted,  is  prior  to,  and 
conditions,  their  existence  in  reality.  It  depends  on  a  certain 
exercise  of  our  powers,  determiried  by  ideas  of  the  objects 
as  wanted,  whether  those  ideas  shall  become  real  or  no. 

87.  The  same  thing  may  perhaps  be  otherwise  stated  by 
saying  that  the  world  of  practice — the  world  composed  of 
moral  or  distinctively  human  actions,  with  their  results — 
is  one  in  which  the  determining  causes  are  motives  ;  a  motive 
again  being  an  idea  of  an  end,  which  a  self-conscious 
subject  presents  to  itself,  and  which  it  strives  and  tends  to. 
realise.  Now,  prima  facie,  as  will  be  admitted  on  all  hands, 
this  causality  of  motives  eifectually  distinguishes  the  world 
which  moral  action  has  brought,  and  continues  to  bring, 
into  being,  from  the  series  of  natural  events.  In  the  latter 
the  occurrence  of  an  event  does  not  depend  on  an  ideal 
of  the  event,  as  a  desired  object,  being  previously  presented] 
If  then  moral  action  is  to  be  brought  within  the  series  of 
natural  phenomena,  it  must  be  on  supposition  that  the 
motives  which  determine  it,  having  natural  antecedents, 
are  themselves  but  links  in  the  chain  of  natural  phenomena ; 
and  that  thus  moral  action,  though  distinguished  from  other 
kinds  of  natural  event  by  its  dependence  on  prior  ideas,  is 
not  denaturalised,  since  the  ideas  on  which  it  depends  are 
themselves  of  natural  origin. 

The  question  whether  this  is  so  is  the  point  really  at  issue 
in  regard  to  the  possibility  and  indispensableness  of  a  Moral 
Philosophy  which  shall  not  be  a  branch  of  natural  science ; 
or,  if  we  like  to  put  it  so,  in  regard  to  the  freedom  of  moral 
agents.  It  is  not  the  question  commonly  debated,  with  much 
ambiguity  of  terms,  between  '  determinists '  and  '  indeter- 
minists ' ;  not  the  question  whether  there  is,  or  is  not,  a  possi- 
bility of  unmotived  willing;  but  the  question  whether  motives, 
of  that  kind  by  which  it  is  the  characteristic  of  moral  or 
human  action  to  be  determined,  are  of  properly  natural 
origin  or  can  be  rightly  regarded  as  natural  phenomena. 

88,  If  the  foregoing  analysis  be  correct,  even  those  mo- 


CH.  l]  THE   FREEDOM   OF    THE   WILL  loi 

tives  (defined  above)  which  lie  nearest,  so  to  speak,  to  ani- 
mal wants,  are  yet  effectually  distinguished  from  them  and 
from  any  kind  of  natural  phenomena.  No  one  would  pre- 
tend to  find  more  than  a  strictly  natural  event  either  in  any 
appetite  or  want  incidental  to  the  process  of  animal  life,  or 
in  the  effect  of  such  a  want  in  the  way  of  an  instinctive 
action  directed  to  its  satisfaction.  But  it  is  contended  that 
such  appetite  or  want  does  not  constitute  a  motive  proper, 
does  not  move  to  any  distinctively  human  action,  except  as 
itself  determined  by  a  principle  of  other  than  natural  origin. 
It  only  becomes  a  motive,  so  far  as  upon  the  want  there 
supervenes  the  presentation  of  the  want  by  a  self-conscious 
subject  to  himself,  and  with  it  the  idea  of  a  self-satisfaction 
to  be  attained  in  the  filling  of  the  want. 

89.  It  is  not  indeed  that  the  want  is  intrinsically  altered, 
or  ceases  to  be  a  want,  through  the  supervention  upon  it  of 
the  moral  motive,  properly  so  called ;  but  that,  while  it  con- 
tinues or  ceases  and  begins  again,  there  arises  a  new  agency, 
other  than  it,  from  its  presence  to  a  self-conscious  subject 
which  takes  from  it  an  idea  of  an  object  in  which  self-satis- 
faction is  to  be  sought.  And  the  new  agency,  thus  resulting, 
is  no  more  a  natural  event  or  process,  or  the  product  of  any 
such  event  or  process,  than  is  the  self-consciousness  to  which 
it  owes  its  distinguishing  character.  We  may  illustrate  the 
state  of  the  case  from  what  takes  place  in  physical  life.  A 
chemical  process  does  not  cease  to  be  a  chemical  process 
because  it  goes  on  in  a  living  organism,  but  it  does  become 
contributory  to  a  result  wholly  different  from  any  which, 
apart  from  a  living  organism,  it  could  have  yielded.  On 
the  other  hand,  life  is  not  a  chemical  or  mechanical  process 
because  chemical  and  mechanical  processes  are  necessary  to 
the  living  body,  unless  such  processes  can  by  themselves 
constitute  life.  No  more  is  any  moral  action,  or  action  from 
motives,  a  natural  event  because  natural  want  is  necessary  to 
it,  unless  the  self-consciousness,  in  and  through  which  a  mo- 
tive arises  out  of  the  want,  is  itself  a  natural  event  or  series 
of  events  or  relation  between  events. 


I02  THE    WILL  [bK.  n 

90.  That  it  is  not  so  is  scarcely  less  plain  of  self-con- 
sciousness, in  that  relation  to  want  which  yields  a  motive, 
than  it  is  of  it  in  that  relation  to  sensation  which  yields 
perception  and,  through  it,  knowledge.  Can  that  be  an 
event  or  phenomenon,  whether  in  the  way  of  want  or  other- 
wise, which  throughout  the  successive  stages,  the  abatements 
and  revivals,  of  a  want  presents  the  single  idea  of  the  self- 
satisfaction  to  be  attained  in  its  filling ;  which  unites  succes- 
sive wants  in  the  idea  of  a  general  need  for  which  provision 
is  to  be  made,  and  holds  together  the  successive  wants  and 
fillings  as  the  connected  but  distinct  incidents  of  an  inner 
life,  as  an  experience  of  happiness  or  the  reverse  ?  Can  it, 
again,  be  a  series  of  events,  either  the  series  of  which  the 
connexion  in  an  inner  life  thus  arises  through  its  action,  or 
any  other  series  ?  Can  it,  finally,  be  the  connexion  or  rela- 
tion thus  arising,  or  any  other  relation  ?  But  when  we  have 
rejected  all  these  alternatives,  when  we  have  said  that  the 
practical  self-consciousness,  which  is  the  distinguishing  fac- 
tor in  all  motives,  is  not  an  event  or  series  of  events  or  rela- 
tion-between  events,  we  have  said  that  it  is  not  natural  in 
the  ordinary  sense  of  that  term ;  not  natural  at  any  rate  in 
any  sense  in  which  naturalness  would  imply  its  determina- 
tion by  antecedent  events,  or  by  conditions  of  which  it  is 
not  itself  the  source. 

91.  If  the  reader  is  satisfied  by  these  considerations  that 
there  is  something  more  than  natural  in  the  motive  to  a 
moral  or  distinctively  human  action,  he  may  be  apt  to  as- 
sume— since  there  is  no  disputing  the  dependence  on  ani- 
mal impulse  a;t  any  rate  of  those  elementary  motives  to  which 
we  have  so  far  confined  our  view — that  animal  impulse  is 
one  component  of  the  motive,  while  self-consciousness  is 
another ;  that  the  moral  agent  is  partly  an  animal,  partly  a 
rational  or  self-realising  subject.  But  against  such  a  view 
we  should  protest  as  much  as  previously  [§  68]  against  the 
notion  that  the  presence  of  a  double  consciousness  in  man 
was  implied  in  the  distinction  pointed  out  between  the  pro- 
cess of  sensation  in  time  and  its  determination  by  a  subject 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM   OF   THE    WILL  103 

not  in  time,  as  alike  necessary  to  perception  and  knowledge. 
If  it  would  be  untrue  to  say  of  the  functions  of  life  that  they 
are  partly  chemical,  because  without  chemical  processes  they 
could  not  be  exercised,  it  is  even  more  untrue  to  say  of  a 
motive,  in  the  proper  sense,  that  it  is  partly  animal,  because, 
unless  an  animal  want  occurred,  it  would  not  arise.  The 
motive  is  not  made  up  of  a  want  and  self-consciousness,  any 
more  than  life  of  chemical  processes  and  vital  ones.  It  is 
one  and  indivisible ;  but,  indivisible  as  it  is,  it  results,  as  per- 
ception results,  from  the  determination  of  an  animal  nature 
by  a  self-conscious  subject  other  than  it ;  so  results,  however, 
as  that  the  animal  condition  does  not  survive  in  the  result. 

The  want,  no  doubt,  may  remain  along  with  the  new 
result — the  motive,  properly  so  called — which  arises  from 
its  relation  to  self-consciousness,  but  it  is  not  a  part  of  it. 
Hunger,  for  instance,  may  survive  along  with  the  motive, 
involving  some  form  of  self-reference,  which  arises  out  of 
it  in  the  self-conscious  man — whether  that  motive  be  the 
desire  to  relieve  himself  from  pain,  or  to  give  himself  plea- 
sure, or  to  quaUfy  himself  for  work,  or  to  provide  himself  the 
means  of  living, — but  hunger  neither  is  that  motive  nor  a 
part  of  it.  If  it  were,  the  resulting  act  would  not  be  moral 
but  instinctive.  There  would  be  no  moral  agency  in  it.  It 
would  not  be  the  man  that  did  it,  but  the  hunger  or  some 
'  force  of  nature '  in  him.  The  motive  in  every  imputable 
act  for  which  the  agent  is  conscious  on  reflection  that  he  is 
answerable,  is  a  desire  for  personal  good  in  some  form  or 
other;  and,  however  much  the  idea  of  what  the  personal 
good  for  the  time  is  may  be  affected  by  the  pressure  of 
animal  want,  this  want  is  no  more  a  part  or  component 
of  the  desire  than  is  the  sensation  of  light  or  colour,  which 
I  receive  in  looking  at  this  written  line,  a  component  part 
of  my  perception  in  reading  it. 

92.  Whether  our  conclusion  be  accepted  or  no,  it  may  be 
hoped  that  the  point  which  it  is  sought  to  make  good  in 
regard  to  the  distinctive  character  of  motives  has  at  least 
been  made  clear.     What  instinct  is,  whether  there  are  in 


I04  THE    WILL  [bk.  II 

truth  merely  instinctive  actions,  is  a  question  on  which, 
though  of  late  some  men  seem  almost  to  have  argued  them- 
selves into  believing  the  contrary,  there  is  much  more  room 
for  doubt  than  there  is  as  to  the  nature  and  reality  of  motives 
and  the  moral  action  determined  by  them.  If  we  have  to 
explain  what  we  mean  by  instinct  and  instinctive  action,  we 
have  to  do  it  by  excluding  the  essential  characteristic  of  our 
own  motives  and  motived  action.  By  an  instinctive  action 
we  mean  one  not  determined  by  a  conception,  on  the  part 
of  the  agent,  of  any  good  to  be  gained  or  evil  to  be  avoided 
by  the  action.  It  is  superfluous  to  add,  good  to  himself; 
for  anything  conceived  as  good  in  such  a  way  that  the  agent 
acts  for  the  sake  of  it,  must  be  conceived  as  his  own  good, 
though  he  may  conceive  it  as  his  own  good  only  on  account 
of  his  interest  in  others,  and  in  spite  of  any  amount  of 
suffering  on  his  own  part  incidental  to  its  attainment.  By 
a  moral  action,  an  action  morally  imputable  or  that  can  be 
called  good  or  bad,  we  mean  one  that  is  so  determined  as 
the  instinctive  action  is  not.  Clearly  it  is  nothing  but  our 
knowledge  of  what  moral  or  motived  action  is,  that  gives 
a  meaning  to  the  negation  conveyed  in  the  description  of 
another  sort  of  action  as  instinctive.  Whether  there  in  fact 
are  actions,  either  done  by  ourselves  under  certain  conditions 
or  by  other  agents,  that  correspond  to  this  negative  descrip- 
tion can  never  be  known  with  the  same  intimate  certainty 
with  which  it  is  known  that  actions  belonging  to  our  con- 
scious experience  are  related  to  motives  in  that  manner  of 
which  the  negative  forms  the  meaning  of  the  description  of 
any  action  as  instinctive. 

93.  It  is  true  that  it  makes  no  difference  to  the  outward 
form  of  an  action  whether  it  is  so  related  to  a  motive  or  no; 
whether  it  has  a  moral  quality  or — as  would  be  the  case,  if 
it  were  determined  directly  by  animal  want — is  merely 
instinctive,  in  the  sense  of  not  proceeding  from  a  conception 
of  personal  good.  It  may  have  the  same  effect  on  the  senses 
of  an  onlooker,  the  same  nervous  and  muscular  motions 
may  be  involved  in  it,  the  same  physical  results  may  follow 


CH.  l]  THE   FREEDOM   OF   THE    WILL  105 

from  it,  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  But  it  is  not  by 
the  outward  fornij  thus  understood,  that  we  know  what 
moral  action  is.  We  know  it,  so  to  speak,  on  the  inner 
side.  We  know  what  it  is  in  relation  to  us,  the  agents; 
what  it  is  as  our  expression.  Only  thus  indeed  do  we  know 
it  at  all.  In  knowledge  so  derived,  where  from  the  nature 
of  the  case  our  judgments  are  incapable  of  verification  in 
the  ordinary  sense  by  reference  to  matters  of  fact — for  the 
motive  which  an  act  expresses  is  not  what  we  commonly 
mean  by  a  matter  of  fact — there  is,  no  doubt,  much  liability 
to  arbitrariness  in  the  interpretation  of  the  self-consciousness 
to  which  alone  we  can  appeal.  Against  such  arbitrarinessi 
it  would  seem,  we  can  only  protect  ourselves  by  great  cir- 
cumspection in  the  adoption  of  our  formulae,  so  that  they  may 
be  as  nearly  adequate  as  possible  to  the  inner  experience 
which  we  mean  them  to  convey,  and  by  constant  reference 
to  the  expression  of  that  experience  which  is  embodied,  so 
to  speak,  in  the  habitual  phraseology  of  men,  in  literature 
and  in  the  institutions  of  family  and  political  life. 

94.  However  insufficient  such  safeguards  may  be,  it 
remains  the  case  that  self-reflection  is  the  only  possible 
method  of  learning  what  is  the-  inner  man  or  mind  that  our 
action  expresses  ;  in  other  words,  what  that  action  really  is. 
Judgments  so  arrived  at  must  be  the  point  of  departure  for 
all  enquiry  into  processes  by  which  our  actual  moral  nature 
may  have  been  reached,  and  into  links  of  connexion  between 
it  and  that  of  animals  otherwise  endowed.  Whatever  the 
result  of  such  enquiries,  it  can  only  be  through  a  confusion 
that  we  allow  them  to  affect  our  conclusions  in  regard  to 
the  actuality  of  our  conscious  life.  Our  knowledge  of  what 
that  life  is  may  not  seldom  entitle  us  to  reject  speculations 
as  to  a  process  by  which  it  has  come  about,  on  the  ground 
that  such  a  product  as  can  be  legitimately  traced  from  the 
process  is  not  the  inner  life  which  we  know.  But  no  infer- 
ence from  such  supposed  processes  can  entitle  us  to  decide 
that  this  life  is  not  that  which  a  sufficiently  comprehensive 
view  of  the  evidence  afforded  by  itself  would  authorise  us  in 


Io6  THE    WILL  [bk.  II 

taking  it  to  be ;  since  the  acceptance  of  this  evidence  as  the 
given  reality  is  the  presupposition  of  any  enquiry  into  a 
process  by  which  the  given  reality  has  come  to  be. 

95.  It  must  be  plainly  admitted,  then,  that  self-reflection 
is  the  basis  of  the  view  here  given  in  regard  to  the  distinc- 
tive character  of  the  motives  which  moral  actions  represent. 
Any  one  making  this  admission  will  of  course  endeavour  to 
conduct  his  self-reflection  as  circumspectly  as  possible,  and 
to  save  it  as  far  as  may  be  from  errors  which  personal 
idiosyncrasy  might  occasion,  by  constant  reference  to  the 
customary  expressions  of  moral  consciousness  in  use  among 
men,  and  to  the  institutions  in  which  men  have  embodied 
their  ideas  or  ideals  of  permanent  good.  In  the  interpreta- 
tion, however,  of  such  expressions  and  institutions  self- 
reflection  must  be  our  ultimate  guide.  Without  it  they 
would  have  nothing  to  tell ;  and  it  is  to  it,  avowedly,  that 
we  make  our  appeal  when  we  say  that  to  every  action 
morally  imputable,  or  of  which  a  man  can  recognise  himself 
as  the  author,  the  motive  is  always  some  idea  of  the  man's 
personal  good — an  idea  absolutely  different  from  animal 
want,  even  in  cases  where  it  is  from  anticipation  of  the 
satisfaction  of  some  animal  want  that  the  idea  of  personal 
good  is  derived. 

Now  a  motive  so  constituted,  like  the  perception  which 
answers  to  it  in  the  sphere  of  speculative  intelligence,  clearly 
admits  of  being  considered  in  seemingly  opposite  ways.  Two 
seemingly  incompatible,  yet  equally  true,  sets  of  statements 
may  be  made  in  regard  to  it ;  which,  however,  are  not  really 
incompatible,  because  one  relates  to  the  motive  in  its  full 
reality,  which  is  not  a  sensible  event,  the  other  to  a  sensible 
event  which  is  implied  in  it  (as  sensation  is  implied  in  per- 
ception) but  is  not  it.  The  sensible  event  or  phenomenon, 
implied  in  the  motive,  is,  like  every  other  event,  determined 
by  antecedent  events  according  to  natural  laws.  The  motive 
itself,  though  it  too  is  in  its  own  way  definitely  determined, 
is  not  naturally  determined.  It  is  constituted  by  an  act  of 
self-consciousness  which  is  not  a  natural  event,  an  act  an 


CH.l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF   THE   WILL  107 

which  the  agent  presents  to  himself  a  certain  idea  of  himself — 
of  himself  doing  or  himself  enjoying — as  an  idea  of  which  the 
realisation  forms  for  the  time  his  good.  It  is  true  that  the 
moral  quality  of  this  act,  its  virtue  or  its  vice,  depends  on 
the  character  of  the  agent.  It  is  this  that  determines  what 
the  kind  of  personal  good,  which  under  any  set  of  circum- 
stances he  presents  to  himself,  shall  be.  This  character,  in 
turn,  has  had  its  history,  just  as  a  man's  developed  intelli- 
gence, as  it  at  any  time  stands,  has  had  a  history.  But  just 
as  this  latter  history,  though  to  call  it  a  history  ^an  eternal 
consciousness  would  be  a  contradiction,  has  yet  taken  its 
distinctive  nature,  as  a  history  of  intelligence,  from  a  certain 
action  of  an  eternal  self-distinguishing  consciousness  upon 
the  processes  of  feeling ;  so  the  history  of  human  character 
has  been  one  in  which  the  same  consciousness  has  through- 
out been  operative  upon  wants  of  animal  prigin,  giving  rise 
through  its  action  upon  them  to  the  speci/ic  quality  of  that 
history. 

96.  The  view  which  it  is  sought  to  convey  may  be  made 
more  plain  by  an  instance.  When  Esau  sells  his  birthright 
for  a  mess  of  pottage,  his  motive,  we  might  be  apt  hastily  to 
say,  is  an  animal  want.  On  reflection,  if  by  'motive'  is 
meant  that  which  an  action  represents  or  expresses,  the 
inner  side  of  that  of  which  the  action  is  the  outer,  we  shall 
find  that  it  is  not  so.  The  motive  lies  in  the  presentation  of 
an  idea  of  himself  as  enjoying  the  pleasure  of  eating  the 
pottage,  or  (which  comes  practically  to  the  same  thing)  as 
relieved  from  the  pain  of  hunger.  Plainly,  but  for  his 
hunger  Esau  could  have  no  such  motive.  But  for  it  his 
presentation  of  himself  as  a  subject  of  pleasure  could  have 
taken  no  such  form.  But  the  hunger  is  not  the  presentation 
of  himself  as  the  subject  of  pleasure,  still  less  the  presenta- 
tion of  that  particular  pleasure  as  under  the  circumstances 
his  greatest  good ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  his  motive.  If  the 
action  were  determined  directly  by  the  hunger,  it  would 
have  no  moral  character,  any  more  than  have  actions  done 
in  sleep,  or  strictly  under  compulsion,  or  from  accident,  or 


Io8  THE    WILL  [bk.  II 

(so  far  as  we  know)  the  actions  of  animals.  Since,  however, 
it  is  not  the  hunger  as  a  natural  force,  but  his  own  conception 
of  himself,  as  finding  for  the  time  his  greatest  good  in  the 
satisfaction  of  hunger,  that  determines  the  act,  Esau  recog- 
nises himself  as  the  author  of  the  act.  He  imputes  it  to 
himself,  and  it  is  morally  imputable  to  him — an  act  for  which 
he  is  accountable,  to  which  praise  or  blame  are  appropriate. 
If  evil  follows  from  it,  whether  in  the  shape  of  punishment 
inflicted  by  a  superior,  or  of  calamity  ensuing  in  the  course 
of  nature  to  himself  or  those  in  whom  he  is  interested,  he  is 
aware  that  he  himself  has  brought  it  on  himself.  Hence 
remorse,  and  with  it  the  possibility  of  change  of  heart.  He 
may  'find  no  place  for  repentance'  in  the  sense  of  cancelling 
or  getting  rid  of  the  evil  which  his  act  has  caused ;  but  in 
another  sense  the  recognition  of  himself  as  the  author  of  the 
evil  is,  in  promise  and  potency,  itself  repentance. 

97.  '  But  how,'  it  will  be  asked,  '  does  this  analysis  of 
Esau's  motive  affect  the  question  of  his  moral  freedom?' 
We  admit  at  once  that,  if  he  is  not  free  or  self-determined  in 
his  motive,  he  is  not  free  at  all.  To  a  will  free  in  the  sense 
of  unmotived  we  can  attach  no  meaning  whatever.  Of  the 
relation  between  will  and  desire  more  shall  be  said  in  the 
sequel.  Eor  the  present  the  statement  may  suffice,  that  we 
know  of  no  other  expression  of  will  but  a  motive  in  the  sense 
above  explained,  or,  as  it  may  be  called  to  avoid  ambiguity, 
a  strongest  motive.  Such  a  motive  is  the  will  in  act.  The 
question  as  to  the  freedom  of  the  will  we  take  to  be  a  ques- 
tion as  to  the  origin  of  such  a  strongest  motive. 

98.  The  assertion  that  Esau's  motive,  and  with  it  the 
action  which  expresses  his  character,  is  the  joint  outcome  of 
his  circumstances  and  character,  however  true  it  may  be, 
throws  little  light  on  the  matter,  unless  followed  by  some 
further  analysis  of  the  circumstances  and  character.  One 
'circumstance'  no  doubt  is  his  hunger,  and  this  has  a  definite 
physical  history.  The  physiologist,  with  sufficient  knowledge 
and  opportunity  of  examination,  could  trace  its  determining 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  Of  THE   WILL 


109 


antecedents  with  the  utmost  precision.  But  even  this  hunger, 
as  it  affects  Esau's  action,  is  not  really  what  it  would  be  in 
relation  to  a  merely  natural  agent,  any  more  than  the  visual 
sensation,  which  this  flower  conveys  to  an  intelligent  person 
who  attends  to  it,  is  really  the  same  as  that  which  it  conveys 
to  a  merely  sentient  animal.  The  want  in  the  one  case,  the 
sensation  in  the  other,  may  rightly  be  abstracted  from  the 
self-consciousness  by  relation  to  which,  in  the  cases  sup- 
posed, it  is  really  determined,  for  the  purpose  of  investigating 
those  natural  conditions  and  antecedents  which  are  un- 
affected by  that  relation ;  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
there  is  an  abstraction  in  so  treating  it,  and  that,  when  the 
moral  bearing  of  the  want  is  in  question,  the  abstraction 
may  become  misleading.  The  circumstances  which  in  com- 
bination with  character  affect  moral  action,  just  because  they 
are  so  combined,  are  no  longer  what  they  would  be  merely 
as  circumstances.  They  are  not  like  forces  converging  on 
an  inert  body  which  does  not  itself  modify  the  direction  of 
the  resulting  motion.  Thus  even  a-  circumstance  in  itself 
and  in  its  antecedents  so  strictly  physical  as  hunger,  if  it  is 
Esau's  hunger,  the  hunger  of  an  agent  morally  endowed,  has 
in  effect  a  quality  not  determined  by  natural  antecedents. 

Of  the  other  circumstances  bearing  on  Esau's  action,  or 
of  the  most  important  among  them,  it  could  not  be  admitted 
that  they  are  merely  physical  at  all,  even  in  their  origin  or 
antecedents  as  distinct  from  their  bearing  on  his  act.  We 
may  perhaps  classify  them  roughly  under  three  heads — the 
state  of  his  health,  the  outward  manner  of  his  life  (including 
his  family  arrangements  and  the  mode  in  which  he  maintains 
himself  and  his  family),  and  the  standard  of  social  expecta- 
tion on  the  part  of  those  whom  he  recognises  as  his  equals. 
All  these  have  their  weight  in  affecting  the  result  which  his 
character  yields  under  the  pressure  of  animal  want,  but  they 
are  all  of  them  influences  which  have  come  to  be  what  they 
are  through  processes  in  which  human  character  or  will  has 
been  an  essential  factor.  Just  as  the  result  to  which  they 
contribute  in  his  conduct  only  arises  from  the  particular 


no  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

mode  in  which  the  self-presenting  and  self-seeking  Ego  in 
him  reacts  upon  them,  so  it  is  only  through  previous  conduct 
similarly  determined,  on  his  own  part  or  that  of  others,  that 
such  circumstances  have  taken  their  actual  shape.  Their 
formation  at  every  stage  has  indeed  been  affected  by  events 
which,  like  the  particular  experience  of  hunger  in  Esau's 
case,  have  each  had  their  definite  chain  of  physical  ante- 
cedents ;  but  it  has  only  been  as  determined  by  relation  to 
the  human  self  that  these  events  have  yielded  the  given 
result  in  the  shape  of  these  particular  circumstances.  In 
the  last  resort,  then,  we  are  thrown  back  on  the  question  of 
the  character  of  the  agency  so  exerted,  alike  in  the  formation 
of  those  circumstances  by  which  the  motive  expressed  in  any 
moral  action  is  affected,  and  in  that  reaction  of  the  man  upon 
the  circumstances  which  actually  yields  that  motive. 

99.  When  we  thus  speak  of  the  human  self,  or  the  man,. 
reacting  upon  circumstances,  giving  shape  to  them,  taking 
a  motive  from  them,  what  is  it  exactly  that  we  mean  by  this 
self  or  man  ?  The  answer  must  be  the  same  as  was  given 
to  a  corresponding  question  in  regard  to  the  self-conscious 
principle  implied  in  our  knowledge.  We  mean  by  it  a  certain 
reproduction  of  itself  on  the  part  of  the  eternal  self-conscious 
subject  of  the  world — a  reproduction  of  itself  to  which  it 
makes  the  processes  of  animal  life  organic,  and  which  is> 
qualified  and  limited  by  the  nature  of  those  processes,  but 
which  is  so  far  essentially  a  reproduction  of  the  one  supreme- 
subject,  implied  in  the  existence  of  the  world,  that  the  pro- 
duct carries  with  it  under  all  its  limitations  and  qualifications 
the  characteristic  of  being  an  object  to  itself.  It  is  the 
particular  human  self  or  person,  we  hold,  thus  constituted, 
that  in  every  moral  action,  virtuous  or  vicious,  presents  to 
itself  some  possible  state  or  achievement  of  its  own  as  for. 
the  time  its'  greatest  good,  and  acts  for  the  sake  of  that  good. 
The  kind  of  good  which  at  any  point  in  his  life  the  person 
presents  to  himself  as  greatest  depends,  we  admit,  on  his 
past  experience — his  past  passion  and  action — and  on  cir- 
cumstances. But  throughout  the  past  experience  he  has  beea 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF  THE   WILL  iii 

an  object  to  himself,  and  thus  the  author  of  his  acts  in  the 
sense  just  stated.  And  as  for  the  circumstances,  in  the  first 
place  they  only  affect  his  action  through  the  medium  of  that 
idea  of  his  own  good  upon  which  he  makes  them  converge ; 
and,  secondly,  in  respect  of  that  part  of  them  which  is  most 
important  in  its  bearing  on  conduct,  they  themselves  presup- 
pose personal,  self-seeking '  agency  of  the  kind  described. 

100.  It  will  probably  be  objected  that  it  makes  no 
practical  difference  to  the  moral  freedom  of  the  individual, 
whether  or  no  the  circumstances  by  which  he  is  influenced 
are  of  strictly  natural  or  of  specially  human  origin,  so  long 
as  it  is  not  to  the  individual's  own  action  that  they  are  due. 
That  there  is  a  sense  of  'freedom,'  indeed,  in  which  it  is 
very  differently  affected  by  such  a  '  circumstance '  as  hunger 
or  imminent  death,  and  by  such  another  '  circumstance '  as 
the  customs  and  expectations  of  a  society  to  which  the 
individual  belongs,  will  hardly  be  disputed.  The  freedom 
of  an  action  must  be  taken  to  mean  simply  its  imputability 
in  the  juristic  sense,  if  it  is  alleged  that  it  makes  no  difference 
to  its  freedom  whether  the  agent  is  influenced  in  doing  it 
by  the  circumstance  of  pressing  physical  need,  or  by  the 
circumstance  that  his  honour  is  appealed  to  by  his  family  or 
his  state.  Before  taking  further  notice,  however,  of  the  very 
various  senses  in  which  freedom  is  asserted  of  man,  and 
of  the  relation  in  which  our  doctrine  stands  to  them,  it  will 
be  well  to  guard  against  further  liability  to  misapprehension 
in  respect  of  the  doctrine  itself  ^ 

'  Do  you  mean,'  it  may  be  asked,  '  to  assert  the  existence 
of  a  mysterious  abstract  entity  which  you  call  the  self  of 

'  The  distinction  between  that  sort  of  self-seeking  which  is  the 
characteristic  of  all  action  susceptible  of  moral  attributes,  and  that 
which  is  specially  characteristic  of  bad  moral  action,  will  be  considered 
in  the  sequel, 

"  [The  author  must  have  determined,  after  this  paragraph  was 
written,  to  omit  the  fuller  account  of  the  diiferent  senses  of '  freedom ' 
which  was  sometimes  given  in  his  lectures  and  is  promised  here. 
It  is  now  printed  in  the  second  volume  of  Green's  Works,  edited 
by,  R.  L.  Nettleship.] 


112  THE    WILL  [bk.  11 

a  man,  apart  from  all  his  particular  feelings,  desires,  and 
thoughts — all  the  experience  of  his  inner  life?'  To  such 
a  question  we  should  reply,  to  begin  with,  that  of  '  entities ' 
we  know  nothing,  except  as  a  dyslogistic  term  denoting 
something  in  which  certain  English  psychological  writers 
seem  to  suppose  that  certain  other  writers  believe,  but 
in  which,  so  far  as  known,  no  one  has  stated  his  own 
belief.  That  the  self,  as  we  conceive  it,  is  in  a  certain 
sense  'mysterious'  we  admit.  It  is  in  a  sense  mysterious 
that  there  should  be  such  a  thing  as  a  world  at  all. 
The  old  question,  why  God  made  the  world,  has  never 
been  answered,  nor  will  be.  We  know  not  why  the  world 
should  be ;  we  only  know  that  there  it  is.  In  like  manner 
we  know  not  why  the  eternal  subject  of  that  world  should 
reproduce  itself,  through  certain  processes  of  the  world,  as 
the  spirit  of  mankind,  or  as  the  particular  self  of  this  or  that 
man  in  whom  the  spirit  of  mankind  operates.  We  can  only 
say  that,  upon  the. best  analysis  we  can  make  of  our  experi- 
ence, it  seems  that  so  it  does.  That  in  thus  reproducing 
itself,  however,  it  remains  an. '  abstract '  self,  apart  from  the 
desires,  feelings,  and  thoughts  of  the  individual  man,  is  just 
the  notion  we  seek  to  set  aside.  Just  as  we  hold  that  our 
desires,  feelings,  and  thoughts  would  not  be  what  they  are — 
would  not  be  those  of  a  man — if  not  related  to  a  subject 
which  distinguishes  itself  from  each  and  all  of  them ;  so  we 
hold  that  this  subject  would  not  be  what  it  is,  if  it  were  not 
related  to  the  particular  feelings,  desires,  and  thoughts,  which 
it  thus  distinguishes  from  and  presents  to  itself.  If  we  are 
told  that  the  Ego  or  self  is  an  abstraction  from  the  facts 
of  our  inner  experience— something  which  we  'accustom 
ourselves  to  suppose '  as  a  basis  or  substratum  for  these, 
but  which  exists  only  logically,  not  really, —  it  is  a  fair 
rejoinder,  that  these  so-called  facts,  our  particular  feelings, 
desires,  and  thoughts,  are  abstractions,  if  considered  other- 
wise than  as  united  in  the  character  of  an  agent  who  is  an 
object  to  himself.  The  difficulty  of  saying  what  this  all- 
uniting,  self-seeking,  self-realising  subject  is — the  '  mystery ' 


CH.l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF  THE   WILL  113 

that  belongs  to  it — arises  from  its  being  the  only  thing,  or 
a  form  of  the  only  thing,  that  is  real  (so  to  speak)  in  its  own 
right ;  the  only  thing  of  which  the  reality  is  not  relative  and 
derived.  For  this  reason  it  can  neither  be  defined  by 
contrast  with  any  co-ordinate  reality,  as  the  several  forms  of 
inner  experience  which  it  determines  may  be  defined  by 
contrast  with  each  other  j  nor  as  a  modification  or  determina- 
tion of  anything  else.  We  can  only  know  it  by  a  reflection 
on  it  which  is  its  own  action ;  by  analysis  of  the  expression 
it  has  given  to  itself  in  language,  literature,  and  the  institu- 
tions of  human  life ;  and  by  consideration  of  what  that  must 
be  which  has  thus  expressed  itself. 

101.  Having  said  that  the  self,  as  here  understood,  is  not 
something. apart  from  feelings,  desires  and  thoughts,  but  that 
which  unites  them,  or  which  they  become  as  united,  in  the 
character  of  an  agent  who  is  an  object  to  himself,  we  have 
implied  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  self  has  a  history, 
though  there  is  another  in  which  it  has  none.   As  has  already 
often  enough  been  pointed  out,  the  eternal  subject,  which 
is  the  condition  of  there  being  a  succession  in  time,  cannot 
itself  exist  as  a  succession.    And  its  reproduction  of  itself  in 
man  carries  with  it  the  same  characteristic,  in  so  far  as  the 
man  presents  himself  to  himself  as  the  subject  to  which  the 
experiences  of  a  life-time  and,  mediately  through  them,  the 
events  of  the  world's  history  are  relative.    Such  presentation 
is  a  timeless  act,  through  which  alone  man  can  become 
aware  of  an  order  of  time  or  becoming,  or  can  be  capable 
of  such  development  as  can  rightly  be  called  moral ;  of  which 
it  is  an  essential  condition  that  it  be  united  by  a  single  con- 
sciousness.    On  the  other  hand,  just  as  there  is  a  growth  of 
knowledge  in  man,  though  knowledge  is  only  possible  through 
the  action  in  him  of  the  eternal  subject,  so  is  there  a  growth 
of  character,  though  the  possibility  of  there  being  a  character 
in  the  moral  sense  is  similarly  conditioned.     It  grows  with 
the  ever-new  adoption  of  desired  objects  by  a  self-presenting 
and,  in  that  sense,  eternal  subject  as  its  personal  good.   The 
act  of  adoption  is  the  act  of  a  subject  which  has  not  come 

I 


114  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

to  be ;  the  act  itself  is  not  in  time,  in  the  sense  of  being  an 
event  determined  by  previous  events;  but  its  product  is 
a  further  step  in  that  order  of  becoming  which  we  call  the 
formation  of  a  character,  in  the  growth  of  some  habit  of  wUL 

102.  We  can  only  express  this  state  of  the  case  by  saying 
that  the  form  in  which  the  self  or  Ego  at  any  time  presents 
a  highest  good  to  itself — and  it  is  on  this  presentation  that 
conduct  depends — is  due  to  the  past  history  of  its  inner 
life;  but  that,  throughout,  to  make  this  history  there  has 
been  necessary  an  action  of  the  Ego,  which  has  no  history, 
has  not  come  to  be,  but  which  is  the  condition  of  our  being 
conscious  of  any  history  or  becoming.  The  particular  modes 
in  which  I  now  feel,  desire  and  think,  arise  out  of  the  modes 
in  which  I  have  previously  done  so ;  but  the  common 
characteristic  of  all  these  has  been  that  in  them  a  subject 
was  conscious  of  itself  as  its  own  object,  and  thus  self- 
determined.  Whatever  influences  have  determined  it  have 
done  so  through,  or  as  taken  into,  its  self-consciousness. 

It  is  to  the  Ego  thus  constituted,  conscious  of  its  nature — 
of  all  that  makes  it  what  it  is,  temper,  character,  ability — 
as  its  own,  that  new  feelings  and  desires  occur  from  moment 
to  moment,  upon  the  suggestion  (to  use  the  most  general 
term)  of  circumstances.  Just  as  feelings  may,  and  constantly 
do,  come  and  go  without  being  attended  to,  so  desires  con- 
stantly arise  and  pass  without  exciting  any  reaction  on  the 
part  of  the  Ego,  without  its  placing  itself  in  an  attitude  of 
acceptance  or  rejection  towards  them.  In  that  case  no 
action,  in  the  moral  sense,  takes  place,  and  the  character, 
in  that  sense  in  which  it  is  the  basis  of  moral  goodness  'or 
badness,  is  not  affected ;  though  probably  even  from  such 
'  unconscious  '  ^  experiences  there  remain  consequences 
affecting  the  conditions  with  which  the  character  afterwards 

'  I  use  the  word  '  unconscious '  here  advisedly,  in  order  to  call 
attention  to  an  ambiguity  in  the  use  of  the  term ;  which  is  sometimes 
applied  in  a  strict  sense  to  a  process  which  is  not  one  of  conscious- 
ness at  all,  but  merely  nervous  or  automatic,  sometimes  in  a  less  strict 
s  ense  to  a  process  of  consciousness  not  attended  to  or  reflected  upon. 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF  THE   WILL  115 

has  to  deal.  In  other  cases  the  Ego  does  react  upon  the 
experience  of  the  moment.  Through  this  reaction,  in  the 
region  of  knowledge  as  distinct  from  practice^  an  image 
recurring  becomes  an  object  to  be  thought  about,  a  feeling 
becomes  a  fact  to  be  known ;  other  facts  and  objects  are 
recalled  from  past  experience,  to  be  brought  into  relation 
with  the  given  fact  or  given  object,  and  there  is  thus  con- 
stituted an  act  of  speculative  thought  or  knowledge,  an 
act  in  which  the  man  sets  himself  to  understand  something. 
Or,  through  another  form  of  the  same  reaction,  the  Ego 
identifies  itself  with  some  desire,  and  sets  itself  to  bring  into 
real  existence  the  ideal  object,  of  which  the  consciousness  is 
involved  in  the  desire.  This  constitutes  an  act  of  will;  which 
is  thus  always  free,  not  in  the  sense  of  being  undetermined 
by  a  motive,  but  in  the  sense  that  the  motive  lies  in  the  man 
himself,  that  he  makes  it  and  is  aware  of  doing  so,  and  hence, 
however  he  may  excuse  himself,  imputes  to  himself  the  act 
which  is  nothing  else  than  the  expression  of  the  motive. 

103.  An  ambiguity  in  the  use  of  this  term  motive  has 
caused  much  ambiguity  in  the  controversy  that  has  raged 
over  'free-will.'  The  champions  of  free-will  commonly 
suppose  that,  before  the  act,  a  man  is  affected  by  various 
motives,  none  of  which  necessarily  determines  his  act ;  and 
that  between  these  he  makes  a  choice  which  is  not  itself 
determined  by  any  motive.  Their  opponents,  on  the  other 
hand,  argue  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  this  unmotived 
choice,  but  that  the  motive  which,  possibly  after  a  period  of 
conflict  with  other  motives,  ultimately  proves  the  strongest, 
necessarily  determines  the  act.  They  have  to  admit,  indeed, 
that  the  prevalence  of  this  or  that  motive  depends  on  the 
man's  character ;  but  the  character,  they  say,  itself  results 
from  the  previous  operatiori  of  motives,  by  which  they 
understand  simply  desires  and  aversions. 

As  against  the  former  view  it  must  be  urged  that,  how- 
ever we  may  try  to  give  meaning  to  the  assertion  that  an 
act  of  will  is  a  choice  without  a  motive,  we  cannot  do  so. 
Unless  there  is  an  object  which  a  man  seeks  or  avoids  in 


Il6  THE   WILL  [bk.II 

doing  an  act,  there  is  no  act  of  will.  Thus  a  motive  is 
necessary  to  make  such  an  act.  It  is  involved  in  it,  is  part 
of  it ;  or  rather  it  is  the  act  of  will,  in  its  relation  to  the 
agent  as  distinct  from  its  relation  to  external  consequences. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  motive  which  is  thus  necessarily 
involved  in  the  act  of  will,  is.  not  a  motive  in  the  same 
sense  in  which  each  of  the  parties  to  the  controversy  con- 
stantly uses  the  term.  It  is  not  one  of  the  mere  desires  or 
aversions,  between  which  the  advocate  of  'free-will'  supposes 
a  man  to  exercise  an  arbitrary  choice,  and  of  which  the 
strongest,  according  to  the  opposite  view,  necessarily  pre- 
vails. It  is  constituted  by  the  reaction  of  the  man's  self 
upon  these,  and  its  identification  of  itself  with  one  of  them, 
as  that  of  which  the  satisfaction  forms  for  the  time  its 
object. 

104.  We  may  say,  for  instance,  that  there  are  various 
'motives,'  i.e.  desires  and  aversions,  which  tend  to  make 
A.  B.  pay  a  debt,  others  which  tend  to  prevent  him  from 
paying  it.  He  wishes  for  the  good  opinion  of  others,  for 
the  approval  of  his  conscience,  for  the  sense  of  relief  which 
he  would  obtain  by  paying  it.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
wishes  for  sundry  pleasures  which  he  would  have  to  forego 
in  paying  it.  Let  us  suppose  that  finally  the  debt  is  paid. 
The  act  of  payment  represents,  expresses,  is  made  what  it  is 
by  a  motive ;  by  the  consciousness  of  an  object  which  the 
man  seeks  in  doing  the  act.  This  object,  however,  as  an 
object  of  will,  is  not  merely  one  of  the  objects  of  desire  or 
aversion,  of  which  the  man  was  conscious  before  he  willed. 
It  is  a  particular  self-satisfaction  to  be  gained  in  attaining 
one  of  these  objects  or  a  combination  of  them.  The 
'  motive '  which  the  act  of  will  expresses  is  the  desire  for  this 
self-satisfaction.  It  is  not  one  of  the  '  motives,'  the  desires 
or  aversions,  of  which  the  man  was  conscious  previously  to 
the  act,  as  disposing  him  to  it ;  at  any  rate,  not  one  of  these 
or  a  combination  of  them,  as  they  were  before  the  deter- 
mination of  the  will,  before  the  man  'made  up  his  mind.' 
It  is  only  as  they  become  through  the  reaction  of  the  self- 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF   THE   WILL  117 

seeking  self  upon  them,  and  through  its  formation  to  itself 
of  an  object  out  of  them — only  as  they  merge  in  an  effort 
after  a  self-satisfaction  to  be  found  in  this  object,— that  they 
yield  the  motive  of  the  act  of  will,  properly  so  called. 

105.  This  motive  does  indeed  necessarily  determine  the 
act ;  it  is  the  act  on  its  inner  side.  But  it  is  misleading  to 
call  it  the  strongest  motive ;  for  this  implies  a  certain  parity 
between  it  and  the  impulses  which  have  been  previously 
soliciting  the  will.  The  distinction  of  greater  or  less  strength 
properly  apphes  only  to  'motives'  in  that  sense  in  which 
they  do  not  determine  the  will — to  desires  and  aversions,  as 
they  are  without  that  reaction  of  the  self  upon  them  which 
yields  the  final  motive  expressed  by  the  action.  It  may 
very  well  happen  that  the  desire  which  affects  a  man  most 
strongly  is  one  which  he  decides  on  resisting.  In  spite 
of  its  strength,  he  cannot  make  its  object  his  object,  the 
object  with  which  he  seeks  to  satisfy  himself.  His  character 
prevents  this.  In  other  words,  it  is  incompatible  with  his 
steady  direction  of  himself  towards  certain  objects  in  which 
he  habitually  seeks  satisfaction. 

If  we  like,  we  may  express  the  state  of  the  case  by  saying 
that  his  strength  of  character  overcomes  the  strength  of  the 
desire.  There  is  no  intrinsic  objection  to  this  metaphorical 
application  of  the  term  '  strength ' ;  all  our  terms  for  what  is 
spiritual  being  metaphors  from  what  is  physical.  But,  if  we 
would  save  ourselves  from  being  misled  by  our  metaphor, 
we  must  bear  two  things  in  mind.  In  the  first  place  the 
power  by  which  the  '  strong '  desire  or  motive  is  overcome, 
is  not  that  of  a  co-ordinate  desire  or  motive — not  that  of 
a  desire  or  motive  in  the  same  sense  of  the  words — but 
the  power  of  a  desire  with  the  satisfaction  of  which  (as 
explained)  the  man  has  identified  his  good,  as  he  had  not 
identified  it  with  the  satisfaction  of  the  desire  overcome. 
In  the  second  place,  the  term  '  strength '  is  not  applied  in  the 
same  sense  to  the  desire  which  affects  a  man,  and  to  the 
character  which  is  the  man.  A  '  strong '  desire  means  gener- 
ally a  desire  which  causes  much  disturbance  in  the  tenour 


1 18  THE    WILL  [bK.  II 

of  a  man's  conscious  life :  a  strong  character  means  that 
habitual  concentration  of  a  man's  faculties  towards  the  fulfil- 
ment of  certain  purposes,  good  or  bad,  which  commonly  pre- 
vents the  disturbance  caused  by  strong  desire  from  making 
its  outward  sign,  from  appearing  in  the  man's  behaviour.  If 
we  are  sometimes  tempted  to  say  that  the  weakest  men  have 
the  strongest  desires,  the  plausibility  of  such  a  statement 
is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  strength  of  the  stronger  man's 
character  makes  us  ignore  the  strength  of  his  desires. 

What  we  call  a  strong  character  we  also  call  a  strong  '  will.' 
This  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  particular  endowment  or 
faculty,  like  a  retentive  memory,  or  a  lively  imagination,  or 
an  even  temper,  or  a  great  passion  for  society.  A  strong 
will  means  a  strong  man.  It  expresses  a  certain  quality  of 
the  man  himself,  as  distinguishable  from  all  his  faculties  and 
tendencies,  a  quality  which  he  has  in  relation  to  all  of  them 
alike.  It  means  that  it  is  the  man's  habit  to  set  clearly  be- 
fore himself  certain  objects  in  which  he  seeks  self-satisfaction, 
and  that  he  does  not  allow  himself  to  be  drawn  aside  from 
these  by  the  suggestions  of  chance  desires.  He  need  not 
therefore  be  a  good  man ;  for  the  objects  upon  which  he  con- 
centrates himself  may  be  morally  bad,  according  to  the 
criteria  of  badness  which  we  have  yet  to  consider.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  weak  man,  taking  his  object  at  any  time 
from  the  desire  which  happens  to  affect  him  most  strongly, 
cannot  be  a  good  man.  Concentration  of  will  does  not 
necessarily  mean  goodness,  but  it  is  a  necessary  condition 
of  goodness. 

106.  According  to  what  has  been  said,  the  proposition, 
current  among  '  determinists,'  that  a  man's  action  is  the  joint 
result  of  his  character  and  circumstances,  is  true  enough  in  a 
certain  sense,  and,  in  that  sense,  is  quite  compatible  with  an 
assertion  of  human  freedom.  It  is  not  so  compatible,  if 
character  and  circumstances  are  considered  reducible,  directly 
or  indirectly,  to  combinations  and  sequences  of  natural 
events.  \X.is  so  compatible,  if  a  'free  cause,'  consisting  in  a 
subject  which  is  its  own  object,  a  self-distinguishing  and 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF    THE    WILL  119 

self-seeking  subject,  is  recognised  as  making  both  character 
and  circumstances  what  they  are.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
moral  freedom  that,  on  the  part  of  the  person  to  whom  it 
belongs,  there  should  be  an  indeterminate  possibility  of 
becoming  and  doing  anything  and  everything.  A  man's 
possibilities  of  doing  and  becoming  at  any  moment  of  his  life 
are  as  thoroughly  conditioned  as  those  of  an  animal  or  a 
plant ;  but  the  conditions  are  different.  The  conditions  that 
determine  what  a  plant  or  animal  or  any  natural  agent  shall 
do  or  become,  are  not  objects  that  it  presents  to  itself;  not 
objects  in  which  it  seeks  self-satisfaction.  On  the  other 
hand,  whatever  conditions  the  man's  possibilities  does  so 
through  his  self-consciousness.  The  climate  in  which  he 
lives,  the  food  and  drink  accessible  to  him,  and  other  strictly 
physical  circumstances,  no  doubt  make  a  difference  to  him  ; 
but  it  is  only  through  the  medium  of  a  conception  of  personal 
good,  only  so  far  as  the  man  out  of  his  relations  to  them 
makes  to  himself  certain  objects  in  which  he  seeks  self- 
satisfaction,  that  they  make  a  difference  to  him  as  a  man  or 
moral  being.  It  is  only  thus  that  they  affect  his  character 
and  those  moral  actions  which  are  properly  so  called  as 
representing  a  character.  Any  difference  which  circum- 
stances make  to  a  man,  except  as  affecting  the  nature  of  the 
personal  good  for  which  he  lives,  of  the  objects  which  he 
makes  his  own,  is  of  a  kind  with  the  difference  they  make  to 
the  colour  of  his  skin  or  the  quality  of  his  secretions.  He  is 
concerned  with  it,  he  cannot  live  as  if  it  were  not,  but  it  is 
still  not  part  of  himself  It  is  still  so  far  aloof  from  him  that 
it  rests  with  him,  with  his  character,  to  determine  what  its 
moral  bearing  on  him  shall  be.  For  that  moral  bearing  de- 
pends not  directly  on  the  physical  circumstances,  but  on  the 
object  which,  upon  occasion  or  in  view  of  the  circumstances, 
he  presents  to  himself  The  imminence  of  the  same  dangers 
will  make  a  hero  of  one  man,  a  rake  of  another,  a  miser  of  a 
third.  The  character  which  makes  circumstances,  physically 
the  same,  so  diverse  in  their  moral  influence,  has  doubtless 
had  its  history  ;  but  the  history  which  thus  determines  moral 


I20  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

action  has  been  a  history  o/" moral  action,  i.e.  of  action  in 
which  the  agent  has  been  an  object  to  himself,  seeking  to 
realise  an  idea  of  his  own  good  which  he  is  conscious  of 
presenting  to  himself. 

107.  The  less  patient  reader  may  here  be  inclined  to 
object  that,  in  professing  to  oppose  the  naturalistic  view  of 
human  action,  we  have  given  up  the  only  position  that  was 
worth  defending.  '  Does  not  this  account  of  moral  action,' 
he  will  ask, '  though  you  call  it  a  vindication  of  freedom,  lead 
to  all  the  practical  ill  consequences  to  which  the  strictly 
physical  theory  of  the  matter  is  said  to  lead?  If  a  man's 
character  and  circumstances  together  necessarily  determine 
his  action,  is  he  not  entitled  to  say,  "  I  have  got  my  charac- 
ter, it  matters  not  how ;  my  circumstances  are  given ;  there- 
fore I  cannot  help  acting  as  I  do  "  ?  And  when  once  he  has 
learnt  to  use  this  language,  will  there  not  be  an  end  to  shame 
and  remorse,  and  to  all  effort  after  self-reformation  ? '  Such 
an  objection  implies  a  misconception  of  the  real  meaning  of 
the  doctrine  objected  to,  which  may  be  partly  due  to  the 
form  in  which  it  is  commonly  stated.  That  moral  action  is 
a  joint  result  of  character  and  circumstances  is  not  altoge- 
ther an  appropriate  statement  of  it.  It  would  be  better  to 
say  that  moral  action  is  the  expression  of  a  man's  character, 
as  it  reacts  upon  and  responds  to  given  circumstances. 
We  might  thus  prevent  the  impression  which  the  ordinary 
statement,  in  default  of  due  consideration,  is  apt  to  convey, 
the  impression  that  a  man's  character  is  something  other 
than  himself;  that  it  is  an  alien  force,  which,  together  with 
the  other  force  called  circumstances,  converges  upon  him, 
moving  him  in  a  direction  which  is  the  resultant  of  the  two 
forces  combined,  and  in  which  accordingly  he  cannot  help 
being  carried. 

108.  It  can  only  be  by  some  such  impression  as  this  that 
the  objection,  just  stated,  is  to  be  accounted  for.  It  disap- 
pears upon  a  due  consideration  of  what  is  meant  by  character. 
An  action  which  expresses  character  has  no  must,  in  the 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF   THE   WILL  I2l 

physical  sense,  about  it.  The  '  can't  help  it '  has  no  appli- 
cation to  it.  Where  it  has  any  true  application  the  action 
is  not  determined  by  character,  any  more  than  is  a  sneeze, 
or  a  twitching  produced  by  a  galvanic  battery.  A  character 
is  only  formed  through  a  man's  conscious  presentation  to 
himself  of  objects  as  his  good,  as  that  in  which  his  self- 
satisfaction  is  to  be  found.  Just  so  far  as  an  action  is  deter- 
mined by  character,  it  is  determined  by  an  object  which  the 
agent  has  thus  consciously  made  his  own,  and  has  come  to 
make  his  own  in  consequence  of  actions  similarly  determined. 
He  is  thus  conscious  of  being  the  author  of  the  act;  he 
imputes  it  to  himself.  The  very  excuses  that  he  makes  for 
it— not  less  when  they  take  the  form  of  an  appeal  to  some 
fatalistic  or  'necessarian'  doctrine  than  in  a  more  vulgar 
guise^are  evidence  that  he  does  so.  And  in  such  a  case 
the  evidence  of  consciousness,  fairly  interpreted,  is  final. 
The  suggestion  that  consciousness  may  not  correspond  with 
reality  is,  here  at  least,  unmeaning.  The  whole  question  is 
one  of  consciousness,  a  question  of  the  relation  in  which 
a  man  consciously  stands  to  objects  (those  of  desire)  which 
exist  only  in  and  for  consciousness.  If  the  man  is  consci- 
ously determined  by  himself  in  being  determined  by  those 
objects,  he  is  so  really :  or  rather  this  statement  is  a  mere 
pleonasm,  for  the  only  reality  in  question  is  consciousness. 

109.  It  is  strictly  a  contradiction,  then,  to  say  that  an 
action  which  a  man's  character  determines,  or  which  ex- 
presses his  character,  is  one  that  he  cannot  help  doing.  It 
represents  him  as  standing  in  a  relation  to  external  agency, 
while  doing  the  act,  in  which  he  does  not  stand  if  his 
character  determines  it.  We  may  say,  if  we  like,  without 
any  greater  error  than  that  of  inappropriate  phraseology,  that, 
given  the  agent's  character  and  circumstances  as  they  at  any 
time  are,  the  action  '  cannot  help  being  done,'  if  by  that  we 
merely  mean  that  the  action  is  as  necessarily  related  to  the 
character  and  circumstances  as  any  event  to  the  sum  of 
its  conditions.  The  meaning  in  that  case  is  not  untrue; 
but  the  expression  is  inappropriate,  for  it  implies  a  kind  of 


122  THE    WILL  [bK.  II 

personification  of  the  action.  It  speaks  of  the  action,  as 
abstracted  from  the  agent,  in  terms  only  appropriate  to  an 
agent  whose  powers  are  directed  by  a  force  not  his  own. 

It  is  probably  a  sort  of  confusion  between  the  improper 
sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that  a  moral  action  cannot 
help  being  done,  because  the  outcome  of  character  in  con- 
tact with  certain  circumstances,  and  the  proper  sense  in 
which  it  is  said  that  a  man  under  compulsion  cannot 
help  doing  something,  which  generates  the  notion  that,  if 
an  action  is  the  result  of  character  and  circumstances,  the 
agent  cannot  help  doing  it  and  is  a  necessary  agent.  All 
results  are  necessary  results.  If  a  man's  action  is  the  result 
of  his  character  and  circumstances,  we  in  effect  add  nothing 
by  saying  that  it  is  their  necessary  result.  If  it  is  not  the 
result  of  character  or  circumstances,  or  (as  we  prefer  to  say) 
if  it  is  not  the  expression  of  a  character  in  contact  with 
certain  circumstances,  there  must  be  some  further  element 
that  contributes  to  its  determination.  What  is  that  further 
element  ?  '  Free-will,'  some  one  may  say.  Yery  well ;  but 
'  free-will '  is  either  a  name  for  you  know  not  what,  or  it  is 
included,  is  the  essential  factor,  in  character.  Rightly  un- 
derstood, the  ascription  of  an  action  to  character  as,  in 
respect  to  circumstances,  its  cause,  is  just  that  which  effec- 
tually distinguishes  it  as  free  or  moral  from  any  compulsory 
or  merely  natural  action.  It  is  simply  a  confusion  to  sup- 
pose that,  because  an  action  is  a  result — and  if  a  result,  a 
necessary  result — of  character  and  circumstance,  the  agent  is 
therefore  a  '  necessary '  agent,  in  the  sense  of  being  an  in- 
strument of  external  force  or  a  result  of  natural  events  and 
agencies ;  in  other  words,  that  '  he  cannot  help '  acting  as 
he  does.  Nay,  it  is  more  than  a  confusion  :  it  is  an  infer- 
ence positively  forbidden  by  the  proposition  from  which  it 
is  inferred.  For  to  say  that  character  is  a  determinant  of 
the  act,  is,  as  we  have  seen,  to  deny  that  it  proceeds  from 
an  agent  in  this  sense  '  necessary.' 

110.  The  view,  then,  that  action  is  the  joint  result  of 
character  and  circumstances,  if  we  know  what  we  are  about 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF  THE   WILL  123 

when  we  speak  of  character,  does  not  render  shame  and 
remorse  unaccountable  and  unjustifiable,  any  more  than,  in 
those  by  whom  it  is  most  thoroughly  accepted,  it  actually 
gets  rid  of  them.  On  the  contrary,  rightly  understood,  it 
alone  justifies  them.  If  a  man's  action  did  not  represent 
his  character  but  an  arbitrary  freak  of  some  unaccountable 
power  of  unmotived  willing,  why  should  he  be  ashamed  of 
it  or  reproach  himself  with  it  ?  As  little  does  such  a  view 
render  the  impulse  after  self-reform  unaccountable,  or,  with 
those  who  accept  it  bona  fide  and  not  as  an  excuse  for  the 
'sins  they  have  a'  mind  to,'  actually  tend  to  weaken  the 
impulse.  There  is  nothing  in  the  fact  that  what  a  man  now 
is  and  does  is  the  result  (to  speak  pleonastically,  the  neces- 
sary result)  of  what  he  has  been  and  has  done,  to  prevent 
him  from  seeking  to  become,  or  from  being  able  to  become, 
in  the  future  other  and  better  than  he  now  is,  unless  the 
capacity  for  conceiving  a  better  state  of  himself  has  been 
lacking  to  him  in  the  past  or  has  become  lost  to  him  at 
present :  and  that  this  is  not  so  is  shown  by  the  fact  that 
he  does  ask  the  question  whether  and  how  he  can  become 
better,  even  though  he  answer  the  question  in  the  negative. 
The  dependence  of  a  man's  present  and  future  on  his  past 
would  indeed  be  fatal  to  the  possibility  of  that  self-reform 
which  is  conditional  upon  the  wish  for  it,  if  his  past  had  not 
been  one  in  which  his  conduct  was  determined  by  a  con- 
ception of  personal  good.  But  because  his  past  has  been 
of  such  a  kind,  there  has  been  in  it,  and  has  been  continued 
out  of  it  into  his  present,  a  perpetual  potentiality  of  self- 
reform,  consisting  in  the  perpetual  discovery  by  the  man 
that  he  is  not  satisfied ;  that  he  has  not  found  the  personal 
good  which  he  sought ;  that,  however  many  pleasures  he 
has  enjoyed,  he  is  none  the  better  off  in  himself,  none  the 
nearer  to  that  which  he  would  wish  to  be. 

The  capacity  for  the  conception  of  being  better,  which 
such  an  experience  at  once  evinces  and  maintains,  forms  in 
itself  both  the  inchoate  impulse  to  realise  the  conception, 
and  the  possibility  of  its  realisation.     The  possibility  is  no 


124  ^^^    WILL  [BK.ir 

doubt  very  different  from  the  realisation.  The  inchoate  im- 
pulse may  be  constantly  overborne  by  other  impulses,  with 
the  gratification  of  which  the  man  for  the  time,  from  habit 
or  strength  of  passion,  identifies  his  personal  good.  Its 
actuaUsation,  however,  depends  simply  on  its  own  relative 
strength,  not  on  any  accessories  or  command  of  means. 
The  prevalent  wish  to  be  better  constitutes  the  being  better. 
Whether  or  no  in  any  individual  case  it  shall  obtain  that 
prevalence,  depends  (to  use  the  most  general  expression)  on 
the  social  influences  brought  to  bear  on  the  man ;  but  the 
influences  effective  for  the  purpose  all  have  their  origin,  ulti- 
mately, in  the  desire  to  be  better  on  the  part  of  other  men, 
as  carrying  with  it  a  desire  for  the  bettering  of  those  in  whom 
they  are  interested.  The  '  Grace  of  God '  works  through  no 
other  channels  but  such  as  fall  under  this  general  descrip- 
tion. If,  and  so  far  as,  in  the  past  and  present  of  individual 
men  and  of  the  society  which  is  at  once  constituted  by  them 
and  makes  them  what  they  are,  this  desire  is  operative,  the 
dependence  of  the  individual's  present  on  his  past,  so  far 
from  being  incompatible  with  his  seeking  or  being  able  to 
become  better  than  he  is,  is  just  what  constitutes  the  defi- 
nite possibility  of  this  self-improvement  being  sought  and 
attained.  If  there  were  no  such  dependence,  if  I  could  be 
something  to-day  irrespectively  of  what  I  was  yesterday,  or 
something  to-morrow  irrespectively  of  what  I  am  to-day,  the 
motive  to  the  self-reforming  effort  furnished  by  regrets  for  a 
past  of  which  I  reap  the  fruit,  that  growing  success  of  the 
effort  that  comes  with  habituation,  and  the  assurance  of  a 
better  future  which  animates  it,  would  alike  be  impossible. 

111.  That  denial,  then,  of  the  possibility  of  a  moral  new 
birth,  which  is  sometimes  supposed  to  follow  logically  from 
the  admission  of  a  necessary  connexion  between  present  and 
past  in  human  conduct,  is  in  truth  no  consequence  of  this 
admission,  but  of  the  view  which  ignores  the  action  of  the 
self-presenting  Ego  in  present  and  past  alike.  Once  recognise 
this  action,  and  it  is  seen  that  the  necessary  relation  in  which 
a  man  stands  to  his  own  past  may  be  one  of  such  conscious 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF  THE   WILL  125 

revulsion  from  it,  on  account  of  its  failure  to  yield  the  self- 
satisfaction  which  he  seeks,  as  amounts  to  what  is  called  a 
conversion.  But,  though  there  is  no  valid  reason  why  the 
acceptance  of  '  determinism,'  in  the  sense  explained,  should 
debar  us  from  looking  for  'changes  of  heart  and  life'  in  the 
individual,  it  may  yet  be  that  a  misunderstanding  of  the  doc- 
trine does  sometimes  in  some  degree  tend  to  paralyse  the 
moral  initiative  and  weaken  the  power  of  self-reform.  It  is 
probably  never  fair  to  lay  the  blame  of  a  moral  deterioration 
or  enfeeblement  primarily  on  intellectual  misapprehension ; 
but  in  a  speculative  age  even  misapprehension  may  tend  to 
promote  vicious  tendencies,  by  interfering  with  the  convic- 
tion which  would  otherwise  be  the  beginning  of  their  cure. 
The  form  of  misunderstanding  on  the  subject  now  before  us, 
most  likely  to  be  practically  mischievous,  will  be  the  con- 
fusion, already  noticed,  between  the  true  proposition  that 
there  is  a  necessary  connexion  between  character  and  motive, 
and  between  motive  and  act,  and  the  false  proposition  that 
man  is  a  necessary  agent,  in  the  sense  of  not  being  his  own 
master  but  an  instrument  of  natural  forces.  Men  may  be 
found  to  argue,  more  or  less  explicitly,  that,  if  that  which  he 
is  depends  on  what  he  has  been  and  has  done,  and  if,  further, 
whatever  he  may  become  in  the  future  will  depend  on  what 
he  now  is — that  if  this  is  so,  as  it  cannot  be  denied  that  it  is, 
there  is  no  good  in  his  trying  painfully  to  become  better ; 
that  he  may  as  well  live  for  the  pleasure  of  the  hour  as  it 
comes.  How  may  such  self-sophistication  most  compen- 
diously be  met  ? 

112.  In  the  first  place,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  such 
language  implies  in  the  highest  degree,  on  the  part  of  any 
one  who  uses  it,  a  self-distinguishing  and  self-seeking  con- 
sciousness. But  for  this  he  could  not  thus  present  to  him- 
self his  own  condition,  as  determined  by  what  he  has  been 
in  the  past  and  determining  what  he  will  be  in  the  future. 
Nor  unless  there  were  something  which  he  sought  to  become, 
a  good  of  himself  as  himself  Ythich.  he  sought  to  attain — 
unless  he  were  thus  determined  by  himself  as  an  object  to 


126  THE    WILL  [bK.  II 

himself — could  the  question,  whether  there  was  any  use  in 
trying  to  improve  himself  instead  of  letting  things  take  their 
course,  have  any  meaning  for  him. 

It  should  be  shown,  secondly,  that  this  self-distinguishing 
and  self-seeking  consciousness,  with  the  yearning  for  a  better 
state  of  himself,  as  yet  unattained,  which  it  carries  with  it, 
in  a  special  sense  makes  him  what  he  is,  and  has  made  that 
past  history  of  himself,  on  which  his  present  state  depends, 
what  it  has  been ;  that  therefore,  just  so  far  as  his  future 
depends  on  his  present  and  his  past,  it  depends  on  this 
consciousness,  depends  on  a  direction  of  his  inner  life  in 
which  he  is  self-determined  and  his  own  master,  because  his 
own  object. 

Further,  it  should  be  shown  that,  so  far  from  the  depen- 
dence of  his  future  upon  what  he  now  is  and  does  being 
a  reason  for  passivity,  for  letting  things  take  their  course 
(which  means,  practically,  for  following  the  desire  or  aversion 
of  which  the  indulgence  gives  him  most  present  pleasure  or 
saves  him  most  present  pain),  it  would  only  be  the  absence 
of  this  dependence  that  could  afford  a  reason  for  such 
passivity.  If  I  could  '  trammel  up  the  consequence '  of  that 
which  at  any  time  I  am  and  do ;  if  there  could  be  any  break 
of  continuity  between  what  I  shall  be  and  what  I  am  j  then 
indeed  I  might  be  reckless  of  what  I  do,  so  long  as  it  is 
pleasant,  and,  in  what  I  allow  myself  to  be,  might  take  no 
thought  of  what  it  is  desirable  that  I  should  become.  It  is 
the  unthinkableness  of  any  such  break  of  continuity  which, 
in  the  presence  of  the  self-distinguishing  and  self-seeking 
consciousness  of  man,  makes  it  impossible  for  the  most 
reckless  sensualist  to  live  absolutely  for  the  moment,  and 
forms  the  standing  possibility  of  self-improvement  even  in 
him.  So  long  as  a  man  presents  himself  to  himself  as 
possibly  existing  in  some  better  state  than  that  in  which  he 
actually  is — and  that  he  does  so  is  implied  even  in  his 
denial  that  the  possibility  can  be  realised — there  is  some- 
thing in  him  to  respond  to  whatever  moralising  influences 
society  in  any  of  its  forms  or  institutions,  themselves  the 


OH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF   THE   WILL  127 

gradual  outcome  through  the  ages  of  man's  free  effort  to 
better  himself,  may  bring  to  bear  on  him.  The  claims  of  the 
family,  the  call  of  country,  the  pleading  of  the  preacher,  the 
appeal  of  the  Church  through  eye  and  ear,  may  at  any  time 
awaken  in  him  that  which  we  call  (in  one  sense,  truly)  a  new 
life,  but  which  is  yet  the  continued  working  of  the  spirit 
which  has  never  ceased  to  work  in,  upon,  and  about  him. 

113.  '  But  what  becomes  of  this  theory,'  the  enhghtened 
man  of  pleasure  may  reply,  '  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the 
human  agent,  in  that  earliest  stage  of  conscious  personal 
being  between  which  and  all  the  following  stages  you  admit 
that  there  is  a  necessary  connexion,  is  a  result  of  strictly 
physical  forces  and  processes  ?  Will  it  not  then  follow  that 
the  man's  life  is  throughout  determined  in  the  same  strictly 
physical  way  as  is  its  earliest  stage  of  personal  consciousness; 
and,  this  being  so,  that  it  is  as  much  a  delusion  for  him  to 
suppose  that  he  can  alter  himself  for  better  or  for  worse,  as 
it  would  be  for  a  plant  or  an  animal  to  suppose  so  ?  Neither 
plant  nor  animal,  indeed,  is  unimprovable.  The  produce  of 
the  plant  can  be  modified  by  grafting,  and  improved  by  tillage. 
Animals  can  be  trained  to  behave  in  a  way  in  which,  to  begin 
with,  they  are  incapable  of  behaving.  So  man,  the  highest 
of  animals,  is  capable  of  improvement ;  but  it  must  be  by 
circumstance,  it  must  be  initiated  from  without.  The  im- 
provement, the  development,  will  not  come  for  the  wishing. 
It  will  come,  for  some,  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  To 
those  for  -whom  it  does  not  so  come  it  will  not  come  at  all, 
and  they  might  as  well  not  bother  themselves  about  it.' 

114.  We  answer  that  the  improvement  determined  by  the 
wish  to  be  better  on  the  part  of  the  improving  subject — 
more  properly,  the  improvement  which  that  wish,  so  far  as 
prevalent,  itself  constitutes — has  nothing  in  common  with 
an  improvement  of  plants  or  animals  such  as  that  referred 
to,  which  is  related  to  no  such  wish,  and,  if  related  to  any 
wish  at  all,  not  to  one  on  the  part  of  the  animal  or  plant 
improved.  That  there  is  such  a  wish,  at  any  rate  in  the 
developed  man,  cannot  be  denied  even  by  those  who  may 


128  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

profess  to  regard  it  as  ineffectual.  We  meet  them,  then,  by 
saying  that  the  child  which  is  to  be  father  of  the  man 
capable  of  such  a  wish,  cannot  be  the  mere  child  of  nature ; 
or,  conversely,  that  the  mere  child  of  nature  cannot  be 
father  of  the  man,  as  in  our  own  persons  we  know  the  man 
to  be.  More  fully :  when  we  say  that  the  character  of 
a  man,  and  his  consequent  action,  as  it  at  any  time  stands, 
is  the  result  of  what  his  character  has  previously  been,  as 
gradually  modified  through  the  varying  response  of  the 
character  to  varying  circumstances,  and  the  registration  in 
the  character  of  residua  from  these  responses,  we  must 
assume,  as  the  basis  of  the  character  throughout,  a  self- 
distinguishing  and  self-seeking  consciousness. 

Unless  we  do  so,  the  proposition  stated  will  not  hold  good. 
No  response  to  circumstances  of  a  being  which  has  not,  or  is 
not,  this  consciousness,  will  account  for  its  coming  to  have 
or  to  be  it.  Such  a  being  could  not  be  father  of  the  moral 
man  affiliated  to  it.  It  will  have  to  be  admitted  that  the 
consciousness  necessary  to  a  character  and  exhibited  in 
moral  action  has  supervened  from  without  upon  the  supposed 
primitive  being.  No  true  development  will  be  possible  of 
the  moral  man  from  the  state  of  being  from  which  he  is  said 
to  have  been  developed,  because  no  true  thread  of  identity 
can  be  traced  between  the  two  states.  If,  recognising  this, 
we  ascribe  to  the  man  or  child  of  the  past,  whose  character 
and  action  we  suppose  to  have  made  the  man  of  the  present 
what  he  is,  that  self-determining  consciousness  which  dis- 
tinguishes the  man  as  he  is,  the  same  impossibility  meets  us 
again  as  soon  as  we  try  to  affiliate  this  man  or  child  of  the 
past  to  mere  nature — to  treat  him  as  the  outcome  of  natural 
forces  and  processes.  It  is  difficult,  no  doubt,  to  understand 
the  relation  to  man's  self-determining  consciousness  of  that 
in  him  which  is  merely  natural  (or,  to  speak  more  properly, 
of  that  in  him  which  would  be  merely  natural,  if  it  were  not 
related  to  such  a  consciousness) ;  but  we  do  not  overcome 
the  difficulty  by  ignoring  the  absolute  difference  between 
such  a  consciousness  and  everything  else  in  the  world,  a 


CH.  l]  THE  FREEDOM  OF  THE   WILL  129 

difference  which  remains  the  same,  whether  we  do  or  do  not 
extend  the  meaning  of  '  nature '  so  as  to  include  modes  of 
being  thus  absolutely  different.  In  its  primitive,  no  less  than 
in  its  most  developed  form,  the  self-determining' conscious- 
ness as  little  admits  of  derivation  from  that  which  has  or  is 
it  not,  as  life  from  that  which  has  or  is  it  not. 

The  statement  then,  that  the  human  being,  in  the  earliest 
stage  of  his  conscious  existence,  between  which  and  all  the 
following  stages  there  is  a  necessary  connexion,  is  a  result  of 
forces  and  processes  which  exclude  a  self-determining  con- 
sciousness,— though  if  it  were  admitted,  it  would  be  fatal  to 
any  doctrine  of  human  freedom  ,^ — cannot  be  admitted  with- 
out self-contradiction.  The  earlier  stage  will  not,  under  any 
modification  by  circumstances,  account  for  the  latter,  if  it  is 
the  result  of  the  processes  described,  or  unless  it  already 
involves  the  self-determining  consciousness  which  carries 
freedom  with  it  in  all  modes  of  its  existence.  Should  the 
question  be  asked,  If  this  self-consciousness  is  not  derived 
from  nature,  what  then  is  its  origin  ?  the  answer  is  that  it 
has  no  origin.  It  never  began,  because  it  never  was  not.  It 
is  the  condition  of  there  being  such  a  thing  as  beginning  or 
end.  Whatever  begins  or  ends  does  so  for  it  or  in  relation 
to  it. 


K. 


CHAPTER   II 

DESIRE,    INTELLECT,    AND   WILL 

115.  The  ground  upon  which,  rightly  or  wrongly,  the 
reducibility  of  moral  conduct  to  a  series  of  natural  pheno- 
mena, and  with  it  the  possibility  of  a  physical  science  of 
ethics,  is  here  denied,  should  by  this  time  be  sufficiently 
plain.  It  lies  in  the  view  that  in  all  conduct  to  which  moral 
predicates  are  applicable  a  man  is  an  object  to  himself; 
that  such  conduct,  equally  whether  virtuous  or  vicious, 
expresses  a  motive  consisting  in  an  idea  of  personal  good, 
which  the  man  seeks  to  realise  by  action;  and  that  thd 
presentation  of  such  an  idea  is  not  explicable  by  any 
series  of  events  in  time,  but  imphes  the  action  of  an  eternal 
consciousness  which  makes  the  processes  of  animal  life 
organic  to  a  particular  reproduction  of  itself  in  man.  The 
first  impression  of  any  one  reading  this  statement  may 
probably  be  that  in  our  zeal  to  maintain  a  distinction  of 
ethics  from  natural  science  we  have  adopted  a  view  which, 
if  significant  and  true,  would  take  away  the  only  intelligible 
foundation  of  ethics  by  reducing  virtuous  and  vicious  action 
to  the  same  motive ;  a  motive  the  rejection  of  which  by  the 
will  we  virtually  declare  to  be  impossible,  by  treating  it  as 
itself  the  act  or  expression  of  will.  In  order  to  avoid  mis- 
apprehension on  this  point,  and  to  explain  how  we  under- 
stand that  distinction  between  the  good  and  the  bad  will 
which  undoubtedly  forms  the  true  basis  of  ethics,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  enter  on  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  nature  of 
Will,  in  its  relation  to  Desire  and  Reason. 

lie.  We  are  all  familiar  with  the  quasi-personifications  of 
Desire,  Reason,  and  Will,  which  in  one  form  or  another 
have  governed  the  language  of  moral  philosophy  in  all  ages 
in  which  such  philosophy  has  existed.  Sometimes  desire 
and  reason  have  been  represented  as  inviting  the  man  in 


DESIRE,   INTELLECT,   AND    WILL  131 

different  directions,  while  the  will  has  been  supposed  to 
decide  which  of  the  two  directions  shall  be  followed. 
Sometimes  the  opposition  has  been  represented  as  lying 
rather  between  different  desires,  of  which  reason  however 
(according  to  the  supposition)  supplies  the  object  to  the 
one,  while  some  irrational  appetite  is  the  source  of  the 
other;  the  will  being  the  arbiter  which  determines  the 
action  according  to  the  rational  or  irrational  desire.  Mean- 
while criticism  has  been  always  ready  to  suggest  that  the 
only  possible  conflict  is  between  desires,  to  which  reason  is 
related  only  as  the  minister  who  counts  the  cost  and 
calculates  means,  without  having  anything  to  do  with  their 
initiation  or  their  direction  to  an  end ;  that  the  only  tenable 
distinction  between  irrational  and  rational  desires  is  really 
one  between  desire  for  the  nearer  pleasure  "and  desire  for 
the  more  remote,  or  between  desire  for  a  pleasure  which 
a  just  calculation  would  pronounce  to  be  overWanced  by 
the  pains  incidental  to  or  consequent  upon  its  ahdnment, 
and  desire  for  one  not  liable  to  be  thus  cancelleaiQ  the 
total  result'. 

When  this  view  is  accepted,  the  will  is  naturally  taken  to " 
be  merely  a  designation  for  any  desire  that  happens  for  the 
time  to  be  strong  enough  to  determine  action.  '  No  doubt,' 
it  will  be  said,  '  there  is  a  particular  class  of  the  phenomena 
observable  by  the  inner  sense — a  class  called  acts  of  will — 
which  are  distinguished  from  other  events  that  take  place 
in  nature  as  being  directed  by  our  feeling.  But  we  are  not 
entitled  to  suppose  that  in  the  case  of  each  man  there  is 
really  a  single  agent  or  power  exerted  in  his  acts  of  willing, 
a  single  basis  of  these  phenomena.  To  do  so  would  be 
of  a  piece  with  the  logical  fiction  of  "things"  underlying 
the  several  groups  of  phenomena  which  we  connect  by 
a  common  name.  Any  act  of  willing  is  the  result  of  the 
manifold  conditions  which  go  to  constitute  the  feeling  by 
which  it  is  directed — conditions  most  various  in  the  various 
cases  of  willing.' 

'  Cf.  Hume,  Treatise  on  Human  Nature,  Book  II.  Part  III.  §§  3, 4. 

K  2 


133  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

The  same  criticism  may  be  applied  to  our  usual  assump, 
tions  in  regard  to  'desire,'  and  'intelligence'  or  'reason,' 
which  we  are  apt  to  distinguish  from  will,  as  faculties  having 
something  in  common  with  it  and  yet  different  from  it. 
'  No  doubt,'  it  may  be  said,  '  there  are  certain  inner  acts  or 
phenomena  which  in  virtue  of  certain  resemblances  we 
describe  by  the  common  name  "  desire ; "  others  which  on 
a  similar  ground  we  designate  "perceptions,"  "conceptions" 
and  "inferences,"  and  afterwards  reduce  to  the  higher  genus 
of  intellectual  acts.  But  we  are  deceived  by  a  process  of 
language  if,  having  arrived  at  an  abstract  term  to  indicate 
the  elements  of  likeness  in  these  several  groups  of  pheno- 
mena, we  allow  ourselves  to  believe  in  the  existence  of 
a  single  agent  or  faculty — desire  as  such — underlying  the 
manifold  desires  of  this  or  that  man,  and  of  another  such 
faculty  ^-intelligence  or  reason  as  such  —  underlying  his 
manifold  perceptions,  conceptions  and  inferences.' 

117.  We  have  then  first  to  enquire  whether  there  is  any 
real  unity  corresponding  to  the  several  terms,  desire,  intelli- 
gence, will,  on  the  part  of  spiritual  principles  to  which  these 
terms  are  appropriate.  Do  they  merely  indicate  each  certain 
resemblances  between  certain  sets  of  inner  phenomena, 
a  single  point  of  view  from  which  these  several  sets  of 
phenomena  may  be  regarded,  and  thus  a  unity  not  in  the 
phenomena  themselves  but  on  the  part  of  the  person  con- 
templating them  ?  Or  is  there,  on  the  other  hand,  a  single 
principle  which  manifests  itself  under  endless  diversity  of 
circumstance  and  relation  in  all  the  particular  desires  of 
a  man,  and  is  thus  in  virtue  of  its  own  nature  designated 
by  a  single  name?  And,  in  like  manner,  are  our  acts 
of  intelligence  and  will  severally  the  expression  of  a  single 
principle,  which  renders  each  group  of  acts  possible  and  is 
entitled  in  its  own  right  to  the  single  name  it  bears  ?  We 
shall  find  reason  to  adopt  this  latter  view,  The  meaning 
we  attach  to  it,  however,  is  not  that  in  one  man  there  are 
three  separate  or  separable  principles  or  agents  severally 
underlying  his  acts  of  desire,  understanding,  and  will.    We 


CH.  ll]  DESIRE  133 

adopt  it  in  the  sense  that  there  is  one  subject  or  spirit, 
which  desires  in  all  a  man's  experiences  of  desire,  under- 
stands in  all  operations  of  his  intelligence,  wills  in  all  his 
acts  of  willing;  and  that  the  essential  character  of  his  desires 
depends  on  their  all  being  desires  of  one  and  the  same 
subject  which  also  understands,  the  essential  character  of 
his  intelligence  on  its  being  an  activity  of  one  and  the  same 
subject  which  also  desires,  the  essential  character  of  his  acts 
of  will  on  their  proceeding  from  one  and  the  same  subject 
which  also  desires  and  understands. 

118.  Let  us  begin  with  the  further  consideration  of  desire. 
The  distinction  has  already  been  pointed  out  between 
instinctive  impulse  and  desire  of  that  kind  which  is  a  factor 
in  our  human  experience.  The  latter  involves  a  conscious- 
ness of  its  object,  which  in  turn  implies  a  consciousness  of 
self.  In  this  consciousness  of  objects  which  is  also  that 
of  self,  or  of  self  which  is  also  a  consciousness  of  objects, 
we  have  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  desire  (as  we 
know  it),  of  understanding  and  of  will,  as  compared  with 
those  processes  of  the  animal  soul  with  which  they  are  apt 
to  be  confused.  And  this  consciousness  is  also  the  common 
basis  which  unites  desire,  understanding,  and  will  with  each 
other.  Our  habitual  language  for  expressing  the  life  of  the 
soul  naturally  lends  itself  to  obscure  the  distinction  upon 
which  it  is  important  here  to  insist.  We  constantly  speak 
of  sensation  as  if  it  were  in  itself  a  consciousness  of  an 
object  by  which  it  is  excited.  We  speak  of  feeling  this 
thing  and  that,  which  we  no  doubt  do  feel,  but  which  we 
only  feel  because  we  are  self-conscious ;  because  in  feeling 
we  distinguish  ourselves  from  the  feelings  as  their  subject. 
The  confusion  is  complicated  by  the  common  usage  of 
feeling  and  consciousness  as  equivalent  terms ;  which  makes 
it  difficult  to  mark  the  difference  between  the  fee/ing  of  self, 
implied  in  all  pleasure  and  pain,  and  that  distinguishing 
presentation  of  self,  as  at  once  the  subject  of  feelings  and 
other  than  them,  which  properly  constitutes  self-conscious- 
ness.    Nor  when  we  have  recognised  the  distinction  between 


134  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

-mere  feeling  and  feeling  as  it  is  in  the  self-conscious  man,  is 
it  easy  to  express  it.  If  we  use  one  set  of  terms,  we  fail  to 
convey  the  difference  between  sensation,  as  the  affection  of 
a  soul  or  of  an  individual  subject  properly  so  called,  and 
any  affection  of  one  material  thing  by  another.  Adopting 
another  set  of  terms,  we  seem  to  fall  into  the  error  just 
noticed,  of  identifying  mere  sensation  with  the  consciousness 
of  self  and  object. 

119.  The  unity  of  an  individual  soul  is  implied  in  all  feel- 
ing ;  or  perhaps  we  should  rather  say  that  feeling  constitutes 
the  unity  of  the  individual  soul.  The  individual  animal  is 
not  merely  one  for  us,  who  contemplate  the  connexion  be- 
tween the  members  organic  to  its  life.  It  is  one  in  itself,  as 
no  material  atom  or  material  compound  is,  in  virtue  of  the 
common  feeling  through  which,  if  one  member  suffer,  all 
the  members  suffer  with  it.  It  is  not  one,  as  the  atom  is 
supposed  to  be,  in  the  sense  of  being  absolutely  simple  and 
excluding  everything  else  from  itself.  Nor  is  it  one,  like 
the  material  universe,  merely  in  respect  of  unity  of  relation 
between  manifold  elements.  It  is  one  in  the  sense  that 
upon  certain  occurrences  in  the  parts  of  a  peculiarly  consti- 
tuted body  there  supervenes  feeling,  which  is  not  any  one 
or  number  of  the  occurrences,  nor  a  result  of  their  combi- 
nation, in  the  sense  of  being  analysable  into  them ;  which 
does  not  admit  of  being  analysed  into  or  explained  by  any- 
thing else,  and  would  therefore  be  unknown  but  for  our  im- 
mediate experience  of  it ;  which,  while  it  is  not  the  attribute 
of  any  or  all  of  the  elements  organic  to  it,  is  incommunica- 
bly  private  to  a  subject  experiencing  it,  affected  by  the  past 
and  affecting  the  future  of  that  particular  subject,  his  own 
and  not  another's. 

The  question  of  the  distinction  between  animals  and 
plants,  the  question  whether  all  '  animals '  feel,  whether  any 
'  plants '  do,  is  one  of  classification  with  which  we  are  not 
here  concerned.  However  such  a  question  may  be  answered, 
it  does  not  affect  the  importance  of  noticing  the  distinctive 
nature  of  the  individuality  which  feeling  constitutes.    It  is 


CH.  Il]  DESIRE  135 

only  indeed  from  experience  of  ourselves,  not  from  observa- 
tion of  the  animals,  that  we  know  what  this  individuality  is ; 
but  according  to  all  indications  we  are  justified  in  ascribing 
it  at  any  rate  to  all  vertebrate  animals.  To  say  that  they  feel 
as  men  do,  or  that  they  are  individual  in  the  same  sense  as 
men,  is  misleading,  because  it  is  to  ignore  the  distinctive 
character  given  to  human  feeling  and  human  individuality 
by  a  self-consciousness  which  we  have  no  reason  to  ascribe 
to  the  animals.  But  the  assertion  that  they  feel  no  less,  and 
are  no  less  individual,  than  ourselves  seems  to  be  within  the 
mark.  And  if  by  desire  we  mean  no  more  than  that  felt 
impulse  after  riddance  from  pain  which  pain  carries  with  it 
to  the  individual,  or  that  felt  want  which  survives  a  feeling 
of  pleasure ;  if  by  will  we  mean  no  more  than  '  activity  de- 
termined by  feeling;'  then  we  cannot  do  otherwise  than 
ascribe  desire  and  will  to  the  animals. 

120.  But  though  feeling,  in  the  sense  explained,  consti- 
tutes individuality,  it  does  not  in  that  sense  amount  to  the 
full  individuality  of  man.  It  does  not  make  the  human 
self  what  it  is.  Each  of  us  is  one  or  individual,  not  merely 
in  the  sense  that  he  feels  and  is  so  far  conscious,  but  in  the 
sense  that  he  presents  his  feelings  to  himself,  that  he  dis- 
tinguishes himself  from  them,  and  is  conscious  of  them  as 
manifold  relations  in  which  he,  the  single  self,  stands  to  the 
world, — in  short,  as  manifold  facts.  It  is  thus  only  as  self- 
conscious  that  we  are  capable  of  knowledge,  because  only 
as  self-conscious  that  we  are  aware  of  being  in  the  presence 
of  facts.  Only  in  virtue  of  self-consciousness  is  there  for  us 
a  world  to  be  known.  In  that  sense  man's  self-consciousness 
is  his  understanding.  This  does  not  of  course  mean  that 
the  abstract  form  of  self-consciousness  is  an  intelligence  of 
facts.  We  know  nothing  of  self-consciousness  apart  from 
feeling,  and  are  probably  entitled  to  assume  that  there  is  no 
such  thing.  The  self-consciousness  therefore  of  which  we 
speak  includes  feeling;  not  indeed  feeling  as  it  is  before 
the  stage  of  self-consciousness  is  reached,  but  feeling  as  it 
is  for  the  self-conscious  soul,  or  feeling  as  manifold  recog- 


136  THE   WILL  [bk.  n 

nised  relation  to  an  objective  world.  In  this  reality  of  its 
existence,  in  this  actual  co-operation  with  the  senses,  self- 
consciousness  is  the  faculty  of  understanding,  which  in  its 
full  activity,  with  the  progressive  analysis  of  that  which  the 
Senses  contain  or  reveal,  becomes  knowledge,  or  the  actual 
understanding  of  a  world.  In  the  same  way  self-conscious- 
ness is  the  faculty  or  possibility  of  desire,  in  so  far  as  it 
is  the  characteristic  of  desire  to  be  directed  to  objects  pre- 
sent to  the  mind  of  the  person  desiring  them. 

If  this  statement  seems  strange,  it  is  because  we  are 
misled  by  our  habit  of  abstraction.  Regarding  self-con- 
sciousness in  unreal  detachment  from  the  sensations  which 
to  the  self-conscious  soul  become  intelligible  facts,  we  find 
a  paradox  in  the  statement  that  it  is  the  basis  of  under- 
standing. For  a  like  reason,  because  we  are  habituated 
to  abstract  self-consciousness  from  the  wants  and  impulses 
which  are  the  sequela  of  sensation,  we  stumble  at  the  notion 
of  our  desires  being  founded  on  self-consciousness.  We 
suppose  self-consciousness,  in  short,  apart  from  a  soul  and 
from  the  activities  of  sense  and  appetite  which  belong  to 
a  soul  before  self-consciousness  supervenes.  We  then 
oppose  it  to  those  very  faculties  and  acts  of  desire  and 
understanding  which  are  really  its  expression,  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  only  as  self-conscious  that  the  soul  exhibits  them. 
No  doubt,  if  self-consciousness  were  not  the  self-conscious- 
ness of  a  soul,  if  it  did  not  supervene  upon  a  sentient  and 
appetitive  life,  it  would  not  exhibit  itself  as  understanding 
and  desire;  but  neither  would  it  be  what  it  is  at  all.  The 
forms  of  psychical  activity  on  which  it  supervenes  are 
carried  on  into  it,  though  with  a  character  altered  by  its 
supervention.  They  form  its  content,  its  filling;  not  one, 
however,  which  remains  what  it  was  upon  the  first  mani- 
festation of  self-consciousness  in  the  soul,  but  one  which  is 
constantly  taking  new  determinations  to  itself  through  the 
activity  of  which  self-consciousness  is  the  distinguishing  form. 

121.  Just  as  the  action  of  self-consciousness  in  under- 
standing becomes  apparent  as  soon  as  we  ask  ourselves 


CH.  Il]  DESIRE  137 

how  the  facts  with  which  our  intelligence  deals  come  to 
be  there  for  us — how  occurrences  of  sensation  come  to  be 
apprehended  by  us  as  facts — so  its  action  in  desire  becomes 
apparent  as  soon  as  we  ask  ourselves  how  the  objects  to 
which  our  desires  are  directed,  and  which  make  them  what 
they  are,  come  to  arise  in  our  minds.  To  take  an  elemen- 
tary instance,  how  do  we  come  to  desire  food?  Because 
we  are  hungry,  is  the  answer  that  first  suggests  itself.  But, 
before  we  accept  the  answer,  we  must  enquire  more  care- 
fully what  we  mean  by  the  desire.  Do  we  mean  by  it  (i) 
hunger  itself,  as  a  particular  sort  of  painful  feeling ;  or 
(2)  an  instinctive  impulse  to  obtain  food,  excited  by  this 
painful  feeling  but  without  consciousness  of  an  object  to 
which  the  impulse  is  directed ;  or  (3)  an  impulse  excited  by 
the  image  of  a  pleasure  previously  experienced  in  eating, 
such  as  we  seem  to  notice  in  a  well-fed  dog  or  cat  when  the 
dinner-bell  rings ;  or  {4)  desire  for  an  object  in  the  proper 
sense ;  /.  e.  for  something  which  the  desiring  subject  presents 
to  itself  as  distinct  at  once  from  itself,  the  subject  that  desires, 
and  from  other  objects  which  might  be  desired  but  for  the 
time  are  not  ? 

It  is  only  if  we  understand  '  desire  for  food '  in  the  second 
of  these  senses  that  any  one  can  be  said  to  desire  food 
merely  because  he  is  hungry.  In  the  first  sense  the  desire, 
being  the  same  thing  as  hunger,  obviously  cannot  be 
explained  by  it,  but  only  by  a  physiological  account  of  the 
way  in  which  hunger  arises.  In  the  two  latter  senses  of 
the  'desire  for  food'  hunger  does  not  account  for  it. 
Hunger,  whether  considered  simply  as  a  painful  feeling  or 
as  involving  an  instinctive  impulse  to  remove  that  feehng, 
may  exist  without  the  desire  for  food  in  either  of  these 
senses.  The  quest  and  taking  of  food  do  not  necessarily 
imply  more  than  hunger  and  an  instinctive  impulse  to 
remove  it.  They  do  not  necessarily  imply  even  the  revival 
of  an  image  of  pleasure  previously  associated  with  eating 
some  sort  of  food ;  much  less  desire  for  an  object,  presented 
as  such.     To  begin  with,  even  by  the  human  infant,  food 


138  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

must  be  sought  and  obtained  instinctively,  without  any 
previous  experience  of  it  as  something  that  will  remove  the 
pain  of  hunger,  without  any  presentation  to  the  mind  of  the 
removal  of  pain  as  an  end  to  which  means  are  to  be  sought. 
If  the  quest  of  food  must  thus  in  some  cases  be  instinctive,  ?'.«. 
carried  on  without  consciousness  of  an  object  to  which  it  is 
directed,  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  it  is  not  so  in  all,  ex- 
cept where  an  experience  of  our  own,  or  an  experience  which 
admits  of  communication  to  us,  testifies  to  the  contrary. 

122.  Now  that  which  takes  place  in  the  soul  of  an  animal 
when  hungry  and  seeking  food  is  not  an  experience  of  this 
kind.  The  reason,  therefore,  which  we  have  for  saying  of 
ourselves  or  our  fellow-men  that  we  desire  food  as  an  object 
of  which  we  are  conscious,  does  not  apply  to  animals.  Those 
animals  indeed  with  which  we  chiefly  associate,  exhibit  all 
the  signs  of  impulses  to  action  excited  by  recurrent  images 
of  pleasure  previously  experienced,  but  this  recurrence  of  the 
image  of  a  past  pleasure  does  not  in  itself  amount  to  the 
consciousness  of  a  desired  object  consisting  in  a  particular 
pleasure.  Self-consciousness  is  implied  in  the  one  as  it  is 
not  in  the  other.  The  mere  revival  in  a  sentient  subject  of 
the  image  of  a  past  pleasure,  with  the  consequent  impulse 
after  the  renewal  of  the  pleasure,  does  not  imply  any  con- 
sciousness by  the  subject  of  itself  in  distinction  from  the 
pleasure,  as  the  subject  which  has  enjoyed  it,  and  may 
enjoy  it  again,  and  which  has  also  enjoyed  other  pleasures 
comparable  with  it ;  nor  any  consciousness  of  an  objective 
world  to  which  belong  the  conditions  of  the  pleasure — the 
means  to  it,  and  its  consequences. 

123.  As  our  principal  concern  is  to  ascertain  what  desire 
in  ourselves  is,  not  what  desire  in  the  animals  is  not,  we 
need  not  dwell  on  the  objections  which  naturally  suggest 
themselves  to  the  view  that  the  actions  of  animals  in  all 
cases  admit  of  being  explained  without  the  ascription  to 
them  of  self-consciousness.  They  are  objections  which  would 
probably  disappear  when  once  the  difference  was  realised 
between  the  existence  of  an  individual  soul  and  the  in- 


CH.  u]  DESIRE 


139 


dividual's  presentation  of  his  individuality  to  himself— his 
distinction  of  himself  from  relations  in  which  he  stands  to 
a  world.  Even  when  the  difference  has  been  apprehended, 
the  affectionate  observer  of  the  dog  and  the  horse  may  be 
slow  to  admit  that  their  behaviour  represents  merely  the 
sequence  of  impulses  upon  images  of  pain  and  pleasure, 
without  conscious  reference  to  self  or  to  a  world;  which 
means  without  either  such  memory  or  such  perception, 
such  fear  or  such  hope,  as  ours.  We  cannot  deny,  at  any 
rate  of  the  beasts  friendly  to  man,  that  in  a  certain  sense 
they  learn  by  experience ;  that  the  processes  by  which  the 
trained  or  practised  animal  seeks  to  obtain  the  pleasure  or 
avoid  the  pain,  of  which  the  imagination  excites  its  impulse, 
imply  the  association  with  the  imagined  pleasure  or  pain  of 
the  images  of  many  sensations  which  have  been  found  to 
be  connected  with  that  pleasure  or  pain.  It  is  readily 
assumed  that  such  habitual  sequence  of  images  amounts 
to  an  experience  of  facts  like  our  own ;  to  an  apprehension 
of  an  objective  world,  of  which  the  necessary  correlative  is 
consciousness  of  self.  The  assumption  becomes  inveterate 
through  the  practice  of  describing  the  behaviour  of  animals 
in  terms  derived  from  our  own  experience, — a  practice 
constantly  becoming  more  prevalent,  as  the  description  of 
animal  life  becomes  a  more  favourite  subject  of  literary  art. 
It  is  not  to  the  purpose  here  to.criticise  the  assumption  in 
detail.  It  is  enough  to  point  out  that  it  is  an  assumption  ; 
that  the  consciousness  of  objects  as  such,  whether  objects 
of  knowledge  or  objects  of  desire,  is  more  and  other  than 
any  established  sequence  of  images  or  any  direction  of 
desire  by-  such  sequent  images ;  and  that  this  consciousness 
of  objects,  whether  any  animals  partake  of  it  or  no,  is  the 
characteristic  thing  in  human  experience,  both  in  the  ex- 
perience through  which  we  become  acquainted  with  nature 
and  in  that  through  which  morality  arises. 

124.  The  desire  for  food— to  return  to  that  primary 
instance — though  there  are  senses  in  which  it  is  independent 
of  self-consciousness,  is  not  in  those  senses  an  element  in 


140  THE   WILL  [bk.  n 

our  moral  experience.  As  a  determinant  of  our  action  as 
men,  it  is  a  desire  for  an  object,  of  the  presentation  of  which 
self-consciousness  is  the  condition.  Whether  we  take  the 
object  desired  to  be  the  removal  of  a  particular  pain  or 
enjoyment  of  a  particular  pleasure,  or  the  maintenance  of 
life  and  strength,  or  some  further  object  for  the  sake  of  which 
life  and  strength  are  sought ;  or  whether  we  suppose  a  wish 
for  each  of  these  ends  to  be  included  in  the  unity  of  a  will 
directed  to  the  taking  of  food ;  in  any  case  the  object  is 
rendered  an  object  to  us  by  a  self  which  distinguishes  itself 
from  its  experience.  The  pain  of  hunger,  the  pleasure  of 
eating,  are  alike  presented  as  constituents  in  a  universe  of 
pains  and  pleasures,  which  the  subject  contemplates  himself 
as  possibly  suffering  and  enjoying,  and  in  relation  to  which 
he  places  the  pain  or  pleasure  that  for  the  time  predominates 
in  his  imagination.  There  is  for  him  a  world  of  feeling,  how- 
ever limited  in  its  actual  range  yet  boundless  in  capacity,  of 
which  he  presents  himself  as  the  centre.  It  is  by  its  relation 
to  this  world  that  any  particular  pleasure  is  defined  for  him 
as  an  object  of  desire,  and  thus,  however  animal  in  its  origin, 
becomes  to  him,  through  such  reference  to  a  '  before  and 
after '  of  experience,  what  it  is  not  to  the  animal  that  feels 
but  does  not  distinguish  itself  from  its  immediate  feeling. 
This  being  true  even  of  animal  pleasure,  if  desired  as  an 
object  or  as  we  desire  it,  it  is  more  plainly  true  of  such  an 
object  as  the  maintenance  of  life  and  strength,  and  of  any 
end  for  the  sake  of  which  life  and  strength  are  desired.  To 
conceive  his  life  as  an  end,  to  conceive  ends  for  which  he 
seeks  to  live,  are  clearly  the  functions  only  of  a  being  who 
can  distinguish  the  manifold  of  his  experience  actual  and 
possible  from  himself,  and  at  the  same  time  gather  it  to- 
gether as  related  to  his  single  self. 

125.  Even  those  desires  of  a  man,  then,  which  originate  in 
animal  want  or  susceptibility  to  animal  pleasure,  in  the  sense 
that  without  such  want  or  susceptibility  they  would  not  be, 
yet  become  what  they  are  in  man,  as  desires  consciously 
directed  to  objects,  through  the  self-consciousness  which  is 


CH.  n]  DESIRE  141 

the  condition  of  those  objects  or  any  objects  being  presented. 
And  it  is  only  as  consciously  directed  to  objects  that  they 
have  a  moral  quality  or  contribute  to  make  us  what  we  are  as 
moral  agents.  To  desire  food,  in  the  sense  either  of  being 
hungry  or  of  having  an  impulse  excited  by  an  imagination  of 
some  pleasure  of  eating,  without  reference  to  a  self  which 
presents  the  pleasure  to  itself  as  a  good  among  other  possible 
good  things,  is  not  a  function  of  our  moral  nature.  If  in 
our  waking  and  sane  life  we  are  capable  of  such  a  merely 
animal  experience  at  all,  it  at  any  rate  does  not  affect  us  for 
the  better  or  worse  as  men.  It  has  no  bearing  on  the  state 
of  soul  or  character  to  which  the  terms  good  or  bad  in  the 
moral  sense  are  applied.  In  order  to  have  such  a  bearing, 
however  dependent  on  susceptibilities  of  the  animal  soul,  it 
must  take  its  essential  character  from  that  supervention  of 
self-consciousness  upon  these  susceptibilities  through  which 
a  man  becomes  aware  of  the  pleasure  derived  from  them  as 
an  end  which  he  makes  his  own. 

126.  Nor  can  it  be  admitted  that  those  desired  objects 
which  are  of  most  concern  in  the  moral  life  of  the  civilised 
and  educated  man,  who  has  outgrown  mere  sensuality,  are 
directly  dependent  on  animal  susceptibilities  at  all.  It  is 
not  merely  their  character  as  objects  which  the  man  makes 
his  good  that  they  owe  to  self-consciousness.  The  suscepti- 
bilities in  which  the  desires  themselves  originate,  unlike  the 
susceptibilities  to  the  pain  of  hunger  or  pleasure  of  eating, 
do  not  arise  out  of  the  animal  system,  but  out  of  a  state  of 
things  which  only  self-conscious  agents  can  bring  about. 
The  conflict  of  the  moral  life  would  be  a  much  simpler 
affair  than  it  is  if  it  were  mainly  fought  over  those  '  bodily 
pleasures,'  in  dealing  with  which,  according  to  Aristotle,  the 
qualities  of  '  continence  and  incontinence '  are  exhibited. 
The  most  formidable  forces  which  'right  reason'  has  to 
subdue  or  render  contributory  to  some  '  true  good '  of  man, 
are  passions  of  which  reason  is  in  a  certain  sense  itself  the 
parent.  They  are  passions  which  the  animals  know  not. 
Because  they  are  excited  by  the  conditions  of  distinctively 


142  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

human  society.     They  relate  to   objects  which  only  the 
intercourse  of  self-conscious  agents  can  bring  into  existence. 

This  is  often  true  of  passions  which  on  first  thoughts  we 
might  be  inclined  to  reckon  merely  animal  appetites.  The 
drunkard  probably  drinks,  as  a  rule,  not  for  the  pleasure  of 
drinking,  but  to  drown  pains  or  win  pleasures — pains  for 
instance  of  self-reproach,  pleasures  of  a  quickened  fancy  or 
of  a  sense  of  good  fellowship — of  which  only  the  thinking 
man  is  capable.  The  love  which  is  apt  to  be  most  danger- 
ously at  war  with  duty  is  not  a  mere  sexual  impulse,  but 
the  passion  for  a  person,  in  which  the  consciousness  on  the 
lover's  part  both  of  his  own  individuality  and  of  that  of  the 
beloved  person  is  at  the  utmost  intensity.  Our  envies, 
jealousies,  and  ambitions— whatever  the  resemblance  between 
their  outward  signs  and  certain  expressions  of  emotion  in 
animals — are  all  in  their  proper  nature  distinctively  human, 
because  all  founded  on  interests  possible  only  to  self-con- 
scious beings.  We  cannot  separate  such  passions  from  their 
exciting  causes.  Take  away  those  occasions  of  them  which 
arise  out  of  our  intercourse  as  persons  with  persons,  and 
the  passions  themselves  as  we  know  them  disappear.  The 
advantages  which  I  envy  in  my  neighbour,  the  favour  of 
society  or  of  a  particular  person  which  I  lose  and  he  wins 
and  which  makes  me  jealous  of  him,  the  superiority  in  form 
or  power  or  place  of  which  the  imagination  excites  my 
ambition — these  would  have  no  more  existence  for  an  agent 
not  self-conscious,  or  not  dealing  with  other  self-conscious 
agents,  than  colour  has  for  the  blind. 

127.  It  should  further  be  noticed  that  not  only  do  those 
desires  and  passions  which  form  part  of  our  moral  experience 
depend  on  the  action  of  a  self-conscious  soul  in  respect 
of  the  presentation  of  their  objects,  many  of  them  also  in 
respect  of  the  conditions  under  which  the  susceptibility 
to  them  arises,  but  that  the  same  action  is  implied  in 
the  manner  in  which  they  qualify  each  other.  We  are  apt 
to  speak  of  our  desires  for  this  object  and  that  as  if  each 
operated  on  us  singly,  or  as  if  each  had  its  effect  on  us 


CH.  Il]  DESIRE  143 

independently  of  the  others,  though  our  conduct  may  repre- 
sent their  combined  result.  But  such  language  is  not  a  true 
expression  of  our  experience.  We  are  never  so  exclusively 
possessed  by  the  desire  for  any  object  as  to  be  quite  un- 
affected by  the  thought  of  other  desired  objects,  of  which 
we  are  conscious  that  the  loss  or  gain  would  have  a  bearing 
on  our  happiness.  In  reflection  upon  our  motives  we 
abstract  the  predominant  desire  from  that  qualification, 
whether  in  the  way  of  added  strength  or  of  abatement, 
which  it  derives  from  the  belief  on  the  part  of  the  desiring 
subject  that  its  satisfaction  involves  the  satisfaction  or 
frustration  of  other  desires.  But  it  is  in  fact  always  so 
qualified.  Our  absorption  in  it  is  never  so  complete  but 
that  the  consideration  of  a  possible  happiness  conditional 
upon  the  satisfaction  of  other  desires  makes  a  difference  to 
it,  though  it  may  not  be  such  a  difference  as  makes  its  sign 
in  outward  conduct.  We  do  not  indeed  desire  the  objects 
of  our  ordinary  interests  for  the  sake  of  our  general  happi- 
ness, any  more  than  for  the  sake  of  the  pleasure  which  the 
satisfaction  of  desire  constitutes.  As  has  often  been  pointed 
out,  if  there  were  not  desires  for  particular  objects  other 
than  the  desire  for  happiness,  there  could  be  no  such  thing 
as  the  desire  for  happiness  ;  for  there  would  be  nothing  to 
constitute  the  happiness  desired.  But  in  every  desire  I  so 
far  detach  myself  from  the  desire  as  to  conceive  myself  in 
possible  enjoyment  of  the  satisfaction  of  other  desires,  in 
other  words,  as  a  subject  of  happiness ;  and  the  desire  itself 
is  more  or  less  stimulated  or  checked,  according  as  its 
gratification  in  this  involuntary  forecast  appears  conducive 
to  happiness  or  otherwise. 

128.  Even  with  the  man  of  most  concentrated  purpose, 
the  object  on  which  his  heart  is  set— e.^.  the  acquisition  of 
an  estate,  election  to  Parliament,  the  execution  of  some 
design  in  literature  or  art — though  it  may  admit  of  descrip- 
tion by  a  single  phrase,  really  involves  the  satisfaction  of 
many  different  desires.  The  several  objects  of  these  admit 
of  distinction,  but  they  are  not  to  be  considered  so  many 


144  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

separate  forces  combining  to  make  up  the  actual  resultant 
motive.  No  one  of  them  apart  from  the  rest  would  be  what 
it  is,  because  each,  as  it  really  actuates  the  man,  is  affected 
by  the  desire  for  personal  well-being ;  and  that  well-being 
presents  itself  to  him  as  involving  the  satisfaction  of  them 
all.  In  the  cases  of  concentrated  purpose  supposed,  the 
man  has  come  to  identify  his  well-being  with  his  success  in 
bringing  about  a  certain  event  or  series  of  events.  To  him, 
as  he  forecasts  his  future,  the  possibility  of  that  success  being 
attained  (his  acquisition  of  the  estate,  his  election  to  Parlia- 
ment) presents  itself  as  the  possibility  of  his  greatest  good. 
It  would  not  seem  so,  indeed,  unless  he  had  (or  had  once 
had)  various  desires,  each  directed  to  its  specific  object  other 
than  his  well-being,  and  unless  he  contemplated  the  satisfac^ 
tion  of  these  desires  as  involved  in  this  particular  success ; 
but  on  the  other  hand  no  one  of  these  desires  would  actuate 
him  as  it  does,  in  the  way  of  directing  all  his  effort  to  the 
single  end  for  which  he  Uves,  unless  it  were  strengthened 
and  sustained  by  the  anticipation  of  a  well-being,  in  which 
he  conceives  the  satisfaction  of  the  other  desires  to  be  as 
much  involved  as  the  satisfaction  of  this  particular  one.  The 
conception  of  this  well-being  is  the  medium  through  which 
each  desire  is  at  once  qualified  and  reinforced  by  all  the  rest, 
in  directing  the  man's  effort  to  that  end  in  which  he  presents 
to  himself  the  satisfaction  of  them  all.  In  the  case  of  men 
whose  effort  is  less  concentrated  in  its  direction,  who  live 
with  more  divided  aims,  though  'chance  desires'  have  greater 
weight,  yet  none  of  these  is  unaffected  by  the  idea  of  a 
happiness  not  to  be  identified  with  the  satisfaction  of  any 
single  desire. 

Now  it  is  only  to  the  self-conscious  soul,  which  dis- 
tinguishes itself  from  all  desires  in  turn,  that  such  an  idea  is 
possible.  In  this  further  sense,  then — not  only  as  the  con- 
dition (i)  of  the  presentation  of  objects,  whether  desired  or 
perceived,  and  (2)  of  the  susceptibilities  in  which  those  of 
our  desires  which  are  of  most  moral  importance  for  good  or 
evil  originate,  but  (3)  as  the  source  of  the  idea  of  happiness — 


CH.  ll]  DESIRE 


145 


it  is  self-consciousness  that  makes  the  action  of  desire  what 
it  really  is  in  the  life  of  moral  beings.  If  it  is  true  that  no 
desire  actuates  us  without  qualification  by  the  consciousness 
of  our  capacity  for  other  experience  than  that  which  this 
particular  desire  constitutes,  then,  in  that  sense,  as  well  as  in 
the  other  senses  indicated,  it  is  true  that  every  desire  which 
actuates  us  has  a  character  that  self-consciousness  gives  it. 
The  objects  of  a  man's  various  desires  form  a  system,  con- 
nected by  memory  and  anticipation,  in  which  each  is  quali- 
fied by  the  rest ;  and  just  as  the  object  of  what  we  reckon  a 
single  desire  derives  its  unity  from  the  unity  of  the  self-pre- 
senting consciousness  in  and  for  which  alone  it  exists,  so  the 
system  of  a  man's  desires  has  its  bond  of  union  in  the  single 
subject,  which  always  carries  with  it.  the  consciousness  of 
objects  that  have  been  and  may  be  desired  into  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  object  which  at  present  is  being  desired. 

129.  To  revert  then  to  the  question  from  which  this  part 
of  our  discussion  started,  we  shall  be  right  in  refusing  to 
admit  that  particular  desires  are  the  only  realities  and  that 
'  Desire '  is  a  logical  fiction;  right  in  asserting  a  real  existence 
of  Desire  as  such,  if  by  this  we  understand  the  one  soul  or 
subject,  and  that  a  self-conscious  soul  or  subject,  which 
desires  in  all  the  desires  of  each  of  us,  and  as  belonging  to 
which  alone,  as  related  to  each  other  through  relation  to  it, 
our  several  desires  are  what  they  are.  But  if  we  mean 
anything  else  than  this  when  we  hypostatise  desire — as  we  do 
when  we  talk  of  Desire  moving  us  to  act  in  such  or  such 
a  way,  misleading  us,  overcoming  us,  conflicting  with  Reason, 
&c. — then  'Desire'  is  a  logical  abstraction  which  we  are 
mistaking  for  reality.  It  is  thus  equally  important  to  bear 
in  mind  that  there  is  a  real  unity  in  all  a  man's  desires, 
a  common  ground  of  them  all,  and  that  this  real  unity  or 
common  ground  is  simply  the  man's  self,  as  conscious  of 
itself  and  consciously  seeking  in  the  satisfaction  of  desires 
the  satisfaction  of  itself. 

But  the  real  unity  underlying  the  operations  of  intelligence 
is  also  the  man's  self-conscious  self.     It  is  only  in  virtue  of 

L 


146  THE    WILL  [bK.  II 

his  self-consciousness,  as  has  previously  been  pointed  out, 
that  he  is  aware  of  facts  as  facts,  or  that  his  experience 
reveals  to  him  a  world  of  related  objects.  It  is  clear  then 
that  we  must  not  imagine  Desire  and  Intellect,  as  our  phrase- 
ology sometimes  misleads  us  into  doing,  to  be  separate 
agents  or  influences,  always  independent  of  each  other,  and 
in  the  moral  life  often  conflicting.  The  real  agent  called 
Desire  is  the  man  or  self  or  subject  as  desiring ;  the  real  agent 
called  intellect  is  the  man  as  understanding,  as  perceiving 
and  conceiving ;  and  the  man  that  desires  is  identical  with 
the  man  that  understands.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  to 
desire  is  clearly  not  the  same  thing  as  to  understand.  How 
then  is  the  state  of  the  case  to  be  truly  represented  ? 

130.  We  commonly  content  ourselves  with  saying  that 
the  same  person  has  distinct  faculties  of  desire  and  under- 
standing; and  to  this  statement,  so  far  as  it  goes,  no 
objection  can  fairly  be  made.  It  is  equally  impossible  to 
derive  desire  from  intellect  and  intellect  from  desire; 
impossible  to  treat  any  desire  as  a  mode  of  understanding, 
or  any  act  of  understanding  as  a  mode  of  desire.  No  reason 
can  be  given  why  any  perception  or  conception  should  lead 
to  desire,  unless  the  soul  has  to  begin  with  some  possibility 
called  into  activity  by  the  idea,  but  other  than  that  of  which 
the  activity  constitutes  the  idea — the  perception  or  concep- 
tion. And,  conversely,  we  cannot  explain  how  a  desire 
should  set  intellectual  activities  in  motion  except  on  a 
corresponding  supposition.  This  being  so,  we  must  ascribe 
to  the  self-conscious  soul  or  man  two  equally  primitive, 
co-ordinate,  possibilities  of  desiring  and  understanding. 
But  we  may  not  regard  these  as  independent  of  each 
other,  or  suppose  that  one  can  really  exist  without  the  other, 
since  they  have  a  common  source  in  one  and  the  same  self- 
consciousness.  The  man  carries  with  him  into  his  desires 
the  same  single  self-consciousness  which  makes  his  acts 
of  understanding  what  they  are,  and  into  his  acts  of  under- 
standing the  same  single  self-consciousness  which  makes  his 


CH.ll]  DESIRE  AND  INTELLECT  I47 

desires  what  they  are.  No  desire  which  forms  part  of  our 
moral  experience  would  be  what  it  is,  if  it  were  not  the 
desire  of  a  subject  which  also  understands :  no  act  of  our 
intelligence  would  be  what  it  is,  if  it  were  not  the  act  of 
a  subject  which  also  desires. 

This  point  would  not  be  worth  insisting  on,  if  it  meant 
merely  that  desires  and  operations  of  the  intellect  mutually 
succeed  each  other;  that  in  order  to  the  excitement  of 
desire  for  an  object,  as  distinct  from  appetite  or  instinctive 
impulse,  there  must  have  been  a  perception,  involving  at 
least  some  elementary  acts  of  memory  and  inference ;  and 
that  a  desire,  again,  commonly  sets  in  motion  an  intellectual 
consideration  of  consequences  and  ways  and  means.  The 
meaning  is  that  every  desire  which  is  within  the  experience 
of  a  moral  agent,  involves  a  mode  of  consciousness  the  same 
as  that  which  is  involved  in  acts  of  understanding ;  every  act 
of  understanding  a  mode  of  self-consciousness  the  same  as 
that  which  is  involved  in  desire.  The  element  common  to 
both  lies  in  the  consciousness  of  self  and  a  world  as  in 
a  sense  opposed  to  each  other,  and  in  the  conscious  effort 
to  overcome  this  opposition.  This,  however,  will  seem  one 
of  those  dark  and  lofty  statements  which  excite  the 
suspicion  of  common  sense.  The  reader's  patience  is  there- 
fore requested  during  one  or  two  paragraphs  of  explanation, 

131.  Desire  for  an  object  may  be  said  generally  to  be  a 
consciousness  of  an  object  as  already  existing  in  and  for 
the  consciousness  itself,  which  at  the  same  time  strives  to 
give  the  object  another  existence  than  that  which  it  thus 
has — to  make  it  exist  really  and  not  merely  in  the  desiring 
consciousness.  A  man  desires,  let  us  suppose,  to  taste  a 
bottle  of  fine  wine,  to  hear  a  certain  piece  of  music,  to  see 
Athens,  to  do  a  service  to  a  friend,  to  finish  a  book  that 
he  has  in  hand.  In  each  case  the  desired  object,  as  such, 
exists  merely  in  his  consciousness,  and  the  desire  for  it 
involves  the  consciousness  of  the  difference  between  such 
existence  of  the  desired  object  and  that  realisation  of  it 
towards  which  the  desire  strives,  and  which,  when  attained, 

L  2 


148  THE    WILL  [bK.  II 

is  the  satisfaction  or  extinction  of  the  desire.  In  that  sense 
the  desire  is  at  once  a  consciousness  of  opposition  between 
a  man's  self  and  the  real  world,  and  an  effort  to  overcome 
it  by  giving  a  reality  in  the  world,  a  reality  under  the  condi- 
tions of  fact,  to  the  object  which,  as  desired,  exists  merely 
in  his  consciousness.  It  is  true  of  course  that  the  bottle  of 
wine,  the  piece  of  music,  the  city  of  Athens,  exist  quite  in- 
dependently of  the  consciousness  of  any  desiring  subject ; 
but  these  are  not  the  desired  objects.  The  experience  of 
tasting  the  wine  or  hearing  the  music  is  the  desired  object ; 
and  this  does  not,  any  more  than  the  anticipated  service  to 
the  friend  or  the  achievement  of  writing  the  book,  exist  while 
desired  except  in  and  for  the  consciousness  of  the  person 
desiring  it.  So  soon  as  it  existed  otherwise  the  desire  would 
cease.  It  is  true  also  that,  though  the  desired  object  is  one 
which  for  the  person  desiring  it  remains  to  be  realised — to 
have  reality  given  it — yet  his  desire  for  it  is  a  real  and  defi- 
nitely conditioned  fact.  To  a  superior  intelligence  contem- 
plating the  state  of  the  case,  the  man's  desire,  with  the  un- 
attained  object  which  it  implies,  would  be  as  real  as  anything 
else  in  the  world.  And  further,  while  it  would  be  apparent 
to  such  an  intelligence  that  it  was  only  in  virtue  of  the  man's 
self-consciousness  that  the  desired  object  existed  for  him,  as 
such ;  only  through  it  that  he  was  capable  of  such  an  expe- 
rience as  that  of  which,  if  the  desire  be  not  simply  sensual, 
the  forecast  moves  him ;  on  the  other  hand  it  would  be  no 
less  apparent  that  the  desire,  however  distinctively  human, 
presupposes  and  entails  some  modification  of  the  animal 
system.  We  are  here  considering,  however^  what  desire 
for  an  object  is  to  the  person  experiencing  the  desire,  while 
experiencing  it,  not  what  it  might  be  to  another  regarding 
it  speculatively  as  a  fact.  As  so  experienced,  the  common 
characteristic  of  every  such  desire  is  its  direction  to  an 
object  consciously  presented  as  not  yet  real,  and  of  which 
the  realisation  would  satisfy,  i.  e.  extinguish,  the  desire.  To- 
wards this  extinction  of  itself  in  the  realisation  of  its  object 
every  desire  is  in  itself  an  effort,  however  the  effort  may  be 


CH.  Il]  DESIRE  AND  INTELLECT  149 

prevented  from  making  its  outward  sign  by  the  interference 
of  other  desires  or  by  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 

132.  Such  desire,  then,  implies  on  the  part  of  the  desiring 
subject  (a)  a  distinction  of  itself  at  once  from  its  desire  and 
from  the  real  world ;  {b)  a  consciousness  that  the  conditions 
of  the  real  world  are  at  present  not  in  harmony  with  it,  the 
subject  of  the  desire ;  {c)  an  effort,  however  undeveloped  or 
misdirected,  so  to  adjust  the  conditions  of  the  real  world  as 
to  procure  satisfaction  of  the  desire.  Let  us  now  turn  for 
a  moment  to  consider  the  generic  nature  of  our  thought. 
Here  too  we  find  the  same  general  characteristic,  a  relation 
between  a  subject  and  a  world  of  manifold  facts,  of  which 
at  first  it  is  conscious  simply  as  alien  to  itself,  but  which  it 
is  in  constant  process  of  adjusting  to  itself  or  making  its 
own.  This  is  no  less  true  of  thought  in  the  form  of  specu- 
lative understanding,  the  process  of  learning  to  know  facts 
and  their  relations,  than  it  is  true  of  it  in  the  practical 
form  of  giving  effect  and  reality  to  ideas.  We  have  already 
seen  how  it  is  only  for  a  self-conscious  soul  that  the  senses 
reveal  facts  or  objects  at  all.  The  same  self-consciousness 
which  arrests  successive  sensations  as  facts  to  be  attended 
to,  finds  itself  baffled  and  thwarted  so  long  as  the  facts  re- 
main an  unconnected  manifold.  That  it  should  bring  them 
into  relation  to  each  other  is  the  condition  of  its  finding 
itself  at  home  in  them,  of  its  making  them  its  own.  This 
establishment  or  discovery  of  relations— we  naturally  call  it 
establishment  when  we  think  of  it  as  a  function  of  our  own 
minds,  discovery  when  we  think  of  it  as  a  function  deter- 
mined for  us  by  the  mind  that  is  in  the  world — is  the  essen- 
tial thing  in  all  understanding.  It  is  involved  in  those  per- 
ceptions of  objects  which  we  are  apt  improperly  to  oppose 
to  acts  of  understanding,  but  which  all  imply  the  discursive 
process  of  consciousness,  bringing  different  sensuous  presen- 
tations into  relation  to  each  other  as  equally  related  to  the 
single  conscious  subject ;  and  it  is  involved  in  those  infer- 
ences and  theories  of  relations  between  relations  which  we 
commonly  treat  as  the  work  of  understanding  par  excellence. 


ISO  THE   WILL  [bk.  11 

Whatever  the  object  which  we  set  ourselves  to  understand, 
the  process  begins  with  our  attention  being  challenged  by 
some  fact  as  simply  alien  and  external  to  us,  as  no  other- 
wise related  to  us  than  is  implied  in  its  being  there  to  be 
known ;  and  it  ends,  or  rather  is  constantly  approaching  an 
end  never  reached,  in  the  mental  appropriation  of  the  fact, 
through  its  being  brought  under  definite  relations  with  the 
cosmos  of  facts  in  which  we  are  already  at  home. 

133.  Now  if  this  is  a  true  account  of  speculative  thinking, 
which  it  is  our  natural  habit  to  put  in  stronger  contrast  with 
desire  than  we  do  practical  thinking,  it  is  clear  that  between 
the  action  of  the  self-conscious  soul  in  desiring  and  its  action 
in  learning  to  know  there  is  a  real  unity.  Each  implies  on 
the  part  of  the  soul  the  consciousness  of  a  world  not  itself 
or  its  own.  Each  implies  the  effort  of  the  soul  in  different 
ways  to  overcome  this  negation  or  opposition — the  one  in 
the  way  of  gathering  the  objects  presented  through  the 
senses  into  the  unity  of  an  intelligible  order ;  the  other  in 
the  way  of  giving  to,  or  obtaining  for,  objects,  which  various 
susceptibilities  of  the  self-conscious  soul  suggest  to  it  and 
which  so  far  exist  for  it  only  in  idea,  a  reality  among  sensible 
matters  of  fact.  The  unity  of  the  self-conscious  soul  thus  exhi- 
bits itself  in  these  its  seemingly  most  different  activities. 

Accordingly,  if  we  understand  by  thought,  as  exercised 
ex  farte  nostra,  the  consciousness  in  a  soul  of  a  world 
of  manifold  facts,  related  to  each  other  through  relation  to 
itself  but  at  the  same  time  other  than  itself,  and  its  operation 
in  appropriating  that  world  or  making  itself  at  home  in  it, 
it  will  follow  from  what  has  been  said  that  thought  in  this 
sense  is  equally  involved  in  the  exercise  of  desire  for  objects 
and  in  the  employment  of  understanding  about  facts.  In 
the  one  case  it  appears  in  the  formation  of  ideal  objects 
and  the  quest  of  means  to  their  realisation  ;  in  the  other,  it 
appears  in  the  cognisance  of  a  manifold  reality  which  it  is 
sought  to  unite  in  a  connected  whole.  This  community  of 
principle  in  the  two  cases  we  may  properly  indicate  by 
calling  our  inner  life,  as  determined  by  desires  for  objects. 


CH.  n]  DESIRE  AND  INTELLECT  15 1 

practical  thought,  while  we  call  the  activity  of  understanding 
speculative  thought. 

134.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  exercise  of  the  one  activity  is 
always  a  necessary  accompaniment  of  the  other.  In  all 
exercise  of  the  understanding  desire  is  at  work.  The  result 
of  any  process  of  cognition  is  desired  throughout  it.  No 
man  learns  to  know  anything  without  desiring  to  know  it. 
The  presentation  of  a  fact  which  does  not  on  the  first  view 
fit  itself  into  any  of  our  established  theories  of  the  world, 
awakens  a  desire  for  such  adjustment,  which  may  be  effected 
either  by  further  acquaintance  with  the  relations  of  the  fact, 
or  by  a  modification  of  our  previous  theories,  or  by  a  com- 
bination of  both  processes.  All  acquisition  of  knowledge 
takes  place  in  this  way,  and  in  every  stage  of  the  process 
we  are  moved  by  a  forecast,  however  vague,  of  its  result. 
The  learner  of  course  knows  not  how  he  will  assimilate  the 
strange  fact  till  he  has  done  so,  but  the  idea  of  its  assimila- 
tion as  possible  evokes  his  effort,  precisely  as,  in  a  case 
naturally  described  as  one  of  desire,  the  idea,  let  us  say,  of 
winning  the  love  of  a  woman  evokes  the  effort  of  the  lover 
to  realise  the  idea. 

Thus  the  process  of  our  understanding  in  its  most  distinc- 
tive sense  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  desire.  But  can  it 
conversely  be  maintained  of  desire,  as  we  experience  it,  not 
only  that  it  has  in  common  with  understanding  the  essential 
characteristics  of  conscious  relation  between  self  and  a  world, 
and  of  conscious  effort  to  overcome  the  opposition  between 
the  two,  but  that  it  necessarily  carries  with  it  an  exercise  of 
understanding  in  the  distinctive  sense,  as  we  have  just  seen 
that  our  exercise  of  understanding  necessarily  carries  with 
it  desire?  On  reflection  it  will  appear  to  be  only  some 
arbitrary  abridgment  of  our  conception  of  desire  which 
makes  us  hesitate  to  admit  that  it  is  so.  So  soon  as  any 
desire  has  become  more  than  an  indefinite  yearning  for  we 
know  not  what,  so  soon  as  it  is  really  desire /<?/•  some  object 
of  which  we  are  conscious,  it  necessarily  involves  an  employ- 
ment of  the  understanding  upon  those  conditions  of  the 


152  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

real  world  which  make  the  difference,  so  to  speak,  between 
the  object  as  desired  and  its  realisation.  In  the  primary 
stages  of  desire  for  an  object,  when  it  is  either  a  desire  on 
the  part  of  a  child  still  feeling  its  way  in  the  world,  or  desire 
for  some  object  that  has  newly  suggested  itself,  the  appre- 
hension of  the  conditions  of  its  realisation  may  be  of  the 
most  elementary  kind ;  or,  again,  the  person  desiring  may 
be  so  familiar  with  those  conditions  that  he  is  scarcely 
aware  of  his  mind  dwelling  on  them.  But  in  every  case, 
if  desire  is  consciously  directed  to  an  object,  and  if  that 
object  is  presented  as  still  unrealised  and  as  dependent  for  its 
realisation  upon  the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions  not  yet 
fulfilled— and  otherwise  it  would  be  an  object  already 
attained,  not  desired — then  a  discursive  action  of  under- 
standing among  those  conditions^  essentially  the  same  as 
that  by  which  we  learn  the  nature  of  a  matter  of  fact,  is  the 
necessary  accompaniment  of  the  desire.  To  the  extent  at 
least  of  an  apprehension  that  there  are  conditions  of  which 
the  fulfilment  is  necessary  to  the  attainment  of  the  object, 
it  is  implied  in  that  merely  inchoate  desire  (if  it  is  con- 
sciously directed  to  an  object  at  all)  which  stops  short 
of  initiating  any  actual  exertion  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
conditions.  Without  it  the  consciousness  of  distinction 
between  the  object  as  desired,  and  those  conditions  of 
reality  that  would  satisfy  the  desire,  could  not  exist. 

135.  Thus  these  two  modes  of  our  soul's  action,  desire 
and  intellect,  or  practical  thought  and  speculative  thought, 
have  not  merely  the  element  in  common  which  is  expressed 
by  the  designation  of  each  as  thought,  but,  as  has  just  been 
shown,  neither  action  can  really  be  exerted  without  calling 
the  other  into  play.  This  is  so  even  when  the  matters  of 
fact  upon  which  the  understanding  is  employed  are  such  as 
neither  have  any  bearing,  or  are  not  conceived  as  having 
any,  upon  the  improvement  of  man's  estate,  nor  make  any 
appeal  to  the  artistic  interest.  It  is  so,  again,  when  the 
object,  of  which  the  realisation  is  desired,  is  merely  the 
enjoyment  of  a  sensual  pleasure.     But  in  other  cases  the 


CH.  n]  DESIRE  AND  INTELLECT  153 

mutual  involution  of  desire  and  understanding,  of  practical 
and  speculative  thought,  is  even  more  complete.  There  are 
processes,  naturally  described  as  intellectual,  in  which  desire 
is  not  merely  involved  in  the  sense  that  the  completion  of 
the  intellectual  task  is  presented  as  an  object  which  stimu- 
lates effort;  while  on  the  other  hand  there  are  processes 
which  we  naturally  ascribe  to  desire,  but  in  which  the  intel- 
lect is  not  merely  involved  as  the  apprehension  of  that  reality 
which  the  desifed  object,  as  desired,  lacks,  or  as  the  quest 
of  means  to  its  realisation.  The  activity  of  the  artist,  not 
merely  in  the  region  which  we  call  that  of  the  fine  arts,  but 
in  any  form  affected  by  an  ideal  of  perfect  work,  from  that 
of  the  writer  of  books  to  that  of  the  craftsman,  we  naturally 
and  properly  count  intellectual.  Yet  it  is  throughout  a 
realisation  of  desire.  Of  the  mathematician  or  man  of 
science  it  may  possibly  be  held  that  he  first  thinks  of  his 
problem,  or  of  facts  not  yet  intelligible,  and  that  the  desire 
to  solve  the  problem  or  to  understand  the  facts  is  a  subse- 
quent and  distinguishable  activity.  But  with  the  artist,  of 
whatever  kind,  the  intellectual  consciousness  of  the  ideal, 
which  initiates  and  directs  his  work,  is  itself  a  desire  to 
realise  it.  An  intellectual  passion  is  our  natural  designation 
for  his  state  of  mind. 

Again,  if  we  consider  any  of  the  more  worthy  practical 
pursuits  of  men,  which,  as  is  impUed  in  calling  them 
pursuits,  are  an  expression  of  desire,  we  shall  find  not 
merely  that  implication  of  self-consciousness  in  the  presenta- 
tion of  the  object,  which  may  not  be  ignored  even  when 
the  object  is  the  enjoyment  of  some  animal  pleasure,  nor 
a  mere  sequence  of  intellectual  action  upon  previous  desire 
for  an  end ;  we  shall  find  that  the  end  itself  is  an  object  of 
understanding  no  less  than  of  desire.  It  is  only  the  fallacy 
of  taking  the  pleasure  that  ensues  on  satisfaction  of  a  desire 
to  be  the  object  of  the  desire,  which  blinds  us  to  this.  If 
the  end  of  a  man  whose  chief  interest  is  in  the  better 
management  of  an  estate,  or  the  better  drainage  of  the 
town  where  he  lives,  or  the  better  education  of  his  family, 


154  THE   WILL  [bK.  II 

6r  the  better  administration  of  justice,  were  indeed  the 
pleasure  which  he  anticipates  in  the  success  of  his  pursuit, 
it  might  be  held  that,  since  pleasure  (in  distinction  from 
the  facts  conditioning  it)  is  not  an  object  of  the  under- 
standing, the  understanding  was  not  co-operant  with  desire 
in  the  initiation  of  his  pursuit.  But,  as  has  often  been 
pointed  out,  the  possibility  of  pleasure  in  the  attainment  of 
an  object  presupposes  a  desire  directed  not  to  that  pleasure 
but  to  the  object ;  and  the  object  in  the  cases  supposed  is 
plainly  one  that  originates  in  intellectual  conception — not 
indeed  in  a  passionless  intellect,  if  there  is  such  a  thing, 
but  in  a  soul  which  desires  in  understanding  and  in  desiring 
understands.  The  same  is  true  in  regard  to  objects  of  less 
worthy,  more  selfish,  ambition.  The  applause  of  a  senate  or 
a  town-council,  the  government  of  an  empire  or  a  borough,  are 
objects  pursued  for  their  own  sake,  not  for  the  sake  either 
of  the  pleasure  of  attaining  them,  or  of  ulterior  pleasures 
to  which  they  may  be  the  means;  and  in  order  to  the 
presentation  of  such  objects  the  soul  must  understand,  in 
the  proper  and  distinctive  sense,  no  less  than  desire. 

136.  On  the  whole  matter,  then,  our  conclusion  must  be 
that  there  is  really  a  single  subject  or  agent,  which  desires 
in  all  the  desires  of  a  man,  and  thinks  in  all  his  thoughts, 
but  that  the  action  of  this  subject  as  thinking — thinking 
speculatively  or  understanding,  as  well  as  thinking  practically 
— is  involved  in  all  its  desires,  and  that  its  action  as  desiring 
is  involved  in  all  its  thoughts.  Thus  thought  and  desire 
are  not  to  be  regarded  as  separate  powers,  of  which  one 
can  be  exercised  by  us  without,  or  in  conflict  with,  the 
other.  They  are  rather  different  ways  in  which  the  con- 
sciousness of  self,  which  is  also  necessarily  consciousness  of 
a  manifold  world  other  than  self,  expresses  itself.  One  is 
the  effort  of  such  consciousness  to  take  the  world  into 
itself,  the  other  its  effort  to  carry  itself  out  into  the  world ; 
and  each  effort  is  involved  in  every  complete  spiritual  act — 
every  such  act  as  we  can  impute  to  ourselves  or  count  our 
own,  whether  on   reflection  we  ascribe  the  act  rather  to 


CH  n]  DESIRE  AND   WILL  155 

intellect  or  rather  to  desire.  If  the  '  intellectual '  act  implies 
attention — and  otherwise  we  cannot  ascribe  it  to  ourselves 
— it  implies  desire  for  the  attainment  of  an  intellectual 
result,  though  the  result  be  attained  as  quickly  as,  for 
instance,  the  meaning  of  a  sentence  in  a  familiar  language 
is  arrived  at  upon  attention  being  drawn  to  it.  If  the  desire 
is  consciously  for  an  object — and  this  again  is  the  condition 
of  its  being  imputable  to  ourselves — it  implies,  as  we  have 
seen,  an  intellectual  apprehension  at  least  of  the  difference 
between  the  object  as  desired  and  its  realisation.  In  all  the 
more  important  processes  of  desire  the  exertion  of  under- 
standing is  implied  to  a  much  more  considerable  extent, 
just  as  in  every  intellectual  achievement  of  importance 
the  action  of  desire  is  much  more  noticeable  and  protracted 
than  in  the  case  just  instanced  of  intelligent  attention  to  the 
import  of  a  proposition,  heard  or  read. 

137.  But  if  it  be  true  that  all  desire  is  the  act  of  a  subject 
which  thinks  in  desiring,  all  thought  the  act  of  a  subject 
which  desires  in  thinking,  what  is  to  be  said  of  willing? 
Any  identification  of  the  will  with  any  form  of  desire  seems 
inconsistent  with  the  apparent  fact  that  a  man  has  the 
power,  however  seldom  he  may  exercise  it,  of  wiUing  to 
resist  all  his  desires,  even  the  strongest,  and  of  acting 
accordingly.  The  existence  of  such  a  power  has  often  been 
supposed  to  be  the  condition  of  any  disinterested  perform- 
ance of  duty  ;  and  the  supposition  is  not  one  to  be  lightly 
set  aside.  Apart  from  any  such  '  transcendental '  doctrine, 
the  difference  between  desire  and  will,  it  may  be  said,  is  too 
firmly  established  in  the  experience  of  men,  as  expressed  in 
our  habitual  language  {i.e.  in  such  phrases  as  'I  should  like 
to,  but  I  won't'),  for  all  the  psychologists  to  get  over  it.  To 
identify  the  will,  again,  with  thought  or  judgment  seems  to 
imply  forgetfulness  of  the  familiar  fact  that  a  man  may  'know 
the  better  and  prefer  the  worse.'  Even  when  it  is  our  own 
action  that  is  the  object  of  thought,  our  will  as  evinced  by 
action  is  apt  not  to  correspond  with  our  thought,  with  our 


156  THE    WILL  [bK.  II 

judgment  of  what  is  best;  while  our  merely  speculative 
thoughts  seem  to  have  as  little  connexion  with  the  will  as  a 
proposition  of  pure  mathematics  has  to  do  with  the  happi- 
ness or  goodness  of  man.  Our  doctrine  that  the  entire  self- 
conscious  subject,  desiring  as  well  as  thinking,  is  concerned 
in  every  complete  intellectual  act,  and  in  every  desire  for  an 
object,  may  seem  to  increase  the  difficulty.  If  this  is  so, 
what  are  we  to  make  of  the  man  who  is  '  torn  by  conflicting 
desires ' ;  who  under  the  influence  of  one  desire  wills  to  do 
what  he  knows  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  satisfaction  of 
another  desire,  which  yet  he  strongly  feels?  What  of  the  man 
who  has  the  truest  thoughts,  not  merely  on  scientific  matters, 
but  about  the  ideal  of  virtuous  conduct — thoughts  which  on 
our  doctrine  should  involve  desires— and  who  yet  is  led  by 
desire  to  act  viciously  ? 

138.  Let  us  first  be  sure  what  we  mean  by  a  conflict  of 
desires,  and  by  the  resistance  of  the_will  to  desire.  Does  a 
man  ever  really  desire,  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  sense, 
objects  which  he  recognises  as  incompatible  with  each  other? 
Our  first  answer  will  probably  be  :  '  Yes ;  we  are  constantly 
divided  between  conflicting  desires.  This  is  the  explanation 
of  our  irresolution  before  action,  and  of  our  regrets  in  action. 
We  are  irresolute  so  long  as  the  strength  of  competing  desires 
is  evenly  matched  :  we  act  with  regret  when,  in  following  the 
desire  which  prevails,  we  are  conscious  of  foregoing  the  grati- 
fication of  another,  only  less  strong.'  But  the  question  is 
whether,  when  a  man  is  in  that  state  in  which  it  can  truly  be 
said  that  conflicting  passions  are  striving  for  the  mastery  in 
him,  he  actually  desires  an  object  at  all ;  and  whether,  con- 
versely, when  his  desire  is  consciously  directed  to  a  certain 
object,  he  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  sense  desires 
another  object,  which  is  neither  included  in  it  nor  a  means 
to  it,  but  recognised  as  incompatible  with  it.  At  any  rate,  if 
we  are  to  allow  that  in  the  divided  state  of  mind  supposed  he 
desires  an  object  at  all,  it  is  in  quite  a  different  sense  that  he 
desires  the  object  which,  when  the  scale  is  finally  turned,  he 
'  makes  up  his  mind '  to  pursue.     And,  again,  he  desires  this 


CH.  ll]  DESIRE  AND    WILL 


157 


object  for  the  time  in  quite  a  different  sense  from  that  in 
which  he  can  be  supposed  at  the  same  time  to  desire  the 
object  which  has  come  off  second  best  in  his  choice.  The 
object  of  his  final  pursuit  is  one  which  he  desires  in  the  sense 
that  for  the  time  he  identifies  himself  with  it.  Living  for 
himself  (as  he  necessarily  does)  he  lives  for  it.  The  single 
self  of  which  he  is  conscious,  the  unit  in  which  all  the  in- 
fluences of  his  life  centre,  but  which  distinguishes  itself  from 
them  all,  is  for  the  time  directed  to  making  it  real.  It  is  not 
in  this  sense  that  any  of  the  objects  are  desired,  between 
which  his  interests  are  divided  while  he  is  in  the  state  of 
irresolution.  If  it  were,  there  would  be  no  suspense  of 
action.  Nor  is  it  thus  that  the  objects  are  desired  of  which 
he  is  still  aware  as  having  attractions  for  him  after  he  has 
made  up  his  mind  to  pursue  another  incompatible  object. 
If  it  were,  he  would  not  be  pursuing  the  other. 

139.  There  are  two  familiar  ways  of  dealing  with  the 
distinction  here  pointed  out.  It  may  be  said  {a)  that  the 
difference  between  the  sense  in  which  a  man  desires  sundry 
incompatible  objects,  when  he  cannot  make  up  his  mind 
between  them,  and  the  sense  in  which  he  finally  desires  the 
object  of  his  ultimate  preference,  is  merely  that  in  the  latter 
case  one  of  the  competing  desires  has  become  stronger  than 
all  the  rest.  The  man  may  be  supposed  still  to  continue  to 
desire  any  of  the  objects  which  he  does  not  pursue,  just  in 
the  same  way  as  he  desires  the  object  which  he  does  prefer 
and  pursue  at  the  very  time  that  he  prefers  the  latter.  The 
difference  may  be  held  to  lie  merely  in  the  strength  of  the 
several  desires ;  the  satisfaction  of  the  strongest,  when  the 
incompatibility  of  their  several  objects  has  become  apparent, 
being  that  which  is  finally  pursued.  It  may  be  said  {b)  that 
the  difference  pointed  out  is  just  that  between  desire  and 
will.  The  desires  between  which  we  have  supposed  a  man 
to  be  suspended,  it  may  be  argued,  are  desires  properly  so 
called,  while  the  '  desire '  with  which  he  pursues  the  object 
to  which  his  preference  is  finally  given,  is  not  properly  desire 
but  will.    Thus  any  of  the  objects  which  he  desired  in  the 


158  THE   WILL  [bk.  11 

State  of  irresolution  he  may  continue  to  desire  when  his  mind 
is  made  up,  though  his  will  is  otherwise  directed. 

140.  Neither  of  these  views  can  be  quite  accepted.  If 
we  are  to  admit  that  the  man,  suspended  for  the  time 
between  desires  of  which  he  knows  the  several  satisfactions 
to  be  incompatible,  desires  incompatible  objects,  instead  of 
rather  saying  that  for  the  time  he  desires  no  object  at  all, 
since  he  does  not  seek  to  realise  the  idea  of  any  object ;  at 
any  rate  the  inward  relation  of  the  man  towards  the  incom- 
patible objects,  between  which  his  desires  are  divided,  is 
wholly  different  from  his  relation  towards  that  which  he 
finally  prefers.  His  relation  towards  the  latter,  again,  is 
wholly  different  from  his  relation  towards  that  which  he  is 
supposed  still  to  desire  though  not  to  pursue.  And  this 
difference  is  not  appropriately  described  as  one  between 
different  degrees  of  strength  of  desire. 

We  will  suppose  a  man  divided  between  hatred  of  a  rival 
whom  he  has  opportunity  of  injuring,  and  some  sense  of 
duty  (however  that  is  to  be  explained),  or  fear  of  conse- 
quences, which  inclines  him  to  do  to  his  rival  as  he  would 
be  done  by.  Here  is  a  conflict  of  passions  or  emotions  by 
which  the  man,  so  far  as  any  action  towards  his  rival  goes, 
is  for  the  time  paralysed.  Hatred  of  his  rival  stirs  him,  the 
idea  of  doing  the  magnanimous  thing  attracts  him,  fear  of 
discredit  deters  him,  but  the  total  effect  of  these  influences 
is  not  such  that  any  definite  object  of  desire  presents  itself 
to  him  of  which  he  se^ks  the  realisation.  We  will  suppose 
that  some  fresh  provocation  intensifies  the  hatred,  that  he 
finally  gives  way  to  it  and  does  the  wrong  from  which  he 
had  previously  abstained;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  that  by 
some  bright  example  or  some  warning  voice  the  counter 
influences  are  strengthened,  and  that  he  does  a  service,  or 
at  least  an  act  of  justice,  to  the  rival.  In  neither  case  is  the 
result  truly  described  by  saying  that  the  desire  which  the 
action  represents  is  simply  the  continuation,  in  greater  rela- 
tive strength,  of  one  among  several  which  were  previously 
competing  in  the  man.   It  differs  in  kind  from  the  competing 


CH.  Il]  DESIRE  AND   WILL  159 

influences.  It  is  what  none  of  them  were  while  competing, 
what  none  of  them  are,  so  far  as  any  of  them  survive  along 
with  it.  It  implies,  as  did  none  of  them,  the  presentation  of 
an  object  with  which  the  man  for  the  time  identifies  himself 
or  his  good,  and  a  consequent  effort  to  realise  this  object. 
However  connected  with  an  intensification  of  one  of  the 
previously  competing  passions,  it  is  a  distinctly  new  motive, 
arising  out  of  a  changed  relation  of  the  man  himself  to  the 
competing  passions.  He  now,  as  he  did  not  before,  con- 
sciously directs  himself  to  the  realisation  of  a  desired  object. 
If  he  desired  before,  it  is  at  any  rate  in  another  way  that  he 
desires  now. 

141.  This  is  equally  the  case,  whether  the  object  for  which 
he  acts  is  that  suggested  by  his  hatred  or  that  suggested  by 
his  conscience.  When  it  is  the  pure  desire  to  do  the  nobler 
thing,  or  this  as  reinforced  by  fear  of  discredit,  that  governs 
the  man's  final  conduct,  the  impropriety  of  treating  it  as  a 
continuation  of  one  of  the  previously  competing  passions, 
which  has  finally  gained  superior  strength,  is  most  apparent. 
The  disturbance  of  the  inner  life,  caused  by  such  passion  as 
hatred  or  love,  is  so  marked  in  comparison  with  such  an 
emotion  as  a  sense  of  duty  or  fear  of  discredit,  that  to  speak 
of  the  latter  as  prevalent  in  virtue  of  its  superior  strength  as 
^  passion  strikes  us  at  once  as  unreal.  It  is  accordingly  to 
the  example  of  virtuous  resolution,  maintained  in  spite  of 
some  violent  passion,  that  the  appeal  is  commonly  made  by 
those  who  would  distinguish  will  from  strongest  desire.  And 
the  distinction  is  a  true  one,  if  it  means  that  the  motive  ex- 
pressed in  a  man's  action  differs  in  kind,  and  not  merely  in 
degree  of  strength,  from  passions  of  which  the  competition 
suspends  his  action  or  with  which  he  has  to  struggle  when 
he  finally  acts.  But  the  distinction  holds  good  just  as  much 
if,  in  the  case  supposed,  the  man  finally  acts  to  gratify  his 
hatred,  to  realise  the  idea  of  crushing  his  rival,  as  if  he  takes 
the  opposite  course.  Between  the  man's  state  of  mind  while 
his  hatred  is  merely  a  competing  passion,  and  his  state  of 
tnind  when  acting  for  the  gratification  of  his  hatred,  the 


l6o  THE   WILL  [bk.  n 

difference  does  not  lie  in  the  degree  of  strength  attained  by 
the  hatred,  but  in  the  fact  that  in  the  latter  state  the  gratifi- 
cation of  the  hatred  has  become  what  it  was  not  in  the 
former,  an  object  which  the  man  seeks  to  realise,  one  which 
for  the  time  he  has  made  his  good. 

142.  The  distinction,  then,  between  '  desires '  of  which 
the  competition  suspends  action,  and  the  '  desire '  which 
expresses  itself  in  a  morally  imputable  action— visible  or 
invisible,  overt  or  only  intended — is  not  to  be  understood 
as  lying  in  the  greater  relative  strength  of  the  latter.  Rather, 
if  the  term  'desire'  is  to  be  employed  in  both  cases,  it  should 
be  understood  that  it  is  used  in  different  senses,  for  in  the 
one  case  the  man  consciously  directs  himself  to  the  realisa- 
tion of  an  ideal  object  (though  perhaps  not  so  as  to  commit 
an  '  overt  act '),  in  the  other  he  does  not  so  direct  himself. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  we  say,  according  to  the  second  view 
(p)  mentioned  above,  that  the  final  preference,  represented 
by  the  actual  pursuit  of  an  object  after  an  interval  of  sus- 
pense between  competing  passions,  is  not  a  desire  but  an 
act  of  will,  we  must  say  the  same  of  the  actual  pursuit  of  an 
object,  even  though  there  has  been  no  previous  suspense  or 
conflict  of  desires.  There  is  nothing  in  the  fact  that  the 
direction  of  the  man's  powers  to  the  realisation  of  an  object 
in  one  case  supervenes  upon  a  period  of  divided  mind,  and 
in  another  case  does  not,  to  justify  us  in  acscribing  it  to 
desire  in  the  latter  case  if  we  do  not  in  the  former.  Yet 
when  a  man  sets  himself  to  gain  the  love  of  a  woman  or  to 
save  a  friend's  life,  without  another  course  of  action  sug- 
gesting itself  to  him  as  possible,  who  would  question  that 
he  desired  the  object  or  that  his  action  was  an  expression 
of  desire  ?  But  if  the  principle  of  action  is  desire  in  such 
cases,  why  should  the  fact  of  its  being  accompanied  by  the 
consciousness  of  a  gratification,  otherwise  possible,  having 
been  forgone,  or  the  fact  that,  before  it  was  in  operation  as 
a  principle  of  action,  the  man  was  for  a  time  divided 
between  the  attractions  of  different  objects,  make  it  any  the 
less  desire  in  those  cases  where  it  is  supposed  to  be  dis' 


CH.ll]  DESIRE  AND   WILL  l6l 

tinctively  '  will '  ?  If,  however,  it  is  thus  difficult  to  suppose 
the  principle  of  action  to  be  a  will  which  is  not  desire,  in 
the  case  of  an  action  which  follows  upon  an  interval  of 
divided  mind,  it  is  equally  difficult  to  regard  it  as  a  desire 
which  is  not  a  will  in  the  contrasted  case,  that  of  the  man 
who  is  said  to  act  upon  impulse.  If  in  such  a  case,  being 
constrained  to  admit  that  the  action  proceeds  from  desire, 
we  persist  in  our  opposition  between  desire  and  will,  we 
shall  have  to  say  that  it  is  not  willed.  And  it  will  follow 
that,  just  so  far  as  a  man  is  '  single-minded,'  he  has  no  will ; 
that  the  voluptuary  who  has  no  scruples,  the  saint  who  has 
no  temptations,  the  enthusiast  who  never  hesitates,  are  so 
far  involuntary  agents. 

143.  The  reader  may  here  fairly  object,  with  some  im- 
patience, that  we  have  had  enough  of  disputation  about  the 
mere  usage  of  the  terms  desire  and  will.  We  no  doubt 
often  use  the  term  '  desire '  for  impulses  or  inward  solicita- 
tions of  which  the  man  is  conscious,  but  which  do  not 
amount  to  a  conscious  direction  of  himself  to  the  realisation 
of  an  object  imagined  or  conceived.  We  say  that  a  man 
desires  what  his  will  rejects.  But  we  represent  such  a  state 
of  the  case  quite  as  naturally  by  saying  that,  although  such 
and  such  objects  have  attractions  for  the  man,  yet  on  the 
whole  he  does  not  desire  them  but  only  the  object  for  which 
he  acts.  On  the  other  hand,  though  we  now  most  com- 
monly apply  the  term  'will'  to  the  direction  of  the  conscious 
self  to  action,  as  opposed  to  a  mere  wish  not  amounting  to 
such  direction,  yet  the  usage  has  been  by  no  means  uniform. 
'  My  poverty  but  not  my  will  consents,'  says  the  seller  of 
poisons  in  '  Romeo  and  Juliet.'  Here  the  consent,  though 
said  not  to  be  of  the  will,  might  have  been  enough  to  hang 
for.  The  will  is  only  the  strong  competing  wish  which  does 
not  suffice  to  determine  action.  Compare  the  outburst  of 
St.  Paul,  as  rendered  in  our  authorised  translation, — 'To 
will  is  present  with  me,  but  how  to  perform  that  which  is 
good  I  find  not.'  But  though  we  cannot  fix  the  usage  of 
words,  it  is  clear  that  the  important  real  distinction  is  that 

M 


l63  THE   WILL  [bk.II 

between  the  direction  of  the  self-conscious  self  to  the  real- 
isation of  an  object,  its  identification  of  itself  with  that 
object,  on  the  one  side  (whether  that  direction  and  identifi- 
cation does  or  does  not  supervene  upon  a  previous  period 
of  indecision,  is  or  is  not  accompanied  by  the  consciousness 
of  attraction  in  an  object  other  than  that  pursued),  and,  on 
the  other  side,  the  mere  solicitations  of  which  a  man  is 
conscious,  but  with  none  of  which  he  so  identifies  himself 
as  to  make  the  soliciting  object  his  object — the  object  of 
his  self-seeking — or  to  direct  himself  to  its  realisation. 

144.  When  it  is  urged,  therefore,  that  the  will  often  con- 
flicts with  and  overcomes  a  man's  desires — even  if  it  be  not 
necessary  in  order  to  constitute  a  will,  as  sometimes  seems 
to  be  supposed,  that  there  should  be  such  a  conflict  with 
desire — and  that  an  act  of  will  therefore  must  be  other  than 
a  desire,  we  answer,  Certainly  it  is  other  than  any  such 
desire  as  those  which  it  is  said  to  overcome.  But  it  is  not 
other  than  desire  iq  that  sense  in  which  desire  is  ever  the 
principle  or  motive  of  an  imputable  human  action,  of  an 
action  that  has  any  moral  quality,  good  or  bad,  that  can 
properly  be  rewarded  or  punished,  or  is  fit  matter  for 
praise  or  blame.  It  is  not  necessary  to  such  an  action  that 
there  should  be  any  overt  effect,  of  which  other  men  can 
take  note.  Morally  the  action  of  a  man  who  has  made  up 
his  mind  to  sacrifice  himself  for  his  friend  or  to  commit 
a  murder  is  the  same  though  he  be  accidentally  disabled 
before  either  the  good  resolution  or  the  bad  one,  as  the 
case  may  be,  has  taken  effect.  The  essential  thing  morally 
is  the  man's  direction  of  himself  to  the  realisation  of  a  con- 
ceived or  imagined  object,  whether  circumstances  allow  of 
its  issuing  in  outward  action,  action  that  affects  the  senses 
of  other  people,  or  no. 

It  would  be  a  forced  restriction  of  the  term  desire  to 
refuse  to  apply  it  to  such  direction  of  the  self;  but  unless 
we  so  restrict  it,  there  is  no  ground  for  holding  that  will  is 
other  than  desire.  The  'desire'  which  is  motive  to  the 
man  who  barters  his  heritage  for  a  mess  of  pottage,  differs 


CH.  It]  DESIRE  AND   WILL  163 

no  doubt  in  its  object  from  the  'will'  of  the  man  who 
sacrifices  his  inclinations  in  adhering  to  a  rule  of  abstinence 
which  he  has  imposed  on  himself ;  but  in  the  same  respect 
it  differs  from  the  '  desire '  or  '  impulse '  of  a  man  who  swims 
the  Hellespont  to  see  his  mistress ;  just  as,  again,  the  '  will ' 
described  in  the  above  instance  differs  in  object  from  the 
'will'  of  the  man  who,  upon  cool  calculation,  sacrifices 
natural  affection  in  order  to  get  a  better  position  in  the  world. 
In  each  of  these  cases  the  principle  of  action  is  different  in 
respect  of  its  object,  but  this  is  a  difference  to  which,  as  we 
see,  the  distinction  in  the  usage  of  the  terms  '  desire '  and 
'  will '  does  not  correspond ;  and,  apart  from  the  difference 
of  object,  there  is  no  difference  between  the  principles  of 
action  in  the  several  cases.  Where  it  is  described  as  will  it 
is  equally  desire ;  where  it  is  described  as  desire  or  impulse 
it  is  equally  will.  But  whether  described  as  desire  or  as 
will,  it  is  wholly  different  in  its  relation  to  the  subject — to 
the  man  willing  or  desiring — from  such  desires  as  are  said 
to  compete  for  mastery  in  the  man,  or  from  any  desire  that 
he  retains  when  consciously  acting  in  a  way  incompatible 
with  its  gratification.  It  is  an  expression  or  utterance  of 
the  man,  as  he  for  the  time  is.  It  begins  from  him,  from 
his  self-conscious  self.  These  other  'desires'  end  where  it 
begins,  viz.  in  this  self.  They  are  influences  or  tendencies 
by  which  the  man,  the  self,  is  affected,  not  a  motion 
proceeding  from  him.  They  tend  to  move  him,  but  he 
does  not  move  in  them ;  and  none  of  them  actually  moves 
him  unless  the  man  takes  it  into  himself,  identifies  himself 
with  it,  in  a  way  which  wholly  alters  it  from  what  it  was  as 
a  mere  influence  affecting  him. 

145.  The  objection  to  saying  that  will  is  merely  a  strongest 
desire  is  that,  as  it  is  apt  to  be  understood,  it  leads  to  this 
difference  being  ignored.  It  is  taken  to  imply  that  the 
principle  of  a  man's  action  is  no  more  than  one  of  the  in- 
fluences to  which  the  man  in  his  inner  life  is  susceptible  — 
that  one  which,  under  the  conditions  of  the  moment,  or 
upon  consideration  of   the   circumstances,   becomes   the 

M  2 


164  THE   WILL  [bk.  ir 

strongest.  In  truth  it  is  never  any  or  all  of  these,  however 
much  it  may  be  affected  by  them,  but  a  self-distinguishing 
and  self-realising  consciousness,  through  which,  as  a  trans- 
forming medium,  these  influences  must  pass  before  they 
can  take  effect  in  a  moral  action  at  all.  Just  as  each  of  us  is 
constantly  having  sensations  which  do  not  amount  to  percep- 
tions, make  no  lodgment  in  the  cosmos  of  our  experience, 
add  nothing  to  our  knowledge,  because  not  gathered  into 
the  focus  of  self-consciousness  and  through  it  referred  to 
objects  or  determined  by  relation  to  each  other ;  so  there 
are  impulses  constantly  at  work  in  a  man — the  result  of 
his  organisation,  of  habits  (his  own  or  his  ancestors'),  of 
external  excitement,  &c. — of  which  he  is  more  or  less  aware 
according  to  the  degree  to  which  their  antagonism  to  each 
other  calls  attention  to  them,  but  which  yet  do  not  amount 
to  principles  of  imputable  action,  or  to  desires  of  which  it 
is  sought  to  realise  the  objects,  because  the  self-seeking, 
self-determining  person  has  not  identified  himself  with  any 
of  them.  It  is  such  impulses  alone  that  are  properly  said 
to  compete  for  mastery  in  a  man  before  his  determination 
to  act,  and  that  may  survive  along  with  an  enacted  desire 
that  represents  none  of  them.  The  'strongest  desire'  or 
will  which  is  realised  in  act  is  not  one  of  them  nor  co- 
ordinate with  them,  though  apart  from  them  it  would  not 
be.  It  is  a  new  principle  that  supervenes  upon  them 
through  the  self-conscious  subject's  identification  of  itself 
with  one  of  them,  just  as  a  perception  is  not  a  sensation  or 
congeries  of  sensations,  but  supervenes  upon  certain  sensa- 
tions through  a  man's  attending  to  them,  i.  e.  through  his 
taking  them  into  self-consciousness  and  determining  them, 
as  in  it,  by  relation  to  others  of  its  contents. 

148.  A  man,  we  will  suppose,  is  acted  on  at  once  by  an 
impulse  to  avenge  an  affront,  by  a  bodily  want,  by  a  call  of 
duty,  and  by  fear  of  certain  results  incidental  to  his  avenging 
the  affront  or  obeying  the  call  of  duty.  We  will  suppose 
further  that  each  passion  (to  use  the  most  general  term) 
suggests  a  different  line  of  action.    So  long  as  he  is  uti- 


CH.ll]  DESIRE  AND   WILL  165 

decided  how  to  act,  all  are,  in  a  way,  external  to  him.  He 
presents  them  to  himself  as  influences  by  which  he  is 
consciously  affected  but  which  are  not  he,  and  with  none  of 
which  he  yet  identifies  himself;  or,  to  vary  the  expression, 
as  tendencies  to  different  objects,  none  of  which  is  yet  his 
object.  So  long  as  this  state  of  things  continues,  no  moral 
effect  ensues.  It  ensues  when  the  man's  relation  to  these 
influences  is  altered  by  his  identifying  himself  with  one  of 
them,  by  his  taking  the  object  of  one  of  the  tendencies 
as  for  the  time  his  good.  This  is  to  will,  and  is  in  itself 
moral  action,  though  circumstances  may  prevent  its  issuing 
in  that  sensible  effect  which  we  call  an  overt  act.  But  in 
the  act  of  will  the  man  does  not  cease  to  desire.  Rather  he, 
the  man,  for  the  first  time  desires,  having  not  done  so  while 
divided  between  the  conflicting  influences.  His  willing  is  not 
a  continuation  of  any  of  those  desires,  if  they  are  to  be  so 
called,  that  were  previously  acting  upon  him.  It  is  that  which 
none  of  these  had  yet  become ;  a  desire  in  which  the  man 
enacts  himself,  as  distinct  from  one  which  acts  upon  him. 
Whether  its  object— the  object  to  which  the  moral  action  is 
directed — be  the  attainment  of  revenge,  or  the  satisfaction 
of  a  bodily  want,  or  the  fulfilment  of  a  call  of  duty,  it  has 
equally  this  characteristic.  The  object  is  one  which  for  the 
time  the  man  identifies  with  himself,  so  that  in  being  deter- 
mined by  it  he  is  consciously  determined  by  himself. 

147.  It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to  that  putting  forth  of 
the  man  or  self  in  desire  which  constitutes  an  act  of  will, 
that  there  should  have  been  beforehand  any  conscious  pre- 
sentation of  competing  objects  of  desire,  with  consequent 
deliberation  as  to  which  should  be  pursued.  When  a  man 
acts  'impulsively'  or  according  to  a  settled  habit,  without 
contemplating  the  possibility  of  a  motive  that  might  lead 
him  to  another  sort  of  action,  it  is  still  only  through  the 
self-seeking  and  self-distinguishing  self  that  the  inducement, 
or  influence,  or  tendency,  becomes  a  principle  of  action. 
In  such  a  case  the  man  makes  the  object,  which  the  passion 
■or  habit  suggests,  his  own,  and  sets  himself  to  realise  it,  just 


l66  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

as  much  as  in  the  case  where  he  contemplates  alternatives. 
The  evidence  of  this  is  his  self-imputation  of  the  act  upon 
reflection.  He  may  make  excuses  for  it,  should  there  be 
occasion  to  do  so,  on  the  ground  of  the  strength  of  the 
inducement,  but  these  very  excuses  witness  that  he  is  con- 
scious of  himself  as  other  than  the  inducements  and  influ- 
ences of  which  he  pleads  the  strength,  and  conscious  that  it 
is  not  from  them,  but  from  himself  as  affected  by  them,  that 
the  action  proceeds.  When  the  case  is  otherwise,  when  he 
is  conscious  of  having  really  been  but  an  instrument  in  doing 
what  he  did,  he  does  not  make  excuses  but  explains  the  fact. 
So  much  for  the  opposition,  sometimes  alleged,  between 
will  and  desire.  It  must  be  admitted  that  an  act  of  will  is 
never  mere  desire,  never  a  desire  which  has  been  in  conflict 
with  other  co-ordinate  desires  and  has  come  out  the  strongest, 
if  in  speaking  of  such  desire  we  suppose  abstraction  to  be 
made  of  the  action  of  a  self-determining  self  upon  and  within 
it.  But  in  this  there  lies  no  difference  between  will  and  any 
other  principle  of  moral  or  human  or  imputable,  as  distinct 
from  merely  animal,  action ;  for  mere  desire,  of  that  kind 
to  which  will  can  properly  be  opposed,  never  amounts  to 
such  a  principle.  The  true  distinction  lies  between  passions 
as  influences  affecting  a  man — among  which  we  may  include 
'mere  desires,'  if  we  please — and  the  man  as  desiring,  or 
putting  himself  forth  in  desire  for  the  realisation  of  some  object 
present  to  him  in  idea,  which  is  the  same  thing  as  willing. 

148.  The  recognised  opposition  between  Will  and  Intellect 
stands  on  a  different  footing.  We  have  already  pointed  out 
that,  though  a  man  in  desiring  (in  the  sense  of  consciously 
directing  himself  to  the  realisation  of  objects)  necessarily 
exercises  intellect,  and  in  exercising  intellect  desires,  yet 
such  desire  and  such  speculative  thought  are  differently 
directed  activities  of  the  self-conscious  subject.  It  is  to  be 
remembered  further  that  the  understanding  employed  in 
the  exercise  of  desire  relates  to  the  desired  object  and  to 
the  conditions  of  its  realisation,  while  the  desire  involved  in 


CH.  Il]  INTELLECT  AND    WILL  167 

a  process  of  thinking  has  for  its  object  the  completion  of 
that  process.  It  is  therefore  not  to  the  purpose  to  insist  on 
the  obvious  fact  that  a  man  morally  excellent,  in  the  sense 
that  his  desires  are  habitually  directed  to  good  practical 
objects,  may  be  '  stupid,'  unskilled,  and  uninterested  in  the 
exercise  of  intellect  on  all  matters  of  literature,  science,  and 
art,  as  well  as  lacking  in  power  of  expression  upon  the 
matters  in  which  he  is  interested ;  or  conversely,  that  a  man 
whose  thoughts  are  habitually  occupied,  and  occupied  to 
great  effect,  in  the  region  of  hterature,  science,  and  art,  may 
be  deficient  in  moral  interests.  From  a  certain  point  of 
view,  no  doubt,  this  apparent  discrepancy  between  moral 
interests  or  objects,  and  those  of  the  artist  and  the  man  of 
science  or  letters,  presents  a  serious  difficulty.  If  we  were 
forming  a  theory  of  the  universe,  or  trying  to  regard  the 
facts  of  human  nature  and  history  as  the  realisation  of  one 
idea  (and  the  effort  thoroughly  to  understand  them  doubtless 
implies  such  an  attempt),  then  it  would  be  a  necessary 
problem  to  show  that  these  seemingly  discrepant  interests 
and  objects  have  some  ultimate  point  of  meeting.  Our 
present  concern,  however,  is  with  the  individual  conscious- 
ness and  its  objects— the  objects  of  this  or  that  man,  as  he 
is  actually  conscious  of  them,  not  as  they  may  be  combined 
with  other  objects  in  an  idea  which  is  not  consciously  his 
though  it  may  be  operative  in  him. 

For  the  consciousness  of  the  individual  the  direction  of 
himself  to  such  objects  as,  e.g.,  the  settlement  of  a  vexed 
question  in  philology,  or  the  perfect  rendering  of  certain 
atmospheric  effects  in  landscape  painting,  has  nothing  in 
common  with  the  direction  of  himself  to  such  objects  as,  e.g.^ 
the  discipline  of  his  own  tongue,  or  the  promotion  of  sobriety 
among  his  neighbours.  It  is  easy  indeed  to  see  that,  even 
within  the  experience  and  sphere  of  action  of  the  individual, 
interests  of  the  one  kind  are  not  without  a  bearing — at  any 
rate  in  the  result — on  interests  of  the  other  kind.  The  effect 
of  'moral'  interests  appears  in  habits  without  which  the 
scholar  or  artist  is  not  properly  free  for  his  work,  nor  exempt 


l68  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

from  the  temptation  to  be  showy  instead  of  thorough  in  it. 
Conversely,  the  effect  of  scientific  and  artistic  interests  may 
be  to  neutralise  to  some  extent  the  attractions  which  com- 
pete most  actively  with  reverence  for  moral  law  and  devotion 
to  the  service  of  men.  There  is  also  such  a  thing  as  a  con- 
sciousness of  the  ultimate  unity  of  all  pursuits  that  contribute 
to  the  perfection  of  man,  which  may  import  a  certain  enthu- 
siasm of  humanity  into  the  devotion  with  which  the  scholar 
or  artist  applies  himself  to  his  immediate  object,  and  which 
may  keep  the  practical  mind  open  to  interests  in  literature 
and  art.  Still  the  immediate  difference,  for  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  individual,  between  the  kinds  of  object  distin- 
tinguished  is  such  that  the  employment  of  thought  upon 
objects  of  a  non-practical  kind,  though  it  necessarily  carries 
with  it  a  direction  of  desire  to  the  realisation  of  the  intel- 
lectual ideal,  may  very  well  go  along  with  an  absence  of 
desire  for  the  realisation  of  any  moral  ideal ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  direction  of  desire  to  the  latter  object,  though 
it  necessarily  implies  an  exercise  of  intellect  in  the  concep- 
tion of  the  moral  object  and  of  the  conditions  of  its  attain- 
ment, may  very  well  go  along  with  a  want  of  inclination  to 
think,  and  of  ability  to  think  well,  about  other  things. 

149.  It  is  clear  then  that  a  particular  act  of  will  does  not, 
on  the  part  of  the  person  willing,  involve  thought  except 
about  the  object  of  the  act  of  will— such  thought  as  is 
implied  in  the  conception  of  self,  of  an  object  present  to  the 
self  in  idea  as  desired,  of  a  world  in  which  that  object  awaits 
realisation,  of  conditions  under  which  it  is  to  be  realised. 
Now  when  we  oppose  thinking  and  willing,  we  may  have 
in  view  the  distinction  between  the  speculative  and  the 
practical  employment  of  the  human  spirit,  the  distinction 
between  its  work  as  directed  to  that  discovery  of  relations 
between  existing  things  which  enables  it  to  regard  them  as 
one,  and  its  work  as  bringing  conceived  or  imagined  objects 
into  real  existence.  This  is  a  valid  distinction,  though  it 
must  be  borne  in  mind,  as  previously  pointed  out,  that  the 
speculative  employment  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  willing 


CH.  Il]  INTELLECT  AND    WILL  169 

— for  we  only  find  unity  in  the  world  because  we  have  an 
idea  that  it  is  there,  an  idea  which  we  direct  our  powers  to 
realise — and  that  throughout  any  practical  process  ideas 
operate  and  are  operated  upon  (to  use  the  most  general 
expression)  in  a  manner  which  we  should  describe  as  thought, 
if  the  term  had  not  come  to  be  specially  associated  with  the 
speculative  exercise  of  thought.  But  if  this  is  the  distinction 
that  we  have  in  view  when  we  oppose  thinking  and  willing, 
it  is  improper  to  say  that  mere  thinking  is  not  willing,  or  that 
willing  is  more  than  thinking.  Speculation  and  moral  action 
are  co-ordinate  employments  of  the  same  self-conscious  soul, 
and  of  the  same  powers  of  that  soul,  only  differently  directed. 
Speculative  thinking  is  not  an  element  of  moral  action, 
requiring  the  addition  of  something  else  to  constitute  moral 
action.  But  when  we  say  that  mere  thinking  is  not  willing, 
we  imply  that  the  thinking  of  which  we  speak  does  stand  in 
this  relation  to  moral  action — that  some  complementary 
element  needs  to  be  added  to  it  in  order  to  constitute  moral 
action.  And  of  the  speculative  exercise  of  thought  this  is 
not  true. 

150.  If  then  the  proposition  in  question  is  to  be  to  the 
purpose  at  all,  it  must  relate  to  such  thinking  as  is  involved 
in  or  presupposed  by  an  act  of  will.  If  we  say,  e.g.,  that 
the  act  of  willing  to  pay  a  debt  is  more  than  mere  thinking, 
what  we  wish  to  point  out  is  certainly  not  that  thinking 
about  a  mathematical  theorem  is  not  equivalent  to  willing 
to  pay  the  debt.  We  probably  mean  to  say  that  the  mere 
thinking  about  paying  the  debt  falls  short  of  willing  to  pay 
it.  But  here  our  rejoinder  will  be  that  this  depends  on 
what  we  mean  by  the  thinking.  If  thinking  about  payment 
of  the  debt  means  merely  an  otiose  contemplation  of  a 
possible  event,  the  proposition  may  be  true  but  is  little 
to  the  purpose.  Such  thought  does  not  amount  to  either 
of  those  activities  of  the  thinking  self  which  have  been 
described  above.  Just  as  sensuous  impressions  are  con- 
stantly occurring  to  us  which  tell  us  nothing,  suggest 
nothing,  because  they  do  not  fit  into  any  context  of  ideas. 


170  THE   WILL  [bk.  II 

SO  ideas  are  constantly,  as  we  say,  passing  through  our 
minds  without  forming  part  of  any  process  of  thought 
speculative  or  practical,  as  defined  by  reference  to  an  end. 
The  possibility  of  paying  his  debts  may  thus  pass  through 
the  mind  of  the  debtor  without  really  amounting  to  an 
object  of  thought  at  all,  either  in  the  sense  in  which  a  fact 
that  I  am  trying  to  understand,  or  that  I  am  applying  to 
other  facts  in  order  to  understand  them,  is  an  object  of 
thought,  or  in  the  sense  in  which  an  understanding  that 
interests  me  is  so.  At  any  rate  the  object  thought  of  in 
such  thinking,  such  otiose  contemplation,  is  not  the  object 
willed  in  the  will  to  pay  the  debt.  The  object  thought  of 
is  a  possible  occurrence — an  object  of  speculative  thought, 
if  of  thought  at  all.  The  man  presents  to  himself  the  pay- 
ment of  his  debt  as  an  event  that  may  happen,  with  its 
various  incidents.  But  it  is  not  such  a  possible  event  that 
a  man  wills  in  willing  to  pay  the  debt.  To  will  an  event, 
as  distinguished  from  an  act,  is  a  contradiction.  The  object 
willed  is  the  realisation  of  an  idea — an  idea  of  relief  from 
annoyance,  of  satisfying  one's  neighbours'  expectations,  of 
what  self-respect  requires,  or  of  a  good  in  which  all  these 
ends  are  included. 

151.  Thus,  though  such  an  object  of  thought  as  the 
possible  event  of  the  debt  being  paid  is  not  the  object 
willed,  the  object  willed  is  yet  an  object  of  thought.  There 
is  always  thinking  in  willing.  A  thoughtless  will  would  be 
no  will.  Without  the  thought  of  self  and  a  world  as 
mutually  determined,  of  an  object  present  to  the  self  in 
a  desire  felt  by  it,  but  awaiting  realisation  in  the  world, 
there  would  be  no  will  but  only  blind  impulse.  Even  in 
cases  where  the  will  is  said  to  be  governed  by  animal 
appetite,  it  is  still  the  realisation  of  an  idea  that  is  the 
object  willed.  The  pleasure  incidental  to  the  gratification 
of  the  appetite  exists  ideally  or  in  anticipation  for  me,  and 
what  I  will  is  the  realisation  of  this  idea.  Otherwise  it 
would  be  no  longer  /  that  did  the  act,  but  an  appetite 
dwelling  in  me.     The  act  would  not  be  mine ;  I  should  not 


CH.  IlJ  INTELLECT  AND   WILL  171 

impute  it  to  myself,  any  more  than,  e.g.,  an  operation  which 
I  find  the  animal  system  has  performed  while  I  have  been 
asleep.  But  if  in  all  cases  of  willing  the  -object  willed  is 
the  realisation  of  an  idea,  the  object  of  will  is  also  an 
object  of  thought.  It  is  only  for  a  subject  which  thinks, 
and  so  far  as  thinking,  that  it  can  exist. 

The  question  accordingly  arises  whether  thinking,  of  the 
kind  which  is  thus  essential  to  willing,  can  properly  be 
regarded  as  merely  depart  of,  or  an  element  in,  willing,  to 
which  something  must  be  added  in  order  to  constitute  an 
act  of  will.  Unless  this  is  so,  the  proposition  that  viere 
thinking  is  not  willing,  that  willing  is  more  than  thinking, 
conveys  a  false  impression.  And  it  would  seem  not  to  be 
so.  The  act  of  willing  is  not  in  part  one  of  thinking.  It  is 
an  act  of  thought,  though  not  of  thought  speculatively 
directed,  wholly  and  throughout.  There  is  no  factor  or 
element  in  it  separable  (except  verbally)  from  thought,  and 
of  which  the  addition  to  thought  makes  up  the  whole  called 
an  act  of  will.  Is  it  not,  we  may  perhaps  ask,  the  addition 
of  desire  to  thought  that  constitutes  will  ?  But  the  answer 
must  be.  No,  will  is  not  thought //««  desire.  Desire  of  the 
kind  which  enters  into  willing  involves  thought ;  thought  of 
the  kind  which  enters  into  willing  involves  desire ;  for  the 
desire  is  the  direction  of  a  self-conscious  subject  to  the 
realisation  of  an  idea,  while  the  thought  is  the  presence  of 
an  idea  in  such  a  subject  impelling  to  its  own  realisation. 
We  cannot  say  that  the  thought  is  separate  from  the  desire 
and  supervenes  upon  it,  or  that  the  desire  is  so  related  to 
the  thought. 

152,  The  notion  of  their  being  separate  elements  which 
together  make  up  an  act  of  will  arises  from  thought  and 
desire  being  severally  supposed  to  be  something  which,  as 
in  will,  they  are  not.  We  have  already  seen  that  when,  on 
the  one  hand,  different  desires  are  said  to  compete  for 
mastery  in  a  man,  or  when  it  is  said  that  one  object  is 
desired  but  another  willed,  and  when,  on  the  other  hand, 
a  moral  action  is  said  to  proceed  from  or  represent  some 


172  THE    WILL  [bk.  II 

desire,  'desire'  is  being  used  in  different  senses.  In  one 
sense  it  means  desire  as  it  affects  a  man,  in  the  other  the 
desire  which  proceeds  from  a  man  or  in  which  he  expresses 
himself.  Desire  of  the  one  sort  ends  where  the  other 
begins,  viz.  in  the  direction  of  the  man's  self  to  an  object. 
In  the  one  case  he  does,  in  the  other  he  does  not,  put 
himself  forth  to  the  realisation  of  the  desired  object,  as  one 
in  the  realisation  of  which  he  seeks  self-satisfaction.  In 
like  manner  our  thoughts  may  mean  either  thoughts  that, 
as  we  say,  occur  to  us,  or  thoughts  to  the  realisation  of 
which  we  direct  ourselves.  It  is  thought  only  in  the  latter 
of  the  two  senses  distinguished,  desire  likewise  in  the  latter 
of  its  two  senses,  that  enters  into  willing. 

No  doubt,  both  thought  in  the  other  sense  and  desire  in 
the  other  sense  are  presupposed  by  willing,  as  conditions 
antecedent ;  and  in  the  sense  in  which  they  are  severally 
conditions  antecedent  of  the  act  of  willing  but  do  not  enter 
into  it,  they  are  clearly  separable.  There  may  very  well  be 
one  without  the  other.  I  may,  e.g.,  contemplate  payment 
of  a  debt  as  a  possible  event,  consider  how  much  money 
would  be  required  for  the  purpose,  how  the  creditor  would 
behave  when  he  got  his  money,  and  so  on,  without  being 
affected  by  any  desire  to  pay;  and  conversely  I  may  feel 
that  I  should  be  more  at  ease  if  I  paid,  without  my  thoughts 
running  further  on  the  event.  But  in  the  sense  in  which 
thought  and  desire  enter  into  an  act  of  will,  each  is  the 
whole  act ;  and  we  can  only  distinguish  them  by  describing 
one  and  the  same  act  of  the  inner  man,  which  thought  and 
desire  equally  constitute,  as  in  respect  of  desire  the  direction 
of  a  self-conscious  subject  to  the  realisation  of  an  idea,  in 
respect  of  thought  the  action  of  an  idea  in  such  a  subject 
impelling  to  its  realisation. 

153.  Will  then  is  equally  and  indistinguishably  desire  and 
thought — not  however  mere  desire  or  mere  thought,  if  by  that 
is  meant  desire  or  thought  as  they  might  exist  in  a  being 
that  was  not  self-distinguishing  and  self-seeking,  or  as  they 
may  occur  to  a  man  independently  of  any  action  of  himself; 


CH.  Il]  INTELLECT  AND    WILL  173 

but  desire  and  thought  as  they  are  involved  in  the  direction 
of  a  self-distinguishing  and  self-seeking  subject  to  the  realis- 
ation of  an  idea '.  If  so,  it  must  be  a  mistake  to  regard  the 
will  as  a  faculty  which  a  man  possesses  along  with  other 
faculties — those  of  desire,  emotion,  thought,  &c. — and  which 
has  the  singular  privilege  of  acting  independently  of  other  facul- 
ties, so  that,  given  a  man's  character  as  it  at  any  time  results 
from  the  direction  taken  by  those  other  faculties,  the  will 
remains  something  apart  which  may  issue  in  action  different 
from  that  prompted  by  the  character.  The  will  is  simply 
the  man.  Any  act  of  will  is  the  expression  of  the  man  as  he 
at  the  time  is.  The  motive  issuing  in  his  act,  the  object  of 
his  will,  the  idea  which  for  the  time  he  sets  himself  to  realise, 
are  but  the  same  thing  in  different  words.  Each  is  the  reflex 
of  what  for  the  time,  as  at  once  feeling,  desiring,  and  think- 
ing, the  man  is.  In  willing  he  carries  with  him,  so  to  speak, 
his  whole  self  to  the  realisation  of  the  given  idea.  All  the 
time  that  he  so  wills,  he  may  feel  the  pangs  of  conscience, 
or  (on  the  other  hand)  the  annoyance,  the  sacrifice,  implied 
in  acting  conscientiously.  He  may  think  that  he  is  doing 
wrong,  or  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  after  all  there  is  really 
an  objection  to  his  acting  as  he  has  resolved  to  do.  He  may 
desire  some  one's  good  opinion  which  he  is  throwing  away, 
or  some  pleasure  which  he  is  sacrificing.  But  for  all  that  it 
is  only  the  feeling,  thought,  and  desire  represented  by  the 
act  of  will,  that  the  man  recognises  as  for  the  time  himself. 
The  feeling,  thought,  and  desire  with  which  the  act  conflicts 
are  influences  that  he  is  aware  of,  influences  to  which  he  is 
susceptible,  but  they  are  not  he. 

'  It  may  prevent  possible  misapprehension,  if  I  say  tliat  the  term 
idea  is  here  and  in  all  similar  passages  used  in  the  wide  sense  gene- 
rally attached  to  it  by  English  writers,  who  have  followed  the 
definition  of  it  by  Locke  as  '  the  immediate  object  of  the  mind  in 
thinking.'  In  this  sense  it  seems  pretty  much  equivalent  to  the 
German  '  Vorstellung.' 


BOOK  III 

THE   MORAL   IDEAL   AND   MORAL   PROGRESS 
CHAPTER  I 

GOOD   AND   MORAL   GOOD 

154.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  return  to  the  difficulty 
which  was  raised  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  chapter,  and 
which  led  to  our  attempt  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  Will,  in 
its  relation  to  desire  and  thought.  That  difficulty  was  as 
to  the  ground  of  distinction  between  the  good  and  the  bad 
will;  a  distinction  which  in  some  form  or  other — whether 
we  consider  the  goodness  of  a  will  to  be  an  attribute  which 
it  possesses  on  its  own  account,  or  to  be  relative  to  some 
result  to  which  it  contributes  beyond  the  will  itself — must 
lie  at  the  root  of  every  system  of  Ethics.  What  becomes 
of  this  distinction,  we  supposed  an  objector  to  ask,  if  the 
doctrine  previously  stated  is  admitted,  '  that  in  all  conduct 
to  which  moral  predicates  are  applicable  a  man  is  an  object 
to  himself;  that  such  conduct,  equally  whether  virtuous  or 
vicious,  expresses  a  motive  consisting  in  an  idea  of  personal 
good  which  the  man  seeks  to  realise  by  action'  (§  115)? 
Further  consideration  has  confirmed  this  statement.  If  it 
is  a  genuine  definition  that  we  want  of  what  is  common  to 
all  acts  of  willing,  we  must  say  that  such  an  act  is  one  in 
which  a  self-conscious  individual  directs  himself  to  the 
realisation  of  some  idea,  as  to  an  object  in  which  for  the 
time  he  seeks  self-satisfaction.  Such  being  an  act  of  willing, 
the  will  in  actuality  must  he  the  self-conscious  individual  as 
so  directing  himself,  while  the  will  in  possibility,  or  as  a 
faculty,  will  be  the  self-conscious  individual  as  capable  of 
so  directing  himself. 

The  above,  however,  is  merely  z.  formal  account  of  willing 
and  the  will.    It  does  not  tell  us  the  real  nature  of  any  act 


GOOD  AND  MORAL   GOOD  175 

of  will,  or  of  any  man  as  willing,' or  of  any  national  will — 
if  there  be  such  a  thing  as  one  will  operating  in  or  upon  the 
several  members  of  a  nation — or  of  the  human  will,  if  again 
there  be  such  a  thing  as  one  will  operating  throughout  the 
history  of  mankind.  For  the  real  nature  of  any  act  of  will 
depends  on  the  particular  nature  of  the  object  in  which  the 
person  willing  for  the  time  seeks  self-satisfaction ;  and  the 
real  nature  of  any  man  as  the  subject  of  will — his  character 
— depends  on  the  nature  at  the  .objectsJn  which  he  mainly 
^en^to  seek  self-satisfaction.  Self^atisfacti©a-4s- the-forni„ 
of  every  object  willed;  but  the  filling  of  that^form,  the 
character  of  that  in  which  self-satisfaction  is/sought,  ranging 
from  sensual  pleasure  to  the  fulfilment  o/a  vocation  con- 
ceived as  given  by  God,  makes  the^gbjg&LaLhat,itj;eallyjs. 
It  is  on  the  specific  difference  of  the  objects  willed  under  the 
general  form  of  self-satisfaction  that  the  quality  of  the  will 
must  depend.  It  is  here  therefore  that  we  must  seek  for  the 
basis  of  distinction  between  goodness  and  badness  of  will. 

155.  The  statement  that  the  distinction  between  the  good 
and  bad  will  must  lie  at  the  basis  of  any  system  of  Ethics, 
and  the  further  statement  that  this  distinction  itself  must 
depend  on  the  nature  of  the  objects  willed,  would  in  some 
sense  or  other  be  accepted  by  all  recognised^ '  schools '  of 
moralists,  but  they  would  be  accepted  in_  very  different 
senses.  On  the  one  side  the  modern  yuljtgBan  would  only 
accept  the  former  statement  in  the  sense  that,  unless  an 
action  is  done  JMtentionally,  it  is  not  the  subject  of  moral 
predicates.  The  action,  in  his  view,  derives  its  moral  quality 
not  from  the  rnotiye  or  character  which  it  expresses, -but 
from  the  effects  which  jt^  produces.  Those  effects,  indeed, 
do  not  entitle  the  act  to  be  reckoned  morally  good  or  bad,' 
unless  it  is  one  which  the  agent  intends  or  wills  to  do ;  but, 
given  the  intentional  act,  it  is  not  on  the  motive  which  leads 
to  its  being  intended,  but  on  its  effects  in  the  way  of  pleasure 
or  pain,  that  its  morality  depends.  This  is  very  plainly  put 
by  J.  S.  Mill :  'The  morality  of  the  action  depends  entirely 
upon  the  intention — that  is,  upon  what  the  agent  wills  to  do. 


176      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

But  the  motive,  that  is,  the  feeling  which  makes  him  will  so 
to  do,  when  it  makes  no  difference  in  the  act,  makes  none 
in  the  morality :  though  it  makes  a  great  difference  in  our 
moral  estimation  of  the  agent,  especially  if  it  indicates  a 
good  or  a  bad  habitual  disposition  —  a  bent  of  character  from 
which  useful  or  from  which  hurtful  actions  are  likely  to 
arise '.'  In  other  words,  while  there  are  two  distinct  objects 
of  moral  approbation  or  disapprobation,  or  two  objects 
which  admit  of  the  designation  morally  good  or  bad,  {a) 
intentional  action,  {b)  the  motive  or  character  of  an  agent, 
the  latter  is  only  to  be  judged  relatively  to  the  former,  just 
as  the  former  is  only  to  be  judged  relatively  to  its  effects  as 
producing  pleasure  or  pain.  The  motive_or  character. is 
morally  good,  Jf  likely  on  the  whole  to  issiie  in  intgational 
actions  which  are  good  in  the  jengfi„ot,producing  on  the 
whole,  one  person  filceh  with  another  and  one  time  with 
another,  an  excess^o/jgleasure  over  pain. 

Clearly,  upon  this  view,  our  statement  that  Ethics  is 
founded  on  the  distinction  between  the  good  and  bad  will 
could  only  be  accepted  under  the  proviso  that  by  good  and 
bad  will  is  understood  good  and  bad  intentional  action,  and 
further  that  intentional  action  is  understood  to  be  good  or 
bad  according  to  its  relation  to  an  ultimate  good  and  evil, 
which  are  constituted  not  by  any  kind  of  action,  intention, 
or  character,  but  by  pleasure  and  pain.  The  other  statement 
that  '  the  distinction  between  the  good  and  bad  will  must 
depend  on  the  nature  of  the  objects  willed '  would  be  sub- 
jected by  the  Utilitarian  to  a  similar  qualification.  He  could 
accept  it  if  by  '  will '  is  understood  intention,  and  if  by  '  the 
objects  willed '  are  understood  the  effects  of  the  intentional 
act  in  the  way  of  producing  pleasure  and  pain.  If  by  '  will ' 
is  meant  '  habitual  disposition,'  and  by  '  objects  willed '  mo- 
tives, he  could  only  accept  the  statement  on  the  understanding 
that  the  'nature  of  the  objects  willed'  is  itself  taken  to  depend 
on  the  tendency  of  the  motives  to  issue  in  actions  productive 
of  a  preponderance  of  pleasure  or  pain  as  the  case  may  be. 
'  Utilitarianism,  p.  27,  note. 


CH.  l]  GOOD  AND  MORAL    GOOD  177 

It  is  in  a  precisely  opposite  sense^  that  the  propositions 
in  question  would  have  to  be  understood,  in  order  to  be 
approved  by  a  strict  followjrof_Kant,  With  him  an  act 
of  will  would  never  be  understood  merely  of  an  intention 
to  do  a  certain  deed,  in  abstraction  from  the  motive  or 
object  for  the  sake  of  which  the  deed  is  done ;  and  with 
him  again  the  good  will  is^gopd,  not  in  virtue  of  any  effects 
extrinsic  to  it,  but  in  virtue  of  what  it.  is  in  itself,- not  as 
a  means,  but  as  an  absolute  end.  The  first  of  the  above 
stateiftents,  therefore,  he  would  accept  in  the  sense  which 
it  naturally  bears.  In  the  second  he  might  see  a  loophole 
for  error.  To  say  that  a  will  is  good  in  virtue  of  the  nature 
of  the  objects  willed,  does  not  exclude  the  notion  that  it 
may  be  good  in  virtue  of  desired  effects  other  than  its  own 
goodness,  or  as  directed  to  objects  which  are  willed  other- 
wise than  for  the  reason  of  their  being  prescribed  by  a 
universal  practical  law.  So  far  as  the  statement  in  ques- 
tion is  understood  according  to  any  such  notion  as  this, 
Kant — at  any  rate  if  interpreted  according  to  the  reiterated 
letter  of  his  doctrine — would  reckon  it  fundamentally  erro- 
neous. 

166.  It  is  not  according  to  the  plan  of  the  present  treatise 
to  examine  critically  either  the  moral  doctrine  of  Kant  as 
stated  by  himself,  or  that  of  Utilitarianism  as  stated  by 
leading  authorities,  until  it  has  been  attempted  to  give  the 
outline  of  a  positive  doctrine  in  regard  to  the  nature  of 
goodness  and  of  our  moral  progress'.  This  done,  the 
criticism  may  be  undertaken  with  less  liability  to  its  drift 
being  misunderstood,  and  without  conveying  the  impression 
that  no  truth  is  thought  to  remain  where  some  error  has 
been  detected.  What  then  ar,e,the  guestions-naturally  raised 
for  us  by  the  considerations  which  we  have  so  far  pursued, 
and  which  a  positive  ethicaL^octrine  should  Jiieginjby^- 
tempting  to  answer^?  The  first  of  them  may  perhaps  be 
statenSui;  Granted  that,  according  to  our  doctrine,  in 
all  willing  a  self-conscious  subject  seeks  to  satisfy  itself — 
'  [See  Preface]. 
N 


178      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

seeks  that  which  for  the  time  it  presents  to  itself  as  its 
good — how  can  there  Jbe  an^such  intrinsic  difference  be- 
tween  the'"oBJects  willed  as  justifies  the  distinc^i_on_which 
'morarsehse'^^seems  to  draw  between  good  and  bad  action, 
between  virtue  and  vice  ?  And  if  there  is  such  a  difference, 
in  what  does  it  consist  ? 

A  possible  answer  to  the  question  would  of  course  be 
a  denial  that  _there  is  any  such--difier£ace  at  all.  By  an 
intrinsic  difference  between  the  objects  willed  we  mean 
a  difference  between  them  in  respect  of  that  which  is  the 
motive  to  the  person  willing  them,  as  distinct  from  a  differ- 
ence constituted  by  any  effects  which  the  realisation  of  the 
objects  may  bring  about,  but  of  which  the  anticipation  does 
not  form  the  motive.  Now  according  to  all  strictly  Hedon- 
istic  theories  the  difference  between  objects  willed  is,  ac- 
cording tothis  sense  of  the  terms,  extrinsic,^nQtJntrinsie^ 
The  motive  to  the  persons  willing  is  supposed  to  be  in  all 
cases  the^^jame,  viz.  4esire^Jor_som£  pleasure  or  aversion 
from  some  pain.  The  conditions  of  the  pleasures  which 
different  men  desire,  or  which  the  same  man  desires  at 
different  times,  are  of  course  most  various ;  but  it  is  not 
the  conditions  of  any  pleasure  but  the  pleasure  iitself  that 
a  man  desires,  if  pleasure  is  really  his  object  at  a^.  On  the 
Hedonistic  supposition,  therefore,  every  object  wj.lled..  is  on 
its  inner  side,  or  in'respect  of  that  which  moves  the  person 
willing,  the  same.  It  moves  him  as  anticipated  pleasure, 
or  anticipated  escape  from  pain.  The  jlifference  between 
objects  willed  lies  on  their  outer  side,  iia  effects  whirh  fnllnw 
from  them  but  are^not  included  .ija,th£ni.as  motives  to  the 
perions  wiUmgT  Two  objects  having  been  equally  willed  as 
so  much  anticipated  pleasure,  the  realisation  of  the  one  does 
in  the  event  produce  a  preponderance  of  pleasure  over  pain 
to  the  agent  himself  or  to  others,  while  the  realisation  of  the 
other  produces  a  preponderance  of  pain  over  pleasure.  Thus 
and  thus  only,  according  to  this  theory — extrinsically  not 
intrinsically — is  the  difference  constituted  between  a  good 
object  of  will  and  a  bad  one. 


CH.  ij  GOOD  AND  MORAL    GOOD  179 

157.  A  detailed  criticism  of  this  doctrine  would  be  out 
of  place  till  we  come  to  the  examination  of  Utilitarianism. 
If  the  amoii  ToC  -^evhois  can  be  explained,  it  will  not  stand 
seriously  in  our  way  ;  for  though  excellent  men  have  argued 
themselves  into  it,  it  is  a  doctrine  which,  nakedly  put,  of- 
fends the  unsophisticated  conscience.  Whatever  the  pro- 
cess may  have  been,  we  have  reached  a  state  in  which  we 
seem  to  knowthat  the  desires  wejhink  well  of  in  ourselves 
differ  absolutely  as  desires,  or  in  respect  of  the  objects  de- 
sired in  them,  from  those  which  we  despise  or  condemn. 
If  asked  straight  out  to  admit  that  all  objects  of  desire,  as 
desired,  are  alike,  since  it  is  pleasure  that  is  equally  the 
desired  thing  in  them  all ;  that  it  is  only  in  the  effects  of 
the  actions  arising  out  of  them,  not  in  what  they  are  for  the 
desiring  consciousness,  that  good  desires  differ  from  bad 
ones ;  upon  first  thoughts  we  should  certainly  refuse  to  do 
so.  Hesitation  would  only  ensue  if  the  enlightened  en- 
quirer asked  us  to  reflect,  whether  we  ever  find  ourselves 
desiring  any  thing  from  which  we  do  not  anticipate  pleasure 
of  some  sort,  and  whether  it  is  not  this  anticipation  that 
makes  us  desire  it.  Thus  challenged,  we  feel  ourselves  in 
a  difficulty.  This,  a&couatjoLdesireiiasLajjLausibility  which 
we  do  not  at  once  seepur  way  to  explaining.  Yet  to  accept , 
it  seems  to  involve  us  logically '  in  an  admission  of_the  m- , 
trinacidentity  of  alljdesirg,  good  and  bad,  which  offends  ^ 
our  mo^  conviction.  If  we  "could  expfain  away  the  appar- 
ent cogency  of  the  plea  that  it  is  some  anticipated  pleasure, 
as  such,  which  we  always  find  ourselves  desiring,  the  con- 
viction of  the  difference  between  good  and  bad  desires,  as 
states  of  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  persons  desiring, 
would  hold  its  own  undisturbed. 

158.  Now,  according  to  the  account  previously  given  of 
desire,  it  is  not  difficult  to  explain  the  confusion  which 

'  The  attempt  to  combine  the  doctrine  that  pleasure  as  such  is  the 
sole  object  of  desire,  with  the  assertion  of  an  intrinsic  diflferente  be- 
tween good  and  bad  desires,  on  the  ground  that  pleasures  differ  in 
quality,  will  be  considered  below. 

N  2 


l8o      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

makes  pleasure  seem  to  be  its  only  object.  We  saw  that, 
in  all  such  desire  as  can  form  the  motive  to  an  imputable 
act, "flielnSI^ual  .direcJts._himself  to  the  realisation  of  some 
idea,  as  to  an  object  in  which  he  seeks  jelTsatisfaction.  It 
is  the  consciousness_that_  self-satisfaction  is  thus  sought  in 
all  enacted  desire,  in  all  desire  that  amount¥  to  will,  com- 
bined  with  the  consciousness  Jhatip  all  self-satisfaction,  if 
attained,  there  is  pleasure,  which  leads  to  the  false  notion 
that  pleasure'  is  always  the  object  of  Besire,  Whether  in 
any  case  it  really  is  so,  or  no,  depends  on  whether  pleasure 
'  is  the  object  with  which  a  man  is  seeking  to  satisj^  hirnself. 
if  it  is  not,  pleasure  is  not  the  object  of  his  dominant  desire. 
However  much  pleasure  there  may  prove  to  be  in  the  self- 
satisfaction,  if  any,  which  the  attainment  of  his  object  brings 
with  it — and  our  common  experience  is  that  the  objects  with 
which  we  seek  to  satisfy  ourselves  do  not  turn  out  capable 
of  satisfying  us — it  cannot  be  this  pleasure  that  is  the  object 
which  he  desires.  Its  possibility  presupposes  the  desire  and 
its  fulfilment.  It  cannot  therefore  be  the  exciting  cause  of 
the  desire,  any  more  than  the  pleasure  of  satisfying  hunger 
can  be  the  exciting  cause  of  hunger.  Only  if  the  idea  which 
in  his  desire  the  man  seeks_to_  realise  is  the  idea  of  enjoying 
some  pleasure — whether  a  pleasure  of  the  kind  which  we 
commonly  call  sensual  in  a  special  sense,  i.  e.  one  incidental 
to  the  satisfaction  of  animal  appetite,  or  a  pleasure  of  pure 
emotion — can  we  truly  say  that  pleasure  is  the  object  of  his 
desire. 

159.  When  the  idea  of  which  the  realisation  is  sought  is 
not  that  of  enjoying  any  pleasure,  thejact^  that  self-satisfac- 
tion is  sought  in  thejeffort^to  realise  the  idea  of  the  desired 
object  does  not  .make,  pleasure  the  object  of  the  desire,_  It 
may  very  well  be  that  a  man  pursues  an  object  in  which 
he  seeks  self-satisfaction  with  the  clear  consGiousness-ihat 
no  enjoyment  of _pleasure  can  yield  him  satisfaction,  and 
thafthere  must  be  such  pain  jn  the,  realisation  of  the  idea 
to  which  he  devoted  himself  ^cannot  ,b£.coi!ngensatedjJn 
any  scale  where  pleasure  and  pain  alone  are  weighed,  by  any 


CH.  l]  PLEASURE  AND  DESIRE  l8l 

enjoyment  of  an  end  achieved '.  So  it  is  in  the  more  heroic 
forms  of  selFsacrilice.  SeKatisfaction  is  doubtless  sought 
in  such  sacrifice.  The  man  who  calmly  faces  a  life  of  suffer- 
ing in  the  fulfilment  of  what  he  conceives  to  be  his  mission 
could  not  bear  to  do  otherwise.  So  to  live  is  his  good. 
If  he  could  attain  the  consciousness  of  having  accomplished 
his  work,  if  he  could  'count  himself  to  have  apprehended' 
— and  probably  just  in  proportion  to  the  elevation  of  his 
character  he  is  unable  to  do  so — he  would  findsatisfaction 
in_yie j:onsciousness,  and_^ith  it  ascertain  pleasure.  But 
supposing  this  pleasure  to  be  attained,  QnlyJhfi_exigenciea  of 
a  theory  could  suggest^ the  notion  that^as  so  much  pleasure, 
ifjnakes  up  for  the  pleasures  forgone  and Jhe  pains  endured 
in  the  life  through  which  it  has  been  reached.  Such  a 
notion  can  only  be  founded  on  the  see-saw  process  which 
first  assumes  that  preference  in  every  case  is  determined  by 
amount  of  anticipated  pleasure,  and  then  professes  to  ascertain 
the  relative  amount  of  pleasure  which  a  given  line  of  action 
affords  a  man  by  the  fact  that  he  prefers  so  to  act. 

160.  Even  if  it  were  the  case,  however,  that  self-satisfac- 
tion was  more  attainable  than  it  is,  and  that  the  pleasure  of 
success  to  the  man  who  has  '  spurned  delights  and  lived 
laborious  days '  really  admitted  of  being  set  against  the 
pleasure  missed  in  the  process,  it  would  none  the  less  be 
a  mere  confusion  to  treatjhis^  pleasure  of  success  as  the 
desired  object,  in  the  realisation  of  which  the  man  seeks 
to  satisfy  himself.  A  man  may  seek  to  satisfy  himself  with 
pleasure,  but  the  pleasure  of  self-satisfaction  can  never  be 
that  with  which  he  seeks  to  satisfy  himself.  This  is  equally 
true  of  the  voluptuary  and  of  the  saint.  The  voluptuary 
must  have  his  ideas  of  pleasures,  unconnected  with  self- 
satisfaction,  before  he  can  seek  self-satisfaction  (where  it  is 
not  to  be  found)  in  the  realisation  of  those  ideas ;  just  as 

^  Cf.  Arist.  Eth.  Nic.  III.  ix.  5.  Ov  S^  iv  aitaaais  Tofs  apirais  to 
^Se(u;  kvepyfTv  vn&pxct,  ttA^v  €^'  Saov  rov  TeKov3  etfMiTTeTat,  *Thus  the 
rule  that  the  exercise  of  virtue  is  pleasant  does  not  hold  of  all  the  virtues, 
except  in  so  far  as  the  end  is  attained. ' 


l82      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  m 

much  as  the  saint  must  have  ideas,  not  of  pleasures  but 
of  services  due  to  God  and  man,  before  he  can  seek  self- 
satisfaction  in  their  fulfilment.  Most  men,  however,  at 
least  in  their  ordinary  conduct,  are  neither  voluptuaries  nor 
saints ;  and  we  are  falling  into  a  false  antithesis  if,  having 
admitted  (as  is  true)  that  the  quest  of  self-satisfaction  is  the 
form  of  all  moral  activity,  we  allow  no  alternative  (as  Kant 
in  effect  seems  to  allow  none)  between  the  quest  for  self- 
satisfaction  in  the  enjoyment  of  pleasure,  and  the  quest  for 
it  in  the  fulfilment  of  a  universal  practical  law.  Ordinary 
motives  fall  neither  under  the  one  head  nor  the  other. 
They  are  interests  in  the,  attainmenl.jQl._objects,  wjthqut 
which  it  seems  to  the  man  in  his  actual  state  thathejcannot 
satisfy  himself,  and  in  attaining  which,  Jbgeanse  he^  has 
desired  themj^he  will  find  a  certain  pleasure,  Jbut  only  be- 
cause^he  has^eyipusly^desicedibem,  not  berause  pleasures 
^re  the  objects  _desired. 

iei.  Such  interests,  though  not  mere  appetites  because 
conditioned  by  self-consciousness,  correspond  to  them  as 
not  having  pleasure  for  their  object.  This  point  was 
sufficiently  made  out  in  the  controversy  as  to  the  '  disinter- 
estedness '  of  benevolence,  carried  on  during  the  first  part  of 
the  eighteenth  century.  When  philosophers  of  the  '  selfish 
school'  represented  benevolence  as  ultimately  desire  for 
some  pleasure  to  oneself,  Butler  and  others  met  them  by 
showing  that  this  was  the  same  mistake  as  to  reckon  hunger 
a  desire  for  the  pleasure  of  eating.  The  appetite  of  hunger 
must  precede^and  jomiition  the  pleasure]ffiHlcE~consists_.ih 
jt s . _s a t j sfac tion .  It  cannot  therefore  have  that  pleasure  for 
its  exciting  object.  '  It  terminates  upon  its  object,'  and  is 
not  relative  fo  anything  beyond  the  taking  of  food;  and  in 
the  same  way  benevolent  desires  terminate  upon  their  objects, 
upon  the  benefits  done  to  others.  In  the  'termination'  in 
each  case  there  is  pleasure,  but  it  is  a  confusion  to  represent 
this  as  an  object  beyond  the  obtaining  of  food  or  the  doing 
a  kindness,  to  which  the  appetite  or  benevolent  desire  is 
really  directed.    What  is  true  of  benevolence  is  true  of 


CH.  l]  PLEASURE  AND  DESIRE  183 

motives  which  we  oppose  to  it,  as  the  vicious  to  the  virtuous, 
e.g.  of  jealousy  or  the  desire  for  revenge.  lago^  does  not 
workjpsaLjQlhelLQ  .fior_the_.§a)ce_  oL  aiiy_gleasure  Jhat^  he 
e2gects_to_ex2erience  when  hjs^e^^  because 

in  his  envious  state  an  object  of  which  the  reaUsation  seems 
necessary  to  the  satisfaction  of  himself  is  Othello's  ruin,  just 
as  the  consumption  of  food  is  necessary  to  the  satisfaction 
of  hunger.  WjiatJxe_desires__is_to.^fie.-QtJieJ]5_dflvi^ 
tlje_£leasure.he  .wilLieeL  when  he  sees  him^— a  pleasure 
which  he  could  not  feel  unless  he  had  desired  the  object 
independently  of  such  anticipation. 

It  is  true  that  any  interest  or  desire  for  an  object  may 
come  to  be  reinforced  by  desire  for  the  ^  pleasure-YducE, 
reflecting  upon  past  analogous  experience,  the  subject  of 
the  intereiEHay  expect  as  incidental  -toJta..5ati5fecliQn.  In 
this  way  '  cool  self-love,'  according  to  the  terminology  of  the 
last  century,  may  combine  with  'particular  desires  or  pro- 
pensions.'  If  there  is  to  be  any  chance,  however,  of  the 
expected  pleasure  being  really  enjoyed,  the  'self-love'  of 
which  pleasure  is  the  object  roust  not  supersede  the  '  par- 
ticular propension  '  of  which  pleasure,  in  the  case  of  ordinary 
healthy  interests,  is  not  the  object.  The  pleasure  incidental 
to  the  satisfaction  of  an  interest  cannot  be  attained  after 
loss  of  the  interest  itself,  nor  can  the  interest  be  revived  by 
wishing  for  a  renewal  of  the  pleasure  incidental  to  its  satis- 
faction. Hence  just  so  far  as  'cool  self-love^JJnJJie-sense 
ola^calculating^pursuit  of  pleasure,  becomes  dominant  and 
supersedes  particular  interesfs^  the  chanceFof  .Measure  are 
really  lostj  which  accounts  for  the  restlessness  of  the 
pleasure-seeker,  and  for  the  common  remark  that  the  right 
way  to  get  pleasure  is  not  to  seek  it. 

162.  It  may  seem  presumptuous  to  charge  clear-headed 
moralists  with  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  a  desire  can 
be  excited  by  the  anticipation  of  its  own  satisfaction.  But 
such  a  mistake  certainly  seems  to  be  accountable  for  the 
acceptance  of  the  doctrine  that  pleasure  is  the  sole  object 
of  desire  by  so  powerful  a  writer  as  J.  S.  Mill.     He,  as  is 


184      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

well  known,  differs  from  the  older  Utilitarians  in  holding 
that,  although  pleasure  and  freedom  from  pain  are  the  only 
things  desirable  as  ends,  some  kinds  of  pleasurejje^more. 
d^kahle  andjaluablejhan  others,  not  as  involving  a  greater 
amount  of  pleasure,  but  |n_thgir  intrinsic  nature*.  Every 
one  must  feel  that  the  Utilitarian  theory  receives  a  certain 
exaltation  from  his  treatment  of  it,  and  especially  from  his 
assertion  of  this  point.  But  the  question  is,  whether  the 
admissions  which  he  has  to  make  in  order  to  establish  it  do 
not  virtually  amount  to  a  departure  from  the  doctrine  that 
pleasure  or  freedom  from  pain  is  the  only  object  of  desire ; 
a  departure  which  he  only  disguises  from  himself  and  his 
reader  by  virtually  assuming  that  a  desire  may  have  for  its 
object  the  pleasure,  or  deliverance  from  pain,  involved  in 
its  satisfaction.  It  will  be  useful  to  dwell  a  little  longer  on 
this  question,  not  for  the  sake  of  picking  holes  in  a  writer 
from  whom  we  have  all  learnt  much,  but  in  order  to  bring 
out  more  clearly  the  distinction  between  the  quest  for  self- 
satisfaction  which  all  moral  activity  is  rightly  held  to  be,  and 
the  quest  for  pleasure  which  morally '^oo(f  activity  is  not. 

163.  No  one  of  course  can  doubt  that  pleasures  admit  of 
distinction  in  quality  according  to  the  conditions  Under 
which  they  arise.  So  Plato  and  Aristotle  distinguished 
pleasures  incidental  to  the  satisfaction  of  bodily  wants  from 
pleasures  of  sight  and  hearing,  and  these  again  from  the 
pleasures  of  pure  intellect.  So  too  we  might  distinguish 
pleasures  of  satisfied  desire  from  pleasures  of  pure  emotion, 
and  subdivide  each  sort  according  to  the  various  conditions 
under  which  desire  or  emotion  is  excited.  No  one  pretends 
that  the  pleasures  of  a  sot  are  not  really  different  from  those 
of  a  man  of  refined  taste.  The  question  is  in  what  sense, 
upon  the  principle  that  pleasure  is  the  ultimate  good  by 
relation  to  which  all  other  good  is  to  be  tested,  these  differ- 
ences of  kind  between  pleasures  may  be  taken  to  constitute 
any  difference  in  the  degree  of  their  goodness  or  desirability. 
All  Utilitarians  would  hold  that  on  one  ground  or  another 
1  Utilitarianism,  pp.  10-12. 


CH.  l]  PLEASURE  AND  DESIRE  185 

they  might  be  so  taken,  but  they  would  not  all  agree  upon 
the  ground.  The  strict  Benthamites  hold  that  such  differ- 
ences of  kind  between  pleasures  as  arise  from  differences  in 
their  exciting  causes  only  affect  their  value  or  the  degree  of 
their  goodness,  in  so  far  as  they  affect  the  amount  of  plea- 
sure enjoyed  on  the  whole;  while  Mill  holds  that  these 
differences  affect  the  value  of  pleasures  independently  of  the 
effect  they  have  on  their  amount.  The  estimation  of  plea- 
sures should  not  depend  on  quantity  alone  :  quality  is  to  be 
considered  as  well  as  quantity  ^- 

164.  For  an  explanation  and  defence  of  this  variation 
from  the  doctrine  of  his  master,  Mill  appeals  to  the  'un- 
questionable fact  that  those  who  are  equally  acquainted  with 
and  equally  capable  of  appreciating  and  enjoying,  both,  do 
give  a  most  marked  preference  to  the  manner  of  existence 
which  employs  their  higher  faculties,'  as  compared  with  one 
involving  more  sensual  pleasures.  They  do  this,  '  even 
though  knowing  it  to  be  attended  with  a  greater  amount  of 
discontent.'  We  naturally  accept  such  an  appeal  because 
we  cannot  help  thinking  of  the  man  whose  preference  Mill 
describes,  as  better  in  himself  th&n  one  more  'sensual,'  and 
of  the  '  higher  faculties '  as  intrinsically  of  more  value ;  in 
other  words,  because  we  regard  the  attainment  of  a  certain 
type  of  character  or  some  realisation  of  the  possibilities  of 
man,  not  pleasure,  as  the  end  by  relation  to  which  goodness 
or  value  is  to  be  measured.  But,  on  the  principle  that  plea- 
sure is  the  only  thing  good  ultimately  or  in  its  own  right, 
we  are  not  justified  in  so  doing.  On  this  principle  one  man 
can  be  better,  one  faculty  higher  than  another,  only  as  a 
more  serviceable  instrument  for  the  production  of  pleasure. 
On  this  ground  it  is  open  to  the  Utilitarian  to  argue  that  a 
man  who  devotes  himself  to  the  exercise  of  such  '  higher 
faculties'  as  Mill  is  here  thinking  of,  produces  a  greater 
amount  of  pleasure  on  the  whole,  all  circumstances  affecting 
that  amount  being  taken  into  account,  than  does  the  man 
who  does  not  trouble  himself  about  his  '  higher  faculties.' 
'  Utilitarianism,  pp.  10-12. 


l86      MOHAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  ill 

■  But  it  is  altogether  against  Utilitarian  principles  that  a  plea- 
sure should  be  of  more  value  because  the  man  who  pursues 
it  is  better.  \/  They  only  entitle  us  to  argue  back  from  the 
amount  of  pleasure  to  the  worth  of  the  man  who  acts  so  as 
to  produce  it. 

If  we  rid  ourselves  then  of  all  presuppositions,  illegitimate 
on  Utilitarian  principles,  in  regard  to  the  superiority  of  the 
man  or  the  faculties  exercised  in  what  we  call  the  highest 
pursuits,  and  if  we  admit  that  all  desire  is  for  pleasure,  the 
strongest  desire  for  the  greatest  pleasure,  what  is  proved  by 
the  example  of  the  man  who,  being  'competently  acquainted 
with  both,'  prefers  the  life  of  moral  and  intellectual  effort 
to  one  of  healthy  animal  enjoyment  ?  Simply  this,  that  the 
life  of  effort  brings  more  pleasure  to  the  man  in  question 
than  he  would  derive  from  the  other  sort  of  life.  It  out- 
weighs for  him  any  quantity  of  other  pleasure  of  which  his 
nature  is  capable.  The  fact  that  he  is  '  competently  acquaint- 
ed with  both '  sorts  of  pleasure  can  give  no  significance  be- 
yond this  to  his  preference  of  one  above  the  other.  He  may 
be  'competently  acquainted'  with  animal  enjoyments;  but 
it  does  not  follow  that  the  pleasure  they  afford  him  is  as 
intense  and  unmixed  as  that  which  they  afford  to  the  man 
who  makes  them  his  principal  pursuit.  The  question  of 
value  then  between  the  two  sorts  will  have  to  be  settled  by 
a  calculation  of  amount,  the  intensity  of  each  kind,  as  ex- 
perienced by  those  to  whom  it  is  most  intense,  being  weighed 
against  its  duration  and  its  degree  of  purity,  productiveness, 
and  extent'.  The  calculation  is  certainly  very  hard  to  make 
— whether  it  can  be  made  at  all  is  a  question  to  be  touched 
on  when  we  come  to  a  more  detailed  examination  of  Utili- 
tarianism * — but  it  is  the  only  possible  way,  if  pleasure  is  the 
sole  and  ultimate  good,  of  measuring  the  comparative  worth 
of  pleasures.  The  example  of  a  certain  man's  preference, 
unless  we  have  some  other  standard  of  his  excellence  than 

'  Cf.  Dumont's  version  of  the  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation 
(Hildretli's  translation),  p.  31. 
''  [See  Book  IV.  chap,  iii.] 


CH.  l]  PLEASURE  AND  DESIRE  187 

such  as  is  relative  to  pleasure  as  the  ultimate  good,  proves 
nothing  as  to  the  superiority  of  the  pleasure  which  he 
chooses  to  another  sort  of  pleasure  preferred  by  some  one 
else.  It  only  proves  that  it  is  more  of  a  pleasure  to  him 
than  is  that  to  which  he  prefers  it ;  and  this  it  only  proves  on 
supposition  that  the  stronger  desire  is  always  for  the  greater 
pleasure. 

165.  Now  it  will  be  found,  we  think,  that  with  Mill  this 
supposition  really  rests  on  a  confusion  between  the  pleasure 
or  removal  of  pain  which  ensues  upon  the  satisfaction  of 
any  desire  and  the  object  of  that  desire.  In  an  eloquent 
passage  he  illustrates  the  unwillingness  of  any  one  acquainted 
with  the  '  higher '  pleasures  to  exchange  them  for  any  quan- 
tity of  the  lower : — 

'  Now  it  is  an  unquestionable  fact  that  those  who  are  equally  ac- 
quainted with,  and  equally  capable  of  appreciating  and  enjoying,  both, 
do  give  a  most  marked  preference  to  the  manner  of  existence  which 
employs  their  higher  faculties.  Few  human  creatures  would  consent  to 
be  changed  into  any  of  the  lower  animals,  for  a  promise  of  ihe  fullest 
allowance  of  a  beast's  pleasures ;  no  intelligent  human  being  would  con- 
sent to  be  a  fool,  no  instructed  person  would  be  an  ignoramus,  no  person 
of  feeling  and  conscience  would  consent  to  be  selfish  and  base,  even 
though  they  should  be  persuaded  that  the  fool,  the  dunce,  or  the  rascal 
is  better  satisfied  with  his  lot  than  they  are  with  theirs.  They  would 
not  resign  what  they  possess  more  than  he,  for  the  most  complete  satis- 
faction of  all  the  desires  which  they  have  in  common  with  him.  If  they 
ever  fancy  they  would,  it  is  only  in  cases  of  unhappi  ness  so  extreme,  that 
to  escape  from  it  they  would  exchange  their  lot  for  almost  any  other, 
however  undesirable  in  their  own  eyes.  A  being  of  high  faculties 
requires  more  to  make  him  happy,  is  capable  probably  of  more  acute 
suffering,  and  is  certainly  accessible  to  it  at  more  points,  than  one  of  an 
inferior  type ;  but  in  spite  of  these  liabilities,  he  can  never  really  wish  to 
sink  into  what  he  feels  to  be  a  lower  grade  of  existence.  We  may  give 
what  explanation  we  please  of  this  unwillingness  ;  we  may  attribute  it 
to  pride,  a  name  which  is  given  indiscriminately  to  some  of  the  most  and 
to  some  of  the  least  estimable  feelings  of  which  mankind  are  capable; 
we  may  refer  it  to  the  love  of  liberty  and  personal  independence,  an 
appeal  to  which  was  with  the  Stoics  one  of  the  most  effectual  means  for 
the  inculcation  of  it ;  to  the  love  of  power,  or  to  the  love  of  excitement, 
both  of  which  do  really  enter  into  and  contribute  to  it :  but  its  most 
appropriate  appellation  is  a  sense  of  dignity,  which  all  human  beings 
possess  in  one  form  or  other,  and  in  some,  though  by  no  means  in  exact, 


I88      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

proportion  to  their  higher  faculties  ;  and  which  is  so  essential  a  part  of 
the  happiness  of  those  in  whom  it  is  strong,  that  nothing  which  conflicts 
with  it  could  be,  otherwise  than  momentarily,  an  object  of  desire  to 
them'.' 

It  appears  from  this  passage  that  there  is  a  motive,  which 
has  been  variously  described  as  '  pride,'  '  love  of  liberty,' 
'  love  of  power,'  '  love  of  excitement,'  but  of  which  the  most 
appropriate  designation  is  '  sense  of  dignity,'  that  makes  a 
man  of  a  certain  sort  refuse  to  accept  any  amount  of  such 
pleasure  as  a  fool,  or  a  dunce,  or  a  rascal  might  share,  in  lieu 
of  the  exercise  of  the  higher  faculties,  however  much  suffer- 
ing this  may  entail,  ^his  refusal  is  appealed  to  as  showing 
that  the  pleasure  attending  this  exercise  is  intrinsically  pre- 
ferable to  such  as  may  be  shared  with  a  dunce  or  a  rascaL] 
That  it  is  intrinsically  preferable  those  who  are  not  Utili- 
tarians will  readily  agree.  But  unless  it  is  a  greater  pleasure 
on  the  whole,  it  is  not  on  Utilitarian  principles  more  really 
desirable  or  the  greater  good,  and  the  fact  that  by  the  sort 
of  person  in  contemplation  it  is  preferred  does^  not  show 
that  it  is  even  for  him,  much  less  that  it  is  on  the  whole, 
the  greater  pleasure,  unless  his  preference  is  necessarily  for;^. 
what  is  to  him  the  greater  pleasure.  ';■',.'; ^^  ^  \^a^,.^ '  ^    , i^'-.j   V 

166.  But  with  what  plausibility  can  the  motive  described 
as  a  sense  of  dignity  be  reckoned  a  desire  for  pleasure  at 
all?  Mill  indeed  calls  it  'an  essential  part  of  the  happiness 
of  those  in  whom  it  is  strong ' ;  but  no  desire  as  such,  since 
it  must  rather  be  painful  than  pleasant,  can  properly  be  called , 
a  'part  of  happiness.'  It  may  be  suggested  therefore  that  by 
the  'sense  of  dignity'  spoken  of  Mill  understands  an  emotion, 
as  distinct  from  desire,  which  he  would  no  doubt  be  justified 
in  calling  a  part  of  happiness,  an  ingredient  in  the  sum  of  a 
man's  pleasures.  In  that  case  we  must  suppose  that  it  is 
desire  foLthe^asure  of  this  einotion  which  makes  the  man, 
who  is  capable  of  the  pleasiire  attending  the  exercise  of  the 
higher  faculties,  prefer  this  to  the  pleasure  which  he  might 
share  with  the  dunce.  If  this  indeed  were  the  true  account 
'  Utilitarianism,  pp.  12-13. 


CH.  l]  PLEASURE  AND  DESIRE  189 

of  the  matter,  the  strict  Benthamite  who  will  recognise  no 
distinction  in  quality  as  distinct  from  quantity  of  pleasure, 
might  say  that  it  was  simply  a  case  of  the  pleasure  preferred 
being  more  'productive.'  The  intellectual  pleasure  brings 
the  additional  pleasure,  consisting  in  the  emotion  called 
sense  of  dignity,  which  the  animal  pleasure  does  not.  It  is 
scarcely  however  a  plausible  account  of  the  motive  which 
makes  an  intelligent  person  unwilling  to  be  a  fool,  a  person 
of  feeling  and  conscience  unwilling  to  be  selfish  or  base, 
though  persuaded  that  the  change  would  save  him  much 
discontent,  to  say  that  it  is  desire  for  the  preponderating 
pleasure  involved  in  the  sense  of  being  a  superior  person. 
Nor,  if  it  were,  would  there  be  any  ground  for  holding  the 
man  so  actuated  to  be  really  happier  than  the  fool  or  the 
selfish  man,  who,  according  to  his  standard  of  measurement, 
has  as  good  a  chance  of  feeling  the  pleasure  of  superiority 
without  corresponding  discontent.  The  truth  is  that  Mill 
does  not  really  regard  this  '  sense  of  dignity '  as  an  emotion 
in  distinction  from  desire.  He  regards  it  as  a  counter  motive 
to  desires  for  animal  pleasure,  which  mere  emotion  could 
not  be.  Nor  does  he  mean  that  the  preference  determined 
by  it  is  preference  for  the  pleasure  of  feeling  superior  to  the 
pleasures  shared  with  average  men.  The  motive  which  he 
has  in  view  is  a  desire  to  be  worthy,  not  a  desire  to  feel  the 
pleasure  of  being  worth  more  than  others;  and  he  only 
regards  it  as  desire  for  pleasure  at  all,  because  he  fancies 
that  a  desire,  of  which  the  disappointment  makes  me  un- 
happy, is  therefore  a  desire  for  happiness— that  a  jJesire  is, 
forjhe  pleasure  which  ensues  upojn  its  satisfaction. 

167.  The  real  ground  then  of  Mill's  departure  from  the 
stricter  Utilitarian  doctrine,  that  the  worth  of  pleasure  de- 
pends simply  on  its  amount,  is  his  virtual  surrender  of  the 
doctrine  that  all  desire  is  for  pleasure;  but  he  does  not 
recognise  this  surrender,  because  he  thinks  that  to  call  a 
desired  object  part  of  the  happiness  of  the  person  desiring  it , 
is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  desire  for  the  object  is  a 
desire  for  pleasure.    Yet  little  reflection  is  needed  to  show 


igo      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

that  it  is  not  so.  The  latter  proposition  can  only  mean  that 
a  possible  action  or  experience  is  contemplated  as  likely  to 
be  pleasant,  and  is  then  desired  for  the  sake  of  the  pleasure. 
It  means  that  the  anticipation  of  pleasure  determines  desire. 
But  the  other  proposition,  that  a  desired  object  is  part  of  the 
happiness  of  the  person  desiring  it,  rather  means  that  desire 
determines  the  anticipation  of  pleasure;  that,  given  desire 
for  an  object,  however  different  from  pleasure  that  object 
may  be,  there  results  pleasure,  or  at  least  a  removal  of  pain, 
in  the  satisfaction  of  the  desire ;  that  the  man  feeling  the 
desire  necessarily  looks  forward  to  this  result  as  part  of 
a  possible  happiness  to  come,  and  cannot  be  completely 
happy  till  the  object  is  attained.  This  is  equivalent  to 
saying,  as  has  been  so  often  mentioned  above,  that  to 
desire  an  object  is  to  seek  self-satisfaction  in  its  attainment, 
but  it  does  not  in  the  least  imply  that  pleasure  is  the  object 
in  which  self-satisfaction  is  sought. 

168.  The  same  is  true  of  the  other  forms  in  which  Mill 
expresses  the  conception  on  which  he  considers  the  proof 
of  Utilitarianism  to  rest.  'Desiring  a  thing  and  finding 
it  pleasant  .  .  .  are  two  parts  of  the  same  phenomenon.' 
'  To  think  of  an  object  as  desirable  .  .  .  and  to  think  of  it 
as  pleasant  are  one  and  the  same  thing '.'  Both  statements 
are  ambiguous.  Each  is  in  a  sense  true,  but  not  in  the 
sense  which  would  imply  that  a  pleasure  is  the  only  possible 
object  of  desire.  In  the  latter  statement,  what  is  meant 
by  'thinking  of  an  object  as  desirable'?  Does  it  mean 
thinking  of  it  as  one  that  should  be  desired  ?  Thus  under- 
stood, the  statement  would  lose  all  plausibility.  No  one 
would  pretend  that  to  think  of  an  object  as  one  which  he 
should  desire  is  the  same  thing  as  thinking  of  it  as  pleasant. 
Rather,  so  long  as  he  thinks  of  it  as  one  in  which  he  finds 
pleasure,  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  place  it  in  any  such 
relation  to  himself  as  could  be  represented  by  saying  that 
he  thinks  of  it  as  an  object  which  he  should  desire.  Nor 
is  there  any  sign  that  Mill  uses  the  terms  '  desired '  and 
'  Utilitarianism,  p.  58. 


CH.  l]  PLEASURE  AND  DESIRE  19I 

'desirable'  esscept  as  pretty  much  equivalent.  To  'think 
of  an  object  as  desirable '  means  with  him  to  reflect  on  it  as 
one  that  is  desired.  Now  it  is  quite  true  that  I  cannot 
reflect  on  an  object  as  one  that  I  desire  without  thinking 
of  it  as  pleasant,  in  the  sense  that  I  cannot  reflect  on  my 
desire  for  it  without  thinking  of  the  pleasure  there  would 
be  in  the  satisfaction  of  the  desire.  But  this  in  no  way 
implies  that  the  desire  is  a  desire  for  that  or  any  other 
pleasure. 

As  regards  the  other  statement,  if  the  'phenomenon' 
under  consideration  is  taken  to  include  both  the  desire  for 
an  object  and  the  satisfaction  of  that  desire  in  the  attain- 
ment of  its  object,  then  to  desire  the  object  and  to  find 
its  attainment  pleasant  are  doubtless  parts  of  that  one  phe- 
nomenon. If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  phenomenon  is  held 
to  be  confined  to  the  desire,  and  not  to  include  its  satis- 
faction, then  '  to  find  a  thing  pleasant '  is  no  part  of  the 
phenomenon ;  for  unsatisfied  desire  involves  no  pleasure. 
We  may  suppose,  however,  that  '  to  find  it  pleasant '  is  here 
hastily  written  for  '  to  anticipate  pleasure  from  it.'  Thus 
interpreted,  the  statement  is  indisputable  so  far  as  it  goes. 
To  desire  an  object,  and  to  anticipate  pleasure  from  its 
attainment,  are  certainly  parts  of  one  and  the  same  phe- 
nomenon. But  the  question  remains  of  the  relation  in 
which  the  two  parts  of  the  phenomenon  stand  to  each  other. 
Is  it  always  the  anticipation  of  pleasure  from  an  object  that 
excites  the  desire  for  it,  or  are  there  cases  in  which  the 
anticipation  of  pleasure  in  the  satisfaction  of  desire  arises 
out  of  an  independent  desire  for  an  object  which  is  not 
pleasure  at  all?  The  former  is  the  view  which  Mill  believed 
himself  to  hold,  and  which  his  '  Proof  of  Utilitarianism ' 
requires ;  but  the  proposition  under  consideration  is  equally 
compatible  with  the  latter  view,  and  it  may  be  doubted 
whether  it  would  have  seemed  so  self-evident  to  most  readers, 
or  even  to  Mill  himself,  if  it  were  not  so. 

169.  The  reason  for  this  doubt  as  regards  Mill  himself 
is  that  he  insists  upon  the  reality  of  desires  which,  as  he 


192      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [ek.  Ill 

describes  them,  are  only  desires  iot  pleasure  in  the  improper 
and  illogical  sense ;  which  are  not  determined  by  an  ante- 
cedent imagination  of  pleasure  ;  but  from  which  there  results 
pleasure  in  the  attainment  of  the  desired  object,  pain  in  its 
absence.  Thus,  having  pointed  out  that  the  Utilitarian 
doctrine  requires  us  to  consider  happiness,  or  pleasure,  the 
only  thing  desirable  as  an  end,  he  goes  on  to  say  ^  that  '  it 
maintains  not  only  that  virtue  is  to  be  desired,  but  that  it  is 
to  be  desired  disinterestedly,'  i.e.,  as  he  explains,  not  as 
a  means  to  '  any  end  beyond  it'  The  mind,  he  tells  us,  is 
'  not  in  a  right  state,  not  in  a  state  conformable  to  Utility,' 
unless  it  so  desires  virtue.  But  such  desire  for  virtue  is 
clearly  not  determined  by  any  antecedent  imagination  of 
pleasure.  It  is  of  course  open  to  any  one  to  argue  that 
what  is  called  desire  for  virtue  is  really  desire  for  pleasures 
that  are  to  be  obtained  in  a  certain  way ;  but  in  that  case 
virtue  is  not  an  ultimate  object  of  desire,  the  desire  for  it  is 
not  disinterested.  That  presentation  of  virtue  which  deter- 
mines any  disinterested  desire  for  it,  can  only  be  a  pre- 
sentation of  a  possible  state  of  character  or  mode  of  action 
as  an  ideal  object  which  we  seek  to  realise ;  and  the  object 
thus  presented  cannot  be  identified  with  any  pleasant  feeling 
or  series  of  feelings,  which,  having  experienced  it,  we  imagine 
and  desire  to  experience  again.  If,  then,  the  presentation 
of  virtue  as  an  ultimate  object,  and  not  merely  as  a  means, 
does  determine  desire,  there  are  desires  which  are  not  ex- 
cited by  the  anticipation  of  pleasure,  though  in  such  cases  as 
much  as  in  any  other  the  desired  object,  just  so  far  as  desired, 
is  '  part  of  the  happiness '  of  the  person  desiring  it,  in  the 
sense  that,  having  desired  it,  he  cannot  be  happy  without  it.. 
There  are  other  objects  of  desire  recognised  by  Mill — 
money,  power,  fame— which  he  admits  are  not  pleasures 
(though  to  power  and  fame,  he  thinks,  'there  is  a  certain 
amount  of  immediate  pleasure  annexed  ^ '),  but  which  have 
yet  come  to  be  desired  for  their  own  sake.  In  regard  to 
them,  as  in  regard  to  virtue,  he  suggests  that  they  were  ori- 
'  Utilitarianism,  p.  54.  =  Ibid.,  p.  55. 


CH.  l]  PLEASURE  AND  DESIRE  193 

ginally  desired  as  means,  as  conducive  to  pleasure  or  to  pro- 
tection from  pain,  but  he  does  not  pretend  that,  by  those 
who  desire  them  most  strongly,  they  are  so  desired  any 
longer.  '  What  was  once  desired  as  an  instrument  for  the 
attainment  of  happiness  has  come  to  be  desired  for  its  own 
sake.'  That  the  desire  for  them  originated  in  a  desire  for 
pleasure  is,  indeed,  a  view  founded  on  the  assumption  that 
pleasures  alone  are  wished  for.  To  aid  in  the  attainment  of 
our  wishes,  as  these  things  do,  is  with  Mill  the  same  thing 
as  to  aid  in  the  attainment  of  pleasure.  But  we  may  waive 
this  point,  for  questions  as  to  the  history  of  any  desire  do 
not  affect  its  present  relation  to  its  object.  If  money,  fame, 
and  power  are  desired  not  as  a  means  to  pleasure  but  for 
their  own  sake — and  this  Mill  admits — then  there  are  de- 
sires, whatever  their  history,  which  are  not  desires  for  plea- 
sure, however  essential  their  gratification  may  be  to  the  hap- 
piness of  those  who  so  desire. 

170.  As  against  the  view,  therefore,  that  all  desire  is  for 
some  pleasure  or  other,  from  which  it  would  seem  to  follow 
that  the  good  will  cannot  differ  intrinsically,  or  as  desire, 
from  the  bad,  but  only  in  virtue  of  effects  in  the  way  of 
pleasure  and  pain,  we  may  adduce  the  involuntary  evidence 
of  the  most  eminent  modern  advocate  of  that  view.  We 
find  him  explicitly  recognising  desires  which,  as  they  exist, 
however  they  may  have  originated,  are  not  desires  for  plea- 
sure, and  which  he  only  brings  under  his  general  theory 
of  desire  on  the  ground  that  the  objects  of  such  desires  are 
desired  by  us  as  part  of  our  happiness.  But  this,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  no  more  than  saying  that  they  are  desired  by 
a  self-conscious  subject,  who  in  all  desire,  or  at  any  rate 
in  all  that  amounts  to  will,  is  seeking  self-satisfaction,  and 
who,  so  far  as  he  reflects  on  any  desire,  reflects  also  on  the 
pleasure  of  its  possible  fulfilment.  It  leaves  the  question 
open  what  the  ideal  object  is,  in  the  realisation  of  which 
self-satisfaction  is  sought.  It  does  not  exclude  the  possi- 
bility of  its  being  even  the  endurance  of  pain,  as  perhaps, 
under  sterner  conditions  of  society  than  ours,  or  under  the 

o 


194      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

influence  of  fanatical  belief,  it  not  unfrequently  has  been. 
The  formula  is  at  any  rate  elastic  enough  to  allow  of  the 
strong  assertion  by  Mill  himself,  that  the  attainment  of  a 
certain  disposition  may  be  an  object  of  desire  in  itself, 
irrespectively  of  any  pleasures  that  flow  from  it.  We  may 
return  then  to  examine  the  question  whether  there  is  any 
intrinsic  distinction  between  objects  willed,  on  which  the 
difference  between  a  good  and  a  bad  will  may  rest,  without 
allowing  ourselves  to  be  stopped  in  limine  by  a  denial  of 
the  possibility  of  such  distinction  and  a  reduction  of  all 
motives,  however  various  in  their  effects,  to  desire  for  some 
pleasure  or  other  on  the  part  of  the  person  desiring. 

171.  It  will  have  appeared  from  the  foregoing  discussion 
that  the  primary  difference  between  the  view  here  advanced 
and  that  of  '  Hedonistic '  philosophers  relates  to  the  generic 
definition  of  the  good — not  only  of  the  morally  good,  but 
of  good  in  the  wider  sense.  Whereas  with  them  the  good 
generically  is  the  pleasant,  in  this  treatise  the  common 
characteristic  of  the  good  is  that  it  satisfies  some  desire. 
In  all  satisfaction  of  desire  there  is  pleasure,  and  thus 
pleasantness  in  an  object  is  a  necessary  incident  of  its  being 
good.  We  cannot  think  of  an  object  as  good,  i.e.  such  as 
will  satisfy  desire,  without  thinking  of  it  as  in  consequence 
such  as  will  yield  pleasure;  but  its  pleasantness  depends 
•on  its  goodness,  not  its  goodness  upon  the  pleasure  it 
conveys.  This  pleasure,  according  to  our  view,  so  far  as 
it  is  a  necessary  incident  of  any  good,  presupposes  desire 
and  results  from  its  satisfaction,  while  according  to  the 
Hedonistic  view  desire  presupposes  an  imagination  of  plea- 
sure. The  importance  of  this  distinction,  which  may  at 
first  sight  seem  somewhat  finely  drawn,  will  appear  as  soon 
as  we  consider  its  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  distin- 
guishing nature  of  the  moral  good,  or  on  that  other  form 
of  the  same  question — the  form  in  which  it  seems  to  have 
been  first  raised  by  philosophy — in  which  it  is  enquired,  how 
the  true  good  differs  from  the  merely  apparent. 


CH.  l]  MORAL   GOOD  I95 

If  the  generic  definition  of  good  is  that  it  is  pleasure,  the 
moral  good  as  distinct  from  the  natural  can  only  be  plea- 
sure obtained  in  a  particular  way;  either  simply  pleasure 
experienced  as  a  result  of  intentional  action,  in  distinction 
from  such  pleasure  as  comes  to  us  in  a  natural  course  of 
events  which  we  have  not  contributed  to  bring  about,  or 
such  pleasure  as,  in  Locke's  language,  '  is  not  the  natural 
product  and  consequence  of  the  action  itself,'  but  is 
attached  to  it  by  some  positive  law,  either  the  law  of  GiDd, 
or  civil  law,  or  the  law  of  opinion'.  This  at  any  rate 
is  what  '  moral  good '  according  to  this  view  must  mean, 
so  long  as  it  is  understood  to  be  the  designation  of  an  end. 
As  a  designation  of  means,  it  will  be  applicable  to  actions 
which  tend  to  produce  the  pleasure  obtainable  in  the  par- 
ticular manner  described.  From  the  same  point  of  view 
the  apparent  good  can  only  be  distinguished  from  the  true 
as  a  pleasure  of  which  the  enjoyment  in  its  consequences 
yields  a  preponderance  of  pain  over  pleasure,  whether  to 
the  individual  enjoying  it  or  (according  to  the  Utilitarian 
view)  to  the  majority  of  persons  or  of  sentient  beings.  On 
the  other  hand,  regarding  the  good  generically  as  that  which 
satisfies  desire,  but  considering  the  objects  we  desire  to  be 
by  no  means  necessarily  pleasures,  we  shall  naturally  dis- 
tinguish the  moral  good  as  that  which  satisfies  the  desire 
of  a  moral  agent,  or  that  in  which  a  moral  agent  can  find 
the  satisfaction  of  himself  which  he  necessarily  seeks.  The 
true  good  we  shall  understand  in  the  same  way.     It  is  an 

'  See  Locke's  Essay,  Book  II.  ch.  xxviii.  §  5  :  'Good  and  evil  are 
nothing  but  pleasure  or  pain,  or  that  which  occasions  or  procures  plea- 
sure or  pain  to  us.  Moral  good  and  evil,  then,  is  only  the  conformity 
or  disagreement  of  our  voluntary  actions  to  some  law,  whereby  good  or 
evil  [«. «.  pleasure  or  pain]  is  drawn  on  us  by  the  will  and  power  of  the 
law-maker.'  Here  it  will  be  seen  that  the  terms  '  good  and  evil,'  when 
qualified  as  '  moral,'  are  transferred  from  end  to  means.  But,  according 
to  the  general  definition  of  '  good  and  evil '  as  equivalent  to  pleasure 
and  pain,  we  must  suppose  that  Locke  considered  the  '  conformity  of 
our  voluntary  actions  to  some  law '  to  constitute  '  moral  good '  only 
because  it  brings  about  the  pleasure  which,  by  one  or  other  of  the  laws 
which  he  recognises,  is  attached  to  such  conformity. 

O  2 


196      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  UI 

end  in  which  the  effort  of  a  moral  agent  can  really  find 
rest. 

172.  It  will  at  once  be  objected  that  this  account  of 
moral  good  either  tells  us  nothing  at  all  about  it,  or  only 
tells  us  anything  in  virtue  of  some  assumption  in  regard 
to  moral  good  involved  in  our  notion  of  a  moral  agent. 
The  objection  is  in  a  certain  sense  a  valid  one.  The 
question,  What  is  our  moral  nature  or  capability  ? — in  other 
words,  What  do  we  mean  by  calling  ourselves  moral 
agents? — is  one  to  which  a  final  answer  cannot  be  given 
without  an  answer  to  the  question,  What  is  moral  good  ? 
For  the  moral  good  is  the  realisation  of  the  moral  capability, 
and  we  cannot  fully  know  what  any  capability  is  till  we 
know  its  ultimate  realisation.  It  may  be  argued  therefore 
that  we  either  know  what  the  moral  good  in  this  sense  is, 
and  accordingly  have  no  need  to  infer  what  it  is  from  our 
moral  nature,  or  else  we  do  not  know  what  it  is,  in  which 
case  neither  can  we  know  what  the  moral  nature  is  from 
which  we  profess  to  infer  what  the  moral  good  is. 

The  answer  is  that  from  a  moral  capability  which  had  not 
realised  itself  at  all  nothing  could  indeed  be  inferred  as  to 
the  moral  good  which  can  only  consist  in  its  full  realisation- 
but  that  the  moral  capability  of  man  is  not  in  this  wholly 
undeveloped  state.  To  a  certain  extent  it  has  shown  by 
actual  achievement  what  it  has  in  it  to  become,  and  by 
reflection  on  the  so' far  developed  activity  we  can  form  at 
least  some  negative  conclusion  in  regard  to  its  complete 
realisation.  We  may  convince  ourselves  that  this  realisa- 
tion can  only  be  attained  in  certain  directions  of  our  acti- 
vity, not  in  others.  We  cannot  indeed  describe  any  state 
in  which  man,  having  become  all  that  he  is  capable  of  be- 
coming— all  that,  according  to  the  divine  plan  of  the  world, 
he  is  destined  to  become — would  find  rest  for  his  soul.  We 
cannot  conceive  it  under  any  forms  borrowed  from  our  ac- 
tual experience,  for  our  only  experience  of  activity  is  of  such 
as  implies  incompleteness.  Of  a  life  of  completed  develop- 
ment, of  activity  with  the  end  attained,  we  can  only  speak 


CH.l]  MORAL    GOOD 


197 


or  think  in  negatives,  and  thus  only  can  we  speak  or  think 
of  that  state  of  being  in  which,  according  to  our  theory,  the 
ultimate  moral  good  must  consist.  Yet  the  conviction  that 
there  must  be  such  a  state  of  being,  merely  negative  as  is 
our  theoretical  apprehension  of  it,  may  have  supreme  in- 
fluence over  conduct,  in  moving  us  to  that  effort  after  the 
Better  which,  at  least  as  a  conscious  effort,  implies  the  con- 
viction of  there  being  a  Best. 

And  when  the  speculative  question  is  raised  as  to  what 
this  Best  can  be,  we  find  that  it  has  not  left  itself  without 
witness.  The  practical  struggle  after  the  Better,  of  which 
the  idea  of  there  being  a  Best  has  been  the  spring,  has 
taken  such  effect  in  the  world  of  man's  affairs  as  makes 
the  way  by  which  the  Best  is  to  be  more  nearly  approached 
plain  enough  to  him  that  will  see.  In  the  broad  result  it 
is  not  hard  to  understand  how  man  has  bettered  himself 
through  institutions  and  habits  which  tend  to  make  the 
welfare  of  all  the  welfare  of  each,  and  through  the  arts  which 
make  nature,  both  as  used  and  as  contemplated,  the  friend 
of  man.  And  just  so  far  as  this  is  plain,  we  know  enough 
of  ultimate  moral  good  to  guide  our  conduct ;  enough  to 
judge  whether  the  prevailing  interests  which  make  our  char- 
acter are  or  are  not  in  the  direction  which  tends  further  to 
realise  the  capabilities  of  the  human  spirit. 

173.  But  here  again  it  may  be  urged  that  we  are  going 
too  fast,  that  we  are  making  huge  assumptions.  We  seem 
to  be  taking  for  granted  that  there  is  some  best  state  of 
being  for  man — best  in  the  sense  that  in  it  lies  the  full 
realisation  of  his  capabilities,  and  that  in  it  therefore  alone 
he  can  satisfy  himself,  though  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  his 
efforts  after  self-satisfaction  he  constantly  acts  in  a  manner 
inconsistent  with  his  attaining  it.  We  seem  to  be  taking 
for  granted,  further,  that  this  best  state  of  man  is  already 
present  to  some  divine  consciousness,  so  that  it  may  pro- 
perly be  said  to  be  the  vocation  of  man  to  attain  it ;  that 
some  unfulfilled  and  unrealised,  but  still  operative,  idea  of 
there  being  such  a  state  has  been  the  essential  influence  in 


198      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

the  process  by  which  man  has  so  far  bettered  himself ;  and 
that  a  continued  operation  of  the  same  idea  in  us,  with  that 
growing  definiteness  which  is  gathered  from  reflection  on 
the  actions  and  institutions  in  which  it  has  so  far  manifested 
itself,  is  the  condition  of  character  and  conduct  being  mor- 
ally good  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  words.  How  are  such 
assumptions  to  be  justified? 

174.  In  order  to  justify  them,  we  must  in  the  first  place 
recall  the  conclusions  arrived  at  in  an  earlier  stage  of  this 
treatise.  We  saw  reason  to  hold  that  the  existence  of  one 
connected  world,  which  is  the  presupposition  of  knowledge, 
implies  the  action  of  one  self-conditioning  and  self-deter- 
mining mind;  and  that,  as  our  knowledge,  so  our  moral 
activity  was  only  explicable  on  supposition  of  a  certain  repro- 
duction of  itself,  on  the  part  of  this  eternal  mind,  as  the  self 
of  man — 'a  reproduction  of  itself  to  which  it  makes  the 
processes  of  animal  life  organic,  and  which  is  qualified  and 
limited  by  the  nature  of  those  processes,  but  which  is  so  far 
essentially  a  reproduction  of  the  one  supreme  subject,  im- 
plied in  the  existence  of  the  world,  that  the  product  carries 
with  it  under  all  its  limitations  and  qualifications  the  char- 
acteristic of  being  an  object  to  itself  (§  99).  Proof  ofsuch 
a_dpctiine,jn  the  ordijiary-S?pse  of  thejTOrd,JrqmJhe_  na- 
ture ojUhe-caseibere  cannot  Jje.  It  is  not  a  truth  deducible 
from  other  established  or  conceded  truths.  It  is  not  a  state- 
ment of  an  event  or  matter  of  fact  that  can  be  the  object  of 
experiment  or  observation.  It  represents  a  conception  tOk^ 
which  no  perceivable  or  imaginable  object  can  possibly  cor- 
respond, but  one  that  affords  the  only  means  by  which,  re- 
flecting on  our  moral  and  intellectual  experience  conjointly, 
taking  the  world  and  ourselves  into  account,  we  can  put  the 
whole  thing  together  and  understand  how  (not  why,  but 
how)  we  are  and  do  what  we  consciously  are  and  do.  Given 
this  conception,  and  not  without  it,  we  can  at  any  rate  ex- 
press that  which  it  cannot  be  denied  demands  expression, 
the  nature  of  man's  reason  and  man's  will,  of  human  pro- 
gress and  human  short-coming,  of  the  effort  after  good  and 


CH.l]  MORAL   GOOD  199 

the  failure  to  gain  it,  of  virtue  and  vice,  in  their  connection 
and  in  their  distinction,  in  their  essential  opposition  and  in 
their  no  less  essential  unity. 

175.  The  reason  and^wilL_of  man„ have. .their.  COininon. 
ground^  in  that_characterist^  of  being  an_ object. tojhimself 
which,  as_we_have  said,Jielongs_to  him-  in-  so-£ar_as_ihe, 
eternal  jnindj^  through  the  medium  of  an  anhnal  organism 
and  under  limitations  .atisiiig  from  .the- employment, of  such 
a  medjumj  reproduces  jtselCiiibim.  It  is  in  virtue  of  this 
self-objectifying  principle  that  he  is  determined,  not  simply 
by  natural  wants  according  'to  natural  laws,  but  by  the 
thought  of  himself  as  existing  under  certain  conditions,  and 
as  having  ends  that  may  be  attained  and  capabilities  that 
may  be  realised  under  those  conditions.  It  is  thus  that  he 
not  merely  desires  but  seeks  to  satisfy  himself  in  gaining  the 
objects  of  his  desire ;  presents  to  himself  a  certain  possible 
state  of  himselfj  which  in  the  gratification  of  the  desire  he 
seeks  to  reach ;  in  short,  wills.  It  is  thus,  again,  that  he 
has  the  impulse  to  make  himself  what  he  has  the  possibility 
of  becoming  but  actually  is  not,  and  hence  not  merely,  like 
the  plant  or  animal,  undergoes  a  process  of  development, 
but  seeks  to,  and  does,  develop  himself.  The  conditions 
of  the  animal  soul,  'servile  to  every  skiey  influence,'  no 
sooner  sated  than  wanting,  are  such  that  the  self-determining 
spirit  cannot  be  conscious  of  them  as  conditions  to  which 
it  is  subject — and  it  is  so  subject  and  so  conscious  of  its 
subjection  in  the  human  person — without  seeking  some 
satisfaction  of  it$elf,  some  realisation  of  its  capabilities,  that 
shall  be  independent  of  those  conditions. 

176.  Hence  arises  the  impulse  which  becomes  the  source, 
according  to  the  direction  it  takes,  both  of  vice  and  of 
virtue.  It  is  the  source  of  vicious  self-seeking  and  self- 
assertion,  so  far  as  the  spirit  which  is  in  man  seeks  to  satisfy 
itself  or  to  realise  its  capabilities  in  modes  in  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  which  its  divine  origin  imposes  on  it  and 
which  is  equally  the  law  of  the  universe  and  of  human 
society,  its  self-satisfaction  or  self-realisation  is  not  to  be 


20O      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  HI 

found.  Such,  for  instance — so  self-defeating — is  the  quest 
for  self-satisfaction  in  the  life  of  the  voluptuary.  Animals 
are  not  voluptuaries ;  for,  if  they  seek  pleasure  at  all,  they 
do  so  in  the  sense  that  they  are  stimulated  to  action  by  the 
images  of  this  pleasure  and  that,  as  those  images  recur. 
They  are  not  objects  to  themselves,  as  men  are,  and  there- 
fore cannot  set  themselves,  as  the  voluptuary  does,  to  seek 
self  satisfaction  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  pleasures  that  are 
to  be  had.  It  is  one  and  the  same  principle  of  his  nature — 
his  divine  origin,  in  the  sense  explained — which  makes  it 
possible  for  the  voluptuary  to  seek  self-satisfaction,  and  thus 
to  live  for  pleasure,  at  all,  and  which  according  to  the  law 
of  its  being,  according  to  its  inherent  capability,  makes  it 
impossible  that  the  self-satisfaction  should  be  found  in  any 
succession  of  pleasures.  So  it  is  again  with  the  man  who 
seeks  to  assert  himself,  to  realise  himself,  to  show  what  he 
has  in  him  to  be,  in  achievements  which  may  make  the 
world  wonder,  but  which  in  their  social  effects  are  such  that 
the  human  spirit,  according  to  the  law  of  its  being,  which 
is  a  law  of  development  in  society,  is  not  advanced  but 
hindered  by  them  in  the  realisation  of  its  capabilities.  He 
is  living  for  ends  of  which  the  divine  principle  that  forms 
his  self  alone  renders  him  capable,  but  these  ends,  because 
in  their  attainment  one  is  exalted  by  the  depression  of 
others,  are  not  in  the  direction  in  which  that  principle  can 
really  fulfil  the  promise  and  potency  which  it  contains. 

How  in  particular  and  in  detail  that  fulfilment  is  to  be 
attained,  we  can  only  tell  in  so  far  as  some  progress  has 
actually  been  made  towards  its  attainment  in  the  knowledge, 
arts,  habits,  and  institutions  through  which  man  has  so  far 
become  more  at  home  in  nature,  and  through  which  one 
member  of  the  human  family  has  become  more  able  and 
more  wishful  to  help  another.  But  the  condition  of  its  fur- 
ther fulfilment  is  the  will  in  some  form  or  other  to  contribute 
to  its  fulfilment.  And  hence  the  differentia  of  the  virtuous 
life,  proceeding  as  it  does  from  the  same  self-objectifying 
principle  which  we  have  just  characterised  as  the  source  of 


CH.  l]  MORAL   GOOD  201 

the  vicious  life,  is  that  it  is  governed  by  the  consciousness 
of  there  being  some  perfection  which  has  to  be  attained, 
some  vocation  which  has  to  be  fulfilled,  some  law  which 
has  to  be  obeyed,  something  absolutely  desirable,  whatever 
the  individual  may  for  the  time  desire ;  that  it  is  in  minis- 
tering to  such  an  end  that  the  agent  seeks  to  satisfy  himself. 
However  meagrely  the  perfection,  the  vocation,  the  law  may 
be  conceived,  the  consciousness  that  there  is  such  a  thing, 
so  far  as  it  directs  the  will,  must  at  least  keep  the  man  to 
the  path  in  which  human  progress  has  so  far  been  made. 
It  must  keep  him  loyal  in  the  spirit  to  established  morality, 
industrious  in  some  work  of  recognised  utility.  What  fur- 
ther result  it  will  yield,  whether  it  will  lead  to  a  man's  mak- 
ing any  original  contribution  to  the  perfecting  of  life,  will 
depend  on  his  special  gifts  and  circumstances.  Though 
these  are  such,  as  is  the  case  with  most  of  us,  that  he  has 
no  chance  of  leaving  the  world  or  even  the  society  imme- 
diately about  him  observably  better  than  he  found  it,  yet  in 
'  the  root  of  the  matter ' — as  having  done  loyally,  or  '  from 
love  of  his  work '  (which  means  under  consciousness  of  an 
ideal),  or  in  religious  language  '  as  unto  the  Lord,'  the  work 
that  lay  nearest  him — he  shares  the  goodness  of  the  man 
who  devotes  a  genius  to  the  bettering  of  human  life. 

177.  It  may  seem  that  in  the  preceding  section  we  have 
gone  off  prematurely  into  an  account  of  virtue  and  vice,  in 
respect  at  once  of  the  common  ground  of  their  possibility 
and  of  their  essential  difference,  without  the  due  preliminary 
explanation  of  the  relation  between  reason  and  will.  A 
very  little  reflection,  however,  on  what  has  been  said  will 
show  the  way  in  which  this  relation  is  conceived.  By  will 
is  understood,  as  has  been  explained,  an  effort  (or  capacity 
for  such  effort)  on  the  part  of  a  self-conscious  subject  to 
satisfy  itself :  by  reason,  in  the  practical  sense,  the  capacity 
on  the  part  of  such  a  subject  to  conceive  a  better  state  of 
itself  as  an  end  to  be  attained  by  action.  This  is  what  will 
and  reason  are  severally  taken  to  imply  in  the  most  primitive 
form  in  which  they  appear  in  us.     A  being  without  capacity  J 


202      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  HI 

for  such  effort  or  such  conception  would  not,  upon  our 
theory,  be  considered  to  have  will  or  reason.  In  this  most 
primitive  form  they  are  alike  modes  of  that  eternal  principle 
of  self-objectification  which  we  hold  to  be  reproducing  itself 
in  man  through  the  medium  of  an  animal  organism,  and  of 
which  the  action  is  equally  necessary  to  knowledge  and  to 
morality.  There  is  thus  essentially  or  in  principle  an  identity 
between  reason  and  will ;  and  widely  as  they  become  diver- 
gent in  the  actual  history  of  men  (in  the  sense  that  the 
objects  where  good  is  actually  sought  are  often  not  those 
where  reason,  even  as  in  the  person  seeking  them,  pro- 
nounces that  it  is  to  be  found),  still  the  true  development 
of  man,  the  only  development  in  which  the  capabilities  of 
his  'heaven-born'  nature  can  be  actualised,  lies  in  the  direc- 
tion of  union  between  tlie  developed  will  and  the  developed 
reason.  It  consists  in  so  living  that  the  objects  in  which  self- 
satisfaction  is  habitually  sought  contribute  to  the  realisation 
of  a  true  idea  of  what  is  best  for  man — such  an  idea  as  our 
reason  would  have  when  it  had  come  to  be  all  which  it  has 
the  possibility  of  becoming,  and  which,  as  in  God,  it  is. 

178.  Such  a  life,  as  in  vague  forecast  conceived,  has 
always  been  called,  according  to  a  usage  inherited  from  the 
Greek  fathers  of  moral  philosophy,  a  life  according  to 
reason.  And  this  usage  is  in  harmony  with  the  definition 
just  given  of  reason  at  its  lowest  potency  in  us.  For  any 
truest  idea  of  what  is  best  for  man  that  can  guide  our 
action  is  still  a  realisation  of  that  capacity  for  conceiving 
a  better  state  of  himself,  which  we  must  ascribe  to  every 
child  whom  we  can  regard  as  'father  of  the  man'  capable  of 
morality,  to  any  savage  to  whom  we  would  affiliate  the  moral 
life  that  we  inherit.  Nay,  even  if  we  mean  by  a  '  true  idea 
of  what  is  best  for  man '  such  an  adequate  and  detailed  idea 
of  our  perfection  as  we  cannot  conceive  ourselves  to  have — 
since  to  have  it  would  imply  that  the  perfection  was  already 
attained,  and  the  conception  of  ourselves  in  perfection  is  one 
that  we  cannot  form — still  such  an  idea  would  be  but  the 
completed  expression  of  that  self-realising  principle  of  which 


CH.  l]  MORAL   GOOD  203 

the  primary  expression  is  the  capacity,  distinctive  of  the 
'  animal  rationale  'in  all  its  forms,  of  conceiving  itself  in  a 
better  state  than  it  is. 

On  the  other  hand  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this 
same  capacity  is  the  condition,  as  has  been  pointed  out, 
no  less  of  the  vicious  life  than  of  the  virtuous.  The  self- 
objectifying  principle  cannot  exert  itself  as  will  without  also 
exerting  itself  as  reason,  though  neither  as  will  nor  as  reason 
does  it,  in  the  vicious  life,  exert  itself  in  a  direction  that 
leads  to  the  true  development  of  its  capacity.  That  a  man 
should  seek  an  object  as  '  part  of  his  happiness,'  or  as  one 
without  which  in  his  then  state  he  cannot  satisfy  himself, — 
and  this  is  to  will — implies  that  he  presents  himself  to 
himself  as  in  a  better  state  with  the  object  attained  than 
he  is  without  it;  and  this  is  to  exercise  reason.  Every 
form  of  vicious  self-seeking  is  conditioned  by  such  presenta- 
tion and,  in  that  sense,  by  reason.  Why  then,  it  may  be 
asked,  should  the  moralising  influence  in  man,  the  faculty 
through  which  the  paths  of  virtue  are  marked  out,  whether 
followed  or  no,  be  specially  called  reason  ?  We  answer : 
because  it  is  through  the  operative  consciousness  in  man 
of  a  possible  state  of  himself  better  than  the  actual,  though 
that  consciousness  is  the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  all 
that  is  morally  wrong,  that  the  divine  self-realising  principle 
in  him  gradually  fulfils  its  capability  in  the  production  of 
a  higher  life.  With  this  consciousness^  directed  in  the 
right  path,  i.e.  the  path  in  which  it  tends  to  become  what 
according  to  the  immanent  divine  law  of  its  being  it  has  in 
it  to  be — and  it  is  as  so  directed  that  we  call  it  '  practical 
reason ' — rests  the  initiative  of  all  virtuous  habit  and  action. 

170.  It  is  true  that,  just  so  far  as  this  consciousness  is 
operative  in  the  direction  supposed,  it  carries  an  improvement 
of  the  will  with  it.  Men  come  to  seek  their  satisfaction, 
their  good,  in  objects  conceived  as  desirable  because  con- 
tributing to  the  best  state  or  perfection  of  man ;  and  this 
change  we  describe  by  saying  that  their  will  becomes  con- 
formable to  their  reason.     For  the  self-realisation  of  the 


204      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

divine  principle  in  man  this  change  of  will  is  just  as  necessary 
as  the  development  of  practical  reason,  and  to  an  intelligence 
which  could  view  the  process  as  a  whole  would  appear 
inseparable  from  it.  But  to  us  who  view  the  process  piece- 
meal, ourselves  representing  certain  stages  in  it,  it  is  natural 
to  treat  the  development  of  practical  reason,  /.  e.  the  gradual 
filling  up  and  definition  of  the  idea  of  human  perfection, 
as  a  separate  process,  upon  which  the  corresponding  con- 
formation of  will  may  or  may  not  ensue.  We  see  that  in 
the  individual  the  idea  of  what  is  good  for  him  in  his  actual 
state  of  passion  and  desire — the  idea  which  in  fact  he  seeks 
to  realise  in  action — is  apt  not  to  correspond  to  his  convic- 
tion of  what  is  truly  good.  That  conviction  is  the  echo  in 
him  of  the  expression  which  practical  reason  has  so  far 
given  to  itself  in  those  institutions,  usages,  and  judgments 
of  society,  which  contribute  to  the  perfection  of  life,  but  his 
desires  and  habits  are  not  yet  so  far  conformed  to  it  that  he 
can  seek  his  good  in  obeying  it,  that  he  can  will  as  it  directs. 
He  knows  the  better — knows  it,  in  a  sense,  even  as  better 
for  himself,  for  he  can  think  of  himself  as  desiring  what  he 
does  not,  but  feels  that  he  should,  desire — but  he  prefers  the 
worse.     His  will,  we  say,  does  not  answer  to  his  reason. 

It  is  thus  natural  for  us  to  treat  will  and  reason  as  separate 
and  even  as  conflicting  faculties,  though  when  we  reflect  on 
moral  action  in  its  real  integrity  we  see  that  it  involves  each 
alike,  and  that  it  is  only  some  better  reason  with  which  in 
vicious  action  a  man's  will  conflicts,  while  there  is  an  exercise 
of  reason  by  him  which  is  the  very  condition  of  his  vicious- 
ness.  The  'better'  reason  is  his  capacity  for  conceiving 
a  good  of  his  own,  so  far  as  that  capacity  is  informed  by 
those  true  judgments  in  regard  to  human  good  which  the 
action  of  the  eternal  spirit  in  man  has  hitherto  yielded; 
while  the  reason  which  shows  itself  in  his  actual  vice  is  the 
same  capacity,  as  taking  its  object  and  content  from  desires 
of  which  the  satisfaction  is  inconsistent  with  the  real  better- 
ing of  man.  But  just  because  it  is  this  capacity  in  a  man 
which,  while  it  alone  renders  selfishness  in  all  its  forms 


CH.  l]  MORAL   GOOD  205 

possible,  is  the  medium  through  which  alone  ideas  of 
a  better  life  than  he  is  living  are  brought  home  to  him — 
ideas  themselves  arising  from  the  development  of  this 
capacity  as  it  has  so  far  gone  in  men — we  are  right,  when 
once  we  have  allowed  ourselves  to  treat  reason  and  will  as 
separate  faculties,  in  regarding  reason  as  the  one  which  has 
the  initiative  in  the  bettering  of  life.  In  the  same  way  of 
thinking  we  may  properly  ascribe  to  reason — not  as  gradually 
unfolding  itself  in  us,  but  as  in  the  perfection  to  which  that 
process  tends,  and  which  we  must  suppose  to  be  actually 
attained  in  the  eternal  mind — a  fully  articulated  idea  of  the 
best  life  for  man,  and  accordingly  speak  of  life  according 
to  reason  as  the  goal  of  our  moral  effort.  Meanwhile  the 
error  which  lies  in  the  treatment  of  reason  and  will  as 
separate  faculties  we  may  correct  by  bearing  in  mind  that 
it  is  one  and  the  same  self  of  which  reason  and  will  are 
alike  capacities ;  that  in  every  moral  action,  good  or  bad, 
each  capacity  is  exerted  as  much  as  the  other;  and  that 
every  step  forward  in  the  self-realisation  of  the  divine 
principle  in  man  involves  a  determination  of  will  no  less 
than  of  reason,  not  merely  a  conception  of  a  possible  good 
for  man,  but  the  adoption  by  some  man  or  men  of  that 
good  as  his  or  theirs. 


CHAPTER   II 

CHARACTERISTICS   OF    THE   MORAL   IDEAL 

A.     Tfw  Personal  Character  of  the  Moral  Ideal 

180.  Let  us  pause  here  to  take  stock  of  the  conclusions 
so  far  arrived  at.  It  will  be  convenient  to  state  them  in 
dogmatic  form,  begging  the  reader  to  understand  that  this 
form  is  adopted  to  save  time,  and  does  not  betoken  undue 
assurance  on  the  part  of  the  writer.  Through  certain  media, 
and  under  certain  consequent  limitations,  but  with  the 
constant  characteristic  of  self-consciousness  and  self-objecti- 
fication,  the  one  divine  mind  gradually  reproduces  itself  in 
the  human  soul.  In  virtue  of  this  principle  in  him  man 
has  definite  capabilities,  the  realisation  of  which,  since  in  it 
alone  he  can  satisfy  himself,  forms  his  true  good.  They 
are  not  realised,  however,  in  any  life  that  can  be  observed, 
in  any  life  that  has  been,  or  is,  or  (as  it  would  seem)  that 
can  be  lived  by  man  as  we  know  him  ;  and  for  this  reason 
we  cannot  say  with  any  adequacy  what  the  capabilities  are^ 
Yet,  because  the  essence  of  man's  spiritual  endowment  is 
the  consciousness  of  having  it,  the  idea  of  his  having  such 
capabilities,  and  of  a  possible  better  state  of  himself  con- 
sisting in  their  further  realisation,  is  a  moving  influence  in 
him.  It  has  been  the  parent  of  the  institutions  and  usages, 
of  the  social  judgments  and  aspirations,  through  which 
human  life  has  been  so  far  bettered ;  through  which  man 
has  so  far  realised  his  capabilities  and  marked  out  the  path 
that  he  must  follow  in  their  further  realisation.  As  his  true 
good  is  or  would  be  ^  their  complete  realisation,  so  his  good- 

'  We  say  that  his  true  good  is  this  complete  realisation  when  we  think 
of  the  realisation  as  already  attained  in  the  eternal  mind.  We  say  that 
it  would  be  such  realisation  when  we  think  of  the  realisation  as  for  ever 
problematic  to  man  in  the  state  of  which  we  have  experience. 


CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL      207 

ness  is  proportionate  to  his  habitual  responsiveness  to  the 
idea  of  there  being  such  a  true  good,  in  the  various  forms 
of  recognised  duty  and  beneficent  work  in  which  that  idea 
has  so  far  taken  shape  among  men.  In  other  words,  it 
consists  in  the  direction  of  the  will  to  objects  determined 
for  it  by  this  idea,  as  operative  in  the  person  willing ;  which 
direction  of  the  will  we  may,  upon  the  ground  stated,  fitly 
call  its  determination  by  reason. 

181.  Our  next  step  should  b^stoexplainfyrther  how  it  is 
that  the  idea  in  man  of  a  possible"  better  state  of  himself, 
consisting  in  a.  further  realisation  of  his  capabilities,  has 
been  the  moralising  agent  in  human  Kfe ;  how  it  has  yielded 
our  moral  standards,  loyalty  to  which — itself  the  product  of 
the  same  idea — is  the  condition  of  goodness  in  the  individual. 
Before  we  attempt  this  explanation,  however,  it  will  be  well 
to  clear  up  an  ambiguity  which  will  probably  be  thought  to 
lurk  in  the  doctrine  already  advanced.     We  have  spoken 
of  a  certain  '  divine  principle '  as  the  ground  of  human  will 
and  reason ;  as  realising  itself  in  man ;  as  having  capabilities 
of  which  the  full  development  would  constitute  the  perfection 
of  human  life ;  of  direction  to  objects  contributory  to  this 
perfection  as  characteristic  of  a  good  will.     But  what,  it  will 
be  asked,  is  to  be  understood  in  regard  to  the  relation  of 
this  'divine  principle'  to  the  will  and  reason  of  individuals? 
Does  it  realise  itself  in  persons,  in  you  and  me,  or  in  some 
impersonal  Humanity  ?    Do  the  capabilities  spoken  of  admit 
of  fulfilment  in  individuals,  or  is  the  perfection  of  human 
life  some  organisation  of  society  in  which  the  individual  is 
a  perfectly  adjusted  means  to  an  end  which  he  is  not  in 
himself?     Until  these  questions    have    been   dealt  with, 
a  suspicion  may  fairly  be  entertained  that  we  have  been 
playing  fast  and  loose  with  the  conception  of  man  as  in 
himself  an  end  to  himself.     We  have  been  taking  advan- 
tage, it  may  be  said,  of  a  speculation  in  regard  to  the 
development  of  the  human  race,  which  is  quite  a  different 
thing  from  what  is  naturally  understood  by  a  moral  progress 
of  the  individual,  to  justify  a  theory  which  that  speculation. 


2o8      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  hi 

fairly  interpreted,  tends  rather  to  invalidate.  The  theory 
we  want  to  maintain  is  one  that  would  found  a  supposed 
duty,  and  a  supposed  possible  effort,  on  the  part  of  the 
individual  to  make  himself  better,  upon  an  ideal  in  him  of 
a  possible  moral  perfection,  upon  a  conception  actuating 
him  of  something  that  he  may  possibly  become  as  an 
absolute  end  in  himself.  Does  not  the  belief  in  a  develop- 
ment of  the  human  race,  which  individuals  indeed  unwit- 
tingly promote  but  perish  in  promoting,  logically  involve 
the  complete  negation  of  such  a  theory? 

182.  It  is  clearly  of  the  very  essence  of  the  doctrine  above 
advanced  that  the  divine  principle,  which  we  suppose  to  be 
realising  itself  in  man,  should  be  supposed  to  realise  itself  in 
persons,  as  such.  But  for  reflection  on  our  personality,  on 
our  consciousness  of  ourselves  as  objects  to  ourselves,  we 
could  never  dream  of  there  being  such  a  self-realising  prin- 
ciple at  all,  whether  as  implied  in  the  world  or  in  ourselves. 
It  is  only  because  we  are  consciously  objects  to  ourselves, 
that  we  can  conceive  a  world  as  an  object  to  a  single  mind, 
and  thus  as  a  connected  whole.  It  is  the  irreducibility  of 
this  self-objectifying  consciousness  to  anything  else,  the 
impossibility  of  accounting  for  it  as  an  effect,  that  compels 
us  to  regard  it  as  the  presence  in  us  of  the  mind  for  which 
the  world  exists.  To  admit  therefore  that  the  self-realisation 
of  the  divine  principle  can  take  place  otherwise  than  in  a 
consciousness  which  is  an  object  to  itself,  would  be  in  con- 
tradiction of  the  very  ground  upon  which  we  believe  that  a 
divine  principle  does  so  realise  itself  in  man.  Personality, 
no  doubt,  is  a  term  that  has  often  been  fought  over  without 
any  very  precise  meaning  being  attached  to  it.  If  we  mean 
anything  else  by  it  than  the  quality  in  a  subject  of  being 
consciously  an  object  to  itself,  we  are  not  justified  in  saying 
that  it  necessarily  belongs  to  God  and  to  any  being  in  whom 
God  in  any  measure  reproduces  or  realises  himself.  But 
whatever  we  mean  by  personality,  and  whatever  difficulties 
may  attach  to  the  notion  that  a  divine  principle  realises  itself 
through  a  qualifying  medium  in  the  persons  of  men,  it  is 


CH.  II]   CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL  209 

certain  that  we  shall  only  fall  into  contradictions  by  substi- 
tuting for  persons,  as  the  subject  in  which  the  divine  self- 
realisation  takes  place,  any  entity  to  which  self-consciousness 
cannot  intelligibly  be  ascribed.  If  it  is  impossible  that  the 
divine  self-realisation  should  be  complete  in  such  persons  as 
we  are  or  can  conceive  ourselves  coming  to  be,  on  the  other 
hand  in  the  absence  of  self-objectification,  which  is  at  least 
the  essential  thing  in  personality,  it  cannot  even  be  inchoate. 
183.  This  consideration  has  an  important  bearing  upon 
certain  ways  of  thinking  or  speaking  in  which  we  are  apt  to 
take  refuge  when,  having  adopted  a  theory  of  the  moral  life 
as  the  fulfilment  in  the  human  spirit  of  some  divine  idea,  we 
are  called  upon  to  face  the  diflficulty  of  stating  whether  and 
how  the  fulfilment  is  really  achieved.  Any  life  which  the 
individual  can  possibly  live  is  at  best  so  limited  by  the 
necessities  of  his  position,  that  it  seems  impossible,  on  sup- 
position that  a  divine  self-realising  principle  is  at  work  in  it, 
that  it  should  be  an  adequate  expression  of  such  a  principle. 
Granted  the  most  entire  devotion  of  a  man  to  the  attainment 
of  objects  contributory  to  human  perfection,  the  very  con- 
dition of  his  effectually  promoting  that  end  is  that  the 
objects  in  which  he  is  actually  interested,  and  upon  which 
he  really  exercises  himself,  should  be  of  Umited  range.  The 
idea,  unexpressed  and  inexpressible,  of  some  absolute  and 
all-embracing  end  is,  no  doubt,  the  source  of  such  devotion, 
but  it  can  only  take  effect  in  the  fulfilment  of  some  particular 
function  in  which  it  finds  but  restricted  utterance.  It  is  in 
fact  only  so  far  as  we  are  members  of  a  society,  of  which  we 
can  conceive  the  common  good  as  our  own,  that  the  idea 
has  any  practical  hold  on  us  at  all,  and  this  very  membership 
implies  confinement  in  our  individual  realisation  of  the  idea. 
Each  has  primarily  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  his  station.  His 
capacity  for  action  beyond  the  range  of  those  duties  is 
definitely  bounded,  and  with  it  is  definitely  bounded  also 
his  sphere  of  personal  interests,  his  character,  his  realised 
possibility.  No  one  so  confined,  it  would  seem,  can  exhibit 
all  that  the  Spirit,  working  through  and  in  him,  properly 


2IO     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS      [bk.  Ill 

and  potentially  is.  Yet  is  not  such  confinement  the  con- 
dition of  the  only  personality  that  we  know  ?  It  is  the  con- 
dition of  social  life,  and  social  life  is  to  personality  what 
language  is  to  thought.  Language  presupposes  thought  as 
a  capacity,  but  in  us  the  capacity  of  thought  is  only  actual- 
ised  in  language.  So  human  society  presupposes  persons  in 
capacity — subjects  capable  each  of  conceiving  himself  and 
the  bettering  of  his  life  as  an  end  to  himself — but  it  is  only 
in  the  intercourse  of  men,  each  recognised  by  each  as  an 
end,  not  merely  a  means,  and  thus  as  having  reciprocal 
claims,  that  the  capacity  is  actualised  and  that  we  really  live 
as  persons.  If  society  then  (as  thus  appears)  is  the  con- 
dition of  all  development  of  our  personality,  and  if  the 
necessities  of  social  life,  as  alone  we  know  or  can  conceive 
it,  put  limits  to  our  personal  development,  can  we  suppose 
it  to  be  in  persons  that  the  spirit  operative  in  men  finds  its 
full  expression  and  realisation  ? 

184.  It  is  from  this  difficulty  that  we  are  apt  to  seek  an 
escape  by  speaking  as  if  the  human  spirit  fulfilled  its  idea  in 
the  history  or  development  of  mankind,  as  distinct  from  the 
persons  whose  experiences  constitute  that  history,  or  who 
are  developed  in  that  development ;  whether  in  the  achieve- 
ments of  great  nations  at  special  epochs  of  their  history,  or 
in  some  progress  towards  a  perfect  organisation  of  society, 
of  which  the  windings  and  back-currents  are  too  complex 
for  it  to  be  surveyed  by  us  as  a  whole.  But  that  we  are 
only  disguising  the  difficulty,  not  escaping  it,  by  this  manner 
of  speech,  we  shall  see  upon  reflecting  that  there  can  be 
nothing  in  a  nation  however  exalted  its  mission,  or  in 
a  society  however  perfectly  organised,  which  is  not  in  the 
persons  composing  the  nation  or  the  society.  Our  ultimate 
standard  of  worth  is  an  ideal  of  personal  worth.  All  other 
values  are  relative  to  value  for,  of,  or  in  a  person.  To  speak 
of  any  progress  or  improvement  or  development  of  a  nation 
or  society  or  mankind,  except  as  relative  to  some  greater 
worth  of  persons,  is  to  use  words  without  meaning.  The 
saying  that  '  a  nation  is  merely  an  aggregate  of  individuals ' 


CH.  n]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL   211 

is  indeed  fallacious,  but  mainly  on  account  of  the  introduc- 
tion of  the  emphatic  'merely.'  The  fallacy  lies  in  the 
implication  that  the  individuals  could  be  what  they  are, 
could  have  their  moral  and  spiritual  quahties,  independently 
of  their  existence  in  a  nation.  The  notion  is  conveyed  that 
they  bring  those  qualities  with  them  ready-made  into  the 
national  existence,  which  thereupon  results  from  their 
combination ;  while.  the__truth  is  that,  whatever  jaoral 
capacity  must  he  prp«"prased.  it  is  only  actualised  through 
the  habits,  institutions,  and  lags,Jn  _virtue  of  which  the 
individuals  forin_a  nation.  But  it  is  none  the  less  true  that 
the  life  of  the  nation  has  no  real  existence  except  as  the  life 
of  the  individuals  composing  the  nation,  a  life  determined 
by  their  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  deriving  its  peculiar 
features  from  the  conditions  of  that  intercourse. 

Nor,  unless  we  allow  ourselves  to  play  fast  and  loose 
with  the  terms  '  spirit '  and  '  will,'  can  we  suppose  a  national 
spirit  and  will  to  exist  except  as  the  spirit  and  will  of  indi- 
viduals, affected  in  a  certain  way  by  intercourse  with  each 
other  and  by  the  history  of  the  nation.  Since  it  is  only 
through  its  existence  as  our  self-consciousness  that  we  know 
anything  of  spirit  at  all,  to  hold  that  a  spirit  can  exist  except 
as  a  self-conscious  subject  is  self-contradictory.  A  '  national 
spirit'  is  not  something  in  the  air;  nor  is  it  a  series  of 
phenomena  of  a  particular  kind;  nor  yet  is  it  God — the 
eternal  Spirit  or  self-conscious  subject  which  communicates 
itself,  in  measure  and  under  conditions,  to  beings  which 
through  that  communication  become  spiritual.  It  would 
seem  that  it  could  only  mean  one  of  two  things ;  either  {a) 
some  type  of  personal  character,  as  at  any  time  exhibited 
by  individuals  who  are  held  together  and  personally  modified 
by  national  ties  and  interests  which  they  recognise  as  such ; 
or  (b)  such  a  type  of  personal  character  as  we  may  suppose 
should  result,  according  to  the  divine  idea  of  the  world, 
from  the  intercourse  of  individuals  with  each  other  under 
the  influence  of  the  common  institutions  which  make  a 
particular  nation,  whether  that  type  of  character  is  actually 


2t2      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

attained  or  no.  At  any  rate,  if  a  '  national  spirit '  is  held 
to  be  a  form  in  which  an  eternal  Spirit,  in  the  only  sense  in 
which  we  have  reason  to  think  there  is  such  a  thing,  realises 
itself,  then  it  can  only  have  its  being  in  persons,  though  in 
persons,  of  course,  specially  modified  by  the  special  condi- 
tions of  their  intercourse  with  each  other.  The  degree  of 
perfection,  of  realisation  of  their  possibilities,  attained  by 
these  persons  is  the  measure  of  the  fulfilment  which  the  idea 
of  the  human  spirit  attains  in  the  particular  national  spirit. 
If  the  fulfilment  of  the  idea  is  necessarily  incomplete  in  them, 
it  can  be  no  more  complete  in  the  national  spirit,  which  has  no 
other  existence,  as  national,  than  that  which  it  has  in  them. 

185.  A  like  criticism  must  apply  to  any  supposition  that 
the  spirit  which  is  in  man  could  fulfil  its  capabihty — the 
capability  which  belongs  to  it  as  a  self-realisation  of  the 
eternal  mind  through  the  medium  of  an  animal  soul — in 
some  history  of  mankind  or  some  organisation  of  society, 
except  in  respect  of  a  state  of  personal  being  attained  by 
the  individuals  who  are  subjects  of  the  history  or  members 
of  the  society.  It  does  not  appear  how  any  idea  should 
express  or  realise  itself  in  an  endless  series  of  events,  unless 
the  series  is  relative  to  something  beyond  itself,  which 
abides  while  it  passes ;  and  such  a  mere  endless  series  the 
history  of  mankind  must  be,  except  so  far  as  its  results  are 
gathered  into  the  formation  of  the  character  of  abiding 
persons.  At  any  rate  the  idea  of  a  spirit  cannot  realise 
itself  except  in  spirits.  The  human  spirit  cannot  develope 
itself  according  to  its  idea  except  in  self-conscious  subjects, 
whose  possession  of  the  qualities — all  implying  self-con- 
sciousness— that  are  proper  to  such  a  spirit,  in  measures 
gradually  approximating  to  the  realisation  of  the  idea,  forms 
its  development.  The  spiritual  progress  of  mankind  is  thus 
an  unmeaning  phrase,  unless  it  means  a  progress  o/' personal 
character  and  to  personal  character — a  progress  of  which 
feeling,  thinking,  and  willing  subjects  are  the  agents  and 
sustainers,  and  of  which  each  step  is  a  fuller  realisation  of 
the  capacities  of  such  subjects.     It  is  simply  unintelligible 


CH.  Il]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL   213 

unless  understood  to  be  in  the  direction  of  more  perfect 
forms  of  personal  life. 

There  may  be  reason  to  hold  that  there  are  capacities  of 
the  human  spirit  not  realisable  in  persons  under  the  condi- 
tions of  any  society  that  we  know,  or  can  positively  conceive, 
or  that  may  be  capable  of  existing  on  the  earth.  Such  a 
belief  may  be  warranted  by  the  consideration  on  the  one 
hand  of  the  promise  which  the  spirit  gives  of  itself,  both  in 
its  actual  occasional  achievement  and  in  the  aspirations  of 
which  we  are  individually  conscious,  on  the  other  hand 
of  the  limitations  which  the  necessity  of  confinement  to 
a  particular  social  function  seems  to  impose  on  individual 
attainment.  We  may  in  consequence  justify  the  supposi- 
tion that  the  personal  life,  which  historically  or  on  earth 
is  lived  under  conditions  which  thwart  its  development,  is 
continued  in  a  society,  with  which  we  have  no  means  of 
communication  through  the  senses,  but  which  shares  in  and 
carnes  further  every  measure  of  perfection  attained  by  men 
under  the  conditions  of  life  that  we  know.  Or  we  may 
content  ourselves  with  saying  that  the  personal  self-conscious 
being,  which  comes  from  God,  is  for  ever  continued  in  God. 
Or  we  may  pronounce  the  problem  suggested  by  the  con- 
stant spectacle  of  unfulfilled  human  promise  to  be  simply 
insoluble.  But  meanwhile  the  negative  assurance  at  any  rate 
must  remain,  that  a  capacity,  which  is  nothing  except  as 
personal,  cannot  be  realised  in  any  impersonal  modes  of 
being. 

186.  It  is  not,  of  course,  to  be  denied  that  the  facts  of 
human  Ufe  and  history  put  abundant  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  any  theory  whatever  of  human  development,  as  from  the 
less  to  the  more  perfect  kind  of  life,  in  distinction  from 
mere  generalisations  as  to  the  nature  of  the  changes  which 
society  has  undergone.  If  it  were  not  for  certain  demands 
of  the  spirit  which  is  ourself,  the  notion  of  human  progress! 
could  never  occur  to.  us.  But  these  demands,  having  a. 
common  ground  with  the  apprehension  of  facts,  are  not  to  I 
be  suppressed  by  it.    They  are  an  expression  of  the  same  ' 


214      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

principle  of  self-objectification  without  which,  as  we  have 
seen,  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  facts  for  us,  for  our 
consciousness,  at  all.     Their  strength  is  illustrated  by  the 
persistency  with  which,  in  spite  of  the  rebuff  they  for  ever 
seem  to  be  receiving  from  observations  of  nature  and  history, 
they  for  ever  reassert  themselves.     It  is  the  consciousness 
of  possibilities  in  ourselves,  unrealised  but  constantly  in 
process  of  realisation,  that  alone  enables  us  to  read  the  idea 
of  development  into  what  we  observe  of  natural  life,  and  to 
conceive  that  there  must  be  such  a  thing  as  a  plan  of  the 
world.     That  we  can  adjust  all  that  we  observe  to  this  idea 
is  plainly  not  the  case.    When  we  have  traced  processes  of 
development  in  particular  regions  of  organic  life,  we  are 
scarcely  nearer  the  goal.     For,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  idea 
\  which  sets  us  upon  the  search  for  development,  we  should 
'be  able  to  connect  all  particular  processes  of  development 
with  each  other,  the  lower  as  subservient  to  the  higher,  and 
to  view  the  world,  including  human  history,  as  a  whole 
throughout  which  there  is  a  concerted  fulfilment  of  capa- 
bilities.    This  we  cannot  do ;  but  neither  our  inability  to 
do  it,  nor  the  appearance  of  positive  inconsistency  between 
much  that  we  observe  and  any  scheme  of  universal  develop- 
ment, can  weaken  the  authority  of  the  idea,  which  does  not 
rest  on  the  evidence  of  observation  but  expresses  an  inward 
demand  for  the  recognition  of  a  unity  in  the  world  answering 
to  the  unity  of  ourselves— a  demand  involved  in  that  self- 
consciousness  which,  as  we  have  seen,  alone  enables  us  to 
observe  facts  as  such.    The  important  thing  is  that  we  should 
not,  in  eagerness  to  reconcile  the  idea  of  development  with 
facts  known  only  bit  by  bit  and  not  in  their  real  integrity, 
lose  sight  of  the  essential  implications  of  the  idea  itself. 

187.  Of  these  implications  one  is  the  eternal  realisation 
for,  or  in,  the  eternal  mind  of  the  capacities  gradually  realised 
in  time.  Another  is  that  the  end  of  the  process  of  develop- 
ment should  be  a  real  fulfilment  of  the  capacities  presupposed 
by  the  process.  When  we  speak  of  any  subject  as  in  process 
of  development  according  to  some  law,  we  must  mean,  if  we 


CH.  u]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL   215 

SO  speak  advisedly,  that  that  into  which  the  subject  is  being 
developed  already  exists  for  some  consciousness.  We 
express  the  same  thing  by  saying  that  the  subject  is  some- 
thing, in  itself  or  potentially,  which  it  has  not  yet  in  time 
actually  become ;  and  this  again  implies  that  in  relation  to 
some  conscious  being  it  is  eternally  that  which  in  some 
other  relation  it  is  in  time  coming  to  be.  A  state  of  life  or 
consciousness  not  yet  attained  by  a  subject  capable  of  it,  in 
relation  to  that  subject  we  say  actually  is  not ;  but  if  there 
were  no  consciousness  for  which  it  existed,  there  would  be 
no  sense  in  saying  that  in  possibility  it  is,  for  it  would  simply 
be  nothing  at  all.  Thus,  when  we  speak  of  the  human 
spirit  being  in  itself,  or  in  possibility,  something  which  is  not 
yet  realised  in  human  experience,  we  mean  that  there  is 
a  consciousness  for  and  in  which  this  something  really  exists, 
though,  on  the  other  hand,  for  the  consciousness  which 
constitutes  human  experience  it  exists  only  in  possibility. 

It  would  not  be  enough  to  say  'a  consciousness  for 
which  it  really  exists.'  That  might  merely  mean  that  this 
undeveloped  capability  of  the  human  spirit  existed  as  an 
object  of  consciousness  to  the  eternal  mind,  in  the  same 
way  in  which  facts  that  I  contemplate  exist  for  me.  Such 
a  statement  would  suffice,  were  the  subject  of  development 
merely  a  natural  organism.  But  when  that  which  is  being 
developed  is  itself  a  self-conscious  subject,  the  end  of  its 
becoming  must  really  exist  not  merely  for,  but  in  or  as, 
a  self-conscious  subject.  There  must  be  eternally  such 
a  subject  which  is  all  that  the  self-conscious  subject,  as 
developed  in  time,  has  the  possibility  of  becoming;  in 
which  the  idea  of  the  human  spirit,  or  all  that  it  has  in  itself 
to  become,  is  completely  realised.  This  consideration  may 
suggest  the  true  notion  of  the  spiritual  relation  in  which  we 
stand  to  God ;  that  He  is  not  merely  a  Being  who  has  made 
us,  in  the  sense  that  we  exist  as  an  object  of  the  divine 
consciousness  in  the  same  way  in  which  we  must  suppose 
the  system  of  nature  so  to  exist,  but  that  He  is  a  Being  in 
whom  we  exist ;  with  whom  we  are  in  principle  one ;  with 


2l6     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  in 

whom  the  human  spirit  is  identical,  in  the  sense  that  He  is 
all  which  the  human  spirit  is  capable  of  becoming. 

188.  In  regard  to  the  other  principle  which  we  have 
noticed  as  implied  in  the  idea  of  development — that  the 
end  of  the  process  of  development  should  be  a  real  fulfil- 
ment of  the  capacities  pre-supposed  by  the  process — it  may 
be  argued  that,  however  indisputable,  it  can  afford  us  little 
guidance  in  judging  of  the  ultimate  end  to  which  any 
process  of  development  is  tending.  In  cases  where  end  or 
function  are  matter  of  observation,  and  capacity  or  faculty 
are  inferred  from  them,  it  has  no  application ;  and  if  it  is 
to  be  available  in  other  cases,  we  must  have  some  means 
of  ascertaining  the  nature  of  capacities,  independently  of 
observation  of  the  ends  to  which  they  are  relative.  But 
have  we  any  such  means  ?  And  in  their  absence,  since  the 
ultimate  end  of  human  progress  must  be  beyond  the  reach  of 
observation,  are  not  our  conclusions  as  to  capacities  of  men 
which  must  be  fulfilled  in  the  course  of  human  development 
mere  arbitrary  guess-work  ?  May  it  not  turn  out  that  what 
we  have  been  regarding  as  permanent  capacities  of  men, 
from  which  something  might  be  inferred  as  to  the  end  of 
human  development,  on  the  ground  that  this  end  must  be 
such  as  really  to  fulfil  them,  are  temporary  phases  of  some 
unknown  force,  working  in  we  know  not  what  direction,  and 
that  their  end  may  be  simply  to  disappear,  having  borne 
their  part  in  the  generation  of  an  unknowable  future  ? 

189.  To  such  questions  we  should  reply  as  follows.  We 
must  be  on  our  guard  against  lapsing  into  the  notion  that 
a  process  ad  infinitum,  a  process  not  relative  to  an  end, 
can  be  a  process  of  development  at  all.  If  the  history  of 
mankind  were  simply  a  history  of  events,  of  which  each 
determines  the  next  following,  and  so  on  in  endless  series, 
there  would  be  no  progress  or  development  in  it.  As  we 
cannot  sum  an  infinite  series,  there  would  be  nothing  in 
the  history  of  mankind,  so  conceived,  to  satisfy  that  demand 
for  unity  of  the  manifold  in  relation  to  an  end,  which  alone 
leads  us  to  read  the  idea  of  development  into  the  course 


CH.  n]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL   217 

of  human  affairs.  If  there  is  a  progress  in  the  history  of 
men  it  must  be  towards  an  end  consisting  in  a  state 
of  being  which  is  not  itself  a  series  in  time,  but  is  both 
comprehended  eternally  in  the  eternal  mind  and  is  intrin- 
sically, or  in  itself,  eternal.  Further :  although  any  other 
capacity  may  be  of  a  kind  which,  having  done  its  work  in 
contributing  to  the  attainment  of  such  a  state  of  being, 
passes  away  in  the  process  of  its  attainment — as  the  par- 
ticular capacities  of  myriads  of  animals,  their  function  ful- 
filled, pass  away  every  hour — yet  a  capacity  consisting  in 
a  self-conscious  personality  cannot  be  supposed  so  to  pass 
away.  It  partakes  of  the  nature  of  the  eternal.  It  is  not 
itself  a  series  in  time ;  for  the  series  of  time  exists  for  it. 
We  cannot  believe  in  there  being  a  real  fulfilment  of  such 
a  capacity  in  an  end  which  should  involve  its  extinction, 
because  the  conviction  of  there  being  an  end  in  which  our 
capacities  are  fulfilled  is  founded  on  our  self-conscious 
personality — on  the  idea  of  an  absolute  value  in  a  spirit 
which  we  ourselves  are.  And  for  the  same  reason  we  cannot 
believe  that  the  capacities  of  men— capacities  illustrated  to 
us  by  the  actual  institutions  of  society,  though  they  could 
not  be  so  illustrated  if  we  had  not  an  independent  idea  of 
them — can  be  really  fulfilled  in  a  state  of  things  in  which 
any  rational  man  should  be  treated  merely  as  a  means,  and 
not  as  in  himself  an  end.  On  the  whole,  our  conclusion 
must  be  that,  great  as  are  the  difficulties  which  beset  the 
idea  of  human  development  when  applied  to  the  facts  of 
life,  we  do  not  escape  them  but  empty  the  idea  of  any  real 
meaning,  if  we  suppose  the  end  of  the  development  to  be 
one  in  the  attainment  of  which  persons — agents  who  are 
ends  to  themselves — are  extinguished,  or  one  which  is  other 
than  a  state  of  self-conscious  being,  or  one  in  which  that 
reconciliation  of  the  claims  of  persons,  as  each  at  once 
a  means  to  the  good  of  the  other  and  an  end  to  himself, 
already  partially  achieved  in  the  higher  forms  of  human 
society,  is  otherwise  than  completed. 

190.  Meanwhile,  as  must  constantly  be  borne  in  mind, 


2X8     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

in  saying  that  the  human  spirit  can  only  realise  itself,  that 
the  divine  idea  of  man  can  only  be  fulfilled,  in  and  through 
persons,  we  are  not  denying  but  affirming  that  the  realisation 
and  fulfilment  can  only  take  place  in  and  through  society. 
Without  society,  no  persons  :  this  is  as  true  as  that  without 
persons,  without  self-objectifying  agents,  there  could  be  no 
such  society  as  we  know.  Such  society  is  founded  on  the 
recognition  by  persons  of  each  other,  and  their  interest  in 
each  other,  as  persons,  i.  e.  as  beings  who  are  ends  to  them- 
selves, who  are  consciously  determined  to  action  by  the 
conception  of  themselves,  as  that  for  the  sake  of  which  they 
act.  They  are  interested  in  each  other  as  persons  in  so  far 
as  each,  being  aware  that  another  presents  his  own  self-satis- 
faction to  himself  as  an  object,  finds  satisfaction  for  himself 
in  procuring  or-  witnessing  the  self  satisfaction  of  the  other. 
Society  is  founded  on  such  mutual  interest,  in  the  sense 
that  unless  it  were  operative,  however  incapable  of  expressing 
itself  in  abstract  formulae,  there  would  be  nothing  to  lead 
to  that  treatment  by  one  human  being  of  another  as  an 
end,  not  merely  a  means,  on  which  society  even  in  its  nar- 
rowest and  most  primitive  forms  must  rest.  There  would 
be  nothing  to  countervail  the  tendency,  inherent  in  the  self- 
asserting  and  self-seeking  subject,  to  make  every  object  he 
deals  with,  even  an  object  of  natural  affection,  a  means  to 
his  own  gratification.  The  combination  of  men  as  lo-oi 
KOI  ojioiai  for  common  ends  would  be  impossible.  Thus  ex- 
cept as  between  persons,  each  recognising  the  other  as  an 
end  in  himself  and  having  the  will  to  treat  him  as  such, 
there  can  be  no  society. 

I  But  the  converse  is  equally  true,  that  only  through  society, 
'in  the  sense  explained,  is  personality  actualised.  Only 
through  society  is  any  one  enabled  to  give  that  effect  to  the 
idea  of  himself  as  the  object  of  his  actions,  to  the  idea  of 
a  possible  better  state  of  himself,  without  which  the  idea 
would  remain  like  that  of  space  to  a  man  who  had  not  the 
senses  either  of  sight  or  touch.  Some  practical  recognition 
of  personality  by  another,  of  an  '  I '  by  a  '  Thou '  and  a 


CH.  Il]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL  2I9 

'  Thou '  by  an  '  I,'  is  necessary  to  any  practical  conscious- 
ness of  it,  to  any  such  consciousness  of  it  as  can  express 
itself  in  act.  On  the  origin  of  such  recognition  in  the  past 
we  speculate  in  vain.  To  whatever  primitive  groupings,  as 
a  matter  of  history  or  of  imagination,  we  can  trace  our 
actual  society,  these  must  already  imply  it.  But  we  know 
that  we,  who  are  born  under  an  established  system  of  family 
ties,  and  of  reciprocal  rights  and  obligations  sanctioned 
by  the  state,  learn  to  regard  ourselves  as  persons  among 
other  persons  because  we  are  treated  as  such.  From  the 
dawn  of  intelligence  we  are  treated,  in  one  way  or  another, 
as  entitled  to  have  a  will  of  our  own,  to  make  ourselves 
the  objects  of  our  actions,  on  condition  of  our  practically 
recognising  the  same  title  in  others.  All  education  goes 
on  the  principle  that  we  are,  or  are  to  become,  persons  in 
this  sense.  And  just  as  it  is  through  the  action  of  society 
that  the  individual  comes  at  once  practically  to  conceive 
his  personality — his  nature  as  an  object  to  himself — and  to 
conceive  the  same  personality  as  belonging  to  others,  so  it 
is  society  that  supplies  all  the  higher  content  to  this  con- 
ception, all  those  objects  of  a  man's  personal  interest,  in 
living  for  which  he  lives  for  his  own  satisfaction,  except  such 
as  are  derived  from  the  merely  animal  nature. 

191.  Thus  it  is  equally  true  that  the  human  spirit  can 
only  realise  itself,  or  fulfil  its  idea,  in  persons,  and  that  it 
can  only  do  so  through  society,  since  society  is  the  condition 
of  the  development  of  a  personality.  But  the  function  of 
society  being  the  development  of  persons,  the  realisation  of 
the  human  spirit  in  society  can  only  be  attained  according 
to  the  measure  in  which  that  function  is  fulfilled.  It  does 
not  follow  from  this  that  all  persons  must  be  developed  in 
the  same  way.  The  very  existence  of  mankind  presupposes 
the  distinction  between  the  sexes ;  and  as  there  is  a  necessary 
difference  between  their  functions,  there  must  be  a  corre- 
sponding difference  between  the  modes  in  which  the  person- 
ality of  men  and  women  is  developed.  Again,  though  we 
must  avoid  following  the  example  of  philosophers  who  have 


220     MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  HI 

shown  an  a  priori  necessity  for  those  class-distinctions  of 
their  time  which  after  ages  have  dispensed  with,  it  would 
certainly  seem  as  if  distinctions  of  social  position  and  power 
were  necessarily  incidental  to  the  development  of  human 
personality.  There  cannot  be  this  development  without 
a  recognised  power  of  appropriating  material  things.  This 
appropriation  must  vary  in  its  effects  according  to  talent 
and  opportunity,  and  from  that  variation  again  must  result 
differences  in  the  form  which  personality  takes  in  different 
men.  Nor  does  it  appear  how  those  reciprocal  services 
which  elicit  the  feeling  of  mutual  dependence,  and  thus 
promote  the  recognition  by  one  man  of  another  as  an 
'alter  ego,'  would  be  possible  without  different  limitations 
of  function  and  ability,  which  determine  the  range  within 
which  each  man's  personality  developes,  in  other  words,  the 
scope  of  his  personal  interests. 

Thus,  under  any  conditions  possible,  so  far  as  can  be 
seen,  for  human  society,  one  man  who  was  the  best  that 
his  position  allowed,  would  be  very  different  from  another 
who  was  the  best  that  his  position  allowed.  But,  in  order 
that  either  may  be  good  at  all  in  the  moral  sense,  i.  e. 
intrinsically  and  not  merely  as  a  means — in  order  that  the 
idea  of  the  human  spirit  may  be  in  any  sense  fulfilled  in 
him — the  fulfilment  of  that  idea  in  some  form  or  other,  the 
contribution  to  human  perfection  in  some  way  or  other, 
must  be  the  object  in  which  he  seeks  self-satisfaction,  the 
object  for  which  he  lives  in  living  for  himself.  And  it  is 
only  so  far  as  this  development  and  direction  of  personality 
is  obtained  for  all  who  are  capable  of  it  (as  presumably  every 
one  who  says  '  I '  is  capable),  that  human  society,  either  in 
its  widest  comprehension  or  in  any  of  its  particular  groups, 
can  be  held  to  fulfil  its  function,  to  realise  its  idea  as  it  is 
in  God. 

B.  The  Formal  Character  of  the  Moral  Ideal  or  Law. 

192.  Having  thus  endeavoured  to  explain  the  relation  in 
which  the  development  of  the  human  race  must  stand  to  the 
personal  perfection  of  individuals,  we  return  to  the  problem 


CH.  Il]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL   221 

which  was  postponed  to  make  way  for  that  explanation. 
We  have  seen  how  there  is  a  real  identity  between  the  end 
for  which  the  good  man  consciously  lives — the  end  of 
fulfilling  in  some  way  his  rational  capacity,  or  the  idea  of  a 
best  that  is  in  him — and  the  end  to  which  human  develop- 
ment, if  there  is  such  a  thing,  must  be  eternally  relative  in 
the  eternal  mind.  It  may  be  no  more  than  such  an  identity 
as  there  is  between  the  mere  consciousness  that  there  is  an 
object  and  the  consciousness  what  the  object  is.  More 
precisely,  it  may  be  no  more  than  the  identity  between  the 
idea  that  a  man  has,  in  virtue  of  his  rational  capacity,  of 
something,  he  knows  not  what,  which  he  may  and  should 
become,  and  the  idea,  perfectly  articulated  and  defined  in 
the  divine  consciousness,  of  a  state  of  being  in  which  the 
capacities  of  all  men  are  fully  realised.  But  the  idea  as  it 
is  in  the  individual  man,  however  indefinite  and  unfilled, 
is  a  communication  in  germ  or  principle  of  the  idea  as  it  is 
in  God,  and  the  communication  .is  the  medium  through 
which  the  idea  as  in  God  determines  the  progressive  develop- 
ment of  human  capacities  in  time.  AHke  as  in  God,  as 
communicated  in  principle  to  men,  and  as  realising  itself 
by  means  of  that  communication  in  a  certain  development 
of  human  capacities,  the  idea  can  have  its  being  only  in  a 
personal,  i.e.  a  self-objectifying,  consciousness.  From  the 
mere  idea  in  a  man,  however,  '  of  something,  he  knows  not 
what,  which  he  may  and  should  become,'  to  the  actual 
practice  which  is  counted  morally  good,  it  may  naturally 
seem  a  long  step.  We  have  therefore  to  explain  in  further 
detail  how  such  an  idea,  gradually  taking  form  and  definite- 
ness,  has  been  the  moralising  agent  in  human  life,  yielding 
our  moral  standards  and  inducing  obedience  to  them. 

193.  Supposing  such  an  idea  to  be  operative  in  man, 
what  must  be  the  manner  of  its  operation?  It  will  keep 
before  him  an  object,  which  he  presents  to  himself  as 
absolutely  desirable,  but  which  is  other  than  any  particular 
object  of  desire.  Of  this  object  it  can  never  be  possible 
for  him  to  give  a  sufificient  account,  because  it  consists  in 


222  \   MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  HI 


the^  realisation  of  capabilities  which  can  only  be  fully  known 
in  their  ultimate  realisation.  At  the  same  time,  because 
it  is  the  fulfilment  of  himself,  of  that  which  he  has  in  him 
to  be,  it  will  excite  an  interest  in  him  like  no  other  interest, 
different  in  kind  from  any  of  his  desires  and  aversions 
except  such  as  are  derived  from  it.  It  will  be  an  interest 
as  in  an  object  conceived  to  be  of  unconditional  value ;  one 
of  which  the  value  does  not  depend  on  any  desire  that  the 
individual  may  at  any  time  feel  for  it  or  for  anything  else, 
or  on  any  pleasure  that,  either  in  its  pursuit  or  in  its  attain- 
ment or  as  its  result,  he  may  experience.  The  conception 
of  its  desirableness  will  not  arise,  like  the  conception  of  the 
desirableness  of  any  pleasure,  from  previous  enjoyment  of 
it  or  from  reflection  on  the  desire  for  it.  On  the  contrary, 
the  desire  for  the  object  will  be  founded  on  a  conception  of 
its  desirableness  as  a  fulfilment  of  the  capabilities  of  which 
a  man  is  conscious  in  being  conscious  of  himself. 

In  such  men  and  at  such  times  as  a  desire  for  it  does 
actually  arise — a  desire  in  that  sense  which  implies  that  the 
man  puts  himself  forth  for  the  realisation  of  the  desired 
object — it  will  express  itself  in  their  imposition  on  them- 
selves of  rules  requiring  something  to  be  done  irrespectively 
of  any  inclination  to  do  it,  irrespectively  of  any  desired  end 
to  which  it  is  a  means,  otAer  than  this  end,  which  is  desired 
because  conceived  as  absolutely  desirable.  With  the  men  in 
whom,  and  at  the  times  when,  there  is  no  such  desire,  the 
consciousness  of  there  being  something  absolutely  desirable 
will  still  be  a  qualifying  element  in  life.  It  will  yield  a 
recognition  of  those  unconditional  rules  of  conduct  to  which, 
from  the  prevalence  of  unconformable  passions,  it  fails  to 
produce  actual  obedience.  It  will  give  meaning  to  the 
demand,  without  which  there  is  no  morality  and  in  which 
all  morality  is  virtually  involved,  that  '  something  be  done 
merely  for  the  sake  of  its  being  done  V  because  it  is  a  con- 

'  '  So  gewiss  der  Mensch  ein  Mensch  ist,  so  gewiss  Sussert  sich  in 
ihm  eine  ZunOthigung,  einiges  ganz  unabhSngig  von  gusseren 
Zwecken  zu  thun,  lediglich  damit  es  geschehe,  und  andres  eben  so  zu 
unterlassen,  lediglich  damit  es  unterbleibe.' — ^J.  G.  Fichte. 


CH.  Il]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL  223 

sciousness  of  the  possibility  of  an  action  in  which  no  desire 
shall  be  gratified  but  the  desire  excited  by  the  idea  of  the 
act  itself,  as  of  something  absolutely  desirable  in  the  sense 
that  in  it  the  man  does  the  best  that  he  has  in  him  to  do. 

194.  But,  granted  the  conception  of  an  unconditional 
good  for  man,  with  unconditional  rules  of  conduct  which 
it  suggests,  what  in  particular  will  those  rules  enjoin  ?  We 
have  said  that  man  can  never  give  a  sufficient  account  of 
what  his  unconditional  good  is,  because  he  cannot  know 
what  his  capabilities  are  till  they  are  realised.  This  is  the 
explanation  of  the  infirmity  that  has  always  been  found  to 
attach  to  attempted  definitions  of  the  moral  ideal.  They 
are  always  open  to  the"  charge  that  there  is  employed  in 
the  definition,  openly  or  disguisedly,  the  very  notion  which 
profession  is  made  of  defining.  If,  on  being  asked  for  an 
account  of  the  unconditional  good,  we  answer  either  that  it 
is  the  good  will  or  that  to  which  the  good  will  is  directed, 
we  are  naturally  asked  further,  what  then  is  the  good  will  ? 
And  if  in  answer  to  this  question  we  can  only  say  that  it  is 
the  will  for  the  unconditional  good,  we  are  no  less  naturally 
charged  with  'moving  in  a  circle.'  We  do  but  slightly 
disguise  the  circular  process  without  escaping  from  it  if, 
instead  of  saying  directly  that  the  good  will  is  the  will  for 
the  unconditional  good,  we  say  that  it  is  the  will  to  conform 
to  a  universal  law  for  its  own  sake  or  because  it  is  conceived 
as  a  universal  law ;  for  the  recognition  of  the  authority  of 
such  a  universal  law  must  be  founded  on  the  conception 
of  its  relation  to  an  unconditional  good. 

It  is  one  of  the  attractions  of  Hedonistic  Utilitarianism 
that  it  seems  to  avoid  this  logical  embarrassment.  If  we 
say  that  the  unconditional  good  is  pleasure,  and  that  the 
good  will  is  that  which  in  its  effects  turns  out  to  produce 
most  pleasure  on  the  whole,  we  are  certainly  not  chargeable 
with  assuming  in  either  definition  the  idea  to  be  defined. 
We  are  not  at  once  explaining  the  unconditional  good  by 
reference  to  the  good  will,  and  the  good  will  by  reference 
to  the  unconditional  good.     But  we  only  avoid  doing  so  by 


224      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

taking  the  good  will  to  be  relative  to  something  external  to 
itself;  to  have  its  value  only  as  a  means  to  an  end  wholly 
alien  to,  and  different  from,  goodness  itself.  Upon  this 
jview  the  perfect  man  would  not  be  an  end  in  himself; 
la  perfect  society  of  men  would  not  be  an  end  in  itself. 
Man  or  society  would  alike  be  only  perfect  in  relation  to 
the  production  of  feelings  which  are  felt,  with  whatever 
differences  of  quantity,  by  good  men  and  bad,  by  man  and 
brute,  indifferently.  By  such  a  theory  we  do  not  avoid  the 
logical  embarrassment  attending  the  definition  of  a  moral 
ideal ;  for  it  is  not  a  moral  ideal,  in  the  sense  naturally 
attached  to  that  phrase,  that  we  are  defining  at  all.  By 
a  moral  ideal  we  mean  some  type  of  man  or  character  or 
personal  activity,  considered  as  an  end  in  itself.  But,  ac- 
cording to  the  theory  of  Hedonistic  Utilitarianism,  no  such 
type  of  man  or  character  or  personal  activity  is  an  end  in 
itself  at  all. 

195.  It  may  not  follow  that  the  theory  is  false  on  this 
account.  That  is  a  point  which  would  have  to  be  con- 
sidered in  a  full  critical  discussion  of  Hedonism.  What 
has  to  be  noticed  here  is  that  such  a  theory  is  not  available 
for  our  purpose.  It  affords  no  help  when  once  we  have 
convinced  ourselves  that  man  can  only  be  an  end  to 
himself;  that  consequently  it  is  only  in  himself  as  he  may 
become,  in  a  complete  realisation  of  what  he  has  it  in  him 
to  be,  in  his  perfect  character,  that  he  can  find  satisfaction ; 
that  in  this  therefore  alone  can  lie  his  unconditional  good. 
When  we  are  seeking  for  a  definition  of  the  moral  ideal  in 
accordance  with  this  view,  we  should  be  aware  what  we  are 
about.  It  is  as  well  to  confess  at  once  that,  when  we  are 
giving  an  account  of  an  agent  whose  development  is  governed 
by  an  ideal  of  his  own  perfection,  we  cannot  avoid  speaking 
of  one  and  the  same  condition  of  will  alternately  as  means 
and  as  end.  The  goodness  of  the  will  or  man  as  a  means 
must  be  described  as  lying  in  direction  to  that  same  good- 
ness as  an  end.  For  the  end  is  that  full  self-conscious 
realisation  of  capabilities  to  which  the  means  lies  in  the  self- 


CH.  Il]   CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  WEAL  225 

conscious  exercise  of  the  same  capabilities — an  exercise  of 
them  in  imperfect  realisation,  but  under  the  governing  idea 
of  the  desirability  of  their  fuller  realisation.  If  we  had  know- 
ledge of  what  their  fuller  realisation  would  be,  we  might  so 
describe  it  as  to  distinguish  it  from  that  exercise  of  them  in 
less  complete  development  which  is  the  means  to  that  full 
realisation.  We  might  thus  distinguish  the  perfection  of 
man  as  end  from  his  goodness  as  means  to  the  end,  though 
the  perfection  would  be  in  principle  identical  with  the  good- 
ness, differing  from  it  only  as  the  complete  from  the  incom- 
plete. But  we  have  no  such  knowledge  of  the  full  realisation. . 
We  know  it  only  according  to  the  measure  of  what  we  have 
so  far  done  or  are  doing  for  its  attainment.  And  this  is  to 
say  that  we  have  no  knowledge  of  the  perfection  of  man  as 
the  unconditional  good,  but  that  which  we  have  of  his  good- 
ness or  the  good  will,  in  the  form  which  it  has  assumed  as 
a  means  to,  or  in  the  effort  after,  the  unconditional  good ; 
a  good  which  is  not  an  object  of  speculative  knowledge  to 
man,  but  of  which  the  idea — the  conviction  of  there  being 
such  a  thing — is  the  influence  through  which  his  life  is 
directed  to  its  attainment. 

196.  It  is  therefore  not  an  illogical  procedure,  because  it 
is  the  only  procedure  suited  to  the  matter  in  hand,  to  say 
that  the  goodness  of  man  lies  in  devotion  to  the  ideal  of 
humanity,  and  then  that  the  ideal  of  humanity  consists  in 
the  goodness  of  man.  It  means  that  such  an  ideal,  not  yet 
realised  but  operating  as  a  motive,  already  constitutes  in 
man  an  inchoate  form  of  that  life,  that  perfect  development 
of  himself,  of  which  the  completion  would  be  the  realised 
ideal  itself.  Now  in  relation  to  a  nature  such  as  ours,  having 
other  impulses  than  those  which  draw  to  the  ideal,  this  ideal 
becomes,  in  Kant's  language,  an  imperative,  and  a  categorical 
imperative.  It  will  command  something  to  be  done  univer- 
sally and  unconditionally,  irrespectively  of  whether  there  is 
in  any  one,  at  any  time,  an  inclination  to  do  it.  But  when 
we  ask  ourselves  what  it  is  that  this  imperative  commands 
to  be  done,  we  are  met  with  just  the  same  difficulty  as  when 

Q 


1226      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS      [bK.  Ill 


-asked  to  define  the  moral  ideal  or  the  unconditional  good. 

jWe  can  only  say  that  the  categorical  imperative  commands 

'  us  to  obey  the  categorical  imperative,  and  to  obey  it  for  its 
own  sake.  If — not  merely  for  practical  purposes  but  as  a 
matter  of  speculative  certainty — we  identify  its  injunction 
with  any  particular  duty,  circumstances  will  be  found  upon 
which  the  bindingness  of  that  duty  is  contingent,  and  the 
too  hasty  identification  of  the  categorical  imperative  with  it 
will  issue  in  a  suspicion  that,  after  all,  there  is  no  categorical 
imperative,  no  absolute  duty,  at  all.  After  the  explanations 
just  given,  however,  we  need  not  shrink  from  asserting  as 
the  basis  of  morality  an  unconditional  duty,  which  yet  is 
not  a  duty  to  do  anything  unconditionally  except  to  fulfil 
that  unconditional  duty.     It  is  the  duty  of  realising  an  ideal 

I  ^^l?i£lLP^!i?P*^  kS  adequately  defined  till  it  is  realised,  and 
which,  when  realised,  would  no  longer  present  itself  as  a 

i  source  of  duties,  because  the  should  be  would  be  exchanged 
for  the  is.  This  is  the  unconditional  ground  of  those  parti- 
cular duties  to  do  or  to  forbear  doing,  which  in  the  effort  of 
the  social  man  to  realise  his  ideal  have  so  far  come  to  be 
recognised  as  binding,  but  which  are  each  in  some  way  or 
other  conditional,  because  relative  to  particular  circum- 
stances, however  wide  the  range  of  circumstances  may  be 
to  which  they  are  relative; 

197.  At  the  same  time,  then,  that  the  categorical  impera- 
tive can  enjoin  nothing  ivithout  liability  to  exception  but 
disinterested  obedience  to  itself,  it  will  have  no  lack  of 
definite  content.  The  particular  duties  which  it  enjoins 
will  at  least  be  all  those  in  the  practice  of  which,  according 
to  the  hitherto  experience  of  men,  some  progress  is  made 
towards  the  fulfilment  of  man's  capabilities,  or  some  con- 
dition necessary  to  that  progress  is  satisfied.  We  say  it  will 
enjoin  these  at  least,  because  particular  duties  must  be 
constantly  arising  out  of  it  for  the  individual,  for  which  no 
formula  can  be  found  before  they  arise,  and  which  are  thus 
extraneous  to  the  recognised  code.  Every  one,  however,  of 
the  duties  which  the  law  of  the  state  or  the  law  of  opinion 


CH.Il]  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL   227 

recognises  must  in  some  way  be  relative  to  circumstances. 
The  rule  therefore  in  which  it  is  conveyed,  though  stated 
in  the  most  general  terms  compatible  with  real  significance, 
must  still  admit  of  exceptions.  Yet  is  there  a  true  sense  in 
which  the  whole  system  of  such  duties  is  unconditionally 
binding.  It  is  so  as  an  expression  of  the  absolute  imperative 
to  seek  the  absolutely  desirable,  the  ideal  of  humanity,  the 
fulfilment  of  man's  vocation.  Because  an  expression  (though 
an  incomplete  one)  of  this  absolute  imperative,  because  a 
product  of  the  effort  after  such  an  unconditional  good,  the 
requirements  of  conventional  morality,  however  liable  they 
may  be  to  exceptions,  arising  out  of  circumstances  other 
than  those  to  which  they  are  properly  applicable,  are  at^  least 
liable  to  no  excgjjtion  for  the  sake  of  the  inHividual's  plea- 
sure^As  against  any  desire  but  some  form  or  other  of  that 
desire  for  the  best  in  conduct,  which  will,  no  doubt,  from 
time  to  time  suggest  new  duties  in  seeming  conflict  with  the 
old — against  any  desire  for  this  or  that  pleasure,  or  any 
aversion  from  this  or  that  pain — they  are  unconditionally 
binding. 

198.  Upon  this  view,  so  far  from  the  Categorical  Impera-  1 
tive  having  no  particular  content,  it  may  rather  seem  to  have 
too  much.  It  enjoins  observance  of  the  whole  complex  of 
established  duties,  as  a  means  to  that  perfection  of  man  of 
which  it  unconditionally  enjoins  the  pursuit.  And  it  enjoins 
this  observance  as  unconditionally  as  it  enjoins  the  pursuit 
of  the  end  to  which  this  observance  is  a  means,  so  long  as  it 
is  suck  a  means.  It  will  only  allow  such  a  departure  from  it 
in  the  interest  of  a  fuller  attainment  of  the  unconditional 
end,  not  in  the  interest  of  any  one's  pleasure.  The  ques- 
tion indeed  is  sure  to  suggest  itself,  what  available  criterion 
such  a  doctrine  affords  us,  either  for  distinguishing  the  es- 
sential from  the  unessential  in  the  requirements  of  law  and 
custom,  or  for  the  discernment  of  duty  in  cases  to  which  no 
recognised  rule  is  applicable.  So  far  as  it  can  be  translated 
into  practice  at  all,  must  not  its  effect  be  either  a  dead  con- 
formity to  the  code  of  customary  morality,  anywhere  and  at 

Q  2 


228        MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS 

any  time  established,  without  effort  to  reform  or  expand  it, 
or  else  unlimited  license  in  departing  from  it  at  the  prompt- 
ing of  any  impulse  which  the  individual  may  be  pleased  to 
consider  a  higher  law  ?  These  questions  shall  be  con- 
sidered in  due  course ' ;  but  before  we  enquire  into  the 
practical  bearings  of  our  doctrine  as  to  the  relation  between 
the  system  of  duties  anywhere  recognised  and  the  uncon- 
ditional ground  of  all  duties — before  we  ask  how  it  affects 
our  criteria  of  what  in  particular  we  should  do  or  not  do — 
we  have  further  to  make  good  the  doctrine  itself.  We  have 
to  revert  to  the  question,  still  left  unanswered,  how  the 
mere  idea  of  something  absolutely  desirable — an  idea  which, 
'  we  confess,  does  not  primarily  enable  us  to  say  anything  of 
,  its  object  but  that, there  must  be  such  a  thing — should  have 
gradually  defined  itself,  shouldhave  taken  body  and  content, 
in  the  establishment  of  recognised  duties,  in  the  formation 
of  actual  virtues,  among  men. 

1  [See  Book  IV.] 


CHAPTER   III 

THE   ORIGIN    AND  DEVELOPMENT   OF   THE   MORAL   IDEAL. 

A.  Reason  as  Source  of  the  Idea  of  a  Common  Good. 

199.  That  an  idea  of  something  absolutely  desira:ble,  which 
we  cannot  identify  with  any  particular  object  of  desire  with- 
out soon  discovering  our  mistake  in  the  dissatisfaction  which 
ensues  upon  the  attainment  of  the  particular  object — that 
such  an  idea  of  a  supreme  good,  which  is  no  good  thing  in 
particular,  should  express  itself  in  a  system  of  social  require- 
ments and  expectations,  of  which  each  would  seem  to  have 
reference  to  a  definite  social  need,  may  naturally  at  first  be 
thought  an  extravagant  supposition.  Further  consideration, 
however,  may  change  our  view.  The  idea  of  the  absolutely! 
desirable;  as  we  have  seen,  arises  out  of,  or  rather  is  identical 
with,  man's  consciousness  of  himself  as  an  end  to  himself.; 
It  is  the  forecast,  proper  to  a  subject  conscious  at  once  of 
himself  as  an  absolute  end,  and  of  a  life  of  becoming,  of 
constant  transition  from  possibility  to  realisation,  and  from 
this  again  to  a  new  possibility — a  forecast  of  a  well-being  that 
shall  consist  in  the  complete  fulfilment  of  himself.  Now  the 
self  of  which  a  man  thus  forecasts  the  fulfilment,  is  not  an 
abstract  or  empty  self.  It  is  a  self  already  affected  in  the 
most  primitive  forms  of  human  life  by  manifold  interests, 
among  which  are  interests  in  other  persons.  These  are  not 
merely  interests  dependent  on  other  persons  for  the  means 
to  their  gratification,  but  interests  in  the  good  of  those  other 
persons,  interests  which  cannot  be  satisfied  without  the 
consciousness  that  those  other  persons  are  satisfied.  The 
man  cannot  contemplate  himself  as  in  a  better  state,  or  on  the 
way  to  the  best,  without  contemplating  others,  not  merely  as 
a  means  to  that  better  state,  but  as  sharing  it  with  him. 

200.  It  may  seem  unphilosophical  now-a-days  to  accept 


230      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

this  distinctive  social  interest  on  our  part  as  a  primary  fact, 
without  attempting  to  account  for  it  by  any  process  of 
evolution.  Any  history  indeed  that  might  be  offered  of  it, 
which  should  enable  us  to  connect  its  more  complex  with 
its  simpler  forms,  would  be  much  to  be  welcomed.  But 
the  same  could  not  be  said  for  a  history  which  should  seem 
to  account  for  it  by  ignoring  its  distinctive  character,  and  by 
deriving  it  from  forms  of  animal  sympathy  from  which, 
because  they  have  no  element  of  identity  with  it,  it  cannot 
in  the  proper  sense  have  been  developed.  What  the  real 
nature  may  be  of  the  sympathy  of  the  higher  animals  with 
each  other,  we  have  probably  no  means  of  knowing.  If 
it  is  merely  an  excitement  of  pleasure  or  pain  in  one  animal, 
upon  sign  of  pleasure  or  pain  being  given  by  another;  if  it 
is  merely  an  impulse  on  the  part  of  one  animal  to  act  so  as 
to  give  pleasure  to  another,  with  whose  pleasure  its  own  is 
thus  associated;  then  what  we  know  as  the  social  interest 
of  men  is  more  and  other  than  a  development  of  it.  For  it 
is  characteristic  of  this  interest  that,  to  the  man  who  is  the 
subject  of  it,  those  who  are  its  objects  are  ends,  in  the  same 
sense  in  which  he  is  an  end  to  himself.  Or,  more  properly, 
they  are  included  in  the  end  for  which  he  lives  in  living  for 
himself.  The  feeling  of  pleasure  or  pain  in  response  to 
manifested  pleasure  or  pain  on  the  part  of  another  sentient 
being  does  not  contain  the  germ  of  such  an  interest,  unless 
the  subject  of  the  feeling  is  conscious  of  himself  as  other 
than  the  feeling  which  he  experiences,  and  of  the  agent 
occasioning  it  as  an  'alter  ego.'  Only  on  that  condition 
can  desire  for  a  renewal  of  the  pleasure  become,  or  give 
place  to,  desire  for  a  good,  to  be  shared  by  the  person 
desiring  it  with  another  whose  good  is  as  his  own. 

However  dependent  therefore  the  social  interest,  as  we 
know  it,  may  be  upon  feelings  of  animal  origin,  such  as 
sexual  feelings,  or  feelings  of  want  in  the  offspring  which  only 
the  parent  can  supply,  it  is  not  a  product  of  those  feelings, 
not  evolved  from  them.  In  order  to  issue  in  it  they  must 
have  taken  a  new  character,  as  feelings  of  one  who  can  and 


CH.ni]      DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL      231 

does  present  to  himself  a  good  of  himself  as  an  end  in  dis- 
tinction from  any  particular  pleasure,  and  a  like  good  of 
another  or  others  as  included  in  that  end.  To  ignore  the 
distinctive  character  which  our  sympathies  thus  derive,  and 
must  have  derived  in  any  being  to  whom  we  can  reasonably 
affiliate  ourselves,  from  the  action  of  a  self-objectifying  con- 
sciousness, is  as  misleading  an  abstraction  from  the  reality 
of  human  nature  as  it  would  be,  on  the  other  hand,  to 
separate  that  consciousness  from  those  sympathies  and  in- 
terests, without  which  the  formal  idea  in  a  man  of  a  possible 
better  state  of  himself  would  have  no  actual  filling. 

201.  We  may  take  it,  then,  as  an  ultimate  fact  of  human 
history — a  fact  without  which  there  would  not  be  such  a 
history,  and  which  is  not  in  turn  deducible  from  any  other 
history — that  out  of  sympathies  of  animal  origin,  through 
their  presence  in  a  self-conscious  soul,  there  arise  interests 
as  of  a  person  in  persons.  Out  of  processes  common  to 
man's  life  with  the  life  of  animals  there  arise  for  man,  as 
there  do  not  apparently  arise  for  animals, 

Relations  dear  and  all  the  charities 
Of  father,  son,  and  brother  : 

and  of  those  relations  and  charities  self-consciousness  on  the 
part  of  all  concerned  in  them  is  the  condition.  At  the  risk 
of  provoking  a  charge  of  pedantry,  this  point  must  be  insisted 
on.  It  is  not  any  mere  sympathy  with  pleasure  and  pain 
that  can  by  itself  yield  the  affections  and  recognised  obliga- 
tions of  the  family.  The  man  for  whom  they  are  to  be 
possible  must  be  able,  through  consciousness  of  himself  as  an 
end  to  himself,  to  enter  into  a  like  consciousness  as  belonging 
to  others,  whose  expression  of  it  corresponds  to  his  own. 
He  must  have  practical  understanding  of  what  is  meant  for 
them,  as  for  himself,  by  saying  '  I.'  Having  found  his 
pleasures  and  pains  dependent  on  the  pleasures  and  pains 
of  others,  he  must  be  able  in  the  contemplation  of  a  possible 
satisfaction  of  himself  to  include  the  satisfaction  of  those 
others,  and  that  a  satisfaction  of  them  as  ends  to  themselves 
and  not  as  means  to  his  pleasure.     He  must,  in  short,  be  ! 


232     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.IH 

capable  of  conceiving  and  seeking  a  permanent  well-being  in 
which  the  permanent  well-being  of  others  is  included. 

202.  Some  sort  of  community,  founded  on  such  unity  of 
self-consciousness,  on  such  capacity  for  a  common  idea  of 
permanent  good,  must  be  presupposed  in  any  groupings  of 
men  from  which  the  society  that  we  know  can  have  been 
developed.  To  the  man  living  under  its  influence  the  idea 
of  the  absolutely  desirable,  the  effort  to  better  himself,  must 
from  the  first  express  itself  in  some  form  of  social  require- 
ment. So  far  as  he  is  set  on  making  his  way  to  some 
further  fulfilment  of  himself,  he  must  seek  to  carry  those  in 
whom  he  is  interested  with  him  in  the  process.  That '  better 
reason"  which,  in  antagonism  to  the  incHnations  of  the 
moment,  presents  itself  to  him  as  a  law  for  himself,  will 
present  itself  to  him  as  equally  a  law  for  them ;  and  as  a  law 
for  them  on  the  same  ground  and  in  the  same  sense  as  it  is 
a  law  for  him,  viz.  as  prescribing  means  to  the  fulfilment  of 
an  idea  of  absolute  good,  common  to  him  with  them — an 
idea  indefinable  indeed  in  imagination,  but  gradually  defin- 
ing itself  in  act. 

The  conception  of  a  moral  law,  in  its  strict  philosophical 
form,  is  no  doubt  an  analogical  adaptation  of  the  notion  of 
law  in  the  more  primary  sense — the  notion  of  it  as  a  com- 
mand enforced  by  a  political  superior,  or  by  some  power  to 
which  obedience  is  habitually  rendered  by  those  to  whom 
the  command  is  addressed.  But  there  is  an  idea  which 
equally  underlies  the  conception  both  of  moral  duty  and  of 
legal  right;  which  is  prior,  so  to  speak,  to  the  distinction 
between  them ;  which  must  have  been  at  work  in  the  minds 
of  men  before  they  could  be  capable  of  recognising  any 
kind  of  action  as  one  that  ought  to  be  done,  whether  because 
it  is  enjoined  by  law  or  authoritative  custom,  or  because, 
though  not  thus  enjoined,  a  man  owes  it  to  himself  or  to  his 
neighbour  or  to  God.  This  is  the  idea  of  an  absolute  and 
a  common  good ;  a  good  common  to  the  person  conceiving 
it  with  others,  and  good  for  him  and  them,  whether  at  any 
^  See  above,  §  179. 


CH.  Ill]     DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL      233 

moment  it  answers  their  likings  or  no.  As  affected  by  such 
an  idea,  a  man's  attitude  to  his  likes  and  dislikes  will  be  one 
of  which,  in  his  inward  converse,  the  '  Thou  shalt '  or  '  Thou 
must '  of  command  is  the  natural  expression,  though  of  law, 
in  the  sense  either  of'  the  command  of  a  political  superior 
or  of  a  self-imposed  rule  of  life,  he  may  as  yet  have  no 
definite  conception. 

And  so  affected  by  it  he  must  be,  before  the  authority 
either  of  custom  or  of  law  can  have  any  meaning  for  him. 
Simple  fear  cannot  constitute  the  sense  of  such  authority 
nor  by  any  process  of  development,  properly  so  called,  be- 
come it.  It  can  only  spring  from  a  conviction,  on  the  part 
of  those  recognising  the  authority,  that  a  good  which  is  really 
their  good,  though  in  constant  conflict  with  their  inclinations, 
is  really  served  by  the  power  in  which  they  recognise  authority. 
Whatever  force  may  be  employed  in  maintaining  custom  or 
law,  however  '  the  interest  of  the  stronger,'  whether  an  in- 
dividual or  the  few  or  the  majority  of  Some  group  of  people, 
may  be  concerned  in  maintaining  it,  only  some  persuasion  of 
its  contribution  to  a  recognised  common  good  can  yield  that 
sort  of  obedience  to  it  which,  equally  in  the  simpler  and  the 
more  complex  stages  of  society,  forms  the  social  bond. 

203.  The  idea,  then,  of  a  possible  well-being  of  himself, 
that  shall  not  pass  away  with  this,  that,  or  the  other  plea- 
sure ;  and  relation  to  some  group  of  persons  whose  well- 
being  he  takes  to  be  as  his  own,  and  in  whom  he  is  inter- 
ested in  being  interested  in  himself — these  two  things  must 
condition  the  life  of  any  one  who  is  to  be  a  creator  or  sus- 
tainer  either  of  law  or  of  that  prior  authoritative  custom  out 
of  which  law  arises.  Without  them  there  might  be  instru- 
ments of  law  and  custom  ;  intelligent  co-operating  subjects 
of  law  and  custom  there  could  not  be.  They  are  conditions  , 
at  once  of  might  being  so  exercised  that  it  can  be  recognised 
as  having  right,  and  of  that  recognition  itself.  It  is  in  this 
sense  that  the  old  language  is  justified,  which  speaks  of  Rea- 
son as  the  parent  of  Law.  Reason  is  the  self-objectifying 
consciousness.     It  constitutes,  as  we  have  seen,  the  capa- 


234     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

1  bility  in  man  of  seeking  an  absolute  good  and  of  conceiving 
this  good  as  common  to  others  with  himself:  and  it  is  this 
capability  which  alone  renders  him  a  possible  author  and  a 
'  self-submitting  subject  of  law. 

In  saying  this  we  are  saying  nothing  for  or  against  any 
theory  of  the  conditions  under  which,  as  a  matter  of  history, 
laws  may  have  been  first  established.  It  is  easy,  and  for 
certain  purposes  may  be  advisable,  to  define  a  sense  of  the 
term  in  which  '  laws '  do  not  exist  till  an  advanced  stage  of 
civilisation,  when  sovereignties  of  ascertained  range  and 
scope  have  been  established,  and  when  the  will  of  the 
sovereign  has  come  to  be  expressed  in  general  and  per- 
manent forms.  In  proportion  as  we  thus  restrict  our  usage 
of  the  term  '  law '  we  shall  have  to  extend  our  view  of  the 
effect  upon  human  life  of  social  requirements,  which  are 
not  '  laws,'  but  to  which  the  good  citizen  renders  an  obe- 
dience the  same  in  principle  as  that  which  he  renders  to 
'  laws ' ;  an  obedience  at  once  willing  and  constrained — 
willing,  because  recognised  as  the  condition  of  a  social 
jgood,  which  is  his  own  highest  good;  constrained,  in  so  far 
(as  it  prevents  him  from  doing  what  he  would  otherwise  like 
I  to  do.  It  is  with  the  ground  of  this  obedience  that  the 
1  moralist  is  concerned,  as  having  been  rendered  when  as  yet 
'  law '  in  the  restricted  sense  was  not,  and  as  still  rendered 
equally  by  the  good  citizen  to  the  law  which  the  state 
enforces,  and  to  that  of  which  the  sanction  is  a  social 
sentiment  shared  by  him. 

\  204.  This  ground  the  moralist  finds  in  Reason,  according 
|to  the  sense  explained.  He  will  listen  respectfully  to  any 
account,  for  which  historians  can  claim  probability,  of  the 
courses  of  events  by  which  powers,  strong  enough  to  enforce 
general  obedience,  have  been  gathered  into  the  hands  of 
individuals  or  groups  of  men;  but  he  will  reflect  that, 
though  the  exercise  of  force  may  be  a  necessary  incident  in 
the  maintenance  of  government,  it  cannot  of  itself  produce 
'  the  state  of  mind  on  which  social  union  in  any  of  its  forms 
depends.     He  will  listen,  further,  to   all  that  the  anthro- 


CH.  m]      DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL      235 

pologist  can  tell  him  of  the  earliest  forms  in  which  such 
union  can  be  traced ;  but  here  again  he  will  reflect  that, 
when  the  phenomena  of  some  primitive  usage  have  been 
duly  established,  the  interpretation  of  the  state  of  mind 
which  they  repiresent  is  a  further  question,  and  one  that 
cannot  be  answered  without  reference  to  the  developed 
consciousness  which  is  ours.  When  the  anthropologist  has 
gathered  all  the  results  he  can  from  a  collation  of  the  sayings 
and  doings  of  such  uncivilised  people  as  can  now  be  observ- 
ed, with  records  and  survivals  from  the  lives  of  our  ancestors, 
his  clue  for  the  interpretation  of  his  material  will  depend  in 
the  last  resort  on  his  analysis  of  that  world  of  feeling,  thought, 
and  desire,  in  which  he  himself  lives.  Unless  the  fragmentary 
indications  obtainable  of  the  life  of  primitive  humanity  can 
be  interpreted  as  expressing  a  consciousness  in  germ  or  prin- 
ciple the  same  as  ours,  we  have  no  clue  to  their  inner  signi- 
ficance at  all.  They  are  at  best  no  more  to  us  than  the 
gestures  of  animals,  from  which  we  may  conjecture  that  the 
animal  is  pleased  or  pained,  but  by  which  no  consciousness 
in  its  intrinsic  nature  is  conveyed  to  us,  as  it  is  conveyed  in 
the  speech  of  another  man.  We  may,  of  course,  take  this 
view  of  them.  We  may  hold  that  no  inference  is  possible 
from  them  to  any  state  of  mind  on  the  part  of  primitive  man. 
But  we  cannot  interpret  them  as  expressing  a  state  of  mind 
without  founding  our  conception  of  the  state  of  mind  on  our 
own  consciousness.  Even  if  it  were  possible  on  any  other 
plan  to  read  a  state  of  mind  in  them  at  all,  we  certainly  could 
not  read  in  them  a  consciousness  from  which  our  own  has 
been  developed,  without  assuming  an  identity,  under  what- 
ever variety  of  modification,  between  the  less  and  the  more 
developed  consciousness. 

Thus,  though  our  information  about  primitive  man  were 
very  different  from  what  it  is,  it  could  never  be  other  than 
a  contradiction  to  found  upon  it  a  theory  of  the  state  of  mind 
underlying  the  earliest  forms  of  social  union,  which  should 
represent  this  state  of  mind  as  different  in  kind  from  that 
which,  upon  fair  analysis  of  the  spiritual  life  now  shared  by 


236     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS      [bk.  Ill 

us,  we  find  to  be  the  condition  of  such  social  union  as 

actually  exists.      If  we  are  right  in  ascribing  to  Reason  a 

I  function  of  union  in  the  life  that  we  know ;  if  we  are  right  in 

holding  that  through  it  we  are  conscious  of  ourselves,  and  of 

others  as  ourselves, — through  it  accordingly  that  we  can  seek 

to  make  the  best  of  ourselves  and  of  others  with  ourselves, 

and  that  in  this  sense  Reason  is  the  basis  of  society,  because 

the  source  at  once  of  the  establishment  of  equal  practical 

rules  in  a  common  interest,  and  of  self-imposed  subjection 

;  to  those  rules ;   then  we  are  entitled  to  hold  that  Reason 

.  fulfilled  a  function  intrinsically  the  same  in  the  most  primi- 

jtive  associations  of  man  with  man,  between  which  and  the 

actual  institutions  of  family  and  commune,  of  state  and  na- 

i  tion,  there  has  been  any  continuity  of  development. 

205.  The  foundation  of  morality,  then,  in  the  reason  or 
self-objectifying  consciousness  of  man^  is  the  same  thing  as 
its  foundation  in  the  institutions  of  a  common  Ufe— in  these 
as  directed  to  a  common  good,  and  so  directed  not  mechani- 
cally but  with  consciousness  of  the  good  on  the  part  of  those 
subject  to  the  institutions.  Such  institutions  are,  so  to  speak, 
the  form  and  body  of  reason,  as  practical  in  men.  Without 
them  the  rational  or  self-conscious  or  moral  man  does  not 
exist,  nor  without  them  can  any  being  have  existed  from 
whom  such  a  man  could  be  developed,  if  any  continuity  of 
nature  is  implied  in  development.  No  development  of  mor- 
ality can  be  conceived,  nor  can  any  history  of  it  be  traced 
(for  that  would  imply  such  a  conception),  which  does  not 
presuppose  some  idea  of  a  common  good,  expressing  itself 
in  some  elementary  effort  after  a  regulation  of  life.  Without 
such  an  idea  the  development  would  be  as  impossible  as  it 
is  impossible  that  sight  should  be  generated  when  there  is  no 
optic  nerve.  With  it,  however  restricted  in  range  the  idea 
may  be,  there  is  given  '  in  promise  and  potency '  the  ideal  of 
which  the  realisation  would  be  perfect  morality,  the  ideal  of 
a  society  in  which  every  one  shall  treat  every  one  else  as  his 
neighbour,  in  which  to  every  rational  agent  the  well-being  or 
perfection  of  every  other  such  agent  shall  be  included  in  that 


CH.  m]  DUTY   TO  HUMANITY 


237 


perfection  of  himself  for  which  he  lives.  And  as  the  most 
elementary  notion  in  a  rational  being  of  a  personal  good, 
common  to  himself  with  another  who  is  as  himself,  is  in 
possibility  such  an  ideal^  so  the  most  primitive  institutions 
for  the  regulation  of  a  society  with  reference  to  a  common 
good  are  already  a  school  for  the  character  which  shall  be 
responsive  to  the  moral  ideal. 

It  has  become  a  common-place  among  us  that  the  moral 
susceptibilities  which  we  find  in  ourselves,  would  not  exist 
but  for  the  action  of  law  and  authoritative  custom  on  many 
generations  of  our  ancestors.  The  common-place  is  doubt- 
less perfectly  true.  It  is  only  misleading  when  we  overlook 
the  rational  capacities  implied  in  the  origin  and  maintenance 
of  such  law  and  custom.  The  most  elementary  moralisation 
of  the  individual  must  always  have  arisen  from  his  finding 
himself  in  the  presence  of  a  requirement,  enforced  against 
his  inclinations  to  pleasure,  but  in  an  interest  which  he  can 
recognise  as  being  his  own,  no  less  than  the  interest  of  those 
by  whom  the  requirement  is  enforced.  The  recognition  of 
such  an  interest  by  the  individual  is  an  outcome  of  the  same 
reason  as  that  which  has  led  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
requirement  by  the  society  he  belongs  to.  All  further 
development  of  morality^all  articulation  of  duties,  all 
education  of  conscience  in  response  to  them — presupposes 
this  primary  recognition.  Of  the  principal  movements  into 
which  the  development  may  be  analysed  we  shall  now  go  on 
to  speak  in  more  detail,  only  premising  that  the  necessity  of 
describing  them  separately  should  not  lead  us  to  forget  that 
they  are  mutually  involved. 

B.     T^e  Extension  of  the  Area  of  Common  Good. 

206.  The  first  of  the  movements  into  which  the  develop- 
ment of  morality  may  be  analysed  consists  in  a  gradual  ex- 
tension, for  the  mental  eye  of  the  moral  subject,  of  the  range 
of  persons  to  whom  the  common  good  is  conceived  as 
common;  towards  whom  and  between  whom  accordingly 
obligations  are  understood  to  exist.     What  may  have  been 


238      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

the  narrowest  restrictions  on  this  range  within  which  the 
process  of  moralisation  has  gone  on,  we  have  no  means  of 
saying.  We  only  know  that  the  earliest  ascertainable  history 
exhibits  to  us  communities,  relatively  very  confined,  within 
any  one  of  which  a  common  good,  and  in  consequence  a 
common  duty,  is  recognised  as  between  the  members  of  the 
community,  while  beyond  the  particular  community  the 
range  of  mutual  obligation  is  not  understood  to  extend. 
Among  ourselves,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  almost  an  axiom  of 
popular  Ethics  that  there  is  at  least  a  potential  duty  of  every 
man  to  every  man — a  duty  which  becomes  actual  so  soon  as 
one  comes  to  have  any  dealing  with  the  other.  It  is  true 
that  plenty  of  pretexts,  some  under  very  philosophical  dis- 
guise, are  always  forthcoming  when  it  is  wished  to  evade  the 
duty ;  but,  when  we  are  free  from  private  bias,  we  do  not 
seriously  dispute  its  validity.  Conscience  is  uneasy  at  its 
violation,  as  it  would  not  have  been,  according  to  all  indi- 
cations, in  the  case,  let  us  say,  of  a  Greek  who  used  his  slave 
as  a  chattel,  though  according  to  his  lights  the  Greek  might 
be  as  conscientious  as  any  of  us.  Yet  the  language  in  which 
we  most  naturally  express  our  conception  of  the  duty  of  all 
men  to  all  men  indicates  the  school — that  of  tribal,  or  civil, 
or  family  obligation — in  which  we  have  been  trained  to  the 
conception.  We  convey  it  in  the  concrete  by  speaking  of 
a  human  family,  of  a  fraternity  of  all  men,  of  the  common 
fatherhood  of  God ;  or  we  suppose  a  universal  Christian 
citizenship,  as  wide  as  the  Humanity  for  which  Christ  died, 
and  in  thought  we  transfer  to  this,  under  certain  analogical 
adaptations,  those  claims  of  one  citizen  upon  another  which 
have  been  actually  enforced  in  societies  united  under  a  single 
sovereignty. 

207.  It  is  not  uncommon  indeed  with  men  to  whom 
a  little  philosophy  has  proved  a  dangerous  thing,  to  make 
much  of  the  distinction  between  an  obligation  that  admits 
of  being  enforced  between  persons  subject  to  a  common 
sovereign,  and  what  is  alleged  to  be  due  from  man  to  man, 
as  such ;  to  extenuate  the  claims  of  humanity,  and  even  to 


CH.  Ill]  DUTY  TO  HUMANITY  '  239 

make  merry  over  the  fraternity  of  men  and  nations.  The 
distinction  is  easily  drawn,  and,  so  long  as  there  continue 
to  be  men  who  will  not  observe  obligations  unless  enforced, 
it  cannot  be  considered  practically  unimportant.  But  for 
the  moralist  it  is  more  important  to  observe  the  real  fusion, 
in  the  conscience  of  those  citizens  of  the  modern  world 
who  are  most  responsive  to  the  higher  influences  of  their 
time,  of  duties  enforced  by  legal  penalties  and  those  of 
which  the  fulfilment  cannot  be  exacted  by  citizen  of  citizen, 
or  by  sovereign  of  subjects,  but  is  felt  to  be  due  from  man 
to  man.  It  is  not  more  certain  that  a  man  would  not 
recognise  a  duty,  e.g.  of  educating  his  poor  neighbours  or 
helping  to  liberate  a  slave,  unless,  generations  before  him, 
equal  rights  had  been  enforced  among  men  who  could  not 
have  understood  the  wrong  of  slavery  or  the  claim  of  the 
labourer  to  a  chance  of  raising  himself,  than  that  there  are 
men  now  to  whom  such  duties  present  themselves  with  just 
the  same  cogency  as  legal  obligations ;  men  to  whom  the 
motive  for  fulfilling  the  latter  has  been  so  entirely  purged 
from  any  fear  of  penalties,  that  the  absence  of  such  fear,  as 
a  motive  to  the  fulfilment  of  humanitarian  duties,  makes  no 
difference  to  the  felt  necessity  of  fulfiUing  them. 

No  gradual  modification  of  selfish  fear  or  hope  could 
yield  a  disposition  of  this  kind ;  and  if  these  were  the  sole 
original  motives  to  civil  or  tribal  or  family  obedience,  it 
would  be  unintelligible  that  a  state  of  mind  should  result, 
in  which  a  man  imposes  duties  on  himself  quite  beyond  the 
range  of  such  obedience.  But  if  at  the  root  of  such  obe- 
dience, as  well  as  of  the  institutions  to  which  it  has  been 
rendered,  there  has  been  an  idea  of  good,  suggested  by  the 
consciousness  of  unfulfilled  possibilities  of  the  rational  nature 
common  to  all  men,  then  it  is  intelligible  that,  as  the  range 
of  this  idea  extends  itself— as  it  comes  to  be  understood  that 
no  race  or  religion  or  status  is  a  bar  to  self  determined  co- 
operation in  its  fulfilment — the  sense  of  duty  which  it  yields, 
and  which  has  gained  its  power  over  natural  desires  and 
aversions  through  generations  of  discipline  in  the  family  and 


240      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

the  state,  should  become  a  sense  of  what  is  due  to  man  as 
such,  and  not  merely  to  the  members  of  a  particular  com- 
munity. The  change  is  not  necessarily  in  the  strength,  in 
the  constraining  power,  of  the  feeling  of  duty — perhaps  it  is 
never  stronger  now  than  it  may  have  been  in  an  Israelite 
who  would  have  yet  recognised  no  claim  in  a  Philistine,  or 
in  a  Greek  who  would  yet  have  seen  no  harm  in  exposing 
a  sickly  child — but  in  the  conceived  range  of  claims  to  which 
the  duty  is  relative.  Persons  come  to  be  recognised  as  having 
claims  who  would  once  not  have  been  recognised  as  having 
any  claim,  and  the  claim  of  the  "o-ot  Koi  o/ioiot  comes  to  be 
admitted  where  only  the  claim  of  indulged  inferiors  would 
have  been  allowed  before.  It  is  not  the  sense  of  duty  to  a 
neighbour,  but  the  practical  answer  to  the  question  Who  is 
my  neighbour  ?  that  has  varied. 

208.  The  extension  of  this  process  has  indeed  often  been 
looked  on  with  suspicion  by  practical  men.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  the  friend  of  man  is  apt  to  be  the  friend  of 
no  one  in  particular.  'Enthusiasm  for  humanity'  is  thought 
to  interfere  with  the  ties  of  country  and  fellow-citizenship, 
without  putting  any  influence  in  their  place  which  can  be 
relied  on  for  controlling  the  selfish  inclinations  of  the 
individual.  The  suspicion  is  probably  groundless.  The 
excuses  which  selfishness  makes  for  itself  in  the  mouths  of 
cultivated  men  will,  no  doubt,  vary  according  to  the  philo- 
sophical tendencies  of  the  time ;  and  it  would  be  hard  to 
deny  that  it  may  take  advantage  of  a  cant  of  Humanita- 
rianism,  as  of  any  other  cant  that  may  be  in  vogue.  But  if 
this  illustrates  the  old  lesson — too  familiar  to  need  illustra- 
tion— that  there  are  no  intellectual  formulae  of  which  the 
adoption  will  serve  as  a  substitute  for  discipline  of  character, 
it  argues  nothing  against  the  view  that,  given  the  discipline 
of  character  by  which  alone  our  selfish  or  pleasure-seeking 
tendencies  can  be  controlled  or  superseded,  the  practical 
value  of  a  man's  morality  increases  with  the  removal  of 
limitations  upon  his  view  of  the  kind  of  humanity  which 
constitutes  a  claim  equal  with  his  own.     If  the  fundamental 


CH.  Mr]  bUTY   TO  tiUMANlty  241 

readiness  to  forgo  pleasure  for  duty  cannot  be  produced 
merely  by  a  wider  view  of  the  claims  which  others  have  on 
us,  it  can  scarcely  suffer  from  such  a  view.  Indeed,  if  habit 
is  strengthened  by  exercise,  it  would  seem  that  the  habit  on 
which  the  fulfilment  of  known  duties  depends,  once  partially 
formed,  must  be  strengthened  rather  than  otherwise  by  that 
more  constant  call  for  the  practice  of  duty  which  naturally 
arises  from  recognition  of  a  wider  range  of  persons  to  whom 
duties  are  due.  Self-indulgent  tendencies  which  often  tend 
to  revive,  as  life  goes  on,  in  those  who  have  mastered  them- 
selves enough  for  '  respectability,'  but  to  whom  the  range  of 
duties  implied  in  respectability  is  a  narrow  one,  will  be 
more  constantly  challenged  by  situations  in  which  unfamiliar 
duties  have  to  be  met.  And  if  the  dutiful  disposition  must 
thus  gain  rather  than  lose  in  strength  from  the  enlighten- 
ment before  which  the  exclusive  dependence  of  moral  claims 
on  relations  of  family,  status,  or  citizenship  disappears,  it 
would  seem  that  with  this  disappearance  its  effect  in  further- 
ing the  social  realisation  of  human  capabilities  must  greatly 
increase.  Faculties  which  social  repression  and  separation 
prevent  from  development,  take  new  life  from  the  enlarged 
co-operation  which  the  recognition  of  equal  claims  in  all 
men  brings  with  it.  Nor  is  it  the  case,  as  we  are  apt  to 
suppose,  that  the  gain  in  this  respect  is  confined  merely  to 
the  majority,  while  the  few  favoured  by  the  system  of 
privileged  status  and  national  antagonism  proportionately 
lose.  We  only  imagine  this  to  be  the  case  from  a  mislead- 
ing association  of  greater  capability  with  more  distinctive 
supremacy.  The  special  qualities  of  command  are,  no  doubt, 
less  highly  developed  as  the  idea  of  the  brotherhood  of  men 
comes  to  be  more  fully  carried  out  in  the  institutions  of  the 
world,  but  meanwhile  the  capabilities  implied  in  social  self- 
adjustment  become  what  they  could  not  be  before.  If  we 
admire  these  capabilities  less  than  the  qualities  of  command, 
it  is  perhaps  because  we  have  not  adjusted  our  admirations 
to  what  we  must  yet  admit  to  be  the  divine  plan  of  man's 
development. 


242      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  M6RAt  PROGRESS      [BK.IU 

209.  The  very  possibility,  however,  of  raising  the  ques- 
tion whether  men  are  really  the  better  for  the  acceptaiice  of 
humanitarian  ideas,  indicates  the  extent  of  their  actual  cur- 
rency. Their  influence  may  be  traced  alike  in  the  positive 
lawSj  and  institutions  maintained  by  law,  of  civilised  nations ; 
in  the  law  of  opinion,  the  social  sentiments  and  expectations, 
prevalent  among  them ;  and  in  the  formulae  by  which  philo- 
sophers have  sought  to  methodise  this  law  of  opinion.  It 
would  be  superfluous  here  to  follow  in  detail  the  process  by 
which  the  law  of  Christendom  has  gradually  come  to  conform 
to  the  '  Jus  naturale '  already  recognised  by  Ulpian  and  the 
Institutes,  according  to  which  'omnes  homines  aequales 
sunt.'  Nor  is  it  to  the  purpose  to  discuss  the  share  which 
Stoic  philosophers,  Roman  jurists,  and  Christian  teachers 
may  severally  have  had  in  gaining  acceptance  for  the  idea  of 
human  equality.  It  is  only  some  spirit  of  partisanship  that 
can  lead  us  to  put  one  set  of  teachers  or  institutions  into 
competition  with  another  for  the  credit  of  having  contributed 
most  to  what,  after  all,  is  but  the  natural  fulfillment  of  a  capa- 
bility given  in  reason  itself— a  fulfilment  which  only  special 
selfish  interests  can  withstand.  Given  the  idea  of  a  common 
good  and  of  self-determined  participators  in  it — the  idea 
implied,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  most  primitive  human 
society — the  tendency  of  the  idea  in  the  minds  of  all  capable 
of  it  must  be  to  include,  as  participators  of  the  good,  all  who 
have  dealings  with  each  other  and  who  can  communicate  as 
'  I '  and  '  Thou.'  With  growing  means  of  intercourse  and 
the  progress  of  reflection  the  theory  of  a  universal  human 
fellowship  is  its  natural  outcome.  It  is  rather  the  retarda- 
tion of  the  acceptance  of  the  theory  that  the  historian  has  to 
explain ;  its  retardation  by  those  private  interests  which  have 
made  it  inconvenient  for  powerful  men  and  classes  to  act 
upon  it,  and  have  led  them  to  welcome  any  counter-theory 
which  might  justify  their  practice ;  such,  e.g.,  as  the  interests 
which  led  some  of  the  American  communities,  after  claiming 
their  own  independence  on  the  ground  that  'all  men  are 
born  free  and  equal,'  to  vindicate  negro  slavery  for  nearly 


CH.  ni]  DUTY   TO   HUMANITY  243 

a  hundred  years  and  only  to  relinquish  it  after  a  tremendous 
war  in  its  defence. 

210.  However  retarded,  equality  before  the  law  has  at 
length  been  secured,  at  least  ostensibly,  for  all  full-grown 
and  sane  human  beings  throughout  Christendom.  Under 
ordinary  circumstances  the  right  to  free  movement,  and  to 
the  free  enjoyment  and  disposal  of  the  fruits  of  his  labour, 
is  guaranteed  to  every  one,  on  condition  of  his  respecting 
the  like  freedom  in  others.  Social  sentiment  not  merely 
responds  to  the  requirements  of  law  in  this  respect  and 
secures  their  general  observance,  but  often  demands,  on  the 
ground  of  a  common  humanity,  some  positive  contribution 
to  the  service  of  others  where  law  can  merely  prevent  a  vio- 
lation of  rights,  and  some  abatement  from  the  strict  exaction 
of  a  claim  which  law  sanctions.  It  would  almost  every- 
where condemn  the  refusal  of  help  to  a  man,  however  alien 
in  blood,  language  and  religion,  whose  life  depended  on  the 
help  being  given  him,  or  the  exaction  of  a  debt  legally  due 
at  the  cost  of  the  debtor's  starvation.  The  necessities  of 
war  indeed  are  treated  as  practically  suspending  the  claims 
of  a  common  humanity.  The  processes  by  which  the  general 
conscience  reconciles  itself  to  their  so  doing  cannot  be  con- 
sidered here ;  but  the  fact  that  it  is  only  when  in  conflict 
with  the  apparent  claims  of  a  common  country  that  the 
claims  of  a  common  humanity  are  thought  to  be  superseded, 
shows  what  a  strong  hold  the  latter  have  obtained  on  social 
sentiment. 

211.  For  an  abstract  expression  of  the  notion  that  there 
is  something  due  from  every  man  to  every  man,  simply  as 
men,  we  may  avail  ourselves  of  the  phrase  employed  in  the 
famous  definition  of  Justice  in  the  Institutes  : — '  Justitia  est 
constans  et  perpetua  voluntas  suum  cuique  tribuendi.' 
Every  man  both  by  law  and  common  sentiment  is  recog- 
nised as  having  a  'suum,'  whatever  the  'suum'  may  be,  and 
is  thus  efiFectually  distinguished  from  the  animals  (at  any 
rate  according  to  our  treatment  of  them)  and  from  things. 
He  is  deemed  capable  of  having  something  of  his  own,  as 

R  3 


244      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

animals  and  things  are  not.  He  is  treated  as  an  end,  not 
merely  as  a  means.  It  is  obvious  indeed  that  the  notion 
expressed  by  the  '  suum  cuique,'  even  when  it  carries  with 
it  the  admission  that  every  man,  as  such,  has  a  '  suum,'  is 
a  most  insufficient  guide  to  conduct  till  we  can  answer  the 
question  what  the  '  suum '  in  each  case  is,  and  that  no  such 
answer  is  deducible  from  the  mere  principle  that  every  one 
has  a  'suum.'  In  fact,  of  course,  this  principle  is  never 
wrought  into  law  or  general  sentiment  without  very  precise, 
though  perhaps  insufficient  and  ultimately  untenable,  deter- 
minations of  what  is  due  from  one  to  another  in  the  ordinary 
intercourse  of  those  habitually  associated.  Particular  duties 
to  this  man  and  that  have  been  recognised  long  before 
reflection  has  reached  the  stage  in  which  a  duty  to  man  as 
such  can  be  recognised.  How  far  upon  reflection  we  can 
find  in  these  particular  duties — in  the  detail  of  conventional 
morality — a  permanent  and  universal  basis  for  right  conduct, 
is  a  separate  question.  For  the  present  we  wish  to  follow 
out  the  effect  exerted  upon  the  responsive  conscience  by  life 
in  a  society  where  a  capacity  for  rights,  some  claim  on  his 
fellow-men,  has  come  to  be  ascribed  to  every  man.  Given 
that  readiness  to  recognise  a  duty  and  to  act  upon  the 
recognition,  which  is  the  proper  outcome  in  the  individual 
of  family  and  civil  discipline  as  governed  by  an  idea  of 
common  good,  what  sort  of  rule  of  conduct  will  the  indivi- 
dual, upon  unbiassed  reflection,  obtain  for  himself  from  the 
establishment  in  law  and  general  sentiment  of  the  principle 
that  every  man  can  claim  something  as  his  due  ?  How  will 
it  tend  to  define  for  him  the  absolutely  desirable,  and  the 
ideal  of  conduct  as  directed  thereto  ? 

212.  The  great  result  will  be  to  fix  it  in  his  mind,  as 
a  condition  of  such  conduct,  that  it  should  be  alike  foi;  the 
real  good  of  all  men  concerned  in  or  affected  by  it,  as 
estimated  on  the  same  principle.  This  rule  has  indeed 
become  so  familiarised  to  our  consciences,  however  fre- 
quently we  violate  it,  that  at  first  sight  it  may  seem  to 
some   too   trivial   to  be  worthy  a  philosopher's  attention. 


CH.  Ill]  DUTY  TO   HUMANITY  245 

while  by  others  it  may  be  remarked  that,  till  we  have 
decided  what  the  real  good  of  all  men  is,  and  have  at  least 
some  general  knowledge  of  the  effect  upon  it,  under  certain 
conditions,  of  certain  lines  of  conduct,  the  rule  will  not  tell 
us  how  we  ought  to  act  in  particular  cases.  Such  a  remark 
would  be  plainly  true.  For  the  present,  however,  we  are 
considering  the  importance  to  the  conscientious  man  of 
this  recognition  of  a  like  claim  in  all  men,  taken  simply  by 
itself,  irrespectively  of  those  criteria  of  the  good  and  of  those 
convictions  as  to  the  means  of  arriving  at  it  by  which  the 
recognition  is  in  fact  always  accompanied.  It  is  the  source 
of  the  refinement  in  his  sense  of  justice.  It  is  that  which 
makes  him  so  over-curious,  as  it  seems  to  the  ordinary  man 
of  the  world,  in  enquiring,  as  to  any  action  that  may  suggest 
itself  to  him,  whether  the  benefit  which  he  might  gain  by  it 
for  himself  or  for  some  one  in  whom  he  is  interested,  would 
be  gained  at  the  expense  of  any  one  else,  however  indiffer- 
ent to  him  personally,  however  separated  from  him  in  family, 
status,  or  nation.  It  makes  the  man,  in  short,  who  will  be 
just  before  he  is  generous ;  who  will  not  merely  postpone  his 
own  interest  to  his  friend's,  but  who,  before  he  gratifies  an 
'  altruistic '  inclination,  will  be  careful  to  enquire  how  in 
doing  so  he  would  affect  others  who  are  not  the  object  of 
the  inclination.  This  characteristic  of  the  man  who  is  just 
in  the  full  light  of  the  idea  of  human  equality  is  independ- 
ent of  any  theory  of  well-being  on  his  part.  Whether  he 
has  any  theory  on  the  matter  at  all,  whether  he  is  theo- 
retically an  '  Ascetic '  or  a  '  Hedonist,'  makes  little  practical 
difference.  The  essential  thing  is  that  he  applies  no  other 
standard  in  judging  of  the  well-being  of  others  than  in 
judging  of  his  own,  and  that  he  will  not  promote  his  own 
well-being  or  that  of  one  whom  he  loves  or  likes,  from  whom 
he  has  received  service  or  expects  it,  at  the  cost  of  impeding 
in  any  way  the  well-being  of  one  who  is  nothing  to  him  but 
a  man,  or  whom  he  involuntarily  dislikes ;  that  he  will  not  do 
this  knowingly,  and  that  he  is  habitually  on  the  look-out  to 
know  whether  his  actions  will  have  this  effect  or  not. 


246     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS      [bK.  Ill 

Oh  supposition  that  a  man  has  really  attained  this  habit 
of  practical  justice,  that  it  is  his  constant  and  uniform  state, 
he  has  in  him  at  least  the  negative  principle  of  all  virtue ; 
a  principle  that  will  effectually  restrain  him  from  doing  all 
that  he  ought  not,  if  it  does  not  move  him  to  do  all  that  he 
ought.  We  cannot  indeed  be  sure  that  it  will  prevent  the 
possibility  of  his  doing  acts  which  in  the  general  result  yield 
more  pain  than  pleasure.  The  most  equitable  intentions, 
most  carefully  carried  out,  will  not,  for  instance,  save  a  man 
from  liability  to  do  something,  in  ignorance  of  its  conse- 
quences, which  will  in  fact  promote  a  dangerous  disease. 
If  however  we  do  not  speak  of  a  man  doing  an  action  which 
he  ought  not  except  in  contemplation  of  his  state  of  mind, 
as  at  any  rate  intending  consequences  which  he  might  have 
known  to  be  mischievous,  then  the  man  who  is  just  in  the 
sense  described  will  be  safe  from  doing  what  he  ought  not.  • 

213.  Such  a  man  perhaps  would  not,  even  at  this  day 
and  in  the  most  Christianised  and  civilised  society,  command 
universal  or  very  hearty  admiration.  Moral  emotions  have 
not  been  so  far  wrought  into  accord  with  that  principle  of 
right  in  man  as  man,  which  has  been  established  in  law  and 
recognised  (though  by  no  means  in  its  full  application)  by 
social  opinion.  There  may  indeed  be  a  well-founded  sus- 
picion that  the  plea  of  justice  before  generosity  is  often  rather 
made  an  excuse  for  deficient  generosity  than  a  ground  for 
scrupulosity  of  justice.  But,  more  than  this,  the  duty  of 
treating  all  men  equally,  even  to  the  extent  of  not  serving 
a  friend  or  kinsman  or  countryman  in  a  manner  prejudicial 
to  any  one  else,  though  it  would  no  longer  be  in  words 
denied,  has  yet  little  hold  on  the  '  hearts '  even  of  educated 
and  respectable  men.  It  has  been  for  this  reason,  far  more 
than  from  its  being  founded  on  a  Hedonistic  psychology, 
which  in  fact  was  common  to  it  with  nearly  all  the  Moral 
Philosophy  of  England,  that  Utilitarianism  has  encountered 
so  much  popular  dislike.  The  principle  embodied  in  the 
formula,  that  '  every  one  should  count  for  one  and  no  one 
for  more  than  one'  in  the  calculation  of  felicific  consequences, 


CH.  m]  DUTY   TO   HUMANITY 


247 


has  been  the  source  at  once  of  its  real  beneficence  in  the  life 
of  modern  society  and  of  the  resistance,  far  more  formidable 
than  that  of  '  Ascetic '  philosophy,  which  it  has  met  with. 
It  has  been  the  source  of  its  beneficence  because,  quite 
independently  of  the  identification  of  the  highest  good 
with  a  greatest  possible  sum  of  pleasures— perhaps  indeed, 
as  we  shall  see  later  on,  inconsistently  with  that  identifica- 
tion— it  has  practically  meant  for  Utilitarians  that  every 
human  person  was  to  be  deemed  an  end  of  absolute  value, 
as  much  entitled  as  any  one  else  to  have  his  well-being 
taken  account  of  in  considering  the  justifiableness  of  an 
action  by  which  that  well-being  could  be  aff'ected.  And  it 
is  precisely  this  that  has  brought  the  Utilitarian  into  conflict 
with  every  class-prejudice,  with  every  form  of  family  or 
national  pride,  with  the  inveterate  and  well-reputed  habit  of 
investing  with  a  divine  right  the  cause  of  the  friend  or  the 
party  or  the  institution  which  happens  to  interest  us  most, 
without  reference  to  its  bearings  on  the  welfare  of  others 
more  remote  from  our  sympathies. 

214.  For  practical  purposes  the  principle  that,  in  the  esti- 
mate of  the  resulting  happiness  by  which  the  value  of  an 
action  is,  to  be  judged,  '  every  one  should  count  for  one  and 
no  one  for  more  than  one,'  yields  very  much  the  same 
direction  as  that  one  of  the  formulae  employed  by  Kant  for 
the  statement  of  the  Categorical  Imperative,  which  has 
probably  always  commended  itself  most  to  readers  alive  to 
the  best  spirit  of  their  time  : — '  Act  so  as  to  treat  humanity, 
whether  in  your  own  person  or  in  that  of  others,  always  as 
an  end,  never  merely  as  a  means.'  We  say  for  practical 
purposes,  because,  as  strictly  interpreted,  the  one  by  a  Ben- 
thamite, the  other  by  a  Kantist,  the  significance  of  the  two 
formulae  is  wholly  different.  The  Benthamite  would  repu- 
diate or  pronounce  unintelligible  the  notion  of  an  absolute 
value  in  the  individual  person.  It  is  not  every  person,  ac- 
cording to  him,  but  every  pleasure,  that  is  of  value  in  itself; 
and  in  accordance  with  this  view  he  has  to  qualify  the  formula 
we  have  been  dwelling  on,  so  as  to  empty  it,  if  not  of  all 


248      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [BK.  Ill 

practical  significance,  at  any  rate  of  the  significance  which 
we  have  ascribed  to  it,  and  which  has  been  the  real  guide 
to  the  reforming  Utilitarian. 

Upon  Hedonistic  principles  it  will  only  be  as  '  supposed 
equal  in  degree"  that  one  person's  happiness,  t'.e.  his  experi- 
ence of  pleasure,  is  to  count  for  as  much  as  another's.  Now 
as  the  ascertainment  of  this  equality  in  degree  between  the 
happiness  of  one  man  and  that  of  another  is  practically  im- 
possible, and  as  there  is  every  reason  to  think  that  different 
men  are  susceptible  of  pleasure  in  most  different  degrees,  it 
is  hard  to  see  how  the  formula,  thus  interpreted,  can  afford 
any  positive  ground  for  that  treatment  of  all  men's  happiness 
as  entitled  to  equal  consideration,  for  which  Utilitarians  have 
in  practice  been  so  laudably  zealous.  The  most  that  could 
be  deduced  from  it  would  be  some  very  general  condemna- 
tion of  those  fixed  class-distinctions  which,  by  interfering  with 
the  free  pursuit  of  pleasure  on  the  part  of  unprivileged  per- 
sons, would  seem  to  lessen  the  aggregate  of  pleasure  resulting 
on  the  whole.  Under  it  a  superior  race  or  order  could  plead 
strong  justification,  not  indeed  for  causing  useless  pain  to  the 
inferior,  but  for  systematically  postponing  the  inferior's  claims 
to  happiness  to  its  own.  Certainly  no  absolute  rule  could  be 
founded  on  it,  prohibiting  all  pursuit  of  happiness  by  orre  man 
which  interferes  with  the  happiness  of  another,  or  what  we 
commonly  call  the  oppression  of  the  weaker  by  the  stronger ; 
for,  the  stronger  being  presumably  capable  of  pleasure  in 
higher  degree,  there  could  be  nothing  to  show  that  the 
quantity  of  pleasure  resulting  from  the  gain  to  the  stronger 
through  the  loss  to  the  weaker  was  not  greater  than  would 
have  been  the  quantity  resulting  if  the  claims  of  each  had 
been  treated  as  equal.  Instead  of  such  a  rule  as  that  on 
which  Utilitarians  have  been  among  the  forwardest  to  act — 
'We  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak, 
and  not  to  please  ourselves ' — we  should  be  logically  entitled 
at  most  to  a  counsel  of  prudence,  advising  much  circumspec- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  strong  before  he  assumes  that  an 
'  See  Mill's  Utilitarianism,  p.  93. 


CH.  Ill]  DUTY  TO  HUMANITY  249 

addition  to  his  pleasure,  which  involves  a  subtraction  from 
the  pleasure  of  the  weak,  would  neutralise  the  subtraction 
in  the  hedonistic  calculus. 

215.  There  is  reason  to  hold,  then,  that  Kant's  formula 
affords  a  better  expression  than  does  Bentham's,  as  inter- 
preted according  to  Bentham's  notion  of  the  good,  for  the 
rule  on  which  the  ideally  just  man  seeks  to  act.  That  rule, 
as  we  have  seen,  is  one  that  such  a  man  gathers  for  himself 
from  the  lessons  which  law  and  conventional  morality  have 

taught  him.     It  is  his  fnav6p6a>iia  vofiov,  5  iWdirii  Sia  TO  KadoKov^, 

his  articulation,  and  application  to  the  particulars  of  life,  of 
that  principle  of  an  absolute  value  in  the  human  person  as 
such,  of  a  like  claim  to  consideration  in  all  men,  which  is 
imphed  in  the  law  and  conventional  morality  of  Christendom, 
but  of  which  the  application  in  law  is  from  the  nature  of  the 
case  merely  general  and  prohibitory,  while  its  application  in 
conventional  morality  is  in  fact  partial  and  inconsistent. 
'  The  recognition  of  the  claims  of  a  common  humanity '  is 
a  phrase  that  has  become  so  familiar  in  modern  ears  that  we 
are  apt  to  suspect  it  of  being  cant.  Yet  this  very  familiarity 
is  proof  of  the  extent  to  which  the  idea  represented  by  it  has 
affected  law  and  institutions.  The  phrase  is  indeed  cant  in 
the  mouth  of  any  one  in  whom  there  is  no  conscientious  will 
giving  vitality  and  application  to  the  idea  which,  as  merely 
embodied  in  laws  and  institutions,  would  be  abortive  and 
dead.  But  if  it  is  only  the  conscience  of  the  individual  that 
brings  the  principle  of  human  equality  into  productive  con- 
tact with  the  particular  facts  of  human  life,  on  the  other  hand 
it  is  from  the  embodiment  of  the  principle  in  laws  and  insti- 
tutions and  social  requirements  that  the  conscience  itself 
appropriates  it.  The  mistake  of  those  who  deny  the  a  priori 
character  of  such  'intuitions'^  of  the  conscience  as  that 

'  I.e.  his  'rectification  of  law,  where  law  fails  through  being 
general.'    Arist.  Eth.  Nic.  V.  jt.  6. 

^  I  use  the  term  '  intuition '  here,  in  the  sense  commonly  attached 
to  it  by  recent  English  writers  on  Morals,  for  a  judgment  not  derived 
deductively  or  inductively  from  other  judgments.  The  reader  should 
be  on  his  guard  against  confusing  this  sense  of  the  term  with  that  in 


250      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

represented  by  Kant's  formula,  does  not  lie  in  tracing  a  history 
of  the  intuitions,  but  in  ignoring  the  immanent  operation  of 
ideas  of  the  reason  in  the  process  of  social  organisation,  upon 
which  the  intuitions  as  in  the  individual  depend.  A  short 
summary  of  the  view  which  we  have  been  seeking  to  oppose 
to  theirs  will  make  this  view  clearer,  as  it  affects  the  intuition 
on  which  the  practice  of  justice  is  founded. 

216.  The  individual's  conscience  is  reason  in  him  as  in- 
formed by  the  work  of  reason  without  him  in  the  structure 
and  controlling  sentiments  of  society.  The  basis  of  that 
structure,  the  source  of  those  sentiments,  can  only  be  a  self- 
objectifying  spirit;  a  spirit  through  the  action  of  which  beings 
such  as  we  are,  endowed  with  certain  animal  susceptibilities 
and  affected  by  certain  natural  sympathies,  become  capable 
of  striving  after  some  bettering  or  fulfilment  of  themselves, 
which  they  conceive  as  an  absolute  good,  and  in  which  they 
include  a  like  bettering  or  fulfilment  of  others.  Without  such 
spiritual  action,  in  however  elementary  a  form,  there  can  be 
no  society,  in  the  proper  human  sense,  at  all ;  no  community 
of  persons,  however  small>  to  whom  the  treatment  in  any  re- 
spect by  each  of  the  other  as  himself  would  be  intelligible. 

On  the  other  hand,  given  any  community  of  persons  ren- 
dered possible  by  such  a  spiritual  principle,  it  is  potentially 
a  community  of  all  men  of  whom  one  can  communicate  with 
the  other  as  '  I '  with  '  Thou.'  The  recognition  of  reciprocal 
claims,  established  as  between  its  own  members  within  each 
of  a  multitude  of  social  groups,  admits  of  establishment  be- 
tween members  of  all  the  groups  taken  together.  There  is 
no  necessary  limit  of  numbers  or  space  beyond  which  the 
spiritual  principle  of  social  relation  becomes  ineffective.  The 
impediments  to  its  action  in  bringing  about  a  practical  recog- 
nition of  universal  humanfellowship,  though  greater  in  degree, 
are  the  same  in  kind  as  those  which  interfere  with  the  main- 
tenance of  unity  in  the  family,  the  tribe,  or  the  .urban  com- 
monwealth.    They  are  all  reducible  to  what  we  may  con- 

which  it  is  used  as  an  equivalent  for  tlie  German  'Anschauung,'  or 
apprehension  of  an  object. 


CH.  in]  DUTy   TO  HUMANITY  251 

veniently  call  the  antagonism  of  the  natural  to  the  spiritual 
man.  The  prime  impediment,  alike  to  the  maijitenance  of 
the  narrower  and  to  the  formation- of  wider -feHowshipvis 
selfishness :  which  we  may  describe  provisionally  (pending 
a  more  thorough  enquiry  into  the  relation  between  pleasure 
and  the  good)  asji  preference  of  private  pleasure  to  common 
good.  But  the  wider,  the  more  universal  the  fellowship  that 
is  in  question,  the  more  serious  become  those  impediments 
to  it,  of  which  selfishness  may  and  does  take  advantage,  but 
which  are  so  far  independent  of  it  that  they  bring  the  most 
self-devoted  members  of  one  tribe  or  state  into  what  seems 
on  both  sides  inevitable  hostility  with  those  of  another. 
Such  are  ignorance,  with  the  fear  that  springs  from  ignorance ; 
misapprehension  of  the  physical  conditions  of  well-being,  and 
consequent  suspicion  that  the  gain  of  one  community  must 
be  the  loss  of  another ;  geographical  separations  and  demar- 
cations, with  the  misunderstandings  that  arise  from  them. 
The  effect  of  these  has  often  been  to  make  it  seem  a  necessary 
incident  of  a  man's  obligation  to  his  own  tribe  or  nation  that 
he  should  deny  obligations  towards  men  of  another  tribe  or 
nation.  And  while  higher  motives  have  thus  co-operated 
with  mere  selfishness  in  strengthening  national  separation  and 
antagonism,  it  would  be  idle  to  deny  a  large  share,  in  the 
process  by  which  such  influences  have  been  partially  over- 
come, to  forces—  e.g.  the  force  of  conquest  and,  in  particular, 
of  Roman  conquest — which,  though  they  have  been  applied 
and  guided  in  a  manner  only  possible  to  distinctively  rational 
agents,  have  been  very  slightly  under  the  control  of  any 
desire  for  social  good  on  the  part  of  the  persons  wielding 
them. 

But  where  the  selfishness  of  man  has  proposed,  his  better 
reason  has  disposed.  Whatever  the  means,  the  result  has 
been  a  gradual  removal  of  obstacles  to  that  recognition  of 
a  universal  fellowship  which  the  action  of  reason  in  men 
potentially  constitutes.  Large  masses  of  men  have  been 
brought  under  the  control  each  of  a  single  system  of  law ;  and 
while  each  system  has  carried  with  it  manifold  results  of  selfish 


252      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

violence  and  seeming  accident,  each  has  been  essentially  an 
expression  of  reason,  as  embodying  an  idea  of  permanent  well- 
being  which  the  individual  conceives  to  be  common  to  his 
nation  with  himself.  Each  has  maintained  alike,  under  what- 
ever differences  of  form,  the  institutions  of  the  family  and  of 
property ;  and  there  has  thus  arisen,  along  with  an  order  of 
life  which  habituates  the  individual  to  the  subordination  of 
his  likes  and  dislikes  to  social  requirements,  a  sort  of  common 
language  of  right,  in  which  the  idea  of  universal  human 
fellowship,  of  claims  in  man  as  man — itself  the  outcome  of 
the  same  reason  which  has  yielded  the  laws  of  particular 
communities — can  find  the  expression  necessary  to  its  taking 
hold  on  the  minds  of  men. 

217.  In  the  light  of  these  considerations  we  may  trace 
a  history,  if  we  like  to  call  it  so,  of  the  just  man's  conscience 
— of  the  conscience  which  dictates  to  him  an  equal  regard  to 
the  well-being,  estimated  on  the  same  principle  as  his  own, 
of  all  whom  his  actions  may  affect.  It  is  a  history,  however, 
which  does  not  carry  us  back  to  anything  beyond  reason.  It 
is  a  history  of  which  reason  is  the  beginning  and  the  end. 
It  is  reason  which  renders  the  individual  capable  of  self- 
imposed  obedience  to  the  law  of  his  family  and  of  his  state, 
while  it  is  to  reason  that  this  law  itself  owes  its  existence. 
It  is  thus  both  teacher  and  learner  of  the  lesson  through 
which  a  conscience  of  any  kind,  with  the  habit  of  conformity 
to  conscience,  is  first  acquired,  and  the  individual  becomes 
capable  of  a  reverence  which  can  control  inclinations  to 
pleasure.  Reason  is  equally  the  medium  of  that  extension 
of  one  system  of  law  over  many  communities,  of  like  systems 
over  a  still  wider  range,  which,  in  prophetic  souls  reflecting 
on  it,  first  elicits  the  latent  idea  of  a  fellowship  of  all,  and 
furnishes  them  with  a  mode  of  expression  through  which  the 
idea  may  be  brought  home  to  ordinary  men.  When  it  is  so 
brought  home,  the  personal  habits  which  are  needed  to  give 
practical  effect  to  it,  and  which  on  their  part  only  needed 
the  leaven  of  this  idea  to  expand  into  a  wider  beneficence, 
are  already  there.    But  they  are  there  through  the  action 


CH.  Ill]  DUTY    TO  HUMANITY  253 

of  the  same  reason,  as  already  yielding  social  order  and 
obedience  within  narrower  forms  of  community. 

Thus  in  the  conscientious  citizen  of  modern  Christendom 
reason  without  and  reason  within,  reason  as  objective  and 
reason  as  subjective,  reason  as  the  better  spirit  of  the  social 
order  in  which  he  lives,  and  reason  as  his  loyal  recognition 
and  interpretation  of  that  spirit — these  being  but  different 
aspects  of  one  and  the  same  reality,  which  is  the  operation 
of  the  divine  mind  in  man — combine  to  yield  both  the  judg- 
ment, and  obedience  tp  the  judgment,  which  we  variously 
express  by  saying  that  every  human  person  has  an  absolute 
value ;  that  humanity  in  the  person  of  every  one  is  always  to 
be  treated  as  an  end,  never  merely  as  a  means  ;  that  in  the 
estimate  of  that  well-being  which  forms  the  true  good  every 
one  is  to  count  for  one  and  no  one  for  more  than  one; 
that  every  one  has  a  '  suum '  which  every  one  else  is  bound 
to  render  him. 


CHAPTER   IV 

THE   DEVELOPMENT   OF   THE   MORAL   IDEAL   (CONTINUED) 

C.    The  Determination  of  the  Idea  of  Common  Good 

218,  The  development  of  morality,  which  we  have  been 
considering,  has  been  a  development  from  the  primary 
recognition  of  an  absolute  and  common  good — a  good 
common  as  between  some  group  of  persons  interested  in 
each  other,  absolute  as  that  of  which  the  goodness  is 
conceived  to  be  independent  of  the  likes  and  dislikes  of 
individuals ;  but  we  have  so  far  considered  the  development 
only  with  reference  to  the  extension  of  the  range  of  persons 
between  whom  the  good  is  conceived  to  be  common,  and 
who  on  this  ground  come  to  recognise  equivalent  duties  to 
each  other.  The  outcome  of  the  process,  when  treated  in 
this  one-sided  way,  exhibits  itself  merely  as  the  intuition  of 
the  educated  conscience  that  the  true  good  must  be  good  for 
all  men,  so  that  no  one  should  seek  to  gain  by  another's  loss, 
gain  and  loss  being  estimated  on  the  same  principle  for  each. 
It  has  not  appeared  so  far  how  the  conscience  is  trained  in 
the  apprehension  of  what  in  particular  the  good  is,  and  in 
the  consequent  imposition  on  itself  of  particular  duties.  We 
have  treated  the  precept  '  suum  cuique '  as  if  the  just  man 
arrived  at  the  idea  of  its  applicability  to  all  men,  and  at  the 
corresponding  disposition  to  apply  it,  without  any  such 
definite  enlightenment  in  regard  to  the  good  proper  to  every 
one  with  whom  he  may  have  to  do,  as  is  necessary  for  his 
practical  guidance.  Some  such  defect  of  treatment  is  un- 
avoidable so  long  as  abstraction  of  some  kind  is  the  condition 
of  all  exposition ;  so  long  as  we  can  only  attend  to  one  aspect 
of  any  reality  at  a  time,  though  quite  aware  that  it  is  only  one 
aspect.  We  have  now  to  make  up  for  the  defect  by  con- 
sidering the  gradual  determination  of  the  idea  of  good,  which 
goes  along  with  the  growth  of  the  conviction  that  it  is 


PLEASURE  AND  COMMON  GOOD  255 

good  for  all  men  alike,  and  of  the  disposition  to  act  accord- 
ingly. 

219.  In  doing  so  we  must  first  recall  some  conclusions 
previously  arrived  at.  The  idea  of  a  good,  we  saw,  is  the 
idea  of  something  that  will  satisfy  a  desire.  In  no  case  is 
to  think  of  a  pleasure  the  same  thing  as  to  think  of  a  good. 
Only  if  some  pleasure  is  the  object  of  desire  does  the 
anticipation  of  the  satisfaction  of  the  desire  yield  the  idea  of 
the  pleasure  as  a  good.  When,  as  is  constantly  the  case,  the 
object  of  strongest  desire  to  a  man — the  object  to  which  he 
is  actually  directing  himself — is  not  any  pleasure,  then  it  is 
not  any  pleasure  that  is  thought  of  as  a  good,  for  it  is  not 
any  pleasure  that  is  the  object  with  which  the  man  thinks  of 
satisfying  himself.  In  that  case  it  is  only  so  far  as  the  man 
in  desiring  contemplates  the  pleasure,  or  relief  from  pain,  that 
will  be  constituted  by  satisfaction  of  the  desire— a  pleasure 
of  which  the  imagination  cannot  from  the  nature  of  the  case 
have  excited  the  desire — that  any  idea  of  pleasantness  enters 
into  the  idea  of  the  object  as  good  at  all.  Taken  by  itself, 
then,  if  it  could  be  taken  by  itself,  the  mere  succession  of 
desires  in  a  man,  as  reflected  on,  would  yield  the  presentation 
of  many  different  good  things,  in  which  the  satisfaction  of 
those  desires  had  been  found  and  was  expected  to  recur. 
Many  of  these  would  be  pleasures,  because  many  objects  of 
desire  are  pleasures  (though  the  thought  even  of  these  as 
pleasures  is  different  from  the  thought  of  them  as  good) ;  but 
many  would  not  be  pleasures,  because  there  are  many  objects 
of  desire  which  are  not  imagined  pleasures,  and  which,  though 
pleasure  may  be  anticipated  in  their  attainment,  cannot  be 
desired  on  account  of  that  pleasure.  That  very  reflection 
on  desires,  however,  which  is  necessary  to  the  idea  of  the 
several  objects  satisfying  them  as  good,  implies  that  the 
subject  of  the  desires  distinguishes  himself  from  them. 
Hence  there  necessarily  accompanies  or  supervenes  upon 
the  idea  of  manifold  good  things,  in  which  manifold  satis- 
factions have  been  or  may  be  foundj  the  idea  of  a  possible 
object  which  may  yield  satisfaction  of  the  desiring  man  or 


256     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

self,  as  such,  who,  as  satisfaction  of  each  particular  desire  is 
attained,  still  finds  himself  anew  dissatisfied  and  wanting. 

220.  Such  an  idea  is  implied  in  the  most  elementary  moral 
judgments.  It  must  be  operative  in  every  one  who  judges  of 
actions  or  dispositions  as  virtuous  or  vicious,  and  must  be 
supposed  by  him  to  be  operative  in  every  one  to  whom  he 
ascribes  virtue  or  vice.  For  an  agent  merely  capable  of 
seeking  the  satisfaction  of  successive  desires,  without  capacity 
for  conceiving  a  satisfaction  of  himself  as  other  than  the 
satisfaction  of  any  particular  desire,  and  in  consequence 
without  capacity  for  conceiving  anything  as  good  petma- 
nently  or  on  the  whole,  there  could  be  no  possibility  of 
judging  that  any  desire  should  or  should  not  be  gratified. 
No  such  judgment  can  be  formed  of  any  desire,  unless  the 
desire  is  considered  with  reference  to  a  good  other  than  such 
as  passes  with  the  satisfaction  of  a  desire.  Even  if  the  judg- 
ment involved  no  more  than  a  comparison  of  the  pleasures 
that  had  been  experienced  in  the  gratification  of  different 
desires,  and  a  decision  that  one  should  not  be  gratified  be- 
cause interfering  with  the  gratification  of  another  from  which 
more  pleasure  was  expected,  this  very  comparison  would 
imply  that  the  person  making  it  distinguished  himself  from 
his  desires  and  was  cognisant  of  something  good  for  himself 
on  the  whole — though  for  himself  only  in  respect  of  his 
capacity  for  pleasure — to  which  good  he  expects  the  gratifi- 
cation of  one  desire  to  contribute  more  than  that  of  another. 
Now  the  capacity  for  regarding  certain  desires  as  desires 
which  should  not  be  gratified,  must  be  supposed  in  any  one 
who  is  either  to  form  moral  judgments  or  to  have  them 
applied  to  him.  This  must  be  equally  admitted  whether  we 
consider  action  or  disposition  to  be  the  proper  object  of 
moral  judgment ;  whether  we  hold  it  to  be  by  effects  or  by 
motives  that  actions  are  rendered  morally  good  or  bad.  Un- 
less a  man  could  think  of  himself  as  capable  of  governing 
his  actions  by  the  consideration  that  of  his  desires  some 
should,  while  others  should  not,  be  gratified,  the  distinc- 
tion of  praise-worthy  and  blame-worthy  actions  would  be 


CH.  IV]         PLEASURE  AND   COMMON  GOOD  257 

unmeaning  to  him.  He  could  not  apprehend  the  dis- 
tinction, nor  could  it  with  any  significance  be  applied  to  his 
actions. 

221.  It  will  scarcely  be  disputed,  then,  that  the  possibility 
of  moral  judgments  implies  some  idea  of  a  good,  other  than 
any  particular  pleasure  or  satisfaction  of  passing  desire,  with 
the  superior  value  of  which  the  value  of  any  such  pleasure  or 
satisfaction  may  be  compared.  But  we  are  apt  to  look  upon 
the  idea  of  superior  good  as  formed  merely  by  the  combina- 
tion in  thought  of  the  many  particular  pleasures  and  satisfac- 
tions, as  an  imagined  sum  of  them.  Every  one  has  experience 
of  certain  pleasures,  of  which  he  retains  the  memory  and  de- 
sires the  recurrence.  Their  recurrence  in  the  largest  quantity 
and  with  the  greatest  intensity  that  he  can  imagine,  forms  for 
him,  it  is  supposed,  when  he  thinks  calmly  of  the  matter, 
that  greatest  good  by  reference  to  which  he  can  estimate  the 
value  of  the  pleasures  which  from  time  to  time  he  desires, 
counting  them  objects  of  which  the  desire  should  or  should 
not  be  gratified,  according  as  their  enjoyment  is  found  upon 
experience  to  be  compatible  or  otherwise  with  the  enjoyment 
of  that  greatest  sum  of  imaginable  pleasures. 

Now  the  question  is  whether  the  practical  idea  of  some- 
thing good  on  the  whole,  of  a  true  or  chief  or  highest  or 
ultimate  good — the  idea  implied  in  the  capacity  for  moral 
judgment — could  even  in  its  earliest  stages  be  formed  in  this 
way.  The  process  by  which  on  first  thoughts  we  are  led  to 
suppose  that  it  can  be  and  is  so  formed,  would  seem  to  be 
as  follows.  The  good  we  rightly  identify  with  the  desired. 
We  at  the  same  time  accept  the  notion  that  the  object  of 
desire  is  always,  some  imagined  pleasure — a  notion  which 
would  not  commend  itself  as  it  does,  but  for  the  confusion 
into  which  we  readily  fall  between  the  pleasure,  or  relief  from 
pain,  constituted  by  the  satisfaction  of  any  desire,  and  the 
object  exciting  the  desire.  Every  particular  good  being  thus 
supposed  to  be  some  pleasure,  we  infer  that  the  greatest  good 
for  any, individual  must  be  the  greatest  quantity  of  pleasure 
possible  for  him,  and  that  the  greatest  good  of  which  the 


258      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

idea  can  affect  him  must  be  tlie  greatest  sum  of  pleasures 
that  he  can  imagine. 

It  is  the  latter  part  of  the  inference  that  is  here  specially 
in  question.  Upon  reflection  it  will  appear  that,  from  the 
supposition  that  every  desire  has  some  imagined  pleasure  for 
its  object,  it  not  only  is  no  legitimate  inference  that  a  greatest 
sum  of  imaginable  pleasures  is  most  desired  and  therefore 
presents  itself  to  the  individual  as  his  greatest  good ;  it  rather 
follows  that  no  such  sum  of  pleasures  can  be  desired  at  all. 
If  the  supposition  is  admitted,  we  are  justified  indeed  in 
arguing  that,  in  one  sense  of  the  term,'  the  greatest  pleasure 
is  most  desired,  but  only  in  the  sense  in  which  the  greatest 
pleasure  means  the  most  intense  particular  pleasure  that  can 
be  remembered  or  imagined.  To  argue  from  it  that  a  greatest 
sum  of  imaginable  pleasures  is  the  object  most  desired,  or 
one  that  can  be  desired  at  all,  is  to  argue  from  desire  for 
a  state  of  feeling  to  desire  for  something  which  is  not  a  pos- 
sible state  of  feeling;  There  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  state 
of  feeling  made  up  of  a  sum  of  pleasures ;  and  if  the  only 
possible  object  of  desire  is  a  state  of  pleasant  feeling,  as 
remembered  or  imagined,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  als  de- 
sire for  a  sum  of  pleasures.  A  sum  of  pleasures  is  not  a 
pleasure,  nor  is  the  thought  of  it  a  remembrance  or  imagina- 
tion of  pleasure,  such  as  on  the  supposition  excites  desire. 
It  can  only  exist  for  the  thought  of  a  person  considering 
certain  pleasures  as  addible  quantities,  but  neither  enjoying 
them  nor  imagining  their  enjoyment.  For  the  feeling  of 
a  pleased  person,  or  in  relation  to  his  sense  of  enjoyment, 
pleasures  cannot  form  a  sum.  However  numerous  the 
sources  of  a  state  of  pleasant  feeling,  it  is  one,  and  is  over 
before  another  can  be  enjoyed.  It  and  its  successors  can  be 
added  together  in  thought,  but  not  in  enjoyment  or  in  imagi- 
nation of  enjoyment.  If  then  desire  is  only  for  pleasure,  /,«. 
for  an  enjoyment  or  feeling  of  pleasure,  we  are  simply  the 
victims  of  words  when  we  talk  of  desire  for  a  sum  of  plea- 
sures, much  more  when  we  take  the  greatest  imaginable  sum 
to  be  the  most  desired.   We  are  confusing  a  sum  of  pleasures 


CH.  iv]         PLEASURE  AND   COMMON  GOOD  259 

as  counted  or  combined  in  thought,  with  a  sum  of  pleasures 
as  felt  or  enjoyed,  which  is  a  nonentity. 

222.  In  the  above  it  is  not  intended  to  deny  that  there 
may  be  in  fact  such  a  thing  as  desire  for  a  sum  or  contem- 
plated series  of  pleasures,  or  that  a  man  may  be  so  affected 
by  it  as  to  judge  that  some  particular  desire  should  not  be 
gratified,  if  its  gratification  would  interfere  with  the  attainment 
of  that  more  desirable  object.  The  contention  is  merely  that 
there  could  not '  be  such  a  desire  if  desire  were  solely  for 
pleasure,  in  the  sense  of  being  always  excited  by  an  imagi- 
nation of  some  feeling  of  pleasure.  As  there  cannot  be  a  feel- 
ing of  a  sum  of  pleasures,  neither  can  there  be  an  imagination 
of  such  a  feeling.  Desire  for  a  sum  or  series  of  pleasures  is 
only  possible  so  far  as  upon  sundry  desires,  each  excited  by 
imagination  of  a  particular  pleasure,  there  supervenes  in  a  man 
a  desire  not  excited  by  any  such  imagination ;  a  desire  for 
self-satisfaction.  The  man  thinks  of  himself — he  cannot  be 
properly  said  to  imagine  himself — as  the  permanent  subject 
of  these  successive  desires  and  of  the  successive  pleasures  by 
imagination  of  which  they  have  been  excited ;  and  a  desire 
to  satisfy  himself  in  their  successive  enjoyment,  unless 
counteracted  by  a  desire  to  satisfy  himself  in  some  other 
way  (whether  with  some  particular  pleasure  imagined,  or  with 
some  object  that  is  not  pleasure  at  all),  may  arise  in  conse- 
quence. Thus,  in  order  to  account  for  the  transition  from 
desire  for  imagined  pleasures  to  desire  for  a  sum  or  series  of 
pleasures,  we  must  suppose  the  action  of  a  principle  wholly 
different  from  desire  for  imagined  pleasures.  We  must  sup- 
pose a  determination  of  desire  by  the  conception  of  self,  its 
direction  to  self-satisfaction.  The  idea  of  something  good  on 
the  whole,  even  if  nothing  but  a  sum  of  pleasures  entered 
into  the  idea  as  present  to  the  mind  of  one  whom  it  renders 
capable  of  moral  judgment,  could  yet  not  result  from  the 
recurrence  of  images  of  pleasure  or  from  a  combination  of 
desires  each  excited  by  such  an  image.  A  desire  to  satisfy 
oneself,  then,  as  distinct  from  desire  for  a  feeling  of  pleasure, 
being  necessary  even  to  desire  for  a  sum  of  pleasures,  the 

s  2 


26o      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

question  is  whether  it  can  be  a  contemplated  possibility  of 
satisfying  oneself  with  pleasures  that  yields  the  idea  of  a  true 
or  highest  good,  with  which  particular  gratifications  of  desire 
may  be  contrasted. 

223.  Now  it  is  not  in  dispute  that  we  may  and  constantly 
do  seek  self-satisfaction  for  the  moment  in  some  imagined 
pleasure,  though  in  our  calmer  mind  we  know  that  the 
pleasure  cannot  afford  the  self-satisfaction  sought.  We  could 
not  deny  this,  according  to  the  account  previously  given  of 
the  will,  without  denying  that  the  will  is  often  directed  to 
the  attainment  of  pleasure.  To  deny  it  would  be  as  untrue 
as  to  say  of  any  one  that  his  object  is  always  a  pleasure, 
even  the  habitual  '^ pleasure-seeker '  being  liable  to  particular 
propensions  excited  quite  otherwise  than  by  imaginations  of 
pleasure.  But,  though  self-satisfaction  is  constantly  being 
sought  in  some  pleasure  or  another,  without  reflection  on 
the  impossibility  of  its  being  found  there,  it  is  clear  that 
interest  in  the  attainment  of  a  pleasure  cannot  suggest  an 
idea,  such  as  can  control  action,  of  something  truly  good  or 
good  on  the  whole— an  idea  of  which  the  import  lies  in 
contrast  with  the  pleasure  of  which  the  attraction  is  for  the 
moment  most  strongly  felt,  and  which  presupposes  some 
consideration  of  the  question  where  self-satisfaction  is  really 
to  be  found.  Reflecting  on  his  desires  for  certain  pleasures, 
a  man  may,  no  doubt,  judge  one  of  them  to  be  more  of 
a  good  than  another,  on  the  ground  of  its  greater  present 
attraction  for  him ;  but  such  a  judgment  neither  implies  nor 
could  yield  the  contrast  of  the  desired  with  the  desirable,  of 
good  for  the  moment  with  good  on  the  whole.  It  does 
indeed  imply  in  any  one  so  judging  a  distinction  of  himself 
from  his  feelings,  which,  at  a  further  stage  of  its  action, 
yields  the  idea  of  something  good  on  the  whole.  This  idea 
arises  from  a  man's  thought  of  himself  as  there  to  be  satisfied 
when  any  feeling,  in  the  enjoyment  of  which  he  may  have 
sought  satisfaction,  is  over.  It  is  the  idea  of  something  in 
which  he  may  be  satisfied,  not  for  this  time  and  turn  merely, 
but  at  least  more  permanently.     Could  a  contemplated  sue- 


CH.  iv]         PLEASURE  AND   COMMON   GOOD  261 

cession  of  pleasures,  then,  seem  to  him  to  offer  this  relatively 
permanent  satisfaction  ?  Could  he,  while  reflecting  on  him- 
self so  far  as  to  conceive  the  need  of  a  lasting  good,  fail  to 
reflect  also  on  the  fleeting  nature  of  the  pleasures  of  which 
he  contemplates  the  succession  ?  Could  he  be  deluded  by 
his  own  faculty  of  summing  the  stages  of  a  succession  into 
supposing  that  a  series  of  pleasures,  of  which  only  one  will 
be  in  enjoyment  at  each  stage  of  the  series,  and  none  at  all 
at  the  end,  is  the  more  lasting  good  of  which  he  is  in  search, 
and  for  the  sake  of  which  he  calls  in  question  the  value  of 
the  pleasure  for  the  time  most  attractive  in  imagination  ? 

224.  To  answer  these  questions  in  the  negative  may  seem 
unwarrantable,  if  for  no  other  reason,  in  presence  of  the 
deliberate  judgment  of  so  many  enlightened  persons  who 
tell  us  that  their  only  conception — the  only  conception 
which  seems  to  them  possible— of  a  true  good  is  just  that 
of  a  greatest  sum  of  pleasures ;  that  when  they  decide  against 
the  pursuit  of  a  particular  pleasure  as  not  good  on  the  whole, 
they  simply  mean  that  its  enjoyment  would  be  incompatible 
with  the  attainment  of  a  larger  sum  of  pleasures  which  it  is 
open  to  them  to  enjoy.  Can  we  doubt  that  such  persons 
really  form  their  judgments  of  the  good  as  they  suppose 
themselves  to  do ;  and  is  it  not  absurd  to  deny  that  those 
conceptions  of  the  true  good,  which  we  inherit  and  which 
affect  our  consciences,  may  at  any  rate  have  been  formed 
in  the  same  way  ? 

Now  undoubtedly,  if  \ve  must  accept  as  true  the  account 
which  most  persons,  under  the  influence  of  the  current 
philosophy,  give  of  the  ultimate  moral  idea  which  actuates 
them ;  if  we  are  to  admit  that  well-being  means  for  them 
a  sum  of  pleasures,  the  highest  well-being  the  largest  possible 
sum  of  pleasures ;  it  is  useless  further  to  argue  the  question 
before  us.  But  there  are  reasons  for  not  accepting  that 
account.  It  rests  on  a  supposition  that  all  desire  is  for 
pleasure.  This  supposition  chiefly  commends  itself,  as  has 
been  previously  pointed  out,  through  the  confusion  into  which 
we  readily  fall,  in  reflecting  on  any  desire,  between  the  object 


262      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

of  which  the  idea  excites  the  desire,  and  the  pleasure  we 
anticipate  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  desire— the  pleasure,  as  it 
is  sometimes  called,  of  success.  If  an  ordinarily  unselfish 
man,  unaccustomed  to  precise  analysis  of  mental  experiences, 
is  appealed  to  by  a  Hedonistic  philosopher  to  say  whether 
in  calm  moments  of  reflection,  when  exempt  from  the 
pressure  of  appetite  or  of  any  particular  passion,  the  good 
for  which  he  finds  himself  wishing  is  not  always  pleasure — 
not  any  single  pleasure,  but  a  quantity  of  pleasures  more  or 
less  distinctly  articulated  in  thought,  or  perhaps  simply 
pleasurable  existence — he  is  apt  to  assent.  He  does  so 
because,  being  interested  in  certain  objects,  and  being  aware 
that,  when  he  reflects  on  his  interests,  he  often  says  to 
himself  '  how  pleasant  it  will  be  when  such  or  such  an  object 
is  attained,'  he  mistakes  the  desire  to  satisfy  himself  in  the 
attainment  of  the  objects  for  a  desire  to  satisfy  himself  with 
the  pleasure  of  the  attainment. 

No  doubt  this  pleasure  of  attainment  is  one  which,  upon 
self-reflection,  the  man  really  contemplates  himself  as 
enjoying ;  there  is  really  a  desire  for  it  which  co-operates 
with  his  various  interests ;  but  it  could  not  take  the  place  of 
the  objects  of  these  various  interests  without  destroying  the 
interests  and  with  them  its  own  possibility.  This  however 
does  not  prevent  men  who  are  in  fact  deeply  absorbed  in  the 
pursuit  of  objects  other  than  pleasures  from  being  argued  into 
the  belief  that,  because  they  are  conscious  of  anticipating 
pleasures  of  attainment,  pleasure  is  the  object  of  their  pursuit. 
The  further  step  is  then  easily  taken  of  interpreting  this 
pleasure  as  made  up  of  those  several  pleasures  to  which, 
through  the  confusion  above  noticed,  it  has  come  to  be 
supposed  that  all  desires  are  directed.  Thus  we  settle  down 
into  the  notion  that  our  motive  principles  are  on  the  one  hand 
particular  passions,  each  excited  by  imagination  of  some 
pleasure  or  some  pain,  and  on  the  other  a  deliberate  desire 
for  a  good  made  up  of  as  many  particular  desired  pleasures 
as,  after  deduction  for  incidental  pains,  we  deem  ourselves 
capable  of  obtaining.     This  deliberate  desire  is  taken  to  be 


CH.  iv]         PLEASURE  AND   COMMON  GOOD  263 

the  source  of  our  disapproval  of  certain  pleasures  as  not  good 
on  the  whole,  because  not  compatible  with  the  acquisition  of 
that  larger  sum  of  pleasures  which  is  more  deliberately  desired. 

225.  As  to  the  mistake  of  supposing  all  desires  to  have 
some  pleasure  or  other  for  their  object,  enough  has  perhaps 
been  said.  But  writers  who  have  fully  recognised  this 
mistake,  who  have  most  strenuously  asserted  that  particular 
desires  terminate  upon  their  objects,  and  that  those  objects 
in  many  cases  are  not  pleasures,  have  adhered  to  the  notion 
that  the  deliberate  desire  for  what  is  good  on  ths  whole  is 
equivalent  to  desire  for  a  greatest  possible  quantity  of 
pleasure.  They  have  indeed  generally  expressed  this  as 
a  desire  for  happiness,  but  they  have  also  been  generally 
ready  to  accept  the  identification  of  happiness  with  a  sum 
of  pleasures,  of  greatest  happiness  with  a  greatest  sum  of 
pleasures.  It  might  perhaps  have  been  otherwise  if  the 
convenient  ambiguity  attaching  to  the  term  '  happiness '  did 
not  tend  to  hide  from  us  the  diflSculty  of  dealing  upon  this 
theory  with  that  desire  for  the  good  of  others,  the  genuine- 
ness of  which  we  should  be  slow  to  dispute.  Clearly 
a  desire  for  the  good  of  others,  though  that  greatest  good 
be  understood  to  consist  for  them  in  pleasures,  is  not 
a  desire  for  pleasure  on  the  part  of  the  person  who  enter- 
tains it,  unless  he  desires  the  production  of  pleasure'  to 
others,  not  as  an  end,  but  as  a  means  to  his  own.  Now 
that  benevolence  is  not  to  be  considered  as  a  desire  for  any 
pleasure  to  oneself,  other  than  that  of  doing  the  benevolent 
act,  is  one  of  the  few  points — and  it  speaks  well  for  the 
improvement  of  our  time  that  it  should  be  so — on  which 
moralists  seem  to  have  come  almost  to  an  agreement.  But 
to  consider  it  a  desire  for  the  pleasure  of  doing  the  bene- 
volent act  is  to  fall  into  the  fallacy  of  supposing  a  desire  to 
be  excited  by  imagination  of  its  own  satisfaction — a  fallacy 
from  which  such  writers  as  Butler  and  Hutcheson,  and  in 
recent  years  Mr.  H.  Sidgwick\  have  kept  themselves  clear. 

226.  A  desire  for  the  good  of  others,  then,  though  it  be 

'  Methods  of  Ethics,  Book  I.  chap.  iv. 


264      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

a  desire  to  produce  pleasure  in  them,  is  not  a  desire  for 
pleasure.  We  may,  if  we  like,  apply  both  to  it  and  to  the 
desire  for  our  own  true  well-being  the  common  designation 
'  desire  for  happiness ; '  but,  if  the  desire  for  our  own  well- 
being  consists  in  a  desire  for  a  sum  of  pleasures,  we  are 
applying  the  common  designation  to  the  two  kinds  of  desire 
in  absolutely  different  senses.  We  shall  have  to  take  it  that 
there  are  two  co-ordinate  principles,  'Benevolence'  and 
'  Reasonable  Self-Love,'  alike,  according  to  the  phraseology 
of  the  last  century,  in  being  calm  or  settled  or  deliberate 
principles,  but  wholly  different  as  desires  in  respect  of  the 
objects  to  which  they  are  directed,  since  one  is,  while  the 
other  is  not,  a  desire  for  pleasure  j  and  we  shall  have  to 
suppose  that  these  serve  indifferently  as  grounds  for  moral 
approbation  and  disapprobation,  the  reason  for  rejecting 
desired  pleasures  as  not  good  on  the  whole  being  sometimes 
that  they  are  incompatible  with  the  object  sought  by 
Benevolence,  sometimes  that  they  are  incompatible  with 
that  sought  by  Reasonable  Self-Love. 

That  our  practical  judgments  as  to  the  true  good  rest  on 
two  such  different  principles  is  a  conclusion  which,  once 
clearly  faced,  every  enquirer  would  gladly  escape,  as  re- 
pugnant both  to  the  philosophic  craving  for  unity,  and  to 
that  ideal  of  'singleness  of  heart'  which  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  associate  with  the  highest  virtue.  The 
method  of  escaping  it  generally  favoured  by  Utilitarians 
involves  the  fallacy,  already  sufficiently  noticed,  of  supposing 
benevolent  desires  to  have  for  their  object  the  pleasure  of 
their  own  satisfaction.  This  fallacy  once  discerned,  the 
conclusion  can  only  be  avoided  either  by  a  bolder  denial  of 
the  existence  of  a  deliberate  and  disinterested  benevolence 
than  we  are  generally  prepared  for — by  a  return,  in  short, 
to  the  position  of  Hobbes — or  by  reconsideration  of  the 
view  that  '  Reasonable  Self-Love,'  desire  for  one's  own  true 
good,  is  equivalent  to  desire  for  a  sum  of  pleasures. 

227.  Such  a  reconsideration  is  forced  upon  us  from  a 
different  quarter  so  soon  as  we  take  account  of  the  fact, 


CH.  iv]        PLEASURE  AND   COMMON   GOOD  265 

already  noticed,  that  pleasures  do  not  admit  of  being 
accumulated  in  enjoyment.  A  man  who  is  enjoying  a  pleasure 
for  the  thousandth  time  has  no  more  pleasure,  however  much 
more  an  enumerator  might  reckon  him  to  have  had — nay,  if 
novelty  adds  a  charm  to  pleasure,  he  has  less  —than  the  man 
who  is  enjoying  it  for  the  first  time.  We  may  talk,  if  we  like, 
of  a  larger  sum  of  pleasures  as  more  of  a  good  than  a  less 
sum,  of  a  largest  possible  sum  as  the  greatest  or  highest 
good,  but  in  doing  so  we  are  bound  to  remember,  if  we  would 
not  be  misled  by  words,  that  we  are  talking  of  '  goods '  of 
which,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  there  can  be  neither 
possession  nor  any  approach  to  possession.  Now  when  any 
one  is  deliberately  judging  what  is  for  his  good  on  the  whole, 
in  the  light  of  the  experience  presupposed  by  such  a  judgment, 
it  would  seem  that  he  can  scarcely  help  being  alive  to  this 
state  of  the  case  and  being  affected  by  it  in  his  judgment. 
Reflection  upon  the  perishing  nature  of  pleasures  suggests 
itself  to  every  one  unsophisticated  in  his  '  moralising '  arid 
unbiassed  by  philosophical  systems.  It  is  traceable  in 
literature  as  far  back  as  the  literature  of  reflection  extends. 
It  would  be  far  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  was  the 
source  of  the  deliberate  quest  for  something  good  on  the 
whole,  than  that  it  could  be  set  aside  in  such  a  quest.  And 
if  it  cannot  be  set  aside,  it  must  effectually  prevent  the  man 
who  has  practically  asked  himself  what  it  is  that  can  satisfy 
him,  from  seeking  a  sum  of  pleasures,  even  'the  greatest 
possible,'  in  expectation  that  it  can  satisfy  or  tend  to  satisfy 
him  ;  in  other  words,  under  the  persuasion  that  it  is  that  truly 
or  ultimately  desirable  object  for  the  sake  of  which  a  particular 
desired  pleasure  should  be  rejected.  He  cannot  really  look 
forward  to  any  millionth  repetition  of  a  pleasant  feeling  as 
bringing  him  nearer  to  the  satisfaction  of  himself  than  he 
was  the  first  time  the  pleasure  was  felt.  It  will  not  at  all 
follow  that  such  a  person,  if  challenged  by  a  philosopher  to 
say  what  the  ultimate  good  is,  of  which  the  idea  actuates  him, 
might  not,  under  pressure  of  the  impossibility  of  adequately 
defining  it,  be  drawn  into  accepting  an  account  of  it  as 


366      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bK.  Ill 

a  greatest  sum  of  pleasures.  The  action  of  the  idea  in  him, 
however,  is  not  dependent  on  the  account  he  may  give  of  it. 
The  question  is  whether  the  idea,  as  it  really  actuates  him, 
can  be  the  idea  of  a  sum  of  pleasures,  of  which  he  must  be 
aware — and  have  become  aware  before  the  idea  could  con- 
sciously actuate  him — that  each  perishes  in  the  enjoyment. 
To  the  present  writer  it  seems  that  this  question,  once 
plainly  put,  carries  a  negative  answer  with  it. 

228.  '  But  why,'  it  may  be  objected,  'should  the  fact  that 
a  greatest  sum  of  pleasures  cannot  be  enjoyed  as  a  sum,  i.e. 
all  at  once,  prevent  a  man  from  wishing  to  enjoy  this  greatest 
sum,  as  it  may  be  enjoyed,  successively,  and  from  regarding 
this  successive  enjoyment  as  the  object  supremely  desirable?' 
Now  undoubtedly,  as  already  admitted,  a  man  may  think  of 
himself  as  enjoying  many  pleasures  in  succession,  may  desire 
their  successive  enjoyment  and,  reflecting  on  his  desire, 
esteem  the  enjoyment  a  good.  But  it  is  not  the  pleasures 
as  a  sum  that  attract  him.  He  cannot  imagine  them  as 
a  sum,  for  the  imagination  of  pleasure  must  always  be  of 
some  specific  feeling  of  pleasure,  which  must  have  ceased  to 
possess  the  imagination  before  another  can  possess  it.  What 
affects  him  is  the  thought  of  himself  as  capable  of  a  state  of 
continuous  enjoyable  existence,  and  on  the  contrary  as  liable 
to  a  like  continuity  of  pain.  The  consideration  how  many 
pleasures  there  will  be  in  the  course  of  the  enjoyable  exist- 
ence, what  their  sum  will  amount  to,  does  not  at  all  enter 
into  or  affect  the  thought  of  it  as  desirable.  If  he  judges 
a  pleasure,  which  now  attracts  him,  to  be  not  truly  a  good 
on  the  ground  of  its  incompatibility  with  ulterior  pleasure,  it 
is  not  because  he  presents  to  himself  two  possible  sums  of 
pleasure— one  as  the  result  would  be  if  the  pleasure  now 
attracting  him  were  enjoyed,  the  other  as  it  would  be  if  that 
pleasure  were  forgone — and  pronounces  the  latter  the  larger. 
It  is  because  he  believes  the  pleasure  which  he  disapproves 
to  entail  an  unnecessary  breach  in  the  enjoyable  existence, 
which  he  wishes  for  without  reference  to  any  sum  of  pleasures 
that  an  enumerator  might  find  it  to  contain. 


CH.  iv]        PLEASURE  AND   COMMON  GOOD  267 

This,  we  say,  is  the  case  if  a.  particular  imagined  pleasure 
is  'in  a  calm  hour'  condemned  on  account  of  its  known 
incompatibility  with  ulterior  pleasure,  which  must  mean  not 
any  imagined  pleasure  but  a  conceived  succession  of  plea- 
sures. But  while  not  denying  that  an  attractive  pleasure  may 
be  disapproved  on  this  account,  we  could  not  admit  that  the 
ordinary  reference  of  a  healthy  moral  man  to  his  own  true 
happiness,  as  a  reason  for  rejecting  present  pleasure,  was  to 
be  thus  explained.  If  it  were,  it  would  not  have  much  effect 
upon  conduct.  The  thought  of  oneself  as  in  a  state  of  enjoy- 
able existence,  if  it  were  not  a  thought  of  anything  else  than 
this,  could  scarcely  countervail  the  attraction  of  an  imagined 
pleasure,  here  and  now  intensely  desired.  An  imagination 
of  pain  might  be  effectual  for  the  purpose,  but  hardly  a  thought 
of  pleasure,  which  is  not  an  imagination  of  any  pleasure  in 
particular.  In  truth  a  man's  reference  to  his  own  true  happi- 
ness is  a  reference  to  the  objects  which  chiefly  interest  him, 
and  has  its  controlling  power  on  that  account.  More  strictly, 
it  is  a  reference  to  an  ideal  state  of  well-being,  a  state  in 
which  he  shall  be  satisfied;  but  the  objects  of  the  man's 
chief  interests  supply  the  filling  of  that  ideal  state.  The 
idea  of  such  a  state,  indeed,  neither  is,  nor  is  conceived  as 
being,  fully  realisable  by  us.  The  objects  of  which  we 
contemplate  the  attainment  as  necessary  to  its  fulfilment 
are  not  contemplated  as  completely  fulfilling  it.  In  our 
contemplation  of  them  as  truly  good  the  forecast  of  an 
indefinable  Better  is  always  present.  But  in  any  considera- 
tion of  true  happiness  which  is  other  than  the  vague  dis- 
content of  the  sated  or  bafHed  voluptuary,  the  consciousness 
of  objects  which  we  are  seeking  to  realise,  of  ideas  to  which 
we  are  trying  to  give  effect,  holds  the  first  place.  Just 
because  we  wish  for  the  attainment  of  such  objects,  we  are 
unhappy  till  we  attain  them ;  and  thus,  owing  to  the 
difficulty  of  mentally  articulating  them,  we  are  apt  to  lump 
them  in  our  thoughts  as  happiness.  But  they  do  not  con- 
sist in  pleasures.  The  ideas  of  them,  which  we  are  seeking 
to  realise,  are  not  ideas  of  pleasures.     Though  we  may  look 


268      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     tsK.  Ill 

forward  to  our  life  in  attaining  them,  or  when  they  are 
attained,  as  a  pleasant  one — and  certainly  we  cannot  look 
forward  to"  it  as  otherwise  —  this  anticipation  is  quite 
secondary.  It  is  only  brought  into  distinct  consciousness, 
if  at  all,  during  intervals  of  relaxed  energy  or  under  the 
pressure  of  an  argumentative  Hedonist.  In  short,  it  is  the 
realisation  of  those  objects  in  which  we  are  mainly  interested, 
not  the  succession  of  enjoyments  which  we  shall  experience 
in  realising  them,  that  forms  the  definite  content  of  our  idea 
of  true  happiness,  so  far  as  it  has  such  content  at  all. 

229.  Our  conclusion  then  is  that  it  is  a  misinterpretation 
of  consciousness,  arising  in  a  manner  not  inexphcable,  to 
regard  the  idea  of  a  truer  or  higher  good,  with  which  the 
good  of  any  particular  pleasure  or  the  gratification  of  any 
particular  passion  may  be  contrasted — an  idea  necessary 
to  the  capacity  for  moral  judgment — as  equivalent  or  re- 
ducible to  the  idea  of  a  larger  sum  of  pleasures  enjoy- 
able by  the  person  entertaining  the  idea.  In  the  mind  at 
least  of  those  persons  over  whom  the  idea  has  any  con- 
trolling power,  its  filling  is  supplied  by  ideal  object^  to  which 
they  are  seeking  to  give  reality,  and  of  which  the  realisa- 
tion forms  their  prevailing  interest.  Such  an  ideal  object  '> 
for  example,  is  the  welfare  of  a  family.  In  those  forms  of 
human  life  which  we  can  know,  either  from  the  intercourse 
of  present  society  or  from  the  record  of  the  past,  this  object 
has  probably  had  the  largest  share  in  filling  up  the  idea  of 
true  or  permanent  good.  As  a  man  reflects — perhaps  quite 
inarticulately — on  the  transitoriness  of  the  pleasures  by 
imagination  of  which  his  desires  are  from  hour  to  hour 
excited ;  as  he  asks  (practically,  if  without  formal  expression) 
what  can  satisfy  the  self  which  abides  throughout  and  survives 
those  desires;  the  thought  of  the  well-being  of  a  family, 
with  which  he  identifies  himself  and  of  which  the  continuity 
is  as  his  own,  possesses  his  mind.  It  is  interest  in  this  well- 
being  which  forms  the  most  primitive  and  universal  counter- 

'  It  will  be  understood  that  by  an  ideal  object  is  meant  an  object 
present  in  idea  but  not  yet  given  in  reality. 


CH.  IV]         PLEASURE  AND    COMMON   GOOD  269 

vailing  influence,  apart  from  imagination  of  pain,  to  the 
attraction  of  imagined  pleasures.  If  not  strong  enough  to 
prevent  such  pursuit  of  pleasures  as  has  been  found  incom- 
patible with  the  well-being  of  a  family,  it  at  least  awakens  self- 
reproach  in  the  pursuit,  a  consciousness  that  it  should  not  be. 

Now  whatever  difficulty  there  may  be  in  adequately 
defining  this  interest — as  there  must  be,  for  it  is  an  interest 
which,  though  fundamentally  always  the  same,  is  constantly 
actualising  itself  in  new  ways — there  is  one  thing  which  it 
clearly  is  not.  It  is  not,  directly  or  indirectly,  an  interest, 
on  the  part  of  the  person  influenced  by  it,  either  in  winning 
any  particular  pleasure,  or  in  securing  an  enjoyable  existence, 
or  in  getting  as  much  pleasure  as  he  can.  Doubtless  in 
looking  forward  to  a  well-being  of  his  family,  he  thinks  of 
himself  as  conscious  of  it  and  sharing  in  it,  even  though  he 
may  expect  to  be  '  laid  in  the  grave '  before  his  idea  of  the 
family  well-being  is  realised.  Every  one  thus  immortalises 
himself,  who  looks  forward  to  the  realisation  of  ideal  objects, 
with  which  on  the  one  hand  he  identifies  himself,  and  which 
on  the  other  hand  he  cannot  think  of  as  bounded  by  his 
earthly  life, — objects  in  which  he  thinks  of  himself  as  stil' 
living  when  dead.  But  to  suppose,  because  a  man  looks 
forward  to  a  satisfaction  of  his  interest  in  the  well-being  of  his 
family  and  contemplates  enjoyment  in  that  satisfaction,  that 
therefore  such  enjoyment  is  the  object  of  the  interest,  would 
be  to  repeat  the  mistake  of  supposing  a  desire  to  be  excitable 
by  the  idea  of  its  own  satisfaction.  The  fact,  if  it  be  a  fact, 
that  the  man's  conception  of  the  well-being  of  his  family  is 
nothing  but  a  conception  of  it  as  possessing  the  means  to  a 
sustained  succession  of  pleasures,  does  not  affect  the  case  in 
this  respect.  It  remains  equally  true  that  his  desire  for  the 
family  well-being  is  absolutely  different  from  a  desire  for 
pleasure. 

230.  There  may  not  be  the  means  of  proving  that,  as 
a  matter,  of  fact,  the  form  in  which  true  good,  or  good  on 
the  whole,  was,  first  conceived  was  that  of  family  well-being. 
The  earliest  forms  in  which  the  most  essential  practical 


270      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

ideas  have  taken  effect  must  always,  from  the  nature  of  the 
case,  remain  beyond  the  reach  of  historical  investigation. 
We  are  warranted  however  by  simple  consideration  of  its 
nature,  in  holding  that  the  idea  of  true  good  could  only 
become  matter  of  definite  consciousness  in  view  of  its 
possible  realisation  in  an  object  which  at  once  excites 
a  strong  interest,  and  can  at  the  same  time  be  regarded  as 
having  the  permanence  necessary  to  satisfy  the  demand 
arising  from  a  man's  involuntary  contemplation  of  his  own 
permanence.  The  idea  of  the  good,  it  must  be  remembered, 
like  all  practical  ideas,  is  primarily  a  demand.  It  is  not 
derived  from  observation  of  what  exists  but  from  an  inward 
requirement  that  something  should  be;  something  that 
will  yield  self-satisfaction  of  the  kind  that  is  sought  when  we 
think  of  ourselves  as  surviving  each  particular  desire  and 
its  gratification.  It  is  this  requirement  or  demand  that 
first  sets  us  upon  seeking  to  bring  objects  into  existence, 
in  which  some  sort  of  abiding  satisfaction  may  be  found  ; 
but  it  is  only  in  contemplation  of  these  objects  as  in  some 
measure  realised  or  in  process  of  realisation,  that  the 
demand  arrives  at  any  clear  consciousness  of  itself,  or  that 
it  can  yield  the  idea  of  something  as  truly  good,  in  contrast 
with  something  else  that  is  not  so. 

231.  Now  among  the  objects  thus  brought  into  existence 
by  demand  for  the  satisfaction  of  an  abiding  self,  and  of 
which  the  contemplation  first  supplied  some  definite  con- 
tent to  the  idea  of  a  true  good,  it  would  seem  that  the 
most  primitive  and  elementary  must  have  been  those  that 
contribute  to  supply  the  wants  of  a  family — to  keep  its 
members  alive  and  comfortably  alive.  If  it  is  asked  by 
what  warrant  we  carry  back  the  institution  of  the  family  into 
the  life  of  the  most  primitive  men,  we  answer  that  we  carry 
it  back  no  further  than  the  interest  in  permanent  good. 
From  beings  incapable  of  such  an  interest,  even  though 
connected  by  acts  of  generation  with  ourselves,  we  cannot 
in  any  intelligible  sense  have  been  developed.  They  cannot 
have  had  any  such  essential  community  with  ourselves  as 


CH.  iv]         PLEASURE  AND    COMMON   GOOD  271 

would  be  implied  in  calling  them  men.  But  the  capacity 
for  such  an  interest  is  also  the  capacity  which  renders 
possible  the  family  bond.  That  determination  of  an  animal 
organism  by  a  self-conscious  principle,  which  makes  a  man 
and  is  presupposed  by  the  interest  in  permanent  good, 
carries  with  it  a  certain  appropriation  by  the  man  to  him- 
self of  the  beings  with  whom  he  is  connected  by  natural 
ties,  so  that  they  become  to  him  as  himself  and  in  pro- 
viding for  himself  he  provides  for  them.  Projecting  him- 
self into  the  future  as  a  permanent  subject  of  possible 
well-being  or  ill-being — and  he  must  so  project  himself  in 
seeking  for  a  permanent  good — he  associates  his  kindred 
with  himself.  It  is  this  association  that  neutralises  the 
effect  which  the  anticipation  of  death  must  otherwise  have 
on  the  demand  for  permanent  good.  At  a  stage  of  intel- 
lectual development  when  any  theories  of  immortality  would 
be  unmeaning  to  them,  men  have  already,  in  the  thought 
of  a  society  of  which  the  life  is  their  own  life  but  which- 
survives  them^  a  medium  in  which  they  carry  themselves 
forward  beyond  the  limits  of  animal  existence. 

232.  Thus  we  conclude  that,  in  the  earliest  stages  of 
human  consciousness  in  which  the  idea  of  a  true  or  per- 
manent good  could  lead  any  one  to  call  in  question  the 
good  of  an  immediately  attractive  pleasure,  it  was  already 
an  idea  of  a  social  good — of  a  good  not  private  to  the  man 
himself,  but  good  for  him  as  a  member  of  a  community. 
We  conclude  that  it  must  have  been  so,  because  it  is 
a  man's  thought  of  himself  as  permanent  that  gives  rise 
to  the  idea  of  such  a  good,  and  because  the  thought  of 
himself  as  permanent  is  inseparable  from  an  identification 
of  himself  with  others,  in  whose  continued  life  he  con- 
templates himself  as  living  j  and  because  further,  as  a 
consequence  of  this,  the  objects  which  the  effort  to  realise 
this  thought  brings,  into  being,  and  in  contemplation  of 
which  the  idea  of  permanent  good  passes  from  the  more 
blindly  operative  to  the  more  clearly  conscious  stage,  are 
arrangements  of  life,  or  habits  of  action,  or  applications  of 


272      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  HI 

the  forces  and  products  of  nature,  calculated  to  contribute 
to  a  common  well-being.     Hence  the  distinction  commonly 
supposed  to  exist  between  considerate  Benevolence  and  • 
reasonable  Self-Love,  as   co-ordinate   principles  on  which 
moral  approbation  is  founded,  is  a  fiction  of  philosophers. 

In  saying  this  we  must  not  be  understood  either  to  be, 
denying  that  reasonable  Self-Love  is  a  source  of  moral  ap- 
probation, or  to  be  seeking  to  reduce  Benevolence  in  any 
way  to  desire  for  pleasure  to  oneself.  The  meaning  is  that 
the  distinction  of  good  for  self  and  good  for  others  has  never 
entered  into  that  idea  of  a  true  good  on  which  moral  judg- 
ments are  founded.  It  must  have  been  held  to  do  so,  no 
doubt  (except  upon  the  selfish  hypothesis),  if  the  actuating 
idea  of  a  true  good,  as  for  oneself,  had  been  founded  on 
desire  for  a  sum  of  pleasures ;  since  a  desire  for  pleasure, 
though  it  may  be  balanced  by  a  desire  to  produce  pleasure, 
and  though  the  two  desires  may  suggest  in  certain  cases  the 
same  course  of  outward  action,  must  always  be  absolutely 
different  from  it  as  a  motive.  But  in  fact  the  idea  of  a  true 
good  as  for  oneself  is  not  an  idea  of  a  series  of  pleasures  to 
be  enjoyed  by  oneself.  It  is  ultimately  or  in  principle  an 
idea  of  satisfaction  for  a  self  that  abides  and  contemplates 
itself  as  abiding,  but  which  can  only  so  contemplate  itself  in 
identification  with  some  sort  of  society;  which  can  only  look 
forward  to  a  satisfaction  of  itself  as  permanent,  on  condition 
that  it  shall  also  be  a  satisfaction  of  those  in  community  with 
whom  alone  it  can  think  of  itself  as  continuing  to  live.  For 
practical  purposes,  or  as  it  ordinarily  affects  a  man,  it  is  an 
idea  of  an  order  of  life,  more  or  less  established,  but  liable 
to  constant  interference  from  actions  prompted  by  passion 
or  desire  fot  pleasure;  an  order  in  the  rnaintenance  and 
advancement  of  which  he  conceives  his  permanent  well- 
being  to  consist.  This  well-being  he  doubtless  conceives  as 
his  own,  but  that  he  should  conceive  it  as  exclusively  his 
own — his  own  in  any  sense  in  which  it  is  not  equally  and 
coincidentally  a  well-being  of  others — would  be  incompatible 
with  the  fact  that  it  is  only  as  living  in  community,  as  sharing 


CH.  iv]        PLEASURE  AND  COMMON  GOOD  273 

the  life  of  others,  as  incorporated  in  the  continuous  being  of 
a  family  or  nation,  of  a  state  or  a  church,  that  he  can  sustain 
himself  in  that  thought  of  his  own  permanence  to  which  the 
thought  of  permanent  well-being  is  correlative.  His  own 
permanent  well-being  he  thus  necessarily  presents  to  himself 
as  a  social  well-being.  The  rule  of  action,  which  a  con- 
sideration of  this  well-being  suggests,  may  sometimes  forbid 
the  indulgence  of  generous  impulses,  as  it  will  constantly 
forbid  the  pursuit  of  an  attractive  pleasure  ;  but  between  it 
and  the  rule  of  considerate  Benevolence  there  can  never  be 
a  conflict,  for  they  are  one  and  the  same  rule,  founded  on 
one  and  the  same  quest  for  a  self-satisfaction  which  shall 
abide,  but  which  no  man  can  contemplate  as  abiding  except 
so  far  as  he  identifies  himself  with  a  society  whose  well- 
being  is  to  him  as  his  own. 

233.  After  all  this  argumentation,  however,  which  may 
already  seem  too  prolix,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  old 
objection  will  here  return.  This  permanent  well-being,  what 
is  it — what  is  it  conceived  as  being  by  the  person  who  de- 
sires it — but  a  succession  of  pleasures,  or  of  states  in  which 
pleasure  predominates  over  pain,  whether  it  is  of  himself  or 
of  others  that  the  man  thinks  as  enjoying  this  succession  ? 
We  can  best  finally  answer  this  question  by  gathering  into  a 
summary  form  the  view  which  it  is  sought  to  oppose  to  that 
suggested  by  the  question.  But  before  doing  so  it  will  be 
well  also  to  put  in  a  final  '  caveat '  against  two  misapprehen- 
sions, which  may  be  lurking  in  our  minds  when  we  put  the 
question.  Though  we  answered  it  in  the  aflfirmative,  we 
should  be  none  the  nearer  to  a  reduction  of.  the  moral  life 
to  an  origin  in  mere  succession  of  feelings.  As  has  already 
been  pointed  out  [§  222],  a  desire  for  one's  own  permanent 
well-being,  though  the  well-being  looked  forward  to  consisted 
merely  in  a  succession  of  pleasures,  would  still  be  quite 
a  different  thing,  would  imply  a  consciousness  of  quite  a 
different  nature,  from  desire  excited  by  an  imagined  pleasure. 
Nor,  if  we  answer  it  in  the  afifirmative,  will  any  recognition 
of  sympathy  bring  us  nearer  to  an  identification  of  self- 


274      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

I'egarding  and  '  altruistic '  motives.  It  is  clear  that  desire 
for  a  well-being  as  consisting  in  a  succession  of  pleasures  to 
oneselfj  is  quite  different  from  desire  for  a  well-being  that 
consists  in  a  succession  of  pleasures  to  others.  The  fact 
that  one  man  may  be  pleased  or  pained  by  the  know- 
ledge of  another's  pleasure  or  pain  does  not  alter  the  fact 
that  each  man's  pleasure  or  pain  is  private  to  himself. 
Desires  are  determined  by  their  objects;  and  desire  for 
pleasure,  having  an  absolutely  different  object,  is  an  ab- 
solutely different  desire  from  desire  for  the  production  of 
pleasure  to  others.  If  therefore  a  man's  desire  for  his  own 
true  well-being  is  essentially  a  desire  that  he  may  enjoy  a 
succession  of  pleasures,  and  that  for  the  well-being  of  others 
a  desire  to  convey  to  them  a  succession  of  pleasures,  the 
two  desires  are  opposite,  though  perhaps  reconcilable  prin- 
ciples of  action,  and  we  must  fall  back  on  the  view,  which 
we  have  been  seeking  to  set  aside,  of  the  co-ordination,  as 
distinct  from  the  identity,  of  Benevolence  and  Reasonable 
Self-Love. 

234.  This  premised,  to  the  question,  What  is  the  well- 
being  which  in  a  calm  hour  we  desire  but  a  succession  of 
pleasures  ?  we  reply  as  follows.  The  ground  of  this  desire 
is  a  demand  for  an  abiding  satisfaction  of  an  abiding  self. 
In  a  succession  of  pleasures  there  can  be  no  such  satisfaction, 
nor  in  the  longest  prolongation  of  the  succession  any  nearer 
approach  to  it  than  in  the  first  pleasure  enjoyed.  If  a 
man,  therefore,  under  the  influence  of  the  spiritual  demand 
described,  were  to  seek  any  succession  of  pleasures  as  that 
which  would  satisfy  the  demand,  he  would  be  under  a 
delusion.  Such  a  delusion  may  be  possible,  but  wei  are  not 
to  suppose  that  it  takes  place  because  many  persons,  through 
a  mistaken  analysis  of  their  inner  experience,  affirm  that 
they  have  no  idea  of  well-being  but  as  a  succession  of 
pleasures.  The  demand  for  an  abiding  self-satisfaction  has 
led  to  an  ordering  of  life  in  which  some  permanent  provision 
is  made,  better  or  worse,  for  the  satisfaction  of  those 
interests  which  are"not  interests  in  the  procuring  of  pleasure, 


CH.  iv]        PLEASURE  AND   COMMON  GOOD  275 

but  which  may  be  described  most  generally  as  interests  in 
the  development  of  our  faculties,  and  in  the  like  develop- 
ment of  those  for  whom  we  care. 

When  a  man  '  sits  down  in  a  calm  hour '  to  consider  what 
his  permanent  well-being  consists  in,  what  it  is  that  in  desir- 
ing it  he  really  desires,  it  is  not  indeed  to  be  supposed  that 
he  traces  the  desire  back  to  its  ultimate  source  in  his  self- 
objectifying  personality,  or  that  he  thinks  of  its  object  in  the 
abstract  form  of  that  which  will  satisfy  the  demand  arising 
from  such  a  personality.  But,  if  unbiassed  either  by  particular 
passions  or  by  philosophical  prepossessions,  he  will  identify 
his  well-being  with  an  order  of  life  which  that  demand  has 
brought  into  existence.  The  thought  of  his  well-being  will 
be  to  him  the  thought  of  himself  as  living  in  the  successful 
pursuit  of  various  interests  which  the  order  of  society— taking 
the  term  in  its  "widest  sense — has  determined  for  him ;  in- 
terests ranging,  perhaps,  from  provision  for  his  family  to  the 
improvement  of  the  public  health  or  to  the  production  of  a 
system  of  philosophy.  The  constituents  of  the  contemplated 
well-being  will  be  the  objects  of  those  various  interests, 
objects  {e.g.  the  provision  for  a  family  or  the  sanitation  of  a 
town)  in  process  of  realisation,  which,  when  realised,  take 
their  place  as  permanent  contributions  to  an  abiding  social 
good.  In  them  therefore  the  man  who  carries  himself  for- 
ward in  thought  along  the  continued  life  of  a  family  or  a 
nation,  a  state  or  a  church,  anticipates  a  lasting  and  accu- 
mulating possession,  as  he  cannot  do  in  successive  enjoy- 
ments. In  them  he  can  think  of  himself  as  really  coming 
nearer  to  an  absolute  good.  Just  so  far  as  he  is  interested 
in  such  objects,  he  must  indeed  anticipate  pleasure  in  their 
realisation,  but  the  objects,  not  the  pleasure,  form  the  actu- 
ating content  of  his  idea  of  true  well-being.  A  transfer  of 
his  interest  from  the  objects  to  the  pleasure  would  be  its' 
destruction. 

235.  If  this  answer  is  accepted  to  the  question,  what  it  is 
that  we  desire  in  desiring  our  own  true  or  permanent  well- 
being,  it  would  seem  that  we  have  already  answered  the 

T  3 


276      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

question,  what  it  is  that  we  desire  in  desiring  the  true  well- 
being  of  others.  It  is  the  same  common  well-being,  the 
same  good  of  a  society  which  we  also  desire  as  our  own. 
No  doubt,  there  are  generous  impulses  consisting  in  desires 
to  convey  pleasures,  simply  as  such,  to  others,  or  to  lessen 
their  pains.  These  are  as  little  to  be  ignored  as  they  are  to 
be  identified  with  desires  for  pleasures  to  oneself.  But  the 
desire  for  the  well-being,  whether  as  of  others  or  as  of 
oneself,  is  no  more  to  be  identified  with  such  generous 
impulses,  with  which  it  may  very  well  conflict,  than  those 
impulses  that  are  excited  by  the  imagination  of  pleasure. 
The  objects  of  which  a  man  anticipates  the  realisation  in 
looking  forward  to  such  well-being,  are  objects,  as  we  have 
seen,  which  he  necessarily  thinks  of  as  realised  for  a  society 
no  less  than  for  himself,  for  himself  only  as  a  member  of 
a  society.  The  opposition  of  self  and  others  does  not  enter 
into  the  consideration  of  a  well-being  so  constituted.  Gener- 
ous impulses  and  desires  for  pleasures  may  indeed  co-operate 
with  the  desire  for  it,  though  never  equivalent  to  that  desire, 
and  may  do  so  in  different  degrees  in  different  cases.  The 
objects  most  prominent  in  a  man's  working  idea  of  true  well- 
being  will  vary,  no  doubt,  according  to  circumstances  and 
his  idiosyncrasy.  To  revert  to  instances  previously  given, 
in  one  case  the  sanitation  of  a  town,  in  another  the  compo- 
sition of  a  book  on  an  abstruse  subject,  may  hold  the  largest 
place  in  a  man's  mind  when  he  sets  himself  to  enquire  what 
in  particular  forms  the  content  of  the  idea  of  true  well-being, 
as  he  individually  is  actuated  by  it.  In  the  former  case  it 
can  be  understood  that  the  impulse  to  convey  pleasures  to 
particular  persons,  or  to  relieve  their  pains,  might  effectually 
co-operate  with  the  idea  as  it  actuates  the  individual,  while 
it  scarcely  could  do  so  in  the  latter  case.  In  both  cases, 
again,  anticipated  pleasures  of  achievement  might  stimulate 
the  work  which  interest  in  a  well-being  not  constituted  by 
pleasures  initiates  and  directs,  though  that  they  should  be- 
come the  main  objects  of  interest  would  be  fatal  to  the  work. 
But  however  the  idea  of  a  true  good  may  vary  in  the  par- 


CH.1V]         PLEASURE  AND   COMMON    GOOD  277 

ticular  aspect  which  it  presents  to  the  individual  according 
to  the  special  nature  of  his  higher  interests,  and  in  what- 
ever measures  impulsive  benevolence  or  any  desire  for  plea- 
sure may  respectively  further  its  operation  in  him,  it  remains 
true  that,  in  its  actuation  of  the  individual,  no  less  than  in 
that  ordering  of  society  which  at  once  is  effected  through 
that  actuation  of  individuals  and  in  turn  conditions  it,  the 
idea  does  not  admit  of  the  distinction  between  good  for  self 
and  good  for  others.  As  the  source  of  moral  action  and  of 
moral  judgment,  it  has  equally  to  control,  and  in  controlling 
must  be  equally  independent  of,  the  desire  for  pleasure  and 
the  desire  to  please. 

236.  But  granting  that  in  a  man's  idea  of  well-being  as 
true  or  permanent  there  is  such  an  identification  of  his  own 
and  others'  well-being,  he  must  still  think  of  it  as  standing 
in  some  definite  relation  to  others  as  to  himself.  He  may 
think  of  their  true  good  as  also  his  and  of  his  as  also  theirs, 
but  how,  it  will  be  asked,  does  he  conceive  of  the  true  good 
for  others,  if  not  as  their  happiness,  i.e.  as  the  most  unbroken 
succession  of  pleasures  possible  for  them  ?  We  answer  that 
the  happiness  which,  under  influence  of  the  idea  of  perma- 
nent good,  a  man  seeks  for  others  is  of  the  same  kind  as 
the  happiness  which,  under  influence  of  the  same  idea,  he 
seeks  for  himself.  We  have  seen  that  true  happiness,  as 
he  conceives  it  for  himself,  consists  in  the  realisation  of 
the  objects  of  various  interests  by  which  he  is  possessed — 
interests  of  which  he  is  only  capable  through  self-identifica- 
tion with  a  society.  True  happiness,  as  he  conceives  it  for 
others,  consists  in  the  realisation  for  them  of  the  same 
objects.  His  own  interest  in  these  objects  carries  with  it 
an  ascription  of  a  like  interest  to  others,  and  in  the  realisa- 
tion of  the  objects  he  anticipates  a  happiness  to  them,  just 
as  he  anticipates  it  to  himself.  Now  the  interest,  as  he 
experiences  it  in  himself,  is  an  interest,  not  in  pleasure,  but 
in  the  objects— these  not  being  pleasures;  and  what  he 
seeks  to  procure  for  others  is  a  satisfaction  of  a  like  interest, 
which  is  not  an  interest  in  pleasures.     He  seeks  to  help 


278      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

them  in  attaining  objects  which  he  supposes  to  be  common 
to  them  with  him,  and  these  objects,  not  being  pleasures  in 
his  case,  cannot  be  pleasures  in  theirs.  In  the  realisation 
of  the  objects  there  must  be  pleasure  for  the  others,  on  sup- 
position of  their  interest  in  the  objects,  as  for  himself,  and 
in  anticipating  their  realisation  of  the  objects  he  will  doubt- 
less also  anticipate  the  pleasure  incidental  to  it;  but  it  is 
primarily  the  objects  which  he  seeks  to  help  them  in  gain- 
ing, the  pleasure  only  as  incidental  to  the  attainment  of  those 
particular  objects.  Pleasures  incidental  to  the  attainment  of 
other  objects,  though  equally  pleasures,  he  would  have  no 
interest  in  conveying  to  them.  It  is  a  true  happiness  which 
he  seeks  for  them,  and  the  truth  of  their  happiness  depends 
on  the  nature  of  the  desired  objects,  not  themselves  plea- 
sures, to  the  realisation  of  which  it  is  incidental. 

237.  By  way  of  illustration,  we  may  again  revert  to  the 
instance  of  a  man  supremely  interested  in  the  sanitation  of 
a  town.  Such  a  man  would  naturally  be  described  as  de- 
voted to  the  true  happiness  of  his  fellow-creatures.  No 
doubt  his  great  object  is  to  help  the  men  whom  he  sees 
about  him  to  live  more  happily,  and,  absorbed  in  his  work, 
he  is  not  likely  to  analyse  very  accurately  what  it  is  that 
he  presents  to  himself  when  he  thinks  of  their  living  more 
happily.  It  is  not  at  all  essential  that  he  should  do  so.  If 
in  confusion  or  haste  he  pronounces  that  the  happiness  he 
is  seeking  for  them  consists  merely  in  a  succession  of  plea-, 
sures,  the  mistake  is  probably  of  little  practical  importance. 
It  matters  less  than  if  he  made  the  same  speculative  mistake 
in  regard  to  the  end  which  he  seeks  for  himself.  A  theory 
that  his  object  for  himself  was  pleasure — the  pleasure,  as 
perhaps  he  might  say,  of  successful  work^might  strengthen 
the  pleasure-seeking  tendency,  by  which  such  a  man,  like 
all  the  rest  of  us,  must  really  be  affected,  till  there  might  be 
danger  of  its  weakening  or  supplanting  the  interest  which  is, 
in  fact,  the  condition  of  his  pleasure  in  his  work.  A  misin- 
terpretation of  the  happiness  which  he  seeks  for  others  can 
have  no  such  mischievous  effect.     Even  if,  through  the 


CH.  IV]         PLEASURE  AND   COMMON   GOOD  279 

notion  that  his  motive  was  desire  for  the  mere  pleasure  of 
others,  it  really  became  so,  he  would  not  have  become  a 
pleasure-seeker.  He  would  have  become  a  practically  less 
wise  and  useful,  but  not  a  selfish  man. 

None  the  less,  however,  such  a  beneficent  person  would 
be  really  misinterpreting  the  object  which  mainly  moves 
him  in  so  describing  it.  It  is  not  pleasure,  as  such,  to  be 
enjoyed  by  other  persons,  that  he  seeks  to  bring  about,  but 
an  improvement  of  the  persons,  of  which  pleasure  is  the 
incident  and  the  sign.  He  conceives  them,  like  himself,  as 
having  objects  which  it  is  their  vocation  to  realise,  which 
health  is  the  condition  of  their  realising,  and  which  form 
part  of  one  great  social  end,  the  same  for  himself  as  for 
them.  What  this  end  is  he  conceives,  like  the  rest  of  us, 
very  dimly,  though,  but  for  the  power  which  the  idea  of 
there  being  such  an  end  exercises  over  him,  not  only  directly 
but  indirectly  through  those  institutions  of  society  which 
are  its  product,  he  would  not  live  the  life  which  he  does. 
Pressed  to  give  an  account  of  it,  he  readily  in  his  description 
puts  the  pleasure,  which  is  the  incident  of  realisation,  in 
place  of  that  realisation  of  worthy  objects  to  which  he  is  in 
fact  seeking  to  help  his  neighbours.  He  speaks  as  if  that 
'  happiness '  of  others  which  he  is  seeking  to  promote  were 
merely  pleasure  irrespectively  of  the  conditions  of  the  plea- 
sure, whereas  in  truth  it  is  a  fulfilment  of  capabilities  which, 
without  clear  analysis  of  what  they  are,  but  on  the  strength 
of  his  own  experience,  he  assigns  to  the  others. 

238.  There  are  two  questions,  however,  of  which  the 
consideration  might  make  him  more  clearly  aware  what  his 
mind  on  the  matter  really  is ;  might  convince  him  that,  not 
pleasure  as  such,  but  the  attainment  of  objects  other  than 
pleasures  though  involving  pleasure  in  their  attainment,  is 
the  end  to  which  he  seeks  to  help  other  men.  Let  him  ask 
himself  whether  he  can  look  upon  the  value  of  the  pleasure, 
which  he  supposes  himself  to  be  labouring  to  produce,  as 
depending  simply  on  its  amount ;  whether  he  does  not,  for 
others  as  for  himself,  distinguish  between  higher  and  lower 


28o      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

pleasures  according  to  the  nature  of  the  pursuit  out  of  which 
they  arise,  or  according  to  the  state  of  mind  to  which  they 
are  relative.  If  he  does,  it  must  follow  that  it  is  not  pleasure 
as  such,  or  by  itself,  that  he  is  seeking  to  produce,  but 
pleasure  as  an  incident  of  a  life  of  which  the  value  or 
desirability  does  not  consist  in  its  pleasantness.  Let  him 
ask  himself,  further,  whether  the  ideal  end  which  he  seeks 
for  others  as  for  himself,  though  it  be  an  end  never  realised, 
is  not  something  in  which  a  permanent  satisfaction  can  be 
found ;  whether  he  himself  could  find  true  happiness  in  a 
succession  of  pleasures  of  which  each,  having  been  enjoyed, 
leaves  him  with  the  consciousness  of  being  no  nearer  satis- 
faction than  he  was  before ;  whether  on  the  contrary  he  does 
not  count  it  an  essential  ciondition  of  every  contribution  to 
his  own  true  happiness  that  it  should  bring  him  nearer  to 
the  fulfilment  of  his  mission,  to  a  completion  of  his  capa- 
cities, as  no  enjoyment  of  pleasure  can  be  held  to  do ;  and 
whether  his  final  object  in  working  for  the  true  happiness  of 
others  can  be  to  help  them  to  a  succession  of  pleasures, 
which  would  be  no  contribution  to  a  true  happiness  as  he 
seeks  it  for  himself. 

239.  These  considerations  might  make  such  a  man  aware 
that  his  interest  in  true  happiness  as  for  himself,  and  his 
interest  in  it  as  for  others,  are  not  two  interests  but  one  in^ 
terest,  of  which  the  object  is  not  a  succession  of  pleasures 
but  a  fulfilment  of  itself,  a  bettering  of  itself,  a  realisation  of 
its  capabilities,  on  the  part  of  the  human  soul.  These 
capabilities  are  not  distinctively  capabilities  of  pleasure- 
The  pleasure  of  their  realisation  does  not  differ  as  pleasure, 
except  perhaps  in  respect  of  its  less  intensity,  from  any 
animal  enjoyment.  They  are  capabilities  of  certain  kinds 
of  life  and  action,  of  which  (as  previously  explained)  no 
adequate  account  can  be  given  till  they  are  attained.  Of 
what  ultimate  well-being  may  be,  therefore,  we  are  unable 
to  say  anything  but  that  it  must  be  the  complete  fulfilment 
of  our  capabilities,  even  while  the  idea  that  there  is  such  an 
ultimate  well-being  may  be  the  guiding  idea  of  our  lives. 


CH.  iv]         PLEASURE  AND   COMMON  GOOD  28r 

But  of  particular  forms  of  life  and  action  we  can  say  that 
they  are  better,  or  contribute  more  to  true  well-being  than 
others,  because  in  them  there  is  a  further  fulfilment  of  man's 
capabilities,  and  therefore  a  nearer  approach  to  the  end  in 
which  alone  he  can  find  satisfaction  for  himself. 

That  interest  in  a  true  good  which  leads  us  to  reject 
attractive  pleasures  as  pleasures  which  should  not  be  enjoyed, 
and  to  endure  repellent  pains  as  pains  which  should  be 
undergone,  is  interest  in  the  furtherance  of  such  better  forms 
of  life  and  action — in  their  furtherance  because  they  are 
better.  The  special  features  of  the  object  in  which  the  true 
good  is  sought  will  vary  in  different  ages  and  with  different 
persons,  according  to  circumstances  and  idiosyncrasy.  There 
are  circumstances  in  which  it  cannot  present  itself  to  the 
individual  as  anything  else  than  the  work  of  keeping  a  family 
comfortably  alive,  without  reference  to  the  well-being  of  any 
wider  society  in  which  the  family  is  included,  or  to  any  other 
form  of  family  well-being  than  such  as  consists  in  the  decent 
satisfaction  of  animal  wants.  From  such  a  form  of  the  in- 
terest in  true  good  to  one  in  which  it  mainly  expresses  itself 
in  the  advancement  of  some  branch  of  knowledge,  or  the 
improvement  of  the  public  health,  or  the  endeavour  after 
'  personal  holiness,'  there  may  seem  to  be  a  great  step.  But 
in  all  its  forms  the  interest  has  the  common  characteristic 
of  being  directed  to  an  object  which  is  an  object  for  the  in- 
dividual only  so  far  as  he  identifies  himself  with  a  society, 
and  seeks  neither  an  imagined  pleasure  nor  a  succession  of 
pleasures,  but  a  bettering  of  the  life  which  is  at  once  his 
and  the  society's. 

240.  We  have  dwelt  thus  at  length  on  the  difference  be- 
tween the  interest  in  a  true  good  or  permanent  well-being  in 
all  its  forms,  and  the  desire  to  experience  any  succession  of 
pleasures,  even  such  a  succession  as  an  imaginary  enumerator 
might  find  to  make  up  the  largest  possible  sum,  in  order  to 
avoid  misapprehension  in  consideration  of  the  process  by 
which  the  idea  of  a  true  good  defines  itself  and,  in  defining 


282      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

itself,  gives  rise  to  the  conception  of  particular  duties.  This 
process,  we  saw,  was  really  inseparable  from  that  of  which 
the  main  features  have  already  been  considered ;  the  exten- 
sion, namely,  of  the  range  of  persons  between  whom  the 
good  is  conceived  to  be  common,  and  who  on  this  ground 
recognise  equivalent  duties  to  each  other.  Following  out 
that  extension  as  if  it  were  a  separate  process,  we  found  that 
its  outcome  was  the  intuition  of  the  educated  conscience 
that  the  true  good  must  be  good  for  all  men,  so  that  no  one 
should  seek  to  gain  by  another's  loss,  gain  and  loss  being 
estimated  on  the  same  principle  for  each.  But  it  had  not 
so  far  appeared  how  the  conscience  is  trained  in  the  appre- 
hension of  what  in  particular  the  good  is,  and  in  the  conse- 
quent imposition  on  itself  of  particular  duties.  This  defect 
was  to  be  made  up  by  considering  the  gradual  determina- 
tion of  the  idea  of  good,  which  goes  along  with  the  growth 
of  the  conviction  that  it  is  good  for  all  men  alike. 

We  committed  ourselves  a  little  way  back  to  the  familiar 
opinion — more  likely  to  find  acceptance  than  many  here 
advanced — that  the  idea  of  a  true  good  first  took  hold  of  men 
in  the  form  of  a  consideration  of  what  was  needed  to  keep 
the  members  of  a  family  alive  and  comfortably  alive.  Now 
between  a  state  of  mind  in  which  the  idea  of  good  is  only 
operative  in  this  form,  and  one  which  can  at  least  naturally 
express  itself  in  the  proposition  that  the  only  true  good  is 
the  good  will,  can  there  be  anything  in  common  ?  Is  it  not 
idle  to  attempt  to  connect  them  as  phases  in  the  operation 
of  a  single  spiritual  principle  ?  It  would  be  so,  no  dpubt,  if 
interest  in  provision  for  the  necessities  of  a  family  really  ex- 
hausted the  spiritual  demand  from  which  it  arises.  But  this 
is  not  the  case.  It  must  be  remembered  that  provision  for 
the  wants  of  a  family,  of  the  kind  we  are  contemplating,  can- 
not have  been  a  merely  instinctive  process.  It  cannot  have 
been  so,  at  least,  on  supposition  that  it  was  a  process  of 
which  we  can  understand  the  nature  from  our  own  experience, 
or  that  it  was  a  stage  in  the  development  of  the  men  that  we 
are  and  know.  •  It  would  not  have  had  anything  in  common 


CH.  iv]        VIRTUE  AS   THE  COMMON   GOOD  283 

with  the  family  interests  by  which  we  are  ourselves  influenced, 
unless  it  rested  not  on  instinct  but  on  self-consciousness— 
on  a  man's  projection  of  himself  in  thought  into  a  future,  as 
a  subject  of  a  possibly  permanent  satisfaction,  to  be  found 
in  the  satisfaction  of  the  wants  of  the  family  with  which  he 
identifies  himself.  Now  this  power  of  contemplating  him- 
self as  possibly  coming  to  be  that  which  he  is  not,  and  as  so 
coming  to  be  in  and  through  a  society  in  which  he  lives  a 
permanent  life,  is  in  promise  and  potency  an  interest  in  the 
bettering  of  mankind,  in  the  realisation  of  its  capabilities  or 
the  fulfilment  of  its  vocation,  conceived  as  an  absolutely 
desirable  end. 

Between  the  most  primitive  and  limited  form  of  the 
interest,  as  represented  by  the  eifort  to  provide  for  the  future 
wants  of  a  family,  and  its  most  highly  generalised  form,  lie 
the  interests  of  ordinary  good  citizens  in  various  elements  of 
a  social  well-being.  All  have  a  common  basis  in  the  demand 
for  abiding  self-satisfaction  which,  according  to  the  theory 
we  have  sought  to  maintain,  is  yielded  by  the  action  of  an 
eternal  self-conscious  principle  in  and  upon  an  animal  nature. 
That  demand  however  only  gradually  exhibits  what  it  has  in 
it  to  require.  Until  life  has  been  so  organised  as  to  afford 
some  regular  relief  from  the  pressure  of  animal  wants,  an 
interest  in  what  Aristotle  calls  to  eS  (ijv,  as  distinct  from  t6 
f^v',  cannot  emerge.  Yet  that  primitive  organisation  of  life 
through  which  some  such  relief  is  afforded,  being  rational  not 
instinctive,  would  be  impossible  without  the  action  of  the 
same  self-objectifying  principle  which  in  a  later  stage  exhibits 
itself  in  the  pursuit  of  ends  to  which  life  is  a  means,  as  distinct 
from  the  pursuit  of  means  of  living.  The  higher  interest  is 
latent  in  the  lower,  nor  would  it  be  possible  to  draw  a  line 
at  which  the  mere  living  of  the  family  ceases  to  be  the  sole 
object  and  its  well-being  begins  to  be  cared  for. 

241.  But,  when  a  supply  of  the  means  of  living  has  been 
sufficiently  secured  to  allow  room  for  a  consideration  of  the 
ends  of  living,  what  are  those  ends  taken  to  be  ?    Can  any 

'  '  Living  well,'  or  '  well-being,'  as  distinct  from  merely  '  living.' 


284      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  ill 

such  progress  be  noted  in  men's  conception  of  them  as  could 
justify  us  in  speaking  of  a  development  of  the  idea  of  duty  ? 
If  the  idea  of  good  were  simply  equivalent  to  the  idea  of 
a  maximum  of  pleasure,  a  growth  of  moral  ideas  would 
simply  mean  a  progressive  discovery  of  means  to  pleasure. 
A  development  of  the  idea  of  duty,  in  the  sense  of  a  process 
affecting  our  conception  of  the  ends  of  action,  there  could 
not  be.  If  on  this  hypothesis  we  are  to  speak  of  a  moral 
development  at  all,  it  can  only  be  in  the  sense  of  an  in- 
creasing enlightenment  as  to  what  should  be  done,  in  order 
to  an  end  of  which  itself  the  idea  undergoes  no  modification. 
It  is  otherwise  if  the  idea  of  the  good  is  an  idea  of  something 
which  man  should  become  for  the  sake  of  becoming  it,  or 
in  order  to  fulfil  his  capabilities  and  in  so  doing  to  satisfy, 
himself.  The  idea  of  the  good,  according  to  this  view,  is  an 
idea,  if  the  expression  may  be  allowed,  which  gradually 
creates  its  own  filling.  It  is  not  an  idea  like  that  of  any 
pleasure,  which  a  man  retains  from  an  experience  that  he 
has  had  and  would  like  to  have  again.  It  is  an  idea  to  which 
nothing  that  has  happened  to  us  or  that  we  can  find  in  ex- 
istence corresponds,  but  which  sets  us  upon  causing  certain 
things  to  happen,  upon  bringing  certain  things  into  existence. 
Acting  in  us,  to  begin  with,  as  a  demand  which  is  ignorant 
of  what  will  satisfy  itself,  it  only  arrives  at  a  more  definite 
consciousness  of  its  own  nature  and  tendency  through 
reflection  on  its  own  creations— on  habits  and  institutions 
and  modes  of  life  which,  as  a  demand  not  reflected  upon,  it 
has  brought  into  being.  Moral  development  then  will  not 
be  merely  progress  in  the  discovery  and  practice  of  means 
to  an  end  which  throughout  remains  the  same  for  the  subject 
of  the  development.  It  will  imply  a  progressive  determina- 
tion of  the  idea  of  the  end  itself,  as  the  subject  of  it,  through 
reflection  on  that  which,  under  influence  of  the  idea  but 
without  adequate  reflection  upon  it,  he  has  done  and  has 
become,  comes  to  be  more  fully  aware  of  what  he  has  it  in 
him  to  do  and  to  become. 
242.  Of  a  moral  development  in   this  sense  we  have 


CH.IV]        VIRTUE  AS   THE   COMMON  GOOD  285 

evidence  in  the  result ;  and  we  can  understand  the  principle 
of  it;  but  the  stages  in  the  process  by  which  the  principle  thus 
unfolds  itself  remain  obscure.  As  has  been  already  pointed 
out,  such  an  end  as  provision  for  the  maintenance  of  a  family, 
if  pursued  not  instinctively  but  with  consciousness  of  the  end 
pursued,  implies  in  the  person  pursuing  it  a  motive  quite 
different  from  desire  either  for  an  imagined  pleasure  or  for 
relief  from  want.  It  implies  the  thought  of  a  possibly 
permanent  satisfaction,  and  an  effort  to  attain  that  satisfac- 
tion in  the  satisfaction  of  others.  Here  is  already  a  moral 
and  spiritual,  as  distinct  from  an  animal  or  merely  natural, 
interest — an  interest  in  an  object  which  only  thought  con- 
stitutes, an  interest  in  bringing  about  something  that  should 
be,  as  distinct  from  desire  to  feel  again  a  pleasure  already 
felt.  But  to  be  actuated  by  such  an  interest  does  not  ne- 
cessarily imply  any  reflection  on  its  nature ;  and  hence  in  men 
under  its  influence  there  need  not  be  any  conception  of  a 
moral  as  other  than  a  material  good.  Food  and  drink, 
warmth  and  clothing,  may  still  seem  to  them  to  be  the  only 
good  things  which  they  desire  for  themselves  or  for  others. 

This  may  probably  still  be  the  case  with  some  wholly 
savage  tribes ;  it  may  have  once  been  the  case  with  our  own 
ancestors.  If  it  was,  of  the  process  by  which  they  emerged 
from  it  we  know  nothing,  for  they  have  already  emerged  from 
it  in  the  earliest  state  of  mind  which  has  left  any  record  of 
itself.  All  that  we  can  say  is  that  an  interest  moral  and 
spiritual  in  the  sense  explained — however  unaware  of  its 
own  nature,  however  unable  to  describe  itself  as  directed 
to  other  than  material  objects — must  have  been  at  work  to 
bring  about  the  habits  and  institutions,  the  standards  of 
praise  and  blame,  which  we  inherit,  even  the  remotest  and 
most  elementary  which  our  investigations  can  reach.  We 
know  further  that  if  that  interest,  even  in  the  form  of 
interest  in  the  mere  provision  for  the  material  support  of  a 
family,  were  duly  reflected  upon,  those  who  were  influenced 
by  it  must  have  become  aware  that  they  had  objects  inde- 
pendent of  the  gratification  of  their  animal  nature;  and. 


286      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  HI 

having  become  aware  of  this,  they  could  not  fail  with  more 
or  less  distinctness  to  conceive  that  permanent  welfare  of 
the  family,  which  it  was  their  great  object  to  promote,  as 
consisting,  at  any  rate  among  other  things,  in  the  continu- 
ance in  others  of  an  interest  like  their  own ;  in  other  words, 
as  consisting  in  the  propagation  of  virtue. 

243.  When  and  how  and  by  what  degrees  this  process  of 
reflection  may  have  taken  place,  we  cannot  say.  It  is  reason- 
able to  suppose  that  till  a  certain  amount  of  shelter  had  been 
secured  from  the  pressure  of  natural  wants,  it  would  be 
impossible.  The  work  of  .making  provision  for  the  family 
would  be  too  absorbing  for  a  man  to  ask  himself  what  was 
implied  in  his  interest  in  making  it,  and  thus  to  become  aware 
of  there  being  such  a  thing  as  a  moral  nature  in  himself  and 
others,  or  of  a  moral  value  as  distinct  from  the  value  of  that 
which-  can  be  seen  and  touched  and  tasted.  However  strong 
in  him  the  interest  in  the  welfare  of  his  society — which,  as 
we  have  seen,  is  essentially  a  moral  interest — until  some  relief 
had  been  won  from  the  constant  care  of  providing  for  that 
welfare  in  material  forms,  he  would  have  no  time  to  think 
of  any  intrinsic  value  in  the  persons  for  whom  the  provision 
was  made,  or  in  the  qualities  which  enabled  it  to  be  made. 
Somehow  or  other,  however — by  what  steps  we  know  not — 
with  all  peoples  that  have  a  history  the  time  of  reflection  has 
come,  and  with  it  the  supervention  upon  those  moral  interests 
that  are  unconscious  of  their  morality,  of  an  interest  in  moral 
qualities  as  such.  An  interest  has  arisen,  over  and  above 
that  in  keeping  the  members  of  a  family  or  tribe  alive,  in 
rendering  them  persons  of  a  certain  kind ;  in  forming  in  them 
certain  qualities,  not  as  a  means  to  anything  ulterior  which 
the  possession  of  these  qualities  might  bring  about,  but 
simply  for  the  sake  of  that  possession ;  in  inducing  in  them 
habits  of  action  on  account  of  the  intrinsic  value  of  those 
habits,  as  forms  of  activity  in  which  man  achieves  what  he 
has  it  in  him  to  achieve,  and  so  far  satisfies  himself.  There 
has  arisen,  in  short,  a  conception  of  good  things  of  the  soul, 
as  having  a  value  distinct  from  and  independent  of  the  good 


CH.  IV]        VIRTUE  AS   THE  COMMON  GOOD  287 

things  of  the  body,  if  not  as  the  only  things  truly  good,  to 
which  all  other  goodness  is  merely  relative. 

Already  in  the. earliest  stages  of  the  development  of  the 
human  soul,  of  which  we  have  any  recorded  expression,  this 
distinction  is  virtually  recognised.  Such  a  formal  classifi- 
cation as  that  which  Aristotle  assumes  to  be  familiar,  between 

TO  em-OS  ayaSa,  ra  irepi  V'<'XW  and  to  nepi  (Tana},  is,  of  COUrse, 

only  the  product  of  what  may  be  called  reflection  upon  reflec- 
tion. It  is  the  achievement  of  men  who  have  not  only  learnt 
to  recognise  and  value  the  spiritual  qualities  to  which  material 
things  serve  as  instruments  or  means  of  expression,  but  have 
formed  the  abstract  conception  of  a  universe  of  values  which 
may  be  exhaustively  classified.  But  independently  of  such 
abstract  conceptions,  we  have  evidence  in  the  earliest 
literature  accessible  to  us  of  the  conception  and  appreciation 
of  impalpable  virtues  of  the  character  and  disposition,  stand- 
ing in  no  direct  relation  to  the  senses  or  to  animal  wants — 
courage,  wisdom,  fidelity,  and  the  like.  The  distinction  is 
at  least  apprehended  between  the  sensible  good  things  that 
come  to  a  man,  or  belong  or  attach  to  him  as  from  without, 
and  the  good  qualities  of  the  man.  It  may  be  that  the  latter 
are  chiefly  considered  in  relation  to  the  former,  as  qualities 
contributing  to  the  material  welfare  of  a  society ;  but,  though 
there  may  be  as  yet  no  clear  notion  of  virtue  as  a  pure  good 
in  itself  independently  of  anything  extraneous  that  it  may 
obtain,  it  is  understood  that  prosperity  and  the  desert  of 
prosperity  are  different  things.  And  the  recognition  of  desert 
is  in  itself  a  recognition  of  a  moral  or  spiritual  good,  as 
distinct  from  one  sensible  or  material.  It  is  evidence  that 
the  moral  nature,  implied  in  the  interest  in  a  social  well- 
being,  has  so  far  reflected  on  itself  as  to  arrive  at  moral 
conceptions. 

244.  Whenever  and  wherever,  then,  the  interest  in  a  social 
good  has  come  to  carry  with  it  any  distinct  idea  of  social 
merit — of  qualities  that  make  the  good  member  of  a  family, 

'  External  goods,  goods  of  the  soul,  and  goods  of  the  body.  Eth. 
Nic.  I.  viii.  b. 


288      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  ill 

or  good  tribesman,  or  good  citizen — we  have  the  beginning 
of  that  education  of  the  conscience  of  which  the  end  is  the 
conviction  that  the  only  true  good  is  to  be  good.  This 
process  is  properly  complementary  to  that  previously  analysed, 
of  which  the  end  was  described  as  the  conviction  that  the  true 
good  is  good  for  all  men,  and  good  for  them  all  in  virtue  of 
the  same  nature  and  capacity.  The  one  process  is  comple- 
mentary to  the  other,  because  the  only  good  in  the  pursuit 
of  which  there  can  be  no  competition  of  interests,  the  only 
good  which  is  really  common  to  all  who  may  pursue  it,  is 
that  which  consists  in  the  universal  will  to  be  good — in  the 
settled  disposition  on  each  man's  part  to  make  the  most  and 
best  of  humanity  in  his  own  person  and  in  the  persons  of 
others.  The  conviction  of  a  community  of  good  for  all  men 
can  never  be  really  harmonised  with  our  notions  of  what  is 
good,  so  long  as  anything  else  than  self-devotion  to  an  ideal 
of  mutual  service  is  the  end  by  reference  to  which  those 
notions  are  formed. 

245.  In  fact  we  are  very  far,  in  our  ordinary  estimates  of 
good,  whether  for  ourselves  or  for  others,  from  keeping  such 
a  standard  before  us,  and  just  for  that  reason  the  conviction 
of  the  community  of  good  for  all  men,  while  retaining  its 
hold  on  us  as  an  abstract  principle,  has  little  positive  influence 
over  our  practical  judgments.  It  is  a  source  of  counsels  of 
perfection  which  we  do  not  '  see  our  way '  to  carrying  out. 
It  makes  itself  felt  in  certain  prohibitions,  e.g.  of  slavery,  but 
it  has  no  such  effect  on  the  ordering  of  life  as  to  secure  for 
those  whom  we  admit  that  it  is  wrong  to  use  as  chattels  much 
real  opportunity  of  self-development.  They  are  left  to  sink 
or  swim  in  the  stream  of  unrelenting  competition,  in  which 
we  admit  that  the  weaker  has  not  a  chance.  So  far  as  negative 
rights  go — rights  to  be  letalone — theyareadmittedto  member- 
ship of  civil  society,  but  the  good  things  to  which  the  pursuits 
of  society  are  in  fact  directed  turn  out  to  be  no  good  things 
for  them.  Civil  society  may  be,  and  is,  founded  on  the  idea 
of  there  being  a  common  good,  but  that  idea  in  relation  to 
the  less  favoured  members  of  society  is  in  effect  unrealised, 


CH.  iv]        VIRTUE  AS    THE  COMMON  GOOD  289 

and  it  is  unrealised  because  the  good  is  being  sought  in 
objects  which  admit  of  being  competed  for.  They  are  of 
such  a  kind  that  they  cannot  be  equally  attained  by  all. 
The  success  of  some  in  obtaining  them  is  incompatible  with 
the  success  of  others.  Until  the  object  generally  sought  as 
good  comes  to  be  a  state  of  mind  or  character  of  which  the 
attainment,  or  approach  to  attainment,  by  each  is  itself  a  con- 
tribution to  its  attainment  by  every  one  else,  social  life  must 
continue  to  be  one  of  war — a  war,  indeed,  in  which  the  neutral 
ground  is  constantly  being  extended  and  which  is  itself  con- 
stantly yielding  new  tendencies  to  peace,  but  in  which  at  the 
same  time  new  vistas  of  hostile  interests,  with  new  prospects 
of  failure  for  the  weaker,  are  as  constantly  opening. 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE   DEVELOPMENT   OF  THE   MORAL   IDEAL — CONTINUED. 

D.    TTie  Greek  and  the  Modern  Conceptions  of  Virtue. 

246.  Our  next  business  will  be  to  consider  more  in  detail 
how  that  gradual  spiritualisation  or  dematerialisation  (in  the 
sense  explained)  of  the  idea  of  true  good,  through  which  alone 
it  can  come  to  answer  the  inward  demand  which  is  its  source, 
exhibits  itself  in  the  accepted  standards  of  virtue  and  in  the 
duties  which  the  candid  conscience  recognises.  The  concep- 
tion of  virtue  is  the  conception  of  social  merit  as  founded  on 
a  certain  sort  of  character  or  habit  of  will.  Every  form  of 
virtue  arises  from  the  effort  of  the  individual  to  satisfy  him- 
self with  some  good  conceived  as  true  or  permanent,  and  it 
is  only  as  common  to  himself  with  a  society  that  the  individual 
can  so  conceive  of  a  good.  He  must  in  some  way  identify 
himself  with  others  in  order  to  conceive  himself  as  the  subject 
of  a  good  which  can  be  opposed  to  such  as  passes  with  his 
own  gratification.  Thus  both  the  practice  of  virtue  and  the 
current  standard  of  virtue,  which  on  the  one  hand  presupposes 
the  practice  and  on  the  other  reacts  upon  and  sustains  it,  have 
a  history  corresponding  to  the  gradual  development  and  deter- 
mination of  the  idea  of  what  social  good  consists  in. 

The  virtue  which  is  practised  and  esteemed  with  reference 
to  a  common  well-being,  constituted  by  such  good  things  as, 
according  to  the  distinction  above  noticed,  would  fall  under 
the  head  of  '  external '  or  '  bodily  goods,'  has  indeed  an  ele- 
ment of  identity  with  the  virtue  practised  or  esteemed  with 
reference  to  a  well-being  of  which  the  virtue  itself  is  an  integral 
element,  but  has  also  an  important  difference  from  it.  The 
identity  between  the  two  kinds  of  virtue  consists  in  the  fact 
that  the  good  to  which  each  is  relative  is  a  common  good  and 
is  desired  as  such.     In  both  cases  the  virtue  rests  upon  an 


GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE       291 

interest  which  is  effectually  distinguished  from  any  desire  for 
pleasure,  from  any  egoistic  passion,  by  being  directed  to  an 
object  which  the  individual  presents  to  himself  as  common 
to  him  with  others  and  as  desirable  on  that  account.  The 
difference  lies  in  the  degree  of  truth  and  adequacy  with  which 
the  common  good  is  conceived  in  one  case  as  compared  with 
the  other. 

When  the  end  with  reference  to  which  social  merit  is 
judged  of  is  merely  some  form  of  material  well-being,  the 
moral  effort  is  being  directed  to  an  end  of  merely  relative 
value  as  if  it  were  of  absolute  value.  That  effort  rests,  as  we 
have  seen,  on  the  inward  demand  for  a  true  or  abiding  self- 
satisfaction,  and  this  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  possession  of 
means  to  a  succession  of  pleasures  any  more  than  in  the 
succession  itself,  not  in  the  possession  of  anything  which  one 
man  or  group  of  men  can  possess  to  the  exclusion  of  another. 
A  common  good  conceived  as  consisting  in  such  possession 
is  inadequately  conceived — conceived  in  a  manner  which 
must  ultimately  lead  to  the  self-defeat  of  the  moral  effort — 
and  the  virtue  directed  by  the  conception,  though  it  has  the 
root  of  identity,  just  pointed  out,  with  a  higher  virtue,  is  so 
far  inferior.  Considered  merely  as  '  self-devotion '  it  may  be 
on  a  level  with  the  highest  virtue.  There  may  be  as  genuine 
self-devotion  in  the  act  of  the  barbarian  warrior  who  gives 
up  his  life  that  his  tribe  may  win  a  piece  of  land  from  its 
neighbours,  as  in  that  of  the  missionary  who  dies  in  carrying 
the  gospel  to  the  heathen.  But  it  is  a  falsely  abstract  view 
of  virtue  to  take  no  account  of  the  end  in  pursuit  of  which 
the  self  is  devoted.  The  real  value  of  the  virtue  rises  with 
the  more  full  and  clear  conception  of  the  end  to  which  it  is 
directed,  as  a  character  not  a  good  fortune,  as  a  fulfilment 
of  human  capabilities  from  within  not  an  accession  of  good 
things  from  without,  as  a  function  not  a  possession.  The 
progress  of  mankind  in  respect  of  the  standard  and  practice 
of  virtue  has  lain  in  such  a  development  of  the  conception 
of  its  end. 

247.  We  cannot  so  write  without  being  reminded  of  the 
u  2 


292     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

famous  opening  of  Kant's  '  Foundation  of  the  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,' — '  Nothing  can  be  conceived  in  the  world,  or  even 
out  of  it,  which  can  be  called  good  without  qualification,  but 
a  Good  Will.'  In  describing  the  development  in  question, 
however,  as  a  growth  of  the  conviction  that  the  only  uncon- 
ditional good  is  a  good  will,  and  a  consequent  more  definite 
refei'ence  of  virtue  to  this  unconditional  good  as  its  end,  we 
run  a  risk  of  misapprehension.  Can  it  be  intended,  the 
reader  may  ask,  that  no  action  is  morally  good,  or  directed 
as  it  should  be,  unless  the  object  of  the  doer  is  to  promote 
goodness  or  to  become  good  ?  Has  this  been  the  object  with 
reference  to  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  habits  and  dis- 
positions ordinarily  reputed  virtuous  have  come  to  be  so 
reputed?  If  the  ultimate  dictum  of  the  enlightened  con- 
science is  to  be  that,  just  as  according  to  St.  Paul  'whatsoever 
is  not  of  faith  is  sin,'  so  no  action  is  morally  good  unless 
done  for  the  sake  of  its  goodness,  shall  we  not  have  to  make 
out  some  wholly  new  diaypa<t>ri  or  '  table '  of  the  virtues,  in- 
capable of  natural  adjustment  to  the  actual  usage  of  our 
terms  of  praise  and  blame  ?  Is  it  not  more  rational  to  say 
with  Hume  that '  no  action  can  be  virtuous,  or  morally  good, 
unless  there  be  in  human  nature  some  motive  to  produce  it, 
distinct  from  the  sense  of  its  morality '  ? ' 

The  formula  quoted  from  Kant  is  certainly  liable  to  be 
understood  in  a  way  which  challenges  these  objections.  The 
good  will  may  be  taken  to  mean  a  will  possessed  by  some 
abstract  idea  of  goodness  or  of  moral  law ;  and,  if  such 
possession  were    possible  at   all,   except    perhaps   during 

'  Treatise  on  Human  Nature,  Book  III.  Part  II.  §  i.  The  ground 
for  the  proposition  in  the  text  is  thus  put  by  Hume  in  the  sequel : 
'  It  is  a  plain  fallacy  to  say,  that  a  virtuous  motive  is  requisite  to 
render  an  action  honest,  and  at  the  same  time  that  a  regard  to  the 
honesty  is  the  motive  of  the  action.  We  can  never  have  a  regard  to 
the  virtue  of  an  action,  unless  the  action  be  antecedently  virtuous. 
No  action  can  be  virtuous  but  so  far  as  it  proceeds  from  a  virtuous 
motive.  A  virtuous  motive  therefore  must  precede  the  regard  to  the 
virtue  ;  and  'tis  impossible  that  the  virtuous  motive  and  the  regard  to 
the  virtue  can  be  the  same.' 


CH.  v]    GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE      293 

moments  of  special  spiritual  detachment  from  the  actualities 
of  life,  it  would  amount  to  a  paralysis  of  the  will  for  all  effec- 
tual application  to  great  objects  of  human  interest.  It  would 
no  longer  be  the  will  of  the  good  workman,  the  good  father, 
or  the  good  citizen.  But  it  is  not  thus  that  we  understand 
the  good  will.  The  principle  which  it  is  here  sought  to 
maintain  is  that  the  perfection  of  human  character — a  per- 
fection of  individuals  which  is  also  that  of  society,  and  of 
society  which  is  also  that  of  individuals — ^is  for  man  the  only 
object  of  absolute  or  intrinsic  value ;  that,  this  perfection 
consisting  in  a  fulfilment  of  man's  capabilities  according  to 
the  divine  idea  or  plan  of  them,  we  cannot  know  or  describe 
in  detail  what  it  is  except  so  far  as  it  has  been  already 
attained ;  but  that  the  supreme  condition  of  any  progress  tO' 
wards  its  attainment  is  the  action  in  men,  under  some  form 
or  other,  of  an  interest  in  its  attainment  as  a  governing  in- 
terest or  will;  and  that  the  same  interest — not  in  abstraction 
from  other  interests,  but  as  an  organising  influence  upon  and 
among  them — must  be  active  in  every  character  which  has 
any  share  in  the  perfection  spoken  of  or  makes  any  approach 
to  it,  since  this  perfection,  being  that  of  an  agent  who  is 
properly  an  object  to  himself,  cannot  lie  in  any  use  that  is 
made  of  him,  but  only  in  a  use  that  he  makes  of  himself. 

248.  We  hold  that  in  fact  the  estimation  of  virtue,  the 
award  of  praise  and  blame,  has  always  had  reference  to  man 
himself,  not  to  anything  adventitious  to  man,  as  the  object 
of  ultimate  value  from  which  the  value  of  any  virtue  was 
derived.  In  those  primitive  conditions  of  society,  in  which 
attention  was  so  necessarily  concentrated  on  the  simple 
maintenance  of  life  that  there  was  no  room  for  the  virtues 
of  culture  and  reflection  to  develope,  we  have  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  it  was  a  contemplation  of  possible  persons  who 
should  exist  in  the  family  which  gave  the  family  interest  its 
real  meaning  to  those  who  were  actuated  by  itj  just  as  now, 
to  the  poor  person  whose  waking  hours  are  spent  in  the 
struggle  to  keep  his  family  respectable,  it  is  not  any  abstrac- 
tion  of  the   family,  but  the   contemplation   of  sons  and 


294      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

daughters,  as  persons  living  decent  lives  in  the  future,  that 
is  the  moving  influence.  The  primitive  virtue  that  meant 
merely  valour  in  the  struggle  for  a  life  of  which  others  were 
to  share  the  benefit  had  yet  its  animating  principle  in  the 
idea  of  something  which  the  valorous  man  and  the  others, 
in  and  for  themselves,  were  to  become.  As  the  horizon  of 
man's  possibilities  expands  upon  the  view,  as  new  forms  of 
social  merit  relative  to  the  fulfilment  of  those  capabilities 
come  to  be  recognised,  the  conception  of  virtue  becomes 
proportionately  complex.  With  an  Athenian  in  the  period 
of  the  bloom  of  Hellas,  the  term  which  we  can  only  render 
'virtue'  was  apparently  used  for  any  eminent  faculty  exercised 
in  anyof  the  regionsof  human  achievement' — regions  scarcely 
less  wide  and  various  then  than  now — so  that  Aristotle  found 
it  necessary  to  distinguish  '  intellectual  virtues '  from  those 
of  habit  and  character.  But  however  discrepant  may  seem 
to  us  to  have  been  the  kinds  of  excellence  or  ability  that 
were  alike  spoken  of  as  the  '  virtue '  of  men,  however  little 
they  may  have  been  affected  by  any  conception  of  moral 
law,  of  any  duty  owed  by  man  to  God  or  his  neighbour,  as 
such,  they  were  still  dependent  both  for  their  estimation  and 
for  their  practice  on  the  conception  of  intrinsic  value,  as 
lying  not  in  anything  that  might  happen  to  a  man,  in  his 
pleasure  or  his  good  fortune,  but  in  what  he  might  do  and 
might  become.  Virtue  was  a  hivafiK  tiepytTiKfj,  a  faculty  of 
beneficence"-  The  range  of  recognised  beneficence  was 
wide,  as  the  range  of  capabilities  of  which  men  were  be- 
coming conscious  was  wide.  There  was  a  'virtue'  to  be 
exhibited  in  handicraft  no  less  than  in  the  functions  of  a 
magistrate  or  citizen-soldier  or  head  of  a  family ;  but  it  was 
some  interest  in  the  achievement  by  men  of  what  they  had 
it  in  them  to  do,  in  their  becoming  the  best  they  had  it  in 
them  to  become,  that  at  once  governed  the  estimation  of 
virtue  in  all  these  cases  and  inspired  or  sustained  the  practice. 
249.  There  were  ages,  no  doubt,  in  which  this  interest, 

'  Time.  I.  xxxiii.  2  ;  II.  xl.  6  (Arnold's  note);  Arist.  Rhet,  I.  ix,  a. 
'  Arist.  loc,  cit. 


CH.  v]     GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE     295 

though  active  enough,  took  little  account  of  itself;  ages  in 
which  the  question  was  never  raised  how  far  the  forms  of 
action  which  commonly  excited  praise  were  really  co-operative 
with  each  other,  or  really  contributory  to  the  end  which  was 
being  pursued  with  little  reflection  on  its  nature.  When  and 
how  the  period  of  reflection  is  reached,  what  are  the  conditions 
which  enable  some  nations  to  reach  it  while  others  apparently 
do  not,  we  do  not  know ;  but  when  it  is  reached,  there  arises 
a  quest  for  some  definite  and  consistent  conception  of  the 
main  ends  of  human  achievement.  Is  there  some  one  direc- 
tion, common  to  all  the  forms  of  activity  esteemed  as  virtuous, 
which  explains  and  justifies  that  estimation  ?  This  question, 
it  is  to  be  observed,  is  in  its  effiect  by  no  means  merely  a  specu- 
lative one.  In  the  process  of  bringing  into  clear  and  har- 
monious consciousness  the  nature  of  ends  previously  pursued 
under  the  influence  of  some  idea  of  value  which  could  give 
no  account  of  itself,  the  incompatibility  of  some  of  these  ends 
with  others  becomes  apparent,  and  the  possibility  suggests  it- 
self of  so  methodising  life  as  to  avoid  the  misdirection  of 
activity  and  keep  it  to  channels  in  which  it  may  really  con- 
tribute to  the  one  end  of  supreme  value,  however  that  may  be 
conceived.  Hence  along  with  the  conviction  of  the  unity  of 
virtue,  which  finds  so  clear  and  strong  an  expression  in  the 
Greek  philosophers,  we  find  an  attempt  both  to  reform  the 
current  estimation  of  the  several  practices  and  dispositions 
counted  virtuous,  and  to  introduce  a  systematic  order  of  living 
for  individuals  and  communities,  corresponding  to  the  idea 
of  the  unity  of  the  end. 

The  habit  of  derogation  from  the  uses  of 'mere  philosophy,' 
common  alike  to  Christian  advocates  and  the  professors  of 
natural  science,  has  led  us  too  much  to  ignore  the  immense 
practical  service  which  Socrates  and  his  followers  rendered  to 
mankind.  From  them  in  effect  comes  the  connected  scheme 
of  virtues  and  duties  within  which  the  educated  conscience 
of  Christendom  still  moves,  when  it  is  impartially  reflecting 
on  what  ought  to  be  done.  Religious  teachers  have  no  doubt 
affected  the  hopes  and  fears  which  actuate  us  in  the  pursuit  of 


296      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

virtue  or  rouse  us  from  its  neglect.  Religious  societies  have 
both  strengthened  men  in  the  performance  of  recognised 
duties,  and  taught  them  to  recognise  relations  of  duty  towards 
those  whom  they  might  otherwise  have  been  content  to  treat 
as  beyond  the  pale  of  such  duties ;  but  the  articulated  scheme 
of  what  the  virtues  and  duties  are,  in  their  difference  and  in 
their  unity,  remains  for  us  now  in  its  main  outlines  what  the 
Greek  philosophers  left  it. 

250.  In  their  Ethical  teaching,  however,  the  greatest  of 
the  Greek  philosophers — those  to  whom  Christendom  owes, 
not  indeed  its  highest  moral  inspiration,  but  its  moral  cate- 
gories, its  forms  of  practical  judgment — never  professed  to 
be  inventors.  They  did  not  claim  to  be  prophets  of  new 
truth,  but  exponents  of  principles  on  which  the  good  citizen, 
if  he  thought  the  matter  out,  would  find  that  he  had  already 
been  acting.  They  were  seeking  a  clearer  view  of  the  end 
or  good  towards  which  the  /Sior  ttoXit-ikos,  the  citizen-life,  was 
actually  directed.  And  this  conception  of  their  vocation 
was  not  less  true  than,  in  its  superiority  to  personal  self- 
assertion,  it  was  noble.  They  were  really  organs  through 
which  reason,  as  operative  in  men,  became  more  clearly  aware 
of  the  work  it  had  been  doing  in  the  creation  and  maintenance 
of  free  social  life,  and  in  the  activities  of  which  that  life  is  at 
once  the  source  and  the  result.  In  thus  becoming  aware  of 
its  work  the  same  reason  through  them  gave  a  further  reality 
to  itself  in  human  life.  The  demand  for  an  abiding  satis- 
faction, for  a  true  or  permanent  good,  in  action  upon  the 
wants  and  fears  and  social  impulses  of  men,  had  yielded  the 
institutions  of  the  family  and  the  state.  These  again  had 
brought  into  play  certain  spiritual  dispositions  and  energies, 
recognised  as  beneficent  and  stimulated  by  the  effect  of  that 
recognition  on  the  social  man,  but  not  yet  guided  by  any 
clear  consciousness  of  the  end  which  gave  them  their  value. 
In  arriving  at  that  consciousness  of  itself,  as  it  did  specially 
through  the  Greek  philosophers,  the  same  spiritual  demand 
which  had  given  rise  to  the  old  virtue  yielded  a  virtue  which 
was  in  a  certain  important  sense  new ;  a  character  which 


CH.  v]    GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE      297 

would  not  be  satisfied  without  understanding  the  law  which  it 
obeyed,  without  knowing  what  the  true  good  was,  for  which 
the  demand  had  hitherto  been  more  blindly  at  work. 

251.  We  speak  of  the  change  advisedly  as  consisting  not 
merely  in  a  new  theory  about  virtue,  but  in  a  higher  order 
of  virtue  itself.  Socrates  and  his  followers  are  not  rightly 
regarded  as  the  originators  of  an  interesting  moral  specula- 
tion, such,  for  instance,  as  Hume  may  have  started  as  to  the 
nature  of  '  moral  sense,'  or  the  evolutionists  as  to  its  here- 
ditary development.  They  represent,  though  it  might  be  too 
much  to  say  that  they  introduced,  a  new  demand,  or  at  least 
a  fuller  expression  of  an  old  demand,  of  the  moral  nature. 
Now  though  our  actual  moral  attainment  may  always  be  far 
below  what  our  conscience  requires  of  us,  it  does  tend  to 
rise  in  response  to  a  heightened  requirement  of  conscience, 
and  will  not  rise  without  it.  Such  a  requirement  is  implied 
in  the  conception  of  the  unity  of  virtue,  as  determined  by 
one  idea  of  practical  good  which  was  to  be  the  conscious 
spring  of  the  perfectly  virtuous  life— an  idea  of  it  as  consist- 
ing in  some  intrinsic  excellence,  some  full  realisation  of  the 
capabilities,  of  the  thinking  and  willing  soul.  Here  we  have — 
not  indeed  in  its  source,  but  in  that  first  clear  expression 
through  which  it  manifests  its  life — the  conviction  that  every 
form  of  real  goodness  must  rest  on  a  will  to  be  good,  which 
has  no  object  but  its  own  fulfilment.  When  the  same  con- 
viction came  before  the  world,  not  in  the  form  of  a  philosophy 
but  in  the  language  of  religious  aspiration — '  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God' — and  when  there  seemed 
to  be  a  personal  human  life  which  could  be  contemplated  as 
one  in  which  it  had  been  realised,  it  appealed  to  a  much  wider 
range  of  persons  than  it  had  done  in  the  schools  of  Greece, 
and  moved  the  heart  with  a  new  power.  But  if  those  affected 
by  it  came  to  ask  themselves  what  it  meant  for  them — in 
what  the  morality  resting  on  purity  of  heart  consisted  —it  was 
mainly  in  forms  derived,  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  from  the 
Greek  philosophers  that  the  answer  had  to  be  given. 

252.  The  purity  of  the  heart  can  only  consist  in  the  nature 


298      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

of  its  motives  or  governing  interests.  Actions,  the  same  out- 
wardly, represent  a  heart  more  or  less  pure,  according  as  the 
motive  which  prompts  them  is  more  or  less  singly  or  pre- 
dominantly an  interest  in  some  form  or  other  of  that  which 
is  truly  good ;  or — to  say  the  same  thing  in  a  manner  less 
liable  to  be  misunderstood,  since  motives  do  not  admit  of 
isolation — according  as  the  motive  belongs  to  a  character 
more  or  less  thoroughly  governed  by  such  an  interest.  This 
distinction  of  true  from  seeming  virtue,  as  dependent  on  the 
motive  of  each,  was  brought  out  by  Plato  and  Aristotle  with 
a  clearness  which  was  in  fact  final.  Their  account  of  the 
true  good  itself  was  indeed  but  formal  and  provisional,  as, 
for  reasons  already  indicated,  every  such  account  must  be ; 
though,  unless  mankind  has  lived  its  last  two  thousand  years 
in  vain,  the  formal  and  provisional  account  of  the  good  should 
mean  more  for  us  than  it  could  mean  for  the  Greeks.  But 
that  a  conscious  direction  to  this  good — a  '  purity  of  heart '  in 
this  sense — was  the  condition  of  all  true  virtue  and  constituted 
the  essential  unity  between  one  form  of  virtue  and  another, 
this  they  taught  with  all  the  consistency  and  directness  which 
a  Christian  teacher  could  desire,  which  indeed  stands  in  strong 
contrast  with  the  appeal  to  semi-sensual  motives  that  has  been 
common,  and  perhaps  necessary  for  popular  practical  effect, 
m  the  Christian  Church.  ToO  khXou  fvcKW  kohov  yap  tovto  roir 
apfTuU ',  is  the  formula  in  which  Aristotle  sums  up  the  teach- 
ing of  himself  and  his  master  as  to  the  basis  of  goodness. 
Like  every  formula,  it  may  have  come  to  be  used  as  cant, 
but  in  its  original  significance  it  conveyed  the  great  principle 
that  a  direction  of  a  man's  will  to  the  highest  possible  realisa- 
tion of  his  faculties  is  the  common  ground  of  every  form  of 
true  virtue.  This  direction  of  the  will,  according  to  both 
Aristotle  and  Plato,  was  to  be  founded  on  habit;  but  the 
habit  even  in  its  earliest  and  least  reflective  stage  was  to  be 
under  the  direction  of  reason,  as  embodied  in  law  or  acting 
through  a  personal  educator,  and  through  appropriate  teach- 

'  '  Desire  for  wliat   is   beautiful   or   noble  ;   this  is   llic  common 
characteristic  of  all  the  virtues.'    Arist.  IClli.  Nic,  IV.  ii.  7. 


CH.  v]     GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE      299 

ing  was  in  due  time  to  pass  into  a  fully  intelligent  and  appre- 
ciative conformity  to  the  reason  which  was  its  source.  Given 
this  direction  of  the  will,  uniting  intellectual  apprehension 
with  strongest  desire,  all  virtue  was  given ' :  without  it  there 
was,  in  the  proper  sense,  none,  but  at  best  only  such  a  possi- 
bility of  virtue  as  may  be  afforded  by  tendencies  and  habits, 
directed  from  without  to  higher  ends  than  the  subject  has 
intelligently  made  his  own. 

253.  This  view  of  the  essential  principle  of  all  virtue  at 
once  distinguishes  the  doctrine  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  from 
any  form  of  Hedonism,  or  of  Utilitarianism  so  far  as 
Hedonistic.  The  condition  of  virtuous  action  according 
to  them  did  not  lie  in  its  production  of  a  certain  effect,  but 
in  its  relation  to  a  certain  object,  as  rationally  desired  by 
the  agent ;  and  this  was  an  object  of  which  the  nature, 
as  desired,  was  not  that  which  according  to  the  Hedonist 
alone  excites  desire.  It  was  not  an  imagined  pleasure. 
But  a  student  of  these  philosophers  will  be  apt  to  remark 
that,  although  clearly  the  quality  which,  according  to  them, 
makes  an  action  good  is  not  that  which  makes  it  good 
"according  to  the  Utilitarian,  and  is  relative  to  some  other 
end  than  the  pleasure  which  the  Utilitarian  deems  alone 
either  desired  or  desirable,  it  is  not  so  clear  what  this  other 
end  is.  And  this  indefiniteness,  he  will  argue,  in  the  con- 
ception of  the  end,  on  conscious  direction  to  which  virtue  is 
made  to  depend,  must  be  just  so  far  an  indefiniteness  in  the 
conception  of  virtue  itself.  An  end,  which  is  not  pleasure, 
is  to  be  desired  for  its  own  sake ;  so  far  '  purity  of  heart '  is 
insisted  on ;  but,  unless  we  know  what  the  end  is,  we  are 
still  in  the  dark  as  to  the  real  characteristics  of  the  heart 
purely  devoted  to  it.  If  from  the  Hedonistic  point  of  view 
'  purity  of  heart '  can  have  no  meaning  at  all,  can  the  Greek 
philosophers  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  askedj  do  more 
than  assure  us  that  there  must  be  such  a  thing  and  that  it 

'  Cf.  Arist.  EtI).  Nic.  VI.  xiii.  6.  "A/ta  7-17  ippoviiati.  lua  ovaig  iraaat 
Inap^ovaiv  {sc.  al  apeTai\  '  The  single  virtue  of  practical  wisdom 
implies  the  presence  of  all  the  moral  virtues.' 


30O      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  ill 

is  morally  all-important,  without  being  able  to  point  to  any 
real  interest  corresponding  to  this  formal  idea?  Did  not 
'  purity  of  heart '  acquire  a  meaning  in  the  Christian  Church, 
other  than  it  could  have  borne  in  the  schools  of  philosophy, 
because  the  Christian  revelation  supplied  this  interest  ? 

Now  that  there  are  senses  in  which  a  higher  moral  standard 
is  possible  for  the  Christian  citizen  than  was  possible  for  the 
Greek  of  Aristotle's  age,  will  not  be  disputed.  We  have 
already  dwelt  on  an  important  difference,  arising  out  of  the 
fact  that  a  practical  conviction  of  the  brotherhood  of  all 
men,  such  as  was  impossible  to  the  Greek,  brings  with  it 
for  us  a  new  standard  of  justice — not  indeed  a  new  concep- 
tion of  what  is  due  towards  those  who  have  claims  of  right 
upon  us,  but  a  new  view  of  the  range  of  persons  who  have 
such  claims.  As  we  proceed  we  shall  see  how  the  interests 
of  the  '  pure  heart '  have  become  really  more  determinate, 
its  demands  upon  itself  fuller,  in  the  Christian  society  than 
they  were  to  the  most  enlightened  and  conscientious  Greek. 
But  for  the  present  our  concern  is  rather  to  point  out  the 
greatness — in  a  certain  sense  the  completeness  and  finality 
— of  the  advance  in  spiritual  development  which  the  Greek 
philosophers  represent.  Once  for  all  they  conceived  and 
expressed  the  conception  of  a  free  or  pure  morality,  as 
resting  on  what  we  may  venture  to  call  a  disinterested 
interest  in  the  good ;  of  the  several  virtues  as  so  many 
applications  of  that  interest  to  the  main  relations  of  social 
life;  of  the  good  itself  not  as  anything  external  to  the 
capacities  virtuously  exercised  in  its  pursuit,  but  as  their 
full  realisation.  This  idea  was  one  which  was  to  govern 
the  growth  of  all  the  true  and  vital  moral  conviction  which 
has  descended  to  us.  It  had  indeed  still  to  acquire  fulness 
and  determinateness  with  the  formation  of  habits  and  insti- 
tutions corresponding  to  it,  but  it  was  itself  the  source  of 
that  formation.  It  was  not  indeed  ever  to  become  such 
a  definitely  presentable  rule  of  life  as  we  often  sigh  for,  but 
we  must  bear  in  mind  that,  so  far  as  the  shortcomings  which 
we  are  apt  to  complain  of  in  it  arise  from  the  impossibility 


CH.  v]    GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE      301 

either  of  envisaging  or  of  exhaustively  defining  the  good 
which  it  presupposes,  they  are  inseparable  from  the  very 
nature  of  morality,  as  an  effort  not  an  attainment,  a  pro- 
gressive construction  of  what  should  be,  not  an  enjoyment 
of  what  is,  governed  not  by  sight  but  by  faith.  They  are 
shortcomings,  in  fact,  to  which  it  is  only  through  illusions 
that  we  can  claim  superiority. 

254.  Aristotle,  as  we  know,  with  all  the  wisdom  of  Plato 
before  him,  which  he  was  well  able  to  appropriate,  could 
find  no  better  definition  of  the  true  good  for  man  than  the 
full  exercise  or  realisation  of  the  soul's  faculties  in  accord- 
ance with  its  proper  excellence,  which  was  an  excellence  of 
thought,  speculative  and  practical.  The  pure  morality  then, 
which  we  credit  him  with  having  so  well  conceived,  must 
have  meant  morality  determined  by  interest  in  such  a  good. 
But  what  real  import  or  filling,  it  will  be  asked,  can  such 
an  interest  have?  Is  not  the  conception  of  morality,  as 
determined  by  this  interest,  if  it  is  really  no  more  than  it 
professes  to  be,  essentially  an  empty  conception  ?  To  this 
we  answer  that  it  would  have  been  an  empty  conception,  if 
there  had  not  already  taken  place  such  a  realisation  of  the 
soul's  faculties  as  gave  a  meaning,  though  not  its  full  and 
final  meaning,  to  the  definition  of  the  good.  In  fact,  how- 
ever, as  we  have  already  seen,  the  same  spiritual  principle 
which  yielded  the  demand  for  an  account  of  what  was  good 
in  itself,  and  the  conception  of  true  goodness  as  determined 
by  interest  in  that  good,  had  also  yielded  a  realisation  of 
the  soul's  faculties  in  certain  pursuits  and  achievements,  and 
in  a  certain  organisation  of  life.  Already  there  were  arts 
and  sciences,  already  families  and  states,  with  established 
rules  of  what  was  necessary  for  their  maintenance  and  fur- 
therance. Thus  such  a  definition  of  the  good  as  Aristotle 
gives  us  was  more  than  explanatory  of  the  meaning  of  a 
name.  It  was  rather  the  indication  of  a  spiritual  problem, 
of  which  some  progress  had  been  made  in  the  solution. 
The  realisation  of  the  soul's  faculties  had  not  to  wait  to 
begin ;  the  desire  for,  the  interest  in,  such  a  good  had  not 


302      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

Still  to  be  initiated.  The  philosopher  had '  not  to  bring 
before  men  an  absolutely  new  object  of  pursuit,  but  to  bring 
them  to  consider  what  gave  its  value  to  an  object  already 
pursued. 

255.  From  that  very  consideration,  it  is  true,  the  object 
took  a  new  character  for  the  consciousness  of  the  person 
pursuing  it.  It  began  to  be  for  him  what  it  had  previously 
been  only  in  itself,  or  in  idea,  or  for  some  divine  spirit 
working  through  him  but  without  his  knowledge.  The 
realisation  of  the  soul's  faculties  in  the  state,  for  instance, 
though  in  one  sense  it  has  already  been  an  object  to  every 
one  who  duly  performs  his  functions  as  a  citizen,  becomes 
an  object  in  a  new  sense  to  one  who  is  conscious  of  his 
citizen's  work  as  contributing  in  some  humble  way  to  an 
end  whicli  is  the  bettering  of  the  citizens,  and  who  does  it 
or  seeks  to  do  it,  not  for  incidental  pleasure  or  reward,  but 
for  the  sake  of  that  end.  To  awaken  such  a  consciousness 
in  men,  and  thus  to  enable  them  to  do  old  work  in  a  spirit 
that  made  it  new,  was  the  function  of  the  Socratic  philoso- 
phers. They  had  not  to  create  wisdom,  or  fortitude,  or 
temperance,  or  justice.  They  had  not  to  direct  the  habits 
of  action,  recognised  as  laudable  under  those  names,  to  any 
other  object  than  that  in  relation  to  which  they  had  always 
had  their  value;  but  they  had  to  make  it  clear  that  this 
object,  being  a  perfection  of  the  rational  man,  an  unfolding 
of  his  capacities  in  full  harmonious  activity,  was  not  one  to 
which  the  virtuous  practices  were  related  as  means  to  an 
external  end,  but  itself  included  their  exercise.  To  do  so 
was  to  establish  the  principle  of  the  conviction  that  goodness 
is  to  be  sought  for  its  own  sake  and,  as  so  sought,  is  itself 
and  alone  the  good ;  but  it  was  not  to  leave  the  conception 
of  goodness  without  definite  content.  On  the  contrary  it 
was  to  determine  it  further,  as  a  conception  of  the  modes  of 
action,  hitherto  counted  virtuous,  with  the  added  qualifica- 
tion that,  in  order  to  be  truly  virtuous,  they  must  be.  brought 
into  harmony  with  each  other  as  jointly  contributing  to  a 
perfection  of  life,  and  must  each  have  their  root  in  a"  char- 


CH.  V]     GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE      303 

acter  of  which  the  governing  interest  was  an  interest  in  that 
perfection. 

256.  In  the  development  of  that  reflective  morality  which 
our  own  consciences  inherit,  both  the  fundamental  principle 
and  the  mode  of  its  articulation  have  retained  the  form 
which  they  first  took  in  the  minds  of  the  Greek  philoso- 
phers. To  whatever  alien  speculative  influences  we  may 
have  been  subject — and  of  late  no  doubt  the  influences  of 
evolutionary  Hedonism  have  been  strongly  alien — we  do 
not  get  rid  of  the  conviction  that  to  be  good  in  one  of  the 
many  forms  of  goodness  is  for  the  individual  the  good ;  that, 
inexhaustibly  various  as  those  forms  may  be,  each  of  them 
must  be  founded  on  a  will,  of  which  the  good  in  one  or 
other  of  these  forms  is  the  object ;  and  that  the  good  for 
man,  in  that  universal  sense  in  which  it  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  individual's  realisation,  must  yet  be  of  a  kind 
which  is  related  to  all  forms  of  individual  goodness  as  the 
life  of  a  body  to  the  various  vital  functions,  at  once  result- 
ing from  them  and  rendering  them  possible.  And  when 
we  come  to  ask  ourselves  what  are  the  essential  forms  in 
which,  however  otherwise  modified,  the  will  for  true  good 
(which  is  the  will  to  be  good)  must  appear,  our  answer 
follows  the  outlines  of  the  Greek  classification  of  the  virtues. 
It  is  the  will  to  know  what  is  true,  tc)  make  what  is  beauti- 
ful; to  endure  pain  and  fear,  to  resist  the  allurements  of 
pleasure  {i.e.  to  be  brave  and  temperate),  if  not,  as  the 
Greek  would  have  said,  in  the  service  of  the  state,  yet  in  the 
interest  of  some  form  of  human  society ;  to  take  for  oneself, 
to  give  to  others,  of  those  things  which  admit  of  being  given 
and  taken,  not  what  one  is  inclined  to  but  what  is  due. 

257.  It  was  not,  of  course,  by  accident  that,  when  reflec- 
tive morality  first  took  shape  among  the  Greeks,  it  became 
aware  of  these  main  lines  through  which  the  good  was  to  be 
pursued.  As  was  said  above,  the  effort  after  a  true  good 
had  already  worked  in  these  lines  and  was  to  continue  to 
work  in  them,  and  it  is  the  continuity  of  that  work  as  carried 
on  by  us— the  actual  progressive  realisation  of  human  capaci- 


304      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  ill 

ties  in  knowledge,  in  art,  and  in  social  life — that  has  been 
the  ground  of  identity  between  the  first  systematic  reflection 
on  the  goodness  exhibited  in  those  Hnes,  and  all  reflection 
on  the  same  subject  that  has  followed.  And  just  as  it  has 
been  the  continuity  in  the  actual  pursuit  of  the  true  good 
that  has  kept  those  standards  of  virtue,  which  arise  in  reflec- 
tion upon  the  pursuit,  the  same  through  succeeding  ages,  so 
it  has  been  in  sequence  upon  variations  in  the  actual  pursuit, 
which  have  taken  place  independently  of  reflection,  that 
variations  in  the  standards  implying  reflection  have  arisen. 

On  the  whole  the  variations  in  the  object  pursued  as  good, 
though  there  have  been  periods  apparently  of  mere  loss  and 
shrinkage,  have  consisted  in  its  acquisition  of  greater  fulness 
and  determinateness.  In  like  manner  the  differences  be- 
tween our  standards  of  virtue  and  those  recognised  by  the 
Greek  philosophers  arise  from  the  greater  fulness  of  condi- 
tions which  we  include  in  our  conception  of  the  perfecting 
of  human  life.  The  realisation  of  human  capacities  has, 
in  fact,  taken  a  far  wider  range  with  us  than  in  the  most 
advanced  of  ancient  states.  As  actually  achieved,  it  is 
a  much  more  complete  thing  than  it  was  two  thousand 
years  ago,  and  every  progress  achieved  opens  up  a  further 
vista  of  possibilities  still  unrealised.  In  consequence  the 
attainment  of  true  good  presents  itself  to  men  under  new 
forms.  The  bettering  of  human  life,  though  the  principle 
of  it  is  the  same  now  as  in  the  Socratic  age,  has  to  be  carried 
on  in  new  ways ;  and  the  actual  pursuit  of  true  good  being 
thus  complicated,  reflection  on  what  is  implied  in  the  pursuit 
yields  standards  of  virtue  which,  though  identical  in  principle 
with  those  recognised  by  Aristotle,  are  far  more  comprehen- 
sive and  wide-reaching  in  their  demands.  This  will  appear 
more  clearly  if  we  consider  how  Aristotle's  account  of  fortitude 
and  temperance  would  have  to  be  modified  in  order  to 
answer  the  requirements  of  the  Christian  conscience. 

258.  If  a  'Christian  worker'  who  devotes  himself,  un- 
noticed and  unrewarded,  at  the  risk  of  life  and  at  the 


ck.  v]    -  PohTiTUDk  305 

sacrifice  of  every  pleasure  but  that  of  his  work,  to  the  service 
of  the  sick,  the  ignorant  and  the  debased,  were  told  that  his 
ideal  of  virtue  was  in  principle  the  same  as  that  of  the  dvdpdoi, 
'  the  brave  man,'  described  by  Aristotle,  and  if  he  were  in- 
duced to  read  the  description,  he  would  probably  seem  to 
himself  to  find  nothing  of  his  ideal  in  it.  Yet  the  statement 
would  be  true.  The  principle  of  self-devotion  for  a  worthy 
end  in  resistance  to  pain  and  fear  is  the  same  in  both  cases. 
But  Aristotle  could  only  conceive  the  self-devotion  in  some 
form  in  which  it  had  actually  appeared.  He  knew  it  in  no 
higher  form  than  as  it  appeared  in  the  citizen-soldier,  who 
faced  death  calmly  in  battle  for  his  State.  In  that  further 
realisation  of  the  soul's  capacities  which  has  taken  place  in 
the  history  of  Christendom,  it  has  appeared  in  a  far  greater 
wealth  of  forms.  In  Aristotle's  view  the  /Si'os  Trpannxos — the 
life  of  rational  self-determined  activity — was  only  possible 
for  a  few  among  the  few.  It  presupposed  active  participa- 
tion in  a  civil  community.  Such  communities  could  only 
exist  in  certain  select  nations,  and,  where  they  existed,  only 
a  few  of  the  people  contributing  to  their  maintenance  and 
living  under  their  direction  were  fit  to  share  in  civil  func- 
tions. These  alone  had  moral  claims  or  capabilities.  The  rest 
were  instruments  of  their  convenience.  In  modern  Christen- 
dom it  is  not  merely  our  theories  of  life  but  the  facts  of  life 
that  have  changed.  '  Weak  things  of  the  world  and  things 
that  are  despised  hath  God  called.'  With  the  recognition  of 
rights  in  human  beings  as  such,  on  which  we  have  previously 
dwelt  (§  201  and  foil.),  there  comes  a  new  realisation  of 
human  capacities,  not  only  for  the  emancipated  multitude, 
but  for  those  whom  Aristotle  would  have  allowed  to  be 
previously  sharers  in  the  /3ior  npoKTiKos.  The  problems  of  life 
become  for  them  far  more  difficult  indeed,  but,  jtist  on 
account  of  their  greater  range  and  complication,  they  be- 
come of  such  a  kind  as  to  elicit  powers  previously  unused. 

We  are  apt  to  speak  as  if  the  life  of  the  Greek  or  Roman 
citizen,  in  the  full  bloom  of  municipal  civilisation,  was  much 
fuller  and  richer  than  that  of  the  modern  citizen  under  a 


3o6      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

regime  of  universal  freedom  and  equal  rights.  For  the 
many  we  admit  the  modern  system  may  be  a  gain,  but  for 
the  few  we  take  it  to  be  a  corresponding  loss.  Yet  this  is 
surely  a  very  superficial  view.  The  range  of  faculties  called 
into  play  in  any  work  of  social  direction  or  improvement 
must  be  much  wider,  when  the  material  to  be  dealt  with 
,  consists  no  longer  of  supposed  chattels  but  of  persons  as- 
serting recognised  rights,  whose  welfare  forms  an  integral 
element  in  the  social  good  which  the  directing  citizen  has 
to  keep  in  view.  Only  if  we  leave  long-suffering,  consider- 
ateness,  the  charity  which  '  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all 
things,  hopeth  all  things,'  with  all  the  art  of  the  moral 
physician,  out  of  account  in  our  estimate  of  the  realisation 
of  the  soul's  powers,  can  we  question  the  greater  fulness  of 
the  realisation  in  the  present  life  of  Christendom,  as  com- 
pared with  the  highest  life  of  the  ancient  world. 

259.  It  is  a  consequence  of  this  change  in  the  realities 
of  social  life  that  the  conception  of  moral  heroism  has 
greatly  widened— widened  not  in  the  sense  of  more  attenu- 
ated abstraction  but  of  more  concrete  filling — so  that  it 
requires  some  patience  of  reflection  to  trace  the  identity  of 
principle  through  all  its  forms.  The  Quaker  philanthropist 
can  scarcely  recognise  a  brother  in  the  citizen-soldier,  or  the 
soldier  a  brother  in  the  philanthropist.  It  is  indeed  in  one 
sense  a  new  type  of  virtue  that  has  come  into  being  with  the 
recognition  of  the  divine  image,  of  spiritual  functions  and 
possibilities,  in  all  forms  of  weak  and  suffering  humanity. 
The  secondary  motives,  which  assist  self-devotion  in  war  or 
in  the  performance  of  functions  of  recognised  utility  be- 
fore the  eyes  of  fellow-citizens,  are  absent  when  neither  from 
the  recipients  of  the  service  done  nor  from  any  spectators  of 
it  can  any  such  praise  be  forthcoming  as  might  confirm  in 
the  agent  the  consciousness  of  doihg  nobly.  Yet  every  day 
and  all  about  us  pain  is  being  endured  and  fear  resisted 
in  rendering  such  service.  The  hopelessly  sick  are  being 
tended ;  the  foolish  and  ignorant  are  being  treated  as  rational 
persons  j  human  beings  whom  a  Greek  would  have  looked 


CH.  v]  FORTITUDE  307 

on  as  chattels,  or  as  a  social  encumbrance  to  be  got  rid  of, 
are  having  pains  bestowed  on  them  which  only  a  faith  in 
unapparent  possibilities  of  their  nature  could  justify.  In 
the  whole  view  of  life  which  this  work  implies,  in  the  objects 
which  inspire  it,  as  those  whom  they  influence  would  de- 
scribe them,  in  the  qualities  of  temper  and  behaviour  which 
it  calls  into  play,  it  seems  to  present  a  strong  contrast  to 
that  which  the  Greek  philosopher  would  have  looked  for 
from  his  ideally  brave  man.  It  implies  a  view  of  life  in  which 
the  maintenance  of  any  form  of  political  society  scarcely 
holds  a  place ;  in  which  lives  that  would  be  contemptible 
and  valueless,  if  estimated  with  reference  to  the  purposes  of 
the  state,  are  invested  with  a  value  of  their  own  in  virtue  of 
capabilities  for  some  society  not  seen  as  yet.  Its  object, 
whether  described  simply  as  the  service  of  the  suffering  and 
ignoble,  or  as  the  service  of  God  manifested  in  suffering  and 
ignobility,  is  one  which  the  philosophic  Greek  would  scarcely 
have  recognised  as  a  form  of  the  koKov.  The  qualities  of 
self-adjustment,  of  sympathy  with  inferiors,  of  tolerance  for 
the  weak  and  foolish,  which  are  exercised  in  it,  are  very 
different  from  the  pride  of  self-sufficing  strength  which  with 
Aristotle  was  inseparable  from  heroic  endurance. 

260.  Yet  beneath  these  differences  lies  a  substantial 
identity.  The  willingness  to  endure  even  unto  complete  self- 
renunciation,  even  to  the  point  of  forsaking  all  possibility  of 
pleasure,  or,  as  Aristotle  puts  it,  of  passing  the  point  beyond 
which  there  seems  no  longer  to  be  either  good  or  evil ' ;  the 
willingness  to  do  this  in  the  service  of  the  highest  public 
cause  which  the  agent  can  conceive— whether  the  cause  of 
the  state  or  the  cause  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ — because  it 
is  part  of  the  noble  life,  of  the  '  more  excellent  way,'  so  to 
do ;  this  is  common  to  the  ideal  of  fortitude  equally  as 
conceived  by  Aristotle  and  as  it  has  been  pursued  in  the 
Christian  Church.  If  we  cannot  ignore,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  limitations  in  Aristotle's  view  of  the  conditions  under 
which  his  ideal  could  be  realised ' — conditions  which  would 

'  Eth.  Nic.  III.  vi.  6  ;  ix.  4,  5.  ^  lb.  III.  vi.  7,  and  foil. 

X  2 


308  MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  HI 

have  rendered  it  wholly  unrealisable  in  the  chief  occupations 
of  Christian  charity— oil  the  other  hand  it  is  only  fair  to 
notice  how  free  it  is  from  debasement  by  any  notion  of  a 
compensation  which  the  brave  man  is  to  find  in  pleasures  of 
another  world  for  present  endurance.  The  fact,  indeed,  that 
Christian  preachers  have  not  been  ashamed  to  dwell  upon 
such  compensation  as  a  motive  to  self-renunciation,  ought 
not  to  be  taken  to  imply  that  the  heroism  of  charity  exhibited 
in  the  Christian  Church  has  really  been  vitiated  by  pleasure- 
seeking  motives.  Religious  rhetoric  is  apt  to  be  far  in  arrear 
of  the  motives  which  it  seeks  to  express,  and  to  strengthen 
by  expression.  '  Unspeakable  joys '  has  been  but  a  phrase 
to  convey  the  yearning  of  the  soul  for  that  perfection  which 
is  indescribable  except  so  far  as  attained.  Joys  that  are 
unspeakable  are  unimaginable,  and  the  desire  which  really 
has  such  joys  for  its  object  is  quite  different  from  a  desire 
excited  by  an  imagination  of  pleasure. 

In  short,  we  are  not  entitled  to  say  that  the  Aristotelian 
ideal  of  fortitude  has  been  either  more  or  less  pure  than 
that  which  has  been  operative  in  Christendom ;  but  there 
is  no  doubt  that  the  latter  has  become  far  more  compre- 
hensive, and  it  has  become  so  in  correspondence  with  an 
enhanced  fulness  in  our  conception  of  the  ends  of  living. 
Faculties,  dispositions,  occupations,  persons,  of  which  a 
Greek  citizen  would  have  taken  no  account,  or  taken 
account  only  to  despise,  are  now  recognised  as  having  their 
place  in  the  realisation  of  the  powers  of  the  human  soul,  in 
the  due  evolution  of  the  spiritual  from  the  animal  man.  It 
is  in  consequence  of  this  recognition  that  the  will  to  endure 
even  unto  death  for  a  worthy  end  has  come  to  find  worthy 
ends  where  the  Greek  saw  nothing  but  ugliness  and  mean- 
ness, and  to  express  itself  in  obscure  labours  of  love  as  well 
as  in  the  splendid  heroism  at  which  a  world  might  wonder. 

261.  Alongside  of  '  fortitude '  in  the  reflective  morality  of 
Greece  was  placed  '  temperance,'  as  that  habit  of  will  which 
stands  to  the  allurements  of  pleasure  in  the  same  relation  as 
'  fortitude '  to  pain  and  fear.     If  we  wish  to  compare  the 


CH.  v]  TEMPERANCE  AND   SELF-DENIAL  309 

standard  of  self-denial  in  respect  of  pleasures,  which  the 
conscience  of  Christendom  in  its  highest  forms  has  come  to 
prescribe,  with  the  standard  recognised  by  the  Greek  phi- 
losophers, it  is  to  the  account  which  the  latter  give  of 
aax^potnjin;  that  we  must  tum.  The  first  impression  of  any 
one  who  came  to  this  account,  having  his  mind  charged 
with  the  highest  lessons  of  Christian  self-denial,  would  be  of 
its  great  poverty — a  poverty  more  striking,  as  it  will  probably 
appear,  in  the  case  of  'temperance'  than  in  the  case  of 
'  courage.'  He  finds  'temperance '  restricted  by  Aristotle  to 
control  over  the  mere  animal  appetites ;  or,  more  exactly,  to 
control  over  desire  for  the  pleasures  incidental  to  the  satis- 
faction of  those  appetites.  The  particular  usage  of  a  name, 
indeed,  is  of  slight  importance.  If  Aristotle  had  reasons  for 
limiting  o-ca^poo-wi;  to  a  certain  meaning,  and  made  up 
elsewhere  for  what  is  lacking  in  his  account  of  the  virtue 
described  under  that  name,  no  fault  could  be  found.  But 
aaxpfioavvr)  and  avhpiia  between  them  have  to  do  duty  for  the 
whole  of  what  we  understand  by  self-denial.  However  little 
we  may  have  cleared  up  the  moral  demand  which  we  express 
to  ourselves  as  the  duty  of  self-denial,  we  cannot  get  rid  of 
the  conviction  that  it  is  a  demand  at  any  rate  of  much  wider 
significance  in  regard  to  indulgence  in  pleasures  than  that 
which  Aristotle  describes  as  actuating  the  '  temperate '  man, 
nor  do  we  find  the  deficiency  made  good  in  any  account 
which  he  gives  of  other  forms  of  virtue. 

262.  If  we  look  a  little  closer,  however,  we  shall  notice 
the  identity  between  the  habit  of  will  of  which  '  temperance,' 
as  conceived  by  Aristotle,  is  an  expression,  and  that  on 
which  every  renunciation  of  pleasures,  even  the  widest  and 
completest,  if  it  is  to  be  of  moral  value,  must  rest.  No 
'ascetic'  moralist,  so  far  as  known,  has  supposed  such 
renunciation  to  be  possible,  or,  if  possible,  to  be  of  value 
merely  on  its  own  account.  It  becomes  possible  only 
through  the  prevalence  of  desire  for  some  object  other  than 
the  enjoyment  of  pleasure.  It  is  this  desire  alone,  not  the 
renunciation  of  pleasures  except  as  an  incident  or  sign  of 


310      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

such  desire,  that  can  be  of  moral  value;  just  as,  on  the 
other  side,  it  is  not  desires  for  pleasures  that  are  in  them- 
selves morally  evil,  but  the  occupation  of  the  will  by  them — 
the  direction  of  a  man's  self  to  this  or  that  pleasure  as  his 
good — to  the  exclusion  of  those  higher  interests  which 
cannot  possess  the  man  along  with  them,  and  which  can 
only  themselves  be  accounted  desires  for  pleasure  through 
the  fallacy,  previously  dwelt  upon,  of  supposing  a  desire  to 
have  for  its  object  the  pleasure  of  its  own  satisfaction. 
Perhaps,  under  a  true  conviction  of  the  essential  immorality 
of  the  pleasure-seeking  character,  certain  moralists  may  have 
sometimes  spoken  as  if  there  were  intrinsic  evil  in  desires 
for  pleasure  apart  from  their  competition  with  other  desires, 
and  again  some  intrinsic  good  in  the  renunciation  of  plea- 
sures apart  from  interest  in  the  higher  object  for  the  sake  of 
which  they  are  renounced ;  but  this  has  only  been  through 
unguardedness  in  expression.  With  Kant,  for  instance, 
whatever  his  rigour  in  identifying  moral  badness  with  selfish- 
ness and  this  with  pleasure-seeking,  it  was  never  doubtful 
that  the  goodness  of  the  good  will  lay  in  the  prevalence  of 
interest  in  a  worthy  object,  badness  in  such  a  failure  of  the 
worthy  interest  as  enables  the  desire  for  pleasure  to  prevail. 
His  error  consisted  in  his  too  abstract  view  of  the  interest 
on  which  he  held  that  true  goodness  must  depend,  and  which 
he  seems  to  reduce  to  interest  in  the  fulfilment  of  moral  law 
according  to  the  most  abstract  possible  conception  of  it.  Of 
this  no  more  can  be  said  here.  For  the  present  our  concern 
is  to  point  out  the  agreement  between  the  motive  which  the 
reflective  Greek  regarded  as  the  basis  of  the  virtue  mani- 
fested in  control  over  certain  desires  for  pleasure,  and  the 
source  of  that  self-denial  which  our  own  consciences  require 
of  us. 

283.  It  must  be  admitted  that,  when  Aristotle  treats  most 
methodically  of  aa(j>poiTvvti,  he  does  little  to  specify  the  par- 
ticular form  of  that  interest  in  the  koKov  which  he  considered 
to  be  the  basis  of  the  virtue.  He  seems  more  intent  on 
specifying  the  psychological  nature  of  the  pleasures,  over 


CH.  V]  TEMPERANCE  AND   SELF-DENIAL  311 

desire  for  which  the  term  cra>(f>poawri,  as  strictly  applied, 
implies  due  control.  But  to  a  Greek  who  was  told  that  the 
virtue  of  temperance  was  a  mastery  over  certain  desires, 
exercised  toC  koKov  evcKo,  there  would  be  no  practical  doubt 
what  the  motive  was  to  be,  what  was  to  be  the  object  in 
which  a  prevailing  interest  was  to  enable  him  to  exercise 
this  mastery.  In  his  view  it  could  only  be  reverence  for 
the  divine  order  of  the  state,  such  a  desire  to  fulfil  his 
proper  function  in  the  community  as  might  keep  under  the 
body  and  control  the  insolence  of  overweening  lust.  The 
regime  of  equal  law,  the  free  combination  of  mutually 
respecting  citizens  in  the  enactment  of  a  common  good, 
was  the  'beautiful  thing'  of  which  the  attraction  might, 
through  a  fitting  education,  become  so  strong  as  to  neutralise 
every  lust  that  tended  to  disqualify  a  man  for  the  effectual 
rendering  of  service  to  his  state,  or  tempted  him  to  deal 
wantonly  with  his  neighbour.  It  was  this  character  of  the 
motive  or  interest  on  which  it  was  understood  to  rest,  that 
gave  to  <ra^po<rimj  an  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  Greek 
moralist  which,  if  we  looked  simply  to  the  very  limited  range 
of  pleasures — pleasures  of  the  merely  animal  nature — in 
regard  to  which  Aristotle  supposes  the  'temperate  man' 
to  exercise  self-restraint,  would  scarcely  be  intelligible.  Not 
the  mere  sobriety  of  the  appetites,  but  the  foundation  of  that 
sobriety  in  a  truly  civil  spirit,  in  the  highest  kind  of  rational 
loyalty,  gave  the  virtue  its  value.  And  hence  it  was — 
because  it  was  associated  with  such  a  basis— that  aacppoavvri 
came  to  be  regarded  as  carrying  with  it  a  group  of  virtues 
with  which  control  of  the  animal  impulses  might  seem  to 
us  to  have  little  to  do.      As  it  is  put  by  a  writer  of  the 

Aristotelian  school,  TrapiireTai  rfi  (ra^poaivri  eiira^ia,  KoaptoTrjs, 

264.  When  we  compare  this  conception  of  '  temperance ' 
with  the  demand  for  self-denial  which  the  enlightened 
Christian  conscience  makes  on  itself,  we  are  struck  alike 

'  De  virt.  et  vit.  1250  b.  12.  'With  temperance  go  orderliness, 
regularity,  the  feeling  of  shame,  discreetness.' 


312      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

with  the  unity  of  principle  and  the  difference  of  range  or 
comprehension  in  the  application  of  the  principle.  The 
idea  of  the  subjection  in  us  of  a  lower  or  animal  man  to 
a  higher  appeals  to  us  as  it  did  to  the  Greek.  We  too  think 
of  the  higher  man  as  the  law-abiding,  law-reverencing  man. 
An  abstinence  or  temperance  dictated  merely  by  fear  of 
some  painful  result  of  indulgence  we  do  not  count  a  virtue. 
The  true  virtue  of  self-denial  we  deem  to  be  only  reached 
when  it  is  through  interest  in  the  performance  of  some 
public  duty  or  other,  in  the  fulfilment  of  some  function  or 
other  which  falls  to  us  as  members  of  a  community,  that 
we  come  practically  to  forbid  ourselves  the  pursuit  of  certain 
pleasures,  or  to  reach  a  state  in  which  the  prohibition  is 
unnecessary  because  the  inclination  to  them  is  neutralised 
by  higher  interests.  On  the  other  hand,  we  present  to 
ourselves  the  objects  of  moral  loyalty  which  we  should  be 
ashamed  to  forsake  for  our  pleasures,  in  a  far  greater  variety 
of  forms  than  did  the  Greek,  and  it  is  a  much  larger  self- 
denial  which  loyalty  to  these  objects  demands  of  us.  It  is 
no  longer  the  state  alone  that  represents  to  us'  the  '  melior 
natura '  before  whose  claims  our  animal  inclinations  sink 
abashed.  Other  forms  of  association  put  restraints  and 
make  demands  on  us  which  the  Greek  knew  not.  An 
indulgence,  which  a  man  would  otherwise  allow  himself,  he 
forgoes  in  consideration  of  claims  on  the  part  of  wife  or 
children,  of  men  as  such  or  women  as  such,  of  fellow- 
Christians  or  fellow-workmen,  which  •  could  not  have  been 
made  intelligible  in  the  ancient  world.  It  is  easy,  no  doubt, 
in  making  such  comparisons  to  be  misled  by  names.  We 
must  not  conclude,  because  to  a  Greek  all  duty  was  summed 
up  in  what  he  owed  to  his  irSKn,  that  he  recognised  no  duties 
but  such  as  we  should  naturally  call  duties  to  the  state. 
The  term  '  state '  is  generally  used  by  us  with  a  restricted 
meaning  which  prevents  it  from  being  a  proper  equivalent 
for  noKis.  But,  apart  from  any  question  of  names,  it  is 
certain  that  the  requirements  founded  on  ideas  of  common 
good,  which  in  our  consciences  we  recognise  as  calling  for 


CH.  v]  TEMPERANCE  AND   SELF-DENIAL  313 

the  surrender  of  our  inclinations  to  pleasure,  are  more  far- 
reaching  and  penetrate  life  more  deeply  than  did  such 
requirements  in  the  ancient  world,  and  that  in  consequence 
a  more  complete  self-denial  is  demanded  of  us. 

265.  Even  if  we  confine  our  view  to  'temperance'  as 
Aristotle  conceived  it,  i.e.  as  a  virtue  exhibited  only  in  deal- 
ing with  the  pleasure  tj  yiverai  iv  airiois  Kal  iv  ■noTois  Koi  rois 

a(j>poSiirioK  Xcyo/ievois^ — waiving  the  consideration  of  other 
forms  of  self-denial— we  shall  find  that  the  highest  Greek 
standard,  as  represented  by  the  philosophers,  falls  short  of 
that  which  a  conscience,  duly  responsive  to  the  highest  claims, 
would  now  require  of  us.  The  principles  from  which  it  was 
derived,  so  far  as  they  were  practically  available  and  tenable, 
seem  to  have  been  twofold.  One  was  that  all  indulgence 
should  be  avoided  which  unfitted  a  man  for  the  discharge 
of  his  duties  in  peace  or  war ;  the  other,  that  such  a  check 
should  be  kept  on  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  as  might  prevent 
them  from  issuing  in  what  a  Greek  knew  as  v^pts — a  kind 
of  self-assertion,  and  aggression  upon  the  rights  of  others  in 
respect  of  person  and  property,  for  which  we  have  not  an 
equivalent  name,  but  which  was  looked  upon  as  the  anti- 
thesis of  the  civil  spirit. 

We  speak  of  these  as  the  only  practically  available  and 
tenable  principles  that  were  recognised  for  the  regulation  of 
'temperance.'  There  is  indeed  another  notion  which  is 
perhaps  the  one  most  constantly  and  distinctly  alleged  by 
the  philosophers  as  a  reason  for  being  '  temperate.'  This  is 
the  notion  that  the  kind  of  pleasure  with  which  temperance 
has  to  do  is  in  some  way  unworthy  of  man,  because  one  of 
which  the  other  animals  are  susceptible.  It  is  not  very  likely, 
however,  to  have  represented  a  conviction  of  the  general  con- 
science, nor  does  it  appear  how  any  practical  standard  of 
temperance  could  have  been  derived  from  such  a  notion. 
The  conviction  that  there  is  a  lower  and  a  higher — that  there 
are  objects  less  and  more  worthy  of  man — is  no  doubt  one 

'  'The  pleasures  of  eating,  drinking:,  and  sexual  intercourse.'  Eth. 
Nic.  III.  X.  10. 


3r4      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

of  the  most  fundamental  of  our  moral  nature ;  or  rather  it  is 
one  of  the  simplest  expressions  for  the  demand  which  is  that 
nature.  This  conviction  must  carry  with  it  a  disapproval  of 
indulgences  which  interfere  with  the  pursuit  of  the  more 
worthy  objects — such,  e.g.,  as  disqualify  for  efficient  citizen- 
ship— but  it  is  a  false  philosophical  gloss  on  this  disapproval 
to  treat  it  as  grounded  on  the  fact  that  these  indulgences  are 
of  a  kind  which  are  not  distinctive  of  man,  but  are  shared  by 
the  '  lower  animals.'  Just  in  that  respect  in  which  they  are 
matter  of  disapproval,  in  so  far,  that  is  to  say,  as  they  inter- 
fere with  the  fulfilment  of  some  higher  human  function,  they 
are  not  indulgences  of  a  kind  in  which  the  animals  are  found 
to  partake.  The  animals  do  not,  so  far  as  we  know,  gratify 
their  appetites  in  a  way  that  interferes  with  the  attainment 
of  any  object  that  they  are  capable  of  presenting  to  them- 
selves \  If  the  gratification  of  appetites,  therefore,  called  for 
our  disapproval  on  the  ground  of  its  being  common  to  us 
with  them,  it  should  be  disapproved  in  itself  and  altogether, 
not  on  account  of  any  obstruction  which  it  offers  to  other 
and  higher  ends  (for  in  the  case  of  the  animals  there  is  no 
such  obstruction),  but  on  account  of  some  intrinsic  quality 
belonging  to  it.  The  conclusion  would  be  that  we  should 
aim  at  an  entire  suppression  of  animal  gratification^  which 
would  entail  the  extinction  of  the  human  race.  We  should 
have  no  measure  of  excess  in  such  gratification — for  one 
degree  of  it  is  no  more  '  brutal '  than  another — but  a  reason, 
practically  inoperative,  for  rejecting  it  altogether. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  little  consideration  would  show  that 
the  attraction  of  pleasures,  '  of  which  the  other  animals  par- 
take,' has  really  little  to  do  with  the  practices  condemned 
by  the  philosophers  and  by  our  conscience  as  '  intemperate.' 
It  is  probably  never  the  pleasure  of  drinking,  strictly  so 
called,  that  leads  a  man  to  get  drunk.  The  mere  pleasures 
of  eating,  apart  from  the  gratification  of  vanity  and  undefin- 
able  social  enjoyments,  have  but  a  slight  share  in  promoting 

'  So  Aristotle  remarks  that  temperance  and  its  opposite  are  not 
predicable  of  brutes.     Eth.  Nic.  VII.  vi.  6. 


CH.  v]  TEMPERANCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL  315 

the  '  excesses  of  the  table.'  The  temptations  to  sexual  im- 
morality would  be  much  less  formidable  than  they  are,  if 
the  attractive  pleasure  consisted  merely  in  the  satisfaction  of 
sexual  appetite.  Thus,  without  including  in  our  conception 
of  intemperance  any  other  vices  than  Aristotle  had  in  view 
when  applying  the  name,  we  must  still  maintain  (i)  that 
these  vices  are  not  in  fact  mainly  due  to  the  attraction  of 
pleasures  of  which  other  animals,  so  far  as  we  know,  are 
susceptible,  and  (2)  that,  if  they  were,  this  would  afford  no 
intelligible  ground  for  treating  such  practices  as  vices,  which 
might  not  equally  be  urged  as  a  reason  for  an  abstinence 
incompatible  with  the  continuance  of  our  race. 

266.  Returning,  then,  to  those  really  tenable  principles  of 
temperance,  wepi  airitav  xai  itotS>v  Koi  tS>v  acjtpoSicriai',  specified 
above,  with  which  the  Greek  philosophers  supply  us,  do  we 
find  that,  as  applied  by  the  philosophers,  they  afford  a  stan- 
dard of  temperance  adequate  either  to  the  recognised  ideal, 
or  to  the  highest  practice,  of  the  modern  world  ?  The  answer 
must  be  that  on  the  most  important  point,  nepi  rav  d(l>po8iaiav, 
they  do  not.  The  limit  which,  on  the  strength  of  them,  the 
philosophers  would  have  drawn  between  lawful  and  lawless 
love,  would  not  have  been  that  which  our  consciences  would 
call  on  us  to  observe.  It  would  not  have  excluded  all  indul- 
gence of  the  sexual  passion  except  as  between  man  and 
woman  in  monogamous  married  life.  The  failure,  however, 
was  not  in  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the  principles  recognised 
by  the  philosophers,  for  there  is  no  true  foundation  for  the 
strictest  sexual  morality  other  than  that  social  duty  which 
they  asserted.  The  failure  arose  from  the  structure  of  exist- 
ing society,  which  determined  their  application  of  their 
principles.  As  we  have  more  than  once  pointed  out,  while 
there  is  one  sense  in  which  moral  ideas  must  precede  practice, 
there  is  another  in  which  they  follow  and  depend  upon  it. 
The  moral  judgment  at  its  best  in  any  age  or  country — /.  e. 
in  those  persons  who  are  as  purely  interested  in  the  perfec- 
tion of  mankind  and  as  keenly  alive  to  the  conditions  of  that 
perfection  as  is  then  possible — is  still  limited  in  many  ways 


3l6      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

by  the  degree  of  progress  actually  made  towards  the  attain- 
ment of  that  perfection.  It  was  thus  the  actual  condition  of 
women,  the  actual  existence  of  slavery,  the  fact  that  as  yet 
there  had  been  no  realisation,  even  the  most  elementary,  of 
the  idea  of  there  being  a  single  human  family  with  equal 
rights  throughout — it  was  this  that  rendered  the  Greek 
philosophers  incapable  of  such  an  idea  of  chastity  as  any 
unbrutalised  English  citizen,  whatever  his  practice,  if  he 
were  honest  with  himself  would  acknowledge.  To  outrage 
the  person  of  a  fellow-citizen,  to  violate  the  sanctity  of  his 
family  rights,  was  for  the  Greek  as  much  as  for  us  a  blamable 
intemperance.  In  the  eye  of  the  philosophers  it  meant  a  sub- 
jection of  the  higher,  or  civil,  or  law-reverencing,  man  to  that 
lower  man  in  us  which  knows  not  law ;  and  they  were  quite 
aware  that  not  merely  the  abstinence  from  such  acts,  but  the 
conquest  of  the  lusts  which  lead  to  them  by  a  higher  interest, 
was  the  condition  of  true  virtue.  To  the  spirit  of  our  Lord's 
re-enactment  of  the  seventh  commandment  in  the  sermon  on 
the  Mount,  to  the  substitution  of  the  rule  of  the  pure  heart 
for  that  of  mere  outward  observance,  they  were  no  strangers. 
What  they  had  still  to  learn  was  not  that  the  duty  of  chastity, 
like  any  other,  was  to  be  fulfilled  from  the  heart  and  with  a 
pure  will,  but  the  full  extent  of  that  duty. 

267.  And  this  they  failed  to  appreciate  because  the  prac- 
tical realisation  of  the  possibilities  of  mankind  in  society 
had  not  then  reached  a  stage  in  which  the  proper  and  equal 
sacredness  of  all  women,  as  self-determining  and  self- 
respecting  persons,  could  be  understood.  Society  was  not 
in  a  state  in  whicli  the  principle  that  humanity  in  the  person 
of  every  one  is  to  be  treated  always  as  an  end,  never  merely 
as  a  means,  could  be  apprehended  in  its  full  universality; 
and  it  is  this  principle  alone,  however  it  may  be  stated, 
which  affords  a  rational  ground  for  the  obligation  to  chastity 
as  we  understand  it.  The  society  of  modern  Christendom, 
it  is  needless  to  say,  is  far  enough  from  acting  upon  it,  but 
in  its  conscience  it  recognises  the  principle  as  it  was  not 
recognised  in  the  ancient  world.     The  legal  investment  of 


CH.  v]  TEMPERANCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL  317 

every  one  with  personal  rights  makes  it  impossible  for  one 
whose  mind  is  open  to  the  claims  of  others  to  ignore  the 
wrong  of  treating  a  woman  as  the  servant  of  his  pleasures  at 
the  cost  of  her  own  degradation.  Though  the  wrong  is  still 
habitually  done,  it  is  done  under  a  rebuke  of  conscience  of 
which  a  Greek  of  Aristotle's  time,  with  most  women  about 
him  in  slavery,  and  without  even  the  capacity  (to  judge  from 
the  writings  of  the  philosophers)  for  an  ideal  of  society  in 
which  this  should  be  otherwise,  could  not  have  been  sensible. 
The  sensibility  could  only  arise  in  sequence  upon  that 
change  in  the  actual  structure  of  society  through  which  the 
human  person,  as  such,  without  distinction  of  sex,  became 
the  subject  of  rights.  That  change  was  itself,  indeed,  as 
has  been  previously  pointed  out  in  this  treatise,  the  embodi- 
ment of  a  demand  which  forms  the  basis  of  our  moral 
nature — the  demand  on  the  part  of  the  individual  for  a  good 
which  shall  be  at  once  his  own  and  the  good  of  others.  But- 
this  demand  needed  to  take  effect  in  laws  and  institutions 
which  give  every  one  rights  against  every  one,  before  the 
general  conscience  could  prescribe  such  a  rule  of  chastity, 
founded  on  the  sacredness  of  the  persons  of  women,  as  we 
acknowledge.  And  just  as  it  is  through  an  actual  change 
in  the  structure  of  society  that  our  ideal  in  this  matter  has 
come  to  be  more  exacting  than  that  of  the  Greek  philoso- 
phers, so  it  is  only  through  a  further  social  change  that  we 
can  expect  a  more  general  conformity  to  the  ideal  to  be 
arrived  at.  Only  as  the  negative  equality  before  the  law, 
which  is  already  established  in  Christendom,  comes  to  be 
supplemented  by  a  more  positive  equality  of  conditions  and 
a  more  real  possibility  for  women  to  make  their  own  career  in 
life,  will  the  rule  of  chastity,  which  our  consciences  acknow- 
ledge, become  generally  enforced  in  practice  through  the  more 
universal  refusal  of  women  to  be  parties  to  its  violation. 

268.  In  this  matter  of  chastity,  then,  there  is  a  serious 
inferiority  of  the  highest  Greek  ideal  to  the  highest  ideal 
of  Christendom,  but  it  is  important  to  notice  where  the 
inferiority  lies.    We  have  no  right  to  disparage  the  Greek 


3l8      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk. Ill 

ideal  on  the  ground  of  any  inferiority  in  the  motive  which 
the  Greek  philosophers  would  have  considered  the  true 
basis  of  this,  as  of  every,  form  of  temperance.  There  can 
be  no  higher  motive  to  it  than  that  civil  spirit,  in  the  fullest 
and  truest  sense,  on  which  they  conceived  it  to  rest.  But 
we  may  fairly  disparage  their  ideal  in  respect  of  the  kind  of 
life  which  the  realisation  of  this  motive  was  considered  to 
require.  The  sexual  temperance  which  they  demanded, 
they  demanded  on  the  true  ground,  but  not  in  full  enough 
measure.  In  that  respect  their  ideal  had  certain  inevitable 
shortcomings — inevitable,  because  no  ideal  can  go  more 
than  a  certain  distance,  in  the  detail  of  conduct  which  it 
requires,  beyond  the  conditions  of  the  given  age. 

And  this  comparative  poverty  of  the  Greek  ideal  becomes 
more  apparent  when  we  reflect  that,  as  has  been  pointed  out 
above,  the  only  form  in  which  the  virtuous.,  renunciation  of 
pleasures  presents  itself  to  the  philosophers  is  that  of  tem- 
perance irepi  a-iriav  Kal  ttotSiv  Kai  rav  d<j)poSi(Tia>v.     Temperance, 

thus  limited,  has  in  their  systems  to  do  duty  for  the  whole 
of  what  we  should  call  self-denial.  Under  no  other  title 
than  that  of  the  a-axppav  is  the  self-denying  man  described 
by  the  philosophers.  And  it  may  fairly  be  argued  that,  in 
respect  of  the  governing  principle  of  the  will,  the  aa>(l)pav, 
as  they  conceive  him,  does  not  differ  from  the  highest  type 
of  self-denial  known  to  Christian  society.  But  the  range  of 
action  which  they  looked  for  from  him,  as  the  expression 
of  this  principle,  was  very  limited  in  comparison  with  the 
forms  of  self-denial  with  which  we  are  practically  familiar ; 
and  it  was  so  limited  because  great  part  of  the  objects,  by 
which  in  the  society  of  modern  Christendom  self-denial  is  in 
fact  elicited,  in  Greek  society  was  not  there  to  elicit  it. 

269.  If  we  consider,  in  regard  to  any  person  whom  we 
credit  with  a  high  degree  of  habitual  self-denial,  what  are 
the  pleasures  which  we  suppose  him  to  deny  himself,  it 
will  appear  that  those,  in  relation  to  which  alone  Aristotle 
supposed  '  temperance '  to  be  exercised,  form  a  very  small 
part  of  them.    In  determining  the  province  of '  temperance ' 


CH.V]  TEMPERANCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL  319 

Aristotle,  following  the  psychology  of  Plato ',  expressly  ex- 
cludes two  kinds  of  pleasure:  (i)  'pleasures  of  the  soul,' 
as  instances  of  which  he  gives  the  pleasures  of  gratified 
ambition  and  love  of  learning;  (2)  such  'pleasures  of  the 
body '  as  are  received  through  the  senses  of  hearing,  sight, 
or  smell.  It  is  not  such  pleasures  as  these  that  the  tem- 
perate man  forgoes.  Now,  as  has  been  already  said,  this 
exclusion  would  be  a  very  small  matter  if  it  merely  con- 
cerned the  usage  of  the  name  '  temperance.'  The  important 
point  is  that  the  ancient  philosophers  seemingly  give  no 
place  to  that  type  of  virtuous  character  in  which  devotion  to 
some  form  of  true  good  leads  to  a  renunciation  of  such 
pleasures  as  those  included  in  the  above  classes.  Yet  it  is 
just  such  pleasures  as  these  of  which  the  renunciation  is 
involved  in  that  self-denial  which  in  our  impartial  and  un- 
sophisticated judgment  we  most  admire — that  which  in  our 
consciences  we  set  before  ourselves  as  the  highest  ideal.  It 
would  seem  no  great  thing  to  us  that  in  the  service  of  man- 
kind one  should  confine  himself  to  necessary  food  and 
drink,  and  should  observe  the  strictest  limitations  of  Chris- 
tian morality  in  the  matter  of  sexual  indulgence ;  and  it  is 
such  indulgence  alone,  we  must  remember,  not  the  enjoy- 
ments of  family  life,  that  would  fall  within  the  class  of 
pleasures  in  which,  according  to  the  Greek  philosophers, 
temperance  is  exercised.  We  have  examples  about  us  of 
much  severer  sacrifice.  There  are  men,  we  know,  who  with 
the  keenest  sensibility  to  such  pleasures  as  those  of  '  gratified 
ambition  and  love  of  learning,'  yet  deliberately  forgo  them  ; 
who  shut  themselves  out  from  an  abundance  of  aesthetic 
enjoyments  which  would  be  open  to  them,  as  well  as  from 
those  of  family  life ;  and  who  do  this  in  order  to  meet  the 
claims  which  the  work  of  realising  the  possibilities  of  the 
human  soul  in  society — a  work  a  hundred-fold  more  com- 
plex as  it  presents  itself  to  us  than  as  it  presented  itself  to 
Aristotle — seems  to  make  upon  them.  Such  sacrifices  are 
made  now,  as  they  were  not  made  in  the  days  of  the  Greek 
1  Eth.  Nic.  III.  X.  2,  3;  Plato,  Philebus,  51. 


320      MORAL  ID&AL  AND  MOIiAL  PliOGRESS     [B^.iil 

philosophers,  and  in  that  sense  a  higher  type  of  living  is 
known  among  us ;  not  because  there  are  men  now  more 
ready  to  fulfil  recognised  duties  than  there  were  then,  but 
because  with  the  altered  structure  of  society  men  have 
become  alive  to  claims  to  which,  with  the  most  open  eye 
and  heart,  they  could  not  be  alive  then. 

270.  To  an  ancient  Greek  a  society  composed  of  a  small 
group  of  freemen,  having  recognised  claims  upon  each  other 
and  using  a  much  larger  body  of  men  with  no  such  recog- 
nised claims  as  instruments  in  their  service,  seemed  the 
only  possible  society.  In  such  an  order  of  things  those  calls 
could  not  be  heard  which  evoke  the  sacrifices  constantly 
witnessed  in  the  nobler  lives  of  Christendom,  sacrifices  which 
would  be  quite  other  than  they  are,  if  they  did  not  involve 
the  renunciation  of  those  '  pleasures  of  the  soul '  and  '  un- 
mixed pleasures,'  as  they  were  reckoned  in  the  Platonic 
psychology,  which  it  did  not  occur  to  the  philosophers  that 
there  could  be  any  occasion  in  the  exercise  of  the  highest 
virtue  to  forgo.  The  calls  for  such  sacrifice  arise  from  that 
enfranchisement  of  all  men  which,  though  in  itself  but 
negative'  in  its  nature,  carries  with  it  for  the  responsive  con- 
science a  claim  on  the  part  of  all  men  to  such  positive  help 
from  all  men  as  is  needed  to  make  their  freedom  real.  Where 
the  Greek  saw  a  supply  of  possibly  serviceable  labour,  having 
no  end  or  function  but  to  be  made  really  serviceable  to  the 
privileged  few,  the  Christian  citizen  sees  a  multitude  of 
persons,  who  in  their  actual  present  condition  may  have  no 
advantage  over  the  slaves  of  an  ancient  state,  but  who  in 
undeveloped  possibility,  and  in  the  claims  which  arise  out 
of  that  possibility,  are  all  that  he  himself  is.  Seeing  this, 
he  finds  a  necessity  laid  upon  him.  It  is  no  time  to  enjoy 
the  pleasures  of  eye  and  ear,  of  search  for  knowledge,  of 
friendly  intercourse,  of  applauded  speech  or  writing,  while  the 
mass  of  men  whom  we  call  our  brethren,  and  whom  we  declare 
to  be  meant  with  us  for  eternal  destinies,  are  left  without 

'  Negative,  because  amounting  merely  to  the  denial  to  any  one  of 
a  right  to  use  others  as  his  instruments  or  property. 


CH.v]  TEMPERANCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL  321 

the  chance,  which  only  the  help  of  others  can  gain  for  them, 
of  making  themselves  in  act  what  in  possibility  we  believe 
them  to  be.  Interest  in  the  problem  of  social  deliverance, 
in  one  or  other  of  the  innumerable  forms  in  which  it  pre- 
sents itself  to  us,  but  in  which  it  could  not  present  itself 
under  such  a  state  of  society  as  that  contemplated  by  the 
Greek,  forbids  a  surrender  to  enjoyments  which  are  not 
incidental  to  that  work  of  deliverance,  whatever  the  value 
which  they,  or  the  activities  to  which  they  belong,  might 
otherwise  have. 

271.  There  thus  arise  those  forms  of  self-denial  which  did 
not  enter  within  the  horizon  of  the  ancient  moralists,  and  in 
which,  if  anywhere,  we  are  entitled  to  trace  the  ethical  progress 
of  our  own  age.  Questions  whether  we  are  better  than  our 
fathers  are  idle  enough,  but  it  is  not  so  idle — indeed  it  is 
a  necessity  of  our  moral  nature — to  endeavour,  through  what- 
ever darkness  and  discouragement,  to  trace  'some  increasing 
purpose  through  the  ages,'  of  which  the  gradual  fulfilment 
elicits  a  fuller  exertion  of  the  moral  capabilities  of  individuals. 
Such  a  purpose  we  may  not  unreasonably  hold  to  be  directed 
to  the  development  of  society  into  a  state  in  which  all  human 
beings  shall  be  treated  as,  actually  or  in  promise,  persons — 
as  agents  of  whom  each  is  an  end  equally  to  himself  and  to 
others.  The  idea  of  a  society  of  free  and  law-abiding  persons, 
each  his  own  master  yet  each  his  brother's  keeper,  was  first 
definitely  formed  among  the  Greeks,  and  its  formation  was 
the  condition  of  all  subsequent  progress  in  the  direction 
described;  but  with  theni,  as  has  been  often  enough  remarked, 
it  was  limited  in  its  application  to  select  groups  of  men 
surrounded  by  populations  of  aliens  and  slaves.  In  its 
universality,  as  capable  of  application  to  the  whole  human 
race,  an  attempt  has  first  been  made  to  act  upon  it  in  modern 
Christendom.  With  every  advance  towards  its  universal 
application  comes  a  complication  of  the  necessity,  under 
which  the  conscientious  man  feels  himself  placed,  of  sacri- 
ficing personal  pleasure  in  satisfaction  of  the  claims  of  human 
brotherhood.    On  the  one  side  the  freedom  of  every  one  to 

Y 


322      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

shift  for  himself — a  freedom  to  a  great  extent  really  secured 
— on  the  other,  the  responsibility  of  every  one  for  every  one, 
acknowledged  by  the  awakened  conscience ;  these  together 
form  a  moral  situation  in  which  the  good  citizen  has  no  leisure 
to  think  of  developing  in  due  proportion  his  own  faculties  of 
enjoyment.  The  will  to  be  good  is  not  purer  or  stronger  in 
him  than  it  must  have  been  in  any  Greek  who  came  near  to 
the  philosopher's  ideal,  but  the  recognition  of  new  social 
claims  compels  its  exercise  in  a  new  and  larger  self-denial. 

272.  An  objection,  indeed,  is  pretty  sure  to  be  made  to 
the  whole  principle  upon  which  we  reckon  such  self-denial 
as  is  here  contemplated  a  higher  virtue  than  entered  into 
the  Greek  ideal.  '  Are  we  entitled,'  it  may  be  asked,  '  to 
make  a  virtue  out  of  the  renunciation  of  anything  intrin- 
sically good,  and  are  not  the  pleasures  which  we  suppose 
to  be  renounced  by  the  self-denying  servant  of  mankind 
intrinsically  good?  We  may  indeed,  upon  the  principles 
of  "  universalistic  Hedonism,"  admire  the  conduct  of  such 
a  person,  as  suited  to  the  times  of  present  distress.  The 
general  capacity  for  pleasure  being  so  Umited  by  the  faulty 
conditions  of  society,  we  may  admit  it  to  be  the  best  thing 
in  the  long  run  that  there  should  be  men  ready  to  forgo  the 
most  really  desirable  pleasures  for  the  sake  of  rendering 
others  ultimately  more  capable  of  them.  The  public  spirit, 
the  altruistic  enthusiasm,  of  such  men  is  of  great  value, 
as  a  means  to  the  end  which  consists  in  the  maximum  of 
pleasure  obtainable  by  human  (or  perhaps  all  sentient) 
bdngs,  taken  together;  and  for  that  reason  it  is  rightly 
counted  virtuous.  But  it  is  not  more  virtuous  in  proportion 
to  the  amount  and  desirability  of  the  pleasure  sacrificed  by 
those  under  its  influence ;  nor  is  it  any  inferiority  of  the 
Greek  ideal  of  virtue  to  that  here  put  forward  as  character- 
istic of  modern  Christendom,  that  it  did  not  imply  any 
sacrifice  of  "pure"  pleasures,  /.«.  of  such  pleasures  as  carry 
no  pain  in  their  train.  It  would  be  another  matter  if  it  could 
be  alleged  against  the  Greek  ideal  that  it  did  not  imply 
public  spirit ;  but  this  is  not  pretended.     The  fault  alleged 


CH.  v]  TEMPERANCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL  323 

is  merely  that  public  spirit,  as  the  Greek  conceived  it, 
involved  a  less  costly  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  individual 
than  do  those  forms  of  altruistic  enthusiasm  to  which  we  are 
now  taught  to  aspire.  But  if  the  allegation  is  true,  so  much 
the  better  for  the  Greek  ideal.  If  the  conditions  of  modern 
life  are  such  that  the  completest  fulfilment  of  social  duty 
does  often  call  for  the  renunciation  of  much  pure  pleasure 
on  the  part  of  the  individual,  this  may  put  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  an  optimistic  view  of  human  history,  but  it  cannot 
make  the  ideal  of  virtue  as  more  painful  higher  than  the 
ideal  of  it  as  more  pleasant.  The  only  pleasures  of  which 
a  limitation  is  properly  included  in  the  conception  of  the 
highest  virtue,  are  those  of  which  the  enjoyment  beyond  a 
certain  point  either  interferes  with  the  individual's  health,  and 
thus  with  his  capacity  for  other  enjoyment,  or  involves  some 
aggression  upon  the  rights  of  others,  and  thus  lessens  the  pos- 
sibiHty  of  enjoyment  on  their  part.  It  was  just  these  plea- 
sures of  which  a  due  limitation  was  taken  to  be  implied  in  that 
constituent  of  the  virtuous  character  which  the  ancients  call 
temperance.  It  was  not  their  defect,  but  their  merit,  that 
they  did  not  conceive  the  highest  virtue  to  involve  properly 
a  rejection  of  normal  pleasures  of  any  other  kind.' 

273.  From  the  point  of  view  of  Hedonistic  Utilitarianism 
such  an  objection  is  inevitable  and  unanswerable.  It  is 
well  to  allow  full  weight  to  it,  were  it  only  for  the  sake  of 
forcing  ourselves  to  consider  whether  the  actual  admiration 
of  our  consciences,  which  we  can  hardly  doubt  is  most  fully 
commanded  by  the  life  of  the  largest  self-denial,  is  in  accord 
with  such  Utilitarianism.  The  answer  which  must  be  given 
to  it,  according  to  the  theory  previously  set  forth  in  this 
treatise,  can  easily  be  anticipated.  It  is  not  because  it 
involves  the  renunciation  of  so  much  pleasure  that  we  deem 
the  life  of  larger  self-denial,  which  the  Christian  conscience 
calls  for,  a  higher  life  than  was  conceived  of  by  the  Greek 
philosophers;  but  because  it  implies  a  fuller  realisation 
of  the  capacities  of  the  human  soul.  It  is  not  the  renun- 
ciation, as  such,  but  the  spiritual  state  which  it  represents, 

y  2 


324      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

that  constitutes  the  value  of  the  life  spent  in  self-devoted 
service  to  mankind ;  and  it  represents,  we  must  remember, 
not  merely  a  certain  system  of  desires  and  interests,  on  the 
part  of  the  persons  who  make  the  renunciation,  but  a  certain 
social  development  in  consequence  of  which  those  desires 
and  interests  are  called  into  play. 

As  we  have  seen,  it  is  the  emancipation  of  the  multitude, 
and  the  social  situations  arising  out  of  it,  that  call  forth  the 
energies  of  the  self-denying  life  as  we  now  witness  it.  When 
we  compare  the  realisation  of  human  capabilities  implied 
in  that  life  with  the  realisation  of  them  implied  in  the 
highest  type  of  citizenship  contemplated  by  the  ancient 
philosophers,  we  must  take  account  not  merely  of  some 
typical  representative  of  Christian  charity  on  the  one  side, 
and  of  the  ideal  Greek  citizen  on  the  other,  each  in  his 
separate  individuality,  but  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  con- 
ditions of  other  men,  to  which  these  several  types  of 
character  are  relative.  For  it  is  human  society  as  a  whole 
that  we  must  look  upon  as  the  organism  in  which  the 
capacities  of  the  human  soul  are  unfolded.  Human  society 
indeed  is  essentially  a  society  of  self-determined  persons. 
There  can  be  no  progress  of  society  which  is  not  a  develop- 
ment of  capacities  on  the  part  of  persons  composing  it, 
considered  as  ends  in  themselves.  But  in  estimating  the 
worth  of  any  type  of  virtue,  as  implying  or  tending  to  bring 
about  a  realisation  of  man's  spiritual  capacities,  we  must  not 
confine  our  view  to  some  particular  group  of  men  exhibiting 
the  virtue.  We  must  consider  also  those  relations  between 
them  and  other  men,  by  which  the  particular  type  of  virtue 
is  determined.  We  must  enquire  whether  any  apparent 
splendour  in  that  virtue  is  due  to  a  degradation  of  human 
society  outside  the  particular  group,  or  whether,  on  the 
contrary,  the  virtue  of  the  few  takes  its  character  from  their 
assistance  in  the  struggle  upward  of  the  many. 

274.  Now,  when  we  compare  the  life  of  service  to  man- 
kind, involving  so  much  sacrifice  of  pure  pleasure,  which 
is  lived  by  the  men  whom  in  our  consciences  we  think  best. 


CH.  v]  TEMPERANCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL  335 

and  which  they  reproach  themselves  for  not  making  one 
of  more  complete  self-denial,  with  the  life  of  free  activity  in 
bodily  and  intellectual  exercises,  in  friendly  converse,  in  civil 
debate,  in  the  enjoyment  of  beautiful  sights  and  sounds, 
which  we  commonly  ascribe  to  the  Greeks,  and  which  their 
philosophers  certainly  set  before  them  as  an  ideal,  we  might 
be  apt,  on  the  first  view,  to  think  that,  even  though  measured 
not  merely  by  the  quantity  of  pleasure  incidental  to  it  but 
by  the  fulness  of  the  realisation  of  human  capabilities 
implied  in  it,  the  latter  kind  of  life  was  the  higher  of  the  two. 
Man  for  man,  the  Greek  who  at  all  came  up  to  the  ideal 
of  the  philosophers  might  seem  to  be  intrinsically  a  nobler 
being — one  of  more  fully  developed  powers — than  the  self- 
mortifying  Christian,  upon  whom  the  sense  of  duty  to  a  suffer- 
ing world  weighs  too  heavily  to  allow  of  his  giving  free  play  to 
enjoyable  activities,  of  which  he  would  otherwise  be  capable. 
But  such  a  comparison  of  man  with  man,  in  abstraction 
from  the  rest  of  mankind,  is  not  the  way  to  ascertain  the 
real  value  of  the  virtue  of  either  in  its  relation  to  the 
possibilities  of  the  human  soul.  If  (as  would  seem  to  be 
the  case)  the  free  play  of  spiritual  activity  in  the  life  of  the 
Greek  citizen,  with  its  consequent  bright  enjoyableness, 
depended  partly  on  the  seclusion  of  the  Greek  communities 
from  the  mass  of  mankind,  partly  on  their  keeping  in  slavery 
so  much  of  the  mass  as  was  in  necessary  contact  with  them  ; 
if  the  seclusion  and  the  slavery  were  incidental  to  a  state  of 
things  in  which  the  powers  of  the  human  soul,  considered 
as  the  soul  of  universal  human  society,  were  still  in  their 
nonage  ;  then,  whatever  value  we  may  ascribe  to  the  highest 
type  of  Greek  life,  as  suggesting  an  ideal  of '  liberty,  equality 
and  fraternity,'  afterwards  to  be  realised  on  a  wider  scale,  we 
cannot  regard  its  exemption  from  the  impeding  cares,  which 
the  intercommunication  of  mankind  on  terms  of  recognised 
equality  brings  with  it,  as  constituting  a  real  superiority. 

275.  Though  it  is  not  to  be  pretended,  then,  that  the 
life  of  the  self-denying  Christian  citizen  is  morally  the  better 
on  account  of  the  burden  of  care  and  the  manifold  limitations, 


326      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

which  the  acknowledged  claims  of  human  brotherhood  im- 
pose on  it,  it  must  be  maintained  on  the  other  hand  that 
the  life  of  the  Greek  citizen  was  not  morally  the  better  for 
the  freedom  from  such  burden  and  limitations  which  he 
enjoyed ;  because  this  freedom  was  correlative  to  an  unde- 
veloped condition  on  the  part  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  The 
title  of  the  modern  or  Christian  type  of  virtue  to  a  positive 
superiority  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  burden,  unknown  to 
the  Greeks,  which  it  bears,  but  in  that  which  the  presence 
of  this  burden  implies ;  the  new  spiritual  activity,  namely, 
on  the  part  of  the  multitude,  now  conscious  of  their  claims 
and  set  free  to  assert  them  practically,  and  the  wider  range 
of  interests  in  human  good  which  in  response  to  those  claims 
are  awakened  in  the  hearts  of  the  virtuous.  That  this 
enhanced  activity,  these  enlarged  interests,  should  involve 
for  the  virtuous  much  voluntary  curtailment  of  the  innocent 
pleasures  which,  but  for  such  disturbing  claims  and  interests, 
would  be  open  to  them,  is,  as  regards  the  attainment  of  moral 
good,  a  matter  of  indifference.  For  the  curtailment  in  itself 
they  are  neither  the  better  nor  the  worse ;  but  in  the  actual 
order  of  things,  so  far  as  appears,  it  is  a  necessary  incident  of 
progress  towards  that  full  development  of  what  man  has  it 
in  him  to  be,  that  satisfaction  of  the  demand  of  the  human 
soul  for  its  own  perfection,  which  is  for  us  the  good ;  and  for 
that  reason  it  is  the  part  of  the  highest  virtue  to  welcome  it. 
276.  We  may  speculate,  indeed,  on  the  possibility  of  a 
state  of  things  in  which  the  most  entire  devotion  to  the 
service  of  mankind  shall  be  compatible  with  the  widest 
experience  of  pleasure  on  the  part  of  the  devoted  person. 
We  may  argue  that  the  perfection  of  the  human  soul  implies 
its  unimpeded  activity,  which  is  pleasure ;  and  that  there- 
fore, though  in  certain  stages  of  the  progress  towards  such 
perfection  there  may  be  for  certain  persons  an  abridgment 
of  pleasure,  its  attainment  must  be  pure  enjoyment.  Or 
again  we  may  comfort  ourselves  with  surmising  that,  though 
to  this  or  that  individual  citizen  his  self-devotedness  may 
mean  a  large  sacrifice  of  pleasure,  yet  to  others,  who  have 


CH.  v]  TEMPERANCE  AND  SELF-DENIAL  327 

the  benefit  of  his  devotion  without  sharing  in  it,  there  is  in 
consequence  such  an  accession  of  pleasure  that  the  result  is 
a  large  addition  to  the  sum  of  enjoyment  on  the  whole. 
All  speculation  of  this  kind,  however,  provokes  much 
counter-speculation.  By  what  right,  it  may  be  asked,  do 
we  assume  that  the  more  developed  or  perfect  state  of  the 
human  soul  is  one  in  which  a  larger  aggregate  of  pleasure 
is  enjoyed  than  in  the  less  perfect  state  ?  There  is  pleasure, 
no  doubt,  in  all  satisfaction  of  desire,  there  is  pleasure  in 
all  unimpeded  activity.  So  far  therefore,  as  a  man  has 
desired  the  perfection  of  the  human  soul,  th^re  will  be  plea- 
sure to  him  in  the  consciousness  of  contributing  to  that 
perfection,  but  not  necessarily  a  greater  amount  than  he  has 
to  forgo  in  order  to  the  contribution.  So  far  as  the  perfec- 
tion is  attained,  again,  there  will  be  less  impediment  to  the 
activity  directed  to  its  attainment,  and  therefore  more  plea- 
sure in  the  exercise  of  the  activity.  But  it  would  seem  at 
least  possible  that,  according  to  the  plan  of  the  world,  the 
perfection  of  the  human  soul  may  involve  the  constant 
presence  of  a  lower  nature,  consisting  in  certain  tendencies, 
never  indeed  dominant,  but  in  conflict  with  which  alone 
the  higher  energies  of  man  can  emerge.  In  that  case  it  may 
very  well  be  that  the  desire  for  human  perfection,  which  is 
the  desire  for  true  good,  though  gradually  coming  to  taste 
more  of  the  particular  pleasure  incidental  to  its  satisfaction 
and  to  the  free  play  of  the  action  which  it  moves,  as  it  more 
fully  attains  its  end,  may  never  be  destined  to  carry  men, 
even  in  its  fullest  satisfaction,  into  a  state  of  pure  enjoy- 
ment, or  into  one  in  which  they  will  be  exempt  from  large 
demands  for  the  rejection  of  possible  pleasure. 

277.  At  any  rate,  whatever  may  be  the  future  in  store 
for  it,  we  should  scarcely  question  the  loss  of  otherwise 
possible  pleasure  which  the  dominance  of  such  a  desire 
entails  on  those  who  are  possessed  by  it,  were  it  not  for  the 
confusion  which  leads  us  to  assume  that  the  satisfaction  of 
a  strongest  desire  must  always  convey  to  the  subject  of  it 
a  pleasure  greater  than  any  which  he  would  otherwise  have 


328      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

enjoyed.  It  is  true,  of  course,  that  for  any  one  in  whom 
the  desire  for  goodness  or  the  love  of  mankind,  or  however 
else  we  may  describe  the  impulse  to  a  life  of  sacrifice,  is 
really  the  dominant  motive,  it  would  be  impossible  really  to 
enjoy  those  pleasures,  however  innocent,  which  interfere  with 
his  giving  effect  to  the  desire  and  which  he  rejects  for  that 
reason.  But  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  he  would  not 
have  had  more  enjoyment  on  the  Ayhole  if  the  dominant 
desire  had  been  different,  and  if  he  had  been  free  to  take 
his  fill  of  the  innocent  pleasures  from  which  it  has  withheld 
him.  According  to  all  appearances  and  any  fair  interpreta- 
tion of  them,  he  certainly  would  have  had  more. 

Whether  the  loss  of  pleasure  in  the  life  of  such  a  man 
through  the  disturbing  action  of  his  altruistic  enthusiasm  is 
or  is  not  compensated  by  a  consequent  accession  of  pleasure 
to  others,  who  have  the  benefit  of  the  results  of  his  en- 
thusiasm without  sharing  in  the  disturbance  or  self-denialj 
may  be  more  open  to  doubt.  If  our  nature  were  such  that 
the  saint  or  reformer  could  set  himself  to  confer  happiness 
on  others  without  seeking  to  communicate  a  character  like 
his  own  ;  if  we  could  take  advantage  of  the  services  of  such 
an  one  without  admiring  and  aspiring  in  some  measure  to 
become  like  him,  the  gain  to  the  general  sum  of  pleasures 
as  the  result  of  his  activity  would  be  less  doubtful  than  it  is. 
But  if,  as  we  must  hold  to  be  the  case,  the  character  and 
activity  of  the  altruistic  enthusiast,  under  ordinary  conditions 
of  temperament  and  circumstance,  is  not  preponderatingly 
pleasure-giving  to  the  enthusiast  himself;  and  if  his  effect 
upon  others  is  always  in  greater  or  less  degree  to  disturb 
their  acquiescence  in  the  life  of  ordinary  enjoyment ;  then 
the  case  is  at  least  not  clear  in  favour  of  the  assumption 
that  the  effect  of  such  a  character  and  activity  is  an  addition 
to  the  aggregate  of  human  pleasure,  one  man  taken  with 
another.  He  must  be  much  stiffened  in  hedonistic  theory 
who  could  maintain  that  the  life  which  ended  on  the  cross 
was  one  of  more  enjoyment  than  that  which  would  have 
been  open  to  the  Crucified  but  for  the  purpose  which  led 


CH.  v]     GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEALS  OF  VIRTUE    329 

to  this  end ;  and  the  Crucified  himself  foresaw  that  he  came 
not  to  send  peace  on  earth  but  a  sword.  It  would  be  un- 
warrantable indeed  to  found  a  general  ethical  argument  on 
this  example,  but  it  may  be  fairly  used  to  bring  home  to  our 
minds  that  question  as  to  the  suflficiency  of  the  hedonistic 
justification  of  the  self-denying  life,  which  is  all  that  it  would 
be  to  our  purpose  here  to  suggest. 

278.  These  considerations  have  arisen  from  our  noticing 
that  the  practical  attitude  towards  pleasures,  which  in  our 
consciences  we  regard  as  belonging  to  the  highest  virtue,  is 
one  of  larger  renunciation  than  was  contemplated  by  the 
Greek  philosophers  as  entering  into  the  ideal  of  virtue.  In 
this  respect  we  claim  a  superiority  for  the  modern  or  Chris- 
tian ideal,  independently  of  all  attempts  to  show  that  con- 
duct in  accordance  with  it  is  more  productive  of  pleasure  in 
the  long  run  or  to  mankind  on  the  whole.  The  success  of 
such  attempts  we  hold  to  be  at  least  very  questionable.  It  is 
not  by  their  aid  that  we  seek  to  show  the  more  self-denying 
(or  pleasure-renouncing)  type  of  virtue  to  be  the  higher ;  nor, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  this  view  founded  on  any  impression 
that  a  virtue  is  more  of  a  virtue  for  being  painful.  We  give 
the  advantage  to  the  Christian  type  because  it  implies, 
directly  on  the  part  of  those  by  whom  it  is  exhibited,  a 
wider  range  of  interest  and  activity  in  the  work  of  perfecting 
mankind,  and  indirectly,  on  the  part  of  the  multitude  by 
whose  claims  it  is  elicited,  a  liberation  of  their  powers  un- 
known to  the  ancient  world. 

279.  This  conclusion,  it  will  be  remembered,  has  been 
arrived  at  in  the  process  of  comparing  those  manifestations 
of  the  good  will  which  the  Greek  philosophers  presented  to 
themselves,  under  the  names  avSpfia  and  o-wi^poo-ui'i;,  as 
specially  related  to  the  endurance  of  pain  and  the  rejection 
of  certain  pleasures  for  worthy  objects,  with  the  self-denying 
disposition  which  our  consciences  acknowledge  as  the  best. 
In  the  root  of  the  matter  the  Greek  conception  of  these 
virtues  is  thoroughly  sound.     They  are  consideired  genuine 


330      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  hi 

only  when  resting  on  a  pure  and  good  will,  which  is  a  will  to 
be  good — a  will  directed  not  to  anything  external,  or  anything 
in  respect  of  which  it  is  passive,  but  to  its  own  perfection,  to 
the  attainment  of  what  is  noblest  in  human  character  and 
action.  In  this  respect  that  which  we  may  call,  after  its  first 
clear  enunciators,  the  Platonic  or  Aristotelian  conception  of 
virtue,  as  has  been  said  above,  is  final.  It  marks  the  great 
transition,  whenever  and  however  achieved,  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  idea  of  true  good  from  the  state  of  mind  in  which 
it  is  conceived  as  a  well-being  more  or  less  independent  of 
what  a  man  is  in  himself,  to  that  in  which  it  is  conceived  as 
a  well-being  constituted  by  character  and  action.  Its  defects, 
as  compared  with  the  standard  which  we  now  acknowledge, 
arose  from  the  actual  shortcoming  in  the  then  achievement 
of  the  human  soul — the  soul  of  human  society — as  compared 
with  that  of  which  we  are  ourselves  partakers. 

As  has  been  previously  pointed  out,  an  explicit  or  reflec- 
tive ideal '  of  the  true  good,  or  of  virtue  as  a  habit  of  will 
directed  to  it,  can  only  follow  upon  a  practical  pursuit  of  the 
good,  arising  indeed  out  of  the  same  spiritual  demand  which 
is  the  source  of  the  ideal,  but  not  yet  consciously  regulated 
by  any  theoretical  form  of  it.  In  this  pursuit  have  arisen 
institutions  and  arrangements  of  life,  social  requirements  and 
expectations,  conventional  awards  of  praise  and  blame.  It 
is  in  reflection  upon  these — in  the  effort  to  extract  some 
common  meaning  from  them,  to  reject  what  is  temporary 
and  accidental  in  them,  while  retaining  what  is  essential — 
that  there  is  formed  such  an  explicit  ideal  of  the  good  and 
of  virtue  as  we  find  in  the  Greek  philosophers.  Any  one 
who  really  conformed  to  their  ideal  of  virtue  would,  no  doubt, 
have  lived  a  better  life  than  any  one  was  actually  living,  be- 
cause he  would  have  been  pursuing,  sustainedly  and  upon 
a  principle  of  which  he  was  aware,  a  line  of  conduct  which 
in  fact  the  best  men  were  only  pursuing  with  frequent  lapses 
through  defect  either  of  will  or  judgment.  But  in  their 
determinate  conception  or  filling  up  of  the  ideal,  and  in 

'  I.e.  an  ideal  which  the  persons  affected  by  it  have  reflected  on. 


CH.  v]    GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEALS  OF  VIRTUE    331 

their  consequent  conception  of  the  sort  of  behaviour  in  which 
the  virtuous  will  was  to  be  exhibited,  they  were  necessarily 
limited  by  the  actual  state  of  human  society.  'Human 
brotherhood'  had  no  meaning  for  them.  They  had  no 
adequate  notion  of  the  claims  in  response  to  which  the  good 
will  should  be  exercised.  In  respect  of  the  institutions  and 
arrangements  of  life,  of  the  social  requirements,  etc.,  just 
spoken  of,  a  great  range  of  new  experience  has  come  into 
being  for  us  which  did  not  exist  for  them.  The  soul  of 
human  society  has  realised  its  capacities  in  new  ways.  We 
know  that  it  can  achieve,  because  it  has  done  so,  much  of 
which  the  Greek  philosophers  did  not  dream. 

280.  Hence  has  resulted  a  change  in  the  ideal  of  what 
its  full  realisation  would  be,  and  consequently  a  change  in 
the  conception  of  what  is  required  from  the  individual  as 
a  contribution  to  that  realisation.  In  particular  the  idea  has 
been  formed  of  the  possible  inclusion  of  all  men  in  one 
society  of  equals,  and  much  has  been  actually  done  towards 
its  realisation.  For  those  citizens  of  Christendom  on  whom 
the  idea  of  Christendom  has  taken  hold,  such  a  society  does 
actually  exist.  For  them— according  to  their  conscientious 
conviction,  if  not  according  to  their  practice — mankind  is 
a  society  of  which  the  members  owe  reciprocal  services  to 
each  other,  simply  as  man  to  maiL  And  the  idea  of  this 
social  unity  has  been  so  far  realised  that  the  modern  state, 
unlike  the  ancient,  secures  equality  before  the  law  to  all 
persons  living  within  the  territory  over  which  its  jurisdiction 
extends,  and  in  theory  at  least  treats  aliens  as  no  less  possessed 
of  rights.  Thus  when  we  come  to  interpret  that  formal 
definition  of  the  good,  as  a  realisation  of  the  powers  of  the 
human  soul  or  the  perfecting  of  man,  which  is  true  for  us 
as  for  Aristotle,  into  that  detail  in  which  alone  it  can  afford 
guidance  for  the  actions  of  individuals,  the  particular  inj&hc- 
tions  which  we  derive  from  it  are  in  many  ways  different  from 
any  that  Aristotle  could  have  thought  of.  For  us  as  for  him 
the  good  for  the  individual  is  to  be  good,  and  to  be  good  is 
to  contribute  in  some  way  disinterestedly,  or  for  the  sake  of 


332      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

doing  it,  to  the  perfecting  of  man.  But  when  we  ask  ourselves 
how  we  should  thus  contribute,  or  what  are  the  particular 
forms  of  virtuous  life  to  which  we  should  aspire,  our  answer 
is  determined  by  the  consciousness  of  claims  upon  us  on  the 
part  of  other  men  which,  as  we  now  see,  must  be  satisfied  in 
order  to  any  perfecting  of  the  human  soul,  but  which  were 
not,  and  in  the  then  state  of  society  could  not  be,  recognised 
by  the  Greek  philosophers.  It  is  the  consciousness  of  such 
claims  that  makes  the  real  difference  between  what  our  con- 
sciences require  of  us,  or  our  standards  of  virtue,  and  the 
requirements  or  standards  which  Greek  Ethics  represent. 

281.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  the  social 
development,  which  has  given  the  idea  of  human  brother- 
hood a  hold  on  our  consciences  such  as  it  could  not  have 
for  the  Greeks,  would  itself  have  been  impossible  but  for  the 
action  of  that  idea  of  the  good  and  of  goodness  which  first 
found  formal  expression  in  the  Greek  philosophers.  It 
implies  interest  in  an  object  which  is  common  to  all  men  in 
the  proper  sense, — in  the  sense,  namely,  that  there  can  be 
no  competition  for  its  attainment  between  man  and  man; 
and  the  only  interest  that  satisfies  this  condition  is  the 
interest,  under  some  form  or  other,  in  the  perfecting  of  man 
or  the  realisation  of  the  powers  of  the  human  soul.  It  is 
not  to  be  pretended,  indeed,  that  this  in  its  purity,  or  apart 
from  other  interests,  has  been  the  only  influence  at  work  in 
maintaining  and  extending  social  union.  It  is  obvious,  for 
instance,  that  trade  has  played  an  important  part  in  bringing 
and  keeping  men  together;  and  trade  is  the  offspring  of 
other  interests  than  that  just  described.  The  force  of  con 
quest,  again,  such  as  that  which  led  to  the  establishment  for 
some  centuries  of  the  '  Pax  Romana '  round  the  basin  of  the 
Mediterranean,  has  done  much  to  break  down  estranging 
demarcations  between  different  groups  of  men;  and  conquest 
has  generally  originated  in  selfish  passions.  But  neither  trade 
nor  conquest  by  themselves  would  have  helped  to  widen  the 
comprehension  of  political  union,  to  extend  the  range  within 
which  reciprocal  claims  are  recognised  of  man  on  man,  and 


CH.V]    GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEALS  OF  VIRTUE    333 

ultimately  to  familiarise  men  with  the  idea  of  human  brother- 
hood. For  this  there  must  have  been  another  interest  at 
work,  applying  the  immediate  results  of  trade  and  conquest 
to  other  ends  than  those  which  the  trader  and  conqueror  had 
in  view ;  the  interest  in  being  good  and  doing  good.  Apart 
from  this,  other  interests  might  tend  to  combine  certain  men 
for  certain  purposes  and  for  a  time,  but  because  directed  to 
objects  which  each  desires  for  himself  alone  and  not  for 
another— objects  which  cannot  really  be  attained  in  common 
•^they  divide  in  spirit,  even  when  they  combine  temporarily 
in  outward  effect ;  and,  sooner  or  later,  the  spiritual  division 
must  make  its  outward  sign. 

282.  It  is  sometimes  supposed,  indeed,  that  desires  of 
which  the  object  on  each  man's  part  is  his  own  pleasure, 
may  gradually  produce  a  universal  harmony  and  adjustment 
of  claims,  as  it  comes  to  be  discovered  that  the  means  by 
which  each  may  get  most  pleasure  for  himself  are  also  the 
means  which  serve  to  yield  most  pleasure  to  every  one  else. 
The  acceptance  of  this  view  probably  arises  from  a  combina- 
tion of  two  notions ;  one,  the  notion  that  in  the  long  run, 
or  on  the  whole,  the  greatest  amount  of  pleasure  results  to 
each  individual  from  that  order  of  life  and  society  which 
yields  most  pleasure  in  the  long  run  to  every  other  individual ; 
the  other,  the  notion  that  a  man's  desire  for  pleasure  is  or 
may  become  a  desire  for  pleasure  on  the  whole,  as  distinct 
from  any  particular  pleasure.  Putting  these  two  notions 
together,  we  conclude  that  men,  having  no  other  motive 
than  desire  for  pleasure,  may,  after  sufficient  experience,  be 
led  by  their  several  desires  each  to  act  in  a  way  productive 
of  most  pleasure  to  all  the  rest. 

But  while  the  first  of  these  notions  is  fairly  arguable,  the 
second  is  certainly  false.  To  be  actuated  by  a  desire  for 
pleasure  is  to  be  actuated  by  a  desire  for  some  specific 
pleasure  to  be  enjoyed  by  oneself.  No  two  or  more  persons 
whose  desires  were  only  of  this  kind  could  really  desire  any- 
thing in  common.  Under  the  given  institutions  of  society 
one  man's  desire  for  pleasure  may,  no  doubt,  lead  to  a 


334      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS      [bk.  Ill 

course  of  action  which  will  incidentally  produce  pleasure  to 
another ;  as  in  trade,  when  A's  desire  for  the  pleasure  to  be 
got  by  the  possession  of  some  article  leads  him  to  give  B 
a  price  for  it,  which  enables  B  in  turn  to  obtain  some  plea- 
sure that  he  desires.  But  even  in  this  case  it  is  clear  not 
only  that  the  desires  of  A  and  B,  as  desires  for  pleasures, 
are  not  directed  to  a  common  object,  but  that,  if  left  to 
their  natural  course,  they  would  lead  to]  conflict.  A  desires 
the  pleasure  which  he  obtains  by  buying  the  article  of  B, 
but  {qua  desiring  pleasure)  he  does  not  desire,  he  has  an 
aversion  to,  the  loss  of  means  to  other  pleasures  involved  in 
paying  a  price  for  it.  He  only  pays  the  price,  and  so 
adjusts  his  desire  for  pleasure  to  B's,  because  under  the 
given  social  order  he  can  obtain  the  article  in  no  other  way. 
The  desires,  in  short,  of  different  men,  so  far  as  directed 
each  to  some  pleasure,  are  in  themselves  tendencies  to  con- 
flict between  man  and  man.  In  many  cases,  through  the 
action  of  society,  there  has  come  to  be  some  established 
means  of  compromise  between  them,  such  as  that  of  buying 
and  selling ;  but  the  cases  in  which  no  such  settled  means 
of  compromise  is  available,  and  in  which  therefore  A'cannot 
gratify  his  particular  desire  for  pleasure  without  depriving  B 
of  the  chance  of  gratifying  his,  occur  constantly  enough  to 
show  us  what  is  the  natural  tendency  of  a  desire  for  pleasure, 
if  left  to  itself*. 

'  Kant  (Werke,  ed.  Rosenkranz,  viii.  p.  138)  illustrates  the  fallacy, 
as  he  considers  it,  of  supposing  that  a  moral  harmony  can  result  from 
the  desire  on  the  part  of  each  man  for  his  own  greatest  pleasure,  by  the 
story  of  the  pledge  given  by  King  Francis  to  the  Emperor  Charles, 
'  was  mein  Bruder  Karl  haben  will  (Mailand),  das  will  ich  auch  haben.' 
It  will  naturally  be  retorted  on  Kant  that  the  illustration  is  inapt, 
because,  while  Charles  and  Francis  could  not  each  possess  the  duchy 
of  Milan,  the  pleasures  desired  by  men  of  well-regulated  minds,  are 
such  that  each  can  gratify  his  desire  without  interfering  with  the 
gratification  of  the  other.  On  reflection,  however,  it  will  appear  that 
this  possibility  of  adjusting  the  desires  for  pleasure  of  different  men 
(as  in  buying  and  selling)  depends  on  the  presence  of  controlling 
agencies  which  are  themselves  not  the  product  of  desires  for  plea- 
sures ;  and  that  on  the  estranging  tendency  of  these  desires,  if  left  to 


CH.  v]    GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEALS  OF  VIRTUE    335 

283.  If  we  are  enquiring,  then,  for  an  interest  adequate 
to  account  for  the  existence  of  an  ever-widening  social  union, 
in  which  the  claims  of  all  are  acknowledged  by  the  loyal 
citizen  as  the  measure  of  what  he  may  claim  for  himself,  it 
is  not  in  the  desire  for  pleasure  that  we  can  find  it,  or  in 
those  'particular  passions,'  such  as  ambition,  which  are 
wrongly  supposed  to  have  pleasure  for  their  object,  but 
which  resemble  the  desire  for  pleasure  in  being  directed  to 
some  object  private  in  each  case  to  the  person  under  the 
influence  of  the  passion.  Given  a  social  authority  strong 
enough  to  insist  on  respect  for  general  convenience  in  the 
individual's  pursuit  of  his  ends,  and  minded  to  do  so,  then 
desire  for  pleasure,  aversion  from  pain,  and  the  various 
egoistic  passions,  may  adjust  themselves  to  its  requirements 
and  even  be  enlisted  in  its  service ;  but  they  cannot  be  the 
source  of  such  an  authority.  It  can  have  its  origin  only  in 
an  interest  of  which  the  object  is  a  common  good ;  a  good 
in  the  effort  after  which  there  can  be  no  competition  between 
man  and  man ;  of  which  the  pursuit  by  any  individual  is  an 
equal  service  to  others  and  to  himself.  Such  a  good  may 
be  pursued  in  many  different  forms  by  persons  quite  uncon- 
scious of  any  community  in  their  pursuits ;  by  the  craftsman 
or  writer,  set  upon  making  his  work  as  good  as  he  can 

themselves,  Kant  Is  substantially  right.  There  are,  no  doubt,  social 
pleasures,  pleasures  which  are  like  all  others  in  that  each  man  who 
desires  them  desires  them  for  himself  alone,  but  which  can  only  be 
enjoyed  in  company,  and  which  therefore  bring  men  together.  But 
though  desires  for  such  pleasures  might  lead  men  to  associate  temporarily 
for  the  purpose  of  their  gratification,  the  association  would  itself  tend 
to  bring  them  into  collision  with  other  men  associated  for  a  like  pur- 
pose, and  would  be  hable  to  perpetual  disruption,  as  desires  for  plea- 
sures of  a  different  kind  arose  in  the  persons  so  associated.  There  are 
also  pleasures,  such  as  the  enjoyment  of  the  common  air  and  sunshine, 
of  which  the  sources  cannot  be  appropriated,  and  for  which  therefore, 
under  the  simplest  conditions  of  life,  the  desire  as  entertained  by 
different  men  cannot  tend  to  conflict.  Under  any  other  conditions, 
however,  the  opportunity  for  enjoying  such  pleasures,  though  not  the 
sources  of  them,  would  become  matter  of  competition,  and  thereupon 
the  desire  even  for  them  would  become  a  tendency  to  conflict. 


33^      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  Ill 

without  reference  to  his  own  glorification;  by  the  father 
devoted  to  the  education  of  his  family,  or  the  citizen  devoted 
to  the  service  of  his  state.  No  one  probably  can  present  to 
himself  the  manner  of  its  pursuit,  as  it  must  have  been  pur- 
sued in  order  to  the  formation  of  the  most  primitive  tribal 
or  civil  society.  If  we  would  find  an  expression  applicable 
to  it  in  all  its  forms,  '  the  realisation  of  the  capacities  of  the 
human  soul,'  or  '  the  perfecting  of  man,'  seems  best  suited 
for  the  purpose.  To  most  men,  indeed,  engaged  in  the 
pursuit  of  any  common  good,  this  expression  might  convey 
no  meaning.  Nevertheless  it  is  as  part  of,  or  as  contributing 
to,  such  a  realisation,  that  the  object  of  their  pursuit  has  its 
attraction  for  them ;  and  it  is  for  the  same  reason  that  it  has 
the  characteristic  described,  of  being  an  object  for  which 
there  can  be  no  competition  between  man  and  man,  and  of 
which  the  pursuit  is  of  general  service. 

284.  Of  such  a  good  there  had,  of  course,  been  pursuit 
ages  before  the  Greek  philosophers  began  to  reflect  on  it 
and  seek  to  define  it.  A  proof  of  this  was  the  very  existence 
of  the  communities  in  which  the  philosophers  lived,  and  of 
which  they  themselves  only  professed  to  explain  the  true 
idea.  But  it  is  one  thing  for  men  to  be  actuated  by  an 
inward  demand  for — to  make  spiritual  effort  after — a  good 
which  in  its  intrinsic  nature  is  universal  or  common  to  all 
men;  another  thing  for  them  to  conceive  it  in  its  uni- 
versality. It  was  because  it  helped  men  to  such  a  con- 
ception of  the  good  in  its  universality  that  the  teaching  of 
the  philosophers  was  of  so  much  practical  importance  in 
the  social  history  of  man.  The  Greek  citizen  who  loyally 
served  his  state,  or  sought  to  know  the  truth  for  its  own 
sake,  was  striving  for  a  good  not  private  to  himself  but  in 
its  own  nature  universal;  yet  he  had  no  notion  of  there 
being  any  identity  in  the  ends  of  living,  for  himself  on  the 
one  side,  and  for  slaves  and  barbarians  on  the  other.  The 
philosophers  themselves — such  was  the  practical  limitation 
of  their  view  by  the  conditions  of  life  around  them — would 
not  have  told  him  that  there  was.     But  when  they  told  him 


CH.  v]    GREEK  AND  MODERN  IDEALS  OF  VIRTVE    337 

that  the  object  of  his  life  should  be  duly  to  fulfil  his  function 
as  a  man,  or  to  contribute  to  a  good  consisting  in  a  realisa- 
tion of  the  soul's  faculties,  they  were  directing  him  to  an 
object  which  in  fact  was  common  to  him  with  all  men,  with- 
out possibility  of  competition  for  it,  without  distinction  of 
Greek  or  barbarian,  bond  or'free.  Their  teaching  was  thus, 
in  its  own  nature,  of  a  kind  to  yield  a  social  result  which  they 
did  not  themselves  contemplate,  and  which  tended  to  make 
good  the  practical  shortcomings  of  their  teaching  itself. 

285.  It  would  not  be  to  the  purpose  here  to  enter  on 
the  complicated  and  probably  unanswerable  question  of  the 
share  which  different  personal  influences  may  have  had  in 
gaining  acceptance  for  the  idea  of  human  brotherhood,  and 
in  giving  it  some  practical  effect  in  the  organisation  of 
society.  We  have  no  disposition  to  hold  a  brief  for  the 
Greek  philosophers  against  the  founders  of  the  Christian 
Church,  or  for  the  latter  against  the  former.  All  that  it 
is  sought  to  maintain  is  this ;  that  the  society  of  which  we 
are  consciously  members — a  society  founded  on  the  self- 
subordination  of  each  individual  to  the  rational  claims  of 
others,  and  potentially  all-inclusive — could  not  have  come 
into  existence  except  (i)  through  the  action  in  men  of 
a  desire  of  which  (unlike  the  desire  for  pleasure)  the  object 
is  in  its  own  nature  common  to  all;  and  (2)  through  the 
formation  in  men's  minds  of  a  conception  of  what  this  object 
is,  sufficiently  full  and  clear  to  prevent  its  being  regarded  as 
an  object  for  any  one  set  of  men  to  the  exclusion  of  another. 
It  was  among  the  followers  of  Socrates,  so  far  as  we  know, 
that  such  a  conception  was  for  the  first  time  formed  and 
expressed— for  the  first  time,  at  any  rate,  in  the  history  of 
the  traceable  antecedents  of  modern  Christendom.  Inevit- 
able prejudice,  arising  from  the  condition  of  society  about 
them,  prevented  them  from  apprehending  the  social  corol- 
laries of  their  own  conception.  But  the  conception  of  the 
perfecting  of  man  as  the  good  for  all,  of  a  habit  of  will 
directed  to  that  work  in  some  of  its  forms  as  the  good  for 
each,  had  been  definitely  formed  in  certain  minds,  and  only 

z 


338     MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bK.  HI 

needed  opportunity  to  bear  its  natural  fruit.  When  through 
the  establishment  of  the  '  Pax  Romana '  round  the  basin  of 
the  Mediterranean,  or  otherwise,  the  external  conditions 
had  been  fulfilled  for  the  initiation  of  a  society  aiming  at 
universality ;  when  a  person  had  appeared  charging  himself 
with  the  work  of  establishing  a  kingdom  of  God  among  men, 
announcing  purity  of  heart  as  the  sole  condition  of  member- 
ship of  that  kingdom,  and  able  to  inspire  his  followers  with 
a  belief  in  the  perpetuity  of  his  spiritual  presence  and  work 
among  them  ;  then  the  time  came  for  the  value  of  the  philo- 
sopher's work  to  appear. 

They  had  provided  men  with  a  definite  and,  in  principle, 
true  conception  of  what  it  is  to  be  good — a  conception  in- 
volving no  conditions  but  such  as  it  belongs  to  man  as  man, 
without  distinction  of  race  or  caste  or  intellectual  gifts,  to 
fulfil.  When  the  old  barriers  of  nations  and  caste  were 
being  broken  down ;  when  a  new  society,  all-embracing  in 
idea  and  aspiration,  was  forming  itself  on  the  basis  of  the 
common  vocation  '  Be  ye  perfect  as  your  Father  in  Heaven 
is  perfect,'  there  was  need  of  conceptions,  at  once  definite 
and  free  from  national  or  ceremonial  limitations,  as  to  the 
modes  of  virtuous  living  in  which  that  vocation  was  to  be 
fulfilled.  Without  them  the  universal  society  must  have  re- 
mained an  idea  and  aspiration,  for  there  would  have  been 
no  intellectual  medium  through  which  its  members  could 
communicate  and  co-operate  with  each  other  in  furtherance 
of  the  universal  object.  It  was  in  consequence  of  Greek 
philosophy,  or  rather  of  that  general  reflection  upon  morality 
which  Greek  philosophy  represented,  that  such  conceptions 
were  forthcoming.  By  their  means  men  could  arrive  at  a 
common  understanding  of  the  goodness  which,  as  citizens 
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  was  to  be  their  common  object 
to  promote  in  themselves  and  others.  The  reciprocal  claim 
of  all  upon  all  to  be  helped  in  the  effort  after  a  perfect  life 
could  thus  be  rendered  into  a  language  intelligible  to  all 
who  had  assimilated  the  moral  culture  of  the  Graeco-Roman 
world.   For  them  conscious  membership  of  a  society  founded 


CH.  v]  THE  MORAL  IDEAL  339 

on  the  acknowledgement  of  this  claim  became  a  definite 
possibility.  And  as  the  possibility  was  realised,  as  conscious 
membership  of  such  a  society  became  an  accomplished 
spiritual  fact,  men  became  aware  of  manifold  relations,  un- 
thought  of  by  the  philosophers,  in  which  the  virtues  of 
courage,  temperance  and  justice  were  to  be  exercised,  and 
from  the  recognition  of  which  it  resulted  that,  while  the  prin- 
ciple of  those  virtues  remained  as  the  philosophers  had  con- 
ceived it,  the  range  of  action  understood  to  be  implied  in  being 
thus  virtuous  became  (as  we  have  seen)  so  much  wider. 

286.  It  will  be  well  here  to  recall  the  main  points  to 
which  our  enquiry  in  its  later  stages  has  been  directed.  Our 
theory  has  been  that  the  development  of  morality  is  founded 
on  the  action  in  man  of  an  idea  of  true  or  absolute  good, 
consisting  in  the  full  realisation  of  the  capabilities  of  the 
human  soul.  This  idea,  however,  according  to  our  view,  1 
acts  in  man,  to  begin  with,  only  as  a  demand  unconscious 
of  the  full  nature,  of  its  object.  The  demand  is  indeed 
from  the  outset  quite  different  from  a  desire  for  pleasure. 
It  is  at  its  lowest  a  demand  for  some  well-being  which  shall 
be  common  to  the  individual  desiring  it  with  others ;  and 
only  as  such  does  it  yield  those  institutions  of  the  family, 
the  tribe,  and  the  state,  which  further  determine  the  morality 
of  the  individual.  The  formation  of  more  adequate  con- 
ceptions of  the  end  to  which  the  demand  is  directed  we 
have  traced  to  two  influences,  separable  for  purposes  of 
abstract  thought  but  not  in  fact :  one,  the  natural  develop- 
ment, under  favouring  conditions,  of  the  institutions,  just 
mentioned,  to  which  the  demand  gives  rise;  the  other, 
reflection  alike  upon  these  institutions  and  upon  those  well- 
reputed  habits  of  action  which  have  been  formed  in  their 
maintenance  and  as  their  effect.  Under  these  influences 
there  has  arisen,  through  a  process  of  which  we  have  en- 
deavoured to  trace  the  outline,  on  the  one  hand  an  ever- 
widening  conception  of  the  range  of  persons  between  whom 
the  common  good  is  common,  on  the  other  a  conception  of 

z  3 


340      MORAL  IDEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS     [bk.  Ill 

I  the  nature  of  the  common  good  itself,  consistent  with  its 
[being  the  object  of  a  universal  society  co-extensive  with 
mankind.  The  good  has  come  to  be  conceived  with  in- 
creasing clearness,  not  as  anything  which  one  man  or  set  of 
men  can  gain  or  enjoy  to  the  exclusion  of  others,  but  as  a 
spiritual  activity  in  which  all  may  partake,  and  in  which  all 
imust  partake,  if  it  is  to  amount  to  a  full  realisation  of  the 
jfaculties  of  the  human  soul.  And  the  progress  of  thought 
in  individuals,  by  which  the  conception  of  the  good  has 
been  thus  freed  from  material  limitations,  has  gone  along 
with  a  progress  in  social  unification  which  has  made  it 
possible  for  men  practically  to  conceive  a  claim  of  all  upon 

I  all  for  freedom  and  support  in  the  pursuit  of  a  common  end. 
Thus  the  ideal  of  virtue  which_our  consciences  acknowledge 
has  come  to  be  the  devotion  of  character  and  life,  in  >vhat- 
eveT'channel  the  idiosyncrasy  and  circumstances  oJLlbe 
indivrdual  may  determine,  to  a  perfecting  of  man,  whii;h  is 
itselTconceived  noFas  an  external  end  to  W  attfij"p'^  by. 
goodnesiTTjut  asconsisting  in  such  a  life  of  self-devoted 
activity  on  the  part  of  all  persons.  From  the  difficulty  of 
presenting  to  ourselves  in  any  positive  form  what  a  society, 

'  perfected  in  this  sense,  would  be,  we  may  take  refuge  in 

'  describing  the  object  of  the  devotion,  which  our  consciences 
demand,  as  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number ; 
and  until  we  puzzle  ourselves  with  analysis,  such  an  account 
>may  be  sufficient  for  practical  purposes.  But  our  theory 
becomes  false  to  the  real  demand  of  conscience,  if  it  inter- 
prets this  happiness  except  as  including  and  dependent  upon 
the  unimpeded  exercise  by  the  greatest  number  of  a  will, 
the  same  in  principle  with  that  which  conscience  calls  upon 
the  individual  to  aim  at  in  himself. 

287.  No  sooner,  however,  has  such  a  statement  been 
made  in  regard  to  the  end  of  moral  effort  than  one  becomes 
aware  how  liable  it  is  to  be  understood  in  an  abstract  sense, 
wholly  inadequate  to  the  meaning  which  it  is  intended  to 
convey.  It  seems  to  reduce  the  life  of  thoroughly  realised 
spiritual  capacity,  in  which  we  must  suppose  all  that  is  now 


CH.  v]  THE  MORAL   IDEAL  341 

inchoate  in  the  way  of  art  and  knowledge,  no  less  than  of 
moral  efforts,  to  have  reached  completion,  to  a  level  with 
that  effort  as  we  know  it  under  those  conditions  of  impeded 
activity  which  alone  (as  it  might  seem)  give  a  meaning  to 
such  phrases  as  'self-sacrifice'  or  a  'devoted  will.'  The 
student  of  Aristotle  will  naturally  recall  his  saying,  aaxoKov- 

fifdn  Li/a  <T)(o\a^aitev,   Koi  TroKe/ioviiev  Iv   etiiTjvrjv  nyaiiev  *,  and  will 

object  to  us  that,  while  professing  to  follow  in  principle 
Aristotle's  conception  of  virtue  as  directed  to  the  attain- 
ment of  a  good  consisting  in  a  realisation  of  the  soul's 
powers,  we  are  forgetting  Aristotle's  pronounced  judgment 
that  the  highest  form  of  this  realisation,  and  with  it  com- 
plete '  happiness,'  was  to  be  reached  not  in  the  exercise  of 
the  '  practical  virtues '  with  their  attendant  pains  and  unrest, 
but  in  the  life  of  pure  contemplation,  which,  whatever  diffi- 
culty there  may  be  in  forming  any  positive  conception  of  it, 
was  certainly  understood  as  excluding  self-denial  and  all  the 
qualities  which  we  naturally  take  to  be  characteristic  of 
moral  goodness.  Even  those  who  may  be  disposed  to  think 
that  Aristotle's  language  about  the  blessedness  of  the  con- 
templative life  expresses  little  more  than  a  philosopher's 
conceit ;  that,  if  applied  to  the  pursuit  of  science  and  philo- 
sophy as  we  in  fact  painfully  pursue  them,  it  is  quite  untrue; 
and  that,  in  any  attempt  to  translate  it  into  an  account  of 
some  fruition  of  the  Godhead  higher  than  we  can  yet  expe- 
rience, we  pass  at  once  into  a  region  of  unreality — even 
such  persons  may  be  ready  to  accept  his  view  in  its  nega- 
tive application.  They  may  think  that  he  makes  out  his 
case  unanswerably  against  the  supposition  that  moral  good- 
ness in  any  intelligible  sense  can  be  carried  on  into,  or  be 
a  determining  element  in,  the  life  in  which  ultimate  good  is 
actually  attained. 

288.  In  meeting  this  objection  it  must  be  once  more 
admitted  that  our  view  of  what  the  life  would  be,  in  which  \ 
ultimate  good  was  actually  attained,  can  never  be  an  adequate  1 

'  Le.  'We  give  up  leisure  in  order  to  enjoy  it,  and  we  make  war 
for  the  sake  of  having  peace."     Eth.  Nic.  X.  vii.  6. 


342      MORAL  ID^AL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

view.   It  consists  of  the  idea  that  such  a  life  must  be  possible, 

'  filled  up  as  regards  particulars,  in  some  inadequate  measure, 

/  by  reflection  on  the  habits  and  activities,  on  the  modes  of 

life  and  character,  which  through  influence  of  that  idea  have 

I  been  brought  into  being.     If  the  idea,  as  it  actuates  us, 

'  carried  with  it  a  full  consciousness  of  what  its  final  realisation 

I  would  be,  the  distinction  between  idea  and  realisation  would 

/  be  at  an  end.     But  while  for  this  reason  it  is  impossible  for 

us  to  say  what  the  perfecting  of  man,  of  which  the  idea 

actuates  the  moral  life,  in  its  actual  attainment  might  be, 

1  we  can  discern  certain  conditions  which,  if  it  is  to  satisfy 

I  the  idea,  it  must  fulfil.     It  must  be  a  perfecting  of  man — 

\  not  of  any  human  faculty  in  abstraction,  or  of  any  imaginary 

individuals  in  that  detachment  from  social  relations  in  which 

they  would  not  be  men  at  all.    We  are  therefore  justified  in 

holding  that  it  could  not  be  attained  in  a   life  of  mere 

scientific  and  artistic  activity,  any  more  than  in   one  of 

'  practical '  exertion  from  which  those  activities  were  absent ; 

in  holding  further  that  the  life  in  which  it  is  attained  must 

I  be  a  social  life,  in  which  all  men  freely  and  consciously  co- 

'  operate,  since  otherwise  the  possibilities  of  their  nature,  as 

agents  who  are  ends  to  themselves,  could  not  be  realised  in 

^  it ;  and,  as  a  corollary  of  this,  that  it  must  be  a  life  determined 

by  one  harmonious  will — a  will  of  all  which  is  the  will  of 

each — such  as  we  have  previously  called,  in  treating  it  as 

the  condition  of  individual  virtue,  a  devoted  will;  i.e.  a  will 

\having   for  its  object  the   perfection  which  it   alone   can 

-maintain. 

When  we  speak  of  the  formation  of  such  a  will  in  all  men 
as  itself  constituting  that  true  end  of  moral  effort,  relation 
'  to  which  gives  the  virtues  their  value,  we  understand  it,  not 
as  determined  merely  by  an  abstract  idea  of  law,  but  as  im- 
plying (what  it  must  in  fact  imply)  a  whole  world  of  beneficent 
social  activities,  which  it  shall  sustain  and  co-ordinate.  These 
activities,  as  they  may  become  in  a  more  perfect  state  of 
mankind,  we  cannot  present  to  ourselves ;  but  they  would 
not  be  the  activities  of  a  more  perfect  mankind,  unless  they 


CH.  v.]  THE   MORAL   IDEAL  343 

were  the  expression  of  a  will  which  pursues  them  for  their 
own  sake,  or  as  its  own  fulfilment.  Such  a  will  therefore  we 
may  rightly  take  to  be  in  principle  that  perfect  life,  unknown 
to  us  except  in  its  principle,  which  is  the  end  of  morality ;  '•• 
a  like  will  being  the  condition  of  those  virtues,  known  to  us 
not  in  principle  merely  but  in  some  imperfect  exercise,  which 
form  the  means  to  that  end. 

289.  This  explanation  made,  we  return  to  our  statement 
that  '  the  ideal  of  virtue  which  our  consciences  acknowledge  1 
has  come  to  be  the  devotion  of  character  and  life  to  a  i 
perfecting  of  man,  which  is  itself  conceived  as  consisting  1 
in  a  life  of  self-devoted  activity  on  the  part  of  all  persons.' 
This  statement  naturally  suggests  two  further  lines  of  objec- 
tion and  enquiry.  If  we  are  to  accept  it  as  a  true  account  of 
the  ideal  of  virtue,  what  is  to  be  said,  it  may  be  asked,  of  those 
activities,  those  developed  faculties,  in  the  pursuit  of  know- 
ledge and  in  the  practice  of  art,  which  we  undoubtedly  value 
and  admire,  and  which  the  ancient  philosophers  for  that 
reason  rightly  reckoned  virtues,  but  which  would  not  com- 
monly be  thought  to  have  anything  to  do  with  such  devotion 
of  character  and  life  to  a  perfecting  of  man  as  is  here  made 
out  to  be  at  once  the  essence  and  the  end  of  virtue,  either 
in  the  way  of  implying  it  on  the  part  of  the  man  of  science 
and  the  artist,  or  as  tending  to  promote  it  in  others  ?  That 
they  tend  to  general  pleasure  may  perhaps  be  admitted,  but 
can  it  be  seriously  held  that  they  contribute  to  a  true  good 
consisting  in  self-devoted  activity  on  the  part  of  all  persons  ? 
Must  we  not  either  be  content  to  accept  the  account  of  true 
good  as  consisting  in  that  general  pleasure  to  which  the 
practice  of  the  moral  virtues  and  the  pursuit  of  science  and 
art  may,  at  least  with  much  plausibility,  be  alike  considered 
means ;  or,  if  we  will  not  accept  this  account  of  the  end  of 
morality,  must  we  not  admit  that  the  value  of  the  moral 
virtues  on  the  one  side,  and  that  of  intellectual  excellence, 
scientific  or  artistic,  on  the  other,  cannot  be  deemed  relative 
to  one  common  good  ? 

290.  To  any  one  who  has  accepted  the  reasons  given  for 


344      MORAL  WEAL  AND  MORAL  PROGRESS    [bk.  Ill 

rejecting  the  notion  that  pleasure  is  the  true  good,  and  who 
at  the  same  time  recognises  the  necessity  of  conceiving  some 
ultimate  unity  of  good,  to  which  all  true  values  are  relative, 
these  questions  present  a  serious  difficulty.  It  shall  be  dealt 
with  in  the  sequel,  and  is  noticed  here  in  order  to  record 
the  writer's  admission  that  it  cannot  be  passed  over '.  But 
for  the  present,  considering  the  readiness  with  which  most 
people  acquiesce  in  the  distinction  of  moral  from  other 
excellence,  as  if  it  were  relative  to  an  end  of  its  own  with 
which  science  and  art,  as  such,  have  nothing  to  do,  it  may 
be  advisable  to  give  precedence  to  another  order  of  objections 
with  which  our  doctrine  is  likely  to  be  challenged. 

Of  what  avail,  it  will  be  asked,  is  the  theory  of  the  good 
and  of  goodness  here  stated  for  the  settlement  of  any  of  the 
questions  which  a  moralist  is  expected  to  help  us  to  settle  ? 
We  want  some  available  criterion  of  right  and  wrong  in  action. 
We  want  a  theory  of  Duty  which,  as  appUed  to  the  circum- 
stances of  life,  can  be  construed  into  particular  duties,  so 
that  we  may  be  able  to  judge  how  far  our  own  actions  and 
lives  (to  say  nothing  of  those  of  others)  are  what  they  should 

'  [The  question  is  not  discussed  in  the  Prolegomena  to  Ethics,  and 
from  a  mark  at  this  point  in  the  Author's  manuscript  it  is  almost 
certain  that  he  had  abandoned  the  idea  of  dealing  with  it  in  the  present 
volume.  It  has  however  been  thought  best  to  print  the  section  in  its 
entirety.  The  reader  will  probably  gather  from  Book  III  a  general 
idea  of  the  way  in  which  the  difficulty  would  have  been  met,  especially 
if  he  remembers  that  the  end  has  been  throughout  defined  as  the 
realisation  of  the  possibilities  of  human  nature,  and  that  devotion  to 
such  objects  as  the  well-being  of  a  family,  the  sanitation  of  a  town,  or 
the  composition  of  a  book,  has  been  described  as  an  unconscious  pur- 
suit of  this  end.  In  other  words,  the  pursuit  of  such  objects  for  their 
own  sakes  is  considered  to  have  a  latent  reference  to  the  whole  of 
/  which  they  are  parts,  a  reference  which  would  become  conscious  if 
the  whole  and  the  parts  were  ever  opposed  to  each  other ;  and  this 
I  point  of  view  would  no  doubt  have  been  worked  out  with  regard  to 
.  the  pursuit  of  art  and  science  as  ends  in  themselves  (cf.  §  370  sub  fin.). 
The  question  becomes  more  complicated  when  the  person  who  devotes 
himself  to  art  or  science  is  supposed  to  have  formed  a  philosophical 
conception  of  the  ultimate  end  ;  and  on  this  question  the  concluding 
pages  of  the  volume  should  be  consulted.] 


CH.vJ  THE  MORAL   IDEAL  345 

be,  and  may  have  some  general  guide  to  the  line  of  conduct 
we  should  adopt  in  circumstances  where  use  and  wont  will 
either  not  guide  us  at  all,  or  will  lead  us  astray.  But  the 
theory  advanced  above,  construed  in  the  natural  way,  would 
seem  too  severe  to  admit  of  practical  use,  for  it  would  offer 
nothing  but  unrealisable  counsels  of  perfection ;  while,  con- 
strued in  another  way,  it  would  seem  to  allow  of  our  treating 
any  and  every  action  as  having  its  measure  of  good.  If  it 
is  meant  that,  in  order  to  be  morally  good — in  order  to  satisfy 
a  duly  exacting  conscience — an  action  must  have  for  its 
motive  a  desire  consciously  directed  to  human  perfection, 
we  shall  have  a  standard  of  goodness  which  might  indeed 
serve  the  purpose,  so  far  as  we  acknowledged  it,  of  keeping 
us  in  perpetual  self-abasement ;  but,  if  we  were  not  to  act 
till  we  acted  from  such  a  motive,  should  we  ever  act  at  all  ? 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  our  theory  of  the  good  practically 
means  no  more  than  that  the  morality  of  actions  represents 
the  operation  in  human  society  of  an  impulse  after  self- 
realisation  on  the  part  of  some  impersonal  spirit  of  mankind, 
it  will  yield  no  criterion  of  the  good  and  bad  in  action ;  for 
we  must  hold  every  distinctively  human  action,  good  and  bad 
alike,  to  be  characterised  by  the  results  of  such  operation. 
Even  if  our  theory  be  correct  in  regard  to  the  spiritual  impulse, 
other  than  desire  for  pleasure,  implied  in  the  formation  of 
morality  and  the  susceptibility  to  moral  ideals,  is  it  not  after 
all  by  a  calculation  of  pleasure-giving  consequences  that  we 
can  alone  decide  whether  an  action  which  has  been  done 
should  or  should  not  have  been  done,  or  which  of  the 
courses  of  action  open  to  us  under  any  given  complication 
of  circumstances  should  or  should  not  be  adopted  ? 
These  questions  will  be  considered  in  our  next  Book. 


BOOK   IV 

THE   APPLICATION    OF    MORAL   PHILOSOPHY 
TO   THE   GUIDANCE   OF   CONDUCT 

CHAPTER   I 

THE  PRACTICAL   VALUE   OF   THE   MORAL   IDEAL 

291.  In  considering  whether  our  theory  of  the  good  and 
of  goodness  can  be  of  use  in  helping  us  to  decide  what  ought 
to  be  done  and  whether  we  are  doing  it,  it  is  important  to 
bear  in  mind  the  two  senses — the  fuller  and  the  more  re- 
stricted— in  which  the  question,  What  ought  to  be  done? 
may  be  asked.  It  may  either  mean— and  this  is  the  narrower 
sense  in  which  the  question  may  be  asked — What  ought  an 
action  to  be  as  determined  in  its  nature  by  its  effects  ?  or  it 
may  be  asked  with  the  fuller  meaning,  What  ought  the  action 
to  be  with  reference  to  the  state  of  mind  and  character  which 
it  represents?    in  which  case  the  simple  ri  Sii  wpdrTeiv ; 

becomes  equivalent  to  n&s  tx<t>v  nparrei  6  to  hiov  npaTTuti) ;  The 

former  is  the  sense  in  which  the  question  is  asked,  when  it 
is  not  one  of  a  self-examining  conscience,  but  of  perplexity 
between  different  directions  in  which  duty  seems  to  call. 
The  latter  is  the  sense  in  which  a  man  asks  it  when  he  is 
comparing  his  practice  with  his  ideal.  We  reckon  the  latter 
sense  the  fuller,  because  a  man  cannot  properly  decide 
whether,  in  respect  of  character  and  motives,  he  is  acting  as 
he  ought,  without  considering  the  effects  of  the  course  of 
action  which  he  is  pursuing,  as  compared  with  the  effects  of 
other  courses  of  action  which  it  is  open  to  him  to  pursue ' ; 
while  he  can  compare  the  value  of  one  set  of  effects  with 
another  without  considering  the  nature  of  the  motives  which 
might  prompt  him  to  the  adoption  of  the  several  courses  of 

'  [This  statement  should  be  taken  in  connection  with  §  304  and  foil.] 


MOTIVE  AND   CONSEQUENCES  347 

action  leading  to  the  several  effects.  Thus,  whereas  the 
question  in  the  latter  sense  includes  the  question  as  asked 
in  the  former  sense,  the  question  can  be  dealt  with  in  the 
former  sense  without  raising  it  in  the  latter. 

292.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  in  whichever  of  these  dis- 
tinguishable senses  we  ask  the  question.  What  ought  to  be 
done  ?  the  answ^er  to  it  must  be  regulated  by  one  and  the 
same  conception  of  the  good.  If  we  hold,  according  to  the 
explanation  previously  given,  that  the  one  unconditional  good 
is  the  good  will,  this  must  be  the  end  by  reference  to  which 
we  estimate  the  effects  of  an  action.  The  circumstances  in 
which  the  question  is  raised,  whether  such  or  such  an  action 
ought  to  be  done,  may  be  of  a  kind,  as  we  shall  see  presently, 
which  prevent  any  reference  to  the  character  of  an  agent,  and 
shut  us  up  in  our  moral  judgment  of  the  act  to  a  considera- 
tion of  its  effects  ;  but  the  effects  which  we  look  to,  accord- 
ing to  our  theory,  must  still  be  effects  bearing  on  that 
perfection  of  human  character  which  we  take  to  be  the  good. 
In  like  manner  the  consistent  Utilitarian  will  answer  the 
question  of  '  ought  or  ought  not '  in  both  the  distinguished 
senses  upon  one  and  the  same  principle.  He  decides  what 
ought  to  be  done  under  any  given  circumstances  by  con- 
sidering what  will  be  the  effects,  in  the  way  of  producing 
pleasure  or  pain,  of  the  several  courses  of  action  possible 
under  the  circumstances ;  and  for  the  same  reasons  upon 
which  he  decides  what  the  action,  as  measured  by  its  effects, 
should  be,  he  will  hold  that  it  should  be  done — will  be  of 
more  value,  according  to  the  same  standard,  if  done — in 
a  state  of  mind  which  itself  involves  pleasure ;  cheerfully  and 
'  disinterestedly,'  not  under  any  kind  of  constraint.  But  it 
will  only  be  indirectly,  according  to  him,  that  the  question 
of  the  motive — of  the  ultimate  object  which  the  man  sets 
before  himself  in  doing  the  act — will  come  into  account- 
The  act  will  not  depend  for  its  goodness  or  moral  value,  for 
being  such  an  act  as  ought  to  be  done,  upon  this  motive  or 
object.  For  this  it  depends  simply,  according  to  the  Utili- 
tarian view,  upon  its  pleasure-giving  effects.     The  question 


348     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

whether  the  motive  from  which  the  act  proceeds  is  good  or 
bad,  a  motive  which  a  man  ought  or  ought  not  to  have,  is 
a  separate  question,  and  one  to  which  the  answer  depends 
on  that  given  to  the  question  whether  the  actions  to  which 
such  a  motive  ordinarily  incites  are  or  are  not  actions  which, 
on  the  ground  of  their  pleasure-giving  effects,  ought  to  be 
done.  The  motives  which  we  ought  to  have,  the  dispositions 
which  we  ought  to  cultivate  (if  indeed  the  term  'ought,' 
according  to  the  Utilitarian  view,  can  be  applied  in  this  con- 
nection at  all),  will  be  so  because  they  lead  to  actions  pro- 
ductive of  preponderating  pleasure '. 

293.  Upon  the  view  of  the  moral  end  or  good  adopt.ed 
in  this  treatise,  the  question  of  motive  and  the  question  of 
effects  hold  quite  a  different  relative  position  to  that  which 
they  hold  in  the  Utilitarian  systerii.  If  the  good  is  a  per- 
fection of  mankind,  of  which  the  vital  bond  must  be  a  will 
on  the  part  of  all  men,  having  some  mode  of  that  perfection 
for  its  object,  it  will  only  be  in  relation  to  a  state  of  will, 
either  as  expressing  it  or  as  tending  to  promote  it,  or  as 
doing  both,  that  an  action  can  have  moral  value  at  all.  The 
actions  which  ought  to  be  done,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the 
word,  are  actions  expressive  of  a  good  will,  in  the  sense  that 
they  represent  a  character  of  which  the  dominant  interest 
is  in  conduct  contributory  to  the  perfection  of  mankind^  in 
doing  that  which  so  contributes  for  the  sake  of  doing  it. 
We  cannot  say  with  complete  truth  of  any  action  which  has 

'  Cf.  Mill's  Utilitarianism,  p.  26,  note.  '  The  morality  of  the  action 
depends  entirely  upon  the  intention — that  is,  upon  what  the  agent  aii7/s 
to  do'  (as  distinct  from  the  end  which  he  seelcs  in  doing  it).  '  But  the 
motiv6,  that  is,  the  feeling  which  makes  him  will  so  to  do,  when  it 
makes  l>o  diiference  in  the  act,  makes  none  in  the  morality :  though  it 
makes  a  great  difference  in  our  moral  estimation  of  the  agent,  especially 
if  it  indicates  a  good  or  a  bad  habitual  disposition — a  bent  of  character 
from  which  useful  or  from  which  hurtful  actions  are  likely  to  arise." 
'  Useful '  of  course  here  means  pleasure-giving.  '  When  it  makes  no 
difference  in  the  act '  means,  when  it  makes  no  difference  in  the  act  as 
measured  by  its  outward  effects.  That  the  motive  should  make  no 
difference  to  an  act,  in  its  true  or  full  nature,  we  should  pronounce, 
according  to  the  view  stated  in  the  text,  to  be  an  impossibility. 


CH.l]  MOTIVE  AND   CONSEQUENCES  349 

been  done,  that  it  has  been  what  it  ought  to  have  been,  un- 
less it  represents  such  a  character,  or  of  any  action  contem- 
plated as  possible,  that  it  will  be  what  it  ought  to  be,  except 
on  supposition  that  it  will  fulfil  the  same  condition. 

But  it  is  clear  that  even  among  past  actions  it  is  only  of 
his  ownj  if  of  them,  that  a  man  has  really  the  means  of  judg- 
ing whether  they  represent  such  a  character.  Of  prospective 
actions  for  which  we  are  not  personally  and  immediately 
responsible,  we  could  never  say  that  they  are  such  as  ought 
to  be  done,  if  we  considered  them  to  depend  for  being  so  on 
the  disposition  of  the  agent ;  since  we  cannot  foresee  what 
the  disposition  with  which  any  agent  will  do  them  will  be. 
When  we  say  that  restraints  ought  to  be  put  upon  the  liquor- 
traffic,  or  that  a  mistress  ought  to  look  carefully  after  her 
servants,  or  that  our  neighbour  ought  to  give  his  children 
a  better  education,  we  are  not  making  any  reference  in 
thought  to  any  motive  or  disposition  from  which  we  suppose 
that  the.  obligatory  act  will  proceed.  In  such  cases,  as  in  all 
where  we  apply  the  predicates  '  ought '  and '  ought  not '  other- 
wise than  in  reflection  upon  our  own  acts,  or  in  some  inter- 
pretation of  the  acts  of  others  founded  on  an  ascription  to 
them  of  motives  which  we  think  their  acts  evidence,  we  are 
not  contemplating  the  acts  in  their  full  nature.  The  full 
nature,  for  instance,  of  a  father's  act  in  providing  for  the 
education  of  his  children  depends  on  the  character  or  state 
of  will  which  it  represents;  and  what  this  is  in  any  particular 
case  no  one  can  tell.  But  the  action  has  a  nature,  though 
not  its  whole  nature,  in  respect  of  its  effect  upon  the  children, 
and  through  them  upon  others;  and  we  can  abstract  this 
nature  from  its  nature  in  relation  to  the  will  of  the  father, 
without  error  resulting  in  our  judgment  as  to  the  former, 
just  as  we  can  judge  correctly  of  the  mechanical  relations 
of  a  muscular  effort  without  taking  account  of  the  organic 
processes  on  which  the  effort  really  depends. 

It  is  an  abstraction  of  this  kind  that  we  have  to  make  in 
all  cases  where  we  judge,  without  reference  to  ourselves, 
that  a  certain  sort  of  action,  not  yet  dpnej  is  one.  that  .ought 


350     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

to  be  done ;  and  it  might  be  well  if  we  could  make  up  our 
minds  that  we  are  not  warranted  in  going  further  when  we 
judge  the  actions  of  others.  Histories,  no  doubt,  would  be 
much  shortened,  and  would  be  found  much  duller,  if  specu- 
lations about  the  motives  (as  distinct  from  the  intentions)  of 
the  chief  historical  agents  were  omitted ;  nor  shall  we  soon 
cease  to  criticise  the  actions  of  contemporaries  on  the  strength 
of  inferences  from  act  to  motive.  But  in  all  this  we  are  on 
very  uncertain  ground.  It  is  clearly  quite  right  in  judging 
either  of  historical  or  contemporary  actions  to  take  account, 
so  far  as  possible,  of  all  the  circumstances — to  appreciate  the 
bearings  of  any  act  as  presented  to  those  who  were  or  are 
concerned  in  doing  it,  to  consider  what  the  effects  of  it,  as 
probably  contemplated  by  them,  were  or  are.  But  this  is 
a  different  thing  from  trying  to  ascertain  the  state  of  character 
on  the  part  of  the  agents  which  the  actions  represent,  and  in 
ignorance  of  which  the  full  moral  nature  of  the  acts  is  not 
known.  It  is  wiser  not  to  make  guesses  where  we  can  do 
no  more  than  guess,  and  to  confine  ourselves,  where  no  quei- 
tion  of  self-condemnation  or  self-approval  is  involved,  to  measur- 
ing the  value  of  actions  by  their  effects  without  reference  to 
the  character  of  the  agents  :  as  we  must  do  (subject  to  a  re- 
servation to  be  stated  below)  where  the  question  is  whether 
an  action,  not  yet  done,  ought  to  be  done  or  not. 

294.  After  this  statement  we  shall  naturally  be  called  on 
to  explain  in  what  cases  and  in  what  way,  according  to  our 
theory,  a  man  should  endeavour,  when  it  is  an  action  which 
he  has  himself  done,  or  thinks  of  doing,  that  is  in  question, 
to  consider  it  in  what  we  have  called  its  full  moral  nature, 
i.e,  with  reference  not  merely  to  effects  which  it  has  had 
or  is  likely  to  have,  but  to  the  state  of  mind  on  the  part  of 
the  agent  which  it  expresses  or  would  express.  Before 
doing  so,  however,  let  us  make  sure  that  the  reader  is  under 
no  misapprehension  as  to  the  points  at  issue  with  the 
Utilitarians,  with  whom  we  agree  in  holding  that  ordinary 
judgments  upon  the  moral  value  of  actions  must  be  founded 
on  consideration  of  their  effects  alone.     To  the  Utilitarian 


CH.  l]  MOTIVE  AND  CONSEQUENCES  351 

the  virtuous  character  is  good  simply  as  a  means  to  an  end 
quite  diflferent  from  itself,  namely  a  maximum  of  possible 
pleasure.  An  action  is  good,  or  has  moral  value,  or  is  one 
that  ought  to  be  done,  upon  the  same  ground.  If  two 
actions,  done  by  different  men,  are  alike  in  their  production 
of  pleasure,  they  are  alike  in  moral  value,  though  the  doer 
of  one  is  of  virtuous  character  and  the  doer  of  the  other 
is  not  so.  In  our  view  the  virtuous  character  is  good,  not 
as  a  means  to  a  '  summum  bonum '  other  than  itself,  but  as 
in  principle  identical  with  the  '  summum  bonum ' ;  and  ac- 
cordingly, if  two  actions  could  be  alike  in  their  moral  effects 
(as  they  very  well  may  be  in  production  of  pleasure)  which 
represent,  the  one  a  more  virtuous,  the  other  a  less  virtuous 
character,  they  would  still  be  quite  different  in  moral  value. 
The  one  would  be  more,  the  other  less,  of  a  good,  according 
to  the  kind  of  character  which  they  severally  represent. 
But  it  is  only  an  action  done  by  himself  that  a  man  has 
the  means  of  estimating  in  relation  to  the  character  repre- 
sented by  it.  Actions  done  by  others,  if  similar  outwardly 
or  in  effect,  can  only  be  referred  to  similar  states  of  character, 
though  the  states  which  they  represent  may  in  fact  be  most 
different;  and  in  regard  to  actions  simply  contemplated 
as  possible  the  question  of  the  character  represented  by 
them  cannot  be  raised  at  all.  When  from  the  nature  of  the 
case,  however,  a  consideration  of  effects  can  alone  enter 
into  the  moral  valuation  of  an  act,  the  effects  to  be  con- 
sidered, according  to  our  view,  will  be  different  from  those 
of  which  the  Utilitarian,  according  to  his  principles,  would 
take  account.  They  will  be  effects,  not  in  the  way  of 
producing  pleasure,  but  in  the  way  of  contributing  to  that 
perfection  of  mankind,  of  which  the  essence  is  a  good  will 
on  the  part  of  all  persons.  These  are  the  effects  which, 
in  our  view,  an  action  must  in  fact  tend  to  produce,  if  it 
is  one  that  ougAt  to  be  done,  according  to  the  most  limited 
sense  of  that  phrase ;  just  as  these  are  the  effects  for  tfie 
sake  of  which  it  must  be  done,  if  it  is  done  as  it  ought 
to  be  done. 


352    PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MODERN  THEORY  [bk.  IV 

295.  For  an  omniscient  being,  indeed,  the  distinction^ 
unavoidable  for  us — between  the  judgment  that  an  action 
ought  to  be  done,  and  the  judgment  that  an  action  is  done 
as  it  ought  to  be  done,  would  not  exist.  It  is  occasioned 
by  a  separation  in  the  moral  judgment  of  act  from  motive, 
only  possible  for  an  imperfect  intelligence.  An  omniscient 
being  could  not  contemplate  a  future  action  as  merely  pos- 
sible, or  apart  from  the  motive  which  must  really  cause  it 
when  it  comes  to  be  done,  any  more  than  it  could  fail  to 
know  the  motive  of  every  act  that  has  been  done.  Knowing 
the  state  of  will  from  which  every  future  act  will  proceed, 
as  well  as  that  from  which  every  past  act  has  proceeded, 
it  would  not  regard  any  act  as  being  what  it  should  be, 
unless  the  character  expressed  by  it  were  what  it  should  be. 
It  would  trace  the  effect  of  any  fault  on  the  part  of  the 
character  in  the  actual  consequences  of  the  action.  For 
it  is  only  to  our  limited  vision  that  there  can  seem  to  be 
such  a  thing  as  good  effects  from  an  action  that  is  bad  in 
respect  of  the  will  which  it  represents,  and  that  in  conse- 
quence the  question  becomes  possible,  whether  the  morality 
of  an  action  is  determined  by  its  motive  or  by  its  con- 
sequences. There  is  no  real  reason  to  doubt  that  the  good 
or  evil  in  the  motive  of  an  action  is  exactly  measured  by 
the  good  or  evil  in  its  consequences,  as  rightly  estimated — 
estimated,  that  is,  in  their  bearing  on  the  production  of 
a  good  will  or  the  perfecting  of  mankind.  The  contrary 
only  appears  to  be  the  case  on  account  of  the  limited  view 
we  take  both  of  action  and  consequences.  We  notice,  for 
instance,  that  selfish  motives  lead  an  able  man  to  head  a- 
movement  of  political  reform  which  has  beneficent  conse- 
quences. Here,  we  say,  is  an  action  bad  in  itself,  accord- 
ing to  the  morality  of  the  '  good  will,'  but  which  has  good 
effects;  is  it  to  be  judged  according  to  its  motive,  or  ac- 
cording to  its  effects  ?  But,  in  fact,  if  we  look  a  little  more 
closely,  we  shall  find  that  the  selfish  political  leader  was 
himself  much  more  of  an  instrument  than  of  an  originating 
cause,  and  that  his  action  was  but  a  trifling  element  in  the 


CH.  l]  MOTIVE  AND   CONSEQUENCES  353 

sum  or  series  of  actions  which  yielded  the  political  move- 
ment. The  good  in  the  effect  of  the  movement  will  really ' 
correspond  to  the  degree  of  good  will  which  has  been  ex- 
erted in  bringing  it  about ;  and  the  effects  of  any  selfish- 
ness in  its  promoters  will  appear  in  some  limitation  to  the 
good  which  it  brings  to  society. 

It  is  seldom  indeed  that  the  most  conspicuous  actors  on 
the  world's  stage  are  known  to  us  enough  from  the  inside, 
or  that  the  movements  in  which  they  take  part  can  be  con- 
templated with  sufficient  completeness,  to  enable  us  very 
certainly  to  verify  this  assurance  in  regard  to  them.  But 
the  more  we  learn  of  such  a  person,  for  instance,  as  Napo- 
leon, and  of  the  work  which  seemed  to  be  his,  the  more 
clearly  does  it  appear  how  what  was  evil  in  it  arose  out  of 
his  personal  selfishness  and  that  of  his  contemporaries, 
while  what  was  good  in  it  was  due  to  higher  and  purer 
influences  of  which  he  and  they  were  but  the  medium. 
And  within  the  more  limited  range  of  affairs  which  each 
of  us  can  observe  for  himself  a  like  lesson  is  being  con- 
stantly learnt.  If  the  '  best  motives '  seem  sometimes  to  ^ 
lead  to  actions  which  are  mischievous  in  results,  it  is  be- 
cause these  'best  motives'  have  not  been  good  enough., 
If  there  has  been  no  other  taint  of  selfishness  about  them,  , 
yet  they  have  been  acted  on  inconsiderately ;  which  means 
that  the  agent  has  been  too  selfish  to  take  the  trouble  duly 
to  think  of  what  his  action  brings  with  it  to  others.  It  is 
only,  in  short,  the  unavoidably  abstract  nature  of  our  judg- 
ments upon  conduct  that  leads  to  distinction  between  good 
in  motive  and  good  in  effect.  We  infer  a  motive  from  the 
action  of  another ;  but,  if  the  inference  be  correct  so  far  as 
it  goes,  we  still  do  not  know  the  motive  in  its  full  reality, — 
in  its.  relation,  so  to  speak,  to  the  universe  of  a  character, 
and  to  the  influences  which  have  made  and  are  making  that 
character.  The  effects  of  the  action,  again,  we  only  con- 
template in  a  like  fragmentary  way.  With  the  whole  spir- 
itual history  of  the  action  before  us  on  the  one  side,  with 
the  whole  sum  and  series  of  its  effects  before  us  on  the 

A  a 


354     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

other,  we  should  presumably  see  that  just  so  far  as  a  good 
will,  i.e.  a  will  determined  by  interest  in  objects  contribu- 
tory to  human  perfection,  has  had  more  or  less  to  do  with 
bringing  the  action  about,  there  is  more  or  less  good,  i.e. 
more  or  less  contribution  to  human  perfection,  in  its 
effects. 

296.  Granting,  then,  that  the  moral  value  of  an  action 
really  depends  on  the  motives  or  character  which  it  repre- 
sents, the  question  remains  whether  for  us  the  consideration 
of  motives  can  be  of  any  avail  in  deciding  whether  an  action 
ought  to  be  done  or  to  have  been  done.  It  must  be  ad- 
mitted at  once  that,  in  judging  of  another's  action,  we  have 
not  enough  insight  into  motive  (as  distinct  from  intention) 
to  be  warranted  in  founding  our  moral  estimate  on  anything 
but  the  effects  of  the  action.  At  the  same  time  we  are 
bound  to  remember  that  an  estimate  so  founded  is  neces- 
sarily imperfect,  and  to  be  cautious  in  our  personal  criticism 
accordingly.  Only  if  the  agent  himself  describes  his  mo- 
tives, as  interesting  persons  are  apt  to  do,  are  we  warranted 
in  judging  them,  and  then  only  as  described  by  him.  Again, 
when  the  question  is  whether  an  action  ought  to  be  done, 
which  we  are  not  ourselves  responsible  for  doing  or  pre- 
venting, a  consideration  of  motives  can  plainly  have  no 
bearing  on  it.  There  remain  the  cases  (r)  of  reflection 
on  past  actions  of  our  own,  (2)  of  consideration  whether  an 
act  should  be  presently  done,  which  it  rests  with  ourselves 
to  do  or  not  to  do.  In  both  these  cases  the  question  of  the 
character  or  state  of  will  which  an  action  represents  may 
be  raised  with  a  possibility  of  being  answered.  Given  an 
ideal  of  virtue,  such  as  has  been  delineated  above,  a  man 
may  ask  himself.  Was  I,  in  doing  so  and  so,  acting  as  a 
good'  man  should,  with  a  pure  heart,  with  a  will  set  on  the 
objects  on  which  it  should  be  set? — or  again^  Shall  I,  in 
doing  so  and  so,  be  acting  as  a  good  man  should,  goodness 
being  understood  in  the  same  sense  ?  The  question  may  be 
reasonably  asked,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the 
case  to  prevent  a  true  answer  being  given  to  it.    It  remains 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  355 

to  be  considered,  however,  whether  it  can  be  raised  with 
advantage ;  whether  our  ideal  of  virtue  can  in  this  way  be 
practically  applied  with  the  result  of  giving  men  either  truer 
views  of  what  in  particular  they  ought  to  do,  or  a  better 
disposition  to  do  it. 

297.  The  habit  in  a  man  of  raising  such  questions  about 
himself  as  those  just  indicated,  is  what  we  have  mainly  in 
view  when  we  call  him  conscientious.  Now  it  must  certainly 
be  admitted  that  there  have  been  men,  great  in  service  to 
their  kind,  to  whom  we  should  not  naturally  apply  this 
epithet ;  and  again  that  although,  in  most  cases  where  a  man 
is  complained  of  as  'over-conscientious,'  the  complaint 
merely  indicates  his  superiority  to  the  level  of  moral  practice 
about  him,  it  may  sometimes  indicate  a  real  fault.  There  is 
a  kind  of  devotion  to  great  objects  or  to  public  service, 
which  seems  to  leave  a  man  no  leisure  and  to  afford  no 
occasion  for  the  question  about  himself,  whether  he  has 
been  as  good  as  he  should  have  been,  whether  a  better  man 
would  not  have  acted  otherwise  than  he  has  done.  And 
again  there  is  a  sense  in  which  to  be  always  fingering  one's 
motives  is  a  sign  rather  of  an  unwholesome  preoccupation 
with  self  than  of  the  eagerness  in  disinterested  service  which 
helps  forward  mankind.  A  man's  approach  to  the  ideal  of 
virtue  is  by  no  means  to  be  measured  by  the  clearness  or 
constancy  of  his  reflection  upon  the  ideal.  A  prevalent 
interest  in  some  work  which  tends  to  make  men  what  they 
should  be  may  be  found  in  those  who  seldom  entertain  the 
question  whether  they  are  themselves  what  they  should  be, 
and  who  in  those  regions  of  their  life  which  lie  off  the  line 
of  the  prevailing  interest — perhaps  also  in  their  choice  of 
means  by  which  to  give  effect  to  that  interest — are  the  worse 
for  not  entertaining  it.  With  all  their  sins  of  omission  and 
commission  such  men  may  be  nearer  the  ideal  of  virtue  than 
others,  who  pride  themselves  on  conformity  to  a  standard 
of  virtue  (which  cannot  be  the  highest,  or  they  would  not 
credit  themselves  with  conforming  to  it),  and  who  so  hug 

A  a  2 


356     PRACTICAL  VALVE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

their  reputation  with  themselves  for  acting  conscientiously 
that  in  difficult  situations  they  will  not  act  at  all. 

298.  This  admission  made,  it  remains  true  that  the  com- 
parison of  our  own  practice,  as  we  know  it  on  the  inner  side 
in  relation  to  the  motives  and  character  which  it  expresses, 
with  an  ideal  of  virtue,  is  the  spring  from  which  morality 
perpetually  renews  its  life.  It  is  thus  that  we  '  lift  up  our 
hearts,  and  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord.'  It  is  thus  alone, 
however  insufficient,  however  '  dimly  charactered  and  slight,' 
the  ideal,  that  the  initiative  is  given  in  the  individual — and 
it  can  be  given  nowhere  else — to  any  movement  which 
really  contributes  to  the  bettering  of  man.  It  is  thus  that 
he  is  roused  from  acquiescence  in  the  standard  of  mere 
respectability.  No  one,  indeed,  who  recognises  in  their  full 
extent  the  results  of  disinterested  spiritual  effort  on  the  part 
of  a  forgotten  multitude,  which  the  respectability  of  any 
civilised  age  embodies,  or  who  asks  himself  what  any  of  us 
would  be  but  for  a  sense  of  what  respectability  requires,  will 
be  disposed  to  depreciate  its  value.  But  the  standard  of 
respectability  by  which  any  age  or  country  is  influenced 
could  never  have  been  attained,  if  the  temper  which  ac- 
quiesces in  it  had  been  universal — if  no  one  had  been  lifted 
above  that  acquiescence — in  the  past.  It  has  been  reached 
through  the  action  of  men  who,  each  in  his  time  and  turn, 
have  refused  to  accept  the  way  of  living  which  they  found 
about  them,  and  to  which,  upon  the  principle  of  seeking  the 
greater  pleasure  and  avoiding  the  greater  pain,  they  would 
naturally  have  conformed.  The  conception  of  a  better  way 
of  living  may  have  been  on  a  larger  or  a  smaller  scale.  It 
may  have  related  to  some  general  reformation  of  society,  or 
to  the  change  of  some  particular  practice  in  which  the  pro- 
testing individual  had  been  concerned.  But  if  it  has  taken 
effect  in  any  actual  elevation  of  morality,  it  is  because  certain 
men  have  brought  it  home  to  themselves  in  a  contrast  be- 
tween what  they  should  be  and  what  they  are,  which  has 
awakened  the  sense  of  a  personal  responsibility  for  improve- 
ment. 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  357 

In  so  doing  they  may  not  have  raised  the  question  of 
personal  goodness,  in  the  form  in  which  it  presents  itself  to 
the  self-examining  conscience  of  one  who  lives  among  a 
highly  moralised  society  and  conforms  as  a  matter  of  course 
to  its  standards.  They  may  not  have  asked  themselves, 
Have  we,  in  doing  what  was  expected  of  us,  been  doing  it 
from  the  right  rriotives?  In  that  form  the  question  pre- 
supposes the  establishment  of  a  definite  standard  of  con- 
ventional morality.  In  the  days  when  such  morality  was 
still  in  making,  and  in  the  minds  of  the  forgotten  enthusiasts 
to  whom  we  owe  it,  this  would  scarcely  be  the  way  in  which 
the  contrast  between  an  ideal  of  virtue  and  current  practice 
would  present  itself.  Under  such  conditions  it  would  pre- 
sent itself  less  as  a  challenge  to  purify  the  heart  than  as 
a  call  to  new  courses  of  overt  action,  the  relation  of  which 
to  motives  and  character  it  would  not  occur  to  any  one  to 
consider.  But  in  principle  it  is  the  same  operation  in  the 
individual  of  an  idea  of  a  perfect  life,  with  which  his  own  is 
contrasted,  whether  it  take  the  form  of  a  consciousness  of 
personal  responsibility  for  putting  an  end  to  some  practice 
which,  to  a  mind  awakening  to  the  claims  of  the  human 
soul,  seems  unjust  or  unworthy,  or  the  form  of  self-interro- 
gation as  to  the  purity  of  the  heart  from  which  a  walk  and 
conduct,  outwardly  correct,  proceeds. 

299.  It  may  be  objected,  however,  that  in  thus  identifying 
the  motive  power  at  work  in  the  practical  reformer  of 
morality  with  that  which  sets  the  introspective  conscience 
upon  the  enquiry  whether  the  heart  is  as  pure  as  it  should 
be,  we  are  obscuring  the  real  question  as  to  the  practical 
value  of  the  latter.  No  one  doubts  that  a  man  who  improves 
the  current  morality  of  his  time  must  be  something  of  an 
Idealist.  He  must  have  an  idea,  which  moves  him  to  seek 
its  realisation,  of  a  better  order  of  life  than  he  finds  about 
him.  That  idea  cannot  represent  any  experienced  reality. 
If  it  did,  the  reformer's  labour  would  be  superfluous ;  the 
order  of  life  which  he  seeks  to  bring  about  would  be  already 
in  existence.     It  is  an  idea  to  which  nothing  real  as  yet 


358     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.'IV 

corresponds,  but  which,  as  actuating  the  reformer,  tends  to 
bring  into  being  a  reality  corresponding  to  itself.  It  is  in 
this  sense  that  the  reformer  must  be  an  Idealist.  But  the 
idea  which  he  seeks  to  realise  is  an  idea  of  definite  institu- 
tions and  arrangements  of  life,  of  courses  of  action,  each 
producing  their  outward  sensible  effects.  What  real  identity 
is  there  between  the  influence  of  such  an  idea — an  ideal  of 
virtue,  if  we  like  to  call  it  so — producing  a  visible  alteration 
in  man's  life,  and  that  of  an  ideal  which  sets  a  man  upon 
asking,  not  what  there  is  which  he  ought  to  do  and  is  not 
doing,  but  whether,  in  that  which  he  has  been  doing  and 
will  (as  he  ought)  continue  to  do,  his  heart  has  been  suffi- 
ciently pure  ? 

The  identity  will  appear,  when  we  reflect  that  it  is  not 
a  '  mere  idea '  of  a  better  order  of  life  that  ever  set  any  one 
upon  a  work  of  disinterested  moral  reform,  in  that  sense  of 
the  term  in  which  one  of  us  might  have  'an  idea'  of  the 
Lord  Mayor's  show,  or  of  a  debate  in  Parliament,  without 
having  been  present  at  them.  The  idea  which  moves  the 
reformer  is  one  that  he  feels  a  personal  responsibility  for 
realising.  This  feeling  of  personal  responsibility  for  its 
execution  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  practical  idea  itself,  of 
I  the  form  of  consciousness  which  we  so  describe.  It  is  that 
which  distinguishes  it  as  a  practical  idea.  The  reformer 
cannot  bear  to  think  of  himself  except  as  giving  effect,  so 
far  as  may  be,  to  his  project  of  reform ;  and  thus,  instead 
of  merely  contemplating  a  possible  work,  he  does  it.  He 
presents  himself  to  himself  on  the  one  hand  as  achieving,  so 
far  as  in  him  lies,  the  contemplated  work,  on  the  other  hand 
as  neglecting  it  for  some  less  worthy  object ;  and  he  turns 
with  contempt  and  aversion  from  the  latter  presentation. 
Now  it  is  because,  to  the  real  reformer,  the  thought  of  some- 
thing which  should  be  done  is  thus  always  at  the  same  time 
the  thought  of  something  which  he  should  be  and  seeks  to 
be,  but  would  not  be  if  he  did  not  do  the  work,  that  there  is 
a  real  unity  between  the  spiritual  principle  which  animates 
him,  and  that  which  appears  in  the  self-questioning  of  the 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  359 

man  who,  without  charging  himself  with  the  neglect  of  any 
outward  duty,  without  contemplating  any  particular  good  work 
which  he  might  do  but  has  not  done,  still  asks  himself  whether 
he  has  been  what  he  should  be  in  doing  what  he  has  done. 

300.  But,  granted  the  unity  of  the  spiritual  principle  at 
work  in  the  two  supposed  cases,  is  there  any  real  unity  in 
the  effects  which  it  produces  in  the  person  of  the  moral 
reformer  and  in  the  person  of  the  self-questioning  '  saint '  ? 
In  the  one  case  the  effect  is  the  recognition  and  fulfilment 
of  certain  specific  duties,  previously  not  recognised  or  not 
fulfilled,  by  the  moral  reformer  and  those  whom  he  in- 
fluences. He  and  they  come  to  deal  differently  with  their 
fellow-men.  But  in  the  other  case,  if  we  enquire  what 
specific  performance  follows  from  the  self-questioning  as  to 
purity  of  heart,  we  find  it  difficult  to  answer.  Among  the 
respectable  classes  of  a  well-regulated  society  there  is  little 
in  outward  walk  and  conduct  to  distinguish  the  merely 
respectable  from  the  most  anxiously  conscientious.  As 
a  rule,  it  will  only  be  to  a  man  already  pretty  thoroughly 
moralised  by  the  best  social  influences  that  it  will  occur  to 
reproach  himself  with  having  unworthy  motives  even  in 
irreproachable  conduct ;  and,  as  a  rule,  when  such  a  man 
comes  thus  to  reproach  himself  in  presence  of  some  ideal 
of  a  perfect  Will,  he  will  already  have  been  fulfiUing,  under 
the  feeling  that  it  is  expected  of  him,  all  the  particular  duties 
which  the  consciousness  of  such  an  ideal  might  otherwise 
challenge  him  to  fulfil.  Unless  he  has  leisure  for  philan- 
thropy, or  a  gift  of  utterance,  there  will  be  little  in  outward 
act  to  distinguish  his  converted  state — if  we  may  so  describe 
the  state  in  which  he  learns  to  contrast  his  personal  un- 
worthiness  with  an  ideal  of  holiness — from  that  of  moral 
self-complacency,  in  which  he  may  have  previously  been 
living,  and  which  is  the  state  of  most  of  the  dutiful  citizens 
about  him. 

301.  If  we  could  watch  him  closely  enough,  indeed,  even 
in  outward  conduct  there  would  appear  to  be  a  difference. 
Doing  the  work  expected  of  him  '  not  with  eye-seuvice,  as 


360     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

a  man-pleaser,  but  in  singleness  of  heart,  as  unto  the  Lord,' 
he  will  rise  to  a  higher  standard  of  doing  it.  Into  the 
duties  which  he  is  expected  to  fulfil  he  will  put  much  more 
meaning  than  is  put  by  those  who  claim  their  fulfilment, 
and  will  always  be  on  the  look-out  for  duties  which  no  one 
would  think  the  worse  of  him  for  not  recognising.  But  in 
so  doing,  he  probably  will  not  seem  to  himself  to  be  acting 
according  to  a  higher  standard  than  those  about  him.  And 
in  fact,  although  in  a  certain  sense  he  transcends  the  '  law 
of  opinion,'  of  social  expectation,  he  only  does  so  by  inter- 
preting it  according  to  its  higher  spirit.  That  law,  being, 
as  we  have  seen,  the  result  of  the  past  action  in  human  con- 
sciousness of  an  ideal  of  conduct,  will  yield  different  rules 
according  as  it  is  or  is  not  interpreted  by  a  consciousness 
under  the  same  influence.  It  speaks  with  many  voices 
according  as  men  have  ears  to  hear,  and  the  spirit  of  the 
conscientious  man  shows  itself  in  catching  the  purest  of 
them. .  He  is  like  a  judge  who  is  perpetually  making  new 
law  in  ostensibly  interpreting  the  old.  He  extracts  the 
higher  meaning  out  of  the  recognised  social  code,  giving' 
reality  to  some  requirements  which  it  has  hitherto  only 
contained  potentially.  He  feels  the  necessity  of  rules  of 
conduct  which,  though  they  necessarily  arise  out  of  that 
effort  to  make  human  life  perfect  which  has  brought  con- 
ventional morality  into  existence,  are  not  yet  a  recognised 
part  of  that  morality,  and  thus  have  no  authority  with  those 
whose  highest  motive  is  a  sense  of  what  is  expected  of  them. 
302.  This  is  true ;  but  it  is  not  merely  on  this  account — 
not  merely  on  account  of  certain  effects  in  outward  conduct 
which,  upon  sufificient  scrutiny,  it  might  be  found  to  yield — 
that  we  claim  for  the  temper  of  genuine  self-abasement  in 
presence  of  an  ideal  of  holiness  an  intrinsic  value,  the  same 
in  kind  with  that  which  all  would  ascribe  to  a  zeal  for  moral 
reform.  We  claim  such  a  value  for  it — a  value  independent 
of  any  that  it  might  possess  as  a  means  to  a  good  other 
than  itself — on  the  ground  that  it  is  a  component  influence 
in  the  perfect  human  life;    on  the  ground  that,  whatever 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  361 

the  universe  of  activities  in  which  that  life  displays  itself 
may  prove  to  be,  the  self-abasing,  which  is  also  the  aspiring 
or  God-seeking,  spirit,  must  always  be  their  source  and 
spring.  The  character  exhibited  by  the  moral  reformer  has 
a  like  value,  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  merely  a  means -to  the 
perfect  life,  but  a  phase  of  the  same  spiritual  principle  as 
must  govern  that  life.  But  whereas  we  cannot  but  suppose 
that,  if  the  perfect  life  of  mankind  were  attained,  this 
spiritual  principle  must  have  passed  out  of  the  phase  in 
which  it  can  appear  as  a  reforming  zeal — for  in  that  event 
there  could  no  longer  be  wrongs  to  redress,  or  indulged 
vices  to  eradicate — on  the  other  hand  we  cannot  suppose 
that,  while  human  life  remains  human  life,  it  can  even  in  its 
most  perfect  form  be  superior  to  the  call  for  self-abasement 
before  an  ideal  of  holiness. 

There  is  no  contradiction  in  the  supposition  of  a  human 
life  purged  of  vices  and  with  no  wrongs  left  to  set  right. 
It  is  indeed  merely  the  supposition  of  human  life  with  all 
its  capacities  realised.  In  such  a  life  the  question  of  the 
reformer.  What  ought  to  be  done  in  the  way  of  overt  action 
that  is  not  being  done?  would  no  longer  be  significant. 
But  so  long  as  it  is  the  life  of  men,  t.  e.  of  beings  who  are 
born  and  grow  and  die ;  in  whom  an  animal  nature  is  the 
vehicle  through  which  the  divine  self-realising  spirit  works ; 
in  whom  virtue  is  not  born  ready-made  but  has  to  be  formed 
(however  unfailing  the  process  may  come  to  be)  through 
habit  and  education  in  conflict  with  opposing  tendencies; 
so  long  the  contrast  must  remain  for  the  human  soul 
between  itself  and  the  infinite  spirit,  of  whom  it  must  be 
conscious,  as  present  to  itself  but  other  than  itself,  or  it 
would  not  be  the  human  soul.  The  more  complete  the 
realisation  of  its  capacities,  the  clearer  will  be  its  apprehen- 
sion at  once  of  its  own  infinity  in  respect  of  its  conscious- 
ness of  there  being  an  infinite  spirit— a  consciousness  which 
only  a  self-communication  of  that  spirit  could  convey — and 
of  its  finiteness  as  an  outcome  of  natural  conditions;  a 
finiteness  in  consequence  of  which  the  infinite  spirit  is  for 


362     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

ever  something  beyond  it,  still  longed  for,  never  reached. 
Towards  an  infinite  spirit,  to  whom  he  is  thus  related,  the 
attitude  of  man  at  his  highest  and  completest  could  still  be 
only  that  which  we  have  described  as  self-abasement  before 
an  ide"hl  of  holiness;  not  the  attitude  of  knowledge,  for 
knowledge  is  of  matters  of  fact  or  relations,  and  the  infinite 
spirit  is  neither  fact  nor  relation ;  not  the  attitude  of  full  and 
conscious  union,  for  that  the  limitation  of  human  nature 
prevents ;  but  the  same  attitude  of  awe  and  aspiration  which 
belongs  to  all  the  upward  stages  of  the  moral  life.  He 
must  think  of  the  infinite  spirit  as  better  than  the  best  that 
he  can  himself  attain  to,  but  (just  for  that  reason)  as  having 
an  assential  community  with  his  own  best.  And,  as  his  own 
best  rests  upon  a  self-devoted  will,  so  it  must  be  as  a  will, 
good  not  under  the  limitations  of  opposing  tendencies  but  in 
some  more  excellent,  though  not  by  us  positively  conceiv- 
able, way,  that  he  will  set  before  himself  the  infinite  spirit. 

303.  The  spiritual  act,  then,  which  in  different  aspects 
may  be  described  either  as  self-abasement  or  self-exaltation — 
the  act  in  which  the  heart  is  lifted  up  to  God,  in  which  the 
whole  inner  man  goes  forth  after  an  ideal  of  personal  holi- 
ness— this  act,  while  it  is  in  principle  one  with  the  whole 
course  of  man's  moral  endeavour,  may  be  deemed  in 
a  certain  sense  its  most  final  form,  because,  in  that  rest 
from  the  labour  of  baffled  and  disappointed  endeavour 
which  a  perfectly  ordered  society  might  be  supposed  to 
bring,  it  would  still  not  be  superseded.  Its  value  is  an 
intrinsic  value,  not  derived  from  any  result  beyond  itself  to 
which  it  contributes.  In  this  respect,  indeed,  it  does  not 
differ  from  any  other  expression  of  the  good  will.  If  it  differs 
apparently  from  the  more  obviously  practical  expressions 
of  such  a  will,  the  reason  is  that  these,  while  sharing  its 
intrinsic  value,  have  also  a  further  value,  as  means,  which  it 
does  not  seem  to  possess.  They  issue  in  sensible  ameliora- 
tions of  human  society.  But  these  very  ameliorations  are 
relative  to  that  intrinsic  good,  the  perfection  of  the  human 
soul,  of  which  the  heart  at  once  self-abased  and  aspiring  is 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  363 

itself  a  lasting  mode.  Whether  such  a  heart,  in  this  person 
or  that,  itself  issues  in  outward  'transient'  action  of  a 
noticeably  beneficent  kind,  will  depend  mainly  on  the  social 
surroundings,  and  on  the  intellectual  and  other  qualifica- 
tions of  the  particular  person.  If  these  in  any  case  are 
such  as  to  call  for  and  to  favour  a  large  amount  of  useful 
social  activity,  we  are  apt  under  the  impression  of  the  out- 
ward elfect  to  overlook  the  spiritual  principle  which  yields  it, 
and  which  may  be  the  same  in  another  person  otherwise 
circumstanced  and  gifted,  by  whom  no  such  apparent  effect  is 
produced.  We  praise  the  successful  reformer,  and  forget  that 
he  is  but  what  the  man  of  unnoticed  conscientious  goodness 
might  be  in  another  situation  and  with  other  opportunities. 

If  the  end  by  reference  to  which  moral  values  are  to  be 
judged  were  anything  but  the  perfect  life  itself,  as  resting 
on  a  devoted  will,  it  would  be  right  to  depreciate  the 
obscure  saint  by  the  side  of  the  man  to  whose  work  we 
can  point  in  the  redress  of  wrongs  and  the  purging  of  social 
vices.  But  if  the  supreme  value  for  man  is  what  we  take  it 
to  be — man  himself  in  his  perfection — then  it  is  idle  to 
contrast  the  more  observably  practical  type  of  goodness 
with  the  more  self-questioning  or  consciously  God-seeking 
type.  The  value  of  each  is  intrinsic  and  identical ;  for 
each  rests  on  a  heart  or  character  or  will  which,  however 
differently  it  may  come  to  be  exhibited  as  human  capacities 
come  to  be  more  fulfilled,  must  still  be  that  of  the  perfect 
man.  The  distinction  between  them,  as  looked  at  from 
the  point  of  view  from  which  moral  values  are  properly 
estimated,  is  mainly  accidental.  It  is  a  distinction  of  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  same  principle  of  action  is 
exercised.  Under  certain  conditions  of  society,  of  individual 
temperament  and  ability,  it  takes  the  one  form,  under  other 
conditions  the  other.  In  neither  form  is  it  barren  Of  effects  ; 
but  in  one  form  its  effects  are  more  overt  and  '  transient,' 
in  the  other  more  impalpable  and  'immanent.'  But  the 
one  order  of  effects  no  less  than  the  other  has  its  value  as 
a  means  to  that  perfect  life,  to  which  the  obscure  saint  and 


364     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

the  true  social  reformer  alike  are  not  merely  related  as 
a  means,  but  which  each  in  his  own  person,  under  whatever 
limitations,  represents. 

304.  From  these  considerations  we  return  to  the  enquiry 
out  of  which  they  have  arisen.  Having  distinguished  the 
question,  What  ought  to  be  done  ?  —  a  question  to  be 
answered  in  detail  by  examination  of  the  probable  effects  of 
contemplated  action — from  the  question,  What  should  I  be? 
— a  question  of  motives  and  character — we  pointed  out  that 
the  latter  question  might  properly  be  raised  by  a  man  with 
reference  to  his  own  actions,  past  or  prospective.  In  regard 
to  others  he  cannot  fully  know  what  the  motives  and  char- 
acter represented  by  any  particular  action  have  been  or  will 
be,  and  in  the  absence  of  such  knowledge  he  certainly  can- 
not be  blamable  for  declining  to  guess.  But  as  to  himself 
any  one  may  ask,  Was  I  what  I  should  have  been  in  doing 
so  and  so?  or,  Shall  I  in  doing  so  and  so  be  what  I  should 
be  ?  He  may  ask  such  a  question  reasonably,  because  it 
does  not  depend  on  the  amount  of  his  information,  or  on 
his  skill  in  analysis,  but  on  his  honesty  with  himself,  whether 
the  answer  shall  be  virtually  a  true  one.  But  will  he  for 
raising  such  questions,  and  raising  them  with  such  an  ideal 
of  virtue  before  him  as  has  been  above  indicated,  be  any 
the  wiser  as  to  what  he  ought  to  do,  or  any  the  more 
disposed  to  do  it? 

305.  Now  it  is  obvious  that,  though  he  put  such  questions 
to  himself  with  all  possible  earnestness,  he  will  not  for  doing 
so,  directly  at  any  rate,  be  the  better  judge  of  what  he  should 
do,  so  far  as  the  judgment  depends  on  correct  information 
or  inference  as  to  matters  of  facts,  or  on  a  correct  analysis 
of  circumstances.  But  a  man's  doubts  as  to  his  own  con- 
duct may  be  of  a  kind  which  such  information  and  analysis 
are  principally  needed  to  resolve.  He  may  be  asking  him- 
self such  questions  as  these :  Was  I  right  in  relieving  that 
beggar  yesterday  ?  Was  I  right  in  making  the  declaration 
required  on  taking  orders  ?  Was  I  right  in  voting  against 
the  Coercion  Act   last  session?     And  he  may  be  asking 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  365 

these  questions  about  himself  in  the  same  sense  in  which  he 
might  ask  them  about  the  actions  of  any  one  else,  or  in 
which  they  might  be  discussed  by  a  debating  society,  with- 
out any  reference  to  the  rnotives  or  character  represented 
by  the  acts  in  question.  The  supposition  that  any  one 
should  ask  such  questions  about  his  own  conduct  solely  in 
this  sense,  is  no  doubt  an  extreme  one.  He  could  not 
really  detach  himself  from  the  consideration  of  the  state  of 
mind,  better  or  worse,  which  led  him  to  act  as  he  did.  In 
relieving  the  beggar  was  he  not  merely  compounding  with 
his  conscience  for  his  self-indulgence  in  shirking  the  trouble 
which  a  more  judicious  exercise  of  benevolence  would  have 
cost  him  ;  or  merely  giving  himself  the  pleasure  of  momen. 
tarily  pleasing  another,  or  of  being  applauded  for  generosity, 
at  the  cost  of  encouraging  a  mischievous  practice?  In 
making  the  declaration  referred  to,  was  his  motive  a  pure 
desire  to  do  good  and  teach  the  truth,  or  was  he  affected  by 
any  desire  to  lead  a  comfortable  life,  combining  a  maximum 
of  reputation  for  usefulness  with  a  minimum  of  wear  and 
tear?  In  voting  against  the  Coercion  Act  was  he  at  all 
influenced  by  the  wish  to  please  an  important  fraction  of  his 
constituents,  or  by  a  pique  against  ministers  ?  It  is  scarcely 
possible  that  any  one,  at  all  honest  with  himself,  should 
consider  his  own  conduct  in  the  cases  supposed  without 
testing  it  by  some  such  questions  of  motive  as  these. 

But  when  the  fullest  and  most  honest  consideration  has 
been  given  them,  they  do  not  supersede  the  questions  of 
fact  and  circumstance  which  the  supposed  cases  necessarily 
involve.  The  man  could  not  measure  the  value  of  his  con- 
duct in  almsgiving,  in  taking  orders,  in  voting  against 
Coercion,  without  taking  account  of  the  effect  of  almsgiving 
in  general  and  in  the  particular  case ;  of  the  circumstances 
on  which  the  usefulness  of  the  Church,  and  the  relative 
truth  of  the  declarations  required  by  it,  depend ;  of  those 
conditions  of  social  life  in  general,  and  in  Ireland  specially, 
which  make  Coercion  a  necessity  or  a  political  evil.  For 
though  he  may  do  what  is  good  in  result  without  being 


366     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

good,  he  cannot  have  been  good  unless  he  has  done  what  is 
good  in  result.  The  question  whether  he  has  done  what  he 
ought  in  any  particular  case  may  be  answered  in  the 
affirmative  without  its  following  that  he  has  been  what  he 
ought  to  be  in  doing  it ;  but  unless  it  can  be  so  answered 
he  may  not  assume  that  he  has  been  what  he  ought  to  be. 
And  in  order  to  answer  it  in  such  cases  as  we  have  been 
supposing,  with  due  reference  to  circumstances  and  effects, 
that  sort  of  knowledge  and  penetration  is  required  which 
the  most  anxious  self-interrogation,  the  most  genuine  self- 
abasement,  will  not  directly  supply. 

306.  But,  it  will  be  objected,  this  admission  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  statement  just  now  made,  that  a  true  answer 
to  the  question,  Was  I  what  I  should  have  been  in  doing  so 
and  so  ?  depends  not  on  the  amount  of  a  man's  information, 
but  on  his  honesty  with  himself.  It  now  appears  that 
a  man  cannot  have  been  what  he  should  have  been  in  doing 
any  action,  unless  the  action  was  of  a  kind  to  yield  good 
results,  and  that  the  correctness  of  a  man's  judgment  in 
certain  cases  on  this  latter  point  depends  not  on  his  honesty 
with  himself,  but  on  his  knowledge  and  powers  of  analysis. 
How  are  the  two  statements  to  be  reconciled  ?  An  explana- 
tion of  this  point  will  bring  out  the  true  function  and  value 
of  the  self-questioning  conscience. 

If  the  function  of  the  conscience  in  challenging  me  with 
the  question.  Was  I  what  I  should  have  been  in  doing  this 
or  that  ?  were  to  arrive  at  a  precise  estimate  of  the  worth  of 
my  conduct  in  the  particular  case,  the  consideration  of  the 
effects  of  the  action  could  be  as  little  dispensed  with  as  that 
of  its  motives.  To  make  my  conduct  perfectly  good,  it 
would  be  necessary  that  the  effects  of  the  act  should  be 
purely  for  good,  according  to  the  true  standard  of  good, 
as  well  as  that  my  interest  in  doing  it  should  be  purely 
an  interest  in  that  good.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that 
the  exact  measure  in  which  my  conduct  has  fallen  short 
of  this  unattainable  perfection,  till  we  can  see  all  moral 
effects  in  their  causes,  cannot  be  speculatively  ascertained.; 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  367 

nor  is  it  of  practical  importance  to  attempt  its  ascertainment. 
What  is  of  importance  is  that  I  should  keep  alive  that  kind 
of  sense  of  shortcoming  in  my  motives  and  character,  which 
is  the  condition  of  aspiration  and  progress  towards  higher 
goodness.  And  to  this  end,  while  the  question  whether 
I  have  been  duly  patient  and  considerate  and  unbiassed  by 
passion  or  self-interest  in  taking  account  of  the  probable 
consequences  of  my  act,  is  an  essential  question — a  question 
which  it  only  needs  that  I  should  be  honest  with  myself, 
not  clever  or  well-informed,  to  answer— the  question  how 
the  action  has  turned  out  in  respect  of  consequences  which 
I  had  not  the  requisite  knowledge  or  ability  to  foresee,  may 
be  left  aside  without  practical  harm.  If  indeed  the  question 
as  to  motives  and  character,  honestly  dealt  with,  could  leave 
me  under  the  impression  that  in  doing  so  and  so,  I  was  all 
thati  should  have  been,  it  would  be  important  for  me  to  be 
reminded  that  the  action  may  have  had  evil  consequences 
which  I  did  not  foresee — perhaps  in  my  dulness  and  ignor- 
ance could  not  foresee — but  which  yet  are  part  of  my  act. 
But  just  because  the  question  of  motives  and  character, 
honestly  dealt  with,  is  incompatible  with  self-complacency 
in  the  contemplation  of  any  piece  of  past  conduct,  its  moral 
function  is  fully  served  without  supplementary  enquiry  into 
unforeseen  consequences  of  the  conduct.  It  is  a  sufficient 
spring  for  the  endeavour  after  a  higher  goodness  that 
I  should  be  ashamed  of  my  selfishness,  indolence,  or  im- 
patience, without  being  ashamed  also  of  my  ignorance  and 
want  of  foresight.  Without  the  former  sort  of  shame,  the 
latter,  if  it  could  be  engendered,  would  be  morally  barren ; 
while,  given  that  personal  endeavour  after  the  highest  which 
is  the  other  side  of  self-abasement,  this  will  turn  the  pro- 
ducts of  intellectual  enlightenment  and  scientific  discovery, 
as  they  come,  to  account  in  the  way  of  contribution  to 
human  perfection.     It  will  do  this,  and  nothing  else  will. 

307.  If  we  are  called  on  to  say,  then,  whether  a  man  will 
.be  any  the  wiser  as  to  what  he  ought  to  do,  or  aiiy  the  more 
disposed  to  do  it,  for  applying  an  ideal  of  virtue  to  his  o^^^n 


368     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

conduct  in  the  form  of  the  question,  Was  I  in  this  or  that 
piece  of  conduct  what  I  should  be  ?  we  must  point  out  that 
this  question  itself  expresses  the  source  of  all  wisdom  as  to 
what  we  ought  to  do.  It  expresses  the  aspiration,  the  effort, 
in  man  to  be  the  best  that  he  has  it  in  him  to  be,  from  which 
is  ultimately  derived  the  thought  that  there  is  something 
which  ought  to  be  done,  and  the  enquiry  what  in  particular 
it  is.  It  represents  the  quest  for  right  conduct,  as  carried 
on  by  the  individual  under  that  sense  of  personal  responsi- 
bility for  doing  the  best,  for  attaining  the  highest,  which  can 
alone  make  him  a  reformer  of  his  own  practice  or  of  the 
practice  of  others.  It  is  true  indeed  that  no  recognition  of 
an  ideal  of  virtue,  however  pure  and  high,  no  such  incite- 
ment to  the  reform  of  oneself  and  one's  neighbour  as  a  com- 
parison of  the  ideal  with  current  practice  can  afford,  will 
enlighten  us  as  to  the  effect  of  different  kinds  of  action  upon 
the  welfare  of  society,  whether  that  welfare  be  estimated 
with  reference  to  a  maximum  of  possible  pleasure,  or  to  an 
end  which  the  realisation  of  a  good  will  itself  constitutes. 
As  it  stands  before  the  mind  of  any  particular  person,  the 
ideal  will  not  directly  yield  an  injunction  to  do  anything  in 
particular  which  is  not  in  his  mind  already  associated  with 
good  results,  nor  to  abstain  from  anything  which  is  not 
already  associated  with  evil  results.  But  while  it  will  not 
immediately  instruct  him  as  to  the  physical  or  social  conse- 
quences of  action,  and  through  such  instruction  yield  new 
commands,  it  will  keep  him  on  the  look-out  for  it,  will  open 
his  mind  to  it,  will  make  him  ready,  as  soon  as  it  comes,  to 
interpret  the  instruction  into  a  personal  duty.  The  agents 
in  imparting  the  instruction  may  be  analysts  and  experi- 
menters, to  whom  the  ideal  of  virtue  is  of  little  apparent 
concern — who  seldom  trouble  themselves  with  the  question 
whether  they  are  what  they  should  be — though,  uiiless  in 
their  intellectual  employment  they  were  controlled  by  an 
ideal  of  perfect  work,  they  would  not  prove  the  instructors 
of  mankind.  But  when  the  instruction  has  been  conveyed, 
the  self-imposed  imperative  to  turn  it  to  account  for  the 


CH.  l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  369 

bettering  of  life  remains  to  be  given ;  and  it  is  only  from 
a  conscience  responsive  to  an  ideal  of  virtue  that  it  can  pro- 
ceed. The  lesson,  for  instance,  of  the  mischief  done  by 
indiscriminate  almsgiving,  or  by  the  sale  of  spirits,  may  have 
been  most  plainly  taught  by  social  or  physical  analysis,  but 
it  would  be  practically  barren  unless  certain  persons,  each 
under  a  consciousness  of  responsibility  for  making  the  best 
of  himself  as  a  social  being,  charged  themselves  with  the  task 
of  getting  the  lesson  put  into  practice  by  society. 

308.  The  notion  that  an  ideal  of  virtue  must  be  barren 
in  the  suggestion  of  particular  duties  previously  unrecogr 
nised,  has  probably  arisen  from  the  necessity  of  expressing 
it  verbally  in  the  form  of  a  definition  or  of  a  general 
proposition.  From  such  a  proposition  as  'the  true  good 
for  man  is  the  realisation  of  his  capabilities,  or  the  perfect- 
ing of  human  life,'  or  '  the  good  will  is  a  will  which  has  such 
perfection  for  its  object,' — or,  again,  from  a  definition  of 
any  particular  form  of  the  good  will,  of  any  specific  virtue 
— we  may  be  fairly  challenged  to  deduce  any  particular 
obligation  but  such  as  is  already  included  in  the /notions 
represented  by  the  terms  which  stand  as  the  subjects  of 
these  several  propositions.  From  a  knowledge  that  the 
true  good,  the  good  will,  the  specific  virtues,  are  as  defined, 
no  one  will  come  to  be  aware  of  any  particular  duties  of 
which  he  was  not  aware  before  he  arrived  at  the  definitions. 
The  most  that  can  be  said  (of  which  more  below)  will  be 
that  such  definitions  may  put  him  on  his  guard  against  gelt 
sophistications,  which  might  otherwise  obscure  to  him, the 
clearness  of  admitted  duties.  If  the  practical  consciousness; 
which  we  name  an  ideal  of  virtue,  were  no  more  than  the 
speculative  judgment  embodied  in  a  definition  of  the  ideal, 
or  than  speculative  reflection  upon  the  ideal,  the  same 
admission  would  have  to  be  made  in  regard  to  it.  But  it  is 
much  more  than  this;  .or,  rather,  it  does  not  primarily  in- 
volve any  such  speculative  judgment  at  all,  but  only  comes 
to  involve  such  a  judgment  as  a  secondary  result  of  that 
aspiration  in  men  after  a  possible  best  of  life  and  character, 

Bb 


370     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  iY 

which  primarily,  constitutes  the  consciousness  of  the  ideal. 
Before  a  definition  of  the  ideal  can  be  possible,  this  aspi- 
ration must  have  taken  effect  in  the  ordering  of  life ;  and  it 
is  reflection  On  the  product  which  it  has  thus  yielded  that 
suggests  general  statements  as  to  the  various  virtues,  and 
as  to  some  supreme  virtue ;  ultimately,  as  intellectual  needs 
increase,  formal  definitions  of  virtue  and  the  virtues. 

But  the  acquaintance  of  educated  men  with  such  defini- 
tions, the  employment  of  the  analytical  intellect  upon  them, 
is  very  different  from  what  we  mean  by  the  practical  con- 
sciousness of  the  moral  ideal.  This  implies  the  continued 
action  in  the  individual  of  the  same  spiritual  principle  that 
has  yielded  those  forms  of  life  and  character  which  form 
the  subject  of  our  moral  definitions ;  its  continued  action 
as  at  once  compelling  dissatisfaction  with  the  imperfection 
of  those  forms,  and  creating  a  sensibility  to  the  suggestions 
of  a  further  perfecting  of  life  which  they  contain.  A  defini- 
tion of  virtue,  a  theory  of  the  good,  is  quite  a  different 
thing,  in  presence  of  such  a  living  inward  interpreter,  from 
what  it  would  be  as  an  abstract  proposition.  A  proposition 
of  geometry,  from  which  by  mere  analysis  no  truth  could 
be  derived  which  was  not  already  contained  in  it,  becomes 
fertile  of  new  truth  when  applied  by  the  geometer  to  a  new 
construction.  A  rule  of  law,  barren  to  mere  analysis,  yields 
new  rules  when  interpreted  by  the  judge  in  application  to 
new  cases.  And  thus  a  general  ethical  proposition,  which 
by  itself  is  merely  a  record  of  past  moral  judgments,  and 
from  which  by  mere  analysis  no  rules  of  conduct  could  be 
derived  but  such  as  have-  been  already  accepted  and  em- 
bodied in  it,  becomes  a  source  of  new  practical  direction 
when  applied  by  a  conscience,  working  under  a  felt  necessity 
of  seeking  the  best,  to  circumstances  previously  not  existent 
or  not  considered,  or  to  some  new  lesson  of  experience. 

309.  Our  conclusion,  then,  is  that  the  state  of  mind  which 
is  now  most  naturally  expressed  by  the  unspoken  questions. 
Have  I  been  what  I  should  be,  shall  I  be  what  I  should  be, 
in  doing  so  and  so?   is  that  in  which  all  moral  progress 


CH.l]  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  371 

originates.  It  must  have  preceded  the  formation  of  definite 
ideals  of  character,  as  well  as  any  articulation  of  the  distinc- 
tion between  outward  action  and  its  motives.  It  is  no  other 
than  the  sense  of  personal  responsibility  for  making  the  best 
of  themselves  in  the  family,  the  tribe,  or  the  state,  which 
must  have  actuated  certain  persons,  many  or  few,  in  order 
to  the  establishment  and  recognition  of  any  moral  standards 
whatever.  Given  such  standards,  it  is  the  spirit  which  at 
once  demands  from  the  individual  a  loyal  conformity  to 
them,  and  disposes  him,  upon  their  suggestion,  to  construct 
for  himself  an  ideal  of  virtue,  of  personal  goodness,  higher 
than  they  explicitly  contain.  The  action  of  such  an  ideal, 
in  those  stages  of  moral  development  with  which  we  are 
now  familiar,  is  the  essential  condition  of  all  further  better- 
ing of  human  life.  Its  action  is  of  course  partial  in  various 
degrees  of  partiality.  It  may  appear  as  a  zeal  for  public 
service  on  the  part  of  some  one  not  careful  enough  about 
the  correctness  of  his  own  life,  or  on  the  other  hand  in  the 
absorbed  religious  devotion  of  the  saintly  recluse.  In  the 
average  citizen  it  may  appear  only  as  the  influence  which 
makes  him  conscientious  in  the  discharge  of  work  which 
he  would  not  suffer  except  in  conscience  for  neglecting,  or 
as  the  voice,  fitfully  heard  within,  which  gives  meaning  to 
the  announcement  of  a  perfect  life  lived  for  him  and  some- 
how to  be  made  his  own.  Taking  human  society  together, 
its  action  m  one  mode  supplements  its  action  in  another,  and 
the  whole  sum  of  its  action  forms  the  motive  power  of  true 
moral  development ;  which  means  the  apprehension  on  our 
part,  ever  widening  and  ever  filling  and  ever  more  fully 
responded  to  in  practice,  of  our  possibilities  as  men  and 
of  the  reciprocal  claims  and  duties  which  those  possibilities 
imply. 


B  b  2 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  A  THEORY  OF  THE  MORAL  IDEAL 

310.  Supposing  the  considerations  with  which  the  last 
chapter  ended  to  be  admitted,  we  have  still  only  convinced 
ourselves  of  the  supreme  value  which  belongs  to  an  ideal 
of  personal  goodness,  as  a  principle  of  action.  The  value 
of  a  certain  theory  of  the  ideal,  of  such  a  doctrine  of  the 
good  and  of  goodness  as  has  been  previously  sketched  in 
this  treatise,  is  a  different  question.  It  was  this  that  we 
undertook  to  consider,  and  this  we  have  so  far  not  directly 
touched.  Having  taken  the  ideal  to  be  a  devotion  of  char- 
acter and  life  in  some  form  or  other  to  the  perfecting  of 
man ;  having  insisted  that  this  perfection  is  to  be  understood 
as  itself  consisting  in  a  life  of  such  self-devoted  activity  on 
the  part  of  all  persons;  we  undertook  to  enquire  what  avail- 
able criterion  of  right  and  wrong  such  a  theory  could  afford; 
how,  applied  to  the  circumstances  of  life,  it  could  be  con- 
strued into  particular  duties,  so  as  to  give  us  some  general 
guide  to  the  line  of  conduct  we  should  adopt  where  conven- 
tional morality  fails  us.  This  enquiry,  it  may  be  fairly  said, 
is  not  met  by  dwelling  on  the  effect  of  a  moral  ideal,  which 
need  not  be,  and  generally  is  not,  accompanied  by  any  clear 
theory  of  itself,  in  awakening  the  individual  to  a  recognition 
of  new  duties,  as  new  situations  arise  and  new  experience  is 
acquired.  The  most  genuine  devotion  to  the  highest  ideal 
of  goodness  will  not  save  a  man  from  occasional  perplexity 
as  to  the  right  line  of  action  for  him  to  take.  If  it  seems  to 
do  so,  it  will  only  be  because,  not  being  the  highest  kind  of 
devotion,  it  makes  him  confident  in  merely  traditional  or 
inconsiderate  judgments.  If  the  perplexity  were  one  which 
admitted  of  being  put  in  the  form,  Shall  I  be  acting  accord- 
ing to  my  ideal  of  virtue,  or  as  a  good  man  should,  in  doing 
so  and  so?  a  true  devotion  to  the  ideal  might  guide  him 


PRACTICAL  VALUE  OP  MORAL  THEORY       373 

through  it.  But  in  that  case,  it  may  be  argued,  the  practical 
action  of  the  ideal  itself  is  enough.  A  theory  about  it,  a 
philosophy  of  the  true  good,  is  superfluous.  But  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  conscientious  man's  perplexity  arises  either 
from  a  conflict  between  two  authorities  which  seem  to  have 
equal  claims  on  his  obedience,  or  from  doubt  as  to  the  effect 
of  different  courses  of  contemplated  action,  while  mere 
devotion  to  the  ideal  will  not  clear  his  path  before  him,  of 
what  avail  will  be  any  instruction  that  we  could  give  him  in 
accordance  with  our  theory  of  the  good  and  of  goodness  ? 

311.  The  discussion  of  this  question  has  been  advisedly 
postponed  till  we  had  considered  the  practical  effect  of  an 
ideal  of  goodness,  as  possessing  a  man  who  may  as  yet  be 
unacquainted  with  any  philosophical  theories  about  it.  Any 
value  which  a  true  moral  theory  may  have  for  the  direction 
of  conduct  depends  on  its  being  applied  and  interpreted  by 
a  mind  which  the  ideal,  as  a  practical  principle,  already 
actuates.  And  it  will  be  as  well  at  once  to  admit  that  the 
value  must  in  any  case  be  rather  negative  than  positive ; 
rather  in  the  way  of  deliverance  from  the  moral  anarchy 
which  an  apparent  conflict  between  duties  equally  imperative 
may  bring  about,  or  of  providing  a  safeguard  against  the 
pretext  which  in  a  speculative  age  some  inadequate  and  mis- 
applied theory  may  afford  to  our  selfishness,  than  in  the  way 
of  pointing  out  duties  previously  ignored.  This  latter  service 
must  always  be  rendered  by  the  application  of  a  mind,  which 
the  ideal  possesses,  to  new  situations,  to  experience  newly 
acquired  or  newly  analysed,  rather  than  by  reflection  on  any 
theory  of  the  ideal.  Whether  a  mind  so  possessed  and  ap- 
plied is  philosophically  instructed  or  no,  is  in  most  circum- 
stances matter  of  indifference.  One  is  sometimes,  indeed, 
tempted  to  think  that  Moral  Philo^apfay  i&  only  needed  to 
remedy  the  evils  which  it  has  itself  caused;  that  if  men  were 
not  constrained  by  a  necessity  of  their  intellectual  nature  to 
give  abstract  expression  to  their  ideals,  the  particular  mis- 
leading suggestions,  against  which  a  true  jjhilosophy  is  needed 
to  guard,  would  not  be  forthcoming. 


374     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL   THEORY    [bK.  IV 

For  these  suggestions  chiefly  arise  from  the  inadequacy 
of  the  formulae  in  which  requirements  imposed  by  a  really 
valuable  ideal  have  found  intellectual  expression.  Under 
influence  of  such  an  ideal  institutions  and  rules  of  life  are 
formed,  essential  for  their  time  and  turn,  but  not  fitted  to 
serve  as  the  foundation  of  a  universally  binding  prescription. 
The  generalising  intellect,  however,  requires  their  embodi- 
ment in  universal  rules  j  and  when  these  are  found  to 
conflict  with  each  other,  or  with  some  demand  of  the  self- 
realising  spirit  which  has  not  yet  found  expression  in  a 
recognised  rule,  the  result  is  an  intellectual  perplexity,  of 
which  our  lower  nature  is  quite  ready  to  take  advantage. 
Blind  passion  is  enlisted  in  the  cause  of  the  several  rules. 
Egoistic  interests  are  ready  to  turn  any  of  them  to  account, 
or  to  find  an  excuse  for  indulgence  in  what  seems  to  be 
their  neutralisation  of  each  other.  Meanwhile  perhaps 
some  nobler  soul  takes  up  that  position  of  self-outlawry 
which  Wordsworth  expresses  in  the  words  put  into  Rob 
Roy's  month  : — 

We  have  a  passion— make  a  law, 
Too  false  to  guide  us  or  control ! 
And  for  the  law  itself  we  fight 
In  bitterness  of  soul. 

And,  puzzled,  blinded  thus,  we  lose 
Distinctions  that  are  plain  and  few ; 
These  find  I  graven  on  my  heart ; 
That  tells  me  what  to  do. 

For  deliverance  from  this  state  of  moral  anarchy,  which  in 
various  forms  recurs  whenever  a  sufficient  liberation  of  the 
intellectual  faculties  has  been  attained,  there  is  needed  a 
further  pursuit  of  the  same  speculative  processes  which  have 
brought  it  about.  As  has  just  been  said,  no  good  will  come 
of  this,  unless  under  the  direction  of  a  genuine  interest  in 
the  perfecting  of  man ;  but,  given  this  interest,  it  is  only 
through  philosophy  that  it  can  be  made  independent  of  the 
tonflicting,  because  inadequate,  formulae  in  which  duties  are 
presented  to  it,  and  saved  from  distraction  between  rival 


CH.  u]     PRACTICAL  VALVE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     375 

authorities,  of  which  the  injunctions  seem  at  once  absolute 
and  irreconcilablej  because  their  origin  is  not  understood. 

312.  But  philosophy  itself  in  its  results  may  yield  oppor- 
tunity to  a  self-excusing  egoism.     The  formulae  in  which 
it  expresses  conceptions  of  moral  ends  and  virtues  must 
always  be  liable  to  proVe  misleading,  in  the  absence  of  that 
living  interest  in  a  practically  true  ideal  which  can  alone 
elicit  their  higher    significance.     They  are  generated   in 
intellectual  antagonism  and   must   always  probably  retain 
the  marks  of  their  origin.     Those  which  have  served  the 
purpose  of  enabling  men  to  see  behind  and  beyond  their 
own  moral  prejudices  or  some  absolute  authoritative  asser- 
tion of  a  merely  relative  duty,  have  not  themselves  conveyed 
complete  and  final  truth.     If  they  had  done  so,  it  would 
still  have  been  a  truth  that  could  only  be  made  instructive 
for  men's  guidance  in  their  moral  vocation,  if  applied  to  the 
particulars  of  life  by  a  mind  bent  on  the  highest.     But  in 
fact  the  best  practical  philosophy  of  any  age  has  never  been 
more  than  an  assertion  of  partial  truths,  which  had  some 
special   present  function  to   fulfil   in   the    deliverance  or 
defence  of  the  human  soul.     When  they  have  done  their 
work,  these  truths  become  insufficient  for  the  expression  of 
the  highest  practical  convictions  operating  in  man,  while 
the  speculative  intellect,  if  enlisted  in  the  service  of  the 
pleasure-seeking  nature,  can   easily  extract  excuses   from 
them  for  evading  the  cogency  of  those  convictions.     But 
the  remedy  for  this  evil  is  still  not  to  be  found  in  the 
abandonment   of  philosophy,   but  in   its    further   pursuit. 
The. spring  of  all  moral  progress,  indeed,  can  still  lie  no- 
where else  than  in  the  attraction  of  heart  and  will  by  the 
ideal  of  human  perfection,  and  in  the  practical  convictions 
which  arise  from  it ;  but  philosophy  will  still  be  needed  as 
the  interpreter  of  practical  conviction,   and  it  can  itself 
alone  provide  for  the  adequacy  of  the  interpretation. 

313.  This  general  account  of  the  practical  function  which 
a  philosophy  of  conduct  has  to  serve  will  probably  carry 
more  conviction,  if  we  consider  some  particular  forms  of 


376      PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

perplexity  as  to  right  conduct  in  which  philosophy  might 
be  of  service,  and  again  some  instances  of  the  oppprtunity 
which  an  inadequate  philosophy  may  offer  to  egoistic  ten- 
dencies. A  previous  reminder,  however,  may  be  needed 
that  a  case  of  perplexity  as  to  right  conduct,  if  it  is  to  be 
one  in  which  philosophy  can  serve  a  useful  purpose,  must 
be  one  of  bona  fide  perplexity  of  conscience.  Now  the 
margin  within  which  such  perplexities  can  arise  in  a  Christian 
society  is  not  really  very  large.  The  effort  after  an  ideal 
of  conduct  has  so  far  taken  effect  in  the  establishment  of 
a  recognised  standard  of  what  is  due  from  man  to  man,  that 
the  articulation  of  the  general  imperative,  '  Do  what  is  best 
for  mankind  V  into  particular  duties  is  sufficiently  clear  and 
full  for  the  ordinary  occasions  of  life.  In  fulfilling  the 
duties  which  would  be  recognised  as  belonging  to  his  station 
in  life  by  any  one  who  considered  the  matter  dispassionately, 
without  bias  by  personal  inclination — in  fulfilling  them 
loyally,  without  shirking,  'not  with  eye-service  as  men- 
pleasers,' — we  can  seldom  go  wrong ;  and  when  we  have 
done  this  fully,  there  will  seldom  be  much  more  that  we 
can  do.  The  function  of  bringing  home  these  duties  to  the 
consciences  of  men — of  helping  them  to  be  honest  with 
themselves  in  their  recognition  and  interpretation  of  them — 
is  rather  that  of  the  preacher  than  of  the  philosopher. 
Speculatively  there  is  much  for  the  philosopher  to  do  in  ex- 
amining how  that  ordering  of  life  has  arisen,  to  which  these 
duties  are  relative ;  what  is  the  history  of  their  recognition  ; 
what  is  the  rationale  of  them ;  what  is  the  most  correct  ex- 
pression for  the  practical  ideas  which  underlie  them.  And, 
as  we  shall  see,  there  may  be  circumstances  which  give  this 
speculative  enquiry  a  practical  value.  These  circumstances, 
however,  must  always  be  exceptional.  Ordinarily  it  will  be 
an  impertinence  for  the  philosopher  to  pretend  either  to  sup- 
plement or  to  supersede  those  practical  directions  of  conduct, 

'  I  use  this  as  a  fair  popular  equivalent  of  Kant's  formula — 'Treat 
humanity,  whether  in  your  person  or  in  that  of  another,  never  merely 
as  a  means,  always  at  the  same  time  as  an  end.' 


CH.  II]  PERPLEXITY   OF  CONSCIENCE  377 

which  are  supplied  by  the  duties  of  his  station  to  any  one 
who  is  free  from  any  selfish  interest  in  ignoring  them. 

314.  Perplexity  of  conscience,  properly  so  called,  seems 
always  to  arise  from  conflict  between  different  formulae  for 
expressing  the  ideal  of  good  in  human  conduct,  or  between 
different  institutions  for  furthering  its  realisation,  which  have 
alike  obtained  authority  over  men's  minds  without  being  in- 
trinsically entitled  to  more  than  a  partial  and  relative  obe- 
dience ;  or  from  the  incompatibility  of  some  such  formula  or 
institution,  on  the  one  side,  with  some  moral  impulse  of  the 
individual  on  the  other,  which  is  really  an  impulse  towards 
the  attainment  of  human  perfection,  but  cannot  adjust  itself 
to  recognised  rules  and  established  institutions.  From  the 
perplexities  thus  occasioned  we  must  distinguish  those  that 
arise  from  difficulty  in  the  analysis  of  circumstances  or  in  the 
forecast  of  the  effects  of  actions.  These  are  to  be  met,  no 
doubt,  by  an  exercise  of  the  intellect,  but  by  its  exercise 
rather  in  the  investigation  of  matters  of  fact  than  by  that 
reflection  upon  ideas  which  is  properly  called  philosophy. 

From  both  kinds  of  practical  perplexity  again  are  to  be 
distinguished  those  self-sophistications  which  arise  from  a 
desire  to  find  excuses  for  gratifying  unworthy  inclinations. 
Such  self-sophistications,  we  know,  will  often  dignify  them- 
selves with  the  title  of  cases  of  conscience ;  and  the  disrepute 
which  has  fallen  upon  '  casuistry '  has  been  partly  due  to  its 
having  often  been  employed  in  their  service.  A  man  will 
pretend  to  be  perplexed  with  a  case  of  conscience,  when 
really  he  is  wishing  to  make  out  that  some  general  rule 
of  conduct  does  not  apply  to  him,  because  its  fulfilment 
would  cause  him  trouble,  or  because  it  conflicts  with  some 
passion  which  he  wishes  to  indulge.  Most  cases  in  which 
we  argue  that  circumstances  modify  for  us  the  obligation  to 
veracity  are  of  this  kind.  When  such  is  the  source  of  the 
'perplexity,'  it  is  not  the  most  perfect  philosophy,  the 
completest  possible  theory  of  the  moral  ideal,  that  will  be  of 
avail  for  deliverance  from  it.  Just  so  far  as  the  character 
is  formed  to  disinterested  loyalty  to  the  moral  law,  however 


378     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

imperfectly  the  law  may  be  conceived,  it  will  brush  aside 
the  fictitious  embarrassment.  As  Kant  puts  it,  that  emotion 
which  on  one  side  is  '  Achtung '  for  the  moral  law,  on  the 
other  is  '  Verachtung '  for  one's  selfish  inclinations.  Such  an 
emotion  may  not  save  a  man  from  many  concessions  to  his 
own  weakness,  but  it  will  make  him  refuse  with  contempt  to 
resort  to  casuistry  for  their  justification.  He  may  be  en- 
lightened enough  to  appreciate  the  relativity  of  most  general 
rules  of  conduct,  to  understand  that  they  admit  of  exceptions 
according  to  circumstances,  but  he  will  despise  the  suggestion 
of  an  exception  to  them  in  his  own  favour — an  exception  in 
order  to  save  himself  pain  or  gain  himself  pleasure.  This 
sort  of  self-contempt  affords  a  short  method  of  settling  ques- 
tions to  which  the  speculative  intellect,  if  once  it  so  far  enlists 
itself  in  the  service  of  passion  as  to  treat  them  seriously,  will 
'  find  no  end,  in  wandering  mazes  lost.' 

315.  There  may  be  cases,  however,  in  which  the  difficulty 
felt  in  adhering  to  a  general  rule,  such  as  that  of  veracity, 
arises  from  an  impulse  entitled  in  itself  to  as  much  respect 
as  the  conscientious  injunction  to  adhere  to  the  rule.  A 
famous  example  is  the  temptation  of  Jeannie  Deans  to  give 
false  evidence  on  a  single  point  for  the  sake,  of  saving  her 
sister,  of  whose  substantial  innocence  she  is  assured.  In 
such  a  case  would  Moral  Philosophy,  if  it  could  gain  a  hear- 
ing, have  any  direction  to  give  to  the  perplexed  person  ?  He 
is  asking  himself,  Shall  I  in  this  case  be  acting  as  I  ought, 
as  a  good  man  should,  in  adhering  to  the  strict  rule  of  veracity, 
or  in  departing  from  it  to  save  the  beloved  person  from 
a  punishment  which  I  know  to  be  undeserved  ?  Whatever 
the  principle  of  our  Moral  Philosophy,  can  it  help  in  answer- 
ing the  question  ?  The  Utilitarian  theory,  which  is  apt  to 
take  credit  to  itself  for  special  practical  availability,  can  here 
have  no  counsel  to  give.  For  by  what  possible  calculus  could 
the  excess,  on  the  whole,  of  pleasure  over  pain  or  of  pain  over 
pleasure,  to  be  expected  from  adherence  to  the  rule  of  vera- 
city, be  balanced  against  the  excess  of  pleasure  over  pain  or 
of  pain  over  pleasure,  to  be  expected  in  the  particular  case 


CH.  ll]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  379 

from  its  violation  ?  But  if  we  suppose  the  question  to  be 
dealt  with  according  to  the  principles  advocated  in  this 
treatise,  we  do  not  escape  embarrassment.  How  shall  the 
perplexed  person  say  whether  the  motive  which  suggests 
adherence  to  the  rule  of  veracity,  or  that  which  suggests 
departure  from  it,  is  the  worthier  of  the  two  ?  A  true  Moral 
Philosophy  does  not  recognise  any  value  in  conformity  to 
a  universal  rule,  simply  as  such,  but  only  in  that  which  ordin- 
arily  issues  in  such  conformity,  viz.  the  readiness  to  sacrifice 
every  lower  inclination  in  the  desire  to  do  right  for  the  sake 
of  doing  it.  But  in  the  case  supposed,  may  not  the  desire 
to  save  the  beloved  person,  known  to  be  substantially  inno- 
cent, claim  to  be  a  disinterested  desire  to  do  right  equally 
with  a  determination  to  adhere  to  the  strict  rule  of  veracity  ? 

316.  If  the  moral  philosopher  were  called  on  to  answer 
this  question  as  a  matter  of  general  speculation,  not  for  the 
guidance  of  a  particular  person  in  a  particular  case,  he 
would  have  to  say  that  it  did  not  admit  of  being  answered 
with  a  simple  '  yes '  or  '  no.'  For  purposes  of  moral 
valuation  neither  the  desire  to  save  the  life  of  the  beloved 
person,  nor  the  determination  at  any  cost  to  adhere  to  the 
rule  of  strict  veracity,  can  be  detached  from  the  relation 
which  it  bears  to  the  whole  history  of  a  life,  to  the  universe 
of  a  character ;  and  this  relation  is  not  in  any  case  ascer- 
tainable by  us.  Of  two  men,  placed  in  precisely  similar 
perplexities,  one  might  adhere  to  the  rule  of  veracity  at  the 
cost  of  sacrificing  the  life  of  a  beloved  and  innocent  person, 
the  other  might  save  the  person  at  the  cost  of  violating  the 
rule  of  veracity,  and  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  moral 
philosopher  to  say  which  action  were  the  better  or  the  worse 
of  the  two ;  because  he  would  not  know  in  regard  to  either 
that  spiritual  history  upon  which  its  moral  value  depends. 

If  on  the  other  hand  (an  unlikely  supposition)  he  had  to 
assist  the  perplexed  conscience'  in  deciding  between  the 

'  [The  expression  'perplexed  conscience''  would  probably  have  been 
modified  on  revision,  in  accordance  with  the  distinctions  laid  down  in 
§  321-] 


380     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bK.  IV 

alternative  actions  in  such  a  case  as  that  supposed,  he  would 
have  to  press  the  question  whether  it  is  not  at  bottom  some 
personal  weakness  which  suggests  the  departure  from  the 
ordinary  moral  rule  ;  whether  it  is  really  a  greater  devotion  to 
the  beloved  person  that  suggests  a  falsehood  for  her  sake, 
and  not  perhaps  a  backwardness  to  serve  her  in  some  more 
difficult  and  dangerous  way,  in  which  she  might  still  be 
served  though  she  had  to  bear  the  consequence  of  the  truth 
being  told.  If  that  consequence  should  prove  to  be  her 
painful  and  undeserved  death,  '  What  are  you,'  the  doubter 
must  be  asked,  'what  is  the  victim  whom  your  untruth 
might  save,  that  the  suffering  of  either  should  be  set  against 
the  duty  of  adherence  to  a  rule,  of  which  the  universal 
observance  is  a  prime  condition  of  the  perfect  ordering  of 
social  life,  and  therefore  morally  necessary  ?  Each  of  you, 
no  doubt,  has  an  absolute  value  which  no  rule,  as  such,  can 
have.  Rules  are  made  for  man,  not  man  for  rules.  But 
the  question  is  not  really  between  the  value  of  either  of 
you  ahd  the  value  of  a  rule,  but  between  the  importance  to 
be  attached  on  the  one  hand  to  your  pain  or  deliverance 
from  pain,  and  that  to  be  attached  on  the  other  to  the  moral 
life  of  society  which  every  lie  must  injure,  and  to  the  integrity 
of  your  character  as  a  person  self  subordinated  to  the  require- 
ments of  social  good.  Let  the  worst  come  from  your  truth- 
speaking  ;  still  it  is  not  that  which  is  of  absolute  value,  either 
in  you  or  in  the  victim  of  the  law,  which  will  suffer  loss. 
Your  devotion  to  the  beloved  person  is  indeed  truly  a  good ; 
but  that  devotion  is  not  set  aside  by,  but  carried  on  into,  the 
larger  devotion  which  includes  it,  and  which  forbids  your 
departure  from  the  rule  of  veracity.  As  to  the  beloved  person 
herself,  the  question  is  more  dark,  for  she  is  passive  in  the 
matter ;  it  is  not  any  action  to  be  done  by  her  that  is  under 
consideration,  and  no  one  can  gain  directly  in  intrinsic  worth 
by  the  action  of  another.  But  it  is  certain  that  her  deliver- 
ance from  suffering  through  your  wrong-doing  could  not  be 
really  for  her  good ;  it  would  not  make  her  heart  purer,  or 
direct  her  will  to  higher  objects  ;  and  you  may  trust  on  the 


CH.  Il]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  381 

other  hand  (though  unable  to  foresee  how  such  a  result 
should  come  about)  that  in  taking  that  consequence  of  her 
conduct,  which  only  your  wrong-doing  could  avert,  she  will 
gain  in  that  spiritual  capability  which  is  alone  to  her  a  source 
of  abiding  good.' 

317.  The  suggestion  of  such  counsel  being  offered  to  any 
one  under  such  trial  as  we  have  supposed,  inevitably  strikes 
us  as  inappropriate.  We  know  that  in  fact  under  such 
circumstances  the  soul  would  not  be  at  leisure  for  philoso- 
phical reflection.  Its  conduct  must  be  determined  by  in- 
fluences that  act  more  swiftly  and  decisively ;  if  in  the  severe 
path  for  which  we  have  supposed  the  philosopher  to  be 
arguing,  by  an  inbred  horror  of  falsehood,  which  does  not 
•wait  to  give  an  account  of  itself,  or  by  sense  of  the  presence 
of  a  divine  onlooker,  whose  disapproval,  not  for  fear  of  penal 
consequences  but  for  very  shame,  cannot  be  faced.  Accord- 
ing to  the  distinction  previously  drawn,  it  is  the  action  of  an 
ideal  of  virtue  itself,  not  any  theory  about  the  ideal,  that  can 
alone  be  efficient  in  such  a  case.  Though  not  in  the  emer- 
gency itself,  however,  yet  in  preparing  the  soul  for  it,  a  true 
philosophy  may  have  an  important  service  to  render.  It 
will  be  a  service,  indeed,  rather  of  the  defensive  and  negative 
than  of  the  actively  inciting  kind — a  service  which  in  a  specula- 
tive and  dialectical  age  needs  to  be  rendered,  lest  the  hold  of 
the  highest  moral  ideas  on  the  mind  should  be  weakened 
from  apparent  lack  of  intellectual  justification. 

Those  ideas,  as  we  have  often  pointed  out,  are  not  abstract 
conceptions.  They  actuate  men  independently  of  the  opera- 
tions of  the  discursive  intellect.  They  rather  direct  those 
operations  than  are  their  result.  The  idea,  in  its  various 
forms,  of  something  that  human  life  should  be,  of  a  perfect 
being  for  whom  this  '  should  be '  already  '  is,'  cannot  pro- 
ceed from  observation  of  matters  of  fact  or  from  inference 
founded  on  such  observation,  though  in  various  ways  (on 
which  we  cannot  here  dwell)  it  regulates  that  observation 
and  inference.  Such  ideas  or  principles  of  action,  at  work 
before  they  are  understood,  not  only  give  rise  to  institutions 


382     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL   THEORY     [bk.  IV 

and  iTipdes  of  life,  but  also  express  themselves  in  forms  ot 
the  imagination.  In  complication  with  effects  of  passion 
and  force,  they  produce  the  laws,  whether  enforced  by 
opinion  or  by  the  magistrate,  which  form  the  essential  and 
permanent  element  in  the  fabric  of  social  obligation;  and 
they  also  yield  the  imagination  of  a  supreme  invisible  but 
all-seeing  ruler,  to  whom  service  is  due,  from  whom  com- 
mands proceed  as  from  an  earthly  superior — the  head  ot 
a  family  or  the  sovereign  of  a  state— and  who  punishes  the 
violation  of  those  commands.  It  is  in  the  form  of  this 
imagination  that,  in  the  case  at  least  of  all  ordinary  good 
people,  the  idea  of  an  absolute  duty  is  so  brought  to  bear 
on  the  soul  as  to  yield  an  awe  superior  to  any  personal  in- 
clination. In  sudden  calls  upon  the  will,  when  the  sustain- 
ing force  of  habit  is  of  no  avail,  when  no  rewards  or  penalties, 
either  under  the  law  of  the  state  or  the  law  of  opinion,  are 
to  be  looked  for,  whatever  the  course  of  action  adopted,  can 
any  of  us  be  sure  that,  except  under  the  impression  of  the 
'  great  task-master's  eye '  upon  him,  he  would  do  the  work 
which  upon  reflection  he  would  admit  should  be  done  ? 

318.  It  is  a  necessity,  however,  of  our  rational  nature 
that  these  forms  of  imagination,  in  which  our  highest  prac- 
tical ideas  have  found  expression,  should  be  subject  to 
criticism.  Is  there  really  a  divine  ruler,  who  issues  com- 
mands which  we  can  obey  or  disobey ;  who  somehow  sees 
and  hears  us,  though  not  through  eye  or  ear;  whom  it  is 
possible  for  us  to  please  or  offend  ?  Now  there  is  undoubt- 
edly a  sense  in  which  these  questions,  once  asked,  can  only 
be  answered  in  the  negative.  The  most  convinced  Theist 
must  admit  that  God  is  as  unimaginable  as  He  is  unper- 
ceivable,— unimaginable  because  unperceivable,  for  that 
which  we  imagine  (in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term)  has  the 
necessary  finiteness  of  that  which  we  perceive ;  that  state- 
ments, therefore,  which  in  any  strict  sense  could  only  be 
applied  to  an  imaginable  finite  agent,  cannot  in  any  such 
sense  be  applied  to  God.  As  applied  to  Him,  they  must 
at  any  rate  not  be  reasoned  from  as  we  reason  from  state- 


CH.  ll]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  383 

ments  about  matters  of  fact.  The  practice  of  treating  them 
as  if  they  were  such  statements,  with  the  confusions  and 
contradictions  to  which  it  inevitably  leads,  only  enhances 
doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  the  divine  Spirit ;  of  which  we 
must  confess  that  it  is  inexpressible  in  its  nature  by  us, 
though  operative  in  us  through  those  practical  ideas  of  a 
possible  perfect  life,  of  a  being  for  whom  this  perfect  life 
is  already  actual,  which,  acting  upon  imagination,  yield  the 
language  of  ordinary  religion. 

319.  Now  when  criticism  comes  to  do  its  inevitable  work 
upon  the  language  of  imagination  in  which  our  fundamental 
moral  ideas  have  found  expression,  a  counter-work  is  called 
for  from  philosophy,  which  has  an  important  bearing  upon 
conduct.  It  has  to  disentangle  the  operative  ideas  from 
their  necessarily  imperfect  expression,  and  to  explain  that 
the  validity  of  the  ideas  themselves,  as  principles  of  action, 
is  not  affected  by  the  discovery  that  the  language,  in  which 
men  under  their  influence  naturally  express  themselves,  has 
not  the  sort  of  truth  which  belongs  to  a  correct  statement 
of  matters  of  fact.  It  has  to  show  when  and  how — these 
ideas  not  being  matters  of  fact  or  obtained  by  abstraction 
from  matters  of  fact — the  figures  of  speech  employed  in 
expressing  the  aspirations  and  endeavours  to  which  they 
give  rise,  being  derived  by  metaphor  from  sensible  matters 
of  fact,  are  liable  to  mislead  us  if  we  argue  from  them  as 
though  they  conveyed  literal  truth.  It  has  to  point  out 
what  is  the  sense  in  which,  alone  the  question  as  to  the 
truth  of  such  language  can  be  properly  asked  or  answered. 
If  the  question  is  asked,  for  instance,  whether  there  is  truth 
in  the  language,  habitual  to  the  religious  conscience,  in 
which  God  is  represented  as  giving  us  certain  commands 
and  seeing  whether  we  perform  them  or  no,  the  philosopher 
will  remind  us  that  to  enquire  whether  such  language  is  true, 
in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  might  be  true  that  I  ordered 
my  servant  to  do  certain  things  this  morning  and  took  notice 
whether  he  did  them,  is  as  inappropriate  as  it  would  be  to 
enquire  (according  to  an  example  employed  by  Locke  in 


384     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IY 

-another  connection)  whether  sleep  is  swift  or  virtue  square. 
It  can  only  be  reasonably  asked  whether  it  is  true  in  the 
sense  that  it  naturally  expresses,  in  terms  of  imagination,  an 
emotion  arising  from  consciousness  of  a  relation  which  really 
subsists  between  the  human  soul  and  God.  If  the  infinite 
Spirit  so  communicates  itself  to  the  soul  of  man  as  to  yield 
the  idea  of  a  possible  perfect  life,  and  that  consequent  sense 
of  personal  responsibility  on  the  part  of  the  individual  for 
making  the  best  of  himself  as  a  social  being  from  which  the 
recognition  of  particular  duties  arises,  then  it  is  a  legitimate 
expression  by  means  of  metaphor — the  only  possible  means, 
except  action,  by  which  the  consciousness  of  spiritual  real- 
ities can  express  itself — to  say  that  our  essential  duties  are 
commands  of  God.  If  again  the  self-communication  of  the 
infinite  Spirit  to  the  soul  of  man  is  such  that  man  is  con- 
scious of  his  relation  to  a  conscious  being,  who  is  in  eternal 
perfection  all  that  man  has  it  in  him  to  come  to  be,  then  it 
is  a  legitimate  expression  of  that  conscious  relation  by  means 
of  metaphor  to  say  that  God  sees  whether  His  commands 
are  fulfilled  by  us  or  no,  and  an  appropriate  emotion  to  feel 
shame  as  in  His  presence  for  omissions  or  violations  of  duty 
incognisable  by  other  men. 

320.  The  above  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  it  is  to 
be  considered  the  business  of  philosophy  to  justify  the  lan- 
guage of  religious  imagination  universally  and  uncondition- 
ally. Even .  as  that  language  is  current  in  Christendom, 
there  may  be  much  in  it  that  a  true  moral  philosophy  will 
have  to  condemn  as  inconsistent  with  the  highest  kind  of 
moral  conviction.  Objection  may  properly  be  taken,  for 
instance,  to  the  ordinary  representation  of  God  as  a  source 
of  rewards  and  penalties;  as  rewarding  goodness  with  certain 
pleasures  bestowed  from  without,  as  punishing  wickedness 
with  pains  inflicted  from  without.  The  objection  to  it,  how- 
ever, is  not  that  it  represents  God  under  a  figure  which  is 
not  a  statement  of  fact  (for  the  same  objection  would  apply 
equally  to  all  the  language  of  religion),  but  that  the  figure  is 
one  which  interferes  with  the  true  idea  of  goodness  as  its 


CH.  II  ]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  385 

own  reward,  of  vice  as  its  own  punishment.  It  is  an  im- 
portant function  of  philosophy  to  examine  the  current  lan- 
guage of  religious  imagination,  not  with  the  unreasonable 
view  of  testing  its  speculative  truth,  as  we  might  test  the 
truth  of  some  doctrine  about  natural  phenomena,  but  in 
order  to  satisfy  ourselves  whether  it  worthily  expresses  the 
emotions  of  a  soul  in  which  the  highest  moral  ideas  have 
done  their  perfect  work. 

With  such  an  application  of  philosophy,  however,  we  are 
not  at  present  concerned.  Our  present  purpose  is  merely 
to  point  out  the  service  which  philosophy  may  render  to 
practical  morality  in  counteracting  the  advantage  which 
scepticism  may  otherwise  give  to  passion  against  duty.  It 
is  true,  of  course,  that  when  the  soul  is  suddenly  called 
upon  to  face  some  awful  moment,  to  which  are  joined  great 
issues  for  good  or  evil  in  its  moral  history,  it  is  not  by 
'  going  over  the  theory  of  virtue  in  one's  mind,'  not  by  any 
philosophical  consideration  of  the  origin  and  validity  of 
moral  ideas,  that  the  right  determination  can  be  given. 
A  judgment  of  the  sort  we  call  intuitive — a  judgment  which 
in  fact  represents  long  courses  of  habit  and  imagination 
founded  on  ideas — is  all  that  the  occasion  admits  of.  But 
even  in  such  cases  it  may  make  a  great  difference  to  the 
issue,  whether  the  inclination  to  the  weaker  or  less  worthy 
course  is  or  is  not  assisted  by  a  suggestion  from  the  intellect 
that  the  counter-injunction  of  conscience  is  illusory.  And 
in  such  an  age  as  ours  this  suggestion  is  likely  to  be  forth- 
coming, if  scepticism  has  been  allowed  to  pull  to  pieces  the 
imaginative  vesture  in  which  our  formative  practical  ideas 
have  clothed  themselves,  without  a  vindication  by  philo- 
sophy of  the  ultimate  authority  of  the  ideas  themselves,  and 
of  so  much  in  the  language  of  religious  imagination  as  is 
their  pure  and  (to  us)  necessary  expression. 

321.  We  have  still,  however,  to  consider  the  service  which 
philosophy  may  render  in  what  we  distinguished  above  as 
iona  fide  perplexities  of  conscience  ;  bona  fide  perplexities,  as 
distinct  from  those  self-sophistications,  born  of  the  pleasure- 

c  c 


386     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

seeking  impulse,  in  dealing  with  which  philosophy  would 
be  misapplied ;  perplexities  of  conscience,  as  distinct  from 
cases  like  that  of  Jeannie  Deans,  where  conscience  speaks 
without  ambiguity  but  is  opposed  by  an  impulse  in  itself 
noble  and  disinterested.  In  cases  of  this  latter  kind  philo- 
sophy may,  as  we  have  seen,  under  special  conditions  of 
intellectual  culture,  have  an  important  service  to  render; 
but  it  will  not  be  in  the  way  of  setting  aside  apparent  con- 
tradictions in  the  deliverance  of  conscience.  It  will  rather 
be  in  the  way  of  vindicating  the  real  authority  of  that 
deliverance  against  a  scepticism  which  might  otherwise  take 
advantage  of  the  discovery  that  the  forms  of  imagination, 
in  which  the  deliverance  is  clothed,  are  not  the  same  as 
statements  of  speculative  truth.  The  kind  of  practical 
perplexity  which  we  have  now  to  consider  arises  not  from 
any  doubt  as  to  the  authority  of  conscience,  nor  from 
any  attempt  of  selfish  inclination  to  'dodge'  conscience 
by  assuming  its  disguise,  but  from  the  fact  that  the 
requirements  of  conscience  seem  to  be  in  conflict  with 
each  other.  However  disposed  to  do  what  his  conscience 
enjoins,  the  man  finds  it  difficult  to  decide  what  its  injunc- 
tion is. 

In  the  crisis,  for  instance,  through  which  several  European 
states  have  recently  passed,  such  a  difficulty  might  naturally 
occur  to  a  good  Catholic  who  was  also  a  loyal  subject. 
His  conscience  would  seem  to  enjoin  equally  obedience  to 
the  law  of  the  State,  and  obedience  to  the  law  of  the  Church. 
But  these  laws  were  in  conflict.  Which  then  was  he  to  obey  ? 
It  is  a  form  of  the  same  difficulty  which  in  earlier  days  must 
have  occurred  to  Quakers  and  Anabaptists,  to  whom  the 
law  derived  from  Scripture  seemed  contradictory  to  that  of 
the  State,  and  to  those  early  Christians  for  whom  the  law 
which  they  disobeyed  in  refusing  to  sacrifice  retained  any 
authority.  In  still  earlier  times  it  may  have  arisen  in  the 
form  of  that  conflict  between  the  law  of  the  family  and  the 
law  of  the  State,  presented  in  the  '  Antigone.'  Nor  is  the 
case  really  different  when  the  modern  citizen,  in  his  capacity 


OH.  n]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  387 

as  an  ofificial  or  as  a  soldier,  is  called  upon  to  help  in  putting 
down  some  revolutionary  movement  which  yet  presents  itself 
to  his  inmost  conviction  as  the  cause  of  'God  and  the  People.' 
This  case  may  indeed  appear  different  from  those  previously 
noticed,  because,  while  those  were  cases  of  conflict  between 
acknowledged  authorities,  this  may  seem  rather  to  be  one  of 
conflict  between  private  opinion  and  authority.  But  if  the 
private  opinion  is  more  than 'a  conceit  which  it  is  pleasant 
to  air ;  if  it  is  a  source  of  really  conscientious  opposition  to 
an  authority  which  equally  appeals  to  the  conscience ;  if,  in 
other  words,  it  is  an  expression  which  the  ideal  of  human 
good  gives  to  itself  in  the  mind  of  the  man  who  entertains 
it ;  then  it  too  rests  on  a  basis  of  social  authority.  No  in- 
dividual can  make  a  conscience  for  himself.  He  always  needs 
a  society  to  make  it  for  him.  A  conscientious  '  heresy,' 
religious  or  political,  always  represents  some  gradually 
maturing  conviction  as  to  social  good,  already  implicitly 
involved  in  the  ideas  on  which  the  accepted  rules  of  conduct 
rest,  though  it  may  conflict  with  the  formulae  in  which  those 
ideas  have  been  hitherto  authoritatively  expressed,  and  may 
lead  to  the  overthrow  of  institutions  which  have  previously 
contributed  to  their  realisation. 

322.  In  preparation  for  the  times  when  conscience  is  thus 
liable  to  be  divided  against  itself,  much  practical  service  may 
be  rendered  by  a  philosophy  which,  without  depreciating 
the  authority  of  conscience  as  such,  can  explain  the  origin 
of  its  conflicting  deliverances,  and,  without  pronouncing  un- 
conditionally for  either,  can  direct  the  soul  to  the  true  end 
to  which  each  in  some  qualified  way  is  relative.  In  order  to 
illustrate  this  in  more  detail,  we  will  suppose  a  philosopher, 
holding  the  doctrines  previously  stated  in  this  treatise,  to  be 
called  upon  for  counsel  in  difficulties  of  the  kind  just  noticed. 
It  will  of  course  occur  to  every  one  that  the  counsel  given 
goes  too  far  back  in  its  reasons,  and  in  its  conclusions  is  of 
too  neutral  a  kind,  to  command  attention  in  times  of  social 
or  religious  conflict  and  revolution.  But,  though  this  is  so, 
it  might  have  its  effect  upon  the  few  who  lead  the  many,  in 

c  c  2 


388     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

preparing  the  mind  through  years  of  meditation  for  the  days 
when  prompt  practical  decision  is  required. 

The  philosopher,  then,  will  begin  by  considering  how 
the  seeming  contradiction  in  the  deliverances  of  conscience 
comes  about.  He  will  point  out  that,  though  there  would 
be  no  such  thing  as  conscience  at  all  but  for  the  conscious- 
ness on  the  part  of  the  individual  that  there  is  an  uncon- 
ditional good  which,  while  independent  of  his  likes  and 
dislikes,  is  yet  his  good — though  this  consciousness  is  as 
irremovable  as  morality — yet  it  does  not  follow  that  all  the 
judgments  which  arise  out  of  this  consciousness  are  uncon- 
ditionally valid.  The  several  dicta  of  conscience  have  had 
their  history.  Passing  beyond  the  stage  of  mere  conformity 
to  custom,  of  mere  obedience  to  persons  and  powers  that 
be — a  conformity  and  obedience  which  themselves  arise 
out  of  an  operative,  though  inarticulate,  idea  of  common 
good — men  have  formed  more  or  less  general  notions  of 
the  customs  and  powers,  as  entitled  to  their  conformity  and 
obedience.  Certain  formulae,  expressing  the  nature  of  the 
authorities  to  which  obedience  is  due,  and  their  most 
familiar  requirements,  have  become  part  of  'the  a  priori 
furniture'  of  men's  minds,  in  the  sense  that  they  are 
accepted  as  valid  independently  of  those  lessons  of  ex- 
perience which  men  are  conscious  of  acquiring  for  them- 
selves. Such  are  what  are  commonly  called  the  '  dicta  of 
conscience.'  Certain  injunctions  of  family  duty,  of  obedience 
to  the  law  of  the  State,  of  conformity  to  a  law  of  honour  or 
opinion,  have  assumed  this  character.  So  too  in  Christen- 
dom have  certain  ordinances  of  the  Church,  notwithstanding 
much  variety  of  opinion  as  to  what  constitutes  the  Church. 

323.  Now  in  all  such  deliverances  of  conscience  the  con- 
tent of  the  obligation  is  blended  with  some  conception  or 
imagination  of  an  authority  imposing  the  obligation,  in 
a  combination  which  only  the  trained  analytical  intellect  cart 
disentangle.  Just  as  to  children  the  duty  of  speaking  the 
truth  seems  inseparable  from  tlie  parental  command  to  do 
so,  so  to  many  a  simple  Catholic,  for  instance,  the  fact  that 


CH.  ll]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  389 

the  Church  commands  him  to  live  cleanly  and  honestly  seems 
the  source  of  the  obligation  so  to  live.  To  give  just  measure 
and  to  go  to  Mass  are  to  him  homogeneous  duties ;  just  as 
to  unenlightened  persons  in  a  differently  ordered  religious 
community  to  give  just  measure  and  to  observe  the  Sabbath 
may  be  so.  An  abrogation  of  the  authority  which  imposes 
the  ceremonial  obligation  would  seem  to  imply  a  disappear- 
ance of  the  moral  obligation  as  well ;  because  this  too  in  the 
mind  of  the  individual  has  become  associated  with  the 
imagination  of  an  imponent  authority,  the  same  as  that 
which  enjoins  the  ceremonial  observance.  This  does  not 
arise  from  the  existence  of  a  Church  as  a  co-ordinate  institu- 
tion with  the  State.  Were  there  no  Church,  the  difference 
would  only  be  that,  as  in  the  Grseco-Roman  world,  the 
State  would  gather  to  itself  the  sentiments  of  which,  as  it  is, 
the  Church  seems  the  more  natural  object.  Moral  duties 
would  still  be  associated  with  the  imagination  of  an  imponent 
authority,  whose  injunctions  they  would  be  supposed  to  be, 
though  the  authority  might  be  single  instead  of  twofold. 

Nor  would  any  considerate  member  of  modern  society, 
even  the  most  enlightened,  venture  to  say  that  his  sense  of 
moral  duty  was  independent  of  some  such  imagination  of  an 
imponent,  however  resolutely  he  might  refuse  to  recognise 
either  the  Church  or  any  particular  personage  as  the  impo- 
nent. If  he  has  ceased  to  describe  himself  naturally  as  a 
good  Catholic  or  good  Churchman,  he  may  still  attach  sig- 
nificance to  the  description  of  himself  as  a  good  Christian ; 
and  this  probably  implies  to  him  the  recognition  of  an  im- 
ponent of  obligation  in  the  founder  of  the  Christian  society 
or  the  author  of  a  Christian  revelation.  Or  if  he  has  ceased 
to  recognise  such  an  imponent,  he  probably  still  calls  him- 
self a  loyal  subject ;  and  in  so  doing  expresses  the  fact  that 
he  presents  to  himself  some  personal  external  source — some 
source  other  than  a  spirit  working  in  him — of  the  law  which 
he  obeys ;  and  that  he  obeys  the  law,  not  from  fear  of  pains 
and  penalties,  but  from  reverence  for  the  authority  from 
which  he  believes  it  to  proceed — as  much,  therefore,  when 


39°     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

he  might  evade  it  with  impunity  as  when  he  runs  the  risk  of 
punishment.  Perhaps  there  may  be  no  ostensible  person, 
no  emperor  or  king,  whom  he  regards  as  the  author  of  the 
law  which  he  obeys,  and  he  may  accordingly  prefer  to  describe 
himself  as  a  loyal  citizen  rather  than  as  a  loyal  subject,  but 
he  is  very  exceptional  if  he  does  not  still  think  of  some 
association  of  persons,  a  '  sovereign  people,'  as  the  authority 
from  which  law  proceeds.  If  he  ceased  to  present  such  an 
/authority  to  himself,  having  previously  discarded  the  imagi- 
nation of  Church  or  King  or  Divine  Lawgiver  as  imponents 
of  duty,  he  WQuld_bfi_ap);_toj5ild.  the  obligation,  not  only  of 
'  what  is  local  and  temporary  in  positive  law,  but  of  what  is 
essential  in  the  moral  law,  slipping  away  from  him. 

324.  This  imagination  of  an  external  imponent,  however, 
is  not  intrinsically  necessary  to  the  consciousness  of  what  we 
call  metaphorically'  moral  law,  while  it  is  the  source  of 
apparent  conflict  between  different  injunctions  of  conscience. 
[it  is  the  very  essence  of  moral  duty  to  be  imposed  by  a  man 
Ion  himself.  The  moral  duty  to  obey  a  positive  law,  whether 
a  law  of  the  State  or  oT  theT^urch,  is  imposed  not  by  the 
author  or  enforcer  of  the  positive  law,  but  by_that-spirit-nf 
man — not  less  divine  because  the  spirit  of  man — which  sets 
before  him  the  ideal  of  a  perfect  life,  and  pronounces  obedi- 
ence to  The^ositiveTawTo'be  necessary  to  its  realisation. 
This  actual  imposition,  however,  of  duties  by  man  upon  him- 
self precedes  and  is  independent  of  a  true  conception  of  what 
duty  is.  Men  who  are  really  a  law  to  themselves,  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  their  idea  of  an  absolute  '  should  be,'  of  some  per- 
fection to  be  realised  in  and  by  them,  that  is  the  source  of 
the  general  rule  of  life  which  they  observe,  are  yet  unable  to 
present  that  rule  to  themselves  as  anything  else  than  the  in- 
junction of  some  external  authority.    It  is  this  state  of  mind 

'  I  say  '  metaphorically,'  because  what  we  primarily  understand  by 
'  law '  is  some  sort  of  command,  given  by  a  superior  in  power  to  one 
whom  he  is  able  to  punish  for  disobedience  ;  whereas  it  is  the  essence 
of  moral  '  law '  that  it  is  a  rule  which  a  man  imposes  on  himself,  and 
from  another  motive  than  the  fear  of  punishment. 


CH.  Il]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  391 

that  renders  them  liable  to  the  perplexities  of  conscience 
described,  in  which  duties  appear  to  conflict  with  each 
other. 

There  is  no  such  thing  really  as  a  conflict  of  duties. 
A  man's  duty  under  any  particular  set  of  circumstances  is 
always  one,  though  the  conditions  of  the  case  may  be  so 
complicated  and  obscure  as  to  make  it  difficult  to  decide 
what  the  duty  really  is.  That  which  we  are  apt  to  call 
a  conflict  of  duties  is  really  a  competition  of  reverences  for 
imagined  imponents  of  duty,  whose  injunctions,  actual  or 
.  supposed,  do  not  agree.  A  woman  perhaps  finds  herself 
directed  to  act  in  one  way  by  her  father,  in  another  by  her 
confessor.  A  citizen  may  find  himself  similarly  distracted 
between  the  law  of  the  State  and  that  of  the  Church ;  or 
between  the  ordinance  of  an  ostensible  sovereign  and  that 
of  a  revolutionary  committee,  claiming  to  act  in  the  name  of 
God  and  the  People.  In  such  cases,  if  the  conscience  were 
clear  of  prepossession  in  favour  of  this  authority  or  that,  and 
were  simply  prepared  to  recognise  as  duty  the  course  which 
contributes  most  to  the  perfect  life,  it  might  yet  be  difficult 
enough  to  ascertain  what  this  course  of  action  would  be, 
though  there  would  be  no  doubt  that  the  one  duty  was  to 
pursue  that  course  of  action  when  ascertained.  But  the 
actual  perplexity  of  conscience  in  such  cases  commonly 
arises  not  from  this  difficulty,  but  from  the  habit  of  identi- 
fying duty  with  injunctions  given  by  external  authorities, 
and  from  the  fact  that  in  the  supposed  case  the  injunctions 
so  given  are  inconsistent  with  each  other. 

325.  Now  the  task  of  the  moral  philosopher  in  regard  to 
such  cases  would  be  a  comparatively  easy  one,  if  it  simply 
consisted  in  trying  to  rid  a  man  of  his  illusions  of  conscience; 
if  he  had  merely  to  point  out  the  work  of  imagination  in 
ascribing  the  essential  duties  which  conscience  enjoins  to  an 
external  imponent,  and  to  show  that  the  apparent  conflict  of 
duties  is  in  fact  merely  a  conflict  between  certain  external 
authorities  which  are  wrongly  supposed  to  impose  duties, 
whereas  all  that  a  purely  external  authority  can  impose  is 


392     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

a  command  enforced  by  fear.  If  the  philosopher  aims  at 
no  more  than  this,  he  may  succeed  in  his  work,  but  its  value 
will  be  doubtful.  It  may  prove  easier  to  convince  men  that 
duties;  in  the  moral  sense,  cannot  be  imposed  from  without 
than,  when  this  has  been  shown,  to  maintain  the  conviction 
that  they  exist  at  all.  If  the  result  of  the  philosopher's  work 
is  to  popularise  the  notion  that  the  authorities  to  which  men 
have  chiefly  looked  as  imponents  of  duties,  are  merely  powers 
able  to  induce  obedience  to  their  commands  by  threat  of 
punishment  for  disobedience,  without  substitution  of  any 
new  reverence  for  that  which  must  be  withdrawn  from  the 
authorities  so  regarded,  we  shall  have  nothing  to  thank  him 
for.  In  truth  the  phrase  '  external  authority,'  as  applied  to 
the  imagined  imponents  of  duty,  involves  something  of  a 
contradiction.  If  they  were  merely  external,  they  would 
not  be  authorities,  for  an  authority  implies,  on  the  part  of 
the  man  to  whom  it  is  an  authority,  a  conception  of  its 
having  a  claim  upon  his  obedience ;  and  this  again  implies 
that  his  obedience  to  it  is  a  self-imposed  obedience— an 
obedience  which  commends  itself  to  his  reason  as  good, 
irrespectively  of  penalties  attached  to  disobedience.  The 
authority,  in  being  recognised  as  an  authority,  has  ceased  to 
be  a  mere  source  of  commands,  enforced  by  fear  of  punish- 
ment for  their  violation,  and  in  that  sense  to  be  merely 
external.  Its  injunctions  now  commend  themselves  to  the 
subject  of  them,  not  indeed  as  proceeding  from  a  spirit 
which  is  his  own  or  himself,  but  as  directed  to  the  attain- 
ment of  an  end  in  which  the  subject  is  interested  on  his 
own  account ;  which  is,  and  is  known  by  him  to  be,  his  true 
good.  How  the  several  injunctions  in  detail  contribute  to 
such  an  end  he  does  not  see ;  but  he  trusts  the  authority 
from  which  they  proceed  to  have  it  more  completely  in  view 
than  he  can  himself.  It  is  thus  that  the  Church  is  an  au- 
thority to  the  good  Catholic,  the  State  to  the  good  citizen, 
the  Bible  to  the  orthodox  Protestant.  In  each  case  the 
acknowledgment  of  the  authority  has  become  one  and  the 
same  thing  with  the  individual's  presentation  to  himself  of 


CH.  ll]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  393 

a  true  good,  at  once  his  own  and  the  good  of  others,  which 
it  is  his  business  to  pursue. 

326.  Now  it  would  be  a  blundering  and  reckless  proce- 
dure on  the  part  of  the  moral  philosopher,  if  he  were  first 
to  construe  too  literally  the  language  in  which  these  authori- 
ties are  described,  so  to  speak,  from  without  for  rhetorical 
or  logical  purposes, — to  take  it  as  if  it  represented  their  true 
spiritual  import  for  those  who  acknowledge  them — and  then, 
in  his  hurry  to  assert  the  truth  that  a  moral  obligation  can- 
not be  imposed  from  without,  were  to  seek  to  dethrone  them 
from  their  place  in  the  moral  imagination,  and  to  substitute 
for  them  an  improvised  conscience  that  should  make  its  own 
laws  de  novo  from  within.  It  must  rather  be  his  object, 
without  setting  aside  any  of  the  established  authorities  which 
have  acquired  a  hold  on  the  conscience,  to  awaken  such  an 
understanding  of  the  impulse  after  an  ideal  of  conduct 
which,  without  being  understood,  has  expressed  itself  in 
these  authorities,  as  may  gradually  render  men  independent 
of  the  mode  of  its  authoritative  expression.  One  who  has 
learnt  this  lesson  will  have  a  rationale  of  the  various  duties 
presented  to  him  in  the  name  of  Caesar  or  of  God,  which 
will  help  him  to  distinguish  what  is  essential  in  the  duties 
from  the  form  of  their  imposition,  and  to  guide  himself  by 
looking  to  the  common  end  to  which  they  are  alike  relative. 
Should  an  occasion  arise  when  the  duties  seem  to  conflict, 
he  will  be  prepared  for  the  discovery  that  the  conflict  is  not 
really  between  duties,  but  between  powers  invested  by  the 
imagination  with  the  character  of  imponents  of  duty.  He 
will  be  able  to  stand  this  discovery  without  moral  deteriora- 
tion, because  he  has  learnt  to  fix  his  eye  on  the  moral  end 
or  function — the  function  in  the  way  of  furthering  perfec- 
tion of  conduct — served  by  the  authorities  which  he  has 
been  bred  to  acknowledge.  He  can  thus  find  in  that  end, 
or  in  the  Spirit  whose  self-communication  renders  him 
capable  of  seeking  it,  a  fit  object  for  all  the  reverences 
claimed  by  those  authorities,  and  which  he  now  discovers  to 
be  due  to  them  only  by  a  derived  and  limited  title. 

327.  It  may  thus  fall  to  the  moral  philosopher,  under 


394     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

certain  conditions  of  society  and  of  intellectual  movement, 
to  render  an  important  practical  service.  But  he  will  render 
it  simply  by  fulfilling  with  the  utmost  possible  completeness 
his  proper  work  of  analysis.  As  a  moral  philosopher  he 
analyses  human  conduct;  the  motives  which  it  expresses, 
the  spiritual  endowments  implied  in  it,  the  history  of  thought, 
habits  and  institutions  through  which  it  has  come  to  be 
what  it  is.  He  does  not  understand  his  business  as  a 
philosopher,  if  he  claims  to  do  more  than  this.  He  will 
not  take  it  for  a  reproach  to  be  reminded  that  no  philo- 
sopher can  supply  a  'moral  dynamic'  The  pretension  to 
do  so  he  would  regard  as  a  great  impertinence.  He  finds 
moral  dynamic  enough  in  the  actual  spiritual  nature  of  man, 
when  that  nature  is  regarded,  as  it  is  his  business  to  regard 
it,  not  merely  in  its  hitherto  performance,  but  in  its  intrinsic 
possibilities.  If  he  cannot  help  wishing  for  more,  that  is 
an  incident  of  the  very  aspiration  after  perfection  of  conduct 
which  constitutes  the  dynamic.  His  immediate  business 
as  a  philosopher  is  not  to  strengthen  or  heighten  this  aspira- 
tion, much  less  to  bring  it  into  existence,  but  to  understand 
it.  As  a  man  and  a  citizen,  indeed,  it  is  his  function  to 
serve  as  its  organ ;  to  give  effect  to  it  in  his  own  conduct, 
to  assist  in  communicating  it  to  others.  And  since  in  being 
a  philosopher  he  does  not  cease  to  be  a  man  and  a  citizen, 
he  will  rejoice  that  the  analysis,  which  alone  forms  his 
employment  as  a  philosopher,  should  incidentally  serve 
a  purpose  subordinate  to  the  'moral  dynamic' — that  it 
should  help  to  remove  any  obstacle  to  the  effort  of  the 
human  soul  after  a  perfect  life. 

The  distraction  of  conscience  caused,  as  we  have  seen,  by 
competition  of  reverences  for  authorities  whose  injunctions 
come  into  conflict  with  each  other,  may  form  such  an 
obstacle.  Its  outward  effect  may  sometimes  be  a  paralysis 
of  action  ;  sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  hasty  and  embit- 
tered action  in  opposition  to  one  of  the  causes  or  authorities 
between  the  claims  of  which  conscience  is  perplexed — action 
hasty  and  embittered  for  the  very  reason  that  the  agent  is 
afraid  to  face  the  consequence  of  dispassionate  enquiry  into 


CH.  li]  PERPLEXITY  OF  CONSCIENCE  395 

the  validity  of  the  claims  to  which  he  blindly  submits.  So 
far  as  the  impediment  to  the  highest  living,  to  the  free 
development  of  human  capabilities,  is  of  this  kind,  the  phi- 
losopher by  mere  thoroughness  and  completeness  of  ethical 
analysis  may  help  to  remove  it.  By  giving  the  most  adequate 
account  possible  of  the  moral  ideal;  by  considering  the 
process  through  which  the  institutions  and  rules  of  life,  of 
which  we  acknowledge  the  authority,  have  arisen  out  of  the 
effort,  however  blindly  directed,  after  such  an  ideal,  and 
have  in  their  several  measures  contributed  to  its  realisation ; 
by  showing  that  conscience  in  the  individual,  while  owing 
its  education  to  those  institutions  and  rules,  is  not  properly 
the  mere  organ  of  any  or  all  of  them,  but  may  freely  and  in 
its  own  right  apprehend  the  ideal  of  which  they  are  more  or 
less  inadequate  expressions ;  by  thus  doing  his  proper  work 
as  a  philosopher  of  morals,  he  may  help  the  soul  to  rise 
above  the  region  of  distraction  between  competing  authori- 
ties, or  between  authorities  and  an  inner  law,  to  a  region  in 
which  it  can  harmonise  all  the  authorities  by  looking  to  the 
end  to  which  they,  or  whatever  is  really  authoritative  in 
them,  no  less  than  the  inner  law,  are  alike  relative. 

328.  That  the  soul,  however,  should  derive  any  such 
benefit  from  philosophy  implies  a  previous  discipUne,  which 
cannot  be  derived  from  philosophy,  but  only  from  conduct 
regulated  by  the  authorities  which  philosophy  teaches  it  to 
understand.  It  is  a  complaint  as  old  as  the  time  of  Plato 
that,  in  learning  to  seek  for  the  rationale  of  the  rules  which 
they  are  trained  to  obey — to  enquire  what  is  the  ideal  of 
human  good,  which  these  rules  serve  and  are  justified  by 
serving — men  come  to  find  excuses  for  disregarding  them. 
And,  no  doubt,  as  Plato  saw,  till  the  character  is  set  in  the 
direction  of  the  ideal,  a  theory  of  the  ideal  can  be  of  no 
value  for  the  improvement  of  conduct  in  any  sense.  It 
may  be  doubted,  indeed,  whether  the  apparent  mischief, 
which  arises  in  a  speculative  age  from  the  habit  of  asking 
a  reason  why  for  the  rules  of  respectability,  does  more  than 
affect  the  excuses  made  for  acts  of  self-indulgence  of  which 
men,  innocent  of  criticism  or  speculation,  would  equally  be 


396         PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY 

guilty.  But,  however  this  may  be,  it  remains  true  that  the 
value  of  the  Dialectic  which  asks  and  gives  such  an  account 
of  ideal  good  as  at  once  justifies  and  limits  obedience  to 
practical  authorities,  is  conditional  upon  its  finding  in  the 
individual  a  well-formed  habitual  morality. 

When  it  does  so,  it  may  influence  life  for  good,  by 
enlisting  in  the  real  service  of  mankind  the  zeal  which  would 
otherwise  become  a  mis-directed  loyalty  or  a  spirit  of  un- 
profitable rebellion.  It  will  teach  a  man  to  question  the 
absoluteness  of  the  authorities  which  speak  in  the  name  of 
Csesar  and  of  God — not  with  a  view  to  shirking  the  precepts 
of  either  in  the  interest  of  his  own  pleasures,  but  in  order 
that  he  may  not  be  led  by  either  into  a  'conscientious' 
opposition  to  the  other,  obstructive  to  the  work  of  which 
the  promotion  in  different  ways  is  the  true  function  of  each. 
When  he  finds  that  the  requirements  of  Church  or  State, 
the  observances  of  conventional  morality  or  conventional 
religion,  are  in  conflict  with  what  some  plead  as  their  con- 
scientious convictions,  it  will  make  him  watchful  to  ascertain 
whether  these  new  convictions  may  not  represent  a  truer 
effort  after  the  highest  ideal  than  that  embodied  in  the 
authorities  which  seek  to  suppress  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  he  finds  some  conviction  of  his  own  in  conflict 
with  authority,  it  will  teach  him  not  indeed  to  conceal  it 
for  fear  of  inconvenient  consequences,  but  to  suppress  all 
pride  in  it  as  if  it  were  an  achievement  of  his  own ;  to  regard 
it  as  proceeding,  so  far  as  it  is  good  for  anything,  from  the 
operation  of  the  same  practical  reason  in  society  which  has 
given  rise  to  the  authorities  with  which  his  conviction 
brings  him  into  collision.  So  regarding  it,  he  will  be 
respectful  of  the  prejudices  which  he  offends  by  expressing 
it ;  careful  to  eschew  support  which  might  be  due  not  to 
an  appreciation  of  what  is  good  in  the  new  conviction,  but 
to  mere  aversion  from  the  check  put  upon  self-will  by  the 
authorities  impugned ;  patient  of  opposition,  and,  in  case 
of  failure,  ready  to  admit  that  there  is  more  wisdom  than 
he  understood  in  the  conventions  which  have  been  too 
strong  for  him. 


CHAPTER   III 

THE    PRACTICAL    VALUE   OF    A    HEDONISTIC    MORAL 
PHILOSOPHY 

329.  The  chief  theory  of  conduct  which  in  Modern 
Europe  has  afforded  the  conscientious  citizen  a  vantage- 
ground  for  judging  of  the  competing  claims  on  his  obedience, 
and  enabled  him  to  substitute  a  critical  and  intelligent  for 
a  blind  and  unquestioning  conformity,  has  no  doubt  been 
the  Utilitarian.  What  we  are  now  considering,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind,  is  the  practical  value  of  theories  in  regard 
to  the  moral  ideal,  as  distinct  from  the  possession  of  the 
character  by  the  ideal  itself.  It  is  not  to  the  purpose,  there- 
fore, to  notice  the  work  of  religious  reformers.  It  is  probable 
indeed  that  every  movement  of  religious  reform  has  origi- 
nated in  some  clearer  conception  of  the  ideal  of  human  con- 
duct, arrived  at  by  some  person  or  persons ;  a  conception, 
perhaps,  towards  which  many  men  have  been  silently  work- 
ing, but  which  finally  finds  in  some  one  individual  the 
character  which  can  give  decisive  practical  expression  to  it. 
But  in  the  initiation  of  religious  reforms  the  new  theory  of  t^ 
the  ideal,  as  a  theory,  always  holds  a  secondary  place.  It  is 
not  absent,  but  it  is,  so  to  speak,  absorbed  in  a  character — 
a  character  to  which  the  speculative  completeness  of  the 
theory  is  of  little  interest — and  it  is  this  character  which 
gives  the  new  conception  of  the  ideal  its  power  in  the  world. 
The  influence  exercised  by  Utilitarianism,  on  the  other  hand, 
has  been  specially  the  influence  of  a  theory.  Whatever  the 
errors  arising  from  its  Hedonistic  psychology,  no  other  theory 
has  been  available  for  the  social  or  political  reformer,  com- 
bining so  much  truth  with  such  ready  applicability.  No 
other  has  offered  so  commanding  a  point  of  view  from  which 
to  criticise  the  precepts  and  institutions  presented  as  authori- 
tative.   When  laws  of  the  Church,  or  of  the  State,  or  of 


398     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

^'opinion,'  have  become  antagonistic  to  each  other;  when 
any  of  them,  again,  has  been  found  to  conflict  with  one  of 
those  convictions  of  tender  consciences,  or  of  enthusiasts  for 
humanity,  which  are  a  '  law  of  opinion '  in  the  making, 
Utilitarianism  furnishes  a  test  by  which  the  competing  claims 
of  the  different  laws,  or  those  of  law  on  one  side  and  in- 
dividual conviction  on  the  other,  may  be  put  to  the  test. 

330.  All  persons  having  a  private  interest  in  the  main- 
tenance of  the  law  or  custom  which  the  Utilitarian  theory 
calls  in  question  ;  all  who  shrink  from  the  trouble  of  having 
to  examine  established  rules  of  conduct;  others  who  are 
rightly  persuaded  that  the  service  rendered  to  mankind  by 
rules  that  have  become  sacred  is  not  to  be  measured  by  any 
account  of  their  usefulness  which  the  most  enlightened 
observer  can  make  out — these  withstand  Utilitarian  criticism 
in  the  name  of  principle  against  expediency.  Generally, 
however — at  any  rate  when  the  question  is  one,  not  of  con^ 
duct  in  private  relations,  but  of  laws  or  institutions,  or  of 
political  conduct — that  view  of  the  right  course  to  take  which 
pleads  '  principle,'  as  against  suggestions  said  to  be  founded 
on  'expediency,'  really  only  differs  from  the  latter  in  respect 
of  the  more  limited  range  of  consequences  which  it  takes 
into  account.  The  '  principle '  alleged  has  originally  derived 
its  authority  from  reference  to  some  social  good  which  it  has 
been  found  to  serve.  The '  expediency,'  for  the  sake  of  which 
a  departure  from  the  established  rule  is  pressed  for,  is  equally 
founded  on  a  conception  of  social  good,  but  on  the  con- 
ception of  a  good  in  which  a  wider  range  of  persons  is  con- 
templated as  partaking. 

The  ill-repute  which  attaches  to  considerations  of  expe- 
diency, so  far  as  it  is  well  founded,  is  chiefly  due  to  the 
fact  that,  when  the  question  of  conduct  at  issue  is  one  which 
the  person  debating  it  has  a  private  interest  in  deciding  one 
way  or  the  other — when  he  himself  will  gain  pleasure  or  avoid 
pain  by  either  decision — the  admission  of  expediency  as  the 
ground  of  decision  is  apt  to  give  him  an  excuse  for  deciding 
in  his  own  favour,    And,  even  when  this  personal  bias  is  not 


CH.ni]  UTILITARIANISM  399 

operative,  the  man  who  looks  to  'expediency'  may  be  apt  to 
trust  to  some  limited  view  of  consequences,  which  is  all  that 
his  own  vision  can  command,  while  if  he  had  'stuck  to  prin- 
ciple' he  would  really  have  been  guided  by  a  more  complete 
view,  gathered  from  the  wisdom  of  ages.  Neither  of  these 
mischiefs,  however,  arises  from  the  Utilitarian  principle  of 
practical  judgment,  as  fairly  applied,  but  from  that  mis- 
application of  it  by  interested  or  hasty  individuals  to  which 
all  principles  are  liable.  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that,  when 
private  interest  affords  a  motive  for  deciding  a  practical 
question  in  a  particular  way,  'principle'  will  sometimes 
furnish  a  more  convenient  excuse  than  'expediency.'  Slave- 
holders, for  instance,  have  never  found  any  difficulty  in 
justifying  slavery  'on  principle.' 

331.  On  the  whole  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  theory  of  an 
ideal  good,  consisting  in  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest 
number,  as  the  end  by  reference  to  which  the  claim  of  all 
laws  and  powers  and  rules  of  action  on  our  obedience  is  to 
be  tested,  has  tended  to  improve  human  conduct  and  char- 
acter. This  admission  may  be  made  quite  as  readily  by 
those  who  consider  such  conduct  and  character  an  end  in 
itself,  as  by  those  who  hold  that  its  improvement  can  only 
be  measured  by  reference  to  an  extraneous  end,  consisting 
in  the  quantity  of  pleasure  produced  by  it ;  perhaps,  when 
due  account  has  been  taken  of  the  difficulty  of  deciding 
whether  quantity  of  pleasure  is  really  increased  by  '  social 
progress,'  more  readily  by  the  former  than  by  the  latter.  It 
is  not  indeed  to  be  supposed  that  the  Utilitarian  theory,  any 
more  than  any  other  theory  of  morals,  has  brought  about  the 
recognition  or  practice  of  any  virtues  that  were  not  recognised 
and  practised  independently  of  it;  or  that  any  one,  for  being 
a  theoretic  Utilitarian,  has  been  a  better  man — i.  e.  one  more 
habitually  governed  by  desire  for  human  perfection  in  some 
of  its  forms— than  he  otherwise  would  have  been.  But  it  ,J 
has  helped  men,  acting  under  the  influence  of  ideals  of 
conduct  and  rules  of  virtuous  living,  to  fill  up  those  ideals 
and  aipply  those  rules  in  a  manner  beneficial  to  a  wider 


400     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL   THEORY     [bK.  IV 

range  of  persons — beneficial  to  them  in  the  sense  of  tending 
to  remove  certain  obstacles  to  good  living  in  their  favour. 
It  has  not  given  men  a  more  lively  sense  of  their  duty  to 
others — no  theory  can  do  that — but  it  has  led  those  in  whom 
that  sense  has  already  been  awakened  to  be  less  partial  in 
*  judging  who  the  'others'  are,  to  consider  all  men  as  the 
'  others,'  and,  on  the  ground  of  the  claim  of  all  men  to  an 
equal  chance  of  'happiness,'  to  secure  their  political  and 
>promote  their  social  equality.  To  do  this  is  not  indeed 
directly  to  advance  the  highest  living  among  men,  but  it  is 
to  remove  obstacles  to  such  living,  which  in  the  name  of 
principle  and  authority  have  often  been  maintained. 

332.  The  practical  service,  however,  thus  rendered  by 
Utilitarianism  has  been  independent  of  its  analysis  of  well- 
being  or  good.  It  has  been  by  insisting  that  it  is  'the 
greatest  number'  whose  highest  good  is  to  be  taken  into 
account,  not  by  identifying  that  highest  good  with  a  greatest 
nett  quantity  of  pleasure,  that  it  has  improved  the  organisa- 
tion of  human  life.  It  is  thus  that  it  has  given  a  wider  and 
more  impartial  range  to  public  spirit,  to  the  desire  to  do 
good.  It  is  thus  that  it  has  made  men  watchful  of  customary 
morality,  lest  its  rules  should  be  conceived  in  the  interest  of 
some  particular  class  of  persons,  who — probably  without  be- 
ing fully  aware  of  it — have  been  concerned  in  establishing  and 
maintaining  them.  It  is  thus  that  it  has  afforded  men  ground 
for  enquiring,  when  laws,  ahke  pleading  the  highest  authority, 
were  found  to  make  conflicting  claims  on  their  obedience, 
whether  either  claim  represented  the  real  good  of  society,  and 
which  represented  the  good  of  the  largest  body  of  persons. 

Very  often  this  question  may  be  sufficiently  answered 
without  any  thorough  analysis  of  what  the  good  of  society 
consists  in,  and  thus  the  truth  of  the  answer  is  independent 
of  the  truth  of  the  theory  which  measures  good  by  the 
quantity  of  pleasure  experienced  on  the  whole.  In  none 
of  the  great  struggles  between  privileged  and  unprivileged 
classes,  through  which  modern  society  has  passed,  would 
a  man  have  been  helped  to  a  sounder  judgment  as  to  the 


CH.  Ill]  UTILITARIANISM  401 

part  which  he  should  take  by  a  more  correct  definition  of 
the  good.  The  essential  thing  for  his  right  guidance  has 
been  that,  whatever  might  be  the  definition  of  good  which 
he  would  accept,  he  should  admit  the  equal  title  of  all  men 
to  it  in  the  same  sense ;  that  account  should  be  taken  of 
the  widest  possible  range  of  society  that  can  be  brought 
into  view,  and  that  whatever  is  deemed  good  for  any  class 
or  individuals  in  the  society  should  be  deemed  good  for  all 
its  members.  In  the  struggle,  for  instance,  through  which 
the  United  States  of  America  lately  passed,  a  conscientious 
Virginian^  divided  in  his  mind  between  allegiance  to  his 
State  and  allegiance  to  the  Union,  could  have  found  no 
useful  direction  in  the  truest  possible  analysis  of  the  nature 
of  ultimate  good.  The  kind  of  well-being  ostensibly  served 
by  the  laws  of  his  State  for  those  who  had  the  benefit  of  the 
laws,  was  not  a  different  kind  from  that  served  by  the  main- 
tenance of  the  Union.  The  question  was  whether  secession 
or  maintenance  of  the  Union  would  promote  that  well-being 
most  impartially,  and  for  the  widest  range  of  society. 

Again,  in  most  cases  where  a  man  has  to  decide  how 
he  may  best  promote  the  greatest  good  of  others,  it  makes 
little  practical  difference  in  regard  to  the  line  of  action  to  be 
taken,  whether  he  considers  their  greatest  good  to  lie  in  the 
possession  of  a  certain  character,  as  an  end  not  a  means,  or 
in  the  enjoyment  of  the  most  pleasure  of  which  they  are 
capable.  No  one  can  convey  a  good  character  to  another,  t 
Every  one  must  make  his  character  for  himself.  All  that  v 
one  man  can  do  to  make  another  better  is  to  remove  ob^ 
stacles,  and  supply  conditions  favourable  to  the  formation 
of  a  good  character.  Now,  in  a  general  way  and  up  to 
a  certain  point,  the  line  of  action  directed  to  this  removal 
of  obstacles  and  supply  of  conditions  favourable  to  good- 
ness, will  also  tend  to  make  existence  more  pleasant  for 
those  whose  good  is  being  sought.  For  instance,  healthy 
houses  and  food,,  sound  elementary  education,  the  removal 
of  temptations  to  drink,  which  are  needed  in  order  to  supply 
conditions  favourable  to  good  character,  tend  also  to  make 

Dd 


4<i2     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

life  more  pleasant  on  the  whole.  The  question  at  issue 
between  Hedonistic  Utilitarians  and  their  opponents  as  to 
the  nature  of  ultimate  good  cannot  affect  their  importance. 
333.  So  far  we  have  seen  how  a  philosophy  of  morals 
may  prevent  the  perplexity  of  conscience,  and  consequent 
paralysis  or  misdirection  of  spiritual  energy,  arising  from  a 
conflict  between  authorities  which  have  alike  some  sacred- 
ness  for  the  imagination,  or  between  such  an  authority  and 
some  unauthorised  conviction  of  the  individual;  how  it  may 
do  this  by  directing  the  devotion,  hitherto  supposed  to  be 
due  to  certain  imponents  of  duty,  explicitly  to  the  end  from 
reference  to  which  all  true  authority,  without  distinction, 
must  be  derived ;  how  the  form  of  philosophy  which  in  the 
modern  world  has  most  conspicuously  rendered  this  service 
has  been  the  Utilitarian,  because  it  has  most  definitely  an- 
nounced the  interest  of  humanity,  without  distinction  of 
persons  or  classes,  as  the  end  by  reference  to  which  all 
claims  upon  obedience  are  ultimately  to  be  measured.  We 
may  pay  this  homage  to  Utilitarianism  without  admitting 
that  Hedonistic  interpretation  of  the  interest  of  humanity 
which  has  in  fact  generally  been  adopted  by  Utilitarians, 
especially  by  those  who  count  themselves  scientific.  Im- 
-  partiality  of  reference  to  human  well-being  has  been  the 
great  lesson  which  the  Utilitarian  has  had  to  teach.  That 
'unscientific'  interpretation  of  well-being  which  the  men 
most  receptive  of  the  lesson,  on  the  strength  of  their  own 
unselfish  wishes  and  aspirations,  halve  been  ready  to  supply, 
has  made  them  practically  independent  of  any  further  ana- 
lysis of  it,  when  once  the  equality  of  claim  to  it  had  been 
thoroughly  recognised.  We  may  give  Utilitarianism,  there- 
fore, full  credit  for  the  work  it  has  done  in  rationalising  the 
order  of  social  and  political  life,  while  holding  at  the  same 
time  that  its  Hedonistic  interpretation  of  well-being,  if  logic- 
ally carried  out,  would  deprive  it  of  any  practical  influence 
for  good ;  and  that,  as  this  interpretation  in  a  speculative 
age  comes  to  be  more  dwelt  upon  by  the  individual,  it  may 
itself  induce  practical  evils,  from  which  deliverance  must  be 


CH.  Ill]  UTILITARIANISM  403 

sought  in  a  truer  analysis  of  the  ultimate  good  for  man.  It 
remains  for  us  then  to  consider,  whether  there  is  any  prac- 
tical service — any  service  in  the  way  of  a  direction  of  con- 
duct— to  be  rendered  in  particular  by  such  a  theory  of  the 
good,  of  the  moral  ideal,  as  has  been  set  forth  above  in  op- 
position to  the  Hedonistic  view.  Are  there  any  questions  in 
regard  to  the  right  line  to  be  taken  in  life,  upon  which  men 
are  liable  to  bona  fide  perplexity',  and  upon  which  this  theory 
might  offer  a  guidance  that  Utilitarianism,  as  a  theory,  could 
not  supply?  And,  again,  can  it  claim  any  useful  office, 
simply  in  virtue  of  its  being  a  philosophy  of  morals  more 
adequate  to  the  moral  capability  of  man,  as  a  counteracting 
influence  to  that  weakening  of  conduct  and  lowering  of  aims, 
which  in  a  speculative  age  a  less  adequate,  and  therefore 
misleading,  philosophy  may  bring  about  ? 

334.  Hitherto  the  practical  effects  of  Utilitarianism,  as 
a  generally  accepted  theory,  have  been  chiefly  seen  in  its 
application  to  public  policy  rather  than  to  private  conduct. 
It  has  been  the  question,  Ought  such  and  such  laws  or 
institutions  to  be  maintained  or  altered?  rather  than  the 
question,  Ought  I  to  do  this  or  that?  which  it  has  in  fact 
generally  been  employed  to  settle.  Philosophic  Utilitarians,^ 
of  course,  have  always  held  that  the  ultimate  criterion  of 
right  and  wrong  in  the  actions  of  individuals,  as  much  as 
in  laws  and  institutions,  is  to  be  sought  in  the  balance  of 
resulting  pleasure  or  pain,  but  they  have  not  generally  been 
forward  to  press  the  application  of  this  criterion  by  individuals 
to  their  own  actions.  They  have  seldom,  indeed,  taken  the 
same  line  as  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick,  who,  while  he  holds  that 
no  other  scientific  test  of  right  conduct  is  possible  than  that 
derived  from  calculating  the  quantity  of  pleasure  produced 
by  any  course  of  action  to  all  sentient  beings  capable  of 
being  affected  by  it,  yet  explicitly  rejects  the  doctrine  that 
pleasure  is  the  sole  object  of  desire ;  and  who,  even  when 
he  has  thus  cleared  the  Utilitarian  motive  from  the  liability 

'  '  Bona  fide  perplexity,'  as  having  its  origin  really  in  intellectual 
difficulties,  not  in  any  selfish  interest. 

D  d  2 


404     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

to  be  identified  with  the  pleasure  of  the  person  moved  by  it, 
still  admits  that  the  moral  sentiments  are  in  fact  independent 
of  it,  and  expressly  guards  himself  against  being  supposed 
to  mean  that  the  desire  of  producing  the  utmost  possible 
pleasure  is  the  only  right  or  best  motive  of  action  *.  Such 
Utilitarianism  has  more  of  Butler  and  Hutcheson  in  it  than 
of  Bentham  and  Mill.  But  there  are  probably  few  even 
among  the  more  strictly  Hedonistic  Utilitarians  who  hold 
that  our  ordinary  judgments  of  actions,  as  right  or  wrong, 
are  formed  upon  any  estimate  by  the  individual  of  the  efifects 
of  the  actions  in  the  way  of  producing  pleasure  or  pain,  or 
-  who  would  wish  them  to  be  so  formed.  Even  when,  as  is 
commonly  the  case,  they  retain  the  psychological  doctrine 
that  pleasure — which  must  mean  pleasure  to  oneself — is  the 
sole  object  of  desire,  pain  the  sole  object  of  aversion,  they 
would  deny  that  in  his  best  actions  the  individual  was  actually 
influenced  by  what  we  naturally  describe  as  interested  mo- 
tives, or  by  a  calculation  of  pleasure-yielding  consequences, 
They  would  admit  that  such  actions  are  done  from  interest 
in  others,  or  from  a  feeling  that  they  ought  to  be  done;  and 
they  would  reconcile  this  admission  with-  their  doctrine  as 
to  pleasure  being  the  sole  object  of  desire,  by  supposing  that 
it  is  aversion  from  some  specific  pain  of  shame,  desire  for 
some  specific  pleasure  in  doing  nobly  or  in  contemplating 
the  pleasure  of  others — by  whatever  process  of  evolution 
these  sensibilities  may  have  arisen — that  form  the  motives  to 
such  actions.  And,  just  as  they  would  thus  qualify  their  view 
of  the  kind  of  desire  for  pleasure  which  is  the  motive  to  an 
admirable  action,  so  they  would  admit  that  in  most  cases 
the  question,  whether  an  action  was  right  or  wrong,  was  most 
likely  to  be  correctly  decided  by  the  individual  on  the 
strength  of  judgments  which  we  call  intuitive,  which  may 
perhaps  represent  prolonged  observation  by  his  ancestors  of 
the  pleasure-giving  and  pain-giving  effects  of  actions,  but  are 
independent  of  any  such  observation  on  his  own  part. 
335.  It  is  not  to  be  expected,  however,  in  an  age  of 
'  Methods  of  Ethics,  Bk.  I.  Chap,  iv,  and  Bk.  IV.  Chap.  i. 


CH.  Ill]  UTILITARIANISM  405 

intellectual  emancipation,  when  a  scientific  test  of  right 
action  has  been  announced  which  is  in  itself  easily  intelli- 
gible (whatever  upon  thorough  enquiry  may  turn  out  to  be 
the  diflficulties  of  its  application),  that  educated  men  will 
fail  to  employ  it  in  their  judgments  of  what  they  individu- 
ally should  do  and  should  not  do.  Having  got  to  the 
water,  the  ducklings  will  swim.  The  habit  of  calling  autho- 
rities in  question  cannot  be  limited  to  philosophers;  and, 
having  once  learned  to  call  them  in  question,  men  will  not 
stop,  short  with  the  authorities  that  have  regulated  their 
civil  and  political  relations.  They  will  seek  a  rationale  of 
their  most  intimate  moral  obligations ;  and  when  the  Utili- 
tarian philosopher  offers  them  a  scientific  test  of  right  and 
wrong,  they  will  not  be  slow  to  apply  it  to  the  question 
which  interests  them  most — the  question  how  they  may 
best  conduct  their  own  lives.  In  the  European  nations 
a  constantly  increasing  number  of  persons  find  themselves 
in  circumstances,  in  which  a  large  option  is  allowed  them 
as  to  the  plan  on  which  they  will  conduct  their  lives.  The 
necessities  of  providing  for  a  family,  or  of  fulfilling  the 
requirements  of  some  employment  without  which  they  could 
not  live,  no  longer  determine  the  whole  course  of  their  exist- 
ence. They  can  'please  themselves'  in  regard  to  a  large 
part  of  their  action;  and  they  are  naturally  interested  in  find- 
ing a  theory  which,  though  it  will  probably  have  much  less 
influence  than  they  ascribe  to  it  in  really  directing  even  their 
more  optional  conduct,  will  always  give  them  a  basis  for 
arguing  with  themselves  and  others,  whether  that  conduct  is 
justifiable  or  otherwise. 

How  prevalent  such  argument  has  become,  at  least  in 
'  cultivated  circles,'  need  not  be  said.  Hedonism  has  become 
not  only  a  serious  topic  in  the  study,  but  often  the  babble 
of  the  drawing-room.  Good  people,  of  the  sort  who  fifty 
years  ago  would  have  found  in  the  law  of  their  neighbours' 
opinion,  or  in  the  requirements  of  their  church  or  sect,  or 
in  the  precepts  of  Scripture  as  interpreted  by  church  or  sect, 
sufficient  direction  for  so  much  of  their  walk  and  conduct 


4o6     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bK.IV 

as  it  would  have  occurred  to  them  to  think  in  need  of  any 
direction,  may  now  be  heard  arguing  whether  this  occupation 
or  that,  this  or  that  habit  of  action,  this  or  that  way  of  spend- 
ing their  time,  conveys  .the  greater  amount  of  pleasure  and 
is  therefore  the  more  to  be  approved.  That  they  attach 
serious  importance  to  the  question,  that  they  suppose  its 
decision  to  go  for  a  great  deal  in  the  actual  guidance  of 
their  lives,  may  be  inferred  from  the  surprise  and  displeasure 
with  which  they  would  receive  a  suggestion  that,  after  all, 
their  action  is  pretty  much  independent  of  it.  They  may  not 
be  very  clear  whether  it  is  pleasure  to  themselves  or  to 
others  that  they  have  in  view ;  they  may  not  have  appreciated 
the  distinction  between  '  egoistic '  and  '  universalistic '  He- 
donism ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  two  things  :  (i)  that 
to  an  extent  unknown  in  previous  generations  they  are  seek- 
ing a  theoretical  direction  for  individual  conduct,  and  seeking 
it  in  a  consideration  of  the  natural  consequences  of  conduct, 
as  causing  pleasure  or  pain ;  and  (2)  that  they  seem  to  them- 
selves to  be  largely  influenced  in  conduct  by  this  theoretical 
direction. 

336.  Those  who  are  glad  of  atopic  for  denunciation  may, 
if  they  like,  treat  the  prevalence  of  such  opinions  among 
educated  men  as  encouraging  the  tendency  to  vicious  self- 
indulgence  in  practice.  No  such  unfairness  vs'ill  here  be 
committed.  There  is  no  good  reason  to  apprehend  that 
there  is  relatively  more — we  may  even  hope  that  there  is 
less — of  such  self-indulgence  than  in  previous  generations ; 
though,  for  reasons  just  indicated,  it  has  a  wider  scope  for 
itself,  talks  more  of  itself  and  is  more  talked  about,  than  at 
times  when  men  were  more  tied  down  by  the  necessities  of 
their  position.  We  are  no  more  justified  in  treating  what 
we  take  to  be  untrue  theories  of  morals  as  positive  pro- 
moters of  vice,  than  in  treating  what  we  deem  truer  theories 
as  positive  promoters  of  virtue.  Only  those  in  whom  the 
tendencies  to  vicious  self-indulgence  have  been  so  far  over- 
come as  to  allow  the  aspiration  after  perfection  of  life  to 
take  effect,  are  in  a  state  to  be  affected  either  for  better  or 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM  407 

for  worse  by  theories  of  the  good.  The  worst  that  can  truly 
be  objected  against  the  prevalence  of  Hedonistic  theory,  just 
noticed,  is  that  it  may  retard  and  mislead  those  who  are 
already  good,  according  to  the  ordinary  sense  of  goodness  as 
equivalent  to  immunity  from  vice,  in  their  effort  to  be  better ; 
and  the  most  that  can  be  claimed  for  the  theory  which  we 
deem  truer,  is  that  it  keeps  the  way  clearer  of  speculative 
impediments  to  the  operation  of  motives,  which  it  seeks  to  in- 
terpret but  does  not  pretend  to  supply.  The  grounds  for  this 
objection  and  this  claim  are  what  we  have  now  to  consider. 
337.  We  have  already  explained  the  reasons  to  which  we 
ascribe  the  general  acceptance  of  Hedonistic  theory  by 
persons  who  are  themselves  by  no  means  habitual  pleasure- 
seekers.  They  seem  to  be  chiefly  two.  One  is  the  confused 
notion  that  the  pleasure  incidental  to  the  satisfaction  of 
desire,  or  to  the  consciousness  of  work  done,  is  itself  the 
object  of  the  desire,  or  the  end  to  which  the  work  is  directed. 
Simply  for  want  of  thorough  reflective  analysis,  men  whose 
main  interest  is  in  the  achievement  of  objects  quite  different 
from  any  enjoyment  of  pleasure,  are  ready  to  admit  that 
their  object  is  always  some  pleasure  or  other,  because  they 
are  conscious  of  always  anticipating  pleasure  in  the  achieve- 
ment of  their  objects.  The  other  reason  is  the  impossibility 
of  adequately  defining  an  end  that  consists  in  the  realisation 
of  human  capabilities,  until  the  realisation  is  accomplished. 
When  we  say  that  the  '  summum  bonum,'  by  reference  to 
which  the  value  of  men's  actions  is  to  be  measured,  is  the 
perfection  of  human  life,  as  consisting  in  the  full  realisation 
of  human  capabilities,  some  more  detailed  account  of  this 
realisation,  and  of  the  perfection  which  it  constitutes,  is 
naturally  asked  for.  Eut  such  an  account  cannot  be  given 
in  a  way  that  is  likely  at  first  to  satisfy  the  questioner.  We 
can  point  indeed  to  a  great  realisation  of  human  capabilities, 
which  has  actually  been  achieved.  Men  have  been  in  large 
measure  civilised  and  moralised;  nature  has  been  largely 
subdued  to  their  use ;  they  have  learnt  to  express  them- 
selves  in   the  fine   arts.     The  ordinary   activity  of  men. 


4o8     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

regulated  by  law  and  custom,  has  its  value  as  contributing 
to  this  realisation.  But  it  is  not  for  this  ordinary  activity,  so 
regulated,  that  those  who  are  seeking  practical  direction  in 
a  theory  of  the  good  need  any  guidance.  It  does  not  occur 
to  them  that  they  have  any  option  in  regard  to  it.  They 
play  their  part  in  it  as  a  matter  of  course.  It  is  an  aspiration 
after  some  further  perfection  than  that  already  attained  in 
those  actual  arrangements  of  life,  which  they  have  no  choice 
but  to  accept  and  help  to  maintain,  that  makes  them 
enquire  into  the  ends  of  living.  If  the  philosopher  can 
only  tell  them  to  try  to  be  better  and  to  make  others  better ; 
to  seek  a  more  complete  fulfilment  of  the  capabilities  of 
human  nature  in  themselves  and  in  others ;  to  make  this  the 
object  of  their  lives  and  the  end  by  reference  to  which  they 
measure  the  value  of  actions  ;  if  he  cannot  at  the  same  time 
tell  them  what  this  greater  perfection  will  positively  mean  for 
themselves  and  others ;  they  will  be  apt  to  think  that  he  has 
told  them  nothing,  and  to  contrast  the  emptiness  of  the  end 
to  which  he  professes  to  direct  them,  with  the  definite  intelli- 
gibility of  that  which  is  explained  to  consist  in  a  greatest  pos- 
sible quantity  of  pleasure  for  all  sentient  beings.  For  does 
not  every  one  know  what  pleasure  is  and  desire  it,  and  cannot 
every  one  compare  a  greater  with  a  less  quantity  of  it  ? 

338.  For  the  moment  we  will  suppose  this  contrast 
between  the  two  ways  of  conceiving  the  chief  good — between 
the  definiteness  of  the  one  and  the  vagueness  of  the  other — 
to  be  valid,  as  it  is,  no  doubt,  generally  accepted.  We  will 
suppose  the  view  that  the  '  summum  bonum '  is  the  greatest 
possible  nett  quantity  of  pleasure  to  be  adopted  by  some  one, 
who  has  no  inducement  to  find  in  it  excuses  for  self-indul- 
gence of  that  kind  which,  as  we  have  seen,  though  it  may  find 
excuses  for  itself  in  theoretical  Hedonism,  is  never  really 
occasioned  by  it.  We  will  suppose  it  to  be  disinterestedly 
applied  by  such  an  one  to  the  direction  of  his  life,  in  those 
respects  in  which  he  is  likely  to  feel  the  need  of  direction. 
We  have  previously  explained  the  grounds  on  which,  as 
a  matter  of  speculation,  we  jeject  this  view,  and  need  not 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM 


409 


here  repeat  them.  The  question  now  to  be  discussed  is 
whether  it  is  likely  to  have  any  effects  which  may  make 
a  reconsideration  of  it,  and  a  more  thorough  insight  into  the 
truth  of  the  view  opposed  to  it,  practically  desirable.  Is  not 
its  intrinsic  unavailability  for  supplying  motive  or  guidance 
to  a  man  who  wishes  to  make  his  life  better,  likely  to  induce 
a  practical  scepticism  in  reflecting  persons  who  have  adopted 
it,  which  tends  to  paralyse  the  effort  after  a  better  life  ? 

To  speak  of  it  as  thus  intrinsically  unavailable  is  a  state- 
ment which  will  probably  be  thought  to  need  prompt 
vindication.  It  will  be  remembered  that  we  are  supposing 
a  man  to  be  in  search  of  some  guidance  of  conduct  which 
mere  conformity  to  established  usage,  and  the  fulfilment  of 
the  duties  of  his  station  according  to  what  is  expected  of  him, 
will  not  afford.  As  regards  duties  recognised  by  the  law  of 
opinion — those  of  common  veracity  and  fair  dealing,  and  of 
beneficence  in  its  more  obvious  forms,  family  duties  and 
those  imposed  by  State  or  Church — it  is  easy  to  show  that 
an  overbalance  of  pain  would  on  the  whole  result  from  their 
neglect  to  those  capable  of  being  affected  by  it,  whether  or 
no  we  consider  this  to  constitute  the  reason  why  they  should 
be  fulfilled.  We  cannot  doubt  that  a  general  desire  to  avoid 
pain  has  had  much  to  do  with  the  establishment  of  such 
duties,  though  we  may  think  that  alone  it  could  not  suffice 
for  their  establishment.  And  it  is  certain  that  any  disturb- 
ance of  the  established  order,  simply  as  disturbance,  must 
cause  much  pain.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  consider- 
able balance  of  pleasure  to  one  who  violates  such  duties,  or 
to  other  exceptional  persons  to  whom  his  act  may  be  an 
occasion  of  pleasure,  to  be  set  against  the  general  pain  caused 
by  it.  From  the  nature  of  the  case  the  pangs  of  fear  and 
shame  must  go  far  to  neutralise  any  access  of  pleasure  to 
such  persons.  In  such  cases,  therefore,  if  the  test  of  felicific 
consequences  is  to  be  applied,  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the 
result  that  it  will  yield.  But  then  these  are  not  the  cases  in 
which  the  application  of  such  a  test  is  ever  likely  to  be  called 
for.     It  is  for  direction  in  cases  where  the  rules  of  conven- 


410     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

tional  morality  fail  them,  or  in  the  attempt  to  remedy  the 
defects  of  that  morality,  that  enlightened  and  conscientious 
persons  look  to  their  theory  of  the  good.  A  man  wishes  to 
satisfy  himself,  for  instance,  whether  he  is  justified  in  spend- 
ing so  much  of  his  time,  without  neglect  of  any  recognised 
duty,  in  the  gratification  of  his  taste  for  music,  or  of  his 
curiosity  in  literature ;  in  conforming  to  the  expectation  of 
his  class  by  accepting  a  challenge  to  a  duel,  or  by  running 
race-horses,  or  by  being  a  party  to  the  purchase  of  votes  at 
an  election  j  whether  he  ought  not,  in  consideration  of  the 
state  of  society,  to  give  up  his  habit  of  moderate  drinking, 
or  apply  less  of  his  wealth  to  private  enjoyments  and  more 
to  public  purposes.  Or  perhaps  he  finds  himself  in  some 
situation,  such  as  that  which  we  illustrated  from  the  '  Heart 
of  Midlothian,'  in  which,  for  the  sake  of  others  as  well  as 
himself,  there  seems  to  be  strong  reason  for  departing  from 
some  ordinary  rule  of  morality,  and  in  which,  having  eman- 
cipated himself  from  those  influences  of  imagination  which 
might  govern  the  conduct  of  less  enlightened  persons,  he 
requires  some  rule  of  reason  to  direct  him.  When  the 
problem  is  of  this  kind,  how  far  will  the  Hedonistic  theory 
really  help  to  its  solution  ? 

339.  In  the  first  order  of  instances  just  suggested,  the 
question  before  the  individual,  speaking  generally,  is  whether 
he  should  depart  from  the  course  of  action  to  which  custom 
or  inclination,  or  the  sense  of  what  the  opinion  of  his  class 
requires  of  him,  would  naturally  lead  him,  with  a  view  to 
some  higher  good ;  and  this,  on  the  principles  of  Hedonistic 
Utilitarianism,  must  mean,  with  a  view  to  the  production 
of  a  quantity  of  pleasure  greater  on  the  whole  than  that  to 
be  expected  from  the  course  of  action  which,  but  for  the 
sake  of  this  higher  good,  he  would  naturally  follow.  We 
will  suppose  the  Hedonistic  calculation,  then,  to  be  under- 
taken by  an  enlightened  and  dispassionate  person  in  order 
to  the  settlement  of  this  question.  How  is  he  to  assure 
himself  that  the  proposed  immediate  and  undoubted  sacrifice 
on  his  own  part  will  be  compensated  by  an  addition  to  the  . 


CH.  in]  HEDONISM 


411 


sum  of  human  enjoyments  on  the  whole  ?  We  say  human 
enjoyments,  in  order  not  to  complicate  the  question  at  the 
outset  by  recognising  the  necessity  of  taking  the  pleasures 
of  all  sentient  beings  into  account,  though  it  is  difficult  to 
see  how  upon  Hedonistic  principles  •  that  necessity  can  be 
ignored ;  for  if  it  is  pleasure,  as  such,  and  not  the  person 
enjoying  it,  that  has  intrinsic  value,  all  pleasures  alike,  by 
whatever  beings  enjoyed,  must  be  considered  in  making  up 
the  main  account.  Though  confining  his  view,  however, 
to  the  pains  and  pleasures  of  men,  our  enquirer,  if  he 
refuses  to  be  put  off  with  answers  which  really  imply  non- 
Hedonistic  suppositions,  will  find  it  difficult  to  assure 
himself  that,  by  any  interference  with  usage  or  resistance 
to  his  own  inclination,  he  can  make  the  balance  of  human 
pleasures  as  against  human  pains  greater  than  it  is. 

340.  And  in  the  process  of  dealing  with  this  difficulty 
he  is  likely  to  find  himself  in  the  presence  of  one  still  more 
formidable,  because  more  closely  affecting  the  springs  of 
his  own  conduct.  He  will  have  to  face  the  question 
whether,  upon  the  principles  which  have  generally  been 
taken  as  the  foundation  of  philosophic  Utilitarianism,  the 
supposition  that  it  is  possible  for  him  to  do  anything  else 
than  follow  his  pleasure-seeking  impulses  can  be  other  than 
an  illusion.  In  the  first  place  he  will  be  likely  to  call  in 
question  the  common  assumption  that  the  aggregate  of 
pleasures  at  any  time  enjoyed  might,  under  the  circumstances, 
be  greater  than  it  is.  He  will  see  that  this  assumption 
conflicts  with  the  principles  on  which  'the  proof  of  Utili- 
tarianism '  has  been  generally  founded.  These  principles 
are  that  every  one  acts  from  what  is  for  the  time  his 
strongest  desire  or  aversion,  and  that  the  object  of  a  man's 
strongest  desire  is  always  that  which  for  the  time  he 
imagines  as  his  greatest  pleasure,  the  object  of  his  strongest 
aversion  that  which  for  the  time  he  imagines  as  his  greatest 
pain.  Now  we  have  clearly  no  title  to  say  that  any  one  is 
mistaken  in  such  imagination ;  that  anything  else  would  be  a 
greater  pleasure  or  pain  to  him  at  the  time  than  that  which, 


412     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

being  what  he  is  and  under  the  given  circumstances,  he  looks 
forward  to  as  a  greatest  pleasure  or  pain.  Of  his  present 
capacity  for  pleasure  we  have,  on  the  hypothesis,  no  test 
but  his  desire,  and  of  his  desire  no  test  but  his  action. 

It  will  be  objected,  perhaps,  that  a  man  is  really  capable 
of  other  pleasure  than  that  which  at  any  time  he  imagines 
as  his  greatest  and  consequently  desires,  since  his  imagina- 
tion of  pleasure  is  founded  on  past  experience  of  pleasure, 
and  this  is  not  the  measure  of  what  he  is  capable  of 
receiving.  Now  of  course  the  pleasure  which  has  been  is 
not  exactly  that  which  shall  be.  A  more  intense  pleasure 
may  from  time  to  time  come  in  a  man's  way  than  any  he 
has  before  experienced ;  and  this  may  affect  his  imagination, 
and  consequent  desire,  of  pleasure  for  the  future.  But  it 
does  not  follow  from  this  that  any  one  at  any  given  time, 
possessed  by  imagination  of  a  particular  pleasure  and  by 
desire  for  it,  is  capable  of  any  other  pleasure  than  that. 
He  may  come  to  be  so  capable,  but  for  the  present  he  is 
not.  The  pleasure  may  turn  out  to  be  much  less  in  enjoy- 
ment than  in  imagination ;  it  may  in  the  sequel  lead  to  the 
most  intense  pain ;  but  it  remains  true  that  for  the  time,  if 
it  is  the  pleasure  which  the  man  imagines  as  then  for  him 
the  greatest,  and  which  by  inevitable  consequence  (on  the 
given  hypothesis)  he  most  strongly  desires,  it  is  in  fact 
the  greatest  pleasure  of  which  he  is  capable.  And,  mutatis 
mutandis,  the  same  will  be  true  of  pain.  Our  enquirer  then 
will  conclude  that,  supposing  his  principles  to  be  true,  the 
aggregate  balance  of  pleasures  at  any  time  enjoyed  by  man- 
kind is  as  great  as  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be,  the  persons  and 
the  circumstances  being  what  they  are ;  and  that,  since  in 
each  of  his  actions  .a  man  obtains  the  greatest  pleasure  or 
avoids  the  greatest  pain  which  is  at  the  time  possible  for 
him,  there  is  no  ground  for  saying  that  in  the  total  result 
he  obtains  a  less  sum  of  pleasure  than  any  which  it  was 
really  possible  for  him  to  obtain,  except  through  some  good 
fortune  independent  of  his  own  action. 

341.  This  conclusion  must  at  least  suggest  a  reconsidera- 


CH.  m]  HEDONISM  413 

tion  of  the  sense  in  which  it  is  commonly  said  that  such  or 
such  an  action  ought  or  ought  not  to  be  done.  The  Utili- 
tarian who  does  not  probe  his  Hedonistic  principles  to  the 
bottom,  has  no  difficulty  in  saying  of  any  one  that  he  ought 
to  do  what  he  does  not,  because,  while  he  takes  for  granted 
that  the  largest  balance  of  possible  pleasure  is  the  chief 
good,  he  does  not  question  that  it  is  open  to  the  man  who 
'does  what  he  ought  not'  to  obtain  a  larger  quantity  of 
pleasure  for  himself  and  for  others  than  he  in  fact  obtains 
by  acting  as  he  does.  But  upon  Hedonistic  principles,  as 
we  have  just  seen,  it  is  clearly  not  possible  for  a  man,  as  his 
desires  and  aversions  at  any  time  stand,  to  obtain  at  the 
time  by  his  own  act  more  pleasure,  or  avoid  more  pain, 
than  he  in  fact  does.  We  cannot  therefore,  consistently 
with  these  principles,  tell  the  man  whom  we  count  vicious 
that,  according  to  the  common  Utilitarian  language,  he  wil- 
fully disregards  his  own  true  interest  and  throws  away  his 
own  greatest  happiness.  At  the  most  we  can  only  tell  him 
that  more  pleasure  on  the  whole  would  have  resulted  from 
another  course  of  action  than  that  to  which  an  inevitable 
strongest  desire  for  pleasures,  from  time  to  time  imagined 
as  the  greatest,  has  in  fact  led  him.  But  even  this,  when 
the  matter  is  looked  into,  will  not  seem  so  certain.  It  is 
not  to  be  denied,  of  course,  that  if  some  instrument  could 
be  invented,  by  which  the  degrees  of  intensity  of  successive 
pleasures  and  pains  could  be  registered,  and  then  the  sum 
added  up,  in  many  cases  where  a  man  had  led  an  immoral 
life  the  balance  would  be  found  much  less  on  the  side  of 
pleasure,  or  much  more  on  the  side  of  pain,  than  would 
have  resulted  had  the  man  led  a  different  life ;  though  on 
each  occasion,  according  to  the  Hedonistic  hypothesis,  he 
must  have  obtained  the  most  pleasure  of  which  for  the  time 
he  was  capable.  This  is  plainly  the  case  where  the  man's 
actions  have  made  his  life  much  shorter,  or  much  more  pain- 
ful in  its  later  period,  than  it  would  have  been  had  he  acted 
differently.  But  here  everything  must  depend  on  the  nature 
of  the  individual  case.    For  a  man  with  a  very  strong  con- 


414     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.IV 

stitution  a  certain  course  of  action  will  have  a  different  bear- 
ing on  his  future  capacity  for  enjoyment  from  that  which  it 
has  for  a  weaker  man.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  man  has 
some  germ  of  disease  in  his  system  which  must  kill  him 
before  he  is  old,  the  method  of  seeking  a  rapid  succession 
of  intense  pleasures,  without  reference  to  the  effects  they 
may  have  in  later  life,  will  be  the  right  one  for  him  to  adopt 
with  a  view  to  enjoying  the  largest  sum  possible  for  him  on 
the  whole,  while  it  would  be  the  wrong  one  for  a  man  who, 
with  care,  was  sure  to  live  to  old  age. 

342.  Even  in  regard  to  modes  of  living,  then,  which  at 
first  sight  seem  certain  to  yield  a  man  more  pain  and 
less  pleasure  on  the  whole  than  he  might  have  had,  if  he 
could  have  lived  differently,  we  shall  find  that  we  have  to 
make  an  indefinite  number  of  exceptions.  Even  in  regard 
to  them,  so  far  as  the  goodness  or  badness  of  a  particular 
course  of  action  is  to  depend  on  its  relation  to  the  nett  sum 
of  pleasure  possible  for  the  individual  so  acting,  we  shall 
have  to  say  that  it  may  be  good  for  one  and  bad  for  another, 
according  to  physical  conditions  which  we  are  not  com- 
petent to  ascertain.  In  other  cases  where,  looking  on  from 
the  outside,  we  are  apt  to  think  that  the  enjoyment  of  cer- 
tain pleasures,  the  most  intense  of  which  the  individual  is 
for  the  time  capable,  diminishes  the  whole  sum  possible  for 
him,  we  are  arguing  from  our  own  conditions  and  suscepti- 
bilities. We  argue  that  the  enjoyment  of  certain  pleasures 
brings  a  preponderance  of  pain  in  the  long  run,  because  it 
brings  poverty  or  dishonour  or  the  pangs  of  conscience,  or 
deprives  a  man  of  the  pleasures  of  friendship  or  family 
affection  or  a  cultivated  taste.  But,  as  to  these  pleasures 
which  we  suppose  to  be  forgone,  we  have  no  means  of 
measuring  their  intensity,  as  enjoyed  by  one  man,  against 
the  intensity  of  pleasures  which  we  count  vicious,  as  enjoyed 
by  another  man.  We  cannot  tell  to  what  degree  they  would 
have  been  pleasures  to  the  man  whom  we  suppose  to  have 
deprived  himself  of  them.  As  to  the  pains,  again,  which 
we  suppose  the  immoral  man  to  incur,  their  incidence  de- 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM  415 

pends  largely  on  his  position,  the  length  of  his  purse,  and 
a  multitude  of  circumstances  which  vary  with  the  individual 
case.  We  are  not  entitled  to  hold  that,  if  incurred  at  all, 
they  are  to  him  what  they  would  be  to  a  man  who  had  lived 
differently.  The  very  pursuit  of  pleasures  of  sense  may  so 
dull  the  moral  sensibilities  that  the  pain,  which  an  onlooker 
associates  with  those  pleasures  as  their  natural  consequence, 
does  not  really  follow  for  the  person  who  has  enjoyed  them. 
It  would  thus  seem  that,  though  there  are  doubtless  many 
men  who  by  their  manner  of  life  make  the  balance  of 
pleasures  and  pains,  number  and  duration  being  duly  set 
against  intensity,  less  favourable  to  themselves  than  it  might 
have  been  if  they  could  have  lived  differently,  yet  we  cannot 
with  certainty  tell  any  particular  person  that  he  is  living 
Such  a  life,  and  are  not  entitled  to  identify  those  in  whose 
case  the  balance  will  turn  out  favourable  with  those  whom 
we  in  fact  count  virtuous,  nor  those  in  whose  case  it  will 
turn  out  unfavourable  with  those  whom  we  count  vicious. 

343.  It  may  be  objected  here  perhaps  that,  although  we 
cannot  say  with  certainty  of  any  particular  course  of  action, 
as  pursued  by  a  particular  person,  that  it  diminishes  the 
sum  of  pleasures  open  to  him,  we  may  be  quite  sure  that 
action  of  that  kind  has  a  general  tendency  to  diminish  plea- 
sure for  the  persons  pursuing  it.  Does  this  mean,  however, 
that  the  supposed  course  of  action  would  diminish  the  sura 
of  pleasures  if  generally  pursued,  or  that  it  does  so  for  the 
majority  of  those  who  pursue  it  ?  The  former  meaning  is 
not  to  the  purpose,  when  we  are  considering  the  question 
whether  the  hves  actually  lived  by  men  bring  them  less 
pleasure  on  the  whole  than  the  same  men  would  experience 
if  they  lived  differently.  Supposing  a  moral  obligation  upon 
the  individual  to  act  according  to  general  rules,  it  will  of 
course  be  his  duty  to  consider  whether  any  course  of  action 
which,  as  adopted  by  himself,  is  productive  of  a  prepon^ 
derance  of  pleasure,  would  have  a  like  result  if  generally 
adopted.  But  no  such  consideration  can  affect  the  questioti 
whether  the  line  of  action,  actually  pursued  by  this  man  or 


4l6     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IV 

that,  is  consistent  with  the  attainment  by  those  persons  of 
the  maximum  of  pleasure  possible  for  them.  On  this  ques- 
tion the  fact  that  the  same  line  of  action,  if  pursued  by 
other  people  than  those  who  do  in  fact  pursue  it,  would 
diminish  the  balance  of  pleasure  possible  for  those  other 
people,  has  simply  no  bearing  at  all.  In  this  regard  each 
particular  action  or  course  of  action  must  stand  upon  its 
own  merits.  If  the  morality  of  the  action— the  question 
whether  it  is  morally  good  or  bad — depends  on  the  balance 
of  pleasure  or  pain  that  will  result  from  it — not  from  appa^ 
rently  similar  actions  done  by  other  men,  but  from  that 
particular  action  as  done  by  the  person  who  does  it,  and 
under  the  circumstances  under  which  it  is  done ;  and  if  we 
cannot  be  sure  that  the  particular  action  diminishes  the 
balance  of  pleasures  which,  given  the  circumstances  of  the 
case  and  the  desires  and  aversions  of  the  agent,  was  really 
possible,  as  little  can  we  be  sure  whether  that  particular 
action  is  morally  good  or  bad,  whether  it  should  be  done  or 
should  not  be  done. 

344.  It  may  be  objected,  however,  that  this  uncertainty 
can  only  continue,  so  long  as  we  confine  our  consideration 
to  the  consequences  of  the  particular  action  to  the  agent 
himself;  that  it  must  disappear  when  we  take  into  account 
its  consequences  to  society  in  general,  as  on  Utilitarian 
principles  we  are  bound  to  do.  But  is  this  so?  It  must 
be  remembered  that  we  are  supposing  the  principles  of 
Hedonistic  Utilitarianism  tp  be  strictly  carried  out.  Accord- 
ing to  them  ultimate  value„  lies  in  pleasures  as  such,  not  in 
the  persons  enjoying  them.  A  pleasure  of  a  certain  intensity, 
enjoyed  by  three  persons,  is  of  no  more  value  than  a  pleasure 
of  threefold  intensity  enjoyed  by  one.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered also  that  the  question  relates  to  the  pleasure-giving 
effects  of  particular  actions,  not  of  kinds  of  action.  Now 
actions  are  no  doubt  sometimes  done,  in  regard  to  which  it 
would  be  idle  to  doubt  ths^t  the  pain,  or  loss  of  pleasure, 
which  they  cause  to  others  far  outweigh?  any  pleasure,  or 
irelief  from  pain,  which  they  bring  to  those  concerned  in 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM  417 

doing  thiem.  But  is  this  the  case  with  the  every-day  actions 
which  men  of  a  high  moral  standard  would  condemn,  and 
to  which  the  moral  reformer  would  seek  to  put  an  end  ?  Is 
it  really  possible  to  measure  the  addition  to  the  pleasure 
of  others,  or  diminution  of  their  pains,  that  would  be  caused 
by  the  agent's  abstaining  from  any  such  an  act — which,  on 
the  hypothesis,  yields  him  the  most  intense  pleasure  of  which 
for  the  time  he  is  capable,  or  it  would  not  be  done — against 
the  loss  of  pleasure  which  he  would  thereby  undergo  ?  The 
loss  of  pleasure  would  vary  indefinitely  with  different  persons; 
it  would  be  different  in  the  same  person  at  different  times, 
according  to  the  degree  of  that  susceptibility  upon  which  the 
intensity  of  the  pleasure  which  is  for  the  time  most  intense 
for  the  individual  depends.  How  can  we  be  sure  that,  in  all 
or  in  most  cases  where  such  actions  are  done,  the  certain 
loss  of  pleasure  or  increase  of  pain  to  each  individual,  which, 
taking  him  as  he  is  on  occasion  of  each  action,  would  be 
implied  in  his  acting  otherwise  than  he  does,  would  be  so 
overbalanced  by  increase  of  pleasure  or  decrease  of  pain  to 
others,  that  the  total  sum  of  pleasure  enjoyed  by  the  aggre- 
gate of  men,  taking  them  as  they  are,  would  be  greater  than 
it  is? 

345.  If  our  supposed  Hedonistic  enquirer  follows  out 
these  considerations  to  their  legitimate  conclusion,  they  are 
likely  at  least  to  have  a  modifying  influence  on  any  zeal  which 
may  have  possessed  him  for  reforming  current  morality  in 
himself  and  others. .  They  will  at  least  make  him  less  con- 
fident in  judging  that  men,  as  they  are,  should  act  otherwise 
than  they  do,  less  confident  in  any  methods  of  increasing 
the  enjoyments  of  mankind,  and  in  consequence  more  ready 
to  let  things  take  their  course.  '  But  after  all,'  it  may  be 
said,  '  this  may  mean  no  more  than  that  they  will  make  him 
less  censorious,  more  patient  of  the  failings  of  mankind, 
more  alive  to  the  slowness  of  the  process  by  which  alone 
any  amelioration  of  the  human  lot  can  be  achieved.  The 
conclusion  supposed  to  be  arrived  at  amounts  to  no  more 
than  this,  that,  if  we  would  increase  the  sum  of  enjoyments 

E  e 


4l8     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IV 

at  any  time  open  to  men,  we  must  first  change  their  desires 
and  their  surrotindings.  The  enquirer  who  is  in  doubt 
whether  or  no  he  should  interfere  with  some  custom,  or 
resist  some  incHnation  of  his  own,  with  a  view  to  increasing 
human  enjoyments,  may  admit  that  by  so  doing  he  cannot 
make  the  balance  of  pleasure  greater  than  it  at  any  time 
happens  to  be,  so  long  as  men  and  circumstances  remain 
what  at  the  time  they  are;  but  he  may  hope  that  his  personal 
sacrifice^  his  disturbance  (necessarily  painful  in  itself)  of 
mischievous  class  conventions,  will  so  alter  men  and  cir- 
cumstances as  to  make  the  balance  of  enjoyments  greater 
in  the  future  than  it  at  present  is.  This  hope  should  be 
enough  to  induce  any  one^who  does  not  need  to  be  attracted 
by  the  glory  of  present  recognised  success,  "  to  spurn  de- 
lights and  live  laborious  days." ' 

,  Now  it  is  quite  true  that  there  is  nothing  in  his  acceptance 
of  the  supposed  principles,  however  logically  he  applies  them, 
to  prevent  our  enquirer,  if  he  is  of  sanguine  temper,  from 
hoping  for  an  increase  in  the  nett  sum  of  human  enjoyments. 
The  question  is  whether  they  warrant  him  in  believing  that 
by  any  self-denial  or  reforming  energy  on  his  part  the  result 
can  be  affected.  The  '  vulgar '  Utilitarian  notion,  of  course, 
is  that  it  is  men's  own  fault  that  they  are  not  happier  on  the 
whole  than  they  are ;  that  it  is  open  to  them  by  their  own 
action  to  increase  the  sum  of  their  enjoyments ;  that  they 
ought  to  do  so ;  that  every  one  is  responsible  for  contributing 
as  much  as  he  can,  according  to  his  lights  and  powers,  to 
the  stock  of  human  happiness.  But  our  enquirer,  following 
out  the  principles  of  philosophical  Utilitarianism,  will  be  apt 
to  doubt  the  justification  of  this  belief,  whatever  he  may  think 
of  its  origin  and  serviceableness.  '  The  course  of  a  man's 
action,'  he  will  say,  'depends  on  the  pleasures  and  pains 
that  have  happened  to  come  in  his  way,  through  a  chain  of 
events  over  which  he  has  had  no  control.  These  determine 
his  desires  and  aversions,  which  in  turn  determine  his  actions 
and  through  them  to  some  extent  the  pleasures  and  pains  of 
his  future.    No  initiative  by  the  individual  anywhere  occurs. 


CH.  in]  HEDONISM  419 

Desires  indeed  may  arise  in  a  man  which  he  has  not  felt 
before,  and  may  lead  to  action  which  increases  the  stock  of 
human  enjoyment ;  but  they  can  only  arise  because  some 
pleasures  have  fallen  to  his  lot  that  he  had  not  experienced 
before.  Clearly  then  there  is  no  alternative  but  to  let  the 
world  have  its  way,  and  my  own  inclinations  have  their  way. 
I  may  indulge  the  hope  that  the  result  will  be  some  diminu- 
tion of  the  misery  of  mankind.  There  may  be  observable 
tendencies  which  encourage  this  hope.  New  pleasures  may 
arise  for  men  in  the  natural  course  of  events,  which  will  so 
modify  their  action  as  in  the  future  to  yield  more  pleasure 
on  the  whole  than  they  have  had  in  the  past.  The  inclina- 
tions which  I  find  in  myself,  and  which  arise  from  pleasures 
that  I  have  experienced,  may  contribute  to  this  result.  It 
may  turn  out  that  I  have  a  taste  which  renders  me  a  medium 
of  increased  pleasure  to  mankind.  But,  whether  it  prove  so 
or  no,  that  I  should  follow  my  tastes  and  inclinations  is  the 
only  possibility.' 

346.  There  is  no  ground  for  surmising  that  any  so  distinct 
conclusion  is  consciously  arrived  at  even  by  the  most 
thorough-going  speculative  Hedonists,  except  under  the 
influence  of  self-indulgent  habits  which  are  quite  indepen- 
dent of  their  theories,  and  may  be  common  to  them  with  men 
who  in  theory  are  'Ascetics.'  But  if  it  is  the  logical  issue 
of  their  theory,  though  a  real  consciousness  of  duty,  which 
the  theory  fails  to  interpret,  may  prevent  its  distinct  avowal 
even  in  the  most  secret  dialogue  of  the  soul  with  itself,  it 
can  scarcely  fail  to  weaken  their  actual  initiative  in  good 
works.  In  a  man  of  strong  speculative  interest  a  suspicion 
that  his  theory  does  not  justify  his  practice  cannot  go  for 
nothing.  Now  that  the  above  conclusion  is  the  logical  issue 
of  the  Hedonistic  theory  is  what  no  one,  aware  of  the  extent 
to  which  that  theory  is  adopted,  and  superior  to  the  tempta- 
tion of  scoring  a  dialectical  victory,  would  wish  to  make  out 
if  he  could  help  it.  But  how  is  the  conclusion  to  be  avoided? 
If  men  at  any  given  time  are  getting  as  much  pleasure  as 
under  the  conditions  is  possible  for  them — and  that  this  is 

E  e  2 


420     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  rv 

the  case  seems  the  necessary  inference  from  the  Hedonistic 
principles  stated — the  only  way  of  increasing  the  sum  will  be 
by  altering  their  possibilities  of  pleasure ;  by  changing  the 
conditions  in  the  way  of  imagination  and  desire,  which 
determine  the  greatest  sum  of  pleasure  possible  for  men  as 
they  are,  in  such  a  way  that  a  larger  sum  shall  be  possible 
for  them  in  the  future.  The  Hedonist  may  hope  that  such 
an  alteration  will  come  about,  either  through  some  benefit 
cence  of  nature,  or  through  the  effort  of  every  man  to  compass 
means  of  attaining  the  pleasures  which  he  most  desires  and 
avoiding  the  pains  which  he  most  dislikes.  But  how,  accord-- 
ing  to  his  doctrine,  should  any  one  try  to  change  the  course 
of  life  to  which  habit  and  inclination  lead  him,  in  order  to 
produce  such  an  alteration  ?  Such  an  attempt  would  imply 
that  an  alteration  of  what  pleases  or  pains  him  most  can  be 
an  object  to  a  man,  to  whom  yet,  upon  the  hypothesis,  desire 
for  the  pleasure  which  most  attracts  him,  aversion  from  the 
pain  which  most  repels  him  in  imagination,  is  the  only 
possible  motive ;  and  is  not  this  a  contradiction  ? 

347.  If  the  speculative  Hedonist,  then,  anxious  about  his 
duty  in  the  world,  once  comes  to  put  to  himself  the  question, 
why  he  should  trouble  himself  about  a  duty  in  the  world  at 
all,  it  would  seem  that  he  can  logically  answer  the  question 
in  only  one  way ;  however  inconsistent  the  answer  may  be 
with  the  fact  that  he  cannot  help  asking  the  question.  He 
must  conclude  that  he  has  no  duty  in  the  world,  according 
to  the  sense  in  which  he  naturally  uses  the  word— no  duty 
other  than  a  necessity  of  following  the  inclination  for  that 
which  from  time  to  time  presents  itself  to  him  as  his  greatest 
pleasure,  or  the  aversion  from  what  presents  itself  as  his  greatest 
pain.  He  must  explain  the  seeming  consciousness  of  duty 
as  best  he  can,  by  supposition  of  its  arising  from  antagonism 
between  aversion  from  some  apprehended  pain  of  punish- 
ment or  shame,  and  inclination  to  some  anticipated  pleasure. 
As  the  vulgar  understand  the  phrases  '  should  do '  or  '  ought 
to  do ' — as  he  himself  understands  them  in  his  unphiloso-r 
phical  moments — he  must  count  it  absurd  to  say  that  any- 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM  ^21 

thing  ought  to  be  done  by  himself  or  any  one  else,  which  is 
not  done  ;  absurd,  that  is,  if  it  is  taken  to  imply  that  any  one 
has  any  real  option  of  acting  otherwise  than  as,  under  im- 
agination of  a  greatest  pleasure  or  a  greatest  pain,  he  in  fact 
does  act,  or  that  there  is  a  happiness  actually  open  to  men 
as  they  are,  which  by  their  own  fault  they  throw  away.  The 
whole  phraseology  of  obligation,  in  short,  upon  Hedonistic 
principles  can  best  be  explained  by  a  theory  which  is 
essentially  the  same  as  that  of  Hobbes,  and  which  in  Plato's 
time  was  represented  by  the  dictum  of  certain  Sophists  that 
'  Justice  is  the  interest  of  the  stronger.'  A  few  words  will 
explain  the  form  in  which  such  a  theory  would  naturally 
present  itself  to  one  who  made  the  legitimate  deductions 
from  the  principles  in  question. 

348.  The  contemplation  of  certain  actions  by  the  indi- 
vidual, as  actions  which  he  ought  to  do,  implies  at  once 
that  they  can  be  done,  and  that  they  are  such  as  the 
individual,  if  left  to  his  natural  desire  for  pleasure  and 
aversion  from  pain,  would  not  do.  But,  upon  Hedonistic 
principles,  except  through  some  desire  for  pleasure  or  aver- 
sion from  pain  they  could  not  be  done.  The  distinction  of 
them,  then,  must  lie  in  the  kind  of  pleasure  or  pain  which 
the  individual  contemplates  as  his  inducement  to  do  them. 
It  must  be  a  pleasure  or  pain  which  he  looks  for  from  the 
agency  of  others,  who  have  power  to  reward  or  punish  him 
— to  reward  or  punish  him,  if  with  nothing  else,  yet  with  an 
approval  or  disapproval  to  which  he  is  so  sensitive  that  the 
approval  may  in  his  imagination  outweigh  every  other 
pleasure,  the  disapproval  every  other  pain.  Thus  the  con- 
sciousness '  I  ought  to  do  this  or  that '  must  be  interpreted 
as  equivalent  to  the  consciousness  that  it  is  expected  of  me 
by  others,  who  are  '  stronger '  than  I  am  in  the  sense  that 
they  have  power  to  reward  or  punish  me — whether  these 
*  others '  are  represented  by  the  civil  magistrate  or  by  some 
public  opinion,  whether  the  rewards  and  punishments  pro- 
ceeding from  them  are  in  the  nature  of  what  we  call  physical, 
or  what  we  call  mental,  pleasure  and  pain.     It  is   their 


422     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

interest  which  is  the  ultimate  foundation  of  the  judgment, 
on  the  part  of  the  individual,  that  he  ought  or  ought  not. 
This  judgment  only  represents  the  interest  of  the  individual, 
in  so  far  as  that  which  he  presents  to  himself  as  his  greatest 
pleasure  or  pain  has  come  to  depend  upon  his  forecast  of 
the  will  or  sentiment  of  the  others,  who  are  stronger  than  he. 
The  better  and  worse  feXS!-,  or  simply,  being  equivalent  to 
the  greater  pleasure  and  greater  pain  simply,  the  morally 
better  and  worse  are  the  greater  pleasure  and  pain  of  those 
who  have  power  to  reward  and  punish,  and  who  through 
that  power  are  able  so  to  affect  the  imagination  of  individuals 
as  to  make  it  seem  a  greatest  pleasure  to  please  them< 
a  greatest  pain  to  displease  them.  So  far  as  in  any  society 
this  power  rests,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  the  majority,  the 
morally  better  for  any  member  of  that  society  will  be  the 
greater  pleasure  of  the  greater  number ;  not  however  because 
that  greater  number  is  the  greater  number,  but  because  it 
possesses  the  power  described.  The  action  of  the  individual 
will  be  morally  good,  according  as  the  greater  pleasure  of 
the  individual — which  is  his  only  possible  motive — corre- 
sponds with  the  greater  pleasure  of  the  stronger,  in  the  sense 
explained,  and  thus  leads  him  to  do  what  is  expected  of  him 
by  the  stronger.  He  is  counted  a  good  man  when  this  is 
habitually  the  case  with  him.  His  conscience  is  that  sym- 
pathy with  the  feeling  of  the  stronger,  in  virtue  of  which  an 
action  that  would  displease  the  stronger,  and  therefore  be 
morally  bad,  becomes  painful  to  him  on  the  contemplation. 
An  action  which  a  man  does  'from  sense  of  duty,'  irre- 
spectively, as  it  seems,  of  anticipated  pleasure  or  pain,  really 
represents  a  sympathetic  sense  of  what  is  expected  of  him, 
which  makes  the  contemplated  pain  of  not  doing  it  outweigh 
any  pleasure  to  be  gained  by  a  contrary  course.  Perhaps  he 
has  no  definite  notion  of  any  particular  persons  who  expect 
it  of  him ,  perhaps  there  are  no  such  persons ;  but  his 
feeling  about  it  is  the  result  of  a  like  feeling  on  the  part  of 
his  ancestors,  which,  as  felt  by  them,  was  directed  to  some 
definite  source  of  hope  or  fear.     Between  fear  of  the  sword 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM  423 

or  stick,  and  the  sort  of  conscience  which  is  said  neither  to 
fear  punishment  nor  hope  for  reward,  the  gap  seems  wide, 
but  it  may  not  perhaps  be  too  wide  for  evolution  and  here^ 
ditary  transmission  to  fill. 

349.  Some  such  account  of  the  '  phenomena  of  morality ' 
seems  the  most  logical  which,  upon  Hedonistic  principles, 
can  be  arrived  at.  If  we  admit  that  the  only  possible  motive 
to  action  is  desire  for  some  pleasure  or  aversion  from  some 
pain,  it  offers  the  most  consistent  method  of  explaining  that 
which  all  must  admit  to  be  the  distinguishing  thing  in 
morality — the  appearance,  namely,  of  there  being  another 
standard  of  value  than  pleasure,  of  there  being  actions  that 
proceed  from  another  motive  than  desire  for  pleasure.  If 
the  question  is  asked,  how"  that  which  is  said  to  be  the  moral 
good  and  criterion,  viz.  the  greatest  nett  sum  of  pleasures 
for  the  greatest  number,  can  be  a  good  or  object  of  desire  to 
the  individual,  who  on  the  hypothesis  can  only  desire  his 
own  pleasure,  it  may  be  replied  that  we  are  not  called  upon 
to  consider  it  such  an  object  of  desire  to  him  at  all.  On 
the  contrary,  in  calling  an  action  morally  good  we  imply  some 
element  of  repugnance  to  the  desire  of  the  person  for  whom 
it  is  morally  good.  It  is  not  good  as  satisfying  any  natural 
desire  for  pleasure  on  his  part,  i.  e.  any  such  desire  as  he 
would  have  if  left  to  himself.  It  is  as  causing  pleasure  to 
others,  not  to  him,  that  it  has  come  to  be  reckoned  good. 
His  interest  in  doing  it  is  merely  the  result  of  the  relation  in 
which  the  action  stands  to  others,  as  a  source  of  pleasure  to 
them  and  therefore  approved  by  them.  He  does  it  as  a 
means  of  gaining  the  pleasure  of  their  approval,  or  of  avoiding 
the  pain  of  punishment  or  shame— the  pleasure  and  pain  to 
which  for  the  time  he  happens  to  be  most  sensitive. 

Again,  upon  this  theory,  we  are  saved  the  embarrassment 
of  having  to  explain  how,  if  the  individual  always  chooses 
what  pleases  him  best,  he  can  miss  a  moral  good  which 
consists  in  or  implies  the  greatest  sum  of  pleasure  possible 
for  him.  According  to  it.  that  which  is  morally  best  for 
the  individual  is  not  /5«  greatest  pleasure,  but  the  greatest 


424     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

pleasure  for  those  who  can  reward  and  punish  him  ;  who  can 
make  their  approval  and  disapproval  objects  of  his  desire 
and  aversion.  Thus,  though  he  always  chooses  the  greatest 
imagined  pleasure,  the  individual's  acts  may  conflict  with 
the  morally  best,  unless  desire  for  reward  or  approval, 
aversion  from  punishment  or  disapproval,  keep  his  action  in 
constant  correspondence  with  the  interest  of  those  who 
make  morality.  There  is  no  need  then  to  attempt  any 
impossible  '  moral  arithmetic,'  any  balance  of  the  extent  and 
durability  of  certain  pleasures  against  the  intensity  of  others, 
with  a  view  to  showing  that  the  immoral  man  misses  the 
greatest  sum  of  pleasure  possible  to  him.  It  is  not  his 
greatest  pleasure,  but  the  greatest  pleasure  of  'the  stronger,' 
which  forms  the  issue  in  all  questions  of  morality.  No 
question  need  be  raised  between  what  '  seems '  good  and 
what  '  is '  good.  That  which  in  the  long  run  seems  to  those 
who  wield  the  forces  of  society  most  conducive  to  their 
pleasure,  is  really  so,  and  the  strongest  force  in  society  tends 
to  become  equivalent,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  that  of  the 
majority :  so  that  a  man's  duty — that  which  he  '  ought  to 
do,'  or  which  he  feels  is  expected  of  him — tends  to  be  that 
sort  of  action  which  conduces  to  the  greatest  happiness  of 
the  greatest  number.  But  as  there  is  no  fixedness  or  finality 
either  in  the  ruling  influence  of  society,  or  in  the  modes  of 
action  which  those  who  exercise  this  influence  find  most  for 
their  pleasure,  no  final  or  absolute  judgment  can  be  given 
as  to  the  morally  better  or  worse.  Within  certain  limits  the 
standard  of  morality  fluctuates. 

350.  So  much  for  the  course  of  speculation  which  a  logical 
mind,  starting  from  the  principles  on  which  Utilitarianism 
has  generally  been  founded,  is  likely  to  follow.  In  order  to 
illustrate  more  definitely  the  weakening  of  moral  initiative 
likely  to  result  from  it,  we  will  suppose  our  enquirer,  having 
been  touched  by  a  scruple  as  to  his  continuance  in  some 
practice  in  which,  like  others  of  his  class,  he  has  indulged, 
and  which  is  not  condemned  either  by  law  or  public  opinion, 
to  be  examining  this  scruple  in  the  light  of  his  Hedonistic 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM  425 

philosophy.  Let  the  enquirer  be  some  one  so  circumstanced 
as  was  C.  J.  Fox,  and  let  gambling  be  the  practice  in  ques- 
tion. Let  us  suppose  a  dialogue  within  the  soul,  excited  by 
the  suggestion  that  the  practice  is  morally  bad  and  ought  to 
be  given  up. 

'  How  can  it  be  morally  bad  ?  I  have  come  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  morally  bad  means  that  which  conflicts  with  the 
will  of  the  stronger,  or,  as  the  Utilitarians  say,  with  a  law 
enforced  by  some  sanction,  either  the  legal  sanction  or  the 
popular  sanction;  but  no  such  law  is  broken  by  the  practice 
in  question.' 

'You  forget  the  other  sanctions,  the  religious  and  the 
natural.' 

'  If  I  forget  the  religious  sanction,  this  shows  that  to  me 
it  is  not  a  sanction.  It  is  a  purely  subjective  sanction,  con- 
sisting in  fear  of  the  pains  of  another  world.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  I  do  not  find  any  ostensibly  divine  prohibition  of 
gambling,  sanctioned  by  the  threat  of  such  pains ;  but,  if 
I  did,  it  would  not  affect  me,  for  it  cannot  be  proved  that 
such  pains  will  ever  be  endured,  and  I  do  not  happen  to  be 
afraid  of  them.' 

'But  the  natural  sanction?  In  gambling  you  are  violating 
a  law  enforced  by  a  natural  sanction,  as  you  will  find  when 
the  painful  consequences  of  your  gambling  propensities  in 
due  course  of  nature  come  to  be  felt.' 

'  Here  at  any  rate  we  are  shifting  our  ground.  The  first 
suggestion  was  that  the  practice  was  tnorally  bad,  and  it 
would  not  be  so  if  it  were  contrary  to  a  law  enforced  by 
natural  sanctions ;  if,  in  the  natural  course  of  things  and 
without  the  intervention  of  any  social  force,  it  led  to  an  over- 
balance of  pain.  But  how  can  it  be  shown  that  in  gambling 
I  violate  a  law  enforced  by  a  natural  sanction  ?  There  is  no 
doubt  about  the  intense  pleasure  I  find  in  gambling,  as 
measured,  according  to  our  principles,  by  my  intense  desire 
to  gamble.  The  pleasures  that  I  am  supposed  to  forgo  by 
gambling  might  not  be  pleasures  to  me;  and,  as  for  any 
future  pains  likely  to  result  from  the  practice,  they  will  scarcely 


426     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

be  so  intense,  when  my  skin  is  hardened  against  many  pangs 
which  would  be  formidable  if  inflicted  now,  as  to  be  compared, 
with  the  pleasure  I  now  find  in  following  my  bent.' 

'Ah,  but  think  of  the  long  succession  of  them;  how  much 
they  will  amount  to,  when  all  put  together.' 

'  But  they  never  will  be  put  together.  I  may  fairly  hope 
that  one  will  be  over,  and  relieved  by  some  interval  of  plea- 
sure, before  another  begins.  Unbroken  continuance  of  even 
slight  pain  is,  no  doubt,  awful  to  anticipate.  But  there  is 
no  reason  to  think  that  the  pain  consequent  on  this  indul- 
gence will  be  unbroken,  or  that,  if  there  were  nothing  to 
relieve  it,  I  need  live  to  endure  it.  If  I  found  it  becoming 
unbearable,  I  should  have  the  remedy  iti  my  own  hands.'    : 

'  Perhaps  we  have  been  arguing  the  question  upon  wrong 
grounds.  The  practice  of  gambling  may  not  be  demon- 
strably productive  of  more  pain  than  pleasure  to  you  indi- 
vidually, but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  so  to  society 
generally.  It  is  true  that,  in  the  present  state  of  law  and  of 
opinion,  it  does  not  violate  any  rule  enforced  by  the  poli- 
tical or  by  the  popular  sanction,  and  thus,  in  the  restricted 
sense  of  the  word,  is  not  morally  bad.  But  this  state  of  law 
and  opinion  is  itself  in  violation  of  a  law  having  a  natural 
sanction— the  sanction  consisting  in  the  excess  of  pain 
above  pleasure  produced  by  gambling  to  society  in  general. 
It  is  thus  bad  in  the  sense  of  being  pernicious,  just  as 
Hobbes  admitted  that  a  law,  though  it  could  not  be  unjust, 
might  be  pernicious.  It  ought  to  be  changed,  and  you  ought 
to  refuse  to  conform  to  it,  in  deference  to  a  higher  law  than 
that  enforced  by  the  state  or  public  opinion,  a  law  having 
the  natural  sanction  which  belongs  to  any  rule  necessary  to 
the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number.' 

'  Here  are  three  propositions,  each  more  doubtful  than  the 
other.  It  is  not  very  easy  to  show  that  the  practice  is  ^per- 
nicious in  that  sense  of  the  word  which  alone,  as  Hedonists, 
we  can  admit ;  viz.  that  more  pleasure,  after  deduction  for 
counterbalancing  pain,  would  at  any  time  be  felt  by  more 
persons  if  the  practice  were  changed. .  You  cannot  dictate 


CH.  m]  HEDONISM  427 

to  pebple  what  their  pleasures  shall  be.  If  the  practice  is  so 
predominantly  unpleasant  in  its  consequences  to  the  majority 
as  you  say,  why  have  they  not  found  that  out  and  stopped 
it  ?  But  granting  that  it  is  so,  what  do  you  mean  by  saying 
that  it  ought  to  be  changed  ?  This  apparently  is  an  obliga- 
tion on  the  part  of  society,  but  to  whom  is  it  an  obligation  ? 
An  obligation  on  the  part  of  the  several  members  of  the 
society  to  each  other  and  to  the  whole  society  is  intelligible. 
But  in  the  absence  of  any  law  either  of  the  state  or  of  opinion 
against  the  practice,  it  cannot  be  said  that  any  such  obliga- 
tion is  violated  by  the  practice.  An  obligation  of  society  to 
itself  is  unintelligible.  You  say  indeed  that  society  ought 
to  change  the  practice,  because  it  violates  a  law  enforced  by 
a  natural  sanction.  But  here  you  are  the  victim  of  a  figure 
of  speech.  You  are  personifying  '  nature '  as  an  imponent 
of  obligation.  Stripped  of  figures  of  speech,  this  proposition 
is  merely  a  repetition  of  that  already  shown  to  be  doubtful, 
that  the  practice  is  pernicious — productive  of  more  pain 
than  pleasure.  If  it  is  so,  that  is  a  reaspn  for  expecting  that 
society  with  increasing  experience  will  see  fit  to  refuse  to 
tolerate  it,  but  none  for  saying  that  it  ought  to  do  so.  Even 
less  is  it  a  ground  for  saying  that,  w^hile  the  practice  con- 
tinues to  be  sanctioned  by  society,  I  ought  not  to  indulge 
in  it.  My  taste  for  gambling  does  not  conflict  either  with 
positive  law  or  with  what  is  e;cpected  of  me  by  society.  To 
whom  then  am  I  under  any  obligation  to  renounce  it  ?  It 
cannot  be  held  that  it  is  a  duty  which  I  owe  to  myself;  for, 
if  there  is  any  meaning  in  that  phrase,  it  can  only  meanj 
according  to  our  principles,  that  the  practice  tends  more  to 
my  pain  than  to  my  pleasure,  and  this  we  have  seen  there 
is  no  reason  for  holding.  If  society  with  further  experience 
changes  its  mind  on  the  matter,  it  may  then  make  it  more 
painful  for  me  to  indulge  my  taste  than  to  abstain ;  but 
there  is  no  reason  why  I  should  anticipate  the  result  of 
social  conflict  in  this  or  in  any  other  case.  Indeed,  accord- 
ing to  Hedonistic  principles,  I  could  not  if  I  would.  For 
the  present  from  time  to  time  a  strongest  desire^strongest 


438     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bK.  IV 

because  excited  by  imagination  of  what  is  for  the  time  my 
most  intense  pleasure — moves  me  to  gamble,  and  I  act  ac- 
cordingly. If  society  will  furnish  me  with  a  stronger  motive 
for  abstaining,  let  it  do  so.  I  can  only  await  the  change  of 
law  or  social  opinion  that  will  bring  such  a  deterrent  to  bear 
on  me.' 

351.  This  sort  of  Hedonistic  fatalism  seems  to  be  logically 
inherent  in  all  Utilitarian  philosophy  which  founds  itself  on 
the  principle  that  pleasure  is  the  sole  object  of  desire.  That 
this  principle  may  be  rejected  by  one  who  yet  accepts  the 
Utilitarian  doctrine  of  ultimate  good,  we  know  from  the 
example  of  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick.  Whether  his  rejection  of 
it  is  not  really  inconsistent  with  his  view  of  the  'Summum 
Bonum '  is  a  point  to  be  considered  later.  What  concerns  us 
here  is  the  fact  that  the  principle  stated  is  taken  as  the  foun- 
dation of  their  Ethical  doctrine  alike  by  Bentham,  J.  S.  Mill 
and  Mr.  H.  Spencer,  and  that,  the  more  the  Utilitarian 
philosophy  is  applied  to  the  direction  of  private  conduct,  the 
more  practically  important  this  principle  is  likely  to  become, 
and  the  more  likely  are  speculative  men  to  draw  from  it 
those  legitimate  inferences  which  we  have  been  considering, 
to  the  embarrassment  of  their  own  higher  impulses.  That 
in  the  most  illustrious  spokesmen  of  Utilitarianism  no  such 
tendency  has  really  appeared,  is  explained  by  their  pre-occu- 
pation  with  great  projects  of  political  and  social  ameliora- 
tion, which  made  their  theoretical  reduction  of  the  good  to 
pleasure  of  quite  secondary  importance.  They  had  the  great 
lesson  to  teach,  that  the  value  of  all  laws  and  institutions, 
the  rectitude  of  all  conduct,  was  to  be  estimated  by  refer- 
ence to  the  well-being  of  all  men,  and  that  in  the  estimate 
of  that  well-being  no  nation  or  class  or  individual  was  to 
count  above  another.  It  mattered  little  for  practical  pur- 
poses that  they  held  the  well-being  of  society  to  consist 
simply  of  the  nett  aggregate  of  pleasures  enjoyed  by  its 
members,  and  that  they  founded  this  view  on  the  principle 
that  some  pleasure  or  other  is  the  sole  object  of  every 
desire.     The  mischief  latent  in  this  principle  could  only 


CH.  Ill]  HEDONISM  429 

appear  if  it  occurred  to  them  to  ask  the  question,  which 
their  reforming  zeal  was  too  strong  to  allow  them  to  ask, 
why  they  should  trouble  themselves  to  alter  their  tastes  and 
habits,  or  those  of  other  people.  It  is  only  when  this  ques- 
tion has  come  to  be  commonly,  asked  by  men  at  once  suf- 
ficiently free  from  the  mastery  either  of  the  lower  or  of  the 
higher  passions,  and  with  sufficient  command  over  the  cir- 
cumstances of  their  lives,  for  the  answer  to  have  real  in- 
fluence over  their  conduct,  that  the  theoretical  consequences 
which  we  have  seen  to  be  involved  in  the  Hedonistic  prin- 
ciple become  of  serious  practical  import. 

We  have  then  to  consider,  not  so  much  whether  the  prin- 
ciple that  pleasure  is  the  sole  object  of  desire  is  itself  tenable 
— on  that  enough  has  been  already  said  in  this  treatise — as 
whether  the  doctrine  which,  having  rejected  this  view  of 
desire,  professes  to  find  the  absolutely  desirable  or  'Sum- 
mum  Bonum '  for  man  in  some  perfection  of  human  life, 
some  realisation  of  human  capacities,  is  of  a  kind,  not  only 
to  save  speculative  men  from  that  suspicion  of  there  being  an 
illusion  in  their  impulses  after  a  higher  life  which  Hedonism 
naturally  yields,  but  also  to  guide  those  impulses  in  cases  of 
honest  doubt  as  to  the  right  line  of  action  to  adopt. 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE   PRACTICAL   VALUE   OF   UTILITARIANISM   COMPARED 

WITH   THAT   OF   THE  THEORY   OF   THE   GOOD 

AS   HUMAN   PERFECTION 

352.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  this  treatise,  as  we 
have  previously  endeavoured  to  state  it,  there  is  a  principle 
of  self-development  in  man,  independent  of  the  excitement  of 
new  desires  by  those  new  imaginations,  which  presuppose 
new  experiences,  of  pleasure.  In  virtue  of  this  principle  he 
anticipates  experience.  In  a  certain  sense  he  makes  it, 
instead,  of  merely  waiting  to  be  made  by  it.  He  is  capable 
of  being  moved  by  an  idea  of  himself,  as  becoming  that 
which  he  has  it  in  him  to  be — an  idea  which  does  not 
represent  previous  experience,  but  gradually  brings  an 
experience  into  being,  gradually  creates  a  filling  for  itself, 
in  the  shape  of  arts,  laws,  institutions  and  habits  of  living, 
■which,  so  far  as  they  go,  exhibit  the  capabilities  of  man, 
define  the  idea  of  his  end,  afford  a  positive  answer  to  the 
otherwise  unanswerable  question,  what  in  particular  it  is 
that  man  has  it  in  him  to  become.  The  action  of  such  an 
idea  in  the  individual  accounts  for  two  things  which,  upon 
the  Hedonistic  supposition,  are  equally  unaccountable.  It 
accounts  for  the  possibility  of  the  question.  Why  should 
I  trouble  about  making  myself  or  my  neighbours  other  than 
we  are  ?  and,  given  the  question,  it  accounts  for  an  answer 
being  rendered  to  it,  in  the  shape  of  a  real  initiation  of 
effort  for  the  improvement  of  human  life. 

The  supposition,  therefore,  of  a  free  or  self-objectifying 
spiritual  agency  in  human  history  is  one  to  which  a  fair 
analysis  of  human  history  inevitably  leads  us.  But  it  remains 
to  be  asked  by  what  rule  the  effort  is  to  be  guided,  which 
we  suppose  the  idea  of  a  possible  human  perfection  thus  to 
initiate.     That  idea,  according  to  our  view,  is  primarily  in 


THE   GOOD  AS  HUMAN  PERFECTION         431 

man  unfilled  and  unrealised ;  and  within  the  experience  of 
men  it  is  never  fully  realised,  never  acquires  a  content 
adequate  to  its  capacity.  There  are  arts  and  institutions 
and  rules  of  life,  in  which  the  human  spirit  has  so  far  in- 
completely realised  its  idea  of  a  possible  Best ;  and  the  in- 
dividual in  whom  the  idea  is  at  work  will  derive  from  it  a 
general  injunction  to  further  these  arts,  to  maintain  and,  so 
far  as  he  can,  improve  these  institutions.  It  is  when  this 
general  injunction  has  to  be  translated  into  particulars  that 
the  difficulty  arises.  How  is  the  essential  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  unessential  and  obstructive,  in  the  processes  through 
which  an  effort  after  the  perfection  of  man  may  be  traced  ? 
How  are  the  arts  to  become  a  more  thoirough  realisation  of 
the  ideal  which  has  imperfectly  expressed  itself  in  them  ? 
How  are  the  institutions  of  social  life,  and  the  rules  of  con- 
ventional morality,  to  be  cleared  of  the  alien  growths  which 
they  owe  to  the  constant  co-operation  of  selfish  passions 
with  interest  in  common  good,  and  which  render  them  so 
imperfectly  organic  to  the  development  of  the  human  spirit  ? 
Above  all,  how  is  this  or  that  individual — circumstanced  as 
he  is,  and  endowed,  physically  and  mentally,  as  he  is — to 
take  part  in  the  work  ?  When  he  is  called  upon  to  decide 
between  adherence  to  some  established  rule  of  morality 
and  service  to  a  particular  person,  or  to  face  some  new 
combination  of  circumstances  to  which  recognised  rules  of 
conduct  do  not  seem  to  apply,  how  is  he  to  find  guidance 
in  an  idea  which  merely  moves  him  to  aim  at  the  best  and 
highest  in  conduct  ?  In  short,  as  we  put  the  difficulty  after 
first  stating  the  doctrine  which  finds  the  basis  of  morality  in 
such  an  idea  (§  198) — 'So  far  as  it  can  be  translated  into 
practice  at  all,  must  not  its  effect  be  either  a  dead  conformity 
to  the  code  of  customary  morality,  anywhere  and  at  any 
time  established,  without  effort  to  reform  or  expand  it,  or 
else  unlimited  licence  in  departing  from  it  at  the  prompting 
of  any  impulse  which  the  individual  may  be  pleased  to  con- 
sider a  higher  law  ? ' 

Unless  these  questions  can  be  satisfactorily  answered,  it 


432     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

would  seem  that  our  theory  of  the  basis  of  morality,  though 
its  adoption  might  save  some  speculative  persons  from  that 
distrust  of  their  own  conscience  to  which  Hedonism  would 
naturally  lead  them,  can  be  of  no  further  practical  value.  It 
may  still  serve  to  dispel  the  notion  that  the  inclination  to 
take  one's  ease  and  let  the  world  have  its  way  is  justified  by 
philosophy.  It  may  still  have  an  important  bearing  on  that 
examination  by  the  individual  of  his  own  walk  and  conduct, 
in  which  the  question  of  motive  should  hold  the  first  place ; 
for  it  recognises,  as  the  one  motive  which  should  be  supreme, 
a  desire  which  the  Hedonist  must  ignore.  But  it  will  have 
no  guidance  to  offer  to  the  impulse  which  it  explains,  and  of 
which  it  asserts  the  importance.  In  those  cases  in  which,  as 
we  have  previously  pointed  out,  the  question,  Ought  this  or 
that  to  be  done  ?  has  to  be  answered  irrespectively  of  motive 
and  with  reference  merely  to  the  effects  of  actions,  it  will  be 
of  no  avail.  For  that  purpose  we  need  some  conception  of  a 
'Summum  Bonum'  or  ultimate  good,  definite  enough  to 
enable  us  to  enquire  whether  the  effects  of  a  particular  action 
contribute  to  that  end  or  no.  But  if  the  idea  of  a  possible 
perfection  of  life  cannot  be  translated  into  any  definite  con- 
ceptions of  what  contributes  to  the  attainment  of  that  life, 
except  such  as  are  derived  from  existing  usage  and  law,  it 
cannot  afford  such  a  criterion  as  we  want  of  the  value  of 
possible  actions,  when  we  are  in  doubt  which  of  them  should 
be  done ;  for  we  want  a  criterion  that  shall  be  independent 
of  law  and  usage,  while  at  the  same  time  it  shall  be  other 
than  the  casual  conviction  of  the  individual, 

353.  Now,  as  we  have  more  than  once  admitted,  we  can 
form  no  positive  conception  of  what  the  ultimate  perfection 
of  the  human  spirit  would  be  ;  what  its  life  would  be  when 
all  its  capabilities  were  fully  realised.  We  can  no  more  do 
this  than  we  can  form  a  positive  conception  of  what  the 
nature  of  God  in  itself  is.  All  the  notions  that  we  can  form 
of  human  excellences  or  virtues  are  in  some  way  relative  to 
present  imperfections.  We  may  say  perhaps,  with  the 
Apostle,  that  Faith,  Hope  and  Charity  'abide;'  that  they 


CH.  iv]      THE  GOOD  AS  HUMAN  PERFECTION       433 

are  not  merely  passing  phases  of  a  life  which  may  come  to 
enter  on  conditions  in  which  they  would  cease  to  be  possible ; 
and  there  may  be  a  sense  in  which  this  is  true.  But  when 
we  come  to  speak  of  the  functions  in  which  those  virtues 
manifest  themselves,  we  find  that  we  are  speaking  of  func- 
tions essentially  relative  to  a  state  of  society  in  which  it  is 
impossible  to  suppose  that  the  human  spirit  has  reached  its 
full  development.  '  Charity  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all 
things,  hopeth  all  things ; '  but  if  all  men  had  come  to  be 
what  they  should  be,  what  would  there  be  for  Charity  to 
bear,  to  hope,  and  to  believe  ? 

Though  the  idea  of  an  absolutely  perfect  life,  however,- 
cannot  be  more  to  us  than  the  idea  that  there  must  be  such 
a  life,  as  distinct  from  an  idea  of  what  it  is — and  we  may 
admit  this  while  holding  that  this  idea  is  in  a  supreme  sense 
formative  and  influential — it  does  not  follow  that  there  is  any 
difficulty  in  conceiving  very  definitely  a  life  of  the  individual 
and  of  society  more  perfect,  because  more  completely  ful-. 
filling  the  vocation  of  individual  and  society,  than  any  which 
is  being  lived.  There  may  have  been  a  period  in  the  history 
of  our  race  when  the  idea  of  a  possible  perfection  was  a  blindly 
moving  influence ;  when  it  had  not  yet  taken  sufficient  effect 
in  the  ordering  of  life  and  the  formation  of  virtues  for  reflec- 
tion on  these  to  enable  men  to  say  what  it  would  be  to  be 
more  perfect.  But  we  are  certainly  not  in  that  state  now. 
We  all  recognise,  and  perhaps  in  some  fragmentary  way 
practise,  virtues  which  both  carry  in  themselves  unfulfilled 
possibilities,  and  at  the  same  time  plainly  point  out  the; 
direction  in  which  their  own  further  development  is  to  be 
sought  for.  It  has  already  been  sought  in  this  treatise  to. 
trace  the  ideal  of  the  cardinal  virtues,  as  recognised  by  the 
conscience  of  Christendom.  In  none  of  these  would  the 
man  who  came  nearest  the  ideal  'count  himself  to  have, 
attained,'  nor  would  he  have  any  difficulty  in  defining  the 
path  of  his  further  attainment.  No  one  is  eager  enough  to 
know  what  is  true  or  make  what  is  beautiful ;  no  one  ready 
enough  to  endure  pain  and  forgo  pleasure  in  the  service  of 

Ff 


434     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

his  fellows  :  no  one  impartial  enough  in  treating  the  claims 
of  another  exactly  as  his  own.  Thus  to  have  more  'intellectual 
excellence ; '  to  be  more  brave,  temperate  and  just,  in  the 
sense  in  which  any  one  capable  of  enquiring  what  it  is  to  be 
more  perfect  would  now  understand  these  virtues,  is  a  suffi- 
cient object  for  him  to  set  before  himself  by  way  of  answer 
to  the  question,  so  far  as  it  concerns  him  individually ;  while 
a  state  of  society  in  which  these  virtues  shall  be  more 
generally  attainable  and  attained,  is  a  sufficient  account  of 
the  more  perfect  life  considered  as  a  social  good. 

354.  It  would  seem  then  that,  though  statements  at  once 
positive  and  instructive  as  to  the  absolutely  Best  life  may  be 
beyond  our  reach,  yetj  by  help  of  mere  honest  reflection  on 
the  evidence  of  its  true  vocation  which  the  human  spirit  has 
so  far  yielded  in  arts  and  sciences,  in  moral  and  political 
achievement,  we  can  know  enough  of  a  better  life  than  our 
own,  of  a  better  social  order  than  any  that  now  is,  to  have  ' 
an  available  criterion  of  what  is  good  or  bad  in  law  and 
usage,  and  in  the  tendencies  of  men's  actions.  The  working 
theory  of  the  end,  which  we  derive  from  the  doctrine  that 
the  ultimate  good  for  man  must  be  some  full  development 
of  the  human  spirit  in  character  and  conduct,  may  be  repre- 
sented by  some  such  question  as  the  following :  Does  this 
or  that  law  or  usage,  this  or  that  course  of  action— directly 
or  indirectly,  positively  or  as  a  preventive  of  the  opposite — 
contribute  to  the  better-being  of  society,  as  measured  by  the 
more  general  establishment  of  conditions  favourable  to  the 
attainment  of  the  recognised  excellences  and  virtues,  by  the 
more  general  attainment  of  those  excellences  in  some  degree, 
or  by  their  attainment  on  the  part  of  some  persons  in  higher 
degree  without  detraction  from  the  opportunities  of  others  ? 
In  order  to  put  this  question  we  must,  no  doubt,  have  a 
definite  notion  of  the  direction  in  which  the  'Summum 
Bonum '  is  to  be  sought,  but  not  of  what  its  full  attainment 
would  actually  be ;  and  this,  it  will  be  found,  is  all  that  we 
need  or  can  obtain  for  our  guidance  in  estimating  the  value 
of  laws  and  institutions,  actions  and  usages,  by  their  effects. 


CH.1V]       THE   GOOD  AS  HUMAN  PERFECTION        435 

It  will  do  nothing  indeed  to  help  us  in  ascertaining  what 
the  effects  of  any  institution  or  action  really  are.  No  theory 
whatever  of  the  'Summum  Bonum,'  Hedonistic  or  other, 
can  avail  for  the  settlement  of  this  question,  which  requires 
analysis  of  facts  and  circumstances,  not  consideration  of 
ends.  But  it  will  sufficiently  direct  us  in  regard  to  the  kind 
of  effects  we  should  look  out  for  in  our  analysis,  and  to  the 
value  we  should  put  upon  them  when  ascertained. 

In  all  cases  then  in  which,  according  to  the  distinction 
previously  explained,  the  question  at  issue  is  not.  What 
ought  I  to  be  ?  but,  What  ought  to  be  done  ?  the  criterion 
just  stated  should  be  our  guide  in  answering  it.  As  we 
have  seen,  the  question,  What  ought  I  to  be  ?  includes  the 
question,  What  ought  to  be  done?  for  I  am  not  what 
I  ought  to  be — my  character  and  motives  are  not  what  they 
should  be — unless  my  actions,  in  virtue  of  their  effects,  are 
such  as  ought  to  be  done.  But,  as  we  have  also  seen,  for 
that  purpose  which  the  question.  Am  I  what  I  ought  to  be  ? 
mainly  serves  in  ethical  development — the  puipose,  namely, 
of  self-reproval  and  consequent  incitement  of  the  effort  to  be 
better  —no  elaborate  enquiry  into  the  effects  of  actions  done 
is  commonly  needed;  So  far,  however,  as  such  an  enquiry 
is  involved  in  the  process  of  self-examination,  the  criterion 
to  be  employed  in  the  valuation  of  effects  will  be  such  as 
we  have  described.  It  will  have  to  be  employed,  again,  in 
all  cases  where  we  are  judging  the  actions  of  others,  whose 
state  of  character  is  incognisableby  us,  or  considering  whether 
outward  action  of  a  certain  kind,  irrespectively  of  motives,  is 
good  or  bad,  whether  certain  institutions  or  practices  of 
society  should  be  maintained  or  given  up — these  being  all 
questions  solely  of  effect.  It  is  a  ciiterion,  indeed,  which 
will  seldom  come  to  the  front,  even  in  the  minds  of  those 
who  are  most  clearly  aware  that  it  is  their  criterion,  because 
in  all  ordinary  cases  of  disinterested  doubt  as  to  the  value  of 
institutions  and  usages,  and  of  actions  in  which  we  are  not 
ourselves  concerned,  the  question  which  occupies  us  is.  What 
under  all  the  conditions  of  the  case  are  the  effects  actually 

F  f  2 


436     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

produced?  not,  What  is  the  value  of  the  effects?  But  it 
should  be,  and  (as  we  hold)  with  all  men  who  have  assimilated 
the  higher  moral  culture  of  Christendom  really  is,  the  measure 
of  value  which  is  kept  in  view  in  the  effort  to  ascertain  the 
effects  of  action,  and  which  is  tacitly  applied  in  the  estimate  of 
all  ascertained  effects  that  are  susceptible  of  moral  valuation. 
355.  The  Utilitarian,  if  he  can  bring  himself  to  attend  to 
what  is  here  advanced,  will  probably  say  that  in  ordinary 
cases  and  for  practical  purposes  he  can  accept  our  criterion, 
but  that  he  cannot  regard  it  as  ultimate  or  scientific,  and 
that  it  fails  us  just  in  those  cases  where  an  ultimate  or 
scientific  criterion  is  needed,  because  in  them  the  rules  of 
established  morality  are  insufficient  or  inapplicable.  He 
will  not  object  to  measure  the  better-being  of  society  in  an 
ordinary  way  'by  the  more  general  establishment  of  con- 
ditions favourable  to  the  attainment  of  the  recognised 
excellences  and  virtues,  by  the  more  general  attainment  of 
those  excellences  in  some  degree,  or  by  their  attainment  on 
the  part  of  some  persons  in  higher  degree  without  detraction 
from  the  opportunities  of  others,'  because  he  will  hold  that 
these  recognised  virtues  and  excellences  represent  an  in- 
calculable accumulation  of  experience  as  to  the  modes  in 
which  the  largest  balance  of  pleasure  may  be  obtained. 
Their  exercise  according  to  him  does  not  constitute  the 
'  Summum  Bonum,'  but  under  ordinary  conditions  it  is  an 
ascertained  means  to  it.  '  Is  there  then,'  the  reader  may 
ask  us,  'any  practical  difference  between  the  Utilitarian 
criterion  and  yours?  You  say  that  the  effects  of  actions, 
institutions,  etc.,  are  to  be  valued  according  to  their  relation 
to  the  production  of  personal  excellence,  moral  and  intelr 
lectual.  The  Utilitarian  does  not  deny  this ;  but  whereas, 
according  to  you,  the  excellence  is  itself  the  ultimate  end, 
according  to  the  Utilitarian  it  has  its  value  only  as  a  means 
— speaking  generally,  a  necessary  and  unfailing  means— to 
the  production  of  the  largest  possible  sum  of  pleasure. 
Since  you  are  both  agreed,  then,  that  the  effects  to  be  looked 
at  in  all  ordinary  moral  valuation  are  effects  that  have  a 


CH.IV]      THE  GOOD  AS  HUMAN  PERFECTION        437 

bearing  on  meritorious  character,  whether  there  be  a  further 
end  beyond  that  character  or  no,  the  several  criteria  come  to 
pretty  much  the  same  thing.  It  will  only  be  in  exceptional 
cases  that  any  difference  between  the  two  views  of  the 
criterion  need  appear;  in  the  estimation,  for  instance,  of 
some  practice  (such  as  vivisection  may  perhaps  be  reckoned) 
which  stands  in  no  ascertained  relation,  direct  or  indirect, 
to  the  maintenance,  advancement,  or  diffusion  of  meritorious 
conduct ;  or  in  the  estimation  of  some  exceptional  act  to 
which  the  general  rule,  that  the  nett  maximum  of  possible 
pleasure  is  only  to  be  reached  by  following  the  paths  of 
recognised  virtue,  is  rendered  inapplicable  by  some  pecu- 
liarity in  the  circumstances  of  the  case  or  in  the  position  of 
the  agent.  Here  the  Utilitarian  must  apply  his  ultimate 
criterion  directly.  He  must  seek  to  ascertain  the  balance 
of  pleasure  or  pain  resulting  from  the  particular  practice  or 
action,  without  the  help  of  those  records  of  prolonged  obser- 
vation upon  pleasure-giving  and  pain-giving  consequences 
which  the  established  rules  of  morality  in  effect  supply. 
This  is  no  doubt  a  difficult  task ;  but,  upon  the  theory 
which  rejects  the  Hedonistic  calculus  as  criterion  on  the 
ground  that  virtuous  character  and  conduct  is  an  end  in 
itself,  is  any  criterion  in  such  cases  available  at  all  ? ' 

356.  Now  it  is  satisfactory  to  acknowledge  that  the  theory 
of  the  criterion  for  which  we  are  arguing  does  not  for 
practical  purposes  differ  much  from  the  Utilitarian,  so  long 
as  the  Utilitarian  view  of  the  criterion  is  not  founded — as  it 
generally  has  been,  and  perhaps  logically  should  be — on  the 
Hedonistic  theory  of  motives.  The  doctrine  that  pleasure 
is  the  only  possible  object  of  desire  logically  excludes  the 
possibility  of  aspiration  for  personal  holiness,  of  effort  after 
goodness  for  its  own  sake.  According  to  it  the  state  of  will 
and  character  which  we  have  previously  used  the  phrase 
'  purity  of  heart '  to  describe,  is  not  only  an  unrealisable 
ideal,  but  an  ideal  which  cannot  excite  desire  for  its  attain- 
ment at  all.  This  theory  of  motives,  therefore,  is  incom- 
patible in  principle  wth  the  whole  view  of  the  nature  of 


438     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IV 

virtue,  as  issuing  from  a  character  in  which  the  interest  in 
being  good  is  dominant,  already  set  forth  in  this  treatise. 
But  if  the  Utilitarian  is  committed  to  no  more  than  a  certain 
doctrine  of  the  criterion  of  morality — the  doctrine  that  the 
value  of  actions  and  institutions  is  to  be  measured  in 
the  last  resort  by  their  effect  on  the  nett  sum  of  pleasures 
enjoyable  by  all  human,  or  perhaps  by  all  sentient,  beings, 
the  difference  between  him  and  one  who  would  substitute 
for  this  '  nett  sum,  etc'  'the  fulfilment  of  human  capacities' 
may  be  practically  small.  A  desire  for  the  enjoyment  of 
pleasure  by  others — whether  in  the  largest  quantity  possible, 
or  in  some  more  positively  conceivable  form — is  so  entirely 
different  from  desire  for  a  pleasure  that,  if  the  Utilitarian 
considers  his  '  Summum  Bonum,'  or  any  limited  form  of  it, 
to  be  a  possible  object  of  desire  to  the  individual,  he  clears 
himself  practically,  even  though  it  be  at  the  sacrifice  of  con- 
sistency, from  chargeability  with  any  such  theory  of  motives 
as  would  exclude  the  possibility  of  a  'pure  heart.' 

We  are  brought,  then,  to  this  point.  The  Utilitarian 
theory  of  ultimate  good,  if  founded  upon  the  Hedonistic 
theory  of  motives,  we  have  found  to  be  'intrinsically 
unavailable  for  supplying  motive  or  guidance  to  a  man  who 
wishes  to  make  his  life  better,'  because  that  theory  of 
motives,  when  argued  out,  appears  to  exclude,  not  indeed 
the  hope  on  the  part  of  the  individual  that  his  own  life  and 
that  of  mankind  may  become  better,  /.  e.  more  pleasant,  but 
the  belief  that  it  can  rest  with  him  to  exercise  any  initiative, 
whether  in  the  way  of  resistance  to  inclination  or  of  painful 
interference  with  usage,  which  may  affect  the  result.  We 
saw  reason  to  think  that  this  logical  consequence  of  the 
theory  tended  to  have  at  least  a  weakening  influence  upon 
life  and  conduct,  and  that  there  was  accordingly  a  practical 
reason  for  seeking  a  substitute  in  another  theory  of  ultimate 
good.  But  the  question  now  arises  whether  this  substitute 
shall  be  sought,  according  to  the  previous  argument  of  this 
treatise,  in  a  theory  which  would  place  the  'Summum 
Bonum '  in  a  perfection  of  human  life,  not  indeed  positively 


CH.  iv]     THE   GOOD  AS   GREATEST  PLEASURE 


439 


definable  by  us,  but  having  an  identity  with  the  virtuous  life 
actually  achieved  by  the  best  men,  as  having  for  its  principle 
the  same  will  to  be  perfect ;  or  rather  in  a  revision  of  the 
Utilitarian  theory,  which  shall  make  it  independent  of  the 
Hedonistic  theory  of  motives,  while  retaining  the  account 
of  the  '  Summum  Bonum '  as  a  maximum  of  possible 
pleasure.  We  will  endeavour  to  consider  candidly  what 
the  latter  alternative  has  to  recommend  it. 

357.  It  is  noticeable  in  the  first  place  that,  if  the  Utili- 
tarian doctrine  of  the  chief  good  as  criterion — the  doctrine 
that  the  greatest  possible  sum  of  pleasures  is  the  end  by 
reference  to  which  the  value  of  actions  is  to  be  tested — is 
dissociated  from  the  Hedonistic  doctrine  of  motives,  though 
it  may  be  cleared  from  liability  to  bad  practical,  effects,  it 
has  also  lost  what  has  been  in  fact  its  chief  claim  to  the 
acceptance  of  ordinary  men.  The  process  of  its  acceptance 
has  been  commonly  this.  Because  there  is  pleasure  in  all 
satisfaction  of  desire,  men  have  come  to  think  that  the 
object  of  desire  is  always  some  pleasure ;  that -every  good  is 
a  pleasure.  From  this  the  inference  is  natural  enough  that 
a  greatest  possible  sum  of  pleasures  is  a  greatest  possible 
good — at  any  rate  till  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  possibility  of 
desiring  a  sum  of  pleasures,  which  never  can  be  enjoyed  as 
a  sum,  would  not  follow  from  the  fact  that  the  object  of 
desire  was  always  some  imagined  pleasure.  But  once  drop 
the  notion  that  pleasure  is  the  sole  thing  desired,  and  the 
question  arises  why  it  should  be  deemed  that  which  '  in  our 
calm  moments '  is  to  be  counted  the  sole  thing  desirable,  so 
that  the  value  of  all  which  men  do  or  which  concerns  them 
is  to  be  measured  simply  by  its  tendency  to  produce  pleasure. 
We  suppose  ourselves  now  to  be  arguing  with  men  who 
admit  the  possibility  of  disinterested  motives,  who  value 
character  according  as  it  is  habitually  actuated  by  them; 
who  neither  understand  by  such  motives  desires  for  that 
kind  of  pleasure  of  which  the  contemplation  of  another's 
pleasure  is  the  condition,  nor  allow  themselves  to  suppose 


440     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bk.  IV 

that,  granting  benevolence  to  be  always  a  desire  to  produce 
pleasure,  it  is  therefore  a  desire  for  («.  e.  to  enjoy)  pleasure. 
Why,  we  ask  such  persons,  do  you  take  that  to  be  the  one 
thing  ultimately  desirable,  which  you  not  only  admit  to  be 
not  the  sole  thing  desired,  but  which  you  admit  is  not  desired 
in  those  actions  which  you  esteem  the  most  ? 

358.  It  may  be  surmised  that  the  chief  attraction  which 
the  Hedonistic  criterion  has  had  for  such  persons  has 
lain  in  its  apparent  definiteness.  The  conception  of  the 
'Summum  Bonum,'  as  consisting  in  a  greatest  possible 
nett  sum  of  pleasures,  has  seemed  to  afford  a  much  more 
positive  and  intelligible  criterion  than  the  conception  of 
a  full  reaUsation  of  human  capacities,  which  we  admit  to  be 
only  definable  by  reflection  on  the  partial  realisation  of 
those  capacities  in  recognised  excellences  of  character  and 
conduct.  It  promises  an  escape,  too,  from  the  circle  in 
which,  as  already  observed,  we  seem  to  move,  when  we  say 
that  we  ought  to  do  so  and  so  because  it  is  virtuous  or 
noble  to  do  it,  and  then  have  to  explain  what  is  virtuous 
Or  noble  as  what  we  ought  to  do.  A  '  Summum  Bonum ' 
consisting  of  a  greatest  possible  sum  of  pleasures  is  supposed 
to  be  definite  and  intelligible,  because  every  one  knows 
what  pleasure  is.  But  in  what  sense  does  every  one  know 
it?  If  only  in  the  sense  that  every  one  can  imagine  the 
renewal  of  some  pleasure  which  he  has  enjoyed,  it  may  be 
pointed  out  that  pleasures,  not  being  enjoyable  in  a  sum — 
to  say  nothing  of  a  greatest  possible  sum — cannot  be 
imagined  in  a  sum  either.  Though  this  remark,  however, 
might  be  to  the  purpose  against  a  Hedonist  who  held  that 
desire  could  only  be  excited  by  imagined  pleasure,  and  yet 
that  a  greatest  sum  of  pleasure  was  an  object  of  desire,  it  is  not 
to  the  purpose  against  those  who  merely  look  on  the  greatest 
sum  of  pleasures  as  the  true  criterion,  without  holding  that 
desire  is  only  excited  by  imagination  of  pleasure.  They 
will  reply  that,  though  we  may  not  be  able,  strictly  speaking, 
to  imagine  a  sum  of  pleasures,  every  one  knows  what  it  is. 
Every  one  knows  the  difference  between  enjoying  a  longer 


CH.  iv]       THE  GOOD  AS  GREATEST  PLEASURE       441 

succession  of  pleasures  and  a  shorter  one,  a  succession  of 
more  intense  and  a  succession  of  less  intense  pleasures, 
a  succession  of  pleasures  less  interrupted  by  pain  and  one 
more  interrupted.  In  this  sense  every  one  knows  the 
difference  between  enjoying  a  larger  sum  of  pleasures  and 
enjoying  a  smaller  sum.  He  knows  the  difference  also 
between  a  larger  number  of  persons  or  sentient  beings  and 
a  smaller  one.  He  attaches  therefore  a  definite  meaning 
to  the  enjoyment  of  a  greater  nett  amount  of  pleasure  by 
a  greater  number  of  beings,  and  has  a  definite  criterion  for 
distinguishing  a  better  action  from  a  worse,  in  the  tendency 
of  the  one,  as  compared  with  the  other,  to  produce  a  greater 
amount  of  pleasure  to  a  greater  number  of  persons. 

359.  The  ability,  however,  to  compare  a  larger  sum  of 
pleasure  with  a  smallei:  in  the  sense  explained — as  we  might 
compare  a  longer  time  with  a  shorter — is  quite  a  different 
thing  from  ability  to  conceive  a  greatest  possible  sum  of 
pleasures,  or  to  attach  any  meaning  to  that  phrase.  It  seems, 
indeed,  to  be  intrinsically  as  unmeaning  as  it  would  be  to 
speak  of  a  greatest  possible  quantity  of  time  or  space.  The 
sum  of  pleasures  plainly  admits  of  indefinite  increase,  with 
the  continued  existence  of  sentient  beings  capable  of  plea- 
sure. It  is  greater  to-day  than  it  was  yesterday,  and,  unless 
it  has  suddenly  come  to  pass  that  experiences  of  pain  out- 
number experiences  of  pleasure,  it  will  be  greater  to-morrow 
than  it  is  to-day ;  but  it  will  never  be  complete  while  sentient 
beings  exist.  To  say  that  ultimate  good  is  a  greatest  pos- 
sible sum  of  pleasures,  strictly  taken,  is  to  say  that  it  is  an 
end  which  for  ever  recedes ;  which  is  not  only  unattainable 
but  from  the  nature  of  the  case  can  never  be  more  nearly 
approached;  and  such  an  end  clearly  carmot  serve  the 
purpose  of  a  criterion,  by  enabling  us  to  distinguish  actions 
which  bring  men  nearer  to  it  from  those  that  do  not.  Are 
we  then,  since  the  notion  of  a  greatest  possible  sum  of 
pleasures  is  thus  unavailable,  to  understand  that  in  applying 
the  Utilitarian  criterion  we  merely  approve  one  action  in 
comparison  with  another,  as  tending  to  yield  more  pleasure 


442     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IV 

to  more  beings  capable  of  pleasure,  without  reference  to 
a  '  Summum  Bonum '  or  ideal  of  a  perfect  state  of  existence 
at  all  ?  But  without  such  reference  is  there  any  meaning 
in  approval  or  disapproval  at  all?  It  is  intelligible  that 
without  such  reference  the  larger  sum  of  pleasures  should 
be  desired  as  against  the  less ;  on  supposition  of  benevolent 
impulses,  it  is  intelligible  that  the  larger  sum  should  be 
desired  by  a  man  for  others  as  well  as  for  himself.  But 
the  desire  is  one  thing,  the  approval  of  it — the  judgment  '  in 
a  calm  hour'  that  the  desire  of  the  action  moved  by  it  is 
reasonable — is  quite  another  thing.  Without  some  ideal — 
however  indeterminate— of  a  best  state  of  existence,  with 
the  attainment  of  which  the  approved  motive  or  action 
may  be  deemed  compatible,  the  approval  of  it  would  seem 
impossible.  Utilitarians  have  therefore  to  consider  whether 
they  can  employ  a  criterion  of  action,  as  they  do  employ 
it,  without  some  idea  of  ultimate  good ;  and,  since  a  greatest 
possible  sum  of  pleasures  is  a  phrase  to  which  no  idea 
really  corresponds,  what  is  the  idea  which  really  actuates 
them  in  the  employment  of  their  criterion. 

360.  When,  having  duly  reflected  on  these  points,  we  try 
(if  the  expression  may  be  pardoned)  to  make  sense  of  the 
Utilitarian  theory — bearing  in  mind  at  once  its  implication 
of  the  conception  of  a  '  Summum  Bonum,'  and  the  impossi- 
bility that  of  pleasures,  so  long  as  sentient  beings  continue 
to  enjoy  themselves,  there  should  be  any  such  greatest  sum 
as  can  satisfy  the  conception — we  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion 
that  the  '  Summum  Bonum  '  which  the  Utilitarian  contem- 
plates is  not  a  sum  of  pleasures,  but  a  certain  state  of  exis- 
tence; a  state  in  which  all  human  beings,  or  all  beings 
of  whose  consciousness  he  supposes  himself  able  to  take 
account,  shall  live  as  pleasantly  as  is  possible  for  them,  with- 
out one  gaining  pleasure  at  the  expense  of  another.  The 
reason  why  he  approves  an  action  is  not  that  he  judges  it 
likely  to  make  an  addition  to  a  sum  of  pleasures  which  never 
comes  nearer  completion,  but  that  he  judges  it  likely  to 
contribute  to  this  state  of  general  enjoyable  existence.     If 


CH.IV]      THE  GOOD  AS  GREATEST  PLEASURE        443 

he  says  that  the  right  object  for  a  man  is  to  increase  the  stock 
of  human  enjoyments,  it  is  presumable  that  he  is  not  really 
thinking  of  an  addition  to  a  sum  of  pleasant  experiences, 
however  large,  which  might  be  made  and  yet  leave  those 
who  had  had  the  experiences  with  no  more  of  the  good  in 
possession  than  they  had  before.  He  does  not  mean  that 
a  thousand  experiences  of  pleasure  constitute  more  of  a  good 
than  nine  hundred  experiences  of  the  same  intensity,  or  less 
of  a  good  than  six  hundred  of  a  double  intensity.  He  is 
thinking  of  a  good  consisting  in  a  certain  sort  of  social  life, 
of  which  he  does  not  particularise  the  nature  to  himself 
further  than  by  conceiving  it  as  a  pleasant  life  to  all  who 
share  in  it,  and  as  one  of  which  all  have  the  enjoyment,  if 
not  equally,  yet  none  at  the  cost  of  others.  By  increasing 
the  stock  of  enjoyments  he  means  enabling  more  persons  to 
live  pleasantly,  or  with  less  interruption  from  pain.  The 
good  which  he  has  before  him  is  not  an  aggregate  of  plea- 
sures but  a  pleasant  life — a  life  at  all  times  and  for  all  per- 
sons as  pleasant,  as  little  marred  by  pain,  as  possible ;  but 
good,  qua  a  life  in  which  the  persons  living  are  happy  or 
enjoy  themselves,  not  qua  a  life  into  which  so  many  enjoy- 
ments are  crowded. 

361.  Now  the  objection  to  this  conception  of  a  chief  good 
is  not  that,  so  far  as  it  goes,  it  is  otherwise  than  true.  Ac- 
cording to  our  view,  since  there  is  pleasure  in  all  realisation 
of  capacity,  the  life  in  which  human  capacities  should  be 
fully  realised  would  necessarily  be  a  pleasant  life  '■■  The 
objection  is  that,  instead  of  having  that  definiteness  which, 
because  all  know  what  pleasure  is,  it  seemed  at  first  to 
promise,  it  turns  out  on  consideration  to  be  so  abstract  and 
indefinite.  It  tells  us  nothing  of  that  life,  to  the  attainment 
of  which  our  actions  must  contribute  if  they  are  to  be  what 
they  should  be,  but  merely  that  it  would  be  as  pleasant  as 
possible  for  all  persons,  or  for  all  beings  of  whose  conscious- 
ness we  can  take  account.  The  question  is  whether  in 
thinking  of  an  absolutely  desirable  life,  as  the  end  by  refer- 
'  [Cf.  however  §  276.] 


444     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [bK.IV 

fence  to  which  the  effects  of  our  actions  are  to  be  valued, 
our  view  must  be  confined  to  the  mere  quaUty  of  its  uni- 
versal pleasantness,  and  whether  in  consequence  productivity 
of  pleasure  is  the  ultimate  ground  on  which  actions  are  to 
be  approved.  The  view  for  which  we  plead  is  that  the 
quality  of  the  absolutely  desirable  life,  which  renders  it  such 
in  man's  thoughts,  is  that  it  shall  be  the  full  realisation  of 
his  capacities ;  that,  although  pleasure  must  be  incidental  to 
such  realisation,  it  is  in  no  way  distinctive  of  it,  being  equally 
incidental  to  any  unimpeded  activity,  to  the  exercise  of 
merely  animal  functions  no  less  than  to  those  that  are  pro- 
perly human ;  that,  although  we  know  not  in  detail  what 
the  final  realisation  of  man's  capacities  would  be,  we  know 
well  enough,  from  the  evidence  they  have  so  far  given  of 
themselves,  what  a  fuller  development  of  them  would  be ; 
and  that  thus,  in  the  injunction  to  make  life  as  full  a  realisa- 
tion as  possible  of  human  capacities,  we  have  a  definiteness 
of  direction,  which  the  injunction  to  make  life  as  pleasant  as 
possible  does  not  supply. 

362.  Such  definiteness  of  direction  as  is  derivable  from 
the  latter  injunction  really  depends  on  the  assumption  that, 
with  a  view  to  the  general  enjoyment  of  life,  conduct  should 
follow  the  paths  of  recognised  virtue.  On  supposition  that 
the  requirements  of  conventional  morality  represent  a  great 
mass  of  experience  as  to  the  social  behaviour  by  which  life 
is  rendered  more  generally  pleasant,  we  may  be  sure  that  as 
a  rule  their  violation  is  not  the  way  to  help  men  on  the 
whole  to  live  more  pleasantly.  The  supposition  need  not 
be  disputed.  But  how  did  these  requirements,  or  what  is 
really  beneficent  in  them,  come  to  be  formed  ?  There  was 
a  time  when  they  did  not  yet  amount  to  the  requirements  of 
a  conventional  morality — when  a  large  part  of  them  were  as 
yet  only  the  convictions  of  a  few  peculiar  people  as  to  what 
was  needed  in  the  interest  of  a  better  social  being.  Whence 
then  did  these  few  derive  direction  for  those  efforts  to  make 
social  life  what  it  should  be,  which  our  present  conventional 
morality  was  not  there  to  guide,  and  which  any  conventional 


CH.IV]       THE  GOOD  AS  GREATEST  PLEASURE       445 

morality  then  current  would  have  discountenanced  ?  Would 
not  the  mere  injunction  to  make  human  life  as  pleasant  as 
possible,  failing  the  interpretation  which  our  present  con- 
ventional morality  may  supply,  but  which  it  was  not  then 
there  to  supply,  have  had  either  no,  significance  for  them  or 
a  misleading  one — a  misleading  significance  if  taken  to  be 
interpreted  by  the  then  recognised  standards  of  meritorious 
conduct,  and  otherwise  none  ?  Has  not  the  spirit  in  which 
the  better  being  of  society  has  in  fact  been  promoted  been 
generally  that  which  Mr.  Browning  puts  into  the  mouth  of 
his  Rabbi  Ben  Ezra  ? — 

Then,  welcome  each  rebuff 

That  turns  earth's  smoothness  rough, 

Each  sting  that  bids  nor  sit  nor  stand  but  go ! 

Be  our  joys  three-parts  pain ! 

Strive,  and  hold  cheap  the  strain ; 

Learn,  nor  account  the  pang ;  dare,  never  grudge  the  throe !  * 

And  would  this  spirit  ever  have  found  its  inward  law 
in  an  injunction  to  produce  as  much  pleasure  as  pos- 
sible— to  seek  as  its  supreme  object  to  obtain  that  for 
others  which  it  would  reject  for  itself?  Does  not  the  same 
spirit  still  find  such  an  injunction  unmeaning  or  repellent, 
in  those  cases  where  it  needs,  owing  to  the  felt  insufficiency 
of  the  rales  of  conventional  morality,  to  resort  for  direction 
to  some  conception  of  ultimate  good  ? 

363.  It  may  be  retorted,  however,  that  by  our  own  con- 
fession the  injunction  to  realise  the  capacities,  to  make  the 
most  and  best,  of  the' human  soul,  derives  its  definite  content 
from  reference  to  the  recognised  virtues  and  excellences  of 
life.    It  is  an  injunction  to  attain  these  more  fully,  to  render 

■  [The  following  passage  from  the  Epilogue  to  '  Romola,'  which  the 
author  intended  to  quote  at  some  point  in  this  chapter,  may  be  added 
here  :  'We  can  only  have  the  highest  happiness,  such  as  goes  along 
with  being  a  great  man,  by  having  wide  thoughts,  and  much  feeling 
for  the  rest  of  the  world  as  well  as  ourselves ;  and  this  sort  of  happi- 
ness often  brings  so  much  pain  with  it,  that  we  can  only  tell  it  from 
pain  by  its  being  what  we  Would  choose  before  everything  else, 
because  our  souls  see  it  is  good.'] 


446     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

them  more  generally  attainable,  to  give  further  realisation  to 
the  spirit  which  has  expressed  itself  in  them.  If  it  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  injunction  to  make  life  as  pleasant  as 
possible  on  the  other,  have  alike  need  of  this  reference  in 
order  to  acquire  definite  meaning,  what  advantage  has  the 
former  over  the  latter?  Its  advantage  we  take  to  be  this. 
The  former  injunction  does,  while  the  latter  does  not,  corre- 
spond to  the  inward  law  by  which  men  have  been  governed 
in  the  effort  and  aspiration  that  have  yielded  the  various 
excellences  in  the  way  of  art  and  knowledge,  no  less  than  of 
conduct,  which  now  determine  our  ideal  of  further  perfection. 
Accordingly  in  those  cases — very  exceptional,  as  we  have  all 
along  pointed  out — where  the  difference  between  the  two 
injunctions  would  make  itself  practically  apparent,  the  one 
would,  while  the  other  would  not,  suggest  a  manner  of  life, 
a  standard  of  achievement  in  knowledge  and  art,  higher 
than  that  which  current  expectations  call  for.  A  man  who 
interprets  the  recognised  virtues  and  excellences  as  having 
been  arrived  at  with  a  view  to  the  increase  of  pleasure,  who 
holds  them  to  be  valuable  only  as  means  to  that  end,  has 
not  the  clue  to  guide  him  in  cases  where  it  is  no  longer 
enough  to  follow  the  '  law  of  opinion '  or  social  expectation, 
but  where  it  behoves  him  to  act  in  the  higher  spirit  of  those 
virtues  and  excellences^ — a  spirit  which  he  must  interpret  for 
himself.  The  question  whether  it  would  conduce  mofe  to 
general  pleasure  that  he  should  set  up  for  being  belter  than 
his  neighbours,  instead  of  swimming  with  the  stream ;  that 
he  should  follow  the  severer  path  of  duty,  where  his  departure 
from  it  would  be  unknown  or  uncondemned,  and  where  it 
would  save  himself  and  those  whom  he  loves  from  much 
suffering ;  that  he  should  seek  the  highest  beauty  in  art,  the 
completes!  truth  in  knowledge,  rather  than  conform  to 
popular  taste  and  opinion— this  is  a  question  which  he  will 
find  for  ever  unanswerable;  and,  in  presence  of  its  un- 
ansvverability,  the  fact  that  his  own  pleasure  will  undoubtedly 
be  served  by  deciding  it  in  the  easier  way  is  likely  to  have 
considerable  weight.    If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  were  governed 


CH.  iv]  ULTIMATE  GOOD  447 

by  the  conviction  that  the  recognised  virtues  and  excellences 
are  ends  in  themselves,  because  in  them  the  human  spirit  in 
some  measure  fulfils  its  divine  vocation,  attains  something 
of  the  perfection  which  it  lies  in  it  to  attain,  he  would  find 
in  reflection  on  them  an  indication  of  the  ends  to  be  kept 
in  view,  where  the  rule  of  being  virtuous  according  to  some 
established  type  of  virtue  is  insufficient,  as  well  as  a  constant 
direction  to  estimate  at  its  highest  the  claim  on  his  personal 
devotion  to  the  further  perfecting  of  man. 

364.  Before  we  attempt  finally  to  illustrate  the  manner  in 
which  these  different  conceptions  of  ultimate  good,  and  the 
different  injunctions  founded  on  them,  would  be  likely  under 
certain  conditions  to  affect  the  practical  judgment,  it  will  be 
well  to  remove  one  more  possible  misapprehension  as  to  the 
distinction  between  them.  They  are  not  to  be  distinguished 
as  if  according  to  one  the  '  Summum  Bonum '  were  a  state 
of  desirable  consciousness,  while  according  to  the  other  it 
was  not.  It  is  agreed  that  in  presenting  a  'Summum  Bonum ' 
to  ourselves  we  present  it  as  a  state  of  desirable  conscious- 
ness. Except  as  some  sort  of  conscious  life  it  can  be  to  us 
nothing ;  and  to  say  that  we  think  of  it  as  desirable  is  the 
same  thing  as  to  say  that  we  think  of  it  as  good.  The 
question  is  whether  we  think  of  it  as  good  or  desirable 
because  we  anticipate  pleasure  in  it,  or  because  and  so  far 
as  we  already  desire  it,  knowing  that  there  must  be  pleasure 
in  the  satisfaction  of  a  desire,  though  pleasure  be  not  the 
object  of  the  desire.  Utilitarians,  however — even  such 
Utilitarians  as  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick  ^ — are  apt  to  argue  as  if 
to  hold  that  the  ultimate  standard  of  moral  valuation  is 
something  else  than  the  productivity  of  pleasure,  was  to  hold 
that  it  is  something  else  than  productivity  of  desirable  con- 
sciousness. So  to  argue  is  quite  consistent  in  those  who 
take  pleasure  to  be  the  sole  object  of  desire ;  for  with  them, 
if  any  kind  of  conscious  life  admits  of  being  desired — and 

1  Methods  of  Ethics,  Book  III.  chap.  xiv.  §  a.  pp.  368-370  (2nd 
Edition). 


448     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

unless  it  admits  of  being  desired,  it  cannot  be  desirable — it 
must  be  on  the  ground  of  the  pleasure  anticipated  in  it.  But 
if  this  view  is  rejected,  as  it  is  rejected  by  Mr.  Sidgwick,  it 
does  not  appear  why  a  state  of  consciousness  should  not  be 
desired  for  another  reason  than  for  the  sake  of  the  pleasure 
anticipated  in  it,  or  why  it  should  not  be  for  another  reason 
that  'when  we  sit  down  in  a  calm  hour'  we  deem  it  desirable. 
The  present  writer  holds  as  strongly  as  Mr.  Sidgwick  could 
do  that  it  is  only  in  some  form  of  conscious  life — more 
definitely,  of  self-conscious  life— that  we  can  look  for  the 
realisation  of  our  capacities  or  the  perfection  of  our  being ; 
in  other  words,  for  ultimate  good.  While  regarding  Truth, 
Freedom,  Beauty,  etc.,  as  constituent  elements  of  the  highest 
good,  not  as  means  to  a  good  beyond  them,  he  would  under- 
stand by  them,  in  Mr.  Sidgwick's  words  \  the  '  relations  of 
conscious  minds  which  we  call  cognition  of  Truth,  contem^ 
plation  of  Beauty,  Independence  of  action,  etc'  He  admits 
further  that  desire  for  perfection  of  being — the  desire  of  which 
the  operation  in  us  gives  meaning  to  the  statement  that  the 
attainment  of  such  perfection  is  supremely  desirable — carries 
with  it  some  anticipation  of  the  pleasure  there  would  be  in 
satisfaction  of  the  desire,  an  anticipation  which  renders  the 
description  of  the  highest  state  as  one  of  happiness  or  bliss 
natural  to  us.  His  contention  is  that  to  suppose  pleasure 
on  that  account  to  be  the  object  of  our  desire  for  supreme 
pr  ultimate  good,  is  to  repeat  the  mistake,  to  which 
Mr.  Sidgwick  is  so  thoroughly  alive,  of  confusing  the 
pleasure  which  attends  the  satisfactiori  of  a  desire  with  the 
object  of  the  desire,  and  the  anticipation  of  that  pleasure 
with  the  desire  itself.  It  is  not  because  looked  forward  to 
as  pleasant,  that  the  form  of  conscious  life  in  which  our 
capacities  shall  be  fully  realised  is  an  object  of  desire  to  us ; 

'  Methods  of  Ethics,  p.  368.  Mr.  Sidgwick  writes,  '  the  objective 
relations  of  conscious  minds.'  I  have  omitted  'objective'  from  rot 
being  quite  sure  of  its  significance  in  this  connection.  Nor  am  I  sure 
that  I  could  accept  '  Independence  of  action '  as  an  equivalent  for 
'  Freedom,'  in  that  sense  in  which  I  look  upon  '  Freedom '  as  a 
constituent  of  the  highest  good. 


CH.  IV]  ULTIMATE   GOOD  449 

it  is  because,  in  such  self-conscious  beings  as  we  are,  a  desire 
for  their  realisation  goes  along  with  the  presence  of  the 
capacities,  that  the  form  of  conscious  life  in  which  this  desire 
shall  be  satisfied  is  looked  forward  to  as  pleasant.  And  it  is 
because  the  object  of  this  desire,  when  reflected  on,  from  the 
nature  of  the  case  presents  itself  to  us  as  absolutely  final, 
not  because  we  anticipate  pleasure  in  its  attainment  as  we 
do  in  that  of  any  and  every  desired  object,  that  '  in  a  calm 
hour '  we  pronounce  it  supremely  desirable. 

365.  Now  it  would  be  unfair  to  convey  the  impression 
that  Mr.  Sidgwick,  in  identifying  that  'desirable  conscious- 
ness,' which  he  holds  that  ultimate  good  must  be,  simply 
with  pleasure,  is  chargeable  with  confusion  between  the  object 
of  a  desire  and  the  pleasure  anticipated  in  its  satisfaction. 
The  result  of  such  a  confusion,  unless  avoided  by  a  further 
one,  would  be  '  Egoistic '  Hedonism,  not  the  '  Universalistic ' 
Hedonism  which  he  himself  adopts.  In  the  common  He- 
donistic ratiocination — we  always  anticipate  pleasure  in  the 
satisfaction  of  desire,  therefore  pleasure  is  the  sole  thing 
desired,  therefore  the  sole  thing  desirable— pleasure  must 
throughout  mean  pleasure  for  the  person  supposed  to  desire 
it.  Since  it  is  not  pretended  that  it  rneans  anything  else  in 
the  two  former  steps  of  the  ratiocination,  it  must  mean  it 
also  in  the  last.  It  can  be  taken  to  mean  the  pleasure  of 
others,  or  of  all  men,  only  through  a  confusion  between  desire 
to  enjoy  pleasure  and  desire  to  produce  it,  from  which 
Mr.  Sidgwick  keeps  quite  free.  It  is  not  upon  any  such 
ratiocination  that  he  founds  his  own  conclusion  that '  desir- 
able feeling '  (by  which  he  understands  pleasure)  '  for  the 
innumerable  multitude  of  living  beings,  present  and  to 
come  V  is  the  one  end  '  ultimately  and  intrinsically  desir- 
able ; '  but  on  an  appeal  to  what  he  calls  '  common  sense.' 
'  As  rational  beings  we  are  manifestly  bound  to  aim  at  good 
generally,  not  merely  at  this  or  that  part  of  it  V  and  in  the 
last  resort  we  can  give  no  meariing  to  good  but  happiness, 
which  ;=  desirable  consciousness,  which  =  pleasure.  Reason 
■  Methods  of  Ethics,  p.  371.  '  Ibid.  p.  355. 

Gg 


45^     PRACtlCAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [fiK.  IV 

therefore  bids  us  aim  at  a  supreme  good,  made  up  of  the 
goods  (or  happinesses)  of  all  sentient  beings;  at  the  good  of 
one  sentient  being  equally  with  another, '  except  in  so  far  as 
it  is  less,  or  less  certainly  knowable  or  attainable.' 

Now  in  this  theory  it  is  clear  that  an  ofHce  is  ascribed  to 
Reason  which  in  ordinary  Utilitarian  doctrine,  as  in  the 
philosophy  of  Locke  and  Hume  on  which  that  doctrine  is 
founded,  is  explicitly  denied  to  it.  To  say  that  as  rational 
beings  we  are  bound  to  aim  at  anything  whatever  in  the 
nature  of  an  ultimate  end,  would  have  seemed  absurd  to 
Hume  and  to  the  original  Utilitarians.  To  them  reason  was 
a  faculty  not  of  ends  but  of  means.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they 
held,  we  all  do  aim  at  pleasure  as  our  ultimate  end ;  all  that 
could  properly  be  said  to  be  reasonable  or  unreasonable  was 
our  selection  of  means  to  that  end.  They  would  no  more 
have  thought  of  asking  why  pleasure  ought  to  be  pursued 
than  of  asking  why  any  fact  ought  to  be  a  fact.  Mr.  Sidgwick, 
however,  does  ask  the.  question,  and  answers  that  pleasure 
ought  to  be  pursued  because  reason  pronounces  it  desirable; 
but  that,  since  reason  pronounces  pleasure,  if  equal  in 
amount,  to  be  equally  desirable  by  whatever  being  enjoyed, 
it  is  universal  pleasure— the  pleasure  of  all  sentient  beingsr- 
that  ought  to  be  pursued.  It  is  not  indeed  an  object  that 
every  one  ought  at  all  times  to  have  consciously  before 
him',  but  it  is  the  ultimate  good  by  reference  to  which, 
'  when  we  sit  down  in  a  calm  hour,'  the  desirability  of  every 
other  good  is  to  be  tested, 

366.  In  this  procedure  Mr.  Sidgwick  is  quite  consistent 
with  himself.  His  rejection  of  'Egoistic'  in  favour  of 
'  Universalistic '  Hedonism  rests  upon  a  ground  which  in 
Mr.  Mill's  doctrine  it  is  impossible  to  discover.  His  appeal 
to  reason  may  be  made  to  justify  the  recognition  of  an 
obligation  to  regard  the  happiness  of  all  men  or  all  animals 
equally,  which,  upon  the  doctrine  that  pleasure  is  the  one 
thing  desirable  because  the  one  thing  desired,  can  only  be 
logically  justified  by  the  untenable  assumption  that  the  only 
'  Methods  of  Ethics,  p.  381. 


CH.1V]  ULTIMATE   GOOD  451 

way  to  obtain  a  maximum  of  pleasure  for  oneself  is  to  have 
an  equal  regard  for  the  pleasure  of  everyone  else.  But 
Mr.  Sidgwick's  way  of  justifying  his  Altruism  constrains  us 
to  ask  him  some  further  questions.  What  does  he  under- 
stand by  the  'reason'  to  which  he  ascribes  the  office  of 
deciding  what  the  one  '  ultimately  and  intrinsically  desirable 
end '  is ;  not  on  the  means  to  it,  but  on  the  nature  of  the  end 
itself?  In  saying  that  it  is  reasonable  to  pursue  desirable 
consciousness,  is  he  not  open  to  the  same  charge  of  moving 
in  a  circle  which  he  brings  against  those  who  say  that  it  is 
reasonable  to  live  according  to  nature,  or  virtuous  to  seek 
perfection,  while  after  all  they  have  no  other  account  to  give 
of  the  life  according  to  nature  but  that  it  is  reasonable,  or 
of  perfection  but  that  it  is  the  highest  virtue  ^  ?  What  does 
he  mean  by  desirable  consciousness  but  the  sort  of  con- 
sciousness which  it  is  reasonable  to  seek  ? 

He  apparently  avoids  the  circle,  no  doubt,  by  describing 
the  desirable  consciousness  as  pleasure ;  but  the  escape  is 
only  apparent.  A  statement  that  it  is  reasonable  to  seek 
pleasure  would  not  itself  be  chargeable  with  tautology,  but, 
unless  it  meant  that  it  was  reasonable  to  seek  pleasure  for 
the  sake  of  some  chief  good  other  than  pleasure  (in  which 
sense  the  statement  is  not  likely  to  be  made),  it  would  be 
absurd.  If  we  hold  pleasure  to  be  itself  the  good,  because 
the  object  of  all  desire,  and  if  we  are  careful  about  our  words, 
we  may  call  it  reasonable  to  seek  certain  means  to  it,  but  not 
to  seek  pleasure  itself.  Mr.  Sidgwick  himself,  as  we  have 
seen,  is  not  guilty  of  this  absurdity,  because  he  carefully 
distinguishes  the  desired  from  the  desirable.  His  doctrine 
is  not  that  it  is  reasonable  to  seek  pleasure  in  that  sense  in 
which  Hedonistic  writers  take  it  to  be  the  one  thing  desired, 
i.e.  as  the  pleasure  of  the  person  seeking  it,  but  that  it  is 
reasonable  to  seek  to  convey  pleasure  to  all  sentient  beings, 
because  this  universal  enjoyment,  though  it  is  only  in  certain 
exceptional  'calm  hours'  desired,  is  intrinsically  and  ulti- 
mately desirable  or  good.  Now  does  he  mean  anything  else 
'  Methods  of  Ethics,  p.  .352. 
Gg2 


452     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY     [BK,  IV 

by  'desirable'  in  this  connection  than  'reasonably  to  be 
desired '  ?  If  not,  does  not  his  doctrine  come  to  this,  that  it 
is  reasonable  to  seek  as  ultimate  good  that  form  of  conscious 
life  which  is  reasonably  to  be  desired  ? 

367.  It  will  be  understood  that,  in  thus  criticising 
Mr.  Sidgwick's  account  of  ultimate  good,  our  object  is 
not  to  depreciate  it,  but  to  show  how  much  more  truth 
there  is  in  it,  from  our  point  of  view,  than  in  the  common 
statement  of  Utilitarianism.  We  have  previously  explained 
how  it  comes  about  that  any  true  theory  of  the  good  will 
present  an  appearance  of  moving  in  a  circle.  The  rational 
or  self-conscious  soul,  we  have  seen,  constitutes  its  own  end ; 
is  an  end  at  once  to  and  in  itself  Its  end  is  the  perfection 
of  itself,  the  fulfilment  of  the  law  of  its  being.  The  con- 
sciousness of  there  being  such  an  end  expresses  itself  in  the 
judgment  that  something  absolutely  should  be,  that  there  is 
something  intrinsically  and  ultimately  desirable.  This  judg- 
ment is,  in  this  sense,  the  expression  of  reason ;  and  all 
those  who,  like  Mr.  Sidgwick,  recognise  the  distinction 
between  the  absolutely  desirable  and  the  de  facto  desired, 
have  in  effect  admitted  that  reason  gives — is  the  source  of 
there  being — a  supreme  practical  good.  If  we  ask  for 
a  reason  why  we  should  pursue  this  end,  there  is  none  to  be 
given  but  that  it  is  rational  to  do  so,  that  reason  bids  it,  that 
the  pursuit  is  the  effort  of  the  self-conscious  or  rational  soul 
after  its  own  perfection.  It  is  reasonable  to  desire  it  because 
it  is  reasonably  to  be  desired.  Those  who  like  to  do  so  may 
make  merry  over  the  tautology.  Those  who  understand  how 
it  arises — from  the  fact,  namely,  that  reason  gives  its  own 
end,  that  the  self-conscious  spirit  of  man  presents  its  own 
perfection  to  itself  as  the  intrinsically  desirable — will  not  be 
moved  by  the  mirth.  They  will  not  try  to  escape  the  charge 
of  tautology  by  taking  the  desirableness  of  ultimate  good  to 
consist  in  anything  else  than  in  the  thought  of  it  as  that 
which  would  satisfy  reason^satisfy  the  demand  of  the  self- 
conscious  soul  for  its  own  perfection.  They  will  not  appeal 
to  pleasure,  as  being  that  which  in  fact  we  all  desire,  in 


CH.  IV]  ULTIMATE   GOOD 


453 


order  to  determine  oilr  notion  of  what  reason  bids  as  desire. 
They  will  be  aware  that  this  notion  cannot  be  determined 
by  reference  to  anything  but  what  reason  has  itself  done ; 
by  anything  but  reflection  on  the  excellences  of  character 
and  conduct  to  which  the  rational  effort  after  perfection 
of  life  has  given  rise.  They  will  appeal  to  the  virtues 
to  tell  them  what  is  virtuous,  to  goodness  to  tell  them  what 
is  truly  good,  to  the  work  of  reason  in  human  life  to  tell 
them  what  is  reasonably  to  be  desired ;  knowing  well  what 
they  are  about  in  so  "doing,  and  that  it  is  the  only  appro- 
priate procedure,  because  only  in  the  full  attainment  of  its 
end  could  reason  learn  fully  what  that  end  is,  and  only  in 
what  it  has  so  far  attained  of  the  end  can  it  learn  what  its 
further  attainment  would  be. 

368.  It  is  perhaps  unjustifiable  to  ascribe  to  any  one 
a  course  of  thought  which  he  would  himself  disavow ;  but 
we  naturally  ask  for  a  reason  why  Mr.  Sidgwick,  having 
accepted  principles,  as  it  would  seem,  so  antagonistic  to 
those  of  the  philosophic  Utilitarians,  should  end  by  accept- 
ing their  conclusion.  When  we  consider  on  the  one  hand 
his  implied  admission  that  it  is  reason  which  presents  us 
with  the  idea  of  ultimate  good,  and  on  the  other  his  pro- 
fession of  inability  to  look  for  that  good  in  anything  but  the 
pleasure  of  all  sentient  beings,  the  conjecture  suggests  itself 
that,  while  really  thinking  of  the  ultimately  desirable  as  con- 
sisting in  the  satisfaction  of  reason,  he  shrank  from  a  state- 
ment seemingly  so  tautological  and  uninstructive  as  that  the 
end  which  reason  bids  us  seek  is  the  satisfaction  or  perfec- 
tion of  the  rational  nature  itself.  He  was  thus  led  to  cast 
about  for  an  account  of  the  supreme  good  in  terms  which 
should  not  imply  its  essential  relation  to  reason.  'Pleasure 
of  all  sentient  beings'  does  not  imply  any  such  relation, 
for  there  is  nothing  in  the  enjoyment  of  pleasure  which 
reason  is  needed  to  constitute;  and  no  one,, except  under 
constraint  of  some  extravagant  theory,  denies  that  pleasure 
is  good.  Thus  the  statement  that  universal  pleasure  is  the. 
ultimate  good  which  reason  bids  us  seek,  seems  on  the  one 


454     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

hand  to  avoid  the  admitted  absurdity  of  saying  that  reason 
bids  us  seek  our  own  pleasure,  and,  on  the  other,  the  tauto- 
logy of  saying  that  reason  bids  us  seek  the  satisfaction  of  reason. 

But  why  does  no  one  deny  that  pleasure  is  good?  Because 
every  one  is  conscious  of  desiring  pleasure  for  himself.  That 
is  to  say,  pleasure  is  good,  not  as = the  desirable,  but  as = the 
desired ;  and  the  pleasure  which  is  thus  good  is  not  universal 
pleasure  but  the  pleasure  of  the  subject  desiring  it,  as  related 
to  his  desire.  Thus  between  the  proposition  that  pleasure 
is  good  as = the  desired,  and  the  proposition  that  universal 
pleasure  is  good  as = the  rationally  desirable,  the  connection 
(as  Mr.  Sidgwick  is  too  acute  not  to  perceive)  is  merely 
verbal.  The  latter  can  only  be  derived  from  the  former  on 
supposition  that  reason  presents  to  itself  as  the  desirabk— 
as  good  in  this  sense — the  enjoyment  by  every  sentient 
being  of  the  pleasure  which  he  in  fact  desires,  and  which  is 
good  for  him  in  that  sense.  Even  if  this  supposition  be 
granted,  it  will  still  be  the  satisfaction  of  reason  that  consti- 
tutes the  good  in  the  sense  of  the  ultimately  desirable, 
though  reason  will  be  supposed  to  satisfy  itself  in  the  con- 
templation of  the  enjoyment  by  every  being  of  that  which 
is  good  in  the  sense  of  being  desired,  viz.  pleasure.  The 
question  will  then  be  whether  reason  can  thus  satisfy  itself. 
Is  it  in  contemplation  of  the  enjoyment  of  unbroken  pleasure 
by  all  sentient  beings  that  we  are  to  think  of  the  rational 
soul  as  saying  to  itself  that  at  length  its  quest  for  ultimate 
good  has  found  its  goal  ? 

369.  To  this  question — which,  it  will  of  course  be  under- 
stood, is  not  put  by  Mr.  Sidgwick  himself,  but  to  which,  in 
our  view,  his  doctrine  leads — his  answer  seems  ambiguous. 
He  holds  indeed  that  a  maximum  of  possible  pleasure  for 
all  sentient  beings  is  the  ultimate  good  at  which  reason  bids 
us  aim,  but  he  explains  that  by  pleasure  he  means  'desirable 
consciousness.'  Now  unless  we  are  to  forget  the  distinction 
between  the  desired  and  the  desirable  which  we  might  learn 
from  Mr.  Sidgwick  himself,  we  cannot  suppose  that  the 
'  Methods  of  Ethics,  p.  361. 


CH.  iv]  ULTIMATE   GOOD  455 

rational  soul,  in  presenting  a  desirable  consciousness  on  its 
own  part  as  involved  in  ultimate  good,  presents  it  simply  as 
so  much  pleasure.  The  very  fact  that  it  asks  for  a  con- 
sciousness which  is  desirable  or  should  be  desired,  shows 
that  it  cannot  satisfy  itself  with  that  which  every  one  naturally 
desires,  but  of  which  for  that  reason  no  one  can  think  as 
what  he  should  desire.  The  presentation  of  an  object  as 
one  that  should  be  desired  implies  that  it  is  not  desired  as 
a  pleasure  by  the  person  to.  whom  it  so  presents  itself  A 
man  may  speak  significantly  of  another  person's  pleasure  as 
desirable,  but  not  of  his  own.  The  desirableness  of  a  plea- 
sure must  always  express  its  relation  to  some  one  else  than 
the  person  desiring  the  enjoyment  of  the  pleasure.  Thus 
to  suppose  a  consciousness  to  be  at  once  desired  as  a  plea- 
sure, and  contemplated  as  desirable  by  the  same  person,  is 
a  contradiction.  To  the  man  who  'in  a  calm  hour'  sets 
before  himself  a  certain  form  of  conscious  life  as  the  object 
which  reason  bids  him  aim  at,  though  it  is  not  impossible 
that  pleasure  should  be  the  desirable  quality  in  that  life  as 
he  seeks  to  bring  it  about  for  other  people,  it  cannot  be  the 
desirable  quality  in  it  as  he  seeks  to  obtain  it  for  himself. 
When  we  are  told,  therefore,  that  ultimate  good  is  desirable 
consciousness  or  pleasure  for  all  sentient  beings,  we  reply 
that,  though  it  may  be  sought  as  pleasure  for  all  sentient 
beings,  it  cannot  be  sought  as  his  own  pleasure  by  one  who 
also  contemplates  it  as  the  consciousness  desirable  for  him- 
self. The  description  of  ultimate  good  as  pleasure,  and  the 
description  of  it  as  desirable  (not  desired)  consciousness,  are 
incompatible  descriptions,  so  far  as  they  are  descriptions  of 
a  state  of  being  which  the  rational  soul  seeks  as  its  own. 

370.  Now,  according  to  the  view  already  stated  in  this 
treatise,  the  rational  soul  in  seeking  an  ultimate  good  neces- 
sarily seeks  it  as  a  state  of  its  own  being.  An  ultimate,  in- 
trinsic, absolute  good  has  no  meaning  for  us,  except  that 
which  it  derives  from  the  effort  of  the  rational  soul  in  us  to 
become  all  that  it  is  conscious  of  a  capacity  for  becoming. 
As  the  rational  soul  is  essentially  the  principle  of  self-con- 


456     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

sciousness,  so  the  idea  of  ultimate  good  on  the  part  .of  every 
one  capable  of  it  is  necessarily  the  idea  of  a  perfect  self- 
conscious  life  for  himself.     The  desirableness  of  that  life  is 
its  desirableness  as  his  own  life.     But  to  any  one  actuated 
by  it  the  idea  of  a  perfection,  of  a  state  in  which  he  shall  be 
satisfied,  for  himself  will  involve  the  idea  of  a  perfection  of 
all  other  beings,  so  far  as  he  finds  the  thought  of  their  being 
perfect  necessary  to  his  own  satisfaction.     Moral  develop- 
ment, as  has  been  previously  explained  more  at  large,  is  a 
progress  in  which  the  individual's  conception  of  the  kind  of 
life  that  would  be  implied  in  his  perfection  gradually  be- 
comes fuller  and  more  determinate ;  fuller  and  more  deter- 
minate both  in  regard  to  the  range  of  persons  whose  partici- 
pation in  the  perfect  life  is  thought  of  as  necessary  to  its 
attainment  by  any  one,  and  in  regard  to  the  qualities  on  the 
part  of  the  individual  which  it  is  thought  must  be  exercised 
in  it.    In  the  most  complete  determination  within  our  reach, 
the  conception  still  does  not  suffipe  to  enable  any  one  to 
say  positively  what  the  perfection  of  his  life  would  be ;  but 
the  determination  has  reached  that  stage  in  which  the  edu- 
cated citizen  of  Christendom  is  able  to  think  of  the  perfect 
life  as  essentially  conditioned  by  the  exercise  of  virtues, 
resting  on  a  self-sacrificing  will,  in  which  it  is  open  to  all 
men  to  participate,  and  as  fully  attainable  by  one  man,  only 
in  so  far  as  through  those  virtues  it  is  attained  by  all.     In 
thinking  of  ultimate  good  he  thinks  of  it  indeed  necessarily 
as  perfection  for  himself;  as  a  life  in  which  he  shall  be  fully 
satisfied  through  having  become  all  that  the  spirit  within 
him  enables  him  to  become.     But  he  cannot  think  of  him- 
self as  satisfied  in  any  life  other  than  a  social  life,  exhibiting 
the  exercise  of  self-denying  will,  and  in  which  'the  multitude 
of  the  redeemed,'  which  is  all  men,  shall  participate.     He 
has  other  faculties  indeed  than  those  which  are  directly  ex- 
hibited in  the  specifically  moral  virtues — faculties  which  find 
their  expression  not  in  his  dealings  with  other  men,  but  in 
the  arts  and  sciences — and  the  development  of  these  must 
be  a  necessary  constituent  in  any  life  which  he  presents  to 


OH.  iv]  ULTIMATE  GOOD  457 

himself  as  one  in  which  he  can  find  satisfaction.  But  'when 
he  sits  down  in  a  calm  hour'  it  will  not  be  in  isolation  that 
the  development  of  any  of  these  faculties  will  assume  the 
character  for  him  of  ultimate  good.  Intrinsic  desirableness, 
sufficiency  to  satisfy  the  rational  soul,  will  be  seen  to  belong 
to  their  realisation  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  constituent  in  a 
whole  of  social  life,  of  which  the  distinction,  as  a  social  life, 
shall  be  universality  of  disinterested  goodness. 

371.  We  should  accept  the  view,  then,  that  to  think  of 
ultimate  good  is  to  think  of  an  intrinsically  desirable  form 
of  conscious  life ;  but  we  should  seek  further  to  define  it. 
We  should  take  it  in  the  sense  that  to  think  of  such  good  is 
to  think  of  a  state  of  self-conscious  life  as  intrinsically  de- 
sirable for  oneself,  and  for  that  reason  is  to  think  of  it  as 
something  else  than  pleasure — the  thought  of  an  object  as 
pleasure  for  oneself,  and  the  thought  of  it  as  intrinsically 
desirable  for  oneself,  being  thoughts  which  exclude  each 
other.    The  pleasure  anticipated  in  the  life  is  not  that  which 
renders  it  desirable  j  but  so  far  as  desire  is  excited  by  the 
thought  of  it  as  desirable,  and  so  far  as  that  desire  is  reflected 
on,  pleasure  comes  to  be  anticipated  in  the  satisfaction  of 
that  desire.    The  thought  of  the  intrinsically  desirable  life, 
then,  is  the  thought  of  something  else  than  pleasure,  but  the 
thought  of  what  ?  The  thought,  we  answer,  of  the  full  realisa- 
tion of  the  capacities  of  the  human  soul,  of  the  fulfilment  of 
man's  vocation,  as  of  that  in  which  alone  he  can  satisfy 
himself — a  thought  of  which  the  content  is  never  final  and 
complete,  which  is  always  by  its  creative  energy  further  de- 
termining its  own  content,  but  which  for  practical  purposes, 
as  the  mover  and  guide  of  our  highest  moral  effort,  may  be 
taken  to  be  the  thought  of  such  a  social  life  as  that  described 
in  the  previous  paragraph.   The  thought  of  such  a  life,  again, 
when  applied  as  a  criterion  for  the  valuation  of  the  probable 
effects  of  action,  may  be  taken  to  be  represented  by  the 
question  stated  in  §  354  : — 'Does  this  or  that  law  or  usage, 
this  or  that  course  of  action — directly  or  indirectly,  positively 
or  as  preventive  of  the  opposite — contribute  to  the  better 


458     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

being  of  society,  as  measured  by  the  more  general  establish- 
ment of  conditions  favourable  to  the  attainment  of  the 
recognised  virtues  and  excellences,  by  the  more  general 
attainment  of  those  excellences  in  some  degree,  or  by  their 
attainment  on  the  part  of  some  persons  in  higher  degree 
without  detraction  from  the  opportunities  of  others?'  It 
remains  for  us  now  finally  to  consider  the  availability  of  the 
injunctions  and  criteria  founded  on  such  a  theory  of  ultimate 
good,  as  compared  with  those  derivable  from  the  identifica- 
tion of  ultimate  good  with  a  universal  enjoyment  of  pleasure, 
in  those  exceptional  cases  in  which  their  comparative  avail- 
ability is  hkely  to  be  put  to  the  test. 

372.  As  has  been  already  remarked,  these  cases  will  be 
exceptional  owing  to  the  efficiency  of  the  direction  for  out- 
ward conduct  which  conventional  morality  now  commonly 
affords.  The  origin  of  that  morality  is  not  here  in  question. 
If  there  is  reason  to  hold,  as  it  has  been  previously  sought 
to  show,  that  the  progressive  principle  in  morality,  through 
which  the  recognised  standard  of  virtuous  living  among  us 
has  come  to  be  what  it  is,  has  not  been  an  interest  either  in 
the  enjoyment  or  in  the  production  of  pleasure,  there  is  so 
far  a  presumption  against  general  pleasure  being  the  ultimate 
good  to  which  we  should  look  for  direction  when  conven- 
tional morality  fails  us.  But  the  reader  naturally  asks  for 
a  conclusion  more  definite  than  this  presumption.  He  will 
wish  to  satisfy  himself  whether,  in  the  settlement  of  real 
questions  of  conduct,  our  theory  of  ultimate  good  has  any 
advantage  over  that  which  Mr.  Sidgwick  describes  as  Univer- 
salistic  Hedonism — whether  under  any  conditions  it  might, 
afford  other  and  better  guidance.  In  discussing  this  point 
we  must  suppose  the  person  who  resorts  to  either  theory  for 
guidance  to  have  accepted  the  direction  of  conventional 
morality,  so  far  as  it  goes — the  one  on  the  ground  that  it 
represents  a  decisive  amount  of  transmitted  experience  as  to 
the  pleasure-giving  or  pain-giving  effects,  on  the  whole,  of 
different  kinds  of  action ;  the  other  on  the  ground  that  its 


CH.IV]  PRACTICAL  VALVE  OF  MORAL  THEORIES  459 

observance,  unless  the  contrary  can  be  shown,  must  be  taken 
as  at  least  a  condition  of  the  social  well-being  which  he  would 
measure  by  the  prevalence  of  a  virtuous  will. 

We  must  also  keep  out  of  sight  difficulties  that  do  not 
relate  to  the  valuation  of  the  anticipated  effects  of  actions, 
but  to  the  question  what  effects  are  to  be  anticipated  from 
them.  In  many  cases  the  whole  practical  difficulty  of  de- 
ciding whether  a  contemplated  action  ought  or  ought  not  to 
be  done,  is  the  difficulty  of  deciding  what  effects  are  likely 
to  follow  from  it ;  not  of  valuing  the  effects  if  once  they 
could  be  ascertained,  but  of  ascertaining  what  they  will  be. 
No  theory  of  ultimate  good  has  an  advantage  over  another 
in  dealing  with  this  difficulty,  since  none  rather  than  another 
can  claim  to  give  us  knowledge  of  facts,  or  to  make  us  clear- 
sighted and  patient  in  the  analysis  of  circumstances.  Any 
difference  in  respect  of  influence  upon  the  practical  judg- 
ment between  the  two  theories  in  question  must  arise  from 
the  different  value  which  they  severally  lead  us  to  put  upon 
effects  ascertained  or  expected,  not  from  any  different 
methods  which  they  suggest  of  ascertaining  the  effects  of 
action,  nor  from  any  difference  in  the  importance  which  they 
lead  us  to  attach  to  doing  so. 

373.  In  a  previous  paragraph  (§  338)  examples  have  been 
given  of  the  kind  of  question  in  regard  to  personal  conduct, 
in  his  answer  to  which  a  speculative  person  might  be  affected 
for  the  worse  by  a  logical  application  of  the  Utilitarian  theory 
of  good,  so  far  as  that  theory  is  founded  on  the  principle 
that  pleasure  is  the  only  possible  object  of  desire.  We  are 
now  supposing  this  principle  to  be  dropped,  but  the  Utilitarian 
doctrine  of  the  chief  good  to  be  retained.  We  are  dealing 
with  a  theory  in  which  the  action  of  disinterested  motives, 
in  the  natural  sense  of  the  words  (as  desires  which  have  not 
pleasure  directly  or  indirectly  for  their  object),  is  fully  recog- 
nised, and  the  identification  of  ultimate  good  with  a  maxi- 
mum of  universal  pleasure  is  accepted  on  the  ground  of  its 
supposed  intrinsic  reasonableness.  The  question  is  whether, 
in  cases  of  the  Icind  supposed,  a  logical  application  of  this 


460     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF' MORAL  THEORY     [bK.  IV 

conception  of  ultimate  good,  as  a  criterion  ofwhat  should  be 
done,  will  be  of  any  avail.  The  cases  are  of  a  kind  in  which  it 
has  to  be  decided  whether,  in  words  already  used  (§  363),  a 
man  '  should  set  up  for  being  better  than  his  neighbours  or 
should  swim  with  the  stream ;  whether  he  should  follow  the 
severer  path  of  duty  where  his  departure  from  it  would  be 
unknown  or  uncondemned,  and  where  it  would  save  himself 
and  those  whom  he  loves  from  much  suffering ;  whether  he 
should  seek  the  highest  beauty  in  art,  the  completest  truth  in 
knowledge,  rather  than  conform  to  popular  taste  and  opinion.' 
For  the  purposes  of  such  a  decision  our  contention  is  not 
that  of  itself  the  theory  of  Universalistic  Hedonism  would 
yield  a  wrong  answer,  but  that  it  would  yield  none  at  all, 
and  would  thus  in  effect  leave  the  decision  to  be  made  by 
the  enquirer's  inclination  to  the  course  of  action  which  is 
most  pleasant  or  least  painful  to  him  individually. 

374.  We  have  already  seen  how,  when  the  question  before 
the  individual  is  whether  for  the  sake  of  some  higher  good 
he  should  depart  from  the  course  of  action  to  which  custom 
or  inclination,  or  the  sense  of  what  the  opinion  of  his  class 
requires  of  him,  would  naturally  lead  him,  the  logical  ten- 
dency of  the  doctrine  that  pleasure  is  the  sole  object  of 
desire  must  be  to  entangle  him  in  a  Hedonistic  fatalism, 
which  would  mean  paralysis  of  the  moral  initiative.  Uni- 
versalistic Hedonism,  as  Mr.  Sidgwick  conceives  it,  is  not 
chargeable  with  this  tendency.  It  justifies  the  question. 
What  should  I  do  for  the  bettering  of  life  ?  for  it  recognises 
the  possibility  of  an  initiative  notdetermined  by  imagination 
of  pleasure  or  pain.  But  for  doubts  of  the  kind  we  are  con- 
sidering, where  conventional  morality  cannot  be  appealed  to 
as  representing  accumulated  experience  of  consequences  in 
the  way  of  pleasure  and  pain,  it  seems  to  afford  no  solution. 
We  have  supposed  a  man  in  doubt  whether^  in  consideration 
of  the  claims  of  society,  he  is  justified  in  spending  so  much 
of  his  time  in  the  gratification  of  his  taste  for  music  or  of 
his  curiosity  in  literature,  or  in  continuing  a  habit  of  '  mode- 
rate drinking.'    Let  such  an  one  translate  '  in  consideration 


CH.iy]  PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORIES  461 

of  the  claims  of  society '  into  '  with  a  view  to  producing  as 
much  pleasure  as  possible  to  all  beings  capable  of  it.'  Must 
it  not  be  apparent  to  him,  just  so  far  as  he  really  apprehends 
the  nature  of  the  problem  which  he  professes  to  set  before 
himself,  that  it  is  wholly  insoluble  ?  What  knowledge  has 
he,  or  from  the  nature  of  the  case  can  he  obtain,  either  of 
the  conditions  on  which  the  pleasures  of  all  other  beings, 
present  and  to  come,  depend  or  will  depend,  or  of  the 
various  degrees  to  which  other  men — to  say  nothing  of  the 
animals — are  susceptible  of  pleasure,  that  he  should  be 
able  to  judge  whether  the  suggested  breach  of  custom,  the 
suggested  resistance  to  personal  inclination,  is  likely  to  con- 
tribute to  the  '  Summum  Bonum '  which  he  adopts  as  his 
criterion  ?  Unless  he  has  really  some  other  conception  of 
ultimate  good  to  fall  back  upon,  will  he  not  inevitably  take 
refuge  in  the  justification  which  the  theory  of  Universalistic 
Hedonism  affords  him  for  attaching  most  importance  to  the 
most  certainly  known  pleasures,  and  let  custom  and  inclina- 
tion decide  him  ? 

375.  In  fact,  the  man  who  is  challenged  by  doubts  of 
the  kind  described,  who  asks  himself  whether  he  is  duly 
responding  to  claims  which  conventional  morality  does  not 
recognise,  always  has  another  standard  of  ultimate  good 
to  fall  back  upon,  however  much  his  Hedonistic  philosophy 
may  obscure  it  to  him.  That  standard  is  an  ideal  of 
a  perfect  life  for  himself  and  other  men,  as  attainable  for 
him  only  through  them,  for  them  only  through  him ;  a  life 
that  shall  be  perfect,  in  the  sense  of  being  the  fulfilment 
of  all  that  the  human  spirit  in  him  and  them  has  the  real 
capacity  or  vocation  of  becoming,  and  which  (as  is  implied 
in  its  being  such  fulfilment)  shall  rest  on  the  will  to  be 
perfect.  However  unable  he  may  be  to  give  an  account  of 
such  an  ideal,  it  yet  has  so  much  hold  on  him  as  to  make 
the  promotion  of  goodness  for  its  own  sake  in  himself  and 
others  an  intelligible  end  to  him.  The  reader,  however, 
will  be  weary  of  hearing  of  this  jdeal,  and  will  be  waiting 
-to  know  in  .what  particular  way  it  can  afford. guidance  jn 


462     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IV 

cases  of  the  kind  supposed,  where  conventional  morality 
and  Utilitarian  theory  alike  fail  to  do  so.  We  have  argued 
that  no  man  could  tell  whether,  by  denying  himself  accord- 
ing to  the  examples  given,  he  would  in  the  whole  result 
increase  the  amount  of  pleasant  living  in  the  world,  present 
and  to  come.  Can  he  tell  any  better  whether  he  will  further 
that  realisation  of  the  ideal  just  described,  in  regard  to  which 
we  admit  the  impossibility  of  saying  positively  what  in  its 
completeness  it  would  be  ? 

376.  We  answer  as  follows.  The  whole  question  of 
sacrificing  one's  own  pleasure  assumes  a  different  aspect, 
when  the  end  for  which  it  is  to  be  sacrificed  ■  is  not  an 
addition  to  a  general  aggregate  of  pleasures,  but  the  har- 
imonious  exercise  of  man's  proper  activities  in  some  life  rest- 
ing on  a  self-sacrificing  will.  According  to  the  latter  view,  the 
individual's  sacrifice  of  pleasure  does  not — as  so  much  loss 
of  pleasure — come  into  the  reckoning  at  all ;  nor  has  any 
balance  to  be  attempted  of  unascertainable  painsand  pleasures 
spreading  over  an  indefinite  range  of  sentient  life.  The  good 
to  be  sought  is  not  made  up  of  pleasures,  nor  the  evil  to  be 
avoided  made  up  of  pains.  The  end  for  which  the  sacrifice 
is  demanded  is  one  which  in  the  sacrifice  itself  is  in  some 
measure  attained — in  some  measure  only,  not  fully,  yet  so 
that  the  sacrifice  is  related  to  the  complete  end,  not  as  a  means 
in  itself  valueless,,  but  as  a  constituent  to  a  whole  which 
it  helps  to  form.  That  realisation  of  the  powers  of  the  human 
spirit,  which  we  deem  the  true  end,  is  not  to  be  thought  of 
merely  as  something  in  a  remote  distance,  towards  which  we 
may  take  steps  now,  but  in  which  there  is  no  present  partici- 
pation. It  is  continuously  going  on,  though  in  varying  and 
progressive  degrees  of  completeness;  and  the  individual's 
sacrifice  of  an  inclination,  harmless  or  even  in  its  way  laud- 
able, for  the  sake  of  a  higher  good,  is  itself  already  in  some 
measure  an  attainment  of  the  higher  good. 

Thus,  whereas  according  to  any  Hedonistic  doctrine  of 
true  good,  though  it  be  '  Universalistic '  Hedonism  not 
'Egoistic,'  the  certain  present  loss  of  pleasure  to  the  indi- 


en.  ivj  PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORIES  463 

vidual  himself  and  to  his  intimates,  involved  in  sacrifices 
of  the  kind  we  are  considering,  is  so  much  deduction  from 
true  good,  only  to  be  justified  by  a  larger  accession  of 
pleasure  in  other  quarters  or  at  other  times — an  accession 
from  the  nature  of  the  case  less  certain  to  the  man  medi- 
tating the  sacrifice  than  the  loss — upon  the  other  view, 
while  the  loss  of  pleasure  implied  in  the  sacrifice  to  the 
person  who  makes  it,  and  to  any  others  whom  he  can  induce 
willingly  to  accept  any  like  loss  that  arises  out  of  it  for  them, 
is  morally,  or  relatively  to  the  true  good,  matter  of  indiffer- 
ence, the  exercise  of  a  devoted  will  in  the  sacrifice,  on  the 
part  of  all  concerned  in  it,  is  an  actual  and  undoubted  con- 
tribution to  true  good.  The  degree  of  its  value  will  only  be 
doubtful,  so  far  as  there  may  be  uncertainty  in  regard  to  its 
tendency  to  yield  more  or  less  further  good  of  the  same  kind 
in  the  sequel.  We  say  '  more  or  less,'  for  that  it  tends  to 
yield  some  further  good  of  the  same  kind  can  never  be  really 
doubtful.  Self-sacrifice,  devotion  to  worthy  objects,  is  always 
self-propagatory.     If  the  question  is  asked, — 

Of  love  that  never  found  his  earthly  close, 
What  sequel  ? 

there  is  at  least  the  answer, 

But  am  I  not  the  nobler  through  thy  love? 
O,  three  times  less  unworthy  ' ! 

In  like  manner,  upon  the  view  that  -of  the  life  which  forms 
the  true  and  full  good  the  self-devoted  will  must  be  the 
principle,  if  the  question  is  asked.  What  comes  of  any 
particular  act  of  self-sacrifice?  there  is  at  least  the  answer 
that  the  act  does  not  need  anything  further  to  come  of  it, 
in  order  to  be  in  itself  in  little  the  good.  But  it  is  only  if 
we  falter  in  that  view  of  the  good,  on  the  strength  of  which 
we  give  this  answer,  that  we  can  doubt  the  beneficent  result, 
in  whatever  manner  or  degree,  of  the  act  in  itself  good.  The 
good  will  in  one  man  has  never  failed  to  elicit  or  strengthen 
such  a  will  in  another. 
377.  But  it  will  be  said  that  we  are  so  far,  dealing  only  in 
'  Tennyson's  '  Luve  and  Duty.' 


464     PRACTICAL  VALVE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IV 

generalities.  It  may  be  admitted  that  an  act  or  habit  of 
self-sacrifice  is  a  good  in  itself,  but  there  are  many  ways  in 
which  a  man  may  sacrifice  himself,  and  he  is  resporisible  for 
choosing  the  most  useful.  It  is  of  little  profit  to  tdl  him  of 
the  intrinsic  nobility  of  self-sacrifice,  unless  we  can  give  him 
some  means  of  judging  for  what  sort  of  objects  he  in  parti- 
cular should  be  prepared  to  give  up  his  tastes  and  inclinations, 
or  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  established  custom.  To  revert  to 
one  of  the  examples  employed,  no  one  would  think  of  saying 
absolutely  that  there  was  merit  in  sacrificing  a  taste  for  music 
On  the  contrary,  there  may  be  a  duty  to  cultivate  it.  The 
question  whether  it  should  be  sacrificed  or  cultivated  must 
-depend  on  the  position  and  general  capabilities  of  the  in- 
dividual, on  the  circumstances  of  his  time,  on  the  claims  of 
surrounding  society.  Some  direction  therefore  is  needed  for 
the  individual  in  making  his  sacrifices;  some  criterion  of 
the  ends  which  he  should  keep  before  him  in  decidirig  for 
this  sacrifice  rather  than  for  that.  How  can  the  view  of  the 
good  for  which  we  have  been  pleading  afford  such  direction 
or  criterion  ? 

The  answer  lies  in  a  consideration  of  that  unity  of  the 
human  spirit  throughout  its  individual  manifestations,  in 
virtue  of  which  the  realisation  of  its  possibilities,  though 
a  personal  object  to  each  man,  is  at  the  same  time  an  object 
fully  attainable  by  one  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  attained  by  the 
whole  human  society.  The  statement  that  the  act  of  self- 
sacrifice  has  its  value  in  itself  is  not  to  be  understood  as 
denying  that  it  has  its  value  in  its  consequences,  but  as  im- 
plying that  those  consequences,  to  be  of  intrinsic  value,  must 
be  of  a  kind  with  the  act  itself,  as  an  exercise  of  a  character 
having  its  dominant  interest  in  some  form  of  human  perfection. 
The  injunction  that  would  be  founded  on  jthe  view  of  that 
perfection  as  the  end  would  never  be  '  Sacrifice  inclination ' 
\  simply,  but '  Sacrifice  inclination  in  so  far  as  by  so  doing  you 
I  may  make  men  better ; '  but  the  bettering  of  men  would 
mean  their  advance  in  a  goodness  the  same  in  principle  as 
that  which  appears  in  the  sacrifice  enjoined,  and  this  sacrifice 
itself  would  be  regarded  as  already  an  instalment  of  the 


CH.  IV]   PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORIES  465 

good  to  be  more  largely  attained  in  its  consequences.  The 
direction  to  the  individual,  in  doubt  whether  he  should  deny 
himself  some  attractive  pursuit  or  some  harmless  indulgence, 
would  be,  not  that  he  should  make  the  sacrifice  for  the  sake 
of  making  it,  but  that  he  should  be  ready  to  make  it,  if  upon 
honest  consideration  it  appear  that  men  would  be  the  better 
for  his  doing  so. 

378.  Universalistic  Hedonism  might  give  the  same 
direction ;  but  in  the  interpretation  of  the  direction  there 
would  be  a  great  difference — a  difference  which  might  very 
w^ell  amount  to  that  between  demanding  the  sacrifice  and 
allowing  the  indulgence.  The  Hedonist,  understanding  by 
the  bettering  of  men  an  addition  to  the  pleasures  enjoyed 
by  them,  present  and  to  come,  has  at  any  rate  an  obscure 
computation  before  him.  In  such  cases  as  we  are  now  con^ 
sidering  he  would  not  have  the  presumption,  afforded  by 
a  call  of  conventionally  recognised  duty,  that  obedience  to 
it,  however  painful  to  the  individual,  would  be  felicific  in  the 
general  result.  The  presumption  from  his  point  of  view 
must  always  be  against  the  '  reasonableness '  of  making  the 
sacrifice,  till  the  probability  of  an  excess  of  pleasure  from  its 
ulterior  consequences  over  the  pain  more  immediately  pro- 
duced by  it  could  be  clearly  made  out.  Such  a  probability 
must  generally  be  very  difficult  to  arrive  at.  It  does  not  at 
all  follow,  as  is  apt  to  be  assumed,  because  an  observance 
of  conventional  morality  may  be  required  in  the  interest  of 
general  pleasure,  that  an  advance  upon  conventional  morality 
is  so.  Upon  the  view  that  the  exercise  of  a  virtuous  will  is 
an  end  in  itself,  the  question  about  a  possible  '  too  much ' 
of  virtue  cannot  arise.  But  it  is  otherwise  if  an  opposite 
view  is  taken.  If  virtue  is  of  value  only  as  a  means  to 
general  pleasure,  it  becomes  necessary  to  enquire  what  is  the 
degree  of  it  which  so  contributes — to  what  extent  an  increase 
in  the  number  of  self-devoted  persons,  and  a  more  intense 
and  constant  self-devotion  on  their  part,  is  desirable,  in  order 
to  an  increase  in  the  sum  of  pleasures  for  all  human,  or  all 
sentient,  beings.  Thus  in  his  forecast  of  the  '  felicific '  results 
to  be  looked  for  from  any  advance  upon  the  '  law  of  opinion ' 

Hh 


466     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bk.  IV 

in  the  way  of  self-denying  virtue,  the  Hedonistic  Utilitarian 
may  not  avail  himself  of  the  short  method  that  would  be 
represented  by  the  maxim,  'The  more  virtue,  the  more 
pleasure.'  He  may  not  assume  that,  because  the  suggested 
self-denial  would  tend  to  increase  virtue  among  men,  it  would 
tend  to  increase  pleasure.  The  pleasure-increasing  tendency 
must  be  made  out  on  its  own  account ;  and,  unless  the  self- 
denial  in  question  is  one  that  upon  physiological  evidence 
can  be  proved  likely  in  its  consequences  to  cause  some 
decisive  reduction  in  physical  suffering,  it  is  not  easy  to  see 
how  this  should  be  done.  When  it  had  been  done,  the 
balance  between  the  remoter  and  less  certain  gain  and  the 
proximate  loss  would  have  still  to  be  struck.  Upon  such 
principles  the  case  against  making  the  'uncalled  for'  sacrifice, 
even  though  dispassionately  conducted,  would  generally  be 
invincibly  strong. 

379.  From  the  other  point  of  view,  even  though  the 
precise  nature  and  strength  of  the  call  for  the  sacrifice 
could  not  clearly  be  made  out,  the  presumption  would 
still  be  in  favour  of  its  being  made,  on  the  ground  of  the 
intrinsic  value  attaching  alike  to  the  exercise  of  the  self- 
denying  character,  and  to  those  results,  of  a  kind  with 
itself,  which  through  the  influence  of  example  it  is  sure 
to  produce  among  men.  It  is  true  that  this  general 
presumption  will  not  help  a  man  to  decide  which  of  many 
particular  courses  of  self-denying  action,  which  it  is  open 
to  him  to  pursue  but  which  he  would  not  be  thought  the 
worse  of  for  not  pursuing,  is  the  one  which  it  is  best  for 
him  to  pursue.  It  is  his  duty  not  to  waste  himself  among 
various  efforts,  each  of  which  might  be  well-intentioned  and 
involve  real  self-denial,  but  none  of  them  in  the  direction 
in  which  he  in  particular  under  the  circumstances  of  the 
case  "might  do  most  good.  For  deciding,  however,  whether 
any  particular  sacrifice  is  one  that  he  ought  to  make,  he  has 
much  more  available  guidance,  according  to  our  view,  than 
a  computation  of  the  total  range  of  pleasures  and  pains  to 
be  looked  for  as  a  consequence  of  the  sacrifice.  He  has  to 
ask,  according  to  the  terms  in  which  the  question  has  been 


CH.  iv]   PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORIES   467 

above  put,  whether  the  suggested  sacrifice  on  his  part  is  one 
by  which  he  may  best  contribute  to  the  well-being  of  society, 
'  as  measured  by  the  more  general  establishment  of  condi- 
tions favourable  to  the  attainment  of  the  recognised  virtues 
and  excellences,  by  the  more  general  attainment  of  those 
excellences  in  some  degree,  or  by  their  attainment  on  the 
part  of  some  persons  in  higher  degree  without  detraction 
from  the  opportunities  of  others.'  It  is  not  to  be  disguised, 
of  course,  that  with  such  an  end  before  him  as  this  question 
represents,  he  may  find  it  difficult  to  ascertain,  by  analysis 
of  circumstances  and  enquiry  into  facts,  in  what  degree  the 
various  forms  of  self-denying  activity  open  to  him  are  likely 
to  contribute  to  the  end.  As  has  already  been  pointed  out, 
such  analysis  and  enquiry  are  not  to  be  dispensed  with  upon 
one  theory  of  the  end  any  more  than  upon  another.  The 
question  is  of  the  object  with  reference  tOAvhich  the  analysis 
and  enquiry  are  to  be  conducted ;  whether  in  order  to  ascer- 
tain tendencies  to  produce  a  maximum  of  pleasure  over  all 
■time  to  all  beings  capable  of  it,  or  in  order  to  ascertain  ten- 
-dencies  to  produce  a  perfection  of  human  society,  resting  on 
the  universal  prevalence  of  the  will  to  be  perfect.  When 
the  point  at  issue  is  whether  some  sacrifice  should  be  made 
which  is  uncalled  for  by  social  converition,  while  its  tendency 
in  the  former  direction  will  generally  be  found  unascertain- 
able,  its  tendency  in  the  latter  will  be  within  the  ken  of  any 
dispassionate  and  considerate  man. 

380.  A  man  asks  himself — to  revert  once  more  to  that 
instance — whether  he  is  justified  in  giving  so  much  of  his 
time  to  the  gratification  of  his  taste  for  music ;  which  must 
mean,  whether  there  are  not  claims  upon  him  for  the  service 
of  mankind  which  cannot  be  satisfied  while  he  does  so. 
JNew  it  may  really  be  a  difficult  question  for  him  to  settle 
.whether  he  cannot  serve  mankind  more  effectually  by  giving 
more  of  his  time  to  music  rather  than  less.  It  is  a  question 
ior  the  settlement  of  which  there"  may  be  needed  careful 
analysis  of  his  own  faculties,  of  the  needs  of  society  about 
him,  of  his  particular  opportunities  and  powers  of  meeting 
those  needs ;  Vnd  in  settling  it  the  truest  conception  of  ulti- 
H  h  2 


468     PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY    [bK.  IV 

mate  good  will  not  prevent  the  mistakes  to  which  hastiness, 
prejudice,  and  self-conceit  naturally  lead.  Still  there  is  all 
the  diiiference  between  approaching  the  question  with  some 
definite  conception  of  the  claims  of  mankind,  of  the  good 
to  be  sought  for  them,  and  without  any  such  conception. 
The  Hedonistic  theory,  as  we  have  tried  to  show,  affords  no 
such  conception.  It  insists  indeed  on  the  claim  of  every 
man  to  have  as  much  pleasure  as  is  compatible  with  the  at- 
tainment of  the  greatest  possible  amount  on  the  whole,  but 
this  claim  cannot  be  translated  into  a  claim  to  be  or  to  do, 
or  to  have  the  chance  of  being  or  doing,  anything  in  par- 
ticular. We  cannot  found  upon  it  even  a  claim  of  every 
man  to  be  free ;  for  who  can  be  sure  that  the  freedom  of 
all  men,  when  the  whole  range  of  the  possibilities  of  plea- 
sure is  taken  into  account,  tends  to  an  excess  of  pleasure 
over  pain  ?  Still  less  can  we  found  upon  it  a  claim  of  every 
one  to  be  helped  to  be  good,  according  to  our  present  stan- 
dard of  goodness.  Hedonistic  theory  can  only  bid  us  pro- 
mote the  received  virtues  and  excellences  among  men  with 
an  ^  which  makes  the  injunction  of  no  avail  in  such  a  case 
as  we  are  considering.  They  are  to  be  promoted  up  to  the 
limit  at  which  their  promotion  still  certainly  yields  more 
pleasure  than  pain  to  the  universe  of  human  or  sentient 
beings ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  this  limit  is. 

It  is  otherwise  when  the  exercise  of  the  recognised  virtues 
and  excellences,  as  resting  upon  a  self-devoted  will  or  will  to 
be  perfect,  is  considered  to  be  an  end  in  itself — to  be  itself, 
if  not  in  completeness  yet  in  principle  and  essence,  the  ulti- 
mate good  for  man.  The  general  nature  of  the  claim  of  other 
men  upon  him  is  plain  to  every  one  who  contemplates  it  with 
reference  to  such  an  end.  It  is  a  claim  for  service  in  the 
direction  of  making  the  attainment  of  those  virtues  and 
excellences,  by  some  persons  and  in  some  form,  more  possible. 
The  question  for  the  individual  will  still  remain,  how  he  in 
particular  may  best  render  this  service,  and  it  may  be  one  of 
much  difficulty.  He  may  easily  deceive  himself  in  answering 
it,  but  he  will  not  have  the  excuse  for  answering  it  in  favour  of 
his  own  inclination,  which  is  afforded  by  reference  to  a  '  Sum- 


CH.  ivj   PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORIES  469 

mum  Bonum  '  of  which  the  most  readily  ascertainable  con- 
stituent must  always  be  his  own  pleasure. 

381.  As  to  the  particular  instance  we  have  been  consider- 
ing, while  intrinsic  value  will  not  be  denied  to  excellence 
in  music  as  having  a  place  in  the  fulfilment  of  man's  voca- 
tion, it  is  a  question,  so  to  speak,  of  spiritual  proportion, 
whether  the  attainment  of  such  excellence  is  of  importance 
in  any  society  of  ftien  under  the  given  conditions  of  that 
society.  For,  like  all  excellence  in  art,  it  has  its  value  as 
an  element  in  a  whole  of  spiritual  life,  to  which  the  moral 
virtues  are  essential;  which  without  them  would  be  no 
realisation  of  the  capacities  of  the  human  soul.  In  some 
Italian  principality  of  the  last  century,  for  instance,  with  its 
civil  life  crushed  out  and  its  moral  energies  debased,  ex- 
cellence in  music  could  hardly  be  accounted  of  actual  and 
present  value  at  all.  Its  value  would  be  potential,  in  so  far 
as  the  artist's  work  might  survive  to  become  an  element  in 
a  nobler  life  elsewhere  or  at  a  later  time.  Under  such  con- 
ditions much  occupation  with  music  might  imply  indifference 
to  claims  of  the  human  soul  which  must  be  satisfied  in  order 
to  the  attainment  of  a  life  in  which  the  value  of  music  could 
be  actualised.  And  under  better  social  conditions  there  may 
be  claims,  arising  from  the  particular  position  of  an  indivi- 
dual, which  render  the  pursuit  of  excellence  in  music,  though 
it  would  be  the  right  pursuit  for  others  qualified  as  he  is, 
a  wrong  one  for  him.  In  the  absence  of  such  claims  the 
main  question  will  be  of  his  particular  talent.  Has  he  talent 
to  serve  mankind — to  contribute  to  the  perfection  of  the 
human  soul — more  as  a  musician  than  in  any  other  way  ? 
Only  if  he  has  will  he  be  justified  in  making  music  his  main 
pursuit.  If  he  is  not  to  make  it  his  main  pursuit,  the  ques- 
tion will  remain,  to  what  extent  he  may  be  justified  in  in- 
dulging his  taste  for  it,  either  as  a  refreshment  of  faculties 
which  are  to  be  mainly  used  in  other  pursuits — to  be  so  used, 
because  in  them  he  may  best  serve  mankind  in  the  sense 
explained — or  as  enabling  him  to  share  in  that  intrinsically 
valuable  lifting  up  of  the  soul  which  music  may  afford. 

382.  Such  questions  are  not  to  be  answered  by  '  intui- 


47°         PRACTICAL  VALUE  OF  MORAL  THEORY 

tipn,'  nor  do  they  arise  under  conditions  under  which  our 
guidance  in  duty  needs  to  be  intuitive — needs  to  be  derived 
from  convictioris  which  afford  immediate  direction  indepen- 
dently of  any  complicated  consideration  of  circumstances. 
They  only  arise  for  persons  who  have  exceptional  opportunity 
of  directing  their  own  pursuits,  and  who  do  not  need  to  be 
in  a  hurry  in  their  decisions.  To  most  people  sufiScient 
direction  for  their  pursuits  is  afforded  by  claims  so  well 
established  in  conventional  morality  that  they  are  intuitively 
recognised^  and  that  a  conscience  merely  responsive  to  social 
disapprobation  would  reproach  us  for  neglecting  them.  For 
all  of  us  it  is  so  in  regard  to  a  great  part  of  our  lives.  But 
the  cases  we  have  been  considering  are  those  in  which  some 
'counsel  of  perfection'  is  needed,  which  reference,  to  such 
claims  does  not  supply,  and  which  has  to  be  darived  from 
reference  to  a  theory  of  ultimate  good.  In  such  cases  many 
questions  have  to  be  answered,  which  intuition  cannot  answer, 
before  the  issue  is  arrived  at  to  which  the  theory  of  ultimate 
good  becomes  applicable;  but  then  the  cases  only  occur  for 
persons  who  have  leisure  and  faculty  for  dealing  with  such 
questions.  For  them  the  essential  thing  is  that  their  theory 
of  the  good  should  afford  a  really  available  criterion  for 
estimating  those  further  claims  upon  them  which  are  not  en- 
forced by  the  sanction  of  conventional  morality,  and  a  criterion 
which  affords  no  plea  to  the  self-indulgent  impulse.  Our 
point  has  been  to  show,  in  the  instance  given,  that  such 
a  criterion  is  afforded  by  the  theory  of  ultimate  good  as  a  per- 
fection of  the  human  spirit  resting  on  the  will  to  be  perfept 
(which  may  be  called  in  short  the  theory  of  virtfle  as  an.  .end 
in  itself),  but  not  by  the  theory  of  good  as  consisting  in 
a  maximum  of  possible  pleasure,  .- 


Oxloid:  Piinted  at  the  Clarendon  Press  by  Hokace  Hart,  M.A. 


MODERN    PHILOSOPHY 

BACON'S  NOVUM  ORGANUM.  Edited,  with  Introduction, 
Notes,  &c.,  by  T.  Fowler.    Second  edition.    8vo.    igj. 

BENTHAM'S  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PRINCIPLES 
OF  MORALS  AND  LEGISLATION.    Crown  8vo.    6s.  (,d. 

THE  WORKS  OF  GEORGE  BERKELEY,  formerly  Bishop 
of  Cloyne.     With  Prefaces,  Annotations,  Appendices,  and  an  account 
of  his    Life    ind  Philosophy,   by  A.  C.   Feaser.      New  edition. 
Crown  8vo.    Four  volumes.     24J. 
Some  copies  of  the  8vo  edition  of  the  Life  are  still  on  sale,  price  i6y. 

SELECTION  FROM  BERKELEY,  with  Introduction  and 
Notes,  for  the  use  of  Students.  Edited  by  A.  C.  Fraser.  Fifth 
edition.    Crown  8vo.    Is.  6d. 

THE  CAMBRIDGE  PLATONISTS :  being  Selections  from 
the  Writings  of  Benjamin  Whichcote,  John  Smith  and  Nathanael 
Culverwel,  with  Introduction  by  E.  T,  Campagnac.  Crown  8vo. 
6s.  6d.  net. 

LEIBNIZ'S  MONADOLOGY  AND  OTHER  PHILOSO- 
PHICAL WRITINGS.  Translated,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 
R.  Latta.    Crown  8vo.     Ss.  6d. 

LOCKE'S  ESSAY  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDER- 
STANDING. Collated  and  Annotated,  with  Prolegomena,  Biogra- 
phical, Critical  and  Historical,  by  A.  C.  Eraser.  Two  volumes. 
8vo,    3  2  J. 

LOCKE'S  CONDUCT  OF  THE  UNDERSTANDING. 
Edited  by  T.  Fowler.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

A  STUDY  IN  THE  ETHICS  OF  SPINOZA.    By  H.  H. 

Joachim.    8vo.     ioj.  6d.  net. 

HUME'S  TREATISE  OF  HUMAN  NATURE.  Reprinted 
from  the  original  edition  in  three  volumes,  and  edited  by  L.  A.  Selby- 
BlGGE.    Second  edition.    Crown  8vo.    6s.  net. 

HUME'S  ENQUIRY  CONCERNING  THE  HUMAN  UN- 
DERSTANDING, and  an  Enquiry  concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals. 
Edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge.    Crown  8vo.    Second  edition.    6s.  net. 

BRITISH  MORALISTS,  being  Selections  from  Writers  prin- 
cipally of  the  eighteenth  century.  Edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge. 
Two  volumes.    Crown  8vo.     12s.  net. 

BUTLER'S  WORKS,  edited  by  W.  E.  Gladstone.  Two 
volumes.  Medium  8vo.  14J.  each.  Or  Crown.  8vo,  ios.6d.  (Also, 
separately— Vol.  I,  8j.  6rf. ;  Vol.  11,  5^.) 


RECENT    PHILOSOPHY 

THE  LOGIC  OF  HEGEL,  translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia 
of  Philosophical  Sciences,  with  Prolegomena,  by  W.  WALLACE.  Second 
edition.    Two  volumes.    Crown  8vo.     los.  dd.  each, 

HEGEL'S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  MIND,  translated  from  the 
Encyclopaedia  of  Philosophical  Sciences,  with  five  Introductory  Essays, 
by  W,  Wallace.    Crown  8vo.    los.  dd. 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC.   By H.W,  B.Joseph.   8vo. 

\_Immediately, 

LOGIC;  or,  The  Morphology  of  Knowledge.  By  B.  Bosanquet. 
8vo.     z\s. 

LOTZE'S  LOGIC,  in  Three  Books— of  Thought,  of  Investiga- 
tion, and  of  Knowledge,  translated  by  B.  Bosanquet,  Second 
edition.    Two  vols.    Crown  8vo.     \2s. 

LOTZE'S  METAPHYSICS,  in  Three  Books— Ontology,  Cos- 
mology, and  Psychology,  translated  by  B.  Bosanquet.  Second 
edition.    Crown  8vo.     \zs. 

AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.    By  H.  H,  Joachim,     8vo. 

GREEN'S  PROLEGOMENA  TO  ETHICS,  Edited  by 
A.  C,  Bradley,  With  a  Preface  by  Edward  Caird.  Fifth  edition. 
Crown  8vo.    6f.  net. 

LECTURES  AND  ESSAYS  ON  NATURAL  THEOLOGY 
AND  ETHICS,  By  W,  Wallace.  Edited,  with,  a  Biographical 
Introduction,  by  E.  Caird.    With  a  portrait.    8vo.     i  zj,  6rf. 

TYPES  OF  ETHICAL  THEORY,  By  J,  Martineau, 
Third  edition.    Two  volumes.    Crown  8vo,     ijj. 

A  STUDY  OF  RELIGION;  its  Sources  and  Contents. 
By   J.  Martineau.     Third  edition.     Two  volumes.  .  Crown  8v6. 

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORALS,  By  T,  Fowler  and 
J,  M.  Wilson.  8vo.  i^j.  Also  separately— Part  I,  3^.  6</. ; 
Part  II,  \05.  6d. 

THE  THEORY  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL.  By  Hastings 
Rashdall.    8vo.     Two  Vols,  [In  the  Press. 

THE  HERBERT  SPENCER  LECTURE,  Delivered  at 
Oxford,  March,  1905,  by  Frederic  Harrison.  8vo,  paper  covers, 
is.  net. 


OXFORD 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 

LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  NEW  YORK  AND  TORONTO 

HENRY  FROWDE 


CLARENDON  PRESS  BOOKS 

History,  Philosophy,  and  Law 
Greece,  Italy,  Egypt,  etc 

Clinton's  Fasti  Hellenici,  from  the  LVIth  to  the  CXXIIIrd  olympiad. 
Third  edition.  4.to.  £1  14s.  6d.  From  the  CXXIVth  Olympiad  to  the  Death 
of  Augustus.     Second  edition.     4to.     £1  13s.     Epitome.     8vo.     6s.  6d. 

Clinton's  Fasti  Romani,  from  the  death  of  Augustus  to  the  death  of 
Heraclius.     Two  volumes.     4to.     £3  2s.     Epitome.     8vo.     7s. 

Greswell's  Fasti  Temporis  Catholici.     4  vols.    svo.    £2  los. 

Tables  and  Introduction  to  Tables.  8vo.  15s.     Origines  Kalendariae  Italicae. 
4  vols.  8vo.  i£2  2s.        Origines  Kalendariae  Hellenicae.  6  vols.  8vo.  £4  4s. 

A  Manual  of  Greek  Historical  Inscriptions.    By  E.  L.  Hicks. 

New  edition,  revised  by  G.  F.  Hill.     8vo.     12s.  6d. 

Latin  Historical  Inscriptions,  illustrating  the  history  of  the  Early 

Empire.     By  G.  M°N.  Rushforth.    8vo.     10s.  net. 

Sources  for  Greek  History  between  the  Persian  and  Peloponnesian 
Wars.    Collected  and  arranged  by  G.  F.  Hill.     8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Sources  for  Roman  History,  b.c.  133-70.     By  A.  H.  J.  Gbeenidge 

and  A.  M.  Clay.    Crown  8vo.     5s.  6d.  net. 

A  Manual  of  Ancient  History.  ByGRAwmrsoN.  2nded.  svo.  i4s. 

Finlay's  History  of  Greece  from  its  Conquest  by  the  Romans  (b.c.  146) 
to  A.D.  1864.  A  new  edition,  revised,  and  in  part  re-written,  with  many 
additions,  by  the  Author,  and  edited  by  H.  F.  Tozeb.    7  vols.    Svo.     £3  10s. 

The  History  of  Sicily  from  the  earliest  limes.      By  E.  A.  Fkeeman. 

Vols.  I  and  II.  JVol.  I.  The  Native  Nations :  The  Phoenician  and  Greek 
Settlements.  Vol.  II.  From  the  beginning  of  Greek  Settlement  to  the 
beginningof  Athenian  Intervention.]     8vo.     £2  2s. 

Vol.  III.   The  Athenian  and  Carthaginian  Invasions.     £1  4s. 

Vol.  IV.  From  the  Tyranny  of  Dionysios  to  the  Death  of  Agathokles. 
Edited  from  posthumous  MSS,  by  A.  J.  Evans.     £1  Is. 

Italy  and  her  Invaders  (a.d.  376-814).   with  plates  and  maps.   Eight 

volumes.     8vo.     By  T.  HoneKDf. 
Vols.  I-II.     The  Visigothic  Invasions.      The   Hunnish  Invasion.      The 

Vandal  Invasion,  and  the  Herulian  Mutiny.     Second  edition.     £2  2s. 
Vols.  III-IV.     The  Ostrogothic  Invasion.      The  Imperial  Restoration. 

Second  edition.     £1  16s. 
Vols.  V-VI.  The  Lombard  Invasion,  and  the  Lombard  Kingdom.    £1  16s. 
Vols.  VII-VIII.     Prankish  Invasions,  and  the  Prankish  Empire.     £1  4s. 

The  Dynasty  of  TheodosiuS  ;  or.  Seventy  Years'  Straggle  with  the 
Barbarians.     By  the  same  author.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Aetoha ;   its  Geography,  Topography,  and  Antiquities. 

ByW.  J.  WoODHOusE.    With  maps  and  illustrations.     Royal  Svo.    £1  Is.  net. 

The  Islands  of  the  Aegean.   By  H.  F.  Tozeb.   Crown  Svo.   ss.  ed. 

1 

B4,ooo 


Dalmatia,  the  Quamero,  and  Istria ;  with  Cettigne  in  Monte- 
negro and  the  Island  of  Grade.  By  T.  G.  Jackson.  Three  volumes.  With 
many  plates  and  illustrations.     8vo.     £S  3s. 

Cramer's  Description  of  Asia  Minor.  Two  volumes,   svo.  iis. 

Descriptionof  Ancient  Greece.  3  vols.  svo.  i6s.  ed. 

The  Cities  and  Bishoprics  of  Phrygia.     By  w.  M.  Ramsay. 

Royal  Svo.    Vol.  I,  Part  I.  The  Lycos  Valley  and  South-Western  Phrygia. 
18s.  net    Vol.  I,  Part  II.   West  and  West  Central  Phrygia.    £1  Is.  net 

Stories   of  the   High   Priests   of  Memphis,  the  Sethon  of 

Herodotus,  and  the  Demotic  Tales  of  Khamnas.     By  F.  Ll.  Gbiffith.    With 
Portfolio  containing  seven  facsimiles.     Royal  Svo.     £2  7s.  6d.  net. 

The  Arab  Conquest  of  Egypt. '  By  A.  J.  BunxE.   with  maps  and 

plans.     Svo.     16s.  net. 

Baghdad  during  the  Abbasid  Caliphate,  from  contemporary 

sources.    By  G.  Le  Strangk    With  eight  plans.    Svo.     16s.  net. 


Archaeology 


Sacred  Sites  of  the  Gospels.  By  W.  Sanday,  with  the  assistance 
of  p.  Waterhouse.  With  63  full-page  illustrations  from  photographs,  maps 
and  plans.     Svo.     13s.  6d.  net. 

Ancient  Coptic  Churches  of  Egypt.    By  A.  j.  Botlek.   2  vols. 

Svo.     30s. 

A  Catalogue  of  the  Cyprus  Museum.     By  J.  L.  Myhes  and 

Max  Ohnefamch-Richter.     Svo.     With  eight  plates,  7s.  6d.  net. 

A  Catalogue  of  the   Sparta   Museum.     By  M.  N.  Ton  and 

A.  J.  B.  Wage.     Svo.     10s.  6d.  net. 

Catalogue    of   the    Greek  Vases    in    the    Ashmolean 

Museum.  By  P.  Gardner.  Small  folio,  linen,  with  26  plates.  £S  3s.  net. 
Catalogue  of  the  Coins  in  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta,  including 
the  Cabinet  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.  Vol.  I.  By  Vincent  A.  SsirrH. 
Royal  Svo,  30s.  net ;  or  separately,  Part  I.  The  Early  Foreign  Dynasties  and 
the  Guptas,  15s.  net.  Part  II.  Ancient  Coins  of  Indian  Types,  6s.  net. 
Part  III.  Persian,  Mediaeval,  South  Indian,  and  Miscellaneous  Coins, 
10s.  6d.  net.  Vol.  II  will  contain  the  Muhammadan  coins.  Section  I  of 
Part  II  is  by  Sir  James  Bourdillon,  the  whole  of  the  remainder  by  H.  Nelson 
Wrjsht.    (Published  for  the  Trustees  of  the  Indian  Museum.) 

The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States.    By  L.  R.  Farnell.    svo. 

Vols.  I  and  II,  with  61  plates  and  over  100  illustrations.    £1  12s.  net : 
Vols.  Ill  and  IV,  with  83  plates.     Immediately. 

Classical  Archaeology  in  Schools.    By  p.  Gardner  and  j.  L. 

Myees.    Svo.    Second  edition.    Paper  covers,  Is.  net. 

Introduction  to  Greek  Sculpture.     By  L.  E.  Upcott.     Second 

edition.    Crown  Svo.    4s.  6d. 
Marmora     Oxoniensia,    inscrlptiones  Graecae  ad  Chandleri  exempla 
editae,  cur.  Gdl.  Roberts,  1791.    Crown  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

De  Antiquis  Marmoribus,  BiasU  CaryophiU.    i828.    7s.  ed. 

Fragmenta  Herculanensia.    A  Catalogue  of  the  Oxford  copies  of  the 
Herculanean  Rolls,  with  texts  of  several  papyri.  By  W.Scott.  Royal  Svo.  £1  Is. 
Thirty-six  Engravings  of  Texts  and  Alphabets  from  the  Herculanean 
Fragments.     Folio.     Small  paper,  10s.  6d.,  large  paper,  £\  Is. 

Herculanensium  Voluminum  Partes  ii.   1824.   svo.    los. 


English  History :  Sources 

Opus  Epistolarum  Das.  Erasmi  Roterodami  denuo  reco- 

gnitiim.et  auctiun  per  P.  S.  "Allen.  Medium  8vo.  Tom.  I,  1484-1514,  with 
four  illustrations.     18s.  net. 

Two  of  the  Saxon  Chronicles  Parallel ;  with  supplementary 

extracts  from  the  others.  A  Revised  Text,  edited,  with  introduction,  notes, 
appendices,  and  glossary,  by  C.  Plcmmer  and  J.  Easle.  Two  volumes 
crown -Svo,  half-roan.  Vol.  I.  Text,  appendices,  and  glossary.  10s.  6d. 
VoL  II.  Introduction,  notes,  and  index.     12s.  6d. 

The  Saxon  Chronicles  (787-1001  A.  D.).    Crown  Svo,  stiff  covers.    3s. 

Baedae  Opera  Historica,  edited  by  C.  Plummeh.  Two  volumes. 
Crown  Svo,  half-roan.    £1  Is.  net. 

Handbook  to  the  Land-Charters,  and  other  Saxonic  Documents, 
by  J.  Eahle.     Crovni  8vo.'    16s. 

The  Crawford  Collection  of  early  charters  and  Documents,  now  in 
the  Bodleian  Library.  Edited  by  A.  S.  Napiee  and  W.  H.  Stevenson. 
Small  4to,  cloth.     12s. 

Asser's  Life  of  Alfred,  with  the  Annals  of  St.  Neot, 

edited  by  W.  H.  Stevenson.     Crown  Svo.     12s.  net 

1  he  Alfred  Jewel,  an  historical  essay.  With  Illustrations  and  a  map, 
by  J.  Earle.    Small  4to,  buckram.     12s.  6d.  net. 

Chronicles  of  London.  Edited,  with  introduction  and  notes,  by 
C.  L.  Kingsfohd.     Svo.     10s.  6d.  net. 

DialogUS  de  Scaccario  (De  necessarUs  observantiis  Scaccarii  dialogus) 
by  Richard,  Son  of  Nigel.  Edited  by  A.  Hughes,  C.  G.  Crump,  and  C. 
Johnson,  with  introduction  and  notes.    Svo.     12s.  6d.  net. 

The  Song  of  Lewes.  Edited  from  the  MS,  with  introduction  and 
notes,  by  C.  L.  Kingsfohd.    Extra  fcap  Svo.    5s. 

Chronicon  Galfridi  le  Baker  de  Swynebroke,  edited  by  Sir 

E.  Maunde  Thompson,  K.C.B.     Small  4to,  18s. ;  cloth,  gilt  top,  £1  Is. 

PaSSio  et  Miracula  Beati  Olaui.  Edited  from  the  Twelfth-century 
MS  by  F.  Metcalfe.     Small  4to.     6s. 

Gascoigne's  Theological  Dictionary  (' Liber Veritatum'):  selected 

passages,  illustrating  the  condition  of  Church  and  State,  1403-1458.     With 
an  in^oduction  by  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers.     Small  4to.     10s.  6d. 

Fortescue's  Governance  of  England :   otherwise  caUed  The 

Difference  between  an  Absolute  and  a  Limited  Monarchy.     A  revised  text, 
edited,  with  introduction,  etc,  by  C.  Plumjieh.    Svo,  quarter-bound.     12s.  6d. 

3 


The  Protests  of  the  Lords,  including  those  wMch  have  been 
expunged,  from  1624  to  1874;  with  historical  introductions.  By  J.  E. 
Thorold  Rogers.     In  three  volumes.     8vo.     £.%  2s. 

The  Clarendon  Press  Series  of  Charters, 
Statutes,  etc 

From  the  earliest  times  to  1307.     By  Bishop  Stubbs. 

Select   Charters  and  other  illustrations  of  English  Constitutional  History. 
I      Eighth  edition.     Crown  8vo.     8s.  6d. 

From  1307  to  1558.     In  Preparation.     By  G.  W.  Prothero. 

Select  Statutes  and  .other  Constitutional  Documents. 

From  1558  to  1625. 

Constitutional  Documents  of  the  Reigns  of  Elizabeth 

and  James  I.     Third  edition.     Crown  8vo.     10s.  6d. 
From  1625  to  1660.     By  S.  R.  Gardiner. 

The  Constitutional  Documents  of  the  Puritan  Revolu- 
tion.    Third  edition.    Crown  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Calendars,  etc 

Calendar  of  Charters  and  Rolls  preserved  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 
8vo.     £\.  lis.  6d. 

Calendar  of  the  Clarendon  State  Papers,  preserved  in  the 

Bodleian  Library.     In  three  volumes.     1869-76. 

Vol.  I.   From  1523  to  January  1649.     8vo.     18s.     Vol.  II.   From  1649  to 
1654.     8vo.     16s.     Vol.  III.  From  1655  to  1657.     8vo.     14s. 


Hakluyt's  Principal  Navigations,  being  narratives  of  the  Voyages 
of  the  Elizabethan  Seamen  to  America.  Selection  edited  by  E.  J.  Payne. 
Crown  8vo,  with  portraits.  Second  edition.  First  and  Second  Series, 
5s.  each. 

Aubrey's  '  Brief  Lives,'  set  down  between  the  Years  1669  and  1696. 
Edited  from  the  Author's  MSS  by  A.  Clark.    Two  volumes.    8vo.    £.\  5s. 

Whitelock's  Memorials  of  English  Affairs  from  1625  to  1660.  4  vols. 
8vo.     &\  10s. 

Ludlow's  Memoirs,  162S-1672.  Edited,  with  Appendices  of  Letters 
and  illustrative  documents,  by  C.  H.  Firth.     Two  volumes.     8vo.     £1  16s. 

Luttrell's  Diary,  a  brief  Historical  Relation  of  State  Affairs,  1678-1714. 
Six  volumes.     8vo.     £X  4s. 

Burnet's  History  of  James  II.    8vo.    9s.  ed. 

Life    of    Sir    M.    Hale,    with   Fell's    Life    of 
Dr.  Hammond.    SmaU  8vo.   2s.  6d. 

4 


Burnet's  History  of  My  Own  Time,    a  new  edition  based  on 

that  of  M.  J.  RotjTH.     Edited  by  Osmund  Airy. 

Vol.  I.  The  Reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  Part  I.     12s.  6d. 
Vol.  n.   Completing  the  Reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  with 
Index  to  Vols.  I  and  II.     12s.  6d. 

Supplement,  derived  from  Burnet's  Memoirs,  Autobiography, 
etc,  all  hitherto  unpublished.  Edited  by  H.  C.  Foxchoft,  1903. 
8vo.     16s.  net. 

Carte's  Life  of  James  Duke  of  Ormond.     a  new  edition 

carefully  compared  with  the  original  MSS.     Six  volumes.     8vo.     ;£!  5s. 

The  Whitefoord  Papers,  being  the  Correspondence  and  other 
Manuscripts  of  Colonel  Chables  Whitefooed  and  Caieb  Whitefoohd,  from 
1739  to  1810.    Edited  by  W.  A.  S.  Hewdis.     8vo.     12s.  6d. 

History  of  Oxford 

A  complete  list  of  the  Publications  of  the  Oxford  Historical  Society 
can  be  obtained  from  Mr.  Frowde. 

Manuscript  Materials  relating  to  the  History  of  Oxford ; 

contained  in  the  printed  catalogues  of  the  Bodleian  and  College  Libraries. 
By  F.  Madan.     8vo.     7s.  6d. 

The  Early  Oxford  Press.  A  Bibliography  of  Printing  and  Publishing 
at  Oxford,  '  1468  '-164(0.  With  notes,  appendices,  and  illustrations.  By 
F.  Madax.    8vo.     18s. 

Bibliography 
Cotton's  Typographical  Gazetteer.    First  Series.   Svo.    12s.  6d. 
Ebert's  Bibliographical  Dictionary.    4  vols.   svo.   ^£3  3s.  net 

Bishop  Stubbs's  and  Professor  Freeman's  Books 
The  Constitutional  History  of  England,  in  its  Origin  and 

Development.     By  W.  Stubbs.     Library  edition.     Three  volumes.     Demy 
Svo.     £,%  8s.     Also  in  three  volumes,  crown  Svo,  price  12s.  each. 

Seventeen  Lectures  on  the  study  of  Mediaeval  and  Modern  History 
and  kindred  subjects,  186T-1884.  By  the  same.  Third  edition,  revised  and 
enlarged,  1900.     Crown  Svo,  half-roan.     8s.  6d. 

History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  England ;  its  Causes 

and  Results.     By  E.  A.  Fbeeman.     Vols.  I,  II  and  V  (English  edition)  are 
out  of  print. 

Vols.  HI  and  IV.     £\  Is.  each.    Vol.  VI  (Index).     lOs.  6d. 
A.  few  copies  of  the  complete  American  edition  remain. 

A  Short  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  England. 

Third  edition.     By  the  same.     Extra  fcap  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

The  Reign  of  William  RufilS  and  the  Accession  of  Henry  the 
First.    By  the  same.    Two  volumes.    Svo.    £1  16s. 

5 


Companion  to  English  History  (Middle  Ages).    Edited  by  F.  P. 

Baknabd.    With  97  illustrations.    Crown  8vo.    8s.  6d.  net. 

School  History  of  England  to  the  death  of  victoria.    With  maps, 

Slans,  and  select  bibliographies.     By  O.  M.  Edwards,  R.  S.  Rait  and  others, 
rown  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

Special  Periods  and  Biographies 

Life  and  Times  of  Alfred  the  Great,  being  the  Ford  Lectures 
for  1901.    By  C.  PurMMEK.    Svo.    5s.  net. 

The   Domesday   Boroughs.     By  Adolphus  Ballahd.    svo,  with 

four  plans.    6s.  6d.  tiet. 

Villainage  in  England,  Essays  in  English  Mediaeval  History.  By 
P.  ViNOGRADOFF.    8vo,  half-bound.     16s. 

The  Gild  Merchant :  a  contribution  to  British  municipal  history.  By 
C.  Gross.     Two  volumes.     8vo,  quarter-bound,  £1  4s. 

The  Welsh  Wars  of  Edward  I  ;  a  contribution  to  mediaeval 
military  history.     By  J.  E.  Mohkis.     Svo.     9s.  6d.  net. 

The   Great  Revolt  of  1381.     By  C.  Oman,     with  two  maps.    Svo. 

Ss.  6d.  net. 

Lancaster  and  York,  a  Century  of  English  History  (a.d.  1399-1485). 
By  Sir  J.  H.  Ramsay.  Two  volumes.  Svo,  with  Index,  £1  17s.  6d.  Index 
separately,  paper  covers,  Is.  6d. 

Life  and  Letters  of  Thomas  Cromwell.    By  r.  b.  MERRniAif. 

In  two  volumes.     [Vol.  I,  Life  and  Letters,  1523-1535,  etc.    Vol.  II,  Letters, 
1536-1540,  notes,  index,  etc.]    Svo.     18s.  net. 

A  History  of  England,  prlncipaUy  in  the  Seventeenth  Century.  By 
L.  VON  Ranke.  Translated  under  the  superintendence  of  G.  W.  Kitchin 
and  C.  W.  Boase.    Six  volumes.    Svo.    £3  3s.    Index  separately.  Is. 

Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  a  Biography,  by  W.  Stebbing.    Post  Svo.     6s.  net. 

Biographical  Memoir  of  Dr.  WiUiam  Markham,  Arch- 
bishop of  York,  by  his  great-grandson.  Sir  Clements  Markham,  K.CB, 
Svo.    5s.  net.    With  photogravure  portrait. 

The  Life  and  Works  of  John  Arbuthnot.    By  a  a.  Aitken. 

Svo,  cloth  extra,  with  Portrait.     16s. 

Life  and  Letters  of  Sir  Henry  Wotton.     By  L.  Pearsall- 

Smith.    Svo.     Two  volumes.     In  the  Press. 

Great  Britain  and  Hanover.    By  a.  w.  Ward.   Crown  svo.  ss. 
History  of  the  Peninsular  War.    By  c.  Oman.   To  be  completed 

in  six  volumes,  Svo,  with  many  maps,  plans,  and  portraits. 

Already  published :  Vol.  I.  1S07-1S09,  to  Corunna.     14s  net. 
Vol.  II.  1809-lSlO,  to  Talavera.     14s,  net. 
Vol.  III.  In  the  Press. 

Frederick  York  Powell.  a  Life  and  a  selection  from  his  Letters 
and  Occasional  Writings.  By  Oliver  Elton.  Two  volumes.  Svo  With 
photogravure  portraits,  facsimiles,  etc.    21s.  net. 

6 


History  and  Geography  of  America 
and  the  British  Colonies 

For  other  Geographical  books,  see  page  10. 

History  of  the  New  World  called  America.    By  E.  J.  Patoe. 

Vol.  I.  8vo.   18s.   Bk.  I.  The  Discovery.   Bk.  II,  Part  I.  Aboriginal  America. 
Vol.  II.    8vo.    14s.    Bk.  II,  Part  II.  Aboriginal  America  (concluded). 

The  Canadian  War  of  1812.  By  c.  p.  Lucas,  c.b.  svo.  with 

eight  maps.     ISs.  6d.  net. 

Historical  Geography  of  the  British  Colonies.     By  c.  p. 

Lucas,  C.B.     Crown  Svo. 

Introduction.     New  edition  by  H.  E.  Egekton.    1903.    With  eight 
maps.    3s.  6d.     In  cheaper  binding,  2s.  6d. 

Vol.  I.     The  Mediterranean  and  Eastern  Colonies. 

With  13  maps.     Second  edition,  revised  and  brought  up  to  date,  by 
R.  E.  Stubbs.     1906.     Ss. 

Vol.  II.     The  West  Indian  Colonies.     With  twelve 

maps.     Second  edition,  revised  and  brought  up  to  date,  by  C.  Atchley, 
I.S.O.     1905.     7s.  6d. 

Vol.    III.        West    Africa.       Revised  to  the  end  of  1899  by 
H.  E.  Egerton.     With  five  maps.     7s.  6d. 

Vol.   IV.      South   and   East  Aj&'ica.      Historical  and  Geo- 
graphical.    With  eleven  maps.     9s.  6d. 

Also  Part  I.  Historical.    1898.     6s.  6d.     Part  II  (1903).  Geographical. 
3s.  6d. 

Vol.  V.  Canada,  Part  I.    1901.   6s. 

Vol.  VI.      Australasia.      By  J.  J.  Rogers.      Immediately. 

The  History  of  South  Africa  to  the  Jameson  Raid.     With  numerous  maps. 

Crown  8vo.    5s. 
History  of  the  Dominion  of  Canada.    By  W.  P.  Greswell.    Crown  Svo.     7s.  6d. 
Geography  of  the  Dominion  of  Canada  and  Newfoundland.    By  the  same  author. 

With  ten  maps.     1891.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
Geography  of  Africa  South  of  the  Zambesi.     With  maps.     1892.     By  the  same 

author.     Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

The  Claims  of  the  Study  of  Colonial  History  upon  the 
attention  of  the  University  of  Oxford.   An  inaugural  lecture 

delivered  on  April  28,  1906,  by  H.  E.  Egehton.     Svo,  paper  covers.  Is.  net. 
Historical    Atlas.      Europe  and   her  Colonies,  27   maps.     3Ss.  net. 

ComewaU-Lewis's  Essay  on  the  Government  of  Depen- 
dencies.    Edited  by  C.  P.  Lucas,  C.B.    Svo,  quarter-bound,  14s. 

7 


History  of  India 


A  Brief  History  of  the  Indian  Peoples.   By  Sir  w.  w.  Hunter. 

Revised  up  to  1903  by  W.  H.  HuTTON.     Eighty-ninth  thousand.     3s.  6d. 

Rulers  of  India  :  The  History  of  the  Indian  Empire  in  a  carefully 
planned  succession  of  Political  Biographies.  Edited  by  Sir  W.  W.  Hunter. 
Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d.  each. 

Babar.     By  S.  Lane-Poole. 

Akbar.      By  Colonel  Malleson. 

Albuquerque.      By  H.  Morse  Stephens. 

Aurangzib.      By  S.  Lane-Poole. 

MMhava  Rao  Sindhia.     By  H.  G.  Keene. 

Lord  Clive.      By  Colonel  Malleson. 

Dupleix.      By  Colonel  Maixeson. 

Warren  Hastings,     By  Captain  L.  J.  Tkottbh. 

The  Marquis  of  Cornwallis.     By  W.  S.  Seton-Kahr. 

Haidar  Ali  and  Tipu  Sultdn.     By  L.  B.  Bowring. 

The  Marquis  Wellesley,  K.G.     By  W.  H.  Huiton. 

Marquess  of  Hastings.      By  Major  Ross-of-Bladensbuhg. 

Mountstuart  Elphinstone.     By  J.  S.  Cotton. 

Sir  Thomas  Munro.     By  J.  Bradshaw. 

Earl  Amherst.      By  Anne  T.  Ritchie  and  R.  Evans. 

Lord  William  Bentinck.     By  D.  C.  Boulger. 

The  Earl  of  Auckland.      By  Captain  L.  J.  Trotter. 

Viscount  Hardinge.      By  his  son,  Viscount  Hardinge. 

Ranjit  Singh.      By  Sir  L.  GKirriN. 

The  Marquess  of  Dalhousie.     By  Sir  W.  W.  Hunter. 

John  Russell  Colvin.     By  Sir  A.  Colvin. 

Clyde  and  Strathnairn.     By  Major-General  Sir  O.  T.  Burne. 

Earl  Canning.      By  Sir  H.  S.  Cunningham. 

Lord  Lawrence.     By  Sir  C.  Aitchison. 

The  Earl  of  Mayo.     By  Sir  W.  W.  Hunttr. 

Supplementary  volumes. 

Asoka.      By  V.  A.  S.MITH.    3s.  6d. 

James  Thomason.      By  Sir  R.  Temple.     3s.  6d. 

Sir  Henry  Lawrence,  the  Pacificator.     By  Lieut.-General  J   J 
M°Leoii  Innes.    3s.  6d. 


The  Government  of  India,  being  a  digest  of  the  statute  Law  relating 
thereto ;  with  historical  introduction  and  illustrative  documents.  By  Sir 
C.  P.  lujEHT.     New  edition,  1907.     10s.  6d.  net. 

The  Early  History  of  India  from  600  B.C.  to  the  Mu- 

hammadan  Conquest,  including  the  invasion  of  Alexander  the 
Great.  By  V.  A.  Smith.  8vo.  With  maps,  plans,  and  other  illustrations. 
14b.  net. 

The  EngUsh  Factories  in  India,  1618-1621.    By  w.  Fosteh. 

8vo.  (Published  under  the  patronage  of  His  Majesty's  Secretary  of  State  for 
India  in  Council.)     19s.  6d.  net. 

Wellesley's  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other  Papers  relating  to  his 
Government  of  India.     Selection  edited  by  S.  J.  Owen.     8vo.     £1  4s. 

Wellington's  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other  Papers  relating  to 
India,     Selection  edited  by  S.  J.  Owen.     8vo.     £1  4s. 

Hastings  and  the  RohiUa  War.  By  sir  j.  Stkachey.  svo.  los.  ed. 

European  History 

Historical  Atlas  of  Modem  Eiirope,  from  the  Decline  of  the 

Roman  Empire.  Containing  90  maps,  with  letterpress  to  each  map :  the 
maps  printed  by  W.  &  A.  K.  Johnston,  Ltd.,  and  the  whole  edited  by 
R.  L.  Poole. 

In  one  volume,  imperial  4to,  half-persian,  £5  15s.  6d.  net ;  or  in  selected 
sets — British  Empire,  etc,  at  various  prices  from  30s.  to  35s.  net  each ; 
or  in  single  maps.  Is.  6d.  net  each.    Prospectus  on  apphcation. 

Genealogical  Tables  illustrative  of  Modern  History.  By  H.  B. 
Geokge.     Fourth  (1904)  edition.     Oblong  4to,  boards.     7s.  6d. 

The  Life  and  Times  of  James  the  First  of  Aragon.    By 

F.  D.  SwiPT.     Svo.     12s.  6d. 

A  History  of  France,  with  maps,  plans,  and  Tables.  By  G.  W.  Kitchin. 
New  edition.     In  three  volumes,  crown  Svo,  each  10s.  6d. 

Vol.  I,  to  14.53.  VoL  II,  1453-1624.  Vol.  Ill,  1624-1793. 

The  Principal  Speeches  of  the  Statesmen  and  Orators 

of  the  French  Revolution,  1789-1795.  With  introductions,  notes,  etc.  By 
H.  MoHSE  Stephens.     Two  volumes.     Crown  Svo.     £1  Is. 

Napoleonic  Statesmanship  :   Germany.     By  H.  A.  L.  Fisheh. 

8vo,  with  maps.     12s.  6d.  net. 

De  Tocqueville's  L'Ancien  Regime  et  la  Revolution. 

Edited,  with  introductions  and  notes,  by  G.  W.  Headlam.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Documents  of  the  French  Revolution,  1789-1791.     By 

L.  G.  WicKHAM  Legg.     Crown  Svo.     Two  volumes.     13s.  net. 

Thiers'  Moscow  Expedition,  edited,with  introductions  and  notes,  by 
H.  B.  George.     Crown  8vo,  with  6  maps.     5s. 

9 


Geography  and  Anthropology 

Relations  of  Geography  and  History.     By  H.  B.  Geoege. 

With  two  maps.     Crown  8vo.    Second  edition.     4s.  6d. 

The  Dawn  of  Modem  Geography.    By  c.  K.  BEA2XETr.    VoL  i 

(to  A.D.  900).     Vol.  II  (a.d.  900-1260).    ISs.  net  each.     Vol.  III.    20s.  net. 
Regions   of  the  World.      Geographical  Memoirs  under  the  general 
editorship  of  H.  J.  Mackinder.    Large  8vo.    Each  volume  contains  maps 
and  diagrams.    7s.  6d.  net  per  volume. 

Britain  and  the  British  Seas.    Second  edition.    By  H.  J.  Mackinder. 

Central  Europe.     By  John  Partsch. 

The  Nearer  East.     By  D.  G.  Hogarth. 

North  America.     By  J.  Russell. 

India.     By  Sir  Thomas  Holdich. 

The  Far  East.    By  Archibald  Little. 

The  Face  of  the  Earth  (Das  Antlitz  der  Erde).     By 

Eduard  Suess.    Translated  by  Hertha  Sollas.    Vols.  1, 11.  25s.  net  each. 

Oxford  Geographies.  By  A.  J.  Herbertson.  Crown  8vo.  VoL  I. 
The  Preliminary  Geography,  with  72  maps  and  diagrams,  Is.  6d.  VoL  II. 
The  Junior  Geography,  with  166  maps  and  diagrams,  2s.  Vol.  III.  The 
Senior  Geography.    In  the  press. 

Geography  for  Schools,  by  A.  Hughes.    Crown  8vo.    2s.  6d. 


The  Evolution  of  Culture,  and  other  Essays,  by  the  late 

Lieut. -Gen.  A.  Lane-Fox  Pitt-Rivers;   edited  by  J.  L.  Myres,  with  an 
Introduction  by  H.  Balfour.     8vo,  with  21  plates,  7s.  6d.  net. 

Dubois'  Hindu  Manners,  Customs,  and  Ceremonies.  Translated 
and  edited  with  notes,  corrections,  and  biography,  by  H.  K.  Beauchamp. 
Third  edition.     Crown  8vo.     6s.  net.     On  India  Paper,  7s.  6d.  net. 

The   Melanesians,  studies  in  their  Anthropology  and  Folk-Lore.      By 

R.  H.  CODHINGTON.      8v0.       16s> 

Iceland  and  the  Faroes.     By  N.  Annandaie.    with  twenty-four 

illustrations  and  an  appendix  on  the  Celtic  Pony,  by  F.  H.  A.  Marshall. 
Crown  8vo.     4s.  6d.  net. 

The  Masai,  their  Language  and  Folk-lore.    By  A.  c.  Holus. 

With  iptroduction  by  Sir  Charles  Eliot.    8vo.    With  27  full-page  illustra- 
tions and  a  map.    14s.  net. 

Celtic  Folklore :  Welsh  and  Manx.    By  J.  Rhys.  Two  volumes. 

8vo.    £1  Is. 

Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend.    By  J.  Rhys.   svo.   i2s.  ed. 

The  Mediaeval  Stage,  from  classical  times  through  folk-play  and 
minstrelsy  to  Elizabethan  drama.  By  E.  K.  Chambers.  With  two  illustra- 
tions.   Svo.     £1  5s.  net. 

10   ■ 


PHILOSOPHY 

Modern  Philosophy 

Bacon's  Novum  Organum,  edited,  with  introduction,  notes,  etc, 
by  T.  Fowler.    Second  edition.    8vo.     ISs. 

Novum   Organum,  edited,  with  notes,  by  G.  W.  KrrcHnf. 
8vo.     9s.  6d. 

Bentham's  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and 

Legislation.     Crown  8vo.    6s.  6d. 

The  Works  of  George  Berkeley,  formerly  Bishop  of  aoyne.   with 

grefaces,  annotations,  appendices,  and  an  account  of  his  Life  and  Philosophy, 
y  A.  C.  Feaser.    New  edition  (1901)  in  crown  8vo.     Four  volumes.     £1  4s. 
Some  copies  of  the  8vo  edition  of  the  Life  are  still  on  sale,  price  16s. 

Selections  from  Berkeley,  with  introduction  and  notes,  for  the  use  of 

Students.    By  the  same  Editor.    Fifth  edition.    Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

The  Cambridge  PlatonistS  :  being  selections  from  the  Writings  of 
Benjamin  Whichcote,  John  Smith,  and  Nathanael  Culverwel,  with  introduc- 
tion by  E.  T.  Camfagnac.    Crown  8vo.     6s.  6d.  net. 

Leibniz's  Monadology  and  other  Philosophical  Writings,  translated, 
with  introduction  and  notes,  by  R.  Latta.     Crown  8vo.    Bs.  6d. 

Locke's    Essay    concerning    Human    Understanding. 

Collated  and  annotated  with  prolegomena,  biographical,  critical,  and  historical, 
by  A.  C.  Fraseb.    Two  volumes.    8vo.    £1 13s. 

Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.   Edited  byT.  Fowler. 

Extra  fcap  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

A  Study  in  the  Ethics  of  Spinoza.    By  h.  h.  Joach™.    svo. 

lOs.  6d.  net. 

Hume's  Treatise  on  Human  Nature,  reprinted  from  the  original 

edition  in  three  volumes,  and  edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge.    Second  edition. 
Crown  Svo.    6s.  net. 

Hume's  Enquiry  concerning  the  Human  Understanding, 

and  an  Enquiry  concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals.     Edited  by  L.  A. 
Sei3T-Bigge.    Crown  8vo.    Second  edition.    6s.  net. 

British  Moralists,  being  Selections  from  writers  principally  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  Edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge.  Two  volumes.  Crown 
8vo.  12s.  net.  Uniform  with  Hume's  Treatise  and  Enquiry,  and  Berkeley's 
Works. 

Butler's  Works,  edited  by  W,  E.  Gladstone.  Two  volumes.  Medium 
Svo,  14s.  each,  or  Crown  8vo,  10s.  6d.  (Also,  separately— Vol.  I  (Analogy), 
5s.  6d.     Vol.  II  (Sermons)  Ss. 

11 


Recent  Philosophy 

The  Logic  of  Hegel,  translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia  of  the  PhUo- 
sophical  Sciences,  wiS  Prolegomena,  by  W.  Wallace.  Second  edition. 
Two  volumes.    Crown  8vo.     10s.  6d.  each. 

Hegel's  Philosophy  of  Mind,  translated  from  Encyclopaedia  of  Philo- 
sophical Sciences,  with  five  introductory  essays,  by  W.  Wallace.  Crown  8vo. 
10s.  6d. 

Lotze's  Logic,  in  Three  Books,  of  Thought,  of  Investigation,'  and  of 
Knowledge.  Translated  by  B.  Bosanquet.    Seconded.   2  vols.   Cr.Svo.    12s. 

Lotze's  Metaphysic,  in  Three  Books,  Ontology,  Cosmologyj  and 
Psychology.   Translated  by  B.  Bosanhuet.    Seconded.  2  vols.  Cr.Svo.   12s. 

Bluntschli's  Theory  of  the  State.  Translated  from  the  sixth 
German  edition.     Third  edition,  1901.     Crown  8vo,  half-bound,  8s.  6d. 

Green's  Prolegomena  to  Ethics.    EditedbyA.  c.  Bbadlet.  Fifth 

edition,  1906.    With  a  Preface  by  E.  Caird.     Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

Types   of  Ethical  Theory,  by  J.  Mabtineau.     Third  edition.     Two 

volumes.    Crown  8vo.     15s. 

A  Study  of  Religion  :  its  Sources  and  Contents.  By  the  same 
author.     Second  edition.    Two  volumes.    Crown  8vo.     ISs. 

The  Principles  of  Morals.    By  T.  Fowleh  and  j.  M.  Wilsok.    8vo. 

14s.    Also,  separately— Part  I,  3s.  6d.    Part  II,  10s.  6d. 

Logic;  or,  The  Morphology  of  Knowledge.   ByB.  Bosanqubt. 

Two  volumes.    8vo.    ^1  Is. 

Lectures  and  Essays  on  Natural  Theology  and  Ethics. 

By  W.  Wallace.      Edited,  with  biographical  introduction,  by  E.  Caibd. 
With  portrait.     8vo.     12s.  6d. 

Studies  in  History  and  Jurisprudence.    By  Rt.  Hon.  J.  Bbtce. 

1901.    2  vols.     8vo.    £1  Ss.  net. 

The  Theory  of  Good  and  Evil.    By  h.  Rashdall.   svo.   2  vols. 

Immediately. 

The  Herbert  Spencer  Lecture.     DeUvered  at  Oxford,  March, 

1905,  by  Frederic  Harrison.     8vo,  paper  covers,  2s.  net. 
An  Introduction  to  Logic.    ByH.W.B.  Joseph.    8vo.    9s.6d.net. 

Essay  on  Truth.     By  H.  H.  Joachim.     8vo.     6s.  net. 

Elementary  Logic 
The  Elements  of  Deductive  Logic.     By  t.  Fowleb.   Tenth 

edition,  with  a  collection  of  examples.     Extra  fcap  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Inductive  Logic.    By  the  same.  Sixth  edition. 

Extra  fcap  8vo.    6s.  In  one  volume  witii  Deductive  Logic,  7s.  6d. 

18 


LAW 

Jurisprudence 
Bentham's   Fragment   on   Government.      Edited  by  F.  c. 

Montague.     8vo.     7s.  6d. 

Bentham's  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and 

Legislation.     Second  edition.     Crown  8vo.     6s.  6d. 

Studies  in  History  and  Jurisprudence.     By  the  Right  Hon. 

James  Bbyce.     1901.     Two  volumes.     8vo.     ^1  5s.  net. 

The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence.     By  t.  e.  Holland.     Tenth 

edition.     1906.     8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Elements  of  Juaw,  considered  with  reference  to  Principles  of  General 
Jurisprudence.  By  Sir  W.  Markbv,  K.C.I.E.  Sixth  edition  revised,  1905. 
8vo.     12s.  6d. 

Roman  Law 
Imperatoris   lustiniani   Institutionum  Libri  Quattuor ; 

with  introductions,  commentary,  and  translation,  by  J.  B.  Moyie.  Two 
volumes.  8vo.  Vol.  I  (fourth  edition,  1903),  16s. ;  Vol.  H,  Translation 
(fourth  edition,  1906),  6s. 

The  Institutes  of  Justinian,  edited  as  a  recension  of  the  institutes 
of  Gains.     By  T.  E.  Holland.     Second  edition.     Extra  fcap  8vo.     Ss. 

Select  Titles  from  the  Digest  of  Justinian.    By  T.  e.  Holland 

and  C.  L.  Shadwell.     8vo.     14s. 
Also,  sold  in  parts,  in  paper  covers  :  Part  I.  Introductory  Titles.     2s.  6d. 
Part  11.  Family  Law.    Is.     Part  III.  Property  Law.    2s.  6d.     Part  IV. 
Law  of  Obligations.      No.  1.     3s.  6d.      No.  3.     4s.  6d. 

Gai  Institutionum  luris  CiviUs  Commentarii  Quattuor : 

with  a  translation  and  commentary  by  the  late  E.  Poste.  Fourth  edition. 
Revised  and  enlarged,  by  E.  A.  Whittuck,  with  an  historical  introduction 
by  A.  H.  J.  Greenidge.    8vo.    16s.  net. 

Institutes  of  Roman  I^aw,  by  R.  Sohm.  Translated  by  J.  C. 
Ledlie  :  with  an  introductory  essay  by  E.  Gkueber.  Second  edition.  1901. 
8vo.   18s. 

Infamia  ;    its  place  in  Roman  Public  and  Private  Law.       By  A.  H.  J. 

Gbeenidge.     8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Legal  Procedure  in  Cicero's  Time.     By  A.  h.  j.  Gbeenidge. 

8vo.    £1  Is. 

The  Roman  Law  of  Damage  to  Property :  being  a  commentary 

on  the  title  of  the  Digest  '  Ad  Legem  Aquiliam '  (ix.  2),  with  an  introduction 
to  the  study  of  the  Corpus  luris  Civilis.     By  E.  Ghueber.     8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Contract  of  Sale  in  the  Civil  I^aw.  By  J.  b.  Moyle.  svo.  los.  ed. 


The  Principles  of  German  Civil  Law.     By  Ernest  j.  Schuster. 
8vo.     12s.  6d.  net. 

13 


English  Law 
Principles  of  the  English  Law  of  Contract,  and  of  Agency  in 

its  relation  to  Contract    By  Sir  W.  R.  Awson.   Eleventh  edition.    1906,    8to. 
10s.  6d. 

Law  and  Custom  of  the  Constitution.    By  the  same,    in  two 

parts. 

Part  I.   Parliament.    Third  edition.    8vo.     13s.  6d. 
Part  II.   The  Crown.     Third  edition  in  preparation. 

Calendar  of  Charters  and  Rolls,  containing  those  preserved  in  the 
Bodleian  Library.    Svo.    £1  lis.  6d. 

Introduction  to  the  History  of  the  Law  of  Real  Property. 

By  Sir  K.  E.  Disby.     Fifth  edition.     Svo.     19s.  6d. 

Handbook  to  the  Land-Charters,  and  other  Saxonic  Documents. 
By  J.  Earle,     Crown  Svo.     16s. 

Fortescue's  Difference  between  an  Absolute  and  a  Limited 

Monarchy.      Text  revised  and  edited,  with  introduction,  etc,  by  C. 
PiuMjrEK.    Svo,  leather  back,  12s.  6d. 

Legislative  Methods  and  Forms.    By  sir  c.  P.  Ilbeht,  k.c.s.i. 

1901.    Svo,  leather  back,  16s. 

Modern  Land  Law.    By  E.  Jenks.   svo.   iss. 

Essay   on  Possession   in  the   Common   Law.     By  Sir  F. 

Pollock  and  Sir  R.  S.  Wright.    Svo.    8s.  6d. 

Outline  of  the  Law  of  Property.    By  t.  Raleigh,  svo.   ts.  6d. 

Villainage  in  England.    ByP.VuroBBADOFF.     Svo,  leather  back,  les. 

Law  in  Daily  Life.  By  Rud.  von  Jhering.  Translated  with  Notes 
and  Additions  by  H.  Goudy.    Crown  Svo.    3s.  6d.  net 

Cases  illustrating  the  Principles  of  the  Law  of  Torts, 

with  table  of  all  Cases  cited.     By  P.  R.  Y.  Radcliffe  and  J.  C.  Miles.    Svo. 
1904.     12s.  6d.  net 

Constitutional  Documents 

Select  Charters  and  other  illustrations  of  English  Constitutional  History, 
from  the  earliest  times  to  Edward  I.  Arranged  and  edited  by  W.  Stubbs. 
Eighth  edition.     1900.     Crown  Svo.     8s.  6d. 

Constitutional  Documents  of  the  Puritan  Revolution,  selected  and 
edited  by  S.  R.  Gardiner.    Third  edition.     Crown  Svo.     10s.  6d. 

Select   Statutes  and  other   Constitutional  Documents, 

illustrative  of  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James  I.      Edited  by  G.  W. 
Prothero.     Third  edition.     Crown  Svo.     10s.  6d. 

14 


International  Law 

International  Law.  By  W.  E.  Haix,  Fifth  edition  by  J.  B.  Atiay. 
1904.     8vo.    ^1  Is.  net 

Treatise  on  the  Foreign  Powers  and  Jurisdiction  of  the 

British  Crown.    By  w.  e.  Hall.   svo.   los.  ed. 
The  European  Concert  in  the  Eastern  Question,  a  coUection 

of  treaties  and  other  public  acts.    Edited,  with  introductions  and  notes,  by 
T.  E.  HoLLAim.    8vo.     12s.  6d. 

Studies  in  International  Law.    By  t.  e.  Holland,   svo.   los.  ed. 
GentiUs  Alberici  de   lure   Belli  Libri  Tres  edidit  T.  E. 

Holland.    Small  quarto,  half-morocco.    £1  Is. 

The  Law  of  Nations.  By  sir  T.  Twiss.  Part  I.  in  time  of  peace. 
New  edition,  rerised  and  enlarged.    Svo.    ISs. 

Colonial  and  Indian  Law 

The  Government  of  India,  being  a  Digest  of  the  statute  Law  relating 
thereto,  with  historical  introduction  and  illustrative  documents.  By  Sir  C.  P. 
Ilbekt,  K.CS.I.    Svo,  cloth.     10s.  6d.  net. 

British  Rule  and  Jurisdiction  beyond  the  Seas.   By  the  late 

Sir  H.  Jenkyns,  K.C.B.,  with  a  preface  by  Sir  C.  P.  Ilbert,  and  a  portrait 
of  the  author.     1902.     Svo,  leather  back,  ISs.  net. 

Comewall-Lewis's  Essay  on  the  Government  of  Depen- 
dencies.    Edited  by  C.  P.  Lucas,  C.B.    Svo,  leather  back,  14s. 

An  Introduction  to  Hindu  and  Mahommedan  Law  for 

the  use  of  students.     1906.     By  SirW.  Markby,  K.C.LE.    6s.net. 

Land-Revenue  and  Teniu-e  in  British  India.    By  b.  h, 

Baden-Powell,  C.LE.     With  map.     Second  edition,  revised  by  T.  W. 
Holderness,  C.S.L  (1907.)    Crown  Svo.     5s.  net. 

Land-Systems  of  British  India,  being  a  manual  of  the  Land- 
Tenures,  and  of  the  systems  of  Land-Revenue  administration.  By  the  same. 
Three  volumes.     Svo,  with  map.     £S  3s. 

Anglo-Indian  Codes,  by  Whitley  Stokes.     Svo. 

VoL  I.  Substantive  Law.    £1  10s.      Vol.  II.  Adjective  Law.    £1  15s. 
1st  supplement,  2s.  6d.     2nd  supplement,  to  1891,  4s.  6d.    In  one  vol.,  6s.  6d. 

The  Indian  Evidence  Act,  with  notes  by  Sir  w.  Mahkbt,  k.c.i.e. 

Svo.  3s.  6d.  net  (published  by  Mr.  Frowde). 
Corps  de  Droit  Ottoman  :  un  Recueil  des  Codes,  Lois,  Rfe^lements, 
Ordonnances  et  Actes  les  plus  importants  du  Droit  Int^rieur,  et  d'Etudes 
sur  le  Droit  Coutumier  de  TEmpire  Ottoman.  Par  George  Young.  Seven 
vols.  Svo.  Part  I  (Vols.  I-III),  cloth,  £2  17s.  6d.  net;  paper  covers, 
£3  12s.  6d.  net,  published :  Part  II  (Vols.  IV- VII),  cloth,  £1  17s.  net,  paper 
covers,  £1  lis.  6d.  net.  Parts  I  and  II  cata  be  obtained  separately,  but  the 
price  of  either  Part,  bought  alone,  will  be  £2  12s.  6d.  net  in  paper  covers,  or 
£2  17s.  6d.  net  in  cloth. 

15 


Political  Science  and  Economy 

For  Bryce's  Studies  and  other  books  of  general  jurisprudence  and  political 
science,  see  p.  13. 

Industrial  Organization  in  the  16th  and  17th  Centuries. 

By  G.  Unwin.     8vo.     7s.  6d.  net. 

Relations  of  the  Advanced   and   Backward   Races   of 

Mankind,  the  Romanes  Lecture  for  1902.     By  J.  Bkyce.     8vo.     2s.  net. 

ComewaU-Lewis's   Remarks    on   the   Use   and   Abuse 

of  some   Pohtical   Terms.      New  edition,  with  introduction  by 
T.  Raixiqh.     Crown  8vo,  paper,  3s.  6d.  ;  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

Adam  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations.    Edited  by  j.  e.  Thorold 

Rogers.     Two  volumes.     8vo.     £1  Is. 

Adam    Smith's     Lectures    on  Justice,  Police,  Revenue  and  Arms. 
Edited  with  introduction  and  notes  by  E.  Cankan.     8vo.     10s.  6d.  net. 

BluntSchK's    Theory   of    the    State.      Translated  from  the  sixth 
German  edition.     Third  edition.     1901.     Crown  8vo,  half-bound,  8s.  6d. 

Co-operative  Production.     By  b.  Jomts.     With  preface  by  A.  h. 

Dyke-Acland.     Two  volumes.     Crown  8vo.     15s. 

Elementary  Pohtical  Economy.    By  E.  Cannan.   Fourth  edition. 

Extra  fcap  Svo,  Is. 

Elementary  PohticS.     By  T.  Raleigh.     Sixth  edition  revised.     Extra 
fcap  Svo,  stiff  covers.  Is. 

A   Geometrical  Political   Economy.      Being  an  elementary 

Treatise  on  the  method  of  explaining  some  Theories  of  Pure  Economic 
Science  by  diagrams.     By  H.  Cxtnynghame,  C.B.     Cr.  8vo.     2s.6d.net. 

The  Elements  of  Railway  Economics.     By  w.  m.  Acworth. 

Crown  Svo.    Second  impression.    3s.  net. 

Economic  Documents 
Ricardo's  Letters  to  Malthus  (isio-isas).     Edited  by  J.  Bonah 

8vo.     7s.  6d. 

Letters  to  Trower  and  others  (1811-1823).     Edited 

by  J.  BoNAR  and  J.  H.  Hollander.     Svo.     7s.  6d. 

Lloyd's  Prices  of  Corn  in  Oxford,  is83-i83o.    Svo.    is. 

The   History  of  Agriculture   and  Prices   in   England, 

A.D.  1259-1793.     By  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers. 

Vols.  I  and  II  (1259-1400).     Svo.     £3  2s. 

Vols.  Ill  and  IV  (1401-1582).     Svo.     £2  10s. 

Vols.  V  and  VI  (1583-1702).     Svo.     £2  10s. 

Vol.  VII.     In  two  Parts  (1702-1793).     Svo.     £2  10s. 

First  Nine  Years  of  the  Bank  of  England.  By  the  same,   svo 

8s.  6d. 

16 


