Select Letters (Gregory of Nazianzus)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 of

 Saint Gregory Nazianzen,

 Archbishop of Constantinople.

 A Selection from the Letters of Saint Gregory Nazianzen, Sometime
 Archbishop of Constantinople.

 ------------------------

 Division I.

 Letters on the Apollinarian Controversy.

 ------------------------

 Introduction.

 The circumstances which called forth the two letters to Cledonius have
 already been described in the first section of the General Prolegomena,
 and it will not be necessary here to add much to what was there said.
 In the letter to Nectarius, his own successor on the throne of
 Constantinople, written about a.d. 383, and sometimes reckoned as Orat.
 XLVI., S. Gregory gives extracts from a work of Apollinarius himself,
 but without mentioning the title of the book.  In this treatise the
 fundamental errors of the heresy (see Proleg. c. 1, p. 172) are laid
 down.  Apollinarius, according to S. Gregory, declares that the Son of
 God was from all eternity clothed with a human body, and not from the
 time of His conception only by the Blessed Virgin; but that this
 humanity of God is without human mind, the place of which was supplied
 by the Godhead of the Only-begotten.  And he goes even further and
 ascribes passibility and mortality to the very Godhead of Christ.
 Therefore S. Gregory earnestly protests against any toleration being
 granted to these heretics, or even permission to hold their assemblies;
 for, he says, toleration or permission would certainly be regarded by
 them as a condonation of their doctrinal position, and a condemnation
 of that of the Church.  Dr. Ullman, however, thinks that while S.
 Gregory was certainly speaking the truth in saying that he had in his
 hands a pamphlet by Apollinarius, yet that he, perhaps unconsciously,
 exaggerated the heretical character of its contents, pushing its
 statements to consequences which Apollinarius would have repudiated.
 The one purpose of the latter was, in Dr. Ullman's view, to safeguard
 the doctrine of the Unity of Christ; and he thought that the orthodox
 expression of Two Whole and Perfect Natures tended to a Nestorian
 division of the Person of Christ; and so he used language which
 certainly seemed to confound the natures, or at any rate to make the
 Incarnation imperfect, inasmuch as a Christ in Whom the human mind is
 absent, and its place filled up by the Godhead of the Son, cannot be
 said to be perfect Man.  But while Epiphanius mentions these
 extravagances of the heresy, and does so with a lingering feeling of
 regret for the lapse of so good a man whose services in the past had
 been of so much value to the Church, yet, in the spirit common to
 Ecclesiastical authorities of the time, he would rather ascribe them to
 an expansion of Apollinarius' teaching by his younger disciples who did
 not really understand what Apollinarius himself meant.

 Olympius, to whom the last of this series is addressed, was Governor of
 Cappadocia Secunda in a.d. 382.  He was a man for whom S. Gregory had a
 very high esteem, and with whom he was upon terms of close friendship,
 as will be seen from other letters of Gregory to him in another
 division of this Selection.  The occasion of the present letter was the
 necessity to appeal to the secular power for aid to punish a sect of
 Apollinarians at Nazianzus, who had ventured to take advantage of S.
 Gregory's absence at the Baths of Xanxaris to procure the consecration
 of a Bishop of their own way of thinking.  Technically the See was
 vacant, but the administration had been committed to Gregory by the
 Bishops of the Province, and though he, foreseeing some such attempt on
 the part of the heretics, had been very earnest in pressing upon the
 Metropolitan and his Comprovincials the necessity of filling this
 throne by a canonical election, yet he was by no means prepared to hand
 over the authority, with which he had been invested, to an irregularly
 elected and uncanonically consecrated heretic.

 To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople.  (Ep. CCII.)

 The Care of God, which throughout the time before us guarded the
 Churches, seems to have utterly forsaken this present life.  And my
 soul is immersed to such a degree by calamities that the private
 sufferings of my own life hardly seem to be worth reckoning among evils
 (though they are so numerous and great, that if they befel anyone else
 I should think them unbearable); but I can only look at the common
 sufferings of the Churches; for if at the present crisis some pains be
 not taken to find a remedy for them, things will gradually get into an
 altogether desperate condition.  Those who follow the heresy of Arius
 or Eudoxius (I cannot say who stirred them up to this folly) are making
 a display of their disease, as if they had attained some degree of
 confidence by collecting congregations as if by permission.  And they
 of the Macedonian party have reached such a pitch of folly that they
 are arrogating to themselves the name of Bishops, and are wandering
 about our districts babbling of Eleusius [4694] as to their
 ordinations.  Our bosom evil, Eunomius, is no longer content with
 merely existing; but unless he can draw away everyone with him to his
 ruinous heresy, he thinks himself an injured man.  All this, however,
 is endurable.  The most grievous item of all in the woes of the Church
 is the boldness of the Apollinarians, whom your Holiness has
 overlooked, I know not how, when providing themselves with authority to
 hold meetings on an equality with myself.  However, you being, as you
 are, thoroughly instructed by the grace of God in the Divine Mysteries
 on all points, are well informed, not only as to the advocacy of the
 true faith, but also as to all those arguments which have been devised
 by the heretics against the sound faith; and yet perhaps it will not be
 unseasonable that your Excellency should hear from my littleness that a
 pamphlet by Apollinarius has come into my hands, the contents of which
 surpass all heretical pravity.  For he asserts that the Flesh which the
 Only-begotten Son assumed in the Incarnation for the remodelling of our
 nature was no new acquisition, but that that carnal nature was in the
 Son from the beginning.  And he puts forward as a witness to this
 monstrous assertion a garbled quotation from the Gospels, namely, No
 man hath Ascended up into Heaven save He which came down from Heaven,
 even the Son of Man which is in Heaven. [4695] As though even before
 He came down He was the Son of Man, and when He came down He brought
 with Him that Flesh, which it appears He had in Heaven, as though it
 had existed before the ages, and been joined with His Essence.  For he
 alleges another saying of an Apostle, which he cuts off from the whole
 body of its context, that The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven.
 [4696] Then he assumes that that Man who came down from above is
 without a mind, but that the Godhead of the Only-begotten fulfils the
 function of mind, and is the third part of this human composite,
 inasmuch as soul and body are in it on its human side, but not mind,
 the place of which is taken by God the Word.  This is not yet the most
 serious part of it; that which is most terrible of all is that he
 declares that the Only-begotten God, the Judge of all, the Prince of
 Life, the Destroyer of Death, is mortal, and underwent the Passion in
 His proper Godhead; and that in the three days' death of His body, His
 Godhead also was put to death with His body, and thus was raised again
 from the dead by the Father.  It would be tedious to go through all the
 other propositions which he adds to these monstrous absurdities.  Now,
 if they who hold such views have authority to meet, your Wisdom
 approved in Christ must see that, inasmuch as we do not approve their
 views, any permission of assembly granted to them is nothing less than
 a declaration that their view is thought more true than ours.  For if
 they are permitted to teach their view as godly men, and with all
 confidence to preach their doctrine, it is manifest that the doctrine
 of the Church has been condemned, as though the truth were on their
 side.  For nature does not admit of two contrary doctrines on the same
 subject being both true.  How then could your noble and lofty mind
 submit to suspend your usual courage in regard to the correction of so
 great an evil?  But even though there is no precedent for such a
 course, let your inimitable perfection in virtue stand up at a crisis
 like the present, and teach our most pious Emperor, that no gain will
 come from his zeal for the Church on other points if he allows such an
 evil to gain strength from freedom of speech for the subversion of
 sound faith.

 [4694] Eleusius was Bishop of Cyzicus, a prominent leader of the
 Semi-Arian party.  He bore a very high character for personal holiness,
 and approached more nearly to orthodoxy than most of his associates,
 men like Basil of Ancyra, Eustathius of Sebaste, etc.  He obstinately
 maintained, however, Macedonian views on the Deity of the Holy Ghost,
 even after their condemnation by the Council of Constantinople.

 [4695] John iii. 13.

 [4696] 1 Cor. xv. 47.

 To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.  (Ep. CI.)

 To our most reverend and God-beloved brother and fellow-priest
 Cledonius, Gregory, greeting in the Lord.

 I desire to learn what is this fashion of innovation in things
 Concerning the Church, which allows anyone who likes, or the passerby,
 [4697] as the Bible says, to tear asunder the flock that has been well
 led, and to plunder it by larcenous attacks, or rather by piratical and
 fallacious teachings.  For if our present assailants had any ground for
 condemning us in regard of the faith, it would not have been right for
 them, even in that case, to have ventured on such a course without
 giving us notice.  They ought rather to have first persuaded us, or to
 have been willing to be persuaded by us (if at least any account is to
 be taken of us as fearing God, labouring for the faith, and helping the
 Church), and then, if at all, to innovate; but then perhaps there would
 be an excuse for their outrageous conduct.  But since our faith has
 been proclaimed, both in writing and without writing, here and in
 distant parts, in times of danger and of safety, how comes it that some
 make such attempts, and that others keep silence?

 The most grievous part of it is not (though this too is shocking) that
 the men instil their own heresy into simpler souls by means of those
 who are worse; but that they also tell lies about us and say that we
 share their opinions and sentiments; thus baiting their hooks, and by
 this cloak villainously fulfilling their will, and making our
 simplicity, which looked upon them as brothers and not as foes, into a
 support of their wickedness.  And not only so, but they also assert, as
 I am told, that they have been received by the Western Synod, by which
 they were formerly condemned, as is well known to everyone.  If,
 however, those who hold the views of Apollinarius have either now or
 formerly been received, let them prove it and we will be content.  For
 it is evident that they can only have been so received as assenting to
 the Orthodox Faith, for this were an impossibility on any other terms.
 And they can surely prove it, either by the minutes of the Synod, or by
 Letters of Communion, for this is the regular custom of Synods.  But if
 it is mere words, and an invention of their own, devised for the sake
 of appearances and to give them weight with the multitude through the
 credit of the persons, teach them to hold their tongues, and confute
 them; for we believe that such a task is well suited to your manner of
 life and orthodoxy.  Do not let the men deceive themselves and others
 with the assertion that the "Man of the Lord," as they call Him, Who is
 rather our Lord and God, is without human mind.  For we do not sever
 the Man from the Godhead, but we lay down as a dogma the Unity and
 Identity of Person, Who of old was not Man but God, and the Only Son
 before all ages, unmingled with body or anything corporeal; but Who in
 these last days has assumed Manhood also for our salvation; passible in
 His Flesh, impassible in His Godhead; circumscript in the body,
 uncircumscript in the Spirit; at once earthly and heavenly, tangible
 and intangible, comprehensible and incomprehensible; that by One and
 the Same Person, Who was perfect Man and also God, the entire humanity
 fallen through sin might be created anew.

 If anyone does not believe that Holy Mary is the Mother of God, he is
 severed from the Godhead.  If anyone should assert that He passed
 through the Virgin as through a channel, and was not at once divinely
 and humanly formed in her (divinely, because without the intervention
 of a man; humanly, because in accordance with the laws of gestation),
 he is in like manner godless.  If any assert that the Manhood was
 formed and afterward was clothed with the Godhead, he too is to be
 condemned.  For this were not a Generation of God, but a shirking of
 generation.  If any introduce the notion of Two Sons, one of God the
 Father, the other of the Mother, and discredits the Unity and Identity,
 may he lose his part in the adoption promised to those who believe
 aright.  For God and Man are two natures, as also soul and body are;
 but there are not two Sons or two Gods.  For neither in this life are
 there two manhoods; though Paul speaks in some such language of the
 inner and outer man.  And (if I am to speak concisely) the Saviour is
 made of elements which are distinct from one another (for the invisible
 is not the same with the visible, nor the timeless with that which is
 subject to time), yet He is not two Persons.  God forbid!  For both
 natures are one by the combination, the Deity being made Man, and the
 Manhood deified or however one should express it.  And I say different
 Elements, because it is the reverse of what is the case in the Trinity;
 for There we acknowledge different Persons so as not to confound the
 persons; but not different Elements, for the Three are One and the same
 in Godhead.

 If any should say that it wrought in Him by grace as in a Prophet, but
 was not and is not united with Him in Essence--let him be empty of the
 Higher Energy, or rather full of the opposite.  If any worship not the
 Crucified, let him be Anathema and be numbered among the Deicides.  If
 any assert that He was made perfect by works, or that after His
 Baptism, or after His Resurrection from the dead, He was counted worthy
 of an adoptive Sonship, like those whom the Greeks interpolate as added
 to the ranks of the gods, let him be anathema.  For that which has a
 beginning or a progress or is made perfect, is not God, although the
 expressions may be used of His gradual manifestation.  If any assert
 that He has now put off His holy flesh, and that His Godhead is
 stripped of the body, and deny that He is now with His body and will
 come again with it, let him not see the glory of His Coming.  For where
 is His body now, if not with Him Who assumed it?  For it is not laid by
 in the sun, according to the babble of the Manichæans, that it should
 be honoured by a dishonour; nor was it poured forth into the air and
 dissolved, as is the nature of a voice or the flow of an odour, or the
 course of a lightning flash that never stands.  Where in that case were
 His being handled after the Resurrection, or His being seen hereafter
 by them that pierced Him, for Godhead is in its nature invisible.  Nay;
 He will come with His body--so I have learnt--such as He was seen by
 His Disciples in the Mount, or as he shewed Himself for a moment, when
 his Godhead overpowered the carnality.  And as we say this to disarm
 suspicion, so we write the other to correct the novel teaching.  If
 anyone assert that His flesh came down from heaven, and is not from
 hence, nor of us though above us, let him be anathema.  For the words,
 The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven; [4698] and, As is the Heavenly,
 such are they that are Heavenly; and, No man hath ascended up into
 Heaven save He which came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which
 is in Heaven; [4699] and the like, are to be understood as said on
 account of the Union with the heavenly; just as that All Things were
 made by Christ, [4700] and that Christ dwelleth in your hearts [4701]
 is said, not of the visible nature which belongs to God, but of what is
 perceived by the mind, the names being mingled like the natures, and
 flowing into one another, according to the law of their intimate union.

 If anyone has put his trust in Him as a Man without a human mind, he is
 really bereft of mind, and quite unworthy of salvation.  For that which
 He has not assumed He has not healed; but that which is united to His
 Godhead is also saved.  If only half Adam fell, then that which Christ
 assumes and saves may be half also; but if the whole of his nature
 fell, it must be united to the whole nature of Him that was begotten,
 and so be saved as a whole.  Let them not, then, begrudge us our
 complete salvation, or clothe the Saviour only with bones and nerves
 and the portraiture of humanity.  For if His Manhood is without soul,
 even the Arians admit this, that they may attribute His Passion to the
 Godhead, as that which gives motion to the body is also that which
 suffers.  But if He has a soul, and yet is without a mind, how is He
 man, for man is not a mindless animal?  And this would necessarily
 involve that while His form and tabernacle was human, His soul should
 be that of a horse or an ox, or some other of the brute creation.
 This, then, would be what He saves; and I have been deceived by the
 Truth, and led to boast of an honour which had been bestowed upon
 another.  But if His Manhood is intellectual and nor without mind, let
 them cease to be thus really mindless.  But, says such an one, the
 Godhead took the place of the human intellect.  How does this touch
 me?  For Godhead joined to flesh alone is not man, nor to soul alone,
 nor to both apart from intellect, which is the most essential part of
 man.  Keep then the whole man, and mingle Godhead therewith, that you
 may benefit me in my completeness.  But, he asserts, He could not
 contain Two perfect Natures.  Not if you only look at Him in a bodily
 fashion.  For a bushel measure will not hold two bushels, nor will the
 space of one body hold two or more bodies.  But if you will look at
 what is mental and incorporeal, remember that I in my one personality
 can contain soul and reason and mind and the Holy Spirit; and before me
 this world, by which I mean the system of things visible and invisible,
 contained Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.  For such is the nature of
 intellectual Existences, that they can mingle with one another and with
 bodies, incorporeally and invisibly.  For many sounds are comprehended
 by one ear; and the eyes of many are occupied by the same visible
 objects, and the smell by odours; nor are the senses narrowed by each
 other, or crowded out, nor the objects of sense diminished by the
 multitude of the perceptions.  But where is there mind of man or angel
 so perfect in comparison of the Godhead that the presence of the
 greater must crowd out the other?  The light is nothing compared with
 the sun, nor a little damp compared with a river, that we must first do
 away with the lesser, and take the light from a house, or the moisture
 from the earth, to enable it to contain the greater and more perfect.
 For how shall one thing contain two completenesses, either the house,
 the sunbeam and the sun, or the earth, the moisture and the river?
 Here is matter for inquiry; for indeed the question is worthy of much
 consideration.  Do they not know, then, that what is perfect by
 comparison with one thing may be imperfect by comparison with another,
 as a hill compared with a mountain, or a grain of mustard seed with a
 bean or any other of the larger seeds, although it may be called larger
 than any of the same kind?  Or, if you like, an Angel compared with
 God, or a man with an Angel.  So our mind is perfect and commanding,
 but only in respect of soul and body; not absolutely perfect; and a
 servant and a subject of God, not a sharer of His Princedom and honour.
 So Moses was a God to Pharaoh, [4702] but a servant of God, [4703] as
 it is written; and the stars which illumine the night are hidden by the
 Sun, so much that you could not even know of their existence by
 daylight; and a little torch brought near a great blaze is neither
 destroyed, nor seen, nor extinguished; but is all one blaze, the bigger
 one prevailing over the other.

 But, it may be said, our mind is subject to condemnation.  What then of
 our flesh?  Is that not subject to condemnation?  You must therefore
 either set aside the latter on account of sin, or admit the former on
 account of salvation.  If He assumed the worse that He might sanctify
 it by His incarnation, may He not assume the better that it may be
 sanctified by His becoming Man?  If the clay was leavened and has
 become a new lump, O ye wise men, shall not the Image be leavened and
 mingled with God, being deified by His Godhead?  And I will add this
 also:  If the mind was utterly rejected, as prone to sin and subject to
 damnation, and for this reason He assumed a body but left out the mind,
 then there is an excuse for them who sin with the mind; for the witness
 of God--according to you--has shewn the impossibility of healing it.
 Let me state the greater results.  You, my good sir, dishonour my mind
 (you a Sarcolater, if I am an Anthropolater [4704] ) that you may tie
 God down to the Flesh, since He cannot be otherwise tied; and therefore
 you take away the wall of partition.  But what is my theory, who am but
 an ignorant man, and no Philosopher.  Mind is mingled with mind, as
 nearer and more closely related, and through it with flesh, being a
 Mediator between God and carnality.

 Further let us see what is their account of the assumption of Manhood,
 or the assumption of Flesh, as they call it.  If it was in order that
 God, otherwise incomprehensible, might be comprehended, and might
 converse with men through His Flesh as through a veil, their mask and
 the drama which they represent is a pretty one, not to say that it was
 open to Him to converse with us in other ways, as of old, in the
 burning bush [4705] and in the appearance of a man. [4706] But if it
 was that He might destroy the condemnation by sanctifying like by like,
 then as He needed flesh for the sake of the flesh which had incurred
 condemnation, and soul for the sake of our soul, so, too, He needed
 mind for the sake of mind, which not only fell in Adam, but was the
 first to be affected, as the doctors say of illnesses.  For that which
 received the command was that which failed to keep the command, and
 that which failed to keep it was that also which dared to transgress;
 and that which transgressed was that which stood most in need of
 salvation; and that which needed salvation was that which also He took
 upon Him.  Therefore, Mind was taken upon Him.  This has now been
 demonstrated, whether they like it or no, by, to use their own
 expression, geometrical and necessary proofs.  But you are acting as
 if, when a man's eye had been injured and his foot had been injured in
 consequence, you were to attend to the foot and leave the eye uncared
 for; or as if, when a painter had drawn something badly, you were to
 alter the picture, but to pass over the artist as if he had succeeded.
 But if they, overwhelmed by these arguments, take refuge in the
 proposition that it is possible for God to save man even apart from
 mind, why, I suppose that it would be possible for Him to do so also
 apart from flesh by a mere act of will, just as He works all other
 things, and has wrought them without body.  Take away, then, the flesh
 as well as the mind, that your monstrous folly may be complete.  But
 they are deceived by the latter, and, therefore, they run to the flesh,
 because they do not know the custom of Scripture.  We will teach them
 this also.  For what need is there even to mention to those who know
 it, the fact that everywhere in Scripture he is called Man, and the Son
 of Man?

 If, however, they rely on the passage, The Word was made Flesh and
 dwelt among us, [4707] and because of this erase the noblest part of
 Man (as cobblers do the thicker part of skins) that they may join
 together God and Flesh, it is time for them to say that God is God only
 of flesh, and not of souls, because it is written, "As Thou hast given
 Him power over all Flesh," [4708] and "Unto Thee shall all Flesh come;"
 [4709] and "Let all Flesh bless His holy Name," [4710] meaning every
 Man.  Or, again, they must suppose that our fathers went down into
 Egypt without bodies and invisible, and that only the Soul of Joseph
 was imprisoned by Pharaoh, because it is written, "They went down into
 Egypt with threescore and fifteen Souls," [4711] and "The iron entered
 into his Soul," [4712] a thing which could not be bound.  They who
 argue thus do not know that such expressions are used by Synecdoche,
 declaring the whole by the part, as when Scripture says that the young
 ravens call upon God, [4713] to indicate the whole feathered race; or
 Pleiades, Hesperus, and Arcturus [4714] are mentioned, instead of all
 the Stars and His Providence over them.

 Moreover, in no other way was it possible for the Love of God toward us
 to be manifested than by making mention of our flesh, and that for our
 sake He descended even to our lower part.  For that flesh is less
 precious than soul, everyone who has a spark of sense will
 acknowledge.  And so the passage, The Word was made Flesh, seems to me
 to be equivalent to that in which it is said that He was made sin,
 [4715] or a curse [4716] for us; not that the Lord was transformed into
 either of these, how could He be?  But because by taking them upon Him
 He took away our sins and bore our iniquities. [4717] This, then, is
 sufficient to say at the present time for the sake of clearness and of
 being understood by the many.  And I write it, not with any desire to
 compose a treatise, but only to check the progress of deceit; and if it
 is thought well, I will give a fuller account of these matters at
 greater length.

 But there is a matter which is graver than these, a special point which
 it is necessary that I should not pass over.  I would they were even
 cut off that trouble you, [4718] and would reintroduce a second
 Judaism, and a second circumcision, and a second system of sacrifices.
 For if this be done, what hinders Christ also being born again to set
 them aside, and again being betrayed by Judas, and crucified and
 buried, and rising again, that all may be fulfilled in the same order,
 like the Greek system of cycles, in which the same revolutions of the
 stars bring round the same events?  For what the method of selection
 is, in accordance with which some of the events are to occur and others
 to be omitted, let these wise men who glory in the multitude of their
 books shew us.

 But since, puffed up by their theory of the Trinity, they falsely
 accuse us of being unsound in the Faith and entice the multitude, it is
 necessary that people should know that Apollinarius, while granting the
 Name of Godhead to the Holy Ghost, did not preserve the Power of the
 Godhead.  For to make the Trinity consist of Great, Greater, and
 Greatest, as of Light, Ray, and Sun, the Spirit and the Son and the
 Father (as is clearly stated in his writings), is a ladder of Godhead
 not leading to Heaven, but down from Heaven.  But we recognize God the
 Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and these not as bare titles,
 dividing inequalities of ranks or of power, but as there is one and the
 same title, so there is one nature and one substance in the Godhead.

 But if anyone who thinks we have spoken rightly on this subject
 reproaches us with holding communion with heretics, let him prove that
 we are open to this charge, and we will either convince him or retire.
 But it is not safe to make any innovation before judgment is given,
 especially in a matter of such importance, and connected with so great
 issues.  We have protested and continue to protest this before God and
 men.  And not even now, be well assured, should we have written this,
 if we had not seen that the Church was being torn asunder and divided,
 among their other tricks, by their present synagogue of vanity. [4719]
 But if anyone when we say and protest this, either from some
 advantage they will thus gain, or through fear of men, or monstrous
 littleness of mind, or through some neglect of pastors and governors,
 or through love of novelty and proneness to innovations, rejects us as
 unworthy of credit, and attaches himself to such men, and divides the
 noble body of the Church, he shall bear his judgment, whoever he may
 be, [4720] and shall give account to God in the day of judgment. [4721]
 But if their long books, and their new Psalters, contrary to that of
 David, and the grace of their metres, are taken for a third Testament,
 we too will compose Psalms, and will write much in metre.  For we also
 think we have the spirit of God, [4722] if indeed this is a gift of the
 Spirit, and not a human novelty.  This I will that thou declare
 publicly, that we may not be held responsible, as overlooking such an
 evil, and as though this wicked doctrine received food and strength
 from our indifference.

 [4697] Ps. lxxx. 12.

 [4698] 1 Cor. xv. 47.

 [4699] John iii. 13.

 [4700] John i. 3.

 [4701] Ephes. iii. 17.

 [4702] Exod. vii. 1.

 [4703] Num. xii. 7.

 [4704] The Apollinarians seem to have charged the Orthodox with being
 Anthropolaters, or worshippers of a mere Man.  S. Gregory retorts upon
 them that if so, they are worse themselves, being actually Sarcolaters,
 or worshippers of mere flesh, denying Mind to Him whom they adore as
 Lord and Saviour.

 [4705] Exod. iii. 2.

 [4706] Gen. xviii. 5.

 [4707] John i. 14.

 [4708] Ib. xvii. 2.

 [4709] Ps. lxv. 2.

 [4710] Ib. cxlv. 21.

 [4711] Acts vii. 14.

 [4712] Ps. cv. 18.

 [4713] Ps. cxlvii. 8.

 [4714] Job. ix. 9.

 [4715] 2 Cor. v. 21.

 [4716] Gal. iii. 13.

 [4717] Isa. liii. 7 LXX.

 [4718] Galat. v. 12.

 [4719] Ps. xxvi. 4 LXX.

 [4720] Galat. v. 10.

 [4721] Matt. xii. 36.

 [4722] 1 Cor. vii. 40.

 Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius.  (Ep. CII.)

 Forasmuch as many persons have come to your Reverence seeking
 confirmation of their faith, and therefore you have affectionately
 asked me to put forth a brief definition and rule of my opinion, I
 therefore write to your Reverence, what indeed you knew before, that I
 never have and never can honour anything above the Nicene Faith, that
 of the Holy Fathers who met there to destroy the Arian heresy; but am,
 and by God's help ever will be, of that faith; completing in detail
 that which was incompletely said by them concerning the Holy Ghost; for
 that question had not then been mooted, namely, that we are to believe
 that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are of one Godhead, thus
 confessing the Spirit also to be God.  Receive then to communion those
 who think and teach thus, as I also do; but those who are otherwise
 minded refuse, and hold them as strangers to God and the Catholic
 Church.  And since a question has also been mooted concerning the
 Divine Assumption of humanity, or Incarnation, state this also clearly
 to all concerning me, that I join in One the Son, who was begotten of
 the Father, and afterward of the Virgin Mary, and that I do not call
 Him two Sons, but worship Him as One and the same in undivided Godhead
 and honour.  But if anyone does not assent to this statement, either
 now or hereafter, he shall give account to God at the day of judgment.

 Now, what we object and oppose to their mindless opinion about His Mind
 is this, to put it shortly; for they are almost alone in the condition
 which they lay down, as it is through want of mind that they mutilate
 His mind.  But, that they may not accuse us of having once accepted but
 of now repudiating the faith of their beloved Vitalius [4723] which he
 handed in in writing at the request of the blessed Bishop Damasus of
 Rome, I will give a short explanation on this point also.  For these
 men, when they are theologizing among their genuine disciples, and
 those who are initiated into their secrets, like the Manichæans among
 those whom they call the "Elect," expose the full extent of their
 disease, and scarcely allow flesh at all to the Saviour.  But when they
 are refuted and pressed with the common answers about the Incarnation
 which the Scripture presents, they confess indeed the orthodox words,
 but they do violence to the sense; for they acknowledge the Manhood to
 be neither without soul nor without reason nor without mind, nor
 imperfect, but they bring in the Godhead to supply the soul and reason
 and mind, as though It had mingled Itself only with His flesh, and not
 with the other properties belonging to us men; although His sinlessness
 was far above us, and was the cleansing of our passions.

 Thus, then, they interpret wrongly the words, But we have the Mind of
 Christ, [4724] and very absurdly, when they say that His Godhead is the
 mind of Christ, and not understanding the passage as we do, namely,
 that they who have purified their mind by the imitation of the mind
 which the Saviour took of us, and, as far as may be, have attained
 conformity with it, are said to have the mind of Christ; just as they
 might be testified to have the flesh of Christ who have trained their
 flesh, and in this respect have become of the same body and partakers
 of Christ; and so he says "As we have borne the image of the earth
 [4725] we shall also bear the image of the heavenly."  And so they
 declare that the Perfect Man is not He who was in all points tempted
 like as we are yet without sin; [4726] but the mixture of God and
 Flesh.  For what, say they, can be more perfect than this?

 They play the same trick with the word that describes the Incarnation,
 viz.:  He was made Man, explaining it to mean, not, He was in the human
 nature with which He surrounded Himself, according to the Scripture, He
 knew what was in man; [4727] but teaching that it means, He consorted
 and conversed with men, and taking refuge in the expression which says
 that He was seen on Earth and conversed with Men. [4728] And what can
 anyone contend further?  They who take away the Humanity and the
 Interior Image cleanse by their newly invented mask only our outside,
 [4729] and that which is seen; so far in conflict with themselves that
 at one time, for the sake of the flesh, they explain all the rest in a
 gross and carnal manner (for it is from hence that they have derived
 their second Judaism and their silly thousand years delight in
 paradise, and almost the idea that we shall resume again the same
 conditions after these same thousand years); and at another time they
 bring in His flesh as a phantom rather than a reality, as not having
 been subjected to any of our experiences, not even such as are free
 from sin; and use for this purpose the apostolic expression, understood
 and spoken in a sense which is not apostolic, that our Saviour was made
 in the likeness of Men and found in fashion as a Man, [4730] as though
 by these words was expressed, not the human form, but some delusive
 phantom and appearance.

 Since then these expressions, rightly understood, make for orthodoxy,
 but wrongly interpreted are heretical, what is there to be surprised at
 if we received the words of Vitalius in the more orthodox sense; our
 desire that they should be so meant persuading us, though others are
 angry at the intention of his writings?  This is, I think, the reason
 why Damasus himself, having been subsequently better informed, and at
 the same time learning that they hold by their former explanations,
 excommunicated them and overturned their written confession of faith
 with an Anathema; as well as because he was vexed at the deceit which
 he had suffered from them through simplicity.

 Since, then, they have been openly convicted of this, let them not be
 angry, but let them be ashamed of themselves; and let them not slander
 us, but abase themselves and wipe off from their portals that great and
 marvellous proclamation and boast of their orthodoxy, meeting all who
 go in at once with the question and distinction that we must worship,
 not a God-bearing Man, but a flesh-bearing God.  What could be more
 unreasonable than this, though these new heralds of truth think a great
 deal of the title?  For though it has a certain sophistical grace
 through the quickness of its antithesis, and a sort of juggling
 quackery grateful to the uninstructed, yet it is the most absurd of
 absurdities and the most foolish of follies.  For if one were to change
 the word Man or Flesh into God (the first would please us, the second
 them), and then were to use this wonderful antithesis, so divinely
 recognized, what conclusion should we arrive at?  That we must worship,
 not a God-bearing Flesh, but a Man-bearing God.  O monstrous
 absurdity!  They proclaim to us to-day a wisdom hidden ever since the
 time of Christ--a thing worthy of our tears.  For if the faith began
 thirty years ago, when nearly four hundred years had passed since
 Christ was manifested, vain all that time will have been our Gospel,
 and vain our faith; in vain will the Martyrs have borne their witness,
 and in vain have so many and so great Prelates presided over the
 people; and Grace is a matter of metres and not of the faith.

 And who will not marvel at their learning, in that on their own
 authority they divide the things of Christ, and assign to His Manhood
 such sayings as He was born, He was tempted, He was hungry, He was
 thirsty, He was wearied, He was asleep; but reckon to His Divinity such
 as these:  He was glorified by Angels, He overcame the Tempter, He fed
 the people in the wilderness, and He fed them in such a manner, and He
 walked upon the sea; and say on the one hand that the "Where have ye
 laid Lazarus?" [4731] belongs to us, but the loud voice "Lazarus, Come
 Forth" [4732] and the raising him that had been four days dead, is
 above our nature; and that while the "He was in an Agony, He was
 crucified, He was buried," belongs to the Veil, on the other hand, "He
 was confident, He rose again, He ascended," belong to the Inner
 Treasure; and then they accuse us of introducing two natures, separate
 or conflicting, and of dividing the supernatural and wondrous Union.
 They ought, either not to do that of which they accuse us, or not to
 accuse us of that which they do; so at least if they are resolved to be
 consistent and not to propound at once their own and their opponents'
 principles.  Such is their want of reason; it conflicts both with
 itself and with the truth to such an extent that they are neither
 conscious nor ashamed of it when they fall out with themselves.  Now,
 if anyone thinks that we write all this willingly and not upon
 compulsion, and that we are dissuading from unity, and not doing our
 utmost to promote it, let him know that he is very much mistaken, and
 has not made at all a good guess at our desires, for nothing is or ever
 has been more valuable in our eyes than peace, as the facts themselves
 prove; though their actions and brawlings against us altogether exclude
 unanimity.

 [4723] Vitalius or Vitalis was one of the principal followers of
 Apollinarius, and by him was consecrated schismatical Bishop of
 Antioch, where, while yet orthodox, he had been ordained a priest by
 Meletius.  But he quarrelled with his Bishop through jealousy of
 another priest, and then fell under the influence of Apollinarius.  He
 was summoned to Rome to clear himself of the charge of heresy; and by a
 clever manipulation of language he produced a confession which the
 Pope, Damasus, accepted as orthodox; but the Pope remitted the whole
 case to Paulinus, who was at that time recognized by the Western Church
 as rightful Bishop.  Vitalius, however, was unable to accept the test
 required, and seceded.  On his return from Rome he had visited
 Nazianzus, where S. Gregory received him as a brother in the faith,
 though further acquaintance compelled him to withdraw from this
 position.  Vitalius, while admitting that our Lord had both a human
 body and a human soul, denied Him a human mind; whose place, according
 to his teaching, was supplied by Divinity.

 [4724] 1 Cor. ii. 16.

 [4725] 1 Cor. xv. 49.

 [4726] Heb. iv. 15.

 [4727] John ii. 25.

 [4728] Baruch iii. 37.

 [4729] Matt. xxiii. 25, 26.

 [4730] Phil. ii. 7.

 [4731] John xi. 34.

 [4732] Ib. xi. 43.

 Ep. CXXV.  To Olympius.

 Even hoar hairs have something to learn; and old age, it would seem,
 cannot in all respects be trusted for wisdom.  I at any rate, knowing
 better than anyone, as I did, the thoughts and the heresy of the
 Apollinarians, and seeing that their folly was intolerable; yet
 thinking that I could tame them by patience and soften them by degrees,
 I let my hopes make me eager to attain this object.  But, as it seems,
 I overlooked the fact that I was making them worse, and injuring the
 Church by my untimely philosophy.  For gentleness does not put bad men
 out of countenance.  And now if it had been possible for me to teach
 you this myself, I should not have hesitated, you may be sure, even to
 undertake a journey beyond my strength to throw myself at the feet of
 your Excellency.  But since my illness has brought me too far, and it
 has become necessary for me to try the hot baths of Xanxaris at the
 advice of my medical men, I send a letter to represent me.  These
 wicked and utterly abandoned men have dared, in addition to all their
 other misdeeds, either to summon, or to make a bad use of the passage
 (I am not prepared to say precisely which) of certain Bishops, deprived
 by the whole Synod of the Eastern and Western Church; and, in violation
 of all Imperial Ordinances, and of your commands, to confer the name of
 Bishop on a certain individual of their own misbelieving and deceitful
 crew; encouraged to do so, as I believe, by nothing so much as my great
 infirmity; for I must mention this.  If this is to be tolerated, your
 Excellency will tolerate it, and I too will bear it, as I have often
 before.  But if it is serious, and not to be endured by our most august
 Emperors, pray punish what has been done--though more mildly than such
 madness merits.

 Division II.

 Correspondence with Saint Basil the Great, Archbishop of Cæsarea.

 Ep. I.  To Basil His Comrade.

 (Perhaps about a.d. 357 or 358; in answer to a letter which is not now
 extant.)

 I have failed, I confess, to keep my promise.  I had engaged even at
 Athens, at the time of our friendship and intimate connection there
 (for I can find no better word for it), to join you in a life of
 philosophy.  But I failed to keep my promise, not of my own will, but
 because one law prevailed against another; I mean the law which bids us
 honour our parents overpowered the law of our friendship and
 intercourse.  Yet I will not fail you altogether, if you will accept
 this offer.  I shall be with you half the time, and half of it you will
 be with me, that we may have the whole in common, and that our
 friendship may be on equal terms; and so it will be arranged in such a
 way that my parents will not be grieved, and yet I shall gain you.

 Ep. II.

 (Written about the same time, in reply to another letter now lost.)

 I do not like being joked about Tiberina and its mud and its winters, O
 my friend, who are so free from mud, and who walk on tiptoe, and
 trample on the plains.  You who have wings and are borne aloft, and fly
 like the arrows of Abaris, in order that, Cappadocian though you are,
 you may flee from Cappadocia.  Have we done you an injury, because
 while you are pale and breathing hard and measuring the sun, we are
 sleek and well fed and not pressed for room?  Yet this is your
 condition.  You are luxurious and rich, and go to market.  I do not
 approve of this.  Either then cease to reproach us with our mud (for
 you did not build your city, nor we make our winter), or else for our
 mud we will bring against you your hucksters, and the rest of the crop
 of nuisances which infest cities.

 Ep. IV.

 (In answer to Ep. XIV., of Basil, about 361.)

 You may mock and pull to pieces my affairs, whether in jest or in
 earnest.  This is a matter of no consequence; only laugh, and take your
 fill of culture, and enjoy my friendship.  Everything that comes from
 you is pleasant to me, no matter what it may be, and how it may look.
 For I think you are chaffing about things here, not for the sake of
 chaffing, but that you may draw me to yourself, if I understand you at
 all; just like people who block up streams in order to draw them into
 another channel.  That is how your sayings always seem to me.

 For my part I will admire your Pontus and your Pontic darkness, and
 your dwelling place so worthy of exile, and the hills over your head,
 and the wild beasts which test your faith, and your sequestered spot
 that lies under them...or as I should say your mousehole with the
 stately names of Abode of Thought, Monastery, School; and your thickets
 of wild bushes, and crown of precipitous mountains, by which may you
 be, not crowned but, cloistered; and your limited air; and the sun, for
 which you long, and can only see as through a chimney, O sunless
 Cimmerians of Pontus, who are condemned not only to a six months'
 night, as some are said to be, but who have not even a part of your
 life out of the shadow, but all your life is one long night, and a real
 shadow of death, to use a Scripture phrase.  And admire your strait and
 narrow road, leading...I know not if it be to the Kingdom, or to Hades,
 but for your sake I hope it is the Kingdom...And as for the intervening
 country, what is your wish?  Am I falsely to call it Eden, and the
 fountain divided into four heads, by which the world is watered, or the
 dry and waterless wilderness (only what Moses will come to tame it,
 bringing water out of the rock with his staff)?  For all of it which
 has escaped the rocks is full of gullies; and that which is not a gully
 is a thicket of thorns; and whatever is above the thorns is a
 precipice; and the road above that is precipitous, and slopes both
 ways, exercising the mind of travellers, and calling for gymnastic
 exercises for safety.  And the river rushes roaring down, which to you
 is a Strymon of Amphipolis for quietness, and there are not so many
 fishes in it as stones, nor does it flow into a lake, but it dashes
 into abysses, O my grandiloquent friend and inventor of new names.  For
 it is great and terrible, and overwhelms the psalmody of those who live
 above it; like the Cataracts and Catadoupa of the Nile, so does it roar
 you down day and night.  It is rough and fordless; and it has only this
 morsel of kindness about it, that it does not sweep away your dwelling
 when the torrents and winter storms make it mad.  This then is what I
 think of those Fortunate Islands and of you happy people.  And you are
 not to admire the crescent-shaped curves which strangle rather than cut
 off the accessible parts of your Highlands, and the strip of mountain
 ridge that hangs over your heads, and makes your life like that of
 Tantalus; and the draughty breezes, and the vent-holes of the earth,
 which refresh your courage when it fails; and your musical birds that
 sing (but only of famine), and fly about (but only about the desert).
 No one visits it, you say, except for hunting; you might add, and
 except to look upon your dead bodies.  This is perhaps too long for a
 letter, but it is too short for a comedy.  If you can take my jokes
 kindly you will do well, but if not, I will send you some more.

 Ep. V.

 (Circa a.d. 361.)

 Since you do take my jokes kindly, I send you the rest.  My prelude is
 from Homer.

 "Come now and change thy theme,

 And sing of the inner adornment."

 --Od. viii. 492.

 Your roofless and doorless hut, your fireless and smokeless hearth,
 your walls dried by fire, that we may not be hit by the drops of the
 mud, condemned like Tantalus thirsting in the midst of waters, and that
 pitiable feast with nothing to eat, to which we were invited from
 Cappadocia, not as to a Lotus-eater's poverty, but to a table of
 Alcinous--we young and miserable survivors of a wreck.  For I remember
 those loaves and the broth (so it was called), yes, and I shall
 remember them too, and my poor teeth that slipped on your hunks of
 bread, and then braced themselves up, and pulled themselves as it were
 out of mud.  You yourself will raise these things to a higher strain of
 tragedy, having learnt to talk big through your own sufferings...for if
 we had not been quickly delivered by that great supporter of the
 poor--I mean your mother--who appeared opportunely like a harbour to
 men tossed by a storm, we should long ago have been dead, rather pitied
 than admired for our faith in Pontus.  How shall I pass over that
 garden which was no garden and had no vegetables, and the Augean
 dunghill which we cleared out of the house, and with which we filled it
 up (sc. the garden), when we drew that mountainous wagon, I the
 vintager, and you the valiant, with our necks and hands, which still
 bear the traces of our labours.  "O earth and sun, O air and virtue"
 (for I will indulge a little in tragic tones), not that we might bridge
 the Hellespont, but that we might level a precipice.  If you are not
 put out by the mention of the circumstances, no more am I; but if you
 are, how much more was I by the reality.  I pass by the rest, through
 respect for the others from whom I received much enjoyment.

 Ep. VI.

 (Written about the same time, in a more serious vein.)

 What I wrote before about our stay in Pontus was in joke, not in
 earnest; what I write now is very much in earnest.  O that one would
 place me as in the month of those former days, [4733] in which I
 luxuriated with you in hard living; since voluntary pain is more
 valuable than involuntary delight.  O that one would give me back those
 psalmodies and vigils and those sojournings with God in prayer, and
 that immaterial, so to speak, and unbodied life.  O for the intimacy
 and one-souledness of the brethren who were by you divinized and
 exalted:  O for the contest and incitement of virtue which we secured
 by written Rules and Canons; O for the loving labour in the Divine
 Oracles, and the light we found in them by the guidance of the Holy
 Ghost.  Or, if I may speak of lesser and slighter matters, O for the
 daily courses and experiences; O for the gatherings of wood, and the
 cutting of stone; O for the golden plane-tree, more precious than that
 of Xerxes, under which sat, not a King enfeebled by luxury, but a Monk
 worn out by hard life, which I planted and Apollos (I mean your
 honourable self) watered; [4734] but God gave the increase to our
 honour, that a memorial might remain among you of my diligence, as in
 the Ark we read and believe, did Aaron's rod that budded. [4735] To
 long for all this is very easy, but it is not easy to attain it.  But
 do you come to me, and conspire with me in virtue, and co-operate with
 me, and aid me by your prayers to keep the profit which we used to get
 together, that I may not perish by little and little, like a shadow as
 the day draws to its close.  I would rather breathe you than the air,
 and only live while I am with you, either actually in your presence, or
 virtually by your likeness in your absence.

 [4733] Job xxix. 2.

 [4734] 1 Cor. iii. 6.

 [4735] Num. xvii. 8, 10.

 Ep. VIII.

 (Written to S. Basil shortly after his Ordination as Priest, probably
 toward the end of a.d. 362.)

 I approve the beginning of your letter; but what is there of yours that
 I do not approve?  And you are convicted of having written just like
 me; [4736] for I, too, was forced into the rank of the Priesthood, for
 indeed I never was eager for it.  We are to one another, if ever any
 men were, trustworthy witnesses of our love for a humble and lowly
 philosophy.  But perhaps it would have been better that this had not
 happened, or I know not what to say, as long as I am in ignorance of
 the purpose of the Holy Ghost.  But since it has come about, we must
 bear it, at least so it seems clear to me; and especially when we take
 the times into consideration, which are bringing in upon us so many
 heretical tongues, and must not put to shame either the hopes of those
 who have trusted us thus, or our own lives.

 [4736] The Editors render "And you were captured just as I also was
 circumscribed," etc., but the Greek hardly bears this rendering.

 Ep. XIX.

 (This Epistle should be read in connection with the three addressed to
 Eusebius of Cæsarea, to which it refers.  For the circumstances see
 General Prolegomena, § 1, p. 194.)

 It is a time for prudence and endurance, and that we should not let
 anyone appear to be of higher courage than ourselves, or let all our
 labours and toils be in an instant brought to nothing.  Why do I write
 this, and wherefore?  Our Bishop Eusebius, very dear to God (for so we
 must for the future both think and write of him), is very much disposed
 to agreement and friendship with us; and as fire softens iron, so has
 time softened him; and I think a letter of appeal and invitation will
 come to you from him, as he intimated to me, and as many persons who
 are well acquainted with his affairs assure me.  Let us be beforehand
 with him then, either by going to him, or by writing to him; or rather
 by first writing and then going; in order that we may not by and by be
 put to shame by being defeated when it was in our power to secure a
 victory by being honourably and philosophically beaten, which so many
 are asking from us.  Be persuaded by me then, and come; both on this
 account and on account of the bad times; for a conspiracy of heretics
 is assailing the Church; some of them are here now, and are troubling
 us; and others, rumour says, are coming; and there is reason to fear
 lest the Word of Truth should be swept away, unless there be stirred up
 very soon the spirit of a Bezaleel, the wise Master builder of such
 arguments and dogmas.  If you think I ought to go too, to stay with you
 and travel with you, I will not refuse to do even this.

 (We insert here the three letters to Eusebius, which are so closely
 connected with the above as not to seem out of place.)

 Ep. XVI.  To Eusebius, Bishop of Cæsarea.

 Since I am addressing a man who does not love falsehood, and who is the
 keenest man I know at detecting it in another, however it may be twined
 in skilful and varied labyrinths; and, moreover, on my own part I will
 say it, though against the grain I do not like artifice, either, both
 from my natural constitution, and because God's Word has formed me so.
 Therefore I write what presents itself to my mind; and I beg you to
 excuse my plain speaking, or you will wrong the truth by depriving me
 of my liberty, and forcing me to restrain within myself the pain of my
 grief, like some secret and malignant disease.  I rejoice that I have
 your respect (for I am a man, as some one has said before), and that I
 am summoned to Synods and spiritual conferences.  But I am troubled at
 the slight which has been inflicted on my most Reverend brother Basil,
 and is still inflicted on him by Your Reverence; for I chose him as the
 companion of my life and words and highest philosophy, and he is so
 still; and I never had reason to regret my judgment of him.  It is more
 temperate to speak thus of him, that I may not seem to be praising
 myself in admiring him.  You, however, I think, by honouring me and
 dishonouring him, seem to be acting like a man who should with one hand
 stroke a man's head, and with the other hand strike him on the face; or
 while tearing up the foundations of a house should paint the walls and
 decorate the exterior.  If then you will listen to me, this is what you
 will do, and I claim to be listened to, for this is justice.  If you
 will pay due attention to him, he will do the like by you.  And I will
 follow him as a shadow does the body, being of little worth and
 inclined to peace.  For I am not so mean as to be willing in other
 respects to philosophize, and to be of the better part, but to overlook
 a matter which is the end of all our teaching, namely love; especially
 in regard to a Priest, and one of so high a character, and one whom I
 know of all my acquaintances to be the best both in life and doctrine
 and conduct.  For my pain shall not obscure the truth.

 Ep. XVII.  To Eusebius, Archbishop of Cæsarea.

 I did not write in an insolent spirit, as you complain of my letter,
 but rather in a spiritual and philosophical one, and as was fitting,
 unless this too wrongs "your most eloquent Gregory."  For though you
 are my Superior in rank, yet you will grant me something of liberty and
 just freedom of speech.  Therefore be kinder to me.  But if you regard
 my letter as coming from a servant, and from one who has not the right
 even to look you in the face, I will in this instance accept your
 stripes and not even shed a tear.  Will you blame me for this also?
 That would befit anyone rather than your Reverence.  For it is the part
 of a high-souled man to accept more readily the freedom of a friend
 than the flattery of an enemy.

 Ep. XVIII.  To Eusebius of Cæsarea.

 I was never meanly disposed towards your Reverence; do not find me
 guilty.  But after allowing myself a little liberty and boldness, just
 to relieve and heal my grief, I at once bowed and submitted, and
 willingly subjected myself to the Canon.  What else could I have done,
 knowing both you and the Law of the Spirit?  But if I had been ever so
 mean and ignoble in my sentiments, yet the present time would not allow
 such feelings, nor the wild beasts which are rushing on the Church, nor
 your own courage and manliness, so purely and genuinely fighting for
 the Church.  I will come then, if you wish it, and take part with you
 in prayers and in conflict, and will serve you, and like cheering boys
 will stir up the noble athlete by my exhortations.

 Ep. XL.  To the Great Basil.

 (About the middle of the year 370.  On the death of Eusebius Basil
 seems to have formed a desire that his friend Gregory should succeed to
 the vacant Metropolitanate; and so he wrote to him, without mentioning
 the death of the Archbishop, to come to him at Cæsarea, representing
 himself as dangerously ill.  Gregory, deeply grieved at the news, set
 off at once, but had not proceeded far on his way when he learned that
 Basil was in his usual health, and that the Bishops of the Province
 were assembling at Cæsarea for the Election of a Metropolitan.  He saw
 through the artifice at once; and thinking that Basil had wished to
 secure his presence at the Metropolis in order that his influence might
 bring about his own (Basil's) Election, he wrote him the following
 indignant letter.  Nevertheless both he and his father felt that no one
 was so well fitted to succeed to the vacant throne; and so Gregory
 wrote in his father's name the three letters which we have placed next,
 addressed respectively to the people of Cæsarea, to the Bishops
 attending the Synod, and to Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.)

 Do not be surprized if I say something strange, which has not been said
 before by anyone.  I think you have the reputation of being a steady
 safe and strong-minded man, but also of being more simple than safe in
 much that you plan and do.  For that which is free from evil is also in
 proportion slow to suspect evil, as is shewn by what has just
 occurred.  You have summoned me to the Metropolis at the moment when a
 council has been called for the election of a Bishop, and your pretext
 is very seemly and plausible.  You pretend to be very ill, indeed at
 your last breath, and to long to see me and to bid me a last farewell;
 I do not know with what object, even what my presence can effect in the
 matter.  I started in great grief at what had happened; for what could
 be of higher value to me than your life, or more distressing than your
 departure?  And I shed a fountain of tears; and I wailed aloud; and I
 felt myself now for the first time unphilosophically disposed.  What
 did I leave unperformed of all that befits a funeral?  But as soon as I
 found that the Bishops were assembling at the City, at once I stopped
 short in my course; and I wondered first that you had not perceived
 what was proper, or guarded against people's tongues, which are so
 given to slander the guileless; and secondly that you did not think the
 same course to be fitting for me as for yourself, though our life and
 our rule and everything is common to us both, who have been so closely
 associated by God from the first.  Thirdly, for I must say this also, I
 wondered whether you remembered that such nominations are worthy of the
 more religious, not of the more powerful, nor of those most in favour
 with the multitude.  For these reasons then I backed water, and held
 back.  Now, if you think as I do, come to this determination, to avoid
 these public turmoils and evil suspicions.  I shall see your Reverence
 when the matters are settled and time allows, and I shall have more and
 graver reproaches to address to you.

 Ep. XLI.  To the People of Cæsarea, in His Father's Name.

 I am a little shepherd, and preside over a tiny flock, and I am among
 the least of the servants of the Spirit.  But Grace is not narrow, or
 circumscribed by place.  Wherefore let freedom of speech be given even
 to the small,--especially when the subject matter is of such great
 importance, and one in which all are interested--even to deliberate
 with men of hoary hairs, who speak with perhaps greater wisdom than the
 ordinary run of men.  You are deliberating on no ordinary or
 unimportant matter, but on one by which the common interest must
 necessarily be promoted or injured according to the decision at which
 you arrive.  For our subject matter is the Church, for which Christ
 died, and the guide who is to present it and lead it to God.  For the
 light of the body is the eye, [4737] as we have heard; not only the
 bodily eye which sees and is seen, but that which contemplates and is
 contemplated spiritually.  But the light of the Church is the Bishop,
 as is evident to you even without our writing it.  As then the
 straightness or crookedness of the course of the body depends upon the
 clearness or dulness of the eye, so must the Church necessarily share
 the peril or safety incurred by the conduct of its Chief.  You must
 then take thought for the whole Church as the Body of Christ, but more
 especially for your own, which was from the beginning and is now the
 Mother of almost all the Churches, to which all the Commonwealth looks,
 like a circle described round a centre, not only because of its
 orthodoxy proclaimed of old to all, but also because of the grace of
 unanimity so evidently bestowed upon it by God.  You then have summoned
 us also to your discussion of this matter, and so are acting rightly
 and canonically.  But we are oppressed by age and infirmity, and if we
 by the strength given us by the Holy Ghost could be present (nothing is
 incredible to them that believe), this would be best for the common
 welfare and most pleasant to ourselves, that we might confer something
 on you, and ourselves have a part of the blessing; but if I should be
 kept away through weakness, I will give at any rate whatever can be
 given by one who is absent.

 I believe that there are others among you worthy of the Primacy, both
 because of the greatness of your city, and because it has been governed
 in times past so excellently and by such great men; but there is one
 man among you to whom I cannot prefer any, our son well beloved of God,
 Basil the Priest (I speak before God as my witness); a man of pure life
 and word, and alone, or almost alone, of all qualified in both respects
 to stand against the present times, and the prevailing wordiness of the
 heretics.  I write this to men of the priestly and monastic Orders, and
 also to the dignitaries and councillors, and to the whole people.  If
 you should approve it, and my vote should prevail, being so just and
 right, and given with God's aid, I am and will be with you in spirit;
 or rather I have already set my hand to the work and am bold in the
 Spirit.  But if you should not agree with me, but determine something
 else, and if the matter is to be settled by cliques and relationships,
 and if the hand of the mob is again to disturb the sincerity of your
 vote, do what pleases you--I shall stay at home.

 [4737] Matt. vi. 22.

 Ep. XLIII.  To the Bishops.

 (The comprovincial Bishops had notified the elder Gregory of their
 Synod, but without mentioning its date or purpose or inviting him to
 take part in it--probably because they knew how strongly he would
 support the election of Basil, to which they were unfavourable.  S.
 Gregory therefore wrote the following letter in his father's name.)

 How sweet and kind you are, and how full of love.  You have invited me
 to the Metropolis, because, as I imagine, you are going to take some
 counsel about a Bishop.  So much I learn from you, though you have not
 told me either that I am to be present, or why, or when, but have
 merely announced to me suddenly that you were setting out, as though
 resolved not to respect me, and as not desirous that I should share
 your counsels, but rather putting a hindrance in the way of my coming,
 that you may not meet me even against my will.  This is your way of
 action, and I will put up with the insult, but I will set before you my
 view and how I feel.  Various people will put forward various
 candidates, each according to his own inclinations and interests, as is
 usually the case at such times.  But I cannot prefer anyone, for my
 conscience would not allow it, to my dear son and fellow priest Basil.
 For whom of all my acquaintance do I find more approved in his life, or
 more powerful in his word, or more furnished altogether with the beauty
 of virtue?  But if you allege weak health against him, I reply that we
 are choosing not an athlete but a teacher.  And at the same time is
 seen in this case the power of Him that strengthens and supports the
 weak, if such they be.  If you accept this vote I will come and take
 part, either in spirit or in body.  But if you are marching to a
 foregone conclusion, and faction is to overrule justice, I shall
 rejoice to have been overlooked.  The work must be yours; but pray for
 me. [4738]

 [4738] There is here a various reading (the difference being merely the
 result of itacism) which seems to give a better sense; "Ours is to pray
 for you."

 Ep. XLII.  To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

 (There still seemed a probability that intrigues and party spirit would
 carry the day, and so the two Gregories determined to call in the aid
 of Eusebius of Samosata, though he did not belong to the Province.  He
 had been a conspicuous champion of orthodoxy against the Arian Emperor
 Valens, and the Gregories hoped much from his presence at the Synod.
 He responded to their appeal, and undertook the three hundred miles of
 very difficult travelling to throw in his influence with the cause
 which they had at heart.  He saw, however, that it was necessary that
 the aged Bishop of Nazianzus, notwithstanding his years and
 infirmities, should make the effort, and he persuaded him to go.  The
 result was all that could be desired; for Basil was elected by a
 unanimous vote.  The letter, which S. Gregory wrote in his own name to
 thank him, will be found later on.)

 O that I had the wings of a dove, or that my old age could be renewed,
 that I might be able to go to your charity, and to satisfy the longings
 that I have to see you, and to tell you the troubles of my soul, and in
 you to find some comfort for my afflictions.  For since the death of
 the blessed Bishop Eusebius I am not a little afraid lest they who on a
 former occasion set traps for our Metropolis, and wanted to fill it
 with heretical tares, should now seize the opportunity, and uproot by
 their evil teaching the piety which has with so much labour been sown
 in the hearts of men, and should tear asunder its unity, as they have
 done in many Churches.  As soon as I received letters from the Clergy
 asking me not to forget them in their present circumstances, I looked
 round about me, and remembered your love and your right faith and the
 zeal with which you are ever possessed for the Churches of God; and
 therefore I sent my beloved Eustathius, my Deacon and helper, to warn
 your Reverence, and to entreat you, in addition to all your toils for
 the Churches, to meet me, and both to refresh my old age by your
 coming, and to establish in the Orthodox Church that piety which is so
 famous, by giving her with us (if we may be deemed worthy to have a
 share with you in the good work) a Shepherd according to the will of
 the Lord, who shall be able to rule His people.  For we have a man
 before our eyes, and you are not unacquainted with him; and if we are
 permitted to obtain him I know that we shall acquire great boldness
 towards God, and shall confer a very great benefit upon the people who
 have called upon our aid.  I beg you again and again to put away all
 delay, and to come to us before the bad weather of the winter sets in.

 Ep. XLV.  To Basil.

 (After the Consecration every one thought that Gregory would at once
 join his friend; and Basil himself much wished for his assistance.  But
 Gregory thought it better to restrain his desire to see his friend
 until jealousies had time to calm down.  So he wrote the following
 letter to explain the reasons for his staying away at this juncture.)

 When I learnt that you had been placed on the lofty throne, and that
 the Spirit had prevailed to publish the candle upon the candlestick,
 which even before shone with no dim light, I was glad, I confess.  Why
 should I not be, seeing as I did that the commonwealth of the Church
 was in sorry plight, and needed such a guiding hand?  Yet I did not run
 to you off hand, nor shall I run to you, not even if you ask me
 yourself.  First, in order that I may be careful of your dignity, and
 that you may not seem to be collecting partisans under the influence of
 bad taste and hot temper, as your calumniators would say; and secondly
 that I may make for myself a reputation for stability, and above
 illwill.  When then will you come, perhaps you will ask, and how long
 will you put it off?  As long as God shall bid me, and until the shadow
 of the present enmity and slander shall have passed away.  For the
 lepers, I well know, will not hold out very long to keep our David out
 of Jerusalem.

 Ep. XLVI.  To Basil.

 (The new Archbishop seems not to have been satisfied with the reasons
 given in Gregory's last letter; so the latter writes again.)

 How can any affairs of yours be mere grape-gleanings to me, O dear and
 sacred friend?

 "What a word has escaped the fence of your teeth," or how could you
 dare to say such a thing, if I too may be somewhat daring?  How could
 your mind set it going, or your ink write it, or your paper receive it,
 O lectures and Athens and virtues and literary labours!  You almost
 make me write a tragedy by what you have written.  Do you not know me
 or yourself, you eye of the world, and great voice and trumpet and
 palace of learning?  Your affairs trifles to Gregory?  What then on
 earth could any one admire, if Gregory admire not you?  There is one
 spring among the seasons, one sun among the stars, and one heaven that
 embraces all things; and so your voice is unique among all things, if I
 am capable of judging such things, and not deceived by my
 affection--and this I do not think to be the case.  But if it is
 because I do not value you according to your worth that you blame me,
 you must also blame all mankind; for no one else has or will
 sufficiently admire you, unless it be yourself, and your own eloquence,
 at least if it were possible to praise oneself, and if such were the
 custom of our speech.  But if you are accusing me of despising you, why
 not rather of being mad?  Or are you vexed because I am acting like a
 philosopher?  Give me leave to say that this and this alone is higher
 than even your conversation.

 Ep. XLVII.  To Basil.

 (The division of the civil Province of Cappadocia into two Provinces in
 the year 372 was followed by ecclesiastical troubles.  Anthimus, the
 Bishop of Tyana, the civil metropolis of the new division of Cappadocia
 Secunda, maintained that the Ecclesiastical divisions must necessarily
 follow the civil, and by consequence claimed for himself that the
 purely civil action of the State had ipso facto elevated him to the
 dignity of Metropolitan of the new Province; and this pretension was
 supported by the Bishops of that district, who were as a rule not well
 disposed towards the great Archbishop.  The next three letters are
 connected with this dispute.)

 I hear that you are being troubled by this fresh innovation, and are
 being worried by some sophistical and not unusual officiousness on the
 part of those in power; and it is not to be wondered at.  For I was not
 ignorant of their envy, or of the fact that many of those around you
 are making use of you to further their own interests, and are kindling
 the spark of meanness.  I have no fear of seeing you unphilosophically
 affected by your troubles, or in any way unworthy of yourself and me.
 Nay, I think that it is now above all that my Basil will be known, and
 that the philosophy which all your life you have been collecting will
 shew itself, and will overcome the abuse as with a high wave; and that
 you will remain unshaken while others are being troubled.  If you think
 it well, I will come myself and perhaps shall be able to give you some
 assistance by my counsel (if the sea needs water, you do counsel!); but
 in any case I shall derive benefit, and shall learn philosophy by
 bearing my part of the abuse.

 Ep. XLVIII.  To Basil.

 (Shortly after the events described above, Basil determined to
 strengthen his own hands by creating a number of new Bishoprics in the
 disputed Province, to one of which, Sasima, he consecrated Gregory,
 very much against the will of the latter, who felt that he had been
 hardly used, and did not attempt to disguise his reluctance.  See Gen.
 Prolegg. p. 195.)

 Do leave off speaking of me as an ill-educated and uncouth and
 unfriendly man, not even worthy to live, because I have ventured to be
 conscious of the way in which I have been treated.  You yourself would
 admit that I have not done wrong in any other respect, and my own
 conscience does not reproach me with having been unkind to you in
 either great or small matters; and I hope it never may.  I only know
 that I saw that I had been deceived--too late indeed, but I saw it--and
 I throw the blame on your throne, as having on a sudden lifted you
 above yourself; and I am weary of being blamed for faults of yours, and
 of having to make excuses for them to people who know both our former
 and our present relations.  For of all that I have to endure this is
 the most ridiculous or most pitiable thing, that the same person should
 have both to suffer the wrong and to bear the blame, and this is my
 present case.  Different people blame me for different things according
 to the tastes of each, or each man's disposition, or the measure of
 their ill feeling on my account; but the kindest reproach me with
 contempt and disdain, and they throw me on one side after making use of
 me, like the most valueless vessels, or those frames upon which arches
 are built, which after the building is complete are taken down and cast
 aside.  We will let them be and say what they please; no one shall curb
 their freedom of speech.  And do you, as my reward, pay off those
 blessed and empty hopes, which you devised against the evil speakers,
 who accused you of insulting me on pretence of honouring me, as though
 I were lightminded and easily taken in by such treatment.  Now I will
 plainly speak out the state of my mind, and you must not be angry with
 me.  For I will tell you just what I said at the moment of the
 suffering, not in a fit of anger or so much in the sense of
 astonishment at what had happened as to lose my reason or not to know
 what I said.  I will not take up arms, nor will I learn tactics which I
 did not learn in former times, when the occasion seemed more suitable,
 as every one was arming and in frenzy (you know the illness of the
 weak), nor will I face the martial Anthimus, though he be an untimely
 warrior, being myself unarmed and unwarlike, and thus the more exposed
 to wounds.  Fight with him yourself if you wish (for necessity often
 makes warriors even of the weak), or look out for some one to fight
 when he seizes your mules, keeping guard over a defile, and like Amalek
 of old, barring the way against Israel.  Give me before all things
 quiet.  Why should I fight for sucking pigs and fowls, and those not my
 own, as though for souls and canons?  Why should I deprive the
 Metropolis of the celebrated Sasima, or lay bare and unveil the secret
 of your mind, when I ought to join in concealing it?  Do you then play
 the man and be strong and draw all parties to your own conclusion, as
 the rivers do the winter torrents, without regard for friendship or
 intimacy in good, or for the reputation which such a course will bring
 you.  Give yourself up to the Spirit alone.  I shall gain this only
 from your friendship, that I shall learn not to trust in friends, or to
 esteem anything more valuable than God.

 Ep. XLIX.  To Basil.  (The Praises of Quiet.)

 You accuse me of laziness and idleness, because I did not accept your
 Sasima, and because I have not bestirred myself like a Bishop, and do
 not arm you against each other like a bone thrown into the midst of
 dogs.  My greatest business always is to keep free from business.  And
 to give you an idea of one of my good points, so much do I value
 freedom from business, that I think I might even be a standard to all
 men of this kind of magnanimity, and if only all men would imitate me
 the Churches would have no troubles; nor would the faith, which every
 one uses as a weapon in his private quarrels, be pulled in pieces.

 Ep. L.  To Basil.

 (At the request of Anthimus it would appear that S. Gregory wrote to S.
 Basil a letter, not now extant, proposing a conference between the
 rival Metropolitans.  Basil took umbrage at the well-meant proposal,
 and wrote a stiff letter to S. Gregory, to which the following is the
 reply.)

 How hotly and like a colt you skip in your letters.  Nor do I wonder
 that when you have just become the property of glory you should wish to
 shew me what you find glory to be, so that you may make yourself more
 majestic, like those painters who picture the seasons.  But, to explain
 the whole matter about the Bishops, and the letter by which you were
 annoyed; what was my starting point, and how far I went, and where I
 stopped, appears to me to be too long a matter for a letter, and to be
 a subject not so much for an apology as for a history.  To explain it
 to you concisely:--the most noble Anthimus came to us with certain
 Bishops, whether to visit my Father (this at least was the pretext), or
 to act as he did act.  He sounded me in many ways and on many subjects;
 dioceses, the marshes of Sasima, my ordination,...flattering,
 questioning, threatening, pleading, blaming, praising, drawing circles
 round himself, as though I ought only to look at him and his new
 Metropolis, as being the greater.  Why, I said, do you draw your line
 to include our city, for we too deem our Church to be really a Mother
 of Churches, and that too from ancient times?  In the end he went away
 without having gained his object, much out of breath, and reproaching
 me with Basilism, as if it were a kind of Philipism.  Do you think I
 did you wrong in this?  And now look at the letter from me, who, you
 say, insulted you.  They fashioned a Synodal summons to me; and when I
 declined it and said that the thing was an insult, they then asked as
 an alternative that through me you should be invited to deliberate upon
 these matters.  This I promised, in order to prevent their first plan
 being carried out; placing the whole matter in your hands, if you
 choose to call them together, and where and when.  And if I have not
 injured you in this, tell me where there is room for injury.  If you
 have to learn this from me, I will read you the letter which Anthimus
 sent me, after invading the marshes, notwithstanding my prohibitions
 and threats, insulting and reviling me, and as it were singing a song
 of triumph over my defeat.  And what reason is there that I should
 offend him for your sake and at the same time displease you, as though
 I were currying favour with him?  You ought to have learnt this first,
 my dear friend; and even if it had been so, you should not have
 insulted me,--if only because I am a Priest.  But if you are very much
 disposed to ostentation and quarrelsomeness, and speak as my
 Superior--as the Metropolitan to an insignificant Suffragan, or even as
 to a Bishop without a See--I too have a little pride to set against
 yours.  That is very easy to anybody, and is perhaps the most suitable
 course.

 Ep. LVIII.  To Basil.

 (An attack had been made in Gregory's presence on the orthodoxy of
 Basil in respect of the Deity of God the Holy Ghost; and in this letter
 he gives his friend an account of the way in which he had defended
 him.  Unfortunately Basil was not pleased with the letter, taking it as
 intended to convey reproach under the guise of friendly sympathy.)

 From the first I have taken you, and I take you still, for my guide of
 life and my teacher of the faith, and for every thing honourable that
 can be said; and if any one else praises your merits, he is altogether
 with me, or even behind me, so far am I surpassed by your piety, and so
 thoroughly am I yours.  And no wonder; for the longer the intimacy the
 greater the experience; and where the experience is more abundant the
 testimony is more perfect.  And if I get any profit in life it is from
 your friendship and company.  This is my disposition in regard to these
 matters, and I hope always will be.  What I now write I write
 unwillingly, but still I write it.  Do not be angry with me, or I shall
 be very angry myself, if you do not give me credit for both saying and
 writing it out of goodwill to you.

 Many people have condemned us as not firm in our faith; those, I mean,
 who think and think rightly that we thoroughly agree.  Some openly
 charge us with heresy, others with cowardice; with heresy, those who
 believe that our language is not sound; with cowardice, they who blame
 our reserve.  I need not report what other people say; I will tell you
 what has recently happened.

 There was a party here at which a great many distinguished friends of
 ours were present, and amongst them was a man who wore the name and
 dress which betoken piety (i.e. a Monk).  They had not yet begun to
 drink, but were talking about us, as often happens at such parties, and
 made us rather than anything else the subject of their conversation.
 They admired everything connected with you, and they brought me in as
 professing the same philosophy; and they spoke of our friendship, and
 of Athens, and of our conformity of views and feelings on all points.
 Our Philosopher was annoyed by this.  "What is this, gentlemen?" he
 said, with a very mighty shout, "what liars and flatterers you are.
 You may praise these men for other reasons if you like, and I will not
 contradict you; but I cannot concede to you the most important point,
 their orthodoxy.  Basil and Gregory are falsely praised; the former,
 because his words are a betrayal of the faith, the latter, because his
 toleration aids the treason."

 What is this, said I, O vain man and new Dathan and Abiram in folly?
 Where do you come from to lay down the law for us?  How do you set
 yourself up as a judge of such great matters?  "I have just come," he
 replied, "from the festival of the Martyr Eupsychius [4739] , (and so
 it really was), and there I heard the great Basil speak most
 beautifully and perfectly upon the Godhead of the Father and the Son,
 as hardly anyone else could speak; but he slurred over the Spirit."
 And he added a sort of illustration from rivers, which pass by rocks
 and hollow out sand.  "As for you my good sir," he said, looking at me,
 "you do now express yourself openly on the Godhead of the Spirit," and
 he referred to some remarks of mine in speaking of God at a largely
 attended Synod, as having added in respect of the Spirit that
 expression which has made a noise, (how long shall we hide the candle
 under the bushel?) "but the other man hints obscurely, and as it were,
 merely suggests the doctrine, but does not openly speak out the truth;
 flooding people's ears with more policy than piety, and hiding his
 duplicity by the power of his eloquence."

 "It is," I said, "because I (living as I do in a corner, and unknown to
 most men who do not know what I say, and hardly that I speak at all)
 can philosophize without danger; but his word is of greater weight,
 because he is better known, both on his own account and on that of his
 Church.  And everything that he says is public, and the war around him
 is great, as the heretics try to snatch every naked word from Basil's
 lips, to get him expelled from the Church; because he is almost the
 only spark of truth left and the vital force, all else around having
 been destroyed; so that evil may be rooted in the city, and may spread
 over the whole world as from a centre in that Church.  Surely then it
 is better to use some reserve in the truth, and ourselves to give way a
 little to circumstances as to a cloud, rather than by the openness of
 the proclamation to risk its destruction.  For no harm will come to us
 if we recognize the Spirit as God from other phrases which lead to this
 conclusion (for the truth consists not so much in sound as in sense),
 but a very great injury would be done to the Church if the truth were
 driven away in the person of one man."  The company present would not
 receive my economy, as out of date and mocking them; but they shouted
 me down as practising it rather from cowardice than for reason.  It
 would be much better, they said, to protect our own people by the
 truth, than by your so-called Economy to weaken them while failing to
 win over the others.  It would be a long business and perhaps
 unnecessary to tell you all the details of what I said, and of what I
 heard, and how vexed I was with the opponents, perhaps immoderately and
 contrary to my own usual temper.  But, in fine, I sent them away in the
 same fashion.  But do you O divine and sacred head, instruct me how far
 I ought to go in setting forth the Deity of the Spirit; and what words
 I ought to use, and how far to use reserve; that I may be furnished
 against opponents.  For if I, who more than any one else know both you
 and your opinions, and have often both given and received assurance on
 this point, still need to be taught the truth of this matter, I shall
 be of all men the most ignorant and miserable.

 [4739] He suffered under the Emperor Hadrian.  The Festival was Sept.
 7.

 Ep. LIX.  To Basil.

 (The reply to Basil's somewhat angry answer to the last.)

 This was a case which any wiser man would have foreseen; but I who am
 very simple and foolish did not fear it in writing to you.  My letter
 grieved you; but in my opinion neither rightly nor justly, but quite
 unreasonably.  And whilst you did not acknowledge that you were hurt,
 neither did you conceal it, or if you did it was with great skill, as
 with a mask, hiding your vexation under an appearance of respect.  But
 as to myself if I acted in this deceitfully or maliciously, I shall be
 punished not more by your vexation than by the truth itself; but if in
 simplicity and with my accustomed goodwill, I will lay the blame on my
 own sins rather than on your temper.  But it would have been better to
 have set this matter straight, rather than to be angry with those who
 offer you counsel.  But you must see to your own affairs, inasmuch as
 you are quite capable of giving the same advice to others.  You may
 look upon me as very ready, if God will, both to come to you, and to
 join you in the conflict, and to contribute all that I can.  For who
 would flinch, who would not rather take courage in speaking and
 contending for the truth under you and by your side?

 Ep. LX.  To Basil.

 (Gregory was not able, owing to the serious illness of his Mother, to
 carry out the promise at the end of Ep. LIX.; so he writes to explain
 and excuse himself.)

 The Carrying Out of your bidding depends partly on me; but partly, and
 I venture to think principally, on your Reverence.  What depends on me
 is the good will and eagerness, for I never yet avoided meeting you,
 but have always sought opportunities, and at the present moment am even
 more desirous of doing so.  What depends on your Holiness is that my
 affairs be set straight.  For I am sitting by my lady Mother, who has
 for a long time been suffering from illness.  And if I could leave her
 out of danger you might be well assured that I would not deprive myself
 of the pleasure of going to you.  So give me the help of your prayers
 for her restoration to health, and for my journey to you.

 Division III.

 Miscellaneous Letters.

 §1.  Letters to His Brother Cæsarius.

 Ep. VII.

 (On the death of the Emperor Constantius the undisputed succession
 devolved on his cousin Julian the Apostate, who at once began to employ
 all the power of the Empire to discourage, while not absolutely
 persecuting, Christianity, and to restore the supremacy of the ancient
 Paganism.  One of his first acts was to dismiss all the men who had
 held high dignities under his predecessor.  S. Cæsarius, Gregory's
 brother, was however to be excepted; Julian, who had perhaps known and
 esteemed him at Athens, did all that he could to keep him at Court, and
 to attach him to himself.  This caused much anxiety to Gregory and
 other friends of Cæsarius, who foresaw that Julian would do his utmost
 to shake the young man's faith, and could not feel sure that he would
 have courage to resist such assaults.  In his trouble Gregory wrote him
 the following letter.  Shortly afterwards the expected attempt was
 made.  S. Cæsarius bravely held his ground against the Emperor, and
 after declaring his unalterable determination to hold firm to his
 faith, resigned his office at Court and withdrew to Nazianzus.)

 I have had enough to blush for in you; that I was grieved, it is hardly
 necessary to say to him who of all men knows me best.  But, not to
 speak of my own feelings, or of the distress with which the rumour
 about you filled me (and let me say also the fear), I should have liked
 you, had it been possible, to have heard what was said by others, both
 relations and outsiders, who are any way acquainted with us (Christians
 I mean, of course,) about you and me; and not only some of them, but
 everyone in turn alike; for men are always more ready to philosophize
 about strangers than about their own relations.  Such speeches as the
 following have become a sort of exercise among them:  Now a Bishop's
 son takes service in the army; now he covets exterior power and fame;
 now he is a slave of money, when the fire is being rekindled for all,
 and men are running the race for life; and he does not deem the one
 only glory and safety and wealth to be to stand nobly against the
 times, and to place himself as far as possible out of reach of every
 abomination and defilement.  How then can the Bishop exhort others not
 to be carried along with the times, or to be mixed up with idols?  How
 can he rebuke those who do wrong in other ways, seeing his own home
 takes away his right to speak freely?  We have every day to hear this,
 and even more severe things, some of the speakers perhaps saying them
 from a motive of friendship, and others with unfriendly feelings.  How
 do you think we feel, and what is the state of mind with which we, men
 professing to serve God, and to deem the only good to be to look
 forward to the hopes of the future, hear such things as these?  Our
 venerable Father is very much distressed by all that he hears, which
 even disgusts him with life.  I console and comfort him as best I can,
 by making myself surety for your mind, and assuring him that you will
 not continue thus to grieve us.  But if our dear Mother were to hear
 about you (so far we have kept her in the dark by various devices), I
 think she would be altogether inconsolable; being, as a woman, of a
 weak mind, and besides unable, through her great piety, to control her
 feelings on such matters.  If then you care at all for yourself and us,
 try some better and safer course.  Our means are certainly enough for
 an independent life, at least for a man of moderate desires, who is not
 insatiable in his lust for more.  Moreover, I do not see what occasion
 for your settling down we are to wait for, if we let this one pass.
 But if you cling to the same opinion, and every thing seems to you of
 small account in comparison with your own desires, I do not wish to say
 anything else that may vex you, but this I foretell and protest, that
 one of two things must happen; either you, remaining a genuine
 Christian, will be ranked among the lowest, and will be in a position
 unworthy of yourself and your hopes; or in grasping at honours you will
 injure yourself in what is more important, and will have a share in the
 smoke, if not actually in the fire.

 Ep. XIV. and XXIII.

 (Under the Emperor Valens Cæsarius returned to public life and was made
 Quæstor of Bithynia.  While he was in this office the following letters
 were written to him by his brother on behalf of two cousins, Eulalius,
 who afterwards succeeded Gregory in the Bishopric of Nazianzus, and
 with whom Gregory was on terms of intimate friendship, and
 Amphilochius, who, through the roguery of a partner, had got into some
 trouble at Constantinople about money matters, and for whom he asks aid
 and advice.  Some however think that this letter is not addressed to
 his brother (who may have been at Constantinople at the time), but to
 some other officer of high rank at the Imperial Court.  Amphilochius
 soon after retired from the world, and by a.d. 347 was already bishop
 of the important See of Iconium.  Gregory's letters to him are given
 later in this division.)

 Do a kindness to yourself and to me, of a kind that you will not often
 have an opportunity of doing, because opportunities for such kindnesses
 do not often occur.  Undertake a most righteous protection of my dear
 cousins, who are worried more than enough about a property which they
 bought as suitable for retirement, and capable of providing them with
 some means of living; but after having completed the purchase they have
 fallen into many troubles, partly through finding the vendors
 dishonest, and partly through being plundered and robbed by their
 neighbours, so that it would be a gain to them to get rid of their
 acquisition for the price they gave for it, plus the not small sum they
 have spent on it besides.  If, then, you would like to transfer the
 business to yourself, after examining the contract to see how it may be
 best and most securely done, this course would be most acceptable both
 to them and me; but if you would rather not, the next best course would
 be to oppose yourself to the officiousness and dishonesty of the man,
 that he may not succeed in gaining one advantage over their want of
 business habits, either by wronging them if they retain their property,
 or by inflicting loss upon them if they part with it.  I am really
 ashamed to write to you on such a subject.  All the same, since we owe
 it to them, on account both of their relationship and of their
 profession (for of whom would one rather take care than of such, or
 what would one be more ashamed of than of being unwilling to confer
 such a benefit?) do you either for your own sake, or for mine, or for
 the sake of the men themselves, or for all these sakes put together, by
 all means do them this kindness.

 Ep. XXIII.

 Do not be surprized if I ask of you a great favour; for it is from a
 great man that I am asking it, and the request must be measured by him
 of whom it is made; for it is equally absurd to ask great things from a
 small man, and small things from a great man, the one being
 unseasonable, and the other mean.  I therefore present to you with my
 own hand my most precious son Amphilochius, a man so famous (even
 beyond his years) for his gentlemanly bearing, that I myself, though an
 old man, and a Priest, and your friend, would be quite content to be as
 much esteemed.  What wonder is it if he was cheated by a man's
 pretended friendship, and did not suspect the swindle?  For not being
 himself a rogue, he did not suspect roguery, but thought that
 correction of language rather than of character was what was wanted,
 and therefore entered into partnership with him in business.  What
 blame can attach to him for this with honest men?  Do not then allow
 wickedness to get the better of virtue; and do not dishonour my grey
 hairs, but do honour to my testimony, and add your kindness to my
 benedictions, which are perhaps of some account with God before Whom we
 stand.

 Ep. XX.

 (In a.d. 368 the City of Nicæa in Bithynia was almost entirely
 destroyed by a terrible earthquake.  Cæsarius lost his house, and his
 personal escape was almost miraculous.  Gregory writes (as also did
 Basil) to congratulate him on his escape, and profits by the occasion
 to urge upon him retirement from his secular avocations.  Cæsarius soon
 resolved to follow this advice, and was taking steps to carry this
 resolution into effect, when he died suddenly, early in a.d. 369, aged
 only 40.  He left the whole of his large property to the poor, but it
 fell for a time into the hands of designing persons, and Gregory, who
 was his brother's executor, had much difficulty in recovering it for
 the purpose for which it had been intended.  (See the letter to
 Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople on this subject.)  He was buried
 at Nazianzus in the Church of the Martyrs, in a vault which his parents
 had prepared for themselves.  Gregory preached the funeral sermon,
 which is given in the former part of this volume.  These four are the
 only letters known to have passed between the brothers.)

 Even frights are not without use to the wise; or, as I should say, they
 are very valuable and salutary.  For, although we pray that they may
 not happen, yet when they do they instruct us.  For the afflicted soul,
 as Peter [4740] somewhere admirably says, is near to God; and every man
 who escapes a danger is brought into nearer relation to Him Who
 preserved him.  Let us not then be vexed that we had a share in the
 calamity, but let us give thanks that we were delivered.  And let us
 not shew ourselves one thing to God in the time of peril, and another
 when the danger is over, but let us resolve, whether at home or abroad,
 whether in private life or in public office (for I must say this and
 may not omit it), to follow Him Who has preserved us, and to attach
 ourselves to His side, thinking little of the little concerns of earth;
 and let us furnish a tale to those who come after us, great for our
 glory and the benefit of our soul, and at the same time a very useful
 lesson to all, that danger is better than security, and that misfortune
 is preferable to success, at least if before our fears we belonged to
 the world, but after them we belong to God.  Perhaps I seem to you
 somewhat of a bore, by writing to you so often on the same subject, and
 you will think my letter a piece not of exhortation but of ostentation,
 so enough of this.  You will know that I desire and wish especially
 that I might be with you and share your joy at your preservation, and
 to talk over these matters later on.  But since that cannot be, I hope
 to receive you here as soon as may be, and to celebrate our
 thanksgiving together.

 [4740] Source of the quotation unknown.

 §2.  To S. Gregory of Nyssa.

 (Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, was a younger brother of Basil the Great.
 Ordained a Reader at an early age he grew tired of his vocation, and
 became a professor of Rhetoric.  This gave scandal in the Church and
 occasioned much grief to his friends.  Gregory of Nazianzus, wrote him
 the following letter of remonstrance, which was not without effect, for
 shortly afterwards he gave up his secular avocation, and retired to the
 Monastery which his brother Basil had founded in Pontus.  Here he spent
 several years in the study of Holy Scripture and the best
 Commentators.)

 Ep. I.

 There is one good point in my character, and I will boast myself of one
 point out of many.  I am equally vexed with myself and my friends over
 a bad plan.  Since, then, all are friends and kinsfolk who live
 according to God, and walk by the same Gospel, why should you not hear
 from me in plain words what all men are saying in whispers?  They do
 not approve your inglorious glory (to borrow a phrase from your own
 art), and your gradual descent to the lower life, and your ambition,
 the worst of demons, according to Euripides. [4741] For what has
 happened to you, O wisest of men, and for what do you condemn yourself,
 that you have cast away the sacred and delightful books which you used
 once to read to the people (do not be ashamed to hear this), or have
 hung them up over the chimney, as men do in winter with rudders and
 hoes, and have applied yourself to salt and bitter ones, and preferred
 to be called a Professor of Rhetoric rather than of Christianity?  I,
 thank God, would rather be the latter than the former.  Do not, my dear
 friend, do not let this be longer the case, but, though it is full
 late, become sober again, and come to yourself once more, and make your
 apology to the faithful, and to God, and to His Altars and Sacraments,
 from which you have withdrawn yourself.  And do not say to me in proud
 rhetorical style, What, was I not a Christian when I practised
 rhetoric?  Was I not a believer when I was engaged among the boys?  And
 perhaps you will call God to witness.  No, my friend, not as thoroughly
 as you ought to have been, even if I grant it you in part.  What of the
 offence to others given by your present employment--to others who are
 prone naturally to evil--and of the opportunity afforded them both to
 think and to speak the worst of you?  Falsely, I grant, but where was
 the necessity?  For a man lives not for himself alone but also for his
 neighbour; nor is it enough to persuade yourself, you must persuade
 others also.  If you were to practise boxing in public, or to give and
 receive blows in the theatre, or to writhe and twist yourself
 shamefully, would you speak of yourself as having a temperate soul?
 Such an argument does not befit a wise man; it is frivolous to accept
 it.  If you make a change I shall rejoice even now, said one of the
 Pythagorean philosophers, lamenting the fall of a friend; but, he
 wrote, if not you are dead to me.  But I will not yet say this for your
 sake.  Being a friend, he became an enemy, yet still a friend, as the
 Tragedy says.  But I shall be grieved (to speak gently), if you do
 neither yourself see what is right, which is the highest method of all,
 nor will follow the advice of others, which is the next.  Thus far my
 counsel.  Forgive me that my friendship for you makes me grieve, and
 kindles me both on your behalf and on behalf of the whole priestly
 Order, and I may add on that of all Christians.  And if I may pray with
 you or for you, may God who quickeneth the dead aid your weakness.

 [4741] Phoen., 534.

 Ep. LXXII.

 (When S. Gregory was consecrated Bishop of Nyssa the Imperial Throne
 was occupied by Valens, an ardent Arian, whose mind was bent on the
 destruction of the Nicene Faith.  He appointed, with this object, one
 Demosthenes, a former clerk of the Imperial Kitchen, to be Vicar of the
 civil Diocese of Pontus.  An old quarrel with Basil had made this man
 unfriendly to Gregory, and after persecuting him in various small ways
 for some time he procured, a.d. 275, the summoning of a Synod to
 enquire into some allegations of irregularity in his consecration, and
 to try Gregory on some frivolous charges of malversation of Church
 funds.  Gregory was unable to attend this Synod, which met at Ancyra,
 on account of an attack of pleurisy; and another was summoned to meet
 at Nyssa itself.  Gregory however refused to appear, and was deposed as
 contumacious.  Thereupon Valens banished him, and he seems to have
 fallen into very low spirits, almost into despondency at the apparent
 triumph of the heretical party.  The three letters which follow throw
 some light upon his state at this time.  They were written in answer to
 letters of his now lost, and their object was to comfort him in his
 trouble and to encourage him to take heart again in the hope of a good
 day coming.  This more cheerful tone was justified by the event, for on
 the death of Valens, a.d. 378, the exiled Bishops were restored by
 Gratian, and Gregory was replaced in his Episcopal Throne, to the great
 joy of the faithful of his Diocese.)

 Do not let your troubles distress you too much.  For the less we grieve
 over things, the less grievous they are.  It is nothing strange that
 the heretics have thawed, and are taking courage from the springtime,
 and creeping out of their holes, as you write.  They will hiss for a
 short time, I know, and then will hide themselves again, overcome both
 by the truth and the times, and all the more so the more we commit the
 whole matter to God.

 Ep. LXXIII.

 As to the subject of your letter, these are my sentiments.  I am not
 angry at being overlooked, but I am glad when I am honoured.  The one
 is my own desert, the other is a proof of your respect.  Pray for me.
 Excuse this short letter, for anyhow, though it is short, it is longer
 than silence.

 Ep. LXXIV.

 Although I am at home, my love is expatriated with you, for affection
 makes us have all things common.  Trusting in the mercy of God, and in
 your prayers, I have great hopes that all will turn out according to
 your mind, and that the hurricane will be turned into a gentle breeze,
 and that God will give you this reward for your orthodoxy, that you
 will overcome your opponents.  Most of all I long to see you shortly,
 and to have a good time with you, as I pray.  But if you delay owing to
 the pressure of affairs, at any rate cheer me by a letter, and do not
 disdain to tell me all about your circumstances, and to pray for me, as
 you are accustomed to do.  May God grant you health and good spirits in
 all circumstances,--you who are the common prop of the whole Church.

 Ep. LXXVI.

 (Basil the Great died Jan. 1, a.d. 379.  Gregory of Nazianzus was
 prevented by very serious illness from attending his funeral, and
 therefore wrote as follows to Gregory of Nyssa.)

 This, then, was also reserved for my sad life, to hear of the death of
 Basil, and the departure of that holy soul, which has gone from us that
 it may be with the Lord, for which he had been preparing himself all
 his life.  And among all the other losses I have had to endure this is
 the greatest, that by reason of the bodily sickness from which I am
 still suffering and in great danger, I cannot kiss that holy dust, or
 be with you to enjoy the consolations of a just philosophy, and to
 comfort our common friends.  But to see the desolation of the Church,
 shorn of such a glory, and bereft of such a crown, is what no one, at
 least no one of any feeling, can bear to let his eyes look upon, or his
 ear hearken to.  But you, I think, though you have many friends and
 will receive many words of condolence, yet will not derive comfort so
 much from any as from yourself and your memory of him; for you two were
 a pattern to all of philosophy, a kind of spiritual standard, both of
 discipline in prosperity, and of endurance in adversity; for philosophy
 bears prosperity with moderation and adversity with dignity.  This is
 what I have to say to Your Excellency.  But for myself who write so,
 what time or what words shall comfort me, except your company and
 conversation, which our blessed one has left me in place of all, that
 seeing his character in you as in a bright and shining mirror, I may
 think myself to possess him also!

 Ep. LXXXI.

 You are distressed by your travels, and think yourself unsteady, like a
 stick carried along by a stream.  But, my dear friend, you must not let
 yourself feel so at all.  For the travels of the stick are involuntary,
 but your course is ordained by God, and your stability is in doing good
 to others, even though you are not fixed to a place; unless indeed one
 ought to find fault with the sun, for going about the world scattering
 his rays, and giving life to all things on which he shines; or, while
 praising the fixed stars, one should revile the planets, whose very
 wandering is harmonious.

 Ep. CLXXXII.

 (Gregory after his resignation of the Patriarchal See of Constantinople
 had retired to Nazianzus, and had been persuaded to undertake the
 administration of the diocese then vacant, until the vacancy should be
 filled.  The Bishops of the Province wished him to retain it
 altogether, and therefore were in no hurry to proceed to election.  At
 length however they yielded to the continually expressed wishes of
 Gregory and chose his cousin Eulalius.  Soon however Gregory's enemies
 spread abroad a report that this election had been made against his
 wishes, and with the intention of unfairly ousting him from the
 administration of that Church.  The following letter was written in
 consequence of this slander.)

 Woe is me that my sojourning is prolonged, and, which is the greatest
 of my misfortunes, that war and dissensions are among us, and that we
 have not kept the peace which we received from our holy fathers.  This
 I doubt not you will restore, in the power of the Spirit who upholds
 you and yours.  But let no one, I beg, spread false reports about me
 and my lords the bishops, as though they had proclaimed another bishop
 in my place against my will.  But being in great need, owing to my
 feeble health, and fearing the responsibility of a Church neglected, I
 asked this favour of them, which was not opposed to the Canon Law, and
 was a relief to me, that they would give a Pastor to the Church.  He
 has been given to your prayers, a man worthy of your piety, and I now
 place him in your hands, the most reverend Eulalius, a bishop very dear
 to God, in whose arms I should like to die.  If any be of opinion that
 it is not right to ordain another in the lifetime of a Bishop, let him
 know that he will not in this matter gain any hold upon us.  For it is
 well known that I was appointed, not to Nazianzus, but to Sasima,
 although for a short time out of reverence for my father, I as a
 stranger undertook the government.

 Ep. CXCVII.  A Letter of Condolence on the Death of His Sister
 Theosebia.

 (The writer of the article on Gregory Nyssen in the Dict. Biogr.
 supposes her to have been his wife, but produces no evidence of this
 beyond the ambiguous expression in this letter which speaks of her as
 "the true consort of a priest," but on the other hand she is expressly
 called his Sister in the same letter.  Some writers have imagined that
 she was the wife of Gregory Nazianzen himself, but there is no evidence
 to show that he was ever married.  The date of her death is uncertain,
 but it was probably subsequent to a.d. 381.  It would seem that the
 term Consort might have a general application to those who shared in
 the same work, and consequently the Benedictine Editors regard
 Theosebia as a Deaconess of the Church of Nyssa.)

 I had started in all haste to go to you, and had got as far as
 Euphemias, when I was delayed by the festival which you are celebrating
 in honour of the Holy Martyrs; partly because I could not take part in
 it, owing to my bad health, partly because my coming at so unsuitable a
 time might be inconvenient to you.  I had started partly for the sake
 of seeing you after so long, and partly that I might admire your
 patience and philosophy (for I had heard of it) at the departure of
 your holy and blessed sister, as a good and perfect man, a minister of
 God, who knows better than any the things both of God and man; and who
 regards as a very light thing that which to others would be most heavy,
 namely to have lived with such a soul, and to send her away and store
 her up in the safe garners, like a shock of the threshingfloor gathered
 in due season, [4742] to use the words of Holy Scripture; and that in
 such time that she, having tasted the joys of life, escaped its sorrows
 through the shortness of her life; and before she had to wear mourning
 for you, was honoured by you with that fair funeral honour which is due
 to such as she.  I too, believe me, long to depart, if not as you do,
 which were much to say, yet only less than you.  But what must we feel
 in presence of a long prevailing law of God which has now taken my
 Theosebia (for I call her mine because she lived a godly life; for
 spiritual kindred is better than bodily), Theosebia, the glory of the
 church, the adornment of Christ, the helper of our generation, the hope
 of woman; Theosebia, the most beautiful and glorious among all the
 beauty of the Brethren; Theosebia, truly sacred, truly consort of a
 priest, and of equal honour and worthy of the Great Sacraments, [4743]
 Theosebia, whom all future time shall receive, resting on immortal
 pillars, that is, on the souls of all who have known her now, and of
 all who shall be hereafter.  And do not wonder that I often invoke her
 name.  For I rejoice even in the remembrance of the blessed one.  Let
 this, a great deal in few words, be her epitaph from me, and my word of
 condolence for you, though you yourself are quite able to console
 others in this way through your philosophy in all things.  Our meeting
 (which I greatly long for) is prevented by the reason I mentioned.  But
 we pray with one another as long as we are in the world, until the
 common end, to which we are drawing nigh, overtake us.  Wherefore we
 must bear all things, since we shall not for long have either to
 rejoice or to suffer.

 [4742] Job v. 26.

 [4743] Referring to her office as a Deaconess.

 §3.  To Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.

 Ep. XLII.

 (This letter, urging his friend to attend at Cæsarea for the election
 of a Metropolitan in succession to Eusebius, has been already given in
 the second division of this Selection.)

 Ep. XLIV.

 (Eusebius, having in response to the appeal referred to above, betaken
 himself to Cæsarea, the Elder Gregory, though in very feeble health,
 resolved to attend the Synod in person, that Basil's Election might be
 secured by their joint exertions, Gregory the Younger sent the
 following letter by his father to explain to his friend the reason why
 he had not come too.  The date is about September of the year 379.)

 Whence shall I begin your praises, and by what name shall I give you
 your right appellation?  The pillar and ground of the church, or a
 light in the world, using the very words of the apostle, or a crown of
 glory to the remaining portion of christendom; [4744] or a gift of God,
 or the bulwark of your country, or the standard of faith, or the
 ambassador of truth, or all these at once, and more than all?  And
 these excessive praises I will prove by what we shall see.  What rain
 ever came so seasonably to a thirsty land, what water flowing out of
 the rock to those in the wilderness?  What such Bread of Angels did
 ever man eat?  When did Jesus the common Lord ever so seasonably
 present Himself to His drowning disciples, and tame the sea, and save
 the perishing, as you have shewn yourself to us in our weariness and
 distress, and in our immediate danger as it were of shipwreck?  I need
 not speak of other points, with what courage and joy you filled the
 souls of the orthodox, and how many you delivered from despair.

 But our mother church, Cæsarea I mean, is now really putting off the
 garments of her widowhood at the sight of you, and putting on again her
 robe of cheerfulness, and will be yet more resplendent when she
 receives a pastor worthy of herself and of her former Bishops and of
 your hands.  For you yourself see what is the state of our affairs, and
 what a miracle your zeal has wrought, and your toil, and your godly
 plainness of speech.  Age is renewed, disease is conquered, [4745] they
 leap who were in their beds, and the weak are girded with power.  By
 all this I guess that our matters too will turn out as we desire.  You
 have my father, moreover, representing both himself and me, to put a
 glorious close to his whole life and to his venerable age by this
 present struggle on behalf of the Church.  And I shall receive him
 back, I am well assured, strengthened by your prayers, and with youth
 renewed, for one must confidently commit all in faith to them.  But if
 he should end his life in this anxiety, it would be no calamity to
 attain to such an end in such a cause.  Pardon me, I beg of you, if I
 give way a little to the tongues of evil men, and delay a little to
 come and embrace you, and to complete in person what I now pass over of
 the praises due to you.

 [4744] Alluding to his work in opposing the prevalence of Arianism.

 [4745] Alluding to the effort made by his father.

 Ep. LXIV.

 (In the year 374 Eusebius and other orthodox Bishops of the East were
 banished by Valens and their thrones filled with Arian intruders.
 Eusebius was ordered to retire to Thrace, and his journey lay through
 Cappadocia, where he saw Basil, but Gregory to his great grief was too
 unwell to leave his house and go to meet him.  Instead he sent the
 following letter.)

 When Your Reverence was passing through our country I was so ill as not
 to be able even to look out of my house.  And I was grieved not so much
 on account of the illness, though it brought about the fear of the
 worst, as by the inability to meet your holiness and goodness.  My
 longing to see your venerable face was like that which a man would
 naturally feel who needed healing of spiritual wounds, and expected to
 receive it from you.  But though at that time the effect of my sins was
 that I missed the meeting with you, it is now by your goodness possible
 for me to find a remedy for my trouble, for if you will deign to
 remember me in your acceptable prayers, this will be to me a store of
 every blessing from God, both in this my life and in the age to come.
 For that such a man, such a combatant for the Faith of the Gospel, one
 who has endured such persecutions, and won for himself such confidence
 before the all-righteous God by his patience in tribulation--that such
 a man should deign to be my patron also in his prayers will gain for
 me, I am persuaded, as much strength as I should have gained through
 one of the holy martyrs.  Therefore let me entreat you to remember your
 Gregory without ceasing in all the matters in which I desire to be
 worthy of your remembrance.

 Ep. LXV.

 (Eusebius having replied to the former letter Gregory wrote again,
 having an opportunity of communicating with his friend through one
 Eupraxius, a disciple of Eusebius, who passed through Cappadocia on his
 way to visit his master.  This letter is sometimes attributed to
 Basil.)

 Our reverend brother Eupraxius has always been dear to me and a true
 friend, but he has shewn himself dearer and truer through his
 affections for you, inasmuch as even at the present time he has hurried
 to your reverence, like, to use David's words, a hart to quench his
 great and unendurable thirst [4746] with a sweet and pure spring at
 your patience in tribulations.  Deign then to be his patron and mine.

 Happy indeed are they who are permitted to come near you, and happier
 still is he who can place upon his sufferings for Christ's sake and
 upon his labours for the truth, a crown such as few of those who fear
 God have obtained.  For it is not an untested virtue that you have
 shown, nor is it only, in a time of calm that you have sailed aright
 and steered the souls of others, but you have shone in the difficulties
 of temptations, and have been greater than your persecutors, having
 nobly departed from the land of your birth.  Others possess the
 threshold of their fathers,--we the heavenly City; others perhaps hold
 our throne, but we Christ.  O what a profitable exchange!  How little
 we give up, to receive how much!  We went through fire and water, and I
 believe that we shall also come out into a place of refreshment.  For
 God will not forsake us for ever, or abandon the true faith to
 persecution, but according to the multitude of our pains His comforts
 shall make us glad.  This at any rate we believe and desire.  But do
 you, I beg, pray for our humility.  And as often as occasion shall
 present itself bless us without hesitation by a letter, and cheer us up
 by news of yourself, as you have just been good enough to do.

 [4746] Ps. xliii. 1.

 Ep. LXVI.

 (The following letter is sometimes attributed to Basil, and is found in
 his works as well as in those of Gregory.  The mss. however, with only
 a single exception, give it to the latter.)

 You give me pleasure both by writing and remembering me, and a much
 greater pleasure by sending me your blessing in your letter.  But if I
 were worthy of your sufferings and of your conflicts for Christ and
 through Christ I should have been counted worthy also to come to you,
 to embrace Your Piety, and to take example by your patience in your
 sufferings.  But since I am not worthy of this, being troubled with
 many afflictions and hindrances I do what is next best.  I address Your
 Perfection, and I beg you not to be weary of remembering me.  For to be
 deemed worthy of your letters is not only profitable to me, but is also
 a matter to boast of to many people, and is an honour, because I am
 considered by a man of so great virtue, and such near relations with
 God, that he can bring others also by word and example into relation to
 Him.

 §4.  To Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople.

 (Sophronius, a native of the Cappadocian Cæsarea, was an early friend
 and fellow-student of Gregory and Basil.  He entered the Civil Service,
 and soon rose to high office.  In a.d. 365 he was appointed Prefect of
 Constantinople, as a reward for timely intimation which he gave to the
 Emperor Valens of the usurpation attempted by Procopius.  He is chiefly
 known to us by the letters of Gregory and Basil, invoking his good
 offices for various persons.  Ep. 21 was written in a.d. 369 to commend
 to him Nicobulus, Gregory's nephew by marriage, the husband of
 Alypiana, daughter of his sister Gorgonia.  This Nicobulus was a man of
 great wealth and ability, but much disinclined for public life.
 Gregory constantly writes to one and another high official to get him
 excused from appointments which had been thrust upon him.)

 Ep. XXI.

 Gold is changed and transformed into various forms at various times,
 being fashioned into many ornaments, and used by art for many purposes;
 yet it remains what it is--gold; and it is not the substance but the
 form which admits of change.  So also, believing that your kindness
 will remain unchanged for your friends, although you are ever climbing
 higher, I have ventured to send you this request, because I do not more
 reverence your high rank than I trust your kind disposition.  I entreat
 you to be favourable to my most respectable son Nicobulus, who is in
 all respects allied with me, both by kindred and by intimacy, and,
 which is more important, by disposition.  In what matters, and to what
 extent?  In whatever he may ask your aid, and as far as may seem to you
 to befit your Magnanimity.  I on my part will repay you the best I
 have.  I have the power of speech, and of proclaiming your goodness, if
 not nearly according to its worth, at any rate to the best of my
 ability.

 Ep. XXII.

 (Is for Amphilochius, written at the same time and in consequence of
 the same trouble as that which we have placed second of the letters to
 Cæsarius.)

 As we know gold and stones by their look, so too we may distinguish
 good men from bad in the same way, and do not need a very long trial.
 For I should not have needed many words in pleading for my most
 honourable son Amphilochius with Your Magnanimity.  I should rather
 have expected some strange and incredible thing to happen than that he
 would do anything dishonourable, or think of such a thing, in a matter
 of money; such a universal reputation has he as a gentleman, and as
 wiser than his years.  But what must he suffer?  Nothing escapes envy,
 for some word of blame has touched even him, a man who has fallen under
 accusation of crime through simplicity rather than depravity of
 disposition.  But do not allow it to be tolerable to you to overlook
 him in his vexations and trouble.  Not so, I entreat your sacred and
 great mind, but honour your country [4747] and aid his virtue, and have
 a respect for me who have attained to glory by and through you; and be
 everything to this man, adding the will to the power, for I know that
 there is nothing of equal power with Your Excellency.

 [4747] Sophronius and Amphilochius were natives of Cæsarea.

 Ep. XXIX.

 (Of the same year.  Here Cæsarius had bequeathed all his property to
 the poor; but his house had been looted by his servants, and his
 friends could only find a comparatively small sum.  Besides this a
 number of persons, shortly afterwards, presented themselves as
 creditors of his estate, and their claims, though incapable of proof,
 were paid.  Then others kept coming forward, until at last the family
 refused to admit any more.  Then a lawsuit was threatened.  Gregory
 intensely disliking all this, and dreading moreover the scandal which
 might be caused by legal proceedings, writes as follows to the
 Prefect.)

 You see how matters stand with me, and how the circle of human affairs
 goes round, now some now others flourishing or the reverse, and neither
 prosperity nor adversity remaining constant with us, as the saying is,
 but ever changing and altering, so that one might trust the breezes, or
 letters written in the waters, rather than human prosperity.  For what
 reason is this?  I think it is in order that by the contemplation of
 the uncertainty and anomaly of all these things we may learn the rather
 to have recourse to God and to the future, giving scanty thoughts to
 shadows and dreams.  But what has produced this talk, for it is not
 without a cause that I thus philosophize, and I am not idly boasting?

 Cæsarius was once one of your not least distinguished friends; indeed,
 unless my brotherly affection deceives me, he was one of your most
 distinguished, for he was remarkably well informed, and for gentlemanly
 conduct was above the average, and was celebrated for the number of his
 friends; among the very first of these, as he always thought and as he
 persuaded me, Your Excellency held the first place.  These are old
 stories, and you will add to them of your own accord in rendering
 honours to his memory; for it is human nature to add something to the
 praises of the departed.  But now (that you may not pass over this
 story without a tear, or that you may weep to some good and useful
 purpose), he lies dead, friendless, solitary, pitiable, deemed worthy
 of a little myrrh (if even of so much), and of the last small
 coverings, and it is much that he has found even thus much compassion.
 But his enemies, as I hear, have fallen upon his estate, and from all
 quarters with great violence are plundering it, or are about to do so.
 O cruelty!  O savagery!  And there is no one to hinder them; but even
 the kindest of his friends only calls upon the laws as his utmost
 favour.  If I may put it concisely, I am become a mere drama, who once
 was wont to be happy.  Do not let this seem to you to be tolerable, but
 help me by sympathy and by sharing my indignation, and do right by the
 dead Cæsarius.  Yes, in the name of friendship herself; yes, by all
 that you hold dearest; by your hope (which may you make secure by
 shewing yourself faithful and true to the departed), I pray you do this
 kindness to the living, and make them of good hope.  Do you think that
 I am grieved about the money?  It would have been a more intolerable
 disgrace to me if Cæsarius alone, who thought he had so many friends,
 turned out to have none.  Such is my request, and from such a cause
 does it arise, for perhaps my affairs are not altogether matters of
 indifference to you.  In what you will assist me, and by what means,
 and how, the matter itself will suggest and your wisdom will consider.

 Ep. XXXVII.

 (A letter of recommendation for Eudoxius a Rhetorician for whom Gregory
 had a warm regard.)

 To honour a mother is a religious duty.  Now, different individuals
 have different mothers; but the common mother of all is our country.
 This mother you have honoured by the splendour of your whole life; and
 you will honour her again now by obtaining for me that which I
 entreat.  And what is my request?  You certainly know Eudoxius the
 Rhetorician, the most learned of her sons.  His son, to speak
 concisely, another Eudoxius both in life and learning, now approaches
 you through me.  In order then to get yourself a yet better name, be
 helpful to him in the matters for which he asks your assistance.  For
 it were a shame were you, who are the universal Patron of our Country,
 and who have done good to so many, and I will add, who will yet
 continue to do so, should not honour above all him who is most
 excellent in learning and in his eloquence, which you ought to honour,
 if for no other reason, because he uses it to praise your goodness.

 Ep. XXXIX.

 (About the same date.  A recommendation of one Amazonius, whose
 learning was much respected by Gregory.)

 I wish well to all my friends.  And when I speak of friends, I mean
 honourable and good men, linked with me in virtue, if indeed I myself
 have any claim to it.  Therefore at the present time when seeking how I
 might do a kindness to my excellent brother Amazonius (for I was very
 much pleased with the man in some intercourse which has lately taken
 place between us), I thought I might return him one favour for all,--in
 your friendship and protection.  For in a short time he shewed proof of
 an extensive education, both of the kind which I used once to be very
 zealous for, when I was shortsighted, and of that for which I am
 zealous in its place since I have been able to contemplate the summit
 of virtue.  Whether I in my turn have appeared to him to be worth
 anything in respect of virtue is his affair.  At any rate I shewed him
 the best things I have, namely, my friends to him as my friend.  Of
 these I reckon you as the first and truest, and want you to shew
 yourself so to him--as your common Country demands, and my desire and
 promise begs; for I promised him your patronage in return for all his
 kindness.

 Ep. XCIII.

 (Written soon after Gregory's resignation of the Archbishopric.)

 Our retreat and leisure and quiet have about them something very
 agreeable to me; but the fact that they cut me off from your friendship
 and society is not so advantageous but rather the other way.  Others
 enjoy your Perfection, to me it would be really a great boon if I might
 have just that shadow of conversation which comes in a letter.  Shall I
 see you again?  Shall I embrace again him of whom I am so proud, and
 shall this be granted to the remnant of my life?  If so, all thanks to
 God:  if not, the best part of my life is over.  Pray remember your
 friend Gregory and pray for him.

 Ep. CXXXV.

 (About the middle of a.d. 382 Theodosius, on the recommendation of S.
 Damasus, summoned a new Synod of Eastern Bishops to meet at
 Constantinople, to try and heal the schism which had been embittered by
 the election of Flavian at Antioch.  As soon as Gregory heard of the
 convocation of this Synod he wrote to several of his influential
 friends at Court, to beg them to do their utmost for the promotion of
 peace.)

 I am philosophizing at leisure.  That is the injury my enemies have
 done me, and I should be glad if they would do more of the same sort,
 that I might look upon them still more as benefactors.  For it often
 happens that those who are wronged get a benefit, while they, whom we
 would treat well, suffer injury.  That is the state of my affairs.  But
 if I cannot make every one believe this, I am very anxious, that at all
 events you, for them all, to whom I most willingly give an account of
 my affairs, should know, or rather I feel certain that you do know it,
 and can persuade those who do not.  You, however, I beg to give all
 diligence, now at any rate, if you have not done so before, to bring
 together to one voice and mind the sections of the world that are so
 unhappily divided; and above all if you should perceive, as I have
 observed, that they are divided not on account of the Faith, but by
 petty private interests.  To succeed in doing this would earn you a
 reward; and my retirement would have less to grieve over if I could see
 that I did not grasp at it to no purpose, but was like a Jonas,
 willingly casting myself into the sea, that the storm might cease and
 the sailors be saved.  If, however, they are still as storm-tost as
 ever, I at all events have done what I could.

 §5. To Amphilochius the Younger.

 Ep. IX.

 (Constantine and Constantius had granted exemption from the military
 tax to all clerics.  This privilege was, however, abolished by Julian,
 and was restored by Valentinian and Valens:  but the collectors of
 revenue often tried to levy it on them in spite of the exemption.  The
 collector at Nazianzus tried to do this in the case of a Deacon named
 Euthalius, in whose behalf Gregory wrote the following letter to
 Amphilochius, who was at the time one of the principal magistrates of
 the province.  The date of the letter is given as a.d. 372, the year of
 Gregory's Ordination to the Priesthood.  For further particulars about
 this Amphilochius, see introd. to letters II. and III. to Cæsarius Epp.
 22, 23.)

 Support a wellbuilt chamber with columns of gold, as Pindar [4748]
 says, and make yourself from the beginning known to us on the right
 side in our present anxiety, that you may build yourself a notable
 palace, and shew yourself in it with a good fame.  But how will you do
 this?  By honouring God and the things of God, than Whom there can be
 nothing greater in your eyes.  But how, and by what act can you honour
 Him?  By this one act, by protecting the servants of God and ministers
 of the altar.  One of these is our fellow deacon Euthalius, on whom, I
 know not how, the officers of the Prefecture are trying to impose a
 payment of gold after his promotion to the higher rank.  Pray do not
 allow this.  Reach a hand to this deacon and to the whole clergy, and
 above all to me, for whom you care; for otherwise he would have to
 endure a grievous wrong, alone of men deprived of the kindness of the
 time and the privilege granted by the Emperor to the Clergy, and would
 even be insulted and fined, possibly on account of my weakness.  It
 would be well for you to prevent this even if others are not well
 disposed.

 [4748] Olymp., Od. vi., 1.

 Ep. XIII.

 (See the first letter to Sophronius.  The nature of the trouble here
 alluded to is unknown.  There are several letters to various persons in
 reference to his troubles and difficulties, many of them coming from
 his reluctance to undertake the duties of any public office.  He died
 at an early age, leaving his widow, Alypiana, with a large family to
 bring up in very reduced circumstances.  Her troubles and the education
 of her children were matters of much concern to Gregory, whose frequent
 letters on the subject will be found below.)

 I approve the statement of Theognis, who, while not praising the
 friendship which goes no further than cups and pleasures, praises that
 which extends to actions in these words,

 Beside a full wine cup a man has many friends:

 But they are fewer when grave troubles press.

 We, however, have not shared winecups with each other, nor indeed have
 we often met (though we ought to have been very careful to do so, both
 for our own sake, and for the sake of the friendship which we inherited
 from our fathers), but we do ask for the goodwill which shews itself in
 acts.  A struggle is at hand, and a very serious struggle.  My son
 Nicobulus has got into unexpected troubles, from a quarter from which
 troubles would least be looked for.  Therefore I beg you to come and
 help us as soon as you can, both to take part in trying the case, and
 to plead our cause, if you find that a wrong is being done us.  But if
 you cannot come, at any rate do not let yourself be previously retained
 by the other side, or sell for a small gain the freedom which we know
 from everybody's testimony has always characterized you.

 Ep. XXV.

 (Amphilochius was acquitted of the charges made against him, referred
 to in former letters; but the result of the accusation on his own mind
 was such that he resigned his office, and retired to a sort of
 hermitage at a place called Ozizala, not far from Nazianzus, where he
 devoted his hours of labour to the cultivation of vegetables.  The four
 letters which follow are of no special importance, and are only given
 as specimens of the lighter style which Gregory could use with his
 intimate friends.)

 I did not ask you for bread, just as I would not ask for water from the
 inhabitants of Ostracine.  But if I were to ask for vegetables from a
 man of Ozizala it were no strange thing, nor too great a strain on
 friendship; for you have plenty of them, and we a great dearth.  I beg
 you then to send me some vegetables, and plenty of them, and the best
 quality, or as many as you can (for even small things are great to the
 poor); for I am going to receive the great Basil, and you, who have had
 experience of him full and philosophical, would not like to know him
 hungry and irritated.

 Ep. XXVI.

 What a very small quantity of vegetables you have sent me!  They must
 surely be golden vegetables!  And yet your whole wealth consists of
 orchards and rivers and groves and gardens, and your country is
 productive of vegetables as other lands are of gold, and

 You dwell among meadowy leafage.

 But corn is for you a fabulous happiness, and your bread is the bread
 of angels, as the saying is, so welcome is it, and so little can you
 reckon upon it.  Either, then, send me your vegetables less grudgingly,
 or--I won't threaten you with anything else, but I won't send you any
 corn, and will see whether there is any truth in the saying that
 grasshoppers live on dew!

 Ep. XXVII.

 You make a joke of it; but I know the danger of an Ozizalean starving
 when he has taken most pains with his husbandry.  There is only this
 praise to be given them, that even if they die of hunger they smell
 sweet, and have a gorgeous funeral.  How so?  Because they are covered
 with plenty of all sorts of flowers.

 Ep. XXVIII.

 In visiting the mountain cities which border on Pamphylia I fished up
 in the Mountains a sea Glaucus; I did not drag the fish out of the
 depths with a net of flax, but I snared my game with the love of a
 friend.  And having once taught my Glaucus to travel by land, I sent
 him as the bearer of a letter to Your Goodness.  Please receive him
 kindly, and honour him with the hospitality commended in the Bible, not
 forgetting the vegetables.

 Ep. LXII.

 (The Armenian referred to is probably Eustathius Bishop of Sebaste, the
 capital of Armenia Minor.  He had been a disciple of Arius, but more
 than once professed the Nicene Faith, changing his opinions with his
 company.  His personal character however stood very high, and for a
 long time S. Basil regarded him with affectionate esteem.  Indeed S.
 Basil's Rule for Monks is based on one drawn up by him.  But after
 Basil's elevation to the Episcopate Eustathius began to oppose him and
 to calumniate him on all sides, and even entered openly into communion
 with the Arians.  It would seem that this man tried to get Amphilochius
 round to his side, and through him Gregory.)

 The Injunction of your inimitable Honour is not barbaric, but Greek, or
 rather christian; but as for the Armenian on whom you pride yourself
 so, he is a downright barbarian, and far from our honour.

 Ep. LXIII.  To Amphilochius the Elder.

 (In a.d. 374 Amphilochius was made Bishop of Iconium; and his father, a
 man of the same name, was deeply aggrieved at being thus deprived of
 his son, to whom he had looked to support him in his old age, and
 accused Gregory of being the cause.  Gregory, who had just lost his own
 father, writes to undeceive him, and to convince him how much he dreads
 the burden of the responsibilities of the episcopate for his friend as
 well as for himself.)

 Are you grieving?  I, of course, am full of joy!  Are you weeping?  I,
 as you see, am keeping festival and glorying in the present state of
 things!  Are you grieved because your son is taken from you and
 promoted to honour on account of his virtue, and do you think it a
 terrible misfortune that he is no longer with you to tend your old age,
 and, as his custom is, to bestow on you all due care and service?  But
 it is no grief to me that my father has left me for the last journey,
 from which he will return to me no more, and I shall never see him
 again!  Then I for my part do not blame you, nor do I ask you for due
 condolence, knowing as I do that private troubles allow no leisure for
 those of strangers; for no man is so friendly and so philosophical as
 to be above his own suffering and to comfort another when needing
 comfort himself.  But you on the contrary heap blow on blow, when you
 blame me, as I hear you do, and think that your son and my brother is
 neglected by us, or even betrayed by us, which is a still heavier
 charge; or that we do not recognize the loss which all his friends and
 relatives have suffered, and I more than all, because I had placed in
 him my hopes of life, and looked upon him as the only bulwark, the only
 good counsellor, and the only sharer of my piety.  And yet, on what
 grounds do you form this opinion?  If on the first, be assured that I
 came over to you on purpose, and because I was troubled by the rumour,
 and I was ready to share your deliberations while it was still time for
 consultation about the matter; and you imparted anything to me rather
 than this, whether because you were in the same distress, or with some
 other purpose, I know not what.  But if the last, I was prevented from
 meeting you again by my grief, and the honour I owed my father, and his
 funeral, over which I could not give anything precedence, and that when
 my sorrow was fresh, and it would not only have been wrong but also
 quite improper to be unseasonably philosophical, and above human
 nature.  Moreover, I thought that I was previously engaged by the
 circumstances, especially as his had come to such a conclusion as
 seemed good to Him who governs all our affairs.  So much concerning
 this matter.  Now I beg you to put aside your grief, which is most
 unreasonable I am sure; and if you have any further grievance, bring it
 forward that you may not grieve both me in part and yourself, and put
 yourself in a position unworthy of your nobility, blaming me instead of
 others, though I have done you no wrong, but, if I must say the truth,
 have been equally tyrannized over by our common friend, although you
 used to think me your only benefactor.

 Ep. CLXXI.  To Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium.

 Scarcely yet delivered from the pains of my illness, I hasten to you,
 the guardian of my cure.  For the tongue of a priest meditating of the
 Lord raises the sick.  Do then the greater thing in your priestly
 ministration, and loose the great mass of my sins when you lay hold of
 the Sacrifice of Resurrection.  For your affairs are a care to me
 waking or sleeping, and you are to me a good plectrum, and have made a
 welltuned lyre to dwell within my soul, because by your numerous
 letters you have trained my soul to science.  But, most reverend
 friend, cease not both to pray and to plead for me when you draw down
 the Word by your word, when with a bloodless cutting you sever the Body
 and Blood of the Lord, using your voice for the glaive. [4749]

 [4749] A very clear assertion of the Real Presence.

 Ep. CLXXXIV.

 (Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia in Cappadocia Secunda, who had apparently
 taken a prominent part in the election and consecration of Eulalius to
 the See of Nazianzus, was accused of heresy by Helladius Archbishop of
 Cæsarea, and a Council met at Parnassus to try him, a.d. 383.  Gregory,
 not being able personally to attend this Synod, writes to Amphilochius,
 to beg him to undertake the defence of the accused.  The letter is
 lost, but Gregory's friend carried out his mission with success, and
 the following letter is to thank him for his kindness.)

 The Lord fulfil all thy petitions (do not despise a father's prayer),
 for you have abundantly refreshed my age, both by having gone to
 Parnassus, as you were invited to do, and by having refuted the calumny
 against the most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop.  For evil men love to
 set down their own faults to those who convict them.  For the age of
 this man is stronger than all the accusations, and so is his life, and
 we too who have often heard from him and taught others, and those whom
 he has recovered from error and added to the common body of the church;
 but yet the present evil times called for more accurate proof on
 account of the slanderers and evil-disposed; and this you have supplied
 us with, or rather you have supplied it to those who are of fickler
 mind and easily led away by such men.  But if you will undertake a
 longer journey, and will personally give testimony, and settle the
 matter with the other bishops, you will be doing a spiritual work
 worthy of your Perfection.  I and those with me salute your Fraternity.

 §6.  To Nectarius Archbishop of Constantinople.

 (Gregory, having failed to persuade the Council of a.d. 381 to end the
 schism at Antioch by recognizing Paulinus as successor to Meletius,
 thought it best for the sake of peace to resign the Archbishopric.  The
 Council elected in his place Nectarius, a catechumen at the time, who
 was Prætor of Constantinople, and he was consecrated and enthroned June
 9, 381.  Gregory always maintained cordial relations with him; and the
 following letter was written in answer to the formal announcement of
 his election.)

 Ep. LXXXVIII.

 It was needful that the Royal Image should adorn the Royal City.  For
 this reason it wears you upon its bosom, as was fitting, with the
 virtues and the eloquence, and the other beauties with which the Divine
 Favour has conspicuously enriched you.  Us it has treated with utter
 contempt, and has cast away like refuse and chaff or a wave of the
 sea.  But since friends have a common interest in each other's affairs,
 I claim a share in your welfare, and feel myself a partaker in your
 glory and the rest of your prosperity.  Do you also, as is fitting,
 partake of the anxieties and reverses of your exiles, and not only (as
 the tragedians say) hold and stick to happy circumstances, but also
 take your part with your friend in troubles; that you may be perfectly
 just, living justly and equally in respect of friendship and of your
 friends.  May good fortune abide with you long, that you may do yet
 more good; yes, may it be with you irrevocably and eternally, after
 your prosperity here, unto the passage to that other world.

 Ep. XCI.

 (A letter of no great importance, except as shewing the friendly
 feelings which Gregory continued to maintain towards his successor.)

 Affairs with us go on as usual:  we are quiet without strifes and
 disputes, valuing as we do the reward (which has no risk attaching to
 it) of silence, beyond everything.  And we have derived some profit
 from this rest, having by God's mercy fairly recovered from our
 illness.  Do you ride on and reign, as holy David says, [4750] and may
 God, Who has honoured you with Priesthood, accompany you throughout,
 and set it for you above all slander.  And that we may give each other
 a proof of our courage, and may not suffer any human calamity as we
 stand before God, I send this message to you, and do you promptly
 assent to it.  There are many reasons which make me very anxious about
 our very dear Pancratius.  Be good enough to receive him kindly, and to
 commend him to the best of your friends, that he may attain his
 object.  His object is through some kind of military service to obtain
 relief from public office, though there is no single kind of life that
 is unexposed to the slanders of worthless men, as you very well know.

 [4750] Ps. xlv. 4.

 Ep. CLI.

 (Written about a.d. 382, commending his friend George, a deacon of
 Nazianzus, to the good offices of the Archbishop and the Count of the
 Domestics, or Master of the Imperial Household, on account of his
 private troubles and anxieties.)

 People in general make a very good guess at your disposition--or
 rather, they do not conjecture, but they do not refuse to believe me
 when I pride myself on the fact that you deem me worthy of no small
 respect and honour.  One of these people is my very precious son
 George, who having fallen into many losses, and being very much
 overwhelmed by his troubles, can find only one harbour of safety,
 namely, to be introduced to you by us, and to obtain some favour at the
 hands of the Most Illustrious the Count of the Domestics.  Grant them
 this favour, either to him and his need, or else, if you prefer it, to
 me, to whom I know you have resolved to grant all favours; and facts
 also persuade me that this is true of you.

 Ep. CLXXXV.

 (See Introduction to Ep. CLXXXIV. above, p. 469.  Bosporius was to be
 sent to Constantinople that his cause might there be tried in the Civil
 Courts.  Gregory therefore writes to the Archbishop to point out what a
 serious infringement of the rights of the Church this would be.
 Probably the attitude which Nectarius took up at the suggestion of
 Gregory was the occasion of the Edict which Theodosius addressed in
 February, a.d. 384 or 5, to the Augustal Prefect, withdrawing all
 clerics from the jurisdiction of the civil tribunals, and placing them
 under the exclusive control of the episcopal courts.)

 Whenever different people praise different points in you, and all are
 pushing forward your good fame, as in a marketplace, I contribute
 whatever I can, and not less than any of them, because you deign also
 to honour me, to cheer my old age, as a well-beloved son does that of
 his father.  For this reason I now also venture to offer to you this
 appeal on behalf of the Most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop Bosporius;
 though ashamed on the one hand that such a man should need any letter
 from me, since his venerable character is assured both by his daily
 life and by his age; and on the other hand not less ashamed to keep
 silence and not to say a word for him, while I have a voice, and honour
 faith, and know the man most intimately.  The controversy about the
 dioceses you will no doubt yourself resolve according to the grace of
 the Spirit which is in you, and to the order of the canons.  But I hope
 Your Reverence will see that it is not to be endured that our affairs
 are to be posted up in the secular courts.  For even if they who are
 judges of such courts are Christians, as by the mercy of God they are,
 what is there in common between the Sword and the Spirit?  And even if
 we yield this point, how or where can it be just that a dispute
 concerning the faith should be interwoven with the other questions?  Is
 our God-beloved Bishop Bosporius to-day a heretic?  Is it to-day that
 his hoar hair is set in the balance, who has brought back so many from
 their error, and has given so great proof of his orthodoxy, and is a
 teacher of us all?  No, I entreat you, do not give place to such
 slanders; but if possible reconcile the opposing parties and add this
 to your praises; but if this may not be, at all events do not allow us
 all, (with whom he has lived, and with whom he has grown old,) to be
 outraged by such insolence,--us whom you know to be accurate preachers
 of the Gospel, both when to be so was dangerous, and when it is free
 from risk; and to be unable to endure any detraction from the One
 Unapproachable Godhead.  And I beg you to pray for me who am suffering
 from serious illness.  I and all who are with me salute the brethren
 who surround you.  May you, strong and of good courage and of good fame
 in the Lord, grant to us and the Churches the support which all in
 common demand.

 Ep. CLXXXVI.

 (A letter of introduction for a relative.)

 What would you have done if I had come in person and taken up your
 time?  I am quite certain you would have undertaken with all zeal to
 deliver me from the slander, if I may take as a token what has happened
 before.  Do me this favour, then, through my most discreet kinswoman
 who approaches you through me, reverencing first the age of your
 petitioner, and next her disposition and piety, which is more than is
 ordinarily found in a woman; and besides this, her ignorance in
 business-matters, and the troubles now brought upon her by her own
 relations; and above all, my entreaty.  The greatest favour you can do
 me is speed in the benefit for which I am asking.  For even the unjust
 judge in the Gospel [4751] shewed kindness to the widow, though only
 after long beseeching and importunity.  But from you I ask for speed,
 that she may not be overwhelmed by being long burdened with anxieties
 and miseries in a foreign land; though I know quite well that Your
 Piety will make that alien land to be a fatherland to her.

 [4751] S. Luke xviii. 1, etc.

 Ep. CCII.

 (An important letter on the Apollinarian controversy has already been
 given above.)

 §7. To Theodore, Bishop of Tyana.

 (Theodore, a native of Arianzus, and an intimate friend of Gregory,
 accompanied him to Constantinople a.d. 379, and shared his persecution
 by the Arians, who broke into their church during the celebration of
 the divine liturgy, and pelted the clergy with stones.  Theodore could
 not bring himself to put up with this, and declared his intention of
 prosecuting the aggressors.  Gregory wrote the following letter to
 dissuade him from this course, by shewing him how much more noble it is
 to forgive than to revenge.)

 Ep. LXXVII.

 I hear that you are indignant at the outrages which have been committed
 on us by the Monks and the Mendicants.  And it is no wonder, seeing
 that you never yet had felt a blow, and were without experience of the
 evils we have to endure, that you did feel angry at such a thing.  But
 we as experienced in many sorts of evil, and as having had our share of
 insult, may be considered worthy of belief when we exhort Your
 Reverence, as old age teaches and as reason suggests.  Certainly what
 has happened was dreadful, and more than dreadful,--no one will deny
 it:  that our altars were insulted, our mysteries disturbed, and that
 we ourselves had to stand between the communicants and those who would
 stone them, and to make our intercessions a cure for stonings; that the
 reverence due to virgins was forgotten, and the good order of monks,
 and the calamity of the poor, who lost even their pity through
 ferocity.  But perhaps it would be better to be patient, and to give an
 example of patience to many by our sufferings.  For argument is not so
 persuasive of the world in general as is practice, that silent
 exhortation.

 We think it an important matter to obtain penalties from those who have
 wronged us:  an important matter, I say, (for even this is sometimes
 useful for the correction of others)--but it is far greater and more
 Godlike, to bear with injuries.  For the former course curbs
 wickedness, but the latter makes men good, which is much better and
 more perfect than merely being not wicked.  Let us consider that the
 great pursuit of mercifulness is set before us, and let us forgive the
 wrongs done to us that we also may obtain forgiveness, and let us by
 kindness lay up a store of kindness.

 Phineas was called Zelotes because he ran through the Midianitish woman
 with the man who was committing fornication with her, [4752] and
 because he took away the reproach from the children of Israel:  but he
 was more praised because he prayed for the people when they had
 transgressed. [4753] Let us then also stand and make propitiation,
 and let the plague be stayed, and let this be counted unto us for
 righteousness.  Moses also was praised because he slew the Egyptian
 that oppressed the Israelite; [4754] but he was more admirable because
 he healed by his prayer his sister Miriam when she was made leprous for
 her murmuring. [4755] Look also at what follows.  The people of
 Nineve are threatened with an overthrow, but by their tears they redeem
 their sin. [4756] Manasses was the most lawless of Kings, [4757] but
 is the most conspicuous among those who have attained salvation through
 mourning.

 O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee, [4758] saith God.  What anger is
 here expressed--and yet protection is added.  What is swifter than
 Mercy?  The Disciples ask for flames of Sodom upon those who drive
 Jesus away, but He deprecates revenge. [4759] Peter cuts off the ear
 of Malchus, one of those who outraged Him, but Jesus restores it.
 [4760] And what of him who asks whether he must seven times forgive a
 brother if he has trespassed, is he not condemned for his
 niggardliness, for to the seven is added seventy times seven? [4761]
 What of the debtor in the Gospel who will not forgive as he has been
 forgiven? [4762] Is it not more bitterly exacted of him for this?
 And what saith the pattern of prayer?  Does it not desire that
 forgiveness may be earned by forgiveness?

 Having so many examples let us imitate the mercy of God, and not desire
 to learn from ourselves how great an evil is requital of sin.  You see
 the sequence of goodness.  First it makes laws, then it commands,
 threatens, reproaches, holds out warnings, restrains, threatens again,
 and only when forced to do so strikes the blow, but this little by
 little, opening the way to amendment.  Let us then not strike suddenly
 (for it is not safe to do so), but being self-restrained in our fear
 let us conquer by mercy, and make them our debtors by our kindness,
 tormenting them by their conscience rather than by anger.  Let us not
 dry up a fig tree which may yet bear fruit, [4763] nor condemn it as
 useless and cumbering the ground, when possibly the care and diligence
 of a skilful gardener may yet heal it.  And do not let us so quickly
 destroy so great and glorious a work through what is perhaps the spite
 and malice of the devil; but let us choose to shew ourselves merciful
 rather than severe, and lovers of the poor rather than of abstract
 justice; and let us not make more account of those who would enkindle
 us to this than of those who would restrain us, considering, if nothing
 else, the disgrace of appearing to contend against mendicants who have
 this great advantage that even if they are in the wrong they are pitied
 for their misfortune.  But as things are, consider that all the poor
 and those who support them, and all the Monks and Virgins are falling
 at your feet and praying you on their behalf.  Grant to all these for
 them this favour (since they have suffered enough as is clear by what
 they have asked of us) and above all to me who am their
 representative.  And if it appear to you monstrous that we should have
 been dishonoured by them, remember that it is far worse that we should
 not be listened to by you when we make this request of you.  May God
 forgive the noble Paulus his outrages upon us.

 [4752] Num. xxiv. 7.

 [4753] Ps. cvi. 30, 31.

 [4754] Exod. ii. 12.

 [4755] Num. xii. 40.

 [4756] Jon. iii. 10.

 [4757] 2 Chron. xxxiii. 12, 13.

 [4758] Hos. vi. 4.

 [4759] S. Luke ix. 54.

 [4760] Ib. xxii. 50.

 [4761] S. Matt. xviii. 21.

 [4762] Ib. xviii. 28 sq.

 [4763] S. Luke xiii. 7.

 Ep. CXV.

 (Sent about Easter a.d. 382 with a copy of the Philocalia, or
 Chrestomathy of Origen's works edited by himself and S. Basil.)

 You anticipate the Festival, and the letters, and, which is better
 still, the time by your eagerness, and you bestow on us a preliminary
 festival.  Such is what Your Reverence gives us.  And we in return give
 you the greatest thing we have, our prayers.  But that you may have
 some small thing to remember us by, we send you the volume of the
 Philocalia of Origen, containing a selection of passages useful to
 students of literature.  Deign to accept this, and give us a proof of
 its usefulness, being aided by diligence and the Spirit.

 Ep. CXXI.

 (Written a little later, as a letter of thanks for an Easter Gift.
 Theodore had quite recently been made Archbishop of Tyana.)

 We rejoice in the tokens of love, and especially at such a season, and
 from one at once so young a man, and so perfect; and, to greet you with
 the words of Scripture, stablished in your youth, [4764] for so it
 calls him who is more advanced in wisdom than his years lead us to
 expect.  The old Fathers prayed for the dew of heaven and fatness of
 the earth [4765] and other such things for their children, though
 perhaps some may understand these things in a higher sense; but we will
 give you back all in a spiritual sense.  The Lord fulfil all thy
 requests, [4766] and mayest thou be the father of such children [4767]
 (if I may pray for you concisely and intimately) as you yourself have
 shewn yourself to your own parents, so that we, as well as every one
 else, may be glorified concerning you.

 [4764] Ps. cxliv. 2.

 [4765] Gen. xxvii. 28.

 [4766] Ps. xx. 7.

 [4767] It seems clear, as Benoît remarks, that this expression refers
 to Spiritual fatherhood.  Theodore does not appear to have been
 married.

 Ep. CXXII.

 You owe me, even as a sick man, tending, for one of the commandments is
 the visitation of the sick.  And you also owe to the Holy Martyrs their
 annual honour, which we celebrate in your own Arianzus on the 23rd of
 the month which we call Dathusa. [4768] And at the same time there
 are ecclesiastical affairs not a few which need our common
 examination.  For all these reasons then, I beg you to come at once:
 for though the labour is great, the reward is equivalent.

 [4768] Probably July.

 Ep. CXXIII.

 (To excuse himself for postponing his acceptance of an invitation.)

 I reverence your presence, and I delight in your company; although
 otherwise I counselled myself to remain at home and philosophize in
 quiet, for I found this of all courses the most profitable for myself.
 And since the winds are still somewhat rough, and my infirmity has not
 yet left me, I beg you to bear with me patiently for a little while,
 and to join me in my prayers for health; and as soon as the fit season
 comes I will attend upon your requests.

 Ep. CXXIV.

 (A little later on, when the weather was more settled, Gregory accepts
 the invitation and proposes to come at once, but declines to attend the
 Provincial Synod.)

 You call me?  And I hasten, and that for a private visit.  Synods and
 Conventions I salute from afar, since I have experienced that most of
 them (to speak moderately) are but sorry affairs.  What then remains?
 Help with your prayers my just desires that I may obtain that for which
 I am anxious.

 Ep. CLII.

 (On his retirement from Constantinople Gregory had at the request of
 the Bishops of the Province, and especially of Theodore of Tyana the
 Metropolitan, and Bosporius Bishop of Colonia (see letters above) and
 at the earnest solicitation of the people, undertaken the charge of the
 Diocese of Nazianzus; but he very soon found that his health was not
 equal to so great a task, and that he could not fulfil its calls upon
 him.  He struggled on for some time, but at length, finding himself
 quite unequal to it, he wrote as follows to the Metropolitan:)

 It is time for me to use these words of Scripture, To whom shall I cry
 when I am wronged? [4769] Who will stretch out a hand to me when I am
 oppressed?  To whom shall the burden of this Church pass, in its
 present evil and paralysed condition?  I protest before God and the
 Elect Angels that the Flock of God is being unrighteously dealt with in
 being left without a Shepherd or a Bishop, through my being laid on the
 shelf.  For I am a prisoner to my ill health and have been very quickly
 removed thereby from the Church, and made quite useless to everybody,
 every day breathing my last, and getting more and more crushed by my
 duties.  If the Province had any other head, it would have been my duty
 to cry out and protest to it continually.  But since Your Reverence is
 the Superior, it is to you I must look.  For, to leave out everything
 else, you shall learn from my fellow-priests, Eulalius the
 Chorepiscopus [4770] and Celeusius, whom I have specially sent to Your
 Reverence, what these robbers [4771] who have now got the upper hand,
 are both doing and threatening.  To repress them is not in the power of
 my weakness, but belongs to your skill and strength; since to you, with
 His other gifts God has given that of strength also for the protection
 of His Church.  If in saying and writing this I cannot get a hearing, I
 shall take the only course remaining to me, that of publicly
 proclaiming and making known that this Church needs a Bishop, in order
 that it may not be injured by my feeble health.  What is to follow is
 matter for your consideration.

 [4769] Hab. ii. 1.

 [4770] Chorepiscopi;--a grade of clergy called into existence in the
 latter part of the Third Century, first in Asia Minor, to meet the
 difficulty of providing Episcopal supervision in the country districts
 of large Dioceses.  They seemed to have been allowed to confer the
 Minor, but not the Holy Orders, unless by special commission from the
 Diocesan, on the ground of their lack of original Jurisdiction.  That
 they were originally possessed of full Episcopal Orders there can be no
 doubt, but eventually the position was allowed to be held by Priests,
 and in the West the office became practically merged in that of the
 Archdeacon.

 [4771] The Apollinarians.

 Ep. CLIII.  To Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia.

 (S. Gregory had to carry out his threat.  He resigned the care of
 Nazianzus, and nothing would induce him to withdraw his resignation.
 Bosporius wrote him an urgent letter with this object, but he replied
 as follows:)

 Twice I have been tripped up by you, and have been deceived (you know
 what I mean), and, if it was justly, may the Lord smell from you an
 odour of sweet savour; [4772] if unjustly, may the Lord pardon it.  For
 so it is reasonable for me to speak of you, seeing we are commanded to
 be patient when injuries are inflicted on us.  But as you are master of
 your own opinions, so am I of mine.  That troublesome Gregory will no
 longer be troublesome to you.  I will withdraw myself to God, Who alone
 is pure and guileless.  I will retire into myself.  This I have
 determined; for to stumble twice on the same stone is attributed by the
 proverb to fools alone.

 [4772] Gen. viii. 21.

 Ep. CLVII.  To Theodore, Archbishop of Tyana.

 (S. Gregory succeeded at the end of a.d. 382 in convincing the
 Metropolitan and his Comprovincials of his sincerity in desiring to
 retire; and so they began to cast about for a Successor.  Gregory
 desired that his cousin the Chorepiscopus Eulalius should be nominated,
 but the Bishops felt some jealousy at what they took to be an attempt
 on his part to dictate to them, and refused to allow him to take any
 part in the election, on the ground that he either never had been, or
 at any rate had ceased to be one of the Bishops of the Province.  He
 protested, but finding that he could not convince them he withdrew his
 claim to a vote and wrote to Theodore, as follows:--)

 Our spiritual affairs have reached their limit:  I will not trouble you
 any further.  Join together:  take your precautions:  take counsel
 against us:  let our enemies have the victory:  let the canons be
 accurately observed, beginning with us, the most ignorant of men.
 There is no ill-will in accuracy; only do not let the rights of
 friendship be impeded.  The children of my very honoured son Nicobulus
 have come to the city to learn shorthand.  Be kind enough to look upon
 them with a fatherly and kindly eye (for the canons do not forbid
 this), but especially take care that they live near the Church.  For I
 desire that they should be moulded in character to virtue by continual
 association with Your Perfectness.

 Ep. CLXIII.

 (George a layman of Paspasus, was sent by Theodore of Tyana to Saint
 Gregory that the latter might convince him of his error and sin in
 repudiating an oath which he had taken, on the ground that it was taken
 in writing and not viva voce.  Gregory seems to have brought him to a
 better mind, and sent him back to the Metropolitan with the following
 letter, requesting that due penance be imposed upon him, and have its
 length regulated by his contrition.  This letter was read to the Second
 Council of Constantinople in 553, by Euphrantes, a successor of
 Theodore in the See of Tyana, and was accepted by the Fathers,
 wherefore it is regarded as having almost the force of a Canon of the
 Church Universal.)

 God grant you to the Churches, both for our glory, and for the benefit
 of many, being as you are so circumspect and cautious in spiritual
 matters as to make us also more cautious who are considered to have
 some advantage over you in years.  Since, however, you have wished to
 take us as partners in your spiritual inquiry (I mean about the oath
 which George of Paspasus appears to have sworn), we will declare to
 Your Reverence what presents itself to our mind.  Very many people, as
 it seems to me, delude themselves by considering oaths which are taken
 with the sanction of spoken imprecations to be real oaths, but those
 which are written and not verbally uttered, to be mere matter of form,
 and no oaths at all.  For how can we suppose that while a written
 schedule of debts is more binding than a verbal acknowledgment, yet a
 written oath is something other than an oath?  Or to speak concisely,
 we hold an oath to be the assurance given to one who asked for and
 obtained it.  Nor is it sufficient to say that he suffered violence
 (for the violence was the Law by which he bound himself), nor that
 afterwards he won the cause in the Law Court--for the very fact that he
 went to law was a breach of his oath.  I have persuaded our brother
 George of this, not to pretend excuses for his sin, and not to seek out
 arguments to defend his transgression, but to recognize the writing as
 an oath, and to bewail his sin before God and Your Reverence, even
 though he formerly deceived himself and took a different view of it.
 This is what we have personally argued with him; and it is evident that
 if you will discourse with him more carefully, you will deepen his
 contrition, since you are a great healer of souls, and having treated
 him according to the Canon for as long a time as shall seem right, you
 will afterwards be able to confer indulgence upon him in the matter of
 time.  And the measure of the time must be the measure of his
 compunction.

 Ep. CLXXXIII.

 (Helladius, Archbishop of Cæsarea, contested the validity of the
 election of Eulalius to the Bishopric of Nazianzus, and accused
 Bosporius of heresy.  S. Gregory here throws the whole weight of his
 authority into the other scale.  It is however manifest from the very
 terms of the letter that the person addressed is not Theodore of
 Tyana.  It was conjectured by Clémencet that perhaps he was Theodore of
 Mopsuestia.)

 Envy, which no one easily escapes, has got some foothold amongst us.
 See, even we Cappadocians are in a state of faction, so to speak--a
 calamity never heard of before, and not to be believed--so that no
 flesh may glory [4773] in the sight of God, but that we may be careful,
 since we are all human, not to condemn each other rashly.  For myself,
 there is some gain even from the misfortune (if I may speak somewhat
 paradoxically), and I really gather a rose out of thorns, as the
 proverb has it.  Hitherto I have never met Your Reverence face to face,
 nor conversed with you by letter, but have only been illuminated by
 your reputation; but now I am of necessity compelled to approach you by
 letter, and I am very grateful to him who has procured me this
 privilege.  I omit to write to the other Bishops about whom you wrote
 to me, as the opportunity has not yet arisen.  Moreover my weak health
 makes me less active in this matter; but what I write to you I write to
 them also through you.  My Lord the God-beloved Bishop Helladius [4774]
 must cease to waste his labour on our concerns.  For it is not through
 spiritual earnestness, but through party zeal, that he is seeking this;
 and not for the sake of accurate compliance with the canons, but for
 the satisfaction of anger, as is evident by the time he has chosen, and
 because many have moved with him unreasonably, for I must say this, and
 not trouble myself about it.  If I were physically in a condition to
 govern the Church of Nazianzus, to which I was originally appointed,
 and not to Sasima as some would falsely persuade you, I should not have
 been so cowardly or so ignorant of the Divine Constitutions as either
 to despise that Church, or to seek for an easy life in preference to
 the prizes which are in store for those who labour according to God's
 will, and work with the talent committed to their care.  For what
 profit should I have from my many labours and my great hopes, if I were
 ill advised in the most important matters?  But since my bodily health
 is bad, as everyone can plainly see, and I have not any responsibility
 to fear on account of this withdrawal, for the reason I have mentioned,
 and I saw that the Church through cleaving to me was suffering in its
 best interests and almost being destroyed through my illness, I prayed
 both before and now again my Lords the God-beloved Bishops (I mean
 those of our own Province) to give the Church a head, which they have
 done by God's Grace, worthy both of my desire and of your prayers.
 This I would have you both know yourself, most honourable Lord, and
 also inform the rest of the Bishops, that they may receive him and
 support him by their votes, and not bear heavily on my old age by
 believing the slander.  Let me add this to any letter.  If your
 examination finds my Lord the God-beloved Priest Bosporius guilty
 concerning the faith--a thing which it is not lawful even to
 suggest--(I pass over his age and my personal testimony) judge him so
 yourselves.  But if the discussion about the dioceses is the cause of
 this evil report and this novel accusation, do not be led away by the
 slander, and do not give to falsehoods a greater strength than to the
 truth, I beg you, lest you should cast into despair those who desire to
 do what is right.  May you be granted good health and spirits and
 courage and continual progress in the things of God to us and to the
 Church, whose common boast you are.

 [4773] 1 Cor. i. 29.

 [4774] Basil's successor.

 Ep. CXXXIX.

 (This letter is written at a somewhat earlier date in reference to the
 consent he had been induced to give to remaining for some time longer
 as administrator of the See of Nazianzus.  It is certainly not
 addressed to Theodore of Tyana, and it is not known who this Theodore
 is.)

 He Who raised David His servant from the Shepherd's work to the Throne,
 and Your Reverence from the flock to the Work of the Shepherd:  He that
 orders our affairs and those of all who hope in Him according to His
 own Will:  may He now put it into the mind of Your Reverence to know
 the dishonour which I have suffered at the hands of my Lords the
 Bishops in the matter of their votes, in that they have agreed to the
 Election, [4775] but have excluded us.  I will not lay the blame on
 Your Reverence, because you have but recently come to preside over our
 affairs, and are, as is to be expected, for the most part unacquainted
 with our history.  This is quite enough:  for I have no mind to trouble
 you further, that I may not seem burdensome at the very beginning of
 our friendship.  But I will tell you what suggests itself to me in
 taking counsel with God.  I retired from the Church at Nazianzus, not
 as either despising God, or looking down on the littleness of the flock
 (God forbid that a philosophic [4776] soul should be so disposed); but
 first because I am not bound by any such appointment:  and secondly
 because I am broken down by my ill health, and do not think myself
 equal to such anxieties.  And since you too have been heavy on me, in
 reproaching me with my resignation, and I myself could not endure the
 clamours against me, and since the times are hard, threatening us with
 an inroad of enemies to the injury of the commonwealth of the whole
 Church, I finally made up my mind to suffer a defeat which is painful
 to my body, but perhaps not bad for my soul.  I make over this
 miserable body to the Church for as long as it may be possible,
 thinking it better to suffer any distress to the flesh rather than to
 incur a spiritual injury myself or to inflict it upon others, who have
 thought the worst of us, judging from their own experience.  Knowing
 this, do pray for me, and approve my resolution:  and perhaps it is not
 out of place to say, mould yourself to piety.

 [4775] See Introd. to Ep. 157.

 [4776] Probably equivalent to A Monk.

 §8. To Nicobulus.

 (See the introduction to the first letter to Sophronius above.)

 Ep. XII.  (About a.d. 365).

 You joke me about Alypiana as being little and unworthy of your size,
 you tall and immense and monstrous fellow both in form and strength.
 For now I understand that soul is a matter of measure, and virtue of
 weight, and that rocks are more valuable than pearls, and crows more
 respectable than nightingales.  Well, well! rejoice in your bigness and
 your cubits, and be in no respect inferior to the famed sons of Aloeus.
 [4777] You ride a horse, and shake a spear, and concern yourself with
 wild beasts.  But she has no such work; and no great strength is needed
 to carry a comb, [4778] or to handle a distaff, or to sit by a loom,
 "For such is the glory of woman." [4779] And if you add this, that
 she has become fixed to the ground on account of prayer, and by the
 great movement of her mind has constant communion with God, what is
 there here to boast of in your bigness or the stature of your body?
 Take heed to seasonable silence:  listen to her voice:  mark her
 unadornment, her womanly virility, her usefulness at home, her love of
 her husband.  Then you will say with the Laconian, that verily soul is
 not a subject for measure, and the outer must look to the inner man.
 If you look at the things in this way you will leave off joking and
 deriding her as little, and you will congratulate yourself on your
 marriage.

 [4777] Otus and Ephialtes, the two Homeric Giants, who piled Pelion on
 Ossa and Olympus on Pelion in the vain endeavour to reach heaven and
 dethrone Zeus, but were slain by Apollo.  (See Hom., Odyss., xi.,
 305-320.)

 [4778] An instrument used in weaving to make the web firm and close.

 [4779] From his own Poem against women who take too much pains about
 adorning themselves (i., 267).

 Ep. LI.

 (An answer to a request made by Nicobulus for a treatise on the art of
 writing letters.  Benoît thinks this and the following ones were
 written to the Younger Nicobulus.)

 Of those who write letters, since this is what you ask, some write at
 too great a length, and others err on the side of deficiency; and both
 miss the mean, like archers shooting at a mark and sending some shafts
 short of it and others beyond it; for the missing is the same though on
 opposite sides.  Now the measure of letters is their usefulness:  and
 we must neither write at very great length when there is little to say,
 nor very briefly when there is a great deal.  What?  Are we to measure
 our wisdom by the Persian Schoene, or by the cubits of a child, and to
 write so imperfectly as not to write at all but to copy the midday
 shadows, or lines which meet right in front of you, whose lengths are
 foreshortened and which show themselves in glimpses rather than
 plainly, being recognized only by certain of their extremities?  We
 must in both respects avoid the want of moderation and hit off the
 moderate.  This is my opinion as to brevity; as to perspicuity it is
 clear that one should avoid the oratorical form as much as possible and
 lean rather to the chatty:  and, to speak concisely, that is the best
 and most beautiful letter which can convince either an unlearned or an
 educated reader; the one, as being within the reach of the many; the
 other, as above the many; and it should be intelligible in itself.  It
 is equally disagreeable to think out a riddle and to have to interpret
 a letter.  The third point about a letter is grace:  and this we shall
 safeguard if we do not write in any way that is dry and unpleasing or
 unadorned and badly arranged and untrimmed, as they call it; as for
 instance a style destitute of maxims and proverbs and pithy sayings, or
 even jokes and enigmas, by which language is sweetened.  Yet we must
 not seem to abuse these things by an excessive employment of them.
 Their entire omission shews rusticity, but the abuse of them shews
 insatiability.  We may use them about as much as purple is used in
 woven stuffs.  Figures of speech we shall admit, but few and modest.
 Antitheses and balanced clauses and nicely divided sentences, we shall
 leave to the sophists, or if we do sometimes admit them, we shall do so
 rather in play than in earnest.  My final remark shall be one which I
 heard a clever man make about the eagle, that when the birds were
 electing a king, and came with various adornment, the most beautiful
 point about him was that he did not think himself beautiful.  This
 point is to be especially attended to in letter-writing, to be without
 adventitious ornament and as natural as possible.  So much about
 letters I send you by a letter; but perhaps you had better not apply it
 to myself, who am busied about more important matters.  The rest you
 will work out for yourself, as you are quick at learning, and those who
 are clever in these matters will teach you.

 Ep. LII.

 (Nicobulus asked Gregory to publish a collection of his letters.
 Gregory forwards a copy.)

 You are asking flowers from an autumn meadow, and arming Nestor in his
 old age, in demanding from me now something clever in the way of
 language, after I have long neglected all that is enjoyable in language
 and in life.  But yet (since it is not an Eurysthean or Herculean
 labour that you are imposing on me, but rather one which is very
 agreeable and quiet, to collect for you as many of my own letters as I
 can), do you place this volume among your books--a work not amatory but
 oratorical, and not for display so much as for use, and that for our
 own home. [4780] For different authors have different
 characteristics, greater or smaller.  Mine is a tendency to instruct by
 maxims and positive statements wherever opportunity occurs.  And as in
 a legitimate child, so also in language, the father is always visible,
 not less than parents are shewn by bodily characteristics.  Mine are
 such as I have mentioned.  You may repay me both by writing and by
 deriving profit from what I have written.  I cannot ask for or request
 any better reward than this, either more profitable to the asker, or
 more becoming him who gives it.

 [4780] I.e. as a model of Christian style.

 Ep. LIII.

 (Gregory put a collection of Basil's letters with his own, and gave
 them the first place.  Nicobulus seems to have been surprised at this,
 and asked the reason.  Gregory explains as follows.)

 I have always preferred the Great Basil to myself, though he was of the
 contrary opinion; and so I do now, not less for truth's sake than for
 friendship's.  This is the reason why I have given his letters the
 first place and my own the second.  For I hope we two will always be
 coupled together; and also I would supply others with an example of
 modesty and submission.

 Ep. LIV.

 On Laconicism.  To be laconic is not merely, as you suppose, to write
 few words, but to say a great deal in few words.  Thus I call Homer
 very brief and Antimachus lengthy.  Why?  Because I measure the length
 by the matter and not by the letters.

 Ep. LV.

 An Invitation.  You flee when I pursue you:  perhaps in accordance with
 the laws of love, to make yourself more valuable.  Come then, and fill
 up at last the loss I have suffered by your long delay.  And if any
 home affairs detain you, you shall leave us again, and so make yourself
 more precious as an object of desire.

 §9.  To Olympius.

 (Olympius was Prefect of Cappadocia Secunda in 382.  One letter to him
 against the Apollinarians, has already been given; the rest, which are
 to follow are mainly recommendations of various persons to his
 patronage.)

 Ep. CIV.

 All The Other favours which I have received I know to be due to your
 kindness; and may God reward you for them with His own mercies; and may
 one of these be, that you may discharge your office of prefect with
 good fame and splendour from beginning to end.  In what I now ask I
 come rather to give than to receive, if it is not arrogant to say so.
 I personally introduce poor Philumena to you, to entreat your justice,
 and to move you to the tears with which she afflicts my soul.  She
 herself will explain to you in what and by whom she has been wronged,
 for it would not be right for me to bring accusations against any one.
 But this much it is necessary for me to say, that widowhood and
 orphanhood have a right to the assistance of all right-minded men, and
 especially of those who have wife and children, those great pledges of
 pity, since we--ourselves only men--are set to judge men.  Pardon me
 that I plead with you for these by letter, since it is by ill health
 that I am deprived of seeing a ruler so kind and so conspicuous for
 virtue that even the prelude of your administration is more precious
 than the good fame of others even at the end of their term.

 Ep. CV.

 The time is swift, the struggle great, and my sickness severer,
 reducing me almost to immovability.  What is left but to pray to God,
 and to supplicate your kindness, the one, that He will incline your
 mind to gentler counsels, the other that you will not roughly dismiss
 our intercession, but will receive kindly the wretched Paulus, whom
 justice has brought under your hands, perhaps in order that it may make
 you more illustrious by the greatness of your kindness, and may commend
 our prayers (such as they are) to your mercy.

 Ep. CVI.

 Here is another laying before you a letter, of which, if the truth may
 be said, you are the cause yourself, for you provoke them by the honour
 you do them.  Here too is another petitioner for you, a prisoner of
 fear, our kinsman Eustratius, who with us and by us entreats your
 goodness, inasmuch as he cannot endure to be in perpetual rebellion
 against your government, even though a just terror has frightened him,
 nor does he choose to entreat you by anyone else than me, that he may
 make your mercy to him more conspicuous through his use of such
 intercessors, whom at all events you yourself make great by thus
 accepting their appeal.  I will say one thing, and that briefly.  All
 the other favours you conferred upon me; but this you will confer upon
 your own judgment, since once you purposed to comfort our age and
 infirmity with such honours.  And I will add that you are continually
 rendering God more propitious to you.

 Ep. CXXV.

 (Given above, § 1.)

 Ep. CXXVI.

 (While Gregory was at Xantharis an opportunity presented itself for
 seeing Olympius, but a return of illness prevented him from taking
 advantage of it.  He writes to express his regret, and takes the
 opportunity also to request that Nicobulus may be exempted from the
 charge of the Imperial Posts.)

 I was happy in a dream.  For having been brought as far as the
 Monastery to obtain some comfort from the bath, and then hoping to meet
 you, and having this good fortune almost in my hands, and having
 delayed a few days, I was suddenly carried away by my illness, which
 was already painful in some respects and threatening in others.  And,
 if one must find some conjecture to account for the misfortune, I
 suffered in the same way as the polypods do, which if torn by force
 from the rocks risk the loss of the suckers by which they attach
 themselves to the rocks, or carry off some portion of the latter.
 Something of this kind is my case.  And what I should have asked Your
 Excellency for had I seen you, I now venture to ask for though I am
 absent.  I found my son Nicobulus much worried by the care of the Post,
 and by close attention to the Monastery.  He is not a strong man, and
 has great distaste for solitude.  Make use of him for anything else you
 please, for he is eager to serve your authority in all things; but if
 it be possible set him free from this charge, if for no other reason,
 at any rate to do him honour as my Hospitaller.  Since I have asked
 many favours from you for many people, and have obtained them, I need
 also your kindness for myself.

 Ep. CXXXI.

 (In 382 Gregory was summoned to a Synod at Constantinople; he wrote to
 Procopius, the Prefectus Urbi, and declined to go, on the ground of his
 great dislike to Episcopal Synods, from which, he said, he had never
 known any good to result.  However he seems to have received a more
 urgent summons through Icarius and Olympius.  His reply to Icarius has
 been lost; that to Olympius is as follows.)

 It is more serious to me than my illness, that no one will believe that
 I am ill, but that so long a journey is enjoined upon me, and I am
 pushed into the midst of troubles from which I rejoiced to have
 withdrawn, and almost thought that I ought to be grateful for this to
 my bodily affliction.  For quiet and freedom from affairs is more
 precious than the splendour of a busy life.  I wrote this yesterday to
 the Most Illustrious Icarius, from whom I received the same summons:
 and I now beg your Magnanimity also to write this for me, for you are a
 very trustworthy witness of my ill health.  Another proof of my
 inability is the loss which I have now suffered in having been unable
 even to come and enjoy your society, who are so kind a Governor, and so
 admirable for virtue that even the preludes of your term of office are
 more honourable than the good fame which others can earn by the end of
 theirs.

 Ep. CXL.

 Again I write when I ought to come:  but I gain confidence to do so
 from yourself, O Umpire of spiritual matters (to put the first thing
 first), and Corrector of the Commonweal--and both by Divine
 Providence:  who have also received as the reward of your piety that
 your affairs would prosper to your mind, and that you alone should find
 attainable what to every one else is out of reach.  For wisdom and
 courage conduct your government, the one discovering what is to be
 done, and the other easily carrying out what has been discovered.  And
 the greatest of all is the purity of your hands with which all is
 directed.  Where is your ill-gotten gold?  There never was any; it was
 the first thing you condemned to exile as an invisible tyrant.  Where
 is illwill?  It is condemned.  Where is favour?  Here you do bend
 somewhat (for I will accuse you a little), but it is in imitating the
 Divine Mercy, which at the present time your soldier Aurelius entreats
 of you by me.  I call him a foolish fugitive, because he has placed
 himself in our hands, and through ours in yours, sheltering himself
 under our gray hair and our Priesthood (for which you have often
 professed your veneration) as if it were under some Imperial Image.
 See, this sacrificing and unbloodstained hand leads this man to you; a
 hand which has written often in your praise, and will I am sure write
 yet more, if God continue your term of government--yours, I mean, and
 that of your colleague Themis.

 Ep. CXLI.

 (The people of Nazianzus had in some way incurred the loss of civic
 rights; and the Order for the forfeiture of the title of City had been
 signed by Olympius.  This led to something like a revolt on the part of
 a certain number of the younger citizens:  and this Olympius determined
 to punish by the total destruction of the place.  S. Gregory was again
 prevented by sickness from appearing in person before the Governor:
 but he pleaded the cause of his native city (using its official Latin
 name of Diocæsarea) in the following letters so successfully as to
 induce Olympius to pardon the outbreak.)

 Again an opportunity for kindness:  and again I am bold enough to
 commit to a letter my entreaty about so important a matter.  My illness
 makes me thus bold, for it does not even allow me to go out, and it
 does not permit me to make a fitting entrance to you.  What then is my
 Embassy?  Pray receive it from me gently and kindly.  The death of a
 single man, who to-day is and to-morrow will not be and will not return
 to us is of course a dreadful thing.  But it is much more dreadful for
 a City to die, which Kings founded, and time compacted, and a long
 series of years has preserved.  I speak of Diocæsarea, once a City, a
 City no longer, unless you grant it mercy.  Think that this place now
 falls at your feet by me:  let it have a voice, and be clothed in
 mourning and cut off its hair as in a tragedy, and let it speak to you
 in such words as these:

 Give a hand to me that lie in the dust:  help the strengthless:  do not
 add the weight of your hand to time, nor destroy what the Persians have
 left me.  It is more honourable to you to raise up cities than to
 destroy those that are distressed.  Be my founder, either by adding to
 what I possess, or by preserving me as I am.  Do not suffer that up to
 the time of your administration I should be a City, and after you
 should be so no longer:  do not give occasion to after times to speak
 evil of you, that you received me numbered among cities, and left me an
 uninhabited spot, which was once a city, only recognizable by mountains
 and precipices and woods.

 This let the City of my imagination do and say to your mercy.  But
 deign to receive an exhortation from me as your friend:  certainly
 chastise those who have rebelled against the Edict of your authority.
 On this behalf I am not bold to say anything, although this piece of
 audacity was not, they say, of universal design, but was only the
 unreasoning anger of a few young men.  But dismiss the greater part of
 your anger, and use a larger reasoning.  They were grieved for their
 Mother's being put to death; they could not endure to be called
 citizens, and yet to be without political rights:  they were mad:  they
 committed an offence against the law:  they threw away their own
 safety:  the unexpectedness of the calamity deprived them of reason.
 Is it really necessary that for this the city should cease to be a
 city?  Surely not.  Most excellent, do not write the order for this to
 be done.  Rather respect the supplication of all citizens and statesmen
 and men of rank--for remember the calamity will touch all alike--even
 if the greatness of your authority keeps them silent, sighing as it
 were in secret.  Respect also my gray hair:  for it would be dreadful
 to me, after having had a great city, now to have none at all, and that
 after your government the Temple which we have raised to God, and our
 love for its adornment, is to become a dwelling for beasts.  It is not
 a terrible thing if some statues were thrown down--though in itself it
 would be so--but I would not have you think that I am speaking of this,
 when all my care is for more important things:  but it is dreadful if
 an ancient city is to be destroyed with them--one which has splendidly
 endured, as I, who am honoured by you, and am supposed to have some
 influence, have lived to see.  But this is enough upon such a subject,
 for I shall not, if I speak at greater length, find anything stronger
 than your own reasons, by which this nation is governed--and may more
 and greater ones be governed by them too, and that in greater
 commands.  This however it was needful that Your Magnanimity should
 know about those who have fallen before your feet, that they are
 altogether wretched and despairing, and have not shared in any disorder
 with those who have broken the law, as I am certified by many who were
 then present.  Therefore deliberate what you may think expedient, both
 for your own reputation in this world, and your hopes in the next.  We
 will bear what you determine--not indeed without grief--but we will
 bear it:  for what else can we do?  If the worse determination prevail,
 we shall be indignant, and shall shed a tear over our City that has
 ceased to be.

 Ep. CXLII.

 Though my desire to meet you is warm, and the need of your petitioners
 is great, yet my illness is invincible.  Therefore I am bold to commit
 my intercession to writing.  Have respect to our gray hair, which you
 have already often reverenced by good actions.  Have respect also to my
 infirmity, to which my labours for God have in part contributed, if I
 may swagger a little.  For this cause spare the citizens who look to me
 because I use some freedom of speech with you.  And spare also the
 others who are under my care.  For public affairs will suffer no damage
 through mercy, since you can do more by fear than others by
 punishment.  May you, as your reward for this, obtain such a Judge as
 you shew yourself to your petitioners and to me their intercessor.

 Ep. CXLIII.

 What does much experience, and experience of good do for men?  It
 teaches kindness, and inclines them to those who entreat them.  There
 is no such education in pity as the previous reception of goodness.
 This has happened to myself among others.  I have learned compassion by
 the things which I have suffered.  And do you see my greatness of soul
 when I myself need your gentleness in my own affairs?  I intercede for
 others, and do not fear lest I should exhaust all your kindness on
 other men's concerns.  I am writing thus on behalf of the Presbyter
 Leontius--or, if I may so describe him, the ex-Presbyter.  If he has
 suffered sufficiently for what he has done, let us stop there, lest
 excess become injustice.  And if there is still any balance of
 punishment due, and the consequences of his crime have not yet equalled
 his offence, yet remit it for our sake and God's, and that of the
 sanctuary, and the general assembly of the priests, among whom he was
 once numbered, even though he has now shewn himself unworthy of them,
 both by what he has done and by what he has suffered.  If I can prevail
 with you it will be best; but if not, I will bring to you a more
 powerful intercessor, her who is the partner both of your rule and of
 your good fame.

 Ep. CXLIV.

 (Verianus, a citizen of Nazianzus, had been offended by his son-in-law,
 and on this account wished his daughter to sue for a divorce.  Olympius
 referred the matter to the Episcopal arbitration of S. Gregory, who
 refused to countenance the proceeding, and writes the two following
 letters, the first to the Prefect, the second to Verianus himself.)

 Haste is not always praiseworthy.  For this reason I have deferred my
 answer until now about the daughter of the most honorable Verianus,
 both to allow for time setting matters right, and also because I
 conjecture that Your Goodness does not approve of the divorce, inasmuch
 as you entrusted the enquiry to me, whom you knew to be neither hasty
 nor uncircumspect in such matters.  Therefore I have refrained myself
 till now, and, I venture to think, not without reason.  But since we
 have come nearly to the end of the allotted time, and it is necessary
 that you should be informed of the result of the examination I will
 inform you.  The young lady seems to me to be of two minds, divided
 between reverence for her parents and affection for her husband.  Her
 words are on their side, but her mind, I rather think, is with her
 husband, as is shewn by her tears.  You will do what commends itself to
 your justice, and to God who directs you in all things.  I should most
 willingly have given my opinion to my son Verianus that he should pass
 over much of what is in question, with a view not to confirm the
 divorce, which is entirely contrary to our law, [4781] though the Roman
 law may determine otherwise.  For it is necessary that justice be
 observed--which I pray you may ever both say and do.

 [4781] The law of the Church.

 Ep. CXLV.  To Verianus.

 Public executioners commit no crime, for they are the servants of the
 laws:  nor is the sword unlawful with which we punish criminals.  But
 nevertheless, the public executioner is not a laudable character, nor
 is the death-bearing sword received joyfully.  Just so neither can I
 endure to become hated by confirming the divorce by my hand and
 tongue.  It is far better to be the means of union and of friendship
 than of division and parting of life.  I suppose it was with this in
 his mind that our admirable Governor entrusted me with the enquiry
 about your daughter, as one who could not proceed to divorce abruptly
 or unfeelingly.  For he proposed me not as Judge, but as Bishop, and
 placed me as a mediator in your unhappy circumstances.  I beg you
 therefore, to make some allowance for my timidity, and if the better
 prevail, to use me as a servant of your desire:  I rejoice in receiving
 such commands.  But if the worse and more cruel course is to be taken,
 seek for some one more suitable to your purpose.  I have not time, for
 the sake of favouring your friendship (though in all respects I have
 the highest regard for you), to offend against God, to Whom I have to
 give account of every action and thought.  I will believe your daughter
 (for the truth shall be told) when she can lay aside her awe of you,
 and boldly declare the truth.  At present her condition is
 pitiable--for she assigns her words to you, and her tears to her
 husband.

 To Olympius.  Ep. CXLVI.

 This is what I said as if by a sort of prophecy, when I found you
 favourable to every request, and was making insatiable use of your
 gentleness, that I fear I shall exhaust your kindness upon the affairs
 of others.  For see, a contest of my own has come (if that is mine
 which concerns my own relations), and I cannot speak with the same
 freedom.  First, because it is my own.  For to entreat for myself,
 though it may be more useful, is more humiliating.  And next, I am
 afraid of excess as destroying pleasure, and opposing all that is
 good.  So matters stand, and I conjecture only too rightly.
 Nevertheless with confidence in God before Whom I stand, and in your
 magnanimity in doing good, I am bold to present this petition.

 Suppose Nicobulus to be the worst of men:--though his only crime is
 that through me he is an object of envy, and more free than he ought to
 be.  And suppose that my present opponent is the most just of men.  For
 I am ashamed to accuse before Your Uprightness one whom yesterday I was
 supporting:  but I do not know if it will seem to you just that
 punishment should be demanded for one man's crimes from another, though
 these were quite strange to him, and had not even his consent; from the
 man who has so stirred his household and been so upset as to have
 surrendered to his accuser more readily than the latter wished.  Must
 Nicobulus or his children be reduced to slavery as his persecutors
 desire?  I am ashamed both of the ground of the persecution and of the
 time, if this is to be done while both you are in power and I have
 influence with you.  Not so, most admirable friend, let not this be
 suggested to Your Integrity.  But recognizing by the winged swiftness
 of your mind the malice from which this proceeds, and having respect to
 me your admirer, shew yourself a merciful judge to those who are being
 disturbed--for to-day you are not merely judging between man and man,
 but between virtue and vice; and to this more consideration than by an
 ordinary man must be given by those who are like you in virtue and are
 skilful governors.  And in return for this you shall have from me not
 only the matter of my prayers, which I know you do not, like so many
 men, despise; but also that I will make your government famous with all
 to whom I am known.

 Ep. CLIV.

 To me you are Prefect even after the expiry of your term of office--for
 I judge things differently from the run of men--because you embrace in
 yourself every prefectoral virtue.  For many of those who sit on lofty
 thrones are to me base, all those whose hand makes them base and slaves
 of their subjects. [4782] But many are high and lofty though they
 stand low, whom virtue places on high and makes worthy of greater
 government.  But what have I to do with this?  No longer is the great
 Olympius with us, nor does he bear our rudder-lines.  We are undone, we
 are betrayed, we have become again the Second Cappadocia, after having
 been made the First by you.  Of other men's matters why should I speak?
 but who will cherish the old age of your Gregory, and administer to his
 weakness the enchantment of honours, and make him more honourable
 because he obtains kindness for many from you?  Now then depart on your
 journey with escort and greater pomp, leaving behind for us many tears,
 and carrying with you much wealth, and that of a kind which few
 Prefects do, good fame, and the being inscribed on all hearts, pillars
 not easily moved.  If you preside over us again with greater and more
 illustrious rule, (this is what our longing augurs), we shall offer to
 God more perfect thanks.

 [4782] I.e. who are accessible to bribery.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [1]1 [2]1:2 [3]1:2 [4]1:5 [5]1:6 [6]1:11 [7]1:11
 [8]1:14 [9]1:16 [10]1:24 [11]1:26 [12]1:26 [13]1:26
 [14]1:26 [15]1:26 [16]1:26 [17]1:27 [18]1:27 [19]1:27
 [20]2:7 [21]2:7 [22]2:7 [23]2:7 [24]2:7 [25]2:7 [26]2:7
 [27]2:7 [28]2:7 [29]2:8 [30]2:9 [31]2:16 [32]2:17
 [33]2:18 [34]3:3 [35]3:5 [36]3:6 [37]3:6-23 [38]3:8
 [39]3:15 [40]3:15 [41]3:17-18 [42]3:19 [43]3:22 [44]3:24
 [45]3:24 [46]4:1 [47]4:12 [48]4:24 [49]4:24 [50]4:26
 [51]4:26 [52]4:26 [53]5:3 [54]5:21 [55]5:22 [56]6:8
 [57]6:13 [58]8:11 [59]8:21 [60]9:6 [61]11:4 [62]11:4
 [63]11:7 [64]12:1 [65]12:6 [66]13:12 [67]14:10 [68]14:14
 [69]14:22 [70]15:6 [71]15:16 [72]17:5 [73]18:1 [74]18:2
 [75]18:5 [76]18:10 [77]18:18 [78]18:25 [79]18:27 [80]19:1
 [81]19:5 [82]19:15 [83]19:17 [84]19:17 [85]19:23 [86]19:24
 [87]19:24 [88]19:24 [89]19:24 [90]19:24 [91]19:26 [92]21:12
 [93]21:19 [94]21:21 [95]22:1 [96]22:2 [97]22:8 [98]22:11
 [99]24:3 [100]24:43 [101]27:21 [102]27:28 [103]27:28
 [104]28:2 [105]28:12 [106]29:21 [107]31:19 [108]32:28
 [109]32:28 [110]32:30 [111]35:19 [112]36:11 [113]36:15
 [114]36:42 [115]37:28 [116]41:1 [117]41:29 [118]41:38
 [119]41:39 [120]41:40 [121]46:29 [122]48:7 [123]49:8
 [124]49:8 [125]49:9 [126]49:9 [127]49:10 [128]49:11
 [129]49:17 [130]49:22

 Exodus

 [131]1:8 [132]2:8 [133]2:12 [134]2:15 [135]3:1 [136]3:2
 [137]3:2 [138]3:4 [139]3:5 [140]3:6 [141]3:6 [142]3:7
 [143]3:14 [144]4:2 [145]4:10 [146]4:10 [147]4:13 [148]4:22
 [149]4:27 [150]4:27 [151]5:6 [152]7:1 [153]7:1 [154]7:8
 [155]7:19 [156]7:22 [157]9:10 [158]10:21 [159]11:2
 [160]11:5 [161]12 [162]12:9 [163]12:11 [164]12:15
 [165]12:15 [166]12:22 [167]12:22 [168]12:23 [169]12:29
 [170]12:37 [171]13:20 [172]13:21 [173]14:9 [174]14:15
 [175]14:20 [176]14:20 [177]14:21 [178]14:21 [179]14:22
 [180]14:23 [181]14:28 [182]15:20 [183]16:2 [184]16:4
 [185]16:13 [186]16:14 [187]16:15 [188]16:15 [189]16:18
 [190]17:6 [191]17:6 [192]17:6 [193]17:10-11 [194]17:11
 [195]17:12 [196]19:10 [197]19:13 [198]19:13 [199]19:14
 [200]19:15 [201]19:16 [202]19:16-18 [203]20:19 [204]20:19
 [205]20:21 [206]21:2 [207]21:17 [208]24:1 [209]24:1-2
 [210]24:1-2 [211]24:8 [212]24:15 [213]24:18 [214]25:32
 [215]25:37 [216]25:40 [217]26:31 [218]26:33 [219]28:36
 [220]29:4 [221]30:22-25 [222]30:33 [223]30:38 [224]31:1-6
 [225]31:2 [226]31:3 [227]32:4 [228]32:11 [229]32:15
 [230]32:20 [231]32:26 [232]33:13 [233]33:17 [234]33:19
 [235]33:19 [236]33:20 [237]33:20 [238]33:20 [239]33:22
 [240]33:22 [241]33:23 [242]33:23 [243]34:1 [244]34:5-7
 [245]34:8 [246]34:9 [247]34:30 [248]34:30 [249]36:1
 [250]37:7 [251]37:7 [252]38:28

 Leviticus

 [253]3:4 [254]4:5 [255]4:16 [256]6:16 [257]6:22 [258]7:14
 [259]7:32 [260]7:34 [261]8:2 [262]8:3 [263]8:31 [264]8:33
 [265]10:1 [266]10:1 [267]11 [268]12:8 [269]14:8 [270]16:34
 [271]20:9 [272]21:17 [273]22:19 [274]26:1 [275]26:27-28

 Numbers

 [276]1:3 [277]1:12 [278]11:24-25 [279]11:26 [280]11:28
 [281]11:29 [282]11:29 [283]12:3 [284]12:7 [285]12:7
 [286]12:40 [287]17:8 [288]17:10 [289]20:17 [290]21:9
 [291]21:9 [292]21:22 [293]24:7 [294]24:9 [295]25:6
 [296]35:7 [297]708

 Deuteronomy

 [298]4:10 [299]4:15 [300]4:24 [301]4:24 [302]4:24 [303]5:16
 [304]5:26 [305]5:27 [306]6:7 [307]9:10 [308]9:20 [309]13:4
 [310]14:1 [311]18:10-11 [312]18:15 [313]19:15 [314]22:27
 [315]23:3 [316]23:3 [317]27:5 [318]28:39 [319]28:66
 [320]32:5 [321]32:6 [322]32:6 [323]32:15 [324]32:21
 [325]32:25 [326]32:32 [327]32:34 [328]32:34 [329]32:49
 [330]33:2 [331]34:9 [332]34:9

 Joshua

 [333]1:2 [334]2:11 [335]3:1 [336]3:15-16 [337]3:16
 [338]5:14 [339]6:4 [340]6:20 [341]6:25 [342]7:19 [343]7:19
 [344]7:21 [345]10:12 [346]10:13 [347]14:1 [348]14:6
 [349]18:1 [350]19:15 [351]23:12 [352]24:12

 Judges

 [353]3:10 [354]6:34 [355]7:5 [356]11:29 [357]13:6
 [358]13:22 [359]13:23 [360]16:19

 1 Samuel

 [361]1:10 [362]1:13 [363]1:20 [364]1:20 [365]2:5 [366]2:6
 [367]2:6 [368]2:8 [369]2:11 [370]2:12 [371]2:15 [372]2:19
 [373]2:23 [374]2:30 [375]6:1 [376]7:5 [377]9:3 [378]9:9
 [379]9:9 [380]10:11 [381]10:22 [382]15:26 [383]15:28
 [384]16:7 [385]16:13 [386]16:16 [387]16:23 [388]17:14
 [389]17:32 [390]17:49 [391]17:49 [392]18:7 [393]19:20
 [394]19:24 [395]23:23

 2 Samuel

 [396]1:21 [397]5:1 [398]6:2 [399]6:6 [400]6:14 [401]12
 [402]12:13 [403]12:16 [404]14:19 [405]15:5 [406]16:10-11
 [407]23:2 [408]23:14

 1 Kings

 [409]1:4 [410]1:39 [411]3:12 [412]4:29 [413]5:4
 [414]6:23-26 [415]8:6 [416]8:6-7 [417]8:27 [418]10:1
 [419]11:14 [420]11:33 [421]12:2 [422]13:6 [423]17:4
 [424]17:6 [425]17:8 [426]17:14 [427]17:21 [428]17:21
 [429]18:4 [430]18:33 [431]18:33 [432]18:42 [433]18:44
 [434]19:8 [435]19:10 [436]19:11 [437]19:11-12 [438]19:18
 [439]21:29

 2 Kings

 [440]1:1 [441]2:11 [442]2:11 [443]2:11 [444]2:11 [445]2:11
 [446]2:13 [447]2:15 [448]4:25 [449]4:34 [450]5:25 [451]20:1
 [452]20:1 [453]24:13 [454]25:7 [455]25:11

 1 Chronicles

 [456]11:4 [457]11:16 [458]13:6

 2 Chronicles

 [459]6:18 [460]15:1 [461]20:7 [462]20:14 [463]24:20-21
 [464]33:6 [465]33:12-13 [466]33:12-13 [467]36:7 [468]36:32
 [469]38:12

 Ezra

 [470]6:15

 Nehemiah

 [471]9:20

 Esther

 [472]8:13

 Job

 [473]1:1 [474]1:3 [475]1:21 [476]2:7 [477]3:6 [478]3:8
 [479]3:9 [480]5:8-9 [481]5:19 [482]5:26 [483]7:9 [484]7:18
 [485]9:8 [486]9:8 [487]9:9 [488]9:23 [489]9:24
 [490]10:10-11 [491]10:11 [492]10:22 [493]11:7 [494]12:8
 [495]12:14 [496]12:24 [497]14:7-10 [498]14:9 [499]14:14
 [500]14:14 [501]15:8 [502]16:2 [503]17:16 [504]19:26
 [505]20:8 [506]21:13 [507]21:18 [508]26:8 [509]26:10
 [510]28:14 [511]29:2 [512]29:15 [513]29:16 [514]29:18
 [515]31:26-27 [516]31:32 [517]33:4 [518]36:27 [519]37:9-10
 [520]37:10 [521]37:16 [522]37:22 [523]37:23 [524]38:1
 [525]38:1 [526]38:2-3 [527]38:3 [528]38:3 [529]38:4
 [530]38:11 [531]38:14 [532]38:17 [533]38:28 [534]38:28
 [535]38:29 [536]38:31 [537]38:36 [538]38:37 [539]38:37
 [540]39:16 [541]39:26 [542]40:3 [543]40:4 [544]40:14
 [545]40:20 [546]40:23 [547]40:26 [548]41:5 [549]41:13
 [550]41:15 [551]41:22 [552]41:24

 Psalms

 [553]1:1 [554]1:2 [555]1:5 [556]1:6 [557]2:1 [558]2:1
 [559]2:2 [560]2:3 [561]2:7 [562]2:7 [563]2:7 [564]2:7
 [565]2:7 [566]2:7 [567]2:7 [568]2:8 [569]2:9 [570]2:10
 [571]2:11 [572]2:12 [573]2:25-26 [574]3:15 [575]3:20 [576]4
 [577]4:2 [578]4:3 [579]4:3 [580]4:4 [581]4:4 [582]4:4-5
 [583]4:7 [584]4:8 [585]4:15 [586]4:15 [587]4:15 [588]4:15
 [589]4:15 [590]4:24 [591]4:25 [592]4:26 [593]4:30 [594]5:9
 [595]5:10 [596]5:13 [597]5:15 [598]5:15 [599]5:15 [600]5:18
 [601]5:32 [602]6:5 [603]6:6 [604]6:23 [605]6:30
 [606]6:30-31 [607]6:37 [608]6:39 [609]6:39 [610]7:6
 [611]7:7 [612]7:9 [613]7:9 [614]7:10 [615]7:32 [616]7:32
 [617]7:40 [618]8:1 [619]8:3 [620]8:3 [621]8:5 [622]9:1
 [623]9:1-3 [624]9:6 [625]9:18 [626]9:25 [627]9:25 [628]10:1
 [629]10:1 [630]10:1 [631]10:1 [632]10:3 [633]10:3 [634]10:3
 [635]10:3 [636]10:3 [637]10:3 [638]10:7 [639]10:7 [640]11:2
 [641]11:6 [642]11:7 [643]11:10 [644]12:1 [645]12:5
 [646]12:7 [647]12:9 [648]12:9 [649]13:3 [650]13:7 [651]14:3
 [652]14:3 [653]14:3 [654]14:6 [655]14:7 [656]14:7
 [657]15:17 [658]16:1 [659]16:4 [660]16:6 [661]16:6
 [662]16:7 [663]16:8 [664]16:10 [665]16:11 [666]17:8
 [667]18:8 [668]18:9 [669]18:9 [670]18:11 [671]18:12
 [672]18:12 [673]18:19 [674]18:22 [675]18:24 [676]18:32
 [677]18:33 [678]18:39 [679]18:46 [680]19:1 [681]19:1
 [682]19:2 [683]19:3 [684]19:4 [685]19:5 [686]19:5 [687]19:5
 [688]19:6 [689]19:6 [690]19:10 [691]19:21 [692]19:24
 [693]19:37 [694]19:91 [695]19:103 [696]19:103 [697]19:105
 [698]19:131 [699]19:131 [700]19:164 [701]19:176 [702]20:7
 [703]22 [704]22:1 [705]22:1 [706]22:2 [707]22:9 [708]22:11
 [709]22:15 [710]22:18 [711]23:1-3 [712]23:2 [713]23:2
 [714]23:2 [715]23:5 [716]23:5 [717]23:5 [718]23:5 [719]24
 [720]24:3 [721]24:7 [722]24:7 [723]24:7 [724]24:10
 [725]25:3 [726]25:4 [727]26:4 [728]26:5 [729]26:5 [730]26:5
 [731]26:5 [732]26:6 [733]26:7 [734]26:8 [735]26:12
 [736]27:1 [737]27:4 [738]28:14 [739]29:3 [740]29:7
 [741]29:9 [742]30:1 [743]30:3 [744]30:3 [745]30:5 [746]31:6
 [747]31:16 [748]31:20 [749]32:1 [750]32:1 [751]32:1
 [752]32:1 [753]32:1 [754]32:4 [755]32:5 [756]32:6 [757]32:6
 [758]32:11 [759]32:13-14 [760]32:15 [761]32:17 [762]33:6
 [763]33:6 [764]33:6 [765]33:9 [766]33:19 [767]34 [768]34:1
 [769]34:3 [770]34:3 [771]34:5 [772]34:5 [773]34:8 [774]34:9
 [775]34:16 [776]35:7 [777]35:18 [778]36 [779]36:5 [780]36:6
 [781]36:7 [782]36:8 [783]36:9 [784]36:9 [785]36:9 [786]36:9
 [787]36:12 [788]37:7 [789]37:24 [790]37:27 [791]37:27
 [792]37:34 [793]38:5 [794]38:9 [795]38:9 [796]38:11
 [797]38:14 [798]39:4-5 [799]39:7-8 [800]39:7-15 [801]39:8
 [802]39:8 [803]39:11 [804]39:12 [805]39:12 [806]39:16
 [807]39:21 [808]40:2 [809]40:3 [810]40:3 [811]40:9
 [812]41:3 [813]41:4 [814]41:4 [815]41:5 [816]41:9
 [817]41:10 [818]42 [819]42:1 [820]42:4 [821]42:5 [822]42:8
 [823]43:1 [824]43:3 [825]43:4-5 [826]43:5 [827]43:10
 [828]43:10 [829]43:10 [830]44:2 [831]44:5 [832]44:19
 [833]44:20 [834]45:2 [835]45:4 [836]45:4 [837]45:6
 [838]45:6 [839]45:6-7 [840]45:7 [841]45:10 [842]45:14
 [843]45:19 [844]46:4 [845]46:10 [846]46:10 [847]47:1
 [848]47:4 [849]47:4 [850]47:4 [851]47:5 [852]47:6 [853]47:8
 [854]47:14 [855]47:16 [856]48:4 [857]48:4 [858]48:5
 [859]48:5 [860]48:7 [861]48:8 [862]48:12 [863]49:1
 [864]49:6 [865]50:3 [866]50:6 [867]50:14 [868]50:18
 [869]50:21 [870]50:21 [871]50:23 [872]51:5 [873]51:7
 [874]51:8 [875]51:10 [876]51:11 [877]51:12 [878]51:12
 [879]51:19 [880]52 [881]52:2 [882]52:4 [883]52:10 [884]53:5
 [885]55:6 [886]55:7 [887]55:9 [888]55:17 [889]55:21
 [890]57:4 [891]57:9 [892]58:4 [893]58:4-5 [894]58:5-6
 [895]59:3 [896]59:6 [897]60:2-3 [898]62:10 [899]63:1
 [900]64:32 [901]65:2 [902]65:9 [903]65:10 [904]65:11
 [905]66:6 [906]66:7 [907]66:10-12 [908]66:12 [909]67:6
 [910]67:6 [911]68:4 [912]68:5 [913]68:9 [914]68:11
 [915]68:17 [916]68:18 [917]68:25 [918]68:26 [919]68:31
 [920]68:35 [921]69:2 [922]69:2 [923]69:21 [924]72 [925]72:5
 [926]72:5 [927]72:6 [928]72:6 [929]72:6 [930]72:6-7
 [931]72:17 [932]73:2 [933]73:8 [934]73:9 [935]73:20
 [936]73:23-24 [937]74:12 [938]74:13 [939]74:14 [940]75:8
 [941]75:9 [942]75:10 [943]76:4 [944]76:7 [945]77:19
 [946]77:20 [947]77:20 [948]78:15 [949]78:24 [950]78:24
 [951]78:25 [952]78:50 [953]78:70 [954]79:4 [955]79:6
 [956]79:12 [957]79:12 [958]79:13 [959]80:1 [960]80:8
 [961]80:9 [962]80:12 [963]80:17-18 [964]81:6 [965]81:10
 [966]81:11 [967]82:1 [968]82:6 [969]82:8 [970]83:13
 [971]84:5 [972]84:6 [973]84:7 [974]85:8 [975]85:11
 [976]85:13 [977]87:4 [978]87:7 [979]88:1 [980]88:4
 [981]88:4 [982]88:5 [983]88:5 [984]88:5 [985]88:5 [986]88:8
 [987]88:10 [988]88:13 [989]89:22 [990]89:26-27 [991]89:29
 [992]89:35-37 [993]89:36 [994]89:37 [995]89:37 [996]90:10
 [997]91:5 [998]91:14 [999]92:13 [1000]93:1 [1001]93:2
 [1002]94:1 [1003]94:11 [1004]94:17 [1005]94:17 [1006]95:1
 [1007]95:2 [1008]95:6 [1009]95:7-8 [1010]96:1 [1011]96:11
 [1012]96:11 [1013]97:3 [1014]97:11 [1015]99:6 [1016]102:25-27
 [1017]104:2 [1018]104:6 [1019]105:32 [1020]107:9 [1021]112:5
 [1022]119:6 [1023]119:60 [1024]119:81 [1025]119:103
 [1026]120:4 [1027]127:2 [1028]129:6 [1029]133:2 [1030]137:6
 [1031]139:6 [1032]139:13 [1033]140:3 [1034]143:8 [1035]144:1
 [1036]145:21 [1037]146:8

 Proverbs

 [1038]1 [1039]1:7 [1040]1:11 [1041]1:16 [1042]2:3
 [1043]3:12 [1044]3:24 [1045]3:28 [1046]4:7 [1047]4:25
 [1048]4:25 [1049]4:27 [1050]5:3 [1051]5:15 [1052]5:17
 [1053]6:6 [1054]6:6-8 [1055]6:9 [1056]6:23 [1057]6:27
 [1058]7:3 [1059]8:22 [1060]8:22 [1061]8:25 [1062]9
 [1063]9:5 [1064]10:1 [1065]10:7 [1066]11:18 [1067]11:26
 [1068]13:9 [1069]14:30 [1070]14:30 [1071]15:7 [1072]16:31
 [1073]16:31 [1074]17:4-6 [1075]17:6 [1076]18:3 [1077]18:17
 [1078]19:17 [1079]20:6 [1080]20:10 [1081]22:20 [1082]22:20
 [1083]24:32 [1084]25:3 [1085]25:12 [1086]25:16 [1087]26:12
 [1088]27:1 [1089]29:20 [1090]30:15 [1091]30:15 [1092]30:21-22
 [1093]30:29-30 [1094]30:33 [1095]31 [1096]31:7 [1097]31:10
 [1098]31:10

 Ecclesiastes

 [1099]1:14 [1100]1:17 [1101]1:18 [1102]2:6 [1103]3:1
 [1104]3:1 [1105]3:1 [1106]3:1 [1107]3:1 [1108]3:2 [1109]5:9
 [1110]7:23 [1111]7:24 [1112]7:29 [1113]9:7-8 [1114]9:11
 [1115]10:4 [1116]10:5 [1117]10:16 [1118]11:1 [1119]11:2
 [1120]11:2 [1121]11:9 [1122]11:10 [1123]11:28 [1124]12:1
 [1125]12:2 [1126]12:3 [1127]12:5 [1128]12:5 [1129]12:6
 [1130]12:8 [1131]12:13 [1132]12:14

 Song of Solomon

 [1133]1:3 [1134]1:3 [1135]1:4 [1136]2:10 [1137]2:11
 [1138]2:12 [1139]2:14 [1140]2:14 [1141]3:1 [1142]3:3-4
 [1143]3:11 [1144]3:11 [1145]4:1-2 [1146]4:11 [1147]4:12
 [1148]4:14 [1149]4:15 [1150]5:1 [1151]5:1 [1152]5:3
 [1153]5:3 [1154]5:3 [1155]5:12 [1156]5:16 [1157]6:1
 [1158]6:3 [1159]8:4 [1160]8:7 [1161]11:15

 Isaiah

 [1162]1:3 [1163]1:5 [1164]1:6 [1165]1:6 [1166]1:6 [1167]1:8
 [1168]1:9 [1169]1:9 [1170]1:10 [1171]1:10 [1172]1:11
 [1173]1:12 [1174]1:14 [1175]1:16 [1176]1:16 [1177]1:16
 [1178]1:17-18 [1179]1:18 [1180]1:19-20 [1181]1:22 [1182]1:23
 [1183]1:26 [1184]2:2 [1185]2:3 [1186]3:4 [1187]3:7
 [1188]3:9 [1189]3:12 [1190]3:14 [1191]3:14 [1192]3:14
 [1193]3:34 [1194]4:4 [1195]5:1 [1196]5:1-2 [1197]5:2
 [1198]5:6 [1199]5:8 [1200]5:8 [1201]5:10 [1202]5:24
 [1203]6:1 [1204]6:1 [1205]6:1 [1206]6:1 [1207]6:2
 [1208]6:2-3 [1209]6:3 [1210]6:6 [1211]6:6-7 [1212]6:8
 [1213]6:10 [1214]7:2 [1215]7:9 [1216]7:10-14 [1217]7:11
 [1218]7:14 [1219]7:14 [1220]7:23 [1221]8:14 [1222]8:18
 [1223]8:18 [1224]8:19 [1225]8:19 [1226]8:21 [1227]9:1
 [1228]9:5 [1229]9:6 [1230]9:6 [1231]9:7 [1232]9:13
 [1233]9:15 [1234]9:16 [1235]10:3 [1236]10:22 [1237]10:22-23
 [1238]11:1-3 [1239]11:2 [1240]11:2 [1241]11:2 [1242]11:2
 [1243]11:3 [1244]11:10 [1245]13:3 [1246]16:3 [1247]19:1
 [1248]19:11 [1249]21:2 [1250]21:2 [1251]21:6 [1252]23:4
 [1253]24:2 [1254]25:6 [1255]25:7 [1256]25:8 [1257]25:8
 [1258]26:6 [1259]26:11 [1260]26:13 [1261]26:18 [1262]26:19
 [1263]26:19 [1264]26:20 [1265]27:1 [1266]27:11 [1267]28:1
 [1268]28:11 [1269]28:15 [1270]28:16 [1271]28:16 [1272]28:17
 [1273]28:19 [1274]28:25 [1275]29:9 [1276]29:10 [1277]29:21
 [1278]30:10 [1279]30:15 [1280]30:17 [1281]32:20 [1282]34:4
 [1283]35:4-6 [1284]35:6 [1285]37:31 [1286]38:8 [1287]38:8
 [1288]40:2 [1289]40:2 [1290]40:3 [1291]40:3 [1292]40:3
 [1293]40:9 [1294]40:9 [1295]40:9-10 [1296]40:12 [1297]40:12
 [1298]40:12 [1299]40:12 [1300]40:18 [1301]40:22 [1302]40:22
 [1303]40:25 [1304]40:31 [1305]41:4 [1306]41:4 [1307]41:8
 [1308]41:22 [1309]42:1 [1310]42:1 [1311]42:8 [1312]42:14
 [1313]42:19 [1314]43:10 [1315]44:1 [1316]44:2 [1317]44:3
 [1318]44:17 [1319]44:21 [1320]44:22 [1321]45:3 [1322]45:7
 [1323]45:7 [1324]45:14-15 [1325]45:16-17 [1326]46:3
 [1327]47:13 [1328]47:14 [1329]48:4 [1330]48:16 [1331]48:16
 [1332]48:29 [1333]49:1 [1334]49:2 [1335]49:3 [1336]49:5
 [1337]49:6 [1338]49:6 [1339]49:7 [1340]49:13 [1341]49:18
 [1342]49:18 [1343]50:4 [1344]50:4 [1345]50:6 [1346]50:6
 [1347]50:11 [1348]51:1 [1349]51:1 [1350]51:2 [1351]51:6
 [1352]51:17 [1353]52:5 [1354]52:5 [1355]52:7 [1356]52:7
 [1357]52:13 [1358]52:15 [1359]53:1 [1360]53:1 [1361]53:1
 [1362]53:2 [1363]53:4 [1364]53:4 [1365]53:4-5 [1366]53:7
 [1367]53:7 [1368]53:7 [1369]53:7 [1370]53:7 [1371]53:7-8
 [1372]53:8 [1373]53:8-9 [1374]53:9 [1375]53:9 [1376]53:11
 [1377]53:11 [1378]53:12 [1379]53:12 [1380]53:23 [1381]54:2
 [1382]54:8 [1383]54:13 [1384]55:1 [1385]55:1 [1386]55:2
 [1387]57:1 [1388]57:1 [1389]57:2 [1390]57:4 [1391]57:13
 [1392]57:14 [1393]58:5 [1394]58:7 [1395]58:7 [1396]58:9
 [1397]59:21 [1398]60:1 [1399]60:4 [1400]60:8 [1401]61:1
 [1402]61:1 [1403]61:1 [1404]61:1-2 [1405]61:10 [1406]61:10
 [1407]61:10 [1408]62:3 [1409]62:4 [1410]62:4 [1411]62:6
 [1412]62:10 [1413]62:10 [1414]62:11 [1415]63:1 [1416]63:1-2
 [1417]63:10 [1418]63:10 [1419]63:11 [1420]63:11 [1421]63:14
 [1422]63:16 [1423]63:16 [1424]63:19 [1425]64:1 [1426]64:2
 [1427]64:4 [1428]64:5 [1429]64:8 [1430]64:12 [1431]65:2
 [1432]65:2 [1433]65:2 [1434]65:8 [1435]65:9 [1436]65:15
 [1437]65:15 [1438]65:15-16 [1439]65:18 [1440]66:1 [1441]66:1
 [1442]66:1 [1443]66:5 [1444]66:8 [1445]66:10 [1446]66:18
 [1447]66:19

 Jeremiah

 [1448]1:5 [1449]1:5 [1450]1:5 [1451]1:6 [1452]1:6
 [1453]1:10 [1454]1:18 [1455]2:8 [1456]2:10 [1457]2:21
 [1458]2:21 [1459]2:21 [1460]2:27 [1461]3:9 [1462]3:14
 [1463]3:15 [1464]4:3 [1465]4:3 [1466]4:4 [1467]4:19
 [1468]4:19 [1469]4:22 [1470]5:3 [1471]5:6 [1472]5:7
 [1473]5:7 [1474]5:8 [1475]5:8 [1476]6:29 [1477]8:1
 [1478]8:5 [1479]9:1 [1480]9:21 [1481]10:16 [1482]10:16
 [1483]10:21 [1484]10:21 [1485]10:24 [1486]11:19 [1487]11:19
 [1488]11:19 [1489]12:1 [1490]12:8 [1491]12:10 [1492]13:23
 [1493]15:10 [1494]18:12 [1495]22:14 [1496]23:1-2 [1497]23:18
 [1498]23:24 [1499]23:24 [1500]23:24 [1501]23:29 [1502]25:34
 [1503]26:18 [1504]32:15 [1505]32:18-19 [1506]37:16
 [1507]39:18-19 [1508]42:16 [1509]49:7 [1510]49:20 [1511]50:25
 [1512]50:31 [1513]51:34

 Lamentations

 [1514]1:1 [1515]3:19 [1516]3:28 [1517]3:34 [1518]3:53
 [1519]4:7 [1520]4:20 [1521]4:20 [1522]4:20

 Ezekiel

 [1523]1:4-28 [1524]1:6-11 [1525]1:16 [1526]1:28 [1527]2
 [1528]3:18 [1529]3:20 [1530]7:26 [1531]8:3 [1532]10:1
 [1533]10:21 [1534]11:5 [1535]11:5 [1536]11:24 [1537]13:14
 [1538]14:5 [1539]14:14 [1540]14:20 [1541]18:20-23 [1542]18:31
 [1543]18:31 [1544]21:9 [1545]22:24 [1546]22:26 [1547]23:42
 [1548]25:13 [1549]28:1-2 [1550]28:12 [1551]28:12-17 [1552]31
 [1553]33:2 [1554]33:3 [1555]33:8 [1556]34:2 [1557]34:6
 [1558]34:6 [1559]34:8 [1560]34:12 [1561]34:14 [1562]36:25
 [1563]36:25 [1564]36:26 [1565]36:27 [1566]37:1 [1567]37:1
 [1568]37:3 [1569]37:7 [1570]37:10 [1571]37:12 [1572]39:17

 Daniel

 [1573]2:26 [1574]2:31 [1575]2:35 [1576]2:44 [1577]2:45
 [1578]2:45 [1579]3:5 [1580]3:12 [1581]4:9 [1582]4:33
 [1583]4:34 [1584]4:34 [1585]5:3 [1586]5:12 [1587]5:25
 [1588]5:31 [1589]6:22 [1590]6:22 [1591]6:23 [1592]7:7
 [1593]7:9 [1594]7:9 [1595]7:9-14 [1596]7:10 [1597]7:10
 [1598]7:10 [1599]7:13 [1600]7:13-14 [1601]7:14 [1602]7:21
 [1603]7:23 [1604]7:23 [1605]7:24 [1606]7:24 [1607]7:25
 [1608]7:27 [1609]9:1 [1610]9:5 [1611]9:18 [1612]9:23
 [1613]9:25 [1614]10:6 [1615]10:9 [1616]10:11 [1617]10:11
 [1618]10:12 [1619]10:16 [1620]10:16-17 [1621]10:18
 [1622]10:18 [1623]12:1 [1624]12:1-2 [1625]12:2 [1626]12:2
 [1627]12:3 [1628]12:3 [1629]12:7 [1630]12:9 [1631]12:11
 [1632]12:12 [1633]14:33

 Hosea

 [1634]2:20 [1635]3:4 [1636]4:2 [1637]4:2 [1638]4:6
 [1639]4:6 [1640]4:9 [1641]4:12 [1642]4:13 [1643]5:1-2
 [1644]5:13 [1645]6:1-2 [1646]6:2 [1647]6:4 [1648]6:5
 [1649]6:6 [1650]7:7 [1651]8:3 [1652]8:4 [1653]8:11
 [1654]9:7 [1655]9:10 [1656]9:12 [1657]10:1 [1658]10:1
 [1659]10:6 [1660]10:12 [1661]11:1 [1662]13:7-8 [1663]13:14
 [1664]13:14

 Joel

 [1665]1:4 [1666]1:10 [1667]1:13 [1668]1:19 [1669]2:3
 [1670]2:5 [1671]2:14 [1672]2:15 [1673]2:17 [1674]2:17
 [1675]2:23 [1676]2:28 [1677]2:28 [1678]2:28 [1679]2:29
 [1680]2:31 [1681]3:18

 Amos

 [1682]1:12 [1683]2:7 [1684]2:8 [1685]4:7 [1686]4:9
 [1687]4:13 [1688]4:13 [1689]5:8 [1690]5:8 [1691]5:10
 [1692]5:10 [1693]5:26 [1694]6:4-6 [1695]7:14 [1696]8:5
 [1697]8:9 [1698]8:10 [1699]8:11 [1700]8:11 [1701]9:6
 [1702]9:6

 Obadiah

 [1703]1:9

 Jonah

 [1704]1:3 [1705]1:3 [1706]1:6 [1707]1:12 [1708]1:12
 [1709]2:1 [1710]2:2 [1711]2:6 [1712]2:8 [1713]3:5
 [1714]3:7-10 [1715]3:10 [1716]4:8

 Micah

 [1717]2:3 [1718]3:8 [1719]3:10-12 [1720]3:12 [1721]3:12
 [1722]4:2 [1723]5:2 [1724]5:2 [1725]5:2 [1726]5:3 [1727]6:3
 [1728]7:1 [1729]7:1-4 [1730]7:2 [1731]7:6

 Nahum

 [1732]1:1-2 [1733]2:1 [1734]2:10

 Habakkuk

 [1735]1:2 [1736]1:5 [1737]1:16 [1738]2:1 [1739]2:1
 [1740]2:1 [1741]2:15 [1742]2:16 [1743]3:2 [1744]3:3
 [1745]3:13

 Zephaniah

 [1746]3:4 [1747]3:7 [1748]3:8 [1749]3:9 [1750]3:9
 [1751]3:10 [1752]3:14-15

 Haggai

 [1753]1:1 [1754]1:9 [1755]2:4 [1756]2:5 [1757]2:6 [1758]2:7
 [1759]2:8 [1760]2:8 [1761]2:8 [1762]2:12

 Zechariah

 [1763]1:6 [1764]2:10-11 [1765]3:1 [1766]3:9 [1767]4:7
 [1768]4:10 [1769]5:1 [1770]5:8 [1771]7:11 [1772]7:13
 [1773]9:9 [1774]9:9 [1775]9:11 [1776]9:11 [1777]10:3
 [1778]11:2 [1779]11:2 [1780]11:3 [1781]11:5 [1782]11:5
 [1783]11:5-6 [1784]11:12 [1785]11:12 [1786]11:13 [1787]11:15
 [1788]12:1 [1789]12:10 [1790]12:12 [1791]12:12 [1792]12:12
 [1793]13:7 [1794]13:7 [1795]14:4 [1796]14:6-7 [1797]14:7

 Malachi

 [1798]1:1 [1799]1:6 [1800]1:7 [1801]1:10 [1802]1:11
 [1803]1:13 [1804]2:5-7 [1805]2:13 [1806]3:1 [1807]3:1-3
 [1808]3:2-3 [1809]3:5 [1810]3:6 [1811]3:8 [1812]4:2 [1813]4:2

 Matthew

 [1814]1:1 [1815]1:20 [1816]1:23 [1817]1:24 [1818]1:25
 [1819]2 [1820]2:2 [1821]2:4 [1822]2:6 [1823]2:9 [1824]2:9
 [1825]2:11 [1826]2:13 [1827]2:13 [1828]2:13 [1829]2:16
 [1830]3:3 [1831]3:3 [1832]3:4 [1833]3:5 [1834]3:5 [1835]3:6
 [1836]3:6 [1837]3:7 [1838]3:7 [1839]3:10 [1840]3:11
 [1841]3:11 [1842]3:11 [1843]3:12 [1844]3:13 [1845]3:13
 [1846]3:13 [1847]3:13-17 [1848]3:14 [1849]3:16 [1850]3:17
 [1851]3:17 [1852]3:17 [1853]3:17 [1854]3:17 [1855]4:1-11
 [1856]4:2 [1857]4:2 [1858]4:6 [1859]4:9 [1860]4:11
 [1861]4:17 [1862]4:23 [1863]5:4 [1864]5:6 [1865]5:6
 [1866]5:14 [1867]5:14 [1868]5:15 [1869]5:16 [1870]5:16
 [1871]5:16 [1872]5:17 [1873]5:17 [1874]5:18 [1875]5:23
 [1876]5:28 [1877]5:28 [1878]5:30 [1879]5:40 [1880]5:45
 [1881]5:48 [1882]6:8 [1883]6:19 [1884]6:19 [1885]6:22
 [1886]6:24 [1887]6:26 [1888]6:26 [1889]7:2 [1890]7:2
 [1891]7:6 [1892]7:6 [1893]7:6 [1894]7:6 [1895]7:6 [1896]7:6
 [1897]7:13 [1898]7:13-14 [1899]7:14 [1900]7:15 [1901]7:26
 [1902]8:8 [1903]8:17 [1904]8:17 [1905]8:17 [1906]8:24
 [1907]8:24 [1908]8:25-26 [1909]8:25-26 [1910]8:32 [1911]9:2
 [1912]9:6 [1913]9:6 [1914]9:13 [1915]9:14 [1916]9:15
 [1917]9:20 [1918]9:20 [1919]9:25 [1920]9:33 [1921]10:7-8
 [1922]10:8 [1923]10:9 [1924]10:9 [1925]10:10 [1926]10:16
 [1927]10:20 [1928]10:23 [1929]10:23 [1930]10:28 [1931]10:29
 [1932]10:34 [1933]10:35 [1934]10:37 [1935]11:3 [1936]11:3
 [1937]11:11 [1938]11:11 [1939]11:11 [1940]11:12 [1941]11:13
 [1942]11:15 [1943]11:20 [1944]11:25 [1945]11:27 [1946]11:27
 [1947]11:27 [1948]11:27 [1949]11:27 [1950]11:27 [1951]11:27
 [1952]11:28 [1953]11:28 [1954]11:28 [1955]11:29 [1956]12:28
 [1957]12:29 [1958]12:31 [1959]12:31 [1960]12:32 [1961]12:32
 [1962]12:34 [1963]12:35 [1964]12:36 [1965]12:40 [1966]12:42
 [1967]13:5 [1968]13:7 [1969]13:13 [1970]13:13 [1971]13:15
 [1972]13:15 [1973]13:16 [1974]13:21 [1975]13:25 [1976]13:31
 [1977]13:32 [1978]13:43 [1979]13:43 [1980]13:43 [1981]13:46
 [1982]13:47 [1983]14:10 [1984]14:19 [1985]14:25 [1986]14:29
 [1987]14:29 [1988]14:30 [1989]15:4 [1990]15:17 [1991]15:21
 [1992]15:27 [1993]16:1 [1994]16:16-17 [1995]16:17 [1996]16:18
 [1997]16:19 [1998]16:19 [1999]16:19 [2000]16:22-23 [2001]17:2
 [2002]17:2 [2003]17:20 [2004]17:24 [2005]18:6 [2006]18:10
 [2007]18:10 [2008]18:12 [2009]18:12 [2010]18:19 [2011]18:20
 [2012]18:21 [2013]18:22 [2014]18:22 [2015]18:23 [2016]18:28
 [2017]19:1 [2018]19:10 [2019]19:16-18 [2020]19:21 [2021]19:24
 [2022]19:26 [2023]19:26 [2024]19:29 [2025]20:1 [2026]20:12
 [2027]20:12 [2028]20:14 [2029]20:18 [2030]20:20 [2031]20:30
 [2032]21:9 [2033]21:9 [2034]21:10 [2035]21:19 [2036]21:31
 [2037]21:31 [2038]22:10 [2039]22:12 [2040]22:12 [2041]22:13
 [2042]22:32 [2043]22:32 [2044]22:43 [2045]23:2 [2046]23:7
 [2047]23:12 [2048]23:13 [2049]23:15 [2050]23:25-26
 [2051]23:27 [2052]23:37 [2053]23:38 [2054]23:39 [2055]24
 [2056]24:2 [2057]24:2 [2058]24:3 [2059]24:3-4 [2060]24:4
 [2061]24:5 [2062]24:6 [2063]24:10 [2064]24:12 [2065]24:12
 [2066]24:14 [2067]24:15 [2068]24:15 [2069]24:16 [2070]24:21
 [2071]24:22 [2072]24:23 [2073]24:23 [2074]24:24 [2075]24:27
 [2076]24:29 [2077]24:30 [2078]24:30 [2079]24:30 [2080]24:30
 [2081]24:31 [2082]24:35 [2083]24:42 [2084]24:42 [2085]24:44
 [2086]24:50 [2087]25:2 [2088]25:8 [2089]25:12 [2090]25:15
 [2091]25:21 [2092]25:26 [2093]25:27 [2094]25:27 [2095]25:29
 [2096]25:31 [2097]25:32 [2098]25:33 [2099]25:34 [2100]25:35
 [2101]25:35-36 [2102]25:41 [2103]25:41 [2104]25:46 [2105]26:2
 [2106]26:2 [2107]26:15 [2108]26:25 [2109]26:26 [2110]26:28
 [2111]26:39 [2112]26:41 [2113]26:49 [2114]26:49 [2115]26:63
 [2116]26:64 [2117]26:67 [2118]27:3 [2119]27:3 [2120]27:5
 [2121]27:5 [2122]27:7 [2123]27:13 [2124]27:24 [2125]27:24-25
 [2126]27:26 [2127]27:28 [2128]27:34 [2129]27:35 [2130]27:45
 [2131]27:45 [2132]27:48 [2133]27:50 [2134]27:51 [2135]27:51
 [2136]27:52 [2137]27:52 [2138]27:52 [2139]27:52-53
 [2140]27:54 [2141]27:60 [2142]27:63 [2143]27:63 [2144]27:65
 [2145]28:5 [2146]28:5 [2147]28:7 [2148]28:7 [2149]28:9
 [2150]28:9 [2151]28:13 [2152]28:19 [2153]28:19 [2154]28:20
 [2155]38:14

 Mark

 [2156]1:1 [2157]1:4 [2158]1:4 [2159]1:5 [2160]1:24
 [2161]2:4 [2162]2:15-16 [2163]2:19 [2164]3:17 [2165]3:23
 [2166]3:29 [2167]4:3 [2168]4:14 [2169]4:34 [2170]4:38
 [2171]5:3 [2172]5:13 [2173]6:5 [2174]7:5 [2175]7:32
 [2176]9:24 [2177]9:24 [2178]9:44 [2179]10:17 [2180]10:21
 [2181]10:38 [2182]11:1 [2183]11:23 [2184]13:32 [2185]13:32
 [2186]14:31 [2187]14:32 [2188]14:38 [2189]14:51 [2190]15:21
 [2191]15:23 [2192]15:46 [2193]16:16 [2194]16:17 [2195]16:19

 Luke

 [2196]1 [2197]1:1 [2198]1:17 [2199]1:23 [2200]1:26-27
 [2201]1:32 [2202]1:33 [2203]1:33 [2204]1:34-35 [2205]1:35
 [2206]1:35 [2207]1:35 [2208]1:35 [2209]1:41 [2210]1:41
 [2211]1:41 [2212]1:43 [2213]1:44 [2214]1:45 [2215]1:53
 [2216]1:67 [2217]1:69 [2218]1:76 [2219]1:76 [2220]1:78
 [2221]2:1-5 [2222]2:4-5 [2223]2:7 [2224]2:9 [2225]2:10-11
 [2226]2:11 [2227]2:14 [2228]2:14 [2229]2:14-15 [2230]2:24
 [2231]2:26-35 [2232]2:29-30 [2233]2:33 [2234]2:41 [2235]2:41
 [2236]2:49 [2237]2:52 [2238]2:52 [2239]3:3 [2240]3:4
 [2241]3:9 [2242]3:11 [2243]3:22 [2244]3:22 [2245]3:23
 [2246]3:23 [2247]3:29 [2248]3:34 [2249]4:1 [2250]4:1
 [2251]4:2 [2252]4:6 [2253]4:6 [2254]4:18 [2255]4:23
 [2256]4:29-30 [2257]4:34 [2258]4:41 [2259]5:8 [2260]5:8
 [2261]5:29 [2262]6:6 [2263]6:12 [2264]6:16 [2265]6:44
 [2266]7:26 [2267]7:38 [2268]8:6 [2269]8:6 [2270]8:14
 [2271]8:18 [2272]8:28-33 [2273]8:31 [2274]8:44 [2275]9:1
 [2276]9:3 [2277]9:5 [2278]9:30-31 [2279]9:32 [2280]9:34
 [2281]9:54 [2282]9:60 [2283]10:17 [2284]10:18 [2285]10:18
 [2286]10:18 [2287]10:18 [2288]10:19 [2289]10:19 [2290]10:22
 [2291]10:30 [2292]11:13 [2293]11:24 [2294]11:24 [2295]11:36
 [2296]12:11-12 [2297]12:18 [2298]12:28 [2299]12:42
 [2300]12:44 [2301]12:46 [2302]12:47 [2303]12:49 [2304]12:49
 [2305]12:49 [2306]12:49 [2307]13:7 [2308]13:8 [2309]13:8
 [2310]13:10 [2311]13:11 [2312]13:15 [2313]14:5 [2314]14:16
 [2315]14:16 [2316]14:28 [2317]15:2 [2318]15:4 [2319]15:4
 [2320]15:4-5 [2321]15:5-6 [2322]15:7 [2323]15:8 [2324]15:8-9
 [2325]15:9 [2326]15:10 [2327]15:20 [2328]16:9 [2329]16:9
 [2330]16:13 [2331]16:19 [2332]16:24 [2333]17:5 [2334]17:12
 [2335]17:34 [2336]17:35 [2337]18:1 [2338]18:13 [2339]18:14
 [2340]18:19 [2341]19:1 [2342]19:3 [2343]19:9 [2344]19:13
 [2345]19:23 [2346]19:23 [2347]19:35 [2348]21:11 [2349]21:11
 [2350]21:20-24 [2351]21:28 [2352]22:44 [2353]22:48
 [2354]22:50 [2355]23:6-7 [2356]23:7 [2357]23:9 [2358]23:12
 [2359]23:14 [2360]23:40 [2361]23:41 [2362]23:42 [2363]23:43
 [2364]23:43 [2365]23:43 [2366]23:43 [2367]23:46 [2368]23:50
 [2369]23:52 [2370]24:1 [2371]24:5 [2372]24:32 [2373]24:36-53
 [2374]24:37 [2375]24:39 [2376]24:39 [2377]24:41 [2378]24:49
 [2379]24:50 [2380]24:51

 John

 [2381]1:1 [2382]1:1 [2383]1:1 [2384]1:1 [2385]1:1 [2386]1:1
 [2387]1:1-3 [2388]1:2 [2389]1:2 [2390]1:3 [2391]1:3
 [2392]1:3 [2393]1:3 [2394]1:3 [2395]1:3 [2396]1:4 [2397]1:5
 [2398]1:5 [2399]1:8 [2400]1:9 [2401]1:9 [2402]1:9 [2403]1:9
 [2404]1:10-11 [2405]1:11 [2406]1:11 [2407]1:12 [2408]1:12
 [2409]1:12-13 [2410]1:14 [2411]1:14 [2412]1:14 [2413]1:14
 [2414]1:14 [2415]1:18 [2416]1:18 [2417]1:18 [2418]1:18
 [2419]1:18 [2420]1:18 [2421]1:23 [2422]1:23 [2423]1:27
 [2424]1:29 [2425]1:29 [2426]1:29 [2427]1:32 [2428]1:33
 [2429]1:33 [2430]2:1-11 [2431]2:1-11 [2432]2:15 [2433]2:15
 [2434]2:16 [2435]2:25 [2436]3:3 [2437]3:3 [2438]3:3
 [2439]3:4 [2440]3:5 [2441]3:8 [2442]3:8 [2443]3:8 [2444]3:8
 [2445]3:13 [2446]3:13 [2447]3:14 [2448]3:16 [2449]3:18
 [2450]3:18 [2451]3:18 [2452]3:24 [2453]3:24 [2454]3:29
 [2455]3:33 [2456]3:34 [2457]3:34-35 [2458]3:36 [2459]3:36
 [2460]3:36 [2461]3:39 [2462]4:7 [2463]4:14 [2464]4:23
 [2465]4:24 [2466]4:24 [2467]4:24 [2468]4:24 [2469]4:29
 [2470]4:34 [2471]4:36 [2472]5:1 [2473]5:8 [2474]5:14
 [2475]5:14 [2476]5:17 [2477]5:17 [2478]5:17 [2479]5:19
 [2480]5:19 [2481]5:19 [2482]5:19 [2483]5:21 [2484]5:22
 [2485]5:22 [2486]5:22 [2487]5:23 [2488]5:23 [2489]5:24
 [2490]5:24 [2491]5:24 [2492]5:26 [2493]5:27 [2494]5:29
 [2495]5:29 [2496]5:30 [2497]5:34 [2498]5:35 [2499]5:35
 [2500]5:35 [2501]5:35 [2502]5:35 [2503]5:37 [2504]5:43
 [2505]6:10 [2506]6:27 [2507]6:27 [2508]6:32-33 [2509]6:33
 [2510]6:33 [2511]6:38 [2512]6:40 [2513]6:45 [2514]6:46
 [2515]6:46 [2516]6:50 [2517]6:51 [2518]6:53 [2519]6:57
 [2520]6:63 [2521]6:63 [2522]7:7 [2523]7:12 [2524]7:17
 [2525]7:19 [2526]7:37 [2527]7:38-39 [2528]8:12 [2529]8:25
 [2530]8:29 [2531]8:38 [2532]8:39 [2533]8:40 [2534]8:41
 [2535]8:44 [2536]8:48 [2537]8:48 [2538]8:49 [2539]8:54
 [2540]8:56 [2541]8:58 [2542]8:59 [2543]9:5 [2544]9:28
 [2545]10:1 [2546]10:7 [2547]10:9 [2548]10:9 [2549]10:11
 [2550]10:11 [2551]10:11 [2552]10:11 [2553]10:14 [2554]10:15
 [2555]10:15 [2556]10:15 [2557]10:18 [2558]10:18 [2559]10:18
 [2560]10:18 [2561]10:30 [2562]10:36 [2563]11:14-44
 [2564]11:34 [2565]11:43 [2566]11:43 [2567]11:43 [2568]11:47
 [2569]12:13 [2570]12:23 [2571]12:24 [2572]12:25 [2573]12:25
 [2574]12:35 [2575]12:48 [2576]12:49 [2577]13:4 [2578]13:4-5
 [2579]13:9 [2580]13:31 [2581]14:6 [2582]14:6 [2583]14:6
 [2584]14:9 [2585]14:9 [2586]14:9 [2587]14:11 [2588]14:16
 [2589]14:16 [2590]14:16 [2591]14:16 [2592]14:16-17
 [2593]14:16-17 [2594]14:23 [2595]14:24 [2596]14:25
 [2597]14:25 [2598]14:26 [2599]14:26 [2600]14:26 [2601]14:28
 [2602]14:30 [2603]14:31 [2604]15:1 [2605]15:1 [2606]15:3
 [2607]15:4 [2608]15:5 [2609]15:5 [2610]15:10 [2611]15:26
 [2612]15:26 [2613]15:26 [2614]15:26 [2615]16:7 [2616]16:7
 [2617]16:7 [2618]16:8 [2619]16:8 [2620]16:12 [2621]16:12
 [2622]16:12-15 [2623]16:13 [2624]16:13-14 [2625]16:14-15
 [2626]16:15 [2627]16:28 [2628]16:33 [2629]16:33 [2630]17:2
 [2631]17:2 [2632]17:3 [2633]17:5 [2634]17:5 [2635]17:5
 [2636]17:10 [2637]17:24 [2638]17:25 [2639]17:25 [2640]18:8
 [2641]18:18 [2642]19:1 [2643]19:15 [2644]19:17 [2645]19:19
 [2646]19:22 [2647]19:24 [2648]19:26-27 [2649]19:29
 [2650]19:29 [2651]19:30 [2652]19:34 [2653]19:39 [2654]19:39
 [2655]19:41 [2656]19:41 [2657]20:1 [2658]20:3 [2659]20:3-4
 [2660]20:11 [2661]20:13 [2662]20:17 [2663]20:17 [2664]20:17
 [2665]20:17 [2666]20:22 [2667]20:25 [2668]20:28 [2669]20:28
 [2670]21:15 [2671]21:17 [2672]21:25

 Acts

 [2673]1 [2674]1:5 [2675]1:7 [2676]1:18 [2677]2:2 [2678]2:2
 [2679]2:3 [2680]2:4 [2681]2:4 [2682]2:4 [2683]2:6 [2684]2:8
 [2685]2:9 [2686]2:13 [2687]2:15 [2688]2:15 [2689]2:25
 [2690]2:34 [2691]2:36 [2692]2:36 [2693]2:37 [2694]2:41
 [2695]2:42 [2696]2:58 [2697]3:1 [2698]3:15 [2699]3:21
 [2700]4:8 [2701]4:8 [2702]4:13 [2703]4:13 [2704]4:32
 [2705]5:3 [2706]5:3 [2707]5:4 [2708]5:8 [2709]5:9
 [2710]5:12 [2711]5:13-16 [2712]5:15 [2713]5:15 [2714]5:15
 [2715]5:16 [2716]5:32 [2717]5:42 [2718]6:2 [2719]6:3
 [2720]6:8 [2721]6:10 [2722]6:15 [2723]7:14 [2724]7:37
 [2725]7:44 [2726]7:48 [2727]7:51 [2728]7:55 [2729]7:58
 [2730]7:59 [2731]7:59 [2732]8 [2733]8:5 [2734]8:7
 [2735]8:13 [2736]8:17 [2737]8:17 [2738]8:18 [2739]8:18-21
 [2740]8:19 [2741]8:20 [2742]8:27 [2743]8:29 [2744]8:32
 [2745]8:36 [2746]9:3 [2747]9:3 [2748]9:3-8 [2749]9:17
 [2750]9:21 [2751]9:25 [2752]9:41 [2753]10:9 [2754]10:11-16
 [2755]10:19 [2756]10:36 [2757]10:38 [2758]10:44 [2759]10:48
 [2760]11:24 [2761]11:26 [2762]11:28 [2763]13:2 [2764]13:2
 [2765]13:2-4 [2766]13:41 [2767]14:15 [2768]15:20
 [2769]15:28-29 [2770]15:29 [2771]16:3 [2772]16:18 [2773]17:21
 [2774]17:28 [2775]17:28 [2776]17:32 [2777]18:8 [2778]18:25
 [2779]19:1-6 [2780]19:12 [2781]19:12 [2782]19:12 [2783]19:14
 [2784]19:19 [2785]20:9-12 [2786]20:23 [2787]20:23 [2788]20:35
 [2789]21:21 [2790]21:24 [2791]21:26 [2792]26:24 [2793]26:28
 [2794]28:25

 Romans

 [2795]1:3 [2796]1:3 [2797]1:3-4 [2798]1:4 [2799]1:6
 [2800]1:19 [2801]1:20 [2802]1:22-31 [2803]1:23 [2804]1:25
 [2805]1:27 [2806]1:28 [2807]1:28 [2808]2:15-16 [2809]2:18
 [2810]2:20 [2811]2:24 [2812]2:24 [2813]2:25 [2814]2:29
 [2815]3:12 [2816]3:30 [2817]4 [2818]4:11 [2819]4:17
 [2820]4:17 [2821]4:17-18 [2822]4:18 [2823]4:19 [2824]5:3
 [2825]5:12 [2826]5:14 [2827]5:17 [2828]5:17-18 [2829]5:20
 [2830]5:20 [2831]5:20 [2832]6:3 [2833]6:3-4 [2834]6:3-4
 [2835]6:3-14 [2836]6:4 [2837]6:4 [2838]6:4 [2839]6:4
 [2840]6:5 [2841]6:5 [2842]6:6 [2843]6:11 [2844]6:12
 [2845]6:13 [2846]6:13 [2847]6:13 [2848]6:14 [2849]6:17
 [2850]6:19 [2851]6:22 [2852]7:16 [2853]7:23 [2854]7:23
 [2855]8:9 [2856]8:9 [2857]8:11 [2858]8:11 [2859]8:11
 [2860]8:14 [2861]8:14 [2862]8:15 [2863]8:15-16 [2864]8:17
 [2865]8:18 [2866]8:26 [2867]8:26 [2868]8:26 [2869]8:28
 [2870]8:29 [2871]8:34 [2872]8:35 [2873]9:3 [2874]9:5
 [2875]9:11 [2876]9:16 [2877]9:17 [2878]9:27 [2879]9:28
 [2880]9:28 [2881]9:33 [2882]10:2 [2883]10:2 [2884]10:2
 [2885]10:6-7 [2886]10:15 [2887]10:18 [2888]11:4 [2889]11:16
 [2890]11:16 [2891]11:20 [2892]11:23 [2893]11:24 [2894]11:33
 [2895]11:33 [2896]11:33 [2897]11:33 [2898]11:35 [2899]11:36
 [2900]11:36 [2901]11:36 [2902]12:1 [2903]12:1 [2904]12:1
 [2905]12:4 [2906]13:1-3 [2907]13:13 [2908]13:13 [2909]14:2
 [2910]14:3 [2911]14:6 [2912]14:9 [2913]15:1 [2914]15:12
 [2915]15:16 [2916]15:19 [2917]15:19 [2918]15:21 [2919]16:17
 [2920]19

 1 Corinthians

 [2921]1:9 [2922]1:9 [2923]1:17 [2924]1:18 [2925]1:23
 [2926]1:23 [2927]1:23 [2928]1:24 [2929]1:24 [2930]1:27
 [2931]1:29 [2932]2:4 [2933]2:4 [2934]2:6 [2935]2:6
 [2936]2:7 [2937]2:7 [2938]2:8 [2939]2:9 [2940]2:9 [2941]2:9
 [2942]2:10 [2943]2:10 [2944]2:10 [2945]2:10 [2946]2:10
 [2947]2:10 [2948]2:10-11 [2949]2:10-11 [2950]2:11 [2951]2:11
 [2952]2:13 [2953]2:13 [2954]2:16 [2955]2:16 [2956]2:17
 [2957]3:1-2 [2958]3:2 [2959]3:2 [2960]3:6 [2961]3:6
 [2962]3:9 [2963]3:12 [2964]3:12 [2965]3:12 [2966]3:12
 [2967]3:12-13 [2968]3:12-19 [2969]3:13 [2970]3:15 [2971]3:15
 [2972]3:18 [2973]4:1 [2974]4:1 [2975]4:3 [2976]4:5
 [2977]4:9 [2978]4:9 [2979]4:9 [2980]4:12 [2981]4:12
 [2982]4:15 [2983]4:15 [2984]4:15 [2985]4:15 [2986]4:15
 [2987]4:15 [2988]4:21 [2989]4:21 [2990]5:5 [2991]5:8
 [2992]5:17 [2993]6:1 [2994]6:7 [2995]6:9-10 [2996]6:19
 [2997]6:19 [2998]6:19 [2999]7:3 [3000]7:5 [3001]7:8
 [3002]7:8-9 [3003]7:9 [3004]7:25 [3005]7:31 [3006]7:40
 [3007]8:2 [3008]8:5-6 [3009]8:5-6 [3010]8:5-6 [3011]8:6
 [3012]8:6 [3013]9:3 [3014]9:18 [3015]9:22 [3016]9:22
 [3017]9:22 [3018]9:22 [3019]9:27 [3020]10:2 [3021]10:4
 [3022]10:10 [3023]10:11 [3024]10:14-21 [3025]10:19-21
 [3026]10:20 [3027]10:21 [3028]10:33 [3029]11:2 [3030]11:3
 [3031]11:3 [3032]11:3 [3033]11:7 [3034]11:23 [3035]11:23
 [3036]12:1 [3037]12:3 [3038]12:4 [3039]12:7-11 [3040]12:8
 [3041]12:8 [3042]12:8-9 [3043]12:9-10 [3044]12:11 [3045]12:11
 [3046]12:11 [3047]12:12 [3048]12:20 [3049]12:23 [3050]12:28
 [3051]12:29 [3052]13 [3053]13:7 [3054]13:7 [3055]13:9
 [3056]13:12 [3057]13:12 [3058]13:12 [3059]13:12 [3060]13:12
 [3061]14:2 [3062]14:8 [3063]14:15 [3064]14:19 [3065]14:22
 [3066]14:22 [3067]14:23 [3068]14:24 [3069]14:28 [3070]14:28
 [3071]14:29 [3072]14:32 [3073]14:34 [3074]15:1-4 [3075]15:3-4
 [3076]15:4 [3077]15:5-6 [3078]15:7 [3079]15:8 [3080]15:9
 [3081]15:9 [3082]15:10 [3083]15:14-15 [3084]15:16 [3085]15:17
 [3086]15:19 [3087]15:20 [3088]15:20 [3089]15:22 [3090]15:25
 [3091]15:25 [3092]15:27-28 [3093]15:28 [3094]15:28
 [3095]15:28 [3096]15:35 [3097]15:35 [3098]15:36 [3099]15:36
 [3100]15:41 [3101]15:45 [3102]15:47 [3103]15:47 [3104]15:49
 [3105]15:49 [3106]15:49 [3107]15:49 [3108]15:52 [3109]15:53
 [3110]15:55 [3111]15:55 [3112]15:55 [3113]16:20

 2 Corinthians

 [3114]1:3 [3115]1:3 [3116]1:22 [3117]1:22 [3118]2:6
 [3119]2:7 [3120]2:8 [3121]2:11 [3122]2:15 [3123]2:16-17
 [3124]3:1 [3125]3:3 [3126]3:6-7 [3127]3:7 [3128]3:10
 [3129]3:14-15 [3130]3:18 [3131]3:18 [3132]3:18 [3133]4:3
 [3134]4:4 [3135]4:4 [3136]4:4 [3137]4:5 [3138]4:6 [3139]4:7
 [3140]4:10 [3141]4:18 [3142]5:1 [3143]5:4 [3144]5:6
 [3145]5:16 [3146]5:17 [3147]5:17 [3148]5:20 [3149]5:21
 [3150]5:21 [3151]6 [3152]6:1 [3153]6:2 [3154]6:2 [3155]6:7
 [3156]6:7 [3157]6:7-8 [3158]6:10 [3159]6:14 [3160]6:14
 [3161]6:16 [3162]6:16 [3163]6:16 [3164]8:3 [3165]8:6
 [3166]8:9 [3167]8:9 [3168]8:9 [3169]9:7 [3170]10:5
 [3171]10:14-16 [3172]11:6 [3173]11:6 [3174]11:14 [3175]11:14
 [3176]11:16 [3177]11:17 [3178]11:23 [3179]11:23 [3180]11:28
 [3181]11:28-29 [3182]12:2 [3183]12:2 [3184]12:2 [3185]12:2
 [3186]12:2 [3187]12:2 [3188]12:4 [3189]12:4 [3190]12:4
 [3191]12:7 [3192]12:7 [3193]12:9-10 [3194]12:13 [3195]12:17
 [3196]13:3 [3197]13:3 [3198]13:4 [3199]13:5-7 [3200]13:14

 Galatians

 [3201]1:8-9 [3202]1:10 [3203]1:10 [3204]2:2 [3205]2:2
 [3206]2:7 [3207]2:8-9 [3208]2:9 [3209]2:9 [3210]2:18
 [3211]3:1 [3212]3:10 [3213]3:13 [3214]3:13 [3215]3:13
 [3216]3:13 [3217]3:24 [3218]3:24 [3219]3:27 [3220]3:27
 [3221]3:28 [3222]4:2 [3223]4:4 [3224]4:4-6 [3225]4:6
 [3226]4:10 [3227]4:25 [3228]4:26 [3229]4:26 [3230]5:10
 [3231]5:12 [3232]5:12 [3233]5:16 [3234]5:22 [3235]5:22-23
 [3236]6:6 [3237]6:14 [3238]6:14 [3239]7:7-17

 Ephesians

 [3240]1:3 [3241]1:5 [3242]1:7 [3243]1:11 [3244]1:13
 [3245]1:13 [3246]1:17 [3247]1:17 [3248]1:17-18 [3249]1:18
 [3250]1:19-20 [3251]1:23 [3252]1:23 [3253]2 [3254]2:4
 [3255]2:8 [3256]2:10 [3257]2:10 [3258]2:14 [3259]2:22
 [3260]3:2 [3261]3:5 [3262]3:6 [3263]3:9 [3264]3:11
 [3265]3:13 [3266]3:14-15 [3267]3:14-15 [3268]3:14-16
 [3269]3:17 [3270]3:17 [3271]4:5 [3272]4:8 [3273]4:11
 [3274]4:11 [3275]4:13 [3276]4:14 [3277]4:15 [3278]4:15
 [3279]4:16 [3280]4:22 [3281]4:22 [3282]4:22 [3283]4:24
 [3284]4:24 [3285]4:26 [3286]4:27 [3287]4:30 [3288]5:6
 [3289]5:7 [3290]5:11 [3291]5:14 [3292]5:14 [3293]5:22
 [3294]5:22 [3295]5:25 [3296]5:25 [3297]5:26 [3298]5:26
 [3299]5:27 [3300]5:32 [3301]6:1-4 [3302]6:5 [3303]6:9
 [3304]6:11 [3305]6:11 [3306]6:12 [3307]6:12 [3308]6:14
 [3309]6:15 [3310]6:16 [3311]6:16 [3312]6:17 [3313]6:17
 [3314]6:18-19 [3315]7:6

 Philippians

 [3316]1:11 [3317]1:19 [3318]1:23 [3319]1:23 [3320]1:23
 [3321]1:23 [3322]2:4 [3323]2:6 [3324]2:7 [3325]2:7
 [3326]2:7 [3327]2:7 [3328]2:7 [3329]2:8 [3330]2:9 [3331]2:9
 [3332]2:10 [3333]2:11 [3334]2:11 [3335]2:15 [3336]2:15-16
 [3337]2:16 [3338]2:17 [3339]3:1 [3340]3:3 [3341]3:4
 [3342]3:8 [3343]3:13 [3344]3:14 [3345]3:21 [3346]3:21
 [3347]3:21 [3348]4:1 [3349]4:4 [3350]4:7 [3351]4:13

 Colossians

 [3352]1:5 [3353]1:11 [3354]1:15 [3355]1:16 [3356]1:16
 [3357]1:16 [3358]1:16 [3359]1:16 [3360]1:16-17 [3361]1:17
 [3362]1:18 [3363]1:18 [3364]1:20 [3365]1:20 [3366]1:25
 [3367]2:5 [3368]2:8 [3369]2:8 [3370]2:10 [3371]2:11
 [3372]2:11-12 [3373]2:12 [3374]2:12 [3375]2:14 [3376]2:15
 [3377]2:15 [3378]3:1 [3379]3:3 [3380]3:5 [3381]3:5
 [3382]3:5 [3383]3:5 [3384]3:9 [3385]3:9 [3386]3:10
 [3387]3:10 [3388]3:11 [3389]3:20 [3390]4:18 [3391]712

 1 Thessalonians

 [3392]2:16 [3393]2:19 [3394]4:13 [3395]4:16 [3396]4:16
 [3397]4:16 [3398]4:16-17 [3399]4:17 [3400]4:17 [3401]5:18
 [3402]5:19 [3403]5:21-22 [3404]5:21-22 [3405]5:23 [3406]5:23

 2 Thessalonians

 [3407]2:3-10 [3408]2:4 [3409]2:7 [3410]2:8 [3411]2:9
 [3412]2:11-12 [3413]2:15 [3414]3:5

 1 Timothy

 [3415]1:13 [3416]1:13 [3417]1:14 [3418]1:17 [3419]1:17
 [3420]2:2 [3421]2:2 [3422]2:5 [3423]2:6 [3424]2:7 [3425]2:8
 [3426]2:12 [3427]2:16 [3428]3 [3429]3:2 [3430]3:2
 [3431]3:15 [3432]3:16 [3433]4:1 [3434]4:3 [3435]5:21
 [3436]5:21 [3437]5:23 [3438]6:8 [3439]6:10 [3440]6:13-14
 [3441]6:15-16 [3442]6:16 [3443]6:16 [3444]6:16 [3445]6:19
 [3446]6:20 [3447]6:20 [3448]6:20 [3449]7:15

 2 Timothy

 [3450]1:10 [3451]1:11 [3452]1:11 [3453]1:14 [3454]1:14
 [3455]1:14 [3456]2:3 [3457]2:4 [3458]2:5 [3459]2:8
 [3460]2:8 [3461]2:8 [3462]2:13 [3463]2:16 [3464]3:8
 [3465]4:2 [3466]4:3 [3467]4:3 [3468]4:7

 Titus

 [3469]1:7 [3470]2:11 [3471]2:14 [3472]2:14 [3473]3:4
 [3474]3:4

 Hebrews

 [3475]1:1 [3476]1:2 [3477]1:3 [3478]1:3 [3479]1:3 [3480]1:6
 [3481]1:8 [3482]1:9 [3483]1:10-12 [3484]1:10-12 [3485]1:13
 [3486]1:14 [3487]2:4 [3488]2:12 [3489]2:13 [3490]2:13
 [3491]2:14 [3492]2:14 [3493]2:14 [3494]2:14-15 [3495]2:18
 [3496]3:1 [3497]3:7 [3498]3:13 [3499]3:14 [3500]3:15
 [3501]4:12 [3502]4:14 [3503]4:15 [3504]4:15 [3505]4:16
 [3506]5:2 [3507]5:4-6 [3508]5:7 [3509]5:7 [3510]5:8
 [3511]5:8 [3512]5:9 [3513]5:12 [3514]5:12 [3515]5:12-14
 [3516]5:14 [3517]5:14 [3518]5:14 [3519]6:11-14 [3520]6:13-20
 [3521]6:18 [3522]7:3 [3523]7:10 [3524]7:13 [3525]7:21
 [3526]7:23 [3527]7:24 [3528]7:25 [3529]7:27 [3530]8:2
 [3531]8:8-13 [3532]9:3 [3533]9:7 [3534]9:7 [3535]9:10
 [3536]9:11 [3537]9:11 [3538]9:14 [3539]9:19 [3540]9:19
 [3541]9:24 [3542]9:24 [3543]9:24 [3544]9:26 [3545]10:1
 [3546]10:1 [3547]10:4 [3548]10:12 [3549]10:15 [3550]10:19
 [3551]10:20 [3552]10:22 [3553]10:29 [3554]10:31 [3555]10:38
 [3556]11:1-2 [3557]11:5 [3558]11:6 [3559]11:8 [3560]11:8-10
 [3561]11:9 [3562]11:11-12 [3563]11:19 [3564]11:26 [3565]11:27
 [3566]11:27 [3567]11:34 [3568]11:37 [3569]11:38 [3570]11:38
 [3571]12:2 [3572]12:2 [3573]12:2 [3574]12:2 [3575]12:9
 [3576]12:15 [3577]12:15 [3578]12:16 [3579]12:18 [3580]12:20
 [3581]12:21 [3582]12:22 [3583]12:22-23 [3584]12:23
 [3585]12:23 [3586]12:26 [3587]12:26 [3588]12:26 [3589]12:27
 [3590]12:27 [3591]13 [3592]13:4 [3593]13:4 [3594]13:8
 [3595]13:8 [3596]13:15 [3597]13:20 [3598]13:20

 James

 [3599]1:2 [3600]1:5 [3601]1:12-13 [3602]1:17 [3603]1:21
 [3604]2:17 [3605]2:19 [3606]2:21 [3607]2:23 [3608]2:25
 [3609]3:9 [3610]3:16 [3611]4:6 [3612]4:8 [3613]5:16-17
 [3614]5:17

 1 Peter

 [3615]1:7 [3616]1:11 [3617]1:17 [3618]1:19 [3619]2:1
 [3620]2:1 [3621]2:4-6 [3622]2:5 [3623]2:6 [3624]2:8
 [3625]2:9 [3626]2:9 [3627]2:9 [3628]2:22 [3629]2:22-23
 [3630]2:24 [3631]3:4 [3632]3:15 [3633]3:19 [3634]3:21
 [3635]3:22 [3636]4:19 [3637]5:2 [3638]5:4 [3639]5:4
 [3640]5:6 [3641]5:6 [3642]5:7 [3643]5:8 [3644]5:8 [3645]5:8
 [3646]5:8 [3647]5:9 [3648]5:9

 2 Peter

 [3649]1:4 [3650]1:4 [3651]1:4 [3652]1:17 [3653]1:19
 [3654]3:10

 1 John

 [3655]1:5 [3656]1:5 [3657]1:7 [3658]1:8 [3659]1:9 [3660]2:1
 [3661]2:15 [3662]2:19 [3663]2:20 [3664]2:20-28 [3665]2:22
 [3666]2:22 [3667]2:23 [3668]2:23 [3669]3:8 [3670]3:10
 [3671]4:18 [3672]5:1 [3673]5:7 [3674]5:7 [3675]5:8
 [3676]5:8 [3677]5:20 [3678]10:9 [3679]14:6

 2 John

 [3680]1:7 [3681]1:10 [3682]1:11

 Jude

 [3683]1:14

 Revelation

 [3684]1:1 [3685]1:7 [3686]1:8 [3687]2:1 [3688]2:5 [3689]2:7
 [3690]5:5 [3691]5:6 [3692]5:12 [3693]7:17 [3694]12:7
 [3695]12:17 [3696]17:11 [3697]18:1 [3698]21:23 [3699]22:5
 [3700]22:14

 Judith

 [3701]5:6

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [3702]1:2 [3703]1:6 [3704]1:7 [3705]2:12 [3706]2:24
 [3707]2:24 [3708]3:7 [3709]3:15 [3710]4:8 [3711]5:9
 [3712]5:10 [3713]6:16 [3714]7:25 [3715]7:26 [3716]9:15
 [3717]13:5 [3718]13:5

 Baruch

 [3719]2:25 [3720]3:17 [3721]3:35 [3722]3:35-37 [3723]3:37
 [3724]3:37

 Susanna

 [3725]1:5 [3726]1:45

 Bel and the Dragon

 [3727]1:33 [3728]1:33

 1 Maccabees

 [3729]2:58

 2 Maccabees

 [3730]2:4 [3731]7:1 [3732]9:4 [3733]9:27

 1 Esdras

 [3734]1:54

 2 Esdras

 [3735]10:22

 Sirach

 [3736]1:2 [3737]3:9 [3738]3:10 [3739]3:11 [3740]3:21-22
 [3741]3:22 [3742]4:30 [3743]4:31 [3744]25:1 [3745]25:9
 [3746]25:9 [3747]32:3 [3748]38:16 [3749]45:12 [3750]49:14

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * vyshl: [3751]1
 * dvphk: [3752]1
 * dvdg: [3753]1
 * dl: [3754]1
 * d"l: [3755]1
 * hdvh: [3756]1
 * hvhy: [3757]1
 * vchysm: [3758]1
 * v&x#o@"hm: [3759]1
 * chysm: [3760]1
 * yds l'": [3761]1
 * ynd': [3762]1
 * yrsb: [3763]1
 * yrvsv: [3764]1
 * l: [3765]1
 * lph': [3766]1
 * nl: [3767]1
 * nmyt": [3768]1
 * gr: [3769]1
 * rymz: [3770]1
 * aidia: [3771]1
 * agenetoi: [3772]1
 * agennetoi: [3773]1
 * agennetos: [3774]1
 * agapesomen: [3775]1
 * agapomen: [3776]1
 * adokimos: [3777]1
 * adelphidon: [3778]1
 * aei kata ta auta kai hosautos echein: [3779]1
 * akouo: [3780]1
 * akroomenoi: [3781]1
 * aktemosi: [3782]1
 * aktemonousi: [3783]1
 * aktemosunen: [3784]1
 * alethinon gennema: [3785]1
 * alla Huios [tou Patros]* ex arches egennethe, [huperano pases
 arches kai aionon tunchanon: [3786]1
 * alla: [3787]1
 * amuetoi: [3788]1 [3789]2
 * anagnosis: [3790]1
 * anadochos: [3791]1
 * anebe: [3792]1
 * anekei: [3793]1
 * anagnosmaton: [3794]1 [3795]2
 * anadidotai: [3796]1
 * anadedegmenoi: [3797]1 [3798]2
 * anadidomenou: [3799]1 [3800]2
 * anastaseos: [3801]1
 * anastenai: [3802]1
 * anastesai: [3803]1
 * anekrathe: [3804]1
 * anelthonta eis ouranous,: [3805]1
 * anexikakos kai summetros sumperipherointo autois: [3806]1
 * anthemis: [3807]1
 * antitupa ton alethinon: [3808]1
 * antitupon: [3809]1 [3810]2 [3811]3 [3812]4 [3813]5 [3814]6
 * antitupos: [3815]1
 * antigennesai: [3816]1
 * antiprosopos: [3817]1
 * antiprosopos: [3818]1
 * antitupou somatos: [3819]1
 * anupostaton: [3820]1 [3821]2
 * anupeuthunos: [3822]1
 * anupostatois logois: [3823]1
 * apenxato: [3824]1
 * apo ton dikaion ton pollon: [3825]1
 * apokruphos: [3826]1
 * aporroia: [3827]1
 * apaugasma: [3828]1 [3829]2
 * apangello: [3830]1
 * apathes kai analloioton: [3831]1
 * apathes: [3832]1
 * aparallaktoi: [3833]1 [3834]2
 * apeirastos: [3835]1
 * apepnige: [3836]1
 * apothemenoi oun pasan kakian kai panta dolon kai hupokriseis kai
 pasas katalalias: [3837]1
 * apoptoseis: [3838]1
 * aporreto: [3839]1
 * apotomen: [3840]1
 * apotropaion: [3841]1
 * arithmetai de auto stagones huetou: [3842]1
 * archas: [3843]1
 * arche: [3844]1
 * archierea tes homologias hemon: [3845]1
 * asage: [3846]1
 * aspasasthe: [3847]1
 * aspazometha: [3848]1
 * atelesteroi: [3849]1
 * atmis: [3850]1
 * aph' houper estin, (esti de aei gennetheis: [3851]1
 * aphairema: [3852]1 [3853]2
 * aphormas: [3854]1
 * aphorme: [3855]1
 * hagion pateron: [3856]1
 * halethinos: [3857]1
 * has kai en 'Ekklesia meta parresias anaginoskomen: [3858]1
 * akros: [3859]1
 * allos: [3860]1
 * anarchon kai aeigenes: [3861]1
 * anarchos: [3862]1 [3863]2
 * anthropos: [3864]1 [3865]2
 * artous elisgemenous ,: [3866]1
 * archein: [3867]1
 * archontas: [3868]1
 * ater d' eunas ktesasthan lithinon gonon: [3869]1
 * achri: [3870]1
 * harchesthai: [3871]1
 * e: [3872]1
 * eidolon: [3873]1
 * engraphon: [3874]1
 * enkecheiristhai: [3875]1
 * enkecheiresthai: [3876]1
 * enkritois panton: [3877]1
 * enkriton: [3878]1
 * ethaumatourgese ten paradoxopoiian: [3879]1
 * etheopoiethe: [3880]1
 * ek Dios archomestha, kai eis Dia legete, moisai: [3881]1
 * ek Parthenou kai Pneumatos Agiou: [3882]1
 * ek gastros pro heosphorou gegenneka se: [3883]1
 * ek duoin enantiotatoin sunkekramenes, hellenikes te kai nomikes
 terateias; hon amphoteron ta mere phugon, ek meron sunetethe.  Tes
 men gar ta eidola kai tas thusias apopempomenoi, timosi to pur kai
 ta luchna; tes de to sabbaton aidoumenoi kai ta peri ta bromata
 estin ha mikrologian, ten peritomen atimazousin: [3884]1
 * ek prokopes: [3885]1 [3886]2 [3887]3 [3888]4
 * ek tes achrantou parthenou Marias ton hemeteron aneilephen
 anthropon Christon 'Iesoun: [3889]1
 * ek tes hupertheseos tes nesteias tes paraskeues: [3890]1
 * ek tes ges: [3891]1
 * ek tes thalasses: [3892]1
 * ek tou me ontos: [3893]1
 * ekkaleisthai: [3894]1
 * ekkaloumen: [3895]1
 * ekklesia: [3896]1
 * ekklesias: [3897]1
 * ekklesiason: [3898]1
 * ekklesiazomenon: [3899]1
 * ekkritois p.: [3900]1
 * ekporeusis: [3901]1
 * ekpetaseos: [3902]1
 * elaio: [3903]1
 * embalomen: [3904]1
 * empagenai: [3905]1
 * emparenai: [3906]1
 * en: [3907]1
 * en anthropois politeusamenon: [3908]1
 * en ekklesiais: [3909]1
 * en exousia: [3910]1
 * en oligo: [3911]1
 * en hupostasei: [3912]1
 * en eidololatreia: [3913]1
 * en eikoni he mimesis, en aletheia de he soteria,: [3914]1
 * en lakko: [3915]1
 * en ousia kai hupostasei: [3916]1
 * en pasin homoios: [3917]1
 * en palatiois: [3918]1
 * en topo hagio: [3919]1
 * en tupo gar artou didotai soi to soma: [3920]1
 * en te nukti en he paredidoto, mallon de heauton paredidou: [3921]1
 * en to G touto legomen: [3922]1
 * en to auto krimati: [3923]1
 * en tois prostagmasi: [3924]1
 * enargeia: [3925]1
 * enanthropesis: [3926]1
 * enanthropesanta: [3927]1 [3928]2
 * energeia: [3929]1
 * enenthropesen: [3930]1
 * enupostaton: [3931]1 [3932]2 [3933]3
 * enupostatos: [3934]1
 * ex arches anarchou: [3935]1
 * ex heteras hupostaseos e ousias: [3936]1 [3937]2
 * ex ouk onton egeneto: [3938]1
 * ex houper en: [3939]1
 * exelipen: [3940]1
 * exeirgasanto: [3941]1
 * exelthein: [3942]1
 * exetazomenon: [3943]1
 * exomologesin.: [3944]1
 * exomologesis: [3945]1
 * exomologesei: [3946]1
 * exomologesomai: [3947]1
 * exomologeisthai, exomologesis: [3948]1
 * exomologoumenos to theo: [3949]1
 * exomologountai hoi daimones ten gastrimargian ten hauton: [3950]1
 * epi metopou kai ton allon sou aistheterion: [3951]1
 * epi periopes: [3952]1
 * epi pleromata hudaton: [3953]1
 * epi prophasei toiade: [3954]1
 * epi toutois megale he doxa kai time pantokratoros: [3955]1
 * epi: [3956]1
 * epistasin: [3957]1
 * ep' autes tes lexeos: [3958]1 [3959]2
 * epangello: [3960]1
 * eparchia: [3961]1
 * epesemeiosametha: [3962]1
 * epignosesthe: [3963]1
 * epiouse hemera: [3964]1
 * epiousios: [3965]1 [3966]2 [3967]3
 * episteme: [3968]1 [3969]2 [3970]3
 * epistasian: [3971]1
 * epistole: [3972]1
 * epiphoitesin: [3973]1
 * erein: [3974]1
 * ereuneseos: [3975]1
 * es touto diebesan: [3976]1
 * estigmenous anthemia: [3977]1
 * ephodion: [3978]1 [3979]2 [3980]3
 * eph' hekastes lexeos: [3981]1
 * heoa te homou lexis kai hesperios--lexis: [3982]1
 * hekklesiastikos: [3983]1
 * hexes: [3984]1
 * heorte heorton, kai paneguris panegurion.  heorte: [3985]1
 * heorte: [3986]1
 * ekpempsis, proodos: [3987]1
 * emphasis: [3988]1
 * ex orous pharan kataskiou daseos: [3989]1
 * esti kai houtos eipein: [3990]1
 * estin: [3991]1
 * echontes zelon tina en allelois peri proteion: [3992]1
 * heos: [3993]1
 * elisgemenen: [3994]1
 * elugismenen: [3995]1
 * eneicheto: [3996]1
 * enescheto: [3997]1
 * he hagiosune: [3998]1
 * he Upapante: [3999]1
 * he theotes: [4000]1
 * he theotokos: [4001]1
 * he kardia autou...hesteken hosper akmon anelatos: [4002]1
 * he soterios: [4003]1
 * he soteria gar haute tes pisteos hemon: [4004]1
 * he ton agathon praxis: [4005]1
 * he cheir 'Abessalom: [4006]1
 * hegiastai kai metabebletai: [4007]1
 * hegemoniko: [4008]1
 * e toiauta: [4009]1
 * hen engraphou su mnemosin deltois phrenon: [4010]1
 * en hote ouk en: [4011]1
 * en pote hote ouk en: [4012]1
 * en pote hote ouk en: [4013]1
 * idean: [4014]1
 * idiotes: [4015]1
 * idiotetes: [4016]1 [4017]2
 * hiereus: [4018]1 [4019]2
 * hina: [4020]1
 * hina me tou psuchous pleion genetai ho chronos, all' hina hai
 nuktes, k.t.l: [4021]1
 * hina te mimesei ton pathematon autou koinonesantes, aletheia ten
 soterian kerdesomen: [4022]1
 * hiptantai: [4023]1
 * olgiostos ei, me ol, ei ouk ol. ei: [4024]1
 * omichle: [4025]1
 * onomatographia: [4026]1 [4027]2
 * oporophulakion: [4028]1
 * ophthalmophanos: [4029]1
 * ho archomenos: [4030]1
 * ho en to G. touto staurotheis: [4031]1
 * ho hiereus ho Christos: [4032]1
 * ho G. ho hagios houtos ho huperanestekos marturei phainomenos:
 [4033]1
 * ho Theos de anarchos arche ton holon panteles arches poietikos:
 [4034]1
 * ho Logos: [4035]1
 * ho gar Theos autos: [4036]1
 * ho gar autos Theos: [4037]1
 * ho gennetheis apathos: [4038]1
 * ho gennetheis apathos.: [4039]1
 * ho gennetheis [apathos pro ton chronon aionion]: [4040]1
 * ho diallasson,: [4041]1
 * ho therapeutes.: [4042]1
 * ho kato: [4043]1
 * ho logos: [4044]1
 * ho makarios houtos G. en ho nun dia ton en auto staurothenta
 sunkekrotemetha: [4045]1
 * ho paron: [4046]1
 * ho protostates ton 'Apostolon kai tes 'Ekklesias koruphaios kerux:
 [4047]1
 * ho tes apostasias anthropos: [4048]1
 * ho tou Patros horos kai logos: [4049]1
 * homilesas: [4050]1
 * homilia: [4051]1
 * homoetheian Theou: [4052]1
 * homoiosis: [4053]1
 * homoiousios: [4054]1
 * homoiopathe: [4055]1
 * homoousion: [4056]1 [4057]2 [4058]3 [4059]4 [4060]5 [4061]6 [4062]7
 [4063]8 [4064]9 [4065]10 [4066]11 [4067]12 [4068]13 [4069]14
 [4070]15
 * homoousios: [4071]1 [4072]2 [4073]3 [4074]4 [4075]5 [4076]6 [4077]7
 [4078]8 [4079]9 [4080]10 [4081]11 [4082]12 [4083]13
 * ho chronois: [4084]1
 * ho chronos: [4085]1
 * horos: [4086]1
 * onta, aei onta: [4087]1
 * homoion te kai aparallakton auton kata panta to Patri: [4088]1
 * homoios en pasin: [4089]1
 * homoios to gegennekoti;  [aidios ex aidiou Patros,]* zoe ek zoes
 gegennemenos. ...kai Theos ek Theou: [4090]1
 * hosa en 'Ekklesiais me anaginosketai: [4091]1
 * hotan: [4092]1
 * hotan gegraptai ....kai apistosin: [4093]1
 * hudaton christophoron echonton euodian: [4094]1
 * humeis: [4095]1
 * huparchousa: [4096]1
 * huper anthropon: [4097]1
 * huper anthropon: [4098]1
 * huper eirenes kai eustatheias tou kosmou: [4099]1
 * huper tou basileos, kai ton en huperoche: [4100]1
 * hupostasin: [4101]1 [4102]2
 * hupostasis: [4103]1 [4104]2 [4105]3 [4106]4 [4107]5 [4108]6 [4109]7
 [4110]8 [4111]9 [4112]10 [4113]11 [4114]12 [4115]13 [4116]14
 [4117]15 [4118]16 [4119]17 [4120]18 [4121]19
 * hupostema: [4122]1
 * hup' eidolois paros een zoon: [4123]1
 * huper: [4124]1
 * hupertheseos: [4125]1
 * hupographen ...hen antomosian kalousin: [4126]1
 * hupographe: [4127]1
 * hupostaseis: [4128]1
 * hupostemati: [4129]1
 * hupharpasai ton to hetero diapheronta: [4130]1
 * huparxis: [4131]1
 * hos: [4132]1 [4133]2
 * hos eis ton ouranon: [4134]1
 * hosphotizomenon ten dianoian ton tauta manthanonton: [4135]1
 * upostasis: [4136]1
 * okonomese: [4137]1
 * 'Adonai: [4138]1
 * 'All' hora me huponoeses ekeino to muron psilon einai. hosper gar
 ho artos tes eucharistias meta ten epiklesin tou hagiou Pneumatos
 ouk eti artos litos, alla soma Christou, houto kai to hagion touto
 muron ouk eti psilon, oud' hos an eipoi tis koinon met' epiklesin,
 alla Christou charisma, kai Pneumatos hagiou parousia tes autou
 theotetos energetikon ginomenon: [4139]1
 * 'All' hos Theou Logon akousantes ....sundromon echousan te boulesei
 ten dunamin: [4140]1
 * 'Anastasis: [4141]1
 * 'Anadidomenou: [4142]1 [4143]2
 * 'Areianophron: [4144]1
 * 'Enkrateia: [4145]1
 * 'Exomologesis: [4146]1
 * 'Exomologesomai soi, Kurie.: [4147]1
 * 'Epiboas epaino hos suntithemenos: [4148]1
 * 'Elias men gar anelephthe eis ouranon: [4149]1
 * 'Iesou Christou tou K. hem.: [4150]1
 * 'Ioanne to Theologo: [4151]1
 * 'Oxun apangeltera logon, Logon hudasin hagnois: [4152]1
 * En pote hote ouk en: [4153]1
 * Os se Logon gennese Pater Pneum' ornin apheken,: [4154]1
 * O Christon echon en sternois: [4155]1
 * O men gar porneusas, pros mian horan d epithumian telei ten praxin;
 kataginoskon de tes praxeos hos miantheis oide loutrou epideomenos,
 kai ginoskei tes praxeos to musaron.  O de Manichaios thusiasteriou
 meson, hou nomizei, tithesi tauta, kai miainei kai to stoma kai ten
 glottan. para toioutou stomatos, anthrope k.t.l: [4156]1
 * Omologia: [4157]1
 * Omoousios: [4158]1
 * Oras tou Golgotha ton topon: [4159]1
 * Oraton te panton kai aoraton: [4160]1
 * Rainon, son Baptisma di' hou puros exephaanthes .: [4161]1
 * sunanaliskesthai: [4162]1
 * "energeia: [4163]1
 * Aithein: [4164]1 [4165]2
 * Baptizesthai: [4166]1
 * Basileus: [4167]1
 * Botanen chortou speiron sperma: [4168]1
 * Gala men he katechesis hoionei prote psuches trophe noethesetai:
 [4169]1
 * Dogo palaiei pas logos: [4170]1
 * Diapherei, anekei: [4171]1
 * Digamia: [4172]1
 * Diplous en ho Christos, k.t.l: [4173]1
 * Doxologia: [4174]1
 * Theein: [4175]1 [4176]2
 * Thura ho Soter anagegraptai: [4177]1
 * Thaiman: [4178]1
 * Theon alethinon: [4179]1
 * Theon ek Theou, phos ek photos. Theon alethinon ek Theou
 alethinou,: [4180]1
 * Theos legetai apo to theorein ta panta, hoionei theoros kai theos,
 egoun theates panton: [4181]1
 * Theos: [4182]1 [4183]2
 * Theasthai: [4184]1
 * Theo: [4185]1
 * Theou anthropous pneumatophorous Pneumatos hagiou: [4186]1
 * Theou gar oude ho sumpas kosmos axion an eie chorion kai
 endiaitema, epei autos heauto tepos: [4187]1
 * Theologos: [4188]1
 * Theopoieisthai: [4189]1
 * Theotokos: [4190]1
 * Theophoros: [4191]1
 * Theorein: [4192]1
 * Theikos: [4193]1
 * Kurios: [4194]1 [4195]2
 * Kakeinoi peri ouranon tas dusphemous echousi glossas. 'Iesous legei
 peri tou patros autou, Ostis ton helion autou anatellei epi
 dikaious kai adikous, kai brechei epi ponerous kai agathous.
 kakeinoi legousin, hoti hoi huetoi ex erotikes manias ginontai, kai
 tolmosi legein, hoti esti tis parthenos en ourano eueides meta
 neaniskou eueidous, kai kata ten ton kamelon e lukon kairon, tous
 tes aischras epithumias kairous echein, kai kata ten tou cheimonos
 kairon, maniodos auton epitrechein te partheno, kai ten men
 pheugein phasi, ton de epitrechein, eita epitrechonta hidroun, apo
 de ton hidroton autou einai ton hueton.  Tauta gegraptai en tois
 ton Manichaion bibliois; tauta hemeis anegnomen, k.t.l: [4196]1
 * Kai eis hen hagion Pneuma: [4197]1
 * Kai eis hena Kurion 'Iesoun Christon: [4198]1
 * Kronou poluonumos huios: [4199]1
 * Konstantinou tou basileos: [4200]1
 * Logos: [4201]1 [4202]2
 * Logos prophorikos: [4203]1
 * Luchnokaie: [4204]1
 * Makrostichos: [4205]1
 * Malakia: [4206]1 [4207]2
 * Marturesai: [4208]1
 * Monarchia: [4209]1 [4210]2 [4211]3
 * Mustagogia prote 'Ioannou episkopou Ierosolumon: [4212]1
 * Mustagogiai: [4213]1
 * Mustagogikai katecheseis pente 'Ioannou 'Episkopou Ierosolumon,
 peri baptismatos, chrismatos, somatos, kai haimatos Christou:
 [4214]1
 * Nosos: [4215]1 [4216]2
 * Nux d' ar' epelthe kake skotomenios: [4217]1
 * Ou tolmo eipein, tini embaptontes ten ischada, didoasi tois
 athliois. dia sussemon de monon deloustho. andres gar ta en tois
 enupniasmois enthumeisthosin, kai gunaikes ta en aphedrois.
 Miainomen alethas to stoma k.t.l: [4218]1
 * Ousia: [4219]1 [4220]2
 * Houtos ho artos....eis pasan sou ten sustasin anadidotai, eis
 opheleian somatos kai psuches: [4221]1
 * Paidagogos: [4222]1
 * Pantokratora: [4223]1
 * Pantokrator: [4224]1
 * Patera: [4225]1
 * Patera pantokratora,: [4226]1
 * Peri Theou Monarchias: [4227]1
 * Pistos: [4228]1
 * Pisteuomen eis hena Theon: [4229]1
 * Pisteuomen eis hena Theon,: [4230]1
 * Pneumatos hagiou parousia tes autou theotetos energetikon: [4231]1
 * Pneuma: [4232]1
 * Pn. hag. parousia: [4233]1
 * Poieten ouranou kai ges: [4234]1
 * Pros Boioton peri tou onomatos: [4235]1
 * Prototokon: [4236]1
 * Sunaxis: [4237]1
 * Sikuelaton: [4238]1
 * Stephanos: [4239]1
 * Stauros: [4240]1
 * Ton homoion kata panta to gennesanti: [4241]1
 * To ei su, achronon kai aidion; to de semeron prosphaton, all' ouk
 aidion, oikeioumenou tou Patros kai ten kato gennesin.  Kai palin
 legei; 'Ek gastros pro heosphorou gegenneka se; touto monon tes
 Theotetos; Pisteuson, k.t.l: [4242]1
 * Tupos: [4243]1
 * To: [4244]1
 * Tithenai: [4245]1
 * Tous de legontas; en pote hote ouk en, kai trin gennethenai ouk en,
 kai hoti ex ouk onton egeneto, e ex heteras hupostaseos e ousias
 phaskontas einai e ktiston e trepton e alloioton ton Pshion tou
 Theou.  anathematizei he katholike ekklesia.: [4246]1
 * Trapeza Kuriou elisgemene estin: [4247]1
 * Trapezites: [4248]1
 * Huio: [4249]1
 * Huio Theou monogenei: [4250]1
 * Uiopator: [4251]1
 * Phoinix: [4252]1
 * Charisma: [4253]1 [4254]2
 * Chairete: [4255]1
 * Chiton: [4256]1
 * Chrisma: [4257]1
 * Chrisoi: [4258]1
 * Christon: [4259]1
 * Christoi: [4260]1
 * Christou charisma kai Pneumatos hagiou parousia tes autou Theotetos
 energetikon ginomenon: [4261]1
 * Christophoroi ginometha: [4262]1
 * aionios: [4263]1
 * haion: [4264]1
 * haima: [4265]1
 * aute: [4266]1
 * auton Christon: [4267]1
 * auton zetein tous eu peisomenous axious te ontas tou Soteros
 mathetas: [4268]1
 * autos enenthropesen, hina hemeis theopoiethomen: [4269]1
 * autos etha: [4270]1
 * autoprosopos: [4271]1
 * haute: [4272]1
 * baptizomenoi: [4273]1
 * baptizomenon: [4274]1
 * baptizomenos: [4275]1
 * baptizomeno: [4276]1
 * blasphemon: [4277]1
 * bomois: [4278]1
 * gegennemenos anarchos: [4279]1
 * genomenos anthropos ho kato theos: [4280]1
 * gennethenta ek tou Patros monogene,: [4281]1
 * gennethenta ou toiethenta, homoousion to Patri,: [4282]1
 * georgotatos: [4283]1
 * ginomenon: [4284]1
 * gonuklinontes, euchomenoi: [4285]1
 * gorgotatos: [4286]1
 * gumnos: [4287]1
 * gune kai haner heautois sumperipheromenoi: [4288]1
 * dechesthai: [4289]1
 * dokesis: [4290]1
 * doxa: [4291]1
 * duschrestos: [4292]1
 * deuterai ousiai: [4293]1
 * dei kai hos: [4294]1
 * dei kai os: [4295]1
 * deuteron: [4296]1
 * dia tes pros allelous heuresilogias: [4297]1
 * diakrisin nephon: [4298]1
 * dio apothemenoi pasan rhuparian: [4299]1
 * di' askesin: [4300]1
 * di' hou ta panta egeneto: [4301]1
 * di' hou ta panta egeneto,: [4302]1
 * diakrinesthai kai dialuesthai to diatmizon hugron hupo tou plethous
 tes thermes anathumiaseos, hoste me sunistasthai rhadios eis hudor:
 [4303]1
 * diakriseis kai sunkriseis: [4304]1
 * diaschedasthesetai: [4305]1
 * diapheronta te Aigupto kai te hagiotate 'Alexandreon ekklesia:
 [4306]1
 * dikaiosei peritomen: [4307]1
 * dikaios: [4308]1
 * douleuonta: [4309]1
 * doulon: [4310]1 [4311]2 [4312]3
 * doulos: [4313]1
 * dokesei: [4314]1
 * dokimasias: [4315]1
 * dokimastikon: [4316]1
 * ei de dei kai hos tines exegountai touto eipein: [4317]1
 * ei de dikaios tines exegountai, dei touto eipein: [4318]1
 * ei de ouk enkrateuontai: [4319]1
 * eidolothuton: [4320]1
 * eikon: [4321]1
 * eikonikos ....eikones tou Christou: [4322]1
 * eis epangelian: [4323]1
 * eis prokopen huiothesias.: [4324]1
 * eis ta hemetera anadidomenou mele: [4325]1
 * eisebaia: [4326]1
 * ei tis episkopos, e presbuteros, e diakonos, e holos tou katalogou
 ton klerikon, k.t.l: [4327]1
 * eide: [4328]1
 * eite kuriotetes, kai ei tines eisin heterai logikai phuseis
 hakatonomastoi: [4329]1
 * eidos monarchias basilikes: [4330]1
 * einai: [4331]1
 * euangelia anastasima heothina: [4332]1
 * euaresteseos: [4333]1
 * euglottias: [4334]1
 * eudokia: [4335]1 [4336]2
 * eudokias: [4337]1 [4338]2 [4339]3
 * euthenein: [4340]1
 * eulabeia: [4341]1
 * eulogiai,: [4342]1
 * eulogias: [4343]1
 * euprepeian: [4344]1
 * eusebeian: [4345]1 [4346]2
 * eustatheia: [4347]1
 * eusumperiphoros: [4348]1
 * euchomenos touto legeis: [4349]1
 * heurein: [4350]1
 * heuresilogia: [4351]1
 * zao: [4352]1
 * zoon: [4353]1 [4354]2
 * zoa: [4355]1
 * zoas: [4356]1
 * zoe: [4357]1
 * zoon: [4358]1
 * zoon: [4359]1
 * thalamos: [4360]1
 * tharsei: [4361]1
 * thesei kai chariti: [4362]1
 * tharron grapho te axiotheo agape humon: [4363]1
 * theos para ten thesin eiretai: [4364]1
 * theotes: [4365]1
 * theion: [4366]1
 * theatromaniai: [4367]1
 * theologia: [4368]1
 * theologian: [4369]1
 * theopoion: [4370]1
 * theotokon: [4371]1
 * theotokos: [4372]1 [4373]2 [4374]3
 * theton: [4375]1
 * threskeia: [4376]1
 * kapparis: [4377]1
 * kupton: [4378]1
 * kai anastanta ek nekron te trite hemera,: [4379]1
 * kai anastanta te trite hemera,: [4380]1
 * kai anelthonta eis tous ouranous,: [4381]1
 * kai aoraton poieten,: [4382]1
 * kai erchomenon: [4383]1
 * kai onta en dexia tou Patros: [4384]1
 * kai autou estin he aionios basileia: [4385]1
 * kai genomenos ...theos: [4386]1
 * kai eis hen baptisma metanoias eis aphesin hamartion: [4387]1
 * kai eis hena Kurion 'Iesoun Christon,: [4388]1
 * kai eis zoen aionion: [4389]1
 * kai eis mian hagian katholiken ekklesian,: [4390]1
 * kai eis sarkos anastasin,: [4391]1
 * kai eis to hagion Pneuma.: [4392]1
 * kai kathisanta ek dexion tou Patros: [4393]1 [4394]2
 * kai palin erchomenon en doxe: [4395]1
 * kai ten endouchian apedonto kai ta somata, kai sun toutois eti
 tinas ton kteseon: [4396]1
 * kai ti pisteuomen: [4397]1
 * kai tous loipous akatonomastous hemin: [4398]1
 * kai: [4399]1
 * kausin: [4400]1 [4401]2
 * kaustin: [4402]1
 * kanonikon: [4403]1
 * kata thesin: [4404]1
 * kata kairon: [4405]1
 * kata metabolen: [4406]1
 * kata ten prosegorian: [4407]1
 * kata phusin: [4408]1
 * kata phantasian: [4409]1
 * kataskopoi: [4410]1
 * kat' oikonomian: [4411]1
 * kat' oikonomian tes Theias charitos: [4412]1
 * katakrithosi: [4413]1
 * kataxioseien: [4414]1
 * kataxioumenoi: [4415]1
 * kataxiotheis: [4416]1
 * katachrestikos: [4417]1 [4418]2 [4419]3
 * katelthonta kai sarkothenta, enanthropesanta, pathonta,: [4420]1
 * katecheisthai ton tes eusebeias logon: [4421]1
 * katechoumen: [4422]1
 * kekoimetai: [4423]1
 * kineseis: [4424]1
 * kleros de en ho lachmos: [4425]1
 * klesis strateias: [4426]1
 * kladeuseos: [4427]1
 * kleidouchos: [4428]1
 * koinonikoi: [4429]1
 * koinonikoi: [4430]1 [4431]2
 * kolumbethra: [4432]1
 * kolumbethran: [4433]1
 * koruphan kat' akran anorousais' alalaxen hupermakei boa: [4434]1
 * krinai zontas kai nekrous,: [4435]1 [4436]2
 * ktisma: [4437]1
 * kunegesiais: [4438]1
 * kurios: [4439]1 [4440]2
 * legei: [4441]1 [4442]2
 * logo: [4443]1
 * logon: [4444]1
 * logos: [4445]1 [4446]2
 * logos endiathetos: [4447]1 [4448]2
 * logos prophorikos: [4449]1 [4450]2
 * lutron metanoias: [4451]1
 * lampades numphagogias: [4452]1
 * litos: [4453]1 [4454]2
 * lito: [4455]1
 * logike: [4456]1
 * loutron metanoias: [4457]1
 * loutrou metanoian: [4458]1
 * mian hupostasin: [4459]1
 * malista men...exairetos de: [4460]1
 * mellei de kai epi se ton baptizomenon phthanein he charis: [4461]1
 * mellete stratologeisthai: [4462]1
 * mechri: [4463]1
 * me epitrepetai: [4464]1
 * me epitrepete: [4465]1
 * me: [4466]1
 * mia ousia, treis hupostaseis: [4467]1
 * mimon: [4468]1
 * molis: [4469]1
 * monon: [4470]1
 * muro: [4471]1 [4472]2
 * mekos, makros: [4473]1
 * meizon epekalesato dikasterion: [4474]1
 * meta pases epistemes: [4475]1
 * meta ta phota: [4476]1
 * meta tou hudatos: [4477]1
 * metanoia tes soterias: [4478]1
 * metapoieitai: [4479]1
 * metousia: [4480]1
 * metousias: [4481]1
 * mede ho nous sou rhembestho: [4482]1
 * migadas: [4483]1
 * migades: [4484]1 [4485]2 [4486]3 [4487]4 [4488]5
 * monazontes: [4489]1 [4490]2
 * monas: [4491]1
 * monadikoi: [4492]1
 * monarchia: [4493]1
 * monasteria: [4494]1
 * monogenes huparchon: [4495]1
 * monoeides: [4496]1
 * monoeide: [4497]1
 * mononouchi daktulodeikton: [4498]1
 * morphothen: [4499]1
 * muoxos: [4500]1
 * murepsikon: [4501]1
 * mustagogiai: [4502]1
 * narthex: [4503]1
 * nussai: [4504]1
 * nun en triadi he theologia teleia estin: [4505]1
 * nun paredothe: [4506]1
 * neeludas;: [4507]1
 * neumati: [4508]1 [4509]2
 * neura: [4510]1
 * nipsamenoi: [4511]1
 * nipsasthai: [4512]1
 * noemata: [4513]1 [4514]2
 * nous: [4515]1
 * noeta: [4516]1 [4517]2 [4518]3
 * noete: [4519]1
 * noeton: [4520]1
 * noetos: [4521]1
 * noeto: [4522]1
 * oiakizei: [4523]1
 * oikeio neumati: [4524]1 [4525]2
 * oikeion haimati: [4526]1 [4527]2
 * oikonomia: [4528]1 [4529]2
 * hoi kata phrugas: [4530]1
 * hoi nun basileis: [4531]1
 * hoi tes epimixias: [4532]1
 * hoi tes eremias: [4533]1
 * hoi tes ereuias: [4534]1
 * hoi toutois diapherontes: [4535]1
 * hoi photizomenoi: [4536]1 [4537]2 [4538]3
 * ou pathei Pater genomenos: [4539]1
 * ou pathei pater genomenos: [4540]1
 * oude to hudati baptizomenos me kataxiotheis de tou Pneumatos:
 [4541]1
 * ouk epoliteueto: [4542]1
 * ouk esti pisteusai aneu katecheseos: [4543]1
 * ousia: [4544]1
 * ousia: [4545]1 [4546]2 [4547]3 [4548]4 [4549]5 [4550]6 [4551]7
 [4552]8 [4553]9 [4554]10 [4555]11 [4556]12 [4557]13 [4558]14
 [4559]15 [4560]16 [4561]17 [4562]18 [4563]19 [4564]20 [4565]21
 [4566]22 [4567]23 [4568]24 [4569]25 [4570]26 [4571]27 [4572]28
 [4573]29 [4574]30 [4575]31
 * ousiai: [4576]1 [4577]2 [4578]3 [4579]4 [4580]5 [4581]6
 * ousian: [4582]1 [4583]2 [4584]3 [4585]4
 * ousias: [4586]1 [4587]2
 * ousiodes epiphoiesis egeneto: [4588]1
 * ousia: [4589]1
 * ousion: [4590]1
 * ousiodes: [4591]1
 * ousiodos: [4592]1
 * ousiodos kai somatikos: [4593]1
 * ouchi: [4594]1
 * oute ho baptizomenos k.t.l: [4595]1
 * oute ho bebaptismenos k.t.l: [4596]1
 * houto kai to atrepton kai analloioton auton einai sothesetai:
 [4597]1
 * houtos mia arche theotetos kai ou duo archai, hothen kurios kai
 monarchia estin: [4598]1
 * oun: [4599]1
 * hou nomizei: [4600]1
 * hou tes basileias ouk estai telos: [4601]1
 * houtos ho Golgothas hou plesion nun pantes paresmen: [4602]1
 * pathe: [4603]1
 * palin hoi legontes monon onoma einai huiou, anousion de kai
 anupostaton einai ton huion tou Theou, k.t.l.: [4604]1
 * panton horaton te: [4605]1
 * pascho: [4606]1
 * pachne: [4607]1
 * pedas: [4608]1
 * pan to plasma: [4609]1
 * paides, douloi: [4610]1
 * paida: [4611]1
 * paidas: [4612]1
 * pais: [4613]1 [4614]2 [4615]3 [4616]4
 * paideuomenoi ek paidiou heos geros: [4617]1
 * paneguris: [4618]1 [4619]2
 * paneguresi: [4620]1
 * paneguris: [4621]1
 * paneguriseis: [4622]1
 * panegurika grammata: [4623]1
 * pantokratora: [4624]1 [4625]2
 * para tes ses eulabeias: [4626]1
 * para te se theosebeia: [4627]1
 * parelthen, eporeuthe heauto: [4628]1
 * para phtheiresthosan: [4629]1
 * paracharasso: [4630]1
 * paroikia: [4631]1 [4632]2
 * parousia: [4633]1
 * pastadas: [4634]1
 * pastas: [4635]1
 * peirathese: [4636]1
 * peirasthese: [4637]1
 * pepedemenous: [4638]1
 * peri Monarchias: [4639]1
 * peri phuson: [4640]1
 * perirrhanteria duo anetheke: [4641]1
 * perikopai: [4642]1
 * peges: [4643]1
 * pistos: [4644]1
 * plasma: [4645]1
 * plagios: [4646]1
 * pneuma: [4647]1 [4648]2
 * pneuma ho theos: [4649]1
 * pneumatikes: [4650]1
 * pneumatophoron: [4651]1
 * pnoe: [4652]1
 * poiema: [4653]1
 * pompas: [4654]1
 * prin gennethenai ouk en: [4655]1
 * prin gennethenai ouk en.: [4656]1
 * pro panton ton aionon,: [4657]1
 * pros tas: [4658]1
 * pros tous Neophotistous: [4659]1
 * pros tous mellontas photizesthai: [4660]1
 * prodromos: [4661]1
 * proxenon: [4662]1
 * prosopa: [4663]1
 * prosopon: [4664]1 [4665]2 [4666]3
 * protos: [4667]1
 * proton pseudos: [4668]1
 * pragmateia: [4669]1
 * pragmateueothe: [4670]1
 * presbeuein: [4671]1
 * proerchesthai, proienai: [4672]1
 * proairoumenon ton Skuthianon: [4673]1
 * probole: [4674]1
 * proboleus-probole: [4675]1
 * prothesmia: [4676]1
 * prokope: [4677]1
 * proselthes: [4678]1
 * proselthes: [4679]1
 * proselthein: [4680]1
 * prosetethesan: [4681]1
 * prosthesthai: [4682]1
 * prostheinai: [4683]1
 * prostagmasi: [4684]1
 * prostenai: [4685]1
 * prosphoran: [4686]1
 * prophorikon: [4687]1
 * prophotizomenes: [4688]1
 * prototokos: [4689]1
 * pterophuesousin hos aetoi: [4690]1
 * pugolampis: [4691]1
 * sage: [4692]1
 * sarx: [4693]1
 * semeron: [4694]1 [4695]2
 * sunaxis: [4696]1
 * suntagma: [4697]1
 * sussomoi: [4698]1
 * sozetai: [4699]1
 * somata: [4700]1
 * soma: [4701]1
 * sarkothenta kai enanthropesanta: [4702]1
 * semnotatos: [4703]1
 * semnotetos: [4704]1
 * semnunetai: [4705]1
 * semeion kai teraton phantasias edeiknuon: [4706]1
 * semeia: [4707]1
 * sikuerato: [4708]1
 * siopomenes: [4709]1
 * skeuasto: [4710]1
 * skotomene: [4711]1
 * stoma atheotetos: [4712]1
 * staurothenta kai taphenta: [4713]1
 * stele: [4714]1
 * sterixosin: [4715]1
 * stratologia: [4716]1
 * sungomen aito para tes humeteras agapes: [4717]1
 * sunkatathesis: [4718]1
 * sunaitountes: [4719]1
 * sunaloiphen: [4720]1
 * sunarithmeitai: [4721]1
 * suntassomai: [4722]1
 * suntassomenos: [4723]1 [4724]2
 * schediastheisa: [4725]1
 * scholazeis: [4726]1
 * scholasate: [4727]1 [4728]2
 * somaton: [4729]1
 * sotismos: [4730]1
 * thon proaulion: [4731]1
 * ta eschata: [4732]1
 * ta zeuge: [4733]1
 * tas aparchas kai ta proteia: [4734]1
 * tas eulogias: [4735]1
 * ta te en to ourano kai ta epi tes ges,: [4736]1
 * ten anabasin autou: [4737]1
 * ten emphasin ten....gegenemenen: [4738]1
 * ten ensarkon parousian: [4739]1
 * ten auten ousian echein: [4740]1
 * ten di' hudatos sphragida: [4741]1 [4742]2
 * ten di' euches logou tou par autou eucharistetheisan trophen:
 [4743]1
 * ten di' euches logou tou par' autou eucharistetheisan trophen:
 [4744]1
 * ten parousan: [4745]1
 * ten stephanephorian: [4746]1
 * ti mempton: [4747]1
 * to anthemion tou chrusiou: [4748]1
 * to antitupon: [4749]1
 * to exousiastikon: [4750]1 [4751]2
 * to idion para to koinon: [4752]1
 * to hupokeimenon: [4753]1
 * to blemma rhembomenon: [4754]1
 * to boulesthai: [4755]1
 * to geras: [4756]1
 * to dokein auton peponthenai: [4757]1
 * to theodochon soma: [4758]1
 * to katholon: [4759]1
 * to koinonikon: [4760]1
 * to kreitton: [4761]1
 * to kurioktonon ton 'Ioudaion: [4762]1
 * to lalesan en tois prophetais: [4763]1
 * to men kata ton Dabid....to de kata ten Theoteta: [4764]1
 * to xenon: [4765]1
 * to ousiodes: [4766]1
 * to pos: [4767]1
 * to par' hemin legomenon hupokamisoe: [4768]1
 * to poluonumon: [4769]1
 * to sumbolon: [4770]1
 * to sunolon: [4771]1
 * to soma autou kata to euangelion tupon epheren artou: [4772]1
 * to sumperipheresthai tois philois: [4773]1
 * to ti en einai: [4774]1
 * to charisma: [4775]1
 * ton ek tou Patros gennethenta,: [4776]1
 * ton 'Eleimuenon: [4777]1
 * ton Monogene,: [4778]1
 * ton Parakleton,: [4779]1
 * ton Christon autou: [4780]1
 * ton Christon: [4781]1
 * ton Pshion tou Theou: [4782]1
 * ton Pshion tou Theou,: [4783]1
 * ton di' hemas tous anthropous kai dia ten hemeteran soterian:
 [4784]1
 * ton theon: [4785]1
 * ton men gar Christon allotriousi tou Patros: [4786]1
 * ton panton despoten: [4787]1
 * ton panton poieten...agnoountes, ton anarchon Theon: [4788]1
 * ton proeiremenon Sk: [4789]1
 * ton sarkothenta kai enanthropesanta: [4790]1
 * tode ti: [4791]1
 * tote thaumatourgei kai paradoxopoiei: [4792]1
 * tupon: [4793]1
 * tupon paradeloun: [4794]1
 * tupos: [4795]1 [4796]2 [4797]3
 * tes humeteras en Christo agapes: [4798]1
 * tes hupertheseos: [4799]1
 * tes ges: [4800]1
 * tes ges ten phulaken encheiristheis para Theou: [4801]1
 * tes theotetos tes Patrikes koinonos: [4802]1
 * tes monarchias tou theou: [4803]1
 * te hupostasei: [4804]1
 * te dunamei: [4805]1
 * te proseuche: [4806]1
 * te chthes hemera: [4807]1
 * ton: [4808]1
 * ton apokruphon: [4809]1
 * ton archomenon: [4810]1
 * ton ergon epeirathen: [4811]1
 * ton autou tou Soteros theologon andron: [4812]1
 * ton genomenon: [4813]1
 * ton....gegenemenon: [4814]1
 * to hierei: [4815]1
 * to dia tes alethous katecheseos gennesanti keitai tis misthos:
 [4816]1
 * to men theio kai athanato kai noeto kai monoeidei kai adialuto kai
 aei hosautos kata ta auta echonti heauto homoiotaton einai psuchen:
 [4817]1
 * to schemati tes prosegorias: [4818]1
 * tauten prospheromen ten thusian: [4819]1
 * tauten ten parakatatheken: [4820]1
 * tautes tes lexeos: [4821]1
 * tais tes humeteras agapes akoais: [4822]1
 * tarachthesontai apo prosopou autou: [4823]1
 * teleioteroi, photizomenoi: [4824]1
 * tous deutero gamo sumperienechthentas: [4825]1
 * tois idiois: [4826]1
 * tois 'Ioudaiois: [4827]1
 * tou: [4828]1
 * tou apokrithenai: [4829]1
 * tou Soteros: [4830]1
 * tou haimatos: [4831]1
 * tou autou Kurillou kai 'Ioannou episkopou: [4832]1
 * tou katharismou auton: [4833]1
 * tou ponerou: [4834]1 [4835]2
 * tou somatos: [4836]1 [4837]2
 * tou toinun prototupou episkopou idontos: [4838]1
 * tou chrismatos delade tou tupikou: [4839]1
 * tout' estin arche plasmatos Kuriou, pepoiemenon enkatapaizesthai
 hupo ton angelon autou: [4840]1
 * toioutou toinun episkopou prototupos idontos: [4841]1
 * tomes: [4842]1
 * toutestin ek tes ousias tou Patros,: [4843]1
 * tria prosopa: [4844]1
 * treis hupostaseis: [4845]1 [4846]2 [4847]3
 * trion archon logos: [4848]1
 * tuphlon aistheton: [4849]1
 * t. n. he heaut, pared: [4850]1
 * huion ek tou Patros anarchos kai aidios gegennemenon, logon de ou
 prophorikon, ouk endiatheton: [4851]1
 * huiothesian: [4852]1
 * huiopatoria: [4853]1 [4854]2 [4855]3
 * phao: [4856]1
 * phusei kai ou thesei: [4857]1
 * phusis: [4858]1 [4859]2
 * phos: [4860]1
 * photisma: [4861]1 [4862]2
 * photon: [4863]1 [4864]2 [4865]3
 * phaino: [4866]1
 * phantasian: [4867]1
 * phantasiodes: [4868]1
 * phantasiokopon: [4869]1
 * phantasiokopei: [4870]1
 * pharan: [4871]1 [4872]2 [4873]3
 * phemi: [4874]1
 * phthanei kathelon: [4875]1
 * phthoran: [4876]1
 * philanthropos de on...poimen ginetai: [4877]1
 * philosophia: [4878]1
 * philostorgia: [4879]1
 * phoran: [4880]1
 * phronesis: [4881]1
 * phugadeuo: [4882]1
 * phugadeuterion: [4883]1
 * phones: [4884]1
 * photizo: [4885]1 [4886]2 [4887]3
 * photizomenoi: [4888]1 [4889]2 [4890]3 [4891]4 [4892]5
 * photizomenon: [4893]1
 * photisthentas: [4894]1
 * photismos: [4895]1 [4896]2 [4897]3 [4898]4
 * charaka: [4899]1
 * charis: [4900]1
 * charisma: [4901]1
 * chrhoniken archen: [4902]1
 * chameunion: [4903]1
 * charaktera: [4904]1
 * cheimones: [4905]1
 * cheirothesia: [4906]1
 * chiliades euthenounton: [4907]1
 * chiton: [4908]1
 * chitonion: [4909]1
 * chroton: [4910]1 [4911]2 [4912]3
 * chrisma: [4913]1 [4914]2
 * chroma: [4915]1
 * chrota: [4916]1 [4917]2 [4918]3
 * chrotes: [4919]1
 * chroton: [4920]1
 * christophoron: [4921]1
 * christophoros: [4922]1
 * choris tou episkopou: [4923]1
 * pseudochristoi: [4924]1
 * pseudepigrapha: [4925]1
 * pseudepiskopoi: [4926]1
 * psilon: [4927]1 [4928]2
 * psuchas ektrachelizon: [4929]1
 * , [kai dunamis ek dunameos: [4930]1
 * Compare x. 11, 15; xvi. 13:  xxi. 1.: [4931]1
 * [to] nipsasthai: [4932]1
 * ]*, Uios tou Patros [en pasin]: [4933]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [4934]i  [4935]iii  [4936]v  [4937]vii  [4938]ix  [4939]x  [4940]xi
 [4941]xii  [4942]xiii  [4943]xiv  [4944]xv  [4945]xvi  [4946]xvii
 [4947]xviii  [4948]xix  [4949]xx  [4950]xxi  [4951]xxii  [4952]xxiii
 [4953]xxiv  [4954]xxv  [4955]xxvi  [4956]xxvii  [4957]xxviii
 [4958]xxix  [4959]xxx  [4960]xxxi  [4961]xxxii  [4962]xxxiii
 [4963]xxxiv  [4964]xxxv  [4965]xxxvi  [4966]xxxvii  [4967]xxxviii
 [4968]xxxix  [4969]xl  [4970]xli  [4971]xlii  [4972]xliii  [4973]xliv
 [4974]xlv  [4975]xlvi  [4976]xlvii  [4977]xlviii  [4978]xlix  [4979]l
 [4980]li  [4981]lii  [4982]liii  [4983]liv  [4984]lv  [4985]lvi
 [4986]lvii  [4987]lviii  [4988]lix  [4989]lx  [4990]lxi  [4991]lxii
 [4992]lxiii  [4993]lxiv  [4994]lxv  [4995]lxvi  [4996]1  [4997]2
 [4998]3  [4999]4  [5000]5  [5001]6  [5002]7  [5003]8  [5004]9
 [5005]10  [5006]11  [5007]12  [5008]13  [5009]14  [5010]15  [5011]16
 [5012]17  [5013]18  [5014]19  [5015]20  [5016]21  [5017]22  [5018]23
 [5019]24  [5020]25  [5021]26  [5022]27  [5023]28  [5024]29  [5025]30
 [5026]31  [5027]32  [5028]33  [5029]34  [5030]35  [5031]36  [5032]37
 [5033]38  [5034]39  [5035]40  [5036]41  [5037]42  [5038]43  [5039]44
 [5040]45  [5041]46  [5042]47  [5043]48  [5044]49  [5045]50  [5046]51
 [5047]52  [5048]53  [5049]54  [5050]55  [5051]56  [5052]57  [5053]58
 [5054]59  [5055]60  [5056]61  [5057]62  [5058]63  [5059]64  [5060]65
 [5061]66  [5062]67  [5063]68  [5064]69  [5065]70  [5066]71  [5067]72
 [5068]73  [5069]74  [5070]75  [5071]76  [5072]77  [5073]78  [5074]79
 [5075]80  [5076]81  [5077]82  [5078]83  [5079]84  [5080]85  [5081]86
 [5082]87  [5083]88  [5084]89  [5085]90  [5086]91  [5087]92  [5088]93
 [5089]94  [5090]95  [5091]96  [5092]97  [5093]98  [5094]99  [5095]100
 [5096]101  [5097]102  [5098]103  [5099]104  [5100]105  [5101]106
 [5102]107  [5103]108  [5104]109  [5105]110  [5106]111  [5107]112
 [5108]113  [5109]114  [5110]115  [5111]116  [5112]117  [5113]118
 [5114]119  [5115]120  [5116]121  [5117]122  [5118]123  [5119]124
 [5120]125  [5121]126  [5122]127  [5123]128  [5124]129  [5125]130
 [5126]131  [5127]132  [5128]133  [5129]134  [5130]135  [5131]136
 [5132]137  [5133]138  [5134]139  [5135]140  [5136]141  [5137]142
 [5138]143  [5139]144  [5140]145  [5141]146  [5142]147  [5143]148
 [5144]149  [5145]150  [5146]151  [5147]152  [5148]153  [5149]154
 [5150]155  [5151]156  [5152]157  [5153]185  [5154]187  [5155]188
 [5156]189  [5157]190  [5158]191  [5159]192  [5160]193  [5161]194
 [5162]195  [5163]196  [5164]197  [5165]198  [5166]199  [5167]200
 [5168]201  [5169]202  [5170]203  [5171]204  [5172]205  [5173]206
 [5174]207  [5175]208  [5176]209  [5177]210  [5178]211  [5179]212
 [5180]213  [5181]214  [5182]215  [5183]216  [5184]217  [5185]218
 [5186]219  [5187]220  [5188]221  [5189]222  [5190]223  [5191]224
 [5192]225  [5193]226  [5194]227  [5195]228  [5196]229  [5197]230
 [5198]231  [5199]232  [5200]233  [5201]234  [5202]235  [5203]236
 [5204]237  [5205]238  [5206]239  [5207]240  [5208]241  [5209]242
 [5210]243  [5211]244  [5212]245  [5213]246  [5214]247  [5215]248
 [5216]249  [5217]250  [5218]251  [5219]252  [5220]253  [5221]254
 [5222]255  [5223]256  [5224]257  [5225]258  [5226]259  [5227]260
 [5228]261  [5229]262  [5230]263  [5231]264  [5232]265  [5233]266
 [5234]267  [5235]268  [5236]269  [5237]270  [5238]271  [5239]272
 [5240]273  [5241]274  [5242]275  [5243]276  [5244]277  [5245]278
 [5246]279  [5247]280  [5248]281  [5249]282  [5250]283  [5251]284
 [5252]285  [5253]286  [5254]287  [5255]288  [5256]289  [5257]290
 [5258]291  [5259]292  [5260]293  [5261]294  [5262]295  [5263]296
 [5264]297  [5265]298  [5266]299  [5267]300  [5268]301  [5269]302
 [5270]303  [5271]304  [5272]305  [5273]306  [5274]307  [5275]308
 [5276]309  [5277]310  [5278]311  [5279]312  [5280]313  [5281]314
 [5282]315  [5283]316  [5284]317  [5285]318  [5286]319  [5287]320
 [5288]321  [5289]322  [5290]323  [5291]324  [5292]325  [5293]326
 [5294]327  [5295]328  [5296]329  [5297]330  [5298]331  [5299]332
 [5300]333  [5301]334  [5302]335  [5303]336  [5304]337  [5305]338
 [5306]339  [5307]340  [5308]341  [5309]342  [5310]343  [5311]344
 [5312]345  [5313]346  [5314]347  [5315]348  [5316]349  [5317]350
 [5318]351  [5319]352  [5320]353  [5321]354  [5322]355  [5323]356
 [5324]357  [5325]358  [5326]359  [5327]360  [5328]361  [5329]362
 [5330]363  [5331]364  [5332]365  [5333]366  [5334]367  [5335]368
 [5336]369  [5337]370  [5338]371  [5339]372  [5340]373  [5341]374
 [5342]375  [5343]376  [5344]377  [5345]378  [5346]379  [5347]380
 [5348]381  [5349]382  [5350]383  [5351]384  [5352]385  [5353]386
 [5354]387  [5355]388  [5356]389  [5357]390  [5358]391  [5359]392
 [5360]393  [5361]394  [5362]395  [5363]396  [5364]397  [5365]398
 [5366]399  [5367]400  [5368]401  [5369]402  [5370]403  [5371]404
 [5372]405  [5373]406  [5374]407  [5375]408  [5376]409  [5377]410
 [5378]411  [5379]412  [5380]413  [5381]414  [5382]415  [5383]416
 [5384]417  [5385]418  [5386]419  [5387]420  [5388]421  [5389]422
 [5390]423  [5391]424  [5392]425  [5393]426  [5394]427  [5395]428
 [5396]429  [5397]430  [5398]431  [5399]432  [5400]433  [5401]434
 [5402]435  [5403]437  [5404]438  [5405]439  [5406]440  [5407]441
 [5408]442  [5409]443  [5410]444  [5411]445  [5412]446  [5413]447
 [5414]448  [5415]449  [5416]450  [5417]451  [5418]452  [5419]453
 [5420]454  [5421]455  [5422]456  [5423]457  [5424]458  [5425]459
 [5426]460  [5427]461  [5428]462  [5429]463  [5430]464  [5431]465
 [5432]466  [5433]467  [5434]468  [5435]469  [5436]470  [5437]471
 [5438]472  [5439]473  [5440]474  [5441]475  [5442]476  [5443]477
 [5444]478  [5445]479  [5446]480  [5447]481  [5448]482

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
