Morals on the Book of Job, Vol. 3, Part 1 (Pope Gregory I (the Great); translated by Rev. James Bliss, 1850)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (p1moralsonbookof03greguoft).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

TO  THK
MOST  REVEKEND  FATHER  IN  GOD

WILLIAM

LORD  ARCHBISHOP  OF  CANTERBURY,

PRIMATE  Oi"  ALL  ENGLAND,
FOUMERLY  REGIUS PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD,

THIS LIBRARY

OF

ANCIENT  BISHOPS,  FATHERS,  DOCTORS,  MARTYRS,  CONFESSORS,
OF  CHRIST'S  HOLY  CATHOLIC  CHURCH,

IS
WITH HIS grace's PERMISSION

RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,

IN  TOKEN  OF

REVERENCE FOR HIS PERSON AND SACRED OFFICE,

AND  OF
GRATITUDE FOR HIS EPISCOPAL KINDNESS.


K


'  MORALS


ON


THE BOOK OF JOB,


i/


BY


S. ^  G  R  E  G  O  R  Y  ' T  H  E GREAT,

THE  FIRST  POPE  OF  THAT  NAISIE,

TRANSLATED,

WITH NOTES AND INDICES.


IN  THREE  VOLUMES.


3'


THE  FIRST  PART  OF 70L.  TIL
PART  V.  AND  BOOKS  XXVIII,  XXIX.


OXFORD,

JOHN  HENRY  PARKER;
F.  AND  J.  RIVINGTON,  LONDON.
MDCCCXLVn.


BAXTER,  PRINTER,  OXFORD.


CONTENTS.


THE  FIFTH  PART.


BOOK  XXIII.


The  thirty-second  chapter,  and  the  thirty-third,  as  far  as  the  twenty-second
verse,  are  expounded  ;  in  which,  while  Job  keeps  silence,  Eliu,  a  younger
person,  enters  on  many  right  and  sound  topics,  though  not  rightly,  or  with
sound  intention.  p.  1

BOOK  XXIV.

The  last  eleven  verses  of  the  thirty-third  chapter  and  the  eighteen  first
verses  of  the  thirty-fourth  chapter  are  expounded,  and  striking  truths  are
taught  concerning  Christ  the  Mediator,  contemplation,  the  course  of
conversion,  and  the  pastoral  office.  50

BOOK XXV.

In  explanation  of  the  thirty-fourth  chapter  from  the  nineteenth  to  the
thirtieth  verse,  the  punishments  of  the  reprobate,  and  the  secret  judg-
ments of  God  are  discussed.  94

BOOK XXVI.

The  holy  Doctor  expounds  the  seven  last  verses  of  the  thirty  fourth
chapter,  the  whole  of  the  thirty-fifth,  with  the  first  twenty-one  verses  of
the  thirty-sixth  chapter ;  and  launches  out,  at  very  great  length,  into
both  allegorical  and  moral  meanings.  132


BOOK  XXVII.

The  last  twelve  verses  of  the  thirty-sixth  chapter  are  expounded,  with  the
whole  of  the  thirty- seventh,  and  their  meanings  ingeniously  examined,
for  the  sake  of  establishing  a  system  of  Christian  doctrine,  and  ethics.

199


viii  CONTENTS.


THE  SIXTH  PART.


BOOK  XXVIII.


Tlie  first  eleven  verses  of  the  thirty-eighth  chapter  are  explained,  in  various
senses,  but  especially  in  a  moral  sense.  260


BOOK  XXIX.

Twenty-two  verses  of  the  thirty-eighth  chapter,  from  the  twelfth  to  the
thirty-third  inclusive,  are  explained ;  and  many  truths  are  taught,
especially  concerning  the  arts  and  snares  of  Satan,  grace,  predestination,
reprobation,  and  the  secret  judgments  of  God.  302


PART V.


BOOK XXIII.

The  thirty- second  chapter,  and  the  thirty-third,  as  far  as  the  twenty-second
verse,  are  expounded;  in  vrhich,  while  Job  keeps  silence,  Eliu,  a  younger
person,  enters  on  many  right  and  sound  topics,  though  not  rightly,  or  with
sound  intention.

1.  It  is  necessary  for  me  to  repeat  the  preface  of  this
work,  as  often  as  I  divide  it  into  separate  volumes,  by  making
a  pause  in  my  observations,  it  order  that  when  it  is  again
begun  to  be  read,  the  subject  of  the  Treatise  may  be  at  once
brought  afresh  to  the  memory ;  and  that  the  edifice  of  teach-
ing may  rise  the  more  firmly,  the  more  carefully  the  found-
ation is  laid  in  the  mind,  from  considering  the  first  beginning
of  the  subject.  Blessed  Job,  known  to  God  and  himself
alone  in  his  state  of  tranquillity,  when  he  was  to  be  brought
before  our  notice,  was  smitten  with  a  rod,  in  order  that  he
might  scatter  more  widely  the  odour  of  his  strength,  the
more  sweetly  he  gave  forth  his  scent,  as  spices,  from  the
burning.  He  had  learned  in  his  prosperity  to  rule  over  his
subjects  with  gentleness,  and  to  guard  himself  strictly  from  evil.
He  had  learned  how  to  use  the  things  he  had  got:  but  we  could
not  tell  whether  he  would  remain  patient  under  their  loss.
He  had  learned  to  offer  daily  sacrifices  to  God  for  the  safety
of  his  children,  but  it  was  doubtful,  whether  he  would  also
offer  Him  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  when  he  was  bereft  of
them.  For  fear  then  that  sound  health  should  conceal  any
defect,  it  vvas  proper  that  pain  should  bring  it  to-  light.
Permission  then  to  practise  temptation  against  the  holy  man
is  given  to  the  crafty  foe. But  he,  in  seeking  to  destroy  his

VOL. III.  B


2  Sntdfi's  craft  against  Job,  tnid  its  utter  failure.

Job  32,  goods which were known to man}-, brings to light the

L: virtue  of  patience  also  which  was  lying  hid,  and  whom  he

l)elievcd  he  was  pressing  hard  by  his  persecutions,  he
magnified  him  by  his  scourges,  and  far  extended  him  in
exam])le.  And  he  exercised  with  great  skill  the  permission
lie  had  received.  For  he  burnt  his  herds,  destroyed  his
family,  overwhelmed  his  heirs,  and,  in  order  to  launch
against  him  a  weapon  of  severer  temptation,  he  kept  in  store
the  tongue  of  his  wife :  that  thus  he  might  both  lay  low  the
bold  and  finu  heart  of  the  holy  man  with  grief,  by  the  loss
of  his  goods,  and  pierce  it  through  with  a  curse,  by  the
words  of  his  wife.  But  by  the  many  wounds  he  inflicted  in
his  cruelty,  he  unintentionally  furnished  as  many  triumphs
to  tlie  holy  man.  For  the  faithful  servant  of  God,  involved
in  wounds  and  reproaches  at  one  and  the  same  time,  both
endued  with  patience  the  sufferings  of  the  flesh,  and  reproved
with  wisdom  the  folly  of  his  wife.  The  ancient  enemy,
therefore,  because  he  was  grieved  at  being  foiled  by  him  in
his  domestic  trials,  ])roceedcd  to  seek  for  help  from  abroad.
He  summoned,  therefore,  his  friends,  each  from  his  own
place,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of  displaying  their  afTection,
and  opened  their  lips,  under  the  pretence  of  giving  con-
solation. But,  by  these  very  means,  he  launched  against  him
shafts  of  re|)roach,  which  would  wound  more  severely  the
heart  of  him  who  securely  listened  to  them,  inasmuch  as  they
were  inflicting  an  unexpected  wound  beneath  the  cover  of  a
friendship  which  was  professed  and  not  observed.  After  these,
also,  Eliu  a  younger  person  is  urged  on  even  to  use  insult,  in
order  that  the  scornful  levity  of  his  youth  might  at  all  events
disturb  the  tranquillity  of  such  great  gentleness.  But  against
these  many  machinations  of  the  ancient  enemy  his  constancy
stood  unconquered,  his  equanimity  unbroken.  For  at  one
and  the  same  time  he  opposed  his  prudence  to  their  hostile
words,  his  conduct  to  their  doings.  Let  no  one  then  suppose
that  this  holy  man  (although  it  was  expressly  written  of  him
Job  1  after  his  scourging,  In  all  these  things  Job  sinned  not  with
2.  his  lips)  sinned  afterwards,  at  least,  in  his  words  in  his
dispute  with  his  friends.  For  Satan  aimed  at  his  temptation,
but  (Jod,  Who  had  praised  him,  took  on  Himself  the  purport
of  that  contest. If  any  one,  therefore,  complains  that  blessed


Job  represents  the  Redeemer  Whom  he  foretold.  3

Job  sinned  in  his  words,  what  else  does  he  do,  but  confess  Book

XXIII
that  God,  Who  pledged  Himself  for  hiiu,  had  been  the  loser.


2.  But  since  the  ancient  fathers,  like  fruitful  trees,  are  not
merely  beauteous  in  appearance,  but  also  profitable  through
their  fertility,  their  life  must  be  so  considered  by  us,  that
when  we  admire  the  freshness  of  their  history,  we  may  learn
also  how  fruitful  they  are  in  allegory,  in  order  that,  since  the
smell  of  their  leaves  is  pleasant,  we may  learn also  how
sweet  is  the  taste  of  their  fruits. For  no  one  ever  possessed
the  grace  of  heavenly  adoption  but  he  who  has  received  it
through  the  knowledge  of  the  Only-begotten. It  is  right
then  that  He  should  shine  forth  in  their  life  and  words.  Who
so  enlightens  them  that  they  may  be  able'  to  shine. Forimere-
when  the  light  of  a  candle  is  kindled  in  the  dark,  the  candle,^"  "'^
which  causes  other  objects  to  be  seen,  is  first  seen  itself.
And  so,  if  we  are  truly  endeavouring  to  behold  the  objects
which  are  enlightened,  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  open  the  eyes
of  our  mind  to  that  Lightening  which  gives  them  light. But
it  is  this  which shines  forth in these  very  discourses of
blessed Job,  when the  shades of  allegory  too have  been
driven  away,  as  though the gloom of  midnight  had  been
dispelled,  a bright light as it  were flaming  across  them.
As when it is said, / know that my  Redeemer liveth,  Job  19,
and in my  jiesh I  shall  see  God. Paul had doubtless  *''
discovered  this  light  in  the  night  of  history,  when  he  said,
All  icere  baptized  in  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea,  and  i  Cor,

10 2-4.

all  ate  the  same  spiritual  meat,  and  all  drank  the  same '
spiritual  drink. But  they  drank  of  the  spiritual  Rock  that
followed  them,  but  the  Rock  ivas  Christ. If  then  the  Rock
represented the Redeemer,  vs^hy should not blessed Job
suggest  the  type  of  Him,  since  he  signified  in  his  suffering
Him  Whom  he  spake  of  in  his  voice  ? And  hence  he  is  not
improperly  called  Job,  that  is  to  say,  ''  grieving,"  because  he
sets  forth  in  his  own  person  the  image  of  Him,  of  Whom  it
is  announced  long  before  by  Isaiah,  that  He  Himself  io/-eIs.53,4.
our  griefs. It  should  be  further  known,  that  our  Redeemer
has  represented  Himself  as  one  Person  with  Holy  Church,
whom  He  has  assumed  to  Himself. For  it  is  said  of  Him,Eph.  4
Which  is  the  Head,  even  Christ. And  again  it  is  written  of  ^'^•
His  Church;  And  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  the  Church.  24.'

B  2


4 Julys  uife  typijies  Ike  carnal;  Ills  friends,  herelics.

Job  32,  Blessed  Job  therelbre,  wlio  was  more  truly  a  type  of  Christ,
— - —  since  he  pro})hcsicd  of  His  passion,  not  by  words  only,  but
also  by  his  sufi'orings,  when  he  dwells  on  setting  forth  the
Redeemer  in  his  words  and  deeds,  is  sometimes  suddenly
turning  to  signify  His  body;  in  order  that,  as  we  believe
Christ  and  His  Church  to  be  one  Person,  we  may  behold
this  signified  also  by  the  actions  of  a  single  man.

3.  lint  what  else  is  signified  by  his  wife,  who  provokes
him  to  words  of  blasphemy,  but  the  depravity  of  carnal  men?
For  placed,  with  yet  unreformed  manners,  within  the  pale  of
the Holy Church, they  press harder on those  of  faithful
lives,  the  nearer  they  are  to  them;  because  when  they  cannot
as  being  faithful  be  avoided  by  the  faithful,  they  are  endured
as  a  greater  evil,  the  more  inward  it  is. But  his  friends,
who  while  pretending  to  advise,  inveigh  against  him,  represent
to  us  heretics,  who  under  the  pretence  of  advising,  carry  on
the  business  of  leading  astra3\ And  thus  while  speaking
to  Job  on  behalf  of  the  Lord,  they  hear  His  reproof;  because
all  heretics  in  truth  while  endeavouring  to  maintain  God's
cause,  do  in  fact  offend  Plim. Whence  also  it  is  properly
Job  13,  said  to  them  by  the  same  holj^  man,  /  desire  to  reason  uith
God,Jirsl  sliewiitg  that  ye  are  forgers  of  lies,  and  folloicers
of  corrupt doctrines. It is plain then that they typify
heretics,  since  the  holy  man  accuses  them  of  being  devoted
to the  profession  of  false  doctrines. And  since  Job  is  by
interpretation  grieving,  (for  by  his  grief  is  set  forth  either
the passion of the Mediator, or the travails of Holy-
Church,  wliich  is  harassed  by  the  manifold  labours  of  this
present  life,)  so do  his  friends  also  by  the  very  word  which
is  used  for  their  names  set  forth  the  nature  of  their  conduct.
For  Eliphaz  signifies  in  Latin"  contempt  of  God;"  and  what
else  is  the  conduct  of  heretics  than  a  proud  contempt  of  God
by  the  false  notions  they  entertain  of  Him? Bildad  is  inter-
preted "  oldness  alone." And  well  are  all  heretics  termed
oldness  alone,  in  the  things  they  speak  of  God,  since  they
are  anxious  to  appear  preachers,  not  with  any  honest  inten-
tion, but  with  an  earnest  desire  after  worldly  honour. For
they  are  urged  to  speak  not  by  the  zeal  of  the  new  man,  but
by the evil principles of  their old life. Sophar too is
called  in  Latin  'dissipation  of  the  prospect,'  or  a  'dissipating  of


3.4.


Tlieir  natnes  explained. Eliii  type  of  the  arrogant. 5

the prospect.' For  the  mmds  of  the faithful  raise  them-  Book
selves  to  the  contemplation  of  things  above  :  but  jvhen  the  '


words  of  the  heretics  endeavour  to  draw  them  aside  from  the
right  objects  of  contemplation,  they  do  their  best  to  dissipate
the prospect. In the  tliree  names  then  of  Job's  friends,
there  are  set  forth  three  cases  of  the  ruin  of  heretics. For
did  they  not  despise  God,  they  would  never  entertain  false
notions  respecting  Him ;  and  did  they  not  contract  oldness,
they  would  not  err  in  their  estimate  of  the  new  life ;  and
unless  they marred the contemplation of the good, the
divine  judgments  would  not  have reproved them with so
strict  a  scrutiny,  for  the  faults  which  they  committed  in  their
words. By despising  God  then,  they  keep  themselves  in
their  oldness :  but  by  remaining  in  their  oldness,  they  obstruct
the  view  of  them  that  are  right  by  their  crooked  discoursing.
4.  After  these  also,  Eliu,  a  younger  person,  is  joined  to  them
in  their  reproaches  of  blessed  Job. Tn  his  person  is  repre-
sented a  class  of  teachers,  who  are  faithful,  but  yet  arrogant.
Nor  do  we  easily  understand  his  words,  unless  we  consider
them  bv  the  help  of  the  subsequent  reproof  of  the  Lord.
Who  is  he  that  involves  sentences  in  unskilful  words?  for  Job  38,
when  He  uses  the  word  '  sentences,'  but does  not  imme-^'
diately  subjoin  of  what  nature  they  are.  He  intends  the  word
without  doubt  to  be  understood  favourably. For  when  '  sen-
tences'  are spoken of, unless  they are said to be bad,
they  cannot  be  understood  in  a  bad  sense. For  we  always
take  the  word  in  a  good  sense,  if  no  unfavourable  addition  is
made;  as  it  is  written,^  slothful  man  seems  uiser  in  his  own  Prov.

. 26 16.

opinion  than  seven  men  uttering  sentences.  But  by  its  '
being  said  that  his  sentences  are  involved  in  unskilful
language,  it  is  plainly  shewn  that  they  were  uttered  by  him
with  the  folly  of  pride.  For  it  is  a  great  unskilfulness  in
him,  to  be  unable  to  express  himself  \vith  humility  in  what
he  says,  and  to  blend  with  sentiments  of  truth  the  words  of
pride.

5.  For  the  nature  of  every  thing  that  is  said  can  be  dis-
tinguished by  four  different  qualities.  If,  for  instance,
either  bad  things  are  said  badly,  good  things  well,  bad  things
well,  or  good  things  badly.  A  bad  thing  is  badly  said,  when
wi-ong  advice  is  given;  as  it  is  written,  Curse  God,  and  die.  Joh2,9.


6  What  is  spoken,  and  how. The  three  friends  reconciled.

Job  32,  A good  thing  is  well  said,  when  right  matters  are  rightly
^\ preached;  as  John  says,  Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven
2. ' '/«  at  hand. A  bad thing  is  \yell  spoken,  when  a  fault  is
adduced by  the s])eaker, simply  to  be  reproved;  as Paul
Kom.  ijSays,  The  uomen  changed  their  natural  use  into  that  ichich
^^" is  against  nature. In which  place  he  subjoined  too  the
execrable  doings  of  men. But  he  related  these  unseemly
things in a  seemly way, that  by  telling  of  things  unbe-
coming,  he  might  recal  many  to the  practice of  what  is
becoming. But a good thing is ill spoken,  when wdiat
is  projier  is  brought  forward  with  an  improper  object;  as  the
Pharisees  are  reported  to  have  said  to  the  blind  man  who
John  9,  had  received  his  sight,  Be  thou  His  disciple;  for  they  said
^^" this  for  the  express purpose of  reproaching him, not as
Johni],  wishing  what  they  said;  or  as  Caiaphas  says.  It  is  expedient
^^- that one man should  die  for the  people^  that  the ivhole
nation  perish  not. It  was  a  good  thing  which  he  said,  but
not  with  good  view;  for  wdiile  he  longed  for  His  cruel  death,  he
prophesied  the  grace  of  redemption. And  in  like  manner
Eliu  also  is  reproved  for  saying  right  things  in  a  wrong  way:
because  in  the  very  truths  which  he  niters  he  is  puffed  up
with  arrogance. And  he  represents  thereby  the  character  of
the  arrogant,  because  through  a  sense  of  what  is  right  he
rises  up  into  words  of  pride.

6.  But  what  is  meant  by  the  Divine  Voice  directing  that
the  three  friends  should  be  reconciled  by  seven  sacrifices,
while  it  leaves  Eliu  only  beneath  the  reproof  of  a  single
sentence  ;  except  it  be  that  heretics,  when  bedewed  with  the
superabundance  of  Divine  grace,  sometimes  return  to  the
unity  of  Holy  Church  ?  This  is  excellently  set  forth  by  the
very  reconciliation  of  the  friends,  for  whom  nevertheless
blessed  Job  is  directed  to  pray.  Because  in  truth  the
sacrifices  of  heretics  cannot  be  acceptable  to  God,  unless
they  be  offered  for  ihem  by  the  hands  of  the  Church  Catholic,
that  they  may  gain  a  healing  remedy  by  her  merits,  whom
they  used  to  smite  by  attacking  her  with  the  shafts  of  their
reproaches.  And  thence  is  it  that  seven  sacrifices  are
said  to  have  been  offered  for  them,  because  whilst  they
receive  on  confession  the  Spirit  of  sevenfold  grace,  they  are
atoned  for,  as  it  were,  by  seven  oblations. Wherefore  in  the


Meaning  of  their  sacrifices. EUii  reproved.  7

Apocalypse  of  John,  the  whole  Church  is  represented  by  the Book
sevenfold  number of  the Churches :  and  hence  is  it  that


Solomon  speaks  thus  of  Wisdom,  Wisdom  hatli  huilded  1ier\\,  '
house,  s/ie  hath  hewn  out  Iter  seven  pillars.  Tlie  heretics  ?'''"^' ^'
then  on  their  reconciliation  express,  by  the  very  number  of
the  sacrifices,  their  own  foi'raer  character,  since  it  is  only  by
their  returning  that  they  are  united  to  the  perfection  of
sevenfold  grace.  But  they  arc  properly  represented  as
having  offered  for  themselves  bulls  and  rams.  For  in  a  bull
is  designated  the  neck  of  pride,  in  a  ram  the  leading  of  the
flocks  that  follow.  What  then  is  the  offering  of  bulls  and
rams  on  their  behalf,  but  the  destruction  of  their  proud
leadership,  that  they  may  think  humbly  of  themselves,  and
not  seduce  any  longer  the  hearts  of  the  innocent  to  follow
them  ?  For  they  had  started  aside  with  swelling  neck  from
the  general  body  of  the  Church,  and  were  drawing  after
them  the  weakminded,  as  flocks  following  their  guidance.
Let  them  come  then  to  blessed  Job,  that  is,  let  them  return
to  the  Church, and  offer  bulls  and  rams  to  be  slaughtered  for
a  sevenfold  sacrifice,  who  in  order  to  be  united  to  the
Church  Catholic,  by  the  coming  in  of  a  spirit  of  humility,
have  to  put  an  end  to  whatever  swelling  thouglits  the}-
before  used  to  entertain  from  their  haughty  leadership.

7.  But  Eliu  (by  whom  are  designated  those  lovers  of
vain-glory  who,  living  within  the  pale  of  the  Church,  scorn
to  state  in  a  humble  way  the  sound  views  which  they  hold)
is  not  directed  to  be  reconciled  by  sacrifice.  For  those  who
are  proud,  and  yet  faithful,  because  they  are  already  within
the  pale,  cannot  be  brought  back  by  seven  sacrifices.  Yet
the  divine  wisdom  reproves  these  people  in  the  person  of
Eliu,  and  blames  in  them  not  their  sentences  of  truth,  but
their  temper  and  language  of  pride.  But  what  is  the  mean-
ing of  the  reproofj  except  that  the  chiding  of  the  divine
severity  chastens  them  with  scourges  as  placed  within  the
Church,  or  by  a  righteous  judgment  leaves  them  to  them-
selves ?  For  such  as  these  preach  the  truth  within  the
Church,  but,  in  the  judgment  of  God,  deserve  to  hear  an
unfavourable  sentence,  because  by  the  sound  truths  which
they  state,  which  are  not  their  own,  they  seek  not  the  glory
of  their  author,  but their own  credit. We  must  therefore


23


8 Teachers  of  Truth  still  need  to  uatch  against  jiride.

Job  32,  carefully  weigh  this  passage,  in which it  is said  by the
— -| —  Divine  A'oice  respecting Kliu,  JMto  is lie? An  interroga-
2. '  tion  of  this  kind  is  but  the  beginning  of  a  reproof. For  we
say  not,  Who  is  he,  except  of  a  person  of  whom  we  are
ignorant. But  God's  ignorance  is  the  same  as  His  rejection  :
whence  He  will  at  the  end  say  to  some  whom  He  rejects,
Mat.  r,  r  know  yon  not whence  yon  are ;  depart  from  Me,  all  ye
workers of  iniquity. To  ask  then  of  this haughty man,
Wlio  is  he?  what  is  it  but  plainly  to  say,  I  know  not  the
haughty.?  that  is,  In  the  excellence  of  My  wisdom  I  approve
not  of  their  doings,  because,  by  being  puffed  up  by  human
praise,  they  are  bereft  of  the  true  glory of  eternal  reward.
By  not  rejecting  then  his  sentiments,  but  blaming  the  person
who  uttered  them.  He  plainly  teaches, as  it  were  saying,  I
know  what  he  says,  but  1  know not  the  speaker: I  approve
of  whatever  is  stated  in  accordance  with  truth,  but  I  acknow-
ledge not  him  who  is  elated  by  the  truths  he  utters.

8.  But  to  shew  more  plainly  how  disgracefully  Eliu  falls
away  in  boastfulness  of  pride,  we  ought  in  the  first  place  to
set  forth  the  character  of  a sound  teacher ; that  from  the
straightness  of  this  standard  the  defoiToity  of  his  distortion
may  be  clearly  manifested. Every  spiritual  preacher  then
of  the  Church  Catholic  carefully  examines  himself  in  every
thing  he  says,  lest  he  should  be  elated  with  the  sin  of  pride
on  account  of  his  sound  preaching;  lest  his  conduct  shoidd
be  at  variance  with  his  words ;  lest  that  very  peace  which  he
preaches in the  Church  he  should  lose  in  his  own  person,
by  sound speaking  and  evil living. But it is his  chief
endeavour  against  the  calunniious  rumours  of  the  adversaries
to defend  his  conduct  by  his  preaching,  and  to  adorn  his
preaching  by  his  life. And  in  all  this  he  seeks  not  his  own
glory,  but  that  of  His Maker ; and considers  that every
gift  of  wisdom  he  has  received  for  the  purpose  of  preaching,
as  bestowed  not  for  his  own  deserts,  but  through  the  inter-
cessions of  those  for  whom  he  speaks. And  thus  while  he
casts  himself  down,  he  rises  higher  and  higher;  because  he
doubtless  makes  greater  progress  in  gaining  his  own  reward,
by  ascribing  to  the  merits  of  others  the  good  gifts  he  is  able
to  exercise. He  counts  himself  unworthy  of  all  men,  even
when  he  lives  more  worthily  than all  together. For  he  is


Elius  name,  parentage,  and  country  explained. 9

aware  that  the  good  qualities  which  are  known  to  the  world  Book
at  large,  can  hardly  exist  in  him  without  great  peril.  And  ^^^^^y
though  he  feels  himself  to  be  wise,  he  would  wish  to  be
really  wise  without  appearing  so :  and  is  especiall}-  afraid  of
that  which  is  spoken  of  and  gets  abroad.  And  he  seeks,  if
possible,  to  be  silent,  from  perceiving  that  silence  is  safer  for
many,  and  considers  that  they  are  ha])pier,  whom  a  lower
part  in  Holy  Church  conceals  in  silence;  and  though,  in
defence  of  the  Church,  he  takes  on  himself  of  necessity  the
duty  of  speaking,  because  he  is  urged  by  the  force  of  charity,
yet  he  seeks  with  earnest  longing  the  rest  of  silence.  The
one  he  maintains  as  a  matter  of  wish,  the  other  he  exercises
as  a  matter  of  duty.  But  of  such  ways  of  speaking  the
proud  are  ignorant.  For  they  speak  not  because  causes
arise,  but  seek  for  them  to  arise  in  order  that  they  may
speak.  Of  such  Eliu  is  now  a  type,  who  in  what  he  says
sets  himself  up  beyond  measure,  through  the  sin  of  pride.
When  the  words  then  of  blessed  Job  were  ended  it  is  added,
These  three  men  ceased  to  answer  Job,  because  he  seemed  joh  32,
just  in  his  own  eyes.  ^"

Tn  the  expression,  because  he  seemed  to  be  just  in  his  own
eyes,  the  author  of  this  sacred  history  intended  to  refer  to
the  opinion  of  Job's  friends,  and  did  not  himself  accuse  him
of  being  puffed  up  with  pride. It  follows  :

Ver.  2.  And  Eliu,  the  son  of  Barachel  the  Buzite,  of  the
kindred  of  Ram,  iras  wroth  and  indignant-

9.  The  names  either  of  himself,  or  of  his  parent,  of  his ii.
home,  or  kindred,  furnish  a  mark  of  his  own  conduct. For
Ehu  being  intei-preted  means,  "  That  my  God,"  or,  "  God
the  Lord." By  whom,  as  we  said  to  you,  is  designated  the
sound  faith  of  proud  men  placed  within  the  Church. Whence
this  very  name  of  his  is  suited  to  them  also. For  though
they  live  not  according  to  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,
they  yet  recognise  God  as  their  Lord,  because  in  the  truth
of  His  flesh  they  realize  also  the  form  of  the  Godhead,  as  is
said  by  the  Prophet,  A'y/o«^  ye  that the  Lord  He is  God.p^^iQo^
But  Barachel,  signifies  when  interpreted,  "  The  blessing  of^-
God," but Buzite, "  contemptible." And  either  of  these
expressions  is  well  suited  to  proud  preachers:  because  in
the  eloquence  of  their  speech they  enjoy the  blessing  of


10  Eliu'ii  kindred. He^finds fault  tmth  both  sides.

Job  33,  Di\'iuo  Grace,  but  in  their  proud  manners  they  shew  that  it  is

£:_  to  he  despised. For  the  gifts  which  they  have  received  they

render  contemptible,  by  not  knowing  how  to  use  them  rightly.
But  he  is  fitly  said  to  be  also  of  the  kindred  of  Ram.  For
Ram  signifies  "  lofty."  For  lofty  is  the  assembly  of  the
faithful,  which  despises  the  low  and  abject  things  of  this  life.
Phil.  3,  Lofty  are  they  who  can  say  with  Paul,  Our  conversation  is
^^'  in  heaven.  Eliu  therefore  is  said  to  be  '  of  the  kindred  of
Ram,'  because  every  haughty  preacher  within  the  bosom  of
the  Church  Catholic,  is  united  to  the  holy  People  in  the
verity  of  the  faith,  however  he  may  be  separated  from  them
in  conduct  by  the  sinfulness  of  his  pride. It  follows,

Bid  he  was  angry  against  Job,  because  he  said  he  was
Just  before  God.  Moreover  against  his  friends  was  he  wroth,
because  they  had  not  found  reasonable  answers,  but  had
merely  condemned  Job.
iii,  10,  It  must  be  carefully  observed,  that  he  blames  blessed
Job  for  professing  himself  just  before  God,  but  his  friends
because  in  condemning  him  they  gave  no  reasonable  reply.
For  it  is  plainly  inferred,  from  these  marks,  that  in  him  are
characterized  the  lovers  of  vain  glory.  For  he  convicts  Job
of  presuming  on  his  righteousness,  his  friends  of  making  a
foolish  answer.  For  all  lovers  of  vain  glory,  while  they  prefer
themselves  to  all  other,  accuse  some  of  folly,  others  of
obtaining  what  they  do  not  deserve:  that  is,  they  consider
some  to  be  ignorant,  others  to  be  evil  livers.  And  though
they  may  justly  accuse  of  heresy  all  who  are  external  to  the
Church,  yet  they  despise  those  who  are  within  for  the  mean-
ness of  their  life,  and  pride  themselves  against  the  one  from
high  notions  of  their  sound  faith,  against  the  others  as  if
from  the  merits  of  their  good  living.  But  Eliu  is  well  said
to  reprove  at  one  time  blessed  Job,  and  at  another  time  his
friends:  because  the  lovers  of  vain  glory,  living  at  times
within  the  pale  of  Holy  Church,  both  crush  her  opponents  by
preaching  the  truth,  and  oppose  the  customs  of  the  same  Holy
Church  in  boasting  of  their  preaching.  They  overwhelm  the
opponents  of  the  Church  by  the  power  of  their  words,  they
oppress  Holy  Church  by  the  way  in  which  they  utter
them.  They  assail  the  one  by  preaching  the  truth,  the  other
by  their  sin  of  pride. It  follows,


The  Church  older  than  heresy,  proud  teachers  younger.  11

Ver.  4,  5.  Elihu  therefore  waited  while  Job  was  sjwaking,  Rook

because  they  who  were  speaking  were  his  elders. But  when  ~ '

he  had  seen  that  the  three  were  not  able  to  answer,  he  was
very  icroth.

11.  Though  Holy  Church  is  unquestionably  older  than  her iv.
adversaries,  (for  they  went  forth  from  her,  not  she  from  them,
as  is  said  of  them  by  John,  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  ^  '^°^'^
were  not  of  tis,)  yet  Eliu  is  properly  described  as  having
been  younger  than  these  same  adversaries. Because  in  truth
after  the  contests  which  arose  with  heretics,  haughty  men
began  to  have  place  in  the  Church,  puffed  up  Avith  the  pride
of  learning. For  when  more  grievous  contests  commenced
with  the  enemy,  there  were  certainly  required  some  subtle
dart-poinls  of  thought,  oppositions  of  arguments,  and  a  more
involved research of  words. And  while  men of  glowing
genius  invent  these  weapoijs  to  suit  the  circumstances,  they
are  frequently  puffed  up  with  pride,  and  (as  is  generally  the
case  in  the  sin  of  pride)  they  are  themselves  made  to  fall
by  the  same  subtle  meanings  with  which  they  assail  the  foe,
while  in  what  they  think  aright  concerning  God,  they  seek
not  God's  glory,  but  their  own. And  hence  is  it  that  though
Eliu  says  many  things  aright,  he  is yet  reproved by  the
Divine  voice,  as  tliough  he  had  stated  errors. But  when  it
is  said  that  Eliu  waited  while  Job  was speaking,  because
they  who  were  speaking  were  his  elders,  it  is  plain  that  he
observed  this  respect  to  blessed  Job  not  out  of  reverence  for
him,  but  for his  friends; because,  namely,  haughty  men
though  dwelling  within  Holy  Church,  despise  that  very  body
which  they  defend;  and  it  is  commonly  the case that  they
pay  greater  respect  to  the  abilities  of  those  who  are  wise  to
an  evil  purpose,  than  to  the  simple  life  of  the  innocent ;  and
that  they  shew greater regard  to the  eloquence  of  those
without,  than to the deserts of  those within. And  this,
though they  are  opposed to  both  in  opposite  ways,  as  dif-
fering from  the  one  in  the  soundness  of  their  opinion,  and
from  Holy  Church  in  the  perverseness  of  their  character. It
proceeds,

Ver.  6,  7.  And  Eliu  the  son  of  Barachel,  the  Buzite,
answered  and  said,  I  am  younger  in  age,  but  ye  are  more
ancient. I  therefore  helddoivn  my  head,  and  feared  to  shew


1'2 Arrogance  in  claiming  gifts  as  onr  own  or  merited.

Job  32,  yoii  my  opinion. For  I  ivas  hoping  that  greater  age  icould

^ — spcnk,  and  that  a  muUitiule  of  years  icouhl  teach  ivisdom.

1-2.  All  these  words,  whicli  are  uttered  by  him  through
swelling  })ride,  must  be  rather  glanced  at  by  the  way  than
cxjiounded  more  attentively.  For  whatsoever  is  deficient  in
solid  gravity,  needs  not  any  elaborate  exposition.  But
I  think  1  need  only  suggest  in  a  few  words,  that  Eliu  was
more  wise,  as  long  as  he  remained  silent  on  account  of  his
age,  but  that  in  desjjising  a  mullitude  of  years  in  others,  and
setting  himself  above  them,  he  shewed  jjlainly  his  childish
folly.  For  both  greater  age  speaks,  against  his  opinion,  and
wisdom  is  taught  by  multitude  of  years.  Because,  though
length  of  life  does  not  confer  intelligence,  yet  it  gives  it
much  exercise  by  constant  practice. It  follows,

Ver.  8.  But,  as  I  see,  there  is  a  spirit  in  man,  and  lite
inspiration  of  the  Ahnighty  giveth  understanding.
vi.  1.3,  ITe  would  be  right  in  saying  this,  did  he  not  arrogate
to  himself  this  same  wisdom  above  all  others.  For  it  is  no
slight'  condemnation  for  a  man  to  boast  within  himself  of
that  advantage  which  is  given  to  him  in  common  with  others
to  know  whence  he  has  received  a  good  gift,  and  to  know
not  how  to  use  the  good  he  has  received.  For  there  are
four  marks  by  which  every  kind  of  pride  of  the  arrogant  is
pointed  out,  either  when  they  think  that  they  possess  any-
good  quality  from  themselves,  or  if  they  believe  that  it  is
given  them  from  above,  yet  that  they  have  received  it  in
.consequence  of  their  own  merits,  or  unquestionably  when
they  boast  of  possessing  that  which  they  have  not,  or  when
they  despise  others,  and  wish  to  appear  the  sole  possessors
of  what  they  have.  For  he  boasted  that  he  possessed  his
good  (jualilies  from  himself,  to  whom  it  is  said  by  the  Apostle,

I  Cot. 4,  But  what  hast  thou  uhich  thou  didst  not  receive?  why  dost
thou  glory, as  if  thou  hadst  not  received  it?  Again^  the  same
Apostle  warns  us  not  to  believe  that  any  gift  of  grace  is  given

Eph.  2,  u^  for  our  precedent  deserts,  when  he  says.  By  grace  ye  are
saved  through  faith,  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  hut  it  is
the  gift  of  God; not  of  works,  lest  any  one  should  boast.

iTim.i,  Who  says  also  of  himself.  Mho  before  was  a  blasphemer,  and
a  persecutor, and contumelious: but I obtained mercy.
■  Ber. '  prava,'  a  misprint  for  '  parva.'


Also  in  claiming  falsely,  or  exchisivelij.  1*3

For  in  these  worrls  he plainly  declares,  that  fn'ACG  is  not  t-ook

Will
given  according  to desert,  when he  taught  us  both  what'^ -


he deserved  of  himself  for his evil deeds, and what he
obtained  by  G'od's  benevolence. But  again,  some  persons
boast  that  they  have  that  which  they  really  have  not,  as  the
Divine  Voice  speaks  of  Moab  by  the  Prophet ; /  know  his  Jer.  48,
pride  and  his  arrogance,  and  Ihat  his  virtue  is  not  according
to  it. And  as  is  said  to  the  Angel  of  the  Church  of  Laodicea,
Because  thou  sayest,  lam  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,B.e\.3,
and  have  need  of  nothing,  and  knotvest  not  that  thou  arl^'-
loretched,  and  miserable,  and.  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked.
Some  again  wish,  in  contempt  of  others,  to  appear  to  be  the
sole possessors of the good qualities which they have.
Whence  also  the  Pharisee  went  down  from  the  temple  with-
out being  justified,  because  by  ascribing  to  himself  as  if  in  a
singular  manner  the  merit  of  good  works,  he  preferred  him-
self to  the  suppliant  publican. The  holy  Apostles  also  are
warned  against  this  sin  of  pride;  for  on  returning  from  their
preaching,  and  saying  with  pride.  Lord,  even the  devils  are  Lukeio,
subject  to  ns  through  Thy  name,  to  keep  them  from  rejoicing
in  this  singular  gift  of  miracles,  the  Lord  at  once  replied  to
them,  saying, /  beheld Satan as lightning  falling  from
heaven. For  he  had  himself  said  with  special  pride,  /  will^^- 14,
exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of  heaven,  I  will  sit  in  the
mount  of  the  covenant,  in  the  sides  of  the  north; I  tvill  be
like  the  Most  High. And  the  Lord,  in  order  to  bring  down
pride  in  the  hearts  of  His  disciples,  related  with wondrous
wisdom  the  judgment  of  downfal,  which  the  prince  of  pride
himself  underwent,  that  they  might  learn,  from  the  author  of
pride,  what  they  had  to  apprehend  from  the  sin  of  haughti-
ness. In  the  fourth  kind  of  pride  then,  namely,  the  boasting
of  the  sole  possession  of  any  thing  it  possesses,  the  mind  of
man  equally  suffers  a  fall. But  it  is  in  this  that  it  approaches
more  closely  to  a  resemblance  of  Satan,  because  whoever
rejoices  at  the  singular  possession  of  any  good  thing,  who-
ever wishes to appear more  exalted  than others, plainly
imitates  him  who  in  despising  the  blessing  of  the  society  of
Angels, and placing his seat at  the north, and proudly
desiring  to  be  like  the  Most  High,  endeavoured  by  his  evil
longing  to  shoot  up  to  some  singular  preeminence. Eliu


14 Eliu  exalts  himself  in  comparison  uilh  his  elders.

Job  32,  then,  tliough  confessing  tliat  wisdom  is  given  by  God,  yet
}h^  falls  in  this species of  pride,  so  as  to rejoice  that  he  is
wiser  than  others,  and  foolishly  to  pride  himself  on  possess-
ing, as  it  were,  a  singular  advantage. Which  he  points  out
in  the  words  which  follow,  when  he  says,

Ver.  9,  10,  11.  Old  men  are  not  wise,  neither  do  the  aged
understand  judgment.  Therefore  I  uill  say,  Hearken  to
me,  I  will  shew  you  my  wisdom.  For  I  waited  for  your
words,  I  heard  your  wisdom,  whilst  ye  were  disputing  in
words:  and  as  long  as  I  thought  that  ye  said  something,  I
considered.
vii.  14.  As  far  as  regards  the  literal  meaning,  Eliu  proves  to
us,  when  he  speaks,  how  proudly  he  remained  silent.  For
when  he  says,  For  I  waited  for  your  words,  and  I  was  think-
ing that  ye  would  say  something,  he  plainly  shews  that  he
remained  silent,  while  the  aged  were  speaking,  rather  with
the  desire  of  judging,  than  with  the  wish  of  learning  from
them.  Though  these  expressions  ai'e  even  a  better  descrip-
tion of  the  conduct  of  proud  men,  who,  when  at  length
brought  within  Holy  Church,  are  accustomed  on  looking  at
her  opponents,  to  consider  not  so  much  the  years  of  their
age,  as  the  intention  of  their  words.  For  however  older  the
heretics  may  be  than  these  same  haughty  men,  they  boldly
overbear  those  persons  in  whose  words  they  reprove  false
doctrine. It  follows,

Ver.  12,  13.  But,  as  I  see,  there  is  no  one  of  you  who  can
convince  Job,  and  reply  to  his  words.  Lest  ye  should  per-
chance say,  We  have  found  out  tvisdom;  God  hath  cast  him
dozen,  not  man.
viii.  15.  Heretics,  from  the  fact  that  they  are  wont  to  appear
contemptible  even  to  men,  when  they  behold  Holy  Church
reverenced  by  well-nigh  all  nations,  endeavour  to  impugn
the  opinion  entertained  of  her  by  every  possible  objection;
and  say  that  she  enjoys  all  abundance  of  temporal  goods,
because  the  gifts  of  eternal  rewards  are  taken  from  her.  Eliu
meets  the  objections  of  such  people,  by  saying.  Lest  ye  should
])erchance  say,  Ji'e  have  found  out  wisdom;  God  hath  cast
him  down,  not  man.  As  if  they  who  are  found  within  the
Church,  but  are  yet  faithful,  should  say  against  the  heretics,
Because  ye  see  that  the  Church  stands  high  in  this  world,


Proud  men  attack  the  Churchy  though  not  as  heretics. 15

throiiRh  the  hicrli  opinion  of  men,  ye  must  believe  that  God  Book

\XIII
hath  not  cast  her  aside. For  her  Redeemer  well  knows  how '

to  administer  comfort  to  her  as  she  is  travelling  on  in  this

her  journey,  and to  keep in store  for  her  the  rewards of

heaven,  when  she  arrives  at  her  eternal  home. In  vain  then

do  ye  assert  that  God  hath  cast  her  down,  and  not  man,

when  ye  behold  her  venerated  by  almost  all  men;  because

the  aid  of  worldly  distinction  is  conferred  on  her  in  order

that  she  may  be  assisted  thereby  in  manifold  ways  to  gain

also  the  rewards  of  heaven. It  follows,

Ver.  14.  He  spake  nothing  to  me,  and  I  will  not  reply  to

hi7n  according  to  gour  words.

16.  What  is  meant  by  his  saying,  He  spake  nothing  to ix.
me? For  does  holy  Church,  when  she  detects  haughty  men
within her, ever omit to instruct  and reprove them by
preachers  of  righteousness.^ She  exercises  these  duties,  and
ceases  not  to  exercise  them  daily. But  let  Eliu,  who  had
heard  blessed  Job  speaking  openly,  say,  He  spake  nothing
to  me; because doubtless,  all haughty  men,  though they
hear  indeed  the  words  of  Holy  Church,  yet  pretend  that  they
are  not  addressed  to  them,  when  they  make  light  of  correct-
ing the  sin  of  pride. Nor  do  they  think  that  they  are  xq-
proved  for  their  pride,  for  they  look  on  themselves  as  humble ;
and  they  also  make  light  of  reproof,  when  they  count  them-
selves much  wiser  even  than  their  reprovers. But  in  saying,
/  will  not  answer  him  according  to  your  words,  he  well  says
that  he  does  not  answer  blessed  Job  with  their  speeches.
For  proud  men  within  the  pale  of  Holy  Church  reply  against
her,  but  yet  not  as heretics  who are  without. For they
oppose  her  not  by  false  teaching,  but  by  evil  living,  because
they do  not  think  unworthily  of  God,  as  do  heretics,  but
more highly than is necessary of their own selves. It
follows,

Ver.  15.  They  were  afraid^  they  answered  no  more,  they
removed  speech  from  themselves.

The  friends  of  Job  are  well  said  to  have  been  afraid  of
the  words  of  Eliu,  since  frequently  proud  defenders  of  the
Church,  though  they  do  not  observe  due  order  in  what  they
say,  yet  confound  the  adversaries  by  the  very  virtue  of  their
words. It  follows,


16 Eliu^  eager  for  display,  like  an  uncovered  vesael.

Job  . 12, Vcr.  16.  Because  therefore  I  have  waited,  and  they  have
— '■ — '-  not  spoken,  they  have  .stood,  and  have  ansicered  no  more.


\


X.  17.  Wise  men  are  accustouicd  to  make  it  the  limit  of  their 9

speaking,  to  speak  so  far  as  to  silence  their  adversaries.  For  ii
they  wish  not  to  display  their  own  powers,  but  to  put  down
the  teachers  of  heresy.  But  after  it  is  said  of  the  friends  of
Job,  They  uere  afraid,  they  ansivered  no  more,  they  removed
speech  from  themselves,  Eliu  subjoins  and  says,  /  have
waited,  and  they  have  not  spoken ;  they  have  stood,  and  have
ansicered  no  more.  Even  when  they  are  already  silent,  he
yet  multi])lies  his  words,  because,  being  an  arrogant  man,
and  representing  the  character  of  the  arrogant,  he  is  in  haste
not  merely  to  refute  the  arguments  of  his  opponents,  but  to
display  his  own  wisdom. Whence  it  also  follows,

Ver.  17.  /  will  also  ansicer  my  part,  and  I  will  display
my  knowledge.

For  every  proud  man  considers  this  to  be  his  part,  if  be
does  not  so  much  possess,  as  make  a  show  of,  knowledge.
For  all  proud  men  are  anxious  not  to  possess  knowledge,  but
to  make  a  display  of  it:  against  whom  Moses  well  says,
Numb.  Ji^iery  vessel  tvhich  hath  not  a  cover  nor  binding  over  it
shall  be  nnclean.  For  the  covering  or  the  binding  is  the
reproof  of  discipline,  and  every  one  who  is  not  kept  under  by
it  is  rejected  as  an  unclean  and  polluted  vessel.  And  was  not
Eliu  a  vessel  without  a  cover,  who  had  considered  it  to  be  his
part  to  make  a  show  of  the  wisdom  which  he  possessed?  For
he  who  lays  himself  open  by  his  desire  of  display,  and  is  not
covered  by  the  veil  of  silence,  is  polluted  as  a  vessel  without
cover  or  binding.  But  holy  preachers  consider  that  they  are
performing  their  part,  if  they  rejoice  in  themselves  at  their
own  wisdom  within,  and  if  they  outwardly  keep  back  others
from  eiTor.  Nor  do  they  so  far  go  out  of  themselves  in
speaking,  as  to  place  the  delight  of  their  mind  in  an  outward
dis]ilay  of  eloquent  language.  But  they  meditate  on  the
benefits  of  wisdom  in  the  secret  of  their  heart,  and  there
rejoice  when  they  perceive  it;  and  not  when  they  are  obliged
to  make  it  known  amidst  the  snares  of  so  many  temptations.
Although  when  they  make  known  the  good  which  they
receive,  yet  charity  steps  in,  and  they  rejoice  at  the  progress
of  their  hearers,  and  not  at  their  own display. But  the


Good  men  prefer  silence ;  it  pains  the  arrogant. 17

arrogant on gaining  any  knowledge  think tliat  ihey  have  Hook
gained  nolliing,  if  it  so  happens  that  they  keep  it  concealed.  '


For  they  place  their  happiness  no  where  but  in  the  praise  of
men. It  is  hence  that  the  foolish  virgins  are  said  to  haveMah25,
taken  no  oil  in  their  vessels ;  because  such  as  be  arrogant,^'
if  perchance  they  keep  themselves  from  any  vices,  cannot
confine  to  their  own consciences the  credit  of  the glory.
But  Paul  had  taken  oil  in  his  own  vessel,  who  said,  O ur 2  Cor.  \,
glory  is  this,  the  testimony  of  our  conscience. To  carry  then  ^'^'
an  empty  vessel,  is  with  a  heart  empty  within  to  seek  for  the
judgment  of  men's  lips  from  without. Because  Eliu,  then,
when  seeking  for  glory  fi'om  without,  has  not  oil  within  his
vessel,  he  well says,  /  icill  answer  my  part,  and  I  will
display  my  learning. And  in  the  words  which  follow  he
shews  what  are  his  sufferings,  from  vain-glory  raging  within,
saying,

Ver.  18 — 20.  I  am  full  of  tvords,  the  spirit  of  my  womh
constraineth  mc.  Behold,  my  belly  is  as  new  wine  without
a  vent,  which  hursts  in  sunder  new  vessels.  I  will  speak,
and  will  take  breath  awhile;  I  will  open  my  lips  and
answer.

18.  When  boastful  men  observe  that  holy  preachers  speak  xi.
eloquently,  and  are  reverenced  for  their  eloquence,  they
frequently  imitate  the  loftiness  of  their  language,  and  not
their  useful  intention.  They  are  far  from  loving  what  the
others  desire,  but  are  especially  anxious  to  gain  great  renown
amongst  men.  For  it  is  frequently  the  case  that  wise  men,
when  they  find  that  they  are  not  listened  to,  impose  silence
on  their  lips.  But  frequently  when  they  see  that  the  sins
of  the  ungodly  gain  strength  when  they  are  silent,  and  cease
to  reprove,  they  endure  a  kind  of  violence  in  their  spirit,  so
that  they  burst  forth  in  language  of  open  reproof  And
hence  when  the  Prophet  Jeremiah  had  imposed  on  himself
silence  in  preaching,  saying,  /  will  not  make  mention  ofj^^.  20,
Him,  nor  speak  any  more  in  His  Name;  he  immediately^-
added.  And  there  was  made  as  it  were  a  burning  fire  in  my
bosom,  and  shut  up  in  my  bones:  and  I  was  wearied,  not
being  able  to  bear  it;  for  I  have  heard  the  insults  of  many.
For,  seeing  that  he  was  not  listened  to,  he  wished  to  hold
his  peace ;  but  when  he  beheld  evil  increasing,  he  no  longer

VOL.  III.  c


18 Zeol  seeks  to  amend  others,  pride  to  display  self.

Job  32,  persisted  in  tlie  same  silence. For  when  he  ceased  to  speak

18—20.  ^jj]jp,i(^  jroii^  being  wearied  of  speaking",  he  felt  a  flame
kindled  within  him  by  the  zeal  of  charity.  For  the  hearts  of
the  just  burn  within  them,  when  they  behold  the  deeds  of
the  ungodly  ^ain  strength  from  not  being  reproved,  and
they  believe  that  they  arc  themselves  partakers  in  the  guilt
of  those,  whom  they  allow,  by  their  own  silence,  to  go  on  in
iniquity. The  prophet  David,  after  he  had  imposed  silence

Ps.3n,i.on  himself,  saying,  /  have  set  a  guard  upon  my  mouth,  while
the  sinner  stood  against  me.  I  was  dumb,  and  teas  humbled,
and  kept  silence  even  from  good  things :  in  the  midst  of
his silence  blazed  forth  with  this  zeal  of  charity,  when  he

Ps.39,3. iiiiniediatcly  subjoined;  My  sorrow  was  renewed,  my  heart
greio  hoi  within  me,  and  in  my  meditation  a  jxre  shall
Jlame  out.  His  heart  grew  hot  within  him,  because  the
flame  of  charity  refused  to  burst  forth  in  words  of  admo-
nition. The  fire  burned  in  the  meditation  of  his  hearty  be-
cause his  reproof  of  the  nngodly  had  ceased  to  flow  on  with
the  chiding  of  his  lips.  For  the  zeal  of  charity  tempers
itself  with  wonderful  consolation,  as  it  gains  strength,  when
it  bursts  forth  in  words  of  reproof  against  the  deeds  of  the
ungodly,  in  order  that  it  may  not  cease  to  reprove  the  faidts
which  it  cannot  amend,  lest  it  should  convict  itself  of  par-
taking in  their  sins,  by  consent  of  keeping  silence.

19.  But  because  certain  vices  frequently  assume  the  guise
of  virtues,  as,  for  instance,  lavishness  wishes  to  appear  like
pity,  stinginess  like  frugality,  cruelty  like  justice  ;  in  like
manner,  a  desire  for  empty  glory,  being  unable  to  keep  itself
within  the  bounds  of  silence,  inflames  like  the  zeal  of  charity,
and  the  powerful  desire  of  ostentation  impels  a  person  to
speak  without  restraint,  and  the  desire  of  display  breaks  out,
as  if  with  the  wish  of  offering  advice.  For  it  cares  not  what
good  it  can  effect  by  its  speaking,  but  what  show  it  can
make :  nor  is  it  anxious  to  correct  the  evil  w^hich  it  beholds,
but  to  display  the  good  which  it  feels.  Hence  Eliu  also,
swollen  by  the  spirit  of  pride,  and  unable  to  keep  himself

ver.  18.  within  the  barriers  of  silence,  says,  I  am  full  of  words,  the
spirit  of  my  womb  constraineth  me ;  behold,  my  belly  is  as
new  wine  without  a  vent  which  bursts  in  sunder  new  vessels.

«  Comma  after  '  locutionis,'  as  the  rhythm  and  the  sense  both  require.


Arrogance  u-ould pass  for  zeal. Self  to  be  first  corrected.  19
20.  If  we must  understand  this passage spiritually,  by  Book

'  XXTTI

'  belly'  he  means  the  secret  recesses  of  tl)e  heart. IJut  by '-


new  wine  is  understood  the  wanutli  ot'  the  Holy  Spirit,  of
which  the  Lord  says  in  the  Gospel,  Tliey  put  new  tvine  into  Matt. 9,
new  skins.  For  when  the  Apostles  were  filled  suddenly
therewith,  and  were  speaking  in  every  tongue,  it  was  said  by
the  Jews,  who  knew  not  the  truth  and  yet  bare  witness  to  it.
These  men  are  full  of  new  wine.  But  by  vessels  we  under-  Acts  2,
stand  not  inappropriately  either  consciences  which  ai'e  weak  ^•
from  their  very  estate  of  humanity,  or  certainly  those  earthly
vessels  of  our  bodies;  of  which  the  Apostle  Paul  says,  We'^Cor.i,
have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels.  But  because  Eliu,  as
we  before  observed,  was  so  puffed  up  and  swollen  with  pride,
as  though  he  were  kindled  within,  to  speak  through  the  grace
of  charity,  by  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  compares  the  spirit,
which  he  felt  within  him  when  silent,  to  new  wine  without  a
vent.  And  he  well  says.  Which  bursts  asunder  new  vessels,
because  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Sjnrit  is  scarcely  kept  in  by  the
new  life,  much  less  by  the  old.  The  new  wine  then  bursts
asunder  new  vessels,  because  by  its  violent  heat  it  is  too
much  even  for  spiritual  hearts.  /  taill  speak,  and  I  will  take  ver.  20.
breath  a  little;  I  will  open  my  lips  and  answer.  He  well
says,  /  will  take  breathy  for  as  it  is  a  distress  to  the  holy  to
behold  wickedness,  without  amending  it ;  so  is  it  a  heavy
distress  to  the  boastful,  if  they  do  not  display  the  wisdom
they  possess.  For  they  can  scarcely  endure  the  violence
which  boils  within  them,  if  they  are  rather  behindhand  in
making  known  every  thing  which  they  think.  And  hence,
when  any  good  deed  is  taken  in  hand,  all  pride  on  account
of  it  must  first  be  overcome  in  the  heart,  lest,  if  it  should
proceed  from  the  root  of  a  bad  motive,  it  should  bring  forth
the  bitter  fruits  of  sin.

21.  These  then,  who  are  as  yet  engaged  in  a  contest  with
their  suis,  ought  never  to  undertake  to  rule  over  others  by
exercising  the  office  of  preaching.  And  this  is  the  reason,
why,  according  to  the  command  of  the  Divine  dispensa-
tion, the  Levites  serve  the  tabernacle  from  their  twenty-  Numb,
fifth  year,  but  from  their  fiftieth  become  the  guardians  '  '
of  the  sacred  vessels.  For  what  is  meant  by  the  five  and
twentieth year,  when  youth is  in  its full vigour,  but  the

c2


23.


20  A(je  of  Leviles  itjpe  of  spirifual  aHainment. Time  short.

Job  32,  contests  against  each  separate  sin?  And  what  is  expressed
^  '  ^•-  by  the  filiieth,  in  wliicli  is  signified  also  the  rest  of  the
Jubilee,  but  the  repose  of  the  mind  within,  when  the  contest
has  come  to  an  end  ?  But  what  is  shadowed  forth  by  the
vessels  of  the  tabernacle,  except  the  souls  of  the  faithful  ?
The  Levites,  therefore,  serve  the  tabernacle  from  their  five
and  twentieth  year,  and  take  charge  of  the  vessels  from  their
fiftieth,  to  shew  that  they  who  endure,  through  pleasurable
consent,  the  contest  with  sins  which  still  assault  them,
should  not  presume  to  take  the  charge  of  others :  but  that
when  they  have  been  successful  in  their  contests  with
temptations,  by  which  they  are  assured  of  inward  tranquillity,
they  may  then  und(jrtake  the  care  of  souls.  But  who  can
perfectly  subdue  these  assaults  of  temptations,  when  Paul
Rom.  7,  says,  I  see  anotJier  law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the
law  of  my  mind,  and  leading  me  captive  to  the  law  of  sin?
But  it  is  one  thing  boldly  to  endure  contests,  another  to  be
unnerved  by  them  and  overcome.  In  the  first  case  virtue  is
kept  in  exercise,  to  secure  it  from  being  puffed  up;  in  the
other,  it  is  quite  quenched  thatit  cease  to  be.  He  then  who  knows
how  to  endure  with  boldness  the  temptation  of  the  contest,
even  when  he  feels  its  shock,  sits  on  high  in  the  lofty  citadel
of  peace.  For  he  sees  that  the  assaults  of  sin  are,  even  when
within  him,  subject  to  his  power,  since  he  does  not  yield  his
'  consent  to  them,  from  being  overcome  by  any  pleasure.  It
follows :

Ver.  21,  22.  /  will  not  accept  the  person  of  man,  T  will
not  equal  God  to  man ;  for  I  know  not  how  long  I  shall
continue,  or  whether  after  a  while  my  Maker  may  take  me
away.
xii.  22.  Most  judiciously  he  does  not  make  God  equal  to  man,
since  he  knows  not  how  long  he  may  continue,  or  when  in
the  judgment  of  God  be  taken  away.  And  he  well  says.
After  a  while  my  Maker  may  take  me  aioay;  for  however
long  is  the  period  of  the  present  life,  it  is  short,  from  the
very  fact,  that  it  is  not  enduring.  For  that  which  is  confined
within  circumscribed  limits  has  no  claim  to  be  considered
lasting.  But  in  the  midst  of  these  sentences  which  he  utters,
based  on  solid  truth,  he  again  bursts  out  into  words  of  pride,
saying,


Eliii's  boasting. Riyhl  manner  of  teaching,  humble. 21

Chap,  xxxiii.  ver.  1,  2. IVIierefore,  Jub,  /war  tnt/  ftpeecltes.  Book

and  hearken  to  all  my  words. Behold,  I  have  opened  my  — '-

mouth;  let  my  tongue  speak  in  my  throat.

23.  Let  us  consider  from  what  a  height  of  pride  he  comes xiii.
down  in  admonishing  Job  to  listen  lo  him,  in  saying  that  he

had  opened  his  mouth,  in  promising  that  his  tongue  would
speak  in  his  throat.  For  the  teaching  of  the  boastful  has
this  peculiarity,  that  they  cannot  modestly  suggest  what  they
teach,  and  cannot  communicate  in  a  right  manner  the  truths
they  hold  rightly.  For  they  make  it  plain  by  their  words
that  they  fancy  themselves,  when  teaching,  to  be  seated  on
some  lofty  eminence,  and  that  they  look  upon  their  hearers
as  standing  far  beneath  them,  as  on  lower  ground,  as  persons
whom  they  hardly  deign  to  address,  not  in  the  tone  of  advice,
but  of  authority.  "Well  does  the  Lord  address  them  by  the
Prophet,  But  ye  ruled  them  with  austerity  and  power.  ForEz.  34,
they  rule  with  austerity  and  power,  Avho  are  eager  to  correct  '
those  under  them,  not  by  calmly  reasoning,  but  to  bend  them
by  the  severity  of  command.

24.  But  sound  teaching,  on  the other hand, the more
earnestly  avoids this sin of  pride in thought, the more
eagerly  it  assails  with  the shafts  of  its  words  the  teacher  of
pride  himself. For  it  takes  heed  lest  it  be  rather  preaching
him  by  a  haughty demeanoui',  whom  it  assails  with  holy
words  in  the  heai-ts of  its  hearers. For it  endeavours  to
state  in  its  words,  and  to  set  forth  in its  doings,  humility,
which  is  the  mistress  and  mother  of  all  virtues,  in  order  that
it  may  enforce  it  on  the  disciples  of  truth  more  by  its  con-
duct than  by  its  words. Whence  Paul  in  speaking  to  the
Thessalonians,  as  if  he  had  forgotten  the  height  of  his  own
Apostleship, We  became  as  children  in  the  midst  of  you.  i  Thess.
Whence  the  Apostle  Peter,  when  saying,  Ever  ready  to  satisfy  i'pet.3,
every  one  that  asketh  you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  ^^'
asserted  that  in  the  science  of  teaching  the  manner  of  one's
teaching  is  to  be  strictly  attended  to,  by  subjoining.  But  with\h.  16,
modesty  and  fear,  having  a  good  conscience. But  in  that
which  the  Apostle  Paul  says  to  his disciple. These  things  \T\m.4,
exhort  and  teach  with  all  authority;  he  does  not  recommend  -jj].  ^
the  tyranny  of  power,  but  the  authority  of  his  life. For  that  'o.

is  enjoined  with  authority  which  is  practised  before it  is


22  Aalhoriiij  of  Example. How  lo  be  Jnimhle  in  correcting.

Job  33  advised. For  when  conscience  makes  the  tongue  falter,  it
^' ^' dcliacls  IVom  the  authority  of  one's  talking. He  did  not
recommend  him  therefore  the  authority  of  haughty  words,
but  the  confidence  of  good  conduct. Whence  it  is  said  of

Matt.  8,  the  Lord,  He  teas  teaching  as  having  authority,  not  as  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees.  For  He  alone  in  a  singular  and
peculiar  manner  spoke  with  sound  authority,  because  He  had
committed  no  sins  from  infirmity.  For  He  possessed  that
from  the  power  of  His  Godhead,  which  He  has  bestowed  in  us
through  the  sinlessness  of  His  Manhood.

25.  For  we,  because  we  are  feeble  men,  when  we  come  to
speak  of  God  to  our  fellows,  should  first  of  all  call  to  mind
our  own  nature,  and  thus  consider  from  our  own  infirmities
in  what  order  we  should  offer  advice  to  our  weakly  brethren.
Let  us  consider  then  that  we  are  either  now  such  as  some  of
those  whom  we  are  correcting,  or  were  heretofore  such,  tliough
by  the  operation  of  Divine  Grace  we  are  so  no  longer:  that
in  humility  of  heart  we  may  correct  them  with  greater  for-
bearance, the  more  truly  we  recognise  ourselves  in  the
persons  of  those  whom  we  correct.  But  if  we  are  neither
now  such,  nor  have  been  such  as  those  still  are  whom  we  are
anxious  to  improve ;  for  fear  our  heart  should  perchance  be
proud,  and  should  fall  the  more  fatall}'  by  reason  of  its  very
innocence,  let  us  recal  to  our  eyes  the  other  good  qualities
of  those  whose  faults  we  ai*e  correcting.  If  they  have  not
any  such,  let  us  fall  back  on  the  secret  judgments  of  God.
Because  as  we  have  received  this  very  good,  which  we  possess,
for  no  deserts  of  our  own;  so  is  He  able  to  pour  on  them  the
grace  of  power  from  above,  so  that  though  roused  to  exertion
after  ourselves,  they  may  be  able  to  outstrip  even  those
good  qualities  which  we  received  so  long  before.  For  who
could  believe  that  Saul,  who  kept  at  his  death  the  raiment  of
those  that  were  stoning  him,  would  surpass Stephen  who

1  meri- had  been  stoned,  by  the  honour*  of  the  Apostleship. Our

senice^  ^^^^'^  ought  then  to  be  first  humbled  by  these  thoughts,  and
then  the  sin  of  offenders  should  be  reproved.  But  as  has
been  often  said,  Eliu  is  shewn  to  be  unacquainted  with  this
mode  of  speaking,  who  is  puffed  up  in  his  words,  by  the
haughtiness  of  pride,  as  if  by  the  power  of  a  kind  of  autho-

Job  33,  lity,  saying.  Wherefore  Job  hear  my  speeches,  and  hearken


Feigned  humilUy. Assumed  shnplicitij.  23

to  all  my  words. Behold  I  have  opened  my  mouth,  let  mij  j$ook

tongue  speak  in  my  throat.  '

26.  To  speak  in  the  throat  is  to  speak  softly,  and not  to
vociferate  loudly. In  which  words  he  designates  haughty
men  living  within  holy  Church. For  these  are  said  to  speak
as  if  in  the  throat,  when  they  do  not  clamour  against  the
adversaries  who  are  without,  but  reiDrove  some  within  the
bosom of  holy Church, as  if  they were neighbours and
placed  near  them. But  haughty  men  often  make  a  show  of
avoiding  that  very  pride,  which  they  entertain ;  and  while
they  do  all  things  so  as  not  to  escape  the  notice  of  any  one,
they  privately  mention  them  to  particular  persons,  in  order
that  they  may  boast  not  merely  of  their  sense  of  wisdom,
but  also  of  their  contempt  of  arrogance  before  men.  Whence
it  is  now  said.  Let  my  tongue  speak  in  my  throat. As  if  it
were plainly  said,  Behold, I  whisper that which I  think
wisely  against  thee. But  they  sometimes  break  out  into  such
a  height  of  impudence,  as,  when  others are  silent, to be
accustomed to praise their own sayings. Wlience he
subjoins,

Ver.  3.  My  words  are  from  my  simple  hearty  and  my  lips
shall  speak  a  pure  sentence.

27.  To  say  that  speech  is  simple,  is  a  praise  of  great  xiv.
weight.  But  because  the  haughty  possess  it  not,  they  assert
the  more  anxiously  that  they  possess  it,  in  order  that  they
may  be  heard  with  less  apprehension.  And  they  declare
that  they  are  going  to  speak  with  pure  intention,  because
they  are  afraid  of  their  wicked  duplicity  being  discovered.  But
they  often  also  blend  together  truth  and  falsehood,  that  their
falsehood  may  be  the  more  speedily  believed,  from  its  being
discerned  that  they  speak  the  truth.  Because  then  Eliu
both  said  that  he  would  speak  with  pure  intention,  and  by
calling  his  words  '  sentences'  ushered  them  in  with  applause,
he  subjoins  the  same  '  sentence'  which  he  promised,  saying,
Ver.  4.  The  Spirit  of  God  hath  made  me,  and  the  breath
of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life.

28.  Intending  to  subjoin  truth,  he  first  uttered boastful xv,
words,  and  being  about  to  state  the  sound  opinions  he  held,
he  first  made  known  how  huge  was  his  swelling. The  minds


24  Good  uords  out  of  season  defile  the  speaker.

Job  33,  oI"  the  arrogant  are  doubtless  so  very  mad,  that  even  in  what

they  think  rightly,  they  are  disfigured  by  the  deformity  of

their  pride. And  hence even  their  sound  opinions  do  not
instruct  their  hearers,  because  in truth they  lead  them  by
their  haughty  sentiments  not  to  reverence  but  to  despise
them. And  when  words  of  folly  are  blended  with  wise  say-
ings, even  their  wisdom  is  not  kept  in  mind,  because  their
folly  is  despised  by  him  who  hears  it. For  hence  it  is  said
Lev.  15,  by  Moses,  A  man  who  svjfers  a  running  of  seed  shall  be
unclean. For  what  are  our  words  but  seed.'' And  when  this
is  poured  forth  in  due  measure,  the  mind  of  the  hearer,  as  the
wonil)  of  her  who  conceives,  is  made  fruitful  for  an  offspring
of  good  works. But  if  it  escapes  at  improper  times,  pollut-
ing him  that  emits  it,  it  loses  its  generating  power. For  if
words  were  not  seed,  the  Athenians  would  never  have  said  of
Actsir,  pg^^l^  as  he  was  preaching  to  them,  What  would  this  word-
Actsi4,,so?t'er'  say'^  of  whom  Luke  says.  He  was  the  chief  speaker.
\semini-^^^^'>  then,  which  is  intended  for  the  purpose  of  procreation,
vcrbius.  when  it  escapes  in  an  improper  manner,  pollutes  the  other
members:  and  speech  also,  by  which  learning  ought  to  be
implanted  in  the  hearts  of  the  hearers,  if  uttered  out  of  due
order,  brings  disgrace  even  on the  truths  it  utters. And
hence  Eliu  also  pollutes  even  the  truths  he  is  able  to  enter-
tain, when  he  is  ignorant  of  what  he  is  saying,  or  to  whom
he  is  saying  it,  and  suffers,  as  it  were,  discharge  of  seed,  when
he  emjdoys his tongue,  which is fitted  to  answer  useful
purpose,  in  words  of  empty  sound. But  he  speaks  in  proper
order  of  his  being  made,  and  receiving  life. For  he  says,
that  he  was  made  by  the  Spirit,  and  that  he  received  life  by
the  breath  of  God. For  it  is  written  of  Adam  when  created,
Gen.  2,  Hq  breathed  into  his  face  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  was
made  into  a  living  soid. But  let  us  listen  whether  he  pro-
ceeds properly  with  what  he  has  well  laid  down. It  follows,
Ver.  5.  1/  thou  canst,  answer  me,  and  stand  before  my
face.
xvi. 29.  Behold  how  in  relating  the  true  order  of  his  creation,
he  suddenly  bursts  forth  into  the  pride  of  haughty  arrogance,
and,  in  other  words,  repeats  the  same  statement,  by  saying,
Ver.  0,  7.  Behold,  God  made  me  as  ivell  us  thee,  and  I  am


Elui  promises  wonders. St.  Paul's  gentleness. 25

also  formed  of  the  same  clay;  yet  let  not  my  wonder  terrify  Hook
thee.,  and  my  eloquence  be  burdensome  to  thee. What  then  iiiHL
is  meant  by  EHu  acknowledging  the  order  of  his  true  creation,
and  not  knowing  the  hmits  of  proper  speech  ? What  by  his
putting  himself  on  a  level  vvitli  Job  when  created,  and  setting
himself  above  him  when  about  to  speak  ? What  but  this,
that  though  haughty  men  remember  that  they  are  equal  in
nature  to  other  men,  yet  that  through  the  pride  of  knowledge
they  do  not  deign  even  to  believe  that  they  have  even  their
equals '':  and  that  though  they  compare  themselves  with  them,
in  the  condition  of  their  nature,  they  place  themselves  above
them  from  pride  in  their  wisdom. They  decide  that  though
they  were made  equal by birth,  yet  they  have  not  con-
tinued so,  in  their  way  of  life. And  from  their  not  being
equal  to  them  as  it  were  in  their  way  of  life,  they  count  it  a
greater  marvel  that  they  were  equal  to  them  when  they  were
born. And hence Eliu says, when inflated with pride.
Behold,  God  made  me  as  icell  as  thee,  and  I  also  was  formed
from  the  same  clay ;  yet  let  not  my  loonder  terrify  thee,  nor
my  eloquence  be  burdensome  to  thee. For  it  is  peculiar  to
the  arrogant,  that  they  always  believe,  even  before  they  speak,
that  they  are  going  to  say  some  wonderful  thing,  and  that
they  anticipate  their  own  words  by  their  own  admiration,
because,  with  all  their  acuteness,  they  are  not  sensible  how
great  a  folly  is  their  very  pride. We  must  observe  also  that
Paul,  when  he  was  giving  the  Hebrews  some  striking  warn-
ings, subjoined,  /  beseech  you,  brethren,  suffer  the  word  o/Heb.is,
consolation,  for  I  have  written  to  you  infeiv  ivords. But  "'
Eliu  uttered  empty  words,  and afterwards  added,  as  if  for
consolation.  Let  not  my  iconder  terrify  thee,  nor  my  eloquence
be  burdensome  to  thee. The  one  called  his  sayings  the  word
of  consolation,  the  other  called  them  eloquence,  and  a  marvel.
Behold,  how  different  in  taste  are  the  fruits which  spring
forth  from  diverse  roots  of  thought. The  one  thinks  humbly
of  his  high  qualities,  the  other  exalts  himself  without  reason
on  his  scanty endowments. What  then  is  specially  to  be
observed  in  all  this,  but  that  those  who  are  about  to  rise,
think  themselves  low,  and  that  they  who  are  soon  to fall,

»  The  text  seems  scarcely  grammatical,  hut  the  sense  caunot  be  far  from
Mhat  is  given.


26 Job  teas  right  in  saying  he  was  scourged  without  fault.

Job  33,  ever  stand  on  high  ground  ?  As  Solomon  bears  witness,
^~^^'.  The  heart  is  exalted  hejore  destniction^  and  is  brought  low
16  1*8.  before  honour. It  follows,

Ver.  8.  Thou  hast  spoken  then  in  mine  ears,  and  I  have
heard  the  voice  of  thy  words.  And  subjoining  the  very  words,
he  says,

Ver.  9 — 11.  I  am  clean,  and  without  spot  of  sin,  and
there  is  no  iniquity  in  me,  because  He  hath  found  complaints
in  me,  therefore  He  hath  counted  me  as  His  enemy.  He
hath  placed  my  feet  in  the  stocks.  He  hath  guarded  all  my
ways.  And  in  answer  to  these  words  which  he  said  blessed
Job  had  spoken,  he  immediately  states  his  own  opinion,
saying,

Ver.  12. This  is the thing then  in ivhich  thou  art  not

justified.

xvi. 30.  Blessed  Job  had  indeed  truly  said,  that  he  had  been

Job  27,  scourged  without  any  fault. For  he  said  of  himself  exactly

Job2,3.  what  the  Lord  had  said  of  him  to  the  devil,  Thou  hast  moved

Me  against  him  to  afflict  him  without  cause. But  Eiiu  did

not  believe,  that  his  fault  doing  nothing  in  it,  he  could  be

scourged  as  a  matter  of  grace, l^'or  he  did  not  know  that  by

his  scourgings  his  fault  was  not  corrected,  but  his  merits

increased,  and  because  he  had  said  that  he  had  been  scourged

without  any  fault,  he  reproves  him  in  these  words,  saying,  This

is  the  thing  then  in  ivhich  thou  art  not  justified. For  it  is

the  special  fault  of  the  arrogant,  to  be  more  eager  to  convict,

than  to  console ; and  to  consider  that  whatever  suffeiings

they  see  befal  men,  have  beAillen  them  solely  from  their  sins.

They  know  not  how  to  enquire  deeply  into  the  secret  judg-

» some ments  of  God',  and  humbly  to  investigate  that  which  they

Mss.add  cannot  understand :  for  while  pride  at  their  knowledge  raises

them  on  high,  it  frequently  casts  them  down  from  the  secret

investigation  of  God's  judgments.

31.  For  suffering  of  mind  is  an  imi^ediment  in  the  way  of
truth:  becjiuse  while  it  puffs  us  up,  it  obscures  our  view.
For  if  these  persons  ever  seem  to  acquire  wisdom,  they  feed,
as  it  were,  on  the  husks  of  things,  and  not  on  the  marrow  of
their  inmost  sweetness;  and  with  their  brilliant  abilities,
they  frequently  reach  only  to  the  outside  of  things,  but
know  not  the  savour  of  their  inward  taste ;  for,  in  truth,  though


I


I


Knowledge  deeply  felt  does  not  puff  up.  27

sharp-sighted  outwardly,  they  arc  blind  within. Nor  do  they  Book

form  such  a  notion  of  God,  as  tastes  secretly  within,  but^-: '

such  as  when  thrown  outward  gives  a  sound. And  though  they
gain  in  their  understanding  a  knowledge  of  some  mysteries,
they  can  have  no  experience  of  their  sweetness :  and  if  they
know  how  they  exist,  yet  they  know  not,  as  I  said,  how  they
savoiu-. And  so  it  is  frequently  the  case,  that  though  they
speak  boldly,  yet  they  know  not  how  to  live  up  to  what  they
profess. Whence a  certain  wise  man  well  said,  3Iay  God YfisA.T,
grant  me  to  speak  these  things  according  to  my  sentence}^'
For  sentence  is  derived  from  sense. And  a  man  who  wishes sen-
not  merely  to  speak  from  outward  knowledge,  but  to  feel  andgg^J^
experience  what  he  says,  is  anxious  to  give  utterance  to  the
truths  he  holds,  not  as  a  matter  of  mere  knowledge',  butisci-
of  real feeling^. But  the  mind of  haughty  men  does  nota^g^.
penetrate  the  meaning  of  its  own  words;  because  by  a  righ-tentia
teous  judgment  it  is  driven  away  from  the  inward  taste  of
things,  and  is  wrecked  by  that  applause  which  it  desires
from  without. But  real  knowledge  influences  without  elating ;
and  makes  those  whom  it  has  filled,  not  proud,  but  son"owful.
For  when  any  one  is  filled  therewith,  he  is  in  the  first  place
anxious to know  himself:  and  conscious  of  his  own  state,
he acquires  thereby  a  greater  savour  of  strength,  the  more
truly  sensible  he  is  of  his  own  weakness  therein. And  this
very  humility opens  to  him  more widely the pathway of
this  knowledge,  and  when  he  beholds  his  own  weakness,  this
very  knowledge  opens  to  him  the  hidden  recesses  of  sublime
secrets ;  and  pressed  down  by  this  knowledge,  he  is  made
more  subtle  to  press  forward  into  things  hidden. Eliu  then
does  not  in  the  scourgings  of  blessed  Job  discover  their  true
reason,  because  he  knows  not  how  to  search for  it  with
humility  :  and  being  more  ready  to  reproach  than  to  console,
he  says,  It  is  in  this  thing,  then,  that  thou  art  not  justified.

32.  We  must  observe  further,  that  blessed  Job  said  that  his  Jobi3,2.
foot  was  placed  in  the  stocks,  but  that  he  never  said  that  he
was  clean,  in  the  way  in  which  is  objected  to  him,  or  free
from  sin,  or  without  spot,  and  iniquity.  But  Eliu,  in  his
desire  to  reprove  austerely  what  has  been  said,  falsely  added
what  had  not  been  said.  For  they  who  are  ever  eager  to
reprove  and  not  to  encourage,  frequently  state  many  false-


28 Plain  truths  strong  ivhen  applied  to  our  oivn  case.

Job  33,  hoods  in  their  reproofs. For  in  order  to  appear  clever  in

'—-  reproving,  they  frequently  invent  statements,  for  the  sake  of

reproving  them,  and,  being  eager,  as  horses,  to  run  their
course  of  ostentation,  they  clear  the  way  for  assailing  those
who  are  subject  to  them  by  inventing  charges  of  iniquity.
It  must  be  understood  besides,  as  I  said  above,  that  haughty
men  often  blend  forcible  words  with  their  words  of  boasting,
and  that  sometimes  they  do  not  consider  how  they  live,
but  studiously  weigh  what  they  teach.  Of  such  Eliu  is  a
specimen  in  the  ]iresent  case,  who  is  not  so  anxious  to  live
well,  as  to  teach  well.  Since  then  he  speaks,  though  arrogantly,
yet  with  knowledge,  let  us  pass  over  the  pride  of  his  conduct,
and  consider  the  solidity  of  his  teaching.  After  all  these
boastful  words,  then,  he  begins  at  length  to  display  his
knowledge,  and  says,

Ver.  12.  /  will  answer  thee,  that  God  is  greater  than  man.
xviii. 33.  Some  one  may  perhaps  observe.  Who  knows  not  that,
even  without  being  told  it.? Bnt  no  wonder  if  this  remark
is  believed  to  be  of  little  value,  if  it  is  not  considered  in  the
very  root  of  its  meaning. He  was  speakii.g  to  one who
had  been  scourged,  who  had  both  felt  the  blows  of  smiting,
and  was  ignorant  of  the  reason  of  them. And  therefore  he
remarked,  I  ivill  answer  thee,  that  God  is  greater  than  man;
that  man,  when  scourged,  yet  considering  that  God  is  greater
than  himself,  may  submit  himself  to  the  judgment  of  Him,
to  Whom  he  has  no  doubt  he  is  inferior,  and  may  believe
that  that  which  he  suffers  from  his  superior  is  just,  even
though  he  does  not  know  the  grounds  of  its  justice. For
whoever  is smitten  for  his sins, nnless he  murmurs and
struggles  against  it,  begins  at  once  to  be  a  righteous  man,
from not  impugning  the  justice of  Him  who smites  him.
For  man  is  created  inferior  to  God,  and  retnrns  to  the  order
of  his  creation,  when  he  submits  himself  to  the  equity  of  his
.Fudge,  even  when  he  cannot  comprehend  it. It  is  therefore
well  said,  /  will  answer  thee,  that  God  is  greater  than  man,
in  order  that  on  considering  the  power  of  the  Creator,  the
swelling  of  the  mind  may  cease  to  rage,  through  the  thought
of  the  condition  in  which  it  was  created. Whence  David  the
Prophet,  when  compelled  by  the  weight  of  the  blows  to  burst
forth  nito  extravagant  words,  says  on  bringinghimsclf  back  to  the


God  answers  us  not  one  by  one,  hut  all  in  Holy  Scripture.  29

consideration  of  his  o^ati  origin,  /  ivas  dumb,  and  opened  not  Book
my  mouth,  since  Thou  hast  made  me. For  he  considered  in  ^_ — ."

. .  Ps.  39

what  ranlc  he  was  created,  and  learned  the  justice  of  the  9." '
blow ;  for  He  Who  kindly  created  him  who  as  yet  was  not,
surely  smote  him  only  with  justice  when  he  was  now  in
being. It  follows.

Ver.  13,  14.  Tliou  contendest  against  Him,  because  He
hath  not  replied  io  thee  to  all  thy  words.  God  will  speak
once,  and  will  not  repeat  the  same  thing  a  second  time.

34.  It  is  natural  to  the  afflicted  heart,  Avhen  it  beholds  any xix.
thing  going  contrary  to  its  wishes,  to  wash  to  gain  an  answer,
if  possible,  by  the  voice  of  God,  why  things  are  in  this  way,
and  not  in  that:  to  consult  God  in  this  whole  matter  under
debate,  and  to acquiesce  on  learning  the  meaning  of  His
reply. But  Eliu,  foreseeing  that  the  Lord  was  composing
holy  Scripture,  for  the  purposes  of  replying  therein  to  the
open  or  secret  enquiries  of  all  men,  says. Thou  contendest
against  Him,  because  He  hath  not  replied  to  all  thy  words.
God  will  speak  once,  and,  will  not  repeat  the  same  tiling  a
.second  time. As  if  he  were  to  say,  God  does  not  reply  in
private speaking  to  the  hearts  of  men one by  one; but
fashions  His  word  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  satisfy  the  en-
quiries of  all  men. For  if  we  look  for  our  own  cases  one  by
one,  we  are  sure  to  find  them  in  the  teaching  of  His  Scriptures;
nor  is  there  need  to  seek  for  a  special  answer  from  the  voice
of  God,  in  our  own  special  sufferings. For  there  a  general
reply  is  given  to  all  of  us  in  om-  own  special  sufferings :  there
the  conduct  of  those  who  go  before  is  a  model  for  such  as
come after. To  take  one  instance  out  of  many. We  are
labouring  under  some  suffering  or  annoyance  of  the  flesh.
W^e  wish  perhaps  to  know  the  secret  reasons  of  this  suffering
or  annoyance,  in  order  that  we  may  be  comforted  in our
trial from the very  knowledge. But because  no special
reply  is  given  to  us  one  by  one,  concerning  our  own  special
trials,  we  betake  ourselves  to  holy  Scripture. And  there  is
it  that  w^e  find  what  Paul  heard  when  tried  by  the  infirmity
of  the  flesh. My  grace  is  sujficientfcr  thee;  for  strength  is  2  Cor.
i7iade  perfect  in  weakness. And  this  was  spoken  to him  ^^'  ^•
in  his  own  peculiar  suffering,  that  it  might  not  be  spoken  to
us  one  bv  one. We  have  heard  therefore  in  holy  Scripture


30  God  spake  once  in  His  word,  Only  Begotten  without  time.

Job  33,  the  voice  of  God  to  Paul  in  bis  affliction,  in  order  that  we
— '- — '-  may  not  seek  to  hear  it  one  by  one,  for  our  own  private  con-
solation, if  perchance  we  are  afflicted.  God  does  not  then
reply  to  all  our  words,  because  He  ivill  speak  once,  and  /rill
not  repeat  the  same  thing  again  ;  that  is.  He  has  provided
for  our  instruction,  by  what  He  stated  to  our  fathers  in  holy
Scripture.  Let  the  teachers  then  of  Holy  Church,  let  even
these  men  of  arrogance,  announce,  (on  beholding  some  within
her  sinking  from  faintheartedness,)  that  God  does  not  reply
to  all  our  words,  that  God  will  speak  once,  and  will  not
repeat  the  same  thing  twice.  In  other  words,  He  does  not
now  satisfy  the  doubts  and  perplexities  of  individual  men  by
the  voice  of  the  Prophets  on  every  side,  or  by  the  ministry  of
Angels.  Because  He  includes  in  holy  Scripture  whatever
can  possibly  befal  each  one  of  us,  and  has  provided  therein
for  regulating  the  conduct  of  those  who  come  after,  by  the
examples  of  those  who  have  gone  before.

35.  But  yet  this  remark,  God  will  speak  once,  and  uill
not  repeat  the  same  tiling  twice,  may  be  understood  in  a
deeper  meaning ;  that  the  Father  begat  His  Consubstantial,
Only-begotten  Son.  For  God's  speaking  is  His  having
begotten  the  Word.  But  for  God  to  speak  once,  is  for  Him
to  have  no  other  Word  beside  the  Only-begotten.  And
hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  And  He  uill  not  repeat  the  same
thing  twice,  because  this  very  Word,  that  is,  the  Son,  He
begat  not  otherwise  than  only-begotten.  But  in  that  He
says  not, "  He  spake,"  but  "  will  speak,"  using,  namely,  not
the  past  tense  but  the  future,  it  is  plain  to  all,  that  neither
past  nor  future  time  is  appropriate  to  God.  Any  tense  is
therefore  the  more  freely  used  in  speaking  of  Him,  since  no
one  is  used  with  strict  truth.  But  any  tense  whatever  could
not  be  freely  used,  if  one  at  least  could  be  used  properly.
It  is  allowable  then  for  any  tense  to  be  boldly  used  in  speak-
ing of  God,  since  no  one  is  strictly  proper.  For  the  Father
begat  the  Son  without  regard  to  time.

26.  And  who  can  worthily  speak  of  that  ineffable  nativity,
that  the  Coeternal  is  begotten  from  the  Eternal,  that  He
who  existed  before  all  ages  begat  His  Equal,  that  the  Son
was  not  posterior  to  Him  Who  begat  Him.?  We  can  marvel
at  these  things,  but  it  is  beyond  our  power  to  look  into  them.


We  see  Divine  things  hut  as  light  with  closed  eyes. 31

But  to  be  able  to  wonder  at  that  mighty  nativity  is  in  a  Book
certain  degree  to  see  it.  But  how  do  we  see  that  wliich  we  ^
do  by  no  means  comprehend  ?  But  we  must  borrow  an
instance  from  the  habits  of  the  body  to  illustrate  the  feelings
of  the  mind.  If  any  one  is  lying  down  in  a  dark  place,  with
his  eyes  closed,  and  the  light  of  a  candle  suddenly  flashes
before  him,  his  eyes,  though  closed,  are  so  struck  by  the  very
approach  of  the  light,  that  they  open.  Why  are  they  thus
affected,  if  they  saw  nothing  when  closed  ?  And  yet  it  was
not  any  thing  perfect  which  they  could  see  when  closed.
For  if  they  had  seen  the  whole  object  perfectly,  why  should
they  when  opened  seek  for  something  to  look  at  ?  And  thus,
thus  are  we,  when  we  endeavour  to  behold  ought  of  the  incom-
prehensible nativity.  For  even  in  this,  that  the  mind  is  struck
with  surprise  at  the  shining,  and  sees  in  a  manner  what  it  is
not  able  really  to  see,  il  beholds  as  if  in  darkness  the  power
of  the  light  with  closed  eyes\  But  because  the  secret  admira-
tion of  the  Divine  Nature  is  not  easily  made  known  to  minds
which  are  occupied  with  worldly  desires,  he  very  fitly  sug-
gests the  way  in  which  God  speaks  to  ns,  by  saying,

Ver.  15. In  a  dremn,  in  a  vision  of  the  night,  when  sleep
falleth  upon  men,  and  they  sleep  on  their  bed.

37.  What  is  meant  by  the  word  of  God  being  made  known  xx.
to  us  in  a  dream,  except  that  we  do  not  learn  the  secret  things
of  God,  if  we  are  kept  awake  by  worldly  desires  ?  For  in  a
dream  the  outward  senses  are  at  rest,  and  inward  objects  are
discerned.  If  we  wish  then  to  contemplate  things  within,
let  us  rest  from  outward  engagements.  The  voice  of  God,  in
truth,  is  heard  as  if  in  dreams,  when,  with  minds  at  ease,  we
rest  from  the  bustle  of  this  world,  and  the  Divine  precepts

*  Here  the  older  Edd.  have  a  pas-  He  ever  begetteth,He  surely 'speaketh;'

sage  which Ben.  omits,  as it is not  though  this  which  we  called  '  perfect'

in the MSS. '  For Eliu  says, God  we  do not say  with strictness. For

speaketh  once; but  David,  looking  to  that which is not effected (factum)

the  nativity  of  the  only-begotten  Word,  cannot  be  strictly  said  to  be  '  perfected,'

says,  God  spake  (nee. ^ For  since  the  (perfectum.)  But  we  express  His  fulness

only-begotten >on and Word of  the  with a somewhat straitened  form of

Father  is  both  called '  Born' in re-  speech ;  as  also  of  the  Father  the  Lord

spect  of  perfection, and  in  respect  of  saith. Be ye  perfect, even as yjtr

eternity  is even  said  to  be  in birth;  heavenly  Father  is  perfect .,  (Matt.  v.

Holy  Scripture  useth  to  say  freely  of  48.) It  looks  like  a  note  on  the  former

God  that  He 'hath spoken,' and  '  speak-  paragraph, which may have been

eth.' For  in  that  He  begat  the  Word  written  at  the  foot  of  the  page,
perfect,  God  '  hath  spoken,'  and  in  that


32 Men  hear  God's  voice  when  asleep  to  eoriliJy  sounds.

Job  33,  arc  pondered  by  us  in  the  deep  silence  of  the  mind. For

— ^^1— when  the  mind  is  at  rest  from  outward  employments,  the
weight  of  the  Divine  precepts  is  more  fully  discerned.  It  is
then  that  the  mind  penetrates,  in  a  more  lively  manner,  the
words  of  God,  when  it  refuses  to  admit  \Aithin  the  tumult  of
worldly  cares.  But  a  man  is  awake  to  little  good  purpose,
when  the  turmoil  of  worldly  business  gives  him  unusual
disturbance.  For  the  crowd  of  earthly  thoughts,  when  it
clamours  around,  closes  the  ear  of  the  mind.  And  the  voice
of  the  presiding  judge  is  less  plainly  heard  in  the  secret
tribunal  of  the  mind,  the  less  the  sound  of  tumultuous  cares
is  kept  still.  For  a  man  when  distracted  is  not  fully  equal
to  attend  to  both  together.  But  while  he  seeks  for  inward
instruction,  but  so  as  yet  to  be  engaged  in  outward  employ-
ments;  by  opening  his  ear  to  things  without,  he  becomes

Ex.  2,  deaf  within.  Moses,  when  living  amongst  the  Egyptians,
was,  as  it  were,  awake,  and  so  when  dwelling  in  Egypt  he
did  not  hear  the  voice  of  God.  But  after  that  he  had  fled
into  the  desert,  after  the  slaughter  of  the  Egyptian,  and
dwelt  there  forty  years,  he  fell  asleep  as  it  were  from  the
disquieting  tumults  of  worldly  desires ;  and  therefore  it  was

'  meruit  vouchsafed  him'  to  hear  the  voice  of  God,  because  the  more
indifferent  he  became  through  Divine  grace  to  outward
objects  of  desire,  the  more  was  he  really  awake  to  discern

Ex.  19,  truths  within.  And  again,  when  appointed  to  rule  over  the
people  of  Israel,  he  is  taken  up  into  the  Mount,  to  learn  the
precepts  of  the  Law,  and  is  preserved  from  tumults  without,
that  he  might  penetrate  into  mysteries  within.

.38.  And  hence  is  it  that  holy  men,  who  are  obliged  by  the
necessity  of  their  employments  to  engage  in  outward  pur-
suits, are  ever  studiously  betaking  themselves  to  the  secrets
of  their  hearts;  and  there  do  they  ascend  the  height  of  secret
thought,  and  learn  (as  it  were)  the  Law  in  the  Mount:  when
they  put  aside  the  tumults  of  worldly  business,  and  ponder,
on  the  height  of  their  thought,  the  sentence  of  the  Divine
will.  And  hence  is  it  that  the  same  Moses  frequently  retires
to  the  Tabernacle  on  doubtfid  points;  and  there  secretly  con-
sults God,  and  learns  what  certain  decision  to  come  to.
For  to  leave  the  crowd,  and  retire  to  the  Tabernacle,  is  to  put
aside  the  tumults  of  outward  objects,  and  to  enter  into  the


God  seen  In  quiet,  and  by  iiJi(i(/es,  as  in  a  dream. 33

secret  recess  of  the  mind. For  the  Lord  is  there  consulted, Book

and we  hear  inwardly and  in silence,  what  we must do  — -"

openly  and  without.  This  course  wise  rulers  dail}-  pursue ;
when  they  are  aware  that  they  cannot  settle  doubtful  points,
they  betake  themselves  to  the  secret  recesses  of  their  mind,
as  if  to  a  kind  of  tabernacle.  By  looking  into  the  Divine
Law,  they  consult  the  Lord,  as  it  were  before  the  Ark.  And
what  they  first  hear  in  silence,  they  afterwards  make  known
to  the  world  in  their  conduct.  For  in-order  that  they  may
engage  in  outward  employments  without  injury  to  themselves,
they  constantly  take  care  to  withdraw  to  the  secrets  of  their
heart.  And  they  thus  hear  the  voice  of  God,  as  it  were,  in
a  dream,  v.hile  they  withdraw  themselves  in  the  thoughts  of
their  mind  from  the  influence  of  carnal  things.  Hence  is  it
that,  in  the  Song  of  Songs,  the  Bride  who  said,  /  sleep,  ajid  Solom.
my  heart  is  awake,  had  heard  the  voice  of  the  Bridegroom 2.  °
in  dreams.  As  if  ;  he  were  saying.  While  I  give  my  outward  •
senses  rest  from  the  anxieties  of  this  world,  I  have  a  more
lively  perception  of  inward  truths,  when  my  mind  is  unem-
ployed. I  am  asleep  to  outward  things,  but  my  heart  is
awake  within,  because,  when  I  am  insensible  as  it  were  to
outward  objects,  1  have  a  keen  apprehension  of  inward
secrets.

30.  Well  then  says  Eliu,  that  God  speaketh  by  a  dream;
and  fitly  did  he  add.  In  a  vision  of  the  night.  For  a  vision
of  the  night  usually  presents  itself  to  the  contemplation  of
the  mind  under  certain  images.  But  we  perceive  objects
more  plainly  by  daylight,  we  see  less  quickly  in  a  vision  of
the  night.  And  because  all  holy  men,  as  long  as  they  are  in
this  life,  behold  the  secrets  of  the  Divine  Nature  only  under
certain  resemblances,  (since  they  do  not,  as  yet,  gain  a  clearer
sight  of  them  as  they  really  are;)  after  Eliu  had  said  that
God  speaks  to  us  in  a  dream,  he  rightly  adds,  in  a  vision  of
the  niyht.  For  '  night'  is  this  present  life,  and  as  long  as
we  are  in  it,  we  are  covered  with  a  mist  of  uncertain  imagin-
ations as  far  as  the  sight  of  inward  objects  is  concerned.
For  the  Prophet  was  sensible  that  he  was  htld  by  a  certain
mist  in  his  sight  of  the  Lord,  when  he  says,  My  soul  longed  l9.'iG,Q.
for  Thee  in  the  night.  As  if  he  were  to  say,  I  long  to  behold
Thee  in the obscurity  of  this  present  life,  but  I  am  still

VOL.  III.  D


34 Teaching  and  discipline  in  the  soul's  inner  chamber.

Job  33,  siuTounded  by  the  mist  of  infirmity.  ^  David  also  wishing  to
avoid  the  gloom  of  this  life,  and  waiting  for  the  brightness  of


Ps,  5,3.  ilie  true  light,  says,  Li  the  morning  I  ivill  stand  before  Thee,
and  ivill  see.  He  who  longs  for  the  approach  of  morning,  in
order  to  behold  God,  perceives  that  he  can  still  see  but
imperfectly,  in  the  night.  But  because,  as  we  said,  sleeping
is  ceasing  from  outward  action,  Eliu  rightly  adds,  IVhen  sleep
falls  upon  men.  And  because  holy  men,  when  unemployed
in  outward  action,  rest  within  the  chambers  of  their  mindj
he  filly  subjoins,  and  they  sleep  on  their  bed.  For  holy  men
to  sleep  in  their  bed,  is  for  them  to  take  rest  in  the  cliamber

Ps.i49,  of  their  mind.  "Whence  it  is  written,  The  saints  shall  exidt
in  glory,  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  beds.  Let  it  be  said  then
that  God  speaks  once  to  us  through  a  dream  in  a  vision  of
the  night,  when  sleep  falls  upon  men,  and  they  sleep  in  their
bed.  Because  we  then  doubtless  discern  the  secrets  of  the
Godhead,  when  we  withdraw  ourselves  into  the  chambers  of
our  minds  from  the  tumultuous  desires  of  this  world.  But
because,  as  we  have  already  frequently  said  before,  the  tur-
moil of  worldly  business  closes  the  ear,  and  the  rest  of  secret
contemplation  opens  it,  he  properly  subjoins,

Ver.  16.  Then  He  openeih  the  ears  of  men,  and  teaching,
inslructeth  them  with  discipline.
xxi.  40.  For  when  they  are  dead  to  outward  objects,  they  hear
with  open  ears  the  causes  which  come  before  their  inward
judgment.  And  when  they  consider  minutely  with  them-
selves either  their  open  punishments,  or  their  secret  judg-
ments, they  cease  not  to  afflict  themselves  with  tears.
Whence  it  is  well  said,  And  teaching.  He  instructeth  them
with  discipline,  because  to  a  mind  which  reflects  and
wounds  itself  with  penitence,  the  sorrows  of  compunc-
tion are  like  the  stripes  of  a  blow.  Whence  Solomon
also rightly  uniting together  the force  of  these kinds  of

Prov.20,  blows,  says.  The  blneness  of  a  wound  cleanseth  away  evil,

on  *

and  blows  in  the  secret  parts  of  the  belly.  For  by  the  blue-
■  ness  of  a  wound  he  implies  the  discipline  of  blows  on  the
body.  But  blows  in  the  secret  parts  of  the  belly  are  the
wounds  of  the  mind  within,  which  are  inflicted  by  com-
punction. For  as  the  belly  is  distended  when  filled  with
food,  so  is  the  mind  puffed  up  when  swollen  with  wricked


k


Joy  in  godly  sorroiv.  Four  thouyhis  to  cause  coinptiiiciioii.  35
ihouffhts. The  blueness  then  of  a  wound,  and  blows  in  the Book

.  XXIII

secret  parts  of  the  belly,  cleanse  away  evil,  because  both — ■ ■'

outward  discipline  does  away  with  fault?,  and  compunction
pierces  the  distended  mind  with  the  punishment  of  penance.
But  they  differ  from  each  other  in  this  respect,  that  the
wounds  of  blows  give  us  pain,  the  sorrows  of  compunction
have  good  savour.  The  one  aflflict  and  torture,  the  others
restore,  when  they  afflict  us.  Through  the  one  there  is  sorrow
in  affliction,  through  the  other  there  is  joy  in  grief.  But
because  the  very  act  of  compunction  wounds  the  mind,  he
not  unfitly  calls  it  discipline.

41.  For  there  are  four  modes  in  which  the  mind  of  a  righ-
teous man  is  strongly  affected by  compunction: when  he
either  calls  to  mind  his  own  sins,  and  considers  where  he
HATH  been;  or  when  fearing  the  sentence  of  God's  judgments,
and  examining  his  own  self,  he  thinks  where  he  shall  be  :
or  when,  carefully  observing  the  evils  of  this  present  life,  he
reflects  with  sorrow  where  he  is;  or  when  he  contemplates
the  blessings  of  his  heavenly  country,  and,  because  he  does
not  as yet enjoy them, beholds with regret where he
IS NOT. Paul had called  to mind his former sins,  and
was  afflicting himself  by  the  sight of  what  he  had  been,
when  he  said,  /  am  not  icorthy  to  he  called  an  Apostle,  i  Cor.
because  I  persecuted  the  Church  of  God. Again,  from  care-  "*'
fully  weighing  the  Divine  sentence,  he  was  afraid  that  it  was
bad  for  him  in  prospect,  when  he  says,  I  chastise  my  body,  i  Cor.  9,
and  bring  it  into  subjection,  lest  perchance,  uhen  I  have  ''
•preached to  others, I  myself  should  become a castauay.
And  again,  he  was  considering  the  evils  of  this  present  life,
when  he  said,  While  ue  are  in  this  body,  we  are  absent  from  2  Cor.6,
the  Juord:  and,  I  see  another  law  in  my  members,  warring  ^^^  y
against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  captive  to  the^^-
law  of  sin  which is  in  my  members. IVretched  man  that
I  am!  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  deatJt?
And  again,  he  was  considering  the  blessings  of  his  heavenly
country,  when  saying.  We  see  now  through  a  glass  darkly,  I  Cor.
hut  then  face  to  face. Now  I  know  in  part,  but  then  shall  I
know,  even  as  also  I  am  knoicn. And  again.  We  know  thai '^  Cor. 5,
if  our  earthly  house  of  (his  habitation  be  dissolved,  we  have
a  building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  ha?ids,  eternal  in

D  2


36  Ills  of  earth  known  by  siyht  of  Heaven. Bodily  images.

Job  33,  the  Iieavens. And  looking  at  the  blessings  of  this  house,  he
-^ —  says  to  the  Ephesians,  That  jje  may  know  what  is  the  hope
18.  19.'  of  His  calliny,  and  what the  riches  of  the  ylory  of  His
inheritance  in  the  saints,  and  what  is  the  exceediny  great-
ness oj  His  poicer  toward  us  nlio  have  believed. But  blessed
Job  7, 1,  Job,  considering  the  evils  of  this  present  life,  says,  The  life  of
man  upon  the  earth  is  a  temptation. Whence  David  says,
Vs.39,G. Every  man  that  liveth  is  altoyether  vanity;  and  tliough  mail
walketh  in  the  image  of  God,  yet  ?iill  he  be  disquieted  in
vain. But  again,  on  contemplating  his  heavenly  home,  and
weighing  the  evils  in  which  he  then  was,  and  considering  the
Ps.  120,  good things  which  he  did  not  as  yet  enjoy,  he  says,  IVoe  is
Ps.  31' '^'^  '^'^^  ^^'!^  sojourning  is  prolonged;  and,  /  said  in  my  fear,
22. lam  cast  out  from  the  sight  of  Thine  eyes. Being  raised
up  in  an  ecstasy,  which  our  translators  properly  interpreted
fear,  he  saw  that  he  was  cast  out  from  the  sight  of  the  eyes
of  God. For  after  beholding  that  inward  light,  which  flashed
within  his  mind  with  bright  rays  through  the  grace  of  con-
templation, he  retm-ned  to  himself; and  discerned,  by  the
knowledge  he  had  gained,  either  the  blessings  which  were
there,  of  which  he  was  deprived,  or  the  evils  with  which  he  was
here  surrounded. For  no  one  is  able  to  look  on  the  ills  of  life
as  they  really  are,  if  he  is  unable  by  contemplation  to  gain  a
taste  of  the  blessings  of  the  eternal  country. Whence  also
he  knew  that  he  had  been  cast  out  of  the  sight  of  the  eyes  of
God. For  when  he  was  raised  up  in  a  trance,  he  saw  that
which,  when  he  fell  back  on  himself,  he  lamented  that  he
could  not  of  himself  behold.

42.  For  that  compunction  with  which  it  dispels  all  bodily
imaginations  which  crowd  upon  it,  and  annoy  it,  and  with
which  it  strives  to  fix  the  eye  of  the  heart  on  the  very  ray  of
the  boundless  light,  is  wont  in  truth  more  deeply  to  affect  a
perfect  mind.  For  these  appearances  of  bodily  figures  it  has
attracted  to  itself  within,  through  infirmity  of  the  flesh.  But
when  it  is  completely  lilled  with  compunction,  it  is  here
specially  on  its  guard,  lest  the  imagination  of  circumscribed
vision  should  delude  it,  when  it  is  searching  after  truth ;
and  it  rejects  all  imaginations  which  present  themselves  to  it.
For  since  it  has  fallen,  by  their  means,  beneath  itself,  it
endeavours  to  rise  above  itself j  by  escaping  from  them :  and


God's  teacliinij  \liscii)line,^ hecnusehanl  iokeeplheinindlo.  37

after  it  has  been  distracted,  in  an  unseemly  manner,  by  many  Book

objects,  it  endeavours  to  gather  itself  again  together; that— ^ '-

prevailing  by  the  mighty  power  of  love,  it  may  contemplate
one  single  and  incori)oreal  lieing.

43.  And  hence  it  is  admitted,  at  times,  to  taste  some
imusual  savour  of  sweetness  within,  and  is  suddenly  in  a
measure  refreshed,  when  breathed  on  by  the  glowing  Spirit;
and  is  the  more  eager,  the  more  it  gains  a  taste  of  something
to  love  ;  and  it  desires  that  within  itself,  which  it  feels  to
taste  sweetly  within,  because  it  has  in  truth,  from  the  love  of
its  sweetness,  become  vile  in  its  own  sight ;  and  after  having
been  able,  in  whatever  way,  to  enjoy  it,  it  has  discovered
what  it  had  hitherto  been  without  it.  It  endeavours  to  cling
closely  to  it,  but  is  kept  from  approacliing  its  strength,  by
its  own  remaining  weakness ;  and  because  it  is  unable  to
contemplate  its  purity,  it  counts  it  sweet  to  weep,  and,
sinking  back  into  itself,  to  make  its  bed  in  the  tears  of  its
own  weakness.  For  it  cannot  fix  the  eyes  of  its  mind  on
that,  of  which  it  has  only  taken  a  hasty  glance  within ;
because  it  is  compelled  by  its  own  old  habits  to  sink  down-
wards. It  meanwhile  pants  and  strives  and  endeavours  to
rise  above  itself,  but  sinks  back,  overpowered  with  weariness,
into  its  own  familiar  darkness.  But  because  a  mind  thus
affected,  has  to  endure  itself  as  the  cause  of  a  stubborn
contest  against  itself,  and  because  all  this  controversy  about
ourselves  causes  no  small  amount  of  pain,  when  we  are  en-
gaged in  it,  whatever  pleasure  may  be  blended  therewith  ;
Eliu,  after  having  said  that  God  speaks  to  us  in  a  di*eam,  and
that  our  ears  are  opened  by  His  words,  calls  this  same
opening  of  the  ears  a  discipline,  and  with  good  reason.
Because  the  more  the  sound  of  inward  wisdom  by  the  grace
of  its  secret  inspiration  bursts  forth  upon  us,  the  more  does
it  affect  us  with  distress.  For  no  one  would  outwardly
lament  that  which  he  is,  if  he  had  not  been  able  to  perceive
within,  that  which  as  yet  he  is  not.  For  on  seeing  that  we
ourselves  were  created  aright,  but  that  we  were  deceived  by
giving  a  fatal  consent  to  the  persuasions  of  the  devil,  we
observe  in  our  own  case,  that  what  we  made  ourselves  is  one
thing,  and  what  we  were  made  is  another:  that  by  nature  we
were  sound,  but  that  we  became  conupted  through  our  own


88 Repentance  leaves  acts  of  pride,  and  escapes  death.

Job  33, fault. And  therefore  when  we  are  pinched  by  conscience,
— Z — :  we  seek  to  escape  from  what  we  ourselves  have  done,  that  we
may  be  refashioned  after  the  pattern  in  which  we  were  first
made. Whence  it  tltly  follows,

Ver.  17. That  He  may  uit/tdratv  man front  the  things
that  he  has  clone,  and  rnaij  delirer  him  from  pride.
xxii. 44. For  what  has  man  done  of  himself  but  sin  } And  it  is
Ecclus.  written,  Pride  is  the  beginning  of  all  sin. It  is  rightly  said,
' ■ then,  that  when  man  is  withdrawn  from  what  he  has  done,
he  is  freed  from  pride. To  transgress  the  commands  of  our
Creator  by  sin,  is  to  be  haughty  against  Him;  because  a
man  casts  off,  as  it  were,  the  yoke  of  His  anthority,  to  Whom
he  scorns  to  submit  b}^  obedience. On  the  other  hand,  he
who  wishes  to  avoid  what  he  has  done,  calls  to  mind  what
he  was  made  by  God  :  and  humbly  returns  to  the  order  of
his  creation,  when  flying  from  his  own  deeds,  he  loves  him-
self as  he  was  at  first  created  by  God. But  because  eternal
glory  is  obtained,  and  eternal  punishments  are  avoided,  by
this  wisdom,  it  is  appropriately  subjoined,

Ver.  18.  Rescuing  his  soul  from  corruption,  and  his  life
from  passing  to  the  sword.
xxiii. 45.  For  every  sinner,  in  consequence  of  his  corruption  by
sin  here,  is  compelled  to  pass  thither  to  the  sword  of  punish-
ment; that  he  may  be  justly  punished  in  that  world,  by  the
very  sins  in  which  he  delighted  in  this.

We  must  observe  therefore,  that  God,  speaking  to  us  in  a
dream,  delivers  us  first  from  corruption,  and  afterwards  from
the  sword  :  because  in  trutli  He  delivers  the  '  life'  of  that
person  from  avenging  punishment  there,  whose  mind  He  here
withdraws  from  the  allurement  of  sin.  Nor  has  he  any  thing
to  fear  therefrom  the  sv^^ord  of  judgment,  whom  the  pollution
of  guilt  has  not  here  corrupted  after  his  amendment.  It  is
well  said  then.  Rescuing  his  soul  Jrom  corruption,  and  his
life  from  passing  to  the  stcord.  For  to  pass  from  corruption
to  the  sword,  is,  after  the  commission  of  sin,  to  arrive  at  the
punishments  which  have  to  be  endured. It  follows,

Ver.  19.  He  chastens  him  also  with  pain upon  his  bed,
and,  inakes  all  his  bones  to  waste  anaij.
XXIV. 4(5. By bed, or pallet, or couch  in  holy  Scripture,  is
understood,  sometimes  carnal  pleasure,  sometimes  a  resting


JRest,  in  earthly  pleasure,  in  means  of  grace,  in  retirement.  39

in  good  works,  sometimes  temporal  rest ; for  what  is  meant  Book
by  what  our  Lord  said  in  the  Gospel  to  a  certain  one  who  -

was  healed,  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  nnto  thine  house,  Mat.  9,
except  that  bodily  pleasure  is  signified  by  bed  ? And  he  is  jyj^pk '>
specially  commanded,  when  restored  to  health,  to  carry  that  li-
on which  he  had  lain  when  sick,  since  every  one,  who  still  24^. '
delights  in  sin,  lies  overpowered  with  fleshly  pleasures. But
he  carries  that,  when  healed,  on  which  he  had  lain  when
sick,  because  when  rescued  by  Divine  assistance  from  his
sins,  he  afterwards  endures  the  insults  of  that  very  flesh,  in
the  indulgence  of  which  he  used  to  rest  content. But  again,
by  bed,  or  couch,  is designated  a  resting  in good  works.
Whence  the  Apostle  Peter  says,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
j^neas,  may  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  make  thee  ichole;  arise.  Acta  9,
and  make  thy  bed. For  what  is  meant  by  rise,  but  leave ^^'
off  the  sins  which  thou  hast  committed  } and  what  by  make
thy  bed,  but  engage  in  those  means  of  grace,  in  which  thou
oughtest  to  rest? So  that  by  rising  he  was  to  forsake  what
he  had  done,  and  by  making  his  bed,  find  after  what  he
should have done. And both these points the Prophet
briefly  sums  up,  in  saying.  Turn  aside  from  evil,  and  do  good.  pg.  37
For  to  turn  aside  from  evil  is  to  rise  from  that  whereon  he  ^7.
lay ;  but  to  do  good,  is  to  make  ready  those  works  that  win
reward,  in  which  he  should  rest. But  he  who  turns  aside
from  evil,  but  does  not  as  yet  do  what  is  good,  has  risen  from
that  whereon  he  lay,  but  has  not yet  made  for  himself  a
place  wherein  he  is  to  rest. And  again,  bed,  or  couch,  is
taken  for  temporal  rest ;  as  it  is  written.  Thou  hast  turned  all  p,s.4i  3.
his bed in  his  sickness. For  when  any  one,  worn  out  by
secular  cares,  is  urged  on  by  Divine  grace  to  forsake  the
toilsome  ways  of  this  world,  he  is  wont  to  consider  how  to
avoid  the  attractions  of  the  present  life,  and  to  rest  from  its
labours. He  presently  seeks  for  himself  the  station  of  rest
which  he  desired,  and  wishes  to  find  a  place of  cessation
from  all  his  labours,  as  though  it  were  a  kind  of  bed. But
because  a  man  while  still  in  this  life,  in  wliatever  situation,
cannot  in  the  secresy  of  any  retirement  whatever  live  with-
out temptations ; the  pain  of  temptation  is  found  to  press
more  heavily  on  that  spot,  which  is  contrived  for  the  sake  of
rest. Whence  it  is  well  said  by  the  Prophet, T/ioti hast


40  Rest  not  allowed  us  lest  ice  stop  on  our  way.

Job  ^3,  turned  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness. As  if  he  were  to  say,  All
^that  be  has  here  contrived  for  himself  for  the  sake  ot  rest,

Thou  liast  by  secret  jiidginent  converted  to  his  disturbance.

And  this  is  so  ordained  by  the  merciful  design  of  God,  in

order  that,  in  the  season  of  his  sojourning,  the  life  of  the  Elect

may  be  exposed  to  confusion.

47.  For  our  present  life  is  the  road  by  which  we  journey
•patriamon to  our  home': and  we  are  harassed  here  by frequent

disturbances,  in  the  secret  judgment  of  God,  expressly  that
wc  may  not  love  our  road  instead  of  our  home.  For  some
travellers,  if  they  see  by  accident  some  pleasant  meadows  on
their  road,  are  wont  to  delay,  and  to  turn  aside  from  the
straight  path  on  which  they  have  entered.  And  the  beauty
of  the  road  delays  their  steps,  while  it  affords  them  pleasure.
The  Lord  then  makes  the  way  of  this  world  fugged  to  His
Elect,  who  are  journeying  towards  Him  :  in  order  that  no
one  wlien  enjoying  the  rest  of  this  present  life,  as  if  it  were
some  beauteous  road,  might  take  greater  pleasure  in  prolong-
ing the  journey  than  in  speedily  arriving  at  its  end  ;  or
forget,  when  delighted  by  the  way,  what  he  used  to  long  for
in  his  home.  But  because  all  the  rest,  which  we  have  hap-
pened to  secure  for  ourselves  in  this  world,  is  liable  to
disturbance,  it  is  well  said,  He  chastens  him  also  with  pain
upon  his  bed,  that  is,  He  disturbs  us  in  the  rest  of  this
world,  either  by  the  stings  of  temptation,  or  by  the  affliction
of  the  scourge.  For  if  the  mind  of  man  has  been  engaged
in  virtuous  pursuits  for  ever  so  short  a  time,  without  tempt-
ation, it  is  often,  in  consequence  of  those  very  pursuits,  in
which  it  is  tranquilly  engaged,  soon  elated  by  those  very
virtues,  which  it  is  endeavouring  to  niultiply  within,  from
being  conscious  of  the  progress  it  is  making.  It  is  therefore
exposed  to  the  assaults  of  temptations,  by  the  merciful
dispensation  of  our  Ruler,  that  thus  pride,  at  the  advance  it  is
making,  may  be  checked  within  it.  Wherefore  after  he  had
said.  He  chastens  him  also  icith  p)ain  on  his  bed,  he  fitly
subjoined.  And  makes  all  his  bones  to  waste  away.

48.  By  bones  in  holy  Scripture  we  understand  virtues;  as
Ps.  34,  it  is  written,  The  Lord  keepcth  all  his  bones ;  not  one  of
^^' them  shall  be  broken. Which  is  specially  understood  not  of

the  bones  of  the  body,  but  of  the  powers  of  the  mind. For


^  Bones  tcasted^  in  templation  bring  down  our  pride. 41

we  know  assuredly,  that  the  bones  of  many  Martyrs  were  Book
broken  in  a  bodily  sense,  and  the  persecutors  of  the  Lord  ?2^11i:
broke  the  bones  of  that  thief,  to  whom  it  was  said,  To-day -^2.  '
shall  thou  be  with  Me  in  Paradise,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Luke23,
other  thief  on  the  cross.  When  He  chastens  us  then  with
pain  on  our  bed.  He  makes  all  our  bones  to  waste  away ;
.because  when  we  are  assailed  with  the  scourge  of  temptation,
in  that  rest  which  we  secure  for  ourselves  from  this  world,  we,
who  might  perhaps  have  been  puffed  up  by  our  virtues,  are
brought  low  by  being  sore  vexed  at  the  knowledge  of  our
infirmity.  For  when  we  are  advancing  as  we  wish  towards
God,  if  no  temj^tation  checked  our  progress,  we  should
believe  that  we  were  persons  of  some  strength.  But  since
the  Divine  dispensation  thus  deals  with  us,  in  order  that  we
may  remember  our  infirmity  when  tempted,  because  we
forget  it  when  we  are  advancing,  we  learn  when  we  advance
what  we  are  by  the  divine  gift ;  and  in  our  temptation  what
we  are  by  our  own  strength.  But  tiiis  temptation  would  in
truth  entirely  hurry  us  away,  did  not  heavenly  protection
keep  us  up.  But  it  strikes  us  without  breaking,  it  presses
on  us  without  moving  us,  it  staggers,  but  does  not  cast
us  down  :  that  we  may  feel  that  it  is  all  owing  to  our  own
weakness  that  we  are  shaken,  but  that  it  is  the  gift  of  God
that  we  stand  firm.  But  because  a  soul  which  is  conscious
of  any  good  quality  in  itself,  frequantly  revels  in  a  kind
of  delight,  on  calling  its  virtues  to  mind,  and  is  bloated  as  it
were  by  congratulating  itself  on  its  own  fulness,  it  is  well
said  that  the  bones  waste  away  under  the  assault  of  tempt-
ation. Because  v/hile  our  own  weakness  is  ascertained  by  the
questionings  of  temptation,  all  that,  as  it  were,  bloated  and
florid  self-congratulation  on  our  own  strength,  is  dried  up  by
the  sudden  pain  of  anxiety.  And  we  who,  on  weighing  our
good  deeds,  believed  them  to  be  of  some  value,  when  smitten
somewhat  more  heavily  arc  afraid  that  we  are  about  to  perish
immediately.  It  is  then  that  all  satisfaction  at  our  goodness
is  changed  into  fear  of  punishment.  We  then  discover  our-
selves to  be  guilty,  though,  but  just  before,  we  believed
ourselves  to  be  saints.  Our  mind  wastes  away,  our  eyes
become  dull,  all  the  prosperity  which  used  to  smile  on  us
vanishes  away;  the  light  itself  is  loathsome,  and  the  darkness


42  Mystical  meanings  of  ^  Bread.'' Heavenly  contemplation.
Job  33,  of  sorrow  alone  spreads  itself  over  the  mind. We  see  nothing

20  .  .  .

'- —  to  please  iis,  every  thing  "which  comes  before  us  is  full  of

sorrow. Whence  it  also  properly  follows,

Ver.  20.  His  bread  becomes  abominable  to  him  in  his  lips,
and  to  his  soul  the  food  ivhich  before  it  desired. ■

XXX.  49.  As  if  he  were  to  say  in  so  many  words;  A  mind  under
affliction  believes  that  every  thing  which  used  easily  to
satisfy,  and  give  it  pleasure,  is  turned  into  bitterness.  For
by  bread  is  understood  in  holy  Scripture  sometimes  the  Lord
Himself,  sometimes  spiritual  grace,  sometimes  the  instruction
of  divine  teaching,  sometimes  the  preaching  of  heretics,
sometimes  sustenance  for  this  present  life,  sometimes  the
agreeableness  of  worldly  jjleasure. The  Lord  is  signified  by

John  6,  bread,  as  He  Himself  says  in  the  Gospel,  /  am  the  living

^^' Bread,  Who  came  doicn  from  heaven.

Again,  by  bread  is  understood  the  grace  of  spiritual  gifts,  as  is

Is.  33, said  by  the  Prophet,  Who  stoppcth  his  ears,  that  he  shoidd  not

^^'  ^^'  hear  of  blood, and  shutteth  his  eyes  that  he  should  not  see  evil, he
shall  dwell  in  high  places,  his  high  place  shall  be  the  muni-
tions of  rocks,  bread  is  given  to  him.  For  what  is  to  close
his  ears,  not  to  hear  blood,  except  to  refuse  consent  to  those
persuasive  sins  which  spring  from  flesh  and  blood  ?  or  what
to  close  his  eyes,  not  to  behold  evil,  but  to  disapprove  of
every  thing  which  is  contrary  to  ujjrightness  }  Such  an  one
will  dwell  in  high  places;  for  though  the  flesh  still  confines
him  to  things  below,  he  has  already  fixed  his  mind  on  things
above.  His  high  place  is  the  munitions  of  rocks,  because
he  who  tramples  beneath  his  feet  his  longings  for  worldly
conversation,  raises  himself  to  his  heavenly  country  by  the
patterns  of  the  fathers  who  have  gone  before.  And  because
he  is  satisfied  with  spiritual  grace  through  the  gift  of  con-
templation, it  is  rightly  subjoined,  Bread  is  given  him;  that
is,  he  enjoys  the  refreshment  of  spiritual  grace,  because  he
has  raised  himself  above  the  goods  of  the  world,  by  hoping
for  those of  heaven. Hence also  the  Lord  says  of  Holy

Ps.  132,  Church  by  David,  /  ivill  satisfy  her  poor  ivith  bread;
because  the  humble-minded  who  dwell  therein  are  filled  with
the  refreshment  of  s})iritual  gifts.  Again,  by  bread  is  set  forth
the  instruction  of  heavenly  doctrine,  as  is  said  by  the  Prophet,

Is.  21, Ye  who  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  South,  meet  with  bread  him


Teaching,  true  or  false;  support  of  nature.  43

that  is  flying  away. For  they  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  South  Rook
who,  placed  within  Holy  Church,  are  breathed  upon  by  the  ^'^"^'
love of  the Spirit from on high. But  he  is  flying,  who
is  wishing  to  escape  from  the  evils  of  this  world, lie  then
who  dwells  in  the  land  of  the  South,  should  meet  with  bread
him  that  is  flying ; that  is,  he  who  is  already  full  of  the  Holy
Spirit  within  the  Church,  should  console  with  words  of  in-
struction the  man  who  is  endeavouring  to  escape  from  his
evil  ways. To  meet  with  bread  him  that  is  flying,  is  surely
to  offer  the  food  of  sound  doctrine  to  one  who  is  in  fear  of
eternal  punishments,  and  at  one  while  to  restrain  his  pride
by  fear,  and  at  another  to  comfort  his  fears  by  encouragement.
But  because  by  bread  is  not  unfitly  understood  the  refresh-
ment of  holy  Scripture,  it  is  said  by  the  same  Prophet  to  the
Jews  who  looked  only  to  the  letter.  Wherefore  do  ye  spetidls. 55,2.
your  money,  hut  not  in  bread. As  though  he  were  saying.
Ye  consider  the  holy  words,  but  not  for  refreshment,  because
while  ye  carefully  guard  the  outward  letter  alone,  ye  lose  that
richness  of  inward  refreshment  which  results  from  the  spiritua
meaning. Whence  it  is  properly  subjoined  in  that  passage,
And  your  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not.

But  again  by  bread  is  designated  the  preaching  of  heretics;
as  by  Solomon  the  woman  who  typifies  the  congregation'  of  ^  eccle-
the  heretics,  and  calls  together  the  foolish,  says,  Eat  ye  gladly
bread  in  secret. Or,  as  is  written  in  our  translation.  Stolen  Prov.  9,
waters  are  sweeter,  and  hidden  bread  is  more  j)leasant. For  ^''
there are some heresies  which are  afraid  to  preach their
views  openly,  and  give  a  greater  flavour  to  their  words  in  condiunt
the  minds  of  the  weak  the  more  they  keep  them  back,  as
if  through  greater  reverence. Whence  it  is  not  improperly
said.  Eat  ye  gladly  bread  in  secret. For  the  secret  words
of  the  heretics  are  more  relished  by  miserable  hearts,  the
more  they  are  not  possessed  by  them  in  common  with  other
people.

But  again,  by  bread is understood  the support  of  this
present  life;  as  Jacob,  on  his  way  to  Laban,  says,  0  Lord  Gen. 28,
God,  if  Thou  shall  have  given  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment '
to  put  on. And  as  the  Lord  says  in  the  Gospel  to  tlic  crowds
which  were  following  Him,  Ye  seek  Ble,  not  because  ye  saw  John  6,
the  miracles,  but  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  wei'e^^'


44 Bread  put  for  susfe/umce,  or,  as  here,  for  pleasure.

Job  ^3,  filled. For  Ihey  had  been  filled  of  the  seven  loaves. And  in

^— their  persons  the Lord  expresses His  detestation  of  those

within  J  loiy^Church,  who  aj)proaching  to  the  Lord  by  holy
ministrations,  do  not  by  those  uiinisirations  seek  to  gain
higher  virtnc,  but  only  sustenance  for  this  present  life :  nor
do  they  think  what  example  ihey  should  imitate  in  their
conduct,  but  wliat  gains  they  may  obtain  so  as  to  be  satisfied.
For  to  follow  the  Lord  from  being  filled  with  the  loaves,  is  to
have  gained  temporal  sujjport  from  Holy  Church.  And  to  seek
the  Lord  not  for  the  miracles'  sake,  but  for  bread,  is  for
people  to  be  eager  for  religious  offices,  not  for  the  sake
of  increasing  their  virtues,  but  of  acquiring  a  means  of
support.

Again,  by  bread  is  understood  the  agreeableness  of  human
pleasure.  Wlience  the  Prophet  Jeremiah  said,  while  lament-
Lam.  1,  iiitr  the  abandoned  habits  of  the  congregation ;  All  her  people
siqhs  and  seeks  for  bread;  they  have  given  all  their  precious
things  for  food  to  revive  the  soul.  For  the  people  sighs  and
seeks  for  bread,  whilst  the  wicked  multitude  of  men  is
afflicted,  because  it  is  not  satisfied,  to  its  heart's  desire,  with
the  pleasantness  of  the  present  life.  And  it  gives  all  its
precious  tilings  for  food,  because  it  bows  down  the  virtues  of
its  mind  to  the  desire  of  transitory  pleasure.  And  it  en-
deavours to  revive  the  soul :  because  it  strives  to  satisfy  its
own  perverse  desires.  And  hence  he  immediately  well  adds
in  the  words  of  that  elect  multitude.  See,  0  Lord,  and
consider,  that  I  am  become  vile.  For  the  People  of  God
becomes  vile,  when,  as  the  number  of  the  ungodly  increases,
it  engages,  in  their  persons,  not  in  high  and  heavenly  em-
ployments, but  in  worthless  and  worldly  pursuits.

.50.  What  else  then  does  Eliu  mean  by  bread,  but  the
pleasures  of  this  life?  For  after  having  stated  the  power  of
temptation,  he  inimediately  subjoined.  His  bread  becomes
abominable  to  him  in  his  life,  and  to  his  soul  the  food  which
before  it  desired:  because,  in  truth,  all  the  sweetness  he  used
before  to  enjoy  from  the  prosperity  of  his  life,  afterwards
becomes  bitter  by  the  power  of  temptation.  For  sometimes
whatever  joy,  and  whatever  virtue  seemed  to  smile  on  him,  is
suddenly  lost  through  fear  of  temptation,  and  the  sorrowful
mind,  as  if  deprived  of  these  very  virtues,  is  possessed  by


Temptation  and  chastisement  make  pleasure  distasteful.  45

srief  alone. For  when  it  is  assailed  somewhat  more  violentlv  Book

^ " X  \  1 1 1
by  the  Ibrce  of  temptation,  because  it  cannot  put  Ibith  the— ^

streui^th  of  its  usual  courasie,  it  laments  for  it  as  if  it  were
already  lost ;  and  feeling  itself  en.iptied  of  itself,  it  leanis  its
own  weakness,  from this  its  emi  tiuess. And  thence  it  is
immediately  broken  otf,  as  it  were,  from  every  pleasure,  and
loathing  the  dainty  morsels  of  former  delight,  takes  its  fill  of
that grief  which  alone  it  eagerly  desires. For  every one,
when  success  in  holy  living  smiles  favourably  on  him,  is  full
of  mirth:  and  this  very  mirth  retreshes  the  mind  like  plea-
surable  food. But when he is  assailed more sharply by
imminent  temptation,  all  joy  is  through  the  loathing  of  grief
rejected by  his  mind,  though  it used  before  to  rejoice  as
though fullv  satisfied  with  that  verv  iov. Because  then  a
man,  when  tempted,  casts  out  from  the  mouth  of  his  heart  all
pleasurable  food,  and  nothing  else  gives  him  pleasure  but
knowing  and  lamenting  himself,  it  is  well  said,  Bread  be-
comes abominable  to  him  in  his  life,  and  to  his  soul  the  food
ichich  before  it  desired.

51.  But,  as  we  said  before,  we  are  allowed  to  be  thus
tempted  under  the  government  of  the  secret  dispensation,  in
order  that  we,  who  by  the  Divine  gift  are  making  progress  in
virtue,  mav  call  to  mind  what  we  are  by  our  own  natural
infirmity  :  and  that  all  who  produce  the  deeds  of  virtue,  fiom
having  received  of  the  gift,  may  olfer  the  sacrifice  of  humility
from  a  remembrance  of  our  own  weakness.  But  sometimes,
after  we  have  increased  in  strength,  not  only  are  we  assailed
bv  sins,  but  chastised  bv  scourges.  But  when  we  are  assailed
bv  sins,  we  are  dealt  with  by  a  merciful  dispensation,  to  keep
us  from  being  elated  by  those  virtues,  in  which  we  are
making  progress.  But  when  we  are  scourged  with  the  rod,
we  are  warned,  by  the  chastisement  of  evil,  not  to  be  led
away  with  the  blandishments  of  the  world.  Whilst  our  sins
tempt  us,  they  bring  low  the  virtues,  whicli  are  gaining
strength  within  us  ;  whilst  scourges  try  us,  they  root  out  the
pleasures  of  this  world  which  are  rising  in  our  heart.  We
learn  bv  our  sins,  which  tempt  us,  what  we  are  of  om-selves ;
by  the  scourges,  which  smite  us,  what  we  should  avoid  in  this
world.  We  are  restrained  by  the  one  from  inward  pride,  we  are
kept  back  by  the  other  from  desiring  any  thing  without  us.


46 Bonea  of  imvard  Virtue  laid  bare  by  sconr(jing.

Job  33,  As  long  llien  as  we  are  in  tliis  life,  we  must  needs  be  scourged
-^ — by  the  rod,  and  at  times  tempted  by  our  sins.  For  both  in
the  tortures  of  the  scourge,  and  in  our  struggle  with  our  sins,
not  only  does  our  weakness  become  known  to  us,  but  we
learn  also  what  progress  we  have  made  in  virtue.  For  no
one,  when  at  rest,  is  conscious  of  his  powers.  For  if  there
is  no  contest,  no  opportunities  arise  for  making  trial  of  our
virtues.  He  who  boasts  of  his  bravery  in  peace,  is  but  a
short-sighted  warrior.  Since  then  the  quality  of  our  strength
is  often  made  known  by  sufferings  of  the  rod,  Eliu  appro-
priately adds,  saying,

Ver.  21.  Hisjiesh  shall  waste  away^  and  his  bones  ivhich
zvere  covered  shall  be  laid  bare.
xxvi. 52.  For  when  every  outward  pleasure  is  worn  away  by  the
pressure  of  the  rod,  the  bones  of  inward  firmness  are  laid
bare. For  what  is  meant  in  this  place  by  the  word  flesh,
but  fleshly  pleasure  itself?  Or  what  by  bones,  but  the  virtues
of  the  soul  ? The  flesh  therefore  wastes  away,  and  the  bones
are  laid  bare,  because  while  carnal  pleasure  is  brought  to
nought  by  the  reproof  of  scourges,  those  sturdy  virtues  are
laid  open,  which  had  long  been  concealed,  as  it  were,  beneath
the  flesh. For  no  one  learns  what  progress  he  has  made,
except in adversity. For in  prosperity,  the  evidences  of
strength cannot be  discerned. Whence  it  is  written  else-
pH.42,8.  where.  The  Lord  commanded  His  loving  kindness  in  the  day
time,  and  declared  it  in  the  night. Because,  in  truth,  it  is  in
tranquil  rest  that  each  man  obtains  the  grace  of  the  heavenly
gift,  but  it  is  in  trouble  and  adversity  that  he  gives  proof  how
much  he  has  received. Let  our  flesh  then  waste  away,  that
our  bones  may  be  laid  bare. Let  us  be  smitten  with  the
reproofs  of  a  father,  that  we  may  know  what  progress  we  are
making. For  by  the  scourge  of  the  Lord  the  rankness  of
carnal  pleasure  is  worn  down,  but  the  bones  of  our  virtues
are laid bare. Oui* outward beauty  is tarnished  by  this
world's sufferings,  but that  which  was  concealed  within  is
Acts  5,  made  manifest. For  when  the  Apostles  had  been  scourged,
they  were  directed  to  speak  no  more  in  the  Name  of  Jesus.
But  they  rejoiced  with  exceeding  joy,  that  they  were  counted
worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the  Name  of  Jesus : and  they

Acts  5,  confidently  replied  to  their  adversaries. We  ought  to  obey
29.


Wasting  ofthejiesh. Draicing  near  to  destruction. 47

God  rather  than  man. See  how  the  strength  of  their  faith  Book

XXIII
shone forth more vigorously in adversity. See how the -

soundness  of  the  flesh  was  cut  through,  but  the  boues  of
their  virtues  were  laid  open.  It  is  hence  said  of  them  by
Wisdom,  God  proved  them,  and  found  them  xcorthy  for  Him-  Wisd.s,
self.  For,  though  tried  by  the  blows  of  adversity,  they  are"*
found  worthy  by  the  laying  bare  of  their  bones.  For  that
the  trial  of  their  scourging  is  here  meant,  is  plainly  declared
by  what  follows,  As  gold,  in  the  furnace  He  tried  them,  andihi6.6.
received  them  as  a  victim  of  a  burnt  offering.  Because,
then,  each  man's  strength  is  made  known  only  by  adversity,
it  is  well  said.  His  fiesli  shall  ivaste  away,  and  his  bones
uhich  icere  covered  shall  he  laid  hare.  For  the  flesh  wastes
away,  while  every  thing  which  is  perishable  and  weak  is
worn  awav  by  the  scourge.  The  bones  are  laid  bare,  while
by  these  means  our  latent  strength  is  also  made  manifest.
As  we  have  before  said,  not  merely  is  the  strength  of  oiu-
resolution  made  known,  but  also  the  weakness  of  our  nature
laid  bare,  by  the  very  trials  of  adversity;  and  every  one  shews
indeed  under  trial  the  progress  he  has  made  through  God,
but  also  confesses  under  the  very  inflictions  of  the  scourges,
how  weak  he  is  in  himself;  because  not  only  are  the  bones
laid  bare,  but  the  flesh  also  wastes  away.  It  is  appropriately
subjoined,

Ver.  22. His  soul  shall  draw  near  to  corruption,  and  his

life  to  the  destroyers.

53.  For  the  soul  of  every  just  man  when  tempted  is  said  xxvii.
to  draw  near  to  corruption,  when,  for  fear  his  virtue  should
elate  him,  he  is  compelled  by  the  rod  to  feel  what  he  is  in  his
own  natural  infirmity.  He  approaches,  in  truth,  to  corruption,
because  he  learns  that  by  his  own  strength  he  is  not  far  from
destruction,  in  order  that  he  may  ascribe  not  to  himself  but
to  the  Lord,  that  he  is  far  from  that  destruction.  But  he
approaches  to  the  destroyers,  because  he  sees  that,  through
the  infirmity  of  the  flesh,  he  is  very  near  to  sins  which  cause
death  :  and  from  these  he  is  the  farther  removed  by  the
Divine  goodness,  the  more  he  is  conscious  that  by  his  own
deserts  he  is  very  near  them.  By  contemplating  his  own
condition,  David  had  drawn  near  to  corruption,  when  he
said.  Remember,  Lord,  that  we  are  dust;  as  for  man  his  day  Ps.  ip3,

14.  15.


48  Help  wilhdrawn  thai  we  may  knoiv ourselves.  An  instance.

Job33, /.<?  grass. Paul  also  had,  by  contemplating  his  own  infirmity,
— ^—  approached  the  destroyers,  when  he  said,  I  see  anoilier  law
^3.  i^.' in  mij  members  uarring  against  lite  law  of  my  mind,  and
leading  me  captive  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  mem-
bers. Wretched man that  I am  ! who  shall  deliver  me
from  the  body  of  this  death? To  approach  then  to  corrup-
tion, and  to  the  destroyers,  is  lor  a  man,  on  considering  the
infirmity  of  our  human  nature,  to  see  that  he  is  a  sinner,  as
far  as  concerns  his  deserts,  and  that  he  possesses,  of  his  own
»  arro- strength,  no  ground  of  boasting'  in  himself For  what  are
gantiam^^^^  when  bereft  of  the  protection  of  our  Maker?  a  protection
which  is  considered  to  be  less  necessary,  if  always  enjoyed.
But  it  is  withdrawn, generally,  for  our good,  that  it  may
be  shewn  to  a  man's  own  self  how  worthless  he  is  without
it. The  hand  of  God,  then,  which  bears  us  up,  even  AAhen
we  know  it  not,  in  prosperity,  brings  us  to  a  true  knowledge
of  ourselves  in  adversity. And  when  we  begin  to  fall,  from
being  deprived  of  it,  we  are  yet  supported  by  its  aid. It  is  a
warning  to  us,  that  we  are  trembling  to  our  fall,  and  His
protection,  that  we  remain  stedfast.

54.  Let  no  one  consider  then  that  he  has  any  real  virtues,
even  if  he  is  able  to  display  any  resolution  :  since,  if  Divine
protection  leave  him  to  himself,  he  is  suddenly  unnerved  and
overpowered  in  that  very  point  in  which  he  used  to  boast  that
he  was  standing  firm.  For  what  is  meant  by  the  man  of  God,
1  Kings  when  directed  to  prophesy  against  the  altar  at  Samaria,  exerting
g^'  in  the  king's  presence  the  authority  of  bold  speaking,  by  his
miraculously  withering  the  extended  arm  of  the  rash  king,
which  he  afterwards  restored  to  health  of  his  tender  pity  .?
by  his  refusing  when  invited,  to  eat  in  his  house,  because  he
kept  the  commands  of  the  Lord,  which  forbade  him  to  eat  by
the  way  ^  But  yet  he  was  afterwards  seduced  to  eat  on  the
same  way,  and  perished  when  he  had  eaten.  Wliat  do  we
gather  from  an  accurate  examination  of  this  matter,  w^hat  (if
I  may  so  speak)  do  we  fear  and  suspect,  except  that  he  was
perhaps  silently  boasting  in  himself  that  he  had  put  contempt
on  the  king  in  obeying  the  commands  of  the  Lord  ?  Hence
it  was  that  he  was  soon  shaken  from  his  inward  stedfastness,
and  that  sin  stole  on  him  in  his  work,  from  the  same  source
as  pride  sprang  up  in  his  heart;  in  order  that  he  might  learn


Danger  of  deal Ji  drtres  to  lite  true  sa/eyiiard  of  life. 49

when  deceived  by  the  false  prophet,  that  it  was  not  of  his  tIook
own  strength  that  he  had  withstood  the  commands  of  the^— — '
king.  But  he  rightly  received  the  sentence  of  death  from
the  mouth  of  that  very  person,  by  whose  seduction  he  had
tnnied  away  from  the  precept  of  life,  in  order  that  he  might
receive  the  true  announcement  of  his  punishment,  from  the
same  quarter  by  which  he  had  through  cai'elessness  admitted
a  fault.  Because  then  the  grace  of  God  more  especially
guards  and  instructs  each  of  His  Elect,  at  the  very  time
when  He  seems  to  smite  and  forsake  them,  let  it  be  rightly
said,  His  soul  shall  approach  to  corruption,  and  his  life
to  the  destroyers ;  that  so  the  more  he  is  led  by  adversity
to  consider  that  he  is  in  his  own  strength  nigh  unto  death,
he  may,  in  all  cases  in  which  he  has  acted  with  resolution,
have  surer  ground  of  life,  by  flying  to  the  protection  which
comes  from  trust  in  God.


VOL.  III.


BOOK XXIV.

The  last  eleven  verses  of  the  thirty-thirfl  chapter  and  the  eighteen  first
verses  of  the  thirty-fourth  chapter  are  expounded,  and  striking  truths  are
taught  concerning  Christ  the  Mediator,  contemplation,  the  course  of  con-
version, and  the  pastoral  office.

Job  33,  1.  It  was  in  speaking  of  the  power  of  the  Divine  dis-
?.\^  •.  pensation,  tliat  Eliu  observed  of  the  sufFerings  of  each  of  the
^*  Elect,  saying,  His  soul  u:ill  draw  nigli  to  corrttption,  and  his
life  to  the  destroyers.  And  in  speaking  of  the  trials  of  a
single  person,  he  shews  in  what  condition  of  trial  the  whole
linman  race  is  placed  ;  and  in  mentioning  what  specially
befals  individuals,  he  plainly  intimates  what  takes  place
generally  in  all.  For  he  so  described  the  temptation  of
certain  persons,  taken  in  themselves  one  by  one,  that  the
temptation  of  all  men  in  a  body  might  be  also  under-
stood thereby.  For  the  whole  body  of  the  Elect  suffers  in
this  life  under  the  pain  of  this  labour.  He  therefore  im-
mediately introduced  a  general  remedy  to  cure  this  general
malady,  saying,

Ver.  23,  24.  If  there  shall  he  an  Angel,  speaking  for  him
one  of  like  tilings  to  shew  the  righteousness  of  man,  he  will
pity  him.
ii. 2.  For  who  is  this  Angel,  but  He  who  is  called  by  the
Is.  9,  6.  Prophet, The  Angel of  mighty counsel? For  because to
^^^' declare  is  called  "  evangelize"  in  Greek,  the  Lord in  an-
as Is.63,nouncing Himself  to us  is  called  '  Angel.* And  he  well
says,  //  there  shall  he  a  messenger  \or  Angel]  speaking  for
Eom.  8,  him  ; because,  as  the  Apostle  says.  He  even  intercedes  for
us. But  let  us  hear  what  he  says  for  us ;  One  of  like  things.
It  is  the  way  with  medicine  to  cure  disease  sometimes  by
similar,  sometimes  by  contrary,  remedies. For  it  has  fre-
quently been  wont  to  cure  the  hot  by  warm,  and  the  cold  by


Our  Lord,  heiiuj  sinless,  suffered  for  us  freely. 51

cold,  applications  ;  and  on  the  contrary,  tlic  cold  by  warmth,  Book

the  hot  by  cold. Our  Physician  then,  on  coining  to  us  from— ^ :

above,  and  finding  us  oppressed  with  such  great  diseases,
applied  to  our  case  something  of  a  like,  and  something  of  a
contrary,  nature.  For  He  came  to  us  as  Man  to  men,  but  as
a  Just  One  to  those  who  were  in  sin.  He  agreed  with  us  in
the  truth  of  His  nature.  He  differed  from  us  in  the  ]X)wer  of  His
righteousness.  For  sinful  man  could  not  be  amended,  except
by  God.  But  it  was  necessary  that  He  who  was  healing
him,  should  be  an  object  of  sight ;  in  order  that  He  might
amend  our  former  sinful  lives,  by  setting  a  pattern  for  us  to
imitate.  But  it  was  not  possible  that  God  could  be  seen  by
man;  He  therefore  became  man,  that  He  might  be  seen.
The  Holy  and  Tuvisible  God  appeared  therefore  as  a  visible
man,  like  ourselves  ;  that  while  He  seemed  to  be  of  like
nature.  He  might  teach  us  by  His  holiness.  And  while
agreeing  with  om-  condition  in  verity  of  natm*e.  He  might
put  a  stop  to  our  sickness  by  the  might  of  His  skill.

3.  Because  then  the  Lord,  when  coming  in  the  flesh,  did
not  bear  our  guilt  for  His  own  fault,  nor  our  punishment  as
a  matter  of  necessity,  (for  untainted  by  spot  of  sin.  He  could
not be involved in our  condition of  guilt,  and  therefore
voluntarily  underwent  our  death,  when  He  so  Avilled,  eveiy
kind  of  necessity  lying  beneath  His  feet*,)  it  is  rightly  said,  •  'caU
that  that  messenger  speaks,  in  behalf  of  man  when  tempted,
'  one  of  like  things,'  because  He  was  neither  born  as  other  men,
nor  was  like  them  in  His  dying,  or  His  rising  again. For
He  was  conceived,  not  by  the  cooperation  of  natural  inter- Lute  l,
course,  but  by  the  Holy  Spirit  coming  on  His  Mother. And
when  born  He  proved  the  fecundity  of  His  Mother's  womb,
though  presendng  its  virgin  purity. But  again,  we  all  die
when  we  do  not  wish  it ;  because  we  are  constrained  through
the  sinfulness  of  our  nature  to  pay  the  debt  of  punishment.
But  He,  from  having  no  admixture  of  sin,  did  not  submit  to
any  punishment  as  a  matter  of  necessity. But  because  He
subdued  our  guilt  by  triumphing  over-  it.  He  underwent  our^al.'con-
punishment  out  of  pity  for  us  ;  as  He  Himself  says,  /  hciv^  j^^,
power  to  lay  down  My  life,  and  I  have  power  to  lake  it  Jo^nio,
again. Who  had  also  said  before.  No  one  taketh  it  from
Me  ; hut  I  lay  it  down  of  3Ljself. But  again,  He  was  not

E  2


52 Our  Lord  likened  to  us  only  in  true  Humanity,
Job  33,  raised a2;ain  like  other  men  ; because  our  resurrection  is

24

'—  deferred  to  the  end  of  the  world,  while  His  was  celebrated

on  the  third  day.  And  we  indeed  rise  by  Him,  for  He  rises
by  Himself.  For  He  Who  was  God  needed  not,  as  we,  to  be
raised  up  by  any  one  else.  In  this  then  does  His  resur-
rection differ  from  ours,  that  we  do  not  rise  again  of  ourselves,
as  He  did.  For  since  we  are  simply  men,  we  need  some
superior  assistance  to  enable  us  to  rise.  But  He  as  God
'  Oxf.  dis])layed  the  same  power  of  raising'  again  with  the  Father  and
Mss.'re-^j^ Holy  Spirit,  though  He  alone  in  His  human  nature  had

suscita-  J I '  o

tioiiis.'  experience  of  it.  Because  then  the  Lord,  though  truly  born,
fjrising.' truly  dead,  and  truly  raised  again,  differs  from  us,  in  all  these
points,  in  tho  greatness  of  His  power,  but  agrees  only  in  the
verity  of  His  nature,  it  is  well  said  that  that  Messenger
speaks  for  us  one  of  like  tilings.  For  since  He  surpasses  us
in  all  His  doings  with  His  immeasurable  power,  yet  in  one
point,  the  verity  of  His  nature,  He  does  not  differ  from  us,

4.  He  speaks  in  our  behalf  to  the  Father,  through  that
in  which  He  shews  Himself  to  be  like  us. For  His  speak-
ing or  intercession  is  His  ])roving  Himself  to  be  very  Man
for  man's  sake. And well, when he had said. He  says
one of  like  things,  he immediately  added,  tJiat he  might
declare  the  righteousness  of  man. Because,  if  He  had  not
become  like  unto  men,  man.  would  not  appear  just  before
Heb.  2,  God. For  He  announces  our  righteousness,  by  the  very  fact
^^' that  He  deigned  to  take  on  Himself  our  infirmity. For  that
Gen.  3,  fatal  persuasion  had  polluted  us  all  with  the  infection  of  sin
^'  from  our  very  origin  ;  and  there  was  no  one  who,  in  speaking

to  God  in  behalf  of  sinners,  could  appear  free  from  sin ;  because
an  equal  guilt  had  involved  all  alike  who  were  created  from
Rom.  5,  the  same  hiuip. Therefore  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father
*^* came  to  us,  and  assumed  our  nature  without  committing  sin.
For  it  was  requisite  that  one  who  could  intercede  for  sinners
should  be  free  from  sin,  because  doubtless  He  could  not  wipe
awEey  the  infection  of  others'  guilt,  if  He  had  to  bear  His  own.
It  is  well  said  then,  that  in  appearing  in  our  likeness  He  an-
nounced righteousness  to  men. For  He  proved  Himself,  in
interceding  for  sinners,  to  be  so  righteous  a  Man  as  to  merit
forgiveness  for  others. It  follows,

Yer.  24.  He will  pity  him,  and  will  say,  Deliver  him


Man  saved  from  ruin  when  brought  to/eel  near  it. 53

from  going  dotcn  to  corruption  ;  I  have  found  a  tvay  to  pro-  Book
pitiate  for  him.  — —

5.  The  Mediator  between  God  and  i«an,  the  Man  Christ i"-
Jesus,  shews  mercy  on  man,  by  having  assumed  the  form  of  a
man. Through  this  compassion  He  says  to  His  Father  on
behalf  of  redeemed  man,  Deliver  him  from  going  doun  to
corruption. For  as  we  before said, His saying, Deliver
him,  is  His  shewing  forth man's  nature  free by  taking  it
upon Him. For by that flesh which He assvmied, He
proved  the  freedom  of  this  also  which  He  redeemed. This
ransomed  flesh  is,  in  truth,  ourselves,  who  are  fettered  by  the
consciousness'  of  our  guilt. But  by  the  righteousness^  of  so^^l-'con-
mighty  a  Redeemer  are  we  set  free,  as  He  says  Himself,  //2a?qui-
ihe  Son  hath  set  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed. And  in  j^*^^  g
behalf  of  this  ransomed  man  it  is  well  Sciid,  That  he  go  not  36.
doicn  to  corruption. For  it  had  been  said  above,  His  soul
shall  draic  near  to  corruption. It  is  declared  afterwards,
That  he  go  not  down  to  corruption. As  if  He  were  to  say,
Because  he  is  aware,  from  a  sense  of  his  infirmity,  that  he  is
not  far  fi-om  corruption,  therefore  let  him  not  descend  to  the
death  of  corruption. For  he  would  rightly  go  down  to  cor-
ruption, if  he  were  to  consider  that  by  his  own  strength  he
was  far  removed  from  it. But  because  he  has  approached
thereto  with  humility,  he  ought  to  be  mercifully  delivered
therefrom  ;  that  the  more  he  confesses  he  is  weak  by  nature,
he  may  be  the  more  strengthened  against  the sins  which
assail  him. For  whoever  extols  himself  above  his  proper  LuieU,
condition, is weighed down by the very  burden of his
pride,  and  pluuges himself  the lower, the more he has
rushed into the sin of  pride,  and has  separated  himself
far from Him Who is truly exalted  ; and  he sinks the
more  to  the  bottom,  from  the  very  fact,  that  he  considered
himself  in  union  with  the  highest; as  is  said  by  the  Pro-
phet to the  soul which exalts  itself, Tiie more beautiful^^-''^^>
thou art, go doun, and sleep with the uncircumcised. ' .
For every one who neglects to consider the hideous-
ness of his infirmity, but looks through haughtiness of
pride  to  the credit  of  his  virtue,  sinks  the  lower,  from  his
being  more  beautiful. Since from  priding  himself  on  his
merits,  he  falls  into  the  lowest  depths  of  destruction,  on
account  of  the  very  qualities,  for  which  lie  considered  him-


54 Christ  our  Atonement . Sin  chastised  in  thejiesh.

Job  33,  self  worthy  of  honour.  And  he  descends  and  sleeps  with  the
^"'  uncircuuicised,  because  he  perishes  in  eternal  death  with
other  sinners.  Because  then  this  man  humbly  confessed
that  he  was  near  to  corruption,  it  is  well  said  of  him,  Deliver
him  from  going  down  to  corruption  ;  in  order  that  he  may
the  more  escape  punishment,  from  his  not  turning  his  eyes  to-
wards what  is  wrong.  But  because  there  was  no  one  for  whose
merits  the  Lord  could  have  needs  been  reconciled  to  us,  the
Only-begotten  of  the  Father,  taking  on  Himself  the  fonn  of
our  infirmity,  alone  appeared  just,  in  order  that  He  might  in-
tercede for  sinners.

C.  And  the  Messenger,  when  speaking  in  behalf  of  this
ransomed  man,  well  says,  /  have  found  a  way  to  propitiate
for  him.  As  though  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man
were  plainly  to  say.  Because  there  was  no  one  to  appear
before  God  as  a  righteous  intercessor  in  behalf  of  man,  I
have  made  Myself  a  Man,  to  gain  propitiation  for  mankind  ;
and  in  manifesting  Myself  as  a  Man,  I  found  a  way  of  justly
propitiating  for  him.  And  because  the  Lord,  in  taking  on
Hiui  infirmity,  when  He  endured  oiu'  punishment  in  His
death,  reversed  our  corruption  by  His  rising  again,  that
Messenger  fitly  subjoins  the  sufferings  of  our  mortal  state,
and  shews  pity  on  them,  saying,

Ver.  25.  His  flesh  is  consumed  by  punishments,  let  him
return  to  the  days  of  his  youth.
iv. 7.  For  when  that  first  man  fell  from  God,  we  were  driven

23^°24*'  ^'o*"  ^^^^  J°y^  ^^  Paradise,  and  were  involved  in  the  miseries
of  this  mortal  life ;  and  we  feel,  by  the  j^ain  of  our  punish-
ment, what  a  grievous  fault  we  committed  by  the  persuasion
of  the  sequent.  For  having  fallen  into  this  state,  we  have
found  nothing,  out  of  God,  except  affliction.  And  because
we  have  followed  the  flesh,  through  the  sight  of  the  eyes,  we
are  tortured  by  that  very  flesh  which  we  preferred  to  the
commands  of  God.  For  in  it  we  daily  suffer  sorrow,  in  it
torture,  in  it  death  ;  that  the  Lord  by  a  marvellous  economy
might  convert  that,  by  which  we  committed  sm,  into  a  means
of  punishment;  and  that  the  severity  of  punishment  might
spring  from  the  same  source  as  that  which  had  given  rise  to
sin  ;  so  that  man  might  be  discij)Hncd  to  life  by  the  bitter
suffering  of  tliat  very  flesh,  by  the  pride  of  delighting  which
he  had  drawn  near  to  death.


Mart's  life  restored  to  youth  in  our  Redemption,  55

8.  Since  then  the  human  race  was  oppressed  by  the  innu-  Book

merable  sufferings  of  tliis  life  in  the  flesh,  but  both  the  guilt "— -

and  punishment  of  our  sin  were  blotted  out  by  the  coming

of  our  Redeemer,  let  it  be  said  of  redeemed  man,  Hisjlesh
is  consumed  tcitli  punishments;  let  Iiini  return  to  the  days  of
his  youth. As  if  he  were  to  say.  Through  the  punishment
of  his  mortality,  he  is  cast  down,  as  it  were,  by  the  age  of  his
old  condition;  let  him  return  to  the  days  of  his  youth;  that  is,
let  him  be  renewed  in  the  integrity  of  his  former  life,  that  he
may  not  remain in  the  state in which  he  has  fallen,  but
return  on  his  redemption  to  that  for  the  enjoyment  of  which
he  was  created. For  Holy  Scripture  is  frequently  accus-
tomed to  put  youth  for  newness  of  life. Whence  it  is  said
to  the  Bridegroom  on  his  approach.  The  young  damsels  haveSo\om.
loved  Thee :  that  is,  the  souls  of  the  Elect,  renewed  by  the  3°"^'  '
gi'ace  of  Baptism,  which  do  not  yield  to  the  practices  of  the
old  life,  but  are  adorned  by  the  conversation  of  the  new  man.
For  he  in  truth  was  bewailing  the  age  of  the  old  man  which
was  wasting  away  in  the  midst  of  sins,  who  says,  /  have^s.6,7.
become  old  amongst  all  mine  enemies:  and  some  one  also
on  the  other  hand,  advising  a  person  to  rejoice  in  virtue,
says.  Rejoice,  O  young  man,  in  thy  youth. As  though  he  Eccles.
were  saying.  Let  each man  who is strong  rejoice in  his '
renewal;  that  is,  let  him  place  his  joy  not  in  the  pleasures
of  his  old  life,  but  in the  virtue of  his  new  conversation.
But  since  we  are  brought  back  to  this  strength  of  new  life,
not  by  our  own  powers,  but  by  the  mediation  of  the  Redeemer,
let  the  Messenger  say,  in  interceding  for  this  man  under
the  rod,  Let  him  return to  the  days  of  his  youth. And
because,  as  our  Redeemer  intercedes  to  the  Father  in  our
behalf,  we  ourselves  shake  off  the  torpor  of  our  former  life,
and  are  inflamed  with  a  thirst  for  prayer,  it  is  well  added
of  ransomed  man,

Ver.  26.  He  si  tail  pray  unto  God,  and  He  will  be  favour-
able unto  him.

9.  He  says  that  the  Messenger  implores  first,  and  man v.
afterwards; for  did  not  the Lord first  intercede  with the
Father  through  His  Incarnation,  and  pray  for  our  life,  our
insensibility  would  never  rouse  itself  to  ask  for  those  things
which  are  eternal. But  the  entreaty  of  His  Incarnation  came


56  Godly  sorrow  prepares  for  inexpressible  joy.

Job  33,  first,  that  our  awakeninfif  from  sloth  might  afterwards  follow.

26.  .

'- —  But  because  the  light  of  truth  bursts  forth  witli  secret  joy  in  our

hearts,  after  temptations,  and  frequently  after  great  griefs,  it
is  rightly  added  of  this  man  thus  tempted,  and  imploring
God,

And  he  shall  see  his  face  in  exnllalioii.
^'-  10.  It  was  stated  above,  how  God  bears  us  down'  by  mani-

festing Himself  to  us.  But  it  is  now  stated  how  He  cheers  us,
while  He  thus  makes  Himself  known.  For  a  man  hath  com-
punction in  one  sort,  when  on  looking  within  he  is  frightened
with  dread  of  his  own  wickedness,  and  in  another  when  on  look-
ing at  heavenly  joys  he  is  strengthened  with  a  kind  of  hops  and
security. The  one  emotion  excites  tears  of  pain  and  sorrow,

jubiium  the  other  tears  of  joy.  For  it  is  called  exultation,  when  joy
unspeakable  is  conceived  in  the  mind,  a  joy  which  can  neither
be  concealed,  nor  yet  expressed  in  words,  ii  beiraj's  itself
however  by  certaiii  motions,  though  not  expressed  in  any  suit-
able words.  And  hence  David  the  Prophet,  on  seeing  that  the
souls  of  the  P^lect  conceive  a  joy  too  great  for  them  to  bring

Ps.  89,  out  in  words,  declares,  Blessed  is  the  people  that  knotceth
exultation.  For  he  says  not  "  that  speaketh,"  but  "  that
knovveth,"  because  exultation  can  be  known  in  the  understand-
ing, though  it  cannot  be  expressed  in  words.  Fur  that  which
is  too  high  for  feeling,  is  felt  therein.  But  since  the  mind
of  him  who  feels  it  is  scarce  sufficient  for  its  contemplation,
hov/  can  the  tongue  of  the  speaker  suffice  to  tell  of  it?
Because,  then,  when  the  light  of  truth  pierces  our  hearts,  it
makes  us  at  one  time  full  of  sorrow,  from  its  display  of  strict
justice,  and  delights  us  at  another  by  disclosing  inward  joys:
after  the  bitternesses  of  temptations,  after  the  sorrows  of
tribulations,  it  is  fiily  subjoined.  He  shall  see  his.  face  in
exuUation.

\  1.  For  the  fire  of  tribulation  is  first  darted  into  our  mind,
from  a  consideration  of  our  own  blindness,  in  order  that
all  rust  of  sins  may  be  burnt  away.  And  when  the  eyes  of  our
heart  are  purged  from  sin,  tliat  joy  of  our  heavenly  home  is
disclosed  to  then?,  that  we  may  first  wash  awav  bv  sorrow
that  we  have  done,  and  afterwards  gain  in  our  transports  a
clearer  view  of  what  we  are  seeking  after.  For  the  inter-
veuii;g  mist  of  sin  is  first  wiped  away  from  the  eye  of  the


Face  of  God  seen  in  brief  and  imperfect  contemplation.  57

mind,  by  burning  sorrow ;  and  it  is  then  enlightened  by  tlie  Book
bright  coruscations  of  the  boundless  light  swiftly  flashing  ^^^^-
upon  it.  At  which  sight,  seen  after  its  measure,  it  is  absorbed
in  a  kind  of  rapturous  security ;  and  carried  beyond  itself,  as
though  the  present  life  had  ceased  to  be,  it  is  refreshed  in  a
manner  by  a  kind  of  new  being.  The  mind  is  then  be-
sprinkled with  the  infusion  of  heavenly  dews  from  an  inex-
haustible fountain.  It  there  discerns  that  it  is  not  sufBcient
for  that  enjoyment,  to  which  it  has  been  hurried,  and  from
feeling  the  truth,  it  sees- that  it  does  not  discern  how  great
that  truth  is.  And  it  covmts  itself  to  be  further  removed  from
tins  truth,  the  nearer  it  approaches  to  it,  because  unless  it
beheld  it  in  a  certain  degree,  it  v/ould  never  feel  that  it  was
unable  really  to  behold  it.

12.  Tlie  effort  therefore  of  the  mind  is  driven  back,  when
directed  towards  it,  by  the  bright  encircling  of  its  boundless
nature. For  filling  all things with  itself,  it encircles all
things ;  and  our  mind  does  not  expand  itself  to  comprehend
that  boundless  object  which  encircles  it,  because  the  imper-
fection of  its  own  circumscribed  state  keeps  it  within  narrow
bounds. It  accordingly  falls back  at  once to  itself,  and
having  seen as  it  were  some traces  of  truth  before  it,  is
recalled  to  a  sense  of  its  own  lowliness. But  yet  this  un-
substantial and hasty  vision,  which results  from contem-
plation, or  rather,  so  to  speak,  this  semblance  of  a  vision,  is
called  the  face  of  God. For  we,  who  recognise  a  person  by
his  face,  not  unnaturally  call  the  knowledge  of  God,  His
face. Whence  Jacob  says,  after  he  had  struggled  with  the
Angel,  /  Jiave  seen  the  Lord  face  to  face. As  though  heGen.32,
were  to  say,  I  know  the  Lord,  because  He  Himself  has  deigned '
to  know  me. But  Paul declares  that  this  knowledge  will
take  place  most  comnletelv  in  the  end,  when  he  says,  Then\  Cor.
shall  I  know,  even  as  f  am  knou/i. Because  then,  after  the ' '
contests  of  labours,  after  the  waves  of  temptations,  the  soul  is
often  caught  up  in  rapture,  in  order  that  it  may  contemplate
a  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Presence,  (a  Presence  vvliich  it
can  feel,  but  which  it  can  never  fully  enjoy,)  it  is  well  said
of  this  man  who  is  tempted,  after  his  many  labours,  He  will
see  Hi^face  in  exultation. But  because  the  more  a  man  con-
templates heavenly things, the more does  he amend his


58 The  llKjhteousncss  of  Man  restored  through  Redemption.

Jou  33,  earthly  doings,  after  the  grace  of  contemplation  he  fitly  adds
-^ — the  righteousness  of  his  doings.

And  He  will  render  to  man  his  righteousness.
vii. 13.  It  is  called  our  righteousness,  not  as  being  of  our-
selves, but  as  made  ours  by  the  Divine  bounty :  as  we  say
Matt.  6,  in  the  Lord's  prayer.  Give  us  this  dmj  our  dnilij  bread. See

L 'ke  ^^'*^  ^°^^^  ^^^^  ^^  °^^^'^'  ^"^  ^^^  "^^^^  ^^^  ^*  ^°  ^^  given  us.  For
11,3.  it  becomes  ours,  when  we  receive  it:  but  yet  it  is  God's,
because  it  is  given  by  Him.  And  it  is  therefore  God's,  as  of
His  gift,  and  it  becomes  truly  ours,  by  virtue  of  our  accept-
ing it.  It  is  in  this  way  then  that  God  in  this  place  renders
to  man  his  righteousness:  not  that  which  he  had  of  himself,
but  that  which  he  received,  having  been  so  created  as  to  have  it;
and  in  which,  having  fallen,  he  would  not  continue.  God  there-
fore will  render  to  man  that  righteousness  unto  which  he  was
created,  that  he  may  take  delight  in  clinging  to  God^  that
he  may  dread  His  threatening  sentence,  that  he  may  no
longer  trust  the  alluring  promises  of  the  crafty  serpent.

14.  For  our  ancient  enemy  ceases  not  daily  to  do  the
very  same  thing  which  he  did  in  Paradise.  For  he  endea-
vours to  pluck  out  the  words  of  God  from  the  hearts  of  men,
and  to  plant  therein  the  false  blandishments  of  his  own
promising.  He  day  by  day  softens  down  the  threatenings
of  God,  and  invites  to  the  belief  of  his  false  promises.  For
he  falsely  promises  temporal  blessings,  to  soften  down  in
men's  minds  those  eternal  punishments  which  God  threatens.
For  when  he  promises  the  glory  of  this  life,  what  else  does  he
Gen. 3  ^o  but  say.  Taste,  and  ye  shall  be  as  gods?  As  if  he  said
^-  plainly,  Lay  hold  on  worldly  desires,  and  appear  lofty  in  this

world. And  when  he  endeavours  to  remove  the  fear  of  the
Divine  sentence,  what  else  does  he  say  but  the  very  words  he
Gen.  3,  used  to  our  first  parents.  Why  hath  God  commanded  you  that
^'  ye  should  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  paradise  ? But  because

man  has,  by  the  Divine  gift,  recovered  on  his  redemption  that
righteousness,  which  he  lost  long  since  after  his  creation,  he
exerts  himself  more  vigorously  against  the  allurements  of
crafty  persuasion,  because  he  has  learnt  by  experience  how
obedient  he  ought  to  be  to  the  Divine  command.  And  him
whom  sin  then  led  to  punishment,  his  own  punishment  now
restrains  from  sin:  in  order  that  he  may  be  the  more  fearful


*  MevH  used  in  bad  sense,  or  else  as  opposed  to  beasts. 59
of  offending,  the  more,  throngh  the  fear  of  punishment,  he  Book

X.  ^  J  V  •


blames  the  evil  he  has  done. Whence  it  follows,

Ver.  27. He  ivill  look on men,  and  will  say,  I  have  .
sinned.

15.  He  would  not  know  himself  to  be  a  sinner,  if  he  had viii.
not  righteousness. For  no  one  detects  his  own  deformity,
except  when  he  has  begun  to  be  upright. For  he  who  is
altogether  deformed,  cannot  perceive  what  he  reall}^  is. But
he  who  is  conscious  that  he  is  a  sinner,  has  begun  in  some
measure  to  be  righteous ;  and  from  being  righteous,  blames
his  conduct  when  yet  unrighteous. And  by  this  accusation
of  himself  he  begins  to cleave to  God; when,  passing  a
righteous sentence against himself,  he condemns  that  in
himself,  which  he  perceives  to  be  displeasing  to  Him. This
man  then,  having  regained  his  righteousness,  exclaims,  /  have
sinned. And  the  expression  which  precedes  deserves  notice.
He  will  look  on  men;  and  it  is  then  subjoined,  and  will  say,
I  have  sinned. For  some  persons  know  not  that  they  have
sinned,  because  they  do  not  observe  men. For  were  they  to
obsene  men,  they  would  more  readily  acknowledge  how  much
they  had  fallen  beneath  men  by  sin. And  though  Holy  Scrip-
ture is  sometimes  accustomed  to  put  "  men"  for  those  who
savour  the  things  of  men,  as  the  Apostle  says.  For  whereas  i  Cot.  s,
there  is  among  you  envying  and  strife,  are  ye  not  carnal,  '
immediately  subjoining,  Are  ye  not  men? Yet  sometimes
it  calls  those '  men,'  whom  reason  distinguishes from the
beasts,  that  is, whom it shews to be vmaifected by  the
bestial  influence  of  passions. To  whom  the  Lord  says  by
the  Prophet, Ye,  the  flock  of  3Iy  pasture,  are  men. ForEz.  34,
the  Lord  in  truth  feeds  them,  whom  carnal  pleasure  does  not
affect  as  it  does  the  beasts. But,  on  the  other  hand,  tliey
who  yield  to  the  desires  of  the  flesh,  are  no  longer  called
men,  but  beasts. As  is  said  by  the  Prophet  of  some  who
were  dying  in  their  sins.  The  beasts  rotted  in  their  dung''.  Joel  I,
For  for  beasts  to  rot  in  their  dung,  is  for  carnal  men  to  finish
their  life  in  the  filth  of  lust. For  they  are  said  to  be  no
longer  men,  but  beasts,  of  whom  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,
Every  one  was  neighing  after  his  7icighbour''s  wife; and  ofJer.3,8.
whom  another  Prophet  says,  Their  Jlesh  is  as  the  flesh  of^L.  23,
»  E.  V.  The  seed  is  rotten  under  their  clods.


60 Good  men's  lives,  Books  to  direct  and  judge  others.

Job  33,  nsses,  and  their  issue  the  issue  of  horses.  And  hence
Pg  '  It  IS  said  by  David,  3Ia7i,  when  he  was  in  honour,  did  not
20.  understand,  he  has  been  compared  to  senseless  beasts,  and
made  like  to  them.  Since  then  those  are  called  men,  who
are  supported  by  reason  and  justice,  and  those  are  termed
irrational  animals,  who  are  slaves  to  carnal  pleasure,  it  is  Avell
said  of  this  penitent.  He  will  look  on'  tnen,  and  iiill  say,
I  have  sinned.  As  thougli  it  were  said.  He  beholds  the
examples  of  holy  men,  and  considering  himself  in  comparison
with  them,  he  discovers  that  he  is  sinful.  For  if  a  person  is
desirous  of  most  completely  learning  his  real  character,  he
ought  no  doubt  to  look  at  those  who  are  different  from  him-
self: that  from  the  comeliness  of  the  good  he  may  measure
the  extent  of  his  own  deformity,  by  that  of  the  goodness  he
has  Jeft.  For  by  those  who  possess  every  good  quality  in
abundance,  he  rightly  considers  of  what  he  is  in  want.  And
he  beholds  in  their  beauty  his  own  deformity,  Avhich  he  is
able  to  endure  within  himself,  but  not  to  perceive.  For  a  man
who  wishes  to  judge  of  darkness  ought  to  look  at  the  light,  in
order  to  see  by  it  what  to  think  of  that  darkness,  by  which  he
is  prevented  from  seeing.  For  if  a  sinner  looks  at  himself,
without  having  learnt  the  character  of  the  righteous,  he  in
no  way  comprehends  himself  to  be  a  sinner.  For  he  cannot
really  see  himself;  for  not  knowing  the  brightness  of  the
light,  what  else,  on  looking  at  himself,  does  he  behold  but
darkness }  We  ought  then  to  look  at  the  conduct  of  the
righteous,  in  order  to  gain  an  accurate  knowledge  of  our  own.
For  what  they  seem  to  be,  is  proposed  as  a  kind  of  model  for
our  imitation.

16.  The  life  of  good  men  is  a  living  study ;  whence  the
same  righteous  men  are  not  undeservedly  termed  books  in
Ilev.20, the  language  of  Scripture;  as  it  is  written.  The  Books  were
^^'  opened,  and  another  Book  icas  opened,  which  is  the  Book  of
Life;  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which
were  written  in  the  Books.  For  the  Book  of  Life  is  the  very
sight  of  the  approaching  Judge.  In  this  are  written  as  it
were,  all  His  commands,  for  whoever  beholds  it,  soon  under-
stands by  the  testimony  of  conscience  what  he  has  omitted
to  do.  The  Books  also  are  said  to  be  opened,  because  the
conduct  of  just  men,  in  whom  the  commands  of  heaven  are


Kids  of  the  Church  f ted  among  lilies  of  good  example. Gl

seen  impressed  in  act,  is  then  made  manifest. And  the  dead  Book

were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  are  written  in  the  ^^ *

Books;  becaiise  in  the  conduct  of  the  righteous,  whicli  is  set
forth,  they  read  as  in  an  open  book  the  good  which  they
refused  to  do  tliemselvcs,  and  are  condemned  on  comparison
with  those  who  did  it. In  order  therefore  that  each  one  then
beholding  them  may  not  lament  his  own  omissions,  let  him  now
observe  in  them  what  he  should  imitate. And  this  the  Elect
do  not  cease  to  do. For  they  study  the  conduct  of  their
belters,  and  leave  off  their  more  depraved  course  of  conduct,
17.  And  hence  in  the  Song  of  Songs  it  is  said  to  Holy
Church  by  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  Thy  two  breasts  areSoiom.
like  two  twill  kids  of  the  she  goat,  which  feed  among  ^/<<?  4.5:6,
lilies,  until  the  day  breathe,  and  the  shadows  incline. For
what  are  the  two  breasts,  except  the  two  peoples  coming
from Jewry  and from among  the Gentiles, who  are  im-
planted  in  the  body  of  Holy  Church,  by  the  purpose  of
wisdom,  upon  the  secret  of  the  heart. And  they  who  are
elected  from  these  people,  are  compared  to  the  young  of  the
she-goat,  because  they  are  conscious  through  their  humility
that  they  are  weak  and sinful ; but  if  any  obstacles  meet
them  in  the  way  of  worldly  impediment,  as  they  are  hastening
on  by  the  power  of  love,  they  bound  over  them,  and  with  the
leaps  of  contemplation  climb  to  the  knowledge  of  heavenly
things. And  in  order  to  do  this,  they  study  the  examples  of
the  Saints  who  have  gone  before. Whence  they  are  said  to
feed  amongst  the  lilies. For  what  is  meant  by  lilies,  but  the
conduct  of  those  who  say  with  all  truth.  We  are  unto  God  a^Cor.^,
sweet  savour  of  Christ  ? The  Elect,  therefore,  in  order  to  ^^*
gain  strength  to  attain  the  highest  eminence,  feed  themselves
to  the  full  by  beholding  the  sweet-scented  and  pure  life  of
the  just. They  even  now  thirst  to  know  tlie  Lord,  they  burn
with  the  fires  of  love,  to  be  satiated  with  the  contemplation
of  Him. But  because  they  are  unable  to  do  so  while  still  in
this  life,  they  feed  meanwhile  on  the  examples  of  the  fathers
who  preceded  them. And  hence  the  time  of  their  feeding
on  the  lilies  is  appropriately  defined  by  the  words,  Until  the
day  breathe,  and  the  shadoivs  incline. For  as  long  as  we  are
passing  along  the  shades  of  this  mortal  state,  till  the  dawn  of
the  eternal  day,  we  need  to  be  refreshed  with  the  examples


62 Sinners  to  be  shamed  by  shewing  them  the  life  of  the  good.

Job  S3,  of  the  righteous. But when the shade of  this temporal

-—  corruption  has  inclined,  when  this  mortal  state  has  passed

away,  because  we  behold  the  light  of  the  day  itself  within  us,
we  do  not  seek  to  be  kindled  with  the  love  of  it  by  the
examples  of  others.  But  now,  since  we  cannot  as  yet  behold
it,  it  is  specially  necessary  for  us  to  be  roused  by  looking  at
the  conduct  of  those  who  have  followed  it  perfectly.  Let  us
see  then  how  beauteous  is  the  activity  of  those  who  pursue
their  course,  and  learn  how  disgraceful  is  the  sloth  of  the
sluggish.  For  as  soon  as  we  behold  the  conduct  of  the
v-irtuous,  do  we  condemn  ourselves  with  the  punishment  of
confusion  within.  Shame  presently  assails  the  mind ;  soon
does  guilt  condemn  us  with  just  severity:  and  we  are  sore
displeased  even  with  that,  in  which  perchance  we  still
disgracefully  feel  pleasure.
Ez.  43,  18.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  Ezekiel,  Son  of  man,  shew
the  temple  to  the  house  of  Israel,  that  they  may  be  confounded
by  their  iniquities,  and  measure  the  fabric,  and  blush  for  all
that  they  have  done.  For  the  temple  of  God  is  shewn  to  the
children  of  Israel  to  their  confusion  ;  when  it  is  shewn  to
sinners  to  their  confusion,  with  what  great  sanctity  the  soul  of
each  righteous  person  shines  forth,  which  God  inhabits  by
His  inspiration  ;  in  order  that  they  may  see  therein  the  good
which  they  slight,  and  blush  in  themselves  at  the  evil  which
they  commit.  But  to  measure  the  fabric,  is  accurately  to
weigh  the  conduct  of  the  righteous.  But  while  we  measure
the  fabric,  we  must  needs  blush  at  all  that  we  have  done :
because  the  more  accurately  we  consider  and  enquire  into
the  conduct  of  the  good,  the  more  severely  do  we  reprove  in
ourselves  all  our  iniquity.  But  the  Prophet  is  rightly  told,
to  shew  the  temple.  For  since  a  sinner  makes  shifts  not  to
consider  the  righteousness  of  the  just,  he  should  learn  it
at  all  events  by  the  voice  of  the  preacher.  But  to  shew  the
temple  to  sinners,  is  to  relate  the  deeds  of  the  virtuous  to
those  who  refuse  to  consider  them  of  their  own  accord.
They  then,  as  we  said,  who  desire  to  attain  to  the  highest
eminence,  must  necessarily  always  attend  to  the  progress  of
their  superiors,  in  order  that  they  may  condemn  their  own
fault  with  greater  severity,  as  they  behold  in  them  a  higher
object  of  admiration.


I


Gifts  varied  that  each  may  be  humbled  by  his  wants. 63

19. But  why  do  wc  sav  this  of  sinners,  when  we  see  the  Book

workers  of  righteousness  themselves  also  carried  forward  with  ^— '

so  high  a  dispensation  ?  For  one  receives  the  gift  of  wisdom,
and  vet  reaches  not  the  grace  of  extraordinary  abstinence.
Anoth.er  is  endowed  with  great  power  of  abstinence,  but  yet
is  not  enlarged  in  the  loftiest  contemplation  of  wisdom.
Another  is  able  to  foresee  all  future  events  by  the  spirit
of  prophecy :  but  yet  cannot  alleviate  the  evils  of  present
annoyance,  by  the  gift  of  healing.  Another  by  the  gift  of
healing  alleviates  the  evils  which  immediately  annoy  us,  but
yet,  from  not  possessing  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  is  ignorant
of  the  future.  Another  is  able  to  give  liberally  to  the
indigent  much  of  what  is  his  own,  but  yet  cannot  boldly
confront  the  evil  doers.  Another  boldly  confronts  evil
doers,  in  God's  behalf,  but  yet  refuses  to  give  all  his  goods
to  the  needy.  Another  by  already  constraining  Iximself  even
from  idle  talk,  subdues  the  wantonness  of  the  tongue,  but  yet
does  not  trample  down  the  emotions  of  anger  which  still  rise
within  him.  Another  now  perfectly  controls  his  rising  passion,
but  still  allows  his  tongue  full  range  in  pleasantry.  What  is  it
then,  that  this  man  needs  that  good  quality,  in  which  another
is  strong,  and  that  another,  though  powerful  in  many  ways,  yet
sighs  for  the  lack  of  those  excellencies,  which  he  observes
others  abundantly  enjoying?  Except  it  be  that  we  are  so
dealt  with  by  a  marvellous  dispensation,  that  by  means  of
this  which  another  enjoys,  and  this  man  has  not,  the  one  may
be  shewn  to  be  superior  to  the  other :  so  that  the  more  a  man
considers,  from  tlie  virtues  which  he  has  not,  that  he  is
infeiior  to  those  tliat  possess  them,  he  may  the  more  eagerly
advance  towards  humility.  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that
while  they  behold  in  each  other  something  to  admire,  their
separate  virtues  both  keep  them  from  loftiness  of  pride,  and
kindle  in  them  a  desire  after  gi-eater  progi-ess.  For  we
prepare  ourselves  with  gi-eat  anxiety  to  undert<ike  our  own
improvement,  when  we  observe  in  others  that  virtue  which
we  have  not  ourselves.  Whence  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  when
he  had  described  the  flving  animals,  subjoined,  And  I  heardEz.3,
behind  me  a  voice  of  a  great  commotion,  saying.  Blessed  be  "  '  '
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  from  His  holy  place,  and  the  sound  of
the  trings  of  the  living  creatures,  striking  one  against  the


64 Holy  Creatures  stirred  up  hi)  each  other's  wings.

Job  33,  other. For  what  must  we  understaud  by  the  wings  of  living

'- —  creatures, but  the  virtues  of  the  Saints  ? For when  they

despise  the  things  of  earth,  they  rise  on  their  wings  to
Is.  40,  heaven.  Whence  it  is  rightly  said  by  Isaiah,  Theij  icho
trust  in  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength,  iliey  shall  take
wings  as  eagles.  The  flying  creatures  then  strike  one
another  with  their  wings,  because  the  minds  of  the  Saints,  in
their  desires  after  heavenly  things,  are  urged  on  by  the
mutual  consideration  of  each  other's  virtues.  For  a  man
strikes  me  with  his  wing,  who  kindles  me  with  desire  of
better  things  by  the  example  of  his  own  holiness.  And
I  strike  with  my  wing  the  next  living  creature,  if  ever
I  present  to  another  person  a  good  deed  for  him  to
imitate.

20.  But  since  we  have  said  that  the  conduct  of  holy  men
is  signified  by  these  living  creatures,  let  us  raise  our  eyes  to
the  light,  and  consider  attentively  with  Avhat  mutual  beating
of  their  wings  they  excite  each  other.  For  Paul,  when  he
surpassed  the  carefulness  of  other  holy  men,  by  labouring
more  vigorously  in  preaching,  that  he  might  keep  himself
from  pride,  and  nourish  his  strength  in  the  bosom  of
humility,  declares  in  remembrance  of  his  former  cruelty,  and

1  Cor. on contemplating the  innocence  of  all the  Apostles,  For
15)  9- I  am  the  least  of  the  Apostles,  that  am  not  meet  io  he  called

an  Apostle,  hecause  I  persecuted  the  Church  of  God.  And
primus,  yet  the  chief  of  these  same  Apostles,  as  though  in  forgetful-
pat^V ^^^^ of  the  preeminence  conferred  on  him,  as  if  he  wei'e

endowed  with  less  wisdom,  admires  the  wisdom  which  was  in

2  Pet. Paul,  saying,  As  our  most  helored  hrother  Paul  also,  according
' ■ to  the  tcisdom  given  unto  liim,  hath  uritten  unto  you,  as  also  in

all  his  Epistles,  speaking  in  them  of  these  things;  in  ichich
are  some  things  hard  io  he  understood.  Lo,  Paul  admires
innocence  in  the  Apostles;  lo,  the  chief  of  the  Apostles
admires  wisdom  in  Paul.  What  then  is  this,  except  that
holy  men  who  mutually  prefer  others  to  themselves,  from  a
consideration  of  their  virtues,  as  flying  animals  touch  each
other  with  the  stroke  of  their  wings,  in  order  that  they  may
excite  each  other  to  higher  flights,  the  more  humbly  they
observe  something  in  each  other  to  admire  ^  We  must
therefore  infer  from  hence  how  anxiously  we,  who  are  lying


Bad  men  feed  pride  by  viewing)  bad  examples. 05

in  the  lowest  depth, should  study  the lives  of  those  who Book

are  om*  superiors  ;  if  even  they,  who  have  already  arrived  at — '- '-

such  a  height  of  sanctity,  are  ever  looking  out  for  something
to  admire  and  imitate  in  others,  in  order  that  by  walking  in
humility  the}'  may  advance  to  greater  things.

21.  But  of  these  things  the  reprobate  are  ignorant:  for
they  ever  fix  their  eyes  on  the  lowest  objects.  And  if  ever
they  come  into  the  way  of  the  Lord,  they  proceed  not  to  trace
the  footsteps  of  those  who  are  better,  but  always  to  look  at
the  examples  of  those  who  are  worse  than  themselves.  Nor
do  they  look  at  the  conduct  of  those  to  whom  they  may  humbly
consider  themselves  inferior,  but  of  those  to  whom  they  may
proudly  prefer  themselves.  For  they  look  at  those  who  are
worse  than  themselves,  to  whom  they  boast  that  they  are  pre-
ferable, and  therefore  they  cannot  advance  to  better  things,
because  they  consider  it  sufficient  for  them  that  they  surpass
the  very  worst.  Wretched  men  !  they  go  on  in  their  way,
and  yet  look  backward.  In  their  hope  indeed  they  do  as  it
were  put  a  foot  before ;  but  in  looking  to  evil  examples  they  turn
their  eyes  behind  them.  They  are  anxious  to  appear  upright,
but  take  a  crooked  standard  by  which  to  find  that  they  are
such.  For  if  they  wish  to  know  themselves  as  they  really
are,  they  should  look  at  the  examples,  not  of  those  who  are
worse,  but  of  such  as  are  better,  than  themselves.  And
therefore  they  are  not  conscious  that  they  are  sinners,
because  they  do  not  look  at '  men.'  For  were  they  to  look  at
men,  they  wovdd  discover  how  far  removed  they  were  from
good  men,  by  their  sins.  Of  this  penitent  then,  who  con-
siders the  examples  of  good  men,  in  order  to  make  it  clear
to  himself  how  grievously  he  has  departed  from  goodness,  it
is  well  said,

Ver.  27.  He  will  look  on  men,  and  will  say,  I  have
sinned,  and  have  truly  done  tcrong,  and  I  have  not  received
as  I  deserved.

22.  Those  even  who  do  not  believe  that  they  have  sinned,  ix.
generally  confess  themselves  sinners.  For  it  is  frequently
the  case,  that  men  openly  confess  themselves  sinners,  but  on
hearing  a  true  account  of  their  sins,  when  other  persons
attack  them,  they  boldly  defend  themselves,  and  endeavour
to  appear  innocent. Every  one,  then,  of  this  character,  if  he

VOL.  III.  F


66 Sin  confessed  feignedly  in  general,  and  out  of  trial.
Job  33,  says  that  he  has  sinned,  speaks  untruly  ; inasmuch  as  he


'— proclaims  himself  a  sinner  not  from  the  inmost  heart,  but  in

Prov. -words  onlv. For  since  it  is  written,  The  just  man  in  the
18 17  '  •'  i/

'  '  heginnlng  acciiseth  himself'',  he  wished  to  gain  credit,  not  to
be  humbled,  by  confessing  his  sin  :  he  desired,  b}-  accusing
himself,  to  appear  humble,  without  being  so.  For  did  he
really  wish  to  be  humble,  by  confessing  his  sin,  he  would
not  attack  others  when  convicting  him  of  the  commission  of
it.  The  righteous  then,  in  passing  sentence  on  his  own
conduct,  knows  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  by  the
examples  of  holier  men,  that  he  really  is  what  he  professes
to  be.  For  he  says,  /  have  sinned,  and  have  truly  done
wrong.  And  adds  further  of  the  very  pain  which  he  is
enduring,  and  have  not  received  as  I  deserved.

23.  For  every  one  when  under  the  rod,  thinks  still  less  of
his  sins,  if  he  considers  that  he  has  been  smitten  either  as,
or  more  than,  he  deserved.  But  this  man,  because  the  more
he  considers  the  examples  of  greater  men,  the  more  strictly
does  he  weigh  and  test  hinTself,  acknowledges  that  he  was
smitten  less  than  he  deserved.  Because  he  sees,  from  their
righteousness,  how  heinous  is  the  guilt  of  his  own  erring,  and
does  not  feel  his  suffering  to  be  severe,  from  having  learned
to  pass  a  severe  sentence  on  his  own  conduct.  But  it  is  very
easy  for  a  man,  when  suffering  nothing  on  account  of  his  sins,
to  confess  himself  a  sinner.  We  fearlessly  call  ourselves  un-
righteous, when  we  feel  no  vengeance  for  our  unrighteous-
ness. P'or  in  a  time  of  tranquillity  we  call  ourselves  sinners,
but  when  chastened  for  these  very  sins,  by  the  blow  which  falls
on  us,  we  murmur.  Punishment  then  puts  us  to  the  test,
whether  we  truly  acknowledge  our  fault.  Let  a  righteous
man  then,  from  regarding  his  fault  severely,  say,  even  under
the  rod,  /  have  not  received  as  I  deserved. It  follows,

Ver.  28.  For  he  hath  delivered  his  soul  from  going  onwards

to  destruction.

X. 24.  Because  when  Divine  Grace  goes  before  us  in  good

works,  our  free  will  follows  it,  we,  who  yield  our  consent  to

God  Who delivers us,  are said  to  deliver  ourselves ;  and

1  Cor. hence  Paul  when  saying,  /  laboured  more  abundantlg  than

' ' they  all,  for  fear  he  should  seem  to  ascribe  his  labours  to

*  E.  V.  He  that  \s  first  in  his  orvn  cause  seemei\i  just.


Grace  and  free  will. Lujhl  how  seen. Alternalions. 67

himself,  immediately  added,  Yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  Rook

... XXIV
which  was  tilth  me. For  since  he  had  followed  with  his  free-  ~ '

will  the  preventing  grace  of  God  in  him,  he  properly  adds,

with  me,  that  he  might  neither  be  unthankful  for  the  Divine

gift,  nor yet remain  a  stranger  to  the merit of  free-will.

But  of  him,  who  by  gaining  a  knowledge  of  himself  consented

to  Him  Who  set  him  free,  he  rightly  saysS  He  hath  delivered^^-'^^i^f^^

Ms  said  from  going  onwards  to  destruction. It  follows,  said.

But  that  it  should  live,  and  see  the  light.

That  is  to  say,  the  light  of  truth,  which  he  could  not  see

when  dead  in  heart. Or  certainly,  because  the  Lord  has

said,  /  am  the  Light  of  the  tcorld,  even  the  dead  also  shall  John  8,

behold  the  hght,  when  all  the  ungodly  shall  have  seen  Him

coming  to  judgment  in  the  form  of  Manhood. But  he  lives,

or  beholds  the  light  at  that  time,  who  has  the  eyes  of  his

heart  set  free,  and  beholds  Him  in  the  form  of  the  Godhead.

It  follows,

Ver.  29.  All  these  things  God  worketh  three  times  with

every  man.

25.  Of  this  man  tempted  and  beaten  by  the  scourge  it  had xi.

been  said  before.  His  bread  becomes  abominable  to  him  in  his  ver.  22.

life,  and  his  soul  hath  drawn  7iigh  to  corruption,  and  his  life

to  the  destroyers. But  it  was  subsequently  added,  He  shall

pray  unto  God,  and  He  will  be  favourable  unto  him,  and  Ae  ver.  26.

will  see  His  face  with  joy ;  and  lie  hath  delivered  his  soid

from  going  onward  to  destruction,  but  that  it  should  live,  and

behold  the  light. In  these  expressions,  then,  now  collected

and  accumulated  together,  the  bitterness  of  sorrow  precedes,

the  joy  of  security  comes  after. And  it  is  presently  added,

All  these  things  God  worketh  three  times  with  every  man.

As  if  he  were  to  say.  What  I  have  said  once  of  one  person

only,  takes  place  three  times  in  every  person. But  we  must

carefully  consider  what  are  these  three  times,  wherein  each

man  is  affected  with  anxiety  and  sorrow,  and  is  immediately

after  soitow  called  back  to  the  security  of  joy.  For,  as  I  before

said,  he  had  stated  above,  that  grievous  sorrow  first  depresses  -  2  afficit

us,  and  that  great  dehght  raises  us  up  afterwards. If  we

watch  then  attentively,  we  find  that  these  three  stages  of

sorrow  and  joy  succeed  each  other,  in  the  mind of  each

f2


08 Paiu  foUoiced  by  joy  three  times;  first  in  Conversion.
Job  33,  of  the  Elect,  in  these  following  ways,  that  is  to  sav,  in  his

29.  .  .  .  .

^—conversion,  his  temptation,  and  his  death.

26.  For  in  that  first  occasion  of  conversion,  which  Ave  have
mentioned,  great  is  the  sorrow  of  a  man,  ',vhen,  from  con-
sidering his  own  sins,  he  wishes  to  burst  the  fetters  of
worldly  cares,  and  to  walk  in  the  way  of  God  along  the
course  of  a  secure  conversation,  to  cast  aside  the  heavy
burden  of  temporal  anxieties,  and  to  bear  the  light  yoke
of  the  Lord,  in  a  bondage  akin  to  freedom.  For  as  he  thinks
on  these  things,  there  occurs  to  his  mind  that  old  familiar
carnal  pleasure,  which,  from  having  become  inveterate,  binds
him  the  closer,  the  longer  it  has  held  him  ;  and  is  the  more
loath  to  permit  him  to  escape.  And  then  what  pain  is  there,
and  what  anxiety  of  heart,  when  the  Spirit  calls  him  on  one
side,  the  flesh  calls  him  back  on  the  other,  his  love  for  his
new  life  invites  him  on  the  one  hand,  his  old  depraved
habits  assail  him  on  the  other:  on  the  one  side  he  glows  with
longings  for  his  heavenly  country,  and  on  the  other  has
to  bear  in  himself  that  desire  of  the  flesh,  which  pleases  him
to  a  certain  degree,  even  against  his  will }  Of  a  man  thus
embittered  it  is  rightly  said,  His  bread  becomes  abominable
to  him  in  his  life,  and  his  soid  hath  drawn  near  to  corruption,
and  his  life  to  the  destroyers.  But  because  Divine  Grace
does  not  suffer  us  to  be  long  exposed  to  these  difficulties,
it  bursts  the  chains  of  our  sins,  and  leads  us  quickly  by  its
consolation  to  the  liberty  of  our  new  life ;  and  the  joy  which
succeeds  makes  up  for  the  former  sorrow.  And  thus  the
mind  of  every  one  when  converted  rejoices  the  more  on
attaining  its  wishes,  the  more  it  remembers  the  pain  it
has  endured  in  its  endeavours  after  them.  Unbounded  is
the  joy  of  the  heart:  because  in  its  hope  of  security  it  now
draws  near  to  Him,  Whom  it  desires  ;  so  that  it  can  rightly
be  said  of  it, He  shall  ^iray  unto God,  and  He  will  be

favourable  unto  him,  and  he  shall  see  His  face  with  joy.
Or  wdthout  question,  He  hath  delivered  his  soul  from,  going
onwards  to  destruction,  but  that  it  shoiUd  live,  and  see  the
light.

27.  But  for  fear  a  man  should  believe  himself  holy  imme-
diately on  his  conversion,  and  security  should  overthrow  him,


The  same  again  experienced  in  Temptation.  G9

whom  the  contest  with  pain could not overpower,  he is  Book

permitted,  in  the  dispensation  of  God,  after  his  conversion, -*

to  be  wearied  witli  the  assaults  of  temptations.  The  lied
sea  was  already  crossed  by  his  conversion,  but  enemies  still
oppose  him  to  the  face  while  in  the  wilderness  of  this  present
life.  We  leave  already  our  past  sins  behind  us,  as  the
Egyptians  dead  on  the  shore.  But  destructive  vices  still
assail  us,  as  fresh  enemies  to  obstruct  the  way  on  which  we
have  entered  to  the  land  of  promise.  Our  former  offences,  as
enemies  who  were  pursuing  us,  have  been  already  laid  low
by  the  power  of  God  alone.  But  the  assaults  of  temptations
meet  us  to  our  face  like  fresh  enemies,  to  be  overcome  with
our  own  endeavours  also.  Conversion  in  truth  produces
security  :  but  security  is  commonly  the  parent  of  negligence.
To  keep  security  from  generating  carelessness,  it  is  written,
My  son,  in  coming  to  the  service  of  God,  stand  in  justice  a«f/Ecclus.

2 1

fear,  and  prepare  thy  soul  for  temptation.  For  he  says,  not  '
for  rest,  but  for  temptation,  because  our  enemy  is  the  more
eager  to  conquer  us  as  long  as  we  are  in  this  life,  the  more
he  discerns  that  we  are  I'ebelling  against  him.  He  cares  not
to  buffet  those,  of  whom  he  perceives  that  he  can  hold  quiet
possession.  But  he  is  excited  the  more  vehemently  against
us,  inasmuch  as  he  is  expelled  from  our  hearts,  as  if  from
the  rightful  possession  of  his  own  habitation.  It  was  this,
which  the  Lord,  in  a  kind  of  economy,  typified  in  His  own
person."  For  he  did  not  permit  the  devil  to  tempt  Him  till
after  His  Baptism :  suggesting  to  us  thereby  as  a  kind  of  sign  Mat.  4,
of  our  own  future  conversion,  that  His  members  would  have  *
to  endure  more  severely  the  wiles  of  temptation,  after  they
were  beginning  to  advance  Godwards.  After  the  first  oc-
casion then  of  sorrow  and  joy,  which  every  one  feels  in  his
endeavour  after  conversion,  does  this  second  time  suc-
ceed. Because  a  man  is  assaulted  with  the  attack  of
temptations,  in  order  that  he  may  not  become  relaxed  by
the  carelessness  of  security.  And  he  is  generally  welcomed
with  great  sweetness  of  consolation,  at  the  beginning  of
his  conversion,  but  he  experiences  afterwards  the  severe
labour  of  probation.

28.  There  are  in  truth  three  states  of  the  converted ;  the
beginning, the middle, and the perfection. But in this


70 God's  dealing  in  conversion  like  His  wedding  Israel.

Job  33,  commencement  they  experience  the  charms  of  sweetness,  in
'■ — the  mid-lime  the  contests  of  temptations,  but  in  the  close  the


plenitude  of  perfection.  Sweets  then  are  first  their  portion,
to  comfort,  afterwards  bitternesses  to  exercise,  and  at  last
transcendent  delights  to  confirm  them.  For  every  man  too  first
soothes  his  bride  with  sweet  blandishments,  though  he  tries
her  when  now  united  to  him,  with  sharp  reproofs,  and  pos-
sesses her,  when  she  is  proved,  with  thoughts  of  security.  And
hence  also  the  people  of  Israel,  on  being  summoned  out  of
Egypt,  when  God  betrothed  Himself  to  the  sacred  marriage
of  the  soul,  was  vouchsafed  at  first,  in  the  place  of  pledges,
the  allurement  of  miracles ;  but,  after  marriage,  is  exercised
with  trials  in  the  wilderness,  and  after  trial,  is  confirmed  in
the  laud  of  promise  with  the  plenitude  of  virtue.  It  first
then  lasted  in  the  miracles  that  which  it  was  to  seek  for;
afterwards  it  was  tried  by  hard  trial,  to  prove  whether  it
could  keep  safely  what  it  had  tasted ;  and  at  the  last  it  also
deserved  to  obtain  a  fuller  enjoyment  of  that,  w^hich  it  had
kept  safe  when  pvit  to  the  test  of  suffering.  A  gentle  com-
mencement therefore  thus  soothes  the  life  of  every  convert,
a  rugged  course  proves  it  in  the  way,  and  after\Nards  full
perfection  gives  it  strength.

29.  For  converts  are  frequently  granted  either  the  most
perfect  tranquillity  in  the  flesh,  or  the  gifts  of  prophecy,
or  the  preaching  of  doctrine,  or  signs  and  wonders,  or  the
grace  of  healing,  immediately  on  their  first  commencement.
But  after  this  they  are  harassed  by  the  severe  trials  of
temptations,  from  Avhich,  when  they  first  began,  they  believed
themselves  entirely  free.  And  it  is  thus  ordained  in  the
dispensation  of  Divine  Grace,  to  keep  them  from  being
assailed  with  sharp  temptations  at  their  first  beginning.  For
if  bitter  temptations  were  to  befal  them  at  the  first,  they
would  fall  back  with  ease  on  the  sins  they  had  abandoned,
as  having  removed  but  a  little  distance  from  them.  For
they  would  be  again  involved  from  their  very  nearness,  in
the  sins  they  first  despised.  Whence  it  is  also  written,
Exodus  When  Pharaoh  had  let  the  people  no,  the  Lord  led  them

13 17  M. I ^ J

'  ■  not  through  the  tcay  of  the  land  of  the  Pliilisdnes,  which  is
near,  thinking  lest  perhaps  they  wonld  repent,  if  they  had
seen  war  rising up against them,  and. might  return to


Comfort  granted  Jirst  to  prepare  for  trial.  71

Egypt. War'  then  is  removed  out  of  the  way  of  those  who  Book
were  coming  out  of  Egypt:  because,  to  those  who  leave  the  ^^^^-
world,  there  is  presented  at  first  a  kind  of  tranquillity,  lest<beUa'
from  being  alarmed  in  the  tenderness  of  their  first  beginning,
they  should  return,  through  fear,  to  that  world  from  which
they  have  escaped. They  feel,  then,  first  the  sweetness  of
security,  they are first nurtured in quietness and  peace.
But  having  tasted  this  sweetness,  they  endure  more  patiently
the  contests  with temptations,  as  they  have  found  in  God
a  higher  object  of  affection. Whence also Peter is first  Mat.i7,
led  up  into  the  mountain,  first beholds  the brightness of^'
the  Lord's transfiguration,  and then  is  afterwards suffered
to  be  tempted  by  a  maid  who  questioned  him;  in  order  that,  Mat.26
having  become  conscious  of  his  state  by  his  weakness  under  ^^•
trial,  he  might  recur  with  sorrow  and  love  to  the  sight  which
he  had  beheld;  and  that,  when  the  wave  of  fear  was  sweeping
him  onwards  to  the  ocean  of  guilt,  there  might  be  an  anchor
of  former  sweetness,  to  keep  him  back. But  the  struggles
with  temptations  frequently  last  as  long,  as  the  allru'ements
on  the  first  commencement. But  frequently  there  is  greater
pleasure  given  at  first,  and  less  trial  in  the  season  of  labour:
and  frequently  again  less  pleasure  at  first,  and  greater  trial  in
the time  of  labour. But a  disjDroportionate perfection  of
strength  never  succeeds  the  labour  of  temptation :  because
every one is rewarded with the plenitude  of  perfection,
according to the result of  the contest. But a convert
commonly  fails,  from  believing  that  he  has  received  the  con-
firmation of  perfection,  when  he  is  welcomed  with  certain
gifts  of  grace,  in  the  sweetness  of  his  first  beginning:  and,  from
not  knowing  that  they  are  only  the  comforts  given  to  beginners,
he  regards  them  as  the  consummation  of  fulness. Whence
it  happens,  that  if  assailed  by  any  sudden  storm  of  temptation,
he  suspects  that  he  is  overlooked  by  God,  and  lost  for  ever.
But  if  he  were  not  to  place  such  full  reliance  on  his  first
commencement,  he  would,  when  still  prosperous,  be  preparing
his mind for adversity, and would afterwards resist the
assaults  of  sin  with  the  more  firmness,  as  having  also  foreseen
them  with  greater  sagacity. For,  by  foreseeing  these  evils,
he  bears  them  with  greater  calmness. But  though  he  fore-
sees, he  does  not  at  all  decline  the  contest  with  them,  for  the


72 Temptations  he/ore  unknotcnfelt  after  cotiierdon.

Job  33,  course  of  our  journey  is  not  brought  to  a  close  witliout  going

'- —  through  the  dust  of  temptation.

30.  But  every  convert  is  generally  assailed  with  such
temptations,  as  he  never  remembers  to  have  been  attacked
with,  before  the  grace  of  conversion :  not  because  this
same  root  of  temptation  did  not  then  exist,  but  because  it
did  not  shew  itself.  For  the  mind  of  man,  when  engaged
with  numberless  thoughts,  frequently  remains  in  a  man-
ner unknown  to  itself,  so  as  to  be  quite  ignorant  of  what
it  is  suffering:  for  while  it  is  distracted  with  many  matters,
it  is  diverted  from  the  inward  knowledge  of  itself.  But  if  it
desires  to  have  leisure  for  thinking  upon  God,  and  lops  off
the  branches  of  distracting  thought,  it  then  beholds  without
obstruction,  that  which  springs  forth  from  the  inmost  depths
of  the  flesh.  For  if  a  thistle  is  growing  in  the  road,  it  is
crushed  by  the  feet  of  those  who  journey  along  it,  and  its
surface  is  worn  away  by  the  constant  passing  of  travellers,  so
as  not  to  appear.  But  though  llie  thorns  do  not  shew  them-
selves- above  and  bear  fruit,  yet  the  root  still  remains  con-
cealed beneath.  But  if  the  feet  of  travellers  have  ceased  to
bruise  and  tread  it  down,  whatever  living  power  remained
buried  in  the  root  soon  rises  to  the  surface,  and  shews  itself.
It  advances  in  its  growth,  and  comes  into  view  by  the  thorns
that  it  bears.  So  also  in  the  heart  of  the  worldly  minded,
some  secret  root  of  temptations  seems  to  grow  up  with  diffi-
culty;  for  placed  as  it  were  in  the  pathway  of  daily  life,  it  is
crushed  by  the  feet  of  thoughts  which  pass  over  it,  and  is  so
trodden  down  by  countless  cares,  as  if  by  many  travellers,
as  not  to  be  seen.  But  if  the  crowd  of  anxieties  is  removed
by  the  grace  of  conversion  from  the  pathway  of  the  heart,  so
that  no  importunity  of  business  wears,  nor  any  tumultuous
thoughts  oppress  it,  then  that  which  was  before  concealed
is  discerned,  then  the  thorn  of  temptation,  springing  from  the
root  of  sin,  freely  inflicts  its  wound.  But  the  hand  of  the
righteous  so  acts  against  it,  that,  as  far  as  may  be,  it  is  not
covered  and  concealed,  but  torn  up  by  the  very  roots.  But
till  this  is  done,  this  thorn  so  troubles  the  mind  of  every
convert,  that  he  frequently  feels  as  if  nearly  overwhelmed  by
sudden  temptation,  and  fears  that  its  wound  has  been
inflicted  with  fatal  effect  to  the  very  quick.


Joy  (jlren  again  after  Hie  pains  of  iemplation. 73

31.  But  these  assaults  of  temptation  are  frequently  pro-  Book
longed  when  they  become  common,  and  become,  not  sharper.  "


but  of  longer  duration.  And  then  they  cause  less  pain,  but
do  more  hurt:  for  the  longer  they  keep  hold  of  the  mind,
the  less  ternible  do  they  become,  the  more  usual  they  are.
The  mind  therefore,  when  involved  in  these  trials,  is  dis-
tracted here  and  there,  and  is  confused  by  the  manifold
assaults  of  temptations,  and  frequently,  when  summoned  from
one  point  to  another,  it  knows  not  which  assailing  sin  to
oppose,  or  which  first  to  assault  itself  It  is  hence  frequently
the  case  that,  while  rebellious  sins  severely  torture,  while
they  drive  to  the  very  brink  of  desperation  the  mind  of  the
person  who  withstands  them,  a  convert  is  afraid  of  this  very
heavenward  path,  which  he  chooses  as  a  remedy,  and  that
he  stumbles,  as  it  were,  when  brought  to  the  summit,  who
used  to  stand  more  firmly  at  the  bottom.  But  he  is  so  hard
pressed  by  the  movements  of  temptations,  which  rage  around
him,  that  it  may  be  rightly  said  of  him.  His  bread  becomes 'f^'^-'^^-
abominable  to  him  in  his  lije^  and  to  his  soid  the  food  ivhich
before  it  desired ;  or  without  question.  His  soid  hath  drawn
near  to  corruption^  and  his  life  to  the  destroyers.  But  be-
cause God  in  His  meixy  suffers  us  to  be  proved  by  ourprobari
temptations,  not  to  be  cast  away,  (as  it  is  written,  But  God  is\^^ri.
faithful,  who  does  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  y^\^^^'
are  able,  but  will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  icay  to
escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it,)  He  speedily
succours  us  with  the  aid  of  consolation,  assuages  the  rising
pangs  of  temptations,  and  calms  with  inward  peace  the
emotions  of  the  thoughts  which  rise  up  against  Him.  And
then  the  mind  soon  derives  great  delight  from  its  hope  of
heaven,  on  beholding  the  evil,  which  she  had  endured,
overpowered.  So  that  of  this  man  tempted  and  delivered  it
may  be  justly  said,  He  shall  see  His  face  with  joy ;  and,  He
hath  delivered  his  soid  from,  going  onward  to  destruction,
but  that  it  shoidd  live  and  behold  the  light.  When  these
two  stages  then,  that  is  of  conversion  and  probation,  have
been  passed  in  sorrow  and  in  joy,  there  yet  remains  the  third,
whose  sorrow  he  has  still  to  fear,  and  whose  jileasures
he  has  to  obtain.

32.  For  after  the  struggle  of  conversion,  after  the  pain  of


74 Tlie  Elect  fear  the  Judge  for  sins  they  do  not  know.

Job  33, probation, there  still  remains  a  hard  temptation;  because
'- — he  cannot  arrive  at  the  joys  of  perfect  liberty,  without  the


debt  of  human  nature  is  first  paid. But  every  convert,  being
careful and anxious for himself, ceases not to consider
secretly  with  himself,  with  what  strictness  the  eternal  Judge
is  coming,  and  he  daily  looks  forward  to  his  own  end,  and
before  the  approach of  such severity  of  justice,  considers
what  account  he  will  have  to  render  for  his  conduct. For
though  he  has  avoided  all  evil  deeds,  which  he  could  tell  to
be  such,  yet  as  having  to  come  before  a  strict  Judge,  he  is
the  more  afraid  of  those  faults,  of  which  he  is  not  conscious
in  himself. For  who can  understand how  many  evils  we
commit every instant, by the irregular motions of our
thoughts? For  it  is  easy  enough  to  avoid  deeds  of  wicked-
ness, but  very  difficult  to  cleanse  the  heart  from  unlawful
Micah thoughts. And  yet  it  is  written,  Woe  to  you  who  think  on*
Bom  2  '^*^^  which  is  unprofitable. And again.  In  the  day  when
16. the  Lord  shall  Judge  the  secrets  of  men,  after  having  said
ib.  15. before, Their  thoughts  mutually  accusing  or  excusing  one
Ps.  12,  another. And again, Crafty lips  in  heart,  and  in  heart
2;58,2.  ^^g,y  /lave  spoken  evil. And  again,  For  in  your  heart  ye
xoork  iniquity  on  the  earth. But  when  the  soul  has  once
forsaken  the  stability  of  eternity,  and  has  sunk  down  to  the
instability  of  temporal  things,  it  is  obliged  against  its  will
to  endure,  in  endeavouring  to  rise,  that  fluctuation  of  alter-
nating emotions,  which  it  sought  of  its  own accord when
willing to fall. And thus it is punished by its former
pleasures,  because  it  endures,  as  converted,  the  labour  of
the  contest,  in  the  very  same  things  in  which  it  sought  while
perverted  the  delight  of  pleasure. And  frequently  that  very
sin,  which  they  skilfully  detect  in  themselves,  and  of  whose
grievous  guilt  they  are  conscious  in  the  sight  of  God,  steals
into  the  thoughts  of  the  Elect  against  their  will. And  though
they  are  ever  afraid  of  a  strict  judgment  for  all  these  things,
thfjy  then  especially  dread  it,  when  on coming  to  pay  the
debt  of  nature,  they  see  that  they  are  drawing  near  the  severe
Judge. And  their  fear  is  the  more  acute,  the  nearer  their
eternal  retribution  approaches. But  no  empty  imagination
from  the  fancy  of  the  thought  flits  at  that  time  before  the  eyes
of  the  heart :  because  when  every  thing  else  has  been  removed.


Even  saints  meet  death  nith  fear  of  Judyment. 75

they  think  of  themselves  only,  and  of  Him,  Whom  they  are  Book

approaching. Their fear increases,  as the retribution of- ■'

righteousness  approaches  nearer. And  as  the  dissolution  of
the  flesh  is  liastening  on,  the  more  the  strict  judgment  comes,
as  it  were,  within  their  reach,  the  more  mightily  is  it  dreaded
by  them. And  though  they  never  remember  to  have  passed
over  the  things  they  know,  they  are  yet  afraid  of  those  sins  of
which  they  are  ignorant. Because,  namely,  they  ai-e  unable
fully  to  understand,  and  pass  sentence  on  themselves,  and,
as  their  end  draws  nigh,  they  are  harassed  by  more  subtle
fear. Whence  our  Redeemer,  approaching  His  dissolution,
and  maintaining  a  resemblance  to  His  members,  fell  into  an
agony,  and  began  to  pray  at  greater  length. For  what  could
He  be  asking  for  Himself  when  in  agony,  W^ho  used,  when
on  earth,  to  confer  heavenly  gifts  with  power  ? But  on  the
approach  of  death,  He  represented  in  His  own  person  the
struggle  which  exists in our  minds ; who suffer  a  violent
fear  and  dread,  on  approaching,  through  the  dissolution  of
the  flesh,  to  the  eternal  judgment. Nor  is  a  man's  mind  at
that  time unseasonably  alarmed,  when  it finds,  after  this
brief  state  of  being,  that  it  must  remain  unchanged  for  ever.
33.  For  we  consider,  that  we  have  by  no  means  been  able  to
pass  through  the  course  of  this  present  life  without  guilt. We
consider  also,  that  even  what  we  have  done  creditably,  is  not
exempt  from  a  degree of  guilt,  if  we  are  judged  without
mercy. For  who  of  us  can  surpass  or  even  equal  the  doings  pietate
of  the  fathers  who  have gone  before  us  ? And  yet  David
says,  Enter  not  into  Judgment  with  Thy  servant,  for  in  Thy^^- 143,
sight  shall  no  man  living  be  Justified. Paul  when  saying,
/  am  conscious  of  nothing  to  myself,  cautiously  added,  Yet  ^  ^or.
am  I  not  hereby  Justified. James  says,  For  in  many  things  j'amea
we  offend  all. John  says.  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  tee  ^'l^j^^^
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us. What  will  i,  8.
then  the  planks  do,  when  the columns  tremble  ? Or  how
will the shrubs remain unmoved,  if  even the  cedars  are
shaken  with  the  whirlwind  of  this  fear  ? The  soul  then  even
of  the  righteous  is  frequently  disturbed  with  the  dread  of
punishment,  as  it  approaches  the  dissolution  of  the flesh.
And  though  it  may  have  tasted  some  tranquillity  in  this  life,
it  is  staggered  when  the  instant  of  its  death  comes  on ;  so


76  The  third  stage,  of  death,  ends  likewise  in  joij.

Job  33,  that  it may be rightly said of  him, His bread  becomes

— '-^—abominable  to  him  in  his  life^  and  to  his  soul  the  food  ivhich

before  it  desired. Or  certainly,  on  account  of  the  punishment

of  fear,  that  wliich  is  there  subjoined,  His  soul  hath  drawn

near  to  corruption^  and  his  life  to  the  destroyers.

34.  But  because  the  souls  of  the  righteous  are  frequently
purified,  through  the  mere  fear  of  death,  from  every  trifling
pollution,  and  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  eternal  recompense
from  the  very  moment  of  the  dissolution  of  the  flesh;  nay
very  often  they  rejoice  at  the  sight  of  the  inward  recom-
pense, even  before  they  are  stripped  of  the  flesh;  and  because
even  while  paying  the  debt  of  their  old  nature,  they  enjoy  the
satisfaction  of  the  new  gift,  it  is  therefore  rightly  said,
He  shall  see  His  face  with  Joy.  Or  certainly,  He  hath
delivered  his  soul  from  going  onward  to  destruction,  but
that  it  should  live  and  see  the  light.  The  soul  of  the
righteous  beholds  the  face  of  God  with  joy,  because  it  feels
so  much  of  inward  happiness,  as  it  can  scarce  contain  even
wdien  taken  up  to  God.  It  therefore  lives  there  and  beholds
the  light,  because  it  fixes  its  spiritual  gaze  on  the  rays  of
the  eternal  sun.  It  lives  there  and  beholds  the  light,  be-
cause having  trampled  under  foot  all  the  vicissitudes  and
shadows  of  mutability,  it  clings  to  the  reality  of  eternity.
And  by  clinging  thus  to  Him  Whom  it  beholds,  it  attains  to
a  resemblance  of  His  unchangeableuess,  and  as  it  gazes  at
the  unalterable  nature  of  Him  Who  made  it,  it  assumes  it  to
itself.  For  that  which  has  fallen  through  its  own  act  into  a
state  of  change,  is  transformed  to  an  unchangeable  condition
by  beholding  the  U»changeable.  Eliu  therefore,  because  he
first  spoke  of  the  bitterness  of  sorrow,  and  afterwards  of  the
joy  of  consolation,  fitly  added  of  this  man  thus  afilicted  and
thus  delivered.  All  these  things  God  worketh  three  times
in  every  man,  that  is  to  say,  in  conversion,  in  probation,  and
in  death.  For  in  these  three  states,  a  man  first  suffers  under
sharp  pangs  of  sori'ow,  and  is  afterwards  comforted  by  great
pleasures  of  security.  But  because  the  mind  of  each  of  the
Elect  suffers  in  each  of  these  three  stages,  that  is,  in  the
pain  of  conversion,  the  trial  of  probation,  or  the  dread  of
dissolution,  and  is  purified  and  set  free  by  this  very  suffering,
it  is  appropriately  added,


Light  of  the  luiny. Vain  Eliii  recurs  to  Iris  pride. 77
Ver.  30. IJiat  he  may  recal  their  souls  front  corruption,  Book

•  • •  XXIV

and  enlighten  them  uitJi  the  light  of  the  living.  '

35.  For  tliat  is  the  light  of  the  dying  which  we  behold  xii.
with  our  bodily  eyes.  But  they  who  still  live  for  this  world,
are  in  darkness  in  the  light  of  the  dying.  But  they  are
enlightened  with  the  light  of  the  living,  who  despising  the
light  of  the  world,  return  to  the  splendor  of  the  inward
brightness,  that  they  may  live  in  that  place  where  they  may
see,  by  feeling  it,  the  true  light,  where  light  and  life  are  not
different  from  each  other,  but  where  the  light  itself  is  life
also ;  where  the  light  so  encircles  us  from  without  as  to  fill
us  within ;  and  so  fills  us  within,  as,  being  itself  uncircum-
scribed,  to  circumscribe  us  without.  They  are  enlightened
therefore  with  this  light  of  the  living,  which  they  behold  at
that  time  the  more  clearly,  the  more  purely  they  now  live  by
its  aid.

3C=  Eliu  has  uttered  great  and  very  powerful  words.  But  it
is  a  characteristic  of  every  boastful  person,  that,  while  giving
utterance  to  truths  and  mysteries,  he  suddenly  blends  with
them,  through  pride  of  heart,  some  foolish  and  proud  ex-
pressions. For  he  endeavours  to  please  the  world  without,
in  that  which  he  thinks  with  truth  ;  and  is  soon  despoiled  of
the  truth,  just  as  through  haughtiness  of  pride  he  goes
back  from  what  is  inward.  For,  because  he  seeks  to  be
approved  of  outwardly  as  a  man  of  learning,  he  loses  inwardly
the  fulness  of  wisdom,  in  which  he  was  instructed.  Whence
also  Eliu,  (who,  as  we  have  often  said,  represents  the
arrogant,)  having  put  forth  many  profound  and  wise  sayings,
as  soon  as  he  has  uttered  these  sentiments  of  truth  and
mystery,  is  elated  by  being  puffed  up  with  pride  at  his
wisdom.  And  as  his  pride  rightly  deserved,  his  feeling
soon  vents  itself  in  empty  words.  For  he  subjoined,
saying,

Ver.  31 — 33.  Attend,  O  Job,  and  hearken  unto  me,  and
hold  thy  peace  while  I  speak.  But  if  thou  hast  any  thing  to
say,  answer  me ;  speak:  for  I  wish  thee  to  appear  just.  But
if  thou  hast  not,  hearken  unto  me;  hold  thy  peace,  and  I
will  teach  thee  wisdom.

37.  He shews what opinion he  has  of  himself  by  this xiii.
expression  in  which  he  says,  Attend,  0  Job,  and  hearken


78  Eliu  feignedhj  asks  Job  to  answer  him.

Job  33,  unto  me,  and hold  ihy  peace while  I  speak. For it is

■  enormous  pride  to  exact  respect  from  one's  elder, and to

impose  silence  on  one  better  than  one's  self.  But  because
holy  preachers,  wlien  reproving  others,  frequently  turn  back
to  their  own  inmost  thoughts,  through  the  grace  of  humility,
and  seek  to  ascertain  if  perchance  they  are  mistaken,  in  the
very  thing  which  they  reprove,  and  give  those,  whom  they
reprove,  the  liberty  of  stating,  in  their  own  behalf,  whatever
they  think  more  just,  haughty  men  also  sometimes  wish  to
imitate  this  plan.  For  putting  aside,  for  a  while,  their  pride
in  words,  they  seek  for  a  justification  of  those  whom  they  Ve-
prove,  if  perchance  they  are  able  to  find  one.  Not  because
it  is  their  real  feeling,  but  they  wish  to  set  thenaselves  off  by
a  show  of  humility.  For  they  are  afraid  of  appearing  to  be
proud  and  haughty,  because  they  are  so.  Whence  Eliu
immediately  subjoined,  saying,  But  if  thou  hast  any  thing  to
say,  answer  me ;  speak,  for  I  wish  thee  to  appear  just.  But
because  he  did  not  say  this  sincerely,  he  did  not  wait  to  hear
that  which  he  had  asked  for.  For  he  added  immediately.  But  if
thou  hast  not,  hear  me;  hold  thy  peace,  and  I  ttill  teach
thee  wisdom.  For  those  who  sincerely  seek  to  hear  what  is
just,  patiently  wait  to  hear  what  they  seek  for.  But  Eliu,
because  he  did  not  sincerely  put  forth  the  words  of  request,
did  not  allow  his  question  to  be  answered,  but  immediately
burst  forth  with  that,  of  which  he  vras  full  within,  and  shewed
how  he  stood  in  his  own  eyes,  by  saying.  Hold  thy  peace,
and  I  will  teach  thee  tcisdom.  For  when  proud  men  say
any  thing  which  has  a  humble  sound,  they  do  not  long
remain  in  the  semblance  of  this  same  humility.  If  they  per-
chance ask  to  have  an  answer,  they  immediately  avoid
being  instructed,  by  beginning  to  speak;  because  the  desii'e
of  display  which  springs  up  from  its  root  in  the  heart  soon
checks  the  words  which  they  had  spoken  superficially.  And
they  soon  prove  that  this  form  of  humility,  which  they  have
assumed  in  appearance  only,  is  foreign  to  their  character,  by
being  unable  any  longer  to.  maintain  it.  Behold  how  Eliu,
when  he  seeks  to  learn  righteousness,  offers  to  teach  it.
Behold  how  his  tongue,  in  seeming  to  enquire  for  what  is
just,  had  spoken  in  humble  strain.  But  it  was  soon  unable
to restrain his swelling consciousness of  pride. For  he


Haughty  ways  of  uttering  even  good  matter.  79

added immediately, Hold thy  peace, and I will teach  Book

thee  wisdom. But  because  haughty  men  are  puffed  up  by *

swelling  pride  in  what  they  say,  and  placed,  as  it  were,
on  high,  assume  the  appearance  of  learned  men,  just  as  if
their  words  were  poured  forth  from  heaven  by  a  kind  of
condescension,  over  undeserving  persons,  a  verse  is
rightly  inserted  by  the  writer  of  this  history,  in  order  to
observe,

Chap, xxxiv. 1. Elin  also  pronounced  and said these
things  likewise.

38.  For  what  is  meant  by  this  word  "  pronounced"  but  the  xiv.
puffing  up  of  pride  .?  in  order  that  his  words,  which  spring  fi-om
the  deep  root  of  pride,  might  come  forth  as  it  were  with  a
degree  of  majesty  and  distinction.  It  is  thus  in  truth  that
all  men  of  aiTogance  are  wont  to  speak.  For  they  bring  forth
with  a  kind  of  assumption  that  which  they  believe  they  have
gained  a  special  understanding ;  and  perhaps  are  preaching
humility  at  the  very  time,  when  they  are  giving  an  example
of  haughtiness  by  being  puffed  up  with  pride.  And  hence  it  is
that  their  preaching  cannot  remain  consistent  with  itself;
for  by  their  perverse  pride  they  impugn  that  truth,  which  they
disseminate  when  they  speak  properly.  For  they  impart
their  words  to  their  humble  auditors,  not  as  if  entering  into
their  feelings,  but  as  if  barely  condescending  to  them.  For
they  consider  that  they  are  exalted  on  high,  and,  as  if  they
were  far  superior,  they  hardly  deign  to  turn  towards  their
hearers,  from  their  high  eminence,  a  glance  of  doctrine.  But
the  words  of  the  just  spring,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the
root  of  humility,  in  order  to  be  able  to  bear  the  fruit  of
piety  :  and  they  impart  whatever  sound  advice  they  can,  not
by  boasting,  but  by  sympathising  with  others.  For,  by
words  of  love,  they  so  put  either  themselves  into  the  place  of
their  hearers,  or  their  hearers  into  theirs,  as  if  their  hearers
were  teaching  by  their  aid  that,  which  they  are  being  taught,
and  they  were  learning  from  their  hearers  that,  which  they
are  putting  forth  and  teaching  themselves.  Let  us  hear
then  what  Eliu  says,  representing  as  he  does  the  boast-
ful, and  commencing  with  the  display  of  pronouncement.
It  follows,

Ver.  2,  3.  Hear  my  tvords,  O  ye  wise  men,  and  listen  to


80 Eliu  iioitld  haie  wise  men  hear,  then  accuses  falsely.

JoB34,?«e,  ye  learned. For  the  ear  irieth  uords,  and  the  throat
discerneth  meats  by  the  taste.


XV.  39.  As  if  he  were  to  say,  as  the  ear  does  not  discern
meats,  nor  the  throat  words,  so  a  fool  does  not  understand
the  sentence  of  the  wise.  Hear  therefore  what  I  say,  ye
wise  and  learned,  who  can  understand  the  meaning  of  what
has  been  said.  Let  us  see  then  how  great  is  his  pride,  who
imagines  that  his  words  can  be  fitly  heard  only  by  the  wise.
Rom.  i,But  the  true  preacher  of  wisdom  says,  /  am  a  debtor  both  to
^^'  the  wise,  and  to  the  umvise.  But  the  arrogant,  on  the  other
hand,  in  his  preaching  looks  only  for  the  eai's  of  the  wise.
And  this  not  because  he  preaches  for  the  purpose  of  making
men  wise,  but  he  seeks  for  wise  men,  in  order  that  he  may
proudly  display  his  sentiments.  For,  as  was  said  before,
he  does  not  seek  to  instruct  them,  but  to  dis2:)lay  himself.
Nor  does  he  consider  how  righteous  those  that  hear  him
become,  but  how  learned  he  appears,  when  listened  to  by
the  learned.  But  since  no  one  would  listen  to  the  preaching
of  the  proud,  if  they  did  not  throw  in  some  semblance  of
humility;  Eliu,  after  having  extolled  himself  with  swelling
words,  again  condescends,  as  it  were,  to  put  himself  on  a
level  of  equality  ;  saying,

Ver.  4.  Let  us  choose to us  judgment,  and let lis see
among  ourselves  what  is  the  best.
xvi. 40.  But  we  easily  learn,  by  considering  the  words  which
follow,  whether  he  sought  for  this  judgment  from  humility  of
heart. It  follows,

Ver.  5,  6.  For  Job  hath  said,  I  am  just,  and  God  hath
subverted  my  judgment. For  in  judging  me  there  is  false-
hood :  and  mine  arrotc  is  violent  without  any  sin.
See  He  complains  that  Job  had  spoken  these  things,  which  the

27, 2.  words  of  the  sacred  history  prove  on  examination  that  he
had  never  said.  But  he,  who  had  sought  for  a  judgment  on
equal  terms,  proceeds  to  promidgate  a  sentence  from  a  fault
of  his  own  invention. For  it  follows,

Ver.  7,  8.  What  man  is  like  Job,  who  drinketh  tip  scorn-
ing like  tcaler,  who  goeth  with  the  icorkers  of  iniquity,  and
walketh  with  wicked  men  ?

Behold,  in  seeking  a  judgment,  he  has  pronounced  a
judgment;  and  after  his  own  allegation,  without  waiting  for


The  proud  love  chiding. Holy  preachers  also  severe. 81

any  statement  of  blessed  Job,  he  condemned  him  as  descrv- Book

ing  of  condemnation  from  his  intercourse  with  the  wicked.  ^^ '

For  he  says,  What  man  is  like  Job?  Tliat  we  may  be  sure
to  understand,  No  one.  And  he  subjoins.  Who  drinkcth  vp
scorning  like  water.  For  water,  when  drunk,  is  so  liquid  a
draught,  that  it  is  not  kept  from  being  swallowed  by  any
clamminess  that  it  has.  But  to  drink  up  scorning  as  water,
is  to  mock  God  without  any  impediment  in  one's  thoughts,
so  that  no  fear  opposes  the  pride,  which  the  tongue  or  the
mind  displays.  But  how  far  this  judgment  of  his  upon
blessed  Job  errs  from  the  roadway  of  truth,  we  learn  from
that  solemn  declaration  of  God,  in  which  He  says  to  the
devil.  Hast  thou  considered  My  servant  Job,  that  there  z*  Job  1,8.
none  like  Mm  on  the  earth  ?  Behold  how  Eliu  declares  him
to  be  a  sinner  beyond  comparison,  whom  the  Truth  pro-
nounces to  be  righteous  beyond  comparison.  But  it  is  the
peciUiar  way  with  haughty  preachers,  that  they  are  more
desirous  of  strictly  reproving  their  hearers  even  when  dis-
ti*essed,  than  to  cherish  them  in  a  kindly  manner.  For  they
study  more  to  chide  and  reprove  faults,  than  to  encourage
goodness  with  praise.  For  they  are  anxious  to  appear
superior  to  other  people,  and  they  are  better  pleased  when
anger  raises  their  feelings  than  when  charity  brings  them
down.  They  ever  wish  to  find  something,  to  smite  sharply
with  reproof.  Whence  it  is  written.  In  the  mouth  of  the  Vrov.u,
foolish  is  a  rod  of  pride,  because  in  truth  he  knows  how  to  '
smite  sharply,  but  not  to  sympathize  with  humility.

41.  Holy  preachers  are  also  accustomed  to  reprove  their
hearers  with  sharp  words,  and  to  rage  with  strict  severity
against  their  sins :  as  it  is  written,  The  words  of  the  wise  are  Ecclea.
as  goads,  and  as nails  fastened  deep. But  their  words  ^^'  ^  '
are  rightly  called  nails,  since  they  do not know how to
handle  gently  the  sins  of  offenders,  but  how  to  pierce  theni
through. Were not the words of  John nails, when he
said,  O  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  shewed  you  to  flee  Matt.  3,
from  the  ivrath  to  conie? Were  not  the  words  of  Stephen''
nails,  when he said. Ye have always resisted the Holy  Acts  7,
Ghost? Were  not  the  words  of  Paul,  when  he  said,  O  sense-  Gal.  3
less Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched  you?  and  again  when  ^•
saying to the Corinthians,  For whereas there is ainongX^^'^'

VOL.  III.  G


82  Holy  preachers  acknowlechje  uhat  is  good  in  the  faulty.

Job  34,  you  envying  and  strife,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and icalk  according
~  ' to  man  ? But  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  look  carefully : for


when  righteous  preacliers  observe  on  the  other  hand  any
good  deeds  in  those  whom  they  reprove,  with  what  just
consideration  do  they  proceed  to  use  these  same  words  of
reproof.  Behold  !  Paul,  when  instructing  the  Corinthians,
and seeing  them guilty  of  the sin of  schism,  began by

1  Cor.  1,  saying,  /  thank  my  God  always  on  your  behalf ,  for the

■ ' grace  of  God,  v:hich  is  given  you  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  in

every  thing  ye  are  enriched  by  Him. He praised them

much  in  saying,  that  they  were enriched  in Christ  in  all

things. And,  lo  ! he  again  multiplies  his  soothing  expres-

1  Cor. i,sions,  by  saying.  In  all  utterance,  and  in  all  knowledge,  as
the  testimony  of  Christ  was  confirmed  in  you.  He  said,  the
testimony  of  Christ  was  confirmed  in  you,  as  though  they
had  carried  out  in  their  conduct,  what  they  had  learned
from  his  teaching. And  he  subjoined  just  after,  in  summing

iCor. i,up  their  praises,  So  that  nothing  is  wanting  to  you  in  any

''  grace,  waiting  for  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
I  pray  thee,  O  Paid,  inform  us  what  art  thou  aiming  at  by
these  numerous  words  of  favour? And,  lo!  it  follows  shortly

1  Cor.  1,  after,  But  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  mercy  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  that  ye  all  speak  the  same  thing,  and  that  there
he  no  schisms  among  you.  For  it  hath  been  signified  unto
me  of  you,  my  brethren,  by  them  which  are  of  Chloe,
that there are  contentions  among you. Of  which con-

1  Cor.3,  tentions  he  afterwards  added,  saying.  For  whereas  there  is
among  you  envying  and  strife,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and.  walk
according  to  man  ?  See  with  what  praises  he  comes  down  to
plain  words  of  reproof;  see  with  how  gentle  a  hand  of  kind-
ness he  has  opened  the  way  for  strict  rebuke  in  the  hearts  of
his  hearers  For  he  first  endeavoured  to  bind  the  arms  of
the  proud  by  the  bands  of  blandishments,  in  order  to  cut
afterwards  into  the  sore  of  their  pride  with  the  knife  of
correction.  The  Corinthians  in  truth  possessed  qualities
which  deserved  praise,  and  such  also  as  deserved  reproof.
The  skilful  physician  then  first  caressed  with  praises  the
sound  limbs  about  the  wound,  and  afterwards  pierced  with  a
blow  the  putrid  cavity  of  the  wound.  This  rule  of  teaching
has  its  weight  with holy  preachers  on either  side,  so  that


They  temper  severity  with  ctuirity  and  humility. 83

they  favour  and cheiisli what  is right,  and cut off'  with  Book

punishment  wliat  is  wrong.

42.  But  frequently  holy  preachers  too  strike  severely. But
it  is  one  thing  when  justice  urges  on,  another  when  pride
puffs  up. The  righteous,  when  severely  correcting,  do  not
lose the  grace  of  inward  sweetness. For  they  frequently
adopt  the  harshjiess of  strict  vigour,  in  order  to  keep  in
check  the  disorderly  passions  of  the  wicked,  but  they  melt
within  with  the  fire  of  charity,  and  glow  with  affection  towards
those,  against whom  they  are raging  with severe reproof.
And  they  humble  themselves  moreover  beneath  them  in  the
secret  of  their  heart  within,  while  they  seem to  scorn  and
chasten  them  in  the  sight  of  men  with  the  sharp  stings  of
punishment. But they frequently both despise by not
despising  them,  and  despair  by  not  despairing,  in  order  that
they  may  lead  them  to  fear,  and  to  shrink  back  the  more
speedily  from  sin,  the  more  they  point  out  to  them  that  the
pit  of  destruction  is,  as  it  were,  nearer  to  them. But  they
frequently  also  point  out  their  own  faults  to  their  disciples,
in  a  kind  of  graceful  temperament,  in  order  that  they  may  hear
and  learn,  how  strictly  they  censure  themselves  for  their  own
conduct. But  they  regulate  themselves  with  such  judgment,
as  not  to  be  severe  within,  even  when  they  exalt  themselves;
nor  again,  when  humbling  themselves,  outwardly  remiss :  for
they  keep  up  humility  in  their  discipline,  and  discipline  in
their  humility, Paul  maintained  discipline,  when  saying  to
the Corinthians,  For  whereas  there  is  ainong  you  envying  l  Cot. 3,
and  strife,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walk  according  to  man  ?
But  even  when  maintaining  discipline  he  lost  not  his  humility;
because  he  began  by  deprecation,  saying,  /  beseech  you,iCox.\,
brethren,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  that  ye  all  speak  the  same
thing,  and that there  be  no  schisms  among  you. Again
he  maintained  humility,  when,  on  speaking  somewhat  more
at  length  than  perhaps  he  had  wished  to  tlie  same  Corinthians,
he  reproves  himself,  saying,  I  am  become  a  fool. Yet  in  this  2  Cor.
humility  he  did  not  give  up  discipline,  since  he  immediately '
added,  Ye  have  compelled  me. He  exhibited  an  instance  of
great  humility,  when  he  said  to  his  disciples,  For  we  preach^CoxA,
not  ourselves,  but  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord;  and  ourselves  your'*'
servants  through  Christ. But  he  lost  not  in  this  humility

G  2


84 Haiiyhty  men,  imitating  seventy,  lose  gentleness.

Job  34,  the  justness  of  discipline,  for  lie  says  to  the  same,  offending,
f~^^' What  will  ye?  shall  I  come  to  yon  with  a  rod?  and  so  on.
21. Holy  preachers  therefore  well  know  how  to  regulate their
skill  in  teaching  by  moderation  on  either  side,  and  when
they  detect the faults of  offenders, they  have  the  art  to
reprove  severely  at  one  time,  and  humbly  to  deprecate  at
another. But  when  haughty  men  seek  to  imitate  them,  they
adopt  from  them  their  sharp  words  of  reproof,  but  know  not
how  to  adopt from them  with sincerity  the entreaties of
humility. For  they  are  better  able  to  be  terrific,  than  gentle ;
and  they  learn  accordingly  reasons  for  setting  themselves  up,
though  they  neglect  to  learn  humility. And  since  they  do
not  know  how  to  admonish  offenders  with  gentleness,  from
their  habit  of  being  over  severe in angry  invective,  they
let themselves loose even against  good doers. And  this
Eliu,  as  representing  such  persons,  does  not  comfort  Job,
but reproves him, saying. What man is like Job,  who
drinketh,  vp  scorning  as  wafer,  tvho  goeth  with  the  workers
of  iniquity,  and  tcalketh  with  wicked  men. And  because
pride  is  ever  a  stranger  to  truth,  he  presently  launches  out
even  in  falsehood,  saying,

Ver.  9.  For  he  hath  said,  A  man  will  not  please  God,
even  though  he  run  with  Him.
xvii.  43.  But  that  he  never  said  so,  every  one  acknowledges
who  reads  the  words  of  blessed  Job.  But  yet  what  wonder,
that  he  who  speaks  for  the  sole  pui'pose  of  proudly  setting
himself  off,  invents  something  to  find  fault  with  in  another
person  ?  For  how  can  he  adhere  to  truth  in  his  words  of
reproof,  whom  pride  of  mind  within  removes  far  away  from
the  same  truth  ? It  follows,

Ver.  10. Therefore  hearken  unto  me.  Ye  men  of  under-
standing.

Behold  again  that,  puffed  up  by  pride  and  haughtiness,  he
seeks  for  those  only  who  are  able  to  follow  him,  by  under-
standing  him  properly ;  and  thus  bursts  out  with  what  he
was  thinking  of,  saying,
impietas  Ver.  10,  11.  Let  umnercifulness  be  far  from  God,  and
iniquity  from  the  Almighty :  for  the  work  of  a  man  shall
He  render  unto  him,  and  ivill  restore  to  them  according  to
the  ways  of  every  man.


God's  judgment  right,  but  not  in  this  life  complete. 85

44.  He  well  said,  that  iniquity  or  unmercifulness  is  not  in  Book

.  XXIV

Almighty  God.  But  that  ^Yhich  he  added  is  by  no  means  always  —^-~-

the  case  in  this  life,  namely,  that  He  renders  to  each  man  ggg  j^^^

according  to  his  work,  and  according  to  his  own  ways. For  22,  12.

both  many  who  commit  unlawful  and  wicked  deeds  He  pre-  10.

vents  of  His  free  grace,  and  converts  to  works  of  holiness :  and

some  who  are  devoted  to  good  deeds  He  reproves  by  means

of  the  scourge,  and  so afflicts  those  who  please  Him,  as

tliough  they  were  displeasing  to  Him. As  Solomon  bears

witness,  saying,  There  are  just  men  to  whom  many  things 'Ecdea.

happen,  as  though  they  had  done  the  deeds  of  the  wicked; '

and  there  are  wicked,  ttho  are  as  secure  as  though  they  had

the  deeds  of  the  just. God  doubtless  so  ordains  it  of  His

inestimable  mercy,  that  both  scourges  should  torture  the  just,

lest their  doings should elate them,  and  that  the  unjust

should  pass  this  life  at  least  without  punishment,  because

by  their evil doings they  are hastening  onwards  to  those

torments,  which are  without  end. For  that  the  just  are

sometimes  scourged  in  no  way  according  to  their  deserts,  is

shewn  by  this  very  history  which  we  are  considering. For

the  same  blessed  Job  had  not  been  scourged  for  any  fault,

who  was  praised  by  the  attestation  of  the Judge  Himself

before  the  smarting  of  the  scourge.  Eliu  therefore  would  speak

more  truly,  if  he  had  said,  That  there  is  not  unmercifulness

and  iniquity  in  God,  even  when  He  seems  not  to  render  to

men  according  to  their  own  ways. For  even  that  which  we

do not understand, is brought forth from the righteous

balance  of  secret  judgment. But  because  haughty  preachers,

when  they  scatter  abroad  many  follies,  also  frequently  utter

many  things  that  are  true  and  solid,  l^liu  rightly  subjoins,

Ver.  12.  For  truly  God  icill  not  condemn  uithout  cause,

nor  will  the  Almighty  subvert  judgment.

45.  The  Lord said  to  the  devil, Thou  hast moved  Me xix.
against  him  to  ajflict  him  icithout  cause. But  Eliu  says,  job 2  3.
That  the  Lord  will  not  condemn  ivithout  cause. A  state-
ment which  is  believed  to  be  at  variance  with  the  words

of  Truth,  unless  weighed  with  careful  consideration.  For  to
condemn  is  one  thing,  to  afflict  another.  He  afflicts  there-
fore in  some  respect  without  cause,  but  does  not  condemn
without  cause. Had  He  not  atHictcd  Job  in  some  respect


86  Qod  Himself  governs.  How  He  draws  the  spirit  to  Himself.

Job  34,  without  cause,  since  siu  was  not  blotted  out,  but  merit
— '- — ^increased  thereby?  For  He  cannot  condemn  without
reason,  inasmuch  as  condemnation  cannot  take  place  partly
for  a  certain  purpose :  since  it  punishes  at  the  end  all  the
ungodliness  which  any  one  has  here  committed.  Nor  does
Almighty  God  subvert  judgment :  because,  although  our
sufferings  seem  to  be  unjust,  yet  they  are  rightly  inflicted  in
His  secret  judgment. It  follows,

V'er.  13.  Whom  else  hath  He  appointed  over  the  earth,  or
whom  hath  He  placed  over  the  icorld  which  He  hath  made?
XX.  46.  In  order,  namely,  that  thou  mayest  understand,  No  one.
For  He  governs  indeed  by  Himself  the  world  which  He
created  by  Himself:  nor  does  He  need  the  aid  of  others  in
governing.  Who  needed  it  not  for  creating.  But  these
points  are  brought  together,  in  order  that  he  might  plainly
point  out,  that  if  Almighty  God  does  not  neglect  to  govern
by  Himself  the  world  which  He  created.  He  most  certainly
governs  aright  that  which  He  created  aright;  that  He  does  not
order  in  unmercifidness  that  which  He  fashioned  in  mercy  ;
and  that  He  Who  provided  for  their  being  before  they  were
made,  does  not  forsake  them  after  their  creation.  Because
then  He  is  present  to  rule.  Who  was  the  First  Cause  at  their
creation.  He  therefore  does  not  omit  to  take  care  of  us.
Whence  also  he  fitly  subjoins,

Ver.  14.  If  he  hath  directed  his  heart  towards  Him^  He
will  gather  to  Himself  his  spirit,  and  his  breath.
xxi.  47.  The  heart  is  crooked,  when  it  seeks  for  things  below.
It  is  made  straight  when  it  is  raised  to  things  above.  If  a
man  therefore  direct  his  heart  to  the  Lord,  the  Lord  draws  to
Himself  his  spirit  and  his  breath.  He  uses,  namely,  spirit
for  inward  thoughts,  but  breath,  which  is  drawn  through  the
bod}',  for  outward  actions.  For  God,  then,  to  draw  the  spirit
and  breath  of  man  to  Himself,  is  for  Him  so  to  change  us
both  within  and  without,  to  turn  towards  Him  in  our  desires,
that  nothing  outward  may  any  longer  please  the  mind,  and
that  the  flesh  (even  if  it  wishes  it)  may  not  endeavour  to  attain
any  inferior  object;  but  that  the  whole  man  may  have  its
inward  desires  kindled  towards  Him  from  Whom  it  vsprings,
and  may  bind  itself  closer  to  Him  without,  by  self-control.
Whence  also  he  fitly  subjoin.s.


Carnal  life  dies  in  those  who  turn  tchnlly  to  God. 87

Ver.  15.  Alljlesh  shall  fail  together,  and  man  shall  return Book
to  ashes.  '— 1


48.  For  all  flesh  fails  together,  when  it  is  no  longer  a  slave  xxiii.
to  its  own  emotions ;  because  the  spirit  presiding  therein
restrains  all  its  waverings,  and  destroys  as  it  were  with  the
sword  of  Its  severity  all  evil  which  lived  therein.  Jeremiah
had,  in  truth,  slain  himself  with  this  sword  of  discipline,
when he said, After Tliou hadst converted me, I  did-^^^-^^y

19.

penance,  and  after  Thou  hadst  shewed  to  me,  I  smote
viij  thiyh.  For  what  is  understood  by  the  thigh,  but  carnal
pleasure .''  And  what  his  saying.  After  Thou  hadst  shewed
unto  me,  I  smote  my  thigh,  except  that  after  he  spiritually
beheld  heavenly  things,  he  extinguished  every  infirm  carnal
desire  which  used  to  live  in  him:  that  as  heav^enly  objects
opened  upon  him,  he  might  feel  less  pleasure  in  those  inferior
things  which  he  had  possessed?  For  the  more  a  man  begins
to  live  to  things  above,  does  he  begin  to  die  lo  things  below.
For  as  far  as  concerns  the  love  of  carnal  doings,  the  whole
flesh  of  Paul  had  perished  together,  when  he  said,  /  no  longer
live,  hut  Christ  liveth  in  me.  Gal.  2,

49.  Eliu  also  properly  subjoined  in  this  place,  And  man
shall  return  to  ashes. Vox  every  one  who  is  involved  in  sin,
forgets  his  mortal  condition,  and  while  he  is  still  puffed  up
with  pride,  remembers  not  that  he  is  earth. But  when,  after
the  grace  of  his  conversion,  he  is  touched  with  the  spirit  of
humility,  what  does  he  call  to  mind  that  he  is,  but  ashes  ?
David  had already  returned  to ashes,  when  he said.  Re-  Ps.  103,
member.  Lord,  that  ice  are  dust. And  Abraham  had  returned
to  ashes,  saying,  /  will  speak  to  my  Lord,  tJtouyh  I  am  dust  Gen.is,
and  ashes. And  though  death  had  not  yet  dissolved  their
living  flesh  unto  earth,  yet  in  their  own  opinion  they  were
that,  which  they  foresaw  without  doubt  they  were  about  to
be. Hence  it  is  said  in  another  place,  Thou  tcilt  take  away  P*.  104,
their  breath,  and  they  will  fail,  and  will  return to  their
dust. But  wliat  is  meant  by  their  breath,  but  the  breath  of
pride  ? Let  their  breath  then  be  taken  away,  that  they  may
fail; that  is,  feel  themselves  to  be  nothing  in  themselves,
when  the  breath  of  pride  is  withdrawn. And  let  them  return
to  dust,  that  is,  let  them  be  humbled  by  their  infirnj  con-
dition. It  is  on  account  oi  this  very  dust,  to  the  recollection


88  Man  '  brought  to  dusV  for  good. Eliii's  progress  in  pride.

Job  34,  of  which  those  are  recalled  who  consider  themselves,  that  it
is  said  by  Wisdom,  The  righteous  shall  shine,  and  shall  run


Wisd.s,  , ,.,

7.  to  and  fro  like  sparks  among  the  reeds. For  holy  men  while

they mix with sinners, kindle them by  the fire of their

example, and reduce to ashes all their brilliancy. For

consumed  by  the  flame  of  holiness,  they  discern  themselves,

on  looking  at  the  infirmity  of  their  condition,  to  be  nought

but  ashes. So  that  when loosened  from  the  hardness of

their pride they may use the words before quoted, Re-

jnemher,  O  Lord,  that  we  are  dust. It  is  well  said  then  that

when  God  draws  the  breath  of  a  man  to  Himself,  all  flesh

will  fi\il  together,  and  man  Avill  return  to  ashes. These  words

of  Eliu  are  true  and  important. But  he  betrays  in  the  words

which  follow  that  he  was  soon  wickedly  puffed  up  by  that

which  he  thought  rightly,  saying,

Ver.  16. 7/  tJien  thou  hast  understanding,  hear  what  is

said,  and  listen  to  the  voice  of  nnj  icords.

xxiii.  50.  All  haughty  men  have  this  peculiarity,  that  when
they  perchance  entertain  any  acute  sentiment,  they  soon
launch  out  in  consequence  into  the  sin  of  pride,  that  they
despise  the  opinion  of  every  one  else  in  comparison  with
their  own,  and  prefer  themselves  in  their  own  judgment  to
the  merits  of  others.  It  is  the  fate  of  these  wretched  men,
to  be  more  in  the  dark  the  more  they  see ;  for  while  they
look  at  subtleties,  they  overlook  themselves;  and  the  more
acutely  they  perceive  their  wisdom,  the  more  fatally  do  they
fall  through  pride.  But  they  would  look  into  subtleties  to
some  use,  if  in  what  they  bring  forward  they  were  to  see

Job  33,  themselves.  For  Eliu  said  above.  If  thou  hast  any  thing  to
say, answer  me;  speak,  for  I  wish  thee  to  appear  just.  But
now  he  says.  If  thou  hast  understanding,  hear  what  is  said.
See  how  his  pride  gradually  advances  in  increase  of  expres-
sion. He  doubted  above  whether  blessed  Job  could  bring
forward  what  was  just.  He  now  makes  it  a  question  if  he
can  even  hear  what  is  said.  He  said  there.  If  thou  hast  any
thing  to  say,  ansner  me.  As  though  he  were  to  say.  Say
something,  if  at  least  thou  wilt  be  able  to  speak  worthily.  But
here  he  says,  Tf  thou  hast  understanding,  hear  what  is  said.
As  though  he  said  plainly,  Hear  me,  if  thou  wilt  be  able  to
hear  worthily. These  are  the  daily  declensions  which  take


He  Hoic  questions  if  Job  can  even  understand  him. 89

place  in  the  heart  of  the  wicked,  by  which  they  are  unceasinoly  Book

sinking  to  worse;  because  while  they  carelessly  neglect  smaller  ^-^ ~

faults,  they  break  out  wickedly  into  greater.  It  had  already
resulted  from  his  pride  that  he  doubted  whether  blessed  Job
could  say  what  was  just.  But  through  neglecting  to  watch
this  fault  in  himself,  he  arrived  at  greater  wickedness:  so
as  not  only  to  doubt  that  he  could  possibly  say  what  was
just,  but  even  to  despair  of  his  understanding  himself
when  speaking  what  was  just.  Wherefore  the  sin  of  pride
must  be  cut  up  at  once  by  the  very  roots,  that  when  it
springs  up  secretly  it  may  be  cut  off  vigilantly,  so  that  it
may  not  gain  vigour  by  growth,  or  strength  by  habit.  For
it  is  a  hard  matter  for  a  man  to  detect  in  himself  inveterate
pride,  because  in  truth,  the  more  we  suffer  under  this  sin,
the  less  do  we  see  of  it.  For  pride  is  generated  in  the  mind
exactly  as  darkness  in  the  eyes.  For  the  wider  it  spreads
itself,  the  more  does  it  contract  the  light.  Pride  then  grows
up  gradually  in  the  heart,  and  when  it  has  extended  itself
wider  and  wider,  it  closes  entirely  the  sight  of  the  mind
which  suffers  from  it,  so  that  the  captive  mind  can  both
suffer  from  the  haughtiness  of  pride,  and  yet  be  unable  to
behold  that  under  which  it  suffers.  But  because  haughty  men,
as  we  have  said,  sometimes  hold  sound  views  in  an  unsound
way,  and  know  how  to  invent  good  arguments,  but  scorn  to
state  them  aright ;  Eliu,  after  the  haughty  pride  with  which
he  had  said.  If  thou  hast  understanding,  hear  what  is  said,
subjoins,  saying,

Ver.  17.  Can  he  be  healed  thai  loveth  not  judgment?  How
dost  thou  so  much  condemn  him  that  is  Just  ?

51.  He  uttered  a  proper  sentiment,  but  it  ought  not  to  xxiv.
have  been  uttered  to  blessed  Job.  For  in  every  thing  which
is  said  we  must  by  all  means  consider,  what  is  said,  to  whom
it  is  said,  where  it  is  said,  how  it  is  said.  But  Eliu  con-
sidered only  what  he  was  saying,  but  did  not  consider  to
whom  he  was  saying  it.  For  blessed  Job  loved  judgment,
since  he  knew  how  to  weigh  his  causes  carefully  with
the  Lord.  Nor  had  he  condemned  Him  that  is  just :  but
humbly  enquired,  when  involved  in  grief,  why  he  had  been
smitten  when  without  sin.  He  loves  judgment,  whoever
examines  his  own  ways  minutely,  and  enters  into  the  secret


90 God  holds  princes,  that  exult  in  power.  Apostates.
Job  34,  chambers  of  his  heart,  and  there  considers  what  the  Lord

18  .

'—  bestows  on  him,  and  Avhat  he  owes  to  the  Lord. But  how

had  blessed  Job  not  acted  thus,  who  used  to  offer  such
frequent  sacrifices  in  expiation  for  his  sons,  even  on  account
of  their  thoughts  ?  Because  then  Eliu  said,  that  he  that
loveth  not  judgment  cannot  be  healed,  accusing  blessed  Job
of  not  loving  judgment,  and  of  having  condemned  Him  who
is  just,  he  immediateh^  subjoins  the  righteousness  of  that
same  righteous  One,  that  is,  the  Lord,  saying,

Ver.  1 8.  Who  saith  to  a  king.  Apostate :  who  calleth  leaders
ungodly.
XXV.  52.  We  know  often  that  most  of  those  who  rule  exact  an
inordinate  degree  of  dread  from  their  subjects,  and  that  they
wish  them  to  venerate  them  not  so  much  for  the  Lord's  sake,
as  in  the  Lord's  place.  For  they  exalt  themselves  with  pride  of
heart  within,  and  despise  all  under  them  in  comparison  with
themselves,  nor  do  they  advise  them  with  condescension,  but
oppress  them  with  authority :  because,  in  truth,  they  set
themselves  up  with  lofty  thoughts,  and  do  not  acknowledge
themselves  to  be  equal  with  those  over  whom  they  happen  to
rule. Against  this  pride  it  is  said  in  the  Book  Ecclesiasticus,

Ecclus.  Have  they  appointed  thee  a  ruler  ? Be  not  lifted  up,  but  be
'' ' among  them  as  one  of  them. This pride the Lord  also

Ez.  34,  reproving  by  the  Prophet  in  shepherds,  saith.  But  ye  ruled
over  them  with  austerity  and  with  power.  For  the  good
advice  which  they  offer  to  their  subjects,  they  bring  out
as  ordering,  rather  than  as  advising  with  them:  for  the  very
reason,  that  to  say  any  thing  to  them  as  if  they  were  on  equal
terms,  they  consider  a  degradation.  For  they  rejoice  in
their  singular  preeminence,  and  not  in  the  equality  of  their
creation.  But  because  the  Lord  carefully  considers  those
swelling  hearts  of  rulers,  it  is  well  said  against  them,  Who
saith  to  a  king.  Apostate.  For  every  haughty  ruler  falls  into
the  sin  of  apostasy,  as  often  as,  through  pleasure  at  his  ruling
over  men,  he  rejoices  in  his  pecidiar  distiuction.  For  he
considers  not  under  Whom  he  himself  is,  and  exults  over
his  equals,  for  that  he  is  as  it  were  not  their  equal.  But
whence  is  it  that  this  root  of  evil  springs  up  in  the  heart  of
rulers,  unless  it  be  in  imitation  of  him,  who,  having  scorned

Is.  14, the  society  of  angels,  said,  /  ivill  ascend  -above  the  height  of

14.


Pride  in  rulers  leads  subjects  to  ungodliness.  91

the  clouds^  and  will  be  like  the  Most  High  ? Since  then  every Book

ruler,  as  often  as  he  prides  himself  on  ruling  over  others,  is  — :

cut  off,  by  falling  into  pride,  from  dependence  on  the  Chief
Ruler  of  all:  and,  because  when  he  despises  his  equals  who
are  subject  to  him,  he  does  not  aclviiowledge  the  supreme
dominion  of  Him  under  Whom  all  are  equal ;  it  is  rightly
said.  Who  saith  to  a  king,  Apostate.

53.  But  since  by  domineering  over  others  they  lead  their
subjects  to  impiety  by  the  example  of  their  pride,  it  is  fitly
subjoined,  Who  calleth  leaders  ungodly.  For  they  would
lead  them  into  the  way  of  piety,  if  they  did  but  present  a
pattern  of  humility  to  the  eyes  of  their  subjects.  But  he  is
an  ungodly  leader,  who  diverges  from  the  path  of  truth,  and
who,  when  falling  headlong  himself,  invites  his  followers  to
the  precipice.  He  is  an  ungodly  leader  who  points  out  the
way  of  error  by  setting  examples  of  pride.  Paul  was  afraid
of  being  an  ungodly  leader,  when  he  brought  down  the  lofti-
ness of  his  power,  saying,  Not  seeking  glory  of  men,  neither  iThess,
of  you  nor  yet  of  others,  xchen  we  might  have  been  a  burden'^''  ^'
as  the  Apostles  of  Christ,  but  we  became  as  children  in  the
inidst  of  you.  He  had  become  as  a  child  in  the  midst  of
them,  because  he  was  afraid  lest  he  should  set  example  of
pride,  if  he  claimed,  among  his  disciples,  the  honour  due  to  his
high  station.  He  was  afraid,  in  truth,  lest  if  he  were  to  seek
lor  himself  the  power  of  pastoral  authority,  the  flock  com-
mitted to  him  should  follow  him  along  precipitous  places,
and  lest  he,  who  had  undertaken  an  office  of  piety,  should  be
leading  to  ungodliness  those  who  followed  him.

54.  It  is  therefore  necessary  for  a  person  in  high  place  to
lake  special  care  what  example  he  sets  his  subjects,  and  to
know  that  he  is  living  for  all  those,  over  whom  he  knows  he
is  placed.  He  should  be  especially  watchful  not  to  pride
himself  on  his  being  set  above  others,  lest  he  should  exact
too  immoderately  the  privileges  of  rightful  authority,  lest  the
rule  of  discipline  should  be  converted  into  tlie  severity  of
pride,  and  lest  by  the  power  he  possessed  of  restraining  his
subjects  from  wickedness,  he  should  pervert  the  more  the
hearts  of  those  who  behold  him ;  and  lest  (as  was  before
observed)  he  should  become  a  leader  of  impiety  by  means  of  his
pious  office. A  man,  however,  ought  not  to  undertake  to  guide


92 Good  rulers,  in  judging,  think  of  Judgment  to  come.
Job  34,  others,  who  does  not  know  how  to  lead  them  in  holy  livmg ;

18

1 —  lest  he,  who  has  been  appointed  to  reprove  others'  fanlts,

shall  himself  commit  the  sin  which  it  was  his  duty  to  cut  off.
Let  rulers  therefore  take  special  care  to  live  for  themselves
and  those  under  them :  to  hide  in  the  bosom  of  their  mind
the  good  which  they  do,  and  yet  furnish  thereby  an  example
of  good  behaviour  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  follow  them;
to  correct  the  faults  of  their  subjects  by  doing  judgment,
and  yet  not  pride  themselves  at  tlie  severity  of  this  same
punishment;  to  be  content  with  slightly  reproving  certain
faults,  and  yet  not  to  relax  the  bonds  of  discipline  by  this
lenity;  to  overlook,  and  bear  with  other  evils,  and  yet  not  to
suffer  them  to  make  head  by  their  overlooking  them.  These
things  are  laborious,  and,  unless  Divine  grace  support,  hard  to
keep.  But  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  Book  of  Wisdom  of  the  coming

Wisd.6,  of  the  strict  Judge,  Horrihly  and  speedily  will  He  appear,  for
a  very  sharp  judgment  shall  he  to  them  who  are  in  high
places.  Since  therefore  people  too  commonly  launch  out
into  pride  from  the  power  of  rule,  and  pride  itself  is  counted
as  an  impiety  by  the  strict  Judge,  it  is  well  said  by  Eliu  of
the  Lord,  Who  calleth  leaders  ungodly.  For  when  they  are
proud  of  their  authority,  they  lead  by  their  example  those
under  them  to  impiety.

55.  A  person  then  who  is  appointed  to  rule  over  men,
must  be  especially  careful,  within  the  secret  chambers  of  his
mind,  to  preside  in  the  seat  of  humility.  And  when  others
stand  before  him  without,  as  he  gives  his  sentence,  he
should  with  watchful  eye  behold  Him,  before  Whom  he  is
hereafter  to  stand  to  be  judged  for  these  very  matters:  that
so  he  may  behold  Him  with  greater  confidence,  when  he
has  seen  Him,  the  more  anxiously  he  trembles  now  before
Him,  Whom  he  does  not  behold.  Let  him  consider  then,
that  he  who  is  hardly  able  perhaps  to  satisfy  so  strict  a
Judge  for  his  own  soul,  has,  from  his  ruling  over  so  many
subjects,  so  many  souls  (so  to  speak)  singly  to  answer  for
to  Him,  at  the  time  for  rendering  his  account.  And  if  this
thought  continually  penetrates  the  mind,  it  crushes  all
the  swelling  of  pride.  And  a  carefid  ruler  will  be  called
neither  an  apostate  king,  nor  an  ungodly  ruler,  the  more
anxiously  he regards the power  he  has received not as


Power,  that  pleases  now,  heavy  hereafter.  93

an  honour,  but  as  a  burden. For  he  that  is  well  pleased  Book

.  XXTV.

at  being  a  judge now,  feels  no  pleasure  at  beholding  the ^^^ ^^^'

Judge  then. For  the  faults  which  are  committed  from  the  6, 15.
desire  of  obtaining  power,  cannot  be  numbered. But  autho-
rity is  then  alone properly  exercised,  when  it  is  held  not
in  love  of  it,  but  in fear. And  in  order  that  it  may  be
properly  administered,  necessity,  and  not  our  own desire,
should,  in the  first  place,  impose  it  on  us. But  it  neither
ought  to  be  abandoned  through  fear  when  once  undertaken,
nor,  again, embraced as  an object  of  desire ; for fear a
person  should,  as  if  by  reason  of  humility,  be  guilty  of  greater
pride,  in  contemning  and  shrinking  from  the  course  of  the
Divine dispensation: or  should  cast off  the yoke of  his
Heavenly  Ruler,  the more  his  own private  authority over
others  gives  him  pleasure. When  power  then  is  possessed
it  must  not  be  greedily  loved,  but  patiently endured; in
order  that  then,  at  the  judgment,  it  may  be  a  light  burden  to
our  comfort,  as  we  know  it  now  for  a  service  which  is  heavy
to  be  borne.


BOOK XXV.


In  explanation  of  the  thirty-fourth  chapter  from  the  nineteenth  to  the
thirtieth  verse,  the  punishments  of  the  reprohate,  and  the  secret  judg-
ments of  God  are  discussed.

Job  34, 1.  The  very  mode  of  man's  creation  shews,  how  far  he

^^' surpasses  all  things  beside. For  the  reason  which  has  been

conferred  on  man  proclaims  how  far  a  rational  nature  sur-
passes all  things  which  are  deficient  in  either  life,  or  sense,
or  reason.  And  yet,  because  we  close  our  eyes  to  inward
and  invisible  objects,  and  feast  them  on  those  which  are
seen,  we  most  commonly  esteem  a  man,  not  for  what  he  is
in  himself,  but  from  what  is  accidental  to  him.  And  since
we  do  not  look  at  what  a  man  is  in  himself,  but  what  he  can
do,  in  our  acceptance  of  persons  we  are  influenced,  not  by
the  persons  themselves,  but  by  what  accidentally  belongs  to
them.  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  even  that  person  is
inwardly  despised  by  us,  who  is  outwardl}-  held  in  honour;
for  whilst  he  is  honoured  for  that  which  is  about  him,  he  is,
from  his  own  doings,  placed  low  in  our  judgment.  But
Almighty  God  examines  the  conduct  of  men,  solely  on  the
nature  of  their  deserts,  and  frequently  inflicts  severer  punish-
ment, from  the  very  fact,  that  He  has  here  given  greater
opportunities  of  serving Him. As  the  Truth  Itself  bears

Lukel2,  witness,  saying.  To  uhom  much  is  given .^of  him  much  will  he
required.  Whence  it  is  now  well  said  by  Eliu,  (vcr.  19.)
Who  acceptetli  not  the  person  of  princes^  and  hath  not
regarded  a  tyrant,  when  disputing  against  the  poor.
11'  2.  But  by  prince,  or  tyrant,  may  be  imderstood  every
proud  person;  but  the  humble  may  be  designated  by  the
poor.  He  does  not  regard  then  a  tyrant,  when  disputing
against  the  poor,  because  He  declai-es  that  He  knows  not,  in
the  judgment,  any  proud  men  who  now  oppress  the  life  of


Death  of  the  ungodly,  and  unprepared,  sudden. 95

the  humble,  saying,  /  /enow  you  not,  tvhence  ye  are. And  Book
because He thus destroys  him, when He wills, by His  £u].ei3
power,  as  He  created  him,  when  He  willed,  by  His  power,  it25.
is  fitly  added  in  argument.

For  they  are  all  the  work  of  His  hands.

And  it  is  immediately  added,

Ver  20.  Suddenly  shall they  die,  and  the  people shall
how  down  at  midnight,  and  pass  atvay.

-  3.  However  long  it  be  before  the  ungodly  are  taken  out  of  iii.
this  life,  they  are  taken  away  suddenly,  and  at  an  instant,
since  they  know  not  how  to  foresee  their  end  by  thinking  on
it.  That  is  sudden  to  any  one,  which  he  has  not  been  able
to  think  of  beforehand.  That  rich  man  was  taken  away
suddenly,  who  left  the  barns  which  he  was  preparing,  and
found  the  place  of  hell,  which  he  was  not  looking  for.  He
was  employing  his  soul  in  thinking  in  one  direction,  he  parted
with  it  in  another  by  his  sentence.  He  fixed  his  thoughts
on  one  ol)ject  when  alive,  he  experienced  another  w^hen  he
was  dying.  For  he  left  those  temporal  things,  which  he  had
long  engaged  in,  and  he  found  eternal  things  which  he  did
not  look  for.  Whence,  in  consequence  of  this  his  blind  igno-
rance, it  is  well  said  to  him  by  the  Divine  sentence.  This  night  l-nkel2,
do  they  require  thy  soul  of  thee.  For  that  soul  was  taken  away
by  night,  which  was  lost  in  blindness  of  heart.  That  was  taken
away  by  night,  which  refused  to  enjoy  the  light  of  consider-
ation, in  order  to  foresee  what  it  would  suffer.  Whence  the
Apostle  Paul  rightly  says  to  his  disciples  who  are  thinking  on
future  things,  But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness  that  that  l  Thes3.
day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief.  Ye  are  all  the  children  '
of  light,  and  children  of  day;  we  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of
darkness.  For  the  day  of  death  seizes  as  a  thief  in  the
night,  when  it  casts  out  the  souls  of  foolish  men,  which
do  not  look  onward  to  the  future.  Whence  it  is  here
also  fitly  subjoined.  And  the  people  shall  bow  down  at
midnight,  and  pass  away.  They  bow  down  and  pass  away
at  midnight,  who  are  brought  low  and  swept  away  by  the
darkness  of  their  negligence.  Tliey  will/  hen  be  bowed
down  by  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  wl  now  refuse  to
bend  with  humility  of  heart.  But  the  Elect  bow  themselves
of  their  own  accord  in  humility,  that  they  may  not  be  bowed


96 The  temporal  life  of  fallen  man  is  ever  passing  away.


Job  34,  down against their  will  in death. Whence  is  it said  to

20

'■ — Holy  Church,  of  the  converted  children  of  her  persecutors,

Is.  60, T/ie  sons  of  tliem  who  humbled  ihee,  shall  come  bending  to
thee.

4.  And  he  says  properly  of  dying  peoples,  not  that  "  they
will  pass  along,"  but  pass  awag,  because  simply  by  living  in
the  world  we  are  daily  coming  to  an  end,  and  vve  pass  along
this  present  life,  as  though  wearing  a  track  in  a  road.  But
that  men  live  subject  to  death,  is  a  kind  of  journeying  death-
wards.  And  every  day  we  pass  of  om*  life,  we  are  approaching
as  it  were  on  our  journey  by  as  many  steps  to  the  appointed
spot.  But  the  very  increase  of  our  years,  is  a  wearing  them
away ;  for  the  length  of  our  life  begins  to  be  not  so  much  as
it  was  at  first.  But  the  first  man  was  so  fashionecl,  that,  as
time  passed  on,  he  remained  stationary,  so  as  not  to  journey
on  together  with  it.  For  he  remained  still,  as  the  moments
hasted  away  ;  since  he  did  not  approach  to  the  end  of  his  life,
through  the  increase  of  his  days.  And  he  stood  the  firmer,
the  closer  he  clung  to  Him  who  is  ever  stationary.  But
after  he  touched  the  forbidden  thing,  having  offended  his
Creator,  he  began  to  pass  onward  together  with  time.
Having  lost,  namely,  the  stability  of  an  immortal  condition,
the  stream  of  mortal  being  engulphed  him.  And,  while
borne  along  by  youth  to  age.  and  by  age  to  death,  he
learned,  as  he  journeyed  on,  what  he  was  when  he  remained
stationary.  And  because  we  are  sprung  from  his  stock,  we
retain,  like  shoots,  the  bitterness  of  our  root.  For  because
we  derive  our  origin  from  him,  we  inherit  his  course  of  life,
at  our  birth,  so  that  every  moment  of  every  day  that  we  live,
we  are  constantly  passing  away  from  life,  and  the  length  of
our  life  decreases  by  the  very  means  by  which  it  is  believed
to  increase.  Since  then  we  are  daily  proceeding,  as  our
years  increase,  to  the  issue  of  death,  it  is  well  said
of  the  dying,  not  that  they  pass  along,  but  pass  away.
For  they  pass  along,  even  while  they  live,  but  pass  away,  as
they  die. It  follows,

And  they  icill  take  atcay  the  inolent  icithoul  hand.
iv. 5.  Thou  understandest, '  The  divine  judgments.' But  they
will  take  him  away  without  hand,  who  was  violent  with  his
hand. They  will take him away  without  hand,  because,


Vengeance  delayed  falls  heavier  on  the  impenitent.  97

namely,  he  is  snatched  avvav,  by  the  violence  of  a  sudden  Book
death,  invisibly, who used  visibly to spoil others. He -


beheld those  whom  he  spoiled,  but  beholds  not  him  who
hurries  him  away  in death. The  violent  therefore  is  taken
away  without  hand,  because  he  both  beholds  not  his  spoiler,
and  yet  is  hurried  along. And  there  follows  him  a  severer
sentence,  the  longer  great  forbearance  is  extended'  to  him 'al.' was
when sinning: because the severity of God punishes a  grant-
sinner  the  more  strictly,  the  longer  it  has  borne  with  him.^^-'
But  it  is  frequently  the  case,  that  while  the  Divine  mercy
is  waiting  for  sinners,  they  plunge into  greater  blindness
of  heart. Whence  it  is  written,  Knowest  thou  not  that  //<eRom.  2,
goodness  of  God leadeth  thee  to  repentance? But  after'^'^'
thy  hardness  and  impenitent  heart,  thou  treasurest  up  for
thyself  -wrath  against  the  day  of  ic  rath,  and  revelation  of  the
righteous  judgment  of  God? Observe,  then,  that  while  the
man of  violence is spoiling those whom he is able, is
oppressing  the  weak,  and  indulging  a  long  time  all  his  sinful
desires ;  because  he  is  not  smitten  at  once,  and  because  his
punishment  is  deferred  to  the  end,  his  most  wicked  conduct
is  believed  not  to  be  observed  by  God. After  then  he  had
spoken  of  his  death,  he  immediately  rightly  added  concerning
the  Lord,

Ver.  21.  For  His  eyes  are  over  the  ways  of  men,  and  He
considers  all  their  steps.

6.  For  He  was  then  believed  not  to  observe  them,  while  v.
this  man  of  violence  was  committing,  unpnnishe  1,  all  tl:e
wickedness  he  could.  God  was  supposed  not  to  behold  the
deeds  of  the  ungodly,  because  He  was  delaying  to  condemn
them  justly;  and  His  great  forbearance  was  regarded  as  a
kind  of  carelessness.  The  wicked  also  himself  believed  that
he  was  not  observed  by  God  in  the  commission  of  sin,  as
often  as  he  sinned  without  being  punished.  To  wdiora  it  is
said  by  a  certain  wise  man.  Say  not,  I  have  sinned,  and  what  Ecck
harm  hath  happened  to  7ne?  He  does  not  wish  to  correct^' ^*
the  wickedness,  for  Avhich  he  has  not  suffered  the  punishment
it  deserved :  and  the  more  mercifully  he  is  spared,  the  more
sinfully  is  he  urged  on  to  wickedness  :  and,  despisin"-  the
long-suffering  of  the  Divine  forbearance,  he  has  added  to  his
faults,  from  the  very  circumstance  that  should  have  led  him

VOL.  III.  H


ins.


98  Judgment  delai/ed,  not  neglected. '  Steps'  in  deed  or  thought.

Job  34,  to  conect  them. As  is  said  by  this  very  Job,  God  gave  him
~^ — a  place for  repentance,  hut he misiiaes  it  in his  pride.

23.  '  Frequently,  also,  because  he  does  not  suffer  immediately  the
punishment  he  deserves,  he  considers  that  his  conduct  is  not
dis2:)leasing  to  God.  I^et  him  go  then  now,  and  launch  forth
j3resum])tuously  into  every  kind  of  blasphemy.  Let  him
take  his  fill  of  his  sinful  pleasures ;  let  him  spoil  others'
goods,  and  satiate  himself  with  the  oppression  of  the  in-
nocent. And,  because  he  is  not  yet  smitten,  let  him  consider
that  his  ways  are  not  observed  by  God,  or,  what  is  worse,
that  they  are  approved  of  by  Him.  There  will  fall  on  him,
full  surely,  there  will  fall  on  him,  a  sudden  and  everlasting
blow.  And  he  will  then  acknowledge,  that  every  thing  is
observed  by  God,  when  he  sees  himself  condemned,  by  an
unexpected  death,  in  retribution  for  all  his  guilt.  He  will
then  open,  in  his  torment,  the  eyes  which  he  long  kept  closed
in  sin.  He  will  then  perceive,  that  the  righteous  Judge  has
observed  every  thing,  when  he  is  now  unable,  by  perceiving
it,  to  escape  the  due  deserts  of  his  sins.  The  ungodly,  then,
who  is  long  spared,  is  swept  away  suddenly,  because  the
eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  all  the  nays  of  men,  and  He
considereth  all  their  steps.  As  though  he  were  to  say.
Because  He  does  not  at  last  leave  those  sins  unpunished,
which  He  long  looks  on  with  forbearance.  For,  behold !  He  has
suddenly  suept  away  the  violent  man,  and  his  sins  which
He  endured  with  patience,  He  has  cut  off  with  punishment.
Let  no  one  s;iy  then,  when  he  beholds  any  ungodly  man
heaping  up  sin  without  restraint,  that  God  does  not  notice
the  conduct  of  men.  For  he  who  is  long  tolerated,  is  swept
away  suddenly.

7.  But  he  calls  the  steps  of  men,  either  our  separate
actions  on  which  we  are  engaged,  or  the  alternating  motives
of  our  inmost  thoughts,  by  which,  as  if  by  steps,  we  either
depart  far  from  the  Lord,  or  approach  near  to  Him  by  holi-
ness. For  the  mind  approaches  by  so  many  steps  nearer  to
God,  as  it  makes  progress  in  so  many  holy  emotions.  And,
again,  it  departs  so  many  steps  further  from  Him,  as  it
becomes  depraved  by  so  many  evil  thoughts.  Whence  it  is
frequently  the  case  that,  though  the  emotion  of  the  mind
does  not  come  forth  in  action,  yet  the  sin  is  already  perfected,


Thought  is  in  God's  sight. No  forgetfulness  icith  Him. 99

by  reason  of  the  guilt  itself  of  the  thought.  As  it  is  written,  Hook
Hand  in  hand,  the  nicked  shall  iiot  he  imwcent.  For  hand  ^^^'
is  wont  to  be  joined  v.ith  har.d,  wlien  it  rests  at  ease,  and  no  n  21.
laborious  employment  exercises  it.  Hand  therefore  in  hand,
the  uicked  shall  not  be  innocent.  As  though  he  were  saying,
Even  when  the  hand  rests  from  sinful  deeds,  yet  the  wicked,
by  reason  of  his  thoughts,  is  not  innocent.  Because  then
we  know  that  not  merely  our  actions,  but  even  our  thoughts,
are  strictly  weighed,  what  will  befal  us  for  our  walking  in
wicked  action,  if  God  judges  so  minutely  the  steps  of  the
heart  ?  Behold,  no  man  witnesses  the  secret  courses  of  our
mind,  and  yet,  in  the  sight  of  God,  ue  are  making  as  many
steps,  as  many  affections  as  we  put  in  motion.  We  fall
before  Him,  as  often  as  we  stumble  away  from  the  straight
path  by  the  foot  of  unstable  thought.  For  unless  this
frequent  stumbling  of  our  minds  increased  in  His  sight,  He
would  not  in  truth  exclaim  by  the  Prophet,  Put  quay  thelsA,\6.
evil  of  your  thoughts  from  before  3Iine  eyes.  But  speaking
thus.  He  witnesses  that  He  cannot  endure,  as  it  were,  the
intensity  of  our  secret  wickedness.  But  it  cannot  be  hidden
from  Him,  because,  namely,  every  unlawful  thought  which  is
conceived  in  secret  by  us,  is  thrust  offensively  before  His
sight. For,  as  it  is  written,  all  things  are  naked  and  open  Heb.  4,

TO

to  His  eyes. Whence  it  is  here  also  properly  subjoined,

Ver.  22. There  is  no  darkness,  and  there  is  no  shadow  of
death,  where  they  who  work  iniquity  may  he  hid.

8.  What did he intend to designate by darkness but vi.
ignorance,  and  what  by  the  shadow  of  death,  except  oblivion  ?
For  it  is  said  of  the  ignorance  of  certain  persons.  Having  Eph.  4,
their  mind  obscured  with  darkness. And  it  is  written  again  ^'^*
of  the  oblivion  which  comes  on  us  at  death.  In  that  day  allPs.i46,
their  thoughts  shall  perish. Since  then  whatever  is  thought
of  during  life is utterly  consigned  to oblivion  by  death,
oblivion  is  a  kind  of  shadow  of  death. For  as  intervening
death  puts  an  end  to  the  doings  of  life,  so  does  intervening
forgetfulness  destroy  that  which  existed  in  the  memory. It
is rightly,  therefore,  called  its shadow,  inasmuch as  it  is
modelled  upon  it,  as  it  were,  while  it  imitates  its  power  in
lulling  the  senses  to rest. But,  since  God  is  neither  un-
acquainted with  men's  evil  thoughts,  nor  forgetful  of  their

H  2


loo  (Jod  alone  Imimirtal,  an  free  from  all  change.

Job  34,  evil  dcc<l»,  (except  indf-er]  they  are  V^JotU^d  out  of  His  sight
'■ — by peniiencc,) it is  appropriately  observed, There is no


darkiieHH,  and  there  is  no  shadow  of  dealli,  vjhere  Ihey  who
iioric  iiiUjiiily  niaij  he  hid.  As  though  he  were  to  say,  No
one  is  hidflen  from  His  judgment,  (or  this  reason,  that  it  is
impossible  for  Him  either  not  to  behold  what  we  do,  or  to
forget  uhat  Jle  beholds.

fi.  Although  '  darkness,'  or  '  the  shadow  of  death,'  can  be
understoorl  likewise  in  another  sense.  For  every  change  is
a  kind  of  resemblance  of  death.  For  that  whicli  changes
any  thing,  cuts  it  off,  as  it  were,  from  what  it  was  Vjefore :
that  so  it  ceases  to  be  what  it  was,  and  begins  to  be  what
it  was  not.  Because  then  tlie  true  Light,  our  Creator,  I
mean,  is  obscured  by  no  vicissitude  of  change,  and  f over-
shadowed by  iKj  defects  in  His  own  nature;  but  it  is  His
nature  to  shine  forth  uncljangeably,  darkness  and  tlie  shadow
of  deatli  are  said  not  to  exist  in  Him.  Wherefore  it  is
JztuH*  vvritt<n  elsewhere,  IVilh  Whom  in  no  vari.ahlerieHH.  nor
nhadow  of  Inruinfj.  And  hence  again,  Paul  the  Apostle
]  'I  i/;i,  says,  H^ho  only  halh  innnorlalily,  and  dwellelh  in  the  Ityhl
''  ''  which  no  man  atn  a/tftroaelt  iinlo.  Jiut,  since  we  all  know
that  >»oth  the  soul  of  man  and  angelic  spirits  were  created
immortal,  why  is  God  alone  said  by  the  Apostle  to  have
immortality,  unless  it  be  that  CuA  alone  truly  dies  not,  since
He  alone  is  never  chatiged  .'

10.  l''or  the  soul  of  man  would  not  fall,  if  it  had  not  been
changeable.  And,  banished  also  from  the  joys  of  J^aradise,
if  it  were  not  caj);ible  of  change,  it  would  in;ver  return  to
lif«'.  Iiut,in  f^ndeavouring  to  return  to  life,  it  is  compelled  to
bear  with  its  <iefects,  from  its  alternation  aiifl  change.  IJecause
then  it  was  fashioned  out  of  nothing,  it  is  of  itself  ever
Hinking  beneath  itself,  unless  kept  up  by  the  hand  of  its
Maker  to  a  condition  of  holy  desire.  Since  then  it  is  a
creature,  it  has  a  downward  tendency.  For  it  considers,  that
of  its  own  strength,  it  is  able  only  to  fall  h(;adlong  ;  but  it
holds  firmly  to  its  Creator,  with  the  hand  of  love,  lest  it
should  fall,  luitil  it  ])asses  over  to  lujchangeableness,  and
]ivf;s  really  innnoitidly,  because  unchangeably.

11.  The  Ange-lic  sjurits  also  were  jiiade  changeabh;  by
iialure,  so  as  to  fall  of  their  own  accord,  or  to  stand  from


Men  should ji/df/e  themselves,  lest  they  br.jadtjed.  101

tlieir  own  will. But,  because  they  humbly  chose  to  cling  to  Job  34,
Him, bv Whom they were created, they overcame the  , — — —

.  ...  ...  ^ee  note

changeableness  which  Nvas  in  them,  by  renuuning  immutably  at  the
firm, so that they deservedly rose above the liability  to^^'j'^"^
change,  to which they  would have been'  subject in the  book,
order of their nature. Since then it is the property of
the Divine Nature alone, not to sutler the shades of
ignorance and change, let it be justly said, There is
no  darkness^  and  there  is  no  shadow  of  death,  uhere  they,
who  work  ini<]uity,  marj  he  hid. For  the  more  unchange-
ably  that eternal light shines, which is God Himself,
the  more  piercingly  does  it  see,  and  it  is  neither  ignorant
of  what  is  hid,  since  It  penetrates  all  things,  nor  does It
forget  the  things  It  has  penetrated,  because  It  lasts  on  with-
out change. And  consequently,  as  often  as  we  conceive  in
our  mind  any  unworthy  thought,  so  often  do  we  sin  in  the
light. Because  It  is  present  to  us  though  not  present  to  It;
and  when  we  walk  wickedly  we  offend  against  It,  from  which
we  are  deservedly  far  away. But,  when  we  believe  that  we
are  not  seen,  we  keep  our  eyes  closed  in  the  sun  light :  that
is  to  say,  we  conceal  Him  from  ourselves,  not  ourselves  from
Him. Let  us  then,  now  while  we  are  able,  blot  out  our  evil
thoughts,  and  more  evil  deeds,  from  the  sight  of  the  eternal
Judge. Let  us  retal  to  the  eyes  of  our  heart  whatever  evil
we  have  committed  tln'ough  the sin ol presumplion. Let
not  our  weakness  flatter  itself,  and  handle  itself  delicately  in
those sins,  which it calls to miiul. But the more it is
conscious  to  itself  of  evil,  let  it  be  the  more  kindly  severe
against  itself. Let  it  set  before  itself  the  future  judgment,  '
and  whatever  sins  it  is  conscious  nuist be  severely  smitten
by  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  let  it  mercifully  smite  in  itself
by  the  penitence  of  conversion. Whence,  after  the  punish-
ment of  this  man  of  violence  has  been described,  it  fitly
follows,

Ver.  23.  For  H  is  no  lon<jer  in the  power  of  man  to  come
ttear  to  God  for  judgment.

12.  This  verse  requires  llu^  greater  discussion,  the  more yii,
painful  is  that  which  it  sj)caks  of,  if  it  is  neglected." Here
doubtless  that  judgment  is  not  designated  which  ])imishes  by
eternal  retribution,  but  that  which,  conceived  by  the  mind.


102  Hoio  to  judge  ourselves,  ichile  we  have  time.

Job  34, cleanses  tlivougli  our  conversation'.  For  wlioever  is  afraid  of
r-i — '- —  beine;concleunied  by  the  first  ofthesc  does  not  desire  to  approach
version.'  near  it.  By  its  being  said  then,  For  it  is  no  longer  in  the  power
at  man  to  come  near  lo  God  for  judgment,  it  is  pointed  out  at
once  that  there  is'a  kind  of  judgment,  wliich  is  at  hist  desired
even  by  the  damned  and  reprobate. And  what  is  that, but  thisof
1  Cor. which  Paul  the  Apostle  speaks,  For  if  ue  zcou/d  judge  our-
' *  selves,  tvc  would  not  be  judged? and  of  which  it  is  said  by
Is.o9,8.  the  Pro]dict,  There  is  no  judgtneut.in  t/ieir  goings,  a.r\d  of
Ps  90-1.  which David  says,  T/ie  lionour  of  a king  loreth  judgment,
nanii'ly,  that  he  who  now  knows  God  by  Faith,  should  care-
fully judge  what  he  owes  Him  in  his  works.. Whence  it  is
Job  35,  written  again,  Be  judged  before  ilie  Lord,  and  wait  for  Him.
^^' He  in  truth  is  judged  before  the  Lord,  who  beholds  the
Lord in his heart, and examines into  his conduct  with
anxious  enquiry,  beneath  His  presence. For  a  man  waits
for  Him  the  more  confidently,  the  more  he  daily  examines
his  life with suspicion. For  he,  who  comes  to  His  final
judgment,  is  no  longer  judged  before  Him, but  by  Him.
Of  this  judgment  also  the  Lord  speaks  by  the  Prophet  to  the
Is.  43, forgetful  soul,  Put  Me  in  remembrance,  that  tee  mag  plead
together  I  tell  me,  if  thou  hast  any  tiling,  that  thou  mayesl  be
jusiijied.

13.  For  the  mind  of  every  one  ought  anxiously  to  enquire
into  its  pleas  before  God,  and  the  pleas  of  God  against  itself.
It  should  weigh  carefully  either  what  good  things  it  has
received  from  Him,  or  what  an  ill  return  it  has  made  for  His
goodness  by  wicked  living.  And  this  the  Fleet  never  cease
Prov.l2,lo  do  day  by  day.  Whence  Solomon  well  says,  TJie  thoughts
°'  of  the righteous are  judgments. For  they,  approach the

secret  chambers  of  the  Judge,  in  the  recesses  of  their  own
heart;  they  consider  how  sharply  He  smiles  at  last.  Who  long
patiently  bears  with  them.  They  are  afraid  for  the  sins  which
they  remember  they  have  committed ;  and  they  punish  by
their  tears  the  faults  which  they  know  they  have  perpetrated.
They  dread  the  searching  judgments  of  God,  even  in  those
sins,  which  they  perchance  cannot  discover  in  themselves.
For  they  see  that  that  is  observed  by  Divine  Power,  which
they,  through  human  weakness,  do  not  see  in  themselves.
They  beliold  the  severe  Judge,  Who  strikes  a  heavier  blow


Thought  of  future  Judgment.,  a  help  to  our  own  penitence. 1 03

the  slower  lie is  in  coming. They  contemplate  also  the  Book
assembly  of  the  holy  Fathers  seated  with  Him  in  judgment,  '  ' '


and  blame  themselves  for  having  slighted  either  their  words  2.  '
or  their  examples.  And,  in  this  secret  chamber  of  inward
judgment,  constrained  by  the  sentence  of  their  own  con-
science, they  chasten  with  ]:)enitencc,  that  which  they  have
committed  through  pride.  For  they  there  count  over  what-
ever comes  against,  and  assails  them.  There  do  they  crowd
before  their  eyes  every  thing  they  should  weep  for.  There
do  they  behold  wliatever  can  be  searched  out  by  the  wrath
of  the  severe  Judge.  There  do  they  suffer  as  mail^  punish-
ments as  they  are  afraid  of  suffering.  And,  in  the  sentence
thus  conceived  in  the  mind  there  is  present  every  agency
which  is  needed  for  the  fuller  punishment  of  those  con-
victed by  it.  For  the  conscience  accuses,  reason  judges,
fear  binds,  and  pain  torlm'es.  And  this  judgment  punishes
the  more  certainly,  the  more  inward  is  its  rage  ;  because  it
does  not  come  to  us  from  any  thing  v.ithout.  For  when  any
one  has  begun  to  enter  on  this  business  of  examination
against  himself,  he  is  himself  the  prosecutor  who  arraigns,
he  is  himself  the  accused  who  is  arraigned.  He  hates
himself,  as  he  remembers  himself  to  have  been  :  and  in  the
person  of  his  present  self  persecutes  his  former  self.  And
a  contest  is  raised  by  a  man  in  his  mind  against  himself,
bringing  forth  peace  with  God.  This  struggle  ol  the  heart
the  Lord  required,  when  He  said,  by  the  Prophet,  I  attended  ^gt. 8,6.
and  hearkened:  no  man  upeaketh  what  is  good,  there  is  no
one  that  doth  penance  for  his  sin,  saying,  What  hate  I  done"?
He  was  appeased  by  this  struggle  of  the  heart,  when  He
spake  to  His  Prophet,  of  King  Ahab^  reproving  himself,
saying,  Hast  thou  seen  Ahah  hnnihled  before  Me?  therefore^  Kings
because  he  liath  humbled  himself  for  My  sake,  I  will  not  '
bring  the  evil  in  his  days.

14.  Since  then  it  is  now  in  our  power  to  undergo  an
inward  judgment  of  our  mind  against  ourselves,  let  us
examine  and  accuse  our  own  selves,  and  torture  our  former
selves  by  penitence.  Let  us  not  cease  to  judge  ourselves,
while  it  is  in  our  power.  Let  us  careful!}-  attend. to  what  is
said,  For  it  is  no  longer  in  the  power  of  man  to  come  near
to  God  for  judgment. For  it  is  a  propeity  of  reprobates  to


104 Daily  self  examination  a  means  of  inward  reneioal.

Job  34,  be  ever  doing  wrong,  and  never  to  repent  of  what  they  have

: —  done. For  they  pass  over,  with  blinded  mind,  every  thing

that  they  do,  and  do  not  acknowledge  what  they  have  done,
except  when  they  have  been  punished.  But  it  is  the
custom  of  the  Elect,  on  the  other  hand,  to  examine  daily  into
their  conduct  from  the  very  first  springs  of  their  thoughts,
and  to  drain  to  the  bottom,  whatever  impurity  flows  forth
from  thence.  For  as  we  do  not  notice  how  our  limbs  grow,
our  body  increases,  our  appearance  changes,  our  hair  turns
from  black  to  white,  (for  all  these  things  take  place  in  us,
without  our  knowing  it,)  in  like  manner  is  our  mind  changed
from  itself,  by  the  very  habit  of  anxiety  every  moment  of
our  life  ;  and  we  do  not  perceive  it,  unless  Ave  sit  down  to
carefully  watch  our  inmost  condition,  and  weigh  our  advances
and  failures  day  by  day.  For  in  this  life,  to  stand  still,  is,  in
itself,  to  go  back,  as  it  were,  to  our  old  state,  and  when  the
mind  is  left  undisturbed,  it  is  overpowered  by  an  old  age,  as
it  were,  of  torpor:  because  by  neglecting  itself,  and  by  losing
insensibly  its  proper  strength,  it  wastes  away,  unknown  to
itself,  from  the  appearance  of  its  former  power.  Whence  it
is  sail  by the  Prophet,  under  the character  of  Ephraim,

Ilos.7,9.^^l>'(iffffSfs  Itave  devoured  his  sirengtli,  and  he  knew  it  not,
but  even  gray  hairs  are  sprinkled  on  him,  and  he  himself  was
ignorant  of  it.  But  when  the  mind  enquires  into  itself,  and
examines  itself  carefully  with  penitence,  it  is  renewed  from
this  its  old  nature,  by  being  bathed  with  tears,  and  kindled
with  grief;  and,  though  it  had  been  well  nigh  frozen  with  the
chill  of  age,  it  glows  afresh  by  a  supply  of  the  zeal  of  inward
love.  Whence  the  Apostle  Paul  warns  his  disciples,  who
were  growing  old  by  contact  with  this  mortal  life, saying,

Eph.  4,  Be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind.

15.  But  both  the  examples  of  the  F'athers,  and  the  pre-
cepts of  holy  Scripture,  assist  us  much  in  acting  thus.  For
if  we  look  at  the  doings  of  the  Saints,  and  lend  an  ear  to  the
Divine  commands,  the  sight  of  the  one  and  the  hearing  of
the  other  inflames  us.  And  our  heart  is  not  benumbed  with
torpor,  when  it  is  urged  on  by  imitation  of  them.-  Whence
ev.  6,  it  is  well  said  to  Moses,  The  fire  on  the  altar  shall  always-
hnr)i,  which  the  priest  shall  feed,  putting  woodonit^every.
day  in  the  morning. For  the  altar  of  God  is  our  hearty  in


23.


12.


Fire  of  love  in  the  heart  needs  fuel  to  sustain  it.  105

which the  fire  is ordered always  to burn : because it  is Book
necessary  that  the  fl;uue  of  love  should  constantly  ascend  •

therefrom  to  God.  And  the  priest  should  put  wood  thereon
every  day,  lest  it  should  go  out.  For  every  one  who  is
endowed  with  faith  in  Christ,  is  made  specially  a  member  of
the  Great  High  Priest,  as  Peter  the  Apostle  says  to  all  the
faithful,  JJut  ye  are  a  chosen  race,  a  royal  jrriestliood.  And  ^  Pet. 2,
as  the  Apostle  John  says,  Thou  hast  made  us  a  kingdom  Rev.  l
and  priests  to  our  God.  The  Priest  therefore  feeding  the^'
fire  on  the  altar,  must  place  fuel  on  it  every  day  ;  that  is,
every  faithful  person  must  never  cease  to  collect  together  in
his  heart  as  well  the  examples  of  those  who  have  gone
before,  as  also  the  testimonies  of  Holy  Scripture,  that  the
flame  of  love  may  not  be  extinguished  within  it.  For  to
make  use  of,  either  the  examples  of  the  Fathers,  or  the
precepts  of  the  Lord,  in  exciting  our  love,  is,  as  it  were,  to
supply  fuel  to  the  tire.  For  since  our  new  life  within  daily
gi'ows  old,  by  its  very  converse  with  this  world,  fire  must  be
fed  by  a  supply  of  wood,  so  that  while  it  wastes  itself  away
by  the  habits  of  our  own  condition,  it  may  revive  by  means
of  the  examples  and  testimonies  of  the  Fathers.  And  it  is
there  rightly  ordered,  that  wood  should  be  thrown  on  every
day  in  the  morning.  For  these  things  are  not  done,  unless
when  the  night  of  blindness  is  extinguished.  Or  certainly,
because  the  morning  is  the  first  part  of  the  day,  every  one
of  the  faithful  nuist  put  aside  the  thoughts  of  this  life,  and
consider  in  the  first  place,  that  he  must  enkindle  by  every
means  in  his  power,  that  zeal  which  is  even  now  as  it  were
failing  within  him.  For  this  fire  on  the  altar  of  the  Lord,
that  is,  on  our  heart,  is  speedily  extinguished,  if  it  is  not
carefully  renewed  by  an  application  of  the  examples  of  the
Fathers,  and  the  testimonies  of  the  Lord.

16.  But  it  is  rightly  subjoined  in  this  place,  And  z^7/e/<  Lev.  6,
the  burnt  offering  is  placed  upon  it  he  shall  burn  I  lie  fat  of
the  peace  offerings.  For  whoever  kindles  within  himself
this  fire  of  love,  places  himself  upon  it  as  a  burnt  offer-
ing, becaase  he  burns  out  every  fault,  which  wickedly
lived  mthiu  hira.  For  when  he  examines  the  secrets  of
his  own  thoughts,  and  sacrifices  his  wicked  life,  by  the
swor(!  of  conversion,  he  has  placed  himself  on  the  allar  of


106 Precept  and  example,  JeretniatCs  ropes  and  rags.
Job  34,  his  own  heart, and  kindled  himself  with  the fire of  love.

go

'- — And  the  fat  of  the  peace  offerings  smells  sweetly  from  this


victim:  because  the  inward  fatness  of  new  love,  making
peace  between  ourselves  and  God,  emits  from  us  the
sweetest  odour.  But  since  this  self-same  love  continues
inextinguishable  in  the heart  of  the  Elect,  it  is  there  fitly

Lev.  6,  subjoined.  This  is  that  perpetual  Jire,  icliich  shall  never  go
out  ON  the  allar.  This  (ire  in  truth  will  never  go  out  on  the
altar,  because  the  glow  of  love  increases  in  their  minds  even
after  this  life.  For  it  is  the  effect  of  eternal  contemplation,
that  Almighty  God  is  loved  the  more  deeply,  the  more  He  is
seen.

17.  But  that  we  are  delivered  from  the  depths  of  this  life,
when  aided  by  the  Divine warning,  and  the examples  of

Jer.  38,  those  who  have  gone  before,  is  also  well  signified  by  Jeremiah
the  Prophet  being  lowered  into  a  well;  for  ropes  and  old
rags  are  let  down,  in  order  to  raise  him  out  of  it.  For  what
is  t3'pified  by  the  ropes  but  the  precepts  of  the  Lord }  For
since  they  both  bind  us  fast,  and  snatch  us  away  when
involved  in  evil  doings,  they  tie,  as  it  were,  and  draw  us,  they
confine  and  raise  us  up.  But  for  fear  he  should  be  cut,  when
bound,  and  dragged  by  the  ropes,  old  rags  are  at  the  same
time  lowered  down :  because  the  examples  of  the  old  fathers
strengthen,  that  the  Divine  commands  may  not  alarm  us.
And,  by  comparing  ourselves  with  them,  we  presume  that
we  are  able  to  do  that,  which  we  shrink  from,  through  our
own  weakness.  If  then  we  are  anxious  to  be  raised  from
the  depth,  let  us  be  fastened  with  ropes,  that  is,  let  us  be
bound  by  the  precepts  of  the  Lord.  But  let  old  rags  also
be  placed  between,  for  the  ropes  to  be  held  better'  by  their
means:  that  is,  let  us  be  supported  by  the  examples  of  those
of  old  times,  that  the  subtle  precepts  may  not,  as  they  raise
up,  wound  us  who  are  infirm  and  timid.  The  Apostle  Paul
used  to  apply,  as  it  were,  some  old  rags,  when  he  adapted
the  examples  of  the  ancients to  his  spiritual  precepts,  in

Heb. 11,  order  to  raise  up  his  disciples,  saying. The  righteous  had

■ '■ trial  of  mockiiigs  and  scourgings,  m weaver  also  of  bonds

and imprisonments: they acre stoned, tliey  were sawn

asmider,  were  tempted,  tvere  slain with the  sword. And

Heb.  1-2,  shortly  after.  Having  therefore  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses


Seeking  ouhoard  things  makes  man  dull  to  those  loithin. 107

placed  over  us,  laying  aside  everij  weight,  and  the  sin  which  Book

• XXV
snrfoimds us,  let  ns  run with  patience  to  the  contest  set '

before  us;  and  again,  Remember  tJtose  nlto  are  placed  over  Meh  13,
yoti,  who  have  spoken  to  you  the  icord  of  God,  whose  faith
imitate,  looking  to  the  end  of  their  conversation.  He  had,
namely,  in  a  former  passage,  lowered  ropes,  as  it  were,
while  announcing  spiritual  precepts.  But  afterwards  he
applied  old  rags,  as  it  were,  when  mentioning  the  examples
of  ancestors.

18.  Roused  then  by  the  voices  of  so  many  precepts,  and
aided  by  the  comparison  of  so  many  examples,  let  us  turn
back  to  our  hearts,  and  examine carefully  all  our  doings.
And  let  us  blame  whatever  within  us  offends  against  the  will
of  Divine  rectitude,  in  order  that  this  very  accusation  may
excuse us with our strict  Judge. For  we  are  the  more
quickly acquitted  in  this  judgment  of  our  conscience,  the
more  strictly  we  regard  ourselves  as  guilty. And  we  must  not
omit  the  opportunities  which  are  afforded  us  for  this  purpose,
because,  after  the  season  of  this  life,  there  is  no  time  for  so
doing. For  it  is  not,  indeed,  said  without  reason.  For  it  is  no
longer  in  the  power  cf  man  to  come  near  to  God  for  judg-
ment. For  we  are  reminded  of  what  we  cannot  do  then,  in
order  that  we  may  not  neglect,  now,  what  we  can  do. But
behold, engagements occupy our  minds, and,  from  their
constant  contact  with  us,  turn  away  the  e^e  of  our  mind  from
self  consideration. For our miod  is distracted  by those
visible  things,  which  it  beholds,  and  when it  is  employed
outwardly,  it  forgets  what  is  going  on  in  itself  within. But
the  Divine  voice  pierces  it  with  its  terrible  sentences,  like  so
many  nails,  to  keep  it  vigilant;  that  man  may,  at  least  when
startled  with  fear,  tremble  at  the  secret  judgments  hanging
over  him,  Avhich  he  pretends  not  to  see,  when  overwhelmed
by  torpor. For,  as  we  said  above,  the  mind  is  weighed  down,
by  being  fatally  accustomed  to  the  habits  of  the  old  life,  and
is  lulled  as  in  sleep  on  these  outward  objects  which  it  beholds;
and  after  havingonce  wasted  its  strengthin  seeking  after  visible
things  without,  it  has  lost  all its  power  for  contemplating
invisible  things  within. Whence  it  is  now  necessary  that
the  mind  which  is  detached  by  visible  objects,  should be
smitten  with  invisible  judgments,  and  that,  since  it  has  laid


108 How  judgment  already  takes  effect  ivithin  the  soul.

Job  34,  itself  low  b}-  its  evil  indulgence  in  these  outward  objects,  it
'—  should  seek,  at  least  when  smitten,  that  which  it  has  forsaken.


But  behold,  Holy  Scripture  transfixes  drowsy  hearts  with  a
kind  of  dread,  in  order  that  they  may  not  cling  to  those
things  which  come  to  nothing  without,  but  which  have
eternally  ruined  them  within.  It  points  out  to  us  what  is
decreed  by  the  secret  sentence,  in  order  that  these  outward
things  may  not  be  too  much  thought  of.  It  informs  us  Avliat
is  doing  above  us  \\ith  regard  to  us,  in  order  that  we  may
turn  the  eyes  of  our  heart  from  these  outward  and  temporal
objects,  to  the  secret  of  the  inward  disposal.  For  after
much  had  been  said,  concerning  the  punishment  of  the
wicked,  there  is  suddenly  introduced  the  secret  judgment,
mercifully  and  justly  passed  upon  us:  how  some  lose  that
which  they  appeared  to  hold  fast,  and  some  receive  that
which  others  deservedly  lose. For  he  says,

Ver.  24.  He  shall break  in  jji^ces many  and  without
number,  and  shall  make  others  to  stand  in  their  stead.
viii. 19.  This  is  daily  occurring. But  because  the  end  of  both
parties  is  not  seen  as  yet,  it  is  less  dreaded. For  the  repro-
bate never  acknowledge  their  fault,  excepting  when under
punishment. And  because  punishment  is  deferred,  the  fault
is  made  light  of But  they  fall  from  a  state  of  righteousness,
and  other's,  on  their  fall,  obtain  the  place  of  life. But  they
think  not  of  their  fall,  since  they  do  not  consider  the  death
which  awaits  them  for  ever. For  did  they  but  turn their
eyes  to  what  they  are about to suffer there,  they  w'ould
tremble  at  what  they  are  doing  here. But  it  is  plain  to  all
that  Almighty  God  will  make  a  public  enquiry  at  that  final
ordeal,  so  as  to  give  up  some  to  torments,  and  admit  others
to  a  participation  of  the  heavenly  kingdom. But  that  is  now
daily  taking  place  by  a  secret,  which  is  then  made  manifest
by  a  public,  judgment. For  either  searching,  or  ordering,  the
hearts  of  men,  one  by  one,  with  justice  and  mercy,  He  casts
forth  some  of  them  to  outward  pursuits,  and  leads  others  on  to
those which are withiii. He inspires these to seek for
inward  joys,  and  leaves  those  to  think,  for  their  pleasure,  on
outward  things. He  raises  the  mind  of  these  to  heavenly
objects,  and  immerses  the  pride  of  the  others  in  the  basest
desires. But  the hearts  of  other  men  are shut up  from


Man  sees  not  ivho  are  draion  inward,  niho  cast  outward. 109

human  sight,  and  it  is  not  known  who  is  rejected  ;  since  the  Book
thoughts  of  each  man  cannot  be  penetrated. For  ofttimes,


though  tlie  heart  be  evilly  disposed,  the  deliberation  of  thouglit
has  not  been  carried  into  efl'ect,  and  a  man  is  perhaps  still  con-
strained within  by  habit,  who  already  wanders  abroad  in  his
mind.  But  such  an  one,  whoever  he  be,  fell  in  the  sight  of  the
inward  Judge,  as  soon  as  he  departed  in  desire  from  seeking
for  things  within.  Ihit  others,  sometimes,  after  a  course  of
evil  living,  revive,  with  sudden  affection,  to  a  hope  of  heaven,
and  they  who  had  dissipated  themselves  by  sinful  conduct,
bring  themselves  back,  by  self  reproof,  to  the  bosom  of  inward
repentance.  And  men  still  looking  back  to  this  conduct,
think  them  still  to  be  such,  as  they  knew  them  to  be  in
behaviour.  But  they  themselves,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the
examination  of  strict  consideration,  attack  their  former  life
as  they  remember  it  to  have  been  ;  and  it  is  known  what
they  were,  but  what  they  have  now  begun  to  be  is  not  known.
In  both  then  of  these  classes  it  is  frequently  the  case,  that
both  they  who  in  the  judgment  of  men  seem  to  stand,  are
already  fallen  in  the  sight  of  the  Eternal  Judge  :  and  that
those  who  are  still  fallen  before  men,  already  stand  firm  in
the  sight  of  the  Eternal  Judge.  For  what  man  could
suppose  that  Judas,  even  after  the  ministry  of  the  apostle-
ship,  would  lose  his  portion  in  life  ?  And  who  would  believe,
on  the  other  hand,  that  the  thief  would  find  a  means  of
life  even  at  the  very  instant  of  his  death  ?  But  the  Judge
secretly  presiding,  and  discerning  the  hearts  of  these  two
persons,  mercifully  established  the  one,  and  justly  crushed
the  other.  He  cast  forth  the  one  with  severity,  He  drew  the
otlier  within  of  His  mercy.  And  hence  in  announcing  even
by  His  Prophet,  that  some  would  fall  and  others  be  raised  up
at  the  lime  of  His  passion,  He  well  says,  /  mingled  J/yPs.  102,
drink  u-illi  loeeping.  For  drink  is  drawn  in  from  without,  *
but  weeping  pours  out  from  within.  For  the  Lord  then  to
mingle  drink  with  weeping,  is  for  rlim  to  draw  some  within,
from  outward  things,  and  to  cast  off  others  from  an  inward  to
an  outward  condition.  He  shall  break  in  pieces,  then,  many
and  niUiout  number,  and  shall  make  others  to  stand  in
their  stead.

•20.  But,  as  was  said  belbre,  this  breaking  is  first  wrought


]  10  Holo  the  heart  is  gradually  broken  down  by  mi.

Job  34,  witliin,  ill  order  to  its  being afterwards  displayed  witliout.


24.


By tliis breaking tlie outward parts of  some sometimes

appear  to  be  still  sound,  while  the  inward  parts  have  already

Prov, 16,  rotted  away. For  it  is written,  Before  ruin the  heart is

exalted.  They  are  smitten  then  on  tlie  very  point  in  which  they

Ez.  6,9.  are  prond. Whence  it  is  written,  /  have  broken  their  heart

vhich  committeth  fornication^  and  ichich departeth  from

Me. For  to  delight  ontwardly  in  forbidden  objects,  is  to

commit fornication within. But this vciy pride of  the

haughty  man  is  a  great  crushing  of  his  heart. For  he  falls

from  the  integrity  of  sound  health,  just  as  he  is  puffed  up

with  pride,  on  account  of  any  virtue. For  proud  men  despise

God,  and,  forsaking  the  glory  of  the  Creator,  seek  their  own.

And,  for  them  to  have  lost  the  support  of  their  superior,  and  to

have  sunk  back  on  themselves,  is  for  them  to  have  already

fallen. They  are  crushed  too  because,  having  abandoned  the

things  of  heaven,  they seek  the  earth. For  what  greater

crushing  can  there  be,  than,  having  forsaken  the  Creator,  to

seek the creature,  having  forsaken the  joys  above,  to be

eager  only  for  things  below  ? Whence  it  is  well  said  by  the

Ps.  147,  p,-ophet, But  He  humbles  sinners  even  to  the  earth. For

when  they  have  lost  heavenly  things,  every  thing  which  they

thirst  after  is  earthly, and  while they endeavour to  seem

greater, that  which  they seek  after  is  of  less value. Of

Jer.  17,  whom  it  is  well  said  by  Jeremiah,  Departing  from  Thee  they

^^' shall  be  written  in  the  earth. But  it  is  said  on  the  other

Lukeio,  hand  of  the  Elect,  Rejoice,  because  your  names  are  written

in  heaven. This  crushing,  then,  first  steals  on  in  the  mind,

in  order  that  it  may  afterwards  advance  in  outward  act. It

shakes first the foundation of  the thoughts, in order  to

smite afterwards  the  fabric of  conduct. We  must  labour

therefore with  the  greatest  care,  in order  that  it  may  be

avoided in the place where it  takes  its  rise. For  it is

Prov.  4,  written.  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  ivatchfulness,  because  life

M  t  1"  proceedeth  f-om  it. And  it  is  written  again,  From  the  heart

19, jjroceed  evil  thoughts. We  must  watch, therefore,  within,

lest  the  mind  should  fall,  when  it  is  exalted. Let  us  guard

within  all  that  we  do  without. For,  if  once  the  rottenness  of

pride  has  eaten  into the  marrow of  the  heart,  the empty

husk  of  outward  appearance speedily  fiills. But  we  must


Fear  of  being,  in  the  Churchy  beyond  the  number  of  the  Elect.  Ill

observe, that,  while  some are said to receive strength to  Book

, . XXV.
stand firm,  when  others  fall, the  number  of  the Elect  is -


shewn  to  be  fixed  and  definite. Whence  it  is  said  also,  to

the  Church  of  Philadelphia,  tlnough  its  Angel,  //o/f/ y«s/ I^«^v.  3,

that  which  thou  hast,  that  another  take  not  thy  crown.

21.  By  this  announcement  tlien,  in  which  it  is  said,  that
the  life  of  some  is  exalted,  and  that  of  others  is  crushed,
both  the  hope  of  the  humble  is  cherished,  and  the  pride  of
the  haughty  brought  low :  since  those  can  forfeit  the  good
qualities  of  which  they  are  proud,  and  these  enjoy  the  good
things,  which  they  were  despised  for  not  possessing.  Let  us
tremble,  then,  at  the  blessings  we  have  received,  and  not
despair  of  those  who  have  not  yet  obtained  them.  For  we
know  what  we  are  to-day  ;  but  we  know  not  what  we  may
become  after  a  little  while.  But  these  persons  whom,  per-
chance, we  despise,  can  begin  late,  and  yet  surpass  our
conduct,  by  their  more  fervent  zeal.  We  must  fear,  there-
fore, lest  he  should  rise,  even  on  our  fall,  who  is  now
derided  by  us,  who  are  standing  firm :  although,  indeed,  he
knows  not  how  to  stand  firm  himself,  who  has  learned  to
ridicule  him,  who  is  yet  unsteady.  But  the  Apostle  Paul,
enforcing  this  dread  of  heavenly  judgments,  into  the  hearts
of  his  disciples,  says,  Let  him  that  ihinkelh  lie  starideth,  i  Cor.

.  ]0 12.

take  heed  lest  he  fall.  But  by  saying,  He  breaketh  in  pieces,  '
and  by  adding  immediately,  icithout  number,  he  desired
either  to  express  the  number  of  the  reprobate,  which  sur-
passes the  amount  of  human  calculation;  or  he,  certainly,
wished  to  point  out,  that  all  who  perish  are  not  reckoned  in
the  number  of  the  Elect,  and  that  they  are  therefore  innu-
merable, as  running  beyond  the  number.  Whence  the
Prophet,  on  beholding  that  as  many,  at  this  period  of  the
Church,  believe  only  in  appearance,  as  it  is  doubtless
certain  exceed  the  number  and  amount  of  the  Elect,  declares.
They  are  multiplied  above  )i umber.  As  though  he  were
saying  to  many  who  are  entering  the  Church,  Even  those
come  to  the  faith  in  appearance  only,  who  are  excluded  from
the  number  of  the  kingdom,  because  in  truth  they  surpass
by  their  multiplicity  the  number  of  the  Elect.-  Whence
also  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet  Jeremiah,  The  city  shall  ie  Jer.  3i,
built  to  the  Lord,  from  the  tower  of  Ananehel,  even  to  the


1 12 City  of  God  here  exceeds  its  measure. Judicial  blindness.

Job  M,gate  of  the  comer,  and  it  will  go  forth  beyond  the  standard

: —  of  measure. For no one  in  truth is  ignorant  tliat  Holy

Church  is  the  city  of  the  Lord.  But  Ananehel  is  inter-
preted the  grace  of  God,  and  two  walls  meet  together  in  a
corner.  The  city  of  the  Lord  is  said  therefore  to  be  built
from  the  tower  of  Ananehel,  even  to  the  gate  of  the  corner:
because  Holy  Church,  beginning  from  the  loftiness  of  Divine
grace,  is  built  u]>,  as  far  as  to  the  entrance  of  both  peoples,
namely,  Jew  and  Gentile.  But  because,  as  its  members  inti*e«se,
reprobates  also  are  included  therein,  it  is  liily  added,  And  it
will  go  forth  beyond  the  standard  of  measure:  because  it  is
extended  even  to  those  who^  transgreising  the  standard  of
justice,  are  not  within  the  number  of  tl\e  hearenly  measure.
Whence it is said also to  the  sama Church by Isaiah,

ls.54,3.  For  thou  shall  spread  for/ h  on  the  right  hand,  and  on  the
left,  and  thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles.  For  it  is
extended  in  so  great  a  multitude  of  Gentiles,  to  the  right
hand,  when  it  admits  some  to  be  justified.  And  it  is  ex-
tended to  the  left  also,  when  it  admits  into  itself  some  who
will  even  remain  in  sin.  On  account  of  this  multitude,
which  lies  beyond  the  number  of  the  Elect,  the  Lord  says  in

Mat.20,the  Gospel,  Many  are  called  hut  few  are  chosen.  But,
because  some  are  crushed,  while  others  are  chosen,  in  con-
sequence  of  the  deserts of  the  sufferer, and  not  from  the

Eora.  3, injustice  of  Him  who  punishes,  (for  God  is  not  unjust,  Who
injiicleth  tvrath,)  it  is  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  25.  For  He  knoweth  their  works,  and  therefore  will
He  bring  night  on  them,  and,  they  shall  be  crushed.
ix,  22.  It  is  specially  to  be  understood,  that  every  sinner  is,
in  two  ways,  crushed  in  the  night;  either  when  he  is  struck
by  the  sufl'ering  of  punishment  from  without,  or  when  he  is
blinded  by  a  secret  sentence  within.  He  falls  at  night,  when
he  loses for  ever  the  light  of  life,  by  the last  judgment.

Mat.22,  Whence  it  is  written.  Bind  him  hands  and  feet,  and  send

^^'  him  into  outer  darkness.  For  he  is  then  sent  of  force
into  outer  darkness ;  because  he  is  now  blinded  of  his  own
will  with  darkness  within.  But,  again,  the  sinner  is  crushed
at  night,  when,  condemned  by  the  overthrow  of  former  sin-
ners, he  finds  not  the  light  of  truth,  and  knows  not  what  he
ought  to  do for the future. For ever}-  sin, which is  not


Sin  may  be  the  cause  or  the  punishment  of  sin.  113

speedily  wiped  out  by  penitence,  is  either  a  sin,  and  a  cause  Book
of  sin,  or  else  a  sin,  and  the  punishment  of  sin. For  a  sin -


which  penitence  does  not  wash  away,  soon  leads  on,  by
its  very  weight,  to  another.  Whence  it  is  not  only  a  sin,
but  a  sin,  and  a  cause  of  sin.  For,  from  that  sin,  a  suc-
ceeding fault  takes  its  rise,  by  which  the  blinded  mind  is
led  on  to  endure  greater  bondage  from  another.  But  a  sin
which  arises  from  a  sin,  is  no  longer  merely  a  sin,  but  a  sin,
and.a.  punishment  of  sin.  Because  Almighty  God  obscures,  by
ajust  judgment,  the  heart  of  a  sinner,  that  he  may  fall  into  other
sins  also,  through  desert  of  his  fonner  sin.  For  the  man
whom  He  willed  not  to  set  free,  He  has  smitten  by  forsaking
him.  That,  theii,  is  not  improperly  called  the  punishment  of
sin,  which,  in  consequence  of  a  just  blindness  having  been
inflicted  from  above,  is  committed  by  way  of  punishment  for
former  offences.  And  it  is  the  result  of  a  system,  ordained
indeed  above,  but  thrown  into  confusion  by  men's  wicked-
ness below,  that  a  preceding  sin  is  the  cause  of  that  which
follows,  and,  again,  a  subsequent  sin  the  punishment  of  that
which  precedes  it.  This  seed,  as  it  were,  of  error,  Paul  had
clearly  observed  in  the  unbelieving  and  unstable,  when
saying.  Who  when  they  had  known  God,  glorified  Him  not  Uom.i,
as  God,  neither  were  thankful,  but  became  vain  in  their^^'
thoughts.  But  he  immediately  added  that  which  sprang  up
from  this  seed  of  error,  saying.  Wherefore  God  gave  them  up 'Rom.  i,
to  the  desires  of  their  own  heart  unto  uncleanness,  to  dis-  ^'
honour  their  own  bodies  between  themselves.  For  because,
though  knowing  God,  they  wittingly  committed  the  sin  of
pride,  they  are  also  so  blinded  as  not  to  be  aware  of  the  sin
they  are  committing.  And  they  who  are  unwilling  to  follow
their  own  understanding  in  sin,  that  is  the  cause  of  sin,  are
deprived  of  the  light  of  understanding  in  sin,  that  is  the  punish-
ment of  sin.  The  pitfal  of  subsequent  sins  is  covered  over
by  the  demerits  of  former  sins,  in  order  that  he,  who  knowingly
commits  sin,  may  afterwards  fall,  even  unwittingly,  in  other
sins.

23.  It  is  provided,  in  fact,  that  some  faults  are  smitten  with
other  faults,  in  order  that  their  very  growth  in  sin  maybe  the
punishment  of  sinners.  For  because  Almighty  God  grants
time  for  repentance,  which  human  wickedness  perverts,  never-

VOL.  III.  I


114 Permission  to  go  on  in  shi,  the  heaviest  judgment.

Job  34,  theless,  to  the  practice  of  its  own  iniquity,  our  guilt  is  doubt-

^  less  permitted  to  increase  by  the  just  judgment  of  God,  in

order  that  it  may  be  heaped  up,  for  Him  to  stiike  it  at  last

a  heavier  blow. For  hence  the  Apostle  Paul  says  again  of

iThess.  certain  persons,  To  Jill  up  their  sins  alivcnj. Hence  it  is

Rev  22  ^'^^^  ^°  John  by  the  voice  of  the  angel,  He  that  liurieth  let

11- him hurt  still,  he  that  is JiUhy  let him be  Jilthy  still.

Ps.  69,  Hence  David  says.  Add  iiiiquily  unto  their  iniquity,  that

'' they  may  not  enter  into  Thy  riyhteotisness. Hence  again  it

Ps.  78,  is  said  of  the  Lord  by  the  same  Psalmist,  Suggestions^  by  evil

J7»??«?'!s- ""•^'^^'^  //e  made  a  way  for  the  patli  of  His  anger. For  the

siones. Lord  justly  permits  the  heart  which  has  been  weighed  down

by  former  demei'its,  to  be  deceived  also  by  the  subsequent

persuasions  of  malignant  spirits,  for,  when  it  is  deservedly

led  into  sin,  its  guilt  is  increased  in  its  punishment.  Whence

also  the  Lord  is  said  to  have  made  a  way  for  His  wrath  out

of  a  path. For  a  way  is  broader  than  a  path. But  to  make

out  of  a  path  a  way  for  His  wrath,  is,  by  strictly  judging  to

extend  the  causes  of  His  wrath,  tliat  they  who  refused,  when

enlightened,  to  act  rightly,  may,  when  justly  blinded,  still  so

act  as  to  deserve  a  greater  punishment. Hence  it  is  said  by

Gen.  15,  jvioses,  The  sins  of  the  Aniorites  are  not  yet  full. Hence

Deut. the  Lord  says  by  the  same  Moses,  For  their  vine  is  of  the

^^^'^~  vineyard  of  Sodom ,  and  their  stock  is  of  Gomorrah. Their

grape  is a  grape  of  gall,  and  the  cluster  of  bitterness  is  in

them. Their  ivine  is  the  ftiry  of  dragons  and  the  rage  of

asps, which  cannot be  healed. Are  not all  these  things

stored  up  with  Me,  and  sealed  up  in  My  treasures? In  the

day  of  vengeance  I  will  repay  them. How  many  of  their

sins  has  Pie  revealed,  and  yet  He  immediately  subjoins.  In

the  time  tcJien  their  foot  shall  have  stumbled. Behold,  their

most  abominable  misdeeds  are  described,  and  yet  for  the  day

of  vengeance, their subsequent  fall  is  looked  forward  to,

whereby  their  faults  are  to  be  heaped  up  to  the  full. They

already  have  enough  to  deserve  punishment ;  but  their  sin  is

still  suffered  to  increase,  in  order  that, sinning,  a  heavier

punishment  may  torture  them. Sin,  the  cause  of  sin,  already

deserves  punishment;  but  it  is  still  deferred,  in  order  that  sin,

the  punishment  of  sin,  may  supply  an  increase  of  suffering.

24.  But  frequently  one  and  the  same  sin  is  also  a  sin  such  as


Progress  from  sin  to  si7i. God  blinds,  as  not  enlightening, 1 15

is both a punishment, and a cause of  sin. We shall  Book

. .  .  xxv

make  this  more  plain,  by  bringing  forward  some  instances.  ^—^ — '-

For  unrestrained  gluttony  excites  the  fulness  of  the  flesh  to
the  heat  of  lust.  But  lust,  when  committed,  is  frequently
concealed  either  by  perjury  or  murder,  for  fear  it  should  be
punished  by  the  vengeance  of  human  laws.  Let  us  suppose
to  ourselves  then,  that  a  man  has  given  the  reins  to  his
gluttony,  that,  being  overcome  by  his  gluttony,  he  has  com-
mitted the  sin  of  adultery,  that  being  detected  in  adultery,
he  has  secretly  murdered  the  husband  of  the  adulteress,  lest
he  should  be  brought  to  judgment.  This  adultery  then,
standing  between  gluttony  and  murder,  springing  from  the
one,  and  giving  being  to  the  other,  is  a  sin,  and  both  the
punishment,  and  the  cause  of  sin  also.  It  is  in  truth  a  sin
of  itself,  but  the  punishment  of  sin,  because  it  has  increased
the  guilt  of  gluttony ;  but  it  is  the  cause  of  sin,  because  it
also  gave  birth  to  the  subsequent  murder.  One  and  the  same
sin,  then,  is  both  the  punishment  of  the  preceding,  and  the
cause  of  the  subsequent,  sin :  because  it  both  condemns  past
sins,  while  it  adds  to  their  amount,  and  sows  the  seeds  of
future  sins,  to  deserve  condemnation.  Because  then  the  eye
of  the  heart  is  blinded  by  previous  sins,  that  blindness  which
confuses  the  mind  of  the  sinner,  by  condemning  him  for  his
former  offence,  is  properly  designated  '  night:'  because  by
this  the  light  of  truth  is  concealed  from  the  eye  of  the  sinner.
It  is  therefore  well  said,  For  He  knoiveih  their  works,  and
therefore  will  He  bring  night  on  them,  and  they  shall  be
crushed.  Because,  as  has  been  often,  observed,  they  doubt-
less commit  previous  offences,  in  order  that  they  should
be  involved  again  in  sin  by  the  darkness  which  follows,  so
that  they  are  now  as  unable  to  behold  the  light  of  righteous-
ness, as  they  were  unwilling  to  behold  it  when  they  were
able.  But  the  Lord  is  said  to  bring  night  on  them,  not
because  He  Himself  brings  on  the  darkness,  but  because  He
does  not  enlighten  in  His  mercy  the  darkened  hearts  of
sinners.  So  that  His  having  blinded  men  in  the  night
is  His  not  having  willed  to  deliver  them  from  the  gloom
of  blindness. It  follows,

Ver.  26.  He  hath  smitten  them  as  ungodly  men,  in  the
place  of  beholders.

I  2


116 Evil  me7i  smitten,  though  placed  ichere  God  is  seen.

Job  34, 25.  In  holy  Scripture  the  word  '  as,'  is  wont  to  be  used,

26  •  '

sometimes  for  resemblance,  sometimes  for  reality. For  it  is


2  Cor  6  "sed  for  resemblance,  as  when  the  Apostle  says,  As  sorrozvfzil,

10- yet  alivay  rejoicing : but  for  the  realit}-,  as  John  says.  We

14, '  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  Only-Begotten  of  the

Father. But  in  this  passage  it  makes  no  difference,  whether

it  is  put  for  resemblance,  or  reality  :  for,  in  whatever  way  it

is  taken,  the  evil  life  of  the  wicked  is  plainly  signified. But

holy Scripture  specially calls  unbelievers  '  ungodly.' For

sinners  are distinguished  from  ungodly  by  this  difference,

that  though  every  ungodly  man  is  a  sinner,  yet  every  sinner

is  not  ungodly. For  even  a  man  who  is  godly  in  the  Faith

lJohni,can  be  called  a  sinner. Whence  John  says,  If  we  say  that

we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves. But  a  man  is  properly

called  '  ungodly'  who is estranged from the holiness of

Ps.  ],  5,  religion. For  of  such  the  Prophet  says.  The  ungodly  shall

not  rise  up  in  the  judgment. But  Holy  Church  is  called

the  place  of  beholders. For  people  rightly  assemble  therein,

in  order  that  the  True  Light,  which  is  God  Himself,  may  be

Ex.  33,  seen. Whence  it  is  said  to  Moses,  There  is  a  place  by  Me,

^^'^"' and  thou shall stand  upon a rock, when My Majesty

ib.  23. passeth  by. And  shortly  afterwards,  /  will  take  away  My

hand,  and  thou  shall  see  My  back  parts. For,  by  the  place,

is  typified  the  Church,  but  by  the  rock,  the  Lord,  but  by

Moses,  the  multitude  of  the  people  of  Israel,  which  did  not

believe,  when  the  Lord  was  preaching  upon  earth. It  stood,

therefore,  on  the  rock,  beholding  the  back  of  the  Lord,  as

He  was  passing  by :  because  in  truth  having  been  brought

into  Holy  Church,  after  the  Passion  and  Ascension  of  the

Lord,  it  obtained  a  knowledge  of  the  faith  in  Christ,  and

beheld  the  back  parts  of  Him,  Whose  presence  it  had  not

seen. Let  it  be  said,  then,  of  those  whom  Divine  Vengeance

finds  within  Holy  Church,  still  persisting  in  their  iniquities  ;

let  it  be  said  of  these,  whose  conduct  Paul  describes  thus.

Tit.  1, Who  conj'ess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  itords  they  deny

Him : let  it  be  said  of  these.  He  hath  smitteti  them  AS

ungodly  in  the  place  of  beholders. For  they  were  standing

in  that  place,  where  they  seemed  to  see  God. They  loved

darkness in that very  place,  where the light  of  truth is

beheld. And  although  they  had  had  their  eyes  opened  in


HolO  sin  and  hypocrisy  lead  to  unbelief.  117

faith,  yet  they  kept  them  closed  in  their  works. Whence  it  Book
is  also  well  said  of  Judtea,  Her  watchmen  are  blind,  because,


'  Is.  56,
namely,  they  did  not  behold  in  works  that  which  they  saw  in  lo.

profession. Whence it is  written also of  Balaam, IVho^yim.

falling  hath  his  eyes  open. For,  falling  in  works,  he  kept ' *

his  eyes  open  in  contemplation. In  like  manner  these  also,

who  open  their  eyes  in  faith,  and  who  see  not  in  works,  who

are placed, from their appearance of  piety, within the

Church,  are  found,  by  their  ungodly  conversation,  without

the  Church. Of  whom  it  is  well  written  in  another  place,

I  satv  the  ungodly  buried,  who  ivhen  iliey  ivere  alive,  icere  Ecdea.

in  the  holy  place,  and  were  praised  in  the  city,  as  men  of^^  ^^'

just  works,

26.  But  the  very  tranquillity  of  the  peace  of  the  Church
conceals  nmny  under  the  Christian  name,  who  are  beset
with  the  plague  of  their  own  wickedness.  But  if  a  light
breath  of  persecution  strikes  them,  it  sweeps  them  away  at
once  as  chaff  from  the  threshing  floor.  But  some  persons
wish  to  bear  the  mark  of  Christian  calling,  because,  since
the  name  of  Christ  has  been  exalted  on  high,  nearly  all
persons  now  look  to  appear  faithful,  and  from  seeing  others
called  thus,  they  are  ashamed  not  to  seem  faithful  themselves ;
but  they  neglect  to  be  that  which  they  boast  of  being  called.
For  they  assume  the  reality  of  inward  excellence,  to  adorn
their  outward  appearance :  and  they  who  stand  before  the
heavenly  Judge,  naked  from  the  unbelief  of  their  heart,  are
clothed,  in  the  sight  of  men,  with  a  holy  profession,  at  least
in  words.

27.  But  some  persons  maintain  the  faith  in  their  inmost
heart,  but  are  not  careful  to  live  faithfully.  For  they  assail
in  their  conduct  that  which  they  reverence  in  profession.
And  it  frequently  happens  that  they  lose,  by  Divine  judg-
ment, even  that  which  they  wholesomely  believe,  through  the
wickedness  of  their  lives.  For  the}^  unceasingly  pollute
themselves  by  wicked  deeds,  and  do  not  believe  that  the
vengeance  of  just  judgment  can  fall  in  retribution  upon  this
conduct.  And  frequently,  when  they  neglect  to  live  strictly,
they  fall  into  unbelief,  even  when  no  one  persecutes  them.
For  they  who  do  not  believe  that  a  strict  judgment  is  hanging-
over  them,  who  imagine  that  they  can  sin,  without  being


118 Evil  spirits  Jinish  their  loork  by  removing  faith.

Job  34, punished  for  it:  how  can  thev  either  be,  or  be  called,  faith-
— ^^^—  fill  ? For  to  believe  that  due  punishment  cannot  be  inflicted
on  their  unrepented  wickedness,  is  to  have  lost  their  faith.
Because then  they scorn to maintain works worthy of
faith,  they  lose  even  the  faith  which  they  seemed  to  pos-
sess. And  the  language  of  destroying  enemies  over  these
is  fitly  mentioned  by  the  Prophet,  under  the  character  of
Pi3. 137,  Jerusalem. For  it  is  said  by  them,  J/a/^'e  her  void,  make  ■
'' her  void,  even  to  the  foundation  thereof. For  Paul  says,
1  Cor. Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  but  that  ichich  is  laid,
' ' which is Christ  Jesus. Destroying enemies, then, make
Jerusalem  bare,  even to  the  foundation,  when  evil  spirits,
having  first  destroyed  the  edifice  of  good  works,  draw  away
also  the  firm  foundation  of  relicrion  from  the  hearts  of  the

o

faithful.  For  works  are  built  on  faith,  as  a  building  on  a
foundation.  To  have  laid  bare  then  even  to  the  foundation,
is,  after  having  overthrown  good  works,  to  have  scattered  the
strength  of  faith.  Hence  also  it  is  said  to  Judcea  by  Jeremiah,
Jer.  2,  The  sojis  also  <f  Memphis  and  Taphnis  have  polluted  thee
even  to  the  head.  For  to  be  itolluted  even  to  the  head,  is,  after
a  habit  of  evil  deeds,  to  be  corrupted  in  the  very  sublimity  of
the  faith.  Fur  when  abandoned  spirits  involve  the  soul  of
any  one  in  wicked  works,  but  cannot  polkite  the  integrity  of
his  faith,  they  pollute,  as  yet,  the  inferior  members,  as  it  were,
but  reach  not  to  the  head.  But  whoever  is  corrupted  in  the
faith,  is  at  once  defiled  even  to  the  head.  For  a  malignant
spirit  reaches,  as  it  were,  from  the  inferior  even  to  the  higher
members,  when,  defiling  the  outward  conduct,  it  corrupts
with  the  disease  of  unbelief  the  pure  loftiness  of  tlie  faith.
Because  then  all  these  things  are  hidden  from  the  eyes  of
men,  but  are  o])en  to  the  siglit  of  God,  and  many  die,  without
faith,  in  this  abode  of  faith  itself,  let  it  be  rightly  said.  He
hath  smitten  litem  as  ungodly  men,  in  the  place  of  beholders.
For  they  exhibit  themselves,  before  men  in  the  Church,  as
godly  persons,  but  because  they  cannot  escape  the  Divine
judgments,  they  are  smitten  as  ungodly.  And  it  tends  to
increase  their  punishment,  that  each  of  them,  having  been
thrown  together  viith  toe  faithful  in  the  Church,  wittingly
despised  the  verity  of  the  faith.  And  a  heavier  punishment
follows  them,  as  the  knowledge  of  good  living  also  attends


Si7is  of  ignorance,  of  injirmitr/,  and  of  set  purpose. 119

them  in  the  examples  of  risrhteous  men. For  the  righteous  Book
and  faithful  brethren  who  are  now  set  before  them,  are  so-i— ^ — -
many  witnesses to assail them in the coming  judgment.
They  know, therefore, that  which they  neglect to  follow.
Whence  it  is  also  filly  subjoined,

Ver.  27. JV/io  departed  from  Him,  as  it  uere  on  purpose.

28.  For  we  must  understand  that  a  sin  is  committed  in xi.
three  ways. For  it  is  perpetrated  either  through  ignorance,
or  infirmitA',  or  of  set  purpose. And  we  sin  more  grievously
from infirmity than through ignorance, but much more
grievously  of  set  purpose than from infirmity. Paul  had
sinned  from ignorance,  when  he  said. Who  was  before  a|  Tim.
blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious,  but  I  obtained
mercy,  because  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief. But  Peter
sinned  through  infirmity,  when  the  single  word  of  a  damsel  Mat.26,
shook  in  him  all  that  strength  of  faith,  which  he  had  spoken  ^bid, 33.
of  to  the  Lord,  and  when  he  denied,  with  his  voice,  the  Lord
Whom  he  held firm  in  his  heart. But  because  a  sin of
infirmity  or  ignorance  is  wiped  away  the  more  easily,  as  it  is
not wilfully committed,  Paul amended by  knowledge  the
points  on  which  he  was  ignorant : and  Peter  strengthened
the  root  of  faith  which  was  moved,  and,  as  it  were,  withering  ibid.  7a.
away, by  watering it with his tears. But  those  persons
sinned intentionally, of  whom  the Master Himself  said.
If  I  had  not  come,  and  spoken  unto  them,  they  would  notZo\n.

. .  15  22.

liave  sin,  hut  noio  they  have  no  excuse  for  their  sin.  And  a  '
little  after,  They  have  both  seen,  and  hated,  both  Me  and  il/y  lbid.24.
Father.  For  not  to  do  good  is  one  thing,  to  hate  a  teacher
of  goodness  another:  as  it  is  one  thing  to  sin  from  pre-
cipitancy, and  another  thing  to  sin  deliberately.  For  a  sin
is  often  committed  from  precipitation,  which  yet  is  condemned
on  thought  and  deliberation.  For  it  frequently  happens  that
a  man  through  infirmity  loves  what  is  right,  and  cannot
perform  it.  But  to  sin  deliberately  is  neither  to  love  nor  to
do  what  is  good.  As  it  is  therefore  sometimes  a  heavier
offence  to  love  sin  than  to  commit  it,  it  is,  in  hke  manner,
more  sinful  to  hate  righteousness,  than  not  to  have  performed
it.  There  are  some  then  in  the  Church,  who  so  far  from
doing  good,  even  persecute  it,  and  who  even  detest  in  others,
what they neglect to do themselves. The sin of  these


120 JVilj'ul  ignorance. Knoioledge  thrust  in  man's  wag.

Job  34,  persons  is  in  truth  not  committed  from  infirmity  or  ignorance,
^ — but  of  intention  alone:  because,  namely,  if  they  wished  to


do  what  is  right,  and  were  unable,  they  would  at  least  love
in  others,  what  they  neglect  in  themselves.  For  were  they
but  only  to  wish  for  it  themselves,  they  would  not  hate  it
when  done  by  others.  But  because  they  despise  in  their
lives,  and  persecute  with  severity  the  very  same  good
qualities  which  they  know  and  hear  of,  it  is  rightly  said,
Who  departed  from  Him  of  purpose.  Whence  also  it  is
rightly  subjoined.

And  would  not  understand  any  of  His  ways.

xii. 29.  For  he  says  not,  they  understand  not  through  infirmity,

but  they  would  not understand ; because men frequently

also  despise  the  knowledge  of  those  things,  which  they  are

Lukel2,  too  proud  to  do. For  since  it  is  written,  The  servant  that

' ' knew  not  his  Lord's  will.,  and  did  commit  things  worthy  of

stripes,  shall  be  beaten  with  few  stripes,  and  the  servant

which  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and  did  not  according  to  it,

shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes,  they  consider  that  their

ignorance secures impunity for their sin. But  they  are

doubtless  overwhelmed  with  the  darkness  of  pride  alone,  and

therefore  discern  not,  because  it  is  one  thing  to  have  been

ignorant,  another  to  have  refused  to  learn. For  not  to  know

is  only  ignorance,  to  refuse  to  learn  is  pride. And  they  are

the  less  able  to  plead  ignorance  in  excuse,  the  more  that

knowledge  is  set  before  them  even  against  their  will. Whence

Prov,  8,  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  Doth  not  wisdom  cry,  and  prudence

'• put  forth  her  voice,  standing  on  the  top  of  lofty  places,  above

the  way,  in  the  middle  of  the  paths  ? We  might  perhaps

be  able  to  pass  along  the  way  of  this  present  life,  in  ignorance

of  this  Wisdom,  if  She  had  not  Herself  stood  in  the  comers

of  the  way.

30,  If  It  had  wished  to  be  concealed,  it  would  have  been
necessary  to  search  after  It.  But  after  It  has  publicly
displayed  the  mysteries  of  the  Incarnation,  after  It  has
exhibited  to  the  proud  a  pattern  of  humility,  It  placed  Itself,
as  it  were,  in  the  middle  of  the  way  as  we  were  passing
along  it;  in  order,  namely,  that  we  might  strike  against  that
which  we  are  unwilling  to  look  for,  and  touch  and  stumble
over  that  which  we  neglect  to  observe  as  we  are  passing  by


The  proud  refuse  to  understand  Ood's  ways.  121

it. Let  it  be  said  then,  And  they  ivould  not  understand  any  Book
of  His  ways. For  the  way  of  Incarnate  Wisdom  is  every


action  which  He  did  in  time.  His  ways  are  the  courses  of
life,  which  He  has  laid  down  for  those  who  are  coming  to
Him,  He  has  marked  out  as  many  ways  for  those  who
come  to  Him,  as  many  patterns  as  He  has  set  forth  of
holy  living.  The  Prophet  had  beheld  His  ways  of  humility,
when  he  sighed,  sajdng,  /  uill  exercise  myself  in  Thy  com-  Ps.  119,
mands,  and  I  will  consider  Thy  ways.  Hence  again  it  is  '
said  of  every  righteous  man  who  takes  cai-e  to  walk  after  the
pattern  of  the  Lord.  The  steps  of  a  man  are  ordered  hy  the  pg.  37^
Lord,  and  he  desireth  greatly  His  uay.  Because  then  all^^-
haughty  men  despise  the  doings  of  the  Lord's  humility,  it  is
rightly  said,  Tliey  would  not  understand  His  ways.  For  these
ways  are  mean  in  appearance,  but  are  to  be  reverenced  in
understanding;  since  that  which  is  seen  in  them  is  one  thing,
that  which  is  looked  for  is  another.  For  what  else  does  it
present  in  this  life  to  the  eyes  of  beholders,  but  degradation,
spitting,  insults,  and  death?  But  we  pass  through  this
lowliness  to  the  highest  glory.  By  these  disgraces,  which
precede,  eternal  and  glorious  things  are  promised  to  us.
Haughty  men  then  have  seen  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  but
have  refused  to  understand  them,  because  by  despising  the
mean  appearance  they  present  in  themselves,  they  have  lost
the  sublime  promises  which  they  offer.  To  understand,
then,  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  is  both  to  endure  humbly  what  is
transitory,  and  steadily  to  wait  for  that  which  is  to  abide ;
in  order  that,  after  the  pattern  of  the  Lord,  coeternal  glory,
which  is  purchased  by  temporal  disgrace,  may  be  sought  for,
and  that  a  person  may  not  fix  his  mind  on  that  which  he
suffers  here,  but  on  that  which  he  looks  for.  Haughty  men,
then,  have  kept  their  eyes  closed  to  these  things,  because
while  they  pride  themselves  on  the  glory  of  this  present  life,
they  have  not  seen  the  loftiness  of  the  Lord's  humility.  For
humility  discloses  to  us  the  light  of  understanding,  pride
conceals  it.  For  it  is  a  kind  of  secret  blessing  of  a  holy
life :  and  the  mind  attains  to  it  the  less,  the  more  it  is  puffed
up :  because  it  is  driven  away  from  it,  the  more  madly  it  is
inspired. It  follows,

Ver.  28. That  they  miyht  cause  the  cry  of  the  needy  to


12*2  Cry  of  the  poor^  against  haugJity  teachers,  or  Jewish  pride.

Son  3^,  come  to  Him,  and  that  He  migltt hear  the  voice  of  the

28.
-poor.

xiii.  31.  For  Avlien  these  men  are  proud,  tliej  who  are  oppressed
by  their  pride,  cry  aloud  to  God.  Or  certainly,  it  is  said
that  they  have  caused  the  cry  of  the  poor  to  come  to  God,
because,  on  their  fall,  the  poor,  that  is,  the  humble  in  spirit,
are  appointed  in  their  room.  And  because  this  has  taken
place  on  their  fall,  they  are  said  to  have  done  it  themselves :
by  the  very  same  mode  of  expression  with  which  we  say
that  a  camp  fights,  because  men  fight  out  of  it.  Or  certainly,
because  every  thing  which  has  been  stated  above,  can  also  be
referred  to  the  rulers  of  the  Church,  who  give  up  the  office
of  preaching,  and  are  involved  in  worldly  business,  on  occa-
sion of  exercising  authority,  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  Tliat  they
might  cause  the  cry  of  the  needy  to  come  to  Him,  ami  titat
He  might  hear  the  voice  of  the  poor.  For  certainly  while,
from  being  engaged  in  worldly  cares,  they  abandon  the
dutj'  of  preaching,  they  compel  the  flock  which  is  under
them  to  burst  out  into  clamorous  complaint.  So  that  each
of  those  under  them  complains,  as  if  justl}-,  of  the  conduct  of
the  pretended  pastor,  why  doth  he  hold  the  place  of  a  teacher,
v.ho  doth  not  exercise  the  office  ?  Although,  by  '  the  pride  of
mighty  men,'  the  haughtiness  of  the  Jews,  and  by  '  the  cry
of  the  poor,'  the  longings  of  the  Gentiles,  are  perhaps  more
Lulceie,  appropriately  typified.  Just  as  by  the  rich  man  feasting
"  '  sumptuously,  as  the  Truth  Itself  witnesses,  the  Jewish
people  is  designated,  which  makes  use  of  the  fulness  of  the
Law,  not  for  the  needful  purpose  of  salvation,  but  for  the
pomp  of  pride,  and  which  does  not  refresh  itself  mode-
rately with  the  teaching  of  the  commandments,  but  makes  a
boastful  display  of  them.  And  by  the  wounded  Lazarus,
(which  is  by  interpretation,  '  Assisted,')  is  set  forlh  the  con-
dition of  the  Gentile  people,  whom  the  Divine  assistance
exalts  the  more,  the  less  it  relies  on  the  resources  of  its
own  strength.  And  he  is  described  as  poor  and  full  of
wounds,  because  the  Gentile  world  has,  with  humble  heart,
laid  open  the  confession  of  its  sins.  For  as  in  a  wound  the
venom  is  drawn  towards  the  skin  from  within,  so,  in  like
manner,  while  secrets  are  disclosed  by  the  confession  of  sin,
evil  humours,  as  it  were,  break  forth  from  the  inmost  parts


God's  secret  counsel  a  reason  for  His  doings.  123

of  the  body. When  they  sin  then,  the  cry  of  the  poor  is  Book


heard ;  because,  while  the  Jews  are  proud  against  God,  the
prayers  of  the  Gentiles  are  come  up  to  God.  Whence  also,
from  his  awe  at  those  boundless  and  unfathomable  judg-
ments, he  does  not  care  to  discuss  them  with  reasoning,  but
to  venerate  them  with  admiration,  and  says,

Ver.  29.  Fur  tvhen  He  giveth  peace,  tcho  is  there  to  con-
demn? since  He  hath  hidden  His  face,  tclin  is  there  that
can  look  on  Him  ?

32. Let no one then discuss,  why the Gentile world xiv.
lay so long in unbelief, while the Jewish people was
yet  standing,  and why the  sin of  unbelief  overthrew  theKom.ii,
Jewish  people,  as  the Gentile world  rose to  belief. Let
nq  one  discuss,  why  one  is  drawn on, as of  a  free gift,
and the other  repealed according to its deserts. For  if
thou  art  surprised  at  the  adoption  of  the  Gentiles, When
He  giveth  peace,  uho  is  there  to  condemn  ? If  thou  art
startled  at  the  loss  of  the  Jews,  Since  He  hath  hidden  His
face,  7cho  is  there  that  can  look  on  Him  ? So  the  counsel
of  supreme  and  hidden  power  becomes  the  satisfaction  of
evident  reason. Whence  also  the  Lord  in  the  Gospel  says,
when  speaking  on  the  subject  of  this  matter,  /  thank  Thee,  Mat.!],
0  Father,  Lord  o/  heaven  and  earth,  because  Thou  hast  hid  '*'
these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed
them  unto  babes. Even  so,  Fatlier. And  He  immediately
adds^  as  a  kind  of  reason  for  this  concealment  and  revealing.
For  so  it  hath  seemed  good  before  Thee. In  which  words,  in  Mat.  11,
truth,  we  learn  a  pattern  of  humility,  that  we  may  not  rashly  ^^'
presume  to  discuss  the  Divine  counsels  concerning  the  call
of  the  one  and  the  rejection  of  the  others. For  after  He
had  mentioned both points.  He did not at  once  give  a
reason,  but  said  that  it was  thus well pleasing  to God;
pointing  out,  namely,this  very  point,  that  that  cannot  be  unjust,
which  has  seemed  good  to  the  Just  One. Whence  also  He
says,  when  paying  the  labourers  in  the  vineyard,  on  equalling
in  compensation  those  who  were  unequal  in  work,  and  Avhen
he  who  had  toiled  longest  asked  for  greater  pay,  Fidst  thou  Mat. 20,
not  agree  with.  3Ie  for  a  pennxj  ? I  will  give  unto  this  last,  13—15.
even  as  unto  thee. Is  it  not  lauful  for  Me  to  do  what  I
will  tcith  Mine  own? In  all  things  then  which  are out-
wardly  disposed  by  Him, the righteousness  of  His  secret


124  God\ijud(/ments  with  nations  and  individuals.

Job  34,  will  is  an  evident  cause  of  reason. Lei  it  be  said  therefore,

29
— —  For  uhen  He  (jivetli  peace,  icho  is  there  to  condemn  f since


He  hath  hidden  His  face,  who  is  there  that  can  look  on
Him?  And  because  God  judges  the  least,  in  the  same  way
as  the  greatest,  things,  and  the  doings  of  individual?,  as
those  of  all  men,  it  is  fitly  subjoined,
Both  over  a  nation,  and  over  all  men.
XV.  -"^S.  As  if  we  were  plainly  directed  to  observe,  that  this
judgment  which  is  spoken  of  over  a  single  nation,  is  also
exercised  over  all  men,  by  an  invisible  examination;  so  that
one  man  is  secretly  elected,  and  another  rejected,  but  no  one
unjustly.  This  then  which  we  see  happening  in  the  greatest
cases,  let  us  also  anxiously  fear  in  ourselves  separately.
For  the  Divine  judgments  are  displayed  in  the  same  manner
over  a  single  soul  as  over  a  single  city ;  and  again  in  the
same  way  over  a  single  city,  as  over  a  single  nation:  and
over  a  single  nation,  as  over  the  whole  multitude  of  the
human  race.  Because  the  Lord  is  as  attentive  to  particidar
persons,  as  though  unconcerned  with  the  world  at  large;  and
again  so  directs  His  attention  to  all  at  once,  as  though
unconcerned  with  individuals.  For  He  Who  fills  all  things
with  His  dispensation,  rules  by  filling  them,  and  when  order-
ing one  single  thing,  is  still  present  in  all,  and  again,  when
ordering  the  world  at  large,  is  present  with  each  individual ;
in  fact,  works  all  things  without  moving,  by  the  power  of  His
own  nature.  What  marvel,  then,  that  He,  when  intent  on
any  thing,  is  not  confined  to  it,  Who  works  still  at  rest  ?
Let  it  be  said  then  that  He  exercises  this  searching  judg-
ment both  over  a  nation,  and  over  all  men.  Because  he  has
passed  then  from  species  to  genus,  he  now  turns  himself
from  genus  to  species,  and  shews  what  Judaea  projjerly
deserves,  saying,

Ver.  30. Who  maJceth  a  man  thai  is  a  hypocrite  to  reign

for  the  sins  of  the  people.

xvi. 34.  For  Judasa  was  unwilling  that  the  true  King  should

reign  over  it,  and therefore obtained a hypocrite,  as  its

merits  demanded. As  the  Truth  Itself  says  in  the  Gospel,

JoLn5,  I  have  come  in  My  Fatheis  name,  and  ye  received  Me  not;
if  another  shall  come  in  his  otvn  name,  him  ye  icill  receive.

2 10  IT*  ^'^^"^  as  Paul  says.  Because  they  received  not  the  lov^e  of  the
truth  that they  might  he  saved,  therefore  God  shall  send


Evil  rulers,  as  Antichrist,  set  over  men  for  their  sins. 125

them  the  operaiion  of  error,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie.  Book

In  that,  then,  which  is  said,  Who  makelh  a  man  that  is  a -'

hypocrite  to  reign  for  t lie  sins  of  the  people,  mny  he  designated
Antichiist,  the  very  chief  of  all  hypocrites. For  that  seducer
then  pretends  to  sanctity,  that  he  may  draw  men  away  to
iniquity. But  he  is  permitted  to  reign  for  the  sins  of  the
people,  because,  in  truth,  they  are  preordained  to  be  under
his  rule,  who  are  foreseen  before  all  ages  to  be  worthy  of
being  his  subjects,  who  by  their  subsequent  sins,  claim  to
be placed under him by antecedent judgments. That
Antichrist  tlien  reigns  over  the  ungodly  arises  not  from  the
injustice  of  the  Judge,  but  from the sin  of  the sufferer.
Although  most  of  them  have  not  beheld  his  sovereign  power,
and  yet  are  enslaved  to  it,  by  the  condition  in  which  their
sins  have  placed  them. Because  they,  doubtless,  reverence
even  him  by  their  evil  lives,  whom  they  do  not  see  tyran-
nizing over  them. Are  not  they  bis  very  members,  who
seek  by  a  shew  of  afi'ected  sanctity  to  seem  what  they  are
not? For  he  in  a  special  manner  assumes  a  false  guise,  who
though a  lost  man,  and an  evil spirit,  falsely announces  2  Thesa.
himself  to  be God. But  they  unquestionably  now come ' '
forth  from  his  body,  who  conceal  their  iniquities  under  the
cloak  of  sacred  honour,  in  order  to  seek  to  seem  to  be  that
in  profession,  which  they  refuse  to  be  in  their  doings. For
since it is written,  that whosoever  committefh  sin  is  thejahnS,
servant  of  sin,  the  more  freely  they  now  commit  the  sins  ^*"
which  they  desire,  the  more  strictly  are  they  bound  down  to
his  service. But  let  no  one  who  suffers  such  a  ruler,  blame
him whom  he suffers : because  his being subject to  the
power  of  a  wicked  ruler  was  doubtless  of  his  own  desert.
Let  him  therefore  rather  blame the  fault  of  his  own evil
doings,  than  the  injustice  of  his  ruler. For  it  is  written, /Hos.  13,
will  give  thee kings  in Mine anger. Why  then do  we  ^  '
scorn  their  being  set  over  us,  whose  authority  over  us  we
endure  from the  anger  of  the  Lord? If  then we  receive
rulers,  according  to  our  deserts,  from  the  wrath  of  God,  we
infer  from  their  conduct,  what  to  think  in  our  estimate  of
ourselves. Although  even  the  Eleot  are  frequently  placed
under  the  reprobate. Whence  also  David  for  a  long  time
endni'ed  Saul. But  it  is  proved  by  the  subsequent  sin  of'^^^J°'


126 Hearts  of  Rulers  ordered  acco7'ding  to  people's  deserts.

Job  34,  adultery,  that  he  then  deserved  to  be  thus  heavily  oppressed
^bv  the  cruelty  of  him  who  was  set  over  him.


35.  The  characters,  then,  of  rulers  are  so  assigned  accord-
ing to  the  deserts  of  their  subjects,  that  frequently  they  who
seem  to  be  good  are  soon  changed  by  the  acceptance  of
power.  As  holy  Scripture  observed  of  the  same  Saul  that
he  changed  his  heart  with  his  dignity. Whence  it  is  written,

1  Sam. lYfieji  thou  wast  little  in  tliine  own  eyes.  I  made  thee  the

head  among  the  tribes  of  Israel.  The  conduct  of  rulers  is
so  ordered  with  reference  to  the  characters  of  their  subjects,
that  frequently  the  conduct  of  even  a  truly  good  shepherd
becomes  sinful,  in  consequence  of  the  wickedness  of  his
flock.  For  that  Prophet  David,  who  had  been  praised  by  the
witness  of  God  Himself,  who  had  been  made  acquainted  with
heavenly  mysteries,  being  puffed  up  by  the  swelling  of  sudden

2  Sam.  pride,  sinned  in  numbering  the  people. And  yet,  though
'  ' 'David  sinned,  the  people  endured  the  punishment. Why

was  this?  Because  in  truth  the  hearts  of  rulers  are  disposed
according  to  the  deserts  of  their  people.  But  the  righteous
Judge  reproved  the  fault  of  the  sinner,  by  the  punishment  of
those  very  persons,  on  whose  account  he  sinned.  But  because
he  was  not  exempt  from  guilt,  as  displaying  pride  of  his
own  free  will,  he  liimself  endured  also  the  punishment  of  his
sin.  For  that  furious  wrath  which  smote  the  people  in  their
bodies,  prostrated  the  ruler  of  the  people  by  the  pain  of  his
inmost  heart.  But  it  is  certain  that  the  deserts  of  rulers  and
people  are  so  mutually  connected,  that  frequently  the  con-
duct of  the  people  is  made  worse  from  the  fault  of  their
pastors,  and  the  conduct  of  pastors  is  changed  according  to
the  deserts  of  their  people.

36.  But  because  rulers  have  their  own  Judge,  subjects
must  be  very  careful  not  to  judge  rashly  the  conduct  of  their
rulers.  For  the  Lord  Himself  did  not  without  a  reason
scatter  the  money  of  the  changers,  and  overthrow  the  seats

Mat.21,of  them  that  were  selling  doves,  signifying  doubtless  that  He
judges  the  conduct  of  people  by  their  rulers,  but  that  He
examines  into  the  doings  of  rulers  in  His  own  person.  And
yet  even  those  sins  of  subjects,  which  are  put  off  from  being
judged,  or  which  cannot  be  judged  by  i-ulers,  are  doubtless
reserved for  His  jiidgment. Therefore whilst  all  is done


Subjects  who  knoio  themselves  can  hear  icith  rulers'  faults. 127

in  good  faith,  it  is  a  worthy  part  of  virtue,  if  whatever  is  in  Book
a  superior  is  tolerated.  Yet  it  ought  to  be  humbly  suggested  -^^-^ — -
whether  any  thing  which  displeases  can  be  amended.  But
great  care  must  be  taken  that  an  inordinate  maintenance  of
justice  does  not  degenerate  into  pride:  lest  humility,  the
mistress  of  what  is  right,  should  be  lost,  while  what  is  right
itself  is  loved  without  due  caution  ;  lest  a  man  should  slight
him  as  his  superior,  whom  he  may  perhaps  happen  to  blame
in  some  part  of  his  conduct.  But  the  mind  of  subjects  is
trained  to  guard  its  humility  against  this  swelling  pride,  if
its  own  weakness  is  constantly  watched.  For  we  neglect  to
examine  honestly  our  own  strength,  and  because  we  believe
ourselves  stronger  than  we  really  are,  we  consequently
judge  those  severely  who  are  set  over  us.  For  the  more  we
neglect  to  know  ourselves,  the  more  clearly  do  we  see  those
whom  we  endeavour  to  blame.  These  are  the  several  evils
which  are  often  committed  by  subjects  against  their  rulers,
and  by  rulers  against  their  subjects.  Because  both  rulers
consider  all  their  subjects  to  be  less  wise  than  themselves,
and  subjects,  again,  judge  the  conduct  of  their  rulers,  and
think  that  they  could  do  better,  if  they  perchance  possessed
the  pow'er.  Since  it  is  frequently  the  case  that  rulers  see
less  judiciously  what  is  to  be  done,  because  the  mist  of  pride
obscures  their  sight,  and  that  a  subject,  when  raised  to  high
power,  sometimes  does  the  very  same  thing,  which  he  used
to  complain  of  when  a  subject;  and  that,  having  committed
the  very  faults  which  he  has  condemned,  he  is  ashamed  at
all  events  that  he  condemned  them.  As  rulers  then  must
take  care  that  their  higher  position  does  not  puff  up  their
minds,  with  a  notion  of  their  singular  wisdom,  so  must  sub-
jects be  careful  not  to  be  oifended  at  the  conduct  of  their
rulers.

37.  But  even  if  the  conduct  of  rulers  is  justly  blamed,  yet
it  is  the  duty  of  subjects  to  pay  them  respect,  even  when  they
displease  them.  But  thou  must  carefully  observe  not  to  be
anxious  to  imitate  a  person  whom  it  is  necessary  for  thee  to
reverence,  and  not  to  scorn  to  reverence  him  whom  thou
despisest  to  imitate.  For  the  narrow  path  of  rectitude  and
humility  must  be  so  maintained,  that,  though  offended  with
the  reprehensible  conduct  of  their  rulers,  the  mind  of  subjects


128 Reverence  for  authoriti/. God  chooses  rulers  as  is  best.

Job  34,  may  not  depart  from  observing  respect  for  their  office.
^^' Which  is  well  set  forth  in  Noah  when  chunk,  the  nakedness

23.  "  '  of  whose  secret  parts  his  sons  came  and  covered  with  averted
looks.  For  we  are  said  to  be  averse  from  that  which  we  repro-
bate. What  is  meant  then  by  his  sons'  coming  with  averted
looks,  and  covering  the  shame  of  their  father  with  a  cloak
thrown  over  their  backs,  except  that  good  subjects,  while
offended  with  the  misdeeds  of  their  rulers,  nevertheless
conceal  them  from  others  ?  They  bring  a  covering
with  averted  looks,  because  judging  the  deeds,  and  reverenc-
ing the  ofhce,  they  do  not  wish  to  behold  the  sin  which  they
conceal.

38.  But  there  are  some,  who  if  they  have  made  ever  so
small  a  beginning  in  spiritual  conversation,  on  observing  that
their  rulers  fix  their  thoughts  only  on  worldly  and  temporal
objects,  begin  to  blame  the  disposition  of  supreme  Providence
as  if  they  were  improperly  appointed  to  rule,  since  they
set  an  example  of  worldly  conversation.  But  these  persons,
from  not  being  careful  to  keep  themselves  from  censure  of
their  rulers,  (as  their  fault  justly  demands,)  proceed  to  blame
even  the  Creator.  For  His  dispensation  is  understood  to  be
more  right  by  the  humble,  for  the  very  same  reason  that  it  is
not  judged  to  be  right  by  the  proud.  For  because  the  power
of  office  cannot  be  exercised  without  our  engaging  in  worldly
cares,  therefore  Almighty  God,  in  His  marvellous  dispensa-
tion of  mercy,  frequently  imposes  the  burden  of  rule  on  hard
and  laborious  hearts ;  in  order  that  the  tender  minds  of
spiritual  men  may  be  released  from  worldly  cares  :  in  order
that  the  one  may  be  more  safely  concealed  from  the  bustle
of  the  world,  the  more  willingly  the  others  employ  them-
selves in  worldly  anxieties.  For  hard  are  the  ways  of
worldly  slavery,  in  the  discharge  of  a  burden  that  has  been
undertaken  even  for  the  good  of  others.

39.  And  frequently,  as  has  been  said,  as  the  Mercifiil  God
tenderly  loves  His  own,  so  does  He  anxiously  conceal  them
from  outward  employments.  For  often  the  father  of  a  family
appoints  his  servants  to  that  work,  from  which  he  releases

subtiles.his  delicate  sons;  and  his  sons  are  comely  and  free  from
annoyance,  from  the  fact  that  the  servants  are  defiled  with
dust. And  how  properly  this  is  ordered  in  the  Church  by


Coarser  texture  above  protects  the  Church's  Ornaments. 129

Divine  appointment  is  signified  by  the  very  construction  of  Book
the  tabernacle. For  Moses  is  comnianded  by  the  voice  of  — - — -


God  to  weaA-e  curtains  of  fine  linen,  and  scarlet,  and  blue,
for  the  covering  of  the  Holy  of  Holies  within.  And  he  was
ordered  to  spread,  for  the  covering  of  the  tabernacle,  curtains
of  goats'  hair,  and  skins,  to  sustain  the  rain,  and  wind,  and
dust.  What  then  do  we  understand  by  the  skins  and  goats'
hair,  with  which  the  tabernacle  is  covered,  but  the  gross
minds  of  men,  which  are  sometimes,  hard  though  they  be,
placed  on  high  in  the  Church  by  the  secret  judgment  of
God  }  And  because  they  are  not  afraid  of  being  employed
in  worldly  concerns,  they  must  needs  bear  the  winds  and
storms  of  temptation  which  arise  from  the  opposition  of  this
world.  But  what  is  signified  by  the  blue,  scarlet,  and  fine
linen,  but  the  life  of  holy  men,  delicate,  but  brilliant  ?  And
while  it  is  carefully  concealed  in  the  tabernacle  under  goats'
hair  and  skins,  its  beauty  is  preserved  entire.  For  in  order
that  the  fine  linen  may  shine,  the  scarlet  glitter,  and  the
blue  be  resplendent  with  azure  brilliance,  the  skins  and  the
goats'  hair  endure  the  rains,  the  winds,  and  the  dust  from
above.  They  then  who  advance  in  great  excellence  within
the  bosom  of  holy  Church,  ought  not  to  despise  the  doings
of  their  rulers,  when  the}'  see  that  they  are  engaged  in  the
business  of  the  world.  For  that  they  penetrate  in  safety  into
secret  mysteries,  is  owing  to  the  help  of  those  who  buffet  with
the  storms  of  this  world  fi'om  without.  For  how  vrould  the  fine
linen  retain  the  grace  of  its  brightness,  if  the  rain  were  to
touch  it.''  Or  what  splendour  and  brightness  would  the
scarlet  or  blue  display,  should  the  dust  light  on,  and  defile
them .?  Let  the  strong  texture  of  the  goats'  hair,  then,  be  placed
above,  to  resist  dust;  the  brightness  of  the  blue,  fitted  for
ornament,  be  placed  beneath.  Let  those  who  are  engaged
in  spiritual  pursuits  alone,  adorn  the  Church.  Let  those
guard  her,  who  are  not  wearied  even  with  the  labours  of  the
world.  But  let  not  him  who  now  gleams  with  spiritual
brightness  within  Holy  Church,  murmur  against  his  superior,
who  is  employed  in  worldly  business.  For  if  thou  glitterest
securely  within,  like  scarlet,  why  dost  thou  blame  the  goats'
hair  with  which  thou  art  protected  ?  ^perhaps

40.  But  some  persons  enquire,  why  it  is  that',  while  I'ulers  piaT^^e-

VOL.  III.  K  cause,'


23


130  l^ad  example  of  rulers  a  judgment  on  subjects.

Job  34,  are  engrossed  in  worldly  concerns,  solely  lor  the  benefit  of

30.  ' •

'■ — those  nnder  them,  many  in  the  Church  are  made  Avorse  by

their  example.  For  who  can  deny  that  this  is  very  true,
when  he  sees  worldly  concerns  more  anxiously  attended  to
by  pastors,  than  heavenly  objects  ?  But  this  is  not  unjust,
if,  as  we  said  before,  the  circumstances  of  rulers  are  ordered
in  accordance  with  the  deserts  of  those  under  them.  For  the
sins,  which  they  commit  secretly  and  wilfully,  demand  a  bad
example  to  be  set  them  by  their  pastors :  in  order  that  by  a
righteous  judgment  the  haughty  man,  who  departs  from  the
way  of  God,  may  stumble,  through  the  guidance  of  his
pastor,  in  the  way  in  which  he  is  walking.  Whence  it  is  said
by  the  Prophet  also,  with  the  zeal  of  one  who  is  announcing,

Ps.  69,  not  with  the  wish  of  one  \yho  is  cursing,  Let  their  eyes  be
darkened,  that  they  see  not,  and  ever  bow  Thou  down  their
back.  As  if  he  were  to  say,  Let  those  who  are  appointed
to  mark  out,  as  it  were,  the  com'ses  of  human  actions,  not
enjoy  the  light  of  truth,  in  order  that  their  subjects,  who
follow  them,  may  be  bent  down  by  the  burden  of  their  sins,
and  lose  entirely  their  slate  of  uprightness.  And  this  we
know  was  unquestionably  the  case  in  Judaea,  whei^,  at  the
coming  of  our  Redeemer,  the  multitude  of  the  Pharisees  and
Priests  closed  the  eyes  of  their  mind  against  the  True  Light,
and  the  people,  walking  after  the  example  of  its  rulers,
wandered  in  the  darkness  of  unbelief

4L  But  it  can  be  reasonably  asked,  How  it  is  said  in  this
place  that  the  Lord  makes  the  hypocrite  to  reign,  when  by  the

Hos.  8,  Prophet  He  complains  especially  of  this  thing,  saying.  They  have
reigned,  but  not  of  3Ie :  they  have  become  princes,  and  I  know
them  not'?  For,  who  that  thinks  rightly,  can  say  that  the
Lord  does  that  of  which  He  knows  nothing  ?  But,  because
God's  knowledge  is  approval.  His  ignorance  is  disapproval.

Lukeis,  Whence  He  says  to  some  whom  He  rejects,  /  know  you
not  whence  ye  are;  depart  from  Me,  all  ye  workers  of
-iniquity.  And  sometimes  God's  doing  a  thing,  is  His
allowing  in  His  anger  that  which  He  forbids  to  be  done.
Hence  He  asserted  that  He  hardened  the  heart  of  the  king
of  Egypt,  because  He,  in  truth,  allowed  it  to  be  hardened.
In  a  marvellous  manner  then  does  God  make  hypocrites  to
reign,  and  knows  them  not. He  makes  them,  by  suffering ;


4


Danger  of  undertaJdng  Power  loithout  God's  IVill. 131

He knows them not, by rejecting them. Whence it is  Book
necessary,  with  reference  to  every  thing,  which  is  desired  in  J^^^v
this  life,  that  the  Inner  Will  should  be  first  enquired  into. i.e.  the
And  when  the  ear  of  the  heart  is  anxious  to  catch  Its  sound,
let  it  know  that  It  speaks,  not  in  words,  but  in  deeds. When
then  a  post  of  authority  is  oflered,  it  is  necessary  for  a  man
first  to  question  with  himself,  whether  his  conduct  is  suited
to  the  place,  whether  his  doings  are  at  variance  with the
distinction it confers; lest, perchance,  tlie  just Ruler  of
all  should,  afterwards,  not  regard  his  prayers  in  tribulation,
because  He  knows  not  his  very  entering  on  that  high  office,
which  is  the  soui'ce  of  all  liis  tribulation.


Note  to  p.  101.


Ben.  here  notes  that  after  the
words  '  they  were  created,'  one  Vatican
Ms.  is  quoted  as  adding, '  They  received
from  the  vision  of  their  Ruler  that  they
should  abide  in  themselves  without
falling.  Hereby,  however,  their  won-
derful method  of  standing  is  formed,  in
that  while  they  know  what  they  can  do
of  their  own  stedfastness,  they  con-
sider  what  they  owe  to  the  government


of  their  Ruler.  And  the  more  easily
they  see  that  they,  au  changeable,  can
fall,  the  more  close  do  they  draw  them-
selves, that  they  may  not  fall,  to  the
love  of  their  Ruler.  Of  their  own
stedfastness,  they  know  they  may  still
tumble  down  headlong,  but  they  hold
them  fast  by  their  Creator  with  the
hand  of  love,  that  they  may  not  fall.'


K  2


BOOK XXVI.

The  holy  Doctor  expounds  the  seven  last  verses  of  the  thirty-fourth
chapter,  the  whole  of  the  thirty-fifth,  with  the  first  twenty-one  verses  of
the  thirty-sixth  chapter;  and  launches  out,  at  very  great  length,  into
hoth  allegorical  and  moral  meanings.

i.  1.  Haughty  men  are  wont  to  display  this  peculiarity  in

what  they  say,  that,  when  they  know  that  they  have  said
any  thing  in  a  praiseworthy  manner,  they  then  enquire
of  their  hearers,  whether  they  have  by  chance  said  any  thing
out  of  the  way.  And  this  they  do,  not  because  they
doubt  of  what  they  say,  but  because,  namely,  they  seek]  for
approval,  in  the  judgment  of  their  hearers.  For  the  object
of  their  enquiry  will  be  easily  discovered,  if  when  any  one
praises  their  good  qualities,  he  also  blames  their  faults.  For
it  is  certain,  that  as  they  are  ])ufFed  up  by  praises,  so  are
they  inflamed  by  reproofs ;  and  when  they  see  that  they  are
blamed,  even  justly,  by  any  one,  they  seek  at  once  in  their
faults  for  materials  of  self-defence.  How  then  do  they
humbly  doubt  of  their  own  good  qualities,  who  even  per-
versely endeavour  to  defend  their  bad  ones .''  For  he  is
really  humble  in  his  good  doings,  who  does  not  defend  him-
self in  his  evil  ones.  For  he  who  is  reproved  for  his  faults,
and  fires  up  against  the  words  of  his  reprover,  when  he
hesitates,  as  if  humbly,  in  speaking  of  his  good  qualities,
seeks,  by  his  words  of  humility,  for  compliments,  and  not
for  instruction.  Eliu  therefore,  as  representing  the  conduct
of  the  haughty,  after  having  stated  many  spiritual  and  sub-
lime sentiments,  behold,  assumes  in  words  an  appearance  of
humility,  and  under  a  kind  of  show  of  being  his  disciple,
addresses  blessed  Job  with  a  fair  proposal,  saying,

Ver.  31,  -32.  Because  I  have  spoken  to  God,  I  will  not
hinder  thee  also.  If  I  have  sinned,  teach  thou  me;  if  I  have
spoken  iniquity,  I  will  add  no  more.


Humilitij  is  but  ill  imitated  hy  the  haiKjlity.  133

2.  As  it  is  frequently  the  case,  that  even  wicked  men  say  Book
what  is  right,  Ehu  called  to  mind  that  he  had  made  a  little  ^~, — l
before many noble statements,  and therefore confidently
enquired of him if pei'chance he had erred. For he
would  not  have  thus  asked,  if  he  had  believed  that  he  had
erred. For,  as  I  said,  it  is  a  craft  peculiar  to  the  boastful  to

be  eager  to  enquire  about  their  erring,  when  they  know
that  they  have  not  erred.  And,  again,  they  disdain  to
make  this  enquiry,  and  to  be  convicted  of  error,  whenever
they  plainly  foresee  that  they  have  done  wrong.  For  they
seek  not  to  be,  but  to  appear,  humble,  and  they  assume  an
appearance  of  humility,  by  then  making  the  enquiry,  when
they  are  praised  the  more  from  the  very  enquiry  itself.  But,
because  it  is  very  difficult  for  the  pride,  which  reigns  in  the
heart,  not  to  break  out  in  the  voice,  if  the  hearers  of  these
liaughty  men  wait  for  a  while,  and  consider  their  sayings  in
silence,  the  words,  which  follow,  too  soon  make  manifest
their  hearts.  For  they  cannot  continue  long  in  that  guise
of  humility,  which  they  assume  in  appearance  only.  For
to  haughty  minds  humility  is  lofty;  and  when  they  en-
deavour to  climb  up  to  its  beauty  they  stumble,  as  if  from
abrupt  and  rugged  paths,  with  the  weary  steps  of  their  mind.
For  that  which  they  wish  to  appear  is  foreign  to  them  :  and
they  cannot  therefore  long  cling  close  to  its  resemblance.
They  count  it  a  heavy  burden,  when  they  bear  it  only  in
appearance,  and  they  suffer  a  kind  of  constraint  in  their
heart,  till  they  cast  it  aside.  Because  in  truth  they  are
slaves  to  the  habit  of  pride,  which  fatally  rules  over  them,
and  are  compelled  by  its  authority  to  shew  what  they  are,
so  that  they  cannot  appear,  for  any  time,  that  which  they
are  not.  Whence  Eliu  also,  after  he  requested  to  be  in-
formed of  his  error,  after  he  promised  that  he  would  no
longer  speak  iniquity,  suddenly  broke  out,  fi'om  an  appear-
ance of  humility,  into  words  of  proud  arguing.  For  he
added,  saying,

Ver.  33.  Doth God  require  it  of  thee,  because it  hath
displeased  thee  ?

3.  As  though  he  were  saying,  I  am  about  to  give  reasons, iii.
in  the  sight  of  God,  why  my  iniquity  is  now  blamed  by  ihee,
though  it  is  plain  that  it  is  not  required  of  thee  in  judgment.


134 Bad  men  fear  present  reproof  more  than  God's  judgment.

Ji)B34,Wheii  good  men  are  unrighteously  assailed  by  the  world,
they  appeal  to  the  judgment  of  heaven. Whence  also  it  is


Job  16,  said  by  the  same  blessed  Job,  Behold,  my  witness  is  in
heaven,  and  He  Who  knoweth  me  is  on  high.  And  because
they  especially  desire  to  please  Him,  they  seek  for  the
witness  of  Him  only.  Wicked  men  also,  because  they  for-
sake the  life  of  the  just,  but  sometimes  imitate  their  words,
when  reproved  for  their  misdeeds  adopt  that,  as  a  ground  of
defence,  which  the  righteous  urge,  as  an  evidence  of  their
purity.  Whence  it  has  become  already  a  custom  with  them,
when  any  one  blames  them  foi  their  doings,  to  seek  the
judgment  of  God  rather  than  of  men.  For,  even  when  they
know  that  they  will  be  condemned  by  God,  they  are  not
afraid  of  being  judged  by  Him,  and  are  ashamed  of  being
judged  by  men.  They  prefer,  therefore,  the  greater,  which
they  fear  not,  in  oi'der  to  be  able  to  avoid  the  less,  of  which

Rom. 14,  they  are  ashamed.  For  it  is  written.  Every  one  of  us  shall
give  account  of  himself  to  God.  Because  then  the  con--
demnation  of  every  one  is  then  manifest,  the  ungodly  now
gather  from  it,  that,  even  the  wicked  conduct  of  every  one
is  out  of  danger,  that  the  righteous  should  now  refute
and  expose  that  conduct,  with  which,  it  is  plain,  he  has
no  concern  in  the  judgment.  But  the  consciences  of
the  holy  consider  on  the  other  hand,  that  a  great  reward  is
conferred  on  them,  when  they  are  now  convicted  of  some  of
their  unlawful  deeds.  For,  they  set  it  before  the  eyes  of
their  heart,  that  the  strict  judgment  of  God  will  then  be
more  surelv  mitit^ated  towards  them,  the  more  severely  it  is
now  anticipated  by  the  reproofs  of  man.  And  they  consider
as  a  gain  the  temporal  wrath  upon  them,  by  which  they
know  well  that  they  can  escape  the  wrath  eternal.  Let  Eliu,
therefore,  (as  representing  all  haughty  men,  and  choosing
rather  to  be  smitten  with  eternal  severity,  than  to  be  re-
proved in  this  life.)  say.  Doth  God  require  it  of  thee,  because
it  halh  displeased  thee?  But  since  those  who  speak  first  in
a  dispute  are  usually  moi*e  to  blame  than  those  who  reply,
he  subjoins,
iv. For  thou  didst  begin  to  speak,  not  /.

4.  He  believed  himself  to  be  so  far  innocent,  in  as  much
as  he  burst forth only on being struck, being doubtless


Eliu  shews  his  proud  meaning  by  disdaining  Job. 1 35

ignorant  that  innocence  is not defended  on  the  score  of  Book

time,  but  on  that  of  reason. For  what  support  does  it  give  to  ^-^ -

his  defence,  that,  though  he  did  not  revile  him  when  silent,
when  he  began  properly,  he  replied  to  hira  revilingly  ?
But  after  he  displays  himself  in  words  of  pride,  lo,  he  again
conceals  himself  under  the  pretext  of  a  demand,  and  pro-
ceeds to  say,

But  if  thou  knowest  any  thing  better,  say  on.

Although,  while  he  does  not  say,  because  thou  knowest
better,  but.  If  thou  knoicest  any  thing  better,  say  on,  it  was
itself  too  proud  of  him,  that  he  had  doubted  of  the  knowledge
of  his  superior.  But  he  signified  that  he  had  exhibited  his
humility,  in  having  given  blessed  Job  an  opportunity  of
speaking.  But,  as  was  before  stated,  that  every  thing  in  the
doings  of  the  proud,  which  is  concealed  by  a  covering  of
words,  is  brought  to  light,  when  the  boastful  purpose  again
breaks  forth,  Eliu  speedily  made  known,  with  what  purpose
he  required  blessed  Job  lo  speak. For  it  follows,

Ver.  34,  35.  Let  men  of  understanding  speak  to  me^  and
let  a  wise  man  hear  me.  But  Job  hath  spoken  foolishhj,  and
his  words  sound  not  of  discipline.

5.  Lo,  how  he  lays  open  that,  which  he  was  cherishing
within,  when,  as  if  humbly,  he  allows  blessed  Job  to  speak ;
saying.  Let  men  of  nnderstanding  speak  to  me.  For  if
blessed  Job  were  to  presume  to  speak,  he  would  have
disdained  hira,  as  though  he  could  not  understand  his
words.  And,  because  he  considered  that  blessed  Job  was
unworthy  not  only  to  speak  with,  but  even  to  hear,  him,  he
immediately  added.  Let  a  wise  man  hear  me.  As  if  he
were  to  say.  This  man  is  unfairly  permitted  to  speak,  who  is
not  worthy  even  to  hear  the  words  of  wise  men.  And  he
presently  shews  plainly,  how  contemptibly  he  thinks  of  him,
saying,  But  Job  hat h  spoken  foolishlg,  and  his  words  sound
not  of  discipline.  He  believed  that  blessed  Job  had  spoken
without  discipline,  because  he  said,  that  he  had  been  just  in
his  doings.  Eliu  would  perhaps  be  speaking  truly,  if  the
Author  of  discipline  had  not  Himself  agreed  with  what
blessed  Job  had  said  of  himself  For  Job  asserted  that  he
had  been  scourged  undeservedly,  whom  God  declared  also
to  have been smitten without  reason. What haughtiness


136  Job  erred  nut  from  kumility  in  keeping  to  truth.

Job  34,  then  did  the  voice  of  the  sufTerer  utter,  which  did  not  at  all

'—  differ  from  the  sentence  of  the  Smiter  ? Those  persons  are

inconsiderately  humble,  who,  whilst  they  avoid  pride,  ensnare
themselves  in  flilsehood.  Nay  rather,  they  shew  pride  in
their  falsehood ;  because  they  set  themselves  up  against  the
truth,  which  they  abandon.  For  he,  who  states  of  himself
good  qualities,  which  are  true,  when  necessity  compels,  the
more  close  ly  is  united  to  humility,  the  more  he  adheres  also
to  truth.  Was  not  Paul  humble,  when  from  zeal  for  the
ti-uth  against  false  Apostles,  he  related  to  his  disciples
so  many  bold  deeds  concerning  himself?  For  he  would
doubtless  be  an  enemy  of  truth,  if,  by  concealing  his  own
good  qualities,  he  had  allowed  the  preachers  of  errors  to  gain
strength.

But  because  proud  men,  in  that  they  haughtily  examine
the  sayings  of  the  righteous,  consider  rather  the  surface  of
the  words,  than  the  order  of  the  matters,  Eliu  believed
that  the  sentiments  of  blessed  Job  had  not  sounded  of  disci-
pline. But  since  the  asperity  of  haughty  men  extends
sometimes  as  far  as  to  the  severity  of  cursing,  he  im-
mediately, as  if  speaking  to  God,  subjoins  against  blessed
Job,

Ver.  36.  3Iy  Father^  let  Job  be  tried  even  to  the  end.
vi.  6.  ].o  !  how  he  lifts  up  even  in  words  of  cursing,  that  which
he  had  before  conceived  of  the  swellings  of  arrogance.
But  he  would  perhaps  wish  for  the  force  of  a  merciful
probation,  if  he  had  believed  that  he  had  stood  firm  in
probation.  In  order  then  that  the  malice  of  his  cruelty  may
openly  appear,  he  prays,  that  he  may  still  be  tried  by
scourges,  who  he  complains  had  already  fallen  during  his
scourges.  He  first  slated  what  he  thought,  in  order  that
what  he  wished  might  be  more  plainly  understood.  He
requires  him  to  be  still  smitten,  whom  he  accuses  of  having
sinned  already  under  the  hand  of  the  Smiter.  These  are
wishes  peculiar  to  the  haughty,  to  pray  that  the  lives  of
those  who  are  suffering  may  be  more  severely  examined,
because  the  more  just  they  are  in  their  own  eyes,  the  more
hardened  are  they  in  others'  sufferings.  For  they  know  not
how  to  take  to  them  the  feeling  of  the  other's  infirmity,  and  to
feel  pity  for  their  neighbour's  weakness,  as  they  do  for  their


Eliu  cruelly  wishes  Jul/ s  further  trial. Searching  reproofs. 137

own. For  since  they  think  highly  of  themselves,  they  do  not  Book

at  all  condescend  to  the  humble. Eliu  believed  that  blessed  '—1 '

Job  had  been  smitten  for  his  sin,  and  therefore  believed  that
no  bowels  of  compassion  were  to  be  shewn  to  him,  even  in
the  midst  of  so  many  sorrows.  But  when  men,  who  are  truly
holy,  behold  anyone  smitten,  even  for  his  faults,  though  they
re])rovc  some  of  his  inordinate  doings,  yet  they  sympathize
with  some  of  his  sufferings  ;  and  they  are  so  skilled  in  keep-
ing down  swellings,  as  yet  to  know  how  to  relieve  wounds,
in  order  that  when  their  hardnesses  are  softened,  their
infirmities  may  be  strengthened.  But  because,  on  the  other
hand,  haughty  men  have  no  bowels  of  love,  they  not  only  do
not  sympathize  with  the  righteous  when  suffering,  but  more-
over afflict  them,  under  pretence  of  proper  reproof,  and  they
either  exaggerate  trifling  faults,  if  there  are  any  in  them,
or  pervert  by  wrong  construction  those  points  which  are
really  good.

7.  Although  even  holy  teachers  are  frequently  wont  to
exaggerate  the  vices  of  offenders,  and  from  some  outward
signs  to  dive  into  secret  faults,  in  order  from  the  smallest
defects  to  discover  greater.  Whence  it  is  said  to  Ezekiel,
Son  of  man,  dig  in  the  wall.  Where  he  presently  subjoined,  Ez.  8,
And  when  I  had  digged  in  the  wall,  there  appeared  a  door ;  ^—^^^
and  He  said  unto  me,  Qo  in,  and  see  the  most  wicked
abominations  that  they  do  here.  And  I  went  in  and  saiv,
and  behold  every  likeness  of  creeping  things,  and  the  abomi-
nations of  animals,  and  all  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,
were  painted  on  the  wall.  For  by  Ezekiel  is  represented
the  person  of  rulers ;  by  the  wall  the  hardness  of  subjects.
And  what  is  the  digging  into  the  w-all,  except  laying  bare
hardness  of  heart  by  sharp  reproofs  ?  For  when  he  had  dug
into  it,  there  appeared  a  door;  because  when  hardness  of
heart  is  opened  by  sharp  reproofs,  a  kind  of  door  appears,
through  which  all  the  secret  thoughts  of  the  person,  who
is  reproved,  can  be  seen.  Whence  it  also  well  follows
in  that  place.  And  He  said  to  me,  Go  in,  and  see  the
most  idcked  abominations  which  they  do  here.  A  person
enters  as  it  were  to  behold  abominations,  who  on  examining
certain  signs  which  appear  outwardly,  so  penetrates  the  hearts
of  those  under  him,  that  all  their  unlawful  thoughts  are  made


138 Imcard  idolatry  exposed  hy  strictly  judging  sliglit  signs.

Job  34,  plain  to  him. Whence  he  added,  And  I  went  in  and  saw ;

^—  and  behold  every  likeness  of  creeping  things,  and  the  abomi-
nation of  anijnals.  By  reptiles  are  especially  understood
worldly  thoiiglils  :  but  by  animals,  those  which  rise  a  little
above  the  earth,  but  still  seek  for  the  rewards  of  an  earthly
recompense.  For  reptiles  cling  to  the  earth  with  the  whole
of  their  body,  but  though  animals  are  in  their  belly  suspended
from  the  earth,  yet  they  are  by  the  appetite  of  gluttony  ever
bending  to  the  earth.  Reptiles  therefore  are  within  the
wall,  when  thoughts  which  are  never  elevated  from  worldly
desires,  are  revolved  in  the  mind.  Animals  also  are  within
the  wall,  when  if  any  just  and  becoming  thoughts  ai'e
conceived,  they  subserve  the  pursuit  of  worldly  gains  and
honours,  and  of  themselves  indeed  they  are  already  sus-
pended, as  it  were,  from  the  earth,  but  by  their  ambition,
they  still  bring  themselves  down  to  the  basest  objects,  as  by
gluttonous  desire.  Whence  it  is  also  well  subjoined,  Aiid
all  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel  icere  painted  on  the  nail.

Col. 3,5.  For  it  is  written.  And  covetousness  lohich  is  idolatry.  After
the  animals,  therefore,  the  idols  are  properly  described,
because,  though  they  arise  themselves,  as  it  were,  from  the
earth  by  becoming  conduct,  yet  they  bring  themselves  down
to  the  earth  again  by  dishonourable  ambition.  But  it  is
well  said.  Were  painted ;  because  while  the  appearances  of
outward  objects  are  drawn  inward,  whatever  is  thought  in
imagination  is  painted,  as  it  were,  on  the  heart,

8,  We  must  therefoi'e  observe,  that  first  a  hole,  and  after-
wards a  door,  is  seen  in  the  wall  :  and  that  then  at  last  the
secret  abomination  is  laid  open  :  because,  doubtless,  the
signs  of  every  sin  are  first  observed  without,  next  the  door  of
detected  iniquity  is  laid  open  ;  and.  then  at  last  all  the  evil
is  disclosed,  which  is  lurking  within.  Therefore  even  holy
teachers  are  wont  to  examine  severely  into  minute  points,  in
order  to  arrive  at  greater  hidden  faults,  from  outer  faults
at  the  very  surface.  They  utter  words  of  sharp  reproof,  in
order  to  root  out  the  thorns  of  deadly  thought,  and  when
they  act  thus,  they  rage  with  the  love  of  charity,  and  are  not
puffed  up  with  the  swelling  of  pride.  For  they  are  ready  to
die  for  those,  whom  they  afflict  as  if  raging  even  to  the
death. In  their  thoughts  they  retain this  affection,  while


HoIyPreachersJikeEzekiel^viakehioivnthe  attacks  of tkeenemi/.  139

they  assume persecution in appearance. They  insinuate  Poor  '

sound truths  in  their  preaching,  they  announce  and  warn  '—:- :

against  evils,  and  do  not  as  Eliu  ])ray  for,  and  desire  tlicm.
They  are  sometimes  so  prompt  in  reproof  af^ainst  those
committed  to  their  care,  as  though  the}-  had  nothing  of
calmness :  but  are  so  tranquil  in  affection,  as  thougli  no
warmth  could  kindle  them.  For  they  greatly  fear,  that  if  they
should  cease  to  reprove  the  wicked,  they  would  be  punished
themselves  for  their  damnation.  And  when  warmed  into
words  of  reproof,  they  unwillingly  have  recourse  to  them,
but  yet  prepare  them,  as  a  defence  for  themselves,  before
their  strict  Judge.

9.  Whence  it  is  said  again  also  to  the  same  Ezekiel,  Son  Ezek.  4,
of  man,  take  thee  a  brick,  and  thou  shalt  place  it  before  ^—'^•
tJiee,  and  thou  shalt  describe  on  if  the  city  Jerusalem,  and
thou  shalt  build  munitions,  and  heap  up  a  mound,  and  set  a
camp  against  it,  and  place  battering  rams  around  it.  And
take  thou  an  iron  pan,  and  thoic  shalt  place  it  as  an  iron
tcall  between  thee  and  the  city.  For  whom  docs  Ezekiel
represent,  but  rulers?  And  to  him  it  is  said,  Take  thee
a  brick,  and  thou  shalt  place  it  before  thee,  and  thou  shalt
describe  on  it  the  city  Jerusalem.  For  lioly  teachers  take  to
themselves  a  brick,  when  they  lay  hold  of  the  earthly  heart
of  hearers,  in  order  to  instruct  it.  And  they  place  this  brick
before  them,  because  they  guard  it  with  the  entire  attention
of  their  anxiety.  And  they  are  ordered  also  to  describe  the
city  Jerusalem  thereon,  because  they  earnestly  endeavour
in  their  preaching  to  shew  to  earthly  hearts,  how  great  is
the  vision  of  heavenly  peace.  And  it  is  well  said  to  him
also,  And  thou  shalt  set  in  array  the  siege  against  it,  and
thou  shalt  build  munitions.  P'or  holy  teachers  set  the  siege
in  array  against  the  brick,  on  which  the  city  Jerusalem  is
described,  when  they  shew  to  an  earthly  mind,  now  seeking
after  its  heavenly  country,  what  an  opposition  of  sins  assails
it  in  the  season  of  this  life.  For  when  it  is  pointed  out,  how
each  separate  sin  lays  ambush  against  the  mind,  the  siege
is  set,  as  it  were,  against  Jerusalem  by  the  voice  of  the
preacher.  But  Ijccause  they  suggest  not  only  how  sins
lay  wait  and  assault  the  mind,  but  also  how  virtues,  when
guarded,  strengthen it, it is rightly subjoinedj And  thou


140 The  preacher's  zeal  ondjirmness,  his  defence  in  judgment.

Job  34,  shall  build  7mmitions, For  a  holy  preacher  builds  munitions,

'—  when  he  ceases  not  to  teach  what  virtues  oppose  what  vices.

And  because  the  contests  of  temptation  frequently  become
stronger  as  virtues  increase,  it  is  still  rightly  added,  And
thou,  shall  heap  up  a  mound,  and  set  a  camp  against  it,  and
place  battering  rams  around  it.  For  every  preacher  raises
up  a  mound,  when  he  points  out  the  mass  of  increasing
temptation.  And  he  raises  a  camp  against  Jerusalem,  when
he  points  out  to  the  right  disposition  of  his  hearers  the
circumventions  of  the  crafty  enemy,  as  snares  which  are
beyond  their  understanding.  And  he  places  battering  rams
around,  when  he  makes  known  the  stings  of  temptations
which  surround  us  on  every  side  in  this  life,  and  pierce
through  the  wall  of  virtues.

10.  Where  it  is  well  added,  And  take  thee  an  iron  pan^
and  thou  shall  place  it  as  an  iron  tvall  between  thee  and
the  city.  For,  by  the  pan  is  set  forth  parching,  and  by  the
iron,  strength.  But  what  so  parches  and  tortures  the  mind
of  a  ruler  and  teacher  as  zeal  for  the  Lord.?  Whence  also
Paul  was  burned  by  the  parching  of  this  pan,  when  saying,
2  Cor. Jj^fio  is  weak,  and  I  am  not  weak  ? who  is  offended,  and  I

11 29.  .

'  burn  not  ?  And  because  whoever  is  kindled  with  a  zeal  for
God  against  sinners,  is  constantly  protected  by  a  sti'ong
guard  within,  in  order  that  he  may  not  be  condemned  for
neglecting  his  charge  of  preaching  and  ruling,  it  is  well  said,
Thou  shall  place  it  as  an  iron  wall  between  Ihee  and  the
city.  For  the  iron  pan  is  placed  as  an  iron  wall  between
the  Prophet  and  the  city,  because  when  teachers  now  display
a  resolute  zeal,  they  hold  afterwards  the  same  zeal,  as  a
strong  bulwark,  between  themselves  and  their  hearers ;  that
they  may  not  then  be  given  up  to  punishment,  if  they  have
been  now  neghgent  in  reproof.  The  same  Prophet  heard
that  he  was  to  hold  this  pan  between  himself  and  his  hearers,
Ez.3,19.  when  the  voice  of  God  addressed  him  before,  saying,  If  thou
hast  announced  to  the  wicked,  and  he  have  turned  not  from
his  wickedness,  and  from  his  evil  way,  he  himself  shall  die
in  his  wickedness,  but  thou  hast  delivered  tliy  soul.  Paul
had  placed  this  pan,  as  a  wall  between  himself  and  his
Acts 20,  disciples,  when  saying,  /  am  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  of
26.  27.  yQy^  .  jfjy  J  have  not  shunned  to  declare  unto  you  the  whole


The  prond  do  not  discriminate. God's  judgment  and  FAi  it's. 141

counsel  of  God. It is,  therefore,  nec(;ssary tliat teachers  Book
should  seek  to  be  burned  up  now  with  ardent  zeal,  that  they  ^^^^'
may  not  be  compelled  to  suffer  torments  in  the  fire  of  hell
for  the  sloth  of  negligence.

11.  But  we  owe  one  duty  to  those  who  are  unrighteous  and
subject  to  us,  and  another  to  those  who  are  righteous  and  not
subject  to  us.  For  fear  should  enkindle  us  to  reprove  those,
and  to  take  good  care  of  the  accounts  we  have  to  render.  But
the  thought  of  equity  should  incline  us  to  reverence  these.
But  haughty  men,  because  they  know  not  this  kind  of  dis-
cretion, exhibit  the  same  conduct  to  those  who  are  righteous,
and  not  subject  to  them,  as  they  see  good  preachers  display
towards  those  who  are  unrighteous,  and  subject  to  them.  And
when  they  unjustly  launch  out  into  warmth  of  invecti^'e,
they  venture  even  on  words  of  malediction.  For,  because
they  do  not  love  their  neighbours  as  themselves,  they  cease
not  to  wish  for  their  neighbours  that,  which  they  are  afraid
of  befalling  themselves.  Whence  Eliu,  venting  his  secret
hatred  in  open  malediction,  exclaims,  O  mij  Fatlier,  let  Job
be  tried  even  to  the  end,  cease  not  from  the  man  of  iniquity.
He  calls  him  a  man  of  iniquity,  whom  God,  by  a  testimony
from  on  high,  pronounces  righteous  above  all  men.  And
because  many  things  are  still  subjoined,  from  this  want  of
discrimination,  I  think  that  they  must  be  run  through  briefly.
For  sayings,  which  are  wanting  in  weight,  do  not  require  any
careful  exposition. It  follows,

Ver.  37. IVJio  hath  added  blasphemy  upon  his  sins.

12.  He  accuses  him  of  having  deserved  scourges  for  his  vii.
sins,  and  of  having  sinned  after  the  scourges.  But  the  Lord
judges  flir  otherwise,  Who  both  asserts  that  he  was  scourged
without  reason,  and  conferred  on  him  double  goods,  after  his
scourges.  Blessed  Job,  then,  is  proved  to  have  spoken
without  sin,  whom  rewards  follow  after  his  speech.  Because,
therefore,  Eliu,  when  speaking  in  the  Lord's  defence,  thinks

of  blessed  Job  differently  from  the  Lord,  he  is  at  variance
with  the  truth,  while  multiplying,  as  it  were,  his  words  in
behalf  of  the  truth. It  follows.

Let  him  be  hound  meanwhile  amongst  us,  and  then  let
him  provoke  God  to  judgment  with  his  words.

13.  As  though  he  were  saying,  Let  him  know  from  our


vni.


142  Job's  confidence  in  Ids  cause  not  too  great.

Job  35,  assertion,  that  he  is  bv^  no  means  able  to  bear  the  examina-

1.2

— ^-^^^tion  of  God.  And,  because  haughty  men  strive  to  say  not
only  Ibolish,  but  also  many,  things,  the  verse  which  follows
is  frequently  well  introduced  respecting  him.

Chap.  XXXV. Vcr. 1. Eliu  therefore  spake these words
again.
ix.  J 4.  Every  one,  who  says  many  things,  is  anx:ions  to  be

always  beginning,  in  his  speech,  in  order,  by  this  very
beginning,  to  keep  his  hearers  in  suspense,  so  that  they  may
be  the  more  attentively  silent,  the  more  they  expect,  as  it
were,  to  hear  some  new  thing.  But  Eliu,  finishing  one  sub-
ject, begins  another  without  delay,  in  order  that  his  loquacity
may  be  continued  without  limit,  by  beginnings  being  con-
stantly joined  on. It  follows,

Ver.  2.  Doth  thy  thought  seem  right to  thee,  that  thou
saidst,  I  am  more  righteous  than  God.
X.  15.  Every  one  observes,  who  reads  the  text  of  the  history,

that  blessed  Job  did  not  say  that  he  was  more  righteous  than
Job  23,  God. But  he  says,  Let  Him  x^ut  forth  equity  against  me,
^'  atid  my  judgment  shall  come  to  victory. Examining  namely
his  life,  and  not  knowing  the  reasons  of  his  smiting,  as  has
been  often  observed,  he  believed  that  he  was  scourged  for
the  sake  of  washing  away  his  sins,  and  not  of  increasing  his
merits. And  he  was  therefore  confident,  that  his  judgment
would  come  to  victory,  because  he  found  in  himself  no  fault,
for  which  he  deserved  to  be  smitten. Which  thing  indeed  the
Job  2,3.  Lord  also  said  of  him  to  the  devil; Thou  hast  moved  Me
against  him,  to  afflict  him  ivithoiit  cause. What  had  he
sinned  then,  by  speaking  thus,  who,  unknowingly,  agreed,  in
these Avords,  with the divine and secret sentence upon
himself? Or  what  harm  is  there,  if,  in  the  judgment  of  men,
our  words  differ,  on  the  surface,  from  the  exactness  of  truth,
when,  in  that  on  which they  turn  in the  heart,  they  are
cordis closely  joined  to,  and  agree  with,  it. The  ears  of  men  con-
car  ine  gj^igj.  Qjjj.  words  to  be  such  as  they  sound  outwardly,  but  the
divine  judgments  hear  them  as  they  are  uttered  from our
inmost  heart. Among  men,  our  heart  is  judged  of  from  our
words, but  with  God,  our  words  are  judged  of  from  our
heart. Whilst  blessed  Job,  then  said  without,  that,  which
God  said  within, he  justly  uttered  every  thing  which  he


Prophetic  ground. FAiu  speaks  ivell,  but  not  to  the  case. 143

said,  inasmuch  as  he,  piousU-,  did  not  differ  from  the  Inner  Book

sentence. Althougli  in  that  which he said, filled by  the '

spirit  of  Prophecy,  Let  Him  put  forth  Equity  against  me,
and  my  judgment  shall  come  to  victory,  he  might  be  looking-
for  the  presence  of  our  Redeemer.  For  He,  Who  is  the
Virtue  and  the  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  may  be,  not  impro-
perly, considered  as  His  Equity.  Whence  it  is  written,
Who  of  God  is  made  unto  uswisdom.and  riqhteousness,  and^Cor.  i,

30

sanctijication .  And  because,  namely,  God  has  placed  this
Equity  against  sinners  who  fly  from  Him,  by  exhibiting
It  Incarnate,  He  recalled  them  at  once  from  their  iniquity  ;
and,  in  that  judgment  in  which  it  found  the  Equity  of  God
opposing  its  ways,  mankind  has  overcome  its  ancient  op-
ponent. It  follows,

Ver.  3.  For  thou  saidst,  that  which  is  right  doth  not
please  thee,  or  what  will  it  profit  thee,  if  I  shall  have  sinned.

16.  If  the  whole  course  of  the  book  is  attended  to,  xi.
blessed  Job  is  proved  to  have  said  none  of  these  things.
But  haughty  men,  as  we  have  also  said  before,  are  wont  to
have  this  peculiarity,  that  while  they  go  on  in  violent  in-
vective, they  also  speak  falsely  in  their  inveighing,  and  that,
when  they  cannot  justly  blame  the  things  which  exist,  they
reprehend,  in  their  falsehood,  those  which  do  not  exist.  It
follows,

Ver.  4.  /  will  therefore  answer  thy  words,  and  thy  friends
with  thee.

In  his  former  saying,  he  mentioned  culpable  words,  as
if  those  of  blessed  Job,  and  derived  from  them  matter  for
his  remarks.  But,  in  the  words  which  follow,  he  examines,
with  great  acuteness,  that,  which  he  craftily  invented  as
matter  to  speak  upon.  And  the  sentiments  which  follow
are  powerful,  but  are  not  applicable  to  the  character  of  blessed
Job;  and  the  shafts  of  this  reproof  strike  him  the  less,  the
more  unjustly  they  are  launched  against  him. It  follows,

Ver.  5 — 7.  Look  xnito  the  heaven,  and  see,  and  behold  the
sky,  that  it  is  higher  than  thou.  If  thou  hast  sinned,  what
wilt  thou  hurt  Him?  If  thine  iniquities  have  been  miil-
liplied,  ivhat  icilt  thou  do  against  Him  ?  If,  moreover,  thou
hast  acted  justly,  ivhat  wilt  thou  give  Him,  or  what  will  He
receive  of  thy  hand  ?


144 Oar  distance  beneath  God  sheron  by  His  works  above.

Job  35, 17.  Althougb  these  words  ought  not  to  have  been  said  to

— rv^  blessed  Job,  who  knew  greater  truths,  yet  the  thmgs,  which
xii

are  said,  are  true,  namely,  that  neither  do  our  sins  hurt  God,

nor  our  good  deeds  assist  Him. Whence  he  followed,  and

added,  (A^er.  8.)  Thine  iniquity  will  hurt  a  man  that  is  like

thee,  and  thy  righteousness  will  projit  the  son  of  man. But

amongst  these  things  we  must  carefully  notice  that  which

he  says.  Look  into  the  heavens,  and  see,  and  behold  the  sky,

that  it  is  higher  than  thou. For  from  speaking  in  this  way

he  doubtless  signifies,  that  Job  should  consider,  how  much

less  he  could  either  benefit,  or  injure,  God  by  his  conduct,

since  he  could  neither  benefit,  nor  injure,  the  loftiness  of  the

heaven,  or  of  the  sky. For  although  we  can  understand  by

the  heaven,  or  the  sky,  the  heavenly  powers,  who  are  ever

steadily  gazing  on  the  sight  of  the  Godhead,  (in  order  that,

when  we  behold  that  the  angelic  spirits  are  still  far  distant

from us, we may acknowledge how far we are distant

below,  from  the  Creator  and  Lord  of  spirits  Himself,)  yet

nothing  prevents  our  understanding  by  them  in  this  place

the  material  substance  of  heaven  and  sky. For  if  we  look

attentively  at  outward  things,  we  are  recalled  by  their  very

means  to  inward things. For  the  wonderful  works  of  the

visible  creation,  are  the  footsteps  of  our  Creator. For  we

cannot  as  yet  behold  Him Himself;  but  we  are  yet  tending

to  a  sight  of  Him,  if  we  admire  Him  in  these  things  which

He  has  made. We  call,  therefore,  the  creation  His  footsteps,

because  we  journey  onwards  towards  Him  by  following  up  those

Rom.  1,  things  which  proceed  from  Him.  Whence  Paul  says.  The
invisible  things  of  Him  are  clearly  seen,  being  nnder stood  by
the  things  that  are  made,  even  His  eternal  power  and  God-
head. Whence  also  it  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom,

"Wisd.  For  by  the  greatness  and  beauty  of  the  creatnres  the  Maker
of  them  can  be  intelligently  seen.  For  to  our  mind,  which  is
through  sin  scattered  abroad,  God  is  not  as  yet  made  known
within,  as  He  really  is.  But  while  He  sets  before  us  from  with-
out the  beauty  of  His  creation,  He  gives  us,  as  it  were,  certain
hints,  and  shews  what  to  follow  within.  He  leads  us  on
wonderfully  by  these  same  outward  forms  to  inward  things,
He  intimates  with  boundless  admiration  what  He  is,  by
shewing  us  these  marvels  without,  which  are  not  Himself.


20


13,5


The  creatures,  by  which  ice  fall,  made  steps  to  our  recovery. 145

For  hence  it is written of  Wisdom,  She sheweth  herself  Book
cheer  full  ij  unlo  them  in  the  icaijs,  and  meeleih  them  in  all-,'.

' '  '  VVisd.t),

Jorethoiigiit.  16.

18.  For  the  works  of  the  creation  are,  when  considered,
ways  to  the  Creator.  For  when  we  see  these  things,  wliich
are  made,  we  admire  the  power  of  their  Maker.  In  these
ways  we  are  met  by  Wisdom,  with  all  forethought,  because
the  power  of  our  Maker  is  set  before  us,  to  be  enquired  into,
in  every  thing,  which  appears  to  have  been  wonderfully
wrought.  And  wherever  the  soul  turns  itself,  if  it  looks
attentively,  it  finds  God  in  the  very  same  objects,  through
which  it  forsook  Him  ;  and  again  acknowledges  His  power,
from  a  consideration  of  those  objects,  for  the  love  of  which
it  abandoned  Him.  And  it  is  recalled,  when  converted,  by
those  things,  by  which,  when  perverted,  it  fell.  For  we
make  efforts  to  rise  on  the  very  spot  where  we  fell,  and  in
rising,  we  place,  as  it  were,  the  hand  of  consideration  on  the
spot,  where,  falling  with  the  foot  of  slippery  love,  we  were
lying  prostrate  through  neglect.  But  because  we  have,  by
visible  things,  fallen  from  invisible,  it  is  right  that  we  should
again  strive,  by  visible  things,  to  reach  invisible ;  in  order
that  what  was  to  the  soul  a  fall  to  the  bottom,  may  be  a  step  in
turn  to  the  summit,  and  that  it  may  rise  by  the  same  paces  by
which  it  fell:  while,  as  was  before  said,  those  objects,  rightly
considered,  recal  us  to  God,  which,  when  improperly  chosen,
separated  us  from  Him.  Eliu,  therefore,  in  order  to  apply
the  force  of  consideration,  and  to  shew  from  bodily  objects,
how  far  higher  is  God  than  man,  well  observed.  Look  unto
the  heaven,  and  see,  and  behold  the  sky,  tliat  it  is  hiyher  than
thou.  For  we  learn  from  these  created  and  corporeal  objects,
howfarwe  aredistant  from  the  loftiness  of  our  Creator:  because,
by  evei'y  thing  which  we  behold,  we  are  warned  to  be  humble;
in  order  that  the  beauty  of  the  creature,  when  considered,  may
be,  as  it  were,  a  kind  of  lesson  to  our  mind.  Let  him  say
then,  Look  unto  the  heaven,  and  see,  and  behold  the  sky,
that  it  is  higher  than  thou.  Lf  thou  hast  sinned,  in  n-hat
wilt  thou  hurt  Him?  If  thine  iniquities  have  been  mul-
tiplied, what  u-ilt  thou  do  against  Him?  If,  moreover,  thou
hast  acted  justly,  what  wilt  thou  give  Him,  or  ichat  icill  He
receive  of  thy  hand? As  if  he  were  saying,  Understand  from

VOL.  III.  L


146 Angels  bettceen  shew  us  distant. Man  may  harm  man.

Job  35,  the  very  creatures,  which  thou  seest  by  thy  bodily  senses,  to

'- — be  higher  than  thyself,  how  far  thou  art  removed  from  the

loftiness  of  the  Divine  Power,  and  conclude,  from  this  thy
consideration,  that  thou  canst  neither  benefit  God  by  thy
good  living,  nor,  again,  injure  Him  by  thy  evil  deeds.

19.  But  if,  as  we  before  said,  we  understand  the  superior
Powers  by  '  heaven.'  or  the  '  sky,'  Eliu,  in  these  words,  warns
us  to  consider,  that,  because  the  angelic  spirits  themselves
cannot  fully  contemplate  the  power  of  our  Creator,  (though  it
is  certain  that  they  are  higher  than  ourselves,  as  not  having
fallen  into  the  lowest  depths,)  we  should  hence  infer,  how  far
we  are  inferior  to  God,  who  are  beneath  even  those  sublime
creatures,  who  are  yet  far  His  inferiors.  As  if  he  were  to  say,
Lo  !  how  widely  thou  art  separated  from  the  loftiness  of  the
Godhead,  from  Whose  might  even  those  powers  shrink  in
their  humility,  who  surpass  thee  with  immeasurable  loftiness;
and  how  far  inferior  thou  art  to  the  Most  High,  who  dis-
cei'ncst  that  thou  art  inferior  to  those,  who  are  inferior  to
Him.  But,  by  pointing  out  the  highest  objects,  he  brings  to
an  equality,  and  says,

Ver.  8-  Thine  iniquity  ivill  hurt  a  man,  who  is  like  thee,
and  thy  riyhteousness  will  profit  the  son  of  man.
xiii.  20.  The  iniquity  of  man  hurts  him,  whom  it  pollutes  by
perversion.  And,  again,  our  righteousness  profits  him,  whom
it  converts  from  his  wickedness.  For  those  things  cannot
either  hurt,  or  profit,  which  cannot  either  corrupt  from  what
is  good,  or  change  from  what  is  evil.  The  powers  above,
then,  cannot  be  either  hurt,  or  profited,  because  they  have
already  received  to  be  free  from  change.  But  they  who  are
involved  in  earthly  desires,  cannot  consider  these  things.
For  it  is  difficult  for  minds,  which  are  scattered  abroad,  to
return  to  themselves ;  because  evil  ways  detain  them,  more
plcasurably,  when  once  ensnared,  the  more  every  thing,
which  pleases  them,  is  therein  permitted.  For  no  wall  of
discipline  stands  in  the  way  to  confine  them,  no  punishment
of  retribution  is  looked  forward  to,  to  frighten  them.  But,
when  the  eyes  of  the  heart  are  closed,  the  soul  is  plunged
the  more  surely  into  the  lowest  abyss,  as  it  is  shut  out  from
the  highest  objects,  and  commits  temporal  sins  more  fear-
lessly, the  more  obstinately  it  despairs  of  eternal  blessings.


Persecutions  of  the  wicked  hasten  the  Elect  in  escaping. l47

21,  But  that  wickedness  of  the  reprobate,  separating  the  Book
life of the Elect, as corn from the chaif  in threshing,- — — '
opjiresses,  that  it  may  purify. For  the  wicked,  whilst  they
afflict  the  good,  release  them  the  more  from  the  desires  of
this  world;  because,  while  they  heap  on  them  many  cruelties
here,  they  compel  them  to  hasten  heavenwards. Which  is
well  signified  by  the  Jewish  people,  when  Moses  was  sum-
moning, and  king  Pharaoh  raging  against,  them. For  Moses
was  then  sent  to  call  them,  when  Pharaoh  had  been  already
urged  to  oppress  them  by  hard  labours :  in  order  that  the
one,  while  summoning,  might  draw  away,  as  it  were,  the
minds  of  the  Israelites  disgracefully  clinging  to  Egypt,  andEx.i6,3.
the  other  might  urge  them  on,  as  it  were,  while  raging :  and
that  the  people,  which  was  disgracefully  held  in  bondage,
might  be  moved,  either  by  being  invited  by  blessings,  or
driven  by  sufferings. This  occurs  daily,  while  the  reprobate
are  allowed  to  rage  against  the  Elect,  when  heavenly  rewards
have  been  announced  to  them;  in  order,  that,  if  we  neglect
to  go  forth,  when  called,  to  the  land  of  promise,  we  may
be compelled at least by  raging oppi-essions ; and, tliat
this  Egypt,  that  is,  our  present  life,  which oppressed us,
when flattering, may aid, when pressing, us: and  that,
that  which,  when  cherishing,  crushed  us  with  the  yoke  of
bondage, may  shew  the way of  liberty,  while  it  tortures.
This  is  the  special  reason,  why  the  righteous  are  allowed  to
be  afflicted  by  the  wicked,  in  order,  namely,  that  while  they
hear  of  future  blessings  to  desire,  they  may  also  suffer  present
evils  to shudder  at; and  that,  while love invites,  torture
may  drive  them  to  an  easier  escape. Whence  Eliu,  going
on  to  speak  of  the  same  su.fferings  of  the  Elect,  under  the
oppressions  of  the  reprobate,  says,

Ver.  9.  They  will  cry  out,  by  reason,  of  the  multitude  of^  caium-
ojjpressors^,  and  ivill  wail  on  account  of  the  force  of  the  a^'m'^H^'J^^l'
of  tyrants.  /"'.

22.  We  can  rightly  term  all  the  ungodly  'oppressors,'  not^,^'"
those only,  who  spoil  our  outward  goods,  but  those,  also, xiv.
who  endeavour  by  their  wicked  habits,  and  by  the  example
of  their  reprobate  life,  to  scatter  our  inward  treasures. For
those  go  about  to  attack  the  things,  which  are  without  us,
but  these  seek  to  prey  on  us  within. The  one  cease  not  to

L  2


148  Many  assail  the  C/n'istian  life  with  hatred.

JoB36,rago  with  love  lor  our  goods,  the  other  with  hatred  of  our
— ^-^ — virtues.  Tlie  one  envy  what  we  possess,  the  others  the
way  we  live.  The  one  desire  to  spoil  our  outward  goods,
because  they  liUe  them,  the  others  are  busy  in  squandering
our  inward  goods,  because  they  dislike  them.  As  the  lile,
then,  of  our  habits  is  superior  to  the  substance  of  our  goods,
he  is  the  greater  ojijn-essor,  who  assaults  our  virtues,  by
wicked  conduct,  than  he  who  injures  our  goods,  by  violently
oppressing  us.  For  thougli  he  lias  withdrawn  nothing  from
our  su})port,  yet  he  has  set  before  us  examples  of  perdition.
lie  has  indicted  on  us,  therefore,  a  heavier  oppression,  since
he  has  roused  our  heart,  when  quiet,  by  temptation.  And
though  he  has  not  persuaded  us  to  the  works  of  his  conduct,  he
has  yet  imposed  on  us  a  contest  of  temptation.  We  suffer
therei'ore  a  heavy  oppression  from  his  life,  because,  doubtless,
we  suffer  that  within,  which  we  nuist  overcome  with  difficulty.
And  because  the  life  of  the  wicked  abounds  in  this  world,  to
torture  us,  it  is  well  said,  T/tey  icill  cry  out  by  reason  of  the
multitude  of  the  oppressors.

2i.  But  because  they  sometimes  endeavour  to  extort  even
by  unrestrained  violence,  that  which  they  cannot  persuade
by  words,  it  'is  rightly  subjoined.  And  will  wail  on  account
of  the  force  of  the  arm  of  tyrants.  For  whoever  compels  us,
by  his  example,  to  live  wickedly,  uses  in  our  case,  as  yet,
the  voice  of  the  oppressor.  But  whoever  desires  to  frighten
us  also,  wlien  ]iersuading  us  to  sin,  now  rages  against  us
with  the  arm  of  tvranny.  For,  to  reconnnend  vices  by  one's
conduct,  is  one  thing,  to  enforce  it  by  terrors,  is  another.
When  we  look  then  at  patterns  of  evil  doing,  we  hear,  thus
far,  as  it  were,  the  noise  of  the  oppressor ;  but  when  we
'  ^;i  CO-  are  by  force  compelled  to  sin,  we  endure  at  once  a  tvrant
in  our  heart.

24.  But  the  minds  of  the  strong,  wliich  are  stedfastly  fixed
in  God,  despise  all  these  assaults,  the  more  they  discern
that  they  rise  u]i  against  the  commands  of  their  Creator.
For  waiting  for  the  rewards  of  eternity,  they  gain  strength
from  their  a(]versities,  because,  as  the  fight  grows  strong,
they  doubt  not  that  a  more  glorious  victory  awaits  them.
Thus  while  the  desires  of  the  Elect  are  kept  down,  they
make  progress  by  adversity,  just  as  the  fire  is  blown  back  by


Trials  of  opposition  prove  and  strengthen  love.  149

the  blast,  in  order  to  increase,  and  gains  strength  by  the Book
means,  by  whicli  it  appears  to be extinguished. For  wc  ^^^^'
shew  in  this  way,  with  wliat  great  desire  for  God we  are
inflamed,  if  we  pass  over  to Him,  not  merely  by  tranquil
and  smooth,  but  even  through  rugged  and  hard  paths. For
hence the Prophet says, Who hath made vnj  feet like  ^'^-  i^,
harts'  feet. Foi",  when  a  hart  climbs mountain  ridges,  it
passes  over,  with  a  bound,  whatever  rugged  places  it  beholds,  .
whatever  spots,  entangled with briars,  oppose themselves,
and  rises  up  to  higher  ground,  without  any  obstacle  to  its
course. So  also  the  minds  of  tlie  Elect  leap  over,  with  the
bound  of  contemjilation,  whatever  they  see  obstructing,  or
opposing  them  in  this  world,  and,  desj)ising  the  thorns  of
worldly  anxieties,  raise themselves, like hinds, to things
above. Hence  he  says  again.  And  by  my  God.,  I  shall  pass'P^- 18,
over  a  wall. For  'a  wall'  is  every  thing  thrown  in  our  wav,
that  we  pass  not  over  to  Him,  Whom  we  love. But  we  pass
over  a  wall,  when  we  trample  down,  for  love  of  our  heavenly
country,  whatever  tilings  have,  in  this  world,  been  placed  in
our  way. Hence  the  Lord  says,  by  the  same  Prophet,  to  a
struggling  soul;  /  heard  thee in the  hidden  place  of  the  ^'^•^^>
tempest,  I  proved  thee  at  the  waters  of  contradiction. For
it  is  '  the  hidden  place  of  the  tempest,'  when  the  waves  of
tempting  thoughts  swell  up  in  the  contrite  heart,  when  the
tumults  of  worldly  cares  dash  themselves  against  the  zeal  of
holy love. He is  heard,  then,  in the  hidden  place  of  the
tempest,  because  this  very  agitation  of  tribulation,  is  the  cry
of  suppliants. But,  because  there  are  never  entirely  wanting
such,  as  endeavour  to  advise  evil  to  those  who  arc  seeking  for
good, the waters of  contradiction are op])osing people.
And  because  our  desire  is  then  proved,  when  it  is  opposed
by  any  adversity,  it  is  rightly  said,  /  have  proved  thee  at  the
icaters  of  contradiction. By  these  efforts  of  virtues,  then,
the  strong  make  progress,  from  adversity:  but  the  weak,  if
any  obstacles  have  been  placed  against  them,  often  languish
in  their  desires,  and,  when  assaulted  by  mighty  tribulation,
fail  from  cowardice. Whence Eliu,  inflicting on blessed
Job  reproaches  for  his  cowardice,  having  fust  mentioned  the
oppressions  of  the  wicked,  proceeds  immediately  to  si)eak  of
the  cowardice  of  the  weak,  saying,


150 The  weak  trust  not  God  iti  ti'ouhles. Songs  in  the  night.
Job  35, Vcr.  10. And  He  said  not. Where  is  God, Who  made

10.  9

— mef

xv, 25.  It  is  the  practice  of  Holy  Scripture,  to  pass  suddenly
from  tlie  singular  to  the  plural,  and  to  turn  itself  from  the
plural  to  the  singular. Whence Kliu,  when saying.  They
will  erg  and  wail,  did  not  subjoin,  Theg  said  not,  JVhere  is
God?  but,  He  said  not,  Where  is  God? For,  coming  from
the  plural  to  the  singular,  he  suddenly  passed  over  to  the
person  of  each  of  the  weak. Perliaps  because  tliat  is  better
discerned by individuals, which  is heard  spoken of  them
individually:  so  that  each  of  them  returns  to  his  own  heart,
and  blames  in  himself  that,  which  is  stated  of  each  man  one
by one. He, therefore, retained the singular number,
saying.  He  said  not,  Where  is  God,  IVho  hath  made  me?
For,  whoever  is crushed by  the  tribulation  of  adversities,
does  not  look  at  Him,  by  Wliom  He  was  made. For  He,
Who  made  that,  which  was  not,  leaves  it  not,  when  made,
without guidance : and He Who made man mercifully,
does  not  permit  him  to  be  tormented  unjustly. Nor  does  He
carelessly  suffer  that,  which  is,  to  perish,  Who  also  created
that  which  was  not,  that  it  might  be. When  we  ask,  then,
the  cause  of  our  tribulation,  and  perhaps  too  slowly  discover
it;  there  is  this  consideration,  we  can  suffer  nothing  unjustly,
because  if,  God  being  our  Creator,  we  exist,  who  before  were
not,  God  being  our  Ruler,  vre,  who  are,  are  not  unjustly
afflicted. It  follows,

IVJio  hath  given  songs  in  the  night.
xvi. 26.  A  '  song  in  the  night'  is  joy  in  tribulation ;  because,
though  afflicted  with  worldly  oppressions,  we  yet  now  rejoice
in  the  hope  of  eternity. Paul  was  announcing  songs  in  the
Roin.l2, night, saying. Rejoicing in  hope, patient in tribulation .
David  had  taken  up  his  song  in  the  night,  who  was  saying,
Ps.  32, Thoii  art  my liope  from  the  oppression  which Jiath siir-
'•  rounded  me,  my  Exultation,  deliver  me  from  those  icJio  sur-

round me.  Lo !  he  calls  oppression  '  night,'  and  yet  amidst
his  straitnesses,  he  calls  his  Deliverer,  his  Exultation.  There
was  '  night'  indeed  without,  in  the  encompassing  of  oppres-
sions, but  '  songs'  were  resounding  within,  from  the  conso-
lation of  joy.  For,  because  we  cannot  return  to  eternal  joys,
except  through temporal  losses,  it  is  the  whole  object  of


Hope  mixed  with  sorroio. Grovelling  Brutes. Vain  fowls, lol

Scripture,  that  the  hope  of  the  joys,  which  will  abide,  should  Book

strengthen  us,  aiuid  these  passing  adversities. Whence  also  "-^ '-

the  Prophet  Ezekiel  witnesses,  that  he  had  received  a  book,
in  which  were  written,  lamentdtions,  a  song,  and  teoe. rorEzek.2,
what  is  signified  by  this  '  book,'  except  the  words  of  God  ?
For  since they  enjoin  on  us  tears  and  sorrow,  lamentations
are  said  to  be  written  therein. They contain  also  a  song
and woe;  ibr  they so set  forth  joy  from hope,  as  yet  to
announce oppression and difficulties in this present life.
They  contain  a  song  and  woe,  because  though  we  seek  for
what  is  sweet  there,  it  is  yet  first  necessary  for  us  to  endure
bitternesses  here. The Lord was preacliing a  song  and
woe  to  His  disciples,  when  He  was  saying.  These  things  /JolmlS,
June  spoken  imlo  you,  tlial  in  Me  ye  might  have  peace:
in  the  lourld  ye  shall  have  trihulaiioii. As  though  He  w^ere
plainly  saying,  May you  have  an  inward  refreshment  and
consolation  from  Me,  because  cruel and  heavy  oppression
will  befal  you  from  the  world  without. Because  then,  every
feeble  person,  when  oppressed,  has,  by  reason  of  his  great
weakness  of  heart,  but  faint  hope  of  joy,  and,  when  suffering
adversities  without,  forgets  that,  in  which  he  used  to  rejoice
within,  it  is  well  sA\(\.,He  said  not,  Where  is  God  Who  made
me,  Who  hath  giveti  songs  in  the  nigh  I? For,  were  he  to
say  these  words,  he  would  moderate  the  violence v/hich  he
suffers,  and,  by  the  lasting  good  he was seeking within,
would  consider,  that  the  transitory  pain  he  endures,  is  not
intolerable. It  follows,

Ver,  1 1.  Who  teacJteth  us  more  than  the  beasts  of  the  earth,
and  instructethiis  more  than  the  fowls  of  heaven.

27.  The  beasts  of  the  earth  are  they,  who  seek  the  lowest  xvu.
things,  from  the  habit  of  a  carnal  life.  But  the  fowls  of  the
heaven  are  they,  who  search  into  lofty  things,  with  the  eager-
ness of  a  proud  curiosity.  These  degrade  themselves,  by
their  conduct,  below  what  they  are  in  themselves ;  these
exalt  themselves,  by  their  enquiries,  beyond  what  they  are
able.  The  pleasure  of  the  flesh  casts  down  those  to  the  very
bottom,  the  lust  of  curiosity  exalts  these,  as  it  xvere,  in  things
above  them.  To  those  it  is  said  by  holy  Scripture,  Be  yeps.3'2,9.
not  as  the  horse,  and  the  mule,  which  have  no  understand-
ing. The  proud  labour  of  these  is  blamed,  when  it  is  said,


]52  Pride  in  knoioledge  forfeits  the  aid  of  grace.

Job  35,  Seek  not  out  the  tliinrjs  that  are  higher  than  thoii^  neither

^— ^search  the  things  that  are  above  thy  strength. To  those  it  is

3.21. said,  Mortify  your  members  tvhich  are  upon  the  earth,  forni'

QQ\'2s\cation,  lust,  evil  concupiscence. To  these  it  is  said,  Let  no

man  deceive  you  through  })hiIosop]ty  and  vain  deceit. God

teaches  us,  therefore,  more  than  tlie  beasts  and  the  fowls  of

the  air,  because,  while  we  understand  what  we  are,  neither

does  the  infirmity  of  the  flesh  cast  us  down,  nor  does  the

spirit  of  pride  raise  us  up. We  do  not,  by  sinking  down,

fall  beneath  the  lowest  things,  nor are  we puffed  up,  by

pride,  as  to  those  above  us. For  he,  who  falls  in  the  flesh,  is

overcome  bj'  the  appetite  of  beasts,  but  he,  who  is  exalted  in

mind,  is  raised  up,  like  the  fowls,  as  if  with  the wing  of

lightness.

28.  Butif  we  keep  strict  watch,  that  both  humility  of  mind
and  chastity  of  body  be  preserved,  we  soon  know  that  the
one  is  preserved  by  the  other. For  pride  has  often  been  to
many  a  seed-plot  of  lust;  for,  whilst  their  spirit  raised  them,
as  it  were,  on  high,  their  flesh  plunged  them  in  the  lowest
depths. For  they  are  first  secretly  raised  up,  but  afterwards
they  fall  openly  ;for  while  they  swell  in  the  secret  motions
of  the  heart,  they  fall  with  open  lapses  of  the  body. Thus,
thus,  elated,  they  required  to  be  smitten  with  righteous  retri-
bution; in  order  that,  since  tliey  set  themselves  above  men
by  pride,  they  might  be  brought  down,  by  their  lust,  even  to
Ps.  -19,  a  resemblance  of  beasts. For,  man  ii-hen  he  wa^  in  honour,
^' understood  not,  he  hath  been  compared  to  the  senseless  beasts,
and  made  like  them. For  the  wing  of  knowledge  had  raised
them,  as  it  were,  on  high,  of  whom  Paul  said  that  w^hich  we
Eom.  ], before mentioned; Because,  when  they  had  known God^
2j- ihxnj  glorified  Him  not  as  God,  or  gave  Him  thanks,  but
became vain  in their thoughts. But how they fell  into
bestial and  more than  bestial  pleasure,  he  added,  saying,
ib.  24. God  gave  them  up  to  the  desires  of  their  hearts,  unto  un-
cleanness. Lo!  the  flesh  overwhelmed  those,  whom  boastful
learning  had  raised  up,  and,  from  the  flying  of  birds,  they
fell  beyond  the  appetite  of  beasts,  and  sank  beneath  them-
selves, by  the  very  means  by  which  they  appeared  to  rise
above  themselves. We  must  take  heed  then,  and  the  mind
must  be  kepi,  with  all  tare,  from  the  swelling  of  pride. For


The  vain  often  left  to  disgraceful  falls.  153

our  thoughts  fly  not  in  vain,  before  the  eyes  of  God  ;  and  no  book
moments  of  time  pass  in  thought,  without  an  abiding  of  retribu-  XXVI.
tion. God  then  beholds  what  elates  the  mind  within;  and
therefore  permits  that  which  is  to  bring  it  down  to  gain  strength
without.  That  which  is  afterwards  to  be  struck  down  without
by  the  pollution  of  lust,  is  first  raised  up within  us. Open
punishment,  namely,  follows  a  secret  fault,  in  order  that  our
inward  evils  may  be  punished,  by  those  from  without,  and
that  the  heart,  which  was  secretly  puffed  up,  may  fall  openly.
For  hence  it  is  said  by  Hosea,  against  the  Israelites, The
spirit  of  fornication  is  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  they  have  H03. 5,
not  known  the  Lord. Who,  in  order  to  shew  that  the  cause  ^•
of  lust  sprang  from  the  sin  of  pride,  proceeded  to  say.  And ih.  5.
the  pride  of  Israel  icill  answer  to  Ids  face. As  if  he  were
saying,  The sin, which  through pride  of mind  lurked in
secret,  openly  replied  by  the  lust  of  the  flesh. Wherefore
the  cleanness  of  chastity is  to  be  preserved,  by  guarding
humility. For,  if  the  spirit  is  piously  humbled  before  God,
the  flesh  is  not  raised  unlawfully  above  the  spirit. For,  the
spirit  holds  the  dominion  over  the  flesh,  committed  to  it,  if  it
acknowledges  the claims  of  lawful servitude to  the  Lord.
For  if,  through  pride,  it  despises  its  Author,  it  justly  takes  on
itself  a  contest  with  its  subject  flesh. Whence  also  that  first  Gen.  3,
disobedient  one,  as  soon  as  he  had sinned  through  pride,'"
covered his shameful parts. For,  because  his  spirit  had
put  an insult on God, it  soon  experienced  the insult of
the  flesh. And,  because  it  refused  to  submit  to  its  Creator,
it  lost  its  right  over  the  subject  flesh,  which  it  used  to  rule:
in  order,  namely,  that  the  confusion  of  its  own  disobedience
might  redound  upon itself,  and that it  might learn,  when
vanquished,  what  it  had  lost  through  ])ride.

29.  Let  no  one,  then,  after  he  has  begun  to  aim  at  things
above  him,  consider,  if  overcome  by  carnal  pleasure,  that  he
is  only  then  defeated,  when  he  is  openly  overpowered.  For,
if  the  poison  of  lust  frequently  springs  from  the  root  of  pride,
the  flesh  then  triumphed,  when  the  spirit  was  secretly  proud.
The  soul  then  fell,  as  to  the  beginning  of  its  fault,  into  the
wantonness  of  beasts,  when,  by  raising  itself,  like  the  fowls,  it
soaredhigherthanitought.  Foritishencc,thatlong-maintained


154  A  sudden  overthrow  comes  of  hidden  sin  before.

Jou  35,  continence  is  suddeuly  broken  through,  hence,  that  virginity,

• '- — thougli  preserved even  to old age,  is  frequently violated.

For,  since  humility  of  heart  is  neglected,  the  righteous  Judge
despises  even  chastity  of  body,  and  at  last  proclaims,  by  an
open  sin,  those  to  be  reprobates,  whom  He  endured  in  secret,
though  long  ago  rejected. For  he,  who  has  suddenly  lost  a
long-treasured  good,  has  retained,  in  himself  within,  another
evil,  from  which  a  further  evil  has  suddenly  burst  forth,  by
which  he  was, even  then,  estranged  from  God,  though  he
shewed that he cleaved to Him by cleanness of  body.
Because,  therefore,  pride  of  mind  leads  to  the  pollution  of
the  flesh,  the  heart  of  the  reprobate  is,  from  the  flight  of
birds,  plunged  into  the  wantonness  of  beasts. But  holy  men,
that  they  may  not  be  earned  down  into  the  whirlpool  of  lust,
through bestial a})petite,  carefully guard the  thoughts of
their  mind  from  the  flight  of  pride  ;  and,  that  they  may  not
sink,  through folly,  into the  lowest  depths,  humbly keep
down  all  their  high notions. It  is  therefore rightly said.
Who  teacheth us  more  than  the  beasts  of  the  earthy  and
instructeth  us  more  than  the  fowls  of  heaven. Thou  under-
standest, '  this  he  also  said  not.'

30.  He  says,  therefore,  that  he  does  not  remember  in
tribulation,  that  he  is  superior  to  the  beasts,  and  to  the  fowls.
As  if  he  were  to  say,  Every  one  who  is  weak,  does  not
strengthen  himself  when  in  perturbation,  because  he  does
not  moderate  himself,  when  in  tranquillity;  and  he  therefore
knows  not  how  to  endure  adversities,  because,  when  pros-
perous, he  knew  not  how  to  keep  himself  down  in  thought
from  the  flight  of  birds,  nor  to  raise  up  the  motions  of  his
flesh  from  the  gluttony  of  beasts.  But  this  was  the  more
unfitly  said  to  blessed  Job,  as  his  life  is  wonderfully  kept  in
the  mean,  between  things  high  and  low.  But  it  can  also  be
understood  in  another  way;  JJ'ho  teacheth  us  more  than  the
beasts  of  the  eartli,  and  instructeth  us  more  than  the  fo iris
of  heaven.  For  as  the  life  of  men,  still  subject  to  the  motions
of  the  flesh,  is  signified  by  the  word  '  beasts;'  so  is  the  pride
of  haughty  spirits  set  forth  by  the  appellation  '  fowls ;'  in
order  that  earthly  men  may  be  designated  by  '  beasts,'  but
the  devils  by  '  fowls.' Wliencc,  when  the  Lord  said  that  the


Holy  men  raised  above  earthly  loalking  and  devilish  pride. 1 55
seeds  had  fallen  by  the  way  side,  He  adds,  The  Jowls  of  the Book

...  X  X  VT

air  came  and  devoured  them  up; signifying  doubtless  by^— : — ;-*
fowls,  the  powers  of  the  air.  4.

31. But  because  hoi}-  persons  neither  follow  the  lowest
examples  of  men,  nor,  again,  are  deceived  by  the  subtlety  of
devils,  they  rise,  by  the  virtue  of  their  instruction,  both  above
the  beasts  of  the  eartli,  and  the  fowls  of  heaven. For  they
are  taught  more  than  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  because  they
despise whatever  can  be  desired  below : and  they  are  in-
structed more  than  the  fowls  of  the  air,  because  they  under-
stand all  the  stratagems  of  unclean  spirits. They  are  taught
above the  beasts  of  the  earth,  because  they  seek  not  any
thing,  which  passes  away  in  this  life. They  are  instructed
more  than  the  fowls  of  the  air,  because  they  trample  down
even  now,  by  the  merits  of  their  life,  the  powers  of  the  air,
wliich  they  still  tolerate  through  the  infirmity  of  the  flesh.
Paul  had  been  already  taught  above  the  beasts  of  the  earth,
when  saying,  For  many  walk;  and  shortly  afterw^ards,  Whose  Phil.  3,
end  is  destruction,  whose  god  is  their  belly,  who  savour  oJ\^
earthly  things. But  our  conversation  is  in  heaven. And
again  he  knew  that  he  was  instructed  above  the  fowls  of  the
air,  when  he  said.  Know  ye  not  that  ive  shall  Judge  angels  ?  \  Cor.G,
He  perceived  that the beasts  were  beneath  him,  because, '■
namely,  though still dwelling on earth,  he  was trampling
down  the  habits  of  men,  who  engage  in  grovelling  pursuits.
And again he had surpassed  the  flying  of  fowls,  by  the
dignity  of  his  merits,  because,  when now  about  to enter
heaven,  he  was  not  ignorant  that  be  would  judge  Angels.
In  the  one  he  w^as  treading  under the basenesses  of  the
impure,  in  the  other  the  loftinesses  of  the  proud. For  the
minds  of  holy  men  despise  all  transitory  objects,  and  behold
every  thing  that  is  proud,  and  every  thing  that  passes  away,
sink  beneath  them. And  placed  on  a  lofty  eminence,  they
see  all  things  the  more  subject  to  them,  the  more  truly  they
submit  themselves  to  the  Author  of  all ;  and  they  transcend
all  things,  just  as  they  prostrate  themselves  in  true  humility
before  the  Creator  of  all  things. Let  him  say  then.  Who
teacheth  us  more  than  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and  instrucieth
us  more  than  the  fowls  of  the  heaven. As  if  he  were  saying,
The  weak  man,  overcome  by  his  cowardice,  said  not  thus.


156 Good  men  ivish  deliverance  for  the  oppressor'' s  conversion.

Job  35,  and therefore  the  adversity  of  temptation  smote  him  : be-

'- —  cause  in  the  season  of  tranquillity  he  did  not  overcome  all

these  transitory  objects,  by  any  perfection.  For  he  would
not  dread  the  adversities  of  this  life,  if  he  had  trampled  even
its  prosperity  under  foot,  by  the  merit  of  his  perfection.
It  follows,

Ver.  12. There  they  will  cry,  and  He  will  not  hear,  because
of  the  pride  of  evil  men.
xviii. 32.  There ;  namely,  in  tribulation  :  as  it  is  written  on  the
Ps.  102,  other  hand  of  joy.  The  children  of  thy  servants  shall  inhabit
there. But  it  seems  doubtful  whether  ho  says.  Because'  of
the  pride  of  evil  men  He  Mall not hear,  or,  they  will  cry
because  of  the pride of  evil  men. But  it  can  be  better
understood,  if  they  are  rather  said  not  to be  heard,  than
to  cry  out,  because  of  the  pride  of  evil  men. For,  that  they
cry  out,  because  of  the  pride  of  evil  men,  is  already  slated,
ver.  9. in  the  verse  in  which  it  is  said,  They  will  cry  out  by  reason
of  the  midtitude  of  the violent. Something is therefore
suggested  to  us  in  this  verse,  to  be  attended  to  a  little  more
minutely. Because  often,  when  the  oppressed  have  cried
out,  they  deserve  indeed  to  be  heard,  for  their  own  sake;
but  yet  their  desires  are  deferred,  on  account  of  the  pride  of
their  oppressors. For  the  Just  God  allows  His  own  people
to  be  oppressed  in  their  worldly  goods,  and  the  malice  of  the
violent  sinfully  to  increase  ;  in  order  that,  while  the  life  of
these  is  wasted  awa}^  in  purification,  the  wickedness  of  those
may  be  consummated. But  it  frequently  happens,  that  the
righteous,  when  involved  in  tribulation,  enjoy,  even  in  this
life,  heavenly  consolation,  which  they  do  not  ask  for  in  this
life. For  they  wish  to  be  saved  not  for  their  own  sakes,  but
for  the  salvation  of  their  adversaries  ; in  order  that,  while
Almighty  God  delivers  them,  by  working  a  kind  of  miracle,
from  their  boundless  dangers,  He  may  manifest  His  might,
even  to  their  persecutors ;  and  may  deliver  the  adversaries
for  eternity,  by  the  same  means,  as  He  rescues  His  own
people  in this  world. As  the  Prophet  also,  taking  up  the
Ps.  69,  language of  mart3'rs, says, Deliver me,  because  of  mine
enemies. As if  he were saying ; For myself  indeed, I
seek  not  to  be  delivered  from  temporal  tribulation  ;  but  yet
I  wish  to  be  delivered,  on account  of  my  adversaries; in


They  are  not  now  relieved  when  he  is  to  be  hardened  in  sin.  157

order  that,  while  my  life  is  seen  to  be  miraculously  preserved, Book

the  hardness  of  my  enemies  may  be  converted  at  the  very:!^ ^"

sight  of  the  miracles. As  the  Lord  then  frequently  rescues
the  life  of  His  own  people,  in  this  world,  for  the  conversion
of  His  enemies,  so  does  He  frequently  not  listen  to  the  cry
of  His  own  people,  for  the  sake  of  the  condemnation  of  their
persecutors  ;  in  order,  namely,  that  they  may  add  to  their
guilt,  from  the  fact  that  they  wickedly  rejoice  that  they  have" .
prevailed. FoTthey^  who  despise  invisible  things,  can  some- \
times be moved by visible  miracles. But  frequently  no
visible  miracle  is  worked  in  behalf  of  the  righteous,  because
their  adversaries  do  not  deserve  to  be  invisibly  enlightened.
Let  it  be  said  then,  There  will  they  cry,  and  He  will  not
hear,  because  of  the  j)ride  of  evil  men. As  if  he  were  saying,
Tlie  guilt  of  the  oppressors  prevents  His  hearing  the  voice  of ,^-^
the  oppressed : and  the  righteous  are  not  visibly  rescued,  ^
because  the  unrighteous  do  not  deserve  to  be  invisibly  saved.
Hence  it  is  again  said  by  the  Prophet,  When  he  shall  see  the  Ps.  49,
wise  dyiny,  the  simjjle  and  the  foolish  shall  perish  together.  ^  '
For those,  whom they  behold dying  visibly,  they  do not
believe  can  live  invisibly,  and  they  add  to  the  guilt  of  their
unbelief,  as  they  despair  of  eternity,  when  they  behold  the
death  of  the  faithful. The  violent,  then,  fail  the  more  fatally,
from  the  very  fact,  that  they  outwardly  prevail  against  the
life  of  the  innocent. And  the  inmost  Truth  drives  them
forth  the  more  from  Itself,  the  more  It  suffers  them  to  work
their  will,  in  this  world,  against  those  who  are  Its  own.

.33.  Whoever,  then,  persecutes  the  life  of  the  good,  is  then
condemned  with  more  fearful  vengeance,  when  he  is  opposed
by  no  adversity ;  and  he  is  then  exposed  to  the  risk  of  more
fearful wrath,  when  he  prosecutes successfully his sinful
desires. Because, namely,  the  vengeance of  the Divine
Judgment  has  given  up,  by  reserving  for  future  punishment,
him,  whom  It  has  here  not  cared  to  oppose  in  his  wicked-
ness. For  hence  the  Lord  says  by  the  Prophet,  I  gave  them  Ps.  si,
up  according  to  the  desires  of  their  heart,  and  they  will  go  ^'
on  in  their  own  wills. Hence  it  is  said  again,  The  rod  of  Job  2\,
God  is  not  upon  ihem. Hence  also  it  is  written  of  their  "
chief  himself.  He  will  do,  and  prosper. Hence  again  it  is  Dan.  8,
said  of  the  same  person,  And  craft  shall  be  guided  aright  in  it."  25.


1 58  Hindrance  to  ill  deeds  a  mercy. Late  ansioers  to  prayer  Vest.

Job  35,  his  hand. For  craft  is  guided  aright,  in  the  hand  of  Anti-

'—  christ,  because  he  is  not  hindered  by  any  adversity,  in  this

world,  from  fulfilling  that,  which  he  has  purposed  against
Prov.  i,tiie  good.  Hence  again  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  The  pros-
perily  of  fools  shall  destroy  them.  It  is,  then,  a  manifest
token  of  perdition,  when  subsequent  success  favours  much-
wished  for  iniquities,  and  when  no  obstacle  hinders  that,
which  a  perverse  mind  has  conceived.  For  frequently,
while  the  wishes  of  sinful  men  are  delayed,  they  are  changed,
and,  while  they  feel  the  difficulty  of  performing  an  evil
action,  tliey  learn  its  guilt ;  and  they,  who  are  thwarted  at
first  against  their  will,  shrink  afterwards,  of  their  own
accord,  from  that  which  they  had  conceived.  Because  then
the  Lord,  when  He.  forsakes  the  wicked,  allows  them  to
prevail,  and,  because  the  wickedness  of  the  proud  is
perfected,  by  the  same  means,  as  the  long-suffering  of  the
humble  is  consummated,  let  it  be  rightly  said,  There  uill
they  cry,  and  He  will  not  hear,  because  of  the  pride  of
wicked  men. It  follows,

Ver.  13.  For  God  will  not  hear  without  reason,  and  the
Almighty  will  hehold  the  causes  of  men  one  hy  one.
xix. 34.  We  must  observe  that  two  points  are stated : both
'  or, '  in  that  He  does  not  hear  without  reason'  him,  who  cries  to  Him,
(wkh ^^^^  y^'^  regards  his  sufferings  ;  and  pretends  not  to  hear  his
difFerent  cry,  and  still  is  not  ignorant  what  each  one  suffers. Let  no
ation.) one,  then,  who  is  not  speedily  heard,  believe  that  he  is  not
cared  for  by  God's  providence. For  our  desires  are  often
heard,  because they are  not  speedily granted: and  that,
which  we  wish  to  be  soon  fulfilled,  is  the  better  prospered
by  the  very  delay. Our  prayer  is  frequently  made  good,  the
more  it  is  deferred ;  and  when  our  request  is,  in  appearance,
neglected,  our  wishes  are  more  fully  carried  out  in  the  deplli
of  our  thoughts. As  the  seeds  of  harvest  are  firmly  com-
pressed by  frost,  and  spring  up  in  greater  number,  to  bear
produce, the slower  they  come  forth  to  the  surface. Our
desires,  therefore,  are  deferred,  in  order  that  they  may  make
progress ;  they  make  progress,  in  order  to  gain  strength  for
that  which  they  are  about  to  enjo}-: they  are  exercised  in
the  contest,  in  order  that  greater  rewards  may  be  heaped  on
them,  in  recompense.  The  labour  of  the  contest  is  protracted,


Great  mercy  in  delayed  help. Self-judyment  in  icaiting. 159

in order that  the crown  of  victory  may  become greater. Book

When the Lord, then, does not speedily hear His own — '-

people,  He  draws  them  to  Himself,  just  as  He  is  beheved
to  repel  them.  For  He  is,  in  truth,  our  spiritual  Physician,
and  cuts  out  the  infection  of  vices,  wliose  existence  within
us  He  utterly  reprobates.  He  extracts  the  poison  of  cor-
ruption with  the  knife  of  tribulation ;  and  the  more  He
pretends  not  to  hear  the  cries  of  His  patient,  the  more  is  He
providing  for  the  endhig  of  his  sickness.  For  hence  the
Prophet  exclaims,  O  my  God,  I  tvill  cry  ilirouyh  the  day^V^.ii^l.
and  Thou  uilt  not  hear ;  and  in  the  night,  and  not  to  my
folly.  As  if  He  were  saying.  It  tends  not  to  my  folly,
that  Thou  dost  not  hear  me,  when  I  cry  to  Thee,  day  and
night,  without  ceasing ;  because  Thou  trainest  me  the  more
in  heavenly  wisdom,  by  seeming,  as  it  were,  to  desert  me  in
ray  temporal  affliction.  Hence  also  he  says,  A  helper  M«ps.9,9.
opportunities,  in  tribulation.  Intending  to  speak  of  tribula-
tions, he  first  mentioned  opportunities ;  because  we  are
frequently  bruised  by  tribulation,  and  yet  it  is  not  a  fit
season  for  our  being  assisted  according  to  our  desire  for
deliverance.  Let  it  be  said  then.  For  God  will  not  hear  with-
out reason,  and  the  Almighty  will  behold  the  causes  of  men
one  by  one.  But  because  some  persons  are  frequently  broken
down  by  this  very  delay  of  assistance,  he  fitly  subjoins,

Ver.  IJ. Even  when  thou  shall  say,  He  doth  not  consider^
judge  thyself  before  Him,  and  ic ait  for  Him.

35.  For  perhaps  when  our  cry  seems  to  be  disregarded,  xx.
the  hope,  which  was  in  our  heart,  is  weakened,  and  we
believe  that  assistance  from  above  will  fail  us,  because  we
are  too  slow  in  asking:  and  we  lament  that  the  unavenged
wrongs  we  are  enduring  are  almost  disregarded  by  God.
But  when  this  storm  of  despair  agitates  us,  our  disordered
mind  sooner  takes  shelter  in  the  harbour  of  hope,  if  it
weighs  accurately  its  causes  with  the  Lord  ;  if  it  recals  to  its
memory  His  favours,  if  it  does  not  artfully  excuse  in  itself
the  evils  it  has  returned  for  His  goodnoss  ;  if  it  balances
what  it  has  justly  deserved,  and  what  it  has  received  of  His
merey  ;  if  it  actively  *  searches  its  own  conduct ;  if,  examining  i
all  its  doings  in  God's  sight,  it  conceals  not  itself  from  *'^'"'
itself;  if  it  remembers  that  it  was  brouglit  into  being,  which


vivaci-


160 Thowjht  of  undeserved  mercy  comforts  lohile  it  shames  ns.

Job  35, before was  not; if  it  reflects  that  though  it  was  lying  in

'- — darkness,  it  was  illumined,  and  raised  up. Bringing then

all  these  points  together  in  itself,  while  it  considers  the
blessings  it  has  received,  it  blames  not  the  ills  it  is
suffering;  and,  strengthened  with  the  consolation  of  so  many
gifts,  it  is  not  crushed  with  despair.  Because,  when  it  calls
to  mind  past  mercies,  it  derives  hope  for  the  future.  Let  him
say  therefore,  Even  when  thou  shall  say.  He  dolh  not  con-
sider, juclye  thyself  before  Him,  and  uait  for  Him.  As
though  he  were  to  say,  When  God  is  believed  not  to  regard,
because  He  is  slow  in  shewing  compassion,  enter  into  thy
most  secret  thoughts,  and  there  undertake  the  judgment  of
thy  cause  before  His  eyes,  and  discern  both  what  thou  hast
conferred  on  Him,  by  thy  conduct,  or  what  thou  hast  mer-
cifully received.  And  then  thou  returnest  to  the  confidence
of  hope,  when  thou  art  ashamed  at  the  mercies  of  such  great
goodness:  so  that  thou  mayest  confidently  look  for  Him  in
adversities,  Whom  thou  rememberest  to  have  been  gracious
to  thee,  even  after  thine  offences.  For  thou  hadst  reason
to  hope  for  assistance  from  above,  even  though  no  favours
had  preceded.  And  thou  must  feel  sure  that  God  does  not
unjustly  reject  man,  whom  He  mercifully  created.

36.  We  must  consider,  therefore,  how  dangerous  it  is  to
behold  past  gifts,  and  to  despair  of  future :  how  dangerous,
if  in  this  storm  of  tribulations,  we  suffer  shipwreck  from
despair,  bound  as  we  are  to  the  harbour  of  hope  by  the
boundless  ties  of  past  favours.  Let  it  then  be  said  rightly,
Judye  thyself  before  Him,  and  uait  for  Him.  For  he  who
judges  not  himself  before  God,  does  not  wait  for  Him
when  afflicted.  For  he  despairs  that  assistance  can  hereafter
come  from  Him,  Whose  preceding  kindnesses  He  does  not
admit:  and  when  he  forgets  those  that  are  past,  he  is  de-
prived also  of  a  bounteous  supply  of  subsequent  blessings.
But  behold,  while  we  are  afflicted,  while  we  patiently  wait
for  the  grace  of  consolation,  the  wicked  break  out  into
greater  wickedness,  and  proceed  the  more  in  adding  to  their
iniquities,  as  they  are  left  unpunished.  And  yet  the
Almighty  mercifully  bears  with  sinners,  and  grants  them
time  for  repentance,  which  He  converts,  if  they  are  not  con-
verted, into  an  evidence  of  greater  guilt;  He  patiently  re-


Wickedness  not.  punished  noiv,  because,  like  Ham's,  hereatier. \  (» I

strains  the  wrath,  vvliich  at  length  He  pours  out  irrevocably. Book
Whence  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  ^^^^'

Ver.  15.  For  He  doth  not now  bring  on  His  fury,  nor
severely  punish  n-ickedness.

37.  For  God  in  truth  bears  a  long  while  with  him,  whom xx.i.
He condemns for ever; and forbears now to bring on
His  wrath,  because  He  reserves  it  to  be  poured  forth,  here-
after, without  end. For  suffering  is  here  the  portion  of  the
Elect,  in  order  to  their  being  trained  for  the  rewards  of  their
heavenly  inheritance. It  is  our  portion  to  receive  stripes
here, for whom an eternity of joy is reserved. For
hence  it  is  written, He  scourgelh  every  son  whom  He  re-Heb.  12,
ceiveth. Hence  it  is  said  to  John, I  rebuke  and  chasten^^^  3
those  whom  I  love. Hence  Peter  says,  It  is  time,  that  Judy- 19-
^nent  must  begin  at  the house  0/ God. Where  he  imme-4, 17/
diately  adds  with  astonishment.  But  if  it  Jirst  begin  at  us,
what  shall  the  end  be  of  them that  believe  not  the  Gospel  of
God  ? For the sevevity  of  God permits not  sins  to  re-
main unpunished; but  the  wrath  of  judgment  commences
with  our  punishment  hercj  in  order  that  it  may  cease  to  rage
at  the  damnation  of  the  reprobate. Let  the  reprobate  pro-
ceed then,  and  accomplish  the  desires  of  their  pleasures,
with  unpunished  iniquity : and  let  them  feel  no  temporal
scourges,  since  eternal  punishments  await  them. But  their
unpunished wickedness, is well signified by the sin of
Ham:  to  whom  it  was  said  by  his  father.  Cursed  he  thy  son  Gen.  9,
Canaan,  a  servant  shall  he  be  to  his  brethren. For  Canaan  ^^*
was  the son  of  Ham. And  what  is  signified  by  his  son
Canaan  receiving  the  sentence  of  punishment,  when  Ham
offended  ? What  is  meant by  his being smitten,  not in
himself,  but  in his  posterity,  except  that the  sins  of  the
reprobate  go  on  unpunished  in  this  world,  but  ai'e  smitten
hereafter  ? Let  it  be  said  then,  For  He  doth  not  now  bring
on  His  fury i  nor  severely  punish  wickedness.

■38.  But  it  must  be  noticed,  that  he  inserted  the  word
''  severely ;"  for,  although  He  patiently  endures  some  wick-
ednesses, yet  some  He  pnnislies  even  in  this  life :  and  He
sometimes  begins  to  smite  even  here,  what  He  intends  to
destroy  with  eternal  damnation.  Therefore  He  smites  some
sins,  and  leaves  some  unpunished  : for,  if  He  were  to  be

VOL.  III.  M


162  Judgment  here  but  in  part.  Job  charged  icith  much  spealdng.

Job  35, severe  with  none,  who  would  believe  llmt  God  regarded  tlid

'- — doings  of  men  ? And  again,  if  He  were  lo  smite  all  of  them

here,  for  what  reason  would  the  last  judgment  still  remain?
Some  are,  therefore,  smitten,  in  order  that  we  may  tremble
at  the  attentive  care  of  our  Ruler  over  us.  But  some  are
still  left  unpunished,  in  order  that  we  may  feel  that  judg-
ment still  remains.  It  is  well  said  then,  He  doth  not  severely
2Junish  sin:  because  while  some  small  portion  of  iniquity  is
punished,  the  sentence  of  eternal  judgment  is  even  now
foretasted  by  unconverted  souls.

39.  All  this  then  that  Eliu  says  is  right,  if  it  were  said
rightly.  For  he  knows  what  he  ought  to  say,  but  knows
not  to  whom  he  is  speaking.  For  the  things  which  he  said
are  true,  but  are  out  of  place,  in  reproving  blessed  Job  ;
because  he  the  less  needed  this  reproof,  as  he  had  not
sinned,  even  from  any  cowardice.  But,  because  the  pride
of  haughty  men  is  often  an  occasion  of  virtues  for  the
righteous,  blessed  Job  is  so  dealt  with  in  the  secret  judg-
ment, in  order  that,  after  the  scourges  of  punishments,  he
may  gain  strength  also,  by  the  words  of  the  arrogant.
For,  lo!  the  more  he  is  despised  by  the  minister  of  pride,
the  more  is  he  comforted  by  the  truth  teaching  him  within.
For,  after  Eliu  knew  that  he  had  said  so  many  powerful
words,  he  disclosed  what  pride  he  bore  within,  and  despised
blessed  Job,  by  thinking  highly  of  himself,  saying;

Ver.  16.  Therefore  doth  Job  open  his  mouth  in  vain,  he
multiplieth  words  without  knowledge.
xxii.  40.  By  introducing  these  words,  he  doubtless  asserts,  that
blessed  Job  both  knew  nothing,  and  had  said  much  ;  and,
though  he  introduces  his  own  opinions  loquaciously,  he
accuses  him  of  the  fault  of  loquacity.  But  this  seems  also
to  be  a  peculiar  fault  of  the  arrogant,  that  they  believe  the
much,  which  they  have  said,  to  be  little,  and  the  little,  which
is  said  to  them,  to  be  much.  For,  because  they  always  wish
to  speak  their  own  words,  they  cannot  hear  the  words  of
others  ;  they  think  that  they  suffer  violence,  if  they  do  not
pour  forth  their  own  immoderate  opinions  more  immoderately.
And,  although  blessed  Job  was  silent  at  his  words,  yet  Eliu
finds  cause  for  invective,  in  the  speech,  in  which  he  had
replied  to  his  friends ; in  order  to  get  himself  larger  space


Eliu  veils  his  pride  hy  professing  to  speak  for  God. 163

of  his  silence, and lliat  he himself  might answer many  Book
things,  he  asserts  that  he  had  multiplied  words. For  he  im-  ~ — i:
mediately  begins  the  commencement  of  a  tedious speech,
and  endeavours  to  commence,  as  though  he  had  as  yet  said
nothing  at  all. Whence  it  is  subjoined,

Chap,  xxxvi.  Ver.  1,  2.  Eliu  also  added,  and  spake  thus;
Suffer  me  a  little,  and  J  will  shew  thee.

41.  He  had  already  said  much,  and  hopes  that  he  will  be  xxiii.
borne  with  yet  a  little  longer;  because,  namely,  haughty
men  consider  that  they  suffer  a  heavy  loss,  if  they  confine
their  skill  by  speaking  within  brief  limits.  For  they  believe,
that  they  shew  themselves  to  be  more  learned,  the  more  they
have  been  able  to  lay  open  their  minds  in  multiplicity  of
much  speaking.  But,  because  they  frequently  perceive  that
the  respect  of  silence  is  not  paid  to  them,  they  mention,  at
times,  the  power  of  the  Lord,  from  Whom  they  seem  to  be
speaking;  and,  under  pretence  of  Him,  they  exact  that
silence  for  themselves,  which  they  by  no  means  deserve ;
and,  while  in  appearance  they  bring  God  forward,  when
exacting  a  hearing  for  themselves  from  reverence  for  Him,
they  strive  more  to  display  themselves,  than  to  set  forth  His
doings. Whence  also  Eliu  subjoins,  saying,

Ver.  2.  For  I  have  yet  somewhat  to  speak  on  God's
behalf.

Because  holy  teachers  sometimes  frequently  repeat  any
things  they  state  rather  obscurely,  in  order  to  instil  these
hidden  sayings  into  the  hearts  of  their  hearers,  by  the
language  of  repetition  ;  haughty  men  also  wish  to  imitate
this  practice,  and  the  things  they  have  said  they  repeat  in  an
insolent  manner,  not  because  they  seek  to  insinuate  the  sub-
jects into  the  hearts  of  their  hearers,  but  because  they  wish
to  appear  eloquent  in  their  judgment.  Wlience  Eliu  sub-
joining, says,

Ver.  3.  /  will  repeal  my  knowledge  from  the  heginniny.

But  because,  on  the  mention  of  knowledge,  his  pride  of
heart  hath  displayed  itself  in  his  voice,  he  is  plainly  dis-
covered to  be  a  haughty  person,  if  he  does  not  quickly  con-
ceal  himself  by  some  disguise.  Whence  in  concealing  his
own  arrogance,  he  immediately  introduces  the  righteousness
of  the  Lord,  and  says,

M  2


164 Good  teachers  praise  their  speech  to  awaken  the  heai'er.

Job  36, A)id  I  trill  prove  mij  Maker  just.

— '■ —  In  order  that,  while  he  speaks  as  if  in  behalf  of  God's
righteousness,  whatever  escapes  from  him  arrogantly,  may  be
excused  in  the  judgment  of  man. It  follows,

Ver.  4.  For  truly  my  words  are  without  falsehood.

xxiv.  42.  Even  righteous  men,  when  they  see  that  they  cannot
be  understood  by  their  feeble  hearers,  are  frequently  wont  to
praise  the  things  they  say.  Not  because  they  are  eager  for
their  own  praise,  but  to  inflame  their  hearers  with  an  anxious
desire  of  listening  to  them  ;  in  order  that,  while  they  are
uttered  by  their  voice,  they  may  be  embraced,  with  more
ardent  affection,  by  the  hearts  of  their  hearers.  Whence
Paul,  when  he  had  spoken  to  the  Corinthians  things  wonderful

2  Cor.  and  many,  says,  Our  mouth  is  opened  unto  you,  O  ye
'  "  Corinthians,  our  heart  is  enlarged.  But  haughty  men,  while
they  know  not  the  heart  of  the  good,  and  imitate  only  their
words,  from  time  to  time,  are  hurried  forward  in  praising
what  they  say,  not  because  the  listlessness  of  their  hearers
displeases  them,  but  because  they  eagerly  please  themselves.
They  imitate  and  feign  the  voice  of  the  righteous,  but
know  not  the  power  of  their  voice.  They  see  what  the
righteous  put  forward,  but  know  not  what  they  seek  for.
For,  when  holy  teachers  set  forth  the  praise  of  their  preach-
ing, they  raise,  as  it  were,  the  hearts  of  their  hearers  from
grovelling  thoughts,  by  the  hand  of  their  voice  :  in  oi'der
that,  having  been  suddenly  roused,  they  may  run,  as  if  to
meet  the  words  which  follow,  and  may  hold  them  the  more
firmly  in  the  embrace  of  their  understanding,  the  more  they
had  loved  them,  by  the  voice  of  their  praiser,  even  before
they  beheld  them.  But,  as  T  said,  haughty  men  know  not
these  things.  For  since  that,  which  they  seek  for,  is  without,
they  cannot  feel  what  is  desirable  within. For  it  is  written

Vs.  45,  of  the  Church  of  the  Elect,  All  the  glory  of  her,  the  daughter

1  '\

Mat.  25  of  kings,  is  from,  within.  And  the  wise  virgins  are  said  to  carry

4-  oil  in  their  lamps. Whence  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  the

2  Cor. Saints,  Our  glory  is  this,  the  testimony  of  our  conscience.

'  But  haughty  men,  because  they  have  no  testimony  of  their

conscience  before  God,  seek  the  testimony  of  another's  voice

before  men ; and,  when they  slowly  obtain it,  they  burst

forth  into  shameless  praise  of  themselves. For  if  they  find  not


Pride,  even  in  heart,  unless  checked,  spinis  our  icork. 165

the  applause  of  men,  which  they  eagerly  look  for,  they  them-  Book
selves  speak  in  praise  of  their  own  wisdom. Whence  also  ^^^^'
Eliu  adds,  saying,

And  perfect  knowledge  shall  he  proved  to  ihec.

43.  He doubtless  felt that  he  was  about  to  utter  great  xxv.
things,  but  he  could  not  conceal  his  lofty  estimate  of  himself,

in  his  swelling  heart ;  and  therefore  preceded  by  his  praises
his  sound  opinions ;  because  he  would  be  already  indeed
guilty  in  God's  judgment,  if  he  had  merely  felt  in  silence
great  things  of  himself.  For  we  are  by  no  means  safe,
before  the  searching  examination  of  the  Truth,  even  though
we  have  nothing  in  ourselves  which  deserves  blame,  in  the
judgment  of  men.  For,  frequently,  when  careless  in  our
thoughts,  we  ai'e  assaulted  by  the  pride,  which  yet  we
suppress  in  silence.  But  unless  our  secret  pride  is  ex-
tinguished, by  awakened  repentance,  in  the  chamber  of  the
heart,  in  which  it  takes  its  rise ;  all  the  merit  of  our  con-
duct is  extinguished  before  our  strict  Jitdge.  We  must,
therefore,  hence  consider,  with  what  gi-eat  punishment  that
pride  will  be  condemned,  which  is  cherished  till  it  is  boldly
uttered,  if  even  that  is  inexcusable  which  springs  up  secretly
in  the  heart.  We  must  consider  also  with  what  poM-er  that
pride  reigns  within,  which  is  so  far  encouraged,  as  not  to  be
ashamed  even  to  break  forth  without.  Because  then  Eliu
felt  great  things,  he  could  not  humbly  control  himself,  he
maintained  the  loftiness  of  knowledge,  he  spurned  the  grace
of  humility.  And  while  following  after  the  gift  by  which  he
desired  to  speak  well,  he  lost  the  grace  by  which  he  might
have  lived  well.  For  knowledge  puffeth  np,  hut  charity  \  Cor.
edijieth.  But  let  him  now  state  that  right  thing,  which  he^'  ^"
still  knows  not  how  to  speak  rightly.  For,  after  he  had
breathed  forth  the  proud  thoughts  of  his  mind,  in  words  of
pride,  he  added  a  noble  sentiment,  saying,

Ver.  5.  God rejecteth  not  the  mighty,  though  He  Himself
is  mighty.

44.  Some things in the  course of  this  mortal life  are  xxvi.
hurtful  in  themselves,  some  are such  from circumstances.
Some  are  hurtful  of  themselves  ; as  sins  and  wickednesses.

But  some  things  are,  now  and  then,  hurtful  i'rom  circum-
stances, as  temporal  power,  or  the  bond  of  wedlock. For


166  Occasional  bad  effects  of  temporal  potcer.

Job  36,  marriage  is  good,  but  those  things  which  grow  up  around  it,

'- —  through  the  care  of  this  world,  are  evil. Whence  Paul  says,

1  Cor. He  tliat  is  wliJt  a  wife,  ihinkcili  of  the  tilings  that  are  of  the
' ' world,  how  he  may  please  his  wife. Whence  also,  recom-
mending to  certain  persons  a  better course,  he dissuades
Ib.v.35.them  from  marriage,  and  says, Bid  this  I  say,  not  that  I
may  cast  a  snare  on  you,  but  for  that  which  is  comely,  and
which  may  give  you  power  to  pray  to  the  Lord  without  im-
pediment. While  that  then  which  is  not  hurtful  is  retained,
something  hurtful  is commonly  committed  from  attendant
circumstances  : as  frequently  we  journey  along  a  straight
and  clear  road,  and  yet  we  ai'e  entangled  by  our  clothes  in
briars  which grow  by  its  side. We  do  not  stumble  in  a
clear  road,  but  something  grows  by  the  side  to  wound  us.
For  great  is  that  temporal  power,  which,  from  being  well
administered,  has  its special reward  from  God  : and yet
sometimes  from  being  preeminent  over  others,  it  swells  with
pride  of  thought. And  while  all  things  for  its  use  are  at  its
service,  while  its  commands  are  speedily  fulfilled,  according
to  its  wish,  while  all  its  subjects  praise  its  good  deeds,  if
there  are  any,  but  do  not  oppose  its  evil  doings  with  any
authority,  while  they  too  commonly  praise,  even  that  which
they  ought  to  blame  ; the  mind,  being  led  astray  by  those
things  that  are  beneath  it,  is  raised  above  itself,  and  while  it
is  encircled  with  imbounded  applause  without,  is  bereft  of
truth  within.  And,  forgetting  itself,  it  scatters  itself  after  others'
speech,  and  believes  itself  to  be  really  such,  as  it  is  spoken
of  without,  and  not  such  as  it  ought  to  see  itself  to  be  within.
It  despises  those  beneath  it,  and  does  not  acknowledge  them
to  be  its  equals  in  order  of  nature,  and  believes  that  it  has
exceeded  those  also  in  the  merits  of  its  life,  whom  it  has
siu'passcd  by  the  accident  of  rank. It  considers  that  it  is
far  wiser  than  all  those,  than  whom  it  sees  itself  greater  in
power. For  it  places  itself  in  truth  on  a  lofty  eminence,  in
its  own  opinion,  and,  he  that  is  confined within  the  same
natural  condition  as  others,  scorns  to  look on  them  as  his
equals,  and  is  in  this  way  led  even  to  resemble  him,  of  whom
joh4i,  it  is  written,  He  beholdeth  every  high  thing,  and  is  a  king
ProvSO  ^^'^*'  "^^  ^^"^  children  of  pride  ;  and  of  whose  body  it  is  said,
13. A  generation,  tvhose  eyes  arc  lofty,  and  their  eyelids  arc


Pride  the  great  temptation  of  men  in  poicer.  1 07

raised  up  on  hiyJi. It  is  led  to  a  resemblance  of  him,  who  Book
aiming  at  singular  loftiness,  and  scorning  a  life  in  company  ±^LiX'
with  angels,  says,  /  ivill ascend  above  the height  of  the^s.M^
clouds,  I  will he  like the  Most High. By  a  marvellous
judgment,  then,  it  finds  the  depth  of  downfal  within,  whilst
it  raises  itself  without,  in  loftiness  of  power. For  a  man  is
in  truth  made  like  an  apostate  angel,  when  he  disdains  to  be
like  his  fellow  men. Thus  Saul  grew  up,  from  meritorious
humility,  into  swelling  pride,  by  his  height  of  power. He
was  in  truth  raised  up  in  consequence  of  his  humility,  and
rejected  through  his  pride  :  as  the  Lord  bears  witness,  Who
says, VVlien thou ivast little  in thine own  eyes,  did  not^^^^'
I  make  thee  the  head  of  the  tribes  of  Israel? Before  he
attained  to  power  he  had  seen  that  he  was  little,  but  sup-
ported by  temporal  authority  he  no  longer  saw  himself  to  be
so. For  preferring  himself,  in  comparison  with  others,  he
counted himself  great in his own judgment. But mar-
vellously, when  little  in  his  own  sight,  he  was  great  in  the
sight  of  the  Lord,  and  when  great  in  his  own  sight,  in  the
Lord's sight  he  was  little. The  Lord  forbids  us,  by  His
Prophet,  to  be  great  in  our  own  sight,  saying,  Woe  unto  gouis.5,21.
that  are  wise  in  your  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in  your  own
sight. And  Paul  admonishes  us  not  to  be  great  in  our  "own
opinions,  saying,  Be  not  ivise  in  your  own  conceits. While  Rom. 12,
the  mind  then  is  puffed  up,  through  the  number  of  those
that  are  subject  to  it,  it  falls  into  the  lust  of  pride,  the  very
height  of  its  power  pandering  to  it.

45.  But  for  this  and  that  not  to  be  good  is  one  thing,  for  any
not  to  know  how  to  use  the  good  aright  is  another.  For  power  is
good  in  its  proper  place,  but  it  requires  careful  conduct  in  a
ruler.  He  therefore  exercises  it  aright,  who  has  learned  both
how  to  retain,  and  how^  to  overcome  it.  He  exercises  it  aright,
wuu  knows  how  to  raise  himself,  by  its  means,  above  his
faults,  and,  with  it,  to  keep  himself  down  on  a  level  with
others.  For  the  mind  of  man  is  frequently  elated,  even
when  not  supported  by  any  power.  How  much  more  then
does  it  exalt  itself,  when  power  joins  itself  unto  it .?  And
yet  it  is  prepared  to  correct  the  faults  of  others  with  due
punishment.  Whence  also  it  is  said  by  Paul,  For  he  is  the'RomAS,
minister  of  God,  a  revenger  to  execute  wrath  upon  him  that


108 Apostles'  discipline  for  sinners,  equal  hearing  to  Saints.

Job  36,  doeih evil. When then the administration of temporal
— '- — power  is  undertaken,  a  person  must  watch  with  the  gi'eatest
care,  in  order  to  learn  how  to  select  from  it  what  is  of  use,
and  to  withstand  its  temptations,  and  to  feel  himself,  even
with  it,  on  an  equality  with  others,  and  yet,  by  his  zeal  for
revenge,  to  set  himself  above  those  who  do  wrong. We  gain
a  fuller  knowledge  of  this  discretion,  if  we  look  also  at  some
instances  of  ecclesiastical  power. Peter  then,  though  hold-
>princi-ing  the  Chief  power'  in  the  Church by  Divine  authority,
pa  um j.gf,jgg(j  ^Q  bg  reverenced  unduly  by  Cornelius,  who  was  a
righteous  man,  and  was  prostrating  himself  before  him,  and
Acts  10,  acknowledged  himself  to  be  but  his  equal,  saying,  Arise,  do
it  not,  I  myself  a jn  also  a  man. But  on  discovering  the  sin
Acts  5,  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  he  soon  disi)layed  with  what  great
~ ■ power  he  had  risen  above  others. For  by  a  word  he  smote
their  life,  which  he  detected  by  the  searching  of  the  Spirit ;
and  called  to  mind  that  he  held  within  the  Church  the  chief
power  against  sinners,  which,  when the  honour  had  been
violently  thrust  on  him,  he  refused  to  acknowledge  before
his  righteous  brethren. In  the  one  case  holiness  of  conduct
deserved  a  communion  of  equality,  in  the  other  his  zeal  for
vengeance  displayed  his  rightful  power. Paul  did  not  ac-
knowledge that  he  was  superior  to  his  righteous  brethren,
2  Cor. when  he  said,  Not  for  that  we  have  dominion  over  your  faith,
' ' but  are  helpers  of  your  joy. And  he  immediately  added,
For  by  faith  ye  stand. As  if  he  were  saying.  We  have  not
dominion  over  your  faith,  for  this  very  reason,  because  ye
stand  by  faith. For  we  are  your  equals,  in  a  case  where  we
know  that  you  are  standing  firm. He  seemed  not  to  know
1  Thess.  that  he  was  superior  to  his  brethren  when  he  said,  We  have
2'cor. niade  ourselves  as  little  ones  among  you  ; and  again.  And
4.  6. ourselves  your  servants  through  Jesus  Christ. But  when  he
discovered  a  fault,  which  needed  correction,  he  immediately
1  Cor. remembered  that  he  was  their  master,  and  said,  What  will
' ' ye?  shall  I  come  to  you  with  a  rod  ?

46.  A  high  place  is  therefore  rightly  discharged,  when  a
ruler  exercises  his  authority  rather  over  sins,  than  over  his
brethren.  For  nature  has  made  us  all  equal ;  but  that  some
are  committed  to  others  to  rule  over  them,  it  is  not  nature,
but their  own fault  which  places  them  beneath. Rulers,


Rulers  should  he  humbled  by  tliuuyhts  of  their  oion  sin. 169

therefore,  ought to raise themselves above the  vices,  on  Book
account  of  which  they  are  placed  above  others  : and,  when  1—- — '-
they  correct  offenders,  they  should  attend  carefully  to  smite
their  faults  with  discipline,  by  the  right  of  their  power,  but,
by  guarding  their  hmnility,  to  acknowledge,  that  they  are
equal  with  those  very  brethren,  who  ai*e  corrected. Although
it is frequently  even  right,  that  we  should,  in  our secret
thought,  prefer  those,  whom  we  correct,  to  ourselves. For
their  faults  are  smitten,  through  us,  with  the  vigour  of  dis-
cipline, but,  in  the  faults  we  ourselves  commit,  we  are  not
wounded  by  any  one,  with  an  attack  of  even  a  word. We
are,  therefore,  the  more  indebted  to  the  Lord,  the  more  we
sin  without  punishment  from  mau. But  our  discipline  the
more  exempts  those  under  it  from  Divine  punishment,  the
more  it  leaves  not  their  faults  unpunished  here. We  must
maintain  then  both  humility  in  our  heart,  and  discipline  in
GUI*  work. And  we must,  meanwhile,  keep  careful  watch,
lest the rights  of  discipline  should  be  relaxed,  while  the
virtue  of  humility  is  unduly  guarded,  and  lest,  while  a  ruler
humbles  himself  more  than  is  becoming,  he  should  be  unable
to  bind  beneath  the  bond  of  discipline  the  life  of  his  subjects.
Let  us  outwardly,  then,  keep  up  that  office,  which  we  under-
take for  others'  benefit. Let  us  keep,  within,  the  estimate  we
entertain  of  ourselves. But  yet  even  those  committed  to  us
may  properly  learn,  by  some  evidences  which  break  forth,
that  we  are  such  to  ourselves  within,  in  order  to  see  what  to
dread  from  our  authority,  and  to  learn  what  to  imitate  from
our humility. Having maintained the authority of our
office,  let  us  return  unceasingly  to  our  heart,  and  assiduously
consider,  that  we  are  created on  an equality  with  others,
not  that  we  have  been  temporally  placed  above  others. For
the  more  eminent  is  our  power  outwardly,  the  more  ought  it
to  be  kept  down  within,  lest  it  should  overpower  om*  thought,
lest  it  should  hurry  the  mind  to  be  delighted  with  it,  and  lest
the  mind  should  soon  be  unable  to  control  that  power,  to
which  it  submits  itself  from  desire  of  authority.

47.  David  had  well  learned  to  govern  his  kingly  power,
who  used  to  overcome,  by  humbling  himself,  all  pride  at  this
power,  saying,  O  Lord,  my  liearl  is  not  exalted. And  who  Ps.  131,
subjoined, to increase his humility.  Nor  mine  eyes  lofty.  '
And  added.  Neither  have  I  walked  in  great  things. And


170  HumilitT/  in,poicer  a  rare  sacrifice  to  God.

Job  36,  examining  himself  still  further,  with  most  searching  enquiry,
— '• — Nor  in  wonderful  tilings  ahove  me.  And  drawing  forth  also
all  his  thoughts  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  he  subjoins,
saying,  If  I  have  thouglit  not  humbly,  hut  if  I  have  exalted
my  soul.  Lo !  he  frequently  repeats  the  sacrifice  of  humility,
offered  from  his  inmost  heart,  and,  by  again  and  again  con-
fessing, ceases  not  to  oifer  it,  and  brings  it  before  the  eyes  of
his  Judge,  by  repeatedly  speaking  of  it.  What  is  this  ?  and
how  had  he  learned,  that  this  sacrifice  was  pleasing  to  God,
which  he  was  offering,  in  His  sight,  with  so  great  a  repetition
of  words  ?  Except  that  pride  is  ever  wont  to  attend  on  the
powerful,  and  that  haughtiness  is  almost  always  associated
with  prosperity ;  because  also  abundance  of  humour  often
causes  the  hardness  of  a  tumour.

48.  But  it  is  very  wonderful,  when  humility  of  manners
reigns  in  the  hearts  of  the  lofty.  Whence  we  must  consider,
that  whenever  powerful  persons  think  humbly,  they  attain  to
an  eminence  of  strange,  and,  as  it  were,  far  distant  virtue  :
and  they  rightly  appease  the  Lord,  the  more  readily,  with
this  virtue,  because  they  humbly  offer  Him  that  sacrifice,
which  the  powerful  can  scarcely  meet  with.  For  it  is  a
most  difficult  art  of  living,  for  a  man  to  possess  a  high
place,  and  to  keep  down  boasting  ;  to  be  indeed  in  power,
and  yet  not  to  know  that  he  is  powerful ;  to  know  that  he  is
powerful,  for  conferring  favours,  not  to  know  all  the  power
he  possesses  for  requiting  wrongs.  It  is  therefore  rightly
said  of  such,  God  rejectetli  not  the  mighty,  though  He
Himself  is  mighty.  For  he,  in  truth,  desires  to  imitate  God,
who  administers  his  lofty  power  with  a  view  to  the  benefit  of
others,  and  is  not  elated  with  his  own  praises ;  wdio,  when
1  pro.  placed  above  others,  desires  to  serve,  and  not  to  rule  over,
pra?esse  them.  For  it  is  swelling  pride,  and  not  position  of  power,
which  is  to  blame.  God  confers  power,  but  the  wickedness
of  our  mind  causes  haughtiness  at  our  power.  Let  us  take
away,  then,  what  we  have  contributed  of  our  own,  and  those
things,  which  we  possess  of  God's  bountj^,  are  good.  For
because  not  lawful  power,  but  wicked  deeds  are  condemned,
it  is  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  6.  But  He  saveth  not  the  wicked,  andgiveth  judgment
to  the  poor.
xxvii. 49.  Holy  Scripture  is  frequently  wont  to  call  the  humble,


Unbelievers  perish  without  trials  had  Christians  loith  it. 171

'poor.' Whence  they  are  mentioned  in  the  Gospel,  with  the  Book

addition,  *  spirit,'  when  it  is  said.  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  '^ —

for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  For,  because  riches 3.
visibly  manifest  the  powerful,  those  are  poor  in  their  OAvn
sight,  who  are  not  puffed  up  in  their  own  minds.  But  he
calls  those  '  wicked,'  who  are  either  cut  off  from  the  piety  of
the  faith,  or  who  else  contradict  themselves,  by  their  wicked
habits,  in  that  which  they  faithfully  believe.  Because  then
Almighty  God  condemns  pride  of  wickedness,  not  loftiness
of  power;  after  it  was  said,  God  rejecteth  not  the  -tnighty,
though  He  is  Himself  might g ;  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  But
He  saveth  not  the  tcicked,  and  giveth  judgment  to  the  poor.
That  is.  He  destroys  the  proud,  but  sets  free  the  humble,  by
His  judgment.  Or  certainly  He  gives  judgment  to  the  poor,
because  those  who  are  now  wickedly  oppressed,  then  come
themselves  as  judges  over  their  oppressors.

50.  There  are  in  truth  two  classes,  namely,  of  the  Elect
and  the  reprobate.  But  two  ranks  are  comprised  in  each  of
these  classes.  For  some  are  judged  and  perish  ;  others  arc
not  judged  and  perish.  Some  are  judged  and  reign  ;  others
are  not  judged  and  reign.  They  are  judged  and  perish,  to
whom  it  is  said  in  our  Lord's  declaration,  /  hungered,  rt7io?Mat.25,

42 43

ye  gave  Me  not  to  eat ; I  thirsted,  and  ye  gave  Me  not ' '
drink  ; I  icas  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  Me  not  in  ; naked,
and  ye  covered  Me  not ; sick  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited
Me  not. To  whom  it  is  before  said,  Depart  from  Me,  yelb.v.41.
cursed,  into  everlasting  Jire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his
angels. But  othei's  are  not  judged  in  the  last  judgment,  and
yet  perish. Of  whom  the Prophet  says, The  ungodly  o?o  Ps.  1,5.
not  rise  again  in  the  judgment. And  of  whom the  Lord
declares.  But  he  that  helieveth  not  is  judged  already. And  J^^n  3,
of  whom  Paul  says,  They  who  have  sinned  uithout  the  Law,  Rom.  2
shall  perish  without  the  Laiv. Therefore  even  all  unbelievers  ^-•
rise  again,  but  to  torment  and  not  to  judgment. For  their  case
is  not  then  examined  ; because  they  come  into  the  presence
of  their  strict  Judge,  with  the  condemnation  already  of  their
own unbelief But those,  who retain their  profession of
faith,  but  have  not  works  in  accordance  with  it,  arc  con-
victed of  sin,  in  order  to  their  perishing. But  they,  who
have  not  enjoyed  even  the  sacraments  of  the  faith,  do  not


172 Among  the  Elect,  penitents  arejudf/ed  and  saved.

Job  36,  hear  the  reproof  of  the  Judge  at  the  last  ordeal ; for,  con-

'■ —  demned  already  by  the  darkness  of  their  own  unbelief,  they

do  not  deserve  to  be  condemned  by  the  open  reproof  of
Him,  Whom  they  had  despised.  Those  hear  at  least  the
words  of  the  Judge,  because  they  have  retained  at  least  the
words  of  His  faith.  These  hear  not  in  their  condemnation
the  sentence  of  the  eternal  Judge  :  because  they  would  not
retain  their  reverence  for  Him  even  in  words.  Those  perish
by  the  Law,  because  they  have  sinned  under  the  Law;
whilst  no  mention  of  the  Law  is  made  to  these,  in  their
condemnation  ;  because  they  made  no  effort  to  have  any
thing  of  the  Law.  For  a  prince,  who  administers  an  earthly
commonwealth,  punishes  in  different  ways  a  citizen,  who
offends  at  home,  and  an  enemy  who  makes  war  abroad.  In
the  first  case,  he  considers  his  rights,  and  condemns  him  in
language  of  just  reproof.  But  against  an  enemy  he  wages
war :  he  wields  instruments  of  destruction,  and  inflicts  the
tortures  his  wickedness  deserves.  But  he  does  not  enquire
what  the  law  provides  for  his  offence.  For  it  is  not  neces-
sary for  him  to  be  destroyed  by  Law,  who  could  never
be  held  by  the  Law.  Thus,  therefore,  in  the  last  judg-
ment, both  a  lavvfid  reproof  smites  him  down,  who  has
departed  in  his  conduct  from  that  which  he  held  in  pro-
fession ;  and  he  is  destroyed  without  a  judicial  sentence,
who  is  not  held  by  the  law  of  faith.

5L  But  of  the  class  of  the  Elect,  some  are  judged  and
reign.  As  those,  who  wipe  away  with  their  tears  the  stains
of  their  life,  who,  atoning  their  former  misdeeds  by  their
subsequent  conduct,  conceal  from  the  eyes  of  their  Judge,
with  the  cloak  of  alms  deeds,  whatever  unlawfulness  they  may
have  ever  committed. To  whom,  when  placed  at  His  right

Mat.25,  hand,  the  Judge  says  at  His  coming,  I  hungered,  and  ye  gave
Me  to  eat.  I  thirsted,  and  ye  gave  3fe  to  drink.  I  was  a
stranger,  and  ye  took  Me  in,  naked,  and  ye  covered  3Ie;
sick,  and  ye  visited  Me;  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  to

Ib.v.34.7!/(?.  To  whom  he  speaks  before,  saying.  Come,  ye  blessed
of  My  Father,  possess  the  kingdom  jnepared  for  you  from
the  foundation  of  the  world.  But  others  are  not  judged,  and
yet  reign;  as  those,  who  surpass  even  the  precepts  of  the  Law
in  the  perfection  of  their  virtues;  because  they  are  by  no


The  more  perfect  reign  %oithout  being  judged.  173

means  satisfied  with  fulfilling that  which  the  Divine  Law  Hook
enjoins  on  all,  but  with  surpassing  eagerness  desire  to  per- -^7^'
form  more,  than  they  would  learn  from  general  precepts. To
whom  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  the  Lord ; Ve  which  have  left  Mat.  19,
all  and  have  followed  Me,  when  the  Son  of  3Ian  shall  sit  on^^'
the  throne  of  His  Majesty,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve
thrones,  judging  the  ticelve  tribes  of  Israel. And  of  whom
the  Prophet  says. The  Lord  will  come  to  judgment  ivith  thels.3,14.
elders  of  His  people. And  of  whom  Solomon,  when  speak-
ing of  the  Bridegroom of  holy  Church, observed,  saying,
Her  husband  is  noble  in  the  gates,  ivhen  he  sitteth  with  MeProv.ai,
elders  of  the  land. These,  therefore,  are  not  judged  in  the  ^^'
last  judgment,  and  yet  reign,  because  they  come  as  judges
together  with  their Creator, For,  leaving  all  things,  they
performed, from ready devotion, more than they heard
ordered  in  general  terms. For  that,  which  the  rich  young  man
heard,  was  said  by  a  special  command  to  the  more  perfect,
and  not  generally  to  all.  Go  and  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  a;2f/Mat.  19,
give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shall  have  treasure  in  heaven,  and '
come  and  follow  Me. For  if  a  general  command  bound  all
persons  under  this  precept,  it  would  be  at  once  a  fault  for  us
to  possess  any  thing  of  this  world. But  a  general  direction
to  all  persons  in  Holy  Scripture  is  one  thing,  a  command
specially  to  the  more  perfect is  another. These  then  are
rightly  not  bound  by  the general  judgment,  who  in  their
conduct  have  far  surpassed  even  general  precepts. For  as
they  are  not  judged,  and  yet  perish,  who,  from  the  persuasion
of  unbelief,  scorn  to be  bound  by  the  Law; so,  they  are
judged  not,  and  yet  reign,  who,  from  the  persuasion  of  god-
liness, advance even beyond  the general  precepts  of  the
Divine  Law. Hence  is  it,  that  Paul,  far  surpassing  even
special  precepts  given  him,  performed  more  in  deed,  than
he  received  by  the  appointment  of  permission. For  wheniCor.9,
he  had  received,  that  preaching  the  Gospel  he  shpuld  live ' '
of  the  Gospel,  he  both communicated the  Gospel  to  his
hearers,  and  yet  refused  to  be  maintained  at  the  expense  of
the  Gospel. Why  then  should  he  be  judged  in  order  to
reign,  who  received  a  less  obligation,  but  found  out  a  higher
mode  of  life? Let  it  be  said  then  rightly.  He  giveth  jiidg-


174 God  overlooks  not  the  rif/kteous. Holy  men  called  Kings.

3oB  3Q,nient  to  the  poor:  because,  the  more  lliey  are  despised,  by

— Il this  world,  for  their  great  humility,  the  more  do  they  then

rise  up,  Avilh  greater  height  of  power,  to  the  seats  which  have
been  assigned  them. Whence  it  also  follows ;

Ver.  7.  He  will  not  withdraw  His  eyes  from  the  righteous,
but  establisheth  kings  on  the  throne  for  ever,  and  there  are
they  exalted.

52.  For  God  is  perhaps  believed  to  have  withdrawn  His
eyes  from  the  righteous,  because  they  are  here  wounded  by
the  injustice  of  the  unrighteous,  and  are  unavenged.  But
He  then  more  regards  His  servants,  when  the  iniquity  of
their  persecutor  unjustly  afflicts  them.  For,  beholding  what
they  here  humbly  endure.  He  doubtless  even  now  looks
forward  to  the  recompense  He  is  there  mercifully  to  bestow  on
them.  He  does  not  therefore  withdraw  His  eyes  from  the
righteous.  Behold  how  the  one  groans  in  his  humility  ;  the
other  is  proud,  and  flourishes  in  his  wickedness.  The  one
bruises  his  heart,  the  other  is  exalted  with  pride  at  his
iniquity.  Which  then  of  these  is  far  withdrawn  from  the
sight  of  God,  the  one  who  has  suffered  injustice,  or  the  one
who  has  inflicted  it  on  the  sufferers  ?  The  one,  who  has  kept
hold  of  Divine  grace,  amid  the  gloom  of  sorrow,  or  he
who,  amidst  external  pleasure,  has  lost  the  light  of  righteous-
ness within .''
xxviii.  53.  But  holy  men  are  properly  termed  '  kings,'  in  the
language  of  Scripture;  because  having  been  raised  above  all
the  motions  of  the  flesh,  at  one  time  they  control  the  appe-
tite of  lust;  at  another,  they  moderate  the  heat  of  avarice;
at  one  time,  they  bow  down  the  boastfulness  of  pride;  at
another,  they  crush  the  suggestion  of  envy ;  at  another,  they
extinguish  the  fire  of  passion.  They  are  '  kings'  then,
because  they  have  learned  not  to  give  way  to  the  motions  of
their  temptations,  by  consenting  to  them ;  but  to  gain  the
mastery,  by  ruling  over  them.  Since,  therefore,  they  pass,
from  this  power  of  authority,  to  the  power  of  retribution,
let  it  be  rightly  said.  He  establisheth  Icifigs  on  the  throne  for
ever.  For  they  are  wearied  for  a  time,  by  ruling  themselves,
but  they  are  placed  for  ever  on  the  throne  of  the  kingdom  of
eternal  elevation;  and  they  there  receive  the  power  of  justly


JVhat  to  sit  on  twelve  thrones,  ivhat  tcith  Christ  on  His  own.  175

judging  others,  just  as  they  arc  here  unskilled  in unjustly tiook
sparing  themselves. For  it  is  hence  said  in  another  place  ;^^iXi'
Until  righteousness  be  turned  into  juchjinent. Paul says  Ps.  94,
of  himself  and  his fellows; That ue  might  he  made  the\^f, .
righteousness of  God in Him. Righteousness, then, is 21.
turned  into  judgment,  because  they,  who  now  live  righteously
and  blamelessly,  then  obtain  the  power  of  judging  others.
Hence  the  Lord  savs  to  the  Church  of  Laodicea,  To  him  Rev.  3,
that  hath  overcome  I  will  give  to  sit  nith  Me  on  I\Iy  throne,"  '
as  I  have  overcome,  and  have  sat  tvith  My  Father  on  His
throne. The  Lord  asserts,  that  He  had  sat  as  a  conqueror
with  His  Father  on  His  throne,  because  after  the  struggles
of  His passion,  after  the  reward  of  His  resurrection.  He
pointed  out  more  clearly  to  all,  that  He  was  equal  to  the
Power  of  the  Father,  and  He  made  it  known  that  He  was
not  inferior  to  Him  by  having  trampled  under  foot  the  sting
of  death. Hence  He  says  to Mary,  who  did  not  as  yet
believe  that  He  was  like  His Father, Touch  Me  not,  for  J ohu20,
I  have  not  yet  ascended  to  My  Father. For,  for  lis  to  sit^'^*
on  the  throne  of  the  Son,  is  for  us  to  judge  with  the  autho-
rity of  the  Son  Himself For,  because  we  derive,  from  His
virtue,  the  power  of  judgment,  we  sit,  as  it  were,  on  His
throne. Nor  is  it  inconsistent,  that  He  declares,  in  another
place,  that  His  disciples  will  come  on  twelve  thrones,  and  Mat.  19,
that  here  He  says,  that  they  will  sit  on  His  throne. For,  by *
twelve  thrones  is  set  forth  the  universal  judgment,  but  by  the
throne  of  the  Son,  the  special  preeminence  of  judicial  power.
One  and  the  same  thing  then  is  designated  by  twelve  thrones,
and  by  the  single  throne  of  the  Son,  because,  namely,  the
universal  judgment  is  undertaken,  by  the  intervention  of  our
Mediator. Let  it  be  said  then,  He  establisheth  kings  on
the  throne  for  ever.

54.  But  by  suitably  subjoining  "for  etw,"  he  suggests,
what  he  plainly  means.  For  if  he  were  speaking  of  the
throne  of  an  earthly  kingdom,  he  would  not  have  added
"for  ever:"  since  they  who  seize  hold  of  that  throne,  are
placed  in  it,  not  for  ever,  but  only  for  a  time..  But  he
properly  subjomcd.  And  there  they  are  exalted.  As  if  he
were  suggesting  to  the  mind  of  his  hearer,  saying,  Because
they  are  here  brought  low,  they  are  there  raised  up. For


176 Good  men  feel  their  bonds,  and  acknoioledge  past  sin.

Job  36,  to  holy  men  this  is  a  place  of  humiliation,  as  that  is  to  be

^one  of  exaltation. Whence  it  is  written  in  another  place,

Pa.  44,  Thou  hast  humbled  them  in  the  place  of  affiiction .  For  this
present  life  is  a  place  of  affliction.  They  then,  who  are
journeying  to  their  eternal  home,  now  despise  themselves  in
the  place  of  affliction  for  a  time,  that  they  may  then  be  truly
exalted  in  the  place  of  joy. It  follows:

Ver.  8,  9.  And  if  they  shall  be  in  chains^  and  bound  with
the  cords  of  poverty,  He  will  shew  them  their  works,  and
their  wickednesses,  because  they  have  been  violent.

xxix.  55.  The  chains  of  bondage,  are  the  very  detention  of  their
present  pilgrimage. Paul  had  seen,  that  he  was  bound  by

Phil.  1,  these  chains,  when  he  was  saying,  /  have  a  desire  to  be
dissolved,  and  to  be  with  Christ.  He  perceived  that  he  was
bound  with  the  cords  of  poverty,  when,  beholding  the  true

Eph.  1,  riches,  he  entreated  them  also  for  his  disciples.  That  ye
may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  His  calling,  what  the  riches
of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the  Saints.

But  after  this  it  is  rightly  added.  He  will  shew  them  their
works,  and  their  wickednesses,  because  they  have  been
violent.  For  when,  by  loving,  we  learn  more  of  heavenly
glory,  we  then  feel  the  sins  we  have  committed  to  have
been  more  burdensome.  Whence  also  Paul,  after  having
felt  the  grace  of  heavenly  things,  found  that  what  he  had
believed  to  be  in  him  a  zeal  for  virtue,  was  but  wickedness ;

1  Tim. 1,  saying.  Who  before  was  a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor,  and
injurious:  but  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it  ignorantly

Phil.  3,  i)i  unbelief.  Or  certainly,  when  saying.  But  what  things
were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ.  Whence
it  is  also  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  10.  He  will  open  also  their  ear,  to  correct  them,  and
will  speak  to  them  that  they  return  from  iniquity.
XXX.  56.  To  '  open  the  ear  from  iniquity,'  is  to  lay  open  the
understanding  of  knowledge.  But  a  man  is  reproved,  and
his  ear  opened,  when  he  feels  within  him  a  desire  after
eternal  goods,  and  acknowledges  the  sins  which  he  has
outwardly  committed.  But  temporal  punishment  can  also
be  understood  by  the  chains  and  cords  of  poverty.  For  they
who  hear  not  the  words  of  their  Ruler,  are  frequently  warned
by  the  blows  of  the  Smiter ;  in  order  that  punishments,  at


Living  for  good. Some  not  amended  by  chastiscmenf. 177

least,  may  lead  them  onwards  to  good  desires,  whom  rewards  Book
do  not  invite.  Whence  it  is  said  by  the  prophet,  Bind  with
bit  and  bridle  the  jaus  of  those  tvho  do  not  draw  near  to  P8.32,9.
Thee.  But  if  they  despise  even  scourges,  it  is  plain  that
they  there  feel  the  sufi'erings  of  heavier  punishments,  the
more  they  here  trample  down  the  grace  of  greater  con-
sideration. Whence  also  it  follows,

Ver.  11,  12.  //'  they  shall  hear  and  observe  Him,  they
sliallfaljil  their  days  in  good,  and  their  years  in  glory;  but
if  they  shall  not  hear,  they  shall  pass  away  by  the  sword,
and  shall  be  cotisuined  with  folly.

57,  By  '  good,'  is  designated  right  conduct,  but  by  *  gloiy,'  xxxi.
heavenly  recompense.  They,  then,  who  study  to  obey  the
Divine  commands,  fulfil  their  days  in  good,  and  their  years
in  glory.  Because  they  pass  the  course  of  this  life  in  right
deeds,  and  perfect  their  consummation  by  a  blessed  retribu-
tion. But  if  they  shall  not  hear,  they  shall  pass  away  by
the  sword,  and  shall  be  consumed  in  their  folly.  For  venge-
ance smites  them  in  tribulation,  and  the  end  shuts  them
up  in  folly.  For  there  are  some,  whom  not  even  torments
keep  back  from  their  abandoned  habits.  Of  whom  it  is  said
by  the  Prophet,  Thou  hast  stricken  them,  but  they  have  not  JeT.5,3.
grieved;  Thou  hast  scourged  them,  and  they  have  refused  to
receive  correction.  And  of  whom  it  is  said  under  the  figure
of  Babylon,  We  have  cured  Babylon,  and  she  is  not  healed.  Jer.  si,
Of  whom  it  is  said  again,  /  have  slain  and  destroyed  My  j'^j.^  15
people,  and  yet  they  have  not  returned  from  their  ways.  ''•
These  sometimes  become  worse  by  the  scourge,  because,
when  attacked  by  pain,  they  are  either  more  hardened  in
their  contumacious  obstinacy,  or,  what  is  worse,  launch  out
into  even  the  exasperation  of  blasphemy.  It  is  well  said,  then,
that  they  pass  away  by  the  sword,  and  are  consumed  with
folly ;  for  through  their  scourges,  they  increase  those  sins,
which  they  ought,  in  consequence  of  them,  to  correct.  And
they  both  feel  even  here  the  punishments  of  the  blow,  and
do  not  escape  there  the  sufferings  of  righteous  retribution.
For  it  is  the  infatuation  of  folly  that  iniquity  so  fetters  them,
that  not  even  punishment  keeps  them  from  offending.  It
follows,

VOL.  in.  N


178  Hypocrisy  the  sin  of  men  of  subtle  loit.

Job  36, Ver.  13. Hypocrites  and  crafty  men  provoke  the  wrath  of

^^^  God.

xxxii.  58,  When  mentioning  hypocrites,  he  appropriately  sub-
joins, '  and  crafty.'  For  unless  they  are  crafty  in  wit,
■  they  cannot  consistently  make  pretence  of  that  which  they
wish  to  appear.  For  there  are  certain  faults,  which  are
easily  perpetrated  even  by  those  of  duller  sense.  For  any
one  even  of  didl  understanding  is  able  to  swell,  for  instance,
with  pride,  to  be  eager  with  the  desires  of  avarice,  and  to
yield  to  the  assaults  of  lust.  But  a  person  is  unable  to
carry  on  the  falsity  of  simulation,  unless  he  is  one  of  more
subtle  wit.  For  whoever  is  such,  is  distracted  in  truth  by
constant  observation,  in  watching  two  points;  so  as  to
skilfully  learn,  both  to  conceal  what  he  really  is,  and  to
make  a  show  of  what  he  is  not;  to  suppress  his  real  faults,
and  to  display  unreal  goods;  not  to  boast  himself  openly  of  that,
which  he  seems  to  be ;  and  to  pretend  often  to  decline  glory,
in  order  to  obtain  the  greater  glory.  For,  because  he  cannot
attain  it  by  pursuing  it  before  the  eyes  of  men,  he  generally
studies  to  secure  it  by  shrinking  liom  it.  These  things
then  do  not  at  all  suit  the  simple;  for  if  they  do,  they  are
no  longer  simple.

59.  But  when  mentioning  hypocrites  and  crafty  men,  he
very  properly  added,  not  that  they  deserve,  but  that  they
provoke  the  uratJi  of  God.  For  to  sin  even  through  igno-
rance, is  to  deserve  the  wrath  of  God.  But  wilfully  to
contradict  His  commands,  to  know  what  is  good,  but  to
raake  light  of  it,  to  be  able  and  yet  unwilling  to  do  good,  is
to  provoke  it.  For  these  are  darkened  within  by  the  com-
mission of  iniquity,  and  are  whitened  outwardly  by  their
display  of  righteousness. To  whom  it  is  declared  by  the

Mat. 23, voice of  the  Lord, M'oe to you, Scribes and Pharisees,

27- 18.  Jnjpocrites,  for  ye  are  like  unto  whited  sepulchres,  which
appear  to  men  beautiful  uithout,  but  are  within  full  of
dead,  tnen^s  bones,  and  all  uncleanness.  Even  so  ye  also
outwardly  appear  righteous  unto  men,  but  uithin  ye  are
full  of  hypocrisy  and  iniquity.  They  preserve,  then,  in
outward  display,  that  which  they  assail  in  their  inward
conduct. But,  by  thinking  evil  within,  they  increase  those


Hypocrites,  even  ichcn  chastised,  ashamed  to  confess^ 170

sins,  which rncv  conceal outward] v,  by assuming  another  Book

.  ' .'  <=>  XXVT.

character. They cannot therefore now  have any excuse,  ^-^ '

before  the  strict  Judge,  from  ignorance ;  because,  while  they
display  every  kind  of  sanctity  before  the  eyes  of  men,  they
are  a  witness  against  themselves,  that  they  are  not  ignorant
how  to  live  aright.  Let  it  be  rightly  said  then,  Hypocrites
and  crafty  men  provoke  the  uraih  of  God.  But  he  adds
what  befals  them  at  last,  saying,

Ver.  13.  Neither  shall  they  cry,  when  they  are  bound.

60.  Every  wicked  person,  who,  though  he  is  wicked,  does  xxxiii.
not  seek  to  appear  holy,  when  smarting  under  the  infliction

of  the  scourge,  is  not  ashamed  to  confess  that  he  is  wicked.
But  a  wicked  person,  who  intercepts  the  judgments  of  men
b}^  a  shew  of  sanctity,  even  when  he  is  smitten  with  the  rod,
shrinks  from  exposing  his  iniquity,  because  he  has  been
accustomed  to  appear  holy.  But  if  he  is  ever  hard  pressed,
he  scarcely  confesses,  even  superficially,  that  he  is  wicked ;
because  he  is  con.''ounded  at  disclosing  his  inward  character
by  sincere  confession.  But  we  are,  as  it  were,  free,  when  v,e
are  not  chastened  by  any  reproofs;  but  we  are  '  bound,'  when
we  are  constrained  by  the  blows  of  the  rod.  We  cry,  then,
the  more  loudly  when  bound,  the  more  sincerely  we  confess
our  sins,  when  placed  beneath  the  blow.  For  devout  con-
fession is  a  loud  cry  in  the  ears  of  God.  Because  then  the
blows  of  the  rod,  even  when  they  chastise  hypocrites,  do  not
bring  them  to  honest  confession;  (for  they  shrink  from  being
discovered  to  be  sinners,  because  they  were  counted  holy  in
the  opinion  of  all  men;)  though  the  scourges  now  smite  them
to  the  utmost,  though  they  are  aware  that  they  are  being  led
on  to  eternal  punishments,  they  yet  wish  to  remain  the  same
in  the  opinion  of  men,  as  they  had  always  studied  to  display
themselves.  Though  smarting,  then,  even  under  the  blow  of
the  extremest  suffering,  because  they  neglect  to  put  forth  an
honest  confession,  even  when  afflicted,  they  scorn,  as  it  were,
to  cry  out,  even  when  bound.  It  is  well  said  then,  Neither
shall  they  cry,  ivhen  they  are  bound.

61.  Although  it  can  be  understood  in  another  way  also.
For  every  one,  who,  although  he  is  wicked,  fears  not  to  be
called  holy  by  men,  though  he  blames  himself  as  wicked,
in his secret thought, yet when he begins to hear  of

N  2


180 Those  who  fear  not  man's  praise  are  deceived  by  it.

Job  3G,  himself  frequently  as righteous,  loses  that  which  he  used
'—  to  hold  of  himself  within. For  he  pours forth his  heart


without ;  and  because  he  wilHngly  receives  a  false  testimony
of  himself  without,  he  does  not  enquire  what  he  should  think
of  himself  within. Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  he  seeks
even  for  the  solaces  of  empty  praise,  if  they  are  wanting,  and
that,  forgetting  what  he  is,  he  seeks  to  appear  what  he  is  not.
While  they  who  are  such,  then,  pretend  to  be  righteous  in
the  judgment  of  men,  and  display  their  praiseworthy  actions
to  the  eyes  of  beholders,  they  are  dealt  with  justly  in  secret,
so  that,  the  more  they  endeavom*  to  deceive  others,  the  more
are  they  even  themselves  deceived  as  to  themselves  within.
For  they  lose  all  eye  for  anxiously  searching  into  their  own
state. For  they  excuse  themselves  from  searching  into,  and
examining  their  own  conduct,  but  believe  themselves  to  be  the
persons  they  are  said  to  be;  and  they  consider  themselves  to  be
holy,  not  because  they  so  live,  but  because  they  are  so  called.
But  they  neglect  God's  searching  judgment,  and  to  look  into
themselves ;  for  they  rest  their  belief  in  their  merit  on  the
testimony  of  another's  mouth. But  when  they  are  smitten
by  a  sudden  blow,  they  are  unable  either  to  confess  that  they
are  wicked,  or  to  discover  themselves  as  they  really  are :
because,  namely,  they  believed  themselves  to  be  holy  from
the  profession  of  men. It  is  well  said,  then.  Neither  shall
they  cry,  when  they  are  bound. For  they  trust,  with  vain
hope,  that  they  are  coming  before  their  heaveidy  Judge,  such
as  they  know  tht^y  appeared  in  the  sight  of  men. And  the
wretched  men  do  not  find  themselves  out,  even  in  the  midst
of  torments ;  and,  while  they  look  for  the  testimony  of  untrue
praise,  they  lose  the  remedy  of  true  confession. They  are
said  even  to  be  bound,  and  yet  to  cry  not;  for,  overcome  by
the  importunity  of  human  applause,  the  wretched  men  consider
themselves  holy, even when they  are dying  in sins. To
Is.46,8.  wliom  it  is  well  said  by  the  Prophet,  Return  ye  transgressors
to  your  heart. For  were  they  to  return  to  their  heart,  thev
would  pour  out  themselves  in  words  of  outward  profession.
For  what  is  nearer  to  us  than  our  heart? What  is  nearer  to
us,  than  that  thing  which  is  within  us  ? And  yet,  when  it  is
distracted  with  wicked  thoughts,  our  heart  wanders  far  away
from  us. The  prophet  then  sends  the  transgressor  a  long


Hypocritical  virtue  fails  in  sudden  trials.  181

way,  when  he  compels  him  to  return  to  his  heart :  lor  the  Book
more  he  has  distracted  himself  with  outward  things,  the  more  1_1__'
does  he  hardly  find  out  the  means  of  returning  to  himself.
But  since,  because  the  mind  of  hypocrites  is  diverted  from
the single consideration  of  eternity,  it  is  ravaged by  the
inimdation  of  manifold  thoughts,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,

Ver.  14. Their  soul  shall  die  in  a  tempest.

62.  For  they  were  seeming  to  live  as  if  in  calm,  when  theyxxxiv.
were  taking  care  to  rejoice  in  the  credit  of  holiness.  But
their  soul,  which  used  to  rejoice  in  the  fatal  tranquillity  of
human  praise,  dies  by  a  sudden  tempest.  For  most  com-
monly an  unexpected  tempest  suddenly  produces  a  change
in  all  the  calm  blandishment  of  the  air,  and  danger  cannot
be  avoided,  inasmuch  as  it  could  not  be  foreseen.  Whence
hypocrites,  who  neglect  to  watch  over  their  conduct,  are  said
to  die  in  a  tempest.  For  the  sudden  whirlwind  of  an  inward
shock  casts  them  forth  hence,  whom  the  pride  of  outward
applause  exalts  on  high;  and,  while  they  embrace  in  their
praise  that  which  they  are  not,  they  suddenly  find  in
vengeance  what  they  are.  But  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon,
As  silver  is  proved  in  thejiiiing-pot,  and  gold  in  the  furnace,  prov.
so  is  a  man  proved  by  the  mouth  of  him  that  praiseth  lam.  ^'^■>  ^•
For  praise  of  one's  self  tortures  the  just,  but  elates  the  wicked.
But  while  it  tortures,  it  purifies  the  just;  and  while  it  pleases  the
wicked,  it  proves  them  to  be  reprobate.  For  these  revel  in  their
own  praise,  because  they  seek  not  the  glory  of  their  Maker.
But  they  who  seek  the  glory  of  their  Maker,  are  tortured
with  their  own  praise,  lest  that  which  is  spoken  of  without,
should  not  exist  witliin  them  ;  lest,  if  that,  which  is  said,
really  exist,  it  should  be  made  void  in  the  sight  of  God  by  these
very  honours;  lest  the  praise  of  men  should  soften  the  firm-
ness of  their  heart,  and  should  lay  it  low  in  self-satisfaction  ;
and  lest  that,  which  ought  to  aid  them  to  increase  their
exertions,  should  be,  even  now,  the  recompense  of  their
labour.  But  when  they  see  that  their  own  praises  tend  to
the  glory  of  God,  they  even  long  for  and  welcome  them.
For  it  is  written,  They  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  ,Matt.5,
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  They  make  themselves,  ^^•
therefore,  a  path  for  men  to  follow,  as  often  as  they  manifest
any  thing  in  themselves,  by  which  God  can  be  recognised;


18'2  Vanity  wimanly. The  ' ear  opened^  by  trouble.

Job  36,  because  they  seek  not  to  attract  the  praises  of  men  to
themselves,  but  wish  they  should  pass  on,  through  their
means,  to  the  glory  of  their  Maker.  But  haughty  men
prostitute  their  effeminate  hearts  to  human  praise,  because
they  arc  corrupted  by  self-love.  Of  whom  it  is  said  in
2Tim.3,^"otlier  place,  71/67?  shall  he  lovers  of  i heir  own  selces.  But
2-  of  this  very  corruption  of  theirs  it  is  here  fitly  subjoined,

A)id  their  life  among  the  ejfeminale.
XXXV. ()-3,  Por, if they  were living as  men, transitory  praise
would  not  infect  them  with  any  corruption. Whence  the
Ps.  31,  Prophet  persuades  the  Elect,  saying,  Do  mavfuUy;  and  let
your  heart  be  strengthened. For  when  saying.  Do  manftil/t/,
he  immediately  subjoined,  and  let  your  heart  he  strengthened.
As  if  he  desired  to  secure  the  sex  of  the  heart. For  the
mind  of  a  luxurious  man  is  corrupted,  if  it  is  delighted  with
transitory objects. The life of  hypocrites then perishes
among  the  efibminate,  because  it  is  found  to  be  corrupted
]  Lxx.^^'ith  the  luxury  of  praise. But  in  another  translation,  it  is
tih^uit  i^Qt rendered, Their life  amour/  the  effeminate,  but.  Let
T^arxc-  their  life  he  uonnded  by  angels. But  though  these  expres-
ftiinvro  gJQj^g  differ  in  vrords,  they  agree  in  sense;  for  angels  wound
the  life of  the  effeminate, when the messengers  of  truth
assail  it  with  the  shafts  of  holy  preaching. Because  we  have
heard  then  what  occui's  in  the  damnation  of  the  reprobates,  let
us  hear  what  follows,  respecting  the  deliverance  of  the  humble.
Ver.  15.  He  will  deliver  the  poor  from  his  strailncss.
Gi.  The  poor  is  delivered  from  his  straitness,  when  any
humble  person  is  set  free  from this affliction of  his  pil-
grimage. For  he  is here oppressed  with even continual
tribulations,  in  order  that  he  may  be  excited  to  seek  for  the
joy  of  real  consolation. Whence  it  follows  also.
And  uill  open  his  ear  ««  tribulation.

To  open  the  ear  in  tribulation,  is  to  open  the  hearing  of
the  heart,  by  the  afBiclion  of  blows.  For  when  we  despise
commands,  we  are  treated  with  a  merciful  severity,  in  order
that  wc  may  fear  the  rod.  Tribulation  then  opens  the  ear  of
the  heart,  which  this  world's  prosperity  often  closes.  For  it
Prov.  i,is  said  by  Solomon,  77/^?  turning  auay  of  the  little  ones
shall  slay  them,  and  the  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy
them. It  follows.


The  pit  of  sin  closes  its  mouth  by  ill  habit.  183

Ver.  16.  Heivill  therefore  bring  thee  safely  from  a  narrow  Book
opening  into  a  broad  place.  '-— "

65.  Every one who forsakes  the  way  of  life,  and  casts xxxvi.
himself  down  into  the  darkness  of  sins,  plunges  himself,  as
it  were,  into  a  well  or  pitfall. But  if,  through  long  com-
mission he  is  also  so  weighed  down  by  a  habit  of  sin,  as  to
be  unable  to  rise  upward,  he  is  pent  in,  as  it  were,  in  the  nar-
row opening  of  a  well. Whence  David  the  Prophet  entreats
in  the  person  of  sinners,  saying.  Let  not  the  tempest  of  water  Vs.GQ,
drown  me,  neitJier  let  the  deep  swallow  me  up,  and  let  not  ^^'
the  well  press  its  month  upon  me. For  a  tempest  of  water
has,  as  it  were,  hurried  away  him,  whom  the  iniquity  of  evil
doing  has  moved  from  stability  in  goodness. But  if  it  has
not  yet  prevailed  by  long  custom,  it  has  not  overwhelmed.
He  has  already  fallen  into  a  well,  who  has  done  that,  which
the  law  of  God  forbids. But  if  long  custom  does  not  yet
weigh him  down,  the well  has not  contracted its  mouth.
He  escapes  therefore  with  greater  ease,  the  less  closely  he  is
pent  in  by  habit. Whence the  prophet Jeremiah,  when
beholding  that  Judtea  had  been  overwhelmed,  through  long-
habit,  by iniquities,  bewails  himself  in his lamentations,
under  her  person,  and  says,  3Iy  life  is  fallen,  into  a  well,  and^^^-  3,
they  have  placed  a  stone  over  me. For  one's  life  falls  into  a
pit,  wlien  it  is  defiled  with  the  pollution  of  iniquity. But  a
stone  is  placed  over,  when  the  mind  is  also  consumed  by
sin,  through  long  habit,  so  that,  though  willing  to  rise,  it  is
quite unable  to  do so,  because  the weight of  evil habit
presses  on  it  from  above. But  because  it  submits to  the
power  of  God,  and  is  brought  back  to  the  large  room  of  good
deeds,  after  the  confinement  of  evil  habit,  it  is  said,  He  will
bring  thee  safely  from  a  narrow  opening  into  a  broad  place.
For  he  is  safely  brought  from  a  narrow  opening  into  a  broad
place,  who,  after  having  borne  the  yoke  of  iniquity,  is  brought
back  by  penitence  to  the  liberty  of  good  works.

GQ.  For  it  is,  as  it  were,  the  narrowness  of  a  confined  opening,
to  wish,  and  yet  to  be  unable  to  rise  from  an  overpowering  evil
habit ;  to  tend, in  desire,  to  things  above,  but  yet  still  to  remain  in
deed  inthingsbelcWjtoadvancein  heart, butnot  to  followinact,
and  to  endure  one's  self  as  a  kind  of  self-contradiction  within
one's  self.  But  when  a  soul,  proceeding  thus,  is  assisted  by  the


184 Deliverance  from  habit. Sin  without  foundation.

Job  36,  hand  of  grace  to  raise  it  up,  it  arrives  from  a  narrow  opening

'—  to  a  broad  place :  because,  having  overcome  its  difficulties,

it  performs  the  good  works  which  it  desires. The  prophet

David  had  beheld  the  enclosure  of  a  narrow  opening,  when

Ps. 31,  he  said,  Thou  hast  delivered  mu  soul  from  necessities,  and
7 8.  .

hast  not  shut  me  up  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. But  he

found  that  he  had  been  brought  safely  into  a  broad  place,
ibid.  when  he  added,  Thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  large  room.  For
our  feet  are  firmly  placed  in  a  large  room,  when  we  journey
to  those  good  things  which  are  fitted  for  us,  and  are  not
impeded  by  any  difficulty.  For  we  are  pi'oceeding,  as  it
were,  through  a  wide  place  whither  we  please,  because  we
are  not  hard  pressed  by  any  difficulties  placed  in  our  way.

67.  But  Eliu  would  say  this  rightly,  if  his  opinion  were  but
suitable  to  blessed  Job,  For  he  believed,  that  he  had  been
scourged  for  his  faults,  and  therefore  decided  that  he  had
fallen  into  a  narrow  opening.  For  with  the  heavier  blows
he  beheld  him  afflicted,  with  the  more  abominable  ini-
quities he  believed  him  to  be  w^eighed  down;  being  surely
ignorant  that  his  scourges  were  an  increase  of  his  merits,
not  a  punishment  for  his  sin.  But  when  he  declares  that
he  had  fallen  into  a  narrow  opening,  he  proceeds,  as  it  were,
to  speak  more  fully  of  the  profound  depth  in  which  Job  is
plunged :  and  says.

And  which  hath  no  foundation  beneath  it.
xxxvii.  68.  Every  sin  has  no  foundation ;  because  it  has  no  sub-
sistence in  its  own  proper  nature.  For  evil  has  no  sub-
stance. But  that  which  any  how  exists,  unites  with  the
nature  of  good.  The  narrow  opening  is  said,  then,  to  have
no  foundation  beneath  it,  because  the  pollution  of  sin  has  no
power  of  subsisting  by  itself.  But  since  foundation  is  de-
rived from  fundum,  (bottom,)  we  may  without  impropriety
understand  that '  foundation'  is  put  for  bottom,  as  hearing  is
derived  from  ear,  and  yet  the  ear  itself  is  frequently  desig-
nated by  the  word  hearing.  When  speaking  then  of  a
narrow  opening,  he  added,  as  wishing  fully  to  describe  the
profound  abyss,  And  which  hath  no  foundation  (or  bottom)
beneath  it.  For  the  infernal  pit  swallows  up  him,  whom
iniquity  hurries  away.  But  the  infernal  pit  is  rightly  believed
not  to  have  a  bottom  ;  because  every  one  who  is  swej)t  away


Sin  bottomless,  in  punishment  and  in  extent.  185

by it,  is  devoured by the boundless profound. For the  Book

"V  V  V"  1

Prophet,  wishing  to  describe  fully  its  boundless  innuensity, :

says, The infernal  pit Iiaf/i enlarged  its  soul,  and  fiath  is.5,]4.
opened  its  mouth  ivitliout  measure. As  therefore  that  is  said
to  be  enlarged  without  measure  which  attracts  very  many  to
itself,  so  it  is  not  improperly  believed  to  be  deep,  and  with-
out a  bottom,  because  it  absorbs,  as  it  were,  into  the  bound-
less  abyss  of  its  immensity those, whom  it  receives into
itself. And  therefore  when saying.  He trill bring  thee
safehj  from  a  narroiv  opening  inio  a  broad  place,  he  filly
subjoined,  And  ichich  hath  no foundation  beneath  it. As
if  he  were  saying,  He  will  bring  thee  safely  from  a  narrow
opening,  which has  no  bottom under  it. P'or  since  it  is
through  sin  that  we  tend  to  the  pit,  He  brings  safely  from  a
narrow opening  him  whom He  delivers from sin. But
him  whom  He  rescues  from  the  narrow  opening.  He  with-
draws from  the  depths  of  hell.

69.  Though  it  can  also  be  understood  in  another  sense.
For  as  he  who  is  plunged  into  a  well,  is  confined  in  the
bottom  of  it;  so  wovdd  the  mind  fall  in,  and  remain,  as  it
were,  at  the  bottom,  if,  after  having  once  fallen,  it  were  to
confine  itself  within  any  measure  of  sin.  But  when  it  can-
not be  contented  with  the  sin  into  which  it  has  fallen,  while
it  is  daily  plunging  into  worse  offences,  it  finds,  as  it  were,  no
bottom  to  the  well  into  which  it  has  fallen,  on  which  to  rest.
For  there  would  be  a  bottom  to  the  well,  if  there  were
any  bounds  to  his  sin.  Whence  it  is  well  said  in  another
place,  When  a  sinner  hath  come  into  the  lowest  depth  Prov.
of  sins,  he  contemneth.  For  he  pnts  by  returning,  ^^' ^'
because  he  has  no  hope  that  he  can  be  forgiven.  But
when  he  sins  still  more  through  despair,  he  withdraws,  as  it
were,  the  bottom  from  the  well,  so  as  to  find  therein  no
resting  place. It  follows,

But  the  rest  of  thy  table  shall  be  full  of  fatness,
70.  The  rest  of  the  table,  is  the  refreshment  of  inward  xxxviii.
satiety  :  which  is  said  to  be  full  of  fatness,  because  it  is  set
forth  with  the  dehght  of  eternal  pleasure. The  Prophet  was
hungering  after  the  feasts  of  this  table,  when  saying,  /  shall  i\.  17,
be  satisfied,  when Thy  glory  shall  be  manifested. He  was  ^^•
thirsting  for  the  cups  of  this  table,  when  saying,  My  soul  Ps.42,2.


186 Proud  men  state  known  things  as  new,  check  kind  icords.

Job  36,  fiafh  thirsted  for  the  living  God;  when  shall  I  come  and

17 — 2].  •  ^  '

appear  before  the  face  of  God  ? Eliu,  therefore,  wishing  to

console  the  temporal  sufferings  of  blessed  Job,  by  an  eternal

compensation,  promises  him,  as  if  freely,  from  himself,  that

whicli  was  justly  due  to  him  as  his  desert,  saying,  But  the

rest  of  thy  table  shall  be  full  of  fatness. It  follows,

Ver.  17.  But  thy  cause  hath  been  judged  as  the  cause  of

the  loigodly,  thou  shall  receive  thy  cause  and  judgment.

xxxix.  71.  The  cause  of  the  good,  is  righteousness.  And  their
cause  is  judged,  as  the  cause  of  the  ungodly,  because  their
righteousness  is  here  smitten  with  fatherly  correction,  that
they  may  be  taught  to  exercise  greater  vigilance,  not  only
by  the  injunction  of  commands,  but  by  the  infliction  of
blows.  But  they  receive  tlieir  cause  and  justice,  because
from  that righteousness, with which they  now  live,  they

1  j^,jjp_  hereafter'  shine  forth  in  the  height  of  judicial  power;  so  that
they  are  then  able  to  judge  all  things  the  more  powerfully,
the  more  strictly  all  their  conduct  is  now  judged.  But  these
points,  which  blessed  Job  ever  maintained  with  stedfast
faith,  Eliu  mentioned,  as  if  he  were  making  some  new  pro-
mise. For  haughty  men  have  these  peculiarities:  they
falsely  exaggerate  what  is  wrong,  and  if  ever  they  state  that
which  is  good,  they  bring  it  forward  as  something  unknown.
Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  they  venture  to  teach  those
who  are  v/iser  than  themselves,  because,  namely,  they  believe
that  they  alone  are  acquainted  with  such  subjects.  But  when
they  condescend  to  any  words  of  consolation,  they  consider
that  they  have  been  at  once  degraded,  and  by  the  harshness  of
proud  reproof,  they  reestablish,  as  it  were,  their  ability  ;  in
order  that  they  who  seemed  to  have  condescended  in  sooth-

2'hlan-ing  speech -,  may  be  dreaded when  reproof  has suddenly

dientes  ^,,,  , -,^,. .  ,. , t  i i

testes sprung  up. Whence  also  Ji,liu  nnmediately  added,  saying,
Ben.  Ygj._  j^g — oi_  i^Qi  jiQt  i/iQji  anqer  overcome  thee,  to  orwress

'  testes  .  ^  }  1  1

seems any  one,  neither  let  the  multitude  oj  places  bow  thee  down.

^  ™j^" Lay  down  thy  greatness  icithout tribulation,  and  all  the

mighty  in  strength. Prolong  not  the  night,  that  people  may

go  up  for  them. Take  heed  that  thou  decline  not  to  iniquity,

x] for  thou  hast  begun  to  follow  this  after  misery.

•"•dono- 7-2_  In  most  manuscripts  we  find  '  gifts^;'  in  a  few,  how-

Moco ever,  but  more ancient,  we  find  'places*.' But  since  the


The  Church  misjudged  in  her  icse  of  discipline. 187

expression,  Let  not  the  multitude  of  gifts  turn  thee  aside.  Book

needs  no  explanation,  we  have  thought  good  that  that  ex- — ^ •*

pression  should  be  ratliev  expounded,  which  seems  to  be
explained  with  some  slight  difficulty.  But  the  pride,  which
uttered  these  words,  proves  of  how  great  haughtiness  they
are.  But,  because  we  have  said  that  Eliu  is  a  type  of  the
arrogant,  and  blessed  Job  of  the  Elect,  if  we  examine  them
more  accurately,  we  demonstrate  how  appropriate  they  are
even  now-  to  haughty  men  within  the  Church.  Holy  men
wonder  at  the  doings  of  others,  even  when  trifling,  but  make
light  of  their  own  doings,  even  when  great.  But  haughty
men,  on  the  other  hand,  make  light  of  other  persons'  doings,
even  when  great,  and  wonder  at  their  own  even  when  trifling,
and  generally  think  well  of  their  own  misdeeds,  but  cease
not  to  think  ill  of  the  good  qualities  of  others.  For  while
they  seek  their  own  glory,  they  are  mischievously  desirous,
that  whatever  virtue  is  performed  by  others,  should  be
scarred  with  the  brand  of  iniquity,  and  a  weighty  deed  of
goodness  they  pervert  into  a  taint  of  guilt.  For  frequently,
when  they  behold  the  wicked  severely  punished  by  the
Church,  they  imjuslly  make  a  kind  of  complaint  that  the
innocent  are  afflicted,  and  they  miscall  the  splendour  of  its
discipline  by  the  appellation  of  iniquity.  Whence  Eliu,
representing  the  arrogant,  as  if  admonishing  Job,  says.
Let  not  anger  overcome  thee,  to  oppress  any  one.  For
whatever  is  done  by  Holy  Church  with  the  censure  of
discipline,  haughty  men  consider  as  an  emotion  of  anger.
And  because,  from  their  desire  of  human  praise,  they  are
ever  anxious  to  appear  kind,  they  consider  that  none  should
be  corrected  with  strictness  and  severity.  Whence  also,  as
was  before  observed,  they  consider  that  those  are  oppressed,
whom  they  see  restrained  from  sin,  against  their  will,  even
by  righteous  rulers.

73.  But  the  Lord  having  been  the  cause  that  Holy
Church  has  grown  up  with  a  height  of  religious  power  in
all  parts  of  the  world;  they  assail,  and  ascribe  to  sinful  pride
this  very  temporal  power,  which  it  exercises  rightly.  Whence
Eliu  subjoins,  saying,  And  let  not  the  mullitude  of  places
how  thee  down.  As  if  it  were  said  by  the  tongue  of  haughty
men to Holy Church herself, preserving her humility


188 The  Church  unjustly  charged  loith  sins  she  loishes  to  hinder.

Job  36,  more  in  prosperity. Because  thou  art  every  where  regarded

-with  the  reverence  of  faith,  beware  that  thou  art  not  elated

> '  fasci- with  the  power*  this  reverence  bestows.  For  they  behold
'fa'stiV  certain  persons,  who  under  the  guise  of  religion,  are  puffed
bus.'  up  with  the  sin  of  pride:  and  the  fault  which  they  justly
blame  in  these,  they  unjustly  bring  forward  as  a  charge
against  all.  Not  at  all  considering,  namely,  that  there  are
those  within  her,  who  know  how  to  exercise  temporal  power
aright,  though  yet  despising  it,  and  to  love  and  look  forward
to  eternal  objects  with  full  desire;  who  can  discharge  the
high  office  which  has  been  committed  to  them,  and  carefully
fulfil  their  duty  of  inward  humility;  so  that  neither  do  they
neglect  all  care  for  the  office  they  have  undertaken,  on
account  of  their  humility  ;  nor,  again,  does  their  humility
swell  into  pride  by  reason  of  their  office.  And  if  there  are
perhaps  some  within  her,  who  serve  not  God,  but  their  own
glory,  under  pretext  of  religion,  yet  she  endeavours  either
severely  to  correct  them,  if  possible;  or,  if  otherwise,  to
endure  them  with  patience.  And  she  either,  in  correcting
them,  embraces  them  as  her  children,  or,  through  tolerating,
is  harassed  by  them  as  her  enemies.  For  she  knows  that
the  life  of  the  just  is  wounded  by  their  pride  ;  she  knows  that
whatever  sin  is  committed  through  the  wickedness  of  such
persons  is  brought  forward  as  a  charge  against  her.  But  she
is  the  less  afraid  of  bearing  the  blame  of  others'  sins,  since
she  is  aware  that  even  her  Head  endured  such  wrongs  as
j2*  '  this.  For  it  is  written  of  Him,  And  He  teas  numbered  icith
Mark the  wicked. Of  Him  it  is  said  again,  He  Himaelf  hath  borne

15 28.  o '  ^

18.63  4.  our  weaknesses,  and  He  Himself  hath  carried  our  sorrows.
Let  haughty  men  then  pursue  their  course,  and  by  their
estimate  of  the  wicked,  vex  the  life  of  the  innocent.  The
Church  of  the  Elect  knows  how  to  tolerate  the  deeds  of  the
one,  and  the  words  of  the  others :  and  to  convert  the  minds
of  the  wicked  by  bearing  AAith  them.  And  even  though  they
are  not  able  to  be  converted,  yet  she  patiently  endures  their
disgrace.  For  she  considers  that  it  tends  to  secure  lier  a
twofold  reward,  that  she  is  scorned  without  for  the  merits  of
those,  by  whose  life  she  is  wounded  even  within.

74.  But  it  must  be  observed  that  he  does  not  say,  Let  not
the  muUHude  of  places  elate  thee,  but.  Let  not  the  niullitude


Faiit  pretence  that  the  Church  is  left  tvithout  Saints. 181)

of  places  hoiv  thee  down. For  every  one  who  is  raised  up  in Book

. • XXVI.
this  world,  is  turned  aside  by  his  very  exaltation  ;  because '

when  he  exalts  himself  outwardly,  he  falls  within.  Eliu,
therefore,  beholding  the  fall  of  a  heart  in  its  pride,  says,
Aud  let  not  the  multitude  of  places  how  lliee  down.  As  if
it  were  said  to  Holy  Church,  by  the  voice  of  haughty  men,
•  Take  heed,  thou  art  not  diverted  from  thy  inward  intention,
if  thou  art  exalted  by  the  veneration  of  the  whole  world.  It
follows,

Ver.  ID.  Lay  down  thy  greatness  without  sorrow,  and  all
the  mighty  in  strength.

75.  Whom  else  do  we  understand  by  the  mighty  of  Holy xli.
Church,  except  those,  who  both  by  their  lofty  attempts,  and
by  successful  designs  have  strength  to  overcome  the  desires
of  this  world  ? Its  greatness  therefore  consists  in  the  life  of
its  mighty  ones;  because  it  is  then  rendered  more  glorious,
when  its  Elect  contend,  even  to  the  death,  with constant
resolution,  in  defence  of  the  Faith. Haughty  men,  there-
fore, when  Apostles  have  been  withdrawn  from  this  world,
and  Martyrs  withdrawn also to  heavenly  places,  because
they  perhaps  perceive  that  more  learned  and  powerful  rulers
are  greatly  wanting,  suspect that  they  have  remained the
only  ones  within  the  Church. And  hence,  while  they  prefer
themselves,  they  insult,  under  pretence  of  advising,  her,  and
say. Lay  down thy  greatness  tvithout  sorrow,  and  all  the
mighty  in  strength. As  if  they  said  in  open  reproaches,
"  Be not confident, that thou possessest greatness, for,
since  the  old  fathers  have  been  taken  away,  thou  hast  no
longer any in whose life thou canst boast." They say
these  things  in  trnth,  as not  knowing that  Almighty  God
does not leave His Church without proper government.
For  when He sunnnons the strong to their reward, He
strengthens,  in  their  place,  the  weak  for  the  contest:  when
He  rewards  the one  by  bearing  them  away,  He  supplies  to
the  others  strength  for  their  labours,  for  Him  to  recompense.
Of  whom  it  is  said  to  the  same  Holy  Church,  Instead  ofthyv^.  45,
fathers,  children  are  born  to  thee;  thou  shall  make  them  ^^•
princes  over  all  the  earth. For  those  who  arc  afterwards
preferred,  are appointed to supply the  virtue  of  the old
fathers,  because also when aged trees are felled,  tender


15)0 The  Church  deaplsed  for  lackiiuj  such  men  she  once  had.

Job  3G,  shoots  grow  up  in  the  place  of  their  strength. Bnt  haughty
'^~^''men beheve not  that  they  arc strong, whom they knew
at  one  time  to  be  weak  :  and  they  disdain  to  reverence  those
when changed,  whom ihcy  remember  to have been con-
temptible.

76.  But  since  they  see  that  the  more  righteous  are  few,
and  the  ungodly  the  largest  body  therein,  just  as  in  threshing
the  fruits,  tlie  quantity  of  the  chaff  is  greater ;  they  despise
even  the  life  of  the  rigiitcous  from  their  estimate  of  the
wicked.  They  see  in  truth  that  some  of  its  rulers,  supported
by  temporal  power,  revel  in  the  pride  of  that  pov/er.  They
see  that  that  reverence  for  religion,  which  their  fathers  pre-
1  so  old  served'  to  this  world  by  dying,  these  sweep  away,  by  exulting
Ms9.  al.^  j^^  worldly  joys ;  and  consider  that  they  are  mighty,  but  not
*  with  strength.  For  while  they  are  supported  by  temporal
power,  they  are  strengthened,  as  it  were,  by  a  kind  of  weak-
ness. For  the  stronger  they  are  vv^ithout,  the  more  are  they
bereft  of  all  the  might  of  strength  within.  And  therefore  it
is  said  to  her  by  haughty  men,  Lay  donn  the  mighiy  in
streiujih.  As  if  it  were  plainly  said,  They  once  clung  to
thee,  truly  strong,  who  maintained,  in  their  lives,  that
which  they  taught  in  words.  But  now  they  who  are  thy
rulers,  are  mighty  in  appearance,  not  in  strength.  For  they
cease  not  to  set  themselves  forth  as  worthy  of  honour,  but
are  the  more  weak  and  contemptible,  the  more  they  are
afraid  that  respect  for  their  honour  is  set  aside,  in  com-
parison with  the  tmth.  Haughty  men  rightly  think  thus
of  most  persons,  but  plunge  headlong  into  the  sin  of  pride,
the  more  they  suppose  all  persons  whom  they  behold  above
them,  to  be  such.  For  the  evil  conduct  of  the  many  ought
not  to  lead  them  to  form  an  opinion  of  all.  For  although
those  w  horn  they  know,  and  decide  upon,  are  wicked ;  yet
some,  whom  they  know  not,  are  holy.  For  now  is  the  season
of  threshing,  and  the  grains  are,  as  yet,  concealed  beneath
the  chaff.  No  fruit  then  will  be  expected  from  the  thresh-
ing floor,  if  that  alone,  which  is  seen  on  the  surface,  is
supposed  to  be  therein.  Because,  therefore,  they  despise
those  whom  they  behold,  and  sneer  at  those,  whom  they
know,  being  put  in  the  place  of  the  old  fathers,  it  is  fitly
subjoined,


Overbcari.'hj  ways. Anger  may  exceed  in  puniihiny. 191

Ver.  20.  Prolong  not  the  niglit,  i/iat  yeople  may  go  up  for  Book
tliem.  '-^ '

77.  As  if  tlie  arrogant  openly  said ; Act  not  so in  the xlii.
darkness  of  ihy  ignorance,  as  to  svibstitute  a  host  of  infirm
persons in the place of  the strong. For by the name
'  people'  are  designated  those,  who,  given  up  to  the  common  I-a*-
practice,  live  without  restraint  in  all  that  they  desire. Butp^gs-
to  '  prolong  the  night,  that  ]ieople  should  go  up  in  tlie  place
of  the  strong,'  is,  if  it  is  caused  by  negligence,  that  the  un-
learned and  weak occupy the place of the learned and
strong. People  go  up  in  the  place  of  the  strong,  when  they
who  have  learned to  live wickedly, obtain the place of
pastors. And  this  would  be  rightly  said,  if  it  were  spoken
humbly. For haughty men, even when they give good
advice,  exercise  their  wicked  over-bearingness'. For,  as  was*  super-

,-  -11  !•  -^-i  ri^ stitionis.

before  stated,  they  more  desire  to  smite  with  reproof,  than  to^jjePQ.
cherish  with  consolation. Whence  it  is  presently  subjoined,  <^^^^ a®-

Ver.  21.  Decline  not  to  iniquity  ;  for  thou  hast  begun  to
follow  this  after  ?nisery.

HauLrhtv  men  in  truth  call  this  the  misery  of  the  Church,
because  they  suspect  that  its  main  body  is  despised  by  God  :
and  they  scorn  it  with  loftier  pride,  the  more  they  suspect
that  it  is  utterly  despised  by  God.

Having  given  rapidly  a  figurative  exposition  of  these
words,  we  must  now  gather  their  moral  meaning;  that,
having  learned  the  figure  of  the  Church,  which  we  believe
to  be  generally  described,  we  may  learn  what  we  may
specially  gather  from  these  words  in  each  single  case.  He
says  therefore,

Ver.  18.  Let  not,  therefore,  anger  overcome  thee,  to
oppress  any  one.

78.  Every  one,  who  is  required  to  correct  the  vices  of  xliii.
others,  ought  first  of  all  to  look  carefully  into  himself;  lest,  ^^°^-
while  punishing  others'  faults,  he  himself  should  be  over-
come by  his  zeal  for  punishment.  For  furious  anger,  under
the  guise  of  justice,  frequently  ravages  the  mind;  and
while  it  seems  to  rage  with  zeal  for  righteousness,  it  gratifies
the  fury  of  its  wrath,  and  considers  that  it  justly  performs,
whatever  its  anger  wickedly  dictates.  Whence  also  it
frequently transgresses the due limits of punishment,


192  Angpr  should  serve,  not  command,  in  judrjment.

Job  36, because  it  is  not  restrained  by  the  measure  of  justice. For
'—  it  is  right,  that  when  we  correct  others'  faults,  we  should  first

MOR  O 7  ^  7

measure  our  own ;  that  the  mind  should  first  cease  to  glow
with  its  own  warmth,  should  first  control  within  ilself  the
>  aequi-  impulse  of  its  zeal  with  calm  moderation  ';  lest  we  should  sin
ourselves,  in  the  correction  of  sin,  if  we  are  hurried  on  with
headlong  fury  to  punish  offences,  and  lest  we,  who  are
deciding  on,  and  punishing,  a  fault,  should  commit  one  by
punishing  it  immoderately.  For  there  follows  not  the
correction,  but  rather  the  oppression  of  the  delinquent,  if,
in  punishment,  our  anger  extends  further  than  the  offence
deserves.  For,  in  the  correction  of  faults,  anger  ought  to  be
under  the  control  of  the  mind  and  not  its  master,  so  as  not
to  take  the  lead  in  the  execution  of  justice,  as  though
imposing  a  command,  but  to  follow  after,  as  though  obeying
directions,  and  to  carry  out,  as  if  employed,  the  sentence
which  has  been  made  known  to  it,  and  not  go  first  as  if  an
employer.  It  is  well  said  therefore,  Let  not  anger  overcome
thee,  to  oppress  any  one.  Because,  namely,  if  he,  who  is
endeavouring  to  correct,  is  overcome  by  anger,  he  oppresses
before  he  corrects.  For,  whilst  he  is  more  inflamed  than  he
ought  to  be,  he  rushes  unchecked  into  enormous  cruelty,
under  the  pretence  of  just  punishment.  And  this  is  fre-
quently the  case,  for  this  reason,  because  the  hearts  of  rulers
are  too  little  intent  on  the  love  of  their  Creator  alone.  For
wdiilst  they  desire  many  things  in  this  life,  they  are  dis-
tracted with  countless  thoughts.  And  when  they  suddenly
discover  the  faults  of  their  subjects,  they  are  unable  to  judge
them  aright,  in  agreement  with  God  ;  because  they  cannot
suddenly  bring  back  to  the  height  of  severity,  their  hearts
which  have  been  scattered  abroad  in  transitory  cares.  They
therefore  discover  less  readily,  when  excited,  the  balance  of
moderation  for  the  punishment  of  sins,  the  less  they  seek  for
it  in  their  season  of  tranquillity.  Whence,  when  Filiu  was
saying,  Let  not  anger  overcome  thee  to  oppress  any,  in  order
to  express  that  the  causes  of  injustice  and  of  overpowering
anger  were  the  same,  he  immediately  added,

And  let  not  the  multitude  of  places  how  thee  down.
xliv. 79.  We  are  turned  aside  into  as  many  places,  as  are  the
cares  with  which  we  are  distracted. For  as  the  space  of  the


The  soul  that  rests  not  in  God  seeks  rest  in  vain. 193
body  is  the  place  of  the  body,  so  is  each  intention  of  ihouglit  Book

"KT  V"  TT  T

the  place  of  the  mind.  And  if,  while  it  is  impelled  hithei-  -
and  thither,  it  is  pleasingly  occupied  \\'\i\\  any  delightful
thought  of  its  own,  it  is,  as  it  were,  put  to  rest  in  a  certain
place.  For  as  often  as,  overcome  by  weariness,  we  are  led
from  thought  to  thought,  we  migrate,  as  it  were,  with  weary
mind  from  place  to  place.  As  many  thoughts  then  as
spring  up  and  dissijiate  the  unity  of  good  intention,  so  do  as
many  places  bend  down  the  loftiness  of  the  mind.  For  the
mind  would  stand  upright,  if  it  always  clung  close  to  that  one
thought  to  which  it  ought.  The  mind  would  stand  upright,
if  it  did  not,  by  its  countless  motions,  prostrate  itself  in
fluctuating  change.  But  when  it  now  takes  up  these  things,
and  now  passes  olF  to  others,  it  is  turned  aside,  as  it  were,
from  its  state  of  uprightness  through  a  multitude  of  places  ;
and  while  it  extends  itself  through  many  things,  it  detaches
itself  from  that  one  intention,  to  which  it  ought  to  adhere.
But  yet  this  habit  of  change  has  become  a  nature  to  us  ever
since  the  guilt  of  the  first  sin.  For  when  the  mind  en-
deavours to  stand  in  itself,  it  is  somehow  or  other  drawn
away  from  itself,  without  knowing  it.  For  the  soul  of  man
is  diverted  by  an  impulse  of  disgust,  from  every  object  to
which  it  directs  its  thoughts.  But  whilst  it  eagerly  seeks
for  subjects  to  think  upon,  and  suddenly  loathes  those  it  has
thought  upon,  it  teaches  us,  that  that  which  does  not  continue
at  rest,  wherever  placed,  depends  on  something  elsewhere.
For  it  does,  in  truth,  depend  on  Him,  by  Whom  it  was
created.  And  because  it  was  made  to  seek  after  God  alone,
and  since  every  thing  which  it  seeks  beneath  Him,  is  less
than  He  ;  that  which  is  not  God,  justly  does  not  satisfy  it.
Hence  it  is  that  it  is  scattered  hither  and  thither,  and  turns
away,  as  we  said,  under  the  impulse  of  loathing,  from  every
object.  For  being  eagerly  desirous  of  satisfaction,  it  seeks
a  place  wherein  to  rest;  but  it  has  lost  that  One,  Whom  it
might  have  had  to  its  satisfaction.  Whence  it  is  now  led
through  many  objects,  that  it  may  be  satisfied  with  their
variety  at  least,  since  it  cannot  be  satisfied  with  their  (juality.
80.  But  holy  men  watch  themselves  with  careful  observa-
tion, so  as  not  to  be  separated,  through  changeableness,  from
the  object  of  their  thoughts ;  and,  because  they  desire  to  be

VOL.  III.  o


194  The  wise  have  One  Object. Saints  knoio  their  good  to  guard  it.

Job  3C,  ever the same,  tliey  carefully  confine themselves to the

-  ^  •  thought  with  which  they  love  God.  For,  in  the  contemplation
of  their  Creator,  they  are  about  to  obtain  this,  that  the}'
enjoy  always  the  same  stability  of  mind.  No  changeableness
then  dissipates  them ;  because,  namely,  their  thought  ever
continues  without  any  difference  in  itself.  They  endeavour,
therefore,  now  to  imitate  that,  with  labour,  which,  afterwards,
they  receive  with  joy  as  a  gift.  To  this  unchangeable  state
had  the  Prophet  attached  himself  by  the  virtue  of  love,  when

Ps.27, 4.  saying,  One  iJiing  I  have  asked  of  the  Lord,  this  I  ivill  seek
after,  that  I  may  dtcell  in  the  house  of  the Lord. To  this

Phil,  3,  unity  Paul  had  adhered  in  his  intention,  when  saying.  But
one  thing  I  do ;  forgetting  those  things  uhich  are  behind,  and
reaching  forth  unto  those  tilings  which  are  before,  I  follow
after  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ.
For,  if  there  is  any  human  weakness  in  their  hearts,  a  severe
examination  speedily  checks  it,  and  when  their  thought
wanders  as  if  childishly,  they  are  soon  kept  in  restraint  by
manly  correction.  Whence  it  is,  that  they  collect  at  once
their  distracted  mind;  and  fix  it,  as  far  as  they  are  able,  in
one  single  thought.  Because  then  the  position  of  the  mind
is  bent  down  by  the  changeableness  of  thoughts,  it  is  rightly
said  by  Eliu,  Lei  not  Ike  midtitnde  of  places  turn  thee
aside.

81 .  But  frequently,  while  the  mind  of  a  righteous  man  stands
firm  in  the  stronghold  of  its  resolution,  while  it  recovers  itself
from  every  dispersion  of  change,  and  keeps  down  whatever
superfluously  arises  within;  it  is  smitten  by  the  very  glory  of
its  own  rectitude,  and  is  raised  up  with  the  pride  of  presuming
on  itself.  For  he  who  performs  great  deeds,  though  he  may
think  humbly  of  himself,  yet  knows  that  his  doings  are  great.
For,  if  he  knows  not  that  they  are  great,  he  doubtless  keeps
but  little  watch  over  them.  And  while  he  neglects  to  watch
them,  he  cither  makes  less  progress  in  them,  or  loses  them
altogether.  Whilst  then  it  is  necessary  to  know  our  good
deeds,  in  order  to  guard  them ;  from  the  very  knowledge  of
them,  a  way  is  opened  to  our  pride,  and  the  hand  of  sin,  by
whose  ravages  they  are  to  be  snatched  away,  is  admitted  to  the
heart  of  him  who  does  them.  But  it  is  brought  about  by  a
marvellous  dispensation,  that  our  Creator  suffers  a  mind  which


Temptation  permitted,  to  cut  off  lofty  thoughts.  195

is  elated  by  prosjieiitj,  to  be  smitten  with  sudden  temptation ;  Book
in  order  that  it  may,  in  infirmity,  behold  itself  more  truly,  and  ^


may  descend,  already  improved,  from  that  haughtiness  of
pride,  which  it  had  assumed  from  its  virtues.  Whence  it  is
now  rightly  subjoined;

Ver.  19.  Lay  doxon  thy  (jreatncss  without  tribulation,  and
all  the  mighty  in  strength.

82.  For  the  motions  of  the  heart  are  mighty,  when  they  xlv.
feel  only  those  things  which  are  virtuous.  But  we  lay  down
our  greatness  and  our  mighty  motions,  when  we  are  com-
pelled, by  the  assaults  of  sin,  to  consider  what  we  are.  We
lay  aside  our  mighty  motions,  when  we  are  no  longer  raised
up  by  our  virtue,  but  when,  by  consenting  to  sin,  we  are
fearful  of  being  overwhelmed  by  that  infirmity,  with  which
we  are  assaulted.  For  the  mind  has  great  confidence  in
itself,  when  it  sees  that  its  strength  is  adequate  to  its  wishes.
It  arrogates  at  once  to  itself  the  assurance  of  sanctity,  and
thinks  that  it  is  now  equal  even  to  all  the  heights  of  virtues,
which  it  has  conceived  in  thought  only.  But  when  a  tempt-
ation suddenly  arises  and  pierces  it  through,  it  utterly  con-
founds those  lofty  thoughts,  which  had  sprung  up  from  its
virtues.  For  an  unexpected  enemy  enters,  as  it  were,  an
unsuspecting  city ;  and  the  necks  of  haughty  citizens  are
smitten  with  a  sudden  stroke.  There  is  nothing  then  at  that
time  but  continual  lamentation,  whilst  the  ca])tured  city  of
the  mind  is,  by  means  of  slaughter,  bereft  of  the  glory  of  its
great  ones.  Whence  it  is  now  said,  Lay  down  thy  greatness
without  tribulation,  and  all  who  are  mighty  in  strength.  As
if  it  were  plainly  said,  Repress  all  the  pride  thou  hadst  con-
ceived within,  at  thy  good  deeds,  and  lay  down  those  mighty
motions  of  the  heart,  which  thou  hadst  from  thy  just  doings;
because  thou  now  considerest,  in  the  assault  of  adversity,
how  vainly  thou  before  entertainedst  high  thoughts  of  thyself
in  thy  pride.  Which  greatness,  it  is  said,  must  be  laid
aside  without  tribulation,  doubtless,  because  when  humility
makes  progress  through  temptation,  that  very  adversity,
which  secures  the  mind  from  pride,  is  itself  prosperous.  But
yet  this  is  not  effected  without  great  tribulation,  when  the
tranquil  mind  is  assailed  by  the  inroads  of  temptations,  as  if
by  a  sudden  enemy. For,  when  the  adversity  of  temptation

o  2


1 96  Weak  and  manifold  actinr/s  of  the  tempted  soul.

Job  36,  forces  itself  into  the  mind,  it  livoduces  therein  a  kind  of  dark-

20  .

ness,  and  confounds,  with  the  gloom  of  its  bitterness,  that  soul


which  had  long  been  enlightened,  within  itself,  by  the
radiant  sweetness  of  its  virtues.  Whence  it  is  also  fitly
subjoined;

Ver.  20.  Prolong  not  the  night,  that  people  should  go  up
for  them.
xlvi.  83.  For  the  night  is  indeed  prolonged,  when  the  sorrow,
that  springs  from  temptation,  is  not  ended  by  the  rising  up
of  consolation.  The  night  is  protracted,  because  the  sorrow
of  the  mind  is  prolonged  by  confused  thoughts.  For  whilst
the  mind,  placed  in  temptation,  considers  that  it  is  driven
away  from  the  former  solidity  of  its  virtue,  it  is  blinded  by
superinduced  sorrows,  as  by  a  kind  of  gloom.  And  its  eye  is
closed  to  every  ray  of  joy,  whilst  it  anxiously  trembles,  lest
it  should  entirely  lose  that  which  it  had  before  begun  to  be.
Whence  it  is  also  well  said,  that,  in  this  night,  people  go  up
in  the  place  of  the  strong  ;  because,  namely,  in  this  sorrow  of
temptation,  instead  of  bold  emotions,  unworthy  and  manifold
thoughts  spring  up  in  the  heart.  For  whilst  it  sees,  in  this
perturbation,  that  it  has  already  almost  lost  that  which  it  had
been,  it  heaps  up  in  itself  countless  waves  and  tumults.  At
one  time  it  sorrows  that  it  has  lost  its  tranquillity ;  at
another,  it  is  afraid  lest  it  should  fall  into  evil  deeds.  At
one  time  it  calls  to  mind  on  what  a  height  it  had  stood,  at
another,  it  observes  in  what  a  depth  of  vices  it  is  lying,  by
means  of  its  pleasure.  At  one  time  it  prepares  itself  to
recover  its  strength,  at  another,  as  though  already  defeated
and  crushed,  it  despairs  that  it  can  recover  it.

84.  W^hen  such  manifold  thoughts  then  come  forth  over
the  convicted  mind,  people,  as  it  were,  rise  and  press  it  down
in  the  night.  Which  people  the  Proj^het  had  doubtless  pre-
sumed he  could  overcome,  not  by  himself,  but  by  the  aid
Ps.  144,  of  the  Divine  protection,  when  he  was  saying,  3Iy  Protector,
and  in  Him  icill  I  hope,  subduing  people  under  me.  For
people  are  subjected  to  holy  minds,  when  foolish  thoughts
start  away  from  them,  at  the  presence  of  strict  severity;
so  as  not  to  hurry  them  through  headlong  fancies,  but,
subjected  to  reason,  humbly  to  cease  from  the  heart.
Hence,  therefore,  the  mind  which  used,  in  prosperity,  to  pre-


Danger  of  gloomy  thoughts. Faults  assumed  to  reprove. 1 07

sume  greater  things  of  itself,  endures,  when  plaeed  in  tempt-  Book

ation,  the  tumults  of  hope  and  despair,  it  is  now  well  said,  ^-^

Prolong  not  the  night,  that  people  should  go  up  for  them.
As  if  it  were  openly  said,  Disperse  at  once  the  darkness  of
sorrow,  when  involved  in  temptation,  lest  thou,  who  hadst
thought  highly  of  thyself  in  tranquillity,  shouldest  overwhelm
thyself  more  fatally  in  trouble  also,  with  the  gloom  of  thy
thoughts.  Which  Eliu  would  properly  say,  if,  however,  he
knew  to  whom  he  was  saying  it.  For  these  sayings  are  the
less  suited  to  blessed  Job,  the  more  deeply  all  things  are
known  by  him.  But  because,  as  we  have  often  said,  haughty
men  fall  even  into  insulting  words  of  reproaches,  while  they
presume  to  teach  those,  whom  they  ought  not,  it  is  added ;

Ver.  21.  Take  heed  that  thou  decline  not  to  iniquity,  for
thou  hast  begun  to  folloio  this  after  misery.

85.  He  follows  iniquity  after  misery,  who,  after  the  evils  xlvii,
which  he  endures  for  his  correction,  inflames  himself,  in  his
glowing  heart,  with  the  torches  of  impatience. Which  Eliu
believed  that  blessed  Job  had  done,  having  heard  him  speak

in  bold  words,  when  in  the  midst  of  scourges :  being  ignorant,
namely,  that  every  thing  which  he  said,  he  uttered  not  from
the  sin  of  impatience,  but  from  the  virtue  of  truth,  who  did
not,  even  when  justifying  himself,  differ  from  the  sentence  of
the  inward  Judge.  But  we  must  greatly  consider  how,  when
saying.  Decline  not  to  iniquity,  he  immediately  subjoined  of
this  very  iniquity;  For  thou  hast  begun  to  follow  this  after
misery.

86.  What  is  this,  that,  while  he  forbids  him  to  decline  to
it,  he  condemns  him  for  it,  at  once,  as  if  he  had  already
declined  to  it;  except  that  arrogant  men  wish  rather  to
appear  judges,  than  consolers  ?  Whence  also,  they  some-
times smite,  with  severe  sentences,  those  faults,  which  they
suspect  have  arisen  in  the  heart.  And,  before  the  fault  of
the  offenders  is  certain,  severe  invective  of  words  is  brought
forward  ;  and  a  person  is  struck  by  their  sentence,  before
any  thing  appears,  to  be  smitten.

87.  Although  even  just  men  commonly  oppose,  by  reproof,
wicked  and  secret  thoughts ;  but,  when  any  preceding
doings  make  plain  these  thoughts,  they  frequently  root  out
from  the  hearts  of  their  hearers,  by the hand  of  reproof.


MOR.


198 Holy  men  sometimes  check  evil  in  others  beforehand.

Job  36,  those  sins  wliich  have  not  shewn  themselves.  But  then
-they  perceive  that  they  are  ah'eady  following  from  others,
which  precede.  For  as  physicians  of  the  body  discern  that
some  diseases  have  already  appeared,  but  heal  others,  that
they  may  not  appear;  so  do  holy  teachers  sometimes  restore
to  health  the  wounds  they  have  discovered,  and  sometimes
so  deal  with  men's  minds  that  they  are  not  wounded.  In
Avhom  we  must  carefully  observe,  that  as  they  generally
reprove  known  faults  with  severity,  so  do  they  speak
against  doubtful  thoughts,  even  with  calmness.  The  un-
doubted they  chastise  with  blows:  the  doubtful  they  ward
off  by  taking  precautions.  But  because  arrogant  men  know
not  their  rule  of  discrimination,  they  wound,  with  the  shafts
of  their  sentences,  known  and  unknown,  certain  and  uncer-
tain faults  alike.  Whence  it  is  now  said  by  Eliu,  Take  heed
that  thou  decline  not  to  iniquity,  for  thou  hast  begun  to
follow  this  after  misery.  But  because  the  remarks  which
follow  are  drawn  out  with  longer  allegation,  we  conclude  this
book  with  this  close,  that  it  may  not  be  too  immoderately
extended.


BOOK  XXVII.

The  last  twelve  verses  of  the  thirty-sixth  chapter  are  expounded,  with  the
v^hole  of  the  thirty-seventh,  and  their  meanings  ingeniously  examined,
for  the  sake  of  establishing  a  system  of  Christian  doctrine,  and  ethics.

1.  Whoever  is  endeavouring  to  gain  knowledge  from  the  i.
mighty  words  of  the  arrogant,  ouglit  carefully  to  secure
himself  from  imitating  their  pride  of  learning,  lest,  with  the
words  of  virtue,  he  should  acquire  the  vices  of  their  habits,
and  in  attaining  to  skill  in  speaking,  should  wound  himself
through  unskilfulness  in  living.  For  when  we  hear  these
persons  speaking  powerful  words,  and  yet  observe  them  proud

of  their  powerful  words,  we  enter,  as  it  w^ere,  the  garden  of
learning,  and  pluck  roses  from  thorns.  We  need,  therefore,
careful  discrimination,  to  cull  that  which  is  sweet  scented,  and
to  avoid  that  which  pricks  us:  lest  the  incautious  hand  of  the
gatherer  should  be  wounded  vv'ith  the  thorn  of  their  habits,
if  the  flower  of  their  words  happens  to  be  carelessly  gathered.
Eliu,  therefore,  being  both  learned  and  arrogant,  produces  at
one  while  something  to  give  a  sweet  scent,  and  at  another,
something  to  wound.  We  must  then  so  gather  what  is
fragrant  from  his  teaching,  as  yet  to  carefully  guard
against  the  wounds  of  his  pride.  He  introduced,  indeed,
many  remarks  above  with  a  moral  object,  and  yet  in  the
words  which  follow  he  raised  himself  solely  to  the  mysteries
of  pro))hecy.  For  he  abandons  the  low  ground  of  morality,
and  rises  to  the  heights  of  prophecy.

2.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  a  haughty  man  could

be  filled  with  the  prophetic  spirit,  when Saul  also  was  in  i  Sam.
the  number  of  the  prophets. I'ut  why  do  we  "say  this  of '
Saul,  when  we -know  that  even  a  she  ass  learned  rational  ^^ "28.

words  from  the  sight  of  an  Angel? But  as  the  irrational 2  Peter

°  2,  i(j.


200  Prophecy  of  Christ,  as  above  all  Laioyivers.

Job  36,  animal  uttered  rational  words,  and  vet  went  not  so  far  as

22  .  'J

'■ — to  take  a  rational  nature  in  exchange;  thus  does  an  unwor-

lliy  person  often  receive  holy  words  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
but  yet  does  not  attain  to  deserve  the  glory  of  sanctity ;  so
as  to  rise  above  himself  in  his  words,  and  listlessly  to  sink
beneath  himself  in  his  life.  Whence  Eliu,  though  not  now
humble,  beholds  the  humble  advent  of  our  Redeemer :  and
announces,  in  prophecy,  Him,  Whom  he  assails  with  his
haughty  manners,  saying,

V^er.  22.  Behold,  God  is  lofty  in  His  strength,  and  none  is
like  Him  among  lawgivers.
ii.  3.  As  if  he  said  plainly,  He,  Who  will  appear  humble  in

weakness, remains  lofty in strength,  Paul also  witnessing
2  Ccr. ^i^js^  v^-ho  says,  For  though  He  was  crucified  through  neak-
ness,  yet  He  liveth  by  the  power  of  God. Of  Whom  it  is
rightly subjoined, None is like Him among lawgivers.
Moses  was  a  lawgiver,  Joshua  a  lawgiver,  the  Prophets  law-
givers also. We can term all lawgivers,  who,  we  know,
admonish  the  people  rightly  from  the  Law. But  there  is  no
one  like  to  this  Mediator  among  lawgivers. For  they,  having
l)een  called  by  grace  from  their  sins,  return  to  innocence,  and,
from  what  they  have  experienced  in  themselves,  bring  back
others  by  their  preaching. But  om-  Kedeemer  is  Man  with-
out sin,  a  Son  without  adoption,  and  has  never  committed
any  thing  which  He  has  disapproved. And  He  so  speaks  to
the  world  by  His  Manhood,  as  yet  to  be  still  the Lord  of
the same  world  before  all  ages  by  His  Godhead. Hence
certain persons  believed  that the Mediator  between  God
and  men was  like the  lawgivers. For when He asked,
Mat.iG,  ll'Jtom  do  men  say  that  the  Son  of  Man  is,  the  disciples
answered  and  said,  Sotne  say  that  He  is  John  the  Baptist,
others  F/ias,  others  Jeremias,  or  one  of  the  Prophets. But
He  doubtless  disclosed  to  Peter  how  lofty  He  was  in  strength;
for  looking  on  Him  truly,  he  separated  Him  from  an  equality
lb.  ]6. vviti^  lawgivers,  saying.  Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living
God. Whence  the  Bride  rightly  says  of  Him  in  the  Song
^°^- of  Songs,  By  night  on  my  bed  I  sought  Him  IVliom  my  soul
3, 1. loveth,  1  sought  Him,  and  f  found  Him  not. And  a  little
ib.  3. after, The  watchmen  who  guard  the  city  found me. Of
ib.  5,  7.  Whom  she  says  again.  They  wounded  me,  they  took  my  cloak.


The  Church  seeking  Christ  not  yet  clearly  revealed. 201

And  she  asks  them  again,  saying,  Saw  ye  Him  Whom  my  soul  Book
loveth? When  I  had  passed  by  them  but  a  little^  I  found- — ~
Him  Whom  my  soul  loveth.  Song

4.  For  the  Beloved  is  sought  for  by  night  on  the  bed;  >  "^^  ^•
because  He  is  longed  for  in  tribulation  of  spirit,  in  the  secret
chambers  of  the  heart.  Whom  yet  the  Bride,  though  seek-
ing, finds  not ;  because  every  Elect  soid  is  already  kindled
with  the  torches  of  His  love,  but  the  sight  of  Him,  which  is
sought  for,  is  still  denied,  that  the  longing  of  the  lover  may
increase ;  and  water  is,  as  it  were,  withdrawn  in  thirst,  that
the  heat  of  the  thirst  may  be  augmented,  and  that  the  longer
a  person  thirsts,  and  longs  for  it,  the  more  eagerly  may  he
seize  it  at  last  when  he  has  found  it.  But  the  watchers
find  her  when  seeking  for  Him ;  and  wound  her,  and  take
away  her  cloak  :  because  when  anxious  teachers  meet  with
any  soul,  already  seeking  for  a  sight  of  its  Redeemer,  they
wound  it,  by  the  word  of  preaching,  with  the  dai'ts  of  heavenly
love:  and  if  it  has  any  covering  of  its  former  conversation,
they  take  it  away;  in  order  that  the  more  it  is  stripped  of
the  burden  of  this  world,  the  more  quickly  may  He,  Who  is
sought  for,  be  found  by  her.  But  it  is  well  added.  When
I  had  passed  by  them  but  a  little,  I  found  Him  Whom  my
soul  loveth  ?  because  the  mind,  eager  for  the  sight  of  Him,
would  not  find  Hiui,  Who  is  above  man,  imless  it  were  to
go  beyond  the  estimate  of  the  Prophets,  the  loftiness  of  the
Patriarchs,  and  the  standard  of  all  men.  To  pass  by  the
watchers,  then,  is  to  postpone,  in  comparison  of  Him,  those
even  whom  the  soul  admires.  And  He,  Who  was  sought  for,
is  then  beheld,  if  He  is  believed  to  be  a  Man,  but  yet  above
the  measures  of  men.  Whence  it  is  now  well  said,  None  is  like
Him  among  lawgivers.  But  He  in  truth,  appearing  to  our
sight  through  the  infirmity  of  the  flesh,  as  He  rejects  some,
and  calls  others,  has  displayed  marvellous  judgments,  which
can  be  thought  upon,  and  yet  not  be  comprehended  by  us.
For  He  says,  For  Judgment  have  I  come  into  this  world,  John  9,
that  they  which  see  not,  might  see,  and  that  they  which  see
might  be  made  blind.  And  again,  I  thank  Thee,  O  Fat  her,  Mat.ii,
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  Thou  hast  hid  these  '
things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them
unto  babes. In  which  judgments  the Jews  are  doubtless


20'2 They  who  sing  God''s  pi-aise  hnoio  not  all  His  icorhs.

Job  36,  rejected,  the  Gentiles  gathered. Which  fact  in  truth  we
^^1^  can  certainly  wonder  at,  but  are  not  at  all  able  to search
into. Whence  it  is  now  also  well  subjoined  by  Eliu,

Ver.  23.  Who  icill  be  able  to  search  out  His  ways  ?  Or
icho  darellt  to  say  to  Him,  Tliou  hast  u-roiiglit  iniquity  ?
iii.  5.  As  if  he  said  ;  '  How  can  lie  be  blamed,  Whose  doing
cannot  be  searched  into.''  For  no  one  judges  properly  of
that,  which  he  knows  not.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  rest  the
more  silent  under  His  judgments,  the  more  we  see  that  we
perceive  not  the  reason  of  His  judgments.  Whence  it  is
also  well  subjoined.

Vcr.  24.  Ronemher  that  thou  knowest  not  His  work,  of
Whom  men  have  sung.
XV. 6.  In  Holy  Scripture  sometimes  Angels,  and  sometimes
I  homi-  persons^  of  perfect  life,  are  called  '  men-.' For  that  an  Angel
?*^^. is  sometimes  called  a  man,  the  Prophet  Daniel  bears  wit-
Dau.  9,  uess,  saying, Behold, the  man Gabriel. And  again,  that
^^' persons  of  perfect  life are  called  by  the  name  of  '  men,'
Prov. Wisdom  declares  in  the  Proverbs,  saying.  Unto  you,  O  men,
'' ' I  call. Men  then  sing  of  the  Lord,  when  either  spirits  from
above,  or  perfect  teachers,  make  knor.n  to us  His  power.
But  yet  His  work  is  not  known;  because  doubtless  even  they
who preach Him,  venerate His unpenelrated  judgments.
They,  therefore,  both  know  Him,  Whom  they  preach,  and
yet  know  not  His  works:  because  they  know,  by  grace.  Him,
by  Whom  they  were  made,  but  yet  cannot  understand  His
judgments,  which are  wrought  by Him even above  their
understanding. For  that  Almighty  God  is  not  clearly  seen
Ps.  18,  in  His  doings  the  Psalmist  bears  witness,  saying.  Who  hath
Ps'.36  6.  made  darkness  His  secret  place. And  again,  Thy  judgments
Ps.  104,  are  a  great  deep. And  again.  The  deep  like  a  garment  is
^' jgg His  clothing. Whcnc&  also  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon,  As
11,6. thou  knowest  not  what  is  the  way  of  the  spirit,  nor  how  the
bones  grow  together  in  the  belly  of  her  that  is  with  child,  so
thou  knowest  not  the  works  of  God,  Who  is  the  Maker  of  all
things.

7.  For  to  state  one  thing  out  of  many,  two  little  ones  come
to  this  light:  but  to  one  it  is  granted  to  return  to  redemption
by  Baptism  ;  the  other  is  taken  away  before  the  regenerating
water  bedews  it. And  the  son  of  faithful  parents  is  often


Inscrutable  judfjments. God  seen  hy  all  afar  off. 203

taken  off  without  faith,  while  that  of  unbelievers  is  renewed  Book

X  X  V'  1 1
by  the  grant  of  the  Sacrament  of  faith. But  some  one  may— ^ -'

perhaps  say,  that  God  knew  that  he  would  act  wickedly  even
after  Baptism,  and  that  He  did  not,  on  that  account,  bring
him  to  the  grace  of  Baptism.  But  if  this  is  the  case,  the
sins  of  some  persons  are  without  doubt  punished  even  before
they  are  committed.  And  who,  that  thinks  rightly,  would  say
this,  that  Almighty  God,  Who  releases  some  from  the  sins
they  have  committed,  condemns,  in  others,  these  very  sins,
even  when  not  committed  ?  His  judgments  are,  therefore,
hidden ;  and  they  ought  to  be  reverenced  with  an  humility,
as  great  as  the  obscurity  by  which  they  cannot  be  seen.
Let  him  say  then,  Bemember  that  thou  knowest  not  His
work,  of  Whom  meyi  have  swig.  As  if  he  were  to  say  plainly,
The  works  of  Him,  of  Whom  mighty  men  have  spoken,  are
concealed  from  the  eyes  of  thy  mind  ;  because  they  surpass
the  measure  of  thy  knowledge,  inasmuch  as  thou  art  circum-
scribed by  thy  humanity. It  follows,

A^er.  25.  All  men  see  Him,  every  one  beholdeth  afar  off.

8.  Every  man  from  the  fact  that  he  is  created  rational,  v.
ought  to  conclude  from  reason  that  He  VVho  made  him  is
God.  And  to  see  Him  at  this  time,  is  doubtless  to  behold,
through  reason.  His  sovereign  power.  But  when  it  is  said,
All  men  see  Him,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  Every  one  beholdeth
afar  off.  For,  to  behold  Him  afar  off,  is  to  behold  Him  at
present  not  in  Person,  but  to  think  of  Him  as  yet,  solely  from
admiration  of  His  works.  Even  the  Elect  behold  Him  here
afar  off;  because  they  do  not  as  yet  discern  His  brightness
with  the  keenness  of  inmost  vision.  For  although  they  are
near  Him  now  by  love,  yet  they  are  separated  from  Him  by
the  burden  of  their  earthly  habitation  ;  and  although  they
cling  close  to  Him  by  good  living,  yet  they  sigh  that  they  are
far  removed  from  the  sight  of  His  contemplation.  And  when
the  reprobate  also  see  Him  coming  to  judgment,  they  doubt-
less behold  Him  afar  off,  because  they  behold  Him  not  in  the
form  of  His  Godhead,  but  in  His  Manhood  only,  in  which
alone  He  could  even  be  comprehended.  Because,  namely,
their  own  evil  deeds,  being  then  brought  back  to  their
memory,  strike  against  their  sight :  and  while  they]  behold
the  Manhood  of  Him,  Whose  Godhead  ihey  see  not,  they


204  JVe  know  Who  works^  but  cannot  discern  hoio.

Job  36,  are,  in  a  wonderful  manner,  far  away  from  the  sight  of  Him
-^ — Whom  Ihey  behold. But  when  it  is  said,  Remember  that
thou  knowest  not  His  work,  and  it  is  then  subjoined,  All
men  see  Him,  (and  to  behold  Him,  is,  as  we  before  said,
to  infer  from  reason  His  all-transcendent  essence,)  it  is  a
great  marvel  that  we  behold  God  Himself,  and  yet  know  not
His  work. For  we  cannot  doubt  of  His  essence,  and  yet  we
remain  uncertain  of  His  judgments. That  which  is  highest
is  plain  to  us,  that  which  is  least  is  concealed. For  His
works  are  surely  less  than  Himself;  and  yet  we  behold  the
Doer,  but  are  in  darkness  as  to  His  doing :  from  the  very
fact,  that  the  reason  why  any  thing  is  done  is  uncertain,  but
Who  it  is  that  acts  thus  uncertainly,  is  not  uncertain. Let
him  say  then.  Remember  that  thou  knowest  not  His  icork,  of
Whom  men  have  sung;  all  men  see  Him,  every  one  beholdeth
afar  off. Because  we  see  by  reason  that  He  exists,  Whose
judgments  we  by  no  means  comprehend. But  yet,  at  present,
we  behold  Him  afar  off,  because  we  are  separated  from  His
strength  by  the  mist  of  our  own  infirmity. It  follows,
Ver.  26.  Behold,  God  is  great,  surpassing  our  knowledge.
vi. 9.  He  had  said  above,  Behold,  God  is  lofty. He  now  says
ver.  22.  ^gain.  Behold,  God  is  great. Why  is  it,  that  when  speaking
of  God  he  says,  '  Behold,'  and  again  repeats,  '  Behold,'  if  it
be  not  that  we  say,  '  Behold'  of  that  thing,  which  we  point
out  as  present  ? And  since  God  is  every  where  present,  when
'  Behold'  is  said  of  Him,  He  is  said  to  be  present  even  to
those  who  see  Him  not. But  he  well  says,  that  He  surpasses
our  knowledge.  Who  he  had  said  before  was  seen by  all
men. Because,  though  He  is  beheld by  reason,  yet  His
greatness  is not  penetrated  by  any  subtlety  of  our  senses.
For  whatever  we  know  of  the  brightness  of  His  greatness,  is
beneath  Him ;  and  the  more  we  suspect  that  we  comprehend
His  power,  the  more  are  we  driven  far  away  from  the  know-
ledge of  Him. For  though  our  mind  is  caught  up  on  high,
yet  it  is  transcended  by  the  immensity  of  His  greatness.
Of  Whom  we  know  as  it  were  something  in  part,  when  we
feel  that  we  are  not  able  to  know  Him  worthily. It  follows,
The  number  of  His  years  cannot  be  reckoned.
vii. 10. He wished,  in  some way  or  another, to  speak of
eternity,  and  he  called  the  very  length  of  eternity,  '  years.'


Eternity  expressed  by  years  without  number.  205

For  when  we  wish  to  expand  the  briefness  of  lime,  we  extend  Book

our  moments through  hours,  our  hours  through  days,  our  _! '

days  through  months,  and  our  months  through  years.  Shice
then  he  wislied  to  speak  of  something  very  large,  but  did  not
find  what  wider  thing  to  speak  of,  he  multiplied  years  in
God  without  reckoning  their  number,  saying,  T/ie  number  of
His  years  cannot  be  reckoned;  in  order  that  while  he  multi-
plies those  things  which  are  long  in  themselves,  human
weakness  may  learn  that  it  cannot  measure  the  length  of
eternity.  Stretch  therefore  thine  eye  into  eternity,  that  thou
mayest  see  God,  either  when  He  is  from  the  beginning,  or
how  far  He  extends.  And  there  is  no  boundaiy  any  where
above,  because  He  begins  not  to  be  ;  no  boundary  any
where  below,  because  He  ceases  not  to  be.  All  things  are
bounded  together  within  Him;  but  He  is  extended  around
all  things  without  space,  is  spread  abroad  without  place.
Behold  all  things  which  are  made,  by  the  very  circum-
scription of  their  creation,  are  encircled  by  a  boundary  both
above  and  below.  For  by  their  own  law,  because  they  begin
from  not  being,  they  are  hastening  not  to  be.

II.  But  some  things  have  marvellously  received  this,  that,
though  a  boundary  commences  them  above,  yet  no  boundary
confines  them  below ;  and  that  though  they  begin  to  be,  yet
that  they  do  not  cease  to  be  for  ever.  But  their  eternity  is
unlike  the  highest  eternity,  because  they  began  to  be  eternal.
When  we  look  at  their  extremes,  we  do  not  comprehend  that
end  of  theirs  which  is  altogether  wanting;  but  when  we  carry
our  mind  back,  we  behold  their  commencement.  And  while
we  turn  our  thoughts  below  and  above  in  them,  we  do  not  at
all  understand  how  far  they  extend,  but  we  see  from  whence
they  begin.  But  since  God  has  a  kind  of  length  of  being
through  eternity,  which  neither  commences  with  a  beginning,
nor  is  terminated  by  an  end,  and  which  does  not  admit
in  itself  the  from  whence,  nor  until  when  ;  let  it  be  said
then,  Tlte  number  of  His  years  cannot  be  reckoned.  By
the  number  of  His  years  being  mentioned,  His  Being  is
shewn  to  be  of  long  duration.  But  by  its  being  said  to  be
beyond  number,  this  same  Being  is  pointed  out  as  infinite
and  incomprehensible.  But  we  have  learned,  that  He  is
known  to  the  minds  of  men,  when  all  men  see  Him;  and


206  Holy  Preachers  signified  by  *  Stars  of  rain.'

Job  36,  that  we  behold  and  admire  His  greatness,  when  the  number
—^ —  of  His  years  is  considered  beyond  number ;  it  now  remains
for  us  to  hear,  what  are  His  doings. It  follows,

Ver.  27.  Who  iaketh  away  the  stars  of  rain,  and  poureth
forth  showers  like  whirlpools.
viii.  12.  There  are  two  kinds  of  just  persons  in  this  life;  one,
namely,  of  those  who  live  uprightly,  but  teach  nothing ;
another,  of  those  who  live  uprightly,  and  teach  accordingly.
As  in  the  face  of  heaven  some  stars  come  forth,  which  no
storms  succeed:  and  others  come  forth,  which  water  the
thirsty  earth  with  great  showers.  As  often  then  as  persons
live  uprightly  in  Holy  Church,  but  yet  know  not  how  to
preach  this  same  uprightness,  they  are  stars  indeed,  but
produced  in  the  dryness  of  the  air :  because  they  can  give
light  to  others  by  their  example  of  good  living,  but  cannot
rain  by  their  word  of  preaching.  But  when  certain  persons
both  live  upvighlly  therein,  and  distil  this  uprightness  into
others  by  their  word  of  preaching,  stars  appear,  as  it  were,
in  heaven,  to  bring  on  rain,  which  are  so  to  enlighten  others
by  the  merits  of  their  life,  as  also  to  rain  with  the  word  of
preaching.  Did  not  Moses  appear  in  this  heaven,  as  a  star
of  rain  ;  who,  when  he  shone  forth  from  above,  watered  also
the  hearts  of  sinners  with  the  rain  of  holy  exhortation  as  the
thirsty  ground  beneath,  to  make  it  bring  forth  grass  abun-
dantly.? Did  not  Isaiah  appear  as  a  star  of  rain,  who  in  fore-
seeing and  holding  up  the  light  of  truth,  watered  the  drought
of  the  unbelieving  by  announcing  the  words  of  prophecy  \
Were  not  Jeremiah,  and  the  other  Prophets,  placed  as  it
were  in  heaven,  like  stars  of  rain,  who,  when  exalted  on  the
high  eminence  of  preaching,  while  they  dared  boldly  to
reprove  the  depravity  of  sinners,  kept  down  as  it  were  the
dust  of  human  blindness,  by  watering  it  with  the  drops  of
their  words?  But  since,  namely,  the  judgments  of  heaven
take  away  from  this  present  life  the  souls  of  these  persons,
enclosed  in  this  corruptible  flesh,  the  stars  of  rain  are  with-
drawn as  it  were  from  the  face  of  heaven.  And  the  stars
return  into  their  hidden  places,  when  the  souls  of  the  Saints,
having  completed  their  courses,  are  laid  up  in  the  treasuries
of  the  Inner  Disposal.

13.  But  since  the  earth  would  be  dried  up,  if  the  streams


Floods  still  given,  when  the  rain-stars  are  withdraion. 207

of  rain  from  above  were  to  cease  entirely,  when  the  stars  Book

were withdrawn, it is  riglilly  said, Vtlio  takclli  awiuj  ihe  — •'

stars  of  rain,  and  poiireili  forth  the  showers  like  whirlpools.
For,  when  the  Lord  had  taken  away  the  Prophets,  He  sent
the  Apostles  in  their  place ;  to  rain  like  whirlpools,  after  the
external  preaching  of  the  liaw  had  ceased,  when  the  old
fathers  had  been  withdrawn.  He  conceals  therefore  the
stars  of  rain,  and  pours  out  showers  like  whirlpools,  because
after  He  withdrew  the  preachers  of  the  Law  to  His  inmost
and  secret  mansions,  a  more  exuberant  power  of  preaching
poured  forth,  by  the  words  of  those  who  came  after.

14,  By  stars  of  rain  can  be  designated  also  the  holy
Apostles,  of  whom  it  is  said  by  Jeremiah  to  rejected  Judaea,
The  stars  of  rain  have  been  wiihholden,  and  there  ]iatJiier.'S,3.
been  no  latter  rain.  The  Lord,  therefore,  has  withdrawn  the
stars  of  rain,  and  has  poui'ed  forth  showers  like  whirlpools;
because,  when  He  took  away  from  Judaea  the  Apostles  who
were  preaching,  He  watered  the  world  with  the  doctrine  of
new  grace.  Both  of  which  things  can  be  understood,  not
improperly,  to  have  been  done  in  the  Church.  For  when
He  withdrew  the  souls  of  the  Apostles  to  the  secret  recesses
of  the  regions  above,  on  the  dissolution  of  their  bodies.  He
hid,  as  it  were,  from  the  face  of  heaven  the  stars  of  rain.
But,  when  the  stars  of  rain  had  been  taken  away,  He  gave
showers  like  whirlpools ;  for,  when  the  Apostles  had  been
withdrawn  to  the  regions  above,  He  disclosed,  in  more
abundant  profusion,  by  the  tongues  of  subsequent  expositors,
the  streams  of  Divine  knowledge  which  had  been  long
concealed.  For  that  which  they  stated  briefl}',  they  mani-
foldly increased  by  expounding  it.  Whence  this  very
preaching  of  expositors  is  not  improperly  compared  to
whirlpools,  since,  while  they  collect  the  sayings  of  many
who  precede  thein,  they  spread  themselves  out  to  a
greater  depth  in  what  ihey  accumulate.  For  whilst  they
unite  testimonies  to  testimonies,  they  make,  as  it  were,
whirlpools  from  drops.  And  whilst  the  Gentile  world  is
daily  taught  by  their  words,  because  the  mind  of  sinners
receives  heavenly  wisdom,  the  water  standing  on  the  earth
exhibits,  as  it  were,  whirlpools.  But  let  not  these  expositors
prefer  themselves  in  any  way  to  the  same  Apostles  in  wisdom.


208 Later  teachers  have  their  knoidedge  from  the  Apostles.

Job  36,  when  they  speak  at  greater  length  in  exposition. For  they

— ^-^—  ought  constantly  to  remember  through  whom  they  have
received  the  discoveries  of  this  very  wisdom.  Whence  it  is
also  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  28. Which  Jiow  from  the  clouds.
ix.  15.  For  these  whirlpools  do  indeed  flow  from  the  clouds;

because,  if  the  power  of  understanding  did  not  begin  with
the  holy  Apostles,  it  would  not  flow  more  fully  through  the
mouths  of  teachers.  For  by  '  clouds'  in  Holy  Scripture,
sometimes  fickle  men,  sometimes  Prophets,  sometimes
Apostles,  are  designated. By  clouds  the  fickleness  of  the

Eccles.  human  mind  is  expressed ;  as  Solomon  says,  He  that  ohserveth
'  '  the  wind,  doth  not  sow,  and  he  that  regardeth  the  clouds,
doth  never  reap.  He  doubtless  calls  the  unclean  spirit,
'  wind,'  but  men  who  are  subjected  to  him,  '  clouds ;'  whom
he  impels  backwards  and  forward,  hither  and  thither,  as
often  as  his  temptations  alternate  in  their  hearts  from  the
blasts  of  suggestions.  He,  therefore,  who  observes  the  wind,
does  not  sow ;  since  he  who  dreads  coming  temptations,
does  not  direct  his  heart  to  good  works.  And  he  who
regards  the  clouds,  does  not  reap,  since  he  w^ho  trembles
from  the  dread  of  human  fickleness,  deprives  himself  of  the
recompense  of  an  eternal  reward. By  '  clouds'  are  Prophets

Ps.  18,  set  forth,  as  is  said  by  the  Psalmist ;  Dark  water  in  the
clouds  of  the  air ;  that  is,  hidden  wisdom  in  the  Prophets.
By '  clouds' also Apostles are designated,  as  is said  by

Is.  6,  6.  Isaiah,  /  will  command  the  clouds  that  theif  rain  no  rain
upon  it.  They  are  '  stars'  then,  because  they  shine  with  the
merits  of  their  life ;  they  are  '  clouds,'  because  they  water
the  parched  ground  of  our  heart  with  the  streams  of  heavenly
knowledge. For  if  they were  not '  clouds,' the Prophet

ls.60,8.  would  not  have  said,  when  looking  on  them.  Who  are  these
that  Jly  as  clouds?  The  whirlpools  of  showers  pour  then
from  the  clouds,  because  the  profound  instructions  of  those
that  follow  derived  the  origin  of  their  wisdom  from  the
holy  Apostles.  Of  which  clouds  it  is  still  further  fitly
subjoined.

Which  cover  all  things  above.
X.  16.  When  the  clouds  cover  the  air  above,  if  we  lift  up  our

eyes  to  the  heaven,  we  behold  not  the  heaven,  but  them;


Examples  of  Saints,  like  clouds,  hetueen  lis  and  the  Sun. 209

nor  does  our  sight  penetrate  the  ethereal  regions,  because  its  Book
own  infirmity  conceals  tliem from it. And  when  the  sun  —
shines  forth  from  the  heaven,  it  first  feeds  itself  on  tlie  air
which  is  poured  between,  tliat  so  it  may  afterwards  conleni-
plate  the  rays  of  the  sun  in  the  sky. Because,  therefore,  we
are  carnal  men,  when  we  endeavour  to  attain  to  heavenly
things,  we  raise,  as  it  were,  our  eyes  to  heaven,  and  direct
our gaze thither ;  for oppressed by  our  connection witli
bodily  things,  we  wish to teach it spiritual things. But
because  our  intellect  is  not  permitted  to  pass  over  to  Divine
objects,  unless  it  be  first  fashioned  by  the  examples  of  j»re-
ceding  Saints,  our  eye,  as  it  were,  now  looks  up  to  heaven,
but  beholds  clouds ; because  it  seeks  to  comprehend  those
things  which  are  of  God,  but  is  barely  able  to  admire  those
things  which  have  been  given  to  men. Whence  it  is  said  in
another place,  ^  Thou enliyhtenest wonderfully  from the^<pu>r:iui
eternal  mountains. For  he,  who  cannot  behold  the  rising  "^^  ^'*~"
sun, looks at the mountains tinged with his rays, ^n^u-prVo^-c^v
discovers  that  the  sun  has  risen. God  enlightens  us,  there- VerJ!^''
fore,  from  the  eternal  mountains,  because  He  illuminates  us  ■'^^J^-
with  the  ray  of  His  brightness,  by  our  admiring  the  doings * '  "
of  former  fathers. Behold  we  are  kindled  with  zeal  of  devo-
tion and  love  for  the  Lord  ;  but  we  are  the  better  moulded
in  this  devotion  and  love  by  our  contemplation  of  these  clouds.
For  what  was  more  devoted  than  Peter .? What  more  full  of
love  than  John? The  one  through  his  devotion  feared  not^at.u,
to  tread  the  watery  ridges  of the  sea. The other  rested  joimi 3
through  love  on  the  very  breast  of  our  Maker:  and  he  who23-2.'>.
had come to the refreshment  of  a bodily feast,  derived
spiritual  food  from  the  bosom  of  the  Kedeemer.

17.  But  because  we  have  said,  that  Prophets  also  are
signified  by  *  clouds,'  it  is  necessary  for  us  still  to  bring
forward  the  examples  of  the  ancient  fathers.  Behold  when
we  are  wishing  to  submit,  through  obedience,  to  heavenly
precepts,  we  are  assisted  by  considering  the  footsteps  of  the
old  fathers.  For  what  was  more  obedient  than  Abraham,
who  at  one  word  from  the  Lord,  forsakes  his  kindred,  and  Gen.  12,

-  1  ^_  A.

his  country ;  and  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  his  eternal  inhe-
ritance, fears  not  to  smite  him,  whom  he  had  received  as  his 't^-  di-
heir,  when  now  old  and  almost  ready  to  die  ? When  we  arc  "'
VOL.  rir.  P


210 Virtues  of  Esau,  Jacob,  Joseph,  3foses,  Joshua.

Job  36,  endeavouring  to  gain  hold  of  the  virtue  of  patience,  we  look  at
the  examples  of  those  who  precede  us. For  what  is  more


Gen, 22,  patient  than  Isaac,  who  carries  the  wood,  asks  about  the
'  '  burnt  offering,  and  is,  shortly  afterwards,  bound,  and  speaks
not:  is  placed  upon  the  altar,  and  resists  not?  What  then
can  be  spoken  of,  more  patient  than  this  man?  who  is  led,
as  if  for  consolation,  and  makes  an  enquiry  ;  who  is  bound
ready  for  the  blow,  and  is  silent;  who  speaks  when  about  to
offer  a  burnt  offering,  but  when  about  to  be  offered  as  a
burnt  offering  speaks  not  ?  When  we  are  endeavouring  to
gird  ourselves  for  endurance  of  toils,  we  are  supported  by
preceding examples. For what is more laborious than

Gen. 29,  Jacob,  who  though  near  to  Laban  b}'  the  rights  of  kindred,
■  discharged  for  so  long  a  time  servile  offices  in  his  family,
and  obeyed  him  in  the  place  of  a  servant,  that  he  might
enjoy  the  rewards  of  the  heir?  When  we  are  striving  to
ascend  the  citadel  of  continence  and  chastity,  we  are  sup-
ported by  the  examples  of  those  who  precede  us. For  what

Gen.39,is  more  chaste  than  Joseph,  who  could  not,  even  though  a
captive,  be  brought  under  the  yoke  of  lust  at  the  desire  of
his  wanton  mistress  ?  And  he  was  indeed  a  slave  to  men,
but  was,  even  in  slavery,  free  from  the  power  of  dominant
wickedness.  When  we  are  wishing  to  be  filled  with  gentle-
ness, we  are  assisted  with  the  examples  of  those  who  pre-

Numb.  cede  us. For  what  was  more  gentle  than  Moses,  who  bears

22'^^" "with  the  sedition  of  the  people  committed  to  his  care,  and
yet  entreats  the  Lord  when  angry,  in  behalf  of  these  his
persecutors,  and  exposes  himself  in  their  stead  to  the  Divine
wrath  ;  because  love  glows  in  his  holy  breast  even  from  per-
secution? When  we  are  endeavouring  to  fashion  the  con-
stancy of  our  mind  against  the  adversities  of  the  world,  we
are  supported  by  the  consideration  of  those  who  precede  us.

Numb.  For  what  is  more  constant  than  Joshua,  who,  when  sent  to

^*'^~^' search  out  the  nature  of  the  nations,  feared  not  either  the
hugeness  of  their  height,  nor  the  multitude  of  their  numbers?
Whence  he  subdued  in  battle  those  very  same  nations  which
he  feared  not  in  searching  them  out.  When  we  are  endea-
vouring to  reach  the  height  of  kindness,  we  are  instructed  by
the  examples  of  those  who  go  before  us.  For  what  is  more
kind than Samuel,  who when deposed  from  his  office  of


David's furhearanre. Fertilizing  rain  from  Saints. 211

governing  the  people,  humbly  seeks  for  his  successor;  and Book

anoints  him  when  found  to  be  king,  and  soon  endures  him — '

when  anointed  as  his  persecutor? He  is  afraid  of  dying  by
his  hands,  and  yet  entreats  the  Lord  not  to  be  angry  with
him. For  he  himself  says  when  he  was  sent,  Saul  will  hear,  i  Sam.
and  will  kill  me. And  the  Truth  says  to  him  by  Itself; '
How  long  dost  tlioa  mourn  for  Saul^  since  I  have  rejectedih.  i.
him. What  then  can be mentioned more  kind  than  that
man, who wishes  not  that  even  he  should  be  smitten  by
God,  by  whom  he  is  afraid  of  being  killed  ? When  we  are
advancing  to  the  height  of  mercifulness  and  humility,  we
are  supported  b^^  the  examples  of  those  who  go  before  us.
For  what  can  be  mentioned  more  merciful  than  David,  what
more  humble,  who  received  from  the  reprobate  king  insults
for  his  victories,  who  bv  his  strength  rescued  the  nation  of
the  Israelites  from  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  and  yet  fled
away  himself  lest  he  should  die,  as  on3  of  no  strength .'' He
knows  that  he  himself  was  elected  by  the  Divine  sentence,
and  that  his  persecutor  was  rejected;  and  yet  he  submits
himself  to  this  very  same  persecutor  of  his,  with  the  humi-
lity of  frequent  satisfaction,  who  takes  away  the spear  of  i  Sam.
his  persecutor,  cuts  off  the  border  of  his  cloak,  and  hastens  ib.'26
at  once  to  the  top  of  the  mountain,  and  at  one  and  the  same  12—16.
time  shews  that  he  has  had  the  power  of  slaying,  and  prays
that  he  might  not  be  slain.

18.  Because  then  we  are  instructed  by  preceding  examples,
in  all  things  which  we  spiritually  desire,  it  is  well  said  of
these  clouds.  Which  cover  all  things  above.  For  we  are
covered  by  the  life  of  the  fathers  spread  over  us,  like  clouds,
in  order  that  we  may  be  watered,  to  bear  the  produce  of  a
fruitful  growth.  And  we  behold,  as  it  were,  the  clouds  first,
when  looking  up  to  heaven ;  because  we  first  behold,  with
admiration,  the  doings  of  the  good,  and  we  afterwards  pene-
trate, by  our  experience,  those  things  which  are  heavenly.
But  because  the  life  and  the  virtue  of  these  clouds,  that  is,  of
these  ancient  fathers,  would  not  be  open  to  us,  unless  other
clouds,  that  is  the  Apostles,  disclosed  it  with  the  light  of
their  preaching,  let  our  discourse  turn  back  to  those  clouds,
which  go  about  the  woi-ld  with  their  preaching;  and  let  it

p  2


212 God  moves  and  dicells  in  Saints  as  His  Tents.

Job  36,  shew  what  the  Lord  has  done  by  their  means  in  the  world.

29.  30. ,, ^  n
It  iollows,

Ver.  29,  30.  //'  He  will  spread  out  clouds  as  His  tent,  and
lighten  with  His  light  from  above,  He  will  cover  also  the  ends
of  the  sea.
xl. 19.  The  Lord  '  spreads  out  the  clouds,'  when,  opening  the
way  of  preaching  to  His  ministers,  He  disperses  them  in
every  direction,  through  the  breadth  of  the  world. But  it  is
well  said,  As  His  tent. For  a  tent  is  wont  to  be  pitched,  on
a  journey. And,  when holy preachers  are sent  into the
world, they  make  a  way  for  God. Whence it  is  written,
Mai.  3,  Behold,  I  send  My  Messejiger  before  Thy  face,  who  shall
'■ prepare  Thy  way  before  Thee. And  hence  also  it  is  said  by
Ps.68,4.the  Psalmist,  Make  a  way  for  Him  Who  ascendeth  over  the
ib.  7, west. And  again,  0  God,  when  Thou  wentest  forth  before
Thy  people,  ichen Thou  passedst  through the  desert,  the
earth  uas  moved. For  God,  Who  of  Himself  is,  not  locally,
in  every  place,  walks  locally  into  the  regions  of  the  world,
by  means  of  His  preachers. Whence  also  it  is  said  by  the
Lev,  26,  Prophet,  And  I  will  walk  in  them. For  He  does  in  truth
^^' walk  through  them,  whilst  He  pours  Himself  into  the  hearts
of  men  by  their  teaching. And  in  this  journey  the  tents  of
God  are  these  self-same  hearts  of  the  Saints,  by  which  He  is
covered,  as  it  were,  in  resting  on  the  way. Whilst  coming
through  them  to  the  minds  of  men,  He  effects  what  He  has
ordained,  and  is  not  beheld. Hence  it  is  that  all  the  syna-
gogue together  is  called  a  '  tent,'  when  the  Lord  complains  by
Jeremiah  that  the  priests  had  ceased  from  preaching,  saying,
Jer.  10,  There  is  none  to  stretch  forth  3Iy  tent  any  more,  and  to  set
^^' up  3fy  curtains. Hence  again  it  is  said  of  its  extermination.
Lam.  2,  ffe  hath  destroyed  His  tent,  as  a  garden.  He  hath  thrown
^'  down His tabernacle. For  since  the  Lord  at  that  time

dwelt  secretly  among  men  in  the  worship  of  a  single  people.
He  called  that  self-same  people  His  tent.  Whence  also
these  clouds  are  now  rightly  called  His  tent,  because  God,
when  coming  to  us  by  His  grace,  is  concealed  within  the
hearts  of  His  preachers.  Was  not  Paul  His  tent,  when
Ilora.l5,  coming  to  the  hearts  of  men,  from  Jerusalem  round  about
into  Illyricum,  the  Lord  was  resting  in  his  mind  ? For  he


Rain  of  ■preaching;  liylitening  of  miracles.  213

was  a  cloud  for  men,  but  a  tent  for  God ;  because  He  was  Booic

V  V  \  r  T  r

invisibly  retaining  Him  in  his  heart,  Whom  he  was  by  his'-^ .'

preaching  pouring  into  the  hearts  of  his  hearers. When  the
same  Paul  was  proceeding  towards  Rome,  bound  in  chains,  to  Acts 27,

.  .  28

take  possession  of  the  world,  God,  concealed  in  his  breast,
was  journeying  as  if  in  a  tent.  Because  He  could  not  be
seen,  from  being  concealed,  and  yet,  disclosed  by  the  words
of  preaching.  He  was  prosecuting  without  ceasing  the  course
of  grace  which  He  had  begun.  Moses  appeared  as  His  Ex.  3.
cloud,  when,  before  he  undertook  the  leadership  of  the
Jewish  peoj^le,  he  was  dwelling  for  forty  years  in  the  wilder-
ness, and  aiming  at  lofty  things,  lived  separated  from  the
converse  of  the  people.  But  he  was  made  the  tent  of  God,
when,  on  being  sent  into  Egypt,  to  bring  back  the  people,  he
was  going  on,  bearing  in  his  heart  the  invisible  truth ;  and
when  Almighty  God,  Who  was  manifested  in  his  work,  was
lying  concealed  in  his  heart.  And  He  who  is  ever  present,
and  containing  all  things,  coming  into  Egypt  was  journeying
thither  in  His  servant. Whence  it  is  written,  God  nent  into 2  Sam.

*7 go

Egypt,  that  He  might  ransom  His  jjeople. Behold  He  is  ' '
said  to  journey, by Whose  uncircumscribed presence all
things  are  contained,  because  He, Who  is  every  where  by
His  Majesty,  places,  as  it were.  His  steps  in  the  way,  by
preaching.

20.  But  words  only  are  by  no  means  sufficient  for  these
same  holy  preachers,  for  persuasion,  unless  miracles  are  also
added.  Whence  it  is  said.  When  He  icill  spread  out  the
clouds  as  His  tent,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  And  lighten  icith
His  light  from  above.  For  what  else  but  miracles  ought  we
to  suppose  lightnings  to  mean  .?  Of  which  it  is  said  by  the
Psalmist,  Thou  wilt  multiply  Thy  lightnings,  and  confoundVs.  144.
them.  By  these  clouds  then  He  lightens  from  above  with
His  light ;  because  by  holy  preachers  He  illumines  the  gloom
of  our  insensibility  even  by  miracles.

31.  And  when  these  clouds  rain  down  with  words,  and
when  they  disclose,  by  miracles,  the  power  of  their  glittering
light,  they  convert  to  divine  love  even  the  farthest  boundaries
of  the  world.  Whence  it  is  rightly  subjoined.  He  tvill  cover
also  the  ends  of  the  sea.  A  thing  which  we  heard  by  the
voice  of  Eliu  was  to  take  place,  but  which  we  at  this  time
see  performed by  the  power  of  God. For  the Ahnighty


VI  4 A/ir/i  uf  llif  ht'tt  huLiiKt'il. Juthjniriit  in  jii  i  m  Imiif.

Jub  ati,  |,oi(l  iiuH  covered,  witli  llisligljIeiiiuK  l1<>iuI«,  thbtiiids  ul  i\\\'.
Bf a ;  becuuse,  by  llio  brilliiml  uiimcles  ol loeueluMs,  lie  bus


broiigbt  cviMi  ibtMMulis  cd' ibu  world  lo  llic  luilb,  I'or,  li»'  lb;
has  iiinv  inuclmUul  iljt;  Imuilw  <•(  idiiiuhl  all  nations;  lo  !  lb-,
liatj  {oini^d  lo^t.lluM'  in  oiut  laitli  (In-  bonndarie8  ol'  tliu  Faist
and  oT  llie  WoHt ;  lo'  ilm  tongnu  ol' Hritain  ",  wbicli  Untnv  oidy
how  lo  \i\i\{v,  barbarian  KOiuuls,  bas  btsgnn  btn^;  hincr,  to
vesoiMid  in  the  i)ivine  ))|-ai»eti  the  Jiebrew  Alhdnia.  Heboid
the  ocean,  vvhicb  be  Tore  waw  wwellin}^,  is  now  cabned  ben«n»th,
and  tjnbjei-t  to,  the  leet  ol  tint  saintti ;  and  its  biubarons
motions,  whit  li  IIk^  itiinccs  ol  the  t^artli  Inid  beiMi  nnable  to
conhtd  with  llic  sword,  <h)  (be  months  of  ])riests  bind  with
hnii|)lii  words  Ihron^h  Tear  ofCiod:  and  he  who,  when  unbi;-
brving,  had  not  drtnujed  tbe  bands  <d  combatants,  now  reai'M,
when  railhlul,  tbe  ttnignes  ol  llu  bninble.  For  because  the
viitiut  ol  Divine  Knowled^t)  is  pointMl  into  bim,  by  tlu!
lieavenly  words  which  iu^  hears,  and  by  lh(!  brigbtness  also  of
miracles,  he  is  so  restrained  by  his  dread  «»r  Ibis  same  Divine
j)ow'ev,  as  to  I'earto  do  wronj^,  and  U\  bmg  with  all  his  desires
to  atlain  lo  the  f^race  td'  ctfrnily  W'lnnce  it  is  heie  also
ajiproprialely  adilcd,

ViM',  HI.  I'or  1)1/  thi'st;  l/iiH(/s  Juil(/('l/i  //<'  I  he  /it'op/c,  und
})ivflh  food  lo  nuuiij  motfat'S.
xW,  2'2.  lly  lht<se  words  of  preachers,  lliul  is  drops  (d  the
clouds,  by  these  ligblnings  itf  u>iracU!S,(iod  dunlitlihs  judges
tlie  ptioples;  because  He  invites  their  Itirrilied  hearts  lo
repentance.  For  whtui  they  hear  heavenly  Ibings,  w  ben
tliey  atttrnd  lo  ni;ii\  clloiis  works,  they  soon  reliuo  mio  iluur
own  hearts,  and  allln  inif,'  thetnselves  for  their  former  wicked-
nesses, dread  ett  rnal  hMinenls.  Jbit  fo(»d  is  givetj  too  by  these
same  clouds  by  wbicb  terror  is  inllicled:  sim-e  mighly  is  the
trust  c«Mnuiilled  lo  pri^acbers  to  know  ho\v  so  lo  alllict  tbe
minds  of  the  haughty,  as  yet  to  be  skilful  in  t  In  risbing  them
when  alllicleti,  v\iili  words  of  consolali(tn  ;  so  as  lo  alarm
sinners  witli  eternal  putuslmu^ntK,  and  sup))ort  penitents  with
tlie  joys  of  tlu<  kingdom  of  luiavtm. Whence  the  very  course

*  Tlii» dpeoiitl iiieiitidu  of DritHiii  liurtluiH. I.ili. xi.  Iml.  iv,  'JH.  *Jt).  (i4.

was |iiiiliitlily mlilfil utlei llm (iiiltii-  (ift, ti(i. Iten. (St. (iiuf^diy wuh  nut,

cmtitm  ill  llu!  wiiit,  as  (lie  ha\oiia  were  liowtivei',  iiiiuwai«  of  thf  cNJatfiiue  of

nt>t oonvertud till Ht.  tllrogory liuil  flie Ihitith Chuioh, ami nuiy have

been  some  years  Tope. See  hiii  K))*.  referred  to  it. iiV/.)
to Ht.  Augustine, liertlia, and I'Mil-


TV/r  miitir,  ir/m  /inti/tiiui  liiim^,  i/m-  jiuxt  In  nuun/ '>\T\

tlC lIlIN lIlHprllHIllllltl IM well ItllHcrVl^d, HO llllll I'.llll HIIhI, III llMi.n

jirii|ii'r (iiili  I, iIimI (iinl (ii.'il hkI^ns iIh^ |»tii|ili- liy llumt',

cIoImIs, illlll iltll'l  U  IIKIh l^ivtlN llli'lil IoimI  Iti'l'illlMn, III llllltl

Aliiii^lil}'  (iiiil  liiHl  rc'|itiivitH  itml  iiiiim-f<  nn  iVniii  iiiii  ivil
(lordK,  liy  niciiiiH  ol  lli  .  |iiiiirli(  is,  iiiid  ullniwiinln  rliriihlirM
UImI ciinHnlcK UN liy liii|i<  I'di il (lie I  liviiii- iliH|ii-ttHiil.ii)i|

<liil  mil  U(;t  t!ni  pin  I  ul  il  |iiilu;r,  liy  lIu'Hc  (  luiid  ,  lie  licvc^r
WDiilil  li;iV(i  Kitiil  In  llicMi-  Humr  clniKlH,  liciiiif  iif  Hit  //(//»/ ,i,,liir.'o,
(ihusi :  IvhllHtl  HOtllUT  HIIIH  IJi-  Ill/lit,  llnlfilli-  liillllhil  1/ 11  fil'^^' '^'^'
fhriii  ;  ,111(1  n /loNtf  Hiti'lU'l'  HtHH  l/t>  If  I  mil,  llnif  iiif  rrliiiiiid.
Ami  a;.';. nil,  il  lli  dul  nul  Inil  liy  iIhiii  oin'  rumiHliril  lioiirlrt,
tliu  Lord  Would  luvif  «ay  to  \\\h  dioripliM,  of  (In-  liimjj;iiiiif.^
jicopic,  (,'iir  iji-  lliiiii  III  rill.  I'lil.  W(^  |ii  In  vu  liiiil  lliiil  \Vii«M„i  |i,
lluii  iloiin  iliiiH  liy  llii  il  Imiidrt,  llial.  Wit  may  ntui  llial.  lliix  iw '"■
<\iu\y  luliiuK  pliMM-  wiilioiil  CI  aniu^  liy  llii^ir  wordM.  I'or  wlial
<lni)n  W'lvv  «dr«!<;f,  win  n  li't  MpraltH  by  IiIn  IspiMtli'M,  uultiHH  it
ix',  lli;il  uiii  iiiiMijilil^  liini(.',t'y  Iii'iu'Im  may  In*  li-d  vvitli  llio
I'liod  o|  llic  uord  ?  Wliiil  iiii'  r.iiil  Old  .l>>lin  l.di>iiiiiii['  ,n ,
will  II  Mpcaliiiijj;  liy  llnif  I'lpiHlJcM,  i'Xi'pl  lli:il  our  miud'i  iiiiiy
onjoy  jiravi-uly  (ood,  and  ovni'CntllO  iImI  Im/iiIiiii).^  oI  liiiu|/cr
with  wliirli  IJiity  vvcrn  dy  i  lifj;  ?  I.'  I  it.  lit?  »uid  tlaii,  \\  Inn  I  In
will  Hjniiiil  mil  l/ir  iloitils  us  I  ll^^  Ir/il,  iiiiil.  Iiijlilrii  n  illi  //in
liijhl  /llllll  tifiiirr,  //r  ii  ill  nmr  iilsn  llir  niih  nj  llii'  sra ;  fni'
hif  llirsr  IhiiiijH  ///•  finlijilli  llii'  firiiiili^  iiiiil  i/ii'rili  f'uuit  In
tiitiini  llllll  IiiIh,  Ak  li  III-  wire  plainly  Kayiii}-',,  II  lli  ■  imU
loiili  I  lis  SiiiulH  lor  llir  uiiuivJiy  ol  |ii'(;a<diiii;/,  and  aid'i  tlnir
woi'dH  liy  tiiiifitdcM,  ||i;  Huuiuioiih  tlir  lioiiudai  ii-ti  ol  all  tlu;
W'oild  tollic  lailli  ,  and  liy  llii'.i'  nn  ant  lln  DimI  judf/<-M  tJin
])i<(iid,  and  alU'rwiildH  rluuiHllffi  Vvitli  hop.-,  and  nliriij/lliruM
tlir  Inniilili iiy  lite  woiil  of  rouHoliilion.

ti.'t. I'nit w  Inn lin w  uH Miiyiu;.^ lliat Ijr (mvi:. food lo
morlaU,  wr miint oliKi^rvn lliat lui doiM not nay to all, Inil.
"■  lo  iiiaiiy.' |{i<  iiUKc,  uaimdy,  it  in  writlcu,  ////  iiirii  liiiii'  itiU-i'\Ut>»*.
/llllll. And to (Cilaiu tii'i'KOIlK It IK Kind, }r  llini'/nir  liriir  ,' ,  '

•  (lOIIII M|

111)1, hiiitiisr ijf II I  r mil i>l <-iiil. And (if^aiu,  Nil inn  II inni'/.

iiiinr In J\/r,  I'.i  I  i/>l llir I'lillui fVlinli linlli •^nil Mr  iliiiir\i '

llllll. And aj-Miii, ///'■ 1.1)1  il liiimnlli llnin Hull nir I/ih.'^ '  ""•

Ji l(».
VVIh!UC<!  iiio-^I pri'MOiiM,  i;V)  n in Holy  ('linnli Jni-.ill,  n  lain

Jaitli,  and  y<;t  iiMiiin  not  lln;  lil<-  oT  lailli  ; liny  piirlaKo  ol'llif

KariannnlK  of  tin |,oid'f. Iinniility,  hut  hconi  lo  \n lninil>l<  d

in  niiilation  ol  tin Loid. 'i  Iny  puituku  lln;  m-niUt  piuiicluiig


216  This  ivorlcCs great  ones  left  in  darkness.

Job  36,  of  the  Divine  Word,  but  continue,  in  themselves,  mighty  in
^~' ,  pride. Whence  here  also,  after  the  breadth  of  the  whole
collected  Church  has  been  signified  by  the  ends  of  the  sea,
it  is  fitly  subjoined  ;

Ver.  32.  He  hideth  the  light  from  the  mighty.

xiii, 24.  For  those  in  truth  are  '  mighty,'  v/ho  exalt  themselves

with  lofty  thoughts. Against  whom  it  is  said  by  Isaiah;

Is. 5, 21.  Woe  unto  goit,  who  are  tcise  in  your  own  eyes,  and  jjriident

Enm ^"  2/c^r  own  sight. Against  whom  also  Paul  says,  Be  not

12, 16. u'ise  in  your  own  conceit. But  the  light  is  hidden  from

these  miglity  ones,  because,  doubtless,  the  knowledge  of  the

trnlh  is  denied  to  haughty  men. Whence  the  Truth  says  by

Mat.  11,  Its  own  self,  I  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and

^^' earth,  because  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and

prudent, and  hast revealed  them to little ones. Calhng,

namely,  the  haughty,  wise  and  prudent. For  He,  Who  did

not  subjoin,  '  Thou  hast  revealed  them  to  fools,'  but,  '  to

little  ones,'  made  it  plain  that  He condemned  their  pride,

and  not  their  wisdom. Whence  it  is  said  in  another  place,

Ps.  116,  The  Lord  guarding  the  little  ones. And  in  order  to  shew

'  parvi-  ^^'1^^^  ^s  meant  by  this  littleness',  it  is  added,  /  was  brought

tas lotv,  and  He  set  me  free. Because  then  there  are  many  in

the  Church,  who  scorn  to  be  little  ones,  they  cease  not  to  be

great  in  their  own  sight,  even  in  the  place  of  humility. You

may  frequently  see  them  raised  high  in  honours,  enjoying

pleasures,  and  spreading  abroad  with  the  multiplicity  of  their

goods. These  often  specially  desire  nothing,  except  to  rule

over  others,  are  pleased  at  being  feared  by  many  ;  neglect  to

live  uprightly,  and  wish  to  have  the  credit  of  an  upright

life ;  court  flattery,  and are  puffed  up  by  applause. And

since they  are abundantly supplied  with goods ready  at

hand,  they  do  not  seek  for  the  joys  which  are to come.

And, because manifold employments engage them, they

prove  them  to  be  strangers  even  to  themselves. And  yet

if  any  trial  of  their  faith  arise,  because  the}-  are  contained

therein  though  but  in  appearance,  they  defend  it  by  words,

they  defend  it  by  their  exertions,  and  claim  their  heavenly

country,  and  yet  love  it  not.

25.  And  these  do  the  sons  of  Eeuben,  and  Gad,  and  the
half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  well  represent  in  Moses;  who  pos-
sessing many  flocks  and  herds,  whilst  they  desire  that  plain


3Ien  who  choose  this  life,  like  Gadiles  and  Reiihenites. 217

country  which  thev  had  seen  beyond  Jordan,  refused  to  Book
receive  an  inheritance  in  the  land  of  promise,  saying,  T/ic  ,,' — ,— *
country  tchich  the  Lord  smote  before  the  sight  of  the  children  32,  4.  5.
of  Israel,  is  of  a  region  most  fertile  for  the  pasture  of  ani-
mals, and  we  thy  servants  have  many  beasts ;  and  we  pray
thee,  if  ue  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  to  give  it  unto  us
thy  servants  fur  a  possession,  and  make  us  not  to  pass  over
Jordan.  They  therefore  who  possess  very  many  beasts  of
burden,  avoid  passing  over  Jordan,  because  they,  whom
many  worldly  engagements  occupy,  do  not  seek  for  the  abode
of  their  heavenly  country.  But  that  faith,  Avhich  they  hold
in  appearance,  urges  them  on ;  lest  they  should  become  in-
active from  the  delight  of  ease,  and  should  deter  others,  by
their  example,  from  the  endurance  of  toil,  and  from  studying
to  be  patient.  Whence  it  is  said  to  them  hy  'Moses,  Sliall'^^'^'^'
your  hreihren  go  to  battle?  and  shall  ye  sit  here?  Why  do
ye  subvert  ihe  minds  of  the  children  of  Israel.  But  because
they  are  ashamed  not  to  defend  that  Avhich  they  confess,  they
hasten  to  contend  for  that  faith  which  they  have  professed  ;
and  secure  it,  not  for  themselves,  but  for  their  neighbours.
Whence  they  say  to  Moses,  We  will  build  sheepfolds,  and  J^umt.
stalls  for  our  beasts,  and  fortified  cities  for  our  little  ones  ;  17,'
but  ice  ourselves  will  go  armed  and  ready  for  battle  before
the  children  of  Israel.  And  they  go  boldly  forth  at  once  in
behalf  of  others,  and  free  the  land  of  promise  from  their
enemies,  and  leave  it,  and  return  to  feed  their  herds  beyond
Jordan,  For  many  persons,  although  faithful,  being  engaged
in  present  cares,  feed,  as  it  were,  their  herds  beyond  Jordan;
because,  contrary  to  the  faith  of  Baptism,  they  are  enslaved,
with  all  their  heart,  and  with  every  desire,  to  perishing
objects.  But  yet,  as  we  have  said,  when  a  trial  of  their
faith  arises,  they  gird  themselves  with  the  arms  of  defence.
They  overcome  and  slaughter  the  enemies  of  the  faith,  and
love  not  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  promise,  that  is,  the
fruit  of  faith.  And  they  so  fight  in  its  behalf,  as  yet  to
deposit  their  pledges  outside  of  it.  For  because  they  have
their  children  without,  they  do  not  place  their  affection  in
dwelling  therein.  Whence  they  return  to  the  plain  country,
because  they  descend  from  the  lofty  summits  of  the  moun-
tains, as  if  from  the  hope  of  heavenly  things,  to  rear  brute
animals  without  the  land  of  promise. Because  they  labour


218  Liglil  uithdrawn  from  the  proud^  restored  to  the  humble.
Job  36,  diligently  to  supply  the  irrational  motions  of  their  mind  with


vai'ious  objects  of  desire :  because  they,  who  are  blinded  with
transient  pursuits,  know  not  how  great  is  the  brightness  of
the  eternal  light;  and  whilst  they  are  proud  of  worldly
things,  they  close  up  for  themselves  the  access  of  the
light  of  heaven.  Whence  it  is  now  rightly  said,  He  hideth
His  light  from  the  mighty.  But  yet  grace  from  above
sometimes  looks  upon  these  mighty  men,  and  afflicts  them
by  the  very  employments  caused  by  their  abundant  goods,
and  intersperses  with  their  prosperity,  adverse,  but  profitable,
tribulations  :  in  order  that,  when  sorrowful,  they  may  turn
to  their  heart,  and  learn  how  vainly  they  are  engaged  in
perishable  pursuits.  Whence  here  also,  after  the  light  is
said  to  have  been  withdrawn,  it  is  fitly  subjoined.
And  order eth  it  to  return  again.
xiv.  26.  Because  the  light  of  truth,  which  is  concealed  from
proud  and  overbusied  minds,  is  revealed  to  the  afflicted  and
humbled.  For  light  approaches,  when  the  afflicted  mind
discerns  the  gloom  of  tribulation  which  it  is  enduring  from
pei-ishable  pursuits  :  for,  if  it  had  not  some  perception  of  the
light  within,  it  would  not  even  see  that  it  had  lost  the  light.
But  this  can  be  specially  understood  also  of  the  Jews,  who
dared  for  this  reason  to  speak  against  our  Redeemer,  coming
in  the  flesh,  because  they  were  mighty  in  their  own  thoughts.
But  the  light  was  hid  from  these  mighty  men;  because,
while  they  are  persecuting  in  their  pride  the  light  of  truth,
they  lost  it.  But  because  they  are  to  be  admitted  to  the
faith  at  the  end  of  the  world,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  And
ordereth  it  to  return  again.  Whence  also  it  is  said  by
Is- 10,  Isaiah,  If  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  sliaU  he  as
the  sand  of  the  sea,  a  remnant  shall  he  saved.  For  the  light
then  returns  to  them  when  they  themselves  return  to  con-
fess the  power  of  our  Redeemer.

27.  But  if  we  take  '  in  manihus,''  not  as  one  noun,  in  the
dative  case,  but  as  two  parts  of  speech'';  it  can  be  under-
stood that  the  light  is  concealed  in  the  hands,  when  the
unjust  are  blinded  in  their  own  works  in  the  presence  of  the
righteous  Judge.  But  yet  it  is  ordered  to  return  again.
Because,  when  sinners  have  learned  that  they  cannot  be
saved  by  their  own  strength,  they  receive  the  light  of  grace,

'■  That  is,  not  inmanibus,  but  in  manibus,  as  Heb.


Liyht  hidden  in  ill  u-orks. Who  are  friends  of  God. 219
and  are  enlishtened  with  the  ravs  of  inward  protection,  so  Book

XXVII

that  they  afterwards  love  their  heavenly  country  with  greater  — '

zeal,  than  they  used  before  to  glow  ^vith  in  earthly  pleasure.
But  when  we  are  speaking  thus  of  our  heavenly  country,  (in
which  we  hear  that  there  are  hosts  of  Angels  endowed  with
wondrous  brightness  ;  over  which  the  Maker  of  all  things
presides,  which  He  refreshes  and  fills  with  the  sight  of
Himself,  of  which  light  is  the  true  inheritance,  and  there  is
no  failure  in  its  brightness  ;)  we  turn  our  thoughts  back  to
ourselves,  and  reflect  that  we  bear  about  us  earthly  members;
we  consider  that  born  in  darkness,  and  estranged  from  the
rays  of  the  light  within,  we  have  lived  the  more  sinfully,  the
more  we  were  given  up  to  bodily  pursuits,  and  dwelt  far
away  from  spiritual  objects.  But  a  heart  affected  with  this
thought,  and  conscious  to  itself  of  sin,  is  alarmed,  and
despairs  of  becoming  a  citizen  of  that  mighty  country,  of
which  it  hears.  Whence  it  is  here  also  fitly  subjoined,  how
the  fearful  mind  is  restored  to  confidence.  For  of  this  light
it  is  immediately  added,

Ver.  33. He  declares  of  it  to  His  friend,  thai  it  is  his
possession,  and  that  he  may  come  up  to  it.

28.  The  friend  of  truth is  a  lover  of  upright conduct, xv.
Whence  the  Truth  Itself  says  to  Its  disciples,  Ye  are  My  John  16,
friends,  if  ye  have  done  what  I  command  you. For  a  friend  ^^'
is  named  as  '  the  keeper  of  the  soul ;' and  hence  he  who  'amicus,
endeavours  to  guard  the  will  of  God  in  His  precepts  is,  not^"?^^

"  .  anirni

undeservedly,  called  His  friend. Hence  is  it  that  the  Truth  custos.'
again says  to the  same  disciples,  But  I have called  you  EtyJn.
friends,  for  all  tilings  that  I  have  heard  of  My  Father  /x.  14.
have  made  known  unto  you. Of  this  light  then  of  the  eternal  15. '
country,  God  announces  to  His  friend,  that  it  is  his  posses-
sion, that  he  should  not  despair  of  himself  from  the  frailness
of  his  own  infirmity  ; that  he  should  not  think  what  he  was
made,  but  what  he  was  new  made ; but  should  know  more
certainly  that  he  possesses  this  light,  the  more  truly  he  is
now  trampling  down  the  glootn  of  assailing  sins. But  it  is
well  subjoined  in  promise.  And  that  lie  may  come  up  to  it.
For  what  is  more  difficult  than  for  a  man  born  on  the  earth,
and  bearing  about  earthly  and  fragile  members,  to  ascend  the
heights  of  heaven,  and  to  penetrate  the  secrets  of  the  spirits
above .''


220  Men  raised  to  cqualily  wllh  Angels  hy  the  Incarnation.

Job  36, 29.  But  the  Maker  of  these  very  spirits  has  come  to  us,  and

^—exhibited  Himself  as  a  man,  even  beneath  them,  as  is  said  of

Ps.8,5.  Him  to  the  Father  by  the  Prophet,  Thou  hast  made  Him  a
lit  lie  loioer  than  the  angels. And  because  He  found  between
these  selfsame  spirits  and  ourselves  the  stumbling-block  of  a
discordant  life,  with  wonderful  power,  and  with  still  more
wonderful  kindness,  creating  the  higher,  and  taking  on  Him
the  lower  nature,  He  united  the  highest  and  lowest  together.
Hence  is  it  that,  on  the  birth  of  this  selfsame  King,  the
bands  of  Angels  come  forth  to  announce  Him,  sing  a  hymn,
and,  the  discordance  of  their  evil  conduct  being  overcome,
acknowledge  those,  as  citizens,  of  whom  they  before  despaired:
Luke  2,  proclaiming  widi harmonious  voice. Glory  to God  in the
^^- highest,  and  on  earth  peace  to  men  of  good  trill. As  if  they
said  plainly  ;  Those  whom  wickedness  had  separated,  let  the
Goodness  now  born  on  earth  unite  to  us. Hence  is  it,  that
Gen.  19,  before  His  Incarnation  we  read  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  a
Jos.  5, "^^"  adored  an  Angel'',  and  was  not  forbidden  to  adore  him.
13—16.  But when after the  coming  of  the  Redeemer,  John  had
Rev.i9,pi.ostrated  himself  to  adore  the  Angel,  he  heard.  See  thou  do
it  not,  I  am  thy  fellow-servant,  and  of  thy  brethren. For
what  is  meant  by  the  Angels  first  patiently  allowing  them-
selves  to  be  adored  by man,  and afterwards  refusing  it ;
except,  that  at  first  the  more  abject  they  knew  man  to  be,  who
had  been  given  up  to  carnal  corruptions,  and  was  not  yet
delivered  from  this  condition,  the  more  justly  did  they  despise
Him,  but  that  afterwards  they  could  not  keep  human  nature
in  subjection  under them,  inasmuch  as  they  beheld  it,  in
their Maker, exalted even above themselves } For that
nature  ought  no  longer  to  be  despised,  and  degraded  in  the
members, which, exalted in the head of the members,
Heb.  2,  deserved to be  venerated. He then,  Who  became  lower
than  the  Angels  for  our  sake,  made  us  equal  to  the  Angels
by  the  virtue  of  His  humiliation. Whence  He  also  tauaht
us  by  dying,  that  death  is  not  to  be  dreaded,  by  His  rising
again,  to  be  confident  of  life,  by  His  ascension,  to  exult  in  our
inheritance  of  the  heavenly  country. That  so  the  members
also  may  rejoice,  that  they  are  following  to  the  same  place,

^  Horn.  8.  in  Evang.  he  names  Lot  of  the  latter  instance  Deut.  34,  10.
and  Joshua.  The  former,  perhaps,  must  not  be  forgotten.  See  also  Dan.
only  bowed  as  to  guests. In  judging 12,  1.


No  man  ascends  to  heaven  hut  Christ,  Head  and  Members.  221
where  tliey  see  that  then*  Head  has  gone  before. Whence  Eook

Y  Y  V  T  T

it  is  well  said  by  this  our  Head  Himself,  Wheresoever  the  -- — — ■'

Mat  24

carcase  is,  there  will  also  the  eagles  he  (jathered  to()ether.  28.
Whence  Peter  says,  To  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  un- 1  Pet,
defiled,  and  that  fadeih  not  away,  reserved  in  the  heavens. '
Wlience  Paul  says,  JVe  know  that  ij'  our  earthly  house  0/2  Cor. 5,
this  habitation  he  dissolved,  we  have  a  buildiny  of  God,  a.
house  not  made  ivitlt  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.

30.  Cut  if  we  also,  who  are  born  on  the  earth,  ascend  into
heaven,  where  is  that  which  the  Truth  again  says,  No  man  John  3,
hath  ascended  into  heaven,  hut  He  that  came  down  from
heaven,  the  Son  of  Man  IVhich  is  in  heaven  ? For  to  this
sentence,  that  which  the  same  Truth  says  is  directly  opposed,
Father,  I  will  that  where  I  am,  they  may  he  with  Me  also.  Jolmir,
But  yet  It  is  not  at  variance  with  Itself  in  Its  words,  but  It
inflames  the  zeal  of  our  mind  to  enquire  into  these  things,
which  seem  at  variance. For  all  we,  who  are  born  in  His
faith,  are  doubtless  His  body. Because  then  the  Lord  has,
by  a  marvellous  dispensation  of  condescension,  been  made
the  Head  of  His  own  members,  He  is  alone,  even  when  with
us,  the  multitude  of  the  reprobate  having  been  cast  off. No
man,  therefore,  ascends  into  heaven,  hut  He  that  came  down
from  heaven,  the  Son  of  Man  Who  is  in  heaven. For,  since
we  have  been  already  made  one  with  Him,  He  returns  alone,
even  in  us,  to  that  place,  from  whence  He  came  alone  in
Himself; and  He  Who  ever  is  in  heaven,  ascends  daily  to
heaven  ; because  He  Who  remains  in  His  Godhead  above
all  things,  draws  Himself  up  daily  to  heaven,  in  the  body  of
His  Manhood. Let  not  then  human  weakness despair  of
itself;  let  it  consider  the  Blood  of  the  Only-begotten,  and  in  its
own  price  behold  how  great  that  is,  which  costs  so  much. Let
it  consider  anxiously,  whither  its  Head  has  gone  before  ;  and
let  that  which  is  bound  by  His  precept  to  good  living,  be
strengthened  to  hope  by  His  example. Let  it  feel  sure  of
heaven  ; let  it  hope  for  the  heavenly  country  ; let  it  know
that  it  is  the  companion  of  Angels,  and  rejoice  that  in  its
Head  it  has  been  preferred  even  to  Angels. Let  it  be  rightly
said  then  of  this  light  of  the  eternal  country.  He  declares  of
it  to  His  friend  that  it  is  his  possession,  and  that  He  may
come  vp  to  it. But  these  things  are  very  marvellous,  and


•222  Fear  moi-es-  ike  soul  from  its  [duce  in  earthly  nffeciio}ts.

Job  37,  very  awful,  that  a  man,  born  on  the  earth,  and  condemned,

'- — as his deserts demand,  to separation from his lieavenly

country,  is  not  only  brought  back  to  the  state  of  his  creation,  but
is  even  exalted  to  a  more  glorious  condition  ;  that  he  who
has  lost  paradise  obtains  heaven,  and  that  so  far  from  the
guilt  of  his  debt  being  binding  on  him,  gifts  are  heaped
upon  him  more  abundantly  even  after  his  sin ;  and  that  that
despiser  of  God,  and  imitator  of  the  devil,  if  he  returns  to  fruit-
ful penitence,  ascends  even  to  the  loftiness  of  contemplating
the  inward  light.  Whose  heart  then  would  not  leap  in
admiration  of  such  graciousness  ?  Whose  sloth  would  not  be
startled  at  the  elevation  of  so  high  a  thought  ?  Whence  it  is
fitly  subjoined.

Chap,  xxxvii.  ver.  1.  At  this  my  heart  trembled,  and  was

moved  from  its  place.

xvi. 31.  Because,  while  fear  strikes  the  mind,  it  estranges  it

from  itself,  the  Latin  translations  sometimes  call  an  ecstasy

Ps.  31,  fear,  as  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  /  said  in  my  fear,  I  am  cast

out  from  the  siyht  of  Thine  eyes ; Where,  namely,  it  could

1  exces-  have  been  called  not  fear,  but  a  transport'. But  fear  is  in

that  place  used  for  transport,  because  the  mind  is  estranged

from  itself  in  fear,  as  it  is  a  transport. Whence  also,  in  this

placcj  after  considering  the  hght  of  the  eternal  country,  it  is

rightly  subjoined,  At  this  my  heart  trembled. As  if  he  said,

It  went  beyond  itself  in  transport  of  admiration,  and  because

the mind  is  inspired with  the  spirit  of  new  hope,  it  has

deserted  itself  as  it  used  to  be  in  its  old  thought.

32.  But  it  is  well  said.  And  was  moved  from  its  place.
For  the  pleasure  of  this  i)resent  life  is  the  '  place'  of  the
human  heart.  But  when  the  place  of  our  heart  is  touched
with  a  divine  aspiration,  there  comes  a  love  of  eternity.  The
mind,  therefore,  is  moved  from  its  place  by  a  consideration  of
its  eternal  home,  because  it  leaves  those  things  which  are
below,  and  fixes  itself  in  thoughts  of  things  above.  For  before
it  knew  not  what  things  were  eternal,  it  had  become  stupified
by  the  delight  of  present  things,  and,  transient  itself,  used  to
embrace  with  love  transitory  things.  But  after  it  knew  what
things  were  eternal,  after  it  reached  the  rays  of  the  heavenly
light,  by  a  hasty  glance,  being  roused  by  its  admiration  of
the  highest  objects,  it  raised itself  from  things  below; so


sus


Terror  of  GocVs  J^oice  wakens  the  soul  fo  though/. '223

that  it  now  feels  no  pleasure  except  in  the  things  of  eternity,  Book

and despising transitory objects, it seeks only  for those '-^ ■'

which  endure.  It  is  well  said  then,  At  this  my  heart
trembled,  and  uas  moved  from  its  place.  For  when  the
sluggish  heart,  which  has  been  long  given  -up  to  earthly
thoughts,  suddenly,  by  going  beyond  itself,  attaches  itself  to
the  highest  objects,  it  has  left  the  place  of  lowest  thoughts.
But  because  the  mind  slumbers  of  itself,  overcome  by  the
love  of  this  present  world,  and  sleeps,  in  its  delights,  cold
and  insensible,  unless  it  is  aroused  by  the  breath  of  Divine
grace,  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  add,  how  it  is  affected  by
its  inward  thoughts,  or  rather  how  it  is  restored  to  a  sense  of
spiritual  truths. It  follows,

Ver.  2.  //  will  hear  a  hearing  in  the  terror  of  His  voice,
and  a  sound  going  out  of  His  mouth.

.33.  It  is  the  habit  of  Holy  Scrijiture,  that,  when  it  informs  xvii.
us  that  any  thing  is  heard  with  the  hearing,  it  says  that  t^iisf^j^^.^. ,
hearing  is  heard. As  Habakkuk  says,  O  Lord,  I  have  heardUa-h.  3,

*  •  •  1

77///  hearing,  and  was  afraid. Whence  it  is  said  here  also,

It  will  hear  a  hearing  in  the  terror  of  His  voice. But  we

must  observe  that  the  voice  of  God  is  said  to  be  heard,  not

in  joy,  but  in  terror. Because,  doubtless,  while  every  sinner

thinks  of  earthly  things  alone,  and  bears  a  heart  overwhelmed

with  degrading  thoughts,  if  he  is  suddenly  touched  by  the

aspiration of  Divine  grace,  he  understands  this,  above all

things,  that  all  his  doings  are  punished  by  the  judgment  of

the  eternal  .ludge. The  hearing,  therefore,  of  the  voice  of

the  Lord,  first  takes  place  in  terror,  that  it  may  afterwards  be

changed  into  sweetness. Because  it  first  chastises  us  with

the dread of  the strict  judgment, in order  that it  may

refresh  us,  when  chastised,  with  the  consolation  of  heavenly

sweetness. For  when  the  overpowering  delight  of  temporal

objects  possesses  our  minds,  and  oppresses  the  eyes  of  our

mind  with  the  sleep  of  sloth,  if  we  are  roused  suddenly  by

the  hand  of  the  Divine  favour,  we  open  at  once  those  eyes,

which  have  been  long  closed,  to  the  light  of  truth  :  we  call

to  mind  the  sins  we  have  committed,  we  see  how  strictly  the

Judge  is  coming  against  them  ;  it  is  considered  within,  how

great  is  the  coming  of  so  mighty  a  Judge;  how  great  is  that

assembly  then  of  men  and  angels  : how  mightily  even  the


224 The  Son,  the  3Iouth  of  God;  lis  Sound,  the  Holy  Ghost.

Job  37,  burning  elements  contend  against  the  reprobate;  how  ter-

— '- — ribly  that  eternal  sentence  comes  forth  from  the  mouth  of

the strict Judge, with which it  is said  to  the  reprobate,

M^.t.ib,  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  which  is

^^' ^prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels. The  punishment  of

these  reprobates  is  presented  to  the  eyes,  and  the  thought

occurs  with  a  heavy  gloom  of  bitterness,  what  is  the  darkness

of  hell? Because  then  the  proud  heart  is  first  shaken  with

terror,  in  order  that,  when  shaken,  it  may  be  established  in

love,  it  is  now  rigluly  said,  //  n-ill  hear  a  hearing  in the

terror  of  His  voice. Where  it  is  also  well  subjoined,  And  a

sound  going  forth  from  His  mouth.

34.  The  sound  from  the  mouth  of  God,  is  the  power  of
fear,  rushing  into  us  from  heavenly  inspiration.  Because
when  God,  by  breathing  on  us,  fills  us  with  thoughts  of  the
future,  He  doubtless  alarms  us,  for  our  past  misdeeds.  But
by  the  '  mouth  of  God'  can  be  designated,  the  Only-Begotten
Son,  Who,  as  He  is  said  to  be  His  arm,  because  God  works
Is.  53  all  things  by  Him,  (of  whom  the  Prophet  says,  To  Whom  is
^'  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed'? of  whom  John  says,  All

3. '  things  were  made  by  Him  ;)  so  is  He  also  called  His  mouth.
Is.  1,20.  jTor  hence  is  that  which  the  Prophet  says.  For  the  Mouth  of
the  Lord  hath  spoken  these  things. By  Whom  He  speaks
all  things  to  us. As  if  the  Word  was  plainly  spoken  of  under
the  name  of  "  mouth;"  as  we  also  are accustomed  to  say
"  tongue"  instead  of  "  words,"  as  when we  speak  of the
Greek  or  Latin  "  tongue"  we  indicate  Latin  or  Greek  words.
We  therefore  rightly  understand  Him,  by  the  '  Mouth  of  the
Lord.' Whence  the  Bride  says  to  Him  in  the  Song  of  Songs,
^o'- Let  Him  kiss  me  with  the  kiss  of  His  Mouth. As  if  She
1. '  said; Let  Him  touch me  with  the  presence  of  the  Only-
Begotten Son my  Redeemer. But,  by  the  sound of  His
Mouth,  can  be  designated  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the  same  Lord.
AVhence  it  is  WTitten  in  another  place  also,  as  signifying  the
Acts  2,  same Spirit, Suddenly  there came  a  sound  from  heaven,
as of  a mighty wind approaching. A sound,  therefore,
proceeds from the  Mouth of  the  Lord,  when His Con-
substantial  Spirit,  coming to  us through  His  Son, breaks
through  the  deafness  of  our  insensibility. As  the  Mouth  of
the  Lord speaks  of  this  same uncircumscribed  and  incor-


TJiey  who  judge  themselves  become  judges. God  xmvnryinq.  225

poreal  sound,  and  says,  He  shall  receive  of  Mine,  and  shall  Book
shew  it  unto  you. By  the  terror  of  His  voice,  then,  can  be  ^^^^^'
understood  the power  of  fear, and by  the sound  of  His  14. '
mouth  the  sweetness  of  consolation  ; for  those,  whom  the
Holy  Spirit fills, He first alarms at  their earthly  doings,
and  afterwards  consoles  with  the  hope  of  heavenly  objects  ;
in  order  that  they  may  afterwards  rejoice the  more in  con-
fidence of  their  rewards,  the  more  they  were  before  afraid
on beholding only the punishments. Hence is it that
Paul  speaks  of  this  Spirit  of  the  Only  Begotten,  as of  this
sound  of  His  mouth. For  ye  have  not  received  the  Spirit  of -Ram.  8,
bondage  again  to  fear,  but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  the  ^^'
adoption  of  sons,  whereby  ice  cry  Abba,  Father. Hence  the
Truth  says  by  His  own  mouth.  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost:  John20,
whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  to  them;  and'^'^'^'^'
whose  soever  ye  retain,  they  are  retained. Lo !  the  teiTor  of
the  converted  is  turned  into  power;  because  while  they  punish
their  sins  by  penance,  they  ascend  up  even  to  the  exercise
of  judgment;  so  as  to  receive  this  power  from God,  which
before  they  used  themselves  to  fear  at  His  hands. For  they
in  truth  become  judges,  who  feared  greatly  the  judgment  of
heaven;  and  they  now  begin  to  remit  the  sins  of  others,  who
had  before  been  afraid  that  their  own  would  be  retained.
But  because  this  very  judgment,  which  takes  place  spiritually,
is  not  now  seen  by  the  carnal;  there  are  some  who  consider
that  God  is  not  concerned about  human  affairs,  and  think
that  they  are  carried  on  by  accidental  movements. Against
whom  it  is  rightly  subjoined,

Ver.  3.  He  himself  considereth  under  all  the  heavens,  and
His  light  is  over  the  ends  of  the  earth.

35.  As  if  it  were  plainly  said;  He  who  rules  over  the  sviii.
highest  things,  forsakes  not  even  the  most  remote.  Because
His  watchful  rule  is  so  directed  towards  the  greatest  con-
cerns, as  not  to  be  kept  from  those  which  are  little.  For
He  Who  is  every  where  present,  and  every  where  equal,  is
not  unlike  Himself,  even  in  unlike  circumstances.  He
therefore  equally  regards  all  things,  equally  disposes  all
things,  Who,  though  present  in  all  places,  is  not  locally  con-
fined, nor  varied  by  attending  to  various  concerns.  But
if  we  understand  by  the  heavens, holy  preachers,  (as  the

VOL. III.  Q


'2'26 Rarity  of  Miracles  not  against  Particular  Providence.

Job  S7,  Prophet  attests  who  says,  Tlie  heavens  declare  the  glory  of
Ps.i9  \.God;) after  the  coming  of  the Holy Spirit  is designated
by  the  sound  of  the  mouth,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  He  Him-
self consideretJi  under  all  the  heavens,  and  His  light  is  over
the  ends  of  the  earth.

36.  For  there  are  some,  who,  when  they  hear  the  won-
derful works  of  the  Apostles,  (that  they  raised  the  dead
by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  they  had  received,  cast  out  devils
from  the  possessed,  removed  infirmities  by  their  shadow,
foretold  future  events  by  prophecy,  and,  speaking  in  the
tongue  of  all  nations,  preached  the  Only  Begotten  Word  of
God ;)  because  they  do  not  see  these  powers  now  in  the
Church,  suspect  that  the  grace  of  heaven  has  been  already
withdrawn  from  the  Church,  forgetting  to  consider  that  it
Ps.9,9.  is  written.  An  a-^sister  in  needful  times,  in  tribulation.
For  Holy  Church  required  then  the  assistance  of  miracles,
when  the  tribulation  of  persecution  oppressed  her.  For
after  she  has  overcome  the  pride  of  unbelief,  she  requires
no  longer  the  signs  of  miracles,  but  the  merits  of  deeds
alone,  though  she  displays  even  them  by  many  persons,
1  Cor.  when  opportunity  demands.  For  it  is  written.  Tongues  are
14,  22.  y-^^.  ^^  ^^-^^^  ^^^^  ^^  them  that  believe,  but  to  them  that  believe

not.  Where  then  all  are  faithful,  what  cause  demands  signs
to  be  displayed?  On  which  head  perhaps  we  the  more  readily
give  satisfaction,  if  we  make  some  mention  of  the  Apostolic
dispensation.

Acts  28,  .37.  For  Paul,  the  illustrious  preacher,  coming  to  Melite,  and
knowing  the  island  to  be  full  of  unbelievers,  healed  by  his
prayers  the  father  of  Publius,  afflicted  with  dysentery  and

1  Tim.  fevers;  and  yet  advised  Timothy  when  sick,  saying,  Use  a
'  "  little  wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake,  and  thine  often  infirmi-
ties. Why  is  it,  O  Paul,  that  thou  restorest  the  sick
unbeliever  to  health  by  thy  prayers,  and  yet  healest  so  great
a  defender  of  the  Gospel  by  food,  like  a  physician  ?  except
that  outward  miracles  are  wrought,  in  order  that  the  minds
of  men  may  be  brought  to  inward  truths;  that  so  by  the
wonder  which  is  visibly  displayed,  those  invisible  truths,
which  are  more  wonderful,  may  be  believed  ?  For  the  father
of  Publius  required  to  be  healed  by  a  sign  of  power,  in
order  that he might revive in mind, while returning to


Timothy  not  cured. Mercy  at  the  eiul  of  sinners. 227

health  by  a  miracle.  But  no  miracle  needed  to  be  mani-  Book
fested  outwardly  to  Timothy,  because  he  was  already  full  of^"^^^^'
life  within.  What  wonder  is  it  then,  that  miracles  are  not
frequently  displayed,  when  the  faith  has  been  spread  abroad,
when  even  the  Apostles  themselves  performed  them  not  in
the  case  of  some  who  already  believed  ?  The  heavens,  then,
having  been  raised  up,  the  Lord  considers  inferior  objects ;
because,  when  the  greatest  preachers  have  been  taken  away,
He  constantly  regards  even  the  lowliness  of  our  infirmity.
And  His  light  beholds,  as  it  were,  the  ends  of  the  earth,
under  the  heavens;  because,  after  the  sublime  doings  of
those  who  have  gone  before,  He  embraces  the  ways  and
doings  even  of  sinners  by  the  illumination  of  His  grace.
And  though  He  does  not  now  frequently  manifest  miraculous
signs,  by  the  life  of  believers.  He  yet  departs  not  from
these  same  believers  by  the  virtue  of  works.  But  His  light
over  the  ends  of  the  earth  can  also  be  thus  understood;  that
whilst  the  preaching  of  heavenly  Grace  gathers  the  nations  to
the  faith,  it  has  embraced  within  itself  the  boundaries  of  the
world.

38.  Or,  certainly,  the  ends  of  the  earth  are  the  ends  of
sinful  men. And  it  is  often  the  case,  that  many  forsake  God,
and  waste  the  seasons  of  their  life  in  carnal  desires. But
yet,  when  looked  down  upon  by  Divine  Grace,  they  turn  to
God  at  their  latter  end,  they  learn  what are the  eternal
judgments,  and punish with  tears  all  the  evil  deeds  they
remember  to  have  committed  ; and  prove  by  their  upright
conduct that  they  are sincerely pi'osecuting  these. And
when righteousness succeeds, their former sin is surely
entirely  forgiven. For  hence  Hannah  says  by  the  spirit  of
prophecy. The Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the earth ;  i  ^^m.
because doubtless  God does  not  judge  the  former  life of  '
sinners,  when,  by  a  look  of  affection  from  above,  He  en-
lightens their  latter  end. Hence  Moses  says,  The  Jirstling  Ex.  13,
of  an  ass  thou  shall  exchange  for  a  sheep. For,  by  an  ass
is  designated  uncleanness,  but  by  a  sheep,  innocence. To
exchange then  the firstling  of  an  ass for a sheep,,  is to
convert  the  beginnings  of  an  impure  life  into  the  simplicity
of  innocence  ;  in  order  that  a  sinner,  after  having  committed
those  deeds  which the  Lord  rejects  as  unclean^  may  now

q2'


2Q8 Man,  roused  to  sense  of  sin,  groans  in  penitence.

Job  37,  display  such  conduct,  as  He  can  offer  to  God  as  a  sacrifice.

'- —  Because  then a sinner  is  converted  after  his  sins, and  is

brought  back  at  last  from  the  darkness  of  his  misdeeds,  at
the  end  of  his  life,  it  is  now  rightly  said,  And  His  light  is
over  the  ends  of  the  earth.  But  that  very  grace,  which  fills
the  mind  after  sins,  affects  it  with  great  grief.  For  it  recals
evil  deeds  to  the  memory,  and  shews  a  man  how  justly  he
is  to  be  condemned.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  he
bewails  with  daily  floods  of  tears  every  sin  which  he  remem-
bers to  have  committed,  and  the  more  he  is  now  able  to
discern  what  is  righteous,  the  more  ardently  does  he  desire
to  punish  his  own  wicked  self  with  groans.  Whence  it  is
fitly  subjoined,  ^,

Ver.  4.  A/ter  Him  a  sound  will  roar.
xix.  39.  For  the  Lord  doubtless  turns  into  sorrow  the  life  of
him  whom  He  has  filled  with  His  illumination  ;  and  the
more  He  suggests  to  the  enlightened  mind  eternal  punish-
ments, the  more  cruelly  does  He  weary  it  with  sorrow
for  its  past  wickedness ;  and  a  man  grieves  at  what  he  was,
because  he  now  begins  to  discern  the  good  which  he  was
not.  He  hates  himself,  as  he  remembers  himself  to  have
been.  He  loves  himself  as  he  discerns  he  ought  to  have
been;  and  now  loves  only  the  bitterness  of  penitence;
because  he  carefully  considers  in  what  gi'eat  pleasures  be
has  sinned  through  self-indulgence.  It  is  well  said  then,
After  Him  a  sound  tvill  roar.  Because  when  God  enters
the  mind,  it  is  doubtless  plain,  that  the  sorrow  of  repentance
immediately  follows,  in  order  that  that  soul  may  now  delight
in  wholesome  sorrow,  which  used  to  rejoice  in  its  iniquity
with  a  lamentable  mirth.  But  the  more  abundantly  a  sin  is
lamented,  the  higher  is  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  attained.
Because  the  conscience,  before  polluted,  is  renewed  by  a
baptism  of  tears,  to  behold  the  light  within.  Whence  after
the  roaring  of  repentance,  it  is  fitly  subjoined.
He  will  thunder  with  the  voice  of  His  greatness.
XX.  40.  For  God  thunders  with  the  voice  of  His  greatness,
when,  to  us  who  have  been  now  well  prepared  by  sorrow,  He
makes  known,  how  great  He  is  in  His  doings  above.  For
thunder  proceeds,  as  it  were,  from  heaven,  when  the  look
of  grace  strikes  us  slumbering  in  carelessness  and  neglect.


Then  God  reveals  Himself. Ways  of  His  Voice  unknoion.  2*2y

with  sudden  fear:  and  when  lying  on  the  crvound  we  hear  a  Book

• • . XX\'1I
sound  from  above  :  for  thinking  of  things  of  earth,  we  are  — '

suddenly  alarmed  at  the  sentence  of  terror  from  above  ;  and

our  mind,  which  used  to  slumber  with  evil  security  in  things

below,  is  now  properly  alarmed  and  anxious  for  things  above.

But  we  know not, in what way the terror of  this  secret

visitation  enters  into  us  :  nor  is  it  discerned  by  the  eye  of

the very mind, whose purpose is changed  for  the better.

Whence  it  is  fitly  subjoined,

And  He  will  not  be  enquired  into,  when  His  Voice  hath
been  heard.

41.  The  voice  of  the  Lord  is  heard,  when  the  breathing  of  xxi.
His  grace  is  conceived  within  the  mind  ;  when  the  insensi-
bility of  our  inward  deafness  is  broken  through,  and  the
heart,  excited  to  zeal  for  the  noblest  love,  is  pierced  by  the
voice  of  inward  power.  But  even  the  mind,  which  has  been
enlightened  by  the  voice  of  the  supervenient  Spirit,  which
insinuates  Iiself  into  the  ears  of  the  heart,  does  not  trace  it
out.  For  it  is  unable  to  consider  by  what  openings  this
invisible  power  flows  into  it,  in  what  ways  it  comes  to,  or
recedes  from,  it.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  John,  The  ivind John  3,
bloiveth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  voice  thereof,
hut  knowest  not  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  goeth.  For
to  hear  the  voice  of  the  Spirit,  is  to  rise  up  to  the  love  of  the
invisible  Creator,  by  the  power  of  inward  compunction.  But
no  man  knows  whence  it  cometh;  because  we  are  not  told
on  what  occasions  it  pours  itself  forth  on  us  by  the  mouths
of  preachers.  And  no  man  knows  whither  it  goeth  ;  because
when  many  hear  one  and  the  same  preaching,  it  doubtless
cannot  be  understood,  whom  It  forsakes  and  casts  off,  or  into
whose  heart  It  enters  and  takes  its  rest.  For  but  one  thing
is  taking  place  without,  but  the  hearts  of  those  who  behold
are  not  penetrated  by  it  in  one  way :  because  He  who
invisibly  modifies  visible  things,  plants  incomprehensibly
the  seeds  of  events  in  the  hearts  of  men.  Hence  is  it  that
some  believed,  when  Lazarus  was  raised  from  the  dead:  John  12,
while  yet  the  greater  number  of  the  Jews  were  roused  to  zeal  *  '
in  persecution  by  this  very  resurrection.  That  one  and  the
same  miracle,  then,  which  conferred  on  some  the  light  of
Faith,  deprived  others  of  the  light  of  the  mind,  by  the  dark-


230  Marvellous  working  of  God's  Voice  hi  man.

Job37,  uess  of  envy. Hence  is  it  that  each  of  the  thieves  beheld

■^  ■'  ^  that  same  death  of  our  Redeemer,  which  was  like  his  own  ;
LuKe23,  ...  .  .  T

39. 40.  but  the  one  feared  not  in  his  pride  to  assail  Him  with  con-
tumely, Whom  the  other  honoured  by  fearing  Him.  In  the
same  circumstance  the  thoughts  of  each  was  not  the  same  ;
because  the  inward  Arbiter,  by  invisibly  modifying,  made  it
to  differ.  But  as  these  secret  modes  of  breathing  on  us
cannot  be  comprehended  by  our  thoughts,  the  traces  of  the
Divine  voice  are  doubtless  unknown  to  us.  Whence  it
is  still  further  subjoined,

Ver.  5.  God  will  thunder  marvellously  with  His  voice.
xxii.  42.  God  thunders  marvellously  with  His  voice,  because
He  penetrates  our  hearts  incomprehensibly  with  His  secret
might.  For  while  with  its  secret  motions  it  overpowers  us  with
fear,  and  fashions  us  in  love,  it  proclaims  in  some  silent  manner
how  eagerly  He  is  to  be  followed,  and  a  violent  impulse  arises
in  the  mind,  though  nothing  sounds  in  the  voice.  And  it  sounds
the  more  loudly  within  us,  the  more  completely  it  deadens
the  ear  of  our  heart  to  every  outward  sound.  Whence  also
the  soul,  as  soon  as  it  is  brought  back  to  itself  by  this  inward
call,  wonders  at  what  it  hears,  because  it  feels  the  force  of
unknown  compunction.  And  this  its  admiration  is  well  signi-
fied in  Moses  by  the  manna  coming  from  above.  For  the
sweet  food  which  is  received  from  above  is  called  '  manhu.'

Ex.  16,  -pox  manhu  means,  What  is  this  ? And  we  sav, '  what  is  this,'
15.  .  '  -^ '  '

when  we  ignorantly  wonder  at  that  which  we  behold.  The
soul  then  perceives  the  manna  from  above,  when,  roused  by
the  voice  of  compunction,  it  is  surprised  at  this  unusual  kind
of  inward  refreshment;  so  that  filled  with  Divine  sweetness,
it  rightly  responds.  What  is  this?  For  while  it  is  kept  from
the  thought  of  lower  objects,  it  feels  unusual  wonder  at  what
it  beholds  from  above.  But  because  the  habit  of  our  former
life  is  immediately  changed,  when  the  deafness  of  our  slumber
is  burst  through,  by  this  voice;  so  that  the  soul,  inspired  by
the  Spirit  fi-om  above,  desires  as  highest  the  things  which  it
had  despised,  and  contemns  as  lowest  what  it  used  to  desire,
it  is  rightly  subjoined,

Who  doetJi  great  tJiitigs  and  inscrutable.
xxiii. 43.  For  that  a  man  who  was  given  up  to  earthly  objects,
and  overpowered  by  sinful  desires,  becomes  suddenly  ardent


He  works  inscrutably. Saints,  condescending,  like  snow. 231

for new  pursuits,  and cold to his  former  liabits,  that  he nooK
renounces outward cares, and is eager for inward con-  ^^^^^'
templation  ;  who  can  be  sufficient  to  consider  this  power  of
the voice from  above  ? who  can comprehend  it on con-
sideration ? Great  are  the  things  which  God  effects  by  His
voice ;  but  they  would  be  less  great,  if  they  could  have  been
searched  out. He doeth, therefore,  great tilings  and in-
scrutable:  because  He  exhibits  outwardly  the  result  of  His
work,  but  the  nature  of  the  work  is  itself  concealed  within.
He  sounds  abroad  with  His  voice,  even  by  Apostles,  but  He
illumines  the  hearts  of  the  hearers  within,  by  Himself: as
Paul  bears  witness,  who  says,  /  have  planted,  Apollos  watered,  i  Cor.
biit  God  gave  the  increase. For  neither  is  he  that  planteth^'  ^'
any  thing,  neither  lie  that  watereth,  but  God  that  giveth  the
increase. But  though  they  do  not  themselves  confer  on  our
minds  the  hearing  of  the  Divine  voice,  they  are  yet. sent  to
condescend  lo  us by  words  from without. Whence  it  is
fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  6.  Who  ordereth  the  snow  to  descend  on  the  earth,
and  the  rains  of  the  ivinter,  and  the  showers  of  His
strength.

44.  Because  the  Psalmist  says.  Thou  shall  wash  me,  and  xxiv.
/  shall  be  whiter  than  snow ; what  do  we  understand  by  7  '  ^^^
snow  in  this  place,  but  the  hearts  of  the  Saints  made  white
by  the  light  of  righteousness  ? But  waters  are  taken  up,  and
congealed  above,  in  order  to  become  snow. But  when  this
snow  descends  to  the  earth,  it  is  changed  again  into  liquid
waters. Waters  therefore  are  the  minds  of  preachers;  which
are  confirmed  in  a  higher  sense  of  things,  when  they  raise
themselves to contemplate heavenly objects. And when
they  are  hurried  along  in  the  consideration  of  lofty  things,
they  receive  the  strength  of  confirmation. But  because  they
are still  retained on  earth by  love  of  the brethren,  they
bring  themselves  down  from  their  lofty  understanding,  and
preaching humbly  to  the  weak,  they  melt  like  snow,  and
water  their  thirsty  hearts. Snow  then  descends  lo  the  earth,
when  the  lofty  hearts  of  the  Saints,  which  already  feast  on
solid  contemplation,  condescend  to  humble  words  of  preach-
ing through  love  of  the  brethren. For  as  snow  covers  the
ground,  when  it  lies  on  it,  but  waters  it,  when  it  melts;  so


232 Saints,  taken  up  to  God,  come  down  for  man's  good.

Job  37,  the  virtue  of  the  Saints  protects  the  life  of  sinners  by  its

— - — strength  with  God,  and  by  its  condescension  melts,  as  it
were,  and  waters  the  thirsty  earth,  to  bear  fruits.  And
because  water  is  first  brought  up  from  below,  that  it  may
afterwards  be  returned  in  showers  from  above  ;  so  do  holy
men,  when  placed  on  the  lofty  eminence  of  their  virtues,
consider  from  whence  they  are  elevated,  for  fear  of  despising
the  meanness  of  others'  infirmity.  Waters,  then,  return,  as
it  were,  to  the  earth  from  which  they  have  been  raised,  when
righteous  men,  condescending  to  sinners,  cease  not  to  re-
member what  once  they  were.  Paul  had  certainly  been
hitherto  but  water  on  the  earth,  when  he  knew  the  Law
carnally.  But  when  raised  up  to  heavenly  knowledge,  he
was  converted  into  snow;  because  he  changed  his  former
feeble  knowledge  into  the  solidity  of  true  wisdom  ;  and  yet,
condescending  to  his  brethren,  he  returned  as  snow  to  the
earth. For  even  after  his  heights  of  virtue,  he  acknowledges

\  ^'5'-  how  unworthy  he  was,  saying,  Who  was  be/ore  a  blasphemer
and  a  persecutor,  ^'C.  Behold  how  considerately  he  calls  to
mind  his  own  weakness,  so  as  to  bear  with  equanimity  the
weaknesses  of  others.  For  Paul  returned,  as  water,  after
being  in  heaven,  to  the  earth  from  which  it  had  been  taken,
when,  after  the  great  secrets  of  his  contemplation,  he  called
to  mind  that  he  was  a  sinner,  in  order  that  he  might  benefit
sinners  by  his  humility.  Let  us  see  therefore  how  this  water,
which  is  to  be  turned  into  solid  snow,  is  drawn  up  to  its

2  Cor, highest  level. He  says,  Whetlier  ice  he  beside  ourselves,  it
' ■ is  to  God. Let  us  see  how  the  snow  returns  to  the  ground,

ibid.  to  water  it,  while  melting.  He  says.  Or  whether  tee  he  sober,
it  is  for  your  cause.  Let  us  see  with  what  hand  it  is  guided,
and  can  be  raised  up,  when  low,  and  be  brought  back  again

ibid.  14.  vvhen  raised  up.  He  says.  For  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth
us.  Because  therefore  the  love  of  Christ,  which  raises  the
minds  of  Saints  to  heavenly  things,  shapes  them  by  its  con-
siderate control  even  to  humble  condescension,  for  the  love
of  the  brethren,  it  is  rightly  said.  Who  ordereth  the  snow  to
descend  on  the  earth.  Where  it  is  also  fitly  subjoined.  And
the  rains  of  the  uinter,  and  the  shower  of  His  strength.

45.  For this present life is indeed winter : in which
though  hope  even  noAv  raises  us  up  to  things  above,  yet  the


Rain  of  preachiny  ends  tvith  winter  of  this  life. 233

cold  torpor  of  our  mortality  still  binds  us. Because  it  is  Book
written,  T/ie  corruptible  body  u-eiyhelh  down  the  soul,  and ^~^ — .'

W  i  s  d  9

tlie  earthly  habitation  presseth  dotcn  the  sense  that  museth  15, '  '
on  many  thinys. But  this  winter  lias  rains,  which  are  doubt-
less the  preachings  of  rulers. Of  which  rains  it  is  in  truth
said  by  Moses,  Let  mu  speech,  he  expected  as  the  rain,  and'^^^^'

■  32 2

niy  ivords  descend  as  the  dew.  These  rains  doubtless  are  '
suited  to  the  winter,  and  will  cease  in  the  summer;  because
now  that  the  heavenly  life  is  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  the  carnal,
it  is  necessary  for  dew  to  be  poured  on  us  by  the  preachings
of  holy  men.  But  when  the  heat  of  eternal  judgment
has  glowed,  no  one  will  then  find  the  words  of  preachers
necessary.  Because  every  one  is  brought  back  to  his  own
conscience,  on  the  coming  of  the  Judge,  so  as  to  understand
what  is  holy,  when  he  cannot  any  longer  perform  it,  and  to
learn  from  the  punishment  of  his  perverseness  the  right
which  he  ought  to  have  pursued.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by
the  Prophet,  Gather  them  together  as  a  flock  for  a  sacrifice, ^^r.  12,
and  sanctify  them  in  the  day  of  slaughter.  For  the  re-  "
probate  are  sanctified  in  the  day  of  slaughter  :  for  they  then
perceive  the  holiness,  which  they  ought  to  have  pursued,
when  they  cannot  now  avoid  the  punishments  which  their
depravity  deserves.  But  since  holy  preaching  will  cease
with  this  present  life,  that  is  the  rains  with  the  winter ;  to
the  soul  which  is  departing,  and  hastening  to  the  summer
regions  of  eternal  happiness,  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  voice
of  the  Bridegroom  persuading  it ; Arise,  haste,  my  beloved,  ^°1-

J. .  J  ,■ t  •  r 1  ,  Song  2,

my  J  air  one,  and  come  :  Jor  the  icintcr  hath  past,  the  ram  10. 11.
hath  passed  and  is  gone.  For  as  the  winter  passes  away,  the
rain  departs:  because  when  the  present  life  is  over,  in  which
the  torpor  of  the  corruptible  flesh  had  surrounded  us  with  a
mist  of  ignorance,  all  the  ministry  of  f)reaching  ceases.  For
we  shall  then  behold  that  more  clearly  with  our  own  eyes,
which  we  nov,-  hear  more  obscurely  by  the  voices  of  the
Saints.  The  Lord  therefore  orders  the  snow,  and  the  rains  of
the  winter,  to  descend  on  the  earth,  while  He  humbles  the
hearts  of  the  Saints  to  the  ministry  of  preaching,  for  the
correction  of  sinners,  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  S])irit.
Where  it  is  rightly  added,  And  the  shower  of  His  strength.
4k6.  For  the  shower  of  the  strength  of  God,  is  the  preaching


234 Strength  preached i  Christ's  Godhead; Weakness,  Manhood.

Job  37,  His  Godhead ;  for  the  shower  of  His  weakness  is  the  preach-

1  Cor ^"^  ^^^  Manhood,  of  which  it  is  said  by  Paul,  The  weakness

1,25. of  God  is  stronger  than  men. And  again,  Though  He  was

13  4.  crucified  through  weakness,  yet  He  liveth  by  the  jjower  of
God.  But  holy  men  so  preach  the  weakness  of  His  Man-
hood, as  to  pour  also  into  the  hearts  of  their  hearers  the
strength  of  His  Godhead. Let  us  hear,  through  the  thunder

John  1,  of  the  cloud,  the  shower  of  His  strength  ;  In  the  beginning
was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word

ibid.  14.  was  God.  Let  us  hear  also  the  shower  of  His  weakness ;  The
Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us. Let  us  hear  the

ibid.  3.  shower  of  His  strength  ;  All  things  were  made  by  Him,  and
without  Him  loas  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made.
What  was made in Him was life. Let us hear also

ibid.  11. the  shower  of  His  weakness;  He  came  unto  His  own,
and  His  own  received  Him  not.  He  commands  there-
fore the  shower  of  His  strength  to  descend  on  the  earth,
because  He  so  pi*eaches  to  us  the  weaknesses  of  His  Man-
hood by  the  voices  of  His  Saints,  as  to  make  known  to  us
also  the  wonders  and  the  strength  of  His  Godhead.  But
when  we  hear  the  power  of  our  Maker,  we  are  immediately
brought  back  to  our  own  hearts  by  the  compulsion  of  fear,
and,  considering  that  so  great  a  Judge  is  over  us,  we  examine

'  Mss. what  we  have  done  (worthily,  and  what) '  unworthily. Whence

^^^^' it  is  well  subjoined,

Ver.  7.  Who  sealeth  the  hand  of  all  men,  that  every  one
may  know  his  works.
XXV.  47.  For  men  scorn  to  think  of  the  sins  they  commit.  But
when  they  hear  the  power  of  heavenly  severity,  they  discern
this  burden  of  misdeeds  which  weighs  them  down.  For
being  roused  by  the  words  of  preaching,  they  keep  on  the
watch,  in  order  to  consider  to  what  punishments  the  merit
of  their  former  doings  is  leading  them.  When,  then,  the
shower  of  His  strength  descends  on  the  earth,  a  seal  is  made
in  the  hand  of  each  one,  for  him  to  know  his  works;  because
when  the  Virtue  of  His  Incomprehensible  Majesty  is  acknow-
ledged, his  own  life  is  weighed  more  carefully  by  each  person.
48.  But  this  can  also  be  understood  in  another  sense.
For  the  Almighty  Creator  has  made  man  a  rational  creature,
distinguished  from  all  which  are  void  of  sense  and  reason ;


God  compels  men  to  knoio  theh  ow7i  loorks.  235

in  order  that  he  should  not  be  ignorant  of  what  he  has  done. Rook

For  he  is  compelled  by  the  law  of  nature  to  know  whether  — -

what  he  is  doing  is  right  or  wrong.  For  why  is  he  brought
to  judgment  for  his  conduct,  if  he  could  be  ignorant  of  what
he  has  done  .?  And  therefore  even  they,  who  scorn  to  be
instructed  by  the  precepts  of  the  Lord,  know  whether  the
things  they  are  doing  are  good  or  evil.  For  if  they  do  not
know  they  are  doing  good,  why  do  they  ostentatiously  boast
of  some  of  their  doings  ?  Again,  if  they  know  not  that  they
are  doing  wrong,  why  do  they  shrink  from  the  eyes  of  others
in  these  very  doings  ?  For  they  are  witnesses  to  themselves,
thai  they  know  what  they  are  doing  is  wrong,  because
they  are  ashamed  of  being  seen  by  others.  For  if  they  did
not  really  believe  it  to  be  wrong,  they  would  not  be  afraid  of
its  being  seen  by  others.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  a
certain  wise  man  ;  When  wickedness  is  fearful,  it  heareth  Wisd.
ieslimoHij  to  its  own  condemnation.  For  when  fear  assails  '  '
and  convicts  the  conscience  of  what  it  has  done,  it  furnishes
testimony  against  itself,  that  its  conduct  is  deserving  of
condemnation.  The  contrary  to  which  is  said  by  John,  j/i  Johns,
our  heart  condemn  us  not,  we  have  confidence  toward
God.  Let  the  wicked  fly  then  from  the  eyes  of  men ;  they
certainly  cannot  fly  from  themselves.  For  that  they  know
the  sin  which  they  commit,  they  have  their  conscience  as  a*
A\-itness,  they  have  their  reason  as  a  judge.  Li  the  sin
therefore  which  they  commit,  they  first  find  the  judgment
of  their  reason  against  them,  and  they  are  afterwards  brought
to  the  strictness  of  the  eternal  judgment.  And  this  is  perhaps
that  vvhich  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Deep  calleth  unto  deep  Ps.42,7.
with  the  voice  of  Thy  ivater-spouts.  Because,  when  by  a
wondrous  course  of  secret  dispensation,  the  evil  which  is
committed  is  not  suffered  to  be  unknown,  a  sinner  both
condemns  himself  at  once  in  his  conscience  by  his  own
sentence,  and  after  his  own  condemnation  hastens  to  the
sentence  of  the  eternal  Judge.  For  deep  then  to  call  on
deep,  is  to  pass  from  one  judgment  to  another.  Let  holy
preachers  proceed  then  to  reprove  the  conduct  of  sinners,
but  let  wicked  hearers  despise  the  words  of  the  righteous.
Let  them  defend  their  wickedness  as  much  as  they  please,
and  multiply  their  shameless  deeds  by  a  more  shameless


236  Antichrist^  and  sinners,  dens  of  the  evil  beast.

Job  sr,  defence.  They  are  certainly  witnesses  to  themselves  in
— - — their  conscience  that  they  arc  without  excuse.  For  by  the
very  fact  that  God  has  created  man  a  rational  being,  He  puts
a  seal  in  the  hand  of  all  men,  that  every  one  may  know  his
own  works.  Bait  because  Eliu  has  stated  his  opinion  of  the
wickedness  of  men  one  by  one,  he  turns  at  once  the  eyes  of  his
mind  to  the  author  of  wickedness  himself,  by  whose  means
each  separate  wickedness  takes  its  rise ;  that,  because  he  had
assailed  in  Ibis  one  verse  the  members  of  a  wicked  head,  he
might  also  briefly  describe  the  head  himself  of  these  mem-
bers. Or  certainly,  because  he  had  mentioned  above  the
virtues  of  the  clouds  of  God,  he  now  proceeds  to  set  forth
also  the  assaults  of  the  adversary  agamst  the  life  of  the
righteous. For  it  follows,

Ver.  8. The  beast  will  enter  his  covert,  and  icill  abide  in
his  den.
xxvi. 49. Who  else  is  understood  by  the  name  of  the  beast,
except  our  ancient  enemy,  who  cruelly  aimed  at  the  deception
of  the  first  man,  and mangled  by  his  wicked advice the
integrity  of  his  life  ? against  whom  it  is  promised by  the
words of  the Prophet,  concerning the  restoration of  the
Is. 35,9.  Church  of  the  Elect  to  its  ancient  condition.  And  no  evil
beast  shall  pass  through  it. But  when  after  the  coming  of
the  Redeemer,  after  the  voices  of  preachers,  after  the  thunder,
as  it  were,  of  the  clouds,  this  beast  has  seized  that  accursed
person,  Antichrist,  what  else  does  he  do  but  enter  his  covert,
in  order  to  abide  in  his  own  den .'' For  that  vessel  of  the
devil  is  the  den  and  covert  of  the  beast,  so  that,  when  lying
in  ambush  against  men  who  are  journeying  through  this  life,
he  both  escapes  their  notice  by  his  wonders,  and  kills  them
by  his  malice,  in  his  person. But  yet  he  possesses  even  now
the  hearts of all reprobates,  before he manifests himself
openly; and occupies  them  by  his  secret  wickedness,  as
though  they  were  his  own  den;  and  conceals  himself  in  their
gloomy  minds,  in  order  to  effect  all  the  hurt  he  desires  against
the  good. Were  not  the  hearts  of  the  persecuting  Jews,  the
den  of  this  beast ;  in  whose  designs  he  long  lurked  secretly,
but  suddenly  burst  forth  with  the  voices  of  those  who  cried,
Johni9,  Crucify,  Crucify? And  because  he  could  not  reach  so  far  in
his  temptation,  as  to  wound  the  mind  of  our  Redeemer,  he


He  dwells  in  fhem,  but  cannot  in  the  righteous.  237

was  eager  for  His  death  in  the  flesh. This  beast  doubtless  Book

possessed  the  hearts  of  many  of  the  Elect,  but  the  Lamb  has,  — '-

by  His  death,  expelled  liiin from  them. Whence  also  He

says  in  tlie  Gospel,  Noio  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  6e  John  12,

cast  out. For  while  He  has,  by  a  wonderful  and  righteous

judgment,  enlightened  and  accepted  the  confessions  of  the

humble.  He  has  forsaken  and  closed  the  eyes  of  the  proud.

Whence  it  is  said  to  Him  by  the  Psalmist,  Tlioa  hast  op-  Ps.  104,

.  20. 21.

pointed  darkness,  and  it  became  nif/ht,  in  it  all  the  beasts  of

the  ivoods  u- ill  pass  through:  the  young  of  lions  roaring  to  seize

their  preg,  and  to  seek  their  food  from  God. For  God  in ^

truth appoints darkness,  when,  in inflicting  judgment in

requital for  sins, He withdraws  the  light  of  His  wisdom. •

And  it  is  made  night,  because  the  mind  of  wicked  men  is

blinded  with  the  errors  of  their  own  ignorance. In  which

all the beasts of  the field pass through,  when malignant

spirits,  lurking  under  the  gloom  of  deceit,  pass  through  into

the  hearts  of  the  reprobates,  by  fulfilling  their  evil  purposes.

In  which  also  the  young  of  lions  roar,  because  spirits  rise  up

with importunate temptations, as the ministers of most

wicked,  but  yet  preeminent,  powers. But  yet  they  seek

their  food  fi'oin  God;  because  doubtless  they  are  unable  to

catch  souls,  unless  by  a  just  judgment  they  are  permitted  by

God  to  prevail. Where  it  is  also  fitly  subjoined.  The  sun  hath  ibid.  22.

arisen,  and  they  arc  gathered  together,  and  have  laid  fhem

down  in  their  dens. Because,  when  expelled  from  the  minds

of  the  faithfTil,  by  the  Light  of  the  Truth  manifested  in  the

flesh,  they  returned,  as  it  were,  to their  dens,  when  they

held  the  hearts  of  unbelievers only. That then  which  is

til  ere  called  the  den  of  lions,  is  here  termed  the  den  of  the

beast.

50.  But  T think  it  ought  to  be  specially  observed,  that

this  beast  is  said,  not  only  to  enter  his  den,  but  to  abide

therein. For  he  sometimes  enters  even  the  minds  of  the

good,  he  suggests  unlawful  thoughts,  he  wearies  them  with

temj)talions,  he  endeavours  to  turn  aside  the  uprightness  of

the  spirit  to  the  pleasure  of  the  flesh  ; he  also  strives to

carry  out  delight  as  far  as  to  consent :  but  yet  he  is  kept

from  prevailing  by  the  op])osition  of  aid  from  on  high. He

can  enter  therefore  into  the  minds  of  the good,  but  cannot


238 The  Elect  drive  evil  thoughts  from  the  heart's  door.

Job  37,  abide therein,  because the heart  of  the righteous  is  not

'■ — the den of  this beast. For  he doubtless abides  in  and

occupies  the  minds  of  those,  whom  he  possesses  as  his  own
den  :  because  he  first  leads  on  their  thoughts  to  wicked
desires,  and  afterwards  leads  their  wicked  desires  even  to
the  commission  of  most  sinful  deeds.  For  the  reprobate  do
not  endeavour  to  repel,  with  the  upright  hand  of  judgment,
the  suggestions  of  him,  to  whose  wishes  they  desire  to  yield,
by  submissive  delight.  And  when  any  evil  thought  arises  in
their  hearts,  it  is  cherished  at  once  by  the  eagerness  of
,  delight ;  and  when  no  resistance  is  made  to  him,  he  is
strengthened  immediately  by  consent,  and  consent  is  in-
stantly carried  into  outward  act,  but  outward  act  is  also
made  worse  by  habit.  This  beast  then  is  well  said  to  abide
in  his  cave;  which  keeps  hold  of  the  thoughts  of  the  repro-
bate, till  it  also  pierces  their  life  with  the  sting  of  evil  deeds.
Jer.  4,  Whence  the  Lord  well  says  to  Judoea  by  the  Prophet,  Hoiv
long  shall  hiirtfnl  thoughts  abide  in  thee?  For  He  does
not  blame  for  their  coming,  but  for  their  remaining  there.  And
unlawful  thoughts  come  even  unto  good  hearts,  but  they  are
forbidden  to  remain;  because  the  nghteous,  in  order  to  keep
the  house  of  conscience  from  being  taken,  drive  away  the
enemy  from  the  very  threshold  of  the  heai't.  And  if  he  has
I  Oxf.  ever  secretly  crept  ^  by  sudden  suggestions  in  front  of  the
'  sub-  entrance,  yet  he  does  not  reach  to  the  gate  of  consent,
repit.'  It  was  to  this  beast  doubtless  that  Peter,  overcome  by  the
Luke22,  impulse  of  sudden  fear,  opened  the  gate  of  his  heart,  by
'~  '  denial,  but  he  withstood  it  by  a  speedy  discovery,  he  closed
it  by  his  tears.  But  because  the  ancient  enemy  has  not
only  entered  and  occupied  the  hearts  of  persecutors,  but  has
also  occupied  and  possessed  them,  let  it  be  rightly  said,
The  beast  will  enter  his  covert,  and  will  abide  in  his  den.
For  we  learn  how  much  he  dwelt  in  the  minds  of  the  Jews,
when  we  hear  their  plans,  on  the  evidence  of  the  Gospel
narrative.  For  therein  it  is  described,  with  what  eager
cruelty  they  raged  for  His  death,  when  they  beheld  our
Lord  quickening  the  dead ;  how  many  evil  designs  they
ardently  wished  to  carry  out  against  Him,  but  yet  feared  the
people;  how  many  opportunities  they  sought  of  kilhng  Him,
and  could  not  find  them ;  how  many  hands  of  aliens  they


Jews Jif/ured  in  '•the  Soiith^  Pilate  in  ^ Arcturus.' 239

used  to  cany  out  their  cruel  wishes ;  because  they  gave  Him  Book

up  to  the  Gentiles  to  be  killed,  Whom  they  themselves  were  ~ -'

not  able  legally  to  put  to  death  ;  in  order  that  the  Roman
governor  might  perform  that  by  his  mere  power,  which  they
eagerly  insisted  ought  to  be  done,  merely  from  their  malice.
Whence  it  is  also  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  9.  A  tempest  will  come  forth  from  the  inner  parts,
and  cold  from  Arctitrus.

51.  When  Holy  Scripture mentions the  inner  parts,  inxxvii.
opposition  to  Arcturus,  it  designates  the  quarter  of  the  South,
opposite  to  the  parts  of  the  North. Wlience  it  is  written  in

this  same  book;  IVlio  makelh  Arcturus,  and  the  Orions,Joh9,9.
atid  the  inner  parts  of  the  South.  Because  then  the  sun
pervades  with  greater  warmth  the  inner  parts  of  the  South,
but  does  not  pursue  its  course  at  all  in  the  North',  by  the 'in  Arc-
word  'inner  parjts'  in  this  place  is  expressed  the  Jewish  people,  "^°'
but  by  the  term  '  Arcturus'  the  Gentile  people.  For  they
who  had  known  the  One  and  Invisible  God,  and  obeyed  His
Law,  at  least  carnally,  were  kept,  as  it  were,  in  the  warmth
of  faith,  under  the  glow  of  the  midday  sun.  But  because
the  Gentiles  had  not  attained  to  any  knowledge  of  heavenly
wisdom,  they  were  remaining,  as  it  were,  in  the  cold,  without
the  sun,  under  the  North.  But  because  a  tempest  imj)els,
but  cold  oppresses  with  torpor ;  it  is  now  rightly  said,  A
tempest  will  come  forth  from  the  inner  parts,  and  cold  from
Arcturus.  As  if  it  were  plainly  said;  From  the  Jews  there
arises  persecuting  malice,  and  from  the  (Jentiles  oppressing
power.  For  the  precepts  of  the  Law  had  not  forbidden  the
performance  of  miracles,  and  yet  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  the
Redeemer  of  the  human  race  on  account  of  these  very
miracles.  And  hence  when  unable  to  fulfil  what  they  had
begun,  they  flocked  to  the  hall  of  Pilate,  in  order  that  he,
whom  no  law  could  restrain  when  murdering  unjustly,  might
himself  put  Him  to  death.  A  tempest  therefore  came  forth
from  the  inner  parts,  and  cold  from  Arcturus,  whilst  the
Gentile  judge  perpetrated  with  the  authority  of  Rome,  that
which  the  Jews  requested  through  envy.  Whence  it  is  well
subjoined  still  further  against  this  same  envy,
Ver.  10. When  God  bloiceth,  the  ice  congeals.

52.  Because,  as  the  Holy  Spirit  breathed  on  the  hearts  of  xxviii.


240  Ice  of  Persecution  thawed  hy  the  Spirit  of  God.

Job  37,  the  faithful,  and  conferred  greater  miracles  of  power,  be-
^^'  numbing  envy  grew  up  the  more  in  the  sluggish  hearts  of
the  faithless;  and  the  unbelieving  multitude  became  hardened
against  God,  from  the  same  causes,  as  tlie  humble  people
softened  the  obduracy,  with  which  it  had  bound  itself.  For
when  God  blew  on  them,  they  were  turned  into  ice,  who
said,  through envy of  the miracles they had  witnessed ;

i6hn\2,  Behold^  the  uhole  world  hath  gone  after  Him. They  were

^^'  beholding  the  signs,  perceiving  the  miracles  performed  by
His  ministers,  and  foi'eseeing,  that  the  whole  world  was  now
about  to  follow  the  preaching  of  the  faith;  and  yet,  the  more
the  Holy  Spirit  had  filled  the  world,  the  more  firmly  was  the
malice  of  envy  binding  their  minds.  The  water  therefore
had  been  turned  into  ice,  when  sluggish  Judaea  was  still
remaining  in  envy,  as  the  whole  world  was  going  after  God.
But  because  Divine  Power  was  sufficient  to  soften  the  hard-
ness even  of  such  great  cruelty,  and  to  melt  the  hearts  of
unbelievers  to  love  Him,  after  this  ice  it  is  immediately  well
subjoined;

And  the  waters  are  again  poured  forth  abundantly.

xxix.  53.  For  the  Lord  has  in  truth  poured  forth  the  waters
abundantly,  after  this  ice  ;  for  after  He  had  endured  the
hardness  of  the  Jews,  even  unto  death.  He  immediately
melted  their  hearts  from  the  hardness  of  unbelief,  by  breath-
ing on  them  the  love  of  Himself;  in  order  that  they  might
afterwards  run  the  more  eagerly  to  obey  Him,  the  more  ob-
stinately they  had  before  resisted  His  commands. Whetice

Ecclus.  it  is  well  said  by  a  certain  wise  man.  As  ice  in  fair  weather,
' ' so  shall  thy  sins  be  melted  away. The  Prophet  had  desired

Ps.  126,  to  be  freed  from  the  ice  of  this  torpor,  when  saying,  Turn

*•  our  captivity,  O  Lord,  as  the  stream  in  the  South. Of  these

waters,  that  is,  of  people  flocking  together  to  the  Lord,  it  is

Ps.  147,  said  again,  He  ivill  send  forth.  His  ivord,  and  will  melt
them:  His  breath  will  blow,  and  the  icaters  will  flow.
Waters  run  from  ice,  because  many  great  preachers  are
made  out  of  hard  persecutors.  Ice  therefore  melts  in  water,
when  the  numbness  of  inward  cold  is  changed  into  the
irrigation  of  preaching. Was  not  Paul  ice,  who  when  going

Acts  9,  to  Damascus,  after  he  had received  letters,  was  seeking  to

^*  check  the  seeds  of  the  word  of  God,  which  had  been  scattered


The  corn  of  God  now  needs  the  ram  of  instruction. 24 1

in  tlie  heart  of  the  failhfal,  as  if  in  the  earth,  that  they  might  I^ooic
not  spring  up  to  the  perfection  of  good  deeds? But  tliis  iccl- ■"


returned  in  water;  because  ])e  after^^■ards  watered  with  the
streams  of  holy  exhortation  those  whom  he  before  en-
deavoured to  oppress  with  persecution,  in  order  that  there
might  arise  a  more  abundant  liarvest  of  the  Elect,  in  so  much
as  the  shower  of  God  was  watering  it  from  the  mouth  even
of  a  persecutor.  Whence  it  is  well  subjoined  ;
Ver.  1 1 . The  corn  deslreth  clouds.

54.  For  what  are  all  the  Elect,  but  the  corn  of  God,  to  xxx.
be treasured up  in the heavenly garners .' Which now
bear  with  the  chaff  in  the  threshing  of  the  floor;  because

in  this  purification  of  Holy  Church,  they  endure  the  con-
trary habits  of  the  reprobate,  till  the  inward  Husbandman
separates  them  with  His  fan  of  judgment,  and  taking  His
Elect,  as  grains  now  cleaned,  into  the  heavenly  habitations,
consigns  the  chaff  to  eternal  fires.  Whence  it  is  well  said
by  John,  Whose  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and  He  icill  throughly  Matt.  3,
purge  His  floor,  and  icill  gather  the  ivheat  into  His  barn,
but  He  icill  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable  fire.  But
this  corn,  till  it  attain  to  the  perfection  of  its  fruits,  looks
for  tlie  rains  of  the  clouds,  in  order  to  its  growth.  Because
the  mind  of  good  men  is  watered  with  the  words  of  preachers,
lest  it  should  be  drahied  of  the  moisture  of  charity  by  the
sun  of  carnal  desires.  The  heavenly  Husbandman  had  be-
held this  corn  growing  up  in  the  world,  and  desiring  the
clouds,  when  He  was  saying.  The  harvest  indeed  is  plenteous, 'M&tt.  9,
but  the  labourers  are  few.  But  pray  ye  the  Lord  of  the  ^'^'  '^^'
harvest,  to  send  forth  labourers  into  His  harvest.  Those
therefore  which  here  are  called  '  corn,'  are  there  called
'  harvest,'  but  they  who  are  here  called  '  clouds,'  are  there
called  '  labourers,'  because  holy  preachers  are  both  clouds
and  labourers  ;  clouds,  namely,  by  their  doctrine,  labourers
by  their  life ;  clouds  because  they  flow  into  us  by  their
■words,  labourers,  because  they  cease  not  to  do  what  they
speak.  "Wlience  it  is  subjoined;
And  the  clouds  scatter  their  light.

55.  For, for clouds to scatter their light, is for holy  xxxi.
preachers  to  spread  abroad  examples  of  conduct,  both  by
their  words  and  actions. But  though  they  scatter  the  liglit

VOL.  III.  11


242  God's  Ministers  guided  to  visit  lohom  He  wills.

Job  37,  of  their  inward  message,  yet  they  do  not  attain  to  the  con-
'—  version  of  all  the  hearts  which  they  desire. For  it  follows  ;


Ver.  12. Which  traverse  all  things  in  a  circuit,  whither-
soever the  will  of  their  Ruler  shall  lead  them.

xxxii.  56.  For  holy  preachers  often  wish  to  exhort  some  persons,
but  cannot  do  so.  Some  they  often  wish  to  avoid,  but  are
yet  most  urgently  compelled,  by  the  impulse  of  inward
instigation,  to  exhort  them.  Let  us  behold  the  cloud  of
God,  how  it  is  led  by  the  hand  of  Him  Who  guides  it,  even
to  those  things  which  it  does  not  seek  after :  and  is,  again,
kept  from  following  its  own  impulse,  by  the  hand  of  Him
who  governs  it.  When  Paul  was  shaking  his  raiment,  and
was  wishing  to  depart  from  the  Corinthians,  he  surely  heard,

Acts  18,  ^6"  not  afraid,  but  speak,  and  hold  not  thy  peace,  for  I  am
with  thee,  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee,  for  I
have  much  people  in  this  city. Again,  when  he  had  wished

iThess.to  go  to  the  Thessalonians,  he  was  kept  back,  and  said,  /
'  *  wished  to  come  unto  you,  even  I  Paul,  both  once  and  again,
but  satan  hindered  me.  For  satan  could  not  of  himself  hinder
the  journeys  of  so  mighty  an  Apostle ;  but,  while  opposing,  he
ignorantly  subserved  the  design  of  the  secret  dispensation;
in  order  that  Paul,  while  he  wished  to  visit  other  persons,
and  was  unable,  might  more  suitably  benefit  those,  from
whom  ho  could  not  depart.  The  clouds  of  God,  therefore,
traverse  all  things  in  a  circuit,  because  they  illuminate  the
ends  of  the  world  with  the  light  of  preaching.  But,  because
being  subject  to  the  Divine  will,  they  cannot  fulfil  their
own  wishes,  they  cannot  go  any  where,  except  where  the
will  of  their  Ruler  shall  lead  them.  Whence  it  is  still  further
subjoined ;

To  every  thing  which  He  shall  command  them  upon  the
face  of  the  earth.

xxxiii.  57.  For  often  when  they  are  led  by  the  will  of  their  Ruler,
they  seek  to  do  one  thing,  but  are  disposed  otherwise.  For
they  frequently  desire  to  con-ect  some  of  their  hearers  in  a
gentle  way,  and  yet  their  speech  is  turned  into  sharpness.
They  frequently  seek  to  be  severe  with  others,  but  yet  their
vigour  is  restrained  by  the  spirit  of  gentleness.  As,  therefore,
they  cannot  go  whither  they  will,  so  also  they  cannot  act  as
they  will. For because  the inward  .Tudge keeps  hold  of


His  ffracious  teaching  granted  in  divers  way?,  and  places. 2-lo

them,  when  He  sends  Ihem,  so  also  does  He  modify  and  Book
take  them  up,  when  He  leads  them  on,  so  that  sometimes -^'^^'
they  arrange  one  thing  in  their  thought,  but  carry  another
into  effect;  they  sometimes  begin  in  one  way,  but  end  in
another.  Because  then  they  serve  according  to  that  which
is  commanded  them,  let  it  be  rightly  said,  Mltithersoever  the
will  of  their  Buler  shall  lead  them,  to  every  thing  ivhich  He
shall  command  them  iqion  the  face  of  the  earth.  For  they
find  the  way  of  their  preaching  the  more  open,  in  that
they  are  guided  to  it,  not  by  their  own  will,  but  that  of  their
Teacher. Whence  it  is  still  further  subjoined  ;

Ver.  13. Whether  in  one  tribe,  or  in  His  oicn  land,  or  in
whatsoever  place  of  His  mercy  He  shall  order  ihem  to  be
found.

58.  The  one  tribe  of  Judah  is  certainly  meant,  which  isxxxiv.
mentioned  in  Holy  Scripture  plainly  and  repeatedly  above
the  rest. For  it  received  a  special  gift  above  them  all,  in
that  it  brought  forth  from  itself  the  flesh  of  our  Redeemer,
But  all  Judaja together is called the land  of  the Lord.Deut.
Because  it  then  produced  to  Him  the  fruit  of  faith,  when  the""' *
whole  world  was  in  error,  the  Gentiles  having  fallen  under
the  worship  of  idols. But  the  place  of  the  mercy  of  God  is
the  Gentile  world  itself,  for  if  the  strict  Judge  were  justly  to
punish  its  faults,  it  would  never  come  to  the  reconciliation  of
grace. For, when it had  no merits before God, it yet


received the grace of  reconcilio.tion of  His sole mer


o


cy-


Whence  it  is  well  said  by  Paul,  And  that  the  Gentiles  should Rom.i5,

glorify  God  for His  mercy. Whence  it  is  written  again,''

Which had  not  obtained  mercy, but  now have  obtained^  P*^^-'^,

.  .  ]0.

mercy, God  therefore  leads  His  clouds,  either  in  one  tribe,

or  in  His  own  land,  or  in  whatsoever  place  of  His  mercy  He

shall order  them to  be  found ; because at  one time He

conferred  preachers  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  on  the

tribe  of  Judah  only,  and  rejected  nearly  the  whole  of  Israel

by  the  wicked  governing  of  their  kings. At  one  time.  He

makes  these  clouds  to  rain,  even  in  His  own  land,  because

He  recalled  this  same  people  of  Jsrael  to  His  former  favour,

after  correction  in  captivity. At  another.  He  wished  them

to  shine  forth  from  the  place  of  His  mercy ; because  He

made known by  holy preachers  even  to  the  Gentiles  the

R  2


244  Eliu  thinks  Job  a  low-minded  hearer.

Job  37,  miracles  of  His  power,  in  order  by  His  sole  mercy  to  free

^ '—  those  from  the  yoke  of  error  whom  His  Avi-ath  in  their  innate

unbelief  was  weighing  down.  But  behold,  because  Eliu  has
perceived  future  events  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  because  he
has  uttered  many  sublime  truths  ;  the  haughty  man,  wearied
with  the  weight  of  his  pride,  is  unable  to  bear  the  burden  of
what  he  sa^s. For  he  adds  at  once  in  a  boastful  manner,

Ver.  14. Hearken  unto  these  things,  O  Job,  stand,  and
consider  the  ivondrous  works  of  God.

XXXV.  59.  He  saw  him  to  be  lying  down,  as  it  were,  in  com-
parison with  himself,  whom  he  directed  to  stand  at  the  words
of  so  great  preaching.  Although  even  by  this  word,  "  Listen^''
which  he  uses,  he  inflicts  a  grievous  insult  upon  Job :
because,  as  we  have  already  said  of  him  also  before,  it  is
arrogance  for  an  inferior,  to  wish  to  extort  for  himself  a
hearing  from  his  superior.  But  although  Eliu  does  not
consider  to  whom  he  is  saying  the  truths  that  he  utters,  yet
we,  who  seek  to  be  instructed  by  all  things,  ought  carefully  to
examine  the  words  of  his  teaching.  For  perhaps  it  is  said
with  great  skill  in  virtue.  Stand,  and  consider  the  uondrous
works  of  God.  For  there  are  some  who  consider  the
wondrous  works  of  God,  but  lying  down;  because  they  do
not  follow  and  admire  the  power  of  His  doings.  For  to
'  stand,'  is  to  act  uprightly. "Wlience  also  it  is  said  by  Paul,

1  Cor. Let  him  that  thinketh  he  sfandeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall.

10 12.

'  ""  And  they  often  indeed  admire  the  judgments  of  heaven,  love
the  announcements  of  their  heavenly  country,  when  they
hear  them,  are  astounded  at  the  wondrous  operations  of  His
inward  ordaining,  but  yet  neglect  to  attain  to  these  words  by
their  love  and  their  lives.  They  then  lie,  and  consider  the
wondrous  works  of  God,  who  think  of  God's  power  in  their
understanding,  but  do  not  love  it  in  their  lives.  They  turn
indeed  their  eyes  in  consideration,  by  thinking  on  them,  but
yet  do  not  raise  themselves  from  the  earth  by  their  intention.
Numb.  Whence  it  is  well  said  in  reproach  of  Balaam,  JVho  falling,

'  '  hath  his  eyes  open.  For  he  had  said  many  things  of  the
coming  of  the  Redeemer,  and  was  foreseeing  what  things
were  to  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days.  But  yet  he  was
unwilling  to  rise  up  to  Him  in  his  life,  Whom  by  foreseeing
he  announced. He  was  lying  then,  and  had  his  eyes  open,


The  clouds  that  rain  doctrine  shine  also  in  life.  245

when  prophecy  was  directing  his  mind  to  heavenly  things, Book

and  covelousness  was  confining  it  to  earth. He  was  lying '

and  had  his  eyes  open,  because  he  vvas  able  to  behold
Him  from  above,  Whom,  grovelling  below,  he  loved  not.
Eliu  therefore,  who  did  not  believe  that  blessed  Job  had
maintained  in  his  life  that,  which  he  professed,  says,  as  if
advising  him,  Stand,  and  consider  the  xvondrous  ivorks  of
God.  He  still  further  examines  him  as  to  future  events,  and
adds,  as  if  humbling  him  for  his  ignorance  ;

Ver.  15.  Dost  thou  know  when  God  commanded  the  rains
to  shew  for  111  the  light  of  His  clouds  ?

60.  If  'clouds'  are  holy  preachers,  the  rains  from  thexxxvi.
clouds  are  the  words  of  their  preaching.  But  when  clouds
fly  through  the  air,  unless  rain  descends  from  above,  we
know  not  what  an  immensity  of  waters  they  carry.  Unless
the  glittering  sun  breaks  forth  amidst  the  rain,  we  cannot
understanrl,  what  brightness  also  is  concealed  within  them.
Because  doubtless  if  holy  preachers  are  silent,  and  shew  not
by  their  words,  how  great  is  the  brightness  of  heavenly  hope,
which  they  bear  in  their  hearts,  they  seem  to  be  like  other
men,  or  far  more  despicable.  But  when  they  have  begun  to
lay  open  by  their  preaching,  wiiat  is  the  reward  of  the
heavenly  country,  which  they  possess  within  ;  when,  oppressed
by  persecution,  they  make  known  in  what  a  height  of  virtue
they  have  made  progress;  when,  despised  ia  outward  appear-
ance, they  point  out  by  their  words  what  makes  them  feared  ;
the  rains  themselves,  which  pour  from  the  clouds,  shew  us  the
light  of  these  very  clouds.  For  we  learn  by  the  words  of
preachers  to  reverence  in  them,  with  great  humility,  the
brightness  of  life  which  they  seek  after.  Paul  was  doubtless
displaying  this  light  to  his  disciples,  when  he  said,  TJiat  yeEph.  i,
may  knoiv,  what  is  the  hope  of  His  calling^  ithat  the
riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the  saints,  and  what
is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power  to  us-ward  who
believe.  This  light  the  Corinthians  had  known  by  the  words
of  his  writings,  as  by  drops  of  rain,  when  thev  said,  His  2  Cor.
letters  are  weighty  and  powerful,  hut  his  bodily  presence  is  '  '
weak,  and  his  speech  contemptible.  But  holy  preachers
frequently  desire  to  display  themselves,  in  order  to  do  good,
but  yet  arc  unable  :  they  frequeudy  desire  to  be  concealed,


24G  Narrow  paths  here  the  xcuy  to  future  greatness.

Job  37,  in  order  to  be  quiet,  and  are  not  permitted. No  cue  tbere-

^-  fore  knows when the rains  shew  the  light  of  the clouds,

because  no  one  comprehends  when  God  grants  the  virtue  of
preaching,  that  the  glory  of  the  preachers  may  shine  forth.
He  says  therefore.  Dost  thou  know,  ichen  God  commanded
the  rains,  to  shew  forth  the  light  of  His  clouds  ?  As  if  he
said  plainly,  If  thou  now  beholdest  preachers  about  to  come  to
the  world,  dost  thou  understand,  when  God  urges  them  on
to  preach,  by  filling  them  with  His  Holy  Spirit,  or  in  what
way  He  makes  known  their  brightness  to  the  world  ?
Whence  it  is  also  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  16.  Dost  thou  know  the  mighty  paths  of  the  clouds,
and  their  perfect  knowledge  ?
xxxvii.  61.  These  clouds  have  most  subtle  paths,  namely,  the
Matt.  7,  ways  of  holy  preaching.  For  narrow  is  the  gate,  which
leadeth  unto  life.  They  confine  then  those  by  paths,  who
do  not  depart  from  the  track  of  their  purpose  by  wandering
through  the  wide  desires  of  the  world.  For  the  strict
censure  of  holy  living  is  not  a  broad  way,  but  a  path,  in
which  each  preacher  is  studiously  confined  :  because  he  is
carefully  hemmed  in  by  the  defence  of  precepts.  Is  it  not,
as  it  were,  a  kind  of  narrowness  of  way  to  live  indeed  in  this
world,  but  to  have  no  desires  for  this  world,  not  to  seek  for
another's  goods,  not  to  retain  one's  own,  to  despise  the
praises  of  the  world,  to  love  reproaches  for  God's  sake,  to
avoid  glory,  to  court  contempt,  to  despise  flatterers,  to
honour  our  despisers,  to  banish  from  our  hearts  the  wrongs
of  those  who  hurt  us,  and  to  retain  towards  them  the  un-
changeable grace  of  affection  in  the  heart  ?  All  which  namely
are  paths,  but  paths  of  greatness.  For  the  narrower  they
are  in  this  life,  for  guarding  our  conduct,  the  more  are  they
enlarged  to  greater  width  in  eternal  retribution.  Whence
also  it  is  well  subjoined,  And  their  perfect  knowledge.

62.  For  it  is  indeed  perfect  wisdom,  for  a  man  to  do  all
these  things  with  anxious  care,  and  to  know  that  he  is
nothing  in  his  own  deserts.  Whence  even  the  clouds  them-
selves are  instructed  in  this  perfect  wisdom,  when  it  is  said
Lukeir,  to  them  by  the  voice  of  Truth  ;  When  ye  hare  done  all  these
things  which  are  commanded  you,  say.  We  are  unprojilahle
servants. It  is  perfect  wisdom  to  know  all  things,  and  yet


More  perfect  knowledge  makes  known  our  iynorance. 247

in  a  certain  way  to  be  ignorant  of  one's  knowledge ;  by  which Book
though  we  already  know  the  precepts  of  God,  though  we  are '  '


now  weighing  with  anxious  attention  the  power  of  His  words,
though  we  are  doing  those  things,  which  we  believe  we  have
understood ;  yet  we  still  know  not  with  what  strictness  of
examination  these  deeds  will  hereafter  be  enquired  into,  nor
do  we  as  yet  behold  the  face  of  God,  nor  see  His  hidden
counsels.  How  great  then  is  our  knowledge ;  which,  as  long-
as  it  is  pressed  down  with  the  weight  of  mortality,  is
darkened  by  the  very  mist  of  its  own  uncertainty  ?  Of  which
it  is  well  said  bv  Paul,  He  who  thinkelh  that  he  knoweth  any  i  Cor.

■  .8 2.

thijig,  knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know.  While  Ave  '
live,  therefore,  in  this  world,  we  then  know  perfectly  what
ought  to  be  known,  when,  as  we  make  progress  in  wisdom,
we  learn  that  we  know  nothing  perfectly.  He  says  there-
fore, Dost  thou  know  the  mighty  paths  of  the  clouds,  and
their  perfect  knowledge  ?  As  if  he  said  openly.  Dost  thou
now  behold  the  lofty  acts  of  preachers,  who  after  raising
themselves  on  high  by  their  wisdom,  humbly  bow  themselves
down  through  knowledge  of  their  ignorance  ?  But  since  it  is
caused  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  alone,  that  the  heart  of
man  is  perfectly  informed  not  merely  of  its  knowledge,  but
also  of  its  ignorance ;  and  that  it  glows  with  fervent  love  for
things  above,  while  it  considers  here  below  that  its  know-
ledge is  of  less  worth,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,

Ver.  17.  Are  not  thy  garments  warm,  ivhen  the  earth  hath
been  blown  upon  by  the  south  ivind  .^

63.  We  have  often  said  already  that  blessed  Job  stands  xxxviii.
for  a  type  of  Holy  Church. But  all  they,  who  are  joined  to
it  by  the  unity  of  the  Faith,  are  the  garments  of  the  Church.
Of  which  the  Lord  says  to  the  same  Church  by  the  Prophet,
As  1  live,  thou  shall  be  clothed  with  all  these,  as  with  an  Is.  49,

...  18

ornament.  But  by  the  south  wind,  which  is  doubtless
warm,  is  designated,  not  improperly,  the  Holy  Spirit,  for
when  any  one  is  touched  by  It,  he  is  freed  from  the  torpor  of
his  iniquity.  Whence  it  is  well  said  in  the  Song  of  Songs,
Arise,  O  north  wind,  and  come  thou  south,  blow  upon  my  Sol.
garden,  and  let  its  sweet  spices  flow  out.  For  the  north  jg"^"*'
wind  is  ordered  to  arise,  in  order,  doubdess,  that  the  opposing
spirit,  wlio  binds  the  hearts  of  mortals,  may  fly  away. For


218  South  wind  of  Grace  hrings  out  sweet  odours.

Job  37,  tlie  soutli  wiud  comes,  and  blows  through  the  garden,  that  its
— ii__ sweet  spices  may  flow  abroad;  because,  Avhile  the  mind  of
man  is  filled  by  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  notion  of
their  virtues  is  soon  scattered  abroad  from  it,  that  the  tongue
of  the  Saints,  like  a  garden  which  is  blown  upon  by  the
2  Cor. 2,  south  wind,  may  now  justly  say,  We  are  iinto  God  a  sweet
odour  of  Christ,  The  garments,  therefore,  of  Holy  Church
are  warm,  while  the  cartli  is  breathed  upon  by  the  south
wind  ;  because  they,  who  cling  to  her  by  faith,  glow  with
fervent  zeal  of  charity,  while  their  mind  is  streamed  through
by  the  breath  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  nothing  liinders  this
being  understood  of  this  same  blessed  Job  ;  because  we  so
speak  of  these  things  in  the  Church  in  general  terms,  as  yet
specially  to  confine  them  to  its  separate  members.

64.  For  every  one,  who  lives  uprightly,  and  has  been
wont  also  to  teach  this  to  others,  has,  as  it  were,  as  many
garments,  as  the  hearers  who  cling  to  him  in  agreement.
For  it  is  the  nature  of  garments,  that  they  cannot  be  warm
of  themselves  ;  but  that,  when  applied  to  a  living  body,  they
cover  the  exuding  pores  of  the  limbs,  they  keep  back  the
heat  which  flows  forth  from  within,  and  from  this  heat  they
doubtless  become  warm :  but  when  they  have  become  warm,
by  retaining  the  heat  they  have  received,  they  return  it  to
the  body.  What  then  is  signified  by  garments  adhering  to
the  living  body,  but  the  life  of  disciples  closely  united  to
teachers  who  live  well .'  Which  receives,  as  it  were,  warmth
through  the  pores ;  because  it  is  kindled  with  the  love  of
God,  both  by  the  example  of  action,  and  the  impulse  of
exhortation.  Which  expels,  as  it  were,  its  own  cold,  when
it  departs  from  its  former  iniquity ;  retains  the  warmth  it  has
received,  because  it  gains  strength  in  that  warmth  which  it
has  obtained  from  preaching.  But  when  holy  preachers
perceive  that  their  hearers  arc  advancing  towards  the  love  of
God,  they  themselves  glow  the  more  in  power  of  teaching  :
and  from  seeing  that  they  are  burning  and  glowing  for  the
highest  objects,  they  arc  themselves  more  mightily  kindled
to  announce  the  good  things  of  the  heavenly  country.  And
if  at  any  time,  because  they  are  still  passing  this  corruptible
life  of  human  infirmity,  they  are  assaulted  by  any  fault,
however  slightly,  in  deed,  word,  or  thought,  thev  look  at  the


Ilearei'Sy  like  garments,  warm  him  who  icarms  them. 240

progress  of  their  disciples,  and  arc  ashamed  of  being  ihcm-  Rook
selves  blameable,  even  in  the  smallest  matters  :  lest  they  ^"^^^^r
should  by  chance  set  a  crooked  examj^le  to  those,  whom
they  are  calling  to  the  rule  of  inward  rectitude  by  the  voice
of  preaching.  When  hearers  then  are  kindled  by  the  word
of  their  teachers,  garments,  as  it  were,  become  warm  from  a
living  body.  But  when  the  conduct  of  the  teachers  also  is
improving,  from  the  progress  of  their  hearers,  the  heat
returns,  as  it  were,  to  the  body  from  the  garments  which
have  been  warmed.  But  let  not  the  teachers  attribute  it  to
themselves,  that  they  see  their  hearers  advancing  to  the
highest  things,  through  their  exhortation :  because,  if  the
Holy  Spirit  fill  not  their  hearts,  the  voice  of  teachers  sounds
in  vain  to  the  bodily  ears.  For  teachers  can  shape  their
voice  without,  but  cannot  impress  it  within;  For  neither  is\  Cor,
he  who  planteth  any  thing,  neither  he  that  watereth,  but  God  '
Who  giveth  the  increase.  Let  it  be  said  then.  Are  not  thy
garments  warm,  when  the  earth  hath  been  blown  upon  by  the
south  icind?  Because,  namely,  hearers,  who  now  adhere  to
teachers  who  live  aright,  receive  the  warmth  of  heavenly
love,  when  they  are  roused  by  the  breath  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
As  if  he  were  saying  plainly  to  blessed  Job  ;  Thou  in  vain
attributest  it  to  thyself,  if  thou  beh oldest  that  any  have  made
progress  in  virtue  by  thy  means ;  because  these,  whom  thou
supposest  to  have  become  warm  through  thee,  would  be  still
remaining  cold,  in  their  own  insensibility,  if  the  warmth  of
the  Holy  Spirit  did  not  touch  them.  But  after  he  spake
these  things  forcibly,  he  immediately  subjoins  words  of
derision,  being  influenced  with  levity  by  arrogance,  saying,

Ver.  18. Thoii  perchance  madcst  v:ith  Him  the  heavens,
which  are  most  solid,  as  if  cast  in  brass.

Qb.  By  '  heavens,'  those  who  are  created  in  the  heavens,  xxxix.
the  angelic  spirits,  can  be  designated. Whence  also  we  are
instructed  by  the  voice  of  Truth  to  say  in  our  Prayer,  Thy  iviat.  6,
will  be  done  as  in  heaven,  so  in  earth. That  the  will  of '
God  mav  be  doubtless  observed  in  all  things  even  by  human
infirmity,  as  it  is  done  by  the  higher  creation. Of  whom
it  is  well  said,  They  are  most  solid,  as  if  cast  in brass.
For  it  is  of  the  nature  of  brass,  that  it  is  difficult  to  be  con-
sumed bv  rust. And  the  angelic  powers,  which  stood  fixed


250 Spiritual  Heavens  madejirm  and  unwasting  as  brass.

Job  37,  in  Diviiie  love,  when  the  proud  angels  fell,  received  this,  as
^^•^^'  their  reward  of  retribution,  that  they  are  no  longer  consumed
by  any  rust  of  sin  stealing  upon  them,  that  they  continue  in
the contemplation of  their  Creator,  without  end  to  their
felicity,  and  exist  with  eternal  stability,  in  that  which  they
were  created. Which  the  very  words  of  the  history  in  Moses
concerning  the  origin  of  the  world  will  attest,  when  both  the
Gt^u.  1,  heaven  is  said  to  have  been  first  made,  and this  is  after-
wards called  the  firmament. Because,  namely,  the  nature
of  Angels  was both first  fashioned  more subtilly,  in the
regions  above,  and was  afterwards still more  wonderfully
strengthened, that it might never fall. But,  as we  have
often  said,  by the  '  heavens'  can  be  expressed  the  minds
of  the  Elect,  raised up by  inward love  from all earthly
pollutions. For  though,  in  the  body,  they  dwell  below,  yet,
because  they  cleave  in  their  heart,  even  now,  to  the  highest
Phil.  3,  objects,  they  truly  say.  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven. Who
are  most  solid,  as  if  cast  in  brass,  because  they  are  not
wasted  away  from the  integrity  of  their original  strength,
by  any  rust  of  changeableness. To  whom,  boldly  bearing
up  against  adversities,  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  their  Maker,
.Johni5,  Ye  are  My  friends,  which  have  continued  with  3Ie  in  My
-Lu\ie22,t^fnptations. But  though  this learned and haughty  one,
28- when  endeavouring  to  make  a  jest  of  this  holy  man,  blends
noble  sayings  with  his  derision,  yet  he  ever  falls  back,  from
those  noble  sayings,  into  empty  words. For  he  again  subjoins
deridingly,

Ver.  19.  Shew  iis  ivhat  to  say  to  Him;  for  we  in  truth
are  involved  in  darkness.

66.  As  if  He  said;  Thou,  who  enjoyest  the  great  light  of
wisdom,  oughtest  to  teach  us,  who  are  involved  in  the  dark-
ness of  ignorance.  But  soon  starting  away  from  his  derision,
he  subjoins  contemptuously;

Ver.  20.  Who  will  tell  Him  the  things  ivhich  I  say?
As  if  he  plainly  said;  The  unheard  truths  which  I  declare
to  Him,  from  an  acute  sense  of  His  praises,  who  can  repeat,
even  after  he  has  heard  them .?  But  because,  Avhen  learning
and  arrogance  contend  together  in  the  habitation  of  the  same
mind,  there  sounds  forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  speaker  not
merely  levity  of  behaviour,  but  also  gravity of  sentiment;


Man  swallowed  up  in  attcntpting  to  utter  things  Divine. '251

after  Eliu  had  been  puft'ed  up  in  levity  by  arroQ-ancc,  saying,  1?o(,k

Wlio  will  tell  Him  t/ie  things  tvhivh  I  say? he  presently ^ -'

subjoined,  through  his  learning,

Even  if  a  man  shall  speak,  he  shall  be  swallowed  up.
67.  Every thing  which devours  any thing,  draws  it  in- xl.
wards, and conceals it from the eyes  of  beholders,  and
hurries  into  the  deep  an  object  which  could  be  seen  on  the
surface. A  man,  therefore,  when  he is  silent  about  God,
seems  to  be  something  on  account  of  the  reason  with  which
he  was  made. But  if  he  begins  to  speak  about  God,  it  is  at
once  shewn  how  nought  he  is ;  because  he  is  devoured  by
the  immensity  of  His  greatness,  and  is  hurried,  as  it  were,
into  the  deep,  and  is  concealed. For  wishing  to  speak  of
the  Ineffable,  he  is  swallowed  up  by  the  narrowness  of  his
own  ignorance. For  flesh  speaks  of  the  Spirit,  the  circum-
scribed spirit  of  the Uncircumscribed,  the  creature  of  the
Creator, the  temporal  of  the Eternal,  the  mutable  of  the
Immutable,  the  mortal  of  the  Quickener. And  since,  being
placed  in darkness, he  knows  not the  inward  light, as  it
really  is,  a  man  wishing  to  discourse  of  eternity,  speaks  as  a
blind  man  of  the  light. //'  then  a  man  shall  speak,  he  shall
he  swallowed  up : because if  a  man  wishes to speak of
eternity  as  it  is,  he  takes  away  also  from  himself  even  the
sense  he  has  of  it  when  silent. But,  behold !  eternity  then
became  truly  known  to  men,  when  It  shewed  Itself  to  them
by  assuming  man's  nature. But  because  this  had  not  yet
been  revealed,  it  is  rightly  subjoined  of  the  same  men;
Ver.  21.  But  now  they  see  not  the  light.

08.  Of  which  light  doubtless  it  is  said  even  by  the  Prophet, xli.
The  people  which  was  sitting  in  darkness,  saw  a  great  light.  Is.  9,  2.
But  he  shews  how  this  hght  is  seen  by  men,  when  he  im-
mediately adds;

The  air  will  suddenly  be  gathered  into  clouds.
For  the  air  is  so  diffused  by  its  own  tenuity,  as  not  to  be
consolidated  with  any  firmness.  But  clouds  are  firmer,  the
denser  they  are.  What  then  is  designated  by  the  '  air,'  but
the  minds  of  worldly  men,  which,  given  up  to  the  countless
desires  of  this  life,  are,  being  fluid,  scattered  hither  and
thither  like  the  air?  But  the  air  is  collected  into  clouds,
when  unstable  minds  are,  by  the  grace  of  the  Divine  regard,


252 Men  iceah  as  air  formed  into  Clouds  by  Grace.

Job  37,  strengthened  with  the solidity  of  virtue,  in  order  that,  by
— - — ^^  thinking  of  what  is  right,  they  may  gather  themselves  within
the  bosom  of  their  heart,  and  may  not  melt  away  in  empty
thoughts.

69.  Peter  had  been  air,  when  the  occupation  of  fishing
for  the  life  of  the  flesh  used,  as  a  transient  breeze  to  agitate
him,  distracted  still  with  earthly  desires.  The  Apostles  had
been  air,  who  had  already  learned  exalted  truths  by  the
Law,  but  who  as  yet  savoured  not  of  strength  by  faith.  But
the  air  was  suddenly  gathered  into  clouds,  because,  through
the  look  of  divine  grace,  the  unstable  hearts  of  fishermen
were  turned  into  the  solidity  of  preachers,  in  order  that  their
infu'm  thoughts  might  become  firm,  by  thinking  boldly,  that
they  might  hold  like  clouds  the  waters  of  wisdom,  and
irrigate  with  the  words  of  their  preaching  the  earth  lying
beneath ;  and  that,  when  this  ministry  was  completed,  they
might  return  to  the  secret  abodes  of  heaven,  and  attain,  when
their  labour  was  passed,  to  eternal  rest.  Whence  it  is
presently  well  subjoined;

And  the  mitid passing  over  will  drive  tliem  aitay.
xlii,  70.  For  the  wind  that  passes  over  is  the  present  life.
The  wind  then  passes  over,  and  drives  the  clouds  away ;
because  mortal  life,  passing  along,  conceals  holy  preachers
from  our  bodily  eyes.  The  passing  wind  drives  away  the
clouds :  because  the  onward  course  of  temporal  life  with-
draws the  Apostles  from  the  flesh,  and  conceals  them,  fi'om
the  surface  of  the  earth,  in  secret  rest,  as  if  in  the  centre
of  the  heavens.  But  because  they  cease  not  to  preach  even
to  their  death,  and  pass  through  the  space  of  this  present
life,  like  clouds,  with  the  shower  of  their  words,  he  adds
what  is  wrought  by  their  labours  in  Holy  Church,  when  he
immediately  subjoins ;

Ver.  22. Gold  will  come  from  the  north.

xliii. 71.  What  is  designated  by  the  '  north,'  but  the  Gentile

world,  fast  bound  in  the  cold  of  sin  ? Which  he  held  under

Is.  14, the  yoke  of  his  tyranny,  who  proudly  said,  /  icill  sit  in  the

^^'  ^^' mount  of  the  covenant,  in  the  sides  of  the  north,  I  will

ascend  above  the  height  of  the  clouds,  1  will  be  like  the

Most  High. And  what  is  expressed  by  '  gold,'  but  faithful

Lam.  4,  souls?  Of  which  it  is  said  bv  Jeremiah,  How  is  the  goid  become
1.


Gold  of  believers  gathered  in  from  the  ^  North''  of  heathenism.  250

dim? the  finest  colour  is  changed? For  he  lamented  that  Book

the  gold  was  diinmed,  because  he  beheld  in  some  ]^ersons^^— -*

the  brightness  of  innocence  changed  into  the  blackness  of
sin.  Gold,  therefore,  is  said  to  come  from  the  north;  because
tlirough  the  favour  of  the  grace  of  the  Redeemer,  the  life  of
the  faithful,  which  is  precious  before  God,  is  increased
within  Hoi}  Church,  from  the  Gentile  world,  which  had
been  long  frozen  in  the  torpor  of  unbelief.  For  gold  comes
from  the  north,  when  the  true  faith  in  God  shines  forth  from
the  very  worshippers  of  idols.  But  when  the  Gentiles  were
converted  to  the  faith,  the  Jewish  people  gainsays  them  ;
and  scorns  to  admit  to  the  recompense  of  eternal  rewards,
those  who  had  been  so  long  worshippers  of  idols.  Whence
it  is  said  to  Peter,  after  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,
Wherefore  wentest  thou  in,  to  men  uncircumcised,  and  Acts  ii,
didst  eat  uitJt  them  ?  In  contradiction  to  which,  the  Lord
rightly  says  by  Isaiah,  I  ivill  say  to  the  north.  Give  up,  and l3A3,6.
to  the  south.  Keep  not  back.  For  as  the  Gentile  world  is
signified  by  the  'north,'  so  is  the  Jewish  People  signified  by
the  '  south,'  which  was  warmed,  as  it  were,  by  the  mid-day
sun,  because  when  our  Redeemer  appeared  in  the  flesh,
it  first  received  the  warmth  of  faith.  Gire  up,  then,  is
said  to  the  north,  when  the  Gentile  world  is  ordered  to
offer  to  God  the  gifts  of  its  faith.  But  the  south  is  com-
manded not  to  keep  back,  because  the  Hebrews  who  stood
firm  in  the  faith  were  ordered  not  to  condemn  and  reject  the
life  of  the  Gentiles.  Whence  here  also,  because  it  was  said.
Gold  Cometh  from  the  north;  it  is  fitly  subjoined;

And  from  God  fearful  praise.

72.  For  fearful  praise  is  said  to  come  from  God,  as  if  it  xliv.
were  said  to  come  from  those  who  are  on  the  side  of  God,
that  is,  the  faithful.  When  gold  then  comes  from  the  north,
fearful  praise  proceeds  from  God ;  because,  while  the
Gentiles  offered  the  brightness  of  their  faith,  the  multitude
of  the  faithful  Hebrews  praised  with  fear  the  Divine  judg-
ments. But  how  gold  comes  from  the  north,  and  how  fear-
ful praise  bursts  forth  from  those  who  are  under  God,  th&
sacred  history  itself  informs  us.  For  it  is  written,  Cornelius,  a  Acts  lo,
centurion  of  the  band,  ivhich  is  called  Italian,  a  religious  ^~'*'


254 Jews  give  praise  loilhfear,  on  the  conversion  of  Gentiles.

Job  37,))ia7i,  (iiul  fearing  God  iviih  all  his  house,  giving  much  alms

'—  to  the  people,  and  praying  to  God  always,  saw  in  a  vision

manifeslly,  about  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day,  an  Angel  of
God  coming  in  to  him,  saying  nnto  him,  Cornelius.  But  he
looking  on  him,  being  seized  with  fear,  said.  Who  art  thou.
Lord?  But  he  said  unto  him.  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms
have  come  up  as  a  memorial  in  the  sight  of  God.  Gold
therefore  came  from  the  north,  when  prayer  with  ahns
went up from the Gentiles in the sight of  God. But

Arts  11,  when  Peter  had  related  to  the  brethren,  either  how  Cornelius
~  '  had  seen  an  Angel,  or  he  himself  had  seen  a  linen  cloth  let
down  from  heaven  to  him  with  beasts,  and  creeping  things
and  birds,  or  how  the  Holy  Spirit  had  bedewed  the  hearts
of  the  Gentiles,  even  before  Baptism,  Who  had  never  come
into  the  minds  of  the  Jews,  excepting  after  the  water  of

ib.  18.  Baptism,  it  is  immediately  written,  When  they  heard  these
things  they  held  their  peace,  and  glorified  Gcd,  saying,  God
hath  therefore  granted  to  the  Gentiles  also  repentance  unto
life.  The  multitude  therefore  of  the  faithful,  which,  on  the
salvation  of  the  Gentiles,  restrained  itself  from  its  murmurs,
by  admiring  the  gifts  of  heavenly  grace  offered  fearful  praise

Acts  10,  to  God. Whence  Peter  himself  also  wonders,  saying,  /  have
found  in  truth,  that  God  is  no  acceptor  of  persons.

73.  But  when  the  Gentiles  receive  the  faith,  why  is  fearful
praise  said  to  come  from  those  who  are  already  believers,
when  it  ought  to  come  from  them,  joyful  rather  than  fearful  ?
But  fearful  praise  came  from  the  Hebrews  who  already
believed,  on  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  doubtless,  be-
cause Judaea  was  justly  rejected,  while  the  Gentiles  were
called  in  mercy;  and  feared  the  loss  of  its  own  rejection,
while  it  beheld  the  gain  of  the  others'  callirig.  Whence  we
also,  when  we  suddenly  behold  the  wicked  raised  up  to  an
unexpected  eminence  of  life,  daily  rejoice  with  fear  under
the  secret  judgments  of  God,  lest  God  should  desert  by  His
secret  judgments  some  who  are  counted  worthy.  Who  calls
thereby  those  to  Himself  who  are  considered  unworthy.  It
follows,

xlv. Ver.  23. We  cannot  worthily  find  Him  out.

74.  Even  if  we  can  now  find  Him  out,  yet  not  worthily.


God  Ineffable. Etiu  touches  at  last  his  aim  case.


-Mo


For  whatever  we  perceive  in llini,  is  of  faitli,  and  not  of  I^ook

sight, Bnt  yet  he adds  that  which he considers he  has  '-^ '■

found,  saying;

He  is  great  in  poicer,  and  judgment^  and  justice,  and
cannot  be  spoken  of.

For  He  is  great  in  power,  becanse  He  overcomes  the
powerful  adversary,  and  talking  from  his  house  the  vessels  of  Mat.  12,
dishonour,  changes  them  into  vessels  of  mercy.  Great  in
judgment;  because,  though  He  here  brings  down  His  Elect
by  adversity,  yet  He  raises  them  at  last  in  the  glory  of
eternal  prosperity.  Great  in  justice  :  for  though  He  here
bears  long  with  the  reprobate,  yet  He  at  last  condemns  them
for  ever.  But  it  is  well  subjoined;  And  cannot  be  spoken  of.
For  if  He  cannot  worthily  be  thought  of,  how  much  less  can
He  be  spoken  of?  But  we  speak  of  Him  far  better,  in  a
measure,  if  we  hold  our  peace  with  admiration  through  fear  of
thinking  upon  Him. It  follows,

Ver.  24.  Therefore  men  u-ill  fear  m?n,  and  all  ivho
seem  to  themselves  to  be  ivise,  vcill  not  dare  to  contemplate
Him.

75.  Eliu  in  this  place  calls  those  who  are  strong  of  under-  xlvi.
standing  'men  '.'  And  we  must  note  that  he  says  not, '  And '  '*''™''-
wise  men  will  not  dare  to  contemplate  Him,'  but,  They  who
seem  to  themselves  to  be  wise.  By  which  words,  namely,  he
implies  those  who  are  skilful,  but  arrogant.  Eliu,  therefore,
while  he  has  many  forcible  sentiments,  has  touched  himself  in
the  close  of  his  speech.  For  when  men,  who  are  learned  and
arrogant,  do  not  live  rightly,  but  are  compelled  by  the  force
of  doctrine  to  say  right  things,  they  become  in  a  measure  the
heralds  of  their  own  condemnation,  because  while  they
enforce  in  their  preaching  that  which  they  scorn  to  do,  they
proclaim  with  their  own  voices  that  they  are  condemned.
Against  whom  it  is  well  said  by  the  Psalmist,  They  were^^-l^,
turned  into  a  crooked  bow.  For  a  crooked  bow  strikes  the
very  person,  by  whom  it  is  aimed :  but  the  tongues  of
arrogant  men  are  in  their  sayings  like  a  crooked  bow ;  be-
cause when  they  speak  against  pride,  they  fix  their  arrows
in  their  own  makers.  Whence  we  must  watch  with  the
utmost  care,  lest  the  wisdom  we  receive  should  take  away
the light  of  humility,  when  it  illuminates  the  darkness  of


256  What  gifts  may^  what  may  not,  be  perverted.

Job  37,  ignorance, and sbould not any  longer be wisdom. For
— ^i—  though  it  shines  forth  in  might  of  speech,  yet  it  obscures  the
heart  of  the  speaker  with  a  covering  of  pride.

76.  For  some  goods  are  of  the  highest,  others  of  a  mixed,
land. The  highest  goods  are  faith,  hope,  charity. Which,
when  they  are  really  possessed,  cannot  be  turned  into  evil,  lint
prophecy,  doctrine,  the  power  of  healing,  and  the  rest,  are
goods  of  a  mixed  nature. For  they  are  so  placed  between
each  extreme,  that  at  one  time  the  heavenly  country  only,
and  at  another  earthly  glory,  is  sought  by  their  means. We
term  these,  then,  virtues  of  a  mixed  nature,  which  we  turn  to
whatever  object  our  mind  wishes  for;  which  the  mind  can
use  when possessed,  just as  it  does  worldly  riches. For
through earthly  riches,  some  pride  themselves  in  boastful
ostentation,  others  perform  offices  of  mercy  upon  their  in-
digent neighbours. When  outward  praise  then  is  sought  for
by  doctrine  and prophecy,  the height  of  earthly  glory  is
aimed  at,  as  if  by  bodily  riches. But  when  doctrine  and
prophecy  are  employed  for  gaining  souls,  the  riches  we  have
received  are  distributed  as  it  were  to our  needy  brethren.
Because  then the  mind,  through  want  of  care,  keeps  itself
aloof  from  the  hand  of  the  Giver,  by  means  of  those  very
gifts  which  it  boasts  of  possessing,  we  must  with  vigilant
forethought  take  care,  that  our  vices  are  first  overcome,  and
our  gifts  afterwards  secured  with  circumspection. For  if  the
mind,  when  amongst  tliem,  incautiously  forsakes  itself,  it  is
not  assisted  and  supported  by  them,  but  is  rejected,  as  if
already  repaid  for  its  former  labours.  Whence  also  it  happens,
that  when  the  virtue  we  possess  is  employed  in  the  service  of
transitory praise,  it  is  no  longer  virtue, because it takes
service  with  vice. For  since  humility  is  the  source  of  virtue,
that  virtue  truly  shoots  up  in  us,  which  remains  firm  in  its
proper  root,  that  is,  in  humility. For  if  it  is  torn  from  it,  it
doubtless  withers  away,  because it loses  the  moisture of
charity,  which  quickens  it  within.

77.  But  because  secret  pride  of  heart  is  reproved  by  this,
which  Eliu  says,  All  who  seem  to  themselves  to  be  wise  will
not  dare  to  contemplate  Him ;  it  seems  good  to  observe
what  great  gifts  of  virtues  David  had  obtained,  and  in  all
these  with  how  firm  a  humility  lie  maintained  himself. For


David,  in  all  his  ylonj,  humble  before  God.  257

whom  would  it  not  puff  up,  to  break  the  mouths  of  hons ;  to Book
rend  asunder  tlie  arms  of  bears;  to  be  chosen,  when  his  elder  '  '
brethren  had  been  despised  ;  to  be  anointed  to  the  govern-
ment of  the  kingdom,  when the King  had  been  rejected;
to  slay  with  a  single  stone  Goliah  who  was  dreaded  by  all ;  to
bring  back,  after  the  destruction  of  the  aliens,  the  numerous
foreskins  proposed  by  the  King ;  to  receive  at  last  the  promised
kingdom,  and  to  possess  the  whole  people  of  Israel  without
any  contradiction  ? And  yet,  when  he  bi'ings  back  the  Ark
of  God  to  Jerusalem,  he  dances  before  the  Ark,  mingled  with
the  people,  as  though  forgetful  that  he  had  been  preferred  to
Ihem  all. And  because,  as  is  believed,  it  had  been  the  custom
of  the  common  people  to  dance  before  the  Ark,  the  king
wheels  round  in  the  dance,  in  service  to  God. Behold  how
he  whom  the  Lord  preferred  specially  above  all,  contemns
himself  beneath  the  Lord,  both  by  equalling  himself  with  the
least,  and  by  displaying  abject  behaviour. The  power  of
his  kingdom  is  not  recalled  to  his  memory  ; he  fears  not  to
be  vile  in  the  eyes  of  his  people,  by  dancing ;  he  remembers
not,  before  the  Ark  of  Him  Who  had  given  him  honour,  that
he  had  been preferred  in  honour  above  the  rest. Before
God  he  performed  even  the  extremest  vilenesses,  in  order  to
strengthen,  by  his  humility,  the  bold  deeds  he  had  performed
in  the  sight  of  men. What  is  thought  by  others  of  his  doings,
I  know  not ;  I  am  more  surprised  at  David  dancing,  than
fighting. For  by  fighting  he  subdued  his  enemies ;  but  by
dancing  before  the  Lord  he  overcame  himself. And  when
Michal,  the daughter  of  Saul,  still mad  with  pride  at  her
royal  descent,  despised him when  humbled, saying,  iJo^£J  2  Sam.
glorious  was  the  kiiuf  of  Israel  to-day,  uncovering  himself  '
before  the  handmaids  of  his  servants,  and made himself
naked,  as  though  one  of  the  buffoons  were  naked:  she  imme-
diately heard.  As  the  Lord  liveth,  I  will  play  before  ///eibid. 2i.
Lord,  Who  hath  chosen  me  rather  than  thy  father. And  a
little  after  he  says.  And  I  will  play,  and  I  uill  become  w/oreibid.22.
vile  than  I  have  been,  and  I  uill  he  humble  in  mine  oirn
eyes. As  if  he  plainly  said,  I  seek  to  become  vile  before
men,  because  I  seek  to  keep  myself  noble  before  the  Lord,
through  my  humility.

78.  But  there  are  some  who  think  humbly  of  themselves ;

VOL.  III.  s


258  Two  ways  of  heinr/  proud  of  humility.

Job  37,  because,  w  hen  placed  in  honour,  they  consider  that  they  art^
-^ —  nothing  but  dust  and  ashes ;  but  yet  they  shrink  from  ap-
pearing contemptible  before  men,  and,  contrary  to  what  they
think  of  themselves  within,  they  cover  themselves,  as  it  were,
with  a  rigid  cloak  of  beauty  without.  And  there  are  some
who  seek  to  appear  vile  before  men,  and  contemn  every  thing
that  they  are,  by  exhibiting  themselves  as  lowly ;  but  they
are  yet  puffed  up  in  themselves  within,  as  if  by  the  very  merit
of  the  mean  look  they  have  displayed;  and  tlvey  are  the  more
elated  in  their  heart,  the  more  they  seemingly  suppress  pride.
But  both  these  warrings  of  the  one  sin  of  pride,  David
detected  with  great  circumspection,  overcame  with  wonderful
virtue.  For  he  teaches  that,  though  thinking  humbly  of
himself  within,  he  seeks  not  honour  from  without,  saying,
/  icill  play,  and  I  will  become  more  vile.  And  since  he  does
not  swell  with  pride  within,  because  he  made  himself  vile
without,  he  adds.  And  I  will  he  humble  in  mine  own  eyes.
As  if  he  said,  Such  as  in  self-contempt  I  represent  myself
without,  such  also  do  I  keep  myself  within.  What  then
should  they  do,  whom  teaching  elates,  if  David  knew  that
our  Redeemer  Avas  to  come  from  his  flesh,  and  announced
His  joys  in  prophecy,  and  yet  kept  down  in  himself  the  neck
of  his  heart,  by  the  strong  heel  of  discretion,  saying,  And
I  will  be  humble  in  mine  own  eyes?

79.  It  is  well  said  therefore  by  Eliu,  Tlierefore  men  will
fear  Him,  and  all  who  seem  to  themselves  to  be  icise  will  not
dare  to  contemplate  Him.  For  they  who  seem  to  themselves
to  be  wise,  cannot  contemplate  the  wisdom  of  God;  because
they  are  the  more  removed  from  His  light,  the  more  they  are
not  humble  in  themselves.  Because  while  the  swelling  of
pride  increases  in  their  minds,  it  closes  the  eye  of  contem-
plation, and  by  considering  that  they  outshine  others,  they
thence  deprive  themselves  of  the  light  of  truth.  If,  therefore,
we  seek  to  be  truly  wise,  and  to  contemplate  Wisdom  Itself,
let  us  humbly  acknowledge  ourselves  to  be  fools.  Let  us
give  up  hurtful  wisdom,  let  us  learn  praiseworthy  folly.  For
1  Cor.  1,  hence  it  is  written,  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  this
\h'.3,\8j^orld  to  confound  the  wise.  Hence  again  it  is  said,  //  any
man  among  you  seemeth  to  be  wise  in  this  world,  let  him
become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be  wise. Hence  the  words  of  the


Wisdom  of  God  knonm  by  means  of  a  xoise  folly. 259

Gospel  history  attest,  that  when  Zacchcus  could  see  nothing  Hook

for  the  crowd,  he  ascended  a  sycamore  tree,  to  see  the  Lord  ~ — .'

.  ,  Lukel9,

as  He  passed  by. For  the  barren'  fig  is  called  a  sycamore.  4.

Zaccheus  therefore,  being  small  of  stature,  ascended  a  syca- „  |.',
more,  and  saw  the  Lord,  because  the}-  who  humbly  choose
the  foolishness  of  the  world,  do  themselves  minutely  contem-
plate the  wisdom  of  God.  For  the  crowd  hinders  small-
ness  of  statiu'e  from  beholding  the  Lord,  because  the  tumult
of  worldly  cares  keeps  the  infirmity  of  the  human  mind  from
looking  at  the  light  of  truth.  But  we  prudently  ascend  a
sycamore,  if  we  carefully  maintain  in  our  mind  that  foolish-
ness which  is  commanded  by  God.  For  wdiat  is  more  foolisli
in  this  w^orld,  than  not  to  seek  for  what  we  have  lost;  to
give  up  our  possessions  to  the  spoilers,  to  requite  no  wrong
for  the  wrongs  we  have  received,  nay  more,  to  exhibit
patience,  when  other  wrongs  have  been  added  }  For  the
Lord  commands  us,  as  it  were,  to  ascend  a  sycamore,  when
He  says,  Of  him  that  taketh  away  thy  goods,  ask  them  not[h.Q,m.
again;  and  again.  If  any  man  smite  thee  on  the  right  cheeky  Ma,tt.  5,
turn  to  him  the  other  also.  The  Lord  is  seen,  as  He  passes ^^*
along,  by  means  of  the  sycamore,  because  though  the  wisdom
of  God  is  not  yet  steadily  beheld,  as  it  really  is,  by  this
wise  folly,  yet  it  is  seen  by  the  light  of  contemplation,  as
though  passing  by  us.  But  they,  who  seem  to  themselves  to
be  wise,  according  to  the  words  of  Eliu,  cannot  see  it ;  for,
hurried  away  in  the  haughty  crowd  of  their  thoughts,  they
have  not  yet  found  a  sycamore,  in  order  to  behold  the  Lord.


S  2


PART VI.


BOOK  XXVIII.

The  first  eleven  verses  of  the  thirty- eighth  chapter  are  explained,  in  various
senses,  hut  especially  in  a  moral  sense.

PREFACE.

1.  After  the  loss  of  his  goods,  the  death  of  his  children,
the  wounds  of  his  body,  the  words  of  his  wife  persuading
him  to  evil,  the  insulting  language  of  his  comforters,  and  the
darts  of  so  many  sorrows  boldly  received,  blessed  Job  ought
to  have  been  praised  by  his  Judge  for  such  great  power  of
constancy,  if  he  had  been  now  going  to  be  called  out  of  this
present  world.  But  after  he  is  here  about  to  receive  back
yet  two-fold,  after  he  is  restored  to  his  former  health,  to
enjoy  longer  his  restored  possessions.  Almighty  God  is
obliged  to  reprove  with  strict  justice  him,  whom  He  pre-
serves alive,  lest  his  very  victory  should  lay  him  low  with
the  sword  of  pride.  For  what  commonly  slays  a  soul  more
fatally  than  consciousness  of  virtue  .?  For  while  it  puffs  it
up  with  self-consideration,  it  deprives  it  of  the  fulness  of
truth  ;  and  while  it  suggests  that  it  is  sufficient  of  itself  for
the  attainment  of  rewards,  it  diverts  it  from  the  intention  of
improvement.  Job,  therefore,  was  just  before  his  scourges,
but  he  remained  more  just  after  his  scourges;  and,  having
been  praised  before  by  the  voice  of  God,  he  afterwards
increased  from  the  blow.  For  as  a  ductile  tube  is  length-
ened by  being  hammered,  so  was  he  raised  the  higher  in
praise  of  God,  as  he  was  smitten  with  heavier  chastisement.


I


Job  too  great  to  he  humbled  hy  a  human  example. 261
But  he  who  stood  thus  firm  in  his  virtues, 'when  prostrated  Book

XXVIII

by  wounds,  needed to be humbled. He needed  to be— ^ -

humbled,  lest  the  weapons  of  pride  should  pierce  that  most
sturdy  breast,  which  it  was  plain  that  even  the  wounds  that
had  been  inflicted  had  not  overcome.  It  was  doubtless
necessar}'  to  find  out  a  person,  by  comparison  with  whom  he
would  have  been  surpassed.  But  what  is  this,  which  is  said
of  him  by  the  voice  of  the  Lord;  Thou  hast  seen  3Iy  servant  ^^^'^fi'i
Job,  that  there  is  no  man  like  him  upon  the  earth.  By  com-
parison with  whom  then  could  he  be  surpassed,  of  whom  it
is  said,  on  the  witness  of  God,  that  he  cannot  be  equalled,
on  comparison  with  any  man  ?  What  then  must  be  done,
except  for  the  Lord  Himself  to  relate  to  him  His  own
virtues,  and  to  say  to  him,  Canst  thou  bring  forth  the  Job  38,
morning  star  in  its  season,  and  canst  thou  make  the  evening
star  to  rise  over  the  sons  of  men?  And  again.  Have  the^^-^'^-
gates  of  death  been  opened  to  tltee,  and  hast  thou  seen  the
gloomy  doors  ?  Or  certainly  ;  Hast  thou  commanded  the  i^'  ^2.
dawn  after  thy  rising,  and  hast  thou  shewn  the  morning  its
place  ?  But  who  can  do  these  things,  but  the  Lord  ?  And  yet
a  man  is  asked,  in  order  tliat  he  may  learn  that  he  is  unable
to  do  these  things ;  in  order  that  a  man,  who  has  increased
with  such  boundless  virtues,  and  is  surpassed  by  the  example
of  no  man,  may,  that  he  should  not  be  elated,  be  surpassed
on  comparison  with  God.  But  O  how  mightily  is  he  ex-
alted, who  is  so  sublimely  humbled !  O  how  great  is  the
victory  of  the  man,  to  have  been  foiled  on  comparison  with
Ood !  O  how  much  greater  is  he  than  men,  who  is  proved
by  testimony  to  be  less  than  God  !  For  he  is  very  mighty,
who  is  proved  by  such  questioning  not  to  be  mighty.  But
since  we  are  being  led  to  discuss  very  obscure  questions,  let
us  now  come  to  the  words  of  the  text.

Chap,  xxxviii.  ver.  1.  But  the  Lord  answered  Job  out  of
the  wldrlwind,  and  said.

L  I  see  it  must  be  obsei-ved,  that  if  the  speech  were  said  i-
to  have  been  addressed  to  one  in  health  and  safety,  the  Lord
would  not  be  described  as  having  spoken  out  of  the  whirl-
■wind.  But  because  He  speaks  to  one  who  has  been  scourged,
He  is  described  as  having  spoken  out  of  the  whirlwind.  For
the Lord speaks to His servants  in one way, when  He


262 God  speaks  in  terrors  to  overawe,  gently  to  comfort.

Job  3S,  improves  them inwardly  by  compunction,  and  in  another,

Li— ^  when  He  presses  on  them  with  severity,  lest  they  be  puffed

up. For  by  the  gentle  address  of  the  Lord,  is  shevvn  His

affectionate  sweetness,  but  by  His  terrible,  is  pointed  out

His  dreadful  power. By  the  one  the  soul  is  persuaded  to

advance,  by  the  other,  that  which  is  advancing  is  checked.

In  the  one  it  learns  what  to  desire,  in  the  other  what  to  fear.

Zech.  2,  By  the  one  He  says,  Be  <jlad  and  rejoice,  O  dauyliter  of

^^' Sio>i,/or,  lo,  I  come,  and  I  uill  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee.

Is.  66, By  the  other  it  is  said ;  The  Lord  icill  come  in  a  tempest,

^^' and  in  the  uhirlwind  are  His  paths. For  He  in  truth  is

gentle,  Who  comes  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  us. But  when

He makes His  way  by  the tempest and whirlwind. He

doubtless  disturbs  the  hearts  which  He  touches;  and  puts

Himself  forth  to  tame  their  pride,  when  He  is  made  known

as  mighty  and  terrible.

2.  It  should  also  be  known,  that  the  Divine  mode  of
speaking  is  distinguished  in  two  ways.  For  either  the  Lord
speaks  by  Himself,  or  His  words  ai'e  adapted  to  us  by  means
of  an  angelic  creature.  But  when  He  speaks  by  Himself,
He  is  disclosed  to  us,  solely  by  the  power  of  His  inward
inspiration.  When  He  speaks  by  Himself,  the  heart  is
instructed  in  His  word,  without  words  and  syllables;  be-
cause His  power  is  known  by  a  kind  of  inward  elevation.
At  which  the  mind  when  full  is  raised  up,  when  empty  is
weighed  down.  For  it  is  a  kind  of  weight,  to  raise  up  every
mind  which  it  fills.  It  is  an  incorporeal  light,  to  both  fill
the  inner  parts,  and  circumscribe  them  without,  when  filled.
It  is  a  discourse  without  noise,  which  both  opens  the  ears,
and  yet  knows  not  to  utter  a  sound.  For  in  that  which
Acts  2  ^^  written  concerning  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  {Snd-
2-  3.  denly  there  was  made  a  sound  from  heaven,  as  of  a  mighty
wind  approaching,  and  it  filled  the  whole  house,  where  they
were  sitting.  And  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues
like  as  of  fire,  and  it  sat  upon  each  of  them ;)  the  Lord
appeared  indeed  by  the  fire,  but  He  spake  to  them  by
Himself  within.  And  neither  that  sound  nor  that  fire  was
God;  but  by  that  which  He  displayed  outwardly,  He  ex-
pressed what  He  performed  inwardly.  For  because  He
made  the  Disciples  both  to  glow  with  zeal,  and  to  be  skilful


Divers  manners  of  His  outward  and  inward  speech. 263

in speech within, He displayed tongues of fire  witliout.  Book
The  elements,  therefore,  were  applied  with  significance,  that  '^xviii.
their  bodies  might  feel  the  fire  and  the  sound,  but  that  their
hearts  might  be  instructed  by  the  invisible  fire,  and  the  voice
without  a  sound. The  fire  then  which  appeared  was  outward,
but  that  which  gave  knowledge  was  inward. And  when  the
eunuch of  queen  Candace  was sitting  in  his  chariot,  and
journeying,  and  was  holding  Isaiah  in his hands,  without
understanding  him,  the  Spirit  had  doubtless  said  to  Philip  in
his  heart.  Join  thyself  to  the  chariot. And  when  Cornelius  Acta  8
had  sent  soldiers  who  feared  God  to  summon  Peter,  Peter  ^^•
doubtless  heard  in  his  mind  by  the  Spirit,  Behold  three  men  Acts  lo,
seek  thee. Arise  therefore,  get  thee  down,  and  (jo  uilli  them.  ^^•
For,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  say,  as  it  were,  certain  words  to
us,  is  for  Him  to  intimate  by  His  hidden  power  what  is  to
be  done,  and  to  instruct  in  an  instant,  without  the  medium
of  sound  or  the  slowness  of  speech,  the  unlearned  heart  of
man in  hidden  mysteries. For  because  the  hearing  does
not  comprehend  at  once  all  the  sayings  which  are  addressed
to  it ;  since  it  understands  reasons  by  means  of  words,  and
words separately  by  syllables ; but  our  sight apprehends
suddenly  and  at  once the  whole object,  by  turning  itself
towards  it;  the  words  of  God  addressed  to  us  from  within
are  seen,  rather  than  heard ; because,  while  He  insinuates
Himself,  without  the delay  of  Avords,  He  illumines  by  His
sudden light the darkness of our ignorance. Whence
also  when  Baruch  the  son  of  Neriah  was  explaining,  when
demanded,  how  he  had  heard  the  words  of  Jeremiah  pro-
phesying, he  said,  He  pronounced  all  these  words  from  his  ^^^  gg
mouth,  as  if  he  were  reading,  and  I  wrote  them. For  he  ^^•
who  speaks  when  reading,  looks  in  one  direction,  but  utters
his  words  in  another;  because  he  speaks  that  which  he  sees.
The  Prophets  of  God  then,  because  they  rather  see  than  hear
His  words  in  the  heart,  speak  as  if  reading.

3.  But  when  God  declares  His  will  by  an  Angel,  He
points  it  out  sometimes  by  words,  sometimes  by  things,  some-
times by  words  and  things  together,  sometimes  by  images
presented  to  the  eyes  of  the  heart,  sometimes  by  images  taken
for  the  time  from  the  air  and  presented  even  before  the  eyes
of  the  body,  sometimes  by  heavenly  substances,  sometimes


264  God  speaks  hy  Angels,  in  Word,  or  in  action.

Job  38,  by  earthly,  and  sometimes  by  earthly  and  heavenly  together.
- — ^—  But  sometimes  God  so  speaks  even  by  an  Angel  to  the  hearts


of  men,  that  the  Angel  Himself  is  presented  to  the  sight  of
the  mind.

4.  For  God  speaks  in  words  by  an  Angel,  when  nothing
is  displayed  in  outward  appearance,  but  the  words  of  the

Johai 7, Heavenly  saying  are  heard;  as  on  the  I^ord  saying,  Father,
^' glorify TJnj  Son, that Thy  Son  may  fjlorify Thee; it  is
Johni2,  immediately  replied,  /  have  glorijied,  and  will  glorify  Him
^^' again. For  God,  Who  speaks  without  time,  by  the  power
of  inward  impulse,  uttered  not  in  time  that  voice  by  His  own
Substance,  v»hich voice,  circumscribed by  time.  He  made
plain by human words. But speaking doubtless from
heavenly  places,  He  fashioned,  by  the  ministry  of  a  rational
creature,  those  His  words  which  He  wished  to  be  heard  by-
men.

5.  But  sometimes  God  speaks  through  Angels  by  things,
when  nothing  is  said  in  word,  but  future  events  are  announced
by  an  object  taken  from  the  elements;  as  Ezekiel,  hearing

Ezet.  1  no  words,  saw  the  appearance  of  amber  in  the  midst  of  the
^'  fire ;  in order,  namely,  that  while he  was  looking  on  this

single  object,  he  might  understand  the  things  which  were  to
1  elec-  come  to  pass  in  the  last  times.  For  amber '  is  a  mixture  of
*'^"'"  the  metals  of  gold  and  silver,  by  which  admixture  the  silver
indeed  is  rendered  more  brilliant,  but  the  brightness  of  the
gold  is  softened  down.  What  then  is  pointed  out  by  amber,
but  the  Mediator  between  God  and  men.?  For  while  He
presented  Himself  to  us  as  a  union  of  the  Divine  and  human
natures.  He  both  rendered  His  human  nature  more  glorious
by  His  Godhead,  and  tempered  the  Divine  Nature  to  our
sight  by  His  Manhood,  For  since  human  nature  shone
forth  Avith  so  many  miracles  by  the  virtue  of  the  Godhead,
the  silver  was  im})roved  by  the  gold ;  and  because  God
could  be  recognised  through  the  flesh,  and  because  He
endured  therein  so  many  adversities,  the  gold  was,  as  it  were,
tempered  by  .the  silver.  And  it  is  well  represented  also  in
the  midst  of  the  fire,  because  the  flame  of  the  judgment
which  follows  attends  the  mystery  of  His  Incarnation.  For
John  i),  it  is  written,  The  Father  jadgefh  no  man,  hut  hath  qiven
all  judgment  to  the  Son.


JVhat  meant  by  actions  toward  Adam,  Jacob,  ^c. 265

C.  But  sometimes God  speaks  by  Angels  in  words  and  Book

deeds  at  once,  when  lie  teaches  by  certain  gestures,  that  ^^ '-

which  He  declares  in  words.  For  neither  could  Adam,  after
his  sin,  hear  the  Lord  in  the  Substance  of  His  Divinity,  but
he  heard  the  words  of  reproof  by  the  Angel,  of  whom  it  is
written; Mlieii  he  had  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God, Gen.  d,

'8

ualkinf/  in  the  garden  at  the  tv/nd  after  viid-day,  he  hid
himself  among  the  trees  of  the  garden.  For  what  is  it,  that
God  after  the  sin  of  man  no  longer  stands,  but  walks  in  the
garden,  except  that  He  points  out  that  He  has  been  driven
from  the  heart  of  man,  by  the  inroad  of  sin?  What  by  His
so  doing  at  the  wind  alter  mid-day,  except  that  the  more
glowing  light  of  truth  had  departed,  and  the  frosts  of  his  sin
were  congealing  his  sinful  soul?  He  reproved,  therefore,
Adam,  when  walking,  that  He  might  make  known  to  be-
nighted souls  their  wickedness,  not  by  words  only,  but  also
by  His  doings;  so  that  sinful  man  might  both  hear  by  His
words  what  he  had  done,  and  perceive,  by  His  walking,  the
inconstancy  of  his  changeableness,  on  having  lost  the
stability  of  eternity,  and  by  the  wind  might  observe  his  own
torpor,  when  the  warmth  of  charity  had  been  driven  away,
and  learn  by  the  declining  of  the  sun  that  he  was  drawing
near  to  darkness.

7.  Sometimes God speaks through Angels by images
presented  to  the  eyes  of  the  heart;  as  Jacob  when  sleeping  Gren. 28,
saw  a  ladder  leaning  against  heaven. As  Peter  caught  up^Jt^io
in  trance  saw  a  linen  cloth  full  of  reptiles  and  quadrupeds;  lo.  ii.
for  he  would  not  have  been  in a  trance,  unless  he  were
beholding  these  things  with  other  than  bodily  eyes. As  a
man  of  Macedonia  appeared  to  Paul  in  a  vision  of  the  night,  >b.i6.9.
who  asked  him  to  come  over  into  Macedonia. Sometimes
God  speaks  through  Angels  by  images  taken  for  the  time  from
the  air,  and  presented before the  eyes  of  the  body. As
Abraham  was  able  not  only  to  behold  three  men,  but  also  to^®°'^^;
receive  them  into  an  earthly  habitation,  and  not  only  to
receive  them,  but  to  supply also  food  for  their  use. For
unless  the  Angels,  when  announcing  some inward truths,
assumed  for  a  time  their  bodies  from  the  air,  they  would  not,
in  truth,  appear  to  our  outward  sight;  nor  would  they  take
food  with  Abraham,  unless  they  were  bearing  for  our  sake


266 God  speaks  by  Angels  in  outward  objects,  or  in  the  soul.

Job  38,  some  solid  substance  from  the  heavenly  element. Nor  is  it

— — ^ —  any  wonder  that  they  who  are  there  received,  are  called,  at

Exod.3,  one  time  '  Angels'  and  at  another  '  the  Lord,'  because  thev,
2. 4.  ...  .

who  were  ministering  outwardly,  are  designated  by  the  word

'  Angel;'  and  He  Who  was  ruling  them  within, is  pointed  out

by  the  appellation  '  Lord ;'  that  by  this  the  power  of  Him

Who  was  ruling,  and  by  the  latter  the  office  of  these  who

were  ministering  might  be  clearly  displayed.

8.  Sometimes  God  speaks  through  Angels by heavenly
substances,  as  it  is  written,  that  when  the  Lord  had  been

Matt.3,  baptized,  a  voice  sounded  from  the  cloud,  saying,  T/ns  is
My  beloved  ^on,  in  Whom  I  have  been  well  pleased.  Some-
times God  speaks  through Angels by earthly substances,

Numb,  as  when  He  reproved  Balaam,  He  formed  human  words  in

22  28.

'  '  the  mouth  of  a  she  ass.  Sometimes  He  speaks  through
Angels  by  earthly  and  heavenly  substances  together.  As
when  He  declared  to  Moses  the  words  of  His  command  in
Exocl.3, the  Mount,  He  brought  together  the  fire  and  the  bush,  and
added  one  from  above,  and  the  other  from  below.  But  this
is  done,  only  when  something  is  signified  by  this  very  con-
junction. For  what  else  did  He  point  out  by  addressing
Moses,  through  the  burning  bush,  except  that  He  would
become  the  ruler  of  that  people,  which  would  feel  the  flame
of  the  Law,  and  yet  would  not  avoid  the  thorn  of  sin?  or
that  there  would  come  forth  from  that  people.  He  Who
would  take  away  by  the  fire  of  His  Godhead  the  sins  of  our
flesh,  as  the  thorns  of  the  bush ;  and  would  preserve  the
substance  of  our  manhood  unconsumed,  even  in  the  very
flame  of  the  Godhead  ?

9.  But  sometimes  God  pours  the  virtue  of  His  inspiration
into the hearts  of  men, through Angels, by their secret

Zech.  1,  presence.  Whence  also  Zechariah  says.  And  the  Angel
^^'  who  teas  speaking  in  me,  said  to  me.  By  saying  that  the
Angel  was  speaking  in  him,  and  yet  to  him,  he  clearly  proved
that  he  who  was  speaking  to  him,  was  not  without  him  by
any  bodily  appearance.  Whence  also  he  added  a  little
ibici.2,3.  after.  And,  behold,  the  Angel  that  teas  talking  in  me  was
going  out.  For  often  they  appear  not  outwardly,  but,  as
they  are  angelic  spirits,  they  make  known  the  will  of  God  to
the  senses  of  the  Prophets,  and  raise  them  up  to  sublime


'The  Son  when  called  on  Anrjel. Ranks  of  Angels. 267

thoughts,  and  whatevei*  events  are  still  future  they  set  forth  Book
as  present  in  their  original  causes. For  the  heart  of  man,  ^xvi"-
burdened  witli  the  very  weight  of  corruptible  flesli,  enduring
this  its  bodily  part  as  an  obstacle,  penetrates  not  into  in-
ward things,  and  lies  as  a  heavy  burden  without;  because  it
has  no  hand  within  to  raise  it  up. Whence  it  results,  as  has
been  said,  that  the  subtilty  of  angelic  virtue  appears  itself,
as  it  really  is,  to  the  senses  of  the  Prophets,  and  that  their
mind  is  raised  up  as  it  is  touched  by  the  subtle  spirit,  and
that  it  is  no  longer  slothful  and  sluggish  below,  but,  filled  with
inspiration  within, ascends on  high,  and  thence beholds,
as  from  a  lofiy  eminence,  the  things  which  are  to  come,  be-
neath it. But  lest  any  one  should  think  that,  in  the  aforesaid
vvords  of  Zechariah,  either  the  Father,  or  the  Son,  or  the
Holy Spirit, is designated by the word '  Angel,' if  he
considers  the text  of  Holy Scriptiue,  he  quickly  amends
his  opinion. For  it  never  calls the  Father,  or  the Holy
Spirit,  an  '  Angel,'  nor  the  Son,  except  when  preaching  His
Incarnation. AVhence  it  is  plainly  shewn  in  the  words  of  the
same  Zechariah,  that  an  Angel,  that  is  a  creature,  was  really
speaking  in  him,  when  it  is  said,  And,  behold,  the  Angel  that
teas  talking  in  me  teas  going  ont. And  it  is  immediately
subjoined,  And  another  Angel  was  going  on  to  meet  him,  Zech.  2,
and  he  said  to  him,  Speak  to  this  young  man,  saying,  Jernsa-  ^'  **
lem  shall  he  inhabited  without  a  wall. The  Angel  therefore
who  is  sent,  who  is  ordered  by  an  Angel  what  words  he  ought
to  speak,  is  not  God. But  because,  in  the  sight  of  their
Creator,  the ordained  ministrations of  Angels  are distin-
guished by  the  position  of  their  ranks,  (in  order  that  after  the
common  happiness  of  their  blessed  state  they  may  rejoice
together  beholding  their  Creator,  and  yet  minister  to  each
other  according  to  the  position  of  their  dignity,)  an  Angel
sends  an  Angel  to  the  Prophets,  and  both  teaches  and  directs
him,  whom  he  beholds  rejoicing  in  God  in  common  with
himself;  because  he  surpasses  him  both  by  his  superior  wis-
dom, in  power  of  knowledge,  and,  by  more  distinguished
grace,  in  height  of  powei*.

10.  These  points  then  have  been  stated,  to  shew  in  what
ways  God  talks  with  men.  But  when  the  Lord  is  said  to
have  answered  Job  from  the  whirlwind,  it  is  disputed,  whether


268 Eliu  reproved^  as  saying  right  things  not  rightly.

Job  38,  He  spoke  to  him  by  Himself,  or  by  an  Angel. For  commo-

■ ^— tions  of  the  air  could  have  been  made  by  an  Angel,  and  these

words,  which  are  subjoined,  could  have  been  delivered  by
him.  And  again,  both  an  Angel  could  agitate  the  air  in  a
whirlwind  without,  and  the  Lord  could  sound  into  his  heart
without  words  the  force  of  His  sentence  by  Himself  within  ;
in  order  that  it  may  be  believed  that  he,  who  when  filled  with
God,  heard  these  things  without  words,  himself  uttered  in
words  the  sayings  of  the  Lord  which  follow.  It  is  therefore
said,

Ver.  2. Who  is  this  that  involves  sentences  in  unskilful
tcords  ?
ii.  11.  As  we  have  said  also  in  the  former  part,  an  interrogative

of  this  kind,  in  which  it  is  said.  Who  is  this  ?  is  the  beginning
of  a  reproof.  For  Eliu  had  spoken  arrogantly. And  we  say  not,
Who  is  this,  excepting  expressly  of  him  whom  we  know  not.
But  knowledge  on  God's  part  is  approval ;  His  not  knowing
is  r-ejection. Whence  He  says  to  certain  whom  He  rejects,
Lukei3,  /  knotv  you  not  iclience  ye  are; depart  from.  Me,  all  ye
workers  of  iniquity. What  then  is  the  enquiring  about  this
haughty  man,  Who  is  litis?  except  saying  openly,  I  know
not  the  arrogant :  that' is,  I  approve  not  of  their  life  in  the
loftiness  of  My  wisdom. Because  while  they  are  puffed  up
by  human  praise,  they  are  deprived  of  the true glory of
eternal retribution. But  in that  He said sentences,  and
added  not  of  what  kind,  we  certainly  understand  them  to  be
good. And  He  asserts  that  these  were  involved  in  unskilful
words,  because  they  had  been  brought  forward  with  language
of  boasting. For  it  is  a  fault  of  unskilfulness,  to  hold  what
is  right  in  a  wrong  way,  that  is,  to  pervert  the  heavenly  gift
to  a  desire  for  earthly  praise. For  as  it  often  happens  that
good  things  are  stated  badly  and  bad  things  properly,  so  the
arrogant  Eliu  brought  forward  right  truths  not  rightly,  because,
in  defence  of  God  he  uttered  humble  sentiments  unhumbly.
Whence  he  deservedly  serves  as  a  type  of  those  who  within
the  Catholic  Church  are  studious  of  vain-glory  :  for  while  they
believe  themselves  to  be  skilful  beyond  others,  they  are  in
the  Divine  judgment  convicted  of  unskilfulness ;  because,  as
1  Cor. the  Apostle said.  If  any  man  think  that  he  knoucth  any
' ' thing,  he  knonelh  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know. For


Job  called  on  to  be  manful  against  the  lust  0/ pride. 269

since  the  original  folly  of  the  Angel  was  pride  of  heart,  Book
humility  in  his  own  estimation  becomes  the  true  wisdom  of^^^'"'
man.  And  whoever  abandons  this  by  even  thinking  great
things,  is  the  more  outrageously  foolish,  the  more  he  knows
not  himself.  Whence  Eliu  both  uttered  sentences,  and
those  involved  in  unskilful  words,  because  he  both  knew  the
truth  which  he  was  speaking  about  God,  and  yet  his  silly
pride  was  making  foolish  the  things  he  said  of  himself.
Having  then  glanced  with  contempt  on  this  man,  His  words
are  directed  to  the  instruction  of  Job.

Ver.  3.  Gird  up  thy  loins  as  a  man.

12.  Holy  Scripture  is  wont  to  call  those  persons  'men,'  who iii.
follow,  doubtless,  the  ways  of  the  Lord  with  firm  and  steady
steps. Whence  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Do  inanfully.,  and  Ps.  31,
let  your  heart  he  strengthened. Whence  Paul  says,  Lift  up  „  V  ,0
the  hatids  tchich  hang  down,  and  the  feeble  knees. Whence  12.
also  Wisdom  in  the  Proverbs,  Unto  you,  O  men,  I  call. As  Prov.  8,
if  She  were  sajdng  openly,  I  do  not  speak  to  women,  but  to
men :  because  they  who  are  of  an  unstable  mind,  cannot  at
all  understand  My  words. But  to  gird  up  the  loins  is  to
restrain  lust  either  in  work,  or  in  thought. For  the  delight
of  the  flesh  is  in the  loins. Whence  it  is said  to  holy
Preachers,  Let  your  loins  he  girded  about,  and  your  lights  Lukei2,
hurning. For  by  the  loins  is  designated  lust,  but  by  lights  ^°'
the  brightness  of  good  works. They  are  commanded  there-
fore to  gird  their  loins,  and  to  hold  their  lights. As  if  they
heard  openly ;  First,  restrain  lust  in  yourselves,  and  then  set
forth  from yourselves  examples  of  good works  to others.
But  since  we  have  known  that  blessed  Job  was  endowed
with  such  great  chastity,  why  is  it  said  to  him  after  so  many
scourges.  Gird  up  thy  loins  as  a  man,  (that  is,  as  a  bold
man  restrain  thy  lust,)  except  that  there  is  one  lust  of  the
flesh,  with  which  w^e  pollute  our  chastity,  but  another  lust  of
the  heart,  by  which  we  boast  of  our  chastity .'' It  is said
therefore  to  him,  Gird  up  thy  loins  as  a  man  :  in  order  that
he  who had first  overcome  the  lust  of  corruption,  should
now  restrain  the  lust  of  pride  ; and  that  he  might  not,  from
priding  himself  on  his  patience  or  his  chastity,  become  more
fatally  lustful  before  the  e^es  of  God  within,  the  more  patient
and  chaste  he  appeared  before  the  eyes  of  men. Whence  it  is


'270 God  questions  us  by  trouble,  by  hard  commands,

Job  38,  well  said  by  Moses,  Circumcise  the  foreskins  of  your  heart ;

_— ?: —  that  is,  after  ye  have  restrained  lust  in  the  flesh,  lop  off"  also

10, 16.  the  superfluities  of  thoughts. It  follows,

/  will  question  thee,  and  answer  thou  Me.
iv.  13.  Our  Maker  is  wont  to  question  us  in  three  ways  ;  Avhen
He  strikes  us  with  the  severity  of  the  rod,  and  shews  what
great  patience  either  exists  in,  or  is  wanting  to,  us.  Or  when
He  enjoins  certain  things  which  we  dislike,  and  lays  open
our  obedience,  or  disobedience.  Or  discloses  to  us  some
hidden  truths,  and  conceals  others,  and  makes  known  to  us
the  measure  of  our  humility.  For  He  questions  us  by  the
scourge,  when  He  assails  with  aflSictions  the  mind  which  has
been  properly  subject  to  Him  in  a  time  of  tranquillity.  As
the  same  Job  is  both  praised,  on  the  evidence  of  his  Judge,
and  yet  is  given  up  to  the  blows  of  the  smiter,  in  order  that
his  patience  might  be  the  more  truly  manifested,  the  more
severely  it  had  been  examined. But  He  questions  us  by

Gen.  12,  enjoining  hard  things,  as  Abraham  is  ordered  to  go  out  of
his  own  country,  and  to  go  whither  he  knew  not ;  to  lead  his
only  son  to  the  mountain,  and  to  offer  up  him,  whom  he  had
received,  when  old,  as  a  consolation.  For  it  is  doubtless  said
to  him,  when  making  a  good  reply  to  the  question,  that  is

ib.22,12.  when  obedient  to the  command, Noiv  I  knoiv  that thou

Deut. fearest  God. Or  as  it  is  written,  The  Lord  your  God  trieth

' you,  to  know  if  ye  love  Him. Vox  God's  trying  us,  is  His

questioning  us  with  mighty  commands. His  knowing  also,

is His making us know our own obedience. But God

questions  us  by  disclosing  some  things  to  us,  and  shutting

Ps.ii  4.  out  others,  as  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  His  eyelids  question
the  sons  of  men.  For,  when  our  eyelids  are  open,  we  see  ;
when  they  are  closed,  we  behold  nothing.  What  do  we
understand  then  by  the  eyelids  of  God,  but  His  judgments  ?
Which  in  one  respect  are  closed  to  men,  and  in  another  are
opened,  in  order  that  men  who  know  not  themselve?;,  may
become  known  to  themselves;  so  that,  while  they  comprehend
some  truths  in  their  understanding,  and  are  not  at  all  able  to
understand  others,  their  hearts  may  secretly  examine  them-
selves, whether  the  Divine  judgments  do  not  stimulate
them,  when  concealed,  or  puff"  them  up  when  laid  open.
For  Paul  was  proved  by  this  questioning,  who  after  he  had


by  coynmunicating  imperfect  knowledge.  »>71

tasted  inward  wisdom,  alter  the  V)arrier  of  paradise  had  been  book
opened,  after  the  ascent  of  the  tliird  heaven,  after  the  mys- -^xviii.
teries  of  Heavenly  worda,  still  says,  I  count  not  myself  to  Vhw.z,
have apprehended. And again; /  am the least of  ^/'^J^^or
Apostles,  that  am  not  meet  to  be  called  an Apostle. And  15,  9.
again;  Not  that  tve  are  sufficient  of  ourselves  to  think  any  2  Cot.
thing  as  of  ourselves  ; hut  our  sufficiency  is  of  God. Paul^'^'
then,  when  questioned  by  the  open  eyelids  of  God,  answered
rightly,  for he  both  reached  to  heavenly  secrets,  and  yet
stood  sublimely  in  humility  of  heart. And  again,  when  he
was  discussing  the  secret  judgments  of  God  concerning  the
rejection  of  the  JeAvs  and  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  and
could  not  attain  to  them,  he  was  questioned,  as  it  were,  by
the  closed  eyelids  of  God. But  he  returned  a  thoroughly
right  answer,  who  in  his  ignorant  state,  wisely  bowed  himself
down  to  Gorl,  saying,  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  of  the  wisdom  sion^n
and knonledge of  God! how incomprehensible are  His^^-^^-
judgments,  and  His  ways  past  finding  out  ! For  ulio  hath
knoivn  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  or  who  hath been  His  coun-
sellor f For,  lo  ! when  questioned  by  mysteries  hidden,  as
with  closed  eyelids,  he  gave  fitting  and  right  answers. For
knocking  at  the  entrance  of  the  mystery,  because  he  could
not  through  his  knowledge  be  admitted  to  inward  things,  he
stood  before  the  gates  in  humble  confession,  and  that  which  he
could  not  comprehend  within,  he  praised  with  dread  without.
Whence  blessed  Job  is  now  also,  after  the  questioning  of  the
rod,  examined  by  the  questioning  of  the  word,  to  make  him
consider  the  things  which  are  above;  and  in  order  that,  when
he  does  not  comprehend  them,  he  may  turn  back  to  himself,
and  learn how  he  is  almost  nothing,  in  comparison  with
heavenly things. Let  him  hear  therefore,  /  will  question
thee,  and  answer  thou  Me. As  if  it  is  more  plainly  said,
I  rouse  thee  by  My  w^ords  to  consider  sublime  truths,  and
whilst  thou  perceivest  that  thou  knowest  not  those  things
that  are above  thee,  I  make  thee  better  known  to  thyself.
For  then  thou answerest Me  truly,  if  thou uuderstandest
what  things  thou  knowest  not. It  follows,

Ver.  4,  5,  6.  Where  icast  thou  when  I  was  laying  the
foundations  of  the  earth  ?  Tell  Me,  if  thou  hast  under-
standing. Mho  hath  laid  the  measure  of  it,  if  thou  knowest  ?


272 '  Foundations  of  the  earth '  may  represent  the  Apostles.

Job  38, or  who  hath  stretched  the  line  upon  it? Wltereupon  are  the
~^^  bases  thereof  fastened.

Alt  "f o  -^  •

y^  14.  Behold  all  things  are  put  together  in  historical  nar-

ration, as  if  concerning  the  origin  of  the  world.  But  some-
thing is  immediately  subjoined,  which  seems  to  be  said  of
the  creation,  not  of  the  world,  but  of  the  Church.  For  it  is
said;

Or  who  hath  laid  the  corner  stone  thereof?
For  by  this,  which  was  not  done  at  the  beginning  of  the
world,  it  is  shewn  that  that  former  expression  was  not  used
of  the  creation  of  the  world.  For  some  obscure  subjects  of
a  different  character  are  blended  with  those  that  are  plain
and  obvious,  for  this  very  purpose  ;  that  in  consequence  of
that  which  agrees  not  with  the  literal  meaning,  that  also
may  be  examined  mystically,  which  sounds  as  if  spoken
literally.  For  as,  by  some  things  which  are  opened  we  learn
others  which  are  closed;  so  are  we  compelled  by  those  which
are  closed,  to  knock  with  a  deeper  understanding  at  those
which  we  believed  to  be  open.  Let  Him  say  then;  Where
tvast  thou,  when  I  was  laying  the  foundations  of  the  earth  ?  In
Holy  Scripture  what  else  do  we  understand  by  foundations  but
holy  preachers  ?  For  since  God  had  placed  them  first  in  the
Church,  the  whole  structure  of  the  subsequent  fabric  has
risen  up  upon  them. Whence also  the  priest  is  ordered,

Ex.  28,  when  he  enters  the  tabernacle,  to  bear  twelve  stones  on  his

2i«  breast.  Because,  namely,  our  High  Priest,  in  offering  Himself
a  sacrifice  for  us,  when  He  set  forth  mighty  preachers  at  the
very  beginning,  carried  twelve  stones  under  His  head  in  the
front  of  His  body.  The  holy  Apostles  therefore  are  stones
on  the  breast,  to  be  displayed  as  an  ornament  in  front,  and
foundations  in  the  ground  for  the  first  firm  basis  of  the
edifice.  And  hence  when  David  the  Prophet  beheld  Holy
Church established  and  built on the lofty  minds of  the

Ps^87  1  Apostles,  he  says;  Her  foundations  are  on  the  holy  hills.
But  when  in  holy  Scripture  '  foundations'  are  not  spoken'of,
but  '  a  foundation,'  in  the  singular  number,  no  one  is  desig-
nated, except  the  Lord  Himself,  by  the  power  of  Whose  Divinity
the  tottering  hearts of  our  infirmity  ai'e  made  strong. Of

]  Cor.  "^vi^om  also  Paul  says;  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay,
hut  that  which  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ. For  He  is  in


Glory  of  their  Maker  shenn. His  lines  and  measures.  273

truth  the  foundation  of  the  foundations,  because  He  is  the  B  ,ok
first  comiuenceuient  of  beginners,  and  the  constancy  of  the  ^'^^^"'
strong.  Because  then  they  who  have  borne  the  weight  of
our  iniquities  are  our  foundations,  lest  blessed  Job  should  be
puffed  up  with  pride  by  the  power  of  liis  own  virtues,  he  is,
in  the  very  commencement  of  the  Lord's  address,  tested  by
the  mention  of  holy  preachers ;  in  order  that  the  more
worthy  of  admiration  he  beheld  them  approach,  tlie  more
vilely  he  might  think  of  himself  in  comparison  with  them.
But  that  is  described  by  the  Lord,  as  if  already  passed:  for
the  very  reason  that,  whatever  is  outwardly  still  future  iu
act,  has  been  already  effected  within  by  predestination.  It
is  said  therefore  to  him.  Where  want  thou,  when  I  was
laying  tlte  foundations  of  the  earth  f  As  if  it  were  openly
said;  Consider  the  virtue  of  the  mighty,  and  think  on  Me
their  Maker  before  all  ages  :  and  when  thou  beholdest  those
wonderful  beings  whom  I  made  in  time,  consider  how  entirely
thou  oughtest  to  be  subject  to  Me,  Whom  thou  acknow-
ledgest  as  the  Author  of  Wonders  without  time. It  follows  ;

Ver.  4,  5.  Tell  Me,  if  thou  hast  understanding,  v)ho  hath
laid  the  measures  of  it,  if  thou  knowest?  or  who  hath
stretched  the  line  upon  it?

15.  Lines  of  measures  are  stretched  forth  in  the  partition vi.
of  lands,  in  order  that  fairness  of  dimension  maybe  observed
by their very extension. But the Lord, coming to the
Church  in  the  flesh,  measured  out  the  measures  of  the  earth
with  lines,  because He  marked out  the  boundaries  of  the
Church with  the subtlety of His secret  judgment. The
secret  measures  or  lines  of  this  earth  were  being  stretched
out,  when  holy  preachers  were  called  by  the  agency  of  the
Spirit  to  go  into  some  parts  of  the  world,  but  were  kept  from
approaching  other  parts. For  when  Paul  the  Apostle  was
neglecting  to preach  in Macedonia,  a  man  of  Macedonia
appeared  to  him  in  a  vision,  to  say,  Come  over  into  Mace-  Acts  \g,
donia  and  help  us. But  on  the  other  hand,  as  it  is  written,"
The  Apostle  essayed  to  go into  Bitliynia,  but  the  Spirit  o/ibid.  7.
Jesus  suffered  them  not. When holy ])reachers  tlien are
called  to  Macedonia,  and  are  kept  from  going  into  Asia,  this
line  of  secret  measure  is  drawn  on  that  side, -and  removed
from  this. It  is  extended there,  that  Macedonia  may  be

VOL.  III.  T


274 Secret  disposal  of  God  infoKudinf)  His  Church.

Job  38,  brought  within  the  limits  of  Holy  Church.  It  is  drawn  in
3—6^  from  hence,  that  Asia  may  be  left  without  the  bounds  of  the
faith.  For  there  were  then  some  therein  who  were  not  to  be
gathered  in  :  but,  when  they  had  been  lost  according  to  their
desert,  Asia  has  now  been  embraced  within  the  measures  of
the  Church,  by  the  bounty  of  God.

10.  Within  these  measures  then  are  all  the  Elect,  without
them  are  all  the  reprobate,  even  if  they  seem  to  be  within
the  limit  of  faith. Whence  it  is  written  in  the  Apocalypse  y

Tcier.u,  The  court  which  is  without  the  temple,  cast  out,  and  mea-

^'  sure  it  not. For  what  else  does  the  court  signify  but  the

breadth  of  the  present  life  ? And  they  who  are  designated
by  the  court  are  rightly  without  the  temple :  and  they  are

Matt.  7,  therefore  not  to  be  measured,  because  narrow  is  the  gate
thai  leadeih  unto  life;  and  the  breadth  of  the  life  of  the
wicked  is  not  admitted  to  the  measures  and  rules  of  the
Elect. These  spiritual  lines  were  being  stretched  in  hidden

iBid.  8,  judgment,  when  to  a  certain  person  who  said,  Master,  I  icill
follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest,  it  was  replied  by  the

ibid.  20.  voice  of  the  same  Master,  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds
of  the  air  nests,  hut  the  Son  of  Man  hath  not  where  to  lag
His  head. Those  measures  and  lines  were  being  stretched

Luke  9,  forth,  when  to  a  certain  person  who  said,  Lord,  suffer  me
to  go  and  burg  mg  father,  it  was  replied  by  the  voice  of  the

ibid.  60.  same  Master,  Let  the  dead  burg  their  dead,  but  go  thou  and
preach  the  kingdom  of  God.  Lo !  one  promises  that  he
will  follow  Him,  and  is  rejected ;  another  demands  to  be
released, _, and  is  retained.  Whence  is  this?  Except  that
the  lines  of  heavenly  judgments  were  being  stretched  over
the  hidden  spaces  of  the  heart,  in  order  that  their  incom-
prehensible measures  might  enclose  the  one  within,  and  that
the  other  might,  not  unjustly,  remain  without.  But  since  no
one  is  ignorant  that  God  stretches  forth  these  lines  of  hidden
judgments,  why  is  it  said  to  Job,  Tell  Me,  if  thou  hast
understanding,  who  hath  placed  the  measures  of  it,  if  thou
knotvest?  or  tvho  hath  stretched  the  line  upon  it?  Is  the
question  put  to  remind  him  of  that  which  he  might  know,
and  yet  forget;  that  he  should  consider  more  anxiously  the
weight  of  the  secrets  of  God,  namely,  that  the  ordering  of  man

J  manu  depends  not  on  human  strength,  but  on  the  power'  of  the


Holy  Doctors  the  ChurcICs  bases  and  columns. 275

Creator,  that  so,  while  considering  Who  is  invisibly  perform-  Book
ing  these  works,  he  may  attribute  nothing  to  himself,  and  no  xxvni.
longer  attempt  any  thing  of  himself,  when  he  dreads  the
secret  judgments  of  God  ?  But  that,  considering  the  mea-
sures and  lines  incomprehensibly  stretched  out  from  above,
he  may  remain  more  firm  in  the  humility  of  fear,  the  more
he  sees  every  thing  depending  on  the  power  of  the  Measurer.
It  follows ;

Ver.  6. Whereupon  are  the  bases  thereof  fastened  f

17.  VVhat  else  do  we  understand  by  the  foundations of vii.
this  earth,  but  the  teachers  of  Holy  Churcli? For  columns

are  raised  on the  bases,  but  on  the  columns  the  weight  of
the  whole fabric is raised. Holy teachers  are then not
improperly  designated  by  the  name of  bases. For  while
they  preach what  is right,  and in  life accord with  their
preaching,  they  uphold  the  Avhole  weight  of  the  Church  by  the
fixed  gravity  of  their  manners ;  they  endure  sharp  assaults
from  unbelievers,  and,  whatever  is  dreaded  by  the  faithful  as
difficult  in  the  precepts  of  God,  they  shew  to  be  easy  by  the
examples  of  their  works. Whence  also,  when  the  tabernacle
was  being  fixed  as  the  type  of  the  Church,  it  is  well  said  to
Moses,  Thou  shall  make  four  columns^  and  their  bases  thou  Ex.  26,
shall  cover  with  silver. For  what else  is  understood  by^^"
silver but the brightness of  the Divine word.? As  it  is
written  ;  The  uvrds  of  the  Lord  are  pure  words,  silver  tried Ps.i2,6.
in  the  fire,  jjurged  from  the  earth,  purified  seven  times.
Bases  therefore  covered  with  silver  support  the  four  columns
of  the  tabernacle  ;  because  preachers  of  the  Church,  adorned
with  the  Divine  word,  in  order  to  set  themselves  forth  as  an
example  to  all,  bear  the  words  of  the  four  Evangelists  in
their  mouth,  and  in  their  works.

18.  Prophets  also  can  be  signified  by  bases;  for  when
they  first  spoke  openly  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord,  we
behold  them  rising  as  bases  from  the  foimdation,  and  bearing
the  weight  of  the  superimposed  fabric.  Whence  also,  when
the  Lord  ordered  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle  to  be  erected,
He  ordered  Moses  that  their  bases  should  be  cast  in  silver.
For  ^^•hat  are  signified  by  the  boards,  but  Apostles  spread
out  in  their  extended  preaching  to  the  world,  and  what  by
the  bases  of  silver  but  the  Prophets :  who  being  themselves  firm

T  2


276 Silver  of  Propheaj  shines  in  use. The  Corner-Stone.

Job  08,  and  molten  sustain  the  boards  placed  upon  them  ? Because
while  the  life  of  the  Apostles  is  instructed  by  their  preach-


Alleo.  .

ing,  it  is  also  strenj^thened  by  their  authority. Whence  also

the  bases  put  together  in  pairs  are  placed  under  the  separate
boards.  Because  when  the  holy  prophets  agree  m  their
words  concerning  the  Incarnation  of  the  Mediator,  they
edify  without  doubt  the  subsequent  preachers  of  the  Church :
and  when  they  disagree  not  with  themselves,  they  establish
them  more  firmly  on  themselves.  But  it  is  not  improperly
ordered  that  the  bases,  by  which  the  Prophets  are  signified,
should  be  cast  of  silver.  For  the  brightness  of  silver  is  pre-
served by  its  being  used;  when  not  used  it  is  turned  into  black-
ness. I'he  sayings  also  of  the  Prophets,  because  they  were
not  held  in  the  use  of  spiritual  knowledge,  remained,  as  it  were,
in  blackness  before  the  coming  of  the  Mediator,  because  they
could  not  be  understood  by  reason  of  their  obscurity.  But
after  the  Mediator,  on  His  coming,  wiped  (hem  before  our
eyes  with  the  hand  of  His  Incarnation,  whatever  light  was
huking  therein  shone  forth,  and  He  brought  into  use  the
meaning  of  preceding  fathers,  because  He  expounded  words
by  events.  Whether  He  signifies  then  the  prophets,  or  the
teachers  who  succeed  them  in  the  latter  times,  by  the  ex-
pression '  bases,'  let  Him  say ;  Whereupon  are  the  bases
thereof  fastened?  Thou  understandest,  except  upon  Me,
Who  hold  all  things  marvellously  together,  and  confer  at  the
first  an  inward  existence  on  things  that  are  good  without.
For  he  who  attributes  Avbat  is  good  to  himself,  is  not  a  solid
basis;  for  whilst  he  rests  not  on  the  foundation,  he  is  by  his
own  weight  precipitated  to  the  bottom.  But  since  many
things  are  now  being  said  concerning  the  building  of  Holy
Church,  the  mind  seeks  to  hear,  with  what  virtue  hostile
nations  are  united  together,  that  is,  with  what  skill  the  different
buildings  of  this  house  are  fitted  together.  It  follows  ;
Or  who  hath  laid  the  corner  stone  thereof?
viii.  19-  It  is  now  clear  to  all  by  Divine  grace.  Whom  Holy
Scripture  calls  the  corner  Stone.  Him  in  truth,  Who  taking
into  Himself  from  one  side  the  Jewish,  and  from  the  other
the  Gentile  people,  unites,  as  it  were,  two  walls  in  the  one
Eph.  2,  fabric  of  the  Church  ;  Him  of  Whom  it  is  written.  He  hath
'•*• made  both  one ;  Who  exhibited  Himself  as  the  corner  Stone,


I


The  same  Stone  counted  in  the  two  walls  it  joins. 277  ,

3iot  only  in  things  below,  but  in  things  above  ;  because  lie Book
united  on  earth  the  nations  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  people  of  ^^^"^'
Israel,  and  l)oth  together  to  Angels  in  heaven. For  at  His
birth  the  Angels  exclaimed,  On  earth  peace  to  men  of  (joodi^xA^i
will. For  they  would  not  offer  their  joys  to  men  of  peace  ^^'
as  a  great  thing  at  the  birth  of  the  King,  if  they  were  not  at
variance  with  each  other. Of  this  Stone  it  is  said  by  the
Prophet ; The  Stone  which  the  builders  rejected.,  is  made  ihcVa.  ns
head  of  the  corner. Jechonias  the.  king  typified  the  Stone,  ^t\
whom  Matthew  when  describing  fourteen  generations,  rec-H.  1-2. '
koned  twice. For  him,  whom  he  had  inserted  as  the  end  of
the  second  generation,  he  inserted  again  at  the  beginning  of
the  third. For  he  himself  was  removed  into  Babylonia  witli
the  people  of  Israel  ; for  while  he  is  led  from  one  to  the
other,  he  is  not  improperly  counted  twice  over  for  the  side
of  each  wall. And by  the bending  of  this  migration he
designates  the  corner  stone. For  where  the  order  is  diverted
from  its  right  course  to  go  into  a  different  direction,  it  makes,
as  it  were,  a  comer. He  could  therefore  rightly  be  counted
twice  ;  for  he  shewed  as  it  were  two  sides  of  himself  alonor
either  wall. Whence also  he properly  represented Him,
Who  born  in  Judaea,  and  gathering  together  the  Gentiles,
went  as  it  were  from  .Jerusalem  to  Babylonia,  and  bound
together  in His own  Person,  by the art  of  charity, that
building  of faith which before  was  rent asunder  by  the
animosity  of  discord.

But  these  things  which  have  been  said,  as  descriptive  of  Mor.
Holy  Church,  it  seems  good  to  repeat  briefly  in  a  moral
sense.  For  it  is  right  for  us  to  be  brought  back  to  our  own
hearts  by  those  things  which  we  know  were  said  to  blessed
Job;  because  the  mind  then  understands  more  truly  the
words  of  God,  when  it  searches  for  itself  therein.  For  be-
hold it  is  said,

Ver.  4. Where  icast  thou  when  I  teas  laying  the  found-
ations of  the  earth  ?

20.  If  the  mind  of  a  sinner  is  dust,  which  is  borne  on  the ix,
surface,  and  is  swept  away  by  the  breeze of  temptation,
(whence  it  is  written,  Not  so  are  the  ungodly^  not  so;  but  as  pg.  1  4,
the  dust,  which  the  uind  driveth  away  from  the  face  of  the
earth;)  nothing  prevents  the  earth  being  understood  to  mean


278 Man  humbled  hy  thought  of  God's  Jirst  work  in  him.

Job  38,  the  soul  of  a  just  man,  of  which  it  is  written,  For  the  earth
^•"' lohich  drinketh  in  the  rain  that  cometh  oft  upon  it,  and
Heb.  6,  briwjeth  forth  the  herbs  meet  for  those  by  whom  it  is  dressed,
^*  receiveth  a  blessing. But  the  foundation  of  this  earth is

faith. The  foundation  of  this  earth  is  laid,  when  the  first
cause  of  firmness,  the  fear  of  God,  is  breathed  in  the  secret
places  of  the  heart. This  man  does  not  as  yet  believe  the
eternal  truths  which  he  hears  ;  when  faith  is  given  him,  a
foundation  is  now  laid  for  the  building  up  of  the  subsequent
work. He  now  believes  eternal  truths,  but  yet  fears  them  not;
he  despises  the  terror  of  the coming  judgment:  he boldly
involves  himself  in  sins  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit. But
when  the  fear  of  future  things  is  suddenly  infused  into  him,
in  order  that  the  edifice of  a  good  life  may  rise  up,  the
foundations  are  now  erected. When  the  foundation  then  of
a  wholesome  dread  has  been  laid,  and  the  fabric  of  virtue  is
being  raised  on  high,  it  is  necessary  for  every  one  to  measm-e
his  strength,  as  he  is  making  progress. So  that  though  he
has  already  begun  to  be  great  by  the  Divine  building,  he
may  without ceasing  look back  to  what  he  was;  in  order
that  humbly  remembering  what  he  was  found  in  merit,  he
may  not arrogate  to  himself  what  he  has  been made by
grace. Whence  also  blessed  Job  is  now  brought  back to
himself  by  the  voice  from  above,  and,  that  he  may  not  dare  to
boast  of  his  virtues,  he  is  reminded  of  his  past  life. And  it
is  said  to him, Where  ivast  thou  ivhen  I  was  laying  the
foundations  of  the  earth  ?  As  if  the  Truth  openly  said  to  the
justified  sinner; Attribute  not  to  thyself  the  virtues  which
were  received  from  Me. Exalt  not  thyself  against  Me  by
reason  of  My  own  gift. Call  to  mind  where  I  foiuid  thee,
when  I  laid  the  first foundations of  virtue in thee,  in  My
fear. Call  to  mind  where  I  found  thee,  when  I  confirmed
thee  in  My  fear. In  order  then  that  I  may  not  destroy  in
thee  that  which  I  have  built  up,  thou  must  not  cease  to  con-
sider with  thyself,  what  I  found  thee. For  whom  has the
Truth  not  found  either  in  sins  or  excesses  ? But  after  this  we
can  well  preserve  that  which  we  are,  if  we  never  neglect  to
consider  what  we  were. But  pride  is  yet  sometimes  wont  to
steal  secretly  even  into  careful  hearts,  so  that  the  thought  of
good  deeds,  though  slight  and  feeble,  as  it  advances  to  a


And  by  the  limits  put  to  his  gifts  and  (/races. 279

great  height  of  virtue,  forgets  its  own  infirmity,  and  does  Book
not  recall  to  mind  what  it  was  in  sins.  Whence  also  ^'^^"''
Almighty  God,  because  He  sees  that  our  weakness  is  in-
creased even  by  salutary  remedies,  places  limits  to  our  very
progress,  that  we  may  have  some  excellencies  of  virtues,  which
we  have  never  sought  for,  and  that  we  may  seek  after  others,
and  yet  be  unable  to  possess  them.  In  order  that  our  mind,
when  unable  to  attain  these  things  which  it  desires,  may
understand  that  it  possesses  not  of  itself  those  even  which  it
does  possess,  and  that,  from  those  which  are  present,  those
which  are  wanting  may  be  thought  of,  and  that,  by  means  of
those  that  are  profitably  wanting,  those  goods  that  are
present  may  be  humbly  preserved.  Whence  also  it  is  rightly
subjoined,  concerning  His  dealings  towards  this  earth,  that
is,  this  righteous  soul ;

Ver.  4,  5.  Declare  to  Me  if  thou  hast  understanding,  who
hath  laid  the  measure  thereof,  if  thou  knowest  ?  or  ivho  hath
stretched  the  line  upon  it  ?

21.  For  who,  but  our  Creator,  lays  the  measures  of  this  x..
earth  ?  Who,  by  the  secret  ordering  of  His  inward  judgment,
gives  to  one  the  word  of  wisdom,  to  another  the  word  of  J^"^^-^
knowledge,  to  another  perfect  faith,  to  another  the  grace  of
healing,  to  another  the  working  of  miracles,  to  another
prophecy,  to  another  discerning  of  spirits,  to  another  kinds
of  tongues,  to  another  the  interpretation  of  speeches ;  in
order  that  one  man  may  by  one  and  the  same  Spirit  be
mighty  in  the  word  of  wisdom,  and  yet  not  be  strengthened
with  the  speech. of  knowledge,  that  is,  of  doctrine,  (for  he
is  able  to  understand  and  discover  even  that  truth  which  he
does  not  attain  to  by  study  and  learning;)  and  that  another
may  shine  with  the  word  of  knowledge,  and  yet  not  be  strong
in  the  word  of  wisdom,  because  he  is  able  fully  to  under-
stand all  that  he  has  learnt,  and  yet  cannot  rise  by  himself  to
understand  any  subtle  question.  One  man  by  faith  commands
the  elements,  and  yet  cures  not  bodily  infirmities  by  the
gift  of  healing.  Another  removes  diseases  by  the  aid  of
prayer,  and  yet  restores  not  by  his  word  the  rain  to  the  thirsty
earth.  This  man  restores  even  the  dead  at  once  to  present
life,  by  the  working  of  miracles,  and  yet,  not  possessing  the
gift  of  prophecy,  knows  not  what  things  are  to  befal  him.


280 Each  member  should  use  his  gifls  for  the  rest.

Job  38,  Another  beholds  all  future  events  as  if  present,  and  yet  does
-jj^-^  not  display  himself  in  any  working  of  miracles.  One  man
by  the  discerning  of  spirits  snbtilly  discerns  the  minds  of
men  in  their  doings,  but  yet  knows  not  tongues  of  divers
kind;  another  examines  into  tongues  of  divers  kind,  but  yet
observes  not  dissimilar  hearts  in  similar  doings.  One  person
skilfully  examines  by  interpretation  the  value  of  words  in
one  language  which  he  knows,  and  yet  patiently  goes  without
the  other  goods  which  he  has  not.

22.  Thus,  therefore,  does  our  Creator  and  Disposer  order
all  things  ;  that  he  who  might  be  puffed  up  by  the  gift  \vhich
he  has,  may  be  humbled  by  that  virtue  which  he  has  not.
He  so  regulates  all  things,  that  when  He  exalts  any  one  by
the  grace  bestowed,  He  also,  by  a  diff'erent  gift,  makes  one
person  inferior  to  another,  and  makes  every  one  to  look  on
him  who  is  beneath  him,  as  superior  to  him  in  some  other
gift,  and  though  he  feels  that  he  is  even  in  some  respects
superior,  to  place  himself  in  others  below  the  very  person
whom  he  surpasses.  He  so  regulates  all  things,  that  while
all  possess  separate  gifts,  they  become,  all  of  them,  the
property  of  each  person  separately,  by  a  connecting  bond  of
charity,  and  that  every  one  so  possesses  in  another  that  which
he  has  not  himself,  that  he  humbly  confers  on  the  other  that
which  he  received  as  his  own  possession.  For  it  is  hence
1  Pet.  4,  said  by  Peter,  As  every  one  hath  received  the  gift,  ministering
^^'  the  same  one  to  another,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold
grace  of  God.  For  the  manifold  grace  of  God  is  then  well
dispensed,  when  the  gift  which  has  been  received  is  believed
to  belong  even  to  him  who  does  not  possess  it,  when  it  is
considered  to  have  been  given  to  a  man's  self  on  account  of
him  in  whose  behalf  it  is  exerted.  Hence  it  is  said  by  Paul,
Ga).  6,  By  love  serve  one  another.  For  charity  then  sets  us  free
from  the  yoke  of  blame,  when  it  engages  us  through  love  in
mutual  service,  when  we  both  believe  that  the  goods  of  others
belong  to  ourselves,  and  present  our  goods  to  others  as  though
offering  them  their  own.  Hence  it  is  again  said  by  Paul,
iCor.i2,  i<br  eren  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many.  If  the
~  foot  shall  say.  Because  I  am  not  the  hand,  I  am  therefore
not  of  the  body,  is  it  therefore  not  of  the  body?  And  if  the
ear  shall  say,  Becaxise  I  am  not  the  eye,  I  am  not  of  the


Had  all  one  work,  the  Body  were  not  one.  281

body;  is  it  there/ore  not  of  the  body? If  the  whole  body  Book
tvere  an  eye,  where  ivere  the  hearing  ? If  the  nliole  were  "j^^"^-
hearing,  where  ircre  the  s}nelling? And  a  little  after,  But  {/Iq"^"^^'
they  were  all  one  member,  ichere  irere  the  body  f Bat  now
are  they  many  members,  yet  but  one  body.

23.  For  what  is  Holy  Church,  except  the  Body  of  its  own
heavenly  Head  ?  Wherein  one  is  the  eye,  by  beholding  lofty
things;  another  a  hand,  by  performing  right  things;  another
a  foot,  by  running  to  and  fro  at  command;  another  an  ear,
by  understanding  the  voice  of  the  precepts;  another  a  nose,
by  discerning  the  foulness  of  wicked,  and  the  fragrance  of
good,  deeds.  And,  while  they  receive  and  discharge  mutual
offices,  like  the  limbs  of  the  body,  they  make  of  themselves
together  one  single  body,  and,\vhile  they  perform  different
offices  in  charity,  they  keep  that  from  being  different,  in
Avhich  thev  are  bound  together.  But  were  they  all  to  do
one  and  the  same  work,  they  would  assuredly  not  be  a  body,
which  is  composed  of  many  members ;  because,  namely,  it
would  not  exist,  as  compacted  of  many  parts,  if  this  har-
monious diversity  of  members  did  not  bind  it  together.
Because  then  the  I^ord  divides  to  the  holy  members  of  His
Church  the  gifts  of  virtues,  He  places  the  measures  of  the
earth.  Whence  Paul  says  again,  As  God  hath  divided  /o  Rom. 12,
ecery  one  the  measure  of  faith.  And  again.  From  W7'o/// ^pj^^
the  whole  body  compacted  and  connected  by  that  which  every  \Q-
joint  supplielh,  according  to  the  operation  in  the  measure  of
every  member,  maketh  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  edifying

of  itself  in  love.

24.  But  since  our  Creator  and  Disposer  with  wonderful
wisdom  confers  gifts  on  one,  which  He  refuses  to  another,
and  refuses  to  one  those  gifts  which  He  bestows  on  another;
whoever  aims  at  doing  more  than  he  has  received,  endeavours
to  exceed  the  limits  assigned  to  him.  As  if,  perchance,  he,
to  whom  it  has  been  only  given  to  discuss  the  secret  mean-
ings of  precepts,  should  attempt  also  to  dazzle  with  miracles;
or,  as  if  he,  whom  the  gift  of  heavenly  virtue  strengthens
only  for  miracles,  should  strive,  besides,  to  lay  open  the
mysteries  of  the  Divine  Law.  For  he  puts  forth  his  foot  on
a  precipice,  who  regards  not  the  limits  of  his  own  measures.
And  he  who  boldlv  hastes  to  grasp  those  subjects  which  he


282  Each  should  keep  his  own  place. Use  of  Examples.

Job  38,  is  unable  to  reach,  commonly  loses  that  power  which  was
,,' ' his. For  we  then  use  arit'ht  the  services  of  our  limbs,  when

jVIor

we  distinctly  preserve  for  them  their  own  offices.  For  with
the  eyes  we  behold  the  light,  with  the  ears  we  hear  a  voice.
But  if  any  one,  having  inverted  the  order,  applies  his  eyes
to  the  voice,  and  his  ears  to  the  light,  both  are  to  him  open
in  vain.  If  any  one  wishes  to  distinguish  scents  with  his
mouth,  to  taste  flavours  with  his  nose,  he  does  away  with
the  service  of  both  senses,  because  he  perverts  them.  For
when  they  are  not  applied  to  their  proper  uses,  they  both
give  up  their  own  offices,  and  do  not  attain  to  those  which  are
foreign  to  them.

25.  The  Prophet  David,  then,  had  rightly  confined  the
foot  of  his  heart  within  the  measure  he  had  received  by  the

Ps.  131,  Divine  bounty,  when  he  said,  /  Jiave  not  ivulked  in  great
matters,  nor  in  things  too  'wonderful for  me.  For  he  would
in  truth  walk  in  things  too  wonderful  for  him,  if  he  sought
to  appear  mighty  beyond  his  power.  For  a  man  is  raised
above  himself  in  wonderful  things,  if  he  endeavours  to  appear
capable  even  in  those  things,  to  which  he  is  unequal.  Paul
also  was  rightly  confining  himself  within  these  limits,  even  in

Rom.i5,the  wide  range  of  his  preaching,  when  he  said,  For  I  do  not

I  ft

dare  to  speak  of  any  of  those  things,  which  Christ  worketh
not  hy  me. But  the  measure  which  has  been  received  is
then  rightly  preserved,  when  the  life  of  spiritual  men  is  viewed
as  set  before  the  eyes. Whence  it  follows;
xi  Ver.  5. Or  who  hath  stretched  the  line  upon  it?

26.  For  a  line  is  stretched  over  this  earth,  when  the
examples  of  preceding  Fathers  are  pointed  out  to  each
Elect  soul,  as  a  rule  of  life  to  be  adopted ;  in  order  for  it  to
consider  from  their  life  what  to  maintain  in  its  own  doings ;
that  so,  by  observing  the  track  of  the  proper  path,  it  may
neither,  through  neglect,  fall  short  of  the  smallest  matters,
nor,  through  pride,  stretch  forth  beyond  the  greatest;  nor
endeavour  to  do  less  than  it  is  able,  nor  grasp  at  more  than
it  has  received;  lest  it  should  either  not  attain  to  the  measure
which it  ought,  or  should,  by  forsaking  this  measure,  fall

Matt.  7,  beyond  its  limit.  For  narrow  in  truth  is  the  gate  which
leadeth  to  life,  and  he  enters  therein,  who  is,  on  account  of
it,  carefully  confined  in  all  his  doings,  by  his  subtlety  of


»S7.  Peter  shetcs  the  lines  both  oj  boldness  and  hitmilitij.  283

discernment.  For  he  who  with  fearless  mind  spreads  himself  Book
abroad  through  his  own  wishes,  condemns  himself  to  ex-  ^^^"^-
elusion  from  the  narrow  gate.  In  order,  tlicn,  for  the  mea-
sure of  this  earth  to  be  preserved,  a  line  is  extended  over  it
from  heaven ;  because  the  discriminating  life  of  the  Saints  is
spread  out  before  us  in  Holy  Scripture,  in  order  that,  either
our  defects  may  be  coiTected,  or  our  excesses  moderated;
and  both  what,  and  how  much,  is  to  be  done,  is  marked  out
by  their  discrimination  which  is  set  before  us.

•27.  Behold  a  person,  fearing  either  the  loss  of  goods,  or
bodily  affliction,  dreads  the  threats  of  worldly  power,  and
presumes  not  to  maintain  the  truth  against  the  might  of
opponents.  Because  Peter  beholds  him  hard  pressed  with
fear,  he  brings  him  back  to  the  wide  space  of  virtue,  by
putting  before  him  the  line  of  his  examples.  For  when  he  Acts  4,
had  been  scourged  by  the  chiefs  of  the  people,  and  perceived  ^q  '  ^'
that  he  had  been  set  free,  on  condition  that  he  should  cease
from  preaching,  when  he  was  commanded  not  to  speak  for
the  future,  he  did  not  yield  even  for  the  time.  For  he  imme-
diately answered  and  said,  We  ought  to  obey  God  ratlier  Acts  5,
titan  men.  And  again.  For  ue  cannot  but  speak  tlie  tltings^^'
which  we  have  seen  and  heard.  But  he,  who  before  was  20.
weak,  and  fearing  present  loss,  when  he  contemplates  ex-
amples of  such  great  courage,  now  follows  the  course  of
Peter,  through  the  authority  of  the  word,  now  fears  not  any
adversity,  and  contemns,  even  with  laceration  of  body,  the
powers  of  the  world,  which  oppose  God.  But  yet  the  more
he  overcomes  the  strength  of  his  persecutors  by  bold  en-
durance, and  the  more,  in  the  midst  of  adversities,  he  yields
not  to  any  terms,  the  more  does  he  in  general  set  himself
above  others,  even  in  the  opinions  he  has  held,  when  placed
among  the  faithful ;  the  more  does  he  choose  his  own  schemes,
and  trust  himself,  rather  than  others.  He  doubtless,  while
exerting  himself  in  virtue,  by  not  yielding  to  unrighteous
opposition,  places  his  foot  beyond  the  proper  limit,  by  not
adopting  even  the  right  advice  of  others.  Him  does  Peter
recall  within  the  line  of  measure,  wlio,  after  he  had  overcome
the  authority  of  rulers  by  the  freedom  of  his  words,  listened,
through  humility  of  heart,  to  Paul's  advice  about  not  circum-
cising the  Gentiles. For  he  desired  so  to  raise  himself  up


284 St.  Paul  gives  the  lines  of  discreet  forbearance.

J-oB  38,  against  the  adversaries  by  his  authority,  as  yet  not  to  trust
—  himself  in  those  points  in  which  he  was  wrong; in  order


that  he  might  overcome  haughty  powers  by  the  freedom
of  his  boldness,  and  might  exhibit  by  the  humility  of  his
gentleness  submission  in  good  counsel  even  to  his  younger
brethren  ;  and  thus  at  one  time  oppose  himself  to  others,
and  at  another  together  with  others  oppose  himself.  In  the
conduct  then  of  Peter  a  line  of  authority  and  humility  is
extended  as  it  were  before  our  eyes,  lest  our  mind  should  not
attain  to  the  standard  tlirough  fear,  or  should  exceed  the
limit  through  pride.

28.  It  has  been  stated,  how  the  line  is  extended,  lest  we
should  fall  into  a  fault  in  another  case,  through  the  bold-
ness of  some  of  our  doings.  Let  it  be  now  slated  how  we
abandon  the  line  of  discretion  in  one  and  the  same  virtue,  if
we  know  not  how  to  perform  it  at  one  time,  and  how  to  defer
it  at  another.  For  a  virtue  is  not  always  one  and  'the  same
thing,  for  the  merits  of  actions  are  often  changed  by  circum-
stances. It  is  hence  the  case,  that  when  we  are  properly
engaged  in  any  pursuit,  we  often  more  properly  desist  from
it ;  and  that  the  mind  more  creditably  abandons  that  em-
ployment for  a  time,  in  which  it  was  creditably  employed
at  its  own  proper  time.  For  if  in  consequence  of  our  lesser
virtues,  (by  performing  which  we  make  progress,  but  by
intermitting  which  we  are  not  endangered,)  greater  evils  and
trials  threaten  our  neighbours,  we  necessarily  put  aside  our
advance  in  virtue,  lest  we  should  cause  losses  to  the  faith  in
our  weaker  neighbours ;  lest  what  we  do  should  so  far  not
be  a  virtue,  the  more  it  overthrows  the  foundations  of  the
faith  in  the  hearts  of  others,  for  the  sake  of  itself.

29.  Which  line  of  sound  judgment  Paul  rightly  extended
before  the  eyes of  the beholders, who both ordered the

Gal.5,2.  Gentiles  who  were  coming  to  the  liberty  of  the  faith  not
Acts  16,  to  be  circumcised,  and  yet,  when  at  Lystra,  and  passing
^'  through  Iconiura,  himself circumcised  Timothy,  who  had

been  born  of  a  Gentile  father.  F'or,  seeing  that  he  would
excite  the  rage  of  the  Jews  even  against  those  who  were
then  present  as  his  companions,  if  he  did  not  shew  that  he
observed  the  commands  of  the  letter,  he  deferred  enforcing
his  assertion,  and  secured  himself  and  his  companions  from


Inlention  to  he  specially  yuardcd  in  Economy. -285

fierce  persecution  without  loss  to  the  faith.  He  did  that  Book
which  he  ordered  not  to  be  done  from  love  to  the  faith  ;  but  ^-^^ "^-
he  brought  back  to  the  service  of  the  faith  that  wliich  he
did  as  it  were  unfaithfully.  For  a  virtue  is  frequently  lost,
when  it  is  maintained  indiscreetly,  and  when  it  is  discreetly
intermitted,  it  is  held  the  more  firmly.  And  it  is  no  wonder
if  we  understand  that  that  takes  place  in  incorporeal,  which
we  see  taking  place  also  in  bodily,  things.  For  a  bow  is
intentionally  unstrung,  in  order  that  at  its  proper  time  it
may  be  usefully  bent.  And  if  it  receives  not  the  rest  of
being  unstrung,  it  loses  its  power  of  striking,  from  being
kept  on  the  stretch.  And  thus  sometimes  when  a  virtue,
which  is  in  exercise,  is  suspended  through  discretion,  it  is
reserved  ;  in  order  that  it  may  afterwards  strike  vices  the  .
more  powerfully,  the  more  it  prudently  abstains  meanwhile
from  striking.  The  subtle  line  of  sound  judgment  is,  there-
fore, then  extended  over  the  earth,  when,  by  setting  before
each  soul  the  examples  of  preceding  fathers,  a  virtue  is  both
profitably  excited  to  action,  and  is  sometimes  also  more
profitably  restrained.

30.  But  when  boldness  of  zeal  is  withdrawn  for  a  while
from  employment,  great  consideration  is  needed,  lest  we
should  perchance  cease  from  the  exercise  of  virtue,  not  from
regard  to  the  common  good,  but  through  fear  for  ourselves,
or  for  the  sake  of  some  object  of  ambition.  For  when  this
is  the  case,  a  man  no  longer  gives  way  to  dispensation,  but
to  sin.  Hence  when  a  person  so  dispenses  the  work  he  has
undertaken  as  to  cease  from  virtuous  exertion,  he  must  take
anxious  care,  and  examine  himself  first  in  the  depth  of  his
heart,  lest  he  should  by  this  greedily  seek  something  for
himself,  by  this  should  spare  himself  alone  through  fear  ;
and  lest  the  result  of  his  work  should  turn  out  ill,  as  not
produced  from  a  proper  intention  of  thought.  Whence
the  Truth  well  says  in  the  Gospel,  The  light  of  thy  body  ^'^J^^'J^^'
thine  eye  ;  if  thine  eye  he  single,  thy  whole  hody  shall  he  full
of  light.  But  if  thine  eye  he  evil,  thy  uhole  hody  shall  he
full  of  darkness.  For  what  is  expressed  by  the  '  eye,'
except  the  intention  of  the  heart  going  before  its  work  ?
vvhicli,  before  it  exercises  itself  in  action,  already  con-
templates that  which  it  desires. And  what  is  designated  by


286  Inieniions  are  the  bases  of  our  practice.

Job  38,  the expression  '  body,' except each single action,  which
-=rr-—  follows its intention  as  the  eye  with  which  it  sees  ? 77/6

MOR.  ^

light  of  the  body,  therefore,  is  the  eye,  because  the  merits  of
an  action  are  enlightened  by  the  ray  of  good  intention.  And
if  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  lohole  body  shall  be  full  of  light,
because,  if  in  the  singleness  of  our  thought  we  intend  rightly,
a  good  work  is  produced,  even  though  it  seem  not  good.
And  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  dark-
ness, because,  when  even  any  thing  that  is  right  is  per-
formed from  a  wrong  intention,  though  it  seem  brilliant
before  men,  it  is  yet  obscured  by  the  sentence  of  the  inward
Luleii,  Judge,  Whence  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  Take  heed,  therefore,
M  6  ^''^^  ^''^  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness.  If,  therefore,
23.  the  light  that  is  in  thee  he  darkness,  how  great  is  that  dark-
ness ?  Because,  if  we  obscure  by  bad  intention  that  which
we  believe  we  are  doing  rightly,  how  great  are  those  evils,
which  we  are  ignorant  are  evils  even  when  we  are  doing
them  t  And,  if  we  see  nothing  in  that  case,  when  we  hold,
as  it  were,  the  light  of  discernment,  how  blindly  do  we
stumble  against  those  sins  which  we  commit  without  dis-
cernment }  Througli  all  our  doings  then  our  intention  must
be  considered  with  watchful  care,  that  it  choose  not,  in  what
it  does,  any  thing  temporal,  but  that  it  fix  itself  entirely  on
the  solid  foundation  of  eternity  ;  lest  the  fabric  of  our  deeds,
if  built  out  beyond  the  foundation,  should  be  rent  asunder
by  the  yawning  earth.  Whence  it  is  here  also  fitly  sub-
joined,

Ver.  6. Whereupon  are  the  bases  thereof  fastened  ?

xii. 31,  For  the  bases  of  each  single  soul  are  its  intentions.

For as the fabric rests on  columns,  but  the  columns  on

bases,  so  is  our  life  based  upon  its  virtues,  but  our  virtues  on

1  Cor. our  inmost intention. And because it is written, Other

foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus

Christ; the bases are then  on  the  foundation,  when  our

intentions  are  firmly  fixed  on  Christ. But  in  vain  do  the

bases  raise  upon  themselves  lofty  edifices,  if  they  then;selves

do not stand firm on  the  solid  foundation,  because  men

doubtless  perform  in  vain  their  deeds,  however  great,  if  the

intentions of their hearts are turned aside beyond the

certainty  of  eternity,  and  if  they  seek  not  the  rewards  of  the


3,  11.


Good  actions  require  a  riffht  foundation.  287

true  life,  and  they  raise  up  u])on  themselves  heavier  losses  of  Book
ruin,  the  loftier  edifices  they  pile  up  beyond  the  foundation.  ^YlJii
For  when  they  aim  not  at  the  rewards  of  eternal  life,  the
more  they  raise  themselves,  as  it  were,  in  virtue,  the  deeper
do  they  fall  into  the  pitfall  of  vainglory.  We  must  not  con-
sider then  what  the  bases  support,  but  where  they  are  sup-
ported :  because  in  truth  the  hearts  of  men  examine,  by
Divine  help,  not  only  what  they  do,  but  what  they  aim  at  in
their  doings.  Whence,  when  Paul  was  describing  the  strict
Judge,  and  was  speaking  of  the  goodness  of  actions,  saying,
W/io  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds;  toiiovc\.2,
these  indeed  according  to  their  patience  in  well-doing,  glory
and  incorruption ;  because,  having  spoken  of  patience  in
well  doing,  he  had  mentioned  the  whole  fabric,  as  it  were,  of
Elect  actions,  he  immediately  enquired  accurately  where  the
bases  of  this  fabric  rested,  saying.  To  those  who  seek  for
glory  and  honour  and  incorruption,  eternal  life.  As  if  he
were  plainly  saying.  Although  certain  persons  exhibit
patience  in  well-doing,  yet  they  receive  not  glory  and  in-
corruption, if  they  place  not  the  intentions  of  their  heart,
that  is  the  bases  of  the  fabric,  on  the  foundation.  Because,
namely,  God  dwells  not  in  the  edifice  even  of  an  honest
life,  which,  placed  without  Himself,  He  Himself  does  not
support.

32.  Because,  therefore,  the  intentions  of  every  Elect  soul
rest  on  the  hope  of  eternity,  it  is  rightly  said  of  this  earth
by  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  Whereupon  are  the  bases  thereof
fastened?  As  if  He  were  plainly  saying,  Except  upon  Me.
For  while  every  righteous  soul  aims  at  this,  every  thing  it
does  temporally,  it  doubtless  builds  on  Me  for  no  temporal
purpose.  But  since  we  are  then  more  solidly  built  on  the
foundation,  when  we  both  follow  the  words  of  God  in  their
outward  precepts,  and  consider  them  with  deeper  under-
standing in  their  inmost  meanings,  it  is  rightly  subjoined.

Or  icho  hatJi  laid  the  corner  stone  thereof?

33.  For  the  '  corner  stone'  is  a  twofold  understanding of  xii'-
Holy  Scripture. And  it  is  laid  by  Divine  power,  when  it  is

not,  by  strict  judgment,  bound  with  the  darkness  of  its
ignorance,  but  enjoys  a  kind  of  liberty,  whereas  it  knows
sufficiently the precepts of God, either to follow their


288 Active  and  contemplative  life  to  be  combined.

Job  38,  outward  commands,  or  to  leain  by  contemplation  their  inner
-~^ — meaning. To  which  om"  understanding  would  never  attain,
if  He,  our  Creator,  did  not  come  to  take  our  nature. For
He  is  called  in one sense '  a corner  stone,'  because He
united in Himself  two  peoples,  and in another,  because
He  set forth in Himself  patterns of  both lives, that is,
the active and the contemplative, united  together. For
the contemplative  life  differs very  much  from the active.
But  our Redeemer  by coming Incarnate,  while He gave
a pattern of both, united both in  Himself For when
Luke  6,  He  wrought miracles in the city, and yet  continued  all
night  in prayer  on  the mountain. He gave His faithful
ones an example, not to neglect, through love of  con-
templation,  the care of their neighbours, nor again to
abandon contemplative pursuits, from being too immo-
derately engaged  in  the  care  of  their  neighbours ; but  so  to
keep  together  their  mind,  in  applying  it  to  the  two  cases,
that  the  love  of  their  neighbour  might  not  interfere  with  the
love  of  God,  nor  again  the  love  of  God  cast  out,  because  it
transcends,  the  love  of  their  neighbour. Because  then  the
Mediator  between  God  and  man  was  manifested  to  the  heart
of  man,  when  it  knew  not  what  it  was  doing,  in  order  by  His
doings  to  set  in  order  things  transitory,  and  to  shew  by  con-
templation whence  all  things  depended,  it  is  rightly  said.  Or
who  hath  laid  the  corner  stone  thereof?  As  if  the  Lord  were
openly  saying.  Except  Myself,  Who  manifested  in  time  for
the  salvation  of  men,  Him  Whom  I  begat  as  My  only  Son
without  time,  that men might  learn in  His  life that  even
diverse  pursuits  are  not  discordant. And  it  must  be  observed,
that  He  does  not  state  that  He  sent  Him  out,  but  that  He
I  j,on  e-  sent  Him  away  ^ Because  in  truth  the  Son,  in  taking  human
sed  di^'  nature,  descended from  a  lofty,  to  the  lowest,  estate. But
misisse.  since  even  the  P^lect  Angels,  who  are  not  redeemed  by  this
1  Pet. mystery,  yet  marvelled  at  the  mystery  of  this  Incarnation,  it
' ■ is  rightly  subjoined,

Ver.  7.  When  the  morning  stars  were  praising  Me  together.

xiv. 34.  For  because  the  nature  of  rational  spirits  is  believed  to

have  been  created  first  in  time,  the  Angels  are,  not  improperly,

called  '  morning  stars.' But  if  this  is  so,  whilst  the  earth

was  invisible,  and  in  disorder,  whilst  darkness  was  over  the


Praise  of  Angels,  exultation  of  men  at  CocVs  Work. '280

abyss,  they  anticipated  in  their  existence  the  coming  clay  Book
of  the  following  age  through  the  light  of  wisdom.  Nor  ^^^liXllL'
must  we  hear  neghgently  the  word  '  together'  which  is
added  ;  because  the  morning  stars  doubtless  praise,  together
with  those  of  the  evening,  the  power  of  the  Redeemer,  while
the  Elect  angels  glorify  even  with  redeemed  men  in  the  end
of  the  world  the  bounty  of  heavenly  grace.  For  in  order  to
excite  us  to  praise  our  Creator,  when  the  Light  arose  in  the
flesh,  they  proclaimed  this  which  we  before  mentioned;
Glory  to  God  in  the  higliest,  and  on  earth  peace  to  men  o/'Luke  2,
good  will.  They  praise  then  together,  because  they  adapt
to  our  redemption  the  words  of  their  exultation.  They
praise  together,  because  when  they  behold  us  admitted,  they
rejoice  that  their  own  number  is  filled  up.  But  they
are  therefore  perhaps  also  termed  '  morning  stars,'  because
they  are  frequently  sent  to  exhort  men,  and  while  they
announce  the  coming  morn,  they  drive  away  from  the  hearts
of  men  the  darkness  of  the  present  life.  But  behold  Angels
praise  the  Divine  Power,  because  the  very  sight  of  such
great  brightness  expands  them.  But  with  what  virtue  do
we,  who  though  ransomed,  are  yet  weighed  down  by  the
corruption  of  the  flesh,  praise  the  gift  which  we  receive?
For  how  will  our  tongue  be  able  to  speak  of  that,  which  our
mind  is  unable  to  understand? It  follows,

And  all  the  sons  of  God  exulting  fo7' joy.

35.  For  it  is  called  '  exultation,'  when  the  joy  of  the  heart  xv.
is  not  fully  expressed  by  the  power  of  the  voice,  but  when  he
who  rejoices  makes  known  in  certain  ways  the  joy  which  he
can  neither  conceal,  nor  fully  express.  Let  Angels  therefore
praise,  who  now  behold  above  the  loftiness  of  such  great
brightness.  But  let  men  exult,  who  still  suffer  here  below
the  straitness  of  their  speech.  But  because  the  Lord  knew
that  these  things  would  certainly  happen.  He  does  not  speak
of  them  as  about  to  occur,  but  rather  relates  them  as  having
occurred.  But  how  is  it  that,  when  the  good  exult  in  the
mystery  of  their  redemption,  envy  inflames  the  wicked,  and
that  whilst  the  Elect  make  progress,  the  reprobate  are  roused
to  furious  madness,  and  persecute  their  rising  virtues,
because  they  do  not  wish  to  imitate  them  ?  And  yet  He
Who  has  redeemed,  forsakes  us  not  even  among  these  trials.

VOL.  III.  u


290 Sea  of  the  loorld,  born  of  evil  thought,  shut  up  by  God.

Job  38,  For  it  is  written;  But  God  is  faithful,  Who  nil  I  not  suffer
Y  (jor.  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able,  but  will  with  the
10, 13.  teniptatiou  also  make  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able
to  bear  it.  For  our  Creator  knows  when  to  suffer  the  storm
of  temptation  to  arise,  when  to  restrain  it  on  rising.
He  knows  how  to  restrain,  in  order  to  our  protection,  that
which  He  allows  to  come  forth  against  us  for  our  exercise ;
that  the  raging  storm  may  wash  over,  and  may  not  over-
whelm us. Whence  also  it  follows;

Ver.  8.  Who  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors,  when  it  was
breaking  forth,  as  if  proceeding  from  the  icomb?
xvi.  36.  For  what  do  we  understand  by  the  '  sea,'  but  the
'^^^^^' world,  and  what  by  the  '  womb,'  but  the  corruption  of  carnal
thoughts  ?  For  in  this  place  by  the  word  '  womb'  is  desig-
nated the  secret  and  evil  thought  of  carnal  things.  And  this
womb  conceives  not  a  bodily  substance  in  order  to  produce
offspring,  but  a  cause  of  sorrow,  in  order  to  fulfil  its  wicked-
ness. Of  this  womb  of  the  heart  of  the  wacked  it  is  said  in
Ps.  7,14.  another  place,  He  hath  conceived  sorrow,  and  hath  brought
forth  iniquity.  By  this  womb  do  the  wicked  conceive  when
they  think  evil  things.  By  this  womb  do  they  bring  forth,
when  they  execiite  the  evils  they  have  thought.  The  sea
then  was  bursting  forth,  as  if  proceeding  from  the  womb,
when  the  waves  of  worldly  threats,  conceived  in  the  iniquity
of  carnal  thoughts,  were  raging  for  the  destruction  of  Holy
Chiu-ch.  But,  by  God's  help,  this  sea  was  shut  up  with
doors,  because  holy  men  were  opposed  as  a  kind  of  door,
against  the  pride  of  persecutors,  in  order  that  the  wrath  of
persecutors  might  be  crushed  by  their  miracles,  and  reve-
rence. For  when  the  princes  of  this  world  had  been  brought
low,  the  Lord  exalted  Holy  Church,  by  their  means,  above
the  height  of  the  world,  and  restrained  the  assaults  of  the
raging  sea,  by  having  raised  up  the  powder  of  the  same
Church.  But  let  us  hear  what  the  Lord  did  to  this  raging
sea. It  follows ;

Ver.  9. When  I  teas  making  a  cloud  the  garment  thereof,

and  was  covering  it  with  darkness  as  with  swaddling  clothes.

xvii. 37.  The  raging  sea  is  covered  with  a  '  cloud,'  because  the

cruelty  of  persecutors  is  covered  with  the  veil  of  their  own

folly. For  it  is  unable  to  behold  the  clear  light  of  truth,


I


Jivil  men  clouded  and  suuidd/cd  in  darkness.  'ifU

from  (hc!  inlerposcd  dailaiess  of  tlicir  unbolid';  and  tliioiigli  Uhok
the  desert  of  its  own  blindness,  it  knows  not  what  it^^"^'
is  doing  by  the  impulse  of  cruelty.  For  had  fliey  known,  iCot.2,
as  says  the  Apostle,  ihet/  uould  never  have  crucified
the  Lord  ofylonj.  This  cloud  is  wont  to  cover  not  only  the
unbelievers  who  are  placed  without  the  Church,  but  also  to
obscure  those  who  live  in  a  carnal  manner  within  it.  Whence
holy  men,  who  sympathize  even  with  others'  negligence,  and
think  that  they  themselves  are  also  suffering  that  which  they
perceive  others  enduring,  pray  to  God,  and  say,  TIton  hasl  Lam.  3,
placed  a  cloud  before  Thee,  that  our  prayer  should  not  pass
through.  As  if  they  openly  said,  To  our  mind  accustomed
to  worldly  pleasures  Thou  presentest,  by  a  righteous  judg-
ment, the  phantoms  of  its  cares,  by  which  Thou  confusest  it,
in  the  very  earnestness  of  its  prayer ;  and  that  which  Thovi
art  not  ignorant  is  given  up  to  the  most  degrading  desires,
Thou  rightly  repellest,  when  blinded,  from  beholding  the
brightness  of  Thy  light ;  so  that  when  it  reaches  towards
Thee,  it  is  turned  away  from  beholding  Thee,  by  the  cloud
of  its  own  thoughts;  and  that  that  which  constantly  thinks
on  these  worldly  subjects,  because  it  wishes  for  them,  may
endure  them  also  in  its  prayer,  when  it  does  not  wish  for
them.  Because  then  the  very  wickedness  of  persecutors  is
so  restrained  by  God's  ordering,  as  not  to  burst  forth  as
much  as  it  wishes  against  holy  men;  alter  He  said,  When
I  was  laying  the  cloud  as  the  garment  thereof,  He  fitly  sub-
joined, ^;?(/  was  covering  it  with  darkness  as  with  swaddling
clothes.  For  the  feet  and  arms  are  bound  with  swaddling
clothes,  lest  they  should  be  thrown  about  hither  and  thither
with  unrestricted  liberty.  Because,  therefore,  the  persecutors
of  Holy  Church,  restless  from  their  instability  of  heart,  and
devoted  to  this  world,  savour  not  the  things  of  age,  but  of
childhood ;  they  who  are  ftist  bound  by  darkness  and  ob-
scurity, (not  by  a  sense  of  the  Divine  judgment,)  so  as  to  be
unable  to  persecute  as  much  as  they  wish,  are  said  to  be
wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes.  Because,  as  has  been  said,
they  savour  of  childish  things,  and  yet,  constrained  by  the
Divine  dispensation  they  do  not  stretch  forth  their  arms
wherever  they  please;  and  if  they  desire  lightly  to  perjjetrate

u  2


29*2 Holy  Preachers^  doors,  open  to  some,  shut  to  others.

Job  38,  every  kind  of  sin,  yet  tliey  are  by  no  means  permitted  to

Alleg.  ^wlfil  all  lliey  wish. It  follows,

Ver.  10. I  surrounded  it  7vifh  My  boundaries.

The  Lord  surrounds  the  sea  with  His  boundaries,  because
He  so  restricts  the  wrath  of  persecutors  by  the  dispensation
of  His  judgments,  that  the  swelling  wave  of  their  mad  wrath
is  broken  on  the  level  shore  of  His  secret  dispensation.  It
follows ;

Ver.  10,  11.  And  I  set  a  bar  and  doors,  and  said,  Hitherto
shall  thou  come,  and  thou  sJialt  not  proceed  further,  and
here  shall  thou  break  thy  swelling  waves.
xviii.  38.  What  is  designated  by  '  doors,'  but  holy  preachers,
and  what  by  the  '  bar,'  except  the  Lord  Incarnate  ?  For  He
has  in  truth  opposed  these  doors  as  a  firmer  barrier  against
the  force  of  the  swelling  sea,  the  more  He  has  strengthened
them  by  barring  them  Himself.  For  because  these  doors  of
Holy  Church  are  strengthened  by  this  bar  being  placed
against  them,  they  could  be  battered  indeed  by  the  waves,
but  they  could  not  be  broken  through :  so  that  though  the
wave  of  persecution  might  dash  on  them  from  without,  yet  it
could  not  penetrate  to  the  centre  of  their  heart.  And  because
holy  Preachers  open  themselves  by  their  preaching  to  their
followers,  but  close  themselves  by  their  authority  against
those  who  oppose  them,  they  are,  not  improperly,  called
1  al.  con- '  doors,'  that  is",  open  to  the  conversation '  of  the  humble,  and

vprsion

closed  to  the  terrors  of  the  proud.  They  are,  not  improperly,
called  '  doors:'  because  they  both  open  an  entrance  for  the
faithful,  and  again  oppose  themselves  to  the  entrance  of  the
unbelieving.  Let  us  consider  what  a  door  of  the  Church
was  Peter,  who  admitted  Cornelius,  when  enquiring  into  the
faith,  and  rejected  Simon  when  seeking  miraculous  powers

Acts  10,  for  a  price;  saying  to  the  one,  I  have  found  in  truth  that
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  he  graciously  opened  the

Acts  8,  secrets  of  the  kingdom. Declaring  to  the  other.  Thy  money

^^*  perish  with  thee,  he  closes  the  entrance  of  the  heavenly
court  by  a  sentence  of  strict  condemnation.  What  are  all
the  Apostles  but  doors  of  Holy  Church,  when  they  hear  by

John20,  the  voice  of  their  Redeemer,  Receive  the  Holii  Ghost ;  whose-

22.  23.

soever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  Iheni ;  and  whose-


Persecution  limited  by  conversion  of  the  Heathen. 293

soever  sins  ye  retain^  they  are  retained?  As  if  it  were  plainly  Book
said  to  them ;  By  you,  those  to  whom  ye  open  yourselves  ^^^^Xiii'
shall  come  in  to  Me;  and  those  to  whom  ye  close  yourselves,
shall  be  rejected.  Whilst  then  the  sea  rages,  the  Lord
opposes  His  bar  and  doors ;  because  whilst  the  storm  ol'
persecution  spreads  itself  out  in  the  world  from  bitter  and
faithless  hearts,  God  exalts  the  glory  of  His  Only  Begotten,
and  the  reverence  of  His  preachers ;  and  while  He  makes
known  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  strength,  He  breaks  in
the  ungodly  the  waves  of  wrath.

39,  But  it  is  well  said,  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and  thou
shalt  not  proceed  fur  ther.  Because  there  is  doubtless  a  limit
of  the  secret  judgment,  both  when  the  storm  of  persecution
should  burst  forth,  and  when  it  should  cease,  lest,  if  not
aroused,  it  should  not  discipline  the  Elect,  or,  if  unrestrained,
should  overwhelm  them.  But  when  the  knowledge  of  the
lailh  reaches  as  far  as  to  the  persecutors,  the  swelling  of  the
troubled  sea  is  appeased, and  there  does  the  sea  break  itswaves,
because  on  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  it  blushes
at  every  thing  it  has  done  wickedly.  For  the  broken  wave
in  truth  glides  back  on  itself;  because  wickedness  when
overcome  is  accused  even  by  the  thought  of  its  own  heart ;
and  suffers,  as  it  were,  the  very  violence  which  it  had  inflicted,
because  it  feels  the  stings  of  guilt,  from  the  depravity  which
it  had  committed.  Whence  it  is  said  to  certain  persons  by
Paul,  JVhat  fruit  had  ye  then  in  those  things  uliereof  ye  areilom.(j,
now  ashamed?  As  if  it  were  said;  Why  did  the  waves  of  '
your  wickedness  raise  themselves  aloft,  which  being  now
broken  in  themselves,  overwhelm  you  when converted,  by

the  same  means  with  which  they  puffed  you  up  when  per-
verted. It  is  therefore  rightly  said.  And  here  shalt  thou
break  thy  sicelliny  waves.  But  that  the  doors  are  spoken  of
a  second  time,  in  this  shutting  up  of  the  sea,  after  the  manner
of  Holy  Scripture,  a  thing  once  mentioned  is  repeated  by
way  of  confirmation.

40,  But  if  we  ought  to  understand  by  the  '  sea'  in  this
place,  not  specially  the  crowd  of  persecutors,  but  the  world
in  general ;  the  Lord  set  up  gates  against  the  sea  a  second
time,  because  He  first  gave  to  the  human  race  the  precepts
of  the  law,  and  afterwards  the  testament  of  new  grace;  He  a


294 Restraint  put  Jirst  on  sins  of  act,  then  of  thought.

Job  38,  second  time  confined  the  violence  of  this  sea  by  the  gates
He  set  against  it,  since  those,  whom  He  chose  to  obey  His


Alleg.

will, He first ke})t from idols, by giving the law, and

afterwards  delivered  from  the  carnal  understanding  of  things

b}'  the  revelation  of  grace. The  sea  a  second  time  received

gates,  because  God  first  prohibited  mankind  from  works  of

iniquity,but  afterwards  restrained  them  from  the  sin  of  thought.

Let  us  see  how  God  first  imposed  gates  on the swelling

Ex.  20,  sea. For  behold  it  is  said  bv  the  law,  Thou  shall  not  kill.

Deut.  5  IhoK shall  not commit adallenj. Tlioii shall not  steal.

17 — 20.  'J'/ioH  shall  fiat  bear  false  witness.  Let  us  see  how  the  Lord
confines  this  sea  with  second  gates. Behold  He  says  in  the

Matt.  5,  Gospel,  Ye  have  heard  that  it  u-as  said  to  them  of  old  time.
Thou  shalt  not  commit  adidtery.  But  I  say  unto  you,  that
whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed
adidtery  ivith  her  already  in  his  heart. And  it  is  said  again,

ib.43.44.  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said,  Thou  shalt  love  thy
neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy.  But  I  say  unto  you,  Love
your  enemies,  and  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you.  He
therefore  Who  first  prohibits  wickednesses  of  deeds,  and
afterwards  does  away  with  the  faults  of  the  heart,  doubt-
less twice  imposes  gates  on  the  swelling  sea,  that  it
pass  not  over  the  shores  of  justice  which  have  been  drawn
around  it.

41.  But  when  He  was  saying.  Who  hath  shut  up  the  sea
with  doors?  He  immediately  also  subjoined  the  time.  When
it  was  breaking  forth,  as  if  proceeding  from  the  womb.
Because,  namely,  He  then  opposed  mankind  by  the  precepts
of  the  Law,  when  the  world,  though  little  removed  from  its
first  beginning,  was  going  forth  even  from  its  very  birth  to
make  progress  in  the  carnal  life.  For  to  proceed  from  the
womb,  is  to  appear  in  the  flesh  in  the  light  of  present  glory.
And  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  When  I  was  laying  the  cloud  as
the  garment  thereof.  Because,  doubtless,  God  did  not  then
present  Himself  to  men  in  open  sight,  but  while  He  rescued
them  from  the  error  of  unbelief,  and  yet  laid  not  open  to
them  the  brightness  of  His  own  light.  He  withdrew  them,  as
it  were,  from  darkness,  and  yet  covered  them  with  a  cloud,
in  order  that  they  might  forsake  their  former  deeds  of
wickedness,  and  yet  see  not  more  clearly  at  present  future


Inferior  -precepts  first  given,  afterioard  better.  295

blessings. Whence  also  it  is  fill}'  subjoined,  And  covering  Book
it  with  darkness  as  xcitU  swaddling  clothes. For  when  He  ~

taught  not  ignorant  people  by  the open  preaching  of  the
Spirit, but bound  them,  in  figurative  language,  with the
literal  precepts,  He  enveloped  them,  while  yet  weak  in  know-
ledge, Avith  the  darkness  of  His  words,  as  if  with  swaddling
clothes ; in  order  that  they  might  gain  strength  by  being
bound  by  grosser  commands,  lest  they  should  perish,  through
a  fatal  freedom,  in  their  own  pleasures. And  since  not  love,
but  fear,  was  confining  them  to  the  way  of  righteousness,  the
Divine  dispensation  kept  them  close,  as  it  were,  in  order  to
nourish them. For when the feeble people unwillingly
endured  the  swaddling  bands  of  precepts,  it  attained  to  a
stronger  condition  from  its  very  bondage. For  because  fear
first  restrained  it  from  sin,  it  came  forth  afterwards,  in  a  fitting
condition,  into  the  liberty  of  the  Spirit. These  sw^addling
clothes which He gave to beginners,  the Lord  Himself
blames  by  the  Prophet,  saying,  I  gave  them  precepts  that  were  Ez.  20,
not  good. For  evil  things  cease,  as  it  were,  to  be  evil,  by
comparison  with  worse,  and  good  things  are,  so  to  say,  not
good,  in  comparison  with  better. For  as  it  is  said  of  Sodom
and Gomorrah,  to  guiltier  Judah,  Tliou  hast  justified  thy'E.z.\Q,
sisters  in  all  thine  ahominations  which  thou  hast  done,  so
are  the  good  precepts,  which  were  given  to  the ignorant,
spoken  of  as  not  good,  by  reason  of  the  better  precepts  of
the New Testament which succeed them. For neither
would  minds which were clinging  to the  practice of  the
carnal  life  be  raised  from  their  low  condition,  unless  they
advanced  through  a  gradual  course  of  preaching. For  hence
is  it,  that  when  they  were  settled  in  Egypt,  their  secret  love
of  gain  is  condescended  to  by  a  considerate  and  righteous
forbearance,  and  they  are  ordered to  depart,  after  having
first  taken  away  the  gold  and  silver  vessels  of  their  neigh-
bours. But when brought to Mount Sinai, they hear
at  once,  on  receiving  the  Law, Thou  shall  not  covet  a?ig  Ex.  20,
thing  that  is  thy  neighbour'' s. And  hence  it  is,  that  in  the
same  law  they  are  directed  to  exact  an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  aExod.
tooth  for  a  tootli,  and  yet  at  last,  on  the  revelation  of  grace,"  ' "
thev  are  commanded,  when  struck,  to  offer  the  other  cheek.  Matt.  5,

38 39

For  because  anger  exacts  more  in  vengeance  than  it  has  suf-
fered in  wrong;  while  they  learn  not  to  requite  their  wrongs  in


296  Allegories  of  the  Law  a  dark  Swathing -band.

Job  38,  a  manifold  manner,  they  would  leavn  at  last  to  bear  them  of
:,  '  their  own  accord,  even  when  multiplied.  Hence  it  is  that
He  prohibited  this  same  ignorant  people  certain  observances,
but  preserved  others  after  their  original  use,  though  He
applied  them  so  as  to  prefigure  a  better  condition.  For  they
used  to  sacrifice  brute  animals  to  idols  in  Egypt,  and  He
afterwards  retained  the  sacrifice  of  animals,  for  their  ob-
servance, but  forbade  the  worship  of  idols;  in  order  that,
while  losing  a  portion  of  their  customs,  their  weakness  might
be  comforted  by  retaining  something  of  them.  But  by  a
marvellous  dispensation  of  wisdom  the  liOrd  converted  into  a
mightier  figure  of  the  Spirit,  that  carnal  custom  which  He
retained.  For  what  do  the  sacrifices  of  those  animals  desig-
nate, except  the  death  of  the  Only-Begotten  ?  What  do  the
sacrifices  of  those  animals  signify,  except  the  extinction  of
our  carnal  life  ?  The  weakness  then  of  an  ignorant  peojjle  is
condescended  to,  by  the  same  means  as  the  greater  strength  of
the  Spirit  is  announced  through  the  shadowy  forms  of  allego-
ries. It  is  therefore  rightly  said.  And  I  u-as  covering  it
with  darkness  as  with  swaddling  clothes ;  because  He  bore
with  the  weaknesses  of  its  tenderness,  by  the  same  means  as
He  raised  a  lofty  cloud  of  spiritual  significations.

4'2.  But  because  He  kept  them  by  the  limits  of  the  pre-
cepts from  unrestrained  wanderings  of  mind.  He  rightly
subjoins  ;  /  surrounded  it  with  My  boundaries.  And  be-
cause He  restrained  the  motions  of  this  human  race  by
sending  the  Mediator,  He  fitly  subjoins  ;  And  I  set  a  bar
and  doors.  For  He  set  in  truth  a  bar  and  doors ;  because
He  confirms  the  preaching  of  the  new  life,  by  sending  our
lledeemer  to  oppose  the  sins  of  the  guilty.  For  doors,  when
closed,  are  strengthened  by  a  bar  being  placed  against  them.
God,  therefore,  placed  against  them  a  bar,  because  against
the  wanton  motives  of  the  human  race  He  sent  the  Only-
Begotten,  Who  confirmed  in  His  actions  the  spiritual  pre-
cepts, which  He  taught  in  words.  But  it  is  well  subjoined  ;
Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and  thou,  shall  not  proceed  further,
and  here  shall  thou  break  thy  swelling  waves.  For  this  sea
had  in  truth  passed  over  its  former  doors,  because  the  wave
of  human  pride  used  to  overleap  the  barriers  of  the  door
opposed  to  it.  But  after  the  world  found  the  Only-Begotten
opposed  to  it,  it  broke  the  force  oi'  its  ]iridc,  and  could  not


Christ  the  Bar. Storms  loithin  the  soul.  297

pass  over,  because  it  found  the  boundary  of  its  fury  closed  Book
up by His strength. Whence it is rightly  said by  the——?'
Pro])het,  The  sea  saw  and  fled.  By  doors,  also,  His  suHerings  Ps.  114,
which  were  seen  can,  not  unfitly,  be  understood. And  He  '
secretly  placed  a  bar  against  them,  because  He  strengthened
them  by  the  invisible  Godhead. Against  which  the  waves
of  the  world  come,  but  they  break  and  are  scattered  :  because
hauglily men despise them  when they see them, but by
experience  dread  their  strength. For  when  the  hiunan  race
first  derided,  and  then trembled  at, the sufferings of  the
Only-Begotten,  it  came  swelling with pride,  like the sea
which  is  about  to  dash  against  the  opposing  doors,  and  was
broken  and  scattered  by  their  power.

But  because  this  is  said  to  blessed  Job,  in  order  that  the
glorying  of  his  heart,  at  liis  many  virtues,  might  be  kept  down,
(lest  he  should  perchance  attribute  to  himself  what  he  knows
of  his  lofty  position,)  if  we  consider  these  words  in  a  moral
sense  also,  we  learn  how  much  they  were  said  for  his  edifi-
cation. Let  Him  say  therefore,

Ver.  8. Who  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors  ?

43.  What  is  this  sea,  except  our  heart,  agitated  by  fury,  xix.
embittered  by  strife,  swelling  with  the  haughtiness  of  pride,  °^'
darkened  by  the  deceit  of  wickedness  .?  And  how  mightily
this  sea  rages,  any  one  observes,  who  understands  in  himself
the  seci'et  temptations  of  thoughts.  For  behold  we  are  now
abandoning  our  perversities,  we  are  adhering  to  proper
desires,  we  are  now  cutting  off,  outwardly,  our  wicked
works.  But  yet  v.e  are  secretly  harassed  within,  by  that
tempest  of  our  former  life,  with  which  we  have  come  thus
far  ;  and  unless  the  barriers  of  unbounded  fear  were  confin-
ing it,  with  the  thought  of  the  judgment,  and  dread  of  eternal
torment,  all  the  foundations  of  the  work  wdiich  has  been
raised  up  in  us  would  have  utterly  fallen.  For  if  that  which
rages  within  in  suggestion,  were  to  burst  forth  in  deliberate
act,  the  whole  fabric  of  our  life  would  have  lain  utterly  over-
thrown. For  being  conceived  in  iniquity  and  born  in  sin,
we  bring  with  us  into  this  world  a  contest,  through  the
plague  of  innate  corruptions,  which  we  must  strive  hard
to  overcome.  Whence  it  is  rightly  said  also  of  the  sea ;
When  it  was  hreakinrj  forth,  as  if  iirocecding  from  the  womb.


298 Grace  restrains  the  waves  of  thought  by  fear  of  God.

Job  38,  For  youth  is  the  womb  of  evil  thought. Of  which  the  Lord
—^ —  says  by  Moses,  For  the  sense  and  thought  of  the  human
Gen.  8,  heart  is  prone  to  evil  from  its  youth. For  the  evil  of  cor-
^^' ruption  which  each  one  of  us  has  acquired  from  the  spring-
ing up  of  his  carnal  desires,  he  exercises  as  he  advances  in
years;  and  unless  the  hand  of  Divine  fear  speedily  repress
it,  sin  quickly  swallows  up  all  the  goodness  of  created  nature.
Let  no  one  then  attribute  the  victory  over  his  thought  to
himself,  since  the  Truth says, Who  shut  up  the  sea  icith
doors,  when  it  was  breaking  forth,  as  if  it  was  proceeding
from  the  womb  ? For did  not Divine grace  resti-ain the
waves of  our  heart, from the very  first beginning  of our
thoughts, the  sea,  raging  with the storms of  temptations,
would  doubtless  have  overwhelmed  the  land  of  the  human
heart,  so  that,  washed  by  the  briny  waves,  it  would  have
become  barren  ;  that  is,  it  would  have  been  charmed  by  the
fatal  pleasures  of  the  flesh,  and  have  perished. The Lord
then  alone  shuts  up  the  sea  with  doors.  Who  opposes  to  the
evil  motions  of  our  hearts  the  barriers  of  inspired  fear. But
because  we  are  prohibited  following  those  things  which  we
behold,  because we are debarred from  the enjoyment  of
bodily  pursuits,  we  delight  to  raise  the eyes  of  our  mind
even  to  things  invisible,  and  to  behold  those  very  things  we
are  ordered  to  follow. But  what  do  we? These  things  are
not  yet  open  to  our  feeble  sight. Behold  we  are  invited  to
their  love,  and  yet  are  restrained  from  their  sight,  because  even
if  we  ever  see  them  by  stealth  and  partially,  we  are  in  darkness
from  our  still  too  imperfect  sight. Whence  it  is  filly  sub-
joined ;

Ver.  9.  When  I  ivas  laying  the  cloud  as  the  garment
thereof,  and  was  covering  it  with  darkness  as  with  swaddling
clothes.
XX.  44.  This  tumultuous  sea,  (our  heart,  namely,  agitated  by
thoughts,)  is  covered  with  a  cloud ;  because  it  is  so  obscured
by  the  confusion  of  its  own  restlessness,  as  not  clearly  to
behold  inward  peace.  This  sea  is  covered  with  darkness  as
witli  swaddling  clothes,  because  it  is  still  kept  from  the  con-
templation of  sublime  truths,  by  its  weak  and  tender  senses.
Let  us  behold  Paul  covered  as  it  were  with  a  kind  of  dark-
1  Cor. ness,  as  with  swaddling  clothes,  when  he  says,  We  now  see

13,  12.


Man's  strength  limited. Sin  restrained  hy  inspired  Virtues.  299

through  a  glass  darkly:  hut  then  face  to  face. Nou-  I  know  ^^^^^
in  part,  hut  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known.
For  did  he  not  perceive  that  he  was  a  child  in  the  under-
standing of  heavenly  things,  he  would  not  have  first  men-
tioned, on  this  point,  a  comparison  of  his  age,  saying.  When  \  Cor.
/  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  understood  as  a  child,^^^  ^'•
/  thought  as a child. We therefore then attain to the
strength  of  youth,  when  we  behold  with  strong  sight  that  life
to  which  we  are  tending. But  now,  since  the  keenness  of
our  sight  is  dazzled,  through  its  infirmity,  by  the  light  within,
our  mind  is,  as  it  were,  held  bound  by  swaddling  clothes.
Where  it  is  fitly  subjoined  ;

Ver.  10.  I  surrounded  it  with  my  boundaries.

45.  For  the  Lord  surrounds  this  sea  with  His  boundaries, xxi.
because  He  keeps  low  within  the  limits  of  contemplation

our  heart  which  is  still  agitated  by  the  plague  and  trouble
of  its  corruption  ;  that  (though  it  desires  more)  it  may  not
ascend  higher  than  the  limit  assigned  to  it.  Or  certainly
the  Lord  surrounds  this  sea  with  His  boundaries;  because
He  calms  by  the  secret  distributions  of  His  gifts  our  heart
swelling  with  temptations  :  at  one  time  keeping  a  wicked
suggestion  from  arriving  at  pleasure,  and  at  another  a  wicked
pleasure  from  breaking  out  into  consent.  He  then,  Who
watches  the  unlawful  motions  ^f  the  heart,  and  in  some
cases  keeps  them  from  coming  as  far  as  to  consent,  but  in
others  restrains  them  even  from  delight,  doubtless  imposes
boundaries  on  the  raging  sea,  that  it  burst  not  forth  in  act,
but  that  tlie  gently  murmuring  wave  of  temptation  may  dash
itself  within  the  secret  recesses  of  the  mind.  But  because
it  is  then  mightily  restrained,  when  it  is  opposed  by  delight
in  God  and  by  inspired  virtues,  it  is  rightly  subjoined ;

Ver.  10,  n.  And  I  set  a  bar  and  doors,  and  said,  Hi-
therto shall  thou  come,  and  thou  shall  not  proceed  further,
and  here  shall  thou  break  thy  swelling  waves.

46.  For  what  do  we  understand  by  *  doors,'  in  a  moral  xxii,
sense,  but  virtues,  and  what  by  a  '  bar,'  but  the  strength  of
charity  ? These doors, therefore,  that is, these virtuous
deeds,  the  raging  sea  rends  asunder,  unless  charity  of  mind,
secretly  placed  against  them,  holds  them  together. But  all

the  goodness  of  virtues  is  easily  destroyed  by  a  temptation


300 Sin  restrained  in  the  Elect  hy  the  Poioer  of  God.
Job  38,  of  the  heart  rushing  upon  them,  unless  it  be  kept  firm  by

1011  ox

-^ — ^charity  rooted  within.  Whence  also  when  Paul  was,  in  his
preaching,  opposing  certain  doors  of  virtues  to  the  sea  of
temptation,  he immediately added to them, as it were,

Col.  3,  the  strength  of  a  bar,  saying,  But  above  all  these  things
having  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness.  For  cha-
rity is  called  the  bond  of  perfectness,  because  every  good
deed  which  is  done,  is  doubtless  fastened  thereby,  so  as  not
to  peiish.  For  any  work  is  speedily  plucked  up  by  the
tempter,  if  it  is  found  free  from  the  bond  of  charity.  But
if  a  mind  is  constrained  by  the  love  of  God  and  of  its  neigh-
bour, when  the  motions  of  temptations  have  suggested  to  it
any  wicked  thoughts,  this  very  love  opposes  itself  to  their
progress,  and  breaks  the  waves  of  sinful  persuasion  by  the
gates  of  virtues,  and  the  bar  of  inmost  love.  Because  there-
fore the  Lord  restrains  the  sins  which  spring  up  in  the  heart,
by  the  strength  of  inspired  charity,  He  checks  the  onset  of
the  rising  sea,  by  barriers  barred  against  it.  Anger,  it  may
be,  exasperates  within,  bnt,  that  heavenly  peace  may  not  be
lost,  the  aid  of  the  tongue  is  not  lent  to  the  agitation  of  the
mind,  so  that  that  which  sounds  tumultuously  in  the  recesses
of  the  heart  does  not  vent  itself  in  words.  Lust  is  kindled
in  the  secret  thoughts,  but,  that  it  lose  not  its  heavenly
purity,  thy  mind  chastens  those  limbs,  which  could  help  to
further  the  uncleanness  conceived  within  ;  lest  the  filthiness
of  the  heart  should  exhale  to  the  corruption  of  the  body.
Avarice  excites;  but,  that  it  lose  not  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
the  mind,  contented  with  its  own  lot,  confines  itself  within
the  bounds  of  parsimony,  lest  it  should  break  out  in  wicked
deeds,  and  lest  the  heat  of  inward  desire  should  ooze  forth
into  outward  acts.  Pride  puffs  up  a  man  ;  but,  that  he  lose  not
his  true  dignity,  by  considering  that  he  is  dust,  he  brings  him-
self down  from  the  loftiness  of  his  conceived  pride  ;  striving,
doubtless,  that  that  which  he  endures  in  the  suggestion  of
thought,  may  not  burst  forth  into  outward  exercise.  It  is
well  said,  therefore,  I  set  a  bar  and  doors,  and  said.  Hitherto
shalt  thou  come,  and  thou  shall  not  proceed  further,  and
here  shalt  thou  break  thy  swelling  waves,  because  while
each  of  the  Elect  is  both  assaulted  bv  sin^  and  vet  refuses  to

*  *■  «j

act  upon  evil  suggestions,  the  sea  is  kept,  as  it  were,  within


Job  warned  not  to  attribute  this  to  himself.  301

bounds. And  thou"li it  lashes  the mind  within,  with  the  Book

° ,  ,  •  XXVIII.

tumultuous  waves  of  thoughts,  yet  it  passes  not  over  the

appointed  bounds  of  holy  living.  This  sea  indeed  swells
itself  up,  but  when  it  is  dashed  against  the  firm  deliberation
of  the  heart,  it  is  broken  and  retires.  That  blessed  Job,
then,  may  not  ascribe  it  to  himself  that  he  stands  firmly
against  the  storms  of  his  heart,  let  him  hear  by  the  voice  of
Gcd ;  Who  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors,  when  it  was  break in(/
forth  as  if  proceeding  from  the  womb  ?  and  the  rest :  as  if  it
were  plainly  said  to  him  ;  In  vain  thou  regardest  thyself  in
thy  good  deeds  without,  if  thou  dost  not  consider  Me  within,
Who  calm  in  thee  the  waves  of  temptation.  For  that  thou
art  able  to  withstand  the  waves  in  act,  is  of  My  might,  Who
break  the  waves  of  temptation  in  the  heart.


BOOK XXIX.

Twenty-two  verses  of  the  thirty-eighth  chapter,  from  the  twelfth  to  the
thirty- third  inclusive,  are  explained;  and  many  truths  are  taught,
especially  concerning  the  arts  and  snares  of  Satan,  grace,  predestination,
reprobation,  and  the  secret  judgments  of  God.

i.  1.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  that  He  is  the  Power  and

Wisdom  of  God,  is  born  of  the  Father  before  all  times,  or

rather,  because  He  neither  began,  nor  ceased  to  be  born,  let

1  natus.  us  say  more  truly  that  He  was  ever  born '. Yet  we  cannot

•2nasci-  say,  He  is  ever  being  born  -,  lest  He  should  seem  imperfect.

^^^ But  in  order  that  He  may  be  designated  both  eternal  and

perfect,  let  us  say  that  He  was  even  ever  born,  so  that '  born'

may  relate  to  His  perfection,  and  '  ever'  to  His  eternity. In

order  that,  in  some  way  or  another,  that  Essence  which  is

without  time  may  be  able  to  be  described  in  words  of  time.

Although  in  calling  Him  perfect,  we  deviate  much  from  the

3  factum  expression  of  His  truth,  since  that  which  has  not  been  made'',

4perfec-  cannot  be  called  perfect "'. And  yet  the  Lord  says,  con-

*?l™*  ^  descending  to  our  words  of  infirmity,  Be  ye  pe7[fect,  even  as

48. qjotir  heavenly  Father  is  jierfect. In  that  Divine  Sonship

therefore  He  could  not  be  discerned  by  the  human  race,

wherefore  He  came  in  human  nature,  to  be  seen;  He  wished

to  be  seen,  in  order  to  be  imitated. Which  birth  of  the  flesh

appeared contemptible  to  the  wise  ones  of  the  world  ;  for

they despised the weaknesses of  His  humanity,  judging

them  unworthy  of  God. And  man  was  the  more  His  debtor,

1  Cor.  I,  the  more  God  took  on  Himself  indignities  for  his  sake. For

^^' since  the  icorld  by  tcisdom  knetv  not  God,  it  pleased  God  by

the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  thai  believe. As  if

He  were  saying.  When  the  world  by  its  wisdom  foimd  not

God,  Who  is  Wisdom  itself,  it  seemed  good  that  it  should


Eternal  Nativity  of  the  Son. The  Church,  the  dawn. 303

behold  God  made  Man  thioim;h  tlie  foolishness  of  humanity,  Book

. XXIX
in  order  that  His  Wisdom  might  come  down  to  our  folly, -

and  that  our  darkness,  when  enlightened  by  means  of  the  clay  John  9,

of  its  own  flesh,  might  behold  the  light  of  heavenly  Wisdom.

Born  therefore  of  the  Father,  before  all  time,  He  deigned  to

be  born  of  His  Mother  in  time,  in  order  that  by  confining  His

birth  between  a  beginning  and  an  end,  He  might  disclose  to

eyes  of  the  human  mind  that  birth,  which  neither  rises  from

a  beginning,  nor  is  bounded  by  an  end. Whence  it  is  now

well  said  to  blessed  Job,

Ver.  12.  Hast  thou commanded  the morning  since  thy

birth,  and  hast  thou  sheton  to  the  day-spring  its  place  ?

2.  Thou understandest, as I. For the origin  of  His ii.
Divinity  has  no  before  and  after. And  while  Its  ever  being  is
through  all  eternity,  while  It  circumscribes  ever\'  thing  which
passes  away,  It  bounds  within  Itself  the  ebbings  and  flowings

of  times.  But  because  the  origin  of  His  Humanity  began
and  ended,  It  received  from  time  a  before  and  after.  But
because,  when  He  took  on  Himself  the  shadows  of  our
temporal  being.  He  shed  on  us  the  light  of  His  eternity,
after  this  beginning  which  the  Creator  made  for  Himself  in
time,  the  day-spring  rightly  learned  its  own  place  without
time.  For  because  the  dawn,  or  day-spring,  is  turned  from
darkness  into  light,  the  whole  Church  of  the  Elect  is,  not
improperly,  designated  by  the  name  of  dawn,  or  day-spring.
For  whilst  it  is  brought  from  the  night  of  unbelief  to  the
light  of  faith,  it  is  laid  open  to  the  splendour  of  heavenly
brightness,  as  the  dawn  bursts  into  day  after  the  darkness.
Whence  it  is  also  well  said  in  the  Sono;  of  Songs,  Who  isshe^o\.
that  Cometh  forth  as  the  rising  dawn  ?  For  Holy  Church,  xo.  ^  '
seeking  for  the  rewards  of  the  heavenly  life,  is  called  the
dawn,  because,  while  it  leaves  the  darkness  of  sin,  it  shines
with  the  light  of  righteousness.

3.  But  we  have  a  deeper  point  to  examine,  on  considering
the  nature  of  the  dawn,  or  day-spring.  For  the  day-spring,
or  dawn,  announces  that  night  has  already  passed,  but  yet
does  not  present  to  us  the  full  brightness  of  day:  but
whilst  they  dispel  the  one,  and  take  up  the  other,  they  keep
the  light  intermingled  with  darkness.  What  then  are  all  we
who  follow  the  truth  in  this  life,  but  day-spring,  or  dawn  ?


304 The  nifffit  departing,  fxdl  dayJiglit  not  yet  come.

Job  38,  Because  we  now  both  do  some  things  which  are  of  the  light,
and  yet  are  hitherto  not  free  from  some  remains  of  the  dark-


Ps.  143,  jjggg Yov  it  is  said  to  God  by  the  Prophet,  In Tky  sight

James shall  no  man  living  he  justified. And  it  is  written  again,

^^'  „  In  many  things  we  offend  all. Paul  also  says,  /  see  another

23, law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,

and  leading  me  captive  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my

members. Where  then  the  law  of  sin  is  contending  with  the

law  of  the  mind,  there  is  svuely  still  day-break ;  because  the

light,  which  has  already  shone  forth,  has  not  yet  entirely

overpowered the passing darkness. It is  yet  day-break  ;

because  while  the  law  of  the  flesh  assails  the  law  of  the  mind,

and  the  law  of  the  mind  that  of  the  flesh,  light  and  darkness

are  contending  one  against  the  other. Whence,  when  Paul

Rom. was saying again. The  night is  far spent; he did not

' ■ subjoin,  '  The  day  has  come,'  but,  The  day  is  at  hand. For

he  who  says,  after  the  deparlin'e  of  night,  not  that  the  day

'  has  arrived,'  but  that  it  is  '  at  hand,'  doubtless  proves  that

he  is  still  in  twilight  before  the  sun,  and  after  the  darkness.

4,  But  the  Church  of  the  Elect  will  then  be  fully  day,
when  the  shade  of  sin  will  be  no  longer  blended  with  it.  It
will  then  be  fully  day,  when  it  has  been  brightened  with  the
perfect  warmth  of  the  inward  light.  It  will  be  then  fully
day,  when  tolerating  no  longer  the  seducing  remembrance
of  its  sins,  it  will  conceal  from  itself  even  all  the  remains  of
darkness.  Whence  also  this  dawn  is  well  pointed  out  as  still
only  in  progress,  when  it  is  said,  And  hast  thou  sheun  to  the
day-spring  its  place  ?  For  that,  whose  place  is  pointed  out,
is  certainly  being  called  from  one  condition  to  another.  For
what  is  the  place  of  dawn  but  the  perfect  brightness  of  the
eternal  vision  ?  And  when  it  has  been  conducted  and  has
arrived  thither,  it  has  no  longer  any  of  the  darkness  of  the
past  night.  But  now,  when  it  is  still  enduring  the  annoy-
ances of  temptations,  because  the  Church  is  in  intention  of
heart  hastening  to  another  condition,  the  dawn  is  proceeding
to  its  place.  But  if  it  did  not  behold  this  spot  with  its
mind,  it  would  still  remain  in  the  night  of  this  life.  But
when  it  is  daily  striving  to  be  perfected,  and  daily  to  be
increased  in  light,  it  already  beholds  its  place,  and  seeks  for
the  sun to shine  fully  upon  it. The dawn considers its


How  our  Lord  taught  the  Church  her  true  Place. 305

place,  when  a  holy  soul  is  burning  to  contemplate  tlic  sight  Hook
of  its  Creator. The  dawn  was  busily  engaged  in  reaching .^iiiHll
its  place,  when  David  was  saying,  My  soul  thirstelh  for  fheP>'A2,2.
living  God  ;  wJien  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  the  face
of  God  ? The  Truth  was  pointing  out  its  place  to  the  dawn,
when  Tt  was  saying  by  Solomon,  For  uhat hath the  uise Eccles.
more  than  the  fool ?  and  nhal  the  poor^  except  to  go  thither^' ^'
ivhere  there  is  life  ? And  this  place  our  Lord  after  His  birth
doubtless  manifested  even  to  the  Patriarchs  who  preceded
His  Incarnation  ;  because  unless  they  knew,  by  the  spirit  of
Prophecy,  that  the  King  of  their  heavenly  country  was  to
become  Incarnate,  they  would  not  see  how  desirable  are  the
goods  of  this  same  country. The  Truth  made  known  its
place  to  the  dawn,  when  in  the  presence  of  His  disciples  He
asked  His  Father, saying. Father,  I  will that they  also  John]?,
whom  Thou  hast  given  Me,  he  with  j\Ie  ichere  I  am. Ple^'*'
pointed  out  its  place  to  the  dawn,  when  saying,  Wheresoever  ^lat.^i,
the  carcase  is,  there  tcill  also  the  eagles  he  gathered  together.  ^^'
The  dawn  was  hastening  to  arrive  at  this  place,  which  it  had
known,  when  Paul  was  saying  that  he  had  a  desire  to  heVhW.i,
dissolved,  and  to  be  icitli  Christ. And  again,  To  me  to  Hve'^?\,
is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain. And  again.  We  know  that  if  2  Cor.
our earthly house of  this habitation were  dissolved, we^'^-
have  a  building  of  God,  an house not made  nith  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens. But  He  well  says  that  He  shewed
its  place  to  the  dawn  after  His  birth,  because  before  He  Him-
self made  known  the  blessedness  of  future  retribution  b}-  His
own  Body,  He  confined  it  in  the  knowledge  of  a  kvw But
when  He  took  the  infirmities  of  a  human  birth,  He  extended
the  knowledge  of  coming  glory  in  the  love  of  a  countless
multitude. But because compassion so carries on the
mystery  of  the  Divine  work,  that  anger  still  attends  it,  in
order  that  the secret  Judge  may  look  favourably  on and
ransom  some,  and  pass  over  and  ruin  others,  since  we  have
learnt  how  He  enhghtens  the  Elect  by  His  Incarnation,  let
us  now  hear  how  He  condemns  the  reprobate. It  follows;

Ver.  13.  Hast  Thou  held  and  shaken  the  ends  of  the  earth,
and  hast  TJiou  shaken  the  wicked  out  of  it  ?

5.  The Lord  '  held  the  ends  of  the  earth,'  because  He iii.
came  in  the  end  of  the  world  to  the  synagogue  which  was

VOL.  in.  X


30f) God  took  the  last  of  Israel,  and  shook  out  the  Wicked.
Job  38, now  forsaken  and  subiect  to  foreign  kings:  and  He  shook

13—15


the wicked  out  of  it,  because  He cast  out  even  from  the
Alleg.  11-11  •  • 1

glorv  of  the  carnal  sacrifice,  those  who  denied  the  spiritual

preaching  of  the  faith.  Or  He  certainly  held  the  ends  of  the
earth,  because  He  chose  out  of  Judsea  a  few  abject  and
humble  men.  He  held  the  ends  of  the  earth,  because  He
forsook  the  doctors  of  the  law,  and  chose  fishermen.  And
while  He  holds  the  ends  of  the  earth,  He  shakes  the  wicked
out  of  it,  because  while  He  strengthens  weak  believers,  He  con-
demns the  sturdy  unbelievers  therein.  But  the  word '  shaking,'
He  also  rightly  added:  because  by  His  coming  He  stirred
up  even  the  hearts  of  the  reprobates  with  immeasurable  fear.

Johni2,  For  they  in  truth  were  shaken  who  were  saying,  We  prevail
nothing^  behold,  the  whole  world  is  gone  after  Him.  But  a
tiling  which  is  shaken  is  wearied  out  by  being  drawn  hither
and  thither. Judaea  therefore  had  been  shaken,  which  was

John  7,  saying  of  Christ  by  some,  That  He  is  a  good  Man,  and  was
^' resisting  Him  by  others,  saying.  Nay ;  hut  He  deceiveth  the

John  9,  people. It  vras  saying  by  some,  I/'  (his  Man  were  not  of
'  ^^' God,  He  could do  nothing. And  at  last  it  exclaims  by

Johnis,  others,  //  this  Man  were  not  a  malefactor,  we  icould  not
have  delivered  Him  up  unto  thee.  The  reprobate  were
shaken  indeed  but  not  prostrated,  when  at  one  time  they
beheld  the  miracles  with  wonder,  and  at  another  despised  and
derided  the  disgraces  of  His  weakness. Had  not  they  been

Johnio,  shaken,  who  were  saying,  How  long  dost  Thou  hold  our  soul
it)  suspense''  If  Thou  he  the  Christ,  tell  ns plainly.  Or  He
certainly  shook  and  held  the  ends  of  the  earth,  because  when
He  terrified  the  feeble  hearts  of  the  humble  with  pious  fear.
He  did  not  abandon  them  to  strict  judgment.  For  the
nuiltilude  of  the  believers  in  God  stood  more  firmly,  from
the  same  reason  that  it  was  alarmed  when  humbled  in
itself. For  that  God  holds  firm  the  person  whom  He  shakes,

Is.  66, He teaches  by  the Prophet, saying,  On  ichom  shall My

LXX.  ^^pivit  rest,  hut  on  the  hutnhle  and  quiet,  and  Him  who
tremhleth  at  My  word^s  ?  That  He  holds  the  person  whom
He  shakes,  is  intimated  by  the  testimony  of  Solomon,  who

Prov. says,  Happy  is  the  man  who  feareth  alway,  hut  he  that  is

■ ' of  a  hard  heart  shall  fall  into  mischief. Because  therefore

the Lord held  the ends of  Judaea in the  Apostles,  and


The  Jews  fumed  back  to  earth,  and  clave  not  to  God's  will.  307
rejected  therefrom the Scribes,  and Phariscijs,  and Hit^h Book

XXIX

Priests,  as  the  merit  of  their  iniqiiity  demanded,  let  us  hear^^— ^^ — ^-^
wliat  is  still  added  respecting  their  condemnation, [t  follows ;
Ver.  14,  The  seal  shall  be  restored  as  clay,  and  shall  stand
as  a  garment.

6.  What  else  but  '  clay'  did  the  Lord  find  the  people  of iv.
Israel,  whom  He  came  unto  when  given  up  to  the  practices  of

the  Gentiles,  and  toiling  at  bricks  in  Egypt  ?  And  whilst
He  led  it  forth  by  so  many  miracles  to  the  land  of  promise,
and  filled  it,  when  brought  thither,  with  the  knowledge  of
His  wisdom,  whilst  He  conferred  on  it  so  many  secret
mysteries  by  means  of  Prophecy,  what  else  did  He  make  it
but  a  '  seal'  for  preserving  His  mystery  ?  For  Divine  Pro-
phecy itself  kept  secret,  whatever  the  Truth  revealed  of
Itself  at  the  end.  But  when,  after  so  many  Divine  secrets,
after  the  many  miracles  which  it  witnessed  at  the  coming  of
GUV  Redeemer,  it  loved  its  land,  in  preference  to  the  truth,
(saying  by  the  Priests,  If  tee  let  Him  thus  alone,  all  wc/i  Johnii,
will  believe  on  Him.,  and  the  Romans  ivill  come,  and  take  aumy
our  place  and  nation ;)  it  returned,  as  it  were,  to  those  bricks,
which  it  had  left  in  Egypt :  and  that  which  had  been  made
the  seal  of  God,  turned  back  again  to  that  which  it  had
abandoned.  And,  having  been  a  '  seal,'  it  appeared  as  '  clay'
in  the  eyes  of  the  Truth,  when  it  lost,  through  the  wicked-
ness of  impiety,  the  mysteries  of  the  word,  which  it  had
received,  and  chose  to  savour  only  of  the  things  of  earth,
which  pollute.

7.  Where  it  is  fitly  subjoined.  And  shall  stand  as  a  garment.
For  because  garments  which  are  unfinished  and  of  thicker
texture,  even  when  put  on,  do  not  adhere,  nor  are  well  fitted
to  the  limbs  of  the  wearer,  they  are  said  to  stand.  Judaea
therefore,  even  when  it  seemed  to  be  labouring  in  the  know-
ledge of  the  truth,  stood  as  a  garment;  because  it  professed
to  serve  God  in  external  commands,  but  refused  to  cling  to
Him  by  the  understanding  of  love.  While  it  observed  the
letter  only,  in  the  precepts  of  God,  and  did  not  through  the
Spirit  unite  itself  to  their  inmost  meanings,  it  did  not  cling,
so  to  speak,  to  Him  Who  had  put  it  on.  Where  it  is  also
fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  15.  From  the  wicked  their  light  shall  be  taken  away.

X  2


308 Wicked  shaken  out  of  the  Church  by  the  last  trial.

Job  38, 8.  Because,  while  they  refuse  to  believe  the  truth,  they
lose  for  ever  the  knowledge  of  the  Law,  and  while  they  boast


Alleg.  of  having received  the  Law,  they  are,  doubtless,  blinded
Ps.  69,  by  boasting  of  their  knowledge. For  it  is  written,  Let  their

ei/es  be  darkened  that  they  see  not.  And  again  it  is  written,
Is.  6,10.  Blind  the  hearts  of  this  people,  and  make  their  ears  heavy.
John  9,  And  again  it  is  written,  For  jiid(/ment  I  have  come  into  this

tvorld,  that  they  which see  ?wt  miyht  see,  and  that  they

which  see  might  he  made  blind. KnA  because  they  boasted

themselves  in  the  works  of  the  Law  against  the  Giver  of  the

Law,  it  is  fitly  subjoined;

And  the  high  arm  shall  be  broken.
vi. 9.  For  the  high  arm  is  broken,  when  the  proud  works  of

the  Law  are  reproved,  by  preaching  the  grace  of  faith,  when
Rom.  3,  it  is  said.  By  the  deeds  of  the  Lata  there  shall  no  flesh  be

justifled.

10.  But  all  these  words  can  be  understood  in  another
sense  also.  For  Holy  Scripture  is  wont  to  call  the  Church
*  earth.'  The  Lord  therefore  holds  and  shakes  the  ends  of
the  earth,  because  He  allows  the  ends  of  His  Church  to  be
agitated  by  most  cruel  persecution  through  the  coming  of
Antichrist,  and  yet  forsakes  her  not,  by  permitting  it.  Some-
times the  Lord  holds  this  earth,  and  shakes  it  not;  sometimes
He  holds  and  shakes  it ;  because  He  possesses  it  at  one
time  with  the  tranquil  peace  of  faith,  at  another  orders  it  to
be  disturbed  with  the  assault  of  persecution.

11.  But  when  saying.  Hast  thou  held  and  shaken  the
ends  of  the  earth,  He  rightly  added  immediately.  And  hast
thou shaken the nicked out of  it  ? For as Paul bears

Tit.  ],  witness,  there  are  many  therein,  who  profess  that  they  know
God,  but  in  works  deny  Him.  The  Lord  therefore  shakes
the  wicked  out  of  it,  because  those,  whom  deep-seated  sins
possess,  will  then  fall  into  the  gulph  of  open  unbelief,  and  pass
over  to  the  heap  of  chaff,  when  moved  by  the  breath  of  that
temptation.  And  though  they  now  conceal  themselves  with-
in the  bosom  of  the  threshing  floor,  under  the  semblance
of  faith,  they  will  then,  doubtless,  bound  forth  from  the  heap
of  grain,  by  the  fan  of  strict  judgment.

12.  Whence  it  is  also  fitly  subjoined,  TJie  seal  shall  be
restored,  as  clay. As  if  he  were  openly  saying;  They  who


Some  sealed  in  the  Church  shall  yet  prove  clay,  309

now  appear  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church  as  a  'seal,'  will  then Book
in  the  sight  of  all  men  be  restored  as  '  clay:'  that  is,  thcy^l-^ — _■
deceive  not  tho  judgments  of  men  concerning  their  profession
of  religion,  but  it  is  proved  that  they  savour  of  earthly  things.
For  Holy  Scripture  is  wont  to  use  the  word  '  seal'  for  faith,
and  '  clay'  for  iniquity. For  the  younger  son,  who  returned
to  his  father,  having  consumed  his substance,  received  aLukeio,
ring  as  a  present. For  the  Gentile  people,  which  returns  to  ""
God,  by  penitence,  having  lost  its  immortality,  is  defended
by  the  seal  of  faith. Whence  also  it  is  said  to  the  Church
by  its  Bridegroom,  Set  Me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart. For  Sol.
a  seal  is  placed  on  things  for  the  very  purpose  that  they  may  g°"^ '
not  be  violated  by  any  boldness  of  plunderers. The  Bride-
groom therefore  is  placed  as  a  seal  on  the  heart,  when  the
mystery  of  His  faith  is  imprinted  for  the  safe  keeping  of  our
thought ;  in  order  that  that  unfaithful  servant,  namely  our
adversary,  observing  our  hearts sealed by  faith,  may  not
presume  to  break  in  upon  them  with  temptation. But  by
'  clay'  worldly  infection  is  set  forth,  as  the  Psalmist  bears
witness,  who  says,  He  hrought  me  up  out  of  the  pit  of  misery,  Ps.40,2.
and  the  deepest  clay. Because  many  then  who  are  found  in
worldly  infection,  are  sealed,  when  brought  to  the  Church,
with  the  sacrament  of  heavenly  faith,  and  jet  depart  not
from  their  wicked  deeds,  and  conceal  themselves  now  under
the  cloke  of  faith,  and  yet  shew  what  they  really  are,  when
they  have  found  an  opportunity,  it  is  rightly  said. The  seal
shall  be  restored  as  clay. For  those  whom  we  now  believe
to  be  faithful,  we  shall  then  find  to  be  the  very  enemies  of
the  faidi ;  and  though,  when  not  tempted,  they  appear  to  be  a
'  seal,'  they  will  doubtless,  when  tempted,  be  '  clay.' Whence
also  it  is  rightly  said,  Shall  be  restored:  for  their  reprobate
life  proves  them  afterwards  to  be  such,  as  their  conscience
could  have  done  before  their  faith. Of  whom  it  is  fitlv  sub-
joined.  And  shall  stand  as  a  garment.

1 3.  For  Holy  Church  is  now  clothed  as  it  were  with  gai-mcnts,
as  many  in  number  as  the  faithful,  by  whose  veneration  she
is  honoured. Whence  also  when  the  Gentiles  were  shewn  to
her,  it  is  said  by  the  Lord  through  the  Prophet;  As  I  live, Is.  49,
saith  the  Lord,  thou  shall  surely  be  clothed  with  all  these,  ^^'
as  uiih an ornament. But she is now arrayed, in  ap-


310 Unstable  profession. LiglU  taken  from  the  Wicked.

Job  38,  pearaiice  only,  with  many  who  seem  to  be  laithful,  but  when

— - —  the  assault  of  ])eiseculion  strikes  them,  she  will  be  stripped
of  them  and  laid  bare;  of  whose  fate  it  is  said,  And  it  shall
stand  as  a  garment. But  to  '  stand'  is  put  in  this  place

Ps.  1,1.  for  persisting  in  sin.  Whence  it  is  written.  And  stood  not
in  the  tray  of  sinners.  Or  certainly  every  reprobate  is  said
to  '  stand  as  a  garment,'  to  shew  that  he  cannot  stand  at  all.
Because,  as  a  garment,  when  put  on,  is  stretched  by  the
body,  in  displaying  its  appearance,  but  when  taken  off  is
bent  and  folded  together ;  so  every  one,  who  has  fallen  back
from  the  stability  of  Holy  Church,  was  stretched  out,  as  it
were,  and  beautiful,  while  being  worn,  but  will  lie  afterwards,
when  stripped  off",  broken  down  and  cast  aside.  But  if  by
'  standing'  wc  understand  '  continuance,'  every  reprobate
person  who  endures  a  short  time  in  this  life,  which  he  loves,
stands  as  a  garment. Whence  also  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,

Ps.  102,  All  shall  wax  old  as  a  garment^  and  as  a  covering  shall
thou  change  them,  and  tlieij  shall  be  changed.  These  points
therefore,  which  he  introduced  veiled  in  a  cloud  of  allegory,
he  now  makes  known  in  plainer  words,  adding,  From  the
wicked  their  light  shall  be  taken  aivay.
vii.  14,  For  neither  does  the  light  of  God  now  illumine  those,
who  veil  the  malice  of  their  iniquity  with  the  name  of  faith.
For  while  they  neglect  to  live  according  to  the  preaching  of
faith,  and  yet  in  appearance  reverence  it,  they  seek  for  the
honour  of  this  present  life  under  the  name  of  religion  ;  and
they  gain  this  light  from  faith,  as  faith  cherishes  them  in  the
sight  of  men.  But  there  are  some  who  sincerely  believe  the
eternal  truths  which  they  hear,  and  yet  contradict  by  evil
living  the  very  faith  which  they  profess.  These  also  have
their  light  in  darkness,  for  while  they  act  pei^versely  and  yet
think  rightly  about  God,  they  are  illumined  in  a  measure  by
the  shining  of  a  light,  so  as  not  to  be  quite  in  darkness.
And  while  they  love  the  things  of  earth  more  than  those  of
heaven,  those  that  they  see  more  than  those  they  hear  of,
when  the  season  of  persecution  assaults  them,  they  lose  that
sound  belief  they  seemed  to  possess.  And  this  is  specially
the  case,  in  a  greater  degree,  at  that  lime,  when  the  head  of
the  wicked  himself  arising,  in  the  last  persecution,  against
Holy Church, his boldness attacks it with unrestrained


Men  join  themselves  to  Antichrist  before  his  time. 311

streiigtli.  Then  is  the  heart  of  each  one  hiid  open,  wlien  Bock
whatcN cv  lay  concealed  is  exposed,  and  they  who  are  now  ?2il^
holy  in  words,  but  unholy  in  heart,  fall  headlong,  on  their
wickedness  being  made  public,  and  lose  the  light  of  faith
which  they  had  in  appearance  possessed.  But  it  is  neces-
sary, amidst  all  this,  for  each  of  us  to  return  to  the  hidden
recess  of  his  heart,  and  to  fear  at  the  fatal  results  of  his
doings,  lest  he  fall,  as  his  merits  demand,  into  the  number
of  such  men,  by  the  strict  justice  of  the  judgments  of  God.

15.  But  let  no  one  inconsiderately  flatter  himself,  and
believe  that  he  therefore  is  exempt  from  such  a  fall,  because
he  thinks  that  lie  does  not  reach  to  the  storm  of  this  tempest.
O  how  many  have  beheld  not  the  times  of  that  temptation,
and  yet  are  involved  in  the  storm  of  his  temptation.  Cain
saw  not  the  time  of  Antichrist,  and  yet  was  deservedly  a
limb  of  Antichrist.  Judas  knew  not  the  fierceness  of  that
persecution,  and  yet  yielded  to  the  might  of  his  cruelty,  by
the  persuasion  of  avarice.  Simon  was  far  removed  from  the  Acts  8,
times  of  Antichrist,  and  yet  joined  himself  to  his  pride,  by  ^^'  '
perversely  seeking  for  tlie  power  of  miracles.  Thus  a  wicked
body  is  united  to  its  head,  thus  limbs  to  limbs,  when  they
both  know  not  each  other  in  acquaintance,  and  yet, are  joined
together  by  wicked  doings.  For  neither  had  Pergamos  known
the  books  or  the  words  of  Balaam,  and  yet,  following  his
wickedness,  it  heard  in  a  voice  of  reproof  from  above;  Thou  Rev.2,
hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,  uho  taiiglit  '
Balac  to  cast  a  stumbling  block  before  the  children  of  Israel,
to  eat  and  to  commit  fornication.  Both  times  and  places  sepa-
rated the  Church  of  Thyatira  from  the  knowledge  of  Jezebel;
but  because  equal  guilt  of  life  had  enthralled  it,  Jezebel  is
said  to  dwell  therein,  and  to  persist  in  perverse  doings,  as  the
Angel  bears  witness,  who  says;  I  have  a  Jew  things  against  ih.2o.
thee,  because  thou  sufferest  that  iconuui  Jezebel,  which  calleth
herself  a  propltetess,  to  teach  and  to  seduce  My  servants  to
commit  fornication,  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols.
Behold,  because  they  could  be  found,  who  followed  the  con-
duct of  Jezebel  in  their  reprobate  deeds,  Jezebel  is  said  to
have  been  found  there:  because  an  agreement  of  habits  makes
a  corrupt  body  one,  even  if  times  or  places  sever  it  asunder.
Whence  it  is  that  every  wicked  person,  who  has  already  gone


312  Envjj,  pride,  Qmhition,  make  members  of  Satan.

JoB_38,by,  survives  in  his  perverse  imitators,  and  that  the  author  of
- — '■ — iniquity,  who  has  not  yet  come,  is  ah'eadv  visible  in  those  who

1  John  do  his  works. Hence  John  says;  Now  are  Ihere  become  many

2  1 8  •  •  • *

' ' Antichrists,  because  all  wicked  persons  are even  no\v  his
members,  which  being  in truth born in wickedness,  have

2  Thess.  prevented  their  head,  by  evil  livinj?.  Hence  Paul  says,  That
'  '  ''  he  might  he  revealed  in  his  iinte ;  fur  the  mystery  of  ini-
quity doth  already  work.  As  if  he  were  saying ;  Then
Antichrist  ^Yill  be  manifestly  seen  ;  for  he  now  secretly  works
his  hidden  works  in  the  hearts  of  the  unrighteous.  For,  to  say
nothing  of  more  open  crimes,  behold  one  man  secretly  envies
his  brother  in  his  heart,  and  if  he  find  an  opportunity,  strives
to  supplant  him. Of  what  other  is  he  a  member,  but  of  hira,

\Visd.2,  of  whom  it  is  written,  Through  envy  of  the  devil  came  death
into  the  worlds  Another,  thinking  himself  a  person  of  great
desert,  preferring  himself  to  all,  through  swelling  of  heart,
believes  all  to  be  inferior  to  him. Of  what  other  is  he  a

Job  41,  niember,  but  of  him  of  whom it is  written,  He  heholdeth
' every  high thing,  and  is  a  king  ever  all  the children of
•pride  / Another  seeks  for  the  power  of  this  world,  not  that
he  may  profit  others,  but  that  he  may  not  be  subject  to  an-
other. Of  what  other  is  he  a  member,  than  of  him,  of  whom  it

Is.  14, is  written,  Who  said,  I  a  ill  sit  in  (he  mount  of  the  testament,

13 14

in  the  sides  of  the  north  :  I  tcill  ascend  above  Die  height  of
the  clouds,  I  uill  he  like  the  Most  High  ?  For  the  Most
High  alone  so  rules  over  all  things,  as  to  be  unable  to  be
subject  to  another.  Whom  the  devil  perversely  wished  to
imitate,  when  seeking  dominion  of  his  own,  he  refused  to  be
subject  to  Him.  Whoever  therefore  seeks  for  power  of  his
own,  imitates  the  devil,  because  he  loathes  to  submit  to  him
who  is  placed  over  him  by  Divine  ordinance.

16.  There  are  many  tilings  besides,  to  proclaim  certain
persons  to  be  faithless,  though  established  in  the  peace  of
the  Church.  For  I  see  that  some  persons  so  accept  the
person  of  the  powerful,  as  not  to  hesitate,  when  requested  by
him,  to  deny,  lor  his  good  will,  the  truth  in  the  cause  of  ?i
John  neighbour.  And  who  is  'J'ruth,  but  He  who  said,  /  ain  the
'  '■  Hay,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life  .^  For  John  the  Baptist  died
not,  when  questioned  about  his  confession  of  Christ,  but
about  the  truth  of  justice ;  but  because  Christ  is  the  Truth,


Christ  denied  by  doing  wrong  for  fear  of  man.  313

he  therefore  went  even  to  death  for  Christ,  because  namely Book

V  V  T  V

for  the  truth.  Let  us  suppose  that  a  person  has,  when  qucs-  "—^ — ^—
tioned,  accepted  the  person  of  tlie  powerful,  and  has  denied
the  trutli,  that  he  might  not  suffer  the  wrong  even  of  a  word.
What,  I  pray  you,  would  he  do  in  the  pain  of  punishments,
who  was  ashamed  of  Christ  among  the  scourges  of  words  ?
Behold,  even  after  this  he  is  still  a  Christian  before  the  eyes
of  men,  and  yet  if  God  resolved  to  judge  him  strictly,  he  is
one  no  longer.

17.  But  I  see  others,  to  whom  are  assigned,  tlirough  their
position  as  teachers,  the  duties  of  exhorting  and  reproving,
who  behold  some  unlawfulness  committed,  and  who  yet,
when  afraid  of  losing  the  good  will  of  certain  powerful  per-
sons, presume  not  to  reprove  it.  What  else  doth  he,  who-
ever he  be,  but  see  the  wolf  coming,  and  flee  away  ?  He
flies,  because  he  was  silent ;  he  was  silent,  because  he
despised  eternal  grace,  and  preferred  temporal  glory.  Be-
hold he  hid  himself  within  the  concealments  of  his
silence  before  the  face  of  a  powerful  man,  and  gave  way  as
to  open  persecution,  so  also  to  secret  fear.  It  is  well  said
of  such  ;  They  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  John
of  God.  If  these  things  are  strictly  judged,  whoever  is  such,  ^^'  ^^"
even  though  public  persecution  was  wanting,  yet  denied
Christ  by  his  silence.  There  are  not  wanting  then,  even  in
the  peace  of  the  Church,  the  temptations  of  Antichrist.  Let
no  one  then  dread  those  times  of  the  last  persecution,  as
though  the  only  ones.  For  the  cause  of  Antichrist  is  con-
tinually promoted  among  the  inigodly,  because  he  is  even
now  secretly  working  his  mystery  in  their  hearts.  And  even
if  many,  now  seemingly  established  within  the  Church,
pretend  to  be  what  they  are  not,  they  will  yet  at  the  coming
of  the  .Judge  be  exposed,  as  they  are.  Of  whom  Solomon
well  says,  I  saw  the  wicked  buried,  who  even  when  they  lived  Ecchs.
here,  were  in  the  holy  place,  and  were  praised  in  the  city,  as^'  ^^•
men  of  just  works.  After  it  was  said  then  of  the  wicked ;
The  seal  shall  be  restored  as  clay,  and  shall  stand  as  a
garment,  and  their  light  shall  be  taken  away  from  the  nicked,
(uiiich  is  certainly  to  take  place  in  that  persecution  of
Antichrist,)  he  presently,  consoling  us  concerning  the  de-
struction of  the  same  Antichrist,  says  ;


.314  Extreme  pride,  and  fall,  of  Antichrist.

Job  38, And  the  high  arm  shall  he  broken.

— ^^^— 18.  For,  for  what  else  is  the  high  arm  taken,  but  the  proud
AiLE*a  lof^-iii6SS  of  Antichrist,  who  is  so  exalted  over  the  reprobate
minds  of  men  with  the  pride  of  worldly  glory,  that  though  a
sinful  man,  and  yet  scorning  to  be  counted  a  man,  he  pre-
tends falsely  that he is  God above men  ? Whence the
2  Thess,  Apostle  Paul  says  ;  So  that  he  sitieth  in  the  temple  of  God,
^'  ^" shewing  himself,  as  if  he  were  God. And  to  shew  his  pride
more  fully,  he stated  before, Who  opposeth  and  exalteth
himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshijiped.
For  even  a  man  can  sometimes  be  called  God,  according  to
Exod. that  which  is  said  to  Moses,  See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to
^'  ^" Pharaoh. But  a  mere  man  cannot  be  worshipped  as  God.
But  because  Antichrist  sets  himself  up  over  all  holy  men,
and  over  the  power  of  the  Godhead  Itself,  he  endeavours  to
sui-pass  that  which  is  called  God,  and  that  which  is  worshipped
as  God,  by  demanding  for  himself  the  name  of  glory. But
we  must  observe  into  what  a  depth  of  pride  he  has  fallen,
who  remained  not  in  that  degree  of  ruin,  in  which  he  fell.
For  both  the  devil  and  man  fell,  by  pride,  from  the  state  of
Is.  14, their  own  creation,  either  for  him  to  say,  /  ivill  ascend  above
^^' the  height  of  the  clouds,  I  will  be  like  the  3Iost  High,  or  for
Geu.  3,  the  other  to  hear  and  to  believe.  Your  eyes  shall  be  opened,
^'  and  ye  shall  be  as  gods. They  fell,  therefore,  both  of  them,

because  they  desired  to  be  like  God,  not  by  righteousness,
but  by  power.  But  man  who  had  fallen,  by  perversely
aiming  at  the  likeness  of  God,  discerning,  when  fi*eed  by
grace,  that  he  was  very  different  from  God,  through  the  guilt
p,.^.89,8. of  sin,  exclaims,  0  Lord,  who  is  like  unto  Thee?  But  the
devil,  having  been  justly  cast  aside  in  his  sinful  lapse,  con-
tinued not  in  his  own  degree  of  ruin  ;  but  the  longer  he  was
deprived  of  the  grace  of  the  Almighty,  the  more  did  he  add
to  the  guilt  of  his  sins.  For  he  w'ho  fell,  because  he  wished,
inverting  the  order  of  things,  to  be  like  God,  was  brought  so
far,  that  entering  into  Antichrist,  he  scorned  to  seem  like
God,  and,  when  condemned,  counts  Him  as  his  inferior.
Whom  he  could  not  in  his  pride  regard  as  his  equal.  For
when  this,  which  we  have  stated  before,  is  said  of  him  ;
21X1^^^.  Exalting  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is
^' • worshipped;  it  is  openly  shewn,  that  by  seeking  at  first  the


God's  mercij  in  convertimj  vien  from  sin  at  the  last. 315

likeness  of  God,  he wished,  as  it were, to exalt  himself  Book
against  God,  bnt  that  increasing  in  ihe  sin  of  pride,  he  now  1^: — -'
sets himself  up above all  that  is  called  God, or tliat is
worshipped. Because  then  this  liis  pride  will  be  smitten  by
the  coming  of  the  strict  Judge,  (as  it  is  written,  Whom  the  2  Thess.
Loi'd  Jesus  shall  slay  ivith  the  spirit  of  His  mouth,  andshall^'  ^'
destroy  vnth  the  brightness  of  His  coming,)  it  is  rightly  said,
And  the  high  arm  shall  be  broken.

\9.  But  all  these  expressions,  which  have  been  twice  dis-  Mor.
cussed,  can  be  still  understood  in  another  sense. For  tlie
words  of  God  are  conserves',  as  it  were,  to  give  us  strength.  •  pig-
Andjust  as,  the  more  a  conserve  is  ground,  the  more  does™^"^
its virtue  increase  in  the  cuj) ;  so  the  more  we bruise  the
Divine  words  by  expounding  them,  the  more,  when  we  hear
them,  are  we  benefited,  as  if  by  the  draught. Because  there-
fore the  merciful  God  long  bears  with  the  sins  of  men,  and
frequently  converts  the  minds  of  sinners,  when  He  sees  the
end  now  approaching,  He  rightly  says  of  Himself,  as  suggest-
ing the  might  of  so  great  affection,

Ver.  13. Hast  thou  held  and  shaken  the  ends  of  the  earth,
and  hast  thou  shaken  the  luicked  out  of  it?

20.  For by  'earth'  is  designated man,  who savours of ix.
things  below ;  to  whom  it  was  said  in  his  sin ;  Earth  thou  Gen.  3,
art,  and  to  earth  shall  thou  go. But  because  the  merci- *
ful  Creator  forsakes  not  His  own  work.  He  both  bears  with
the  sins  of  men,  by  His  wisdom,  and  at  last  remits  them  by
their  conversion. But,  w'hen  He  beholds  hard  and  insensi-
ble minds. He scares  them at  one  time with threats,  at
another  with  blows,  at  another  with  revelations : in  order
that  those  which  had  become  hardened  by  most  fatal  security
may be softened by  wholesome fear,  so that they may,
though at  last,  return,  and  blush  at  least  at  this,  that  they
have  long  been  waited  for. For  thus  the  Lord,  because  He
judges  more  severely  the  ends  of  our  life,  therefore  purges
also  His  Elect  more  carefully  at  the  close. For  it  ist  written;
God  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the  earth. He  therefore  watches  i  Sam.
more  anxiously  over our  closing  deeds,  the  more  He  con- '
siders  that  the  beginnings  of  our  coming  life  depend  upon
them. And  because  He  does  this  of  His  mercy;  by  bringing
forward  His  tenderness,  with  which He  receives  even  those
sinners  who  have  been  converted  at  the  last.  He  instructs


316 Man  returned  to  clay,  and  laid  by  as  a  garment.

Job  38,  the  righteousness  of  blessed  Job,  saying; Hast  thou  held

13.  j^  a«c/  sJiaken  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  hast  thou  shaken  the
Mob

wicked  out  of  it?  Thou  undeistandest,  As  T,  Who  frequently

arouse  sinners  by  alarming  them  at  their  last  moments,  hold
them  fast  by  converting  them,  and  pluck  from  their  hearts
the  wicked  motions  of  their  thoughts.  And  the  Lord  rightly
teaches  blessed  Job,  how  He  converts  sinners  at  the  end.
As  if  He  openly  said,  Observe  the  power  of  My  mercy,  and
bring  down  the  pride  of  thy  righteousness.  But,  that  that
punishment  of  former  sin  accompanies  these  closing  hours  of  a
man,  through  the  death  of  the  Hesh,  even  when  he  is  con-
verted. He  immediately  teaches,  saying ;

Ver.  14.  The  seal  shall  be  restored  as  clay,  and  shall  stand
as  a  garment.
X.  21.  For  the  Lord  made  man,  whom  He  fashioned  after
His  own  likeness,  as  a  kind  of  seal  of  His  power.  But  yet
it  shall  be  restored  as  clay ;  because,  though  he  may  by
conversion  escape  eternal  suflfei'ings,  yet  he  is  condemned
by  the  death  of  the  flesh,  in  pmiishment  of  the  pride  he  has
commiltcd.  For  man,  who  has  been  formed  from  clay,  and
adorned  with  the  likeness  of  the  Divine  image,  having
received  the  gift  of  reason,  forgets,  when  swelling  with  pride
of  heart,  that  he  was  formed  of  the  basest  materials.  Whence
it  hath  been  ordered  by  the  marvellous  justice  of  the  Creator,
that,  because  he  became  proud  in  consequence  of  that  rea-
sonable sense  which  he  received,  he  should  again  by
death  become  earth,  which  he  was  unwilling  humbly  to
regard  himself.  And  because  he  lost  the  likeness  of  God
by  sin,  but  returns  by  death  to  the  substance  of  his  own  clay,
it  is  rightly  said ;  The  seal  shall  be  restored  as  clay.  And
because,  when  the  spirit  is  summoned  from  the  body,  it  is
stripped,  as  it  were,  of  its  kind  of  covering  of  flesh,  it  is  fitly
subjoined  of  the  same  clay;  and  shall  stand  as  a  garment.
For,  for  our  clay  to  stand  as  a  garment  is  for  it  to  remain
empty  and  stripped  oflf,  even  till  the  time  of  the  resurrection.
But  because  even  they  do  not  escape  this  punishment  of
pride,  who  overcome  this  very  pride  by  living  humbly.
He  subjoins  what  is  the  special  punishment  of  the  proud,
saying ;

Ver.  15.  From  the  wicked  their  light  sJiall  be.  taken  away,
and  the  high  arm  shall  be  brol<en.


The  high  browjht  down. Christ's  descent  into  Hell. 317

22.  For  the  death  of  tlie  flesli,  wliich  restores  tlie  Elect  to  Book

■V "Y T XT

their  light,  takes  away  their  light  from  the  reprobate.  For  ^  .'
the  light  of  the  proud  is  the  glory  of  this  j^rcsent  life.  And
that  light  is  then  withdrawn  from  it,  when  it  is  called  by  the
death  of  the  flesh,  to  the  darkness  of  its  own  retributions.
For  then  is  the  high  arm  there  broken,  because  loftiness  of
heart,  which  has  been  violently  seized  on,  beyond  the
order  of  nature,  is  scattered  by  the  weight  of  Divine  justice
which  overwhelms  it,  in  order  that  how  '  wickedly  it  had '  Oxf.
exalted  itself  for  a  while,  it  may  learn  when  it  is  crushed  forq^'^n,,
ever  by  the  weight  of  judgment.  But  none  of  us  would
know  what  was  to  follow  alter  death,  did  not  the  Creator  of
om'  life  come  even  to  the  punishment  of  our  death.  For  did
He  not  of  His  own  mercy  seek  the  lowest  condition,  He  could
not  justly  bring  back  to  the  highest,  us,  who  were  lost
after  we  had  received  His  likeness.  Whence  it  is  rightly
subjoined  ;

Ver.  16.  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  depth  of  the  sea,  and
hast  thou  walked  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  abyss?

23.  As  if  He  said,  As  I,  Who  not  only  sought  the  sea,  that xii.
is  this  world,  by  assuming  the  flesh  and  soul  of  a  man,  but
also  descended  by  that  flesh  voluntarily  subjected  to  death,

to  the  bottom  of  the  pit,  as  if  to  the  depths  of  the  sea.  For
if  the  '  sea'  must  be  understood  to  mean  the  world  after  the
manner  of  Scripture  language,  nothing  hinders  the  '  depths
of  the  sea'  from  meaning  the  bars  of  the  pit.  But  the  Lord
sought  this  depth  of  the  sea,  when  He  entered  the  lowest
parts  of  the  pit,  in  order  to  rescue  the  souls  of  His  Elect.
Whence  also  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  Thou  hast  made  thels.^i,

10

depths  of  the  sea  a  uay,for  the  ransomed  to  pass  over.  For
this  depth  of  the  sea  was,  before  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer,
not  a  way,  but  a  prison,  because  it  confined  within  it  even
the  souls  of  the  good,  though  not  in  places  of  punishment.
But  the  Lord  made  this  depth  a  way,  because  He,  by  coming
thither,  granted  His  Elect  to  pass  over  from  the  bars  of
the  pit  to  heavenly  places.  Whence  it  is  there  fitly  said,
for  the  ransomed  to  pass  over.  But  that  which  He  had
called  the  depths  of  the  sea,  repeating  in  other  words  He
calls  the  lowest  parts  of  the  abyss :  because  as  the  abyss  of
waters  is  not  comprehended  by  our  sight,  so  are  the  secrets


318 Christ  not  hound  by  sin. His  sight  of  the  dark  doors.

Job  38,  of  tho pit not penetrated by  us with any  sense of  oui'

— — —  understandinfj. For  we  behold  who  are  withdrawn  hence,
Myst.

but  we  see  not  what  retribution  of  punishments  awaits  them

according  to  their  desert.

24.  But  we  must  carefully  notice,  that  He  says  that  He

had  walked  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  abyss. For  to  walk

belongs  not  to  one  who  is  bound,  but  to  one  who  is  free.

For  fetters  impede  to  a  like  extent  the  steps  of  him  whom

they  bind. Because  then  the  Lord  endured  no  bonds  of  sin,

He  walked  in  the  pit. For  He  came  unfettered  to  those

Ps,  88,  who  were  bound. Whence  it  is  written,  /  am  become  as  a

' ' man  without  help,  free  among  the  dead. For  the  Lord  then

to  walk  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  abyss  is  for  Him  to  find

nothing  to  detain  Him  in  tlie  place  of  damnation,  as  Peter

Acts  2,  bears  witness,  who  says,  Having  loosed  the  pains  of  death,
because  it  was  not  possible  for  Him  to  he  holden  of  it.  Or
certainly,  (because,  when  we  are  led  in  walking  from  place  to
place,  we  are  found  present  here  and  there,)  the  Lord  is  said
to  have  walked  in  the  pit,  in  order  to  shew  that  He  was
present  to  Elect  souls  in  their  several  places,  by  the  power

Wisd.  7,  of  His Godhead. Whence also  the spirit of  wisdom is

^^'  described  as  full  of  motion,  that  by  means  of  that  which  is
no  where  absent.  He  might  be  described  as  meeting  us  every
where.  And  this  descent  of  His,  our  Lord  regards  as  more
marvellous  the  more  frequently  He  makes  mention  of  it  to
ransomed  man. For  repeating  it  again.  He  subjoins ;

Ver.  17.  Have  the  gates  of  death  been  opened  unto  thee,
and  hast  thou  seen  the  gloomy  doors  ?
xiii.  25.  For  the  '  gates  of  death'  are  the  adverse  powers.  Which
the  Lord  descended  and  opened,  because  by  dying  He
overcame  their  strength.  Which  are  by  another  appellation
called  the  '  gloom 3^  doors,'  because  while  they  are  not  seen,  by
reason  of  their  crafty  concealment,  they  open  to  deceived
minds  the  way  of  death.  Which  gloomy  doors  the  Lord
beholds;  because  He  both  observes  and  represses  the  crafty
malice  of  unclean  spirits.  And  did  He  not,  by  beholding,
restrain  them,  while  we  know  them  not,  our  mind  would  both
know  nothing  of  their  snares,  and  would  be  taken  and  perish
by  them.  But  even  we  behold  these  gloomy  gates,  when  we
are  illumined  with  rays  of  heavenly  light. Whence  also  it  is


Breadth  of  the  spiritxial  earth  in  the  end.  319

said  by  the  Prophet,  Tlie  Lord  is  nty  Itelper,  and  I  shall  see  Book
mine  enettiies. He  therefore  Himself  beholds  our  enemies, "


Ps 1 IH

Who  by  His  gift  makes  our  enemies  visible  to  us.  Or  7.
certainly,  the  Lord  then  beheld  the  gloomy  gates,  when
penetrating  the  barriers  of  the  pit.  He  smote  the  cruel  spirits,
and  by  His  death  condemned  them  that  presided  over  death.
Which  is  here  spoken  of  no  longer  as  of  a  future,  but  as  of  a
past  event ;  for  this  reason,  because  that  which  He  intended
to  do  in  deed.  He  had  already  done  in  predestination.  But
because  the  Church  increased  after  His  death  and  resurrec-
tion, and  was  extended  in  all  nations,  it  is  fitly  subjoined  ;

Ver.  18.  Hast  thou  considered  the  breadth  of  the  earth?

26.  For  whilst  the  Lord  sought  the  narrowness  of  death, xiv.
He  spread  abroad  His  faith  in  the  nations,  and  extended
Holy  Church  to  numberless  hearts  of  believers. To  whom
it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  ient,'is.5i,
and extend  the  curtains of  tlnj  tabernacles ; spare not,
lengthen  thy  cords,  and  strengthen  thy  slakes :  for  thou  shalt
penetrate  to  the  right  hand  and  to  the  left,  and  thy  seed  shall
inherit  the  Gentiles. But  this  breadth  of  the  earth  would
surely  not  exist,  had  He  not  first  despised, in  dying,  the
life  which  we  know,  and  pointed  out  by  His  rising  again,  the
life  which  we  know  not. For  He  opened  by  His  death  the
eyes  of  our  minds,  and  shewed  us  what  was  the  life  which
was  to follow. Whence also,  observing  this  order  in  the
Gospel,  He  says  to  His  disciples.  Thus  it  behoved  Christ  ^oLuke24,
suffer,  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day,  and  that
repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  in  His
Name  through  all  nations. For  {^w  of  the  people  of  Israel
believed  at  His  preaching,  but  numberless  peoples  of  the
Gentiles  followed  the  way  of  life,  ou  His  death. For  He
endured  the  proud,  while  He  was  still  living  in  a  suffering
condition,  but  He  overthrew them  when  dead  to  a  life  of
suffering. Which Samson long before well typified in
himself,  for  he slew but  few during his  life ; but  on  the  Judges
destruction  of  the  temple  he  slew  a  host  of  enemies,  at  his '
death. Because  the  Lord  doubtless  killed  but  itvi  from -their
pride and haughtiness' when alive,  but more, when the '  as  we
Temple  of  His  body  was  broken  in  pieces: and  the  Elect ^Ygad
from the Gentiles, whom He endured in His life. He "."'°

'  sin.


320  GocVs  icalkivg  in  the  depths  of  the  soul.

Job  30,  subdued  all  at  ouce  by  His  death.  Alter  then  He  had
^^'  taught  us  that  He  had  penetrated  the  regions  below,  He
rightly  subjoined  innnediately  the  breadth  of  the  earth  to  be
considered,  Hast  thou  considered  the  breadth  of  the  earth  ?
As  if  He  were  saying  to  man  when  scourged,  Think  on
what  I  have  endured,  and  consider  what  I  have  purchased ;
and  complain  not  thyself  of  the  rod,  when  thou  art  ignorant
Avhat  rewards  await  thee,  in  retribution.  In  the  midst  then
of  these  words  of  the  Creator,  1  think  it  worth  while  for  us  to
turn  away  our  eyes  for  a  while  from  the  common  and  public
good,  and  to  observe  what  He  secretly  does  wilh  each  of
ourselves. For  He  says  ;

Ver.  16.  Hast  thou  entered  the  depth  of  the  sea?
XV.  -7.  For  the  '  sea'  is  the  mind  of  man,  and  God  enters  it^s
MoR.  depths,  when  it  is  roused  from  its  inmost  thoughts  to  lamenta-
tions of  penitence  through  its  knowledge  of  itself,  when  He
calls  to  its  memory  the  wickednesses  of  its  former  life,  and
rouses  the  mind  which  is  agitated  by  its  own  confusion.  God
penetrates  the  depth  of  the  sea,  when  He  changes  hearts,
which  are  even  despaired  of.  For  He  goes  into  the  sea,
when  He  humbles  a  worldly  heart ;  He  enters  the  depth  of
the  sea,  when  He  disdains  not  to  visit  minds  which  are  even
overwhelmed  with  sins.  Whence  it  is  rightly  added  in  a
question  ;  And  hast  thou  walked  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the
abyss?  For  what  abyss  is  there,  but  the  human  mind,  which
while  unable  to  comprehend  itself,  is  like  an  obscure  abyss,
hid  from  itself,  in  every  thing  that  it  is. Whence  it  is  well

Hab.  3,  said  by  the  Prophet,  The  abyss  littered  its  voice  from,  the
depth  of  its  thoiiyht.  For  whilst  the  human  mind  does  not
dive  into  itself,  it  praises  more  humbly,  by  comparison  with
itself,  the  power  of  the  Divine  nature,  which  it  is  unable  to
comprehend.

28.  For  God  then  to  walk  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  abyss,
is  for  Him  to  convert  the  hearts  even  of  the  wickedest  men,
and,  by  touching  minds  which  are  despaired  of,  with  traces
of  His  visitation,  wonderfully  to  refashion  them.  For  when
any  one  feels  compunction  after  enormous  sins,  what  else  is
beheld  but  God  walking  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  abyss  ?
For  God  walks,  as  it  were,  in  the  abyss,  when  He  penetrates
the  gloomy  heart,  and  tramples  down  the  invisible  waves  of


God's  power  over  Ihe  ^  yules  of  death,''  or  evil  thoiKjlils. 3*21

sins.  For  we  frequently  lament  some  sins  past,  and  are  Booic
being  assaulted  by  others  present;  so  that  we  are  liarassed -^  ^^*
at  one  time  by  pride,  at  another  by  anger,  at  another
by  lust,  and  at  another  by  avarice  tempting  us.  But  when
the  Lord  suppresses  all  these  in  our  heart  by  the  fear
of  His  secret  visitation,  what  else  doth  He  but  place  His
steps  in  the  abyss  ?  Which  steps  we  behold  with  the  mind,
when  we  consider  how  the  gifts  of  His  fear  stand  up  to
oppose  these  rebellious  sins.  For  the  Prophet  had  beheld
these  steps,  when  He  was  saying,  TJiy  goings  were  seen,  O  Ps.  Gs,
God,  the  goings  of  my  God,  my  King,  fVho  is  in  His  lioly"^^'
place.  For  He  who  beholds  the  inordinate  motions  of  his
mind  restrained  within  him  by  the  memory  of  the  Divine
judgments,  beholds,  as  it  were,  the  steps  of  God  walking
within  him.  Let  it  be  said,  therefore,  to  blessed  Job  ;  Hast
Ihou  entered  (he  depth  of  the  sea,  and  hast  thou  tcalked  in
the  lofcest  parts  of  the  abyss  ^  Thou  understandest,  as  1,
Who  with  wondrous  pity  trample  down  in  the  hearts  of  sin-
ners, at  one  time  anger,  at  another  lust,  at  another  avarice,
at  another  rising  pride.  As  if  it  were  plainly  said  to  him,  If
thou  seest  that  I  alone  suppress  the  lurking  vices  of  the
heart,  thou  wilt  cease  to  be  puffed  up  with  self-justification.
And  because  when  we  are  visited  by  God,  we  are  led  to
confession  concerning  even  the  secret  and  unlawful  motions
of  our  mind,  it  is  rightly  subjoined  ;

Ver.  17.  Have  the  gates  of  death  been  opened  tmto  thee?

29.  For  the  gates  of  death  are  wicked  thoughts: which xvi.
we  open  to  God,  when  we  confess  them  with  weeping  in
penitence. For  He  beholds  them  even  when  not  confessed ;

but  enters  into  them,  when  confessed.  For  He  then  in  truth
opens  a  way  for  Himself  in  the  gates  of  death,  when  we  have
put  aside  evil  thoughts,  and  He  comes  to  us  after  confession.
And  they  are  called  the  gates  of  death  for  this  reason,
because  the  way  to  death  is  always  opened  through  evil
thoughts.  Which  is  again  repeated,  when  it  is  subjoined  ;
And  hast  thou  seen  the  gloomy  doors  ?

30.  For  the  gloomy  doors  are  the  lurking  evils  of  the
mind,  which  can  both  exist  within,  and  yet  not  be  observed
by  another.  Which  yet  the  Lord  beholds,  when  He  destroys
them  by  the  secret  look  of  grace. For  it is  written, The

VOL.  III.  Y


32-2 Breadth  of  soul  in  hidden  Saints  needs  consideration.

Job  38,  King  Who  siltcth  in  the  throne  of  judgment,  scatlereth  aicaij

~MoR ^^^  ^^''^  with  His  sight. And  because  every  vice  contracts,

ProT. and  every  virtue  enlarges  the  mind,  after  the  destruction  of

' * vices it is riglitly subjoined, Hast thou considered the

breadth  of  the  earth  ? For  did  not  virtue  enlarge  the  mind,

^^"/•^^Paul  would  not  say  to  the  Corinthians,  Be  ye  also  enlarged,
and  he  not  yoked  icith  unbelievers.  But  we  must  observe
carefully  that  which  is  said ;

Ver.  18.  Hast  thou  considered  the  breadth  of  the  earth?
xvii.  31.  For  the  extent  of  the  inwardly  good  is  not  at  all  com-
prehended, unless  it  is  carefully  considered.  For  poverty  fre-
quently humbles  them  outwardly,  the  torture  of  punishment
straitens  them ;  but  yet,  in  the  midst  of  these  things,  their
inward  resolution  expands  itself  ever  to  hope  for  heavenly
rewards.  The  Apostles  had  outwardly  been  straitened,  when
they  were  enduring  scourges ;  but  they  were  standing  at
liberty  in  great  width  within,  w^ho  had  tm-ned,  in  themselves.

Acts  5,  these  very  scourges  into  joy.  For  it  is  written,  The  Apostles
departed  from  the  presence  of  the  council;  rejoicing  that
they  icere  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the  Name
of  Jesus. Paul  had  found  this  width,  in  his  straits,  who

Phil.  l,said,  But  I  wish  you  to  know,  brethren,  that  the  things

which  happened  unto  me,  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the

furtherance  of  the  Gospel,  so  that  my  hands  in  Christ  tcere

made  manifest  in  all  the  palace. David  was  possessing  this

Ps. 4, 1,  width,  in  the  midst  of  narrowness,  when  saying,  Tliou  hast
enlarged  me  in  tribulation.  This  earth,  therefore,  that  is
the  conscience  of  holy  men,  is  then  enlarged  when  it  is
pressed  outwardly  with  the  adversities  of  this  world.  For
when  it  is  driven  away  from  security  in  this  life,  it  is  beaten
inwardly  on  itself,  so  as  to  stretch  toward  the  hope  of  heavenly
things.  And  when  it  is  not  allowed  to  wander  abroad,  being
brought  back,  as  it  were,  into  its  own  bosom,  it  is  enlarged.
We  however  behold  what  misfortunes  good  men  endure,  but
see  not  how  much  they  rejoice  within.  We  learn,  on  consi-
deration, the  breadth  of  their  mind,  sometimes  in  their  words,
sometimes  in  their  deeds  :  but  yet  we  know  not  how  great  is
the  range  of  that  breadth  in  them.  Let  human  wisdom  hear
then,  Hast  thou  considered  the  breadth  of  the  earth  ?  and
let  it  learn  its  own  folly. As  if  he  said.  As  I,  Who  alone


Waya  of  light  and  darkness,  the  passing  of  good  and  ill. 32o

fully  consider  llie secret  rejoicing  of  the holy,  when  sur-  Book
rounded  with  scourges,  because  I  alone  mercifully  fashion ^ '  '


them.  Or  certainly,  blessed  Job  is  asked  whether  he  has
considered  the  breadth  of  the  earth,  in  order  that  he  might
be  humbled  by  the  example  of  another's  enlargement.  As
if  it  were  openly  said  to  him,  Consider  those  Avliom  the
countless  evils  of  this  world  cannot  confine,  and  cease  to
boast,  amid  thy  blows,  of  the  state  of  thy  own  heart.  It
follows ;

Ver.  18 — "20.  Tell  Me.  if  Ihou  knoicesl  all  tilings,  in  what
path  the  light  dwelleth,  and  what  is  the  place  of  darkness?
that  Ihoii  magest  take  each  of  them  to  the  hounds  thereof
and  understand  the  paths  to  the  house  thereof.

32. Blessed  Job  is  tried  with  a  weighty  question,  in  that  xviii.
he  is  examined  as  to  the  way  of  light  and  the  place  of  dark-
ness, whether  he  should  bring  them  each  to  their  boundai'ies,
and  should  understand  the  paths  to  the  house  thereof For
what  is  understood  by  the  word  '  light'  but  righteousness  ?
and  what  is  designated  by  '  darkness'  but  iniquity  } Whence
it  is  said  to  some  who  had  been  converted  from  the  wicked-
ness of  sins,  Ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  are  weEph.  5,
light  in  the  Lord. And  it  is  stated  of  some  who  continue
in  sin,  They  that  sleep,  sleep  in  the  night. It  is  said  there- 1  Thcs.^.
fore  to  blessed  Job,  Tell  Me,  if  thou  knowest  all  things,  in
ichat  path  the  light  dwelleth,  and  what  is  the  place  of  dark-
ness  ? As  if  it  were  said  to  him,  If  thou  imaginest  that  thou
hast  perfect  wisdom,  tell  Me,  either  into  whose  heart  that
innocency,  which is now  wanting,  is  coming,  or  in  whose
heart  that  wickedness,  which  now  exists,  remains. ///  what
path  the  light  dwelleth :  that  is,  whose  mind  righteousness
comes  and  fills. And  what  is  the  2:>lace  of  darkness,  that  is,
in  whom does  blind iniquity  rcniain. That  thou mayest
take  each  of  them  to  the  bounds  thereof,  that  is,  that  thou
mayest  decide  whether  he  who  is  now  seen  to  be  wicked,
finishes  his  life  in  iniquity,  and  whether  he  who  is  now  seen
to  be  righteous,  terminates  the  conclusion  of  his  life  with  the
perfection  of  righteousness. And  understand  the  paths  to
the  house  thereof: that  is,  that  thou  mayest  consider  and
discern,  either  for  whom  perseverance  in  good  deeds  secures
an  eternal  mansion  in  the  Kingdom,  or  whom  evil  habits,

Y  '2


o,  /,


324 '  House^  the  abiding  cotulition. MinCn  ignorance.

Job  38, binding  to  the  end,  condemn  to  eternal  punishment. For

-^ '-'  house'  is  put  for  resting  place,  and  'path'  for  conduct. A

path  therefore  leads  to  a  house,  because  our  doings  lead  on
to  our  resting  place.  But  what  man  could  speak  when  ques-
tioned on  these  points  ?  who  could  hear  them  at  least
without  fear .''  For  we  daily  see  many  who  shine  forth  with
tlie  light  of  righteousness,  and  who  are  yet  at  their  close
obscured  with  the  darkness  of  wickedness.  And  we  behold
many  involved  in  the  darkness  of  sins,  and  yet  at  the  end  of
their  life  suddenly  set  free  and  restored  to  the  light  of  righ-
teousness. We  also  know  that  many  have  preserved  entire,
even  to  the  end,  the  path  of  righteousness  which  they  have
once  foimd,  and  we  have  beheld  that  most  men  have  heaped
up  without  ceasing,  even  to  the  end,  their  wickedness  which
they  have  once  begun.

33.  But  who,  amid  these  clouds  of  secret  judgments,  can
so  dart  forth  the  light  of  his  mind,  as  to  distinguish  with  any
discernment,  either  who  continues  in  sin,  or  who  perseveres
in  righteousness,  or  who  is  converted  from  the  highest  to
the  lowest  condition,  or  who  relapses  from  the  highest  to  the
lowest?  These  points  are  hid  from  men's  senses,  nor  is
aught  known  of  the  end  of  any  one,  because  the  abyss  of
the  divine  judgments  is  not  at  all  penetrated  by  the  eye  of
the  human  mind.  For  we  see  that  that  Gentile  world  which
was  opposed  to  God  was  overspread  with  the  light  of  righ-
teousness, and  that  Judoea,  long  beloved,  was  darkened  with
the  night  of  unbelief.  We  know  also  that  the  thief  passed
from  tlfb  cross  to  the  kingdom,  and  that  Judas  sank  into  hell
from  the  glory  of  the  Apostleship.  And  again,  because
destinies  once  commenced  are  sometimes  not  changed,  we
know  that  the  other  thief  arrived  at  punishment,  and  that  the
Apostles  enjoyed  the  appointed  kingdom,  which  they  had
longed  for.  Who  then  can  examine  in  what  path  light
dwells,  and  what  is  the  place  of  darkness,  to  bring  each  of
them  to  its  own  bounds,  and  to  understand  the  paths  to  the
house  thereof?  I  see  Paul  called  from  that  cruelty  of  per-
secution to  the  grace  of  Apostleship ;  and  j'et  he  is  so
alarmed  in  the  midst  of  secret  judgments,  as  to  fear  that  he
be  cast  away,  even  after  he  had  been  called.  For  he  says,
lCor.9,  /  clinsten  my  hoily,  and  bring  it  into  siihjection,  lest,  per-


Not  knowing  the  end  calls  to  hnmilUy  and  care. 325

chance,  having  preached  to  others,  I  miiself  should  become  Rook
a  cast-aicay. And  again,  I  count  not  myself  to  have  appre- 1^ ~
hended ; but  one  thiny  I  do,  foryelting  those  things  tvhich  13.  li.'
are  behind,  and  stretching  forth  myself  unto  those  things
which  are  before,  I  follow  the  destined  mark,  to  the  prize
of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. I  follow  «/?er,  ibid.  12.
if  that  I  may  apprehend  that,  for  which  also  I  am  appre-
hended. And  it  certainly  had  been  already  said  of  him  by
the  voice  of  the  Lord,  He  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  Me ;  and  yet  Acts  9,
he  still  chastens  his  body,  and  is  fearful  of  being  rejected.

34.  Alas  for  our  wretched  selves,  who  have  known  as  yet
no  voice  of  God  concerning  our  election,  and  are  still  slum-
bering in  ease,  as  if  from  security. But  there  ought,  there
ought  doubtless  to  be  not  only  security  in our  hope,  but
also  fear  in  our  conversation,  that  the  one  may  encourage  us
in  the  contest,  the  other  sting  us  when  listless. Whence  it
is  rightly  said  by  the  Prophet,  Let  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  Pa.  iio,
trust  in  the  Lord. As  if  he  were  openly  saying ; He  pre-
sumes in  vain  on  his  hope,  who  refuses  to  fciir  God  in  his
doings. But  why  is  blessed  Job  questioned  on  so  mighty  an
enquiry,  which  is  utterly  unknown  by  men,  how  he  understands
the  end  of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust,  except  thathe  should
turn  to  his  own  end,  from  behig  unable  to  understand  that  of
others;  and  that  from  being  ignorant  of  his  own  end,  as  well
as  others',  he  might  be  afraid  at  his  ignorance,  be  humbled
through  his  fear;  from  being  humbled  might  not  be  elated
at  his  own  doings;  and  from  not  being  elated,  might  remain
stedfast  in  the  citadel  of  grace  ? Let  it  be  said  then  to  him,
Tell  3Le,  if  thou  hast  understanding,  in  what  path  the  light
dwellelh,  and  what  is  the  place  of  darkness,  that  thou  mayest
take  each  of  them  to  the  bounds  thereof. As  if  it  were  said ;
As  thou  knowest  not  who  are  converted  from  sin  to  good-
ness, nor  who  turn  back  from  goodness  to  sin  ;  so  also  thou
dost  not  understand  what  is  doing  towards  tliyself,  as  thy
merits  deserve. And  as  thou  dost  not  at  all  comprehend
another's  end,  so  art  thou  also  unable  to  foresee  thine  own.
For  thou  knowest  now  what  progress  thou  hast  made  thyself,
but  what  I  still  think  of  thee  in  secret,  thou  knowest  not.
Thou  now  thinkest  on  thy  deeds  of  righteousness;  but  thou
knowest  not  how strictly  they  are  \>cighed  by  Mc, Woe


326 Man  comprehends  not  his  beginning  or  end.

JoD  38,  even  to  the  praiseworthy  life  of  men,  if  it  be  judged  without

— ^^-^—  mercy,  because  when  strictly  examined,  it  is  overwhelmed

in  the  presence  of  the  Judge,  by  the  very  conduct  with  which

it  imagines  that  it  pleases  Him. Whence  it  is  rightly  said

Ps.  143  to  God  by  the  Prophet,  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  Thy

^' servant,  for  in  Thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  he  justijied.

Eccles.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon, There  are  righteous

^' ^* and  vise  men,  and  their  works  are  in  the  hand  of  God:

and  yet  no  man  hnoweth  ichether  lie  is  deserving  of  love,  or

of  hatred  ;  hut  all  things  are  kept  uncertain  for  the  time  to

Prov. come. Hence  again  it  is  said  by  the  same  Solomon,  What

20,24,  jjidfi  i(-{ii  jjQ  (ij)i(.  fQ  njidersiand  his  own  ivay? And  any

one  doing  good  or  evil  is  doubtless  known  by  the  testimony
of  his  conscience.  But  it  is  said  that  their  own  way  is  not
known  to  men,  for  this  reason,  because  even  if  a  man  under-
stands that  he  is  acting  rightly,  yet  he  knows  not,  under  the
strict  enquiry,  whither  he  is  going.  After  He  has  alarmed
him  then  with  this  consideration  of  his  end.  He  goes  back
to  examine  his  beginning:  and,  that  he  may  not  complain
wherefore  knows  he  not  his  end.  He  mentions  also  that  he
does  not  even  understand  with  what  beginning  he  came
hither. For  it  follows ;

Ver.  21.  Didst  thou  know  then  that  thou  wast  about  to  he
born,  and  didst  thou  know  the  number  of  thy  days?

35.  As  if  He  were  openly  saying,  What  wonder  if  thou
understandest  not  thine  end,  since  thou  dost  not  comprehend
thy  beginning  ?  And  since  thou  knowest  not  with  what
beginning  thou  camest  hither,  what  wonder,  if  thou  canst
not  tell  with  what  end  thou  art  taken  away  ?  If  therefore  it
was  My  work  to  bring  thee  forward  from  secresy  to  sight  at
thy  beginning,  it  will  be  Mine  also  to  bring  thee  back  from
sight  to  secresy.  Why  complainest  thou  aught  of  the  dis-
pensation of  thy  life,  who,  ignorant  of  thyself,  art  supported
by  the  hand  of  thy  Creator  ?  Thou  oughtest  therefore  to
boast  thyself  the  less  in  what  thou  dost,  the  more  thou  art
confined  within  the  bosom  of  eternity,  and  knowest  not
either  in  what  order  thou  camest  hither,  nor  when,  or  how
thou  art  taken  hence.

30.  But  these  words  can  yet  be  understood  in  another
sense  also;  Didst  thou  knoiv  then  that  thou  wast  about  to  be


XIX.


Our  Lord  foreknew  His  Own  Conception.  327

horn,  and  didst  thou  know  the  number  of  thy  days? Thou  Book

XXIX

uuderstandest,  As  I,  Who  Imew  that  I  was  about  to  be  born, "


because,  even  before  the  birth  of  My  Manhood,  I  always
existed  substantially  in  the  Godhead.  For  men  begin  then
to  exist,  when  they  are  born  in  the  womb  of  their  mothers.
For  even  the  very  conception  is  called  nativity,  according  to
that  which  is  written.  That  which  is  born  in  Iter  is  of  the  Mditt.i,

20

Holi/  Ghost.  And  they  therefore  know  not  that  they  are  about
to  be  born,  because  they  do  not  exist,  before  they  are  created.
But  God,  Who  ever  existed  without  beginning,  foresaw  this
of  Himself,  that  He  assumed  a  beginning  in  the  womb  of
the  Virgin;  and  because  He  foreknew.  He  ordained  it;  and
because  He  ordained.  He  doubtless  endured  nothing  in
human  form,  except  of  His  own  free  will.  Let  man  then,
who  could  not  foresee  his  own  birth,  be  reproved  for  com-
plaining of  his  scourges,  if  even  He,  Who  foresaw  and
ordained  His  own  birth,  prepared  Himself  for  scourges
amongst  men. It  follows,

Ver.  22,  23.  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  treasures  of  snoio,
or  hast  thou  seen  the  treasures  of  the  hail,  which  I  have
lyrepared  against  the  time  of  the  enemy,  against  the  day  of
battle  and  itar  ?

37.  What  else  must  be  understood  by  the  '  snow'  or  '  hail,' xx.
but  the  cold  and  hard  hearts  of  the  wicked  ? For  as  charity
is  designated  by  warmth,  so  also  in  Holy  Scripture  wicked-
ness is  wont  to  be  designated  by  cold. For  it  is.  written,
As  a  cistern  maketh  its  water  cold,  so  doth  its  otcn  wicked-  jer.  6,
ness  make  cold  the  soul. And  again,  Iniquity  shall  abound,!.'^  ,„,

-,  .  JMat.24,

and  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold.  What  then  can  12.
be  more  fitly  understood  by  the  cold  of  snow,  or  the  hardness
of  hail,  than  the  life  of  the  wicked,  which  both  waxes  cold
by  torpor,  and  strikes  with  the  malice  of  hardness  ?  Whose
life  the  Lord  yet  tolerates,  because  He  keeps  them  for  the
probation  of  His  just  ones.  Whence  also  He  rightly  sub-
joined. Which  I  have  j)repared  against  the  time  of  the
enemy,  against  the  day  of  battle  and  war.  In  order  that,
when  our  adversary  the  devil  endeavours  to  tempt  us,  he  may
make  use  of  their  habits  as  his  weapons  against  us.  For  by
them  he  tortures  us  in  his  rage,  but  unwittingly  purges  us.
For  they  become  scourges  to  our  sins,  and  when  we  are


328  Hail  and  li(j]tl)iing  instrumeiils  of  God.

Job  38,  smitten by  tlicir life,  which is such,  we are freed from

22.  23

— ^-^^  eternal  deatli.  Whence  it  is  so  ordered,  that  even  the
abandoned  life  of  the  reprobate  benefits  the  life  of  the  Elect,
and  that  whilst  their  ruin  furthers  our  interest,  it  is  thus
marvellously  ordained,  in  order  that  even  every  thing  which
is  lost,  may  not  be  lost  to  the  Elect  of  God.

38.  This  also  can  be  understood  in  another  way,  so  as  not
to  differ  from  the  exposition  of  the  former  verse,  since  it
seems  connected  with  the  words  that  precede  it. For  because
He  had  pointed  out  that  cither  the  good  can  be  changed  to
sin,  or  the  wicked  to  goodness,  He  immediately  proceeded
to  add,  Hast  thou  entered  into  the  treasures  of  snow,  or  hast
thou  seen  the  treasures  of  the  hail,  ivhich  I  have  jyrepared
against  the  time  of  the  enemy,  against  the  day  of  battle  and
war? By  either  cold,  or  hard,  snow,  or  hail,  we  understand,
as  has  been  said, the  hearts  of  the  wicked. But  because
Almighty  God  has  chosen  His  Saints  from  such,  and  knows
how  many  of  the  Elect  He  has  still  stored  up  amongst  the
life  of  the  wicked,  He  fitly  says,  that  He  has  His  treasures  in
snow  or  hail. For  '  thesaurus'  (treasure)  is  so  called  from
Seo-*?,  that  is,  from  its  being  placed  away. And  He  beholds
many  long  concealed  in  a  life  of  coldness,  whom  He  brings
out,  when He  orders it, and  exhibits glittering  with the
brightness  of  righteousness, through grace  from on high.
rs.5i,7.For  it  is  written,  Thou  shall  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter
than  snow. And  He  hides  them  for  a  long-  while  beneath
the  seal  of  His  foreknowledge,  prepared  against  the  day  of
war  and  of  battle,  but  the  moment  He  brings  them  out.  He
strikes  the  opposing breast of  the adversaries,  with  their
words  and  refutations,  as  if  with  hailstones. Whence  it  is
Ps.  18,  written  elsewhere.  Through  the  brightness  in  His  presence
„  ' the  clouds  passed  away,  hailstones  and  coals  of  fire. For
Aug.  ad  coals  pass  away  through  brightness,  because  holy  preachers
°'^' traverse  the  whole  compass  of  the  world  with  the  brightness
of  their  miracles. And  they  are  called,  moreover,  hailstones,
and  coals  of  fire;  because  they  both  strike  with  their  reproof,
and  kindle  with  the  flame  of  charity. The  bold  reproof  of
the  Saints  is also  fitly  represented  by  the  nature  of  hail.
For  hail  strikes  as  it  falls,  and  waters  when  it  melts. But
holy  men  both  strike  the  hearts  of  their  hearers  with  dread,


Blantj  chosen  ones  yet  stored  in  the  cold  of  sin. 3*29

and  bedew  them  with  comfort. J''or  the  Prophet  bears  wit-  Pook
iiess  how  they  strike,  saying,  They  shall  speak  of  the  miylil^


Ps.  145

of  Thy  terrible  ads,  and  they  shall  tell  of  Thy  greatness,  (j, '  ' '
And  he  has  proceeded  to  subjoin,  ho\v  they  bedew  with  gentle-
ness; They  shall  ittter'the  memory  of  the  abundance  of  Thy  ih.  7.
siveetne.is,  and  shall  exult  in  Thy  riyhleousness.  Treasures,
therefore,  are  kept  in  the  snow  or  hail, because  many  who  were
frozen  in  the  torpor  of  iniquity,  when  taken  up  unto  heavenly
grace,  shine  forth  in  Holy  Church  with  the  light  of  righte-
ousness, and  smite  with  the  blows  of  their  doctrine  the  evil
wisdom  of  their  adversaries.  Whence  also  it  is  filly  sub-
joined, IVhiclt  I  have  prepared  against  the  time  of  the
enemy y  against  the  day  of  battle  and  war.  For  Saul  in
Irulh  had  been  snow  or  hail  through  cold  insensibilitj- ;  but
he  became  snow  and  hail  against  the  breasts  of  his  adver-
saries, either  by  the  brightness  of  righteousness,  or  by  the
reproof  of  his  keen  eloquence.  O  what  a  treasure  did  the
Lord  keep  him,  stored  np  in  snow  or  hail,  when  He  already
secretly  beheld  him  as  His  own  Elect,  though  placed  among
the  life  of  the  wicked.  And  to  smite  how  many  breasts  of
His  adversaries  did  He  grasp  in  His  hand  this  hailstone,  by
which  He  laid  prostrate  so  many  hearts  which  resisted  Him,
39.  Let  no  one  then  boast  himself  of  his  own  deeds ;  let
no  one  despair  of  those,  whom  he  sees  slill  cold.  For  be
sees  not  the  treasures  of  God  in  snow  and  hail.  For  who
could  beheve  that  that  very  person,  who  at  his  death  kept  Acts  7,
the  raiment  of  all  those  who  stoned,  could  go  before  the^^"
martyred  Stephen  through  the  grace  of  apostleship .?  If
therefore  we  refer  to  these  secret  gifts,  or  judgments,  while
not  despaiiug  utterly  of  any,  we  do  not  prefer  ourselves  in
our  hearts  to  those,  to  whom  for  a  time  we  have  been  pre-
ferred. For  though  we  now  observe  how  much  we  have
outstripped  them,  yet  we  know  not  how  much  we  may  be
surpassed  ourselves,  when  they  begin  the  race.  It  is  well,
therefore,  said  to  blessed  Job,  Hast  thou  entered  the  treasures
of  snow,  or  hast  thou  beheld  the  treasures  of  the  kail,  ivhich
I  have  prepared  against  the  time  of  the  enemy,  against  the
day  of  battle  and  icar?  As  if  it  were  openly  said.  Prefer
not  thyself  to  any  one,  by  reason  of  thy  doings;  for  of  these,
whom  thou  beholdcst  still  frozen  in  sin,  thou  knowcst  not


330  Christ  the  Way  hy  Which  Light  came.

Jon  38,  what mighty workers of  righteousness, and defenders of
— 1-^ — sound  faith  I  intend  to  create. But  because  this  is  effected


by  the  coming  of  the  Mediator,  it  is  rightly  subjoined;
Ver.  24.  By  what  way  is  the  light  scattered?

xxi.  40.  For  He  in  truth  is  the  way.  Who  says,  /  am  the  Way,
John  14,  ^f^Q  Truth,  and  the  Life.  The  light  is,  therefore,  scattered  by
this  way,  because  all  the  Gentile  world  is  enlightened  by
His  presence.  But  He  rightly  said.  Is  scattered,  because
the  light  of  preaching  was  not  contracted  or  confined,  but
shone  forth  with  its  brightness  far  and  wide  by  the  voices  of
the  Apostles.  But  because  the  power  of  love  glows  within,
when  the  light  of  conversion  has  been  received,  in  order  that
either  our  past  sins  may  be  anxiously  lamented,  or  future
blessings  be  most  ardently  sought  for,  it  is  suitably  added.
The  heat  is  divided  over  the  earth.

xxii.  41.  For  when  the  light  is  spread  abroad  the  heat  is  divided
over  the  earth ;  because  when  righteousness  is  openly
preached,  the  anxious  desire  of  the  heart  to  seek  God  is
spread  forth  in  the  practice  of  virtues  ;  so  that  one  person
shines  forth  in  the  word  of  wisdom,  another  in  the  word  of
knowledge  ;  one  is  mighty  in  the  grace  of  healing,  another
in  the  working  of  mighty  deeds ;  and  that  thus,  while  they
severally  receive  unequally  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  they  are
all  necessarily  united  to  each  other,  and  imanimously  in-
flamed. But  after  the  light  is  said  to  be  spread  abroad,  it
can  readily  be  understood  that  persecution  is  designated  by
'  heat:'  because  as  the  light  of  preaching  shone  brightly,  so
the  heat  of  persecution  immediately  blazed  forth  from  the
hearts  of  the  unbelievers.  For,  that  persecution  is  described
by  '  heat,'  the  discourse  of  the  Lord  bears  witness,  speak-
ing  of the seeds which had been cast on the rocky

Matt, ground, When  the  sun  arose  they  icere  all  scorched,  and

y^i  ^-  because  they  had  not  root,  they  withered  away.  And  when
He  expounded  it  a  little  after.  Pie  called  '  heat,'  persecution.
The  heat  therefore  is  divided  over  the  earth,  when  the  hght
is  spread  abroad,  because,  as  the  life  of  the  faithful  became
bright,  the  cruelty  of  the  faitliless  was  kindled.  For  the  heat
was  divided,  when  persecution  was  raging,  now  at  Jerusalem,
now  at  Damascus, and now  in  other countries  far away.

Acts  8,  For  it  is  written,  At  that  time  there  arose  a  great  persecution


Heat  of  persecution. Our  Vujhl  is  '  scattered.'' 331

in  the  Church,  which  teas  at  Jcrusaletn,  and  thei/  ivere  all  ^opk

XXIX
scattered  abroad  throughout  the  regions  ofJudcea  and  Samaria. "-  -' — — *

And  it  is  written  again  ;  Saul^  yet  breathing  out  threatenings  Acts  9,
and  slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord,  went  unto  '  '
the  high  priest,  and  desired  of  him  letters  for  him  to  take  to
Dainascus  to  the  synagogues,  that  if  he  had  found  any  of
this  way,  men  and  women,  he  might  bring  them  bound  to  Jeru-
salem. Because  then  persecution  had  increased,  now  here,
now  there,  they  who  had  known  the  hght  of  truth,  were
panting,  as  it  were,  under  the  burning  of  the  divided  lieat.

42.  But  because  we  have  heard  blessed  Job  questioned  in
the  former  words,  respecting  the  secret  judgment; it  now
behoves  us  to  examine  more  accurately  this  which  is  said  of
the  scattered  light,  or  divided  heat. For  he  is  still  examined
with  lofty  questioning,  iu  order  that  he  may  at  least  learn
that  he  is  ignorant,  and  that  it  may  be  said  to  him,  By  ichat
icay  is  the  light  spread,  the  heat  divided  over  the  earth?
For  what  is  designated  by  the  word  '  light'  but  righteous-
ness ? Of  which  it  is  written  ; The  people  which  was  sitting  Is.  9,  2.
in  darkness,  saw  a  great  light. But  every  thing  which  is
scattered,  is  thrown,  not  continuously, but  with  a  kind  of
intermission. And  light  is  therefore  said  to  be  '  scattered,'
because, though  we already  behold some things  as  they
really  are,  yet  some  things  we  see  not,  as  they  are  to  be  seen.
For  scattered  light  had  possessed  the  heart  of  Peter,  who
had  shone  forth  with  such  great  brightness  of  faith,  and  of
miracles,  and yet,  whde  he  was imposing  the weight  of  Gal.  2,
circumcision  on  the  converted  Gentiles,  he  knew  not  what
to say  aright. Light,  therefore,  is  '  scattered'  in  this  life,
because  it  is  not  continuously  possessed,  to  the  understanding
of  every  thing. For  whilst  we  comprehend  one  thing  as  it  is,
and  are  ignorant  of  another,  we  both  see  as  it  were  jiarlially
in  scattered  light,  and  remain  partially  in  darkness. But
our  light  will  then  no  longer  be  scattered,  when  our  mind,
caught  up  entirely  to  God,  will  shine  forth.

43.  And  because  it  is  not  known  in  what  ways  this  light
is  insinuated  into  the  heart  of  man,  it  is  rightly  said  in  a
question  ;  By  what  ivay  is  the  light  scattered?  As  if  it  were
openly  said;  Tell  Me,  in  what  order  I  pour  My  righteous-
ness into  the  secret  recesses  of  the  hearts,  when  I  am  not


332  Graces  and  iemplations  hoik  distributed.

Job  38,  seen,  cvcii  in  My  ajiproacb,  and  yet  I  invisibly  change  the
— -^—  visible  doings  of"  men,  when  I  irradiate  one  and  the  same
mind,  at  one  time  with  this,  and  at  another  with  that  virtue,
and  yet  I  permit  it,  through  scattered  light,  still  to  remain,  in
a  measure,  in  the  darkness  of  temptation.  Let  ignorant  man
be  asked,  by  what  way  the  light  is  scattered.  As  if  it  were
openly  said,  While  I  soften  the  hard  hearts,  bend  the  rigid,
smooth  the  rough,  warm  the  cold,  strengthen  the  weak,
establish  the  wandering,  confirm  the  wavering,  come,  if  thou
canst,  incorporeally,  and  behold,  on  what  minds  I  shed  this
light.  For  all  these  things  we  behold  when  done ;  for  we
know  not  how  tlicy  are  wrought  within.  The  Truth  shews
in  the  Gospel,  that  this  way  of  light  is  invisible  to  us,  say-
John  3,  ing;  The  wind  hloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest
^'  the  sound  thereof,  and  knoivest  not  whence  it  cometh,  and
ivhither  it  goeth.

44.  But  because,  when  the  light  is  scattered,  temptations
presently  spring  up  from  the  hidden  adversary  against  the
enlightened  mind,  it  is  rightly  subjoined;  The  heat  is  divided
over  the  earth.  For  the  crafty  foe  strives  to  inflame  with
unlawful  desires  the  minds  of  those  whom  he  sees  shining
forth  with  the  light  of  righteousness  ;  so  that  they  frequently
feel  themselves  more  assaulted  with  temptations,  than  at  the
time  when  they  beheld  not  the  rays  of  inward  light.  Whence
also  the  Israelites,  after  they  had  been  called,  complain
against  Moses  and  Aaron  of  their  increasing  labour,  saying ;

Exod.  Let  the  Lord  see  and  Judge,  because  ye  have  made  our
'  '  savour  to  stink  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh  and  his  servants,  and
have  given  him  a  sword  to  slay  us.  For  when  they  wished
to  depart  from  Egypt,  Pharaoh  had  taken  away  the  straw,
and  yet  required  works  of  the  same  amount.  The  mind,
therefore,  secretly  murmurs,  as  it  were,  against  the  law,  after
tlic  knowledge  of  which  it  endures  sharper  stings  of  temj)t-
ations,  and  when  it  beholds  i^s  labours  increasing,  because
it  is  displeasing  to  its  adversary,  it  grieves  that  it  stinks,  as  it
were,  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh.  Ilcat,  therefore,  follows  after
light;  because  after  the  illumination  of  the  heavenly  gift,
the  contest  of  temptation  is  increased.

45.  But  the heat  is  rightly  said also to be  '  divided  :'
doubtless,  because  separate  persons  arc  not  assailed  by  all


Temptation  varied  hy  Satan,  tempered  by  Grace. 333

vices,  but  by  certain  ones  whicli  are  near,  and  ])laced  close ^"ok

. XXIX
to  them. For  tlie  ancient  enemy  first  beholds  the  character'  of, '

each  person,  and  then  applies  the  snares  of  temptations.  For  spersio-
one  person  is  of  a  clieerful,  another  of  a  morose,  another  of  a  ^™'
timid,  another  of  a  proud  disposition.  Our  secret  adversary,
in  order  then  to  catch  us  easily,  prepares  deceptions  closely
connected  with  our  several  characters.  For  because  pleasure
borders  on  mirth,  he  holds  out  lust  as  a  bait  to  cheerful  dis-
positions. And  because  moroseness  easily  slides  into  anger,
he  offers  the  cup  of  discord  for  the  morose.  Because  the  timid
dread  punishments,  he  threatens  terrors  to  the  fearful.  And
because  he  beholds  the  proud  elated  with  praises,  he  draws
them  on  to  wdiatever  he  pleases,  by  flattering  applause.  He
lays  snares  therefore  against  men  one  by  one,  by  vices  adapted
to  them.  For  he  Avould  not  easily  lead  them  captive,  if  he
were  either  to  offer  bribes  to  the  lustful,  or  bodily  pleasures
to  the  covetous,  or  if  he  were  to  assail  the  greedy  by  the
pride  of  abstinence,  or  the  abstinent  by  gluttonousness,  or  if
he  were  to  seek  to  seize  the  gentle  by  eagerness  for  the
contest,  or  the  angry  by  the  dread  of  fear.  Because  then,
when  in  the  heat  of  temptation,  he  craftily  larks  in  ambush
against  each  one  by  himself,  and  secretly  lays  the  snares
which  are  akin  to  their  habits,  it  is  rightly  said  ;  The  heat
is  divided  over  the  earth.

46.  But  when  it  is  first  stated.  By  what  icay  the  light  is
scattered:  and  is  there  immediately  subjoined.  The  heat  is
divided  over  the  earth,  it  is  doubtless  indicated  that  the  heat
is  also  divided  by  the  same  way,  by  which  the  light  is
scattered.  For  when  the  lofty  and  incomprehensible  grace
of  the  Holy  Spirit  irradiates  our  minds  with  its  light,  it  also
so  disposes  and  modifies  the  temptations  of  the  adversary,  that
either  they  do  not  come  upon  us  many  together,  or  else  that
those  only  which  can  be  endui'cd,  assail  the  mind  already
illuminated  by  God;  so  that  they  do  not  burn  us  with  the
fire  of  their  full  strength,  when  they  torture  us  with  the  heat
of  their  touch.  As  Paul  bears  witness,  who  says.  But  God}^^^^-
is  faithful,  Who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that
ye  are  able,  but  will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to
escape,  that  ye  may  he  able  to  hear  it.  This  heat  then  our
crafty su]:»planter divides in one way, and our mercifid


834 God  opens  the  way  for  the  Preaching  of  His  Word.

Job  38,  Creator  in  another.  The  one  divides,  in  order  thereby  to
— — — slay  more  speedily;  the  other,  to  make  it  more  tolerable.
And,  because,  when  we  are  harassed  with  temptation,  we  are
not  only  instructed  with  the  Spirit  of  God  within,  but  are
also  assisted  with  the  words  of  preachers  without,  after  the
divided  heat,  it  is  rightly  added,

Ver.  25. Who  hath  given  a  course  for  the  most  violent
shower  ?
xxiii. 47.  But  if,  as  we  said before,  that persecution in the
regions  of  Juda;a  is  designated  by  the  name  of  divided  heat,
because  this  very  fierceness  of  persecution  kept  not  from
tlieir  office  of  preaching,  through  any  fear,  the  holy  preachei's,
who  were  assisted  by  the  gift  from  on  high.  He  fitly  sub-
joins ; Who hath  given a course  for the most violent
showers  ?  As  if  He  were  saying,  Except  Myself. For  to  have
given  a  course  to  the  most  violent  showers,  when  the  heat
was  divided,  is  to  have  strengthened  the  force  of  preaching,
amid  the  very  difficulties  of  persecution,  in  order  that  the
power  of  preachers  might  the  more  increase,  the  more  the
cruelty  of  persecutors  stood  in  their  way,  so  that  they  might
bedew  the  thirsty  hearts  of  their  hearers  with drops of  rain,
and  water  more  abundantly  the  drought  of  unbelief;  and  that
though  the  heat  of  cruelty  was  glowing  against  them,  yet
the voice of grace might not through them be silent.
Paul  was  both  enduring  and  watering  this  heat  of  persecu-
2  Tim. tion,  when  saying,  /  labour  even  to  bonds,  as  an  evil  doer,
^'  '■^* but  the  word  of  God  is  not  bound. Of  this  shower  it  is  said
la.  5,  6.  elsewhere  ;  /  will  command  the  clouds that  they  rain  no
rain  upon  it. Of  this  course  of  the  shower  which  is  going
on  in  the  hearts  of  the  Elect,  the  Psalmist  witnesses,  saying  ;
Ps.  147,  His  word  runneth  swiftly. But  it  is  generally a  shower
only,  and  has  no  course  ;  because  preaching  comes  to  the
ears,  but  inward  grace  not  acting,  it  passes  not  through  to  the
hearts  of  the  hearers. And  of  the  words  of  this  preaching  it
Ps- 77,  is  said,  on  account  of  the  Elect;  For  thine  arrows  jjQ-ssed
through. For  the  arrows  of  God  pass through,  when  the
words  of  His  preaching  descend  from  the  ears  to  the  hearts.
And because  this  is  effected  solely by  Divine  grace,  the
Lord  witnesses  that  He  has  given  a  course  to  the  shower.
48.  But  I  see  it  must  be  observed,  that  He  calls  this  same


Most  violent,  in  high  precepts ;  thundering  in  terrors. 335
shower  not  '  violent,'  but  '  most  violent.' A  violent  shower  Book

V  "V  T  V"

is  great  force ;  but  a  most  violent  one,  is  the  boundless  ^-^ — ^*
power  of  preaching.  For  it  Nvas  a  violent  shower,  when
holy  preachers  were  advising  the  belief  of  eternal  joy.  But
'  most  violent,'  when  they  were  advising  men  that  on  account
of  their  hope  their  interest  should  be  abandoned,  all  visible
objects  despised  on  account  of  invisible,  and  that  the  pains
and  tortures  of  this  present  world  should  be  tolerated  for  the
sake  of  the  joys  they  have  heard  of.  But  when  so  many  of
the  Elect,  having  learned  the  fiuth,  abandoned  their  posses-
sions, when  the  heat  of  persecution  was  raging,  forgot  their
carnal  affection,  and  exposed  their  limbs  to  torture  for  joy  of
spirit;  what  else  did  the  Lord  do,  but  make  a  course  for
even  the  most  violent  shower,  which  by  bodily  words  so
watered  the  invisible  recesses  of  the  heart,  that  it  performed
even  the  highest  commands?  Where  it  is  also  fitly  sub-
joined;

And  a  way  for  the  sounding  thunder?

49.  For  what is  understood by '  thunder' except the  xxir.
preaching  of  heavenly  terror  ? And  when  the  hearts  of  men
feel  this  terror,  they  are  shaken. But  sometimes  by  thunder
is  set  forth  the  Incarnate  Lord  Himself,  Who  was  brought
to  our  knowledge  by  the  coucunrent  prophecy  of  the  ancient
fathers,  as  if  by  the  clashing  together  of  clouds  ;  Who,  ap-
pearing visibly  among  us,  sounded  forth  awfully  those  things
which were above us. Whence also  the Holy  Apostles
themselves  begotten  by  His grace  were  called Boanerges, Marks,
that  is,  sons  of  thunder. But  sometimes,  as  has  been  said,
'  thunder'  is  taken  for  their  preaching,  by  which  the  terror  of
the  heavenly  judgments  is  heard. But  because  any  preacher
can  present  words  to  the  ears,  but  cannot  open  the  hearts,
and  since,  unless  Almighty  God  alone  grant  the  words  of
preachers  a  hearing  invisibly  by  inward  grace  in  the  hearts
of  their  hearers,  that  preaching  is  received  in  vain  by  the  ear
of  the  hearer,  which  is prevented  by  his  deaf  heart  from
reaching  to  his  inmost  soul ;  the  Lord  asserts  that  He  grants
a  way  to  the  sounding  thuuder : for  when  He  vouchsafes
the  words  of  preaching.  He  pierces  the  heart  with  terror.
Paul,  the  illustrious  preacher,  when  he  was  awfully  sounding
forth  the  heavenly  mysteries,  seeing  that  he  could  not  possess


836 Rain  (/hen  to  the  GeniUe  desert,  ivhere  was  no  '  man:

Job  38,  this  way  by  himself,  admonished  his  disciples,  saying,  Withal

^-?^  praying  aha  for  us  that  God  would  open  to  us  a  door  of

'  'utterance,  to  speak the  mystery  of  Christ. He therefore

who  was  speaking  mysteries,  but  was  praying  for  a  door  to

be  opened  by  the  Lord  for  these  same  mysteries  in  the  heart

of  his  hearers,  possessed  indeed  the  thmider  already,  but  was

seekino-  for  a  way  to  be  granted  it  from  above. John,  who

1  Joiin  was  saying,  Ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you,  hut  as  His

^'  '*'''• anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  knew  that  he  could  not

give  this  way. Paul  again  taught  Who  could  give  this  way,

1  Cor. saying,  For  neither  is  he  that  planteth  any  thing,  neither

^'  '^' he  that  watereth,  hut  God  that  giveth  the  increase. Let  us

hear  then  what  this shower  and  thunder  effect,  when  the

way  has  been  granted  them. It  follows;

Ver.  26. That  it  should  rain  upon  the  earth,  ivithout  man,

in  the  desert,  where  no  mortal  dicelleth.

XXV. 50.  To  rain  upon  the  earth  without  man  in  the  desert,  is

to  preach  the  word  of  God  to  the  Gentile  world. For  whilst

it retained  no worship of  the Godhead, and shewed in

itself  no  appearance  of  good  works,  it  was  plainly  a  desert.

And  because  there  waslherein  no  lawgiver,  nor  any  one  who

could  seek  God  in  a  reasonable  way,  there  was,  as  it  were,

'  no  man ;'  and  it  remained  as  if  occupied  by  beasts  alone,

void  of  men. Of  this  land  of  the  desert  it  is  said  elsewhere,

Is.  43, He  made  a  icay  in  the  desert. Of  this  preaching  vouchsafed

P^*.  107  ^o  ^^^  Gentiles,  the  Psalmist  witnesses, saying,  He  made

33. rivers  in  the  desert. But  we  must  observe,  that  after  the

heat  was  divided  over  the  earth,  the  most  violent  shower

received  its  course,  that  it  might  rain  in  the  desert. Because

after  the  harshness  of  persecution  became  dreadful  in  Judaja,

so  as  not  only  not  to  receive  the  faith,  but  even  to  assail  it

with  the  sword,  every  preacher  who  had  been  sent  to  Israel,

turned  aside  to  summon the  Gentiles. Whence  the  holy

Apostles  say  to  the  persecuting  Hebrews  whom  they  aban-

Acts]3,don,  We  ought  first  to  preach  the  word  of  God  to  you,  hut

^ '' because  ye  put  it  from  you,  and  judge  yourselves  unworthy

of  everlasting  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles. When  the

heat,  then,  has  been  divided,  the  land  which  is  desert,  and

without  man,  is  watered ;  because,  when  the  persecution  of

the  faithful  had  spread  abroad  in  .Tudoea,  the  Gentile  world.


Rain  on  the  jxilkless  desert. Meaning  of  ^  grans.' 337

long  since  abandoned,  and  estrantrod,  as  it  were,  from  the  Rook
nilusion  of reason, is watered [)y  the  drops  of  preaching.
But  in  what  state  the  Gentile  world  was  still  found  by  the
preachers,  is  shewn,  when  it  is  added  ;

Ver.  27. Tlial  it  should  Jill  the  pathless  and  desolate  land.

But  what  it  produced  when  rained  on,  is  shewn,  when  it
is  immediately  subjoined,  And  should  produce  green  herbs.

51.  For  the  Gentile  world,  to  which  a  way  was  not  open  xxvi.
for  the  word  of  God,  was  a  long  while  pathless. For  on  the
coming  of  our  Redeemer  it  so  received  the  calling  of  grace,

as  that  there  had  not  been  in  it  before  the  way  of  Pro-
phecy. It  is  also  rightly  called  desolate ;  namely,  as  being
destitute  of  either  the  wisdom  of  counsel,  or  of  the  fruit  of
good  works.  The  Lord  therefore  gave  a  coui'se  to  the  most
violent  shower,  and  a  way  to  the  sounding  thunder,  that
it  should  rain  in  the  desert,  and  fill  the  pathless  and  desolate
land,  and  should  produce  green  herbs.  That  is.  He  added
to  outward  preaching  inward  inspiration;  that  the  parched
hearts  of  the  Gentiles  miglit  become  green,  the  closed  might
be  opened,  the  empty  filled,  the  unfruitful  germinate.

52.  For  in  holy  Scripture  '  grass'  is  sometimes  taken  for
the  verdure  of  temporal  glory,  sometimes  for  the  food  of  the
devil,  sometimes  for  the  support  of  preachers,  sometimes  for
good  works,  sometimes  for  the  knowledge  and  doctrine  of
eternal  life.  For  it  is  taken  for  the  verdure  of  temporal
glory,  as  the  Prophet  says,  Let  it  jxiss  atoay  in  the  morning  P3.90,6.
like  grass,  in  the  morning  let  it  flourish  and  pass  away.

For  to  flourish  and  to  pass  away  in  the  morning  like  grass,
is  in  the  prosperity  of  this  world  for  the  beauty  of  temporal
glory  speedily  to  dry  away.  Grass  is  taken  for  the  food  of  the
devil,  as  it  is  said  of  him  by  the  Lord,  For  him  the  moun--f°^  ^o>

.  .  .  20.

tains  hear  grass. As  if  He  were  saying.  Whilst  proud  and
haughty men exalt themselves in unlawful thoughts and
actions,  they  feed  him  with  their  iniquities. Grass  is  pointed
out  to  be the support  of  preachers, when it  is said, He^^'^^7,
produceth  grass  on  the  mountains,  and  herbs  for  the  servicers,  104
of  men. For  grass  is  produced  on  the  mountains,  and  herbs  ^^*
for  the  use  of  men,  when  the  lofty  ones  of  this  world,  being
called to the knowledge of the faith, bestow on holy
preachers,  in  the  journey  of  this  life,  food  for  theii'  sojourn.
VOL,  III  z


6


338  '  Grass'  put  for  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life.

Job  38,  Grass  is  put  for  good  works,  as  it  is  written,  Let  the  earth
bring  forth  the  green  grast.  And  though  we  hold  that  it
thus  took  place  historically  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  yet
we  suppose,  without  impropriety,  the  earth  to  have  been  a
type  of  the  Church,  which  brought  fordi  the  green  grass,  in
that  it  produced,  at  the  command  of  God,  fmitful  works  of
mercy. We  sometimes  take  '  grass'  for  the  knowledge  and

Jer.  14,  doctrine  of  eternal  verdure;  as  it  is  said  by  Jeremiah,  The
wild  asses  did  stand  on  the  rocks,  theg  snuffed  up  the  uinds
as  dragons ;  their  eyes  did  fail,  because  there  was  no  grass.
By  which  expression  the  proud  and  most  wicked  persecution
of  the  Jews  was  prophesied.  For  they  are  called  iu  truth
wild  asses,  for  their  pride  of  mind,  and  dragons,  for  their
virulent  thoughts.  And  they  stood  on  the  rocks,  because
they  trusted,  not  in  God,  but,  in  the chief  powers  of  this

John world,  saying,  JVe  have  no  king  but  Ctssar. They  snuffed

^^'  ^^'  up  the  winds  as  dragons,  because  being  puffed  up  by  the
spirit  of  pride  they  were  sv^ollen  with  malicious  haughtiness.
Their  eyes  failed,  because  in  truth  their  hope  fell  short  of
that  which  it  was  aiming  at.  For  loving  temporal  things,  it
neglected  to  wait  for  eternal,  and  lost  earthly  goods,  because

n^48  ^t  preferred  them  to  God.  For  they  said,  If  we  let  Him
thus  alone,  all  men  will  believe  on  Him,  and  the  Romans
will  come,  and  take  away  both  our  place  and  nation.  They
were  afraid  lest  they  should  lose  their  place,  if  the  Lord  had
not  been  slain,  and  yet  they  lost  it,  when  He  was  slain.
But  he  adds  the  reason  why  these  things  befel  the  wretched
men.  Because  there  icas  no  grass:  that  is,  because  the
knowledge  of  eternity  was  wanting  in  their  hearts,  and  did
not  refresh  them  with  the  food  of  the  verdure  of  inward
doctrine.  In  this  place  then  what  else  do  we  understand  by
green  herbs,  but  the  knowledge  of  heavenly  doctrine,  or
works  in  accordance  ?  The  desert  earth  then  is  watered  by
the  rain,  for  the  green  herbs  to  be  produced  from  it,  because
when  the  Gentile  world  enjoyed  the  shower  of  holy  preach-
ing, it  budded  forth  with  both  the  works  of  life,  and  the
herb  of  doctrine. This  verdure  is  promised  to  the  desert

Is. 35, 7.  land  by  the  voice  of  the  Prophet,  when  it  is  said.  In  the
dens,  in  which  the  dragons  dwelt  before,  shall  rise  tip  the
verdure  of  the  reed  and  bulrush. For  what  is  designated  by


Its  spyiiKjing  in  the  Geniile  ivorld,  or  ignorant  mind, 339

the  reed  but  preachers :  and  what  by  the  biihush,  whicli  Book
ahvays  grows  by  the  moisture  of  \vater,  but  weak  and  tender  '-^ — —
hearers  of  the  sacred  word  ?  The  v-erdure  of  the  reed  and
bulrush  grows  up  then  in  the  dens  of  the  dragons,  because
in  those  peoples,  which  the  malice  of  the  old  enemy  used  to
possess,  both  the  knowledge  of  teachers  and  tlie  obedience
of  hearers  is  collected  together.

53.  But  these  things  which  have  been  stated  generally  of  Mor.
the  Gentile  world,  we  see  taking  place,  if  we  carefully  exa-
mine, in  individuals  within  the  bosom  of  Holy  Church.  For
there  are  many,  grievously  insensible  to  the  words  of  God,
who  are  counted  under  the  name  of  faith,  who  hear  the
words  of  life  with  their  ears,  but  suffer  them  not  to  pass
through  to  the  inward  places  of  the  heart.  What  else  are
these  than  desert  land  ?  Which  land  in  truth  has  not  a
man,  because  their  mind  is  void  of  the  sense  of  reason.
And  no  mortal  dwells  in  this  land,  because  if  thoughts  of
reasonable  meanings  ever  spring  up  in  their  conscience,  they
do  not  remain  there.  For  evil  desires  find  a  resting-place
in  their  hearts,  but  if  good  desires  have  ever  come  there,
they  pass  away,  as  if  urged  on.  But  when  the  merciful  God
deigns  to  give  a  course  to  His  shower,  and  a  way  to  the
sounding  thunder,  being  stung  with  grace  within,  they  open
the  ears  of  their  heart  to  the  words  of  life.  And  the  pathless
land  is  filled:  for  while  it  grants  a  hearing  to  the  word,  it  is
overwhelmed  with  mystery.  And  it  brings  forth  green  herbs:
because  when  watered  by  the  grace  of  comjninction,  it  not
only  willingly  receives  the  words  of  preaching,  but  returns
them  back  with  abundant  increase ;  so  that  it  is  now  eager  to
speak  what  it  could  not  hear,  and  that  that  which  had  become
dry,  even  within,  through  not  listening,  feeds  with  its  verdure
as  many  as  are  hungry.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  the  Pro-
phet, Send  forth  Thy  Spirit,  and  they  shall  be  created,  and^^.  io4,
Thou  shalt  renew  the  face  oj  the  earth.  For  thus,  thus,  the
face  of  the  earth  is  changed  by  the  virtue  of  renewal,  when
the  mind  which  before  was  dry,  is  watered  by  the  coming  of
grace,  and  is,  after  its  former  barrenness,  arrayed  with  the
verdure  of  knowledge,  as  though  by  grass  which  it  had
brought  forth.  Which  grace  of  our  Creator  is  commended
still  more  highly,  when  it  is  subjoined;

z2


340 The  rain  and  dew  of  preaching  both  from  God.
Job  38, Ver.  28, Who  in  the  father  of  the  rain  ?  or  who  hath  be-

no

■T — '—;■  gotten  the  drops  of  deiv  ?

xxvii,  54.  As  if  He  were  saying,  Except  Myself,  Who  sprinkle,  of
My  free  grace,  the  barren  earth  of  the  human  heart  with
drops  of  knowledge. For  of  this  rain  is said  elsewhere,

Ps.68,9.  Thou  wilt  set  apart,  0  God,  a  voluntary  rain  for  thine  inhe-
ritance. For  God  sets  apart  a  voluntary  rain  for  His  inhe-
ritance, because  He  grants  it  to  us,  not  for  own  deserts,  but
from  the  bounty  of  His  own  benignity.  And  He  is  in  this
place  called  the  father  of  this  rain,  for  this  reason,  because
His  heavenly  preaching  is  begotten  in  us,  not  for  our  merits,
but  from  His  grace.  For  the  drops  of  dew,  are  the  holy
preachers  themselves,  who  water  the  fields  of  our  breast,
(parched  amid  the  evils  of  the  present  life,  as  though  amid
the  gloom  of  a  dry  night,)  with  the  grace  of  bounty  from

Jer.3,3.  above.  Of  these  drops  it  is  said  to  obstinate  Judah  ;  There-
fore the  drops  of  rains  have  been  withholden,  and  there
hath  been  no  latter  rain.  For  the  drops  of  dew  are  the
same  as  the  drops  of  rains.  For  when  they  soften  down
their  preaching  by  any  accommodation,  they  sprinkle,  as  it
were,  the  tender  dew.  But  when  they  say  what  they  think
of  heavenly  things,  with  the  power  with  which  they  are
strong,  they  pour  forth,  as  it  were,  the  flowing  rain  abun-
dantly. Paid  was  sprinkling  the  dew,  when  saying  to  the

1  Cor. Corinthians,  For  I  determined  to  knoiv  nothing  among  you,

save  Jesus  Christy  and  Him  crucified. And  again  he  was

2  Cor. pouring  forth  the  rain,  saying,  O  ye  Corinthians,  our  mouth
' ■ is  opened  unto  you,  our  heart  is  enlarged. Hence  it  is,  that

Moses,  who  knew  that he would say  bold  things  to the

Deut. strong,  and  gentle  to  the  weak,  observed.  Let  my  speech  be

' waited,  for  as  the  rain,  and  let  my  words  descend  as  the

dew.

But,  lo  ! we  have  heard  with  what  favour  the  Gentiles  are

called,  let  us  now  hear  with  what  severity  Judah  is  rejected.

We  have  heard  how  He  cultivates  what  is  desert,  and  waters

what  is  barren : let  us  now  hear  how  He  casts  forth  those

which  seem  to  be,  as  it  were,  within. For  He  does  not  so

gather  His  Elect,  as  not  also  to  judge  the  reprobate;  nor

does  He  so  forgive  faults  to  some  persons,  as  not  to  punish

Ecclus.  them  in  some  also. For  it  is  written.  For  mercv  and  wrath
5, 6.  ' .  ^


Ice  from  heacen,  the  wicked,  hij  creation,  from  God. 311

come  from  Him. Whence  here  also,  after  lie  had  iiUroduced  Hook
so  many  gifts  of  grace,  He  conceals  not  the  judgments  of^-^— *
His  wrath. For  it  follows  ;

Ver.  29. Out  of  wJtose  womb  came  the  ice,  and  the  frost
from  heaven,  who  hath  gendered  it  ?

55.  For  what  else  do  we  understand  by  'frost'  or  '  ice,'xxviii.
but  the  hearts  of  the  Jews  frozen  and  bound  with  the  torpor
of  unbelief?  Who  formerly  by  the  receiving  of  the  Law,  by
the  keeping  of  the  commandments,  by  the  ministry  of  sacri-
fice, by  the  mysteries  of  prophecy,  were  so  kept  within  the
bosom  of  grace,  as  if  within  the  womb  of  the  Creator.  But
because,  on  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  being  hard  bound  with
the  frost  of  unbelief,  they  lost  the  warmth  of  faith  and  cha-
rity, being  cast  forth  from  the  secret  bosom  of  grace,  they
came  forth  like  ice  from  the  womb  of  the  Creator.  And  the
frost  from  heaven,  tcho  hath  gendered  it  ?  What  else  ought
'  heaven'  to  be  here  understood  to  mean  but  the  lofty  life  of
the  saints?  To  which  heaven  it  is  said,  Gice  ear,  0  heaven, Tteat.
and  I  uill  speak.  Of  which  abode  it  is  elsewhere  written, "^^'  "
The  soul  of  the  just  is  the  seat  of  wisdom^.  Because  then
God  is  wisdom,  if  the  abode  of  God  is  heaven,  and  the  soul
of  the  just  is  the  seat  of  wisdom,  the  soul  of  the  just  is  certainly
heaven.  Abraham  was  heaven,  Isaac  was  heaven,  Jacob
was  heaven.  But  because  the  persecutors  of  the  Lord,  the
high  priests  of  the  Jews,  who  were  frozen  with  the  torpor  of
unbelief,  sprang  from  the  race  of  those  ancestors,  the  frost
came,  as  it  were,  from  heaven,  because  the  frozen  herd  of
unbelievers  came  forth  from  the  lofty  offspring  of  the  saints.
For  when  Caiaphaswas  born  from  Abraham,  what  else  was  it,
but  that  ice  came  forth  from  heaven  ?  Yet  this  frost  the  Lord
says  that  He  had  gendered,  for  this  reason,  because  He  per-
mitted the  Jews,  whom  He  Himself  naturally  created  good,
to  go  forth  from  Him,  by  a  just  judgment,  frozen  through
their  wickedness.  For  the  Lord  is  the  Author  of  nature,  not
of  sin.  He  engendered  therefore,  by  naturally  creating,  those
whom  He  suffered,  by  patiently  enduring,  to  remain  in  sin.
And  because  those  hearts  of  the  Jews,  which  before  were

a  Perhaps  Prov.  12,  23.  LXX.  A  cautious  man  is  the  scat  of  tcisdom.
where  it  is  read,  A  prudent  man  is  the  Boit  On  Horn.  38,  in  Ev. thej  suggest
ffirone  of  sense. In  the  Syriac  version, Wisd.  7,  7,  or  27.


342 TJie  Jeivs  became  hard  like  the  Gentiles  of  old.

Job  38,  tender, and easily penetrated by faith, were afterwards

-.  '  hardened  in  tlie  obstinacy  of  unbelief,  it  is  rightly  sub-
joined;

Ver.  30. TJie  waters  are  hardened  afier  the  likeness  of  a
stone.

xxix.  56.  For  I  remember  that  I  have  often  taught  already  that
'  waters'  are  taken  for  peoples.  But  by  a  '  stone,'  by  reason
of  its  very  hardness,  the  Gentile  peoples  are  sometimes  desig-
nated. For they themselves worshipped stones. And of

Ps.  115, these  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  Let  tliem,  that  make  them,
become  like  unto  them,  and  all  ivho  trust  in  them.  Whence
John,  beholding  that  the  Jews  boasted  themselves  in  their
pedigree,  and  foreseeing  the  Gentiles  passing  over  to  the
stock  of Abraham, by the knowledge  of  the faith, says,

Matt.  3,  Think  not  to  say  within  yourselves.  We  have  Abraham  to
our  father ;  for  I  say  unto  you,  thai  God  is  able  of  these
stones to raise up sons to Abraham. Certainly calling
*  stones'  the  Gentiles,  who  were  hardened  in  unbelief. Be-
cause then  Judaea  first  believed  in  God,  while  all  the  Gentile
world  was  remaining  in  the  obstinacy  of  its  unbelief,  and
because  the  hearts  of  the  Gentiles  were  afterwards  softened
to  receive  the  faith,  and  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews  was  hard-
ened, it is  well said, The  teaters  are  hardened  after  the
likeness  of  a  stone. As  if  He  were  saying,  Those  soft  hearts
of  the  Jews,  easily  penetrated  by  faith,  are  converted  into
the  insensibility  of  the Gentiles. For  when  God  in His
mercy  drew  to  Him  the  Gentiles,  He  repelled  Judaea  in  His
wrath. And  it  came  to  pass,  that  as  the  Gentiles  had  been
at  first  hardened  against  the  reception  of  the  faith,  so,  when
the  Gentiles  were  afterwards  admitted  to  the  faith,  was  the
people  of  Jud;ea  hardened  in  the  torpor  of  unbelief. Whence
Ilom.li,the  Apostle  Paul  says  to  these  very  Gentiles,  As  ye  in  times
'  past  have  not  believed  God,  yet  now  hare  obtained  mercy
through  their  unbelief  even  so  Jiave  these  not  believed^  in
your  mercy,  that they  also  may  obtain mercy. For  God
hath  concluded  all  in  unbelief,  (hat  He  miyht  have  mercy
upon  all. And  accurately  considering  this  his  opinion,  first
concerning  tlie  calling  of  the  Jews,  and  the  rejection  of  the
Gentiles,  and  afterwards  concerning  the  calling  of  the  Gen-
tiles, and  the  rejection  of  the  Jews,  and  reflecting  that  he


Satan  came  forth  like  frost  to  harden  the  reprobate. 343

could  not  comprehend  the  secret  iudgmcnts  of  God,  he  sub- Book
...  .  ■  .  XXIX

joined  in exclamation, O the  depth of  the  riches  of  the' ~-

uisdom  and  knowledge  of  God! hniv  incomprehennihle  are 33.

His  judgments^  and  His  ivays  un searchable. Whence  here

also  when  the  Lord  was  saying  of  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews,

The  waters  are  hardened  after  the  likeness  of  a  stone,  to

shew  that His  judgments  concerning  their rejection  were

secret,  He  fitly  subjoined;

And  the  surface  of  the  deep  is  congealed.

57.  Because  the  eye  of  the  human  mind  does  not  at  all  xxx.
jjenctrate  the  incomprehensibleness  of  the  Divine  judgment,
from  a  kind  of  veil  of  our  ignorance  having  been  thrown

over  it. For  it  is  written,  Thy  judgments  are  a  great  deep.  Ps.36,6.
Let  no  one  then  seek  to  investigate,  why,  when  one  is  re-
jected,  another  is chosen,  or,  why,  when  one is  chosen,
another  is  rejected,  because  the  surface  of  the  deep  is  con-
gealed, and  as  Paul  witnesses.  His  jndgments are  inscrntable,B.om.u,
and  His  trays  unsearchable.

58.  But  by  that  which  is  said,  (ver.  29.)  Out  of  ivhose  womb  Myst.
came  the  ice, and  the  frost  from  heaven,icho  hath  gendered  it?
nothing  prevents  Satan  being  understood  by  the  frost  and

ice.  For  he  came  forth  as  if  ice  from  the  womb  of  God,
because  the  teacher  of  iniquity  came  forth,  frozen  with  the
torpor  of  sin,  from  the  warmth  of  His  mysteries.  He  was
gendered  as  frost  from  heaven,  because  he  was  suffered  to
fall  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  condition,  and  to  go  and
bind  tlie  hearts  of  the  reprobate.  And  having  been  fashioned
righdy  in  heaven,  when  he  fell,  he  bound  as  frost  the  hearts
of  his  followers,  in  the  coldness  of  sin.  And  what  he  did
amongst  men,  on  coming  to  the  earth,  is  fully  stated,  when
it  is  added.  The  waters  are  hardened  after  the  likeness  of  a
stone.  For  by  '  waters'  peoples  are  designated,  but  by  a
'  stone'  the  hardness  of  this  very  Satan.  The  waters  there-
fore were  hardened  after  the  likeness  of  a  stone,  when  he
came  on  earth,  because  men,  imitating  his  wickedness,  lost
the  soft  bowels  of  charity.  And  because  his  crafty  designs
cannot  be  detected  by  men  who  have  been  led  astray,  it  is
rightly  subjoined;  And  the  surface  of  the  deep  is  congealed.
For  one  thing  lies  concealed  within  him,  and  another  he
presents  without. For  he  transforms  himself  as  an  angel  of


344  Conrerts,  growing  proud,  go  forth  as  ice.

Job  38,  light,  and  willi  his  cunning  art  of  deception  frequently  pro-
-jjj-r;— poses  laudable  objects,  in  order  to  lead  on  to  unlawful.
The  surface  of  the  deep  is  therefore  congealed ;  for  while
the  fair  appearance  of  his  pei'suasion  appears,  as  it  were,
like  solid  ice  on  the  surface,  his  wickedness,  lurking  in  the
depth,  is  not  observed.
MoR.  59.  But  we  can  understand  all  these  in  another  sense  also,
if  we  enquire  into  them,  in  their  moral  meaning.  For  whilst
Almighty  God  fashions  the  minds  of  men  in  His  fear.  He
conceives  them,  as  it  were,  and  bi'ings  them  forth  to  open
vii'tues,  when  He  advances  them  onwards.  But  if  they  are
elated  by  the  virtues  they  have  received,  He  abandons  them.
And  wc  often  know  persons  to  be  smitten  by  consideration
of  their  sins,  to  glow  with  fear  of  the  Divine  dread,  and,
commencing  in  fear,  attain  to  the  highest  virtues.  But  when
they  are  elated  by  these  virtues  which  they  receive,  being
bound  with  the  snare  of  vain  glory,  they  return  to  their
former  torpor.  When  God  therefore  casts  off  such  ])ersons.
He  rightly  says,  Out  of  whose  womb  came  the  ice?  For  the
ice  comes  forth,  as  it  were,  from  the  womb  of  God,  when  those
who  had  before  been  warm  within,  become  cold,  by  reason
of  the  gift  of  virtue,  and,  being  torpid,  seek  after  outward
glory,  for  the  very  reason  by  which  they  ought  to  glow  with
greater  warmth  to  love  things  within.  And  whilst  one  man
is  powerful  in  signs,  another  in  knowledge,  another  in  pro-
phecy, and  another  in  mighty  works,  and  seeks  by  these  gifts
to  please  men,  he  turns  all  his  former  inward  warmth  into
torpidity,  from  loving  outward  praises.  He  comes  forth
therefore  as  ice  from  the  womb,  when,  after  the  favours  of
gifts,  he  is  separated  from  the  bowels  of  heavenly  compassion.
Are  not  they  '  ice,'  who  in  the  virtues  they  receive  seek
praise  from  men  ?  And  yet  they  say  to  the  Judge  on  His
Matt.  7,  coming,  when  recalling  His  own  gifts  to  His  mind ;  Lord,
^^'  Lord,  have  ive  not  prophesied  in  Thy  name  ?  and  in  Thy
name  have  cast  out  devils?  and  in  Thy  name  have  done
many  mighty  works?  But  He  shews  how  the  Lord  casts  out
ib.  23.  this  ice,  saying,  /  know  you  not  whence  ye  are.  Depart
from  Me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity.  The  Lord  now  bears
this  ice  in  His  womb,  because  He  tolerates  it  within  the
bosom  of  the  Church. But  He  then openly  casts  it  out,


3Ien*s  growing  cold  of  God  by  just  permission. 345
when  He  banishes  such  from  the  secret  abodes  of  heaven  by Hook

V  "v"  r  V

the  last  and  public  judgment.  What  is  then  the  plain  object  -- — ~
of  these  words,  except  that  Job  should  be  brought  down
from  his  lofty  virtues,  that  he  should  not,  in  consequence  of
his  former  warmth  in  good  living,  grow  cold  through  pride,
and  be  repelled  and  go  Ibrth  from  the  womb  of  the  Godhead,
by  being  swollen  up  within  the  bosom  of  his  own  heart?

60.  And  because  by  a  righteous  judgment  He  permits
haughty  minds  to  go  forth  to  commit  sin,  from  the  virtue
they  have  received,  it  is  rightly  added,  still  farther;  And
the  frost  from  heaven,  who  hath  gendered  it  ?  For  He
frequently  vouchsafes  the  knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture,  but
when  he  who  receives  it  is  elated  by  this  knowledge,  he  is,
by  the  anger  of  the  strict  Judge,  so  blinded  in  the  Scripture
itself,  that  he  no  longer  sees  its  inward  meaning,  from  seek-
ing thereby  for  outward  applause;  and  that,  though  he
could  be  warm  by  remaining  within,  he  goes  forth  and
becomes  frozen,  and  that  he  who  before,  when  easily  led  to
the  knowledge  of  God,  remained  unfrozen  at  the  top,  be-
comes hardened,  and  sinks  to  the  bottom.  Is  not  Holy
Scripture  '  heaven,'  which  opening  to  us  the  day  of  under-
standmg,  illuminates  us  with  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  and
which,  while  the  night  of  the  present  life  surrounds  us,  shines
for  us  with  the  stars  of  the  commandments.  But  since  there
must  be  heresies,  that  they  which  are  approved  may  be  made  i  Cor.
manifest,  when  the  proud  mind  is  kept  back  from  a  sound  ^^'^^"
understanding  of  Scripture,  frost  is  generated  from  heaven
by  the  judgment  of  the  strict  Judge ;  in  order  that,  when
Holy  Scripture  itself  glows  in  the  hearts  of  the  Elect,  it  may
cast  forth  from  itself  in  a  frozen  condition,  those  who  proudly
seek  to  know  it.  For  they  err  in  the  very  point,  in  which
they  should  have  con-ected  their  faults ;  and  while  they  fall
away  from  the  heavenly  understanding  of  the  resplendent
Word,  both  hardened  themselves,  and  about  to  deceive
others,  they  sink  to  the  bottom,  as  ice,  and  bind  others  also.
But  yet  the  Lord  says  that  He  Himself  genders  this  frost,
not  because  He  Himself  fashions  the  minds  of  the  wicked  to
sin,  but  because  He  does  not  liberate  them  from  sin.  As  it  is
written  ;  /  loiU  harden  the  heart  of  Pharaoh. For  because  Exod.

4,21.


346 False  surface, liain  and  Ice  in  a  good  sense.

"^"^0^^'  ^^  I'efused  to  soften  it  in  His  mercy,  He  plainly  announced
jvIqjj  -that  He  had  hardened  it  in  His  severity.

01.  But,  because  the  image  of  virtue  is  retained  for  the
sake  of  human  praise,  when  the  virtue  of  Divine  fear,  which
has  begun,  is  itself  lost,  it  is  rightly  subjoined;  The  waters
are  hardened  after  the  likeness  of  a  stone,  and  the  surface  of
the  deep  is  congealed.  For  waters  are  hardened  by  ice  at
the  surface,  but  remain  fluid  underneath.  And  what  do  we
imderstand  by  waters  but  the  unstable  hearts  of  the  reprobate?
For  w^hen  they  are  deliberately  forsaking  virtue,  they  shew
themselves  forth,  in  their  hypocrisy,  as  resolute  in  good
works,  and  whilst  they  are  inwardly  gliding  do>vn  into  sins,
they  outwardly  feign  themselves  imitators  of  the  holy  and
resolute.  77/6  waters  are  hardened  after  the  likeness  of  a
stone,  and  the  surface  of  the  abyss  is  hound  together,  because
their  weak  and  unstable  conscience  is  concealed  from  men,
by  a  superinduced  appearance  of  sanctity.  For  when  they
are  inwardly  foul  in  their  own  sight,  they  are  an-ayed  before
the  eyes  of  others  with  a  kind  of  comeliness  of  living.

62.  But,  lest  any  one  should  wish  tliese  words  of  the  Lord
to  be  understood  in  a  good  sense,  we  ought  to  add  it,  for
*  per- those  also  who  thus  look  for  it,  provided  we  are  not^  con-
^P^' f°  sidered  to have  neglected  points  which  needed  to  be  ex-
not.' amined. For  it  is  said in  the former  verse, Wlio  is  the
modo")  fi^l>er  of  rain? or  who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  dew?
And  it  is  immediately  added,  Out  of  whose  womb  came  the
ice?  and  the  frost  from  heaveti  who  hath  gendered  it? If
therefore  the  following  sentence  is  connected  with  the  pre-
ceding words  with  a  similar  sense,  its  meaning  is  clearly  laid
open  without  any  obstacle  of  difficulty  even  in  a  good  sense.
For  when  the  earth  is  watered  by  rain,  the  seeds  which  have
been cast  in are pressed down more productively. But
again,  if  the  rain  waters  it  too  immoderately,  it  changes  the
richness  and  virtue  of  the  corn  in  the  stalk. But  if  the  seed
which  has  been  thrown  in,  is  after  rain  checked  by  the  frost,
the  more  it  is  kept  from  appearing  too  quickly  above  ground,
the  more  productively  does  it  root  itself  beneath: and  the
more  it  is forbidden  to  grow,  the  more  it  is  compelled  to
multiply:  because,  when  it  is  kept  from  too  early  a  growth,


God  checks  His  growing  corn  icith  wholeso)ne  frost. 347
being-  expanded  by  ibe  slowness  of  its  conception,  it  is  filled  Book

• •  T  •  XX  TX

more  abundantly  for  fruit. What  is  meant  then  by  the  Lord — *

first  speaking  of  Himself  as  the  father  of  the  rain,  but  after-
wards saying  that  the  ice  comes  forth  from  His  womb,  and
declaring  that  He  genders  the  frost  from  heaven  ?  Except
that  He  first  waters  in  a  wondrous  manner  the  soil  of  our
hearts  for  the  reception  of  the  seeds  of  the  word,  by  the
secret  rain  of  His  grace,  and  that  He  afterwards  keeps  it
down  by  the  disci})line  of  His  secret  dispensation,  lest  it  should
bring  forth  too  luxuriantly  with  the  virtues  it  has  conceived,
in  order  that  the  rigor  of  discipline  may  likewise  bind  that
which  the  rain  of  grace  received  irrigates,  lest  it  turn  its  fruit
into  grass,  if  it  produce  its  virtues,  either  before  it  ought,  or
more  than  is  necessary.  For,  frequently,  when  a  good  work
is  displaced  before  it  ought  by  beginners,  it  is  emptied  of
the  grain  of  perfection,  and  while  virtues  are  more  exuberant
than  is  necessary,  they  frequently  dry  up.  Whence  the  Lord
either  refuses  the  desires  even  of  His  Elect,  before  the  fit
time,  or  again  restrains  at  the  fit  time  their  unlimited  pro-
gress, lest,  if  they  advance  either  sooner,  or  farther,  than  they
ought,  they  should  fall  into  the  defect  of  pride  by  the  great-
ness of  their  proficiency.  For  when  the  heart  is  pricked
with  compunction  after  sin,  the  earth,  which  had  been  dry,
is  watered  by  the  pouring  of  rain  upon  it ;  and  when  it
proposes  to  abandon  its  iniquities  and  to  follow  after  good
works,  it  receives,  as  it  were,  seed  after  the  ruin.  And  many
persons,  when  they  conceive  holy  desires,  are  burning  to
exercise  themselves  at  once  in  the  sublimest  virtues,  so  that
sin  may  not  only  not  infect  their  doings,  but  may  not  even
assail  their  thoughts.  They  are  still  indeed  living  in  the
body,  but  they  wish  to  suffer  no  further  from  their  connexion
with  the  present  life.  They  seek  to  aim  at  inward  stability
of  mind  in  their  intention,  but  are  driven  back  by  interrupt-
ing temptations,  in  order,  namely,  that  they  may  remember
their  own  infirmity,  and  may  not  be  elated  at  the  virtues
wliich  they  receive.  And  when  this  is  effected  by  the
wonderful  constraint  of  discipline,  what  else  but  frost  is
gendered  from  heaven  over  the  watered  earth  ?  What  but
ice  is  produced  from  the  M'omb  of  God,  when  the  dispensa-


348  Frost  of  difficulty  and  adversity  usefiiL

JoB38,tion  comes  forth  from  its  secret  place  within,  and  our  wills


30.


are  restrained  even  in  their  good  desires  ?


\7.


63.  Let  us  see  with  what  ice  of  discipline  Paul  (that  is,  the
Rom.  7,  watered  earth)  is  weighed  down,  when  he  says.  To  will  is
^^' present  with  me,  but  to  perform  what  is  good  I  find  not.

For  he  who  asserts  that  he  has  the  will,  makes  known  what
seeds  are  even  now  concealed  within  him  by  the  pouring
of  grace  upon  him.  But  whilst  he  finds  not  to  do  good,  he
certainly  points  out  how  much  ice  of  the  heavenly  dispens-
ation weighs  on  him.  Had  not  this  ice  pressed  their  hearts,
Gal.  5,  to  whom  he  was  saying,  8o  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that
ye  woiild  ?  As  if  he  were  plainly  saying,  The  secret  seeds
of  your  heart  are  now  seeking  to  break  forth  into  fruit,  but
they  are  kept  down  by  the  ice  of  the  heavenly  dispensation,
in  order  that  they  may  afterwards  shoot  forth  more  produc-
tively, the  more  patiently  they  bear  the  weight  of  the  Divine
judgment  pressing  on  them.

64.  And  because  the  hearts  of  men,  since  they  are  unable
to  break  out  into  those  virtues  which  they  desire,  are
frequently  harassed  with  the  stings  of  temptation,  so  far  as
they  shrink  back  from  carrying  out  their  intention,  but  yet
repress  these  same  temptations  of  their  thoughts,  and  fashion
themselves,  by  the  habit  of  discipline  in  a  kind  of  strict-
ness of  living,  it  is  well  subjoined ;  The  waters  are  hardened
after  the  likeness  of  a  stone.  Because,  though  unstable
thoughts  harass  within,  yet  they  do  not  at  all  lead  to  consent
in  wicked  doings.  But  the  mind  conceals,  under  an  habitual
custom  of  good  living,  as  if  under  a  kind  of  exterior  hard-
ness, whatever  is  softened  within  by  the  assault  of  temptation.
Whence  it  is  well  subjoined  ;  And  the  surface  of  the  deep  is
congealed.  Because,  even  if  an  evil  thought  comes  as  far  as
to  suggestion,  it  does  not  break  out  into  consent,  because  the
superinduced  rigour  of  holy  discipline  suppresses  the  fluctu-
ating motions  of  the  mind.

65.  But  by  '  frost'  or  '  ice'  can  also  be  designated  the
adversity  of  this  present  Hfe,  which  while  it  keeps  down  the
holy  by  its  asperity,  makes  them  stronger.  For  while
Almighty  God  permits  us  to  be  exercised  with  annoyances,
and  carries  us  on  to  the  condition  of  a  better  life  bv  the


Good  men  frozen  over  with  cautious  self-restraint. 340

intervention  of  sorrow,  He  genders  with  wonderful  wisdom Book

the  frost  and  ice  over  the  coming  fruit ;  in  order  that  each  ^-4 -'

of  the  Elect  may  endure  in  this  present  life,  as  if  in  winter,
the  adversities  of  winds  and  frosts,  and  may  exhibit  after-
wards, as  in  the  serenity  of  summer,  the  fruits  which  he  has
here  conceived.  Whence  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  the
Bridegroom  to  every  soul  which  is  hastening  after  the  whirl-
wind of  this  life  to  those  joys  of  eternity,  Arise^  hasten,  J/?/^"'-
beloved,  Mi/ fair  one,  and  come.  For  the  ivinter  has  already  \^S\l
passed,  the  shower  has  departed  and  gone.  But  because  we
are  relaxed,  if  prosperity  alone  attends  us,  but  are  the  better
strengthened  for  virtues  by  means  of  adversities,  it  is  rightly
subjoined,  TJie  waters  are  hardened  after  the  likeness  of  a
stone.  For  minds,  which  had  softly  melted  away  through
prosperities,  become  firm  when  hard  pressed  by  adversities.
And  water  is  brought  to  the  likeness  of  a  stone,  whenever
any  one  who  is  weak  imitates  the  sufferings  of  his  Redeemer
by  endurance  received  from  above.  For  water  had,  in  truth,
hai-dened  after  the  fashion  of  stone,  when  Paul,  that  former
impatient  persecutor,  was  saying,  I  fill  up  those  things^^^-  ^^
which  are  icanting  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in  my  Jiesh.

QQ.  And  because  persons,  when  depressed  by  adversities,
guard  more  carefully  their  inward  gifts,  it  is  rightly  added ;
And  tlie  surface  of  the  deep  is  congealed. For  joy  is  wont
to  lay  open  the  secrets  of  the  mind,  and,  by  laying  open,  to
lose them. But when adversities depress us outwardly,
they  make  us  more  careful  within. After  frost  then  or  ice,
the  surface  of  the  deep  is  congealed,  because  our  mind  is
strengthened  by adversities,  to preserve those dee]) gifts
which  it  has  received. For  Isaiah  had  congealed  the  surface
of  his  abyss,  when  he  was  saying ;  My  secret  to  myself,  my  Is.  24,
secret  to  myself Paul  had congealed  the  surface  of  his  ^'
abyss,  who  labouring  under  so  many  dangers  and  adversities,
under  cover  of  some  one else, speaks  of  himself,  saying;
/  have  heard  secret  words,  which  it  is  not  laiaful  fw  a  vian'i^  Cor.
to  utter. And  again.  But  I  forhear,  lest  any  man  s]iould \\1^q[
think  of  me  ahove  that  which  he  seeth  in  me,  or  heareth
any  thing  of  me. What then had he done, who, when
enduring  adversity  without,  was  afraid  to  open  the  secrets  of
his  heart,  lest  he  should  perchance  vent  himself  in  praises;


350 Pleiades  and  Arctiirus. Hie  Sevenfold  Spirit.
Job  38,  what,  but  covered  tiie  abvss  of  his  inward  secrets  by  a  coii-

31

'—  gealed  surface  ? Il  follows.


Ver.  31.  Wilt  thou  he  able  to  join  together  the  shining
stars,  the  Pleiades,  or  will  thou  be  able  to  break  up  the
circuit  of  Arc  turns  9

xxxi.  67.  The  stars  Pleiades,  are  so  called  from  TrXsia-ro;,  that  is,
^"*  from  plurality.  But  they  were  made  so  near  to  each  other,
and  yet  so  distinct,  that  they  can  be  near  together,  and  yet
cannot  possibly  be  united,  since  tliey  are  united  in  near-
ness, but  disunited  as  to  contact.  But  Arcturus  so  illu-
minates the  seasons  of  night,  as  placed  in  the  axis  of
heaven,  to  turn  itself  in  divers  ways,  and  yet  never  to  set.
For  it  does  not  revolve  out  of  its  orbit,  but  placed  in  its  own
position,  it  inclines  to  all  quarters  of  the  world,  though  it
will  never  set.  What  then  is  it,  that  man,  who  was  formed
from  the  earth,  and  placed  upon  the  earth,  is  questioned  as
to  the  government  of  heaven,  that  he  cannot  join  together
the  Pleiades,  which  he  sees  were  made  close  to  each  other
and  almost  united,  and  that  he  cannot  break  up  the  circuit
of  Arcturusjj*  though  he  can  behold  it  almost  dissipated  by  its
own  rapidity  of  motion.?  Is  it  not,  that  considering  in  those
His  servants,  the  power  of  their  Creator,  he  should  remember
his  own  weakness,  and  consider  how  beyond  our  com-
prehension is  He,  in  the  very  government  of  His  heavenly
ministers,  Whom  he  cannot  as  yet  behold  in  His  own
majesty.''

Myst.  68.  But  why  do  we  say  these  things,  who  are  urged  by  the
stimulus  of  reason,  to  learn  the  sense  of  these  words  pregnant
with  mystical  meaning.''  For  what  else  do  the  shining
Pleiades,  which  are  also  seven  in  number,  indicate,  but  all  the
Saints,  who  amid  the  darkness  of  this  present  life,  illumine
us  with  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  sevenfold  grace,  who,  from
the  first  beginning  of  the  world,  even  to  its  end,  sent  at
divers  times  to  prophesy,  are  in  some  degree  united,  and  in
some  degree  separate  from  each  other?  For  the  stars  the
Pleiades,  as  was  before  said,  are  united  to  each  other  in  their
contiguity,  and  disunited  as  to  contact.  They  are  situated
indeed  together,  and  yet  pour  forth  separately  the  rays  of
their  light.  In  like  manner  all  the  Saints  appearing  at
different times for the purpose of preaching, are both


Saints  united,  yet  distinct.  351

disunited  in  our  sight  of  tl)eir  iicrson,  and  united  in  their  n-ioK

XXIX.
intention  of  mind. They  shine  together,  because  they  preach  V^^^'

One; but they touch not each other, because they are

divided  by  different  limes.

69.  At  what  different  times  did  Abel,  Isaiah,  and  John
appear!  Tliey  were  separated  indeed  in  time,  but  not  in  the
subject  of  their  preaching.  For  Abel  offered  up  a  lamb  in
sacrifice,  typifying  the  passion  of  our  Redeemer ;  of  Whose
passion  Isaiah  says;  As  a  lamb  before  its  shearer  He  will  beis.b'S,1.
dumb,  and  icill  not  open  His  moutJi.  Of  whom  John  also
says;  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God;  behold,  JVho  taketh  awaij John],
the  sins  of  the  world.  Behold  the}-  were  sent  at  different
times  indeed,  and  yet  agreeing  in  their  thought  of  the  inno-
cency  of  our  Redeemer,  they  spake  of  the  same  Lamb,  John

by  pointing  to  Him,  Isaiah  by  foreseeing,  and  Abel  by
offering;  and  Him,  Whom  John  set  forth  by  pointing  to
Him,  and  Isaiah  set  forth  in  his  words,  Abel  held,  in  signifi-
cation, in  his  hands.

70.  Because  then  we  have  said  how  the  Pleiades  accord
together  concerning  the  Humanity  of  our  Redeemer,  let  us
now  point  out  how  they  shine  in  concord  in  setting  forth  the
Unity  of  the  Trinity.  For  David,  Isaiah,  and  Paul  appeai'ed
at  different  periods  of  the  world.  But  yet  none  of  them
thought  differently  from  another;  because,  though  they
knew  not  each  other  in  face,  yet  they  had  learned  one  and
the  same  thing  by  Divine  knowledge.  For  David,  in  order  to
set  forth  God  in  Trinity  as  the  Creator  of  all  things,  said,

Let  God  bless  iis,  our  God,  let God  bless  us. And  for  fear  Ps.  67,
he  should  be  considered  to  have  spoken  of  three  Gods,  from
his mentioning  God  three times, he immediately added,
teaching  thereby  the  Unity  of  the  same  Trinity;  And  let  all
the  ends  of  the  earth  fear  Him. For  by  adding  not '  them,'
but '  Him,'  He  intimated  that  the  Three whom He  had
named  were  One. When  Isaiah  also  was  uttering  praises  of
the  Unity  of  the  Trinity,  he  says,  in  describing  the  words  of
the  Seraphim,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy. But  lest  he  should  seem  Is.  6,3.
b)'  mentioning  '  Holy'  thrice,  to  sever  the  unity  of  the  Divine
Substance,  he  added,  Lord  God  of  hosts. Because  then  he
added  not  '  Lords,'  '  Gods,'  but '  Lord  God,'  he  pointed  out
that  that  Being,  Whom  he  had  tlirice  called  Holy,  existed  as


362 Divers  forms  of  sanctity. Arcturus,  the  Church.

Job  38,  One.  Paul  also,  to  set  forth  the  operation  of  the  Uoly
'^ — ^—Trinity,  says;  Of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  in  Him  are
'Rom.n,aIl  things.  And  m  ordei*  to  leach  the  Unity  of  this  same
Trinity,  he  immediately  added;  To  Him  he  glory  for  ever
and  ever.  Amen.  By  adding  then  not  '  to  them,'  but  to  Him,
he  made  Him  known  as  One  in  nature,  Three  in  Persons,
Whom  he  had  thrice  addressed  by  the  same  word.  The
Pleiades  therefore  are  both  situated  as  it  were  in  one  place,
because  they  think  alike,  concerning  God;  and  yet  they
touch  not  each  other,  because,  as  has  been  said,  they  are
distributed  through  different  periods  of  this  world.

71.  Which  the  Prophet  Ezekiel  well  and  briefly  describes,
who,  when  saying  that  he  had  beheld  living  creatures  of

Ez.  1,9. different  kinds,  added;  Their  wings  were  joined  one  to
another.  For  the  wings  of  living  creatures  are  joined  one  to
another;  because  though  the  things  ^Yhich  they  do  are
different,  yet  the  voices  and  the  virtues  of  the  Saints  are
united  together  in  one  and  the  same  sense.  And  though
one  may  be  a  man,  from  doing  all  things  rationally,  another,
who  is  bold  in  suffering,  may  be  a  lion,  from  not  fearing
the  adversities  of  the  world ;  another,  from  offering
himself  through  abstinence  as  a  living  victim,  may  be
a  calf;  another,  from  soaring  on  high  on  the  wing  of
contemplation,  may  be  an  eagle;  yet  do  they  touch  each
other  with  their  wings,  whilst  they  fly,  because  they  are
united  to  each  other  by  the  confession  of  their  words,  and
the  accordance  of  their  virtues.  But  because  it  belongs  to
the  power  of  God  alone  both  to  join  together  in  the  preach-
ing of  the  faith  those  who  were  sent  at  different  times,  and
to  unite  in  brightness  of  intention  those  that  were  endued
with  dissimilar  virtues,  it  is  rightly  said ;  JVilt  thou  he  able
to  join  together  the  shining  stars,  the  Pleiades?  As  if  He
said,  As  I,  Who  alone  fill  all  things,  and  Who  by  filling  the
minds  of  the  Elect  join  them  in  a  sense  of  unity.

72.  But  by  Arcturus,  which  illumines  the  night  season  in
its  orbit,  and  never  sets,  is  designated,  not  the  doings  of  the
Saints  separately  manifested,  but  the  whole  Church  together,
which  suffers  indeed  weariness,  but  yet  does  not  incline  to
fall  from  its  own  proper  position,  which  endures  a  circle  of
toils,  but  hastens  not  to  set  together  with  time. For  Arc-


Three  stars  and  four,  above  hij  hnits,  Faith  and  Works. 353
turus  comes  not  with  the  night  season  to  the  kjwest  ])art  of  Book

^  Y  T  V

the  heavens,  but  even  while  it  is  revolving  itself,  niglu  is —

brought  to  a  close.  Because  doubtless,  while  Holy  Church
is  shaken  with  nnniberless  tribulations,  the  shade  of  the
present  life  comes  to  an  end ;  and  the  night  passes  by,  as  it
continues  stationary,  because  while  the  Church  remains  in
her  own  original  condition,  the  life  of  this  mortal  state  passes
away.  There  is  in  Arcturus  a  point  for  us  to  observe  more
carefully.  For  it  revolves  with  seven  stars,  and  at  one  time
raises  three  to  the  highest  point,  and  depresses  four  to  the
lowest;  at  one  time  raises  four  on  high,  and  depresses  three
below.  Holy  Church  also,  when  she  preaches  at  one  time  to
unbelievers  the  knowledge  of  the  Trinity,  and  at  another  the
four  virtues,  that  is,  prudence,  fortitude,  temperance,  justice,
to  believers,  changes,  as  it  were,  by  a  kind  of  rotation  in  its
preaching,  the  appearance  of  its  position.  For  when  she
strips  of  confidence  in  their  own  doings  those  who  boast  of
their  own  works,  and  exalts  faith  in  the  Trinity,  what  else
does  Arcturus,  but  elevate  three  stars,  and  depress  four.?
And  when  she  forbids  some,  who  have  no  good  works,  to
presume  on  their  faith,  and  orders  them  to  work  out  more
earnestly  the  things  which  are  commanded,  what  else  does
Arcturus  do,  but  raise  up  four  stars,  and  bring  down  three?
Let  us  see  how  it  elevates  three,  and  depresses  four.  Behold
it  is  said  by  Paul  to  those  who  were  priding  themselves  on
their  works  in  opposition  to  faith  ;  If  Abraham  were  just ijicd  Rom.  4,
hy  works  he  hath  fflory,  but  not  before  God.  For  what  saith  '
the  Scripture?  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted
iinto  him  for  righteousness.  Let  us  see  how  it  elevates  four
and  depresses  three.  Behold  it  is  said  by  James  to  those
that  were  boasting  of  faith  in  opposition  to  works;  As  the  J nmes
body  without  the  spirit  is  dead,  so  faith  loithoitt  works  is  '
dead  also.  Arcturus  therefore  revolves,  because  Holy  Church
turns  herself  on  different  sides  with  skill  in  preaching,
according  to  the  minds  of  her  hearers.  Arcturus  revolves,
because  she  is  whirled  round  in  the  tribulations  of  this  night.
But  the  Lord  breaks  up  at  last  this  circuit  of  Arcturus,  because
He  turns  the  labours  of  the  Church  into  rest.  Then  does
He  also  more  entirely  join  the  Pleiades,  when  He  destroys
the  orbit  of  Arcturus,  because  all  the  Saints  are  then
doubtless  joined  to  each  other  even  in  outward  appearance,
VOL.  III.  A  a


354 North  rising  stars  the  Law,  Eastern  the  Gospel.
Job  38,  when  Holy  Church  at  the  end  of  this  world  is  released  from

31

those  labours  which  she  now  endures. Let  Him  say  then ;


Myst.

Wilt  thou  be  able  to  join together  the  shining  stars  the

Pleiades,  or  wilt  thou  be  able  to  break  up  the  circuit  ofArctu-
rus?  Thou  understandest  As  1,  Myself,  Who  then  unite  the
life  of  the  Saints  even  in  outward  appearance,  when  T  bodily
dissolve  the  circuit  of  the  Church  Universal.  And  what
man  is  ignorant  that  this  is  the  act  of  Divine  power  alone  ?
But  let  man,  in  order  that  he  may  know  what  he  is  himself,
be  constantly  reminded  what  it  is  that  God  alone  can  effect.
73.  We  have  still  some  other  meaning  to  give  of  the  stars
the  Pleiades,  and  Arcturus.  For  the  Pleiades  rise  from  the
East,  but  Arcturus  on  the  side  of  the  North.  But  wherever
Arcturus  turns  itself  in  its  circle,  it  presents  to  view  the
Pleiades ;  and  when  the  light  of  the  day  is  now  approaching,
the  order  of  its  stars  is  extended.  By  Arcturus,  then,  w^hich
rises  in  the  quarter  of  the  cold,  can  be  designated  the  Law ;
but  by  the  Pleiades,  which  rise  from  the  East,  the  grace  of
the  New  Testament.  For  the  Law  had,  as  it  were,  come
from  the  North,  which  used  to  alarm  those  subject  to  it  with
such  asperity  of  rigor.  For  while  it  was  ordering  some  to
be  stoned  for  their  faults,  others  to  be  punished  by  the  death
of  the  sword,  it  was,  like  a  frozen  region,  far  removed,
as  it  were,  from  the  light  of  charity,  rather  nipping  the  seeds
of  its  precepts  with  cold,  than  nourishing  them  with  warmth.
Peter  had  shuddered  at  the  weight  of  this  oppression,  when
Acts  15, saying;  Why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of
the  disciples,  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to
bear?  Nor  is  it  any  wonder  that  the  Old  Testament  is  set
forth  by  the  seven  stars  of  Arcturus,  because  both  the
seventh  day  was  held  in  veneration  under  the  Law,  and
the  vows  of  the  appointed  sacrifice  were  extended  through
the  whole  week.  But  the  Pleiades,  which  themselves  are
also  seven,  as  we  have  before  said,  point  out  the  more
plainly  the  grace  of  the  New  Testament,  the  more  clearly  we
all  see,  that  by  it  the  Holy  Spirit  enlightens  His  faithful
ones  with  the  light  of  the  sevenfold  gift.  Wherever  there-
fore Arcturus  turns,  it  presents  the  Pleiades  to  view,  because
by  every  thing  the  Old  Testament  says,  the  works  of  the
New  Testament  are  announced.  For  under  the  text  of  the
letter  it  conceals  the  mystery  of  prophecy. And  Arcturus


The  seven  Gifts  joined  in  Christ,  the  haw  relaa^ed. 355

inclines  itself,  as  it  were,  and  points  Ihem  out,  because  while  Book
it  bends  itself  to  the  spiritual  sense,  the  light  of  sevenfold-—'^  —
grace,  which  is  signified  thereby,  is  laid  open. And  as  the
light  of  day  approaches,  the  order  of  its  stars  is  extended,
because  after  the  Truth  became  known  to  us  by  Itself,  It
released  the  precepts  of  the  letter  from  carnal  observance.

74.  But  our  Redeemer,  coming  in  the  flesh,  joined  to-
gether the  Pleiades  ;  because  He  possessed  the  operations  of
the  sevenfold  Spirit  all  at  once,  and  abiding  in  Himself Of
Whom  it  is  said  by  Isaiah: There  shall  come  forth  a  rod  oitt"^^-  i^-
vf  the  root  of  Jesse,  and  a  flower  shall  grow  up  from  his
root,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest upon  Him,  the
Spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  Spirit  of  counsel
and  might,  the  Spirit  of  fcnmvledge,  and  of  godliness,  and
the  Spirit  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  shall  flll  Him. Of  Whom
Zechariah  says; Upon  one  stone  are  seven  eyes. And  again, Zech. 3,
And  on  the  golden  candlestick  seven  lamps. But  no  man  everib,  4  2.
possessed  all  the operations  of  the Holy  Spirit at once,
except the  sole  Mediator  between God and  man,  Wliose  1  Tim.
is  the  same  Spirit,  Who  proceedeth  from  the  Father '  before  1  'see
all  ages. It is well  said,  therefore, Upon one  stone  are"°*^=^*

T-  /• 1  • o  1  .the  end

seven  eyes.  Jbor,  tor  this  btone  to  have  seven  eyes,  is  to  of  the
possess  at  once  in  operation  every  virtue  of  the  Spirit  of^^g^^
sevenfold  grace.  For  one  receives  prophecy,  another  know-
ledge, another  virtues,  another  kinds  of  tongues,  another  the
interpretation  of  tongues,  according  to  the  distribution  of
the  Holy  Spirit.  But  no  one  attains  to  the  possession  of  all
the  gifts  of  the  same  Spirit.  But  our  Creator,  in  taking  our
weakness,  because  He  taught  us  that  by  the  power  of  His  God-
head He  possessed  all  the  virtues  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  once,
doubtless  joined  together  the  shining  Pleiades.  But  whilst
He  joins  the  Pleiades,  He  breaks  up  the  circuit  of  Arcturus.
Because,  when  He  made  it  known  that  He,  having  become
Man,  possessed  all  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  He
loosened  in  the  Old  Testament  the  burden  of  the  letter,  that
each  of  the  faithful  may  now  understand  that  in  the  liberty
of  the  Spirit,  which  he  used,  amid  so  many  dangers,  to  serve
with  fear.  Let  blessed  Job  therefore  hear ;  Wilt  thou  be
able  to  join  together  the  shining  stars  ike  Pleiades  ?  As  if
it  were  npenly  said.  Thou  canst  indeed  possess  the  light  of
certain  virtues,  but  art  thou  able  to  exercise  at  once  ali  the
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit .''  Behold  Me,  therefore,  uniting


356 Antichrist  their  star  that  refuse  the  Morning  Star.
Job  38,  the  Pleiades  in  all  virtues,  and  be  kept  from  boasting  thyself

on

TTi — '—  of  a  few  only. Hear  what  is  said,  Or  ivilt  thou  be  able  to  break
Myst.  -^  . .  ....

the  circuit  of  Arcturus? As  if  it  were  openly  said  to  Inm  ;

Even  if  thou  thyself  now  understand  est  what  is  right,  canst
thou  do  away  by  thy  power,  even  in  the  hearts  of  others,  the
laboiu'  of  grosser  understanding  t  Consider  Me  therefore,
who  correct  the  follies  of  the  carnal,  whilst  I  manifest  my-
self in  the  foolishness  of  the  flesh,  that  thou  mayest  the  more
bring  down  these,  which  thou  countest  the  mightinesses  of  thy
virtues,  the  more  thou  canst  not  apprehend  even  the  footsteps
of  My  weakness.  But,  because,  in  the  very  mystery  of  the
Lord's  Incarnation,  the  light  of  truth  is  manifested  to  some,
but  the  hearts  of  others  are  darkened  bv  an  offence  ;  it  is
lightly  subjoined ;

Ver.  32.  Dost  thou  bring  forth  the  morning  star  at  its
time,  and  dost  thou  make  the  evening  star  to  rise  over  the
sons  of  earth  ?
xxxiii. 75.  For  the  Father  brought  forth  the  morning  star  in  his
Gal.4,4. season,  because,  as  it  is  written; When  the  fidness  of  the
time was come, God sent His Son born of  a  woman,
made  under  the  Law,  to  redeem  them  that  are  under  the
Law. Who  being  born  of  a  Virgin,  appeared  as  the  morn-
ing star,  amid  the  darkness  of  our  night,  because,  having  put
to  flight  the  obscurity  of  sin,  He  announced  to  us  the  eternal
morn. But  He  made  Himself  known  as  the  morning  star,
because  He  arose  in  the  morn  from  death,  and  overcame,  by
the brightness  of  His light, the hideous  darkness  of  our
Rev.  22  mortality. Who'  is  well  called  by  John ; The  bright  and
?  n  f tnorning  star. For,  appearing  alive  after  death,  He  became
Mss. our  morning  star; because  while He  furnished  us  in  His
^"'" own  person  an  instance  of  resurrection,  He  pointed  out  what
light  comes  after. But  the  Lord  makes  the  evening  star  to
rise  over  the  sons  of  earth,  because  He  permits  Antichrist  to
hold  sway  over  the  unbelieving  hearts  of  the  Jews,  as  their
desert  demands. And  they  are  therefore  justly  subjected  by
the  Lord  to  this  evening  star,  because  they  chose  of  their
own  accord  to be  the  sons  of  earth. For  by  seeking  after
earthly,  and  not  heavenly  things,  they  were  so  blinded  as
not  to  behold  the  brightness  of  our  morning  star;  and  while
they  seek  for  the  evening  star  to  rule  over  them,  they  are
John  .5,  plunged  in  the  eternal  night  of  subsequent  damnation.  Hence
the  Lord  says  in  the  Gospel,  I  came  in  My  Father's  name,


Preachera,  3Iorning  Star  to  some,  Eveniuy  to  others. 357

and  ye  received  3Ie  not;  another  will  come  in  his  own  name, Book
and  him  ye  will  receive. Hence  Paul  says  ;  Because  they  ^^^^'
receive  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved,  ^jhess
for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  the  operation  of  e/ror,  2,10-12.
that  they  shoidd  believe  a  lie,  that  they  all  might  be  judged  .
who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  consented  to  iniquity. The
evening  star  therefore  would  never  rise  over  them,  if  they
had  wished  to  be  the  sons  of  heaven. But  while  they  seek
after  visible  things,  having  lost  the  light  of  the  heart,  they
are  in  darkness  under  the  prince  of  night.

76.  But  if  we  examine  this  in  a  moral  sense,  we  find  how  Mor.
it  is  daily  occurring ;  because  both  the  morning  star  doubt-
less rises  on  the  Elect,  and  the  evening  star,  by  God's
permission,  rules  over  the  reprobate.  For  there  is  one  and
the  same  word  of  God  in  the  mouth  of  the  preacher.  But
while  these  hear  it  with  joy,  and  those  with  envy,  they
change  for  themselves  the  brightness  of  the  morning  star
into  the  darkness  of  the  evening.  Whilst  these  humbly
receive  the  voice  of  holy  preaching,  they  open,  as  it  were,
the  eyes  of  the  heart  to  the  light  of  the  star.  But  whilst
those  feel  envy  at  one  who  advises  them  well,  and  seek  not
the  cause  of  their  salvation,  but  the  glory  of  boasting,  when
the  evening  of  their  iniquity  bursts  forth,  they  close  their
eyes  in  the  sleep  of  death.  By  a  secret  sentence,  therefore,
he  who  is  the  morning  star  to  elect,  is  the  evening  star  to
reprobate  hearers.  Because  by  that  holy  exhortation,  with
which  the  good  come  back  to  life,  the  reprobate  perish  more
fatally  in  sin.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  Paul;  We  are  unt02Cox.2,
God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ,  in  them  that  are  saved,  and^^'^  '
in  them  that  perish,  to  the  one  the  savour  of  death  unto
death,  but  to  the  other  the  savour  of  life  unto  life.  He  saw
then  that  his  word,  by  which  he  beheld  some  roused  from
their  iniquity,  and  others  on  the  contrary  lulled  to  sleep  in
their  iniquity,  was  both  the  morning  and  the  evening  star
to  its  hearers.  And  because  this  takes  place  by  the  secret
judgment  of  God,  which  cannot  be  comprehended  by  men
in  this  life,  he  rightly  there  subjoined;  And  who  is  sufficient
for  these  things?  As  if  he  were  saying;  We  are  sufGcient
indeed  to  consider  that  these  things  occur,  but  we  are  not
sufficient  to  investigate  why  they  occur.  Whence  also,  the
Lord  in  this  place,  because  He  had  said  that  the  morning
star  is  brought  forth  for  some,  but  that  the  evening  star  rises


358 Course  of  GocVs  Judgments  hidden  from  our  eyes.

Job  38,  for  Others,  that  man  might  not  dare  to  scan  the  secret  judg-
-^ —  ments  of  God,  immediately  subioins  ;

MOR  .  J  '

Ver.  33.  Knoivest  thou  the  course  of  heaven,  and  wilt  thou
set  down  the  reason  thereof  on  the  earth  ?
xxxiii.  77.  To  know  the  course  of  heaven,  is  to  see  the  secret
predestinations  of  the  heavenly  disposals.  But  to  set  down
the  reason  thereof  on  the  earth  is  to  lay  open  before  the
hearts  of  men  the  causes  of  such  secrets.  To  set  down,
namely,  the  reason  of  heaven  on  the  earth,  is  either  to
examine  the  mysteries  of  the  heavenly  judgments,  by  con-
sideration, or  to  make  them  manifest  in  words.  Which  cer-
tainly no  one  can  do  who  is  placed  in  this  life.  For,  to  pass
from  little  to  greater  things,  who  can  understand  what  is  the
secret  reason,  that  a  just  man  frequently  returns  from  a  trial,
not  only  unavenged,  but  even  punished  besides,  and  that
his  wicked  adversary  escapes,  not  only  without  punishment,
but  even  victorious }  Who  can  understand  why  one  man,
who  plots  for  the  deaths  of  his  neighbours,  survives,  and
another,  who  would  be  likely  to  preserve  the  lives  of  many,
dies  ?  One  man,  who  is  only  eager  to  do  hurt,  attains  the
height  of  power,  another  only  desires  to  defend  the  injured,
and  yet  he  himself  is  lying  under  oppression.  One  man
wishes  for  leisiue,  and  is  involved  in  innumerable  occu-
pations, another  wishes  to  be  engaged  in  employments,  and
is  compelled  to  be  disengaged.  One  beginning  badly  is
drawn  on  from  worse  to  worse,  even  to  the  end  of  his  life ;
another  beginning  well,  proceeds  through  a  long  period  of
time  to  the  increase  of  his  merits.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
one,  who  is  an  evil  liver,  is  spared  for  a  long  time,  in  order
that  he  may  improve ;  but  another  seems  to  be  living  pro-
perly, but  continues  in  this  life  till  he  breaks  out  into
evil  ways.  One,  wdio  has  been  born  in  the  error  of  unbelief,
perishes  in  his  error;  another,  who  has  been  born  in  the
soundness  of  the  Catholic  faith,  is  perfected  in  the  soundness
of  the  Catholic  faith.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  one,  who  has
come  forth  from  the  womb  of  a  Catholic  Mother,  is  swallowed
up,  at  the  close  of  his  life,  in  the  gulph  of  eiTor,  but  another
terminates  his  life  in  Catholic  piety,  who,  born  in  misbelief,
had  sucked  in  the  poison  of  error  with  his  mother's  milk.
One  both  wishes,  and  is  able,  to  aim  at  the  loftiness  of  holy
living ;  another  is  neither  willing  nor  able.  One  wishes,  and
is  not  able ;  another  is  able,  and  is  not  willing. Who  then


I


I


Cases  emimeraled. Practical  inference.  359

can  examine  into  these  secrets  of  the  heavenly  judgments  ?  Book
AVho  can  understand  the  secret  balance  of  hidden  equity  ?  ^-~"
For  no  one  attains  to  understand  these  recesses  of  secret
judgments.  Let  this  be  said  then  to  a  man,  that  he  may
learn  his  own  ignorance;  let  him  know  his  own  ignorance,
that  he  may  fear;  let  him  fear,  that  he  may  be  humbled;
let  him  be  humbled,  that  he  may  not  trust  in  himself;  let
him  trust  not  in  himself,  that  he  may  seek  for  the  assistance
of  his  Creator,  and  that  he  who  is  dead  from  trusting  in
himself,  may  seek  the  assistance  of  his  Maker,  and  live.
Let  the  righteous  man,  then,  who  knows  himself  indeed,  but
who  still  knows  not  those  things  which  are  above  him,  hear
the  words,  Knowest  thou  the  course  of  heaven,  and  wilt  thou
set  down  the  reason  thereof  upon  the  earth  ?  That  is,  Dost
thou  comprehend  the  secret  courses  of  the  heavenly  judg-
ments, or  art  thou  able  to  disclose  them  to  the  ears  of  men  ?  *
Blessed  Job  therefore  is  questioned  concerning  his  investi-
gation of  the  incomprehensible  judgments,  as  if  it  were
plainly  said  to  him,  All  things  which  thou  suiferest,  thou
ouglitest  to  endure  the  more  jiatiently,  the  more,  in  thv
ignorance  of  heavenly  secrets,  thou  knowest  not  why  thou
sufTerest  them.


Note  to  p.  355.

St.  Gregory  speaks  here  of  our  Lord  as  Man,  and  therefore  naturally
mentions  only  the  Procession  from  The  Father.  Elsewliere  he  uses  the
same  language  with  the  later  Latin  Church  very  distinctly,  though  there
is  nothing  to  shew  that  he  does  it  in  any  sense  which  the  more  candid
Greeks  would  not  allow.  We  have  had  already  in  ftlor.  i.  §.  30.  p.  48.
the  expression,  "He  bestowed  the  Holy  Spirit,  Which  proceeds  from  Him-
self, upon  the  hearts  of  His  disciples,"  and  in  Mor.  xxvii.  §.  34.  p.  224,
an  implication  to  the  same  effect.  In  Dial.  ii.  near  the  end.  Ben.  p.  275.
Lat.  276,  we  have,  "  ^^'hereas  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  Paraclete  Spirit
ever  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  why  saith  the  Son,  that  He
will  depart,  that  He  may  come  \\'ho  never  departs  from  the  Son?"
which  stands  at  present  in  the  Greek,  "  ever  proceeds  from  the  Father,
and  abides  in  the  Son."  John  Diaconus  accuses  the  Greeks  of  having
falsified  Pope  Zachary's  version.  See  also  p.  375  of  this  volume.  Horn,  in
Ev.  xxvi.  p.  1551.  B.  he  has,  "Although  '  to  be  sent'  may  also  be  under-
stood after  the  nature  of  the  Godhead.  For  thereby  is  the  Son  said  to  be
sent  by  the  Father,  in  that  He  is  begotten  (generatur)  of  the  Father.
For  the  Holy  Spirit  also.  Who  being  coequal  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,
yet  was  not  Incarnate,  the  same  Son  declarelh  Himself  to  send,  saying:
If'Tien  the  Comforter  is  come,  JFhoni  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the
Father.  (John  1 5,  26.)  For  if  to  be  sent  must  be  understood  merely  to
be  Incarnate,  the  Holy  Spirit  doubtless  would  by  no  means  be  said  to  l)c
sent,  who  was  not  at  all  Incarnate.  But  His  '  being  sent"  is  the  very  Pro-
cession whereby  He  proceeds  from  tin?  Father  and  the  Son. As  therefore


360  Note.

the  Spirit  is  said  to  be  sent  because  He  proceeds;  so  also  is  the  Son  not
unfitly  said  to  be  sent  because  He  is  begotten."'  Which  is  quoted  by
Theodulfus,  in  the  8th  century,  and  could  not  have  been  interpolated  by
simply  adding  of  '  And  the  Sou,'  as  the  context  requires  those  words.

St.  Augustine  uses  sometimes  rather  the  Greek,  sometimes  rather  the
Latin  way  of  speaking ;  the  two,  fairly  understood,  not  being  contradictory.
See  Enchiridion,  §.  3.  Tr.  p.  90.  (where  the  reading  is  doubtful)  and  note  g.

TertuUian,  against  Praxeas,  c.  iv.  has,  '  I  consider  the  Spirit  not  to  be
other-whence  than  from  the  Father,  by  the  Son:'  and  c.  viii.  '  The  Spirit
is  Third  from  God  and  (qu.  '  of,'  ex  for,  et?)  the  Son,  as  the  fruit  is  of  (ex)
the  tree,  third  from  the  root,  and  the  stream,  of  (ex)  the  river,  third  from
the  Fountain,  and  the  point,  of  (ex)  the  ray,  third  from  the  sun.'
Similarly  St.  Athanasius  explains  Fs.  36,  9.  In  Jhy  Lir/ht  shall  ive  see
Liyht,  because  *  the  Son  in  the  Father,  is  the  Fountain  of  the  Spirit.'  De
Inc.  et  contr.  Ar.  §.  9.  Ben.  p.  877-  St.  Hilary  De  Trin.  viii.  20.  allows
liberty  of  language  as  to  whether  the  Spirit  is  of  the  Father  or  the  Son,
but  says  that  His  very  Procession  from  the  Father  is  '  receiving  that  which
is  the  Son's,'  by  which  he  seems  to  mean,  participation  of  that  essence
which  is  already  the  Son's.  This  doctrine  is  what  the  Greeks  would
allow,  but  one  which  seems  also  to  bear  out  the  Latin  form  of  expression,
and  to  be  in  fact  what  is  commonly  meant  by  those  who  make  use  of  it.
Thus  Petavius  De  Trin.  vii.  3.  §.  8,  on  a  passage  of  St.  Cyr.  Al.  Thes.
c.  34.  t.  V.  p.  345.  "  When  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost,  become  within  us,
makes  us  conformed  to  God,  and  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son ;
it  is  plain  that  It  is  of  the  Divine  Essence  (or  Substance),  Essentially  (or
substantially)  in  It  and  from  It  proceeding.  As  in  fact  is  the  breath  that
flows  forth  from  the  mouth  of  man,  to  use  a  poor  illustration."  "  This
Procession  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  says  Petavius,  "  can  be  supposed  no  other
than  that  Essential,  in  which  He  is  said  to  proceed  from  the  Father  and
the  Son,  in  XIcct^Is  xa)  T'lou,  as  he  presently  explains  it,  '  Essentially  from
It  proceeding,'  making  it  the  same  to  proceed  from  the  Father  and  the
Son,  as  to  proceed  from  the  Essence  of  the  Father  and  the  Sou."  He
cites  other  passages  of  St.  Cyril.  St.  Leo  seems  to  imply  the  same  doc-
trine, Ser.  2  de  Pentec.  where,  in  explaining  John  xvi.  13,  he  says,
"  What  the  Spirit  receives,  the  Father  giving,  the  Son  gives."

The  doctrine  of  St.  Basil  was  a  subject  of  dispute  in  the  Council  of
Florence,  the  question  turning  much  on  the  reading  of  a  passage  in  book  3,
against  Eunomius,  §.  1,  in  which  according  to  some  copies  the  Spirit  is
said  to  '  have  His  Being  of  the  Son.'  The  Benedictines  argue  that  this
must  have  been  his  meaning,  at  any  rate,  from  the  argument  at  the  end  of
book  2,  against  Eunomius  ascribing  the  Spirit  to  the  Son  onl?/,  as  His  crea-
ture, whereas  He  is  truly  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  He  also  in
other  places  speaks  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  related  to  the  Son  as  the  Son  is
to  the  Father;  not,  of  course,  strictly. De  Sp.  S.  §.  43.  t.  iii.  p.  36.

That  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Son,  as  well  as  of  the  Father,
is  acknowledged  by  all,  and  hence  it  is  very  natural  that  many  should
never  have  written  so  distinctly  on  the  point  as  to  say  whether  He  is
of  the  Son  in  the  sense  of  from  the  Son.  St.  Epiphanius,  however,
Ancorat.  67,  has.  But  if  Christ  is  believed  to  be  of  the  Father,  God  of
God,  and  the  Spirit  of  (s*)  Christ,  or  from  (iraga)  Both;  as  Christ  says,
Which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  and  He  sitall  take  of  Mine."  And
Hser.  Ixxiv.  7-  "  And  the  Holy  Spirit  is  from  (wa^a)  Both,  Spirit  from
(Ix)  Spirit."  St.  Greg.  Nyss.  end  of  B.  1 ,  against  Eunom.  says,  that  the  Son
is  "  viewed  as  prior  to  the  Spirit  in  order  of  causation,"  which  comes  to  the
same  point.  See  Petavius  1.  c,  Leo  Allat.  Gr.  Orthod.,  Forbes  Inst.
Hist.  Theol.  vi.  Pearson  on  the  Creed,  Art.  viii.,  adds  further  testimony
to  the  Latin  doctrine.


LIBRAKY OF THE FATHERS.


PUBLICATION  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  TEXTS.

The  plan  of  publishing  some  at  the  least  of  the  originals  of  the  Fathers,
whose  works  were  translated  in  the  "  Library,"  has  been  steadily  kept  in
view  from  the  first,  and  Collations  have  now  been  obtained,  at  considerable
expense,  at  Rome,  Paris,  Munich,  Vienna,  Floi-tnce,  Venice,  and  the
Editors  have  materials  for  the  principal  works  of  S.  Chrysostom,  for
S.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  S.  Macarius,  TertuUian,  and  S.  Augustine's  Homilies
on  the  Psalms. Collations  are  also  being  made  for  S.  Gregory  of  Nyssa.

Of  these,  they  have  begun  with  S.  Ciirysostom  on  St.  Paul,  the
Rev.  F.  Field,  M.  A.  Trin.  Coll.  Cambridge,  having  united  with  them  in  this
great  task.  He  has  already  edited  the  Homilies  on  the  2d  Ep.  to  the  Cor.,
is  now  carrying  through  the  press  those  on  the  1st  Ep.  (some  of  the  materials
for  which  arrived  at  a  later  period,)  and  then  intends  to  proceed  to  the
Homilies  on  the  Ep.  to  the  Rom.

All  the  best  MSS.  known  in  Europe  have  been  collated  for  this  edition,
and  the  text  has  been  considerably  improved,  as  that  of  the  Homilies  on
S.  Matthew  had  already  been  by  the  same  Editor  *.  There  is  then  every
prospect  that  the  English  Edition  of  S.  Chrysostom  will  be  again  the  best
extant.

All  the  extant  European  MSS.  have  likewise  been  collated  for  S.  Cyril
of  Jerusalem  and  Tertullian,  Of  these  S.  Cyril  is  nearly  ready
for  the  press.

The  publication  of  Tertullian  has  been  delayed,  because  it  was  discovered
that  the  result  of  the  collations  would  be  to  make  the  text  more  genuine,  yet
more  difficult  than  before.  M.  Heyse,  who  was  collating  for  the  Editors
at  Rome,  being  requested  to  search  for  the  MS.  or  MSS.  which  F.  Ursinus
alleged  that  he  had  used,  discovered  the  original  papers  of  Ursinus,  in
which  it  appeared  that  the  readings  which  Kigaltius  adopted  from  him,
were  in  fact  only  ingenious  conjectures  by  Ursinus  himself,  which  he  gave
out  as  collations  of  M  SS.  The  Editor  of  the  treatises  of  Tertullian  already
translated,  being  thus  thrown  back  upon  the  older  text,  found  reason  to  think
that  in  those  cases  the  readings,  which  Ursinus  had  corrected,  allliough
at  first  sight  obscurer,  were  (he  believes  with  one  exception)  the  more
genuine.

With  regard  to  S.  Augustine,  there  seemed  reason  to  think  that  there
was  very  little  or  nothing  left  to  be  done  for  the  improvement  of  the  text
after  the  admirable  labours  of  the  Benedictines.  Some  collations  which
the  Editors  obtained,  through  their  laborious  Collator,  from  very  ancient
MSS.  of  his  Epistles  at  Monte-Cassino,  confirmed  this  impression.  And
this  is  again  renewed  by  some  Collations  on  the  Psalms,  which  the  same
Scholar  has  made  for  them  from  a  very  ancient  Codex  rescriptus  in  the

•  Mr.  Field's  edition  of  the  Homilies  on  S.  Matthew  is  sujjplied  to  Subscribers  to  the
Library  at  the  same  reduced  rate  as  the  other  volumes. [  I'tMisher.]


Vatican.  Still,  besides  the  improvement  of  the  text  of  any  Father,  if
possible,  the  Editors  had  the  distinct  object  of  making  single  valuable
works  accessible  to  Clergy  who  could  not  afford  to  purchase  his  whole
works.  They,  therefore,  propose  to  publish  S.  Augustine's  Homilies  on  the
Psalms,  since  they  are  not  only  a  deep  and  valuable  Commentary  on  a
portion  of  Holy  Scripture,  which  forms  so  large  apart  of  our  public  devotions,
but  contain,  perhaps,  more  of  his  practical  theology  and  hints  as  to  the
inward  spiritual  life,  than  most  of  his  works.  Besides  the  above
Vatican  MS,  Collations  are  being  madeof  someof  the  Bodleian  MSS, which
have  not  been  used,  since  even  an  occasional  improvement  of  the  collocation,
or  still  more  occasional  of  the  text  itself,  is  not  without  interest  in  a  work
of  such  exceeding  value.

Large  Collations  had  been  made  for  S.  Maca  rius,  and  it  seemed  almost
ready  for  publication,  when  their  indefatigable  Collator,  iVI.  Heyse,  disco-
vered in  the  Vatican  an  entirely  different  recension.  In  accordance  with
the  rules  of  the  Vatican,  access  was,  upon  this,  denied  them  to  all  MSS.
whatever  of  S.  Macarius,  and  the  edition  has  consequently  been,  for  the
time,  suspended.

For  S.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  considerable  preparations  have  been  made,
although  nothing  is  yet  ready  for  the  press.

For  these  undertakings,  the  Editors  have  only  their  private  resources,
(any  profits  from  the  translations  having  been  much  more  than  absorbed
by  the  Collations.)  The  present  number  of  Subscribers  to  the  original
texts  is  only  416.  Works  printed  in  England  have,  owing  to  the  expense
of  labour  here,  but  a  limited  circulation  abroad.  If  then  it  is  wished  that
the  publication  of  the  originals  should  proceed  more  rapidly,  there  must  be
additional  Subscribers.


OEDICATED  (BY  PERMISSION)
TO HIS GRACK THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.


A

LIBRARY  OF  FATHERS

OF THE

HOLY  CATHOLIC  CHURCH,

ANTERIOR TO THE DIVISION OF THE EAST AND WEST.


TRANSLATED BY MEMBERS OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH,

WITH NOTICES OF THE RESPECTIVE FATHERS, AND BRIEF NOTES BY THE EDITORS,

WHERE REQUIRED, AND SUMMARIES OF CHAPTERS AND INDICES.


f


EDITED BY

The  Rev.  E.  B.  PUSEY,  D.D.

Uegius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Canon  of  Christ  Cliurch,  late  FetCoti-  of  Oriel  <  \iHese.

The  Rev.  JOHN  KEBLE,  M.A.

Professor of Poetry, late Fellotv of  Oriel College.

The  Rev.  C.  MARRIOTT,  M.A.

Fellow  of  Oriel  College.


A  Publication,  answering  to  the  above  title,  appeared  to  the  Editors
calculated  to  answer  many  and  important  ends,  and  to  supply  considerable
wants,  some  peculiar  to  our  own  ("hurch  and  times,  others  more  general.

Their  chief  grounds  for  thinking  it  very  desirable  were  such  as  the  fol-
lowing : —

1.  The  great  intrinsic  value  of  many  of  the  works  of  the  Fathers,  which
are,  at  present,  inaccessible, except  to  such  as  have  large  libraries,  and  are

familiar  with  the  languages  in  which  they  are  written  ;  and  this  the  more,
since  a  mere  general  acquaintance  with  the  language  will  not  enable  a
person  to  read  with  ease  many  of  the  Fathers.  E.  g.  Knowledge  of
Latin  alone  will  not  suffice  to  read  Tertullian:  and  in  cases  less  strong,
ecclesiastical  language  and  peculiarity  of  style  will  often  present  consider-
able difficulties  at  first.

2.  The  desirableness  of  bringing  together  select  works  of  different
Fathers.  Many  who  would  wish  to  become  acquainted  witli  the  Fathers,
know  not  where  to  begin  ;  and  scarcely  any  have  tlie  means  to  procure  any
great  number  of  their  works.  Editions  of  the  whole  works  of  a  Father,
(such  as  we  for  the  most  part  have,)  nre  obviously  calculated  for  divines
not  for  private  individuals  :  they  furnish  more  of  the  woiks  of  each  Father
than  most  require,  and  their  expense  precludes  the  acquisition  of  others.

3.  The  increased  demand  for  sacred  reading.  The  Clergy  of  one  period
are  obviously  unequal  to  meet  demands  so  rapid,  and  those  of  our  day  have
additional  hindrances,  from  the  great  increased  amount  of  practical  duties
Where  so  much  is  to  be  produced,  there  is  of  necessity  great  danger  that

a2


much  will  not  be  so  mature  as,  on  these  subjects,  is  especially  to  be  desired.
Our  occupations  do  not  leave  time  for  mature  thought.

4.  Every  body  of  Christians  has  a  peculiar  character,  which  tends  to
make  them  look  upon  the  system  of  faith,  committed  to  us,  on  a  particular
side ;  and  so,  if  they  carry  it  on  by  themselves,  they  insensibly  contract  its
limits  and  depth,  and  virtually  lose  a  great  deal  of  what  they  think  that
they  hold.  While  the  system  of  the  Church,  as  expressed  by  her  Creeds
and  Liturgy,  remains  the  same,  that  of  her  members  will  gradually  become
contracted  and  shallow,  unless  continually  enlarged  and  refreshed.  In
ancient  times  this  tendency  was  remedied  by  the  constant  living  intercourse
between  the  several  branches  of  the  Catholic  Church,  by  the  circulation  of
the  writings  of  the  Fathers  of  the  several  Churches,  and,  in  part,  by  the
present  method — translation.  We  virtually  acknowledge  the  necessity  of
such  accessions  by  our  importations  from  Germany  and  America;  but  the
circumstances  of  Germany  render  mere  translation  unadvisable,  and  most
of  the  American  Theology  proceeds  from  bodies  who  have  altered  the  doc-
trine of  the  Sacraments.

5.  The  peculiar  advantages  of  the  Fathers  in  resisting  heretical  errors,
in  that  they  had  to  combat  the  errors  in  their  original  form,  before  men's
minds  were  familiarized  with  them,  and  so  risked  partaking  of  them  ;  and
also  in  that  they  lived  nearer  to  the  Apostles.

6.  The  great  comfort  of  being  able  to  produce,  out  of  Christian  antiquity,
refutations  of  heresy,  (such  as  the  different  shades  of  the  Arian  :)  thereby
avoiding  the  necessity  of  discussing,  ourselves,  profane  errors,  which,  on  so
high  mysteries,  cannot  be  handled  without  pain,  and  rarely  without  injury
to  our  own  minds.

7.  The  advantage  which  some  of  the  Fathers  (e.  g.  St.  Chrysostom)
possessed  as  Commentators  on  the  New  Testament,  from  speaking  its  lan-
guage.

8.  The  value  of  having  an  ocular  testimony  of  the  existence  of  Catholic
verity,  and  Catholic  agreement;  that  truth  is  not  merely  what  a  man
troweth  ;  that  the  Church  once  was  one,  and  spake  one  language;  and
that  the  present  unhappy  divisions  are  not  necessary  and  unavoidable.

9.  The  circumstance  that  the  Anglican  branch  of  the  Church  Catholic
is  founded  upon  Holy  Scripture  and  the  agreement  of  the  Universal  Church;
and  that  therefore  the  knowledge  of  Christian  antiquity  is  necessary  in
order  to  understand  and  maintain  her  doctrines,  and  especially  her  Creeds
and  her  Liturgy.

10.  The  importance,  at  the  present  crisis,  of  exhibiting  the  real  practical
value  of  Catholic  Antiquity,  which  is  disparaged  by  Romanists  in  order  to
make  way  for  the  later  Councils,  and  by  others  in  behalf  of  modern  and
private  interpretations  of  Holy  Scripture.  The  character  of  Catholic  anti-
quity, and  of  the  scheme  of  salvation,  as  set  forth  therein,  cannot  be  ap-
preciated through  the  broken  sentences  of  the  Fathers,  which  men  pick  up
out  of  controversial  di\inity.

1 1.  The  great  danger  in  which  Romanists  are  of  lapsing  into  secret  infi-
delity, not  seeing  how  to  escape  from  the  palpable  errors  of  their  own
Church,  without  falling  into  the  opposite  errors  of  Ultra-Protestants.  It
appeared  an  act  of  especial  charity  to  point  out  to  such  of  them  as  are  dissa-
tisfied with  the  stale  of  their  own  Church,  a  body  of  ancient  Catholic  truth,
free  from  ihe  errors,  alike  of  modern  Rome  and  of  Ultra-Protestantism.

12.  Gratitude  to  Almighty  God,  who  has  raised  up  these  great  lights
in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  set  them  there  for  its  benefit  in  all  times.


I

I


I


EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  PLAN  OF  THE  WORK.

I.  The  subjects  of  the  several  treatises  to  be  published  shall  mainly  be,  Doctrine,
Practice,  Exposition  of  Holy  Scripture,  Refutation  of  Heresy,  or  History.

8.  The  Editors  hold  themselves  responsible  for  the  selection  of  tlie  several  treatises
to  be  translated,  as  also  for  the  faithfulness  of  the  translations.

II.  The  originals  of  the  works  translated  shall  be  printed".  It  would  be  well,
therefore,  if  Subscribers  would  specify,  if  they  wish  for  the  originals,  eitlicr  with  or
without  the  translations.

12.  It  is  understood  that  subscriptions  continue,  until  it  be  intimated  tlir>t  tlicy  are
discontinued,  and  that  they  extend,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  to  the  end  of  eacli
year.

14.  Not  luore  than  four  volumes  to  appear  for  each  year  :  tlie  price  to  Subscribers  7iol
to  exceed  'Js.  for  a  closely  printed  8vo  of  400  pages;  to  the  public  it  will  be  raised
one-fourth. Wlien  old  Translations  are  revised,  the  price  will  be  diminished.

*  The  object  of  puhlhhiii-;  the  originals  has  been  steadily  kept  in  view,  though  delayed  by
difficulties,  inseparable  from  the  coniviencement  of  such  an  undertaking,  as  well  as  bit  sorroujul
dispensations.  Collations  of  MSS.  at  Rome,  Paris,  Munich,  Vienna,  Florence,  Venice,  have
now  been  in  part  obtained,  in  part  are  being  made,  for  S.  Chrysoit-im''s  Homilies  on  S.  Paul,  on
the  Statues,  S.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  Macarius,  Tertnllian,  S.Greg.  Nyss.  &;c.

RIVINGTONS, LONDON: J.  H.  PARKER,  OXFORD.


Works  already  published.

ArHANASlUS,S -On (he Nicene Delinitioii,  ^

Councils  of  Ariminumand  ^^ j_  ^ Newman,  B.D.  FeUou'  oj  Oritl.
Seleucia,  and  the  Orations  I
against  the  Arians  J

Historical  Documents Rev.  M.  Atkinson,  .1/.^.  Fetlow  of  Lincoln.

AUGUSTIN E,  S Confessions Old  Translation,  revised  hy  E.  IS.  Puseii,  D. i>.

Homilies  on  the  New  Testa-  /  ^^^ ^  MacmuUen,  M.J.  FeUow  ofC.C.C.

ment,  2  vols J  '  -'

On  the  Psalms,  Vol.  1 partly  by  Rev.  J.  E.  Twe^d,  C/iupluin  of  Christ  Church.

Practical  Treatises  k  ^^"^  ''•  •'"•  Cornish,  M.A.  Fellotr  of  Exeter.

I  ractical L realises  |  ^^^ ^  Brotcne,  M.A.  St.  Peters  Coll.  Camb.

CVRIL.S.OFJERUSALEM  Cateclictical  Discourses Rev.  R.  W.  Church,  M.A.  FeUow  of  Oriel.

CYPRIAN.  S. Treatises, late  Rev.  C.  Tkornlon,  M.A.  Christ  Church.

Epistles Rev.  H.  Carry,  M.A.  Worcester  College,

CHRYSOSrO.M,  S HoiiiiliesonSt.Matthew,Partsl,2.  Rev.  Sir  G.  Precast,  M-A.  Oriel.

\  Rec.  J.  B.  Morris,  M.A-  Fellow  of  Exeter.
Rev.  J.  Medley,  M.A.(now  Ld.  lip.  of  Fredcricion.
Rev.  H.  K.  Cornish,  M  A.  late  Fii/iu  of  Exclrr.
The  kite  C.  If'ooU,  M.A.  Oriel.
"Rev.  IV.  J.  Copeland,  B.D.  Fei'on  ofTrinity.
Rev.  W.  C.  Cotton,  M.A.  Student  olCh.  Ch.
Rev.  J.  A.  Ashicorth.  M.A.  Fellow  of  Brase-iwie
Rev.  J.  Tweed,  M.A.  C.C.C.  Cam'j.
Homilies  on  the  Statues Rev.  E.  Bttdge.

GREGORY,  S.  THE  GREAT  Magna  MoraUa,  T.  I.  II.  III.  pt.  1.

PACIAN,  S ^Pa^nd''B%Tm'  "^^  ^«Pf '^'.''"f « |  Rer.  C.  H.  CoUyns,  M.A.  Student  of  Ch.  C.

TERTULLIAN '•fr°eS'' '"" ^""'"'  \  ^^-  ^-  Dodgson,  M.A.  late  Stud^l  ofCh.  Ch.

ORIGINALS.

AUGUSTINE,  S Confessiones Rev.  E.  R.  f'usey,  P. D.

CHRYSOSTOM,  S Hom.  in  Bp.  1  et  2.  ad  Cor Rev.  F.  Field,  M.A.  Trinity  Coll.  Camb.

In  the  Press.

AUGUSTINE,  S Ou  the  Psalms,  Vol.  2

CHRYSOSTOM,  S On  St.  Matthew,  Vol.  3 Rer.  Sir  G.  Prevost,  M.A.  Oriel.

On  2  Corinthians Her.  J.  A  As/tworlh,  M.A.  Fellow  of  Brascnvse.

GREGORY  S.  THE  GREAT  .Magna  Moralia,  Vol.  HI.  2. ..Rev.  Jas.  Bliss,  M.A.  Oriel.

^  SoF  N  Azi AN  zV^^i  }  «~ «-  «•  ^^-  "•"-"'  "-'■  ^-'-

ORIGINALS.

CHRYSOSTOM,  S Hom.  in  Ep.  ad  Rom Ret.  F.  Field,  M.A.  Trinity  Coll.  Camb.


On  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,
ICorinthians,Galatians,Ephe-
sians,  Philippians,  Colossians,
Thessalonians,  1  and  2  Timo-
thy, Titus,  and  Philemon.


Preparing  for  Publication.


ACTS  of  early  MAR!  Y  RS  .  .  CGenuine)

AMOHOSE,  ^ .On  the  Psalms

On  St.  Luke partly  by  the  late  S.  F.  Wood,  M.J.  Oriel.

Doctrinal  Treatises

Episiles partly  by  the  late  S.  F.  Wood,  M.A.  Oriel.

ATHANASIUS,  S Tracts  on  the  Incarnation  and  )  „ ^ n ^  «,  j c-  n /■ /n..,-,/

,. .  .  ^ .  .  >  Rev.  C.  Daman,  M.A.  rellow  of  Oriel.

AUGUSTINE,  S Anti-Ielagian  Tracts .

Anti-Donatist  Tracts  ..■...,

Hoinilies.inSt.John'sGospel  ..John  G.  Shcppard,  M..1.  Scholar  of  Wadham.

First?

Kpislie . .  y

the  Fsalms ....  Anonymous.

Epistles  . . Rev.  H.  If.  WUberforce,  M.A  Oriel.

City  of  God  Old  Translation  revised.

HASH,,  S.  THE  GREAT . .  Letters,  Treatises,  and Ho-\  ^gj, j^ Williams,  M.A.  Fellote  of  Trinity.

niUies  J

CIIRYSOSTOM,S Homilies  on  St.  John Ret.  G.  T.  Stupart,  M.A.  FeUow  of  Exeter.

—  the  Acts Reo.  T.  S/ieppard,  M.A.  Oriel.

tlie  Hebrews Rev.  T.  Keble,  M.A  late  Fellow  of  C.C.  C.

Select  Homilies Rev.  C.  B.  Pearson,  M.A.  Oriel.

On  the  I'ricsihood The  lute  Up.  Jebb,  finished  by  Rev.  J- Jebb,  M.A.

Epistles  Rev.  E.  Churton,  M.A.  Christ  Church.


CLEMENT,  S.  OF  ALEX-  I  Pajdaeosus.
ANURIA Ji-djnagogus,

CYRIL,  S.  OF  ALEXAN-? .,.„  ,, . .
jjn  j^  >  Against  Neiitorins


LUSEBIUS Ecclesiastical  History Ret.  E.  A.  Dayman,  M.A.  late  Fellow  of  Exeter.

GREGORY,  S.  OF  NYSSA  ..Sermons  and  Commentaries..

GREGORY,  S.  THE  GREAT  Magna  MoraUa,  Vol.  3 Rev.  Jas.  Bliss,M.A.  Oriel.

HILARY,  S On  the  Trinity Rev.  A.  Short,  M.A.  (Bp.  Elect  of  Adelaide.)

Psalms.  G.  G.  Hayter,  B.A.  late  Scholar  of  Oriel.

On  St.  Matthew.

IREN.a:US,  S Against  Heresy Rev.  J.  Keble,  M.A.

JEROME,  S Epis;les  Rev.  J.  Mo::  ley,  M.A.  Fellow  of  Magdalen.

J  U.STI N,  M Works Fen.  Archdeacon  Maniiijig,  M.A.  late  Fellow  of  Mert.

LEO,  S.  THE  GREAT Sermons  and  Epistles

MACARIUS  S Works  i  ^^'^ Translation  revised  by Rev. C.  Marriott, M.J.

' \ FeUow  of  Oriel.

OPT.^TUS,S.  ... On  the  Donatist  Schism

ORIGEN  Against  Celsus Rev  T.  Mozley,  M  A.  late  Feilmv  of  Oriel.

TERTULLIAN Works Rev.  C.  Dodgson,  M.A.  late  Student  of  Ch.  Ch-

■J'HEODORET,  i:c.  .. Ecclesiastical  History Rev.  C.  Marriott,  M.A.  Fellow  of  Oriel.

Coinpendinm of Heresies  ">  „ n .. .^ t,, . ^^  ,, ^  „ „•  ,
!i(i  Dialogues /  ^^'' ^-  ^cott,  M.A.  Felloiv  of  Balliol.


and


.MISCELLANIES., St.  Clement  of  Alex. "Qnis

dives  salvettir?"  Ep.  ad
Diognettun  ;  Tracts  of  Hip-
poly  tiis.


}


*»*  This  list  was  never  meant  to  be  final,  and  it  has  been,  from  time  to  time,  enlarged.  It  might
then  save  waste  of  labour,  if  persons  contemplating  the  translation  of  works,  not  set  down,  would
enquire  of  the  Editors,  whether  they  are  included  in  the  plan.


s


Just  pttblished,  price  14a-. To  Subscribers  to  the  Library  of  the  Fathers,  \0s.  6d.

,KS  of  S.  EPHREM  THE  SYRIAN. Translated  out  of
and  Indices.

Oxford,  John  Henry  Parker  j  F.  and  J.  Rivington,  London.


ELECT  WORKS  of  S.  EPHREM  THE  SYRIAN. Translated  out  of  the  Original  Syriac.
With  Notes  and  Indices.


SUBSCRIBERS.


Those  marked  with  an  *  are  subscribers  to  both  the  Texts  and  the  Translations.

Those  marked  t  to  the  Texts  only.

Those  not  marked,  to  the  Translations  only.


*His  Grace  The  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.
His  Grace  The  Lord  Archbishop  of  York,
Right  Hon.  and  Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  London.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishoj)  of  Lincoln,
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Bangor.
Hon.  and  Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells-
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Oxford.
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Rochester.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Exeter.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Worcester,  dec.
*Right  Rev,  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Chichester,  dec.
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Lichfield,
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Worcester.
*Right  Rev,  The  Lord  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,
Right  Rev,  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Ripon,
*Right  Rev,  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Barbados.
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Aberdeen.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Ross  and  Argyll.
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Guiana.
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Tasmania,
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Fredcricton.
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Adelaide.
*Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Newcastle.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  North  Carolina,  2  copies.
*Right  Rev,  The  Lord  Bishop  of  New  Jersey.
Right  Rev.  The  Lord  Bishop  of  Ohio.
Right  Rev.  Bishop  Luscombc,  Paris,  dec.


8


SUBSCRIBERS.


Abbiss,  Kev.  J .

♦Aberdeen  Diocesan  Library

A. B. Theological College, Illinois,
N.  A.

Abraham.  Rev.  C.  J.  Eton  Coll.

tAcklar.d, Rev. T. S. Clare Hall,
Camb.

Acklora,  J.  Esq.  Downing  Coll.  Carab.

Acland,  L.  Esq.  Killerton

*Acland,T.  D.Esq.  M.F.

Acland,  P.  Leopold,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.

Acland,  Arth.H.  Dyke,  Esq.  Dorchester

Adams,  Rev.  H.  G.  Dunsford,  Devon

Adams,  Rev.  D.  one  of  the  Vicars  of
Bampton

•Adams,  John,  jun.  Esq.

Adams,  T.  Esq.  Halifax

Adams,  Rev.  W.  Merton  Coll.

Adcock, Rev. Halford H. Scraptoft,
Leicestershire

Addison,  Rev.  W.  F.  Macclesfield

Addison, Rev. Berkeley, St. John's,
Edinburgh

Agnevv,  Rev.  J.  R.Wootten,  nearWood-
stock

Agnew,  Mrs.  WesternPavilion, Brighton
Airey,  Rev.  W.  Hexham

Aitken, Rev. R. Walcot Terrace,

Kensington  Road
Aitchison,  Rev.  D.  Glasgow
Alexander,  Rev.  John,  Edinburgh
Alger,  Owen  T.  Esq.
Allen,  A.  Esq.  Clifton
Allen,  E.  J.  Esq.  Jesus  Coll.  Cambridge
Allen,  Rev.  Jas.  Castle  Martin,  Pem-
brokeshire
Allen,  Rev.  Joseph,  Athy,  Ireland
Allen,  Rev.  P.  Westbourn,  Sussex
Allen,  R.  B.  Esq.  Walthamstow
*Allies,  Rev.  T.  W.  Launton,  Bicester
Allom.  ]\Ir.  Bookseller,  York
*A11  Souls  College  Library,  Oxford
Ambrey.Mr,  C.  Bookseller,  Manchester
Amphlett, Rev. M. Churchleach,

Evesham
*Anderdon,  John  L.  Esq.
*Anderdon,  \V.  H.  Esq.  University  Coll.
Anderson,  George,  Esq.  Inverness
Anderson,  G.  W.  Esq.  Bombay
Anderson,  Rev.  John,  Merton  Coll


Anderson,  Rev.  Philip,  Gateshead
Anderson,  Hon.  Mrs.  Brighton
Anderson,  Rev.  Sir  C.  Bart.  Lea
Andrew, Rev. John, Worsborough,

Barnsley,  Yorkshire
Audi  ewes.  Rev.  W.  Sudbury
Andrews,  Mr.  Geo.  Bookseller,  Durham
Andrews,  Mr.  W.  Bookseller,  Bristol
Anstey,  Rev.  George,  Acomb  Hall
*Anstice,  Mrs.  Joseph
Anthon,  Rev.  Henry,  D.D.  New  York
Antrobus, Rev. George, St. John's

Withyam,  Sussex
Antrobus,  Rev.  John
*Appleton  and  Co.  New  York
Archer,  C.  Rev.  Ball.  Coll.
Arden,  Rev.  G.  Powderham
Armstrong,  Rev.  J.  H.  Dublin
Armstrong,  Rev.  J.  Dinder,  Somerset
Armstrong, Rev. C. E. Hemsworth,

Yorkshire
Arjijstrong,  Rev.  J.  Wallsend
*Arnold,  Rev.  T.  K.  Lyndon,  Rutland
Ashby-de-la-Zouch  Theological  Library
Ashington,  Miss,  Little  Saxham
Ashworth,  F.  H.  Esq.
Ashworth,  Rev.  J.  H.  East  Woodhay,

Hants
*Ashworth,  Rev.  J.  A.  Bras.  Coll.
f  Atkinson,  Rev.  M.  Lincoln  Coll.
Attwood,  Rev.  E.  \V.  Jesus  Coll.
Aubin,  Rev.  Philip,  Jersey
*AudIand.  Rev.  W.  F.  Queen's  Coll.
Austin,  Mr.  S.  Bookseller,  Hertford
Austin,  Rev.  J.  T.  Aldworth,  Berks
•Awdry,  Rev.  C.  Worthen,  Shropshire
Aynslie,  Murray,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.


♦Bacon,  Rev.  R.  W.  King's  Coll.  Camb.
Badeley,  E.  Esq.  Temple
*Bagge,  Rev.  James,  Lincoln
Bagot,  G.  T.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll.
Baillie,  Rev.  Evan,  Trinity  Coll.
Bain, Mr. 6ookseller,Haymarket, London
Baker,  Rev.  C.  F.  Exeter  Coll.


SUBSCRIBERS.


0


Baldwin,  Rev.  C.  F.  Hampton,  Mid-
-^  diesex

tBallard,  Rev.  E.

tBallard,  G.  F.  Esq.

Ballas,  Eev.  J.

Bamplon,  A.  H.  Esq.  Plymouth

tBandinel.Rev.Bulkeley,  D.D.  Bodleian

Librarian
*Baring,  Re^.  C.  Ch.  Ch.
Barker,  Rev.  H.  Raymond,  Mert.  Coll.
Barker,  Rev.  C.  Raymond
•Barker,  Rev.  F.  Raymond,  Oriel  Coll.
Barling,  Rev.  J.  Halifax
Barlow,  Rev.  T,  Northampton
Barnes,  Rev.  J.  W.Trinity  Coll.  Camb.
Barnes,  Ven.  A  rchdeacon.Sowton, Exeter
Barnstaple  Clerical  Book  Club
Barrett,  Rev.  W.  Stratford-on-Avon.
Barrow,  Rev.  John,  Queen's  Coll.
Barter,  Rev.  W.  B.  Burghclere,  Hants
Bartholomew,  Rev.  Canon,  Exeter
Bartholomew,  Rev.  C.  C.  Lympstone,

Devon
Barton, Rev. J.H.  Wicken,  Northampton
Batcheller,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Dover
*Bates,  Rev.  W.  Christ's  Coll.  Camb.
Bath  Clerical  Society
Bather, Kev. E. jun. Meole Brace,

Shrewsbury
Bathurst,  Rev.  L.  C.  Wells  Theological

Coll.
Bathurst,  Rev.  S.  Merton  College
Baxter,  Rev.  Arthur,  Hampreston  Wim-

bourne,  Dorset.
Bayldou,  Rev.  J.
Bayley,  W.  R.  Esq.  Bath
Bayliff,Rev.T.  L.King's  Walden, Herts.
*Bayly,  Rev.  W.  H,  R.  Stapleton,  near

Bristol
Bayne, Rev.  Thos.  Vere,  Broughton,

Manchester
*Beadon, Rev. H. W. Latton, near

Cricklade
Beadon,  Rev.  Rich,  a  Court,  Cheddar,

Somerset
"Beaufort,  Rev.  D.  A.  11,  Gloucester

Place,  Portman  Square
Beaumont,  Rev.  J.  A.St.  Mary's,  Leeds
Beckwith,  Rev.  H.  W.  Bishop's  Wear-
mouth,  Durham


Bedford,  Rev.  H.

Begbie,  — i  Esq.  Pemb.  Coll.  Camb.

Beitch,  Rev.  W.  D.

Belaney,  Rev.  Robt.  Arlington,  Sussex

Bell,  Rev.  Henry.  Ruddington

Bell,  Rev.  John,  Oullon

Bell,  W.  W.  Esq.  Civil  Service,  Bombay

Bellairs,  Rev.  W.  Bedworth

Bellairs,Rev.  H.  W.  Buckley,  Flintshire

•Bellamy,  Rev.  J.W.  Merchant  Taylors'
School

Bellasis,  Edward,  Esq.

Belli,  Rev.  C.  A.  Southweald,  Essex

*Bellingham,  Rev.  J.  G.  Farmington,
Gloucestershire

Bennett,  Rev.  E.  Leigh,  Long  Sutton,
Lincoln

Bennett,  Rev.  W.  B.  Sandnell

Bennett,  Rev.  W.

Benning  and  Co.  Messrs.  London

Bentley,  Rev.  T.  R.  Manchester

Berkeley, Rev.G.C. South  Minster,Essex

Berry,  Rev.  P.  Cork

Bethune,  Rev.  G.

*Bevan,  Beckford,  Esq.  16,  Devonshire

Place
Bevan,  J.  J.  Esq.  16,  Devonshire  Place
Bevan,  R.  Esq.  llougham

Beveridge,  Mr.  Thos.  Gordon,  Aberdeen
Bickersteth,  Rev.  E.  Watton,  Herts
Biggor,  D.  Esq.

Birchinall,  T.  Esq.  Park  Lane,  Mac-
clesfield
Bird,  Rev,  C.  Warden  Hexham,  North-
umberland
Bird,  Rev.G.  Great  Wigborough,  Essex
Biron,  llev.  J^dwin,  Hythe,  Kent
Birtwhistle,  Mr.  W.  Halifax
♦Bishops'  College,  Calcutta
Blackburn,  Rev.  P.  Steeple  Langford,

Heytesbury
Blackburn,  Rev.  J.  Royston
Blackwell,  Rev.  Wra.  Mells,  Frome
Blackwood  and  Sons,  Edinburgh
tBlake,  Rev.  W.  Cam,  Dursley
Blandy,  Charles,  Esq.  Reading
Blandy,  Rev. Francis  J.  Netheravon,

Amesbury,  Wilts
•Blew.Rev.W.  J.IMiltoii.nr.Gravesend
*Bliss,  Rev.  James,  Marsden,  Devizes


10


SUBSCRIBERS.


Bliss,  Eev.  W.  Bath

Blower,  —  Esq.  Wolverhampton

Bloxam,  Rev.  J.  R.  Magd.  Coll.

Boissier,  Rev.  P.  E.  Malvern  Wells

Bolton,  Lord

Bond,  F.  H.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll.

Bond,  Rev.  N.  Holme  House,  Dorset

*Bonney,  Rev.  Thos.  Rugeley

Bonney,  Ven.  Archdeacon,  King's  Cliff,
Oundle

Bonwell,  Rev.  J.  Childwall,  Liverpool

Boodle,  Rev.  R.  G.  Compton  Dando»
near  Bath

tBorrodaile,  Rev.  A.

Bosanquet,  Rev.  E.  (Chrysostom)

*Bosanquet,  Rev.  R.  W.

Bosanquet, S. Esq. East Woodhay,
Newbury

Bosanquet,  W.  H.  Esq.

Bosanquet,  S.  Esq.  Montagu  Place

Boteler,  Mr.  Northampton

Bourke,  Rev.  S.  G.

Bourne,  Geo.  Esq.  Bath

Boutflower, D. Esq. Christ's Coll.
Camb.

Bowden,  Mrs.  17,  Grosvenor  Place

Bov/den,  Rev.  Robert,  Stoke-Gabriel

Bowdler,  Rev.  T.  Sydenham
Bowles,  Rev.  H.  A.  St.  John's  Coll.

Bowles,  Rev.  F. A.  Singleton,  Chichester
tBowstead, Rev. J. Greetham,  near

Horncastle
*Bowyer,  Rev.  W.  A.
Boyle,  Hon.  G.  F,  Ch.  Ch.
Boyle,  Rev.  John,  Brighouse,  Yorkshire
Bradford,  Rev.  C.  Vicar  of  Arlington,

Sussex
Bradshaw,  Rev.  J.
Bradshaw,  J.  Esq.  Nottingham
Braithwaite,  Rev.  F.  London
Braithwaite,  Rev.Wm.  St.Peter's,Jersey
Bray,  late  Rev.  Dr.  A ssociates  of,  5  copiw
Bray,  Rev.  E.  A.
Brereton,  Chas.  Esq.  New  Coll.
Brereton,  Rev.  John,  New  Coll.
■Brett,  Rev.  Stamford
♦Brewer,  Rev.  J.  S.  Queen's  Coll.
•Brewster, Rev.  W.  Hawarden, near

Chester
tBridges,  Rev.  A.  H.


•Bridges,  Rev.  A.  H.  Horsham,  Sussex
Bridges,  Rev.  C.  Old Newton,  Stow-

market
*Brine,  Rev.  James  G.  Great  Baddom,

Essex
Bristol  Library  Society
Broadbent,  Rev.  C.  F.  Worfield,  Shrop-
shire
tBrockman, Rev. T. St. Clement's,

Sandwich,  Kent
Brodie,  W.  Esq.  of  Brodie,  near  Forres,

N.  B.
Brogden,  Rev.  James
Brooksbank,  Rev.  C.  Ch.  Ch.
Broughton,  Rev.  H.  V.  St.  Peter's  Coll.

Cambridge
Broughton, Rev. B. S. Washington,

Durham
Broughton,  Mr.  Thos.  K.  Boston
tBrowell,  Rev.  W.  R.  Pembroke  Coll.
Brown,  Messrs.  Booksellers,  Leicester
Brown,  Mr.  Charlotte  Street,  London
Brown,  Rev.  E.  Leeds
tBrown,  Rev.  Henry,  Chichester
Br&wD.Rev.W.L.  Wendlebury, Bicester
Brown,  Rev.  J.  L.  Ashwelllhorpe,  Wy-

mondham,  Norfolk
*Browne,  Rev.  E.  G.  Bawdsey  Wood-
bridge,  Suffolk
Browne, Rev.  H. Borehara Rectory,

Chelmsford
*Browne, Rev. R. W. King's ColL

London
Browne,  Rev.  E.  H.  Emmanuel  Coll.

Camb.
Browne,  Rev.  T.  C.  Fendowne,  Wel-
lington, Somerset
Browne, Rev. W. R. Harlington,

Hounslow
Browne,  Rev.  J.  Haxey
Brownrigg, C. C. Esq. Port Louis,

Mauritius
Bruce,  Rev.  W.  Duffryn,  near  Cardiff"
Brymer, Ven.  Archdeacon, Pulteney

Street,  Bath
•Buchanan,  Mrs.  Dursley,  Gloucester-
shire
Buck,  —  Esq.  Jersey
•Buckerfield,  Rev.  F.  H.  Little  Bedwin
Buckle,  W.  H.  Esq.  Ramsgate


SUBSCRIBERS.


11


Buckley,  Mr.

*  Buckley, Rev. Joseph, Badminton,

Gloucestershire
*Buckley,  W.  E.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll.
Buckley, W. H. G. Esq. Bradford,

Yorkshire
Bukett,  T.  Esq.  Malton
Bull, Rev. .lohn,  D.D.  Canon  of  Gh.Ch.
"Buller,  Rev.  A.  IMary  Tavy,  Tavistock
Buller,  John  Edw,  Esq.
BuUey,  Rev.  F.  Magdalen  Coll.
Bullock,  W.  Esq.  Kilburn
Bunting,  Rev.  E.  S.
Burlton,  Rev.  J.  F.
Burnaby,  Rev.  Robt.  Leicester
Burney,  Rev.  C.  Magdalen
Burns,  Rev.  Manchester

*  Burrows,  Rev.  H.N.  Yarmouth, Norfolk
*Burton,  H.  Esq.  Hotham  Hall
Burton,  Rev.  C.  H.  Leeds

Burton,  Rev.  R.  C.  Peckham

Burton,  T.  Esq.  St.  Peter's  Coll.Camb.

*Bute,  The  Marquis  of

Butler,  Rev.  D.  Clergy  Orphan  School,
St.  John's  Wood

Butler,  Rev.  I.  Inkpen,  Newbury

Butler,  Rev.  J  as.  York

Butler,  Rev.  T.  Magdalen  Coll.

Butler,  Rev.  VV.  A.  Professor  of  Moral
Philosophy,  University  of  Dublin

Butler,  Rev.  \V.  J.  Wantage

Buttemer,  Rev.  Mr.  Aldham

*Butterfield,Rev.  John,  Bradford,  York-
shire

Butterworth,  Rev.  J.  H.  All  Souls,
Marylebone,  London


Caldwell,  Rev.  R.  Madras

Cambridge  Union  Society

Campbell,  Rev.  S.  C.  St.  Nicholl's,  near

Cardiff
Carapden,  Viscount
Campion,  Rev.  Hesketh,  Albourne
Canham.  A.  J.  Esq.  Tenterden


Canterbury  Clerical  Book  Society
Capes,  Rev.  J.  M.  Shipton  le  Moyne
Capper,Rev.D.  Huntley, Gloucestershire
Capper,  Rev.  George,  Wherstead
*Capper,  S.  J.  Esq.  Leyton
Garden,  Rev.  Lionel,  English  Bicknor,

near  Coleford,  Gloucesteishire
Carey,  E.  L.  Esq.  Philadelphia
Carey,  Rev.  C.
Carlyon,  Rev.  E.
Carlyon,  Rev.  Philip,  Colchester
Carrighan,  Rev.  G.  Plymoulh
Carter,  Rev.  W.  Eton  College
Carter,  Rev.  John,  Frenchay,  Bristol
*Carter,  Rev.  T. T. Cluver  Rectory,

Windsor
Cartwright,  Rev.  J.  B.
Carwardine, Rev. C.  W.  Tolleshurst

Knights,  Essex
Case,  Rev.  G.  Brasenose  Coll.
Case,  Rev.  James,  Liverpool
Caswall,  Rev.  E.  Stratford  Sub.  Castle,

near  Salisbury
Cator,  Mr.  Launceston
Cator,  Rev.  John,  Wakefield
Caulfield,  Rev.  W.  Pallas,  Kerry
•Cavendish,  Hon.  Richard
Cerjet,  Rev.  H.  West  Harley,  Surrey
♦Chaffers,  Rev.  T.  Brasen-nose  Coll.
Chambers,  J.  D.  Esq.
"Chambers,  Rev.  J.  C.  Deacon  of  the

Church,  Sedbergh
Champernowne,  H.  Esq.  Trinity  Coll.
Champernowne,  Rev.  R.  Ch.  Ch.
Chandler,  Rev.  J.  Witley
Chanter,  Rev.  Mr.  Ilfracombe
Chapman,  C.  Esq.  Trinity  Coll.
Chapman,  Rev.  J.  M.  Tendring,  Essex
*Chase,  Rev.  D.  P.  Oriel  Coll.
Cheetham  Library,  Manchester
*Chepmell,  Rev.  H.  L.  M.  Pemb.  Coll.
*Chessyre,  Rev.  W.  J.  Canterbury
Chester,  Rev.  Anthony
Cheyne,  Rev.  P.  Aberdeen
Chichester,  Dean  and  Chapter  of
Chichester,  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  of
Cliilders,  Mrs.  A.  W.  Cantley,Donca8ter
Christie,  Rev.J.  F.  Ufton,  near  Reading
•Christ's  College  Library,  Cambridge
•Church,  Rev.  R.  W.  Oriel  Coll.


12


SUBSCRIBERS.


Church,  Rev.  W.  M.  H.  Geddington
•Churton, Rev. Edw.  Crayke, near

Easingwold
Cirdeaux,  Rev.  J.  Whiston
Clarke.Rev.E.W.GreatYeldham.Essex
Clarke,  Rev.H.  Danvers,  Exeter  Coll.
Clarke,  Rev.  S.  Mortlake,  Surrey
Clark,  G.  N.  Esq.  Newcastle-on-Tyne
Clark,  Mr.  Wm.  Manchester
Clark,  Rev.  John,  Leeds
Clark,  Rev.  J.Dixon,  Belford,Nevircastle
Clayton,  —  Esq.  Twickenham
Claxson,  Rev.  B.  S.  D.D.  Gloucester
Cleaver,  Mr.  W.  J.  Bookseller,  Baker

Street,  London
Clement,  Rev.B.P.  Canon  of  W  inchester
•Cleoburey, Rev. C. Steeple Aston,

Oxon.
Gierke, Ven. C. C.  Archdeacon of

Oxford
*Clerke,  Rev.  Wm.  Melton  Mowbray
Clifford,  Rev.  F,  C.  Dursley
•Clissold,  Rev.  A.  Stoke  Newington
»Clutterbuck,  Rev.  H.  Exeter  Coll.
Cockin, M. Esq. Rangeworthy,  Iron

Acton
Cocks,  Hon.  and  Rev.  J.  S.  Worcester
tCocks,  Rev.  Charles
»Codd, Rev.  E.  T. St.  John's  Coll.

Cambridge
*Codrington  College  Library,  Barbados
Coffin,  Rev.  R.A.  Ch.  Ch,
Coit, Rev.  T. D. President  of the

Transylvanian  University,  U.  S.
Cole,  Geo.  Edw.  Esq.
*Coleridge,  Hon.  Mr.  Justice
Coleridge,  Rev.  E.  Eton  Coll.
Coleridge,  F.  G.  Esq.  Ottery  St.  Mary
tColeridge,  Rev.  Derwent,  Chelsea
Coleridge,  Rev.  Theodore,  Exeter
*Coles,  Rev.  G.  Croydon
fCoUege  of  Doctors  of  Law,  Doctors'

Commons
Collett,  W.  L.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll.
CoUey,  Rev.  James,  Shrewsbury
tCoUins,  Rev.  C.  M.Chudleigh,  Devon
Collinson,  Mr.  R.  Mansfield
*Collis,  Rev,  J.  D. Head Master  of

Bromsgrove  School
CoUison,  Rev.F.  W.  St.  John's,  Camb.


*Collyns,  Rev.  Chas.  Henry,  Ch.  Ch.
Coltman, Rev. George, Stickney,

Lincolnshire
tColson,  C.  Esq.  Cambridge
Colvile,  Rev.  Frederick  L.  Leamington
Colville,  James  W.  Esq.
Combe  and  Crossley,  Leicester
Combs,  John,  Esq.
Compigne,  D.  Esq.  Gosport
Compton,  Rev.  J.  Minestead
Conway,  W.  F.  Esq.
Cooper,  Rev.  E.  P.  Vicarage,  Burford.

Oxon.  (Tr.  of  S.  Chrys.)
Cooper,  Rev.  G.  M.  Wilmington,  Lewes
Cooper,  Rev.  R.  Howe,  Norfolk
Copeland,  Rev.  W.  J.  Trinity  Coll.
Coplestone,  Rev.  R.  E.  Barnes,  Surrey
tCopleston, Rev. W. J. Cromhall,

Gloucestershire  (Chrysostom)
Corbett,  Ven.  S.  Archdeacon  of  York

Wortley,  Sheffield
*Cornish,Rev.Dr. King's  School,  Ottery

St.  Mary
Cornish, Rev. Hubert K. Bakewell,

Derbyshire
Cornish,  Rev.  C.  L.  Littlemore
*Cornthwaite,  Rev.  T.  Hornsey
fCory,  Isaac  Preston,  Esq.
Cosens,  Rev.  Robert,  Dorchester
Cosserat,  Rev.  G.  P.  Graham,  Ipswich
Cotes,  Rev.  Peter,  Litchfield,  Hants
*Cotton,  Rev.  W.  C.  New  Zealand
Cotton,  William,  Esq.  Bank  of  England
Courtenay,  Lord,  Powderham  Castle
*Courtenay,  Rev.  Francis,  Exeter  Coll.
Cowie,  Rev.  M.  St.  John's  Coll.  Camb.
tCox,  Rev.  W.  H.  St.  Mary  Hall
*Cox,  Rev.  J,  Walgrave
Cox,  Rev.  F.  H.  Tasmania
Coxson,  Rev.  Mr.  Davenham,  Cheshire
Coxwell,  G.  S.  Esq.  Newcastle-on-Tyne
Cragg,  Rev.  Richard,  Wymondham
Cramp,  W.  Esq.  Camberwell
Crawley,  C.  Esq.  Littlemore
Crewe,  Lord,  Trustees  of,
•Crichlow, Rev. H. M. Radipole,

Weymouth
Cripps,  Rev. J. M. Novington,  near

Lewes
Croft,  Archdeacon,  Saltwood,  Hythe


I


SUBSCRIBERS.


13


Crompton, Rev. J. L. Tiin. Coll,

Camb.
Cross,  J.  E.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.
tCureton,  Rev.  W.  British  Museum
Currer,  Miss,  Eshton  Hall,  Yorkshire
*Currey,  Rev. G.  St. John's  College,
^ Cambridge

Ciirrie,  Rev.  Horace  G.  Milford
*Currie,  Rev.  James


Dale,  Rev.  H.  Bristol

tDalgairns,  J.  D.  Esii.  Exeter  Coll.

*Dalton,  Rev.  W.  Lloyd  House, Wolver-
hampton

Dalton,  Rev.  W.  Little  Binstead,  Essex

*Dalton,  Rev.  C.  B.  Rectory,  Lambeth

Dalton,  Mr.

*Daman,  Rev.  Charles,  Oriel  Coll.

Danby,  T.  B.  Esq.  Kendal

*Dansey,  Rev.  \Vm.  Donliead  St.  An-
drew, Wilts

*Darby,  Rev. Christopher,  Knocktopher

Darnell,  Rev.  W.  Stanhope.  Durham

♦Darling,  Mr.  James,  22,  Little  Queen
Street,  London

Darling,  Rev.  Thomas  St.  John's  Coll.
Cambridge

Darwall,  Rev.  L.  Criggion,  near  Shrews-
bury

Davie,  Rev.  G.  J.  Brasted,  Kent

Davies,  Mr.  John,  Bookseller,  Shrews-
bury

Davi«,  Rev.  E.  Hereford

Davies,  Rev.  J.  Abbenhall,  Glouceslcr-

shire
Davies,  Rev.  W.  L.  Elizabeth  College,
Guernsey


Davison,  INIrs. College  Green,  Worcester
Dawson,  Rev.  G.  Exeter  Coll.
•Dawson,  J.  Esq.  Exeter  C^oll.
Dawson, Rev. I. INIassey, Abinger

Rectory,  near  Dorking
Day,  Rev.  John  D.  Ellesmere,  Salop
Dayman, Rev. E. A. Shillingston,

Dorset
tDayman,  Rev.  A.  J.  Exeter  Coll.
"Deacon,  Rev.  G.  E.  Ottery  St.  Mary,

Devon
Dealtry,  Rev.  Dr.  Clapham
•Dean,  Rev.  W.  S.  Abdon
Dean,  Rev.  E.  B.  All  Souls  College
Deane,  Rev.  H.  Gillingham,  nr.  Shaftes-
bury
Debrisay,  Rev. J.  T.  St.  Margaret's,

Leicester
Deede^,  Rev.  Gordon
Delafosse,  Mrs.  Addiscombe
Demain,  Rev.  Henry,  Hertford
Demerara  Clerical  Library
Denny,  Rev.  A.  Mauritius
Denton, Rev. Henry, Great Ilford,

Essex
De Teissier, Rev. A. P.  Barfreston,

Kent
•De  Teissier,  Rev.  G.  C.C.C.
De  Vere,  Aubrey,  Esq.  Currah  Chase,

Limerick
•De  Watteville,  Edw.  Esq.  St.  Alban

Hall
Dew,  Lieutenant

•Dewes,  A.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll,  Camb.
Dewhirst,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Huddersfield
Dewhurst,  Rev.  John
•Dickinson,  F.  H.  Esq M.P.
tDisney,  Rev.  J.  Moy,  Ireland

»Dimsdale,Charles,Esq.Essendon  Place,
Herts.

Dingwall,  Charles,  Esq.

Dixon,  Rev.  James,  ShefTield

Dixon,  Rev.  Robert,  King  Wm.  Coll.

Isle  of  Man
•Dobson,  —  Esq.  Liverpool
■ Dodd,  Rev.  VV.  Newcastle-on-Tyne
*Dodgson,  Uev.  C.  Croft,  Voikshire
•Dodsworlh,  Kev.  William
fDonkin,  W.  F.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll.
Donne,  Rev.  Jas.  Bedford


14


SUHSCKIBKRS.


Dornford,  Rev.  J.  Flymtree,  Devon
Douglas,  Rev.  H.  Whickham,  Durham
Downes,  Rev.  J.

*Downing,  Rev.  H.  Kingswinford
Drummond,  Henry,  Esq.  Albury  Park,

Guildford
Drummond,  Rev.  Arthur,  Charlton
Diummond,  Rev.  Spencer  R.  Brighton
Drummond,  Rev.  R.  Feering
Drummond,  Colonel,  Brighton
Dry,  Rev.  Thos.  North  VValsham
Duffield, Rev. R. Frating, near

Colchester
*Dugard,  Rev.  Geo.  Manchester
tDukes,  R.  M.  Esq.  Lincoln  Coll.
Dundas,  Wm.  Pitt,  Esq.  Edinburgh
tDunn,  John, Esq.  Advocate,  Aberdeen
Dunraven,  Earl  of,
*Dunster,  Rev.  Mr.  Tottenham
Durnford,  Rev.  Francis,  Eton  College
Dyer,  Rev.  J.  H.  Waltham,  Essex
•Dyke,  Rev.  Henry,  Cottisford,  Oxon.
Dymock,  Rev.  J.  Rector  of  Roughton
Dyne,  Rev.  J.  B.  High  gate
•Dyson,  Rev.  C.  Dogmersfield
Dyson,  Rev.  F.  Tidworth


Edwardes,  Stephen,  Esq.  Streatham
♦Edwards,  Rev.  A.  Magd.  Coll.
Edwards,  W.  E.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll.
Eedle,  Rev.  Edward  Brested,  Bognor
Eland,  Rev.  H.  G.  Bedminster,  Bristol
Eld,  —  Esq.  Leeds
Elder,  Rev.  Edward,  Balliol  Coll.
Eldridge,  Rev.  J.  A. Bridlington,  Yorkshire
Ellacombe,  H.  N.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll.
fEllicott,  C.  J.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll.
Ellison, Rev.N.T.HuntspilljBridgewater
Ellon  Episcopal  Chapel  Library
•Ellon,  Rev.  Mr.  G.  N.  B.
Elwes,  C.  C.  Esq.  Bath
Elphin,  Ven.  Archdeacon  of,  Ardcarnes

Boyle,  Ireland
Elton,  A.  Esq.  Clevedon
Emmanuel  College  Library,  Cambridge
•Erskine,  Hon.  and  Rev.  H.  D.  Kirby

Underdale,  Yorkshire
Estcourt,  T.  G.  Bucknall,  Esq.  M.P.

Estcourt,  Gloucestershire
Estcourt.  Rev.  E.  E.  Cirencester
Ethelston,  Rev.  C.  W.  Uplyme,  Lyme

Regis
Etough,  Rev.  Dr.  Claydon,  Ipswich
•Evans,  Herbert  N.  M.D.  Hampstead
Evans,  Rev.  W.  Burlton  Court
•Evans,  Rev.  T.  S.  Broinpton
Evans,  Rev.  Hugh,  Durham
Evetts,  T.  Esq.  C.  C.  C.
Ewing, Rev. A. St. John's Chapel,

Forres
Exeter,  Very  Rev.  The  Dean  of
Ewing,  Rev.  A.  Forres
Ewing,  Rev.  W.  Ipswich


East,  Rev.  E.  Magdalen  Hall
Eaton  and  Sons,  Booksellers,  Worcester
Eaton,  W.  Esq.  Merton  Coll.
Eden,  Rev.  R.  Rochford,  Leigh,  Essex
Edge,  Rev.  W .  J.  Waldringfield,  Wood-
bridge
Edgell,  Rev.  E.  East  Hill,  Frome
Edinburgh,  University  of
Edmonstone,  Sir  Archibald,  Bart.
Edmonstone,  Rev.  C.  St.  Mary's  Marl-
borough, Wilts


•Faber, Rev. F.  W. Elton Rectory,

Stilton,  Huntingdonshire
Faber,  Rev.  J.  C.  Cricklade,  Hindoo,

Wilts


SUBSCRIBERS.


1<j


Fallow,  Rev.  T.  M.

Fanshawe,  Rev.  F.  Exeter  Coll.

*Farcbrother, Rev. Thomas, Aston,
Birrainghani

•Farrer,  James  William,  Esq.

Fawkes,  Mrs.

Faulkner,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Doncaster

Fawcett,  Rev.  Jas.  Leeds

Fearon,  Rev.  D.  R.

Felix,  Rev.  Peter

Fellowes,  Rev.  C.  Shottesham,  Norfolk

Fellows, Mrs. Money Hill House,
Rickmansworth,  Hertfordshire

Fenton,  Rev.  G.  L.  Lillesliall,  Shiffnal,
Salop,  {Augustine)

Fenwick,  Rev.  M.  J.  Donegal

Ferniey, John, Esq. Stanley Grove,
near  Manchester

Few,  Robert,  Esq.

Field,  Rev.  S.  P.  High  Beech,  Essex

tField,  T.  Esq.  B.A.  St.  John's  Coll.
Camb.

Fielding,  Rev.  H.  near  Horncastle

Finch,  Miss  C.

*Fisher,  Rev.  \X.  A.  Hilmore,  Cork

Fitzgerald,  Rev.  A.  Carlow

Fitzgerald,  C.  R.  Esq.

Fitzherbert, Rev. Alleyne, Ashbourn,

Derbyshire
Fitzroy,  Rev. August.  Fakenham,  Suffolk
Fleming,  J.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll.  Camb.
Fletcher,  Rev.  C.  Southwell
Fletcher,  Sir  Henry,  Bart.  Ashley  Park,

Walton  on  Thames
*Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  K.  Bombay
Flint,  Rev.  W.  C.  R.  Morden,  Surrey
Floyer,  Rev.  T.  B.  Oldershaw,  Lichfield
Foley,  Henry,  Esq.  Worcester
Forbes,  Lord,  Castle  Forbes,  N.  B.
Ford,  Rev.  J.  Bailey,  near  Exeter
Ford,  Wm.  Esq.

*Ford,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Islington
Forester, Hon. and Rev. Orlando,

Brazeley,  Shiffnoll
*Formby,  Rev.  R.  Brasenose  Coll.
Forster.Rev  .C  .G  addesby  H  all ,  Leicester
Forster,  Rev.  H.B.  Coin  Rogers  Rectory,

Northleach
*Forsyth,  Dr.  Aberdeen
Fortescue,  Rev.  R.  H.  Bideford,  Devon


Foskett,  Rev.  T.  M.  Enfield,  Middlesex
Foster,  Rev.  J.  Great  Haseley
Foster,  William,  Esq.
Foulkes,  Rev.  E.  S.  Jesus  Coll.
Foulkes,  Rev.  H.  P.  Balliol  Coll.
Fowler,  Rev.  H.  Liskeard,  Cornwall
Fox,  Rev.  Charles,  Bridport
Fox,  Mr.
Fox,  Rev,  W.  Marsh  Chapel,  Louth,

Lincolnshire
Fraser, Rev. Robert, St. Stephen's,

Canterbury
Freeland,  F.  E.  Esq.  Chichester
Freeman,  Rev.  H.  Peterboro'
Freith,  Rev.  F.  H.  Univ.  Coll.  Durham
Froude,  Ven.R.H.  Archdeacon  of  Totness
Fulford, Rev.  F.  Croydon,  Arrington,

Camb.
Fulford,  Rev.  J.  Exeter  Coll.
•Furlong,  Rev.  C.  J.  Warfield,  Berks
Fursdon, Mrs. Fursdon House, near

Exeter


♦Gace,  Rev.FrederickAubert, Magdalen

Hall
•Garden,  Rev.  Francis
Gardner,  Rev.  W.  Rochford,  Essex
Garratt, John, Esq.  jun. Farringdon

House,  near  Exeter
Gathercole,  Rev.  M.  A.  Chatteris
Gaunt,  Rev.  C.  Isfield
Gaye,  Rev.  C.  if.
•Gawthern,  Rev.  Francis  Seeker,  Exeter

Coll.
•Gepp,  Rev.  Geo.  Edw.  Ashbourn
Gibbings,  Rev.  Rich.Trin.  Coll.  Dublin
•Gibson,  J.  Esq.  Jesus  Coll.  Camb.
•Gibson,  Rev.  W.  Fawley
Gilbertson,  Rev.  L.  Llangorwen,  near

Aberystwith


16


SUBSCRIBERS.


Gillet,  Rev.  G.  E.
Gilpin,  Rev.  E.  Cirencester
Gladstone,  Rev.  John,  Liverpool
Gladstone,  John,  Esq.  Fasque,  Fetter-

cairne,  Kincardineshire
Gladstone,  William Ewart,  Esq.  M.P.

Ch.  Ch.  2  copies
Gladwin,  Rev.  C.  Liverpool
Glanville,  Rev.  Edward  F.  Wheatfield

Rectorjs  Tetsworth
Glasgow,  University  of,
*Glencross,  Rev.  J.  Balliol  College
Glossop,  Rev.  Hen.  Vicar  of  Isleworth
Glover,  Rev.  F.  A.  Dover
Glynne, Rev. H.  Hawarden  Rectory,

Flintshire
Godfrey,  Rev.  W.  Tibberton,  Worcester
Golding, Rev. Edward, Hesseaford,

Cornwall
Goldsmid,  Nathaniel,  Esq.  M.A.  Exeter

Coll.
Gooch, Rev. J. H.  Head  Master  of

Heath  School,  Halifax
•Goodford,  Rev.  C.  O.  Eton  Coll.
♦Goodlake,  Rev.  T.  W.  Pembroke  Coll.
Goodwin,  Rev.  H.  Cains  Coll.  Camb.
Gordon,  Rev.  Osborne,  Ch.  Ch.
Gordon,  C.  S.  Esq.  Exeter
Gordon,  H.  Esq.  Kendal
Gother,  Rev.  A.  Chale  Rectory,  Isle  of

Wight
Gough,  Rev.  H.  Carlisle
■tGoulburn,  H.  Esq.
Gould,  Rev.  R.  J.  Farnham  Royal
Gower, Rev. Stephen, Kingston-on-
Thames
Graham,  Rev.  VV.  H.
Graham,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Oxford
Grantham  Clerical  Library
Grant  and  Bolton,  Messrs.  Booksellers,

Dublin
Grant  and Son, M^rs. Booksellers,

Edinburgh
•Grant,  Ven.  Archdeacon,  Romford
Grant,  Rev.  James  B.  Dublin
*Granville,  Rev.  Court,  Mayfield,  near

Ashbourn
Grapel,  Mr.  W.  Liverpool
Graves,  Rev.  John,  Ashperton,  Here-
fordshire


Gray,  Rev.  R.  Old  Park,  Durham
Green,  Rev.  H.  Cople,  Bedfordshire
tGreen,  Rev.  J.  H.  Swepstone
Green,  Rev.  M.J.  Lincoln  Coll.
Greene,  R.  Esq.  Lichfield
*Greenwell,  W.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll.

Cambridge
"Gregory,  Rev.  G.  Sandford,  Devon
Gregory, Rev. R, Panton Wragby,

Lincolnshire
Gresson,  Henry,  Esq.  Lowlynn,  North-
umberland
Gresley,  Rev.  Sir  Nigel,  Bart.
Gresley,  Rev.  W.Lichfield
*Gresley,  Rev.  J.  M.  Exeter  Coll.
Greswell,  Rev.  R.  Worcester  Coll.
*Grey,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Francis,  Morpeth,

Northumberland
Grey, Hon. and Rev.  John,  Wooler,

Northumberland
Griffiths,  Rev.  John,  Ch.  Ch.  Oxford
t  G  rub,George,Esq.  Advocate,  Aberdeen
Grueber,  Rev.  C.  S.  Magd.  Hall
*Guillemard,  Rev.  J.  St.  John's  Coll.
*Guillemard,  Rev.  H.  P.  Trinity  Coll.
Gunner,  Rev.  W.  Winchester


HaflTenden,  Miss,  Langford  Hall,  Newark

Haight,  Rev.  B.  I.  New  York,  U.  S.

Haines,  Herbert,  Esq.  Hampstead

Haines,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Oxford

Halcombe,  John,  Esq.

Hale,  Rev.  G.  C.  Hillingdon

*  Hale,  Ven.  Archdeacon,  Charter  House

Hall,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Cambridge

Hall,  Rev.  Adam,  Drumbair,  Ayrshire

*Hall,  Ven.  Archdeacon,  Isle  of  Man

Hall,  Rev.  S.  C.

Hall,  Rev.  W.Manchester

Hall,  Rev.  W.  J.


SUBSCRIBERS.


17


•Halleu, Rev.  G. Rushock  Medonte,

Upper  Canada
Halliburton,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Coldstream
Halson,  Mr.

•Hamilton,  Rev.  Jas.  Beddington
*Hamilton,  Rev.  Walter  Kerr,  Merton
Coll.  Chaplain  to  the  Bp.  of  Salisbury
tHaanah,  Rev.  J.  Lincoln  Coll.
Hannafoid,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Exeter
Harcourt, Rev. Vernon, West Dean

House,  Midhurst
•Harding,  Rev,  I.  St.Ann's,  Blackfriars
Hardisty,  Rev.  W.  L.  43,  Great  Marl-

bro'  Street,  London
Hardwick,  Rev.  Charles,  Gloucester
Harington, Rev. Rich. Principal of

Brasenose  Coll.
Harley,  John,  Esq.  Wain  Wemm,  Ponty

Pool
•Harness,  Rev.  Wm.
Harper, Rev.  S. B.  Donniugton,  near

Newbury
•Harper,  T.  N.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll.
Harper,  E.  N.  Esq Kensington
Harper,  Rev.  H.  J.  C.  Mortimer,  near

Reading
Harrington,  Rtv.  E.  Exeter
Harris, Hon.  and  Rev.C. A. Wilton, Wilts
Harris..  Rev.  Thomas
Harris,  Rev.  J.  City  of  London  School
Harris,  Rev.  J.  J. W. Inworth, near

Kelvedon,  Essex
Harrison,  Benj.  Esq. Clapham  Common
Harrison,  Benson,  E«q.  Ambleside
Hairison,  Rev.  C.  R.
•Harrison,  Yen.  Archdeacon,  Domestic

Chaplain  to  the  Abp.  of  Canterbury
Harrison,  Rev.  H.  Lamberliurst,  Kent
Harrison,  W.  Esq.
Harter,  Rev.  G.  Manchester
Hartley,  L.  L.  Esq.  Middleton  Lodge,

near  Richmond,  Yorkshiie
Hartneil,  E.  G.  Esq.
•Hatherell,  Rev.  J.W.  D.D.  Charmouth

Rectory,  Dorset
Hassells,  Rev.  C.  S.  Newcastle-under-

Lyme
Hawker,  Rev.  R.  S.  Morwcnstow,  Corn-
wall
♦Hawker,  Rev.  J.  M.  Balliol  Coll.


•Hawkins,  Rev.  Edward,  Jamaica

Hawkins,  Rev.  E.  Newport,  Monmouth-
shire

Hawkins,  Rev.  Ernest,  Exeter  Coll.

Hawks,  Rev.  \V.  Gateshead,  Durham

•Hay ward,  W.  W.  Esq.

Hazlehurst, R.  K. Esq.  Trinity Coll.
Cambridge

Head,  —  Esq.  Exeter

•Heale,  Rev.  S.  W.  Queen's  Coll.

Heath,  Christopher,  Esq.

*Heathcote,  Rev.  C.  J.  Clapton

Ilealhcote,  Rev.  G.  North  Tamerton

tHeathcote, Rev. George,  Connington
Rectory,  Stilton,  Hunts

•Heathcote,  Rev.  W.  B.  New  Coll.

Heaven,  H.  G.  Esq.  Trinity  Coll.

Heaven,  Rev.  Hudson  Crosett,  Bishop's
College,  Bristol

Hedley,  Rev.  T.  A.  Gloucester

Hemsley,iMr.  W .  Kej  worth ,  Nottingh am

Henderson,  Rev.  T.  Messing,  Kelvedon

•Henderson,  Rev.  W^  G.  Magd.  Coll.

Henderson,  H.  R.  Esq.

Henn,  Rev.  W.  Burton  Agnes

Hepburn,  T.  R.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.

Hervey, Hon.  and Rev.  Lord  Arthur,
Ick  worth

Heslop,  Rev.  A.  Preston,  Lancashire

Hevvett,  Rev.P.Binstead,  Isle  of  Wight
•Hewelt,  J.  W.  Esq,  Exeter

Hewitt,  T.  S.  Esq.  Worcester  Coll.
Hcycock,  Rev.  Owston,  Leicestershire
tHeygate, T.  E. Esq. Queen's  Coll.

Cambridge
•Hibbcrt,  Miss  E.  S.
Hildyard, Rev. James, Christ's  Coll.

Cambiidge
Hill,  E.  Esq.  Wadham  Coll.
Hill,  Rev.  Edw.  Ch.Ch.
Hillraan,  G.  Esq.  Magd.  Coll.  C'amb.
Hilton,  A.  D.  Esq.  Theological  College,

Wells
II indie,  Rev.  Joseph,  Higham
Hinde,  Rev.  Thos.  Liverpool
tllinde,  W.  H.  F.  Esq.  University  Coll.
lline,  Rev.  H.  T.  Quarringlon,  Sleaford,

Lir.colnsliirc
Hingeston,  James  Ansley,  Esq.
Hippisley,  J.H.Esq.  Lambourne,  Berks


18


SUBSCRIBERS.


Hippisley,  Rev. R. W. Stow  in the

Wold,  Gloucestershire
Hoare,  Rev.  W.  H.  Ashurst  Park,  Tun-
bridge  Wells
Hobhouse,  Rev.  E.  Fellow  of  INIert.  Coll.
*Hobhouse,  Rev.  R.  Bridgenorth
Hobson, Rev. \Y. W. Bedingham,

Norfolk
Hocking,  Richard,  Esq.  Penzance
Hodgson,  Jas. Esq. Trinity College,

Cambridge
Hodgson,  Rev.  Chas.  Bodmin
tHodson, Rev. G. H. Trinity Coll.

Cambridge
Hodgson,  Rev.  J.  Geo.  Croydon
Hodgson,  Rev.  John,  St.  Peter's,  Thanet
*Hodgson,  Rev.  J.  F.  Horsham
*  Hodgson,  Rev.  H.
Hodgson,  W.  Esq.  Wanstead
Hogan,  Rev.  J.  Tetbury,  Gloucestershire
Hogben,  Mr.  Geo.  Sheerness
Hogg,  Rev.  J.  R.  Brixham
Holden,  Rev.  Geo.  Liverpool
*lIolden,  Rev.  W.  R.  Worcester
•Holden,  Mr.  A.  Bookseller,  Exeter
Holden, Rev. Henry, Uppingham,

Rutland.
Holder,  the  Misses,  Torquay
Holdsworth,  Miss  M.  Dartmouth
*Hole, Rev. George,  Chumleigh,  near

Exeter
Holland,  Rev.  J.  E.  M.  Stoke  Bliss,  near

Tenbury
Hollis,Rev.  G.  P.  Duddington,  Somerset
Holmes,  Hon.  Mrs.  A'Court
Holmes,  Rev.  Peter,  Plymouth
Holthouse,  Rev.  C.  S.
tHookins,  Rev.  Philip,  Combe  Florey,

Taunton
♦Hope,  A.  J.  B.  Esq.  M.P.  Trinity  Coll.

Cambridge
Hope, Jas. R.  Esq. D.C.L. Merton

College
Hopwood,  Rev. H. Rector  of  Bothal

Morpeth,  Northumberland
Hook,  Rev.  W.  F.  D.D.  Leeds
Hopkins,  Rev.  A.  Clent.  Worcestershire
*Horncastle  Clerical  Society
Hornby,  Rev.  James,  Winwick,  War-
rington


Hornby,  Rev.  Wm.  St.  Michael's  Gar-

stang,  Lancashire
Hornby,  R.  W.  B.  Esq.  Manor  House,

Heworth,  York
Horner,  Chas.  Esq.  Mill  Park,  Somerset
Horner,  Rev.  John,  Melis,  Somerset
*Horsfall,  Rev.  A.  Grange, Derby
Horsfall,  J.  Esq.  Standard  Hill,  Notts
*Horsley.  Rev.  J,  W.  Yille  of  Dunkirk,

Faversham,  Kent
*Hoskins,  Rev.  W.  E.  Margate
Hotham,  Rev.  C.  Patrington,  Hull
Hotham,  Rev.  W.  F.  All  Souls  Coll.
Hotham, Rev.  J. G.  Sutton-at-home,

Dartford
Houblon,  Rtv.  T.  A.  Peasemore,  New-
bury
Houtjhton,  Rev.  J.  Matching
Houghton, Rev. \V. Hartford, near

Northwich,  Cheshire
Howard,  Rev.  N.  A.  Plymouth
Howard,  Rev.  W,  Great  Witchingham,

Norfolk
*Howard,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Wm.  Whiston,

Rotherham,  Yorkshire
Howell,  Rev.  Alexander,  Southampton
Howell,  Rev.  H.  JMerton  Coll.
Howell,  Rev.  A.  Sedgley
"Hubbard,  Rev.  Thos.  Leytonstone
Huddleston,  Rev.  G.  J.
•Hue,  Dr.
*Hughes,  Rev.  H.

Hulton,  Rev. Campbell Grey, Man-
chester
Hulton,  Rev.  W.  *

Hunt,  Rev.  R.  S.  Exeter  Coll.
Hunter, Rev. A. Alvechurch, Wor-
cestershire
Hunter,  Rev.  W.  St.  John's  Coll.
*Huntingford, Rev. G. W. College,

Winchester
Hutchins,  Rev.  James,  Telscombe
Hutchins,  Rev.  W.  Bath
Hutchinson, Rev. Cyril, Batsford,

Gloucestershire
Hutchinson,  Rev.  C.  Firle
Hutchinson,  Rev.  T.  Lymm,  Cheshire
Hutchison, W. Esq. Trinity College,

Cambridge
Hutton,  Rev.  W.  Warfon,  Lancaster


SUBSCRIBERS.


19


tJackson,  Rev.  J.

Jackson, Rev. Dr. Lowther, near

Penrith
Jackson,  Rev.  W.  Ardley  Rectory
tJacobson,  Rev.  W.  Magd.  Hall
J  affray,  Mr.  Jas.  Bookseller,  Berwick
James,  Rev.  J.  Tor,  Devon
James, Rev. E. Prebendary  of  Win-
chester
Janvrin,  Rev.  James  H.  Winchester
Jefferson,  Rev.  J.  D.  Thorganby,  York-
shire
»Jeffray,  Rev.  L.  W.  Preston
*Jeffreys,  Rev.  Henry  .Anthony,  Hawk-
hurst,  Kent
•Jelf,Rev.Richard  William, D.D.  Canon

of  Ch.  Ch.
Jelf,  Rev.  W.  E.  Ch.  Ch.
Jellott,  H.  Esq.
Jennett,  ]\Jr.
Jennings,  Rev.  M.  J.
Jennings,  Rev.  J.  Prebendary  of  West-
minster
Jennings,  Mrs.  Driffield
Jeremie,  Rev. J.  A.  Trinity  College,

Cambridge
Jerrard,  Rev.  M.  Norwich
Jersey,  The  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  of
Hlingworth,  Rev.  E.  A.
Inge,  Rev.  T.  R.  Southsea
Inglis,  Sir  R.H.Bart.  M.P.
Ingram,  Rev.  Geo.  Chedburgh,  Suffolk
•Ingram,  Rev.  R.
Johnson,  C.  W.  Esq.  Balliol  Coll.
Johnson,  Miss
Johnson,  Rev.  E.  M.  Brooklyn,  New

York
Johnson, Manuel  John, Esq.  Magd. Hall,

Radcliffe  Observer
Johnson,  ]\Ir.  Bookseller,  Cambridge
Johnfon,  W.  F.  Esq.
Jones,  H.  W.  Esq.  Cheltenham
*Jones,  Yen.  H.  C.  Archdeacon
Jones,  Rev.  D.  Stamford
Jones,  Rev.  E.  Wigan
Jones,  Rev.  Edward,  Fatherwell,  near

West  Mailing,  Kent
Jones,  Rev.  H.  J.  Edinburgh
Jones, Rev. Hugh, D.D. Rector of
Beaumaris


Jones,  Rev.  J.  Hereford
•Jones, Rev. R. J. Newcastle-on-
ly ne
Jones,  W.  B.  Esq.  Magdalen  Hall
Jones,  Rev.  R. Branxton,  Coldstream,

N.B.
Jones,  Rev.  W.  Henry,  Alderly  Congic

ton,  Cheshire
Jones,  E.  K.  Esq.  28,  Mark  Lane
Irby,  Hon.  and  Rev.  F.  Hydie
*Irons,  Rev.  W.  J.  Brompton
*Irvine,  Rev.  A.  Leicester
Irvine,  Rev.  J.  Knowle,  near  Bristol
Irving,  Geo.  Esq.  Newton,  Edinburgh
Isham,  Rev.  A.  All  Souls  Coll.


J> til


Karslake,  Rev.  W.  Colebrook,  Devon

Keble,  Miss

Keble,  Rev.  T.  Bisley,  Gloucestershire

Keigwin,  Rev.  James  P.  Wadham
College

Kekewich,  S.  T.  Esq.  Peamore

Kempe,  Rev.  G.  Salterton

Kendal,  Rev.  J.  H.  F.  Kirkby  Lons-
dale

Kenney,  Rev.  F.  Ch.  Ch.

Kenrick,  Rev.  J.  Horsham

*Kcnt,  Rev.  G,  D.  Sudbrooke,  near
Lincoln

Kenyon,  Ilobt.  Esq.  D.C.L.  All  Souls
College

Kerr,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Lord,  Dittisham

Kerrier  Clerical  Club,  Cornwall

Keymer,  Rev.  N.  Hertford

Kindersley,  R.  T.  Esq.

King,  Yen.  Archdeacon

King,  R.  P.  Esq.  Bristol

King's  College  Library,  l^ndon

King's  College,  Fredericfon


20


SUBSCRIBERS.


tKirnan,  Rev.  H.

•Kirwan,  Rev.  E.  Tiverton

Kitson, Rev. G. Antony Vicarage,

Cornwall
Knatchbull.Rev.H.E.  Elmham,  Norfolk
Knight, Rev, T. H. Priest  Vicar  of

Exeter  Cathedral
Knight,  Rev.  W.  Worcester  Coll.
Knollys,  Rev.  Erskine
*Knowles,  E.  H.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll.
Knowles,  J.  L.  Esq.  Pembroke  Coll.
Knox, Rev. H. B. Monk's Eleigh,

Hadleigh
Kyle,  Rev.  John  Torrens,  Cork


Lace,  F.  John  Esq.  Ingthorpe  Grange,

Yorkshire
Lacon,  F.  Esq.  Worcester  Coll.
*Laing,  Rev.  David
Lake,  Rev.  W.  C.  Balliol  Coll.
*Lampen,  Rev.  R.  Probus,  Cornwall
Lance,  Rev.  Edw.  Buckland  St.  Mary,

Somerset
*Landor,  Rev.  R.  E.  Birlingham
•Landor.  Rev.  C.  W.  Over-Whilacie,

Warwickshire
Landon,  Rev.  E.  H.
Lane,  Mrs.  F.
Lane,  Rev.  C.  Deal
Lane,  Rev.  E.  Gloucester
Lane,  Rev.  C.  Kennington
Lane,  Rev.  Samuel,  Frome
Langbridgc,  Mr.  Birmingham
Langdon,  Rev.  G.  H.  Oving
•Langdon,  Augustus,  Esq.
Langmore,  W.  Esq.  M.D.
*Laprimaudaye,  Rev.  C.  J.-Leyton


Larkin,  —  Esq.  Bombay

Latham,  Rev.  Henry,  Selmeston,  Sus-
sex

Latimer,  Rev.  G.  B.  P.  Tynemouth

Law, Rev. I.  T. Chancellor of the
Diocese  of  Litchfield

Law, Hon. and Rev. W. T. East
Harborne,  Birmingham

Lawrie,  A.  J.  C.  Esq.

LawsoD,  Rev.  C.  Richmond

Lawson,  Rev.  Robt.

Lawson,  Rev.  W.  Delancey,  Oakham

Layton,  Rev.  F.  W.  H.  Islington

Lechmere,  Rev.  A.  B.  Welland,  Wore.

Lee,  Rev.  S.  Sidmouth

Lee,  Rev.  W.  Trinity  Coll.  Dublin

tLeefe,  Rev.  Audley  End,  Essex

Lefroy,  Rev.  A.  C.

Legge,  Lady  Anne

*Legge,  Rev.  Henry,  EastLavant,  near
Chichester

Legge,  Rev.  W.  Ashtead

Leigh,  Stratford,  Esq.

Leigh, Wm. Esq.  Little Aston  Hall,
Lichfield

*Leighton,  Rev.  F.  K.  All  Souls  Coll,

Le  Mesurier,  John,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.

tLe  Mottle,  Rev.  Wm.  Guernsey

Lepage,  ]Mr.  Calcutta

*Leslie,  Rev.  Charles

Leslie,  Mr.  Bookseller,  London

Lewis,  Rev,  G.  Dundee

Lewis,  Rev.  R,  Farway,  near  Honiton

'Lewis, Rev. T, T, Aymestry,  near

Leominster
tLewlhwaite,  Rev.  Geo.  jun.  Adel,  near

Leeds
Ley,  Rev.  Jacob  S.  Ashprington,  Devon
Ley,  R.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll.
Library  of  Christ's  Coll.  Cambridge
Library  of  Congress,  W^ashington
•Library  of  Domus  Scholarum,  Wotton-

under-Edge
Liddell  and  Brown,  Booksellers,  Boston
LifFord, Right Hon. Lord Viscount,

Astley  Castle,  near  Coventry
Light  and  Ridler,  Bristol
Lightfoot,  Rev.  N,  Slockleigh,  Devon
Lindsay, Hon. Colin, Haigh Hall,
Wigan


i


SUBSCRIBERS.


21


Linzee,  Rev.  E.  H.

Litler,Eev.  E..  Poynton,nearMacclesfield
Littlehales,  Rev.  J.  New  Coll.
*Liveing,  Rev.  Henry  Thomas,  Stoke  by

Nayland,  Suffolk
Liverpool  Library
tLloyd,  Rev.  E.  Badgeworth
Lloyd,  Rev.  H.  Pentrevogla«,  N.  Wales
Lloyd,  Rev.  John  F.  Ballylany,  Rich-
hill,  Ireland
Lloyd.Rev.  R.W.Wilnecote,  Tamworth
Lloyd-Carevi',  Rev.  H.  Pembrokeshire
Lockwood,  Rev.  John,  Rector  of  King-

ham,  Oxon
Lockwood,  Rev.  Mr.  Coventry
Lockyer,  E.  L.  Esq.  Emmanuel  Coll.

Cambridge
•Lodge,  Rev.  B.
London  Institution,  The
London  Library,  49,  Pall  Mall
»Long,  W.  Esq.  Bath
Losh,  Miss,  Woodside,  Carlisle
tLousada,  P.  M.  Esq.  Merton  Coll.
Low,  Rev.  R.  Ahasenogh,  Ireland
Lowder,  Rev.  C.  F.  Fetbury,  Gloucester-
shire
*Lowe,  John  Wni.  Esq.
Lowe,  Rev.  T.  Oriel  Coll.
Lowe,  Rev.  R.  Misterton,  Somerset
Lowe,  Very  Rev.  T.H.  Dean  of  Exeter
Lowe,  Rev.  R.  F.  Madeira
Lowe,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Wimborne
Lucas,  W.  H.  Esq.  Merton  Coll.
Lumsden,  Rev.  H.  St.  Peter's,  Ipswick
Lund,  Rev.  T.  Morton,  Derbyshire
Lundie,  Rev.  W.  Compton,  Berwick-on-

Tweed
Luscombe,  Rev.  E.  K.  Plymouth
Lush,  A.  Esq.

Lutener,  Rev.  T.  B.  Shrewsbury
Luxmore,  Rev.  J.  H.  M.
Lyali,  Rev.  Alfred
Lyall, Very Rev. W. R. Dean of

Canterbury
Lysons,  Rev.  Samuel,  Hempstead,  Glou-
cestershire


Maberly,  Rev.  T.  A.

•M'Call,  Rev.  E.  Brightsone,  Isle  of
Wight

Macauley,  Rev.  S.  Herrick

Mac-Donnell,  Rev.  J.  Dublin

*Macfarlane,  Rev.J.  D.Frant,Tunbridge
Wells

Machlachlan,  Stewart,  and  Co.  Edin-
burgh

Machlachlan,  Rev.  A.  N.  Campbell,
Kelvedon,  Essex

Maclean,  Rev.  H.  Coventry

Rlaclean,  Rev.  J.  Sheffield

Mackenzie,  L.  M.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll.

tMackenzie,  A.  C.  Esq.  St.  John's
College

Mackinson,Rev.T.C.  Colonial  Chaplain,

New  South  Wales

Maddy,  Rev.  B.  Shrewsbury

Madox,  Wm.  Esq.  154,  Albany  Street,
Regent's  Park

Magdalene  College  Library

M'Clintoch,  G.  F.  Esq.  Bengal  Civil
Service

Mahon,  Rev.  C.  Fort  St.  George,  Ma-
dras

•Major,  Rev.  Dr.  King's  College,
London

M'lver,  Rev.  Wm.  West  Derby

Maitland,  Rev.  S.  R.

Maitland,  Rev.  P.  Blackburn,  Lanca-
shire

Male,  Rev.  Edward,  Birmingham

*M'Laren,  Major,  Portobello,  Greenock

Mallory,  Rev.  G.

Manley,  N,  M.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll.
Camb.

Mann,  Rev.  W.  Moxon,  British  Chap-
lain, Coblentz

Manning,  C.  J.  Esq.

Manning,  Yen.  Hen.  Archdeacon  of
Chichester,  Lavington,  Sussex

Manning,  Rev.  G.  W.

Margetts,  Hev.  H.  Huntingdon

Markland,  J.  H.  Esq.  Bath

Markland,  Thomas Esq.  Manchester

•Marriott,  Rev.  J.  Bradfield,  Reading

Marriott,  Ven.  F  A,  Arrhdeacoa  of
Tasmania

Marsden,  Rev.  A.  Gargrave


•22


SUBSCRIBERS.


Marsh, Rev. II. A. Trinity College,

Cambridge
Marshall,  Rev.  Edward,  C.C.C.
Marshall, Rev. Edward, Cranuell,

Sleaford,  Lincola
Marshall,  Rev.  T. W.  Charlton,  near

Shaftesbury
Marsham, Rev. G. F. J. Allington,

Maidstone
Martin,  Rev.  John,  Sidney  Sussex  Coll'

Cambridge
IMartin,  Rev.  Richard,  Menheniot
Martyn,  Rev.  J.  Exeter
INIason, Rev. A. W. Docking, near

Braintree
•Mason,  Rev.  W.  Normanton
IMassingberd ,  Rev.  F.C .  Orinsby,Spilsby
Master,  \V.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll.
Masters,  Rev.  J.  S.  Greenwich
Matheson,  G.  F.  Esq.
Mathison,  Rev.  W.  C.  Fellow  of  Trinity

Coll.  Camb.
Maunsell,  Rev.  F.  R.  Castle  Island
INIay, Rev. G. Liddington, Swindon,

Wilts.
Mayo,  A.  Esq.  Oriel
*Mayor,  Rev.  C.  Wrentham,  Suffolk
Mayow,  Rev.  M.  W.  Market  Lavington,

Devizes
JMc  Ewen,  Rev.  A.  Semington,  Melk-

sham,  Wilts.
*]Meade,  Rev.  E.  Stratford  on  Avon
*Medwyn,  Hon.  Lord,  Edinburgh
*Mence,  Rev.  J.  W.
IMendham,  Rev.  J.  Clophill,  Beds.
tlNIenet,  John,  Esq.  Exeter  Coll.
Menzies,  Rev.  F.  Hambleden
Meredith,  Rev.R.  F.  Wore. Coll.
Merewether,  Rev.  Francis,  Whitwick,

Leicestershire
•Merivale, Rev. C. St. .John's Coll.

Cambridge
*JMerriman,  Rev.  N.J.  Street,  Somerset
tMerton  College  Library
*Metcalf,  Rev.  W.  L.  Scarborough
♦Metcalfe,  Rev.  W.  Harleston,  Norfolk
M'E;ven,  Rev.  A.  Semington,  Wilts
iMeyritk,  F.  E  q.  Trii.ily  Coll.
M'Glaihen,  !\Ir.  James,  Dublin
Milburnc,  Hcv.  William,  Durham


•Mill,  Rev.  Dr.  Domestic  Chaplain  to

the  Abp.  of  Canterbury
Miller,  Rev.  C.  Harlow,  Essex
Miller,  Rev.  John,  Worcester  Coll.
Milles,  Rev.  T.  Tenterden,  Kent
Millett,  Rev.  II.  D.  near  Marlborough
Milliken,  Rev.  Rich.  Compfon,  Sussex
Millner,  Rev.  W.  Bristol
Mills,  I.  J.  Esq.  Lexden  Park
Mills,  Rev.  T.  Gloucester
xMilward,  Rev.  Hen.  Parlton,  Somerset
Minchin,  O.  II.  Esq.  Dublin
Mittre,  Rev.  Gopal  Chunder,  Bishop's

Coll.  Calcutta
*Moberly,  Rev,  Dr.  Winchester
Moberly,  Rev.  C.  E.  Balliol  Coll.
Money,  Rev.  Kirle  E.  A.
Monro,  Rev.  Edward,  Oriel  Coll.
*Moody,  Rev.  Henry  R.  Chartham,  near

Canterbury
Moore,  Lady  H.  Frittenden,  Kent
Moore, Rev.  A.  Stratton,  Gloucestershire
*Moore,  Rev.  J.  W.  Hordley,  Ellesmere
Moorsom,  Captain,  Lowndes  Square
More, Rev,  R. H.  G. Larden Hall,

Shropshire
Morgan,  Rev.  J.  P.  C.  Llangwyryfor
Morgan,  Rev.  J.

Morrell,  Baker,  Esq.  St.  Giles,  Oxford
Morrell,  F.  Esq.  St.  Giles,  Oxford
*Morrell,  Rev.  G.  K.  St.  John's
Morrice,  J.  Esq  SidclifT,  near  Sidraoulh
Morris,  Rev.  Dr.  Elstree
*Morris,  Rev.  T.  E.  Ch.  Ch.
Morrison,  J.  Esq.  Glasgow
fMorrison,  Rev.  A.  J.  W.
Morton,  Rev.  M.  C.  Exeter  Coll.
Morton,  Mr.  T.  N.  Boston
Moserley,  Rev.  C.  E.  Balliol  Coll.
Mosse,  Rev.  S.  T.  Ashbourn,  Derbyshire
*Mozley,  Rev.  Thomas,  Cholderton
Mozley,  H.  Esq.  Derby
Munby,  Joseph,  Esq.  York
Murray,  C.  R.  Scott,  Esq.  1 1 ,  Cavendish

Square,  London
^lurray,  Rev.  James,  London
Muriay,  F.  H.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.
Murray,  Rev.  G.  E.  All  Souls  Coll.
Mushet,  Robert,  Esq.
Muskett,  Mr.  C.  Bookseller,  Norwich


SUBSCRIBERS.


2y


Neave,  Rev.  II.  L.  Epping
•Needliam, Hon. Mr. Trinity Coll-

Cambridge
Nelson,  Earl,  Trinity  Coll.  Cambridge
*Nevile,  Rev.  Charles,  Trinity  Coll.
Newdigate,  Mrs.  Aubry,  near  Coventry
*New,  Rev.  F.  T.  Christ  Church,  St.

Pancras
*New  York  Society  Library
New  York  Theological  Seminary
Newcastle-on-J'yne  Clerical  Society
♦Newman, Eev. W. J. Tankersley,

Yorkshire
Newman,  Rev.  \V.  S.  Warwick
Newton,  Mr.  Croydon
Nichol,  J.  Esq.  Islington
Nicholl,  Rev.  J.  R.  Streatham
•Nicholls,  Rev.  W.  L.  Clifton,  Bristol
♦Nicholson,  Rev.  P.  C.  Leeds
•Nicholson,  Kev.  Wm.
Nicholson,  Miss  F.  Rochester
*Nind,  Rev.  \V.  Fellow  of  St.  Peter's,

Cambridge
Northcote,  Rev.  G.  B.  Exeter  Coll.
Norman,  Rev.  Hugh,  Dunfanaghy
Norris,  Eev. W.  H. Carlisle, United

States
Norwich,  Dean  and  Chapter  of
Nuans,  Rev.  Thomas,  Leeds
Nutt, Rev. Charles, Tiverton, near

Bath
*Nutt,  Mr.  D.  Bookseller,  Fleet  Street


O'Brien,  S.  August.  Esij.  I31atherwycke
Park,  Wansford

O'Connell,  Rev.  A.  Dublin

Ogilvie,  Rev.  C.  A.  D.D.  Regius  Pro-
fessor of  Pastoral  Theology,  Oxford

Ogle,  J.  A.  M.D.  Clinical  Professor
of  Medicine,  Oxford

Ogle,  Maurice,  Esq.  Glasgow

Ogle,  Mr.  Robert,  Bookseller,  Edin-
burgh

Oldham,  Rev.  G.  R.  East  Dulwich
Grove,  Peckham

Oliverson,  R.  Esq.

Ormandey  and  Son,  Liverpool

fOrmerod,  Geo.  Esq.  Sedbury  Park,
Chepstow

fOrmerod,  Rev.  Thomas  J.  Brasenose
College

Osborne,  J.  Esq.

Oswald,  Alexander,  Esq.

Oswell,  Rev.  Lloyd,  Stoulton,  near
Worcester

Oswell,  Edward  W.  Esq.  Wanstead,
Essex

Ouvry,  Rev.  P.  T.

Owen,  Rev.  E.  Wendover

Oxenham,  Eev,  Nutcombe,  Medbury,
Devon

Oxford  Union  Society

Oxley,  R.  D.  Esq.  Ripon,  Yorkshire


Oakeley, Rev. Sir Herbert, Bart.

Bocking
Oakey,  Mr.  H.  Bookseller,  Preston
O'Brien,  Rev.  II.  Kelleshandra,  Ireland
'O'Brien,  Rev.  Hewitt,  Edgefield  Rec-
tory, Norfolk


Packe, Mrs. J. Richmond Terrace,

Reading
Page,  Rev.  Dr.  Gillingham,  Kent
Page,  Rev.  Cyril
Page,  Rev.  L.  F.  \Voolpit
Paget,  Rev.  F.  E.  Eiford,  Lichfield
Palk,  Rev.  Wm.  Ashcombe,  Devon
Palmer,  Rev.  J.
Palmer,  Rev.  W.  Worcester  Coll,


24


SUBSCRIBERS.


•Palmer,  Rev.  W.  Magd.  Coll.

Palmer,  R.  Esq,

t  Palmer,  G II.  Esq.  Lincoln's  Inn

Panting,  Rev.  L.  Chebsey

Panting,  Rev.  R.  Calcutta

Panting,  T.  Esq.  Pembroke  College

•  Papillon,  Rev., Tohn,Lex(len, Colchester

Pardoe,  Rev.  J.

Parker, C. Esq. 41, Upper Bedford

Place
tPaiker,  Rev.  \V.  Appleton-le-Street
tPaikes,  Rev.  W.
•Parkinson,  Rev.  ,T,  P.  D.C.L.  Magd.

Coll.
Parkinson,  Rev.  R,  Manchester
Parlby,  Rev.  Hall
I'armixses,  Rev.  Geo.  A.  Plymouth
*Parsons,  Rev.  G.  L.  Benson
*Pattescn,  Hon.  Mr.  Justice
•Pattison,  Rev.  Mark,  Lincoln  Coll.
Paul,  Rev.  Charles,  Bath
Paul,G.  W.Esq.  Magd.  Coll.
tPayne,  Cornelius,  Esq.
Payne,  Randolph,  Esq.  Magd.  Hall
Peake,  Rev.  G.  E.  Taunton
tPearse,  T.  Esq,  Magdalen  Coll,
Pearson,  the  Very  Rev,  Hugh  N.  D.D.

Dean  of  Salisbury
Pearson, Rev. Charles, Knebvvorth,

Stevenage,  Herts
Pearson,  Rev.  H.  W.  Guildford
Pearson,  Rev.  F.  T.  Duckmanton,  near

Chesterfield
Peck,  J.  Esq,  Temple  Combe
Peel,  Very  Rev.  J,  Dean  of  Worcester
^Pelly,  Rev.  Theophilus  C.C.C.
iPennell.R.  O.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.
Pennington,  J.  Esq.  Philadelphia
•Penny,  Rev.  Edw.  St.  John's  Coll,
•Perkins,  Rev,  B. R. Wotton-under-

Edge
Perrin,  Rev.  J.  Stockenham
•Perry,  Mr.

Perry,  Mr,  E,  \V.  Bookseller,  Plymouth
Peters, Rev. Henry, St. John Lee,

Northumberland
*Pelheiam,  Mr.  Bookseller, Chancery

Lane,  London
Petley, Rev. Henry, Glyude  Lewes

Sussex


Phelps,  Rev.  H.  D.  Tarrington,  Led-
bury, Herefordshire

Phillipps,  R.  Biddulph,  Esq.  Longworth
near  Ledbury,  Herefordshire

Phillipps,  S.  M.  Esq.

Phillips,  Rev.  G.  Queen's  Coll,  Cam-
bridge

Phillips,  Rev,  E.

*Phillips,  Rlr.  John,  Worthing

Phippen,  Robt,  Esq.  Badgworth  Court,
Somerset

tPigot,  Rev.  I.  T.  Wigan

•Pigott,  Rev,  G,  Bombay

Pigott,  Rev.  J.  R.  Hiighenden  Vicarage,
Bucks,

Pinckard,W'm,Esq,  HandIey,To\vcester

•Pinder, Rev,  J. H. Diocesan Coll.
Wells

Pirie,  A,  jun,  Esq.  Aberdeen

Piatt,  Rev.  George

•Piatt,  T.  P.  Esq,  Liphook,  Hants

Plcmer, Rev. J. J. Swallowfield,
Berks

Plummer,  Rev.  Mat.  Heworth,  Durham

tPIumptre,  E.  H.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll,

Pocock,  Mr,  Bookseller,  Bath

*Pocock,  Rev.  N.  Queen's  Coll.

Pole, Rev.  R. Chandos,  Radbourne,
Derby

*Pole,  E.  S,  Chandos,  Esq,  Radbourne
Hall,  Derby

Pollen,  Rev,  J,  H,  Merton  Coll,

*Ponsonby,  Hon,  Walter

*Poole,  Rev,  J,  Enmore,  near  Bridge-
water

tPooley,  Rev.  M,  Scotter

Pope, Rev.  T.  A.  Jesus Coll, Cam-
bridge

Popham,  Rev,  John,  Chilton,  Hungerford

Porcher,  Charles,  Esq,

Portal,  Melville,  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.

Porter,  Rev.  Chas.  Stamford

Porter,  Henry,  Esq.  Winslade,  Exeter

Poitman,  Rev,  F,  B.  Staple  Fitzpaine,
Somerset

Pountney,  Rev.  H,  Wolverhampton

Povah,  Rev,  J,  V.

Poweil,  Arthur,  Esq,

*Powell,  Chas,  Esq,  Speldhurst

•Powell,  Rev.  Edw,  Arnett


I


SUBSCRIBERS.


25


•Powell,  Rev.  J.  C.

Powell,  John,  Esq.

Powell,  Rev.  Rob.  Worcester  Coll.

Power,  Mr.  Pembroke  Coll.  Camb.

*Powles,  Rev.  R.  Cowley,  Exeter  Coll.

Pownall,  Rev.  C.  C.  B.  IMilton  Ernest

•Prescott,  Rev.T.  P.  Willingale,  Chip-
ping Ongar,  Essex

Presslej-,  Rev.  I\Ir.  Fraserburgh,  Aber-
deenshire

•Prevost,  Rev.  Sir  George,  Bart.  Oriel
Coll.

*Price,  Rev.  B.  Pembroke  Coll.

Prickett,  Rev.  M.  Trinity  Coll.  Cam-
bridge

Pridden,  Rev.  W.  West  Stow

Prideaux, Esq.

tPritchard Rev.  H.  Great  IMarlow

Pritchard,  Rev.  J.  C.  Biistol

Pryor, A. Esq.  Downlodge, Wandsworth

Puckle,  Rev.  John,  Dover

Pym,  Rev.  F,  Plymstock,  Devon


tRadcIiffe,  Rev.  J.  Exeter
RadcJiffe,  Rev.  J.  F.
Randall,  Rev.  H.  G.  Queen's  Coll.
Randall,  R.  W.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.
*Randolph, Rev. E. Jesus Coll.

Cambridge
*Randolph, Rev.  Francis, St. John's

College,  Cambridge
Randolph,  Rev.  G.  Coulsdon,  Croydon
•Randolph,  Rev. Herbert, Abbotsley,

St.  Neot's,  Hunts
Randolph, Rev. Thomas, Hadham,

Herts.
Randolph,  Rev.  E.J.  Dunnington,  York


Rashdall,  Rev.  John,  Exeter
•Raven, Rsv, V. iMagd. College,

Cambridge
•Rawle,  Rev.  R.  Cheadle,  Staffordsliire
Rawlins,  Rev. C. Allerthorpe, Pock-

lington
Ray,  Rev.  H.  W.  Kendal
Rayer,  Rev.  Wm.  Tiverton
Rayleigh, Right Hon. Lord, Terling

Place,  Essex
Redstone,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Jersey
Reece,  Rev.  .Tames,  Tinsley
Reed,  Rev.  Christ.  Tynemouth
Reid,  Rev.  C. 1].  Teynham, near  Sit-

tingboume
•Relton,  Rev.  J.  R.  Tewkesbury
Rew,  Rev.  Chas.
Rhodes, M. J. Esq. Norman Hill,

Dursley
•Rice, H. Esq. Highfield, near

Southampton
*Richavds,  Rev,  J.  L.  D.D.  Rector  of

Exeter  College
Ricliards,  Rev.  E.  T.  Farlington
Richards,  Rev.  George,  Warrington
Richards, Rev, Henry,  Horfield,  near

Bristol
Richards,  Rev.  Upton
Richards,  Rev.  H.  M.  Andover
Rickards,  Rev.  S.  Stowlangtoft.
Ricketts,  Rev.  F.
Riddell, Rev.  J.  C.  B. Harrietsham,

Maidstone
Ridings,  Mr.  George,  Bookseller,  Cork
Ridley,  Rev.  W.  H.  Ch.  Ch.
Ripon, Yeiy Rev. the Dean of,

Dawlish
Ritson,  J.  Esq.  Jesus  Coll.  Camb.
Roberts,  L.  Esq.  Whitewell  Clitheroe,

Lancashire
Robertson,  J. Esq. D.C.L. Doctors'

Commons
•Robertson,  Rev.  J.  C.  Trinity  Coll.

Camb.  Beakesbourne,  nr.  Canterbury
Robertson,  Rev.  J.  C.  University  Coll.
•Robson,  Rev.  J.  U.  Winston,  Suffolk
•Robinson, Rev.  C.  Kirknewton,  near

Wooler,  Northumberland
Robinson,  Rev.  R.  B.  Lytham  Preston,

Lancashire


26


SUBSCRIBERS.


Robinson,  Rev.  C.  W.  Hoton,  Leices

tershire
Robins,  Rev.  S.  Shaftesbury
Robin,  Rev.  Philip  R.  Bolton,  Lanca-

shire
Rochester,  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  of
♦Rodmell,  Rev.  John,  Burford,  Salop
Rodd,  Rev.  C.  North  Hill
Rodwell,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Bond  Street
Rogers,  Edw.  Esq.  Blackheath
Rogers,  Rev.  John,  Canon  of  Exeter
Rohde,  Mrs.  Eleanor,  Croydon
Romney,  Rev.  F.  H.  near  Worcester
Rooke,  Seton  P.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll.
Rooper,  Rev.  Wm.  Abbots'  Ripton
*Rose,  Rev.  H.  H.  Eardington, Bir-
mingham

Rothfield,  Rev.  John  M.

Round,  Rev.  James  F.  Colchester
Rouse,  W.  G.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.

Routh,  Rev.  Martin  Joseph,  D.D.  Presi-
dent of  IMagdalen  Coll.

Rowe,  W.  Esq.  Rockwell,  Tipperary

Rump,  James,  Esq.  Swanton  Morley,
Norfolk

Rusher  and  Johnson,  Messrs.  Booksellers,
Reading

Russell,' J.  Watts,  Esq.  Ham  Hall

Russell,  Rev.  M.  Watts

tRussell,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Aberdeen

Russell,  Rev.  J.  F.  Enfield

Russell,  Rev.  Samuel  Henry

Ryder,  Rev.  G.  D.  Easton,  Hants

♦Ryder,  T.  D.  lisq.  Oriel  Coll.


Salter,  Rev.  John,  Iron  Acton,  Bristol
Sampays,  A.J.  Esq.  Fulham
Sanders,  Uev.  John,  Liverpool
Sanders,  Rev.  Lloyd,  Exeter


*Sandford, Rev. G. B. Prestwich,

Manchester
Sandham,  Rev.  J.  M.  St.  John's  Coll.
Sandilands, Rev.  R. S.  B. Croydon,

Cambridgeshire
Saunders,  Rev.  A.  P.  D.D.  Charterhouse
Saunders,  Rev.  J.  Sidney  Sussex  Coll,

Camb.
Savage,  Rev. W.  St.  Mary's  Church,

Torquay
Sawyer, Chas.  Esq.  Hey  ward  Lodge,

Maidenhead
Scadding,  Rev.  H.  Chaplain  to  Bishop

of  Toronto
Schneider,  Rev.  H.
Scobell,  Rev.  John,  Southover,  Lewes
Scott,  H.  B.  Esq.  Honiton
Scott,  Rev.  John
*Scott,  Rev.  R.  Balliol  Coll.
Scott,  Rev.  W.
tScudamore,  Rev.  W.  E.  Ditchinghim,

Bungay
Selwyn,  Rev.  Wm.  Ely
*Sewell,  Rev.  J.  E.  New  Coll.
Seymour,  Rev.  Sir  J.  H.  Bart.  North-
church,  Herts
Seymour, Rev. Richard, Kinvvarto"»

Alcester
Shadwell,  Rev.  J.  E.  Southampton
Sharp,  Rev.  John,  Horbury
Sharp, Rev.  W.  Addingham,  Cumber-
land
*Sharpe,  Rev.  W.  C.  Marlborough
Sharpies,  Rev.  T.  Blackburn
Shaw,  Rev.  E.  B.  Narborough,  Leices=

tershire
Shaw,  Rev.  Morton,  Hawkhurst,  Kent
tShaw,  Rev.  G.  Fen  Drayton
Shearly,  Rev.  W.  J.
Shedden,  S.  Esq.  Pembroke  College
Shepherd,  Rev.  Samuel
Sheppard,  J.  H.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll.
tSheppard,  W.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll.
Sheppard,  Rev.  F.  Clare  Hall,  Camb.
♦Sherlock, Rev. H. H. Ashton, in

Win  wick
Sherwood,  Rev.  Mr.
*Shillibeer,  Mr.  John,  Oundle
Shiptoii,  Mr.  Thos. Bookseller,  Chel-
tenham


SUBSCRIBERS.


27


Short,  Rev.  T.  Trinity  Coll.
Shortland,  Rev.  H.  V.  Twinstead,  near

Pialsted
Snow,  Rev.  D.  Blandford
Sidgwick,  C.  Esq.  Skipton  Castle,  York-
shire
*Simms,  Rov.  E.  Great  Malvern
Simpson,  Rev.  J.  D.  Sidney  Sussex  Coll.

Camb.
*Simpson,  Rev.  Joseph,  Shrewsbury
Simpson,  Rev.  T.  \V.  Thurnscowe  Hall
Simpson,  Rev.  R.  Mitcham,  Surrey
Sinclair, Rev. John, Chaplain  to  the

Bishop  of  London
Sittingbourne  Reading  Society
Sitwell,  F.  Esq.  Barmoor  Castle, Ber-

wick-on-Tweed
Skinner,  F.  Esq.
Skipsey,  Rev.  Mr.

Skrine,  Rev.  Harcourt,  Sunbury,  Mid-
dlesex
Sladen,  Rev.  E.  H.  M.  Warnford
Siocombe  and  Simms,  Messrs.  Leeds
Smart,  Thomas,  Esq.
Smirke,  Sir  Robert

S.nith,Andrew,M.D. Fori  Pitt, Chatham
fSmith,  Rev.  Dr.  Leamington
Smith,  Rev.  Jeremiah,  Long Buckby,

Northampton
Smith, Rev. E. O. Uulcote, near

Woburn
Smith,  Rev.  John,  Newhaven
Smith,  Rev.  E.  H.  Killamarsh
Smith, Rev. J. C. Castle Cary,

Somerset
Smith,  Rev.  H.  R.Somers,Liltle  Bentley,

Essex
*Smith,  Rev.  John,  Bradford
Smith,  Rev.  Edward,  Bocking
•Smith,  R.  P.  Esq.  Pembroke  College
Smith,  Rev.  Mr.  Greenock
*  Smith,  Rev.  S.  Selby,  Yorkshire
Smith,  S.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll.  Durham
Smith,  Henry,  Esq.
Smith,  Rev.  Joseph,  Trinity  Coll.
Smyth,  Rev. H. Fenor Glebe,  John-
stown, Ireland
Smythe,  Rev.  P.  M.  Tanworth,  Henley

in  Ardcn
Snow,  Rev.  D.  Blandford


Soltau,  Mr.

Somers  Cocks,  J.  S.  Esq.
Somers,  Right  Hon.  Countess
Southby,  Rev.  Dr.  Bulford,  Amesbury
*Sotheby,  Rev.  J.  iMilverton,  Taunton
Southouse,  Rev.  George,  Oriel  Coll.
•Southwell,  Rev.  Geo.  Bristol
Sparkes,  Rev.. Chas.Chesterford,  Saffron

Walden
Sparkes, Rev. E. Hapton Parsonage,

Lon2  Stratton
*Spencer,  Rev.  W.  J.  Slarsten,  Norfolk
Spreat,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Exeter
Spry, Rev. John Hume, D.D. Oriel

Coll.  Rector  of  St.  Mary-le-bone
*Stackhouse's  Library,  the  Trustees  of
Stacy,  Rev.  Thomas,  Cardiff
♦Stafford,  Rev.  J.  C.  Dinton,  Salisbury
St.  Andrew's  University
Stanfield,  Mr.  J.  Bookseller,  Wakefield
Stanley,  Rev.  E.  Rugby
Stanton,  Richard,  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll.
Stalter,  Rev.  Jas.  ^Vorminghall
Staveley,  J.  Bookseller,  Nottingham
Stebbing,  Rev.  Dr.
Steel, Rev. H. W. Mathern, Mon-

mouthshire
Stephens,  Rev.  C.  L.  Kencott
Stephenson,  G.  H.  Esq.
Stevens,  Rev.  M.  F.  T.  Thornbury
Stevens,  Rev.  R.  Culver
Stewart,  Mr.  Pembroke  Coll.  Cambridge
Stewart,  S.  B.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll.
Stewart,  Mr.  5,  Park  Crescent,  Torquay
Stirrop,  H.  G.  Jukes,  Esq.  Worcester

Coll.
Stockdale,  Rev.  Henry,  Misterton
Stockham,  Rev.  J.  H.  Ponighill
*Stonard,  Rev.  Dr.  L^Iverstone
*Storer,  l^ev.  John,  Hawksworth,  Notts
Story,  A.  B.  Esq.  St.  Alban's
Storks,  T.  F.  Esq.  Jesus  College,  Camb.
Stracey,  W.  J.  Esq,  Wells  Theol.  Coll.
•Street,  Joseph,  Esq.  South  Sea  House
Street,  Rev.  A.  W.  Bishop's  College,

Calcutta
Street,  Rev.  J.  C.  Plymouth
•Sturrock,  Rev.  W.  Diocese  of  Calcutta
Sunter,  Mr.  Bookseller,  York
Sunidge,  Rev.  Dr.


28


SUBSCRIBERS.


Sutherland,  Dr.  A.  J.  Ch.  Ch.

Sutton,  Rev.  K.  S.  Exeter  Coll.

•Swainson,  Rev.  C.  L. Crick, Northamp-
tonshire

*Swainson,  Rev,  C.  A.  Fellow  of  Christ's
Coll.  Cambridge

Swan,  —  Esq.  Clifton

Swan,  Rev.  11.  Bredon

Swayne,  Rev.  R.  G.  Slymbridge,
Gloucestershire

*Swete,  Rev.  B.  Cork

Swete,  Rev.  William,  Babbicombe,
Torquay

Sykes,  G.  M.  Esq.  Downing  College,
Cambridge

fSymons,  Rev.  B,  P.  D.D.  Warden  of
Wadham  Coll.


•Tait,  Rev.  Dr.  Head  Master  of  Rugby

School
Talbot,  Hon.  and  Rev.  W\C.  Ingestrie,

Lichfield
Talbot,  Rev.  G.Bristol
Tarbutt, Rev. Arthur, St. Mary's,

Reading
+Tate,  Rev.  Frank,  University  Coll.
Tatham,  Rev.  Arthur
Taylor,  A.  Esq.  Queen's  Coll.
Taylor,  Miss,  London  Road,  Brighton,

(C/irt/sosfom)
Taylor,  Rev.  M.  J.
Taylor,  Rev.  Joseph,  Stockport


Taylor,  Rev.  Robert,  Leeds

"'Tennant,  Rev.  W^m.

Temple,  The Hon. the  Society  of  the

Inner
*Theodosius, J. H. Christ's  College,

Cambridge
Thomas,  Rev.  C.  N.  St.  Cohimba's
*Thomas,  Rev.  R. Bancroft's  Hospital,

Mile  End
Thomas,  Rev.  R.  Blue  Hayes
Thompson, Rev. E. H. St. James's,

U'estminster
'Thompson,  Rev.  Sir  H.  Bart.  Fareham
*  J'hompson,  Rev.  W.  H.  Trinity  Coll.

Cambridge
Thompson,  Captain,  R.  N.  Hayes'  Com-
mon, Kent
Thomson,  Rev.  George,  Abbot's  Anne,

Andover
•Thornton,  H.  S.  Esq.  Battersea  Rise
tThornton,  Rev.  F.  V.  Bisham,  Marlow
Thornton, Rev. W. J. Llanwarne,

Hereford
Thornton, Rsv. Spencer, Windover,

Bucks
Thorold,  iMr.  W.  Barnstaple
*Thorp,  Rev.  Henry,  Topsham
*ThurIow,  Rev.  John,  Durham
Thwaytes,  Rev.  J.  Carlisle
Thynne,  Rev, Lord  Chas. Lonorbridce

Deverill,  W'arminster
tTickell,  G.  Esq.  University  Coll.
Tidswell,  Rich.  Esq.  Upper  Clapton
Timins,  Rev.  Henry
Tindale,  J.  Esq.  Huddersfield
Tindal,  H.  Esq.  Brasenose  Coll.
*  Todd,  Rev.  J.  H.  D.D.Trinity  College,

Dublin
Tomkyns,  Rev.  John,  Greenford
Tomlinson's  Library, Newcastle-on-Tyne
Tonge,  George,  Esq.
Toovey,  Mr.  Bookseller,  London
*Totlenham,  Rev.  E.  Bath
Tovvnsend,  Rev.  George,  Prebendary  of

Durham
*Townsend,  Rev.  G.  F.  Brantingham,

Yorkshire
Trenow,  Rev.  F.  W.  near  Worcester
•Tripp,  Rev.  H.  St.  Columba's,  Navan,
Ireland


SUBSCRIBERS.


29


Tristram,  B.  Esq.  Lincoln

•Tritton, Henry, Esq. 54, Lombard

Street,  London
Trollope,  Rev.  Arthur,  4,  Falcon  Street,

London
Troughton,  Rev. J. E. Harwardune,

Flintshire
•Trowers,  Rev.  Walter
*Truro  Theological  Library
Tucker,  Rev.  ]\L  jun.
Tucker, \Vm. Esq. Coryton Park,

Axminster
Tufnell, Rev.  G. Worming  ford, near

Colchester
»Turbitt,  Rev.  W.  Halford
Turner, Rev. John, Burwash Hunt

Green,  Sussex
Turner,  Rev.  Chas.  Kidderminster
Turner,  Rev.  J.  Stourbridge
Turner,  Rev.  J.  F.  Exeter
Turner,  Sharon,  Esq.
Turner,  Rev.  Thomas,  Exeter  Coll.
Turner,  Rev.  W.  H.  Norwich
Tute,  Rev.  J.  S.  Cleckheaton
Twiss,  A.  O.  Esq.  Boyle,  Ireland
Twopeny,  Rev.  D.  S.  Sittingbourne
•Tyler,  Rev.  James  Endell,  Rector  of

St.  Giles  in  the  Fields
Tyndale,  Rev.  H.  A.  Westerham,  Kent
Tyrrell,  T.  Esq.
Tytler,  Patrick  Eraser,  Esq.


Upton, Rev,  J. S.  Wentworth,  Rotherham
tUtterton,  Rev.  J.  S.  Oriel  Coll.


Vaux,  Rev.  Bowyer, Collegiate  Church,

Wolverhampton
*Vaux,  Rev.  William, Prebendary  of

Winchester
Venables, Rev. E. Hurst  Monceaux,

near  Brighton
Vernon-Ilarcourt,  Rev.  L.
Vicars,  Rev.  M.  Exeter
Vickerman,  C.  R.  Esq
Vickers, Yen. Archdeacon, Chetton,

Bridgenorth
Vickery,  Mr.  Bristol
Vigne,  Rev.  H.  Sunbury,  Rliildiesex
Vincent,  Rev.  Thomas,  Wantage
*  Vizard,  John,  Esq.
Vogan,  Rev.  T.  S.  L.
Vyvyan,  Rev.  V.  F.  Withiel,  Cornwall


Underbill,  Mr.  E.  B.  Oxford
University  of  Glasgow


Wainwright,  Rev.  Dr.  Boston,  U.  S.  A.
Wagner, A. Esq. Trinity College,

Cambridge
Walford,  Rev.  Oliver,  Charterhouse
Walford,  Rev.  Wm.  Hatfield,  Essex
Walker,  C.  H.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll.
Walker,  E.  Esq.  Lincoln  Coll.
Walker, Rev. G. A. Alverthorpe,

Wakefield
Walker,  Rev.  T.
Walker,  Rev.  Thos.  Clipstone,  Maiket

Harborough
Walker,  Rev Queen's  Coll.  Camb.


30


SUBSCRIBERS.


'Walker,  Rev.  Thos.  Christ's  Coll.  Cam-
bridge

Wall,  Rev.  Henry,  Vice-Principal  of
St.  Allan  Hall

Wallace,  Rev.  Geo.  Canterbury

Wallas,  Rev.  John,  Queen's  Cull.

Wallinger,  Rev.  W.

Wallis,  Mr.  H.  Bookseller,  Cambridge

Walter,  J.  Esq.  Exeter  Coll.

Walter,  Rev.  Ed«v.  Langton  Rectory,
Horncastle

Walter,  Rev.  Ernest,  Tachbrook

Walter,  Rev.  Keats

Walthanistow  Library

*  Walton,  Rev.  Dr.  Birdbrook
Ward,  Right  Hon.  Lady,  Himley  Hall
Ward,  Rev.  R.

♦Ward,  Rev.W.  P.  Compton  Vallance,

Dorchester
Ward,  Rev.  W.  C.  Brome,  Suffolk
Wardroper,  Rev.  Charles,  Gloucester
Warren,  Rev.  Z.  S.
*Warter,  Rev.  J.  Wood,  West  Tarring,

Sussex
Wason,  James,  Esq.  Stroud
Watkins,  Rev.  Frederick
Watkins,  Rev.W.  Chichester
Watkins,  Rev.  Henry,  South  Mailing,

Lewres
Watson,  Joshua,  Esq.
Watson, Rev. J. D. Guilsborough,

Northampton
Watson,  Rev.  Alex.  Cheltenham
Watson,  Rev.  Geo.  Etheiley,  Durham
Watts, Rev.  John,  Tarrant Gunville,

Blandford
Watts, Richard, Esq. Clifton House,

Workington

*  Watts,  Rev.  William
*Wayett,  Rev.  W.  Pinchbeck

*  Weare,  Rev.  T.  W.  Westminster
Webb,  J.  W.  Esq.  Clare  Hall,  Camb-

bridge
*Webster,Rev.  William, Christ'sHospital
•Weguelin, Rev. \V. Stoke, near

Arundel
♦Wells, Rev. F. B. Woodchurch,

Kent
Wells,  F.  F.  Esq.  Cambridge
Wells,  Rev.W.  St.  Martin's,  Liverpool


•West,  Hon,  and  Rev.  R.  W.  Baliiol

Coll.
Westmacott,  Rev.  Horatio,  Chastleton,

Oxon.
Westhorp,  Rev.  John,  Sudbury
Wheailey, C.  B.  Esq. Mirfield, near

Dewsbury
Wheeler,  Mr.  Bookseller,  Oxford
White,  P.  Esq.
White,  Rev.  W.  S.
White,  Rev.  R,  M.  Aveley,  Essex
White, Rev. R. Longridge, near

Pres/on
White,  Mr.  W.  Pall  Mall
White,  Rev.  H.  M.  New  Coll.
Whitford,  Rev.  R.  W.  Madras
*Whitfield,  Rev.  G.  T.
Whitmore, Mr. Bookseller, Man-
chester
*VVickham,  Rev.  R.  Twyford,  Hants
tW^ickens,  Rev.  H.
Wight,  Isle  of,  Clerical  Library
Wigson, Rev. W. Coggeshall, near

Kelvedon
*WiIberforce,  Rev.  H.  East  Farleigli,

Kent
Wilberforce,  Ven.  Robert,  Archdeacon

of the East Riding of Yorkshire,

Burton,  Agnes,  Driffield
Wilde, Rev. S. D. Fletching. near

Uckfield
Wilding,  Rev.  W.  H.  Worcester
Wilkin,  Rev.  Mr.  Bole,  Gainsborough
Wilkins, Rev. J. M. Southwell,

Notts.
Wilkinson,  Rev.  M.  Butterwick
Wilkinson,  Chas, Esq.  Trin.  College,

Cambridge
Williams,  Hugh,  Esq.  London
Williams,  Rev.  E.  T.  Exeter  Coll.
♦Williams,  Rev.  G.  King's  Coll.  Cam-
bridge
♦Williams,  Matthew  D.  Esq.
Williams,  Sir  John,  Bart.  Bodelwyd-

dan
Williams,  Rev.  I.  Trinity  Coll.
Williams,  Rev.  F.  D.  Great  Wishford,

Wilts
Williams,  Rev.  J.  West  Hackney
"Williams,  Robert,  Esq.


I


SUBSCRIBERS.


31


Williamson, Rev. R. H. Ilurworth,

Newcastle-on-Tyne
*  Willis,  Rev.  A.  Ludlow
Willis, H.  Esq.  Catherine  Hall,  Cam-
bridge
Willock,  Rev.  W.  W.
Wilshere,  Rev.  E.  Madras
Wilson,  Rev.  John,  Trinity  Coll,
*Wilson, Rev. R. F. Hursley, near

Winchester
Wilson,  Robt.  Esq.  Magdalen  Hall
Wilson,  Thomas,  Esq. Bath
Wilson, Rev. Charles T. Magdalen

Hall
Wilson,  Walter,  Esq.  Bath
Wilson,  J.  H.  Esq.  Wadham  Coll.
Winchester,  The  Dean  and  Chapter  of
tAVinchester, Rev. W. Ashelworth,

Gloucester
tWingfield,  Rev.  William
Winterbottom,  J.  Esq.
Wise,  J.  A.  Esq.  Clayton  Hall,  Sta-

fordshire
Wise,  Rev.  Henry,  Offchurch
Wither, Rev. W. B. Otterbourne,

Hants
*Withers,  Rev.  Geo.  Calcutta
Witts,  Rev.  Edw.  F.  Upper  Slaughter,

Gloucestershire
Wix,  Rev. E. Archdeacon of  New-
foundland
Wood,  C.  Esq.  Univ.  Coll.  Durham
Wood,  Rev.  G.  Newcastle
Wood,  Rev.  H.
Wood,  Rev.  H.  O.

Wood,  Rev.  J.  R.  The  College,  Wor-
cester
Wood,  Rev.  R.  Broughton,  Manchester
Wood, Rev. Jas. Settrington, near

Malton
Wood,  Mrs.  W.  Tunbridge  Wells
Woodcock, H. Esq. Bank House,

Wigan
Woodford,  Rev.  Russell,  Coalpit  Heath,

Bristol
Woodgate,  Rev.  Henry  A.  St.  John's

College
Woodham,  C.  B.  Esq.  St.  John's  Coll.

Cambridge


Woods,  Rev.  G.  H.  West  Dean,  Chi-
chester
Woods,  Rev.  P.  Dublin
•Woodward,  Alex.  Esq.  Catherine  Hall,

Cambridge
•Woodward,  Rev.  F.  B.
Woodward,  Rev.  J.  H.  Bristol
tWoollcombe,  E.  C.  Esq.  Oriel  Coll.
WooUcombe, Rev.  Wm. W. Exeter

College
WooUcombe, Rev. Louis, Exeter

College
WooUcombe,  G.  Esq.  Ch.  Ch.
WooUey,  F.  Esq.
t  Wordsworth, Rev. Dr. Canon of

Westminster
•Wordsworth,  Rev.  Chas.  Warden  of

Trinity  College,  Perth
Wordsworth,  Rev. C.  F.  Gillingham,

Dorset
Worthy,  Rev.  C.  Exeter
Wray,  Rev.  Cecil,  Liverpool
Wrench, Rev, Frederick, Stowting

Rectory,  Ashford
Wright,  Rev.  J.  A.
Wright,  Rev.  T.  B.  Wrangle  Vicarage,

near  Boston
Wright,  Rev.  H.  P.  St.  Peter's  College,

Cambridge
Wright,  Rev.  T,  P.  Hackney
Wright.  Rev,  R.  R.
Wyalt,  Rev.  W.Snenton,  Notts.
Wylde, Rev. T. Bellbroughton,

Worcestershire
Wylde,  Rev.  C.  E.  Sheerness
•  VVynter,Rev.Dr.  President  of  St.  John's

Coll.
•Wynter, Rev. J. C. St. John's
College


:V2  SUBSCRIBERS.

Yard,  Rev.  J.  Havant  *YouDg.  Rev.  P.  Ilursley,  near  Win-

Yates,  Dr.  Brighton  Chester

Yates,  Rev.  E.  T.  Aylsham,  Norfolk

Young,  Rev.  R.  G.  Zordiffe,  T.  Esq.


•»♦  The  Publishers  of  the  Library  of  the  Fathers  respectfully  inform  the
Subscribers,  that  they  cannot  be  ordinarily  responsible  for  delivering  the  Volumes
at  Subscribers'  price  beyond  three  months  after  the -time  of  Publication  ;  and  re-
quest that  any  change  of  residence  of  a  Subscriber  may  be  made  known  to  them,
and  that  they  may  receive  directions  in  what  manner  the  Volumes  are  to  be  for-
warded in  continuation.


Jfti


There  seems  to  be  ground  for  thinking,  that  many,  who  wished  to
become  Subscribers  to  the  Original  Texts,  have  not  distinctly  specified
that  wish.  It  is  requested  that  these,  or  any  other  corrections,  may  be
sent  to  the  Publishers.


BIBLIOTHECA  PATRUM  ECCLESI^  CATHOLIC.'E

QUI ANTE OCCIDENTIS  ET  ORIENTIS  SCHISMA  FLORUERTJNT.

Price  to  Subscribers  7s. To  Non-Subscribers  9s.
S.  AUGUSTINI  CONFESSIONES.

3  vols.  8vo.  11.  lis.  6d. To  Non-Subscribers  21.  2s.
S.  JOANNIS  CHRYSOSTOMI HOMlLIyE  IN MATTHEUM.
Textum ad Fidem Codicum 1\ISS. et Versionum emendavit, praecipuum
Lectionis  Varietatem  adscripsit,  Annotationibus  ubi  opus  erat,  et  novis  Indicibus
instruxit  F.  FIELD,  A.M.,  Coll.  SS.  Trin.  apud  Cant,  nuper  Socius.

Price  to  Subscribers  9s. To  Non-Subscribers  12s.
S.  CHRYSOSTOMI H0MILL4: IN  S.  PAULl EPIST.  PIUMAM  AD

CORINTHIOS,  GR.^CE.

Price  to  Subscribers  8s. To  Non- Subscribers  10s.  6d.
S.  CHRYSOSTOMI  HOMILl^  IN D.  PAULI  EPISTOLAM  SECUN

DAM  AD  CORINTHIOS.

Ad  Fidem  Codicum  MSS.  et  Versionum  Antiquaiura  diligenter  castigata.


The  remainder  of  the  Text  of  S.  Chrysostom's  Homilies  on  S.  Paul's  Epistles
will  follow  in  due  course  ;  Collations  having  been  obtained  for  the  whole  at
considerable  expense.


BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD.


COMMENTARY  ON  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,

FOR  THE  UNLEARNED.


Many  readers  of  Holy  Scripture  slill  feci  the  want  of  a  Com-
mentary, fitted  at  once  to  draw  out  the  practical  and  devotional
teaching,  the  true  living  import  of  the  Text,  and  to  give  them  helps
enough  to  carry  tlicui  through  the  hard  passages  they  meet  with,  so
far  as  can  be  done  without  pretending  to  more  knowledge  than  we
possess.

The  sort  of  exposition  which  seems  desirable,  is  one  which  will
answer,  in  some  degree,  the  following  conditions  : —

1.  It  should  rather  give  the  result  of  acquaintance  with  the
original  languages,  than  involve  the  reader  in  critical  enquiry.

2.  It  should  be  based,  as  its  groundwork,  upon  our  admirable
received  Version,  wrought  as  that  is  the  very  substance  of
devotional  minds  amongst  us.  Still,  wit!  uit  undutifulness,  any
additional  meaning  may  be  supplied,  which  the  original  may
contain,  beyond  what  is,  or  perhaps  can  be,  expressed  by  any
single  rendering  ;  or  another  rendering  may  occasionally  be
suggested,  according  to  the  precedent  of  our  existing  marginal
renderings.  As  far,  however,  as  this  should  be  done,  it  would  be
the  desire  of  the  writers  neither  to  perplex  the  English  reader,  nor
to  unsettle  any  as  to  our  present  Version,  which  they  themselves  so
much  reverence.

3.  It  should  embody,  as  far  as  may  be,  or  remould  the  valuable
expositions  of  older  writers,  (especially  the  Fathers,)  rather  than
set  down  different  explanations,  side  by  side,  (after  the  manner  of
Catenaj,)  or  (ordinarily  speaking)  discuss  them.

4.  It  should  be  confined  to  one  or  two  leading  spiritual  inter-
pretations (where  these  are  called  for)  relating  to  Christ  and  His
Body  the  Church,  or  the  soul  of  each  individual  member  of  Christ's
mystical  bod}-,  rather  than  give  manifold  spiritual  meanings.  For
these,  although  all  contamed  in  the  depths  of  Holy  Scripture,  (as
the  prismatic  colours  are  in  light,)  and  all  beautiful,  still  rather
perplex  a  reader  who  has  not  been  accustomed  to  look  for  them,
or  to  consider  how  they  may  be  evolved  out  of  that  original  light.  In
attempting  this,  the  writers  would  hope,  (following  the  Fathers,)
to  take  as  their  guides,  as  far  as  may  be,  leading  interpretations
in  Holy  Scripture  itself.

5.  But  chiefly,  such  an  exposition  should  endeavour,  in  all  good
faith,  to  introduce  nothing  of  the  writer's  own  into  Holy  Scripture,
but  to  evolve  some  portion  of  the  meaning  of  Holy  Scripture  itself;
to  bring  truths  not  into,  but  out  of,  Holy  Writ.  And  this  the
writers  would  desire  to  do,  in  the  full  conviction,  that  all  truth
does  indeed  lie  in  Holy  Scripture,  although  individuals  must
necessarily  be  unable  to  see  more  than  the  skirts  of  it ;  and  they
therefore  defer  to  the  wisdom  of  those  before  them,  and  of  the
Church  collectively,  not  as  any  thing  additional  to  Holy  Scripture,
but  as  derived  from  Him  Who  is  the  Wisdom  of  God,  teaching
them  to  understand  Holy  Scri})ture,  through  that  Holy  Spirit  Who
inspired  it.


In  this  attempt  their  hope  is,  not  to  involve  the  reader  in  con-
troversy, but,  on  the  contrary,  to  bring  back  whom  they  may,  from
restless  and  often  irreverent  controversies  and  speculations,  to  the
deep,  pure,  calm  waters  of  the  river  of  God,  hoping  that  by  reverent
contemplation  and  study  of  it,  we,  in  God's  good  time,  may  find
the  full  truth,  which  now  is  too  often  divided  among  us  ;  see  its
reality,  which  in  disputation  too  often  eludes  men's  grasp ;  and  be
refreshed  by  it,  or  rather  by  Him  Who  is  the  Truth,  instead  of  being
dried  up  by  controversies  about  it.

They  are  also  convinced,  that  the  great  bulwark  against  modern
scepticism  lies  in  the  reverent  study  and  unfolding  of  the  meaning
of  Holy  Scripture  itself;  that  Holy  Scripture  so  studied  does  carry
with  it  the  conviction  of  its  own  Divinity  :  and  that  thereby  alone
(with  corresponding  life)  can  the  Faith  be  maintained  against  the
unbelief  of  "  the  last  days."

Those  engaged  in  this  work  would  wish,  if  they  might,  to  ask  for
the  prayers  of  their  brethren  ;  hoping  that  this  will  be  charitably
construed,  not  as  though  they  or  their  work  were  worthy  of  them,
but  as  a  confession  of  their  own  insufficiency  to  carry  out  what  yet
they  hope  has  been  suggested  to  them  for  the  good  of  some  at  least
of  their  brethren.


It  is  therefore  proposed  to  publish  a  series  of  Commentaries  on
the  several  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  written  for  the
purpose  by  difierent  hands,  and  edited  by  the  Rev.  J.  Keble,  M.A.
the  Rev.  E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.  the  Rev.  Is.  Williams,  B.D.  and  the
Rev.  C.  Marriott,  M.A.

The  text,  headings  of  chapters,  marginal  notes,  &c.,  will  be
printed  (in  the  upper  part  of  the  page),  as  in  our  ordinary  Bibles :
the  additional  matter  will  be  in  the  notes.

It  is  hoped  that  some  advantage  may  be  gained  from  the  close
attention  that  may  be  given  by  each  writer  to  one  or  two  Books  at
a  time,  when  free  from  the  distraction  of  a  whole  Commentary  in
prospect.  At  the  same  time  the  Editors  will  endeavour  to  secure
such  consistency,  as  may  prevent  any  serious  perplexity,  arising  fi-om
difference  of  expositions  in  different  parts.

The  size  will  be  demi-quarto :  the  type  of  both  the  text  and
notes  of  such  size  as  to  be  readily  legible.

It  will  probably  be  as  much  as  a  year  before  any  portion  of
the  work  can  be  in  the  Press,  and  several  years  will  be  required  for
completing  it ;  but  each  part  published  shall,  as  far  as  possible,
form  a  whole  in  itself,  consisting  of  some  book  or  books  of  Holy
Scripture  entire  (except  perhaps  the  book  of  Psalms.)

The  Editors  desire  to  make  the  work  as  little  expensive  as  is
consistent  with  durability  and  facility  of  reading;  and  since  the
expense  to  purchasers  will  very  much  depend  upon  the  number
printed,  they  would  be  glad  to  receive  beforehand  the  names  of
subscribers. These  will  not  be  published.

Letters  should  be  addressed  to  Mr.  Masson,  2,  Bear  Street,  Oxford.


BAXTERj  PRINTER,  OXFORD.


^r


1


.*» ».  ui_U - ka»


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


I3S
