Morals on the Book of Job, Vol. 2 (Parts III-IV) (Pope Gregory I (the Great); translated by Rev. James Bliss, 1845)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (moralsonbookjob03igoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

TO  THB
MORT RRTKRVItD FATRBR IN OOD

WILLIAM

LORD ARCHBISHOP  OF OANTBftBUBT,

PRIMATB OP ALL BNOLAND,
fCHlMBRLT  RMIOH  rKOTBlWOK  OT  DITtlfITT  Iff  THS  ONfynMfTY  OP  OXFORD.

THIS  LIBRARY

OF

ANCIKNT  BISHOPS,  FATHERS,  DOCTORS,  MARTYRS,  CONFESSORS,
OF  OHRISrS  HOLY  CATHOLIC  CHURCH,

IS

WITH HIS ORACB's PBRMI88I0N

RR8PBCTFULLT INSORIBBD,

IN  TOKSN  OP

RRTBRRKCR FOR HIS PBB80N AND 8ACRBD OFFICB,

AltDOP

6RATITUDB FOR HIS BPI800PAL KINDNR88.

¥

MORALS


02f


THE BOOK OF JOB,


S. GREGORY THE GREAT,


THE  FIRST  POPE  OF  THAT  NAME,


TRANSULTSD,


WITH NOTES AND INDICES.


IN  THREE  VOLUMES.


VOL II. PARTS  III.  AND  IV.


OXFORD,

JOHN HBMRT PARKER;

F. AND J. RIVINGTON, LONDON.

1845.

C  o7Z.35


BAXTER,  PRINTER,  OXFORD.

CONTENTS.


THE THIRD  PART.

BOOK  Xt.

In  whieh  the  twelfth  chapter,  from  the  fixtii  Terse,  the  thirteenth,  and  the
drat  four  Tereet  of  the  fourteenth,  are  explained,  a  different  style  heing
adopted  for  the  time.  Page  1

BOOK  XII.

Wherein  after  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Joh  has  heen  ez-
pltthied,  heginning  at  the  fifth  Terse,  the  fifteenth  chapter  entire  Is
explained  for  the  most  part  in  a  moral  sense.  45

BOOK  XIII.

Wherein  is  contained  a  short  exposition,  moral  and  tjrpical,  of  the  sixteenth
and  serenteenth  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Job.  87

BOOK  XIV.

\^lierein  8.  Gregory  unfolds  the  historical,  allegorical,  and  moral  sense  of
the  eighteenth  and  nineteentii  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Job. 118

BOOK  XV.

In  which  there  is  a  brief  explanation  given  of  the  twentieth  and  twenty-
first  chi^ters  of  the  Book  of  Job.  1 78

BOOK  XVI.

After  going  through  the  twenty-seoond  and  twenty- third  chapters  of  the
Book  of  Job,  and  the  twenty-fourth  to  the  middle  of  rerse  twenfy  with
a  brief  explanation,  he  brings  the  Third  Part  to  a  dosow  285

IV  CONTENTS.

THE  FOURTH  PART.

BOOK  XVII.

What  rmuaiiui  of  the  tweuty-fourth  chapter  beginning  firum  the  middle  uf
verse  20,  together  with  chapters  twenty-five  and  twenty-six  entirci  he
sets  forth  chiefly  in  a  moral  sense.  27d

BOOK  XVIII«

Contains  the  (exposition  of  the  twenty-seventh  and  twenty-eighth  cliapters
of  the  Book  of  Job,  to  the  twenty-first  verse  and  half  through  it,  after
manifold  senses.  317

BOOK  XIX.

The  interpretation  being  carried  on  firom  the  last  part  of  the  twenty-first
verse  of  the  twenty- eighth  chapter  to  the  twenty-first  verse  of  the  (bllow-
ing  chapter  exclusive,  various  meanings  are  laid  open  not  less  learnedly
than  piously,  chiefly  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church.  394

BOOK  XX,

The  five  concluding  verses  of  chapter  twenty-nine  of  the  Book  of  Job  are
more  largely  exjdoined,  together  with  the  whole  of  chapter  thirty,  chiefly
on  the  subject  of  heretics  and  carnal  persons  distressing  the  Church.  446

BOOK  XXI.

The  thirty-first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job  is  explained  to  verse  twenty-
four,  exclusive,  and  chastity,  humility,  and  mercifulness  being  first
commended,  many  particulars  are  especially  taught  relative  to  the
avoiding  of  the  oooadon  of  sin.  51 3

BOOK  XXII.

All  that  remained  of  chapter  thirty-one  of  the  Book  of  Job  is  explained,
and  submissiveness  of  mind,  and  moderation,  patience,  charity,  and
earnest  interest  for  those  under  our  charge,  are  especially  conmiended.

546

f*


PART III.


BOOK  XI.

In  which  the  twelfth  chapter,  from  tho  sixth  Yerse,  the  thirteenth,  and  the
fint  fonr  verses  of  the  fourteenth,  are  explained,  a  different  stjle  hebg
adopted  for  tiie  time.

1.  Though  in  a  long  work  variableness  of  style  ought  not i.
to  be  a  matter  of  blame,  yet  lest  any  should  censure  me  for
change  in  my  way  of  expressing  myself^  in  the  Epistle  which
was  prefixed  to  these  books^  I  gave  the  reasons'  why  I  never  i  pi.  A.
brought  the  third  part  of  this  Work  up  to  a  likeness  andjj^^*^*
accordance  with the  others  by  amending  it. And  while
these  are  omitted,  there  is  this  added  further,  that  the  inter-
pretation of  this  same  paft  begins  from  the  verse  in  which  it  is
said,  Tfie  tabernacles  of  robbers  have  plenty^  S^c.  and  reaches
down  in  the  handling  thereof  to  that  which  is  written^  Their  Job  S4,
sweetness  shall  be  through  tlte  tcorm,  8fc.  which  in  fact^'
includes  so  much,  that  it  is  impossible  all  should  be  comprised
in  one  volume,  except  it  be  reduced  to  great  brevity;  and
so  let  any  one  that  is  free  from  other  employments  read  the
other  parts  that  are  given  in  a  multiplied  form,  but  for  him,
who  has  no  time  to read  with diligent  application,  the
shortness  of  this  part  may  be  to  his  mind,  wherein  we  do
not  so  much  deliver  what  we  have  in  our  mind,  as  mark  what
there  is  to  deliven Therefore,  whereas  I  have  herein  left
many  things  such  as  they  were  received  fi-om  me  by  word  of
mouth,  take  kindly,  reader,  this  change  of  style,  in  that  to
people  eating  often  the  same  meats,  a  diflerence  in  the  mode
of  cooking  is  acceptable. But  as  you  take  the  several  parts
to  read,  make  it  your  business  ever  to  recall  to  mind  that
original  of  the  case  which  I  have  set  forth ; how  that  both

VOL.  If.  B

2 Job  repreunU  our  Lord  and  His  Body;  he  judges  rightly.

Job  is,  by  blessed  Job,  who  is  called  ^  Grieving/  are  denoted  the
'^  suflTerings  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Body,  i.  e.  the  holy  Church,
and  that  his  friends  bear  the  likeness  of  heretics,  who,  as  we
have  often  said  already,  whilst  they  strive  to  defend,  only
offend  God;  and  those,  whilst  they  falsely  abet,  forcibly
wound  the  souls  of  Saints.  Yet  not  that  in  all  which  they  say
they  are  void  of  understanding  in  knowledge  of  the  truth,
but  for  the  most  part  they  blend  what  is  wise  with  what  is
foolish,  and  the  true  with  the  false;  that  while  they  first
propose  somewhat  on  tlie  side  of  truth,  they  may  easily  draw
aside  into  falsehood.  And  hence  too,  what  the  fi-iends  of
blessed  Job  utter  is  one  while  worthy  of  contempt,  and  at
another  time  deserves  admiration,  which  same  the  holy  man
whilst  sometimes  discarding  he  condemns  it,  sometimes
approving  admits,  and  turns  to  the  account  of  righteousness
even  the  veiy  things,  which,  though  right,  are  not  by  them
rightly  delivered ;  and  so  he  scorns  them,  when  they  scorn
his  destitution,  and,  placed  upon  a  dunghill  in  the  body,  he
shews  on  how  high  a  summit  of  virtue  he  is  seated  within,
when  he  records  that  this  life's  riches  are  nought,  which  he
describes  to  be  abundantly  bestowed  even  on  the  sons  of
perdition,  saying ;

Ver.  6.  The  tabernacles  of  robbers  have  plenty^  and  they
provoke  God  with  boldness;  when  He  hath  given  all  into
their  hand.
ii.  2.  It  is  easy  for  a  man,  at  the  time,  to  despise  riches,  when
he  has  them,  but  it  is  hard  to  hold  them  worthless,  when  he
lacks  them.  Hence  it  is  clearly  shewn,  how  great  a  con-
tempt of  earthly  things  was  lodged  in  the  breast  of  blessed
Job,  who  then  declares  that  all  is  nought  which  the  lost
enjoy  in  plenty,  at  the  time  when  he  had  lost  every  thing.
Thus  he  says,  TIte  tabernacles  of  robbers  have  plenty^  and
they  provoke  Ood  with  boldness;  for  it  very  commonly
happens  that  bad  men  set  themselves  up  the  more  against
God,  even  the  more  they  are  enriched  by  His  bounty
contrary  to  their  desert,  and  they  that  ought  to  be  impelled
by  good  gifts  to  better  conduct,  are  rendered  worse  men  by
the  blessings.

8.  But  we  have  to  make  out  how  they  are  called  ^  robbers,*
whereas  it  is  thereupon  added,  When  He  hath  given  all  into

God  permits  jiutly^  what  man  dae$  wrongfiUly.  9

their  hands.  For  if  tbej  are  robbers,  then  they  took  by  Boos
force,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  (}od  is  no  abettor  of  those
that  use  force.  In  what  sense  then  does  He  Himself  bestow
what  they  that  are  robbers  carry  off  by  wicked  means  ?  We
are  to  know  then  that  what  Almighty  Ood  in  His  mercy
vouchsafes  is  one  thing,  and  another  thing  what  in  Hid
wrath  He  suffers  men  to  have ;  for  that  which  robbers  do
contrary  to  right  the  Equal  Dispenser  no  otherwise  than
justly  permits  (o  be  done  by  them,  that  both  the  man  who  is
let  to  rob  being  blinded  in  mind  may  increase  his  guilt,  and
thathe  who  suffers  from  his  robbing,  may  now  in  the  mischief
thereof  be  chastised  for  some  sin,  which  he  had  been  guilty
of  before.  For  look,  a  man  taking  post  in  the  pass  of  a
mountain  lies  in  wait  for  travellers  passing  by ;  now  he  that
is  taking  his  journey  perchance  has  done  some  wickedness
at  one  time  or  another,  and  Almighty  God  requiting  him  his
evil-doing  in  the  present  life,  and  giving  him  into  the  hands
of  tlie  lier-in-wait,  suffers  him  either  to  be  spoiled  of  his
goods,  or  even  to  be  killed.  And  so  what  the  robber  un*
justly  aimed  at,  the  same  the  Equitable  Judge  justly  per-
mitted  to  be  done,  that  both  the  one  might  be  repaid  what
he  had  done  contrary  to  justice,  and  the  other  might  one
time  or  another  receive  the  worse  chastisement,  by  whose
voluntary  deed  of  atrocity  Almighty  Ood  brought  just
vengeance  for  sin  upon  the  head  of  anothet*.  He  is  cleansed
that  suffers  the  wrong:  in  the  case  of  him  that  does  the
wrong  guilt  is  accumulated ;  that  either  from  the  very  depth
of  wickedness  he  may  one  day  be  brought  back  to  repent-
ance, or  else  be  visited  with  eternal  damnatiot),  aggravated
in  proportion  as  he  was  borne  with  for  long  in  his  sin.
With  the  first  He  deals  in  mercy  that  he  may  bring  his  sins
to  an  end,  with  the  other  in  severity  that  he  may  greatly  add
thereto,  unless  he  betake  himself  to  repentance ;  in  the  one
evil  deeds  are  wiped  away  while  he  suffers  violence,  in  the
other  they  are  accumulated  while  he  offers  it  Therefore  it
is  meet  and  right  that  Almighty  God  suffer  that  to  be  done
which  He  forbids  to  be  done,  that  by  the  very  same  act,
whereby  He  now  awaits  and  bears  with  the  unconverted  for
long.  He  may  one  day  smite  them  the  worse.  Therefore  it
is  rightly  said.  The  tabernacles  of  robbers  are  in  plenty^  and

b2

4 Bad  men  hold  spiritual  gifts  as  robbers,  yetfivm  Ood.

Job  13,  thejf  provoke  God  tcith  boldness ; when  He  giveth  all  into
^-T-^  their  hand; for  what  the  wicked  take  away,  He  does  Him-
self give  them,  Who  might  have  withstood  them  in  iheir
rapine,  if  He  had  been  minded  to  pity  them.

4.  Yet  this  may  likewise  be  understood  of  spiritual  things.
For  it  very  often  happens  that  some  have  gifts  of  teaching
vouchsafed  them,  yet  they  are  swoln  with  the  same,  and  have
a  desire  to  appear  great  by  comparison  with  others.  And  to
*  provoke*  Almighty  God  is  to  be  lifted  up  amongst  our
neighbours  on  the  score  of  His  gifts.  Which  same  also  are
not  unjustly  called  ^  robbers/  in  that  whilst  they  speak  what
they  never  do,  they  take  away  the  words  of  the  righteous  to
serve  the  tura  of  their  own  speech.  But  because  tliose  very
words  heavenly  Grace  vouchsafes  to  some  persons,  whose
lives  notwithstanding  it  leaves  in  a  course  of  wickedness,  in
themselves  they  are  *  robbers  /  but  yet  the  good  that  is  theirs
they  have  gotten  from  above. It  goes  on ;

Yer.  7, 8.  Bui  a^k  now  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach  Vtee;
and  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they  shall  tell  thee. Or  speak
to  the  earthy  and  it  shall  answer  thee:  and  thefislies  qf  the
sea  shall  declare  unto  thee.
iii. 5.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  *  the  beasts,*  but  men  of
slow  parts ;  and  what  by  ^  the  fowls  of  the  air/  but  those  that
are  skilled  in  high  and  sublime  truths  ?  For,  of  ^  the  beasts/
Pik68,  i.  e*  the  dull  of  sense,  it  is  written ;  Thine  animals^  shall
I  y^  ^  dwell  therein. And  forasmuch  as  tliose,  who  have  minds  for
sublime  themes,  soar  among  the  words  of  the  Redeemer,  it  is
Mat.  18,  written,  So  that  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and  lodge  in  the
^^' branches  thereof. And  what  by  ^  the  earth/  saving  men
whose  taste  is  for  earthly  things  ? Hence  too  it  is  said  to  the
Oen.  8,  first  man  on  his  forsaking  tho  things  of  heaven,  Dust  thou
^^* art,  and  unto  dust  shall  thou  return. What  are  wo  to  un-
derstand by  ^  the  fishes  of  the  sea/  but  tlie  inquisitive  ones
Ph.  8, 8.  of  this  world,  concerning  whom  the  Psalmist  saith,  TAe  fish
qf  the  sea,  that  pass  through  the  paths  qf  the  seqs. Which
same  busy  themselves  in  large  researches  into  things,  as  it
were  in  undiscoverable  floods. Now  what  all  these  teach
upon  being  so  interrogated,  he  adds,  saying,

Ver.  9.  W7io  knoweth  not  in  all  these  that  the  hand  of  the
Lord  hath  wrought  this  ?

Every  tori  of  creature  bears  ioitneu  to  God. .  5

6.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms ;  *  Whether  you  ask  the  Book
dull  of  understanding,  or  persons  full  of  the  loftiest  subjects^ *  '
or  those  devoted  to  earthly  way s,  or  the  men  busied  with
investigations  that  belong  to  this  world,  all  of  them  acknow-
ledge Ood  to  be  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  with  one  consent
agree  about  His  Power,  though  they  do  not  witli  one  consonf

five  in  submission  to  it  For  thai  which  the  righteous  man
speaks  by  his  way  of  living  too,  that  the  unrighteous  man
generally  is  constrained  to  own  concerning  Ood  by  his  voide
alone,  if  not  otherwise ;  and  it  comes  to  pass  that  evil-doers,
by  attesting  Him,  do  homage  to  the  Creator  of  all  things.
Whom  by  their  deeds  they  rebel  against,  in  that  Him,  Whom
they  have  dared  to  fight  against  by  their  lives,  they  Cannot
deny  to  be  the  Creator  of  all  things.  Yet  this  same  may  also  Lit.
be  understood  to  good  purpose  after  the  mere  form  of  the
letter  alone ;  in  that  every  creature,  when  it  is  looked  at,  as  it
were  utters  a  voice  of  its  own,  bearing  witness  by  that  mere
form  which  it  has.  We  ask  *  the  beasts,*  or  *  the  fowls  of  the
air,* '  the  earth,'  or  ^  the  fish,*  whilst  we  vieW  them,  and  these
answer  us  with  one  accord,  that  *  the  Hand  of  the  Lord  hath
wrought  all  things,*  in  that  whilst  they  present  their  lineaments
to  our  eyes,  they  bear  witness  that  they  are  not  from  them-
selves. For  by  Xha  more  circumstance  that  they  are  creAtod,
by  the  figure  they  present,  they  render  as  it  were  the  voice
of  confession  to  their  Creator,  Who,  as  He  created  all  things,
likewise  ordained  how  they  should  be  conducted.  Hence  it  *  .
is  added,

Ver.  IOl  /»  Whoee  Hand  is  the  soul  qf  every  living  thing ^
and  the  spirit  of  all  Jlesk  of  man,  ,

7.  For  by  the  *  Hand*  Power  is  denoted.  Thus  *  the  soul  v.
of  every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind,*  is  in  the
Power  of  Him,  from  Whom  it  has  its  being,  that  He  Himself
should  appoint  in  what  condition  it  should  be.  Who  vouch-
safed that  to  be,  which  was  not.  But  by  ^  the  soul  of  every
living  thing*  may  be  denoted  the  life  of  beasts.  Now  Al-
mighty God  quickens  the  soul  of  beasts  to  the  extent  of  the
corporeal  senses,  but  man*is  spirit  He  draws  out  to  a  spiritual
understanding ;  and  thus  ^  in  His  Hand  is  the  soul  of  every
linng  thing  and  the  breath  of  all  flesh  of  men,*  in  that  both

in  the  one,  He  bestows  this  power  on  the  soul  that  it  should

0 Meanhigt  of  the  word  ^  spirit* Many  ienses  by  one  brain.

Job  13,  give  life  to  the  flesh,  and  in  the  other  He  quickens  the  soul

^^' to  this  degree,  that  it  should  attain  to  the  understanding  of

eternity. But  we  are  to  bear  in  mind  that  in  Holy  Writ

*  the  spirit  of  man'  is  wont  to  be  put  in  two  wajrs. For

sometimes  *  the  spirit'  is  put  for  the  soul,  somedmes  for

spiritual  agency. Thus  ^  the  spirit'  is  put  for  the  soul,  as  it

4olm is  written  of  our  own  Head  Himself,  And  He  bowed  Hie

I  «ptri-  Head^  and  gave  up  Hie  Spirits For  if  the  Evangelist  had

^"!> called  any  thing  else  *  the  spirit'  saving  the  soul,  then  surely

upon  that  spirit  departing,  the  soul  would  have  remained.

Moreover,  the  term  ^  spirit'  is  used  for  spiritual  agency,  as

Pi.  104,  where  it  is  written,  Who  maketh  Hie  Angele  epiriie^  Hie

^' Minietere  a  Jlaming  fire. For  Preachers  are  occasion^y

called  ^  Angels,'  i.  e.  ^  bearers  of  tidings,'  in  Holy  Writ,  as

Mai.  3,  where  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  The  prieefe  lipe  keep  know-

ledge,  and  they  eeek  the  law  from  hie  mouth :  /or  he  ie  the

*Y.An.  AngeP  qf  the  Lord  of  Hoeie. Thus  Almighty  God  *  maketh

^  ^ His  Angels  spirits/  in  that  He  changeth  His  Preachers  into

spiritual  men. But  in  this  passage,  if  by  ^  the  soul  of  every

living  thing,'  the  mere  life  of  the  body  is  denoted,  by  the

'  spirit  of  all  flesh  of  man,'  there  is  set  forth  the  agency  of  a

spiritual  understanding. It  goes  on ;

Yer.  11.  The  ear  trieth  words,  and  the  mouth  qf  the  eater
eavour.
Yi.  8.  There  is  scarce  a  person  that  is  ignorant  that  the  five
senses  of  our  body,  viz.  of  seeing,  hearing,  tasting,  smelling,
and  touching,  in  all  their  operations  of  perceiving  and  dis-
criminating derive  the  power  of  perception  and  discrimination
from  the  brain.  And  whereas  there  is  but  one  judge  that
presides  within,  viz.  the  percipient  faculty  of  the  brain,  yet
by  their  proper  passages  he  keeps  five  senses  distinct,  God
causing  grout  marvels,  so  that  neither  the  eye  should  hear,  nor
the  ear  see,  the  mouth  take  in  scent,  the  nose  taste,  nor  the
.  hands  smell ;  and  whereas  all  things  are  determined  by  the
one  faculty  of  the  brain,  yet  no  one  of  the  senses  can  do
aught  but  what  it  received  by  the  Creator's  appointment.
And  so  by  these  corporeal  and  external  arrangements  we  are
left  to  gather  the  interior  and  spiritual  ones ;  so  that  by  that
which  is  open  to  the  eye  in  us,  we  ought  to  pass  on  to  tlie
secret  tiling  that  is  in  us,  and  escapes  our  eyes. For  we  are

One  fVisdam  g%ve$  various  powers. Hearinff  is  not  tasHng. 7

to  obseire^  that  whereas  there  is  one  Wisdom,  it  dwells  hi  Book

one  man  less,  in  another  more. To  one  it  gives  this  function^ ^

to  another  that ;  and  in  the  manner  of  the  brain,  it  uses  our-
selves like  so  many  senses,  that  though  in  itself  it  bears  no
dissimilitude  to  itself,  yet  by  us  it  is  ever  working  different
and  dissimilar  operations,  so  as  for  this  man  to  receive  the  gift
of  wisdom,  and  that  the  gift  of  knowledge ;  one  to  have  kinds
of  tongues,  and  another  the  grace  of  healing.

0.  But  in  these  words  wherein  blessed  Job  saitb,  7%e  ear
trieih  wordsy  and  the  mouth  of  the  eater  savour^  he  seems
likewise  to  imply  something  about  the  Elect  and  the  damned;
for  the  words  of  wisdorti,  which  tlie  children  of  perdition  heari
the  Elect  not  only  hear  but  taste  too,  that  that  should  have
a  savour  for  them  in  the  heart,  which  conveys  no  sound  to
the  minds  of  the  damned,  but  only  to  their  ears.  For  it  is
one  thing  to  hear  food  named  only,  and  another  thing  to
taste  of  it  also ;  then  the  Elect  so  hear  of  the  meat  of  wisdom,
that  they  taste  of  it,  in  that  what  they  hear  is  full  of  relish
to  them  in  their  very  marrow  *  from  love ;  but  the  knowledge  of  i  mednl-
the  reprobate  extends  only  to  the  cognizance  of  the  sound,  so  ^^^
that  they  hear  indeed  of  virtues,  but  yet  from  coldness  of
heart  they  know  nothing  what  a  relish  Uiey  have.  By  which
same  words  blessed  Job  condemns  the  inexperience  of  his
friends,  and  the  presumption  of  all  that  are  puffed  up  for
their  learning  in  wisdom,  in  that  it  is  one  thing  to  know
somewhat  concerning  God,  and  another  to  taste  with  the
mouth  of  understanding  the  thing  that  is  known.  Therefore
it  is  well  said.  Doth  not  the  ear  try  words  f  and  the  mouth
of  the  eater  savour  f  As  if  it  were  said  to  the  presumptuous
in  plain  words,  *  The  words  of  instruction,  which  came  to
you  only  so  far  as  to  the  ear,  to  me  touch  the  mouth'  of  un-
derstanding likewise  in  the  inward  savour/  But  because  a
weak  age,  even  when  it  hath  a  right  sen{(<B,  should  not  spring
forth  with  incautious  haste  to  preach,  it  is  rightly  added ;

Yen  12. With  the  ancient  is  wisdom ^  and  in  length  of
days  understanding,

10.  For  these  sayings  are  set  fast  in  the  root  of  wisdom, vii.
which  by  continuance  in  living,  are  also  made  strong  by  the
practice  of  deeds. But  because  there  are  many  to  whom  at
•  <  Fauoet,'  which  meaiif  the  part  of  the  mouth  toward  the  throat.

8 Th9  Penonal  and  the  Inherent  fVisdom  and  Power  of  God.

Job  iSyonce  longer  life  is  giveD,  and  yet  no  grace  of  wisdom  vouch-
-^^  safedyil  is  further  shewn  with  propriety  on  whose  decision  the
gifts  themselves  depend,  whilst  it  is  added ;

Yer.  13.  With  Him  ie  windom  and  etrength :  He  lutth
counsel  and  under elanding.
viii. 11.  We  not  unfitly  interpret  these  words  of  the  Only-
begotten  Son  of  the  Supreme  Father,  so  as  to  undersUnd
Him  to  be  Himself '  the  Wisdom  and  Suength  of  God.* For
Paul  also  bears  testimony  to  our  interpretation,  in  the  words,
1  Cor. Chriet  the  Power  qf  Qod  and  the  Wisdom  qf  God. Who  is
Jobni,  ever  *  with  Him,*  in  that,  In  the  Beginning  wa^  the  Word,
>• and  the  Word  was  with  Ood,  and  the'  Word  was  God. But
Ood  ^  hath  counsel  and  understanding ;'  ^  counsel,'  in  that
He  orders  His  own  matters,  ^  understanding,'  in  that  He  knows
ours. By  the  naming  of  ^  counsel'  may  also  be  denoted  the
mere  delay  of  secret  judgment  alone,  as  that  He  is  sometimes
slow  in  striking  offenders,  not  because  the  sin  of  bad  men  is
not  seen,  but  that  their  sentence  of  condemnation,  which  is
delayed  for  the  practising  of  penance,  may  seem  as  if  out  of
counsel  slow  to  issue  forth. And  so  what  the  public  declara-
tion one  day  reveals  without,  that  lay  hid  with  the  Almighty
Lord  in  counsel  before  the  world  began. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  14.  J[f  He  break  doten,  there  is  none  that  can  build

again :  {/*  He  shut  up  a  man,  there  is  none  that  can  open.

i3^* 12.  Almighty  Ood  ^  breaks  down'  the  heart  of  man,  when

He  forsakes  it ;  He  <  builds  it  up,'  when  Ho  fills  it For  Ho

does  not  destroy  man's  soul  by  consummation  of  war,  but  by

withdrawing  Himself  fix>m  it;  in  that  when  it  is  left  to  itself,

it  wants  nothing  to  its  own  ruin. Whence  it  commonly

happens,  that  when  the  heart  of  the  hearer,  in  due  of  his  sins,  is

not  filled  with  Almighty  Ood's  grace,  it  is  in  vain  that  he  is

outwardly  admonished  by  the  preacher.  For  every  mouth  that

speaks  is  but  mute,  if  He  does  not  utter  a  voice  in  the  heart

within.  Who  inspires  the  words  that  are  admitted  into  the

Pi.  137,  ears. Hence  the  Prophet  saith.  Except  the  Lord  build  the

house,  they  labour  in  vaifi  that  build  it. Hence  Solomon

f^^  saith.  Consider  the  work  qf  Qod;  for  who  can  set  him  right

* ' whom  He  liath  despised? Nor  is  it  strange,  if  the  preacher

is  not  attended  to  by  the  reprobate  soul,  since  it  sometimes

happens  that  the  Lord  Himself,  in  the  things  which  Ho

Nam  can  alter  Godt$  (opening  and  tkidting,  9

speaks,  is  withstood  by  the  tempers  of  those  that  withstand  Book
Him.  For  hence  it  is  that  Cain  could  be  admonished  even  ^^'
by  the  voice  of  God,  yet  could  not  be  changed,  because  as
due  to  the  sin  of  his  eril  heart,  within  God  had  already  for-
saken the  soul,  to  which  outwardly  He  addressed  words  td
serre  for  a  testimony.  And  it  is  well  added.  If  He  shut  Up
a  man^  there  is  none  thai  can  open;  in  that  every  man,
whereinsoever  he  does  wrong,  what  else  does  he  but  make
for  himself  a  prison-house  of  his  own  conscience,  that  guilti-
ness of  soul  may  oppress  him  even  though  no  man  accuse
him  without?  And  when  by  the  judgment  of  God  he  is  left
in  the  blindness  of  his  evil  heart,  he  is  as  it  were  shut  up
within  himself,  that  he  may  never  find  a  place  of  escape,
which  he  never  deserves  to  find.  For  it  often  happens  that
thero  are  persons  who  long  to  quit  their  bad  practices,  but
because  they  are  weighed  to  the  ground  by  the  burthen  of
diem,  being  shut  up  in  the  prison-housC  of  bad  habit,  they
are  unable  to  go  forth  of  themselves.  And  there  are  some
that  anxiously  desiring  to  visit  their  own  offences  with
punishment,  turn  into  worse  offences  what  they  reckon
themselves  to  be  doing  aright ;  and  it  is  brought  to  pass  in
a  lamentable  way,  that  what  they  take  for  their  going  out
they  find  to  be  their  imprisoning.  Thus  the  reprobate  Judas,  Matsf,
when  he  inflicted  death  upon  himself  to  spite  sin,  was  brought  '
to  the  punishment  of  eternal  death,  and  repented  of  sin  in  a
more  heinous  way  than  he  had  committed  sin.

13.  Therefore  let  it  be  said.  If  He  shuiteih  up  a  man^  theffs  Exod.4f
U  none  thai  can  open. For  as  no  man  withstands  His'^'  ^'''
bountifiilness  in  calling,  so  no  one  withstands  His  justice  in
forsaking ; and  so  for  God  to  '  shut  tip*  is,  not  to  open  to
those  that  are  shut  up  ; and  hence  it  is  said  to  Moses  con-
cerning Pharaoh,  /  wiU  liarden  his  Iteari. For  God  is  said  Gen.  87,
to  harden  the  heart  in  executing  justice,  when'He  does  not''
soften  the  reprobate  heart  in  bestowing  grace. And  so  He
*  shuts  up'  the  man,  whom  He  leaves  in  the  darkness  of  his
own  practices. For  Isastc  desired  to  open  this  shutting  up  ib.  35,
to  his  first-bom  son,  when  he  endeavoured  to  set  him  before  *°<^  94.
his  brother  in  blessing  him. But  the  son  whom  the  father  de-
sired, the  Lord  rejected ;  and  him,  whom  the  Lord  desired,  the
father  blessed  even  against  his  will ;  that  he,  who  had  sold  his

10 Oodfi  ffifli  and  influencn  rtaew  caul  change  man.

Job  13,  birthright  to  his  brother  for  a  meal,  might  not  get  the  blessing

-  J^*  of  the  first-born,  which  he  had  relinquished  through  a  glut-
tonous  appetite ;  who,  whilsl  that  aiming  at  earlhly  objecU,
following  afler  transitory  things,  he  desired  lo  inherit  the

Heb.i8,  blessing,  was  rejected.  For  he  found  no  place  for  repenl*
ance^  though  he  sought  it  with  lean;  for  tears  have  no
fruit,  which  are  spent  on  regretting  with  sighs  Ihings  destined
to  perish.  And  so  Isaac  could  not  open  even  to  his  son,
whom  Almighty  Ood  by  a  just  judgment  shut  up  in  the
prison-house  of  his  evil  heart. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  15.  If  He  withholdeth  the  waters j  all  things  are
dried  up. If  He  sendeth  them  out^  theg  will  overturn  the
earth.
X. 14.  If  ^  water*  be  understood  of  knowledge  for  preaching,  as

ProY.  when  it  is  written.  The  wortk  qfa  man^s  mouth  are  as  deep
'  '  waters^  and  the  well-spring  of  wisdom  as  an  overflowing
brook ;  when  ^  water  is  withheld,  all  is  dried  up,*  in  that  if
the  knowledge  of  the  preacher  is  withdrawn,  the  hearts  of
those  that  might  have  flourished  in  eternal  hope,  are  forth-
with ^  dried  up,*  that  they  should  remain  in  hopeless  barren-
ness, whilst,  in  love  with  transitory  things,  they  care  not  to
look  for  those  which  shall  abide.  But  if  by  the  term  of
^  water*  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  denoted,  as  it  is  said

John  7,  by  the  voice  of  Truth  in  the  Gospel,  He  that  helieveth  in  Me,

^*  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers
of  living  water ;  in  which  place  the  Evangelist  immediately
added.  But  this  spake  He  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that
believe  in  Him  should  receive ;  a  suitable  sense  is  laid
open  in  these  words  wherein  he  saith,  Behold  He  withholdeth
the  waters,  and  all  things  are  dried  up  ;  in  that  if  the  grace
of  the  Holy  Spirit  be  withdrawn  from  the  hearer's  mind,
the  sense  is  at  once  '  dried  up,*  which  already  through  hope
seemed  to  be  green  in  the  hearer.  But  forasmuch  as  he
does  not  mention  ^  water'  but  ^  waters,*  by  the  plural  designa-
tion, he  refers  to  the  sevenfold  grace  of  spiritual  gifts,  inas-
much as  every  one  is  filled,  so  to  speak,  with  as  many  waters
as  he  is  replenished  with  gifts,  of  which  it  is  fitly  added,
Also  if  He  sendeth  them  out,  they  will  overturn  the  earth.
15.  For  what  is  ^  the  earth'  taken  for,  but  the  sinner,  to

■  Lat. whom  it  is  said  in  sentence,  Dust^  thou  art,  and  unto  dust

Terra

Orac€  giv€n  turns  mm  to  eontrarU$.  1 1

9haU  thou  return  t Thus  the  earth remains  imtnoreable  Booh

when  the  sinner  scorns  to  obey  the  precepts  of  the  Lord^ ^

when  he  erects  the  neck  of  pride^  and  shuts  the  mind^s  eyes
to  the  light  of  tmth.  But  whereas  it  is  written,  Hii /eetUwh-Bf
stoodf  and  the  earth  was  moved;  in  that  when  Truth  isfxilT'
rooted  in  the  heart,  the  immoreableness  of  the  mind  is  stirred;
if  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  bestowal  from  above,  is
infused  according  to  the  roice  of  the  preacher,  instantly  the
earth  is  *  overturned,*  in  that  the  obduracy  of  the  guilty  soul
is  changed  from  the  stubbornness  of  its  immobility,  that
it  should  afterwards  bow  down  itself  in  weeping  to  the
precepts  of  the  Lord,  as  much  as  it  aforetime  erected  the
neck  in  swelling  high  against  the  Lord.  For  you  may  see
that  (he  earth  of  the  human  heart,  when  the  water  of  Ood^s
blessing  is  poured  upon  it,  afterwards  gladly  bears  injurill,
which  before  it  outrageously  inflicted;  afterwards  even  gives
its  own,  whereas  before  it  even  laid  hands  on  the  things  of
others;  afterwards  tortures  the  flesh  by  practising  abstinence,
whereas  before,  in  the  plenishing  of  the  flesh,  it  let  itself
loose  in  the  deadly  gratifications  of  gross  sensualities;  after-
wards loves  its  very  persecutors,  whereas  before  it  refused  to
love  even  those  that  loved  itself.  When,  then,  the  human
soul  watered  by  Ood*s  bounty  begins  to  act  contrary  to  what
was  its  wont,  *  the  earth  is  overturned,'  in  that  the  part  is
put  down,  which  before  reared  itself  on  high,  and  the  face
is  lifted  upwards,  which  was  before  weighed  down  deeply
below.

16.  It  seems  well  in  illustration  of  this  point  to  bring
fom'ard  Paul  as  one  among  many. Who  when  he  was  on
his  way  to  Damascus  armed  with  letters  against  Christ,  being  Aett  9,
on  his  journey  watered  with  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  ^'
was  changed  on  the  spot  from  that  bloodthirsty  purpose  which
he  had,  and  afterwards  received  those  strokes  in  Christ's
behalf,  which  he  was  journeying  with  the  intention  of  in-
flicting upon  Christians ;  and  he  who  before,  when  living  after
the  flesh,  strove  to  deliver  tho  Saints  of  the  Lord  over  to
death,  is  afterwards  rejoiced  to  oflTer  the  sacrifice  of  hii
flesh  for  the  life  of  the  Saints.  Those  cold-blooded  pnrposei^
of  cruelty  are  turned  into  the  warmth  of  pity;  and  he  that l  Tim.
aforetime  was  a  blasphemer  and  a  persecutor,  afterwards  '


Digitized  by


Google —


12 Omverpm  of  Si.  Paul. Ephraim  a  *  cake  unturned.'

Job  18,  becomes  a  bumble  and  compassionate  preacher. He,  who

-7 — accounted  it  great  gain  to  him  to  slay  Christ  in  His  Disciples,

•  Aou  9,  now  holds  *  Christ  to  be  his  life,  and  to  die  gain  ;*  and  so  when

PhU  1  ^®  ^  sendeth  out  the  waters,  the  earth  is  overturned,'  in  that

St* the  mind  of  Paul,  the  moment  he  received  the  grace  of  the

Holy  Spirit,  altered  the  fixture  of  his  stubbornness  and  cruelty.

Contrary  to  which  the  Lord  utters  the  complaint  against

Hmm  Ephraim,  by  the  Prophet,  saying,  Ephraim  is  a  cake  under

1  V.*M.  the  ashei^  not  turned. For  a  cake  under  the  ashes,  that  hath

ashes  upon  it,  lays  the  cleaner  side  flat  to  the  ground,  and  has

the  upper  side  the  fouler,  in  proportion  as  it  carries  the

ashes  upon  it. And  so  with  the  mind  that  harbours  earthly

thoughts,  what  else  does  it  carry  upon  itself  but  a  load  of

ashes  ? But  if  it  will  be  ^  turned,'  the  clean  surface,  which  it

\^  kept  doH'nwards,  it  brings  back  to  the  top,  when  it  has

shaken  off  the  ashes  that  it  had  upon  it If  therefore  we

shake  off  from  the  mind  the  ashes  of  earthly  thoughts,  as  it

were  we  ^  turn  the  cake  under  the  ashes,'  that  that  bent  of

our  mind  may  henceforth  go  to  the  rear,  which  the  ashes  of

grovelling  thought  before  overlaid,  and  the  clean  face  come

to  the  top,  that  our  right  bent  of  mind  may  not  henceforth

be  surcharged  with  the  weight  of  earthly  desire.' Which  we

can  never  do,  except  we  be  bedewed  with  the  grace  of  the

Holy  Spirit,  in  that  when  Almighty  Ood  ^sendeth  out  the

waters,  they  will  overturn  the  earth.' It  proceeds ;

Ver.  16.  With  Him  is  strength  and  wisdom.

^^* 17.  A  little  above  it  had  been  said,  With  Him  is  wisdom

and  strength ;  but  now  it  is  said,  With  Him  is  strength  and

wisdom. For  because  Almighty  Ood,  when  in  the  mjrstery

of  piUfulness  He  was  made  Man,  first  gave  tho  lesson  of

mildness,  and  afterwards  at  the  Judgment  He  shews  what

strength  Ho  is  of;  it  is  rightly  done  that  in  the  place  above

Wisdom  is  mentioned  before  Strength,  wh^n  (lie  thing  is

spoken  of  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of  the  Father,  With  Him

is  Wisdom  and  Strength.  But  forasmuch  as  when  He  cometh

to  judge,  He  will  appear  in  the  terribleness  of  His  power,

and  the  damnqd  being  cast  off,  will  manifest  to  His  Elect  in

His  everlasting  kingdom,  how  fie  is  ^  the  Wisdom'  of  tho

Father,  it  is  rightly  said  in  the  subsequent  sentence,  that

with  Him  is  first  ^  strength'  and  then  ^  wisdom.' Thus  in  tho

Wudom  before  Sirenjih  now^  Strength  before  Wiedom  at  last.  13

first  words  wherein  he  saith.  With  Him  i$  wisdom  and  Book
strength;  he  plainly  shews^  that  what  He  taught  in  mildness -


how  to  believe,  in  the  power  of  the  Judgment  He  will
exhibit  in  terribleness.  But  in  the  subsequent  words,  wherein
He  sailh,  With  Him  is  strength  and  wisdom  ;  He  makes  it
clearer  than  the  day,  that  He  first  destroys  reprobate  men  in
the  Jud(pient  by  dint  of  power;  and  afterwards  shines  into
the  souls  of  the  Elect  with  the  perfect  light  of  the  eternal
kingdom.  But  bccaitse  before  the  day  of  final  Judgment,
He  never  ceases  daily  to  judge  the  deeds  of  mortal  men  by
His  secret  awards,  He  comes  back  to  that  which  is  done  in
this  present  time,  where  it  is  added ;

Yer.  16, 17.  He  knoweth  both  the  deceiver  and  deceived^
He  bringeth  councilors  to  a  foolish  end,  and  the  judges  to
dulness.  ^

18.  Whereas  every  man  that  strives  to  deceive  his  neign-  xii.
hour  is  wicked,  and  *  IVuth'  saith  to  the  wicked,  /  neoer  Matt  7,
knew  you,  depart  frofn  Me  ye  that  work  iniquity;  in  what
sense  is  it  said  here,  that  *  the  Lord  knoweth  the  deceiver  ?'
But  forasmuch  as  God^s  'knowing*  sometimes  means  'B.xi
taking  cognizance,  sometimes  His  approving,  He  at  once
knows  a  wicked  man,  in  that  in  taking  cognizance  He
judges  him,  (for  He  would  never  judge  any  wicked  man,  if
He  did  not  take  cognizance  of  him,)  and  yet  He  does  not
know  a  wicked  person,  in  that  He  does  not  approve  his
doings. .  And  so  He  both  knows  him,  in  that  He  finds  him
out,  and  knows  him  not,  in  that  He  doth  not  acknowledge
him  in  a  likeness  to  His  own  Wisdom.  As  it  is  said  of  any
truthful  man,  that  he  does  not  know  falsehood.  Hot  because,
irhen  any  thing  false  is  said  even  by  others,  he  is  too  blind
to  find  fault  with  it,  but  this  very  falsehood  he  at  once  knows
in  the  tracing  out,  and  knows  not  in  the  affection  of  the
heart,  so  as  not  to  do  that  himself,  which  he  condemns  the
doing  of  in  others.  And  it  may  ofl^n  happen  that  persons,
busy  in  artfol  contrivances,  spread  the  nets  of  their  wicked-
necU(  for  another's  life-,  and  when  he,  iii  ignorance  of  ii,  is
seen  to  be  taken  by  the  snares,  perchance  it  is  questioned
whether  such  things  arc  seen  from  above,  and  ln%n  wonder,
why  it  is,  if  God  does  see  them,  that  He  suffers  them  to  be
done. But  He  knoweth  the  deceiver  and  the  deceived. For

c


14 OpM  Judgment  deferred^  Counsettan  turned  to  folly.

Job  19/  He  knovreth  the  deceiver/  in  that  generally  He  sees  former
-fj—  sins  of  his,  and  by  a  just  judgment  suffers  him  to  fall  into
others  also. ^  He  knoweth  the  deceiver/  in  that,  left  in  the
hand  of  his  pwn  doings,  He  forsaketh  him,  that  he  may  be
Apoo. precipitated  into  worse  ones,  as  it  is  written.  He  thai  is
93, 11.  iiiy'ii^^  iff^  j^iff^  j^  unjust  stilly  and  he  that  isJUthy  let  him  be
>  Lat  JUthy^  still. Moreover  ^  He  knoweth  the  deceived'  too,  in
j^ that  men  often  do  evil  things  that  they  know,  and  therefore
they  are  suffered  to  be  *  deceived,*  so  as  further  to  fall  into
evil  things  which  they  know  not However,  this  is  used  to
be  done  to  ihe  deceived  sometimes  for  their  purifying,  some-
times as  the  beginning  of  vengeance.

10.  He  bringeth  counsellors  also  to  a  foolish  end^  when
they  do  any  thing  good  even,  with  no  good  purpose,  but  are
ig  after  the  recompensing  of  a  temporal  reward.  For,  if
lie  Only-begotten  Son  of  the  Most  High  Father,  because
hereby,  that  He  was  made  Man,  He  preached  eternal  truths,
is  therefore  called  the  Angel  of  great  counsel^  we  rightly
interpret  ^  the  counsellors,'  those  preachers,  who  furnish  the
*  counseV  of  life  to  their  hearers.  But  when  any  preacher
preaches  the  truths  of  eternity  for  this,  that  he  may  acquire
temporal  gains,  assuredly  he  is  ^  brought  to  a  foolish  end,'  in
that  be  is  aiming  to  reach  that  point  by  laborious  effort,
whence  he  ought  to  have  fled  in  uprightness  of  mind.

20.  And  it  is  rightly  added,  And  the  fudges  to  dulness.
For  all  that  are  set  over  the  examination  of  other  men's
couduct,  are  rightly  called  ^judges;'  but  when  he  that  has
this  oversight  does  not  ciiligently  examine  the  lives  of  those
under  his  authority,  nor  acquaint  himself  whom  he  should
correct,  and  how,  ^  the  judge  is  brought  to  dulness,^  in  that  he,
who  should  have  judged  things  that  were  ill  done,  never  finds
out  those  things  which  are  to  be  judged. It  proceeds;

Ver.  18.  He  loose th  the  belt  qf  kings ^  and  girdeth  their
reins  with  a  cord.
xiii.  21.  They  that  know  how  to  regulate  aright  the  motions  of
their  members,  are  not  unjustly  called  ^  kings.'  But  when
the  mind  is  touched  with  pride  on  the  grounds  of  that  very
continence,  it  very  often  happens  that  Almighty  God,  desert-
ing its  pride,  suffers  it  to  fall  into  uncleanness  of  practice.
And  so  *  He  looseth  the  belt  of  kings,'  when  in  the  case  of

Gifts  withdrawn  to  humble  men.  Glory  and  disgrace  ofPriede.  15

those  who  seemed  to  regulate  their  members  aright^  on  Book
account  of  the  sin  of  pride  he  undoes  the  girdle  of  chastity.


Now  what  is  meant  by  ^  a  cord/  but  sin  ?  As  Solomon  says.
Hie  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked  himself ^  and  A^Prov.s,
shall  be  holden  toith  the  cords  qf  his  sins.  And  because
fleshly  gratification  has  its  dominion.in  the  ^ reins,*  the  strict
Judge  of  the  conscience,  Who  *  looseth  the  belt  of  kings,*
*  girdeth  their  reins  with  a  cord,*  that,,  when  the  girdle  of
chastity  is  undone,  then  the  gratification  of  sin  should  have
dominion  over  their  members,  so  that  those  whom  pride
pollutes  in  secret,  He  may  shew  even  publicly  to  be  as  abo-
minable as  they  are. It  goes  on,

Ver.  19.  He leadeth the  priests inglorious^  and  over-
throu^th  the  trughty.

22.  The  great  glory  of  the  priest  is  the  righteousnessAfi  xiv.
those  that  are  subject to him. Whence the excellent
preacher  saith  well  to  his  disciples ;  For  what  is  our  hope^  or  i  Tbet.

Joy^  or  crown  qf  rejoicing  f  Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence^*  ^^'
of  our  Lord?  But  when  the  priests  neglect  the  lives  of
their  charge,  and  bring  no  fruit  from  their  advancement
before  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  what  else  is  this  but
that  they  are  called  ^  ^  inglorious  V  Since  before  the  strict
Judge  they  do  not  then  find  glory,  who  do  not  now  seek  it
out  in  the  lives  of  those  subject  to  their  charge  by  urgency
in  preaching.  And  it  is  well  said.  And  overthroweth  the
mighty.  In  that,  when,  by  a  righteous  judgment^  He  forsakes
the  heart  of  those  that  rule,  it  does  not  look  for  the  inward
recompensing  of  the  reward,  and  it  is  overthrown  in  that
whereby  it  is  deceived,  so  as  to  rejoice  in  temporal  supe-
riority instead  of  eternal  glory.  Therefore  '  the  mighty  are
overthrown,*  in  that  while  they  lose  sight  of  the  real  rewards
of  the  heavenly  country,  they  are  brought  to  the  ground  here
in  their  own  pleasures. It  goes  on,

Ver.  20. Who  changeth  the  lip  qf  the  truthful^  and  taketk
away  the  instruction  qf  the  aged.

23.  When  the  priest  does  not  do  the  good  that  he  tells, xv.
even  the  very  word  of  his  lips  is  withdrawn  from  him,  that  he
may  not  dare  to  speak  what  he  does  not  practise ;  as  where

it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  But  unto  the  wicked  Ood  saithyV^tM^

16.
^  '  Dionnbir,'  nome  Mw.  read  <  dneantur/ '  are  led.'

10  ThUh  taken  away  from  tlie  wmgliieouM.

Job  19,  <  What  ha$i  thou  to  do.  to  declare  My  itatutei.  or  that  thou
' '  take$t  My  covenant  in  thy  mouth  f  Whence  also  he  beseeches,

Pa.  119,  saying.  And  take  not  the  word  qf  truth  utterly  out  qf  my

^''  mimth.  For  he  reflects  that  Aunighiy  God  gives  die  word  of
truth  to  those  that  do  it,  and  takes  it  away  from  those  that
do  it  not  He  then  that  prayed  that  he  might  not  have
it '  taken  out  of  his  mouth,'  what  did  he  else  than  pray  for  the
grace  of  good  practice  ?  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words, '  Let
me  not  go  astray  from  good  works,  lest,  while  I  lose  the
regularity  of  good  living,  I  also  part  with  the  right  rule
of  speaking.'  And  for  the  most  part  the  teacher,  who
ventures  to  teach  what  he  neglects  to  practise,  when  he
ceases  to  speak  the  good  which  he  sconied  to  do,  begins  to
teach  his  charge  the  evil  things  that  he  does,  that,  by  the
kffbteous  judgment  of  the  Almighty,  that  man  may  not
henceforth  have  a  tongue  for  a  good  theme,  who  will  not
have  a  good  life;  so  that  whilst  his  mind  is  inflamed  with  the
love  of  earthly  things,  he  should  be  ever  speaking  of  earthly

Matis,  things. Whence  ^  Truth*  saith  in  the  Gospel,  For  out  qf

^'  ^*  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh.  A  goodman
out  qf  the  good  treasure  qf  the  heart  bringeth  forth  good
tking$f  and  an  evil  man  otit  qf  the  evil  treasure  bringeth

iJt^it/orth  evil  things.  Hence  also  John  saith.  They  are  qf  the
worlds  therefore  speak  they  of  the  world.  Therefore  it  is
well  said,  Who  changeth  the  lip  of  the  truthful^  and  laketh
away  the  instruction  qf  the  aged.  In  that  while  they,  who
were  aforetime  ^  truthful*  in  preaching  heavenly  things,  setting
their  affection^  on  those  of  time,  are  sunk  down  to  the  same,
'  the  lip  of  the  truthfiil  is  changed,  and  the  instruction  of  the
aged  taken  away;'  in  that  being  in  love  with  temporal  things,
they  never  follow  the  precepts  of  their  predecessors,  so  as  to
be  occupying  the  place  of  authority  as  if  but  for  the  fruit  of
pleasure,  and  for  no  good  end  of  labour.

Pbopb.  24.  Which  nevertheless  may  be  understood  more  plainly
of  the  Jews,  who  before  the  Lord's  Incarnation  were  '  truth-
fiU,'  in  that  they  believed  that  He  was  to  come,  and  pro-
claimed the  same ;  but  when  He  appeared  in  the  flesh,  they
denied  that  it  was  He.  Therefore  ^  the  lip  of  the  truthful
was  changed,'  in  that  Him,  of  Whom  they  had  told  that'Ho
was  about  to  come,  they  denied  when  present;  *  and  the

FattoftiteJiWi  and  calling  of  OenHkifirtiheum. It

instraciioii  of  the  aged  was  taken  away/  in  thai  they  nerer  Book

followed  in  beHeving  the  things,  which  they  remembered

their  fathers  to  have  foretold.  Whence  too  at  the  coming  of
Elijah  it  is  promised,  thai  he  shall '  turn  the  hearts  of  ihelULi,
chUdren  to  Uieir  fathers  ;*  that  ^  the  instruction  of  the  aged/  *
which  is  now  *  taken  away*  from  the  heart  of  the  Jews,  upon
the  Lord  taking  compassion  on  them,  may  then  be  brought
back,  when  the  children  begin  to  understand  that  concerning
the  Lord,  which  their  fathers  foretold.  But  if  by  '  the  aged*
we  understand  likewise  those  same  Jews,  who,  by  the  per-
suasions of  unbelief,  set  themselves  to  oppose  the  word  of
'  Truth,*  then  '  the  instruction  of  the  aged  was  taken  away,'
when  the  Church  consisting  of  the  Gentiles,  being  indeed
young,  received  it,  as  she  saith  by  the  Psalmist,  /umfer-J^^^^*
stand  more  than  the  ancienU.  And  because  she  kept  this
same  in  practising  it,  in  what  way  she  came  to  understand
more  than  the  ancients,  she  makes. plain,  whereas  she  adds
directly,  Because  I  keep  Thy  precepts.  For  whereas  she
aimed  to  fulfil  in  practising  that  thing  which  she*  learnt,  it
was  vouchsafed  her  to  understand  what  she  might  .teach.
Whence  it  is  still  further  added  with  propriety,

Vcr.  21.  He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes^  and  lijleth
up  those  that  were  oppressed.

25.  For  whilst  the  Jewish  people  continued  in  tl|e  precept  xvi
of  the  Law,  and  the  whole  Gentile  .^world  knew  nothing  of
the  precepts  of  God,  both  the  former  jseemed  to  be  as
'  princes*  by  faith,  and  the  latter  lay  borne  down  in  the
depth  by  uubelief. But  when  Judaea  denied  the  mystery  of
our  Lord's  Incarnation,  and  the  Gentile  world  believed  it,
both  ^  the  princes*  fell  into  contempt,  and  they  that  had
been  borne  down  in  the  sin  of  unbelief,  were  '  lifted  up*  in
the  liberty  of  true  faith.^ But  Jeremiah  s^ing  this  fdl  of
the  Israelites  long  before,  says,  7%e  Lord  is  become  as  t^Lam.s,
were  an  enemy; He  hath  swallowed  up  Israel;  He  haih^'
thrown  down  all  his  palaces;  He  hath  destroyed  his  hulr
works. Now  'palaces*' in  cities  are  fqf'  ornaments,  but  the
'  bulwarks*  are  for  defence. And  the  gifts  tKat  keep  us  safe  are
one  thiilg,  thos^  that  ornament  us  are  another. For  pro-
phetical teadhing,  difierent  kinds  of  tongues,  the  power  of
working  cures,  are  a  kind  of  *  palaces*  of  the  mind,  which

c

1 8  Gifiijirsi/brftited,  then  ffraa  itsslf.

Job  19,  though  a  man  have  Qot,  yet  he  is  able  to  stand  fast  defended
PaoFH.^y  '^^  ^^^  righteousness,  though  he  does  not  shew  himself
at  all  adorned  with  the  towering  height  of  the  gifts  of  virtue;
but  faithy  hope,  and  charity,  are  not  our  *  palaces,*  but  our
'  bulwarks,*  which,  if  we  neglect  to  possess  ourselves  of,  we
lie  exposed  to  the  snares  of  the  enemy.  In  the  case  of
Judaoa,  therefore,  seeing  that  He  took  away  from  her  pro-
phecy, and  teaching,  and  miraculous  signs,  ^  He  overthrows
all  her  palaces.'  And  because,  for  her  hardness  of  heart,
He  let  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  be  taken  away  from  her,  He
was  bent  to  '  destroy  her  bulwarks/  Now  we  have  the  right
order  observed,  in  that  the  *  palaces*  first,  and  then  the
^  bulwarks,'  are  described  as  destroyed,  because,  when  the
sinful  soul  is  forsaken,  first  the  gifts  of  miraculous  powers,
which  were  given  in  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  are  destroyed,
and  afterwards  the  foundations  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity.
All  which,  being  taken  away  from  the  unfaithfiil,  the  Lord
bestowed  upon  the  Gentile  world,  and  by  the  things,  which
He  took  from  the  unbelievers.  He  adorned  the  believers'
P^  68,  minds.  Whence  it  is  written.  And  to  divide  the  spoils  of  the
i^«  beauty  of  the  house.  For  when  He  took  away  from  the  Jews
the  spoils  of  the  powers  of  virtue.  He  imparted  the  beauty
of  His  gifts  to  the  house  of  the  heart  of  the  Gentiles,  which
He  deigned  to  dwell  in  by  faith.  Which  same  was  brought
to  pass,  when  the  words  of  God  were  on  the  one  hand  inter-
preted by  the  Jewish  people  after  the  mere  *  letter,'  which
a  Cor.  <  kiUeth,'  and  on  the  other,  by  the  converted  Gentiles  pene-
^  '  trated  in  the  ^  spirit,'  which  ^  maketh  alive.'  Whence  it  is
directly  added,

Yer.  22. fVho  discovereth  deep  things  out  of  darkness,

and  bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  death,

xvii. 20.  For  when  the  several  mystical  truths  arc  recognised

in  the  secret  ^ords  of  the  Prophets  by  them  that  believe,

what  else  is  it,  than  that '  deep  things  are  discovered  out  of

darkness?'  Whence  too  ^  Truth'  Himself,  speaking  in  parables

Matt, to  the  disciples,  saith.  What  I  tell  you  in  darkness,  that

^^' *  speak  ye  in  light. For  when  by  explaining  we  unravel  the

mystical  knots  of  allegories,  then  we  as  it  were  ^  speak  in

light,  what  we  have  heard  in  darkness.' Now  '  the  shadow

of  death'  was  the  hardness  of  the  old  Law,  which  made  every

Man's  prids  in  God's  gifts  hrthtght  down.  19

bhe  that  sinned  liable  to  be  punished  with  the  death  of  the  Book

body. Bat  when  our  Redeemer  tempered  bj  mildness  the

harshness  of  the  sanctions  of  the  Law,  nor  any  longer  ordained
death  of  the  fiesh  to  be  inflicted  for  sin,  but  shewed  how
greatly  the  death  of  the  spirit  was  to  be  dreaded,  then,  surely,
^  He  brought  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  deadi.*  For  this
death,  wherein  the  flesh  is  severed  from  the  soul,  is  a
'  shadow'  of  that  death,  wherein  the  soul  is  seTcred  from
Ood,  and  so  *  the  shadow  of  death  is  brought  out  to  light,*
when,  upon  the  death  of  the  spirit  being  understood,  the
death  of  the  body  is  no  whit  feared.  Which  may  likewise  be
understood  in  another  sense  also.  For  those  are  not  unjusdy
called  *  princes,'  who  with  great  judiciousness  of  counsel  rule
the  thoughts  of  their  hearts  at  all  times,  and  by  the  power  of
wisdom  keep  down  all  the  motions  of  folly.  But  it  rerf
often  happens  that  the  mind  is  in  secret  lifted  up  on  the
grounds  of  its  very  wisdom  to  the  topmost  pitch  of  pride,
and  is  brought  to  the  ground  under  tfiose  evil  habits,  over
which  it  was  rejoicing  to  have  gained  the  victory.  Therefore
it  is  well  said.  He  paureth  contempt  upon  princes.  But  be-
cause it  sometimes  happens  that  they  who  appear  to  lie  pro-
strate in  evil  ways  have  recourse  to  tears  of  penitence,  and
gather  themselves  up  against  the  sins,  to  which  they  were
subjected,  it  is  fitly  added.  And  tifteih  up  those  thai  were
oppressed.  For  there  are  some,  who,  being  enlightened  by  the
gift  from  on  high,  see  in  what  exceeding  filthiness  of  their
sinftil  doings  they  lie  grovelling,  wash  with  tears  the  stains  of
their  misdeeds,  and  henceforth  keep  down  beneath  them  the
motions  of  the  flesh,  by  which  they  were  aforetime  weighed
to  the  ground.

27.  Which  same  is  brought  to  pass  by  the  excellent  dis-
posal of  Almighty  God,  that  so  in  this  life  every  thing  should
be  accounted  uncertain,  and  no  man  be  set  up  for  possessing
chastity,  seeing  that  jfte  poureih  contempt  upon  princes^
and  no  man  despair  from  his  evil  habits  weighing  him  down,
seeing  that  He  lifteth  up  those  that  were  oppressed.  And
because,  when  these  things  are  done,  there  is  brought  forth
out  of  tfie  secret  counsels  of  God  an  open  sentence  upon
each  individual,  it  is  rightly  subjoined.  And  revealeth  deep
things  out  of  darkness.

c2

20 Satan  dragged  to  light. Nations  destroyed  and  restored.

Job  19, 28.  For  the  Lord  *  revealeth  deep  things  out  of  darkness,'

g^j~-when  He  manifests  an  open  sentence  from  His  secret
counsels,  so  as  to  shew  what  lie  thinks  concerning  each
individual.  For  because  now  the  Creator  seeth  all  things,
and  Himself  is  not  seen  in  His  counsels,  it  is  well  said  of

Pf.  I8y  Him  by  the  Psalmist,  He  made  darkness  His  secret  place.
But  it  is  as  if  He  issued  out  from  that  darkness  into  light,
when  He  shews  what  are  His  thoughts  concerning  the
actions  of  each  individual.  And  whereas  when  he,  who
was  sunk  down  by  the  weight  of  his  sins,  is  brought  to  the
sotting  up  of  uprightness,  ho  for  the  first  time  sees  that  very
death,  wherein  he  was  going  on  ruiuing  himself,  and  at  the
same  time  too  blind  to  take  account  of  it;  it  is  rightly  added,
And  bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  death.  For  ^  the
shadow  of  death'  is  evil  doing,  which  is  drawn  as  if  in  bodily
lineaments  by  a  copy  of  our  old  enemy. Concerning  whom

BeT.  6,  too,  in  the  character  of  a  certain  one,  it  is  said.  And  his  name
was  Death.  And  it  very  often  happens  that  his  evil  instiga-
tion escapes  the  minds  of  men,  and  by  this  circumstance,
that  it  is  not  known,  is  the  more  successful.  And  so  ^  the
shadow  of  death  is  brought  to  light,*  in  that  the  evil  doing  of
our  old  enemy  is  revealed  to  the  minds  of  the  Saints  that  it
may  be  made  an  end  of. It  goes  on :

Yer.  23. Who  multiplieth  the  nations  and  destroyeth
them,  and  them  that  are  overturned  He  restoreth  etUire.

xviii.  20.  We  may  understand  it,  viz.  that  ^  the  Lord  multiplieth
^'^*  the  nations  and  destroyetli  them,'  in  this  way,  that  day  by
day  men  are  bom  destined  to  die,  and  that '  them,  tliat  be
overturned.  He  restoreth  entire,'  in  that  they,  who  were  dead,
shall  rise  again;  which  however  we  shall  interpret  in  a  better
sense,  if  we  thiuk  how  it  is  that  this  is  done  in  their  souls.

Propu.  For  ^  He  increaseth  thp  nations  and  destroyeth  them,'  in  Uiat
He  both  enlarges  them  by  fruitfulness  of  offspring,  and  yet
leaves  them  in  their  own  infidelity ;  but  ^  them,  that  were
overturned.  He  restoreth  entire,'  in  that  those,  whom  He  had
left  in  the  downfall  of  infidelity,  He  one  time  or  another
reestablishes  in  the  seat  of  faith.  And  these  being  restored
in  a  whole  state  of  mind,  that  ancient  People,  which  seemed
faithful  to  Ood,  being  reprobate  was  cost  away  in  heart,  ^
that,  being  deceived  by  its  own  misbelief,  it  should  afterwards

7%0  Jews  deceived  and' staggered  bg  our  Lard^s  Humanitg,  2 1

rise  up  against  Him^  Whom  it  had  before  preached. It  goes  Book
on;  ■  ^^'

Ver.  34,  25.  Who  changeth  the  heart  of  the  chief  of  the
people  ^  the  earthy  and  decetveth  them^  that  theg  wander
in  vain  where  (here  is  no  way.  Theg  shall  grope  in  the
dark  without  any  lights  and  He  shall  make  them  to  stagger
like  a  drunken  man.

30.  For  *  the  heart  of  the  chief  of  the  earth  was  changed,*  xix*
when  the  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people  in  Jud»a  set
themselves  to  withstand  Him  by  their  counsels.  Whom  they
beforehand  proclaimed,  that  He  was  to  come. And  when
they  strove  to  put  out  His  Name  by  persecuting  Him,  being
deceived  by  their  own  wickedness  they  vainly  essayed  to
*  wander  where  there  is  no  way/  because  it  was  impossible
that  a  ^  way*  cotdd  be  open  to  their  cruelty  directed  against
the  Creator  of  all  things. They  saw  the  miracles,  they  were
made  to  fear  by  His  power*,  but  refusing  to  believe,  they
still  sought  signs, whilst  they  said, fVhat  sign  shewest  John  6^
Thou  tlten^  that  we  may  see  and  believe  Theet Therefore^*
it  is  well  said,  They  grope  in  the  dark  without  light  f For
he  that  hesitates  in  the  midst  of  so  many  manifest  miracles,
as  it  were  ^  gropes  in  the  dark,*  in  that  he  sees  not  what  he
is  touching. Dut  every  man  that '  staggers,*  is  borne  now
hither,  now  thither. And  because  they  were  shewn  at  one
time  to  believe,  as  when  they  said.  If  this  man  were  not  (/John
Ood  He  could  do  nothing^  and  at  another  time  denied  that  '  ^'
He  was  from  God,  as  when  they  said  contemning  Him,  Ts  Mat.i9,
not  this  the  carpenter*s  Son? Is  not His  mother  called^* ^'
Maryf  and  His  brethren ^  JameSf  and  Joseph^  and  Simon ^
and  Judas  t  And  His  sisters^  are  they  not  all  with  tM  ^  it  is
rightly  added.  He  maketh  them  to  stagger  like  a  drunken
man* For  ihey  saw  both  that  He  raised  the  dead,  and  yet
that  He  was  a  mortal  being. Who  would  not  believe  that
He  was  God,  Whom  they  beheld  raise  the  dead  to  life  ?  But
on  the  other  hand,  when  they  saw  that  He  was  mortal,  they
scorned  to  believe  that  He  was  immortal  God,  and  so  herein,
viz.  that  Almighty  God  manifested  Himself  such  to  their
eyes  as  to  be  both  capable  of  exhibiting  divine  signs  and  of

« *  Tirtate  iernsbaiitar.'  A.  B.  C.  D.  M. bantnr,  tembftntor.*  <  They  Wondered  at
and  fome  ap.  Ben.  read  '  Tirtatet  mira- Hia  acts  of  power,  tfiey  were  terrified.*

23 Job  prophuied  wUh  undenUmding. Hii  humility.

Job  18,  undergoing  homan  sufTerings,  He  ^  made  them  to  stagger
—^ —  like  drunken  men/  that  their  pride,  which  chose  rather  to
'spurn  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  than  to  follow  it,
should  at  one  and  the  same  time  lift  itself  up  against  His
human  nature,  and  wonder  at  the  power  of  His  Divine
nature  shining  within.  And  because  all  these  were  made
present  to  the  eyes  of  blessed  Job  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
it  is  rightly  added ;
Chap.  xiii.  1.  Zo,  aUI
3K3C.  31.  For  what  was  to  follow  he  saw  as  present  in  Him,
Whom  neither  things  future  come  to,  nor  things  past  go  iirom ;
but  all  things  are  present  at  once  and  together  before  His
eyes.  And  because  the  very  things  that  were  to  come  he
saw  were  part  in  works  and  part  in  words,  it  is  rightly  said,
AU  this  mine  eye  haih  ieen,  mine  ear  haih  heard.  But  words
are  without  use,  if  they  lack  the  understanding  of  them.
Whence  it  is  fitly  added.  And  I  have  understood  every  whit.
For  when  any  thing  is  shewn  or  heard,  if  the  understanding
of  it  be  not  bestowed,  it  is  little  of  a  prophecy.  Thus
Pharaoh  saw  in  a  dream  things  that  were  to  come  upon
Egypt,  but,  because  he  could  not  understand  what  he  saw.
Pan.  6,  he  was  no  prophet.  King  Balthasar  ^  saw  the  fingers  of  the
hand  that  wrote'  upon  the  wall  \  but  he  was  no  prophet,
because  he  did  not  attain  to  the  understanding  of  that  thing
which  he  saw.  Therefore,  that  blessed  Job  might  testify  that
he  had  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  he  declares  not  only  that  he
had  '  seen  and  heard,'  but  also  that  he  had  ^  understood  all
this.'  And  that  he  is  not  elated  on  the  grounds  of  such
understanding,  his  words  subjoined  bear  witness,  when  he
says,

Ver.  2.  What  ye  know,  the  same  do  I  know  also;  J  am
not  inferior  to  you.
xxi.  32.  By  which  same  words  he  made  known  what  exceeding
humility  he  had,  who  says  that  he  was  *  not  inferior*  to  them,
whose  life  by  holy  living  he  very  far  surpassed.  For  he
makes  good  that  *  what  they  knew  he  knew,'  who  by  knowing
the  things  of  heaven  transcended  their  earthly  thoughts
through  the  spirit  of  prophecy  in  addition. It  goes  on ;

Yer.  3.  Yet  still  I  would  speak  to  the  Almighty,  and  I
desire  to  reason  with  God.

Tho$€  who  hoot  aUfir  Ood  may  reamn  with  Him. 28

88.  We  '  speak  with  the  Almigbty/  when  we  beseech  His  Book
pity ;  but*  we  *  reason  with  Him,'  when  uniting  ourselves  to  — rp
His  righteousness,  we  sift  our  actions  with  minute  investiga-
tion. Or  otherwise,  to  '  reason  with  God,'  is  for  him  who
obeyed  His  commandments  here,  to  come  with  Him  here*
after  as  Judge  to  judge  the  people.  As  it  is  said  to  the
Preachers  that  leave  all  things,  Verify  I  $ay  unto  yot«,  that  ^^
fe  which  have  followed  Me^  in  the  regeneration^  when  the  *
Son  of  man  ithaU  Ht  on  the  throne  of  His  glory ^  ye  also  ihall
sit  upon  twelve  thrones^  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.
Whence  the  Lord  saith  by  Isiuah  too,  Relieve  the  oppressed^U-hit
judge  the  fatherless^  plead  for  the  widow.  Come  noWf  and
let  us  reason  together.  For  it  is  right  that  they  should
reason  with  Grod  concerning  iheir  charges'  in  the  Judgment,
who,  at  the  words  of  God,  entirely  give  up  the  present  world.
Thus  the  '  speaking*  has  to  do  with  prayer,  and  the  '  reason-
ing* has  to  do  with  judgment  Therefore  the  holy  man
'  speaks'  to  the  Almighty  now,  that  he  may  *  reason'  with  the
Almighty  hereafter,  in  that  He  cometh  with  God  afterwards
as  a  judge,  who  here  in  this  present  time  was  familar  with
Him  in  prayer.  But  Holy  Church,  whom  we  have  already
said  that  blessed  Job  bears  the  likeness  of,  not  only  then
judges  the  wicked,  when  the  day  of  final  Judgment  shall
come,  but  even  now  doth  not  cease  to  judge  all  that
either  act  wickedly,  or  think  foolishly.  And  hence  it  is
added ;

Ver.  4.  First  shewing  thai  ye  are  builders  qf  lies,  and
votaries  of  wrong  doctrines*

84.  By  which  same  words  it  is  clearly  shewn  that  his  xxiii.
friends  as  in  the  likeness  of  heretics  oppose  the  decisions  of
the  holy  man's  judgment.  For  it  is  clear  that  they  do  not
hold  the  figure  of  Catholics,  who  are  termed  *  votaries  of
wrong  doctrines.'  Wherein  this  likewise  ought  to  be  marked,
that  they  are  called  *  builders  of  lies.'  For  as  an  edifice  is
^  built'  with  stones,  so  a  lie  is  *  built'  with  words.  For  when
there  is  not  deceitful  speech,  but  a  meaning  of  truth,  it  is
like  a  fortified  mound,  arising  not  by  fabrication,  but  by
nature. It  goes  on;

« <  de  pnpUlis,*  Ut  <  wards'  same Mott  Vim.  rend  <  pe^alit,'  <  peoplai,'
word  M  '  fiktherlMi'  in  our  Y  «nioii. bat  with  im  abbreilatioD.

24 Job  reproves  hie  Friende  ae  epeaking  faleely  far  Ood.
Job  la, Yen  5.  0  thai  ye  would  altogether  hold  your  peace,  and


^ ye  ehould  be  accounted  wiee!

xxir.  ^^'  ^^  ^°  ^  house,  when  the  door  18  shut,  it  is  not  known
what  members  there  are  hidden  within,  so,  generally  speaking,
if  a  fool  hold  his  peace,  it  is  hidden  whether  he  be  wise  or
foolish,  only,  however,  if  do  other  works  come  to  light,  which
may  speak  the  mind  even  of  one  that  is  silent  For  this
reason  the  holy  man,  seeing  that  his  friends  were  anxious  to
appear  what  they  were  not,  charged  them  to  hold  their  peace,
that  they  might  not  appear  what  they  were.  And  hence  it
ProT.  is  said  by  Solomon;  Even  a  fool  when  he  holdeth  hie  peace
17,  S8.  ^  counted  wiee.  But  because  when  a  fool  speaks,  from  this,
that  he  brings  in  his  own  words,  he  is  unable  to  reflect  on
the  words  of  the  wise,  after  he  had  bidden  silence,  he  yet
further  adds  rightlyy  >

Yer.  6.  Hear  now  my  reproqfe,  and  hearken  to  the
/udgment  qftny  lipe.
XXV.  SO.  Now  he  did  well  first  to  bring  forward  '  reproof,*  and
afterwards  ^judgment.'  For  except  by  reproof  first  the
swelling  of  the  fool  be  put  down,  the  judgment  of  the
righteous  is  not  by  comprehension  at  all  understood.  It
goes  on;

Yer.  7.  Doth  Ood  need  your  lie,  that  ye  ehould  talk  de-
ceitfully far  Him?
xxvi.  37.  Ood  doth  not '  stand  in  need  of  a  lie,'  in  that  Truth
does  not  seek  to  be  stayed  up  by  the  aid  of  falsehood.  But
because  Heretics  are  unable  to  defend  on  principles  of  truth
the  things  which  they  erroneously  conceive  about  Ood,  it  is
as  if  they  sought  for  the  shadow  of  falsehood,  to  shew  the
ray  of  light.  And  they  '  speak  deceitfully  for  Him,'  in  that
weak  minds,  by  being  senselessly  seduced,  they  deceive  in
the  understanding  of  Him. It  goes  on ;

Yer.  8.  Will  ye  take  Hie  pereon  ?  will  ye  etrive  to  Judge
for  Ood?
xxvii.  88.  For  when  foolish  men  behold  the  doings  of  the  wise,
they  all  seem  to  them  to  be  worthy  of  blame;  who,  forgetting
their  own  emptiness  and  deficiency,  pass  judgment  on  the
concerns  of  others  the  more  eagerly,  in  proportion  as  they
are  more  deeply  ignorant  of  their  own.  But  on  the  other
hand,  when  the  righteous  reprove  the  deeds  of  the  wicked.

God  is  notphoied  that  men  take  His  part  wrongful^. 35

ever  conscious  of  their  own  weakness,  they  administer  reproof.  Book

though  in  launching  forth  against  them  outwardly,  Jrrt  In ^

sympathizing  with  them  inwardly;  in  that  it  belongs  to  Him
alone  to  scrutinise  the  sins  of  men  without  fellow-feeling.
Who  by  the  omnipotence  of  His  nature  knows  not  to  commit
sin.  Therefore,  as  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  had  so  re-
proved his  deeds  as  if  they  had  nothing  in  themselves  to  be
reproved,  it  is  well  said  in  this  place.  Will  ye  take  Hie/acef
Will  ye  etrive  to  Judge  for  Oodt  Fot  to  *  take  the  face  of
God'  is  to  assume  His  authority  in  the  act  of  judging;  and
he  as  it  were  *  strives  to  judge  for  God,'  who  when  he*
reproves  the  several  weak  points  in  another,  does  not  feel
weak  in  himself  within  from  fellow-feeling. It  goes  on;

Ver.  9.  Or  ehall  it  please  Him^  from  Whom  nothing  can
b^  concealed^ f Or  like  as  a  fnan  imll  He  be  deceived  by^  eeiare.
your  deceits.

39.  Heretics  shew  God  deceit  in  that  they  fabricate  such^^^*
things  as  cannot  be  pleasing  to  the  very  Being,  in  Whose
behalf  they  say  them. And  whilst  they  set  themselves  to  if
to  defend,  they  only  offend  Him,  in  that  they  are  brought  to
the  ground  in!  fighting  against  Him,  Whom  they  appeur  ^y^'S*^*
preaching  to  be  serving. Hence  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  <  ^n*
That  Thou  mightest  still  the  enemy  and  the  defender*. For  >»J°j[  ^
every  heretic  is  to  Almighty  God  an  ^  enemy  and  defender,'
for  wherein  he  strives  in  his  way  to  defetid  Him,  therein  he
fights  against  His  truth. But  because  nothing  can  escape
God's  sight,  He  judges  according  to  that  in  them,  which
they  think  within  their  heart,  but  not  by  their  appearing
without  to  be  doing  Him  service. Therefore  since  by  their
firauds  *  as  a  man  is  deceived,  God  is  not  so  deceived,*  it  is
rightly  added,

Ver,  10, 11.  He  will  surely  reprove  you,  if  ye  do  secretly
take  His  face.  Presently  when  He  arise th  He  shall  make
you  qfraid;  and  His  dread  shall  fall  upon  you.

40.  This  part,  wherein  He  declares  that '  the  face  of  God^^^^-
is  taken  in  secret,'  may  be  understood  in  two  ways, j^or
there  bo  some,  who  at  one  and  the  same  time  perceive  truth
in  thoir  hearts,  and  yet  utter  outwardly  concerning  God
things  thdt  are  false. For  lest  they  should  appear  to  be

26  Ood  wiU  ene  day  be  moved  against  hypocrUee,

Job  19,  subdued,  they  both  know  the  truth  within,  and  yet  assail  it
.^lii:- without.  i}ence  it  is  well  said  in  this  place,  He  will  surely
'  reprove  you,  if  ye  do  secretly  take  His  face.  As  if  it  were
expressed  in  plain  words;  ^  Ye  are  the  more  to  be  blamed  in
His  sight  for  falsehood,  as  ye  see  in  yourselves  what  is  true.*
And  there  be  some,  who  when  they  turn  back  into  the  interior,
contemplate  the  justice  and  righteousness  of  God,  and  in
praying  and  weeping  tremble  with  fear,  but  after  the  hour  of
contemplation  has  passed  by,  they  return  with  as  much
boldness  to  their  w><^lce^esses,  as  if,  being  placed  behind
His  back,  they  were  not  seen  by  the  light  of  His  righteous-
ness. And  so  these  with  themselves  in  secret  *  take  Qod*s
face*  as  if  it  saw  with  a  bodily  sight,  in  that  both,  when  they
are  present  to  Him,  they  flatter  Him  with  their  tears,  and,
when  they  are  as  it  were  gone  from  His  sight,  they  make
slight  of  Him  by  their  practices.  And  these  deserve  to  be
beaten  more  for  their  evil  doings,  even  in  proportion  as  in  the
secret  of  their  hearts  they  know  the  righteous  judgments  of
God.  And  hence  it  is  added;  As  soon  as  He  stirreth  up
Himeeift  He  will  trouble  you,  and  His  dread  shall  fall
upon  you.

41 .  Seeing  that  Almighty  God  is  of  a  nature  unchangeable,
in  the  wrath  of  judgment  He  is  not  capable  of  being  moved;
but  by  the  expression  proper  to  man,  of  God*s  being  ^  moved,'
is  understood  nothing  else  than  that  enforcement  of  His  rule
of  righteousness,  by  which  the  wickedness  of  man  is  chastised.
Now  righteous  men  conceive  a  dread  of  God  before  His
indignation  is  stirred  up  against  them;  they  fear  Him  at
rest,  lest  they  should  feel  Him  as  moved.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  the  wicked  then  for  the  first  time  fear  to  be  smitten,
when  they  are  under  the  rod,  and  terror  then  rouses  them
from  the  sleep  of  then*  insensibility, when vengeance  is

Is.  88,  troubling  them. And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  And

^^'  only  the  vexing  alone  shall  supply  understanding  to  the
hearing.  For  when  they  have  begun  to  be  stricken  in  venge-
ance for  the  contempt  and  neglect  of  God's  precepts,  then
they understand the thing  that they heard. And the

Pt.  78,  Psalmist  saith,  fVhen  He  slew  them,  then  they  sought  Him.
Therefore  it  is  well  said.  As  soon  as  He  stirreth  up  Himself
He  will  trouble  you,  and  His  dread  will  fall  upon  you ;

Earthly  memoHab  vaniiH^  riche$  end  im  rdUmmk, 27

in  thai  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  perdition  have  not  Boos
fear  producing  repose,  but  punishment  producing  fear. It 1—


goes  on;
Ver.  12.  Tour  remembrances  are  like  unto  a$he$.

42.  All  that  are  conformed  to  this  present  state  of  being  xxx.
by  an  earthly  temper  of  mind,  mean,  by  all  that  they  do,  to
leave  the  remembrance  of  themselves  to  the  world. Some

in  the  toils  of  war,  some  in  the  towering  walls  of  edifices,
some  in  eloquent  books  of  this  world^s  lore,  they  are  eagerly
toiling  and  striving  and  building  up  for  themselves  a  name
of  remembrance. But  whereas  life  itself  runs  on  to  an  end
with  speed,  what  is  there  in  it  that  will  stand  stedfast,  when
even  its  very  self  by  nature  running  rapidly  speeds  away.
For  a  breath  of  air  seizes  the  ashes,  as  it  is  written;  7^Pt.i,4.
ungodly  are  not  so,  bul  are  like  the  chaffs  which  the  wind,
ecaiterelh  away  /ram  the  face  ^  the  eHrth, And  so  the
remembrance  of  fools  is  rightly  compared  to  '  ashes,*  in  that
it  is  placed  there,  where  it  is  liable  to  be  carried  away  by  a
breath  of  air. For  howsoever  a  man  may  toil  to  achieve  the
glory  of  his  name,  he  has  placed  his  ^  remembrance  like
ashes,*  in  that  the  wind  of  mortality  hurries  it  away  in  a
moment Contrary  to  which  it  is  written  of  the  just  man,
The  righteous  shall  be  liad  in  everlasting  remembrance.  Pn.  li9,
f'or  by  the  very  circumstance,  that  he  imprints  his  deeds  ^*
upon  the  eyes  of  God  alone,  he  sets  firm  the  name  of  his
remembrance  in  the  eternal  world. It  goes  on;
And  your  necks  shall  be  brought  down  to  the  mire.

43.  As  the  sight  is  used  to  be  denoted  by  the  eye,  so  is  xxxi.
pride  by  the  *  neck.* Thus  '  the  neck  is  brought  down  to

the  mire,'  when  every  proud  man  is  humbled  in  death,  and
the  flesh  that  was  lifted  up  rots  in  corruption.  For  let  us
contemplate  how  and  like  what  the  carcases  of  the  rich  lie  in
their  graves,  what  that  form  of  death  is  in  the  lifeless  flesh,
what  the  rottenness  of  corruption.  Ahd  surely  these  were
the  very  persons  who  were  lifted  up  with  honours,  swollen
nith  the  things  gotten  by  them,  who  looked  down  upon
others,  and  exulted  to  stand  as  it  were  alone.  Yet,  while
they  neyer  considered  whereunto  they  were  going,  they  knew
nothing  at  all  what  they  were.  But  *  the  neck  is  brought
down  to  the  mire,'  in  that  they  lie  tieglected  in  rottenness,

28 Job  gpeaki  myUeriet. ITie  ChurdCs  teeth^  Preachers.

Job  13, who  swelled  high in  emptiness. 'The  neck  is  brought
.^lilidown  to  the  mire/  because  what  the  might  of  flesh  is  good
for,  the  rottenness  of  corruption  evidences. It  goes  on;

Ver.  13.  Hold  your  peace  for  a  liiile^  thai  J  may  speak
Ufhaisoever  my  mind  shall  bid  me.
xxxii.  44.  He  shews  that  they  S])oko  witli  the  perception  of  tlio
flesh,  whom  he  therefore  binds  to  silence,  that  he  may  speak
that  which '  his  mind  bids  him.*  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,
'  I  do  not  speak  in  a  carnal,  but  in  a  spiritual  way,  because
I  hear  by  (he  perception  of  the  Spirit  things  that  I  bring
forth  by  the  service  of  the  body.  Whence  he  at  once  mounts
up  on  high,  and  lifts  himself  aloft  in  mysteries,  and  changes
into  mystical  discourse  the  reproofs  which  he  had  delivered,
saying,

Ver.  14. Wlierefore  do  I  take  myjlesh  in  my  teeth,  and

put  my  life  in  my  hand  f

xxxiii 45.  In  Holy  Scripture  *  teeth*  are  sometimes  used  to  be

Myst.  understood  for  the  holy  preachers,  and  sometimes  for  the

. interior  senses'. Thus  of  tlic  holy  preachers  it  is  said  to  the

Cftnt.  i,  Bride,  Thy  teeth  are  like  a  Jlock  of  sheep  that  are  even

^* shorn,  which  came  up  from  the  washing* And  hence  it  is

said  to  one  of  them,  when  the  Gentiles  were  represented  to

Aott him  in  a  figure,  KiU  and  eat,  i.  e. '  crush  their  oldness,  and

^^t  1^*  convert  it  into  the  body  of  the  Church,  i.  e.  into  your  own

members.' Again,  that  '  teeth'  are  wont  to  be  understood  of

the  interior  senses,  is  testified  by  the  Prophet  Jeremiah,  when

Lam.  8,  he  says,  He  hath  broken  my  teeth  by  number. For  by  the

^^' '  teeth'  the  food  is  broken  in  pieces,  to  allow  of  its  being

swallowed. Hence  we  not  unjustly  understand  the  interior

senses  by '  teeth,'  which  as  it  were  chew  and  mince  small

the  several  particulars  that  occur  to  the  mind,  and  transfer

them  to  the  belly  of  the  memory,  which  the  Prophet  declares

to  be  ^  broken  by  number,'  in  that  according  to  the  measure

of  each  particular  sin  there  is  blindness  of  understanding

engendered  in  our  perception,  and  h)  proportion  to  that

which  each  person  has  committed  outwardly,  he  is  made  dull

of  sense  in  that,  which  he  might  have  understood  of  the

'  S.  TliooiM  Aq.  dUtiDgoinhet  four reMOD  makes  inthwn. Sum.  Theol.  1.
iDterior  ieniet  in  men  and  animala,  the P.  Quest.  IxxTiii.  Art  4.
same  In  both,  with  the  difference  thai

The  ^  Teeth*  may  mean  the  tnterhr  pereeptUme. 90

inward  and  invisible.  Whence  too  it  is  rightly  written,  Book
Evety  one  that  hath  eaten  the  sour  grape^  his  teeth  shaU  fcg-x
numbed.  For  what  is  'the  sour  grape,*  saving  sin?  foraJtr.si,*
*  sour  grape*  is  fruit  before  the  time.  So  whosoever  desires^'
to  be  satisfied  with  the  enjoyments  of  this  present  life,  is  as
it  were  in  a  hurry  to  eat  fruit  before  the  time.  Thus  *  the
teeth  of  him  that  eateth  the  sour  grape  are  numbed,*  in  that
he  who  feeds  in  the  gratification  of  the  present  life,  has  the
interior  perceptions  tied  fast,  that  they  should  no  longer  be
able  to  cat,  i.  e.  to  understand  spiritual  things;  in  that  from
the  rety  self-same  cause  that  they  gratify  themselTes  in
outward  things,  they  are  rendered  dull  in  those  of  the  interior.
And  whereas  the  soul  is  fed  with  sin,  it  is  unable  to  eat  the
bread  of  righteousness,  ill  that  the  teeth  bemg  tied  fast  by
the  custom  of  sin,  can  never  at  all  chew  such  good,  as  has  A
relish  in  the  interior.  In  this  place  then,  because,  as  we
have  said,  we  understand  '  the  teeth*  to  be  the  interior
perceptions,  we  ought  to  consider  very  heedfully  what  the
righteous  are  wont  to  do.  Who,  commonly,  if  they  detect
in  themselves  any  points  of  a  carnal  sort  however  slightly,
going  over  these  in  the  interior  senses,  vehemently  prosecute
them  in  their  own  person,  afBict  themselves  with  self-
chastisement,  and  with  excessive  self-inflictions  visit  in
judgment  the  very  least  things  wrong  in  them,  and  condemn
them  by  penitence.  Which  same  they  do  for  this  reason,
that  in  the  sight  of  the  eternal  Judge,  both  they  may  them-
selves be  found  as  far  as  may  be  without  blame,  and  that
those,  who  see  them  thus  judge  themselves,  may  be  kindled
to  reform  themselves  from  worse  offences.  And  ilus  blessed
Job  had  done  in  the  presence  of  his  friends,  who  kept  fiist
temporal  glory,  and  extolled  transitory  blessings.  Yet  he
could  not  bring  their  sense  to  see  the  usefiilness  of  the
scourge  witK  which  he  was  afflicted,  that  so  they  might
bethink  themselves  that  Almighty  Ood  not  only  bestows
prosperity,  but  likewise  brings  down  adversity  upon  us,  when
He  is  favourable.  Whence  he  says  well  in  this  place.
Wherefore  do  I  (ear  myfleah  with  my  teeth  f  As  if  he  said
in  plain  words,  *  Why  with  my  interior  perceptions  do  I  hunt
out  things  carnal,  if  there  be  any  such  thing  done. in  me,  if

30 JbA  comphini  thai  they  will  not  Uamfrom  his  life.

^•19,1  cannot  thereby  benefit  my  epectatore?^ Where  too  it  is

^fiUy  added,

And  ca^rrjf  my  life  in  my  hand?

46.  To '  carry  our  life  in  our  handa"  is  to  shew  forth  the
bias  of  the  heart  in  practice.  For  the  righteous  have  this
thing  proper  to  them,  that  in  all  that  they  do,  and  all  that
they  say,  they  not  only  seek  their  own  increase,  but  the
edification  of  their  neighbours  likewise.  Sometimes  they
judge  themselves  in  some  point,  that  they  may  recall  indolent
hearers  to  the  consideration  of  themselves.  Sometimes  they
exhibit  good  works,  that  their  spectators  may  be  ashamed

Matt,  s,  not  to  imitate  what  they  see. For  it  is  written,  Jliat  they

^^*  may  see  your  good  u>orke,  and  glorify  your  Father  Which  u
in  Heaven.  Thus  he  that  exhibits  the  bent  of  his  mind  by
his  works, '  carries  his  life  in  his  hand  ;*  but  when  any  good
man,  whether  by  judging  himself  or  by  exhibiting  good  works,
furthers  not  his  neighbour's  welfare  by  what  he  has  done,  he
returns  to  words  of  sorrow.  Whence  it  is  rightly  said  in  this
place.  Wherefore  do  I  take  my  flesh  in  my  teeth?  and
carry  my  life  in  my  hand?  i.e.  ^  Why  do  I  either  judge
myself  strictly  before  men,  or  shew  in  practice  what  my  heart
is  bent  on,  if  I  do  not  advance  my  neighbour's  good  either
by  passing  judgment  on  my  evil  things,  or  exhibiting  good
ones?*  But  yet  the  righteous,  even  while  they  speak  so,
never  give  over  setting  their  neighbour  a  good  example.
Hence  blessed  Job,  still  further  exemplifying  and  exhibiting
the  excellence  of  paUence  before  the  eyes  of  his  friends,  saith.
Though  He  slay  me,  yet  tcill  I  trust  in  Him.

xxxiv.  47.  There  is  no  room  for  the  virtue  of  patience  in  pro^*
perous  circumstances.  He  is  really  patient,  who  is  at  once
bruised  with  misfortune,  and  yet  not  bowed  down  from  the
erectness  of  his  hope. Concerning  the  temper  of  mind  of

Pf.  49,  the  reprobate  man  it  is  written.  He  will  praise  Thee^  when

y  V  Thou  doest  well  to  him.  Hereby,  then,  the  righteous  mind  is
distinguished  from  the  unrighteous,  that  even  in  the  midst  of
a£9iction  the  former  acknowledges  the  praise  to  Almigh^
God,  that  he  is  not  broken  down  together  with  his  worldly
fortune,  does  not  fall  together  with  the  fall  of  outward  glory,
but  hereby  proves  the  more,  what  he  was  with worldly

HypoeriUM  do  tu^  judge  themsdves^  to  be  mfkfrom  Judgment.  SI

goods,  who  eren  without  worldly  goods  stands  tbe  stronger.  Book
It  goes  on ;


Ver.  15,  16.  Bui  I  trill  rebuke  mine  oum  waye  b^ore
Him. He  also  ihaU  be  my  $alvation.

48.  Whereas  Panl  the  Apostle  saith ;  For^  if  we  would  xxxv.
judige  oursehee^  we  should  not  be  judged^  the  Lord  is  found  j/^\
to  be  our  *  Salvation*  llien,  in  proportion  as  onr  sin  is  now
rebuked  by  ourselves,  from  fear  of  Ood. Whence  the  Elect

are  used  nerer  to  spare  their  own  sins,  that  they  may  find
the  Judge  of  sin  rendered  propitious;  and  they  look  to  find
•Him  hereafter  truly  their  'Salvation,*  Whom  they  now
strictly  fear  as  their  Judge.  For,  he  that  spareth  himself
now  in  sin,  is  not  spared  hereafter  in  punishment  So  let
htm  say,  But  I  mil  rebuke  mine  own  ways  before  Him,
And  what  use  and  advantage  results  from  such  rebuking,  let
him  add.  He  aho  shall  be  my  salvation.  It  goes  on ;
For  an  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before  Him.

49.  Whereas  we  know  that  the  Judge,  when  He  cometh,  xxxvi.
will  set  the  sheep  on  His  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  His

left,  with  what  reason  is  it  now  said,  '  that  the  hypocrite
shall  not  come  before  Him,'  when,  if  he  be  among  the  goats,
he  will  appear  on  the  left  hand  of  the  Judge  ?  But  we  are
to  bear  in  mind  that  we  come  before  the  Lord  in  two  ways.
One,  whereby  taking  exact  account  of  our  ofiences  here  we
punish  and  judge  ourselves  before  Him  with  weeping.  For
as  often  as  we  recall  to  our  perception  the  power  of  our
Creator,  we  as  often,  as  it  were,  stand  before  Him.'  Hence
too  it  is  well  said  by  Elijah,  the  man  of  Ood,  The  Lord\  Klngt
God  of  Israel  livethj  before  Whom  I  stand.  In  another  way  ^^>  ^'
we  '  come  before  Ood,'  when  at  the  last  Judgment  we  (iresent
ourselves  before  His  Tribunal.  And  thus  the  hypocrite  in
the  last  reckoning  does  come  before  the  Judge,  but  because
now  he  shuts  his  eyes  to  consider  and  bewail  transgressions,
he  refiises  to  '  come  before'  the  Lord.  For  as  righteous  men,
when  they  fix  their  eyes  on  the  severity  of  the  Judge  that
shall  come,  recall  their  sins  to  remembrance,  bewail  the
things  that  they  have  done,  and  judge  themselves  severely
that  they  be  not  judged;  so  hypocrites,  as  they  outwardly
please  the  world,  hence  omit  to  look  inwardly  into  themselves,
and  wholly  engross  themselves  in  the  words  of  their  neigh-

89 Job  kumbb  m  calling  himself  juitf  when  God  said  more.

Job  iB^boun,  and  account  themselves  to  be  holy,  because  they  con-

^'  ^^'  sider  that  they  are  so  i^ccounted  by  their  fellow-creatures,
'  And  when  they  have  dissipated  their  mind  in  the  words
that  sound  their  own  praises,  they  never  recall  it  to  the
cognizance  of  sin,  never  mark  wherein  they  offend  the
interior  Judge,  entertain  no  fears  concerning  His  severity,
for  they  believe  that  they  have  pleased  Him  as  they  have
their  fellow-creatures.  Yet  if  they  but  brought  His  terrible-
ness  to  mind,  this  very  circumstance,  that  fixed  in  a  wrong
biai^  they  are  making  themselves  pleasing  to  their  fellow-
creatures,  would  cause  them  to  fear  the  more.  Therefore  it  is.
well  said,  For  an  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before  Him ;  in  that
be  does  not  set  before  his  eyes  the  severity  of  God,  so  long
as  he  is  ambitious  to  please  the  eyes  of  men.  Who,  if  he
set  himself  in  the  presence  of  God  in  searching  hb  own
conscience,  would  then  assuredly  no  longer  be  a  hypocrite.
It  goes  on ;

Ver.  17.  Hear  my  speech,  and  take  in  my  riddles  with
your  ears

xxxvii.  60.  Herein,  that  he  names  '  riddles,'  he  shews  that  he
has  parts  of  his  speech  framed  in  figures.  Whence  too  it  is
fitly  added  by  the  voice  of  the  faithful  People;

Ver.  18.  If  I  shall  be  judged,  I  know  that  I  shall  be
foundjust.

zzxviii  61.  Which  too  is  not  at  variance  with  the  person  of  the
self-same  blessed  Job,  sinco  ho  is  only  telling  that  concern-
ing himself  without,  which  ^  Truth'  had  inwardly  declared
to  his  enemy  concerning  him;  Hast  thou  considered  My
servant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth?
And  yet  it  is  much  less  that  the  holy  man  records  con-
peming  himself,  than  v^hat  the  Lord  declared  concerning
him.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  be  *  just,'  and  another  to  have
^  nope  like  him.'  Therefore  he  thought  humbly  of  himself,
who,  whereas  he  was  just  beyond  comparison  with  another,
described  himself  not  just  above  others,  but  simply  able  to
be  *  found  just.'  It  seems  however  to  furnish  this  ground  for
raising  a  question  in  his  words,  viz.  that  he  who  said  above,
/  will  rebuke  mine  own  ways  before  Him ;  and  again  says

▼.  26. further  on,  JTiou  wouldest  consume  me  in  the  iniquities  of
my  youth; and  seeing  his  sins  with  a  distinct  eye,  says

Job  riffhieauSf  thnmgh  graeej  in  all  Aat  man  eouU  tee. 88

stiil  farther  on,  Mjf  iranegreman  is  sealed  Up  in  a  bag^  Book
now  saitfa,  If  I  shall  be  judged,  I  know  thai  I  shall  ^jf^
found  just.  For  it  is  impossible  for  sin  and  righteonsnesA  17.  '
to  meet  together.  But  the  holy  man^  attributing  wickedness
to  himself^  and  the  purifjing  of  him  to  Almighty  Ood,  at
once  sees  that  he  is  a  sinner  in  himself,  and  knows  that  he  is
made  righteous  by  free  gift.  Who  even  in  the  midst  of
good  practice  earned  in  superabounding  grace  to  have  stripes
put  upon  him.  And  he  already  rejoices  to  bo  '  found  just*
in  Judgment,,  who  beheld  himself  before  Judgment  smitten
with  the  rod.  Hence  too  when  he  says  long  afterwards,  ify
transgression  is  sealed  up  in  a  bag^  he  adds  directly;  but
Thou  hast^  healed  mine  iniquity*  He,  then,  that  describes
himself  as  ^  found  just'  in  Judgment,*  says  not  at  all  that  he
is  not  jusdy  smitten,  although  the  Lord  did  not  intend  to
obliterate  sins  by  the  scourge,  but  to  increase  his  merits*  It
proceeds;

Ver.  19. Who  is  he  that  will  plead  with  mef Let  him
come.

52.  Holy  men  so  guard  themselves  in  their  good  works,  xzzix.
with  G^od  for  their  aid,  that  there  can  be  no  where  found,
without,  grounds,  whereon  to  accuse  them;  but  within, in  the
secret  thoughts  of  their  own  hearts,  they  watch  over  them-
selves with  such  good  heed,  that,  if  it  might  be,  they  may
at  all  times  stand  blameless  before  the  eyes  of  the  interior
Judge.  But  what  they  are  able  to  effect,  that  they  never  should
slip  outwardly  in  act,  they  are  unable  to  effect  inwardly,
that  they  never  should  mske  a  false  step  in  thought.  For
man^s  conscience,  from  the  very  fact  that  it  withdraws'  from
the  things  deepest  within,  is  always  on  slippery  ground.
Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  even  holy  men  often  slip  in
them.  So  let  holy  Job,  speaking  as  well  in  his  own  voice  as
in  the  voice  of  the  Elect,  say.  Who  is  he  that  will  plead
with  mef  Let  him  come.  For,  seeing  that  in  external  actions
there  is  no  occasion  for  which  to  fasten  a  blame  upon  him,
he  freely  looks  about  for  an  accuser.  But  because  the
consciences  even  of  the  righteous  sometimes  have  to  charge
themselves  with  foolishness  of  thought,  it  is  on  this  account
perhaps  that  it  is  added ;

f  <  reoedit/  but  tome  reiu)  <  oeddit/  <  hath  bllen.'
VOL.  II.  D

84 Qnudmce  noia  thaughi$* Ood  not  fully  itrvtd  in  fear.

Job  is, fVhy  am  I  consumed  in  Hlencef

53.  For  he  is  ^  consumed  in  silence,'  irho,  in  blaming


^1^  *  himself  for  foolishness  of  thought*  is  gpaawed  in  his  own

heart  by  the  toolh  of  conscience. As  if  he  said  in  plain

words,  '  As  I  have  so  lived  that  I  should  never  fear  any

.  accuser  without,  would  that  1  had  so  lived  that  I  should

never  have  my  conscience  for  mine  accuser  within  me.' For

he  is  '  consumed  in  silence,'  who  discovers  in  himself  within

1  onde cause  whereby  the  fire  should  gpaaw  him^ It  goes  on;

"^^^ Ver.  20.  Only  do  not  two  things  unto  me :  then  will  I  not

hide  myself  from  Thy  face.

64.  What  are  we  to  understand  here  by  the  ^  face  of  God,'
saving  His  vbitation?  In  which,  whilst  He  beholds.  He
also  punishes  our  sins,  fi'om  which  no  just  man  even  is
hidden,  if  the  two  things,  which  he  entreats,  be  not  removed;
concerning  which  he  adds;

Ver.  21.  Withdraw  Thine  hand  far  from  me,  and  let  not

Thy  dread  make  me  afraid.

xli. 66.  By  which  same  two  what  else  does  he  ask  in  a  voice

PaopH*  ^f  prophecy,  but  the  season  of  grace  and  redemption  ? For

the  Law  held  the  people  obnoxious  to  the  stroke  of  vengeance,

that  whoso  committed  sin  under  its  yoke,  should  be  forthwith

punished  with  death. Nor  did  the  Israelitish  people  serve

God  from  a  principle  of  love,  but  of  fear. But  righteousness

simplerican  never  be  perfected'  by  fear,  seeing  that  according  to  the

1  John  voice  of  John,  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear. And  Paul

ItornJa  comforts  the  children  of  adoption,  by  saying.  For  ye  have

15. fioi  received  tlie  spirit  qf  bondage  again  to  fear  ^  but  ye  have

received  the  Spirit  of  adoption^  whereby  we  cry^  Abba,

Father. Therefore  in  the  voice  of  mankind,  longing  for  the

hardness  of  the  stroke  of  the  Law  to  pass  away,  and  eagerly

desiring  to  advance  from  fear  to  love,  he  names  in  prayer  what

*  two  things  God  should  put  far  from  him,'  saying.  Withdraw

nine  hand  far  from  me,  and  let  not  Thy  dread  make  me

afraid:  i.  e.  remove  from  me  the  hardness  of  the  stroke,

take  away  the  weight  of  dread,  and  while  the  grace  of  love

illumines  me,  pour  upon  me  the  spirit  of  assurance,  in  that

if  I  be  not  removed  far  from  the  rod  and  fi'om  dread,  I  know

that  I  shall  not  be  withdrawn  from  the  strictness  of  Thy

searching. Since  he  cannot  be  justified  before  Thee,  who

Conver$e  with  Ood. Knowledge  of  our  $in$  Heedfitt. 35

•erres  Thee  not  on  a  principle  of  lore,  bat  of  fear.* Hence  Book
he  seeks  the  rerj  presence  of  his  Creator  itself,  as  it  were  — —


fiuniliariy,  and  in  a  bodily  sort,  that  be  may  thereby  both
hear  what  he  is  ignorant  of,  and  be  heard  in  the  things  thAt
he  knows. For  he  adds  directly;

Ver.  32.  Then  ecUl  Thou^  and  I  will  answer;  or  lei  me
epeaki  asid  anstoer  Thou  me.

66.  Who  at  the  time,  when  He  did  appear  by  the  assump-
tion of  the  flesh  to  the  eyes  of  mankind,  disclosed  to  men
their  sins,  which  they  were  doing  and  knew  not  Whence
it  is  added;

Ver.  23.  How  many  are  mine  iniquitiee  cmd  my  rinet
make  me  to  know  my  eritnee  and  my  qffeneee.

67.  Thoagh  the '  calling*  and  *  answering^  may  likewise  xlii.
be  understood  in  another  way. For  God's '  calling*  ns  is
His  having  respect  to  ns  in  loring  and  choosing  tis,  and  onr

*  answering*  is  the  yielding  obedience  to  His  lore  by  good
works,  l^ere  it  is  fitly  added.  Or  let  me  epeak,  and  anstoer
Ifum  me.  For  we  *  speak,*  when  we  beg  for  God*s  face  in
desire,  and  God  answers  onr  speaking,  when  He  appears  to
OS  that  love  Him.  Bat  because  whoever  pants  with  longing
for  the  eternal  world,  examines  his  doings,  taking  himself  to
task  with  great  exactness,  and  searches  lest  there  be  aught
in  him,  whereby  he  might  offend  the  face  of  his  Creator,  he
rightly  adds.  How  many  are  mine  iniquitiee  and  my  sine  f
Make  me  to  knbw  my  crimes  and  offences.  This  is  the  task
of  the  righteous  in  this  life,  to  find  out  themselves,  and  on
finding  out  to  bring  themselves  to  a  better  state  by  weeping
and  self-chastening.  And  though  John  the  Apostle  tells  us  that
there  is  no  odds  between  iniquity  and  sin,  when  he  says,  1  Jobn
iniquity  is  sin;  yet  in  the  rimple  usage  of  speech, '  iniquity*'*  ^'
sounds  something  more  than  *  sin,'  and  every  one  confesses
himself  a  ^  sinner,*  but  he  is  sometimes  ashamed  to  call
himself  an  iniquitous  person.  Now  between  ^  crimes*  and
^  offences*  there  is  this  difference,  that  ^  crime*  over  and
above  exceeds  the  weight  and  measure  of  sin,  but  an '  offence*
does  not  exceed  the  weight  of  sin;  for  thus,  when  a  sacrifice
is  commanded  to  be  offered  under  the  Law,  it  is  doubtless
enjoined,  as  for  a  '  sin,*  the  same  for  an  *  offence'  too.  And
crime  is  never  done  but  in  deed,  whereas  offence  is  most

d2

36  Misery  of  fallen  man  in  not  seeing  Ood*

Jot  IS,  commonly  commiUed  in  thought  alone. Hence  it  b  said  by

jJ^the  Psalmist,  Who  can  understand  his  offences  f seeing

Pa.  19/  that  sins  of  practice  are  known  the  quicker,  in  proportion  as

^^ they  appear  externally,  but  sins  of  thought  are  the  more

difficult  to  apprehend,  that  they  are  committed  out  of  sight

Hence  any  one,  who  being  made  solicitous  by  the  love  of

Eternity,  has  it  at  heart  to  appear  clean  before  the  Judge

that  shall  come,  examines  himself  so  much  the  more  exactly

now,  in  proportion  as  he  bethinks  himself  how  he  may  then

present  himself  free  to  His  terribleuess;  and  he  beseeches  to

have  it  shewn  him,  wherein  he  offends,  that  he  may  punish

that  thing  in  himself  by  penance,  and  by  judging  himself

here,  may  be  rendered  unobnoxious  to  judgment.

68.  But  herein  it  is  needful  to  observe,  how  great  is  the
punishment  of  our  pilgrimage  which  has  fallen  upon  us,  who
have  been  brought  to  such  a  degree  of  blindness,  that  we  do
not  know  our  own  selves.  We  do  evil,  and  yet  do  not  quickly
find  it  out,  even  when  done.  For  the  mind,  being  banished
from  the  light  of  truth,  finds  in  itself  nothing  else  than  dark-
ness, and  very  often  puts  out  the  foot  into  the  pit  of  sin,  and
knows  it  not.  Which  it  is  subject  to  from  the  blindness  of
the  state  of  exile  alone,  seeing  that,  being  driven  away  from  the
illumining  of  the  Lord,  it  even  lost  the  power  to  see  itself,
in  that  it  loved  not  the  face  of  its  Maker.  Hence  it  is  added ;
Ver.  24.  Wherefore  hidest  Tfiou  Thy  face,  and  holdest  me
for  Thine  enemy  i
xliii.  59«  Man  enjoyed  the  light  of  inward  contemplation  in
Paradise,  but  by  gratifying  himself,  as  he  departed  firom
himself,  he  lost  the  light  of  the  Creator,  and  fled  firom  His
face  to  the  trees  of  Paradise,  seeing  that,  after  his  sin,  he
dreaded  to  see  Him,  whom  he  had  used  to  love.  But  mark,
after  sin  he  is  brought  into  punishment,  but  from  punishment
he  returns  to  love,  because  he  finds  out  what  was  the  conse-
quence of  his  transgression,  and  that  face,  which  he  feared
in  sin,  being  awakened  to  a  right  sense,  he  seeks  afiresh  by
punishment,  that  he  may  henceforth  flee  the  darkness  of  his
blind  condition,  and  shrink  with  horror  from  this  alone,  that
he  does  not  behold  his  Creator.  Pierced  with  which  long-
ing the  holy  man  exclaims.  Wherefore  hidest  Titou  Thyface,
and  takest  me  for  Thine  enemy?  *  since,  if  Thou  didst  regard

Mm  im  UmpiatUm  likB  a  baf  driven  by  the  wbul. 87

me  as  n  friend,  Thoa  wooldest  not  deprive  me  of  the  light  of  Book
Thj  Tision.' And  going  on,  he  adds  the  fickleness  of  the "*
hnman  heart,  saying,

Yer.  25.  fViti  Thou  shew  Thy  power  against  a  leaf  driven
to  andfrof  and  wilt  Thou  pursue  the  dry  stubble f

60.  For  what  is  man  but  a  leaf,  who  fell  in  Paradise  from  xli?.
the  tree  ?  what  bat  a  leaf  is  he,  who  is  caught  by  the  wind
of  temptation,  and  lifted  up  by  the  gusts  of  his  passions  i
For  the  mind  of  man  is  agitated  as  it  were  by  as  many  gusts,
as  it  undergoes  temptations.  Thus  very  often  anger  agitates
it;  when  anger  is  gone,  empty  mirth  succeeds.  It  is  driren
by  the  goadings  of  lust,  by  the  fever  of  avarice  it  is  made  to
stretch  itself  fiur  and  wide  to  compass  the  things  which  belong
to  the  earth.  Sometimes  pride  lifts  it  up,  and  sometimes
excessive  fear  sinks  it  lower  than  the  dust  Therefore  seeing
that  he  is  lifted  and  carried  by  so  many  gusts  of  temptation,
man  is  well  likened  to  a  '  leaf.^  Hence  it  is  well  said  too  by
Isaiah,  And  we  all  have  fallen  as  a  leaf,  and  our  iniquities  UMyB.
like  the  wind  have  taken  us  away.  For  '  our  iniquity  like  a
wind  has  taken  us  away,'  in  that  being  steadied  by  no  weight
of  virtue,  it  has  lifted  us  into  empty  self-elation.  And  it  is
well  that,  after  a  leaf,  man  should  be  called  '  stubble*  likewise.
For  he  that  was  a  *  tree'  by  his  creating,  was  by  himself  made
a  *  leaf  in  his  tempting,  but  afterwards  he  appeared '  stub-
ble' in  his  fallen  estate.  For  in  that  he  fell  from  on  high,
he  was  a  leaf,  but,  whereas  by  the  flesh  he  was  fellow  to  the
earth,  even  when  he  seemed  to  stand,  he  is  described  as
'  stubble.'  But  because  he  lost  the  greenness  of  interior
love,  he  is  henceforth  *  dry  stubble.'  So  let  the  holy  man
reflect  both  what  meanness  man  is  of,  and  what  severity  God
is  of,  and  let  him  say.  Wilt  Thou  shew  Thy  power  against
a  leaf  driven  to  andfrof  and  wilt  Thoa  pursue  the  dry
stubble?  As  if  he  openly  bewailed,  saying,  *  Why  dost  Thou
run  him  down  with  so  much  force  of  righteousness,  whom
Thou  knowest  to  be  so  frail  in  temptation?' It  goes  on;

Ver.  26.  For  Thou  writest  bitter  things  agaifist  me,

01.  For  seeing  that  every  thing  we  speak  passes  away,  ^^*
but  what  we  write  remains,  God  is  said  not  to  '  speak,'  but  to
*  write  bitter  things,'  in  that  His  scourges  upon  us  last  for
long. For  it  was  said  once  to  man,  when  he  sinned.  Dust

38 Severity  of  Ood. Sins  of  youth  feared  in  Monhood.

Job  18)  thou  artf  and  unto  duet  ehalt  thou  return  f  And  Angels  many
g — ^  times  appearing  gave  commandments  to  men. Moses,  the
lawgiver,  restrained  sins  by  severe  means. The  Only-Degot*
ten  Son  of  the  Most  High  Father,  Himself  came  to  redeem
us,  He  swallowed  up  death  by  dying,  He  announced  that
everlasting  life  to  us,  which  He  exhibited  in  Himself;  yet
that  sentence  which  was  given  in  Paradise  concerning  the
death  of  our  flesh  remains  unaltered  from  the  very  first  be-
ginning of  the  human  race  up  to  the  end  of  the  world. For
Pt.  69,  what  man  ie  he  that  liveth^  and  ehall  not  see  death?  which
Pt.  je ^®  P&almist  considering  well  saith  again,  Thou,  even  Thou,
7- art  to  be  feared:  and  who  may  etand  in  Thy  eight  when  once
Thou  art  angry  t  Who  being  ^  once  angry,*  when  man  sinned
in  Paradise,  fixed  the  sentence  of  the  mortality  of  our  flesh,
which  now  even  to  the  very  last  may  never  be  changed  a
whit. Therefore  let  him  say.  Thou  writest  bitter  things
against  me. Hence  it  is  fiirther  added ;

And  wouldest  waste  me  with  the  iniquities  qf  my  youth.
xlvi.  62.  Observe,  that  whereas  the  holy  man  finds  not  that  he
1  jttTcn*  has  ever  sinned  in  his  manhood',  he  dreads  the  sins  of  his
<adolet. youth*.  Now  it  is  necessary  to  know,  that  as  in  the  body,  so
^^^*  are  there  advances  of  age  in  the  mind  also.  Thus  the  first
age  of  man  is  infancy,  when,  though  he  lives  in  innocence,
he  cannot  speak ^  the  innocence  which  is  in  him;  and  then
follows  boyhood,  in  which  he  has  henceforth  the  power  of
speaking  what  he  wishes;  to  which  youth  succeeds,  which  we
know  is  the  first  age  in  active  life,  which  is  followed  by
manhood,  i.  e.  that  which  is  suited  to  hardihood;  and  after-
wards old  age,  which  from  mere  time  even  is  now  fellow  to
maturity  of  mind.  Therefore,  as  we  have  called  the  first  age
fit  for  good  actions  '  youth,'  and  as  the  righteous  when  they
are  fiaur  advanced  in  perfect  maturity  of  mind,  sometimes
recall  to  recollection  the  beginning  of  their  deeds,  and  blame
themselves  for  their  first  commencement  in  an  equal  degree
as  they  have  advanced  deeper  in-  gravity  of  mind,  because
they  find  that  they  were  once  void  of  discretion,  in  proportion
as  they  afterwards  more  thoroughly  attain  possession  of  the
stronghold  of  discretion,  it  is  rightly  that  now,  in  the  words  of

^  In  allnfioD  to  tb«  etymology  of  the anoe.'  from  <  in/  privatise,  and  <  (aii'  *  to
word  <  intiwt,'  i.  e.  '  not  haring  ntter- speai.'

Haw  God  retains  our  iim^  and  marks  out  tary  hUsnticm.  89

the  holy  man,  the  sins  of  his  youth  are  dreaded* But  if  this  Book

is  to  be  held  after  the  bare  letter,  we  ought  from  this  con- ^

sideration  to  infer  how  grievous  the  sins  of  grown  men  and
the  aged  are,  if  the  just  so  greatly  fear  even  that  which  they
did  wrong  in  the  years  of  weakness. It  goes  on;

Ver.  27.  Thau  puttest  my  foot  also  in  the  stocks^  and
lookest  narrowly  into  all  my  paths;  Thou  markest  the  prints
(if  my  feet.

63.  Ood  *  set  man's  foot  in  the  stocks,'  in  that  he  bound  xWii.
fast  his  wickedness  with  the  strong  sentence  of  His  severity.
And  He  ^  looketh  narrowly  into  all  his  paths,'  in  that  He
judges  with  minute  exactness  all  the  several  particulars  that
belong  to  him.  For  a '  path'  is  usually  narrower  than  a  *  wbj  ;'
but  as  by  '  ways'  we  understand  actions,  so  by  ^  paths'  we
not  unjustly  understand  the  mere  thoughts  of  them.  So
Ood  *  looketh  narrowly  into  all  our  paths,'  in  that  in  all  our
several  actions  He  takes  account  of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart
too;  and  He  *  marketh  the  prints  of  our  feet,'  in  that  He  exa-
mineth  the  intentions'  of  our  works,  how  far  they  are  placed
aright,  lest  that  which  is  done  a  good  work,  be  not  done  with
a  right  object.  But  it  is  possible  that  by  the  prints  of  the
feet  the  several  things  done  badly  may  be  understood.  For
a  foot  in  the  body  is  a  print  in  the  way.  And  very  commonly,
when  we  do  some  things  wrong,  whereas  out  brethren  see  it,
we  are  setting  them  a  bad  example,  and  our  foot  being  as  it
were  turned  out  of  the  way,  we  leave  to  those  that  follow  our
footsteps  all  awry,  while  by  our  own  deeds  we  lead  the  way
for  other  men's  consciences  to  stumble.  But  it  is  very  hard  for
man  to  keep  on  his  guard,  that  he  never  presume  to  do  evil,
that  in  his  good  actions  he  be  not  tmsteady  in  the  intention,
and  amidst  upright  deeds  let  no  wrong  purpose  deceive  him.
Yet  an  these  particulars  Almighty  Ood  minutely  examines,
and  weighs  each  one  of  them  in  judgment.  But  when  can
man,  bound  about  as  he  is  by  the  frailty  of  the  flesh,  have
power  to  rise  up  against  all  of  them  with  exact  particularity,
and  to  maintain  the  line  of  uprightness  with  the  thought  of
the  heart  unmoved  ? Hence  it  is  properly  added ;

Ver.  28.  Who  am  as  a  rotten  thing  to  be  eonsumedy  and
as  a  garment  that  is  moth  eaten,

I  Which  he  often  eonskbrf  to  he  repreeented  hj  the  pattiog  forth  of  the  loot

40 Sin  $ai$  into  ih$  said  as  a  moth. Man^i  frail  origin.

Job  is.  64.  ]Por  as  a  garment  ia  eaten  by  the  moth  aprung  out  of
^'  itself,  so  man  containeth  rottenness  in  himself,  whereby  he
^j^^ll^^consumeth,  and  that  which  he  is,  is  that  whereby  he  con-
sumetb  that  he  should  not  be.  Which  may  be  taken  in
another  sense  also,  if  it  be  said  in  the  voice  of  man  when
tempted;  And  I  as  a  rotten  thing  am  to  coMume^  as  a  gar-
ment that  is  moth  eaten.  For  man  '  as  a  rotten  thing  con-
sumeth,'  in  that  he  is  wasted  by  the  corruption  of  his  flesh.
And  because  impure  temptation  springs  up  to  him  from  no
other  source  than  from  himself,  like  a  moth,  temptation  con-
sumes the  flesh,  as  a  garment  from  which  it  issues.  For  man
contains  in  himself  the  occasion  whence  he  is  tempted.
Therefore  as  it  were  *  the  moth  consumeth  the  gaynent,'
whilst  it  proceeded  from  that  very  same  garment  However,
we  ought  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  moth  digs  its  way  through
the  garment  without  any  sound,  and  it  very  often  happens  that
thought  pierces  the  mind  in  such  a  way,  that  the  mind  itself
is  not  sensible  of  it,  until  after  it  has  been  pierced  by  its
sting.  Therefore  it  is  well  said  that  man  ^  consumeth  like  a
garment  that  is  moth  eaten,'  for  sometimes  we  do  not  know
the  wounds  of  temptation,  unless  after  we  be  pierced  thereby
within  our  souls.  Which  same  frailty  of  ours  the  holy  man
yet  Aurther  considering  justly  adds;

Chap*  xiv.  1.  Man  that  is  bom  qfa  woman  liveth  a  short
time^  and  is  full  qfmany  miseries.
xlix. 66.  In  Sacred  Writ  *  woman'  is  taken  cither  for  the  sex,
Oal.  4,  or  else  for  *  frailty.' For  the  '  sex,'  as  where  it  is  written,  Qod
^* sent  forth  His  Son^  made  qfa  uxmian,  made  under  the  Latp.
EooloA.  But  for  frailty,  as  where  it  is  said  by  the  Wise  Man,  Better
^'  ^^*  is  the  iniquity  of  a  man  than  a  woman  doing  welL For  ^  a
man'  is  the  term  for  every  strongmiuded  and  discreet  person,
but  ^  a  woman'  is  understood  of  the  weak  or  indiscreet  mind.
And  it  often  happens  that  even  the  discreet  person  suddenly
fiUls  into  a  fi^ult,  and  that  another  weak  and  indiscreet  man
exhibits  good  practice. But  he  that  is  weak  and  indiscreet  is
sometimes  lifted  up  the  more  on  the  score  of  what  he  has
done  well,  and  falls  the  worse  into  sin;  but  the  discreet  per-
son even  from  that  which  he  sees  that  he  has  done  amiss,
takes  occasion  to  recall  himself  with  closer  application  to  the
rule  of  strictness,  and  advances  the  ftirther  in  righteousness

Mwflt  Aori  K/i  hawfkB  rfmi$eH€$  ai  but.  41

from  the  same  act,  whereby  he  aeemed  to  hare  fallen  from  Book
righteonmess  for  a  time.  In  which  respect  it  ii  rightly  said,  — —
Better  is  the  iniquity  qfa  man  than  a  uxnnan  doing  noell;
in  that  sometimes  the  rerj  fault  of  the  strong  becomes  occa-
sion of  Tirtae,  and  the  virtue  of  the  weak  occasion  of  sin.
In  this  place  then  by  the  name  of '  a  woman/  what  else  but
^  frailty*  is  denoted,  when  it  is  said,  Man  that  is  bom  qfa
woman?  As  if  it  were  said  in  plainer  words, '  What  strength
shall  he  hare  in  himself,  who  was  bom  in  frailty?'

66.  Idveih  a  short  time^  and  iiJiM  of  many  miseries*  Ob-
senre  by  the  holy  man's  words  we  hare  the  punishment  of  man
briefly  set  forth,  in  that  he  is  at  once  stmted  in  life  and  filled
out  in  misery.  For  if  we  consider  with  exactness  all  that  is
done  here,  it  is  punishment  and  misery.  For  to  minister  to
the  corruption  of  the  flesh  by  itself  in  things  necessary  and
permitted  is  misery,  in  such  measure  that  clothing  should  be
sought  out  against  cold,  food  against  hunger,  coolness  against
heat.  That  the  health  of  the  body  is  kept  only  with  great
care,  that  eren  when  kept  it  is  lost,  when  lost  it  is  recorered  not
without  great  difficulty,  and  yet  after  being  restored  is  always
in  risk;  what  else  is  this  than  the  misery  of  the  life  of  mortality  ?
That  we  lore  our  friends,  mistrusting  lest  they  may  be
oflTended  with  us;  that  we  dread  our  enemies,  and  truly  are
not  secure  touching  those  whom  we  dread;  that  we  often  talk
to  our  enemies  as  confidentially  as  to  friends,  and  often  take
the  sincere  words  of  our  friends,  and  those,  perhaps,  that
lore  us  rery  much,  as  the  words  of  enemies;  and  that  we,  who
wish  tierer  either  to  be  deceired  or  to  deceive,  err  the  more
by  our  caution ;  what,  then,  is  all  this  but  the  misery  of  man's
life?  That  after  the  heavenly  country  has  been  lost,  banished
man  is  delighted  with  his  exile,  that  he  is  weighed  down
with  cares,  and  yet  shuts  his  eyes  to  considering  how  great  the
burthen  is,  in  that  he  is  fall  of  a  multitude  of  thoughts;  that
he  is  deprived  of  the  interior  light,  and  yet  in  this  life  wishes
to  prolong  his  state  of  blindness;  what  else  is  this  but  misery,
the  offspring  of  our  punishment?  Yet  though  he  desire  to
stay  here  for  long,  still  he  is  driven  on  by  the  mere  current
of  his  mortal  life  to  depart  out  of  it  Hence  the  holy  man
rightly  adds;

Ver.2.  Hecometh  forth  like  a Jloweryandis  crushed:  hejleeth
also  as  a  shadow,  and  never  continueih  in  the  same  state.

42 Afon'i  li/i  as  *  thejhwer  ofprau,'  a$  *  a  Aadaw?

Job  14, 67.  For^  ^  as  a  flower,  be  cometh  forth/  in  that  be  shews

j^-^  fair  in  the  flesh;  but  be  is  '  crushed/  in  that  be  is  reduced

\^ to  corruption. For  what  are  men,  as  bom  in  the  world,  but

a  kind  of  flowers  in  a  field? Let  us  stretch  our  interior  eyes

oyer  the  breadth  of  the  present  world,  and,  lo,  it  is  filled

as  it  were  with  as  many  flowers  as  there  are  human  beings*

So  life  in  this  flesh  is  the  flower  in  grass. Hence  it  is  well

Pf.  103,  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Ai  for  man,  his  days  are  at  grass:  as

il'40  6.  ajlot^r  ofthejieldy  so  he  Jlourisheth. Isaiah  too  saith,  AU

flesh  is  grasSf  and  all  the  glory  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the

fleld. For  man  cometh  forth  like  a  flower  firom  concealment,

and  of  a  sudden  shews  himself  in  open  day,  and  in  a  moment

is  by  death  withdrawn  firom  open  view  into  concealment

again. The  greenness  of  the  flesh  exhibits  us  to  view,  but

the  dryness  of  dust  withdraws  us  firom  men^s  eyes. Like  a

■oneHt. flower  we  appeared,  who  were  not;  like  a  flower*  we  wither,

graft.'  who  appeared  only  in  time.

68.  And  whereas  man  is  daily  being  driven  into  death
moment  by  moment,  it  is  rightly  added,  Hefleeth  also  as  a
shadow,  and  never  continueth  in  the  same  state. But  as  the
sun  is  unceasingly  going  through  his  course,  and  never  stays
himself  in  a  state  of  stedfastness,  why  is  the  course  of  man's
life  likened  to  *  a  shadow'  rather  than  to  the  *  sun,'  ex-
cepting that,  when  be  parted  with  the  love  of  the  Creator,
he  lost  the  heat  of  the  heart,  and  remained  in  the  coldness  of
his  iniquity  alone? Since  according  to  the  voice  of  Truth.
Matt Because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  qfmany  shall  wax
'  * cold^ He,  then,  who  hath  not  warmth  of  the  heart  in  the
love  of  God,  and  yet  keepeth  not  the  life,  which  he  loves,
assuredly  he  *  fleeth  like  a  shadow.' Hence  it  is  well  written
Eoolua.  concerning  him,  that  he  hathfoUowed  a  shadow.  Now  it  is  well
^'  ^' said,  and  never  continueth  in  the  same  state. For  whereas
infancy  is  going  on  to  childhood,  childhood  to  youth,  youth
to manhood,  and manhood  to  old  age,  and  old  age  to
death,  in  the  course  of  the  present  life  he  is  forced  by  the
very  steps  of  his  increase  upon  those  of  decrease,  and  is  ever
wasting  fi*om  the  very  cause  whence  he  thinks  himself  to  be
gaining  ground  in  the  space  of  his  life. For  we  cannot  have
a  fixed  stay  here,  whither  we  are  come  only  to  pass  on ;  and  this
very  circumstance  of  our  living  is  to  be  daily  passing  out  of  life.
Which  same  flight  the  first  man  could  not  have  known  before

FaUen  man  borne  downward. Ooifi  looking  on  inoH. 4S

the  transgression,  seeing  that  times  passed,  himself  standing.  Boos

Bat  after  he  transgressed,  he  placed  himself  on  a  kind  of ^

slide  of  a  temporal  conditiont  and  because  he  ate  the  for-
bidden firoit,  he  fonnd  at  once  the  fiJlnre  of  his  stay.  Which
liability  to  change  man  suffers,  not  onlj  without,  but  also
within  him,  when  he  strides  to  arise  to  better  works.  For  by
the  weight  of  its  changeableness  the  mind  is  always  being
driven  forwards  to  some  other  thing  than  it  is,  and^  except  it
be  kept  in  its  stay  by  stringent  discipline  in  self-keepings  it
is  always  sliding  back  into  worse.  For  that  mind  which
deserted  Him,  Who  ever  standeth,  lost  the  stay  in  which  she
might  have  continued.

Henceforth  now  when  he  strires  after  better  things,  he
has  as  it  were  to  strain  against  the  force  of  the  stream.
But  when  he  relaxes  in  his  bent  to  ascetid,  without  effort
he  is  carried  back  to  the  lowest  point  Thus  whereat  iU
ascent  there  is  effort,  in  descent  rest  from  effort,  the  Lord
warns  us  that  we  have  to  enter  by  a  narrow  gate,  saying.
Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate;  for  when  about  toI««l^
mention  *  the  entering  in  of  the  narrow  gate,*  He  premised,  '
Strive^  since  unless  there  be  an  ardent  striving^  of  the  heart,
the  water  of  the  world  is  not  surmounted,  whereby  the  soul
is  ever  being  borne  down  to  the  lowest  place.  And  so  whereas
man  '  springeth  up  like  a  flower  and  is  cut  down,  and  fleeth
also  as  a  shadow,  and  never  continueth  in  his  place,*  let  us
hear  what  he  further  subjoins  in  this  train  of  reflection.  It
goes  on ;

Ver.  3.  And  dost  I%ou  deign  to  opeti  Thine  eyes  upon
ouch  an  one^  and  io  bring  him  into  judgment  kdth  Thee  f

69.  For  he  surveyed  above  both  the  power  of  Almighty  H.
Odd  and  his  own  frailty;  he  brought  before  his  view  himself
and  Ood,  he  considered  Who  would  come  into  judgment,
and  with  whom.  He  saw  on  the  one  side  man,  oil  the  other
side  his  Creator,  i.  e.  dust  and  Ood;  and  he  rightly  exclaims.
Dost  Thou  deign-  to  open  Thine  eyes  upon  such  an  onef
With  Almighty  Ood,  to  open  the  eyes  is  to  execute  His
judgments,  to  look  whom  to  smite.  For  as  it  were  with  eyes
closed  He  does  not  wish  to  look  at  him,  whom  He  does  not
wish  to  smite.  Hence  it  is  immediately  added  also  about  the
k  al.  **  onlMf  the  porpoM  of  the  Mill  be  fenrent.''

44 Qod  only  can  cUanu  man  conmved  in  uncleanne$$.

Job  I4y judgment  iUel^  Tb  bring  him  into  judgment  with  Theef
^ —  But  whereas  he  had  vieired .  God  coming  to  judgment^  he
]^^  *  again  takes  a  view  of  his  own  frailty. He  sees  that  he  can-
not be  clean  of  himself,  who,  that  he  might  be  able  to  be,
came  forth  out  of  uncleanness. And  he  adds,

Ver,  4.  Who  can  make  clean  a  thing  conceived  of  unclean
seed? Is  it  not  Thou,  Who  only  Art?
lii. 70.  He  That  alone  is  clean  in  Himself  can  cleanse  the
unclean  thing. For  man,  who  lires  in  a  corruptible  flesh,
has  the  UQcleannesses  of  temptation  engrained  in  him,  seeing
that  he  derived  them  from  his  birth. For  his  very  conception,
for  the  sake  of  fleshly  gratification,  is  uncleanness. Hence
PiJ»,7.  the  Psalmist  saith,  Behold,  I  teas  ihapen  in  wickedness,  and
in  sin  hath  my  mother  conceived  me. Hence  it  is  therefore
that  he  is  very  often  tempted  even  against  his  will. Hence
it  is  that  he  is  subject  to  impurities  in  imagination,  even
though  he  strive  against  them  by  reason,  because  being  con-
ceived in  uncleanness,  whilst  he  follows  after  cleanness,  he
is  striving  to  get  the  better  of  that  which  he  is. But  whoever
has  mastered  the  motions  of  secret  temptation,  and  overcome
uncleanness  of  thought,  must  never  ascribe  his  cleanness  to
himself,  in  that  none  can  make  clean  a  thing  conceived  of
unclean  seed,  save  He  Who  alone  is  clean  in  Himself. Let
him,  then,  that  has  already  reached  in  mind  the  place  of
cleanness,  cast  his  eye  upon  the  way  of  his  conception,
which  he  came  by,  and  thence  satisfy  himself,  that  in  his  own
power  he  has  no  cleanness  of  life,  the  beginning  of  whose
existence  was  made  in  uncleanness. But  the  meaning  here
may  be  that  blessed  Job,  regarding  the  Incarnation  of  the
Redeemer,  saw  that  That  Man  only  in  the  world  was  not
conceived  of  unclean  seed,  Who  so  came  into  the  world  from
the  Virgin's  womb,  tlial  He  had  nothing  derived  from  unclean
conception. For  He  did  not  proceed  from  the  man  and  the
woman,  but  from  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  Virgin  Mary. He
only  then  proyed  tnily  clean  in  His  Flesh,  Who  was  incapable
of  being  affected  by  the  gratification  of  Uie  flesh,  seeing  that
it  was  not  by  the  gratification  of  the  flesh  that  He  came
hither.

BOOK  XII.  .

Wberdii  ftfter  the  fborteenUi  dwpter  of  the  Book  of  Job  Hm  boon  «z-
plalnocl,  beginniiig  at  the  fifth  Tiirte,  the  fifteenth  ohi^yter  entfare  is
expUined  for  the  moet  part  fai  a  moral  feme*

It  is  the  practice  of  the  righteonsi  to  think  of  the  present  Lit.
Kfe,  how  transitory  it  is,  so  much  the  more  heedfnllj  in
proportion  as  they  are  taught  more  earnestly  to  take  thought
of  the  eternal  blessings  of  the  heUvenly  Country;  for  by
those  things,  which  they  see  lasting  within,  they  more  exactly
mark  the  flight  of  things  passing  away  without  Whence
blessed  Job,  when  he  had  delivered  a  sentence  on  the  transi-
tion of  man's  time,  saying,  Man  thai  U  bom  qf  a  woman
hath  but  a  short  time  to  live;  and  again,  He  fleeth  aUo  a$
a  shachtCf  and  never  continuetk  in  the  same  etate;  ftirther
adds  of  the  shortness  of  his  life ;

Ver.  5.  The  days  qf  man  are  shorty  the  number  qf  hie
months  is  with  Thee.

1.  For  he  sees  that  that  as  it  were  is  not  with  us,  which i.
runs  by  with  such  great  rapidity,  but  seeing  that  even  things
passing  away  stand  with  Almighty  Qod,  he  declares  that

*  the  number  of  our  months  is  with  Him.* Or,  indeed,  by  the

*  days,*  the  shortness  of  time  is  denoted,  but  by  the  *  months*
the  spaces  of  the  days  are  multiplied.  Thus  to  ourselves
'the  days  are  short;'  but  seeing  that  our  life  is  further
extended  afterwards,  *  the  number  of  our  months'  is  recorded

,  to  be  with  Ood.' Hence  also  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  Length  Prov.  S,
qf  days  is  in  her  right  hand. It  goes  on;

Thou  hast  appointed  his  bounds^  that  he  cannot  pass,

2.  Of  the  things  that  happen  to  men  in  this  world,  none ii.
come  to  pass  without  the  secret  counsel  of  Almighty  Ood ;

for  Ood,  foreseeing  all  things  that  should  follow,  before  the
Ages  of  the  world  decreed  how  they  should  be  ordered  in  the

46  QoJti  $$tminff  ehangu  ofpurpoufrre$Hn.

Job  i4y  ages  of  tfie  world. Since  it  is  already  appointed  to  man

— 7 —  both  to  what  extent  the  prosperity  of  the  world  shall  attend
him,  or  in  what  degree  adversity  shall  £|U  upon  hiniy  that
His  Elect  neither  unbounded  prosperity  may  exalt,  nor
overmuch  adversity  sink  them  too  low;  moreover  it  is  ap-
pointed in  this  very  life  of  mortality  how  long  he  shall  live
with  the  coqditions  of  time.  For  although  Almighty  God
added  fifteen  years  to  the  life  of  King  Hezekiab,  yet  at  that
moment  that  he  suflTered  him  to  die,  He  foresaw  he  would
die. Wherein  a  question  presents  itself,  viz.  how  it  is  that

s  Kingiit  should  be  said  to  him  by  the  Prophet,  Set  thine  house  in
'  '  order,  far  thou  ihalt  die,  and  not  live?  For  he,  to  whom
sentence  of  death  was  declared,  immediately  upon  his  tears
had  life  added  to  him.  Now  the  Lord  said  by  the  Prophet
at  what  time  he  in  himself  deserved  to  die,  but  by  the
bountiftilness  of  mercy.  He  kept  him  for  the  undergoing  death
at  that  time,  which  He  Himself  foreknew  before  the  ages
began.  Nor  eveQ  therefore  was  the  Prophet  deceptive,  because
he  made  known  the  time  of  death,  at  which  that  man  deserved
to  die,  nor  were  the  appointments  of  the  Lord  rent  and  torn,
forasmuch  as  this  also,  that  the  years  of  life  should  be  added
to  by  the  bountifiilness  of  God,  was  foreordained  before  the
ages  began;  and  the  period  of  life,  which  was  added  contrary
to  expectatiop  without,  was  inwardly  appointed  without
increase  upon  foreknowledge ;  and  so  it  is  well  said.  Thou  ha$t
appointed  hii  bounds  ufhich  he  cannot  pass.

Mom.  8.  Which  may  also  be  taken  according  to  the  spirit,  in  that
we  sometimes  endeayour  to  advance  in  virtuous  attainments,
and  some  gifts  we  are  vouchsafed,  but  being  kept  off  firom
some,  wo  lie  prone  in  things  below.  For  there  is  no  man  who
masters  that  degree  of  goo4ness  which  he  desires,  in  that
Almighty  God,  Who  discerneth  the  inward  parts,  sets  bounds
to  the  very  spiritual  attainments  themselves;  that  by  reason
of  that  which  man  tries  to  master,  and  is  unable,  he  may
not  exalt  himself  in  those  things,  in  which  he  has  the  power.
Whence  too  that  great  Preacher,  that  had  been  carried
up  into  the  third  heaven,  and  penetrated  the  secrets  of
Paradise,  after  that  revelation,  was  not  left  the  power  to  be
at  rest,  and  without  temptation;  but  whereas  Almighty  God
has  ^  appointed  man  his  bounds,  which  he  cannot  pass,'  he

itfon*!  atiainmemiM  Kmited. langmgfifr  ih$  end» 47

both  exalted  him to  know  things  on  high,  and  set  him  Book
down  again  to  be  subject  to  weak  things,  that  he  looldng  at


the  measure  of  his  compass,  whiUit  he  endearoared  to  lay
hold  on  security,  and  could  not,  that  he  might  not  be  carried
out  of  himself  in  pride,  might  be  forced  in  humility  ever  to
return  back  within  his  own  bounds. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  6.  Turn  from  him  a  Utile  whiles  ihiU  he  may  re#l,
iiU  his  longed  for  day  come^  at  an  hirelings.

4k,  In  this  place.  Turn  from  him,  means,  '  remore  from  iii,
him  the  force  of  the  stroke,*  for  who  can  rest  when  He  turns
away  from  him,  when  He  Himself  alone  is  rest,  and  the
further  off  a  man  is  from  Him,  he  is  also  rendered  roid  of
rest  in  proportion?  Thus  it  is  in  such  sort  said.  Turn  from
him,  that  you  should  understand,  ^  from  smiting  ;*  for  it  is  fitly
added,  till  hie  longed  for  day  comet  a»  an  hireUng^e.  In
proportion  as  an  hireling  is  far  from  the  end  of  his  work,  so
is  he  far  from  the  recompense  of  his  wages.  Thus  erery
holy  man  being  set  in  this  Hfe,  whilst  he  sees  that  he  is  far
from  departing  out  of  the  present  life,  laments  that  he  is
far  from  the  eternal  bliss.  What  then  is  it  to  say,  Turn
from  him  a  lUile  while ^  that  he  may  rest;  but,  *  withdraw
now  the  strokes  of  the  present  life,  and  shew  the  blessings
of  eternal  rest?'  Whence  too  it  is  added  concerning  that
rest  itself;  till  hi*  longed  for  day  come^  as  an  hireling's;
for  then  the  longed  for  day  as  of  an  hireling  comes  to  man,
when  he  receives  eternal  rest  in  compensation  for  his  labour.
But  as  far  as  relates  to  the  aspect  of  the  present  life,  how
despicable  is  the  race  of  man,  so  frill  of  miseries,  blessed
Job  yet  further  tetU>  and  describes  how  greatly  the  very
things  without  sense  seem  to  surpass  him,  when  he  says ;

Ver.  7 — 10.  For  there  is  a  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  doum,
that  it  will  be  green  again ;  and  that  the  tender  branches
thereof  will  sprout  forth.  ITumgh  the  root  thereof  wax  old
in  the  earthy  and  the  stock  thereof  die  in  the  ground;  yet
through  the  scent  qf  ttater  it  will  budy  and  bring  forth  foliage
as  when  it  was  planted.  But  many  when  he  is  dead,  and
strippedy  and  consumedy  where  is  hef

5.  Now  because  this  is  self-evident  according  to  the  letter, It.
we  must  refer  the  sense  to  the  things  of  the  interior,  and  ^^^'
search  how  they  are  to  be  made  out  after  the  spiritual

48 Recovery  of  the  Tree  eymbol  of  that  of  the  Bighteous.

Job  14,  signification. Thus  in  Holy  Scripture  by  the  name  of '  tree'

J*  ^' we  have  represented  sometimes  the  Cross,  sometimes  the

*  righteous  man,  or  even  the  unrighteous  man,  and  sometimes

the  Wisdom  of  God  Incarnate. Thus  the  Cross  is  denoted

Jer.  11,  by  '  the  tree/  when  it  is  said,  Let  ue  put  ttie  tree  into  his

19.  y. ii^^^j.  [qjp  ^  ( p^|  ^Q  ij^QQ  iiiiQ  (f^Q  bread*  is  to  apply  the

Cross  to  the  Body  of  our  Lord. Again  by  the  title  of  ^  the
tree'  we  have  the  just  man,  or  even  the  unjust  man,  set  forth,
Es.  17,  as  the  Lord  saith  by  the  Prophet,  I  the  Lord  have  brought
down  the  high  tree^  and  exalted  the  low  tree. Forasmuch
Luk«i4,  as  according  to  the  word  of  the  self-same  Truth,  Whosoever
^^* ewalteth  himself  shall  be  abased;  and  he  that  humbleth  him-
"Roo.  II f  self  shall  be  exalted:  Solomon  also  saith.  If  the  tree  fall
^' towards  the  Souths  or  toward  the  Norths  in  the  place  where
the  tree  fatleth^  there  it  shall  be. For  in  the  day  of  their
death  the  just  man  does  *  fall  to  the  South,'  and  the  unjust  *  to
the  North,'  in  that  both  the  just  man  in  favour  of  the  Spirit  is
brought  to  joy,  and  the  sinner,  together  with  the  apostate
Iia.  14,  Angel,  who  baid,  /  unll  sit  also  upon  the  mount  of  the  tes-
^^ timony,  in  the  sides  of  lite  North,  is  cast  away  in  his  frozen
heart Again,  the  Wisdom  of  God  Incarnate  is  represented  by
ProT.  8,  ^  the  Tree,'  as  where  it  is  written  thereon,  Shu  is  a  tree  of
^^' life  to  them  that  lay  hold  on  Her. And  as  She  Herself
Lake3S,  says.  If  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be
done  in  the  dry?  And  so  in  this  place  whereas  a  tree  is  pre-
ferred before  roan,  what  is  man  taken  for  but  every  carnal
person?  and  what  is  denoted  by  the  title  of '  the  tree,'  but
the  life  of  the  righteous? For  I  here  is  a  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it
be  cut  down,  that  it  will  be  green  again. For  when  in  a
death  of  painful  endurance  the  just  man  is  hard  bestead*
for  the  truth,  in  the  greenness  of  everlasting  life  he  is  re-
covered again;  and  he  who  here  proved  green  by  faith,  there
ispeciem  becomes  green  in  actual  sight  >• *  And  his  branches  shoot,'
in  that  it  is  most  often  the  case  that  by  the  sufferings  of  the
just  man,  all  faithful  persons  are  redoubled  in  the  love  of  the
heavenly  country,  and  they  receive  the  greenness  of  the
spiritual  life,  while  they  are  glad  that  he  did  courageously
here  in  God's  behalf. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  8,  9.  T/iough  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  the  earth,
•  Some  omit '  in,'  maUng  it  limply  <  ig  put  to  a  death  of  mflering  for  the  troth.'

The  '  Root  ofthe  Righteous'  revives  in  adversity. id

and  the  stock  thereof  die  in  the  dust;  yet  through  the  sceni  ^k

oftcater  it  wilt  budj  and  bring  forth  leaves  as  when  it  was ^

first  planted.

6.  What  is  '  the  root*  of  the  righteousy  but  holy  preaching, ▼.
since  it  is  that  he  springs  out  of,  and  that  he  holds  on  in  ?
and  what  is  meant  by  the  name  of '  the  earth*  or  of  *  dust,*
but  the  sinner? to  whom  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  the
Creator,  ''Earth  tlwu  art,  and  unto  earth  shalt  thou  return.  Oen.  s.
Or,  indeed,  as  our  Translation  reads,  ^Dust  tlu>u  art,  andi^
unto  dust  shalt  thou  return. Thus  '  the  root  of  the  righto-  ^^8*
ous  waxes  old  in  the  earth,  and  his  stock  dies  in  the  dust^*
in  that  in  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  his  preaching  is  despised,
and  thought  dried  of  all  goodness,  and  *  his  stock  dies  in  the
dust,*  in  that  amidst  the  hands  of  the  persecutors  his  body
is  bereft  of  life ;  for  according  to  the  words  of  Wisdom,  In  Wi0d.8,
the  sight  of  the  unwise  they  seemed  to  dte,  and  their  depar-^'
ture  is  taken  for  misery. But  this  one,  whose  *  root  waxed
old  in  the  earth,  and  whose  trunk  died  in  the  dust,'  through
the  smell  of  water ,  huddeth ;  in  that  through  the  inspiration
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  example  bf  his  conduct  he  causes
the  budding  of  virtue  in  the  hearts  of  the  Elect. For  by
the  designation  of  water  sometimes  the  watering  of  the  Holy
Spirit  is  used  to  be  imderstood,  as  where  it  is  written,  Ifjolm  7,
any  man  thirst ,  let  him  come  unto  Me^  and  drink. But^^y^^
whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him,  shalti^*
never  thirst. It  follows;  And  bring  forth  foliage  as  when
it  was  first  planted. To  ^-bring  forth  foliage  on  the  stock
being  cut  down'  is,  when  the  just  man  is  put  an  end  to  in  the
body,  by  the  mere  example  of  his  suffering  to  raise  up  the
hearts  of  many,  and  out  of  a  right  faith  to  shew  forth  the
greenness  of  truth. And  it  is  well  ssdd. As  when  it  wcu
first  planted. All  that  is  done  by  the  righteous  here  is  a
second  planting;  in  that  clearly  the  first  planting  does  not
consist  in  the  practice  of  the  good,  ))ut  in  the  foreknow-
ledge of  the  Creator;  and  whereas  alt  that  the  Elect  do,  as  it
is  first  seen  and  settled  interiorly,  so  afterwards  is  executed
outwardly,  it  is  well  said,  And  bring  forth  foliage  as  when  it
was  first  planted,  i.  o.  it  shews  its  greenness  in  the  exe-

"  Old  Italic  YeraioD,  Vid.  Sftlwtier.
VOL.  II.  K

GO The  *  Roof  imy  be  Maris  Nature,  or  the  FleMh  of  ChrUt.

Job  14,  cuting  of  practice,  such  as  it  had  before  in  the  foreknowledge
-  t  * of  the  Creator.

7.  The  ^  root  of  the  righteous'  may  also  be  taken  for  the
very  nature  itself  of  a  human  being,  by  virtue  whereof  he
subsists,  which  same  root  waxes  old  in  the  earth,  when  the
natural  fi'ame  of  flesh  comes  to  nought  being  reduced  to
dust,  whose  '  stock  dies  in  the  dust/  in  that  the  body  dis-
mantled of  its  own  form  and  fashion  crumbles  to  nought ;
but  at  the '  scent  of  water  it  buds,*  in  that  through  the  coming
of  the  Holy  Spirit  it  rises  again;  and  it  will  bring  forth  boughs
as  when  il  teas  Jirsi  planted,  in  that  it  returns  to  that  form,
which  it  was  created  to  receive,  if,  when  he  was  set  in
Paradise,  he  had  refused  to  sin.
Proph.  8.  Which  perhaps  may  also  be  taken  of  the  Lord  Himself,
Who  is  the  Head  of  all  the  good ;  for  according  to  that
which  we  have  said  before,  whereas  He  saith  of  Himself,
Lake  For  if  they  have  done  these  things  in  a  green  tree,  what
^>  ^^'  shall  be  done  in  a  dry?  He  said  that  Himself  was  the  green
tree,  and  we  the  dry  tree,  forasmuch  as  He  contained  in  His
own  Person  the  power  of  the  Divine  Nature,  but  we  that  are
mere  men  are  called  a  dry  tiee.  And  so  *  there  is  hope  of  a
tree  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,'  in  that  even
if  He  was  able  to  be  put  to  death  by  His  Passion,  yet  by  the
glory  of  His  Resurrection,  He  came  to  the  greenness  of  life
again;  *  His  branches  shoot,'  in  that  the  faithful  being  multi-
plied by  His  Resurrection  grew  out  far  and  wido ;  His  root
as  it  were  waxed  old  in  the  earth,  in  that  the  preaching  of
Him  was  to  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews  a  despicable  thing;  *  and
His  stock  4ried  in  the  dust,'  in  that  in  the  heart  of  those
that  persecuted  Him,  which  was  uplifted  by  the  wind  of  their
unbelief,  He  was  held  as  an  object  of  scorn  and  contempt,
in  that  He  was  capable  of  being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh ;
but  *  at  the  scent  of  water  He  budded,'  in  that  through  the
power  of  God  His  Flesh  after  demise  returned  to  life,  accord-
Acts  3,  ing  to  that  which  is  written.  Whom  Ood  hath  raised  from
^*-  the  dead.  For  in  that  God  is  a  Trinity,  the  Holy  Trinity,
i.  e.  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  raised  up  to
life  the  extinct  Flesh  of  the  Only-Begotten  Son.  And  '  It
brought  forth  foliage  as  when  It  was  first  planted,'  in  that  the
feebleness  of  the  Apostles,  which  in  the  season  of  His  death

Man  itripi  ofinnoeeney  loses  his  true  Betng.  51

was  afraid  and  denied,  and  by  denying  turned  diy,  by  the  Book

glory  of  His  Resurrection  was  again  qnickened  in  faith. In ^

comparison  with  which  Tree  what  is  erery  man  but  dust  ?
Hence  it  is  added ;

Ver.  10.  Bui  when  man  is  {lead,  and  stripped^  and  con*
sumed,  where^  //w'ay,  ishet

9.  There  is  no  man  without  sin^  save  Him  Who  came  not vi-
into  this  world  by  rin ;  and  whereas  all  we  are  tied  £ut  in
the  bonds  of  giult,  we  die  by  the  mere  loss  of  righteousness.

Of  the  robe  of  innocence  given  us  aforetime  in  Paradise,  we
are  stripped  naked,  and  we  are  yet  further  consumed  by  the
subsequent  dissolution  of  the  flesh.  Thus  man  being  a
sinner  dies  in  guilt,  is  stripped  bare  of  righteousness,  is  con-
sumed in  punishment.  This  nakedness  of  his  erring  son  the
Father  roucbsafcd  to  cover,  who  said,  on  his  returning  to
him.  Bring  forth  quickly  the  Jirsi  robe.  For  '  the  first  Lokt
robe*  is  the  robe  of  innocence,  which  man  being  created  *•>  ^*
aright  received,  but  being  persuaded  wrongly  by  the  serpent
forfeited.  Against  this  same  nakedness  it  is  said.  Blessed  is  Rer.  is,
he  that  ttatcheihy  and  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk^^'
naked.  For  we  *  keep  our  garments,'  when  we  keep  the  pre-
cepts ofinnoeeney  in  our  hearts,  that  whereas  guilt  strips  us
naked  to  the  Judge,  penance  should  cover  us  returning  to
the  innocence  we  had  forfeited.  And  it  is  well  said,  Where,
I  pray y  is  hef  in  that  the  sinner,  man,  refused  to  stand
there  where  he  was  created ;  while  here,  where  he  fell,  he
is  forbidden  to  stay  for  long.  Willingly  he  forfeited  his
country,  unwillingly  he  is  driven  forth  from  his  exile,  which
he  delights  in.  Where  then  is  he,  who  is  not  in  His  love,
where  only  it  is  truly  to  be  ? It  proceeds ;

Ver.  11, 12.  As  if  the  waters  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the
river  being  emptied  drieih  up:  so  man  lieth  down,  and
riseth  not.

10.  The  mind  of  man  is  the  sea,  and  the  thoughts  of  his vii.
mind,  as  it  were,  a  wave  of  the  sea;  which  sometimes  swell

in  anger,  are  made  calm  by  grace,  and  from  hatred  run  out
in  bitterness;  but  when  man  dieth,  *  the  waters  of  the  sea  faU,*
in  that  according  to  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  In  that  very  Pn.  146,
day  his  thoughts  perish. And  again  it  is  written  concerning^'
the  dying  soul,  Also  their  love,  and  their  hatred,  and  their  Bed.  9,

e2  ^-

52  Beiurrectian  denied  only  till  this  uHtrld  ends.

Job  u^envy  shall  perish  together.  Thus  ^  the  river  being  emptied
lliiL  drieth  up/  in  that^  when  the  soul  is  withdrawn,  the  body
remains  empty*  For  the  lifeless  body  is  as  it  were  the  empty
channel  of  a  river,  wherein  it  is  to  be  marked  with  an  atten-
tive eye  that  the  present  life,  i.  e.  the  time  while  the  soul
stays  in  the  body,  is  likened  to  the  sea  and  to  a  river,  for  tlie
water  of  the  sea  is  bitter,  of  a  river  sweet.  And  because  we
that  are  living  here  are  at  one  time  under  the  influence  of
certain  bitternesses,  and  at  another  time  are  seen  to  be  serene
and  gentle  with  sweetness,  the  course  of  the  present  life  is
set  forth  by  the  similitude  of  the  sea  and  a  river.

11.  But  herein  that  seems  to  be  exceedingly  hard  which
is  added.  So  man  lieih  downy  and  riseth  not. Wherefore  do
we  so  toil  and  labour,  if  we  are  not  straining  after  the  recom-
pense of  the  Resurrection?  And  how  is  it  said,  and  riseth  not^
1  Cor. when  it  is  written,  We  shall  all  rise  again,  but  we  shall  not
Yalff!'  ^^'  ^^  changed? And  again.  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope
▼.  19. of  life  in  Christ, tee  are  of  all  men  most  miserable:  and  when
John  0,  *  Truth*  says  by  Itself,  All  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear
S8.  89.  jj^^  voice,  and  shall  come  forth;  they  that  have  done  good
unto  the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil
unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation. But  the  sentence  sub-
joined points  out  what  distinction  there  is  concealed  in  the
sentence  preceding. For  it  is  added;

'fill  the  heavens  be  no  more  they  shall  not  awake,  nor  be
raised  out  of  their  sleep.
viii.  12-  For  it  is  plain  tliat  they  shall  not  rise  again,  that  is,
till  the  heavens  be  no  more,  in  that  except  the  end  of  the
world  come,  the  race  of  mankind  shall  not  wake  to  life  from
the  sleep  of  death.  Not,  then,  that  he  shall  not  rise  again  at
all,  but  that  before  the  crumbling  of  the  heavens  the  human
race  shall  not  rise  again,  is  what  he  teaches.  Moreover  it  is
a  thing  to  be  marked,  why  after  he  had  called  man  dead
above,  below  he  designates  him  not  dead,  but  sleeping,  and
tells  that  he  shall  never  rise  again  from  his  sleep  until  the
heaven  be  crumbled  in  pieces,  which  is  no  otherwise  than
that  it  is  plainly  given  us  to  understand,  that  by  the  likeness
of  the  tree  quickened  afresh  to  life,  he  designates  man  a
dead  sinner,  i.  e.  extinct  from  the  life  of  righteousness;  but
when  he  speaks  of  the  death  of  the  flesh,  he  preferred  to  call

Chrisi  truly  diedf  yd  SainU  die  not EMl^  haw  divided.  53

this  not  death  but  sleep,  teaching  us  surelj  the  hope  of  the  Book

Resurrection;  in  that  as  a  man  quickljr  awakes  out  of  sleep, ^

so  shall  he  rise  in  a  moment  at  the  nod  of  his  Creator  from
the  death  of  the  bodj. For  the  name  of  death  is  horribly
feared  by  weak  minds,  but  the  title  of  sleep  is  not  feared.
Hence  Paul  in  charging  his  disciples  saith,  But  I  tcwu/cfil^^
not  have  you  to  he  ignoranty  brethren^  concerning  them  *
which  are  asleep^  thai  ye  sorrow  not  as  men  without  hope.
For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again^  even  so
them  also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring
again  with  Him. IIow  is  it  that  the  great  Preacher  calls
the  death  of  the  Lord  death,  but  the  death  of  the  servants  of
the  Lord  he  names  not  death,  but  sleep;  but  that,  having
regard  to  the  weak  hearts  of  his  hearers,  he  mixes  the
medicine  of  his  preaching  with  wonderful art,  and  Him,
Whom  they  knew  to  have  risen  already,  he  does  not  doubt
to  teach  them  was  dead,  while  those,  who  had  not  as  yet
risen  again,  that  he  might  teach  the  hope  of  the  Resurrection,
he  calls  not  dead,  but  sleeping? For  he  did  not  fear  to  call
Him  dead  Whom  his  hearers  knew  to  have  already  risen,  and
he  was  afraid  to  call  those  dead,  whose  rising  again  they
scarcely  believed. Thus  blessed  Job,  seeing  that  he  does
not  doubt  of  those  that  are  dead  in  the  flesh  waking  again
to  life,  calls  them  sleeping  rather  than  dead. It  goes  on;
Ver.  18.  O  that  Thou  wouldest  defend  me  in  hell/
18.  That  before  the  coming  of  the  Mediator  between  Ood ix.
and  man,  every  person,  though  he  might  have  been  of  a  pure
and  approved  life,  descended  to  the  prisons  of  hell,  there
can  bo  no  doubt;  in  that  man,  who  fell  by  his  own  act,  was
unable  by  bis  own  act  to  return  to  the  rest  of  Paradise,
except  that  He  should  come,  Who  by  the  mystery  of  His
Incarnation  should  open  the  way  into  that  same  Paradise.
For  hence  afler  the  sin  of  the  first  man  it  is  recorded,  that
a  flaming  sword  was  placed  at  the  entrance  of  Paradise,  Geo.  s,
which  is  also  called  *  moveable  S*  in  that  the  time  should  ?^„^
come  one  day,  that  it  might  even  be  removed. Nor  yet  do  tiWt,  V.
we  maintain  that  the  souls  of  the  righteous  did  so  go  down
into  hell,  that  they  were  imprisoned  in  places  of  punishment;
but  it  is  to  be  believed  that  there  are  higher  regions  in  hell,
and  that  there  are  lower  regions  apart,  so  that  both  the

54 JcbprayMfir  uifity  in  HeU^  and  reteoH  at  toii.

Job  14,  righteous  might  be  at  rest  in  the  upper  regions,  and  the

-j^^  unrighteous  be  tormented  in  the  lower  ones. Hence  the

Psalmist,  by  reason  of  the  grace  of  God  preyenting  him,  says,

Pi.  86,  j%ou  Aasi  delivered  my  soul /ram  the  lowest  hell.  Thus
blessed  Job  before  the  coming  of  the  Mediator,  knowing  of
hb  going  down  into  hell,  implores  the  protecting  hand  of
his  Maker  there,  in  order  that  he  might  be  a  stranger  to  the
places  of  punishment;  where,  while  he  is  brought  to  enjoy
rest,  he  might  be  kept  hidden  from  punishment.  Hence  he
subjoins;

^P^j[', That  thou  vxnUdest  keep  me  secret^  until  Thy  wrath  quite^

Yulg.  pass  by.
X.  14.  For  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God  does  herein  execute
the  force  of  its  severity  every  day,  that  those  who  live
unworthily  it  swallows  up  in  most  worthy  punishments.
Which  wrath  now  indeed  '  passes  by,*  but  at  the  end  it
*  quite  passes  by,'  in  that  now  it  is  executed,  but  at  the  end
of  the  world  it  is  finally  consummated.  Yet  this  wrath  as  to
the  souls  of  the  righteous  *  quite  passed  by*  on  the  coming
of  our  Redeemer,  in  that  those  the  Mediator  between  God
and  man  brought  back  from  the  prisons  of  hell  to  the  joys
of  Paradise,  when  He  did  Himself  go  down  there  in  pity.
And  on  this  subject  it  is  necessary  to  be  known,  that  the
term  ^  wrath'  does  not  suit  the  Divine  Being,  in  that  no
disquieting  influence  disorders the  simple  nature  of  God.

Wud. Whence  it  is  said  to  Him,  But  Thou^  Ruler  qf  power^

*^'  ^®*  judgest  with  tranquillity ^  and  orderest  us  with  exceeding
great  regard.  But  because  the  souls  of  the  righteous  were
one  day  to  be  set  free  by  the  coming  of  the  Mediator  from
the  regions  of  hell,  though  not  the  places  of  punishment,  this
too  the  righteous  man  foresees,  and  beseeching  adds;

And  appoint  me  a  set  time,  when  Thou  shouldest  re-
member  me.
x\. 15.  But  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  Qod  sent

4, 5^  ^'  forth  His  Son,  made  qf  a  woman,  made  under  the  Law,  to
redeem  them  that  were  under  the  Law.  Thus  the  man  of  the
Lord  foreseeing  this  redemption,  wherein  many  of  the
Gentile  world  as  well  were  destined  to  be  set  free,  as  he

Job  10,  himself  says;  Though  these  things  Thou  dost  hide  in  Thi$ie
heart,  yet  I  know  that  Thou  dost  remember  all  things;

Our  Lord  the  Death  of  death,  the  BUing  of  Hell. 55

prays  for  a  time  for  the  remembering  of  him,  to  be  appointed  B«)or
him  with  Almighty  Ood. For  it  is  hence  that  the  Lord  saith — ^
in  the  Gospel,  And  /, ;/  /  be  lifted  upfroin  the  earth,  trnZ/Johnis,
draw  all  things  unto  Me,  i.  e.  *  all  things  Elect;*  for  neither^
did  the  Lord,  when  He  returned  from  hell,  draw  the  Elect
and  the  lost  together,  but  Ho  bore  off  all  those  things  from
thence,  which  He  did  foreknow  would  have  attached  them-
selves to  Him. Hence  He  also  says  by  the  Prophet  Hosea,
I  will  be  thy  death,  O  death;  I  will  be  the  biting  of  lhee,Hr».ls,
O  hell. Now  what  we  put  to  death,  we  do  our  best  that  it'^*
should  not  be  at  all,  and  of  that  which  we  bite,  a  part  we
take  away,  and  a  part  we  leave. Therefore  whereas  the
Lord  wholly  destroyed  death  in  His  Elect  members.  He
proved  Himself  the  '  Death  of  death  ;*  but  whereas  He  took
a  part  from  hell,  and  left  a  part,  He  did  not  wholly  destroy
but  did  *bito  hell.' Therefore  He  says,  /  will  be  thy  Death,
O  death;  i.  e.  ^  in  Mine  Elect,  I  utterly  destroy  thee. — I  will
be  the  biting  qf  thee,  O  hell; in  that  in  taking  those
away,  I  pierce  thee  in  part.* And  so  let  blessed  Job,  knowing
of  this  coming  of  our  Redeemer  to  hell,  pray  for  what  he
foresaw  in  the  future,  and  let  him  say,  And  that  Thou
shouldest  appoint  me  a  set  time  wherein  Thou  wouldest  re^
member  me. It  goes  on;

Ver.  14.  Thinkest  thou  that  a  dead  man  shall  live  again  f  ^ulg.

16.  It  is  common  with  righteous  men,  in  that  which  xii.
they  themselves  feel  to  be  sure  and  well-grounded,  to  urge
something  as  if  in  doubting,  so  as  to  put  the  words  of  the
weak  into  their  own  lips ;  and  again  by  a  strong  sentence
ihey  gainsay  utterly  him  that  halts  in  doubtfulness,  that  by
that  which  they  are  seen  to  put  forth  doubtfully,  they  may
in  some  degree  condescend  to  the  weak,  and  hereby,  that
they  deliver  a  sure  sentence,  they  may  draw  the  doubtful
minds  of  the  weak  to  firm  ground.  Which  whilst  they  do,
they  are  following  the  pattern  of  our  Head.  For  our  Lord,
when  He  was  near  to  His  passion,  took  up  the  voice  of  those
that  were  weak  in  Himself,  saying,  O  My  Father,  if  it  be  Matt.
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me;  and  that  He  might^^'^*
remove  their  fear.  He  took  it  in  Himself.  And  again  shewing
by  obedience  the  force  of  strength,  He  saith.  Nevertheless,  not
as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt. That  so  when  that  thing  threatens

56 Job  seemi  to  doubt  that  he  may  confirm  the  Resurrection.
Job  14,  us  which  we  would  not  have  take  place,  we  should  so  in

14  15

^^^  '  weakness  pray  that  it  may  not,  as  that  in  strength  we  may  be
ready  for  the  will  of  our  Creator  to  be  done,  even  in  opposi-
tion to  our  o\ra  will.  After  this  pattern,  then,  the  words  of
weakness  are  sometimes  proper  to  be  adopted  by  the  strong,
that  by  their  strong  preachings  afterwards  the  hearts  of  the
weak  may  be  more  acceptably  strengtliened*  Hence  blessed
Job  when  he  uttered  words  as  of  one  in  doubt,  saying,
Thinkeat  thou  that  a  dead  man  shall  live  again?  presently
added  the  sentence  of  his  sure  belief,  whereby  he  saith,

All  the  days  that  I  now  serve  militant  will  I  u^aity  till
my  change  come,

^1"*  17.  He  that  waits  for  his  change  with  such  ardent  longing,
shews  how  great  his  certainty  was  of  the  Resurrection,  and  he
makes  it  appear  how  greatly  he  looks  down  upon  the  course
of  the  present  life,  who  designates  it  a  ^  service  militant.'  For
in  the  militant  state  there  is  the  going  on  continually  to  an
end,  day  by  day  the  finishing  of  the  conclusion  is  expected.
Thus  he  despises  the  course  of  this  Ufo,  and  looks  for  the
settling  of  fixedness,  who  hereby,  that  he  is  serving  subject
to  changeableness,  is  in  haste  to  attain  to  his  change.  For
to  the  just  man  in  this  life  the  very  load  of  his  corruption  is
burthensome.  Because  watchings  exhaust  with  weariness,
sleep  is  sought,  that  the  labour  and  harassing  effect  of
watchings  may  be  moderated :  but  sometimes  even  sleep
kills.  Hunger  wastes  the  body,  and  tliat  its  craving  may  be
banished,  victuals  are  sought  after:  but  frequently  even  the
very  victuals  oppress,  which  had  been  sought  in  order  to
banish  the  oppression  of  debility.  And  so  the  load  of
corruption  is  a  heavy  burthen,  which  except  it  were  so  heavy,
Rom.  s,  Paul  would  never  have  said.  For  the  creature  was  made  subject
'  to  vanity^  not  willingly,  but  by  reason  of  Him  IVlio  hath  sub-
jected the  same  in  hope.  Because  the  creature  itself  also  shall
be  delivered/rom  the  bondage  into  t/ie  glorious  liberty  of  the
children  of  God.  For  we  know  that  the  whole  creation
groaneth  and  travailelh  in  pain  together  until  now.  So  let
the  holy  man,  longing  for  the  state  of  incorruption,  say.  All  the
days  that  I  noio  serve  militant  will  I  wait  till  my  change  come.
In  which  same  change  what  it  is  that  takes  place,  he  adds^
Ver.  la.  Thou  shall  call  me,  and  I  will  answer  Thee.

Man  enabled  to  antwer  God  through  HU  *  Right  Hand.^  57

18*  We  are  said  to  answer  any  one,  wben  we  do  works  in  Book
turn  answerable  to  his  deeds. Thus  in  that  change  the  Lord


*  calls,*  and  man  *  answers,'  in  that,  before  the  brightness  of  **^*
The  Incorrnpt,  man  is  shewn  forth  incorrupt  after  conuption.
For  now  so  long  as  we  are  subject  to  corruption,  we  do  not
in  any  wise  *  answer*  our  Creator,  seeing  that  whereas  cor-
ruption is  far  firom  incorruption,  there  is  no  similarity  suitable
to  our  answering. But  of  that  change  it  is  written,  When  1  John
He  shall  appear f  we  shall  be  like  Him:  far  we  shall  see  *
Him  as  He  is. Then  therefore  we  shall  truly  *  answer  God,*
Who  '  calleth,*  when  at  the  bidding  of  the  Supreme  Incor-
ruption we  shall  arise  incorruptible;  and  because  the  creature
is  not  able  to  earn  this  by  itself,  but  it  is  brought  to  pass  by
the  gift  of  Almighty  Ood  alone,  that  it  should  be  changed  to
that  exceeding  glory  of  incorruption,  it  is  rightly  subjoined ;

TTiou  wilt  stretch  forth  Thy  right  hand  to  the  work  qf
Thine  hands,

19.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words;  *  For  this  reason  Thy  xv.
corruptible  creature  is  able  to  hold  tsmi  unto  incorruption,
because  he  is  lifted  up  by  the  hands  of  Thy  power,  and  is
kept  by  the  grace  of  Thy  regard,  that  he  should  hold  fast*
For  the  human  creature  by  this  alone,  that  it  is  a  creature,
has  it  inherent  in  itself  to  sink  down  below  itself,  but  man
has  obtained  it  from  his  Creator,  that  he  should  both  be
caught  above  him&elf  by  contemplation,  and  held  fiist  in
himself  by  incorruption.  And  so  that  the  creature  may  not
fall  away  beneath  himself,  but  hold  on  in  incorruption,  he  is
lifted  to  the  stedfastness  of  immutability  by  the  right  hand
of  His  Maker.  Moreover  it  may  be  that  by  the  tide  of  *  the
Right  Hand'  the  Son  may  be  designated ;  in  that,  All  things  John  i,
were  made  by  Him.  Thus  Almighty  God  *  stretched  out  His  '*
Right  Hand  to  the  work  of  His  hands,*  because,  that  He
might  lift  on  high  the  human  race^  become  refiise  and
grovelling  in  the  lowest  things,  He  sent  the  Only-Begotten
One,  made  Incarnate  for  this  end.  By  Whose  Incarnation  it
has  been  vouchsafed  to  us  that  we,  who  fall  into  incomiption
of  our  own  will,  should  one  time  be  enabled  to  answer  God
when  He  calls  us  in  the  glory  of  incorruption.  Wherein
who  can  estimate  the  bountiftilness  of  Divine  Mercy,  that
He  should  bring  man  after  sin  to  such  a  height  of  glory?

08  Qod  numUrs  our  sieps^  yet  sparei  our  mitu,

Job  14,  God  takes  account  of  the  bad  things  we  do,  yet  by  the  grace
"LirT


lA 17

'  of  His  loyingkindness  He  remits  them  to  us  in  mercy. And


hence  it  is  added;

Yen  16.  For  now  Thou  numberest  my  steps^  but  TTtou
sparest  my  sins.

xvi.  20.  God  ^  numbers  our  steps,*  when  He  marks  each  one
of  our  several  deeds  for  the  recompensing  tlicm.  For  what
is  denoted  by  the  steps,  but  each  particular  act  of  ours?
Thus  Almighty  God  both  '  numbers  our  steps*  and  ^  spares
our  sins,*  in  that  He  at  once  surveys  our  actions  viith  exact-
ness, and  yet  remits  them  in  mercy  to  those  that  repent,
Who  both  sees  obduracy  in  those  that  sin,  and  yet  softens  it
into  penitence  by  preventing  grace.  Thus  He  ^  numbers
sins,'  in  that  He  turns  us  ourselves  to  bewail  the  several
things  which  we  have  done.  And  He  remits  them  in  mercy,
in  that  whilst  we  our  own  selves  punish  them.  He  Himself
never  judges  them  in  the  last  reckoning,  as  Paul  testifies,

1  Cor. ^ho  saitb,  For  if  we  should  judge  ourselves^  we  should  not
' *  be  judged. Hence  it  is  further  added ;

Ver.  17.  Tfiou  hast  sealed  up  as  it  weie  in  a  bag  my
transgressions:  but  Thou  hast  healed  mine  iniquity.
xvii.  21.  Our  *  transgressions  are  sealed  up  as  it  were  in  a  bag,*
in  that  that  thing  which  we  ourselves  do  in  outward  act,
except  we  wash  away  by  penance  in  the  mean  while,  is  kept
in  the  secrosy  of  God*s  judgments  under  u  kind  of  biding,
that  one  day  it  may  also  come  forth  out  of  the  bug  of  sccrcsy
into  the  publicity  of  tho  Judgment. Hence  it  is  said  by

Dent.  Moses  too ;  Is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  Me.  and  sealed
'  '  up  among  My  treasures?  In  the  day  of  vengeance  I  will
repay  them.  But  when  for  the  evil  things  that  we  have
done,  we  are  bruised  with  the  stroke  of  discipline,  and
lament  the  same  by  penance,  He  ^  sealcth  up,*  and  ^  healetli*
our  iniquity,  in  that  He  neither  leaves  things  unpunished
here,  nor  reserves  them  to  be  punished  in  the  Judgment.
Thus  He  '  seals  transgressions,*  in  that  He  marks  them  with
exactness  here,  to  chastise  them  with  the  rod,  but  He
*  heals*  them,  in  that  He  wholly  remits  them  in  the  stroke.
Hence  the  iniquity  of  that  persecutor  of  Him,  whom  He  laid
prostrate  on  the  ground.  He  did  also  by  sealing  heal,  seeing

Acta  0,  that  He  said  concerning  him  to  Ananias ;  He  is  a  chosen

IS.

Sint  ieahd  vp,  yet  h^abd. l\oo  kinds  o/knqf^Uian. 59

veuel  unto  Me  to  hear  My  Name  be/ore  the  Gfentiles,  and  Boos
kinys,  and  ike  children  of  Israel. Ibr  I  will  shew  him-


how  great  things  he  must  suffer /or  My  Name^s  sake.  For
to  that  maD,  whom  on  account  of  paat  transgressions  He  still
threatens  with  future  sufferingSi  what  he  had  done  wrong,
surely  He  kept  sealed  in  the  heart;  but  as  sureljr  in  so
sealing  He  had  healed  his  transgressions,  in  that  He  called
him  *  ft  chosen  resscl".*  Or,  surely,  *  our  transgressions  ^©Vjjff"
sealed  in  a  bag,*  when  tlie  evil  things  we  have  been  guilty
of,  we  reflect  on  continually  with  a  heedful  heart  For  what
is  the  heart  of  man,  but  God's  '  bag?*  wherein  whilst  we
eamestiy  look  to  see  how  much  we  transgress,  we  cany  our
sins  as  it  were  *  sealed  up  in  Ood*s  bag.*  Did  not  David  keep
his  sin  *  sealed  up  in  a  bag,*  when  he  said.  For  Iacknow'P§Jii^.
ledge  my  transgressions,  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me.  And
because  the  faults,  which  we  are  made  acquainted  with  in
reviewing  and  repeating,  the  pitiful  Creator  remits  to  us,  after
the  '  transgressions  being  sealed  in  a  bag,*  it  is  rightly  sub-
joined. But  Thou  hast  healed  mine  iniquity:  as  if  he  said
in  plain  speech,  *  What  things  Thou  dost  now  seal,  so  that
I  in  repenting  should  see,  doubdess  Thou  doest  it,  that  in  the
retribution  they  should  never  be  seen.* It  follows ;

Ver.  18, 19.  And  surely  the  mountain  falling  slippeth
awayf  and  the  rock  is  removed  out  of  his  pUice.  The  waters
wear  the  stones,  and  by  washing  little  by  little  the  earth  is
consumed,  and  so  Thou  wilt  in  a  like  way  destroy  man.

22.  This  is  very  often  the  case,  that  upon  rocks  falling,  a  xviii.
piece  of  rock  is  removed  to  other  places ;  that  waters  wear
stones,  and  Httie  by  little  the  ground  is  wasted  by  the  wash-
ings of  the  flood:  but  we  have  need  to  make  out  with  great
diligence  that  which  is  brought  in;  and  man  Thou  wilt  in  a
Uke  way  destroy.  For  what  is  that,  that  to  a  mountain
falling,  a  rock  removed,  a  stone  worn  hollow,  and  ground
consumed  by  the  washing  of  the  flood,  the  ruin  of  man  is
likened,  but  this,  which  we  are  plainly  given  to  understand,
that  there  are  two  sorts  of  temptations,  one  sort,  which
passes  in  the  mind  even  of  the  good  man  by  sudden  accident,
that  he  should  be  so  tempted  of  a  sudden,  that  by  the  un-
expectedness of  the  event  it  should  make  him  reel,  and
bring  him  to  the  ground,  and  that  he  does  not  s^  his

60 The  itrmg  mind  may  be  tlowfy  worn,  or /all  suddenly.

Job  14,  fallings  until  after  he  has  fidlen;  while  there  is  another  which
^g^jjl^  comes  by  little  and  litde  into  the  mind,  and  by  gentle
suggestions  corrupts  the  resisting  soul,  and  not  by  its  ex-
cessiveness  biut  by  its  importunity  wastes  all  the  powers  of
righteousness  therein?  And  so,  whereas  there  is  one  sort  of
temptation,  which  by  a  sudden  assault  very  often  brings  the
good  down  to  the  ground,  let  it  be  said,  And  surely  the
mountain  falling  comeih  to  nought,  and  the  rock  is  removed
out  qfhis  place,  i.e.  the  holy  mind,  whose  place  was  righ-
teousness, is  by  a  sudden  impulse  removed  into  sin.  Again,
because  there  is  another  sort  of  temptation,  which  infuses
itself  gently  into  the  heart  of  man,  and  wears  and  wastes  all
the  hardness  of  its  resolution,  let  it  be  said,  'ITie  waters  wear
the  stones;  in  this  way,  viz.  that  the  unremitted  and  soft
flatteries  of  lust  suck  away  the  hardness  of  the  soul,  and  the
slow  and  penetrating  evil  habit  corrodes  the  hard  and  forci-
ble purpose  of  the  mind.  Hence  it  is  added.  And  by  wash-
ing the  ground  is  consumed  little  by  little.  For  as  when
water  flows  in,  ^  the  ground  is  consumed  little  by  little,'  so
when  bad  habit  creeps  on "  by  gentle  degrees,  even  the  strong
mind  is  engulphed.  Hence  it  is  well  added.  And  TTiou
wilt  in  a  like  way  destroy  man,  i.  e.  in  this  way,  that  when
Thou  by  a  righteous  appointment  sufierest  temptation  of  a
sudden  to  get  the  dominion  over  the  mind  of  him,  who  is  seen
to  have  his  stand  on  high.  Thou  causest  ^  the  mountain  to  &11
and  slip  away,'  and  when  the  will  is  changed  to  evil,  it  is  as
if  ^  the  rock  were  removed  to  a  new  place,'  but  whilst  Thou
lettest  a  gentle  and  fine  yet  unremitting  temptation  prevail
over  the  minds  of  those,  who  are  accounted  strong,  ^  the
waters  in  a  manner  wear  the  stones,  and  by  washing,  the
ground  is  consumed  little  by  little,'  in  that  the  hardness  of
the  mind  being  subdued  by  gentle  suggesting  is  made  soft.

23.  Let  us  see  how  that  David  was  a  ^  high  mountain,'
who  was  enabled  to  contemplate  such  great  mysteries  of  God
by  the  Spirit  of  prophecy;  but  let  us  mark  how  he  '  slipped
down,'  by  a  sudden  fall,  who  whilst  walking  on  the  solar,
lusted  after  and  carried  off  another  man's  wife,  and  killed
her  husband  with  loss  to  his  own  army.  Then  ^  fell  a  moun-
tain with  a  sudden  fall,'  when  that  mind  which  was  used  to
"  aL  '  furripienti/  *  enoroaohet.*

Datifi  iyddenfall;  Solomon^s  alaw  loasHng.  01

dwell  with  hearenly  mjsteries,  was  OTercome  by  tiiddeii  Boov
temptation,  and  brought  under  to  anch  moat  monstroua  .±=-L
pollution.  And  so  *  the  rock  was  removed  from  its  place/
when  the  mind  of  the  prophet  being  shut  out  from  the  mys-
teries of  prophecy  came  to  imagine  filthy  things.  Let  us
see  moreorer  how  *  the  waters  wear  the  stones,  and  by
washing  the  ground  is  consumed  little  by  littie,*  in  that
Solomon  by  an  immoderate  intercourse  and  frequency  with
women  was  brought  to  this  pass,  that  he  built  a  temple  to
idols :  and  he  who  had  before  erected  a  temple  to  Qody  by
frequency  of  lust,  being  eren  bowed  down  under  misbelief,
was  not  afraid  to  erect  idol-temples.  And  so  it  came  to
pass,  that  by  unremitting  wantonness  of  the  flesh,  he  was
brought  even  to  misbelief  of  the  spirit.  What  else  then,  but
that  the  '  waters  did  wear  away  the  stone,  and  by  washing
the  ground  was  consumed  little  by  littie,'  in  that  by  the
encroaching  *  of  sin  as  it  flowed  in  little  by  little,  the  ground  >  rarrf-
of  his  heart  crumbled  away  unto  wasting  ?  Thus  let  blessed '^^"^
Job  consider  both  sorts  of  temptation,  whether  the  sudden
and  excessive,  or  the  gentle  and  prolonged  sort,  let  him  con-
template the  falls  of  his  fellow-creatures,  and  from  those
things  which  take  place  outwardly  let  him  catch  the  key-
note of  his  contemplation  within,  saying,  And  $urefy  the
mountain  fcMing  cameth  to  nought ,  and  the  rock  is  removed
out  of  his  place:  the  waters' wear  the  stones,  and  by  wash-
ing  little  by  little  the  earth  is  wasted:  and  Thou  wilt  in
like  manner  destroy  men;  L  e. '  as  these  things  without  sense
at  one  time  are  brought  to  the  ground  suddenly,  at  one  time
are  worn  little  by  littie  by  the  softness  of  water  being  let  in ;
so  likewise  him,  whom  Thou  hast  created  a  reasoning
creature.  Thou  dost  either  overdirow  by  sudden  temptation,
or  permittest  to  be  worn  and  wasted  by  a  long  and  genUe
one  f  and  that  reasoning  creature  he  directly  describes  in
the  following  words,  saying,  ^

Ver.  20.  TTmu  hast  strettgthened  him  for  a  little  space,
that  he  might  pass  by  for  ever.

24.  Man  has  been  *  strengthened  here  for  a  littie  space,'  xix.
in  that  he  has  received  here  powers  of  living  fot  a  while,  that I^*
be  should  for  ever  pass  away  thither,  where  po  end  should
bound  and  shut  in  his  life,  but  in  this  moment's  space  where

62  Man^  defaced  by  death,  knows  not  thinffi  an  earth  save  in  Ood.

Job  14,  he  has  been  ^  strengthened/  he  extracts  that  wherefirom  in  the
-  *  eyeilasting  worid  he  may  either  iSnd  how  always  to  have  joy,
or  not  ever  escape  the  punishments  ho  has  entered  upon.
And  for  this  reasoui  that  ^  he  has  been  strengthened  for  a
little  space/  to  *  pass  away  for  everlasting/  it  is  fitly  added
immediately;

Hum  unit  change  his  countenance,  and  send  him  away.
XX.  25.  ^  The  face  of  man  is  changed/  when  his  form  is  wasted
by  death;  but  ^  he  is  sent  away/  in  that  from  those  things
which  he  kept  willingly  he  is  necessitated  to  pass  away  to
the  eternal  world  against  his  will,  and  while  he  is  brought
thereunto,  these  things  which  he  held  long  and  thought  on,
how  it  will  be  with  them  now  left  behind  him  he  knows
nothing. Hence  it  is  added ;

Ver.  21.  Whether  his  sons  be  in  honour  or  dishonour,  he
perceiveth  not.
xxi.  26.  For  as  they,  who  are  still  living,  know  nothing  of  the
souls  of  the  dead,  in  what  place  they  are  held;  so  the  dead,
concerning  the  life  of  those  living  after  them  in  the  flesh,
know  not  at  all  how  it  is  ordered;  in  that  both  the  life  of  the
spirit  is  far  from  the  life  of  the  flesh,  and  as  the  corporeal
and  incorporeal  are  things  different  in  kind,  so  are  they
parted  in  knowledge.  Which  however  is  not  to  be  imagined
concerning  holy  souls,  in  that  they  which  behold  the  bright-
ness of  Almighty  God  within,  we  cannot  for  a  moment  sup-
pose that  there  is  any  thing  without  that  they  know  not\
But  because  carnal  persons  bestow  their  chief  afiection  on
their  children,  blessed  Job  declares  that  they  are  hereafter
ignorant  of  that,  which  they  loved  here  with  all  their  heart,
so  that  ^  whether  their  sous  be  in  honour  or  dishonour  they
know  not,'  whereas  their  care  for  these  was  always  preying

MoftAL.  upon  their  minds. Which  however  if  it  is  to  be  understood
in  a  spiritual  sense,  with  no  unfitness  by  the  title  of  sons  we

1  Tim.  have  works  denoted,  as  Paul  saith of  woman,  Notwith-

^*  ^** standing,  she  shall  be  saved  in  childbearing. Not  that  a
woman,  who  being  devoted  to  continency  never  bears  children,

^  S.  T.  Aqainaa,  Sum.  Theol.  P.  1.  and  o.  xti.  St.  A  as.  howeTer  arguet

Q.  89.  Art  8.  prefera  thia  opinion  to  rather  againataapporinffaoch knowledge

that  doubtfully  giTen  br  8t  Anguatine,  nataral,  than  againat  the  probability  of

De  oora  gerenda  pro  Mortaia,  o.  xiii.  ita  exiatiog  aa  a  dirine  gift.

Man  knawi  not  the/ait  of  hU  works. PainkUloiinHfl.  68

shall  not  be  saved,  btit  she  is  said  to  be  *  sared  by  child-  Book
bearing/  because  by  the  operation  of  good  works  she  is-


tmited  to  everlasting  salvation.  Thus  the  children  in  hononr
are  good  deeds,  and  the  children  in  dishonour  are  bad  deeds.
And  often  man  strives  to  do  things  with  a  good  intention,
yet  by  reason  of  the  many  occasions  that  creep  upon  him,
how  his  actions  are  accounted  of  in  the  sight  of  Almighty
Ood  is  a  thing  uncertain.  And  so  *  whether  his  sons  be  in
hononr  or  dishonour  he  perceiveth  not,'  in  that  his  works
being  sifted  with  a  searching  scrutiny,  whether  they  be  ap-
proved or  condemned  he  cannot  tell.  Thus  here  man  is
placed  in  the  painfiilness  of  labour,  and  thither  he  is  brought
in  the  fearfulness  of  misgiving.  Hence  it  is  yet  further  sub-
joined concerning  the  labour  of  the  present  life  itself,

Ver.  22.  Bui  hisjtesk  while  *he  liveih  shall  have  pain^  and
his  soul  shall  mourn  over  himself.

27.  Concerning  the  married  Paul  mih^  Never IhelesSjSueA  xxii.
shall  have  trouble  in  thejtesh. But  they  may  *  have  trouble  ;  ^'
in  the  flesh  here,*  who  are  even  now  leading  spiritual  lives.
Wherefore  then  is  it  said  as  it  were  in  a  special  sense,  that
there  is  *  trouble  of  the  flesh*  to  married  persons,  seeing  that

it  is  not  far  removed  even  from  the  life  of  the  spiritual ;  ex-
cepting that  those  commonly  meet  with  worse  troubles  from
the  flesh,  who  delight  themselves  with  the  pleasures  of  the
flesh  ?  And  it  is  well  said,  And  his  soul  within  him  shall
mourn  over  himself:  in  that  whosoever  desires  to  rejoice  in
himself,  by  this  alone  is  henceforth  in  woe,  viz.  that  he  has
gone  far  from  the  true  joy.  For  the  true  joy  of  the  soul  is
the  Creator.  Therefore  it  is  meet  that  man  should  ever  find
in  himself  sorrow,  who,  forsaking  His  Creator,  sought  joy  in
himself. It  proceeds ;

Chap.  XV.  1.  Then  answered  Eliphaz  the  Temanite,  and
saidj  Should  a  wise  man  answer  as  if  speaking  into  the
windi  and  Jill  his  belly  with  burning?

28.  We  have  already  said  frequently  that  blessed  Job  xxiii.
bears  a  type  of  the  Holy  Church  universal,  and  that  his-^**"^'
friends  bear  the  likeness  of  heretics,  who  as  it  were  on  the

plea  of  defence  of  the  Lord  find  occasion  of  foolish  talking,
and  let  loose  insulting  words  against  good  men;  to  whom  all
is  displeasing  that  is  thought  by  the  faithfiil,  as  though  it  were

04  HereticM  accuse  Holy  Church  of  presumption  and  id  living.

Job  1ft,  uttered  to  the  wind.  Whence  it  is  said  now,  Should  a  wise
— b —  man  answer  as  if  speaking  into  the  wind?  Nor  do  they  ac-
'  count  the  words  of  the  good  as  the  sayings  of  reason,  but  as
the  stingings  of  madness.  Whence  it  is  added,  And  shall  he  Jill
his  belly  with  burning  ?  in  that  tliosc  things  even  which  they
know  theipselves  to  say  by  way  of  insult,  tbey  are  ever  bent
to  palliatCy  as  has  been  said,  on  the  ground  of  defending  the
Lord. Whence  Eliphaz  adds;

Thou  reprovest  with  words  him  that  is  not  equal  to  thee;
and  thou  speakest  what  is  not  expedient  for  thee.
xxiv.  ^9*  Now  they  suppose  that  no  one  has  the  fear  of  the
Lord,  saving  him  whom  they  can  draw  into  the  foolishness
of  their  own  confession.  Hence  he  adds,  Yea^  thou  easiest
off  fear,  and  hast  taken  prayer  before  God.  '  Taken'  means
*  tidcen  away ;'  as  if  he  said  ip  plain  terms,  *  Presuming  on
Thine  own  righteousness,  thou  scomest  to  implore  the  grace
of  Thy  Creator.'  For  when  heretics  do  not  find  real  evils  to
urge  against  the  good,  they  feign  things  to  reproach  tlicm
with,  that  they  may  seem  righteous,  and  it  very  often  happens,
that  they  come  to  open  words  of  insult  Whence  it  is  still
further  added,

For  thine  iniquity  teacheth  thy  mouthy  and  thou  folloujest
the  tongue  qf  the  crafty.

80.  ^  Iniquity  teaches  the  mouth,'  when  there  is  conceived
by  a  bad  life  somewhat  to  be  spoken  of  a  woi*se  kind.  Now
because  blessed  Job  was  free  in  speech  in  proportion  as  he
was  holy  in  action,  by  his  friends,  who  hold  the  typeof  lierclics,
he  is  found  £euilt  with  at  once  on  the  grounds  of  a  wicked  life
and  of  a  bold  mouth,  so  that  it  should  be  said.  Thine  iniquity
teacheth  thy  mouth.  As  if  it  were  said  to  him  in  plain  words,
^What  thouspeakest  wickedly,  thou  hast  leamtof  a  more  wicked
life.'  But  it  often  happens  that  heretics,  wliilst  in  seeming  they
venerate  God,  oppose  His  mysteries,  and  they  think  it  humility
if  they  deny  the  truth.  For  there  are  some,  who  imagine
that  they  are  bringing  injury  upon  God,  if  they  confess  that
He  took  true  flesh,  or  if  they  should  think  that. ^ He  was
capable  of  really  dying  for  us  in  the  flesh.  And  whilst  they
endeavour  as  it  were  to  bestow  upon  God  a  greater  degree
of  honour,  they  are  enforced  to  deny  the  real  praises' of  jHis
goodness. For  in  praise  of  His  charity  what  is  there  more

HmticM  praudfy  ehargt  Holy  Church  with  presumpHan. 66

efficaciouSi  than  that  in  our  behalf  He  should  make  those  Book
things  meet  to  Himself  for  the  undertaking  them,  which  seem
for  Him  unworthy.  But  Holy  Church  confesses  His  very
and  true  Flesh,  His  very  and  true  Death,  but  in  declaring
these  things  she  is  thought  by  Heretics  to  put  an  indignity  upon
Ood.  Whence  it  is  said  now,  And  ihonfolhweii  the  tongue
qf  them  that  blaspheme.  And  if  any  piece  of  adversity  befall
her  in  this  world,  they  say  that  it  was  brought  upon  her  by
this  very  injuriousness  of  her  confession.  Hence  it  is  yet
further  added;

Ver.  6.  Thine  own  mouth  shall  condemn  thee^  and  not  /;
yea^  thine  own  lips  shall  answer  thee,

31.  For  because  they  suppose  that  the  evils  of  adversity  xxvi.
br^ak  out  in  consequence  of  the  erroneousness  of  confession;
they  say  that  *  her  own  lips  shall  answer  her,*  so  that  fault

of  utterance  should  be  the  cause  of  the  scourge.  But  some-
times they  desire  to  repress  it  as  if  by  reasoning;  whence
Eliphas  sets  himself  to  reprove  blessed  Job  as  it  were  on
principles  of  reason,  saying,

Ver.  7,  8.  Art  thou  thejirst  man  that  was  bornf  or  wast
thou  made  before  the  hills  f  Hast  thou  heard  the  secret  of
God  f  and  shall  His  wisdom  be  it^ferior  to  theef

32.  As  if  He  sud  in  plainer  words,  *  Thou,  who  speakest  xxvii.
of  the  Eternal  One,  consider  that  thou  art  a  creature  of  time.
Thou  thatarguest  concerning  His  wisdom,  remember  that
thou  knowest  not  His  counsel.* But  that  Heretics  for  this

take  up  the  words  of  the  defence  of  the  Lord,  that  they  may
appear  to  be  learned,  and  whilst  they  seem  to  defend  the
glory  of  God,  are  making  known  their  knowledge  to  men,  the
very  words  of  Eliphaz  subjoined  bear  witness,  who  began
indeed  to  speak  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  but  immediately  fell
into  self-elation,  saying,

Ver.  0.  JfTiat  knowest  thou  that  we  know  not  f  What
understandest  thou  which  is  not  in  us  f

Which  same  sentences  plainly  shew  in  what  exaltation  of
mind  all  that  comes  forth,  which  sounds  as  if  it  were  for
defence  of  the  Lord. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  10.  With  us  are  both  the  gray  headed  and  very  aged
men^  much  elder  than  thy  father.

33.  That  all  Heretics  are  gone  out  of  the  Holy  Church  xxviii.

VOL.  II.  p

6^  Heretics  take  trovMeforjudyment^  eantemplaiianfor  hypocrisy.
Job  15,  ITuiversaly  John  testifies,  when  he  says,  TTiey  went  <mtjTcm

AiT^'^^^*  ^'  ^^^^  ^''^^  ^^^  ^f^*' ^^^  ^^^  those  things  which

1  John  they  maintain  they  may  recommend  to  the  weak  minds  of

^'  ^^'  their  fellow-creatures  as  on  the  grounds  of  antiquity,  they
testify  that  they  have  ancient  fathers,  and  the  very  Doc-
tors of  the  Church  themselves  they  declare  are  the  masters
of  their  school;  and  whilst  they  look  down  upon  present
preachers,  they  pride  themselves  with  unfounded  presump-
tion on  the  tutorage  of  the  ancient  fathers,  so  that  they
avouch  that  the  things  they  themselves  assert  the  old  fathers
held  as  well,  in  order  that  what  they  are  not  able  to  build  up
in  truth  and  right,  they  may  strengUien  as  by  the  authority  of

Heb.  13,  those. But  because  it  is  written.  Whom  the  Lord  lovetk  He

^'  chasteneih^  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  He  receiveth,
oftentimes  Holy  Church  travails  with  countless  adversities
in  this  life,  and  the  life  of  the  children  of  perdition  is  let  to
go  free  of  the  scourge,  in  proportion  as  it  is  not  reserved  for
any  rewards.  But  Heretics  seeing  the  tribulations  of  Holy
Church,  look  down  upon  her,  and  fancy  that  she  is  bruised

>  profet-  by  such  a  multitude  of  strokes,  in  due  of  a  false  creed  \ Hence

*'**^ it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  11.  Is  it  a  great  thing  that  God  should  console  thee?
But  thine  evil  words  prevent  this.

xxiz.  ^^'  ^^  ^f  ^^  ^^^^  ^  ^'^^  ^^  plain  words;  ^  If  thou  wouldest
amend  thy  profession  of  (kith,  thou  mighlest  long  ago  have
had  consolation  in  thy  scourges.* It  goes  on;

Ver.  12.  ff7iy  does  thine  heart  Itft  thee  up,  and  hast  thou
thine  eyes  astonished  as  thinking  of  great  things  ?

xzx.  85.  Often  the  mind  of  the  righteous  is  so  suspended  in
contemplating  things  on  high,  that  outwardly  their  face  seems
to  have  been  struck  with  stupefaction.  But  because  Heretics
are  not  taught  to  enforce  the  power  of  contemplation  in
secret,  they  think  that  it  is  done  by  the  just»  and  those  that
are  imbued  with  a  right  understanding,  more  in  hypocrisy
than  in  truth,  in  that  what  they  cannot  themselves  obtain
the  possession  of,  they  do  not  suppose  exists  in  others  in  a
genuine  way. It  goes  on;

Ver.  13. Why  doth  thy  spirit  swell  against  Ood,  that
thou  let  test  such  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth  ?

xxxi. 36.  Very  often  when  the  righteous  are  aflSicted  with  any

A  man  may  tpeak  humbfy  of  his  own  good  deeds. 67

woes,  they  are  forced  to  confess  their  works,  as  bles^  Jot>  Book
had  done,  who  after  jast  living  was  pressed  down  by  the -^


strokes  of  the  rod ;  but  when  the  nnrighteoos  hear  their  sayitigi!,
they  think  that  they  are  uttered  in  self-exaltation  ratfi^
than  in  truth. For  they  weigh  the  words  of  the  righteous
by  their  own  feelings,  and  do  not  think  that  good  words  can
be  said  in  a  humble  spirit. For  as  it  is  a  great  sin,  for  a
man  to  ascribe  to  himself  what  there  is  not,  so  it  \t  conl-
monly  no  sin  at  all  if  he  speaks  with  humility  the  good  thut
there  is. Hence  it  often  happens  (hat  the  just  and  unjust  .
have  words  that  are  like,  but  always  a  heart  that  is  widely
unlike,  and  by  the  same  sayings  for  which  the  Lotd  \A
offended  by  the  unrighteous.  He  is  even  propitiated  by  the
righteous. Thus  the  Pharisee  when  he  entered  the  temple
said,  I  fait  twice  in  the  week;  I  give  tithei  of  all  that  /Ij*«*8,
possess. But  the  publican  went  out  justified  nlore  thdn  he.
Hezekiah  too,  the  king,  when  he  was  afflicted  with  sickness
of  the  body,  and  brought  to  the  last  point  of  life,  said  with
his  heart  pierced  in  prayer,  Remember  now^ O  Lord,  Fl9*9B,
beseech  thee,  how  J  have  walked  before  Thee  iti  truth,  and
with  a  perfect  heart. Nor  yet  did  the  Lord  disregard  this
confession  of  his  perfectness,  or  refuse  him,  whom  He  imme-
diately heard  effectually  in  his  prayers* See,  the  Pharisee
justified  himself  in  act,  and  Hezekiah  tliaintained  himself
to  be  just  in  thought  as  well,  and  by  the  sanle  act  by  which
the  one offended,  the  other  propitiated  God. Wherefore
then  was  this,  but  that  Almighty  Ood  estimftte^  the  #ords  of
each  by  the  thoughts  within,  and  in  His  ear  thos^  ate  not
high,  which  are  uttered  with  a  lowly  heart  i Hence  blessed
Job,  when  he  put  forward  his  deeds,  did  not  iii  the  ledst
degree  swell  out  against  Ood,  in  that  those  things  which  he
had  really  done,  he  spoke with  a  humble spirit Now
Heretics  are  accustomed  to  mix  some  true  points  with  thb
statements  of  their  erroneous  perstiasions. And  the  friends
of  blessed  Job,  though  in  the  reproving  of  him  they  afe
altogether  deceired,  may  y^t  eveti  say  some  thiiig^  true,
which they  learnt  by  frequent  communication  with  hinli.
Whose  words  were  they  all  to  be  coiliradicted',  the  Apoiltle
Paul  would  never  hdve  brought  forward  the  S^ntenc^  of
Eliphaz,  saying.  He  taketh  the  tcise  in  their  own  crqftiness.  i  Cor-

,2  '» *••

08  No  man  by  nature  pur$  or  unchangeabh.

Job  10,  And  80>  because  those  things  which  they  say  right,  they  do
-j-^  not  rightly  say  against  blessed  Job,  let  us  in  their  sayings
MoAAL.at  once  tread  under  our  feet  the  mischief  of  indiscretion,  and
sift  the  marrow  of  rightness. It  goes  on;

Yer.  14.  Wlial  is  man,  that  he  should  be  clean  f
xxxii.  37.  For  hereby  alone  that  he  is  called  ^  man'  he  is  described
as  earthly  and  weak;  for  man  is  so  named*  from  the  earth.
And  how  is  it  possible  for  him  to  be  free  from  stain,  who
being  made  of  earth  of  his  own  will  fell  into  infirmity  7  where
it  is  added;  And  he  that  is  born  of  a  woman,  that  he  should
be  righteous?  For  the  first  piece  of  unrighteousness  the
woman  proffered  to  the  man  in  Paradise.  And  so  how  shall
he  appear  righteous,  who  was  bom  of  her  that  proved  the
bidder  of  unrighteousness  7 It  goes  on ;

Yer.  16.  Behold,  among  His  saints  tltere  is  no  one  that
is  unchangeable:  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  His  sight.
xxxiiL 38.  He  repeated  that  with  tlie  title  of  ^  the  heavens,'
Mt8t.  ^.]^^]j  i^Q  before  denoted  by  the  appellation  of  the  ^  Saints.'
Ps.i9,l.  p^f  ii  |g  ^tten  concerning  those  very  Saints;  The  heavens
are  telling  the  glory  qf  Qod;  all  of  whom  have  by  nature  in
themselves  changeableness  proper  to  them,  but  while  they
earnestly  desire  to  attach  themselves  always  to  the  unchange-
able ^  Truth,'  in  attaching  themselves  they  bring  it  to  pass
that  they  become  unchangeable ;  and  whilst  they  keep  them-
selves fixed  thereto  with  a  full  affection,  they  one  day  obtain
that  being  carried  above  themselves,  they  get  the  better  of
this,  that  in  themselves  they  were  changeable. For  what  is
changeableness  but  a  kind  of  death? which  while  it  changes
one  thing  into  another,  as  it  were  kills  that  which  was,  that
that  should  begin  to  be  which  was  not. And  it  is  written
1  Tim.  concerning  th^  Author  of  all  things, Who  only  hath  tm-
' changeableness,  in  that  He  only  is  unchangeable  in  Himself.
Jam.  1,  Concerning  whom  it  is  written  by  James ;  With  Whom  tar  no
variableness,  neither  shadow  qf  changing. For  changeable-
nessitself is  a  shadow,  which  ifit  altered  the  light  by  any  changes,
ff  ould  as  it  were  obscure  it. But  because  in  Ood  changeable-
ness entereth  not, '  no  shadow  of  changing'  intercepts  His
Light. Now  it  is  well  said,  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  His
tight,  in  that  by  themselves  before  the  strict  cognizance  of  God
a  <  homo'  from  *  humua/  at  Habraw  *  Adam.*

Man?$  yood  tnadi  Uieka  by  mrit. Sin  pneiify  kwalhwid. 69

not  eren  they  can  be  clean  to  perfection,  who  are  preacher^  Book
of  cleanness,  as  John  testifies,  who  saith,  If  %ce  ^  /Ao/  ui^^^i
have  no  Min^  we  deeewe  ourselvee. If  then  ^  among  Hiss. °  '
Saints  there  is  no  one  unchangeable,  and  the  heavens  are
not  clean  in  His  sight,'  who  may  presume  in  himself  upon
the  practice  of  righteousness  ? Hence  it  is  further  added;

Ver.  16.  How  much  more  abominable  atui  useless  is  man,
which  drinkeih  iniquily  like  water  f

39.  He  who  first  said  it  was  impossible  that  man  should  xxxir.
of  himself  be  clean  from  sin,  and  righteous,  calls  him  ^  abo-
minable' and  '  useless;'  *  abominable^  on  account  of  the
uncleanness  of  his  stain,  but  '  useless'  on  account  of  the
unrighteousness  of  an  imperfect  life;  who  however  may  be
understood  as  ^  abominable  and  useless'  in  another  sense.

For  often  a  bad  man  seems  to  do  some  things  rightly,  but  by
those  things  which  are  wrong,  even  those  which  are  right
belonging  to  him  are  brought  to  nought;  and  because  the  evil
ones  are  very  displeasing  to  God,  neither  are  those  pleasing
which  seem  to  be  good.  And  so  he,  that  is  ^  abominable'
before  God  in  his  evil  things,  is  *  useless'  in  the  good;  in
that  whilst  he  shews  himself  an  object  of  execration  to  God
by  wicKed  deeds,  neither  is  that  which  seems  right  proceed-
ing from  him  well-pleasing.  And  it  is  well  said,  Which
drinkeih  iniquity  like  water.  For  what  is  eaten  is  swallowed
not  without  delay,  seeing  that  it  is  chewed  in  order  to  be
swallowed;  but  what  is  drunk  has  no  hindrance  to  be
swallowed,  iii  proportion  as  it  hath  again  no  need  to  be
chewed.  And  so  because  sin  is  committed  by  the  foolish
man  without  any  dralring  back,  iniquity  is  drunk  like  waten
For  because  he  does  unlawful  things  without  fear,  he  swallows
the  draught  of  iniquity  without  let  or  hindrance.  It  goes  on ;
Ver.  17.  /  vrill  shew  it  thee,  hear  me;  and  that  which  I
have  seen  I  will  declare  to  thee.

40.  All  arrogant  persons  hare  this  proper  to  them,  thatxxxv.
when  they  have  a  right  notion,  though  the  thing  be  little^
they  wrest  it  to  serve  the  turn  of  pride^  and  by  the  same  act
whereby  from  understanding  they  might  to  themselves  be
raised  higher,  fi^om  swoln  pride  they  only  £U1  into  the  pit  of  self-
exalting,  and  account  themselves  better  instructed  than  the
learned,  and  they  exact  respect  for  themselves  from  their

70 Heretic^  booii  ofF(Uher$  miperior  to  iemptaHm.

Job  10,  betters,  and  stand  upon  it  to  teach  as  with  authority  those

r-^^  *  that  are  l^olier  men.  Hence  it  is  tkow  said,  /  will  $hew  thee,
'hear  me.  And  because  he  teaches  with  less  authority  who
tells  things  that  he  has  heard,  than  he  who  tells  those  things
which  he  has  seen,  in  order  that  Eliphaz  may  claim  to  him-
self the  stronger  kind  of  authority,  he  says,  And  that  which
I  have  seen  I  will  declare.  But  because  Heretics  are  some-
times confounded  by  their  fathers  being  condemned,  and  yet
bring  forward  as  it  were  with  authority  the  sentences  of
those,  by  whose  folly  they  are  deservedly  rejected ;  the  very
audacity  of  Heretics  is  itself  rightly  introduced,  when  it  is
said,

Yer.  18.  Wise  men  cor^eas^  and  do  not  hide  their  fathers.

xxxvi.  41,  ^d  at  once  they  leap  out  in  praise  of  them,  and
boast  that  they  had  been  as  it  were  the  only  rulers  of  Uie
Church.  Hence  it  is  yet  further  added.  Unto  whom  alone
the  earth  was  given^  and  the  stranger  passed  not  among
them.  They  tliink  that '  the  earth  was  given  to  their  fathers
alone,*  in  that  the  masters  of  their  erroneous  teaching  alone
really  had  rule  in  the  Church.  And  who  is  termed  *  the
stranger,'  but  the  Apostate  Angel? Whence  too  it  is  said  by

PiiUM,8.the  Psalmist  concerning  all  the  wicked  spirits  together;  For
strangers  are  risen  up  against  me^  and  oppressors  seek  after
my  soul.  And  so  Heretics,  because  they  think  that  the
hearts  of  their  doctors  were  not  subject  to  the  Apostate
Angel,  say  that  ^  the  stranger  passed  not  among  them.'  For
which  same  stranger  to  pass  through  each  individual,  is  his
putting  wicked  thoughts  into  his  heart.  And  hence  it  b  said
by  the  voice  of  the  Prophet  of  the  evil  spirits  arrayed  against

^  ^^  the  soul  standing  erect,  Which  have  said  to  thy  soul^  Bow
down^  that  v)e  may  go  over.  But  whereas  Eliphaz  the
Temanite,  when  going  to  tell  some  things,  wishes  to  be
heard,  though  he  knows  many  things  which  were  proper  to
be  said,  and  yet  does  not  know  that  they  were  not  proper  to
be  said  to  blessed  Job,  let  us  hear  the  sentences  which  he
uttered  against  blessed  Job.  For  neither  ought  we  to  con-
sider the  person  to  whom,  but  only  what  it  was  that  he  said.
It  goes  op;

Ver.  20.  The  uncked  man  feels  proud  all  his  days.

xxxvii. 4*2.  The  Elect  also  are  apt  to  feel  pride  in  some  of  their

71b  Ebei,  if  they  €v$rJUpridey  leave  Uoff.  71

IbongbU  and  actions. But  becaaSe  they  are  ISect  persons,  Buok
they  cannot  feel  pride  all  their  days^  because  before  they


end  their  livesi  they  turn  their  hearts  from  self-exaltation  to
the  fearing  of  humility.  But  ^  the  wicked  man  feels  pride
all  his  days/  in  that  he  so  brings  his  life  to  an  end,  that  he
nerer  departs  from  self-exaldng.  He  looks  round  him  on  all
that  is  floorishing  in  time,  and  he  neglects  to  consider  whither
he  is  being  carried  for  ever.  He  puts  hiA  trust  in  the  life  of
the  flesh,  and  thinks  that  those  things  continue  for  long,
which  he  holds  at  the  moment  His  mind  is  set  firm  in
self-exaltation,  erery  one  of  his  kin  is  brought  into  contempt,
how  suddenly  death  creeps  upon  him  he  never  takes  thought,
how  uncertain  his  happiness  he  never  reflects;  whereas  if
he  did  but  turn  his  eyes  to  the  uncertainty  of  fleeting  life,  he
would  nerer  keep  for  a  certainty  things  uncertain.  And
hence  it  is  well  added;

And  the  nmnber  of  the  yeare  qfhie  tyranny  i$  uHeertain.

43.  For  he  ought  not  to  have  felt  pride  at  all,  even  if  hexxxTtti.
might  have  had  the  number  of  his  years  assured^  So  that
knowing  how  long  he  should  live,  he  might  know  before-
hand when  to  withdraw  himself  from  self-exalUttion.  But
mnce  the  present  life  is  always  uncertain,  death's  creeping
upon  him  ought  always  to  be  Apprehended  the  more,  inso-
much as  it  can  never  be  foreseen.  And  he  rightly  calls  the
pride  of  the  wicked,  ^  tyranny."  For  he  is  justly  styled  a
tyrant,  who  in  the  commonwealth  takes  the  lead  without  right.
And  be  it  known  that  every  proud  man,  according  to  his
several  measure,  exercises  tyranny.  For  what  sometimes
one  person  practises  ill  the  commonwealth,  in  this  case^  by
power  of  high  oflElce  accorded  to  him,  another  in  a  province,
another  in  a  city,  another  in  his  own  family,  this  same
another  by  concealed  wickedness  practises  to  himself  in  the
thought  of  his  own  heart  Nor  does  the  Lord  regard  what
amount  of  evil  each  person  may  be  able  to  do,  but  what  amount
he  may  have  the  mind  to  do.  And  when  the  power  is  want-
ing without,  he  is  a  tyrant  within  himself,  whom  iniquity
lords  it  over  within;  for  though  he  does  not  oppress  his
neighbours  outwardly,  yet  inwardly  he  seeks  to  possess  power,
in  order  to  oppress  them ;  and  because  Almighty  Ood  con-
siders the  hearts  of  men,  the  wicked  man  has  already  done  in

73  Tli€  wicked  JbU  ofiuspician  and  uncertainty.

Job  15,  his  eyes  the  thing  thai  he  conceived.  Now  our  Creator
"T—  willed  that  our  end  should  be  hidden  from  us  with  this  riew.
Moral,  that  whereas  we  are  uncertain  when  we  may  die,  we  may
always  be  found  ready  for  death.  Hence  after  it  has  been
said,  All  his  days  the  wicked  man  /eels  praudy  he  rightly
adds,  and  the  nwnber  qfthe  years  qf  his  tyranny  is  uncertain.
As  if  it  were  said  in  plain  words,  ^  Wherefore  is  he  lifted  up
as  if  on  the  grounds  of  a  certainty,  the  tenure  of  whose  life
is  held  under  the  penalty  of  uncertainty?*  But  Almighty
Ood  not  only  reserves  future  punishments  for  those  that  live
wickedly,  but  even  here,  where  they  go  wrong,  be  besets  their
hearts  with  punishments,  that  by  this  alone,  viz.  that  they
sin,  they  should  be  smiting  themselves,  and  that  always
trembling,  always  full  of  suspicion,  they  should  be  afraid  of
meeting  with  those  mischiefs  from  others,  which  they  remember
themselves  to  have  done  to  others.  Whence  it  is  yet  further
added  of  this  wicked  one;

Vor.  21.  A  dreadful  sound  is  altcay  in  his  ears,  and  when
there  is  peace,  he  suspecteth  plots,
xxxix.  44.  But  there  is  nothing  more  happy  than  simplicity  of
heart,  in  that  in  proportion  as  it  shews  forth  innocency
towards  others,  there  is  nothing  it  dreads  to  meet  with  from
others.  For  it  has  its  simplicity  as  a  kind  of  citadel
of  strength,  nor  is  it  suspicious  of  undergoing  what  it  has  no
remembrance  of  having  itself  done.  Whence  it  is  well  said
ProT.i4,by  Solomon,  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  cof\fidence.
ProT.is,Who  also  says  agaii,  A  secure  mind  is  like  a  perpetual
^^'  feast.  For  the  mere  repose  of  security  is  like  the  continuance
of  refreshment  Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evil  mind
is  always  set  in  pains  and  labours,  since  it  is  either  contriving
mischiefs  that  it  may  bring  down,  or  fearing  lest  these  be
brought  down  upon  it  by  others ;  and  whatever  plot  it  hatches
against  neighbours,  it  is  afraid  of  being  hatched  by  neigh-
bours against  itself.  It  is  on  every  side  full  of  suspicions,
on  every  ^de  full  of  alarms.  Every  one  that  occurs  to  mind
is  supposed  to  be  making  out  things  hostile  to  him,  and  so
he,  to  whom  the  repose  of  security  is  wanting,  has  surely  '  a
dreadful  sound  in  his  ears*  always.  Audit  often  happens  thathis
neighbour,  whoever  he  be,  speaks  to  him  with  a  single  inten-
tion, and  designs  nothing  hostile,  but  *  when  there  is  peace.

7)b  fVidked/iar,  Mjmt  ffffidr/or  AipmmL 73

he  sospecteih  plots;*  in  that  he,  who  is  alwayk  dealing  eraftilj,  Book
calcnlates  that  there  is  not  single  dealing  towards  hiinsel£  — -1-.
And  whereas  it  is  written.  When  the  wicked  man  eamethTww.iB,
into  the  pit  qf  nnnerSj  he  eontefnneth^  he  being  eticompassed  '*
with  the  darkness  of  his  iniqoity  henceforth  despairs  of  light
Hence  too  it  follows;

Ver.  23.  He  believeth  not  that  he  shall  return  out  qf  dark-
neeSy  a$%d  he  is  vxiitedfor  qfthe  sword*

45.  For  because  be  believes  himself  to  be  on  all  sides xl*
stricken  from  ambnsh,  despuring  of  salvation,  he  is  ever
growing  on  in  wickedness. Now  there  are  times  too  when
this  ungodly  man  turns  his  eyes  to  judgments  from  above  as

-well,  and  dreads  their  coming  upon  him.  But  whilst  he
seeks  the  wages  of  the  present  life,  these  same  judgments
which  he  had  begun  to  fear,  being  conquered  by  the  madness
of  avarice,  he  sets  at  nought  And  he  thinks  indeed  that  it
is  possible  he  may  die  in  sin,  but  yet  he  does  not  cease  from
sin. Hence  it  is  subjoined ;

Ver.  23.  When  he  has  stirred  himself  to  seek  breads  h^
knou:eth  that  the  day  qf  darkness  is  ready  in  his  hand.

46.  For  *  bread'  is  the  wages  of  the  present  life,  and '  the  day xli.
of  darkness*  is  taken  for  the  time  of  vengeance. And  so  in

the  course  of  his  conduct,  the  wicked  man  at  times  weighs
well  the  present  wrath  of  the  Judge  Above,  but  he  is  not
diverted  from  wickedness,  so  that  it  too  should  be  itself
diverted  from  bis  destruction.  But  his  conscience  accusing
him,  he  fears  to  be  smitten,  yet  he  is  ever  increasing  that
whereby  he  should  be  smitten.  He  makes  slight  of  his
return,  he  despairs  of  pardon,  he  carries  himself  high  in  sin,
^et  he  has  fear  within,  a  witness  of  his  wickedness.  And
though  he  seem  outwardly  to  be  doing  wicked  things  with  a
bold  front,  yet  for  these  in  his  own  heart  he  is  untrained  to
tremble.  Whence  it  is  written;  For  whereas  wickedness  is  YTkd.
iimorouSy  she  gives  witness  to  condemnation.  For  when  ti^^'  ^'*
man  does  unlawful  things,  he  is  in  dread  of  the  thing  that  he
does;  and  the  open  witness  for  his  condemning  is  the  very
fearfulness  of  wickedness  itself,  in  that  both  tiie  thing  that  is
done  is  feared,  and  yet  the  evil  that  is  feared  is  not  overcome.
Of  which  it  is  yet  further  added.

74  Bad  men  know  that  their  detncee  may  fail  them.

Jos  li, Yer.  24.  Trouble  ehall  make  him  qfraid^  etraits  ehall

j^y^  beeiege  him^  m  a  king  ready  to  the  battle.
Moral. 47.  In  all  that  the  wicked  man  does,  he  is  hedged  in  with

^'"*  anguish,  and  tribulation,  and  straits;  in  that  his  soul  is  con-
founded with  anxiety  and  misgiving.  One  man  secretly
longs  to  seise  another^s  goods  by  force,  and  he  toils  and
strains  in  the  thoughts  of  his  heart,  that  he  may  not  be  found
out.  Another  man,  forsaking  truth,  makes  up  his  mind  to
tell  a  lie,  that  be  may  deceive  the  mind  of  those  that  hear
him;  but  what  great  labour  it  is  to  guard  with  sufficient
heed,  that  his  deceit  itself  may  not  be  found  out !  For  he
sets  before  his  eyes  what  answer  may  be  made  to  him  by
those  that  know  the  truth,  and  with  great  ettovi  of  thought
he  makes  out  how  by  the  appliances  of  falsehood  he  may
surpass  the  evidences  of  truth.  He  cloaks  himself  about  on
this  side  and  on  thatf  and  against  that  wherein  he  might  have
been  found  out,  he  looks  about  for  an  answer  resembling
truth,  whereas  if  he  had  been  minded  to  tell  the  truth,
assuredly  he  might  have  done  it  without  pains.  For  the
path  of  truth  is  smooth,  and  the  road  of  falsehood  grievous.
Jer.o,s.  And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  They  have  taught  their
tongue  to  speak  lies,  and  wearied  themselves  to  commit
iniquity.  Therefore  it  is  well  said,  Drouble  shall  make  him
e/raidfCand  straits  besiege  him:  in  that  in  himself  he  is
undone  in  the  toilsomeness  of  fear,  who  forsakes  the  way  of
truth,  which  is  the  companion  of  security.  And  ho  is  riglidy
compared  to  a  king  prepared /or  battle^  seeing  that  in  that
very  evil  that  he  does  he  is  at  once  alarmed  and  presses  on;
at  once  made  to  tremble  by  conscience,  and  to  pant  from  desire ;
fears,  and  swells  high;  is  scared  with  mbgivings,  and  lifts  up
his  spirit  in  audacity.  Moreover,  we  are  to  know  that  *  a
king  who  is  prepared  for  battle*  is  so  apprehensive  against  the
enemy,  that  he  also  fears  for  that  very  army  which  he  is
leading,  lest  it  should  be  seduced,  lest  by  the  desertion  of
his  soldiers  he  be  laid  open  to  the  darts  of  the  enemy.  And  so
*  the  wicked  man  is  besieged  with  straits,  Uke  a  king  ready
to  the  battle ;'  in  that  whilst  practising  false  things  and  utter-
ing false  words,  he  dreads  lest  he  should  lose  his  own
soldiers ;  i«  e.  the  appliances  of  falsehoods ;  and  lie  exposed

Th§JbwUjf  wicked  id  tiunmhtM  $touify  againit  Ood. 75

to  the  darts  of  trnth,  if  it  chance  that  that  be  lackiDg  to  him,  Book
which  he  might  have  to  oppose  od  the  side  of  deceit  But  ■'
thongh  the  spirit  trembles,  though  conscience  accuses,  yet
the  wicked  man  is  mastered  by  his  own  passion ;  and  forcing
under  fear,  he  assumes  hardihood  from  his  iniquities.  And
often  when  revenge  is  set  before  his  mind,  he  lifts  himself  up
against  Ood;  he  determines  to  undergo  any  inflictions  at  His
hands,  so  long  as  in  this  life,  while  he  has  the  power,  he  may
do  all  that  he  pleases. And  hence  it  is  added;

Ver.  25, 96.  For  he  hath  Mtretehed  out  his  ha$ut  againit  Chd,
and  ii  itrengthened  against  the  Almighty ;  He  runneth  upon
Him  udth  erected  neck,  and  he  ii  armed  with  a  stout  neck.

48.  These  things  are  more  plainly  understood  of  the  head  xliii*
of  the  wicked  himself,  i.  e.  Antichrist,  who,  while  lifting  up
his  hand  against  Ood,  is  said  to  be  *  strengthened,*  in  that
for  a  little  time  he  is  permitted  to  be  exalted ;  that  in  pro-
portion as  he  is  let  to  glory  for  a  while,  he  may  be  punished
the  more  pitilessly  for  CTerlasting ;  but  seeing  that  all  the
wicked  are  his  members,  this,  which  he  then  in  the  end  of  the
world  shall  do  alone  in  a  preeminent  way,  let  us  see  how  it
is  done  now  by  each  one  of  the  wicked  severally.  Thus
there  are  some  who  even  if  they  do  ever  set  themselres  to  do
things  in  opposition  to  the  judgment  of  Almighty  Ood,
disabled  by  the  very  impossibility  of  putdng  their  will  in  ex-
ecution, look  to  themselves,  and  are  made  to  turn  themselves
to  Him  Whom  they  were  minded  to  despise,  and  they,  who
might  hare  gone  far  from  Him,if  they  had  been  able  to  execute
what  they  were  minded  to  do,  are  sometimes  hereby  saved,
because  they  could  not  execute  what  they  wickedly  had  the
mind  for;  and  hence  being  brought  back  to  themselves,  they
see  what  condition  they  are  of,  and  mourn  that  they  had  the
mind  to  do  things  contrary  to  *  Truth.*  And  there  are  some,
who  by  the  just  judgment  of  Ood  are  suflered  to  execute
with  worse  wickedness  that  which  they  wickedly  desire  to  do
in  opposition  to  Ood.  And  whilst  an  evil  disposition  inflames,
and  power  strengthens  them,  they  are  henceforth  unable  to
attain  to  know  themselves  in  their  erring  course,  in  pro-
portion as  in  the  affluence  of  their  fortunes  they  are  by
power  ever  being  drawn  out  of  themselves. Concerning  the

76  The  <  itoni  neoh'  of  the  Wicked  is  wealthy  pride.

Job  15,  bent  of  whose  mind  it  is  here  said,  For  he  stretcheth  forth
'  ^^'  his  hofid  against  Ood,  and  is  strengthened  against  the
Moral.  Almighty.  For  ^  to  stretch  forth  the  hand  against  God/  is  to
persevere  in  evil  doing,  setting  at  nought  the  judgments  of
God.  And  because  God  is  then  more  wroth,  when  He  suffers
that  to  be  fulfilled,  which  thing  ought  not  to  have  been  con-
ceived at  all  in  thought,  this  wicked  man  is  *  strengthened
against  the  Almighty,'  in  that  he  is  suffered  to  prosper  in  his
wicked  course  of  conduct,  so  that  he  should  both  do  wicked
things,  and  yet  live  in  happiness.  Of  whom  it  is  yet  further
added.  He  runneth  upon  Him  with  erected  neck.

49.  To  *  run  against  God  with  erected  neck'  is  to  commit
with  shamelessness  such  things  as  are  di9pleasing  to  the
Creator.  Of  whom  it  is  rightly  said.  He  ran^  \.  e.  in  doing
evil,  he  had  no  let  or  hindrance  from  adversity.  Concern-
ing whom  it  is  yet  fiurthcr  added  \  And  he  is  armed  with  a
1  pingai  stout  neck  ^  '  A  stout  neck'  is  wealthy  pride,  as  being
cerTice.  buttressed  up  with  overflowing  stores,  as  it  were  with  a
quantity  of  flesh.  And  so  the  bad  man  with  power  '  is
armed  against  God  with  a  stout  neck,'  in  that  swollen  with
temporal  good  things  he  is  set  up  as  by  a  great  bulk  of  flesh
against  the  precepts  of  truth.  For  what  is  poverty  but  a  sort
of  leanness,  and  what  is  the  abundance  of  stores  but  the
fatness  of  the  present  life  ?  And  so  he  lifts  himself  up  '  with
a  stout  neck  against  God,*  who  takes  temporal  abundance  to
serve  tlie  end  of  pride.  For  the  powerful  and  wicked  have
this  thing  proper  to  them,  that  being  engrossed  with  deceitful
riches  they  neglect  the  true  riches  of  God,  and  in  proportion
as  they  investigate  the  less  what  is  true,  they  are  the  more
lifted  up  by  false  acquisitions.  For  the  care  and  concern  of
earthly  things,  because  it  engrosses,  utterly  blinds  the  sight.
Whence  it  is  yet  further  added  with  justness,
Ver.  27.  Fatness  hath  covered  his  face.
xliv.  ^^-  P^'  ^he  sight  is  in  the  face,  wherein  too  is  the  first
more  honourable  part  of  the  body.  Therefore  the  bent  of
the  mind  is  not  unjustly  denoted  by  the  face,  which  wherever
we  turn  it,  there  we  see.  And  so  '  fatness  covers  the  face,'
in  that  the  earnestly  coveted  abundance  of  earthly  good
things  presses  down  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  and  that  which

*  Sicfcf *  ofth€  wicked  'fat*  with  evU/ottowen.  77

should  be  honourable  ^  in  ibeniy  it  makee  foul  in  the  eyea  of  Book
God,  in  that  it  weight  it  to  the  earth  with  a  multitude  of-^Hl-


concems.  Who  do  not  however  find  it  enough  that  thejr
themselves  should  be  full  of  pride,  unless  those  too  that  are
united  to  them,  themselves  also  are  made  boastful  hy  their
fatness.  For  there  are  some  who  on  being  countenanced  by
the  patronage  of  the  greater  ones,  are  set  up  with  pride,  and
on  the  strength  of  their  power  uplifted  agunst  the  destitute.
Hence  it  is  yet  further  subjoined ;
And  thefai  hangnfrom  his  Hdes.

51.  Because  the  (at  is  the  richness  of  the  flesh,  and  we  are  xlv.
accustomed  to  call  those  persons  the  *  sides''  of  the  rich,  whom  i  Ut«ra
we  see  united  to  them, '  the  fat  hangs  down  from  his  sides,'

in  that  every  one  that  attaches  himself  to  the  powerful  and
wicked  man  is  by  his  power  himself  also  as  it  were  swollen
with  the  fatness  of  good  things,  so  that  following  the  wicked-
ness of  an  evil  patron  he  has  no  fear  of  Ood,  he  distresses
the  poor,  whom  he  is  able,  and  as  much  as  he  is  able,  and
uplifts  his  heart  on  the  strength  of  temporal  glory.  So  when
there  is  such  an  one  who  is  attached  to  a  powerful  wicked
man,  *  from  his  side,'  surely  enough, '  the  fat  hangs  down.'
Concerning  whom  it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  28.  And  he  dweUelh  in  denoUite  cammunities,  and  in
deserted  houses^  tthich  are  became  heaps.

52.  For  as  a '  community'  has  its  name  from  the  intercourse  xlvi.
of  persons  living  together  in  common,  ^  desolate  communities'

are  the  actual  throngs  of  wicked  followers,  by  whose  shouts
this  bad  man  is  commended,  when  he  is  hurried  away  by  his
wickedness  into  evil  deeds.  Whence  it  is  written;  7%ePt.io,8.
sinner  is  commended  in  ihe  desires  of  his  soulf  and  he  thai
doeih  unrighteousness  is  blessed.  But  *  deserted  houses'  are
bad  thoughts,  which  this  wicked  man  inhabits,  in  that  by  all
that  he  does  he  seeks  to  please  the  thoughts  of  the  wicked.
Which  communities  are  rightly  called  '  desolate,'  and  houses
*  deserted,'  in  that  except  Almighty  God  had  abandoned  the
dealings  and  thoughts  of  such  on  account  of  their  previous
sins,  they  would  never  arrive  at  the  commission  of  worse
ones.  And  it  is  well  said,  Which  are  reduced  io  heaps.
For  the  ruined  buildings  of  houses  and  cities  make  heaps ;
^  A.  B.  C.  b.  nore  boiKmrable.

78  The  Wicked  takee  no  root  in  the  eternal  Land.

Job  16,  in  that  whilst  the  wicked  severally  are  joined  to  one  another
j^^^ for  wicked  deeds  in  confused  courses  of  conduct^  they  shew
Moral,  without  doubt,  that  they  have  fallen  from  the  edifice  of  life.
It  goes  on ;

Ver.  29.  He  $haU  not  be  inhabited^  neither  shall  hie
eubetance  continue,  neitlier  ehall  he  send  forth  his  root  into
the  earth.
xlvii.  68.  That  which  is  here  expressed,  He  shall  not  be  inhabited^
I  have  found  in  some  copies,  He  shall  not  be  enriched ;  but
the  sense  is  not  at  variance,  though  the  phraseology  is  at
variance.  For  he  is  *  enriched*  with  virtuous  attainments
whose  mind  is  ^  inhabited'  by  Almighty  God.  But  because
the  thought  of  the  proud  man  is  not  *  inhabited*  by  the  grace
of  his  Maker,  hereby  surely  he  is  not  *  enriched*  with  virtues.
On  this  account  then  that  he  is  empty  within,  let  it  be  said,
He  shall  not  be  inhabited.  But  in  respect  to  that  which  is
swollen  up  without,  being  of  a  transitory  nature,  it  is  rightly
added,  Nor  shall  his  substance  continue.  As  though  it  were
said  in  plain  speech,  *  This  which  he  seems  to  have  outwardly
passes  away,  and  what  was  not  capable  of  passing  away,  he
has  not  within.'  And  hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  Neitlter
shall  tie  send  his  root  into  the  earth.  Which  if  we  take  as
spoken  of  this  earth,  doubtless  it  is  plain,  that  the  tree  which
has  no  root  in  the  earth,  is  brought  to  the  ground  on  being
shaken  by  the  very  slightest  gales  of  wind;  and  every  proud
man  while  he  is  ^  strongtiiened  against  the  Almighty  Lord,'
while  he  ^  runs  with  erected  neck,'  and  is  ^  uplifted  with
a  stout  neck  against  his  Maker,*  is  seen  to  stand  like  a  tree;
but  his  standing  is  without  root,  in  that  as  it  were  at  a  light
breath,  so  at  the  stirring  of  the  secret  sentence,  his  life  is
rooted  up.  But  if  in  this  passage  we  take  ^  the  earth*  for  the
recompensing  of  the  Eternal  Country,  concerning  which
Pf.i43,|he  Prophet  saith,  My  portion  is  in  the  land  of  the  living^
this  wicked  roan  does  not  ^  send  forth  his  root  in  the  earth,*
in  that  he  never  plants  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  into  the
desire  of  the  eternal  life.  For  what  the  root  is  to  the  tree,  the
same  is  the  thought  of  his  own  heart  to  each  one  of  man-
kind ;  for  in  the  case  of  that  which  is  seen  outwardly,  there  is
a  holding  by  that  which  is  not  seen  outwardly '. And  hence

*  al. '  which  (heiog)  within  ii  not  teen.'

Darkneu  aiuijlame$jbr  th€  wiekid. Their  iim  &f^)eeeh.  79

it  b  said  by  the  IVopbet,  Shall  again  take  root  dawnwafd$^  Book
and  bear  fruit  upwarde. For  when  we  stretch  our  thought  ^^'
in  sympathizing  with  a  poor  neigtiboor;  <  we  as  it  were  stadsi. '
a  root  downwards,  that  we  may  bear  the  ihiit  of  recompense
above.* ItfoUows;

Ver.  80.  He  shall  not  depart  out  q^  darkneee.

54.  If  this  prond  man  had  been  minded  io  turn  back  from  xWiii.
sin  to  righteousness,  he  might  *  depart  out  of  darkness.'

Bnt  because  he  seeks  not  the  light  of  righteousness,  he  does
not  depart  out  of  darlmess.  After  whose  example,  those
likewise,  who  attach  themselves  to  him  outbreathe  themselves
in  making  earthly  advancements,  are  kindled  with  the  torches
of  avarice,  and  scorched  with  the  fires  of  carnal  denres.
And  hence  it  is  added,

Thejlame  shall  dry  up  his  branches.

55.  For  if  he  united  to  himself  any  that  were  searching  xlix.
after  the  Eternal  Country,  he  would  have  green '  branches*  in
himself. But  because  they  that  are  joined  to  him,  are  also
heated  with earthly  passions,  and  the  flame  of  passions
kindles  the  hearts  of  his  followers,  it  doth  surely '  dry  up

his  branches,*  that  they  should  not  bear  the  fruit  of  good
works,  seeing  that  for  the  chace  after  the  lowest  objects  they
pant  in  wickedness. And  it  is  well  added.

And  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth  shall  he  be  taken  away.

W.  For  the  proud  man,  in  proportion  as  he  is  more  strong  1.
in  this  life,  the  more  shamelessly  lets  loose  fot  himself  the
reins  of  his  tongue,  so  as  to  utter  bad  things  of  every  sort,
to  apprehend  no  man  for  his  words,  to  wound  thete  with
insults,  to  cast  at  those  with  curses.  But  sometime  he  is
carried  away  into  blasphemy  agunst  his  Creator,  as  it  is
said  by  the  Psalmbt  of  such  persons.  They  set  their  mouths  ^f^-^^i^'
against  the  heavens^  and  their  tongue  walketh  through  the
earth.  And  hence  the  rich  man,  being  set  in  the  fire,
implores  to  have  water  dropped  for  him  on  his  tongue  by
the  finger  of  Lazarus.  By  which  circumstance  it  is  perceived
that  in  that  part  where  a  man  has  sinned  most,  there  he  was
the  more  fiercely  burned.  Therefore  it  is  rightly  said  now.
And  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth  shaU  he  go  away;  in  that  he
received  sentence  of  smiting,  in  proportion  as  he  did  not

80  Alms  redeem  mi  bad  men  from  death  or  hell.

Job  16,  restrain  the  breath  of  his  mouth  under  the  fear  of  Ood. It

31.59.

-j;jj^goesou;

Moral. Ver.  81.  Let  him  not  believe^  being  vainly  deceived^  that
he  ie  to  be  redeemed  urith  any  price.
li. 67.  As  often  as  we  do  akns  after  sin^  we  as  it  were  pay
a.  price  for  bad  actions. Whence  too  it  is  said  by  the

Pii.  49,  Prophet  concerning  him  who  doeth  these  things  not.  He  unit
not  give  Ood  his  propitiation^  nor  the  price  of  the  redemp*
tion  qf  the  souL  But  sometimes  the  rich  being  elated  oppress
those  below  them,  seize  on  the  things  of  another,  and  yet  in
a  certain  way  give  somewhat  to  others,  and  whilst  they  bear
down  multitudes,  they  sometimes  render  the  support  of
defence  to  particular  persons,  and  for  the  iniquities  which
they  never  abandon  they  seem  to  offer  a  price.  But  the
price  of  alms  then  frees  us  from  sins,  when  we  lament  and
renounce  things  we  have  been  guilty  of.  For  he  who  would
both  always  be  sinning,  and  as  it  were  always  bestowing
alms,  gives  a  price  in  vain,  in  that  he  does  not  redeem  his
soul,  which  he  does  not  keep  from  evil  habits.  Hence  it  is  now
said.  Let  him  not  believe,  being  vainly  deceived^  (hat  he  is  to
be  redeemed  with  any  price.  For  the  alms  of  the  rich  and
proud  man  has  no  efficacy  to  redeem  him,  seeing  that  his
robbery  of  the  poor  man  committed  at  the  same  moment,  will
not  allow  it  to  Vise  up  before  the  eyes  of  Ood.  Which  same
may  likewise  be  understood  in  another  sense;  in  that  it  often
happens  that  proud  men  of  riches,  when  they  bestow  alms,
do  not  give  it  for  the  desire  of  the  eternal  life,  but  for  the
extending  of  the  temporal  life;  they  think  that  they  can  put
off  death  by  gifts,  but  let  him  not  think,  being  vainly  deceived,
that  lie  is  to  be  redeemed  with  any  price:  in  that  he  is  not
able  to  secure  by  the  gift  bestowed,  that  he  should  escape
the  end  that  is  due  to  him,  when  his  very  nickedness  cuts
asunder  his  life. Hence  too  it  is  added;

Ver.  33.  B^ore  his  days  are  fulfilled  he  shall  perish,  and
his  hands  shall  wither.
lii.  58.  The  days  foreordained  to  each  individual  by  the
Divine  Prescience  can  neither  be  increased  nor  lessened,
except  it  happen  that  they  be  so  foreknown  as  either  to  be
longer  if  they  be  accompanied  with  the  most  perfect  works,

Bad  men  die  prenuUurely  to  virtue  if  not  to  life. 81

or  shorter  with  the  most  wicked,  just  as  Hezekiah  obtained  ^o<

increase  of  days  by  the  bestowing  of  tears,  and  as  it  is ^

written  concerning  the  wicked,  jD^aM  meets  the  undisciplined^
Yet  oftentimes  the  wicked  man,  though  in  the  secret  fore*
knowledge  of  God  no  protracted  periods  of  life  may  be  pre-
destined him,  himself,  forasmuch  as  he  desires  to  live  after
the  flesh,  sets  length  of  days  before  his  imagination.  And
because  he  cannot  attain  to  that  time  that  he  looks  forward
to,  he,  as  it  were,  *  perishes  before  his  days  are  fulfilled.*  Which
same  we  may  likewise  imderstund  in  another  sense  also.
For  very  commonly  we  see  persons  that  both  lead  wicked  lives,
and  attain  to  the  very  extreme  of  old  age.  How  then  is  it  said.
Be/ore  hi$  days  are  fuyUledj  he  shall  perish :  when  in  the
case  of  particular  persons  we  often  see,  that  their  limbs
already  fail  from  age,  and  yet  their  passions  do  not  cease  to
carry  out  their  wickedness?

59.  For  there  are  some,  who  after  a  lost  way  of  life  turn  back
to  themselves,  and  their  conscience  accusing  them,  forsake
their  fit>ward  ways,  alter  their  doings,  withstand  their  old
wickedness,  flee  earthly  courses,  and  pursue  heavenly  aims,  but
before  they  be  firmly  rooted  in  those  holy  aims,  firom  deadness
of  mind  they  return  to  the  things  which  they  began  to  pass
sentence  on,  and  fall  back  to  the  evil  habits  which  they  had
determined  to  eschew.  For  whereas  it  often  happens  that  for
the  profit  of  many,  even  holy  men  bow  their  necks  to  external
actions,  and  are  busied  with  the  governance  of  a  people,  the
weak  seeing  this,  and,  firom  their  former  pride  still  by  them,
seeking  to  follow  their  example,  set  themselves  in  outward  ways
of  action;  but  in  proportion  as  they  do  not  come  thereto  well
imbued  with  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  they  execute  them  in  a
carnal  manner.  For  except  the  heart  be  first  confirmed  in
heavenly  desires  by  long  application  and  a  continued  con-
versation, when  it  is  poured  back  again  for  the  executing  of
things  exterior,  it  is  rooted  out  from  all  its  standing  in  good
practice.  Whence  too  it  is  rightly  said  of  this  wicked  man.
Be/ore  his  days  are  fu{fiUed^  he  shall  perish.  In  that  even
if  he  begin  perchance  to  do  any  thing  good,  before  he  is
strengthened  therein  by  length  of  time,  he  falls  l^ack  to  out-
ward things,  and  wickedly  abandons  what  he  appeared  to
" •  Ed.  Ben.  tnggesti  Aat  this  may  be  taken  from  Ecelat.  xx.  9.

VOL.  II.  O

82 Weak  devotion  chilled  by  outward  employments.

Job  16,  hare  entered  upon  rightly. And  hence  it  is  fitly  added  f
^'^^'  And  his  hands  shall  wither;  in  that  whilst  he  is  prematarely
'  involved  in  exterior  actions,  ho  is  ^  dried  up*  of  all  good
practice. Hence  it  is  yet  fui'ther  added  aright  ^

Ver.  33,  34.  His  cluster  s/tall  be  spoilt  like  a  vine  in  the
first  flower i  and  like  an  olive  casting  its  flower. For  the
congregation  of  the  hypocrite  s/iall  be  barren,
liii. 60.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Divine  Word  so  speaks  of
this  wicked  man  in  general  terms,  that  yet  it  comes  down  to
his  particular wickedness. For  he  that  on  saying,  His
cluster  shall  be  spoilt  like  a  vine  in  the  first  flower  ^  and  like
an  olive  casting  its  fiower;  directly  adds.  For  the  congre-
gation  qf  the  hypocrite  shall  be  barren^  plainly  makes  it
appear  that  in  this  wicked  man  it  is  against  his  hypocrisy
that  he  passes  sentence  of  condemnation. Now  we  have  to
consider  how  it  is  that  the  hypocrite  is  *  spoilt  like  a  vine  in
the  first  flower,  or  like  an  olive  casting  its  flower.' If  the
vine  in  flowering  be  touched  by  excessive  cold  in  an  in-
equality of  the  weather,  it  forthwith  makes  it  dry  of  all
moistness  of  verdure. And  there  are  some,  who  after  bad
courses  long  to  follow  ways  of  holiness,  but  before  that  good
desires  are  confirmed  in  them,  as  we  have  said,  some  piece
of  good  fortune  of  the  present  life  comes  upon  them,  which
entangles  them  with  outward  concerns,  and  whilst  it  with-
draws their  mind  from  tlie  heat  of  interior  love,  as  it  were
puts  it  out  by  cold,  and  whatever  seemed  to  be  shewing
itself  of  the  blossom  of  virtue  in.  them,  it  kills. For  in
earthly  courses  of  action  the  mind  grows  very  cold,  if  it
be  not  yet  by  the  interior  gifts  firmly  settled. Whence
it  follows  that  higher  stations  or  exterior  works,  which  are
intended  to  be  of  use  to  the  necessities  of  man,  those  persons
should  take  upon  them  to  put  them  in  execution,  who  have
skill  to  judge  of  them,  and  to  force  them  to  bow  beneath
themselves  in  the  power  of  interior  virtue. For  when  any
ft'ail  person  is  drawn  away  either  to  the  post  of  government
or  to  execute  exterior  employments,  in  proportion  as  he  is
as  it  were  carried  out  of  himself,  he  is  rooted  up,  in  that  the
tree,  which  does  not  first  send  roots  deep  below,  is  the
sooner  laid  low  by  the  impulse  of  the  winds,  if  it  lifts  itself
on  high  in  its  top;  and  is  the  more  speedily  brought  down

JFi-uit  of  a  good  beginning  loai  through  heat  of  marie  praiee.  83

to  the  Tery  lowest,  in  proportion  as  it  grew  higher  in  the  air  Book
without  roots. But  sometimes  the  vine  in  flower  is  dried, -^ — -


not  by  the  cold  but  by  the  heat,  and  when  it  is  touched  by
excessive  heat,  its  flower  being  shed,  the  cluster  is  made  to
wither.  And  it  very  often  happens  that  they  who  do  not
come  to  good  works  with  a  right  intention,  when  they  see
that  they  please  their  fellow-creatures,  are  the  more  vehe-
mently inflamed  to  execute  the  same  good  works,  anxiously
set  themselves  to  do  what  is  calculated  to  please  the  eyes  o(
men,  and  are  as  it  were  heated  in  a  holy  devotedness.  What
then  but  heat  in  the  time  of  the  blossom  has  come  upon  these,
whom  the  appetite  of  human  applause  has  made  bare  of  fruit?
Hence  it  is  well  added.  And  like  the  olive  casting  hie
flower.  For  when  the  olive  is  in  flower,  if  it  be  touched  by
an  immoderate  fog,  it  is  bared  of  the  fulness  of  fruit.  And  as
often  as  people  that  are  entering  on  good  works,  begin  to  be
extolled  by  those  that  behold  them,  and  to  take  delight  in
the  commendations  of  themselves,  there  is  caused  a  mist  of
the  understanding  in  the  thoughts,  that  they  can  now  no
longer  discern  with  what  intention  they  do  a  thing,  and  lose
the  fruit  of  practice '  as  it  were  by  the  fog  of  applause.
Hence  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon,  Let  ue  get  up  early  to  the  Cut.  7,
vineyards;  let  us  see  if  the  vines  flower  ^  if  the  blossoms  bear  *
fruit.  *  The  vines  flower,'  when  the  minds  of  the  faithful
put  forth  good  works;  but  they  do  not 'bear  fruit,*  if  in  what
they  may  have  purposed^  they  are  disabled,  from  being  over-
come by  certain  erring  practices.

61.  We  have  not  then  to  look  whether  the  vines  flourish,
but  if  the  blossoms  are  strong  for  the  bearing  of  fruit,  in  that
it  is  not  any  thing  to  admire  if  a  man  begins  good  works,
but  it  is  much  to  be  admired,  if  with  a  right  intention  he
holds  on  in  good  works.  Whence  it  very  often  happens  that
if  in  good  practice  a  right  intention  is  not  kept,  even  the
very  work  itself  which  is  supposed  good  is  lost  For  we
have  often  seen  persons  abandon  the  earthly  things  which
they  possessed,  and  henceforth  seek  nought  transitory,  and
be  mixed  up  with  no  janings  for  the  sake  of  this  life.  When
then  the  believing  mind  exhibits  this  in  itself,  it  is  as  if  the
olive  put  forth  blossom,  but  when  any  of  this  sort  begin  to
seek  Uie  glory  of  tiie  world  which  they  had  contemned,  and

g2

84  JTie  Itypocriie^i  vain  labour. Praise  an  earthly  reward.

Job  16,  to  pant  with  insatiable  desire  after  the  earthly  things  which
■^ — -  they  appeared  to  have  disdained,  to  give  themselves  to
brawls,  to  seek  out  mischiefs  upon  their  neighboui-s;  then
indeed  the  olive  has  cast  her  flower,  which  she  put  forth,  in
that  she  never  brought  to  perfect  works  the  beginnings  of  a
good  purpose.  But  we  are  to  bear  in  mind  tliat  such  things
are  often  happening  to  those  who  do  not  follow  God  with  a
pure  and  single  aim.  Hence  it  is  rightly  added,  For  the
gathering  of  the  hypocrite  is  batren.  For  the  good  things
he  has  begun  he  would  not  lose,  if  he  had  not  been  a
hypocrite.  Now  hypocrites  gather  together  good  works,  but
their  gathering  itself  is  barren,  in  that  in  the  things  they  do
they  never  make  it  their  object  to  receive  fruit  in  the  eternal
recompensing.  They  look  fruitful  and  green  to  the  eyes  of
their  fellow-creatures,  but  in  the  sight  of  the  hidden  Judge
they  appear  unfruitful  and  blasted.  But  oftentimes,  being
inflamed  with  the  fever  of  avarice,  they  display  greater  works
of  their  own  before  the  eyes  of  men,  in  proportion  as  they
desire  to  have  larger  rewards  ofiered  them  by  their  fellow-
creatures.  ,  Hence  it  is  yet  furtlier  added ;

And  fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of  those  trho  are
ready  to  take  rewards.
liv.  62.  For  as  tlie  body  dwells  in  a  tabernacle,  so  the  mind
dwells  in  thought.  But  the  ^  fire  consumes  tlie  tabernacles,'
when  the  heat  of  avarice  wastes  the  thoughts.  And  it
very  commonly  happens  tliat  the  hypocrite  scorns  to  re-
ceive gold,  or  the  several  good  things  of  the  body,  at  the
hands  of  his  fellow-creatures,  but  because  he  does  not  take
these,  he  aims  to  win  greater  commendations  from  them ;
and  perhaps  he  does  not  reckon  that  he  has  *  received  a
reward,'  because  he  refuses  to  take  the  good  things  of  the
body.  Hence  it  is  proper  to  be  known  that  a  gift  is  some-
times profiered  by  the  hand,  and  sometimes  by  the  mouth.
Thus  one  who  presents  money,  has  given  a  reward  with  the
hand;  but  he  that  bestows  the  word  of  applause,  has  put
forward  a  reward  from  the  mouth.  Though,  then,  the  hypo-
crite refuse  to  take  external  gifts,  which  may  perhaps  answer
earthly  necessity,  yet  that  is  a  greater  thing  which  he  aims
to  have  paid  him  in  return,  when  desiring  to  be  extolled
beyond  his  desert,  he  seeks  a  reward  from  the  mouth. And

Entfy  and  detraction  spring  from  lore  o/prniMe. 85

because  in  the  mere  appetite  of  praise  his  heart  is  kindled  Book
with  orermucb  heat,  let  it  be  rightlj  said.  And  fife  shall  .^ill


consume  the  tabernacles  of  those  thai  are  ready  to  take
rewards.

63.  Bnt  if  we  are  to  understand  by  their  *  tabernacles^  the
bodies  which  their  souls  inhabit,  then  the  fire  consumes  the

*  tabernacles/  because  those  who  here  are  on  fire  in  the  soul
with  the  flames  of  avarice,  are  there  consumed  in  the  flesh
too  by  the  fires  of  hell,  and  because  the  mind  of  the
hypocrite  is  nerer  at  rest  from  the  thinking  of  wickedness,
in  that  whether  he  goes  after  the  things  of  earth,  or  applause,
he  grudges  those  things  to  others,  which  he  pants  to  hare
awarded  to  himself,  and  striTes  to  make  others  appear
wicked  in  proportion  as  he  desires  to  appear  more  holy  to
all  the  world,  so  that  by  means  of  this,  that  others  are
rendered  contemptible,  he  may  himself  at  all  times  appear
more  worthy  of  respect  Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  as
touching  his  credit  \rith  his  neighbour,  he  spreads  out  the
nets  of  his  tongue  before  the  judgments  of  his  fellow-
creatures,  that  he  by  himself  may  catch  the  good  opinion  of
those  whom  he  seeks  to  please. Whence  too  it  follows ;

Ver.  36.  They  conceive  woe^  and  bring  forth  iniquity  ^  and
their  womb  preparelh  deceit.

64.  For  he  *  conceires  woe,*  when  he  devises  wicked  things ; Ivi.
he  *  brings  forth  iniquity,'  when  he  has  begun  to  fulfil  what  he

has  devised;  by  entertaining  envy,  he  '  conceives  woe;*  by
uttering  slanders,  he  ^  brings  forth  iniquity/  For  it  is  grievous
wickedness  when  he  who  is  wicked  strives  to  make  others
appear  wicked,  that  he  may  himself  thereby  appear  as  holy,
because  he  has  shewn  that  others  are  not  holy.  But  we
ouf^ht  to  bear  in  mind,  that  in  Holy  Writ  by  the  title  of  the

*  belly'  or  the  *  womb'  the  mind  is  used  to  be  understood.
Hence  it  is  that  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  For  the  candle  ofthevro^.
Lord  is  the  breaihway  of  man ^  searching  aU  the  inward^^^'^'
parts  of  the  belly.  For  the  light  of  grace,  which  comes  from
above,  affords  a  ^  breathway'  to  man  unto  life,  which  same
light  is  said  to  ^  search  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  belly,'  in
that  it  penetrates  all  the  secrets  of  the  heart,  that  the  things
which  were  hidden  from  the  soul  touching  itself  it  may  bring
back  before  the  eyes  thereof  with  weeping. Hence  Jeremiah

86  Inward  parts  of  the  body  put  for  the  mind.

Job  I5,gaithy  My  bowels!  my  bowels!  I  am  pained.  Who,  that  he
y^^*^^  might  shew  what  he  had  called  his  belly,  added,  the  senses
Jer.  a/  of  my  heart  are  troubled.  So  by  the  tide  of  the  womb  the
^  '  mind  is  rightly  understood,  in  that  like  as  the  offspring  is
conceived  in  the  womb,  so  is  thought  engendered  in  the
mind.  And  as  meats  are  contained  in  the  belly,  so  are
thoughts  in  the  mind;  and  so  the  ^  womb'  of  the  hypocrite
<  prepares  deceits,'  in  that  he  is  ever  conceiving  in  his  mind
the  greater  wickedness  against  his  neighbours,  in  proportion
as  he  aims  to  appear  by  himself  above  all  men  innocent
Eliphaz  therefore  put  forward  these  things,  in  that  he  looked
upon  blessed  Job  as  stricken  with  that  great  scourge  on
account  of  his  hypocrisy.  But  his  words,  though  they  apply
to  many,  are  at  odds  with  him  alone,  for  whom  alone  they
were  said,  in  thai  the  holy  man  had  nought  of  double-dealing
in  bis  conduct,  whom  Truth  being  witness  to  him  praised
for  ibe  singleness  of  his  heart

BOOK  xm.

Wharain  ii  contained  a  short  ezpoaition,  moral  and  typical,  of  iht  ■iztetmOi
and  serenteenth  dia|>tert  of  tlie  book  of  7ob.

1.  This  is  found  to  be  a  peculiar  way  with  the  wicked^  Hist.
iriz.  to  urge  their  own  bad  points  slanderously  against  the  ^^\^^'
good,  before  they  are  themselves  truly  accused  of  them;  and
srhile  they  dread  to  be  reproached  for  the  things  which  they

So,  they  testify  that  the  righteous  who  withstand  their  wicked-
nesses commit  the  same.  Now  holy  men  hear  with  forbear-
ance, even  what  they  never  remember  to  have  done,  although
those  wrong  things  wluch  they  see  to  be  urged  against  them-
selves, they  know  to  be  committed  by  their  very  accusers;
and  when  they  cannot  correct  them  by  preaching,  they  suffer
them  by  submitting  to  the  evil,  that  if  they  cannot  attain  the
Aruit  of  their  convernon,  they  may  at  least  win  by  those  very
persons  the  reward  of  long  endurance.  Hence  Holy  Church
aays  in  the  words  of  the  Prophet  David,  Sinnen  haoe  plowed  ^  isa,
up<m  mtf  backy  in  that  whilst  she  puts  up  with  heretics,  or  *
lost  persons  of  any  kind,  whom  she  is  not  able  to  correct,
she  bears  upon  her  back  the  deeds  of  those  that  commit
iniquity.  Thus  blessed  Job,  seeing  Eliphaz  liis  friend
making  much  complaint  against  him  out  of  hypocrisy,  in
Ihat  from  words  of  comfort  he  had  broken  out  into  bitterness
of  upbraiding,  and  shewed  himself  a  feigned  comforter,  does
by  his  own  patience  maintain  a  type  of  the  Church,  which
is  wont  to  endure  such  things  in  hearing  them,  and  when
her  discourse  is  received,  by  reasoning  to  bring  them  to
nought;  and  he  says,

Ver.  2.  /  have  heard  many  such  things.

2.  For  the  Elect  often  hear  the  wrong  things  of  others, ii.
as  if  they  belonged  to  themselves,  and  guilt  is  charged  upon

88 The  Elect  falsely  charged.  Oood  ihitiys  wrongly  said,

Jon  16,  them  by  those^  by  whom  the  charges  so  fastened  on  them  are
•g-^  done.  Now  by  this  reply^  blessed  Job  denotes  that  season
ALLBo.of  the  Church,  when,  under  oppression  from  her  adversaries,
she  is  looked  upon  as  cast  to  the  ground  by  their  temporal
power.  Whence  it  follows;  burlhensome  comforters  are  ye
all.  Whether  they  be  heretics,  or  whether  any  of  the
wicked,  when  they  see  the  good  travailing  in  adversity,
herein  that  they  aim  to  console  them,  they  endeavour  to
prompt  wrong  things  to  their  minds.  Whence  not  without
reason  their  consoling  is  rendered  burthensome  to  the  mind
of  good  men,  in  that  amongst  words  of  sweetness,  they  are
bent  to  proflTer  the  poison  of  error,  and  whilst  in  seeming  they
lighten  their  griefs  by  soothing  words,  they  are  in  haste  to
put  upon  them  a  load  of  sin.  But  Elect  persons,  even  when
they  are  bereft  of  temporal  glory,  do  not  lose  the  forcibleness
of  interior  judgment.  For  they  are  taught  both  to  endure
crosses  without,  and  yet  unimpaired  within  to  uphold  what
is  right  without  being  daunted.  Whence  it  is  added,
Yer.  8.  Shall  windy  words  have  an  end  f
iii.  3.  For  those  are  *  windy  words,*  which  sen^e  the  end  of
temporal  inflating,  rather  than  the  end  of  righteousness.
Now  oftentimes  the  wicked  speak  even  good  things,  but
because  they  do  not  say  them  well,  they  are  putting  forth
^  windy  words:'  for  their  words,  even  if  they  be  at  any
time  sound  in  the  sentence,  are  yet  blown  out  in  self-ela-
tion. But  in  this  that  is  said,  viz.  burthensome  comforters
are  ye  all;  what  else  are  we  taught  by  the  tutorage  of
blessed  Job,  but  that  every  one  should  learn  to  look  to  it
heedfuUy,  that  in  the  season  of  sorrow  he  never  urge  words
of  upbraiding  ?  For  if  there  be  some  points  which  might  be
justly  found  fault  with  in  time  of  distress,  they  ought  to  be
put  aside,  lest  the  comforter  by  rebuking  heighten  the  sorrow,
which  he  had  it  in  view  to  alleviate. It  goes  on;

Or  is  there  any  thing  troublesome  to  tliee,  if  thou
speakest  f
iv.  4.  When  bad  men  utter  abusive  words  to  those  that  are
like  to  themselves,  they  are  the  more  quickly  silenced,  in
proportion  as  they  in  a  moment  hear  concerning  themselves
the  like  to  what  they  say  to  their  hearers.  But  when  they
assail  good  men  by  words  of  contumely,  nought  of  annoyance

JoVs  ftiihfar  hi$  friends  to  he  Uke  htm,  a  kind  one. 89

is  occasioned  them by  their  abnse,  in  that  they  speak  Boor

against  those  that  hold  their  peace,  nor  are  made  to  hear '-

what  they  are,  seeing  that  the  righteous  nerer  retom  abuse,
even  when  they  are  made  to  hear  what  they  are  not.  And
so  it  is  well  said,  Or  in  there  any  thing  troublesome  io  thee
if  thou  speakestf  As  if  it  were  said  in  plain  words  to  him ;
*  Thou  speakest  the  more,  that  thou  hearest  not  from  me
any  thing  unpleasant  concerning  thy  conduct'  Hence  it  is
added,  /  also  could  speak  as  ye  do.  The  just  man  tells
what  he  had  the  power  to  do,  but  lest  he  should  depart  from
righteousness,  he  forbears  what  he  might  have  done.  It  goes
on;

Ver.  4 — 6.  And  O  that  your  soul  were/or  my  soul!  I
too  would  contort  you  with  speecheey  and  move  my  head
over  you:  I  would  strengthen  you  with  my  mouthy  and  move
my  lips  as  if  sparing  you,

5.  It  is  sometimes  necessary  that  wicked  minds,  which  t.
are  incapable  of  being  corrected  by  man's  preaching,  should
hare  the  strokes  of  God  wished  for  them,  in  a  spirit  of
kindness;  and  while  this  is  done  with  great  earnestness  of
love,  then  plainly  not  the  punishment  but  the  correction  of.
the  guilty  person  is  the  thing  aimed  at,  and  it  is  shewn  to  be
a  prayer  rather  than  a  curse.  And  in  these  words  blessed
Job  is  shewn  to  aim  at  this,  that  the  friends,  who  knew  not
how  to  sympathize  in  his  grief  through  charity,  might  learn
by  experience  how  they  ought  to  have  pitied  the  affliction
of  another,  and  being  subdued  by  griefs  might  draw  from  their
own  suffering,  how  to  minister  consolation  to  others,  and  then
live  the  more  healthfully  within,  when  they  are  made  sensible
of  something  of  frailty  without.  Observe  that  he  does  not
say,  O  that  my  eoul  were  for  your  soul;  but,  O  that
your  soul  were  for  my  soul ;  in  that  he  would  have  been
cursing  himself,  if  he  bad  wished  himself  to  be  made  like
to  them;  but  it  was  for  them  he  wished  better  things,
in  that  he  sought  they  should  be  made  like  to  himself.
Now  we  *  comfort*  bad  men,  placed  under  the  rod,  when  we
point  out  that  by  the  exterior  infliction  the  interior  health  is
established  within  them.  Moreover,  we  *  move  our  head,'
when  the  mind,  which  is  our  leading  part,  we  bend  to  sym-
pathy; and  we  ^  strengthen'  these  in  the  midst  of  strokes  of

00 The  Preacher't  care  in  rebuking  divert  charncien.

Jofl  le,  affliction,  when  we  soothe  the  force  of  their  grief  with  gentle
'  -  words;  for  there  are  some  persons,  who,  forasmuch  as  they


Hist.
ALLsa.  know  nothing  of  the  things  of  the  interior,  are  overwhelmed

witli  despair  by  external  afflictions ;  of  whom  it  is  said  by  the
10*  *^^'  Psalmist,  They  shall  iwt  hold  up  in  cffliciions;  for  he  is  well
instructed  to  hold  up  in  outward  afflictions,  who  knows  how
to  exult  always  iu  the  hope  that  belongs  to  the  interior.

6.  But  whereas  he  says,  not,  ^  sparing,*  but,  a»  tftparing
you;  I  think  that  this  point  ought  not  to  be  passed  by  care-
lessly, in  that  Holy  Church,  while  keeping  vigorousaess  of
discipline  together  with  an  union  of  gentleness,  sometimes
aven  while  '  as  if  sparing,*  is  far  from  sparing  the  wicked,
but  sometimes,  when  ^  as  if  not  sparing*  does  spare  them;
which  we  shall  exhibit  the  more  effectually,  if  we  bring
forward  the  very  things  themselves  which  are  not  unirequently
happening.  So  then  let  us  place  before  the  eyes  of  the  ima-
gination, two  bad  men  set  within  the  ps^e  of  Holy  Church,  of
whom  let  the  one  be  powerful  and  insolent,  and  the  other
mild  and  under  government.  If  a  fault  has  stolen  upon  the
one  that  is  gentle  and  under  government,  the  preacher  directly
by  rebuking  the  thing  follows  hard  upon  him,  and  corrects
him;  and  by  correcting  frees  him  from  guilt,  and  resets  him
Again  in  the  way  of  righteousness.  What  did  he  then  to  this
fnan,  but  spare  in  sparing  not?  iu  that,  forasmuch  as  he  did
not  hold  back  the  word  of  correction,  he  the  more  speedily
Bet  him  free  from  sin.  For  in  freely  charging  him  home,  he
4lid  not  spare  him ;  but  in  this  respect,  that  he  rebuked  him,
be  did  spare  him.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  powerftil  and
insolent  man,  when  he  is  discavered  to  have  been  guilty  oi
jony  thing,  there  is  an  opportunity  sought,  in  order  that  he
may  be  rebuked  for  the  evil  he  has  committed.  For  except
the  preacher  wait  till  such  Ume  as  he  may  be  able  to  bear
correction  in  a  proper  way,  he  increases  in  him  the  evil  tliat
he  is  prosecuting.  For  it  is  very  often  the  case  that  he  is  of
«ueh  a  character  as  to  receive  no  words  of  rebuke.  What  then
is  the  preacher  to  do  in  the  case  of  the  sin  of  this  person,
but  that  in  the  charge  of  admonition,  which  hu  makes  for  tlie
general  well-being  of  all  his  hearers,  he  should  bring  forward
^uch  faults,  as  he  sees  that  he  has  been  guilty  of,  who  is  by,
and  cannot  as  yet  be  charged  on  his  own  account  individually,

Open  nin  to  be  retuked  in  all  at  all  hazards. 91

lest  he  be  rendered  worse  ?  and  while  invectire  in  general  is  Book
aimed  against  the  faalt,  the  word  of  rebuke  is  readily  brought  .^!1L
homo  to  the  mind,  in  that  the  powerful  bad  man  does  not
know  that  it  is  delivered  against  himself  in  particular.  What
then  did  his  preacher  to  this  person,  but  in  sparing  not  spare?
against  whom  he  at  once  brought  not  words  of  rebuke  with
any  special  reference,  and  yet  hit  his  wound  under  a  general
admonition  ;  and  hence  it  is  very  often  brought  to  pass  that
lie  bewails  the  sin  committed  so  much  the  more  bitterly,  in
proportion  as  even  when  he  feels  himself  struck,  he  supposes
his  guilt  not  to  be  known.

7.  Therefore  it  must  be  managed  with  wonderful  art  in
preaching,  that  those  who  are  made  worse  by  open  rebuke,
may  by  a  certain  abatement  of  rebuke  be  brought  to  a  state

of  saving  healths  Whence  too  Paul  saith.  And  those  mem- 1  Cot.
iers  of  the  body  which  tre  think  to  be  less  honourable^  ttpon^*^^^
those  we  bestow  more  abundant  honour^  and  our  uncomely
parts  have  more  abundant  comeliness  ;  for  our  comely  parts
have  no  need.  For  as  there  are  uncomely  members  in  the
body,  so  there  are  persons  within  the  bosom  of  Holy  Church,
powerful  and  insolent,  who,whcreastheydo  not  adroit  of  being
.stricken  with  open  upbraiding,  arc  ns  it  were  clokcd  with
the  respectfulness  of  a  covering.  But  this  we  speak  of  the
secret  transgressions  of  the  powerful;  for  when  they  sin  and
others  know  of  it,  they  are  also  to  be  rebuked,  and  others
should  know  of  it;  lest,  if  the  preacher  hold  his  peace,  he
seem  to  have  sanctioned  the  sin,  and  this  which  the  tongue
of  the  pastor  does  not  cut  off,  going  on  increasing,  should
come  to  be  an  example.  Thus  while  Holy  Church  by
her  preachers  rebukes  particular  deeds  of  wicked  men  under
the  covert  conveyance  of  a  general  reproof,  she  *  moves
her  lips,  as  if  sparing;'  but  yet  while  sparing  spaieih  not,  in
that  she  does  not  in  general  hold  her  peace  to  the  reproving
•of  a  fault,  which  in  the  special  case  she  does. It  goes  on;

Vcr.  7.  Bitt  what  am  I  to  do?  Tltough  I speaky  my  grief
is  not  assuaged ;  and  though  I  forbear ^  it  mil  not  depart
from  me,

8.  How  this  accords  with  the  person  of  blessed  Job,  there W.
is  no  one  that  is  ignorant;  but  if  it  be  drawn  into  a  type  of
Holy  Church,  she  both  when  she  speaks  *  has  not  her  grief

02  Weak  limbs  ofj^  C/t.  *  brought  to  nought*  when  et^il prospers.

Job  Id,  assuaged/  since  she  does  not  see  the  wicked  amended  by  her
j^ — 1- speaking;  and  *  when  she  holds  her  peace^  her  grief  does
not  depart  from  her;'  in  that  though  she  turns  away  and
holds  her  peace,  this  very  circumstance  of  her  being  silent
she  laments  the  more,  in  tliat  while  she  is  silent,  she  sees
the  sin  of  the  wicked  grow  to  a  height; It  proceeds;

Ver.  8.  But  now  my  grief  has  oppressed  me,  and  my  limbs
are  brought  to  nought.
vii.  9.  Holy  Church  is  oppressed  by  her  grief,  when  she
beholds  the  wicked  grow  to  a  height  in  their  wickedness;
and  whereas  while  the  wicked  increase,  the  weak  too  that
are  in  her  are  set  oh  to  follow  the  bents  of  wickedness,  it  is
rightly  added.  And  all  my  limbs  are  brought  to  vought.  For
as  the  strong  by  *  bones,*  so  by  ^  limbs*  the  weak  sort  are
wont  to  be  denoted,  and  so  *  the  members  of  the  Church  are
brought  to  nought,'  when  by  the  imitating  of  the  wicked  that
are  increased  in  this  world,  all  the  weak  are  worse  weakened.
For  on  seeing  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  they  often  slide
away  from  their  very  stand  in  faith  itself,  they  seek  after
temporal  good  things,  and  are  in  a  manner  ^  brought  to
nought;*  in  that  while  they  abandon  the  Being  of  God  that  is
lasting,  loving  things  that  are  transitory,  they  are,  as  it  were,
on  their  way  to  be  not.  And  it  is  well  said.  But  now  my
grief  has  oppressed  me;  in  that  the  season  of  the  grief  of
the  Church  is  now,  and  tlie  time  of  her  joy  shall  follow  here-
after. Now  it  often  happens  that  Holy  Church  not  only
meets  with  unbelievers  and  those  without  her  borders  as  her
adversaries,  but  with  difficulty  bears  with  the  plots  and  oppo-
sition of  those  too,  whom  she  has  within  her.  Whence  it  is
fitly  said  directly  by  the  voice  of  the  blessed  man ;
Ver.  10.  My  u^rinkles  speak  a  lesiimoay  against  me.
viii.  ^^'  What  is  denoted  by  *  wrinkles,'  but  doubledealing  ?
and  so  all  they  are  wrinkles  of  Holy  Church,  who  therein  live
in  doubledealing,  who  avouch  the  faith  with  their  voices,
disown  it  by  their  works.  '  These  persons  doubtless  in  time
of  peace,  because  they  see  that  with  the  powers  of  this  world
that  faith  is  an  honour,  falsely  feign  themselves  of  the  num-
ber of  believers;  but  when  a  sudden  storm  of  adversity  dis-
quiets Holy  Church,  they  thereupon  shew  what  they  are
going  after  in  their  heart  of  unbelief. Now  these  '  wrinkles*

Holy  Church  ha$  wrinklei  now, Saian  l%€$  agaimt  her.  98

Holy  Church  has  not  in  her  Elect,  in  that  they  have  not  the  Book
art  to  shew  one  thing  in  themselves  on  the  outmde,  and  to  2EHL
hold  another  withinside. Whence  the  great  Preacher  says
truly.  Thai  He  might  present  it  to  Himself  a  glorious  z^hm.
Church  J  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle. For  she  *  has  not  spot*'  '^'
or  wrinkle,*  in  that  she  is  without  both  foulness  of  practice,  and
dottbleness  of  tongue;  but  because  now  she  holds  within  the
bosom  of  the  faith  numbers  even  of  the  children  of  perdition,
when  the  time  of  persecution  blazes  out,  she  bears  those  very
persons  for  her  enemies,  whom  she  seemed  before  to  be
nourishing  with  words  of  preaching. Therefore  let  her  say,
Mg  wrinkles  speak  a  teslimong  against  me;  i.  e.  those  very
persons,  while  they  persecute,  inveigh  against  me,  who  ifow,
being  fixed  in  my  body,  do  not  mind  in  themselves  the
wickctlncss  of  their  doubledealing. Whence  it  is  rightly
added  yet  further;
And  the  liar  is  lifted  up  against  myface^  gainsaying  me.

11.  Even  in  her  time  of  peace  Holy  Church  is  subject  to ix.
the  *  liar,*  in  that  there  are  numbers  in  her,  who  disbelieve  in

the  promise  of  eternal  life,  and  yet  falsely  feign  themselves
to  be  of  the  faithful. And  as  they  do  not  dare  openly  to
gainsay  her  preaching,  she  is  exposed  to  the  liar,  not,  as  it
were,  *  before  her  face,*  but  behind  her  back;  but  when  the
time  of  wickedness  breaks  out,  he  who  now  disparages  being
full  of  apprehension,  comes  *  before  the  face  to  gainsay,*  in
that  he  withstands  by  open  sentences  of  the  voice  the  words
of  true  faith. But  it  is  to  be  known  that  when  we  meet  with
such  things  at  the  hands  of  carnal  men,  it  is  not  so  much
they  individually  that  rage  cruelly  in  our  death,  as  thd  evil
spirit  who  rules  their  minds,  as  it  is  said  by  Paul,  For  tre  Ephet.
wrestle  not  against  Jlesh  and  blood;  but  against  principali-^f  ^'*
tieSi  against  powers^  against  the  rulers  of  darkness  of  this
world. Whence,  whereas  here  also  he  is  speaking  of  lying  ^  >A3.D.
with  propriety  he  turns  his  words  directly  to  teU  of  the  prince  ||^>
of  that  lying,  and  says ;

Ver.  9.  He  gathered  his  fury  against  me;  and  threatening
me  he  gnashed  against  me  with  his  teeth;  mine  enemy  looked
on  me  with  terrible  eyes.

12.  What  else  are  all  wicked  men  but  members  of  the x.
devil?  Therefore  he  himself  does  by  them,  whatever  he  puts

94 Saian^M  gathered  fury^  his  *  teeth,  and  *  eyet!

Job  ie,it  into  their  hearts  that  thej  ought  to  do. For  the  devil  even
'-now  entertains  iiiry  against  H0I7  Church,  but  his  fury  is


scattered,  in  that  he  sets  afoot  his  secret  temptations  through
the  agency  of  individuals ;  but  when  he  bursts  out  against  her  iu
open  persecution, '  he  gathers  his  fury  against  her,^  in  that
in  the  afflicting  of  her  he  knits  up  himself  with  the  entire  bent
of  his  efforts.  But  his  members  in  this  time  of  peace  have
not  *  fury  gathered*  against  the  Elect  in  this  way,  because
they  feel  that  they  have  less  power  to  fulfil  their  wickedness
than  they  have  will;  but  when  they  see  full  range  of  wicked-
ness at  their  command,  they  smite  at  her  the  more  boldly,  in
proportion  as  they  are  drawn  to  a  head  against  her  in  unani-
mity. And  so  it  is  rightly  said  now ;  He  gathered  up  hisfiiry
against  me.  And  that  his  fury  might  be  still  more  fully  set
forth,  it  is  said,  And  threatening  me,  he  gnashed  upon  me
with  his  teeth.  Of  whom  too  it  is  added,  mine  enemy  looked
on  me  with  terrible  eyes.  For  that  ancient  enemy  of  the
Church  *'  gnashes  against  her  with  the  teeth,*  and  *  looks  on
her  with  terrible  eyes,'  in  that  he  executes  cruelties  by  one
set,  and  by  another  provides  cruelties  to  execute.

13.  For  ^  the  teeth*  of  this  enemy  are  the  pei*secutors  and
executioners  of  the  good,  who  mangle  her  members,  while
they  distress  her  elect  ones  by  their  persecutions. But  the
<  eyes*  of  this  enemy  are  those,  that  provide  measures  to  her
hurt,  which  tliey  may  put  in  practice,  and  by  their  counsels
light  up  tlie  cruelties  of  her  persecutoi*s. 'J'hus  her  old
enemy  *  gnashes  upon  her  with  his  teeth,*  so  long  as  by  the
cruel  children of  perdition in her  he hunts down the
life  of  good  men  within  her. He  '  looks  on  her  with  terrible
eyes  ;*  in  that,  by  the  counsels  of  bad  men,  he  never  ceases
to  make  out  schemes  of  mischief,  by  which  he  may  torment
her  ever  worse  and  worse;  for  as  Incarnate  '  Trutli*  in  His
preaching  chose  poor  common  persons  and  simple  men,  so
on  the  other  hand  that  accursed  man,  whom  the  Apostate
Angel  will  take  on  him  at  the  end  of  the  world,  shall  choose
for  the  preaching  of  his  falsity,  the  cunning  and  double-
minded,  and  such  as  have  this  world*s  knowledge. Hence  it
In.lSyJ.is  said  by  Isaiah, Woe  to  the  landy  the  cymbal  of  unngs,
which  is  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia. Which sendeth
ambassadors  by  the  sea  even  in  vessels  of  papyrus  upon

AntiehrUiU  preaeherM  and  perteeuii&ns.  .  00

ike  water$. For  the  land,  that  has  woe  prononnced  agaioM  Boov

it,  18  principally  that  accursed  man,  who  is  called  a  *  cymbal '-

of  wings,*  in  that  they  who  in  pride  soar  np  into  the  height
of  imagination,  by  preaching  soand  forth  that  man  of  ini-
qnity.  Which  same  land  is  rightly  described  as  being
'  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,'  for  Ethiopia  sends  forth  a
black  people,  and  whereas  this  worid  brings  forth  every  man
a  sinner,  Ethiopia  as  it  were  bears  a  black  people.  And  the
land  that  has  woe  pronounced  against  it,  is  described  as
being  *  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,'  in  that  that  accursed
man  is  so  exceedingly  and  beyond  all  measure  bad,  that  he
goes  beyond  the  sins  of  all  that  commit  iniquity ;  and  he
*  sends  ambassadors  by  the  sea,*  in  that  he  spreads  his
preachers  over  the  world ;  and  it  is  rightly  told  of  them,  how
they  are  sent,  when  it  is  said,  in  veaels  (^papyrus  upon  the
tcatera,  for  from  the  ^  papyrus*  paper  is  made.  What  then
is  denoted  by  the  *  papyrus*  but  secular  knowledge  7  and
so  the  vessels  of  papyrus  are  the  hearts  of  the  learned  of  the
world.  Therefore  *  to  send  ambassadors  upon  the  waters  in
vessels  of  papyrus,*  is  to  put  the  preaching  of  him  in  the
brains  of  the  carnally  wise,  and  to  call  the  people  running
out  into  sin.  Those  very  persons  then  who  are  there  denoted
by  '  vessels  of  papjrrus,*  here,  in  that  they  see  with  a  carnal
right,  are  denoted  by  ^  eyes.*  Of  whom  it  is  yet  further
added;

Ver.  10.  They  have  gaped  upon  me  with  their  mouthy
reproaching  me.

14.  Lost  sinners  open  their  mouths  *  in  reproaching,*  xu
when  they  at  once  do  not  fear  to  proclaim  the  mischiefs  of
their  errors,  and  laugh  to  scorn  the  announcements  of  the
right  faith:  with  regard  to  whom  be  it  known  that  they
chiefly  prosecute  those  in  Holy  Church,  whom  they  see
likely  to  be  of  service  to  many,  who  bruise  the  life  of  the
carnal  by  the  word  of  correction,  and  change  them  spiritually
into  the  body  of  the  Church. Hence  it  is  added ;

They  have  smitten  me  upon  the  cheek;  they  have  taken
their  fill  qf  my  punishments.

15.  For '  the  cheek*  of  the  Church,  are  the  holy  preachers, xii.
as  where  it  is  said  under  the  figure  of  Judsa,  by  Jeremiah,

She  weepeth  sore  in  the  night,  and  the  tears  are  on  herlMm.  i,

9.

96  Tlie  ChurcVi  *  ieeth^  preachers.  Her  ouiu>ard  adversities.

Job  \e,  cheeks.  For  in  the  adversidea  of  the  Church  those  mourn
— '-—  the  most,  who  are  used  to  crush  the  life  of  the  carnal  by
preaching ;  for  by  these  very  persons  Holy  Church  breaks
and  bruises  the  wicked  to  bad  habits,  and  as  it  were  swallow-
ing them  converts  them  into  members  of  herself.  Ilence  it
is  said  to  the  first  preacher  himself  too,  as  to  a  ^  cheek'  of
Acta  10,  the  Church,  Kill  and  eat.  It  is  hence  too  that  Samson  laid
Jndffef  hold  of  the  jawbone  of  an  ass,  and  destroyed  his  enemies ;
l^y  ^^'  ill  that  our  Redeemer,  with  the  Hand  of  His  power  laying
hold  of  the  simplicity  and  submissiveness  of  these  that
preach,  killed  the  carnal  to  their  bad  habits.  And  the
jawbone  thrown  down  upon  the  earth,  afterwards  poured  out
water,  in  that  the  bodies  of  the  preachers  given  over  to
death,  shewed  great  miracles  to  the  people.  So  the  wicked
*  smite  the  cheek*  of  Holy  Church,  when  they  persecute
good  preachers ;  and  whereas  lost  sinners  thus  reckon  them-
selves to  have  done  something  great,  when  they  do  put  an
end  to  the  life  of  the  preachers ;  after  the  striking  of  *  the
cheek,*  it  is  properly  added.  They  have  taken  their  Jill  qf
my  punishments^  for  that  punishment  does  fill  them  to  satis-
faction, which  chastises  the  mind  of  the  Church  in  an
especial  manner. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  11.  Ood  hath  shut  me  up  with  the  ungodly^  and
turned  me  over  into  the  hands  of  the  wicked.
xiii.  16.  The  people  of  the  Elect  is  *  shut  up  with  tlie  ungodly
man,*  when  its  flesh  is  given  up  in  this  present  time  to  the
persecutions  of  our  old  adversaiy ;  and  it  is  '  turned  over,*
not  to  the  spirit,  but  *  the  hands  of  the  wicked;*  in  that  in
proportion  as  they  cannot  take  it  captive  in  mind,  they  are
the  more  pitilessly  inflamed  against  the  flesh  thereof.  But  the
People  of  Holy  Church,  when  it  begins  to  suffer  adversities
to  an  extreme  degree,  and  sees  the  weak  ones  in  her  going
off  to  worse  and  worse,  recalls  to  mind  tlie  times  of  her
peace,  when  she  fed  her  faithful  children  with  the  richness
of  her  preaching Hence  it  is  fitly  added;

Ver.  13.  /,  the  same  that  was  once  rich,  am  crushed  oti  a

sudden.

xiv. 17.  Herein,  viz.  that  he  declared  himself  to  be  ^  crushed

on  a  sudden,*  he  denoted  the  unguarded  mind  of  weak  j)er-

sons:  who,  whilst  they  are  not  skilled  to  foresee  the  evils

P^r$ecutum  humbles  weak  tnembers  of  the  Oiureh,  97

which  are  destined  to  come,  find  them  more  severe  in  pro-  Book

X.III

portion  as  thej  also  undergo  them  contrary  to  expectation. !

But  to  stedfast  minds  adversities  do  not  come  on  a  sudden,
in  that  they  are  foreseen  before  they  come.  And  this  Holy
Church  too  does  now  undergo  in  certain  backsliding  people,
who,  after  the  richness  of  instruction,  are  sometimes  so
crushed  by  sudden  assaults  of  evil,  that  they  fall  as  deeply
in  certain  wicked  practices,  as  if  they  had  never  been
vouchsafed  the  food  of  the  word. It  proceeds ;

He  hcUh  held  my  neck,  and  broken  me  in  hoOj  and  set  me
up  for  His  mark.

18.  As  in  evil  the  '  neck*  denotes  pride,  so  in  good  it xv.
denotes  the  lifting  up  in  freedom ;  whence  it  is  sometimes
the  case  that  ^  pride*  itself  is  also  put  for  the  authority
belonging  to  that  lifting  up;  as  when  the  Lord  says  by  way
of  promise  to  Holy  Church  by  the  Prophet,  /  mil  set  thee  !••  «o,
/or  the  pride  qf  ogee. And  because  in  time  of  persecution
some  that  are  weak  do  not  dare  to  preach  with  freedom  the
truths  they  have  a  sense  of,  it  is  rightly  said  of  this  enemy,
He  hath  held  my  neck,  and  broken  me  in  two. Biit  per-
chance those  are  denoted  by  the  appellation  of  *  neck,'  who,
in  the  season  of  her  peace,  are  lifted  up  more  than  befits,
and  by  occasion  of  defending  the  cause  of  right  minister  to
the  evil  of  self-exalting ;  which  same  in  time  of  persecution
feel  adversity  the  more  sensibly  on  this  account,  that  they
are  elevated  by  prosperity. Concerning  whom  it  is  rightly
said.  He  hath  held  my  neck,  and  broken  me  in  two;  i.  e.
the  pride  which  she  had  in  her  weak  members.  He  bowed
down  by  the  severity  of  His  smiting. And  set  me  up  for
His  mark. It  is  known  that  *  a  mark*  is  for  this  reason  ^  set
up,*  that  it  may  be  hit  by  the  sending  of  the  arrow. And  so
the  faithful  people  is  *  set  as  a  mark'  to  its  enemy,  in  that
he  is  ever  assaulting  it  with  his  blows  and  afflicting  it  with
his  persecutions :  for  he  that  undergoes  perpetual  ills  in  this
life,  as  if  set  for  a  mark,  receives  blows  from  one  striking  him;
and  hence  the  great  Preacher,  when  he  was  suffering  the  ills
of  persecution,  and  groaning  beneath  the  persecuting  efforts
of  his  enemies,  to  comfort  the  tender  soul  of  the  disciples
touching  his  troubles,  says,  For  yourselves  know  thai  we  are  i  The*.
appointed  thereunto. As  if  he  said  to  them  in  plain  words ;  '>  '*

VOL.  II.  H

96 Temptation  around;  concurrence  give*  it  power  to  wouiul.

Job  16/  Wherefore  at  this  season  do  ye  wonder  at  my  wounds>  when,
^^* if  we  seek  the  joys  of  the  eternal  world,  we  have  come  hither
allbo.£^^  this,  even  to  be  stricken  ?' It  proceeds ;

Ver.  13.  He  hath  compassed  me  about  with  His  lances^
He  haih  wounded  my  loins  together^  He  hath  not  spared,
and  He  hath  poured  out  my  bowels  upon  the  ground.
jLvi. 19.  These  particulars  would  seem  to  accord  with  blessed
MoBAi.  Jq^  ^ef  ihe  letter,  in  that  it  is  said,  He  hath  compassed
me  with  His  lances,  He  hath  wounded  my  loins  together.
He  hath  not  spared;  if  that  were  not  added,  which  is  not
read  as  written  about  him,  he  hath  poured  out  my  bowels
upon  the  ground. From  which  circumstance  it  follows,  that
whereas  we  cannot  find  this  after  the  letter,  we  should  inves-
tigate after  the  spirit  those  points,  which  in  his  words  sound
as  of  the  fact  of  history. Holy  Church  is  ^  beset  with  lances*
by  her  enemy,  whensoever  she  is  in  her  members  assaulted
by  the  cunning  assailant  with  the  darts  of  temptation ;  and
it  is  well  said  tliat  we  are  ^  encompassed  with  lances,*  in  that
our  old  enemy  assails  us  on  every  side  with  the  wounding  of
temptation. Thus  oftentimes  whilst  the  appetite  is  restrained,
that  lust  may  be  brought  under,  the  dart  of  vainglory  strikes
the  mind ;  but  it  the  body  is  not  worn  down  by  the  inflic-
tion of  abstinence,  the  flame  of  lust  kindles  itself  against  the
soul:  often  whilst  we  sti-ive  to  observe  economy,  we  fall  into
stinginess ;  and  often  whilst  we  give  profusely  the  things  we
possess,  we  are  led  into  avarice,  in  that  we  seek  to  make  up
again  what  we  may  have  to  give. Whereas  then  the  darts
of  the  old  enemy  assail  us  in  every  direction,  it  is  rightly
said  now,  he  hath  compassed  me  about  with  his  lances.
And  because,  in  the  case  of  every  sin,  the  crafty  enemy
indeed  recommends  it,  but  we  by  consenting  to  his  recom-
mendatious  execute  it,  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  he  hath  wounded
my  loins  together,  for  in  the  loins  lust  is  seated. Hence  he
who  desired  to  eradicate  the  deUght  of  lust  from  the  heart,
I  Pet.  1,  preached  the  words, Oird  up the  loins qf  your  mind,
^^' And  so when our  old  enemy draws the faithful  people
into  lust,  surely  he smites that people '  in the  loins;*
in  which  place  it  is  deserving  of  observation,  that  he  does
i^vubM-not  say  '  he  has  wounded',*  but,  he  hath  tvoundedmy  loins
(^^/.  together, t^or  as  to  talk  is  sometimes  an  act  of  one  person.

Men  of  hidden  Kfi  ejpoted. Every  rin  weakens.  99

but  to  '  talk  together'  of  two  or  perhaps  of  many,  so  our  old  Book

enemji  in  that  he  does  not  huny  us  into  sin  without  our  own

willy  is  never  said  *  to  wound  our  loins,'  but,  *  to  wound  our
loins  together  f  in  that  what  he  prompts  us  amiss  we  fulfil
by  following  of  our  own  will;  and,  as  it  were,  *  wound  our-
selves togeUier*  in  union  with  him,  because  we  are  at  the
same  time  led  to  commit  the  evil  deed  of  free  wilt.  It  goes
on;  he  hath  not  ttpared;  as  if  ho  said, '  he  hath  not  ceased;'
and  he  hath  poured  out  my  boweh  upon  the  ground.  What
else  are  we  to  understand  by  *  the  bowels'  of  Holy  Church,
save  the  minds  of  those  who  contain  in  themselves  certain
of  her  mysteries,  who  are  devoted  to  the  interior  Sacraments?
But  our  old  adversary,  when  he  draws  over  to  secular  con-
cerns any  of  the  faithfol,  who  appeared  to  be  devoted  to  the
interior  sacraments,  does,  surely, '  pour  out  her  bowels  upon
the  ground ;'  in  that  he  treads  those  down  in  things  below,
who  were  before  buried  from  sight  in  secret  and  spiritual
practices. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  14.  He  hath  broken  me  with  breach  upon  breach.

20.  In  her  weak  members  Holy  Church  is  *  broken  with  xvii.
breach  upon  breach,*  when  sin  is  added  to  sin,  that  trans-
gression should  be  brought  to  a  more  dreadful  pitch. Thus

for  him,  whom  avarice  forces  to  robbery  and  robbery  leads
into  deceit,  so  that  the  sin  committed  is  further  defended  by
falsehood,  how  else  is  it  with  this  man,  but  that  he  is  broken
with  breach  upon  breach  f When  too  it  is  well  said  by  the
Prophet; Cursing^  and  lying ^  and  killing^  and  etealingy'Bm.A^
and  adultery  J  have  overjlowedy  and  blood  toucheth  blood.^'
For  by  the  title  of '  blood'  sin  is  used  to  be  denoted;  whence
one  who  longs  to  be  set  free  from  sin  exclaims  in  penitence.
Deliver  me  from  bloodK So  *  blood  toucheth  blood,'  when  P«.  6i,
sin  has  heaped  on  sin ;  and  whereas  when  breach  is  added  ij^^,
to  breach,  Uie  powers  of  our  old  enemy  are  the  more  terribly  n*hi«
increased  against  uS;  it  is  rightly  added ;
'  He  runneth  upon  me  like  a  giant.

21.  The  enemy  is  easy  to  be  resisted,  if  he  is  not  consented  xviii.
to,  whether  in  many  backslidings,  or  in  one  for  a  continu-
ance. But  if  the  soul  has  been  accustomed  to  submit  to  his
persuasions,  the  oftener  it  subjects  itself  to  him,  it  makes

him  the  harder  to  itself  to  bear,  so  that  it  has  not  the  poiTer

h2

100 Strmiff  members  of  Holy  Church  tufferfor  the  weak.

Job  16,  to  struggle  against  him ;  in  that  our  wicked  adversary,  *  like
j^^^^^  a  giant,*  fights  against  it,  when  it  is  vanquished  by  bad  habit:
yet  very  often  Holy  Church,  even  after  sins  have  been  com-
mitted, brings  back  the  minds  of  the  faithful  to  penitence,
and  cleanses  away  the  sins  of  practice  by  the  efficacy  of  a
voluntary  self-chastening. Whence  it  is  well  added;

Ver.  15.  I  have  sewed  sackcloth  upon  my  skiiiy  and  covered
my^esh  with  ashes.
xix.  22.  What  ought  to  be  understood  by  *  sackcloth  and
ashes,*  but  penance ;  what  by  '  the  skin*  and  '  the  flesh,*  but
sin  of  the  flesh  ?  And  so  whereas  there  are  persons  who
after  the  backsliding  of  the  flesh  are  brought  back  to  penance,
it  is  as  if  ^  sackcloth  were  sewn  upon  the  skin,*  and  *'  the  flesh
covered  with  ashes;*  because  the  guilt  of  the  flesh  is  ^  covered
with  ashes*  by  penance,  that  it  should  not  be  seen  for  its
avenging  in  the  inquest  of  the  strict  Judge.  But  Holy
Church,  when  she  withdraws  her  weak  members  from  sins,
and  conducts  tliem  to  the  remedy  of  penance,  those  she
surely  aids  with  her  tears,  that  they  may  recover  strength  to
receive  the  grace  of  their  Maker,  and  in  the  strong  she  be-
wails what  she  has  not  done,  which  yet  in  her  weak  members
she  has  as  it  were  done  herself.  Hence  it  is  well  added
yet  further ;

Ver.  16.  My  face  is  swelled  unth  weeping.
XX.  23.  For  '  the  face*  of  Holy  Church  are  those,  who  being
set  in  posts  of  governorships  ap|)oar  the  foremost,  that  in
their  goodly  appearance  should  be  the  honour  of  the  faithful
people,  even  if  there  were  aught  deformed  in  the  body  hidden
from  sight.  Which  same  persons  that  are  set  over  the
people  bewail  the  sins  of  those  that  go  weakly,  and  so  chasten
themselves  for  the  downfall  of  others  as  if  for  their  own.
And  often  when  they  see  some  returning  to  pardon  after  sin,
and  others  persisting  in  wickedness,  they  marvel  at  the
secret  counsels  of  Almighty  God,  but  cannot  fathom  them.
For  they  are  dumb  at  the  things  which  they  do  not  under-
stand. And  hence  it  is  fitly  added;

And  mine  eyelids  have  become  darkened.
xxi. 24.  For  they  are  rightly  entitled  *  eyelids,*  who  are  on  .
their  watch  for  the  fore-ensuring  the  paths  of  the  feet ;  but
when  not  even  the  rulers  on  the  watch  can  understand  the


»

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


Chriii  nigknd  withmst  dm. His  Bloifd  never  hidden. 101

secret  judgments  of  God,  *  the  eyelids*  of  Holy  Church  are  Boos
*  darkened  ;*  but,  as  1  remember  that  1  have  already  often  -


saidy  blessed  Job»  while  bearing  a  type  of  Holy  Church,  uses
at  one  time  the  voice  of  the  body,  and  at  another  time  the
voice  of  the  Head ;  and  while  he  is  speaking  of  her  members,
he  is  raised  on  a  sudden  to  speak  the  words  of  her  Head.
Whence  here  too  it  is  added;

Ver.  17.  /  have  suffered  this  tciihaut  Hie  wickedness  qf
mine  hand^  whilst  I  made  pure  prayers  to  Qod.

25.  He  suffered  without  the  wickedness  of  His  hand,  Who\  Pet
did  no  sin^  neither  was  guUe  found  in  His  mouthy  and  yet^'^*
endured  the  pain  of  the  Cross  for  our  redemption. Who
only  above  all  others  *  made  pure  prayers  to  God,'  in  that
even  in  the  very  anguish  of  His  Passion  He  prayed  in  behalf

of  His  persecutors,  saying.  Father j  forgive  them,  for  they  Luke
know  not  what  they  do.  For  what  can  be  described,  what ^»*^'
can  be  conceived  more  pure  in  prayer,  than  when  the  merci-
fulness of  intercession  is  vouchsafed  even  those,  from  whose
hands  pain  is  undergone  ?  Whence  it  was  brought  to  pass,
that  that  Blood  of  our  Redeemer,  which  His  persecutors  in
raging  had  spilt,  afterwards  in  believing  they  drank,  and
proclaimed  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  Concerning  which
same  Blood  it  is  fitly  subjoined ;

Ver.  18.  O  earthy  cover  thou  not  my  blood;  and  let  my
cry  find  no  place  to  lie  hid  in  thee.

26.  It  was  said  to  man  on  his  committing  sin,  Earth  xxiii.
thou  artf  and  unto  earth  shalt  thou  return;  and  this  *  earth*  ^^* ''
does  not  *  cover  the  blood'  of  our  Redeemer :  in  that  each
several  sinner  taking  to  himself  the  price  of  his  redemption
makes  confession  and  sings  praise,  and  publishes  it  to  all  of

his  neighbours  that  he  is  able. Moreover,  ^  earth  did  not
cover  His  blood,*  in  that  Holy  Church  has  now  preached  the
mystery  of  His  redemption  in  all  parts  of  the  world. And
observe  what  is  added:  And  let  my  cry  find  no  place  to
lie  kid  in  thee. For  the  very  blood  of  redemption  that  is
taken  is  itself '  the  cry*  of  our  Redeemer. Hence  Paul  too
says,  And  to  the  Blood  qf  sprinkling ^  that  speaketh  better  u,shA2f
^things  than  that  qf  Abel. It  had  been  said  of  the  blood  of  ^^*
Abel ;  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto  Me  from  ©,„.  4
the  ground. But  *  the  Blood  of  Jesus  speaketh  better  things  ^^'

102 Christy  not  known  ofmen^  had  His  tVitness  above.

Job  16,  than  the  blood  of  Abel/  because  the  blood  of  Abel  brought
' the  death  of  his  fratricidal  brother,  but  the  blood  of  the


Allbo.

Lord  won  life  for  His  persecutors.  So  then  that  the  Sacra-
ments of  our  Lord's  Passion  may  not  be  ineffectual  in  us,  we
are  bound  to  imitate  that  which  we  take,  and  to  preach  to
others  what  we  adore.  For  *  His  cry  does  find  a  place  to  lie
hid  in  us,'  if  what  the  mind  has  been  brought  to  believe  the
tongue  is  silent  about.  But  that  His  cry  may  not  lie  hid  in
us,  it  remains  that  each  one  of  us  according  to  his  small
measure  should  make  known  to  his  neighbours  the  mystery
of  his  own  quickening.  It  is  good  to  recall  the  eyes  of  the
interior  to  the  hour  of  the  Lord's  Passion,  when  the  Jews
raged  against  Him  in  persecution,  and  the  Disciples  fled
from  Him  in  alarm.  For  He  that  appeared  to  die  in  the
flesh  was  not  in  any  wise  believed  to  be  God.  Hence  it  is
properly  added  in  this  place,

Ver.  19.  AhOy  now^  behold  my  witness  is  in  heaven^  and
^^amici-my  hearts  associate^  is  on  high.

meus' ^^*  ^^'  yrhen  the  Son  was  brought  to  His  downfall  on

lit' My  earth,  there  was  a  witness  to  Him  in  heaven. Since  the

oliee,' Father  is  the  witness  of  the  Son;  concerning  Whom  He

^^**  Himself  saith  in the  Gospel, And  the  Father  Himself ^

mji Which  hath  sent  Me,  hath  borne  witness  qf  Me. Who  is  also

Icxiv ^'s'^^y  called  ^  mine  heart's  associate,'  in  that  with  one  will,

Johns',  and  with one counsel,  the  Father  acts  always  in  union

Mat  11  ^*^^  ^®  ®^°' W*^^  witness  too  He  is,  in  that  no  man

27. '  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father. Thus  He  had  then  *  a

witness  in  heaven,'  and  His  '  heart's  associate'  on  high,  when

they,  who  saw  Him  dying  in  the  flesh,  had  their  eyes  closed

to  see  the  power  of  His  Divine  nature ;  and  whereas  men

did  not  know,  yet  in  the  hour  of  death  the  Mediator  between

God  and  man  did  know,  that  the  Father  was  working  together

with  Himself. Which  perhaps  may  be  likewise  applied  to

the  voice  of  His  Body. For  Holy  Church  for  this  reason

undergoes  the  miseries  of  this  life,  that  the  grace  above  may

lead  her  on  her  way  to  the  rewards  of  eternity. She  slights

the  death  of  her  flesh,  because  she  is  intent  on  the  glory  of

the  resuiTectiou ;  and  what  she  suffers  is  transitory,  what

she  expects  everlasting,  concerning  which  same  everlasting

blessings  she  has  no  misgiving,  in  that  she  has  already  a

Our  Lard  *  knaw$  aurf)ram€^  as  having  taken  it  an  Him, 108

faitbfbl  testimony  in  the  glory  of  her  Redeemer. For  she  Book
sees  with  the  mind  the  resurrection  of  His  flesh,  and  is —


strongly  fortified  to  hare  hope,  in  that  what  she  sees  already
brought  to  pass  in  her  Head,  she  hopes  without  doubting
will  also  follow  in  His  Body,  which  is  herself.  Which  same
Church  the  Psalmist  seeing  destined  to  continue  in  ererlast-
ing  perfection,  describes  her  under  the  title  of  the  moon.  A^**  ^t
perfect  moon  for  everlasting.  And  whereas  the  Resurrection
of  the  Lord  heartens  her  to  entertain  the  hope  of  a  Resur-
rection, be  properly  added.  And  afaitlful  witness  in  hea-
ven. Forasmuch  as  that  she  may  not  tremble  for  her  own
resurrection,  she  has  Him  in  hearen  for  a  witness,  Who  rose
again  from  the  dead;  and  so  let  the  faithful  People  when  it
suflers  adversity,  when  it  is  harassed  with  sore  tribulations,
lift  up  tlie  mind  to  the  hope  of  the  glory  to  follow,  and
trusting  in  the  resurrectiofk  of  the  Redeemer,  let  it  say.  Also
now  behold  my  witness  is  in  heaven^  and  mine  associate  on
high.  Who  is  also  rightly  called  '  an  associate,*  in  that  He
was  acquainted  with  our  nature,  not  only  by  creating,  but
by  taking  it  upon  Himself.  For  His  knowing  is  His  having
undertaken  what  belongs  to  us.  Whence  too  it  is  said  by
the  Psalmist,  For  He  knoweth  our  frame.  For  what  won-  Pt.  los,
der  is  it  if  He  is  said  emphatically  *  to  know  our  frame,*  ^^'
when  it  is  plain  that  there  is  nothing  that  He  does  not  know?
But  His  ^  knowing  our  frame,*  is  His  having  taken  it  upon
Himself  out  of  pitifulness.

88.  Yet  this  voice  may  together  with  blessed  Job  suitably
apply  to  each  one  of  ourselves  as  well ;  for  every  man  who
in  what  he  does  aims  at  human  praises,  seeks  a  '  witness*  on
earth;  but  he  that  is  eager  to  please  Almighty  God  by  his
deeds,  takes  thought  that  he  has  a  *  witness  in  heaven.*  And
it  often  happens  that  the  very  good  things  themselves  in  us
are  found  fault  with  by  inconsiderate  men ;  but  he  that  *  has
a  witness  in  heaven,*  has  no  need  to  fear  men*s  reproofs.
Hence  it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  20.  My  friends  are  full  of  words ;  but  mine  eye
poureth  out  tears  unto  God.

29.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  eye,  but  the  intent  of  the  xxv.
heart  7  as  it  is  written,  if  thine  eye  be  single^  thy  whole  body  Matt.  6,
shaU  befall  qf  light. For  when  any  thing  is  done  with  a^'

104 Job^i  wish  to  know  why  God  thus  dealt  with  him.

JOB  16,  good  intention,  the  enacting  of  that  intention  contracts  no
jj|j^8oil  in  the  sight  of  God;  and  so  when  friends  are  full  of
Hist,  words,  i.  e.  when  the  very  same  persons,  detract  that  are
joined  with  us  in  faith, '  the  eye*  must  needs  *  pour  out  tears
to  God/  that  so  the  whole  bent  of  our  heart  may  nm  out
in  the  piercing  of  interior  lore,  and  lift  itself  up  to  the  things
of  the  interior,  the  more  exactly  that  being  forced  back  by
external  reproaches,  it  is  driven  to  turn  back  within,  lest  it
should  vanish  away  without. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  -21.  Oh!  that  a  man  were  so  fudged  with  Gorf,  as  a
son  qfman  is  judged  with  his  fellow!
xxvi.  30.  We  acknowledge  indeed  always  that  we  are  sinners,
yet  often,  when  laid  under  the  rod,  we  do  not  know  for  what
sin  in  particular  we  are  stricken,  and  we  sift  ourselves  with
minute  examining,  that  if  we  might  in  any  way  be  able  we
might  trace  out  the  cause  of  our  being  struck;  and  whereas
this  is  for  the  most  part  hidden  from  us,  our  blindness
becomes  a  load  upon  us,  and  we  are  the  more  pained  at
what  we  are  suffering.  But  any  one  that '  comes  to  judg-
ment with  his  neighbour,'  both  says  what  he  thinks,  and
knows  what  answer  is  made  in  return,  and  strikes  a  blow
where  he  will,  and  knows  from  what  quarter  he  is  struck.
But  he  that  is  smittten  with  the  visitation  of  God,  while  he
knows  indeed  that  he  is  beaten,  but  knows  not  why  he  is
beaten,  as  it  were  himself  says  what  ho  thinks,  but  docs  not
know  what  may  be  said  against  him;  seeing  that  he  himself
indeed  groans  under  the  rod,  but  God  docs  not  declare
openly  for  what  cause  of  vengeance  He  strikes  him.  There-
fore it  is  said  now.  Oh!  that  a  man  toere  so  fudged  with
Qodf  as  a  son  qfman  is  fudged  with  his  neighbour!  As  if
it  were  expressed  in  plain  words ;  ^  As  in  all,  that  I  say,  I
am  heard,  so  would  that  I  heard  all  that  is  said  concerning
me.'  Which,  nevertheless,  can  never  be  brought  about  in
this  life,  in  that  there  is  a  great  obstruction  before  the  eyes
of  our  heart,  against  our  beholding  the  subtle  nature  of  God,
even  our  mere  frailty  by  itself;  but  we  shall  then  see  Him
with  clearness  by  Whom  we  are  now  searchingly  beheld,
when  this  frailty  laid  aside,  we  attain  to  the  grace  of  the
1  Cor.  interior  contemplation,  of  which  Paul  saith.  For  then  shall  I
i'>  1^*  knowy  as  also  I  am  known. Hence  blessed  Job,  seeing  that

m$  Ufk  retunu  not. Wading  ofipirit  through  fear. J  05

that  knowledge  can  never  be  in  the  fullest  way  perfected  Book
here,  groans  indeed  over  the  blindness  of  the  present  life;  XIII,
yet  consoles  himself  by  the  shortness  thereof,  saying,

Ver.  22.  When  a  few  pears  are  comoj  then  I  shall  go  the
way  whence  I  shall  not  return.

SI.  Every  thing  that  passes  is  short,  even  though  it  should  xxvii.
seem  slow  in  being  finished,  but  in  the  way  of  death  we
'go,  and  do  not  return  by  it," not  because  we  are  not  brought
back  by  rising  again  to  the  life  of  the  flesh,  but  because  we
do  not  come  again  to  the  labours  of  this  mortal  life,  or  to  earn
rewards  by  our  labours.

Chap.  xvii.  ver.  1.  Mff  spirit  shall  be  wasted  to  thinness.

32.  '  The  spirit  is  wasted  to  thinness,'  by  the  fear  of  judg-xxviii.
ment;  in  that  the  minds  of  the  Elect,  the  more  they  feel
themselves  to  be  approaching  the  final  Judgment,  tremble  so
much  the  more  fearfully  in  the  searching  of  their  own  selves;
and  if  they  ever  find  in  themselves  any  carnal  thoughts,  they
consume  them  by  the  fervour  of  their  penance ;  nor  do  they
suflTer  their  thoughts  to  expand  with  carnal  delight,  in  that
they  pass  sentence  and  inflict  punishment  on  themselves
more  rigorously  in  proportion  as  they  are  awaiting  the  strict
Judge  close  at  hand;  whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  they  look
upon  their  departure  as  always  near.  For  the  minds  of  the
lost  do  many  things  wickedly  on  this  account,  because  they
suppose  themselves  living  here  for  long ;  and  so  '  the  spirit
of  the  righteous  is  wasted  to  thinness,*  but  the  spirit  of  the
wicked  is  thickened.  For  in  proportion  as  they  swell  out
in  self-elation,  they  have  not  the  wearing  down  of  the  spirit:
but  the  righteous,  whilst  they  consider  the  shortness  of  their
life,  eschew  the  sins  of  pride  and  impurity.  And  hence  it  is
added;

My  days  shall  be  shortened,  and  the  grave  only  is  left  me*

83.  For  be  that  bethinks  himself  what  he  will  be  in  death,  xxix.
is  always  rendered  fearftil  in  practice,  and  from  the  very
cause  that  henceforth  he  does  not  as  it  were  live  in  his  own
eyes,  he  does  genuinely  live  in  the  eyes  of  his  Creator;  he
goes  after  nothing  of  a  nature  to  pass  away,  he  withstands  all
the  desires  of  the  present  life,  and  views  himself  as  almost
dead,  in  th&t  he  is  not  unaware  that  he  is  destined  to  die. For

106 Jobi  not  uinning  wickedly y  a  type  of  Him  Who  sinned  not.

Job  17,  a  perfect  life  b  aa  imitation  of  death,  which  while  the

— ?1—  righteous  diligently  enact,  they  escape  the  snares  of  sins.

Ecolai.  Whence  it  is  written.  Whatsoever  thou  takest  in  hand,  re-
faisT.  member  thy  latter  end,  and  thou  shalt  never  do  amiss. And

^^^'°*  hence .  blessed  Job,  because  he  sees  that  his  ^  days  are
shortened,'  and  reflects  that  ^  the  grave  only  is  left  him,'  fitly
subjoins,

/  have  not  sinned,  and  mine  eye  ahideth  in  biltemessts.

XXX.  34.  As  if  he  expressed  himself  in  plain  words;  ^  I  have
not  been  guilty  of  sin,  and  I  have  undergone  scourges.'  But
on  this  point,  seeing  that  in  many  passages  of  this  history  he
confesses  himself  to  have  boon  guilty  of  sinning,  is  the  mind
moved  by  the  thought  with  what  reason  he  now  denies  him-
self to  have  committed  sin  ?  But  with  reference  to  this  the
reason  quickly  occurs,  in  that  neither  did  he  sin  to  such  an
extent  as  to  deserve  strokes  of  the  rod,  nor  yet  was  capable
of  being  without  sin.  For  that  he  was  stricken  not  for  the
correcting  of  sin,  but  the  increasing  of  grace*  the  Judge
Himself  bears  witness.  Who  praises  while  He  stiikes.  And
again,  that  he  was  not  without  sin  neither  does  he  himself
deny,  who  is  commended  by  the  Judge,  and  therefore  com-
mended because  he  denies  it  not.  But  I  think  that  we  shall
make  out  these  words  the  better,  if  we  understand  them  as
spoken  in  the  voice  of  the  Head.  For  our  Redeemer,  in
coming  for  our  Redemption,  at  once  did  not  sin  and  did
*  undergo  bitterness,'  in  that  being  without  sin  Ho  undertook
the  punishment  of  our  sin,  in  Whose  voice  it  is  added,

Yer.  S.  Set  me  free,  and  put  me  beside  thee,  and  let  the
hand  qf  any  one  fight  against  me.
xxxi.  35.  For  Jfe  did  not  sin  either  in  thought  or  deed:  He  was
made  to  *  abide  in  bitterness'  by  His  Passion,  He  was  ^  set
free'  by  the  Resurrection,  He  was  ^  put  beside'  tlie  Father  by
His  Ascension;  in  that  having  gone  up  into  heaven  He  sitteth
on  the  right  hand  of  God.  And  because,  after  the  glory  of
His  Ascension,  Judaea  was  stirred  up  in  the  persecuting  of
His  Disciples,  it  is  rightly  said  here.  Let  the  hand  of  any  one
fight  against  me.  For  the  madness  of  the  persecutors  did
then  rage  on  His  members,  then  the  flame  of  cruelty  blazed
out  against  the  life  of  the  faithful;  but  where  should  the

The  wicked  keep  far  from  dieeipliney  and  in  law  pureviie, 107

wicked  go,  or  what  should  they  do,  whilst  He  Whom  they  Book
pereecnted  on  earth  was  now  seated  in  heareu  ?  Concerning  ^^"*
whom  it  is  yet  forther  added ;

Yer.  4.  Thou  hast  removed  their  heart  far  ffxnndueipline.

86.  For  if  they  had  been  acquainted  with  the  keeping  of  xxxii.
discipline,  nor  ever  despised  the  precepts  of  our  Redeemer,
the  mere  mortal  condition  of  their  flesh  by  itself  would  have
excited  them  to  Uie  love  of  the  life  immortal ;  for  this  very
thing,  even  our  being  subject  to  corruption  in  this  life,
is  of  the  scourge  of  discipline.  For  to  be  made  to  feel
annoyance  from  heat  and  cold,  from  hunger  and  thirst,  to  be
afflicted  with  diseases,  and  one  day  even  to  be  put  out  of
existence,  what  else  are  all  these,  but  the  scourges  of  sin  ?
Now  there  are  some  that  both  undergo  scourges,  and  yet
never  fashion  anew  their  life  by  the  fear  of  Him  Who
scourges  them.  Whence  it  is  rightly  said  now.  Thou  haet
removed  their  heart  far  from  discipline;  in  that  though  the
body  is  under  discipline,  yet  the  heart  is  not  under  discipline,
so  long  as  a  person  is  stricken  with  the  rod,  and  yet  not
brought  back  to  humbleness  of  mind.  Nor  yet  is  this  spoken
in  such  a  sense,  as  if  the  Almighty  and  Merciful  God  'removed
the  heart  of  man  far  from  discipline,'  but  that  having  fallen
away  of  his  own  accord,  there  in  executing  judgment  He  suf-
fered him  to  remain,  where  he  had  fallen ;  as  we  also  say  to
Him  in  praying,  And  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  i.  e.  *  do
not  ever  suffer  us  to  be  led  into  temptation.* It  proceeds ;

Therrfore  tliey  shall  not  be  exalted.

37.  For  if  the  heart  were  under  discipline,  it  would  seek  xxxiii.
ader  things  above,  it  would  not  be  openmouUied  to  obtain
transitory  good  things.  Of  those,  then,  whose  heart  is  not
under  discipline,  it  is  rightly  said.  Therefore  they  shall  not
he  exalted^  in  that  while  let  go  at  large  in  the  lowest  enjoy-
ments, they  are  ever  longing  for  the  good  things  of  earth,
they  never  lift  the  heart  to  die  delights  of  heaven;  for  they
would  be  exalted,  if  they  lifted  their  minds  to  the  hope  of
the  heavenly  country;  but  they,  who  do  not  make  it  their
business  to  guard  their  way  by  discipline,  ever  in  their
desires  lie  grovelling  in  things  below,  and,  what  is  more
grievous,  in  lying  low  set  themselves  up,  in  that  they  are
uplifted  on  the  ground  of  things  transitory. And  they  may

1 08  SakaCi  dehnvi  promises  to  hU  followers.

Job  17 f  be  uplifted,  but  cannot  be  exalted,  in  that  tbey  are  sunk  the
—J —  deeper  below*  by  the  very  act  by  which  they  are  rendered
'higher  to  themselves;  and  so  the  heart  that  is  without  disci-
pline cannot  be  exalted,  in  that  the  human  mind,  as  when
elevated  amiss  it  is  forced  down  below,  so  forced  down
aright  is  lifted  up  on  high. It  proceeds;

Yer.  5.  He  promiseih  prey  to  his/riends;  and  the  eyes  of
his  children  shall  fail.
xxxiv. 38.  After  that  blessed  Job  had  uttered  a  sentence  relating
to  the  multitude  of  the  wicked,  i.  e.  the  body  of  our  old  enemy;
he  directly  shifts  the  sentence  to  the  very  leader  of  them,
i.  e.  the  head  of  all  the  children  of  perdition,  and  returns
from  the  plural  to  the  singular  number :  for  the  devil  and  all
wicked  people  are  so  one  body,  that  it  very  often  happens
that  the  body  is  rated  with  the  name  of  the  head,  and  the
head  de^gnated  by  the  title  of  the  body. Thus  ihe  body  is
rated  with  the  name  of  the  head,  when  it  is  said  of  a  bad
Johns,  man,  And  one  of  you  is  a  devil. And  again  the  head  is
^^' designated  by  the  title  of  the  body,  when  it  is  said  of  the
Matis, apostate  Angel  himself,  A  man^  that  is  an  enemy  hath  done
?Tiilff  ^^^* Thus  the  prince of  all the  wicked  has some for
<  mtrni- '  associates*  and some as  ^  children.* For who are  his
'^j^  associates,  but  those  apostate  Angels^  who  fell  with  him  from
the  seat  of  the  heavenly  country  ?  or  what  others  has  he  as
children,  saving  bad  men,  who  are  begotten  by  his  evil  per-
suading in  the  practice  of  wickedness. Whence  too  it  is
Johns  ^id  by  ^^  voice  of  Truth  to  unbelievers.  Ye  are  of  your
^- father  the  devil.

89.  So  that  evil  author  of  error  promises  ^  prey'  to  his
^  associates,*  in  that  he  promises  the  evil  spirits  the  souls  of
bad  men  to  be  seized  at  their  latter  end ;  and  the  eyes  of  his
children  shall  fail^  in  that  while  he  sets  on  the  aims  of  men
to  look  for  earthly  things  only,  he  causes  them  to  love  that
which  they  cannot  keep  for  long:  for  neither  can  tlie  bent
of  misdirected  love  remain,  when  it  appears  that  both  that
which  he  loves,  and  he  himself,  who  loves  it,  are  tending  to
nought  at  a  rapid  rate.  It  may  also  be,  that  by  ^  the  associates*
perhaps  are  understood  all  those  that  are  most  cruel  and
already  full  of  every  kind  of  wickedness ;  but  by  the  sons,
those  who  being  still  deluded  by  beguiling  promises,  are

SeemmffJiidffmeiUiafahui  A^  Righietms  perplex  fimny. 109

being  nourished  ap  to  increasing  of  wickedness ;  that  hence-  Book
forth  the  devil  shonld  as  it  were  by  the  title  of  wickedness^-^^Hi.
hare  these  as  his  *  associates/  who  now  no  longer  hare
wheremito  to  grow  in  perdition,  while  these  he  has  as  sons,
whom  he  sockles  with  promises,  that  they  may  go  on  ad-
vancing to  worse.  But '  the  eyes  of  his  children  shall  fail/
in  (hat  the  aims  of  the  wicked  fall  to  the  ground,  when  all
that  they  go  after  here,  they  leare  behind,  and  there  suffer
without  end  what  is  fitted  to  fill  them  with  grief.  It
proceeds ;

Ver.  6.  He  hath  made  me^  as  it  were^  a  bjfword  of  the
people^  and  I  am  an  example  h^ore  them.

AO.  This  let  blessed  Job  say  in  his  own  person,  yea  and  xxxr.
in  the  roice  of  all  of  the  Elect.  For  erery  one  that  is  stricken
with  the  rod,  is,  as  it  were, '  made  a  byword  of  the  people,*
in  that  every  fool,  when  he  desires  to  curse  any  one,  takes  up
his  cursing  in  a  likeness  to  him,  whom  he  sees  stricken  with
a  temporal  stroke,  and  wishes  that  punishment  for  his  adver-
sary, which  he  sees  to  have  befallen  the  righteous  man.
And  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  with  persons  not  endowed  with
a  right  perception,  the  upright  man  is  brought  into  an  ex-
ample, while  both  the  punishment  of  the  just  passes  current
for  the  condemnation  of  him,  and  the  glory  that  is  in  store
for  him  is  not  foreseen  by  any  expectance  of  faith.  It
proceeds ;

Ver.  7. Mine  eye  is  dim^  for  indignaiion^  and  all  my
members  are  as  it  were  brought  to  nothing,

41.  For  '  the  eye  is  dim  for  indignation,'  when  those  very  xxxvi.
persons  likewise,  who  in  the  Lord's  Body,  i.  e.  in  the  Church,
are  endued  with  the  light  of  truth,  whilst  they  see  themselves
too  long  despised  and  disdained  by  the  wicked,  are  con-
founded in  astonishment  at  the  inscrutable  judgment,  and
fail  to  fathom  the  secret  of  God ;  for  what  reason  it  is  that
the  wicked  are  suffered  to  prevail  against  the  innocence  of
the  good  ?  For  who  is  not  amazed,  when  Herodias  by  her
daughter's  dancing  obtains  at  the  hands  of  the  drunken  king,
that  the  head  of  that  Friend  of  the  Bridegroom^  that '  Pro-
phety  and  more  than  a  Prophet^  should  be  brought  before
the  faces  of  his  guests  upon  a  charger?  Now  when  the  just  are
*  dimmed  in  indignation,^  the  weak  very  commonly  go  head-

1 1 0 TTie  *  Innocettf  how  *  stirred  aguimt  tlie  hypocrite,*

Job.  i7,loug  into  actual  infidelity;  whence  it  is  added,  And  my  mem-
*  '  hers  are  as  it  were  brought  to  nothing.  For  by  the  term  of
'^  members/  we  have  the  tenderness  of  the  weak  set  forth,
who,  while  they  behold  bad  men  flourishing,  and  good  men
tormented,  are  sometimes  brought  to  this  pass,  that  they
regret  that  they  even  began  in  good  tlungs,  and  so  speedily
fall  back  to  doing  evil  things,  as  if  the  good  they  had  begun
were  a  detriment  to  their  life.  But  this  that  he  says,  Mine
eye  is  dimmed  in  indignation^  he  unfolds  in  plainer  words,
when  he  adds ;

Ver.  8.  Upright  men  shall  be  astonied  at  Ihis^  and  the
innocent  shall  stir  up  himself  against  the  hypocrite.
xzxvii. 42.  In  this  place,  *•  the  innocent'  is  taken  for  the  as  yet  im-
^'^* perfectly  righteous,  who,  as  yet  but  commencing  in  good  ways,
though  he  is  not  minded  to  do  mischief  to  others,  yet  is  not
at  all  able  himself  to  do  things  that  are  perfect;  and  because
the  hearts  of  the  little  ones,  while  they  see  the  wicked  flourish-
ing in  the  present  life,  are  set  on  firo  with  the  brands  of
envy ;  (for  a  man  the  more  envies  others  present  good  in
proportion  as  he  less  despises  it  himself. Since  of  that
which  cannot  be  possessed  by  all  men  all  of  it  together,  what
1 « dMit'  this  one  has  would  be  so  much  lacking  *  to  the  other.)  Now
Sl'^mT  '  ^^  innocent  is  kindled  against  the  hypocrite,'  when  even  he
'deficit.'  who  is  not  used  to  injure  any  one,  envies  the  glory  of  the
dissembler. But  if  in  this  passage  the  innocent  means  any
one  perfect  in  goodness, '  the  innocent  is  moved  against  the
hypocrite;'  when  he  both  sees  him  flourishing,  and  contemns
him  and  all  his  flourishing,  and  by  preaching  the  things  that
are  right  plainly  says  that  he  ought  to  be  despised  by  others,
&e  more  in  proportion  as  he  sees  him  eagerly  in  quest  of
things,  which  cannot  abide  with  him  for  long,  and  in  this
point  of  view  it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  9.  The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way,  and  to
clean  hands  he  shall  add  strength.
xxxviii.  48.  On  considering  the  hypocrite,  *  the  righteous  holds  on
his  way,'  in  that  whilst  he  sees  that  it  is  by  a  wicked  will
that  he  obtains  the  things  that  are  of  the  world,  he  is
himself  tied  and  bound  the  stronger  to  the  love  of  heavenly
things,  knowing  that  to  good  desires  eternal  rewards  shall  not
be  wanting,  whereas  both  to  bad  and  double  hearts  the  good

Clean  handi  itrenpihetied. The  Hlf-wise  most  foolish. 111

things  of  time  are  not  denied;  from  which  circumstance  it  Book
comes  that  *  to  clean  hands  he  adds  strength/  in  that  seeing 1^


bad  men  win  temporal  glory,  be  brings  his  good  works  to
perfection,  and  looks  down  upon  temporal  things  from  th^
loftier  height  in  proportion  as  he  sees  them  to  abound  even
to  the  wicked.  For  he  sees  how  much  those  things  deserve
to  be  despised,  which  Almighty  Ood  Touchsafes,  eyen  to  bad
men:  for  if  they  were  primarily  great,  the  Creator  would
never  rouclisafe  them  to  His  adversaries;  and  hence  he
considers  that  it  is  to  himself  an  unworthy  thing,  thai  he
should  go  after  that  good,  which  he  sees  to  abound  even  to
the  wicked;  but  he  applies  his  mind  to  the  winning  of
heavenly  blessings,  which  can  never  be  shared  with  him  by
the  children  of  perdition.  Thus  after  he  had  introduced  the
outward  advancements  of  the  wicked,  and  the  interior  ad-
vancements of  the  good,  he  brought  forward  words  of  exhort-
ation, saying,

Ver.  10.  Bui  as  for  you  ally  do  ye  turtt  and  come  now.

44.  Which  same  words  of  exhortation  he  properly  frames  xxxix.
to  the  Elect,  whom  he  calls  to  the  eternal  world;  who  are
bidden  in  two  ways,  viz.  that  they  should  '  tum,^  and  that
they  should  *  come;*  *  turn*  by  faith,  *  come*  by  practice.  Or
indeed  that  they  '  turn'  by  abandoning  evil  deeds,  and
*come'  by  doing  good  ones;  as  it  is  written.  Depart  from  Tm.  97,
evily  and  do  good:  but  that  is  wonderful  which  is  added,

And  may  I  not  find  one  wise  man  among  you.

45.  For  what  does  this  mean,  that  he  bids  them  to  wisdom, xl.
and  yet  wishes  that  he  may  not  find  them  wise,  saving  that  (hey
cannot  come  to  true  wisdom,  who  are  deceived  in  confidence

in  their  own  false  wisdom  ? Concerning  whom  it  is  written,
Woe  unto  you  that  are  wise  in  your  own  eyes,  and  prudent  u.5,2i.
in  your  own  sight ;  and  to  whom  it  is  said  again,  Be  not  wise  Rom.
with  your  own  selves;  whence  that  same  great  preacher  ^^^  ^^*
sought  that  those,  whom  he  found  carnally  wise,  in  order
that  they  might  attain  true  wisdom,  should  first  become
foolisli;  saying,  If  any  man  among  you  seemeth  to  be  wise  \Cor.
in  this  worldf  let  him  become  a  fool^  that  he  may  be  wise.^^  ^^'
And  *  Truth*  saith  by  Itself,  /  thank  Thee,  0  Father ^  Lord  M%tk.
of  heaven  and  earth,  because  TTum  hast  hid  these  things  from  ^*»  ^'

112 Power  and  persecution  both  bring  eartldy  cares.

Job  17,  the  wise  and  prudent^  atid  hast  revealed  thein  unto  babes*
And  80  because  Uiey  that  are  wise  in  themselves  cannot


LiTw

come  to  true  wisdom^  blessed  Job,  being  anxious  for  the
conversion  of  his  hearers,  rightly  desires  that  he  may  not
^  find  any  wiso  man  among  them.'  As  if  ho  said  to  them  in
plain  speech ;  ^  Loam  to  be  foolish  in  your  own  selves,  that
ye  may  be  truly  wise  in  God.' It  goes  on ;

Ver.  1 1 .  My  days  are  past  away,  my  though  ts  are  scattered^
racking  my  heart.
xli. 46.  The  Holy  Church  of  the  Elect  sees  that  the  spaces  of
MoiAL.*  ^^^  ^^'^  P^^^  ^^  periods  of  day  and  night,  in  that  it  is  hers  in
adversity  to  have  ^  a  night/  and  in  prosperity,  *  a  day.* For
there  riseth  as  it  were  light  unto  her  from  the  tranquillity  of
peace,  and  night  from  the  grief  of  persecution. Now  as
often  as  after  the  pauses  of  rest  she  returns  to  the  toilsome-
ness  of  persecution,  growing  to a head  against  her,  she
testifies  that  her  ^  days  have  past;*  in  which  days,  however,
she  is  accustomed  to  be  weighed  down  with  so  much  the
heavier  cares,  in  proportion  as  she  bethinks  her  that  for  tliat
very  tranquillity  of  rest  a  more  exact  reckoning  is  required
of  her  by  the  Judge. For  in  the  tranquil  state  of  peace,  at
one  time  she  is  employed  with  the  profits  of  souls,  at  another
time  she  attends  to  the  ministrations  of  earthly  things,  which
same  ministrations  of  earthly  affairs  are  more  burthensome
to  the  minds  of  good  men,  in  proportion  as  by  the  act  of
looking  at  them  they  are  torn  away  though  but  for  a  brief
space  from  looking  at  the  things  of  heaven. Whence  blessed
Job,  whether  in  his  own  voice,  or  the  voice  of  the  Church
Universal,  after  testifying  that  ^  his  days  were  past,*  thereupon
subjoined.  My  thoughts  are  scattered^  racking  my  heart;
in  that  when  temporal  glory  is  gone  to  the  minds  of  the
good,  even  that  charge  of  earthly  stewardship  is  likewise
removed  from  them,  which  seemed  to bo torturing  them
within  their  thoughts;  for  while  they  aim  to  be  always  bent
upward  for  the  perception  of  the  things  of  heaven,  by  this
very  circumstance  that  sometimes  in  their  earthly  steward-
ships they  are  made  to  descend  to  take  thought  of  the  lowest
matters,  they  feel  themselves  to  be  put  to  torture. Whence
it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  the  very  hostility  of  persecution  is

Liffht$  and  shades  of  li/e.  State  of  departed  souls  chanffed, 113

itself  too  changed  into  a  mighty  exultation  of  joy,  on  account  Book
of  the  repose  of  the  heart  that  is  obtained. Hence  it  is  fitly


added ;

Ver.  12.  Tkeif  have  changed  the  night  into  day.

47.  For '  the  thoughts  being  scattered  change  night  into  xlii.
day/  in  that  it  is  sometimes  more  gprateful  to  the  righteous
through adversity to undergo  sufferings, rather than as

the  effect  of  prosperity to  be  harassed  with the  charge
of  earthly  ministering. But  because  they  have  learnt  by
paying attention that both adversity passes away, and
prosperity  dawns  again,  it  is  fitly  added;
And  again  after  darkness  I  look  for  light.

48.  For  *  the  light  is  looked  for  afler  darkness/  in  that  xliii.
after  the  night  of  the  present  life,  the  light  eternal  is  dis-
cerned, or  advcrsily  and  prospcrsity  do  so  alternate  here,
that  they  do  not  cease  to  succeed  one  another  by  turns.
Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  even  in  the  light  night  is
suspected,  and  in  the  night  light  is  presumed  on;  as  when

it  is  written,  In  the  day  of  prosperity  he  not  forgetful  ^Eodas.
.  affliction y  and  in  the  day  of  affliction  be  not  forgetful  qf^^^^'
prosperity.  But  mark,  forasmuch  as  we  have  been  redeemed
by  the  grace  of  our  Maker,  we  henceforth  have  this  boon  of
heavenly  bestowal,  that  when  we  are  removed  from  dwelling
in  our  flesh,  we  are  at  once  carried  off  to  receive  heavenly
rewards;  in  that  since  our  Creator  and  Redeemer,  penetrating
the  bars  of  hell,  brought  out  from  thence  the  souls  of  the
Elect,  He  does  not  permit  us  to  go  there,  from  whence  He
has  already  by  descending  set  others  free*  But  they  who
were  brought  into  this  world  before  His  Coming,  whatsoever
eminency  of  righteousness  they  may  have  had,  could  not  on
being  divested  of  the  body  at  once  be  admitted  into  the
bosom  of  the  heavenly  country*;  seeing  that  He  had  not  as
yet  come.  Who  by  His  own  descending  should  unloose  the
bars  of  hell,  and  place  the  souls  of  the  righteous  henceforth
in  their  everlasting  seat  Hence  blessed  Job,  both  feeling
the  stroke  of  aflliction,  and  knowing  that  the  recompensing
of  the  righteous  was  as  yet  delayed,  fitly  subjoins ;

"  Ha  ujt  elsewhere  that  the  more  are  kept  elsewhere,  and  that  all  haTe

perfecteouhareadfliittednow  to  heaven,  to  wait  till  the  Judginent  for  their  bodiet

where  the  Body  of  Christ  is,  quoting  to  he  broughtinto  the  heavenly  mansions.

Phil.  i.  13.  He  adds  that  the  less  perfect  Dial.  iv.  35.

VOL.  II.  I

114 SairUi  of  old  not  punished  though  in  hcU.  Man's  corruption.

Job  17, Ver.  \S.  If  f  wait  J  hell  is  mine  house:  and  I  have  made

.Lllllut^  bed  in  the  darkness.

xliv.  ^^'  ^^^  ^^^  former  Saints  could  undergo  adversity,  and  yet
could  not,  when  brought  out  of  the  body,  be  at  once  freed
from  the  regions  of  hell ;  in  that  He  had  not  yet  come.  Who
should  descend  thereinto  without  sin>  tliat  lie  might  set  free
those,  who  were  there  bound  by  right  of  sin.  And  man
then  '  made  his  bed  in  darkness/  when  he  forsook  the  light
of  righteousness  by  consenting  to  the  crafty  Prompter:  and
whereas  in  those  very  regions  of  hell  the  souls  of  the  righteous
were  kept  imprisoned  witliout  torment,  so  that  both  on  behalf
of  original  sin  they  should  still  go  down  thereunto,  and  yet
by  right  of  their  own  deeds  not  undergo  punishment;  to  have
'  made  their  bed  in  the  darkness,^  in  a  manner,  is  to  have

■  graTe  prepared  themselves. rest  in  hell.  For  it  was  sad  weariness*
'""^  to  the  Elect,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  flesh,  not  yet  to  see
the  likeness  of  the  Creator.  Which  wearisomeness  blessed
Job  not  improperly  designates  *  darkness.'  But  whereas
this  came  in  the  punishment  of  infirmity,  he  rightly  adds
that  same  infirmity  directly,  saying,

Ver.  14.  /  have  said  to  corruption^  Jliou  art  my  father ^
and  to  the  worm^  Thou  art  my  mother  and  my  sister.
xlv.  50.  What  does  this  mean,  that  he  said  to  corf-uptiouy  Thou
art  my  father;  saving  that  every  man  descends  from  an
already  corrupted  origin  ?  and  hence  it  is  added.  And  to  t/ie
worm.  Thou  art  my  mother  and  my  sister;  m  this  way,  viz.
that  wo  come  into  this  world  at  once  from  corruption  itself,
and  along  witli  conuption  itself.  For  as  regards  tlio  matter
of  corruptible  flesh,  the  worm  is  our  ^  mother  and  sister,'  in
that  we  both  come  forth  out  of  corruption,  and  come  with
corruption  which  we  carry  about  us.  And  if  we  may
understand  it  in  a  spiritual  sense,  nature  is  not  unappro-
priately  called  our  ^  mother,^  and  habit  too  a  *  sister,'  m  that
we  are  from  the  one,  and  along  with  the  other;  which  same
*  mother  and  sister'  are  ^  worms,'  in  that  in  virtue  of  a  corrupt
nature  and  evil  habit  we  are  necessitated,  as  by  a  kind  of
^  worms,'  so  by  disquieting  tlioughts  to  be  gnawed  in  the
mind.  For  the  corrupted  nature  of  the  flesh,  and  bad  habit,
in  that  they  generate  numberless  cares  in  the  heart  of  our
frailty,  are  well  called  ^  worms  our  mother  and  sister.' For

Hopes  of  the  Patriarchs  painfully  delayed.  115

cares  gnaw  the  mind,  while  thej  disquiet  it For  righteous  men  Book
do  not  cease  either  heedfolly  to  take  thought  and  counsel  what  ^'"'
th(5y  are  to  do,  or  thoughtfully  to  look  into  it,  whither  they
are  destined  to  be  led  after  the  present  life. And  so  because
the  Elect  then,  before  the  Coming  of  the  Lord,  both  saw
tliat  they  were  in  the  toils  of  the  present  life,  and  still  after
the  present  life  did  not  as  yet  receive  the  heavenly  blessings,
they  were  made to  smart'  with  many  thoughts  of  heart. 'w»b«ii-
Fcir  \hcy  wnitod  for  the  grace  of  the  Redeemer,  and  yet  by  *^'
living  in  the  flesh  could  not  attain  thereto:  whence  it  is
filly  added,

Vcr.  15. If 'here  fhen  itt  now  my  eaipectaiion  ?

61.  What  could  be  the  *  expectation^  of  the  righteous,  xlvi.
but  God  Who  justifieth  the  righteous,  Who  should  freely
go  down  to  (what  was)  the  punishment  of  mankind,  and  by  the
e/ficacy  of  His  righteousness  set  free  the  captives  of  death  ?
For  they  never  ceased  to  expect  His  appearing  with  intent
expectation;  they  knew  that  it  was  to  come*  but  they  sought
for  it  to  come  quickly.  Wherefore  he  does  not  say,  *  Where,
dicn,  is  my  expectation  ?'  but,  tchere  then  is  now  my  expecta*
lion  t  For  in  that  he  adds,  now^  he  shewed  that  what  was  to
come  one  day,  he  desired  might  come  without  delay.  It
goes  on.

And  who  considereth  my  patience  9

52.  He  expressed  the  longing  desire,  wherewith  whilst  set  xlvii.
in  the  flesh  he  hastes  to  be  redeemed,  and  brought  back
from  hell  to  the  regions  above.  And  indeed  it  belonged  to
but  few  men  to  enter  into  the  consideration  of  these  things,
that  they  should  learn  to  think  of  the  labours  of  the  present
life,  or  of  the  subsequent  delay  after  death.  Both  of  which
the  just  grieved  to  be  subject  to  before  the  coming  of  our
Redeemer.  And  hence  it  is  rightly  said.  And  who  considereth
my  patience  f  Verily,  there  is  not  lacking  One,  to  '  consider
patience.'  But  when  God  does  not  hear  quickly,  He  is  said,
as  it  were,  not '  to  consider/  For  the  Redemption  of  mankind
itself,  which  came  at  the  end  of  the  world,  by  those  who
came  before  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  was  accounted
slow,  in  that  during  a  long  period  of  time  Uiey  were  severed
from  the  recompensing  of  the  heavenly  things,  as  Truth  testifies,
Which  saith,  Many  prophets  and  kings  have  desired  to  see^^^^^t

I  2

110 JoVs  Itnigivgs.  How  he  could  speak  of  the  *  lowest  Hell.*

Job  17)  Ihose  things  which  ye  see^  and  have  not  seen  them. And  so
'  -as  to  that  which  is  now  said^  Who  considereth  my  patience?


Lit.

the  breathings  of  fervent  desire  are  laid  open. For  neither,

as  we  said  before,  does  God  forbear  to  consider  the  patience
of  the  righteous;  but  not  ^  to  ha?e  regard/  in  a  manner,
means  to  appear  less  quickly  answering  to  the  aspirations
of  longing  desire,  and  by  lengthened  periods  of  time  to
delay  the  grace  of  His  Dispensation.  Therefore  let  him  say.
Who  considereth  my  patience?  in  that  what  is  short  to  Him
that  ordereth,  is  long  to  him  that  lo?es.  Hence,  still  reflecting
on  the  privations  of  his  delay,  he  repeats  that  which  he  had
already  said  before;  and  being  destined  to  descend  below,
he  redoubles  the  voice  of  his  grief,  saying,

Ver.  16.  All  of  mine  shall  descend  into  the  lowest  hell.
xlviii.  53.  Whereas  it  appears  that  among  those  below  the
righteous  ai'e  held  bound  not  in  places  of  punishment,  but
in  the  bosom  of  tranquillity  above,  an  important  question
springs  up  before  us,  why  it  is  that  blessed  Job  declares,
saying.  All  of  mine  shall  descend  into  the  lowest  hell;  who
even  if  before  the  Advent  of  the  Mediator  between  God  and
man  he  had  to  descend  into  hell,  yet  it  is  plain  that  into  the
^  lowest  heir  he  had  not  to  descend.  Does  he  call  the  very
higher  regions  of  hell,  *  the  lowest  hell  ?*  Plainly  because  in
relation  to  the  loftiness  of  heaven,  the  region  of  this  sky
may  not  unappropriately  be  called  the  lower  region.  Whence
when  the  Apostate  Angels  were  plunged  from  the  seats  of
heaven  into  this  darksome  region  of  the  air,  the  Apostle
3  Pet.  2,  Peter  says.  For  \f  God  spared  not  the  Angels  that  sinned^
*•  but  delivered  them^  dragged  down  with  infernal  chains^  into
hell,  to  be  reserved  for  torments  in  the  Judgment.  If  then
relatively  to  the  height  of  heaven  this  dai'ksome  air  is  inferaal,
relatively  to  the  elevation  of  this  air,  the  earth  which  lies
below  may  be  taken  both  as  infernal,  and  as  deep ;  and  rela-
tively to  tlie  height  of  that  earth,  even  those  parts  of  hell
which  are  higher  than  the  other  mansions  of  the  place
below,  may  in  this  place  not  unsuitably  be  denoted  by  the
designation  of  the  lowest  hell ;  in  that  what  the  sky  is  to
heaven,  and  the  earth  to  the  sky,  the  same  is  that  higher
hollow  of  the  regions  below  to  tlie  earth.

54.  But  that  is  very  wonderful  which  he  subjoins.  All  of

Job  held  his  soul /or  all. His /ears  of  Judgment. 117

mine  shall  descend;  for  whereas  the  soul  alone  shall  descend  Book
into  the  regions  of  hell^  how  is  it  that  the  holy  man  tells  that  i^lH:.
*  all  of  his*  shall  descend  there,  but  that  he  saw  himself  to  be
there  entire  where  he  perceives  the  great  weight  of  his
recompense?  seeing  that  this  which  he  leaves  of  himself
without  sense  on  the  earth,  until  he  returns  to  the  incorrup-
tion  of  the  resurrection,  he  does  not  feel  to  be  himself.  And
so  he  declares  that '  all  of  his  will  descend  into  the  lowest
hell,*  whither  he  sees  his  soul  only  shall  descend ;  in  that
the  whole  of  him  is  there,  where  he  is  capable  of  having  a
sense  of  that  which  he  has  got.  Or,  surely,  ^  all  of  his  did
descend  into  hell,*  in  that  the  recompensing  of  all  his  toils
was  as  yet  expected  to  be  received  only  in  the  rest  of  hell;
and  all  that  he  has  done  as  it  were  '  descends*  there,  in  that
there  he  finds  rest  in  his  recompensing  for  all  things.
Whence  also  the  expected  rest  is  itself  added,  when  the
words  are  thereupon  introduced,

Dost  thou  think  at  least  there  will  be  rest /or  me  there?
55.  By  which  same  words  he  both  makes  known  what  he  xlix.
desires,  and  yet  marks  that  he  is  still  doubtful  of  receiving
the  rest,  lest  he  whose  holy  works  so  many  scourges  followed,
should  by  the  hidden  judgment  of  the  heavenly  Judge,  after
temporal  scourges,  have  lasting  torments  likewise  following
him. Wherein  it  behoves  ourselves  to  consider  with  exceed-
ing fear  which  of  us  is  now  secure  of  the  everlasting  rest,  if
even  he  still  trembles  for  it,  proclaim  of  whose  virtue  the
very  Judge,  Who  smites,  does  Himself  sound. For  if  the lV%t, a,
righteous  scarcely  be  saved^  where  shall  the  sinner  and  the *
ungodly  appear? For  blessed  Job  knew that  he  should
attain  to  rest  after  the  strokes  of  affliction,  but  that  he  might
shake  our  hearts  with  fear,  he  himself  seemed  to  doubt  about
the  recompensing  of  Eternal  rest,  when  he  says,  Dost  thou
think?  plainly  that  we  might  think  well  with  what  exceeding
apprehension  we ought  ever  to dread the  Judgment  to
come,  if  even  he,  who  was  commended  by  the  Judge,  was
not  yet  in  his  own  words  secure  of  the  rewards  of  the  Judg-
ment.

BOOK  XIV.

Wherein  8.  Gregory  unfolds  the  historical,  allegorical,  and  moral  sense
of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Job.

i.  1.  In  a  former  part  of  this  work  we  have  handled  the  point,

^"''*  that  Almighty  God,  in  order  to  amend  the  heaits  of  those
under  the  law,  brought  forward  the  life  of  blessed  Job  for  a
testimony} who  knew  not  the  law  and yet  kept  it,  who
observed  the  precepts  of  life,  which  be  had  not  received  in
writing. This  man's  conduct  is  first  extolled  by  God's  bear-
ing witness  to  it,  and  is  afterwards  suflered  to  be  put  to
the  proof  by  the  devil's  plotting  against  it,  that  ho  might
prove  by  the  trials  of  tribulation,  how  much  he  had  attained
before  in  a  state  of  peace. This  man's  life  the  adversary  of
the  human  race,  evil  disposed  after  his  manner,  both  knew
to  be  commended  by  tlie  attestation  of  God,  and  yet  asked
for  to  prove  it. And  when  he  could  not  succeed  in  bringing
him  to  the  ground,  smitten  with  so  many  losses  in  his  sub-
stance, so  many  bereavements,  he  set  on  his  wife  against
him  in  the  goading  of  mispersuasion,  that  at  all  events  by
the  words  of  his  own  household  he  might  ruin  him,  whom  he
could  never  bring  down  by  so  many  torments  of  tidings.
But  whereas  what  by  woman's  aid  he  won  against  Adam  first
in  paradise,  he  could  not  make  good  against  this  scconcl
mau  sitting  on  a  dunghill,  he  betook  himself  to  other  appli-
ances of  tempting,  that  he  should  bring  in  his  friends  as  if
administering  consolation,  and  yet  stir  up  their  feelings  in
bitterness  of  upbraiding,  that  him  whoso  patience  scourges
had  failed  to  subdue,  at  least  bitter  words  in  the  midst  of
those scourges  might  succeed in overcoming. Hut the
adversary,  while  laying  his  plots  with  craft,  was  a  victim  to
the  deceit,  which  he  had  contrived  against  the  holy  man,  in

BiUad  ihink$  him$e^ ttcomed^  a$  Her^a^  do.  119

that  for  all  tlio  occasions  of  niin  thai  he  brought  upon  the  Book
holy  man,  he  supplied  him  with  as  many  occasions  of  victory.  -EiZl
For  against  torments  ho  maintained  patience,  against  words,
wisdom,  in  that  he  at  once  sustained  the  pains  of  stripes
with  resignation,  and  restrained  the  foolishness  of  ill  ad-
risers  with  wisdom.  But  whereas  in  those  very  sufferings
and  well-instructed  speeches  he  bears  a  figure  of  Holy
Church,  by  his  friends,  as  we  have  already  often  said,  uttering
some  things  right  and  some  foolish,  heretics  are  not  unjustly
represented,  who  in  respect  of  this,  that  they  are  friends  of
the  holy  man,  say  many  things  right  of  the  wicked,  but  in
respect  of  this,  that  they  bear  a  likeness  of  heretics,  very
often  transgress  in  the  excesses  of  the  lips,  and  they  smite
the  breast  of  the  holy  man  with  the  darts  of  their  words,  but
are  tired  out  by  their  very  own  smiting  against  his  indomi-
table spirit  So  then  it  is  our  business  to  distinguish  with
exact  discrimination,  both  what  there  is  in  their  words  that
they  think  aright  concerning  the  lost,  and  what  that  they
sound  that  is  foolish  as  directed  against  blessed  Job.

Ver.  1,  2.  Then  answered  Bildad  the  ShuMtej  and  saidy
Unto what  end  tailt  ye  cast  abroad  words  f understand
first ^  and  so  let  us  speak.

2.  All  heretics  tiiink  that  in  some  things  that  are  known ii.
to  her  Holy  Church  is  full  of  pride,  while  son^e  things  they  ^'•*'"<'-
fancy  that  she  does  not  even  understand. Whence  Bildad

the  Shuhite,  as  it  were,  asserts  that  blessed  Job  had  broken

out  into  pride,  when  he  declares '  that  he '  casts  abroad  words.' ' '  ^<^-

tar*  \m

But  he  gives  a  token  with  what  pride  he  was  himself  swoln,  m^
who  supposed  that  blessed  Job  spoke  things  that  he  did  not***^'
understand ;  and  whereas  all  heretics  complain  that  they  are
despised  by  Holy  Church  in  her  estimate  of  them,  it  is  fiUy
subjoined,

Ver.  3. WJierefore  are  we  counted  as  beasts^  and  reputed
as  vile  in  your  sight  ?

3.  It  is  natural  to  the  human  mind  to  suppose  that  the  iii.
tiling  that  it  does  is  done  to  itself.  Thus  they  believe  them-
selves to  bo  deApisod,  who  arc  used  to  despise  the  ways  of
the  good;  and  whereas  in  such  things  as  are  capable  of  being
understood  by  reason,  the  Church  proves  against  heretics
that  what  they  make  up  is  unreasonable,  they  imagine  them-

120 Ueretici  think  t/u  Churc/i  proudj  violent^  and  exdusivc.

Job  18,  selves  to  be  counted  as  '  beasts*  iu  her  vieif . On which
J — '— supposition  of  their  being  despised,  they  directly  break  out
'in  disdain,  and  are  urged  to  abuse  of  that  Church. Whence
it  is  added;

Ver.  4.  JVhy  dost  thou  ruin  thy  soul  in  thy  fury  f
iv.  4.  Hei-etics  esteem  whether  a  strong  feeling  for  the  rule
of  right,  or  the  spiritual  grace  of  holy  preaching,  not  as  good
weight  of  virtue,  but  as  the  madness  of  fury.  By  which  same
fury  they  believe  that  *'  the  souls  of  the  faithful  are  ruined,'
in  that  they  imagine  that  the  life  of  the  Church  is  destroyed
by  the  very  same  means  whereby  they  see  she  is  made  to
kindle  against  themselves.  It  goes  on;
Shall  the  earth  be  forsaken  for  thee  9
V.  5,  For  they  think  that  they  themselves  worship  God  every
where,  that  they  themselves  have  occupied  the  whole  world.
What  is  it  then  to  say.  Shall  the  earth  be  forsaken  for  thee'^
but  what  they  often  say  to  the  faithful,  viz.  '  that  if  this
thing  which  you  say  be  true,  all  tlio  earth  is  forsaken  by
God,  which  we  ourselves  already  occupy  from  the  multitude
of  us.'  Now  the  holy  Church  universal  proclaims  that  God
cannot  be  truly  worshipped  saving  within  herself,  asserting
that  all  they  that  are  without  her  shall  never  be  saved.  But
conversely  heretics,  who  are  confident  that  it  is  possible  for
them  to  be  saved  even  without  her  pale,  maintain  tliat  tho
Divine  aid  is  rendered  to  them  in  every  place.  Whence  they
say;  ShiM  tlie  earth  be  forsaken  for  tliee  f  i.  e.  ^  is  it  so,  that
whosoever  is  out  of  thee  cannot  be  saved  ?'  Whence  it  is
added  further;

And  shall  the  rocks  be  moved  out  of  their  place  ?
vi.  6.  Heretics  call  those  persons  *  rocks'  who  in  their  views
by  tlie  sublimity  of  their  thoughts  stand  out  in  the  human
race,  which  same  they  glory  that  they  have  fur  teachers.
But  when  Uoly  Church  addresses  herself  to  the  task  of  gather-
ing together  the  different  erring  preachers  within  the  bosom
of  the  right  faith,  what  else  is  this  but  that  she  *  removes  the
rocks  from  their  places,'  that  having  a  right  view  of  things,
they  may  lie  down  in  humility  within  her,  who  aforetime
were  standing  stiff  in  their  own  wrong  notions  ?  But  heretics
altogether  make  against  the  doing  of  this,  and  withstand  the
*  rocks  being  moved  out  of  their  i^laces'  on  account  of  her

Afflieiiim$  of  good  men  misiaken  for  Judgments. 121

voice,  because  they  are  averse  thai  Uiej,  who  among  diem-  Book
selves,  being  lifted  up  in  their  thoughts,  were  embued  with  ^^^*
false  doctrine,  by  coming  to  her  should  think  what  is  trtie  in
a  humble  spirit.

7.  Now  it  very  often  happens  that  heretics,  when  they  see
any  persons  within  the  bosom  of  Holy  Church  travailing
whether  with  want  or  calamities,  lift  themselves  up  directly
in  the  presumption  of  righteousness,  and  whatsoever  they
see  to  have  happened  of  an  adverse  kind  to  the  faithful,  they
suppose  it  is  done  for  their  iniquities,  not  knowing  doubtless
that  the  complexion  of  the  present  life  does  not  in  the  least  de-
gree prove  the  worth  of  men's  conduct.  For  very  often  both
good  things  befal  the  bad,  and  bad  ones  befal  the  good,  on  thd
very  principle  that  real  goods  are  reserved  for  the  good,  and
real  ills  for  the  bad,  in  the  season  of  the  eternal  recompensing.
Thus  Bildad  bearing  a  figure  of  heretics,  who  lift  themselves
up  on  the  grounds  of  this  life's  good  fortune,  swells  against
the  strokes  of  blessed  Job,  as  if  with  their  voice  in  opposition
to  the  reproach  of  the  righteous,  and  expressly  he  is  arguing
against  the  ungodly  indeed,  but  how  wickedly  he  speaks
in  such  terms  against  a  good  man,  he  is  not  aware.  Thus
he  added,  saying,

Ver.  5.  Shall  not  the  light  qf  the  wicked  he  put  out,  and
the /lame  of  his  fire  cease  to  shine  f

8.  If  he  says  this  in  describing  the  present  life,  he  is  mis- vii.
taken ;  in  that  very  oft^en  both  the  light  of  prosperity  is  seen

in  the  ungodly,  and  the  darkness  of  ignominy  and  poverty
envelopes  the  godly.  But  if  his  discourse  points  to  this,  viz.
to  shew  what  the  ungodly  meet  with  in  their  end,  it  is  said
with  truth.  Shall  not  the  light  of  the  uricked  be  put  out^  and
the  flame  of  his  fire  cease  to  shine  f  Which  if  it  might  have
been  rightly  spoken  in  regard  to  an  ungodly  man,  ought  never
to  have  been  delivered  against  a  holy  man  set  fast  in  the
midst  of  scourges.  But  let  us,  considering  well  the  powers
of  his  arm  in  delivering  sentences,  reflect  how  strongly  he
hurls  the  darts,  and  let  us  cease  to  look  at  him  whom,  while
so  hurling  them,  he  aims  to  hit,  knowing  surely  that  he
strikes  a  stone  with  foiled  blows.  So  let  him  say;  Shall
not  the  light  of  I  he  wicked  be  put  out  f  For  even  the  un-
godly have  their  *  light,'  i.  e.  the  good  fortune  of  the  present

122  Light  of  the  wicked  to  be  qfienclied  at  last.

Job  18,  life. Bui  *  the  light  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out/  id  thai

-j^ this  present  life's  good  fortune  is  speedily  terminated  along

with  life  itself. Wlience  it  is  fitly  added;  and  the  flame  of
his  fire  shall  not  shine.

9.  For  every  ungodly  man  has  a  '  flame  of  his  own  Arc,"
which  he  kindles  in  his  heart  from  the  heat  of  temporal
desires,  whilst  he  bums  now  with  these  now  with  those  lusts,
and  fans  his  thoughts  into  a  bigger  flame  by  the  diverse
flatteries  of  the  world. But  if  a  fire  has  no  flame,  it  does  not
shine  by  shedding  any  light. And  so  the  flame  of  the  fire
is  his  outward  beauty  or  power,  which  comes  firom  his  burn-
ing within. For  what  he  anxiously  desires  to  get,  he  very
often  winS|  to  the  heaping  up  of  his  own  niin ;  and  whether
in  the  power  of  the  loftiest  pitch,  or  in  the  wealth  of  multi-
plied increase,  he  as  it  were  shines  in  external  glory.  But  *  the
flame  of  his  fire  shall  not  shine,*  in  that,  in  the  day  of  his
departure  hence,  all  the  fair  shew  without  is  removed,  and
he  is  consumed  by  his  own  burning  within  alone. And  *  so
the  flame*  is  removed  from  the  '  fire,*  when  his  exterior  glory
is  separated  firom  his  interior  burning. Even  the  righteous
too  have  a  flame  of  their  fire,  but  one  doubtless  to  shine
bright,  in  this  respect,  that  their  desires  give  light  in  good
works. But  the  light  of  the  wicked  does  not  shine  in  the
least,  in  that  hereby,  viz.  that  they  aim  at  what  is  evil,  they
are  forced  to  darkness. And  hence  it  follows ;
Ver.  6.  The  light  shall  he  dark  in  his  iubarnavUf.
viii. 10.  If  wo  very  freciuently  take  darkness  for  sorrow,  wc
ought  without  unfairness  to  take  light  for  joy. And  so  '  the
light  is  dark  in  his  tabernacle,'  in  that  in  his  conscience,
which  he  inhabits  in  wickedness,  the  joy  which  he  had  from
things  temporal  is  brought  to  an  end. Whence  too  it  is
fitly  added;

And  the  candle  that  is  over  him  shall  be  put  out.
For  to  spe^ik  in  language  grounded  on  the  usage  of  many,
iluoeraaa  *  candle  *'  is  a  light  in  an  earthen  vessel,  but  a  light  in  an
earthen  vessel,  is  delight  in  the  flesh.  And  so  ^  the  candle
that  is  over  him  is  put  out,'  in  that  when  the  recom))ensing
of  his  wickednesses  comes  upon  the  ungodly  man,  carnal
delight  is  brought  to  nought  in  his  heart.  Now  it  is  well
that  it  is  not  said  of  this  candle, '  which  is  by  him,'  but

The  Wicked  work  their  awn  conjkrion,  123

'  which  18  over  him/  in  that  earthly  enjoymento  possess  the  Book
mind  of  the  bad,  and  so  swallow  it  up  in  delight,  that  they ~^.
are  '  over'  it,  and  not  *  by'  it. But  the  righteous  even  when
they  have  the  good  fortune  of  the  present  life,  are  taught  to
force  it  to  bow  beneath  them,  that  this,  viz.  that  they  are
made  glad  in  themselves  with  good  things,  they  may  get
above  by  the  counsel  of  a  steadied  mind,  and  surmount  by
the  control  of  virtue. And  so  *  the  candle'  of  the  wicked
man,  *  which  is  over  him,  is  put  out,'  in  that  his  joy  is
quickly  brought  to  an  end,  which  possessed  him  wholly  in
this  life,  and  the  man,  who  now  wickedly  lets  himself  out  at
large  in  pleasures,  punishment  hereafter  closely  encompasses
round  about  in  woe. Whence  it  is  yet  further  added ;
Ver.  7.  The  steps  qf  his  strength  shall  be  straitened,

11.  For  now  as  it  were  he  puts  forth  *  the  steps  of  his ix.
strength,*  an  often  as  ho  oxccutos  the  violent  acts  of  his
power. Ihit '  the  steps  of  his  strength  shall  be  straitened,'

in  that  the  resources  of  his  wickedness,  which  he  now  dis-
plays in  his  own  gratification^  punishment  hereafter  binds
fast. It  goes  on ;

And  hin  own  counsel  shall  cast  him  down.

12.  Every  bad  man  makes  it  his  counsel  now  to  aim  at x.
present  things,  to  abandon  the  things  of  eternity,  to  do  what

is  unjust,  to  sneer  at  what  is  just;  but  when  the  Judge  of  the
just  and  unjust  shall  come,  every  ungodly  person  is  '  cast
down  by  his  counsel,'  in  that  for  this  that  he  chose  to  go
after  here  with  bad  intent,  he  is  drowned  in  the  darkness  of
eternal  woe.  For  that  man  whom  temporal  glory  uplifts
here,  punishment  without  end  there  sinks  down.  He  who
here  revels  in  sclf-gratificatiou,  is  there  tortured  with  ever-
lasting vengeance.  And  it  often  happens  that  the  very
prosperity  of  this  life,  which  is  so  eagerly  hankered  after  by
the  ungodly,  so  clogs  their  steps,  that  even  when  they  have
the  mind  to  relum  to  good  ivorks,  they  are  scarcely  able :  in
that  they  have  not  the  power  to  do  what  is  right,  while  they
fear  to  displease  the  lovers  of  this  world.  Whence  it  is
brought  to  pass  that  through  that  glory  which  the  ungodly
man  derives  from  sin,  his  sins  are  yet  further  doubled  and
redoubled. Which  Bildad  rightly  sets  forth,  when  he  adds ;

124 Sin  entangles  in  sin. Sutan^s  thirst  for  maid  ruin.

Job  18, Ver.  8.  For  he  hath  ptU  his  awn  foot  into  the  net,  and  he
r-5i?;.  walketh  in  the^  meshes  qfiL

*macuu$

xi^  IS.  He>  who  *  puts  his  feet  into  a  net/  cannot  get  them
MoAAL.  out>  when  he  has  a  mind ;  so  he  that  lets  himself  down  into
habits  of  sin>  cannot  rise  up  the  moment  he  wishes  it ;  and
he  ^  that  walketh  in  the  meshes  of  a  net/  entangles  his  steps
in  walking,  and  when  he  tries  to  extricate  himself  to  walk,
he  is  tied  and  bound  that  he  cannot.  *  For  it  very  often
happens  that  a  man,  beguiled  by  the  dclightfulness  of  this
world,  reaches  after  the  gloriousness  of  the  honour  thereof,
that  he  attains  to  the  effecting  of  his  desires,  and  rejoices  to
have  attained  the  object  which  he  sought  after;  but  seeing
that  the  good  things  of  this  world,  when  not  possessed,  are
objects  of  love,  and  very  often,  when  possessed,  grow  worth-
less, he  leaiiis  by  the  act  of  obtaining  how  worthless  that  is
which  he  sought  after.  Whence  being  brought  back  to  him-
self, he  looks  out  how  without  sin  to  get  quit  of  that  which
he  sees  himself  to  have  gotten  with  sin ;  but  the  very  same
dignity  which  entangled  him,  holds  him  fast,  and  he  cannot
without  further  sins  flee  from  thence,  whereunto  he  came  not
without  sin.  And  so  he  has  '  put  his  feet  into  the  net,  and
walketh  in  the  meshes  thereof,'  in  that  when  he  strives  to  get
quit,  he  then  sees  in  a  true  light  with  what  hard  knots  he  is
held  bound.  For  we  do  not  even  know  of  our  binding  in  a
true  sense,  save  when  in  striving  to  get  free,  we  as  it  were  try
to  lift  our  feet.  And  hence  ho  makes  known  this  same
binding,  by  adding,

Ver.  9.  The  gin  shall  take  him  by  the  heel ;
in  that  the  end  shall  be  made  fast  in  sin. And  because
the  enemy  of  mankind,  when  he  binds  up  in  sin  the  life  of
each  individual^  eagerly  pants  after  his  death,  it  is  rightly
added ;

And  thirst  shall  bum/uriously  against  him.
^ii-  14.  For  our  old  enemy,  when  he  ensnares  the  life  in  sin,
thirsts  that  he  may  drink  the  death  of  the  sinner.  Which
however  may  also  be  understood  in  another  sense.  For  the
evil  mind  when  it  sees  that  it  has  been  brought  into  sin,
seeks  with  a  certain  superficialness  of  tliought  to  escape  out
of  the  snares  of  sin ;  but  fearing  either  the  threats  or  re-

Greediness  like  the  dropsy. Hidden  snares.  125

preaches  of  men,  it  chooses  rather  to  die  for  ever,  than  Book
to  undergo  a  little  of  adversity  for  a  season,  whence  it— — -
abandons  itself  wholly  to  evil  ways,  in  which  it  perceives
itself  to  be  already  once  bound.  And  so  he  whose  life  is
bound  fast  in  sin  even  to  the  end,  has  his  '  heel  held  by  the
gin.*  But  forasmuch  as  in  the  same  degree  that  he  minds
that  he  is  tied  and  bound  with  evil  habits,  he  is  in  despair  of
his  return,  by  that  very  despairing  he  henceforth  kindles
more  fiercely  to  tlic  lusts  of  this  world,  the  heat  of  desire
arises  within  him,  and  the  mind  having  been  ensnared  by
previous  sins,  is  inflamed  to  even  worse  transgressions.  And
hence  it  is  added ;  And  thirst  shall  burn  furiously  against
him.  For  in  his  mind  there  is  a '  thirst  that  bums  out  against
him,'  in  that  in  proportion  as  he  is  used  to  do  wicked  things,
he  is  the  more  vehemently  on  fire  to  drink  down  evil.  Since
for  tlie  ungodly  man  to '  thirst*  is  to  lust  afler  the  good  things
of  this  world.  And  hence  our  Redeemer  cures  the  man  with
the  dropsy  before  the  Pharisee's  house,  and  when  he  was
arguing  against  avarice,  it  is  written.  And  the  Pharisees  also  Lnkeis,
who  were  covetous  heard  all  things;  and  they  derided  Him.
What  does  it  mean  then  that  the  man  with  the  dropsy  is
cured  before  the  house  of  the  Pharisee,  but  that  by  the
sickness  of  one  man's  body  the  sickness  of  heart  in  another
is  represented  ?  For  one  sick  of  a  dropsy,  the  more  he  drinks,
thirsts  the  more,  and  every  covetous  person  redoubles  his
thirst  by  drinking,  in  that  when  he  has  got  the  things  he
desires,  he  pants  the  more  in  desiring  others.  For  he
that  by  getting  is  made  to  long  for  more,  has  his  thirst  .
increased  by  drinking. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  10.  His  snare  is  buried  in  the  earthy  and  his  trap
upon  the  xcay.

15.  His  '  snare  is  buried  in  the  earth,'  when  sin  is  hidden xiii.
under  earthly  interests. For  our  enemy  in  executing  his
plots  shews  to  the  human  mind  something  to  long  afler  in
eartiily  gain,  and  hides  the  snare  of  sin,  that  it  may  bind  his
soul  tight,  so  that  he  should  see  indeed  what  he  might  set
his  heart  on,  and  yet  never  see  in  what  a  snare  of  sin  he  is
putting  his  foot Now  a  trap*  has  its  name  from  entrapping,  i  aeei-
And  *  a  trap  is'  then  *  placed'  by  our  old  enemy  *  upon  the  P**'*
way,'  when  in  the  course  of  this  world's  practice,  which  the

12G Satan  aeti  traps  in  the  patii  0/  each  man's  temper.
Job  18,  mind  is  bent  to  followy  the  snare  of  sin  is  prepared,  which


11.


same  would  not  so  easily  entrap,  if  it  were  possible  to  be  seen.


Moral.  .  1  ., 1  . !• 1 j • •

For  a  trap  is  so  sct>  that,  while  the  meat  is  displayca,  it  is
not  itself  seen  by  the  passers  by.  For  like  to  meat  in  a  trap
is  gain  with  sin,  and  the  prosperity  of  this  world  with  wicked-
ness; and  so  when  gain  is  sought  after  by  one  with  a  covet*
ous  view,  it  is  as  if  the  trap  which  is  not  seen  laid  hold  of
the  foot  of  tlie  mind.  Thus  there  are  often  set  before  the
mind  along  with  sin,  honours,  riches,  health,  and  temporal
hfe,  which,  while  the  weak  mind  sees  like  food,  and  does
not  see  the  trap,  by  the  meat,  which  on  seeing  it  longs  after,
it  is  caught  fast  in  the  sin,  which  is  not  seen.  For  there  arc
kinds  of  tempers  which  border  upon  certain  bad  qualities.
Thus  harsh  teiiipei*s  are  usually  found  to  be  united  eitlier  to
cruelty  or  to  pride ;  but  tempers  that  are  soft,  and  joyous
beyond  what  is  becoming,  are  sometimes  allied  to  lust  and
dissoluteness.  Therefore  the  enemy  of  mankind  surveys  the
tempers  of  each  individual,  to  sec  what  bad  quality  they  are
allied  to,  and  he  sets  those  objects  before  the  face,  which  he
sees  the  mind  is  most  readily  inclined  to,  so  that  to  the  soft
and  joyous  tempers  he  often  proposes  dissoluteness,  and
sometimes  vainglory,  but  to  harsh  dispositions  he  proposes
pride  or  cruelty,  and  so  there  he  sets  a  trap,  where  he  sees
the  path  of  the  mind  to  be,  in  that  he  there  introduces  peril
by  deception,  where  he  has  found  tliat  there  is  the  *  way'  of  a
kindred  turn  of  thought.  And,  whereas  all  that  the  bad  man
does,  he  fears  to  undergo  too,  and  reckons  that  to  be  doing
by  all  others  toward  himself,  which  he  himself  prepares  for
all  others,  whom  he  is  able,  it  rightly  follows ;

Ver.  1 1. Terrors  shall  make  him  qfraid  on  every  side.
xiv. )G.  For  he  imagines  all  men  to  be  such  toward  himself,
as  ho  himself  strives  to  be  towards  all. Ami  what  e/Ibct
these  sauie  terrors  have  in  his  conduct,  is  brought  in,  when
it  is  said ;

And  shall  entangle  his  feet.

For  if  *  the  feet  be  entangled,'  they  cannot  have  free  steps,
and  are  not  able  to  accomplish  any  journey ;  in  that  their  own
entanglements  hold  them  fast.  Therefore  bad  desires  force
into  vilest  practice,  and  vilest  practice  holds  fast  in  terror ;
which  same  terror  entangles  the  feet,  that  they  should  have  no

Pati  sin  IwUh  man  ensnared.  Hit '  strength  hxcngerhitten,^ 127

power  to  step  out  into  right  practice. And  it  often  happens  Book
that  a  person  for  this  reason  fears  to  be  good,  that  he  may  not 1-


himself  suffer  that  at  the  hands  of  the  wicked,  which  he  remem-
bers himself  to  have  done  to  the  good;  and  whereas  he  dreads
to  undergo  that  thing  which  he  has  himself  done,  on  every  side
affrighted,  on  every  side  full  of  misgiving,  he  as  it  were  has
his  feet  entangled,  who  is  ensnared  by  fear;  he  is  able  to  do
nothing  freely ;  in  that  ho  has  in  a  manner  lost  his  going  in
good  practice  by  the  same  act,  whereby  he  stepped  out  of  the
line  into  the  evil  which  he  set  his  heart  on. It  goes  on ;

Vcr.  12.  Let  his  strength  be  hungerhiiteny  and  starvation
invade  his  ribs.

17.  After  the  manner  of  Holy  Scripture,  he  has  the  ap- xv.
pearance  of  wishing  that  which  he  foresees  will  be,  not  surely

in  the  S])irit  of  one  uttering  curses,  but  of  one  pronouncing
prophecies.  Thus  every  man,  in  that  he  consists  of  soul  and
flesh,  is  as  it  were  made  up  of  strength  and  weakness.  For
by  virtue  of  that  part,  by  which  he  was  created  a  reasoning
spirit,  he  is  not  improperly  called  *  strong,'  but  in  respect  of
that,  by  which  he  is  of  a  fleshly  substance,  he  is  weak.  And
so  ^  the  strength'  of  roan  is  the  reasoning  soul,  which  is  able
to  resist  by  reason  the  tendencies  to  evil  that  assail  it.  And
hence  it  is  said  again  by  blessed  Job,  Thou  hast  strengthened  i^  M,
him  for  a  tthitey  that  he  might  pass  through  for  evermore.
Since  from  a  reasoning  soul  man  derives  it,  that  he  should
live  for  evermore.  And  so  this  wicked  man's  *  strength  is
hungerbilten,'  in  that  his  soul  is  not  fed  by  any  refreshment
of  the  interior  food.  Of  which  same  hunger  Ood  saith  by
the  Prophet;  /  tcill  send  a  famine  in  the  hmd^  not  a  famine  Amop  s,
of  bread  nor  a  thirst  for  water ^  but  of  hearing  tlie  word  of
the  Lord.

18.  And  it  is  well  added,  And  starvation  invade  his  ribs.
For  the  ribs  lace  in  the  bowels,  that  lying  out  of  sight  within
they  should  be  fortified  by  their  solidity. And  so  the  *  ribs'  of
every  one  are  the  senses '  of  the  mind,  which  fence  the  hidden  •  vide
thoughts. Tlierefore  *  starvation  invades  the  ribs,'  when  allSs'niS.
spiritual  refreshment  being  removed,  the  senses  of  the  mind

fail,  and  cannot  either  rule  or  guard  their  thoughts.  ^  Starv-
ation invades  the  ribs'  of  the  wicked  man,  in  that  the  interior
hunger  debilitates  the  senses  of  the  mind,  thai  they  may  not

128 Pfide^  *  Uiejirsibom  of  deatii^  consumes  t/ie  WicheiU
Job  18,  rule  their  thoughts  at  all. For  when  the  senses  of  the  mind


IS


.  are  du11ed>  the  thoughts  issue  forth  to  things  without,  and,


'as  it  were,  the  ribs  being  weak,  the  bowels  which  might  have
lain  in  secret  in  a  sound  state,  are  poured  forth  without.
Hence  it  comes  that  when  the  thoughts  are  spread  abroad
without,  the  mind  being  deceived  goes  after  the  image  of  ex-
terior glory,  and  is  pleased  with  nothing  save  what  it  beholds
beautiful  without;  against  whom  the  words  yet  further  sub-
joined are  filly  directed ;

Ver.  13.  Let  it  devour  the  beauty  of  his  skin;  and  let  the

firstborn  death  consume  his  arms.

xvi. 19.  ^  The  beauty  of  his  skin*  is  temporal  glory,  which

whereas  it  is  coveted  as  an  object  without  us,  is  retained  as

a  beauty  on  the  skin. But  by  the  title  of*  arms*  works  are

not  unfitly  set  forth,  in  that  the  work  of  the  body  is  done  by

the  arms. And  what  is  death  but  sin,  which  kills  the  soul

Bev.90,  to  the  interior  life  ? Whence  it  is  written ;  Blessed  and  holy

is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection^  in  that  he

shall  hereafter  rise  again  joyfully  in  the  flesh,  who  whilst  set

in  this  life  has  risen  again  from  the  death  of  his  soul. If

then  sin  b  death,  *  the  firstborn  death*  may  not  unsuitably

Ecoliu.  be  taken  for  pride;  in  that  it  is  written.  Pride  is  the  beyin-

1^1 13*  iiing  of  all  sin. And  so  *  the  beauty  of  his  skin  and  his

arms  the  firstborn  death  devoureth,*  in  that  the  glory  or  the

practice  of  the  bad  man  is  overthrown  by  pride. For  he

might  have  been  glorious  even  in  this  life  without  sin,  if  he

had  not  been  proud. He  might  in  the  judgment  of  His

Creator  have  been  commended  for  some  works,  if  before  His

eyes  pride  had  not  overturned  those  very  works. Thus  we

often  see  rich  people,  who  might  have  had  wealth  and  glory

without  guilt,  if  they  would  have  had  them  with  humility.

But  they  are  uplifted  by  possessions,  they  are  flushed  with

honours,  they  disdain  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  place  their

life's  whole  hope  and  trust  iu  the  mere  abundance  of  good

Lakei3,Aiii(^  alone. Hence  a  certain  rich  man  said,  Soul^  thou

^^* hast  much  good  laid  up  for  many  years;  take  thine  ease,

eati  drintf  and  be  merry. Which  thoughts  of  their  heaits

when  the  Judge  above  beholds,  He  plucks  them  away  for

this  very  confidence  of  theirs  by  itself. Hence  in  this  place

too  it  is  fitly  added;

Safan  shall  trample  on  those  in  whom  sin  reigns. 129

Vcr.  14.  Let  his  cof\/idence  he  rooted  out  of  his  taber-  Book
nacle,  and  let  death  as  a  king  trample  on  him.


20.  In  this  place  by  the  title  of  ^  death*  we  hare  denoted  xvii.
the  enemy  of  the  human  race  himself,  who  brought  in  death,
who  18  set  forth  by  a  particular  minister  of  his,  of  whom  it

is  said  to  John,  And  his  name  was  Death,  And  so  thisR«v-0>
*  death,'  in  the  day  of  departure  hence,  '  tramples  upon  the
wicked  man  as  a  king,*  in  that  him,  whom  he  before  deceived
by  soft  persuasions,  at  the  last  he  carries  off  to  punishment
in  bonds  of  violence,  and  forces  him  down  the  more  cruelly,
in  proportion  as  he  ties  him  the  stronger  in  bad  deeds.
And  here  too  while  he  possesses  the  heart  of  the  lost  sinner,
he  *  tramples*  upon  it,  in  that  as  often  as  he  pressed  it  with
feelings  of  delight,  he  as  it  were  set  upon  it  the  feet  of  his
tyrannical  dominion.

21.  But  if  by  the  title  of  ^  death,*  we  are  to  understand
not  the  devil  explicitly,  but  sin,  in  consequence  of  which  the
lost  meet  with  the  doom  to  be  dragged  to  death,  then  indeed
such  '  death  tramples  on  the  mind  like  a  king,*  when  it  pos-
sesses the  same  making  no  resistance.  For  temptation  to
sin  cannot  be  away  from  man  whilst  set  in  this  life.  But  it
is  one  thing  to  resist  sin  tempting  us,  and  another  to  be
enthralled  by  it  tyrannizing  over  us.  And  so  the  wicked
man,  because  he  is  not  taught  to  resist  the  persuasions  of  sin,
and  is  not  afraid  to  be  subdued  to  its  dominion,  has  it  rightly
said  of  him,  Death  as  a  king  shall  trample  on  him.  For  it
was  the  reign  of  this  death  that  Paul  was  keeping  off  from

the  hearts  of  his  disciples,  when  he  said,  Let  not  sin  there-  Rom.  6,
fore  reign  in  your  mortal  body.  Since  he  does  not  say,
^  let  it  not  be,*  but,  let  it  not  reign^  in  that  it  cannot  help
but  be,  but  reign  it  may  not,  in  the  hearts  of  the  good.
And  so  whereas,  when  a  sin  strikes  the  heart  of  the  bad  man,
it  does  not  find  it  resist,  but  bows  it  under  its  dominion,  let
it  rightly  be  said.  Let  his  confidence  be  rooted  out  qf  his
tabernacle^  and  let  death  as  a  king  trample  on  him.  And
so  ^  his  confidence  is  rooted  out  of  the  earth,*  when  the
bad  man,  who  in  this  life  had  provided  for  himself  many
goods  after  his  mind,  is  brought  to  nought  by  death  in  an
instant  And  *  death  as  a  king  tramples  on  him,'  in  that
he  is  either  pressed  upon  here  by  evil  habits,  or  at  the  Hxrw

VOL.  If.  K

130  Tabernacle  qfa  wicked  soul  haunted  by  devilish  thoughts.

Job  18,  of  his  death,  hereby,  viz.  thai  he  is  carried  off  to  punish-
inent,  he  is  brought  under  to  the  |)ower  of  the  devil.  Which
is  tlius  done  in  the  winds  of  the  wicked  on  this  account;
because,  even  when  the  opportunity  of  committing  sin  is
lacking,  the  suggestions  of  the  desire  are  not  in  the  least
lacking  to  their  minds.  And  whereas  they  do  always  follow
the  devil  in  practice,  yet  do  they  doubly  bind  themselves
fast  to  him  in  thought.  And  so  there  is  first  sin  in  thought,
and  afterwards  in  act Whence  it  is  said  to  the  daughter  of

It. 47|i.  Babylon,  Come  down  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  Virgin  daughter
of  Babylon,  sit  on  the  earth.  For  whereas  dust  is  always
earth,  earth  is  not  always  dust.  What  then  are  we  to  under-
stand by  dust  but  thoughts,  which,  while  they  perseveringly
and  silently  fly  up  in  the  mind,  blind  its  eyes  ?  And  what  is
denoted  by  ^  the  earth,'  but  an  earthly  way  of  acting?  And
whereas  the  mind  of  the  lost  sinner  is  first  cast  down  to
imagine  wicked  things,  and  afterwards  to  do  them,  to  the
daughter  of  Babylon,  who  came  down  from  the  judgment  of
interior  uprightness,  it  is  rightly  said  in  a  wounding  sentence,
that  first  she  should  '  sit  in  the  dust,'  and  afterwards  '  in  the
earth,'  in  that  except  she  had  lowered  herself  in  thought,  she
would  never  have  settled  fast  in  bad  practice.  It  goes  on ;
Let  his  fellows  dwell  in  his  tabernacle,  because  he  is  not.

xviii.  ^^*  i*  &•  In  his  mind  apostate  angels  shall  have  their
haunt  by  vilest  thoughls,  they  being  ^  his  fellows,'  who
for  this  reason  no  longer  '  is,'  because  he  has  departed
from  the  Supreme  Essence,  and  for  this  is,  by  a  daily
augmented  declension,  as  it  were  tending  *  not  to  be,'  in  that
he  has  once  fallen  from  Him  Who  truly  is ;  who  moreover
is  rightly  said  '  not  to  be,'  in  that  he  has  lost  well-being,
though  he  has  not  lost  natural  being.  Still,  yet  further  set-
ting forth  these  thoughts  of  the  bad  man  witli  more  minute-
ness, he  subjoins,  saying.

Let  brimstone  be  scattered  upon  his  habitation.
xix.  28.  What  is  *  brimstone'  but  the  fuel  of  fire,  which,  how-
ever, so  cherishes  the  fire,  that  it  sends  out  the  very  foulest .
stench.  What  then  do  we  understand  by  ^  brimstone,'  but
carnal  sin,  which,  while  it  fills  the  mind  with  wicked  thoughts
like  a  kind  of  ill  savours,  is  kindling  everlasting  fires  for  it;
and  whilst  it  spreads  the  cloud  of  its  stench  in  tlie  lost  soul.

Brimstone  typifies  ut9cteannes$. Thought  the  root  of  works.  181

it  18  as  it  were  providing  against  it  foel  for  the  flames  to  Book
come  after.  For  that  the  ill  savour  of  the  flesh  is  understood— —-
bj  brimstone,  the  mere  historv  of  Holy  Writ  by  itself  bears
record,  which  relates  that  the  Lord  *  rained  down  fire  andO«ihl9,
brimstone  upon  Sodom.'  Who,  when  He  had  determined  to
panish  her  carnal  wickednesses,  by  the  very  character  of  the
punishment  marked  out  the  stain  of  her  guilt:  since  ^  brimstone*
hath  stench,  and  fire  burning ;  and  so,  forasmuch  as  they  had
been  kindled  to  bad  desires  in  the  ill  savour  of  the  flesh,  it
was  meet  that  they  should  perish  by  fire  and  brimstone  com-
bined ;  that  by  their  just  punishment  they  might  be  taught
what  they  had  done  in  unjust  desire.  And  so  this  '  sulphur
is  scattered  upon  the  habitation'  of  the  wicked  man,  as  often
ns  the  corrupt  indulgence  of  the  flesh  exercises  dominion
within  him;  and  whereas  bad  thoughts  unceasingly  occupy
him,  and  forbid  his  bringing  forth  the  fruit  of  good  practice,
it  is  rightly  added ;

Ver.  10.  Let  his  roots  he  dried  up  beneaih^  and  above  let
his  crop  be  spoiled.

24.  For  what  do  we  understand  by  the  title  of  '  roots,*  xx.
which  are  set  out  of  sight,  and  bring  forth  a  shoot  into  open
view,  but  the  thoughts,  which,  while  they  are  not  seen  in  the
heart,  produce  visible  works  ?  And  hence  by  the  title  of  a
*  crop'  there  is  denoted  the  same  visible  practice,  which  is
thus  produced  fi'om  a  hidden  root*  And  whereas  every  bad
man  first  dries  up  in  the  imaginings  of  temptation  and  after-
wards dies  ofi*  from  good  deeds,  it  is  rightly  said  by  Bildad,
Let  his  roots  be  dried  up  beneath^  and  above  let  his  crop  he
spoiled^  in  that,  whereas  the  wicked  man  sets  his  thoughts  in
things  below,  and  neglects  to  seek  the  delights  of  everlasting
greenness,  what  is  this  but  that  he  lets  his  *  roots  be  dried
beneath?'  Whose  ^  crop  too  is  spoiled  above,'  in  that  all  his
practice  is  counted  as  nothing  in  the  view  of  the  judgment
above,  even  if  it  seem  good  in  the  eyes  of  man.  Thus  the
'  roots'  are  at  the  bottom,  and  the  '  crop'  above,  in  that  we
first  send  out  good  thoughts  here,  that  we  may  one  day  deserve
to  receive  the  fruit  of  our  good  works  in  eternal  recompensing;
but  every  wicked  person  when  he  abandons  good  thoughts,
and  pours  himself  forth  upon  the  things  that  are  without,
has  *  his  roois  dried  up  below:'  but  *  above his  crop  is

k2

182 Tlie  vain  ambilion  of  Antichrist /or  a  lasting  name.

Job  18,  spoiled/  in  that  he^  who  persists  barren  here>  after  this  life  is

— — '-  bidden  to  no  rewards. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  17.  Lei  his  remembrance  perish  from  the  earth,  and
let  not  his  name  be  repeated  in  the  streets.
xxi.  25.  It  is  deserving  of  our  notice,  that  Bildad  the  Shuhite
so  expresses  himself  of  each  one  of  the  wicked>  that  his  words
are  secretly  directed  against  the  head  of  all  the  wicked ;  for
the  head  of  the  wicked  is  the  devil.  And  he  in  his  own
person  having  in  the  last  times  entered  into  that  vessel  of
perdition,  shall  be  called  ^  Antichrist/  who  will  endeavour  to
spread  his  name  far  and  wide,  which  same  every  individual
now  likens  himself  to,  when,  by  the  memorial  of  an  earthly
name,  he  strives  to  extend  the  gloriousness  of  his  praise,  and
exults  in  transitory  reputation.  Therefore  let  these  words
be  so  understood  of  each  one  of  the  wicked,  that  they  be
referred  in  a  particular  manner  to  the  head  of  tho  wicked
himself.  Therefore  let  him  say,  Let  his  remembrance  perish
from  the  earth,  and  let  not  his  name  be  repeated  in  the

<  ^Uteti' streets. For*  streets  are  called  by  a  Greek  term  from  width,
|[|]^/ and  so  Antichrist  aims  to  settle  the  remembrance  of  himself

<  broad.'  upon  earth,  when  he  longs,  if  it  were  possible,  to  remain  for

ever  in  temporal  glory.  He  delights  to  have  *  his  name
celebrated  in  the  street,'  whilst  he  spreads  the  working  of  his
wickedness  far  and  wide.  But  whereas  this  wickedness  of  his
is  not  permitted  to  be  reared  to  a  height  for  a  long  time,  let
it  be  said,  Let  his  remembrance  perish  from  the  earth,  and
let  not  his  name  be  repeated  in  the  street ;  i.  e.  that  he
should  both  quickly  part  with  the  fame  of  his  earthly  power,
and  lose  all  the  pleasures  of  his  name,  which  he  had  spread
far  and  wide  in  the  shortlived  prosperity  of  time.  It  goes  on;

Ver.  18.  He  shall  drive  him  from  light  into  darkness.
a^xiii. 26.  lie  is  led  ^  from  light  to  darkness,'  when  for  honour  in
the  present  life,  he  is  condemned  to  eternal  punishments.
And  hence  it  is  more  plainly  added.

And  translate  him  out  of  the  world.

For  be  is  *  translated  out  of  the  world,*  when  upon  the
Judge  above  appearing,  he  is  taken  away  from  this  world,
in  which  he  wickedly  glories ;  and  for  this,  that  when  the  end
of  the  world  breaks  in  upon  him,  he  is  condemned  with  all
his  followers,  it  is  rightly  subjoined;

His  seed  cut  off. Enoch  and  Elias  ia  be  slain  bjf  him.  IdcS

Ver.  0.  There  shall  neither  be  seed  qfhim^  nor  offspring  Bowc
tfi  his  people^  nor  any  remnant  in  his  parts,  • '"'

For  it  18  written,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  consume  Atm^Thew.
with  the  Spirit  qf  His  mouthy  and  shall  destroy  him  with  the  '
brightness  qf  His  coming.  And  so,  then,  whereas  his  wick-
edness is  ended  together  with  the  settled  constitution  of  the
world,  there  shall  be  ^  no  offspring  of  him  leil  in  his.  people,,'
in  that  both  he  himself  and  his  people  along  with  him  are
equally  forced  to  punishment;  and  all  the  wicked,  who  by
his  evil  advising  were  bom  in  bad  courses,  by  the  brightness
of  the  Lord's  coming  are  struck  with  eternal  destruetion
together  with  that  head  of  theirs.  And  there  is^no  offspring
of  him  remaining  in  the  world,'  in  that  the  strict  Judge  ends
the  iniquities  of  that  one  simultaneously  with  the  end  of  the
world.  Now  that  these  words  are  to  be  understood  expressly
of  Antichrist  is  shewn,  when  it  is  added;

Ver.  20.  Fn  his  days  the  last  shall  be  astonied,  and  horror
shall  seize  on  the  first.

27.  For  he  will  then  let  himself  loose  against  the  righteous  xxiii.
with  such  a  measure  of  iniquity,  that  even  the  hearts  of  the
Tery  Elect  shall  be  struck  widi  no  small  consternation.  Whence
it  is  written,  Insomuch  that  if  it  were  possible^  they  shall  de-  Mat34,
ceive  the  very  Elect.  Which,  clearly,  is  said,  not  because  the  **'
Elect  shall  fall,  but  because  they  shall  tremble  with  terrible
alarms.  Now  at  that  time  both  the  latest  Elect  and  the
first  Elect  are  described  as  maintaining  the  conflict  for
righteousness  against  him,  in  that  both  they  that  shall  be
found  among  the  Elect  at  the  end  of  the  world,  are  destined
to  be  laid  low  in  the  death  of  the  flesh,  and  they  too  who
proceeded  from  the  former  divisions  of  the  world,  i.  e.  Enoch
and  Elijah,  shall  be  brought  back  amongst  men,  and  fthall
be  exposed  to  the  savageness  of  his  cruelty  still  in  their
mortal  flesh.  This  one's  forces  let  loose  in  such  terrible
power,  ^  the  latest  are  astonied  at,  and  the  first  do  dread,'  in
that,  though  in  respect  of  this,  viz.  that  he  is  lifled  up  by  a  spirit
of  pride,  they  despise  all  his  temporal  power,  yet  in  respect
of  this,  that  they  are  themselves  still  in  mortal  flesh,  wherein
they  are  liable  to  suffer  temporal  anguish,  they  dread  the
very  punishments,  which  they  bear  with  resolution;  so  that
there  is  in  them 'at  one  and  the  same  time  both  constancy

184  The  wicked  go  at  last  to  their  own  place.

Job  18, derived  from  virtue,  and  alarm  proceeding  from  the  flesh;  in
^^^^^  thai  though  they  be  of  the  number  of  the  Elect,  so  that  they
cannot  be  overcome  by  torments,  yet  from  this  only  that  thoy
are  men,  they  fear  the  very  torments,  that  they  overcome.  So
let  it  be  said.  In  his  days  the  last  shall  be  astonied^  and  terror
shall  seize  an  thejirst.  In  that  he  shall  then  shew  foith  such
signs,  and  do  things  so  cruel  and  hard  hearted,  as  to  force
them  to  astonishment,  whom  he  shall  find  at  the  end  of  the
world,  and  to  pierce  with  the  pang  of  carnal  death  the  first
fathers,  who  are  reserved  for  his  extirpation.  Therefore
whereas  he  has  described  many  particulars  relating  to  all  tlie
wicked,  or  to  the  head  of  the  wicked  himself,  he  immediately
adds  with  a  general  description,

Ver.  21.  Surely t  such  are  the  dwellings  of  the  wicked^
and  this  is  the  place  qfhim  that  knoweth  not  Ood.
xxiv.  28.  For  he  had  said  above ;  He  shall  drive  him  from  light
MokAL.g^^^  dlarknesSf  and  translate  him  out  of  the  world;  and  upon
subjoining  his  miseries,  he  added;  Surely^  such  are  the
dwellings  qf  the  wicked,  and  this  is  the  place  of  him  that
knoweth  not  Ood.  [n  that  he  who  is  now  lifted  up  from  not
knowing  Ood,  is  then  brought  to  his  own  ^  dwellings,*  when
his  own  wickedness  plunges  him  into  woes ;  and  one  day
he  finds  *  darkness  his  place,'  who,  while  he  made  himself
glad  here  in  the  counterfeit  light  of  righteousness,  was  occu-
pying the  place  of  another.  For  bad  men  in  all  tliat  they
do  in  dissimulation,  are  striving  to  possess  themselves  of  the
righteous  man's  name  of  credit,  as  of  another*s  place.  But
they  are  then  brought  to  their  own  place,  when  they  are
tormented  with  everlasting  fire,  as  the  desert  of  their  iniquity.
For  here  in  all  that  they  do  they  are  ministering  to  their
desire  of  winning  praise,  and  by  the  semblance  of  good
works,  they  are  opening  wider  the  bosom  of  the  mind  to
avarice.  So  let  the  wicked  man  go  now,  and  full  blown  with
complete  equipments,  let  him  build  his  habitations  here
below,  let  him  spread  a  name  of  glory,  let  him  multiply
estates,  and  delight  himself  in  abundant  stores,  but  when  he
shall  be  brought  to  everlasting  punishments,  then  surely  he
shall  know  that  *  such  are  the  dwellings  of  the  wicked,  and
this  is  the  place  of  him  that  knoweth  not  God*  Now  Bildad
said  this  rightly,  but  he  did  not  know  who  it  was  that  he

Job  vexed  wiih  hearing  wrong  and  npeaking  in  vain. 135

was  Mijing  it  to. But  the  heart  of  a  good  man  is  seriously  Boon

afflictedi  when  sentences  are  pronounced  against  him  upon 1-

an  unfair  estimate. Whence  blessed  Job  directly  answeredi
saying ;

How  long  wiU  ye  vex  my  touly  and  break  me  in  pieces
wiih  wordi  f

29.  The  sayings  of  the  holy  man,  as  we  have  already  often  xxv.
said,  are  to  be  understood  as  spoken  sometimes  in  his  own  ^''^*
person,  sometimes  in  tho  voice  of  the  Ileml,  and  sometimes
in  a  figure  of  Uio  Church  Universal.  Now  the  soul  of  the
righteous  is  deeply  distressed,  when  those  persons  launch
severe  sentences  against  the  good,  who  have  not  learned  to
lead  good  lives,  and  by  the  words  of  the  mouth  claim  righ-
teousness to  themselves,  to  which  in  practice  they  are
enemies.  Whence  to  the  friends  of  blessed  Job,  who,  as  we
have  already  often  said,  bear  a  type  of  heretics,  himself
rightly  answers,  How  long  will  ye  vex  my  goul,  and  tcear
me  wiih  words  f  For  good  men  are  *  worn*  with  the  words
of  the  wicked,  when  those  swell  out  against  them  in  words
of  the  lips,  who  lie  low  either  in  a  corrupt  faith,  or  in  bad
habits. It  goes  on ;

Zo,  these  ten  times  ye  confound  me.

80.  On  enumerating  the  successive  times  of  the  speeches  xxvi.
of  Job's  friends,  we  learn  that  as  yet  they  had  spoken  but
five  times.  But  for  this  reason,  that  he  had  five  times  heard
rebukes  from  them,  and  five  times  himself  replied  to  their
rebukes,  he  says  that  he  had  been  ten  times  confounded;
because  both  herein,  viz.  that  he  had  been  causelessly  re-
proached, he  suflered  deeply,  and  in  this,  that  he  uttered
words  of  instruction  to  those  that  gave  no  ear,  he  underwent
confusion.  And  so,  while  in  hearing  he  held  his  peace,  and
in  speaking  was  not  heard,  that  person  had  trouble  put  upon
him,  who  both  in  holding  his  peace  submissively,  and  in
speaking  to  them  fruitlessly,  experienced  pain  within  his
heart;  and  hence  he  says  above,  fVhat  shall  I  dot  If  t
speak f  my  gritf  is  not  assttaged;  and  though  I  forbear,  it
will  not  depart  from  me.  But  if  we  make  these  words  refer  Allbo.
to  a  type  of  Holy  Church,  it  is  well  known  that  it  is  her
great  delight  to  keep  the  precepts  of  the  Ten  Commandments;
and  the  wicked  ^  confound  her  ten  times,*  in  that  by  all  that

ISO Shame  checks  some  in  sin  thai  fear  noi  God.

«ioB  19,  they  do  wrong  in  their  wicked  principles,  they  forsake  the
j-^ —  precepts  of  the  Ten  Commandments^  and  cause  confusion  ta
'  the  good  as  often  as  they  set  themselves  against  the  words  of
God  in  their  doings. It  goes  on ;

And  ye  are  noi  ashamed  thai  ye  oppress  me.
xxvii. 31.  There  are  some  persons,  whom  bad  principle  suddenly
springing  up  invites  to  the  commission  of  wickedness,  yet
respect  for  their  fellow-creatures  recalls  again. And  very
often  from  this,  viz.  that  they  are  made  ashamed  outwardly ,
they  are  brought  back  into  their  own  interior  heart,  and  pass
an  inward  judgment  upon  themselves;  in  that  if  tliey  are
afi-aid  to  do  what  is  evil  on  mau^s  account,  how  much  more
ought  they  not  even  to  have  longed  after  what  is  evil,  on  God*s
account.  Who  sees  all  things? And  in  the  case  of  these
persons  it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  they  correct  greater  evil
by  inferior  good,  i.  e.  interior  sin  by  exterior  shame. Again,
there  are  some,  who,  when  once  they  have  brought  them^
selves  to  contemn  God  in  their  hearts,  despise  the  judgments
of  their  fellow-creatures  much  more,  and  all  the  evil  tliat
they  long  after,  they  do  not  blush  to  execute  boldly,  which-
persons  secret  wickedness  invites  to  the  commission  of  sin,
' and  outward  shame  holds  not  back;  as  it  is  said  also  of  a
Lol^e certain  wicked  judge,  Which  feared  noi  God,  neither  re-
^^'  ' garded  man. Hence  too  it  is  said  of  certain  persons  siu-
lf.3,o.ning  with  shameless  effrontery; And  they  have  declared
their  sin  as  Sodom. Tims  very  often  there  are  such  persons
enemies  of  Holy  Church,  persons  who  are  not  withheld  from
committing  wicked  things,  either  by  the  fear  of  God,  or
regard  of  man ;  and  it  is  well  said  to  these  by  blessed  Job,
And  ye  are  noi  ashamed  thai  ye  oppress  me;  seeing  tliat
though  it  was  wrong  to  have  wished  bad  things,  it  is  worse
not  to  bo  ashamed  of  things  wrongly  desired. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  4.  And  be  it  indeed  thai  [have  been  ignorant,  my
ignorance  remaineth  with  myself.
xxviii.  32.  Heretics  have  this  about  them,  that  they  are  swoln
by  the  empty  pretensions  of  their  knowledge,  and  often  turn
to  ridicule  the  simplicity  of  those  that  believe  rightly,  and
account  the  life  of  the  humble  to  be  of  no  worth.  On  the
other  hand  Holy  Church,  in  all  that  she  has  really  wise  in
her,  keeps  low  the  level  of  her  view  in  liumility,  that  she  be

Even  their  ignorance  is  goodfoir  good  men. 187

not  puffed  up  by  knowledge,  nor  be  made  to  «^ell  high  on  Book

the  seeking  out  of  things  hidden,  and  venture  to  dive  into '-

points,  that  are  above  her  powers. For  with  more  profit  to
herself  she  b  anxious  not  to  know  things  she  is  unable  to
fathom,  rather  than  boldly  to  define  things  she  does  not
know. As  it  is  written;  It  is  not  good  to  eat  much  honey:  ProT.
$0  he  that  is  a  searcher  of  majesty^  shall  he  overwhelmed  by '
glory. For  if  the  sweetness  of  honey  be  taken  in  greater
measure  than  there  is  occasion  for,  from  the  same  source
whence  the  palate  is  gratified,  the  life  of  the  eater  is  destroyed.
The  ^  searching  into  majesty'  is  also  sweet; but  he,  that
seeks  to  dive  into  it  deeper  than  the  cognizance  of  human
nature  admits,  finds  the  mere  gloriousness  thereof  by  itself
oppress  him,  in  that,  like  honey  taken  in  excess,  it  bursts
the  sense  of  the  searcher  which  is  not  capable  of  holding  it
Now  that  is  said  to  be  '  with'  us,  which  is  for  us ;  and  on
the  other  hand  that  is  said  not  to  be  with  us,  that  is  agiunst
us ;  and  so,  because  his  own  knowledge  puffs  out  the  heart
of  the  heretic,  while  his  perception  of  his  own  ignorance
abases  the  faithful,  let  blessed  Job  say  in  his  own  voice,  let
him  say  also  in the  confession  of  the  Church  Universal,
And  he  it  indeed  that  I  have  been  ignorant ^  my  ignorance
shall  be  with  me. As  if  it  were  said  in  express  words  to
Heretics;  ^  All  your  knowledge  is  not  with  you,  since  it  is
against  you,  so  long  as  it  uplifts  you  in  foolish  pride;  but
my  ignorance  is  with  me,  because  it  is  for  me ;  since,  where-
as I  do  not  dare  to  search  into  any  thing  relating  to  Ood  in
pride  of  heart,  I  keep  myself  in  the  truth  in  a  spirit  of
humility.' And  because  these  very  same  things  that  heretics
seek  to  know,  they  apply  perforce  to  the  furtherance  of  self-
elation  only,  that  they  may  seem  learned  in  contrast  to  the
faithful  and  humble,  it  is  rightly  added  ;

But  ye  are  set  up  against  me.

83.  But  perhaps  we  shall  consider  these  words  morexxix.
thoroughly,  if  we  point  out  how  they  apply  to  the  inends  of  ^"^*
blessed  Job  personally  in  a  special  sense.  For  they,  when
they  saw  the  righteous  man  smitten,  ought  to  have  turned
back  into  their  own  deepest  interior,  and  not  to  have  perse-
cuted blessed  Job  with  words  of  upbraiding,  but  to  have
bewailed  their  own  case;  seeing  that,  if  he  was  so  stricken,

138  Thow  who  spare  their  own  sin  ptoud  in  judging  ollurs.

Job  19,  who  served  as  he  did,  with  what  vengeance  did  they  deserve
-gj2i7  ^  ^®  smitten,  who  bad  not  served  like  him?  And  it  is  rightly
said  to  them,  Ye  are  set  up  against  me;  as  if  it  were  said
to  them  in  plainer  terms;  *  Ye  who  ought  by  occasion
of  my  being  smitten  to  have  been  set  up  against  your
own  selves/  this  being  the  order  of  such  setting  up  on  the
side  of  goodness,  viz.  that  we  be  first  set  up  against  ourselves,
and  afterwards  against  the  wicked.  For  he  that  is  set  up
against  the  good,  is  blown  out  in  pride.  Thus  we  are  set
up  against  ourselves,  when,  reviewing  our  own  evil  deeds,  we
smite  oiurselves  with  the  severe  avenging  of  penance,  wheu
we  do  not  spare  ourselves  at  all  in  our  sins,  and  are  not
biassed  by  any  fond  thoughts  towards  ourselves,  who,  if  we  first
rigidly  follow  up  our  evil  things  in  ourselves,  it  is  likewise
fair,  that  we  should  be  set  up  against  the  evil  in  others  too
for  their  good,  and  that  the  evil  which  w&  punish  in  ourselves,
we  should  subdue  in  others  too,  by  charging  it  home  to
them.

84.  But  this  sort  of  setting  up  the  wicked  know  nothing
of,  because  they  leave  themselves,  and  attack  the  good;  they
incline  themselves  towards  themselves,  in  their  secret  heart,
by  the  softness  of  fond  flattering,  and  they  are  set  up  against
the  lives  of  good  men  by  the  severity  of  harshness,  whence  it
is  now  rightly  said  to  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  swelling  against
him  under  his  scourge.  Ye  are  set  up  against  me:  i.  e.
•  Your  own  selves,  that  deserve  to  be  rebuked,  ye  leave,  and
me  ye  rebuke  with  severe  sentences.'  For  he  that  does  not
judge  himself  first,  is  ignorant  what  to  judge  right  in  another;
and  if  perchance  he  did  know  by  the  hearing  what  to  judge
right,  yet  he  is  not  able  to  judge  rightly  the  merits  of
another,  who  has  no  rule  of  judging  supplied  him  by  the
consciousness  of  his  own  innocence.  Hence  it  is  that  it  is
said  to  certain  persons  dealing  deceitfully,  when  they  brought

John  By  an  adulteress  to  receive  punishment;  He  that  is  without  sin
among  you,  let  himjirst  cast  a  stone  at  her.  For  they  went
for  the  punishing  of  others'  sins,  and  they  had  left  their  own
behind;  and  so  they  are  called  back  to  their  conscience
within  them,  that  they  should  first  correct  their  own  faults,
and  then  reprove  those  of  others. It  is  hence  that,  wheu

^KM  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  was  deep  sunk  in  the  giiilt  of  carnal

7%e  Proud  reproach  the  Biffhteoug  with  their  troMe$.  189

sin,  all  Israel  banded  together  would  have  arenged  that  Book
wickedness,  yet  was  once  and  again  itself  smitten  down  in '


the  conflict  of  war;  bat  on  the  Lord  being  consulted  whether
they  should  go  to  take  vengeance,  it  was  commanded  them.
The  People,  that  went  according  to  the  bidding  of  God^s
Toice,fell  both  once  and  again,  and  then  at  length  eflectually
smiting  the  sinning  tribe,  almost  wholly  extirpated  it  How
is  it  that  it  is  first  kindled  to  the  revenge  of  sin,  and  yet  after-
wards itself  brought  down;  but  that  those  are  to  be  chastised
first  themselves,  by  whose  means  the  sins  of  others  are  chas*
tised;  that  they  may  themselves  now  come  cleansed  through
vengeance,  who  are  forward  to  chastise  the  evil  of  others  ?
Whence  it  follows  that  when  the  vengeance  of  God's  inquest
is  at  rest  towards  us,  our  own  conscience  should  reprove  its
own  self,  and  by  its  own  act  lift  itself  up  against  self,  to
sorrows  of  penance,-  neither  being  set  up  towards  the  good,
and  humble  towards  itself,  but  unbending  towards  itself,  and
bowed  low  towards  all  the  good.  Thus  to  proud  men
administering  reproof,  it  is  rightly  said;  Te  are  set  up
againsi  mey  and  ye  charge  me  with  my  reproaches.  All
persons  that  are  set  up,  account  temporal  afllictions  to  be  a
grievous  reproach,  and  they  think  every  individual  to  be  the
more  despised  by  God,  in  proportion  as  they  see  him
scourged  with  the  rod  of  affliction.  For  they  look  for
nothing  in  principles,  they  look  for  nothing  in  practices;
but  whomsoever  they  see  to  be  stricken  in  this  life,  they
imagine  to  be  already  condemned  by  God's  sentence;  whence
it  is  well  said  on  this  occasion  by  the  voice  of  blessed
Job;

And  ye  charge  me  with  my  reproaches.

35.  In  that  they,  who  knew  him  to  be  righteous  before  xxx.
his  strokes,  were  now  judging  him  to  be  unrighteous  by  the
mere  fact  of  bis  being  stricken,  and  hence  it  very  often
happens  that  Heretics,  because  they  see  persons  within  the
bosom  of  Holy  Church  suflering  afllictaon ;  (for  it  is  written
of  God,  And  scourgeth  every  son  whom  He  receiveth;)  fancy  Heb.
tliat  the  sorrows  or  the  faithful  arise  from  nothing  but  sin,  ^^*
and  themselves  they  for  this  reason  conclude  to  be  righteous,
because  being  left  in  the  thoughts  of  their  evil  ways,  lacking
the  rod,  they  have  become  hardened. It  proceeds ;

140 Job  calls  not  God  unjust^  hul  himself  innocent.

Job  19; Yer.  6.  Know  now  at  least  that  Qod  hath  cycled  me
— 2: —  with  no  just  Judgment.

xxxi. 86.  O,  bow  hard  docs  the  voice  of  the  righteous  man
sound,  suflcring  under  the  infliction  of  the  rod !  which  same,
however,  not  pride,  but  grief  gave  vent  to ! Now  he  is  not
righteous, who gives up righteousness under sorrow;
and  blessed  Job,  because  he  had  a  meek  spirit,  did  not
sin  even  by  a  hard  word. For,  if  we  saj  that  he  did  err  by
this  voice,  we  make  out  that  the  devil  accomplished  what  he
JobS,6.ptitposed,  when  he  said.  Touch  his  bone  and  his  fleshy  and
see  if  he  have  not  blessed  Thee  to  Thy  face. Therefore  a
serious  quesUon  arises ;  for  if  he  did  not  sin  in  that  he  says.
Know  now  at  least  that  Ood  has  not  evicted  me  with  a  just
judgment; we agree to God's having done something
unjustly,  which  it  is  profane  to  say  ;  but  if  he  did  sin,  then
ihe  devil  made  appear  concerning  him  the  thing  that  he
promised. And  so  it  must  be  asserted  both  that  God  acted
rightly  in Ilis  dealings with blessed  Job,  and  yet  that
blessed  Job  herein,  viz. that  he  says that  he  ^  was  not
afflicted  by  a  just  judgment  of  God,'  did not  speak  an
untruth,  and  that  our  old  enemy  in  respect  of  that  which  he
promised  of  sin  in  the  blessed  man  did  speak  an  untruth.
For  sometimes  the  words  of  the  good  are  for  this  reason
supposed  wrong,  because  they  are  not  over  considered  in
their  interior  signification. Thus  blessed  Job  had  turned
his  eyes  to  his  own  life,  and  he  estimated  the  strokes  which
he  was  undergoing,  and  saw  that  it  was  not  just  that  upon
such  a  life  such  strokes  should  be  dealt. And  when  he
says  that  he  was  not  afflicted  by  a  just  judgment,  he  spoke
that  with  unreserved  voice,  which  God  in  His  own  secresy
T.  3. had  said  concerning  him  to  his  adversaiy,  thou  movedst  Me
against  him^  to  qfflict  him  without  cause. For  what  God
expresses,  that  He  *  had  afflicted  blessed  Job  without  cause,'
this  blessed  Job  asserts  again  in  the  words  that  he  was  not
'  afflicted  of  the  Lord  by  a  just  judgment?' Wherein  then
did  he  sin,  who  was  in  nothing  at  odds  with  the  sentence  of
his  Maker  ?

87.  But  perhaps  some  one  will  say,  that  for  us  to  speak
that  good  concerning  ourselves,  which  the  Judge  may  have
said  in  secret  conccmiug  us,  cannot  be  done  without  sin.

A  man  may  speak  irnih/ar  himse\f  on  occasiaiK 141

For  he  whom  the  Judge'  praises,  it  cannot  be  doubted,  ii  '^^^

jusUy  praiseworthy;  bu.t  if  he  in  his  own  person  praises -

himself,  his  righteousness  is  henceforth  supposed  to  be  no
longer  deserving  of  praise ;  and  this  is  said  rightly,  if  what
the  just  Judge  delivers  in  impartial  sentence,  the  person  in
question  should  venture  to  say  afterwards  concerning  him-
self in  pride  of  heart.  For  if  he  himself  too  continuing  in  a
humble  frame,  when  the  occasion  or  his  grief  brings  it  out,
has  uttered  good  that  is  true  in  his  own  praise,  he  has  not
departed  from  the  line  of  righteousness,  in  so  far  as  he  was
not  at  all  at  variance  with  truth.

88.  Whence  Paul  the  AposUe  also  related  many  brave
things  of  himself  for  the  edification  of  his  disciples,  but  he
did  not  commit  sin  by  relating  these  things,  in  that  both  by
an  undeniable  attestation,  and  a  humble  mind,  ho  did  not
depart  from  tlie  pathway  of  truth ;  and  so  let  blessed  Job,
conscious  of  his  own  life  being  just,  say  that  he  is  not
afflicted  by  a  just  judgment;  neither  yet  does  he  sin  by  that
voice,  wherein  he  is  not  at  variance  with  His  Maker,  in  that
he  whom  God '  smote  without  cause,'  himself  also  asserts  that
he  was  not '  afflicted  by  a  just  judgment.*  But  again  there
arises  another  question,  which  I  remember  has  been  already
solved  in  the*  beginning  of  this  work,  viz.  whereas  Almighty
God  does  nothing  without  cause,  why  does  He  bear  witness
that  He  had  afflicted  blessed  Job  without  cause?  For  our
just  Creator  by  those  many  strokes  inflicted  upon  blessed
Job  did  not  aim  to  do  away  with  enl  qualities  in  him,  but
to  increase  his  merits;  and  so  that  was  just,  which  He  did
in  the  heightening  of  his  good  deserts;  but  it  did  not  seem
equitable,  because  it  was  thought  to  be  the  punishing  of
instances  of  sin.  Now  blessed  Job  believed  that  sins  of  his
doing  were  obliterated  by  those  scourges,  not  that  his  merits
were  added  to,  and  therefore  he  calls  it  ^  not  a  just  judgment,'
because  he  tests  his  life  side  by  side  with  the  scourges :  thus,
if  the  life  and  the  scourges  be  weighed  in  the  scales,  that
was  not  equal  dealing,  which  blessed  Job,  as  I  have  said,
supposed  to  be  done  to  him  in  the  wrathfulness  of  severity;
but  if  the  mercifulness  of  the  Judge  be  looked  to,  seeing  that
by  the  punishment  of  the  just  man  the  merits  of  his  life  are
heightened,  it  was  an  equal  or  rather  a  merciful  judgment:

142  OodPs  final  sentence  proves  thai  Job  did  not  blaspheme.

Job  19,  therefore  at  once  Job  spoke  what  was  true,  so  long  as  he
.=!!:-^  balanced  his  life  with  the  stroke ;  and  God  did  not  afflict  Job
*  with  an  uujust  judgment,  in  that  ho  heightened  his  merits
by  the  stroke;  and  the  devil  did  not  achieve  what  he  pro-
mised ;  seeing  that  blessed  Job,  amidst  words  which  sound
hard,  was  neither  removed  from  a  true  sentence  nor  a  humble
mind. But  perhaps  we  shall  understand  these words  of
blessed  Job  less  well,  if  we  are  not  acquainted  with  the
sentence  of  the  Judge ;  Who,  when  He  was  delivering  sen-
tence between  the  two  parties,  says  to  the  friends  of  Job;
Job  42,  Ye  have  not  spoken  of  Me  the  thing  that  is  rights  as  My
i^3Cp«^rvan/  Job  hath. Who  then  is  there  so'  foolish  in  mind  as
<  um.'  to  own  that  blessed  Job  had  been guilty  in his  way  of
speaking,  when  he  is  declared  to  have  spoken  rightly  by  the
very  voice  of  the  Judge  itself? Which  same  voice,  indeed,
if  we  refer  to  the  person  of  Holy  Church,  we  not  unsuit-
ably apply  it  to  her  weak  members,  which  while,  in  the
season  of  her  persecution,  they  weigh  both  her  merits  and
her  scourges,  forasmuch  as  they  see  that  the  unjust  thrive,
and  the  just  perish,  have  no  notion  that  this  is  just. Now  it
is  well  added  by  the  voice  of  the  blessed  man,
And  compassed  me  with  his  scourges.
xxxii. 39.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  be  smitten,  and  another  thing  to
be  '  compassed  with  scourges/ Thus,  we  are  smitten  with
scourges,  when  even  in  our  sorrows  we  have  a  consolation
derived  from  other  sources;  for  when  aflliction  lies  so  heavy
on  us  that  the  spirit  can  no  longer  take  breath  by  consola-
tion from  any  one  thing ;  we  are  now  no  longer  smitten  only,
but  even  '  compassed  with  scourges,'  in  that  we  are  every
way  surrounded  by  the  rod  of  affliction. Thus  Paul  had
3  Cor. 7, been  compassed  with  scourges,  when  he  said.  Without  were
^' fightings^  within  were  fears. He  had  been  compassed  with
3  Cor. scourges,  when  he  said.  In  perils  by  mine  own  countrymen^
ii>  *^*  in  perils  by  the  heathen^  in  perils  in  the  city^  in  perils  in
the  wilderness^  with  the  other  particular,  which  he  so  enu-
merates, as  to  shew  that  he  no  where  had  rest. l)ut  when
Holy  Church  is  *  compassed  with  the  scourges'  of  her  tribu-
lation, all  the  weak  in  her  are  brought  down  in  the  fall  of
littleness  of  mind,  so  that  they  now  suppose  themselves  dis-
regarded, in  proportion  as  they  see  that  they  are  the  more

Godf  not  9hewing  Hinjudgment^  seemed  not  io  judge.  143

dowly  heard  with  effect And  it  is  rightly  added  yet  further  Boov
likewise  in  a  fignre  of  them  by  the  roice  of  the  holy  man, ^^^'


Ver.  7.  Behold^  I  cry  out  ofwrong^  but  I  am  not  heard;
I  cry  aloud^  but  there  is  no  one  to  judge.

40*  Almighty  God,  knowing  what  has  in  it  efficacy  to  prore  xxxiii.
our  good,  shuts  His  ears  to  hear  the  roice  of  persons  mourn-
ing, that  He  may  add  to  their  adrantage,  that  their  life  may
be  purified  by  punishment,  that  the  tranquillity  of  rest
which  can  no  where  be  found  here,  may  be  sought  for
elsewhere.  But  there  are  some  of  the  faithful  eren  that  know
nothing  of  this  grace  of  Providential  ordering,  in  whose
person  too  it  is  now  said;  Behotd,  I  cry  out  of  wrong^  but
I  am  not  heard;  I  cry  aloud^  but  there  is  no  one  to  judge;
for  it  is  said,  ^  there  is  no  one  to  judge,'  when  He  veils
His  eyes  to  judge,  in  that  beside  Him  ^  there  is  not  any
to  judge'  our  cause  against  our  adversary.  Nor  yet  is  this
very  thing  void  of  judgment,  viz.  that  judgment  is  delayed;
seeing  that  at  the  very  time  that  blessed  Job  said  this,  both
the  merits  of  the  holy  man  and  the  punishment  of  his  adver-^
sary  were  increased:  so  then  this  very  deferring  of  judgment
is  the  act  of  a  judge. But  what  God  settles  justly  within  is  *

one  thing,  and  what  the  soul  bruised  by  scourges  without
seeks  after  is  another.  Whence  he  still  further  adds  of  that
sinking  under  scourges,

Ver.  8.  He  hath  fenced  up  my  way 9  that  I  cannot  pass :
and  He  hath  set  darkness  in  my  paths.

41.  He  saw  his  ^  way  fenced  up*  with  strokes,  whenxxxir,
anxiously  desiring  to  pass  into  a  state  of  security,  he  was  not
able  to  escape  the  scourges,  and  whereas  he  saw  himself
smitten,  and  yet  did  not  find  in  himself  a  life  worthy  of  such
smiting,  as  it  were  ^  in  the  paths'  of  the  heart  he  met  with
^  the  darkness'  of  his  own  ignorance,  in  that  he  could  iiot
fathom  the  cause  wherefore  he  was  so  scourged.  And  this  is
not  unfitly  applied  to  the  weak  members  of  Holy  Chiurch
too,  when  from  this  which  they  remember  to  have  done
wickedly,  they  are  made  backward  in  good  practice  as  well,
and,  frightened  by  their  own  weakness,  do  not  venture  to
attempt  strong  acts  of  goodness  to  match  them.  For  they
fear  to  begin  great  acts  of  goodness,  who  call  to  mind  that
they  are  infirm  in  their  ways;  and  whereas  they  very  often

144  The  ioeakjind  their  way  dark^  and  are  shipped  qf  gUn^y.

Job  19,  do  not  know  the  very  good,  which  they  should  choose,  they,
as  it  were,  shrink  from  the  *  darkness  placed  in  their  paths.'


*  For  the  mind  often  becomes  so  doubtful  of  its  own  doings,
as  not  to  know  at  all  which  is  the  virtue  and  which  the  fault.
Thus  he  '  finds  darkness  in  his  path,'  who  in  those  things
which  he  desires  to  do,  is  ignorant  what  he  ought  to  choose.
Therefore  seeing  that  there  is  sin  often  from  infirmity,  and
sometimes  from  ignorance,  it  is  said  in  the  person  of  the
members  that  go  weakly,  He  haih  fenced  up  my  way  thai
I  cannot  pass.  While  in  the  person  of  those  who  see  not
clear  as  to  the  very  good  work  itself  which  they  should
choose,  it  is  added;  and  lie  hath  set  darkness  in  my  paths.
For  it  is  puuishment  of  sin,  to  see  the  good  which  we  ought
to  do,  and  yet  not  to  have  the  power  to  fulfil  it ;  and  again
it  is  in  still  worse  punishment  of  sin,  not  even  to  see  what
we  ought  to  do;  and  hence  against  both  of  these  it  is  said

P».87,hby  the  voice  of  the  Psalmist,  The  I^ord  is  my  Light  and  my
Salvation;  whom  then  shall  I/ear  ?  For  against  the  darkness
of  ignorance  the  Lord  is  a  ^  Light ;'  against  weakness  *  Sal-
vation,' whilst  He  both  shews  what  ought  to  be  desired  for

'  the  doing  it,  and  supplies  the  powers,  that  what  lie  shews

may  be  fulfilled. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  9.  He  hath  stripped  me  i^f  my  glory ^  and  taken  the
crown  frotn  my  head,

XXXV.  42.  That  all  this  suits  the  person  of  the  blessed  man  set
in  the  midst  of  tribulation,  there  can  be  no  doubt;  buty  siuce
the  words  of  the  historical  account  are  plain,  they  do  not  re-
quire explaining  after  the  letter,  therefore  they  have  to  be
traced  out  in  their  mystical  senses.  Thus  he  says,  He  liath
stripped  me  of  my  glory.  For  the  glory  of  each  individual
is  his  righteousness.  Now  just  as  a  garment  protects  from
the  cold,  so  docs  righteousness  defend  from  death ;  hence
righteousness  is  not  improperly  likened  to  a  garment,  where

Pt.  13S,it  is  said  by  the  Prophet;  Let  Thy  priests  be  clothed  with

^*  righteousness.  But  seeing  that  in  the  season  of  her  tribula-
tion thb  garment  of  righteoushess,  which  covers  her  in  the
sight  of  God,  is  lost  to  Holy  Church  in  her  members  that  go
weakly,  let  it  be  rightly  said;  He  hath  stripped  me  of  my
glory,  i.  e.  righteousness  has  been  taken  away  from  the  weak,
whereas  it  could  never  possibly  have  been  taken  away  from

Victory  and  hope  of  reward  loeifor  a  while  bjf  the  WMk.  lib

them,  if  it  had  beta  infixed  in  them  from  the  gromid  bt  th6  Book

heart,  but  for  this  reason  it  was  possible  to  be  takeil  Kirkf ^

from  them,  because  it  was  attached  to  them  outwardly,  Uke  a
garment  Wherein  the  question  offers  itself,  how  they  could
be  called  members  of  Holy  Church,  who  were  capable  of
losing  the  righteousness  which  they  seemed  to  maintain.
But  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  know,  that  reiy  often  righteous-
ness is  lost  for  a  while  by  her  weakly  members,  but  when
they  are  afterwards  brought  back  to  penitence  in  the  acknow-
ledgment of  their  fault,  they  attach  themselves  to  that  very
righteousness  which  they  had  lost  more  strongly  than  was
supposed  credible.  And  it  is  yet  fiirther  added  thereby,  and
taken  the  crown  from  my  head.  As  the  head  is  the  first  part
of  the  body,  so  the  leading  part  of  the  interior  man  is  the
mind.  Now  the  crown  is  the  reward  of  victory,  which  is  set
from  Above,  in  order  that  he  that  has  contended  should  be
rewarded ;  and  so  because  many  persons,  under  the  pressure
of  adversities,  do  not  hold  out  in  the  contest,  in  these  Holy
Church  as  it  were  *  loses  a  crown  from  her  head:*  for  ^  a
crown  on  the  head'  is  the  reward  from  Above  in  the  mind ;
there  are  t  great  many  who  whilst  they  are  pressed  with
adversities,  neglect  to  take  thought  of  the  rewards  &boVe,
and  cannot  reach  to  the  completion  of  victory;  in  such,  then,
*  the  crown  is  taken  from  the  head/  in  that  the  heavenly  and
spiritual  reward  is  taken  away  fit>m  the  aim  of  the  mind,thAt
they  should  henceforth  go  after  the  externally  peacefiil,  not
look  out  for  the  eternal  rewards,  which  they  used  to  have  at
heart

48.  Or  otherwise,  ^  the  head'  of  the  faithful  is  not  inappro-
priately taken  to  mean  the  priests,  in  that  they  ard  the  first
part  of  the  Lord's  members ;  and  hence  it  is  expressed  by
the  Prophet,  that  ^  the  head  and  the  tail'  are  rooted  out,  in
which  same  place  both  by  the  title  of  the  '  head'  we  have  the
priests  denoted,  and  by  the  designation  of  the  *  tail'  the
reprobate  prophet  Therefore  '  the  crown  is  taken  from  the
head,'  when  eten  they  abandon  the  heavenly  rewards,  who
seemed  to  have  the  lead  in  this  body  of  the  Church ;  atid
it  generally  happens  that,  when  the  leaders  fall,  the  army,
that  followed,  is  the  wider  worsted ;  tod  hence  directly  aft^r

VOL.  II.  L

146  Some  lose  hope  in  iriak,  sotne^  siricken  vi  judgment y  fail.

Job  19,  the  ills  to  the  greater  ones,  going  on  about  the  manifold

.^^lilL:  undoing  of  the  Church,  he  added;

Yen  10.  He  hath  destroyed  me  on  every  side^  and  I  am
gone,'  and  He  hath  retnoved  mine  hope  like  as  ttnth  a  tree
torn  away.

xxxvi.  44.  The  Church  is,  as  it  were,  *  destroyed  on  every  side,'
and  undone  in  her  weak  members,  when  those  very  ones  that
seemed  strong,  are  brought  to  ruin ;  when  *  the  croirn  is
taken  away  from  the  head,'  i.  e.  when  the  rewards  of  eternity
are  neglected  even  by  those  set  at  the  head ;  and  it  is  well
added  concerning  weak  ones  falling,  And  mine  hope  hath
He  removed  like  as  with  a  tree  torn  away ;  for  a  tree  is
pushed  by  the  wind  that  it  falls,  and  with  him  whom  threats
so  terrify,  as  to  make  him  go  headlong  into  unrighteousness,
what  else  is  it,  but  that  a  tree  met  with  a  blast  of  the  wind,
and  lost  the  standing  of  its  uprightness  ?  For  he  has,  as  it
were,  lost  hope  by  the  wind,  who,  subdued  by  the  threats  and
persuasions  of  tlie  wicked,  has  parted  with  those  eternal
rewards,  which  he  looked  forward  to;  and  because  it  very
often  happens  that  a  person,  from  fear  of  punishment,  gives
over  righteousness,  it  is  brought  to  pass  by  God's  decreeing
it,  that  even  in  giving  up  righteousness  he  does  not  get  quit
of  the  punishments,  which  he  was  afraid  of,  and  that  he  who
did  not  fear  at  all  Uie  destruction  of  Uie  soul,  meets  even  with
the  ills  of  the  flesh,  which  he  apprehended.  Hence  it  is  yet
further  added;

Ver.  11.  He  hath  also  kindled  His  fvrath  against  me^and
He  counteth  me  unto  Him  as  one  of  His  enemies.

xxxvii. 45.  For  we  have  been  taught  by  the  excellent  Preacher

1  Cor. attesting  it,  that  *  God  is  faithful,  Who  will  not  suffer  us  to
' *  be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able,  but  will  with  the  tempta-
tion also  make  a  way  to  escape,  that  we  may  be  able  to  bear

Jer.  30,  it.'  Moreover  the  Lord  says  by  the  Prophet,  For  I  have
wounded  thee  with  the  wound  of  an  enemy ^  with  a  ci^el
chastisement.  He  then  that  is  so  stricken  that  his  powers
are  overcome  by  that  striking,  the  Lord  no  longer  now  smites
him  as  a  son  in  the  course  of  discipline,  but  as  an  enemy  in
indignation.  Thus  when  the  strokes  exceed  the  power  of
our  patience,  it  is  very  much  to  be  feared,  lest,  our  sins

Etil  spirilM  permitted  to  beset  the  eoul  as  robbers. 14T

demanding  it,  we  are  now  no  longer  stricken  as  sonsbjr  a  ^^

Father,  but  as  enemies  by  the  Lord;  and  whereas  it  very  often ^

comes  to  pass  that  eril  spirits  too  press  home  many  things  to
the  hearts  of  the  afflicted,  and  amidst  the  scourges  which  strike
them  outwardly,  infuse  bad  thoughts  into  their  hearts,  after
the  wrath  of  the  Lord  it  is  rightly  added;

Ver.  12.  His  robbers  come  together ^  and  make  themselves
a  way  through  me.

46.  For  *  his  robbers^  are  evil  spirits,  who  busy  themselves  xxxviii.
in  hunting  out  the  deaths  of  men;  and  these  '  ipake  them-
selves a  way'  in  the  hearts  of  the  afflicted,  when,  amidst  the
adversities  that  are  undergone  outwardly,  they  do  not  cease
to  infuse  bad  thoughts  likewise ;  of  whom  it  is  yet  further
added;

And  encamp  round  about  my  tabernacle.

For  they  *  encamp  round  about  our  tabernacle,'  when  they  ^^'''
encircle  the  mind  on  every  side  with  their  temptings;  which
by  most  wicked  prompting  they  persuade  one  while  to  mourn
for  things  temporal,  at  another  time  to  despair  of  things
eternal,  now  to  go  headlong  into  impatience,  and  to  cast  words
of  blasphemy  against  God.  Yet  these  words,  as  we  have
already  said  before,  agree  with  blessed  Job  even  taken  his-
torically ;  who,  whilst  he  heaped  before  his  eyes  the  ills  he
was  enduring,  judged  himself  to  be  not  like  a  son  that  must
be  corrected,  but  as  an  enemy  stricken  with  affliction.
Through  whom  even  *  His  robbers  made  themselves  a  way,'
in  that  the  evil  spirits  obtained  against  him  the  leave  to
smite.  ^  Round  about  whose  tabernacle  they  encamped,'
in  that  afler  his  substance  and  his  children  were  taken  away,
they  bruised  his  whole  body  too  with  wounds.  But  it  is
very  extraordinary,  why,  when  he  spoke  of  the  '  robbers,'  he
added  HiSj  clearly  with  a  view  to  shew  that  these  same
robbers  belonged  to  God;  on  which  point,  if  we  make
a  distinction  between  die  power  and  the  will  of  evil
spirits,  it  is  made  evident,  why  they  are  called  ^  God's
robbers;'  for  evil  spirits  incessantly  pant  to  do  us  mis-
chief; but  while  they  have  a  bad  will  derived  from  them-
selves, they  have  not  the  power  of  doing  mischief,  except
the  Supreme  Will  vouchsafes  them  permission ;  and  while
of  themselves  indeed  they  long  to  hurt  us  unjustly,  yet  by

l2

1 48 «/o6,  deserted  by  hu  otvMy  a  type  of  mr  Isord.

Job.  19,  Almighty  God  they  are  not  suffered  to  hurt  auy  one  saving
13—15.  j„ftt]y.  mij  gQ  whereas  the  will  is  unjust  in  ihem  and  the
power  just|  they  are  at  once  called  ^  robbers,'  and  ^  God's
robbers/  tliat  it  should  come  from  themselves^'  that  they  aim
to  bring  down  evil  things  unjustly,  and  from  God  that  the
things  so  desired  they  do  not  consummate  saving  justly;  but
because,  as  we  have  often  said  already,  the  holy  man  set  in
the  midst  of  the  pain  of  punishment,  one  while  speaks  in  his
own  accents,  at  another  time  in  the  accents  of  the  Church,
at  another  time  of  our  Redeemer,  and  very  frequently  so
describes  his  own  circumstances,  that  in  a  figure  he  delivers
those  that  belong  to  the  Holy  Church  and  to  our  Redeemer,
concern  for  historical  fact  being  for  a  little  space  put  aside,
let  us  shew  in  these  things,  which  he  subjoins,  how  he
accords  with  the  accents  of  our  Redeemer.  It  goes  on ;
Allbo.  Ver.  IS,  14.  He  hath  put  my  brethren  far  from  me;  and
mine  acquaintance  are  verily  estranged  from  me.  My  kins-
folk  have  failed,  and  my  familiar  friends  have  forgotten  me.
xxxix.  47.  We  shall  shew  this  the  better,  if  we  bring  forward  the
John  1,  testimony  of  John,  who  says.  He  came  unto  His  oum,  and
^''  His  own  received  Him  not;  for  His  *  brethren  were  put  far
from  Him,^  and  His  'acquaintance  were  estranged*  from
Him,  Whom  the  Hebrews  that  held  the  Law  were  taught  to
prophesy,  and  never  knew  to  acknowledge  when  present;
whence  it  is  rightly  said.  My  kint/olk  have  failed  me,  and
my  familiar  friends  have  forgotten  me.  For  the  Jews,
*  kinsfolk*  in  the  flesh, '  acquaintance*  by  the  teaching  of  the
Law,  as  it  were  forgot  Him,  Whom  they  had  foretold,  in  that
Him  they  both  sung  of  in  the  words  of  the  Law,  as  destined
to  be  made  Incarnate,  and  when  made  Incaitiate  denied
Him  by  the  words  of  unbelief. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  15.  Tliey  t/uii  dwell  in  my  house ,  and  my  maids,
count  me  for  a  stranger.
xl.  48.  The  inmates  of  God's  house  were  the  Priests,  whose
I  origo  j^^Q  I  QQ^Q  gel  apart  in  the  service  of  God,  was  henceforth
by  office  continued  in  that  state.  But  the  '  maids*  are  not
improperly  taken  for  the  souls  of  the  Levites,  servants  to  the
hidden  parts  of  the  tabernacle  us  it  were  by  a  more  familiar
service  to  the  interior  of  the  bedchamber.  Therefore  let
him  say  of  the  Priests,  serving  with  sedulous  care,  let  him

Our Lordtakenfaranalienjand diiownedhy  Hisservants.  149

say  of  the  Levites  attending  on  the  interior  of  the  house  of  Book
God  They  thai  dwell  in  my  home^  and  my  maids,  have  ^^^'
counted  me  for  a  stranger;  in  that  the  Incarnate  Lord,
Whom  thej  had  for  long  foretold  in  the  words  of  the  Law,
they  refused  to  acknowledge  and  to  reverence.  And  he  yet
more  plainly  shews  that  He  was  not  known  by  their  wicked
will|  when  he  adds ;

And  I  was  as  it  were  an  alien  in  their  sight,

49.  For  our  Redeemer  whereas  He  was  not  recognised  xli.
by  the  Synagogue,  was  rendered  ^  as  it  were  an  alien*  in  His
own  house.  Which  the  Prophet  plainly  witnesses,  saying,
W/iere/ore  shall  thou  be  as  a  settler  in  the  land,  and  as  a  Jer.  14,
wayfaring  man  that  turneth  aside  to  tarry?  For  whereas^*
He  was  not  heard  as  the  Lord,  He  was  taken  not  as  the
owner  but  for '  a  setder  of  the  land  ;*  and  He  only  ^  turned
attde  to  tarry  as  a  wayfaring  man,*  in  that  He  carried  off  but
few  out  of  Judaoa,  and  going  on  to  the  calling  of  the  Oentiles
finished  the  journey  He  had  begun ;  and  so  *  He  was  an
alien*  in  their  sight,  in  that  while  they  thought  only  of  the
things  they  could  see,  they  were  unable  to  perceive  in  the
Lord  the  things  they  could  not  see ;  for  whilst  they  contemn
the  flesh  that  was  to  be  seen,  they  never  reached  to  the
unseen  Migesty;  therefore  let  it  be  rightly  said;  And  I  was
as  it  were  an  alien  in  their  sight.  Concerning  which  people
it  is  yet  further  fitly  added ;

Ver.  16.  /  called  my  servant^  and  he  gave  me  no  answer.

60*  For  what  was  the  Jewish  people  but  a  ^  servant,*  which xlii.
never  obeyed  the  Lord  with  the  love  of  a  son,  but  the  fear
of  a  slave  ? Contrariwise  it  is  said  to  us  by  Paul,  For  ye  Ron.  8,
have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again:  but  ye  have^^'
received  the  spirit  qf  adoption,  whereby we cry Abba,
Father. And  so  this  *  servant*  the  Lord  ^  called,*  in  that  by
benefits  vouchsafed,  as  by  voices  given  out,  He  strove  to
bring  it  to  Himself;  but  it  ^  answered  not,*  in  that  it  was
indifferent  to  render  back  deeds  corresponding  to  His  gifts.
For  God  ^  calls*  us,  when  He  presents  us  with  His  gifts;  and
we  '  answer*  to  this  calling,  when  we  serve  Him  worthily
according  to  the  benefits  we  have  been  vouchsafed;  therefore
because  He  prevented  the  people  with  so  many  benefits,  let
him  say,  /  called  my  servant,  and  because  even  after  such

150  Tlie  Synagogue^  wedded  to  our  Lard,  shrank  frain  Him.

Job  19, numberless  benefits,  it  contemned  Him,  let  him  add:  and
17

he  gave  me  no  answer. It  goes  on ;


/  entreated  him  with  my  own  mouth.
xliii. 51.  As  though  he  said  mor^  plainly;  ^  1,  the  Same  that
before  My  Incarnation  had  given  it  in  charge  so  many  pre-
cepts to  be  practised,  by  the  mouths  of  the  Prophets,  coming
to  it  Incarnate,  entreated  it  with  my  own  mouth.' And
hence  Matthew,  when  he  was  telling  of  precepts  being
Matt.  6,  delivered  by  Him  on  the  Mount,  says.  And  He  apened  His
^' mouth,  and  taught. As  if  he  said  in  plain  speech;  '  Then
He  opened  His  own  mouth.  Who  before  had  opened  the
mouths  of  the  Prophets;'  it  is  hence  too  that  it  is  said  of
Cant.  i,Him  by  the  Spouse  longing  for  His  presence,  Let  Him  kiss
^' me  unth  the  kisses  of  His  mouth;  since  for  all  the  precepts
'which  she  learnt  by  His  preaching.  Holy  Church,  as  it  were,
received  so  many  ^  kisses  of  his  mouth.' Now  it  is  well
said,  /  entreated:  in  that  being  exhibited  in  the  flesh,  whilst
He  spoke  the  precepts  of  life  with  humility,  He,  as  it  wei-e,
besought  His  servant  filled  with  pride  that  he  would  come ;
and  hence  it  is  fitly  added;

My  u4/e  shuddered  at  my  breath.
xliv.  52.  What  does  the  *  wife'  of  the  Lord  mean  save  the
Synagogue,  subject  to  Him  in  the  Covenant  of  the  Law  with
a  carnal  perception  ?  Now  the  breath  is  from  the  flesh,  and
the  unbelieving  people  understood  the  incarnation  of  the
Lord  in  a  carnal  manner;  in  that  it  took  lliui  for  mere  man;
and  so  His  '  wife  shuddered  at  His  breath,'  in  that  the
Synagogue  was  afraid  to  take  Him  for  God,  Whom  it  saw  to
be  man;  and  when  it  heard  the  words  from  His  mouth  by
bodily  utterance,  it  refused  to  perceive  in  Him  the  mysteries
of  the  Divine  Nature,  and  would  not  believe  Him  to  be
Creator,  Whom  it  saw  to  be  created;  and  so  the  carnal  ^  wife
shuddered  at  the  breath'  of  the  carnal  body,  in  that  being
given  over  to  carnal  senses,  it  did  not  take  knowledge  of  the
mystery  of  the  Incarnation.  It  goes  on ;
/  entreated  the  children  of  mine  oum  womb.
xlv.  53.  In  God,  Who  is  not  circumscribed  by  tlie  figure  of  a
body,  the  members  of  the  body,  i.  e.  the  hand,  the  eye,  the
womb,  are  named  in  such  a  way,  that  by  the  designation  of
the  members,  the  effects  of  His  Power  are  represented. As

IVise  andJooUsh  alike  despised  Him.  151

He  18  said  to  have  eyes,  in  that  He  sees  all  things;  He  is  Book

described  as  having  hands,  in  that  He  works  all  things. '-

Now  in  the  womb  the  offspring  is  conceived,  which  is
bronght  forth  in  this  life;  what  then  are  we  to  take  the  '  womb'
of  God  for,  but  His  counsel,  wherein  before  time  we  were
conceived  by  predestination,  that  being  created  in  time  we
might  be  brought  into  the  world  i  And  so  God,  Who  abides
before  time,  *  besought  the  children  of  His  womb;'  in  that
those,  whom  He  created  with  power  by  His  Divine  nature,
coming  Incarnate  He  besought  with  humility ;  but  because
in  that  same  flesh,  wherein  He  appeared.  He  was  contemned
in  their  estimation,  it  is  subjoined ;

Ver.  18.  The  foolish  too  despised  me.

54.  Tlie  wise  falling  away  from  faith  in  the  truth,  there  is  xlvi.
an  addition  rightly  made  concerning  '  fools'  as  well ;  in  that
when  the  Pharisees  and  the  Lawyers  despised  the  Lord,  the
rabble  of  the  people  too  followed  the  example  of  their  incre-
dulousness,  which  herein,  that  it  saw  Him  a  man,  slighted  the
announcements  of  the  Redeemer  of  the  world. For  often  by
the  title  of  fools,  are  denoted  those  who  are  poor  among  the
common  people ;  whence  too  it  is  said  by  Jeremiah,  There^  Jer.  ff,
fore  I  said^  perchance  these  are  poor,  and  foolish  ones,  that*'
know  not  the  way  of  the  Lord,  nor  the  judgment  qf  their
Ood. But  leaving  the  rich and  wise  of  the  world,  our
Redeemer  came  to  seek  the  poor  and  foolish,  whence  it  is  now
said,  as  if  for  the  heightening  of  grief,  T?ie  foolish  despised
me. As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain  speech ;  *  Even  those
Tory  persons  despised  Me,  for  whose  healing  I  took  to  Me
the  foolishness  of  preaching.' As  it  is  written.  For  after  that  iCor.  i,
in  the  wisdom  of  God  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,^^'
it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  qf  preaching  to  save  them
that  believe. For  the  *  Word'  is  *  the  Wisdom  of  God,'  but
*  the  foolishness'  of  this  *  Wisdom,'  the  Flesh  of  the  Word  is
called;  that  whereas  the  carnal  severally  could  not  by  craft
of  the  flesh  attain  to  the  wisdom  of  God,  by  the  foolishness
of  preaching,  i.  e.  by  the  incarnation  of  the  Word,  they  might
be  healed. Therefore  he  says,  77t«  foolish  too  despised  me.
As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain  words;  *  Even  by  Uiose  very
*^ persons  I  was  despised,  for  whose  sake  I  was  not  afraid  to'
be  counted  foolish.' And  whereas  the  Jewish  multitude,

Itii Our  Lofd  abhorred  by  the  Coumelhrs  of  HU  people.

Job  I9,whw  it  sa^  the  puracles  of  our  Redeemer,  honoured  Him

-i^  for  His  miracles,  saying,  7%ff  U  the  Christ ;  but  when  it

John^/ beheld  the  infinpities  of  His  human  nature,  it  disdained  to

41.18.  account  Him  the  Creator,  saying.  Nay,  but  He  deceive th

the  people  ;  it  i^  rigl^ tly  subjoined ;

And  u>hen  I  departed  from  them,  they  spake  against  me.

xlvii. 54.  For  the  Lord  a§  it  were  dre\v  near  to  the  hearts

of  people,  y(hfm  He  displayed  miracles  to  them;  and  He  as

it  >f  ere  *  departed  Arom  them,'  when  If  e  shewed  them  no  signs;

b|it  they  spake  against  the  Lord  so  ^  departing,'  when  they

refuaed  to  yield  their  faith  to  Him  thus  resting  from  miracles;

but  what  wonder  that  He  met  with  such  treatment  from  the

common  folk,  when  those  very  persons,  who  appeared  to  be

t^ach^rs  of  t|ie  Law,  who  gave  it  out  that  He  was  to  be  made

Incarnate  in  the  words  of  prophecy,  both  beheld  Him  made

Incarqate,  and  yet  were  parted  from  Him  by  the  disjoining

of  unbelief? Concerning  whom  it  is  added ;

Ver.  19.  They  that  were  once  my  counsellors  abhorred
m^i  and  he  whom  I  loved  most  turned  away  from  me.
xlviii.  96.  |t  is  plain  to  all  people,  that  God  does  not  stand  in
need  of  counsellors,  Who  to  man's  very  counsellors  them-
Hoiiua.^lyes  too  vouchsafe^  the  counsel  of  wisdom.  Of  whom
ll' 40°^  moreover  it  is  written,  Who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the
18.  Lord^  pr  who  hath  been  His  counsellor?  but  as  when
brea4  01^  clothing  if  bestowed  on  one  that  lacks  them,  the
|jord  bear9  witness  that  He  Himself  has  received  them;
so  wfien  right  counsel  is  given  to  one  that  is  ignorant  of  it,
He  ^iInsplf  receives  it,  of  Whom  that  man  is  a  member,
who  is  so  ini|t)ructed;  for  all  we,  that  are  of  the  number  of  the
fiuthful,  are  member^  of  our  Redeemer;  and  as  He  Himself
is  fed  in  our  persons  by  tlie  pitying  of  liberality,  so  He  is
Himself  i^de4  in  our  persons  by  the  counselling  of  instruc-
tion; a^d  so  ^e  scribes  and  doctors  of  the  Law  who  used  to
instruct  die  people  with  respect  to  life,  what  else  were  they
but  ^  counsellors'  of  the  Redeemer,  Who  was  to  come  i
WhO)  nevertheless,  when  they  beheld  the  Lord  become
Incami^te,  separated  numbers  from  faith  in  Him  by  their
coimsels,  though  before  they  had  seemed  to  teach  numbers
by  the  ffords  of  tl>e  Prophets  to  believe  the  mystery  of  His
Incarp.4tiop;  s^ld  because  iiritl^  God  he  is  more  in  His  love.

Tft€^skin^claDeioihe*bonefWtienAp<>$tl€^dtWomen8tajfed.  1 58

who  draws  the  greatest  number  to  the  love  of  HiiD|  it  is  Book
farther  added  of  that  same  order  of  the  doctors  of  the  Law-^lZl
and  the  Hiarisees;  and  he  whom  T  loved  most^  turned  away
from  me.  For  that  very  order,  through  the  prompting  of
unbelief,  was  turned  aside  from  faith  in  the  truth,  which
before,  while  serving  in  the  labours  of  preaching,  was  most
beloved,  which  same  not  only  to  the  extent  of  not  believing
the  Lord,  but  even  of  persecuting  Him  as  weU,  the  rabble  of
the  common  people  followed,  and  was  kindled  with  the
firebrands  of  cruelty  to  the  very  deed  of  His  Passion;  in
which  very  Passion  too  the  hearts  of  the  disciples  were
troubled;  whence  also  it  is  here  added;

Ver.  20.  My  hone  cleaveih  to  my  skin,  through  myJUih
being  feasted.

67.  By  '  bone'  we  have  strength,  and  by  flesh  weakness  ^li^*
of  the  body  denoted;  therefore,  whereas  Christ  and  the
Church  are  one  person,  what  is  signified  by  the  *  bone*  but
the  Lord  Himself?  what  by  the  *  flesh*  save  the  disciples,
who  in  the  hour  of  His  Passion  were  weakly  disposed?  but
by  the  ^  skin,*  which  in  the  body  remains  more  outward  than
the  flesh,  what  is  represented  but  those  holy  women,  who
with  the  view  to  furnish  the  stays  of  the  body,  served  the
Lord  by  outward  offices  of  ministration?  for  when  His
discipleSf  though  not  yet  firm,  were  preaching  faith  to  the
people,  the  flesh  kept  close  to  its  bone ;  and  when  the  holy
women  prepared  the  outward  things  that  were  necessary,  they
as  it  were  like  *  a  skin*  remained  on  the  body  outwards;  but
when  it  came  to  the  hour  of  the  Cross,  exceeding  great  fear,
caused  by  the  persecution  of  the  Jews,  took  possession  of
His  disciples :  they  severally  fled,  the  women  *  stuck  close,*
and  so,  the  *  flesh,*  as  it  were,  ^  being  consumed,*  ^  the  bone  of
the  Lord  clave  to  its  skin,*  in  that  His  strong,  when  the  .
disciples  fled  in  the  hour  of  the  Passion,  had  the  women
close  beside  it.  Peter  indeed  stood  for  some  time,  but  yet
afterwards  being  aflrighted  he  denied  Him.  John  too  stood,
to  whom  at  the  very  time  of  the  Cross  it  was  said,  Behold Johnid,
thy  mother.  But  he  could  not  persevere;  since  it  is  also
written  concerning  him%  And  there  followed  Him  a  certain  Mark

*  See  the  Life  of  St.  John  by  CaTe,  but  either  opinion  otn  be  only  a  oon-  52.

who  lays,  that  <  the  ancients'  under-  Jectare. St.  John  was  at  least  aroongft

stand  it  01  bin. Theophylact  takes  it  those  who  ftfrtook  Him  and/led.
to  mean  James  the  brother  of  onr  Lord ;

154  ^Lips  left  to  ieeih^  when  they  despaired,  pel  spake  of  Him,

Job  19,  young  man^  having  a  linen  cloth  cast  about  his  naked  body^
^^'  and  the  young  men  laid  hold  of  him.  And  he  leji  tlie  linen
'  cloth^  and  fled  from  them  nakttf;  who  although  afterwards^
to  hear  the  words  of  his  Redeemer,  he  returned  at  the  hour
of  the  Cross,  yet  first  he  was  affrighted  and  fled;  but  the
women  are  related  not  only  not  to  have  been  afraid  nor  to  have
fled,  but  even  to  have  stood  fast  even  to  the  sepulchre ;  and
so  let  him  say,  My  bone  cleaveth  to  my  skint  through  the
flesh  being  wasted:  u  e.  ^  they  that  ought  to  have  attached
themselves  closer  to  My  strength,  in  the  season  of  My
Passion  were  consumed  with  dread ;  aud  those  whom  I  set
to  external  ministrations,  in  My  Passion  I  found  attached
themselves  faithfully  to  Me  without  fear.'  And  here  it  is
plainly  implied  that  these  words  are  delivered  in  mystery,  iu
that  it  follows ;

And  the  lips  otily  are  left  about  my  teeth*
I-  68.  For  what  do  we  have  *  about  our  teeth,'  but  *  lips,'
even  if  we  suffer  no  scourges  of  affliction?  but  what  is
signified  by  ^  the  lips'  but  talk,  what  by  '  teeth'  but  the*
holy  Apostles  ?  who  are  with  this  intention  set  in  this  body
of  the  Church,  that  they  may  bite  at  the  life  of  the  carnal
by  correction,  and  break  it  in  pieces  from  the  hardness
of  its  obstinacy;  and  hence  it  is  said  to  that  first  of  the

Aotil0,^pQ3llQg^  as  being  set  as  a  tooth  in  His  Body,  Kill,  and
eat.  But  because,  at  the  time  of  His  Passion,  these  *  teeth'
firom  fear  of  death  lost  the  biting  of  coiTection,  lost  tlic
assurance  of  strength,  lost  the  efficiency  of  practice  of  every
sort,  so  that  two  of  them  as  they  walked,  after  His  death

Liike34,|^i^j  resurrection,  talked  by  the  way  and  said,  Bat  we
trusted  that  it  should  have  been  lie  which  should  have
redeemed  Israel;  it  is  rightly  said  hero.  And  the  lips
only  are  left  about  my  teeth.  They  were  still  conversing
about  Him,  but  now  they  no  longer  at  all  believed  in  llini ;
and  so  ^  the  lips  only  remained  about  His  teeth,'  in  that  they
had  parted  with  the  efficiency  of  good  practice,  and  only
retained  words  of  converse  about  Him.  They  had  lost  the
bite  of  correction,  and  possessed  the  mooting  of  speech.
Therefore,  ^  the  lips  only  were  left  about  the  teeth,'  in  that
to  talk  about  Him  indeed  they  knew  still,  but  to  preach  Him
now,  or  to  bite  the  bad  ways  of  unbelievei*s,  they  were
afraid. Therefore  these  particulars  being  finished,  which  he

Job  beseechesy  though  wronged.  Persecution  how  from  God.  155

spoke  in  the  Toice  of  the  Head,  blessed  Job  is  brought  back  Book
to  his  own  words,  saying ;


Ver.  21.  Have  pity  upon  me^  have  pity  upon  me^  O  ye
my  friends:  for  the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me.

59.  The  mind  of  godly  men  is  used  to  have  this  peculiar H.
to  itself,  that  when  it  suffers  unjust  treatment  at  the  hands

of  enemies,  it  is  not  so  much  moved  to  wrath  as  to  prayer;
that  if  the  wickedness  of  those  persons  could  be  made  to
subside  to  a  calm,  they  would  choose  rather  to  beseech  than
to  be  wroth;  whence  it  is  rightly  said  in  this  place.  Have
pity  upon  me,  have  pity  upon  me,  O  ye  my  friends:  for  the
liand  of  God  hath  touched  me.  Observe,  those  by  whom  he
sees  that  be  is  ever  being  treated  with  insults,  he  calls
*  friend:},'  in  that  to  godly  minds  the  very  things  that  seem
contrary  dre  made  favourable ;  for  any  that  are  wicked  are
either  converted  by  the  sweetness  of  the  good  so  as  to  turn
back,  and  by  this  alone  they  are  friends,  viz.  that  they  are
made  good,  or  they  persevere  in  their  wickedness,  and  herein
also  even  against  their  will  they  are  ^  friends,*  in  that,  if  there
be  any  transgressions  of  the  good,  by  their  persecutions  they
purge  them  away  even  unknowingly.  Observe  too,  that  with
these  things  which  are  done  with  God  in  secret,  the  words
of  the  blessed  man  openly  spoken  are  quite  of  a  piece*  Thus
he  had  been  smitten  by  Satan,  yet  he  did  not  ascribe  his
being  smitten  to  Satan,  but  he  calls  himself  *  touched  by  the
hand  of  God,'  as  Satan  himself  too  had  said;  But  put  forth  ^^f^'
thine  hand  now  and  touch  his  bone  and  his  fleshy  and  see  if
he  bless  Thee  not  to  Thy  face.  For  the  holy  man  knew  that  in
that  very  thing  which  Satan  had  done  towards  him  with  an
evil  will,  he  derived  his  power  not  from  himself,  but  from
the  Lord. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  22. Why  do  ye  persecute  me  as  God;  and  arefiUed
with  my  flesh  f

60.  It  is  not  at  variance  with  the  style  of  piety  that  he liii.
tells  that  he  is  persecuted  by  God. For  there  is  a  good
persecutor;  as  when  the  Lord  says  of  Himself  by  the  lips  of

the  Prophet,  Him  that  pfivily  slandereth  his  neighbour fF§.ioif
him  did  I  persecute. But  when  any  Saint  is  suffered  to  be^*
stricken,  he  knows  that  he  is  undergoing  persecution,  sent
against  evil  he  has  been  guilty  of,  from  the  interior  ordering.

150 Men  should  be  sparing  where  God  plainly  chastises.

Job  19,  Now  the  savage  minds  of  the  persecutors,  when  thej  desire
^'  the  power  to  smite,  are  inflamed  against  tlie  life  of  the  good
not  with  the  ardour  of  puriiyingi  but  with  the  firebrands  of
envy;  and  they  do  that  indeed^  which  Almighty  God  allows
to  be  done;  in  that  while  there  is  one  cause  with  God
transacted  too  by  their  agency,  yet  there  is  not  one  will
maintained  in  that  cause,  since  whilst  Almighty  God,  in
loving,  is  enforcing  purification,  the  wickedness  of  the  unjust
is  exercising  malice  in  raging.  This  then  that  is  said,  Wliy
do  ye  persecute  me  as  Ood?  he  spoke  with  reference  to  the
external  smiting,  not  to  the  interior  intention,  in  that  though
they  execute  that  externally  which  God  ordained  to  be
done,  yet  in  their  doing  it  they  do  not  seek  that  which  God
does,  viz.  that  good  men  should  be  purified  by  means  of
affliction*  Which  too  may  likewise  be  understood  in  another
sense  also.  For  Almighty  God  chastens  the  evil  qualities  of
others  so  much  the  more  justly  in  proportion  as  He  has
no  whit  of  evil  qualities  in  Himself;  but  men  when
they  strike  others  in  the  course  of  discipline,  ought  so  to
chasten  the  frailty  of  another,  that  they  should  at  the  same
time  have  learnt  the  habit  to  recall  their  eyes  to  their  own
frailty,  so  as  to  consider  from  themselves  how  they  ought  to
spare  in  smiting  others,  seeing  that  they  are  not  unaware
that  they  themselves  too  are  worthy  of  stripes.  And  so  it  is
said  in  Uiis  case.  Why  do  ye  persecute  me  as  Ood?  As  if  it
were  expressed  in  plain  words ;  *  Ye  do  so  afflict  me  on  the
grounds  of  my  frailties,  as  if  ye  yourselves  after  the  manner
of  God  owned  nought  of  infirmity :'  whence  it  is  to  be  con-
sidered, that  if  perchance  there  be  persons  that  need  sharp-
ness of  correction,  hard  correction  is  then  to  be  used  to
them  by  us,  when  the  hand  of  God  ceases  from  using  the
rod ;  but  when  strokes  from  above  are  upon  them,  from  us
there  is  now  due  no  longer  correction  but  consolation,  lest,
while  in  their  grief  we  join  our  reproach,  we  put  smiting  to
smiting.

61.  Now  it  is  well  added,  And  are  filled  with  my  flesh  y
The  mind  which  hungers  for  the  punishing  of  a  neighbour,
surely  seeks  to  be  '  filled  with  the  flesh'  of  another.  More-
over it  is  necessary  to  be  known,  that  those  also  who  feed  on
the  slander  of  another's  life,  are  as  surely  *  filled  with  the

Slander  is  i/ie  devonring  qf  others^  flesh.  157

flesh*  of  another. Whence  it  is  said  by  Solomon ;  Be  not  Book
in  the  /eastings  of  winebibbers;  nor  eat  with  those^  toho,^IZl^
bring  together  flesh  to  eat. For  to  *  bring  tc%eiher  flesh  to£^.
eat,*  is,  in  the  parlance  of  disparagement  to  tell  hj  tarns  the
bad  qualities  of  neighbonrs ;  concerning  whose  punishment
it  is  directly  added  there,  they  thflt  are  given  to  e^ps,  and\h.  3i.
that  give  a  contribution^  shall  be  consumed^  and  drowsiness
shall  clothe  a  man  with.  rags. They  are  *  given  to  cups*
who  make  themselves  drunk*  with  slander  of  another*s  life;**®^
but  to  ^  give  a  contribution  V  is  in  the  same  way  that  eachigj^iM,.
individual  is  used  to  contribute  provisions  for  his  share  to  be^^"**
eaten,  so  in  the  parlance  of  slander  to  contribute  words.
But  *  they  that  are  given  to  cups  and  that  give  a  contribu-
tion shall  be  consumed,'  in  that  as  it  is  written.  Every  BmJSA.
slantierer  shall  be  rooted  out;  but  *  drowsiness  shall  cover  ap^  ^
man  with  rags,'  in  that  his  death  finds  him  an  object  of  con- 10,  ff.
tempt  and  empty  of  all  good  works,  whom  the  sickly  habit' ^g,j^JI7
of  detraction  took  possession  of  here  for  the  raking  out  the|['
misdemeanours  of  another  man's  life. But  all  those  hardships  ^^^^
which  blessed  Job  undergoes  it  is  not  meet  should  be  let
pass  in  silence,  and  that  the  obscurity  of  ignorance  should
cover  them  from  man's  knowledge;  for  so  many  may  be
odificd  for  the  preserving  of  patience,  as  they  who,  by
grace  from  above  replenishing  them,  may  be  made  ac-
quainted with  the  achievements  of  his  patience. And  hence
the  same  blessed  Job  would  have  the  strokes which he
feels  carried  into  an  example,  in  that  he  immediately  adds,
saying;

Ver.  23,  24;  0  that  my  words  were  now  written!  0  that
they  were  graven  in  a  book  with  an  iron  pen^  and  a  plate  qf
leady  or  surely  that  they  were  hewed  in  the  flint!

62.  Whereas  all  that  blessed  Job  underwent,  that  heavy  mj,
Jewish  people,  being  instructed  by  the  strong  declaration  of
the  Fathers,  was  brought  to  know,  they  were  written  with  *  an
iron  pen'  and  *  a  plate  of  lead ;'  but  whereas  the  hard  hearts
of  the  Gentiles  also  were  made  acquainted  with  them,  what
is  this  but  that  we  see  them  ^  hewn  in  the  flint  ?'  And
observe,  that  what  is  written  on  lead,  by  the  mere  softness  of
the  metal,  is  quickly  obliterated;  but  upon  the  flint  letters
may  be  more  slowly  stamped  indeed,  but  more  hardly  obli-

158  Lead  is  heavy ^  but  takes  no  abiding  marks.

Job  I9,terated. Therefore  it  is  not  unsuitably  that  by  '  the  plate  of

jl~~-  lead*  Judaea  is  represented,  which  at  once  received  the  pre-

'  cepts  of  Ood  without  labour,  and  lost  them  with  speed ;  and

rightly  by  '  the  flint*  the  Gentile  world  is  represented,  which

could  with  difficulty  receive  the  words  of  sacred  revelation

to  keep,  but  kept  them  when  received  fixedly. Now  by  the

*  iron  pen^  what  else  is  denoted  save  the  strong  sentence  of

Jer.  17,  Ood? Whence  too  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  The  sin  qf

I'nngua  •'•'^A  ^  written  with  a  pen  qf  iron  on  a  diamond  naiP.

*  The  end  of  the  body  is  in  the  nail,  and  a  diamond  is  so  hard

a  stone,  that  it  cannot  be  cut  with  iron. Now  by  ^  an  iron

pen*  there  is  denoted  a  strong  sentence,  but  by  a  *  diamond

nail*  the  eternal  end;  so  the  sin  of  Judah  is  said  to  be

written  with  a  '  pen  of  iron  upon  a  diamond  nail,*  in  that  the

guilt  of  the  Jews  is  reserved  by  the  strong  sentence  of  God

for  an  end  that  is  endless.

63.  Rightly  too  by  *  a  plate  of  lead'  we  understand  those,
whom  the  load  of  avarice  weighs  down,  to  whom  it  is  said
by  the  Prophet  with  upbraiding,  O  ye  sons  ofmen^  how  long
heavy  in  heart! For  by  lead,  the  nature  whereof  is  of  a
heavy  weight,  the  sin  of  avarice  is  in a  special  manner
denoted,  which  renders  the  mind  it  has  infected  so  heavy,
that  it  can  never  be  raised  to  aim  at  things  on  high. Hence
Zech.  6,  it  is  written  in  Zechariah,  £0  up  now  thine  eyes^  and  see
*— *• what  is  this  that  goeth  forth. And  I  said.  What  is  it?  And
« Lat. he  said.  This  is  an  ephah*  that  goeth  forth. He  said  more-
'^^^^  over,  This  is  their  eye  throughout  all  the  earth. And  behold
there  %Joas  lifted  up  a  talent  of  lead,  and,  lo,  one  woman  sit-
ting in  the  midst  of  the  ephah. And  he  said.  This  is
wickedness ;  and  he  cast  her  into  the  midst  qf  the  ephah,
^  Of  inio  and  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  on  her  face^. And  with
M0iM reference  to  this  vision  of  '  the  ephah,*  and  ^  the  woman,'
ihertqf.  i^nd  ( ihe  lead,*  that  he  might  shew  more  fully  what  he  had
T.  9-11.  Ijqqii  made  to  know,  he  yet  further  added  going  on.  Then
lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold  there  catne
out  two  women,  and  a  spirit  was  in  their  wings,  for  they
had  wings  like  the  wings  qf  a  kite,  and  they  lifted  up  the
ephah  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven. Then  said  I  to
the  angel  that  talked  with  me.  Whither  do  these  bear  the
ephah? And  he  said.  To  build  it  an  house  in  the  lamdqf

Careiof*nnes9f  the  chi^  wickedness^  bears  down  eipil  men.  \59

SAinar.  Which  testimony  of  the  Prophet  we  have  brought  Book
forward  as  a  proof  of  the  lead  to  no  purpose,  if  we  do  not  ^^^'
also  explain  it  going  over  it  again.  Thus  he  says,  Lift  up
now  thine  eyes^  and  see  what  is  this  that  goeth  forth;  and  I
said^  What  is  this  f  And  he  said,  It  is  an  ephah  that  goeth
forth,  God  desiring  to  shew  to  the  Prophet,  by  what  stn
above  all  others  the  human  race  fell  away  from  Him,  by  the
figure  of  an  ephah  as  it  were  denoted  the  wide-opened
mouth  of  avarice.  For  avarice  is  like  an  ephah,  in  that  it
keeps  the  mouth  of  the  heart  open  and  agape  on  the  stretch  ^  'Moam-
And  he  said.  This  is  their  eye  through  all  the  world.  We****"'
see  many  men  of  dull  sense,  and  yet  we  see  them  sharp  in
bad  practices,  as  the  Prophet  too  testifies,  who  saith,  They  Jer.  4,
are  wise  to  do  evil;  but  to  do  good  they  have  no  knowledge.^*
And  so  these  are  dull  in  sense,  but  in  those  things  which
they  desire,  they  arc  urged  on  by  tho  goads  of  avarice;  and
they  that  are  blind  to  see  good,  under  tlie  incitements  of
rewards  are  quick-eyed  to  Uie  doing  evil  things.  Hence  it
is  rightly  said  of  this  same  avarice.  This  is  their  eye  in  all
the  world.  And  behold  there  was  lifted  up  a  talent  of  lead.
What  is  '  a  talent  of  lead*  but  the  weight  of  sin  from  that
very  avarice.  Andy  lo,  one  woman  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the
ephah.  Which  same  woman,  lest  perchance  we  should
doubt  who  she  was,  the  Angel  thereupon  made  known ;  for  it
follows  there  immediately.  And  he  said.  This  is  impiety;
and  he  cast  her  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah.  Impiety  is
*  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah,'  in  that  in  avarice  there  is
always  impiety  taken  in.  And  he  cast  the  weight  cf  lead
on  her  face.  The  mass  of  lead  is  cast  on  the  woman's  face,
in  that  the  impiety  of  avarice  is  borne  down  by  the  very
weight  of  its  own  sin ;  for  if  it  did  not  reach  after  things  that
are  below,  it  would  never  prove  impious  towards  God  and
our  neighbour.

64.  Then  Itfted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold
there  came  out  two  women,  and  a  spirit  was  in  their  wings.
What  do  we  understand  by  these  *  two  women'  but  the  two
principal  vices,  i.  e.  pride  and  vain  glory,  which  are  without
any  doubt  united  to  impiety  ?  Which  two  are  described  as
having  *  a  spirit  in  their  wings;'  in  that  they  are  subservient
to  the  will  of  Satan  in  their  actions;  for  the  Prophet  calls

160  Pi'ide  and  vain  glory  bear  men  off  earth  and  below  heaven.

Job  19,  that  one  ^  a  spirit,*  conceniing  whom  Solomon  saith,  ff  the
*  spirit  qf  him  that  hath  power  rise  above  thee^  leave  not  thy
10,4.  place :  and  of  whom  the  Lord  saitb  in  the  Gospel;  When
M**-i3,  ^  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  many  he  walketh  through
dry  places.  ^  A  spirit  is  in  their  wings/ in  that  in  whatsoever
they  do,  pride  and  vain  glory  render  obedience  to  the  will  of
Satan.  And  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  kite.  Now
the  kite  is  always  busied  in  plotting  against  the  chicken  kind.
So  these  women  have  '  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  kite/  in  that
sorely  their  doings  are  like  the  devil,  who  is  always  plotting
against  the  life  of  the  little  ones.  And  they  lifted  up  the
ephah  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven.  Pride  and  vain
glory  have  this  peculiar  to  them,  that  whosoever  is  infected  by
them,  they  lift  up  in  his  own  conceit  above  the  rest  of  his
fellow  creatures :  at  one  time  by  pursuit  of  the  gifts  of  fortune,
at  another  time  by  the  desire  of  dignities,  the  man  whom  they
have  once  gotten  captive,  they,  as  it  were,  lift  up  into  the
height  of  honour.  And  he  that  is  between  the  earth  and  the
heaven,  at  once  leaves  things  below,  and  fails  altogether  to
attain  the  things  on  high.

65.  These  women,  then,  *  lift  up  the  ephah  between  the
ei^rth  and  the  heaven,'  in  that  pride  and  vain  glory  so  exalt
the  mind  taken  captive  through  greediness  of  honour,  that
looking  down  upon  all  their  neighbours,  men  do,  as  it  were,
leave  things  below,  and  in  proud  boasting  seek  high  things.
But  all  such  persons,  while  they  give  themselves  up  to  pride,
at  once  in  imagination  mount  above  those,  with  whom  they
are  placed,  and  are  far  from  ever  being  united  to  the  citizens
above.  Thus  the  ephah  is  said  to  be  ^  lifted  up  between
earth  and  heaven,'  in  that  all  covetous  persons  through  pride
and  vain  glory  at  once  despise  their  neighbours  at  their  side,
and  never  lay  hold  of  the  things  above,  which  are  beyond
them;  and  so  they  are  carried  *  between  the  earth  and
the  heaven,*  in  that  they  neither  keep  equality  of  brother-
hood in  this  lower  world  by  charity,  nor  yet  are  able  to
attain  the  world  above  by  setting  themselves  up.  And  I
said  to  the  Angel  that  talked  with  me,  Whither  do  these
bear  the  ephah  f  and  he  said^  To  build  it  an  house  in  the  land
qf  Shinar.  That  same  ephah  has  a  '  house  built  it  in  the
land  of  Shinar,'  for  ^  Shinar*  is  rendered  '  their  ill  savour  /

Trnik  wriilen  as  on  lead  andflUit, JoVs  clear  prophecy,  161

Hnd  as  there  is  a  sweet  saToar  from  virtne,  as  Paal  bears  Book
witness,  who  saith;  and  makeih  manifest  ike  savour  of  Bis^


J  Cor.  3

knowledge  by  us  in  every  place; For  we  are  unto  God  au, '  '
sweei  savour  qf  Christ ;  so  reversely  there  is  an  ill  ssTonr
from  rice. For  covetousness  is  the  root  of  all  evil. And  ijlw-*,

10*

whereas  every  thing  evil  is  engendered  by  avarice,  it  is  meet
that  the  house  of  avarice  should  be  erected  in  *  ill  savour.*
Moreover  it  is  necessary  to  be  known  that  *  Shinar'  is  a  very
wide  valley,  wherein  the  tower  was  begun  to  be  built  by  men
giving  themselves  to  pride,  which,  when  the  diversity  of
tongues  was  brought  to  pass,  came  to  destruction;  which
same  tower  was  called  Babylon,  forsooth  on  account  of  that
very  confusion  of  minds  and  tongues:  nor  is  it  inappropriately
that  the  '  ephah'  of  avarice  is  placed  there,  where  *  Babylon,*
i.  0.  *  confusion,*  is  building,  in  that  whereas  it  is  certain  that
from  avarice  and  impiety  all  things  bad  have  their  origin,
this  same  avarice  and  impiety  are  rightly  described  as  dwell-
ing in  confusion.

M.  We  have  sud  these  things  in  few  words  out  of  course,
that  we  might  shew  that  the  weight  of  sin  is  set  forth  by  the
^  plate  of  lead.*  Yet  these  very  words  of  blessed  Job  are  also
i^plicable  to  Holy  Church,  who  while  keeping  the  two
testaments  of  sacred  revelation,  as  it  were  begs  a  second
time  that  her  words  should  be  written,  saying.  Oh!  that  my
words  were  now  written!  Oh  !  that  they  were  printed  in  a
book  1  Which  same,  in  that  she  speaks  with  a  strong  sentence
at  one  time  to  hearts  heavy  from  the  weight  of  avarice,  at
another  time  to  hardened  hearts, '  writes  with  a  pen  of  iron
upon  a  plate  of  lead,*  or,  surely,  *  upon  the  flint*  Now  we
-say  with  justice  that  blessed  Job  uses  the  accents  of  our
Redeemer  and  His  Church,  if  we  find  any  thing  that  he  says
explicitly  of  that  same  Redeemer  of  us  men;  for  how  is  it  to
be  believed  that  he  teaches  us  any  thing  connected  with  Him
in  a  figure,  if  he  does  not  point  Him  out  to  us  in  express
words  ?  But  now  let  him  disclose  to  us  what  he  is  sensible
of  concerning  Him,  and  let  him  take  away  from  us  all
misgivings  in  our  thoughts. .It  goes  on ;

Ver.  25.  For  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth.

67.  For  he  who  does  not  say,  *  Creator,*  but  *  Redeemer,* liv.
expressly  tells  of  Him,  Who  after  He  created  all  things,

VOL.  II.  M

102 Job  believed  our  Lord's  Re$urreciionj  and  hu  own.

Job  19,  appeared  Incarnate  amongst  us,  that  He  might  redeem  us
f*^'  from  a  state  of  bondage,  and  by  His  Passion  set  us  free  from
death  everlasting;  and  mark  with  what  sure  faith  he  makes
himself  secure  in  the  power  of  His  Divine  Nature,  of  Whom
^  Cor.  ii  ig  aaid  by  Paul,  For  though  He  was  cruci/ied  through
'  '  weakness^  yet  He  liveth  by  the  power  of  God.  For  be  says,
For  I  know  tJuit  my  Redeemer  liveth.  As  if  he  said  in
express  terms;  '  The  unbelievers  may  know  that  He  was
scourged,  mocked,  struck  with  the  palms  of  the  hand,
covered  with  a  crown  of  thorns,  besmeared  with  spittings,
crucified,  dead:  I,  with  sure  faith,  believe  Him  to  live  after
death  ;  I  confess  with  unreserved  voice,  *  that  my  Redeemer
liveth,*  Who  died  by  the  hands  of  wicked  men.'  And  how,
O  blessed  Job,  through  His  Resuirection,  thou  trustest  to  the
resurrection  of  thine  own  flesh,  declare,  I  pray,  in  open
speech. It  goes  on;

And  that  I  shall  rise  at  the  last  day  from  the  earth.
Iv.  68.  That  is,  because  the  resurrection  which  He  manifested
in  His  own  Person,  He  will  one  day  bring  to  pass  in  our-
selves as  well ;  for  the  resurrection,  which  He  exhibited  in
Himself,  He  pledged  to  us ;  seeing  that  the  members  follow
the  glorj'  of  their  Head.  Thus  our  Redeemer  underwent
death,  that  we  might  not  fear  to  die;  He  manifested  the
resurrection,  that  we  might  have  a  sure  hope  tliat  we  are
capable  of  rising  again.  And  hence  He  would  not  have  that
death  to  be  of  more  than  tliree  days*  dumtion,  lest  if  the
resurrection  Mere  dcfened  in  Ilini,  it  should  be  altogether
despaired  of  in  ourselves ;  and  this  is  rightly  said  of  Him  by
Pt.  110, the  Prophet;  He  shall  drink  of  the  brook  in  the  way:  there^
^'  fore  shall  he  lift  up  the  head.  For  He  in  a  manner  conde-^
scended  to  drink  of  that  current  as  it  were  of  our  suffering,
not  in  an  abiding  place,  but  *  in  the  way,*  in  that  He  met
death  in  a  ti'ansitory  way,  i.  e.  for  three  days,  and  in  that
death  which  He  met  He  did  not,  like  ourselves,  remain  unto
the  end  of  the  world.  And  so,  whereas  He  rose  again  on  the
third  day,  what  then  is  to  come  after  in  His  body,  i.  e.  in  the
Church,  He  makes  appear;  for  He  shewed  in  example,  what
He  promised  in  reward,  that  as  believers  knew  and  owned
that  He  had  Himself  risen  again,  so  they  might  hope  for  the
rewards  of  the  resurrection  in  themselves  at  the  end  of  the

Aanm^s  rod  Blands/or  Christy  the  reHjbr  mankind. 168

world. Lo,  we,  tbroagh  the  death  of  the  flesh,  remain  in  the  Book

dost  until  the  end  of  the  world,  bat  He  on  the  third  day -

bndded  into  life  from  the  dryness  of  death,  that  bj  the  Tery
renewal  of  His  flesh  by  itself  He  might  shew  the  power  of
His  Divine  Natnre.  Which  is  well  shewn  in  Moses  by  the
twelve  rods  placed  in  the  Tabernacle :  for  when  the  priest-
hood of  Aaron,  who  was  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  was  despised,
and  the  tribe  was  not  accounted  worthy  to  offer  up  burnt-offer-
ings, twelve  rods  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  were  ordered
to  be  put  in  the  Tabernacle,  and,  lo,  the  rod  of  Levi  budded,  Nm-iT,
and  shewed  what  efficacy  Aaron  had  in  the  office*  By^'
which  same  sign  what  is  conveyed,  but  that  all  we  who  lie
in  the  arms  of  death  until  the  very  end  of  the  world,  remain
like  the  rest  of  the  rods  in  a  state  of  barrenness  ?  But  when
all  the  rods  remained  in  a  state  of  dryness,  the  rod  of  Levi
returned  to  flowering,  in  that  the  body  of  our  Lord,  i.  e.  our
true  Priest,  being  set  in  the  dryness  of  death,  burst  into  the
flower  of  the  Resurrection.  By  which  same  flowering  Aaron
is  rightly  known  to  be  the  Priest,  in  that  by  this  glory  of  the
Resurrection  our  Redeemer,  Who  sprung  from  the  tribe  of
Judah  and  TjCvi*,  is  shewn  to  be  an  Intercessor  in  our  behalf. 'l^^l^i ;
And  so,  lo !  the  rod  of  Aaron  buds  now  after  dryness,  but  '
the  rods  of  the  twelve  tribes  remain  in  a  dry  state,  in  that
already  indeed  the  body  of  the  Lord  lives  after  death,  but
our  bodies  are  kept  back  from  the  glory  of  the  resurrection
until  the  end  of  the  world.  Whence  he  carefully  introduced
this  same  delay,  by  saying.  And  thai  I  shall  rise  at  the
last  •  dayfi'om  the  earth*  •  hotI*.

69.  Therefore  we  have  a  hope  of  our  own  resurrection,  by
considering  the  glory  of  our  Head.  But  lest  any  one  say
perhaps  merely  in  the  secret  thought  of  his  heart,  tfiat  it  was
in  this  way  that  He  rose  again  from  the  dead,  viz.  that  being
Ood  and  Man  in  one  and  the  same  Person,  the  death,  which
He  underwent  in  His  Human  Nature,  He  overcame  by  His
Divine  Nature,  while  we,  who  are  mere  men,  are  not  able  to
rise  from  the  curse  of  death;  it  happened  rightly  that,  in  the
season  of  His  resurrection,  the  bodies  of  many  of  the  Saints
arose  at  the  same  time,  that  both  in  Himself  He  might  shew
us  an  example,  and  by  the  resurrection  of  others  who  were
like  to  ourselves  in  respect  of  a  mere  human  nature.  He  might

m2

164 Tlie  course  of  nature  shadows  out  the  Uesurreclion.

Job  19,  give  U8  a  sure  coufirmatioiiy  that  whereas  man  despaired  of
-j^  his  obtaining  what  He  that  was  God  and  Man  had  exhibited
in  Hb  own  Person,  he  might  presume  that  that  was  capable
of  being  brought  to  pass  in  his  own  case,  which  he  knew  to
have  been  brought  about  in  the  case  of  those  very  persons,
who  he  doubted  not  were  but  simple  human  beings.

70.  But  there  are  some  who,  observing  that  the  spirit  is
parted  from  the  flesh,  that  the  flesh  is  turned  into  corruption,
that  its  corruption  is  reduced  to  dust,  that  this  dust  is  so
dissolved  into  elementary  parts  that  it  is  incapable  of  being
seen  by  the  eyes  of  man,  despair  of  the  possibility  of  tho
resurrection  being  brought  to  pass,  and  whilst  they  gaze  on
the  dry  bones,  they  distrust  its  being  possible  for  these  to  be
clothed  with  flesh,  and  again  flushing  into  life ;  which  per-
sons, if  they  do  not  hold  the  resurrection  of  the  body  on  the
principle  of  obedience,  ought  certainly  to  hold  it  on  the
principle  of  reason.  For  what  does  the  universe  every  day,
but  imitate  in  its  elements  our  resurrection  ?  Thus  by  the
lapse  of  the  minutes  of  the  day  the  temporal  light  itself  as
it  were  dies,  when,  the  shade  of  night  coming  on,  that  light
which  was  beheld  is  withdrawn  from  sight,  and  it  daily  rises
again  as  it  were,  when  the  light  that  was  withdrawn  from
our  eyes,  upon  the  night  being  suppressed  is  renewed  afresh.
For  the  progress  of  the  seasons  too,  we  see  the  shrubs  lose
the  greenness  of  their  foliage,  and  cease  from  putting  fortli
fruit;  and  on  a  sudden  as  if  from  dried  up  wood,  by  a  kind
of  resurrection  coming  we  see  the  leaves  burst  forth,  the
fruit  grow  big,  and  the  whole  tree  clothed  with  renewed
beauty ;  we  unceasingly  behold  the  small  seeds  of  trees  com-
mitted .to  the  moistness  of  the  ground,  wherefrom  not  long
afterwards  we  behold  large  trees  arise,  and  bring  forth
Comp.  leaves  and  fruit  Let  us  then  consider  the  little  seed  of  any  tree
00  1  ^*'  whatever,  which  is  thrown  into  the  ground,  for  a  tree  to  be
J^l^'  produced  therefrom,  and  let  us  take  in,  if  we  are  capable  of
it,  where  in  that  exceeding  littleness  of  the  seed  that  most
enormous  tree  was  buried,  which  proceeded  from  it  ?  where
was  the  wood?  where  the  bark?  where  the  verdure  of  the
foliage  ?  where  tlie  abundance  of  the  fruit  ?  Was  there  any
thing  of  the  kind  perceived  in  the  seed,  when  it  was  thrown
into  the  ground? And  yet  by  the  secret  Artificer  of  all

Joh*$/aiih  $hame$  doubt  afitr  our  Lord^s  Riiing. 165

Ihings  ordering  all  in  a  wonderful  manner,  both  in  the  soft-  Book

ness  of  the  seed  there  lay  buried  the  roughness  of  the  bark, ^

and  in  its  tenderness  there  was  hidden  the  strength  of  its
timber,  and  in  its  dryness  fertility  of  productireness.  What
wonder,  theut  if  that  finest  dust,  which  to  our  eyes  is  resolved
into  the  elements.  He,  when  He  is  minded,  fashioneth  again
into  the  human  being,  Who  from  the  finest  seeds  resuscitates
the  largest  trees  ?  And  so,  seeing  that  we  have  been  created,
reasoning  beings,  we  ought  to  collect  the  hope  of  our  own
resurrection  from  the  mere  aspect  and  contemplation  of  the
objects  of  nature.  But  forasmuch  as  the  faculty  of  reason
was  deadened  in  us,  the  grace  of  the  Redeemer  came  in
for  an  example.  For  our  Creator  came.  He  took  death  upon
Him,  He  exhibited  the  Resurrection,  in  order  that  we,  who
would  not  hold  the  hope  of  the  Resunection  by  reason,
might  hold  it  by  His  succour  and  example;  and  so  let
blessed  Job  say;  /  know  thai  my  Redeemer  liveth^  and  that
I  shall  rise  at  the  last  day  from  the  earth.  And  let  any
one  that  despairs  of  the  possibility  that  the  power  of  the
Resurrection  should  be  brought  to  pass  in  himself,  blush  at
the  words  of  a  belieting  person  set  in  the  midst  of  the
Gentile  world,  and  let  him  reflect  with  what  a  weight  of
punishment  he  deserres  to  be  stricken,  if  he  still  does  not
believe  his  own  resurrection,  who  now  knows  the  resurrection
of  the  Lord  which  has  taken  place,  if  even  he;  believed  his
own,  who  as  yet  expected  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus
to  be  brought  to  pass.

7L  But  see,  I  hear  of  the  resurrection,  but  it  is  the  efiect
of  the  resurrection  that  I  am  searching  out  For  I  believe
that  I  shall  rise  again,  but  I  wish  that  I  might  hear  what
kind  of  person ;  since  it  is  a  thing  I  ought  to  know,  whether
I  shall  rise  again  perhaps  in  some  other  subtle  or  ethereal
body,  or  in  that  body  wherein  I  shall  die.  But  if  I  shall
rise  again  in  an  ethereal  body,  it  will  no  longer  be  myself,
who  rise  again.  For  how  can  that  be  a  true  resurrection,  if
there  may  not  be  true  flesh  ?  so  that  plain  reason  suggests,
that  if  it  shall  not  be  true  flesh,  assuredly  it  will  not  be  a
true  resurrection;  for  neither  can  it  be  rightly  termed  a
resurrection,  when  it  is  not  what  fell  that  rises  again.
But  in  this  too  for  us,  O  blessed  Job,  do  thou  remove  these

166 TTrtf  body  shall  truly  rise. Error  qf  Euiychius.

Job  10,  clouds  of  mUginng,  and  whereas  through  the  grace  of  the
^^y Holy  Spirit  vouchsafed  thee  thou  hast  begun  to  speak  to  us
of  the  hope  of  our  resurrection,  shew  in  plain  words  if  our
flesh  shall  really  rise  again. It  follows,

Yer.  26.  And  I  shall  be  again  encompassed  with  my  skin.
Ivi. 72.  Whereas  the  ^  skin'  is  expressly  named,  all  doubt  of  a
true  resurrection  is  removed ;  in  that  our  body  will  not,  as
^Eutychius  the  Bishop  of  Constantinople  wrote,  in  that  glori-
ousness  of  the  resurrection  be  impalpable,  and  more  subtle
than  the  wind  and  air :  for  in  that  gloriousness  of  the  resur-
rection our  body  will  be  subtle  indeed  by  the  efficacy  of  a
spiritual  power,  but  palpable  by  the  reality  of  its  nature ;
whence  also  our  Redeemer,  when  the  disciples  doubted  of
His  resurrection,  shewed  them  His  hands  and  feet,  and  offered
Lu^ His  bones  and  flesh  to  be  touched,  saying.  Handle  Me  and
* '  see :  for  a  spirit  hath  not  fiesh  and  bones  as  ye  see  Me
have. And  when,  being  placed  in  the  city  of  Constantinople,
I  brought  before  Eutychius  this  testimony  of  truth  from  the
Qospel,  he  said,  ^  For  this  reason  the  Lord  did  this,  that  He
might  take  away  all  doubt  of  the  resurrection  from  the  hearts
of  the  disciples.* To  whom  I  said;  ^  This  is  a  very  extra-
ordinary thing  that  you  assert,  that  doubting  should  arise  to
ourselves  from  the  same  quarter,  whence  the  hearts  of  the
disciples  were  cured  of  doubting.' For  what  can  be  said
worse  than  that  that  is  made  doubtfiil  to  us  relating  to  His
true  flesh,  whereby  His  disciples  were  restored  anew  to  faith
from  all  doubting  ? For  if  He  is  declared  not  to  have  had
that,  which  He  manifested;  from  the  same  source,  horn
whence the  faith of  His  disciples  is  confirmed,  ours  is
destroyed. And  he  frirther  added,  saying,  ^  He  had  that
body  which  He  shewed  a  palpable  body;  but  after  the  hearts
of  those  that  handled  it  were  confirmed,  all  that  in  the  Lord
which  was  capable  of  being  handled,  was  reduced  into  a
certain  subtle  quality.' To  which  same  I  answered,  saying ;
Bom.  6|  <  It  is  written,  Knowing  that  Christ  being  raised  from  the
dead  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over
Him. If  then  there  was  aught  in  the  Body  which  was
capable  of  being  altered  after  His  resurrection,  contrary  to
the  truly  spoken  declaration  of  Paul,  the  Lord  after  His
resurrection  returned  into  death ;  and  what  fool  even  would

The  FU$k  will  be  the  $ame  in  iubetance^not  in  pamont.  167

vetiiiire  to  say  thisi  8are  he  that  dentea  the  true  reaurrectiou  Book
of  Hia  flesh  ?'  Then  he  objected  to  me,  saying, '  Whereas  it  is  iEilL
written ;  Fle$h  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  Oodj  l  Cor.
by  what  means  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  flesh  traly  rises  *^'  ^*
again?*  To  whom  I  say;  *  In  Holy  Writ  flesh  is  named  in
one  way  according  to  nature,  and  in  another  way  according
to  sin  or  corruption/ For  there  is  flesh  according  to  nature,
as  where  it  is  written,  This  is  now  bone  of  my  bones^  and^'^»
flesh  of  my  flesh. And,  The  Word  was  made  fleshy  (^ndjohni^
dwelt  among  us. But  there  is  flesh  according  to  sin,  as'^*
where  it  is  written,  My  Spitit  shall  not  always  abide  in  those  (^n*  6,
men,  for  that  they  are  flesh. And  as  the  Psalmist  saith ;
For  He  remembered  that  they  were  but  fleshy  a  wind  thatVn,  78,
passeth  away^  and  cometh  not  again. Whence  too  Paul  said
to  the  disciples ;  But  ye  are  not  in  the  fleshy  but  in  the  Rom.  8,
spirit. For  it  was  not  that  these  persons  were  not  in  the'*
flesh,  to  whom  he  was  sending  letters,  but  for  that  they  had
subdued  the  motions  of  carnal  passions,  henceforth,  free
through  the  eflicacy  of  the  Spirit,  they  *  were  not  in  the  flesh.*
Therefore  in  respect  to  what  Paul  says,  that  flesh  and  blood
cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God^  he  would  hare  flesh
to  be  understood  as  applied  to  sin,  not  flesh  as  applied  to
nature. Hence  directly  afterwards  that  he  was  speaking  of
flesh  after  sin  he  makes  plain,  by  adding;  Neither  doth
corruption  inherit  ineorruption. Therefore  in  that  glory  of
the  heavenly  kingdom  there  will  be  flesh  according  to  nature,
but  not  flesh  according  to  the  desire  of  the  passions ;  in  that
the  sting  of  death  being  overcome,  it  will  reign  in  eternal
incorruptibility.*

73.  To  which  words  the  same  Eutychitis  directly  answered
that  he  assented,  yet  still  he  denied  that  the  body  could
rise  again  a  palpable  body.  Who  in  the  treatise  too  which  he
had  written  concerning  the  resurrection,  had  put  in  the
testimony  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  when  he  says;  Ttuit  which \cw.
thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it  die.  And  that  which  ^^*  ^'
thou  sowest,  thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be,  but
bare  grain.  Ueing  eager  to  shew  this,  that  the  flesh  will
either  be  impalpable  %  or  will  not  be  itself  identically,  seeing

*  Nearly  all  M8S.  read, '  palpabilii,'  which,  if  right,  moat  come  under  the
following  oegatiTe.

168  Euiychius  convinced  through  Job's  words.

Job  19,  that  the  holy  AposUey  when  treating  of  the  glory  of  the
^^  resurrection,  says  that  ^  it  was  not  sown  the  body  that  it  shall
be/  But  the  answer  to  this  is  soon  made.  For  tlio  Apostle
Paul,  when  he  says,  TKou  sotvesi  tiot  that  body  that  shall
be,  but  bare  grain,  is  telling  us  of  what  we  see ;  viz.  that  the
grain,  which  is  sown  without  a  stalk  or  leaves,  springs  up
with  a  stalk  and  leaves;  so  that  he,  in  heightening  the
glory  of  the  resurrection,  did  not  say  that  what  it  was  is
wanting  to  it,  but  that  what  it  was  not  is  present :  but  this
man,  whereas  he  denies  the  real  body  to  rise  again,  does  not
say  that  what  was  wanting  is  there,  but  that  what  it  was  is
wanting.

74.  Upon  this,  then,  we  being  led  on  in  long  disputing  on
this  point,  we  began  to  recoil  from  one  another  with  the
greatest  animosity,  when  the  Emperor  Tiberius  Constantine,
of  religious  memory,  bringing  myself  and  him  to  a  private
audience,  learnt  what  dispute  was  being  carried  on  between
us,  and  weighing  the  statement  of  both  sides,  and  by  bis  own
allegations  as  well  disproving  that  same  book  which  he  had
written  concerning  the  resurrection,  determined  that  it  ought
to  be  consumed  in  the  flames.  Upon  our  leaving  whom,  I
was  seized  with  a  grievous  sickness,  while  to  that  same
Eutychius  sickness  and  death  shortly  followed.  And  when
he  was  dead,  because  there  was  well  nigh  no  one  who  followed
his  statements,  I  held  back  from  prosecuting  what  I  had
commenced,  lest  I  should  seem  to  be  darting  words  at  his
ashes,  but  while  he  was  still  alive,  and  I  sick  of  violent  fever,
if  any  of  my  acquaintance  went  to  him  for  the  sake  of  greet-
ing him,  as  I  learnt  from  their  relation,  he  used  to  take  hold
on  the  skin  of  his  hand  before  their  eyes,  saying,  ^  I  confess
that  we  shall  all  rise  again  in  this  flesh;*  which  as  they  them-
selves avowed  he  was  before  wont  altogether  to  deny.

75.  But  let  us,  laying  aside  these  considerations,  minutely
search  out  in  the  words  of  blessed  Job,  if  there  will  be  a
true  resurrection,  and  the  true  body  in  that  resurrection ;  for,
lo,  we  are  no  longer  able  to  doubt  of  the  hope  of  the  resur-
rection, in  that  he  says.  And  that  I  shall  rise  at  the  last  dag

from  the  earth.  Moreover  he  has  removed  all  doubting  of
the  true  renewal  of  the  body,  in  that  he  says.  And  I  shall
be  again  encompassed  with  my  skin. And  he  still  further

Sure  faith  in  Chriif$  rising  implieiour  owH. 169

adds,  with  the  yiew of  removing  the  misgivings  of  out  Book
thought;  "^'

And  in  myjlenh  nhall  I  nee  God.

76.  Mark,  he  owns  the  resurrection,  *  the  skin/  *  the  flesh/  Irii.
in  explicit  words. What  is  there  left  then,  by  which  our  mind
should  have  occasion  to  doubt? If  this  holy  man  then  before

the  fact  of  the  Lord's  resurrectioui  believed  in  the  flesh  being
destined  to  be  brought  back  to  its  entire  state,  what  will  be
the  guilt  of  our  doubting,  if  the  true  resurrection  of  the  flesh
not  even  after  the  proof  of  our  Redeemer  obtains  credit?
For  if  after  the  resurrection  there  will  not  be  a  palpable  body,
surely  another  person  rises  again  than  dies:  which  is  profane
to  say;  viz.  to  believe  that  it  is  I  who  die,  and  another  that
doth  rise  again'.  Wherefore  I  entreat  thee,  blessed  Job,'ABCD,
add  how  thou  art  minded,  and  remove  from  us  all  ground  ot^^^
scruple  on  this  point. It  follows;  H«e.'

Ver.  27.  Whom  I  shall  see  for  myseify  and  mine  eyes  shall
behold  J  and  not  another.

77.  For  if,  as  certain  votaries  of  false  opinions  believe,
after  the  resurrection  there  shall  be  no  palpable  body,  but
the  subtle  quality  of  an  invisible  body  shall  be  called  the
flesh,  though  there  be  no  substance  of  flesh,  then  surely  he
that  dies  is  one  person,  and  he  that  rises  again  is  another.
But  blessed  Job  destroys  this  assertion  for  them  by  a  truth*
telling  voice,  in  that  he  says,  Whom  I  shall  see  for  myself j
and  mine  eyes  shall  behold^  and  not  another'.  But  we,  fol-
lowing the  faith  that  blessed  Job  held,  and  truly  believing
the  palpable  Body  of  our  Redeemer  after  His  resurrection,
confess  that  our  flesh  after  the  resurrection  will  be  at  once
both  the  same  and  different,  the  same  in  respect  of  nature,
different  in  respect  of  glory,  the  same  in  its  reality,  different
in  its  power.  Thus  it  will  be  subtle,  in  that  it  will  be  incor-
ruptible; it  will  be  palpable,  in  that  it  will  not  lose  the
essence  of  its  very  and  true  nature.  But  that  same  assurance
of  the  resurrection  the  holy  man  subjoins  with  what  sure  hope
he  holds  it,  with  what  certainty  he  awaits  it. It  goes  on ;

This  my  hope  is  laid  up  in  my  bosom,

78.  We  suppose  that  we  hold  nothing  more  surely  than  Iviii.
what  we  have  in  our  bosom ;  and  so  he  kept  *  hope  laid  up

in  his  bosom,"  in  that  he  laid  hold  beforehand  on  true  cer^-

170 Fear  of  Judgment  sfumld  clieck  rash  censures.

Job  10,  taint/  concerning  the  hope  of  the  resurrection.  But  whereas
£^^  'he  made  known  that  the  day  of  the  resurrection  would  come,
he  now,  whether  in  his  own  voice,  or  in  a  figure  of  the  holy
and  universal  Church,  reproves  the  deeds  of  the  wicked,  and
foretells  the  Judgment  which  ensues  on  the  day  of  the
resurrection. For  he  straightway  adds ;

Ver.  28.  29. Wlierefore  then  do  ye  now  say,  Let  us  per-
secute him,andjind  out  the  root  qf  the  word  against  himf
Fly  therefore  from  the /ace  of  the  sword,  for  the  sword  is  an
avenger  of  wickedness i  and  know  that  there  is  a  judgment.
lix. 79.  For  in  the  firat  sentence  ho  reproved  the  deeds  of  the
wicked,  while  in  the  following  he  made  known  the  punish-
ments proceeding  from  the  Divine  judgment. Thus  he  sailh,
Wher^ore  then  do  ye  now  say;  Let  us  persecute  him  and
find  out  the  root  of  the  word  against  him? Wicked  per-
sons, because  they  hear  with  wrong  earnestness  things  well
put  forth,  and  seek  to  find  in  the  tongue  of  the  righteous  an
inlet  for  accusation,  what  else  do  they  but  ^  seek  the  root  of
the  word  against  him,'  from  which  same  they  may  take  the  com-
mencement of  speaking,  and  in  the  accusing  of  him  expand
the  bi-anches  of  evil  talkativeness  ? But  when  the  holy  man
meets  with  such  things  at  the  hands  of  wicked  men,  it  is  not
against  them  but  rather  for  them  that  he  feels  sorrow,  and
reproves  the  things  wickedly  harboured  in  the  heart,  and
shews  them  evil  for  them  to  escape,  saying,  Fly  then^ore
from  the  face  of  the  sv)ord;  for  the  sword  is  the  avenger  of
wickedness;  and  know  that  there  is  ajudgmefil. Every  one
that  does  wicked  things,  even  herein,  that  he  is  too  indifferent
to  fear  this,  does  not  know  of  there  being  a  judgment  of  God.
For  if  he  did  know  that  this  was  a  thing  to  be  feared,  he
would  never  do  things  that  are  destined  to  be  punished  in  it.
For  there  are  very  many  who  know  that  there  is  a  final
Judgment  as  far  as  the  words  go,  but  by  acting  wickedly
they  bear  witness  that  they  do  not  know  it. Since  whereas  he
does  not  dread  this  as  he  ought,  he  does  not  yet  know  with
>  al. '  be  what  a  tempest  of  terror  it  will  come. For  if  he  had  ■  been
wbobad'  ||^„g]||  |q  estimate  the  weight  of  the  dreadful  scrutiny,  surely
in  fearing  he  would  guard  against  the  day  of  wrath. More-
over, *  to  fly  from  the  face  of  the  sword,'  is  to  propitiate  the
sentence  of  the  strict  visitation  before  it  appears. For  the

Judgment  can  onltf  he  eicaped  h^orehand. 171

tenibleness  of  the  Jadge  cannot  be  avoided  sating  before  the  Book
Judgment.  Now  He  is  not  discernedi  but  is  appeased  by  '
prayers.  But  when  He  shall  sit  on  that  dreadful  inquest,
He  is  both  able  to  be  seen  and  not  able  any  longer  to  be
propitiated;  in  that  the  doings  of  the  wicked  which  He
bore  long  while  in  silence,  He  shall  pay  back  all  of  them
together  in  wrath.  Whence  it  is  necessary  to  fear  the  Judge
now,  while  He  does  not  yet  execute  judgment,  while  He
bears  patiently  for  long,  while  He  still  tolerates  the  wicked-
ness diat  He  sees,  lest  when  He  has  once  plucked  out  His
hand  in  the  awarding  of  Tengeance,  He  strike  the  more
severely  in  judgment,  in  proportion  as  He  waited  longer
before  judgment.

BOOK  XV.

In  which  there  is  a  brief  expbnation  given  of  the  twentieth  and  twenty-
first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job.

That  Ibe  friends  of  blessed  Job  could  never  have  been
bad  men,  the  words  of  Zophar  the  Naamathite  bear  witness,
who  on  hearing  from  his  lips  the  terribleness  of  the  Judg-
ment to  come,  adds  directly;

Ver.  1.  Therefore  do  my  thoughts  chang^ully  succeed  one
another^  and  my  mind  is  transported  diverse  ways.
i.  I.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words;  ^  Because  I  see  the

^''*  terribleness  of  the  last  Judgment,  therefore  I  am  confounded
in  a  state  of  consternation  by  the  tumults  of  my  thoughts.'
For  the  mind  spreads  itself  wider  in  its  range  of  thought,  the
more  it  considers  how  dreadful  that  is  which  threatens  it.
And  ^  the  mind  is  transported  diverse  ways,'  when  with
anxious  alarm  she  weighs  and  considers,  one  while  the  evil  she
has  done,  at  another  time  the  good  she  has  left  undone,  now
all  the  blameable  practices  that  she  remains  in,  and  now  the
right  habits  that  she  sees  to  be  lacking  to  her.  But  though
the  Mends  of  blessed  Job,  instructed  by  habituation  to  his
life,  knew  how  to  live  well,  yet,  being  uninstructed  to  form
an  exact  esUmate  of  God's  judgments,  that  any  one  of  the
righteous  can  be  susceptible  of  ills  here  below,  they  did  not
believe  possible.  And  hence  they  imagined  that  holy  man
to  be  wicked,  whom  they  saw  scourged,  and,  in  consequence
of  this  suspicion,  it  came  to  pass  that  they  slipt  aside  into
the  upbraiding  of  him  as  well,  whereunlo  nevertheless  they
do  not  descend,  save  under  the  guise  of  a  kind  of  respect.
Hence  Zophar  adds  in  these  words ;

Ver.  3.  TIte  lesson  whereby  thou  dost  reproach  me  I  will
hear;  and  the  spirit  of  my  understanding  will  answer  me.
ii* 2.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words;  ^  Thy  words  indeed
I  hear,  but  whether  they  were  delivered  aright,  1  discern  by

Zophar  Irul^  caUn  the  triumph  qf  the  wicked  short.  178

the  spirit  of  my  understanding." For  they  Ibat  disregard  the  Book

words  of  the  teacher,  employ  his  teaching  not  for  an  assist -^

ance  but  for  an  occasion  of  contention,  rather  that  they  may
criticise  the  things  heard  than  to  follow  them.  This  then
being  premised  with  a  sort  of  restraint,  he  now  springs  out
into  the  open  reviling  of  the  blessed  man,  when  he  adds ;

Ver.  4j6.  1  hioto  this  of  old ^  since  man  tens  placed  upon
earthy  that  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  shorty  and  the
Joy  qf  the  hypocrite  htUfor  a  moment.

S.  Now  it  is  clear  to  be  seen  that  being  pufled  up  with  Hi.
the  spirit  of  his  understanding,  he  warps  the  sentences,  which
he  pronounces  against  the  ungodly,  to  the  reproving  of
blessed  Job.  For  in  him  whom  he  first  saw  following
right  ways,  and  aderwards  undergoing  punishment,  he
reckons  all  that  ho  saw  to  have  been  but  hypocrisy,  in  that
ho  did  not  believe  it  possible  for  a  just  senrant  to  be  put  to
distress  by  a  just  God.  But  those  same  sentences,  which,
being  right,  he  did  not  pronounce  in  a  right  way,  let  us  go
through,  weighing  them  with  earnest  intentness  of  mind ;  and
setting  at  nought  what  he  says  untrue  against  blessed  Job,
let  us  consider  how  true  are  the  things  he  speaks,  if  he  were
speaking  them  against  the  ungodly.  /  know  this  of  old^  since
man  was  placed  upon  earthy  that  the  triumphing  of  the
wicked  is  short.  Going  to  tell  the  shortness  of  the  present
life,  he  carried  back  the  eye  of  the  interior  to  the  outset  of
the  commencement,  in  order  to  collect  from  the  past  how
nothing  all  things  are,  that  while  they  continue  to  be,  se^m
to  be  something.  For  if  we  carry  the  eyes  of  our  imagina-
tion from  the  very  commencement  of  the  human  race  up  to
the  present  time  in  which  we  now  are,  we  see  how  short  all
was  that  was  of  a  nature  to  come  to  an  end.  Let  us  ima-
gine a  man  to  have  lived  from  the  first  day  of  the  world's
creation  to  this  present  day,  yet  on  this  day  to  end  the  life,
which  he  seemed  to  have  continued  to  so  great  a  length,  lo,
the  end  is  come,  the  things  past  are  already  become  nought,
in  that  every  thing  has  passed  away.  For  the  future  in  this
\vorid  is  nought,  in  that  not  a  moment,  or  the  very  shortest
particle  of  time  remains  to  our  life.  Where  then  is  that
long  time,  which,  comprehended  between  the  beginning  and
the  end,  is  so  wasted  in  substance,  just  as  if  it  had  not  ever
been  even  short  in  duration  ?

174 The  hypocrite^ 9  joy  is  in  things  thai  abide  not.

Job  80,  4.  Therefore  because  the  wicked  have  their  heart  centered
1^,^'  in  this  life,  surely  they  set  themselves  up  therein  and  seek  to
win  applause.  They  are  lifted  up  by  the  flattery  of  the  lips,
having  no  desire  to  be  good,  but  only  to  be  called  so.
Which  praise  they  think  is  of  a  great  length  while  they  receive
it,but  understand  to  have  been  brief  when  they  lose  it.  Whence
it  is  well  said  against  these  wicked  persons.  This  I  know  of
oldf  since  man  was  placed  upon  earth,  that  the  triumphing
of  the  wicked  is  short ;  and  it  is  well  added,  And  the  joy
of  the  hypoa-ite  hut  for  a  moment.  It  often  happens  that
while  the  hypocrite  passes  himself  off  for  holy,  without  a
fear  of  letting  himself  appear  wicked,  he  is  honoured  of  all
men,  and  the  high  credit  of  holiness  is  awarded  to  him,  by
those  who  can  make  out  the  outside,  but  have  no  eyes  to
look  into  the  interior  of  things.  Whence  it  happens,  that  he
triumphs  in  having  the  first  seat,  is  overjoyed  in  getting  the
first  couch,  filled  with  pride  at  receiving  the  first  invitation,
elevated  at  the  respectful  address  of  his  followers,  swoln  in
the  pride  of  his  heart  at  the  observance  of  his  dependents,

Miit.23,  as  is  said  of  such  by  tlie  voice  of  Truth  Himself.  But  all
their  works  they  do  for  to  be  seen  of  men :  they  makj  broad
their  phylacteries^  and  enlarge  the  borders  qf  their  garments,
and  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts,  and  the  chi^  seats
in  the  synagogues,  and  greetings  in  the  markets,  and  to  be
called  qf  men.  Rabbi,  Babbi.  But  all  tliis  joy  of  theirs,
compared  with  eternity,  what  will  become  of  it,  when,  the
crisis  of  death  being  upon  them,  it  perishes,  as  though  it  had
never  been? Of  which  same  joy  the  mirth  is  all  gone,  the

I  oaoM,  punishment  remains,  and  when  the  thing  is  lost,  the  guilt ^

*'*'^  ^  endures.  And  it  is  well  said ;  The  joy  (f  the  hypocrite  like
a  point.  For  in  making  a  point  the  style  is  lifted  up  as
soon  as  set  down,  and  there  is  no  lingering,  that  it  may  be
drawn  along  a  line  to  be  described.  And  so  the  joy  of  the
hypocrite  *  is  like  a  point,'  in  that  it  appears  for  a  moment,
and  is  gone  for  ever;  and  just  as  the  style,  in  the  case  of  a
point,  while  set  down  is  lifted  up  in  one,  so  the  hypocrite,
whilst  he  touches,  parts  with  the  joys  of  the  present  life.
Concerning  whom  it  is  also  added;

Yer.  6,  7.  Tliough  his  pride  mount  up  unto  the  heavens,
and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds :  Yet  he  shall  perish
at  last  like  the  dunghill.

The  hjfpocfiie*9  soul  shewn  ai  last  a  dunghill  of  vices.  175

5.  The  pride  of  the  hypocrite  is  said  to  '  mount  np  unto  Book
the  hearenS)'  when  his  high-mindedness  has  the  appearance-
of  leading  a  hearenlj  life;  and  his  '  head  as  it  were  reaches
unto  the  clondsi*  when  the  leading  part,  i.  e.  his  intellect,  is
thought  to  equal  the  merits  of  the  Saints  that  have  gone
before.  Yet  he  *  perishes  at  last  like  the  dunghill/  because
at  his  death,  when  he  is  led  to  torments,  being  full  of  the
dung  of  evil  habits,  he  is  trodden  under  foot  of  evil  spirits.

For  the  joys  of  the  present  life,  which  the  imrighteous
account  great  good,  righteous  men  look  upon  as  dung.
Whence  it  is  written ;  A  slothful  man  is  stoned  with  the  Eeolw*
dung  of  oxen.  Thus  he  that  will  not  follow  God  is  made  '
slothful  in  the  love  of  the  life  everlasting.  And  as  often
as  he  is  stricken  with  the  loss  of  temporal  goods,  he  is
surely  troubled  on  the  score  of  those  things,  which  the
righteous  look  down  upon  as  *  dung:'  what  else  is  it  with
him,  then,  that  is  bruised  with  the  buffeting  of  things  earthly,
than  that  he  *  is  stoned  with  the  dung  of  oxen  V  And  the
hypocrite  is  justly  described  like  a  dunghill,  in  that  while
he  aims  to  obtain  temporal  glory,  at  one  time  in  the  ima-
gination of  his  heart  he  swells  within  himself,  at  another
time  he  grudges  that  same  glory  to  some,  and  laughs  at
others  having  it  really.  For  all  the  evil  qualities  then  that
he  is  full  of,  his  breast  as  it  were  is  defiled  with  so  much
dung,  in  the  eye  of  the  Eternal  Judge.  Therefore  it  may
be  said.  Though  his  pride  mount  up  unto  the  heavens^  and
his  h£ad  reach  unto  the  clouds^  yet  he  shall  perish  at  last
like  the  dunghill.  Which  same,  though  he  feign  to  lead
a  heavenly  life,  though  he  shew  his  view  of  truth  to  accord
with  the  true  preachers,  yet  he  *  perishes  like  a  dunghill  in
the  end,'  in  that  hie  soul  is  damned  for  the  stench  of  his  evil
qualities. It  goes  on ;

They  which  had  seen  him  shall  say^  Where  is  he?

6.  It  generally  happens  that  the  life  of  the  hypocrite  is v.
even  by  all  men  discovered  at  the  end  to  be  damnable,  for  it

to  be  made  appear  by  plainer  marks  now  what  sort  they  were
of.  They  then  that  saw  him  elate  at  this  present  time  shall
say  of  him  when  dead,  Where  is  hef  For  neither  is  he  seen
here  where  he  was  elated,  nor  yet  in  the  rest  of  eternity,  which
he  was  supposed  to  be  of.  Concerning  the  shortness  of
whose  life  it  is  yet  further  added  with  fitness;

176 Tlie  hypocrite^ n  li/e  a  dream  o/Jiilse  yloiy.

Job  30, Yer.  8.  He  shall  fly  away  as  a  dream^  and  shall  not  be
-found:  yea^  he  shall  be  chased  away  as  a  vision  qf  the


8.


Lit.


night.

vi.  7.  What  else  is  the  life  of  the  hypocrite  but  tlie  vision  of
a  phanlomy  which  exhibits  that  in  semblance  which  it  does
not  possess  in  truth?  Whence  too  it  is  justly  likened  to  ^  a
dream/ in  that  all  praise  and  glory  is,  as  it  were,  gone  from  him
whilst  it  is  being  held.  For  oftentimes  in  a  ^  vision  of  the
night/  some  that  are  poor  are  full  of  wonder  that  they  are
made  rich,  they  see  honours  awarded  to  them,  they  behold
heaps  of  riches,  a  multitude  of  attendants,  the  most  beautiful
garments,  abundance  of  food  presented  to  them.  They  are
delighted  to  have  escaped  poverty,  which  they  bore  with  a
grieved  spirit;  but  on  a  sudden,  when  they  wake,  they  find
how  fsXse  all  the  joy  was  which  they  felt,  and  they  are  sad
that  they  have  awoke,  in  that  real  want  gripes  them
awake.  Thus  the  minds  of  hypocrites,  whilst  what  they
do  is  one  thing,  and  what  they  exhibit  to  men  another,
win  applause  by  the  mere  exhibiting  of  holy  living;  in  the
esteem  of  men  they  are  set  before  numbers  that  are  better,
and  whilst  they  are  highminded  with  the  secret  thought
within,  they  exhibit  themselves  without  as  humble.  And
whereas  they  are  excessively  commended  by  men,  they  imagine
that  in  the  eyes  of  God  also  they  are  such,  as  they  delight  to
make  themselves  known  to  be  to  their  fellow-creatures.  Hence
it  comes  to  pass  that  they  assume  that  they  will  likewise
obtain  the  rewards  of  eternal  life,  and  they  who  triumph  here
below,  upon  the  commendations  of  their  fellow-creatures,
doubt  not  for  a  moment  that  they  will  have  rest  there;  but
in  the  midst  of  this  the  secret  hour  of  their  call  creeps  upon
them,  and  while  they  shut  the  eyes  of  the  flesh  they  open
those  of  the  spirit,  and  so  soon  as  they  have  gotten  otenial
punishments,  they  there  see,  that  they  were  rich  in  the  repute
for  virtues  only  in  sleep.  Well  then  is  it  said  of  such  a
hypocrite,  Yea^  he  shall  be  chased  away  as  a  vision  qf  the
niyht.  For  this,  that  he  sees  himself  for  a  brief  space  rich
in  man's  esteem,  is  of  the  show  of  a  phantasm,  not  of  the
lal.'of  gubstance  of  virtue'.  For  when  his  soul  wakes  up  at  the
dissolution  of  the  flesh,  it  learns,  assuredly,  that  it  was  in
a  sleeping  state  that  it  saw  tlie  partial  regards  of  men  about
it. It  goes  on ;

The  hypocrite^sJlniterer$fail  him. His  imiiators  poor.  177

Ver.  9.  7%tf  eye  aho  which  saw  him  shall  see  him  no  Book
more:  neither  shall  his  place  any  more  behold  him.


8.  What  is  the  *  place'  of  the  hypocrite,  saving  the  heart Tii.
of  his  flatterers? For  there  he  rests,  where  he  finds  par-
tialities towards  him. Therefore  *  the  eye  that  saw  him  shall

see  him  no  more,*  because  being  removed  by  death,  he  is
hidden  from  his  foolish  lovers,  who  were  wont  to  behold  him,
admiring  him.  '  Neither  shall  his  place  any  more  behold
him,'  because  the  tongues  of  his  flatterers  do  not  follow  him
with  their  partialities  to  the  Judgment  Yet  so  long  as  he
lives  he  does  not  cease  to  teach  his  followers  likewise  the
things  that  he  practises  himself ;  and  through  the  frowardness
of  his  erring  way  he  begets  others  also  in  a  likeness  to  that
false  pretension  which  he  shews  forth.  Concerning  whom  it
is  fitly  added  in  this  place,

Ver.  10.  His  children  shall  he  frasled  with  poverty.

9.  It  is  written,  For  into  a  malicious  soul  wisdom  shall  viii.
not  enter;  and  it  is  declared  by  the  Psalmist,  The  rich  havej^^^'^*
lacked  and  been  a  hungred. For  if  their  want  and  hunger  P«-  s^i
were  spoken  of  outward  starving,  then  surely  they  would  be

any  tiling  but  rich,  who  were  in  want  of  the  bread  of  the
body.  But  forasmuch  as  whilst  they  are  increased  without,
they  are  rendered  void  within,  they  are  described  as  rich
and  needy  at  one  and  the  same  time,  in  that  they  never
entitle  themselves  to  be  filled  with  the  bread  of  wisdom.
And  so  the  children  of  this  hypocrite  are  *  worn  down  with
want,'  because  they  that  are  bom  in  hypocrisy  in  mimicry  of
him,  whilst  they  do  not  hold  the  substance  of  truth,  are
brought  to  nought  in  the  penury  of  the  heart
And  his  hands  shall  repay  him  his  own  grief.

10.  What  is  denoted  by  *  hands,'  saving  works?  Thus  ix.
*  his  hands  will  repay  him  grief,'  because  he  will  reap  just
damnation  from  his  wicked  course  of  life.  Now  it  is  well
said,  not '  give,'  but '  repay,'  in  that  his  froward  deeds  shall
pay  him  back  eternal  punishment  like  a  kind  of  debt  But
before  he  is  brought  to  eternal  punishment,  let  him  add
more  fully  the.  sort  of  character  that  he  shews  himself  here.

It  goes  on,

His  bonei  shall  be  full  qf  the  sin  qf  his  youths  and  shall
sleep  trith  him  in  tlie  dust.

N

178 lU  habiis  sirettyihened  by  tin,  yood  ottes  woiUd.

Job 80, II.  The  origin  of  a  bad  beginning  by preoccupying

_i^i—  further  multiplies  the  causes  of  sin. For  when  a  man  has

^ *  begun  to  do  evil,  by  custom  he  now  grows  to  a  worse  height

in  that  which  he  had  begun. What  then  is  the  ^  youth'  of

this  hypocrite,  but  the  beginning  of  wickedness,  since  in

youth  passion  now  begins to  kindle  ? And  the  hypocrite

then  has  youth,  when  he  begins  to  long  for  and  to  embrace

the  passion  for  glory. Which  same,  whilst  the  soft  salves  of

flatterers  redouble  it,  they  give  strength  to,  and  as  it  were

turn  it  into  bones. For  what  he  begins  badly,  he  is  daily

strengthening  for  the  worse  by  custom. Therefore  let  it  be

said ;  HU  bones  shall  be  full  of  the  sin  of  his  youth  ;  in  that

the  rgid  habits  of  evil  practices  in  him  are  taken  from  the

sin  of  an  ill  beginning. Hence  it  is  written  in  the  Proverbs,

ProY. TJte  young  man  according  to  his  own  way^  when  he  is  old,

*^'  *• will  never  depart  therefrom. Which same  *  bones'  truly

^  will  sleep with him  in  the  dust,' for  so  long  do  evil

practices  endure  in  him,  until  they  drag  him  to  the  dust

of  death. Since  for  his  *  bones,'  or  evil  habits,  to  *  sleep

with  him  in  the  dust'  is  for  these  never  to  quit  him  even

to  the  very  dust,  that  is,  never  to  cease  from  sin  even  until

death. Therefore  bad  habits,  which  are  once  begun,  keep

hold  of  him,  and  daily  become  more  hardened. And  they

*  sleep  with  him  in  the  dust,'  because  they  are  never  ended

but  with  bis  life.  But  this  may  be  taken  in  another  sense  also.

12. For  the hypocrite  occasionally  has sometliing in

practice  that  is  strong  and  vigorous,  but  whilst  he  makes

believe  to  have  many  good  points  that  he  is  without,  be

loses  even  these  which  he  has. Whence  it  is  well  said  now ;

His  bones  shall  be  full  of  the  sin  qf  his  youth. For  whereas

in  his  levity  and  fickleness  he  does  many  things  like  a  child,

even  in  strong  ones  which  he  may  do  he  is  enervated  in  sin.

Which  same  *  bones  shall sleep with  him  in  the  dust,'

because  as  all  that  hypocrisy  which  he  carries  on  is  dust,

so  too  whatever  he  has  in  him  that  is  strong  is  robbed  of  all

its  solidity,  so  that  by  pretension  to  virtue  he  loses  that  also

which  there  might  have  been  in  him  of  a  virtuous  nature.

And  so  for  *  his  bones'  to  *  sleep  with  him  in  the  dust'  is

even  if  there  be  things  done  well,  for  them to  come  to

nought  together  with  his  evil  deeds. It  proceeds ,

fVhai  in  *  ofC  the  tongue  not  alwa^i  what  is  '  undet^  it,  179

Ver.  12. For  when  wickedneu  shall  he  sweet  in  his  Book
mouth,  he  will  hide  it  under  his  tongue.  ^^'

13.  *  Wickedness  is  sweet  in  the  mooth*  of  the  hypocrite,  xi.
in  that  evil  tastes  sweet  to  him  in  the  thought.  For  *  the
moath^  of  the  heart  is  the  thought,  whereof  it  is  written ;
Deceitful  lips  spake  evih  in  a  double  heart.  Now  the  eTilPff.i9,s.
that  is  thus  sweet  in  the  mouth  of  the  hypocrite  is  hidden
tinder  the  tongue,  in  that  the  harshness  of  an  e?il  disposition,
which  lies  hidden  in  the  mind,  is  concealed  nnder  the  cloak
of  a  mild  address.  For  the  eril  would  be  on  the  tongue  and
not  under  it,  if  the  hjrpocrite  in  speaking  disclosed  the
mischievousness  of  his  froward  heart  But  as  is  the  case
with  most  of  the  righteous,  when  they  see  any  persons
acting  badly,  who  deserve  to  be  risited  with  severe  rebukes,
they  put  harshness  on  the  tongue,  but  under  the  tongue  corer
the  kindness  of  their  feelings ;  (whence  too  it  is  said  to  Holy
Church  by  the  voice  of  the  Spouse ;  Honey  and  milk  are  Cut  4,
under  Thy  tongue.  For  they  that  shrink  from  disclosing
the  sweetness  of  their  inward  feeling  to  the  weak,  and  so  in
speaking  strike  them  with  a  degree  of  harshness,  and  yet
amongst  their  harsh  words  secretly  as  it  were  let  drop  a
sprinkling  of  sweetness,  these  persons  clearly  have  sweetness
not  on  the  tongue,  but  under  the  tongue,  in  that  amidst  the
hard  words  which  they  utter^  they  give  out  some  that  are
sweet  and  softened,  whereby  the  wounded  mind  may  be
cheered  and  refreshed  by  kindness;)  so  with  the  wicked
severally,  because  they  hare  evil  not  upon  the  tongue,  but
under  the  tongue,  in  the  words  of  their  mouth  they  hold  out
sweet  things,  and  in  the  thoughts  of  their  heart  are  plotting
mischiefs.  For  it  is  hence  that  Joab  held  the  beard  of  Amasa  s  Sam.
with  his  right  hand,  whilst  secretly  putting  his  left  hand  to^'
bis  sword,  he  shed  out  his  bowels.  For  to  bold  the  chin
with  the  right  hand  is  to  caress  as  if  in  kindness.  But  he
puts  his  left  hand  to  his  sword,  who  in  secret  strikes  in
malice.  Hence  too  it  is  written  concerning  their  head
himself;  Under  his  tongue  is  mischief  and  pain.  For  hePt.io,7.
that  doth  not  display  openly  the  ill  that  he  designs,  does
not  put  forth  on  the  tongue  the  mischief  and  pain  of  those,

•  TlMwo«inP</ltiiotijitli«yii1fato,BoriiiaUeopiMofLXX.
k2

180 The  bread  of  the  wicked  turns  to  gall  within.

Job  so,  whose  destruction  he  aims  atf  but  keeps  them  close  under
L '  the  tongue. Now  it  is  rightly  added  of  this  hypocrite,

Ver.  13.  He  will  spare  it^  and  forsake  it  noty  but  keep  ii
stilt  within  his  throat.
xii.  14.  For  the  evil  that  he  delights  in  he  ^  spares/  because
he  does  not,  by  practising  penance,  hunt'it  down  in  himself.
Whence  too  it  is  added ;  and  forsake  it  not.  For  if  he  had
the  mind  to  '  forsake,'  he  would  not  *  spare'  it,  but  would
pursue  it  closely.  Now  he  ^  keeps  it  within  his  throat  ;*
because  he  so  retains  il  in  thought,  that  he  never  utters  it  in
speech. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  14.  His  bread  in  Ms  belly  shall  be  turned  into  the
gall  of  asps  within  him.
xiii.  10.  What  bread  is  in  the  belly,  the  same  is  fulness  of
earthly  gratification  in  the  mind.  So  let  the  hypocrite  now
be  filled  to  the  full  with  the  praises  tendered  him,  let  him
revel  in  honours,  *  his  broad  in  his  belly  is  turned  into  the
gall  of  asps,'  because  the  fulness  of  transitory  enjoyment,
in  the  final  Retribution,  will  be  turned  to  bitterness,  in  that
what  here  passed  for  the  praise  of  greatness  is  discovered
to  have  been  ^  the  gall  of  asps,'  i.  e.  the  prompting  of  evil
spirits.  For  the  wicked  then  perceive  that  they  are  infected
with  the  venom  of  the  old  serpent,  when,  being  delivered
over  to  avenging  flames,  they  arc  tormented  along  witli
that  prompter  of  theirs.  And  so  this  '  bread'  has  one  sort
of  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  another  in  the  belly,  in  that
the  joy  of  transitory  pleasure  is  sweet,  while  it  is  tasted
here  by  a  chewing  of  teeth,  as  it  were,  but  it  turns  bitter  in
the  belly,  because  when  the  joy  is  past  it  is  swallowed  to
his  ruing.

16.  Or  indeed  forasmuch  as  bread  is  not  unsuitably  taken
for  the  sense  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  refireshes  the
mind  and  fuiiiishes  it  with  the  sinews  of  right  practice,  and
the  hypocrite  generally  makes  it  his  object  to  be  well
instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  Holy  Writ,  not  that  he  may
live  by  them,  but  that  it  may  appear  to  the  rest  of  the
world  how  learned  he  is,  his  ^  bread  in  his  bowels  is  turned
into  the  gall  of  asps,'  in  that  whilst  he  boasts  of  the  know-
ledge of  tlie  Sacred  Law,  he  converts  the  draught  of  life  into
a  Clip  of  poison  to  himself,  and  dies  in  a  state  of  reprobation

Even  ike  food  qf  GotFs  Word  prqfitM  not  had  men. 181

from  the  same  cause,  whence  he  appeared  to  derive  instmc*  Book
tion  unto  life.  Nor  is  this  again  unfitly  taken  to  be  the-^Zl.
meaning,  that  while  the  hypocrite  sometimes  applies  himself
to  the  word  of  instruction  for  display,  being  blinded  by
God*s  judgment,  he  takes  in  a  wrong  sense  that  very  word
which  he  seeks  in  a  wrong  spirit  But  when  he  falls  into
heretical  error,  it  is  his  fate,  that  as  by  the  '  gall  of  asps,*  so
the  unhappy  wretch  perishes  by  *  bread  ;*  and  in  his  own  self-
instruction  he  finds  doatli,  because  in  the  words  of  life  he
never  sought  life.  But  it  often  happens  that  the  sentences  of
dirine  warning,  even  if  they  be  understood  rightly  by  the
hypocrite,  forasmuch  as  he  neglects  to  observe  them  in
practice,  are  lost  to  him  even  before  the  course  of  the
present  life  is  at  an  end,  so  that  it  is  taken  from  him  to
know,  what  while  he  knew  he  refused  to  practise.  Hence  it
is  added ;

Ver.  15. The  riches  he  hath  ewallowed  daum^  he  shall
vomit  upf  and  God  shall  cast  them  out  of  his  belly.

17.  The  hypocrite  desires  to  know  the  revelations  of  God,  xiv.
yet  not  to  practise  them.  He  would  speak  sagely,  but  not
live  so.  For  this  reason,  then,  that  he  does  not  do  what  he
knows,  eren  that  which  he  knows  he  loses,  that  forasmuch
as  he  does  not  unite  pure  practice  with  his  knowledge,  con-
temning purity  of  right  practice  he  loses  the  knowledge  also.
Therefore  the  *  riches*  of  the  Sacred  Law,  which  he  *  swal-
lowed* in  reading,  he  vomits  in  forgetting,  and  God  *  casts
them  out  of  his  belly,'  in  that  what  he  would  not  observe
to  do,  by  a  righteous  judgment  He  roots  out  of  his  recol-
lection, that  at  all  events  he  should  not  keep  the  precepts  of
God  in  the  tongue,  which  he  keptnot  in  his  life.  Whence  it  is
said  by  the  Prophet ;  But  unto  ihe  wicked  Ood  saith.  What  P**  <M>,
hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes^  and  that  thou  shouldest
take  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth  ?  Which  words  of  instruction
if  it  ever  at  any  time  chance  that  the  hypocrite  should  seem
to  retain  in  his  mouth  until  the  end,  he  will  be  condemned
the  more  on  the  veiy  grounds,  whereon  not  even  a  bad  man
is  ever  deprived  of  the  good  gift  of  God.  For  it  is  written ;
To  those  that  remember  His  commandments  to  do  them.  Pi.  los,
He  then  that  keeps  His  commandments  in  mind,  but  never  ^^*

182  Holy  IVrilMhewM  the  BU$9ingand  Curuefroni  above.

Job  ^>  doot  iheiDi  tucb  an  one  holds  in  the  words  of  instruction  tb«

- ' sentences  whereby  he  is  condemned.
Zech.  fl, 18.  For  hence  it  is  written  in  Zechariah;  What  seest  thouy
^  ^' Zechariah?  And  I  amwered^  I  see  a  flying  roll;  the  length
thereof  is  twenty  cubits^  and  the  breadth  thereof  ten  cubits.
Hits  said  he  to  me;  This  is  the  curse  that  goeth  over  the  face
of  the  whole  earth. For  ecet^/  one  that  siealeth  sliall  be
jtidged  as  on  this  side  according  to  it. For  what  is  a  ^  flying
roir  saving  Holy  Writ,  which  whilst  it  tells  us  of  heavenly
themes,  lifts  up  the  bent  of  the  mind  to  things  on  high ;  for
while  we  see  that  it  is  above  us,  we  leave  mindiog,  i.  e.
desiring  things  below. And  it  is  described  as  having  ^  a
breadth  of  ten  cubits'  and  a  ^  length  of  twenty  cubits/  in  that
the  breadth  of  our  practice  is  single,  and  the  long  expectance
of  hope  is  extended  to  double,  since  in  return  for  our  good
practice  both  here  there  is  peace  of  mind,  and  there  eternal
joys  in  store  for  us,  as  Truth  bears  witness,  Who  saith;
Mat.i9,  And  every  one  thai  hath  forsaken  houses  or  landsy  ^c.
^^' shall  receive  an  hundreit/bld^  and  shall  inherit  everlasting
life. For  the  number  one  hundred  is  completed  by  the
number  ten  multiplied  ten  times. Thus  he  gets  back  an
hundredfold  ^  who,  though  he  has  nothing,  by  the  mere
perfection  of  his  mind  alone,  no  longer  seeks  to  possess  any
thing  in  this  world. And  in  this  way,  since  by  this  same  we
have  a  double  measure  paid  back  to  us  for  a  single  one,  that
roll  is  justly  draviii  out  through  twenty  cubits  in  length,
which  is  carried  out  in  breadth  through  ten. But  because
these  very  sacred  oracles  stand  for  eternal  condemnation  to
those  who  either  will  not  acquaint  themselves  with  them,  or
in  any  wise  when  made  acquainted  witli  theip  set  them  at
nought,  it  is  rightly  said  of  this  roll,  This  is  the  curse^  which
goeth  forth  over  the  face  qf  the  whole  earth. Aud  wherefore
it  is  called  a  curse  is  added ;  For  every  one  that  is  a  thitf^
as  it  is  therein  written,  shall  be  judged. Therefore the
hypocrite,  as  he  cares  not  to  live  after  the  words  of  the
law  which  he  knows,  and  seeks  golden  opinions  by  store  of
instruction,  will  be  '  a  thief  to  be  judged,*  since  by  this,  that
he  speaks  just  words,  he  usurps  to  himself  the  praise  of  the
^  perhap«  *  an  hundredfold  A«re,'  (reading  Hto.)

OeniUr  temptaUamJirsif  violent  onei, after. 183

lost  man^s  life. Concerning  whom  it  is  still  farther  added  Book
'rightly,  ^^•


Ver.  16.  He  shcM  suck  the  headofaspe:  the  viper^e  tongue
ehall  slay  him.

19.  The  *  asp*  is  a  small  serpent,  but  the  *  riper'  hath  xr.
more  length  of  body.  And  asps  produce  eggs,  and  their
yonng  are  hatched  from  the  eggs.  But  when  vipers  have
conceived,  their  yonng  ravin  in  their  womb,  which  bursting
the  parents'  sides  issne  out  of  their  bellies.  Tlenco  too  it  is
called  the  '  viper,*  becanse  it  is  a  '  *  parent  by  violence.*  *  '  ^^
Thus  the  viper  is  so  produced  that  it  comes  forth  by  violence,  ^*
and  is  brought  into  the  world  by  the  killing  of  the  mother.
What  then  is  represented  by  the  little  asps,  saving  the
hidden  suggestions  of  impure  spirits,  who  steal  upon '  the
hearts  of  men  by  slight  prompting  at  first,  and  what  by  the
'  viper's  tongue'  save  the  violent  temptation  of  the  devil  ?
For  at  first  he  steals  upon  them  gently,  but  afterwards  he  drags
them  even  by  force.  And  so  he  *  sucks  the  poison  of  asps,*
in  that  the  little  beginning  of  secret  suggestion  is  first  pro-
duced in  the  heart,  but  *  the  viper^s  tongue  slayeth  him,'  in
that  afterwards  the  captive  soul  is  killed  by  the  venom  of
violent  temptation.  In  the  first  case  uncleaii  spirits  speak
to  the  heart  of  man  with  their  crafty  counsels,  and  these,
while  they  persuade  with  gentleness,  as  it  were  inruse  the
poison  of  asps.  Whence  it  is  written,  They  break  asps'  egys,  11.09,0.
and  weave  the  spider's  web;  He  tliat  eaieth  qf  their  eyys
diethf  and  that  which  is  hatched  breaketh  out  into  a  basi-
lisk. Since  to  *  break  asps'  eggs,'  to  wicked  men  is,  to
manifest  by  evil  deeds  the  counsels  of  evil  spirits,  which
lurk  in  their  hearts.  Moreover,  to  *  weave  spiders*  webs'  is,
on  account  of  the  lust  of  this  worldi  to  be  busied  in  any
temporal  employments.  Which,  whilst  they  are  established
with  no  stedfastness,  assuredly  are  carried  off  by  the  wind  of
a  mortal  life.  And  it  is  well  added ;  He  that  eateth  (if  their
eggs  dieth.  In  that  he  that  admits  the  counsels  of  impure
spirits  kills  the  life  of  his  soul  in  him.  *  And  that  which  is
hatched,  breaketh  out  into  a  basilisk,'  in  that  the  suggestion
bf  the  bad  spirit  which  is  covered  up  in  the  heart,  is  nursed
*  B€B. '  inrrlpiiiiit,'  Sitml  from,  but  otheri '  fvirqiiiiit'

184 Alan  yields  willingly  aljirai,  then  cannot  resist.

Job  so,  unto  full  iniquity.  For  '  basilisk*^'  means  the  king  of  serpents,
T  '  and  who  is  the  head  of  the  sons  of  perdition,  save  Antichrist?
Therefore  *  that,  which  is  hatched,  will  break  out  into  a
basilisk,'  in  that  he  who  harbours  in  himself  the  counsel  of
the  *  asp'  to  nourish  them  to  Hfe,  being  made  a  member  of
the  wicked  head,  is  engrafted  into  the  body  of  Antichrist.
Of  which  hypocrite  it  is  said,  He  shall  suck  the  head  qf  asps^
and  the  viper's  tongue  shall  slay  him^  in  that  when  he  gladly
welcomes  the  evil  suggestion  of  our  old  enemy,  afterwards
he  surrenders  himself  vanquished  to  his  forcible  temptations.
Ilence  too  in  Paradise,  to  man  when  he  was  standing,  he
brought  in  words  of  soft  suggestion,  but  him  whom  he  once
caught  away  to  tlie  act  of  consent,  now  henceforth  he  forces
on  even  resisting  him,  and  conquered  by  the  gi*atifications
of  his  corrupt  state  of  being,  kills  him  well  nigh  by  dint  of
violence.  But  perhaps  we  may  be  able  to  make  out  the  mean-
ing of  these  same  sentences  by  a  contrary  mode  of  inter-
pretation. Thus  because  the  ^  asp'  kills  quickly  by  its
venom,  but  the  ^  viper^  more  slowly,  by  the  ^  asp'  we  have
denoted  a  violent  and  instantaneous  temptation,  but  by  the
*  viper'  a  gentle  and  prolonged  one.  And  hence  to  tlie  one
death  is  said  to  lie  in  the  '  sucking  of  the  head,'  but  to  the
viper  ^  in  the  tongue,'  in  that  a  sudden  temptation  often
as  soon  as  it  arises  kills  the  soul  off  its  guard,  but  a  length-
ened temptation,  because  it  is  longer  recommending  evil
things  by  the  suggesting  of  them,  kills  as  does  a  viper  with
its  tongue.  And  because  every  hypocrite,  being  penetrated
with  the  suggestion  of  evil  spirits,  as  with  the  poison  of
serpents,  never  considers  what  ai-e  the  gifts  from  above  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  while  he  spreads  abroad  the  bent  of  the  heart  in
golden  opinions  without,  it  is  rightly  added ;

Yer.  17.  He  shall  not  see  the  streamlets  qf  the  torrent
fiver  (/  honey  and  butter.

j^yl^ 20.  The  Lord  saith  in  the  Gospel;  He  that  believeth  in

John  7,  Me^  as  the  Scripture  hath  saidy  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow

'  rivers  qf  living water. Where  the  Evangelist subjoins,

saying,  But  this  spake  He  qf  the  Spirit,  which  they  that

believe  on  Him  should  receive. And  so  ^  the  streamlets  of

4  <  Reguluf/  which  it  a  ftraotUdon  of  the  Greeli  B«#»x/r««#.  see  Plin.  riii.  3].

Streamleis  of  the  river  of  God  unseen  ty  the  wicked.  185

the  rivef  are  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit Charity  is  *  a  Boos
streamlet  of  the  rirer/  faith  is  'a  streamlet  of  the  river,'  hope


is  *  a  streamlet  of  the  river/  But  because  no  hjrpocrite  ever
loves  either  God  or  his  neighbour,  when  he  makes  the  tran-
sitory glory  of  the  world  his  aim,  he  does  not  see  the  stream-
lets of  the  river,  in  that  he  is  not  watered  with  the  over-
flowing of  charity.  Whereas  the  hypocrite  goes  after
present  gains,  he  disregards  future  blessings,  and  not  having
faith,  he  sees  not  in  the  mind  *  the  streamlet  of  the  river,'
inasmuch  m  faith  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen.  AndHeb.ii,
while  the  hypocrite  clings  to  the  things  that  are  seen,  he
makes  light  of  those,  which  are  not  seen,  therefore  he  does
not  see  the  '  streamlets  of  the  river'  in  desire,  in  that  he  is
taken  up  with  visible  things  alone.  And  it  is  written.  For  Rom.  s,
what  a  man  seeth^  why  doth  he  yet  hope  /or?  He  then
would  have  seen  '  streamlets  of  the  river'  if  he  had  shut  his
eyes  to  the  glory  of  this  world,  and  opened  them  to  the  love
of  the  heavenly  country.  And  observe  that  he  does  not  say
'  streams,'  but  *  streamlets.'  For  the  *  streamlets  of  the  river*
may  be  taken  for  those  spiritual  gifts,  which  trickle  in  such
fine  streams  from  heavenly  sources  into  the  soul  of  him  that
loveth,  that  they  can  never  be  compassed*  by  the  mouth  of
the  flesh.  For  it  is  often  the  case  that  the  spirit  of  him  that
loves  is  filled  with  such  a  mighty  gift  of  contemplation,  that
it  has  power  to  see  what  it  has  not  power  to  utter.  Now
the  *  torrent  river'  is  the  inundation  of  the  Holy  Spirit
itself,  which  in  exuberant  outpouring  is  gathered  in  the  soul
of  him  in  contemplation,  when  his  mind  is  full  beyond  what
he  is  able  to  comprehend.  And  it  is  necessary  to  be  known,
that  when  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  bathes  us,  it  fills  us
with  ^  honey  and  butter'  equally.  For  *  honey'  falls  from
above,  but  *  butter'  is  drawn  from  the  milk  of  animals,  and
so  ^  honey'  is  from  the  air,  *  butter'  from  the  flesh.  But  the
Only-begotten  Son  of  the  Most  High  Father,  while  He  is
God  above  all  things,  was  made  Man  one  among  all  things.
Who  when  he  replenished  us  with  the  sweetness  of  His
Divine  Nature  and  the  mystery  of  His  Incarnation,  satisfied
us  with  '  honey  and  butter'  at  once.  And  so  seeing  that  the
Holy  Spirit  rejoices  the  soul  It  has  filled,  at  once  with  the

*  *  Expleri.'  K.  '  at  per  eof  Cmrais ikma  the  dedret  of  the  fleth  cannot  be
H^iideria  enpleri  neqneant;*  *  that  bj satisfied.'

186  An  ever-livinjf  deaih  pay$for  a  dead  life.

JoBSOytweetnesi  of  His  dinnity and  the  belief  of  His  Incar-

• natioD,  these  are  described  as  ^  the  streamlets  of  the  torrent

'  river  of  honey  and  bntter*  together,  in  that  they  both  refresh

the  soul  with  sweetness  by  the  exalted  knowledge  of  God»

I  <  cu-  and  anoint  it  with  the  mystery  of  the  Benefit^  by  the  grace

^^^  of  the  Incarnation.  But  whereas  this  hypocrite,  being  dissi-
pated in  outward  regards,  does  not  taste  these  interior  gifts,
he  adjoins  to  what  afler  punishments  he  is  tending,  in  that  it
is  added ;

Ver.  18.  He  shall  pay  for  all  the  thinge  that  he  hath
done,  nor  yet  ehall  he  be  consumed.
x?ii.  21.  For  he  ^  pays*  in  torment  for  those  desires,  which  he
^^'  retained  here  contrary  to  right,  and  being  consigned  to
avenging  flames,  he  is  always  dying,  in  that  he  is  always
kept  alive  in  death.  For  he  is  never  consumed  in  death,  in
that  if  his  life  in  dying  were  consumed,  his  punishment  like-
wise would  be  brought  to  an  end  together  with  his  life ;  but
that  he  may  be  tormented  without  end,  he  is  forced  to  live
on  without  end  in  punishment,  that  he  whose  life  here  was
dead  in  sin,  may  have  his  death  there  living  in  punishment.
Let  him  say  then;  He  shall  pay  for  all  the  things  that  he
hath  done,  nor  yet  shall  he  be  eonsumed^  forasmuch  as  he  is
tormented,  and  not  put  out,  he  dies  and  lives,  he  is  fidling
away  and  holding  on,  always  finishing,  without  being
finished.  These  things  are  very  terrible  in  the  hearing  of
the  ear  only,  how  infinitely  more  terrible  in  the  enduring  of
them!  Now  because  the  multiplicity  of  his  wickedness
demands  that  he  should  never  be  without  punishment,  it  is
fitly  added;

According  to  the  mtUtitude  qf  his  inventions  shall  he  also
stfffer.

xviii.  32.  For  whereas  he  found  out  many  things  in  order  to  sin,
he  is  tormented  with  new  inventions  in  punishment.  Since
what  he  could  not  have  suspected  here,  he  is  made  sensible
of  there,  when  he  is  given  over  to  vengeance.  For  as  the  Elect
in  exercising  themselves  in  good  works,  sometimes  set  them-
selves to  do  more  than  the  Lord  thought  fit  to  bid  them,  (for
virginity  of  the  flesh  is  no  where  commanded,  but  only  com-
mended; since  if  it  were  commanded,  then  it  would  follow
that  wedlock  must  henceforth  be  deemed  sin,  and  yet  there
are  many  strong  in  the  virtue  of  virginity,  so  as  to  render

IfoMUMiom  condemn^  much  more  inveniiom  in  Wff.  187

more  in  service  than  diey  received  in  commandy)  so  rely  Boos
commonly  the  wicked  are  each  practised  in  bad  ways^  so
thai  they  find  out  in  evil  doing  more  for  them  lo  do  than
by  the  practice  of  the  lost  they  received  examples  of
wickedness.  And  hence  they  are  stricken  with  the  tor-
ments of  an  ampler  retribution,  in  that  they  too  of  their
own  heads  invented  practices  on  an  ampler  scale,  which
they  deserve  to  be  stricken  for.  And  so  it  is  well  said.
According  to  the  muliitude  of  hi$  inventions  nhall  he
aUo  suffer.  For  he  would  not  find  out  new  wickedness,
except  he  also  sought  it;  and  he  would  not  seek  it,  except  he
was  eager  to  do  it  of  set  purpose.  Therefore  in  his  torment-
ing the  excessiveness  of  evil  devising  is  taken  into  account^
and  he  receives  the  pain  of  a  worthy  recompense.  And
although  the  woe  of  all  the  damned  is  infinite,  yet  they  have
worse  tonnonts  inflicted  upon  them,  who  invented  many
things  in  wicked  ways  by  their  desires  as  well. ,  Now  since
Zophar  has  brought  in  the  punishment  of  this  hypocrite,  he
immediately  adds  his  sin,  nor  does  he  describe  any  one  in
particular,  but  that  from  which  all  sins  have  their  origin.
For  it  is  written,  Coveiousness  is  the  root  of  all  evil.  He  i  Tim.
then,  whom  covetousness  is  described  as  having  dominidti  ^' ^^*
over,  surely  is  proved  to  be  subject  to  all  evil  propensities.
Thus  he  subjoins,

Ver.  19,  20.  Because  he  hath  broken  down  and  laid  bare
the  house  of  the  poor j  because  he  hath  violently  taken  it  away
and  not  builded  it^  neither  is  he  sati^d  in  his  belly.

23.  He  '  breaks  in  pieces  and  lays  bare  the  house  of  the  jtix.
poor,*  who  is  not  ashamed  as  well  to  rob  out  of  avarice  him
whom  he  crushes  by  power. ^  He  violently  taketh  it  away
and  doth  not  build  it.' As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain
words;  ^  He  that  ought  to  have  builded  it,  he  over  and
above  takes  it  away.' For  the Lord  Who  is  to  come  in
judgment,  shall  say  to  the  reprobate.  For  I  was  an  hungred,  Hat.96,
'and  ye  gate  Me  no  meat :  I  was  thirsty^  and  ye  gave  Me  no  ***  **•
drink :  I  was  a  stranger y  and  ye  took  Me  not  in ;  naked^  and
ye  covered  Me  not^  8fc.  as  the  consequence  of  which  sin  it  is
added,  Depart  from  Me^  ye  cursed^  into  everlasting  fire^^.ii.
preparedfor  the  devil  and  his  angels. If  then  he  is  sentenced
to  so  great  a  penalty,  who  is  convicted  merely  of  not  having

188 Man^M  greediness  most  punished  wlien  viost  Jilted.

Job  90,  given  away  his  own,  with  what  punishment  does  not  that  man
??iH:  deserve  to  be  stricken,  who  is  proved  to  have  taken  the
things  of  others  also  ?  And  so  he  *  took  it  away  and  did  not
build  it  up,'  in  that  he  not  only  never  gave  any  thing  of  his
own,  but  also  took  away  what  was  anotlici's.  Now  it  is  well
added ;  Surely  his  belly  shall  not  be  satined.  For  the  ^  belly*
of  the  wicked  man  is  avarice,  in  that  there  is  collected
together  in  it  whatsoever  is  swallowed  with  wrong  desire.
But  it  is  plain  that  avarice  is  not  extinguished,  but  increased
by  the  objects  desired.  For  like  fire,  when  it  has  got  fuel
to  feed  on,  it  increases;  and  from  the  same  cause  thai  the  flame
appears  to  be  restrained  for  a  moment,  it  is  seen  a  little
while  after  to  spread  itself  out.  And  it  often  happens  that
when  Almighty  God  is  greatly  wroth  with  the  covetous  soul,
He  first  lets  all  things  accrue  to  it  according  to  its  wish,  and
afterwards  takes  it  away  in  vengeance,  that  it  may  undergo
eternal  punishments  on  account  of  them.  And  hence  it  is
added;

And  when  he  shaU  have  thai  which  he  desired^  he  shall
not  be  able  to  possess  it.
XX.  24.  For  it  is  a  mark  of  greater  indignation,  when  that
thing  is  given  which  is  desired  amiss,  and  therefrom  there
ensues  sudden  retribution,  because  he  got  that  likewise,
which  he  went  after  when  God  was  wroth  the  while.  And
hence  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  where  the  people  are  de-
scribed as  having  lusted  after  flesh  for  food  in  a  wrong  way  ;
Pa.  78,  But  while  their  meat  was  yet  in  their  mouths^  the  wrath  of
^•**'  Qod  came  upon  them^  and  slew  the  most  of  them.  For  the
judgments  of  God  are  used  to  be  slower  in  appearing,  when
wrong  wishes  are  hindered  that  they  should  not  be  put  in
execution.  For  the  quicker  that  a  bad  wish  is  suffered  to  be
fulfilled,  it  is  usually  punished  the  more  speedily  in  propor-
tion. And  so  by  the  very  acl,  whereby  the  hypocrite  is
aggrandized  in  haste  to  become  powerftil,  it  is  brought  to
pass  with  proportionate  rapidity,  that  he  should  not  be.  For
the  trees  too  that  grow  slower,  last  to  number  many  years,
and  those  which  make  way  in  a  short  space  of  time,  wither
the  sooner,  and  in  a  manner,  whilst  they  are  hasting  to  be,
they  are  going  the  way  not  to  be.  It  goes  on;
Ver.  21.  There  shall  none  qfhis  meat  be  left.

Sinful  desire  straitens  itself  in  its  own  fulness. 189

25.  *  Hi8  meat'  is  all  thai  he  coveted  with  wrong  desire ;  Boos
but  when  the  hypocrite  is  struck,  *  there  is  none  of  his  meat  ^^*
left,'  in  that  when  he  is  himself  carried  to  eternal  punishments,  ^^*
he  is  parted  from  all  the  good  things  that  he  had  gotten
here. And  hence  it  is  jet  further  added;

Uier^ore  shall  nought  remain  from  his  goods. ,
For  if  *  aught  did  remain  of  his  goods,'  he  would  take
along  with  him  the  things  that  he  had  possession  of. But
because  while  going  after  every  thing,  he  would  not  fear  the
Judge,  upon  being  removed  out  of  this  life,  he  goes  naked  to
the  .Tudge. To  which  same  wicked  man,  it  is  but  little  for
his  recompensing  that  he  is  tormented  in  after  punishment,
if  only  in  this  life  he  is  let  to  go  free. But  there  is  no
liberty  in  sin,  seeing  that  it  is  written;  where  the  Spirit  qf^Cor.s,
the  Lord  is^  there  is  liberty;  and  to  the  wicked  soul  usually  ^^'
its  very  own  sin  becomes  its  own  punishment. And  hence  it
is  rightly  added  ;
In  the  fulness  of  his  stffficiencyy  he  shall  be  iri  straits.
20.  For  first  from  avarice  he  pants  to  heap  together  things  x^cii.
he  covets,  and  when  he  has  gathered  together  a  great  multi-
tude as  it  were  in  a  kind  of  belly  of  avarice,  *  in  the  fulness
of  his  suflicioncy,  he  is  in  straits/  in  that  whilst  he  is  full  of
anxiety  how  he  may  keep  the  things  he  has gotten,  his
own  fulness  itself  straitens  him. For  the  field  of  a  certain
rich  man  had  brought  abundant  fruits,  but  because  he  had
not  where  to  lay  up  such  stores,  he  said. What  shall  I  dOy  LokeiSy
because  I  have  no  room  where  to  bestow  my  fruits? And
he  said,  This  will  I  do;  I  will  pull  down  my  bams,  and  build
greater. He  then  who  from  being  straitened  by  his  abun-
dance said.  What  shall  I  dof  was  in  a  fever  as  if  oppressed
with  a  quantity  of  food. Let  us  consider  with  what  longings
he  desired  his  land  might  produce  abundant  crops. Behold
flow  his  wishes  are  completed,  seeing  that  the  land  did  bring
him  abundant  fruits. But  forasmuch  as  there  are  not  places
enough  to  stow  it  away,  the  rich  man  being  greatly  aggrandized
knows  not  what  he  should  do. O  straitness  caused  by  *  ful-
ness of  sufficiency !' By  the  abundance  of  his  land  the  mind
of  the  covetous  man  is  straitened* For  when  he  says, What
shall  I  do  ?  he  clearly  shews  that,  surcharged  with  the  en-

190 Miieries  qfiit^ful  aims  here  and  here<\fier.

Job  20,gro88meDU  of  his  desires,  he  went  heavily  under  a  kind  of
-^ — 1  bundle  of  stores ;  and  so  it  is  well  said.  In  ihe/ulnese  of
hia  etfffioiency  he  sAall  be  in  straita.  Since  the  luind  of  the
covetous  man,  which  had  before  looked  for  rest  from  plenty,
was  afterwards  put  to  worse  trouble  for  the  keeping  thereof
And  hence  it  is  also  yet  further  added;

He  shall  burn  with  heat^  and  every  woe  shall  come  down
upon  him.
zxiii.  27.  For  first  he  had  sorrow  in  the  mere  wearying  of  his
own  concupiscence  how  to  snatch  hold  of  the  things  coveted,
how  to  secure  one  sort  by  arts  of  flattery,  anotlier  soil  by
means  of  threats;  but  after  that  having  possessed  himself
of  the  gifts  of  fortune  he  has  attained  his  desire,  another
annoyance  wears  him  down,  viz.  that  it  is  with  fear  and
anxiety  he  keeps  safe  that  which  he  remembers  it  cost  him
infinite  trouble  to  acquire.  On  every  side  he  dreads  con-
spirators, and  fears  to  be  himself  subjected  to  the  very  thing
that  he  has  done  to  others.  One  more  powerful  he  is  afraid
of,  lest  he  be  exposed  to  violence  from  him ;  a  poor  man,
when  he  sees  one,  he  looks  on  as  a  thief.  The  things  them-
selves which  he  has  hoarded  up,  he  is  at  great  pains  about,
lest  by  the  failure  of  their  own  inherent  nature  they  be  con-
sumed by  neglect.  In  all  these  particulars  then,  because
fear  by  itself  is  punishment,  the  unhappy  wretch  suffers  things
as  great  as  he  fears  to  sufier«  And  after  this  he  is  yet  further
brought  to  hell,  and  given  over  to  eternal  torments.  There-
fore ^  every  woe  cometh  down  upon  him,*  who  is  at  once
consumed  first  here  by  the  punishment  of  coveting,  afterwards
by  the  trouble  of  safe  keeping,  and  There  at  some  future  time
by  the  punishment  of  retributive  wrath.

28.  But  it  is  wonderful  security  of  the  heart,  not  to  seek
what  does  not  belong  to  us,  but  to  rest  content  with  each
day*s  sustenance  day  by  day.  From  which  same  security
it  is  that  the  Rest  everlasting  also  arises,  seeing  that  from  a
good  and  quiet  firame  we  pass  to  eternal  delights.  Contrari-
wise lost  sinners  are  at  once  worn  down  here  in  desires,  and
there  in  torments.  And  firom  the  labour  of  taking  thought
there  arises  to  them  the  labour  of  pain,  in  that  by  the  fever
of  avarice  they  are  drawn  into  the  fire  of  hell. And  because,

How  God  raim  down  wrath. Two  sources  of  avarice.  191

at  We  ha?6  already  often  said»  it  often  happens  that  the  Book
wicked  man,  the  sooner  he  attains  his  object,  is  the  more ^^'
easily  carried  off  to  torment,  it  is  added  in  the  form  of  a
wish;

Ver.  23.  Would  that  hU  belfy  might  be  Jilted,  that  God
might  cast  thejurjf  of  His  wrath  upon  him,  and  rain  His
war  upon  him.

29.  The  Lord '  rains  His  war*  npon  this  hypocrite,  when  xxir.
he  smites  his  deeds  with  tlie  swords  of  His  judgments,
Thns  for  Qod  to  *  rain  war,'  is  His  pressing  hard  to  destmc-

tion  the  life  of  the  wicked  man  by  His  strict  sentences  from
on  high.  God  '  raining  war'  is  His  smiting  the  hearts  that
are  lifted  up  against  Himself,  and  His  wounding  the  blasted
soul  with  the  darts  of  His  judgments,  as  with  a  kind  of
thickening  drops  of  rain,  that  when  he  is  now  carried  off  to
judgment,  one  while  he  should  remind  himself  how  he
coveted  wickedly,  and  more  wickedly  set  himself  to  heap
together  the  things  he  coveted,  at  another  time  grieve  that
he  is  parted  from  the  things  thus  heaped  together,  and  one
day  feel  the  very  fire  of  retribution,  which,  that  he  might  not
live  well,  he  was  too  indifferent  to  foresee. It  goes  on;

Ver.  24.  He  shall  Jlee  from  the  iron  weapons;  and  rush
%qxm  the  bow  qf  brass.

30.  We  ought  to  know,  that  avarice  sometimes  steals  upon  xxv.
men  from  pride,  and  sometimes  from  apprehension. Thus
there  are  some  who  whilst  they  aim  to  appear  with  greater
power,  are  kindled  to  the  going  after  the  things  of  others ;  and
there  are  some,  who  while  they  are  afraid  lest  the  necessaries

of  the  aids  of  life  should  be  wanting  to  them,  freely  give
their  minds  to  covetousness,  and  go  after  the  things  of  others
when  they  fancy  that  their  own  may  not  be  enough  for  them.
Now  all  necessity  is  not  unaptly  termed  '  iron,'  in  that  it
pains  the  life  of  him  that  wants  with  the  wound  of  grief,  as  it
is  likewise  expressed  concemmg  the  necessities  of  him,  who,
being  sold  by  his  brethren,  led  an  afflicted  life;  The  tronP^loft,
entered  into  his  souL  What  then  are  '  the  iron  weapons*  *
but  necessities  of  the  present  life,  which  press  hard  upon,
and  push  to  extremi^,  the  life  of  the  needy  ?  Since  iron  is
consumed  by  rust,  but  brass  is  naturally  more  difficult  to  be
consumed  by  it Therefore  by  *  iron'  there  is  represented

192 Man^  drawn  by  Suian^  yet/reely  chooses  evil.

Job  so,  present  necessity  which  is  transient,  but  by  *  brass'  the
j^^y^  eternal  doom.  And  whereas  the  judgment  Abore  is  not
heeded  by  the  mind  of  the  wicked  man,  it  is  justly  likened  to
a  ^  bow/  since  it  strikes  as  it  were  out  of  ambush,  whilst  the
person  that  is  struck  does  not  observe  it.  And  ihus,  He
shall  flee /ram  the  iron  weapons^  and  rush  upon  the  bow  qf
brass;  in  that  whilst  from  dreading  present  necessities,  he
seizes  things  without  number,  through  avariciousness  he  is
exposing  himself  before  the  severe  strokes  of  the  final
judgment;  and,  while  be  ^  fleelh  the  weapons  of  iron,*  he  is
encountered  by  the  arrows  from  the  bow  of  brass,  in  that,
while  foolishly  proyiding  against  the  ills  of  lime,  he  is  struck
by  eternal  doom.  For  whosoever  with  guilt  fleeth  the  hard-
ness of  need  here,  meets  there  an  everlasting  duration  of  just
retribution.  But  before  the  time  that  he  is  hurried  off  to
judgmenl,  what  are  the  things  which  this  wicked  man  is
busied  in  here,  he  yet  further  informs  us. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  25.  He  is  drawn  and  comeih  out  of  his  shealhy  yea,
lightening  in  his  bitterness.
XX vi.  31.  This  wicked  man  lays  plots  in  arts  of  robbery  on  his
neighbours.  And  whilst  he  is  plotting  mischief  in  the
thoughts  of  his  heart,  it  is  as  if  ^  the  sword  were  still  in  its
sheath;*  but  when  he  wickedly  executes  the  mischief,  which
he  has  contrived,  he  ^  cometh  out  of  his  sheath,'  in  that  he  is
brought  out  to  view,  from  the  secresy  of  his  thoughu,  in  the
wickedness  of  evil  doing.  lie  is  shewn  to  light  in  the  deed,
such  as  he  was,  hidden  from  view,  in  the  thought.  And
observe  that  he  says,  drawn  and  cometh  out;  i.  e.  *  drawn'  by
the  deceiver,  but  ^  coming  out*  by  the  act  of  his  own  free
will.  For  he  that  is  *  drawn'  unquestionably  follows  one
that  draws  him.  But  he  that  '  cometh  forth,'  seems  to  act
according  to  his  own  will.  Tliat  man,  then,  who  is  at
once  drawn  to  the  several  wicked  practices  by  our  old  enemy,
and  yet  fast  .bound  in  the  desire  of  them  by  his  own  fi*ee
will,  is  described  as  ^  drawn  and  coming  forth  fi*om  his
sheath,'  since  this  thing,  that  he  issues  forth  from  the  bad
thought  to  the  worst  enacting,  belongs  at  once  to  ithe
wickedness  of  that  spirit  that  prompted,  and  of  him  that
consented  by  an  act  of  his  own  will.

32.  The  terribleness  of  whose  power  is  further  shewn,

Bitter  end  of  false  fflory. Demb  go  to  and  fro  on  had  men.  l93

where  it  is  immediately  added,  Yea^  lightening  in  his  bitter-  Book

ness. For  when  the  lightning  comes  suddenly  from  abore, ^

when  it  shines  with  terribleness  before  our  eyes,  it  displays
shining  brightness,  and  strikes  the  objects  before  it  Thus,
thus  is  it  with  the  wicked  man,  when  he  has  secured  to  himself
the  glory  of  the  present  life :  by  the  same  cause  by  which
he  is  shewn  to  view  bright  by  power  in  the  present  world,
it  is  brought  to  pass  that  he  is  blasted  at  the  last  For
the  wicked  man's  as  it  wero  *  lightening,'  is  his  shining  in
this  life's  honour;  but  whereas  the  splendour  of  that  glory
is  consigned  to  the  eternal  woes  of  hell,  it  is  rightly  said  in
this  place,  *  Yea,  lightening  in  his  bitterness.'  For  he  that
now  seems  as  though  he  took  delight  in  striking  by  terrible-
ness and  brightness,  for  this  cause  afterwards  undergoes
punishments  for  everiasting.  And  indeed  it  is  written  of  a
certain  rich  man  that  he  *  fared  splendidly'  every  day.  Now
it  is  one  thing  to  shew  '  splendidly,'  and  another  to  *  lighten;'
for  sometimes  there  is  splendour  without  striking,  but  splen-
dour with  striking  is  described  by  the  title  of  *  lightning.'
He  then  who  being  placed  in  power  does  injury  to  others,  is
not  unaptly  entitled  Mightening,'  in  that  from  the  same
means  whereby  he  is  himself  exalted  against  the  good,  as  it
were  by  the  light  of  glory,  the  life  of  the  good  is  made  to
feel  torture. It  goes  on;

Terrible  ones  shall  come  and  go  over  him.

83.  Who  are  here  called  *  terrible  ones'  except  evil  spirits,  xx\ii.
who  are  to  be  feared  and  avoided  by  godly  minds?  And
whereas  those  same  evil  spirits  are  to  be  believed  to  attach
themselves  severally  to  certain  particular  vices,  when  this
wicked  man  seems  to  quit  for  a  moment  one  set  of  faults,  and
begins  to  commit  another,  then  surely  ^  the  terrible  ones  come
and  go  over  him,^  in  that  the  soul  of  the  bad  man  though  one
set  of  bad  habits  abandons,  yet  another  takes  possession  of  it
For  you  may  often  see  the  bad  man,  who  is  set  in  earthly  power,
agitated  with  furious  passion,  and  executing  all  that  his  rage
suggests;  and  when  his  ftiry  is  gone,  then  directly  lust  ravages
his  soul;  when  lust  is  stopped  for  a  time,  self-exaltation  as
on  the  ground  of  continency  is  immediately  made  to  take  its
place  in  his  heart,  and  that  he  may  be  feared  by  others,  he
aims  to  shew  himself  as  an  object  of  terror. But  when  the

VOL.  II.  o

1U4 All  eml  at  once  m  a  had  noti. EverhuHng  Fire.

Job  90,  occasion  requires  that  he  should  say  any  thing  with  double-
dealing,  laying  aside  in  a  certain  sort  the  terribleness  of  pride,
he  flatters  with  an  easy  address,  and  when  he  ceases  to  shew
himself  proud,  he  does  not  dread  to  turn  double-dealing.
And  so  it  is  rightly  said  of  him,  in  whose  mind  one  vice
continually  takes  the  placo  of  another.  Terrible  ones  come
and  go  upon  him;  since  for  all  the  evil  habits  that  be  is
borne  down  with  departing  and  taking  each  other's  place,
hb  soul  is  as  it  were  overrun  by  as  many  evil  spurits  going  and
returning.  But  it  is  these  things  which  he  does  in  act,  that
issue  outwardly  by  parts  and  pieces,  for  on  his  soul  he  has  all
things  bad  tied  fast  at  once  and  together.  Hence  it  is  added;
Ver.  36.  All  darkness  is  hid  in  his  secret  places.

xxviii.  34.  For  though  the  hypocrite  exhibits  good  actions  on
the  surface,  yet  a  certain  ^  darkness'  of  evil  deeds  appears  in
him ;  yet  it  less  comes  forth  in  act,  than  lies  buried  in  his
secret  thought.  For  he  who  does  not  fulfil  all  things  at  once
in  execution,  does  in  his  heart  in  silence  hold  all  things  that
may  do  mischief.  Thus  ^  all  darkness'  is  said  to  be  ^  hid  in
his  secret  places,'  in  that  though  he  does  not  exhibit  to  view
all  things  evil  in  himself,  yet  he  aims  to  bring  down  all  upon
his  fellow-creatures.  Now  let  him  add  the  retribution,  which
this  soul  so  reprobate  shall  be  visited  with.  It  goes  on ;
AJi/re  that  is  not  kindled  shall  consume  him.

xxix.  35.  Most  wonderfully  in  these  few  words  is  the  fire  of  hell
set  forth !  For  bodily  fire,  in  order  to  become  fire,  stands  in
need  of  bodily  fiiel ;  and  when  it  is  necessary  for  it  to  be
preserved,  as  we  well  know,  it  is  nourished  by  wood  heaped
upon  it,  neither  can  it  be,  except  by  being  kindled,  nor  live,
save  by  being  cherished.  But  contrarily  the'  fire  of  hell,
whilst  it  is  a  bodily  fire,  and  bodily  consumes  the  children
of  perdition  that  are  cast  into  it,  is  neither  kindled  by  human
effort,  nor  kept  alive  by  wood,  but  being  once  made  to  be,  it
lasts unextinguishable:  atone  and  the  same  time  it  needs  no
kindling,  and  lacks  not  heat.  And  so  it  is  well  said  of  this
wicked  one ;  A  fire  not  kindled  shall  consume  him  ;  in  that
the  justice  of  the  Almighty,  foreseeing  fixture  events,  did  from
the  very  beginning  of  the  world  create  the  fire  of  hell,  which
should  once  begin  in  the  punishment  of  the  wicked,  but
never  end  its  hoat  even  without  fueh But  it  is  necessary  to

71U  TUtfredfluh  a  mitery  to  ihi  wicM.  105

know,  that  all  the  children  of  perdition,  as  they  sinned  in  Book
spirit  and  flesh  conjointly,  are  there  tormented  in  spkit  and


flesh  alike.  Hence  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Thou  «AaftP^9^'-
make  t/iem  as  ajiery  oven  in  the  time  of  TTiine  anger.  The
Lord  sliall  confound  them  in  His  tcrathj  and  the  fire  shall
devour  them.  For  an  *  oven^  is  heated  within  ;  but  he  who
is  *  devoured  by  fire^  begins  to  be  consumed  from  the  outside.
Thus  that  holy  Scripture  might  shew  that  the  lost  bum  both
within  and  without,  it  testifies  that  they  are  at  once '  devoured
by  fire,'  and  *  made  as  a  fiery  oven,'  that  by  fire  they  should
be  tormented  in'the  body,  and  by  grief  bum  in  spirit  Hence
in  this  place  too,  when  it  is  declared  of  the  ungodly  man
that  afire  that  is  not  kindled  shall  consume  him^  it  is  forth-
with added  concerning  his  spirit;

Being  Irft  in  his  tabernaclej  it  shall  go  ill  with  him.

SG.  The  *  tabernacle'  of  the  wicked  man  is  his  flesh,  in  that  xxx.
he  inhabits  it  in  joyfulness,  and,  if  it  were  possible,  wishes  he
might  never  quit  it  But  the  righteous,  as  they  place  their
delight  in  the  prospect  of  heavenly  rewards,  and  have  their
conversation  in  heaven,  while  they  are  still  in  the  flesh  are
as  if  they  were  no  longer  in  the  flesh,  in  that  they  are  not
fed  with  any  gratification  of  the  flesh.  And  hence  it  is  said
to  some  persons;  But  ye  are  not  in  the  fleshy  but  in  tAeBom.  s,
spirit:  not  that  they  were  not  in  the  flesh,  who  by  the
epistles  of  their  master  received  charges  of  exhortation ;  but
it  is  in  a  manner  to  be  no  longer  '  in  the  flesh,'  not  to  own
aught  connected  with  the  love  of  fleshly  objects.  But  on
the  other  hand  this  wicked  man,  because  he  set  all  his
delight  in  a  fleshly  life,  *  dwelt  in  the  tabernacle'  of  the  flesh.
Which  very  flesh  when  )ie  shall  receive  back  in  the  resur-
rection, he  shall  bum  along  with  it  delivered  over  to  the
fires  of  hell.  Then  he  longs  to  be  brought  out  of  it;  then
he  seeks,  if  he  might  be  able,  to  escape  from  his  torments ;
then  he  begins  to  wish  he  could  get  quit  of  that  which  he
loved:  but  because  he  preferred  that  flesh  to  Ood,  it  is  brought
to  pass  by  the  judgment  of  Ood,  that  by  it  he  is  more  folly
tormented  in  the  fire,  ilere  then  he  has  no  mind  to  leave  it,
and  yet  is  severed  from  it,  and  there  he  wishes  to  leave  it,
and  yet  is  kept  in  it  for  punishments.  And  so  for  the
increase  of  his  torments,  he  is  at  once  both  removed  out  of

o2

lOG Both  good  and  bad  shall  testify  against  the  unjust.

Job  90,  the  body  here  against  his  will,  and  held  fast  in  the  body
y  there  when  he  would  not.  Therefore  because  his  spirit  in
torment  longs'  to  get  rid  of  the  flesh,  which  it  set  before
itself  in  loving  amiss,  and  has  not  the  power,  it  is  rightly
said  here,  being  left  in  his  tabernacle  it  shall  go  ill  with
him.  Of  whose  accusing  it  is  directly  said ;

Ver.  27.  The  heavens  shall  reveal  his  iniquity;  and  the
earth  shall  rise  up  against  him.

xxxu  37.  What  do  we  understand  by  ^  the  heavens,'  but  the
righteous,  and  what  by  ^  the  earth,'  but  sinners  ?  And  hence
in  the  Lord's  prayer  we  pray ;  Thy  will  be  done  on  earthy  as
it  is  in  heaven^  meaning  this,  that  the  will  of  our  Creator,  in
the  same  way  as  it  is  accomplished  in  all  the  righteous,  may
also  be  fulfilled  in  all  sinners  as  well. Moreover  of  the

Pi.i9,i.  righteous  it  is  said,  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  qf  Qod.
And  to  man  when  he  sinned  the  sentence  is  pronounced.
Earth  thou  art,  and  unto  earth  thou  shall  return.  And  so
of  this  ungodly  man,  when  dragged  to  that  awful  judgment ;
'  the  heavens  reveal  his  iniquity,  and  the  earth  rises  up
against  him,'  that  that  man,  who  here  never  spared  either  the
good  or  the  bad,  should  in  that  tremendous  inquest  have  the
life  of  the  righteous  and  of  sinners  alike  accusing  him.  And
of  the  two  indeed  it  is  worse  if  a  man  injure  the  good  rather

£t.S4,7.  than  sinners  i  and  hence  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  For  her
blood  is  in  the  midst  qf  her:  she  poured  it  upon  the
smoothest  rock';  she  poured  it  not  upon  the  ground  to  cover
it  with  dust:  by  ^  the  ground'  and  *  the  dust'  indeed  denoting
sinners,  but  by  the  ^  very  smooth  rock,'  the  righteous  man,
who  is  not  made  rough  by  the  hard  grazes  of  sins ;  and  so
'  the  blood  is  poured  upon  the  very  smooth  rock,'  when  the
wickedness  of  a  bloodthirsty  mind  rages  in  the  afflicting  of
the  righteous  soul.  While  then  it  is  worse  unjustly  to  distress
the  righteous  than  the  unrighteous,  yet  it  is  much  worse  to
hurt  the  righteous  and  unrighteous  together;  and  therefore
whereas  the  wicked  have  injured  both  the  good  and  the  bad
alike,  in  the  accusing  to  damnation,  '  the  heavens  shall
reveal  his  iniquity,  and  the  earth  shall  rise  up  against  himi
because  he  at  one  and  the  same  time  set  himself  against

f  So  A.B.C.D — Ben.  *  •ball  long.' Xwwir^Up  Sept.
f  <  Soper  limpidiMimam  petram'^y.

*Ear0C  may  mean  the  eeatlar^  *  Heaven*  the  reHffiaui  life.  107

those  who  savoured  the  things  of  hearen,  and  oppressed  Book
those  who  savoured  of  things  below.  But  it  may  be  that  bj-2EZl.
'  the  eartV  we  have  denoted  not  the  sinful  and  reprobate,
but  those  that  being  busied  in  earthly  courses,  by  the  help  of
alms  and  of  tears  attain  to  eternal  life.  Concerning  whom
it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  when  the  Lord  is  proclaimed  as
coming  to  Judgment,  He  ehall  call  to  the  heavens  /romJ?nJ60,4.
above f  and  to  the  earth  thai  He  may  judge  Hie  people.  For
lie  *  calls  the  heavens  from  above,'  when  they,  who»  leaving
all  that  they  had,  held  on  the  tenour  of  the  heavenly  life,  are
called  to  sit  with  Him  in  judgment,  and  come  with  Him  as
judges ;  but  '  the  earth  is  called  from  above,'  when  they
who  were  tied  down  to  earthly  courses  of  action,  yet  sought
therein  for  heavenly  more  than  for  earthly  profit  and  ad-
vantage, to  which  persons  it  is  said,  /  wa$  a  stranger^  and
ye  took  me  in;  nakedy  and  ye  clothed  me.  So  *  the  heaven
reveals  the  wickedness'  of  the  hypocrite,  and  '  the  earth  rises
up  against  him,'  in  that  both  they  who  come  in  company
with  God  as  judges,  and  they  who  through  the  ordeal  of  the
Judgment  are  set  free,  become  the  witnesses  of  his  iniquity.
Thus  nought  of  the  things  he  has  committed  is  hidden  from
sight  in  the  time  of  condemnation,  and  if  indeed  many  of  his
deeds  are  now  concealed  from  his  fellow-creatures  by  double-
dealing,  yet  in  the  day  of  condemnation,  whatever  there  was
that  lay  hidden  within  him,  it  is  brought  to  light  Hence  it
is  fitly  added ;

Ver.  28.  The  shoot  of  hie  house  shall  be  diselasedy  and  he
shall  be  taken  away  in  the  day  qf  God's  wraths

38.  ^  The  shoot  of  his  house  is  disclosed,'  when  oToryXXxii*
thing  bad  that  sprung  up  in  his  consciousness  is  shewn  to
view.  For  now  tfie  *  shoot  of  the  hypocrite's  house'  remains
hidden  fi'om  sight,  in  that  though  his  practice  appears  good
in  the  delineation,  yet  the  intent  lies  hidden.  Since  it  is  one
thing  what  he  does,  and  another  thing  what  he  has  in  view.
But  when,  at  the  coming  of  the  Judge,  each  man's  conscience
shall  be  brought  forward  for  its  testimony,  (whence  it  is
written.  Their  thoughts  the  mean  while  accusing  or  e&tfR<mi.9,
excusing  one  another^  then  the  *  shoot  of  the  hypocrite's
house  is  herein  disclosed,'  because  the  evil  desigh  is  laid
bare  in  his  heart. '  And  he  shall  be  taken  away  in  the  day

]  08 DUecHon  and  cattinff  away^  ilie  portion  ofilie  wicked.

JoB90,ofOod*s  wrath/ in  that  when  the  indignation  of  the  Judge
-  *  -  is  revealed,  being  given  to  avenging  fires,  he  is  parted  from
His  sight  For  he  that,  whilst  he  lived,  would  not  take
thought  of  the  highest  things,  being  forced  down  by  the
weight  of  his  sins,  shall  fall  from  the  face  of  the  Judge  into
the  depths  of  punishment  But  now  the  Judge  both  sees
and  bears  with  the  sinper  in  his  sins,  and  because  it  is  the
day  of  forbearance  and  not  as  yet  the  day  of  fiiry,  He  waits
for  eabh  one  for  his  conversion.  Now  in  this  day  of  for-
bearance the  hypocrite  as  it  were  remains  unmoved,  whilst
he  both  commits  msmy  evil  deeds,  and  is  chastised  by  no
scourges ;  but  *  in  the  day  of  fury  he  shall  be  taken  away,'
in  that  being  carried  off  to  punishment  in  the  season  of
vengeance  he  is  cut  off  from  the  countenance  of  the  eternal
Judge. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  29.  This  is  the  portion  qf  a  wicked  man  from  Ood,
and  the  heritage  qfhis  words  from  the  Lord,
zxxiii.  39.  For  if,  while  placed  in  this  life,  he  had  been  minded
to  act  rightly,  he  would  have  had  for  his  ^  portion*  with  the
Lord  fellowship  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  but  because  he
chose  to  be  subjected  to  bad  desires,  his  ^  portion  from  the
Lord*  he  found  in  torment,  because  he  did  not  seek  to  obtain
a  share  in  the  grace  of  that  Lord.  But  it  is  well  said,  And
the  heritage  of  his  words  from  the  Lord.  For  he  that  is
immersed  in  punishment  for  enormous  deeds  of  wickedness
perchance  it  was  thought  would  never  bo  judged  for  die  words
which  he  had  spoken  amiss.  But  when  the  strict  justice  of
Almighty  God  exacts  punishment  from  lost  sinners  for  their
iroward  deeds,  it  renders  evil  things  to  them  even  to  the
recompensing  of  their  words,  that  they  who  are  debtors  for
great  transgressions,  being  consigned  to  punishment,  may
pay  even  the  very  last  farthing.  For  they  are  spared  the
least  misdemeanours,  who  rigorously  lamented  the  greater
evils  in  themselves.  And  those  whom  great  sins  weigh  down
even  the  very  least  alike  put  to  pain  in  hell.  Now  holy  men
desire  not  to  receive  a  portion  from  the  Lord,  but  to  have
the  Lord  Himself  for  their  portion.  Hence  the  Prophet
^  7*>  prays,  saying,  God  is  my  portion  for  ever:  but  the  wicked
man,  because  he  sought  not  to  have  the  Lord  Himself  for
his  ^  portion,*  found  fire  for  his  ^  portion*  without  the  Lord,  that

Jobf  Aeuffh  wranffed,  enireaii. He/ears  not  lavghier.  199

bebg  shut  out  from  His  face,  because  he  did  not  seek  to  Book

find  joy  in  Him,  he  might  be  toimented  beneath  Him. L.

These  things  Zophar  brought  forward  in  such  a  way,  that
by  what  he  spoke  against  the  hypocrite,  he  might  strike
a  blow  against  the  life  of  blessed  Job,  thinking  that  he  who
was  stricken  by  the  Lord,  had  not  done  with  a  simple  heart
all  the  good  things  which  he  had  done.  For  him,  whom  he
saw  beneath  the  rod,  he  supposed  to  have  displeased  God.
But  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  likewise  maintain  a  likeness
of  heretics  in  this  particular,  in  that  whilst  thoy  see,  in  Holy
Church,  some,  that  live  aright,  groaning  beneath  the  rod,
they  reckon  that  they  have  not  good  merit  in  good  deeds,
and  set  them  down  as  bad  men,  whom  ihey  see  afflicted  with
the  scourge  of  God ;  not  knowing,  that  is  to  say,  that  Many  pg.  34^
are  the  affiiciiofis  of  the  righteous,  and  that  He  Bcourgeih  ^®-
every  son  whom  He  receiveth.  But  blessed  Job,  after  thee/  '^*'
manner  of  the  Holy  and  Universal  Church,  which  bears  with
patience  the  darts  of  words  at  the  hands  of  the  froward,  and,
when  she  hears  the  sajrings  of  the  proud,  never  leaves  the
pathway  of  her  humility,  made  answer  with  great  humility  of
heart,  saying,

C.  xxi.  Ver.  2.  Hear  I  pray  you  my  speech,  and  practise
penitence.

40.  For  ho  that  when  he  said  Hear,  added,  I  pray  you,xxxiv.
shews  how  humbly  he  speaks,  whilst  he  entreats  persons,
swelling  with  pride  against  him,  to  bring  back  their  thought

to  the  teaching  of  saving  truth.  But  whereas  holy  men,
within  the  pale  of  the  Universal  Church,  are  not  only  ready
to  teach  what  is  right,  but  also  to  undergo  things  that  are
done  against  them,  they  do  not  dread  being  laughed  at
Hence  it  is  added ;

Suff^  me  thai  I  may  speak;  and  qfter  my  words,  if  it
shall  seem  so,  laugh.

41.  For  when  good  men  speak,  there  are  two  points,  which  xxzv.
they  regard  in  their  discourse,  viz.  that  they  should  be  of

use  to  themselves  and  their  hearers,  or  to  themselves  alone,
if  they  are  unable  to  be  of  use  to  their  hearers.  For  when  the
good  things  thoy  deliver  are  heard  to  good  purpose,  thoy
benefit  both  themselves  and  their  hearers;  but  when  they  are
turned  to  ridicule  by  the  hearer,  doubtless  thoy  were  of  use

200  Jch  feared  he  had  some  way  diipkaied  God.

Job  SI,  to  tbemselvesy  wiiom  they  made  quit  of  the  sin  of  silence.
*  And  so  let  blessed  Job,  that  he  might  serve  both  himself  and
his  hearers,  speak  the  words ^  Hear  I  pray  you  my  speech^
and  practise  repentance.  But  that  he  may  discharge  him-
self of  the  obligation  which  he  owes,  even  if  he  is  unable  to
avail  his  hearers,  he  adds.  Suffer  me  that  I  speak;  and  after
my  words^  if  it  shall  seem  so,  laugh.  I  observe  that  whereas
he  added,  and  practise  repentance,  he  first  premised,  Hear,
but  when  he  added  the  words,  and  after  my  words,  \f  it
shall  seem  so,  laugh,  he  premised.  Suffer  me  that  I  may
speak:  for  ^  hearing'  is  of  one  who  acts  of  free  will,  but
^  bearing'  of  one  who  acts  against  his  own  inclination.  And
so  if  his  friends  desire  to  be  taught,  let  them  ^  hear,'  but  if
they  are  ready  to  mock,  let  them  ^  suffer*  the  things  that  are
said;  seeing  that  to  a  proud  mind,  instruction  in  humility  is
a  grievous  and  onerous  weight. It  goes  on;

Ver.  4.  As  for  me,  is  my  dispute  against  man,  that  I
should  not  be  justly  sad  ?
xxxvi. 42.  Whosoever  in  pleasing  Qod  displeases  man,  has  no
grounds  for  sadness. But  he,  who  in  pleasing  man  dis-
pleases Ood,  or  thinks  that  he  displeases  both  God  and  man
together,  if  sadness  does  not  come  upon  him,  proves  a
stranger  to  the  excellency  of  wisdom. Now  blessed  Job
believed  that  be  had  displeased  God  in  the  midst  of  his
strokes,  and  therefore  he  called  back  his  mind  to  sadness,  in
that  He  was  not  to  be  disregarded.  Whom  he  was  afraid  that
ho  had  displeased. Now,  if  he  had  been  pleading  against
mai)  (concerning  the  merits  of  his  life,  he  would  have  had  no
occasion  to  feel  sadness,  but  seeing  that  by  his  present
strokes  he  was  made  doubtful  of  his  past  life,  he  justly
sought  for  sadness  under  the  scourge. Hence  too  it  is  added ;
Ver.  ^.  Mark  me,  and  be  astonislied.
xxxvii. 43.  i.  e.  Consider  what  1  have  done,  and  be  astonished  at
the  things  that  I  undergo  under  this  infliction  ^f  the  rod.
And  he  yet  further  rightly  introduces  the  words ;
And  lay  your  finger  upon  your  mouth.
As  if  he  had  said  in  plain  speech;  ^  Knowing  the  good
things  that  I  have  done  and  seeing  tlie  ills  that  I  am  subjected
to,  your  own.  selves  keep  even  from  oAence  in  words,  and
in  my  strokes  dread  your  own  hurls.' Or  indeed  seeing  that

JoVsfiar  qfrim. Hie  wicked  tomeHmeipraqferaut. 201

by  our  fingers  we  distinguish  things  severally,  discretion  is  dot  Book
unfitly  represented  by  the  fingers ;  and  hence  it  is  said  by  the


Psalmist,  Biessed  be  the  Lord  my  Oodf  Which  teacheth  my^^*  H4,
hande  io  war,  and  my  fingere  iojighi  ;  i.  e.  by  the  '  hands*
denoting  practice,  and  by  the  *  fingersi*  discretion.  And  so
the  finger  is  laid  to  the  mouth,  when  the  tongue  is  bridled
by  discretion,  that  by  what  it  utters,  it  may  not  fall  into  the
sin  of  foolishness.  And  therefore  he  says,  Lay  yourjinger
upon  your  mouth  ;  i.e.  'join  the  virtue  of  discretion  to  your
speech,  that  in  those  things  which  ye  say  right  against  the
hypocrite,  ye  may  see  to  what  persons  they  are  proper  to  be
said.* It  goes  on;

Ver*  G.  Even  when  I  remember  I  am  afraid,  and  trem-
bling taketh  hold  ofmyflenh.

44.  That  blessed  Job  was  not  forgetful  of  his  deeds,  the  xzzviii.
last  utterance  of  his  lips  proves. Wherefore  this  which  he

now  says  to  his  friends.  Even  when  I  remember  I  am
a/raid,  and  trembling  taketh  hold  ofmyjtesh,  must  clearly
be  said  in  mockery.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words;  *  If  1
remember  that  I  have  had  any  thing  of  the  hypocrite  in  me,
directly  I  tremble  in  tears  of  penitence.'  And  '  if  he  remem-
bered, his  flesh  was  shaken  with  trembling*  he  declares,  i.  e.
that  the  weakness  of  practice  was  disheartened  by  the  dread
of  vengeance*  But  as  Zophar  said  many  things  about  the
sudden  condemnation  of  the  wicked  man,  whereby  he  snapped
at  the  powerful  estate  of  blessed  Job,  the  holy  man  subjoins
in  answer  to  his  words,  saying.

Yen  7.  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live,  are  lifted  up,  and
strengthened  by  riches  f

45.  For  except  the  patience  of  God  bore  with  them,  they  xxxix.
would  never  live  long  in  their  sins. For  they  are  *  lifted  up

by  riches,'  when  they  first  begin  to  be  powerful,  but  they  are
'  strengthened,'  when  they  are  permitted  to  continue  long  in
this  life.  Since  those  whose  substance  uplifts  them,  length
of  days  strengthens  in  the  pride  of  their  power.  Or
surely  they  are  said  to  be  lifted  up  and  strengthened,  in  that
they  are  *  lifted  up'  by  honours,  *  strengthened'  by  substance.
But  there  are  very  many,  who  while  they  are  both  *  lifted  up'
by  honours  and  *  strengthened'  by  riches,  are  vouchsafed  the
things  which  they  covet  in  this  life,  but  deprived  of  the

202 Th$  wicked /avaur id  with  children  as  well  as  wealth.

Job  sj,  succession  of  children.  To  these  their  veiy  power  is  piinish-
-y — '  ment|  when  they  see  themselves  possessed  of  a  large  inhe-
ritance, but  not  possessed  of  heirs  to  whom  they  may  leave
it.  What  good  then,  if  every  thing  be  forthcoming,  but
children  be  wanting  who  may  become  their  heirs?  It  pro-
ceeds;

Ver.  8.  Uieir  seed  is  esiablished  in  their  sight  with  them,
xl.  46.  For  the  increase  of  exceeding  happiness,  together
with  a  large  patrimony,  they  have  heirs  too  given  them  \  and
that  no  unavoidable  temporal  circumstance  either  may  re-
move from  their  eyes  those  in  whom  their  soul  delights,  it  is
said  of  this  seed  of  theirs.  Their  seed  is  established  in  their
sight.  But  what  if  children  are  vouchsafed,  yet  the  children
themselves  stricken  with  barrenness?  The  family  is  made
extinct  in  them,  in  like  sort  as  it  was  feared  it  would  be  made
extinct  by  the  barrenness  of  their  parents. It  goes  on ;

And  a  crowd  of  kinsfolk  and  grandchildren  before  their
eyes.

Observe,  life  is  theirs,  honours  and  riches  are  theirs,  children
are  theirs,  grandchildren  are  theirs.  What  if  any  secret
fancy  gall  the  mind,  and  domestic  discord  pierce  the  joys
of  their  security?  What  is  the  prosperity  of  this  world,  if  it
be  not  joyful  ? It  goes  on ;

Ver.  9.  Tlieir  houses  are  secure  and  at  peace,  neither  is
the  rod  of  Ood  upon  them.
xli.  47.  Their  '  houses  are  secure  and  at  peace,'  in  that  they
live  on  committing  sin,  they  do  things  to  be  mourned  over,
and  they  never  leave  their  joys.  And  the  ^  rod*  of  discipline
from  Above  '  does  not  smite  them,'  and  they  go  on  the  more
unrestrainedly  in  sin,  in  proportion  as  they  are  punished  less
for  sin.  But  as  we  have  heard  the  things,  which  go  prosper-
ously witliin,  what  prosperity  smiles  on  them  in  the  field  too,
let  us  see. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  10.  Tlieir  ox  conceiveih,  andfaileth  not;  their  cow
calvelhf  and  loseth  not  her  calf*
>  <  bot*  It  is  the  usage  of  common  talk  to  call  ^  ox''  masculine,  and
^  cow'  feminine,  but  literary  phraseology  designates  '  ox'  of
the  common  gender.  Hence  it  is  now  said,  Their  ox  con-
ceivethf  and/aileth  not;  their  cow  calveUi,  andloseih  not  her
calf. ^^^  ^  ^^^  owner  of  flocks,  the  firat  good  fortune  is

Death  ends  their  joyous  estate  in  a  point  of  time. 903

that  the  flocks  being  free  from  barrenness  conceive,  next  (hat  Book
the  conception  come  to  the  birth,  and  the  third  that  the  ^^*
thing  which  is  produced  be  by  nourishment  reared  to  a
growth.  And  so  in  order  to  shew  that  the  wicked  had  them
all  together,  blessed  Job  declares  that  '  their  flocks  had
conceived  and  not  miscarried,  that  they  had  brought  forth
and  were  not  deprived  of  their  own  offspring/  But  it  is
inferior  good  fortune,  if  whilst  the  flocks  increase,  the  keepers
of  them  do  not  thrive  at  the  same  time.  And  hence  to  the
fmitfulness  of  the  flocks  we  have  the  fruitfulness  of  their
household'  made  to  succeed  immediately. For  it  is  said, ' '  funU

Ver.  11.  TTieir  little  ones  go  forth  like  flocks^  and  their  *
children  revel  in  sports.

48.  That  as  there  are  greater  stores  bestowed  on  them xlii.
to  have  the  possession of,  so  great  numbers  may  spring

up  to  keep  them  safe.  But  whereas  he  said,  revel  in  sportSf
lest  we  should  imagine  that  the  mere  sport  of  the  children  in
the  house  of  the  wicked  by  itself  was  too  mean  and  poor,
he  adds,  saying;

Ver.  12.  They  take  the  timbrel,  and  harp,  and  rejoice  at
the  noise  of  the  organ.

As  if  he  said  in  plain  speech;  ^  Whilst  the  masters  swell
with  honours  and  substance,  the  dependants  rejoice  in  festive
sports.^  But,  O  blessed  man»  wherefore  dost  thou  tell  us  all
these  many  things  of  the  delights  of  the  wicked  ?  It  is  now
a  long  time  that  thou  runnest  on  in  the  description  of  them ;
after  much  said,  in  one  word  point  out  what  thou  thinkest.
It  goes  on;

Ver.  13.  They  spend  their  days  in  wealthy  ahd  in  a  point
of  time  go  down  to  the  lower  parts.

49.  Yes,  O  blessed  man,  thou  hadst  for  long  dilated  on  xliii.
their  joys,  how  dost  thou  now  declare  that  ^  in  a  point  of
time  they  go  down  to  the  lower  parts,*  saving  that  all  length

of  time  of  the  present  life  is  then  known  to  be  but  a  '  point,'
when  it  is  cut  short  by  the  end  ?  For  when  a  person  is  brought
to  the  last  end,  he  no  longer  keeps  aught  of  the  past,  seeing
that  all  the  periods  of  time  have  elapsed,  he  has  nought  in
the  future,  in  that  there  remain  not  to  him  the  moments  of  a
single  hour.  So  the  life,  which  could  be  thus  narrowed,  was
but  a  *  point'  of  time. For  as  we  have  before  said,  we  set

204 Bad  men,  unpunished  here,  choose  not  to  know  God.

Job  si,  down  the  style  in  a  point,  and  lift  it  up;  and  so  he  as  it  were
-fj^  touched  life  by  a  point  who  received  and  lost  it.  By  a
^  point'  it  is  possible  that  this  also  may  be  understood,  that
it  often  happens  that  they  that  were  long  borne  with  in
wickedness,  are  seized  by  sudden  death,  that  it  should  not
even  be  granted  them  to  bewail  before  death  the  things  they
have  done  wrong,  but  seeing  that  occasionally  the  life  of  the
righteous  also  is  cut  short  by  a  sudden  end,  we  shall  under-
stand it  better,  if  we  take  the  words  of  their  temporal  life,  in
that  whatever  was  capable  of  passing  away  was  sudden.
But  the  friends  of  blessed  Job,  who  believed  him  to  be
unrighteous  on  this  account  that  they  saw  him  afflicted  with
scourges,  rightly  have  the  truth  shewn  them  by  the  voice  of
that  holy  man  concerning  the  blooming  and  ruin  of  the
wicked,  in  that  prosperity  in  the  present  life  is  no  witness  to
innocency,  since  many  are  brought  back  to  everlasting  life  by
scourges,  and  very  many  die  without  a  scourge  to  be  dragged
to  infinite  woes.  Of  whom  it  is  yet  further  added ;
Ver.  14.  Who  say  unto  Ood,  Depart  from  us.
xliv.  50.  To  say  this  in  words  even  foolish  men  have  not  the
boldness,  yet  all  wicked  persons  say  to  Ood,  not  by  their
words  but  by  their  ways,  Depart  from  us.  For  they  that
do  those  things  which  Almighty  God  forbids,  what  else  are
they  doing  but  shutting  up  their  soul  against  the  Almighty.
For  just  as  to  think  of  His  precepts,  is  to  introduce  Him  into
one's  self,  so  to  resist  His  commandments  is  to  kcoj)  Him  away
from  tlio  dwelling-place  of  the  heart.  And  so  they  say.
Depart  from  us,  who  refuse  to  yield  Him  an  approach  to
them;  and  assail  Him  with  wicked  deeds,  even  if  they  seem
to  praise  Him  in  words.  Moreover  they  say ;
For  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  qf  Thy  ways.
xlv.  51.  And  that  by  this  alone,  that  they  are  too  indiflcrent
to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  Him.  For  there  be  some  who
Lokeis,  from  this  that  ^  Truth'  saith ;  And  that  servant,  which  knou^eth

47  48

not  his  hordes  will,  and  doth  things  uvrthy  qf  stripes,  shall
be  beaten  with  few.  But  he  that  knotoeth  his  Lord's  unll,
and  did  not  according  to  it,  shall  be  beaten  with  many ;
choose  not  to  know  what  they  should  do,  and  reckon  as  if
they  will  be  beaten  less,  if  they  are  ignorant  of  what  they
ought  to  have  put  in  practice. Yet  it  is  one  thing  not  to

WUHng  ignorance  punished. Ood  un$een  by  edmal  eyee.  205

hare  known,  and  another  thing  not  to  have  chosen  to  know.  Book

For  he  knoweth  not,  who  is  willing  to  make  the  acquisition, ^^'

but  is  not  able. But  he  who,  that  he  may  not  know,  turns

away  his  ear  from  the  voice  of  truth,  such  a  person  is  brought

in,  not  one  in  ignorance,  but  a  despiser* Now  '  the  way*  of

God  is  peace,  *  the  way*  of  God  is  humility,  *  the  way*  of

God  is  patience. But  whilst  the  wicked  disregard  all  these,

tlioy  say,  We  desire  not  (he  knowledge  qf  Thy  ways.  For  whilst

ihey  are  big  with  pride  in  this  life,  whilst  they  are  swollen

with honours,  whilst,  even  if  they  have  not,  they  covet,

they  slight  *  the  ways*  of  God  in  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts.

For  because  God*s  way  in  this  world  was  humility,  this  very

Lord  and  God,  the  Redeemer  of  us  men,  came  to  reproaches,

to  mockery,  to  the  Passion ;  and  He  underwent  the  adverse

treatment  of  this  world  with  patience,  resolutely  eschewed

its  good  fortune,  that  He  might  both  teach  the  prosperity  of

the  eternal  life  to  be  aimed  at,  and  the  adversities  of  the

present  life  not  to  be  dreaded. But  because  the  wicked

covet  the  glory  of  the  present  life,  and  eschew  disgrace,  they

are  described  as  saying.  We  desire  not  the  knowledge  qf

Thy  ways. For  they  are  unwilling  to  know,  what  they  scorn

to  do. Whose  words  are  further  continued,  where  it  is  said;

Ver.  15.  Who  is  the  Almighty^  that  we  should  serve  Himf

52.  For  the  mind  of  man  being  miserably  discharged  xlvi.

without,  is  so  dissipated  in  things  corporeal,  as  neither  to

return  to  itself  within,  nor  to  be  able  to  think  of  Him,  Who

is  invisible. Thus  carnal  men  setting  at  nought  spiritual

commands,  because  they  do  not  see  God  with  bodily  sight,

one  time  or  another  come  to  this  pass,  that  they  even  imagine

Him  not  to  be. Hence  it  is  written.  The  fool  hath  said  in  V9.\4,\.

his  heart,  There  is  no  Ood. Whence  also  it  is  said  now,

Who  is  the  Almighty,  that  we  should  serve  Him  f For  it

very  often  happens  that  men  make  it  more  their  aim  to

serve  their  fellow-creatures,  whom  they  see  with  bodily  sight,

than  to  serve  God,  Whom  they  do  not  see. For  in  all  that

they  do;  they  stretch  towards  the  reach  of  their  eyes,  and

because  they  cannot  stretch  the  eyes  of  the  body  to  God,

they  either  scorn  to  pay  Him  homage,  or  if  they  begin  they

grow  wearied. For,  as  has  been said,  they  do  not  be-

206  Thesaul  better  than  the  body. Real  good  scorned  by  the  carnal.

JoBSKlieye  Him  to  he,  Whom  they  do  not  behold  with  bodily
.Ji?  sight.  These,  did  t))ey  bat  seek  God  the  Author  of  all
things  in  a  spirit  of  humility,  would  in  themselves  ex-
perience (hat  a  thing  which  is  not  seen  is  better  than  an
object  which  is  seen.  For  they  themselves  subsist  in  being  by
virtue  of  an  invisible  soul  and  a  visible  body ;  but  if  that  which
is  not  seen  be  withdrawn  from  tliem,  |it  once  that  perishes
which  is  seen.  And  the  eyes  of  the  body  indeed  are  open,  but
they  cannot  see  or  perceive  any  thing.  For  the  sense  of  sight  is
gone,  because  the  indweller  has  quitted,  and  the  house  of  the
flesh  remains  empty,  since  that  invisible  spirit  has  departed
which  was  ^ont  to  look  through  its  windows.  Therefore
that  invisible  things  are  better  than  visible  ones,  all  carnal
persons  ought  severally  to  conclude  from  themselves,  and
by  this  ladder  of  reflection  (so  to  speak)  to  mount  towards
Ood,  seeing  that  He  is  even  herein  that  He  continues
invisible,  and  continues  supreme  in  proportion  as  He  can
never  be  comprehended.  But  there  are  some,  who  do  not
doubt  either  that  Ood  b,  or  that  He  is  incomprehensible,
H'ho  notwithstanding  seek  from  Him  not  Himself,  but  His
external  gifts.  And  when  they  see  that  these  are  wanting  to
those  that  obey  Him,  they  scorn  to  obey  Him  themselves.
In  relation  to  whose  words  it  is  further  added ;
And  what  profit  should  we  have,  \f  we  pray  unto  Him  ?
xlvii.  63-  When,  in  praying,  Ood  is  not  the  object  we  seek,  the
mind  is  soon  wearied  in  praying,  in  that  when  a  man  asks
those  things,  which  it  may  be  that  Ood  of  His  secret  counsel
refrises  to  bestow.  He  is  Himself  brought  into  loathing.  Who
will  not  give  the  thing  which  is  loved.  Now  the  Lord
desires  that  He  may  be  loved  Himself,  more  than  the  things
which  He  has  made,  and  that  things  eternal  should  be
Katt. 6, rather  prayed  for  than  temporal  ones;  as  it  is  written,  Seek
^'  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all
these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you.  For  in  that  He  saith
not,  '  shall  be  given,'  but  shall  be  added  unto  you,  he
plainly  shews  that  what  is  given  as  principal  is  one  thing,  and
what  is  added  over  and  above,  another.  For  whereas  to  us
the  eternal  world  ought  to  be  in  the  thought  and  intent,  but
the  world  of  time  in  the  use,  both  the  one  is  ^  given*  and  the

VainpitnmtM. BadmmwfimadenofArirgoodAings.  207

other  *  added'  of er  and  above  in  saperabnndance.  And  yet  Book
it  very  often  happens,  that  when  men  pray  for  temporal  good  JEZl-
ihings,  bat  do  not  look  for  eternal  rewards,  they  seek  the
thing  that  is  added,  and  do  not  want  that  wherennto  it
should  be  added.  Nor  do  they  reckon  it  to  be  the  worth
of  their  prayer,  if  here  they  be  poor  in  things  temporal,
and  there  Uto  for  everlasting  rich  in  blessedness ;  hot  having
their  eyes  fixed  on  visible  things  alone,  as  has  been  said,
they  refiise  to  purchase  for  themselves  the  invisible  by  the
labour  of  beseeching  it.  Who  if  they  but  sought  objects
above,  would  ply  their  labour  already  with  fruit,  in  that
when  the  mind,  employed  in  prayers,  pants  after  the  form


and  fashion*  of  its  Maker,  burning  with  divine  longings, it  is>f]
united  to  that  which  is  above,  disjoined  from  that  below,  opens
itself  in  the  affection  of  its  fervent  passion,  that  it  may  take
in,  and  while  taking  in  kindles  itself:  merely  to  love  things
above  is  already  to  mount  on  high ;  and  whilst  with  longing
desire,  the  soul  is  agape  after  heavenly  objects,  in  a  marvel-
lous way  it  tastes  the  very  thing  it  longs  to  get. It  goes  on;

Ver.  16.  But  because  their  good  things  are  not  in  their
handf  may  their  counsel  he  far  from  me.

54.  He  *  holds  his  good  things  in  his  hand,'  who  in  xlviii.
despising  temporal  things,  forces  them  under  the  dominion
of  the  mind.  For  whoever  loves  them  over  much,  subjects
himself  more  to  them,  than  them  to  himself.  For  many
of  the  righteous  were  rich  in  this  world ;  sustained  by  their
substance,  and  by  their  honour,  they  seemed  to  possess
many  things;  yet  forasmuch  as  their  mind  was  not  possessed
by  the  excessive  enjoyment  of  these  things,  which  were
theirs,  *  their  good  things  were  in  their  hand,'  because  they
were  held  subordinate  to  the  authority  of  the  soul.  But  on
the  other  hand  the  wicked  so  discharge  themselves  with  all
their  hearts  in  aims  at  outward  things,  that  they  do  not
themselves  so  much  hold  the  things  possessed,  but  are
holden  with  minds  in  bondage  by  the  things  they  possess.
Therefore  because  '  their  good  things  are  not  in  their  hand,'
it  is  rightly  added,  let  their  counsel  be  far  from  me.  For
what  is  *  (he  counsel  of  Uie  wicked,'  saving  to  seek  earthly
aud  neglect  eternal  glory,  to  aim  at  temporal  well-being  at
the  cost  of  interior  detriment,  and  to  ciiange  away  transitory

208 TTi€  light  of  the  wicked  iometimes  put  out  here.

Job  91,  sorrows  for  eternal  woes  i  Let  the  holy  man,  then,  regarding
^^'  ^^'  these  aims  of  the  wicked,  turn  from  them  and  say.  Lei  their
^"*  counsel  he  far  from  me.  Hecanse  he  sees  it  to  be  good
beyond  comparison,  as  it  is,  he  had  rather  for  a  brief  space
groan  here  beneath  the  rod,  than  undergo  the  woes  of
eternal  vengeance.  But  not  even  in  this  life  do  they,  that
are  bent  to  make  their  way  prosperous  therein,  enjoy  an
iminterrupted  course  of  prosperity.  But  many  times  their
joys  are  broken  off  by  groans  arising.  Whence  it  is
added ;

Yer.  17.  How  often  shall  their  candle  be  put  out  f  and
how  oft  shall  a  flood  come  over  them,  and  shall  He  divide
sorrows  in  His  fury  f
xlix.  fid*  It  often  happens  that  the  wicked  man  reckons  the
life  of  his  children  as  a  '  candle,'  but  when  the  son,  that
is  loved  overmuch,  is  taken  away,  what  seemed  the  ^  light'  of
the  wicked  is  ^  put  out.'  Often  the  wicked  man  reckons  the
credit  of  present  honour  his  '  candle,'  but,  whilst,  his  dignity
gone,  he  is  cast  down  from  his  height,  his  candle  is  extin-
gubhed,  which  shone  for  him  according  to  his  desire.
Often  the  wicked  man  thinks  that  the  resources  of  earthly
substance  are  his,  like  a  great  candle  for  light,  but  when
upon  ruin  falling  on  him,  he  loses  the  riches  which  he  loved
more  than  himself,  what  else  with  this  man  but  that  he  has
lost  the  candle,  in  the  light  of  which  ho  was  rejoicing  ?  And
so  he  that  has  no  wish  to  rest  his  joy  on  the  things  of
Eternity,  neither  here,  where  he  is  minded  to  establish  him-
self, can  he  rejoice  uninterruptedly.  For  as  often  as  the
*  candle  of  the  wicked  is  put  out,'  at  once  there  ^  cometh  a
flood  upon  them,  and  God  divideth  sorrows  in  His  fiiry.'  'A
flood  cometh^  upon  the  wicked  when  they  undergo  the  waves
of  sorrow  from  adversity  of  some  kind.  For  Almighty  God,
when  He  sees  Himself  contemned,  and  that  delight  is  taken
in  earthly  concupiscence,  smites  that  with  woes  which  He
sees  is  preferred  before  Himself  in  the  thoughts  of  the
wicked  man.  Now  it  is  well  said,  And  divideth  sorrows  in
His  fury.  For  He  That  reserves  eternal  woes  for  the  wicked
man  in  retribution,  and  sometimes  smites  through  his  soul
even  here  with  temporal  woe,  because  both  here  and  there
too  He  smites,  *  divideth  son'ows  in  His  fury'  upon  the

The  tnighiiesi  sinnern  found  as  chaff  in  the  Judgment  209

head  of  the  ungodly. For  oeither  does  present  punishment,  Boos
which  does  not  turn  the  mind  of  the  wicked  man  from  his ^^'
bad  desires,  set  him  free  from  eternal  chastisements. And
hence  it  is  sud  by  the  Psalmist,  Upon  the  wicked  He  shatlVnAifi.
rain  Morenyfirey  and  brims toney  and  blasts  qf  storms ;  this
shall  be  a  portion  qf  their  cup. In  mentioning  *  snares,  fire,
and  brimstone,  and  blasts  of  storms,^  he  introduced  indeed
a  multitude  of  woes;  but  because the  sinner  that  is  not
amended  by  them  is  called  to  eternal  punishments,  he  con-
sequently called  these  woes  no  more  his  whole  cup,  but '  a
portion  of  his  cup,*  lieeing  that  their  suffering  is  begun
indeed  here  in  woes,  but  is  consummated  in  everlasting
▼engeance. Concerning  whose  end  it  is  yet  frurther  added ;

Ver.  18.  They  shall  be  as  chaff'  before  the  windy  and  as
ashes  that  the  storm  scattereth.

56.  When  the  wicked  man  is  seen  in  power,  when  he  is  1*
utterly  without  check  or  restraint  in  his  acts  of  oppression
and  violence,  by  the  imaginations  of  the  weak  he  is  accounted
tck>  well  ballasted,  and  as  rooted  in  this  world.  But  when
the  sentence  of  the  strict  Judge  cometh,  *  all  the  wicked  shall
be  as  chaff  before  the  wind,*  because,  if  I  may  say  so,  all
they  are  by  the  sudden  blast  of  wrath  lifted  and  carried  to  the
fire,  whom  here  once  in  their  hasty  judgments  the  tears  of  the
distressed  were  as  unable  to  move  as  a  superincumbent  mass
of  a  stubborn  weight.  And  to  the  hands  of  griping  Judg-
ment those  are  light,  who  by  injustice  were  heavy  upon  their
neighbours.  And  as  ashes  that  the  storm  scattereth.  Before
the  eyes  of  Almighty  Ood,  the  life  of  the  wicked  man  is
ashes,  in  that  though  he  appear  green  for  a  moment,  yet  is
he  already  seen  consumed  by  His  judgment,  seeing  that  he
is  set  aside  for  everlasting  burning.  These  ashes  the  storm
disperses,  in  that,  God  shall  come  in  statCy  even  our  Godf  andvsM^s.
shall  not  keep  silence.  Afire  shall  devour  before  Himy  and
there  shall  be  a  mighty  tempest  round  about  Him.  For  by
the  fiiriousness  of  this  tempest  the  wicked  are  carried  away
from  the  sight  of  the  eternal  Judge.  And  those  that  here
had  set  their  mind  firm  with  evil  desire,  will  then  appear  but
'  chaflT  and  '  ashes,'  because  those  persons  the  storm  seizes
and  transports  to  eternal  punishment. It  goes  on ;

VOL.  II.  P

210  Children  how  punished  for  fatlier^i  Hns,  and  how  not.

JoB.91,  Ver.  19.  Qod  shall  lay  up  for  his  children  the  grief  qf
— <!—  their  father.  And  when  He  repayeth^  then  he  shall  know  it.
II  '  57.  We  know  ibat  it  is  writieu;  Visiting  the  iniquity  qf
Ex.  84,  the  fathers  upon  the  children^  and  upon  the  children's  chil"
^'  dren  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation.  And  again  it  is
Ezek.  written,  What  mean  ye  that  ye  make  this  a  proverb  among
18, 2^.  y^^  concerning  the  land  of  Israel^  saying^  The  fathers  have
eaten  sour  grapes^  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge'^
As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord^  ye  shall  not  have  this  for  a
proverb  any  more  in  Israel.  Behold  all  souls  are  Mine;  as
the  soul  qf  the  father t  so  also  the  soul  qf  the  son  is  Mine:
the  soul  that  sinnethf  it  shall  die.  Tbus  in  tbese  two  sen-
tences whereas  there  is  found  a  dissimilar  meaning,  the  mind
of  the  hearer  is  instructed,  that  it  should  search  out  with
minute  care  the  waj  of  discernment.  Since  original  sin  we
derive  from  our  parents,  and,  except  by  the  gi-ace  of  Baptism
we  be  loosed  from  it,  we  bear  with  us  tlie  sins  of  our
very  parents,  seeing  that  surely  we  are  still  one  with
them.  And  so  *  He  visitetli  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon
the  children,'  when  on  account  of  the  guilt  of  the  parent,  the
soul  of  the  offspring  is  polluted  by  original  sin.  And  again
He  does  not  *  visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,'
in  that  when  we  are  freed  frx>ra  original  guilt  by  Baptism,  we
no  longer  own  the  sins  of  our  fathers,  but  those  which  we
have  ourselves  been  guilty  of.  Which  however  may  be  un-
derstood in  another  way  as  well,  in  that  whosoever  imitates
the  wicked  ways  of  a  bad  father,  is  bound  in  his  sins  also.
But  whosoever  does  not  follow  the  wickedness  of  his  parent,
is  never  burthened  by  his  offence.  And  hence  it  comes  to
pass  that  the  bad  son  of  a  bad  father  not  only  pays  for  his
own  sins,  which  he  has  added,  but  the  sins  of  his  father  as
well;  seeing  that  to  the  evil  practices  of  his  father,  which  he
is  not  ignomnt  that  the  Lord  is  angry  with,  he  is  not  afraid
to  add  yet  further  his  own  wickedness  too.  And  it  is  meet
that  he  who  being  liable  to  a  strict  Judge  does  not  fear  to
follow  the  ways  of  a  wicked  parent,  should  be  compelled  in
this  present  life  to  pay  for  even  his  parent's  misdeeds.
And  hence  it  is  there  said,  The  soul  of  the  father  is  Mine,
and  the  sotU  qf  the  son  is  Mine :  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it

Sins  copied  by  children. Punishment  opens  the  eyes. 911

shall  (he,  because  in  the  flesh  by  the  sin  of  the  father  the  Book

i lev
sons  too  are  sometimes  ruined. But  now  that  original  sin ^

has  been  done  away,  thej  are  not  bound  in  the  soul  by  fhe
parentis  wickedness.  For  how  is  it  that  little  children  are
Tery  often  seized  by  devils,  saving  that  the  flesh  of  the  son  is
mulcted  in  punishment  of  the  father  ?  For  the  bad  father  h
stricken  in  his  own  person,  and  is  too  stubborn  to  feel  the
force  of  the  blow.  Very  often  he  is  stricken  in  his  children,
so  as  to  be  more  sharply  stung,  and  the  sorrow  of  the  father  is
rendered  to  the  flesh  of  the  children,  to  the  end  that  the  evil
heart  of  the  parent  may  be  chastened  by  inflicUons  on  the
children.  But  when  not  little  children,  but  such  as  are  now
more  advanced  in  years,  are  stricken  by  the  parentis  sin,  what
else  are  we  given  clearly  to  understand,but  that  they  likewise  pay
the  penalties  of  those  whose  deeds  they  have  imitated  ?  And
hence  it  is  rightly  said.  Even  unto  the  third  and  fourth  gene-
ration. For  whereas  it  is  possible  that  '  even  to  the  third
and  fourth  generation,'  children  may  witness  the  life  of  their
father,  which  they  copy,  vengeance  extends  even  to  them,  who
witnessed  what  they  might  mischievously  imitate*

58.  And  because  sin  shuts  the  eyes  of  the  ungodly,  but
punishment  opens  them  wide  at  the  last,  it  is  rightly  sub-
joined ;  And  when  He  repay eth^  then  he  shall  know  it.  For
the  ungodly  man  knows  not  the  evil  things  he  has  done,
except  when  he  has  already  begun  to  be  punished  for  those
same  evil  deeds.  Honce  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet ;  And  the
vexation  alone  shall  give  understanding  to  the  hearing.
For  he  then  *  understands*  what  he  has  heard,  when  he  now
grieves  that  he  is  ^  vexed'  for  the  neglect  of  it  Hence  it  is
said  by  Balaam  concerning  himself;  the  man  whose  eye  if  Numb.
shut  hath  said:  He  hath  said  which  heard  the  words  of^^>^*^*
Godf  which  saw  the  vision  qf  the  Almighty^  which  shall/all^
ofid  so  his  eyes  shall  be  opened.  For  he  gave  counsel  against
the  children  of  Israel,  but  he  saw  afterwards  in  punishment
what  it  was  he  had  been  guilty  of  before  in  sin.  Now  the  Electi
forasmuch  as  they  see  beforehand  so  that  they  should  not  sin,
the  eyes  of  these  surely  are  open  before  their  fall.  But  the
wicked  man  opens  his  eyes  after  his  fall,  because  after  his
sin  he  now  in  his  own  punishment  sees  that  he  ought  to
have  avoided  that  ill  which  he  did. Concerning  the  know-

p2

212 Eyei  opened  at  last. Fear  of  temporal  judytnenU.

Job  si,  ledge  of  which  man,  at  that  Ume  useless  from  henceforth,  the
-=-1 — 1  words  are  next  introduced  ;

lilT.

Ver.  20.  His  eyes  shall  see  his  destruction^  and  he  shall
drink  of  the  wrath  qf  the  Almiyhty.
lii.  59.  This  man,  if  whilst  placed  in  this  life  he  had  been
willing  to  open  his  eyes  to  his  sin,  would  not  hereafter  ^  drink
of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty.'  But  he  that  here  turns  away
his  eyes  from  the  sight  of  his  guilt,  cannot  there  avoid  the
sentence  of  condemnation.  But  often  those  that  do  not  fear
eternal  punishments,  at  all  events  on  account  of  temporal
chastening  are  afraid  to  do  what  is  bad.  But  there  are  some
that  have  become  so  hardened  in  wickedness  that  they  do
not  fear  to  be  stricken  even  in  the  very  things  that  they  love,
if  only  they  can  accomplish  what  they  have  iniquitously
planned.  Hence  it  is  here  added  concerning  the  obduracy
of  the  wicked  man,

Ver.  21.  Fox  tvhat  doth  it  concern  him  about  his  house
after  him  ?  or  if  the  number  of  his  months  be  halved  f
liii.  60.  Not  that  we  ought  so  to  understand  it  as  that  this
wicked  one,  after  he  is  condemned  to  everlasting  punish-
ment, shall  never  think  of  *  his  house,*  i.  e.  of  his  relations,
Luke  whom  he  has  left;  since  *  Truth'  tells  us  by  His  own  lips,
1^)  ^*  that  the  rich  man,  who  was  buried  in  hell,  even  in  the  midst
of  punishment  had  care  and  concern  touching  his  five
brethren,  whom  he  had  left.  For  every  sinner  will  turn  wise
in  punishment,  who  continued  foolish  iu  sin,  because  being
now  wrung  with  anguish  there,  he  opens  his  eyes  to  reason,
which  here  being  devoted  to  pleasure  he  kept  shut;  and  under
the  torturing  of  punishment  it  is  forced  from  him  to  learn
wisdom,  who  here  by  pride  blinding  him  made  himself  foolish.
Which  person,  however,  his  wisdom  will  then  no  longer  avail,
in  that  here,  where  ho  ought  to  have  acted  after  tlie  dictates  of
wisdom,  he  lost  the  opportunity.  For  he  covets  as  the
sovereign  good  here  to  have  progeny  of  his  race,  to  fill  his
house  with  servants  and  with  substance,  and  to  live  long  in
this  corrupt  condition  of  the  flesh.  But  if  perchance  any
thing  has  come  into  his  wishes,  which  however  he  can-
not obtain  except  with  the  offending  of  his  Creator,  his  mind
is  disturbed  for  a  while,  and  he  considers  that,  if  he
does  aught  here  to  incur  his  Creator^s  being  offended,  he  is

This  fear  overcome. Godjudgeth  even  AngeU. 213
smitten  in  his  hoose,  children,  lire. Bui  prompted  by  his  Book


pride,  he  directly  hardens  himself,  and  whatever  infliction  he-
may  feel  in  his  house,  or  whatever  infliction  in  his  life,  he
minds  it  nothing,  so  long  as  he  can  accomplish  the  things  he
has  projected,  and  whilst  he  lives,  he  never  ceases  to  com-
pass his  pleasures.  For  see,  his  house  is  struck  on  account  of
sin;  but  what  does  it  concern  him  about  his  house  after
him  f  See,  for  the  avenging  of  his  etil  doing,  the  length  of  life,
which  he  might  have  had,  is  shortened ;  hni  what  does  it  con-
cern him  if  the  number  of  his  months  be  cut  off  in  the  midst  f
Even  in  that  thing  therefore  the  sinner  sets  himself  stiffly
against  Gk>d,  in  which  Almighty  Ood  breaks  in  pieces  his
stiflTness;  and  not  even  Uie  smiting  inflicted  brings  down  the
mind,  which  stubbornness  on  deliberation  hardens  in  resist*
ance  to  God.  And  observe  how  heavy  the  heinousness  of
the  sin,  at  once  to  set  before  the  mind  punishment  for  sin,
and  yet  not  even  from  fear  of  torment  to  bend  the  neck  of
the  heart  beneath  the  yoke  of  our  Maker !  But  see,  when  we
hear  these  things  said,  the  question  occurs  to  our  mind,  why
the  Almighty  and  Merciful  God  permitted  the  faculty  of
reason  in  the  human  mind  to  fall  into  such  blindness  ?  But
lest  any  one  presume  to  sift  beyond  what  he  ought  the
hidden  judgments  of  God,  it  is  rightly  added ;

Ver.  22.  Shall  any  teach  God  knowledge  f  seeing  that  He
judgeth  those  that  are  high.

61.  When  in  the  things,  which  are  done  concerning  us,  liv.
we  have  doubts,  we  ought  to  look  at  others,  which  are  well
known  to  us,  and  to  pacify  that  murmuring  of  the  thought,
which  had  arisen  to  us  in  consequence  of  our  uncertainty.
For  see,  whereas  scourges  recover  the  Elect  to  life,  and  not
even  scourges  keep  Uie  wicked  from  bad  deeds,  Almighty
God's  judgments  upon  us  are  very  secret  and  are  not  unjust*
But  if  we  stretch  the  eye  of  our  mind  to  the  things  above,  we
see  by  those  thai  touching  ourselves  we  have  nought  to  com-
plain of  with  justice.  For  Almighty  God  discerning  the  merits
of  Angels,  ordained  some  to  abide  in  eternal  light  without
falling,  others,  fallen  of  free  will  from  the  standing  of  their
loftiness.  He  laid  low  in  the  vengeance  of  eternal  damnation.
By  us,  then,  He  doth  nothing  unjustly,  Who  judged  justly
even  a  nature  more  refined  than  ours. So  let  him  say;  Sliall

214  The  end  sets  right  present  inequalities.

Job  si.  any  teach  Qod  knowledge  f  seeing  that  Hejttdgeth  those  that

-are  high. For  He  that  doeth  wonderful  things  above  our

level,  it  is  surely  plain  that  touching  ourselves  He  ordereth
all  things  with  knowledge.  This  then  being  set  first,  he
adds,  where  it  is  the  mind  of  man  is  wearied  in  making
research. For  it  is  added ;

Ver.  23 — 25.  One  dieth  in  his  full  strength^  being
rich  and  prosperous.  His  inwards  are  full  of  fatness^
and  his  bones  are  moistened  with  marrow.  And  another
dieth  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul,  and  hath  never  any
wealth.
Iv.  62.  These  things  being  so,  who  may  investigate  the  secrets
of  Almighty  God,  to  find  out  wherefore  He  permits  them  so  to
be?  Now  to  the  Elect  and  the  Lost,  their  life  indeed  is
unlike,  but  the  corruption  of  the  flesh  in  death  is  no  way
unlike. Hence  it  is  added ;

Ver.  26.  And  yet  they  shall  lie  down  alike  in  t/te  dustf
and  the  worms  shall  cover  them.

What  wonder  then  if  those  persons  for  a  moment  run  a
course  unlike  in  the  prosperity  and  adversity  of  this  world,  who
through  the  corruption  of  the  flesh  return  alike  to  the  earth  7
So  that  life  alone  is  to  be  thought  on,  wherein  together  with
the  resurrection  of  the  flesh  there  is  the  arrival  at  an  unlike
end  of  recompensing.  For  what  is  *  strength  and  ease*  to
the  wicked,  what '  marrow  and  riches,*  seeing  that  all  is  left
here  in  a  moment,  and  There  that  retribution,  which  may
never  be  left,  is  found  7  For  as  the  mirth  of  this  wicked  one
passes  on  to  woe,  so  the  woe  of  the  innocent  soul  in  affliction
passes  on  to  joy.  So  neither  ought  riches  to  lift  up  the
soul,  nor  poverty  to  disturb  it.  Hence  blessed  Job  in  the
midst  of  hurts  in  substance  receives  to  the  mind  no  hurts  in
thoughts ;  but  to  them  that  despise  him  under  the  infliction
of  the  rod,  he  adds  rebuking  tliem,  saying,

Ver.  27,  28.  Behold  J  know  your  thoughts,  and  the  devices
that  ye  wrongfully  imagine  against  me.  Fa-  ye  say,  Wtiere
is  the  house  of  the  prince  ?  and  where  are  the  dwellings  of
the  wicked  f
Ivi.  63.  For  they  had  imagined  him  a  wicked  man,  whom  they
saw,  his  substance  gone,  in  a  temporal  way  ruined.  But  tlie
holy  man  judges  them  with  a  lofty  review  in  proportion  as

strength  and/atneis  of  wicked  men  here.  215

amidst  the  losses  which  he  had  met  withy  he  was  standing  Book
with nndiminished  uprightness. For  how  had  his  losses *
of  substance  without  hurt  him,  who  had  not  lost  That  Beingi
Whom  he  loved  within  ?

64.  But  this  that  is  said.  They  shall  lie  down  alike  in  the  hhhEo.
dust^  and  the  worms  shall  cover  them^  i(  any  one  wish  to

take  in  the  way  of  allegory,  we  may  shortly  accomplish'  it»  if'  tee
what  has  been  already  said  concerning  this  bad  rich  man,^^],  '
we  repeat  again. Thus  it  is  said.  His  inwards  are  full  Q/'Book.
fatnesSy  and  his  bones  are  moistened  with  marrow. For  as^*  ^'

*  fat*  arises  from  much  food,  so  does  pride  from  abundance
of  goods,  which  fattens  his  mind  in  his  riches,  while  his
spirit  is  lifted  up  in  his  proud  behaving.  For  the  pride  of
the  heart  is  like  a  kind  of  richness  of  fat  Whence,  because
very  many  commit  sins  from  abundance,  it  is  said  by  the
Prophet,  Their  iniquity  has  come  out  as  it  were  fromV%.1s^1.

fatness.  It  follows,  And  his  bones  are  moistened  with
marrow.  The  lovers  of  this  life  have  *  bones*  as  it  were,
when  in  this  world  they  possess  the  strong  stay  of  dignities.
But  if  in  the  outward  dignity  there  lack  earthly  private
wealth,  as  to  their  judgment  they  have  ^  bones*  indeed,  but

*  marrow*  in  the  bones  they  have  not  Whereas  then  that
lover  of  this  worid  is  so  stayed  up  by  outward  power  that  he
is  likewise  at  the  same  time  stuffed  to  the  full  with  the
inward  abundance  of  his  earthly  house,  it  is  said.  And  his
bones  are  moistened  with  marrow.  Or  otherwise  the '  bones*
of  the  rich  man  are  bad  and  stubborn  practices,  but  the
'  marrow  in  the  bones*  are  the  mere  desires  of  bad  living
alone,  which  not  even  in  the  satisfying  of  wickedness  are
filled  to  the  full.  Which  marrow  as  it  were  moistens  the
bones,  when  bad  desires  keep  on  their  evil  habits  in  the
gratification  of  pleasures.

65.  And  there  are  some  that  in  this  world  have  not  riches,
but  long  to  have,  and  seek  to  be  exalted,  though  in  this
world  they  are  unable  to  get  the  thing  they  desire,  and
whilst  they  have  no  substance  or  dignity  to  support  them,
yet  by  bad  desires  conscience  declares  them  guilty  in  the
sight  of  the  interior  Judge.  For  every  such  person  is  very
often  in  this  accounted  distressed,  because  he  cannot  be  rich
and  cany  himself  proudly. Concerning  whom  it  is  also  added.

216 IVorms  of  care  cover  ihote  who  lie  low  in  desire.

Job  91,  And  another  dieth  in  the  bitterness  qfhis  soul^  and  without

-^11^  any  wealth. Observe  from  the  same  cause  whence  the  rich

*man  emptily  rejoices  with  a  proud  heart,  another  that  is

poor  more  emptily  sorrows  with  a  proud  heart. Now  it  is

rightly  added  concerning  both,  And  yet  they  shall  lie  doum

together  in  the  dust^  and  the  worms  shall  cover  them. For

to  ^  lie  down  in  the  dust'  is  to  close  the  eyes  of  the  mind  in

earthly  desires ;  hence  it  is  said  to  every  individual  living  in

Eph.  6,  sin,  and  lying  asleep  in  his  wickedness,  Awake  thou  that

^^' steepest,  and  arise  from  t/^e  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee

light. But  the  *  worms*  that  spring  from  the  flesh  cover

them  alike»  in  that  carnal  cares  overlay  the  mind  whether  of

the  rich  man  or  of  the  poor  man  carrying  himself  proudly.

For  in  the  things  of  earth  the  poor  and  the  rich  children  of

perdition,  though  they  be  not  sustained  by  a  like  share  of

prosperity,  are  yet  troubled  by  a  like  degree  of  solicitude,  in

that  what  the  one  already  possesses  with  alarm  the  other

longs  for  with  anxiety,  and  because  he  is  unable  to  get  it  he

is  grieved. So  let  it  be  said  ;  77#ey  shall  lie  down  together

in  the  dust,  and  the  worms  shall  cover  them. In  that

though  they  be  not  alike  lifted  up  by  temporal  good  things,

yet  in  care  of  temporal good things  they  are  both  alike

lulled  asleep  by  insensibility  of  mind. And  the  worms  cover

them  together,  because  whether  this  one,  that  he  may  possess

what  is  coveted,  or  that  one,  that  he  may  not  lose  what  is

possessed,  carnal  thoughts  overlay  both.

Lit. 66.  But  blessed  Job,  who  neither  when  he  had  substance

was  elated,  nor  when  it  was  taken  from  him  sought  it  with

anxiety,  as  he  was  devoured  by  no  thoughts  of  outward  loss,

had  no  *  worms  of  the  heart  covering  him  ;*  and  because  he

had  not  sunk  his  mind  in  eailhly  care,  he  did  not  *  lie  asleep

m  the  dust.* It  goes  on ;  Behold  I  know  your  thoughts,  and

I  Cor.2, your  wrongful  sentences  against  me. As  it  is  written.  For

^^* what  man  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  qf

man  which  is  in  himf on  what  principle  is  it  said  here.

Behold  I  know  your  thoughts  ? But  the  spirit  of  a  man  is

then  unknown  to  another,  when  it  is  not  diewn  forth  either

Matt.  7,  by  words  or  deeds. For  whereas  it  is  written,  Wherqfore  by

^* their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them:  it  is  by  the  thing  that  is

done  outwardly that  whatever lies concealed within is

Johjudgei  hy  aciSf  hi$  Friends  tnf  man^s  pre$eni  lot 217

brought  to  sight. Whence  too  it  is  rightly  said  by  Solomoti,  ^^
As  in  water  the  faces  qf  beholders  shine  bright^  so  the  hearts  f^^^
qfmen  are  plain  to  the  wise. Again  blessed  Job,  when  he«7, 19.
declared  that  he  knew  the  thoughts  of  his  fnends  who  were
talking  with  him,  thereupon  added,  and  your  w\fUst  sentences
against  me:  that  by  a  thing  open  to  view  he  might  shew
he  had  found  out  that  which  lay  concealed  in  them. Hence
he  adds  their  very  wicked  sentences  themselves  as  well,
saying,  For  ye  soy.  Where  is  the  house  qf  the  prince  f  and
where  are  the  dwelling-places  qf  the  wicked?

67.  The  weak,  that  desire  to  thrive  in  this  worid^s  fortune,
and  as  evils  of  great  magnitude  so  dread  scourges,  in  the
case  of  those,  whom  they  see  smitten,  measure  offence  by
the  punishment;  for  those,  whom  they  see  struck  with  the
rod,  they  suppose  have  displeased  Ood.  Hence  blessed
Job's  friends  were  persuaded  that  he,  whom  they  be  held
under  the  rod,  had  been  ungodly,  i.  e.  as  reckoning  that  if
he  had  not  been  ungodly,  his  *  dwelling-places  would  have
remained  :*  but  no  man  thinks  so,  saving  he  who  still  travails
with  4he  weariness  of  infirmity,  who  sets  fast  the  footstep  of
his  thoughts  in  the  gratification  of  the  present  life,  who  is
not  taught  to  pass  on  with  perfect  desires  to  the  eternal  land*
Hence  it  is  well  added ;

Ver.  29,  30.  Ask  every  one  of  them  that  go  by  the  way ;
and  ye  will  know  that  he  understands  this  same.  Because
the  wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  qf  destruction^  and  he  is
brought  to  the  day  qf  wrath.

68.  For  often  the  patience  of  Go^  bears  for  long  wiUi  Ivii.
those,  whom it already  condemns  to  punishments  fore-
known; it  suffers  those  to  go  on  thriving,  whom  it  sees
still  committing  worse  things. For  whereas  He  sees  to  what

pit  of  condemnation  they  are  going  on,  He  esteems  to  be  as
nothing  to  them,  that  the  wicked  multiply  here  things  which
must  be  abandoned.  But  he  that  is  wedded  to  the  glory  of
the  present  life,  counts  it  great  happiness  to  thrive  here
according  to  his  wish,  though  he  be  driven  hereafter  to
undergo  eternal  punishment.  Therefore  that  man  only  sees
it  to  be  nothing  for  the  wicked  man  to  thrive,  who  has
already  removed  the  step  of  his  heart  from  the  love  of  the
present  world. Hence,  in  speaking  of  the  after  condemnation

218  *  Wayfaferi  here  see  mo9i  truli/.

Job  91,  of  the  wicked  man,  it  is  rightly  premisedi  Aek  any  one  qf

^'^'  the  wajifarere,  and  ye  shall  know  thai  he  understandeth

'these  same  things. For  be  is  called  a  ^  wayfarer/  who  iniDds

that  the  present  life  b  to  him  a  way  and  not  a  native  land,

who  thinks  it  beneath  him  to  fix  bis  heart  on  the  love  of  this

passing  state  of  being,  who  longs,  not  to  continue  in  a

transitory  scene  of  things,  but  to  reach  the  eternal  world.

For  he  that  does  npt  aim  to  be  a  wayfarer  in  this  world,  is

far  firom  setting  at  nought  this  world's  good  fortune,  and

when  he  sees  those  things  which  he  himself  covets  abounding

to  others,  he  wonders. Hence  the  Prophet  David,  as  he  had

already  passed  in  heart  from  the  love  of  the  present  world,

^'|^>  in  describing  the  glory  of  the  wicked  man,  said ;  I  have  seen

the  ydcked  in  great  potoer,  and  spreading  like  a  green  bay

tree. But  because  he  did  not  submit  his  heart  to  this  world,

he  justly  looked  down  upon  him,  saying,  I  passed  on^  but^

lo,  he  was  not. For  the  wicked  man  would  have  been

something  in  his  esteem,  if  he  had  not  himself  passed  on  in

the  bent  of  his  mind  from  this  present  scene. But  this  man,

I  Oxt who  ^  to  one  not  ^  passing  by'  would  have  been  som^hing

read' 8^^^*  ^  ^^®  ^  passing  by'  in  mind,  how  little  he  was,  was

*  qui.' shewn ;  in  that  whilst  everlasting  retribution  is  thought  on,

it  is  seen  how  little  present  glory  is. Hence  Moses,  when

he  was  seeking  the  glory  of  heavenly  contemplation,  said,

Exoa.8,/||;i7/  nouf  pass  on,  and  see  this  great  sight. For  except

he  had  witlidrawn  the  footstep  of  tlie  heart  from  the  love  of

the  world,  be  would  never  have  been  able  to  understand

things  above. HencQ  Jeremiah  entreating  for  the  sorrow

^•i»of  his  heart  to  be  taken thought  on,  saith.  All  ye  that

pass  by,  Behold  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my

sorrow! For  they  who  do  not  pass  through  the  present  life

like  a  way,  but  think  on  it  as  their  country,  are  unskilled  to

take  in  with  the  mind's  eye  the  sorrow  of  heart  of  the  Elect

These  persons  therefore  the  Prophet  looks  out,  that  they  may

view  his  sorrow,  whose  it  was  not  to  have  set  fast  their  mind

in  this  world. Hence  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  Open  thy

mouth  for  the  dumb,  and  in  the  cause  qf  all  such  as  are

passing  by. For  those  are  called  *  the  dumb,'  who  never  set

themselves  against  the  Preacher's  words  by  gainsaying  them;

who  are  also  persons  *  passing  by,'  in  that  they  disdain  to  fix

Boldness  required  to  rebuke  the  evU  one  to  his  face. 819

the  bent  of  their  mind  in  the  love  of  the  present  life*  Boos
Therefore  that  the  bad  man  is  being  *  reserved  for  the  day  of  ^^*-
perdition/  and  *  brought  to  the  day  of  fary/  this  thing  there  is
none  but  he  who  is  *  a  wayfarer*  that  understandeth,  in  that
he  that  has  set  his  heart  in  the  present  scene  of  things  does
not  find  out  the  punishments  that  follow  the  wicked  man.
Of  whom  it  is  still  further  added;

Ver.  81.  Who  shall  reprove  hie  way  to  his/aeef  and  who
shall  repay  him  what  he  hath  done?

69.  Often  that  wrath  of  Ood,  which  the  wicked  man  is  to  Inii.
suffer  for  ever,  even  while  placed  in  this  life  too  he  is  made  to
experience,  whilst  he  loses  the  good  fortune  that  he  loves,  and
meets  with  the  adversity  that  he  dreads.  And  though  even  in
prosperity  ho  may  be  rebuked  for  his  wickednesses  by  the
tongue  of  tho  righteous,  yet  we  know  that  it  is  when  his  evil
deeds  bring  the  bad  man  to  the  earth,  that  the  reproof  of  the
righteous  gains  force.  But  in  what  sense  is  it  now  said.
Who  shall  reprove  his  way  to  his/aeef  seeing  that  the
righteous  even  holding  their  peace  this  too  is  well  known,
that  so  often  is  *  the  way  of  the  wicked  man  reproved  to  his
face*  here,  as  often  as  his  prosperity  is  disturbed  by  adversity
intervening.  But  blessed  Job,  while  he  was  speaking  of  the
body  of  all  the  wicked,  suddenly  turns  his  words  to  the  head
of  all  the  wicked.  For  he  saw  that  at  the  end  of  the  world
Satan  entering  into  the  man,  whom  Holy  Scripture  calls
Antichrist,  is  lifted  up  with  such  exaltation,  lords  it  with
such  power,  is  exalted  wiUi  such  wonderful  signs  and  mar-
vels in  the  exhibiting  of  holiness,  that  his  deeds  cannot  be
charged  home  to  him  by  man,  in  that  with  the  power  of
terribleness  he  likewise  unites  the  signs  of  holiness  which  is
exhibited,  and  he  says.  Who  shall  reprove  his  way  to  his
face  f  *  Who,*  that  is  to  say,  *  of  mankind  may  dare  to  rebuke
him?  whose  face  does  he  dread  to  endure'?  Yet  not  o^^^j]?'/^
Elijah  and  Enoch  who  are  brought  forward  for  the  rebuking  wLmhe
of  him,  but  even  all  the  Elect  *  reprove  his  way  to  his  face,'^*^*
whilst  they  shew  contempt,  and  whilst  by  excellence  of  mind
ihey  oppose  his  wickedness.  But  because  this  they  do  by
divine  grace  and  not  by  their  own  powers,  it  is  rightly  said
now,  Who  shall  reprove  his  way  before  his  face?  For
*  who*  is  there  save  God,  by  whose  aid  the  Elect  are  sup-

S20  Ood  alone  the  reprover  of  AnlichrUU

Job  SI, ported  to  have  power  to  withstand  him? For  somedmes
,  ^V-in Holy  Scripture,  when  in  asking  a  question the  word
^^ *  ^  who' is put,  the Almighty  is denoted. Hence  it  is
GeD.49, ^tten,  lyho  shall  raise  him  up? Of  Whom  it  is  said
GtL  I,  ^y  P«^»Ji  Whom  God  raised  from  the  dead. In  respect  then
1* that  holy  men  oppose  tliemselves  to  his wickedness,  it
is  not  themselves,  that  '  reprove  his  way/  but  it  is  He,
by  Whose  grace  they  are  strengthened,  and  whereas  his
presence,  wherewith  he  will  come  in  man,  will  be  much  more
dreadful  in  persecution  than  it  is  now,  when  he  is  not  seen
at  all,  in  that  he  is  not  as  yet  preeminently  borne  by  that
special  vessel  of  his,  it  is  well  said,  be/ore  his  face. For
there  are  many  now  who  judge  and  rebuke  the  ways  of
Antichrist,  but  this  they  do  as  it  were  in  his  absence,  in  that
they  rebuke  him  whom  they  do  not  as  yet  in  a  special  man-
ner see. But  when  he  shall  come  in  that  damned  man,
whoever  withstands  his  presence,  *  reproves  his  way  before
bis  face,*  the  powers  of  whom  he  at  once  sees  and  sets  at
nought Or  surely,  to  *  reprove  bis  way  before  his  face'  is  to
disturb  the  prosperity  of  his  course  by  the  interrupting  of
eternal  punishment. Which  thing  because  the  Lord  alone
STheM.^  to  do  by  His  own  might,  of  Whom  it  is  written,  Whom  the
3»  8- Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  spirit  of  His  mouthy  and
shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  His  coming^  it  is  rightly
said.  Who  shall  reprove  his  way  before  hie  face?  And  hence
the  words  follow.  And  who  shall  repay  him  what  he  hath
done? Who,  truly,  save  the  Lord,  Who  alone  shall  *  repay
that  lost  man  what  he  hath  done,'  when  by  His  coming  He
shall  dash  in  pieces  his  exceeding  mighty  power  with  eternal
damnation  ? But  what  this  exalted  prince  of  the  wicked  is
about,  as  long  as  he  is  in  this  life,  let  us  hear. It  goes  on;

Ver.  82.  He  shall  be  brotight  to  the  graves,  and  in  the
heap  qf  the  dead  bodies  he  shall  watch.
lix  ^^'  Whereas  graves  cover  dead  bodies,  what  else  is  denoted
by  ^  the  graves'  but  the  lost,  in  whom  their  souls  extinct  of
the  life  of  blessedness  lie  as  in  graves?  Thus  this  wicked
one  shall  be  ^  brought  to  the  graves,'  in  that  he  shall  be
admitted  in  the  hearts  of  the  wicked,  in  that  they  only  admit
him,  in  whom  are  found  soids  dead  to  God,  concerning
whom  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  Prophet  likewise  where  his

The  wicked  are  pebbles  in  the  stream  qf  helpless  sorrow.  221

ponishinenU  are  described.  His  graves  are  about  Mm^  all  the  Book
slain^  and  those  that  fell  by  the  sword. For  they  in  hell  ^^
*  are  about  hiniy'  in  whom  that  evil  spirit  lies  dead,  which
same  fell,  having  been  slain  by  the  sword  of  his  wickedness.
Whence  it  is  written,  Who  hast  delivered  David  Thy  servant
from  the  hurtful  sword. And  it  is  rightly  said,  in  the  heap
qfthe  dead  bodies  he  shall  wateh,  in  that  now  in  the  assembly
of  sinners  he  puts  forth  the  artifices  of  his  cniining. And
on  tliis  account,  that  in  the  world  there  is  a  scarcity  of  good
men,  and  a  multitude  of  bad,  it  is  rightly  called  *  the  heap  of
dead  bodies,'  that  the  very  multitude  of  the  wicked  might
be  denoted.  For  broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  destruction,  Mat  7,
and  many  there  be  that  go  in  thereat. So  Satan's  'keeping^''
watch  in  the  heap  of  dead  bodies,'  is  his  exercising  the
wiles  of  his  wickedness  in  the  hearts  of  the  children  of
perdition. Of  whom  it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  33.  He  was  sweet  to  the  pebbles  qf  Cocytus.

71.  'Cocytus'  in  the  Greek  tongue  is  the  term  for  'lament*  Ix.
ation,'  which  is  used  to  be  taken  for  the  lamentation  of
women,  or  any  persons  going  weakly.  Now  the  wise  of  this
world  bdng  shut  out  from  the  light  of  truth,  endeavoured  by
making  search  to  hold  a  kind  of  shadows  of  truth.  Hence
they  thought  that  Uie  river  Cocytus  rta  amongst  the  dead
below,  clearly  denoting  that  they  that  commit  deeds  Worthy
of  painful  inflictions,  run  to  an  end  into  hell  unto  lamenta-
tion. But  for  ourselves  let  us  make  little  of  the  shadow  of
carnal  wisdom,  who  now  hold  the  light  relating  to  the  truth,
and  let  us  see  that  in  the  utterance  of  the  holy  man  'Cocytus'
means  the  lamentation  of  the  weak  sort.  For  it  is  written.
Be  of  good  courage,  and  let  your  heart  be  strengthened,  pg.  si,
For  they  who  refuse  to  be  'strengthened'  in  Ood,  are  going ^*
the  way  to  lamentation  through  weakness  of  the  mind.  Now
we  are  used  to  call  by  the  name  of  pebbles  the  little  stones
of  rivers,  which  the  water  in  running  away  carries  along  with
it.  What  then  is  denoted  by  the  pebbles  of  Cocytus,  but
the  lost,  who,  being  devoted  to  their  gratifications,  are  as  it
were  ever  being  dragged  by  the  river  down  to  the  lowest  depth.
For  they  that  refuse  to  stand  strong  and  stedfast  against  the
pleasures  of  this  life,  become  *  pebbles  of  Cocytus,'  who  by
their  slippings  day  by  day  are  going  the  way  to  lamentation,

222 The  evil  eweei  to  the  perUIUng^  seamed  by  the  Elect.

Job  91,  that  they  may  hereafter  mourn  for  eyerlastingy  who  now
^—^—indulgently  give  themselves  a  loose  in  their  pleasures.  And
whereas  our  old  enemy,  having  entered  into  bis  vessel,  that
son  of  perdition,  whilst  he  hestows  gifts  on  the  wicked,  whilst
be  exalts  them  with  honours  in  this  world,  whilst  he  exhibits
marvels  to  their  eyes,  has  all  drifting  souls  admiring  and  follow-
ing him  in  his  marvels,  it  b  said  well  of  him  here,  He  was
sweet  to  the  pebbles  of  Cocyius.  For  whilst  the  Elect  despise
him,  whilst  they  spurn  him  with  the  foot  of  the  mind,  those
love  while  they  follow  him,  who  are  as  it  were  drawn  by  the
water  of  pleasure  to  everlasting  lamentation,  who  from  earthly
concupiscence  roll  down  to  the  lowest  depth  like  gravel,  by  slip-
pings  day  by  day.  For  to  some  he  proffers  the  taste  of  his
sweetness  through  pride,  to  others  through  avarice ;  to  one
set  by  envy,  to  another  by  deceitftilness,  and  to  another  by
lust,  and  for  all  the  kinds  of  evil  that  he  forces  men  to,  he
presents  to  them  so  many  draughts  of  his  sweetness.  For
when  he  prompts  any  thing  proud  in  the  heart,  tlie  thing
becomes  sweet  that  he  says,  because  the  wicked  man  longs
to  appear  advanced  above  the  rest  of  the  world.  Whilst  he
strives  to  infuse  avarice  into  the  mind,  that  which  he  speaks
in  secret  becomes  sweet,  because  by  abundance  need  is
avoided.  When  he  suggests  any  thing  to  do  with  envy,
what  he  says  is  rendered  sweet,  in  that  when  the  ftt)ward
mind  sees  another  go  off,  it  exults  in  not  appearing  at  all  inferior
to  him.  When  it  prompts  any  thing  to  do  with  dcceitfulness,
what  it  says  is  made  sweet,  seeing  that  by  this  alone,  that  it
deceives  the  rest  of  the  world,  it  appears  to  itself  to  be  wise.
When  it  speaks  lust  to  the  seduced  soul,  what  it  recom-
mends is  rendered  sweet,  in  that  it  dissolves  the  soul  in
pleasure.  Therefore,  for  all  the  evil  propensities  that  it  in-
sinuates into  the  hearts  of  carnal  men,  it  as  it  were  holds  out
to  them  so  many  draughts  of  its  sweetness;  which  same
sweetness,  however,  as  I  have  before  said,  none  receive  save
they,  who  being  devoted  to  present  gratifications,  are  drawn
to  everlasting  lamentation.  And  so  it  is  well  said,  He  was
sweet  to  the  pebbles  qfCocytus;  seeing  that  he  is  bitter  to
the  Elect  and  sweet  to  the  lost.  For  them  only  does  he  feed
with  his  delights,  whom  by  daily  slippings  he  is  urging  to
lamentations. It  goes  on ;

Aniichrisi  draws  manp  carnal  now,  all  at  la$i. 223

Ver.  S3.  J$ui  he  draweih  every  man  <tfler  him^  a$  there  Boos
are  innumerable  be/ore  him.  ^^*

78.  In  this  place  bj  *  man*  is  meant  one  whose  taste  is  for  Izi.
things  human.  Bat  whereas  *  every  one'  is  more  than  an
*  innumerable'  qnantitj,  we  have  to  enqaire,  wherefore  he  is
said  before  him  to  draw  an  *  innumerable'  quantity,  and  after
him  *  every  man'  saving  that  our  old  enemy,  having  then  en-
tered into  the  man  of  perdition,  drags  under  the  yoke  of  his
sovereignty  all  the  carnal  ones  that  he  finds ;  who  even  now
before  his  appearing  '  draws  an  innumerable  quantity'  indeed,
yet  not  *  every  one'  of  the  carnal,  in  that  there  are  many  that
are  daily  recalled  to  life  from  carnal  practice,  and  some  by  a
short,  others  by  a  long  course  of  penitence  return  to  the
state  of  righteousness.  And  now  he  seizes  on  an  ^  innu-
merable quantity,'  when  he  does  not  exhibit  the  miracles  of
his  falseness  for  men  to  marvel  at  But  when  he  performs  his
prodigies  before  the  eyes  of  the  carnal  for  them  to  wonder  at,
he  then  draws  after  him  not  an  *  innumerable  quantity,'  but
'  every  one,'  in  that  they  who  delight  themselves  in  present
good  Ulings,  submit  themselves  to  his  power  without  repeal.
But  as  we  before  said,  because  it  is  more  to  *  draw  every
man'  than  an  *  innumerable  quantity,'  wherefore  is  it  first
said  that  he  draws  every  man,  and  afterwards  in  augmentation
an  innumerable  quantity  is  added  ?  For  reason  requires  that
first  what  is  least  should  «be  spoken  of,  and  afterwards  in  aug-
mentation that  which  is  more.  Now  we  are  to  know  that  in
this  passage  it  was  more  to  say, '  an  innumerable  quantity'
than  *  every  man.'  For  be  after  him  *  draws  every  man,'  in
that  in  three  years  and  a  half  all  that  he  may  find  busied  in
the  pursuits  of  a  carnal  life  be  binds  fast  to  the  yoke  of  his
dominion;  but  before  him  he  draws  an  innumerable  quantity,
in  that  during  the  successive  stages  of  five  thousand  years
and  more,  though  he  could  never  succeed  in  drawing  M  the
carnal,  yet  in  so  long  a  period  the  innumerable  quantity
whom  he  carries  away  before  him,  are  many  more  in  number
than  *  air  whom  he  finds  to  carry  ofi*  in  that  so  short  time.
And  so  it  is  well  said,  And  he  draweih  every  man  after  him^
also  innumerable  before  him;  in  that  he  both  takes  away
less  then,  when  he  takes  away  '  every  man,'  and  he  gets  a
bigger  booty  now,  when  he  assails  the  hearts  of  an  *  innu-

224  Job  grieved  at  his  FiiemU  situ

JuB  SI,  merable  quantity.*  Whereas  blessed  Job  then  delirered
■^^  '  ■  these  things  excellently  against  the  prince  of  the  wicked,
who  is  permitted  to  be  exalted  in  this  life,  but  will  be
destroyed  in  the  coining  of  the  Lord,  touching  himself  he
plainly  shews  that  he  received  the  scourges  of  the  Lord  not
by  his  offending,  since  if  the  bad  man  is  permitted  to  prosper
in  this  Ufe,  it  is  necessary  that  the  elect  of  God  should  be
held  fast  under  the  reins  of  the  scourge.  From  which  cir-
cumstance he  reproves  his  friends,  saying.

How  then  comfort  ye  me  in  vain,  seeing  your  answer  is
shewn  to  be  against  IVuth  f
Ixii.  73.  The  Aiends  of  blessed  Job  could  not  console  him,
in  whom  they  gainsaid  the  truth  by  their  discourse,  and
when  they  called  him  a  hypocrite  or  ungodly,  hereby  that
they  themselves  by  lying  were  guilty  of  sin,  assuredly  they
augmented  the  chastisement  of  the  righteous  man  chastened
with  wounds.  For  the  minds  of  the  Saints,  because  they
love  the  truth,  even  the  sin  of  another*s  deceit  wrings.
For  in  proportion  as  tliey  see  the  guilt  of  falsehood  to  be
grievous,  they  hate  it  not  only  in  themselves,  but  in  others
also.

BOOK  XVI.

After  going  ttirongh  the  iwentj-tecond  and  iwenty-third  chapters  of  the
Book  of  Job,  and  the  twenty-fourth  to  the  middle  of  verse  twenty  with  a
brief  explanation^  he  brings  the  third  Pari  to  a  close.

Thosb  persons,  who  being  opposed  to  the  words  of  truth,  Lit.
get  the  worst  in  making  out  a  case,  often  repeat  even  what  is
well  known,  lest  by  holding  their  tongue  they  should  seem
defeated.  Hence  Eliphaz,  being  pressed  closely  by  the
sayings  of  blessed  Job,  utters  things  which  no  one  but  is
aware  of. For  he  says,

Ver.  2.  Can  a  man  he  compared  unio  Ood,  even  when  he
ha$  perfect  knowledge  f

K  By  comparison  with  God,  our  knowledge  is  ignorance,  i.
for  it  is  by  participation,  and  not  by  comparison,  with  Ood
that  we  become  imbued  with  wisdom.  What  wonder  then
when  that  is  said,  as  if  in  the  way  of  instruction,  which  might
have  been  known,  even  if  it  had  been  kept  silent  ?  And  yet
further  be  subjoins  the  power  of  God  as  defending  it

Ver.  8.  le  it  any  prqfit  to  itte  Almighty  that  thou  art
righteoui  f  or  is  it  gain  to  Him^  that  thou  makest  thy  ways
perfect?

2.  For  in  all  that  we  do  well,  we  are  doing  good  to  ourselves ii«
and  not  to  God.  And  hence  by  the  Psalmist  it  is  said,  O  mysoul^  Pt.16,9.
t/iou  hast  said  unto  ihe  Lordy  Thou  art  my  God^  seeing  that
Thou  needest  not  my  goods. For  He  is  truly  ^  Lord'  to  us,
because  He  is  also  assuredly  '  God,'  Who  needs  not  ihe
good  in  him  that  serveth  Him,  but  bestows  the  goodness
which  He  receives,  so  that  ihe  goodness  which  is  offered  up
should  avail  not  Himself,  but  those  thai  first  receive  and
afterwards  render  back. For  though  the  Lord,  wheu  He
Cometh  for  Judgment,  siuth.  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  Hatss,
unto  the  least  of  these  My  brethren^  ye  liave  done  it  unto^^'
Me;  it  is  with  extraordinary  piiifulness  thai  He  says  this,
by  Sjrmpathy  with  His  members. And  He  the  same  Being

VOL.  II.  Q

220 Eliphaz  passeifrom  truisms  to  false  charges,

JoB99,hereby)  viz.  that  He  is  our  Head,  aids,  Who  by  our  good
-i=^  deeds  in  Hb  members  is  aided. Yet  further  Eliphaz  adds
what  there  is  no  man  but  is  aware  of,  saying,

Ver.  4.  Will  He  reprove  thee  for  fear  of  thee  f  Will  He
enter  with  thee  into  judgment  9
iii.  3.  Who  that  was  out  of  his  senses  even  would  think  this,
that  from  fear  the  Lord  reproves  us,  and  from  dread  sets  His
judgment  against  us  7  But  they  who  do  not  know  how  lo
mete  their  words,  doubtless  slip  down  to  idle  discourse.
Wherein  if  they  never  at  all  take  themselves  to  task,  without
delay  they  leap  forth  to  words  mischievous  and  insulting.
Hence  Eliphaz,  who  brought  in  idle  words,  immediately  burst
out  into  abusive  ones,  saying,

Ver.  5.  Is  it  not  for  thy  wickedness  that  is  greats  and  thine
iniquities  that  are  ir^finite  9
iv.  4.  Observe  how  from  a  deadened  heart  he  came  to  idle
words,  and  from  idle  words  in  the  heinousness  of  lying  he
blazed  out  into  insults.  For  these  are  the  descents  of
increasing  sin,  that  the  tongue  when  not  restrained  should
never  there  where  it  has  fallen  lie  still,  but  be  always
descending  to  what  is  worse;  but  these  things  that  are
subjoined,  because  they  are  very  plain  taken  after  the  history,
do  not  need  to  be  set  forth  after  the  letter.

6.  But  whereas  we  have  said  that  the  friends  of  blessed
Job  bear  the  likeness  of  heretics,  but  that  he  himself  bears
the  representing  of  Holy  Church,  the  words  of  Eliphaz
how  they  fit  the  falseness  of  heretics,  let  us  now  at  once  point
out. For  it  proceeds ;

Ver.  6 — 8.  For  thou  hast  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  brother

for  nought^  and  stripped  the  naked  qf  their  clothing. Tftou

hast  not  given  water  to  the  weary^  thou  hast  withholden

bread  from  the  hungry. In  the  might  qf  thine  ann  thou

didst  possess  the  land^  and  as  the  most  powerful  thou  didst

hold  it.

V. 0.  In  Holy  Scripture  by  the  teim  of  ^  a  pledge*  sometimes

ALLBo.^e  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  sometimes  the  confession  of

sin,  are  denoted. Thus  pledge  is  taken  as  the  gift  of  the

2  Cor.  1,  Holy  Spirit,  as  where  it  is  said  by  Paul,  And  given  the  ear-

^^- nest  of  the  Spirit  in  our  hearts. For  we  receive  a  pledge  for

this,  that  we  may  hold  an  assurance  touching  the  promise

Holy  Church  charged  with  hard  dealing  by  Heretics. S27

thai  is  made  to  us. And  so  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  Book
caUed  a  pledge,  in  that  by  this  our  sonl  is  strengthened  to  •


assuredness  of  the  inward  hope.  Again  by  the  name  of  a
*  pledge*  confession  of  sin  is  used  to  be  intended,  as  it  is
written  in  the  Law;  If  thy  brother  oweth  thee  attghij  aiufEx*n,
thou  takeet  away  a  pledge  from  him^  restore  the  pledge
btfore  the  setting  qf  the  sun.  For  our  brother  is  made  a
debtor  to  us,  when  any  fellow-creature  is  proved  to  have
done  any  thing  wrong  against  us.  For  sins  we  call  ^  debts.*
Whence  it  is  said  to  the  servant  when  he  sinned,  I  forgave  U^xM^
thee  all  that  debt.  And  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  we  pray  daily,  ^*
Forgive  us  our  debts^  as  we  forgive  our  debtors.  Now  we  Matt  6,
'  take  a  pledge*  from  our  debtor,  when  from  the  lips  of  him
who  is  found  to  have  sinned  against  us,  we  have  now  gotten  a
confession  of  his  sin,  whereby  we  are  entreated  to  remit  the  sin,
which  was  committed  against  us.  For  he  that  confesses  the
sin  that  he  has  done,  and  begs  pardon,  has  already  as  it
were  given  a  *  pledge*  for  his  debt,  which  pledge  we  are
bidden  to  ^  restore  before  the  sun  set,'  because  before  that  in
ourselves  through  pain  of  heart  the  Sun  of  righteousness
shall  set,  wo  are  bound  to  render  back  the  acknowledgment
of  pardon  to  him,  from  whom  we  receive  the  acknowledgment
of  transgression,  that  he  who  remembers  that  he  has  done
amiss  towards  us,  may  be  made  sensible  that  what  he  has
done  amiss  is  by  us  at  once  remitted.  Therefore  whereas
Holy  Church,  when  it  receives  back  any  returning  from
heretics  to  the  truth  of  the  faith,  first  persuades  them  that
ihey  must  confess  the  sin  of  their  error,  it  is  said  by  Eliphaz  -
as  under  the  likeness  of  heretics;  For  thou  hast  taken
away  a  pledge  from  thy  brother  for  nought^  i.  e.  *  From
those,  that  come  to  thee  from  us,  thou  didst  exact  a  confes-
sion of  error  to  no  purpose.*  But,  as  we  said  before,  if  we
suppose  a  ^  pledge'  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  heretics  say
that  Holy  Church  has  ^  taken  away  the  pledge  of  her  brothers,'
because  they  imagine  that  those  that  come  to  her,  lose  the
gifts  of  the  Spirit  Hence  it  follows,  And  stripped  the  naked
of  their  clothing.

1.  Those  whom  tliey  draw  after  them  by  their  perverted
preaching,  heretics  count  to  have  the  precepts  of  their
teaching  as  a  kind  of  garments,  and  they  esteem  them  to  be

q2

228  Pure  mind$  quit  heresy. Heretics  think  they  give  food.

Job  9S,  clothed  80  long  as  the  things  which  they  themselves  preached
^^^^j^q^  they  witness  observed  by  them,  and  when  any  persons  return
to  Holy  Church  from  them^  they  immediately  fancy  that
they  have  lost  the  garments  of  instruction.  But  whereas
one  that  is  naked  cannot  be  spoiled,  we  have  to  enquire  bow
they  are  first  mentioned  as  '  naked/  and  afterwards  as  '  strip*
ped7*  Now  it  is  necessary  to  know  that  every  one  that
enjoys  purity  of  mind,  by  the  very  circumstance  that  he  has
not  the  cloak  of  double-dealing,  is  *  naked.*  And  there  are
some  among  the  Heretics^  who  have  purity  of  heart  indeed,
but  yet  take  up  the  corrupt  tenets  of  their  teaching.  These
same  are  at  once  by  their  own  purity  *  naked,'  and  by  the
preaching  of  those  persons  they  are  as  it  were  clothed.  And
whereas  all  such  are  easily  brought  back  to  Holy  Church,
for  this  reason  that  they  do  not  use  the  wickedness  of  double-
dealing,  those  persons  heretics  acknowledge  as  naked,  whom
they  call  stripped  by  her  of  their  clothing,  because  they  look
upon  all  the  simple-minded  as  slow  and  dull,  who,  they  see^
have  parted  with  their  own  corrupt  tenets.

8.  It  follows^  Thou  hast  not  given  water  to  the  weary ^
and  thou  hast  withholden  bread  from  the  hungry.  Heretics
in  proportion  as  they  hold  not  the  solid  substance  of  truth,
so  sometimes  they  busy  themselves,  that  they  may  appear
full  of  discourse,  and  against  the  faith  of  Catholics  they  are
boastful  as  of  the  knowledge  of  learning;  all  that  they  see
they  seek  to  draw  to  them  by  their  wicked  discoursings,  and
by  the  very  same  act,  whereby  they  are  joining  others  to
themselves  for  destruction,  they  think  themselves  doing
something  conducive  to  life.  Now  we  call  those  *  weary'
that  are  worn  down  under  the  wearisome  load  of  this  world.
Mat  11,  And  hence  Tnith  saith  by  Himself)  Come  unto  Me^M  ye
that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.
And  so  whereas  heretics  never  cease  to  preach  their  own
doctrines,  they  mock  at  Holy  Church  as  if  for  ignorance.
Thou  hast  not  given  water  to  the  weary ^  and  thou  hast  with-
h  olden  bread  from  the  hungry.  For  themselves  they  think
they  ^  give  water  to  the  weary'  when  to  persons  travail-
ing under  their  earthly  load  they  supply  the  cup  of  their
own  error.  And  they  look  upon  it  ttiat  they  themselves  have
not  ^  withholden  bread  from  the  hungry,'  in  that  when  ques-

They9ajf  the  Church  holds  back  trttth/indprevails  by  power.  229

tioned  even  touching  dungs  invisible  and  incomprehensible,  Book

they  answer  with  pride  and  boldness;  and  they  then  set -

themselves  down  as  learned  above  all  men,  when  they  most
miserably  presume to speak on  things unknown. But
Holy  Clmrch  when  she  sees  any  one  hungering  for  that
which  it  would  not  be  for  his  good  to  get,  either  on  the  one
hand  if  they  be  things  already  known  to  her  keeps  them
back  with  reserve,  or  if  they  appear  to  be  unknown  as  yet,
confesses  it  with  humility ;  and  such  she  recalls  to  a  sense  df
well-regulated  humility,  when  she  bids  every  one  of  them
by  her  Preacher,  not  to  be  wise  of  himself  above  thai  he  Rom.
ought  to  thinkf  but  to  think  soberly. And  again,  Be  m^^^*
highmindedf  but  fear. And  again.  Seek  not  out  the  things  ii^  90.
thai  are  too  deep  for  thee;  neither  search  the  things  that^^^^
are  above  thy  strength. And  again,  Hast  thou  found  honey  f  p,^*
eat  so  much  as  is  sufficient  for  thee^  lest  perchance  thou  be^9  ^^
JUled  therewith^  and  vomit  it. For  to  *  find  honey,'  is  to
taste  the  sweetness  of  holy  intelligence. Which  is  eaten
enough  of  then,  when  our  perception  according  to  the  measure
of  our  fBCvXty  is  held  tight  under  control. For  he  is  *  filled
with  honey,  and  vomits  it,*  who  in  seeking  to  dive  deeper  than
he  has  capacity  for,  loses  thai  too  from  whence  he  might
have  derived  nourishment. And  so,  seeing  that  Holy  Church
forbids  it  to  feeble  minds  to.  dive  into  deep  truths,  it  is  said
to  blessed  Job,  And  thou  hast  withhdden  bread  from  the
hungry.

9.  And  her  greatness  also  because  heretics  envy,  because
she  keeps  the  companies  of  people  every  where  in  the  true
fidth,  when  they  meet  with  a  season  of  earthly  prosperity,  they
launch  out  against  her  in  terms  of  pride,  and  by  their  upbraiding
disclose  how  greatly  before  they  secretly  envied  her  power.
Thus  it  follows ;  For  in  the  might  qf  thine  arm  thou  didst
possess  the  earthy  and  as  the  most  powerful  thou  didst  hold
it.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,  *  Whereas  thou  didst  take
possession  of  the  earth  every  where  in  thy  preaching,  it  was
the  power  of  might,  and  not  the  reasonableness  of  truth.
For  whereas  they  see  that  Christian  princes  hold  fast  her
preaching,  all  the  credit  which  is  given  to  her  by  the  people,
they  look  upon  not  as  the  efficacy  of  righteousness,  but  the
account  of  secular  power. It  goes  on ;

230  The  Churcli  mid  to  rob  men  of  their  teachers  and  their  strength.

^i^iQ* Ver.  0.  Thou  hast  sent  widows  away  empty ^  and  the  arms
— ^ — '- of  the  fatherless  hast  thou  broken.
vi- 10.  The  common  multitudes  that  are  brought  under  to
'  heretics  on  their  preaching  by  a  carnal  understanding  con-
ceive the  corrupt  seeds  of  their  false  doctrine,  and  are  joined
to  them  in  their  condemnation. But  when  the  preachers  of
errors  tliemselves,  Holjr  Church  either  receives  into  her
bosom  subdued  by  reason,  or  binds  in  under  the  fetters  of
her  discipline, being hardened by attachment to evil;
heretics,  being  deserted,  when  they  see  that  the  people
remain  left  with  themselves  without  preachers,  what  else  do
they  but  lament  the  *  widows*  left  empty  by  Holy  Church  ?
And  whereas  when  the  masters  of  heretics  are  withdrawn,
they  imagine  that  their  disciples  are  enfeebled  in their
practice,  they  complain  that  the  arms  of  the  fatherless  are
broken  by  Holy  Church  as  it  were. Or  in  another  way,
because  when  Holy  Church  receives  persons  coming  to  her
from  heretics,  it  is  plain  without  a  doubt  that  she  stands  up
against  their  former  error. Thus  there  are  some  that  are  so
attached  to  virginity  of  the  flesh,  that  they  condemn  marriage,
and  there  are  some  who  so  extol  abstinence,  that  they  abhor
those  that  take  necessary  nourishment. Concerning  whom
iTim.4,it  is  said  by  Paul,  Forbidding  to  marry ,  and  commanding  to
^* abstain  from  meats,  which  Ood  hath  created  to  be  received
with  thanksgiving  of  them  which  believe. Tliose  persons
then  seeing  she  recalls  from  the  carnal  bias  of  their  super-
stitious bcHef,  when  heretics  see  such  living  otherwise  tlian
they  taught  them,  they  bear  witness  that  to  the  way  of
acting  which  they  before  maintained,  tlieir  '  arms  are  broken*
by  Holy  Church. And  hence  in  this  period  of  discipline,  if
any  piece  of  misfortune  chance  to  befall  her,  they  suppose
that  it  has  come  in  meet  retribution  for  her  sins. For  it  is
added ;

Ver.  10.  Therefore  snares  are  round  about  t/iee;  and
sudden  fear  trouble th  thee.
vii.  U.  That  man  ^  sudden  fear  doth  trouble,'  who  neglects  to
consider  what  there  is  hanging  over  his  head  from  the  severity
of  the  Judge,  when  He  comes.  Therefore,  whereas  heretics
look  upon  the  faithful  people  as  borne  down  by  sins  of  mis-
belief, they  make  it  a  charge  that  ^  snares  are  round  about

Traublei  taken  forjvdgmtnU,  Charge  ofhw  thought  of  Goi.  26  i
them.' And  because  tber  believe  that  it  does  not  foresee  Book

3f  V  f

the  fatnre,  they  suppose  this  people  under  the  smiting  to -

be  ^troubled  with  sudden  fear;*  which  persons  adding  yet
further  insult  subjoin,

Ver.  11.  And  thou  ihaughtesi^  thou  wouldest  not  Bee  dark-^^^^d
nets;  a$ut  thai  ihau  wouldesi  not  be  borne  doum  with  ihe^SI^Lif
force  of  overflowing  waters.

As  if  he  said  in  plain  speech ;  ^  Thou  didst  promise  thyself
security  of  peace  in  hope,  and  therefore  thou  wast  glad  for
thine  assurance  as  for  the  light,  nor  ever  thoughtest  for
thyself  to  be  oppressed  with  tribulation.  But  see,  whilst
thou  art  afflicted  with  evils  coming  upon  thee,  whether  what
thou  maintainest  be  right,  the  very  darkness  of  trouble  which
weighs  upon  thoe  makes  plain;  which  same  troubles  Eliphaz
compares  to  *  overflowing  waters,'  in  that  whilst  one  set
rushes  in  over  another,  as  in  swoln  waters  waves  follow
waves. It  goes  on,

Ver.  12—14.  Doet  thou  bethink  thee  thai  God  is  in  the
height  qf  heaven^  and  high  above  the  height  of  the  stars  f
And  thou  sages t^  How  doth  God  know  f  andf  Hejudgeth  as
in  the  dark.  Thick  clouds  are  a  covering  to  Him,  tliat  He
seeth  not  our  matters;  and  He  walketh  in  the  circuit  of
heaveti.

12.  There  are  very  many  so  dull  that  they  cannot  dread  viii.
aught,  saving  What  they  see  in  a  bodily  form.  Whence  it  is
brought  to  pass  that  they  do  not  fear  God,  in  that  they
cannot  see  Him.  But  heretics  because  they  think  themselves
wise  utter  words  of  insult  against  Catholics,  and  imagine  that
lie  is  not  feared  by  them,  because  they  are  unable  to  see
Him  in  a  bodily  shape,  so  that  as  it  were  from  deadness  of
perception  they  think  that  their  Maker,  because  He  is  higher
than  heaven  and  exalted  above  the  tops  of  the  stars,  is  not
able  to  see  from  a  distance,  and  that  because  between  our-
selves and  the  seat  of  heaven  the  regions  of  the  air  are  inter-
posed. He,  ^as  it  were  buried  in  a  cloud  passes  judgment  out
of  the  darkness,'  and  intent  upon  things  above,  the  less
considers  those  below,  and  whilst  He  holds  together  the
hinges  of  heaven  by  encircling  them,  doth  not  see  into  the
interior  parts.  But  who  that  was  out  of  his  right  mind  even,
could  suspect  such  things  of  God. Who  indeed,  whereas

232  Ood  partially  hidcn  HimselJ\  an  the  Church  well  knows.

Job  ss,  He  is  always  Omnipotent,  so  minds  all  things  that  He  is
j]^y  '  present  to  each  one  individually,  and  so  present  to  each  that
His  Presence  is  never  wanting  to  all  together.  For  though
He  forsakes  persons  when  they  sin,  yet  to  those  very  persons
He  is  present  in  respect  of  judgment,  to  whom  He  is  seen  to
be  wanting  in  respect  of  aidance.  Therefore  He  so  encircles
what  is  without  that  He  yet  fills  what  is  within,  so  fills  what
is  within  that  He  yet  encircles  what  is  without,  so  rules  the
heights  above  that  He  does  not  quit  the  depths  below,  is  in
such  sort  present  to  the  parts  beneath  that  He  does  not
depart  from  those  above,  is  so  concealed  in  His  own  appear-
ance that  nevertheless  He  is  known  in  His  working,  so  known
in  His  work  that  yet  He  cannot  be  comprehended  by  the
calculation  of  the  person  knowing  Him;  He  is  in  such  a  way
present  that  yet  He  cannot  be  seen,  in  such  a  way  impossible
to  be  seen  that  yet  His  very  own  judgments  bear  witness  to
His  Presence,  so  yields  Himself  to  be  understood  by  us  that
yet  the  very  ray  of  the  perception  of  Himself  He  overclouds
to  us,  and  again  so  holds  us  in  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance
that  notwithstanding  He  shines  into  our  minds  with  the  rays
of  His  brightness,  so  that  at  once  by  being  lifted  up  it  may
see  somethings  and  made  to  recoil  may  tremble  all  over,  and,
because  such  as  He  is  it  is  impossible  to  see  Him,  may  yet
know  Him  by  seeing  Him  some  little.  But  all  this  heretics
do  not  reckon  Holy  Church  to  be  acquainted  with,  because
by  a  foolish  judgment  they  suppose  that  they  alone  are  wise.
In  a  type  of  whom  it  is  yet  further  added ;

Yer.  15.  Wouldesi  thou  mark  the  old  tray,  which  wicked
men  have  trodden  t
ix.  13.  As  the  ^  way*  of  our  Redeemer  is  humility,  so  the  way
of  the  world  is  pride.  And  so  wicked  men  tread  the  way  of
the  world,  in  that  by  the  desires  of  this  world  they  walk  in
self-exaltation.  Of  which  same  wicked  persons  it  is  yet
fiirther  added ;

Ver.  \6*  Which  were  taken  away  before  their  time^  whose

'  foundation  was  overjloum  with  a  flood,

X. 14.  Whereas  the  period  of  our  life  is  assuredly  foreordained

for  us  in  the  foreknowledge  of  God,  it  is  a  very  important

question  on  what  principle  it  is  said  now,  that  the  wicked  are

withdrawn  from  the  present  world  ^  before  their  time.* For

God /oreknoiTt  whom  He  will  cut  off  before  hi$  time. 288

Almighty  Gk>d  though  He  often  change  His  sentence,  yet  Book
His  counsel  never. At that time,  then,  is  ereiy  man  JEXL.
*  taken  away*  from  this  life,  at  which  by  Divine  power  he  is
foreknown  to  be  before  all  times. But  it  is  necessary
to  be  known,  that  Almighty  God  in  creating  and  disporing
of  us,  according  to  the  deserts  of  each  one  also  appoints
his  bounds  too,  so  that  either  that  bad  man  should  live  a
short  time,  lest  he  do  mischief  to  numbers  doing  right;  or
that  this  good  man  should  last  longer  in  life,  that  he  may
prove  a  helper  of  good  practice  to  numbers ;  or  again  that
the  bad  man  should  be  detained  longer  in  life,  to  add  yet
more  to  his  wicked  deeds,  purified  by  the  testing  whereof  the
righteous  may  live  a  truer  life ;  or  that  the  good  inan  should
be  withdrawn  more  speedily,  lest  if  he  were  to  live  long  here,
wickedness  should  spoil  his  innocence.  Yet  it  is  to  be  borne
in  mind,  that  it  is  the  loving-kindness  of  God,  to  vouchsafe
to  sinners  space  for  repentance. But  because  the  times
vouchsafed  they  do  not  turn  to  the  fruits  of  penance,  but  to
the  service  of  iniquity,  what  by  the  mercifulness  of  God  they
might  have  obtained,  they  let  go  out  of  their  hands.  Although
Almighty  God  foreknows  that  time  of  each  individual  for
death,  at  which  his  life  is  brought  to  an  end ;  nor  could  any
one  ever  have  died  at  any  time,  saving  at  that  actual  time
when  he  does  die.  For  if  to  Hezekiah  fifteen  years  are  related
to  have  been  added  for  life,  the  time  of  his  life  was  increased
firom  that  end,  indeed,  in  which  of  himself  he  deserved  to  die;
for  God's  providence  foreknew  his  time  at  that  point  whereat
He  afterwards  withdrew  him  out  of  the  present  life. This
then  being  so,  what  does  it  mean  that  it  is  said,  that  the
wicked  were  cut  down  hitfore  their  time^  but  that  all  they
that  love  the  present  life,  promise  to  themselves  longer
periods  of  that  life  ? But  when  death  coming  on  withdraws
them  from  the  present  life,  the  spaces  of  their  life,  which  they
were  wont  as  it  were  in  imagination  to  draw  out  to  themselves
longer,  it  cuts  asunder. Of  whom  it  is  righUy  said,  whoie
foundation  was  oner/toum  with  a  flood.

15.  For  the  wicked  while  they  neglect  in  heart  to  go  on  to
the  things  of  eternity,  and  do  not  observe  that  all  things
present  are  fleeting,  fix  their  heart  on  the  love  of  the  present
life,  and  as  it  were  therein construct  for  themselves  the

284  Tlie  Elect  have  their  iettlement  hereafter^  the  bad  here.

Job  99,  foundaiiQU  of  a  long  abode,  because  by  desire  they  are
-Y"-^  Mtablished  in  earthly  things.  Thus  Cain  is  described  the
Gen.  4,  first  to  have  constructed  a  city  upon  earth,  who  thereby  is
^^*  plainly  proved  an  alien,  in  that  the  same  set  a  foundation
upon  earth,  who  was  alien  to  the  stedfastness  of  the  eternal
world;  for  being  a  stranger  to  the  things  above,  he  has
settled  his  foundation  in  things  beneath,  who  has  placed  the
settling  of  his  heart  in  earthly  delight.  And  hence,  in  the
stock  of  that  man,  Enoch,  which  is  by  interpretation  '  dedica-
tion,' is  bom  the  first  But  in  the  offspring  of  the  Elect
Enoch  is  described  to  have  been  the  seventh,  in  this  way,
because  the  sons  of  perdition  by  building  dedicate  themselves
in  this  life  which  comes  first,  but  the  Elect  await  the  dedica-
tion of  their  building  up  in  the  end  of  time,  i.  e.  the  seventh
number.  For  one  may  see  great  numbers  minding  temporal
things  alone,  seeking  after  honours,  open-mouthed  after  the
compassing  of  good  things,  look  out  for  nothing  after  this
life.  What  then  do  these  but '  dedicate  tliemselvcs*  in  tlie
first  generation  ?  One  may  see  the  Elect  seeking  nothing  of
present  glory,  gladly  bearing  want,  undergoing  the  ills  of  this
life  with  a  composed  mind,  that  they  may  be  crowned  at  the
Gen.  6,  end. And  so  to  the  Elect  Enoch  is  bom  in  the  seventh

91

generation,  in  that  the  dedication  of  their  joy  they  look  for
in  the  glory  of  the  last  retribution.  And  whereas  by  the
daily  lapse  of  time  the  mortal  state  in  the  present  life  itself
runs  to  an  end,  and  destroys  the  dedication  of  the  children
of  perdition  by  removing  those  very  children  of  perdition,  it
is  rightly  saiid  of  the  wicked,  fVhoxe  foundation  was  over-
Jloum  with  a  flood;  i.  e.  the  mere  course  of  changeableness
overthrows  in  them  the  settlement  of  wicked  rearing.  It
goes  on ;

Vor.  17.  Which  said  unto  God,  Depart  from  uk.
xi. 16.  That  this  too  blessed  Job  hud  said,  who  can  doubt  ?
Job  91,  But  what  we  have  unfolded  in  his  words,  on  account  of
^^* wearying  the  reader,  we  forbear  to  repeat. It  goes  on ;

And  as  though  the  Almighty  could  do  nothing^  so  reckoned
concerning  Him,

In  this  part  likewise  the  wording,  and  not  the  statement,  is
Job  91,  changed.  For  what  was  expressed  by  blessed  Job ;  What
^^' is  the  Almighty  that  we  should  serve  Him  f  is  expressed  by

TheriffhteoushatebadmenU  ways^  yet  are  not  self-exaUed.  2S5

Eliphaz,  And  a#  thimgh  the  Almighty  could  do  nothing^  to  Book
reckoned  concerning  Him. It  goea  on ;  ^ — l

Ver.  18.  Yet  He  hasJUled  their  houses  with  good  things.

17.  The  Lord  *  fiUeth  the  houses  of  the  wicked  with  good
things,'  in  that  even  to  the  nnthankful  He  refuses  not  His
gifts,  that  either  they  may  blush  at  the  loving-kindness  of
their  Creator  and  be  brought  back  to  goodness,  or  altogether
despising  to  return  thereto,  may  from  the  same  cause  be
there  worse  punished,  that  here  they  rendered  an  evil  return
for  Ood's  more  bounteous  good,  so  that  severer  woes  should
there  chastise  those  whose  wickedness  here  not  even  gifts
overcame. It  goes  on ;

But  let  their  sentence  hefarjrom  me.

This  too  was  expressed  by  blessed  Job.  For  he  says,
Whose  counsel  be  far  from  me.  Though  *  sentence*  may  Job  91 »
be  taken  for  one  thing  and  *  counser  for  another ;  for  ^^'
^  sentence'  is  in  the  mouth,  ^  counsel'  in  the  thoughts.  And
so  whereas  Eliphaz  wished  himself  far  from  tlie  '  sentence'  of
the  wicked,  and  blessed  Job  from  the '  counsel,'  it  is  plain
without  denial,  that  the  first  desires  to  be  unlike  the  words
of  the  wicked,  but  the  other  unlike  their  way  of  thinking
even. It  goes  on;

Ver.  19.  The  righteous  shall  see  it  and  be  glad;  and  the
innocent  one  shall  laugh  them  to  scorn.

18.  The  righteous  when  they  see  the  unrighteous  erring  xiii.
here  cannot  be  glad  for  the  enor  of  persons  ruining  them-
selves. For  if  they  rejoice  in  errings,  they  cease  to  be
righteous. Again,  if  in  the  feeling  of  triumph  they  be  glad,

for  this  that  they  are  not  such  as  diey  see  others  are,  they  are
altogether  fiill  of  pride.  Hence  the  Pharisee  lost  his  justifi-
cation, because  being  glad  he  set  himself  above  the  merits  of
the  Publican,  sayings  /  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other
men  are^  extortioners^  unjust^  adulterers^  or  even  as  this
Publican.  Again,  if  we  say  that  the  righteous  can  triumph
with  a  perfect  joy  over  the  death  of  the  wicked,  what  sort  of
thing  is  joy  for  vengeance  on  sinners  in  this  world,  wherein
the  life  of  the  righteous  is  still  uncertain  ?  Let  us  then  dis-
tinguish between  the  times  of  trembling  and  exulting.  For
the  righteous  see  the  unrighteous  now,  and  pine  at  their
wickedness;  and  when  they  see  those  smitten,  they  are  made

2S0 The  rijfhteaui  shall  rejoice  in  GoitJUial  Judgment.

Job  ss,  distrasUul  touching  their  own  life  too. When  then  shall  the

-=^ — -'righteous  see  the  destruction  of  the  wicked  and  be  glad,
saving  when  with  the  strict  Judge  thejr  incorporate  hence-
forth with  perfect  sureness  of  triumphing,  when  in  that  final
Inquest  thejr  shall  see  the  condemnation  of  those,  and  shall
now  no  longer  have  aught  to  fear  for  themselves?  Now  there-
fore they  see  the  children  of  perdition  and  groan,  then  they
shall  see  them  and  laugh  them  to  scorn,  because  in  triumphing
they  shall  set  at  nought  those,  whom  now  they  neither  see
doing  wickedness  without  groaning  nor  dying  for  their
wickedness  without  fearing.  Hence  by  that  which  is  added
it  is  proved  that  the  thing  is  spoken  as  concerning  their
final  condemnation.  For  the  sentence  i^  directly  introduced,
Ver.  20.  le  not  their  erecting  cut  down,  and  the  remnant

^9i.$haUofthem  the  fire  hath  consumed^?

^^'"^'^  10.  For  here  the  wicked  are  erected,  in  that  they  are  lifted
up  in  bad  deeds.  For  they  both  do  wickedly,  and  yet  for
their  wicked  deeds  they  are  not  stricken.  They  sin  and
thrive,  they  add  to  their  sins,  and  multiply  earthly  good.
But  ^  their  erecting  is  cut  down'  then,  when  they  are  either
dragged  fix)m  the  present  life  to  destruction,  or  firom  the
sight  of  the  EtemaJ  Judge  to  the  eternal  burning  of  helL
Which  people,  though  here  they  quit  their  dead  flesh,  yet
that  same  in  the  resurrection  they  receive  again,  that  together
with  that  flesh  they  may  bum,  in  which  flesh  they  did  their
sin.  For  as  their  sin  was  in  mind  and  body,  so  the  punish-
ment shall  be  in  spirit  and  flesh  alike.  Therefore,  whereas
not  even  that  shall  be  quit  of  torment  to  them,  which  here
ihey  leave  dead,  it  is  rightly  said  now,  the  remnant  of  them
the  fire  hath  consumed. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  21,  22.  Be  at  one  then  with  Him,  and  be  at  peace ;

thereby  thou  shall  have  the  best  fruits. Receive^  I  pray  thee,

the  law  from  his  mouth,  and  lay  up  his  words  in  thine  heart.

XV. 20.  There  is  the  sin  of  pride  in  teaching  one  better  than

Allbo.  oue^s  self,  which  heretics  are  often  guilty  of,  who  touching
things  which  they  have  wrong  notions  of,  take  upon  them
as  if  to  instruct  Catholics.  For  such  they  think  are  then
*  at  one  with  God,^  if  it  chance  for  them  to  assent  to
their  bad  ways ;  and  to  those  thus  '  at  one'  they  promise
peace,  in  that  they  henceforth  cease  to  quarrel  with  those

Hereiici  premme  io  recall  Holy  Church  to  God. 237

who  agree  with  themselves. Now  '  the  best  firmts*  they  Book
promise  to  those  agreeiog  with  themselves,  in  that  they ''
believe  that  they  only  do  good  works,  whom  they  triumph  in
themselves  drawing  in  to  their  own  tenets;  which  persons
this  also  suits  that  he adds,  BeceivCf  I  pray^  the  law
out  of  His  mouth  ;  because  the  things  they  think  of  their
own  heads,  they  fancy  proceed  firom  the  mouth  of  Ood.
And  lay  up  His  words  in  thine  heart ;  as  if  he  asserted  it
in  plain  words,  saying,  *  which  up  to  this  present  time  in
thy  mouth  thou  hast  held^  and  not  in  thine  heart* For
because  he'  rejected  their  corrupted  tenets,  they  allege  against  *«LHol7
him'  that  the  words  of  God  he  had  held  not  in  the  feeling,  t «].]!«,
but  in  the  shewing  off. Whence,  as  if  under  a  certain  ^^
appearance  of  sweetness,  they  insinuate  the  poison  of  pestilent
persuading,  so  as  to  admonish  the  Church  to  lay  up  the
words  of  God  in  the  heart ;  which  words,  if  they  had  ever
departed  froni  her  heart,  from  those  piersons  she  would  never
have  heard  such  things. It  follows ;

Ver.  28.  ^  thou  return  to  ttte  Almighty^  thou  shall  be
built  upy  thou  shall  put  away  iniquity  far  from  thy
tabernacle.

21.  That  the  faithful  people  have  gone  away  from  Ood  is  xvi.
the  opinion  of  heretics,  because  they  see  it  opposed  to  their
preachings;  which  same,  when  they  see  it  afflicted  with
present  calamities,  they  endeavour,  as  if  by  admonition,  to
draw  to  their  Maker's  Grace,  saying.  If  thou  return  to  the
Almighty^  thou  shall  be  built  up.  As  if  they  said  in  plain
words;  Whereas  by  gainsaying  our  doctrines  thou  hast  gone
away  from  the  Lord,  therefore  to  the  building  up  of  righte-
ousness thou  art  undone.  Now  by  a  tabernacle  we  under-
stand sometimes  the  habitation  of  the  body,  and  sometimes
the  habitation  of  the  heart ;  for  as  by  the  soul  we  inhabit  the
body,  so  by  the  thoughts  we  inhabit  the  mind.  Therefore
*  iniquity  in  the  tabernacle'  of  the  mind  is  an  evil  bent  in  the
attachment  of  the  thought.  But  *  iniquity  in  the  tabernacle'
of  the  body  is  carnal  doing  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  deed.
Thus  Eliphaz,  forasmuch  ss  he  was  the  friend  of  a  blessed
person,  seeing  some  things  true,  and  yet  in  those  points  in
which  he  departs  from  the  right  line,  holding  the  likeness  of
heretics,  not  knowing  that  it  was  in  consequence  of  good

238  God  gives  the  converted  strength^ protection ,  and  wealth.

Job  99,  qualities  ble9S64  Job  was  siricken,  fiincied  that  he  had  erred

j-^ — ^  whom  be  saw  smitten,  and  makes  him  promises  if  he  would
*  returo  to  Almighty  Ood,  saying,  I%ou  nhalt  put  away  iniquity
far  from  thy  tabernacles.  As  if  be  said  in  plain  speech,  ^  Who-
soever after  ening  ways  is  brought  back  to  God,  is  purified
both  in  thought  and  in  deed  together.' It  follows ;

Ver.  24.  He  shall  give  the  JUnl  far  earthy  and  for  the
flint  golden  torrents.
xvii.  22.  What  is  denoted  by  *  earth'  but  weakness  in  conduct,
what  by  the  hardness  of  the  flint  but  strength,  what  do  we
understand  by  ^  the  golden  torrents,'  but  the  instruction  of
interior  brightness?  Now  to  those  that  turn  themselves  to
Him  Almighty  God  *  gives  for  earth  the  flint,'  in  that  for
weak  conduct  He  bestows  the  strength  of  vigorous  practice.
He  also  gives  '  for  the  flint  golden  torrents,'  in  that  for
vigorous  practice  He  redoubles  the  instruction  of  bright
preaching,  that  every  converted  sinner  may  from  weak  be
enabled  to  prove  strong,  and  in  his  strength  rise  up  even  to
the  uttering  forth  words  of  the  inner  brightness,  so  that  in  that
person,  both  weakness  of  conduct,  in  which  like  earth  he  is
crumbled,  by  strength  of  good  living  may  be  firmly  settled,
and  whereas  perception  is  derived  from  the  life,  from  that
same  finnness  torrents  of  gold  may  run  out,  seeing  that  in
the  mouth  of  those  that  live  well  brightness  of  teaching  runs
over. It  follows;

Ver.  25.  Yea  the  Almighty  shall  he  against  thine  enemies^
and  thou  shall  have  heaps  of  silver.

xviii.  23.  What  other  enemies  are  we  more  subject  to  than  evil
spirits,  who  in  our  thoughts  besiege  us,  that  they  may  break
into  the  city  of  our  minds,  and  hold  it,  taken  captive,  under
the  yoke  of  their  dominion?  Now  by  the  name  of  ^  silver,'
the  Psalmist  testifies  the  sacred  oracles  are  denoted,  when  he

Pa.  19,  says.  The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  wordsy  as  silver  tried
in  a  furnace  of  earth.  And  often  when  we  apply  ourselves
to  the  sacred  oracles,  we  are  more  grievously  subject  to  the
artifices  of  evil  spirits,  in  that  they  sprinkle  upon  our  mind
the  dust  of  earthly  thoughts,  that  the  eyes  of  our  heeding
they  may  darken  to  the  light  of  the  interior  vision.  Which
same  the  Psalmist  had  undergone  when  he  said,  Depart
from  me,  ye  evil  ones,  and  I  will  search  into  the  command-

Intcard  »ente  qf  Divine  Truth  tweet  and  engaging. S89

fnent9  of  my  God;  i.  o.  plainly  teaching  us  that  he  could  not  Book
search  into  the  commandments  of  Ood,  when  he  was  suffer-


ing in  mind  the  snares  of  the  evil  spirits.  Which  thing  in
the  work  of  Isaac  too  we  know  to  be  represented  under
the  evil  doing  of  the  Philistines^  who  with  a  heap  of  earth  QeB.90,
filled  up  the  wells  which  Isaac  had  dug.  For  these  very
same  wells  we  ourseWes  dig,  when  in  the  hidden  meanings
of  Holy  Scripture  we  penetrate  deep.  Which  wells  however
the  Philistines  secretly  fill  up,  when  to  us  advancing  to  deep
things  unclean  spirits  bring  iu  earthly  thoughts,  and  as  it
were  take  away  the  water  of  divine  knowledge  which  has
been  discovered.  But  because  no  one  can  overcome  these
enemies  by  bis  own  power^  it  is  said  by  Eliphaz,  Yea  the
Almighty  shall  be  against  thine  enemies^  and  thou  shall  have
heaps  of  silver.  As  if  it  were  said  in  plain  words;  *  While
the  Lord  drives  away  from  theo  the  evil  spirits  by  His  power,
the  shining  talent  of  divine  revelation  within  gains  growth.*
It  proceeds;

Ver.  36.  Then  shall  thou  abound  with  delicacies  over  the
Almighty.

24.  To '  abound  with  delicacies  over  the  Almighty'  is  in  xix.
the  love  of  Him  to  be  filled  to  the  full  with  the  banquet  of
Holy  Scripture.  In  Whose  words  surely  we  find  as  many
delicacies,  as  for  our  profiting  we  obtain  diversities  of  mean-
ing, so  that  now  the  bare  history  should  be  our  food,  now,
veiled  under  the  text  of  the  letter,  the  moral  allegory  refresh
us  from  our  inmost  soul,  and  now  to  the  deeper  things
contemplation  should  hold  us  suspended,  already,  in  tne  dark-
ness of  the  present  life,  shining  in  upon  us  from  the  light
of  eternity.  And  it  is  necessary  to  be  known,  that  whosoever
'  abounds  with  delicacies,'  is  released  in  a  kind  of  loosening
of  himself,  and  slacks  from  devotion  to  labour  as  it  were  from
weariness,  because  the  soul  when  it  has  begun  to  abound  with
the  interior  delicacies,  henceforth  consents  not  ever  to  give
itself  to  earthly  employments,  but  being  captivated  by  the  love
of  the  Creator,  and  by  its  captivity  henceforth  free,  for  the
contemplating  of  His  likeness  fainting  it  draws  breath,  and
as  it  were  whilst  giving  over,  is  invigorated;  because  whereas
sordid  burtliens  it  is  now  no  longer  able  to  bear,  unto  Him
through  rest  it  hastens  Whom  it  loves  within. Hence  also

240 Delicaciei  of  Holy  Church. Her  face  lified  to  God.
Job  99,  in  admiration  of  the  spouse  it  is  writteni  Who  is  this  that

96*


.  eometh  up  from  the  unldemess  abounding  with  delicacies?

Cant  sjiu  that  truly  except  Holy  Church  *  abounded  with  the  delica-

5.  Yiilg.  ^j^t  q[  Ood^s  words,  she  could  not  mount  up  from  Uie  deserts
of  the  present  life  to  tlie  regions  above.  Thus  she  *  abounds
with  delicacies  and  comes  up/  in  that  whilst  she  is  fed  by
mystical  senses,  she  is  lifted  up  for  the  contemplating  day
by  day  the  things  above. Hence  likewise  the  Psalmist  says,

Tb.  189, Even  the  night  shall  be  light  about  me  in  my  delicacies;

y^.  i^  ^^^  while  by  mystical  perception  the  earnest  mind  is
regaled,  henceforth  the  darkness  of  the  present  life  is  lighted
up  in  her  by  the  radiance  of  the  day  to  come.  So  that  even
in  the  blindness  of  this  state  of  corruption  the  force  of  the
future  light  should  break  out  into  her  understanding,  and
she  being  fed  with  delicacies  of  words,  might  learn  by  thus
foretasting  what  to  hunger  for  of  the  food  of  truth.  It  goes
on;  *

And  shall  lift  up  thy  face  unto  Ood.
XX.  26.  To  lift  up  the  face  to  Ood,  is  to  raise  the  heart  for  the
searching  into  what  is  loftiest.  For  as  by  the  bodily  face  we
are  known  and  distinguishable  to  man,  so  by  the  interior
figure  to  Ood.  But  when  by  the  guilt  of  sin  we  are  weighed
to  the  earth,  we  are  afraid  to  lift  the  face  of  our  heart  to  Ood;
for  whereas  it  is  not  buoyed  up  by  any  of  the  confidence  of
good  works,  the  mind  is  full  of  affright  to  gaze  on  the
highest  things,  because  conscience  of  itself  accuses  self.
But  when  by  the  tears  of  penance  sin  is  now  washed  out,
and  things  committed  are  so  bewailed  that  nothing  to  be
bewailed  is  any  more  committed,  a  great  coufidence  springs
up  in  the  mind,  and  for  the  contemplating  the  joys  of  the
recompensing  from  above  ^  the  face  of  our  heart  is  lified
up.'  Now  these  things  Eliphaz  would  hf)ive  spoken  aright,
if  he  had  been  admonishing  one  that  was  weak ;  but  when
he  looks  down  upon  a  righteous  man  on  account  of  his
scourges,  what  is  this,  but  that  he  pours  out  words  of  know-
ledge in  not  knowing  ?  Which  same  words  if  we  bring  into
a  type  of  heretics,  Uiey  are  they  that  with  false  promises
engage  for  us  to  *  lift  our  face  to  Ood.*  As  if  they  said
plainly  to  the  faithfiil  people,  ^  As  long  as  thou  dost  not
follow  our  preaching,  thine  heart  thou  sinkest  down  in

Joh^9  prayer  teemed  ^nkeard^  hie  dimjirueirated. S41

things  below.^ Bat  whereas  Eliphaz  charged  blessed  Job  Book
to  return  to  God,  from  Whom  observe  that  same  blessed -


man  had  never  departed,  he  yet  further  subjoins,  as  pro-
mising ;

Ver.  27.  Thou  ehali  make  thy  prayer  unto  Him^  and  He
shall  hear  thee.

26.  For  they  make  their  prayer  to  Ood,  but  never  obtain  xxi.
to  be  listened  to,  who  set  at  nought  the  precepts  of  the
Lord,  when  He  enjoins  them. Whence  it  is  written,  HeTnr,
that  turtieth  away  hie  ear /ram  hearing  the  law^  even  his^^^*
prayer  shall  be  abomination. So  long  then  as  Eliphaz
believed  that  blessed  Job  was  not  heard,  he  determined  that
that  person  had  surely  done  wrong  in  his  practice. And
hence  he  adds  fiirther,

And  thou  shall  pay  thy  vows.

He  tliat  has  vowed  vows ,  but  is  unable  from  weakness  to
pay  the  same,  has  it  dealt  to  him  in  punishment  of  sin,  that
whilst  willing  good,  the  having  the  power  should  be  taken
away  from  him.  But  when  in  the  sight  of  the  interior
Judge,  the  sin  which  hinders  is  done  away,  it  is  immediately
brought  to  pass,  that  the  being  able  attends  upon  the  vow.
It  goes  on ;

Ver.  28.  Thou  shall  also  decree  a  thing^  and  it  shall  be
established  unto  thee.

27.  This  is  used  to  be  the  special  conclusion  of  those  xxii.
going  weakly,  that  in  such  proportion  they  esteem  a  man
righteous  as  they  see  him  obtain  all  that  he  desires;  whereas

in  truth  we  know  that  earthly  goods  are  sometimes  withheld
from  the  righteous,  while  diey  are  bestowed  with  liberal
bounty  upon  the  unrighteous;  seeing  that  to  sick  persons
also  when  they  are  despured  of,  physicians  order  whatever
they  call  for  to  be  supplied,  but  those  whom  they  foresee
may  be  \)rought  back  to  health,  the  things  which  they  long
for  they  refuse  to  have  given  them.  Now  if  Eliphaz  intro-
duced these  declarations  with  reference  to  spiritual  giAs,  be
it  known  that  *  a  thing  is  decreed  and  is  established"  to
a  man,  when  the  virtue  which  is  longed  for  in  the  desire,  is,
by  God's  granting  it,  happily  forwarded  by  the  carrying  of
it  out  as  well.  And  hence  it  is  yet  further  added ;
And  the  light  shall  shine  upon  thy  ways.

VOL.  II.  R

242 Light  of  righteous  teorii  vain  without  humility.

Job  99, 28.  Since  for  ^  light  to  shine  in  the  ways*  of  the  righteous,
-£^is  by  extraordinary  deeds  of  virtue  to  scatter  the  tokens
Moral,  of  their  brightness,  that  wherever  they  go  in  the  bent
xxm.  Qf  ihe  miod^  fxom  the  hearts  of  those  beholding  them  they
may  dispel  the  night  of  sin,  and  by  the  example  of  their  own
practice  pour  into  them  the  light  of  righteousness ;  but  what-
ever justness  of  practice  there  may  be,  in  the  eye  of  the
interior  Judge  it  is  nothing,  if  pride  of  heart  uplifts  it
Hence  it  is  added ;

Ver.  29.  For  he  that  has  been  abased  shall  be  in  glory ^
and  he  that  has  bent  down  his  eyes,  the  same  shall  be
sa/oed.
xxiv. 29. Which  same  sentence  is  not  at  variance  with  the
Lukei4^  mouth  of  ^  Truth,'  when  It  says.  For  whosoever  exalteth
^^* himself  shall  be  abased,  and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall
Prov. be  exalted. And  hence  it  is  said  by  Solomon, Bqfore
18. 13.  (instruction  the  heart  of  man  is  haughty ^  and  before  honour
is  humility. But  it  is  properly  said,  For  he  that  has  bent
down  his  eyes^  the  same  shall  be  saved;  in  that  so  far  as  it  is  to
be  discovered  through  the  minbtering  of  the  members,  the  first
manifestation  of  pride  is  used  to  be  with  the  eyes. Hence
Pf.  18,  it  is  written.  And  unit  bring  down  high  looks. Hence  it  is
said  of  the  very  head  himself  of  those  that  behave  proudly,
Job  4],  He  beholdeth  all  high  things. Hence  it  is  written  con-
^' coming  her,  who  by  unbelief  attached  herself  to  him.  There
30,  IS.  is  a  generation,  0  how  Iqfty  are  their  eyes!  and  their  eye-
lids are  lifted  up. So  to  *  bend  down  the  eyes,  is  no  man
on  looking  upon  him  to  look  down  upon,  but  one's  self  to  look
upon  as  inferior  and  below  all  one  sees. He  then  that
'  bends  down  his  eyes  shall  be  saved ;'  because  he  who  quits
the  false  height  of  pride,  scales  the  loftiness  of  truth. It
goes  on ;

Ver.  30.  771^  innocent  shall  be  saved,  but  he  shall  be  saved

by  the  cleanness  of  his  hands.

XXV. SO.  Which  same  sentence  now  if  it  be  delivered  touching

the  recompense  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  supported  by

Rom.  3,  truth,  in  that  whereas  it  is  written  concerning  God,  Who

^' renderelh  lo  every  man  according  to  his  deeds,  that  man

in  the  Last  Inquest  the  justice  of  the  Judge  Eternal  saveth,

whom  here  His  pitifulness  sets  free  from  impure  deeds. But  if

Preveniing  graeefoUowed  up  bp  itunCsfiree  will. S43

a  man  is  to  this  purport  supposed  to  be  here  8a?ed  by  the  clean-  Book
ness  of  his  own  hands,  that  by  his  own  powers  he  should  be  made  2lLL.
innocent,  assuredly  it  is  an  error;  for  if  Grace  above  do  not
prevent  him  when  faulty,  assuredly  it  will  never  find  any  one
faultless  to  recompense  without  fitult  Whence  it  is  said  by
the  truth-telling  voice  of  Moses ;  And  no  man  of  himself  iiExoA.
innocent  in  T%f  right.  And  so  heavenly  pity  first  works  '
something  in  ourselves  without  the  help  of  ourselves,  that,
our  own  6*00  will  following  it  up  as  well,  the  good  which  we
now  desire,  it  may  do  along  with  ourselves ;  yet  the  good
coming  by  grace  bestowed,  in  the  Last  Judgment,  He  so
rewards  in  ourselves,  as  if  it  had  proceeded  only  from  our-
selves. For  whereas  the  Goodness  of  Gk>d  prerents  nil  to
make  us  innocent,  Paul  says,  Bui  bg  the  grace  of  Ood  T  am  \^^'
what  I  am.  And  whereas  our  firee  will  follows  that  grace',  '
he  adds.  And  Bis  grace  which  was  bestowed  upon  me  was
not  in  vain^  but  I  laboured  more  abundantly  ihan  they  all.
Who  whereas  he  saw  that  he  was  nothing  of  himself,  says,
Tet  not  /,  and  yet  forasmuch  as  he  saw  that  he  was  some-
thing in  union  with  grace,  he  added,  (til  the  grace  of  God
with  me.  For  he  would  not  have  said,  with  me^  if  together
with  preventing  grace  he  had  not  had  free  will  following  it
up.  Therefore  in  order  to  shew  that  he  was  nothing  without
grace,  he  says,  Tet  not  /,  but  that  he  might  shew  that
along  with  grace  he  had  worked  by  firee  will,  he  added,  but
the  grace  qf  Ood  with  me.  Thus  '  the  innocent  man  shall
be  saved  by  the  cleanness  of  his  hands/  in  that  he  who  is
here  prevented  by  the  gift,  that  he  may  be  made  innocent,
when  he  is  brought  to  judgment,  is  rewarded  of  merit  All
which  things,  as  was  before  said,  Eliphaz  though  he  delivered
rightly,  yet  to  whom  he  was  delivering  them  he  knew  not ;
because  one  better  than  himself  it  was  not  his  business  to
teach,  but  to  hear.  All  which  particulars  however  agree  in
a  figure  with  the  promises  of  heretics,  who  when  they  find
any  of  the  faithful  afliicted  in  the  present  life  suppose  them
stricken  for  the  sin  of  misbelief,  and  promise  them  if  they  will
follow  their  doctrine  the  saving  health  of  innoccncy  by
cleanness  of  good  works. But  the  mind  of  the  faithful  looks

•  Ben.  notes  that  three  or  feor  Mn. but  nearly  all  an  ffiren  in  the  text,  and
read  <  that  grace  followa  our  free  will/ as  the  senie  reqaires.

r2

244 The  Elect  in  pain  here^  and  more  toheti  ill  consoled.

Job  33,  down  upon  tbem  so  much  the  deeper  down,  m  proportion  as
^'^"  it  does  not  see  them  to  possess  the  innocency  which  they


Prov.  1  promise. Whence  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon,  Surely  in  vain

17.  ike  nel  is  spread  in  the  sighi  of  any  icinged  fowl.  For  the
'  winged  fowl'  are  the  spirits  of  good  men,  which  whilst  in  the
hope  of  truth  they  soar  up  to  the  higher  regions,  shun  the
nets  of  bad  men  set  for  their  deceiving. It  goes  on  ;

Chap,  xidii.  1,  2.  TJien  Job  answered  and  said^  Now  also
is  my  complaint  bitter:  and  the  hand  of  my  stroke  is  heavier-
than  my  groaning.

xxvi.  31,  In  his  own  way  blessed  Job  sets  out  with  the  plainer
sort  of  words,  but  his  declaration  ho  closes  by  the  deep
following  on  of  mystery.  For  the  pain  of  the  afflicted  man
ought  to  have  been  healed  by  the  consoling  of  his  friends,
but  because  their  consoUng  broke  out  into  ihe  soothings  of
deceit,  the  pain  of  the  stricken  man  was  made  harsher.  For
whereas  Eliphaz  was  not  afraid  to  promise  him  better  things
on  being  converted,  it  was  as  if  by  a  poisonous  remedy
the  wound  were  increased.  Hence  it  is  rightly  said.  Even
to-day  is  my  complaint  bitter ^  and  the  hand  qfmy  stroke  is
heavier  than  my  groaning,  in  this  respect,  viz.  that  die
straining  of  unregulated  consoling  increased  the  stroke  mani-
fold, which  it  ought  to  have  diminished;  by  which  same
words  taken  in  a  type  of  Holy  Church,  the  pain  of  the
faithful  is  likewise  set  forth,  who  groan  the  more,  the  more
they  see  the  wicked  using  the  acts  of  flattery,  who,  according

Rom. to  the  declaration  of  Paul,  by  good  words  and  fair  speeches

'^»  *^'  deceive  the  hearts  of  the  simple.

32.  Which  words  may  also  be  rightly  applied  to  the
viewing  with  greater  exactness  the  mind  of  the  faithful,  who
can  never  be  without  bitterness  even  if  they  seem  to  prosper
in  this  world.  Which  persons  when  adversity  too  bclalls,  it
redoubles  that  pain  which  it  finds.  Whence  it  is  rightly
said.  Now  also  is  my  complaint  bitter,  that  it  might  be
plainly  shewn  that  even  in  prosperity  the  mind  of  the  Elect
should  not  be  without  bitterness.  And  it  is  well  said,  And
the  hand  of  my  stroke  is  heavier  than  my  groaning.  For
^  the  hand  of  a  stroke,'  is  the  force  of  the  striking.  For  their
first  striking  the  Elect  see  to  be,  that  fr'om  the  vision  of
their  Creator  they  are parted,  that  the brightness  of  tlie

The  Elect  painfully  long  to  behold  God.  245

interior  iUamiDing  they  ne^er  enjoji  but  groan  as  being  Book
banished  in  the  exile  of  the  present  life  as  in  a  place  of  JLZL
darkness.  Thus  thej  always  have  their  groaning  in  this
*  hand  of  their  stroke  ;*  but  when  over  and  above  adversities
also  befall  them  in  this  life,  *  the  hand  of  their  stroke  is
heavier  than  their  groaning.^  For  there  was  groaning  for
the  stroke  even  when  the  adversities  of  the  present  life  were
away.  Unt  tlio  bitterness  of  the  original  stroke  is  increased
over  and  above  by  ilie  trial  of  adversity.  Therefore  he  says,
And  the  hand  of  my  stroke  is  heavier  than  my  groaning  f
In  that  any  just  man  adversity  did  not  smite  whilst  happy  in
this  life,  but  came  to  redouble  in  him  the  pain  of  the  wound.
Yet  it  happens  by  the  extraordinaty  governance  of  Almighty
God,  that  when  in  tiiis  life  the  spirit  of  the  righteous  man
travails  most  in  adversities,  he  thirsts  the  more  ardentiy  after
the  beholding  of  his  Maker^s  face.  Hence  it  is  fitiy  sub-
joined here,

Yer.  8.  O  that  one  would  grant  me  that  I  might  know
andjlnd  Him^  that  I  might  come  even  to  His  seat  /

83.  An  elect  person  if  he  did  not  know  God,  assuredly  ^^^jj
would  not  love  Him.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  *  know'  by  faith,
and  another  to  know  by  His  own  Form,  one  thing  to  find
by  trustfulness,  another  to  find  Him  by  contemplation.  In
consequence  whereof  it  is  brought  to  pass  that  Him  Whom
they  know  by  faith,  all  of  the  Elect  long  to  see  by  His
own  Form  as  well.  With  the  love  of  Whom  they  bum  and
glow,  because  the  honey  of  His  sweetness  they  already  taste
of  in  the  mere  certainty  of  their  faith.  Which  that  person  in
the  country  of  the  Gerasenes  cured  of  the  devils  well  repre-
sents, who  wishes  to  depart  with  Jesus;  but  by  the  Master  of
health  it  is  told  him,  Seiurn  to  thine  own  house,  and  shew  j^^^
wliat  great  things  God  hath  done  unto  thee.  For  on  him  that 39.
loves  delay  is  still  imposed,  that  by  the  longing  of  love  delayed
the  tiUe  to  rewarding  may  be  heightened*  And  so  to  us
Almighty  God  is  made  sweet  in  miracles,  and  yet  in  His  own
loftiness  remains  hidden  from  our  eyes,  that  both  by  shewing
something  of  Himself,  He  may  by  secret  inspiration  set  us
on  fire  in  the  love  of  Him,  and  yet  by  hiding  the  glorious-
ness  of  His  Majesty  may  increase  the  force  of  that  love  of
Him  by  the  heat  of  longing  desire. For  except  the  holy

246  Angels  are  Qodft  Throne. Judging  ieffin  His  sight

Job  S8,  man  sought  to  see  This  Being  in  His  Majestji  surely  he
-^ —  would  not  bring  in  the  words,  thai  J  might  came  even  to  His
AhLEQ.seatf  For  what  is  the  ^  seat*  of  Ood  but  those  angelical
Sp|ritS|  who  as  Scripture  testifies  are  called  *  Thrones?*  He
then  that  desires  to  ^  come  to  the  seat  of  God/  what  else
does  he  long  for  but  to  be  among  the  Angelic  spirits,
that  no  failing  moments  of  the  periods  of  time  he  henceforth
be  liable  to,  but  rise  up  to  abiding  glory  in  the  contem-
plation of  eternity.

84.  Which  words  nevertheless  are  likewise  appropriate  to
the  righteous  whilst  placed  in  this  life.  For  when  they  see
any  thing  done  against  their  wish  and  desire,  they  have
recourse  to  the  hidden  judgments  of  God,  that  therein  they
may  read  that  that  is  not  irregularly  ordered  within,  which
seems  to  pass  irregularly  without.  For  when  they  behold
with  the  eyes  of  &ith  the  Creator  of  all  things,  ruling  over
the  Angelical  Spirits,  then  they  *  come  to  His  seat.*  And
whereas  they  observe  tliat  He,  Who  rules  tlio  Angels  in  a
wonderful  manner,  does  not  dispose  of  man  in  any  way
contrary  to  justice,  then  indeed  the  principles  of  cases  they
see  to  be  as  just  as  they  are,  whilst  the  cases  themselves
externally  seem  to  be  unjust.  And  whereas  they  do  this
with  humility,  they  often  lay  blame  to  themselves  in  their
will,  and  their  own  wishes  they  sometimes  judge  in
themselves,  whilst  they  ponder  that  those  things  are  better
which  the  Creator  appoints.  Hence  it  is  well  added  in
addition,

Ver.  4.  /  unll  order  my  cause  before  Him^  and  Jill  my
mouth  with  reproaches.
xxviii.  30*  To  *  order  our  cause  before  God'  is  within  the  secret
depth  of  our  mind  by  the  contemplating  of  faith  to  open  the
eyes  of  our  view  to  the  awful  inquisition  of  His  Majesty,  to
maik  what  man  as  a  sinner  deserves,  of  the  now  bidden  and
secret  Judge  to  take  thought  how  terrible  He  will  hereafter
appear.  In  consequence  of  which  it  happens,  that  the  soul
is  recalled  to  tlio  knowledge  of  itself  with  greater  exactness,
and  in  proportion  as  it  sees  its  secret  Judge  the  greater  object
of  alarm,  is  so  much  the  more  horribly  wmng  with  fears  for
its  actions.  It  trembles  with  anxious  alarm;  its  offences  it
prosecutes  with  lamentation ;  in  repenting  it  charges  home

j€bfear$  what  God  might  $ap  ajfaimt  him.  247

what  it  remembers  itself  to  haTe  been ;  whence  now  too  after  Book
it  had  been  said,  /  will  order  my  cause  be/ore  Him^  it  is  ^^''
right!  J  sabjoioed,  And  Jill  my  mouth  with  reproaches.  For
he  who  '^  orders  his  cause  before  Ood/  does  '  fill  his  month
with  reproaches,*  in  that  while  he  beholds  the  exact  scrutiny  of
the  awfol  Jndge  directed  against  himself,  he  pursues  himself
with  the  charges  of  bitter  repentance.  Now  it  often
happens  that  whilst  we  neglect  to  take  account  of  our  faults,
what  blaming  of  them  may  follow  in  the  Judgment  we  are
left  ignorant  of:  but  whilst  we  pursue  them  by  exercising
repentance,  what  the  Judge  in  His  Inquintion  inay  say  to  us
concerning  them,  we  find  out.  Whence  it  is  further  added
with  propriety,

Ver.  5.  That  I  may  know  the  words  that  he  will  amwer
me,  and  understand  what  he  will  say  unto  me.

86.  For  we  then  bewail  our  sins,  when  we  begin  to  weigh  xxix.
them ;  but  we  then  weigh  them  the  more  exactly,  when  more
anxiously  we  bewail  them,  and  by  our  lamentations  it  rises
up'  more  perfectly  in  our  hearts,  what  the  scYerity  of  Ood^oM
threatens  those  with  that  commit  sin,  what  will  be  those  ^'^ J*
rebukings  upon  the  children  of  perdition,  what  the  terror,
what  the  abhorrence  of  the  unappeasable  Majesty. For  so
great  things  shall  the  Lord  then  being  angry '  say*  to  the  lost,
as  great  as  He  permits  them  of  justice  to  undergo. Which
same  words  of  His  visitation,  the  righteous,  because  now
ihey  anxiously  fear  them,  escape  free  firom. But  who  in
that  inquisition  might  be  found  righteous,  if  God  according
to  the  Majesty  of  His  Might,  so  sifted  the  life  of  man?
Therefore  it  is  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  6.  /  would  not  that  He  should  contend  mth  me  with
great  power  ^  nor  oppress  me  with  the  weight  qf  His
mightiness,

37.  For  the  soul  of  one  however  righteous,  if  he  be  judged  xxx.
with  strictness  by  Almighty  Ood,  is  borne  down  by  the
weight  of  His  mightiness.  In  which  same  words  this  is
likewise  to  be  understood,  that  whereas  the  holy  man  shews
the  might  of  Ood,  what  else  of  Him  does  ho  desire,  but  His
weakness  ?  And  it  is  written,  the  weakness  of  Chd  is  stronger  l  Cor.  i ,
than  men. Whence  too  he  directly  adds,  ^

248  Ood^i  Equity  to  man  is  the  Incarnation.

Job  ss, Ver.  7.  Lei  Him  put  forth  equity  against  me,  and  my
'-judgment  shall  come  unto  victory.


For  who  else  saving  the  Mediator  between  Ood  and  man^
the  Maa  Christ  Jesus,  is  denoted  by  the  title  of  ^  equity  ?*
1  Cor.  1,  Concerning  Whom  it  is  written,  Who  of  God  is  made  unto
us  wisdom  and  righteousness.  And  whereas  this  same
righteousness  came  into  this  world  against  the  ways  of
sinners,  we  get  the  better  of  our  old  enemy,  by  whom  we
were  held  captive.  So  let  him  say,  /  would  not  that  He
should  contend  with  me  with  great  power,  nor  oppress  me
with  the  weight  of  His  mightiness.  Let  Him  put  forth
equity  against  me,and  my  judgment  shall  come  unto  victory.
i.  e.  ^  for  the  rebuking  of  my  ways,  let  Him  send  His  Incar-
nate Son,  and  then  the  plotting  foe,  by  the  sentence  of  mine
absolving,  I  as  victor  will  turn  out.*  For  if  the  Only-begotten
Son  of  Ood  had  so  remained  invisible  in  the  strength  of  the
Divine  Nature,  as  not  to  have  admitted  aught  derived  from
our  weakness,  when  could  weak  men  ever  have  found  the
access  of  grace  to  Him  i  For  the  weight  of  His  greatness,
being  considered,  would  rather  have  oppressed  than  aided
him ;  but  the  Strong  above  all  things  came  weak  among  all
things,  that  whereas  He  agreed  with  us  by  assumed  weakness.
He  might  elevate  us  to  His  own  abiding  strength.  For  in
Its  loftiness  the  Divine  Nature  could  never  have  been
apprehended  by  us,  inasmuch  as  being  too  little,  but  He
bowed  Himself  down  to  man  through  human  nature,  and  we
as  it  were  mounted  up  on  Him  laid  low ;  He  rose,  and  we
were  lifted  up.  Whence  this  too  is  added  directly,  whereby
the  Divine  Being  may  be  shewed  invisible  and  incompre-
hensible. Thus  it  goes  on ;

Ver.  8,  9.  If  I  go  to  the  East,  He  appeareth  not ;  if  I  go
to  the  West,  I  shall  not  understand  Him;  if  I  go  to  the
left  hand,  what  shall  I  do?  I  sluill  not  comprehend  Him;
if  I  turn  myself  to  the  right  hand  I  stiall  not  see  Him.
xxxi.  ^^'  ^^^  ^®  Creator  of  all  things  is  not  in  a  part,  inasmuch
as  He  is  every  where.  And  then  He  is  found  the  less,  when
He,  That  is  whole  every  where,  is  sought  in  a  part.  For  the
Incomprehensible  Spirit  containctli  all  things  witliin  Itself,
Which  at  the  same  time  both  while  filling  cncompasseth,  and

Grod  U  beyond  our  nghi  hoicever  u:e  map  took. 240

wbOe  encompassing  filleth,  both  in  snpportiilg  orertops,  and  Boos
in  ofertopping  supports ;  and  it  is  well  that  aAer  it  had  been  ^^^*
said,  j(f  I  go  to  the  East^  He  appeareth  not;  tf  I  go  to  the
Westf  I  shall  not  understand  Him;  if  I  go  to  the  l^t  hand^
what  shall  I  do?  I  shall  not  comprehend  Him;  if  I  turk
myself  to  ^  ^Hl^  hand  I  shall  not  see  Him;  he  thereupon
added,  But  He  inoweth  the  way  that  I  take.  As  if  he  said
in  plain  words,  *  I  am  unable  to  see  Him,  Who  seeth  me,
and  Him  that  beholdeth  me  most  minutely,  I  ha?e  no
power  to  behold :'  that  is  to  saj,  that  he  might  shew  that  He
is  so  much  the  more  heedfully  to  be  feared,  in  proportion  as
He  is  not  discernible.  For  He  Who  so  beholds  us  that  He
may  not  be  by  us  beheld,  is  so  much  the  more  to  be  dreaded
in  proportion  as  in  seeing  all  things  Ho  is  not  seen  in  the
least  degree.  For  when  we  believe  that  there  is  any  one
hidden  in  ambush  to  assault  us,  we  dread  him  the  more  that
we  do  not  at  all  see  him ;  and  when  we  do  not  at  all  discover
his  ambush  where  it  is  placed,  we  I4)prehend  it  even  there
where  it  does  not  exist  And  our  Creator,  Who  is  whole
every  where,  and  while  discerning  all  things  is  not  discerned,
is  the  more  to  be  dreaded  in  proportion  as  continuing  invisible,
what  He  may  determine  concerning  our  actions  and  at  what
time  is  notlmown.  Which  words,  too,  may  be  understood  in
another  sense  also.  For  we  ^  go  to  the  E^t,*  when  we  lift  up
our  mind  in  thinking  of  His  Majesty.  But  ^  He  appeareth
not,*  seeing  that  such  as  He  is  in  His  own  Nature,  by  mortal
thought  He  cannot  be  seen  to  be.  I/Igo  to  the  fVest,  I  shall
not  understand  Him ;  we  *  go  to  the  west,'  when  the  eye  of  the
heart  that  is  lifted  up  in  Ood,  but  made  to  recoil  by  the  mere
immensity  of  the  light,  we  bring  back  to  our  own  selves,  and
being  spent  with  labour,  we  learn  that  the  thing  is  very  much
above  us  which  we  were  seeking;  and  viewing  our  own  mortal
condition  find  out  that  as  yet  we  are  creatures  unfit  to  have
the  power  to  behold  One  that  is  Immortal.  If  I  go  to  the
left  hnndf  what  shall  I  do?  I  shall  not  comprehend  Him.  To
'  go  to  tho  left  hand'  is  to  yield  one's  self  to  the  enjoyments
of  our  sins.  And  it  is  surely  plain,  that  he  cannot '  appre-
hend God,'  who  still  in  the  gratification  of  sin  lies  prostrate
along  the  left  side.  If  I  turn  myself  to  the  right  side  I
shall  not  see  Him. He  truly  is  '  turned  to  the  right  hand,'

240  JoV$  cof^fidence  of  himself  below  what  was  true  of  him.

Job  88,  who  is  lifted  up  on  (be  ground  of  virtnous  attainmento.

j^^^  But  he  cannot  see  God,  who  is  glad  with  selfish  joy  for

his  good  deeds ;  because  in  that  man  the  swelling  of  pride

weighs  down  the  eye  of  the  heart. Whence  it  is  well  said

l^^ elsewhere,  TTum  shall  not  decline  to  Hie  right  hand  nor  to
' *  the  Iqfi, In  all  which  particulars  the  soul  very  often  searches
out  itself,  nor  yet  is  able  perfectly  to  find  out  itself. Whence
it  is  fitly  added  here.

But  He  Himself  knoweth  the  way  that  I  take.

xxxii.  89.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms,  ^  I  for  mine  own  part  both
search  myself  strictly,  and  am  not  able  to  know  myself
thoroughly;  yet  He,  Whom  I  have  not  power  to  see,  seeth
most  minutely  all  the  things  that  I  do.* It  goes  on;

And  He  shall  try  me  like  gold  which  passeth  through  the
Jire.

Gold  in  the  ftimace  is  adyanced  to  the  brightness  of  its
nature,  whilst  it  loses  the  dross.  And  so  like  '  gold  that
passeth  through  the  fire*  the  souls  of  the  righteous  are  tried,
which  by  the  burning  of  tribulation  through  and  through,
both  have  their  defects  removed,  and  their  good  points
increased.  Nor  was  it  of  pride  that  the  holy  man  likened
himself  as  set  in  tribulation  to  gold,  in  that  he  who,  by  the
voice  of  God,  was  pronounced  righteous  before  the  stroke,  was
not  for  this  reason  permitted  to  be  tried  that  bad  qualities  might
be  cleared  ofi*,  but  that  excellences  might  be  heighteuod;  but
gold  is  purified  by  fire;  loss  then  than  he  was  did  he  think
of  his  own  self,  in  that,  being  delivered  over  to  sufier  tribula-
tion, he  beUeved  that  he  was  being  purified,  whereas  he  had
not  any  thing  in  him  to  be  purified.

40.  Now  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  know,  that  though  the
nund  of  the  righteous  entertains  humble  thoughts  touching
itself,  yet  the  several  things  that  thoy  do,  they  see  to  bo  as
right  as  they  are,  while  they  never  presume  on  Ihe  rightness  of
them.  Whence  it  is  yet  fiirther  added;  My  foot  hath  held
his  steps,  his  way  have  I  kept  and  not  declined.  Neither
have  I  gone  back  from  the  commandment  qf  his  lips,  and  I
have  hid  the  words  of  his  mouth  in  my  bosotn.  But  in  the
midst  of  all  this  let  us  see  whether  he  thinks  himself  to  bo
any  thing.  It  follows;  But  He  is  Himself  alone.  By  the
subjoining  of  which  sentenco,  he  shews  that  amidst  all  the

FooUiep$of  Ood  the  SainUf  rule  o/ttfe.  Ml

good  things  which  he  had  done  he  beliered  himself  to  be  1^^

nothing. Bui  taking  up  these  same  words  from  the  begin-  -

ningy  let  us  mn  oyer  them  as  well  as  we  are  able.

Ver.  11.  Mf/ooi  kaih  held  His  steps.

41.  For  as  a  kind  of  footsteps  of  Gk>d  are  His  doings  xxziii.
which  we  see,  by  which  doings  both  the  good  and  bad  man
is  goTcmedy  by  which  the  righteous  and  unrighteous  are
arranged  in  their  classes,  whereto  both  every  one  that  is
subject  is  led  on  day  by  day  to  better  things,  and  he  that  is
in  rebellion  against  them  is  borne  with  going  headlong  into
worse. Concerning  which  same  footsteps  the  Prophet  said.
Thy  goings  have  been  seen^  O  Ood. And  so  we,  when  wep».eBy
behold  the  efficacy  of  His  long-suffering  and  pitifiilness,  and^*
upon  so  beholding  strive  to  imitate  the  same,  what  else  do
we  but  follow  the  *  footsteps  of  His  goings,*  in  that  we  imitate
some  outskirts  of  His  metliod  of  proceeding. Thus  these
footsteps  of  His  Father  *  Truth'  gave  it  in  charge  to  imitate
when  He  said,  Pray  for  them  which  persecute  you  oncfMattSy
falsely  €Lccuse  you; that  ye  may  he  the  children  of  your
Father Which  is  in  heaven* Fbr  He  maiketh  His  sun
to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on the good. It may  be  too
that  blessed  Job  who  had  already  said  with  assured  faith,
/  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  I  shall  arise  Jnfb  19,
at  the  latter  day  from  the  earth;  so  dwelt  on  the  fliture^*
working  of  Wisdom  Incarnate  to  be,  in  like  manner  as
we  behold  by  fiuth  the  works  of  that  Wisdom  now  past,
how  that the Mediator  between God and man should
be  kind to give, humble to bear,  patient  to  afford  an
example.  Whose  life  while  blessed  Job,  filled  with  the  Spirit
from  above,  regarded  with  heedful  intentness,  foreseeing  the
future  lowliness  of  His  mild  character,  he  refers  as  it  were  to
a  pattern  set  before  him,  so  that  whatever  he  did  in  this  Kfe
he  might  bind  fast  to  His  footsteps  in  imitating,  that  so  he
who  was  incapable  of  seeing  the  high  things  of  His  secret
ordering,  as  it  were  looking  on  the  ground,  might  keep  His
footsteps  for  imitation. Of  which  same  '  footsteps*  of  Him  it
is  said  by  Peter,  Because  Christ  also  suffered  for  us^  leaving  i  Pet  s,
us  an  example^  that  ye  should  follow  His  footsteps.  *  Con-^^'
earning  whom  it  is  yet  fhrther  added;

3512  7716  righteous  keep  Ood^s  Way,  and  watch  for  His  Will,

"i^*!?' ^®^*  ^^*  ^**  **^y  ^^  I  kept^  and  not  declined.

-J— ^ 42.  For  ho  *  keops  the  way  and  does  not  decline/  who

xxxiv.  practises  the  thing  whereon  his  mind  is  bent.  Since  to
*  keep'  in  the  bent  is  ^  not  to  decline'  in  the  practice.  For
this  is  the  anxiety  of  the  righteous,  that  day  by  day  they
should  try  their  actions  by  the  ways  of  tvulh»  and  proposing
these  as  a  rule  to  themselves,  they  should  not  decline  from
the  track  of  their  right  course.  Thus  day  by  day  they  strive  to
get  above  themselvesi  and  in  proportion  as  they  are  lifted
up  upon  the  summit  of  virtues,  they  judge  with  heedful
censure,  whatever  there  is  of  themselves  left  remaining
below  themselves.  And  they  are  in  haste  to  draw  the  whole
of  themselves  there,  where  they  find  tliat  they  have  been
brought  in  part. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  12.  Neither  have  I  gone  back  from  the  command-
ments qf  His  lips.

XXXV.  ^^*  ^s  servants  that  serve  well  are  ever  intent  upon  Iheir
masters'  countenances,  that  the  things  they  may  bid  they
may  hear  readily,  and  strive  to  fulfil ;  so  the  minds  of
the  righteous  in  their  bent  are  upon  Almighty  God,  and  in
His  Scripture  they  as  it  were  fix  their  eyes  on  His  face,  that
whereas  Ood  delivers  therein  all  that  He  wills,  they  may  not
be  at  variance  with  His  will,  in  proportion  as  they  learn  that
will  in  His  revelation.  Whence  it  }iappens,  that  His  words
do  not  pass  superfluously  through  their  ears,  but  that
these  words  they  fix  in  their  hearts.  Hence  it  is  here
added ;

/  have  hid  the  words  qf  His  mouth  in  my  breast.

2xxvi.  ^^*  ^^^  ^®  '  b^^^  ^^®  words  of  His  mouth  in  the  bosom  of
our  heart,' when  we  hear  His  commandments  not  in  a  passing
way,  but  to  fiilfil  them  in  practice. Hence  it  is  that  of  the

Luke  9,  Virgin  Mother  herself  it  is  written,  l)ut  Mary  kept  all  these

^^*  thingsy  and  pondered  them  in  her  heart.  Which  same
words  even  when  they  come  forth  to  the  practising  lie
hidden  in  the  recesses  of  the  heart,  if  through  that  which  is
done  without,  the  mind  of  the  doer  be  not  lifted  up  within.
For  when  the  word  conceived  is  carried  on  to  the  deed,  if
human  praise  is  aimed  at  herein,  the  word  of  God  assuredly
is  not  '  hidden  in  the  bosom  of  the  mind.' But  I  would

God  alone  IS  of  Himself,  aU  else  has  being  from  Him. 16S

know,  O  blessed  man,  wherefore  thou  examinest  thyself  with  Book
so  much  earnestness,  wherefore  thou  takest  thyself  to  task  ^^^'
with  so  much  anitiety  ? It  goes  on,

Ver.  13.  Bui  He  is  Himself  alon^y  and  no  man  can  turn
away  His  thought

45.  Are  there  not  angels  and  men,  the  heavens  and  thexzzvii.
earth,  the  air  and  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  all  the  winged
crisatures,  quadrupeds,  and  creeping  things?  And  surely  it  is  Qcn.  9,
written,  Which  God  created  that  theg  should  be.  Whereas*'
then  there  is  such  a  multitude  of  things  in 'the  circle  of
nature,  wherefore  is  it  now  said  by  the  voice  of  the  blessed
man.  He  is  Himself  alone  f  Why,  it  is  one  thing  to  be,
and  another  thing  to  BE  primarily,  one  thing  to  be  sub-
jectly  to  change,  and  another  thing  to  BE  independently
of  change.  For  these  are  all  of  them  in  being,  but  they
are  not  maintained  in  being  in  themselves,  and  except  they
be  maintained  by  the  hand  of  a  governing  agent,  they  cannot
ever  be.  For  all  things  subsist  in  Him  by  Whom  they  were
created,  nor  do  the  things  that  live  owe  their  life  to  them-
selves, nor  are  those  ihat  are  moved,  but  do  not  live,  by  iheir
own  caprice  brought  to  motion.  But  He  moveih  all  things.
Who  quickens  some  with  life,  whilst  some  that  are  not  so
quickened  He  preserves,  disposing  them  in  a  wonderful
way  for  last  and  lowest  being.  For  all  things  were  idade  out
of  nothing,  and  their  being  would  again  go  on  into  nothing,
except  the  Author  of  all  things  held  it  by  the  hand  of  govern-
ance. All  the  things  then  that  have  been  created,  by  them-
selves can  neither  subsist  nor  be  moved,  but  they  only  so  far
subsist,  as  they  have  obtained  that  they  should  be,  are  only
so  far  moved,  as  they  are  influenced  by  a  secret  impulse*
For  see  the  sinner  is  ordained  to  be  scourged  by  human
accidents ;  the  earth  is  parched  in  his  toilings,  the  sea  tossed
in  the  shipwreck  of  him,  the  air  on  fire  in  his  sweating,  the
heavens  are  darkened  in  floods  upon  him,  his  fellow  creatures
bum  with  Are  in  oppressions  of  him,  and  the  angelical
powers  are  made  active  in  his  troubling.  Are  all  these
things  which  we  have  named  being  inanimate,  or  which  we
have  named  endued  with  life,  put  into  activity  by  their  own
instincts,  or  rather  by  impulses  from  God  ?  Whatever  there-
fore it  be  that  is  arrayed  against  us  outwardly,  in  that  thing

2M fVhat  9eem$  to  change  OotFa  mU,  camfi  of  It.

Job  ss,  That  Being  is  to  be  regarded  Who  ordains  it  inwardly.  In
-every  case  then  He  is  to  be  regarded  as  alone,  Who  IS
primarily,  Who  also  saith  to  Moses,  /  AM  THAT  I  AM,
Thw  shali  thou  say  unto  the  children  qf  Urael,  He  that  IS
hath  sent  me  unto  you.  And  so,  when  we  are  scourged  by
the  things  that  we  see,  we  ought  anxiously  to  fear  Him
Whom  we  do  not  see.  And  so  let  the  hyly  man  look  down
upon  all  that  alarms  him  without,  all  that  in  respect  of  its
being  would  go  on  to  nothing  except  it  were  ruled,  and  with
the  eye  of  the  mind,  all  else  being  kept  back,  let  him  see
Him  only  in  comparison  with  Whose  Being  for  ourselves  to
be  is  not  to  be,  and  let  him  say.  He  only  is  Himself  alone.

46.  Concerning  Whose  unchangeableness  it  is  directly
after  added  with  propriety,  No  man  can  turn  auxiy  His
thought,  for  as  He  is  unchangeable  in  Nature,  so  He  is
unchangeable in Will. For *  none tumeth away His
thought,*  in  that  no  man  has  power  to  resist  His  secret
judgments. Since  though  there  have  been  persons who
might  seem  to  '  have  turned  away  His  thought,*  yet  His
interior  thought  was  this,  that  they  should  by  praying  have
power  to  avert  His  sentence,  and  that  they  shoidd  obtain
from  Him  what  to  effect  with  Him. So  let  him  say,  and  no
man  turnelh  away  His  thought,  in  that  His  judgments  once
Pa.  148,  fixed  can  never  be  altered. Whence  it  is  written.  He  hath
^^ made  a  decree  which  shall  not  pass. And  again.  Heaven
18,81.  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My  words  shall  not  pass
If.66,8.  away. And  again,  For  My  thoughts  are  not  as  your  thoughts,
neither  are  your  ways  as  My  ways. And  so  whenever  out-
wardly the  sentence  appears  to  be  altered,  inwardly  the
counsel  is  not  altered,  in  that  in  relation  to  each  particular
thing  that  is  unalterably  established  within,  whatever  is  done
altembly  witliout. It  goes  on;

And  what  His  soul  desireth,  even  that  He  doeth.
xxviii.  47.  Whereas  Ood  is  exterior  to  all  bodies,  interior  to  all
minds,  that  identical  power  of  His,  whereby  He  penetrates
all  things,  and  regulates  all  tilings,  is  called  His  ^  soul.*
Whose  will  not  even  those  things  oppose,  which  appear  to
be  done  contrary  to  His  will,  seeing  that  even  what  He  does
not  order,  to  this  end  He  sometimes  suffers  to  be  done,  that
so  through  this  thing  that  which  He  does  order  may  be  the

How  Jobf  $0  afflietedj  could/eat  more.  865

more  sorely  done. For  the  will  of  the  Apostate  Angel  ik  bad,  Boos

yet  by  Ood  it  is  wonderfolly  ordered,  so  that  eren  his  rery

artifices  as  well  should  promote  the  welfare  of  the  good,
whom  they  pnrify  whilst  they  try.  So  then  '  whateTer  His
sonl  desireth,  that  He  doetb,'  that  from  the  sanie  sonrce  as
well  He  might  fiilfil  His  will,  whence  there  seemed  to  be  a
resisting  of  His  will.  Therefore  let  the  holy  man  be  filled
with  alarm,  and  contemplating  the  weight  of  that  great
Majesty,  let  him  find  himself  out  to  be  weak.

48.  Dnt  it  is  well  to  put  the  question  amidst  these  words,
and  to  say, '  O  blessed  Job,  wherefore  in  the  midst  of  such
scourges  dost  thou  dread  still  further  affllictions?'  Thou  art
already  encompassed  with  sorrows,  by  innumerable  calamities
thou  art  already  straitly  beset.  Misfortune  is  to  be  appre-
hended, which  is  not  yet  entered  upon.  Thou  being  in  the
midst  of  such  great  sorrow,  what  dost  thou  apprehend?  But
mark  how  the  holy  man  satisfying  our  questioning  adds;

Ver.  14.  For  when  He  hath  accomplUhed  His  will  in
me,  there  are  many  other  euch  things  with  Him.

49.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words, '  Already  I  weigh  well  xxziz.
what  I  am  suffering,  but  I  still  dread  things  that  I  may
-undergo.* For  He  accomplishes  His  will  in  me,  in  that  He
aflOicts  one  with  many  strokes,  but  '  there  are  many  like
things  with  Hiro,^  in  that  if  He  is  minded  to  strike,  He  sees

-yet  further  where  the  stroke  may  be  added  to.  Hence  we
may  collect  how  fearfiil  he  was  before  the  scourge,  who  eren
after  being  scourged  still  dreads  lest  he  should  be  fiBurther
stricken.  For  seeing  the  incomprehensible  force  both  of
power  and  penetration  that  resides  in  Him,  the  righteous
man  would  not  eren  on  the  ground  of  the  scourge  upon  him
be  secure. And  hence  fearing  still  more  He  adds ;

Ver.  \b.  Therefore  am  I  troubled  at  His  pretence;  when
I  consider  I  am  a/raid  of  Him.

50.  He  is  rightly  '  troubled  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,*  xl.
who  sets  before  the  view  of  his  eyes  the  terribleness  of
His  Majesty,  and  is  throughly  shaken  by  dread  of  His
Righteousness,  whilst  he  sees  that  he  is  not  fit  to  render  his
accounts  if  he  be  judged  with  severity.  Now  it  is  rightly
said,  When  I  consider  I  am  afraid  of  Him,  because  the
force  of  the  Divine  visitation  when  a  man  considers  little,

256 JobU  continued  fearing  f  a  special  gifi  of  Ood.

Job  ss,  He  dreads  but  little,  and  in  ibis  life  is  as  it  were  secure,  in

— proportion  as  be  is  a  stranger  to  tbe  consideration  of  tbe

interior  strictness.  For  tbe  rigbteous  are  ever  turning  back
into  tbe  secret  cbamber  of  tbe  beart,  contemplating  tbe  power
of  tbe  bidden  strictness,  presenting  tbemselves  to  tbe  judg-
ment of  tbe  interior  Majesty/ tbat  tbey  may  one  day  be  tbe
more  secure,  in  proportion  as  tbey  would  not  make  tbem-
selves  secure  bere  so  long  as  tbey  lived.  For  wben  tbe
minds  of  evildoers  refuse  to  consider  wbat  tbey  bave  to  fear,
sooner  or  later  by  rejoicing  tbey  are  brougbt  to  tbat,  wbicb
tbey  do  not  by  fearing  in  any  way  escape.  But  see  in
regard  to  blessed  Job,  we  know  tbat  be  was  devoted  to  fre-
quent sacrifices  to  God,  tbat  be  was  given  up  to  acts  of  bos-
pitality,  to  tbe  necessities  of  tbe  poor,  tbat  be  was  bumble
towards  bis  own  dependants  even,  kind  towards  tbose  tbat
opposed  bim,  and  yet  be  received  sucb  numberless  scourges,
nor  now  became  secure  amidst  tbem,  but  still  entertained
fear,  still  tbinking  of  tbe  power  of  tbe  Divine  strictness  be
is  made  to  tremble.  Wbat  tben  sball  we  miserable  creatures
say?  wbat  sball  we  sinners  say,  if  be  so  fears,  wbo  so  acted?
But  let  bim  make  known  wbetber  tbe  weigbt  of  tbis  great
fear  be  bas  from  bimself. It  goes  on;

Ver.  16.  For  Qod  makeih  my  heart  sqft^  and  the  Almighty
trouhleth  me.
xli.  61.  By  divine  gift  tbe  beart  of  tbe  rigbteous  man  is  said
to  be  made  soft,  in  tbat  it  is  penetrated  witb  tbe  fear  of  tbe
judgment  from  Above.  For  tliat  it  is  soft,  wbicb  is  capable
of  being  penetrated,  but  tbat  is  bard,  wbicb  cannot  be
ProT^,  penetrated.  Wbence  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  Happy  is  the
^^'  man  that  feareth  always^  but  he  that  hardeneth  his  heart
shall  fall  into  mischief.  And  so  tbe  merit  of  bis  dread  be
ascribes  not  to  bimself  but  to  bis  Creator,  wbo  says.  For  Ood
maketh  my  heart  soft^  and  tlie  Almighty  troubleth  me.  Now
tbe  bearts  of  good  men  are  not  secure  but  troubled,  in  tbat
wbilst  tbey  tbink  on  tbe  beavy  weigbt  of  tbe  friture  reckon-
ing, tbey  do  not  seek  to  enjoy  rest  bere,  and  tbey  interrupt
tbeir  security  by  tbe  tbougbt  of  tbe  interior  severity.  Wbicb
persons  nevertheless,  in  tbe  midst  of  tbe  very  cbastenings  of
fear,  often  recall  tbeir  mind  to  tbe  gifts,  and  tbat  by  comfort-
ing tbey  may  cheer  themselves,  amidst  tbis  which  they  fear.

Job  not  puni$hed. SainU  have  to  i»aieh  agaimtfautU.  257

they  bring  back  the  eye  to  the  gifts  which  they  hare  receiTed,  Book

that  hope  may  buoy  np  him  whom  fear  bears  down. Hence -

too  it  follows;

Ver.  17.  Because  I  have  not  perished  on  account  of  the
overhanging  darkneu;  neither  hath  the  darkness  covered
my  face.

52.  For  he,  being  set  under  the  scourge,  dies  off  from  the  xlii.
health  of  the  body  '  on  account  of  the  OTcrhanging  darkness,*
who  is  for  this  reason  smitten  for  the  past  that  he  may  be
shielded  fix>m  future  punishments. For  scourges  inflicted  on

the  good  either  wipe  out  eril  things  done,  or  parry  off  future
ones  which  might  haTe  been  done.  But  blessed  Job,  foras-
much as  when  set  under  the  rod  he  was  neither  purified
from  foregoing  sins  nor  shielded  from  those  that  threatened,
but  only  had  his  goodness  increased  under  the  stroke,  says  with
confidence,  Because  I  have  not  perished  on  account  of  the
overhanging  darkness^  neither  hath  the  darkness  covered  mg
face.  For  he  that  always  had  before  his  eyes  the  weight  of  *
divine  dread,  the  face  of  his  heart  the  darkness  of  sin  never
covered.  And  he  whom  no  punishments  followed,  did  not
lose  the  health  of  the  body  '  on  account  of  the  overhanging
darkness.*

53.  And  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  in  his  own  person  telling
what  had  gone  before,  he  never  says  '  neither  haUi  darkness
touched  my  face,'  but  '  neither  hath  darkness  covered  my
face;'  for  often  even  the  hearts  of  the  righteous  do  thoughts
arising  defile,  and  affect  them  with  the  gratifications  of  things
earthly,  but  whereas  they  are  speedily  put  away  by  the  hand
of  holy  discretion,  it  is  qilickly  brought  to  pass  that  darkness
should  not  cover  the  face  of  the  heart,  which  was  already
touching  it  by  unlawful  enjoyment;  for  often  in  the  very  sacri-
fice of  prayer  urgent  thoughts  press  themsehes  on  us,  that
they  should  have  force  to  carry  off  or  pollute  what  we  are
sacrificing  in  ourselves  to  God  with  weeping  eyes.  Whence
when  Abraham  at  sunset  was  offering  up  the  sacrifice,  he
was  subject  to  birds  setting  on,  which  he  diligendy  drove
away,  that  they  might  not  carry  off  the  sacrifice  which  had
been  offered.  So  let  us,  when  we  offer  to  God  a  holocuast
upon  the  altar  of  our  hearts,  keep  it  from  unclean  birds,  that
the  evil  spirits  and  bad  thoughts  may  not  seize  upon  that

VOL.  11.  s

258  Crod  knotcfi  by  Faith,  but  incomprehennble  in  Nature.

Job  Uf  which  our  mind  hopes  that  it  is  offering  up  to  Ood  to  a  good

-jjj—  end. It  goes  onj

C.  xxiv.  1.  Titnei  are  not  hidden  from  the  Almighty ;  they
that  know  Him,  know  not  His  days,

xliii. 64.  What  are  called  *  the  days*  of  God,  save  His  very
Eternity  itself? which  is  sometimes  described  by  the  an-

Pf.  84,  nouncement  of  *  one  day/  as  where  it  is  written.  For  one  day
in  Thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand.  But  sometimes  on
account  of  its  length  it  is  represented  by  the  expression  of  a

Ft.  103,  number  of  days,  whereof  it  is  written,  Thy  years  are  through^
out  all  generations.  We  then  are  wrapped  up  within  the
dinsions  of  time,  through  this  that  we  are  created  beings.
But  God,  Who  is  the  Creator  of  all  things,  by  His  Eternity
encompasses  our  times.  And  so  he  says,  Times  are  not
hidden  from  the  Almighty;  they  that  know  Him,  know  not
His  days;  seeing  that  He,  indeed,  sees  all  of  ours  to  the
comprehending  thereof,  but  all  that  is  His  we  are  in  no  de-
gree able  to  comprehend.  But  whereas  the  nature  of  God
is  sipiple,  it  is  very  much  to  be  wondered  at  why  he  should
say,  They  that  know  Him,  know  not  His  days.  For  it  is  not
that  He  Himself  is  one  thing  and  His  ^  days*  another;
since  God  is  that  thing  which  He  hath.  For  He  hath
eternity,  yet  He  is  Himself  Eternity.  He  hath  Light,  yet  He
is  Himself  His  own  Light.  He  hath  brightness,  yet  He  is
Himself  His  own  Brightness.  And  so  in  Him  it  is  not  one
thing  to  be,  and  another  thing  to  have.  What  does  it  mean
then  to  say.  They  that  know  Him,  know  not  His  days,  except
that  even  they  that  know  Him,  do  not  know  Him  as  yet  ?
For  even  ihey  who  already  hold  Him  by  faith,  as  yet  know
Him  not  by  appearance.  And  whereas  He,  Whom  we  truly
believe,  is  Himself  eternity  to  Himself,  yet  in  what  way  there
is  that  eternity  of  Him  we  know  not.  For  in  the  thing  that  we
hear  touching  the  power  of  the  Divine  Nature,  we  are  some-
times used  to  imagine  such  things  as  we  know  by  experience.
Thus  every  single  thing  that  begins  and  ends,  is  bounded  by
the  beginning  and  ending.  And  if  it  be  by  any  little  delay
stayedfrombeingended,it  is  called  long;  on  which  same  length
whilst  a  man  carries  back  the  eyes  of  his  mind  in  recollection,
and  stretches  them  out  before  in  anticipation,  as  it  were  over
a  space  of  time  he  expands  them  in  imagination. And  when

Ottr  concepH<m»  of  God  alwayn  impeffect.  359

he  heats  the  eternity  of  God  mentioned  in  hamta  sort,  to  his  Book
mind  on  the  stretch  he  sets  forth  long  spaces  of  Hfe»  in  which  — — *-
same  he  may  eirer  measure  both  what  has  gone  away  in  the  rear
as  a  thing  to  be  retained  in  the  memory,  and  what  remains
before  as  a  thing  to  be  looked  forward  to  in  the  intention.

55.  But  as  often  as  in  the  case  of  eternity  we  bare  such
thoughts,  we  do  not  as  yet  know  eternity.  ForHhat  which  is
neither  commenced  by  a  beginning  nor  finished  by  an  ending,
is  there,  where  neither  is  there  looked/orward  to  that  which
shall  come,  nor  does  there  pass  by  that  which  may  be  recalled
to  mind, but  thatalone  is, which  iseverlasting  BEINO.  Which
though  we  and  the  Angels  with  a  beginning  begin  to  see  to  be,
yet  we  see  it  to  be  without  beginning,  where  it  is  to  be  always
without  end,  in  such  a  way,  that  the  mind  never  extends
itself  to  things  following  in  a  sequence,  as  if  things  that  are
were  multiplied  and  made  long.  For  though  by  the  Spirit
of  Prophecy  it  is  said,  The  Lord  shall  reign/or  ever  and^for  Exod.
worlds  and  fkrther;  after  the  manner  of  Holy  Writ,  the  i^^x
Spirit  spoke  in  man's  way  to  men,  so  as  to  speak  of '  ftirther'to.
there,  where  looking  forward  could  not  enter.  For  eternity
has  no  *  further,'  which  has  it  always  to  be,  wherein  no  part
of  its  length  goes  by  that  another  part  should  take  its  place,
but  the  whole  at  once  is  Being,  that  nothing  should
seem  to  be  wanting  to  it,  which  it  may  not  see,  in  which
eternity  every  thing  that  is  the  mind  sees  to  be  at  once  not
slow  and  long*  But  in  speaking  such  things  of  the  days  of
eterni^  we  are  trying  to  see  something  more  than  we  do  see.
And  so  let  it  be  rightly  said,  lltey  that  know  Him  know  not
His  days;  in  that  though  we  already  know  God  by  faith,
yet  how  His  Etetnity  is  at  once  without  a  past  before  all
ages,  without  a  future  after  all  ages,  long  without  delay,  and
everlasUng  without  looking  forward,  we  do  not  see.  Thus
blessed  Job,  whilst  bearing  a  type  of  Holy  Church,  (because
he  restrains  himself  under  a  great  bridling  of  knowledge,  ro
as  not  to  be  wiser  than  he  ought  to  be,)  and  testifying  that
the  days  of  God  can  never  be  understood,  directly  brings
back  the  view  of  the  mind  to  the  pride  of  Heretics  who  aim
to  be  deeply  enlightened,  and  what  they  are  incapable  of
taking  in  at  all,  they  boast  that  they  know  in  perfect  mea-
sure. Thus  it  goes  on;

s2

Hereiici  pervert  Ike  simple  dieep  and  labouring  asses.

Job  84, Ver.  2.  Others  remove  the  landmarks;  they  violently  take

j£~^  aiwiy^«?it*,  and  feed  them,

xHv.  ^'  Whom  does  be  denote  by  tbe  title  of  ^  otbers/  saving
Heretics,  wbo  to  tbe  bosom  of  Holy  Cburch  are  strangers  ?
For  tbey  tbe  same  persons  remove  landmarks,  in  tbat  tbe
constitutious  of  tbe  Fatbers  tbey  by  walking  awry  do  over-
step. Concerning  wbieb  same  constitutions  it  is  written,

^fow^fjl^jjuove  not  the  ancient  landmark  which  thy  fathers  have  set.
And  tbese  violently  take  away  the  Jtocks^  and  feed  them,  in
tbat  all  tbe  inexperienced,  by  wicked  persuasions,  tbey  draw
to  tbemselves,  and  witb  baneful  lessons  nourisb  tbem  for
slaugbtering.  For  tbat  tbe  ignorant  multitudes  are  repre-
sented by  tbe  designation  of  ^  flocks,'  tbe  words  of  tbe
Spouse  bear  witness,  Wbo  addresses  His  Espoused,  in  tbe
words.  Except  thou  know  thyself,  O  beautiful  amongst
women,  depart  forth,  and  go  after  the  footsteps  of  the  flocks;
i.  e.  *  excepting  tbat  by  living  well,  tbou  knowest  tbine
bonour  wbereby  tbou  art  created  after  tbe  likeness  of  God,
depart  fortb  from  tbe  sigbt  of  tbe  cpntemplation  of  Me,  and

■al.  'the follow  tbe  life*  of  tbe  uninstructed  multitudes.  It  goes  on ;
Ver.  S.  They  drive  away  the  ass  of  the  fatherless,  they  take
the  widow^s  ox  for  a  pledge,
xlv.  67.  Wbom  do  we  understand  by  tbe  fiitberless  in  tbis
place,  but  tbe  Elect  of  Ood,  wbo  are  set  in  tenderness
of  mind,  are  nourisbed  witb  tbe  efficacious  grace  of  faitb,
and  do  not  yet  see  tbe  face  of  tbeir  Fatber,  Wbo  bas  already
died  in  tbeir  bebalf.  And  tbere  are  very  many  in  tbe
Cburcb,  wbo  see  certain  persons  aiming  at  tbe  tbings  of
heaven,  baving  all  eartbly  tbings  in  contempt,  and  tbougfa
tbey  tbemselves  are  toiling  witb  all  tbeir  strength  in  tbis
world's  labours,  yet  to  tbose  wbom  tbey  see  panting  after
beavenly  tbings,  from  tbe  goods  wbicb  tbey  possess  in  tbis
world,  tbey  bring  tbis  life's  aid  and  support.  And  tbougb
tbey  cannot  tbemselves  follow  a  spiritual  life,  yet  to  tbose
reacbing  fortb  to  tbe  tbings  above  tbey  gladly  yield  means  of
support  For  an  ass  is  used  to  bear  tbe  burthens  of  men.
He  then  is  as  it  were  a  kind  of  ass  of  tbe  Elect,  wbo  wbilst
yielding  himself  to  eartbly  courses,  carries  loads  for  tbe  uses
of  men.  And  often  wben  Heretics  turn  aside  any  sucb
person  from  tbe  bosom  of  Holy  Cburcb,  tbey  are  as  it  were

Theyiakeih«^ox\fthe  widowedChurchjlogei  more/rom  her.  261

driring  off  die  ass  of  the  faUieriess,  in  thai  when  they  force  ^k

fahn into  their  own  misbelief,  they  drive  him  away  from -

tendance  on  the  good.

58.  But  who  is  to  be  understood  by  the  *  widow*  saving
Holy  Church,  who  is  bereft  in  the  mean  season  of  the  right
of  her  slain  Husband  i  Now  *  the  ox'  of  this  ^  widow*  is  erery
individual  preacher.  And  it  often  chances  that  Heretics  by
their  perverted  tenets  draw  over  even  those  very  persons  that
appeared  to  be  preachers.  And  to  they  *  take  the  widow's
ox/  when  they  carry  off  from  Holy  Church  even  a  person
preaching.  And  it  is  rightly  added  hersj  for  &  pledge.  For
when  a  pledge  is  taken  away,  one  thing  indeed  is  held  in
our  hands,  but  another  yet  further  is  sought  for.  And  very
often  Heretics  for  this  reason  try  to  cany  off  those  that
preach,  that  they  may  draw  to  them  their  followers  likewise.
Thus  *  the  widow's  ox  is  taken  away  for  a  pledge,'  when  the
same  person  that  practised  preaching  is  for  this  reason
carried  off,  that  others  may  follow  after  him.  By  whose
downfall  it  is  very  often  brought  about,  that  they  also  go
forth  fiom  the  bosom  of  Holy  Church,  who,  imbued  with
godly  habits  in  her,  seemed  to  be  meek  and  humble.  Hence
it  is  added ;

Ver.  4.  They  have  turned  the  needy  wtt  qf  the  way;  and
have  oppressed  together  the  meek  of  the  earth.

59.  For  by  the  term  of  *  poverty,'  humility  is  very  often  xlvi.
denoted;  and  very  often  they  that  appear  gende  and  humble,

if  they  have  not  learnt  to  maintain  discretion,  fall  by  the
examples  of  other  men.  But  there  are  some  Heretics,  who
eschew  to  mix  themselves  with  the  multitudes,  and  seek  the
retirement  of  a  life  of  greater  privacy,  and  these  very  often
with  the  bane  of  their  persuasion  poison  those  that  they
meet  with  the  more,  in  proportion  as  by  the  claims  of  their
life  they  the  more  seem  deserving  of  respect  Concerning
whom  it  is  subjoined ;

Ver.  5.  Others  as  tcild  asses^  in  the  desert  go  forth  to*  onagri
their  work,

60.  For  the  *  onager'  is  k  wild  ass;  and  in  this  place  Heretics  xlvii.
are  rightly  likened  to  *  wild  asses,'  in  that  b^ing  let  loose  in

theur  pleasures,  they  are  strange  to  the  fetters  of  faith  and
reason* Hence  it  is  written ;  A  wild  ass  used  to  the  wilder-  Jer.  9,

S4.

202 HereiicH  rob  OoiPsJield  and  vineyard  by  violence.

Job  34,  ness  that  snuffeih  up  the  wind  of  his  love  at  his  pleasure. For

-—^ — he  is  a  wild  ass  used  to  the  wilderness,  who  whilst  he  does  not

'cultivate  the  ground  of  his  heart  with  excellence  of  discipline,

there  dwells,  where  there  is  no  fruit.  Since  he  ^  snuffeth  up  the

wind  of  his  love  at  his  pleasure,'  in  that  the  things  that  from  the

desire  of  knowledge  he  conceives  in  his  mind,  are  efficacious

I  Cor.  8,  to  puff  up  but  not  to  edify. Against  whom  it  is  said.  Know-

^' ledge  puffeth  up^  but  charity  ed\fieth. Hence  here  too  the

words  are  suitably  brought  in  ;  they  go  forth  to  their  work.

For  it  is  not  the  work  of  God,  but  their  own  work  tliat  they

do,  whereas  they  follow  not  right  doctrines,  but  their  own

Pu.  101,  desires. For  it  is  written,  He  that  walketh  in  a  perfect  way,

^' he  served  me. So  he  that  does  not  walk  in  a  perfect  way,

serves  himself  more  than  the  Lord. It  goes  on ;

Watching  for  a  prey^  they  provide  bread  for  their  children.

xlviii. ^^*  They  ^  watch  for  a  prey,'  who  are  always  trying  to

seize  the  words  of  the  righteous  according  to  their  own

perception,  that  by  them  they  may  provide  tlie  bread  of  error

for  evil-minded  children. Of  which  some  bread  it  is  said  in

Solomon,  in  the  words  of  the  woman  that  bears  the  figure  of

ProT.  9,  heretical  wickedness,  Stolen  waters  are  svoeet,  and  bread

'^' eaten  in  secret  is  pleasant. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  6.  TItey  reap  afield  not  their  own^  and  the  vineyard
of  him  whom  tliey  have  oppressed  by  violence  they  gather.

62.  By  the  name  of  a  *  field'  may  be  denoted  the  wide

compass  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  Heretics  ^  reap'  it  not  being

their  own,  in  that  they  carry  away  from  it  sentences  which

are  infinitely  removed  from  their  own  notions;  which  same  is

furthermore  described  by  the  title  of  a  *  vineyaid,'  in  that

through  the  sentences  of  truth  it  puts  forth  the  clusters  of

the  virtues;  the  owner  of  which  vineyard,  i.  e.  the  originator

of  Holy  Scripture,  they  as  it  were  '  oppress  with  violence,'

because  they  endeavour  violently  to  twist  and  turn  a  sense

Is.  48, of  His  upon^  the  words  of  Holy  Writ ;  as  He  saith,  But  thou

>L.oDly^^^^  iTtatfe  Me  to  serve  with  thy  sins^  thou  hast  given  Me

readt labour  in  thine  iniquity. And  they  *  reap  the  vintage  of

y<^  ?  that  vineyard,'  in  that  they  heap  together  therefrom  clusters

of  sentences  after  the  bent  of  their  own  understanding. It

may  bo  that  by  the  title  of  a  *  field'  or  of  a  '  vineyard*  the

Church  Universal  is  set  forth,  which  corrupt  preachers  ^  reap,'

Theff  strip  men  of  good  ttork$  thai  were  iheir  covering.  MS,

and  by  oppressiDg  in  His  members  the  Anthor  of  it,  *  gaiherthe  Book
vintage/  in  that  in  bearing  down  npon  the  grace  of  oar— — l


Creator,  whilst  they  seize  off  therefrom  persons  who  seemed
to  be  righteoas,  what  else  is  this  bat  that  they  cany  off '  ears*
or  *  clnsters'  of  soals  ? Of  whom  it  is  yet  farther  added ;

Ver.  7.  771^  send  men  away  nakedy  taking  away  their
garments^  who  have  no  covering  in  the  cold.

63.  As  garments  cover  the  body,  so  do  good  works  the  L
seal.  When<5e  it  is  said  to  one,  Blessed  is  he  thai  watcheth  Ber.is,
and  keepeth  his  garments^  lest  he  walk  nakedy  and  they  see  ^^'
his  shame.  So  Heretics,  when  in  the  minds  of  any  they
destroy  good  works,  manifestly  take  away  the  garments  of
clothing;  and  it  is  well  said,  who  have  no  covering  in  the
cold.  For  '  covering'  has  relation  to  righteoaspess, '  cold'  to
sin.  And  there  are  some  that  in  some  points  commit  sin,
bat  in  some  points  follow  good  works.  He  then  that  does
wrong  by  one  set  of  actions,  and  practises  righteoasness  by
another,  what  is  this  man  but  clothed  in  the  cold  ?  He  is
cold»  and  he  is  covered,  in  that  in  one  part  of  practice  he  is
made  warm  for  righteoasness,  in  another  he  is  made  cold  for
sin.  Bat  whenever  Heretics  take  away  their  good  works  from
sach  persons,  they  bring  it  to  pass  that  they  have  not  in  the
cold  wherewith  to  clothe  themselves.  Therefore  it  is  rightly
said.  They  send  men  away  nakedy  taking  away  their  gar-
ments,  who  have  no  covering  in  the  cold;  that  is,  for  the  cold
of  sin  by  itself  to  kill  those  whom  the  warmth  of  a  different
practice  in  some  degree  covered.  Bat  it  may  be,  that  by  the
cold  thereis  denoted  desire,  by  the  garment  practice.  And  there
are  great  numbers  who  are  still  agitated  with  wrong  desires,
but  striving  with  themselves  in  the  spirit,  they  fight  against
themselves  by  right  works,  and  with  good  actions  cover  that
which  they  perceive  through  temptation  to  spring  against  them
of  the  wrong  sort  And  so  these  from  the  cause  that  they
desire  what  is  evil  are  cold,  and  by  the  act  by  which
they  practise  what  is  good,  they  are  clothed.  But  when
Heretics  by  wrong  statements  do  away  with  the  works  of  a
right  faith,  what  else  do  they  bring  to  pass  but  that  those
that  still  feel  the  cold  of  carnal  desires  should  die  without
the  clothing  of  good  works  r It  proceeds ;

264  Men  lacking  righleausness  $eek  the  aid  of  holy  Marlyn.

Job  94, Yer.  8.  They  are  wet  with  the  ifiowers  of  the  mouniaini,

Allko,^^*^  «ii6ractf  the  itOHes/or  want  of  a  garment.

64.  ^  The  showers  of  the  mountains*  are  the  words  of  the
learned. Of  which  same  ^mountains'  it  is  delivered  by  the

Ptf.isi, voice  of  Holy  Church;  I  lifted  up  mine  eyee  unto  the
hills:  and  so  those  persons^  'the  showers  of  the  mountains
wet,'  in  that  the  streams  of  the  holy  fathers  fill  them  to  the
full.  But  as  we  have  already  said  before,  *  the  garment'  we
take  for  the  covering  of  good  practice,  with  wtiich  a  man  is
covered,  that  in  the  eyes  of  Almighty  God  the  filthiness  of
his  depravity  should  be  clothed  over. Whence  it  is  written,

^^-^i^' Blessed  pre  they  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is
covered.  Whom  do  we  understand  by  the  title  of '  the  stones'
but  the  strong  ones  within  the  bounds  pf  Holy  Church,  to

1  Pec.8,  vbom  it  is  declared  by  the  first  shepherd ;  Ye  also  as  lively
stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house.  And  so  those  who  on
the  grounds  of  their  own  practice  have  no  reliance,  fly  to  the
protection  of  the  holy  Martyrs,  at  their  sacred  bodies  set
themselves  to  tears,  and  entreat,  at  their  intercessions,  to
obtain  pardon  '•  What  then  do  these  do  by  such  self-abase-
ment, but  because  they  lack  the  covering  of  good  practice
*  embrace  the  stones  ?'  It  goes  on ;
Ver.  9.  Tliey  have  done  violence  in  preying  on  thefather^

^V^*^  t^^f  (^nd  have  spoiled  the  common  folk  qf  the  poor*.

rum,  66.  When  Heretics  lack  the  good  fortune  of  the  present
lii*  life,  to  weak  minds  they  recommend  by  words  of  soft  per-
suasion things  that  are  wrong ;  but  if  the  good  fortune  of  the
present  time  at  all  smiles  upon  them,  they  do  not  cease  even
by  violence  to  draw  those  they  are  able.  So  that  by  the  title
of '  fatherless'  they  are  denoted  who  are  still  delicate,  being
set  within  the  pale  of  Holy  Church,  whose  life  their  mercifid
Father  by  dyipg  preserved,  who  are  already  brought  forward
to  a  good  purpose  of  mind,  but  are  not  yet  confirmed  with
any  efficacy  in  good  deeds.  The  Heretics,  then, '  do  violence  in

^  He  ipetki  u  of  an  ettabliibed  ofdamnadon. But  8t.  Oregorr  alwajt

practice,  and  in  &ct  it  if  foand  at  a  •peakaoftheremiationofpQnishoientat

mnob  earlierperiod. See  St  Chrjs.  on  a  matter  of  degreee,  and  in  Horn,  in  £▼.

theStatoee,  Horn.  Ti.§.  19,  and  note  l.Tr.  xzxii.  7.  where  be  relatea  a  fisioo  of

p.  134.  The  Cburobhaa  never  departed  SS.  Prooeiiua  and  Martiniannv, he

from  the  doctrine  of  St.  Chrjs.  on  1  eaja  thej  promised  the  woman  who

Cor.  md  of  Horn.  zHi.  that  no  inter-  offered  them  alme  to  do  in  the  Daj  of

ceeaion  can  deliver  one  who  is  in  a  state  Judgment '  what  they  couUL'

Hereiie»  take  the  bread  ofiruihfrom  hungering  eouU.  965

preying  on  the  fatherless/  in  that  upon  the  weak  mmds  of  Book
the  faithful  they  make  assaalt  with  violence  in  words  and
deeds.  But  '  the  common  folk  of  the  poor*  are  the  un-
instructed  multitude,  which,  if  it  had  the  riches  of  true
knowledge,  would  never  part  with  the  covering  of  its  fiuth.
For  genuine  teachers  are  like  a  kind  of  senators  within  the
bounds  of  Holy  Church,  who,  while  they  multiply  knowledge
in  the  heart,  abound  in  the  true  riches  in  themselves.  But
Heretics  '  spoil  the  common  sort  of  the  poor,'  in  that  whilst
the  learned  they  cannot,  aU  the  unlearned  by  their  pestilent
preaching  they  strip  naked  of  the  covering  of  the  faith.  It
goes  on;

Ver.  10.  From  the  nakedyOnd  ihoee  going  without  clothinj/
and  a  hungered^  they  have  taken  away  the  ears  of  com.

66.  What  he  calls  naked  he  repeats  in  the  words  without  liii.
clothing f  but  it  is  one  thing  to  be  naked  and  another  thing
to  go  naked.  Thus  every  person  that  does  neither  what  is
good  nor  what  is  bad  is  nidced  and  idle ;  but  he  that  does
what  is  evil  '  goes  naked,'  in  that  without  the  covering  of
good  practice  he  is  going  by  the  road  of  wickedness.  But
there  are  some  who,  as  knowing  the  evil  of  their  wickedness,
are  in  haste  to  be  filled  with  the  bread  of  righteousness,  and
hunger  to  receive  the  sayings  of  Holy  Scripture ;  and  these,
as  often  as  they  turn  over  in  thought  the  sentences  of  the
Fathers  for  the  improvement  of  the  mind,  as  it  were  from  a
good  crop  they  carry  ears  of  com.  And  so  *  from  the  naked
and  those  going  without  clothing  and  a  hungered.  Heretics  take
away  ears  of  com;'  in  that  whether  any  persons  be  idle  and
never  exercise  themselves  in  any  thing  good,  or  whether  they
are  going  by  the  way  of  shamolessness  without  the  covering
of  good  practice,  even  if  they  at  any  time  have  now  the
desire  to  return  to  repentance,  and  long  for  the  food  of  the
word,  from  those  same  being  a  hungered  they  take  away  the
ears  of  com,  because  in  the  minds  of  those  persons  by
mischievous  persuasions  they  destroy  the  sentences  of  the
Fathers.  Nor  do  we  improperly  say  that  the  ears  of  com
signify  the  sentences  of  the  Fathers,  in  that  often  whilst  they
are  delivered  in  forms  of  figurative  diction,  we  remove  the
covering  of  the  letter  firom  them  like  the  chafi*of  cotn,  that  we
may  be  regaled  with  the  marrow  of  the  Spirit It  goes  on ;

300  Heretics  join  those  who  tread  the  winepress  of  persecution.

Job  94,  Ver.  11.  They  rest  at  mid-day  amid  the  heaps  of  those
^^'  that  thirst  with  the  winepresses  being  trodden.
liv.  ^7*  ^'^  those  that  persecaie  Holy  Church,  what  else  do
they  but  *  tread  the  winepress?*  Which  is  allowed  to  be
by  the  Divine  appointment,  that  the  clusters  of  souls  may
flow  out  into  spiritual  wine,  and  being  divested  of  the
corruptible  flesh  run  into  the  heavenly  realms  as  into  a
receptacle.  For  whilst  the  unrighteous  bear  down  the
righteous,  they  as  it  were  put  clusters  of  the  grape  beneath
their  feet  And  the  clusters  being  squeezed  run  over  for  the
fulness  of  the  heavenly  feast,  which  were  before  as  if  hanging
in  the  freedom  of  this  air.  Thus  David  the  Prophet,  re-
garding the  chastening  of  Holy  Church  ^  writes  the  Psalm
^  for  the  winepresses.'  Now  all  that  bear  hard  upon  the
life  of  the  fidthful,  tread  and  thirst,  in  that  by  doing  things
that  are  cruel  they  are  rendered  the  more  savage;  being
blinded  by  just  deserts  of  their  ungodliness,  they  go  about
to  do  things  more  grievous  the  more  they  have  already  done
grievous  things.  But  Heretics,  when  they  have  not  them-
selves the  power  of  persecuting,  stir  up  the  men  of  this
world  that  have  power,  and  incline  their  minds  for  the  ex-
ercising persecution,  and  inflame  them  with  what  persuasions
they  are  able.  And  when  they  see  these  pursuing  cruel
measures  against  the  lives  of  the  Catholics,  they  as  it  were
rest  in  the  very  fervour  of  the  sun.  Therefore  it  is  well  said
now,  They  rest  at  mid-day  amidst  the  heaps  of  those  that
thirst  with  the  winepresses  being  trodden ,  in  that  they  join
the  multitude  of  those  whom  they  see  already  employed  in
hard  measures  and  still  thirsting  after  harder  ones.  And
whilst  the  fervour  of  these  satisfies  their  desires,  they  rest  in
the  deeds  of  such  as  in  the  mid-day.  It  goes  on  ;
Ver.  12.  They  have  caused  men  to  groan  out  qfthe  cities.
It.  68.  Whereas  cities  (civitates)  are  so  called  from  the
people  living  together,  (conviventes,)  by  the  designation  of
^  cities'  the  churches  of  the  true  faith  are  not  unfitly  repre-
sented, which  being  settled  in  the  different  parts  of  the

^  PMliiitTiU,lzzxi,aiiaixxxW.bear  from  <  Gath'  and  ngnifiM  <  ofGath.'

the  title,  '  Pro  torcuUribiit'  in  Tulg.  The  word  for  winepreuei  it  'Gittoth/

*T«)f  rm  Xtnm,  Sept. The  word  in  the  with  which  *  Gittith'  ii  probably  coa-

Uebrew  is  Gittith,  which  it  retained  in  nected. 8ee  alio  Calinet't  Com. in

the  title  of  Uie  £.  A.  V.  it  it  deri?ed  Vet  Teat,  in  Ps.  viii.

ne^  canne  grief  in  the  ciiien  of  God  hy  huHiPtg  the  iteak.  2A7

world  constitute  one  Catholic  Cborch,  in  which  all  the  Boos
faithful  thinking  what  is  right  concerning  Ood  Ivre  togetlier  JLJi
in  harmony.  For  this  Teiy  harmony  of  people  linng  together
the  Lord  even  by  the  distinguishing  of  places  set  forth  in  the
Gospel,  when  being  about  to  satisfy  the  people  with  five
loaves,  He  bade  them  lie  down  by  fifties  or  hundreds  in
ranks,  so  that  the  crowd  of  the  faithfiil  might  take  its  food  at
once  separate  in  places,  and  united  in  ways.  For  the  rest
of  the  jubilee  is  contained  in  a  mystery  of  the  number  fifty,
imd  fifty  is  carried  twice  to  be  brought  to  a  hundred.
Therefore  because  there  is  first  rest  from  bad  practice,  that
the  soul  may  afterwards  rest  more  perfectly  in  the  thoughts,
some  lie  down  by  fifties  and  some  by  hundreds,  rince  tiiere
are  some  that  already  enjoy  the  rest  of  practice  from  evil
deeds,  and  there  are  some  that  already  enjoy  the  rest  of  the
soul  from  evil  thoughts.  Wherefore  since  Heretics  often,
attaching  themselves  to  the  powerful  evil-doers  of  this
world,  bear  down  upon  the  united  life  and  harmony  of  the
good,  it  is  rightly  said  in  this  place,  771^  have  earned  fHen
to  groan  from  the  cities.  Whom  blessed  Job  rightly  describes
as  *  men,*  in  that  Heretics  rather  go  about  to  put  an  end  to
those,  who  with  perfect  steps  run  in  the  way  of  Ood  not
effeminately  and  loosely  but  manfully ;  who  when  they  see
the  wound  of  misbelief  inflicted  in  the  mind  of  the  fitithful  little
ones,  always  Ml  back  to  crying  out  and  groaning.  And
hence  it  is  rightly  said.

And  the  soul  qf  the  wounded  erieth^  and  Ood  stfffereth  him
not  to  go  unavenged.

69.  For  the  soul  of  the  righteous  is  '  wounded,'  when  the  Ivi.
faith  of  the  weak  is  unsettled,  unto  whom  this  identical  thing
^  to  cry'  is  to  be  now  consumed  for  the  downftJl  of  another.
But  Ood  does  not  suffer  him  to  go  unavenged,  in  that  though
by  just  appointment  he  suffers  an  unjust  thing  to  be  done,
yet  He  does  not  let  that  unjust  thing  go  unavenged
which  He  has  justly  permitted  to  be  done,  seeing  that  at
once  by  the  injustice  of  the  sons  of  perdition  He  smites
certain  sins  of  the  Elect,  which  He  sees  to  be  in  them,  and
yet  by  Eternal  Justice  does  not  neglect  to  smite  the  injustice
of  those  smiters. It  goes  on,

Ver.  13.  They  are  rebellious  against  the  light.

i68 Men  refiue  the  light  ^  and  then  tose  sight  of  it.

70.  Very  often  wicked  people  at  once  know  the  rigbi
thingt  that  they  ough(  to  follow^  and  yet  neglect  to  follow
what  they  know ;  and  to  they  are  ^  rebellious  against
the  light/  in  that  following  their  desires,  they  contemn
the  good  that  they  know.  They  then  that  do  wrong  not
from  ignorance,  but  pride,  present  the  shield  of  their
exaltation  against  the  darts  of  truth,  that  they  may  not
be  stricken  in  heart  to  their  good.  By  which  same
pride  of  theirs  it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  whereas  they  will
not  do  the  things  that  they  know,  neither  do  they  now  know
the  good  they  should  do,  but  that  their  own  blindness
should  utterly  exclude  them  from  the  light  of  truth.  And
hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined,

They  know  not  the  ways  thereqf,  nor  have  returned  by  the
paths  thereqf.

Iviii.  71.  For  they  that  are  first  rebels  knowing  it,  are  after-
wards blinded  so  as  not  to  know ;  as  it  is  said  of  certain,

Bom.  1,  BecavM  that  when  they  knew  Ood  they  glorified  Him  not  as
Qodf  neither  were  thanlfftU. Of  whom  it  is  added  a  little

▼•88.  ^iu]e  afterwards,  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind^
to  do  those  things  which  are  not  convenient.  For  because
they  would  not  glorify  Him  Whom  they  knew,  being  given
over  to  a  reprobate  sense,  they  were  left  to  this  fate,  that
they  should  not  any  longer  know  how  to  estimate  the  evil
things  they  did.  And  it  is  well  said,  They  hiow  not  the
ways  thereof^  neither  have  returned  by  the  paths  thereof.
For  a  ^  path*  is  narrower  than  a  ^  way.'  Now  those  that
care  not  to  do  the  plainer  good  works,  never  attain  to  the
understanding  of  the  more  refined.  But  Almighty  Ood
waited  that  they  might  go  ^  by  the  paths  thereof.*  And
would  that  they  had  been  minded  even  to  have  *  returned'  by
them,  that  the  paths  of  life  which  they  would  not  keep  by
innocency  they  might  at  least  keep  by  repentance.  Wherein
of  what  great  mercifulness  are  the  bowels  of  Ood  is  shewn,
in  that  those  whom  He  sees  departing  from  Him,  He  seeks
that  they  may  return.  Hence  after  the  sins  of  those  doing
wrong  having  been  enumerated.  He  calls  back  the  Syna-

Jer.8,4.gogue  by  the  voice  of  Prophecy,  saying,  Therefore  at  least
from  this  tirne  cry  unto  Me^  My  Father ^  Thou  art  the  guide
qf  my  youth. It  proceeds  ^

The  wicked  murder4m$  in  kii  da^  <(f  power. M9

Ver.  14.  The  mwrderer  rising  with  the  light  killeth  the  Book
poor  and  neecfy,  and  in  the  night  i$  a$  a  thiif.  Ig^

72.  Whereas  the  murderer  in  the  killing  of  his  neighbours u^.  *
is  wont  to  come  upon  them  chiefly  in  the  silence  of  the
night,  why  is  it  that  he  is  said  in  this  place  to  '  rise  with  the
lights  in  order  to  *  kill  the  poor  and  needy/  whilst  '  in  the
night'  he  is  described  '  to  be  as  a  thief?' Now  forasmuch  as
the  letter  in  the  bare  words  alone  is  not  consistent  with
itself,  we  are  called  back  for  the  inyestigating  the  hidden
meanings  of  the  Spirit In  Holy  Scripture  the  '  morning'
is  sometimes  used  to  be  put  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord's
Incarnation,  sometimes  for  the  coming  of  the  henceforth
dreadful  and  searching  Judge,  sometimes  for  the  prosperity
of  the  present  life. Thus  the  coming  of  the  Lord's  Incar-
nation proved  a '  morning,'  as  the  Prophet  saith.  The  morning  u.  si,
cometh,  and  also  the  night;  in  that  both  the  beginnings'^
of  the new  light  shone  forth in  the  appearing  of  our
Redeemer,  and  yet  the  shades  of  their  misbelief  were  not
cleared  off*  from  the  hearts  of  the  persecutors. Again,  by
the  *  morning'  the  coming  of  the  Judge  is  denoted. Whence
it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Early  I  will  destroy  all  the  V§.ioi,
wicked  of  the  land. As  also  when  personating  the  Elect,  ^*
he  says,  In  the  morning  will  I  stand  in  Thy  presence^  and  Ft.  5,8.
will  look  up. Again,  by  the  '  morning'  this  life's  prosperity
is  represented;  as  where  it  is  sud  by  Solomon*  Woe  to  lAetf,Eoe.io,
O  landf  when  thy  Sing  is  a  child,  and  thy  princes  eat  in  the '
morning. For  whereas  the  morning  is  the  first  part  of  the
day  and  the  evening  the  last,  we  ought  not  ever  to  be
regaled  by  this  life's  prosperity  which  goes  first,  but  by
those  things  which  at  the  end  of  the  day,  that  is  at  the
termination  of  the  world,  follow  after. Thus  those  '  eat  in
the  morning,'  who  by  this  world's  successes  are  lifted  up,
and  whHst  they  passionately  interest  themselves  with  present
things,  pay  no  heed  to  the  things  of  the  future. For  whosoever  l  John
hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer. So  the  '  murderer  rises '>  ^^'
up  with  the  earliest  dawn,'  in  that  every  wicked  man  is  set
up  in  the  glory  of  the  present  life,  and  bears  down  the  life
of  those,  who  whilst  they  thirst  after  the  glory  to  follow,  as  it
were  anxiously  look  out  to  be  filled  in  the  evening. For
the  bad  man  in  this  world  whilst  seizing  on  the  dignity  of

270  Het'eiicB  aduUeromly  seekfame^  not  children/or  Ood.

Job  94,  traDsitoiy  power  spreads  himself  out  the  more  cruelly  for  tlie

Uygy'  enacting  of  what  is  eyil,  in  proportion  as  there  is  no  man  he

lores  in  the  bowels  of  charity*  l^^r  as  often  as  in  the  thoughts

of  his  heart  he  is  maddened  against  the  good,  so  often  does

he  kill  the  life  of  the  innocent.

7S.  And  if,  God  ordaining  it,  he  suddenly  lose  the  glory
of  the  power  he  has  gotten,  he  changes  his  place  but  not  his
disposition,  for  he  directly  falls  away  to  that,  which  is
subjoined.  And  in  the  night  is  as  a  thief.  For  in  the  night  of
his  tribulation  and  sunkenness,  though  he  has  no  power  to
put  forth  the  hand  of  cruelty,  yet  to  those  whom  he  sees  to
be  empowered,  he  recommends  counsels  of  wickedness,  and
goes  about  hither  and  thither,  and  prompts  whatever  things
he  is  able  toward  the  injuring  of  the  good.  And  he  is
rightly  called  ^  as  a  thief,*  because  in  all  those  very  evil
counsels  of  his  he  dreads  lest  he  should  be  caught  out.
He  then  that  towards  the  poor  and  needy  is  a  murderer
in  the  morning,  in  the  night  like  a  thief  is  hidden  out  of  sight,
in  that  every  bad  man,  who  in  this  life's  prosperity  by
bearing  down  kills  the  life  of  the  humble,  being  in  adversity
and  abasement,  by  evil  counsels  does  mischief  in  a  concealed
way,  and  what  he  is  unable  to  accomplish  by  himself,  that
he  puts  in  practice  by  attaching  himself  to  the  powerful  ones
of  this  world. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  15.  TTie  eye  aho  of  the  adulterer  wailelh  for  the
twilight^  saying^  No  eye  shaU  see  me.
Ix.  74.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  but  that  this  may  be  under-
stood even  after  the  latter,  seeing  that  he  who  desires  to
commit  adultery,  seeks  out  the  dark.  But  whereas  it  is  a
sentence  uttered  against  Heretics,  it  is  meet  that  this  thing
which  is  declared  be  understood  in  a  mystical  sense.  Thus
9Cor.3,pj^^|  gj^yg^  p^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^  many  that  adulterate^  the  word

>  Vdg.  of  God.  For  the  adulterer  seeks  not  offspring,  but  pleasure
ran/M.''^  the  act  of  carnal  copulation.  And  every  bad  roan,  and
that  is  also  a  slave  to  vain-glory,  is  rightly  said  to '  adulterate*
the  word  of  Ood,  because  by  the  sacred  word  of  Revelation
he  desires  not  to  beget  children  to  God,  but  to  exhibit  his
own  knowledge.  For  he  that  is  drawn  to  speak  by  lust  of
glory,  bestows  his  pains  rather  on  gratification  than  the  pro-
duction of  children. And  it  is  rightly  added  there.  No  eye

Him  fkai  so  dinguUeth  himself^  God  wiU  not  know.  S71

Mhalt  $ee  me;  because  the  adnltery  which  is  committed  in  Boos
the  interior  b  very  hard  indeed  that  it  should  be  penetrated  "^
bj  the  eye  of  man. Which  same  the  firoward  soul  commits
with  the  more  assurance,  in  proportion  as  it  does  not  fear
being  seen  by  men,  whom  it  may  blush  at Moreover  it  is
to  be  known  that  as  he  that  commits  adultery  joins  to  him-
self unlawfully  the  flesh  of  another  man^s  wife,  so  all  here-
tics, while  they  carry  off  the  faithful  soul  into  their  own
error,  are  as  it  were  bearing  off  another's  wife,  in  this  way;
because  the  soul  which  is  spiritually  wedded  to  God  and
joined  to  Him  as  if  in  a  kind  of  bridechamber  of  love,  when
by  wicked  persuanons  it  is  led  on  into  corruptness  of  doc-
trine, is  as  it  were  like  the  wife  of  another  defiled  by  the
corrupter. And  it  is  well  added ;
And  dUguueth  hiifaee.

75.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  adulterer  *  disguises  his Izi.
face,'  that  he  may  not  be  known. Now  every  man  who
either  in  thinking  or  in  acting  lives  badly,  '  disguises  his
fiice,'  because  by  corruptness  in  doctrine  or  in  practice  he  is
tending  to  this,  that  he  should  not  be  able  to  be  recognised

in  the  Judgment  by  Almighty  God.  Hence  He  shall  say  to
certain  persons  at  the  end,  /  never  knew  you;  depart  from  Matt.  7»
Me^  ye  thai  work  iniquity.  And  what  is  the  *  face'  of  the
human  heart,  save  the  likeness  of  God  ?  which  same  face  the
bad  man  '  disguiseth,'  that  he  may  not  be  able  to  be  known,
when  his  life  he  discomposes  either  by  bad  deeds,  or  by  the  error
of  misbelief.  But  every  such  person  when  he  seds  the
righteous  upheld  by  this  world's  good  fortune,  never  ventures
to  prompt  what  is  wrong  to  them,  but  if  any  storm  of  adver-
sity falls  upon  those  persons,  he  directly  breaks  out  into
words  of  pestilent  persuasion* And  hence  it  is  added ;

Ver.  10.  In  the  dark  they  dig  through  houeei^  which  they
had  marked  for  themielve$  in  the  day  time;  they  know  not
the  light.

76.  For  what  is  there  here  denoted  by  the  title  of  *  houses'  Ixii.
but  consciences,  wherein  we  dwell,  when  we  do  any  thing,
busying  ourselves  with  it? Whence  it  is  said  to  one  on
being  healed.  Return  to  thine  dwn  house^  and  $hew  how  hnUSf
great  things God  hath  done  unto  thee;  i.  e«  henceforth,^'
secure  from  the  evil  habit  of  sin,  turn  back  to  thy  conscience,

273  The  wickedchecked  and  alarmed  by  good  men^a  prof  pertly.

Job  S4,  and  be  ihou  roused  into  the  yoice  of  preaching.'  And  so
^^'  when  in  the  present  world  the  righteous  are  brightened  by
'  the  day  of  prosperity,  to  those  persons  the  leaders  of  false
tenets  are  afraid  to  recommend  what  is  wrong.  But  they
search  out  counsels,  with  all  care  they  await  the  abasement  of
their  prosperity,  that  in  the  darkness  of  adversity  they  may
by  their  persuading  dig  through  the  minds  of  those,  to  whom
whilst  living  prosperously  they  never  presumed  to  speak
wrong  things,  whom  as  soon  as  they  see  under  adversity
they  rise  up  and  maintain,  that  no  otherwise  saving  in  desert
of  dieir  sins  those  suffer  such  things;  because  loving  the  glory
of  the  present  life  alone,  the  stroke  they  take  for  condemna-
tion. So  *  in  the  dark  they  dig  through  houses,*  in  that  the
minds  of  the  good  by  their  mere  misfortune  alone  to  corrupt
is  their  endeavour.  Now  it  is  well  said,  tchich  they  had
marked  in  the  day  time^  in  that  when  they  saw  the  righteous
to  have  been ,  made  to  shine  with  the  light  of  prosperity,
because  they  were  prevented  speaking,  they  were  only  at
liberty  for  concocting  malevolent  designs  against  them.  But
whether  it  be  heretics  or  any  bad  persons,  they  rejoice  when
they  see  the  righteous  in  a  depressed  condition,  whereas
when  they  see  those  break  forth  to  the  height  of  power  for
ruling,  they  are  confounded,  they  are  filled  wiih  fears,  they
are  consumed  with  misery^ And  hence  it  is  added,

Yer.  17.  I/*  the  morning  suddenly  appear ^  it  i$  to  them
even  as  the  shadow  qf  death.
Ixiii.  77.  For  the  wicked  look  for  the  afflicting  of  the  righteous,
and  long  to  see  them  in  distress,  and  '  in  the  dark  they  dig
through  houses,'  when  tlie  heart  of  the  innocent  but  weak
ones  they  corrupt  in  the  season  of  their  casting  down  by  the
worst  mode  of  discourse.  But  it  commonly  happens  that
when  they  see  the  good  in  a  sunken  state,  on  a  sudden,  by
the  secret  appointment  of  God,  any  righteous  one  that  seemed
to  be  borne  down  is  upheld  by  some  share  of  the  world's
power,  and  the  prosperi^  of  the  present  life  smiles  on  him,
whom  the  darkness  of  adversity  before  overlaid.  Which  same
prosperity  of  that  man  when  the  wicked  behold,  as  it  has
been  said,  they  are  troubled.  For  directly  they  turn  back
to  their  own  hearts,  they  bring  back  before  their  minds*  eye
whatever  they  remember  themselves  to  have  done  amiss,  they

The  wicked  hoe  this  dark  sMe  as  if  ii  were  lighU 273

fear  for  every  particular  sinful  habit  to  be  arenged  in  thcnii  ^k

and  by  the  aame  means  by  which  he  that  receives  power  is '-

made  to  shine,  the  bad  man  who  dreads  to  be  corrected  is
darkened  in  sorrow.  And  so  it  is  well  said»  If  the  morning
suddenly  appear,  iheg  think  ii  is  the  shadow  of  death.  For  *  the
morning'  is  the  mind  of  the  righteous  man,  which  quitting  the
darkness  of  its  sin,  now  breaks  out  into  the  light  of  eternity,  as
ii  is  said  of  Holy  Church  likewise ;  fVho  is  she  thai  looketh  ^%  ^
forth  as  the  morning  t  Therefore  in  the  same  measure  that  lo.'  '
erery  righteous  person  shining  with  the  light  of  righteous-
ness is  in  the  present  life  reared  to  a  heiglit  with  honours,  in
the  same  measure  before  the  eyes  of  the  wicked  comes
the  *  darkness  of  death,*  in  that  they  who  remember  that
they  hare  done  bad  things  are  in  fear  of  being  corrected.
For  they  desire  always  to  have  a  loose  given  them  in  their
iniquities,  to  live  free  from  correction,  and  from  sin  to  have
delight;  whose  fatal  mirth  is  itself  appropriately  described  in
the  words  that  are  direcdy  introduced.

And  they  walk  so  in  darkness,  as  in  the  light.

78.  For  with  a  froward  mind  they  delight  in  deeds  of  Ixiv.
wickedness,  through  their  sin  they  are  day  by  day  being
dragged  to  punishment,  and  are  full  of  assurance. Hence  it

is  said  by  Solomon,  And  there  are  wicked  men  that  are  as  EceLS,
secure  as  if  they  had  the  deeds  of  the  righteous.  Concerning  ^^'
whom  it  is  written  again,  Wlio  rejoice  to  do  evil,  and  deUght
in  the  most  wicked  doings.  Thus  *  they  walk  in  dark-
ness as  in  the  light,*  in  that  they  so  delight  in  the  night
of  sin  as  if  the  light  of  righteousness  spread  around  them.
Or  otherwise,  whereas  darkness  not  inappropriately  represents
the  present  life,  wherein  the  consciences  of  other  men  are
not  seen,  whilst  our  light  is  the  eternal  land,  in  which  when
we  look  at  faces,  our  hearts  within  us  we  mutually  see ;  and
because  the  wicked  so  love  the  present  life,  and  embrace
these  times  of  exile,  as  if  they  already  reigned  in  their  native
country,  it  is  rightly  said.  They  walk  in  darkness  as  in  the
light,  in  that  they  are  as  full  of  gladness  in  the  present  state
of  blindness,  as  if  they  already  enjoyed  the  Jight  of  the
eternal  country. It  goes  on ;

He  is  light  above  the  face  of  the  water.

79.  From  the  plural  number  he  returns  to  the  singular,  Ixv.

VOL.  II.  T

274  Mind  of  Iheicicked  borne  away  by  the  trind  oftetnptaiian.

JoBSMjbecanse  most  frequently  one  person  begins  what  is  bad,  and

-J—  numbers  by  imitating  him  follow  after,  but  the  fault  is  pri-
marily bis,  who  to  the  bad  men  following  after  furnislied
examples  of  wickedness;  and  hence  the  sentence  frequently
returns  to  him  who  was  the  leader  in  sin.  Now  ihe  surface
of  water  is  carried  hilher  and  thither  by  the  breath  of  the
air,  and  not  being  steadied  with  any  fixedness  is  put  in
motion  every  where.  And  so  tlie  mind  of  the  wicked  man  is
*  lighter  than  the  surface  of  water/  in  that  every  breath  of
temptation  that  touches  it,  draws  it  on  without  any  retarding
of  resistance.  For  if  we  imagine  the  unstable  heart  of
any  bad  man,  what  do  we  discover  but  a  surface  of  water  set
in  the  wind  ?  For  that  man  one  while  the  breath  of  anger  drives
on,  now  the  breath  of  pride,  now  the  breath  of  lust,  now  the
breath  of  envy,  now  the  breath  of  falsehood  forces  along.  And
so  he  is  ^  light  above  the  surface  of  the  water,*  whom  every
wind  of  error  when  it  comes  drives  before  it. Whence  too  it

J^*  ^^1  is  well  said  by  the  Psalmist,  O  my  God,  make  them  like  a
tvheelf  aa  the  siubble  before  ihe  wind.  For  the  wicked  ai*e
^made  like  a  wheel,'  in  that  being  sent  into  the  round  of  labour,
whilst  the  things  that  are  before  they  neglect,  and  those
which  ought  to  be  given  up  they  follow,  in  the  hind  parts
they  are  lifted  up,  and  in  the  fore  parts  they  fall.  And  they
are  likewise  rightly  compared  to  ^  stubble  before  the  face  of
the  wind,'  in  that,  when  the  breath  of  temptation  comes  upon
them,  having  no  principle  of  gravity  to  rest  upon,  they  are
only  lifted  up  to  be  dashed  to  the  ground,  and  they  often
account  themselves  of  some  merit  in  proportion  as  the  blast
of  error  bears  them  on  high. It  goes  on;

IM  their  portion  be  cursed  in  the  earth; and  let  him
not  walk  by  the  way  of  the  vineyards.

Ixvi.  go.  Whoever  in  tho  present  life  does  what  is  right
and  meets  with  misfortunes,  is  seen  indeed  to  travail  in  adver-
sity, but  for  the  blessing  of  the  everlasting  inheritance  he  is
finished  complete;  but  whoever  does  what  is  bad  and  yet
meets  with  good  fortune,  and  does  not  even  by  the  bountiful-
ness  of  blessings  withhold  himself  from  wicked  deeds,  is  seen
indeed  to  prosper,  but  is  tied  fast  by  the  bond  of  everlasting
cursing.  Hence  it  is  rightly  said  now.  Let  their  portion  be
cursed  in  the  earthy  in  that  though  he  is  blessed  for  a  time,

Not  guided  by  the  Churchy  they  go  from  error  to  error.  275

jet  he  18  held  fast  in  the  bond  of  cursing. Concerning  Book

whom  too  it  is  fitly  added,  He  walketh  not  by  the  way  of ^

the  vineyardn.  For  '  the  way  of  the  Tineyards,*  is  the  right*
ness  of  the  Churches.  Wherein  nothing  hinders  but  that  we
understand  either  the  heretic  or  oTery  carnal  maUf  because
'  the  way  of  the  vineyards,'  i.  e.  the  Tightness  of  the  Churches,
is  parted  with,  when  either  the  right  faith  or  the  right  rule  of
just  liritig  is  tiot  held.  For  he  '  walks  by  the  way  of  tlio
rineyards,'  who  taking  to  heart  the  pteachbg  of  the  Holy
Catholic  Church»  demtes  neither  from  the  right  line  of  faith
nor  of  good  deeds.  Since  to  *  walk  in  the  way  of  the  vine-
yards' is  to  behold  the  Fathers  of  Holy  Church  as  hanging
clusters  of  the  vine,  whose  words  whilst  he  heeds  in  the  toils
of  the  journey,  he  is  intoxicated  with  the  love  of  Eternity.
It  goes  on ;

Ver.  19.  Let  him  pose  to  excenive  heat  from  the  enow
waters.

81.  Iniquity  is  on  this  account  likened  to  cold,  because  Ixvii.
the  mind  that  sins  it  binds  up  with  insensibility. Hence  it
is  written ;  A$  a  fountain  has  made  her  waters  cold^  so  she  J«r.  0,
has  made  her wickedness cold. Contrariwise  charity is

*  heat,'  in  this  respect  that  it  fires  the  soul  it  fills. Of  which

*  heat'  it  is  written.  Because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  Mftt94,
qf  many  shall  wa.v  cold. And  there  are  some  who  while '
they  shun  the  cold  of  their  wickednesses  come  to  tnie  faith  or

to  die  wearing  of  sanctity,  but  because  they  presume  on  their
own  faculties  for  perceiving  more  than  should  be,  oftentimes
in  the  faith  which  they  receive  they  are  minded  to  pry
curiously  into  the  things  that  they  do  not  take  in,  so  as  to  be
held  fast  in  God  rather  by  reason  than  by  faith.  But  because
the  mind  of  man  has  not  power  to  dive  into  the  mysteries  of
Ood,  all  that  they  ^annot  get  to  the  bottom  of  by  reason,
they  care  not  to  believe,  and  by  overmuch  investigation  they
fall  into  error.  So  these,  when  they  did  not  as  yet  believe,
or  were  still  busied  for  works  of  wickedness,  were  '  snow
waters;'  but  when  abandoning  carnal  deeds,  in  the  faith  to
which  they  have  been  brought  they  aim  to  dive  deeper  than
they  have  capacity  for,  they  are  hot  beyond  what  they  ought  to
be.  And  so  touching  this  wicked  kind  of  person  the  sen-
tence of  one  prophesying  only  and  not  wishing  the  thing  is

t2

270  Sin  unrepenled  here  u  canied  on  to  Hell.

Job  S4,  righlly  delivered.  Let  him  pass  to  ovennuch  heatji'om  the
,  snow  waters.  As  if  it  were  said  in  plain  speech ;  *  he  thai
is  not  restrained  in  humility  under  the  fetters  of  self-disci-
pline, from  his  unbelief,  or  from  the  coldness  of  bad  practice,
through  immoderate  wisdom  falls  into  error.  Whence  too
the  great  Preacher  getting  quit  of  this  excessive  heat  of  too
refined  wisdom  from  the  hearts  of  his  disciples  saith  well,

Bom.  2Vi><  to  be  wise  of  himself  above  that  he  ought  to  be  wise;
but  to  be  wise  unto  sobriety.  Lest  perchance  excessive  heal
might  destroy  those,  of  whom  ^snow  waters,'  i.e.  unbelief,  or
the  fruits  of  deadened  actions,  held  possession  in  the  way  to
die.  And  because  it  is  very  difficult  for  him  who  accounts
himself  wise  to  bring  down  his  mind  to  humility  and  believo
those  that  preach  right  things,  and  reject  the  view  of  his
own  wrong  thought,  it  is  rightly  said ;
Vcr.  19.  And  his  sin  even  to  hell.

Ixviii.  82.  For  sin  is  ^  brought  even  to  hell,'  which  before  the
end  of  the  present  life  is  not  by  chastening  reformed  unto

1  John  repentance. Of  which  same  sin  it  is  said  by  John,  Thei-e

^*  *®'  is  a  sin  unto  deaths  I  do  not  say  thai  he  shall  pray  for  it.
For  *  a  sin  unto  death'  is  a  sin  even  until  death  in  this  way,
that  the  pardon  of  that  sin  is  sought  in  vain  which  is  not
corrected  here.  Concerning  which  same  it  is  yet  further
subjoined ;

Ver.  20.  Let  mercy  forget  him.

Almighty  God's  mercy  is  said  to  ^  forget  him,'  who  has
forgotten  Almighty  God's  justice,  in  that  whoever  does  not
fear  Him  now  as  just,  can  never  find  him  merciful  afterward.
Which  same  sentence  is  not  only  held  out  against  him,  who
abandons  the  preachings  of  tme  faith,  but  against  him  like-
wise, who  being  in  tlie  right  faith  lives  a  carnal  life,  in  that
the  vengeance  of  eternal  condemnation .  is  not  got  quit  of,
whether  sin  lie  in  faith  or  practice.  For  though  the  kind  of
condemnation  be  unequal,  yet  guilt  which  is  not  wiped  away
by  repentance,  there  is  no  means  supplied  for  the  absolving
thereof It  goes  on;

The  worm  is  his  sweetness.
Ixix. 83.  Whoever  desires  to  make  his  way  prosperous  in  this
world,  to  surpass  the  rest  of  the  world,  to  swell  high  with
substance  and  (lonours,  to  this  man  no  doubt  worldly  busi-

The  delight  of  the  wicked  m  the  warmj  restlesM  and/ovL  277

ness  is  a  delightt  and  repose  a  labour. For  he  is  very  mach  Boob
tired  if  the  business  of  ihe  world  be  lacking  wherewith  to  be '-


tired.  Now  because  it  belongs  to  the  nature  of  worms  to  be
put  in  motion  unceasingly  every  moment,  restlessness  of
thoughts  is  not  unjustly  denoted  by  the  name  of  *  worms.'
And  so  *  the  worm  is  the  sweetness*  of  the  wicked  soul»
in  that  he  is  fed  to  his  satisfaction  from  the  same  source
whence  he  is  unceasingly  agitated  in  restlessness.  More-
over it  may  be  that  by  the  title  of  the  ^  worm'  the  flesh
may  be  more  plainly  denoted.  Hence  it  is  said  further
on»  How  much  Icbm  man  that  is  a  worm?  or  the  son  o/* man 0.17,14.
which  is  a  worm?  And  so  of  every  one  that  is  full  ofj^*^'
Inst  and  devoted  to  the  pleasures  of  the  flesh,  how  great
is  the  blindness  is  shewn,  when  it  is  said,  7%e  worm  is  his
sweetness.  For  what  is  our  flesh  but  *  rottenness'  and  *  the
worm  ?'  And  whosoever  pants  with  carnal  desires,  what  else
does  he  but  love  '  the  worm  ?'  For  what  the  substance  of  the
flesh  is,  our  graves  bear  witness.  What  parent,  what  faith-
ful friend  can  bear  to  touch  the  flesh  of  one  however  beloved
fraught  with  worms?  And  so  when  the  flesh  is  lusted  after,
let  it  be  considered  what  it  is  when  lifeless,  and  it  is  under-
stood what  it  is  that  is  loved.  For  nothing  has  so  much
efficacy  to  subdue  the  appetite  of  carnal  desire,  as  for
every  one  to  consider,  what  that  which  he  loves  alive  will  be
when  dead.  For  when  we  consider  the  corruption  of  the
flesh,  we  see  in  a  moment,  that  when  the  flesh  is  unlawfully
lusted  after,  corruption  is  desired.  Therefore  it  is  well  said
of  the  mind  of  the  lustful  man,  the  worm  is  his  sweetness^  in
that  he  who  is  on  fire  with  the  desire  of  carnal  corruption,
pants  after  the  stink  of  rottenness.

All  this,  as  I  remember  that  I  promised  in  the  beginning  B.  zi.
of  this  third  part,  I  have  run  over  in  brief,  that  the  tilings
which  foUow  after  in  this  work ',  as  they  are  involved  in  great
obscurity,  may  with  God's  aid  be  more  fully  gone  into.

*  Opere.  Ben.  notM  that  lome  Mm.  rem)  'oorpore.'  which  would  mesQ
*  Volnrat.'

THE  FOURTH  PART.


BOOK XVII.

What  remains  of  the  twenty-fuoxth  chapter  begioDing  from  the  middle  of
verse  20,  together  with  chapters  twentj-five  and  twenty-six  entire,  he
sets  forth  chiefly  in  a  moral  i


i.  As  often  as  in  the  history  of  the  holy  man  we  betake
ALLso.oarselves  in  a  new  book  to  unravel  the  mystery  of  the  typical
explanation,  it  must  be  either  from  that  man's  name  or  course
of  suffering  that  we  mainly  draw  out  the  mystical  inter-
pretation, so  that  after  the  manner  of  dwelling  houses,  whilst
we  set  forth  a  superscription  of  the  title  on  the  very  front  of
the  door  post,  whereas  it  is  known  whose  hou^e  it  is,  one
may  enter  with  greater  security.  Now  I  remember  that  I
have  often  said  that  blessed  Job,  both  by  his  course  of
suffering  and  his  name,  marked  out  the  sufferings  of  our
Redeemer,  and  of  His  Body,  i.  e.  Holy  Church.  For  *  Job'
is  by  interpretation  ^  Grieving.'  And  who  else  is  represented
in  this  grieving  one  saving  He,  concerning  Whom  it  is
Ig.ss,4.  written,  iStfre/y  He  haih  borne  our  griefs^  andcairied  our
ib.  s.  sorrows.  Concerning  Whom  again  it  is  written.  And  mih
His  bruise  we  are  healed?  But  his  friends  bear  the  likeness
of  heretics,  who,  as  we  have  often  said  already,  while  they
set  themselves  to  defend,  only  offend  Ood.  Thus  let  the
holy  man  by  words  and  wounds  so  tell  things  of  his  own  as
at  the  same  time  to  set  forth  ours  also,  and  most  often,  by  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  relate  things  to  come,  surmount  things
present,  yet  sometimes  so  tell  of  those  present  as  to  be  silent
touching  those  future.  The  keeping  then  of  this  exercise  of
discernment  being  understood  in  accordance  witli  tlie  altering
of  his  voice,  let  our  understanding  likewise  turn  about,  that  it
may  agree  the  more  truly  with  his  ideas  iu  proportion  as  it
also  shifts  itself  with  his  accents.  Thus  by  the  preceding
words  the  holy  man,  in  sentences  eloquently  formed  by  the

The  wicked  how/orgoiien  of  God^  and  how  remembered.  279

art  of  wisdom,  set  forth  the  offences  of  the  bad  roan  of  Book
.  XVII

whaterer  kind,  and  represented  how  damnable  his  condnct  j^

was,  of  whose  punishment  he  directly  adds,  saying,  Moiial.

Lei  him  not  be  in  remembrance ;  let  him  be  crushed  like

an  unfruitful  Hump.

2.  For  he  is  not  brought  back  into  the  *  remembrance*  of  ii.
his  Creator,  whosoever  to  the  yery  end  of  his  life  is  in
subjection  to  evil  habits.  Since  if  the  recollection  of  the
regard  from  Above  did  make  itself  felt  on  such  an  one,
assuredly  it  would  recall  him  from  his  wickedness.  For  his
deserts  require  that  he  should  be  utterly  blotted  out  from  his
Maker*s  remembrance.  But  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that
Ood  can  never  strictly  be  said  to  *  remember  ;*  for  One  Who
cannot  forget,  in  what  way  is  it  possible  for  Him  to  re-
member? Hut  whereas  it  is  our  way  that  those  whom  we
remember  wo  embrace,  but  those  whom  wo  forget  we
part  far  from,  after  the  usage  of  man  God  is  both  said

to  *  remember,'  when  He  bestows  gifts,  and  to  forget,  when
He  forsakes  one  in  guilt. But  because He  weighs all
things,  views  all  without  any  alternating  of  intermission.  He
both  remembers  the  good,  whom  still  He  never  forgets,  and
no  wise  remembers  the  bad,  whom  nevertheless  in  judgment
He  does  ever  behold. For  He  as  it  were  returns  to  the
recollection  of  the  good,  which  same  nevertheless  He  never
quitted,  and  as  it  were  He  never  regards  the  bad,  whose
deeds  howsoever  He  has  an  eye  on,  but  reserves  for  the  last
scene  the  judgment  of  condemnation  thereupon. For  hence
it  is  written. The  eyei  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place^  ProTjs,
beholding  the  evil  and  the  good. Hence  it  is  said  by  the  '
Psalmist,  Tlieface  of  the  Lord  is  upon  them  t/iat  do  evily  to  Pt.  84,
cut  off  t/ie  remembrance  qf  them  from  the  earth, llierefore
the  persons  for  Him  to  punish  He  does  regard,  but  those  very
persons  before  He  did  not  see,  in  that  He  *  knows  them  not*
For  He  shall  say  to  some  at  the  end,  I  know  you  not  whence  hxiktiSf
ye  are:  depart  from  me^  ye  that  work  iniquity. Thus,  in  a*^-
wonderful  way.  He  both  beholds  and  forgets  the  life  of  bad
men,  in  that  those  whom  by  severity  of  sentence  He  judges,
as  regards  the  remembrance  of  mercy  He  is  ignorant  of.

3.  And  these  same,  because  they  do  not  come  into  His
remembrance,  like  an  unfruitful  stump  are  broken  to  pieces

'280  Fruitless  tree  broken.  Tlte Flesh barrenilhesoulundowed.

Job  34,  by  His  judgment. For  the  earlh  supported  them  with  a

rr— ^  temporal  outfitting,  the  shower  of  preaching  poured  down

'on  Uiem  from  above. But  because  their  life  never  put  forth

the  fruit  of  good  works,  the  husbandman  in  anger  cut  it  clean

away,  that  according  to  the  sentence  of  Truth  it  might  not

cumber  the  space,  which  another  may  occupy  for  fruit. Of

Matt,  s,  which  same  ^  unfruitful  stump*  it  is  said  by  John,  And  now

Lakes  ^^^  l^  ^^^  <^  ^^^^  ^l  l^^^  ^<^l  ^f  ^''^  trees;  therefore  every

^' tree  which  hringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  shall  be  hewn  down,

and  cast  into  the  fire. But  in  this  place,  in  order  that  the

eternal  punishments  of  the  lost  sinner  may  be  denoted,  the

tree  is  not  said  to  be  cut  away,  but  to  be  broken  to  pieces,  in

that  the  death  indeed  of  the  flesh  cuts  off  the  reprobate,  but

the  punishment  ensuing  breaks  them  in  pieces. For  here

it  is  as  it  were  cut  down,  when he  is severed  from the

present  life. But  in  hell  it  is  broken  in  pieces,  when  he  is

tortured  with  everlasting  damnation. But  the  holy  man,  as

he  set  forth  the  strict  punishment  of  the  froward  one,  at  once

falls  back  to  the  sin,  that  by  the  immensity  of  the  unjustncss

he  may  effectually  teach  that  tliat  excessive  damnation  of  him

was  not  unjust. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  21.  For  he  fed  the  barren  and  her  that  beareth  not,
and  to  the  widow  he  did  not  do  good,
iii*  4.  Who  is  it  in  this  place  that  is  denominated  ^  barren*
saving  the  flesh,  which  while  it  goes  after  things  present
alone  is  not  able  to  engender  good  thoughts  ?  and  who  is
styled  ^  a  widow'  but  thu  soul,  which  same  bccuuse  the
Maker  was  minded  to  unite  to  Himself,  He  came  to  the
maiTiage  chamber  of  the  carnal  womb,  as  the  Psalmist
Pi  19,5.  tesiifles,  who  saith.  Which  is  as  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of
his  chamber?  And  she  is  rightly  called  *  a  widow,*  in  that
her  Husband  underwent  death  in  her  behalf,  and  now  in  the
retreats  of  heaven  hidden  from  her  eyes  as  in  the  tract  of
another  region  He  lives.  Thus  the  wicked  man  ^  feeds  the
barren*  and  scorns  to  ^  do  good  to  the  widow,'  because  in
obeying  the  desires  of  the  flesh,  he  makes  little  of  the  care  of
the  soul  and  its  life.  For  with  the  whole  bent  and  with
every  effort  he  considers  how  without  necessities  of  any
kind  the  flesh  which  is  to  die  may  be  made  to  hold  on,  and
he  is  indifferent  to  concern  himself  for  the  life  of  the  soul.

77^0  Church  a  Widaw^  Heretical  seels  barren. *  281

which  either  in  death  or  in bliss  most  surely  lives  for  Book

e%'erniore« Now  it  is  rightly done  that  when  it  is  said, -

He  fed  the  barren^  it  is  directly  added,  and  her  that
beareth  not.  For  certain  women  we  know  from  sacred
history  were  found  *  barren,'  but  yet  in  the  end  of  their  days
brought  forth*  But  the  flesh  is  not  only  called  barren^  but
also  she  that  beareth  not^  in  that  of  her  own  wit  not  even  at
the  last  is  she  capable  of  begetting  good  thoughts.  For  from
her  own  vigour  she  is  now  already  going  off*,  fllnd  yet  things
transitory  she  still  ceases  not  to  long  for,  and  being  now  spent  of
original  force,  is  well  nigh  thrown  off  by  that  rery  world
which  she  lores,  yet  by  mischievous  endeavour  still  strives
to  acquire  what  is  temporal.  She  now  no  longer  has  (he
ability  to  do  wicked  things,  yet  does  not  a  whit  cease  to
mind  in  thought  even  the  things  which  she  does  not  in  act
Rightly  therefore  is  she  called  not  only  *  banen,'  but  also
*  one  that  beareth  not,'  in  that  of  her  own  wit,  as  we  said,
for  the  offspring  of  good  thought,  not  even  when  she  has
become  powerless  does  she  conceive.

5.  Which  same  may  likewise  be  understood  of  heretical
persons  preaching.  For  every  single  preacher  of  error,
while  he  teaches  a  people  set  without  the  pale  of  the  Church's
unity,  is  surely  *  feeding  the  barren,  and  her  that  cannot
bear,'  seeing  that  he  is  bestowing  the  serviceableness  of  his
labour  upon  her,  who  never  makes  any  return  of  spiritual
fruits.  *  Neither  does  he  do  good  to  the  widow,'  forasmuch
as  for  that  Holy  Church  Universal,  whose  Husband  suffered  the
adverse  treatment  of  death,  he  scorns  to  live  to  and  to  serve.
For  to  *  do  good  to  the  widow'  is  to  take  much  pains  in  the
consoling  of  her,  who  by  the  love  of  her  dead  Husband  is
crushed  to  the  ground.  And  hence  by  the  voice  of  the
Psalmist  this  same  widow,  i.e.  Holy  Church,  makes  complaint,
saying,  /  looked  for  comforters^  but  I  found  none.  Since  P».  60,
then  only  does  she  *  find  a  comforter,'  when  from  that  death
which  her  husband  Underwent,  she  beholds  many  within
herself  arise  to  life.  Now  very  often  the  preacher  of  error  h
allied  with  the  rich  of  this  world,  who  for  this  reason,  that
they  strain  over  earthly  employments,  are  too  blind  to  detect
the  crafty  tricks  of  the  things  delivered,  and  whereas  they
go  about  to  be  powerful  without,  they  are  taken  without

282  The  mighiif  lakeii  in.  Bad  men  believe  not  iheir  own  life.

Job  94,  labour  by  the  noose  of  froward  preaching. Hence  too  it  is
^' added;


Ver.  22.  He  took  away  the  mighty  in  his  might,
iv.  6.  Since  in  the  might  of  his  wickedness  the  mighty  be
severally  takes  away,  whilst  by  the  craftiness  of  his  error  he
carries  off  the  great  ones  of  this  world.  In  opposition  to
1  Cor.i,  whom  it  is  said  by  Paul,  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of
the  world  to  confound  the  things  that  are  mighty.  Now  the
'  might*  of  the  corrupt  preacher  is  the  high-flown  science  of
his  speaking,  puffed  up  with  which  be  despises  all  tlie  rest
of  the  world,  and  in  contempt  of  all  men,  as  being  pre-
eminently proficient  in  himself,  he  swells  big.  Who  whilst
thinking  what  is  great  of  himself,  and  not  knowing  what  is
true  of  Qod,  is  parted  far  from  knowledge  of  the  faith,  and
yet  .endeavours  to  make  himself  appear  a  preacher  tliereof.
Whence  it  is  further  added;

And  when  he  standeth,  he  trill  not  believe  his  life.
V. 7.  Every  evil  preacher  *  standeth'  in  this  world,  so  long
as  he  lives  in  an  earthly  body* But  he  refiises  to  *  believe
his  life,'  because  he  is  too  proud  to  open  his  eyes  to  what  is
true  relating  to  God. For  he  would  ^  believe  his  life,*  if  he
had  right  notions  concerning  tlie  Substance  of  his  Creator.
These  things,  then,  we  were  describing  above  as  spoken  of
every  bad  man,  but  we  suddenly  made  the  meaning  turn
to  the  preacher  of  error. Whence  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  we
are  so  drawn  on  to  the  special  case  as  not  yet  in  any  wise  to
be  quite  taken  off  from  the  general. For  every  bad  man,
even  if  he  seem  to  maintain  the  faith  in  the  bosom  of  the
Church  Universal,  *  standelh  and  believeth not  his  life,*
because  they  are  right  things  indeed which by  faitli  he
understands  of  his  Creator,  yet  the  works  of  faith  he  cares
not  to  maintain;  and  he  is  convicted  of  unbelief,  in  that,  even
from  that  which  he  sets  forth  as  his  creed,  by  his  way  of
1  John  living  he  is  condemned. For  hence  it  is  said  by  John,  He
*  ' that  saith  he  knoweth  God^  and  keepeth  not  His  command-
Tit.  1,  mentSf  is  a  liar. Hence  Paul  saith,  They  pro/ess  that  they
know  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  Him. Hence  James
Jtn.2,  saith,  Faith  without  works  is  dead. But  amidst  all  this  the
Creator  by  a  wonderful  economy  of  counsel  at  once  lias  an
eye  to  offences,  and bestows  periods  of  living,  that  the

Lengthened  Ufe  given  for  repentance  or  condemnation.  288

lengthened  portions  of  temporal  life  may  to  the  person  either  Book

being  conrerted  be  turned  into  the  fartheratice  of  rewardf  or ^

not  being  converted  to  the  heightening  of  condemnatioii.
Hence  it  is  yet  farther  subjoined,

Ver.  23.  Ood  hath  given  unto  him  room  for  repentance^
and  he  abweth  it  in  pride.

8.  Whosoever  commits  sin  and  lives,  such  a  person  vi.
Divine  Appointment  for  this  reason  bears  with  in  iniquitji
that  it  may  withhold  him  from  iniquity.  But  he  that  is
borne  with  for  a  longer  time,  and  yet  is  not  withholden  from
iniquity,  is  vouchsafed  indeed  the  benefit  of  the  patience
Above,  yet  with  the  chains  of  his  guilt  is  by  that  very  benefit
binding  himself  the  tighter.  For  because  the  times  of  repent-
ance vouchsafed  he  diverts  to  sin,  the  strict  Judge  in  the
end  converts  the  instances  of  mercy  bestowed  into  punish-
ment Hence  it  is  said  by  Paul ;  Or  knowest  thou  not  tluU  ^"i-  ^>
the  longnuffering  qf  God  leadeih  thee  io  repentance?  But
after  thg  hardness  and  impenitent  heart  treasurest  up  uttto
thf  self  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  and  reveUUion  ofthi
righteous  judgment  of  God.  Hence  Isaiah  saith,  For  the^^^
child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old^  but  the  sinner  being
an  hundred  years  old  shall  be  accursed.  As  though  he
deterred  us  in  plain  words,  saying,  '  The  life  of  a  child
indeed  is  drawn  to  a  great  length,  in  order  that  he  may  be
corrected  of  childish  doings,  but  if  he  be  not  even  by  length
of  time  restrained  from  the  comraissioii  of  sin,  this  very
length  of  life,  which  he  received  in  piti  fulness,  is  made  to
grow  to  him  into  an  aggravation  of  cursing.^  Whence  it  is
necessary  that  the  longer  time  that  we  see  ourselves  to  be
waited  for,  we  fear  the  very  seasonsofpitifulness  before  granted*  >pr»ra-
as  the  grounds  of  condemnation,  lest  by  the  clemency^
of  the  Judge  the  punishment  of  the  sinner  should  be  height-
ened, and  by  the  same  means  whereby  any  one  might  have
been  rescued  from  death,  he  should  tend  to  death  in  a  man-
ner the  more  disastrous.  Which  is  for  this  reason  very  often
brought  to  pass,  because  the  eye  of  the  mind  is  not  in  the
least  degree  weanod  from  things  present  For  the  sinner  is
careless  to  regard  Uie  ways  of  the  Redeemer,  and  so  he
grows  old  in  his  own  paths  without  stopping.  Hence  it  is
added ;

884  Worldly  men  inlenl  on  Iheir  own  wayn^  not  those  of  Ood.

Job  S4y For  his  eyes  are  upon  his  xoays.

— 7— 9.  For  the  sinner  ^  regards  his  own  ways/  because  he  sets

MoiAL.  himself  to  mind  only,  to  have  an  eye  only  for,  things  which
may  stand  him  in  stead  for  temporal  advantage. Thus  it  is

Phil.  3,  hence  Paul  saith.  All  seek  iheir  own^  not  the  things  which
are  Jesus  Christs.  For  the  way  of  the  highminded  is  pride;
the  way  of  the  robber,  avarice;  the  way  of  the  lecherous,
carnal  concupiscence.  Thus  every  bad  man  bends  his  eyes
down  on  his  own  ways,  in  that  he  is  intent  on  vicious  pur-
suits alone,  that  by  these  he  may  satisfy  his  mind.  Whence
it  is  said  by  Solomon,  Tlw  eyes  qf  a  fool  are  in  the  ends  of
the  earth:  because  that  only  they  regard  with  the  whole
bent  of  the  heart,  whereby  they  may  attain  to  the  end  of
earthly  desire.  Now  the  sinner  would  never  fix  the  gaze  of
his  looking  on  earth,  if  he  lifted  up  the  eyes  of  the  mind  to
the  holy  paths  of  his  Redeemer. Whence  it  is  again  said

^S<>ol.s,  by  Solomon,  Tlie  wise  man^s  eyes  are  in  his  head;  in  this
way,  viz.  that  with  undivided  intentness  the  wise  man  regards
Him,  of  Whom  he  reflects  by  faith  that  he  is  a  member.
For  these  ways  of  man*s  walk  and  conversation, he  had

Pi.  119,  deemed  it  little  worth  to  have  in  his  eye,  who  said,  f  will

^^*  meditate  in  Thy  statutes,  and  have  respect  unto  Thy  trays.
As  if  he  gave  his  word  in  plain  terms,  saying,  *  The  things
which  are  mine  own  I  henceforth  eschew  the  seeing  of,  in
that  by  the  path  of  the  imitating  of  Thee  I  burn  to  go  on  in
the  steps  of  behaviour.'  For  he  who  hencerorlli  withstands
the  present  world,  by  ihe  continual  inciting  of  love  presents
the  ways  of  his  Redeemer  to  the  eyes  of  the  heart,  that  so
tlie  mind  may  eschew  what  is  prosperous,  be  in  readiness  for
what  is  adverse,  desire  nought  that  soothes  down,  dread
nought  that  is  supposed  to  dismay,  account  sorrow  joy,
estimate  the  delights  of  the  present  life  as  the  ills  of  woe,
not  fear  the  diminutions  of  a  state  of  scorn,  but  thereby  seek
room  for  enduring  glory.  For  these  ways  Truth  shewed  to
the  eyes  of  those  that  were  following  Him,  when  He  said,

Johois,  ^  ^ny  jnan  serve  Me,  let  him  follow  Me.  To  these  ways
he  recalled  the  swelling  hearts  of  the  Disciples,  when  they
were  already  seeking  room  for  glory,  but  knew  not  the  patli-
way  of  that  glory,  saying.  Are  ye  able  to  drink  of  Ihe  cup
that I  shall  drink  ojl For  they  had  been  seeking  the

Tlkeir  high  esiaie  found  shorilited  at  its  end. 285

height  of  that  session  with  Him  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  Book
left  hand,  but  how  great  die  narrowness  of  the  pathway
thereunto  thev  did  not  see;  and  henco  the  cup  of  the  Passion
is  at  once  presented  to  their  eyes  as  a  thing  for  theol  to
imitate,  that,  surely,  if  they  were  making  for  the  joys  of  exalt-
edness,  they  should  first  find  the  way  of  humility.  And
therefore  because  the  sinner  is  careless  to  hare  an  eye  to  the
ways  of  Ood,  but  is  bent  on  those  only  wherein  he  may  be
made  to  delight  in  a  carnal  manner,  it  is  rightly  said  in  this
place,  For  his  eyes  are  upon  his  ways. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  24.  They  are  exalted/or  a  little  while^  but  they  shall
not  hold  on.

10.  The  glorr  of  bad  men,  whilst  it  is  for  the  most  part  vm.
extended  into  a  multitude  of  years,  is  by  the  minds  of  the
weak  reckoned  to  be  long  and  as  it  were  stable;  but  when  an
instantaneous  end  cuts  it  off,  surely  it  proves  to  its  face  that
it  was  short,  because  the  end  by  putting  a  limit  makes  it
known  that  that  which  was  capable  of  passing  away  was  little.
And  so  '  they  are  exalted  for  a  little  while,  and  do  not  hold
on,*  because  from  the  mere  circumstance  that  they  seek  to
appear  high,  they  are  by  self-exalting  made  far  removed  from
the  true  essence  of  God. For  they  are  not  able  to  hold  on,
because  they  are  severed  from  the  solid  basis  of  the  Eternal
Essence,  and  they  undergo  this  first  ruining,  that  by  glorying i
in  self  they  fall  in  themselves. For  hence  it  is  said  by  the
Psalmist,  Thou  eastedst  them  down^  when  they  were  lifted  ^*'  ^»
t^; because  they  are  brought  down  within,  in  proportion
as  they  arise  wrongly  without. Regarding  this  shortness  of
temporal  glory,  he  saith  again ;  /  have  seen  the  wicked  above  Pt.  87,
measure  exalted^  and  lifted  up  like  a  cedar  of  Libanus;  I '
passed  by^  and  lo^  he  was  gone. Hence  again  he  saith.  For  n>.  lo.
yet  a  little  while^  and  the  wicked  shall  not  be. Hence
James  says.  For  what  is  your  l\fe?  it  is  even  a  vapour  that
appeareth  for  a  little  time. Hence  the  Prophet  reflecting
on  the  shortness  of  carnal  glory,  tells  it  forth,  saying.  All  U.  40^
flesh  is  grass  J  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  ^'
of  hay. For  the  power  of  the  wicked  is  likened  to  the
'  flower  of  hay,*  because  the  glory  of  the  flesh,  whilst  it  shines
bright,  it  falls,  whilst  it  is  exalted  in  itself,  cut  off  by  a  sud-
den end  it  is  brought  to  a  close. For  in  the  same  way  by

286  Dad  mefi^$  glory  runs  to  an  end  as  other  earthly  things.

Job  94,  iha  blowing  of  breezes  the  stubble  is  caughl  on  high,  bul  by
:rz — ^an  instantaneous  fall  it  is  brought  back  to  earth  below.
Thus  the  smoke  is  lifted  up  to  tlie  clouds,  but  suddenly
whilst  swelling  out  it  is  scattered  to  nought.  Thus  the  vapour
from  beneath  thickening  lifu  itself  on  high,  but  the  ray  of
the  sun  when  risen  clears  it  away,  as  though  it  had  not
been.  Thus  on  the  surface  of  the  herbs  the  moisture  of  the
dew  of  night  is  sprinkled,  but  by  the  sudden  heat  of  the
light  of  day  it  is  dried  away.  Tims  the  foamy  bubbles  of
water,  raised  on  showers  beginning,  come  forth  racing  from
within,  but  being  burst  asunder  they  come  to  nought  the
more  quickly  in  propoitiou  as  being  inflated  they  are  raised
higher,  and  when  they  grow  to  a  head,  so  as  to  appear,  in
growing  they  make  it  that  they  should  *  not  hold  on.'
Therefore  concerning  the  wicked  that  are  swoln  with  the
exaltation  of  temporal  glory,  and  yet  not  enduring  with
any  stedfastness  in  this  glory,  let  it  be  rightly  said,  they  are
exalted  for  a  Utile  while^  but  they  shall  not  hold  on.  Of
whom  it  is  yet  further  added  \

And  they  shall  be  brought  low  as  all  things^  and  sfiall  be
taken  away.
ix.  11.  Such  should  be  the  advancement  of  contemplation,
that  it  should  be  carried  ofi*  from  few  things  to  the  taking  a
view  of  many,  from  many  to  taking  a  view  of  all  things,  so
that  being  led  forth  step  by  step  it  should  advance,  and
whilst  judging  all  things  transitory  should  by  comprehending
itself  grow  forth  well  nigh  incomprehensibly.  Hence  the
holy  man,  whilst  he  was  sifting  the  glory  and  the  failing  of
the  wicked,  stretched  to  *  all  things'  presently  the  eye  of  the
mind,  saying,  they  shall  be  brought  low  as  all  things,  and
shall  be  taken  away;  *  all  things'  earthly  assuredly.  As
though  he  said  in  plain  words;  *  They  cannot  any  way
stand,  because  the  very  things  flee  away  as  well  whereon
they  rest  for  support,  and  while  tliey  are  in  love  ¥rith  things
temporal,  along  with  these  by  the  currency  of  time  they  run
to  an  end.'  But  it  may  be  asked,  whereas  it  is  said  by
Ecol.  1,  Solomon,  One  generation  passe th  away,  and  another  getie*
ration  comet h;  but  the  earth  abidcthfor  ever;  why  does
blessed  Job  declare  that  *  all  things  are  brought  low,  and
taken  away  ?' Yet  this  we  easily  sift  out,  if  we  keep  distinct

T%e  essence  of  things  abides^  their  forms  pass  away. 287

liow  earth  and  hearen  either  pass  away  or  remain^ For  Book

both  these  in  respect  of  that  figure  which  they  now  hare -

pass  away,  yet  in  respect  of  their  essence  they  are  held  in
being  without  end.  Hence  it  is  said  by  Paul,  Far  ^A^ JCor.r,
fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away.  Hence  Truth  saith  by
Itself,  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  awafy  but  My  words^^^y
shall  not  pass  away.  Hence  it  is  told  John  by  the  Toice  of
the  Angel,  Tltere  shall  be  a  new  heaten  and  a  new  earth.^^^^^^t
Wliich  indeed  are  not  to  be  created  other  things,  but  these
very  same  are  renewed.  And  thus  heaven  and  earth  at  once
*  pass  away'  and  '  shall  be,'  seeing  that  both  by  fire  from
that  fashion  which  they  now  have  they  are  clean  wiped  out,  and
yet  in  their  own  nature  are  ever  preserved.  Hence  it  is
said  by  the  Psalmist,  Thou  shall  change  thentj  and  theyy**^^^
shall  be  changed.  Which  same  final  changing  of  themselves
they  do  now  nnnonncc  to  us  by  those  very  successions,
whcrchy  for  our  services  they  unceasingly  shift  about  For
the  earth  by  the  dryness  of  winter  falls  oflT  from  its  fashion,
b  V  the  moisture  of  spring  it  is  made  green.  Heaven  is  every
day  overlaid  by  the  darkness  of  night,  and  renewed  by  the
brightness  of  day.  Hence,  then,  hence  let  every  believer
gather  that  these  things  both  perish,  and  yet  by  renewal  are
restored,  which  it  is  plain  are  now  perpetually  as  it  were
from  decay  being  refitted.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  then  the
holy  man,  whilst  he  beholds  the  course  of  the  wicked,  makes
it  known  with  what  a  visitation  they  are  one  day  to  come
to  nought,  when  he  forthwith  adds;

And  as  the  tops  of  ears  ff  corn  they  shall  be  crushed,
12.  For  the  tops  of  Ihe  ears  of  com  are  the  beards;  now  x.
the  beards  come  out  joined  in  an  c^r  of  com,  but  going  on
growing  little  by  little  they  are  separated  from  one  another
bristly  and  rough.  Thus,  verily,  thus,  as  to  this  world's  glory
do  the  evil-minded  rich  ones  rise  up.  For  by  a  fellowship  of
nature  they  are  joined  to  one  another,  but  going  on  increasing
ihey  are  in  turn  divided  against  one  another.  For  one  looks
down  upon  anotlier,  and  a  second  is  inflamed  against  a  third
with  the  torches  of  envy ;  they  then  who  by  the  swelling  of
the  mind  separate  themselves  from  the  unity  of  charity,  as  it
were  after  the  way  of  beards  stand  bristling  against  one
another. What  then  might  I  have  called  the  evilminded

288  Bad  men  beaten  out  as  beards  from  the  grain  in  Judgment.

Job  24,  rich  ones  of  this  world  but  a  kind  of  beards  of  the  hiimai)

j2 — ^race,  who  while  they  are  lifted  high  against  one  another,

but  with  one  consent  press  hard  upon  the  life  of  the  good,

are  indeed  divided  against  themselves,  yet  with  one  accord

boar  down  the  grains  beneath.

13.  At  this  present  time  then  ihe  beards  spring  up  on
high,  the  grains  lie  hidden;  because  both  the  power  of  lost
sinners  towers  high,  and  tlie  glory  of  the  Elect  does  not
appear.  The  one  shew  themselves  off  in  the  high  estate  of
honours,  the  others  lower  themselves  in  humility.  But  the
time  of  winnowing  will  arrive,  which  is  calculated  both  to  break
the  bristling  of  the  beards,  and  not  to  bniise  the  solid  grains.
For  then  the  pride  of  the  wicked  is  broken  in  pieces,  then
the  life  of  the  Elect  is  shewn  to  view,  with  what  faultlessness
it  shines  bright;  in  that  while  the  unrighteous  are  undone,
by  this  very  crushing  of  the  beard  it  is  brought  to  pass  that
the  grains  should  appear,  which  were  holden  out  of  sight;
and  when  the  beards  are  broken,  the  whiteness  of  the  grains
is  made  to  appear,  because  upon  the  wicked  falling  into  ever*
lasting  punishments,  the  righteousness  of  the  Saints  is
manifested,  with  what  truth  it  is  shining  white.  Whence
Matt.  3,  too  it  is  rightly  said  by  John,  Whose  fan  is  in  His  hand,
^**  ajid  He  will  throughly  purge  His  floor^  and  gather  His
wheat  into  the  gamer:  but  He  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with
unquenchable  fire.  So  let  blessed  Job  mark  with  what  awful
visitation  the  pride  of  bad  men  shall  be  broken,  and  com-
paring them  to  beards  that  perish,  let  him  say,  Like  the  tops
qf  ears  qf  com  they  shall  be  crushed.  Surely  because  the
bristling  of  the  proud  is  broken  by  the  stress  of  the  final
winnowing,  whereas  now  looking  down  upon  the  life  of  the
Elect  it  is  lifted  up. It  proceeds;

Ver.  S6.  And  jf  it  be  not  so  now,  who  will  convict  me  of
having  lied,  and  set  my  words  bqfore  Qodf
xi.  14.  If  it  be  not  so  as  he  tells,  then  surely  all  people  are
able  to  convict  him  of  falsehood.  Why  then  is  it  said.  And
if  it  be  not  so  now,  who  unll  convict  me  of  having  lied?  i.  e.
whilst  we  know  that,  one  who  is  false,  it  is  allowed  any  one
to  find  fault  with?  But  if  we  sift  out  the  sense  of  the
speaker  with  exact  questioning,  how  right  the  things  are
that  he  put  forth,  we  speedily  discover. For  the  righteous

The  proud  majf  fioi  judge  the  wards  qf  the  Righie&us^  MO

maD,  though  he  does  ever  speak  anj  thing  wrong,  yet  tt  is '  Boos
far  from  meet  that  he  ahould  be  judged  by  the  unrighteous  — ^ — -
and  ill  living.  Whence  the  holy  man  lowering  the  pride  of
his  friends,  not  even  if  it  be  so,  but  even  *  if  it  be  not  so*  as
he  set  forth,  is  confident  that  he  can  never  be  found  fault
with,  because  assuredly  those  are  able  rightljr  to  reprove
things  that  are  false,  who  are  not  taught  to  do  things  that
are  false.  For  the  daring  of  reproof  against  deceit  those
persons  lose,  who  still  live  on  principles  of  deceit  There-
fore he  says,  And  if  it  he  not  so  now^  who  will  convict  me
of  having  liedf  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words  i  *  All  things
are  so  as  I  have  set  forth,  but  if  they  were  not  so,  I  could
not  a  whit  be  charged  home  with  them  by  you ;  for  whilst  ye
still  give  way  to  your  own  deceit,  ye  are  not  able  to  find
fault  with  the  deceit  of  another.'

16.  In  which  place  it  is  fitly  added ;  And  to  set  my  words
before  God.  For  whoever  really  finds  fault  with  false  say-
ings in  the  true  way,  in  thinking  on  the  things  he  has  heard
and  estimating  ihem  by  the  rule  of  truth  ^  sets  words  before
God,'  because  to  himself  in  the  eye  of  Truth  he  makes  proof
what  he  should  outwardly  decree  against  falsehood.  Since
'  to  set  words  before  God'  is  with  the  interior  Judge  kept  in
view  to  estimate  the  exterior  sayings.  Thus  the  holy  man
does  not  reckon  it  possible  for  his  *  words  to  be  set  before
Gh>d*  by  friends  behaving  with  pride.  As  if  he  said  in  plain
terms,  ^  The  things  which  I  utter  ye  are  for  this  reason
unable  to  set  before  the  Judge,  because  by  committing  sin
ye  hide  His  face  from  you  ?'  Which  same,  however,  nothing
hinders  from  being  understood  in  type  of  Holy  Church  as
wen,  which  whilst  for  her  weak  members  she  is  found  fault  -
with  by  the  scoffing  of  heretics,  laughs  to  scorn  that  same
craftiness  of  their  scoffing,  because  with  God  it  is  more
tolerable  that  a  man  should  be  prostrated  in  weakness  and  in
ignorance,  in  conjunction  with  humility,  than  that  he  should
compass  high  themes  with  self-exaltation.  But  forasmuch
as  the  holy  man  had  uttered  many  words  against  those,  who
by  transitory  power  are  made  proud,  and  with  windy  honours
swell  themselves  out;  by  his  rebuke  Bildad  the  Shuhite
gaining  ground  has  his  eyes  opened  to  see  with  Whom  true
power  is  deposited ;  saying,

VOL.  II.  V

290 Peace  among  Angels  thai  work  seeming  contraries.

Job  36, Ver.  2.  Dominion  and /ear  are  unih  Him; Who  makeih

-Jl — peace  in  His  high  places.

j^*  16.  As  though  he  expressed  himself  in  plain  words;  *  He
only  truly  terrifies  the  hearts  of  mortals,  Who  by  the  power
of  ilis  Divine  nature  truly  possesses  these.'  For  what  toiTor
does  the  power  of  man  infuse,  which  knows  not  when  it  may
lack  the  right  of  that  power  ?  Now  it  is  rightly  said,  He
maketh  peace  in  His  high  places.  Because  there  are  many
things  at  variance  with  themselves  below,  but  they  run
answerably  to  the  harmonious  fulness  of  tilings  above,  and
by  the  causing  of  the  interior  peace  it  is  brought  to  pass,
that  oftentimes  the  things  that  are  without  are  ordered  with-
out peace.  Thus  the  good.  Almighty  Ood  is  advancing  to
merit,  when  He  permits  the  bad  to  rage  against  their  life ;
and  things  above  are  made  to  fit  together  in  harmony,  whilst
those  below  are  thrown  into  confusion;  because  in  the
heavenly  world  He  joins  His  Elect  to  the  choirs  of  the
Angels  by  the  same  means,  whereby  in  the  earthly  and
lowest  scene  of  things.  He  bears  the  practices  of  lost  sinners
opposing  His  behests.

17.  But  herein  it  is  of  interest  to  us  to  enquire,  if  the
highest  peace  is  maintained  ^  in  the  high  places,'  what  that  is

Dan.  10,  which  is  said  to  Daniel  by  the  Angel,  /  am  come  for  thy
words;  but  the  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia  withstood
me  one  and  twenty  days:  but^  lo,  Michael^  one  of  the  chief

▼.  30.  princes^  came  to  help  me.  And  a  little  afterward ;  And  now
will  I  return  to  fight  with  the  prince  of  tlie  Persians.  For
when  I  was  going  forth  there  appeared  the  prince  of  the
Greeks  coming.  Whom  else  then  but  Angels  does  he  call  the
*  princes'  of  the  naUons,  that  could  have  had  tlie  power  to
resist  him  as  he  went  forth  i  Accordingly  what  peace  can
there  be  *  in  the  high  places,'  if  even  among  tlie  Angelical
spirits  themselves  also  there  is  a  conflict  of  wamug  carried
on,  who  are  always  standing  present  to  the  view  of  Truth  i
But  because  there  are  fixed  charges  of  the  Angels  set  to
superintend  the  regulating  of  the  several  particular  nations,
when  the  practices  of  the  subject  peoples  deserve  the  assist-
ance of  the  presiding  spirits  against  one  another,  the  spirits
themselves  that  are  set  in  charge  arc  said  to  come  against
one  another. Thus  the  Angel  iliat  spake  to  Daniel  is  known

Presiding  Angels  help  nations  as  they  deserve. 291

to  have  been  appointed  over  the  captives  of  the  Israelitish  Book

People  established  in  Persia,  but  Michael  is  ascertained  to  •- -'

be  the  ruler  of  those  who  remained  in  the  land  of  Judsea
from  among  the  same  people.  And  hence  it  is  said  a  little
afterwards  to  Daniel  by  this  same  Angel ;  And  tliere  is  none  ▼•  ^i*
thai  holdeth  teith  me  in  these  things^  but  Michael^  your
prince.  Concerning  whom  he  says  this  too  which  we  have
before  said,  bnt^  lo^  Michael^  one  of  the  chi^  princes^  came
to  help  me.  Who  whereas  he  is  never  said  *  to  be  with/  but
to  *  come  to  help,*  is  plainly  scon  to  be  set  over  that  peoplo
which  was  held  captive  in  another  part.  What  then  is  it  for
the  Angel  to  say,  /  am  come  for  thy  ufords,  but  the  prince
qf  the  kingdom  of  Persia  witltstood  me,  but  to  tell  his
doings  to  Uiose  under  him?  As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms;
*  The  claims'  of  thy  prayers  indeed  demand  that  the  Israelitish*  merita
People  should  be  loosed  from  the  yoke  of  their  captivity,  but
there  is  still  in  that  same  people  that  which  must  be  purged
by  the  dominion  of  the  Persians;  so  that  touching  the
liberation  of  that  people  the  prince  of  Persia  should  by  rights
withstand  me,  though  to  thy  prayers  the  tears  of  those  too
who  were  left  in  Judsa  come  in  aid.'  Whence  he  subjoins
that  too  which  we  said ;  But,  lo,  Michaety  your  prince,  came
to  help  me.  And  when  he  goes  forth  in  order  to  fight  against
the  prince  of  the  Persians,  there  appeareth  to  him  the  prince
of  the  Greeks  coming  towards  him.  By  which  circumstance  it
is  implied  that  against  the  Greeks  too  Judaea  had  been  guilty
of  somewhat,  on  account  of  whom  without  a  doubt  it  was  that
he  withstood  the  rescuing  of  her.  So  the  Angel  hears  efiec-
tually  the  prayers  of  the  Prophet,  but  the  prince  of  Persia  with-
stands, b^ause  though  the  life  of  the  righteous  one  making
supplication  already  claims  the  rescue  of  the  People,  yet  the
life  of  that  same  People  still  withstands,  that  whereas  those
that  had  been  brought  into  captivity  were  not  yet  completely
purified,  Persia  should  rightfully  have  the  dominion  over
them  still.  Michael  gives  aid,  but  the  prince  of  Greece  comes
to  battle,  because  that  lengthened  captivity  of  the  People  suffer-
ing oppression  might  indeed  have  merited  pardon,  but  to  the
benefit  of  their  liberation  that  also  stood  opposed,  which
they  had  done  wrong  against  the  Greeks.  Therefore  it  is
rightly  said  that  the  Angels  come  against  each  other,  because

u2

293 Angeli  can  be  numbered  by  Ood,  not  by  man.

Job  95,  the  claims  of  the  nations  under  them  are  reciprocally  at  odds
-r-^ —  with  one  another.  For  the  lofty  Spirits  that  are  princes  to  those
nations  never  fight  in  behalf  of  those  that  act  unjustly,  but
justly  judge  and  try  their  deeds.  And  when  either  the  guilt
or  guiltlessness  of  each  separate  nation  is  brought  into  the
debate  of  the  Court  Above,  the  ruling  Spirit  of  that  nation  is
said  to  have  won  in  the  conflict  or  not  to  have  won;  the  one
identical  victory  of  all  of  whom,  however,  is  the  Supreme
Will  of  their  Maker  above  them,  which  Will  whilst  they  ever
have  before  their  eyes,  what  they  have  not  the  power  they
have  not  the  mind  to  obtain.  Therefore  it  is  well  said,
Wfio  maketh  peace  in  His  high  places.  It  follows ;
Yer.  3.  Is  there  any  number  of  His  soldiers^
xiii.  18.  In  the  cognizance  of  human  reason  there  is  not  any
number  of  the  spirits  above,  in  that  it  cannot  tell  how  great
is  that  concourse  of  the  Invisible  Host,  whereof  it  is  said  by
Ban.  7,  Daniel,  Thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  Him.  and  ten
thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood  before  Him.  The  num-
ber of  the  citizens  above  is  represented  as  infinite  and
definite,  in  order  that  that  which  relatively  to  Qod  is  capable
of  being  numbered  may  be  shewn  relatively  to  man  to  be
incapable  of  being  numbered.  Though  it  is  one  thing  '  to
stand  before,'  and  another  thing  to  ^  minister  to.*  For  those
Powers  stand  before  Him  without  a  doubt,  which  never  go
forth  for  the  communicating  things  to  men.  But  those
*  minister  to*  Him,  who  como  for  discharging  the  ofiicos  of
bearers  of  tidings ;  yet  these  same  beings  also,  by  the  act  of
contemplation,  are  not  withdrawn  firom  the  interior  world.  And
because  they  are  more  in  number  that  ^  minister'  than  those
that  preeminently  ^  stand  before  Him,'  the  number  of  those
so  ^  standing  in  presence'  is  represented  as  being  definite,
but  of  those  that  ^  minister'  as  indefiuite.

19.  Now  the  Angelical  spirits  we  rightly  call  ^  the  soldiers'
of  Qod,  because  we  are  not  unaware  that  those  war  against  the
powers  of  the  air,  which  same  conflicts  however  they  carry
on  not  by  labour  but  by  authority ;  for  whatsoever  thing,  in
acting  against  impure  spirits,  they  desire  for,  by  the  aid  of
Him  Who  ruleth  all  things,  they  are  equal  to.  So  of  this
Luke  s,  army  when  our  King  was  bom  it  is  written.  And  suddenly
^^' there  u;as  with  the  angel  a  multitude  qf  the  heavenly  host.

Man  dark  in  himteff,  and  unclean  in  his  origin. 293

Unto  which  same  heavenly  host  the  number  of  the  Elect  of  Book
men  too  is  joined,  who  bj  the  lofty  aspirations  of  the  mind '-


are  set  free  from  the  bondage  of  an  earthly  conversation.
€?onceming  whom  it  is  said  by  Paul,  No  man  that  warreth
entangUth  himself  with  the  affairs  of  this  life.  Which
same  though  now  they  be  shewn  few  in  number,  yet  in  the
invisible  country  they  reign  innumerably  many,  in  that
though  by  comparison  with  the  evil-minded  they  are  few,  yet
in  the  concourse  of  their  assemblage  they  cannot  be  any  way
measured.  But  because  the  goodness  of  those  soldiers  is  set
firm  not  by  iheir  own  powers,  but  by  the  inspiration  of  grace
from  Above,  it  is  rightly  added,
And  upon  whom  doth  not  His  light  arise  f

20.  For '  the  light*  of  God  is  preventing  grace,  which  if  it  xiv.
never  arose  of  free  gift  in  our  heart,  assuredly  our  mind
would  remain  dim  in  the  darkness  of  its  sins. And  hence  it

is  added;

Yer.  4. Can  a  man  be  justified  being  compared  with
Oodf  or  can  he  be  found  clean  that  is  bom  of  a  woman  f

21.  This  verse  is  spoken  above  by  blessed  Job,  and  is xv.
now  repeated  in  the  upbraiding  of  him ; since  every  just
man  is  just  by  illumination  from  Ood,  not  by  comparison
with  Ood. For  man's  righteousness  when  compared  with

the  Maker  is  unrighteousness,  since,  even  although  man  had
held  fast  in  his  own  estate  of  creation,  the  creature  could
never  be  equalled  to  the  Creator.  To  which  creature  how->
soever,  unto  heavier  burthens  of  deficiency,  there  accnied
sin  also,  which  the  serpent  by  plotting  brought  in,  and
woman  proving  frail  recommended.  Hence  now,  forasmuch
as  man  is  bom  by  the  agency  of  woman  who  is  made  subject
to  sin,  the  frailty  of  the  first  guilt  is  inherited  in  the  offspring ;
and  because  the  branch  of  the  human  race  was  made  rotten
in  the  root,  it  does  not  hold  up  in  the  greenness  of  its
creation.  Hence  it  is  rightly  said  now,  Can  a  man  be
justified  being  compared  with  Ood  f  or  can  he  be  found
clean  that  is  bom  of  a  woman  f  As  if  it  were  expressed  in
plain  terms,  *  Let  not  man  entertain  pride  against  his  Creator,
let  him  reflect  whence  he  came  hither,  and  understand  what
he  is.*  But  observe,  there  are  those  that  when  by  the  gift  of
the  Spirit  they  are  holpen  against  the  firailty  of  their  flesh,

294 Tfiey  thai  shine  on  earth  still  not  clean  before  God.

Job  36,  are  made  to  erect  themselves,  gleam  forth  in  virtues,  jea,

—^ —  flash  out  in  the  marrels  of  miraculous  signs  as  well,  yet  is

there  no  man  who  may  pass  through  life  free  from  sin,  so

long  as  he  bears  upon  him  flesh  of  corruption. Wlience  it

is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  6.  Behold  even  to  the  moon,  and  it  shineth  not;  yea^
the  stars  are  not  pure  in  His  sight,
xvi.  22.  What  is  denoted  by  <  the  moon'  but  the  whole  Church
together?  what  by  ^  the  stars*  but  the  souls  of  the  several
persons  that  live  rightly?  who  amidst  the  practices  of
wicked  men,  whilst  they  are  conspicuous  by  rare  virtues,  as
it  were  shine  in  the  darkness  of  night.  Whence  likewise  it
Phil.  2,  is  said  by  Paul  to  the  disciples;  Among  whom  ye  shine  like
lights  in  the  world.  For  that  Holy  Church  is  represented
by  the  designation  of  ^  the  moon,^  the  Prophet  bears  witness,
Hab.  3,  saying,  Tlie  sun  was  lifted  up,  and  the  moon  stood  in  her
^^'  order.  For  on  ^  the  sun  being  lifted  up,  the  moon  is  esta-
blished in  her  order,'  in  that  on  our  Lord  ascending  into  the
heavens.  Holy  Church  is  thereupon  made  strong  in  the
authoritative  function  of  preaching.  And  that  by  the  title
of  *  stars'  the  Elect  are  represented,  Paul  again  informs  us,
1  Cor.  by  saying.  For  one  star  d\jferethfrom  another  star  in  glory.
*  '  So  ^  the  moon  doth  not  shine,  and  the  stars  are  not  clean  in
His  sight,'  because  neither  doth  Holy  Church  by  her  own
power  shine  forth  in  so  many  miracles,  except  the  gifts  of  pre-
venting grace  fall  in  showers  upon  her,  nor  are  the  minds  of  the
several  persons  that  live  rightly  clean  of  the  stains  of  sinful
practices,  if  they  be  judged  apart  from  pity;  because  in  the
eyes  of  the  strict  Judge  every  single  individual  his  own
proneness  to  corruption  doth  pollute,  unless  the  grace  of  One
sparing  day  by  day  wipe  this  away.  For  the  mind  of  the
Elect  strives  to  go  forth  to  the  liberty  of  righteousness,  but  is
still  bound  and  tied  with  the  fetters  of  frailty,  and  it  longs
indeed  perfectly  to  get  the  better  of  offences,  but  so  long  as
it  is  fettered  by  the  corruption  of  the  flesh,  it  is  tied  with  the
chains  thereof,  even  when  it  would  not  be.  Hence  thereforo
let  him  collect  with  what  a  load  of  sins  they  are  borne  down,
who  neglect  to  wai'  against  the  same,  if  not  even  they  entirely
get  the  better  of  evil  doing,  who  strenuously  fight  against  it.
And hence  it  is  said.  Behold  even to  the  moon,  and  it

Carnal  man  roUennesi,  a  warm  born  of  corruption.  295

shineih  noi^  and  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  Hie  sight;  it  is  Book
directly  added;  ^^"•


Ver.  0.  How  much  more  is  man  rottenness^  and  the  son  of
man  a  worm  f

28.  As  if  \i  were  in  plain  words;  '  If  those  very  persons  xvii.
also  cannot  be  void  of  contagion,  who  amidst  the  darkness  of
the  present  life  shine  bright  by  Firtuoos  attainments,  with
what  guilt  of  wickedness  are  they  bound,  who  still  live  after
the  flesh?  If  those  persons  cannot  be  free  from  sin,  who  are
already  walking  in  the  way  of  hearenly  desires,  what  they
who  still  lie  under  the  loads  of  sinful  habits?  who  whilst  they
are  abandoned  to  the  gratifications  of  their  fleshly  part,  still
bear  the  yoke  of  rottenness  ?  Hence  Peter  saith ;  And  if  the  i  Pet  4,
righteous  scarcely  be  saved^  where  shall  tJie  ungodly  and^^'
the  sinner  appear?  Hence  it  is  said  by  Isaiah,  Upon  the  19.32^
land  of  My  people  shall  come  up  thorns  and  briars;  how^^'
much  more  upon  all  the  houses  of  joy  in  the  joyous  city.
For  by  '  the  land  of  His  People,*  the  Lord  meaneth  the
mind  of  all  of  the  lUect.  Upon  which  He  tells  of  *  thorns
and  briars  coming  up;*  because  He  sees  that  not  even  that
very  mind  is  free  from  the  prickles  of  bad  habits.  But  *  the
house  of  joy  in  the  joyous  city'  is  the  mind  of  the  wickedf
which  whilst  it  neglects  to  regard  the  punishments  that  are
destined  to  come,  in  the  gratification  of  the  flesh  going  away
6rom  itself,  revels  in  empty  mirth.  Thus  he  saith;  Upon  the
land  of  My  people  shall  come  up  thorns  and  briars^  how
much  more  upon  all  the  houses  of  joy  in  the  joyous  city.
As  if  He  said  in  plain  words;  If  evil  habits  sink  low  even
the  minds  of  those,  who  for  desire  of  the  heavenly  country
put  themselves  to  pain,  what  guilty  courses  are  they  brought
under,  who  without  any  apprehension  abandon  themselves  in
the  gratification  of  the  flesh?

24.  But  it  is  a  point  to  be  noticed  in  his  discourse  how
Bildad  observed  the  order  of  our  creation  and  of  our  birth,  in
that  he  calls  *  man'  not  *  a  worm,*  but  *  rottenness,*  but  *  the
son  of  man'  *  a  worm.'  For  the  first  parent  of  the  human
race  was  *  man,'  not  *  the  son  of  man;'  from  whom  whosoever
came  forth,  was  not  only  *  man,'  but  *  the  son  of  man'  as
well.  As  then  from  man  springs  the  son  of  man,  so  from  rot*
tenness  springs  the  worm. Whence  man  is  rightly  called

396  JoV$  sirongesi  point  cornea  lasL

Job  96/  rottenness/  but  the  son  of  man  ^  a  wonn.' For  the  first

* man  was  ^  rottenness*  not  *  a  worm,'  in  that  though  by  death

he  turned  to  '  rottenness»*  yet  he  did  not  come  by  a  birth

out  of  rottenness. But  he  that  is  tlie  son  of  man  is  called

*  a  worm/  because  he  is  henceforth  propagated  from  the  cor-
ruption of  mortal  bodies.

25.  Therefore  because  the  words  of  his  friends  are  con-
cluded;  blessed  Job  sets  on  with  a  more  penetrating  acuteness
of  the  suing,  and  his  words  are  proportionably  strong  as  they
are  the  last;  seeing  that  even  in  the  same  way  it  is  the  usage
of  lawyersi  that  the  argument,  by  which  they  beforehand  see
that  they  are  above  their  adversaries,  they  reserve  for  the
conclusion  of  the  suit. It  follows;

C.  xxvi.  1,  2.  But  Job  answered  and  said,  Of  whom  art
thou  the  helper  f  whether  of  one  that  is  powerless?  or  dost
thou  sustain  the  arm  of  him  that  is  not  strong?
xviii.  26.  To  help  one  that  is  weak  is  an  act  of  charity,  to  wish
to  help  one  Uiat  is  powerful,  of  pride;  and  so  because  his
friends,  whilst  bearing  the  likeness  of  heretics,  on  the  plea  of
helping  God,  endeavoured  to  make  a  display  of  their  own
wisdom»  Bildad  is  justly  found  fault  with,  that  it  should  be
said.  Of  whom  art  thou  the  helper?  whether  of  one  that  is
powerless?  or  dost  thou  sustain  the  arm  qf  him  that  is  not
strong?  As  if  be  said  in  plain  words;  ^  While  thou  settest
thyself  to  help  Him,  under  Whose  greatness  thou  dost  sink
to  the  earth,  all  the  encouragement  which  thou  affordest
comes  of  ostentation,  not  of  piety.'

27.  But  herein  it  is  requisite  to  be  known,  that  even  God,
Who  surely  is  not  ^  powerless/  we  help  whilst  acting  with
I  Cor.  8,  humility.  And  hence  it  is  said  by  Paul,  For  we  are  helpers
of  Ood.  For  when  to  him,  whom  He  doth  Himself  by  inte-
rior grace  pervade,  wo  by  the  voice  of  exhortation  contribute,
this  which  He  through  the  Spirit  brings  to  pass  within»  we
outwardly  by  the  office  of  the  voice  do  assist,  and  then  only
is  our  exhortation  brought  to  completion,  when  God  was  in
ib.  7.  the  heart,  to  be  aided.  Hence  He  saith  elsewhere;  So  then
neither  is  he  that  planteih  any  thing,  neither  he  that  water-
eth; but  Ood  that  giveth  the  increase. For  to  ^  plant'  and

*  water*  is  to  *  help,'  both  which  will  bo  but  a  void  ministra-
tion, if  in  the  heart  God  ^  giveth  not  the  increase.' But  they

ffis/riends  premmed  in  taking  GotTspari, 297

who  hare  high  thoughts  of  their  own  power  of  mind,  will  not  Boos
be  helpers  of  God  with  humility;  because  whilst  they  reckon  5IHr
themselves  to  be  of  use  to  Ood,  they  are  making  themselves
strangers  to  the  fruit  of  usefulness. And  hence  it  is  said  to
the  disciples  by  the  voice  of  Truth,  When  ye  shall  haveLnU
done  all  those  things  that  are  commanded  gou^  say.  We  are  ^^'  ^^'
unprofitable  servants^  we  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty
to  do. It  proceeds;

Ver.  3.  To  whom  hast  thou  given  counsel?  perchance  to
him  that  hath  not  wisdom  f

28.  To  '  give  counsel  to  one  that  is  foolisV  is  an  ofHce  of  xix.
charity,  to  give  it  to  one  that  is  wise,  of  ostentation ;  but  to
give  it  to  Wisdom  Itself,  of  wrougmindedness;  and  because
those  who  we  have  said  bear  the  likeness  of  heretics,  by  their
mode  of  speech,  were  administering  to  ostentation  rather  than

to  usefulness,  it  is  yet  further  added  rightly  against  Bildad,

And  sheum  thine  own  prudence  overmuch.

To  one  to  whom  there  is  right  prudence  it  is  not  over-
much, because  according  to  Paul's  declaration,  he  seeketh
not  to  be  wise  above  the  degree  that  he  ought  to  be  wise.
But  to  whomsoever  there  is  overmuch  prudence,  there  is  not
right  prudence.  For  whilst  it  is  carried  beyond  due  mea-
sure, it  is  made  to  turn  off  on  one  side  or  another  of  offence.
Now  they  shew  their  prudence  to  be  *  overmuch,'  who  aim
to  appear  fuller  of  prudence  in  comparison  of  others;  whence
it  very  frequently  happens  that  whilst  they  have  not  the  art
to  be  wise  in  moderation,  they  even  speak  things  that  are
foolish.  On  account  of  which  circumstance,  the  actual
excess  of  prudence  is  yet  further  subjoined,  that  it  should  be
said,

Ver.  4.  Whom  wonldest  thou  have  taught  f  Was  it  not
Him  Who  made  the  breathway  f

29.  By  the  '  breathway'  we  live,  by  prudence  we  are  wise.  xx.
But  it  is  ours  first  to  live,  and  afterwards  to  be  imbued  with
wisdom;  because  in  order  that  we  have  the  power  to  be
wise,  it  is  first  brought  to  pass  that  we  should  have  being.
He,  then.  Who  bestowed  life,  the  same  doubtless  gave  pru-
dence as  well.  But  because  Bildad  thought  blessed  Job
was  scourged  for  sin,  that  secret  judgment  of  Ood  which  he
should  have  adored  in  humility,  he  set  himself  with  over-

298  Proud  spirits  unable  to  rise  up.

Job  36,  weeniog  temerity  to  peoeirate  to  the  bottom.  And  so  that
-rr^ —  very  One  he  preferred  himself  before  in  respect  of  prudence,
Whose  judgment  without  understanding  it  he  judged.  That
very  One  ho  preferred  himself  before  in  prudence,  from
Whom  he  received  Uie  brealhway  of  life,  as  though  ho  were
wise  more  than  He,  the  very  Being  from  Wliom  he  had
it  given  it  him  that  he  should  be.  But  because  blessed
Job  whilst  bearing  a  type  of  Holy  Church  delivered  a  few
things  in  the  rebuking  of  proud  men,  who,  he  was  not  igno-
rant, bore  a  likeness  of  heretics,  according  as  he  said  above;
Job  IS,  /  desire  lo  reason  with  Ood;  first  slewing  that  ye  are
forgers  of  lies^  and  followei*s  of  wrong  tenets;  he  suddenly
lifts  himself  up  to  instruction,  and  in  opposition  to  the  igno-
rance of  the  highminded,  he  opens  wide  the  breadth  of  his
knowledge  in  sentences,  saying,

Ver.  5.  Zo,  the  giants  groan  under  the  waters.
xxi. 30.  For  it  was  fitting  that  by  rebuking  he  should  first  beat
down  the  swelling  of  earthly  wisdom,  and  by  instruction
afterwards  pass  on  to  words  replete  with  mysteries. Thus
by  ^  giants,'  either  apostate  Angels,  or  all  proud  men  may
without  objection  be  understood. For  hence  it  is  said  by
Ifl.  36, the  Prophet,  TTie  dead  shall  not  live,  the  giants  shall  not
^^' rise  up  again. For  whom  does  he  call  ^  die  dead*  saving
sinners,  and  whom  does  he  designate '  giants*  save  those,  who
over  and  above  take  pride  in  sin. Now  the  former  do  *  not
live,'  because  by  sinning  they  have  forfeited  the  life  of  righ-
teousness; these  latter  too  ^  cannot  rise  up  again*  after  death,
because,  after  their  transgression  being  swoln  with  pride,  they
do  not  have  recourse  to  the  remedies  of  penitence. Hence
Prov it  is  written  again,  Ihe  man  that  wandereth  out  of  the  way
**'  *®*  of  understanding  shall  remain  in  the  congregation  qf  the
dea<$. For  whosoever  forsakes  the  way  of  righteousness,  to
whose  number  does  he  join  himself,  saving  to  the  number  of
the  proud  spirits  i  Now  it  is  well  said  in  opposition  to  the
high-minded,  L09  llie  giants  groan  under  the  waters* As  if  it
were  expressed  in  plain  speech ;  *  Wherefore  on  the  score  of
knowledge  should  man  be  proud,  when  the  abyss  of  igno-
rance keeps  at  the  bottom  the  very  proudest  of  the  spirits  of
the  Angels  ?*

31.  But  if  by  the  name  of  *  the  giants*  the  |X>werful  ones

JEarihljf  power  brings  b»rden$  and  danjgers. 299

6(  this  world  are  denoted,  in  ^  the  waters'  we  may  hare  the  Book

multitudes  represented,  as  John  beareth  witness,  who  fiiaith> '-

The  waters,  which  thou  seesif  are  peoples.  Now  against  Rev.  17,
him  that  is  filled  with  pride  it  is  well  spoken ;  £o,  the  giants^^'
groan  under  the  waters;  because  all  that  are  high  and  lifted
up,  while  in  this  life  they  long  to  attain  the  highest  pitch  of
honours,  groan  under  the  burthens  of  peoples.  For  in  pro-
portion  as  a  man  is  the  higher  lifted  up  here,  he  is  burthened
with  so  much  the  heavier  cares.  And  to  those  very  same
people  in  mind  and  thoughts  he  is  put  tinder,  whom  in
dignity  he  is  put  over.  And  by  these  words  it  is  well  sheiHi
in  brief  that  all  pride  lies  prostrate  on  the  ground  by  the
mere  act  by  which  it  lifts  itself  up  on  high,  so  as  to  be  the
more  effectually  bowed  down  beneath  all  things  from  the
same  cause,  that  it  would  fain  be  set  above  all.  For  man
when  he  is  lifted  up  in  high  stations,  bears  so  many  in
number  over  him,  as  he  rules  persons  put  beneath  him.  .
But  those,  that  are  associated  with  such  persons,  are  by
fellowship  in  their  labour  themselves  also  weighed  to  the
ground.  For  together  with  them  ihey  likewise  bear  the
toilsomeness  of  the  burthen,  whilst  along  with  ihem  they  go
after  the  gloriousness  of  the  honour*  Hence  whereas  be
said,  Xo,  the  giants  groan  under  the  waters;  he  directly
added ;

And  ihey  that  dwell  along  with  them.

82.  As  though  he  said;  *  Equally  with  them  do  they  xxii.
groan,'  who  by  taking  delight  are  associated  to  their  glory.
Now  the  very  employment  of  worldly  dignities  is  borne  down
with  readier  vices  in  proportion  as  it  is  charged  with  heavier
cares.  For  would  that  the  mind  of  man  even  at  rest  might
be  able  to  see  and  eschew  sins !  And  so  because  he  saw
that  the  longed  for  heights  of  affairs  cannot  be  administered
without  sins,  and  because  it  is  not  hidden  from  the  wrath  of
(}od,  whatsoever  is  committed  of  an  unlawful  kind,  he  fitly
subjoined  in  pursuance;

Ver.  0.  Hell  is  naked  before  Himj  and  destruction  hath
no  covering.

3d.  Which  same  Paul  likewise  saith,  But  all  things  are  xxiii.
naked  and  opened  unto  His  eyes.  But  by  the  title  of  *  hell'  ^***-  *»
and  '  perdition'  he  denoted  the  devil  and  all  the  associates  of

800  Ood  puli  iolid  good  in  ihe  void  where  Saiiin  dwell.

Joi  sa,  his  condemnation ;  but  Who  that  One  is  before  w.hom  '  hell

Hy^y  is  naked/  he  goea  on  with  telling ;

Yer.  7.  He  slrelchelh  out  ihe  norlh  over  Ihe  empty  place.

xxir.  34.  By  the  title  of  the  ^  north/  in  Holy  Writ  the  devil  is
used  to  be  designated,  who.  with  the  thought  to  bind  up  the
hearts  of  the  nations  with  the  iciness  of  insensibility^  said.

If.  14,  /  ioill  sii  clUo  upon  the  mount  of  ihe  Covenant^  in  ihe  sidei
of  the  north.  And  he  is  ^  stretched  over  the  empty  place/
because  he  has  possession  of  those  hearts,  that  are  not  filled
with  the  grace  of  the  love  of  God.  Yet  is  it  competent  to
Almighty  Ood,  that  even  those  vessels  of  the  devil,  empty
of  every  virtue,  He  may  fill  with  the  gift  of  His  grace,  and
deposit  the  solid  substance  of  Divine  fear  in  those  persons,
whom  He  does  not  see  stablished  by  any  conduct  of  righ-
teousness. Hence  it  is  fitly  added ;
And  hangeth  the  earth  upon  nothing.
XXV.  Sd.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  title  of  ^  earth,*  saving
Holy  Church;  who,  whilst  she  receives  the  words  of  preach-
ing, renders  back  the  fruit  of  good  works  ? Whereof  it  is

Beat said  by  Moses,  Let  the  earth  hear  the  words  out  qfmy  lips^

'  *  "let  my  speech  be  looked  for  like  ihe  rain. And  what  but  the

several  gentile  peoples  are  denoted  by  *  nothing,'  of  whom  it

If.  40,  is  spoken  by  the  Prophet,  All  nations  before  Him  are  as
nothing^  and  they  are  counted  to  Him  less  than  nothing.
In  that  ^  nothing,'  then,  is  *  the  earth  hung  suspended,'  which
before,  being  a  void  place,  was  occupied  by  the  '  north;'
because  those  hearts  of  the  Gentiles  became  filled  with  the
love  of  God,  which  had  been  aforetime  weighed  down  by
a  deadness  of  the  devil. But  it  may  be  that  both  by  this

*  empty  place,'  the  infidelity  of  Judaea  is  denoted,  and  by

*  the  earth,'  as  we  said,  the  propagation  of  Holy  Church.
Thus  let  the  holy  man  look  at  the  full  of  Judooa  in  her
perishing,  and  espy  the  privileges  of  the  gentile  world  brought
back  to  pardon,  and  let  him  say.  He  stretcheih  out  the
north  over  the  empty  place,  and  hangeth  the  earth  upon
nothing.  For  because  the  hearts  of  the  Gentiles,  being  void
of  faith,  were  made  subject  to  the  devil,  ^  He  stretched  the
north  over  the  empty  place;'  and  because,  there  being  no

Pf.56,  merits  forthcoming,  (as  it  is  said.  For  nothing  shalt  Thou
^'save  them,)  upon  the  OenUles  the  Lord  founded  His  Church,

He  stapi  ioo  great  Jloodi  qf  kn&wtedg^ /rem  ik^  %beiA.  801

which  same  Oentiles  are  bj  the  Ptophet  called  *  nothiog/  in  Boo<

puTsniDg  the  tabject  he  rightly  adds,  And  hamgeik  ike  earik ^

upon  nothing. Now  in  what  order  this  thing  was  done,  he
continues  in  subjoining  with  wonderful  method. For  he  saith,

Ver.  8.  He  bindeih  up  ike  waiere  in  kin  thick  clouds,  ikat
ikeg  ikould  not  buret  forik  aKke  benealk,

86.  For  what  does  he  call  *  the  waters^  in  this  place  but  xxri.
knowledge ;  what '  clouds*  but  the  Preachers  ? For  that  in
Holj  Writ '  water**  may  sometimes  be  a  term  used  for  know-
ledge,  we  have  been  taught  by  Solomon  bearing  witness  to
it,  who  says,  Tke  tcords  of  a  marie  mouik  are  as  deep  Pror.
waters,  and  the  well-spring  of  wisdom  as  a  flowing  brook.  ^^'  ^*
That,  by  water  knowledge  is  denoted,  the  Prophet  David
bears  witness,  saying.  Dark  water  in  clouds  of  tke  sky,  i.e.P^  18,
secret  knowledge  in  the  Prophets,  who  before  the  Advent  of *
the  Lord,  whilst,  pregnant  with  secret  sacraments,  they  were
bearing  in  them  boundless  mysteries,  to  the  eyes  of  beholders
had  their  meaning  obscured. But  by  the  name  of  *  clouds,*
what  else  is  denoted  in  this  passage  but  the  holy  Preachers,
i.  e.  the  Apostles,  who  being  dispatched  in  every  direction
through  the  regions  of  the  world,  both  knew  how  to  shower  in
words,  and  to  flash  forth'  in  miracles? Whom  the  Prophet' <»«•-
Isaiah  beholding  long  before,  said.  Who  are  ikese  tkat  flgu^eOfS.
as  clouds  f Thus  because  this  man,  filled  with  the  spirit  of
prophecy,  in  this  utterance  of  his  voice  longs  that  for  the
praise  of  Ood  the  rise  of  Holy  Church  may  commence,  he
betakes  himself  to  tell  the  order  of  her  rise  from  the  preaching
of  the  Apostles,  who  took  the  greatest  pains  to  preach  to
uninstructed  people  what  was  plain  and  comprehensible,  not
what  was  high  and  arduous. For  holy  knowledge,  which  is
here  set  forth  by  the  title  of  water,  if  in  the  same  way  that
they  drew  it  from  the  heart,  so  they  poured  it  forth  from  the
lips,  by  the  immensity  thereof  they  would  overwhelm  rather
than  water  their  hearers. Hence  his  knowledge  being  un-
bound within,  that  it  should  not  burst  forth  alike  beneath,  in
nourishing  his  hearers  with  the  dropping  of  words,  that
'  cloud*  spake,  saying.  And  I  breikren  could  not  speak  unto  i  Cor.
gou  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto  carnal,  even  as  unto  babes^'  ^'  ^'
in  Ckrist. I  kave  fed  you  witk  milk  and  not  witk  meat.
For  who  could  have  borne  it  if  he  that  was  caught  up  to  the

302  Ohrui  taught  the  weak  not /ram  earth,  nor  too  far  off.

JoB86ythir()  heareni  that  was  caught  into  paradisei  even  hearing

11^2^  unutterable  words,  which  it  was  not  permitted  to  man  to
speaki  bad  opened  such  unbounded  depths  of  celestial
knowledge?  or  what  bearer's  power  would  he  not  overwhelm,
if  all  that  he  might  have  been  able  to  draw  witliin,  as  fur  as
tongue  of  flesh  may  suffice,  overflowing  without  the  mighty
flood  of  this  water  had  poured  forth  ?

d7.  But  that  uninstructed  hearers  might  be  comforted  not
by  an  inundation  of  knowledge,  but  by  the  tempered  dropping
of  preaching,  Ood  tieth  up  the  waters  in  the  cloudi^  that
they  may  not  burst  forth  atike  beneath.  Because  He
tempers  the  preaching  of  the  teachers,  that  so  the  infirmity
of  the  hearers,  being  nourished  by  the  dew  of  the  things
spoken,  may  be  made  strong.  Which  is  well  described  in
the  Gk)spel  by  a  mystical  mode  of  representation,  where  it  is

Luke  6,  said,  Jesus  etttered  into  the  boat  of  Peter,  and  prayed  him
that  he  would  thrust  out  a  little  from  the  land ;  and  he  sat
down  thus,  and  taught  the  people.  By  Peter's  ship  what
else  is  denoted  but  the  Church  committed  to  Peter?  and
that  the  Lord  may  preach  to  the  crowds  flocking  together
out  of  this  ship.  He  orders  it  to  be  '  thrust  out  a  little  from
the  land/  Which  same  he  neither  bids  to  be  carried  into
the  deep,  and  yet  does  bid  that  it  be  thrust  out  from  the
land,  signifying,  surely,  that  to  uninstructed  people  His
preachers  ought  not  to  preach  either  what  is  too  deep  relating
to  the  heavenly  world,  nor  yet  what  is  earthly.  And  so
*  water  is  bound  up  in  the  cloudsi'  because  the  knowledge  of
the  Preachers,  speaking  to  the  minck  of  the  firail,  is  forbidden
to  teach  as  much  as  it  is  able  to  see*

38.  Since,  for  the  most  part,  if  the  heart  of  the  hearers  is
spoilt  by  the  vastness  of  the  utterance,  the  tongue  of  the
persons  teacl^ing  is  mulcted  in  the  damage  of  indiscretion.

Ex.  31,  Whence  it  is  written ;  And  if  a  man  shall  open  a  cisteink.  or

AS  S4

if  a  man  shall  dig  a  pit  and  not  cover  it,  and  an  ox  or  an
ass  fall  therein,  the  owner  of  the  pit  shall  make  it  good^
For  what  is  it '  to  open  a  cistern,'  saving  with  strong  under-
standing to  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  Holy  Writ?  And
what  is  understood  by  an  '  ox'  and  an  '  ass,'  viz.  a  clean  and
an  unclean  animal,  save  every  believer  and  unbeliever  ?  Ac-
cordingly, let  him  that  ^  diggeth  a  cistern  cover  it|  lost  an  ox

The  ibrong  cannot  hear  aU^  still  leU  the  weak. 80$

or  an  ass  tumble  headlong  ihereiD/  i.  e.  let  binii  #bo  already  Book
makes  out  deep  things  in  Holy  Writ,  by  silence  cover  o?er-


his  lofty  perceptions  before  those  that  do  not  reach  that
compass,  lest  by  a  stumbling-block  to  the  soul  |ie  kill  either
the  believing  little  one,  or  the  unbelieving,  who  might  have
been  led  to  believe.  For  upon  the  death  of  the  beasts  of
burthen  there  are  damages  due,  plainly  because  he  is  con-
victed of  having  done  that,  whereby  he  is  held  a  debtor  for
the  exercising  of  penance  *.  Accordingly^  *  the  cistern  must
be  covered,^  in  that  before  little  mindSf  deep  knowledge
requires  to  be  veiled,  lest  by  the  same  cause  that  the  heart
of  the  teachers  is  lifted  up  to  the  highest  things,  the  infirmity
of  the  hearer  fall  away  to  the  lowest.  Accordingly  let  it  be
said  with  justice,  He  bindeth  up  the  waters  in  His  claudSf
that  they  should  not  burst  forth  alike  beneath.  For  *  the
waters  would  burst  forth  alike,*  if,  in  the  presence  of  weak
hearers,  the  knowledge  came  forth  from  the  lips  of  the  speaker
as  great  as  it  is,  if  all  the  whole  fulness  of  preaching  poured
itself  out  at  once,  and  reserved  nought  to  itself  together  with
those  making  progress.  For  it  is  fitting  that  he  that  preaches
should  have  an  eye  to  the  measure  of  him  that  hears  him,  so
that  the  preaching  itself  may  grow  with  his  hearers*  stages  of
grotvth.  For  so  does  it  behove  every  single  preacher  to  do,
as  it  is  dealt  with  himself  firom  heaven  ;  never  to  tell  to  the
weak  all  that  he  has  the  perception  of,  because  he  himself
too,  so  long  as  by  flesh  of  mortality  he  is  weak,  does  not
perceive  all  those  things  that  belong  to  heaven.  And  there-
fore he  ought  not  to  preach  to  the  ignorant  as  much  as  he  is.
acquainted  with,  because  even  he  himself,  touching  heavenly
mysteries,  cannot  have  his  eyes  open  to  see  how  great  they
are.  For  hence  it  is  that  Paul  the  Apostle,  after  he  was
admitted  to  the  mysteries  of  heaven,  saith.  For  now  we  see  \  Cor.
through  a  glass  darkly;  but  then  face  to  face.  And  hence  ^^'  '^*
it  here  follows  in  continuation ;

Ver.  9.  He  holdeth  back the  face  of  His  Throne^  and
spreadeth  His  cloud  upon  it.

*  Some  editioDi  add, '  For  whoso,  words  a  clean  eool  or  an  nnolean  be

when  he  comeih  to  deep  atreams  of  taken  in  mltohlef.' Thia  passage  is

knowledge,  eovereth  them  not  before  hardly  found  in  any  Mas.  and  seems

the  brutifih  hearts  of  his  hearers,  is  to  have  been  introdnoeJ  into  Uie  text

held  bound  to  a  penalty,  if  throogh  his  from  the  margin.  Ben.

804  Ood '  withholdeih  the  face  qf  Hii  Throne'  ai  present.

Job  sa,  89.  In  the  £au:e  there  is  wont  to  be  shewn  forth  acquaint-
-=-^ — 'anceship.  Thus  ^  the  face  of  His  Throne  is  held  back/  in
xxvii.  ^^^  by  us  in  this  life  the  gloriousness  of  His  kingdom  is  not
perceiredi  so  great  as  it  is  had  within;  ^upon  which  the
cloud'  is  rightly  said  *  to  be  stretched  ;*  because  that  glory
^^'  of  the  heavenly  kingdom  is  not  seen  such  as  it  is.  For  the
corruptible  body  presseth  down  tlie  soul;  and  the  earthy
tabernacle  weigheih  doum  the  mind  that  museth  upon  many
things.  And  so  against  seeing  it  we  are  besprinkled  with  a
mbt,  for  we  are  darkened  by  the  mere  cloudiness  of  our
ignorance.  Whence  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  Psalmist,
^j|i  And  darkness  was  under  His  feet;  and  He  rode  above  the
Cherubim,  and  didjly;  He  did  fly  above  the  wings  of  the
wind:  He  made  darkness  His  secret  place.  For  there  is
*  darkness  to  Him  under  His  feet,'  in  that  by  those  beneath
He  is  not  seen  in  that  brightness,  wherewith  He  exercises
dominion  among  those  above.  For  He  '  rode  above  the
Cherubim,  and  did  fly;'  since  the  *  Cherubim'  is  a  term  used
for  the  fulness  of  knowledge.  By  consequence  he  is  said
above  the  fulness  of  knowledge  to  have  '  ridden,  and  to  have
flown,'  because  the  loftiness  of  His  Majesty  there  is  no
knowledge  doth  compass.  *  He  did  fly,'  because  He  trans-
ported Himself  on  high,  far  from  the  reach  of  our  under-
standing. *  He  did  fly  above  the  wings  of  the  wind,'  because
He  transcended  the  knowledge  of  souls.  He  made  darkness
too  His  secret  place,  because  whereas  we  are  dimmed  with
the  mists  of  our  infirmity,  by  virtue  of  our  ignorance  He  is
hidden  from  us,  that  He  should  not  be  seen  by  us  now  in
eternal  and  interior  Brightness.  Hence  in  the  Song  of  Songs
Cant.  8,  also  it  is  said  to  Him  by  the  Spouse,  Escape^  my  Beloved,
^^  escape.  *  It  escapes  us,'  we  say,  as  often  as  that  does  not
occur  to  our  minds  which  we  wish  to  remember.  ^  It  escapes
us,'  we  say,  when  that  which  we  wish  we  do  not  retain
in  our  recollection.  So  Holy  Church,  after  that  she  sets
forth  the  Death  and  Resurrection  and  Ascension  of  our
Lord,  cries  out  to  Him,  full  of  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy,
Escape,  my  Beloved,  escape.  As  though  she  said ;  *  Thou
That  art  made  by  the  flesh  comprehensible,  do  Thou  by  Thy
Divine  Nature  transcend  the  comprehension  of  our  percep-
tion, and  in  Thine  own  Self  remain  to  us  Incomprehensible.'

God  hidetk  Hi$  Majenty^  and  boundelh  men*i  doings.  305

And  80  He  *  holdeth  back  tbe  face  of  His  throne/  because  Book
He  hideth  tbe  power  of  His  Majesty  from  mortal  beings. '

40.  Bat  if  we  render  His  '  tbrone*  tbe  Angelical  Powers,
for  on  tbese  same  Powers  He  sittetb  enthroned  as  on  a  royal
seat,  *  He  keeps  back  tbe  face  of  His  Tbrone*  from  ns,  becanse
so  long  as  we  baye  oar  subristence  in  tbis  mortal  flesb,  wbat
and  bow  wonderful  those  ministrations  of  tbe  Angels  are,  we
do  not  perceive.  *  And  He  spreadeth  His  cloud  upon  it*
assuredly  because  He  both  lifts  up  our  heart  for  making
search,  and  yet  it  is  brought  to  pass  by  a  secret  mode  of
control,  that  by  the  very  endlessness  of  its  searching  it  is  kept
back.  Whence  it  is  written,  The  deep  uttered  its  voice  at  the  Hab.  s,
Iq/Hnees  qfite  imagining. For  the  mind  of  man  is  forced  to

cry  out  in  admiration,  when,  in  loftiness  of  survey,  it  is
straitened  in  its  soarchings  by  the  very  act  by  which  it  is
enlarged.  Or,  surely,  becanse  we  are  ourselves  tbe  '  throne'
of  Ood,  He  is  said  not  unjustly  to  *  keep  back  the  face  of
His  throne,*  when  our  knowledge  is  prevented  advancing  to
things  of  a  higher  range.  Upon  which  same  throne  Ood  is
said  *  to  spread  His  cloud,*  because  remaining  Himself
invisible,  He  puts  forth  secret  judgments  upon  us,  that  at
once  a  thing  should  be  done  in  prominency,  that  we  should  be
able  to  see,  and  yet  the  origin  of  the  deed  be  hidden  in  con-
cealment, so  that  the  reason  wherefore  it  be  done,  we  should
needs  not  know. Hence  too  it  is  fitly  added;

Ver.  11.  He  hath  compassed  the  waters  with  bounds^  until
the  light  and  darkness  come  to  an  end.

41.  Because  very  often  in  Holy  Writ,  as  we  said  above,  by  xxviiL
tbe  name  of'  waters*  peoples  are  denoted ;  the  Lord  dompasseth

the  waters  with  bounds;  because  He  so  tempers  tbe  knowledge
of  mankind  that  until  the  successions  of  the  changing  seasons
pass  away,  it  cannot  perfectly  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  the
Interior  Brightness.  But  if  by  the  name  of '  light*  we  under-
stand the  righteous,  and  by  the  designation  of  *  darkness*
sinners;  (and  hence  Paul  saith.  For  ye  were  sometimes Zph.  5^
darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light;)  there  is  nothing  to  binder®'
this  same  thing  that  we  said  being  understood,  '  that  the
perfect  knowledge  of  eternity  is  vouchsafed  to  no  one,  until
the  course  of  the  righteous  and  of  the  unrighteous  is  brought
to  an  end.*  But  because  it  is  not  wonderful  that  carnal
people  know  nothing  of  things  above,  tbe  holy  man  lifts

VOL.  II.  X

300 Jivett  they  thai  are  '  Pillars'  Irenible  before  God.

Job  26,  himself  up  in  astonishment  at  that  same  Divine  power,  and

^ considers  that  it  surpasses  the  very  knowledge  of  Angels  and
'  perfect  men  as  well,  saying,

The  pillar M  qf  heaven  IremblOj  and  are  astonished  at  his
nod.

xxix.  42.  What  else  docs  ho  coll '  the  pillais  of  heaven'  but  the
holy  Angels,  or  the  principal  preachers  of  the  Church,  over
whom  in  the  heavenly  world  the  whole  structure  of  the
spiritual  edifice  increasing  arose,  as  Holy  Scripture  elsewhere

Rev.  3,  bears  witness,.saying.  Him  that  overcometh  will  1  make  a

*^  pillar  in  the  temple  qf  my  Qod.  For  whoever  is  established
firmly  by  a  right  purpose  of  mind  in  the  work  of  God,  is  set
up  as  a  pillar  in  the  structure  of  the  spiritual  edifice ;  that
being  placed  in  this  temple,  which  is  the  Church,  he  should
be  both  for  usefulness  and  ornament.  But  Job  calls  those
^  pillars  of  heaven'  whom  the  Apostle  calls  *  pillars'  of  the

Gal.  3,  Church,  saying,  Peter ^  and  James,  and  John,  which  seemed

^- to  be  pillars,  gave  me  the  right  hand,

43.  We  may  also  not  inappropriately  interpret  the  '  pillars
of  heaven'  the  Churches  themselves,  which  being  many  in
number,  constitute  oue  Catholic  Church  spread  over  the
whole  face  of  tlie  earth.  Hence  too  the  Apostle  John  writes
to  the  seven  Churches,  meaning  to  denote  the  one  Catholic
Church  replenished  wdth  the  Spirit  of  sevenfold  grace,  and

ProT.9,we  know  that  Solomon said  of  the  Lord, Wisdotn  hath

^*  builded  her  house,  she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  pillars.  And
the  same,  to  make  known  that  it  was  of  the  seven  Churches
he  had  spoken  that,  in  going  on sedulously  introduced  the

Pror.  o,very  Sacraments  themselves  too,  saying.  She  hath  killed
her  sacrifices,  she  hath  mingled  her  wine,  she  hath  also  set
forth  her  table  ;  she  hath  sent  forth  her  maidens,  that  they
may  cry  to  the  citadel  and  to  the  walls  qf  the  city,  (fany
be  a  little  one,  let  him  come  to  me.  For  the  Lord  '  killed
the  sacrifices'  by  offering  Himself  on  our  behalf.  He
'  mingled  the  wine,'  blending  together  the  cup  of  His  precepts
from  the  historical  narration  and  the  spiritual  signification.

Pf.  75,  Whence  it  is  elsewhere  written,  For  in  the  hand  qf  the  Lord
there  is  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red;  it  is  fall  of  mixture.
And  '  He  set  forth  His  table,'  i.  e.  Holy  Writ,  which  with
the  bread  of  the  word  refireshes  us  when  we  are  wearied,  and


3-4.


8

IViidam/ar  the  humble.  Fear  b^sboth  men  and  An^h.  807

come  to  Him  away  from  the  burthens  of  the  world,  and  by  Book

its  effect  of  refreshing  strengthens  m  against  oiir  fltdversaries. —

Whence  too  it  is  elsewhere  said  by  the  Church; 7%otiPf.2S,
prepareet  a  table  before  me^  againet  them  that  trouble  me,  ^'
He  ^  sent  forth  His  maidens/  i.  e.  the  souls  of  the  Apostles,
being  in  their  actual  beginning  infirm',  'that  they  might ite.
cry  to  the  citadel  and  the  wills  of  the  city;*  in  that  whilst *''J??  '
they  tell  of  the  interior  life,  they  lift  us  up  to  the  high  walls  McUmt,
of  the  City  Above,  which  same  walls,  surely,  except  any  be  j^^^^
humble  they  do  not  ascend. Whence  it  is  there  added  by  B.  1. 1.

90  T  1

that  same  Wisdom;  If  any  be  a  little  one^  let  him  come  tintop.  41J
Me*  As  if  she  said  in  plain  terms;  '  Whosoever  accounts
himself  great  in  his  own  eyes,  contracts  the  avenue  of  his
approach  unto  Me;  Tor  there  is  a  loftier  reaching  unto  Me  in
proportion  as  the  mind  of  each  one  is  in  himself  tlie  more
truly  abased.'

44.  But  with  whatever  degree  of  goodness  a  man  may  be
advanced,  with  whatever  knowledge  he  may  be  made  to  grow,
he  cannot  fathotn  to  the  bottom,  what  a  governance  of  judg-
ments the  Lord  rules  us  with.  Therefore  let  him  say,  7%«
pillan  of  heaven  tremble^  and  are  astonished  at  his  nod ;
because  in  most  things  not  those  even  are  able  to  reach  the
lofty  height  of  His  will,  who  whilst  announcing  see  the  re-
wards of  that  will.  Which,  as  we  said  above,  there  is  tiothing
hinders  being  interpreted  of  the  Holy  Angels  as  well ;  because
the  very  Powers  of  the  heavenly  world  themselves,  which
behold  Him  without  ceasing,  in  that  tery  contemplation  of
theirs  are  made  to  tremble.  But  that  that  should  n6t  be  a
trembling  of  woe  to  them,  it  is  one  not  of  fear^  but  of  itdmira-
tion.  Now  because  he  had  brought  in  how  great  the  conster-
nation of  his  wonderment  was,  he  now  relates  the  order  of  our
salvation. It  follows;

Ver.  12.  In  His  might  the  seas  are  suddenly  gathered
together i  and  His  wisdom  hath  struck  th^  proud  one.

45.  What  else  is  denoted  by  the  title  of  the  sea  save  the  xxx.
present  world,  wherein  the  hearts  of  men  seeking  after
eatthly  things  swell  with  the  diverse  billows  of  the  thoughts  ?
which  same  being  stirred  up  by  the  exaltation  of  pride,  whilst
with  cross  sway  they  thwart  one  another,  do  as  with  con-
fronting waters  ditsh  themselves  together. But  henceforth

x2

308 Ood  can/oundeih  S€{fan  by  wischm,  not  mere  farce.

Job  86/  the  seas  are  gathered  together  in  His  might/  because  on
PaoFH,  ^^  ^^^^  being  made  Incarnate,  the  discordant  hearts  of
worldly  men  believe  in  agreement.  Henceforth  Peter '  walks
on  the  sea/  because  to  the  preachers  of  Christ,  these  once
swelling  hearts  are  by  lowly  hearing  bowed  down  to  the
earth,  so  that  in  the  Gospel  too  it  justly  represented  the
gentleness  of  this  world,  that  the  stormy  water  of  the  sea,  its
swelling  being  forced  down,  was  trodden  by  the  feet  of  the
Lord.  Now  in  what  manner  that  was  done  is  disclosed,  when
it  is  said,  HU  wisdom  hath  struck  the  proud  one.

46.  Who  else  is  here  called  '  proud,'  saving  he  who  said,
Is.  14,  /  will  ascend  above  the  height  of  the  clouds^  I  will  be  like
the  Most  High:  and  concerning  whom  it  is  spoken  by  the
Job  41,  voice  of  God,  Who  is  made  that  he  should  fear  none,  and
^'*'  •  himself  is  king  over  all  the  sons  qf  pride.  With  reference
to  whom  moreover  the  prophet  David  agrees  with  this
Pf.89,  sentence,  saying.  Thou  hast  abased  the  proud  man^  like  one
^^*  wounded.  But  though  to  the  simple  nature  of  Deity  it  is
not  one  thing  to  be,  and  another  thing  to  be  wise,  nor  one
thing  to  be  wise,  and  another  to  be  strong,  forasmuch  as  the
strength  is  identically  the  same  that  the  wisdom,  and  the
wisdom  that  the  essence  of  the  Deity  is,  yet  I  consider  it  a
thing  to  be  regarded  with  lively  attention,  that  this  man
being  filled  with  the  prophetic  spirit,  chose  to  describe  the
proud  devil  as  stricken  by  *  the  wisdom'  rather  than  the  power
of  God.  For  he  saith  not,  *  His  might,'  but, '  His  wisdom
hath  struck  the  proud  one.'  For,  as  we  have  said,  although
by  right  of  simple  Nature,  the  Might  of  God  is  the  Wisdom
of  God,  yet  as  to  the  appearance,  the  Lord  overcame  the  devil,
not  by  power,  but  by  reason;  for  the  devil  himself,  by  over-
throwing us  in  that  root  of  our  first  parent,  as  it  were  right-
fully held  man  under  his  thraldom,  who  whilst  he  was  created
with  free  will,  yielded  consent  to  him,  when  he  prompted
what  was  unjust.  For  when  created  to  life  in  the  freedom  of
his  own  will,  he  was  of  his  own  accord  made  the  debtor  to
death.  Therefore  such  a  transgression  was  to  be  done  away ;
but  saving  by  sacrifice  it  could  not  be  done  away.  A  sacrifice
was  to  be  sought  after,  but  what  sacrifice  could  be  found
for  the  setting  men  free?  For  neither  was  it  just  that  for
reasoning  man  there  should  be  slain  sacrifices  of  brute  beasts.

Saiam^s  pride  beatem  down  <y  our  Lord  Oi  Man. 809

Whence  the  Apostle  says,  //  was  ther^ore  necessary  thai  Book
the  paUerns  of  things  in  the  heavens  should  be  purified  wM


these;  hU  the  heavenly  things  themselves  with  better  sacrifices^,  *  '
than  these.  And  so  if  brute  creatures  on  behair  of  a  rational
animal,  i.  e.  in  the  stead  of  man,  were  not  proportionate
Tictims,  a  man  was  to  be  sought  out,  who  shoidd  be  offered
for  men,  that  for  a  reasoning  being  committing  sin  there
might  be  offered  a  reasoning  victim.  But  what  of  the  fact,
that  a  man  without  sin  could  not  be  found?  And  the  victim
offered  in  our  stead,  when  could  it  cleanse  us  from  sin,  if  the
actual  victim  itself  was  not  without  sin^s  contagion?  Since
it  being  defiled  could  never  have  cleansed  the  defiled.
Therefore  that  it  might  be  a  rational  victim,  Man  was  to  be
offered,  but  that  it  might  cleanse  man  from  his  sins,  Man  and
that  Man  without  sin.  But  who  might  there  be  man  without
sin,  if  he  was  descended  from  a  combination  in  sin  ?  There-
upon in  our  behalf  the  Son  of  Ood  came  into  the  womb  of
the  Virgin;  there  for  our  sakes  He  was  made  Man.  Nature,
not  sin,  was  assumed  by  Him.  He  offered  a  sacrifice  in  our
behalf.  He  set  forth  His  own  Body  in  behalf  of  sinners,  a
victim  void  of  sin,  that  both  by  human  nature  He  might  be
capable  of  dying,  and  by  righteousness  be  capable  of
purifying.  This  One,  then,  when  the  ancient  enemy  saw
after  the  Baptism,  then  directly  fell  upon  Him  with  tempta-
tions, and  by  diverse  avenues  strove  to  insinuate  himself  into
His  interior;  he  was  overcome  and  laid  prostrate  by  the  mere
sinlessness  of  His  unconquerable  mind.

47.  But  because  to  the  interior  his  strength  did  not
reach,  he  betook  himself  to  His  outward  man,  that
because  he  was  subdued  by  the  prowess  of  the  soul,  Him,
Whom  he  had  not  the  power  to  deceive  by  temptation,
he  might  at  all  events  by  the  death  of  the  flesh  seem  to
vanquish.  And,  as  it  has  been  said  before  us,  he  had  leave
granted  to  him  against  that,  which  the  Mediator  had  taken
from  us  mortals.  But  where  he  had  power  to  do  something,
there  he  was  vanquished  utterly  on  every  side;  and  from  the
same  cause  that  he  obtained  the  power  outwardly  to  kill  the
flesh  of  the  Lord,  his  interior  power,  whereby  he  held  us
fast,  was  killed.  For  he  was  himself  vanquished  within,
whilst  in  seeming  he  vanquished  without;  and  he^  who  of

310 Tfie  mystic  '  Heaoeni  owe  their  adorning  to  the  Spirit.

Job  36,  right  held  us  the  debtors  of  death>  of  right  lost  in  us  the
Uy^'y  right  of  death;  because  by  means  of  his  ministers,  he  sought
'  for  the  flesh  of  Him  to  be  done  to  death,  in  Whom  he  found
no  whit  of  the  debt  of  sin.  Thus  our  Lord  did  in  our  behalf
pay  death  not  due,  that  death  due  might  not  injure  us ;  and  so
it  is  well  said,  And  His  wisdom  hath  struck  the  proud  one;
because  our  old  enemy  by  th^  excess  of  his  presumption  lost
even  him.  whom  by  the  law  pf  wicked  persuasion  he  got
possession  of;  and  whilst  he  audaciously  went  after  Him,  in
Whom  there  was  nought  at  his  command,  by  right  he  lost
him,  whom  he  as  it  were  justly  held  bound.  Therefore  he
was  '  stricken  by  wisdom,*  and  not  by  power,  in  that  while
he  is  let  loose  for  the  templing  Ood,  he  is  unfastened  from
possessing  man ;  so  that  him  that  was  under  him,  he  should
lose  by  the  same  act,  whereby  he  had  ventured  to  come  to
an  encounter  with  Him,  Who  is  over  him.  But  upon  the
Lord  being  killed  in  the  flesh,  what  gloriousness  of  powers
came  upon  his  Preachers  is  related,  when  it  is  added,
Ver.  IS.  His  Spirit  garnished  the  heavens.
xxxi*  48.  What  ^  heavens,*  saving  those  concerning  whom  it  is
Pi.10,1.  written,  Tlie  heavens  are  telling  the  glory  o/Qodf  Which
^  heavens  His  Spirit  garnished*  then,  when  It  *  filled*  them.
Aotf  3,  Which  we  have  learnt  by  Luke*8  relating,  who  saith.  Suddenly
~  '  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven^  as  of  a  rushing  mighty
windi  and  it  Jilted  cdl  the  house  where  they  wa-e  sitting;
and  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues  like  as  ofjire^
and  it  sat  upon  each  of  them:  and  they  were  alt  ^filled  with
the  Holy  Ohostf  and  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues  as
the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.  From  Him,  then,  they
received  the  adornments  of  prowess,  whom  an  exceeding
disfigurement  of  fear  before  had  possession  of.  For  we  know
that  first  one  of  tlio  Apostles,  i.  e.  of  the  *  heavens,'  how
often,  before  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  vouchsafed,
whilst  he  feared  to  die,  he  denied  '  the  Life;*  who  not  by
punishments,  not  by  inflictions,  not  by  the  dreadful  power  of
any  one,  but  by  the  simple  interrogation  of  a  single  slave,
was  brought  to  tlie  ground.  And  truly  that  that  slave  the
sterner  sex  might  not  exhibit  as  an  object  to  cause  alarm,  it
was  by  a  maidservant  putting  the  question  that  he  was  tiied.
Again,  that  the  weakness  of  such  a  sex,  by  the  lowness  of  her

Oloiy  qf  the  Apotilek  after  PentecMt.  31 1

office  as  well  might  be  roade  contempliblei  he  was  questioned  Book
not  by  a  maidservant  only,  but  by  a  maidservant  keeper  of. '
the  door. See  how  contemptible  the  person  is  that  is  sought  17. '
out  for  the  purpose  of  trying  him,  that  it  might  be  plainly
brought  to  light,  what  excessive  weakness  of  fear  possessed
him,  who  even  before  the  voice  of  a  maidservant  of  the  door
could  not  stand  fSaist.

49.  But  this  one  a  little  before  so  (till  of  affright,  what
after  the  Coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  he  became,  let  us  now
se6.  Surely  we  have  learnt  by  Luke*s  attesting  it,  with  what
an  authoritativeness  he  preached  the  Lord,  in  opposition  to
the  priests  and  rulers.  For  when  upon  a  miracle  being
wrought  inquiry  had  arisen,  and  the  rulers  from  among  the
priests,  the  elders,  and  the  scribes  laid  their  hands  together  in
tho  persecution  of  the  Apostles,  setting  those  persons  in  the
midst,  they  busied  themselves  to  ask  in  what  power  they  had
wrought  the  miracle.  Unto  whom  Peter  being  filled  with
the  Holy  Spirit  spake.  Ye  rulers  of  the  people  and  elders;  Acta  4,
if  we  be  this  day  examined  qfthe  deed  done  to  the  impotent^' ^'
man,  by  what  means  he  is  made  whole;  be  it  known  unto
you  ally  and  fo  all  the  people  of  Israel^  that  by  the  Name  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  Whom  ye  cruc\fkdy  Whom  Ood
raised  from  the  dead,  even  by  Him  doth  this  man  stand
here  before  you  whole.  And  when  the  rage  of  the  persecutors
against  this  grew  to  a  head,  and  the  priests  and  rulers  forbade
those  men  to  preach  Jesus,  with  what  independent  power
Peter  rose  in  height  against  the  wrath  of  the  rulers,  is  made
plain,  when  it  is  there  added  directly.  But  Peter  and  the  ^r*  19.
Apostles  answered  and  said  unto  them.  It  is  right  to  obey
God  rather  than  man.  But  when  the  commands  of  those
withstanding  did  not  repress  the  influence  of  the  persons
preaching,  it  comes  to  scourges.  For  it  is  added.  And  when  Aots  5,
the  chief  priests  had  beaten  them,  they  commanded  that  they^'
should  not  speak  in  the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  let  them  go.
But  that  the  prowess  of  the  Apostles  not  even  scourges  had
power  to  restrain,  is  openly  shewn,  when  it  is  immediately
introduced  next,  And  they  departed  from  the  presence  of  the
council,  rejoicing  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer
shame  for  the  Name  of  Jesus.  And  immediately  even  after
the  rejoicing  of  their  scourges  what  they  did  we  have  pointed

312  The  SainU  adorned  by  the  Spirii  with  sundry  Oi/U.

Joi  96,  out;  And  daily  in  the  temple^  and  in  every  house,  they  ceased
MviF  ^^^  ^^  ^<ich  and  to  preach  Jesus  ChiHst  Mark,  that  man,  a
little  whilo  before  full  of  fears,  now  speaks  witli  tongues,
flashes  forth  with  miracles,  with  free  voice  rebukes  the
unbelief  of  the  priests  and  rulers,  gives  to'  the  rest  for  the
preaching  of  Jesus  an  example  of  independence.  That  he
should  not  speak  in  His  Name,  he  is -restrained  by  scourg-
ings,  and  jet  is  not  withheld.  He  sets  at  nought  the
strokes  of  those  that  scourged  him,  who  a  little  while  back
had  dreaded  the  words  of  those  that  questioned  him.  And
he  that  when  asked  a  question  shrunk  in  consternation
from  the  powers  of  a  maidservant,  when  beaten  with  the  rod
forces  back  the  powers  of  the  rulers.  For  being  henceforth
established  by  the  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  heights
of  this  world  he  trod  down  with  the  heel  of  liberty,  that  he
should  see  that  that  was  low  down  on  the  earth,  whatever
it  was  that  swelled  high  against  the  grace  of  the  Creator.

50.  These  are  the  ornaments  of  the  heavens,  these  are  the
gifts  of  the  Spirit,  that  are  used  to  be  manifested  by  divers
powers,  which  as  divided  by  the  bestowal  of  secret  distri-

1  Cor. bution  Paul  reckons  up,  saying.  For  to  one  is  given  by  ihe

^^^  Spirii  the  word  of  wisdom:  to  another  the  word  of  knowledge
by  the  same  Spirit:  to  another  faith  by  the  same  Spirit:  to
another  the  gifts  of  healing  by  the  same  Spirit:  to  another
the  working  of  miracles:  to  another  prophecy:  to  another
discerning  of  spirits:  to  another  divers  kinds  of  tongues:
to  another  the  interpretation  of  tongues.  All  which  directly
afterwards  including  in  one  by  a  general  statement  he  says,
But  all  these,  worketh  that  one  and  the  selfsame  Spirit,
dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  He  will. Of  these  *  heavens*

VaJSSfi.  too  it  is  said  in  the  Psalm,  By  the  hand  of  the  Lord  were  the
heavens  set  fast.  Of  these  ornaments  of  the  Spirit  also  it  is
added.  And  all  the  power  of  them  by  the  Spirit  of  His  mouth.
Therefore  it  is  well  said.  His  Spirit  hath  garnished  the
heavens:  because  the  holy  Preachers,  except  they  received
the  gifts  of  the  Paraclete,  that  were  promised  to  them,  would
not  have  shone  with  any  comeliness  of  might  But  because
when  the  Holy  Apostles  were  beautified  with  the  grace  of
the  gifts  of  virtue,  the  preaching  of  life  gained  ground  against
the  hearts  of  unbelievers,  and  our  old  enemy  being  expelled

Satan  lurki  like  a  terpent  in  ike  wicked  heari* 813

by  the  voices  of  the  preachers,  abandoned  the  minds  of  the  Boos
unbelievers,  which  he  had  close  beset;  after  the  ornaments  of-
the  heavens  it  is  fiUj  subjoined;

Jnd  by  the  midwifery  of  Hie  hand  the  crooked  eerpeni  i$
brought  forth.

51.  For  who  is  described  bj  the  designation  of  the  'ser-xxxii*
pent,'  but  our  old  enemy,  at  once  slippery  and  crooked,  who
for  the  deceiving  of  man  spake  with  the  mouth  of  a  serpent  i
Of  whom  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  Leviathan  the  ftar-Mr- If.97»l.
penty  the  crooked  one;  who  was  for  this  reason  allowed  to
speak  with  the  mouth  of  a  serpent,  that  by  that  very  vessel
of  his  man  might  learn  what  he  was  that  dwelt  within.  For
a  serpent  is  not  only  crooked  but  slippery  as  well;  and  so
because  he  stood  not  in  the  uprightness  of  truth,  he  entered
into  a  crooked  animal,  and  because  if  to  his  first  suggestion
resistance  be  not  made,  in  a  moment  whilst  it  is  not  per-
ceived he  slips  in  entire  into  the  interior  of  the  heart,  he
made  speech  to  man  by  a  slippery  animal.  Now  *  the  dens*
of  this  serpent  were  the  hearts  of  wicked  men.  Which  same
because  he  drew  on  to  his  own  depravity,  he  as  it  were
rested  in  the  dwelling  place  of  them.  But  *  by  the  midwifery
of  the  Lord's  hand,  the  crooked  serpent  is  driven  out  of  his
own  dens,'  in  that  whilst  the  Divine  grace  heals  us,  he  that
had  held  possession  of  us,  our  old  enemy,  is  cast  out  of  us,
as  Truth  Incarnate  says.  Now  shall  the  prince  of  thie  world Jthni^,
be  east  out.  Hence  all  the  Saints  now  already  he  does  not  *
possess  by  holding,  but  persecutes  by  trying.  For  because
he  does  not  reign  in  them  within,  he  fights  against  them
without,  and  because  he  has  lost  his  dominion  in  the  inte-
rior, he  sets  on  foot  wars  in  the  exterior.  For  him  That  One
drove  forth  from  the  carnal  hearts  of  men.  Who  for  the  sake
of  men  came  to  the  state  of  Incarnation;  and  whereas  He
took  seisin  of  the  hearts  of  unbelievers,  He  as  it  were  put
His  hand  to  the  dens  of  the  serpent.  Whence  it  is  rightly
said  by  the  Prophet;  And  the  sucking  child  shall  play  onU.Uy
the  hole  qf  the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child  shall  put  his  hand^*  *;
on  the  cockatrice^  den.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in
'  all  My  Holy  Mountain.  For  whom  does  he  call  *  the  sucking
child,'  or  '  the  weaned  child/  saving  the  Lord  ?  And  what
did  he  denote  by  '  the  hole  of  the  asp,'  and  '  the  cockatrice

314  Our  Lord  dragged  Satan  from  hia  dwelluiy  in  man.

Job 86, den/  saving  the  hearts  of  wicked  men?  Because  our  old
p — '•—  enemy,  whereas  he  gat  himself  wholly  into  their  couseutiug>
as  a  crooked  serpent  in  his  own  hole,  he  gathered  and  wound
up  the  coils  of  his  craftiness;  whom  ho  both  designates
with  the  title  of  ^  asp'  as  covertly  ravening,  and  of  a  '  cock-
atrice' as  openly  wounding.  And  so  the  Lord  '  put  His
hand  upon  the  hole  of  the  asp  and  the  cockatrice/  when  He
took  seisin  of  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  by  Divine  power.
And  the  asp  and  the  cockatrice,  being  seized,  i.  e.  the  devil,
he  drew  away  therefrom  a  captive,  that  *  in  His  Holy
Mountain,*  which  is  the  Church,  he  might  not  ^  harm'  His
Elect  believers.

Thus  it  is  hence  said  in  the  Song  of  Songs,  on  the  coming
Cant  4,  of  the  Spouse ;  Thou  shaU  be  crowned  from  the  top  q/"
®*  Amana,  from  the  top  qf  Shenir  and  Hermon^  from  the
Hans*  dens.  For  what  else  is  denoted  by  the  title  of  the
lions  but  the  devils,  which  rage  against  us  with  the  fury  of
the  deadliest  cruelty  ?  And  because  the  sinners  are  called  to
faith,  whose  hearts  were  oifce  t  the  dens  of  lions,'  when  by
their  confession  the  Lord  is  believed  to  have  overcome
death,  it  is  as  if  He  were  *  prowned  from  the  lions'  dens.'
For  a  crown  is  the  recompense  of  victory.  So  often  then  do
the  faithful  offer  a  crown  to  Him,  as  they  confess  that  He  has
overcome  death  by  virtue  of  the  Resurrection.  And  so  *  the
lion  is  diiven  from  his  den,'  because  '  by  tlie  midwifery  of
the  Lord's  hand,'  ^  the  crooked  serpent  is  hindered  from
dwelling  in  the  dens,'  which  he  had  possession  of.  For  he
went  fortli  defeated  from  the  hearts  of  believers,  who  had
aforetime  ruled  over  them  with  the  sceptre  of  unbelief.

53.  Observe  how  in  a  few  short  sentences  the  holy  man
related  the  order  of  the  Lord's  Advent,  set  forth  its  weighty
charges,  and  in  admiring  described  what  by  His  Incarnation
was  possible  to  be  done.  But  He,  Who  wrought  marvellous
things  when  He  came  in  humility,  cannot  be  viewed  with  all
the  great  terribleness  He  shall  come  with,  when  He  appeareth
in  the  mightiness  of  His  Majesty.  The  order  of  His  first
Advent  might  be  viewed  and  estimated,  in  so  far  as  in  coming
to  redeem  carnal  beings,  He  abated  the  greatness  of  His
Divinity  to  cai'ual  eyes.  But  who  might  bear  the  terrors  of
His  Highness,  when  with  the  power  of  the  Second  Advent

Ood  shews  a  little  of  His  wags. We  could  not  hear  all.  816

in  exercising  judgment  by  fire^He  shall  glow  in  the  Majesty  Book

of  His  power? Whence  the  holy  man  describes  His  first -

Advent,  but  is  exhausted  for  the  second,  saying,

Ver.  14.  Loy  these  things  have  been  spoken  for  part  qf
His  ways ;  and  whilst  we  scarcely  hear  a  little  drop  qf  His
words,  who  shall  be  able  to  look  on  the  thunder  qf  His
Mqfestyf

64.  What  is  meant  in  this  place  by  the  designation  ofxxxiiL
the  *  ways,'  but  the  Lord's  modes  of  acting  ?  Hence  too  the
Lord  saith  by  the  Prophet;  For  My  ways  are  not  as  yotir  lf.S6,8.
ways.  Accordingly  in  telling  of  the  Advent  of  the  Lord,  be
had  described  the  ways  of  God  in  part;  because  His  method
of  acting  by  which  He  created  us  was  one  thing,  and  that  by
which  Fie  redeemed  ns  another.  Tlius  those  things,  which
he  told  touching  the  Lord's  way  of  acting,  making  light
of  by  comparison  with  the  final  Judgment,  he  says,  Zo,  these
things  are  spoken  for  part  qf  His  ways.  Which  he  also
calls  ^  a  little  drop  of  His  words,*  for  whatsoever  thing  that
is  high,  whatsoever  thing  that  is  terrible,  we  whilst  set  in
this  life  are  brought  to  know  by  the  contemplation  of  Him,
firom  the  vast  ocean  of  the  secrets  of  Heaven  wells  out  to  us
like  a  slight  drop  of  the  liquid  element  Above.  And  who
shall  be  able  to  look  on  the  thunder  qf  His  Mfqfesty  f  As
though  he  expressed  himself  in  plain  words;  ^  If  we  scarce
endure  the  wonders  of  His  humility,  the  loud  and  dreadfid
Advent  of  His  Majesty  with  what  nerve  do  we  encounter  ?*
This  thundering  of  His  Advent  the  Psalmist  also  sounds  out,
saying.  Our  Ood  shall  come  in  state,  our  Ood,  and  shall  ^9-50,8.
not  keep  silence,  a  fire  shall  devour  b^ore  Him,  and  a
mighty  tempest  round  about  Him.  Hence  Zephaniah  the
Prophet  tells  it  out,  saying.  The  Great  Day  of  the  Zorrf  wZepb.i,
Hear;  it  is  near  and  hasteth greatly.  The  voice  qf  the  Day  qf^  ""  *
the  Lord  is  bitter:  the  mighty  man  shall  be  troubled  there.
That  Day  is  a  day  qf  wrath,  a  day  of  trouble  and  distress,
a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation,  a  day  of  darkness  and
gloominess,  a  day  of  cloud  and  whirlwind,  a  day  qf  the
trumpet,  and  qf  a  dbreadful  sound.  The  terror  then  of  the
Strict  Inquest,  which  Zephaniah  calls  ^  the  Trumpet,*  blessed
Job  designates  *  thundering.'  Which  Joel  also  viewing
saith,  Let  all  the  inhabitants  qf  the  land  be  troubled;  fbr^oeia,

316  First  and  second  Advent  conirasled.

Job  96,  the  Day  qf  the  Lard  eameth:  for  it  is  nigh  at  hand,  a  day
-  ^^'  qf  darkness  and  qf  gloominess,  a  day  qf  cloud  and  whirl-
^'wind.  For  the  Day  qf  the  Lord  is  great,  and  very  terrible,
and  who  shall  sustain  itf  But  how  incomprehensible  and
unimaginable  that  Oreatness  wherewith  He  shall  come  in
His  Second  Manifesting,  in  some  degree  we  estimate  aright,
if  we  consider  with  heedful  reflection  the  weighty  particulars
of  His  first  Advent.  Surely  that  He  might  redeem  us  from
death,  the  Lord  came  to  die,  and  the  impoyerishment  and
punishments  of  our  flesh  He  underwent  in  His  own  Body ;
Who  before  He  came  to  the  stock  of  the  Cross,  sufiered
Himself  to  be  bound,  to  be  spit  on,  to  be  mocked  and  to  be
beaten  with  blows  on  His  cheek.  Observe  to  what  disgrace-
ful treatment  He  for  our  sakes  consented  to  come,  and  yet,
before  He  permitted  Himself  to  be  laid  hold  of.  He  ques-
tioned His  persecutors,  saying.  Whom  seek  ye?  To  Whom
they  thereupon  gave  answer,  Jesus  qf  Nazareth.  And  when
He  said  to  them  directly,  /  am  He,  He  only  uttered  a
voice  of  the  mildest  answer,  and  at  once  prostrated  His
armed  persecutors  to  the  earth.  What  then  shall  He  do
when  He  cometh  to  judge  the  world,  who  by  one  utterance
of  His  voice  smote  His  enemies,  even  when  He  came  to  be
judged?  What  is  that  Judgment  which  |Ie  exercises  as
immortal.  Who  in  a  single  utterance  could  not  be  endured
when  He  was  about  to  die  ?  Who  may  sustain  His  wrath.
Whose  very  mildness  even  could  not  be  sustained  ?  So  then
let  the  holy  man  consider  it  and  say.  And  whilst  we  scarcely
hear  a  little  drop  qf  His  words,  who  shall  be  able  to  look  on
the  thundering  of  His  Mcffesty  t

BOOK  xvm.

ContAiiM  the  ezpotkiaii  of  the  twntj-miwmA  tad  tweiilj-dglitfi  ehaptert
of  the  Book  of  Job,  to  the  tweiity-flni  twm  and  half  throngli  li,  after
manifold  I


It  is  the  case  for  the  most  part  in  Holy  Writ  that  there
are  things  of  a  mystical  nature  so  representedi  that  neverthe^
less  they  seem  pat  forth  in  accordance  with  the  historical
relation..  But  oftentimes  such  sort  of  descriptions  are  mixed
together  in  that  same  historical  relation,  whereby  the  whole
outside  of  history  is  rendered  null';  whjch  same  whilstjheyj  ei
sound  of  nothing  belonging  to  the  history,  oblige  the  reader  ^'^
to  look  for  something  else  in  them.  For  things  being  spoken
that  we  suppose  plaiu,  when  we  find  any  particulars  inter-
spersed with  a  more  obscure  meaning,  we  are  as  it  were
pricked  by  a  kind  of  spurs,  that  we  should  both  be  alive  for
the  understanding  some  things  iq  a  dfispei-sens*,  and  that  we
should  take  even  those  things  as  put  forth  in  a  more  obscure
sense,  which  we  looked  upon  as  spoken  in  their  plaip  import
Whereas,  then,  blessed  Job  was  speaking  of  the  Word  of  the
Lord,  and  the  greatness  of  His  thundering,  next  in  order  to
these  words  it  is  directly  introduced ;

Chap,  xxvii.  1.  Moreover  Job  added  taking  up  his  parable,
and  said.  -

2.  By  which  same  verse  it  is  shewn  ^ffhow  great  myster^  i.

the  words  of  this  most  saintly  man  are*  delivered,  when  *  a

parable,*  i.  e.  a  simile,  is  described  as  ^  taken  up'  by  him,  who

uttors  nothing  below  in  the  way  of  simile  or  comparison.

For  be  it  far  from  us  in  this  place  to  interpret  a '  parable*

that  musical  instrument*. Since  neither  is  it  allowable  to

suppose  that  under  infliction  of  chastenings  he  used  music,

when  Truth  saith  by  His  Scripture,  Music  in  mourning  is  Ecchm.

S9,  6.
•  '  We  know  of  no  mufieal  instrn- but  one  may  imagine  iorae  ao  naiiie<l
meat  ao  ealjed  either  now  or  fermerlj ; from  their  paraboUe  figure.'  Ben.

318 Job  declares^  like  Holy  Churchy  hu/aith  in  Ood.

Job  S7,  OS  a  tale  out  of  season. The  word  ^  parable/  then,  having

- — : —  been  namedy  see  bow  we  now  learn,  the  text  itself  telling  it,
'  not  by  the  text  only  to  estimate  his  words.  And  so  every
thing  must  be  drawn  to  turn  to  that  likeness,  by  which  the
Church  is  denoted  in  a  figure.  And  indeed  in  the  very,
beginning  of  his  speaking,  the  things  said  are  put  forth  in
a  plain  sense,  but  they  "are  ¥i'UwTne<rwuh  more  obscure  ones
subjoined.  For  he  begins  as  he  isused,  with  a  plain  mode
^ot  speech,  but  he  finishes  his  words  with  a  description  preg-
nant through  mystical  significations^ And  so  he  saith,

Ver.  2.  As  God  liveth^  JVIiO  hath  taken  away  my  judg-
mentf  and  the  Almighty^  Who  hath  brought  my  soul  to
bitterness.
ii.  3.  By  which  same  words  blessed  Job  at  once  tells  his  own
circumstances,  and  represents  the  times  of  Holy  Church
under  affliction,  wherein  she  is  borne  down  by  the  open
firowardness  of  unbelievers,  and  vexed  by  the  bitterness  of
persecution.  For  in  two  ways  the  Church  is  subject  to  be
tried  by  her  adversaries,  viz.  that  she  should  sufier  persecu-
tion either  by  words  or  swords.  Now  Holy  Church  aims
with  the  greatest  jiligence  to  possess  w^sdom^nd  patiencg.
An  J  her  wisdom  is  exercised  when  she  is  tried  with  words,
her  patience  is  exercised  when  she  is  tried  with  sworcTs.
T^owT^owever,  he  is  speaking  of  that  persecution,  wherein
she  is  provoked  not  by  swords,  but  by  false  statements.
Now  we  know  numbers,  who  when  they  encounter  some
things  adverse  in  this  life,  do  not  believe  that  God  is,  but
there  are  some  that  hold  that  God  is,  but  does  not  concern
Himself  in  the  least  with  the  afiairs  of  men. For  of  the  one

Pi  14,1.  it  is  said  by  David,  Tike  fool  liath  said  in  his  hearty  Tltere  is
no  Ood.  But  the  latter  say  in  him,  How  doth  Ood  know  f
And  is  there  knowledge  in  the  Most  Highf And  again;

Pt.94,7.  Yet  they  say  again ;  The  Lord  shall  not  see^  neither  sftall
the  God  of  Jacob  regard  it.  Thus  this  person  who  bore  a
type  of  Holy  Church,  whilst  set  fast  in  the  very  bitterness  of
his  affliction,  made  answer  against  them  both.  For  as  life
has  ^  being,'  but  death  has  not,  to  avow  that  God  is,  he  saith,
As  Ood  liveth,  but  that  he  might  tell  tliat  God  concerns
Himself  with  the  affairs  of  mortals,  he  added,  fVho  hath
taken  away  my  judgmentt  and  hath  brought  my  soul  to

God  permiU  8aiari$  wnmgfin:  righi  endi. 819

bitterness. For  these  ills  which  he  suflTera  he  bean  record  Book
thai  he  suffers  not  by  accident,  but  by  Ood  Who  ordereth^^^
aU  things,  nor  does  he  attribute  the  power  for  his  bitterness
tojiis  tempter,  but  to  his  Creator.

4.  For  he  knows  that  the  devil,  though  he  is  ever  aiming
at  the  aflSicting  of  the  just,  yet  if  he  do  not  receive  the  power
from  our  Maker  is  not  empowered  in  the  least  degree  for  any
tittle  of  temptation.  And  hence  all  the  deviFs  will  is  unjust,
and  yot  whilst  God  permits  it,  all  his  power  is  just  For  of
himself  he  docs  unjustly  seek  to  try  men  indifferently,  but
those  that  require  to  be  tempted,  in  so  far  as  they  require  to
be  tried,  God  does  not  permit  to  be  tried  otherwise  than
justly. Whence  also  in  the  Books  of  the  Kings  it  is  written

the  devil,  Tfiat  the  evil  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  KP^*!/^'
Saul,  Where  the  question  justly  occurs,  *  If  it  was  the  '
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  why  should  it  be  called  an  evil  spirit?
and  if  an  evil  spirit,  why  the  Lord's  V  But  in  two  words
there  is  comprehended  at  once  the  just  power  and  the  unjust
will  in  the  de\'il.  For  both  he  himself  is  called  an  evil
spirit  in  respect  of  a  most  evil  will,  and  the  same  spirit  is
called  the  Lord's  spirit  in  respect  of  the  most  just  power
bestowed  on  him.  A^d  so  it  is  well  said ;  God  liveth^  Who
hath  taken  away  my  judgment ;  and  the  Almighty j  Who
hath  brought  my  soul  to  bitterness.  For  though  the  enemy
rage  furiously,  who  longs  to  deal  theblow,  j-et  il  Is  JSih
"Creator,  Who  permits  IBim  to  have  power  for  any  thing.  But
forastnuch  as  the  holy  man  by  invoking  the  life  of  dod
bound  himself  to  somewhat,  let  us  hear  what  in  so  obliging
himself  he  subjoins. It  follows ;

Ver.  8,  4.  AU  the  while  my  breath  is  in  me^  and  the  Spirit
of  God  is  in  my  nostrils^  my  lips  shall  not  speak  iniquity^
nor  my  tongue  meditate  falsehood.

5.  What  he  first  calls  ^  iniquity,'  this  repeating  afterwards  iii.
he  calls  *  falsehood.'  For  both  all '  falsehood'  is  *  iniquity,'
and  all  *  iniquity'  *  falsehood,'  because,  whatever  thing  is  at
variance  with  truth  is  surely  at  odds  with  equity.  But  between
this  which  ho  expresses, '  to  speak'  and  that  which  he  adds
afterwards^  to  ^  meditate*'  there  is  a  wide  difference.  For
sometimes  it  b  a  worse  thing  to  *  meditate*  falsehood  than  to  .
speak  it For  to  speak  is  very  frequently  a  matter  of  pre-

320 AU  tying  is  wrongs  and  mars  even  a  good  purpose.

Job  s7,  cipitatioo,  but  to  ^  meditate'  of  purposed  wickedneM. And

_?: —  who  could  be  ignorant  by  what  great  difference  the  sin  ia

diatinguiahed,  whether  a  man  tell  a  lie  by  precipitation  or  of

set  purpose  ? But  the  holy  man^  to  be  entirely  attached  to

the  truth,  tells  that  he  woidd  neither  lie  of  set  purpose,  nor

by  precipitation. For  all  lying  is  very  seriously  to  be

guarded  against,  though  sometimes  there  is  a  certain  sort  of

lying  which  is  of  lighter  complexion,  if  a  man  lie  in  rendering

Wifd. goo^l^ But  seeing  that  it  is  written,  The  mouth  that  belieth

y^\'9layeth  the  soul. And,  Thou  slialt  destroy  all  them  that

'  *  speak  leasing. This  kind  of  lying  also  those  that  are  perfect

eschew  with  the  greatest  caret  so  that  not  even  the  life  of

any  man  should  by  deceit  of  theirs  be  defended,  lest  they

hurt  their  o?m  souls,  whilst  they  busy  themselves  to  give

life  to  another's  flesh ;  though  the  same  particular  kind  of

sin  we  believe  to  be  very  easily  remitted. For  if  any  sin  is

by  godly  practice  ensuing  after  to  be  done  away,  how  much

more  is  this  easily  wiped  off,  which  pitifiilness,  the  mother  of

good  works,  herself  accompanies  ?

6.  But  there  are  some  that  from  the  deceit  of  the  midwives
endeavour  to  establish  that  this  species  of  lying  is  not  sin,
chiefly  because,  upon  those  midwives  lying,  it  is  written,

Bxod. That  the  Lord  made  them  houses. By  which  mode  of

1 91

'  '  recompensing  it  is  rather  leai-nt  what  the  offence  of  lying
earns;  for  the  profits  of  their  kindness  which  might  have  been
repaid  them  in  everlasting  life,  on  account  of  the  sin  of  lying
mixing  in  are  diverted  into  an  earthly  recompense,  that  in
their  own  Ufe,  which  they  were  ready  to  defend  by  lying,
they  should  receive  back  the  good  which  they  did,  and  not
have  any  reward  of  their  recompensing,  that  they  might  look
.  forward  to  beyond.  For  if  the  thing  be  weighed  with  exact-
ness, it  was  from  the  love  of  the  present  life  they  lied,  not
froqi  the  being  bent  on  the  recompense ;  for  by  the  act  of
sparing,  they  endeavoured  to  protect  the  life  of  the  infants ;
but  by  the  act  of  lying,  their  own  life.

7.  And  though  in  the  Old  Testament  a  few  such  cases
may  possibly  be  discovered,  yet  almost  on  no  occasion  will

to  Edd. '  YiUm  prattando/  but  mott  piuage  it  quoted  io  Grat.  Deor.  Cauf.

Mm.  ooly  *  pnertando.' Ben.  quotea  83.  q.  3.  o.  16.  aae  alio  St.  Isidore  Seot.

St.  Ieidore,^iioD.  Si.  03.  de  Mend,  at  ii.  o.  80.  f.  10.  St  Aug.  oo  Pt.  ▼.  7.

uiiug  the  word  thui,  and  notei  that  this  takes  the  same  view.

ne  Oa$pel  siricier  than  ike  Law. JoV$  honeHtJlrmnesi.  921

the  attentive  reader  there  find  this  or  a  like  kind  of  lying  Book
practised  by  those  that  were  perfect,  althongh  the  lie  might  lEIHI*
seem  to  bear  some  sort  of  semblance  of  truth ;  and  perchance  it
might  be  an  ofience  of  a  lighter  complexion  under  the  Old
Testament,  wherein  by  victims  of  bulls  and  goats,  the
sacrifice  was  not  the  very  Truth  itself,  but  a  shadow  of  the
truth.  For  in  the  New  Testament,  after  Truth  has  been
manifested  by  flesh,  we  are  advanced  by  a  higher  scale  of
precepts,  and  it  is  meet  and  right  that  certain  actions  which
in  that  People  were  instrumental  to  a  shadow  of  the  Truth,
we  should  g^ve  over.  But  if  there  be  any  man,  who  would
defend  his  lying  by  the  Old .  Testament,  because  there
perhaps  it  was  less  detrimental  to  particular  persons,  he
must  needs  be  compelled  to  say  that  the  robbing  of  another's
property,  and  the  retaliation  of  an  injury,  which  were  there
allowed  to  those  in  a  weak  state,  cannot  be  injurious  to
himself.  All  of  which  it  is  plain  to  all  men  with  what  severe
strictures  Truth  doth  visit  Which  ^  Truth'  now  henceforth,
the  shadow  of  the  betokenment  of  Him  set  aside,  is  brought
to  light  in  very  flesh.  But  as  the  holy  man  gives  his  word
neither  to  *  speak'  nor  *  meditate  falsehood,'  these  actual
particulars,  wherein  he  agrees  with  the  truth,  he  subjoins,
carrying  it  on;

Ver.  5.  Ood  forbid  that  I  should  Ju»t^  you;  till  I  die,
I  will  not  depart  from  mine  innoeeney.

8.  For  he  would  ^  depart  from  his  innoeeney,'  if  he  reckoned iv.
good  things  of  bad  persons;  as  Solomon  bears  witness,  who
saith.  He  thcU /u8t\fieth  the  wicked^  and  he  thai  eondemneth^rf^M^
the  juBt,  even  they  both  are  abomination  to  the  Lord. For '
there  are  persons,  who,  whilst  they  extol  with  commendation
deeds  of  men  ill  done,  heighten  that  which  they  ought  to
have  rebuked. For  hence  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  Woe  to  Ei.  is,
those  that  sew  pillows  under  every  elbow  qf  the  hand,  and '
make  cushions  under  the  head  qf  every  age. For  a  *  pillow'
is  put  for  this,  that  we  may  rest  the  easier. Therefore
whoever  flatters  persons  doing  wrongly  is  putting  a  pillow
under  the  head  or  the  elbow  of  one  lying,  so  that  the  man
that  should  have  been  chidden  on  account  of  sin,  being
stayed  up  therein  by  commendations,  should  rest  at  his  ease.
Hence  again  it  is  written.  And  one  built  up  a  wall,  and,  lo,  ib.  lo.

VOL.  II.  T

322  Job  feared  to  speak  wrongly^  having  a  clear  conscience.

Job  97 1  others  daubed  it. For  by  the  term  of '  a  wall>'  the  hardness

-g^~~of  sin  is  denoted.  And  so  ^  to  build  up  a  wall'  is  for  a  man
to  rear  against  himself  barriers  of  sin;  but  they  ^  daub  the
wall/  who  flatter  those  that  commit  sins,  that  what  the  first
by  doing  wickedly  build,  those  same  persons  by  spreading
their  flatteries  should  as  it  were  make  of  bright  colour.  But
the  holy  man,  as  he  does  not  think  what  is  bad  of  the  good,
so  he  refuses  to  judge  what  is  good  of  the  bad ;  saying,  Ood
forbid  that  I  should  judge  you  fust:  till  I  die,  I  unll  not
depart  from  mine  innocency.  Where  he  subjoins  in  plain
words;

Ver.  6.  My  righteousness,  which  I  began  to  hold  fast,
I  will  not  abandon.

For  ^  his  righteousness'  that  he  had  ^  begun  with,'  he  would
^  abandon,'  if  he  went  out  of  the  way  into  the  praising  of
persons  committing  sin.  But  because  we  then  more  truly  keep
away  from  the  sins  of  others  when  we  first  keep  ourselves  safe
from  our  own,  why  he  is  so  afraid  to  be  guilty  touching
those,  he  gives  the  grounds  of  the  principle,  when  he  adds;
For  neither  doth  mine  heart  reproach  me  in  all  my  life,
V.  9.  As  if  he  expressed  himself  in  plain  words;  ^  On  your
account  I  ought  not  to  be  drawn  into  guilt,  in  that  I  have
dreaded  to  commit  sin  iu  my  own  aflairs.'  But  it  is  a  thing
to  be  known,  that  every  one  that  is  at  variance  with  the
precepts  of  the  Lord  in  practice,  as  often  as  he  hears  them,
is  reproached  and  confounded  by  his  own  heart,  because
that  which  he  has  never  done  is  brought  to  recollection.
For  whereinsoever  it  sees  itself  to  have  done  amiss,  the
conscience  by itself  secretly accuses self. Whence  the

Pa.us/prophet  David  beseeches,  saying,  Then  may  I  not  be
ashamed,  when  I  have  respect  unto  all  Thy  commandments.
For  greatly  '  ashamed'  is  every  man,  when  either  by  reading
or  hearing  them  he  turns  his  eye  to  the  precepts  of  God,
which  by  his  way  of  living  he  has  disregarded. Thus  it  is

1  John hence  declared  by  the  voice  of  John,  If  our  heart  condemn

8  SI  99  ' ^

'  '  '  %is  not,  then  have  we  confidence  toward  Qod,  And  whatsoever
we  ask  we  receive  qf  Him,  As  if  he  said  in  plain  speech,
'  If  that  He  bids,  we  do,  that  we  ask,  we  shall  obtain.'

10.  For  with  God  both  these  two  do  of  necessity  match
with  one  another  exactly,  that  practice  should  be  sustained

Bad  ihoughU  reuUted  are  nHy  but  not  usiljkl  ein. 893

by  prajer,  and  prayer  by  practice, lliua  it  is  hence  that  fiooic
Jeremiah  saith;  Let  us  eearch  and  try  our  waye^  and  turn  t^  i*
again  to  the  Lord, Lei  us  lift  up  our  hearts  with  our  hands  40. 41. '
unto  Ood  in  the  heavens. For  to  *  search  oar  ways*  is  to
sift  what  is  inmost  in  the  thoughts. But  he  *  lifts  up  his
heart  with  his  hands/  who  strengthens  his  prayer  by  good
works. For  he  that  prays,  but  shuts  his  eyes  to  pracdce,
'  lifts  up  the  heart,'  but  does  not '  lift  up  the  hands.' But
whosoeTor  practises,  but  does  not  pray,  ^  lifts  up  the  hands,'
but  does  not '  lift  up  the  heart' And  so  according  to  the
voice  of  John,  the  heart  then  acquires  confidei^ce  in  prayer,
when  no  wickedness  of  life  withstands  it. Of  which  same
confidence  it  is  rightly  said now  by  the  holy  man;  For
neither  doth  mine  heart  reproach  me  in  all  my  life. As
though  he  said  in  plain  speech,  ^  It  never  remembers  to  hare
been  guilty  of  that,  whereby  it  might  be  made  ashamed  in  its
prayers.' But  it  may  bo  asked,  on  what  principle  he  declares
that  he  is  not  reproached  by  his  heart,  seeing  that  he  accuses
himself  above of  having  sinned,  saying,  /  have  sinned:  J^7f
what  shall  I  do  unto  Thee^  O  Thou  Preserver  qf  men  f Or  *^*
surely.  If  I  would  justify  my  self ^  ^^^  <^^'^  mouth  shall  9^  90.
condemn  me.

11.  But  it  is  requisite  to  be  known  that  there  are  sins  that
by  righteous  men  are  possible  to  be  avoided,  and  there  are
some  sins  which  even  by  righteous  men  are  not  possible  to
be  avoided.  For  what  man's  heart,  whilst  bound  up  with
this  corruptible  flesh,  does  not  slip  in  ill  bent  thought,  even
if  he  be  not  plunged  into  the  very  pit  of  consenting  ?  And
yet  to  think  these  same  wrong  thoughts  is  to  commit  sin.
But  while  there  is  a  resisting  of  the  thought,  the  soul  is  (reed
from  being  confounded.  And  so  the  mind  of  the  righteous,
though  it  be  firee  from  bad  practice,  yet  sometimes  it  falls  to
the  ground  in  bad  thinking.  Thus  then  into  sin  too  it  slips,
because  in  the  thought  of  the  heart  at  all  events  it  is  made
to  swerve,  and  yet  it  hath  not  that  whereon  to  upbraid  itself
afterwards  in  weeping,  because  it  recovers  itself  before  that
it  falls  by  consenting.  And  so  with  just  propriety  he  who
confessed  himself  a  sinner,  declares  that  he  is  never  upbraided
by  his  heart,  because  though  perhaps  by  thinking  unlawful
thoughts  he  ever  fell  short  of  righteousness,  yet  by  the

y2

324  Enemies  of  Holy  Church  within  and  udthaut  her  pale.

Job  87,  resolute  struggle  of  the  soul,  be  resisted  the  thought. It
*  -follows;


Alleo.

Ver.  7.  Lei  mine  enemy  be  like  the  ungodly y  and  he  that

riaeth  up  againsl  me  as  the  unrighteous.

vi. 12.  In  Holy  Writ,  Ihe  words  ^  like  as'  and  ^  as  if  are

. sometimes  put  not  for  a  likeness,  but  for  the  reality. Whence

John  ly  we  have  that;  And  we  beheld  His  glory y  the  glory  as  of  the

^^' only-begotten  of  the  Father. And  thus  here  also  ^  like,*  and

'as*  seem  to  be  said  rather  for  the  sake  of  affirmation  than

similitude. Now  between  the  ungodly  and  the  wicked  man

there  is  wont  to  be  this difference  sometimes,  that  every

ungodly  man  is  unrighteous,  but  not  every  unrighteous  man

ungodly. For  the  ^  ungodly'  is  put  instead  of  unbeliever,  i.  e.

a  stranger  to  the  godliness  of  religion. But  a  man  is  called

unrighteous,  who  by  wrongness  of  practice  is  at  variance  with

righteousness,  even  if  he  does  perhaps  bear  the  name  of  the

Christian  Faith. Therefore  by  the  typical  voice  of  blessed

Job,  Holy  Church,  which  is  subject  to  some  gainsaying  the

right  Faith,  avouches  that  she  has  an '  ungodly  man  her  enemy/

But  because  she  has  to  bear  others  imder  the  cloke  of  the

faith  within  her  pale  living  in  bad  practices,  she  abhors  the

*  unrighteous*  man  as  being  her  adversary. But  if '  like*  and

*  as*  it  is  right  we  should  understand  as  put  on  account  of

*  likeness,*  Holy  Church  brands  by  a  likeness  to  the  ungodly
those  whom  she  is  subject  to  living  in  a  carnal  manner
within  her  pale.  For  within  her  bounds  he  is  an  enemy  to
her,  who  whilst  he  maintains  himself  a  believer  by  pro-
fessions, denies  it  by  practices.  And  because  he  accounts
him  as  an  unbeliever,  who,  whilst  set  within  her  pale  in  sem-
blance, only  assails  her  with  mischief  of  evil  doing,  he  rightly
says.  Mine  enemy  is  like  the  ungodly^  and  fie  that  riseth  up
against  me  as  the  unrighteous.  As  though  he  said  in  plain
speech;  *  He  is  at  variance  with  me  in  faith  as  well,  who
does  not  agree  with  me  in  practice.' It  follows;

Ver.  8.  For  what  is  the  hope  of  the  hypocrite^  if  he  seize
with  covetousnesSy  and  God  free  not  his  soul?
vii. 13.  The  hypocrite,  who  in  the  Latin  language  is  termed
A  simu-  pretender',  aims  not  to  be  but  to  appear  just,  and  therefore
he  is  a  covetous  robber,  because  whereas  while  doing  wick-
edly he  desires  to  be  revered  for  sanctity,  he  seizes  on  the


lator

HypocriieM  court  praise,  Saini$  dUUke  ii.  325

praise  of  a  life  not  his  own. But  it  is  said  to  be  the  aim  of  ^^^J*

hypocrites,  that  both  what  they  are  they  may  keep  back,  and ■'

what  they  are  not  they  may  make  themselves  known  to  men
as  being;  so  that  they  should  surpass  their  own  measure  in
esteem,  and  by  credit  for  conduct  shew  themselves  to  excel
the  rest  of  the  world.  They  eschew  the  seeming  to  be  that
which  they  are,  and  before  the  eyes  of  men  (hey  clothe
themselves  with  a  kind  of  overlaid  respectability  of  innocency.
Hence  in  the  Gospel  they  are  rightly  upbraided  by  the  voice
of  our  Redeemer,  when  Uie  words  are  spoken  to  them,  fVoe  Matsa,
unto  you,  hypocrites!  for  ye  are  like  unto  whited  sepulchres,
which  indeed  appear  to  men  beautiful  outward,  but  are
within  full  of  dead  tnen^s  bones^  and  of  aU  uncleanness.
Even  so  ye  also  outwardly  appear  righteous  unto  men,  but
within  ye  are  full  of  covetousness  and  iniquity.  Contra*
riwise  all  that  are  Saints  really  not  only  do  not  ever  at  all
covet  glory  that  is  beyond  their  measure,  but  do  also  eschew
appearing  that  very  thing,  which  they  have  obtained  to  be.
And  hence  that  great  Preacher  of  truth,  in  speaking  against
the  false  apostles;  while  he  was  relating  the  extraordinary
excellences  of  his  practice  for  the  instruction  of  his  disciples;
whilst  he  was  describing  that  he  had  undergone  such  count-
less perils  in  accumulated  persecution,  and  after  this  made
mention  of  his  having  been  carried  up  to  the  third  heaven,
and  into  Paradise  again,  where  he  had  power  to  learn  things
so  great,  as  he  had  not  power  in  any  degree  to  teU ;  was
on  the  point  perhaps  of  telling  things  still  more  marvellous
of  himself,  yet  holding  himself  in  from  human  applause  by
deep  reflecting  he  adds,  But  now  I  spare,  lest  any  man  ^Cor^
should  think  of  me  above  that  which  he  seeth  me  to  be,  or  ^'^'
that  he  heareth  of  me.  He  then  had  somewhat  yet  further
to  be  declared  concerning  himself,  who  '  forbears^  to  speak.
But  the  great  Preacher  did  both,  that  both  by  telling  the
things  which  he  had  done  he  might  instruct  his  disciples,
and  by  being  silent  keep  himself  safe  within  the  bounds  of  •
humility.  For  he  would  have  been  over  ungracious,  if  he
had  withheld  all  relating  to  himself  from  the  disciples ;  and
perhaps  incautious  over  much,  if  even  to  the  disciples  he
had  uttered  all  about  himself.  But  in  a  wonderful  way,  as
has  been  said,  he  did  both  the  one  and  the  other,  so  that  by

8Q6  Sainii  lellgood  of  ihemselveSf  as  Ood^/ar  others^  good.

Job  S7,  speaking  he  might  instruct  the  life  of  those  that  heard  him,
'  ' and  by  holding  his  peace  preserve  his  own.

14.  Now  it  deserves  to  be  known,  that  holy  men  as  often
as  they  communicate  any  tiling  concerning  themselves  to
their  followers,  are  imitating  the  custom  of  their  Creator.
For  Gody  Who  forbids  us  that  we  never  be  commended  by
our  own  lips,  in  Holy  Writ  does  utter  His  own  praises;  not
that  He  Himself  needs  them,  Who  cannot  be  a  gainer  by
praises;  but  whilst  He  relates  to  us  His  greatness,  He  lifts
up  our  ignorance  to  Himself,  and  by  telling  His  own  good
He  teaches  us;  whereas  man  woiUd  never  know  Flim,  if  He
had  been  minded  to  be  Mlent  about  Himself.  And  so  He
for  this  reason  shews  His  own  praises,  that  we  may  be  able
by  hearing  to  know,  by  knowing  to  love,  by  loving  to  follow,
by  following  to  obtain,  and  by  obtaining  to  enjoy  the  vision
Pt.  Ill,  of  Him.  Whence  the  Psalmist  saith.  He  unU  tell  the  people
^'  the  power  of  His  tvorks,  and  that  He  map  give  them  the
heritage  of  the  heathen.  As  if  he  expressed  himself  in  plain
terms;  ^  For  this  reason  He  tells  the  mightiness  of  His  doing,
that  he  that  heareth  thereof  may  be  enriched  with  His  gifts.'
Therefore  holy  men,  imitating  the  way  of  their  Creator,
sometimes  reveal  things  that  concern  tliemselves,  that  those
who  hear  them  they  may  instruct,  not  that  they  may  themselves
be  gainers,  and  yet  in  these  things  they  keep  guard  over  them-
selves by  bethinking  themselves  deeply,  lest  whilst  they
lift  up  others  from  an  earthward  bent,  they  should  themselves
be  sunk  in  the  coveting  of  earthly  applause.  Whoso  state-
ments hypocrites  for  the  most  part  follow,  but  the  meaning
of  their  statements  they  are  wholly  blind  to,  because  what
the  righteous  do  with  a  view  to  the  advantaging  of  their
neighbour,  this  these  same  do  with  a  view  to  the  extending
of  their  own  name.  But  the  holy  man  beholding  that
hypocrites  seek  not  at  all  after  future  glory,  but  desire  to
possess  themselves  of  present  glory,  says,  fVhat  is  Hie  hope
of  the  hypocrite  f  in  that  while  he  loves  the  present  things,
Bom.  8,  he  hopes  not  for  the  future.  For  it  is  written.  For  what  a
^**  man  seethe  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for?  And  so  for  this  reason
there  is  on  the  part  of  the  hypocrite  no  advancing  in  any
degree  to  the  eternal  rewards  by  hope,  because  that  which
required  to  be  sought  elsewhere,  he  makes  it  his  pride  to

God  will  not  hear  at  la$i  those  who  hear  not  Him  now.  827

have  in  possession  here. And  because  his  offence  was  set  Book

ibrth,  the  punishment  too  is  subjoined,  when  it  is  forthwith '

brought  in  next;

Will  God  hear  his  cry,  when  trouble  cotneth  upon  him  f
15.  *  His  cry  in  the  time  of  his  straits  God  heareth  not/  viii.
because  in  the  time  of  tranquillity  he  did  not  himself  hear
the  Lord  crying  in  His  precepts. For  it  is  written;  ffePrw.
that  tumeth  atcay  his  ear  from  hearing  the  lawy  even  his '
prayer  shall  be  abomination. And  so  the  holy  man  seeing
that  all  they  that  are  indifferent  to  practise  what  is  right
now,  in  the  time  at  the  end  betake  themselves  to  words  of
beseechingi  saiUi;  Will  God  hear  his  cryf By  which  words
assuredly  he  follows  close  upon  the  words  of  our  Redeemer,
Who saith, Last of  all  come the  foolish virgins  afoo,M*tt.
saying^  Lordj /A)rdf  open to  us. And it is answered *
them^  Verily  I  say  unto  you^  T  know  you  not. Because
great  severity  is  exercised  then,  in  proportion  as  now  greater
mercy  is  prolonged  ^  and  He  does  then  with  strictness  put*«l*
forth  judgment upon persons  not corrected,  Who now^^e-
patiently  bestows  pity  upon  them  going  on  transgressing.  ^^^
For  hence  it  is  the  Prophet  saith.  Seek  ye  the  Lordy  whUe^^'^*^'
He  may  be  found: call  ye  upon  Him^  while  He  is  near.
Now  He  is  not  seen,  and  '  is  near,^  then  He  shall  be  seen,
and  shall  not  '  be  near.' He  hath  not  yet  appeared  in
judgment,  and  if  He  be  sought.  He  is  found. For  in  a  won*
derful  way,  when  He  appeareth  in  judgment  He  is  at  once
able  to  be  seen,  and  unable  to  be  found. Hence  Solomon
describes  Wisdom  at  once  caressing  sweetly,  and  judging
dreadfully,  saying, Wisdom  crieth without;  she  uttereth  ^ro^.lj
her  voice  in  the  streets. Whose  language  he  also  tells, ""
adding.  How  long^  ye  simple  ones^  will  ye  love  simplicity^
and  fools  delight  in  their  own  harm^  and  silly  ones  hate  know-
ledge? Turn  you  at  my  reproof Behold^  I  will  pour  out
my  Spirit  unto  you :  I  will  make  known  my  words  unto
you. Mark  with  what  kind  of  words  her  sweetness  in  call-
ing is  expressed. Let  us  see  now  in  what  ways  her  severity
in  upbraiding  is  told,  that  in  the  end  sooner  or  later  her
strictness  in  punishing  may  have  free  scope. Because  I  have
calledf  and  ye  reused,  I  have  stretched  out  my  hands  and

328 Lt^ve  of  the  world  excludei  deUghi  in  God.

Job  s7i  no  man  regarded;  but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  counsel^
^^'  and  would  none  of  my  reproqf.  Let  her  now  say  how  she  wUl
smite  those,  whom  she  bears  with  so  much  longsuffering,
never  turning  back  to  her:  /  also  will  laugh  at  your  destruc-
tion,  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh,  when  sudden
calamity  fallelh  on  you^  and  your  destruction  riseth  as  a
whirlwind:  when  distress  and  anguish  cometh  upon  you.
Then  shall  they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  ansu^er.  They
shall  rise  up  early ,  but  they  shall  not  find  me.  Bj  the
mouth  of  Solomon  then,  the  wisest  of  men,  all  particulars
are  carefully  set  forth  relating  to  the  Judgment  from  Above :
because  she  both  at  first  calls  us  sweetly,  and  afterwards
upbraids  us  terribly,  and  at  the  last  condemns  us  irretrievably.
And  so  it  b  well  said;  IViU  Ood  hear  his  cry  when  trouble
cometh  upon  himf  Surely  because  the  hypocrite  then
findeth  not  a  remedy  in  crying,  who  now  lets  slip  the  fitting
opportunity  of  crying.  Concerning  whose  wickedness  it  is
yet  fiirther  added ;

Yer.  10.  Or  will  he  be  able  to  delight  himself  in  the
Almighty?
ix.  16.  For  he  that  is  overcome  by  the  love  of  earthly  things,
in  no  degree  delights  himself  in  God.  The  soul  indeed  can
never  exbt  without  its  delight,  for  it  delights  itself  either  in
things  below  or  in  things  above,  and  in  proportion  as  it  is
employed  with  higher  devotion  towards  Uiose  above,  it
grows  deadened  with  the  greater  loathing  towards  those
below,  and  as  it  glows  with  a  keener  interest  for  those  below,
it  cools  in  proportion  with  an  accursed  insensibility  from
those  above.  For  both  cannot  possibly  be  loved  together
and  alike.  Hence  the  Apostle  John,  well  knowing  thai
amongst  the  thorns  of  worldly  attachments  the  crop  of
heavenly  charity  can  never  shoot,  before  he  produces  tlie
seeds  of  the  love  eternal,  with  the  holy  hand  of  the  word
eradicates  from  the  hearts  of  his  hearers  the  thorns  of  worldly
1  John  afiections,  in  the  words,  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the
^*  ^^'  things  that  are  in  the  world.  And  he  directly  subjoins.
If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in
him.  As  if  he  said  in  express  terms;  ^  Both  these  loves
cannot  contain  themselves  in  one  and  the  same  heart,  nor

Bad  men  call  on  God  in  trouble  only. Erroi^  refuted.  329

does  the  crop  of  charity  from  Above  shoot  in  that  heart,  Book
wherein  the  thorns  of  gratification  down  below  kill  it* And^^^
he  reckons  up  all  the  prickles  arising  from  that  gratification
below,  saying,  For  all  that  is  in  the  world  is  the  lust  qf  the^'  ^••l^*
fleshy  and  the  lu$t  of  the  eyes^  and  the  pride  ofUfOy  which  %$
not  qf  the  Father^  but  is  of  the  world. And  the  world
passeth  away^  and  the  lust  thereqf. And  so  the  *  hypocrite
cannot  delight  himself  in  Qod,*  because  hearenly  desires
never  spring  forth  in  his  mind,  soeing  surely  that  the  thorns
of  earthly  love  overiay  it Of  whom  it  is  fitly  added;
Will  he  always  call  upon  Oodf

17.  For  it  is  then  tiiat  the  hypocrite  *  calls  upon  God,*  x.
when  the  wretchedness  of  earthly  circumstances  wrings  him
hard.  For  when  in  this  world  he  has  obtained  the  carrying
out  of  the  good  fortune  sought  for,  his  Maker,  Who
vouchsafed  him  this  same  good  fortune,  he  asks  not  for.-
But  because,  as  we  said  before,  the  art  of  those  that  teach
should  be,' that  in  their  hearers*  minds  they  should  first  aim

to  destroy  what  is  wrong,  and  afterwards  to  preach  what  is
right;  (lest  the  hearts  that  are  full  of  evil  things  should  not
contain  the  good  seed  of  holy  preaching,  whence  it  is  said  to
Jeremiah,  See^  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  nations  andjv.  i,
over  the  kingdoms^  to  root  out  and  to  pull  down  and  to^^'
destroy  and  to  throw  down^  to  build  and  to  plant.  For  it  is
first  bidden  him  that  he  should  pull  down,  and  afterwards
that  he  should  build,  first  to  pluck  up,  and  afterwards  to
plant;  because  the  foundation  of  rightful  truth  is  not  laid,
except  the  edifice  of  error  be  first  pulled  down;)  blessed
Job  after  that  he  had  made  the  case  of  the  Universal  Church
his  answer  to  the  statements  of  his  friends  as  if  in  opposition
to  words  of  heretics,  and  that  by  a  manifold  rejoinder  he  hitd
destroyed  tiieir  pride,  describes  himself  henceforth  to  teach;
that  is,  that  he  might  be  plainly  seen  in  those  things  which
he  added  to  plant  what  is  right,  but  in  those  that  he  pre-
mised to  have  plucked  up  what  is  wrong. It  goes  on;

/  will  teach  you  by  the  hand  qf  Ood,  that  which  is  with
the  Almighty;  I  will  not  conceal.

18.  In  such  a  way  does  blessed  Job  speak  in  his  own ^i.
words  as  to  denote  something  connected  with  what  relates  to

ddO Knowledge  taken  pride  in  turns  to  condemnation,

^^■>^iw.  For  Holy  Church  in  teaching,  in  bo  far  as  it  is  expe-
j^ — '  dient  to  know  it»  hides  not  a  particle  of  truth.  Thus  because
3^  ^  '  *  the  Hand  of  God'  is  a  name  for  the  Son;  for,  by  Him
were  all  things  made;  she  tells  that  by  the  Hand  of  God
she  teaches  those,  whom  she  sees  continuing  foolish  in  their
own  wisdom.  As  if  she  said  in  plain  words;  ^  I  know  not
any  thing  of  myself;  but  whatever  I  perceive  of  the  Truth,
'  this  I  comprehend  by  the  bountifuloess  of  that  same  Truth.
Ye  for  this  reason  are  not  embued  with  right  wisdom,
because  this  same  wisdom  that  you  have  you  ascribe  not  to
the  Hand  of  God,  but  to  your  own  selves.'  For  the  adver-
saries of  Holy  Church,  if  they  do  at  times  perceive  any
thing  true,  this  they  attribute  to  their  own  powers,  and  they
deprive  themselves  so  much  the  more  of  the  Wisdom  from
Above,  in  the  same  proportion  as  they  wish  to  have  it  appro-
priated to  themselves  as  being  derived  from  their  own  wits.
Unto  whom  it  is  sometimes  vouchsafed  for  their  judgment,
that  they  should  indeed  know  some  things  aright,  but  by
this  very  same  knowledge  be  rendered  the  more  obnoxious
to  punishment. Whence  it  is  fitly  added ;

Ver.  12.  Beholdf  all  ye  yourselves  know:  why  then  do  ye

utter  vain  things  without  cause  ?

xii. 19.  It  is  written;  And  that  servant^  which  knew  his  lord's

J^^J^tUTiW,  and  prepared  not  himself,  neither  did  according  to

his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes. But  he  that

knew  not,  and  did  not  worthily,  shall  be  beaten  with  few

JtLm,  4,  stripes. And  again  it  is  written; Therefore  to  him  that

knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him it  is  sin.

And  so  for  the  heightening  of  greater  guilt  Holy  Church  tells

it  that  her  enemies  at  once  know  what  they  ought  to  follow,

and  will  not  follow  what  they  may  know. Of  which  same

Pi.  M,  persons  it  is  elsewhere  said ;  Let  them  go  dimn  quick  into

^^' hell. Those  are  ^  quick'  that  are  sensible  of  tlie  things  tliat

are  done  towards  them. For  the  dead  neither  know  nor  are

sensible  at  all,  and  so  ^  tlie  dead'  who  do  not  feel  are  used  to

be  put  for  persons  that  know  not,  but  ^  the  quick,'  who  are

sensible,  for  those  that  know. Therefore  to  ^  go  down  quick

into  hell'  is  for  persons  to  sin  knowing  and  being  sensible  of

it It  goes  on;  This  is  the  portion  of  an  ungodly  man  with

They  thai  wrest  Gotfa  IVard  multiply  but  to  perish.  831

Ood,  and  the  heritage  of  oppressors^  which  they  shall  receive  Book
qf  the  Almighty. Which  same  '  portion'  and  <  inheritanpe*^:^!!*
he  thereupon  givesi  when  he  adds;

Ver.  14.  If  his  children  be  multiplied,  it  is  in  the  sword;
and  his  grandchildren  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  bread.

20.  The  title  of  the  '  ungodly'  is  not  without  meaning  xiii.
given  to  heretics,  who  through  the  erroneousness  of  false
doctrine  are  far  removed  from  the  knowledge  of  the  truth ;
whom  in  the  words  following  he  calls  ^  violent'  as  well,  as
being  persons  who  set  themselves  to  wrest  by  violence  to  a
wrong  meaning  the  sentences  of  Holy  Scripture  contdning
right  articles  of  doctrine* And  so  they  are  *  violent'  if  not

in  the  goods  of  men,  at  all  events  in  the  senses  of  precepts.
But  the  *  sons  of  violent  men'  are  the  followers  of  heretics,
who  while  they  consent  to  their  error,  are  as  it  were  engen-
dered by  their  preaching.  But  while  being  '  multiplied'
they  shall '  be  in  the  sword,'  for  though  now  they  grow  up  in
an  immense  multitude  in  a  ruinous  liberty,  yet  they  are
smitten  by  the  sentence  of  the  Judge  to  come.  Whence  the
Lord  saith  by  Moses,  My  sword  shall  devoUr  Jlesh.  ForI>««t.
*  the  sword  of  God  devours  flesh,'  because  in  the  Final  '
Judgment  His  sentence  destroys  those,  who  are  carnally
wise.  On  which  point  it  is  to  be  made  out  why  it  should
be  said  that  the  wicked  '  receive  this  portion'  and  in-
heritance of  theirs  from  the  Almighty  ?  Yet  to  those  taking
a  right  view  it  is  plain  that  though  they  had  it  from  them-
selves to  act  unjustly,  yet  it  comes  before  the  Equity  Above,
what  is  unjustly  done  justiy  to  judge;  so  that  the  sentence
of  Ood  should  orderly  appoint  for  punishment  those  whom
their  ill-ordered  conduct  drew  into  sin.  Concerning  whom
it  is  fitly  subjoined ;  And  his  grandchildren  shall  not  be
satisfied  with  bread.

21.  For  '  the  grandchildren'  of  Heretics  are  they  that  are
bom  by  the  preaching  of  children  in  error.  And  these
^  bread  fails  to  satisfy ;'  because  while  in  the  provender  of
the  sacred  Word  they  seek  to  perceive  more  than  they  take
in,  they  are  ever  a  hungering  to  tiie  knowledge  of  the  truth;  and
the  preachings  of  instruction,  which  they  are  busy  to  seek
for  questioning,  they  are  incapable  of  having  for  refreshment.
But  because  from  the  number  of  these  heretics  some  Holy

333  When  false  teachers  die,  hate  ii  fares  with  iheir  people.

Job  s7,Cburcb  gathers  in,  some  she  leaves  obstinate  in  their  wicked-

jj;jjj-ness,  it  is  thereupon  added;

Yer.  15.  TTiase  that  remain  of  him  shall  be  buried  in
death.
3Liv.  32.  Doubtless  ^  the  persons  left'  of  that  tribe  of  heretics
^  are  buried  in  death/  for  whereas  they  return  not  to  the  light
of  truth,  assuredly  they  are  sunk  down  in  everlasting  punish-
ment by  an  earthly  perception.  And  because  it  is  some-
times the  casoi  that  whilst  the  leader  of  the  common  herds  in
error  is  carried  off  to  punishment,  the  common  herds  that
were  led  astray  are  new  set  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and
then  Uie  persons  under  thom  return  to  true  knowledge,  when
these  persons  are  brought  to  eternal  punishments,  who  had
been  wrongly  set  over  them,  it  is  fitly  added ;
And  his  widows  shall  not  weep.
XV*  28.  Whom  do  we  take  for '  his  widows'  but  the  subject
common  herds  left  deserted  for  their  happiness  by  his  death?
For  oftentimes,  as  has  been  said,  when  die  preacher  of  error
is  carried  off  to  everlasting  punishments,  his  subject  multi-
tudes are  brought  back  to  the  grace  of  a  true  acquaintance.
For  these  multitudes  the  wicked  preacher  was  set  over  like  a
husband,  because  the  seducer  of  the  soul  did  cleave  joined
to  them  for  the  worse.  Or,  indeed,  ^  the  widows  do  not
weep,'  because  whilst  continuing  in  their  erring  belief,  where-
as they  hold  their  preacher  to  have  been  holy,  they  are
beguiled  by  a  deceitful  hope,  that  they  should  not  mourn.
It  follows;

Yer.  16,  17.  Though  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  earth,  and
prepare  raiment  as  the  mud;  he  may  prepare,  but  the  just
shall  put  it  on,  and  the  innocent  shall  divide  the  silver.
xvi. 24.  Silver  is  used  to  be  interpreted  the  clearaess  of  sacred

Ps.  18,6.  Writ,  as  it  is  elsewhere  said;  Vie  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure
words:  as  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth.  And  because
there  are  those  that  long  to  have  the  Word  of  God  not
inwardly  in  the  exemplifying  but  externally  in  the  displaying,
therefore  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  AU  they  that  are  clothed
in  silver  are  cut  off,  being  those,  who  by  the  word  of  God
do  not  fill  themselves  with  the  interior  refreshment,  but  array
themselves  in  the  outward  exhibition.  Hence  their  '  silver,'
i.  e.  the  word  of  heretics,  is  compared  to  '  earth,'  because,

Heretics  furnished  in  vain  from  Hofy  Writ. 888

toachiog  the  subject  of  Holy  Writ,  that  there  may  be  some-  Book

thing  that  they  know,  they  toil  atld  strain  from  the  coveting .*

of  earthly  applause.  And  these,  too,  *  prepare  raiment  as
the  road,*  because  they  make  up  testimonies  of  Holy  Scrip-
ture loosely  and  bedaubingly,  whereby  they  would  defend
themselves.  He  shall '  prepare*  indeed,/  but  the  just  shall
put  them  on,*  because  the  person  who  is  full  of  right  faith,
which  is  used  to  be  accounted  to  the  Saints  for  righteous-
ness, gathers  together  those  self-same  testimonies  of  Holy
Writ,  which  the  heretic  adduces,  and  therefirom  he  charges
home  the  obstinacy  of  that  one's  error.  For  whereas  they
fetch  against  us  the  testimonies  of  the  Sacred  Law,  they
bring  with  them  unto  us  that  whereby  they  may  be
defeated.  And  hence  David  representing  a  type  of  the
Lord,  but  Goliath  the  pride  of  Heretics,  they  spake  that  in
deeds,  which  we  are  disclosing  in  words.  Thus  Goliath
came  to  battie  with  a  sword,  but  David  with  a  shepherd's
scrip,  but  David,  defeating  that  same  Goliath,  with  his  own
sword  slew  him.  Which  thing  we  likewise  do,  who  by  His
deigning  have  obtained  to  be  made  members  of  the  promised
David*.  For  when  heretics  full  of  pride,  and  advancing
sentences  of  Holy  Writ,  we  defeat  by  the  same  words
and  sentences,  which  they  bring  forward,  we  as  it  were
behead  Goliath  in  his  pride  with  his  own  sword. And  so

*  the  just  puts  on  those  same  garments,'  which  the  unjust
man  *  prepares,'  because  the  holy  man  employs  in  the
service  of  truth  those  same  sentences  by  which  the  bad  man
strives  to  exhibit  himself  a  master  of  learning  in  opposi-
tion to  the  truth.

25.  And  the  innocent  shall  divide  the  silver.  For  ^  the
innocent  to  divide  the  silver'  is  to  set  forth  the  revelations  of
the  Tjord  piece  by  piece  and  with  discrimination,  and  to
apply  to  each  individual  what  may  be  proportionately  suitable.
For  the  Word  of  the  Lord  which  is  here  entitied  '  silver*  or'

*  garments,'  this  same  is  elsewhere  denominated  *  spoils.'
Which  the  Psalmist  likewise  witnesses  in  the  way  of  com-
parison, saying,  /  rejoice  at  Thy  Word  as  one  thatjindeih  Pt.  no,
great  spoils. Which  spoils  are  so  called  for  this  reason,*^*
because  on  the  Gentile  world  passing  over  to  the  faith  of  the
Lord,  the  Jews  are  spoiled  of  tibe  Sacred  Oracles  with  which

•  •].  <  the  promiied  memben  of  Dsrid.'

834  CatholicH  never  fahehood  from  truth  tauyht  by  Helvetia,

Job  s7,  they  bad  been  invested. And  of  tbis  division  of  tbe  silver  or

^ — '—  of  spoils  it  is  elsewbere  said,  Benjamin  is  a  ravening  wotf:  in

Gtn,  49,  the  morning  he  shall  devour  the  prey^  and  at  night  he  shall

^'' divide  the  spoils, B7  whicb  words,  no  doubt,  the  Apostle

Paul  is  designated,  as  being  descended  from  tbe  slock  of

Benjamin,  wbo  ^  in  the  rooming  devoured  tbe  prey,*  because

in  his  first  beginnings  seizing  upon  all  the  believers  be

was  able,  he  glutted  his  own  cruelty. But  ^  in  the  evening

be divided the spoils,'  because  afterwards being made  a

believer,  he  portioned  out  the  sacred  oracles  by  interpreting

them.

36.  Though  this  ^  silver,*  which  ^  the  innocent  divides,'
may  be  understood  in  anotlier  sense  as  well.  For  Heretics,
that  they  may  be  easily  able  to  recommend  what  is  wrong,
mix  with  their  statements  things  that  are  right,  that  the  minds
of  those  that  hear  them  by  right  views  they  may  attract,  and
by  wrong  ones  wound.  Which  same  persons,  because,  in  the
precepts  of  God,  they  are  pied  with  a  sound  and  unsound
Li]kei7,mode  of  speech,  are,  in  the  Gospel,  well  represented  by  the
appearance  of  the  '  ten  lepers,'  with  whose  healthy  colour
whereas  an  evil  whiteness  is  intermixed,  by  this  excessive
whiteness  they  are  rendered  foul.  Hence  we  are  warned,
Rom.is,  Not  to  think  of  ourselves  more  t/tan  we  ought  to  thinks  but
to  think  soberly.  And  these  too,  because  they  do  not  as  yet
love  either  God,  of  Whom  they  entertain  wrong  notions,  nor
yet  their  neighbour,  from  whom  they  are  separated,  are
opposed  to  the  precepts  of  the  Decalogue,  and  therefore  for
the  beseeching  of  the  Lord  they  come  ten  in  number.  Now
for  this  cause,  that  they  mixed  what  is  sound  with  what  is
unsound,  they  are  pied  with  a  difference  of  colour;  but
because  they  offended  in  His  precepts,  they  call  Him  that
whereby  they  had  so  offended,  saying,  Jesus,  Preceptor;  and
hereby  they  directly  obtained  to  be  healed.  And  so  because
the  Catholic  makes  out  the  things  that  are  thought  rightly,  or
that  are  thought  wrongly  by  them,  ^  the  innocent  divideth
tbe  silver,'  i.  e.  distinguisheth  what  may  have  been  by  them
delivered  either  with  wholesome  or  baneful  effect.  It  goes  on ;
Yer.  18.  He  buildeth  his  house  as  a  moth.
xvii.  37.  ^  The  moth  builds  a  house'  for  itself  by  corrupting.
Nor  could  the  heretic  have  been  shewn  by  a  better  com-
parison, who  makes  a  dwelling  for  his  misbelief  no  where

Fleeting  things  of  earth  made  sure  bg  well  bestowing.  885

else  save  in  the  minds  which  he  has  corrapied,  who  also  Book

engages  for  his  followers  to  be  free  from  everlasting  fire. For  he

pledges  to  them  the  refreshment  of  eternal  rest,  but  his  words
have  no  solidity,  because  they  lack  the  fulness  of  truth.
Whence  it  is  added,  And  as  the  keeper  he  maketh  a  booth.
For '  the  booth  of  the  keeper*  is  not  set  firm  by  any  foundation,
but  the  time  passing  it  is  directly  destroyed.  And  the  rest
promised  by  heretics  is  destroyed  togeUier  wi^h  the  time,
in  that  after  this  life  it  is  not  found  at  all.  And  because
oftentimes  Heretics  in  contempt  of  the  Church  Universal  are
supported  by  the  patronage  of  the  powerful  ones  of  the
world,  and  the  rich  do  not  cease  to  aid  them  with  all  the
countenance  of  active  agency  that  they  are  empowered  with,
that  identical  person  also,  whoever  he  be,  that  is  made  to
swell  against  the  face  of  his  Maker  by  temporal  good  things,
is  now  touched  by  the  sentence  of  the  holy  man,  and  from
the  particular  ruin  of  heretics,  the  discourse  is  drawn  ofi*  to  a
general  characterizing  of  all  the  self-exalted,  when  it  is
added ;

Ver.  1 9.  When  the  rich  man  sleepethy  he  shall  take  nothing
away  with  him^  he  shall  open  his  eyes  and  shall  find  nought.

28.  In  harmony  with  which  same  sentence  the  Psalmist  xviii.
saith.  All  the  foolish  in  heart  are  troubled^  they  have  sleptV:75jS.
their  sleep y  and  all  the  men  qf  riches  have  found  nothing
in  their  hands. For  in  order  that  the  rich  after  diath  may
*  find  something  in  their  hand,*  it  is  told  to  them  before
death,  in  whoe  hands  they  should  place  their  riches. JtfakehQk%
to  yourselves  friends  of  the  Mammon  q/' unrighteousness^  that  **'  **
when  ye  fail  they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  habitations.

When  the  rich  man  sleepethy  he  shall  take  nothing  away
with  him.  His  goods  when  he  dieth  he  would  take  away
with  him,  if  whilst  he  lived,  at  the  voice  of  him  that  be-
sought him,  he  had  taken  them  home  to  himself;  for  all
things  earthly,  which  we  part  with  by  keeping,  we  keep  by '
bestowing;  our  patrimony  which  retained  is  lost,  whilst
paid  out  of  hand  it  remains.  For  we  cannot  long  continue
together  with  our  goods.  Since  either  we  by  dying  abandon
them,  or  they  by  perishing  as  it  were  abandon  us  while
living. And  so  it  remains  for  us to  manage  that  things

330  The  bodjfs  sleep,  ike  touts  wakitig. Riches  a  dream.

Job  s7,  doomed  unreservedly  to  perUb  we  may  compel  to  pass  over

-=-—'-  into  a  reward  that  does  not  perish.

Moral.  9Q.  But  that  is  very  much  to  be  wondered  at  that  is
spoken,  When  he  sloepeih,  he  shall  open  his  eyes  and  shall
find  nothing.  For  in  order  to  sleep  we  close  our  eyes,  and
on  waking  up  open  them.  Out  on  this  point,  forasmuch  as
m^n  consists  of  soul  and  body,  while  it  is  called  sleep  of  one
subject,  the  waking  of  the  other  is  shewn  to  view;  because
when  the  body  falls  asleep  in  death,  then  the  soul  wakes  up
in  a  true  acquaintance.  And  so  ^  the  rich  man  sleeps,  and
opens  his  eyes,*  because,  when  he  dies  in  the  flesh,  his  soul
is  compelled  to  see  what  it  despised  to  foresee.  Then  in-
deed it  wakes  up  in  true  acquaintance ;  then  it  sees  that  all
is  nothing  that  it  possessed ;  then  it  finds  itself  empty ;  whereas
it  used  to  rejoice  in  being  full  of  good  things  above  the
rest  of  the  world.  It  ^  sleeps,  and  takes  away  nothing  along
with  it,*  nothing  surely,  of  the  goods  that  it  possessed.  For  the
sin  of  the  goods  is  carried  on  along  wiib  it,  though  every
thing  for  the  sake  of  which  sin  was  committed  be  left
beliind  here.  So  then  let  him  go  now,  and  swell  himself
out  with  good  things  gotten,  let  him  lift  himself  up  above
the  rest  of  the  world,  and  pride  himself  in  having  what
his  neighbour  has  not  The  time  will  come  sooner  or  later
that  he  shall  awake,  and  then  learn  how  empty  that  was
which  he  had  possessed  in  sleep.  For  it  oflen  happens
to  the  needy  whilst  sleeping  that  he  sees  himself  rich  in  a
dream,  and  on  the  strength  of  those  acquisitions  uplifts  his
mind,  is  overjoyed  that  he  has  what  he  had  not,  and  now
counts  to  be  disdainful  of  those  whom  it  grieved  him  to  be
disdwied  by;  but  that  suddenly  waking  up  he  is  grieved
that  he  has  woke  up,  in  that  meanwhile  though  but  while
sleeping  he  possessed  the  semblance  of  riches.  For  be
groans  directly  under  the  weight  of  poverty,  aud  is  wrung  by
the  straitness  of  his  indigence,  and  this  so  much  the  worse,
as  though  but  for  the  shortest  space  of  time  he  was  even  thus
emptily  rich.  Thus,  thus,  too  surely  is  it  with  the  rich  ones
of  this  worid,  who  are  bloated  with  good  things  acquired.
They  have  no  knowledge  to  do  right  by  their  abundance;  as
persons  asleep  they  are  rich;  but  on  waking  up  they  find

Tke  rich  man  in  hell  found  his  earthly  goode  vain. 987

their  poreitf ,  becaose  they  ^  bring  nothing  with  them*  to  Book

that  Judgment,  that  is  calculated  to  remain,  and  in  proportion ^

as  they  are  now  lifted  up  the  higher  for  a  brief  space,  the
more  hearily  they  groan  against  themselves  for  everlasting.
So  then  let  him  say,  He  ehall  open  hie  eyee^  and  ehall  find
nothing.  Because  he  then  *  opens  those  eyes*  to  punishments,
which  here  he  kept  closed  to  mercy.  He  '  opens  his  eyei
and  he  '  finds  not*  the  fruit  of  pity,  in  that  he  kept  them  shut
here,  when  he  did  ^  find*  it  Those  also  are  slow  in  ^  opening
their  eyes,*  who,  as  Wisdom  is  witness,  are  described  as
going  in  the  time  of  their  condemnation  to  say,  FF%a/ AaMWM.5,
pride  prq/ited its?  or  what  good  hath  riches  with  otir  vaunting  '
brought  usf  All  these  things  are  passed  away  like  a  shadow^
and  as  a  post  that  hasteth  by.  That  the  things  which  they
possessed  were  worthless  and  transitory  they  now  learn  by  their
loss,  which  same,  so  long  as  they  were  theirs,  seemed  to  their
foolish  hearts  at  once  great  and  lasting.  It  was  late  that  tho
rich  man '  opened  his  eyes,*  when  he  saw  Lazarus  at  rest,
whom  he  scorned  to  see  lying  at  his  door.  He  understood
There  the  thing  that  here  to  do  he  refiised:  by  his  condemn-
ation he  was  forced  to  learn  what  it  was  that  he  lost,  when
he  did  not  own  his  neighbour  being  in  want  Of  whom  it  is
yet  further  added;

Ver.  30. Want  shall  take  hold  of  him  Uke  ioater; a
tempest  shall  overwhelm  him  in  the  night.

30.  Let  us  look  now  at  the  want  of  the  rich  man  as  xix.
burning,  whose  abundance  was  so  great  as  feasting. For  he
says.  Father  Abraham^  have  mercy  on  me^  and  send  Lazarus  jjAtX^^
that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water^  and  cool  my^^'
tongue^  for  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame. By  which  same
words  it  is  not  this  that  is  made  known  to  us,  that  there  in
that  excessive  burning  a  single  drop  of  water  is  then  asked
for  as  a  sufficiency  of  refreshment,  but  that  he  who  has  sinned
by  abundance  should  there  be  consumed  by  a  want  burning
to  excess. For  we  see  in  the  words  of  the  rich  man,  resulting
from  the  exactest  judgment  of  God,  how  proportionate  a
punishment  answered  such  sin. For  moved  by  want,  he  is
there  driven  to  beg  for  the  very  least,  who  here,  moved  by
covetousness,  went  so  far  as  to  refuse  the  very  least.  What  can
be  paid  back  more  exactly,  what  more  strictly  ? He  begged

VOL.  II.  z

838 The  *  Lake*  of  Hell. Storm  qf  Judgment  unforeneeu.

Job  37,  a  drop  of  water,  who  refused  cmmbs  of  bread;  and  so  '  want
taketh  hold of  him like water.* That  want  is  then  not


Lit.

unsuitably  likened  to  water,  because  there  is  that  tormenting

in  hell,  which,  as  swallowing  up  those  it  receives  in  the
depths  below,  is  used  to  be  denoted  by  the  title  of  a  ^  lake.*
Whence  it  is  delivered  by  the  Prophet  in  the  voice  of  man-
Lam.  3,  kind.  My  life  is  fallen  into  the  lake. But  by  the  triumphing
P^  so ^^  those that  are  escaped  it  is  sung,  O  Lord  my Ood,  I
s.  3.  '  cried  unto  Tliee  and  Thou  liast  healed  me. O  Ix^rd^  JJiou
hast  brought  up  my  soul  from  the  grave:  Thou  hast  kept  me
from  them  that  go  down  into  the  lake.

31.  J  tempest  shall  overwhelm  him  in  the  night. What
in  this  place  does  he  call  ^  the  night,*  but  the  hidden  time
of  sudden  departing? And  by  the  name  of  ^  tempest'  he
represents  the  whirlwind of  the  Judgment. Which  the
Pi50,3.  Psalmist  also  testifies,  in  the  words,  Our  God  shall  come  in
statCy  our  God,  and  shall  not  keep  silence ;  afire  shall  devour
before  Him,  and  round  about  Him  a  mighty  tempest. Of
Prov.i,  which same  ^  tempest'  Wisdom also  saith  by  Solomon;  /
also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock  wlien  your
fear  cometh;  when  your  fear  cometh  as  deflation,  and  your
destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind. And  because  the  very
ignorance  of  the  coming  departure  is  itself  called  ^  Night,'
*  in  the  night  a  tempest  shall  overwhelm  him,'  i.  e.  the  whirl-
wind of  Divine  Judgment,  whilst  he  is  ignorant,  shall  seize
Mat.24,upon  Him. For  it  is  hence  tliat  Truth  saith  by  Itself,  But
^^'  ^*'  know  this,  that  \f  the  good  man  qf  the  house  had  known  in
what  watch  the  thiqf  would  come,  he  would  have  watched,
and  would  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  up.
Therefore  be  ye  also  ready. For  in  such  an  hour  as  ye
think  not  the  Son  qf  Man  cometh. Hence  also  it  is  spoken
▼.48-60.  against  the  *  evil  servant;'  But  if  that  evil  servant  shall  say
in  his  heart.  My  Lord  delayeth  His  coming;  and  shall  begin
to  smite  his  fellow  servants,  and  to  eat  and  drink  with  the
drunken. The  Lord  qf  that  servant  shall  come  in  a  day
when  he  looketh  not  for  him,  and  in  an  hour  that  he  is  not
1  Thew.  aware  qf. Hence  Paul  says  to  the  disciples,  But  ye,  brethren^
'  '  '  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as
a  thiqf. Ye  are  all  the  children  qf  the  light  and  the  children
qf  the  day.^  We  are  not  of  the  night  nar  qf  darkness.

The  searching  wind  of  temptation  carries  off  the  wicked.  839

Hence  to  the  rich  man, '  giving  a  loose  to  pride,  it  b  aud  by  the  Book
voice  of  God,  Thoufool^  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  ^^'^'^^raj^'
qf  thee;  then  whose  shall  those  things  be  which  thou  hastw.
provided/ In  the  night  he  is  described  as  giving  up  his
sonl,  who  whilst  not  seeing  death  beforehand  is  carried  off
in  darkness  of  the  heart. Thus  then  he  sailh,  A  tempest
shall  overwhelm  him  in  the  night. For  because  he  is  not
minded  to  do  the  good  things  that  he  sees,  he  is  caught  by
the  tempest  of  his  dcstniclion  which  ho  sceth  not. Of  whom
it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  21.  The  scorching  wind  shall  carry  him  off,  and  take
him  away.

82.  Who  is  in  this  place  called  Ihe^  scorching  wind'  but xx.
the  evil  spirit,  who  stirs  up  the  flames  of  divers  lusts  in  the
heart,  that  he  may  drag  it  to  an  eternity  of  punishments  ?
And  so  •  the  scorching  wind'  is  said  to  *  carry  off*  any  bad
men,  because  the  plotter,  the  evil  spirit,  who  inflames  a  man
whilst  living  to  evil,  drags  him  when  dying  tb  torments.
For  that  *  the  scorching  wind'  is  wont  to  be  meant  for  the
unclean  spirit,  who  by  the  breath  of  evil  suggesting  kindles
the  hearts of  the  wicked to  earthly  desires,  the  propliet
Jeremiah  testifies,  saying,  A  pot  kindled  I  see,  and  the /ace  jer.  i,
thereof  by  the/ace  of  the  North. For  « the  pot  kindled'  is  the  ^*-
heart  of  man  boiling  with  the  heatings  of  worldly  concerns,
and  with  ihe  restlessness  of  desires. Which  is  kindled  by
*  the  face  of  the  North,'  i.  e.  set  on  fire  by  the  suggestions
of  the  devil. For  that  very  being  is  used  to  be  called  by  the
tide  of  *  the  North,'  who  said,  /  will  sit  also  upon  the  mount  U.  14,
of  the  congregation^  in  the  sides  of  the  North. I  will  aseend^^'
above  the  heights  qf  the  clouds. Thus  by  the  burning  effect
of  this  scorching  wind  the  mind  of  each  one  of  the  Elect  is
cooled  down,  when  the  heat  of  evil  inclinations  is  extinguished
therein,  and  the  flame  of  carnal  desires  turned  to  ice. And
hence  Holy  Church  in  the  praises  of  her  spouse  cries  out
with  exultation,  /  sat  down  under  the  shadow  qf  him^  whom  Cant,  s,
I  had  desired. Of  the  abatement  of  this  heat  it  is  said  to'*
her  by  Isaiah,  by  promise  of  the  Lord,  Instead  qf  the  ground  U.  60,
willow  shall  come  up  the  fir-tree^  and  instead  qf  the  nettle^^' ,
shall  come  up  the  myrtle  tree. For '  instead  of  the  ground
willow  there  comes  up  in  her  the  fir-lree,'  when  in  the  heart

z  2

S40  Divine  ififiuence  cools  the  soul. Unsparing  judgment.

Job  97,  of  the  SainU|  instead  of  the  sunkenness  of  earthly  thought,
j^^y-  the  elevation  of  heavenly  contemplation  rises  up.  Now  the
nettle  is  altogether  of  a  fiery  nature.  But  the  myrtle  is  said
to  be  of  cooling  virtue,  and  therefore  *  instead  of  the  nettle
there  comes  up  the  myrtle  tree/  when  the  minds  of  the
righteous  are  brought  from  tlie  initatiou  and  heat  of  bad
habits  to  coolness  and  quietness  of  the  thoughts,  while  they
now  no  longer  seek  earthly  things,  while  they  extinguish
the  flames  of  the  flesh  by  heavenly  aspirations.
83.  In  reference  too  to  this  cooling  of  the  soul,  which  is

Lukei,  given  from  heaven,  it  is  said  to  Mary,  The  power  of  the

^*  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee;  though  on  this  point,  by  tlie
term  of  ^  the  overshadowing,^  either  Nature  of  God  to  be
made  Incarnate  might  have  been  denoted.  For  a  shadow  is
formed  by  light  and  body.  Now  the  Lord  is  light  in  respect
of  the  Divine  Nature,  Who,  by  means  of  a  soul  intervening,
vouchsafed  in  her  womb  in  respect  of  human  nature  to
become  a  body.  And  so  because  the  Incorporeal  Light  was
in  her  womb  to  be  made  corporeal,  to  her,  who  conceived
the  incorporeal  for  corporality,  it  is  said.  The  power  qf  the
Highest  shall  overshachw  thee;  i.  e.  The  Incorporeal  Light
of  the  Divine  Nature  shall  in  thee  take  the  corporeal  substance
of  Human  Nature.  But  now  let  us  carry  to  an  end  what
we  began  relating  to  any  wicked  man.  Accordingly  ^  the
scorching  wind  takes  him  away,Mn  this  way,  viz.  that  him  whom
the  evil  spirit  now  kindles  with  the  fire  of  evil  concupiscence,
ho  afterwards  carries  ofi*  to  the  flames  or  hell.  It  goes  on;
And  as  a  whirlwind  shall  carry  him  out  of  his  place.
xxi.  34.  ^  The  place*  of  the  wicked  is  the  gratification  of  the
life  of  time,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  flesh.  Therefore  every
single  individual  is  in  a  manner  ^  carried  out  of  his  place  by
a  whirlwind,'  when  overwhelmed  with  afiright  on  the  Last
Day  he  is  severed  from  all  his  gratifications.  Of  which  same
Last  Day  it  is  direcdy  added  with  justice,

Ver.  22.  For  He  shall  lei  loose  upon  him^  and  not  spare.

xxii,  35.  God,  as  often  as  He  chastens  the  sinner  by  smiting
him,  for  this  reason  ^  lets  loose*  the  scourge,  that  lie  may
*  spare.'  But  when  by  smiting  He  brings  his  life  to  an  end
whilst  remaining  in  sin.  He  *  lets  loose'  the  scourge,  but
never  at  all  ^  spares.' For  the  Same,  Who  '  let  loose'  the

Chastitemeni  thai  amends  not,  atones  not.  841

scourge  that  He  might  *  spare/  one  day  ^  lets  it  loose*  with  Book

this  view  that  He  may  not  spare. For  in  this  life  the  Lord ^

busies  Himself  so  much  the  more  that  He  may  spare,  in
proportion as  He  scourges  the  more  in  awaiting; as  He
Himself  saith  to  John  by  the  voice  of  the  Angel,  As  many  as  Rer.  8,
/  hve^  J  rebuke  and  chasten ;  and  as  it  is  elsewhere  spoken,  ^^'
For  whom  the  Lord  loveth,  He  chasteneth. But  reversely  it  Heb.i9,
is  written  of  the  scourge  of  condemnation,  The  wicked  t^p^gi^^
taken  in  the  work  of  his  own  hands. Of  whom  the  Lord
smth  by  Jeremiah,  when  He  sees  the  multitudes  transgressing
irreclaimably,  whom  He  now  no  longer  regards  as  sons  under
discipline,  but as  enemies  under  unmitigated  scourging,
For  I  have  wounded  thee  with  the  tround  of  an  enemy y  with  Jer.so,
a  cruel  chastisement. And  what  is  said  here,  and  notspare^  '**
is  llicre  likewise  brought  out  in  other  words;  Why  criest ^^t.  16,
thou  for  thine  affliction  f  thy  sorrow  is  incurable. Whence
tlie  Elect  always  make  this  provision,  that  they  should  return
to righteousness  before  the  wrath  of  the  Judge  is  inex-
tinguishably kindled,  lest  being  caught  by  the  last  stroke,
they  find  life  ended  to  them,  together  inth  sin. For  the  rod
will  then  do  away  with  the  sin,  when  it  alters  the  life,  since
whosesoever  ways  it  does  not  change,  his  doings  it  does  not
atone for. Therefore all smiting from God  is  either a
purifying  of  the  present  life  in  us,  or  a  commencement  of
the  punishment  that  follows. For  with  reference  to  those
who  profit  by  the  scourge  it  is  written,  Whoframest  pain  in  p^.  94,
the  commandment. For  in  that  case  when  the  wicked  man^*
is  scourged  and  amended,  to  the  commandment  he  would  not
give  ear ;  to  the  pain  he  does. And  so  there  is  '  pain  framed
in  the  commandment*  to  him,  who  by  pain  as  it  were  in  the
stead  of  the  commandment  is  kept  back  from  evil  practices.
But  touching  these  persons  to  whom  scourges  are  a  curse,
not  a  clearance,  it  is  said.  Thou  hast  stricken  them^  but  they  ^^^^^  3^
have  not  grieved:  Thou  hast  consumed  themj  but  they  have
refused  to  receive  correction. With  these,  their  scourges
commence  in  this  life,  and  last  on  in  everlasting  smiting.
Whence  the  Lord  saith  by  Moses,  For  a  fire  is  kindled  in  Deut.
Mine  anger ^  and  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  hell. For  so  ^»  ^'
far  as  regards  the  present  smiting  it  is  rightly  said,  A  fire  is
kindled  in  Mine  anger.  But  as  regards  the  eternal  damnation,

342  Eternal  punUhment  begun  here. Some,  t^rarned,  escape.

Job  97,  itis  immediately  added  with  propriety,  And  shall  burn  unto  the

^' lowest  hell. Though  by  some  pei-sons  that  is  used  to  be

Nab.  1.  alleged,  which  is  written,  God  judgeth  not  twice  upon  the

9.LXX  ^^^  thing. Which  persons,  howsoever,  do  not  pay  regard

Jer.i7,  to  this  that  is  spoken  by  the  Prophet  of  the  wicked;  And

^' crush  them  with  double  confusion* And  that, which  is.

Jode6.  written elsewhere; Jesus  in saving  the People  out of

Egyptf  a second  time  destroyed  them  that  believed  not.

To  which  persons,  however,  if  we  yield  assent,  that  any  sin

cannot be twice visited with  punishment,  this  must  be

judged  of  those  persons  smitten  for  sin  and  dying  in  their  sin,

that  their  smiting begun  here is completed tliere,  that

so  -to  the  unreformed  there  should  be  one  and  the  same

scourge,  which  begins  here  in  time,  but  is  consummated  in

eternal  punishments,  that  to  those  that  wholly  refuse  to  be

amended,  the  dealing  of  present  scourges  now  should  be  the

beginning  of  the  torments  to  ensue. And  so  God  shall  let

loose  upon  him^  and  not  spare. It  goes  on ;

Fleeing  he  shall  Jlee  out  of  His  liand.

xxiii. 86.  For  he  ^  flees  out  of  the  hand'  of  the  Smiter,  who

amends  the wickedness of  his behaviour; or  otherwise,

because  in  Holy  Writ  the  hand  is  used  to  be  taken  for

acting,  he  '  flees  from  the  hand  of  the  smiter,'  who,  whilst

he  marks  the  destruction  of  the  wicked  man,  forsakes  the  path

of  wickedness. Whence  it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  23.  He  shall  bind  up  his  hands  over  him.

xxiv. ^^'  ^^^  ^  ^  ^^^^  ^^P  ^^^  hands'  is  to  establish  the  practices

Heb.i9,of  his  life  in  uprightuess. Whence  Paul  too  saith.  Where-

'^' fore  lift  up  the  loosed  handsy  and  the  unstrung  knees. While,

then,  they  behold  the  destruction  of  another,  they  are  made

to  turn  back  to  the  conscience,  to  remind  themselves  of  their

own,  and  by  the  very  same  cause  whereby  one  man  is  carried

to  torments,  another  is  freed  from  torments. And  so  ^  ]ie

binds  up  his  hands  over  him,'  because  he  observes  in  the

punishment  of  another  what  to  be  afraid  of;  and  whilst  he

sees  one  living  in  transgression  so  smitten,  he  binds  fast  his

own  too  loose  practices  with  the  sinews  of  righteousness.

And  so  it  is  brought  to  pass  that  he  who,  being  a  bad  man,

whilst  living,  had  drawn  numbers  into  transgression  by  the

delightfulness  of  sin,  in  dying  recovers  some  from  trans-

l%e  RigtUeoHsbeiter for  seeing jndgmenis.  Holy  Wril^ilver.^AS

gression  by  the  terribleness  of  torments. Which  same  th^  Book
Psalmist  bears  witness  to  be  of  advantage  to  the  good  as  *

welly  iMtying,  The  righteous  Hhall  rejoice  when  he  ueih  ihe  Pb.  58,
vengeances  he  shall  wash  his  hands  in  ihe  blood  qf  sinners.
For '  in  the  blood  of  sinners,*  when  dying, '  the  righteous  do
wash  their  hands,*  because,  when  their  punishment  is  seen,
the  Ufe  of  the  person  seeing  it  is  cleansed. It  goes  on ;
And  he  shnU  hiss  upon  him,  beholding  his  place.

38.  What  is  expressed  in  the  hissing,  but  tlie  straining  of  xxv.
wonderment? But  if  in the hissing  there  is  some  other

'  meaning  sought,  when  the  sinner  dies,  these  that  witness  his
•death  draw  tight  the  mouth  in  hissing,  in  that  they  are  con-
-verted  to  those  spiritual  words,  which  they  had  contemned,
so  that  they  henceforth  begin  to  believe  and  to  teach,  what
before,  while  they  perceived  the  wicked  man  thriving,  they
used  not  to  believe.  For  it  very  often  happens  that  the
mind  of  the  weak  is  the  more  unsteadied  from  the  hearing  of
the  truth,  as  it  sees  the  despisers  of  the  truth  flourishing;  but
when  just  vengeance  takes  away  the  unjust,  it  keeps  others
away  from  wickedness.  Whence  it  is  said  by  Solomon;
When  ihe  pesiileni  man  is  punished,  ihe  little  one  will  be  Pro?.
wiser.  Thus  the  holy  man  after  be  had  adequately  filled  up'^'  ^^'
the  punishments  of  the  men  of  power  that  are  lifted  up  in  the
world,  again  directs  his  words  to  the  pride  of  heretics,  who
are  lifted  up  in  speech,  saying ;

Chap*  xxviii.  ver.  1.  The  silver  hath  the  beginnings  of  its
veins,  and,  to  ihe  gold  there  is  a  place,  where  they  fine  it.

39.  In  silver  the  power  of  speaking,  in  gold  brightness  of
life  or  of  wisdom  is  used  to  be  denoted.  And  because
heretics  are  so. filled  with  pride  for  the  brilliancy  of  their
speaking,  that  they  are  not  based  firmly  by  any  authority  of
the  sacred  books,  (which  books  are  for  speaking  like  a  kind
of  veins  of  silver  to  us,  because  from  those  identical  books
we  derive  the  spring  and  source  of  our  speaking,)  he  recalls
them  to  the  pages  of  sacred  authority,  that  if  they  have  a
desire  to  speak  in  a  true  way,  they  may  from  that  source
draw  forth  what  to  say.  And  he  saith,  TIte  silver  hath  ihe
beginning  of  its  veins,  and  to  the  gold  there  is  a  place,
where  they  fine  ii.

As  if  he  sai(f  in  plain  words;  *  He  that  is  fitting  himself

844 Drue  teaching  comes  from  Scripture  and  old  authors.

Job  S8,  for  the  words  of  true  preaching,  the  originals  of  the  cases  he
-^ —  must  of  necessity  derive  (rom  the  sacred  page,  so  as  to  bring
'  round  every  thing  that  he  speaks  to  a  foundation  of  divine
authority,  and  in  that  set  firm  the  edifice  of  his  own  speaking.
For,  as  we  before  said,  oftentimes  heretics,  whilst  they  are
eager  to  prop  up  what  is  bad  of  their  own,  broach  things
which  assuredly  are  not  maintained  in  the  page  qf  the
sacred  books. And  hence  the  great  Preacher  admonishes
6  soT  ^^^  disciple,  saying,  O  Timothy^  keep  that  which  is  com-
mitted to  thy  trustf  avoiding  profane  novelties  of  speaking^
for  whereas  heretics  long  to  be  extolled  as  if  for  excellency
of  wit,  they  as  it  were  bring  out  new  things  which  are  not
maintained  in  the  old  books  of  the  ancient  Fatliers,  and  dms
it  follows,  that  whilst  they  desire  to  appear  wise,  they  scatter
seeds  of  foolishness  to  their  wretched  hearers.

40.  And  it  is  well  added;  And  to  tlie  goldt/iere  is  a  place,
where  they  fine  it. As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms;  *  The  true
wisdom  of  believers,  which  has  the  Church  Universal  for  its
place,  undergoes  tribulation  by  you persecuting  her,  but
from  all  the  dross  of  sins  by  the  fire  of  your  persecution  she
EooliM.  is  purified.' Whence  it  is  written;  For  gold  is  tried  in  the
*'  *• fire,  and  acceptable  men  in  the  furnace  of  adversity. In
which  passage  this  too  may  be  appropriately  taken  for  the
meaning,  that  for  their  foolish  suffering  heretics  might  seem
to  be  rebuked. For  oftentimes  for  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ,
our  Lord  and  Redeemer,  they  suffer  much,  and  by  those
same  sufferings  they  look  for  themselves  to  become  Ilis
martyrs. To  which  persons  it  is  now  said  by  the  voice  of
the  holy  man;  and  to  tfte  gold  there  is  a  place,  where  they
fine  it. For  according  to  that  which  has  been  already  said
even  before  us,  he  that  suffers  out  of  tlie  unity  of  the  Church,
punishments  he  may  suffer,  but  a  Martyr  he  cannot  be  made;
for  *  to  the  gold  there  b  a  place,  whore  they  fine  it.* What
tlien,  ye  heretics,  say  ye  to  these  tilings  i Ye  are  minded  to
be  ^  fined*  by  the  afflicting  of  the  flesh,  nay  even  by  mar-
tyrdom, but  the  place  where  ye  must  be  fined,  ye  know  not.
Hear  ye  what  is  spoken  by  the  voice  of  the  holy  preacher.
*  To  the  gold  there  is  a  pkce,  where  they  fine  it.* So  then,
seek  ye  tliis  ^  place  for  the  fining,'  this  furnace,  wherein  the
gold  may  be  fitly  purged,  find  ye  out.

Suffering  no  martyrdom  out  of  the  *  place*  ofuhity, 8i5

41.  There  is  one  Charch,  in  which  he  that  may  have  Book

XVIII
attained  to  be  fined,  may  likewise  be  purified  from  all

the  dross  of  sins. If  for  die  sake  of  God  ye  undergo  aught

of  bitterness,  if  aaght  of  tribulation,  being  without  her  pale,

ye  can  only  be  burnt,  ye  cannot  be  purified. Let  Jeremiah

tell,  let  him  tell  in  what  way  the  fire  of  your  fining  is  void

of  all  efficacy. The  finer  melteth  in  vain;  for  their  wicked-  ^'  •>

nessei  are  not  done  away. See  how  the  fire  externally

melting  at  once  administers  a  punishment  of  hard  suffering,

and  yet  does  not  clear  off  tfie  rin  of  misbelief;  it  bodi

furnishes  torments  of  cruel  punishments,  and  does  not  cause

additions  of  good  merits. Moreover  the  fire  of  this  fining

which  is  undergone  out  of  the  Catholic  Church,  how  utteriy

it  is  void  of  all  efficacy  the  Apostle  Paul  instructs  us,  when

he  says,  And  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned^  and  have  i  Cor.

not  charily^  it  proJUeth  me  nothing. For  some  think  wrong '

things  touching  Grod,  and  others  hold  what  is  right  about

the  Creator,  but  do  not  maintain  unity  with  their  brethren;

the  one  are  sundered  by  erroneousness  of  faith,  and  the  others

by  the  commission  of  schism. And  hence  in  the  very  first

part  of  the  Decalogue  the  sins  of  both  sides  are  checked,

seeing  that  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  God,  And  thou  shalt  livkia,

love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  otf  p^ts,

thy  soul^and  with  all  thy  might. And  it  is  immediately'*

added.  And  thou  $halt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself For

whoso  imagines  what  is  wrong  about  God,  surely  it  is

evident  that  he  does  not '  love  God.' But  he  who  while  he

entertains  right  notions  about  God  is  divided from  the

unity  of  the  Holy  Church,  it  is  plain  that  he  does  not  love

his  neighbour,  whom  he  refuses  to  have  for  his  fellow.

42.  Whosoever,  then,  is  divided  from  this  unity  of  the
Church  our  Mother,  either  through  heresy  in  entertaining
wrong  notions  concerning  God,  or  by  the  erroneousness  of
schism  in  not  loving  his  neighbour,  is  bereft  of  the  grace  of
that  charity,  concerning  which  Paul  saith  what  we  have
before  given ;  And  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and
have  not  charity,  it  prqfiteth  me  nothing.  As  if  he  ex-
pressed himself  in  plain  utterance ;  *  Without  the  bounds  of
its  place,  the  fire  of  fining  being  applied  to  me  only  afflicts
me  with  torment,  and  does  not  purify  me  by  its  cleansing.'

346  TVue  gold  refined  only  in  Charily  *  C/ianged  characlers.

Job  S8,  This  plttCQ  ^U  ^ey  ihfit  are  lovere  of  holy  peace  seek  with
r— —  bearliest  eudQ^vours,  this  on  seeking  ibey  fiod^  ibis  finding
*  they  keep,  knowing  the  remission  of  sin,  as  to  where,  or  when,
or  to  what  sort  it  is  vouchsafed. For  where  is  it,  save  in  the
bosom  of  our  Catholic  Mother  ? When,  but  before  the  day
3  Cor. of  coming  departure  ? Because,  Behold^  now  is  the  accepted
It.  65 lime;  behold^  now  is  Ihe  day  of  salvalion. And,  Seek  ye
^' ihe  Lord  while  He  may  be  founds  call  ye  upon  Him  while
He  is  near. To  what  sort  of  persons,  but  to  the  converted,
who  after  the  imitating  of  little  children  are  fashioned  by
Matt humility  as  theu*  mistress  ? To  whom  it  is  said ;  Suffer  Utile
*  **•  children  to  come  unto  Afc,  and/orbid  t/iem  not ;  for  of  such  is
Matt, the  kingdotn  of  heaven. And,  Except  ye  be  converted  and
'  ' become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  heaven. And  therefore,  because  there  are  no  true  martyrs
madQ  saving  in  the  Catholic  Church,  it  is  rightly  said,  To
the  gold  there  is  a  place  where  they  fine  it. Because  the
soul  would  not  be  made  bright  in  the  radiance  of  everlasting
beauty,  except,  so  to  say,  it  were  first  burnt  here  in  tlie  work-
shop of  charity.

48.  Moreover,  we  are  to  consider  that  there  are  some  whom
Almighty  Ood  by  His  secret  counsel  preserving  in  inuocency
from  their  very  beginnings  promotes  to  the  topmost  heights
of  virtuous  attainments,  that,  as  their  age  increases,  botli
numerousness  of  years  and  loftiness  of  merits  should  simul-
taneously advance  in  them.  But  others  abaudoniug  in  their
outset  He  suffers  to  go  with  bad  habits  fermenting  by  head-
long ways.  Yet  for  the  most  part  even  these  He  has  regard
to,  and  for  the  following  after  Him  He  kindles  them  with  the
fire  of  holy  love,  and  the  itchings  of  bad  propensities  en-
grained in  their  hearts  He  converts  into  a  fervour  of  virtue,
and  tbey  are  the  more  set  on  fire  to  the  desire  of  beseeching
the  pitifulness  of  God,  in  proporlion  as  they  are  the  more
ashamed  at  the  recollection  of  their  own  wickedness ;  as  it
often  happens,  that  in  the  conflict  of  the  fight  the  soldier,
who  is  placed  before  the  eyes  of  his  leader,  basely  yields  to
the  enemy's  valour,  and  that  whilst  he  powerlessly  turns  his
back  he  is  stmck ;  ypt  nevertheless  being  osliamed  of  this
IS  Mm. very  thing  that  he  has  done'  disgracefully  before  his  leader's
*7^^^^'  eyes,  from  the  more  sense  of  sliunie  he  gathers  greater  force ;

Sound  men  made  from  earthly  trt  iron  from  earth. 847

ami  afterwards  executes  deeds  of  prowess,  to  so  high  a  Book
degree  that  ha  may  at  once  achieve  present  credit  of  his  ^ZHi*
valonr,  and  cover  past  disgrace  of  weakness.  In  a  like  way,
these  persons  are  sometimes  more  actively  established  in  the
service  of  God  by  conseqnenco  of  past  weakness,  and  sach
persons  for  the  keeping  of  His  commandments  both  the
desire  of  things  futiure  draws  on,  and  the  remembrance  of
things  past  urges  forward,  that  on  the  one  side  affection
to  that  which  is  to  come  should  stimulate,  and  on  the  othet
shame  for  that  which  is  past  spur  on.  Which  same  how-
ever, while  the  enemies  of  the  Church  see  to  be  endowed
with  the  highest  virtues,  and  in  their  present  life  cannot  any
way  find  out  that  whereby  they  may  derogate  from  their
merit,  they  set  themselves  to  impeach  them  of  the  past,' as
the  Manichaean  assails  our  Moses,  in  whom  he  endeavours
to  soil  with  the  sin  of  a  past  homicide  the  grace  of  subsequent
virtuous  attainments ;  in  whom  he  heeds  not  how  patient  he
was  afterwards  to  endure,  but  how  precipitate  he  was  before
to  strike.  Such  adversaries  as  these  blessed  Job  encounter-
ing with  the  exactest  eye  of  observation,  after  that  he  said,
Silver  hath  the  beginning  of  its  veins;  and  to  gold  there  is  a
place  where  they  fine  it ;  he  justly  added ;

Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,

44.  Heretics  are  used  to  pride  themselves  against  us  byxxvii.
the  self-priding  of  their  righteousness,  and  to  boast  high
their  practices  with  the  swelling  of  ostentation,  and  our-
selves, as  we  have  said,  they  impeach  either  for  being  or
having  been  bad  persons.  Accordingly  in  a  most  humble
confession,  and  in  a  truthful  defence  against  those,  the
holy  roan  speaks,  saying.  Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth.  As
if  he  said  in  plain  speech ;  *  men  of  strength,  who  by  the
sharpest  swords  of  their  tongues  are  become  iron  in  this
pitched  battle  of  the  defending  of  the  faith,  were  one  time
but  *  earth*  in  dhe  lowest  sphere  of  actions.*  For  to  man  on
his  sinning  it  was  8|X)ken ;  Earth  thou  arty  and  unto  earth
sJutlt  thou  return.  But  ^  iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,*  .
when  the  hardy  champion  of  the  Church  is  separated  from
an  earthly  course  of  conduct,  which  he  before  maintained.
Accordingly  he  ought  not  to  be  contemned  in  any  thing
whatever,  that  he  was,  who  has  already  begun  to  be  that

848 Some  once  hard  in  evil  made  strong  for  good.

Job  38^  which  he  was  not.  Was  not  Matthew  found  in  the  earth,
^'  who^  invoked  in  earthly  matters,  served  the  business  of  the
*  receipt  of  custom  ?  But  having  been  taken  out  of  the  earth,
he  was  strengthened  into  the  forciblencss  of  iron,  in  that  by
his  tongue,  as  by  the  sharpest  sword,  the  Lord  in  the  en-
forcing of  the  Gospel  pierced  the  hearts  of  unbelievers.
And  he  that  before  was  weak  and  contemptible  by  his  earthly
occupations,  was  afterwards  made  strong  for  heavenly  preach-
ings. Hence  it  is  yet  fuither  subjoined ;

And  the  stone  being  melted  with  heat  is  turned  into  brass.
45.  Then  is  *  the  stone  dissolved  with  heat,'  when  the
heart  that  is  hard  and  cold  to  the  fire  of  divine  love  is
touched  by  that  same  fire  of  divine  love,  and  melted  in  the
glowing  warmth  of  the  Spirit,  that  to  the  life  that  follows  it
should  bum  with  the  heat  of  its  longings,  which  life  on
hearing  of  before,  it  remained  uninfluenced.  By  the  power  of
which  same  heat,  he  is  at  once  softened  down  to  love  and
invigorated  to  practice,  that  as  before  he  was  hard  in  the
love  of  the  world,  so  he  should  afterwards  give  himself  out
strong  unto  the  love  of  God,  and  what  he  declined  to  give  ear
to  before,  he  should  henceforth  begin  both  to  believe  and  to
preach.  And  so,  the  stone  being  dissolved  with  heat  is
turned  into  brass,  because  the  hai'deued  mind,  being  melted
by  the  fire  of  love  from  Above,  is  changed  to  true  strength.
So  tliat  the  sinner  that  was  before  unmoved  should  after-
wards be  made  at  once  strong  in  respect  of  authority,  and
sounding  in  respect  of  preaching. Which  is  well  spoken  by

It. 40, Isaiah; They  thai  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  change  their

^^*  strength.  We  *  change  our  strength,'  when  being  converted,
we  eschew  the  present  scene  of  things  with  as  much  power
and  might  as  we  before  were  seeking  it.  But  because  the
foregoing  life  is  unfairly  by  adversaries  comited  to  tlie
character  of  Catliolics,  it  is  rightly  added;

Ver.  3.  He  hath  set  a  time  to  darkness^  and  Himself
vieweth  the  end  q/'all  and  every  one.

xxix.  46.  He  hath  Himself  ^  set  a  time  to  the  darkness,'  i.  e.
bounds  to  the  wicked,  where  they  should  cease  to  be  wicked.

Bph.6,  Whence  it  is  said  to  them  by  the  Apostle;  Ye  were  some-
times  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord.  Like  as
to  the  other  diiiciples  as  well  the  same  great  teacher  saith.

God  $ee8  the  end  before,  whatever  men  seem  to  be. 949

The  night  Ufar  epeni^  the  day  i$  ai  hand;  let  «ft  ther^are  Book
ea$t  qffthe  works  qf  darkness,  and  let  mput  on  the  armaur^Hl:
qf  light. Let  us  walk  honestly  as  in  the  day. Hence  Also  la,  it.
in  the  Song  of  Songs  on  the  coming  of  the  Church  it  is  said,  i^*
Who  is  she  that  comeih  forth  as  the  morning  in  rising  f cant.  6,

For  fitly  is  the  Church  described  by  being  compared  with  ^^*
'  the  morning/  in  that,  by  the  knowledge  of  the  faith  she  is
changed  from  the  darkness  of  sins  to  be  in  the  bright  Hght  of
righteoosness.  By  the  term  of  ^  all  and  every  one,*  he  would
have  both  the  Elect  and  the  damned  to  be  comprehended.
For  God  both  in  doing  and  ordering  what  is  good,  yet  not
doing  what  is  bad,  but  what  by  the  wicked  is  done  Himself
so  regulating  that  the  things  should  not  come  forth  irregularly,
*  vieweth  the  end  of  all  and  every  one/  and  bears  all  things
patiently,  and  beholds  the  goal  of  the  Elect,  how  that  from
evil  thoy  arc  changed  to  good.  Ho  sees,  too,  the  end  of  the
damned,  how  tliat  for  bad  practice  they  are  dragged  to  a
punishment  worthy  of  them.  He  saw  the  end  of  Saul  when
persecuting,  wherein  prostrated  on  the  earth  he  should  say.
Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  dot  He  saw  the  end  of  Acts  9,
the  seeming-obedient  disciple,  that  for  the  guilty  deed  he  had  *
committed  he  should  tic  his  throat  with  a  noose,  and  both
punish  himself  when  guilty  of  sin,  and  by  thus  punishing,
betray  himself  the  worse.  He  saw  the  Ninevites  transgress-
ing, but  beheld  the  end  of  the  transgressing  in  the  repentance
of  the  reformed.  He  saw  likewise  Sodom  transgressing,  but
He  beheld  the  end  of  the  burning  of  lust  in  the  fire  of  hell.
He  saw  the  end  of  the  Gentile  world,  how  that  whilst
occupied  by  the  darkness  of  iniquities,  it  should  be  one  day
brightened  with  the  light  of  faith.  He  also  saw  the  end  of
Jud»a,  how  that  from  that  light  of  faith,  which  it  held,  it
should  blind  itself  with  the  darkness  of  hardened  unbelief.
Whence  it  is  yet  further  added  with  just  applicability,

Ver.  4.  17^  stone  likewise  of  darkness,  and  the  shadow  qf
death,  the  torrent  divides  from  the  people  on  travel.

47.  What  was  that  people  of  the  Jews,  hard  by  unbelief,
that  refused  to  behold  by  faith  that  Author  of  life,  whom  it
foretold  by  prophecy,  but  ^  a  stone  of  darkness?'  because  it
proved  at  once  hard  by  cruelty,  and  clouded  by  unbelief.
Which  same  is  also  called  by  another  term  ^  the  shadow  of

350 Evil  men  Saian^s  shadow. GoWs  people  piUpimu.

JdB  38,  death.' For  a  shadow  is  drawn  such  and  of  the  same  sort  as
— ~.  the  outlines  were  of  that  object,  from  which  it  is  derived.
^^''  And  who  is  designated  by  the  name  of  ^  death'  but  the  devil?
Of  whom  in  a  kind  of  mode  of  rcprosontation  by  his  minister*
Rev.  6,  \^  ig  8iii(}^  And  his  name  was  Death. Of  whom  that  people
was  a  shadoWi  because  in  following  his  wickedness,  it  pre-
sented in  itself  a  semblance  of  him. But  what  is  named  by
the  title  of  the  ^  torrent,'  save  that  fire  that  issues  forth  from
the  sight  of  the  Awful  Judge  in  the  final  Inquest,  and  divides
the  Elect  and  the  danmcd  ? Whence  too  it  is  said  by  tlic
Dan.  7,  Prophet,  AJiery  and  rapid  stream  came  forth  from  before
Him.

48.  But  what  People  is  *  on  travel'  in  this  world,  but  that

which  hastening  to  the  inheritance  of  the  Elect  knows  well  that

it  has  its  native  country  in  the  heavenly  world,  and  expects

that  it  will  there  find  its  own  the  more,  in  proportion  as  here

it  reckons  all  things  that  pass  away  to  be  unconnected  with

iti^lf  ? '  Thus  the  ^  pilgrim  People'  is  the  number  of  all  the

Elect,  who  accounting  thislife  a  species  of  exile  to  themselves,

pant  with  the  whole  bent  of  the  heart  after  their  native  country

Heb.ll,  Above;  of  which  persons  Paul  saith,  And  confessed  that  they

^' *  ipe^'e  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth. For  they  that

say  such  things^  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a  country.

This  pilgrim  state  that  same  Apostle  also  was  undergoing

9Cor.6,  when  he  said.  Knowing  that^  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the

|J.  7- hody^  we  go  pilgrimH^  away  from  the  Tjord. For  we  walk  by

grina-  faith^  not  by  sight. The  woes  of  this  pilgrim  state  ho  was

PMl  1  ^^  h^to  ^  \S^^  q^^i^  of  when  he  said.  Having  a  desire  to

S8. depart  and  to  be  with  Christ;  and  again.  To  me  to  live  is

lb.  ai. Qj^^^^  Q^^  f^  ^g  ^  g^^^ rjnjj^  burthen  of  tliis  pilgrimage

Pt.  130,  Ae  Psalmist  felt  lying  heavy  upon  him,  when  he  said ;  tVoe
*•  *•  is  me  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech,  that  I  dwell  in  the  tents  of
Kedar!  My  soul  hath  been  much  a  sojourner.  From  ihis  he
was  panting  to  be  extricated  as  speedily  as  possible,  when  in-
Ps.42,a.  flamed  with  heavenly  aspirations  he  said.  My  soul  thirstethfor
Godyfor  the  living  God;  when  shall  I  come  and  appear
before  God! But  this  desire  they  are  strangers  to,  who  rivet

* 1  Ms. ap.  Ben.  '  by  a  certain %.  28,  and  other  place*  where  he  takea
lignitication  ot  hit  office/  but  tee  b.  zi, thin  as  not  laid  or  Satan  himfelf.

Judgment  severs  them  from  the  dark  and  hardened. S6l

their  heart  on  earthly  gratifications. For  whilst  they  love  Book

only  the  things  that  are  visible,  surely  the  inyisible  things, -'

even  if  they  believe  them  to  exist,  they  do  not  love,  in  that
whilst  they  follow  themselves  too  mach  with  the  outward
following,  even  in  the  interior  they  become  carnal.  Thus
both  people  run  together  in  this  life,  but  do  not  together
attain  to  the  life  everlasting,  because,  iAe  stone  qf  darkness
and  the  shadow  q/' death  the  torrent  divides /rom  the  people
on  travel.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  speech,  *  Those  whom  in
this  present  time  either  infidelity  makes  blind,  or  cnielty
makes  hard,  the  fiery  stream  that  issues  from  before  the  Judge
Eternal  doth  then  sever  from  the  People  of  the  Elect,  that
til  us  from  the  company  of  good  men  the  fire  of  the  strict
Inquest  should  part  those,  whom  now  the  darkness  of  evil
habits  makes  blind  in  their  lusts.

40.  Perhaps  by  the  designation  of  the  '  torrent,*  the  actual
watering  ofholypreaching  may  be  understood,  according  to  that,
that  is  said  by  Solomon ;  The  eye  thatsneereth  at  his/other  amd  Pror.
despiseththetravailqfhismotherjlotheraven^romthetorrents^^*  ^^*
shall  pick  it  out. For  bad  men,  while  they  find  fault  with  the
judgments  of  Ood,  do  *  sneer  at  their  father,*  and  heretics  of
all  sorts  whilst  in  mocking  they  contemn  the  preaching  of
Holy  Church,  and  her  fruitfulness,  what  else  is  this  but  that
they  '  despise  the  travail  of  their  mother  ?*  whom  we  not  un-
justly call  the  mother  of  them  as  well,  because  from  the  same
they  come  forth,  who  speak  against  the  same,  as  John  bears
witness,  who  says.  They  went  out  from  uSy  but  they  were  not  1  Joha
qfus;  for  if  they  had  been  qfus^  they  would  no  doubt  have^^  ^^'
continued  urith  us. But  ^  the  ravens  from  the  torrents  come,*
when  the  true  Preachers  come  forth  for  the  defence  of  Holy
Church  from  the  streams  of  the  Sacred  Books* Which  same
also  are  rightly  termed  *  ravens,*  because  they  never  pride
themselves  on  the  light  of  their  righteousness,  but  by  the
grace  of  humility  confess  in  themselves  the  blackness  of  sins.
Whence,  too,  it  is  spoken  by  the  Church  of  Elect  souls,  /  am  Cant  i,
blacky  but  comely. And  John  says,  ffwe  say  that  we  have  no  i  joimi,
«tn,  we  deceive  ourselves. Which  same  ravens,  no  doubt,  9*
'  pick  out  the  eyes*  of  him  that  *  sneereth,*  because  they
overcome  the  aim  of  bad  and  froward  men. Thus  by  this
testimony,  if  here  as  well  ^  the  torrent*  is  to  be  taken  for

853 Christ  f  wade  poor  Jot'  us^  turned  away /rant  tlie  Jews.

Job  s8,  preaching ;  the  stone  qf  darknese^  and  shadow  qf  deaths  the

jJ^—  torrent  dhidee  from  the  people  on  travel:  because  the

'  preaching  of  the  Saints  gives  over  the  hardened  minds  of  the

lo8t»  and  betakes  itself  to  the  pious  hearts  of  the  lowly*  Hence

it  is  yet  further  subjoined,

Those  whom  the  foot  qf  the  needy  man  forgot^  and  the
inaccessible  ones.

60.  What  other  in  this  place  is  taken  to  be  the  needy

man,  saving  Him  concerning  Whom  it  is  said  by  Paul,

3  Cor. Though  He  was  rich,  get  for  your  sakes  He  became  poor,

'*' The*  feet'  of  which  *  needy  man*  were  tlie  holy  Preachers,

by  the  presence  of  which  same  compassing  the  Gentile

world.  He  went  round  about  the  whole  globe. Of  whom  it

L6T.36,is  said  by  the  Prophet,  And  I  will  walk  in  them. Was  not

^^^^ he  His  foot,  who  whilst  held  fast  in  fetters,  said,  For  which  I

6, 16. am  an  ambassador  in  bonds  ? But  those,  who  proved  them-

2(^  '  '  selves  *  a  shadow  of  death  and  a  stone  of  darkness,'  *  the

foot  of  the  needy  Man  forgot,'  because  in  the  very  outset  of

the  new  bom  Church,  whereas  the  holy  Apostles  were

minded  to  have  preached  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  Judisa,

seeing  that  they  profited  for  nothing  at  all,  they  went  off  for

the  preaching  to  the Gentiles,  as  they  themselves  say  in

Act!  18, their  Acts; It  was  necessary  that  the  word  of  Ood  should

fbrsi  have  been  spoken  to  you ;  but  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you^

and  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life,  lo,  we

turn  to  the  Gentiles. Concerning  whom  also  it  is  said  by

Pt.46,s.  the  Psalmist,  The  mountains  shall  be  carried  into  the  heart

qf  the  sea;  because  the  Apostles,  being  thrust  off  by  Judiea,

were  *  carried'  into  this  scene  of  the  Gentile  world. Who

then  are  those,  that  by  unbounded  hardness  and  from  dim-

sightedness  of  heart,  like  a  kind  of  ^  stone  of  darkness  and  the

shadow  of  death,'  are  divided  from  the  People  of  the  Saints

going  on  travel,  saving  those  whom  ^  tlie  foot  of  the  needy  Man

forgot,'  i.  e.  whom  the  Preachers  of  the  Lord,  poor  as  He

was,  that  is,  in  respect  of  human nature,  abandoned on

account  of  the  swelling  of  their  pride ;  and  those  tlicy  wholly

forgot,  whilst  they  transferred  the  seeds  of  their  preaching  to

the  getting  fruit  of  the  Gentiles  only  ? Whom  moreover  he

rightly  calls  *  inaccessible'  also,  because  while  they were

hardened  in  their  infidelity,  they  refiised  to  give  the  words  of

Tke  land  thai  had  the  bread  of  Truth  htkrned  up. 868

life  access  to  their  heart But  this  Jadsea  which  grows  thus  Book
hardened,  whether  what  she  was  for  long,  or  what  she  ■
underwent  afterwards,  let  us  listen  to. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  5.  The  earthy  from  which  bread  aroecy  i$  overturned
in  He  place  by  fire.

51.  Judsea  was  wont  to  gire  bread,  in  that  she  used  to  setxxxii.
before  men  the  words  of  the  Law. Which  same  Law  because
tlie  children  of  perdition  could  now  no  longer  understand
and  interpret,  the  prophet  Jeremiah  bewails  in  the  Lamenta-
tions, saying,  The  young  children  aeked  bready  and  there  tta$  Lun.  4,
no  man  to  break  it  unto  them  ;  but  this  '  earth  is  overturned  ^'
in  its  place  with  fire,*  because  on  beholding  the  miracles  of
the  faithful  it  consumed  itself  with  the  firebrand  of  envy.
For  because  envy  is  always  used  to  be  engendered  firom
pride,  she  *  perished  in  her  place  by  fire,'  who  for  this  reason
burned  with  envy,  because  she  did  not  abandon  pride. And
so  *  the  earth,  which  first  had  bread,  was  afterwards  over-
turned by  fire,'  because  the  Synagogue,  which  set  before  men
the  commandments  of  God  in  the  Law,  by  persecuting  the
new-bom  Church  consumed  itself  with the fire  of  envy.
Was  it  not  in  flames  with  the  brands  of  its  jealousy  when  on
seeing  the  miracles  of  our  Redeemer,  it  said  by  certain  of
its  own,  1Vh€U  do  wef  for  this  Man  doeth  many  miraclee  f  Johoii,
Or,  surely,  Te  see  that  toe  gain  nothing  ;  yea^  the  whole  ^^oor/d^i^  19.
goeth  qfter  Him. They  saw  that  whereby  they  should  have
been  converted,  and  they  were  thereby  rendered  the  more
froward. They  sought  to  stifle  Him,  Whom they  beheld
give  life  to  the  dead. They  held  the  Law  in  the  mouth,  but
persecuted  the  Author  of  the  Law. Therefore  the  earthy
from  which  bread  aroee^  was  overturned  in  its  place  by  fire.
Because  Judsa  had  in  her  own  self  first  the  Law  that  should
refiresh,  and  afterwards  envy  that  should  consume  her. For
the  describing  of  whom  it  is  further  added,

Ver.  6.  The  stones  qf  it  are  the  place  qf  sapphire,  and  her
clods  gold.

52.  The  proclaim  of  the  glory  going  before  adds  to  the  xxxiii.
guilt  of  the  sin  following  after. For  the  fall  of  every  indi-
vidual is  of  worse  criminality,  in  proportion  as  before  he  fell
he  had  the  power  to  be  of  greater  excellency. Thus  let  it  b^
told  of  Judaea,  let  it  be  told  what  she  was,  and  let  the  great-

TOL.  II.  A  a

354  *  Siones^  express JinnnesSf  *  sapphires*  heavenlincss.

Job  98,  ness  of  tbe  excellei^cie^  goiog  before  gf o^  ipto  the  heigluening

p  of  the  deliqquencies  succeeding  aAerwarda.  Her  stones  were
'  the  place  ofsapphireSy  avd  her  clods  of  gold.  What  do  we
undcr|}tand  in  this  place  by  ^  gold,*  but  the  minds  of  the
Saints  and  strong  ones?  For  in  Holy  Scripture  *  stones'
are  wont  to  be  taken  sometimes  on  the  side  of  bad  and  some-
times on  the  side  of  good.  For  when  a  ^  stone'  is  put  for
insensibility,  by  ^  stones'  we  have  hard hearts  denoted.

Matt.  8,  Whence  also  it  is  said  by  John;  God  is  able  of  these  stones
to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham;  who,  surely,  by  the
name  of  *  stones'  denotes  the  hearts  of  the  Gentiles,  at  that
time  hard  and  insensible  in  respect  of  unbelief. And  by  the

Ex.  11,  Pro])het  the  lx>rd  promises,  saying,  And  I  will  take  the  stony
heart  otit  of  your  Jlesl^^  and  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh.
Again  by  *  stones'  the  minds  of  the  strong  ones  are  used  to
be  denoted. And  heqce  it  is  said  to  the  Saints  by  Peter,

iPeta,  J^e  also  as  lively  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an
holy  priesthood. And  by  the  Prophet  tlie  Lord  promises  to

In.  64, the  Church  when  she  comes,  saying.  Behold,  I  will  lay  down

11—13.  ^yj^y  atones  t/f  order,  and  lay  thy  foundations  uHth  sapphires;
and  I  will  make  ihy  bulwarks  jasper,  and  thy  gates  in  cut
stones,  and  all  thy  borders  into  pleasant  stones.  And  all  thy
children  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord.  For  He  did  *  lay
down  in  her  the  stones  in  order,'  in  that  He  distinguished  the
holy  souls  in  her  by  the  diverseness  of  merits.  He  '  laid  her
foundation  in  sapphires,'  which  same  stones  retain  in  them-
selves the  likeness  of  tlie  colour  of  the  air,  because  the
strength  of  the  Church  is  firmly  based  in  souls  seeking  after
heavenly  things.  And  because  a  jasper  is  of  a  green  hue,
He  ^  made  his  bulwarks  of  the  jasper,'  because  they  are
advanced  against  her  adversaries  in  the  defence  of  Holy
Church,  who  growing  green  and  fresh  by  interior  desires,
do  not  die  off  by  any  drying  up  of  (damnable  lukewarmnoss.
But  He  ^  set  her  gates  in  cut  stones.'  For  those  are  the
*  gates'  of  the  Church,  by  whose  life  and  teaching  the  mul-
titude of  those  that  believe  enter  into  her.  Who  also  for  this
reason,  that  they  are  rich  in  great  deeds,  and  that  what  by
speaking  they  declare,  by  living  they  exhibit,  are  described  to
be  not  plain  but  *  cut  stones.'  For  in  whosesoever  life  right
practice  is  seen,  there  is  as  it  were  represented  in  those  same

The  humble  Faiih/nl  in  the  Law,  ^  clods  of  gold: d55

persons  what  thej  have  clone. Whore  also  embracing  all  Boos
the  number  of  the  Elect  in  a  general  roll,  he  added,  oim/ a// ?EZHt
thy  borders  in  pleasant  stones. And  as  though  we,  on  hearing
tlieso  things,  begged  that  he  would  make  Icno^tn  those  stones
that  he  spoke  of,  he  added.  All  thy  children  shall  be  taught
(if  the  Lord, And  therefore  because  from  out  of  Judaea  there
were  never  wanting  holy  souls,  to  lead  a  heavenly  life,  it  is
said,  her  stones  are  the  place  of  sapphires. And  because
with  an  extraordinary  brightness  of  life  and  of  wisdom  she
shone  forth  by  faith,  it  is  added,  and  her  clods  gold. What
is  denoted  by  '  clods,*  but  the  assemblages  and  multitudes  of
the  several  orders? Now  clods  are  compacted  of  moisture
and  dust;  and  so  all  they  that  being  watered  with  the  dew  of
grace  confessed  with  a  true-sighted  knowledge  that  by  the
debt  of  death they  are  dust,  whilst  they  were  made to
shine  bright  by  excellency  of  life,  lay  in  her  like  *  clods  of
gold.* '  Clods*  this  earth  had  in  the  Prophets,  *  clods*  she
had  in  the  teachers,  *  clods*  in  the  Ancient  Fathers,  who  by
an  extraordinary  infusion  of  grace  kept  themselves  close  in
unanimi^  of  profession  and  of  practice. Therefore  let  him
say.  And  the  clods  qfit  gold;  because  therein  the  multitude
of  the  spiritual  souls  shone  with  greater  perfection,  in  pro-
portion as  it  bound  itself  up  in  God  and  its  neighbour  with
greater  unanimity.

53.  But  this  gold  was  afterwards  dimmed  by  the  darknesi
of  unbelief. Whose  blackness,  surely,  the  Prophet  Jeremiah
surveying  laments,  saying.  How  is  the  gold  become  cftmf  Iaib.4,
how  is  the  most  fine  gold  changed/  For  *  the  gold  is  become  '
dim,*  in  that  that  ancient  brilliancy  in  them  of  faith  and
innocency,  upon  unbelief  coming  upon  them,  dulled  itself  with

the  night  of  wickedness.  Therefore,  what  it  was  since  we
have  heard,  even  that  her  stones  are  the  place  ofsapphiresy
now  let  us  hear  next  wherefore  that  People  so  beloved  of
God  lost  these  great  blessings. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  7.  The  pathway  of  the  bird  it  knew  not,  nor  beheld
the  eyes  of  the  vulture.

54.  Who  is  denoted  in  this  place  by  the  title  of  ^  the  bird,*xxxiv.
saving  He,  Who  in  ascending  poised  skywards  the  fleshly
body,  which  He  took  to  Him. Who  furthermore  is  fitly
designated  by  the  title  of  the  ^  vulture*  as  well. For  the

A  a  2

350 Our  LoriTs  way  mjn\fied  by  the  '  birit$  paih*^

Job  88,  ^  vuUure*  while  it  is  flies  if  it  sees  a  carcase  lying,  drops
g-*  itself  down  for  the  devouring  of  the  carcase,  and  very  often
it  is  in  this  way  taken  in  death,  when  it  has  come  from  on
high  after  the  dead  animal.  Rightly  therefore  is  the  Mediator
between  Qod  and  Man,  our  Redeemer,  denoted  by  the  ap-
pellation of  a  Culture,' Wlio  whilst  remaining  in  the  loftiness
of  His  Divine  Nature,  marked  as  it  were  from  a  kind  of
flight  on  high  the  carcase  of  our  mortal  being  down  below,
and  let  Elimself  drop  from  the  regions  of  heaven  to  the  lowest
places.  For  in  our  behalf  He  vouchsafed  to  become  man,  and
while  he  sought  the  dead  creature,  He  found  death  among
us,  Who  was  deathless  in  Himself.  Now  ^  the  eye*  of  this
*  vulture'  was  the  actual  aiming  at  our  ResuiTection,  because
He  Himself  being  dead  for  three  days  set  us  free  from  ever-
lasting deaih.  And  so  that  faithless  people  of  Judaea  saw
Him  in  the  state  of  mortality,  but  how  by  His  death  He
should  destroy  our  death,  it  noted  not.  It  beheld,  indeed,
the  vulture,  but  *  the  eyes  of  the  vulture  it  did  not  behold.*
Which  People,  whereas  it  refused  to  regard  the  ways  of  His
humility,  whereby  He  lifted  us  up  on  high,  ^  knew  not  the
pathway  of  the  bird.'  For  neither  did  it  betake  itself  to
consider  that  His  humility  would  lift  us  to  the  heavenly
heights,  and  the  aim  of  His  death  renew  us  to  life.  There-
fore the  pathway  of  the  bird  it  knew  not^  nor  beheld  the  eyes
of  the  vulture.  For  though  it  saw  Him  Whom  it  held  bound
in  death,  it  refused  to  see  what  wonderful  glory  by  His
death  CoUowed  our  life^  And  hence  it  was  kindled  to  the
cruelty  of  persecution  Hkewise;  it  refused  to  receive  the  words
of  life ;  the  Preachers  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  by  forbidding,
by  evil  entreating,  by  smiting  it  thrust  from  it  Which  same,
being  so  thrust  ofi*,  abandoning  Judsea  whereto  tliey  had
been  sent,  were  dispersed  for  tlie  gatliering  together  of  the
Qentile  world. And  hence  it  is  further  added;

Ver.  8.  The  children  of  the  dealers  have  not  trodden  it^

nor  hath  the  lioness  passed  through  it,

>  IniU- 55.  In  all  the  Latin  copies  we  find  the  word  *  Instructors''

«ne«oti-P^^  down,  but  in  the  Greek  we  find  *  traders*,'  whereby  it

atoret. may  be  inferred  that  in  this  passage  the  several  copyists  from

being  ignorant  put  ^  instructors' ('  institutors')  instead  of

■•  al. '  what  glory  in  our  lifo  nhould  follow  from  His  dtath.'

Hofy  Preachers  trade  unth  Truth  for  good  works, 357

'  instiiores'  C  dealers*). For we call traders/ instiiores*  Book

on  this  acconni,  that  they  are  *  instant  in plying  work.'

'Bxxi  both  the  one  phrase  and  the  other,  though  they  dis-
agree in  utterancey  yet  are  not  at  variance  in  meaning/
because  all  those  who  instruct  the  practice  of  the  faithful,
carry  on  a  spiritual  dealing,  that  while  they  supply  preach-
ing to  their  hearers,  they  should  receive  back  from  them
laith and right  works; as  where it  is  written touching
Holy  Church,  ^e  tnaketh  fine  linetiy  amd  eelleth  it Con-Pror.
ceming  whom  it  is  likewise  said  a  little  after  in  that  place,  ''>  ^  *
She  perceiveth  thai  her  trading  is  good. Who  in  this  place  ▼•  18-
are  called  ^  instructors*  but  the  holy  Prophets,  who  busied
themselves by prophesying  to  instruct  the ways  of the
Synagogue  unto  faith  ? *  Sons*  of  whom,  assuredly,  the  holy
Apostles  are  styled,  who  that  they  should  believe  God  Man
were  begotten  to  the  same  faith  by  the  preaching  of  those.
Concerning  whom  it  is  said  to  the  Church  by  the  Psalmist;
Instead  of  thy  fathers  are  born  to  thee  children  j  whom  thouPs.  46,
mayest  make  princes  over  all  the  earth. But  because  the  '^'
Apostles  being  thrust  off  went  out  from  the  borders  of  the
Synagogue,  it  is  rightly  said  now,  The  children  of  the  dealers
have  not  trodden  it. Since  the  ^  children  of  the  dealers*
would  have  *  trodden  it,*  if  the  holy  Preachers  had  borne
down the badness  of the  Synagogue  with the  heel  of
goodness. But  if  those  same  *  dealers*  we  take  for  the
Preachers  of  Holy  Church,  then  the  *  children*  of  the  dealers,
nothing  hinders  us  taking  for  the  Shepherds  and  Teachers
who  followed  the  way  of  the  Apostles. Which did not
*  tread*  the  Synagogue,  because  whilst  their  fathers,  i.  e.  the
Apostles,  were  thrust  off  by  that  Synagogue,  they  themselves
too  ceased  from  the  calling  of  her.

M.  Which  same  Synagogue  '  the  lioness  passed  not  by,'
because  Holy  Church,  being  devoted  to  the  assembling
together  of  the  Gentiles,  never  any  longer  employed  itself
upon  that  people  of  Judsea.  Now  the  Church  is  rightly
called  *  a  lioness,*  in  that  persons  living  amiss  in  bad  habits,
it  kills  with  the  mouth  of  holy  preaching.  Hence  to  the
first  Shepherd  himself  it  is  said  as  to  Uie  mouth  of  this
lioness ;  slay  and  eat.  For  what  is  '  slain*  is  killed  out  of  Aots  lo,
life,  whilst  that  which  is  eaten  is  changed  into  the  body  of*'*

358 The  Church  a  lioneu. The  ^  Mountain*^  humbled.

Job  S8,  the  persoD  eating.  Accordingly  it  is  said,  *  Slay  and  eat  ;*
•— —  i.  e. '  Kill  those  to  the  sin  wherein  they  are  living,  and  con-
*  vert  them  from  themselves  into  thine  own  members.'  And
because  this  Church  is  the  body  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  like-
wise Himself  by  the  voice  of  Jacob  is  called  ^  a  lion'  in
respect  of  Himself,  a  *  lioness'  by  the  body,  when  it  is  said
Gen.49,to  him  under  the  likeness  of  Judah,  To  the  prey^  my  son^
art  thou  gone  up.  Thou  hast  couched  as  a  Uon^  and  as  a
lioness.  Who  shall  rouse  him  up  ?  Accordingly  this  lioness  it
is  never  said  *  passed  not'  Judaea,  but  ^  passed  not  through.'
For  upon  the  Apostles  preaching,  in  the  first  instance  three
thousand  out  of  her,  and  afterwards  five  thousand,  believed.
And  so  the  Church  *  passed  by'  the  way  of  the  Synagogue,
but  *  passed  not  through,'  because  a  few  from  out  of  her  it
carried  ofi*  to  faith,  but  yet  that  faithless  people  it  did  not
utterly  make  extinct  to  misbelief.  But,  what  we  have
already  ofren  said,  being  cast  ofi*  by  the  infidelity  of  the
Jews  it  turned  away  to  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  Hence
it  is  yet  further  said  of  that  same  lioness ;

Ver.  9.  He  sirelcheth  out  his  hand  to  the  Jlint;  he  over-
turneth  the  mountains  by  the  roots.
^xxvi.  57.  For  ^  he  stretched  out  his  hand  to  Uie  fiint,'  because
He  put  forth  the  arm  of  His  preaching  to  the  hardness  of  the
Gentiles.  Hence  the  same  blessed  Job,  forewarned  of  the
history  of  his  suflferiug  being  destined  to  be  raudc  known  to
Job  19,  the  Gentiles,  says,  Let  these  things  be  graven  with  an  iron
pen  in  a  plate  o/lead^  or  hewn  in  the  Jlint.  But  whom  in
this  place  do  we  understand  by  the  ^  mountains'  saving  the
powerful  ones  of  this  world,  who  on  account  of  earthly
substance  swell  themselves  high  ?  Concerning  whom  the
Pt.  144,  Psalmist  saith,  Touch  the  mountains^  and  they  shall  smoke ;
but  the  mountains  are  overturned  from  the  roots,  because,  on
Holy  Church  preaching  the  highest  powers  of  this  world  fell
from  their  inmost  thinking  into  the  adoring  of  Almighty
God«  For  *'  the  roots'  of  the  mountains  are  the  inmost
thoughta  of  the  proud.  And  *  the  mountains  fall  from  the
roots,'  because  for  the  worshipping  of  God,  the  powers  of
the  world  are  laid  level  with  the  earth  from  the  lowest
tlioughts.  For  by  a  root  the  hidden  thought  is  rightly
denoted,  because  by  means  of  that  which  is  not  seen,  being

Sireami  cut  in  Oeniile  rock  for  living  Waters  ioJUno.  S50

within,  there  bunts  out  what  should  be  seen  without And  Book
hence  on  the  side  of  good  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  And  the^ ^
remnant  thai  is  escaped  of  I  he  hotise  ofJudah  shall  dgdin  si, '
take  root  downward^  and  bear  fruit  upward. As  though  it
were  expressed  in  plain  speech ;  '  Deep  down  below  the
thought  springs  up,  that  up  on  high  the  reward  may  be
rendered  back.' So  then  let  him  say,  He  stretcheth  out  his
hand  to  the  flinty  and  overturneth  the  mountains  from  the
roots. For  whilst  the  sacred  preaching  sought  the  hardness
of  the  Gentiles,  it  entirely  fhistraied  the  lofUness  of  the
proud. But  because  those  whom  it  empties  of  earthly
thoughts,  it  fills  with  heavenly  gifts,  and those,  whom  it
drains  of  interest  below,  it  waters  with  streams  from  Above,
it  is  directly  added  ;
Vcr.  lO.  He  cutteth  out  streams  in  the  rocks.

58.  i.  e.  in  the  hard  hearts  of  the  Gentiles  he  opened  thexxxvii.
rivets  of  preaching ;  as  it  is  likewise  spoken  by  the  Prophet

of  watering  the  dryness  of  the  Gentiles; He  turneth  the PB.i07y
ttildemess  into  a  standing  watery  and  dry  ground  into  water  ^'
springs. And  in  the  Gospel  the  Lord  promises,  saying.  He  John  7,
that  believeth  on  Me,  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  ofhis^^
hellg  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water. What  we  then  heard
promised,  we  now^  see  fulfilled. For  see  how  in  the  holy
preachers,  iiot  sprung  from  Judaea,  through  the  universal
Church  spread  over  the  whole  world,  streams  of  heavenly
precepts  flow  forth  in  abundance  firom  the  months  of  the
Gentiles.  Thiis  because  in  the  rocks  He  opened  streams,  fi-om
hard  hearts  loo  there  flowed  forth  the  river  of  holy  preaching.
It  goes  on ;
And  hii  eye  hath  seen  every  precious  thing.

59.  It  is  a  thing  to  be  especially  borne  in  mind,  that  eachxxxviii.
individual  soul  is  rendered  the  more  precious  in  the  sight  of
God,  by  how  ititich  it  is  for  love of  the  truth  the  more
despised  in  its  own  eyes. When  thou  Uxist  little  in  thine  i  Sam.
own  sighty  did  I  not  make  thee  the  head  qf  the  tribes  qf^^^  ^"^^
Israel  ? As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms,  ^  Thou  wast  great  with

Me,  because  thou  wast  contemptible  to  thyself,  but  now
because  thou  art  great  to  thyself,  thou  art  become  con-
temptible to  Me.*  And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet;  Woe
unto  them  that  ate  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in

800  Lowly  touh  precious  in  OocFt  sight j  and  by  Him  chosen.

Job  38,  iheir  own  eight!  Thus  every  man  becomes  the  more  worthless

l^y^'^  to  Qod|  in  proportion  as  he  is  more  precious  to  himself,  so
*  much  the  more  precious  to  Qod  as  he  is  for  His  sake  more

Pi.  138, If orthless  to  himself;  because  He  regardeth  the  lowly ^  and
knoweth  the  high  afar  off.  Every  precious  thing ^  therefore,
His  eye  saw. In  Holy  Scripture  God*s  *  seeing'  is  put  for

4^^  ^'  ^  choosing,*  as  it  is  written  in  the  Gospel;  IVhen  thou  wast
under  the  Jig  tree,  I  saw  thee,  i.  e.  I  chose  thee  whilst  placed
under  the  shadow  of  the  Law.* Therefore  He  *  saw  every

1  Cor. lathing  precious,'  because  He  chose  the  lowly.  Ood  hoUh
chosen  the  weak  things  qf  the  world  to  cor^ound  the  things
which  are  mighty.  He  '  saw  the  precious  thing'  when  the
human  soul,  having  base  views  of  itself,  He  visited  with  the
illumination  of  His  grace. Of  which  same  soul  it  is  said  by

Jer.  15,  the  Prophet ;  j/*  thou  separatest  the  precious  from  the  vile,
thou  shall  be  as  My  mouth.  For  the  present  world  is  vile
with  God,  but  the  soul  of  man  is  precious  to  Him.  He,  then,
that  *  separates  the  precious  from  the  vile'  is  called  ^  as  the
mouth  of  God,'  because  by  that  man  God  deals  forth  His
words,  who  by  speaking  the  things  that  he  is  able  to  speak,
plucks  out  the  soul  of  man  from  the  love  of  the  present
world.  And  because  the  teachers  of  the  New  Testament
are  brought  to  this,  that  even  the  hidden  darkness  of  allegories
in  the  Old  Testament  they  search  out,  it  is  rightly  added ;

Ver.  11.  The  depths  also  of  the  floods  He  hath  searched,
and  the  hidden  things  He  hath  brought  to  light.

xxxix.  60.  For  what  else  are  here  called  *  floods'  but  the  sayings
of  the  ancient  Fathers.  For  who  might  be  able  to  estimate
how  vehement  a  flood,  whilst  he  was  founding  the  Law,  burst
forth  from  the  very  breast  of  Moses  ?  how  vehement  a  flood
gushed  from  the  heart  of  David  ?  what  mighty  streams  of
floods  flowed  out  from  the  lips  of  Solomon  and  all  die
Prophets?  Now  of  these  ^  floods'  Judsea  held  the  shew,  when
in  keeping  the  surface  of  the  letter  she  knew  not  the  depths
thereof.  But  we,  who,  on  the  Lord  coming,  seek  therein
interior  spiritual  things,  search  their  '  depths.'  And  this
thing  the  Lord  is  Himself  said  to  do,  because  by  Himself
vouchsafing  it  we  are  enabled  to  do  it;  and  so  by  us,  who
follow  not  the  letter  which  killeth,  but  the  spirit  which
maketh  alive,  the  Lord  *  searcheth  the  depths  of  the  floods.

Deep  meanings  of  the  Law  brought  to  light  in  the  Gospel.  36 1

and  bringeth  the  hidden  things  into  light,'  because  the  state-  Book

ments  of  the  I^w,  which  the  too  dark  history  makes  obscnrei -*

a  spirilnal  interpretation  now  lights  np.  And  hence  '  Tmth*
when  speaking  in  parables  in  the  Gospel  bade  the  Disciples,
saying,  What  I  tell  you  in  darkness^  that  specie  ye  in  light;  M«t  lo,
and  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear^  that  preach  ye  on  the  house  tops.
For  the  plainly  spoken  words  of  these  interpreting  have  made
the  sentences  of  the  ancient  Fathers  henceforth  clear  to  us.
Hence  the  Prophet  Isaiah  viewing  the  words  plain  by  the
interpretation  of  Holy  Church,  not  obscured  by  the  darkness
of  allegories,  exclaimed,  saying.  The  place  of  rivers^  /A^l0.88,
broadest  and  open  streams.  For  the  sayings  of  the  Old
Testament  were  as  narrow  and  close  streams,  which  bound
up  the  sentences  of  their  lore  in  the  darkest  gathering
together.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  teaching  of  Holy
Church  are  '  streams  both  broad  and  open,*  because  her
declarations  are  at  once  many  in  number  to  those  that  find
ihem,  and  plain  to  those  that  seek.  Therefore  he  says,
The  depths  qf  the  floods  he  hath  searched^  and  the  hidden
things  he  hath  brought  to  light.  Because  when  He  poured
into  His  interpreters  the  spirit  of  understanding,  He  set  open
the  ancient  obscurities  of  those  prophesying.  And  that  Holy
Church  henceforth  knows  and  sees  by  the  Spirit,  which  the
Synagogue  before  was  not  at  all  able  to  understand  by  the
letter.  Whence  Moses  also,  while  he  spoke  to  the  people,
veiled  his  face;  surely,  in  order  to  denote  that  that  People  of
the  Jews  knew  the  words  of  the  Law,  but  did  not  at  all  see
the  clearness  of  that  Law.  And  hence  it  is  rightly  said  by
Paul;  But  even  to  this  day,  when  Moses  is  read^  the  veil  waCor.s,
ujwn  their  heart.  But  because  the  declarations  of  Ood  are,
without  His  wisdom,  never  fathomed  at  all,  (for  except  him
who  hath  received  His  Spirit,  none  knoweth  in  any  sort  His
words,)  the  holy  man  adds  words  touching  the  subject  of
searching  out  that  same  Wisdom  of  Ood,  saying ;

Ver.  12 — 15.  But  where  shall  wisdom  be  foundf  and
where  is  the  place  of  understanding  f  Man  knoweth  not  the
price  thereqf:  neither  is  it  found  in  the  land  qf  them  that
live  pleasantly.  The  depth  saithy  It  is  not  with  me,  and  the
sea  saithy  It  is  not  with  me.  Fine  gold  shall  not  be  given
for  it :  neither  shall  silver  be  weighed  for  the  price  thereqf.

862  Letter  incoMisteni  unleu  taken  of  Divine  Wisdom,

Job  S8y  61.  It  U  first  to  be  noted,  that  two  points  be  proposed
— — ^to  himself,  and  two  he  adds  making  answer.  For  to  this  that
^j^ '  he  said  above.  Where  shall  tvisdom  be  founds  and  where  is
the  place  qf  understanding  t  he  answered  in  this  verse,  The
depth  saithy  It  is  not  with  me;  and  the  sea  saithy  It  is  not
with  me.  But  in  answer  to  that  which  he  had  said,  Man
knoweth  fiot  the  place  thereqf;  neither  is  it  found  in  the  land
qf  them  that  live  pleasantly ;  he  gave  the  lower  verse,
sajing.  Fine  gold  shall  not  be  given  for  it;  neither  shall
silver  be  weighed  for  the  price  thereof.  So  then  he  answered
to  both  questions,  yet  in  adding  to  what  ho  had  objected,  not
in  solving  it  For  when  he  enquired  the  place  of  Wisdom,
and  then  answered  below,  The  depth  saith.  It  is  not  with
me  ;  he  pointed  out  not  where  it  was,  but  where  it  was  not.
Again  when  he  said  that  *  the  price  thereof  was  not  known
by  man,'  and  rejoined  to  this  below,  ^/t^  gold  shall  not  be
given  for  it;  he  shewed  not  what  was  the  price  of  it,  but
what  was  not.  For  it  is  plain  to  all  that  neither  can  this
wisdom  of  man  be  held  in  a  place,  nor  be  bought  with  riches.
But  the  holy  man  being  full  of  mystical  ideas  sends  us  on  for
the  making  out  other  things,  so  that  we  should  look  for  not
wbdom  created,  but  Wisdom  creating ;  for  except  in  those
words  we  search  the  secret  depths  of  allegory,  surely  those
things  that  follow  are  utterly  deserving  of  disregard,  if  they
be  estimated  according  to  the  historical  narration  alone.  For
a  little  afterwards  he  saith,  Qold  and  glass  cannot  equal  it;
and  while,  as  we  know,  glass  is  far  and  incomparably  of  lower
price  than  gold,  wherefore  after  the  name  of  gold,  which
is  unquestionably  a  precious  metal,  by  way  of  unlimited
praise  did  he  say  that  '  glass'  too  is  not  equal  to
wisdom  ?  So  by  the  mere  difficulty  of  the  letter,  wo  are
forced  that  we  be  quicksighted  to  the  mystical  sentiments
in  these  words.  So  then  what  wisdom  is  it,  the  holy  man  is
contemplating,  but  that  of  which  Paul  the  Apostle  saith,
1  Cor.i,  Christ  the  Power  qf  Qod,  and  the  Wisdom  of  Ood?  Con-
ProT.  9  ceming  which  it  is  written  by  Solomon ;  Wisdom  hath
P  104  ^*'^^^  ^  house;  and  of  which  the  Psalmist  saith ;  In
24.'  ^wisdom  hast  Thou  made  all  things.  Of  this  same  Wisdom
^  man  knoweth  not  the  price,'  because  he  findeth  nothing
worthy  of  the  estimate  thereof. Now  this  price  of  Wisdom

Man  did  not  of  hitnse(f  merit  the  gift  of  Wisdom. 868

is  not  said  at  once  '  to  be/  and  not  '  to  be  known/  btit  as  booK
for  this  reason  '  not  to  be  known/  because  it  is  wanting,  iti  mil*
that  manner  of  speaking  by  which  a  person  caught  in  d
strait,  when  he  finds  no  remedy  of  succour,  is  wont  to  confess
that  *  what  to  do  he  knows  not/

62.  So  then  '  not  to  know  the  price  of  (his  Wisdom/  is  to
find  no  meriting  of  meet  practice  whereby  to  obtain  it.  For
we  give  a  price  with  this  object,  that  instead  of  it  we  may
possess  ourselves  of  that  object  which  we  long  after.  But
what  have  we  given,  that  we  should  deserve  to  obtain  this
Wisdom,  which  is  Christ?  Since  it  is  by  grace  we  are
redeemed.  For  those  works  alone  by  living  badly  have  wd
given,  for  which  if  a  just  return  were  reserved,  not  Christ
but  punishments  would  be  rendered  back*.  But  man
deserved  one  thing  in  the  way  of  justice,  and  obtained
another  in  respect  of  grace.  Let  Paul  bear  witness,  before
the  time  that  his  mind  received  the  seed  of  unbought
truth,  with  what  briars  of  error  he  was  overlaid.  Who  uxUi  Tim.
btforOj  he  says, 'd  blasphemer^  and  a  persecutor,  and^'^^'
if\furumsj  but  I  obtained  mercy j  because  1  did  it  ignorafitfy
in  unbeliqf.  Let  him  testify  for  ^hat  sort  of  persons  Christ
deigned  to  die.  While  we  were  yet  sinners,  he  says,  Christ  in  Rom.  s,
due  time  died/or  the  ungodly.  We,  theii,  who  on  Wisdom^s  ^'  ^'
coming  were  found  Ungodly,  what  title  of  good  practice  hate
we  given,  whereby  we  might  obtain  to  receive  that  Wisdom  ?
*  The  price  of  this  Wisdom  man  knoweth  uot,'  because  whoso

<  See  1.  ii.  on  Exekiel,  Horn.  vii.  fore  that  the  Creator  of  all  things  wae
§.  9.  '  One  maj  also  by  the  <  porch'  God,  hot  that  His  Almightr  Son  was
nnderatand  *  Faith.'  For  it  is  before  Incarnate  he  knew  not.  For  neither
the  8tq>s  and  the  gate :  becaose  we  coald  he  have  done  good  works,  aoless
come  first  to  faith,  that  after  by  spiritual  he  had  first  bdieved.  For  it  is  written,
gifts  assteps  the  heaTenly  life  s  entrance  fLake  xi.  6.)  Wiihtmi  Faiih  ii  i$
may  be  reached.  For  not  by  virtaes  trnpoitihle  to  pleate  OoeL  He  therefore
do  we  come  to  faith,  bat  by  faith  we  had  fkitfa,  whose  prayers  and  alms  were
attain  to  Tirtaes.  For  Cornelias  the  able  to  pleaiie  God.  Bat  br  his  good
eentorlon,  whose  alms  before  baptism  practice  ne  earned  (promeroit)  that  he
by  the  Angel's  witnessing  received  should  come  to  know  God^erfectly,
praise,  did  not  by  works  come  to  foith,  and  believe  the  Mystery  of  His  1  near-
bat  by  faith  came  tmto  works.  For  nation,  in  order  rfiat  he  might  attain
even  to  him  by  the  Angel  it  Is  said,  to  the  Sacraments  of  Baptism.  By
(Acts  X.  4.)  Thjf  vrajf9r$  and  ihin9  faith  then  he  came  to  works,  bat  by  works
0bn$  are  gone  up  o^ore  GotL  For  if  he  wss  completed  in  faith.'  This  seems
he  had  not  believed  the  troe  God  even  to  give  the  troe  notion  of  that  merit  of
herore  Baptism,  to  whom  did  he  pray  P  '  oongraity,'  which  oar  xilith  Article
Or  how  had  Almisfaty  God  heard  him.  implies  as  belonginc  to  works  done  bt
unless  he  had  soogbt  of  Himself  in  good  the  aid  of  partial  grace  and  fiuth
works  to  be  perfected  P  He  knew  there-  befbre  full  grace  is  reoei  ved.

864  Man  merits  not  grace  but  through  grace  Jirst  given.

Job  88,  is  separated  from  brute  animals  by  the  understanding  faculty
^  of  reason,  understands  that  he  is  not  saved  by  his  own  merits,
'  knows  and  sees  that  he  had  not  given  any  thing  of  good
practice  that  he  might  come  to  faith.  For  it  is  as  it  were  to
give  a  price  for  the  obtaining  of  Wisdom,  to  anticipate  the
coming  to  the  knowledge  of  God  by  the  merchandize  of  one's
conduct

63.  He  had  learnt  that  of  this  Wisdom  there  is  ^  no  price,*
Bom* who  said,  Who  hath  Jirst  given  unto  Him,  and  it-  shall  be

*  '  recompensed  unto  him  again.  Hence  it  is  written  again,
Bph.  a,  pojr  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith;  and  that  not  qf
yourselves;  it  is  the  gift  qf  Qod.  Not  qf  uxnrks,  lest  any
man  should  boast.  Hence  concerning  himself  he  again
J  Cor.  speaks,  saying,  By  the  grace  qf  Qod  I  am  what  I  am.  And
'  '  as  by  the  inspiration  of  this  same  grace,  the  practices  of  the
parts  of  virtue  are  at  once  engendered  in  the  heart,  so  that
from  free  will  also  conduct  should  follow,  which  after  this
life  the  Eternal  Recompensing  should  answer  to,  he  thereupon
added.  And  His  grace  which  was  bestowed  upon  me  was  not
in  vain.  But  there  are  those  who  exult  that  they  are  in  a
sound  state  by  their  own  powers,  and  pride  themselves  that
by  their  own  merits  going  before  they  have  been  redeemed,
whose  declaration,  surely,  is  found  to  be  contradictory  to  them-
selves, because,  while  they  maintain  themselves  at  once
'  innocent'  and  ^  redeemed,'  this  very  name  of  redemption  tlioy
make  null  and  void  in  tlicmselves.  For  every  one  that  is
redeemed  is  doubtless  set  free  from  some  sort  of  captivity.
Whence  then  is  this  said  person  redeemed,  if  he  was  not  before
captive  under  sin  ?  It  is  plain  then  that  he  greatly  misjudges
who  judges  so.  For  heavenly  grace  does  not  find  desert  of
man,  in  order  to  make  it  come,  but  after  it  has  come,  causes
the  same;  and  God,  when  He  comes  to  the  undeserving
mind,  at  once  sets  it  forth  to  Himself  deserving  by  so  coming,
and  causes  therein  merit  for  Him  to  recompense,  whereas
He  had  found  only  that  for  Him  to  punish.

64.  It  is  good  herein  to  recall  the  eyes  of  the  mind  to  that
robber,  who  from  the  jaws  of  the  devil  ascended  the  Cross,
and  from  the  Cross  mounted  to  Paradise.  Let  us  behold
what  sort  of  person  he  came  to  the  stock  of  the  Cross,  what
sort  of  person  he  went  from  the  Cross. He  came  boimd

The  Thief  on  the  CrosSf  hew  changed  hy  grace. 865

by  his  brother's  bloody  he  came  liloodstdned,  but  by  interior  Bqok

grace  he  was  changed  on  the  Cross ;  and  he  who  inflicted ■

death  upon  a  brother,  of  the  Lord  when  dying  proclaimed
the  life,  saying,  Lord^  remember  me  when  Thou  earnest  iniolAA»
Thy  Kingdom. On  the  Cross  the  nails  had  bound  fast  his***  ***
hands  and  feet,  and  there  remained  nought  in  him  that
punishment  left  free,  but  the  tongue  and  the  heart But
God  inspiring  it,  he  offered  all  to  Him  that  he  found  free
in  himself,  so  that  according  to  that  which  is  written,  he
should  with  the  heart  believe  unto  righteousnese,  and  with  Bon.
the  mouth  make  confession  unto  salvation. But  that  in  the  ^^'  ^^*
hearts  of  the  fidthftil  there  are  three  virtues  in  a  special
manner  abiding,  the Apostle  testifies, saying. And  now  l  Cor.
abidethfaithj  hope^  charity ;  all  of  which  the  robber  being  ^^>^'*
filled  with  instantaneous  grace  both  received  and  kept  on
the  Cross* For  he  had  faith,  who  believed  the  Lord  was
about  to  reign,  when  he  saw  Him  dying  equally  with  him-
self; he  had  hope,  who  begged  for  admission  into  His
kingdom,  saying,  Lord^  remember  me  when  Thou  earnest
into  7%y  kingdom. Charity  also  in  his  death  he  livingly
retained,  who  at  once  charged  home  for  his  iniquity  a
brother  and  fellow  robber  dying  for  the  like  crime,  and
preached  to  him  the  life  which  he  had  Icamty  saying.  Dost  Loke
not  thou/ear  Gody  seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  condemnation  f  ^>  ^'
And  we  indeed  justly:  for  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our
deeds:  hut  this  Man  hath  done  nothing  amiss. He  that
came  such  to  the  Cross  by  sin,  see  what  he  departed  from  the
Cross  by  grace. He  confessed  the  Lord^  Whom  he  beheld
dying  along  with  himself  by  human  frailty,  at  the  time  that
the  Apostles  denied Him,  Whom they  had seen  doing
miracles  by  divine  power.

65.  But  they  who  make  out  that  man  is  saved  by  bis  own
powers,  fancy  that  that  same  confession  of  man  is  from  the
eflicacy  of  man  by  himself.  Which  if  it  were  so,  the  Psalmist
would  not  say  in  praise  of  Ood,  Confession  and  great  doing  Ps.  ii]y
are  His  work.  So  that  from  Him  we  receive  it  to  confess'*
what  is  right,  by  Whom  it  is  granted  us  to  practise  what  is
great  also.  Therefore  because  we  have  not  given  aught  of
good  practice,  whereby  we  might  deserve  to  be  vouchsafed
this  Wisdom,  let  it  be  righdy  said,  Man  knoureih  not  its

300 Pleaturei  of  ihis  life  exclude  irtie  tVudotn.

Job  98,  pnce.  Inasmuch  as  he  that  l^^nceforih  uses  reason  looks
~i£i-  down  upon  himself  under  the  perception  of  this  Wisdom  so
'  much  the  deeper»  in  proportion  as  he  more  truly  knows  the
interior  depth  of  that  Wisdom,  so  as  to  see  that  he  has
attained  to  her  being  unworthy,  by  the  which  it  is  brought  to
poss  without  price,  that  he  should  be  made  worthy.  Con-
cerning which  it  is  well  said ;

Neither  is  it  found  in  the  land  of  those  that  live  sweetly,
xli. 00.  What  is  denoted  in  this  passage  by  the  title  of  the
'  land,*  saving  the  soul  of  man  ? Concerning  which the
Pi.  148,  Psaluiist  saith,  My  soul  thirsieth  after  Thee,  as  a  land  with-
out water. But  this  wisdom  cannot  be  *  found  iu  the  land
of  those  that  live  sweetly;'  because  the  man  that  is  still  fed
with  the  pleasures  of  this  life,  is  severed  from  the  perception
of  Eternal  Wisdom. For  if  he  were  truly  wise-minded,  being
banished  from  the  interior  delights,  he  would  mourn  over
that  blind  estate  of  his  exile,  whercinto  he  has  fallen. For
£ool.  1,  hence  it  is  said  by  Solomon ;  He  that  addeth  knowledgOf
addeth  pain  also. For  the  more  a  man  begins  to  know  what
he  has  lost,  the  more  he  begins  to  bewail  the  sentence  of  his
corruption,  which  he  has  met  with. For  he  sees  whence
and  whereto  he  has  fallen  ;  how  that  from  the  joys  of  Para-
dise he  has  come  to  the  woes  of  the  present  life,  from  the
companyings  of  the  Angels  to  carings  for  necessities;  he
considers  in  what  a  number  of  perils  he  now  lies  prostrate,
who  before  without  peril  disdained  to  stand ;  he  bewails  the
exile  which  being  accursed  he  undergoes,  and  sighs  after  the
state  of  heavenly  glory,  which he  might  be  enjoying  in
security,  if  he  had  not  had  a  mind  to  commit  sin. Which
Pt.8i,  same  the  Psalmist  regarding  rightly,  saith, /  said  in  my
**• fear,  I  am  cast  out  from  the  face  of  thine  eyes. For  after
contemplating  the  interior  joys  of  the  vision  of  God,  and  the
assemblage  in  fellowship  of  tlie  Angels  holding  fast,  he
brought  back  his  eyes  to  things  beneath,  he  saw  where  he
was  laid  low,  who  was  created  for  this  end  that  he  might
have  been  able  to  stand  in  heavenly  realms;  he  considered
where  he  was,  and  where  he  was  not  he  grieved  to  think,  he
mourned  for  himself  as  ^  cast  out  from  the  face  of  God*s  eyes,*
because  by  comparison  with  the  interior  light,  he  had  felt  the
darkness  of  his  exile,  that  he  was  undergoing,  to  be  the

ne  wise  will  not  solace  themselves  with  this  world. 867

heavier. Hence  it  is  that  he  iidniits  not  to  his  soul  the  solace  Book

of  any  faronring  from  the  present  life,  saying,  I  refused  my -'

sof$l  to  be  comforted. For  oftenlimes  tlio  rich  ones  of  this
world,  being  afflicted  with  weariness  of  spirit,  are  used  to
regard  the  good  gifts  bestowed  on  them  in  time,  and  to
soften  down  their  sadness. For  when  they  feel  themselves
affected  with  something  of  sadness,  they  look  at  their  horses,
they  surrey  the  vessels  of  their  gold  and  their  silver,  they  go
the  round  of  their  estates. And  while  they  gladly  carry  their
eyes  through  the  range  of  these  temporal  things,  they  get  the
better  of  the  sadness  of  soul  that  has  risen  up. And  hence
Truth  saith  to  them  also  in  the  Gospel ;  But  woe  unto  fou  Lake  6,
that  are  rich^for  ye  have  your  comfort  here. But  the  holy
man,  who  mourns  for  this,  that  he  has  fallen  from  everlasting
joys,  does  not  admit  consolation  on  the  ground  of  things
temporal,  saying,  /  have  refused  my  soul  to  be  comforted.
As  though  he  said  in  plain  speech;  '  I,  who  do  not  grieve
for  the  loss  of  temporal  things,  am  utterly  unable  to  be  com-
forted by  the  abundance  thereof.* And  as  though  we  our-
selves on  hearing  these  things  said  to  him, '  What  then  dost
thou  seek,  who  refusest  to  find  comfort  in  those  things  that
arc  of  the  world  ?*  he  thereupon  added ;  /  remembered  Ood^
and  was  delighted. As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms ;  '  Me  not
even  the  abundance  of  things  earthly  doth  cheer,  but  even
able  to  see,  gives  me  delight' So  then,  this  is  the  bitterness
the  remembrance  only  of  my  Maker,  Whom  as  yet  I  am  not
of  the  wise,  that  whilst  they  are  lifted  up  on  high  in  hope,
they  do  not  bow  down  the  mind  here  to  any  delights. For
hence  it  is  written ;  The  heart  of  the  wise  is  where  there  is  EooL  r,
sorrow^  and  the  heart  of  fools  where  there  is  mirth. Hence
James  saith:  Be  afflicted  and  mourn  and  weep;  let  yourjwn^B
laughter  be  turned  to  mourning^  and  your  joy  to  heatdness.  *'  ^*
Hence  *  Truth  bears  witness  by  Itself,  saying,  Bleued  are  Matt  s,
they  that  moum^for  they  shall  be  comforted^* So  wisdom^*
cannot  be  *  found  in  the  land  of  those  that  live  sweetly ;'
because  they  are  the  more  really  foolish,  in  proportion  as
whilst  parting  with  the  greater  things  they  delight  themselves
in  the  least Hence  Peter  blames  that  same  folly  of  the
wicked,  sayiiig,  TTial  count  for  pleasure  the  indulgence  ofthe^V^ts

Sf  I*.

308 Soul  of  sinners  a  bottomless  pit  where  Satan  lies.

Job  88,  day  of  defilement  and  stain  ^ Hence  Solomon  saith,  /

-.g^— counted  laughter  an  error;  and  said  to  mirths  Wliy  art

Eool.  %  thou  vainly  deceived? Accordingly  let  the  holy  man  say

^' concerning  Wisdom,  Neither  is  it  found  in  the  land  of  those

that  live  sweetly. In  this  way  plainly,  tliat  those  who  in  this

world  live  sweetly,  are  still  so  besotted,  that  this  very  thing

too they know not,  viz.  Whence  they  have  fallen. It

follows;

Ver.  11.  The  bottomless  pit  saith^  It  is  not  with  me.
67.  What  does  he  call  *  the  bottomless  pit'  but  the  hearts
of  men,  which  are  at  once  by  the  fall  all  floating,  and  by  the
mistiness  of  double-dealing  full  of  darkness  ?  Which  same
^  bottomless  pit'  declares  that  this  Wisdom  *  is  not  with'  it ;
because  the  wicked  mind,  while  it  longs  to  be  wise  in  a
carnal  way,  shews  itself  foolbh  as  to  things  spiritual.  For
because  as  Paul  testifies,  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolish-
ness with  Oodf  so  much  the  more  completely  is  every  one
rendered  foolish  within,  as  he  endeavours  to  appear  wise
B«?.  20,  without.  Concerning  this  abyss  it  is  said  by  John,  And
^~^'  I  saw  an  Angel  come  down  from  heaven^  having  the  key  of
the  bottomless  pitf  and  a  great  chain  in  his  hand.  And  he
laid  hold  on  the  dragon^  that  old  serpent^  which  is  the  Devil
and  Satanf  and  bound  him  a  thousand  years.  And  cast
him  into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  shut  him  up%  and  set  a  seal
ppw  him,  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more,  till
the  thousand  years  should  be  fuifiUed.  For  by  the  number
of  a  thousand,  he  denoted  not  the  quantity  of  time  but  the
universality,  with  which  the  Church  exercises  dominion.
Now  the  old  serpent  is  bound  with  a  chain  and  cast  into  the
.bottomless  pit,  because  being  tied  up  from  the  hearts  of  the
good,  while  he  is  shut  up  in  the  minds  of  lost  sinners,  he
rules  over  them  witli  worse  cruelty.  And  a  little  while  after-
wards he  is  described  as  brought  up  out  of  the  hollow  of  the
bottomless  pit,  in  that  from  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  which
now  rage  secretly,  having  then  gotten  power  against  the
Church,  he  shall  break  out  into  the  violence  of  open  perse-
cution. And  so  this  bottomless  pit,  wherein  the  devil  is  now
kept  hidden,  *  saith  that  Wisdom  is  not  with  it,'  because  by
Beading  '  eomqutnationiSf'  'coinfwnaiioitet.*  Yulg.  ai  ourt.

Deep  crajl  and  reislless  worUUineBS  lack  Wisdom. 869

wicked  deeds  it  shews  itself  a  stranger  to  trae  wisdom. For,  Book
whilst  a  man  covers  wickedness  in  the  heart,  but  with  the  *

month  gives  forth  flatteries,  whilst  he  overshadows  bis  pur-
poses  with  double-dealing,  whilst  he  eschews  words  of  ringl^
mindedness  as  foolishness,  whilst  he  shuns  the  ways  of  simple
innocency,  it  is  as  if  the  Abyss  denies  that  she  has  the
Wisdom  of  Ood.  And  because  minds  that  are  devoted  to
this  world,  are  disturbed  by  the  cares  and  anxieties  of  the
present  life,  and  therefore  are  quite  unable  to  enjoy  the
repose  of  that  Wisdom,  it  is  rightly  added ;

And  the  sea  saith^  It  is  not  with  me.

68.  For  what  is  there  denoted  by  the  name  of  the  sea  xliii.
saving  the  bitter  disquietude  of  worldly  minds,  which  while
they  fall  foul  of  one  another  in  enmities  by  turns,  dash
themselves  together  like  encountering  waves? For  the  life
of  worldly  |)ersons  is  rightly  called  '  a  sea  f  because,  whilst
it  is  agitated  by  the  tempestuous  stirrings  of  actions,  it  is
parted  from the  tranquillity and stedfastness  of  interior
Wisdom. Contrary  to  which  it  is  well  said  by  the  Prophet,
Upon  whom  shall  My  Spirit  rest  but  upon  him  that  isu.96fl.
humble  and  quiet,  and  that  trembleth  at  my  words  f But
from  earthly  minds  the  Spirit  flies  the  further  in  proportion
as  He  findeth  no  rest  with  them. For  it  is  hence  that  it  is
said  of  certain  by  the  Psalmist;  Bruising  and  unhappinessT%.\z,1.
is  in  their  ways^  and  the  way  qf  peace  have  they  not  known.  |/  f[
From  which  same  bruising  of  disquietude  the  Lord  calls  us^ob^^i'*
back,  saying.  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  ar^  Matii,
heavy  laden^  and  I  will  give  you  rest. Take  My  yoke  upon  ^'  ^*
you^  and  learn  qf  Me;  /or  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in
hearty  and  ye  shall  Jind  rest  unto  your  souls. For  what  is
more  toilsome  in  this  life  than  to  be  fevered  with  earthly
desires  ?  or  what  is  there  more  full  of  repose  here,  than  to
long  for  nought  of  this  world  ? It  is  hence  that  the  Israelitish
people  received  the  keeping  of  the  Sabbath  in  gift; it  is
hence  on  the  opposite  side  that  Egypt  was  smitten  with  a
multitude  of  flies. For  the  people,  that  follows  Ood,  receives
the  Sabbath,  i.  e.  the  rest  of  the  spirit,  that  it  should  not  be
worn out  in this  life  by  any  craving  of  carnal  passions.
But  Egypt,  which  bears  a  likeness  of  this  world,  is  stricken
with  flies. For  the  fly  is  an  excessively  intrusive  and  restless

VOL.  II.  B  b

370 Busy  thoughtt  ofearlh  muaigo  ere  WUdani  catne.

Job  88^  creature. Wherein  what  else  18  there  represented  but  the

Ij^p—r  intrusive  solicitations  of  carnal  desires. Whence  it  is  said

£oo.  io\  elsewhere.  Dying  JUee  destroy  the  sweetness  qf  the  ointment.

Because  superfluous  thoughts,  which  in  the  mind  taken  up

with  things  carnal  are  for  ever  both  springing  into  life  and

dying  away,  destroy  that  sweetness,  with  which  each  individual

has  been  inwardly  anointed  by  the  Spirit ;  because  they  do

not  suffer  him  to  enjoy  the  unadulteratedness  thereof. And

so  Egypt  is  smitten  with  flies,  because  the  parts  of  those

persons  that  love  an  earthly  life,  while  they  are  stricken  with

the  disquietudes  of  their  desires,  are  by  the  swarms  of  carnal

imaginations  borne  down  beneath,  so  that  they  cannot  be

lifted  up  to  the  desire  of  interior  rest. Whence  when  Truth

comes  to  the  heart  with  the  wonderful  help  of  His  pitifulness.

He  first  banishes  therefrom  the  fevers  of  carnal  thoughts,

and  afterwards  distributes  in  it  the  gifts  of  the  parts  of  virtue.

Which  same  the  sacred  history  of  the  Gospel  excellently

conveys  to  us ;  in  which  when  the  Lord  being  besought  was

led  by  the  way  in  order  to  restore  the  daughter  of  the  ruler

Matt.  9,  to  life,  it  is  added  directly.  But  when  the  crowd  were  put

^' forth  He  went  in,  and  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  the  maid

arose. So  the  crowd  is  cast  forth  without,  in  order  that  the

damsel  may  be  raised  up ;  because  if  the  importunate  throng

of  worldly  cares  be  not  first  expelled  from  the  inner  recesses

of  the  heart,  the  soul,  which  lies  dead  in  the  interior,  cannot

rise  up. For  whilst  it  lets  itself  loose  amongst  the  countless

imaginings  of  earthly  desires,  it  never  in  any  degree  gathers

itself  up  to  the  consideration  of  self. Thus  then,  knowing

and  seeing  that  in  these  waves  of  perturbations  Wisdom

cannot  dwell,  he  says.  And  the  sea  saith.  It  is  not  with  me.

For  no  man  receives  her  fiiUy,  saving  he  who  strives  to

withdraw  himself  from  all  the  drifting  to  and  fro  of  carnal

Eoolus.  courses. And  hence  it  is  said  elsewhere.  Write  wisfJom  in

^'  ^^'  the  time  qf  leisure. And  he  that  is  lessened  in  doing,  even

Ps.  46,  fie  shall  win  her. And  again.  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am

»»• Qod.

69.  But  how  is  it  that  we  know  that  most  of  the  old
Fathers  at  once  interiorly  held  fast  this  Wisdom  in  its  life,
and  outwardly  administered  the  affairs  of  the  world  in
ordinary  ? Do  we  call  Joseph  deprived  of  the  attainment  of

fVisdom  can  diceil  with  cares  borne /or  obedience, 87 1

iliis  Wisdom,  who  in  the  time  of  dearth  taking  upon  himself  Book

the  affairs  of  all  Egypt  not  only  furnished  provisions  to  the ^-

Egyptians,  but  by  the  skiliulness  of  his  administration
preserved  the  life  of  foreign  people  as  well  that  came  to
him  ?  Did  Daniel  prove  a  stranger  to  this  Wisdom,  who,
when  he  was  made  by  the  king  of  the  Chaldeans  in  Babylon
chief  of  the  governors,  was  busied  with  greater  charges  in
proportion  as  by  a  higher  pitch  of  dignity  he  was  likewise
sot  above  all  ?  Whereas  then  it  is  plain  that  very  dlen  even
the  good  are  engaged  in  earthly  charges  with  no  interest,  we
plainly  see  that  in  this  way  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem  some-
times render  services*  to  Babylon,  in  like  manner  as  often- 1  anga-
times  the  citizens  of  Babylon  pay  suit  and  service  to*^^
Jerusalem.  For  there  are  some  persons  who  preach  the
word  of  life  for  the  displaying  of  wisdom  alone,  they  minister
the  succour  of  ahns  from  the  passion  of  vain-glory ;  and
indeed  the  things  they  do  seem  to  be  proper  to  Jerusalem,
but  yet  are  they  citizens  of  Babylon.

70.  In  this  way  then  it  sometimes  happens,  that  they  who
love  the  heavenly  Gountfy  alone,  seem  to  be  subjected  to
the  charges  of  the  earthly  country.  Whose  ministration
however  is  distinguished  from  the  practices  of  the  wicked
for  the  most  part  in  act,  but  sometimes  before  the  Judge
Above  in  thought  only.  For  being  full  of  wisdom  from
Above,  they  distinguish  how  they  may  at  once  be  free  to
one  thing  inwardly,  and  busied  with  another  thing  outwardly ;
so  that  if  perchance  by  God's  secret  appointment  aught  of
the  concerns  of  this  world  is  charged  upon  them,  they
coveting  it  not,  they  may  yield  to  Ood  Whom  they  delight
in,  and  from  the  love  of  Him,  may  interiorly  desire  His
Vision  only,  but  from  the  fear  of  Him  externally  discharge
the  course  imposed  upon  them  with  humility,  that  they
should  at  once  desire  to  be  disengaged  to  God  by  force
of  the  free  attachment  of  loving  affection,  Und  again  fulfil
the  charges  imposed  upon  them  by  force  of  the  constitution
of  servitude ;  and  when  the  affairs  of  business  make  a  din
without,  within  the  most  peaceful  repose  is  maintained  in
love ;  and  the  turmoils  of  employments  outwardly  clamouring,
reason  as  presiding  judge  disposes  of  within,  and  with
tranquil  governance  regulates  the  things,  which  all  around

Bb2

872 Inward  iranquUUiy. WUdom  to  come  in  Person.

Job  S8,  it  are  too  little  tranquil. For  as  force  of  mind  is  at  the  head
^^' for  bridling  the  motions  of  the  flesh,  so  very  often  the  love


pROPH

AixBolof  tranquillity  regulates  aright  the  imposed  turmoils  of
business ;  because  exterior  charges,  if  they  be  not  desired
with  a  wrong  aflectiou,  may  be  executed  with  a  miud  not
disordered  but  regulated.  For  holy  men  never  court  them,
but  lament  them  when  put  upon  them  by  secret  jtppointment,
and  though  in  respect  of  a  better  aim  they  shun  them,  yet
in  respect  of  a  submissive  mind  they  bear  them.  Which
same  they  are  above  every  thing  eager  to  avoid  if  it  might
be,  but  fearing  the  secret  dispensations  of  God,  they  lay
hold  of  that  they  eschew,  and  execute  what  they  avoid.
For  they  go  into  their  conscience,  and  they  there  take
counsel  what  the  secret  will  of  God  would  have,  and  being
conscious  that  they  ought  to  be  subject  to  the  Appointments
on  high,  they  humble  the  neck  of  the  heart  to  the  yoke  of
Divine  Providence.  But  he  that  is  such  as  this,  whatever
turmoils  are  at  work  without,  they  never  reach  to  his  interior
parts.  And  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  there  is  one  thing
maintained  within  in  winh  and  another  thing  maintained
without  in  office,  and  that  with  this  Wisdom  their  hearts
are  filled,  being  no  longer  troubled  and  disordered,  but  in  a
state  of  tranquillity.  Well,  then,  is  it  said  thereof,  that  ihe
depth  Baithy  It  is  not  mth  me^  and  the  sea  saith^  It  is  not
with  me.  As  though  it  were  expressed  in  plain  speech;
'  llie  troubled  minds  of  the  worldly  cry  out  by  the  more
circumstance  of  their  not  beiug  quiet,  that  they  are  widely
separated  from  tnie  Wisdom.  But  because  this  Wisdom  of
God,  abiding  with  the  Father  before  the  ages  of  the  world,
was  to  be  made  Incarnate  in  tlie  end  thereof,  so  that  in
order  to  redeem  tlie  human  race.  It  should  send  not  the
holy  Angels,  not  just  men,  but  in  the  manifestation  of  very
sight  comes  by  Its  own  Self,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,
Ver.  15.  Fine  gold  shall  not  be  given  for  it.
xliv.  71.  For  what  is  deuoted  by  *  fine  gold,*  save  the  holy
1 1  ^  Angels,  who  are  rightly  called  both '  gold,*  and  '  fine '  ;*  ^  gold,*
sum.'  because  they  shine  with  brightness  of  righteousness  ;  *  fine,*
becaus^e  they  never  had  any  defilement  of  sin.  But  for  just
men,  so  long  as  they  are  in  this  corruptible  flesh  with  tlie
conditions  of  mortality,  ^  gold*  they  may  indeed  be,  *  fine

No  iuh$Ututefor  Her, No  man  pure  as  ike  AngeU.  373

gold'  thej  cannot  be  in  any  wise ;  because  the  corruptible  Book
6o(fy  pres9eih  down  the  eouly  and  the  earthy  tabernacle  ^^^^^
tceigheth  down  the  mindy  that  museth  upon  many  things.  15,
For  though  in  this  life  they  may  shine  by  an  extraordinary
brightness  of  righteousness,  yet  they  never  purely  laclc  the
dross  of  sins ;  as  John  the  Apostle  bears  witness,  who  says^
ffwe  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves^  and  the  truth  i  John
is  ftot  in  us ;  and  as  James  affirms,  who  puts  a  proof,  saying,  ^*  ^'
For  in  many  things  we  all  offend. As  the  Prophet  likewise  Jamw
beseeches,  who  says,  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  Thyy^\^
servant^  O  Lord^for  in  Thy  sight  shdll  ho  man  living  be^^
justified. Those  then  are  termed  '  fine  gold'  who  whilst
holding  fast  in  that  innocency,  wherein  they  were  created,
at  once shine with the  brightness  of  righteousness,  and
are  stained  with  no  dross  of  sins,  no  not  the  very  least

72.  But  because  in  the  stead  of  this  Wisdom  no  one  of  the
Angels  was  to  be  sent  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  human  race,
lest  in  those  Angels,  who,  we  have  been  taught,  have  often
appeared  in  aid  of  men,  any  man  should  rest  his  hope,  it  is
said.  Fine  gold  shall  not  be  given/or  it. As  though  it  were
expressed  in  plain  speech ;  '  By  Its  own  Self  shall  Wisdom
be  manifested,  in  order  that  the  human  race  may  be  redeemed
from  sin.' There  is  no  Angel  sent  in  His  stead  ;  because  it
must  needs  be  that  by  the  Creator  the  creature  should  be
set  free. And  hence  the  Lord  saith  in  the  Gospel,  If  the  John  By
Son  shall  make  you  free^  ye  shall  be  free  indeed. But  the *
holy  man,  being  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  that  same  Wisdom,
foresaw  that  there  would  not  be  wanting  in  Judaea  some  that
should  put  their  hope  in  the  Lawgiver,  and  make  Moses  the
author  of  their  salvation,  even  as  to  the  man  that  had  been
healed,  speaking  evil,  they  say,  Be  thou  His  disciple,  but  John  9,
we  are  Moses^  disciples. Whence  it  is  yet  further  introduced  ^*
with  propriety.

Nor  shall  silvet  be  weighed  in  exchange  thereqf.

78.  For  because  the  divine  revelations  are  often  denoted  ^clv.
by.  •  silver,'  by  the  term  of  silver  it  may  be  that  the  writers  of
that  revelation  are  also  understood,  whose  life  shone  amidst
the  crowds  of  tlieir  fellow-creatures  with  the  light  of  virtuous
attainments.  But  because  the  Law  was  able  to  point  out
sins,  but  not  able  to  take  them  away,  it  was  not  any  one  of

374 No  ttorki  of  men  could  stand  in  ChrUd  stead.

Job  S8,  the  ancient  Fathers,  nor  the  Lawgiver  Moses,  that  became
Pboph  ^^^  Redeemer  of  mankind.  So  *  silver  is  not  weighed  in
A  LLBo.  exchange  of  this  Wisdom/  because  all  that  have  had  power
to  be  holy,  by  comparison  with  the  Only-begotten  Son  of
God  are  accounted  to  have  been  of  no  worth,  who  except
they  had  known  and  seen  that  they  were  servants  of  that
^  Wisdom,'  could  never  at  all  have  been  holy.  For  to  this
end  were  they  sent,  that  in  the  hearts  of  men  they  might  by
preaching  prepare  a  way  for  this  ^  Wisdom,'  neither  yet  that
for  her,  but  by  her  they  might  govern  the  peoples  under  their
charge.  For  because  it  was  certain  that  by  the  accession  of
periods  of  time,  the  ailments  of  the  waning  world  should
grow  to  a  height,  it  was  brought  about  that  in  tlie  end  of
ages  the  Eternal  Wisdom  of  God  should  by  Its  own  Self
come  to  this  full  grown  sick  one,  with  his  overgreat  infirmity,
i.  e.  to  the  human  race  lying  sick,  throughout  the  whole
world,  that  preachers  having  been  dispatched  beforehand,
like  a  kind  of  visitors,  the  power  of  Uie  physician  might
afterwards  come  so  much  the  more  eflBcacious,  in  proportion
as  the  sickness  of  the  diseased  had  more  grown  to  a  head.
But  because  there  is  no  one  sent  in  the  stead  of  Him  for  the
saving  of  us,  let  it  be  rightly  said.  Nor  shall  silver  be  weighed
in  the  emchange  thereof.  Forasmuch  as  the  life  of  the  just
men  who  preached,  with  whatever  light  of  holiness  it  might
abound,  doth  not  by  its  presence  make  exchange  for  the
coming  of  Heavenly  Wisdom  to  us.  But  there  were  multi-
tudes of  the  Gentiles,  who  being  attached  to  the  systems  of
discipline  of  this  world's  wise  ones,  observed  those  things
which  are  honourable  among  men,  and  believed  that,  houour-
able  dealing  being  observed,  they  were  sure  to  be  saved,  nor
any  longer  sought  a  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  since
they  held  tlie  teaching  of  the  philosophers  as  being  sufficient
for  them. In  contempt  of  whom  it  is  directly  added ;

Ver.  16.  Nor  shall  it  be  compared  to  the  dyed  colours  of
India.
xlvi.  74.  For  what  is  meant  by  India,  which  furnishes  a  black
people,  saving  this  world,  wherein  the  life  of  man  is  en-
gendered dark  in  respect  of  sin?  Now  *  the  dyed  colours  of
India'  are  the  wise  ones  of  this  world,  who  though  in  respect
of  infidelityy  and  oftentimes  in  respect  of  behaviour,  they  be

FalsecolourMofman^swisdom,  Hidden^ensein meanwords.S75

fool,  yet  before  the  eyes  of  men  are  stained  with  the  hue  of  Book
overlaid  bonourableness. But  the  coetemal  Wisdom  of  God  ■

is  not  *  compared  to  the  dyed  colours  of  India,*  in  that  he,
who  really  takes  It  in,  discovers  how  widely  it  differs  firom
those  human  beings  whom  the  world  has  worshipped  for
wise  ones.  And  the  very  words  of  His  precepts  differ  from
the  wise  ones  of  this  world,  in  that  while  they  strain  after
eloquence,  their  sayings  appear  as  if  fair  in  shew  and  in  the
staining  of  the  dye,  and  while  tlioy  lack  the  power  of
realities,  feign  themselves  to  be  something  else  than  what
they  are  by  combination  of  words  as  by  overcoated  colours.
But  on  the  other  hand  the  instruction  of  Wisdom  is  at  once  fair
by  preaching  and  shining  by  nnadulterated  truth,nor  does  it  by
deceit  set  itself  forth  one  thing  outwardly,  and  retain  another
thing  inwardly,  nor  in  its  sayings  aim  to  appear  fair  by
brilliancy  of  speech,  but  by  uncorruptness  of  truth.  There*
fore  in  its  precepts  the  Wisdom  of  Ood  is  not  *  compared  to
the  dyed  colours  of  India,*  since  whereas  it  has  not  the
stained  adornments  of  eloquence,  it  pleases  lik^  a  robe  with-
out dye.  Which  staining  of  the  dye  Paul  rightly  despised,
when  he  said,  Wliich  things  aho  we  speak  not  in  the  words  i  Cor.
that  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost^*^^'
teacheth.  For  he  chose  rather  to  display  this  *  Wisdom*  by
the  simple  transparency  of  truth  alone,  but  not  to  stain  it
with  the  dyeing  of  speech. It  follows ;

Nor  to  the  most  precious  sardonyx  stone ^  nor  to  the  sapphire.  •
75.  That  the  sardonyx  and  sapphire  are  not  precious
stones,  who  would  be  ignorant  ?  And  whereas  there  be  many
other  precious  stones,  which  immeasurably  exceed  these  in
the  account  of  greatness,  why  is  the  sapphire  or  the  sardonyx
especially  called  precious,  when  either  stone  by  comparison
with  other  stones  is  most  contemptible  ?  except  that  those
stones  which  are  described  as  precious,  when  we  know  not  to
be  precious,  we  look  out  for  some  other  thing  in  the  meaning
of  them.  For  the  sardonyx  bears  the  likeness  of  red  earth,
but  the  sapphire  has  an  aereal  appearance.  And  so  it  may
be  that  in  the  sardonyx  by  the  red  earth  human  beings  are
denoted,  in  the  sapphire  by  the  aereal  appearance  the  Angels
are  denoted.  'For  whereas  the  sardonyx  stone  bears  the
appearance  of  red  earth,  it  not  improperly  denotes  man;

876  Old  Saints  of  earth  and  new  of  Heaven  alike  turpasaed.

Job  S8,  because  *  Adam'  himself,  who  was  created  the  first,  is  called

Peofh.'^  ^^^  ^^^^  toogue  *  Red  earth.' What  does  it  meaw  then

Allbo.  that  it  is  said  that  this  Wisdom  is  not  *  compared  to  the

sardonyx  nor  to  the  sapphire/  but  that  He,  Who  is  the

^  Power  of  God  and  the  Wisdom  of  God,'  i.  c.  the  Mediator

between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  surpasses  all

things  by  such  preeminent  greatness  that  neither  the  fiiiit

man  on  the  earth,  nor  the  Angels  in  heaven,  can  be  compared

Pf.89,6.  to  Him. And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Who  in  the

heaven  can  be  compared  unto  the  Lordf IVho  among  the

aonsofOod*  can  he  likened  unto  the  Lordf

.76.  But  it  is  possible  that  by  the  siirdonyx  stone  the
Fathers  of  the  Old  Testament,  while  by  the  sapphire  the
Preachers  of  the  New  Testament,  are  set  forth.  For  the
first,  though  they  maintained  an  extraordinary  life  of  righ-
teousness, yet  lent  themselves  to  carnal  procreation.  There-
fore whereas  it  is  plain  that  they  did  some  things  of  an  earthly
kind,  they  are  not  inappropriately  denoted  by  the  sardonyx
stone,  which  as  we  before  said  bears  the  appearance  of

*  red  earth.'  But  by  the  sapphire,  which  is  of  an  ethereal
hue,  we  suitably  understand  the  Preachers  of  the  New
Testament,  who  laying  aside  the  desires  of  carnal  gender-
ing, followed  after  the  things  of  heaven  alone.  And  hence
the  Prophet  beholding  the  holy  Apostles  mounting  above
all  the  desires  of  the  flesh  with  spiritual  fei'vency,  being

Ii. 60, 8.  struck  with  admiration,  saith.  Who  are  these  that  fly
as  clouds?  As  though  he  expressed  it  in  plain  speech  ;  ^  We
go  along  by  the  way  of  earth,  in  that  we  are  still  involved  in
roarryings  and  employ  acts  of  the  flesh  upon  the  propagating
oflspring ;  but  these  walk  not  on  earth,  but  they  *  fly  as
clouds,'  who  whilst  they  aim  at  heavenly  things  touch  nought
connected  with  earthly  desires.'  Therefore  he  says  tliat  the
Wisdom  of  God  is  not  ^  compared  to  the  sardonyx  or  the
sapphire  stone.' As  though  he  told  in  plain  terms,  saying,

*  To  Him,  Who  is  seen  Man  among  men,  neither  any  in  the
old  Fathers  nor  any  in  the  now  is  equalled,  in  that  from  His
Godhead  He  derives  it  that  in  His  Manhood  He  hath  not  any
like  to  Him.' Whence  it  is  yet  further  added;

Ver.  17.  Jlie  gold  and  the  glass  cannot  eqtlal  it.

*  '  SoDi  of  God'  WM  a  common  cx|ireiiAion  for  AnfiroU.

Glau  ifpi/lei  the  mviual  knowledge  of  Sainii  above.  S77

77,  Who  that  is  sound  of  perception  would  deem  it  Boos
worthy  to  understand  this  according  to  the  letter? For^EZIH:
*  glass/  as  we  said  aborc,  is  of  much  less  worth  than  *  gold,'  **^»"*
and  after  it  was  said  that  *  gold  is  not  equaF  to  this  Wisdom,

it  is  yet  further,  as  if  heightening,  subjoined,  that  *  glass'  too
cannot  equal  it  either.  But  the  bare  letter  failing  us  in  the
historical  sense,  sends  us  to  investigating  the  mystery  of  the
allegory.  For  we  know  that  the  metal  gold  shines  with
a  superior  brightness  to  all  the  metals.  But  it  is  of  the
nature  of  glass  diat  whilst  seen  without  it  shines  with  perfect
transparency  in  the  inside.  In  erery  other  metal  whatever
is  contained  within  is  hidden  from  sight,  but  in  the  case  of
glass,  every  liquid,  such  as  it  is  contained  within,  such  is  it
shewn  to  be  witliout,  and,  so  to  say,  all  the  liquid  in  a  glass
vessel,  whilst  shut  up  is  open.  What  other  thing,  then,  do  we
understand  by  *  gold  and  glass,'  but  that  heavenly  Country,
that  society  of  blessed  citizens,  whose  hearts  mutually  oue
with  another  at  once  shine  with  brightness,  and  are  trans*
parent  by  pureness ;  which  John  in  Revelations  had  beheld,
when  he  said.  And  the  building  of  the  wall  of  it  wa9  ^Rer.si,
jaxper,  and  the  city  wa4  of  pure  gold  like  unto  clear  glass.  *®'
For  because  all  the  Saints  shall  shine  in  the  supreme  bright-
ness of  bliss,  it  is  described  as  constructed  of  gold.

78.  And  because  their  very  brightness  itself  is  reciprocally
open  to  them  in  each  other's  breasts,  and  when  the  counte-
nance of  each  one  is  marked  his  conscience  is  penetrated
along  with  it,  this  very  gold  is  described  as  like  pure  glass.
For  there  the  mind  of  every  person  no  bodily  frame  of  limbs
will  hide  from  the  eyes  of  his  fellow,  but  the  interior  will  be
given  to  view,  the  very  harmony  of  the  body  too  will  also  be
plain  to  the  eyes  of  the  body,  and  each  one  will  be  in  such
wise  distinguishable  to  another,  as  now  he  cannot  be  dis-
tinguishable to  himself  But  now  our  hearts,  so  long  as  we
are  in  this  life,  because  they  cannot  be  seen  in  one  by
another,  are  enclosed  not  within  glass  vessels,  but  within
vessels  of  earthenware ;  in  which  same  clay  in  respect  of  the
mind  beting  affected  the  Prophet  dreaded  to  stick,  when  he
said,  Deliver  me  out  of  the  clay^  that  t  mag  not  stick  fast.  v§.  60,
Which  very  tabernacle  of  bodies,  Paul  calls  *  our  earthly  **•

house,'  saying,  For  we  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  o/*2Cor.6,

I*

378 No  Saintf  however  glorious,  comparable  to  Christ.

Job  88,  Mm  tabernacle  be  dissolved,  tee  have  a  building  qf  Ood,  an

Ption.^^^*^  ^^*  titoii^  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens. There-

ALLBo.Vorc  in  this  earthly  bou80  so  long  as  we  live,  the  mere

partitiou  wall  of  our  corrupt  state,  so  to  say,  we  do  not

penetrate  with  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  and  the  hidden  things

in  each  other  we  cannot  see. Hence  Holy  Church  desiring

to see the form of  her  Spouse  in the Godhead,  yet

not  being  able,  because  the  fashion  of  His  Etenial  Being,

which  she  longed  to  behold.  His  Manhood,  which  He  look

upon  Him,  hid  from  her  eyes,  says  mourning  in  the  Song  of

Caot.  2,  Songs ;  Behold  he  standeth  behind  our  wall. As  if  she  said

in  plain  speech,  *  I  desire  to  see  HIM  now  already  in  the

appearance  of  His  Godhead,  but  I  am  still  shut  out  from

the  sight  of  Him  by  the  wall  of  the  flesh  He  has  assumed.'

Therefore  so  long  as  we  live  in  this  corruptible  flesh,  we  see

not  the  thoughts  of  the  hearts  in  one  another. Whence  it  is

1  Cor.  2,  said  by  the  same  Paul,  For  what  man  knoweth  the  thifigs  of

a  man  save  the  spirit  qf  man  that  is  in  him  f And  again ;

iCot.i^  There/ore  Judge  nothing  bqfore  the  time,  until  the  Lord

come.  Who  both  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of

darkness,  and  will  make  manifest  the  counsels  qf  the  hearts.

So  then  that  City,  which  manifests  the  hearts  of  them  that

are  in  it  to  each  severally  and  reciprocally,  is  described  ^  of

gold  like  to  pure  glass,'  that  by  the  gold  it  may  be  represented

bright,  and  by  the  glass  transparent

79.  But  though  all  the  Saints  therein  glitter  with  such
wonderful  brightness,  and  shine  through  with  such  extra-
ordinary transparency,  yet  that  Wisdom,  by  a  likeness  of
Which  they  have  all  that  they  are,  they  ^  cannot  equal.'
Therefore  it  is  well  said.  The  gold  and  the  glass  cannot
equal  it. For  it  is  for  this  that  all  the  Saints  are  brought
to  those eternal  joys,  that they  may  bo like to  God,
1  John  as  it  is  written,  IVheft  He  sftall  appear,  we  shall  be  like
*'  *• Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him as  He  is. And  yet  it  is
Pi.S9,0.  written,  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  who  is  like  unto  Theef And
ib.  Y.  6.  again ; Who  shall  be  like  unto  God  among  the  sotis  of  God  ?
Whence  then  shall  they  be  like,  and  whence  not  like,  but
that  to  this  [  Wisdom'  tliey  at  once  be  like  for  a  semblance
and  not  like  for  equality  7 For  by  gazing  ou  the  Eternity  of
God,  it  is  brought  to  pass  upon  them  that  they  should  be

77m  iruih  implied  in  Si.  Petet^s  eonfession. 379

eternal,  und  while  they  receive  the  gift  of  seeing  Him,  hj  Book
the  receiving  of  Blessedness  thej  copy  the  thing  thai  they
see.  They  are  both  like,  then,  because  they  are  made
blessed ;  and  they  are  not  like  to  the  Creator,  because  they
are  a  creature.  And  thus  they  both  have  a  certain  likeness
to  God,  because  they  are  without  end ;  and  yet  they  have
no  equality  to  the  Incomprehensible  One,  because  they  have
comprehensible  being.  Therefore  let  it  be  justly  said,  7%<r
ffold  and  the  glans  is  pot  equal  to  it.  For  with  whatever
brightness  and  transparency  the  Saints  may  shine,  it  is  one
thing  for  men  to  be  wise  in  God,  and  another  thing  for
a  Man  to  be  the  Wisdom  of  God.  Which  same  Wisdom
he  was  truly  acquainted  with,  who  never  ventured  to  liken
any  one  of  the  Saints  to  the  Mediator  between  God  and
man. And  hence  it  is  added ;

Neither  shall  vessels  of  gold  high  and  overtopping  he
excfianged  instead  of  it.

80.  For  a  '  lofty  vessel  of  gold*  did  Elijah  prove,  *  a  lofty  xlix.
vessel  of  gold'  Jeremiah,  *  lofty  and  overtopping  vessels  of
gold'  the  old  Fathers  were.  But  this  Wisdom  of  God,  in
order  that  It  might  redeem  us  from  a  carnal  kind  of  life,
appeared  in  the  flesh,  and  he,  who  did  not  see  that  Wisdom
in  a  true  light,  supposed  that  the  Mediator  between  God  and
man,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  was  one  of  the  Prophets,  which
Christ  the  eyes  of  the  Elect  held  for  God,  when  they  saw
Him  but  Man.  Hence  it  is  said  by  Him  to  the  holy  Dis-
ciples, IVhom  do  men  say  thai  f,  the  Son  of  man^  ^^^  Mat  is,
And  when  they  thereupon  answered  Him,  Some  say  that^^*^^
Thou  art  John  the  Baptist;  some  Elias:  some  Jeremias^
or  one  of  the  prophets ;  they  were  immediately  interrogated
touching  their  own  perception;  But  whom  say  ye  thai  lam?
To  whom  Peter,  answering  directly  in  the  voice  of  the  whole
Church,  says,  7%oii  art  the  Christy  the  Son  (if  the  Living
God.  Thus,  then,  forasmuch  as  according  to  the  declaration
of  Paul  we  *  know  Christ,  the  Power  of  God,  and  the  Wisdom  of
God,'  for  this  Wisdom  Peter  refused  to  *  exchange  vessels  of
gold  lofty  and  overtopping,'  because  he  understood  concerning
it  no  other  thing  than  it  was.  For  as  has  been  said,  a  groat
*  vessel  of  gold'  was  John,  a  great  *  vessel  of  gold*  Elijah,  a
great  *  vessel  of  gold'  Jeremiah. Now  whoever  accounted

380  Error  of  the  Jews  in  taking  Christ/or  one  of  the  Propheis.

Job  98,  that  Thai  Ood  was  any  one  of  these,  did  '  exchange  a  vessel
-i£i..  of  gold  high  and  overtopping*  for  this  ^  Wisdom.*  But  for
ALLBoi^his  Wisdom  the  Church  doth  not  ^  exchange  vessels  of  gold
high  and  overtopping/  because  it  holds  that  Christ  the  Son
of  God  is  not  one  of  the  Prophets,  but  the  One  Lord  of  the
Prophets.  For  seeing  that  ^  Wisdom'  Itself  had  come  to  her,
she  refused  to  keep  herself  fixed  in  those  golden  vessels,  but
was  eager  with  certainty  of  faith  to  pass  on  into  that  Wisdom.
Cant.  3,  Whence  she  saith  in  the  Song  of  Songs;  7%e  watchmen  that
keep  the  city  found  me;  to  whom  I  saidy  Saw  ye  him^  whom
my  soul  loveth  f  It  was  but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  them^
but  I  found  him^  whom  my  soul  loveth.  For  whom  do  we
take  ^  the  watchmen  that  go  about  the  city'  to  be,  but  the
former  fathers  and  prophets  who  set  themselves  to  watch  by
the  voice  of  holy  preaching  for  our  safe  keeping  ?  but  when
the  Church  sought  her  Redeemer,  she  would  not  fix  her
hope  in  those  same  ancient  preachers,  in  that  she  says.  It
was  but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  them,  but  I  found  him
whom  my  soul  loveth.  For  Him  she  had  not  been  able  to
find,  if  she  had  been  unwilling '  to  pass  by  through  these.'
For  the  unbelievers  had  rested  themselves  in  those  warders,
who  believed  that  Christ  the  Son  of  God  was  any  one  of
those.  With  the  voice  then  and  the  faith  of  Peter„  Holy
Church  passed  by  the  watchmen  she  found,  in  that  site
disdained  to  believe  the  Lord  Who  had  been  prophesied  to
bo  any  one  of  the  number  of  the  prophets.  Thus,  let  it  bo
said,  nor  shall  vessels  of  gold  high  and  overtopping  be  ex-
changed  for  it.  Because  the  Elect  severally  both  venerate
the  life  of  the  Saints  for  their  loftiness,  and  yet  do  not  take
up  with  it  for  error.  For  those  whom  they  know  to  be
simple  men  they  do  not  all  compare  to  God-Man.  Whence
it  is  further  added ;

Yer.  18.  Nor  shall  they  be  mentioned  in  comparison  with
her.
1.  81.  For  all  the  Elect  of  the  Country  Above  are  indeed
holy  and  righteous,  but  by  a  participation  of  Wisdom,  not  by
comparison  therewith.  For  what  are  men  compared  with  God  7
Now  ^  Light'  Wisdom  is  used  to  be  called,  ^  light'  also  the
servants  of  Wisdom  are  wont  to  be  called ;  but  She  as  light
John  1,  lighting  up,  they  as  light  lighted  up;  as  it  was  written ;  That

The  Saints  partakers  of  M^isdom^  not  compared  to  Her.  381

ftas  the  true  Light j  Which  light eth  every  man  that  comet h  Book
into  the  world. Bot  to  these  it  is  onlj  said,  Te  are  /A^lllli'
light  of  the  world. *  Righteousness*  indeed  Wisdom  is  14.  '  '
called,  *  righteousness,*  the  servants  of  * -Wisdon^*  as  well  are
called: but  She  righteousness  that  makelh  righteous,  they
righteousness  that  is  made  righteous. For  of  God,  Who  is

*  Wisdom,'  it  is  said,  Tftat  He  might  Himself  be  just  and  the  Kom. «,
Justijier;  but  these  say,  that  we  might  he  made  the  righteous-  ^'
nesso/Godin  Him, So  then  it  is  after  one  sort  that  the  6, 91.'

*  Light  lighting*  is  to  be  reverenced,  after  another  that  the

*  light  lighted'  is  to  be ;  in  one  way  the  Righteousness  that
maketh  righteous,  in  another  way  the  righteousness  that  is
made  righteous.  Now  Wisdom  both  is  and  is  wise,  nor  has
She  for  one  thing  to  be,  and  for  another  thing  to  be  wise ;  but
the  servants  of  *  Wisdom*  are  indeed  able  to  be  wise  men,
but  yet  they  have  not  their  being  the  same  thing  as  being
wise.  For  they  may  be,  and  not  be  wise.  Wisdom  hath
life,  but  She  hath  not  one  thing,  and  is  another  thing,  inasmuch
as  to  Her  it  is  that  to  be  that  it  is  to  live.  But  the  servants
of  *  Wisdom'  whilst  they  have  life  are  one  thing  and  have
another,  inasmuch  as  to  whom  to  be  is  not  the  identical
thing  it  is  to  live.  For  they  may  be  after  a  sort,  and  yet  not
live.  For  to  them  it  is  one  thing  to  be,  and  a  different  thing
to  live;  for  in  the  very  first  parent  they  had  being  by  a
beginning,  and  life  by  an  addition,  since  man  was  first  made

of  the  earth,  and  afterwards  as  it  is  written ;  He  breathed Otn.  s,
into  his  nostrils  the  breath  qf  life.  Now  Wisdom  hath  being,  ^'
She  hath  life ;  but  this,  which  She  hath.  She  Her  own  Self
is.  Wherefore  She  lives  unchangeably,  because  she  lives
not  by  contingency,  but  essentially.  He  then  alone  Is  truly
with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  Whose  Being  ours
compared,  is  not  to  Be.  To  this  Wisdom  if  we  be  joined,  we
are,  we  live,  we  are  wise.  If  we  be  compared  to  Him,  we
neither  are  wise,  nor  live  at  all,  nor  are.

82.  Hence  it  is  that  all  the  Saints,  when  they  advance  in
the  vision  of  God,  the  more  they  view  the  interior  depths
of  the  Divine  Nature,  see  so  much  the  more  that  they
themselves  are  nothing.  For  it  is  no  where  read  that
Abraham  confessed  that  he  was  dust  and  ashes  except
when  he  obtained  to  enjoy  the  convei-se  of  God. For  he

382  Our  Lord  U  Wisdom  eueniiaUy  and  unchangeably.

Job  88,say8>  I  have  iaken  tgpon  me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord,  which
'^' am  but  dust  and  ashes, Fpr  he  would  perchance  have
Geo.  18*  thought  that  he  was  something,  if  he  had not  perceived
^^* at  all  the  true  Essence  that  is  above  himself. But  when
for  the  contemplating of  the  Unchangeable  One  he  was
transported  above  himself,  being  filled  with  so  mighty  a
power  of  contemplation,  when  he  saw  Him,  he  saw  that  he
himself  was  nought  but  ^  dust.' Hence  it  is  that  the  Prophet
Pi.  los,  being  filled  with  the  same  Wisdom  crieth  out,  Remember,
14.  Ixx.  ^  Lord,  that  we  are  but  dust; who  again viewing  the
Pt.  103,  unchangeableness  of  that  Essence,  saith,  Yea,  all  qf  them
^'  ^^*  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment,  and  as  a  vesture  shall
Thou  change  them,  and  they  shall  be  changed;  but  Thou  art
the  same,  and  Thy  years  shall  not/ail. Hence  it  is  said  to
Ex.8,  Moses,  /  AM  THAT  I  AM: Thus  shall  thou  say  unto
**' the  children  qf  Israel,  HE  THAT  IS  hath  sent  nte  unto
you. For  He  alone truly IS,  Who  alone  unchangeably
continues. For  every  thing  that  now  is  after  this  way,
and  now  after  another  way,  is  near  to  not  being. For  to
continue  in  its  standing,  it  is not  able. And  in  some
manner  there  is  a  going  on  not  to  be,  whilst  from  that  which
was,  it  is  by  the  eniarings  of  time  ever  being  led  away  to
some  other  thing. In  order  then  that  in  the  partaking  of
His  Body  we  may  be  something,  let  us  know  and  see  our
own  selves,  that  we  are  well  nigh  nothing. Therefore  it
b  well  said.  Nor  shall  they  be  made  mention  of  in  com-
parison with  her;  because  vessels  of  gold  high  and  over-
topping, which  by  participation  of  Wisdom  are  fit  objects
of  reverence  to  us,  in  comparison  of  Wisdom  are  not  even
fit  to  be  made  mention  of. But  because  this  Wisdom  is
by  secret  means  poured  into  the  hearts  of  men,  (as  it  is
John  8,  likewise  said  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  The  wind  bloweth  where
^' it  listeth,  and  thou  /nearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst
not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth ;)  for  this
reason  it  is  added.

For  unsdom  is  draum/rom  out  qf  sight.

li. 8S.  '  Wisdom  is  drawn from out of  sight  ;* because

whereas  She  is  invisible.  She  cannot  be  found  saving  in  an

invisible  way. And  She  is  rightly  said  to  be  '  drawn'  also,

because  like  as  we  draw  the  breath,  that  the  body  may

Ertvr  of  those  who  think  Christ  once  mere  Man, 388

liTOy  so  from  the  interior  depths  of  Wisdom  the  Spirit  is  Book
derired,  that  the  soul  may  hold  on  to  life. Whence  the  ? V^*
Psalmist  says,  /  opened  my  mouthy  and  drew  in  the  spirit,  isi.
Which  very  Wisdom,  taking  human  flesh  together  with^'^'^^J
a  rational  soul,  when  It  had  presented Itself  from  the^onof-'
interior  depths  close  at  hand,  because  this  world  could
not  behold  its  invisible  Maker,  Him  Whom  it  saw  visible
Man,  it  also  knew  as  invisible  God  as  well. The  Gentile
world  was  converted  from  the  darkness  of  its  unbelief,  being
before  full  of  pride  by  its  avertedness ;  signs  and  wonders
being  exhibited,  faith gained,  ground ;  and  the  .faith  being
spread  abroad,  the  summit  of  Holy  Church  shone  forth  in
reverence  with  all  men. To  which  same  when  there  were
wanting  open  adversaries,  she  began  to  be  tried  by  her  own
members. For  numberless  heresies  springing  up  in her,
they  arrayed  against  her  wars  of  cruel  conflict. For  she
must  be  exercised  at  this  time  by  toiling,  who  is  on  the  way
to  her  recompensing  in  that  which  follows. Whereby  it  has
come  to  pass  that  some  in  her  should  come  forth  who  should
call  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ
Jesus,  created  mere  man,  but  one  by  grace  made  God,  and
should  attribute  so  much  of  holiness  to  him  as  they  knew
in  the  rest  of  the  Saints,  the  same  being  His  servants.
Which  persons  blessed  Job  being  inspired  with  the  spirit
of  prophecy,  reproves  by  the  laying  out  of  his  sentence,
saying,
Ver.  19.  The  topaz  qf  Ethiopia  shall  not  equal  it,
84.  What  do  we  take  '  Ethiopia*  for,  save  the  present lii.
world,  which  same  by  darkness  of  hue  denotes  a  sinning
people  in  the  foulness  of  its  merits. But  sometimes  by  the
name  of  Ethiopia  the  Gentile  world  in  a  special  manner
is  used  to  be  denoted,  as  being  before  black  by  the  sins  of
unbelief. Which  same  on  the  Lord's  coming,  the  Prophet
Habakkuk  beheld  aflfrighted  with  fear,  and  says.  The  tents  Bth.s^
qf  the  Ethiopians  tremble  with  dread^  the  tents  qf  the  tand*^*
qf  Madian. David  also,  the  Prophet,  seeing  that  the  Lord
should  come  for  the  redeeming  of  Judaea,  but  that  first
the  Gentile  world  should  believe,  and  afterwards  Judaea
should  follow,  (as  it  is  written, Until  the  fulness  qf  the  Uom.
Oentiles  be  come  in,  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved,)  says,^^  ^*

384 Manhood  in  Christ  never  apart  from  Ood/tead.

Job  as,  Ethiopia^  her  hand  shall  be  first  to  Qod;  i.  e.  ^  before  that
p — '—  Judsea  believes,  the  Gentile  world  being  black  with  sins
PLes/ofiera  itself  to  Almighty  God  to  be  saved/  Now  the  topaz
is  a  precious  stone,  and  because  in  the  Greek  tongue  to  pan
is  the  word  for  ^  every  thing,'  on  this  account,  that  it  shines
bright  with  eveiy  colour,  it  is  called  ^  topazium,'  as  if  ^  to-
pantium.'  But  when  the  Gentile  world  being  turned  to  God
believed,  numbers  from  out  thereof  were  so  enriched  with
the  gift  of  His  Spirit,  that  as  with  many  colours,  so  with
many  virtues  they  shone  bright.  But  lest  any  man  be
lifted  up  by  the  virtues  he  has  received,  it  is  now  said  by
the  holy  man.  The  topaz  qf  Ethiopia  shall  not  equal  it.
As  though  he  said  in  plain  words ;  ^  No  one  of  the  Saints,
with  however  many  virtues  he  may  be  filled,  yet  as  being
gathered  out  of  this  blackness  of  the  world  can  equal  Him,
Lukei,  concerning  Whom  it  is  written.  That  holy  Thing  which  shall
be  bom  of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son  qf  Qod.  For  we,
though  wo  are  made  holy,  yet  are  not  born  holy,  because
by  the  mere  constitution  of  a  corruptible  nature  we  are  tied
and  bound,  that  we  should  say  with  the  Prophet,  Behold^  I
toas  shapen  in  wickedness^  and  in  sin  hath  my  mother  con-
ceived me.  But  He  only  is  tnily  bom  holy,  Who  in  order
that  He  might  get  the  better  of  that  same  constitution  of  a
corruptible  natui-e,  was  not  conceived  by  the  combining  of
carnal  conjunction.

85.  To  this  Wisdom  as  it  were  a  kind  of  '  topaz  from
1  Nm-  Ethiopia  wished  to  equal  itself,'  when  a  certain  heresiarch  *
^g^»  said,  *  I  do  not  envy  Christ  being  made  God,  because,  if  I
wish  even  I  myself  may  be  made  so.'  Who  imagined  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be  God,  not  by  the  mystery  of  His
conception,  but  by  the  promotion  of  grace,  ai'guing  by  mis-
construed proofs  chat  He  was  bom  simple  man,  but  in  order
to  be  God  that  He  had  advanced  by  merit,  and  on  tliis
account  reckoning  that  both  himself  and  any  others  might
be  made  coequal  with  Him,  which  same  are  made  the
children  of  God  by  grace,  not  understanding  nor  minding
that  the  topaz  from  Ethiopia  is  not  equcd  to  Him,  For  it
is  one  thing  for  those  bora  men  to  receive  the  grace  of
adoption,  and  another  for  one  by  the  power  of  Godhead  pre-
eminently to  have  come  forth  God  from  the  very  conception.

Our  Lord  One  Person  in  Two  distinct  Natures. 885

Neither  is  it  possible  that  to  the  glory  of  the  Only-begotten,  Book

possessed  by  nature,  another  glory  should  be  equal,  received *

by  grace.  For  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man^  the  l  Tim.
Man  Christ  JesuSj  is  not  as  this  one  raves  one  person  in  His''  ^'
human  nature,  and  another  person  in  the  Divine  nature.
Not  conceived  and  brought  forth  simple  man,  did  he  after-
wards obtain  of  merit  that  He  should  be  God.  But  the
Angel  announcing  it,  and  the  Spirit  coming,  at  once  the
Word  in  the  womb,  at  once  within  the  womb  the  Word
made  flesh,  (ihat  unchangeable  Essence  likewise  remaining
to  Him  which  He  has  coetemal  together  with  the  Father
and  the  Holy  Spirit,)  did  take  upon  Him  within  the  bowels
of  the  Virgin  that  whereby  He  might  both  being  Impassible
suffer  passion,  and  Undying  suffer  death,  and  whilst  Eternal
before  the  world  be  a  temporal  being  in  the  end  of  the  world,
that  through  an  unutterable  mystery,  by  a  holy  conception
and  an  inviolate  birth,  in  accordance  with  the  verity  of  both
natures,  the  same  Virgin  should  be  at  once  the  handmaid
and  mother  of  the  Lord.  For  so  is  it  said  to  her  by
Elisabeth;  Whence  is  this  to  me  that  the  mother  ^  my  Luke  i,
Lord  should  come  to  mef  And  the  Virgin  herself  at  her  con-  **•
ception  said.  Behold  the  handviaid  of  the  Lord.  Be  it  unto^>  38.
me  according  to  thy  word.  And  though  He  the  same  Being
is  one  thing  from  the  Father,  and  another  thing  from  the
Virgin,  yet  He  is  not  one  Person  from  the  Father,  and
another  Person  from  the  Virgin.  But  the  same  Person  is
Eternal  from  the  Father  and  die  same  a  temporal  being  from
the  Mother,  the  same  Who  made  is  the  same  That  was  made,
the  same  beautiful  in  form  above  the  children  qf  men  in  Pi.4S,3.
respect  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  the  same  of  whom  it  is
written;  fVe  saw  Him^  and  there  wcu  no  sftewj  and  He  hath  10.63,3.
not  form  nor  comeliness,  in  respect  of  the  human  nature.
The  same  before  the  world  from  the  Father  without  mother,
and  the  same  at  the  end  of  the  world  from  the  Mother  with-
out father.  Tlie  same  a  Temple,  the  same  the  Builder
of  the  Temple.  The  same  the  Maker  of  the  work,  and  the
same  the  Work  of  the  Maker,  remaining  one  Person  from
both  and  in  both  natures,  neither  being  confounded  by  the
conjunction  of  natures,  nor  doubled  by  the  distinctness  of
natures. But  because  it  is  not  these  points  that  we  have

VOL.  II.  c  c

SMNoftemaycomparewiih  Christ.  Virtue  not  man^s  by  nature.

Job  98,  taken  upon  us  to  treat  of,  let  ua  return  to  our  course  of

JJjj  interpreting.

86.  We  are  to  take  note  that  the  holy  man,  in  order  to
shew  that  the  Angels  are  widely  distant  from  this  Wisdom,
says,  Fine  gold  shall  not  be  given  for  it.  Which  same  that
ho  might  exhibit  the  ancient  Fathers  likewise,  dealers  witli
sacred  Revelation,  as  inferior,  added,  Nor  shall  silver  be
weighed  in  ewchange  thereof*  Moreorer  that  he  might
point  out  that  the  wisdom  of  the  philosopher  is  far  beneath
this  Wisdom,  he  brought  in ;  Nor  shall  it  be  compared  to
the  dyed  colours  of  India,  And  he  subjoined.  Nor  to  the
most  precious  sardonyx  stone^  nor  to  the  sapphire.  Further-
more in  order  that  he  might  shew  that  in  that  city  Above  no
one  attains  to  equality  with  the  Ouly-begotten,  he  added;
The  gold  or  the  glass  cannot  equal  it.  That  he  might  make
it  appear  that  the  Prophets  likewise  were  beneath  It,  he
added ;  Neither  shall  vessels  of  gold  high  and  overtopping
be  exchanged  instead  of  it.  Nor  shall  they  be  mentioned  in
comparison  with  her.  For  Wisdom  is  drawn  from  out  of
sight.  Whilst  at  the  last,  that  he  might  rebuke  the  very
heretics  in  the  Church  themselves  as  well,  who  on  coming
from  the  error  of  the  Gentile  world,  split  through  pride  the
iaith  which  they  receive,  he  added;  The  topaz  of  Ethiopia
shall  not  equal  it.  As  tliough  he  taught  in  plain  words,
saying;  TliesCt  who  from  the  blackness  of  sin  come  to  con-
version, cannot  equal  God-Mau,  though  they  may  seem  to
shine  bright  with  many  virtues  for  colours.  And  that  their
pride  might  be  thrown  over,  it  is  fitly  added,

Neither  shall  the  purest  dyes  be  brought  into  comparison.
liii.  ^^-  ^^^  those  are  called  *  the  purest  dyes'  who  are
genuinely  humble,  and  genuinely  holy,  who  know  that  from
themselves  indeed  they  have  not  the  show  of  virtuous  attain-
ments, but  that  they  hold  tliis  by  the  gift  of  accessory  grace.
For  they  would  not  be  ^  dyed,'  if  they  had  possessed  holiness
by  nature.  But  ihey  are  *  the  purest  dyes'  because  they  keep
in  themselves  with  humility  the  superinduced  grace  of  virtues
which  they  have  been  vouchsafed.  Hence  it  is  tliat  it  is
said  by  the  voice  of  the  Spouse  concerning  Holy  Church;

Cant. 6,  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  blanched? For  because  Holy

^^' Church  has  not  a  heavenly  life  by  nature,  but  on  the  Spirit

Baptism  tfyes  U9  bright. God^  how  seen^  haw  not  heen.  887

adding  Itself  is  arrayed  with  beantifulness  of  gtfts^  she  is  ^?j^.

described  not  as  white  but  as  *  blanched.* And  obiorvey  that *

when  he  said  above,  Nor  shall  it  be  compared  to  the  dyed
colours  of,  India f  those  same  colours  he  did  not  bring  in
*  pure ;'  but  in  this  place  that  he  might  distinguish  the  dye
of  true  virtues  from  that  staining  of  the  philosophers,  whilst
speaking  of  djes,  he  added  *  the  purest.*  For  those  are
rightly  called  *  the  purest  dyes,*  who  were  aforetime  foul
through  wicked  deeds,  yet,  the  Spirit  coming  upon  them,  are
clothed  with  the  brilliancy  of  grace,  that  they  should  appear
to  be  far  other  than  they  were.  Whence  also  *  BapUsm,*  i.  e.
'  dyeing  V  is  the  name  given  to  our  own  descending  into  the  ^'^o-
water  itself.  Since  we  are  dyed,  and  we,  who  were  before
unsightly  by  the  deformity  of  bad  habits,  on  the  faith  being
received  are  rendered  beautiful  by  grace  and  the  adornment
of  virtues. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  20,  21,  Wlietk^e  then  cometh  wisdom?  and  where  is
the  place  of  understanding?  Seeing  thai  it  is  hid  from  the
eyes  of  all  living.

88.  It  deserves  to  be  especially  considered,  that  it  is  asked  liv.
by  the  holy  man,  whence  Wisdom  cometh.  For  It  *  comes*
firom  Him  from  Whom  It  sprung.  Now  because  It  is  bom
of  the  Invisible  and  Coetemal  Father,  the  way  thereof  is
hidden.  Whence  too  it  is  said  by  the  IVophet,  And  whol9»S8fir.
shall  declare  His  generations?  Now  *  the  place  of  the  un-
derstanding of  her'  is  the  mind  of  man,  which  mind  the
Wisdom  of  God  when  it  has  filled  makes  holy.  And  so
because  both  He  is  invisible,  from  Whom  It  came  forth,  and
it  is  doubtful  to  us  in  whose  mind  It  rests  as  being  under-
stood, it  is  rightly  said  now.  Whence  then  cometh  wisdom  f
and  where  is  tlie  place  of  understanding  ?  But  this  is  very
wonderful  that  it  is  directly  brought  in;  seeing  thai  it  is
hidden  from  the  eyes  of  all  living.  For  if  the  Wisdom,  which
is  God,  had  been  *  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  all  living,*  then
surely  this  Wisdom  no  one  of  the  Saints  would  have  seen.
But  see,  I  hear  John  agreeing  with  this  sentence,  who  says.
No  man  hath  seen  Ood  at  any  time.  And  again,  when  T  i  John
look  at  tlie  Fathers  of  the  Old  Testament,  I  learn  that^'  '^'
many  of  those,  as  the  very  history  of  the  Sacred  Reading  is
witness,  did  see  God. Thus  Jacob  saw  the  Liord,  who  says,

c  c  2

388 Moses  and  others  saw  Ood  only  by  a  semblance.

Job  28,  For  I  have  seen  Ood  face  to  face^  and  my  life  is  preserved.

~-~.  Moses  likewise  saw  God,  of  whom  it  is  written.  And  the

so.  ' '  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  face  ioface^  as  a  man  speakclh  unto

^*'  ^'  his  friend. This  very  Job  saw  the  Lord,  who  says,  I  have

Job  42,  heard  of  TJiee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear;  but  now  mine  eye

Is.  6,  i.^^l^^  Thee. Isaiah  saw  the  Lord,  who  saith,  In  the  year

that  king  Uzziah  died  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne

1  Kingthigh  and  lifted  up. Michaiah  saw  the  Lord,  who  saith,  /

' '  saw  the  Ij)rd  sitting  on  His  throne^  and  all  the  host  of

heaven  standing  by  Him  on  His  right  hand  and  on  His  left.

What  does  it  mean  then  that  so  many  Fathei*s  of  the  Old

Testament  have  witnessed  that  they  have  seen  God,  and  yet

concerning  this  Wisdom,  which  is  God,  it  is  said.  Seeing

that  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living? And  John  saith,

No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time. Seeing  this,  which  is

plainly  given  us  to  undei*stand,  that  so  long  as  we  live  here  a

mortal  life,  God  may  be  seen  by  certain  semblances,  but  by

the  actual  appearance  of  His  Nature  He  cannot  be  seen,  so

that  the  soul  being  inspired  with  the  grace  of  the  Spirit

should by certain figures  behold  God,  but  not  attain  to

the  actual  power  of  His  Essence? For  hence  it  is  that

Jacob,  who  bears  witness  that  ho  hud  seen  God,  saw  Him

not  save  in  an  Angel. Hence  it  is  that  Moses  who  ^  talked

with  God  face  to  face,  as  a  man  spcaketh  unto  his  friend,'

Ex.  33,  in  ^ho  midst  of  the  very words  of  his  speaking,  says,  Jf

^- /  have  found  grace  in  T/iy  sight y  shew  Tliyself  manifestly

Sheto to  me,  that  I  may  see  Thee. For  assuredly  if  it  were  not

Jf^^^^^God  with  whom  he  was  talking,  he  would  have  said,  *  Shew

me  God,'  and  not '  Shew  me  Thyself But  if  it  was  Ood,

with  Whom  he  was  speaking  '  face  to  face,'  wherefore  did

he  pray  to  see  Him,  Whom  he  was  seeing  ? But  from  this

requesting  of  his,  it  is  inferred  that  Him  he  was  athirst  to

perceive  in  the  brightness  of  His  Incomprehensible  nature,

Whom  he  had  already  begun  to  see  by  certain  semblances,

that  so  the  heavenly  Essence  might  be  present  to  the  eyes  of

his  mind,  in  order  that  for  the  vision  of  Eternity  there  might

not  be  interposed  to  him  any  created  semblance  witli  the

circumstances  of  time. And  so  the  Fathers  of  the  Old

Testament  saw  the  Lord,  and  yet  according  to  the  voice  of

John,  No  man  hath  seen  Ood  at  any  time;  and  according

Crod  never  seen  by  any  ihai  lite  to  the  world. 889

to  the  sentence  of  blessed  Job,  the  Wisdom  Wbich  is  God  Book

is  *  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living/  because  by  persons ^'

settled  in  this  mortal  life  He  was  both  able  to  be  seen  in
certain  comprehensible  images,  and  not  able  to  be  seen  in
the  Incomprehensible  Light  or  Eternity.

89.  But  if  it  is  so,  that  by  some  while  still  living  in  this
corruptible  flesh,  yet  growing  in  incalculable  power  by  a
certain  piercingness  of  contemplation,  die  Eternal  Brightness
is  able  to  be  seen,  this  too  is  not  at  variance  with  the
sentence  of  blessed  Job,  who  says.  Seeing  that  it  ie  hid
from  the  eyes  of  all  living;  because  he  that  sees  *  Wisdom,*
Which  is  God,  wholly  and  entirely  dies  to  this  life,  that
henceforth  he  should  not  be  held  by  the  love  thereof.  For
no  one  has  seen  Iler,  who  still  lives  in  a  carnal  way,  because
no  man  can  embrace  God  and  the  world  at  one  and  the
same  time.  He  who  sees  God  dies  by  the  mere  circumstance
alone,  that  either  by  the  bent  of  the  interior,  or  by  the
carrying  out  of  practice,  he  is  separated  with  all  his  mind
from  the  gratifications  of  this  life.  Hence  ye^  further  it  is
said  to  that  same  Moses  too;  For  there  shall  no  man  «^Ex.d8,
Me,  and  live.  As  though  it  were  plainly  expressed,*  No^*
man  ever  at  any  time  sees  God  spirituallv  and  lives  to  the
world  carnally.*  Hence  Paul  the  Apostle  too,  who  as  yet
had  learnt  the  invisible  things  of  God,  as  he  himself  testifies,
in  part,  related  that  henceforth  he  was  dead  all  over  to  this  i  Cor.
world,  saying.  By  Whom  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  ^'•rf^^^J'
I  unto  the  world.  For  as  we  have  already  said  far  above,  it  14. '
is  not  enough  for  him  to  say,  I  am  crucified  to  the  world,
except  he  also  first  out  with,  Ttie  world  is  crucified  to  me,
that  he  might  not  only  bear  witness  that  he  was  dead  to  the
world,  but  also  that  the  world  was  dead  to  himself,  so  that
neitlier  he  himself  should  covet  the  world,  nor  the  world
henceforth  covet  him.  For  if  perchance  there  be  two  in
one  place,  of  whom  one  is  alive,  and  the  other  dead,  though
the  dead  person  does  not  see  the  living,  yet  the  live  one
does  see  the  dead.  Now  the  Preacher  of  God)  in  order
that  he  might  shew  that  by  the  abasement  whereby  he  had
cast  himself  down  in  humbling  himself  he  was  now  become
such,  that  neither  he  himself  longed  after  the  world,  nor
the  world  after  him;  not  only  says  that  he  was  crucified

300 God  seen  in  His  Essence  by  Saints  and  Angels.
Job  38,  to  the  world,  that  he  himaelf  as  one  dead  should  not  see

90  91

^^'^y^^the  glory  of  the  world,  that  he  might  long  after,  but  likewise
declared  the  world  crucified  to  him,  wiierein  he  had  cast
himself  down  to  the  ground  with  such  humilily,  that  the
world  itself  likewise,  as  if  dead  to  him,  could  not  now  at  all
see  Paul  as  being  humble  and  despised.

00.  But  we  are  to  know  that  there  were  some  persons,
who  said  that  even  in  that  region  of  blessedness  God  is
beheld  indeed  in  His  Brightness,  but  far  from  beheld  in  His
Nature.  Which  persons  surely  too  little  exactness  of
enquiry  deceived.  For  not  to  that  simple  and  unchangeable
Essence  is  Brightness  one  tiling,  and  Nature  anotlier;  but
Its  very  Nature  is  to  It  Brightness,  and  the  very  Bright-
ness is  Nature.  For  that  to  Its  votaries  the  Wisdom  of
Ood  should  one  day  display  Itself,  He Himself  pledges

JohnH,  His  word,  saying.  He  that  laveth  Me,  shall  be  loved  of  My

Father,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  Myse\f

to  him. As  though  He  said  in  plain  terms,  *  Ye  who  see

Me  in  your  nature,  it  remains  that  ye  should  see  Me  in

Mau.s,Mine  own  nature.' Hence  He  says  again; Blessed  are

I'cor. ihe  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  Ood. Hence  Paul

i^>  IS*  says.  For  now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  then  face

to  face;  now  I  know  in  part,  then  shall  I  know  even  as

also  I  am  known.

01.  But  because  it  is  said  concerning  God  by  the  first
iP«t.  9,  preacher  of  the  Church,  Whom  the  Angels  desire  to  look

upon,  there  are  some  who  imagine  that  even  the  Angels
never  see  God ;  and  yet  we  know  that  it  is  spoken  by  a
Mat.  18,  sentence  of  Truth,  In  heaven  their  Angels  do  always  behold
^^*  the  face  of  My  Father,  Which  is  in  heaven.  Does,  then,
IVuth  sound  one  thing  and  the  preacher  of  truth  another  ?
But  if  both  sentences  be  compared  together,  it  is  ascertained,
that  they  are  not  at  all  at  variance  with  one  auotlicr.  For
the  Angels  at  once  see  and  desire  to  see  God,  and  thirst  to
behold  and  do  behold.  For  if  they  so  desire  to  see  Him
that  they  never  at  all  enjoy  the  carrying  out  of  their  desire,
desire  has  anxiety  without  fruit,  and  anxiety  has  punishment*
But  the  blessed  Angels  are  £Bir  removed  firom  all  punishment
of  anxiety,  because  never  can  punishment  and  blessedness
meet  iu  one. Again,  when  we  say  that  these  Angels  are

Denre  and  sa tut/action  abide  together  in  Heaven. 891

satisfied  with  the  vision  of  Ood«  because  the  Psalmist  too  Book
says,  /  ehalt  be  eati^fied  when  I  atpake  with  Thy  UkenesSfY^j^'
we  are  to  consider  that  upon  satisfying  there  follows  dis-  is.
gust  So  then,  that  the  two  may  rightly  agree  together^  let
Truth  say,  thai  they  always  see ;  and  let  the  excellent  Preacher
say,  that  they  always  desire  to  see.  For  that  there  be  not
anxiety  in  desire,  in  desiring  they  are  satisfied,  and  that
there  be  not  disgust  in  their  satisfying,  whilst  being  satisfied
they  desire.  And  therefore  they  desire  without  suffering,
becauso  desire  is  accompanied  by  satisfying.  And  tlicy  are
satisfied  without  disgust,  because  the  very  satisfying  itself  is
erer  being  inflamed  by  desire.  So  also  shall  we  too  one
day  be,  when  we  shall  come  to  the  fountain  of  life.  There
shall  be  delightfully  stamped  upon  us  at  one  and  the  same  time
a  thirsting  and  a  satisfying.  But  from  the  thirsting  necessity
is  far  absent,  and  disgust  far  from  that  satisfying,  because  at
once  in  thirsting  we  shall  be  satisfied,  and  in  being  satisfied
we  shall  thirst  Therefore  we  shall  see  Ood,  and  it  shall  be
the  very  reward  of  our  labour,  that  after  the  darkness  of  this
mortal  state  we  should  be  made  glad  by  His  light  being
approached  unto.

92.  But  when we  talk  of  His  light  being  approached,
that  presents  itself  to  the  mind  which  Paul  says,  Dwelling  l  Tim.
in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto^  Whom  no  man  *»  ***
hath  seen,  nor  can  see. And  again,  I  hear  what  the  Psalmist
says ;  Approach  unto  Him^  and  be  enlightened. How  thenP«u34,s.
by  approaching  are  we  enlightened,  if  we  see  not  the  very
IJght  by  which  we  are  able  to  be  enlightened  ? But  if  by
approaching  to  Him  we  see  the  very  Light  whereby  we  are
enlightened,  how  is  it  declared to be unapproachable?
Wherein  it  deserves  to  be  considered  that  he  called  it  unap-
proachable, but  to  every  man  that  minds  the  things  of  men.
Since  sacred  Scripture  is  used  to  mark  all  the  followers  of
carnal  things  with  the  designation  of  the  being  *  men.'  Whence
the  same  Apostle  says  to  certain  persons  at  strife.  For  i  Cor.
whereas  tltere  is  among  you  envying  and  strife  and  divisions^^^  '*  ^'
are  ye  not  camalyand  walk  as  menf To  which  he  soon
afterwards  appends,  Are  ye  not  men? And  hence  he  else-
where brought  forward  tiie  testimony;  Eye  hath  not  seen,^  Cor.

3|  9,

302 God  revealed  to  those  who  *  walk  *  not  *  as  men*
Job  98,nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  o/nuin

80  SI

pjj^^  the  things  which  Ood  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him.

'And  when  he  had  described  this  as  hidden  from  *  men/  he

}^*^'-*' added  direcdy,  But  Ood  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  His

Spirit; separating  his  own  self  from the  designation  of

*  man'  in  that  having  been  transported  above  man  he  now
tasted  what  is  divine.  So  also  in  this  place,  when  ho  told
of  the  light  of  God  being  unapproachable,  that  he  might
shew  to  what  persons  unapproachable,  he  added.  Whom  no
man  hath  seen,  no  nor  can  see. After  his  manner  calling

*  men'  all  whose  taste  is  for  things  of  man.  Because  they
who  have  a  taste  for  what  is  divine,  are  doubtless  above
men.  Therefore  we  shall  see  God,  if  by  a  heavenly  conver-
sation we  obtain  to  be  above  men.  Not  yet  that  we  shall  so
see  Him  as  He  Himself  sees  His  very  own  Self.  For  the
Creator  sees  Himself  in  a  way  far  unlike  to  that  in  which  the
creature  sees  the  Creator.  For  as  to  the  unmeasurableness
of  God  there  is  a  certain  measure  of  contemplation  set  to  us,
because  wu  arc  limited  by  tho  mere  weight  that  wo  are  a
creature.

93.  But  assuredly  we  do  not  so  behold  God,  as  He  sees
Himself,  as  we  do  not  so  rest  in  God,  as  He  rests  in  Himself.
For  our  sight  or  our  rest  will  be  to  a  certain  degree  like  to
His  sight  or  His  rest,  but  not  equal  to  it  For  lest  we  should
be  prostrate  in  ourselves,  the  wing  of  contemplation,  so
to  say,  uplifts  us,  and  wo  are  carried  up  from  ourselves  for
the  beholding  Him,  and  being  carried  away  by  the  bent  of
the  heart  and  tho  sweetness  of  contemplation,  in  a  certain
manner  go  away  from  ourselves  into  Himself,  and  now  this
very  going  away  of  ours  is  not  to  rest,  and  yet  so  to  go
is  most  perfectly  to  rest  And  so  it  is  perfect  rest  because
God  is  discerned,  and  yet  it  is  not  to  bo  equalled  to  His
rest,  Who  doth  not  pass  on  from  Himself  into  anotlier,  that
He  may  rest.  And  therefore  the  rest  is^  so  to  say,  liko  and
unlike,  because  what  His  rest  is,  our  rest  imitates.  For
that  we  may  be  blessed  and  eternal  for  everlasting,  we
imitate  tlie  Everlasting.  And  it  is  a  great  eternity  tons  to  bo
imitating  eternity.  Nor  are  we  hcritless  of  Him  Whom  we
imitate,  because  in  seeing  we  partake,  and  in partaking

Fiiion  of  Ood  begun  here  hy  faith.  398

imitate  Ilim. Which  same  right  is  now  begun  by  faith,  Book

bat  is  then  perfected  in  Appearance,  when  we  drink  at  the •*

rery  springhead  the  Wisdom  coctemal  with  Ood  which  we
now  derive  throngh  the  lips  of  those  that  preach,  as  it  were
in  running  streams.

BOOK XIX.

The  interpretation  being  carried  on  from  the  laet  part  of  the  twenty-flrtt  verse
of  the  twentjr-eighth  chapter  to  the  twenty-first  verse  of  the  following
chapter  exclusive,  various  meanings  are  laid  open  not  less  learnedly  than
piously,  chiefly  concemhig  Christ  and  the  Ghurch.

Myst. 1.  What  wonder  is  it  if  the  Eternal  *  Wisdom*  of  God  is

r\nt  iihlft  {^  hft  ftftftii,  when  thft  vp.ry  inviaibjg  thJnus  themselves
as  wellj  which  were  created  thereby,  cannot  he  emhrnnfid  by
the  eyes  of  men?  So  then  by  things  created  we  learn  with
what  self-abasement  to  revere  the  Creator  of  all  things;  so
"that  m  this  lite  the  human  mind  should  not  dare  to  Qsurp^
toTtself  aught  belonging  to  the  Appearance  of  Almighty  6od|
whicTi  HeTeserves  T6f  HiB  Eluctoijly^aajlieir  reward  m  the
ensuing  Kecompensing.  Whence  after  it  was  said,  //  is  hid
Jfom  Jhe^eyesof  all  /mwy/welmve'tTie  words  thereupon
fntroduceJ  next :  *  '  '

Chap,  xxviii.  21.  And  is  kepi  close  also  J^om  Ihe  fowls
oflhe  air.
i'  2.  For  in  Holy  Scripture  *  birds*  are  sometimes  given  to
be  understood  in  a  bad  sense,  and  sometimes  in  a  good  sense.
Since  by  the  birds  of  the  air  occasionally  the  powers  of  the
air  are  denoted,  being  hostile  to  the  settled  pui*poses  of  good
Matt. men. Whence  it  is  said  by  the  mouth  of  Truth,  And  when

13  4

'  ' he  sotoedf  some  seeds  fell  by  Ihe  wayside^  and  Ihe  fowls  of

the  air  came  and  devoured  il;  in  this  way,  because  evil

spirits  besetting  the  minds  of  men,  whilst  they  bring  in

bad  thoughts,  pluck  the  word of  life  out  of  the  memory.

"Hence  again  it  b  said  to  a  certain  rich  man  full  of  proud

Matt  8,  thoughts;  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  Ihe  birds  qf  Ihe  air  have

Luke  9,  nests,  but  the  Son  qf  Man  hath  not  where  to  lay  His  Head.

^' For  foxes  are  very  cunning  animals,  that  hide  themselves

in  ditches  and  caves;  and  when  they  face  the  light,  tlioy

never  run  in  straight  courses,  but  always  by  crooked  doublings.

-^


*  Fowls  of  the  aW  in  good  and  bad  ien$e,  595

But  the  birds  as  we  Iraow  with  loity  flight  lift  themselres  Boos
into  the  air.  So,  then,  by  the  name  of*  foxes,*  the  crafty-
and  cunning  aeiBOHg.  and  bv  Ih^  titiB  uf  thu  '  birds  of  ihe
aiy.lBese  same  proud  demons  are  denoted.  "As  if  ^  said^
*  The  deceitful  and  tiplifted  demons  find  thelF  habitation  in
your  heart;  i.  e.  in  the  imagination  of-pride,' '  but  the  Son  of
Man  hath  not  where  to  lay  His  Head/  i.  e.  *  My  humility
findeth  not  rest  in  your  proud  mind/  For  as  by  a  kind  of
flight  that  first  bird  lifted  itself  up,  which  said  in  the  uplifted
imagination  of  the  heart;  /  will  ascend  into  heaven^  I  will u,  14,
exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of  Ood:  I  will  Ht  also  upon  ^  '
the  mount  of  the  congregation  in  the  sides  qf  the  North.
I  will  ascend  above  the  heights  qf  the  clouds.  I  will  be  Hie
the  Most  High.  Mark  how  he  in  flying  sought  the  regions
on  high  with  pride.  Which  same  flight  also  he  recom-
mended  to  the  first  of  human  kind  as  well.  For  they
themselves  by  flying  as  it  were  tried  to  go  above  their
own  selves,  when  it  was  told  them  that  they  should  taste  and
be  like  gods.  And  while  they  seek  after  Uie  likeness  of  the
Deity,  they  lost  the  blessings  of  immortalityi  which  same
would  not  by  dying  have  gone  into  the  earth,  if  they  had
been  willing  to  stand  with  humility  upon  the  earth.

3.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  *  the  birds  of  the  air*  are  wont
to  be  put  in  a  good  sense,  as  in  the  Oospel  the  Lord,
when  He  wa^^soladmgrftjikeness  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven
by  a  grain  ^mustard  8ee^)laid,  Unto  what  is  the  kingdom Lnkeis,
of  heaven  l^Y  ana  w/iereunto  shall  1  resemble  itf Itis^^'^^'
like  a  grain  of  mustard  seedy  which  a  man  took  and  cast
into  his  garden,  and  it  grew  and  waxed  a  great  tree,  and  the ifi^i  1  ^
fowls  of  the  air  lodged  in  the  branches  of  it. For  He  is J  ^^  /  ^

Himself*  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,' Who,  when  He  was  planted ^  ^ Lfy(^'^^
in  the  burial  place  of  the  garden,  rose  up  a  great  tree. For v"^*^  \^ \
He  was  *  a  grain,'  whereas  He  died,  but  *  a  tree,'  whereas
He  rose  again. *  A  grain,'  through  the  abasement  of  the
flesh,  '  a  tree,' through the  mightines8_ot  Wis  Majesty.
'  A^raihj^because  t^  have^seen'lSRmy  and'He'was  notu,^^%,
regarded:  but  *  a  tree,'  because  fairer  in  form  than  the  V$.i5fl.
children  of  men. The  branches  of  this  tree  are  the  holy
preachers. And  let  us  see  how  wide  they  are  stretched  out
For  what  is  said  concerning  them? Their  sound  is  gonePn.i9,A.
forth  into  all  the  earth,  and  their  wprds  to  the  end  of  the

396  Evil  ipirils  know  God  but  afar  off.

Job  88,  toorld. In  these  *  boughs  the  birds  of  the  air  rest,'  becaiiao

^'  the  holy  souls,  which  by  a  kind  of  wings  of  virtues  lift
'  themselves  up  from  earthly  thinking,  do  in  the  word  and
consolations  of  these  take  breath  from  the  wearying  of  this
life.  And  so  in  this  place  after  it  was  said  of  ^  Wisdom,*
It  if  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  men;  it  is  rightly  added,  It  is
kept  close  also  from  the  fowls  of  the  air:  because  being
settled  in  the  corruptible  flesh,  these  very  persons  do  not  in
seeing  penetrate  the  mightiness  of  His  Nature,  who  earn
by  holy  contemplation  even  now  to  fly  with  wings.  Where  it
is  well  added,

Ver.  22.  Destruction  and  death  say^  We  have  heard  the

fame  thereof  unth  our  ears.

ii- 4.  Who  are  denoted  by  the  title  of  ^  destruction  and  death,*

save  the  evil  spirits,  who  proved  the  inventors  of  destruction

and  of  death,'  as  of  their  leader  himself  under  the  appearance

Be?.  6,  of  his  minister  it  is  said  by  John,  And  his  name  was  Death.
Unto  whom  all  spirits  of  pride  being  subject,  say  concerning
this  ^  Wisdom,'  Which  is  God,  tVe  have  heard  the  fame
thereof  with  our  ears^  in  this  way,  that  the  vision  thereof
doubdess  they  could  not  have  with  complete  blessedness.
For  perfectly  to  see  the  Wisdom  coetemsd  with  God,  is  the
same  thing  as  to  *  have.' Hence  it  is  said  to  John  of  the

B«T.  9,  reward  of  one  conquering,  /  will  give  him  a  white  sione,  and
in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving
lie  that  receiveth  it.  For  in  this  life  we  are  able  either  to  know
or  see  sometimes  a  thing  even  which  wo  have  not  received ;
but  to  have  '  a  new  name  written  on  a  white  stone'  is  in  an
eternal  recompense  to  have  the  knowledge  of  God  strange  to
the  faculties  of  men,  which  no  man  can  know  saving  he  that
receiveth  it.  Therefore  as  we  have  said,  because  to  see  God
is  the  same  thing  that  it  is  to  have,  therefore  the  evil
spirits  do  not  see  this  ^  Wisdom,'  because  being  cast  ofl*
through  pride  they  were  never  able  to  have  It.  For  they
shut  the  eyes  of  the  heart  to  the  light  of  It,  resisting  the  rays
thereof shed abroad over them, as that may be also

Job  24,  understood  of  the  same  evil  spirits,  which  is  written,  Tltey
are  of  those  that  rebel  against  the  light.  And  so  for  evil
spirits  to  have  *  heard  of  the  fame  of  Wisdom,'  but  not  to
have  seen  that  Wisdom,  is  at  once  to  have  ascertained  the
power  thereof  by  its  efficacy,  and  yet  to  have  been  unwilling

The  Father  the  *  Pktce^  of  the  Son,  Manhood  Hit  <  way:  397

to  stand  humbly  nnder  it Hence  it  is  said  by  tbe  voice  of  Book

Tnith  of  the  actual  head  of  evil  spirits.  He  teas  a  murderer  ^^^'

from  the  beginning,  and  abode  not  in  the  truth, tt  follows;  44. "  '

Ver.  $8.  God  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and He
knoweth  tfie  place  thereof

d.  This  Wisdom  coeternal  with  God  has  ^  a  way*  in  one  iii.
sense,  and  in  another  sense  *  a  place;*  but  only  a  *  place,*  if
a  person  understand  it  a  place  not  local.  For  God  is  not
capable  of  being  held  close  after  the  manner  of  a  body.
But  as  has  been  said,  a  place  not  local  is  meant  The  '  place*
of  '  Wisdom*  is  the  Father,  *  the  place*  of  the  Father  is
*  Wisdom,*  as.  Wisdom  Herself  bearing  testimony,  it  is  said,
/  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me.  So  then  the  JobnH,
same  identical  Wisdom  has  *  a  way*  in  one  sense,  and  '  It'^'
place*  in  another  sense;  *  a  way*  by  the  passing  of  the
manhood,  *  a  place*  by  the  settledness  of  the  Godhead.
For  She  passes  not  by  in  the  respect  that  She  is  eternal,  but
She  does  pass  by  in  the  respect  that  for  our  sakes  She  appeared
subject  to  time.  For  it  is  thus  written  in  the  Gospel,  And  as  Matso,
they  depariedfrom  Jericho,  the  Lord  passed  by.  And,  behold,  ^'  *^'
two  blind  men^  sitting  by  the  way  side,  cried  out,  saying.
Have  mercy  on  uSy  O  Lord,  Tliou  Son  of  David.  At  whose
voice,  as  it  is  there  written,  Jesus  stood  still,  and  restored  Ter.  39.
light  Now  what  is  it  to  hear  passing  by,  but  to  restore
sight  standing  still,  but  that  by  His  manhood  He  com-
passionated us.  Who  by  the  power  of  His  Godhead  banished
from  us  the  darkness  of  our  souls  ?  For  in  that  for  our  sakes
He  was  bom  and  suffered,  that  He  rose  again  and  ascended
into  heaven,  it  is  as  if  Jesus  passed  by,  because  surely  these
are  doings  in  time.  But  Ho  touched  and  enlightened  them
standing  still,  because  not  as  that  temporal  economy  doth
likewise  the  Word's  Eternity  pass  by,  Which  while  remaining
in  Itself  renews  all  things.  For  God*s  standing  is  His
ordering  all  things  mutable  by  immutable  purposing.  He,
then.  Who  heard  the  voices  of  those  imploring  Him  while
'  passing  by,*  restored  light  standing  still.  For  though  for
our  sakes  He  underwent  things  temporal,  yet  He  bestowed
light  upon  us  by  the  same  thing  that  He  knows  not  to  have
the  passing  of  mutability.  Therefore  because  when  He
should  through  flesh  appear  to  men  was  an  uncertain  thing.

898 Jlie  ^place^  and  *  way*  of  Wudom  in  man  unseen.

JoBS8,it  18  rightly  said  now,  God  understandeih  the  way  thereof^

«. 'and  He  knaweth  the  place  thereof. As  though  it  were

'  expressed  in  plain  words;  ^  To  the  thought  of  roan  the  two

are  bidden,  whether  the  time  when  by  flesh  Wisdom  may

come  to  men,  or  the  mode  how,  even  wlien  He  appears

without,  He  continues  invisible  with  the  Father.

6.  Although  this  may  also  be  understood  in  another  sense.
For  *  the  way  thereof  is  not  inappropriately  taken  to  be  that
actual  thing  that  comes  into  the  mind,  and  infuses  itself  into
us  in  the  interior.  And  *  the  place  thereof  the  heart  becomes,
coming  unto  which  She  abides. Thus  of  this  Her  way  it*  is

Mat.  8,  said,  7%tf  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wildernesSy  Prepare  ye
the  way  of  the  Lord;  i.  e.  *  Open  in  your  hearts  an  entrance

Pii.6R,4.to  Wisdom  at  Her  coming;*  as  it  is  elsewhere  said;  Make
"  ^'  a  way  for  him^  that  ancendeth  above  the  setting.  For  to
^  ascend  over  the  setting,*  was  by  rising  again  to  have  got
the  mastery  over  that  very  death.  He  had  undergone.  And
so  he  says.  For  him,  that  ascendeth  aver  the  settings  make
ye  a  way  ;  \.  e.  *  To  the  Lord  on  His  rising  again  make  a
way  in  your  hearts  by  faith/ Hence  it  is  said  to  John  by

Luke  1, the  Spirit;  Thou  shalt  go  before  the  face  of  the  Lord^  to
prepare  His  ways.  For  every  one  that  by  preaching  cleanses
the  hearts  of  those  that  hear  him  from  the  defilements  of  bad
habits,  prepares  a  way  for  Wisdom  on  Her  coming.  Thus,
this  *  Wisdom*  hath  *  a  way,'  and  hath  ^  a  place  ;*  *  a  way'
whereby  She  comes,  ^  a  place'  wherein  She  abides ;  as  She

JohnU,  Herself  saith ;  If  any  man  love  Afe,  he  will  keep  My  words,
and  My  Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  come  unto  him,
and  make  Our  abode  with  him.  So  then  there  is  *  a  way'
by  which  She  comes,  *  a  place'  wherein  She  abideth.  But
whereunto  does  She  come.  Who  is  every  where  ?  Is  it  for
Wisdom  to  come,  by  the  enlightening  of  our  mind  to  make
the  presence  of  Her  mightiness  to  appear?  And  because  it  is
doubtAil  to  men  both  into  what  person's  heart  She  comes,  or  in
what  roan,  after  She  has  come.  She  rests  in  abiding  there,  it  is
rightly  said  now,  Ood  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  and
He  knoweth  the  place  thereof.  Because  it  appertains  to  the
Divine  sight  alone  to  see,  whether  by  what  methods  the  per-
ception of  Wisdom  may  come  to  the  heart  of  man,  or  whoso
soul  shall  i^ot  lose  by  deadly  imaginations  the  understanding

( Eye  ofOod.  Man  byi  light  without  a  gift  from  ttini.  399

of  life,  which  it  has  been  vouchsafed. And  because  this  Book
same  *  Wisdom'  made  manifest  by  the  gracioasliess  of  the*^^^'
Manhood  was  destined  in  all  the  regions  of  the  world  to  fill  *
to  the  full  the  hearU  of  the  Elect,  it  is  rightly  added ;

Ver.  14.  For  he  regardeth  the  ends  (^  the  earthy  and  eeeth
cUl  things  that  are  wider  the  heaven,

7.  For  God's  *  regarding'  is  the  renewing  to  His  grace  the ir.
things  that  were  lost  and  undone ;  whence  it  is  written,  A  Ptot.
King  that  eitteth  in  the  throne  qf  judgment  eeattereth  auHMy^^^'
all  evil  ivith  His  eyes. For  by  regarding  He  restrained  the
evils  of  our  lightness,  and  bestowed  great  worth  of  matured-
ness. Whence  it  is  further  added ;

Who  made  the  weight  for  the  winds.

8.  For  in  the  Holy  Scripture,  by  the  rapidity  and  subtlety v.
of  the  winds  souls  are  used  to  be  denoted,  as  it  is  spoken  by

the  Psalmist  of  Ood;  Who  walketh  above  the  wings  of  the  F9.i04y
winds; i.  e.  *  Who passes above the  virtues  of  souls.' '•^'*'*'
Accordingly  *  He  made  the  weight  for  the  winds,^  in  that
whilst  Wisdom  from  above  fills  souls,  it  renders  them  weighty
with  imparted  maturity,  not  with  that  weightiness,  of  which
it  is  said,  Fe  children  of  men^  how  long  with  a  heavy  heart  Pi.  4, 3.
For  it  is  one  thing  to  be  weighty  in  respect  of  counsel,  and
another  in  respect  of  sin ;  it  is  one  thing  to  b^  weighty,  by
constancy,  another  to  be  weighty  by  ofience. For  this  latter
weightiness  has  weight  of  burthen,  the  other  weight  of  merit.
Thus,  therefore,  souls  receive  weight,  that  they  should  not
henceforth  with  light  motion  glance  ofi*  from  their  aim  at
God,  but  be  made  to  settle  into  Him  with  immoveable
weightiness  of  constancy. Still was  that  people  lightly
moved  to  and  fro,  of  which  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  Andu,bl^
he  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  qf  his  own  heart. I  have  '^*  '®*
seen  his  ways:  and  I  let  him  go. But  weighty  counsel  in
heart  banishes  all  inconstancy  of  wandering. And  because
tliere  are  souls,  that  with  light  motion  are  now  after  one  set
of  objects,  now  after  another.  Almighty  God,  because  these
very  light  waverings  of  men's  minds  He  does  not  estimate
lightly,  by  abandoning  passes  judgment  on  the  wandering  of
the  heart. But  when  through  grace  He  regards  the  wander-
ing mind,  He  fixes  it  into  stedfastness  of  counsel. And  so
it  is  rightly  sdd  now.  And  made  weight  for  the  winds;

400  ^  IVaieri/  meaning  here  Elect  souUf  kept  to  measure.

Job  «8,  because  the  light  motions  of  the  mindi  when  He  deigns  to
'  •  regard  with  mercifulnessi  He  directly  fashions  that  mind  to


tf  *  maluredness  of  constancy. Or  otherwise  to  *  make  weight
for  the  winds/  is  to  qualify  with  intermixed  infirmity  the
glory  resulting  from  virtuous  achievements,  which  is  vouch-
safed to  the  Elect  here. Whence  it  is  also  subjoined ;
And  he  tveigheth  the  waters  by  measure.
vi. 0.  ^  Waters*  in  Holy  Scripture are  wont  sometimes  to
denote  the  Holy  Spirit,  sometimes  sacred  knowledge,  some-
times wrong knowledge, sometimes calamity,  sometimes
drifting  peoples,  sometimes  the  minds  of  those  following  the
faith. Thus  by  water  wo  have  tlie  lupouring  of  the  Holy
John  7,  Spirit  represented,  as  when  it  is  said  in  tlic  Gospel,  He
^'  ^'  that  believeth  on  Me^  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his
belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.  Where  the  Evangelist
following  on  added;  But  this  spake  He  qf  the  Spirit,  which
they  that  believe  on  Him  should  receive. Again,  by  water
Eoohit.  sacred  knowledge  is  denoted,  as  it  is  said ;  And  give  him
^^'  ^' the  water  ofwisdotn  to  drink. By  water  likewise  bad  know-
ledge is  wont  to  bo  designated,  as  when  the  woman  in
Solomon,  who  bears  a  type  of  heresy,  chaims  with  crafty
ProT.  9,  persuasion,  saying,  Stolen  waters  are  sweet. By  the  term  of
waters  too  tribulation  are  used  to  be  signified,  as  it  is  said
Pt.69,i.by  the  Psalmist,  Save  me,  O  Qod,for  the  waters  are  come
in  even  unto  my  soul. By  water  peoples  are  denoted,  as  it
BeY.i7,is  said  by  John,  Now  the  waters  are  peoples. By  water
likewise  not  only  the  tide  of  peoples  drifting  away,  but  also
the  minds  of  good  men  that  follow  the  preachings  of  faith,
It.  83,  are  denoted,  as  the  Prophet  saith.  Blessed  are  ye  that  sow
^J  ^ upon  all  waters. And  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist;  The  voice
8. ' *  qfthe  Lord  is  upon  the  waters. In  this  place,  then,  what  is
denoted  by  the  title  of  ^  waters,'  saving  the  hearts  of  the  Elect,
which  by  the  understanding  of  Wisdom,  have  now  received
the  hearing  of  the  heavenly  voice  ? Touching  whom  it  is
rightly  said ;  And  weigheth  the  waters  by  measure.  Because
the  very  Saints,  who  by  the  Holy  Spirit  bearing  them  up  are
transported  on  high,  so  long  as  they  are  in  this  life,  that  they
may  not  swell  high  with  any  self-elation,  are  kept  down  by
certain  temptations,  that  they  may  never  have  the  power  to
advance  as  much  as  they  have  the  wish,  but  lest  they  should

Elifah,  with  great  gifU^  made  stffe.bf  wealmeuee. 401

be  exalted  by  pride,  there  takes  place  in  them  a  kind  of  Book
meaanre  of  thdr  rery  rirtuea.


10.  It  is  hence  that  Elijah,  after  that  by  so  many  achiere-
ments  he  had  advanced  on  high,  was  suspended  aloft  by  a
kind  of  measure,  when  he  afterwards  fled  from  Jezebel,  though
a  queen,  yet  only  a  weak  woman.  For  I  consider  with
myself  that  this  man  of  marrellous  power  drew  down  fire
from  hearen,  and  once  and  again  by  momentary  beseeching
consumed  the  captains  of  fifty  with  all  their  men,  by  a  word
shut  up  the  hearens  from  rain,  by  a  word  opened  the  heaTens
to  rain,  raising  the  dead,  foreseeing  the  sereral  things  to
come,  and,  lo,  again  it  occurs  to  mind,  with  what  dismay  he
fled  before  a  single  weak  woman.  I  see  the  n^an,  as  being
stricken  with  fear,  from  the  hand  of  Ood  seeking  death,  yet
not  obtaining  it,  from  the  hand  of  a  woman  shunning  death
by  taking  to  flight  For  he  sought  death,  whilst  he  fled,
saying,  U  is  enough;  nawj  O  Lord^  take  awag  mg  life:  fori  Kings
/  am  not  better  than  mg  fathers.  Whence  then  was  he  **'  **
so  powerful  as  to  perform  those  so  numerous  miracles?
whence  so  weak  as  to  be  dismayed  at  a  woman,  except  that

'  the  waters  are  weighed  with  measure;*  that  the  rery  Saints
of  God  should  at  once  prevail  greatly  through  the  power  of
God,  and  again  be  limited  by  a  kind  of  measure  through  their
own  infirmity.  In  those  powers  Elijah  learnt  what  he  had
received  from  God,  in  these  weaknesses  what  he  had  power
to  be  by  himself.  That  mightiness  was  power,  this  weakness
the  keeper  of  power.  In  these  powers  he  shewed  what  he
had  received,  in  these  weaknesses  that  which  he  had  received
he  kept  safe.  In  the  miracles  Elijah  was  to  be  brought  out  to
view,  in  the  weaknesses  he  was  to  be  preserved  secure.

11.  In  the  same  way  I  see  that  Paul,  encountering  9  Cor.
the  perils  of  rivers  and  robbers,  of  the  city  and  the  wil-  ^^'  ^
demess,  of  sea  and  land,  bridling  the  body  by  fasts  and
watchings,  undergoing  the  ills  of  cold  and  nakedness,  exer-
cising himself  watchfully  and  with  pastoral  care  to  the
safe-keeping  of  the  Churches,  being  caught  up  into  the
third  heaven,^  and  again  caught  up  into  Paradise,  at  once
heard  secret  words  which  it  is  not  permitted  to  man  to
utter,  and  yet  is  given  over  to  an  angel  of  Satan  to  be
tempted ;  be  prays  that  he  might  be  released,  and  is  not

VOL.  u.  D  d

402 Si.  PauF$  if^firmiiy  safely  to  him^  inslruclian  to  us.

^oB  98,  heard And  when  I  loo)c  to  the  mere  beginnings  of  his
Hygy^  conversion,  I  consider  with  myself  that  heavenly  pity  opens
the  heavens  to  him,  and  Jesus  shews  Himself  to  him  from
on  high. He  that  lost  the  light  of  the  body  for  a  time,
received  the  light  of  the  heart  for  evermore. He  is  sent
Aotf  9,  \0  Ananias,  he  is  called  A  chosen  vessel,  and  yet  from  that
same  city,  which  he  had  entered  after  the  vision  of  Jesus,
he departs  in  flight,  as  he  himself  bears  witness,  saying,
scor. Tn Damascus  the  governor  under  Aretas  the  king  kept
^1 '  gtuird  over  the  city  of  the  Damascenes,  desirous  to  appre*
hend  me  ;  and  through  a  window,  in  a  basket,  was  I  let
doum  by  the  wall,  and  so  escaped  his  hands. Unto  whom  1
will  take  leave  to  say,  *  O  Paul,  already  soest  thou  Jesus  in
heaven,  and  still  dost  thou  fly  man  on  earth  ? Art  thou
carried  into  Paradise,  art  thou  made  acquainted  with  secret
words  of  God,  and  still  art  thou  tempted  by  a  messenger  of
Satan? Whence  so  strong,  that  thou  art  caught  up to
heavenly  places,  whence  so  weak  that  thou  fliest  from  man
on  the  earth,  and  still  sufierest  hard  handling  from  a  mes-
senger of  Satan,  saving  that  the  Same,  Who  lifts  thee  on  high,
again  limits  thee  with  the  minutest  measuring,  that  both  in
thy  miracles  thou  shouldest  preach  to  us  the  power  of  God,
and again in thy  fear  cause us to  remember  our  own
infirmity?* Which  same  infirmity,  however,  that  it  may
not  draw  us  on  into  despair  when  it  buffets  us,  whilst  thou
wert  beseeching  Ood  touching  thine  infirmity,  because  tliou
wert  not  heard,  to  us  also  thou  hast  told  what  thou  didst  hear ;
s  Cor. My  grace  is  stffficient  for  thee ;  for  My  strength  is  made
**>  ^' perfect  in  weakness.

12.  Thus  by  the  plain  voice  of  God  it  is  shewn  that  the
guardian  of  power  is  frailty.  For  we  are  then  kept  to  good
effect  within,  when  by  God's  appointment  wo  arc  temptud
to  a  bearable  degree  witliout,  sometimes  by  bad  proiKsnsities,
sometimes  by  pressing  misfortunes.  For  to  these  likewise,
whom  we  know  to  have  been  men  of  mighty  virtues,  there
were  not  wanting  temptations  and  conflicts  fix)m  the  vices.
Hence  it  is  that  for  our  encouragement  the  same  great
Preacher  condescends  to  bring  to  view  things  of  that  kind
Bom.  7,  concerning  his  own  case,  saying,  /  see  another  law  in  my
^^' members  warring  against  the  law  qf  my  mind,  and  bringing

Saintsnoiraisedioohigh.  SpirUyal^min,*  and*iempe$t.*  408

me  into  edpHtity  to  the  law  qfein,  which  is  in  niy  memberi,  Booic
For  the  flesh  forces  down  below,  that  the  Spirit  may  iiot  "^
uplift,  and  the  Spirit  draws  Up  on  high,  that  the  flesh  majr
not  bring  to  the  ground.  The  Spirit  lids  up»  that  we  niay
not  lie  grovelling  in  the  lower  world,  the  flesh  li'eighll
down,  that  we  should  not  be  lifted  up  on  account  of  the
things  on  high.  If  the  flesh  tempted  us,  while  the  Spirit
did  not  uplift  us,  too  surely  by  the  absoluteness  of  it^
tempting  it  would  cast  us  down  below.  Rut  again,  if  the
Spirit  lifted  us  above,  while  the  flesh  did  not  tempt.  It  would
by  that  very  uplifting  prostrate  us  the  worse  in  the  fall  of
pride.  But  by  a  certain  regulating  method  it  tak^s  place,
that  whilst  each  one  of  the  Saints  is  already  indeed  trans-
ported on  high  inwardly,  but  is  still  tempted  outwardly,  he
neither  incurs  the  downfall  of  desperation,  nor  of  self-
exaltation  ;  seeing  that  neither  does  outward  temptation  bring
transgression  to  its  accomplishment,  because  the  interior
bent  draws  upwards ;  nor  again  does  this  interior  bent  lift
up  into  pride,  because  the  exterior  temptation  abases  whilst
it  weighs  down.  Thus  by  a  high  appointment  we  see  in  the
interior  advancement  what  we  receive,  in  the  exterior  short-
coming what  we  are,  and  by  a  strange  method  it  is  brought
to  pass  that  a  man  should  neither  be  lifted  up  on  the  ground
of  virtue,  nor  despair  on  the  ground  of  temptation,  because
while  the  Spirit  draws,  4nd  the  flesh  draws  back,  by  the
exactest  regulating  of  the  Interior  Judgment,  the  soul  is
balanced  in  a  kind  of  mean  above  the  things  below,  and
below  the  things  above. Therefore  it  is  well  said,

Ver.  26,  27.  When  He  made  a  decree  for  the  rain^  and  a
way  for  the  sounding  tempests,  then  did  He  see  it  and  declare
it;  He  prepared  it,  yea,  and  searched  it  out.

13.  By  *  rain'  the  sayings  of  those  that  preach  are  used  to vii.
be  denoted. Whence  it  is  said  by  Moses ;  Let  my  doctrine  be  Deat
waited  for  as  the  rain ;  whose  words,  that  is  to  say,  when  they  ^*»  *'
gently  persuade  are  *  rain,*  but  when  they  thunder  out  terrible
things  touching  the  Judgment  to  come,  they  are  '  sounding
tempests.' And  it  deserves  to  be  noted,  that  *  a  decree  is
made  for  the  rain,'  in  order  that  *  a  way  may  be  opened  for
the  sounding  tempests.' For  a  decree  has  been  set  to  the
preachers  themselves,  tliat  by living  they  fulfil  what  by

Dd2

404  [mw9  set  for  the  preaching  thai  made  way  for '  IViidom*

Job  88,  uttering  tbey  are  forward  to  recommend. For  the  autho-

' ritatiyeness  of  speaking  is  lost,  when  the  voice  is  not  snp-

'  ported  by  the  practice. For  here  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmisti

Ps.60,  Bui  unto  the  wicked  Ood  aaiih:  What  hast  thou  to  do  to

'  ^^'  declare  My  statutes,  or  that  thou  shouldest  take  My  covenant

in  thy  mouth?  seeing  thou  hatest  instruction,  and  castest  My

words  behind  thee. For  the  words  of  Ood  the  preacher  does

cast  behind  himself,  when  the  same  that  he  says  he  thinks

scorn  to  do. But  when  may  another  obey  his  sayings,  whilst

he  himself  rejects  in  practice  what  he  preaches  with  the

voice,  and  shews  not  to  hear  that  he  tells  ? Of  this  law  of

Mat  ft,  preaching  it  is  written ;  IVhosoevei'  therefore  shall  break  one

^  * of  these  least  commandments,  and  shall  teach  men,  he  shall

be  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven:  but  whoso  shall

do  and  teach  them,  the  same  stiall  be  called  great  in  the

kingdom  of  heaven. *  The  kingdom  of  heaven,*  we  see.  He

calls  the  present  Church; concerning  which  it  is  written,

UntAS^And  they  shall  gather  out  of  His  kingdom  all  things  that

^^' offend. For  in  the  Kingdom  Above  ^  offences*  that  should

have  to  be  gathered  out  thereof  do  not  take  place. He  then

that  breaks  in  practice,  and  teaches  the  like  in  words,  in  this

kingdom  of  heaven  shall  be  the  least,  in  the  other  not  even

the  least. Now  *  He  set  a  way  to  the  sounding  tempests,*

when  for  His  preachers  He  made  access  to  the  hearts  of  men

stricken  with  dread  of  the  Judgment  to  come. So  first  ^  a

law  is  set,'  that  afterwards  *  a  way  may  be  opened,'  because

that  voice  pierceth  the  heart  of  him  that  heareth,  which

maintains  by  practice  the  thing  that  it  has  sounded  with  the

lips. Now  it  was  then  when  ^  He  set  a  law  to  the  showers,

and  a  way  to  the  sounding  tempests,*  that  Ood  '  saw,  declared,

prepared,  and  searched*  this  *  Wisdom.*  By  a  mode  of  speech

customary  to  Holy  Writ,  for  Ood  to  see  is  a  phrase  for  causing

Geii.89,  us  to  see,  as  the  Lord  saith  to  the  righteous  man.  Now  I  know

^^* that  thoufeqrest  Ood. And  the  Israelites  are  forewarned;

Deut The  Lord  your  Ood  proveth  you,  to  know  whether  ye  love  the

^^f  ^' Lord  your  God,  i.  e.  *  that  He  may  make  you  to  know.* At

that  time,  then,  when  MI e  set  a  law  to  the  showers,*  i.  e.  gave

the  precept  of  watching  to the  preachers,  this  *  Wisdom'

made  Incarnate  He  caused  to  be  ^  seen  and  declared*  by  the

preachers,  to  be  ^  prepared  and  searched*  by  the  hearers.

Wisdamt  in  Herself  unseen,  in  man  ie  holy  fear. 405

Since  he  'prepares*  Her  for  himself,  whosoever  by  living  ^«

aright  is  procuring  Her favonrable  against the  Day  of ^

Judgment  And  observe  that  there  are  four  particulars
spoken  respecting  her.  For  he  says,  He  did  see  ii  and
declare  ii.  He  prepared  it^  yea.  He  searched  it.  Thus  He
*  saw,*  in  that  She  is  '  a  Likeness;*  He  *  declared  it,'  in  that
She  is  '  the  Word  ;*  *  prepared  it,'  in  that  She  is  a  remedy ;
and  *  searched  it,'  in  that  She  is  a  thing  hidden  from  sight
But  this,  viz.  that  the  Eternal  Wisdom  of  God  is  *  the
likeness'  and  *  the  Word'  of  the  Father,  when  is  it  pene-
trated by  the  mind  of  man  ?  For  who  might  understand
either  a  Word  apart  from  time,  or  a  Likeness  apart  from
limiting.  Therefore  there  was  need  for  something  to  be  said,
which  man  might  recognise  concerning  Her  by  himself;
whence  it  is  fitly  subjoined ;

Ver.  28.  And  unto  man  He  said,  *  Behold,  the  fear  of  the
Lord,  that  is  Wisdom;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  under*
standing.

14.  As  though  it  were  spoken  in  plain  speech;  'Man,  viii.
turn  back  to  thine  own  self;  sift  thoroughly  the  secrets  of
thine  own  heart  If  thou  findest  out  that  thou  dost  fear  Ood,
surely  it  is  plain  that  of  this  Wisdom  thou  art  full.  Which
same  if  thou  art  not  able  to  learn  what  in  herself  She  is,
meanwhile  thou  henceforth  findest  what  She  is  in  thyself.
For  She  that  is  feared  in  herself  by  the  Angels,  in  thee  is
called  '  the  fear  of  the  Lord.'  Because  it  is  certain  that  thou
possessest  Her,  if  it  is  not  uncertain  that  thou  dost  fear  God.'
Hence  also  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist;  The  beginning  of Pm.iii,
Wisdom  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  because  She  then  begins  to  *^*
penetrate  the  heart,  when  She  disturbs  it  by  the  dread  of  the
final  Judgment  Therefore  the  Word  of  God  draws  Itself  in
to  our  littleness;  just  as  a  father,  when  he  speaks  to  his  little
child,  in  order  that  he  may  be  able  to  be  understood  by  him,
talks  stammeringly  of  his  own  accord.  For  because  we  are
unable  to  penetrate  the  nature  of  Wisdom,  what  She  is  in
herself,  by  the  condescension  of  God  we  have  heard  what
She  is  in  us,  when  it  is  said.  Behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that
is  Wisdom.  But  because  he  really  understands  the  force  of
Divine  fear,  who  keeps  himself  from  all  bad  practices,  it  is
rightly  subjoined;  And  to  depart  from  evil  is  understanding.

406 JoVi  loHl  words  represent  the  Church  in  last  days.

Job  S9|So  then*  the  things  thai  come  after,  that  they  are  full  of  the

— -I —  spirit  of  prophecy,  the  words  of  the  sacred  history  them-
'  selves  bear  testimony,  whereas  it  is  said,

C.  xxix.  I.  Moreover  Job  continued  his  p($rablef  and  said.

i3C. 16.  For  because  a  pairable  is  a  name  for  a  likeness,  it

plainly  appears  that  through  a  form  of  exterior  words  he

speaks  mysteries,  who  with  reference  to  speaking  is  recorded

ALLBo.  to  hare  ^  taken  up  a  parable.*  For  when  he  relates  his  own
circumstances,  he  is  telling  all  the  things  that  are  to  come  to
Holy  Church,  and  through  the  thing  that  he  himself  under-
goes he  points  out  what  die  should  undergo.  But  sometimes
he  so  mixes  the  words  of  his  own  history,  that  he  sounds  not
of  any  thing  allegorical,  while  sometimes  he  so  utters  his  own
sorrows  as  though  he  were  giving  utterance  in  the  voice  of
the  sorrowing  Church.  But  in  the  last  part  of  his  discourse,
he  designates  the  last  time  of  the  Church,  when  her  ad-
versaries, i.  e.  carnal  persons,  or  heretics  and  pagans,  whom
she  now  busies  herself  to  repress  by  the  authority  of  wisdom,
being  set  up  with  unbridled  boastfulness,  she  is  obliged  to
put  up with,  while  derided. Whence  in this  discoiu^e

Job  80,  likewise  it  is  said  i  But  now  they  that  are  younger  than  I
have  me  in  derision^  whose  fathers  I  would  have  disdained
to  put  with  the  dogs  of  my  flock.  And  the  very  principle  of
the  arrangement  requires  that  by  the  last  words  of  blessed
Job,  the  last  days  of  Holy  Church  should  be  denoted,  when,
persecution  increasing,  she  is  forced  to  bear  the  undisguised
voices  of  heretics,  when  those  motions  of  their  hearts,  which
they  now  cover  up  within  the  depths  of  their  thoughts,  they
then  disclose  in  the  utterance  of  error  made  manifest.  For
now,  as  it  is  said  by  John,  the  dragon  is  imprisoned  and  held

BeT.80,  fast  in  the  bottomless  pit^  because  the  wickedness  of  the  devil
is  hidden  from  sight  in  their  crafty  hearts.  But,  as  is  there  said,
the  dragon  shall  bo  brought  forth  out  of  tlie  bottomless  pit,
because  whatsoever  is  now  covered  over  from  fear,  then  against
the  Church  openly  out  of  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  is  all  that
serpent's  venom  brought  to  light  For  now  the  envenomed
feeling  hides  itself  from  sight  under  a  flattering  tongue,  and

»  The  inferoDM  ia  Dot  obviouM. It be  it  going  to  ipeak  of  them  in  biniaelf
Memfl  to  be  thii: that  Job  deolaret at  Her  type,
theee  tbingi  to  be  <  Wiwlom/  beoaute

Church  harder  pret^ed  at  tasi  hff force  and  by  arguinehU.  407

malevolence  of  craft  as  it  were  covers  itself  with  a  kind  of  Book
bottomless  pit  of  dissembling.  Now  the  Lord,  As  it  is  ex-
pressed  by  the  voice  of  the  Psalmist,  galhereth  the  wdiers  ofV^M^I.
the  9ea  ae  in  a  skin.  For  the  '  skin*  is  carnal  thinking.  So
'  the  waters  of  the  sea  are  gathered  in  a  skin,'  when  the
bitterness  of  a  froward  mind  does  not  burst  forth  outwardly
into  the  voice  of  unhallowed  liberty.  Surely  the  time  shall
come,  when  the  froward  and  the  carnal  speak  forth  against
her  with  unreserved  voice  that  which  they  now  go  about
with  secret  thought.  The  time  shall  come  when  they  shall
oppress  the  Catholic  Church  not  only  with  unjust  words,
but  with  cruel  wounds.

16.  For  from  her  adversaries  the  Church  suffers  persecu-
tion in  two  ways,  viz.  either  by  words  or  by  swords.  Now
when  she  bears  persecution  by  words,  her  wisdom  is  put  in
exercise,  when  by  swords,  her  patience.  Now  persecutions
of  words  we  do  now  too  as  well  daily  undergo  at  the  hands  of
heretics,  when  heretics  themselves  flatter  us  with  crafty
tongues  and  with  feigned  humility,  but  the  persecutions  of
swords  are  destined  to  follow  towards  the  end  of  the  world,  that
the  grains  to  be  stored  up  in  the  heavenly  granaries  may  be
the  more  genuinely  cleared  of  the  chaff  of  sins,  the  more  straitijr
they  are  bruised  witii  affliction.  Then  all  the  Elect,  that
may  be  caught  in  that  tribulation,  call  to  mind  these  times
when  now  the  Church  secures  the  peace  of  the  faith,  when
she  holds  under  the  proud  necks  of  heretics,  not  by  the
potency  of  her  highness,  but  by  tiie  yoke  of  reason.  They
call  to  mind  ourselves,  who  are  passing  quiet  times  of  faith,
who,  though  we  be  straitened  in  the  wars^  of  the  nations^  yet
are  not  driven  to  extremity  in  the  sayings  of  Fatiiers.  Thus
blessed  Job  bearing  a  type  of  Holy  Church,  which  is  then
found  in  these  straits,  and  yet  remembers  herself  of  our
tranquillity,  as  I  said,  describes  the  particulars  of  himself
past,  and  tells  the  particulars  destined  to  come  to  others,
saying ;

Ver.  2.  fVfio  would  give  me  tfiat  I  might  be  as  in  the
months  past  f

17.  For  Holy  Church  being  borne  down  with  sorrows  is  to x.
say  many  like  things. For  it  shall  be  for  her  ib  be  besieged

i»  Alhidiiig  to  fh»  hoftUities  of  the  Lombards  eipaoialiy.

408  The  Churchy  ieeing  many  faU^  shall  lotigfar  past  times.

Job  »,  with  such  great  tribulationa,  as  with  great  sighing  to  long  for
—^ —  these  times,  which  we  undergo  with  great  sorrow.  So  then
'  let  her  say,  let  her  say  in  the  voice  of  blessed  Job,  fVho
would  give  me  thai  I  might  be  as  in  the  months  past  f  For
because  an  appointed  number  of  days  has  the  name  of
^  mouths,'  what  eke  does  he  signify  by  the  title  of  months,
but  the  gatherings  of  souls?  For  days,  while  they  are
gathered  in  months,  are  removed  away,  because  in  this  time
as  well  Holy  Church,  while  she  gathers  in  souls  shining
bright  with  the  light  of  truth,  hides  them  in  the  interior
depths. Sometimes  also  a  month  is  put  for  perfection,  as

li.  66,  when  the  Prophet  says,  It  shall  be  a  month  from  a  month ;
i.  e.  perfection  in  rest  to  those,  to  whom  there  may  now  be
perfection  in  practice.  So  let  her  remember  her  perfection  of
old,  let  her  bring  back  to  mind  with  what  preaching  of  hers,
by  souls  gathered  in,  she  carried  off  her  gains,  and  being
straitened  by  tribulations,  let  her  say,  fVho  would  give  me
that  I  might  be  as  in  the  months  of  old  f  In  which  same
months,  who  and  what  he  was,  he  subjoins  in  telling  over,
/wying;

Ver.  3.  Js  in  the  dags  whett  Ood  preserved  me ;  when  His
lamp  shined  upon  my  head^  and  when  by  His  Ught  I  walked
through  darkness.
xi.  18.  For  then,  persecution  forcing  thereto,  she  sees  multi-
tudes of  the  frail  fall  from  her,  whom  now  as  a  mother  she
cherishes  as  her  litde  ones  within  the  bosom  of  peace,  and
keeps  close  within  the  qiiiet  cradles  of  faith,  seeing  that  being
mixed  with  the  strong  they  are  nurtured  by  the  very  tran-
quillity of  the  faith.  But  then  many  such  are  destined  to
&11,  and  through  the  bowels  of  charity,  whatever  it  sustains
in  the  damage  of  the  litde  ones,  the  mind  of  the  perfect
laments  that  itself  undergoes.  For  erery  damage  of  the
weak  is  by  compassion  made  to  pass  to  the  hearts  of  the

a  Cor. stnmg. Whence  it  is  said  by  Paul,  Who  is  weak,  and  I  am

il>  ^*  not  weak  f  who  is  offended,  and  I  bum  not  f  For  a  man  is
perfect  in  such  proportion  as  he  perfecUy  feels  the  sorrows
of  others.  Whence  Holy  Church,  being  brought  to  a  pass
by  the  weak  ones  Ming  at  that  time,  shall  say  with  right.  As
in  the  days  when  Ood  preserved  me;  because  herself  she
then  accounts  to  fall  in  those,  who  now  sees  herself  in  these

Godfa  light  shining  on  the  head. Youth  <^the  Church.  409

to  be kept  safe. And  it  is  well  said,  When  His  lamp  Book
shined  upon  my  head,  and  when  by  His  light  I  walked  ^^*
through  darkness* For  by  the  teitn  of  a '  lamp*  the  light  of
Holy  Scriptare  is  represented,  whereof  the  Shepherd  of  the
Charch  himself  saith,  We  have  also  the  word  of  prophecy^FBti,
more  sure  ;  whereunlo  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed^  as  unto  ^^'
a  lamp  that  shineth  in  a  dark  place^  until  the  day  dawn  and
the  day-star  arise  in  your  hearts. And  the  Psalmist  saith,
Thy  word  is  a  lamp  unto  myfeet^  and  a  light  unto  my  path.  Pi.  1I9,
Now  because  our  topmost  part  is  the  mind,  the  mind  is
rightly  styled  by  the  dedgnation  of  '  head.' Whence  it  is
said  by  the  Psalmist,  77tou  host  anointed  my  head  with  oil.  PbM^.
As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms,  *  Thou  hast  filled  my  soul  with
the  fatness  of  charity.' And  so  now  ^  the  lamp  shines  upon
the  head'  of  the  Church,  because  the  sacred  Oracles  enlighten
the  darkness  of  our  minds,  that  in  this  darksome  place  of  the
present  life,  whilst  we  receive  the  light  of  the  word  of  GK>d,
we  should  see  what  things  are  to  be  done. Now  she  ^  walks
by  His  light  in  darkness,'  because  the  Holy  Church  Universal,
though  it  penetrate  not  the  secrets  of  another's  thought,
because  as  it  were  it  does  not  know  the  face  in  the  night,
yet  it  sets  the  steps  of  good  practice,  being  governed  by  the
light  of  Heavenly  Revelation. It  goes  on  ;

Ver.  4.  As  I  was  in  the  days  of  my  youths  wlien  God  was
secretly  in  my  tabernacle.

19.  As  of  each  individual  man,  so  is  the  age  of  Holy xii.
Church  described. For  she  was  a  little  one,  when  fresh
from  the  birth  she  was  unable  to  preach  the  Word  of  Life.
Hence  it  is  said  of  her.  My  sister  is  a  little  one^  and  she  hath  Cant,  s,
no  breasts; in  this  way,  that  Holy  Church,  before  she
made  progress  by  accessions  of  virtue,  was  not  able  to  yield
the  teats  of  preaching  to  the  weak  ones  her  hearers. But
the  Church  is  called  '  adult'  when  being  wedded  to  the
Word  of  God,  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  office  of
preaching  she  is  with  young  in  the  conception  of  children,
with  whom  by  exhorting  she  travails,  whom  by  converting
she  brings  forth. Of  this  age  of  hers  it  is  said  to  the  Lord ;
77ie  young  maidens  have  loved  Thee. For  all  the  Churches,  Cant,  i,
which  constitute  one  Catholic Church,  are  called  young^'
maidenSf  not  now  aged  by  rin,  but  young  ones  by  grace,  not

410 The  Jewi  to  be  converted.  Ood  present  within  man.

Job  99,  barren  by  old  age,  but  by  the  age  of  the  soul  fitted  for

*' spiritual  firuitfulness. Accordingly  then,  when  in  those  days

*  being  as  it  were  enfeebled  by  a  kind  of  old  age  she  hath  not

strength  to  bring  forth  children  by  preaching,  she  calls  to

mmd  the  bygone  Aruitlulnessy  saying,  Am  I  was  in  the  days

of  my  youth. Though  after  those  days  wherein  she  is  borne

down,  yet,  tliis  notwithstanding,  now  at  length  towards  the

actual  end  of  times,  she  is  empowered  with  a  mighty  efficacy

of  preaching. For  the  Gentiles  being  taken  in  to  the  full,

all  the  Israelitish  people  that  shall  then  be  found  she  draws

Bom. into  the  bosom  of  tlie  faith. Since  it  is  written  ;  Until  the

86.' '  fulness  of  the  Oentiles  be  come  in^  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be

saved. But  before  those  times  there  shall  be  days,  in  the

which  she  shall  appear  for  a  little  while  borne  down  by  her

adversaries,  when  too  she  remembers  these  days,  saying.

As  I  was  in  the  days  of  my  youth;  when  God  was  sec^-etly

in  my  tabernacle.

20.  What  in  this  place  do  we  take  the  *  tabernacle*  for  but
the  dwelling-place  of  the  mind  i  Because  by  all  that  we  do
with  taking  thought,  we  dwell  in  the  counsel  of  our  heart.
But  whoever  in  silence  thinks  of  the  precepts  of  God,  to  him
*  God  is  secretly  in  his  tabernacle.'  For  he  had  seen  the
dwelling-place  of  his  heart  to  be  before  the  eyes  of  God,
Pf.  19,  who  said.  And  the  meditation  of  my  heart  always  in  Thy
sight.  For  outward  deeds  are  open  to  the  eyes  of  men,  but
widely  and  incomparably  more  our  interior  and  minutest
thoughts  are  open  to  the  eyes  of  God.  For^  as  it  is  written,
all  things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  Him.  And
oftentimes  in  the  outward  deed  we  are  afraid  to  appear  dis-
ordered before  the  eyes  of  men,  and  in  the  interior  thought
are  not  afraid  of  the  regard  of  Ilim,  Whom,  whilst  lie  sees  all
things,  wo  see  not.  For  we  are  much  more  discernible  by
God  within  than  we  are  by  men  without.  And  hence  all  the
Saints  scan  themselves  both  within  aud  without  on  every
side,  and  are  in  fear  of  either  shewing  themselves  blame-
worthy outwardly,  or  wicked  inwardly  to  the  invisible  seeing.
It  is  hence  that  the  living  creatures,  which  are  seen  by  the
£s.i, 18. Prophet,  are  recorded  to  be  ^  full  of  eyes  round  about  and
Bsr!^4'  within.'  For  he  that  orders  his  outward  circumstances  re-
6.  &  8.  spectably,  but  disregards  the  inward,  has  eyes  *  round  about'

Sainis  regard  Ood  tDtlhin^  not  men  without 411

but  not '  within.'  But  all  the  Saints,  becanae  ibey  at  once  Book
scan  their  exterior  ways  round  and  round  that  they  may  ^
furnish  good  examples  in  themselves  to  their  brethreh,  and
watchfully  mark  their  interior  ways,  because  they  are  pro-
Tiding  themselves  irreproachable  for  the  regarding  eye  of  the
Interior  Judge,  are  described  as  having  eyes  both  '  round
about  and  within ;'  and  that  they  may  please  Ood,  even  more
do  they  make  tliemselves  complete  within  their  interior  self,  as
it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist  as  well  of  Holy  Church,  AU  the  glory  Pi*  46,
of  her  ^  the  king*$  daughter^  in  from  within.  But  because  she
keeps  her  outward  things  also  irreproachable,  he  added  with
justice  concerning  her;  Clothed  about  in  clothing  ofwtoughi
gold  with  embroidery.  That  she  should  be  at  once  beauti-
Ail  to  herself  *  within,'  and  to  others  *  without,'  both  advanc-
ing herself  by  interior  glory,  and  instructing  others  by  the
outward  examples  of  deeds.  Thus  then  let  blessed  Job  say
in  himself,  yea,  let  him  say  in  the  person  of  the  Church
Universal,  When  Ood  was  secretly  in  my  tabernacle.  For
that  he  may  make  it  evident  how  much  he  had  advanced  with-
in, he  tells,  that '  God  was  secretly  in  his  tabernacle.'  That  he
may  also  shew  the  deeds  of  righteousness  to  what  extent  he
outwardly  kept  them,  he  adds ;

Ver.  5.  IVhen  the  Almighty  was  yet  with  me;  and  when
my  servants  were  about  me.

21.  Now all  that  stand  in  awe  of  the  divine  precepts  xiii.
become  Ood's  *  tabernacle.' Hence  as  we  have  already  said
above,  ^  Truth'  saith  by  Himself  of  the  man  that  keeps  His
commandments,  I  and  My  Father  will  come  and  make  Otir  John
€Lbode  with  him. Contrariwise  the  wicked  severally,  whereas  ^^'  ^*
they  do  not  aim  at  the  things  within,  pour  themselves  forth
without  in  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts. Whence  it  is  said  to
them  by  the  Prophet,  Turn  back  to  the  heart  within^  Oyeu.46fi.
transgressors.  And  again,  JVoe  to  you  that  devise  a  vain  thing.  Mio.  9,
Since  in  their  actions  they  are  afraid  of  men,  whom  they  see  ^*
with  bodily  sight,  and  Ood,  Whotn  they  do  not  see,  they  do  not
account  to  be  present  to  them. Contrary  whereunto  it  is
said  in  commendation  of  a  righteous  person,  seeing  that  he
disregarded  the  king  of  Egypt,  and  obeyed  the  command-
ments of  Ood,  For  he  endured^  as  seeing  Him  Who  f9Htb.ll,
invisible. For  the  wicked  ruler  of  the  earth  he  as  it  were  '^'

413  Walking  as  in  QoJPn  tight. The  Church's  '  servants:

Job  99,  saw  not,  in  thai  he  banished  him  from  the  eyes  of  the  heart
Y— ^ —  But  the  King  Invisible  ^  as  seeing/  ^  he  endured,'  because
'from  the  regarding  of  His  fear  he  turned  not  aside  the  eye
of  the  soul. So  Holy  Church  being  taken  then  in  great
tribulations,  when  she  sees  many  by  evil  imagining  depart
from  Qody  surely  she  sees  the  tabernacle  of  their  mind  on
God*s  departing  to  remain  empty,  and  justly  lamenting,  she
says,  When  Qod  was  secretly  in  my  tabernacle. By  which
words,  and  not  inappropriately,  the  feigning  of  religion  is
likewise  bewailed,  because  there  are  those  even  now  that  aim
not  to  be,  but  to  seem  Christians. These  without  question
have  God  in  public,  not  *  in  secret.' But  Holy  Church
desires  to  have  God  ^  in  secret,*  because  He  regards  those
really  fidthftd  ones,  whom  He  knows  to  be  holding  on  to  the
life  of  fiuth  with  complete  affection.  Which  same,  as  well  also
with  reference  to  the  external  uprightness  of  her  activity,
saith, When  the  Almighty  was  yet  with  me:  when  my
servants  were  about  me. '  Servants'  surely  those  are  called,
who  do  the  bidding  of  the  heavenly  precepts. Whence  the
I1.8, 18.  Lord  saith  by  the  Prophet,  Behold  /,  and  my  servants  which
Jolm3i,  the  Lord  hath  given  me. And  again  in  the  Gospel,  Servants^,
^' have  ye  any  meat? And  so  now  ^  the  servants  are  round
about  her,'  because  in  all  nations  almost  there  are  found
those  that  keep  the  commandments  of  heaven,  and  obey  the
rules  of  spiritual  discipline. Which  servants,  too  truly,  shall
then  be  lacking  to  do  her  service,  when  the  wicked  doers,  that
shall  be  found,  despise  her  spiritual  precepts. It  goes  on ;
Ver.  6. When  I  washed  my  feet  with  butter.
xiv. 32*  Whereas  we  have  already  frequently  said  that  Christ
and  the  Church  are  one  person,  He,  tliat  is  to  say,  the  Head
of  that  Body,  and  She  the  Body  of  that  Head ;  these  words  are
to  be  understood  after  the  voice  of  the  Head  in  one  way,  after
the  voice  of  the  Body  in  another  way. Whom  then  do  we
take  for  *  the  feet'  of  the  Lord,  but  the  holy  Preachers. Of
LeT.26,  whom  He  saith.  And  I  will  walk  in  them. Thus  ^  the  feet
are  washed  with  butter,'  because  the  holy  Preachers  are
filled  to  the  ftdl  with  the  fatness  of  good  works. For,  as  we
have  already  said  above,  scarcely  is  the  mere  preaching
itself  carried  on  without  something  being  done  wrong. For
•  Pmn-i  Yalf .  The  Greek  diniinuti?e  banlly  bean  Uiif.

Feet  qf  Preachers  to^Uhed  in  cleaneing  or  cheering. 418

any  man preaching  is  either  drawn  on  into  some  slight  Book
indignation,  if  he  is  despised,  or  into  some  little  glorying,  if  he  •


is  reverenced  by  those  that  hear  him. Whence  the  Apostles

too  had  their  feet  washed,  that  from  any  slight  defilement

contracted  in  the  act  of  preaching  itself  they  might  be

eleansed  as  from  a  sort  of  dust  collected  by  a  jonmey. And

blessed  James  saith,  My  breihreuy  he  not  many  masters,  ^^^'h

And  a  little  after,  For  in  many  things  we  offend  all. Thns

*  the  feet  are  washed  with  butter,*  because  the  dust  gathered

by  gloiy  in  preaching  is  steeped  and  cleansed  by  the  fatness

of  good  works. Or  otherwise  '  the  feet  are  washed  with

butter,*  when  the  wages  owing  are  paid  to  the  holy  Preachers

by  those  that  hear,  and  those  whom  the  imposed  labour  of

preaching  exhausts,  the  richness  of  good  practice  exhibited

by  the  disciples  cheers;  not  that  they  preach  for  this  that

they  may  be  fed,  but  that  they  are  therefore  fed,  that  they

may  preach;  i.  e.  that  ihey  may  hold  up  to  preach ;  not  so

that  die  action  of  the  preacher  should  pass  into  the  aim  of

getting  support,  but  that  the  ministering  of  support  should

be  made  subsenrient  to  the  usefulness  of  preaching. Whence

by  good  preachers  it  is  not  for  the  sake  of  the  means  of

living  that preaching is rendered,  but for the  sake  of

preaching  that  the  means  of  living  are  accepted. And

as  often  as what  is  wanted  is  bestowed  on those  that

preach  by  those  that  bear  them,  they  are  not  used  to

take  delight  in  the  benefit  of  the  good  things,  but  in  the

reward  of  those  bestowing  them* Whence  it  is  said  by

Paul,  Not  because  I  desire  a  gift,  but  I  desire  fruit. For  PWl.  4,

the  *  gift*  is  the  actual  thing  that  is  bestowed;  but  the  fruit *

thereof  is  if  with  a  kindly  disposition  a  thing  be  bestowed

in  the  pursuit  of  the  fiiture  recompense. So  we  receive  the

gift  in  the  thing,  the  fruit  thereof  in  the  heart. And  because

the  Apostle  was  fed  rather  by  the  recompense  of  his  disciples

than  by  the  benefaction,  he  avouches  that  he  *  seeks  not  a

gift,*  but '  fruit* Hence  he  straightway  added,  saying.  But

I  have  all  and  abound. Therefore '  the  feet  are  washed  with

butter,'  when  the  holy  preachers,  as  we  said,  worn  out  by  the

actual  preaching  itself,  are  regaled  with  the  good  deeds  of

their  hearers. For  the  weary  *  feet*  he  had  '  anointed  with

butter,'  who  heard.  Because  the  bowels  of  the  Saints  ar^  Philem.

7.

iliHolyChurchfasJob,washesi/te/eei  of  weak  ones  by  teaching.

Job  29,  Threshed  by  the  brother.  With  thi«  *  butter  the  foot  was
Y^ —  anointed.*  which  was  held  fast  in  fetters,  saying,  The  Lord
s  Tim.  *  give  mercy  unto  the  house  qf  OneHphorus :  for  he  oft  refreshed
^*  ^^*  me^  and  was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain.  So  then  if  by  the
voice  of  the  Head  we  form  our  estimate  of  the  words,  we  do
rightly  as  has  been  said  in  taking  ^  the  feet*  for  preachers*

38.  But  if  we  are  to  interpret  these  words  in  the  voice  of
the  Body  alone,  then  the  feet  of  the  Church  are  the  ministers
of  inferior  works,  which  whilst  they  enforce  the  things  that
are  without  for  necessary  purposes,  by  the  lowest  ministration
stick  to  the  ground  like  feet  But  they  that  are  at  the  head,
who  are  intent  on  the  pursuit  of  instruction,  ought  with  heed-
ful care  to  question  the  hearts  of  the  busied,  and  by  the
voice  of  frequent  admonition  to  administer  to  them  that
pouring  in  of  richness  which  they  themselves  as  disengaged
receive.  For  because  in  one  body  the  members  are  interested
for  one  another  reciprocally,  just  as  our  outermost  parts  are
stayed  up  by  their  ministrations,  so  it  is  necessary  that  their
interior  parts  should  be  filled  by  our  pursuits.  When  then
to  persons  devoted  to  the  extremest  offices  the  holy  doctors
preach  the  anointing  oil  of  our  Lord's  Incarnation,  they
*  wash  the  feet  witli  the  butter*  of  utterance.  Moreover  the
feet  are  accustomed  to  be  lacerated  by  the  mere  ruggedness
of  the  way;  whence  it  is  altogether  difficult  at  once  to  go  a
journey  in  the  earthly  actions  of  this  life,  aud  not  sustain  any
wounds  at  all  from  the  exertion  of  the  journey.  And  so
when  the  rulers  keeping  watch  call  back  to  their  heart  within
their  hearers  engrossed  with  exterior  concerns,  that  they  may
ascertain  what  evil  things  they  have  committed  amidst  the
very  deeds  allowed  to  be  done,  and  that  what  they  find  out
they  may  bewail,  ^  they  wash  tlie  feet  with  butter;*  because
to  the  wounds  of  these  persons  they  administer  the  ointments
of  penitence.  Therefore  let  Holy  Church  being  unspeakably
afflicted  remember  how  in  the  time  of  her  peace  she  purified
by  the  word  of  exhortation  even  the  furthest  members  in
herself,  and  let  her  say,  IVlien  I  washed  my  feet  with  butter.
Hist.  Which  it  is  wonderfully  interesting  to  view  in  the  case  of
blessed  Job,  who  amidst  so  many  cares  of  property,  so  many
interests  for  children,  so  many  engagements  of  sacrifices,
preached  to  his  dependents,  howsoever  the  very  farthest,

Oii/rom  the  Rock^  grace  and  knowledge  from  Ohrisi.  415

the  good  things  of  the  life  ensuing,  that  those  he  might  Book
inoculate  touching  heavenly  things,  who  were  working  for  him  ■


at  earthly  services.  What  do  we  Bishops  say  to  all  this,  who
to  those  committed  to  us  care  not  to  render  the  word  of  life,
when  a  wedded  husband,  neither  the  secular  garb,  nor  the
management  of  large  means  were  able  to  debar  the  office
of  preaching.  But  saving  the  historical  verity,  let  us  now  Allbo.
return  to  the  words  of  Holy  Church,  who  tells  by  blessed
Job,  i.  e.  by  the  mouth  of  a  Member  of  her  own,  how  great
are  the  tilings  that  she  shall  suffer  in  the  last  time,  when
she  remembers  her  past  fortunes,  when  by  that  same  rich-
ness of  the  word  the  life  of  those  in  action  was  cleansed.
Who  in  more  fully  following  out  that  same  watchfulness  of
her  preachers  adds;

Jnd  (he  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  oil.

24.  That  by  the  title  of  a  rock  Christ  is  denoted,  the  great xv.
Preacher avouches,  saying, Jnd that rock was Christ,  i  Cor.
Which  very  '  rock'  doth  now  *  pour  out  rivers  of  oil'  for  the '
use  of  Holy  Church,  because  Uie  Lord  by  speaking  therein
gives  out  the  preachings  of  the  interior  anointing. '  From
this  Rock  that  river  of  oil  issued  forth,'  the  book  of  Matthew,
the  book  of  Mark,  the  book  of  Luke,  and  the  book  of  John.
In  the  several  regions  of  this  world  for  all  the  preachings  she
put  forth,  this  '  Rock  poured  out'  as  many  *  rivers  of  oil'  by  the
mouths  of  the  Apostles. As  many  times  still  *  a  river  of  oil
is  poured  out  from  this  Rock,'  as  often  as  to  the  minds  of  the
hearers,  to  be  anointed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  those  things  are
explained  which  are  spoken  concerning  Christ  in  the  old
Books. And  they  are  called  ^  rivers  of  oil,'  because  they  run
out  and  anoint;  in  which  same  he  that  is  dipped  is  anointed,
and  he  that  is  anointed  is  fattened  within. Of  which  fatness
doubtless  it  is  that  the  Psalmist  saith,  Let  my  soul  beJUled  as  Pt.S8,5.
with  marrow  andfatness.  It  may  be  that  by  the  designation  of
oil  the  actual  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  denoted,  whereof
it  is  said  by  the  Prophet ; And  the  yoke  shall  rot  at  the  Is.  lO,
presence  of  the  oil. For  *  the  yoke  doth  rot  at  the  presence'**
of  the  oil,'  because  whilst  we  are  anointed  with  the  grace  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  wo  are  set  free  from  the  bondage  of  our
captivity;  and  whereas  the  proud  dominion  of  the  evil  spirit
is  thrown  off,  the  yoke  is  broken  in  pieces,  wherewith  the

410 The  Church  in  good  toarks  as  rulers  in  the  gale.

Job  38,  necks  of  our  liberty  were  borne  down.  Of  this  oil  again  it  is
. ""  '  written ;  A  vineyard  was  made  to  my  beloved  on  the  hom^  a
l8.  ft,  {.child  of  oil.  For  ^  a  child  of  oil/  the  faithful  people  is  called,
which  is  engendered  to  the  faith  of  God  by  the  interior
anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  so  at  that  time  let  Holy
Church,  being  borne  down  by  countless  sorrows,  recal  to
remembrance  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  and  the  marvellous
preachings  which  are  her^s  now,  and  let  her  bewail  her  own
silence,  saying.  The  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  oil.  To
which  words  he  filly  subjoins;

Ver.  7 — 10.  When  I  toenl  out  to  the  gate  qf  the  city^  and
in  the  street  they  prepared  me  a  chair  f  The  young  men
saw  me  and  hid  themselves^  and  the  old  men  rose  up  and
stood.  The  princes  ceased  to  speak,  and  laid  the  finger  on
the  mouth.  The  rulers  held  their  peacOy  and  their  tongue
cleaved  to  their  mouth.  .^

xvi.  25.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  ancients,  that  the  elders
should  sit  together  in  the  gates,  and  judge  the  cases  of  those
entering  in,  that  so  the  people  of  the  city  might  be  the  more
peaceful,  in  proportion  as  it  was  not  allowed  to  those  at
variance  to  enter  in.  Now  we  in  revering  the  sacred  history
hold  it  certain  that  all  this  blessed  Job  did  for  the  sake  of  the
observance  of  just  dealing,  and  we  are  led  to  the  investigating
the  mysteries  of  the  allegory.  What  then  is  denoted  by  *  the
gate  of  the  city*  saving  every  good  action,  by  which  the  soul
enters  in  to  the  company  of  the  heavenly  Kingdom  ?  Hence
P8.  Pi  ^be  Prophet  saith ;  Thou,  that  liftest  me  up  /rotn  the  gates
of  death,  that  I  may  declare  all  Thy  praises  in  the  gates  of
the  daughter  qf  Sion.  For  ^  the  gates  of  death*  are  bad
actions,  which  drag  to  destruction ;  but  because  *  Sion*  is
the  word  for  '  a  viewing,*  ^  the  gates  of  Sion*  we  interpret
good  actions,  by  which  we  enter  into  the  Country  Above,
that  we  may  view  the  glory  of  our  King.  But  what  is  denoted
by  the  seat  but  the  authority  of  mastership.  Now  ^  a  street*
in  the  Greek  tongue  is  equivalent  to  ^  breadth.'  And  so  now
Holy  Church  goes  forth  to  the  gate  of  the  city,  because  that
she  may  obtain  access  to  the  heavenly  country,  she  puts
herself  out  in  holy  actions.  For  whom  there  is  ^a  seat
prepared  in  the  street,*  because  in  the  breadth  of  high
authority  she  displays  the  freedom  of  her  mastership. For


18.  14.

Holy  Church  feared  by  the  lights  honoured  by  the  grave.  417

she  that  proclaims  with public announcement  the  right  Book
things  she  has  a  perception  of  as  it  were  '  sits  in  the  street 1-


on  the  seat/  in  that  she  fears  no  one  for  her  preaching,  and
oppressed  bj  alarms  for  no  man  buries  herself  under  silence.
Does  not  she  in  public  sit  in  command  to  teach,  whom  at
one  and  the  same  time  truth  in  perceiving  and  power  in
teaching  bear  up  ?  But  whilst  he  *  went  forth  to  the  gate,
and  sat  in  the  street  on  the  seat,*  what  was  done  by  the
light-minded,  what  by  the  grave,  he  adds,  saying ;

Ver.  8.  The  young  men  saw  mo  and  hid  themselves^  and
the  old  men  rose  up  and  stood.

20.  If  we  give  heed  to  the  history,  the  things  that  he  said  xvii.
we  believe,  if  to  the  allegory,  we  see  the  things  that  he
foretold;  for  those  use  to  be  called  *  young  men'  who  are  not
burdened  with  any  weightiness  of  counsels.  But  Holy
Scripture  is  used  to  call  those  '  elders,'  not  who  are  ripe  by
amount  of  years  alone,  but  by  ancientness  of  character.
Hence  it  was  said  by  one  that  was  wise:  For  venerable  o&f  Wbd.4,

8  0

age  is  not  that  qf  long  time,  nor  counted  by  the  number  of  '
years;  but  the  understanding  qf  a  man  is  grey  hairs^  and  a
spotless  life  is  old  age.  Whence  the  Lord  also  rightly  saith
to  Moses;  Gather  unto  Me  seventy  men  qf  the  elders  qfjuxmh.
Israel f  whom  thou  knowest  that  they  are  elders  qf  the^^'^^'
people.  In  whom  what  else  is  required  saving  the  old  age
of  the  heart,  when  such  sort  of  persons  are  bidden  to  be
chosen  who  are  known  to  be  elders  ?  For  if  it  were  the  old
age  of  the  body  that  were  sought  for  in  them,  they  might
have  been  known  by  as  many  as  they  might  have  been  seen
by.  But  whereas  it  is  said,  whom  thou  knowest  that  they  are
elders  qf  the  people;  doubtless  it  is  clear  that  the  old  age  of
the  mind  and  not  of  the  body  is  told  as  fit  to  be  chosen.
Thus  now  '  the  young  men  see  Holy  Church,  and  hide
themselves,  and  the  old  men  rise  up  and  stand,'  because  her
activity  and  uprightness  the  immature  are  afraid  of,  the  aged
magnify.  Tliey  that  are  light  of  mind  flee,  but  the  grave
and  perfect  do  homage  to  her  by  rising  up  to  the  merits  of
her  life.  Since  the  discipline  thereof  the  perfect  sort  love,
the  imperfect  ones  blame.  And  so  '  the  young  men  see  her
and  hide  themselves,'  because  they  are  afraid  to  be  detected
in  their  hidden  courses  of  conduct.  But '  the  elders  rise  up
VOL.  If.  E  e

418 Heretical  leaders  once  forced  to  keep  silence  ^

Job  99,  and  Stand/  because  all  the  perfect  make  it  appear  by  humility
'  ^^ how  much  they  have  gained  ground  in  good  practice. But
'because  he  describes  all  this  of  his  own  people,  let  him
describe  as  well  how  he  is  feared  by  foreign  people.

Ver.  9, 10.  The  princes  ceased  to  speak,  and  laid  the  finger
on  the  mouth.  The  rulers  held  their  peace,  and  their  tongue
cleaved  to  their  throat.

xviii.  27.*  Who  else  in  this  place  can  be  understood  as  leaders  or
princes,  but  the  framers  of  heretical  evil? Concerning  whom

Pi.  107,  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Strife  was  poured  out  upon  their
princes,  and  they  led  them  aside  in  the  pathless  place,  and
not  in  the  way.  For  these  identical  persons,  while  they  are
not  afraid  to  interpret  the  dispensation  of  God  in  a  wrong
sense,  assuredly  draw  the  common  herds  subject  to  them
not  into  that  way  which  is  '  Christ,'  but  into  *  a  pathless
place:'  over  whom  *  strife  also  is  rightly  said  to  be  poured  out,'
because  by  their  statements  they  contradict  mutually  diem-
selves.  For  Anus  in  receiving  three  Persons  in  the  Divine
Nature  believed  three  Oods  as  well.  Contrary  to  whom
Sabellius  taking  up  one  Ood  believed  there  was  one  Person.
Between  whom  Holy  Church  unswervingly  holding  the  right
pat^^way  of  her  preaching  both  in  proclaiming  one  God,
asserts  against  Sabellius  three  Persons,  and  in  asserting
three  Persons,  confesses  against  Arius  one  God.  Again,
because  in  sacred  Revelation  MauichaBUS  found  virginity  to
bo  commended,  ho  condemned  uiurriago.  But  on  the  other
hand  Jovinian,  because  he  know  marriages  to  bo  allowed,
despised  the  pureness  of  virginity.  Whence  it  takes  place
that,  heretics  being  always  at  cross  purposes  by  a  wrong
apprehension,  reciprocally  their  wickedness  is  at  once  in
accordance  with  itself  in  sin,  and  at  variance  with  itself  in
opinion.  But  on  the  other  hand  Holy  Church  midway
between  the  disputes  of  either  side  moves  with  composed
peace,  and  knows  so  to  receive  the  higher  good,  that  she  also
knows  to  venerate*  the  lower,  so  that  she  should  neither
equal  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  nor  again  despise  the  lowest
whilst  she  venerates  the  highest.  And  so  now  the  rulers  of
heretical  multitudes  considering  well  the  authority  of  Holy

*  He  probably  uiet  tbit  ttrong  word  on  account  of  the  Mndiltf  of  marriage.

fTe%  to  speak  in  last  daffs. Job  blessed  as  heard  and  seen.  419

Church  cease  to  speak,  and  as  it  were  '  put  the  finger  Book
on  their  month,*  whilst  with  false  complaints  they  signify  ^^^.
that  they  are  restrained  not  by  the  reasoning  of  the  roice
but  by  the  hand  of  power.  ^  *  The  rulers  hold  their  peace/
because  those  same  persons  who  endeavour  to  draw  after
them  the  people  going  wrong,  that  they  should  not  now  dare
to  utter  what  is  wrong,  are  checked  at  once  by  the  weight
of  authority  and  the  efficacy  of  reason.  Whose  ^  tongue
cleaveth  to  their  throat,'  because  though  they  dare  not
to  speak  what  is  bad  with  an  unrestrained  utterance,  yet
they  inwardly  cover  up  in  themselves  all  the  things  which
they  go  to  work  to  propound  untrue  against  the  true  faith ;
therefore  these  times,  the  Church,  being  seized  by  the  tribu-
lation ensuing,  calls  to  mind  and  laments,  saying,  IVhen
I  went  out  to  the  gate  through  the  ctVy,  and  when  they  pre-
pared  me  a  seat  in  the  street;  the  young  men  saw  me  and
hid  themselves:  and  the  aged  arose  and  stood  up :  ttie princes
re/rained  talking^  and  laid  their  hand  on  their  mouths.
Tlie  leaders  held  their  peace^  and  their  tongue  cleaved
to their  throat. As though she  said in plain speech ;

*  When  there  was  an  opportunity  given  me  to  preach  with
a  voice  publicly  raised,  every  one  who  was  not  in  subjection
to  the  truth  dreaded  me.*  For  at  that  time,  when  Holy  Church
is  weighed  down  by  adversity,  license  of  speech  is  afforded
to  all  the  bad  preachers  severally. Which  Jeremiah  behold-
ing long  while  beforehand,  saith.  Even  the  sea-monsters  barehua.  4,
the  breasts:  they  give  suck  to  their  young  ones. For  what^
else 'does  he  designate  *  monsters''  saving  heretics  bearing  ■  lamUs
the  face  indeed  of  a  human  being,  but  the  hearts  of  brute
creatures  through  impiety  ? Which  same  then  *  bare  the
breast,'  when  they  freely  preach  their  error. Then  they

*  give  suck  to  their  young'  in  that  the  misattached  souls  of
the  young  ones,  while  they  insinuate  therein  what  is  wrong,
by  nourishing  they  confirm  in  impiety. It  follows ;

Ver.  11.  Tlie  ear  hearing  me^  blessed  me;  and  the  eye
seeing f  gave  witness  to  me.

28.  Whereas  blessed  Job  avouches  himself  to  be  ^  blessed  xix.
by  those  that  heard  him,'  and  to  *  have  witness  given  to  him  ^''^*
by  those  that  saw  him,'  what  he  was  in  speech  and  what  in
practice,  we  have  shewn  us« For  neither  is  he  henceforth

E  e  2

420  Oood  witnessed  by  men  in  the  ChurcfCs  words  and  deeds.

^^■^»  perfect  in  practice,  whom  wickedness  of  the  tongue  still
jl'^gy'  withstands,  or  praiseworthy  in  speech  who  does  not  exhibit
in  practice  the  thing  that  he  utters.  Therefore  that  blessed
Job  being  found  out  by  the  reproaches  of  Iiis  own  friends,
might  declare  that  he  had  both  these,  he  shews  himself  to
have  been  an  object  of  veneration  both  to  the  persons
hearing  and  the  persons  seeing  him.  Which  if  we  refer  to
the  voice  of  Holy  Church,  that  man  '  blesses  her  words,'  who

A  LLBo.  completes  in  practice  the  things  he  has  heard.  That
person  '  gives  testimony  to  her,'  who  in  patterns  of  life
responds  to  her  by  living  well.  For  he  in  a  true  sense  sees
Holy  Church,  whose  life  bears  witness  that  he  sees  her.
For  to  this  end  the  righteousness  of  the  good  is  seen  within
her,  that  all  that  see  her  may  be  corrected  of  their  wicked-
nesses. Not  yet,  then,  does  he  see  the  good  within  the  pale
of  Holy  Church,  who  is  not  reformed  from  evil  habits.  But
whence  *  the  testimony  is  rendered  to  him,*  is  shewn,  in  that
he  subjoins;

Ver.  12,  18.  Because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  criecl^  and
the  fatherless,  and  him  that  had  none  to  help  him.  The
blessing  qf  him  that  was  ready  to  perish  catne  upon  me:  and
I  contorted  the  undow^s  heart.
XX.  29.  Great  mercifulness  these  deeds  are  proofs  of,  to
Hist,  t  deliver  the  poor  that  crieth,*  to  minister  aid  to  the  *  father-
less,' to  rescue  one  on  the  point  to  perish,  to  ^  cheer  the
heart  of  the  widow.'  For  above  it  was  said  what  he  put
forth  in  respect  of  instruction.  For  he  says;  The  ear
hearing  blessed  me ;  but  now  he  relates  what  he  rendered
in  respect  of  mercifulness,  saying.  Because  I  delivered  the
poor  that  cried,  and  the  fatherless^  and  him  that  had  none
to  help  him. Since  the voice  along  with the  deed  of

A  LLBO.  necessity  accords  with  itself.  Tliese  things  blessed  Job
both  exhibited  to  those  under  him,  and  thus  notwithstanding
represented  them  as  destined  to  be  exhibited  by  Holy
Church.  Who  doth  now  unceasingly  enact  both  one  and
the  other,  that  is  to  say,  that  her  children  she  should
at  once  feed  by  speaking,  and  protect  by  shielding,  so
that  she  should  at  once  by  words  replenish  the  good,  and
by her  patronage defend them  from the evil. Now it

Gen.  1,  »8  well  written;  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  grass,  the  herb

11.

n^otfr  tempered  with  mildnesi. Help/or  the  helpless.  421

yielding  seed,  and  the  fruit-tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  Book
kind.  Which  reaUy  and  truly  happened  in  such  a  way,  ^^^*
that  it  was  a  sign  of  something  really  and  truly  to  happen.
For  by  *  the  earth'  the  Church  is  represented,  which  both
regales  us  with  the  provender  of  the  word,  and  keeps  us
safe  by  the  shadow  of  her  patronage ;  which  both  by  speak-
ing feeds  and  by  aiding  protects,  so  that  she  should  not  only
bring  forth  the  herb  of  refreshment,  but  also  along  with  the
fruit  of  the  deed,  the  tree  of  protection.

30.  I  see  that  it  also  deserres  to  be  well  considered  by  hist.
those  who  head  the  governments  of  the  common  herds,  that

in  saying  above,  The  young  men  saw  me  and  hid  themselves;
he  now  aflSirms,  /  comforted  the  widow^s  heart.  What  great
discipline  of  rule,  that  before  his  presence  *  the  young  men'
should  *  hide  themselves !'  What  great  mildness  of  pitying
that  by  him  *  the  widows'  hearts  should  be  cheered !'  For
there  are  some  persons  so  severe  that  they  lose  even  all
gentleness  of  kindly  affection,  and  there  are  some  so  mild,
that  they  part  with  the  rights  of  strict  rule.  Whence  by  all
rulers  both  are  with  all  diligence  to  be  maintained,  that  ,
neither  in  the  rigorousness  of  discipline  they  abandon  the
loving-kindness  of  a  mild  disposition,  nor  again  in  gentleness
abandon  severity  of  discipline,  so  that  they  may  neither  grow
hard  to  the  fellow-feeling  of  pitifulness,  when  they  chastise
the  contumacious,  nor  enervate  the  strong  arm  of  discipline
when  they  cheer  the  hearts  of  the  weak.  Thus,  then,  let
vigour  of  discipline  control  mildness,  and  mildness  adorn
vigour,  and  so  let  the  one  be  recommended  by  the  other,
that  neither  vigour  become  hard,  nor  mildness  unstnmg.

31.  Now  these  works  of  pitifulness,  which  we  have  named
above,  Holy  Church  at  once  exhibits  corporally,  and  ceases  Ailbo.
not  to  exhibit  spiritually. For  she  '  delivers  the  poor  that
crieth,'  when  to  the  sinner  imploring  pardon  she  remits  those

sins  which  he  has  been  guilty  of. Since  it  is  of  such  poor

that  it  is  said.  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit ,  for  theirs  is  M«Matt.5,

kingdom  of  heaven. And  the  cry  of  such  poor  ones  is  the

cry  of  those  saying  in  the  voice  of  the  Psalmist,  Let  Thy'^^'l^fi*

tender  mercy  speedily  prevent  us;  for  we  are  made  very

poor.  Now  she  ^  delivers  the  fatherless  who  hath  no  helper,'  in

that  every  one  who  now  flying  the  desires  of  a  persecuting

422 Holy  Church  comforts  the  faiherleia  and  widowed  soul.

Job  89,  world^  his  old  father  the  deyil  being  dead,  runneth  to  the

J — '—  bosom  of  Holy  Church,  finds  therein  the  help  of  exhortation.
'It  may  bo  that  by  the  title  o(*  the  fatherless/  any  believer
may  be  understood  even  with  reference  to  the  d^ath  of  a  good
father,  of  the  sight  of  whom  he  is  deprived  for  a  while,  though
not  deprived  of  solace.  And  ^  the  blessing'  too  ^  of  him  that
was  ready  to  perish'  comes  upon  her,  when  she  anticipates
the  destruction  of  a  sinner,  and  when  by  holy  admonitions

Jam.  6,  she  brings  him  back  from  the  pit  of  sin.  Whence  it  b
written;  He  that  converteth  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  hia
%vay^  shall  save  his  soul  from  deaths  and  shall  hide  a  multi-
tude qf  sins.  For  if  it  is  a  thing  of  great  recompense  to
rescue  from  death  the  flesh  sooner  or  later  to  die,  of  what
high  merit  is  it  to  free  the  soul  from  death,  to  live  without
end  in  the  heavenly  country  ?  Now  ^  the  heart  of  the  widow'
she  *  comforteth,'  in  that  to  each  faithful  soul  he  that  describes
the  recompenses  of  the  Lord,  as  it  were  recalls  to  remem-
brance the  blessings  of  her  husband.  Unto  Whom  as  the
soul  is  spiritually  united.  He  being  dead,  she  is  called
*  a  widow,'  but  is  cheered  by  the  declarations  of  Holy  Church
in  consequence  of  His  Resurrection.  Great  consolation
therefore  doth  the  heart  of  the  widow  receive,  when  the
faithful  soul  learns  by  the  words  of  the  Church  somewhat
concerning  the  Coming  of  Him,  to  Whom  she  is  spiritually
united. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  14.  With  righteousness  was  I  clothed,  and  arrayed
myself  as  unth  raiment.
xxi.  82.  Surely,  when  we  are  clothed  with  a  garment,  we  are
Hist,  gurrounded  on  every  side,  and  so  he  is  ^  clothed  with
righteousness  as  with  a  garment,'  who  defends  himself  on
every  side  with  good  practice,  and  leaves  no  part  of  his
conduct  naked  to  sin  ;  for  he  that  is  just  in  some  deeds  and
unjust  in  others,  it  is  as  if  he  covered  over  this  side,  and
exposed  that  one  naked;  nor  are  those  henceforth  good
deeds,  which  are  defiled  by  other  evil  deeds  springing  up.

Eool.9,  For  hence  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  He  that  offendeth  in  one

viig. ^^*  *A^''  ^^  ^^'^^^^y  ^^^  «^^  good' Hence  James  saith.

Jam.  a,  But  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend

><>• in  one  point,  he  shall be  guilty  tf  all. Which same

sentence of  his  he  himself  diligently  unfolded,  when  he

Garment  of  Righteousne$i  needed  on  all  sidet. 423

added,  For  He  that  eaid^  Do  not  commit  adultery^  said  Book
ofoo,  Do  not  kill. Now  if  thou  commit  no  adultery^  V^^^  ^*


1^  thou  killy  thou  art  become  a  transgressor  qfthe  law.  9,  ii.

33.  And  80  with  the  eyes  of  the  heart  stretched  out
roundabouts,  watching  must  be  enforced  by  us  on  every
side. Hence  it  is  rightly  said  by  Solomon  also.  Keep  thy  Pro?.  4,
heart  with  all  watching^  for  out  qf  it  are  the  issues  qjf'  Itfe.  ^'
For  going  to  say  watching^  he  put  first  ally  withdut  question
that  each  one  might  scan  himself  diligently  on  this  side  and
on  that  side,  and  as  long  as  he  is  in  tliis  life  know  that
he  is  set  in  pitched  battle  against  spiritual  enemies,  lest  the
reward  which  he  is  making  up  by  one  set  of  actions,  he
should  lose  by  another  set,  lest  on  this  side  he  bar  the
door  against  the  enemy,  but  on  another  side  open  an  en-
trance.  For  if  against  plotting  enemies  a  city  be  encompassed
bj  a  great  rampart,  be  girt  with  strong  walls,  on  every  side
defended  by  a  sleepless  watch,  yet  a  single  opening  only  be
left  therein  undefended  through  neglect,  from  this  quarter
surely  the  enemy  enters  in,  who  seemed  to  be  every  way
shut  out For  that  Pharisee  who  went  up  into  the  Temple
to  pray,  with  what  fortifying  he  had  begirt  the  city  of  his
soul,  let  us  hear. I  fast  twice  in  the  iveek^  he  says,  I  jriWLukels,
tithes  qfall  that  I  possess. He  that  set  out  with  /  thank  Thee^  ^^•
did,  surely,  employ  extraordinary  defences. But  let  us  see
where  he  left  an  opening  undefended  for  a  plotting  enemy ;
Because  I  am  not  as  this  publican. See  how  he  opened
the  city  of  his  heart  to  plotting  enemies  through  self-exalting,
which  city  he  fruitlessly  shut  close  by  fasting  and  almsgiving.
Vainly  is  all  the  rest  defended,  when  one  spot  by  which  an
entrance  lies  open  to  the  enemy  is  not  defended. He  rightly
gave  thanks,  but  wrongly  exalted  himself  above  the  publican.
The  city  of  his  heart  by  being  lifted  up  he  betrayed,  which
by  living  abstemiously,  and  by  giving  alms,  he  guarded. The
greedy  appetite  was  subdued  by  abstinence,  the  gluttony
of  the  belly  was  destroyed,  a  grasping  inclination  was  got
the  better  of,  bj  bountifulness  covetousness  was  kept  down.
With  what  great  pains  do  we  suppose  this  to  have  been
done? .  But,  alas! what  a  series  of  painful  efforts  being
struck  by  one  bad  point  fell  to  the  ground! What  great
excellencies  were  killed  by  the  sword  of  one  sin  ! Whence

424 Good  works  shy  the  unguarded  through  pride.

Job  89,  it  is  needful  with  great  diligence  both  always  to  be  doing
U  ' good  things^  and  to  keep  ourselves  heedfuUy  in  the  thought

Moral,  of  the  heart  from  the  very  good  things  themselves,  lest,  if
they  uplift  the  mind,  they  be  not  good,  which  are  enlisted  not
to  the  Creator,  but  to  pride.

84.  With  reference  to  which  particular  wo  arc  not  acting
irregularly,  if  from  the  books,  though  not  Canonical  ^  yet
brought  out  for  the  edifying  of  the  Church,  we  bring  forward

I  Mace,  testimony.  Thus  Eleazar  in  the  battle  smote  and  brought
'  down  an  elephant,  but  fell  under  the  very  beast  that  he
killed.  Whom,  then,  does  this  one  represent,  whom  his  own
victory  bore  down,  but  those  persons  who  overcome  bad
habits,  but  by  being  lifted  up  are  brought  down  under  the
very  things  they  bring  under  ?  For  it  is  as  if  he  died  under
the  enemy  he  lays  low,  who  is  lifted  up  by  the  sin  that  ho
subdues.  Accordingly  it  deserves  above  every  thing  to  be
considered,  that  good  points  cannot  avail,  if  bad  ones  that
creep  in  unawares  are  not  guarded  against.  All  that  is  done
perishes,  if  it  be  not  heedfully  preserved  in  humility. Hence

G«5D.  2,  too  it  is  well  said  of  the  Arst  parent  himself;  And  the  Lord

^^*  put  the  inan  into  the  Paradise  qf  pleasure^  to  ux>rk  and  to
keep  it.  For  he  ^  worketh,'  who  does  in  act  the  good  that
is  enjoined.  But  what  ho  has  wrought  he  keepeth  not,
whom  that  creepeth  upon  which  is  forbidden.  Therefore
let  blessed  Job,  because  he  had  covered  himself  on  every
side  with  good  practice,  say,  With  righteousness  I  was
clothed^  and  arrayed  myself  as  with  a  garment.  Where  it  is
fortliwiih  added,

And  my  judgment  a  diadem.

'6b.  The  judgments  of  the  righteous  are  rightly  compared
to  a  *  diadem,'  because  by  the  gloriousness  of  great  practice,
they  lead  to  a  crown  of  rewarding.  Which  same  judgments
they  carry  on  with  themselves  day  by  day  in  the  interior,
what  they  owe  to  God,  what  to  their  neighbour,  tliey  look  to
with  quick  discernment,  and  they  kindle  themselves  with
ardour  to  the  doing  of  what  is  good,  and  rebuke  themselves


i>  Cited  by  Cofiii,  Scholatt.  Hist,  of  ore  discuftied.  The  tame  work  oonUiot

Caoon,  c.  viii.  art.  xoix.  where  ioiue  a  general  roviow  ol'  authorities  on  the

attempta  at  reconciling  such  ttatenieou  Canon  of  H.  S.  a  lubject  too  cxtentive

with  the  decree  or  the  Council  of  Trent  f«ir  a  inure  note.

Jttdgmeni  of  the  righteous  has  its  crown  above. 425

with  seTerity  for  the  evil  things  cotntnitted. Hence  it  is  Book
well  said  bj  Solomon  as  well ;  The  thoughts  qf  the  righteous  3^
are  Judgments. Since  within  they  are  brought  back  to  their  13, 5*.
own  hearts  from  all  the  tumult  of  the  world,  and  then  they
monnt  the  tribunal  of  the  mind,  and  set  before  the  eyes
themselves,  and  their  neighbour,  and  bring  forward  in  the
midst  the  rule  of  the  Testament,  wherein  it  is  said,  Ti^^or^  Matt.  7,
all  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  ^^'
do  ye  eren  so  unto  them. They  transfer  into  themselves
the  person  of  their  neighbour,  and  heedfuUy  mark  what  to
themselves,  had  they  been  so  circumstanced,  they  would
jnsdy  have  wished  done  or  left  undone,  and  so  with  strict
justice  and  judgment,  they  try  the  cause  of  themselves  and
their  neighbour  by  the  tables  of  the  Divine  Law,  in  the  court
of  the  heart. Therefore  it  is  well  said,  The  thoughts  qf  the
righteous  are  Judgments,  because  the  very  interior  motion
of  their  heart  is  itself  as  it  were  a  kind  of  scales  of  judicial
power. Which things  being done,  because  they  do  not
look for  recompensing  below,  their  judgments  are  rightly
compared  to  *  a  diadem/ For  a  diadem  is  set  upon  the
upper  part  of  the  body ;  and  so  the  judgment  of  the  righteous
is  styled  a  *  diadem,*  because  they  do  not  thereby  covet  to
find  their  reward  by  it  in  things  below  and  of  this  earth,
but  up  above. It  follows ;

Ver.  15,  10.  I  was  an  eye  to  the  blind,  and  afoot  was  I
to  the  lame.  I  was  a  father  to  the  poor,  and  the  cause
which  I  knew  not  I  searched  out.

86.  Herein  the  mind  of  the  reader  might  perchance  put  xziii.
the  question,  wherefore  it  is  that  blessed  Job  reckons  up  his
own  virtue  with  so  much  particularity. For  it  is  a  mark  of
holy  men  to  conceal  the  good  things  they  may  have  done,
lest  it  chance  that  they  bring  upon  themselves  the  downfall
of  exaltation. Whence  Truth  saith by  Itself, Take  heed  Mmtt  9,
that  ye  do  not  your  righteousness  b^ore  men,  to  be  seen  qf^'
them. It  is  hence,  too,  that  in  giving  light  to  the  two  blind
men  sitting  by  the  way-side,  He  charged  them,  saying.  See  that  Matt.  9,
no  man  know  it. Of  which  ))ersons  it  is  thereupon  said,  that^*
they  ^  departed  and  spread  abroad  the  fame  of  Him  through-
out all  that  region.' Now  it  is  a  question  for  us  to  consider,
what  this  means,  that  the  Almighty  Himself,  unto  Whom  to

426 Good  UH)rki  to  be  concealed  on  the  doer^s  account.

Job  99,  have  the  will  is  the  same  thing  as  to  ha?e  the  power,  both
-gj~7  ^i^b^^  ^^^  ^^  extraordinary  powers  should  be  kept  secret,
and  notwithstanding  by  those  Uiat  were  illumined  with  sight
as  it  were  against  Ilis  will  lie  is  made  manifest  Which  is
nothing  else  than  that  to  His  servants  following  al'ter  Ilim
He  gave  an  example,  that  of  tliemsclvcs  indeed  they  should
desire  to  have  their  extraordinary  endowmenrs  kept  hidden
from  sight,  and  yet,  that  others  might  profit  by  their  example,
they  should  be  brought  to  view  against  their  will,  and  indeed
by  concealing  their  own  achievements  keep  themselves  safe,
but  whilst  they  are  brought  to  view  against  their  will,  convey
good  examples  on  to  their  neighbours.  So  then  let  them  be
hidden  in  set  purpose,  and  made  public  by  necessity,  and
let  the  hiding  of  them  be  the  safe  keeping  of  self,  and  the
making  them  public  usefulness  to  others.  Again,  because
Mau.6,it  is  written.  Neither  do  men  light  a  candle,  and  put  it
^^'^^'  under  a  bushel,  but  in  a  candlestick,  and  it  giveth  light
to  all  that  are  in  the  house.  Let  your  light  so  shine
bqfore  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and
glorify  your  Father,  Which  is  in  heaven.  There  are  times
when  holy  persons  are  compelled  to  do  good  things  even
in  the  presence  of  their  fellow-creatures,  or  else  to  tell
these  very  deeds  of  theirs  to  their  fellow-creatures,  but  only
to  this  end  relating  every  thing,  viz.  that  by  tliose  works  not
they  themselves,  but  their  Father,  Which  is  in  heaven,  may
bo  glorified.  For  whilst  they  preach  tilings  holy,  the  very
preaching  itself  perhaps  goes  for  nought,  of  those  whose  life
is  not  known.  So  they  are  forced  to  tell  their  own  life,  that
they  may  be  able  to  change  the  life  of  their  hearers.  And
they  relate  their  deeds  that  they  may  be  held  in  veneration,
and  they  seek  to  be  venerated,  that  they  may  be  listened  to
Ei.1,81.  with  awe.  Since  it  is  written;  And  wlteti  ilie  living  creatures
were  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  the  wheels  were  lifted  up
over  against  them.  Because  it  is  so  that  when  the  minds  of
the  hearers  take  in  the  life  of  those  that  preach,  surely  they
necessarily  admire  the  force  of  the  preaching  as  well.

37.  Hence  it  is  therefore  that  good  preachers  at  once
eschew  honour  on  account  of  being  set  up,  and  yet  wish  to
be  honoured  on  account  of  being  imitated.  In  the  same
way  surely  Paul  the  Apostle,  when  speaking  to  the  disciples,

revealed  for  the  benq/U  of  others.  427

at  once  flees  honour,  and  yet  shews  how  greatly  he  desenredBo  ok
to  be  honoured. For  when  he  said  to  the  Tliessalonians ;  p^^
For  neither  at  any  time  used  we  flattering  tnords^  as  y«s,5.6..7.
know;  nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness^  God  is  witness:  he  adds
going  on ;  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory y  neither  of  you^  nor
of  othersy  when  we  might  have  been  burthensome  to  you
as  the  Apostles  of  Christ ;  But  we  were  gentle  among  you.
Again  to  the  Corinthians,  avoiding  honour  he  saith;  For  %  On,
tre  preach  not  ourselves^  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord^  anrf^'*'
ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus  Chris  fs  sake. Which  same
however  he  seeing  to  be  led  aside  from  the  track  of  the  true
faith  by  the  persuasions  of  false  apostles,  with  the  greatest
pains  shews  to  them  bow  much  he  was  worthy  to  be  held
in  reverence,  saying,  Howbeit  whereinsoever  any  is  bold^  (/3  Cor.
speak  foolishly^  I  am  bold  aho. Are  they  Hebrews?  so  am^^
I. Are  they  Israelites?  so  am  I. Are  they  the  seed  of
Abraham  f  so  am  I. Are  they  ministers  of  Christ  f  (/  speak
as  a  fooly)  I  am  more. To  which  particulars  he  likewise
adds  how  that  to  him  the  secrets  of  the  third  heayen  also
were  set  open,  how  that  being  caught  up  he  even  penetrated
the  mysteries  of  Paradise. See,  how  eschewing  honour  he
proclaims  himself  the  servant  of  the  disciples. See  how
for  the  use  of  his  hearers  seeking  honour,  he  advances  the
claims  of  his  life  above  the  false  apostles. Since  the  great
teacher  acted  with  this  view,  that  whilst  he  himself  is  seen
and  known  for  what  he  was,  both  the  life  and  the  tongue  of
those  that  preached  amiss  might  by  comparison  with  him  be
made  wordiless. Therefore in  a  wonderful  way  he  both
exhibits  the  grace  of  humility,  and  seeks  accessions  of  use-
fulness, so  as  both  to  proclaim  himself  a  servant  of  the  dis-
ciples, and  prove  himself  better  than  the  adversaries. He
displays  to  the  disciples  what  he  had  been  vouchsafed  of
humility,  he  displays  to  the  opponents  what  he  had  been
vouchsafed  of  loftiness. He  makes  appear  in  opposition  to
adversaries  what  he  had  by  gift,  he  makes  appear  to  disciples
what  he  remains  in  himself  in  thought,  he  makes  known  to
opponents  what  he  is  presented  without  in  practice. So
holy  men,  when  they  are  constrained  to  relate  the  good
things  that  they  do,  do  not  lend  themselves  to  exaltation  but
usefulness. Whence  to  his  friends,  unjustly  upbraiding  him,

428  Justice  first  namedf  since  merey  needs  it.

Job  39^  and  80  not  knowing  the  good  things  in  him^  blessed  Job
J^'  telling  rereals  them,  that  surely  they  might  learn,  not  whilst
"^*  upbraiding  him  to  lift  themselves  up  against  his  life,  but
holding  their  peace  to  copy  the  same.  Though,  as  wc
have  already  often  said  above,  the  despair  urged  on  him  by
those  upbraiding  him,  forced  him  to  recall  his  own  deeds  to
remembrance.  For  amidst  so  many  pains  of  wounding  and
words  of  despair,  when  he  tells  the  things  which  he  did,  his
mind  as  it  were  sunk  down  by  words  and  wounds  he  sets
anew  to  hope.  So  let  him  say  the  good  things  that  he  has
done,  that  he  may  not  be  forced  in  the  midst  of  so  many  evil
things  that  he  hears  to  despair  of  himself  /  was  eyes  to  the
llindyfeet  teas  I  to  the  lame.

88.  When  we  are  estimating  the  examples  of  holy  practice,
we  ought  first  to  mark  what  a  right  order  is  observed  in
relating  them,  so  that  first  works  of  righteousness,  next  works
of  mercy  should  be  described. For  that  man  does  well  what
is  pitifiil,  who  is  taught  first  to  observe  what  is  just,  so  that
the  stream  of  mercy  bestowed  on  our  neighbours  be  brought
from  the  fountain-head  of  righteousness. For  there  are
many  that  in  a  manner  render  works  of  mercy  to  their  neigh-
bours, but  do  not  abandon  the  deeds  of  unrighteousness,
which  same  if  they  are  anxious  truly  to  shew  mercy  to  their
neighbours,  ought  first  by  living  jusUy  to  have  shewn  pity  to
Ecolof.  themselves. Whence  it  is  written ;  Have  mercy  upon  thine
(Valff. ^'^'^  ^^  ^  pleasing  Ood. He  then  that  would  pity  his
s^*) neighbour  must  needs  derive  the  original  of  pitying  from
Mat  19.  himself. For  it  is  written ;  Thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour  as
thyself. How,  then,  is  he  pitifiil  to  another  by  shewing
mercy,  who  by  still  living  unjustly  becomes  pitiless  to  him-
Ecolos.  self? Whence  it  is  also  said  by  one  that  was  wise ;  He  that
^**  *• is  evil  to  himself ^  to  whom  vnll  he  be  goodf Since  for  shew-
ing forth  mercy,  that  it  may  be  rendered  to  the  needy  out-
wardly in  perfection,  two  things  necessary  agree  together,
i.  e.  the  man  that  is  to  give,  and  the  thing  to  be  given. But
the  man  is  by  far  and  without  comparison  better  than  the
thing. And  so  he  who  gives  up  his  outward  substance  to
his  neighbour  in  want,  but  does  not  keep  his  own  life  from
doing  evil,  gives  his  estate  to  God,  but  himself  to  sin. The
thing  which  is  the  lesser  he  ofiered  to  the  Creator,  and  that

Holy  Church  is  eyes  to  the  blindyfeei  to  the  lame. 429

which  is  the  greater  he  reserved  to  wickedness.  And  so  it  Book
is  well  said  first  by  blessed  Job,  With  justice  I  was  clothed  ^^^'
and  arrayed  myself  as  with  a  garment^  and  with  myjudg-
ment  as  with  a  diadem :  and  is  next  added ;  /  was  eyes  to
the  hlindy  and  feet  foas  I  to  the  lame.  Because  there  is
then  in  Qod's  sight  the  ofiering  of  true  righteousness,  when
from  the  root  of  righteousness  the  branches  of  pitifulness
proceed.  But  because  in  the  very  work  of  mercy  itself  the
spirit  is  wont  to  bo  thought  more  of  with  the  interior  Judge
than  the  thing  done,  observe  that  he  declares  that  to '  die
blind  he  had  been  eyes,  to  the  lame  feet/  For  by  saying
these  things  assuredly  he  points  out  that  both  to  the  one  he
had  held  out  a  hand  by  himself,  and  that  the  other  he  bore
up  by  carrying.  From  which  it  is  gathered  how  greatly  the
bowels  of  his  mercy  were  poured  out  upon  the  weak  and
needy. Whence  it  is  added ;  /  was  a  father  to  the  poor.

39.  Which  same  words  if  we  refer  to  the  utterance  of  Holy  Allbq^
Church  by  a  typical  mode  of  interpretation,  the  same  is '  eyes
to^the  blind,*  because  she  gives  light  by  the  Word,  and  the
same  *  feet  to  the  lame,*  because  she  stays  them  up  by  support.
For  by  preaching  she  enlightens  the  blind,  while  the  lame
by  helping  she  supports.  For  *  the  blind'  is  he  that  as  yet
seeth  not  whitlier  he  is  going,  but  ^  the  lame'  is  he  who  has
not  tlie  power  to  go  there  where  he  sees.  For  frequently  sin  is
committed  either  by  ignorance  or  weakness,  so  that  either  the
man  knows  not  what  he  ought  to  desire,  or  cannot  do  every
thing  that  he  has  the  desire  to  do.  Contrarily  it  is  rightly
said  by  the  Psalmist,  Tlie  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salva-p^j^i  j.
tion.  For  because  the  J^rd  bestows  both  knowledge  and
force,  at  once  in  opposition  to  ignorance  He  is  called  *  Light,'
and  in  opposition  to  weakness  '  Saving  Health.'  It  is  hence
that  it  is  said  of  the  wicked,  Let  their  way  be  dark  andF9jS5fi.
slippery:  that  is  to  say,  that  through  the  darkness  they
may  not  see  where  they  should  go,  who  even  if  they  did  see
what  was  right,  yet  by  reason  of  the  slippery  quality  they
should  not  be  able  to  stand  fast  therein.  And  so  the  one
sort  through  the  slipperiness  halt  in  the  midst  of  good  things,
and  the  other  sort  through  the  darkness,  are  ignorant  what
good  things  to  follow.  Thus  then  Holy  Church,  being  seized
by  tribulations  at  the  end,  calls  to  mind  the  old  times  when

430  'Hie  GeuiilcH  blinds  llie  Jews  laine.

Job  S9,  ^be  was  accustomed  both  to  enligbten  by  teaching  and  to

■^ — '-  stablish  by  helping,  and  speak  with  the  lips  of  her  foregoing
member,  saying,
1  uHis  an  eye  to  the  blind,  and  afoot  was  I  to  the  lame.
40.  And  whereas  she  has  gathered  together  two  Peoples  in
herself,  viz.  the  Jewish  and  the  Gentile,  by  the  ^  blind,'  the
Gentile  People  may  also  be  rightly  denoted,  and  by  ^the
lame*  the  Jewish.  Since  the  Gentile  People  had  as  it  were
no  eyes,  because  the  Law  not  being  received  it  saw  not
where  it  ought  to  have  gone.  But  on  the  other  hand  the
Jewish  People  having  eyes  was  lame,  because  the  Law  indeed
in  knowing  it  held,  but  did  not  stretch  forth  the  step  of  right
practice  therein. For  if  the  Gentile  People  bad  not  been

It.  9, 3.  blind,  the  Prophet  would  not  say,  TJte  people  that  walked  in
darkness  have  seen  a  great  light.  Again,  if  the  Israelitish
People  had  not  gone  lame  to  good  practice,  the  Psalmist

Ft.  18,  would  never  have  said  in  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  The  strange

44 45

'  children  have  lied  to  me:  the  strange  children  have  waxed
old,  they  have  gone  lame  out  qf  thoir  paths.  Which  doubtless
is  for  this  reason  termed  a  lame  People,  in  that  it  had  not  a
sound  step  in  practice,  since  it  would  not  use  both  feet,  while
it  admitted  one  Testament,  and  spumed  the  other.  Which
People  when  Holy  Church  receives  coming  to  her,  because
to  the  same,  already  holding  the  Old  Testament,  she  intro-
duces the  New  Testament  as  well,  for  the  directing  the  steps
thereof,  she  as  it  were  joins  on  another  foot.  Which  faithful
People  of  Holy  Church  still  further  adds  aright,  /  wcls  a
father  to  the  poor,  because  surely  the  humble,  who  are  called
^  poor  in  spirit,'  are  begotten  by  her  preaching.  But  it  is
necessary  for  us  in  all  these  particulars  to  weigh  with  exact-
ness the  actual  words  of  the  history. For  he  says;

Ver.  16.  /  was  a  father  qf  the  poor,  and  the  cause,  which
I  knew  not,  I  searched  out.
xxiv.  4L  For  very  often  men  give  much  to  the  poor,  not  because
Hi8T.  ^Qy  Iqyq  those  poor,  but  because  if  they  do  not  give,  they
dread  the  indignation  of  the  Judge  Above;  which  persons,  if
they  were  not  afraid  of  God,  would  have  had  no  mind  to
give  the  things  they  possess.  And  indeed  in  good  deeds  it
is  the  first  step  of  beginners,  that  he  who  does  not  yet  know
how  to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  nevertheless  should

Kindliness  qf  Charity. Diligence  in  well-doing. 481

yet  benceforth  begin  to  dread  tbe  judgments  from  Above.  Book
Tbu8  because  it  is  one  thing  to  do  a  good  deed  by  command  — — 1
and  another  to  do  it  from  aflection  as  well,  that  the  holy
man  may  teach  us  the  inward  spirit  of  his  practice,  let  him
say,  /  toaa  a  father  to  the  poor.  For  not  a  patron,  or  a
neighbour,  or  an  helper  to  the  poor,  but  ^  a  father'  he  testifies
that  he  had  been;  in  this  way,  because  by  the  great  atten-
ti?eness  of  his  charity  he  converted  the  purpose  of  mercy
into  the  affection  of  nature,  that  he  should  look  on  those  as
children  by  love,  whom  he  was  the  head  of  as  a  father  by
protecting.  Therefore  because  the  force  of  his  mercy  had
copied  nature,  he  records  himself  to  have  been  a  father  to  the
poor. Where  he  likewise  adds;

And  the  cause  that  I  knew  noty  I  most  carefully  searched
out.

42.  In  which  words  we  have  to  consider  all  the  particulars  xxv.
how  distinctly  they  are  related,  and  that  no  profit  is  passed
over  by  him. Since  he  is  just  in  his  actions,  pitiful  in  his
neighbours'  infirmities,  active  in  the  concerns  of  the  poor.
For  he  that  takes  thought  of  the  blessings  of  the  eternal
recompensing,  must  needs  extend  himself  to  every  occasion
of  the  repayment  to  follow  after. For  hence  it  is  said  by
Solomon ;  He  ihatfeareth  God,  neglecietji  nothing. Hence  Eeo.  7,
also  Paul  saith ;  prepared  unto  every  good  work. But  herein  9%|,„,
we  ought  to  bear  in  mind  that  occasionally  in  our  actions  3, 31.
lesser  good  things  are  to  be  let  pass  for  the  usefulness  of
greater  ones. Thus  who  could  be  ignorant  that  it  has  the
merit  of  a  good  work  to  bury  the  dead :  and  yet  to  one,  who
bad  prayed  to  be  let  go  in  order  to  the  burying  of  his  father,
it  was  said ;  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead;  but  go  thou  andhnk  9,
preach  the  kingdom  of  God. Thus  the  dutifulness  of  this^'
service  was  to  be  made to give place to  the  office  of
preaching,  because  by  the  first  he  would  be  burying  persons
dead  in  the  flesh  in  the  earth,  by  the  other  he  would  be  raising
up  persons  dead  in  the  soul  to  life. By  the  Prophet  likewise
it  is  said  to  the  chiefs  of  the  Synagogue;  Seek  judgment^in.\,\i,
relieve  the  oppressed* And  yet  Paul  the  Apostle  says;  Set  iCor.%
them  to  judgcy  who  are  least  esteemed  in  the  Church. For
he  was  kindling  his  hearers'  hearts  to  the  excellency  of
wisdom,  to  different  kinds  of  tongues,  to  the  investigating

482 Earthly  cares  to  be  taken  up  as  a  duty  by  some.

Job  99,  the  mysteries  of  prophecy  also,  saying.  Desire  spiritual  gi/ts^

-gjjjr-  but  rather  that  ye  may  prophesy.  But  because  they  would
not  be  capable  of  ^  spiritual  giAs,'  if  earthly  matters  had
weighed  tliem  to  the  ground,  he  premised  long  before,
saying,  Set  them  to  judge  who  are  least  esteemed  in  the
Church.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words ;  '  they  that  are
of  least  worth  in  the  Church,  and  not  enriched  with  any
power  of  extraordinary  gifts,  let  these  only  judge  concerning
earthly  matters,  that  by  whom  extraordinary  good  cannot
be  supplied,  the  lesser  good  may  be.*  Whom  he  at  once
styles  *  contemptible,*  and  yet  calls  *  wise,'  when  he  says ;

iCor.6, /«  it  so  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man  among  you  f  no  one
that  shall  be  able  to  judge  between  his  brethren?  From
which  point  what  else  is  concluded  but  that  they  are  to  try
earthly  causes, who  have  received  wisdom  in  things  external?
But  they  that  have  been  enriched  with  spiritual  gifts  surely
yj  ought  never  to  be  entangled  with  earthly  concerns,  that
while  they  are  not  compelled  to  manage  the  good  things
beneath,  they  may  by  being  exercised  bo  enabled  to  serve
the  interests  of  the  good  things  Above.

43.  But  above  every  thing  it  needs  to  be  looked  to,  that
they  who  shine  forth  with  spiritual  gifls  should  never  entirely
abandon  the  affairs  of  their  neighbours  of  weak  condition,
but  that  they  should  entrust  the  same  to  be  managed  by
others,  whom  it  is  meet  for.  Whence  also  Moses  appointed
to  the  people  seventy  persons  in  the  stead  of  himself,  that  in
proportion  as  he  buried  himself  out  of  the  way  of  external
causes  he  might  with  the  greater  fervour  go  into  the  things  of
the  interior.  And  so  it  comes  to  pass,  that  those  that  are  the
highest  advance  more  to  spiritual  gifts,  when  things  that  are
lowest  do  not  trample  on  their  minds,  and  again  the  persons
that  are  the  last  in  the  Church  do  not  live  without  good
practice,  while  in  matters  external  they  find  right  things
which  they  may  do.  Tf  or  Holy  Church  is  so  compacted  by

^  a  unity  of  the  faithful,  as  our  body  is  made  one  by  the
jointing  of  the  limbs.  Thus  there  are  some  members  in  the
body  which  are  subservient  to  beholding  the  light,  others
which  are  never  parted  from  the  contact  of  earth.  Since  the
eye  is  set  intent  on  tlie  light,  and  that  it  may  not  be  made
blind,  it  is  kept  safe  from  the  dust But  the  foot  then  rightly

Afemberi  o/Holp  Chnreh  bound  to  mutual  ierviee. 488

discharges  its  office,  when  it  does  not  shrink  firom  taking  on  Book
it  the  dost  of  the  earth. Which  same  members  of  the  bodj,  ^ ■
howeyer,  are,  bj  imparting  their  functions  to  one  another,
reciprocallj  united  in  one,  so  that  the  foot  should  run  for
the  eyes,  and  the  eye  look  out  for  the  feet

44.  Thus,  then,  thus  ought  the  members  of  Holy  Church
to  be  at  once  distinct  in  office  and  united  in  charity,  that  the
highest  persons  may  look  out  the  way  of  those,  who  go  at
liberty  in  the  concerns  of  earth,  so  that  the  foot  may  as  it
were  walk  by  the  light  of  the  eyes,  and  again  that  whaterer
they  execute,  being  buued  with  the  affiiirs  of  earth,  this  they
may  apply  to  the  use  of  tlie  greater  sort,  so  that  the  foot,
whose  way  is  looked  out,  may  step  not  for  itself  only  but  for
the  eyes  as  well.  And  so  whilst  they  suit  one  another  by
turns,  by  reciprocal  ministering,  in  a  wonderful  way  it  is
brought  about,  that  whereas  all  the  Elect,  by  bestowing
labour  on  one  another,  do  what  they  are  able,  those
works  too  become  their  own,  which  they  cannot  do  them-
selves.

45.  But  herein  we  ought  to  bear  in  mind,  that  when  those
are  wanting,  who  might  fitly  minister  to  the  exterior  occa-
sions of  their  neighbours,  those  too  who  are  full  of  spiritual
gifts  ought  to  lower  themselves  to  their  inferiority,  and,  as
far  as  they  may  with  propriety  be  able,  lend  themselves  with
the  condescension  of  charity  to  the  earthly  necessities  of
those  persons.  Nor  should  it  weary  the  mind,  if  its  per-
ception, being  ever  intent  on  the  contemplation  of  the
spiritual,  is  sometimes  as  it  were  bent  down,  diminished  in
managing  the  least  concerns,  when  that  Word,  by  Which  all
things  created  are  held  together,  in  order  that  He  might
benefit  mankind,  having  taken  to  Him  the  nature  of  man,  was
willing  to  be  *  made  a  little  less  than  the  Angels.'  What
wonder,  then,  if  man  for  man's  sake  draws  himself  in,  when
the  Creator  of  men  and  Angels  for  man's  sake  took  upon
Him  the  form  of  man  ?  Not  however  that  the  perception  is
diminished  when  it  is  thus  drawn  in ;  because  it  penetrates  tlie
things  above  with  more  exact  penetration,  in  proportion  as
with  more  abundant  humility  for  the  love  of  the  Creator  it
does  not  even  despise  the  things  beneath.  What  is  there
that  is  unworthy  of  us  or  difficult,  if  we  cany  the  mind  above

VOL.  II.  F  f

484  God  seems  to  enquire  before  judging  ^  for  our  example.

Job  89,  and  below,  when  of  the  body  we  wash  the  face  with  the  same

-=-^-  hand,  with  which  we  shoe  the  foot  ? Therefore  let  blessed

Moral.  Job,  bccause  when  he  was  doing  great  things  he  did  not

think  tlie  least  things  beneath  him,  let  him  say,  And  the

cause  thai  I  knew  not  I  very  carefully  searched  out.

46.  Wherein  I  sec  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  for  delivering
sentence  we  should  not  ever  bo  precipitate,  that  things  not
examined  into  we  should  not  rashly  judge,  that  any  thing
heard  of  a  bad  nature  should  not  affect  us,  that  what  is
reported  every  where  about  we should not  credit  without
proving. Which  same,  without  doubt,  we  shall  be  afraid  of
committing,  if  we  consider  the  doings  of  our  Creator  with
some  degree  of  minuteness. For  that  very  Crealor,  tha(  He
might  withhold  us  from  a  precipitate  delivery  of  sentence,
Heb.  4,  whereas  '  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to  His  eyes,*  yet
refused  to  judge  the  evil  deeds  of  Sodom  when  beard,  in
Gen.i8,  that  He  saith ;  Because  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  Qomorrah  is
^^'^  '  very  great,  and  because  their  cry  is  very  grievous; I  will
go  down  now,  and  see  whether  they  have  done  altogether
according  to  the  cry  of  it,  which  is  coine  unto  Me;  and  %f
notf  I  will  know. Thus  God,  Who  is  Almighty  and  knowing
all  things,  wherefore  does  He  before  the  proving  seem  to
doubt,  but  iu  order  to  set  fortli  to  us  an  example  of  gravity,
that  the  evil  of  our  fellow-creatures  we  should  never  venture
to  believe  before  we  prove  it? Observe  how  by  His  Angels
He  comes  down  for  the  ascertaining  of  the  evil,  and  imme-
diately smites  the  culprits;  and  He  That  is  patient.  He  Who
Wi»d. is  gentle.  He,  of  Whom it  is  written;  But  Thou,  Lord,
i«»  18.  j^ffgi  y^ith  tranquillity. He,  of  Whom  it  is  written  again ;
Eoolut.  The  Lord  is  a  patient  Bewarder,  finding  them  involved  in
*  ' such  enormous  guilt,  as  it  were  overlooked  patience,  and
would  not  await  the  day  of  Final  Judgment  for  vengeance,  but
with  the  fire  of  judgment  prevented  them  before  the  Day  of
Judgment. See,  the evil He  in seeming  believed with
difficulty  when  He  heard  it,  but  visited  without  backwardness
when  acquainting  Himself  He  found  it  true ;  surely  that  He
might  give  us  an  example  that  worse  crimes  are  both  to
be  believed  with  difficulty,  when  they  are  heard,  and  to  be
punished  more  quickly  when  they  are  truly  ascertained. For
this  heedfulness  accordingly  blessed  Job  entertaining  anxious

Holy  Church  judgen  with  care;  reBcuesfrcm  Satan.  485

interest,  saith.  The  cause  thai  I  knew  notj  I  very  dar^fkUly  Booe
searched  out.  Which  same  words  we  may  likewiae  apply  not  jjj^j^^
inappropriately  in  the  voice  of  the  Church  to  a  typical  way
of  interpretation.  For  that  same  Church  by  her  elect
members  does  when  she  judges  the  evil  deeds  of  carnal  men
*  search  out  that,  which  she  knows  not,*  in  that  the  evil
things  which  she  knows  not  in  doing  them,  she  searches  out
in  correcting  them  in  judgment.  And  so  Holy  Church,  when
she  shall  be  cramped  for  a  time  by  the  villainy  of  the  unjust,
remembers,  saying,  The  cause  that  I  knew  not^  I  very  care-
fully searched  out.  As  though  she  sidd  in  plun  speech ;
'  The  evil  that  in  mine  Elect  I  knew  not  in  doing,  in  wicked
men  I  did,  by  judging,  chasten  with  severity.'  And  because
she  now  bruises  the  devil  by  the  power  of  her  preaching,  and
carries  off  out  of  his  mouth  the  soul  of  every  one  that  she
receives,  he  goes  on  in  the  words )

Ver.  17.  And  I  brake  the  Jaws  qfthe  wicked^  and  plucked
the  spoil  out  qfhis  teeth.

47.  Oh  what  a  spoil  did  she  take  from  the  mouth  of  the  xxvi.
devil,  when  by  converting  she  carried  off  Saul  himself  the
spoiler ;  when  still  breathing  threats  he  was  on  his  way  to  Aott  a,
Damascus,  having  received  letters ^  and  whereas  by  persecuting  *
the  faithful  he  was  gathering  prey  for  the  devil,  he  was,  by
being  made  acquainted  with  the  faith,  himself  gathered  to
Christ.  As  tnany  times  did  the  Church  ^  pluck  the  spoil  out
of  the  mouth  of  the  wicked,*  as  often  as  by  preaching  she
snatched  off  a  soul  from  the  gripe  of  error.  For  who  can  be
more  truly  called  a  wicked  one  than  the  devil  ?  whose  ^  jaws
we  break,*  as  often  as  by  arguing  against  his  deceits,  we  bring
to  light  his  secret  contrivances.  And  so  we  *  pluck  the  spoil
out  of  his  teeth,*  because  the  soul,  which  he  had  already  bitten
by  breaking  it  to  sin,  by  converting  we  recover  to  the  saving
health  of  life.  Since  by  '  the  jaws*  are  exhibited  his  hidden
plots,  while  by  the  teeth  the  now  open  commission  of  sin*
Of  which  same  jaws  and  teeth  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist;  ButP§JiSfi,
Ood  shall  break  their  teeth  in  their  mouth;  the  Lord  shall
break  the  jaw  bones  qf  the  lions.  But  the  holy  man  declares
himself  to  '  break  the  jaws*  first  that  he  might  afterwards  be
able  to '  carry  away  the  spoil  from  the  teeth*  of  that  one;
because  we  then  truly  snatch  the  prey  from  his  teeth,  when

Ff2

436  Breaking  Satan's  jawM.  The  Church's  *  fiesi  'for  the  young.

Job  99,  we  first  know  how  to  break  his  jaws. For  it  is  necessary  first

^^  '  to  bring  to  light  the  secret  artifices  of  his  contrivances,  that
afterwards  we  may  be  able  to  recover  the  soul  of  our  hearer
from  open  falling.  The  jaws  of  this  wicked  one  the  chief
pastor  of  the  Church  himself  did  by  preaching  break  in

iPet.6,  pieces,  when  he  said,  Be  sober^  be  vigilant^  because  your
adversary  the  devil  as  a  roaring  lion  goeth  about  seeking
whom  he  may  devour;  Whom  resist^  steclfast  in  the  faith.
Against  this  ^  lion*  Holy  Church,  because  she  sees  his
plottings,  guards  the  folds  of  the  faith.  Whose  ^  jaws  sho
breaks'  as  often  as  she  destroys  the  arguments  of  heretics,
and  as  many  timc9  ^  seizes  the  spoil  out  of  his  tcetli,*  as  sho
by  preaching  converts  a  man  from  error.  And  because  there
shall  then  be  many  of  the  just,  who  reckoned  that  they
would  depart  out  of  this  world  in  the  time  of  the  Church's
peace,  blessed  Job^  while  he  tells  his  own  case,  likewise  points
out  the  voices  of  the  just  coming  after  him,  saying;

Ver.  18.  Then  I  saidy  I  shall  die  in  my  nest^  and  I  shall
multiply  my  days  as  a  palm.

xxvii.  48.  What  else  is  set  fortli  in  this  place  by  the  title  of  a
'  nest,'  but  the  tranquil  rest  of  the  faith  whereby  every  infirm
soul  is  nourished  ?  For  that  multitude  of  the  good,  which
shall  be  overtaken  by  the  times  of  persecution,  thought  to
accomplish  the  days  of  its  nourishings,  as  in  a  nest,  so  in  a
place  of  repose.  For  except  that  Holy  Church  now  nourished
up  the  weak  children  severally  in  tlio  nest  of  peace,  the

Pt.84,s.  Psalmist  would  not  say,  Yea^  the  sparrow  hath  found  her  an
house,  and  the  turtle  a  nest  where  she  may  lay  her  young.
Since  henceforth  ^  the  sparrow  hath  found  her  an  house,'
because  our  Redeemer  has  entered  into  the  Eternal  dwelling-
place  of  heaven.  And  ^  the  turtle  hath  found  a  nest,'  because
Holy  Church,  influenced  by  lovo  of  the  Creator,  makes  use
of  frequent  sighiugs,  and  as  it  were  builds  up  a  ^  nest'  for
herself,  i.  e.  the  most  peaceful  rest  of  the  Faith,  wherein  her
growing  children,  like  callow  young,  till  they  fly  up  to  the
regions  above,  she  fosters,  cherished  warm  in  the  bosom  of
charity.  And  so  because  there  shall  then  be  tliose,  who
thought  in  the  time  of  peace  to  take  their  passage  to  the
regions  on  high,  i.  e.  to  soar  away  from  the  nest,  their  voice
is  anticipated  by  the  voice  of  blessed  Job,  when  he  says.

Holy  Churchy  like  the  palm^faireil  above.  437

Then  Isaidf  I  shall  die  in  my  neat. Bui  because  this  same  Book

quietness  of  peace  Ihey  promised  themselves  in  a  length  of ^

many  days,  he  rightly  subjoins,  saytng^^n^f  1  shall  mulHply
my  days  as  a  palm.  For  the  palm  advances  slowly,  but
holds  on  long  in  greenness.  But  with  many  difficulties
Holy  Church  comes  to  the  firm  standing  of  the  Faith,  and
for  the  gathering  together  of  very  many  she  desires  to  be  set
the  longer  in  the  glory  of  that  Faith.  And  so  as  '  a  palm'
she  thought  *  to  multiply  her  days,*  who  on  the  crisis  of
sudden  temptation  emerging  upon  her,  grieves  for  the  boon
of  peace  at  once  slowly  gotten  by  the  faithful,  and  quickly
intercepted  by  the  unbelievers.

49.  Nor  is  it  unfairly  that  the  life  of  the  righteous  is
likened  to  a '  palm,*  in  this  respect,  that  the  palm  below  is
rough  to  be  touched,  and  in  a  manner  enveloped  in  dry
barks,  but  above  it  is  fair  with  fruit  even  to  be  looked  at;
below  it  is  compressed  by  the  enfoldings  of  its  barks,  above
it  is  spread  out  in  amplitude  of  beautiful  greenness.  For  so
is  the  life  of  the  Elect,  despised  below,  beautified  above.
Down  beneath  the  one  is  as  it  were  enfolded  in  many  barks,
in  that  it  is  straitened  by  innumerable  afflictions.  But  on
high  the  other  is  as  it  were  spread  out  with  the  foliage  of
beautiful  greenness  in  the  amplitude  of  the  rewarding.  The
palm  too  has  another  thing  as  well,  by  which  it  differs  fi-om
all  kinds  of  trees.  For  every  tree  holds,  in  its  timber,  large
sized  towards  the  ground,  but  in  growing  it  is  narrowed
above,  and  in  proportion  as  it  is  by  degrees  higher,  it  is
rendered  so  much  the  minuter  on  high;  but  the  palm  sets  out
of  less  circumference  from  the  bottom,  and  arises  with  wider
timber  towards  the  boughs  and  fruit;  and  that  which  goes
on  slender  from  the  bottom  grows  up  more  huge  to  the  top.
Accordingly  to  what  but  earthly  minds  are  other  trees  found
to  be  like,  expanded  below,  narrowed  above  ?  because  surely
all  the  lovers  of  this  world  are  strong  in  the  things  of  earth,
but  feeble  in  the  things  of  heaven.  Thus  for  temporal  glory
they  long  to  spend  themselves  even  to  death  itself;  and  for
the  everlasting  hope  they  do  not  though  but  a  little  hold  on
in  exertion.  For  the  sake  of  earthly  gains  they  submit  to
any  injuries,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  heavenly  reward  they
refuse  to  bear  the  insults  even  of  the  most  trifling  word.

438 Most  grow  small  upwards^  like  common  trees.

Job  99,  They  are  strong  enough  to  stand  before  an  earthly  judge
^;^  even  a  whole  day  through,  but  in  praying  in  the  presence  of
God  they  are  tired  even  with  the  space  of  a  single  hour.
tioD^  Oftentimes  they  bear  nakedness,  abjectness^  hunger,  for  the
sal^e  of  acquiring  riches  and  honours,  and  they  torment
themselves  with  the  stinting  of  those  things,  which  they  are
in  such  haste  to  obtain  \  but  from  seeking  with  hearty  endea-
vour the  things  that  are  above,  they  excuse  themselves  the
more,  in  proportion  as  they  imagine  them  to  be  more  slowly
paid  back. So  these  as  it  were  after  the  manner  of  the  rest
of  the  trees  are  wide  spread  below,  narrow  above,  because
they  hold  strong  towards  the  parts  below,  but  go  oif  towards
the  parts  above. But  on  the  other  hand  by  the  character  of
palm  trees  the  progressive  life  of  the  righteous  is  represented,
who  are  never  strong  in earthly  pursuits,  and  weak  in
heavenly  ones,  but  exhibit  themselves  devoted  to  God  with
<<lon-  a  farther  and  wider  extension*  than  they  remember  to  have
qiM  aV  been  to  the  world. For  whereas  it  is  said  to  certain  persons
^**°^'by  our  Preacher,  I  speak  after  the  manner  ofmen^  because
19. ^  of  the  if{/irmity  of  your  flesh:  for  as  ye  have  yielded  your
members servants to  uncleanness and to  iniquity  unto
iniquity:  even  so  now  yield  your  members  servants  to  Hghte^
ousness  unto  holiness:  without  doubt  there  is  a  condescending
to  their  infirmity,  as  though  it  were  said  to  them  in  plainer
terms;  ^  If  ye  cannot  any  way  do  more,  at  all  events  be  ye
such  in  the  fruit  of  good  works  as  ye  were  for  long  in  tlie
practising  of  bad  habits,  so  that  the  holy  freedom  of  charity
may  not  possess  you  weaker  persons,  whom  the  habit  of
earthly  pleasure  possessed  strong  ones  in  the  flesh.

50.  But  there  are  some  who,  while  they  aim  at  heavenly
things,  and  forsake  the  pernicious  doings  of  this  world,  by
the  littleroindedness  of  inconstancy  fall  away  day  by  day  from
their  setting  out«  To  what  but  to  the  rest  of  the  trees  should
I  call  these  like,  who  never  rise  such  persons  above  as  they
spring  up  below?  For  these  when  they  are  brought  to  con-
version do  not  hold  on  such  as  they  began ;  and  as  it  were
after  the  way  of  trees,  they  are  of  large  size  in  the  beginning,
but  they  grow  slight,  because  little  by  little  through  the
accessions  of  the  divisions  of  time  they  suffer  die  diminutions
of  the  attainments  of  virtue. For  imperceptibly  heavenly

Holy  Church  shall  mourn  thai  some  fall  offal  lasl. 439

desires  fade  away  in  them,  and  they  who  had  proposed  to  Book
themselves  things  vigorous  and  strong,  achieve  only  weak
and  feeble  ones,  and  whilst  they  progress  by  increase  of  age,
grow  as  it  were  easy  to  be  bent  But  the  palm,  as  has  been
said,  is  of  vaster  extent  in  the  summit  than  it  began  with  being
from  the  root;  because  oftentimes  the  conversion  of  the
Elect  accomplishes  more  in  finishing  than  it  purposes  on
setting  out;  and  if  it  begins  the  first  things  somewhat  luke-
warmly, it  completes  the  last  with  more  ardour;  that  is  to
say,  it  reckons  itself  to  be  always  beginning,  and  therefore
it  lasts  unwearied  in  newness.  It  was  this  constancy  of  the
righteous  that  the  Prophet  regarding  said,  Bui  they  that  ^9. 40^
trust  in  the  Lord  shall  change  their  strength;  they  shall
take  to  them  wings  as  eagles ;  they  shall  run^  and  not  he
weary:  they  shall  walk,  and  not  faint.  For  they  ^  change
their  strength,*  because  they  are  earnest  to  be  strong  in
spiritual  practice,  who  were  for  long  strong  in  the  flesh.
And  they  ^  take  to  them  the  wings  as  of  an  eagle,'  because
by  exercising  contemplation  they  fly ;  ^  they  walk,  and  do  not
faint,'  because  they  hold  in  the  rapidity  of  their  understanding,
that  they  may  condescend  to  the  slower  sort  But  under  all
circumstances  in  proportion  as  the  good  things  they  receire
they  gladly  adapt  to  others,  so  much  the  more  do  they
hold  on  themselves  unchangeable  in  newness;  and  they  tliat
proceed  small  from  the  root  of  the  begmning  are  consolidated
as  strong  in  the  finishing  of  the  topmost  point  So  then  let
blessed  Job  say  in  his  own  person,  let  him  say  in  the  voice
of  Holy  Church  in  behalf  of  those  whom  in  the  time  of
peace  she  had  owned,  converted  to  herself,  and  imagined
would  persevere  in  good  ways,  Tlien  Isaid^  I  shall  die  in  my
nestj  and  1  shall  multiply  my  days  as  a  palm.  For  ^  as  a
palm*  she  thought  to  ^  multiply  her  days,'  in  that  she  sup«
posed  that;the  minds  of  the  faithful  would  rise  up  stronger
even  to  the  very  last.  For  when  the  hearts  of  multitudes
worn  out  with  persecutions  begin  to  turn  sofl,  she  henceforth
grieves  that  those  in  her  as  it  were  tend  to  weakness,  whom
she  used  to  admire  for  their  having  purposed  strong  things.
And  because  in  mind  she  is  always  intent  upon  spiritual
knowledge,  it  is  rightly  subjoined,

Ver.  19.  My  root  is  opened  beside  the  waters.

440 Chrut  $ei  a«  a  Tree  by  i/te  stream  ofman^s  race.

Job 99, 51.  For  'by  the  waters  the  root  is  opened/  when,  for

nr  receiving  the  streams  of  truth,  secretly  the  thought  of  the

b.Tai.o'.™i"<l  is  spread  out. For  as  we  have  already  said  in  a  former
^i* book,  in  Holy  Writ  by  the  term  of  *  the  root'  the  hidden
thought  is  used  to  be  denoted. Therefore  '^  our  root  we
open  by  the  waters,'*  when  to  the  Interior  watering  we  stretch
the  thought  of  the  secret  heart Which  same  words  if  we
carry  on  to  the  voice  of  Holy  Church,  her  ^  root'  must  be
taken  for  the  very  Incarnation  our  Redeemer  itself. Which
'  root  is  opened  by  the  waters,'  in  that  God  Invisible  by  the
assumption  of  His  Manhood  was  laid  open  to  the  regardings
of  our  sight. Since  the  Creator,  Who  was  not  able  to  bo
seen  in  the  Godhead,  took  to  Him  from  us  that  whereby  He
might  by  us  be  seen. So  ^  the  root  is  opened  by  the  waters,'
because  the  Author  of  the  human  race  by  means  of  His
human  nature  is  manifested to human  beings. Whence
P«.  i,s.|ilso  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  Psalmist,  And  he  sliall  be  like  a
tree  that  ia  planted  beside  the  runnings  of  waters. For  ^  the
runnings  of  waters'  are  the  daily passings  by  of  peoples
LukeSS,  dying  off. And  Truth  saith  concerning  Itself,  1/  they  do
^^* these  things  in  the  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry?
And  so  there '  is  a  tree  beside  the  runnings  of  waters,'
because,  whilst  putting  forth  fruit  and  the  covering  of  His
shade  for  us,  the  Creator  appeared  in  the  flesh,  that  by  a
rising  again He  might  stay  the  human  race,  which  by  a
falling  off  was  day  by  day  going  on  into  death. It  goes  on ;
And  the  dew  shall  stay  on  my  harvest.
xxix. 62.  Understand,  /  said. For  the  harvest  of  Holy  Church
is  not  inappropriately  taken  to  be,  when  perfect  souls  with-
drawn from  their  bodies,  like  ripe  crops  cut  away  from  the
ground,  are  transported  into  the  heavenly  granaries ;  which
same  because  it  takes  place  not  by  our  own  power,  but  by
heavenly  grace  vouchsafing  it,  he  saith  well,  And  the  dew
shall  stay  on  my  harvest. For  the  dew  falls  from  above,
but  the harvest is  gathered in from below. And so
*  the dew  stays  on  the  harvest,' because  grace coming
from  above  causes  it,  that  we  should  bo  meet  persons
to  be  gathered  in  from  the  world  below. For  by  that  same
grace  watering  us  from above,  we  bear  the  fmit  of  good
is^To.  P'^c^i^®* Whence  also  it  is  rightly  said  by  Paul,  But  by

Sadnets  of  not  keeping  the  Ji'eihiieis  of  grace. 4ii

the  grace  qf  God  I  am  what  I  am  ;  and  HU  grace,  ithich  Book
ftas  bestowed  upon  me,  was  not  in  vain.  For  if  it  be  enquired  .EIZL
what  is  tho  dew  coining  from  above,  be  telU  us,  B^  the  grace
of  God  I  am  what  1  am.  If  we  look  at  the  crop  growing  up
beneath  the  dew,  he  sajs.  And  His  grace  was  not  in  vain
in  me,  but  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all.  It
proceeds ;

Ver.  20.  Mg  glory  shall  always  be  fresh  in  me^  and  my
bow  shall  be  renewed  in  mine  hand.

53.  Understand,  /  said ; since  all  is  joined  on  to  the  xxx.
sentence  above,  that  is  introduced  next  in  a  continuous
thread  of  discourse,  when  he  says.  Then  I  saidf  1  sihaU  die
in  my  nest,  and  I  shall  multiply  my  days  as  the  palm ;  and
afterwards  it  is  subjoined,  My  root  is  opened  by  the  wtUers,
and  the  dew  shall  stay  on  my  harvest; my  glory  shall
ever  be  fresh  in  me^  and  my  bow  shall  be  renewed  in  mine
Iiand. To  all  that  know  what  is  true  it  is  clear,  that  to  the
old  life  qualities  of  evil  are  proper,  to  the  new  qualities  of
virtue. Thus  it  is  hence  that  Paul  saith.  Putting  off  the  oldCotZfi.
man  with  his  deeds,  and  putting  on  the  new  man. Hence
he  says  again,  Our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him. Hence  Bom.  6,
the  Psalmist  speaking  in  a  type  of  man,  as  being  caught  in^'
the  midst  of  evil  spirits,  saith,  /  have  waxed  old  amongst  ol/Ps.S,  7.
mine  enemies. For  unto  fervour  of  mind,  whether  amidst
spiritual  enemies,  or  in  the  midst  of  our  several  carnal  neigh-
bours, in  some  degree  by  the  mere  habituation  of  living  '  we
wax  old,*  and  the  form  of  newness  taken  upon  us  we  soil.
Against  which  same  oldness,  however,  if  our  earnest  pains
after  heedfulness  be  daily  on  the  watch,  by  praying,  by
reading,  and  living  well  we  are  renewed  afresh  ;  because  our
life,  while  it  is  washed  with  tears,  exercised  in  good  works,
drawn  out  by  holy  meditations,  is  without  ceasing  restored
to  its  newness. Blessed  Job  then  so  tells  his  own  case  that
he  represents  ours,  because  Holy  Church,  when  she  sees  her
faithful  ones  return  to  the  transgressions  of  the  old  life,  is
forced  to  lament  for  those  whom  she  sees  lose  the  newness
of  the  interior. Since  the great  Preacher says  to his
disciples.  For  what  is  our  hope  or  joy  or  crown  qf  rejoicing  f  i  Th««.
Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lordt And  so  Holy  ' '

442  *  Bow^  of  the  enemy ;  of  Judgment;  ofOoSi  Word.

Job  39,  Church  beifaHs  her  glory departed,  when  she  sees  her

^' faithful  ones  return  to  the  old  life. Thus  she  says,  /  iaid^

'My  glory  shall  always  be  made  fresh ;  because  those  whom

she  bolievod  wore  enlisted  within  her  to  tlie  new  life,  she  sees

to  be  lending  themselves  to  old  desires.

54.  Now  by  the  name  of  a  'bow'  in  Holy  Scripture,  some-
times the  plots  of  evil  men,  sometimes  the  Day  of  Judgment,
while  sometimes  the  actual  sacred  Oracles  themselves  are
denoted. Since  by  a  bow  plots  are  denoted,  as  where  it  is

Pt.64,s.  said  by  the  Psalmist,  And  have  bent  their  bow^  a  bitter  thing.
Moreover  by '  a  bow'  the  Day  of  the  Last  Judgment  is  denoted,
Pi.60,s.  as  where  it  is  said  again  by  the  same  Psalmist,  77ioii  hast
^'  shewed  Thy  people  hard  things^  Thou  hast  made  us  to  drink
the  wine  of  remorse^  Thou  hast  given  a  token  to  them  that
fear  Thee^  that  they  may  fly  from  before  the  bow.  For  in
a  bow  in  proportion  as  the  string  is  drawn  out  far,  the  arrow
flie9  off  the  keener  from  it.  Thus,  yes,  thus  the  Day  of
Judgment,  in  proportion  as  it  is  delayed  for  long  that  it
should  come,  when  it  does  come,  the  keener  the  sentence
goes  forth  therefrom.  But  for  this  reason  we  are  now
stricken  with  sundry  losses,  in  order  that  being  amended
thereby,  we  may  then  be  found  more  prepared.  Whence  it
is  there  premised.  Thou  hast  shewed  Thy  people  hard  things^
i.  e.  the  scourges  of  the  present  state,  which  are  forerunners
of  the  Day  of  Judgment,  to  follow  far  worse.  Thou  hast
made  us  to  drink  the  wine  of  remorse^  so  that  earthly  joys
should  be  converted  into  tears.  Tliou  hast  given  a  token
to  them  that  fear  Thee,  that  they  may  fiy  from  before  the
bow.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  terms ;  '  This  is  the  season
of  ^lercy,  that  shall  be  the  time  of  Judgment.'  Thus  by
these  scourges  of  this  present  time  Thou  dost  betoken  how
Thou  wilt  then  strike  when  Thou  judgest  not  sparing.  Who
dost  now  strike  so  sharply  when  Thou  sparest.

55.  But  sometimes  by  a  '  bow'  Holy  Scripture  is  denoted
as  well.  For  that  is  the  '  bow'  of  the  Church,  that  is  the
'  bow'  of  the  Lord,  wherefrom  like  arrows  striking,  so  do
terrifying  sentences  come  to  the  hearts  of  men. Whence

P«.7,i3«also  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  Psalmist,  He  hath  bent  His  bow,
^^* and  made  if  ready ;  He  hath  also  prepared  in  it  the  vessels

T%e  New  lUiameni  a  siring  to  bend  the  how  of  the  Old.  448

of  death,  He  hath  made  His  arrows  for  the  burning  ones.  Book
For  the  Lord  hath  « bent  His  bow/  because  to  all  sinners  "^*
fie  hath  set  forth  threats  in  sacred  Rerelalion.  In  which
same  bow  He  '  prepares  the  vessels  of  death,*  because  ac-
cording to  the  sentence  of  His  Rerelation,  those  that  neglect
to  be  reformed  now,  He  condemns  as  reprobate.  In  which
bow  also  He  *  made  His  arrows  for  the  burning  ones/
because  against  those  persons,  whom  He  amends  hy  terror^
He  sends  forth  the  kindled  sentences  of  words.  Concerning
this  bow  of  the  preachers  it  is  declared  by  Isaiah;  Wilhu.7^u.
arrows  and  with  bofcs  they  enter  in  thither;  in  this  way^
because  the  holj  Apostles  came  for  the  smiting  the  hardness
of  the  Gentiles'  life  with  the  keen  dartings  of  words.  What
then  in  this  place  is  to  be  understood  by  the  name  of  the
bow  but  sacred  Revelation  ?  For  by  the  string  the  New
Testament,  while  by  the  bow  the  Old  Testament,  is  under-
stood. Now  in  a  bow  when  the  string  is  drawn,  the  horn  is
bended :  so  in  this  same  sacred  Revelation,  when  the  New
Testament  is  read,  the  hardness  of  the  Old  is  rendered  pliant
For  to  the  spiritual  and  mild  precepts  of  this,  the  rigidness
of  the  letter  of  the  other  bends  itself;  because  whilst  the
New  Testament  as  it  were  by  a  kind  of  arm  of  good  practice
is  drawn,  in  the  Old  Testament  the  claims  of  severity  are
relaxed.  Nor  do  we  improperly  say  that  the  string  accords
with  the  New  Testament,  which  it  is  certain  came  out  ^by
the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord.  And  so  as  it  were  the
string  is  drawn  and  the  horns  bent;  because  when  in  the
New  Testament  the  Incarnation  of  our  Mediator  is  seen,  the
rigidness  of  the  Old  Testament  is  made  to  bend  to  a  spiritual
signification.  Therefore  the  holy  man  says,  /  said,  My
glory  shall  always  he  fresh,  and  my  bow  shall  be  renewed  in
mine  hand.

56.  ^  A  bow  in  the  hand'  is  Holy  Writ  in  the  practising.
For  he  holds  '  a  bow  in  his  hand,'  who  performs  by  the
practising  the  divine  revelations  which  he  learns  by  appre-
hension. Thus  the  ^  bow  is  renewed  in  the  hand,'  in  that
whatever  is  learnt  belonging  to  Holy  Revelation  by  studying
is  fulfilled  by  living  accordingly.  Hence  also  Solomon
when  he  was  describing  the  strong  warriors  of  the  spiritual
fight,  says,  Alt  holding  swords^  being  Well  instructed  for  Cant  9,

444  Holy  Church  laments  the  falling  off  in  latter  days.

Job  so,  wars.  For  what  U  represented  in  Dirine  Writ  by  '  a  sword/
^  Paul  laid  open  by  saying,  And  the  sword  of  the  Spirit^  which
Eph-s/^  Ihe  word  of  Ood.  Now  Solomon  saith  not  '  all  having*
!/•  but  *  all  holding  swords;*  suroly  because  not  only  to  know
the  word  of  God  is  admirable,  but  likewise  to  do  it.  For
he  has  but  does  not  ^  hold'  a  sword,  who  kuows  indeed
Divine  Revelation,  but  neglects  to  live  according  to  it,  and
he  cannot  now  any  longer  be  ^  well  instructed  to  wars,*  who
never  exercises  the  spiritual  sword  that  he  has.  For  he  is
altogether  not  equal  to  resist  temptations,  who  by  living  badly
puts  it  behind  him  to  hold  this  sword  of  the  word  of  God.
So  then  let  Holy  Church,  which  is  weighed  down  by  subse-
quent persecution,  taking  thought  of  tlie  multitude  of  bad
and  the  scarcity  of  good  ones,  by  the  accents  of  blessed  Job
foreannounce  her  own  woes,  saying,  Tlien  I  said^  I  shall
die  in  my  nest,  and  I  shall  multiply  my  days  as  a  palm.
My  root  is  opened  wide  by  the  waters,  and  the  dew  shall
stay  on  my  harvest.  My  glory  shall  ever  be  fresh,  and  my
bow  shall  be  renewed  in  mine  hand.  Which  same,  whilst
taking  a  view  of  all  things,  was  never  imposed  on  by  a  false
hope.  For  they  that  be  perfect  now  see  many  her  supporters,
but  doubtless  they  reflect  that  on  the  crisis  of  temptation
coming  forth,  the  greater  number  of  these  become  her  enemies,
who  in  the  time  of  peace  seem  to  bo  her  citizens.  But  they
do  not  despair  of  all  in  like  manner,  yet  nevertheless  it  very
frequently  falls  out  that  those  persons,  touching  whom  they
had  entertained  more  confident  assurance  as  to  the  Faith,
themselves  become  fiercer  enemies  of  the  Faith,  so  that  they
then  see  those  acting  against  the  sacred  Oracles,  by  whose
working  they  had  thought  to  restore  those  same  sacred
Oracles  to  the  benefit  of  preaching.  Which  same  times,
however,  we  lament  have  now  already  commenced,  when  we
see  numbers,  set  within  the  pale  of  the  Church,  who  either
refuse  to  practise  what  they  understand,  or  this  very  sacred
Revelation  likewise  disdain  to  see  into  and  to  know.  For
turning  away  the  hearing  from  the  truth,  they  are  turned  to
Phil.  2,  fables,  whilst  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  that  are
^^'  Jesus  ChrisCs.  The  written  words  of  God  every  where
found  are  presented  to  their  eyes,  but  men  disdain  to  acquaint
themselves  with  these,  scarce  one  seeks  to  know  what  he  has

Her  Marrow  expre$$ed  beforehand.  445

belioved. So  then  let  the  multitade  of  good  men  going  Book

before  grieve  to  have  their  *  bow  destroyed,*  which  same

always  thought  to  have  sacred  Revelation  restored  by  the
efforts  of  those  coming  after.

BOOK  XX.

The  fiTe  oonolading  Tenet  of  chapter  twenty-nine  of  the  Book  of  Job  are
more  largely  explained,  together  with  the  whole  of  chapter  thirty,  chiefly
on  the  tubject  of  heretics  and  carnal  persons  distressing  the  Church.

i.  1.  Although  all  knowledge  and  all  lore  Sacred  Scripture

without  all  comparison  far  excels,  to  say  nothing  thatittells
forth  what  is  true ;  that  it  bids  to  the  heavenly  country  ;^that
it  changes  the  heart  of  him  that  reads  it  from  earthly  desires
to~the  embracing  of  things  Above;  that  by  its  obscnreT"
statements  it  exercises  the  strong,  and  by  its  humble  strain
^eaks  gently  to  me  nine  onesj_that  it  is  neither  so  shut  up,
that  it  should  come  to  be  dreaded,  nor  so  open  to  view  as  to
become  contemptibie  f  that  by  use  it  removeft  wearineflfly  and
IS  the  more  delighted  Fn  ttie^mdre  it  is  inediiated  on;  t^at
theTmind  of  Tmn^  who  reads  il,  by  words  of  a  low  pitch  ii~
\t  J)  ^^^^>  ^^^  ^y  meanings  of  a  lofty  flight  uplifts ;  that  in  some
\\\  '^ L  sort  it  gro'  s  with  the  persons  reading,  that  by  uninstructed'

H^  readers  it  is  in  a  manner  reviewed,  and  yet  by  the well

^V^  instnictcd  is  alwaysTound  new;  so  then  To  say  nothing  of  the

'^  weightiness of  the~~8ubjec(?,  it  goes  beyond  all  foims  of

knowledge  and  teaching  even  by  the  mere  manner  of  its  style
of  speaking,  because  in  one  and  the  same  thread  of  discourse,
while  it  relates  the  text,  it  declares^  a  mystery,  and  has  the
art  so  to  teil  the  past,  that^  merely  by  that  alone  it  knows
how  to  announce  the  future,  and  the  order  of  telling  remain-
ing unaltered,  is  instructed  by  the  very  self-same  forms  of
speech  at  once  to  describe  things  done  before,  and  to  tell
things  destined  to  be  done,  just  as  it  is  with  these  same  words
oTbltiHSed  Job,  who  Wb}le  he  t^lU~  hfi'  own"  circumstances
TgyfiteU  'ours,  anrwTuTeTre  points  out  Jiis  own  sorrows  in
respect  of  the  phrase,  sounds  of  tlie_cases  and  occasions  of
Holy  Church  in  respect  of  the  meaning. For  he  says;


^#y


V

CJ^Oi  ■


Men  should  not  dare  to  add  to  Ike  ChuteVs  teaching.  447

Ver.  21 — 23.  They  that  heard  me  aivaited  my  eentenee,  B^k

and  listening  kept  silence  at  my  counsel. Ihey  dared  not ^

to  add  any  thing  to  my  toordSj  and  my  speech  dropped  i^Hm

them. And  they  waited  for  me  as  the  rain^  and  opened -^^

their  niouih  wicte  asjor  tne  latter  rain.

2.  F^t  thlfl  Awe  ot  tnose  vmAet  him  we  unqnesdooably  U*
believe  to  have  been  towards  blessed  Job.  JBiit  as  we  bare
already  orten  said,  Holj  Church  being  driven  to  extremities
by  the  inflictions  of  heretics  or  carnal  persons,  remembers
the  times  past,  in  which  all  that  is  spoken  by  her  is  listened
to  with  fear  by  the  faithful,  and  lamenting  the  frowardness
of  her  adversaries,  she  says,  They  that  heard  me  awaited  fny
sentence^  and  listening  kept  silence  at  my  counsel.  As
though  she  expressed  herself  in  plain  speech,  ^  Not  like)
these  forward  and  swoln  ones,  who  whilst  they  refuse  to  admit
the  words  of  truth,  do  as  it  were  in  teaching  forestall  the
sentences  of  my  preaching/  Whose  disciples  now  *  intent
upon  her  counsel  keep  silence,*  because  her  words  they  dare
not  to  impugn,  but  take  on  faith.  For  that  they  may  be  able
to  profit  by  these  same  words,  they  hear  them,  doubtless,
not  with  a  view  to  judge  them,  but  to  follow  (hem.

3.  Of  whom  it  is  rightly  added.  To  my  words  they  dared
not  to  add  any  thing;  surely  because  heretics,  at  that  time
when  against  her  they  are  in  liberty  the  most  mischievous,
free  of  all  check,  do  *  dare  to  add  something  to  her
words,*  in  that  they  busy  themselves  as  if  to  correct  the
rightness  of  her  preachings.  Which  same  still  further  adds
touching  the  good  hearers,  And  my  speech  dropped  Upon
them:'

4.  By  this  dropping  of  s]»eech,  what  else  is  understood  but
the  measure  of  holy  preaching?  because  it  is  requisite  that
the  boon  of  exhortation  be  bestowed  to  each  according  to
the  capacity  of  his  parts.  And  in  respect  of  this  that  is  said,
To  my  words  they  dared  n4)t  to  add  any  thing;  the  reverential
feeling  of  the  persons  hearing  is  extolled;  but  in  respect  of
this,  that  is  added.  And  my  speech  dropped  upon  them;  the
masters*  distributing  is  pointed  out  For  one  who  teaches
ought  to  look  exactly,  that  be  be  not  forward  to  preach  more
than  is  comprehended  by  the  one  who  hears  him.  For  it  is
his  duty  by  contracting  himself  to  let  himself  down  to  the

448  DropiofHuly  ieachimj. The  Oospel  *  Uiiier  rainJ'

Job  99,  infirmity  of  bis  hearers,  lest  whilst  he  speaks  to  little  persons
^ 'lofty  things,  which  for  that  reason  will  not  profit  them,  he  be
*  more  minded  to  make  a  display  of  himself  than  to  benefit
^*  ^>  his  hearers. Now  at  the  Lord's  bidding,  there  are  not  only
16.* '  flagons  but  likewise  cups  prepared  for  the table  of  the
Tabernacle. For  what  is  denoted  by  ^  flagons'  but  ample
preaching,  and  what  by  cups  but  the  smallest  and  slightest
speaking  about  God? Therefore  on  the  table  of  the  Lord
there  are  both  flagons  and  cups  made  ready,  in  this  way
because  in  the  teaching  of  sacred  Revelation  there  are  not
only  to  be  set  forth  things  great  and  mysterious  that  in-
toxicate, but  also  little  and minute ones, which afibrd
knowledge  as  it  were  in  a  tasting. So  tlien  let  Holy  Church
being  borne  down  in the  last  times  remember  this  most
discriminating  disposal  of  hers,  and  let  her  say.  And  my
speech  dropped  upon  them.
-  6.  ^Whgre  too  it  is  fitly  added,  They  tcaited  for  me  as  the

^^ rain^  and  opened  their  mouth  as  for  the  latter  rain,  _  For
the  words  of  holy  preaching  we  undergo  as  rain,  when  by
true  humility  we  learn  the  dryness  of  our  hearts,  that  we
may  be  watered  by  the  draught  of  holy  preaching. Whence
Pi.  Xi'S^  also  it  is  rightly  said  to  God  by  the  Psalmist,  My  soul  is  like
*• earth  without  water  to  Thee. The  Prophet  charges  us  to  be
If.M,i.  bathed with these  streams  of  teaching,  saying,  Ho^  every
one  that  thirsteth  come  ye  to  the  waters, ^WhojjrhihtJnahe
final  portion  of  the  world  w^  now  receive  the  words  of  holx
preactnng,  as  it  were  ^  open  the  mouth  of  the  heart  to  the
latter  ram/ For  if  there  "were  not  in  Tlie  licailt  *  a  niouth,^
Pt.U,9.  the  Psalmist  would  not  say,  Crafty  lips  in  hearty  and  with
the  heart  they  have  spoken  evil  things. The  mouth  of  the
'Heart,  then,  because  we  applx^ouisclycj^^taJhe  ^orrf  (^jT^Xfi
preaching  at  the  end,  this,  1  say,  wo  aaL^l-^JL^-  9P^"  ^^  ^^'^
lailer  streams. ' WhicTi'  same  preaching  came  forth  to  us  by
Pt.  141,  the  sacrifice  of  Ilim,  Who  says  by  the  Psahnist,  And  the
^' lifting  up  qf  my  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice. For  because
our  Redeemer  at  the  end  of  the  world  underwent  the  violence
of  those  that  persecuted  Him,  Himself  He  ^  gave  an  evening
Jer.  6, giicYigce  for  us.' Of  this  '  latter  rain'  it  is  elsewhere  written,
Deiit.li,  /  wiU  give  you  rain^  both  the  early ^  and  the  latter  rain. For
i*V«m-  He  *  gave  the  early  rain,'  because  in  the  former  period  He

jiorifMim'

Gentlepfess  in  ruling  to  be  tempered  with  severity. 440

bestowed  on  His  Elect  the  knowledge  of  the  Law. He  *  gave  Book
the  latter  rain,'  because  He  caused  the  mystery  of  His


Incarnation  to  be  preached  in  the  last  days.  Which  same
mystery  because  Holy  Church  ceases  not  to  tell  forth  day
by  day,  she  waters  the  mouths  of  her  hearers*  hearts  as  it
were  by  *  the  latter  rain.' It  goes  on ;

Ver.  24.  I/I  laughed  on  ihem^  they  believed  it  not:  and
the  light  of  my  countenance  fell  not  on  the  ground.

6.  If  wo  understand  this  according  to  the  words  of  the
history,  it  must  be  imagined  that  the  holy  man  had  shewn
himself  such  to  those  under  him,  that  even  in  laughing  he
was  able  to  be  feared.  But  whereas  he  relates  above  that  he
had  been  ^  a  father  to  the  poor,  and  the  comforter  of  the
widows  ;*  the  case  needs  very  great  penetration  to  discrimi-
nate how  and  in  what  way  in  such  terribleness  of  govern-
ment there  was  likewise  so  much  gentleness  and  mildness  of
pity  there  present.  For  without  extraordinary  gentleness  of
loving-kindness  there  was  not  this,  viz.  that  he  describes
himself  *  the  father  of  the  poor,  and  comforter  of  the  widows;*
whilst  again  without  great  severity  he  could  not  even  when
*  laughing*  be  feared :  on  which  point  what  else  are  we
taught,  but  that  such  ought  to  be  the  management  of
governance,  that  he  who  is  in  command  should  rule  himself  )(
towards  those  under  him  by  this  measure,  that  both  while
laughing  he  may  be  feared,  and  when  angered  be  loved,  that
neither  excessive  mirth  should  render  him  contemptible,  nor
unlimited  severity  make  him  hated  ?  For  oftentimes  we  break
in  pieces  those  under  our  charge  when  we  maintain  the  energy
of  justice  beyond  what  is  just,  which  energy  will  surely  now
no  longer  be  that  of  justice,  if  it  do  not  keep  itself  under  just
control.  And  often  those  under  us  we  unloose  from  the  fear
of  discipline,  if  to  our  rule  we  let  go  the  reins  of  mirth,
because  whilst  they  behold  us  joyful  as  it  were  at  our  liberty,
ihey  are  themselves  boldly  let  loose  to  what  they  are  not  at
liberty.  But  that  the  countenance  of  the  ruler  may  even
when  joyful  be  feared,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  himself
unceasingly  fear  the  countenance  of  his  own  Afaker.  For
credit  then  is  with  difficulty  given  to  that  mind  as  to  glad-
ness, which  it  is  known  by  those  under  its  charge  chastens
itself  continually  for  the  love  of  God. For  he  who  with  an

VOL.  II.  o  g

450  Job*$9eriout/ear  o/Ood;  his  freedom  from  low  ihoughit.

Job  99,  uniutermitted  fever  of  spiritual  desire  seeks  after  things
^'  above,  has  this  come  into  very  great  doubt  concerning  him,
that  he  is  sometimes  glad  of  heart  before  men.  And  hence
that  same  blessed  Job  was  not  long  afterwards  to  say>  For
I  always  feared  God  as  waves  swelling  over  me.  For  he  so
feared  his  Judge  as  immediately  impending  assaults  of  waves,
now,  now  on  the  point  to  die.  He  then  into  whose  mind  the
sadness  of  the  fear  of  God  had  poured  itself,  rightly  did
those  imder  him  not  believe  his  joyiulness;  because  they
were  forced  not  to  believe  him  when  he  laughed,  whose
heart  they  knew  what  unremitting  sadness  possessed  under
the  fear  of  his  Creator.

7.  That  also  may  not  unsuitably  be  understood  after  the

history,  which  is  next  brought  in  directly  ;  And  the  light  of

my  countenance  fell  not  on  the  ground. Since  it  is  written ;

ProT. But  the  eyes  of  a  fool  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth. And

^^  ^  again  it  is  said  by  the  same  Solomon,  Tlie  wise  man^s  eyes

14. '  are  in  his  head. Paul  also  said ;  T/ie  head  of  every  man  is

ii^s'* ^A^^^* So  *  the  wise  man's  eyes  are  in  his  head,*  in  that  he

'  ' is  ever  contemplating  the  works  of  his  Redeemer  that  he

should  imitate  them. So  ^  the  light  of  his  countenance  fell

not  on  the  ground/  because  those  thiugs  that  are  of  the  earth

he  beheld  not  in  concupiscence.

Allbo. 8.  But  whereas  we  have  made  out  the  outside  of  the  history

in  brief,  what  lies  concealed  in  the  points  belonging  to

mystical  meaning  let  us  consider  well. That  Christ  and  the

Church  are  one  Person,  we  have  very  frequently  said  already,

and  it  oftentimes  happens  that  the  voice  of  the  Head  passes  to

the  voice  of  the  Body,  and  often  that  the  voice  of  the  Body

passes  over  to  the  voice  of  the  Head. For  they  that  consist

in  one  flesh,  nothing  hinders  but  that  they  also  accord  in

one  voice. So  then  let  her  say  in  the  voice  of  the  Head

touching  His  Elect  members,  let  the Church say.  If  I

laughed  on  them  they  believed  it  not; since  for  God  to

*  laugh*  is  for  the  ways  of  the  Saints  to  be  made  to  prosper

by  His  favour  following  them. As  it  is  also  expressed  by

common  usage  of  those,  whom  in  this  world  the  caresses  of

good  fortune  accompany ;  *  The  time  smiled  upon  them.*

Whence  reversely  it  is  called  the  wrath  of  God  to  be  dis-

Pi.s,i9.  abled  from  good  pract  *ce. As  it  is  written ;  Lest  the  Lord

The  Elect  take  noljojf  to  ihetn  wiihoui/ear. 45l

be  angry ^  ahd  ^e  perish  fro)k  the  right  wdy. If  theti  Book
the  Lord  is  Mid  to  he  *  angry*  when  nien  los^  the  way  of  ^^'
righteousness,  the Lord  is  rightlj  described  aA  *  smiling*
when  our  good  works  the  favour  of  grace  from  Above  accoiil*>
panics  on  the  way. But  all  the  Elect  so  long  as  they  are  iil
this  life  never  hold  out  to  themselves  the  assurance  of
security. For  being  at  all  times  alive  to  suspicion  against
temptations,  they  dread  the  plottings  of  the  hidden  enemy,
who  even  on  temptation  ceasing,  are  greatly  disturbed  eveii
by  the  mere  suspecting  only. For  odentimes  to  matljr  heed-
less security  has  proved  great  haasard,  so  that  the  plots  of  th^
crafty  enemy  they  should  be  made  acquainted  with j  not  wheil
tried,  but  when  already  laid  low. For  we  have  always  to  be  oil
the  watch,  that  the  mind  unceasing  in  its  solicitiide  never  be
slackened  in  its  heavenly  bent,  that  abandoning  what  is
painful,  laid  low  in  loose  thoughts  as  in  a  kind  of  soft  litters,
the  mind  be  tiot  all  undone  and  prostitute  itself  to  that
corrupter  the  devil  on  his  coming. But  the  soul  tnust  always
be  gathered  up  for  the  encounter  of  th^  adversary,  Uways
there  must  be  caution  provided  against  secret  snares. For
hence  the  Prophet  Habakkuk  saith ;  /  kvill  stand  upon  iny  Hab.  9,
watch. Hence  again  it  is  written; Set  thee  up  a  u^-atchj^^^i
tower  f  make  thee  bitternesses^  [thou  thatpteachest  glad  tidings  si.
to  lS•ion^3 Hence  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  Happy  is  the  fnaH  *  not  in
that  always feareth;  but  he  that  hardenelh  his  hedrt  shall^^^
fall  into  mischief. Hence  he  saith  again;  Every  man  hath^t  i^*
his  sword  upon  his  thigh,  because  of  fears  in  the  night. Thes. '
*  fears  in  the  night'  are  the  hidden  snares  of  temptation.
But '  the  sword  upon  the  thigh*  is  watch  on  gtiard,  keeping
down  the  enticements  of  the  flesh. So  then  that  *  the  fear
by  iiight,*  i.  e.  secret  and  sudden  temptation,  inay  not  creep
tipon  us,  it  is  always  necessary  that  the '  sword*  of  watching
placed  thereon  should  press  our  thigh. For  holy  men  are  so
assured  touching  hope,  that  nevertheless  they  are  ever  mis-
trustful touching  temptation,  as  being  those  to  whom  it  is
said  ;  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear  y  and  r^ce  unto  Him  with'^^^A^*
trembling:  so  that  by  hope  rejoicing  should  be  produced,
and  by  mistrust  *  trembling.' In  whose  voice  the  Psalmist
saith  again,  Let  my  heart  rejoice  that  it  may  fear  Thy  Pi.  86,
Name* Wherein  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  he  does  not  say^  *  Let  ^^*

Gg2

452 St.  Paul,  con$ciou9  of  grace ^  yei  distrusted  self

Job  99,  it  rejoice  that  it  may  be  assured ;'  but.  Met  it  rejoice  that  it
*' may  fear.' For  they  remember  that  though  their  course  of
'  conduct  be  made  to  succeed,  they  are  still  in  this  life,  touch-
Job;,  i.ing  which  it  is  said  by  tliat  same  Job ;  T/ie  life  of  man  upon
Wiad.9y  earth  is  trial. They  remember  again  that  it  is  written ;  For
^^* the  corruptible  body  presseth  down  the  soul^  and  the  earthly
tabernacle  toeigheth  down  the  mind^  that  museth  upon  many
things. They  remember  and  they  stand  in  fear,  and  they
do  not  dare  to  promise  to  themselves  in  themselves  assured-
ness,  but  being  set  between  the  joy  of  hope  and  the  fear  of
temptation,  they  trust  and  tliey  fear,  they  are  heartened  and
they  falter,  they  are  assured  and  they  are  distrustful. There-
fore it  is  well  said  by  the  voice  of  the  elect  member  under  a
figure  of  our  Head,  If  I  laughed  on  them,  they  believed  it
not. Because  our  Redeemer  as  it  were  smiling  on  us  we  do
not  believe  when  His  many  gifts  now  beaiing  their  testimony,
we  at  once  receive  the  boon  of  His  favour,  and  yet  still  go
faltering  under  His  judgment  for  our  own  frailly.

9.  Let  us  see  how  to  Paul  there  is  henceforth both  a
^  smiling'  through  grace  from  Above,  and  he  himself  still
*  believes  not'  as  it  were through  the  fear  of  misgiving.
Already  the  Lord  as  it  were  speaking  to  him  from  Heaven,
and  whilst  opening  his  eyes  inwardly,  closing  th«m  out-
wardly, had  displayed  the  power  of  His  Majesty:  already  He
Aoti  9,  had  said  to  Ananias  concerning  Him ;  For  he  is  a  chosen
8  Cor. ^*^^f  ^'^l^  ^'^* Already  he  had  been  transported  to  the
13,  s. third  heaven  above  himself. Already  carried  into  Paradise
he  had  heard  mystic  words,  which  he  might  not  tell,  and
1  Cor. yet  being  still  fearful  he  says.  But  I  keep  under  my  body  and
' bring  it  into  subjection,  lest  that  by  any  means  when  I  have
preached  to  others  I  should  be  a  castaway.  See  how  to  Divine
grace  smiling  on  him  he  already  trusts  in  respect  of  hope,  and
yet  trusts  not  in  respect  of  self-assurance. For  that  these
words  agree  perfectly  with  the  words  of  our  Redeemer,  tliose
subjoined  do  also  declare,  when  it  is  said,  And  the  light  of  my
countenance  did  not  fall  upon  the  earth. For  what  is  styled
^  the  earth'  but  the  sinner,  to  whom  it  was  said  by  the  first
Gen.  8,  sentence ;  Earth  thou  art,  and  unto  earth  shatt  thou  return  ?
^  * So  '  the  light  of  the  Lord's  countenance  does  not  fall  to
the  earth,'  because  the  brightness  of  His  Vision  does  not

Discriminaiepreaching.  Christ  comes  at  wittjandiiisjirst.  458

appear  to  siniiere. Thus  it  is  written ;  Let  the  ungodly  man  Book
be  removed  away  that  he  see  not  the  glory  of  God. For  -


light  would  as  it  were  fall  upon  the  earth,  if  when  He  comes  lo. '
in  the  Last  Judgment,  He  manifested  the  brightness  of  His
Majesty  to  sinners.

10.  But  if  we  receive  these  words  in  the  voice  of  Holy
Church,  we  may  not  unsuitably  understand  that  '  the  light
of  her  countenance  does  not  fall  upon  the  earth,'  because
to  them  that  are  busied  in  earthly  courses  she  forbids  to
preach  the  highest  mysteries  of  her  contemplation.  For
what  is  strong  she  forbids  to  be  spoken  to  the  weak,  lest
whilst  they  bear  things  incapable  of  being  comprehended,
they  be  borne  to  the  ground  by  the  words  of  preaching  by
which  they  should  have  been  lifted  up.  For  the  mere  cor-
poreal light,  which  illumines  sound  eyes,  darkens  weak
ones,  and  whilst  by  weak  seeing  eyes  tlie  gaze  is  set  on  the
brightness  of  the  sun,  there  is  very  frequently  darkness  pro-
duced to  them  from  light  Thus  let  Holy  Church  being
borne  down  in  the  time  of  her  persecution,  but  bearing  in
mind  her  foregoing  discrimination,  say.  The  light  of  my
countenance  did  AM  fall  upon  the  earth.  But  because  these
words  we  began  to  take  as  from  her  Head,  let  us  in  the  Same
still  follow  out  what  comes  after. For  it  is  added :

Yer.  25.  If  I  was  minded  to  go  to  t/tenti  I  sat  chief

11.  Because  in  the  heart  of  lost  sinners,  the  actions  of  the iv«
flesh  are  in  the  first  place,  and  of  the  soiil  in  the  second,
surely  in  their  thoughts  Christ  ^  sits*  not  ^  first*  but  *  last'
But  each  of  the  Elect,  because  above  all  others  they  mind

the  things  that  are  eternal,  and  if  there  be  any  things  of  a
temporal  kind,  they  manage  them  with  an  after  and  the  least
concern ;  to  whom  it  is  also  said  by  the  preceptress  voice  of
Truth,  Seek  ye  first  tfie  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous-  Matt «,
nessy  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you;  in  their ^'
heart  the  Lord  *  sits  first'  In  which  place  it  is  fitly  pre-
faced, If  I  had  been  minded  to  go  to  them.  For  because,
as  has  been  said.  He  docth  all  things  according  to  the  counsel
of  His  Will,  not  in  answer  to  our  desert,  but  because  He  is
Himself  so  minded,  the  Lord  enlightens  us  with  His  visita-
tion. And  so  He  both  comes  '  when  He  is  minded,'  and
when  He  comes  He  ^  sitteth  first,'  because  both  His  Coming

454  Vir(ue$  an  army  roun4  Christy  the  Elect  round  Teachers.

joB99yin  our  heart  is  gratuitous,  and  the  longing  of  the  desire  of
^'  Him  in  the  thought  of  our  heart  is  not  th^  same  ^  the  rest
LLBo.  ^j  ^^^^  desires. It  goes  on ;

And  tchm  I  Ml  as  a  king  mih  (J^n  amny  standing  rounds
nevei'iheless  I  teas  ike  Comforter  of  those  that  mourned.
V. IS«  The  Lord  *  siU  as  a  king  in  the  heart/  because  He
rules  the  clamouring  motions  of  the  heart  in  our  thinking.
For  in  the  soul  which  He  inhabiu,  whilst  He  stirs  up  the
dull,  bridles  the  restless,  inflames  the  cold,  tempers  the
inflamed,  softens  down  the  hard,  and  binds  up  the  l^ose,  by
this  mei*e  diversity  of  thoughts,  a  kind  of  '  army,'  as  it  were,
^  stands  around  Him.' Or  surely  He  *  sitteth  as  King  with
an  army  standing  around  Him,'  because  that  King,  whilst  He
presides  over  the  minds  of  the  Elect,  a  host  of  virtues
surround. And He too  is  *  the  comforter  of  those that
Hat.  s,  mourn,'  by  that  promise,  by  which  He  says.  Blessed  are  they
John  16  ^^^^  mourn  %  for  they  shall  he  comforted. And  again;  /  will
S3. gee  you  again^  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice^  and  your  joy  no
man  shall  take  from  you. But  the  things  which  we  have
delivered  concerning  the  Head  of  Holy  Church,  therq  is
nothing  hinders  us  if  we  should  apply  to  the  voice  of  the
same  Church  as  well. For  in  her  the  order  of  the  teachers
presides  like  a  king,  whom  the  crowd  of  her  believing  ones
surrounds. Which  same  multitude  of  believers  is  also  rightly
•*Ex0r- called  ^  an  army  V  because  it  is  unceasingly  making  ready
^  ^* day  by  day  against  the  wars  of  temptations  in  the  array  of
good  works. The  hearts  of  them  that  mourn  Holy  Church
also  comforts,  whilst  she  considers  the  souls  of  the  Elect
borne  down  by  the wofulness  of  the  present  pilgrimage,
and  gladdens  them  with  the  promise  of  the  Eternal  Country.
Moreover  she  sees  that  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  are  stricken
with  divine  dread,  and  those  whom  she  sees  have  heard  con-
cerning God  strict  things  that  they  should  stand  in  fear,  she
likewise  brings  it  to  pass  that  Uiey  should  also  hear  the
gentleness  of  His  pity,  that  they  may  have  boldness.

13.  For  thus  does  Holy  Church  mix  hope  and  fear  to  her
believers,  touching  the  pity  and  justice  of  the  Redeemer,  in
the  continued  course  of  her  ministry;  so  that  they  may  not
either  heedlessly  rely  on  Mercy,  nor  hopelessly  dread  justice.
Fqi*  with  the  words  of  her  Head  she  cheers  up  those  that  are

Holy  Church  cheen  and  (Uarm$  hy  the  word  of  God. 455

alanned,  saying,  Fear  noty  Utile  Jtock;  for  it  if  your  FatherU  Book
good  pleasure  to  give  you  ike  kingdom. And  again,  those t


that  are  preenming  she  affrights,  when  she  says,  Watch  anemia, 89.
pray^  thai  ye  enter  not  into  temptation. Again,  those  (hat^*^
are  in  dread  she  cheers,  saying,  Rejoice^  because  your  nameslA\%
are  written  in  heaven. But  those  presuming  in  themselves '
she  affrights,  when  she  says,  /  beheld  Satan  as  lightning
fall  from  heaven. Those  in  dread  she  cheers  when  she  says.
My  sheep  hear  My  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  JtAnio^
Mcy  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life;  and  they  shaM  never^*^*^'
perishj  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  My  Hand.
But  those  presuming  in  themselves  she  aflfrights,  saying,
And  shall  shew  great  signs  and  wonders,  insomuch  thai  if  it  Matt.
were  possible  they  shall  deceive  the  very  Elect, lliose  in^>^*
dread  she  cheers,  when  she  says,  But  he  that  shall  endure^'  13.
unto  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved. The  presuming  she
affrights,  when  she  says.  Nevertheless,  when  the  Son  ofManhnU
Cometh,  shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  f The  fearing  she  ^^'  ^
cheers,  when  He  says  to  the  robber.  To-day  shall  thou  be
with  Me  in  paradise. But  she  frightens  the  presuming,
when  Judas  falls  ftx>m  the  glory  of  the  Apostleship  into  the
pit  of  hell. Concerning  whom  it  is  said,  in  the  laying  down
of  a  declaration,  /  have  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  qf  you  John  6,
is  a  devil. One  in  dread  she  cheers,  when  she  says,  tf^^j^g
man  put  away  his  wife,  and  she  go  from  him,  and  become  l.
another  maris,  shall  he  return  unto  her  again  f Shalt  not
thai  woman  be  greatly  polluted  f But  thou  hast  played  the
harlot  with  many  lovers;  yet  return  again  to  Me,  saith  the
Lord. But  one  presuming  she affrights,  when  she  says,
Why  criesi  thou  upon  thine  affliction  f thy  sorrow  is  in-Jer.  so,
curable. One  dreading  she  cheers,  saying.  From  this  tinteYm.s^
at least  call  me.  My  father,  thou  art  the  guide  qf  my^'
virginity. But  the  presuming  one  she  frightens,  saying,
Thy  father  was  an  Amorite,  aud  thy  mother  an  Hiitite.  £«•  i^
One  in  dread  she  cheers,  when  she  says.  Return,  thou  back-  j^r. «,
sliding  Israel,  saith  the  Lord;  and  f  will  not  cause  mine^^-
anger  to  fall  from  you ;  for  I  am  holy,  saith  the  Lord;  and
I  will  not  keep  anger  for  ever. But  one  presuming  she
affrights,  when  she  debars  her  prophet  from  interceding,  in
the  words,  lAft  not  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them ;  for  I  willjw.  14,
not  heat  in  the  time  of  their  crying  to  me,  in  the  iime^^'

456  Job  09$  example  to  rulers  in  striclness  and  kindness.

Joh  99,  of  their  afflicticn:  for  though  Moses  and  Samuel  stood
ji^^^  before  me^  my  soul  is  not  toward  this  people.  Thus  her
Jer.  I5y  hearer's  mind  Holy  Church  both  lids  up  touching  the  loving-
kindness  of  mercy,  and  disquiets  touching  the  strictness
of  judgment,  that  in  her  preaching,  whilst  she  rightly
blends  both,  her  Elect  may  neither  presume  on  the  score  of
righteousness  set  forth,  nor  despair  on  the  ground  of  bygone
iniquity.
Hist.  14.  Yet  this  which  he  BSLys^  And  when  I  sat  as  a  King
with  an  army  around^  nevertheless  I  was  a  con\fofter  qf
them  that  mourned^  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  know  that  even
taken  according  to  the  history  it  may  ver}'  greatly  edify  the
reader,  if  he  considers  well  how  with  good  rulers  both
authoritativeness  of  ruling  and  loving-kindness  of  consoling
are  mixed  together.  For  he  says;  And  when  I  sat  as
a  King  with  an  army  around;  see  the  authoritativeness  of
governance ;  nevertheless  I  was  a  con/orter  qf  them  that
mourned;  mark  the  service  of  pitifulness.  For  discipline  or
mercy  is  much  bared,  if  the  one  be  maintained  without  the
other.  But  towards  their  subjects  there  ought  to  be  in  the
I  hearts  of  rulers  both  mercy  giving  comfort  in  justice,  and
justice  dealing  wrath  with  pitifulness.  It  is  hence  that  to
the  wounds  of  that  half-dead  man,  who  was  carried  by  the
Samaritan  into  the  inn,  there  is  both  wine  applied  and  oil,
that  by  the  wine  the  wounds  should  be  bitten,  and  by  the  oil
they  should  be  soothed;  that  so  every  one  who  has  the
charge  over  the  healing  of  wounds  may  by  wine  apply  the
biting  of  strictness,  and  by  oil  tlie  softness  of  pitying;
that  by  the  wine  what  is  putrid  may  be  made  clean,  and  by
the  oil  what  is  to  be  heded  may  be  soothed.  Thus  then
gentleness  is  to  be  mixed  with  severity,  and  a  certain
qualifying  process  by  both  to  be  performed,  that  those  under
charge  may  not  either  be  made  sore  by  much  sharpness,  nor
be  relaxed  by  overmuch  kindness.  This  surely  that  ark  of
the  tabernacle  betokens,  in  which  along  with  the  tables  there
are  the  rod  and  manna  together ;  because  when  there  is  the
knowledge  of  sacred  Scripture  in  the  breast  of  a  good  ruler,
if  there  is  the  rod  of  severity,  let  there  also  be  the  manna  of
Pa.S8,4.  sweetness.  Hence  alsd  David  says.  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff
contorted  me.  For  we  are  stricken  by  the  rod,  and  we  are
sustained  by  the  staff. If  then  there  be  the  strictness  of  the

MaseSf  how  compassionate^  yet  how  severe.  457

rod  that  it  may  smite,  let  there  also  be  the  comfort  of  the  staff  book
that  it  may  sustain.  So  then  let  there  be  love,  but  not  that  ^^*
softens,  let  there  be  vigour,  but  not  that  grates,  let  there  be
zeal,  but  not  that  storms  to  excess,  let  there  be  pitiiiilness
that  does  not  spare  more  than  may  be  expedient  It  is  good
to  regard  in  the  breast  of  Moses  mercy  united  with  severity.
Let  us  see  him  loving  pitifully  and  venting  himself  severely.
Surely  wtien  the  people  of  Israel  before  the  eyes  of  Ood
contracted  an  almost  unpardonable  offence,  so  that  its  Ruler
heard.  Get  thee  down;  thy  people  have  sinfied:  as  though £,39^
the  Voice  of  God  said  to  him,  '  Tliat  people  which  has^*
fallen  in  so  great  a  sin,  is  henceforth  no  longer  Mine,*  and
subjoined.  Now  there/ore  let  Me  alone,  that  Myfiiry  may
wax  hot  against  them,  and  that  I  may  destroy  them,  and  I
will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation;  once  and  again  in  behalf  of
the  people  that  he  was  set  over  presenting  himself  as  a  bar
to  the  assault  of  God  in  His  indignation,  he  saith,  Either
forgive  them  this  sin ;  or  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,
out  qf  Thy  book  which  Thou  hast  written.  Let  us  re-
flect then  with  what  bowels  he  loved  that  people,  for  whose
life  he  begged  to  have  himself '  blotted  out  of  the  book*  of
life.  But  yet  this  one  who  is  tied  and  bound  with  such
great  love  of  his  people,  let  us  consider  with  what  warmth  of
righteousness  he  is  inflamed  against  its  sins.  For  directly
that  by  the  first  request  he  obtained  pardon  of  the  offence,
that  they  should  not  be  blotted  out,  coming  to  that  people
he  says.  Put  every  man  his  sword  by  his  side,  and  go  in  and^j^^  ^
out  from  gate  to  gate  throughout  the  camp,  and  slay  every  ^'^'  ^•
man  his  brother,  and  every  man  his  companion,  and  every
man  his  neighbour.  And  there  fell  qf  the  people  that  day
about  twenty  three  thousand  men.  See,  he  who  begged  for  the
life  of  all  even  with  his  own  death,  killed  the  life  of  a  few  with
the  sword.  Within  he  burned  with  the  fire  of  love,  without
he  was  inflamed  by  the  warmth  of  severity.  So  great  was
his  pitifulness,  that  he  did  not  hesitate  to  offer  himself  to
death  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  in  their  behalf,  such  was  his
severity,  that  those  whom  he  had  feared  to  have  stricken  by
divine  power,  he  did  himself  strike  with  the  sword  of
judgment;  he  so  loved  those  whom  he  was  set  over,  that
in  their  behalf  he  did  not  even  spare  himself,  and  yet  the

458  Lave  within^  discipline  without. Scomers.

Job  so,  persons  offendiug)  whom  he  loved,  he  so  persecuted,  that
— Jb —  even  when  the  Lord  spared  them,  he  laid  them  low.  Both
ways  a  forcible  ambassador,  both  ways  an  incomparable
mediator ;  the  cause  of  the  people  he  pleaded  before  Qod
by  prayers,  the  cause  of  God  he  pleaded  before  the  people
with  swords.  Within  loving  he  withstood  the  wrath  of  God
by  entreating,  without  venting  himself  he  consumed  sin  by
smiting.  He  succours  all  quickly  by  the  death  of  a  few
being  manifested.  Therefore  Almighty  God  listened  the
sooner  to  His  faithful  servant  dealing  in  behalf  of  the
people,  because  He  saw  what  he  was  of  himself  about  to
do  upon  the  people  in  behalf  of  God.  In  the  governance
therefore  of  the  people  Moses  blended  both,  that  neither
should  discipline  be  lacking  to  mercy,  nor  mercy  to  dis-
cipline. Hence  here  also  it  is  said  answerably  to  either
excellency ;  And  %ohen  I  sat  as  a  King  with  an  army
around,  nevertheless  Iwa^  a  comforter  iff  them  that  mourned.
For  to  '  sit  with  an  army  around*  ut  the  vigour  and  discipline
of  governance,  but  *  to  comfort  the  hearts  of  them  that
mourn*  is  the  ministration  of  pitifulness.  But  because  in
the  midst  of  all  this  it  is  necessary  that  the  line  of  interpre-
ALLvo.tation  should  fall  back  to  the  spiritual  meaning,  Holy  Church
when  borne  down  by  her  adversaries  in  the  last  times,  calls
to  mind  the  laws  of  her  past  governance,  calls  to  mind  too
what  great  benefits  of  pitifulness  she  displayed  to  them  that
were  afflicted.  Whose  discipline  and  mercy  are  then  derideS
by  the  light  of  mind. And  hence  it  is  added ;

Chap.  XXX.  1.  But  now  they  that  are  younger  than  I  have

me  in  derision.

vi. 15.  All  heretics  when  compared  to  the  age  of  the  Church

Universal  are  fitly  called  ^  younger*  in  time,  because  they

went  forth  out  of  her,  not  she  out  of  them. Whence  it  is

1  John  rightly  also  said  by  John ;  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they

'  ^  * were  not  of  us:  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  no

doubt  have  contintted  with  us. For  <  they  that  are  younger

in  time  deride  Holy  Church,*  when  they  that  went  out  from

her,  set  at  nought  the  words  of  her  instruction ;  concerning

whom  it  is  further  added ;

Whose  fathers  I  would  have  disdained  to  set  with  tlie  dogs
of  my  flock.

Here$iarch$  not  numbered  ttith  the  dog$  of  thejlock.  450

Who  is  the  *  flock*  of  Holy  Church  saving  the  maltiiude  Book
of  the  faithful  ? Or  who  else  are  called  ^  the  dogs'  of  this  •


flock,  but  the  holy  Teachers,  who  became  the  guardians  of
those  believers? Which  same  whilst  in  behalf  of  their  Lord
they  cried  aloud,  given  up  to  daily  and  nightly  watchings,
uttered,  so  to  say,  loud  barks  of  preaching. Concerning
whom  it  is  said  to  that  Church  by  the  Psalmist,  The  tongue  F§.eBy
of  Thy  dogs/rom  the  enemies  by  the  same. Since  there  are^'
some  that  being  recalled  from  the  worshipping  of  idols  are
made  the  preachers  of  God. So  *  the  tongue  of  the  dogs*  of
the  Church  goeth  forth  from  enemies,  because  the  Gentiles
that  are  converted  the  Lord  makes  even  preachers. Whence
the  slowness  of  the  Jews,  who  refused  to  speak  in  God's
behalf  by  the  Prophet  upbraiding  them  is  made  matter  of
blame,  where  he  says,  they  are  all  dumb  doge^  they  eannotU.Mi
bark.  ^^•

16.  Now  we  speak  of  the  fathers  of  Heretics  meaning
those  whom  we  style  *  Heresiarchs,'  by  whose  evil  preach-
ing, i.  e.  by  the  seed  of  speaking,  the  peoples  following
them  were  begotten  in  error.  So  then  Holy  Church  '  dis-
dains to  set  the  fathers'  of  heretics  '  with  the  dogs  of  he^
flock,'  because  the  founders  of  erring  tenets  on  trying  she
rejects,  and  contemns  to  number  them  among  the  true  Fathers.
Which  persons  though  they  seemed  to  have  recalled  some
from  the  erroneousness  of  heathenism,  to  have  trained  the
practices  of  some  to  the  doing  what  is  right,  yet  for  this  that
they  did  not  think  right  things  of  God,  she  does  not  ^  set
them  with  the  dogs  of  the  flock,'  because  she  does  not  rank
them  with  right  preachers.  For  it  is  plain  that  Arius,
Photinus,  Macedonius,Nestorius,  Eutyches,  Dioscorus»  Seve-
rus,  and  numbers  like  to  these,  endeavoured  by  teaching  and
persuading  to  appear  fathers.  '  But  their  errors  the  Holy
Church  Universal  trying  u-ith  strict  severity,  does  not  *  num-
ber those  persons  among  the  keepers  of  her  flock,'  whom  she
condemns  as  breaking  up  the  unity  of  that  flock.  Of  which
same  it  is  said  to  the  Ephesians  by  the  voice  of  Paul,  For  /Actsao,
know  thiSf  that  after  my  departing  shall  grievous  wolves
enter  in  among  yoUf  not  sparing  thejlock.  And  because  it
sometimes  happens  that  heretics  in  proportion  as  they  fall

460 Miracles  fio  tsuch  proof  of  grace  as  Charity .

Job  so,  away  more  into  the  erroneousness  of  misbelief,  guard  them-
— ?: —  selves  the  more  fully  in  outward  practising,  so  that  they  may
'appear  to  do  great  things  above  the  rest  of  the  world,  the
Holy  Church  Universal  sets  at  nought  all  their  works,  which
she  observes  do  not  come  forth  by  the  authority  of  faith.
Whence  also  it  is  rightly  added  by  the  ^voice  of  blessed
Job,

Ver.  2.  The  power  qf  whose  hands  was  nothing  to  me,
and  qf  life  itself  they  were  accounted  unworthy,
vii.  17.  ^  Power  in  the  hand*  is  greatness  in  practising.  But
*  the  power  of  the  hands*  of  Heretics  is  reckoned  '  as  nothing
to*  Holy  Church,  because  she  sees  that,  the  true  faith  being
lost,  whatsoever  they  do  it  is  of  no  merit.  For  the  charity  of
God  and  our  neighbour  they  forsake,  who  both  imagine  what
is  false  concerning  God,  and  by  wrangling  are  separated
from  their  neighbours.  But  *  the  strength  of  the  hands*
without  charity  the  great  preacher  bears  witness  is  of  no
1  Cor,  avail,  in  that  he  says,  And  though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to
^*>^  feed  the  poor,  and  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and
have  not  charity,  it  prqfiteth  me  nothing.  But  sometimes
Heretics  perform  signs  and  miracles  as  well,  but  in  order
that  they  may  here  receive  back  the  rewards  of  their  chasten-
ing and  abstinence,  i.  e.  the  praises,  which  they  go  after.
Matt.  7,  And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  the  Redeemer,  Many
^'  will  say  to  Me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  pro-
phesied in  Thy  Name,  and  in  Thy  Name  have  cast  out
devils,  and  in  Thy  Name  done  many  wonderful  works?
And  then  will  I  prqfess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you,
depart  from  Me,  ye  that  work  iniquity.  By  which  same
sentence  what  is  there  given  to  be  understood,  but  that  in
man  it  is  the  humbleness  of  charity  and  not  the  signs  of
miraculous  virtues  that  ought  to  be  revered  ?  Whence  Holy
Church  now,  even  if  there  be  any  miracles  of  heretics  per*
formed,  sets  it  at  nought,  because  she  sees  that  those  are  no
proof  of  holiness.  Since  the  way  to  prove  holiness  is  not  to
perform  miracles,  but  to  love  every  man  as  one's  self;  and  con«
ceming  God  to  think  what  is  true,  and  of  his  fellow-creature
to  think  better  things  than  of  himself.  For  that  true  power
lies  in  love,  and  not  in  the  manifesting  of  a  miracle,  *  Truth*

Hereiicif  $eeking  vain  knowledge^  go  empty. 461

shews,  Who  says*  By  this  shall  all  men  know  ihcU  ye  are  Book
My  disciples^  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another.  For  He  Who  jjjjjj-
says  not, '  iu  this  shall  it  be  known  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  ss.
if  ye  shall  perfonn  miraculous  signs,*  but  Who  saith,  ^  if  ye
have  love  one  to  another,'  plainly  proves  that  it  is  not
miracles  but  charity  alone  that  proves  the  true  servants
of  God.  So  the  witness  to  the  heavenly  discipleship
is  the  gift  of  brotherly  charity.  Which  same  love,  because
all  heretics  refuse  to  have,  whilst  they  are  divided  from
the  Unity  of  the  Church  Universal,  it  is  justly  said  con-
cerning them ;  the  strength  qf  whose  hands  was  nothing  to
me.  And  because  to  these  same  signs,  that  they  set  forth,
they  do  not  accord  themselves  by  any  humility,  it  is  rightly
added.  And  qf  life  itself  they  were  accounted  unworthy.  Or
indeed,  all  heretics  Holy  Church  declares  unworthy  of  life
itself,  for  this  reason,  because  under  the  Name  of  Christ,
they  fight  against  the  Name  of  Christ  Of  whom  it  is  yet
further  added ;

Barren  by  want  and  hunger.

18.  All  heretics,  whilst  in  sacred  Revelation  they  make  it  viiL
their  aim  to  dive  into  secrets  of  God  beyond  what  they  are
capable  of,  by  their  hunger  become  barren.  For  they  do
not  seek  those  things,  whereby  they  may  train  themselves  to
humility,  may  order  their  ways  in  tranquillity,  keep  patience,
shew  forth  long  suffering,  but  those  alone  which  may  prove
ihem  learned  and  talkers;  they  aim  to  know  those  things,  by
which  they  may  seem  to  be  in  a  special  manner  instructed.
For  they  very  often  treat  with  boldness  of  the  nature  of  the
Divine  Being,  whilst,  wretched  as  they  are,  they  know  not
their  own  selves.  And  so  they  become  ^  barren  by  want  and
hunger,'  because  they  desire  to  dive  into  those  things,  by
which  they  should  not  bring  forth  the  buddings  of  a  good  life.
For  the  things  which  they  dive  into  are  beyond  themselves.
And  whilst  they  make  for  that  which  they  are  unable  to
comprehend,  they  neglect  to  acquaint  themselves  with  those
things,  by  which  they  might  have  been  instructed.  Which
same  boldness  of  theirs  the  great  Preacher  rightly  checks,
saying,  not  to  think  qf  himself  more  highly  than  he  ought  VLam.
to  think^  but  to  think  soberly.  Hence  Solomom  says,  ^''  '*
Set  bounds  to  thine  own  wisdom. Hence  again  he  says,  ProT.ss,

4.

462 Reverent  forbearance  needed  in  high  enquiries.

Job  80,  Hast  ihou  found  honey t  eat  so  much  as  is  sufficienifor  thee,
j^jlj—^  lest  thou  be  filled  therewith  ^  and  vomit  it. For  the  sweet-
ProT. noM  of  spiritual  meaning  he  who  seeks  to  eat  beyond  what
^'  ^  *  he  contains,  even  what  he  had  eaten  he  *  vomiteth ;'  because
whilst  he  seeks  to  make  out  things  above,  beyond  his  powers,
even  the  things  that  he  had  made  out  aright,  he  forfeits.
▼•  27. Hence  he  says  again ;  As  for  one  to  eat  much  honey  is  not  good,
so  he  that  wouldsearch  out  Majesty  shaU  be  crushed  with  glory.
For  the  glory  of  the  Invisible  Creator,  which  when  searched  into
with  moderation  lifts  us  up,  being  dived  into  beyond  our  powers
bears  us  down? Therefore  heretics,  because  in  proportion  as
they  aim  to  be  more  completely  filled  by  sublime  perception,
so much the more  entirely  they  become  empty,  have  it
rightly  said  concerning  them,  batmen  by  want  and  hunger.
Since  by  unbounded  attempts  the  more  they  go  after  the  know-
ledge of  heavenly  acquaintanceship,  the  more  they  lose  it

19.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  that  in  Holy  Church  are
truly  humble,  and  truly  instructed,  are  taught  touching
heavenly  mysteries,  both  some  things  when  viewed  to  under-
stand, and  some  things  not  understood  to  reverence,  that
so  what  they  understand  they  may  hold  with  reverence,  and
what  they  do  not  as  yet  understand  they  may  look  forward  to
with  humility.  Whence  it  is  said  to  us  by  Moses,  that  in
Bx.  19,  eating  the  lamb,  that  which  remaineth  of  it  we  should  bum
with  fire;  for  we  '  eat  the  lamb,'  when  in  understanding  many
particulars  of  the  Lord's  human  Nature,  we  deposit  them  in
the  belly  of  the  mind.  Wherefirom  there  are  some  things  left  to
us,  which  cannot  be  eaten;  because  many  particulars  still
remain  concerning  Him,  which  can  by  no  means  be  under-
stood. Which  same  nevertheless  are  to  be  ^  consumed  with
fire,*  because  the  things  which  we  are  unable  to  understand
concerning  Ilim,  we  reserve  with  humility  for  the  Holy  Spirit.
Which  same  humility  very  often  reveals  even  those  things
to  the  perceptions  of  the  Elect,  which  appeared  to  be  things
impossible  to  be  understood.  For  the  froward  minds  of
heretics,  whilst  they  proudly  attribute  understanding  to  them-
selves, as  it  were  presume  to  deliver  fixed  decisions  even
touching  what  is  unknown.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that
the  self-elation  itself  which  lifts  them  up  in  themselves
within,  should  without  drive  them  off  from  the  truth,  and

Hereiici  but  gnaw  at  loweH  and  ouimoH  imih. 463

that  in  the  declarations  of  God  they  should  hardly  ereti  Boos
comprehend  the  outward  things,  who  thought  that  they  had ^^'-
in  an  especial  manner  gone  to  the  bottotn  of  spiritual  secrets.
Whence  it  is  also  added  here;

Ver.  8,  4.  fVho  gnawed  in  solUudef  being  scurvp  with
calamity  and  misery^  and  chewed  herbs  and  the  barks  nf
trees*

20.  That  is  wont  to  be  *  gnawed/  which  cannot  be  eaten, ix.
Now  heretics  because  they  apply  themselves  to  make  out
Scripture  by  their  own  power,  assuredly  never  can  compre-
hend it,  which  same  whilst  they  do  not  make  out,  they^  as  it
were,  do  not  eat. And  because,  not  being  aided  by  grace
from  on  high,  they  are  unable  to  eat  it,  they  as  it  were  '  gnaw'
it  with  certain  efforts. Since  they  handle  it  outwardly,  when
indeed  they  endeavour  but  do  not  attain  to  the  interior  piu'ts  ^
of  it. Which  same  because  they  are  separated  from  the
society  of  the  Church  Universal,  are  menUoned  as  gnawing
not  any  where,  but  *  in  solitude/ To  which  same  *  solitude'
that  the false  teachers draw  thdr  followers.  Truth  long
before forewarned,  saying, If  they  shdlt  say  unto you^Untu,
Beholdf  he  is  in  the  desert^  go  not  forth. And  these  are'**
rightly  recorded  as  ^  scuiTy  with  affliction  and  misery,'  because
they  are  despicable  at  once  by  the  destructireness  of  their
practices,  and  the  badness  of  their  perceptions. Who  do  also

*  eat  herbs  and  the  batks  of  ttees,'  because  being  kept  off  by
the  bar  of  self-exaltation,  they  are  unable  to  perceive  in
sacred  Revelation  what  is  great  and  interior,  but  with
difficulty  discover  therein  a  few  things  that  are  tender  and
exterior. Since  by  ^  herbs'  the  plainer  statements,  and  by

*  the  barks  of  trees'  the  exterior  declarations  of  the  Fathers
are  betokened.  Those  then  who  seek  to  know  those  things,
by  which  they  may  not  at  &11  be  learned,  but  seem  to  be,
whilst  in  the  sacred  volumes  they  do  not  from  the  heart's  core
search  out  the  force  of  charity  towards  God  and  our  neigh-
l^ur,  are  as  it  were  *  fed  by  the  herb  and  the  bark,'  because
they  are  either  the  lowest  or  the  outer  things  which  flourish
the  souls  of  those  who  carry  themselves  proudly.  Or  surely
to  '  eat  herbs'  is  touching  Holy  Scripture  to  ob^rvc  the
least  precepts,  and  to  disregard  the  greater  ones.  Whotii
Truth  rightly  rebukes^  saying,  fVoe  unto  you^  Scribes  anciMat.ss,

S3.

464  Sin  wounds  us  either  for  harm  or  sorrow.

JoB^o^Pharisees^  hypocrites;  for  ye  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise
•  and  cummin,  and  fiave  omitted  the  weightier  matters  of  the


Allkg.

Law. Who  do  also  ^  eat  the  barks  of  trees/  because  there

are  some  who  in  the  sacred  volumes  respect  the  outside  of
the  letter  only,  nor  keep  in  safety  any  thing  belonging  to  the
spiritual  meaning,  whereas  tliey  imagine  that  there  is  nothing
more  in  the  words  of  God,  but  that  which  they  may  hear  on
the  outside.  Which  persons  nevertheless  the  passion  of  vain
glory  possesses  in  all  their  errors,  and  the  thirst  after  honour
holds  them  captives,  and  generally  by  the  very  things  that
they  speak  they  seek  after  nothing  else  but  earthly  profits.
Bom.i6,  Concerning  whom  it  is  said  by  Paul,  For  they  that  are  such
serve  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  their  own  belly.  Whence
too  it  is  rightly  subjoined ;

And  juniper  roots/or  their  meat.
X. 21.  For  the  juniper  tree  has  prickles  instead  of  leaves,  for
so  bristly  is  that  which  they  put  forth,  that  like  to  thorns  it  is
able  to  prick  the  person  handling  it Now  a  thorn  is  all
sorts  of  sin;  because  whilst  it  draws  into  self-gratification,
as  it  were  by  pricking  it  wounds  the  soul. Whence  it  is
Pa.83,4.  spoken  by  the  voice  of  one  righteous  and  penitent,  /  was
turned  in  my  calamity,  while  the  thorn  is  broken,  surely
because  the  mind  is  turned  to  lamenting,  that  the  prick  of  sin
may  be  broken  by  repenting. But  in  another  translation,
1  <  ooD-  the  thorn  is  described  not  as  ^  broken','  but  ^  fixed*,'  which
tS^D-  same  is  not  at  variance  with  the  same  sense,  because  Uie
^^' mind  of  the  penitent  is  brought  to  sorrow  when  the  sin
that  has  been  committed  is  retained  fixed  fast  in  the  recol-
lection. What  then  is  there  denoted  by  the  '  root  of  the
juniper^  saving  avarice,  firom  which  the  thorns  of  all  the  sins
1  Tim.  are  produced?  Concerning  which  it  is  said  by  Paul,  For  the
'  ^^' love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil. For  that  springs  up
covertly  in  the  mind,  and  brings  forth  openly  the  prickles  of
all  sin  in  the  practice. Which  same  prickles  arising  from
this  root  the  great  preacher  immediately  implies,  when  he  sub-
joins, Which  while  sotnc  coveted  after,  they  have  erred  from
the  faith,  and  pierced  themselves  through  with  many  sorrows.
For  he  who  spoke  of '  many  sorrows'  made  known  as  it  were
the  prickles  arising  from  this  root. So  by  ^junipers'  we
understand  sins,  but  by  *  the  root  of  junipers'  what  else  do

Hereiics  coveioud,  vociferouMy  and  $ure  to/ail. 465

we  understand,  but  avarice,  i.  e.  the  material  of  sins  ? So  Book

then  because  heretics  in  their  words  generally  go  after  ex '-

temal  gains  alone,  yet  are  not  ignorant  that  they  make  up
what  is  wrong,  but  do  not  abandon  the  preachings  of  error,
whilst  they  wish  to  receive  their  emoluments  as  teachers,  it
is  well  said  of  them  now  by  the  voice  of  the  holy  man,  and
juniper  roots  for  their  meatj  because  whilst  they  think  of
avarice  with  all  the  faculties  of  their  minds,  they  are  as  it
were  fed  by  that  nourishment,  wherefrom  assuredly  the
prickles  of  sins  ensuing  are  used  to  be  produced.  Which
persons  if  ever  in  sacred  Revelation  they  seemingly  discover
things  with  sagacity,  which'  while  they  do  not  understand,
they  fancy  make  for  their  statements,  they  directly  scatter
these  vociferating  them  to  their  wretched  bearers,  whom
they  covet  not  the  souls  of  but  the  substance.  Whence  it  is
fitly  brought  in  next,

Ver.  5.  Who  carrying  these  tame  eff  from  the  valleysj
when  they  found  each  ofthem^  ran  to  them  with  clamour.

22.  They  *  carry  them  off  from  the  valleys,*  because  with  xi.
a  high  spirit  they  gather  them  from  the  lowly  sayings  of  the
Fathers.  Which  same  whilst  they  exult  to  have  found
making  for  their  cause,  they  run  to  them  with  outcries,
because  every  thing  that  they  have  a  perception  of,  by  the
appetite  of  praise  they  strive  to  cry  abroad  to  the  ears  of
men. It  goes  on;

Ver.  6.  TTiey  shall  dwell  in  tlie  desert  places  of  the  torrents^
and  in  the  caves  of  (he  earthy  or  upon  the  ground.

23.  We  give  the  name  of '  torrents*  to  the  brooks,  that  are xii.
gathered  by the  winter  rains,  which likewise  at  certain
seasons  are  dried  up. Thus  with  justice  the  framers  of  wrong
doctrines  are  called  '  torrents;'  because  being  cold  to  the
warmth  of  charity,  they  grow  to  a  height  in  the  deadness  of

the  winter  season;  because  they  do  not  flow  out  with  perpe-
tual fulness,  but  by  the  pleadings  of  Catholics,  as  by  summer
suns,  are  dried  up.  And  indeed  the  fabricators  pf  wrnng,
doctrines  sgrinf^ing  up  afi;ain8t  Holy  Church,  are  already
liiade  aiTend  of  by  the  heat  of  trutl^,  yft  ntrtiTithntftni4ing
the  thjn^  which  they  taughtjtheir  discipl^  do  not  j^ease  to
mdgtain  and  to  defend.  Thus  then  tliey  that  follow  the  errors
of  those  persons  *  dwell  in  the  desert  places  of  torrents,"  i.  e.
VOL.  II.  H  h  '

46Q Hereiici  given  to  lurking^  and  unstable  ways.

Job  80,  put  their  trast  in  the  preaching  of  those,  whose  effusions  are
-j^ —  already  hj  the  answering  and  reasoning  of  Catholics  dried
'up. Now  what  else  do  we  take  ^  the  caves  nf  the  fiarth*  fori
i^^^yy-  but  the  hidden  preachings  of  heretics  ? For  heretics  meet
together  in  secret  conclaves  in  such  sort,  that  the  revercncei
which  they  cannot  invest  their  erring  belief  with  by  reason,
they  way  by  concealment,  and  that  to  weak  souls  the  speech
of  pervertedness  may  appear  more  to  be  treated  with  awe  in
^i proporUon  as  it  is  secret. Hence  in  Solomon  the  woman  as
Pro?/fr,a  type  of  heresy  persuades,  saying,  Stolen  waters  are  sweety
^^' and  bread  eaten  in  secret  is  pleasant. Which  ;sul£;same
Mat84,  secret  preachingg^JTr^thLftbhors,  saying.  Then  \f  any  man
If  ^^'  sKalTsay  unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christy  or  there^  believe  it
not. And  again; Wherqfore  if  they  shall  say  unto  you.
Behold,  he  is  in  the  desert,  go  not  forth;  Behold,  he  is  in
the  secret  chambers,  believe  it  not. For  as  the  lightning
/  cometh  out  qf  the  East,  and  shineth  even  unto  the  West:  so
(^  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  qf  Man  be. So  then  that  is
*  in  the  secret  chambers'  there,  which  here  is  phrased  in
^  caves.' Thus  heretics  ^  dwell in caves,'  because  they
generally  conceal  tlieir  error  by  preachings  in  secret;  that  in
the  degree  that  they  forbear  to  shew  themselves  to  the  more
learned  and  wber  sort,  they  may  the  more  irresistibly  draw
to  them  the  uninstructed. Whence  also  the  words  are  rightly
brought  in  next;  Or  upon  the  gravel. For  we  call  by  the
name  of  *  grayel'  those  very  little  stones  which  the  water  of
the  river  draws  along. Accordingly,  the  teachers  of  perverted
doctrines  *  dwell  upon  the  gravel,'  because  they  draw  after
them  those  minds  of  men  which  are  not  established  with  any
stedfastness  of  gravity,  which  the  streams  of  errors  are  as  it
were  ever  carrying  from  place  to  place. And  hence  the  great
preacher,  whereas  he  desired  that  his  hearers  should  not  be
led  by  the  chances  of  time,  but  that  they  might  be  established
Eph.  4,  ^y  ^^^™  gravity,  charged  them,  saying,  That  we  hencefotih
14. he  1XO  more  like  children,  tossed  to  and^/ro,  and  carried  about
by  every  wind  qf  doctrine. Thus  Holy  Church,  being  borne
down  by  her  adversaries  for  a  space,  when  she  sees  the  bold
minds  of  those  in  error  insuhing  over  her,  recalls  to  remem-
brance what  the  behaviour  of  those  was,  saying.  They  shaL
dwell  in  the  desert  places  qf  torrents,  and  in  the  caves  qf  the

Heretics refoice  in  thai  which  wounds;  are  chUdtenoffbols.Ml

earthy  or  iqxm  the  gravel  For  because  tbeir  wrong  preachtDg,  Book
the  fire  of  charity  being  gone,  gained  power  by  coldness  of ^


feeling,  surely  it  *  dwelt  in  the  desert  places  of  torrents/
And  because  it  was  not  open  and  at  large,  it  *  lay  hid*  in
caves.  And  because  it  held  the  people  not  fixed  but  lightly
moved,  it  remained  not  upon  the  rock  but '  upon  the  gravel/
Concerning  which  it  is  yet  further  added ;

Ver.  7.  Who  rejoiced  in  the  midst  qfthe  likCj  and  reckoned
there  were  delights  under  brambles.

24.  What  do  we  understand  by  the  name  of  *  brambles,'  xiii.
but  those  'piercings^'  of  sins,  which  we  have  already  *  i  ^i-
described  above.  Now  because  froward  minds  delight  in
wickednesses,  which  they  should  have  bewailed,  all  heretics
uplift  themselves  with  vain  joy  in  proportion  as  they  gain
power  for  worse  acts ;  and  they  ^  reckon  there  arc  delights
under  the  brambles,'  because  they  lift  up  the  froward  mind
to  joy,  from  the  same  cause  that  Uiey  bear  the  thorns  of  sins.
For  if  ever  they  have  been  able  to  draw  any  one  to  their
error,  they  plume  themselves  in  glee ;  and  by  the  same  act,
whereby  they  are  daily  heaping  to  themselves  sins,  even  by
ruining  others,  they  exult  tfiat  they  are  as  it  were  leaders  to
righteousness.  And  so  it  is  well  said;  Who  ryoiced  amongst
the  like  J  and  reckoned  that  there  are  delights  under  brambles.
For  they  drag  all  that  they  are  able  to  their  own  destruction;
and  to  be  under  sins,  or  to  add  ofiences  to  offences,  they
imagine  their  heaping  up  a  superabundance  of  virtuous
acquirements.

Ver.  8.  They  were  children  qf/oolSj  yea,  children  of  bane
men;  and  in  the  earth  not  appearing  at  all.

S5.  That  is  to  say,  the  children  of  those,  who  were  the xiv.
masters  of  errors. So  they  are  called  'children,'  not  as
engendered  by  the  seed,  but  by  the  imitating of  those,
who  by  teaching  what  is  wrong  were  'fools'  in  respect  of
ignorance,  and  by  living  wicked  lives  '  base  men'  in  respect
of  conduct. Who  are  not  allied  to  our  Redeemer  by  any
relationship  of  wisdom,  or  by  any  of  life. Concerning  which
it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  Solomon  in  commendation  of  Holy
Church,  Her  husband  is  noble  in  the  gates. So  these,  p^jj^
because  they  followed  the  froward  examples  of  those  going  ^-
astray,  were  recorded  as  being  '  the  children  of  fools  and  of

Hh2

468 Carnal  liven. Chreedy  gnawers  wiihoui  goodness.

Job  80,  base  men.' Now  it  is  rightly  subjoiDed>  and  on  the  earth  not
AttiQ.  appearing  at  all. Becanse  whilst  they  aim  to  appear  some-
thing here,  surely  from  the  land  of  the  living  they  are  made
outcasts.

26.  But  this  which  we  have  delivered  in  a  type  of  heretics,
nothing  is  at  all  in  the  way,  if  we  understand  it  as  well  of
persons  froward  and  carnal,  though  set  in  the  right  faith.
For  neither  does  Holy  Church  account  those  only  adversaries
to  her,  who,  as  placed  without,  dissent  from  her  faith,  but
those  also  who  by  living  amiss  inwardly  stifle  her  life.  So  then
let  her,  afflicted  with  the  wofulness  of  adversity  coming  down
upon  her,  survey  how  in  the  season  of  her  prosperity,  by  the
wickedness  of  evil-doors  living  within  her  oven  she  was
burthened.  Let  her  consider  that  in  due  of  the  deserts  of
some,  the  life  of  all  was  not  unjustly  disturbed  in  her,  and
let  her  say,  fVho  gnawed  in  solitude^  scurvy  with  affliction
and  misery.  As  I  before  said  in  the  first  part  of  this  work,
the  solitude  of  the  interior  is  sometimes  used  to  be  under-
stood in  respect  of  the  excellency  of  contemplation.  But  in
this  place,  where  *  solitude*  is  mentioned  in  the  way  of
reproach,  what  else  is  there  demonstrated  but  a  barrenness
of  goodness  ? And  hence,  under  the  type  of  Judasa,  Jeremiah

Lam.  1,  mourns  over  the  soul  of  the  sinner,  saying,  Hoiv  doth  the  city

^' sit  solitary  that  was  full  of  people  I But  when  it  is  said  by

blessed  Job  respecting  the  evil-doers,  they  gnawed  in  solitude ,

it  is  well  to  look  at  that  also  which  is  delivered  by  the

Pt.79,9.  Psalmist,  His  enemies  shall  lick  the  dust.

27.  For  there  are  two  sorts  of  men  that  lend  themselves  to
their  own  ambition,  i.  e.  one  which  always  employs  the
flatteries  of  the  tongue  to  serve  to  avarice,  another  which  is
bent  on  robbery  by  open  force.  For  we  '  gnaw'  when  we
wear  away  any  tiling  outwardly  with  strong  effort.  For
there  is  *  licking'  when  that  which  cannot  be  eaten  with
ease  is  tasted  by  the  lightness  of  the  tongue  being  pressed
upon  it.  All  persons  then  who  even  under  a  guise  of  faith
live  wickedly,  who  long  after  what  belongs  to  another,  but
are  not  any  way  able  to  seize  upon  the  object  that  they  long
after,  but  try  by  flattering  speeches,  and  as  it  were  by  the
softening  of  sweetness,  to  carry  ofi*  the  things  coveted,  what
else  do  they  iMive  ^  lick  the  ground*?' because  the  several

Tlie  Church  compUiina  ofihem  within  her  ptUe. 469

things  of  earth,  which  they  cannot  by  power,  they  stri?e  to  Book
make  away  with  by  the  softness  of  the  tongue.  But  they  ^^*
who  are  sustained  in  this  world  by  any  degree  of  power,  and
whilst  coveting  the  things  of  others,  scorn  indeed  to  cozen
by  deceit,  because  they  are  able  even  by  unjust  strength  to
fulfil  what  they  have  a  mind  for,  the  thing  that  they  long  for
these  persons  do  not  *  lick*  but  '  gnaw  ;*  because  they
demolish  the  life  of  their  fellow-creatures  by  the  forcibleness
of  power  as  by  the  cflect  of  teeth.  So  then  let  Holy
Church  regard  the  true  riches  of  the  Eternal  Country,  let
her  behold  the  throng  of  the  citizens  Above,  let  her  dis-
cern in  her  Elect  Children  the  culture  of  the  mind,  and
the  excellencies  of  countless  virtues,  and  from  these  let
her  recall  the  eye  of  the  mind  to  the  life  of  the  wicked,  which
is  made  void  of  all  goodness^  and  by  comparison  with  them
let  her  see  how  and  in  what  way  that  life  is  destitute  of  all
virtuous  attainments,  because  it  has  abandoned  the  things  on
high,  and  coveted  those  beneath.  Let  her  see  how  very
often  that  thing  which  he  longs  for,  if  perchance  he  has
power,  he  even  seizes  by  violence.  Let  her  see  that  she  has
long  been  subject  to  such  persons  as  set  within  her  pale,  and
that  by  their  offences  she  has  come  even  to  the  very  jeopardy
and  hurts  of  the  good  too,  and  let  her  say,  fVho  gnawed  in
soHiude.  As  though  she  complained  openly,  saying, '  The
things  of  others  they  would  not  gnaw,  even  by  seizing  them
by  violence,  except  they  themselves  first  remained  in  their
own  interior  solitary,  and  bare  of  the  culture  of  virtues.'
But  she  rightly  explains  the  kind  and  sort  of  those,  saying,
Scurvy  with  affliction  and  misery.  For  unhealthy  flesh,  if
it  be  overlooked  to  be  heedfuUy  taken  care  of,  is  by  foulness
growing  over  it  worse  pressed  with  disease,  and  whilst  to
the  misfortune  of  sickness  the  wretchedness  of  neglect  is
superadded,  heavier  inconvenience  is  undergone  by  scurf
arising.

28.  Therefore  Human  Nature  having  been  created  aright,
but  having  sunk  into  disease  by  the  demerit  of  its  own  will,
it  fell  into  utter  overthrow,  because  being  pressed  by  countless
necessities,  it  found  nought  in  this  life  save  that  whereby  it
should  be  beaten  down ;  but  whereas  those  same  necessities
of  our  nature  we  generally  minister  to  beyond  what  is  ad-
visable, and  overlook  the  care  of  the  soul,  by  the  wretched-

470 Pleasure  entices  u$  by  occasion  of  our  necessities.

Job  ao,  neM  of  neglect  we  add  to  our  in6rmiiy  ibe  foulness  of  sin.

i^^^Q,  For  the  necessities  of  nature  are  such  as  to  have  this  in  them
firaught  with  the  greatest  danger,  that  often  there  is  no
discerning  therein,  what  there  is  done  relating  to  them  in
the  aim  at  usefulness,  and  what  in  the  evil  of  self-gratification.
For  veiy  firequ^tly  occasion  of  beguUement  being  met  with,
whilst  we  render  the  things  due  to  necessity  we  are  doing
service  to  the  evil  of  self-gratificaUon,  if  our  self-excusing
cloaks  itself  with  the  veil  of  infirmity  before  the  eyes  of
discernment,  and  as  it  were  hides  itself  under  the  countenance
of  discharging  the  usefiil.  But  to  let  loose  the  frailty  of  our
nature  by  neglect  is  nothing  else  than  to  add  misery  to
a£9iction,  and  by  that  misery  to  redouble  the  foulness  of  the
vices.  Whence  holy  men,  in  every  thing  they  do,  dis-
criminate with  the  most  earnest  aim,  that  the  frailty  of  their
nature  exact  not  from  them  more  than  is  owed,  and  that
under  the  cloak  of  necessity  there  grow  not  up  in  them  the
evil  of  gratification.  For  they  undergo  one  thing  from  in-
firmity, and  another  thing  from  the  prompting  of  temptation,
and  being  appointed  as  a  kind  of  most  equitable  umpires
between  necessity  and  pleasure,  they  lift  up  the  one  by
comforting,  and  bridle  the  other  by  keeping  down.  Whence
it  comes  to  pass,  that  even  if  they  are  exposed  to  the  a£9iction
of  their  infirmity,  yet  they  never  descend  from  neglect  to  the
foulness  of  misery.  For  this  mere  thing,  to  be  in  affliction,
is  to  be  subject  to  the  necessities  of  nature  from  the  frailty  of

Pt.  ss,  flesh  still  liable  to  corruption.  Which  same  necessities  he
longed  to  get  quit  of,  who  said,  Deliver  me  from  my  neces-
sities. For  he  knew  that,  for  the  most  part,  the  sins  of  the
pleasures  break  forth  by  occasion  of  necessities,  and  that  he
might  not  of  his  own  will  commit  aught  unlawful,  he  was
busy  to  have  that  itself  plucked  up  which  he  was  subject
to  unwillingly  in  the  root*.

29.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  evil-minded  take  delight
in  those  necessities  of  their  corrupt  state,  because  they  force
them  back  to  serve  the  occasion  of  gratifications.  For  while
they  minister  to  nature  by  recruiling  their  bodies  with  food,
through  the  gratification  of  the  palate  they  are  swelled  out
in  the  glutting  of  delight. When  they  seek  clothing  for

»  Ad  example  of  this  oaie  it  fouod §.  48 — 47.
in  St.  Augufftme'ii  Coofetfionf,  B.  x.


/

Bad  men  are  wone  for  punuhmenf ;  mar  others*  virtue$.  471

covering  the  limbs,  tbej  look  out  not  only  for  things  that  Boov

may  cover,  but  also  may  uplift,  and  against  the  numbness  of ^

cold  not  only  what  may  defend  by  thickness,  but  like-
wise delight  by  softness;  not  only  what  may  soothe  the  touch
by  softness,  but  also  beguile  the  eyes  by  the  colour.  So
then,  to  turn  occasion  of  necessity  to  the  use  of  pleasure,
what  other  thing  is  it  but  to  join  the  foulness  of  misery  to
his  affliction  i  Thus  let  the  Church,  being  borne  down  in
the  season  of  adversity,  call  to  mind  those  by  whose  deserts
she  undergoes  these  things,  and  let  her  say.  Who  gnawed  in
ioliiudej  Bcurvy  tcith  affliction  and  misery.  They  indeed
would  not  be  made  foul  by  affliction,  if  they  did  not  superadd
to  inherent  necessities  the  misery  of  gratifications.  Which
same  necessities  we  have  earned  by  the  offence  of  the  first
parent  But  they  who  add  misery  to  their  affliction,  fix>m
the  torture  of  punishment,  break  forth  into  augmentations  of
guilt.  But  would  that  such  persons,  whilst  they  scorn  to  be
changed  for  the  better,  did  things  wrong  in  such  a  way  as
not  to  proffer  them  to  others  as  well.  Would  that  their  own
death  only  were  enough  for  them,  and  that  by  their  baneful
persuasions  they  did  not  kill  another^s  life  likewise.  For
they  grudge  others  being  what  they  are  not,  they  grieve  for
others  to  obtain  the  thing  that  they  lose ;  for  if  by  chance
they  perceive  any  good  points  springing  up  in  the  acts  of
others,  they  directly  pluck  them  up  with  the  band  of  mis-
chievous reviling.  Whence  too  it  follows,  And  they  did  eat
herbs  and  the  harks  of  trees.

80.  For  what  is  denoted  by  ^  herbs,'  but  the  life  of  those
beginning  well  tender  ond  close  to  the  ground  ?  and  what
by  the  barks  of  trees,  but  the  outward  deeds  of  those  who
henceforth  seek  after  things  aloft  ?  For  bad  men,  when  they
see  persons  beginning  what  is  right,  either  by  deriding  or  as
if  counselling  them,  offer  opposition.  But  when  they  now
think  with  themselves  that  certain  persons  are  making  way
to  the  highest  things,  because  they  cannot  wholly  and  entirely
scatter  to  the  winds  their  advancements,  they  divert  those
persons  firom  some  of  their  deeds.  Thus  then  to  ^  eat  herbs
and  the  barks  of  trees,*  is  by  pestilent  persuasions  as  by  a
kind  9f  teeth  of  their  evil-mindedness  to  scatter  to  nought,
whether  the  aims  of  those  beginning  aright,  or  the  doings  of

472 Heretics  imitate  le$ser  and  outer  good  in  the  Fathers.

Job  30,  persons  now  henceforth  after  the  manner  of  trees  making
J — "-^  towards  that  which  is  above.  The  children  of  perdition  '  eat
'herbs/  when  by  scoffing  they  consume  the  beginnings  of  the
frail  sort.  Likewise  they  ^  eat  the  barks  of  trees/  when  with
the  hand  of  evil  counsel  they  withdraw  from  the  life  of  those
growing  rightly  the  covering  of  good  deeds.  Now  tliese
latter  they  strip  like  trees  in  particular  actions,  but  those
because  like  herbs  they  drag  whilst  despising  them,  they  as
it  were  eat  what  they  tread  under  them.  The  strength  of
some  now  rising  on  high  they  in  part  make  away  with,  but
the  tenderness  of  some  even  still  placed  below  they  utterly
break  in  pieces.  So  then  let  him  say,  they  eat  herbs  and  the
barks  qf  trees^  because  by  wicked  mockings  in  some  they
broke  up  piecemeal  external  deeds,  and  in  some  hearts  in
hope  growing  lively.

81.  Or  surely  to  ^  eat  herbs*  is  to  copy  some  things  light
and  lender  belonging  to  die  ancient  Fathers.  Whilst  to  ^  eat
the  barks  of  trees'  i^  to  practise  their  deeds  so  far  as  the
outside,  but  in  these  same  works  not  to  maintain  a  right
intention.  For  there  are  some  persons  who,  whereas  they
cannot  obtain  the  glory  of  the  present  world  by  that  world's
courses  of  conduct,  seek  after  a  semblance  of  sanctity,  assume
the  garb  of  reverence,  long  to  appear  imitators  of  the  old
Fathers,  and  some  few  things  indeed,  little  and  light,  tliey
do  employ  themselves  upon,  but  their  strong  things,  and
such  as  come  forth  from  the  root  of  charity  alone,  they  are
indifferent  to  imitate.  These  truly  *  eat  herbs,*  because  they
overlook  what  is  great,  and  are  filled  with  what  is  worthless.
Yet  very  often  they  put  in  execution  even  some  deeds
seemingly  more  vigorous,  but  they  do  not  hold  a  right  in-
tention in  those  same  deeds.  To  which  persons  surely  to
^  eat  the  barks  of  trees'  is  to  take  to  them  the  outward  acts  of
the  Elect,  and  not  to  have  a  good  intention  in  good  acts.
For  whilst  for  the  sake  of  human  applause  they  search  out
right  deeds,  but  are  indifferent  to  imitate  tlie  heart  of  those
doing  rightly,  they  are  filled  *  by  the  barks  of  trees*  alone.
For  with  all  the  desire  they  seek  after  the  glory  or  abundance
of  the  present  life.  Whence  too  it  is  rightly  subjoined.  And
the  root  of  Junipers  was  their  meat.

32.  For  being  set  within  by  faith,  whilst  they  for  the  most

Rooii  thai  bear  Pricklei. Running  after  gain$. 478

part  lend  themselves  to  thougbis  of  ararice,  thej  as  it  we're  Book
'  eaC  that,  whereby  in  the  final  close  of  life  the  rongbnesses  ^^'
of  punishments  are  put  forth.  Which  persons,  while  they
do  not  long  after  the  fruitage  of  divine  revelation,  but  make
themselves  subservient  for  the  going  after  things  temporal^
are  never  filled  with  the  bread  of  wheat,  but  with  the  '  root
of  the  juniper/  For  the  mere  things  springing  up  from  what
is  beneath  and  lowest  engross  them,  that  they  may  prick
them  afterwards  after  the  manner  of  the  juniper  by  the  hard-
ness of  recompensing,  as  by  the  sharpness  of  leaves.  For
whilst  they  despise  God  here,  they  are  never  made  sensible
what  great  evil  it  is  that  they  do.  For  still  they  are  *  eating
the  root  of  the  juniper,*  but  how  sharp  the  branches  of  this
root  are  they  do  not  give  heed ;  because  verily  bad  conduct
now  as  it  were  in  the  root  gives  delight  in  sin,  but  afterwards
as  it  wore  in  the  branches  it  pricks  in  punishment.  Where
also  it  is  well  subjoined;  Who^  carrying  these  same  off  from
the  valleys,  when  they  found  each  one,  did  run  thereto  with
clamour.

83.  In  comparison  surely  with  things  above,  all  the  present
life  is  a  *  valley.*  But  these,  because  they  know  not  to  con-
template the  heights  of  mountains,  i.  e.  the  strong  deeds  of
the  Saints,  are  always  busied  in  the  lowest  gratification  as  iii
'  the  valleys/  and  when  they  find  any  gain,  even  of  a  slight
acquisition,  they  run  with  clamouring,  because  they  strive
even  by  wrangling  to  make  off  with  this,  for  *  upon  each
being  found  in  the  valley  to  run  with  clamour,*  is  on  the
occasions  of  cases  arising  to  wrangle  even  for  small  payment.
Now  it  very  often  happens  that  him,  whom  good  conduct
exhibits  as  holy,  occasion  of  earthly  advantage  springing  up
puts  to  the  proof.  For  you  may  see  persons  already  employed
on  what  is  lofty,  already  in  the  practice  of  abstinence,  already
in  the  work  of  instruction,  following  after  the  patterns  of  the
fathers  that  went  before ;  but  when  they  suddenly  find  the
gain  of  the  present  life,  as  the  fruit  of  the  valley,  they  '  run
thereto  with  clamour  ;*  because  the  quiet  of  overlaid  sanctity
being  broken  through  they  spring  forth  to  that.

84.  It  may  be  too  that  by '  herbs  and  the  barks  of  trees*  not
only  the  deeds  of  the  good  are  meant,  as  has  been  said  before,
but  consolations  and  blessings  in  this  life. For  oftentimes

i74Badmen$eek(niierc<m{fort8fandgoo(bihaiiheSaintsleave.

Job  ao,  Almighty  Ood,  when  He  enriches  His  Elect  with  interior
Allbq.P^*  uplifts  them  with  external  honours  as  well.  And  while
He  renders  them  objects  of  honour  by  advancing  them  above
others,  He  exhibits  them  the  wider  as  objecls  of  imitation ;
and  sometimes  the  evil-minded  despise  indeed  the  life  of
those,  but  long  to  attain  their  good  success  in  this  world.
And  so  because  they  seek  here  below  the  flatteries  of
transitoiy  comfort,  they  *eat  herbs;*  because  in  their  thoughts
they  dwell  on  the  external  glory  of  these  persons,  they  *  chew
the  barks  of  trees  ;*  and  because  in  all  these  they  minister
to  avarice  alone  with  the  entire  bent  of  their  mind,  they  are
filled  with  the  '  root  of  the  juniper.'  All  which  things  they
<  carry  off  from  the  valleys,*  because  from  love  of  this  low
corruptible  life  they  are  made  to  bum  with  boundless  lusts.
And  *  when  they  find  each  one,  they  run  thereto  with
clamours,'  because  surely  of  the  holy  Fathers,  whose  merits
they  never  seek  to  acquire,  they  are  busy  to  lay  hold  of  the
posts  and  governments,  and  when  they  very  firequently  cannot
attain  these  by  quiet  means,  they  even  try  it  by  bursting
asunder  the  peacefiilness  of  concord.

35.  And  for  this  that  these  are  widely  separated  firom  the
conduct  of  the  Fathers  going  before,  it  is  rightly  subjoined ;
They  dwelled  in  the  desert  places  qf  torrents,  and  in  the
caves  qf  the  earth,  or  upon  the  gravel.  For  on  the  side  of
good  we  rightly  take  the  *  torrents'  for  the  holy  preachers,  who
whilst  in  the  present  life  they  flow  into  us  by  divine  effusions,
are  as  it  were  collected  by  a  concourse  of  waters  in  the  winter
season*  Who  also  withdraw  themselves  on  the  summer  sun
appearing,  because  when  the  light  of  the  Eternal  Country
shines  forth,  they  will  cease  to  preach.  *  The  desert  places
of  these  torrents'  are  the  benefits  of  the  life  of  time.  For
these  they  abandon,  and  betake  themselves  to  the  obtaining
of  heavenly  gains*  But  all  these  that  *  torrent*  had  forsaken
Phil,  a,  who  said;  For  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  qf  all  things,
and  do  count  them  but  dung.  But  because  ihe  minds  of  the
wicked  seek  to  obtain  those  things  in  this  life,  which  the
righteous  abandon  despising  them,  they  are  related  to  '  dwell
in  the  desert  places  of  the  torrents.'  For  those  things  which
are  unworthy  of  the  Saints,  those  same  long  to  win  as  great.
But  the  *  caves  of  the  e^rth'  are  wicked  thoughts,  in  which

Bad  men  unstabie  and  downward  $Upp%ng  as  on  gravel.  476

thej  baiy  themselves  from  the  eyes  of  their  feOow-creatnres.  Book
For  as  they  are  eril,  thej  shun  being  seen  by  men,  and  i
whilst  they  pretend  themselves  something  else  than  what
they  are,  they  conceal  themselves  in  the  lurking  places  of
their  conscience,  as  ^  in  caves  of  the  earth/  which  persons
would  not  do  all  these  things,  unless  they  were  hopeless  of
an  eternal  and  substantial  life,  unless  they  set  their  mind  in
this  uncertainty  of  the  temporal  state.  Whence  it  is  well
added,  Or  upon  the  gravel.

36.  For  the  *  gravel'  is  the  present  life,  which  by  the  mere
failure  of  mutability,  as  by  the  impulse  of  a  river,  is  an*
ceasingly  being  brought  to  its  end.  Hence  to  '  dwell  upon
the  gravel'  is  to  attach  one's  self  to  the  tide  of  the  present
life,  and  there  to  set  the  bent  of  the  mind,  where  it  cannot
stablish  the  step  by  standing  firmly.  There  is  another
circumstance  *  in  gravel/  which  ought  in  no  wise  to  be
passed  over  in  silence,  namely,  that  when  the  foot  is
set  upon  the  top  of  it,  it  slips  by  the  mere  rolling  tendency
thereof,  and  is  made  to  roll  down  to  the  bottom.  From
which  circumstance  the  life  of  the  wicked  is  in  nothing  at
variance,  because  whilst  for  love  of  the  world  they  set  them-
selves to  do  some  things  lawful  and  respectable,  they  in  a
manner  set  the  foot  flat  upon  the  top,  but  suddenly  the  foot
slips  to  the  bottom,  because  their  course  of  conduct,  whilst
it  ever  seeks  after  more,  descends  even  to  what  is  wicked  and
unlawfiil.  So  then,  when  Holy  Church  meets  with  the
crosses  of  this  period,  let  her  in  remembrance  have  recourse
to  the  life  of  the  carnal,  whom  even  in  her  prosperity  she
bore  as  adversaries  to  her,  and  by  whose  deserts  it  is  that
she  suffers  these  things  let  her  see  and  know,  saying,  Jlieg
dwelled  in  the  deseri  places  ofiorreniSy  and  in  caf)es  of  the
earthy  and  upon  the  gravel.  For  because  they  are  bared  of
the  teaching  of  the  Fathers,  they  are  related  to  ^  dwell  in  the
desert  places  of  the  torrents ;'  because  they  cover  themselves
up  in  the  hidden  thoughts  of  the  heart,  they  are  related  to
*  dwell  in  caves  of  the  earth ;'  whilst  because  tliey  desire  to
fix  their  aim  in  the  changeableness  of  the  present  state  of
being,  they  are  related  to  *  dwell  upon  the  gravel.'  But  would
that  such,  seeing  that  sins  when  they  tempt  they  have  no
mind  to  do  violence  to,  even  after  they  have  been  committed,

476 light  neglected  leave$  men  to  their  false  joys.

Job  80,  cleansed  them  away  by  weeping :  would  that  at  all  events,
— t: —  when  done,  they  acquainted  themselves  with  their  evil  deeds,
'''''^*and  applied  to  the  barren  fig-tree  the  basket  of  dung,  i.  e.  to
the  unfiruitful  soul  the  richness  of  lamenting.

87.  But  the  mind  of  man  has  for  the  most  part  this  thing
proper  to  it,  that  as  soon  as  ever  it  falls  into  transgression,  it
is  still  further  removed  from  ihe  knowledge  of  self.  For  this
very  evil,  that  it  commits,  inserts  itself  to  the  soul  as  a  bar
before  the  eye  of  reason.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  the
soul,  being  first  encompassed  by  voluntary  darkness,  after-
wards does  not  any  longer  even  know  the  good  it  should
seek.  For  the  more  it  attaches  itself  to  evil  things^  the  less
does  it  apprehend  the  good  ones  that  it  loses.  Since  tlio  light
of  truth,  because  it  minutely  tries  the  ofiences  of  lost  sinners,
in  the  same  degree  that  it  is  neglected  when  had,  so  does  it,
judging  rigidly,  allow  it  to  be,  that  not  even  when  lost  it
should  be  sought  back,  and  when  it  is  banished  A'om  the  act,
it  departs  from  the  perception  ;  that  that  whereof  the  face,
as  it  were,  is  slighted  iu  practice,  should  now  no  longer  have
its  very  hinder  parts  appear  in  the  remembrance.  Thus,
hence  it  is  that  lost  sinners,  whilst  subject  to  sins  to  be
lamented,  rejoice ;  concerning  whom  it  is  said  by  Solomon,
ProT.  9,  Who  rejoice  to  do  evil,  and  delight  in  the  worst  things.
^^'  Hence  it  is  that  occasions  of  lamentations  Ihey  go  through
dancing;  hence  it  is  that  the  business  of  their  death  they
cany  on  laughing. Whence  here  also  it  is  fitly  subjoined,

Ver.  7.  Wfto  rejoiced  in  the  midst  of  the  like,  and  reckoned
there  were  delights  under  the  brambles,
XV.  88.  ^  They  rejoice  in  the  midst  of  the  like,'  because,  surely,
they  give  heed  to  the  transitory  things  which  they  receive,
and  neglect  to  look  at  the  lasting  blessings  which  they  lose.
And  whilst  they  arc  on  fire  with  tlie  lovu  of  things  temporal,
they  are  willingly  ignomnt  of  the  true  joy.  Which  same  if
they  earnestly  sought  to  acquaint  tliemselves  with,  how  greatly
the  delights  which  they  seek  after  are  to  be  wept  for,  they
would  see.  But,  while  they  are  unconcerned  to  know  what
are  better,  they  choose  those  alone  for  themselves,  as  the
highest,  which  flatter  the  eyes  in  the  visible  by  a  fleeting
beguilement.  That  is  to  say,  they  fix  fast  their  heart,
following  ailer  the  visible,  and  rejoice  so  much  the  more

Sinners  insensible  from  passion  to  their  oum  misery. 477

outwardly,  in  proportion  as  they  are  without  the  remembrance  Book
of  themselves  inwardly. Yet,  generally,  there  are  mixed ^


with  their  joys  calamities,  and  by  the  actual  things,  by  which
they  are  filled  with  pride,  they  are  scourged.  For  neither
can  they,  without  grievous  inconveniences  of  anxieties,
either  seek  when  not  possessed,  or  retain  when  sought,  the
temporal  things  that  they  desire ;  among  their  equals  aim  at
superior  glory ;  from  inferiors  exact  respect  beyond  what  is
meet,  and  to  superiors  shew  Torth  tho  same  less  than  they
ought ;  for  the  most  part  display  the  mastery  by  masterful-
ness ;  ever  do  what  is  wicked,  and  yet,  that  they  may  not
have  the  credit  of  wickedness,  guard  themselves  with  dread.
All  these  things  surely  sting  the  wretched  persons,  but  those
same  stings  they  do  not  feel,  from  being  overcome  by  the
mere  love  of  the  things  of  time.  And  hence  it  is  rightly  said
now.  And  reckoned  there  were  delights  under  the  brambles;
because,  being  closely  encompassed  by  the  enjoyments  of
sins,  from  the  affecting  of  the  present  life,  how  sharp  the
things  they  are  that  they  undergo  they  are  not  aware.

39.  Therefore  they  *  rejoice,*  but  *  under  brambles ;'
because  they  delight  in  earthly  things  indeed,  but  yet,
whilst  they  are  unable  to  manage  those  same  things  of  time
without  trouble,  the  wretched  persons  are  stung  by  that
same  care  which  they  are  pressed  by.  They  continue  *  under
the  brambles,*  and  this  very  thing  they  account  delight,
because  they  at  once  endure  hardships  indeed  from  the  love
of  the  present  life,  but  yet,  being  bound  about  by  the  ab-
sorption of  over-great  desire,  they  account  the  trouble  of
that  endurance  to  be  pleasure.  Hence  Jeremiah,  rightly
taking  upon  himself  the  likeness  of  all  human  conduct,  com-
plains in  lament,  saying.  He  has  made  me  drunken  withlMai.9^
wormwood.  For  as  we  have  already  said  before  in  a  part  ^*'
above,  any  one  drunk  knows  nothing  what  he  is  undergoing.
But  he  that  is  made  *  drunk  with  wormwood,*  both  has  the
thing  that  he  has  taken  bitter,  and  yet  does  not  understand
that  same  bitterness  which  he  is  filled  with.  So  the  race  of
man,  being  by  the  right  judgment  of  God  left  to  themselves
in  their  pleasures,  and  by  those  same  pleasures  consigned  to
voluntary  sufferings,  is  *  drunk  with  wormwood ;'  because
both  these  are  bitter  things  which  it  endures  for  the  love  of

478 Man  chooses  toil  and  toretchednessfor  the  world.

Job  80,  this  life,  and  yet  that  same  bilterness,  by  the  blindDess  of
j££~- concupiscence,  as  by  the  insensibility  of  drunkenness,  it
remains  ignorant  of. For  thirsting  after  the  glory  of  ibe
world,  whilst  it  finds  instead  thereof  numberless  tribulations,
what  it  drinks  is  bitter. But  because  it  took  this  too  eagerly,
from  mere  drunkenness  it  is  not  now  able  to  discern  the  evil
of  that  bitterness. For  bad  men,  for  the  sake  of  the  glory  of
this  world,  love  tribulations  even,  and  on account  of  it
willingly  lend  themselves  to  all toils,  and  most devotedly
submit  their  necks  to  the  yoke  of  heavy  labours. Which  is
well  described  by Hosea whilst  prophesying,  under  the
Hot.  10,  likeness  of  Ephraim,  saying,  And  Ephraim  is  a  heifer  that
is  taught  to  love  threshing. For  a  heifer  accustomed  to  the
labours  of  threshing,  very  often,  when  loosed,  returns  even
not  forced  to  the  same  customariness  of  labour. So  the  mind
of  the  wicked  being  devoted  to  the  services  of  this  world,
and  accustomed  to  the  wearyings  of  temporal  things,  even  if  it
be  allowed  to  be  freely  at  liberty  to  itself,  yet  is  eager  to
»aL'£rom submit  itself  to  earthly  pains  and  toils,  and  seeks  the  usage'
"••*^ of  a  wretched  way  of  life,  *  the  threshing*  of  labour,  that  it
should  not  be  acceptable,  even  if  it  were  allowable,  to  give
over  the  yoke  of  worldly  servitude. Which  same  yoke  the
Lord  loosed  from  the  neck  of  the  disciples*  when  He  said,
Lukedl,  Afyi  take  heed  to  yourselves^  lest  at  any  time  your  hearts  be
^' overcharged  with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness ;  and  straight-
way added,  and  cares  of  this  life:  and  so  that  day  come  upon
Mat.  11,  you  unawares. And  again.  Come  unto  Me^  all  ye  that  labour
^' and  are  heavy  laden^  and  I  will  give  you  rest. Take  My
yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  Me;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowfy
in  heart. What  is  it  for  the  Lord  to  call  Himself '  meek  and
lowly'  in  preceptorship,  save  leaviug  behind  the  difficulties
for  exercising  self-exaltation,  to  point  out  souie  plain  ways
of  living  well? But  because  the  minds  of  the  wicked  are
more  pleased  by  what  is  harsh  in  self-exalting  than  by  what
is  gentle  in  mildness  and  humility,  they  '  suppose  there  are
delights  under  brambles.' For  from  love  of  the  world  they
are  ready  to  bear  what  is  hard  as  things  soft  and  delightful,
whilst  they  try  in  this  life  to  lay  hold  of  the  topmost  pinnacles
of  affairs.

40.  The  Lord  bids  ceasing  from  the  labours  of  the  world.

Manna  Mcomedfor  the  hard  earthly  fruiU  of  Egypt. 479

He  prompts  the  sweetness  of  holy  traoqaOlity,  and  yet  the  Book

frenzied  mind  of  the  wicked  is  more  rejoiced  to  obtain  what 1-

is  harsh  in  the  carnal  way  than  to  hold  what  is  mild  in  the
spiritual  way.  It  is  more  fed  by  the  bitterness  of  wearisome-
ness  than  by  the  sweetness  of  tranqnillity.  Which  the
Israelitish  people  openly  shews  us  in  itself,  which  same,
whilst  it  received  the  refreshment  of  manna  from  aboveyNomb.
lusted  after  the  flesh-pots,  and  the  melons,  and  the  leeks,  ^'>^'
and  the  onions,  from  Egypt.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the
*  manna,*  but  the  food  of  grace,  having  a  sweet  savour,  given
from  Above  for  the  refreshment  of  the  interior  life  to  persons
rightly  free  ?  And  what  by  the  *  flesh-pots,'  saving  carnal
works,  which  are  with  difficulty  to  be  dressed  by  the  toils  of
tribulations,  as  by  fires  ?  What  by  *  melons,'  but  earthly
sweets  ?  What  by  *  leeks  and  onions,'  which  those  who  eat
very  often  shed  tears,  excepting  the  hardness  of  the  present
lire,  which  is  both  gone  through  by  the  lovers  of  it  not
without  mourning,  and  notwithstanding  is  loved  with  tears  ?
Therefore,  forsaking  '  manna,'  together  with  melons  and  flesh-
meats  they  sought  leeks  and  onions,  surely  because  bad
minds  despise  the  gifts  of  tranquillity,  sweet  by  grace,  and
for  the  sake  of  carnal  pleasures  they  covet  the  wearisome
ways  of  this  life,  even  though  full  of  tears;  they  scorn  to
have  where  they  may  rejoice  in  a  spiritual  manner,  and
ardently  seek  where  they  may  even  groan  in  a  carnal  way.
So  then,  let  Job  with  a  truth-telling  voice  rebuke  the  madness
of  these  persons,  for  no  other  reason  than  that  by  a  perverted
judgment  they  set  the  troubled  before  the  tranquil,  the  hard
before  the  gentle,  the  harsh  before  the  mild,  the  transitory
before  the  eternal,  (he  suspicious  before  the  assured.  The
madness  of  such  let  Holy  Church  call  to  remembrance,  when
she  is  encompassed  with  cruel  adversities  without,  which
persons  she  held  within  herself  as  if  believers,  but  for  long
endured  their  life  opposing  the  faith,  and  let  her  say,  WTko
rejoiced  in  the  midst  of  the  like^  and  reckoned  there  were
delights  under  brambles;  surely,  because  the  evil  things
that  they  do,  they  learnt  by  the  badness  of  the  wicked  going
before. Whence  also  it  is  rightly  subjoined ;

Ver.  8.  They  were  children  qf  fools^  yea  children  of  base
men*

480 There  is  a  ^/ooluhness  of  6od^  that  is  not  base.

Job  so, 41.  It  is  right  for  us  to  know  that  some  within  the  pale  of

j££~-  Holy  Church  are  styled  *  fools,'  but  yet  *  noble/  whilst  others

xvi. are  ^  fools*  and  *  base.' For  they  are called  ^  fools,'  but

cannot  be  *  base,'  who  contemning  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh,

desire  foolishness  that  shall  stand  them  in  stead,  and  after

the  newness  of  the  interior  descent  are  exalted  by  the

nobility  of  virtue,  who  set  at  nought  the  foolish  wisdom  of

the  world,  and  covet  the  wise  foolishness  of  God. Since  it

1  Cor.  1,  is  written,  Because  the  foolishness  qf  Qod  is  voiser  than  men.

This  *  foolishness'  Paul charges  ourselves  to  lay  hold  of,

when  he  says,  If  any  man  among  you  seemeth  to  be  wise  in

this  worldy  let  him  become  a  fool^  that  he  may  be  wise.

This  *  foolishness'  they  that  perfectly  followed  obtained  to

Mat  19,  hear  from  the  voice  of  Wisdom,  Ye  which  have  followed  Me

^* in  the  regeneration^  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  in  the

throne  qf  His  glory ^  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones

jndging  the  twelve  tribes  qf  Israel. Mark  how  by  abandoning

temporal  things  they  purchased  the  glory  of  eternal  power.

Accordingly  what  is  there  more  foolish  in  this  world  than  to

abandon  one's  own? And  what  more  noble  in  the  eternal

world  than  to  come  with  God  as  judges? Verily  the  nobility

of  these  judges  is  made  mention  of  by  Solomon  bearing

record,  where  this  which  I  have  already  spoken  before  is

Prov. said.  Her  husbatid  is  noble  in  the  gates^  when  he  sitteth

81 SS  ^  '

'  '  among  the  senators  qf  the  land.  For  noble  above  measure
does  he  regard  those,  whom  he  calls  *  senators.'  This
*  nobility'  Paul  had  beheld  in  himself,  when  being  united  by
Aou  17,  the  spirit  to  the  relationship  of  the  Creator,  he  said,  Foras-
much  then  as  we  are  the  offspring  qf  God,  tve  (night  not  to
think  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold,  or  silver,  or  stone
graven  by  art  or  nuMfCs  device;  \.  e.  we  are  styled  ^  the
offspring  of  God,'  not  as  being  brought  forth  in  His  Nature,
but  as  being  by  His  Spirit  both  created  by  His  Will  and
made  anew  by  His  adoption.  So  much  the  more  then  is
each  one  lifted  up  to  this  nobility,  in  proportion  as  he  is
renewed  in  the  image  he  has  received  to  the  likeness  of  That
Being  in  a  copy.

42.  But  contrariwise  tliey  are  ^  fools  and  base  men,'  who
while,  in  following  themselves,  they  flee  A*om  the  wisdom
Above,  are  lulled to  sleep  in  their  ignorance as  in the

IJnd  men  i$i  the  Church  not  her  son$,  nor  known  o/Ood.  481

vileness  of  an  abject  descent. For  in  proportion  as  they  do  Book
not  understand  that  for  which  they  were  made,  in  the  same ^


measure  they  lose  the  relationship  of  high  birth  vouchsafed
then  in  the  Likeness.  So  they  are  '  fools  and  base  men/
whom  the  slavery  of  the  soul  withholds  from  the  fellowship
of  the  Eternal  Inheritance.  As  it  is  written,  Whosoever  JfihnS,
eommitteth  sin  is  the  servant  qf  sin.  And  it  is  spoken  by'  *
the  voice  of  the  great  preacher,  For  the  wisdom  qf  thisiCot.Bf
world  is  foolishness  with  Ood.  They  then,  who  whilst  they  **
were  wise  in  earthly  things  were  held  back  from  the  interior
nobility,  were  *  fools  and  base  men'  at  once.  Whose  actions
while  very  many  imitate  they  are  rendered  '  the  children  of
fools  and  base  men,*  and  whilst  they  follow  these  in  notions
and  practices,  they  are  at  once  '  fools,*  because  they  do  not
understand  tnie  wisdom,  and  *  base  men,*  because  they  are
not  renewed  by  any  freedom  of  the  Spirit  But  these  persons
though  they  may  practise  the  arts  of  the  wicked,  yet  very
often  in  this  life  occupy  the  places  of  the  just,  and  they
account  themselves  the  children  of  those,  whose  offices  from
lust  of  honour  they  outwardly  discharge.  Which  persons
holy  correction  rccals  to  the  knowledge  of  themselves,  i.  e.
that  being  settled  in  bad  desires,  they  should  mind  whose
children  they  are.  For  they  are  not  the  children  of  those
whose  places  they  occupy,  but  whose  deeds  they  execute^
Therefore  let  it  be  rightly  said,  The  children  qf  fools  and
base  men. Where  it  is  fitly  subjoined ;

And  on  earth  utterly  not  appearing.

43.  For  as  there  are  very  many  persons  upon  earth,  and  xvii.
they  are  hidden  from  the  knowledge  of  their  fellowcreatures
by  the  lowness  of  their  vile  condition,  as  by  a  kind  of  over-
laying of  a  cloak,  so  there  are  some  in  the  Church,  who
whilst  they  submit  themselves  to  the  degradation  of  wicked
deeds,  are  not  known  to  the  Divine  sight.  To  which
persons  it  is  one  day  to  be  said.  Verily  I  say  unto  you^
I  know  you  not.  So, '  to  be  on  earth  and  appear*  is  in  a
right  faith  through  the  excellency  of  practice  to  display  the
nobility  of  the  soul.  *  To  be  on  earth  and  utterly  not
appear,'  is  to  be  set  fast  in  the  Church  indeeil  by  faith,
but  to  shew  forth  nothing  worthy  of  faith  in  practice.  These
then  being  within  the  pale  of  Holy  Church,  to  the  eyes  of

VOL.  II.  I  i

482 No  real  approach  to  Ood  wilhoul  obedience.

Job  80,  the  Divine Being  both  ^  appear'  in  respect  of  judgment,

— -^ —  and  yet  do  ^  not  appear*  in  respect  of  the  deserts  of  a  good

life,  because  those  things,  which  by  confessing  tlicy  hold,

by  living  they  do  not  shew  forth. Concerning  whom  Paul

Tit.  1,  sailh,  TAeyprq/esit  thai  they  know  Ood^  but  in  works  they  deny
Him.  These  persons  in  Holy  Chiurch  bear  down  rather  than
venerate  the  faith  which  they  protest  that  (hoy  hold,  whereas
by  her  name  they  covet  rather  to  secure  their  own  profits  than
her*s.  But  the  Elect,  whilst  they  take  care  to  preserve  the
deservingness  of  faith  by  right  deeds,  are  brought  near  to
the  knowledge  of  their  Maker  even  amidst  the  throngs  of
lost  sinners.  Which  is  well  denoted  in  the  Gospel  by  the
woman  suffering  from  the  bloody  flux. Concerning  whom

Luke  8,  the  Lord  says,  Who  touched  Me?  Peter  answered  reasoning,

^^'  '  Master f  the  multitude  throng  Thee  and  press  Thee^  and  sayest
Tliou^  Who  touched  Mef  Bui  he  obtained  to  hear  the
causes  in  true  reason,  when  the  Lord  said  to  him.  Somebody
hath  touched  Me^/or  I  likeunse  perceive  thai  virtue  is  gone
out  qf  Me.  See  how  the  throng  '  pressed^  the  Lord,  but
she  only  ^  touched*  Him,  who  came  to  Him  in  humility,
because  surely  even  many  lost  sinnei*s  in  Holy  Church  by
learning  *  press*  the  truth,  which  same  they  neglect  to  *  touch*
by  living  well.  They  *  press*  and  are  far  off,  because  by
professions  they  follow  Divine  knowledge,  by  habits  flee
it.  They  *  press,*  I  say,  and  are  far  off,  because  by  acting
they  contradict  that  faith,  which  by  speaking  they  assert.
As  then  we  are  instructed  by  this  testimony,  that  by  touching
some  do  not  *  touch*  the  Lord,  so  some  are  not  '  seen'  by
the  Lord,  even  when  they  are  seen;  because  to  His  secret
regards,  and  for  the  punishment  of  condemnation,  they  do
appear,  but  for  the  claim  of  Election  they  do  not  appear.
Therefore  let  it  be  rightly  said,  Afid  on  earth  utterly  not
appearing;  because  though  the  Church  held  theui  to  the
extent  of  seeming,  yet  those  being  within  her  the  Creator
did  not  see,  in  that  He  did  not  know  them.  Who  in  the
season  of  peace  for  this  reason  maintain  the  faith  to  the
extent  of  words,  because  they  see  that  that  faith  flourishes
generally.  But  when  a  sudden  storm  of  adversity  rises  up
against  that  Church,  tliey  are  directly  parted  from  her  by
a  public  denial^,  and  whatever  tliey  before  held  as  if  vene-

The  Church  in  time  of  trouble  a  byword  to  teomers. 483

rating  bcr,  iliey  aftorwards  fight  against  the  same  as  deriding  Book
her. Whence  it  is  fitly  added ;  ^^*


y er.  9.  And  now  am  I  their  song,  yea,  I  am  become  their
byword.

44.  By  which  same  words  that  time  of  Holy  Church  is  set  xviii.
forth,  when  she  is  openly  derided  by  the  lost;  when  the
wicked  gaining  ground,  faith  shall  be  for  a  reproach,  and
truth  shall  be  for  a  ground  of  accusation.  For  so  much  the
more  contemptible  shall  each  individual  be  in  proportion  as  he
may  be  more  righteous ;  and  the  worse  object  of  abhorrence,

the  more  worthy  object  of  praise.  Therefore  the  Holy
Church  of  the  Elect  in  the  time  of  calamity  *  becomes  a
proverb'  to  the  wicked,  because  when  they  see  the  good  die
by  torments,  they  take  their  likeness  of  cursing  from  those.
For  in  proportion  as  they  see  a  passing  death,  but  do  not  see
a  lasting  life,  so  much  the  more  in  scoffing  do  they  flee
present  ills,  in  proportion  as  by  the  understanding  interiorly
they  do  not  reach  to  lasting  goods.  But  the  particulars  that
are  subjoined  because  they  are  not  involved  in  obscurer  sorts
of  sentences,  we  must  run  through  in  brief,  that  we  may  be
able  to  come  the  sooner  to  those  parts,  wherein  we  have  to
labour. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  10.  ney  abhor  me,  they  flee  far  from  me,  and  spare
not  to  spit  in  my  face,

45.  All  the  wicked  *  fly  far'  from  Holy  Church,  not  by  the  xix.
paces  of  footsteps,  but  by  the  characters  of  practices ;  they

fly  far  not  in  place,  but  desert,  whereas,  pride  gaining  ground,
ihey  contemn  her  with  open  upbraiding.  For  *  to  spit  in  his
face'  is  not  only  to  detract  from  the  good  in  absence,  but  to
give  the  lie  to  each  one  of  the  just  even  in  presence.  And
these  then  whilst  the  wicked  by  openly  deriding  set  at
nought,  they  as  it  were  let  out  in  insults  upon  them  loose
words,  like  streams  of  spittle  running  down.  But  Holy
Church  knows  how  to  gain  ground  in  sufferings,  and  in  the
midst  of  reproaches  to  maintain  an  honourable  life ;  she  is
taught  neither  to  be  cast  down  by  adversities,  nor  to  glory  in
prosperity.  Sho  is  instructed,  in  meeting  prosperity,  to  lay
low  the  mind  in  downcasting;  sho  is  taught,  in  meeting
adversity,  to  lift  up  the  soul  to  the  hope  of  the  height  above.
She  knows  how  to  ascribe  her  good  things  to  the  mercifulness

ii2

484 ChastUemeHi  sometimes  open. Speech  restrained*

Job  80,  of  the  Redeemer,  she  knows  bow  to  ascribe  her  evil  things
j^j^^^^  to  the  justice  of  the  JadgCi  that  both  what  is  good  she  has
by  His  bestowing,  and  what  is  bad  she  suffers  by  His  per-
mitting. And  hence  He  immediately  adds  touching  tlie
Lord,  saying,

Ver.  11.  Because  He  hath  opened  His  quiver  and  afflicted
me.
XX. 46.  What  is  denoted  by  *  the  quiver*  of  God,  but  secret
counsel  ? Now  the  Lord  casts  the  arrow  from  the  quiver,
when  from His  secret  counsel  He  sends  forth  an  open
sentence. For  that  any  man  b  scourged,  we  know,  but  for
what  cause  the  scourge  comes,  we  know  not. But  when  after
the  scourge  amendment  of  life  follows,  the  actual  power  of
counsel  is  itself  disclosed  as  well. So  the  quiver  shut  is
hidden  counsel. But  we  are  chastened  by  an  open  quiver,
when  by  that  which  follows  after  the  scourge,  we  see  with
what  counsel  we  are  stricken. When  the  Lord  beholds  sins,
and  yet  does  not  move  the  hand  to  vengeance,  He  as  it  were
holds  the  quiver  shut,  but  by  striking  He  shews,  how  greatly
that  displeased  Him  in  us,  which  He  bore  long  beholding  it
Therefore  let  the  Holy  Church  of  the  Elect  being  pressed
by  tribulations  say,  For  He  hath  opened  His  quiver^  and
afflicted  me. Which  same  on  meeting  with  the  insolent
voices  of  her  adversaries,  when  she  sees  tliat  her  preaching
is  not  received,  giving  over  the  hardness  of  some,  restrains
the  words  of  her  preaching. For  reflecting  that  her  perse-
cutors are  rendered  worse  at  the  voice  of  her  exhortation,
she  rather  prefers  to  hold  her  peace. And  when  she  sees
tliem  persons  unworthy  to  hear,  she  binds  up  her  preaching
with  silence  drawn  over. Whence  he  fitly  adds ;
And  put  a  bridle  into  my  mcmth.
xxi. 47.  They  were  acquainted  with  *  a  bridle  put  upon  them-
Acu  18,  selves*  before  certain  persons,  who  said,  //  vxu  necessary
^P* tliUt  the  word  qf  Qod  should  first  have  been  spoken  to  youj
but  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you,  and  judge  yourselves  unworthy
qf  everlasting  life^  lo,  V)e  turn  to  the  Oeniiles. Holy  men
see  *  the  bridle'  of  silence  put  upon  themselves  with  the  hard
Pi.  187,  hearts  of  lost  sinners,  when  they  say  by  the  Prophet,  How
^' shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land?  Paul  also
charged  '  a  bridle  to  be  put,'  who  enjoined the disciple,

Reproof  stayed  in  charity.  Assaults  by  seeming  Christians.  485

sayingy  A  n%an  that  is  an  heretic  (ffter  the  first  a$ui  second  Book
admonition  rqfect,  knowing  that  he  thai  is  such  is  subverted,,^^
and  sinneth  condemned  qfhimse(f. For  holy  teachers  very  lo. '
often  by  lohy  ken  survey  the  hearts  of  those  that  oppose
them^  and  when  they  see  those  hearts  forsaken  by  God,  afflicted
and  groaning  they  hold  their  peace. Doth  not  Solomon
sometimes  *  put  a  bridle*  upon the  teachers,  who  saith.
Reprove  not  a  scorner^  lest  he  hate  thee^  but  if  we  hold  our  Pron  9,
peace  from  rebuking  for  this  reason,  because  we  are  afraid
for  the  scomer's  hates  to  rise  up  against  us,  we  no  longer
seek  God's  profits,  but  our  own. Wherein  it  requires  to  be
known  that  sometimes  when  bad  men  are  reproved  they
become  worse. Them  therefore  we  spare,  and  not  ourselves,
if  from  the  love  of  those  we  cease  from  the  rebuking  of  them.
Whence  it  is  needful  that  we  sometimes  endure  keeping  to
ourselves  what  they  are,  in  order  that  they  may  learn  in  us
by  good  living  *  what  they  are  not Therefore  because  Holy '  •!.  *bjr
Church,  who  ever  gives  forth her  words  in  a  spirit  of***^^
charity,  sometimes  also  withholds  them  on  the  principle  of
charity,  let  her  say.  He  hath  put  a  bridle  in  my  mouth. As
though  he  confessed  openly,  saying,  *  Because  in  some  I  did
not  see  the  advancement  of  preaching,  from  those  I  refrained
assault,  that  my  life  at  all  events  by  patience  they  might  be
taught,  whereas  my  words  they  would  not  by  the  preaching
proffered  consent  to  receive.' But  very  often  this  grieves  us
most  in  tribulations,  that  we  meet  with  them  from  those,  in
whom  we  trusted  with  the  love  of  kin. And  hence  it  is  added;

Yer.  12.  At  the  right  hand  qf  the  East  my  calamities  on
the  spot  arose.

48.  For  '  calamities'  would  '  rise  to  the  left,'  if  at  the  hand  xixu
of  any  persons  set  without  the  pale  of  Religion,  and  openly
denying  Christ,  she  met  with  the  adverse  dealings  of  perse-
cution. But  when  she  undergoes  from  persons  seemingly
believers  the  trial  of  tormentings,  it  is  as  if  calamities  arose
to  her  at  the  right  hand,  because  they  who  are  enlisted
under  Christ's  name,  assail  Christ's  name  in  her.  For  by
the  very  usage  of  speech  we  speak  of  having  as  *  on  the
right'  what  we  account  as  great,  and  as  on  the  left  that
which  we  look  down  upon,  which  Zechariah  openly  teaches,
saying,  And  he  shewed  me  Jesus  the  high  priest  standing  Zeoh.3f

It  9.

486  Satan  at  Christ's  *  right  hand"  as  perverting  the  Jews.

Job  80,  before  the  Angel  qfthe  Lard,  and  Satan  standing  at  his  right

'^' hand  to  resist  him. Who  that  be  might  the  more  plainly

'shew  this  that  he  set  before,  added  going  on;  And  the  Lord

said  unto  Satan ^  The  Lord  rebuke  thee^  O  Satan;  even  the

Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee. Is  not  this

a  brand  plucked  out  qf  the  fire  f Now  Jesus  was  clothed

>  al.  <  iMwith  filthy  garments. '  Jesus  was*  clothed  with  filthy  gar-

^a«'  ments,'  because  though  He  was  a  stranger  to  all  sin,  yet  He
came  into  the  likeness  of  the  flesh  of  sin.  And  to  Him  on
His  coming  Satan  stood  on  His  right  hand.  For  the  Lord
appeared  to  hold  the  Jewish  People  as  great,  and  the  Gentiles
as  nought.  But  after  that  He  appeared  Incaraate,  the  Gentile
world,  ^'hicb  had  been  held  as  *  on  the  leA'  believedi  whilst
the  Jewish  People  swerved  aside  to  unbelief.  Thus  ^  Satan
^tood  on  the  right  hand  to  Him  f  because  he  carried  off  from
Him  that  People,  which  had  been  for  a  long  while  beloved.
But  because  that  same  Jewish  people,  being  now  lost,  shall  in
the  end  one  day  believe,  as  the  Prophet  testifies,  who  says,

^  ^^9  The  remnant  shall  be  saved;  the  Lord  removes  Satan  from
His  right  hand,  saying.  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan.
And  betokening  the  deliverance  of  that  same  people,  he  adds,
,  because  He  hath  chosen  Jerusalem.  Which  same  people
because  under  the  guidance  of  unbelief  it  let  itself  run  down
to  the  burnings  of  hell,  but  whilst  it  is  brought  back  to  faith,
is  set  free  from  that  same  burning  of  everlasting  fire,  has  it
directly  added  there  concerning  it,  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked
out  qfthe  fire  f

49,  So  then  as  there  for  *  the  right  hand'  the  Jewish  people
is  denoted,  so  in  this  place  by  the  term  of  *  the  right  hand,*
the  faithful  people  of  Holy  Church  is  denoted.  And  hence
the  Judge  that  is  to  come  *  shall  set  the  goats  on  His  left
Hand,  and  the  sheep  on  His  right  Hand.'  But  when  these
very  persons  too  fret  Holy  Church  in  the  time  of  adversity,
who  seemed  to  be  of  the  faithful,  surely  *  calamities  ai'ise
to  her  on  the  right  hand.' Now  rightly  is  thij^same  called

<Jji«£rJ£lilliftnd  nf  ihe  gflatj^ince  i^  ja  wriitAn  nf  tlm  Hftnd

Zooh.  6^  itaelf  nf  the  aame.  The  East  is  His  Naitw. For  seeing  that

ts.Yui.^^^  light  springs  fiom  tlie  East,  He  is  rightly  called  *  the

East,'  by  the  light  of  whose  righteousness  the  night  of  our

unrighteousness  is  enlightened.  _So  ^  calamities  arise  to  the

Tlie  weak  in  Holy  Church  turned  aeide  and  overwhelmed.  487

right  hand_of  the  Eas.t/_  becausa  thftte  likowise  leap  forth  to  Book

persecutioii^ho  were  suppose  j  to  be  Elect  Menphftrg  of  our —

RftHppmer  Which  same  calamities  he  righdj  declares  ^  arise
on  the  spoty*  because  whereas  they  who  persecute  were  not
persons  without  her  pale,  evils  are  brought  about  by  them
suddenly  and  on  the  spot.  But  if  *  the  right  hand*  is  a
designation  of  those  who  are  truly  believers, '  calamities  arise
to  the  right  of  the  East/  because  on  the  crisu  of  persecution
breaking  forth,  the  righteous  undergo  the  cruel  assaults  of  the
wicked. It  follows;

Yer.  12.  They  overturned  my  feety  amd  oppressed  with
their  footpaths  as  with  waves.

50.  What  are  denoted  by  the  Church's  *  feet,*  but  her  xxiii.
outermost  members?  which  while  they  lend  themselves  to
earthly  deeds,  are  able  to  be  the  sooner  deceived  by  adver-
saries in  proportion  as  they  do  not  understand  things  on
high.  Therefore  these  *  feet  adversaries  overturn/  that  is  to
say,  when  they  draw  her  outermost  members  to  the  error  of
their  doctrine.  The  *  feet  overturned*  cannot  keep  the  way,
in  that  all  the  weak  being  either  persuaded  by  the  promises
of  their  persecutors,  or  affrighted  by  their  threats,  or  broken
by  their  tortures,  swerve  from  the  right  path*  Now  ^  the
paths'  of  adversaries  are  rightly  likened  to  waves,  when  it  is
said,  and  they  oppressed  with  their  footpaths  as  with  waves;
in  this  way,  because  the  life  of  the  evil-minded,  mischievous
with  wayward  restlessness,  comes  down  as  a  tempest  for  the
overwhelming  the  ship  of  the  heart,  so  to  say.  Concerning
which  same  tempest  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  As  a  tempest  Pnw.
passing^  the  wicked  shall  not  be.  And  when  the  weak  man  ^*  ***
sees  the  froTfard  flourishing,  that  man  the  wave  of  wretched
imitation  plunges  into  the  sea  of  frowardness. It  follows;

Yer.  18.  They  did  away  with  my  paths ^  they  plotted
against  me,  and  prevailed^  and  there  was  not  any  to  bring
help.

01.  Let  blessed  Job  tell  these  things  of  evil  spirits,  i.  e.  of  xxiv.
secret  enemies.  Liet  the  Church  Universal  speak  them  of
bad  men  persecuting,  i.  e.  of  open  adversaries.  For  ^ese
^  do  away  with  her  paths,*  when  in  the  souls  of  certain
weak  ones  they  interrupt  the  ways  of  truth  by  crafty  per-
suading. These  in  *  plotting  prevail,  when  those,  whom

488 Ood/orsakes  iho$e  He  loves,/or  irial,/or  a  time.

Job  30,  they  cannot  openly  force  to  evil^  they  turn  aside  by  pretend-
2 — ^— ing  what  is  good,  but  that  is  very  wonderfu],  which  he
'subjoins^  And  there  was  noi  any  one  to  bring  help^  when  the
Pi.9,9.Pssdini8t  exclaims  touching  the  help  of  God;  A  helper  in
^^* seasons,  in  tribulation. And,  Let  them  hope  in  Thee,  who
know  Thy  Name,  for  Thou,  Lord,  wilt  not  forsake  those
Eoolof.  that  seek  Thee. And  when  it  is  written  again,  Did  ever  any
' ' trust  in  thd  Lord  and  v?as  cofifounded?  or  did  any  abide  in
His  commandments,  and  was  forsaken  f Or  whom  did  He
ever  despise,  that  called  upon  Him  ? On  what  principle,
then,  is  it  now  said ;  And  there  was  not  any  to  bring  help,
excepting  that  those,  whom  Almighty  Ood  loves  for  all
eternity.  He  sometimes  leaves  for  a  time? Whence  it  is
11.64,  written;  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee,  and
I'  ®' with  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee. In  a  little  wrath  I
hid  My  face  from  thee  for  a  moment,  and  with  everlasting
kindness  unit  I  have  mercy  upon  thee. Hence  too  the
P«.  119,  Psalmist  besought,  saying,  O  forsake  me  fiot  utterly. He
^' then  knew  that  he  might  be  left  for  a  little  while  with  advan-
tage, who  prayed  that  he  might  not  be  ^  utterly  forsaken.*
For  the  Lord  by  coming  helps  His  Saints,  by  ^  leaving'  puts
them  to  llie  proof,  by  gifts  he  establishes,  by  tribulations  he
Eoolui.  tries. Whence  too  it  is  rightly  said  by  one  of  Wisdom,  For
* ' at  the  first  she  will  uHilk  with  him  by  crooked  ways,  cmd
bring  fear  and  dread  upon  him,  and  torment  him  with  her
discipline  until  she  try  him  in  his  UiOughts. Since  the  soul
of  the  righteous  grace  calls,  trial  puts  to  the  question. And
Almighty  Ood  allows  the  adversaries  of  His  Elect  to  grow  to
a  height  in  time,  that  the  life  of  the  goodjaay  be  purified
the  pitilessness  ofihaJiadL^

52r^Since  the  Lord  would  never  suffer  them  to  be  hostile
to  the  good  except  he  also  saw  what  great  good  they  did.
For  whilst  the  unrighteous  deal  cruelly,  the  righteous  are
purified,  and  the  life  of  the  wicked  is  oulistcd  to  tlie  advautago
of  the  innocent,  in  that  this  same  both  by  bearing  down  it
abases,  and  by  abasing  ever  fashions  to  better.  Hence
ProT.  too  it  is  rightly  said  by  Solomon;  the  fool  shall  be  servant
^^'  ^'  to  the  wise  qf  heart.  And  yet  we  often  see  the  wise  subor-
dinate, and  fools  occupying  the  stronghold  of  dominion,
wise  men  paying  obedience  in  servitude,  and  fools  lording  it

The  wicked^asservaniSfChasten  the  young  heirs  of  Heaven,  480

with  tyrannical  exultation. How  then  by  the  marking  out  of  Book
God^s  sentence  is  '  the  fool  serrant  to  the  wise/  when  gene-


rally speaking  he  keeps  him  down  by  the  right  of  temporal
dominion  i  But  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  whilst  against
the  life  of  the  wise  man  the  fool  being  uppermost  enforces
the  terribleness  of  power,  whilst  he  wearies  him  out  with
labours,  rends  him  with  insults,  such  a  person  surely  by
burning  he  purges  from  all  the  rusi  of  bad  habits.  Thus  the
fool  even  in  ruling  is  '  serrant  to  the  wise/  in  that  by  bearing
him  down  he  advances  him  to  a  better  state.  In  this  way  it
is  sometimes  the  case  that  over  masters  under  age  servants  are
set  for  the  tutorage  of  discipline,  they  frighten,  they  bear
hard  upon  them,  strike  them,  yet  do  not  at  all  cease  to  be
servants,  because  they  are  appointed  to  this  very  end,  that
to  their  masters  whilst  progressing  they  should  render  service
even  by  striking  them.  Therefore  because  the  ills  of  the
children  of  perdition  purify  whilst  they  torment  the  good^
even  the  power  of  the  wicked  is  enlisted  to  the  welfare  of
the  just.  But  very  often  the  just  when  seized  by  tribulation
account  the  hand  of  Him  Who  helps  them  slow,  when  the
barbarity  of  those  persecuting  them  wrings  them  somewhat
too  long.  And  the  remedies  of  the  deliverer  indeed  are
quickened,  but  that  which  is  done  quickly  by  the  deliverer,
appears  slow  to  him  that  is  in  grief.  And  when  there  is
sought  help  to  present  itself  to  the  supplicating  voice,  if  it
does  not  follow  the  voice  directly,  it  is  reckoned  that  it  is
wanting.  Whence  it  is  said  now;  And  there  was  not  any
one  to  bring  help.  In  which  same  utterance  we  have  set
forth  the  actual  force  of  the  suffering,  because  help  from
Above,  though  it  is  there  as  to  the  appointed  providence  of
the  protector,  yet  is  thought  to  be  wanting  as  to  the  quick-
ened wishes  of  the  sufferer. It  follows ;

Ver.  14.  As  by  a  wall  being  broken^  and  a  door  being
opened^  they  rushed  in  vpon  me^  and  were  rolled  down  to  my
miseries.

68.  What  is  in  this  place  designated  by  the  title  of  '  a  xxv.
wall,"  but  the  llodeemor  of  the human race, concerning
whom  it  is  said  by  tlio  Prophet  for  the  edifying  of  Holy
Church,  There  shall  be  set  in  her  a  wall  and  a  bulwark  f  i^^e^u
For  that  same  Redeemer  is '  a  wair  to  us.  Who  forbids  the

400  The  Prophets  a  '  bulwark'  be/are  Christ,  the  '  WaU:

Job  80,  rushing  of  evil  spirits  to  reach  to  our  hearts.  Who  also  set
— i^i —  *  a  bulwark'  as  well  to  our  faith,  because  before  that  He
'shewed  Himself  in  flesh,  He  sent  prophets  as  preachers  of
His  mystery.  Since  they  are  rightly  entitled  by  the  name
Xante- of  *a  bulwark',*  because,  whereas  Uicy  preached  the  Lord
'  coming  after,  they  stood  as  it  were  ^  before  the  wall.'  But  it  is
as  if  *  the  wall  were  broken,'  when  by  the  promptings  of  the
wicked,  faith,  which  is  in  our  Redeemer,  is  done  away  in  the
hearts  of  some.  And  when  power  is  awarded  to  the  per\'erse
in  this  life,  what  else  but  *a  door'  of  error  is  opened?
And  so  it  is  as  if  the  wall  being  burst  asunder  and  the  door
opened  the  wicked  rush  in  upon  the  good,  when  power  being
received  temporally,  the  corrupt  set  themselves  to  pull  down
the  very  defences  of  faith  too  in  the  hearts  of  some.  Con-
cerning whom  it  is  fitly  said ;  And  were  rolled  down  for  my
miseries;  that  is  to  say,  because  in  the  first  instance  to  their
own  miseries.  For  except  that  by  living  corruptly  they
fell  before  to  their  own  *  miseries,'  they  would  never  after-
wards persuade  others  also  to  those  miseries.  Uut  after
their  own  the  children  of  perdition  are  *  rolled  down  to  our
miseries'  also,  when  to  those  evil  things  wherein  they  are
themselves  already  involved,  they  draw  persons  as  well  who
are  linked  to  ourselves*

54.  It  is  possible  too  that  by  the  title  of  a  wall  may  be

understood  the  defence  of  discipline,  as  Solomon  bears  wit-

ProT. ness,  who  says,  /  went  by  the  field  of  the  sloUful^  and  by

^»  ^*  the  vineyard  qf  the  fnan  void  of  understanding. And  lo,  it

was  all  grown  over  with  nettles^  and  thorns  had  covered  the

face  thereof  and  the  stone  wall  thereqf  was  broken  dovm.

For  to  *  pass  by  the  field  of  the  slothful,  and  by  the  vineyard

of  the  man  void  of  understanding,'  is  to  look  into  the  life  of

any  careless  liver,  and  to  take  a  view  of  his  deeds. Which

same  *  nettles  or  thorns  fill  up,'  because  in  the  hearts  of  the

careless,  itching  earthly  desires  and the prickles  of  bad

ProT. habits  sprout  forth,  since  it  is  written.  In  desires  is  every  one

?ix.*  ^^^^^  ^  ^^^' ^  ^^^  stone  wall  was  pulled  down,'  i.  e.  the

Beo.bot  discipline  of  the  Fathers  was  loosened  from  his  heart. For

91, 36.  because  ^  the  stone  wall  being  pulled  down'  he  saw  tliat  dis-

^^' cipline  was  loosened,  he  directly  added  in  tliat  place  going

on ;  Then  1  saw  and  laid  it  up  in  my  heart ;  and  by  ex-

TlieEUci  seem  brought  to  nought  Dorires  of  the  weak/ait.  491

ample  I  learned  instruction. And  therefore  as  it  were  (he  Book

wall  being  burst  the  enemy  enters  in,  when  by  the  crafty ^

persuading  either  of  evil  spirits,  or  of  bad  men,  the  defences
of  discipline  in  the  heart  are  scattered  away.  But  when  the
rigour  of  that  same  discipline  is  relaxed  in  the  heart  of  the
lost,  in  their  eyes  all  the  deeds  of  the  good  are  had  in  con-
tempt, and  they  account  it  nothing,  whatever  they  see
relating  to  virtues  in  the  Elect. And  hence  it  is  added;

Ver.  15.  /  u>as  reduced  to  nought.

65.  For  in  the  reckoning  of  the  wicked  we  are  '  brought  xxvi.
to  nought,*  when  those  temporal  goods,  which  they  them-
selves love  as  chief,  we  do  not  retain  in  our  hands.  Because
the  promises  from  Above  being  disregarded  they  desire  the
things  of  earth,  and  if  ever  aught  rises  up  in  the  mind  of
those  persons  in  the  way  of  longing  after  the  Eternal  world,
it  is  quickly  done  away  by  transitory  gratification  springing
up. And  hence  it  is  directly  subjoined  ;

As  the  wind  thou  didst  fake  away  my  desire.

Since  the  faithful  People  declares  that  itself  suffers  that,
wherein  those  whom  it  loves  it  grieves  should  suffer.  Thus
*  the  wind  takes  away  desire,*  when  any  transitory  object
does  away  the  longing  after  Eternity.  And  hence  it  is  yet
further  fitly  subjoined;  And  as  a  cloud  my  health  hath
passed  away.  Since  the  cloud  towers  on  high,  but  the  breath
of  wind  drives  it  into  career.  Thus,  surely,  then  is  it  with
the  temporal  good  things  of  the  wicked.  They  appear  as  it
were  by  loftiness  of  honour  to  pass  their  time  as  on  high,  but
they  are  daily  driven  on  to  the  career  of  life  as  by  a  kind  of
blasts  of  their  mortality.  So  *  health  passes  as  a  cloud,'
because  the  glory  of  the  wicked,  in  the  degree  that  it  is  lofty,
is  not  fixed.  But  after  the  desires  and  the  courses  of  persons
going  weakly  have  been  finished,  the  discourse  is  made  to
turn  to  the  voice  of  the  Elect,  when  it  is  forthwith  introduced,

Ver.  16.  But  now  my  soul  in  mine  own  self  is  icithered,
and  the  days  of  affliction  have  taken  hold  upon  me.

50.  Since '  the  souV  of  the  Elect '  withers  now,*  because  it  is  xxvii.
afterwards  made  green  in  that  eternal  triumphing. '  Now,
the  days of  affliction take  hold  upon  them,*  because  the
days  of  joy  follow  afterwards. As  it  is  written.  To  him  that  Eoo]aB.
feareth  God  it  shall  go  uell  at  the  last. And  again  it  ig '•*••>••

492 Job  speaks  mosl  of  those  that  fail  itt  the  Church.

Job  80,  delivered touching  the  Church,  And  she  shall  laugh  in

^11^^  the  last  day. For  now  is  the  time of  affliction  to  the

ProT. good,  that  one  day  exulting  may  follow  them  apart  from

* *  tears. Hence  it  is  elsewhere  said  by  those, TItou  hast

Pi.  44

10.  '  humbled  us  in  the  place  of  affliction.  Since  '  the  place  of
afflicUon*  b  tlie  present  life,  so  the  righteous  here  below,
i.  e.  *  in  the  place  of  affliction,*  are  ^  humbled,*  because  in
the  eternal  life,  i.  e.  in  the  place  of  delight,  they  are  elevated.
But  when  he  said  that  *  the  soul  was  withered,'  he  rightly
put  before  too,  in  mine  own  self;  because  in  our  own  selves,
indeed,  our  soul  is  afflicted,  but  in  God  refreshed,  and  it  is
become  far  removed  from  the  greenness  of  joy,  in  proportion
as  still  being  withheld  from  the  light  of  the  Creator,  it  draws
back  to  itself.  But  then  it  attains  to  the  greenness  of  true
joy,  when  being  Ufted  up  by  the  grace  of  eternal  contempla-
tion it  even  transcends  its  very  self.  Now  these  particulars
which  we  have  run  through  by  allegorical  investigating,
it  is  requisite  that  we  hold  in  all  points  after  the  history  as
well.  Which  particulars  however  I  now  for  this  reason  pass
over,  because  I  am  not  unaware  that  they  are  pkin  to  those
that  read  them.  Now  in  the  days  of  final  persecution,
because  there  are  many  that  are  lost  and  a  small  number
that  are  saved,  for  this  reason  the  holy  man,  in  the  time  of
his  suffering,  both  utters  few  particulars  touching  the  good,
and  a  great  many  touchnig  the  wicked.  And  hence  he
directly  turns  his  words  to  the  person  of  those  who  are
brought  to  the  ground,  and  so  conveys  his  own  circumstances,
that  the  things  he  relates  may  accord  with  those  tliat  fall.
Thus  it  follows;

Ver.  17.  In  the  night  season  my  bone  is  pierced  with
pangs,  and  they  that  eat  me  sleep  not.

xxix.  57.  If  we  mark  the  history  by  itself,  the  case  appears  plain,
because  the  body  of  the  holy  man,  through  the  hollows  of
ulcers,  a  swarming  multitude  of  worms  was  wounding.  But
if  we  dive  into  the  mystery  of  tlie  allegory,  what  are  denoted
by  ^  the  bones,'  but  the  strong  ones  severally  in  the  body  of
Holy  Church?  Who,  as  it  were,  by  their  solidity  hold
together  the  members,  while  tliey  bear  with  sted&stness  the
practices  of  those  going  weakly.  But  when  the  heat  of  the
last  tribulation  is  grown  to  a  head  against  her,  in  the  night

Bones  qfthe  Church  pierced:  her  garment  woiied, 403

season  her  bone  is  pierced  with  pangs;  because  sometiines  Book
being  overcome  with  tormenUy  even  the  very  persons  let_~l^
themselTes  run  off  to  faithlessness,  who  seemed  to  be  keeping
fast  others  to  the  faith.  Therefore  she  says.  In  the  night  season
my  bone  is  pierced  ttnth  pangs.  As  though  she  said  in  plain
words,  *^  Pressed  with  the  darkness  of  tribulation,  they  are  so
penetrated  with  a£Biction,  that  even  the  very  persons,  who
had  within  me  the  firmness  of  strength,  have  now,  as  it  were,
a  kind  of  piercing  of  fear/  And  it  is  well  said,  And  t/ieg
that  eat  me  take  no  sleep ;  because  the  evil  spirits,  that  ^  eat
up*  all  the  carnal  out  of  the  Church,  know  not  how  to  rest
from  tempting  in  proportion  as  they  are  not  burthened  with
any  weight  of  flesh.  But  the  persecutors  of  Holy  Church,
because  they  are  very  corrupt,  would  that  they  were  few  in
number ! It  goes  on ;

Ver.  18.  In  the  multitude  of  them  is  my  garment  con*
sumedf  and  they  have  bound  me  about  as  with  the  collar  of
my  coat,

08.  If  we  give  heed  to  the  history,  what  else  do  we  take  xxiz.
^  the  garment*  of  blessed  Job  for,  but  his  body?  whose
*  garment  indeed  is  consumed'  when  the  flesh  is  put  to
torment.  But  according  to  the  mystery  of  allegory,  '  the
garment'  of  Holy  Church  is  the  life  of  the  faithful.  For  as
the  whole  Church  together  is  *  the  garment'  of  Christ  so  the
faithful  severally  are  accounted  ^  garments'  of  that  same
Church.  For  if  Holy  Church  were  not  Christ's  *  garment,'
Paul  surely  would  not  say,  That  He  might  present  it  toEpli.0,
Himself  a  glorious  Churchy  not  having  spot  or  fcrinkle  ;  i.  e.^'*
neither  in  respect  of  sin  ^  having  spot,'  nor  in  respect  of  a
double  mind '  having  wrinkle,'  because  both  by  righteous-
ness she  is  clean,  and  by  a  single  bent  stretched.  She  then
that  is  washed  that  she  should  not  *  have  spot,'  and  stretched
that  she  should  not '  have  wrinkle,'  assuredly  is  a  '  garment'
Therefore  as  the  clothing  of  Christ  is  the  name  given  to  the
whole  Church  in  general,  so  the  clothing  of  the  Church  are
the  souls  of  the  several  persons  which  being  converted  from
error, by  believing  that  same  Church,  encircle  her  by  attaching
themselves  with  faithfulness  to  her.  Concerning  which  same
the  J-iord  saith  to  that  Church  by  the  Prophet,  As  I  livCy  U,  49,
saith  the  Lordy  thou  shall  surely  be  clothed  with  them  ally  ^^*

494  Enemies  would  throHle  the  Church:  hold  her  as  mire.

Job  80,  as  with  an  ornament. But  when  the  storm  of  cruel  persecu-

j — ^  tion  arises,  very  many  of  the  faithful  are  separated  from  the
love  thereof,  who  seemed  to  have  themselves  attached  to  her
heartily.  So  then  let  her  say.  In  the  multitude  of  them  is
my  garment  consumed;  because  whilst  there  are  many  that
torment,  the  greatest  number  are  brought  to  an  end,  who
were  attached  to  her  by  the  binding  tie  of  love.

59.  Now  it  is  well  added,  And  have  bound  me  about  as
with  the  collar  qf  my  coat.  Since  *  the  collar  of  a  coat'
encircles  the  neck  of  the  wearer,  but  if  the  neck  is  tied  up,
the  use  of  the  voice  and  the  puff  of  life  is  done  for.  Holy
Church,  then,  do  the  children  of  perdition  ^  tic  up  us  with  a
collar  of  a  coat,'  because  they  endeavour  by  their  persecutions
to  put  out  in  her  the  life  of  faith,  and  the  voice  of  preaching.
Since  this  thing  her  persecutors  are  in  a  special  manner  wont
to  essay,  that  before  all  things  they  may  take  away  from  her
the  word  of  preaching.  And  hence  these  persons  who  with-
stood the  fii*st  beginnings  of  the  holy  faith  told  the  Apostles

Acta  ff,  beaten  with  rods,  saying.  Did  we  not  straitly  command  you
that  ye  should  not  teach  in  this  namet  and,  behold,  ye  have
filled  Jerusalem  with  your  doctrine.  So  the  body  of  Holy
Church  they  had  as  it  were  girded  with  *  the  collar  of  a  coat,'
who,  the  preachers  being  tied  up,  as  it  were  pressing  her
neck,  wished  to  shut  up  the  way  of  the  voice  in  her.  But
the  several  Elect  are  more  ready  to  die  in  the  time  of  their
persecution  than  to  hold  their  peace.  Who  whilst  they  are
brought  down  in  death  in  the  body,  are  accounted  despicable
and  mean  by  all  the  foolish  and  tlic  cai-nal,  because  when
the  lost  are  unable  to  see  what  good  things  the  Elect  hold  in
the  spirit,  these  whom  they  see  brought  to  an  end  in  the  flesh,
they  account  unhappy. And  hence  it  is  added ;

Ver.  19.  /  was  likened  to  mire,  and  became  like  dust  and
ashes.

xxxi.  ^^'  Since  in  the  judgment  of  lost  sinners  the  Holy  Church
of  the  Elect  is  '  likened  to  mire,'  because  it  is  trodden  under
and  despised  in  time ;  it  is '  compared  to  dust  and  ashes,'
because  while  they  do  not  see  her  interior  good  things,  they
calculate  that  she  has  been  brought  to  those  bad  things  alone,
which  they  see  brought  to  view  in  her  in  the  body.  But  the
faithful  people  of  the  Elect,  while  it  sees  many  fall  from

Hearing  delayed  brings  prqjfii  through  patience. 496

itself,  wishes,  if  it  might  obtain  this,  to  have  ihe  times  of  its  Book
adversities  reversed. Because  the  prayer  of  this  people  i^


delayed,  its  groaning  is  increased. Hence  it  is  further  added ;
Ver.  20.  /  will  cry  unto  Tkee^  but  Thou  wilt  not  hear  me;
I  standi  and  Thou  regardeat  me  not.

61.  Since  Holy  Church  in  the  time  of  her  persecution  xxxi.
'  stands'  by  faith,  and  '  cries*  by  longings. But  she  is  grieved

that  she  is  *  not  regarded'  as  it  were,  when  she  sees  her  wishes
under  tribulations  delayed.  For  by  a  high  counsel,  Almighty
God,  when  His  Saints  are  wrung  tightly  by  the  persecutions
of  adversaries,  and  when  they  cry  with  never  ceasing  entrea-
ties that  they  may  be  set  free,  is  wont  to  put  off  their  voices
in  entreating  Him,  that  their  merits  in  suffering  may  be
increased,  in  order  that  they  may  be  the  more  heard  in
answer  to  merit,  the  more  they  are  not  heard  quickly  in  .
answer  to  wishing.  Whence  it  is  elsewhere  written,  0  my  Pi.S3,3.
Ood^  I  cry  in  the  day  time^  but  Thou  heareet  not^  and  in  the
night  season.  And  the  very  usefulness  itself  resulting  from
the  delay  of  hearing  is  immediately  added,  when  it  is  there
brought  in  directly,  And  not  for  foolishness  to  me.  Since
for  redoubling  the  wisdom  of  the  Saints  it  is  beneficial,  that
what  is  prayed  for  they  receive  slowly,  that  by  delay  desire
may  increase,  and  by  desire  the  understanding  may  be  aug-
mented. But  when  the  understanding  is  stretched  to  the
full,  there  is  opened  a  more  ardent  affection  thereof  towards
God.  And  the  affection  is  made  large  for  obtaining  the
things  of  heaven,  in  proportion  as  it  was  long  suffering  in
expecting.  Yet  in  the  midst  of  these  things  grief  prompts
the  patience  of  the  Saints  to  utterance,  and  whilst  being
delayed  they  gain  ground,  they  dread  lest  their  powers  failing
they  should  being  despised  be  rejected. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  21.  Thou  art  changed  to  cruel  unto  me;  and  in  the
hardness  qf  Thy  hand  Thou  opposest  Thyself  against  me.

62.  The  old  translation  is  widely  at  variance  with  this  sense,  xxxii.
because  what  is  spoken  in  this  concerning  God,  is  related  in ^"•
that  of  adversaries  and  persecutors. Yet  because  this  new
translation  is  said  to  have  transferred  evety  thing  from  the
Hebrew  and  Arabic  more  truly,  we  should  believe  whatever  is
delivered  in  it,  and  the  right  way  is  that  into  the  word  of  it

our  interpretation  should  search  with  exactness. Accordingly

400  Ia>w  expresnions  concennuy  God  shew  language  weak.

JoB80,be  Bays,  Thou  art  changed  to  cruel  unto  me,  and  in  the
-^il—  hardness  qf  Thy  hand  Thou  opposest  Thyself  to  me. In
Holy  Scripture  when  any  thing  is  said  of  God  unworthy,
the  mind  of  the  reader  is  affected,  as  if  it  were  ever  the  case
that  any  thing  that  is  worthy  were  spoken  of  God. Since
well  nigh  every  thing  that  is  spoken  touching  God,  b  by  thb
alone  henceforth  unworthy,  that  it  admitted  of  being  spoken.
But  for  Him  to  Whose  praise  the  conscious  faculty,  being
astounded,  is  not  equal,  when  may  the  tongue  by  speaking
suffice?  But  the  Holy  Spirit  teaching  to  men  that  understand
this  same  truth,  how  unutterable  are  the  things  above  and
the  things  of  God,  sometimes  uses  even  those  words  con-
cerning God,  which  amongst  men  are  held  as  a  fault,  that
from  these  things  which  seem  unworthy  of  men,  and  yet  are
spoken  concerning  God,  men  should  be  admonished  to  know
that  neither  are  those  things  even  worthy  of  God,  which
whilst  they  are  accounted  worthy  among  men,  are  thought
worthy  of  God.
Ex.84, 68.  For  God  is  called  ^jealous,' as  it  is  written.  The
^*' Lord,  his  Name  is  *  Jealous,* He  is  called  *  wroth,'  whence
Pi.  86,  it  is  written.  The  Lord  was  wroth  against  Israel. The  Lord
Namb.  '^  called  *  repentant,'  as  where  it  is  written,  //  repenteth  Me
^>  IS-  that  I  have  made  man  upon  the  earth. And  again ; //
7.****  '  repenteth  Me  that  I  have  set  up  Saul  to  be  king  over  Israel.
15^??'  He  is  entitled  compassionate,  as  where  it  is  yirxii^n,  Merc\ful
and  pitiful  is  the  Lord,  patient  and  full  qf  compassion.
He  is  called  ^  foreknowing,'  as  the  Apostle  saith  concerning
Rom.  8,  Him,  For  whom  He  did/oreknow,  He  did  also  predestinate
^' to  be  cofiformed  to  the  image  qf  His  Son. Whereas  neither
'jealousy,' nor  '  wrath,' nor  '  repentance,' nor  strictly  speaking

*  compassionateness,'  nor  '  foreknowledge,'  can  be  in  God.
For  all  these  particulars  arc  derived  into  Him  from  human
qualities,  while  there  is  a  dcscoudiug  to  words  expressive  of
infinuity,  thut  as  it  were  a  kind  of  steps  being  made  for  us,
and  set  beside  us,  by  the  things  which  we  see  close  to  us,
we  may  one  time  be  enabled  to  mount  up  to  the  high  Uiings
of  Him.  For  He  is  said  to  '  feel  jealous,'  who  guards  the
chastity  of  his  wife  with  torment  of  mind. He  is  said  to  be

*  wrath,'  who  is  inflamed  witli  heat  of  spirit  against  evil  that
deserves  to  be  punished. He  is  said  to  '  repent,'  to  whom

QuaUiuB  qftnen  ancrihed  to  God  in  another  seme.  497

thai  which  he  has  done  is  displeasing,  and  contraiily  hf  Book
changing  does  some  other  thing.  He  is  caOed  *  compassion-  ^^
ate,'  who  is  moved  with  pity  towards  his  neighbour. Now

*  misericordia*  (^  commiseration')  is  so  called  from  *  misemm
cor,'  ('  a  miserable  heart,')  for  this  reason,  because  each
individual  sees  a  person  wretched,  and  sympathizing  with
him,  while  he  is  affected  with  grief  of  mind,  he  himself  makes
his  heart  miserable,  that  he  may  free  from  misery  the  man
that  he  is  set  on.  He  is  said  to  *  foreknow,'  who  sees  each
particular  event  before  it  comes,  and  that  which  is  future
foresees  before  it  becomes  present.  How  then  is  God
described  as  being  'jealous,'  Who  in  watching  over  our
chastity,  is  not  affected  by  any  torment  of  mind?  How  is
He  *  wroth,'  Who  in  taking  vengeance  on  our  evil  ways  is  not
stirred  by  any  agitation  of  mind  ?  How  is  He  *  repentant,'
Who  what  He  has  once  done  is  never  at  all  sorry  that
He  has  done  ?  How  is  He  *  commiserating,'  Who  has  not
ever  a  heart  of  misery  ?  How  is  He  foreknowing,  whereas
nothing  but  what  is  future  can  be  foreknown?  And  we  know
that  to  God  there  is  nothing  future,  before  the  Eyes  of  Whom
ihings  past  there  are  none,  things  present  pass  not  by,  things
future  come  not;  seeing  that  all  that  to  us  was  and  will  be  is  in
His  sight  at  hand,  and  all  that  is  present  He  is  able  to  know
rather  than  foreknow  \  And  yet  He  is  called  'jealous,'  He
is  called  *  wroth,'  He  is  called  *  repentant,'  He  is  called

*  commiserating,'  He  is  called  '  foreknowing,'  that  because
He  watches  over  the  chastity  of  each  individual  soul.  He
should  after  man's  method  be  called  '  jealous,'  though  He  be
not  touched  by  torment  of  mind.  And  because  He  smites
sins.  He  is  said  to  be  '  wroth,'  though  He  be  not  affected  by
any  agitation  of  the  spirit  And  because  Himself  unchange-
able He  changes  that  that  He  is  minded.  He  is  said  to  '  repent,'
though  it  is  the  thing  He  changes,  not  His  counsel.  And
when  He  succours  our  misery,  He  is  called  *  commiserating,'
though  He  succours  the  miserable,  and  has  not  ever  a  heart
of  misery.  And  because  the  things  which  to  us  are  future
He  sees,  which  same  however  to  the  Same  Being  are  always
at  hand,  He  is  styled  '  foreknowing,'  though  He  does  not  in
any  way  foresee  the  future,  which  He  sees  as  present. For

*  al.  *  can  rather  be  known  than  foreknown.'
VOL.  II.  K  k

41)8  Ood  changes  noi,  yet  neems  to  change  ioward  man.

Job  30,  even  whatsoever  ihiDgs  are,  in  His  Eternity  are  not  therefore
.^;  seen  because  they  are,  but  therefore  they  are  because  they
*  are  seen.  Whilst  therefore  there  is  a  coming  down  to  the
words  of  our  changeableness,  by  those,  as  being  made  a  kind
of  steps,  let  him,  who  is  able,  mount  up  to  the  unchangeuble-
ness  of  God,  that  he  may  see  One  shewing  jealousy,  without
jealousy.  One  wroth  without  wrath,  One  repentant  witliout
sorrow  or  repentance,  full  of  commiseration  without  a  mise-
rable heart,  foreknowing  without  foresight.  For  in  Him
can  neither  the  past  nor  the  future  be  found,  but  all  things
changeable  last  unchangeably,  and  things,  which  in  themselves
cannot  exist  together,  are  all  of  them  at  once  and  together
present  to  Him,  and  nothing  that  goes  by  passes  away  in
Him,  because  in  His  Eternal  Being,  in  an  incomprehensible
manner,  all  the  rolls  of  ages  whilst  passing  remain,  whilst
running  a  race  stand  still.

64.  As  then  we  understand  Him  ^jealous'  without  jealousy,
*  wroth*  without  wrath,  so  He  might  by  the  holy  man  be  also
called  '  cruel'  without  cruelty.  Since  he  is  called  *  cruel,'
who  while  smiting  with  severity  spares  not;  that  is  to  say
that  in  this  passage  ^  cruel'  should  be  taken  for  one  striking
with  severity,  and  not  sparing  the  avenging  of  sin.  Hence
also  Isaiah,  when  he  saw  the  day  of  final  Judgment  was
destined  to  come  not  henceforth  with  pardon  but  with  rigour,
It.  IS, 9.  says.  Behold  the  dag  of  the  Lord  comeih^  cruel  both  with
wralhf  and  fierce  anger^  to  lay  the  land  dtuolate;  and  to
destroy  the  sinnei'8  thereof  out  of  il.  Therefore  the  holy
man,  tliat  he  might  declare  that  this  same  cruelty  is  more
suited  to  himself  than  to  God,  says.  Thou  art  changed  to
cruel  unto  me.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  terms,  ^  Thou,
Who  hast  in  Thine  own  Self  nought  of  cruelty,  to  me,  whom
Thou  sufl'erest  not  to  draw  breath  from  persecution,  Thou
seemest  cruel.'  For  so  God  is  not  capable  of  being  cruel,
just  as  He  is  not  in  the  least  degiee  capable  of  being  changed.
But  because  in  God  there  comes  not  either  cruelty  or
changeableness  at  any  time,  whilst  He  says  ^  unto  me,'  he
shews  that  he  is  sensible  that  God  is  in  Himself  neither
*  cruel'  nor  ^  changeable.'  But  becausd  as  concerns  our-
selves things  prosperous  and  things  adverse  shift  to  and  fro,
in  this  that  wo  ourselves  are  changed,  we  as  it  were  imagine

Go(P9  Hand  $eem9  hard  to  $ofne. Unstable  elevation,  499

as  concerns  ourselves  His  mind  changed. But  He  the  same  Book
Being  remaining  unchangeable  in  Flimselfi  in  the  thought  of '—


men's  hearts  comes  to  be  felt  now  one  way  and  now  another,
according  to  the  character  of  their  minds.  For  the  light  of
the  sun  too,  whereas  it  is  not  at  all  unlike  to  itself,  seems  to
weak  eyes  harsh,  but  to  sound  eyes  gentle ;  that  is  to  say,  by
their  changing,  not  by  its  own.  ITierefore  as  we  before  said,
in  saying,  Thou  art  changed^  he  added  unto  me,  that  this
very  *  cruelty*  and  *  changing*  might  be  not  in  the  attributes
of  the  Judge,  but  in  the  mind  of  the  sufferer.  Which  he  laid
open  by  other  words  also,  saying.  And  in  the  hardness  qf
Thine  hand  Thou  opposest  Thyself  to  me.  For  *  the  Hand*
of  the  Lord  is  thought '  hard,*  when  being  opposed  to  our
will,  that  thing  which  displeases  Him  in  us,  it  follows  hard
upon  by  striking ;  and  He  redoubles  the  strokes,  when  the
soul  of  the  sorrower  looks  for  clemency.  Which  words,  how-  ^llbo.
soever,  according  to  the  mystery  of  the  allegory,  suit  well  the
words  of  Holy  Church  speaking  in  (he  accents  of  the  weak,
who  very  often  reckon  themselves  to  be  smilten  more  than
they  fancy  they  deserve,  and  esteem  as  cruelty  of  the  Judge
the  severity  of  the  lancing  howsoever  most  just,  seeing  too
that  when  the  wound  of  the  sick  man  is  cut  away  by  the
chirurgeon's  steel,  the  operator  is  called  cruel,  who  however
by  the  hardness  of  the  hand  that  cuts  is  opposed  to  the
wound,  but  in  concert  with  the  health. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  *22.  Thou  liftedst  me  up^  and  as  it  were  setting  me
upon  the  ttind^  thou  dashedst  me  down  strongly.

05.  Because  the  glory  of  the  present  life  is  seen  as  on  xxxiii.
high,  but  is  not  set  firm  by  any  stcdfastness,  one  is  as  if  he
were  *  lifted  up  and  set  upon  the  wind,*  who  rejoices  in
earthly  prosperity,  because  the  breath  of  fleeting  happiness
lifts  him  up  only  for  this  end,  that  it  may  in  a  moment
prostrate  him  the  worse  below.  For  whereas  Holy  Church
is  high  in  honour  with  all  persons,  the  weak  ones  in  her,  who
rej  oice  in  transitory  successes  **,  whereunto  do  they  seem  li fted  up
but  as  set  upon  the  wind  7  Because  in  the  succeeding  season
of  persecution,  when  the  breath  of  prosperity  is  gone  by,
their  *  lifting  up'  is  brought  to  the  earth  in  a  moment,  if

^ Some  read  '  micoeMibat/  oUiers '  advaocementu  occurring  in  the  change
'■QCceMiooibns/  which  last  may  mean of  things.'

Kk2

500 JoVsfall  bui  in  seeming. Death  appointed  him.

Job  80,  instautly  they  learn  by  falling,  that  whilBl  lifted  up  before  they
p  '  were  seated  upon  the  wind.  Which  very  words  in  a  peculiar
manner  accord  with  the  person  of  the  holy  man  also,  not  as
to  the  thing  that  was,  but  as  to  the  thing  that  seemed  to  bo.
For  never  had  fleeting  prosperity  ^  lifted  up'  his  mind,  which
mind  in  the  midst  of  such  overflowing  stores  of  good  things
he  ever  kept  down  by  a  wonderful  weight  of  virtue.  But
according  to  that  which  might  have  externally  appeared,  he
who  was  little  in  his  own  eyes,  was  exalted  in  the  eyes  of
others,  and  as  it  were  ^  placed  upon  the  wind,'  he  was
^  dashed  down  strongly,'  because  being  buoyed  up  by  out-
ward goods,  by  the  same  means,  whereby  he  was  accounted
to  rise,  he  appeared  to  have  fallen.  Which  same  fall  in  the
interior  the  holy  man  did  not  undergo,  because  no  bad
fortune  throws  down  the  man,  whom  no  good  fortune  corrupts.
For  he  who  is  attached  to  the  truth,  is  in  no  degree  brought
under  to  vanity,  because,  whereas  he  has  planted  with  a  firm
foot  the  bent  of  the  thought  within,  all  that  is  brought  to
pass  in  change  without,  reaches  not  in  the  least  degree  to
the  citadel  of  the  interior. It  goes  on;

Ver.  23.  /  know  that  Thou  wilt deliver  me  to  deaths
where  is  the  house  appointed/or  all  living,
xxxiy. QQ^  Ij^  (^q  preceding  part  of  this  work  the  point  was  treated
§.48.&o.of,  that  before  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  even  the  righteous  did
descend  to  the  abodes  of  hell,  though  they  were  kept  not  in
woes  but  in  rest. Which  thing  wo  omit  to  prove  by  testimo-
nies now,  because  we  think  it  is  already  sufficiently  proved
there. This,  then,  that  is said,  /  know  that  Tliou  will
deliver  me  to  d^ath,  where  is  the  house  appointed  for  all
living^  is  rightly  suited  to  blessed  Job  even  according  to
the  history,  whereas  surely  it  appears  that  before  the  grace
of  the  Redeemer  even  the  just  were  carried  to  the  caverns  of
1  sdmU-hell. For  the  mere  entering'  of  ^  hell'  is  itself  called  ^  the
"^^ house  of  all  living,'  because  no  one  came  hither,  who  before
the  Advent  of  the  Mediator  did  not  pass  by  thereunto  by  the
simple  constitution  of  his  state  of  corruption. No  one  came
hither,  who  did  not  go  on  to  the  death  of  the  flesh,  by  the
steps  of  that  same  corruption  belonging  to  him. Of  which
Pi. 89,  selfsame  death  it  is  evidently  said  by  the  Psalmist;  IFhai
^* man  is  he  that  liveth,  and  shall  not  see  death  ? For  though

Elijah  i$  to  die. SameJuU  to  deaths  others  restored.  501

Elijah  is  related  to  have  been  transported  to  heaven,  never-  Bodk
tbeless  he  delayed,  and  did  not  escape  death.  For  by  the
very  mouth  of  Truth  it  is  said;  Elias  truly  shall Jirst  coiit^,Mati7,
and  restore  aU  things.  For  he  shall  come  to  '  restore  alP^*
things/  since  for  this  end  surely  is  he  restored  to  this  world,
that  he  may  both  fulfil  the  functions  of  preaching,  and  pay
the  debt  of  the  flesh.  Which  sentence  however  of  the  holy  Allbo.
man  suits  the  accents  of  Holy  Church  in  the  person  of  the
weak  sort,  who  hold  the  faith  to  the  extent  of  the  word  of
the  lipri,  but  contrary  to  the  precepts  of  faith  act  the  slave  to
their  desires*  For  she  says;  /  know  that  thou  wilt  deliver
me  to  deaths  where  is  the  house  appointed  for  all  living.
For  because  she  sees  multitudes  in  her  devoted  to  pleasures,
and  already  foresees  the  destruction  of  those,  she  reflects
that  in  the  course  of  the  present  life  they  serve  their  desires
indeed,  but  yet  all  are  brought  to  the  house  of  death,  who  in
that  same  course  live  carnally.  But  there  are  some  that  are
brought  down  into  the  pit  of  their  gratifications,  yet  by  the
tears  of  repentance  quickly  recover  the  foot  from  below,
which  persons  the  strokes  of  smiting  from  Above  cut  rather
for  instruction  than  destruction.  In  the  person  of  whom  it
is  fitly  subjoined;

Ver.  24.  Howbeit  Thou  dost  not  put  forth  thine  hand  for
the  destroying  of  them;  and  if  they  are  brought  to  the
ground,  Thou  unit  save  them  Thyself.

67.  In  which  words  assuredly  this  ought  to  be  perceived  xzzv.
with  penetration,  that  blessed  Job,  while  he  is  telling  his  ^"''*
own  circumstances  transfers  others  into  himself. For  he  as  Allbo.
it  were  in  a  special  manner  said  of  himself;  Thou  Ijftedst
me  upj  and  as  it  were  setting  me  upon  the  wind  dashedstme
down  with  strength:  I  know  that  Thou  wilt  deliver  me  to
death,  where  is  the  house  appointed  for  all  living;  and  yet
he  adds  not  concerning  himself  but  others,  Howbeit  Thou
dost  not  put  forth  Thine  hand  for  the  destroying  qf  them.
For  whereas  whilst  speaking  of  himself  in  arguing,  he  subjoins
cases  applying  to  others,  he  shews  how  many  he  represents
the  persons  of  in  himself. Accordingly  the  Lord  *  puts  not
forth  His  band  for  the  destroying^  of  those  that  sin,  when  by
striking  He  reforms  from  sins,  and  *  He  saves  those  that  are
falling  to  the  ground,*  when  those  falling  into  transgression

502  TVue  compassioti^  as  in  Christ,  takes  suffering  to  itself.

Job  so,  He  wounds  as  to  the  health  of  the  body;  that  being  brought

- — ^low  outwardly  they  should arise  inwardly^  in  order  that

lying  prostrate  in  the  body  those  should  be  brought  back  to

the  standing  of  the  interior,  who  whilst  standing  outwardly

lay  low  to  the  standing  of  the  soul. It  goes  on;

Ver.  25.  I  wept  of  old  over  him  that  was  in  trouble;  my
soul  suffered  unth  the  poor,
xxxvi.  53,  Though  it  is  true  compassion  to  concur  with  the
suffering  of  a  fellow  creature  by  bountifulness,  yet  sometimes
when  the  several  outward  things  are  abundantly  provided  for
us  to  bestow,  the  hand  of  him  that  gives  finds  the  act  of
giving  more  quickly  than  the  feeling  does  sorrow.  Hence  it
is  necessary  for  us  to  know  that  he  gives  in  a  perfect  way,
who  together  with  that,  which  he  reaches  forth  to  the  afilicted,
takes  in  himself  the  feeling  of  the  afflicted  as  well;  that  he
should  first  transfer  the  suffering  of  the  person  sorrowing
into  himself,  and  then^  to  meet  the  sorrow  of  that  person  by
the  act  of  service  render  concurrence.  For  often,  as  we  said
before,  the  abundance  of  good  things  creates  the  bestower
of  a  benefit,  and  not  the  excellence  of  compassion.  For  he,
who  perfectly  compassionates  the  afflicted,  generally  even
gives  that  to  the  persons  in  want,  wherein  he  himself,  if  he
gives  it,  is  brought  to  shifts.  And  then  the  compassion  of
oiu:  heart  is  to  the  full,  when  we  ara  not  afiaid  to  take  upon
ourselves  the  evil  of  want  in  behalf  of  a  fellow  creatme,  in
order  that  we  may  set  him  free  from  suflcring.

69.  Which  model  of  pitifulness  in  very  deed  the  Mediator
between  God  and  Man  gave  to  us.  Who  when  He  could
have  succoured  us  even  without  dying,  yet  was  minded  to
come  to  the  aid  of  mankind  by  dying,  because  plainly  He
would  have  loved  us  too  little,  except  He  took  upon  Him
our  wounds  as  well ;  nor  would  He  exhibit  the  face  of  His  love
to  us,  unless  the  thing  that  He  was  to  take  away  from  us.
He  did  Himself  uudergo  for  a  time.  For  lie  found  us
subject  to  suffering,  and  mortal  beings,  and  He,  Who  caused
us  to  exist  out  of  nothing,  doubtless  had  the  power  to  restore
us  from  suffering  even  without  death.  But  that  He  might
shew  how  great  the  virtue  of  Compassion  is.  He  deigned  to
become  in  our  behalf  what  He  would  not  have  us  to  be,  that
He  should  take  upon  Him  death temporally  in  His  own

Real  compassion  is  more  than  any  gift.  508

Person,  which  death  He  should  banish  for  evermore  from  Book
ourselves. Could  not  He,  while  conlinuing  innsible  to  us
in  the  riches  of  His  own  Godhead,  have  been  able  to  enrich
us  with  wonderful  powers? But  that  man  might  be  brought
back  to  the  interior  riches,  God  deigned  to appear  poor
without. Hence also the  great  Preacher,  that  he  might
kindle  to  the  kindness  of  bounty  the  bowels  of  our  com-
)>assion,  said,  For  our  sakes  He  became  poor,  wtien  He  u'a^sCor.s,
rich. Who  speaks  in  this  way  also;  Not  that  to  oitiers  ^A^^fb.^.ia.
should  be  a  releasing^  but  to  you  tribulation. These  things
doubtless  he  brought  in  condescending  to  the  weak,  because
some  not  having  the  strength  to  bear  want,  it  is  better  borne
to  give  less,  than  after  one's  bounty  to  murmur  on  account
of  stmitness  of  poverty. For  that  he  might  kindle  the  minds
of  those  that  heard  him  to  great  affections  for  giving,  a  little
while  after  he  introduced  the  words,  saying.  But  this  /  My,  3  Cor.  9,
He  which  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly. But**
we  sometimes  say  that  it  is  more  to  sympathize  in  heart  than
it  is  to  give;  because  every  one  who  perfectly  sympathizes
with  one  in  want,  reckons  as  less  all  that  he  gives. For
except  that  good will  surpassed  the  band of  a  person
in  giving,  that  same  great  Preacher  would  not  have  said  to
the  disciple,  Who  have  begun  before  not  only  to  do^  but  also^Cor.B,
to  be  forward  a  year  ago. Since  it  is  easy  in  good  deeds  to  ^^'
obey  even  against  one's  will. But  this  great  excellence  had
appeared  in  the  disciples,  that  the  good  that  was  enjoined
them,  they  had  been  forward  to  even  before.

70.  Thus  because  the  holy  man  knew  that  with  Almighty
God  greater  sometimes  is  the  gift  of  the  mind  than  of  the
benefit,  let  him  say,  /  wepi  of  old  over  him  that  was  in
trouble^  and  my  soul  compassionated  the  poor  man.  For  in
bestowing  outward  things,  he  rendered  an  object  without
himself.  But  he  who  bestowed  upon  his  neighbour  weeping
and  compassion,  gave  him  something  eveii  from  his  very
self.  But  on  this  account  we  say  that  compassion  is  more
than  the  gift,  because  for  the  most  part  some  sort  of  thing
oven  he  gives  who  does  not  entertain  compassion,  but  never
does  he,  who  feels  tnie  compassion,  withhold  that  which  he
sees  to  be  necessary  for  his  neighbour.

71.  Which  sentence  surely  is  well  suited  to  the  accents

504 Holy  Church  suffers  for  those  who  lack  virtue.

Job  so,  of  Holy  Church,  who  while  she  sees  persons  afflicted  in  the
'  *  tears  of  penitence,  joins  her  own  tears  thereto  by  continual
prayer,  and  sympathizes  with  the  needy  person  as  often  as
by  the  entreaties  of  her  intercession  she  helps  the  mind
bared  of  virtues.  Since  we  lament  over  the  afflicted  sjrmpa-
thizing  with  him,  when  we  reckon  the  hurts  of  others  as  our
own,  and  by  our  tears  strive  to  cleanse  away  the  sins  of  those
guilty  of  transgression.  In  the  doing  which,  indeed,  we  very
often  help  ourselves  mora  than  we  do  those  in  whose  behalf
it  is  done,  because  before  the  Inmost  Umpire,  Who  also
breathes  into  us  the  grace  of  charity,  he  perfectly  washes  out
his  own  several  acts,  who  disinterestedly  bewails  those  of
others.  Therefore  let  Holy  Church,  being  seized  in  the
time  of  the  last  persecution,  recall  to  remembrance  the  good
things  which  she  has  done  in  the  time  of  peace,  saying,
I  wept  of  old  over  him  that  was  affile ted^  and  my  soul
compassionated  the  poor  man.  Who  longing  for  the  eternal
delights  of  the  interior  light,  yet  still  delayed,  because  she  is
beset  with  outward  ills,  may  subjoin  in  the  accents  of  the
holy  man;

Ver.  26.  When  I  looked  for  good,  then  evil  came  unto  me;
and  when  I  waited  for  light,  there  broke  forth  darkness.
xxzni.  72.  For  the  faithful  people  *  looks  for  good,'  but  receives
evil,  and  it  ^  waits  for  light,'  and  meets  with  ^  darkness,'
because  by  the  grace  of  the  racompensing  it  hopes  to  be
now.  already  admitted  to  the  joys  of  the  Angels,  and  yet
being  delayed  for  a  longer  time  here  below,  it  is  exposed  to
the  hands  of  those  that  persecute  it;  and  he  who  calculates
to  enjoy  as  quickly  as  possible  the  recompensing  of  the
light  Eternal,  is  still  forced  to  suffer  here  the  darkness  of
his  persecutors.  Which  same  ills  of  those  persecuting  them
would  grieve  them  the  less,  if  they  arose  fi'om  unbelievers
and  adversaries.  But  they  torture  the  mind  of  the  Elect  the
worse  in  proportion  as  they  proceed  from  those,  upon  whom
they  were  foreassuring  good.  Whence  it  is  yet  further
added;

Ver.  27.  My  bowels  boiled,  and  rested  not.

Since  for  *  the  bowels'  of  Holy  Church  *  to  boil'  is  for  her
to  endure  in  the  fierceness  of  persecution,  these  very  persons
too,  whom  she  had  before  in  the  love  of  the  faith  carried  as

Holy  men  self-abated  in  praeperiiy.  505

*  bowels/  Which  same  first  acqaainting  themselyes  with  Book
her  secrets,  in  the  same  proportion  as  ihey  know  where  she
suffers  the  greatest  pain,  to  so  mnch  the  worse  degree  never
rest  from  the  afiBicting  of  her ;  which  persons  however  even
in  the  time  of  her  peace  she  bears  heavily  with,  because  she
takes  ihoughtof  their  ways  as  opposite  to  her  own  preachings.
For  she  groans  when  she  espies  the  life  of  those  as  onlike  to
herself. Concerning  whom  also  it  is  fitly  sabjoined;

7%^  days  qf  affliction  prevented  me.

For  the  Holy  Church  of  Elect  persons  knows  that  in  the
last  persecution  she  shall  suffer  many  ills,  but  *  the  days  of
her  affliction  prevent  her;*  because  even  in  the  time  of  peace
she  bears  within  herself  the  life  of  the  wicked  with  a  heavy
spirit  For  though  in  the  last  days  there  follow  the  open
persecution  of  the  unbelievers,  yet  this  same  even  before  it
comes  to  light,  those  in  her  who  are  believers  to  the  extent
of  the  word  only  by  bad  practices  forerun. It  goes  on;

Ver.  28.  /  went  mourning :  without  rage  rising  up,  I  cried
out  in  the  crowd.

73.  I  see  that  it  is  a  thing  to  be  carefully  noted  historically  zzxviii.
considered,  that  the  holy  man  who  a  litUe  before  said.  Thou  ^"''
hast  lifted  me  up^  added  below,  /  went  mourning.  For  by
a  wonderful  arrangement  at  one  and  the  same  time  there  is
wont  to  meet  together  in  the  courses  of  good  men,  at  once
without,  the  honour  of  the  highest  pitch,  and  within,  the
mourning  of  afflicted  abasement  Hence  the  holy  man  like-
wise, whilst  lifted  to  a  height  by  substance  and  by  honours,
'  went  mourning;*  for  though  this  man  the  high  credit  of  power
displayed  advanced  above  his  fellow-creatures,  yet  inwardly
he  offered  to  the  Lord  by  his  mourning  the  secret  sacrifice
of  a  contrite  heart  Since  the  sacrifice  qf  Ood  is  a  IroubledPn.  6i,
spirit.  Now  all  the  Elect  are  taught  by  inward  reflecting  to  ^^'
fight  against  the  temptations  of  outward  superiority.  Which
persons,  if  they  set  their  heart  to  their  outward  good  fortune,
assuredly  would  cease  to  be  righteous.  But  because  it  can-
not be  that  upon  the  mere  grounds  of  the  successes  of  fortune
alone  the  heart  of  man  should  never  be  at  all  tempted  with
however  slight  a  degree  of  pride,  holy  men  strive  hard  within
against  their  very  good  fortune  itself;  I  do  not  say,  lest  in  self-
exaltation,  but  lest  in  the  love  of  that  prosperity  at  all  events

500 Holy  men  apeak  ffot  in  raye^  though  provoked.

Job  so,  tbey  should  be  brought  to  the  ground.  And  it  is  most  eflec-
^'  tually  to  have  been  brought  under  this,  to  have  surrendered
"^*  the  mind  in  a  state  of  captivity  to  the  desires  thereof.  But
who  that  has  a  taste  for  earthly  things,  who  that  embraces
temporal  objects,  would  not  look  upon  blessed  Job  as  happy
amidst  so  many  circumslunccs  of  prosperity,  when  tlio
health  of  the  body,  the  life  of  his  children,  the  preservation
of  his  household,  the  completeness  of  his  flocks,  were  all
vouchsafed  to  him  ?  But  that  in  all  these  circumstances  he
did  not  take  delight,  he  is  his  own  witness,  in  that  ho  says,
/  toent  mourning.  For  to  the  holy  man  still  placed  in  this
state  of  pilgrimage,  all  that  is  full  of  abundance,  without  the
Vision  of  God,  is  destitution;  because  when  the  Elect  see
that  all  things  are  theirs,  they  lament  that  they  do  not  see
the  Author  of  all  things,  and  to  them  all  this  is  too  little,
because  there  is  still  wanting  the  a))pcarance  of  One.  And
in  such  sort  does  the  grace  of  Heavenly  Appointment  exalt
them  without,  that  nevertheless,  witliin,  the  sorrow  of  the
instructress  charity  holds  them  under  discipline.  By  which
same  they  learn,  that  for  the  things  which  they  receive  out*
wardly,  they  should  ever  be  the  more  humbled  to  themselves,
should  keep  the  mind  under  the  yoke  of  discipline,  should
never  by  the  liberty  of  power  be  made  to  break  out  into
impatience.  Whence  also  it  is  fitly  subjoined.  Without  rage
rising  in  the  crowds  I  cried  out.  For  it  often  happens  that
the  tumults  of  seditious  men  provoke  the  spirit  of  their  rulers,
and  by  disorderly  emotions  they  transgress  tlie  limit  of  their
orderliness.

74.  And  very  often  they  who  are  set  at  the  head,  except
in  the  mouth  of  the  heart  they  be  held  in  with  the  bridle  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  leap  forth  into  the  fierceness  of  enraged
retribution,  and  as  much  as  they  are  able  to  do,  reckon
themselves  to  be  at  liberty  to  do  witli  those  under  them.
For  impatience  is  almost  always  the  friend  of  power,  and
that  power  when  evil  it  even  rules  over  as  subject  to  it.  For
what  that  same  feels,  power  executes.  But  holy  men  bow
down  tliemselves  much  more  to  the  yoke  of  patience  inwardly,
than  they  are  above  others  outwardly,  and  they  exhibit  without
the  truer  goveniance,  in  proportion  as  they  maintain  within
more  lowly  servitude  to  God :  and  they  for  this  reason  often

Sadness  of  the  Church, Associafioti  kith  hypocrites. 507

endure  persons  the  more  fully,  the  more  they  have  it  in  their  Book
power  to  revenge  themselves  upon  them,  and  lest  tbej  should  -


ever  pass  over  into  things  unlawful,  they  very  often  will  not
put  in  execution  in  their  own  behalf  even  what  is  lawful;
they  are  subject  to  the  clamours  of  those  under  their  charge,
they  rebuke  in  love  those,  whom  they  bear  in  mildness.
Whence  it  is  rightly  said  now.  Without  rage  rising  up  in
the  crowds  I  cried  out:  in  this  way,  because  against  the
clamours  of  the  unnily  the  good  have  *  crying  out,"  but  they
have  not '  rage,*  because  those  whom  they  bear  with  gently
they  do  not  cease  to  teach.  But  these  particulars  which  Allko.
after  the  historical  view  we  have  delivered  concerning  one
individual,  it  remains  that  we  understand  after  the  allegorical
view  concerning  diverse  Elect  ones  of  Holy  Church.  For
she  too  in  her  Elect  '  goes  mourning,'  even  in  prosperous
circumstances*  For  she  accounts  nothing  truly  prosperous
to  her,  until  the  good,  which  she  is  preeminently  seeking
after,  she  may  lay  hold  of.  Since  her  faithful  ones  enjoy
temporal  peace  indeed,  but  sigh  evermore;  they  are  honoured,
and  afflicted;  because  very  often  they  are  seen  at  the  highest
pitch  there,  where  they  are  not  citizens.  She  too  '  rises  in
the  crowd  without  rage,  and  cries  out,'  because  she  presses
upon  the  life  of  the  evil  doers  with  the  eagerness  of  right
jealousy,  not  with  the  frenzy  of  rage.  She  is  angry  and
loving,  she  deals  wrathfully  and  is  tranquil,  that  so  her  weak
members  she  may  reform  by  zealousness,  and  cherish  in
pitifulness. It  goes  on;

Ver.  29.  /  was  a  brother  to  dragons^  and  a  companion  to
ostriches.

76.  What  is  there  denoted  by  the  title  of  *  dragons,'  butxxxix.
the  life  of  evil  minded  men  7 Of  whom  also  it  is  said  by  the
prophet. They  drew  up  the  wind  like  dragons. For  all  Jar.  14,
wicked  men  *  draw  in  wind  like  dragons,'  when  they  are^*
swolu  with  evil  minded  pride. But  who  are  used  to  be
understood  by  the  designation  of '  ostriches,'  saving  pretenders  ?
For  the  ostrich  has  wings,  but  has  not  flight;  because  all
pretenders  have  an  appearance  of  sanctity,  but  the  good-
ness of  sanctity they have not For  those  persons  the
appearance  of  good  conduct  adorns,  but  the  wing  of  virtue
never  lifts  them  from  the  earth. So  let  the  Elect  people  of

508 Sinners  mingled  with  ike  Righteous  io  try  them.

Job  80,  Holy  Church,  because  in  the  time  of  its  peace  it  suffers  within
.  '  itself  persons  that  are  evil  minded  and  pretenders,  say  the
words,  /  WM  a  brother  to  dragone^  and  a  companion  to
ostriches.  Which  too  in  a  special  manner  accords  with  the
words  of  blessed  Job,  who  to  the  highest  pitch  of  great  forti-
tude was  a  good  man  amongst  bad.  For  no  one  is  perfect
who  amidst  his  neighbours*  evil  things  is  not  patient.  For
be  who  does  not  bear  others*  evil  with  composure,  is  by  his
impatience  witness  to  himself  that  he  is  very  far  removed
from  the  plenitude  of  goodness.  For  he  refuses  to  be  Abel,
whom  the  malice  of  Cain  does  not  exercise.

76.  Thus  in  the  threshing  of  the  floor  the  grains  are  squeezed
under  the  chaff,  thus  the  flowers  come  forth  between  thorns,
and  the  rose  that  smells  grows  along  with  the  thorn  that
pricks.  Thus  the  first  man  had  two  sons,  but  one  was  elect,
the  other  refuse.  The  three  sons  of  Noah  too  did  the  ark
contain,  but  while  two  continued  in  humility,  one  went  head-
long into  the  mocking  of  his  fatlier.  Two  sons  Abraham
had,  but  one  was  innocent,  the  other  the  persecutor  of  his
brother.  Two  sons  also  Isaac  had,  one  saved  in  humility,
while  the  other  even  before  that  he  was  bom  was  cast  away.
Twelve  sons  Jacob  begat,  but  of  these  one  was  sold  in
innocency,  while  the  rest  were  through  wickedness  the  sellers
of  their  brother.  Twelve  Apostles  too  were  chosen  in  Holy
Church;  but  that  they  might  not  remain  untried,  one  is
mixed  with  them,  who  by  persecuting  should  try  them.  For
to  a  just  man  there  is  joined  a  sinner  together  with  wicked-
ness, just  as  in  the  furnace  to  the  gold  there  is  added  chaff
along  with  fire,  that  in  proportion  as  the  chaff  bums  the
gold  may  be  purified.  So  then  those  are  truly  good  men,
who  are  enabled  to  hold  on  in  goodness  eyen  in  the  midst  of
bad  men;  herein  too  it  is  said  to  Holy  Church  by  the  voice  of
Cant,  s,  ^6  Spouse ;  As  a  Uly  among  thorns^  so  is  my  love  among
Ez  s  6  ^'^  daughters.  Hence  the  Lord  saith  to  Ezokiol;  And  ihou^
son  of  man f  unbelievers  and  overturners  are  with  thee^  and
thou  dweUest  among  scorpions.  Hence  Peter  magnifies  the
s  Pet.s,  life  of  blessed  Lot,  saying.  And  delivered  righteous  Lot^  when
^'^'  oppressed^  Jrom  the  wrongful  conversation  of  the  wicked.
For  to  be  seen  and  to  be  heard  he  was  righteous^  living  among
those,  who/i'om  day  to  day  vexed  the  soul  of  the  righteous  man

Outer  ones  of  Holy  Church  in  trial  as  blackened  skin.  509

by  fticked  works. Hence  Paul  magnifies  the  life  of  his  Book
ctisciples,  and  in  niagnifjing  strengthens  it,  saying*  In  the '
midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation  ^  among  whom  ye  is.  is/
shine  as  lights  in  the  worlds  holding  the  word  qfli/e. Hence
by  John,  the  Angel  of  the  Church  of  Pergamus  is  borne
witness  to  in  the  words,  /  know  where  thou  dwellesty  even  Bev,  9,
where  SatarCs  seat  is;  and  thou  holdest/ast  My  name^  and^^
hast  not  denied  My  faith. So  then  let  blessed  Job,  that  he
may  evince  what  firmness  he  is  of,  tell  with  whom  he  lived,  say-
ing, /  was  a  brother  to  dragons^  and  a  companion  to  ostriches.
Because  it  would  have  been  but  little  that  he  himself  did
good  things,  except  that  for  the  heightening  of  his  goodness
he  likewise  sustained  what  was  evil  at  the  hands  of  others.
It  goes  on ;

Ver.  30.  My  skin  is  black  upon  me,  and  my  bones  are
burned  with  heat.

77.  This  we  forbear  to  take  account  of  after  the  history,  xl.
for  this  reason,  that  the  force  of  the  speech  appears  from  the
pain  of  the  suffering.  But  because,  as  we  have  already  often
said,  blessed  Job  very  frequently  so  relates  things  done,  as
to  foretell  things  to  be  done,  this  excellently  agrees  with  the
accents  of  Holy  Church,  who  in  her  weak  members  grievously
feels  the  pain  of  the  last  persecution.  And  when  others  die
off  from  her,  all  the  stronger  ones  are  wrung  with  sorrow.
For  her  outward  concern  is  earthly  dispensing,  but  the  interior
is  a  heavenly  charge.  And  so  by  the  name  of  the  *  skin*
the  weak  are  denoted,  who  now  do  service  in  her  to  exterior
usefulness.  While  by  the  bones  the  strong  are  represented,
in  that  in  them  the  whole  jointing  of  her  body  is  cemented.
And  therefore  because  either  being  invited  by  bribes,  or  dis-
tressed by  persecuUons,  many  weak  persons  in  her  fall  from
the  standing  of  faiih,  and  themselves  after  they  have  fallen
persecute  her,  what  is  it  but  that  she  suffers  a '  blackness  of
her  skin,*  that  in  those  very  ones  she  should  afterwards
appear  foul,  in  whom  she  before  shewed  fair.  For  whilst
they  who  had  been  before  accustomed  to  manage  outward
things  aright,  afterwards  rage  against  the  Elect  of  G^od,  as  it
were  '  the  skin*  of  the  Church  has  lost  the  hue  of  foregoing
righteousness,  in  that  it  has  come  to  the  blackness  of  iniquity.
Which  Jeremiah  also  bewails  under  the  likeness  of  the  pri*^-

510  Hie  strong  burn  with  grief  of  zeal  when  the  taeak/all.

JoBSO,cipal  metal,  saying.  How  is  the  gold  become  dim; how  is
'  thejine  colour  changed? The  fro  ward,  therefore,  when  they


Alleo.  ^

Lam.  4,  go  forth  from  her  sacraments,  very  often  take  a  place  of

^* honour  amongst  the  children  of  perdition,  so  that  the  very
persons  should  rage  against  Holy  Church  with  authority,
who  as  it  were  in  knowing  despise  this  Church  more  cruelly.
And  hence  when  he  said,  My  skin  is  blacky  he  added,  upon
me:  because  those  whom  she  before  had  as  it  were  white  as
to  the  beautifulness  of  righteousness,  she  afterwards  carries
.'  black'  the  worse. But  when  ^  the  skin*  is  turned  to  ^  black-
ness,* the  strong  that  are  in  her  are  consumed  with  jealousy  of
tlie  faith. And  hence  he  filly  subjoins;  And  my  bones  are
dried  up  with  heat. For  in  this  wo^  in  the  time  before  too  that
strongest  bone  of  Holy  Church,  Paul,  burned  with  a  certain
dryness  of  weariness,  when  he  said  to  some  persons  on  their
s  Cor. falling ;  Wlio  is  weak,  and  I  am  not  weak  f  Who  is  offended,
' '  and  I  burn  not? And  so  ^  the  skin  is  made  black,  and  the
bones  are  dried  up  with  heat  i  because  while  the  weak  leap
forth  to  iniquity,  all  the  strong  are  tortured  with  the  fire  of
their  zeal. It  goes  on ;
Ver.  81.  My  harp  also  is  turned  to  mourning,  and  my
' organ  into  the  voice  of  them  that  weep.
xli. 78.  Whereas  the  organ gives its  sounds  by  means  of
pipes,  and  the  harp  by  chords;  it  may  be  that  by  the  *  harp'
right  practising  is  denoted,  and  by  the  ^  organ'  holy  preach-
ing. For  by  the  pipes  of  an  organ  we  not  unsuitably  under*
stand  the  mouths  of  persons  preaching,  and  by  the  chords  of
the  harps  the  bent  of  those  living  aright. Which  whilst  it  is
stretched  to  another  life  by  the  afflicting  of  the  flesh,  it  is  as
I'ezte-  if  the  thin  drawn  ^  chord  in  the  harp  sounded  in  the  admira-
aK^^z-  ^'^"  ^^  those  beholding. For  the  chord  is  dried  that  it  may
teDto.' give  a  suitable  note  on  the  harp;  because  holy  men  also
chasten  their  body,  and  subject  it  to  service,  and  are  stretched
from  things  below  to  those  above. Moreover  it  is  to be
considered  that  the  chord  in  the  harp,  if  it  be  strung  too
little,  does  not  sound,  if  too  much,  it  sounds  harsh;  because
doubtless  the  virtue  of  abstinence  is  altogether  nothing  if  a
man  does  not  tame  his  body  as  much  as  he  is  able;  or  it  is
very  ill  ordered  if  he  wears  it  down  more  than  he  is  able.
For  by  abstinence  the  imperfections  of  the  flesh  are  to  be

Self-discipline  must  hejirm^  but  tviihin  bounds. 511

done  awQjr,  and  not  the  flesh ;  and  every  one  onght  to  rule  Book

Iiimscir  with  such  great  control,  that  both  the  flesh  may  not —

carry  itself  high  for  sin,  and  yet  that  it  may  be  upheld  in
practice  for  the  carr}'ing  out  of  righteousness.  It  is  a  satisfaction
herein  to  look  at  the  great  preacher,  with  u  hat  great  skill  of
preceptorship  the  souls  of  believers  like  chords  strung  on  the
harp,  one  set  by  stretching  the  more,  he  draus  fine,  another
by  loosening  from  their  stretch  he  preserves. For  to  some
he  says ;  Nol  in  rioting  and  drunkenness^  not  in  chamber-  Bom.
ing  and  wantonness. And  again  he  says ;  Mortify  therefore  JJ|^'|*
your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth. And  yet  to  the  5.
most  beloved  preacher  he  writes,  saying.  Drink  no  longer  i  Tim.
watery  but  use  a  little  wine,  for  thy  stomach's  sake,  and  for  *
thine  often  ifi/irmities. Thus  those  chords  by  drawing  thin
he  stretches,  lest  by  not  being  stietched  they  altogether  give
no  sound. But  this  chord  he  abates  of  its  stretching,  lest
whilst  it  is  stretched  more,  the  less  it  should  sound.

79.  But  whether  it  be  the  holy  preachers  in  the  Church,
or  the  simpleminded  and  temperate  generally,  as  far  as  they
are  vouchsafed  powers,  they  render  to  their  neighbours  in
her  the  song  of  goodly  exhortation.  For  both  the  wise  sort
severally  keep  discreetly  on  the  watch  to  the  fruit  of  preach-
ing, and  that  they  may  draw  others  to  life  they  ply  themselves
with  a  sound  of  mighty  persuading ;  and  they  that  appear  to
be  of  slower  wit  within  her,  by  the  mere  merit  of  their  lives,
to  the  extent  that  they  see  that  they  are  able,  take  upon
them  authority  of  exhortation  towards  others,  and  cease
not  to  draw  to  the  heavenly  Country  those  whom  they  are
able.  But  Holy  Church  being  borne  down  by  the  last  per-
secutions, when  she  sees  her  words  to  be  set  at  nought  by
the  ehildren  of  perdition,  shapes  the  goodness  of  her  love  to
lamentations  alone,  because  surely  she  bewails  those  whom
she  is  not  able  by  exhorting  to  draw.  Let  her  say  then.  My
harp  also  is  turned  to  mourning,  and  mine  organ  into  the
voice  qf  them  that  weep.  As  though  she  avowed  in  plain
words,  saying,  ^  In  the  season  of  my  peace,  indeed,  by  some
I  preached  little  things  afler  the  manner  of  a  harp,  whilst  by
others  things  great  and  sounding  aflcr  the  manner  of  an
organ;  but  now  ^  my  harp  is  turned  into  mourning  and  mine
organ  into  the  voice  of  them  that  weep,*  because  whilst  I  see

512  T%e  Church  lamenis  her  song  of  preaching  silenced.

Job  so,  myself  to  be  despised  1  toouru  o?er  ibose  who  hear  not  the
j^j~-  song  of  preaching.*  Such  tilings  is  Holy  Church  to  do  by
certain  persons  in  the  end^  these  things  has  she  already
done  by  certain  in  her  beginnings.  For  the  first  martyr
Stephen  endearoured  by  preaching  to  benefit  the  Jews  that
persecuted  him,  which  persons  when  he  saw,  notwithstanding,
afterthe  words  of  preaching  to  ha?e  flocked  togetlier  to  throwing
Aott7>  stonest  he  prayed  with  his  knees  set  fast,  saying,  Lord
^*  Je$us,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge.  How  then  was  it  to
bim  who  for  long  had  told  things  both  small  and  great,  but
that  the  melody  of  his  ^  harp  and  of  his  organ*  was  already
mute,  and  they  were  ^  turned  into  mourning,*  because  those
whom  he  had  not  drawn  in  preaching,  he  wept  for  in  loving?
Which  same  Holy  Church  ceases  not  daily  to  do,  because
she  already  sees  Uiat  the  word  of  preaching  is  almost  every
where  become  mute.  For  some  close  their  mouths  from
speaking,  others  scorn  to  hear  right  things.  But  the  mind  of
the  Elect  whilst  it  sees  the  song  of  preaching  to  be  stilled,
returns  groaning  and  in  silence  to  lamentations.  Therefore
let  her  say,  My  harp  is  turned  into  mourning^  and  mine
organ  into  the  voice  qf  thetn  that  weep^  because  every  elect
person  in  proportion  as  the  voice  of  holy  preaching  has  been
stilled,  so  much  the  more  sorely  does  he  bewail  the  woes  of
the  Church.

Thus  far  blessed  Job  has  described  the  evils  that  he  under-
went; but  from  this  place  he  begins  to  relate  witli  more  par-
ticularity the  good  things  that  he  did.  Now  the  words  of
grief  we  have  run  through  by  an  historical  and  allegorical
explanation:  but  the  deeds  of  virtuous  qualities  we  in  great
measure  hold  according  to  the  text  of  the  history  alone,  lest
if  we  draw  these  to  the  exploring  of  mysteries,  we  should
- perchance  appear  to  be  making  void  the  verity  of  the  deed.

BOOK  XXI.

The  thirtj-first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job  it  explained  to  verse  twenty-
four,  exclofiTe,  and  ehattity,  humility,  and  meroifulnem  being  first
eommendedy  many  partieulars  are  espedally  tanght  relative  to  the
avoiding  of  the  occasion  of  tin.

1.  The  sense  of  Sacred  Revelation  requires  to  be  weighed i.
with  so  exact  a  Tmlnncing  between  the  text  ancf  the  mysteryT"
that  the  scale  of  cither  side hcnig  a(kjustc(l,  this lattcT' ,
neither  the  weiglit  of  over-curious  scrutinizing  should  sink ^J^
down,  nor  again  the  deadness  of  unconcern  leave  voi^ For
many  sentences  thereof  are  pregnant  with  such  a  conception

of  allegories,  that  any  one  wT&o  strives  to  hold  them  after  tHe*
history"a1one,  is  creprived  of  the  knowledge  of  them  by  his
indifljBiieuce^  But  there  are  some  that  are  so  made  sub-
ordinate to  external  precepts,  that  if  a  man  desires  to
penetrate  them  with  greater  particularity,  within  indeed
he  finds  nothing,  whilst  even  that  too  which  they  tell  of
without,  he  hides  from  himself.

2.  Whence  it  is  well  said  also  in  historical  relation  by  a
method  of  representing ;  And  Jacf^h  ir^ft  him  ¥nel»  gf  ^rfiat^  a^  «a
poplar,  am/V*  the  almoncTand  plane-trees^  and  pilled  them  *^'^^'
in  strakes^and  w/ie7i_  iJe  hark  w.aR  qff^  wht>re  they  were
stripped,  the  white  appeared,  and  the  parts  that  werewhole
remained  green;  and  after  this  manner  the  colour  wg^
made  variegated.  When  it  is  further  added,  And  he  set
liKemin  the  gutters  in  the  watering-troughs,  that  when  the
flocks  cam^e  to  drink  they  should  have  the  rods  b^ore  their
eyes,  and  should  conceive  in  looking  on  them.  And  the
flocks,  when  Ih&y  conceived,  looked  on  the  rods,  and  brought
forth  cattle  ringsiraked,  spoiieU,  and  speeded, f'or  whatTs  TT

*  '  hanc,'  which  seemi  to  agree  with  '  intellectas'  referred  to  '  mytterimn/
VOL.  II,  L  1

514 JacoVa  rochy  Scripture  eramples,  mj/stic  and  direct.

Job  81  y  to  set  before  the  eyes  of  the  cattle  ^  rods  of  green  poplar,

• — "and  of  the  almond  and  plane-trees/  tut"  lln'ougTi  tlie  cours6  '^

of  Holy  ScrFpture  to  furnish  foran  example  to  tTje  people  the
lives  and  sepjcnces  of  the  AjQLcktnl.  Fnllmra,  whirh,.same.
because  by  the  testing  of  reason  they  are  in  a  riglit  line,  are
stylcJ  "^ VocIsT'Trbin' Tvliicb  he  *  peels  lljc  budi.'  in  part,
that  in  tliose"wlncb  are  stripped  the  inward  whiteness  may
lippcat;  at1*1to;;g5rn)eTeeps'ihe  bark,  thatJMst  03  they  were
olitwarHly,  they  should  Remain  in^ecnness.  And  the  colour
oi  iht  roilsls'madc  pied,  whereas  the  bark  is' in  part  stripped
off,  in  part  retained.  Since  before  the  eyes  of  our  reflection
the  sentences  of  the  foregoing  Fathers  are  place(lj[ikfi,yi^l
rod8,'in"which  wjicrca§,jn:u.ja^ry  nftfin  avoid  tha  tM*iisn  of
the  letter,  we  are  as  it  were  withdrawing  the  bark,  andjjherjj^s
"WBTgry  often"  foTTqw  the  meaning  of  the  letter,  we  as  it
were  prQservQ.  th^  t)%rj^^^  And  when  from  those  same  the
bark  of  the  letter  is  removed,  the  interior  \vhiteness  of  the
allegory  is  brought  to  view,  and  \vhcn_tlic  bark  is  left,  the
gieen  grown  examples^  of^jhe  putward  .meaning^  are _she\vn.
Which  Jacob  did  well  to  *  set  in  the  watering-troughs/
because  our  Redeemer  set  them  in  the  books  of  the  Sacred
Lore  by  which  we  are  inwardly  watered.  ^  Tlie  rams  mix
with  the  sheep  looking  at  ihese,'  because  our  reasoning
spirits  when  they  are  fixed  in  the  earnest  minding  of  those
mingle  themselves  with  the  several  particular  actings,  that
they  should  beget  such  a  progeny  of  works  as  they  see
examples  of  precepts  going  before  in  words,  and  the  progeny
of  good  practice  may  have  a  different  colour,  because  both
sometimes,  the  bark  of  the  letter  beiug  removed,  it  sees
what  is  within  with  acuteness,  and  sometimes,  the  covering
of  the  hisioiy  being  preserved,  it  moulds  itself  well  in  tho
outward.

8.  For  because  the  Divine  sentences  require  sometimes
to  be  exjglored  inTciTiJlly,  and  stimetiraes  to_be  viewed"^
ProT.  externally^  it  is  said  l)y  Solomon  also,  He  that  strongly
80,  as.  pfcsseth  the  udder  for  the  rhuwintf/nUM  milk  aqueezeth  out
^^emnu' butter  J  and  he  that  v^ringeth^  violently  draweth  otit  blood.
« emul-'  For  we  *  press  the  udder  strongly,'  when  we  weigh  witli
^***'  minute  understanding  the  word  of  Sacred  Revelation,
by  which  way  of  *  pressing'  whilst  we  seek  *  milk,'  we  find

tVhal  is  plairfy  not  to  be  ^trained  to  mystery. 515

*  batter/  because  whilst  we  seek  to  be  fed  with  but  a  litde  Book

XXI
insight,  we are anointed  wilh the abundance  of  interior -■

richness. Which,  nevertheless,  we  ought  neither  to  do  too
much  nor  at  all  times,  lest  while  milk  is  sought  for  from  the
udder  there  should  follow  blood. For  very  often  persons i^l^^y^
whilst  they  sift  the  words  nf  ^<><ir.rp.ft K/>vp|fltinn  mnrft  ^h^ff ^  '

they  ought,  fall  into  a  carnal  apprehension,  for  *  he^  draws  ^^^^^^^
TorUi  blood,  who  wringcth  violently.*  Since  that  is  rendered  K..^.^  k^^'CC
comal  which  is  perceived  by  an  over-great  sifting  of  the
"^Int.  Whence  it  is  requisite  that  the  deeds  of  blessed  Job,
wIhcTT  he  for  this  reason  relates  amidst  the  words  of  up-
braiding friends,  that  his  afflicted  soul  might  not  fall  away
in  despair,  we  should  examine  into  according  to  the  weight  of
the  history,  lest  if  the  mind  explain  these  in  a  spiritual  sense
above  what  is  necessary,  from  the  udder  of  his  words  there
be  blood  answering  us  instead  of  milk.  But  if  ho  does
sometimes  relate  some  things  mystical  in  the  relation  of  his
works,  it  is  necessary  that  the  mind  with  quickened  speed
return  to  these  considerations,  whereunto  as  is  given  to  be
understood  the  very  order  of  the  person  speaking  itself  bids
that  mind.  For  the  holy  man,  after  he  had  told  the  things
that  had  been  inflicted  on  him  by  the  scourge  of  God,  now
by  enumerating  in  order  his  own  virtues  makes  it  known
what  sort  of  person  he  was  before  the  scourge,  so  constructing
the  history  of  his  life,  as  to  insert  therein  a  something  very
rare  which  might  be  understood  in  an  allegorical  way,  that
both  in  a  large  proportion  they  should  be  historical  facts
that  he  records,  and  yet  occasionally,  by  means  of  these
same,  he  should  rise  up  to  a  spiritual  meaning.  Thus  with
what  strength  he  had  bound  up  his  exterior  conduct  from
all  falling  by  the  training  of  inward  safe-keeping,  he  tells,
saying,

Ver.  1.  I  made  a  covenant  with  mine  eyes  that  I  should
not  even  think  upon  a  maid.

4.  Whereas  the  soul  is  invisible,  it  is  in  no  degree  affected ii.
by  the  delightfulness  of  things  corporeal,  except  that,  being  H"'*-
closely  attached  to  the  body,  it  has  the  senses  of  that  body
as  a  kind  of  opening  for  going  forth. For  seeing,  hearing,
tasting,  smelling,  and  touching,  are  a  kind  of  ways  of  the
mind,  by  which  it  flhOUld  COhie  forth  without,  and  go  a  lust-

516 Job  guarded  the  eye^  to  keep  the  soul  from  lusi.

Job  si,  ing  after  the  things  that  are  without  the  limits  of  its  substance.

-=-^ —  For  by  these  senses  of  ihe  body  as  by  a  kind  of  windows  the

H18T. _,^^-^ ; jy— r 1 — --— ^^^ — ' T~' T"

\^ soul  takes  a  view  of  the  several  exterior  oniccts^  ami  on

Jer.B, viewing  ron{j[S  after  them.  ^Jlpi^icnce  Jeremiah  saith ;  For

death  is  come  up  through  our  triudowsj  and  is  entered  into

our  palaces;  for  ^  death  comes  up  by  the  windows  and  enters

into  the  palace,'  when  concupiscence  coming  through  the

senses  of  the  body  enters  the  dwelling-place  of  the  mind.

Contrary  whereunto  that  which  we  have  ofien  already  said

In. 60, touching  the  righteous  is  spoken  by  Isaiah; IVho  arc  they

that  fly  as  clouds,  and  as  the  doves  at  their  windows? I'or

the  righteous  arcsaid  to  fly., as  clouds^  becausu^tjicy  are

lifted  up  from  the  (ierilcmonts  of  eartli,  and  they  are  *  as

^' ''  doves' at  tFeif  "WiHdowK,*  because"  through  the  senses  oriEe-"

/7 '  '' /,  '^^  y body  thej  do  not  reganl  the  several  objects  withoutjrith  the

//  ' , ^  \  \i&ti\  of  rapacity,  and  carnal  concupiscence  docs  ncH  cany

( '^  "^^  those  persons  off  without. But  he  who  through  these  windows

1  jj  of  the  body'TieedlessTy'Tboks  without,  very  oft<m  falls^ven

against  his  will  into  the  delightfulness  of  sin,  ^nd  being^^^

^onnd*^  desires,  he  begins  to~wiU  what  he  wille^^of.""For

the  precipitate  soiil,  whilst  it  does  not  forecast  beforehand,

that  it  should  not  incautiously  see  what  it  might  lust  after,

-' ^[  begins  afterwards  with  blinded  eyes  to  desire  the  thing  that

i 4I;  *^  ^^" ^"^  hence  the  mind  of  the  Prophet,  which  being

'  . \^^'  uplifted  was  oft^n  admitted  to  interior  mysteries,  because  he

i  ''  beheld  the  wife  of  another  without  heed,  being  darkened

^  afterwards  joined  her  to  him  without  right. But  the  holy

man,  who  as  a  kind  of  judge  of  greatest  equity  is  set  over  the

senses  granted  him  in  tlie  body,  as  over  subject  officers,  sees

offences  before  they  come,  and  closes  the  windows  of  the

body  as  against  a  plotting  enemy,  saying,  I  made  a  covenant

with  mine  eyes  that  I  should  not  exwn  think  upon  a  maid. For

that  he  might  preserve  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  with  chastity,

he  ^  made  a  covenant  witli  his  eyes,'  lest  he  should  first  see

without  caution  what  he  might  afterwards  love  against  his

will. For  it  is  very  greatly  that  the  flesh  drags  downwards,

and  the  image  of  a  shape  once  bound  on  the  heart  by  means

of  the  eye  is  with  difficulty  unloosed  by  the  hand  of  great

struggling. So then that we may  not  deal with things

lascivious in  thought we have need to  take  precaution;

Eve  fell  by  unguarded  looking. The  Gospel  nnlicipaled.  517

because  it  is  not  befitting  to  look  at  what  is  not  lawful  to  be  Book
lusted  a(ier. For  that  the  mind  may  be  preserved  pure  in.—— ^
thought,  the  eyes  must  be  forced  away  from  the  wantonness
of  their  pleasure,  like  a  kind  of  ravishing  uuto  Bi^^~Por"
Neither  would  Eve  have  touched  the  forbidden  tne,  except
slie  had  looked  on  it  first  without  taking  heed ;  wnce  it  is '
^vnttcn,  And  Ihe  woman  snwjhat  the  tree  wax  goad  f^-  f^^^l^  n^  j
nndUHil  if  wasf  plvnnanl  to  the  ^yen^  and  a  /rw*  dplighfful  lo^'
loot ftJ)o Iff  find  nhc  look  of  the  frnil  thereof  and  did  eat,
'  llencc, therefore,  it  is  to  be  estimated with ,  what  great*"
control  we  who  arc  living  a  mortal  life  ought  to  restrain  our
sight  towards  forbidden  objects ;  if  the  very  mother  of  the
Hving  came  to  death  through means  of  the  eye8»__  Hfehce"
too  under  the  voice  of  Judsea,  who,  whereas  by  seeing  she
coveted  external  things,  parted  with  interior  l)lessings,  the
Prophet  says ;  Mine  eye  hath  robbed  mine  heart. For  by  Lam.  3,
lusting  after  things  visible,  she  lost  the  invisible  virtues.  She,**'
then,  who  lost  the  interior  fruits  by  the  exterior  sight,  did
by  the  eye  of  the  body  endure  the  *  robbing  of  the  heart.*
Hence  by  ourselves,  for  safely  keeping  purity  of  heart,  there
ought  also  to  be  preserved  the  disciplining  of  the  exterior
senses. For  with  whatever  degree  of  excellency  the  mind
may  be  enriched,  with  whatever  amount  of  gravity  it  may  be
invigorated,  yet  the  carnal  senses  ring  outwardly  with  a  some-
thing childish,  and  except  they  were  restrained  by  the  weight
of  interior  gravity,  and  as  it  were  by  a  sort  of  manly  energy,
they  drag  the  soul  unstrung  to  things  loose  and  light.

5.  Let  us  then  sec  in  what  manner  blessed  Job  kept  in  by
a  manly'  vigour  of  wisdom  all  that  the  flesh  might  breathe  ofKjuTe-
in  him  of  loose  and  childish. For  he  says,  /  mack  a  cot^enant  "'**'
with  mineeyeHy  and  because  hequenched  not  only  the  doing  but
also  the  thinking  of  lust  in  himself,  going  on  he  added;  that  I
should  itot  even  think  on  a  maid. For  he  knew  that  lust
has  need  to*be  checked  in  the  heart,  he  knew  by  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Spirit  that  our  Redeemer  on  His  coming  would  go
beyond  the  precepts  of  the  Law,  and  put  away  from  His
Elect  not  only  lustful  indulgence  of  the  flesh,  but  also  of  the
heart,  saying,  It  hath  been  written^  Thou  shall  not  commit  Matt  5,
adultery? But  I  say  unto  youy  that  tvhosoever  looketh  on  a*^'^*


^

518 The  xerpent  assaiU  ihoutjhi  wlteH  reusled  in  deed.


Job  3if  woman  to  lust  frfler  her^  hath  already  committed  adultery
"Hiix"  ^^^  ''^''  *'*  ***  heart.  For  by  Moses  lust  perpetraied,  but
by  the  Author  of  purity  lust  imagined,  is  condemned.  For
hence  it  is  that  the  first  Pastor  of  the  Church  says  to  the
iPet.  lydigeipies;  Wherefore  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be
sober,  and  hope  perfectly  in  the  grace  that  in  offered  to  you*
For  to  <  gird  up  the  loins'  of  the  flesh  is  to  withhold  lust  from
accomplishment,  but  ^  to  gird  up  the  loins  of  the  mind/  is  to
restrain  it  from  the  imagining  thereof  as  well.  Hence  it  is
that  the  Angel  who  addresses  John  is  described  as  being
BeT.  I,  ^  girt  above  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle.'  For  because  the
purity  of  the  New  Testament  puts  restraint  upon  lust  of  the
heart  likewise,  the  Angel  who  appeared  therein,  came  '  girt'
in  the  breast  Whom  a  golden  girdle  rightly  binds,
because  whoever  is  a  citizen  of  the  country  Above  does  not
now  forsake  impurity  from  dread  of  punishment,  but  from  the
love  of  charity.  Now  the  wickedness  of  lust  is  committed
cither  in  thought  or  deed.  For  our  crafty  enemy  when  he  is
driven  away  from  the  carrying  out  of  the  deed,  makes  it  his
business  to  defile  by  secret  thought.  Hence  too  it  is  said  to
Gen.  8,  the  seipent  by  the  Lord,  Thou  shall  deep  on  the  breast  and  \  r*

^*' belly. That  is,  *  the  serpent  creeps  with  his  belly,'  when  the Q  Y^"^^^ r
gliding  enemy  by  the  human  members  subject  to  him  calls  I  .  -^  7"-^

lust  into  exercise  even  to  the  fulfilling  of  the  deed;  but  ^  the  )  v^^^^
sei-pent  creeps  with  the  breast,'  when  those  whom  he  cannot  I
pollute  in  the  deed  of  lust,  he  does  pollute  in  the  thought.
Thus  one  man  now  perpetrates  lust  in  act  of  doing,  to  this
man  the  serpent  creeps  by  the  belly.  But  another  man  entertains
it  in  the  mind  as  to  be  committed,  and  to  him  the  serpent
<  creeps  by  the  breast.'  But  because  through  the  thought  we
are  brought  to  the  fulfilling  deeds,  the  serpent  is  rightly  de-
scribed first  as  ^  creeping  upon  the  breast,'  and  afterwards
^  upon  the  belly.'  Hence  blessed  Job  because  he  maintained
discipline  even  in  the  thought,  by  a  single  guaidiug  inaistered
both  ^  the  breast  and  belly  of  the  serpent,'  saying,  /  made  a
covenant  with  mine  eyes,  that  I  should  not  even  think  on  a
maid.  Which  same  purity  of  heart  whoever  does  not  aim  at
acquirhig,  what  else  docs  he  but  dri\e  away  from  himself  the
Author  of  that  purity  ?  whence  blessed  Job  too  dii*ectly  adds  \

God  diwwfu  ihe  impure  in  thought* Sin  i^  in  connenl.  519

Ver.  2. For  what  portion  would  God  have  in  me  from  Booic

nbovej  and  what  inheritance  would  the  Almighty  have  from '-

on  high  f

6.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words;  ^  If  I  defile  my  iii.
mind  in  thought,  I  can  never  be  the  *  inheritance'  of  Him,'
Who  is  the  Author  of  purity/  For  the  rest  are  no  good
things  at  all,  if  to  the  eyes  of  the  secret  Judge  they  be  not
approved  by  the  testimony  of  chastity.  For  M  the  virtues  lift
themselves  up  in  the  sight  of  the  Creator  by  reciprocal  aid,  that
because  one  virtue  without  another  is  either  none  at  all  or  the  very
least  one,  they  should  be  mutually  supported  by  their  alliance
together.  For  if  either  humility  forsake  chastity,  or  chastity
abandon  humility,  before  the  Author  of  humility  and  chastity,
what  does  either  a  proud  chastity,  or  a  polluted  humility
avail  to  benefit  us? And  so  that  the  holy  man  might  obtain

to  be  owned  by  his  Maker  in  the  remaining  particulars  of
good,  keeping  purity  of  the  heart,  let  him  say,  /  made  a
covenant  tailh  mine  eyes,  that  I  should  not  even  think  on  a
maid.  For  what  portion  would  God  have  in  me  from  above^
and  what  inheritance  would  the  Almighty  have  from  on
high?  As  though  he  made  tho  confession  in  plain  words,
saying.  The  Creator  of  the  things  on  high  refuses  to  own  me
for  his  possesidon,  if  in  Ilis  sight  my  mind  rots  in  the  lowest
desires.

7.  But  herein  it  should  be  known  that  that  is  one  thing
which  the  mind  meets  with  from  the  tempting  of  the  flesh,
and  another  thing,  when  by  consent  it  is  tied  and  bound
with  gratifications.  For  very  often  it  is  struck  by  wrong
thinking  and  resists,  but  very  often  when  it  conceives  any
tiling  wrong,  it  revolves  this  within  itself  even  in  the  way  of
desire.  And  certainly  impure  thought  never  in  the  least
defiles  the  mind  when  it  strikes  it,  but  when  it  subdues  the
same  to  itself  by  the  taking  delight.  Thus  it  is  hence  the
great  Preacher  says,  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you  i  Cor.
but  such  as  is  common  to  man.  For  that  is  '  temptation  ^^'  ^''
common  to  man,'  by  which  we  are  very  often  reached  in  the
thought  of  the  heart  even  against  our  will,  because  this,  viz.
that  ei'en  things  forbidden  sometimes  occur  to  the  mind,  this
assuredly  we  have  in  our  own  selves  derived  from  die  burthen

of  human  nature  as  subject  to  corruption. But  henceforth  it

5*^0 Consent  wiihhtld  keeps  sin  from  reigning.

Job  81,  is  devilish  and  not  *  buman'  temptation^  when  to  that  which
*  ■  the  corruptibility  of  the  flesh  prompts,  the  mind  attaches
Rom.  6  itself  by  the  consent  Hence  again  he  says,  Lei  not  sin  reign
'"''*  III  your  mortal  body.  For  he  forbad  not  that  sin  should  ^  bo*
in  our  mortal  body^  but  that  it  should  '  reijjn  in  our  mortal
body.'  Because  in  flesh  as  subject  to  corruption  it  may  not
^  reign,'  but  cannot  help  but  ^  be.'  For  this  very  thing  to  be
tempted  touching  sin>  is  sin  to  it,  which  same  because  so  long
as  we  live,  we  are  not  perfectly  and  altogether  without,  holy
preaching  seeing  that  it  could  not  wholly  banish  the  same,  took
away  from  it  its  ^  reign'  from  the  dwelling-place  of  our  heart,
that  the  unlawful  longing,  though  it  very  often  secretly  insinuate
itself  as  a  thief  in  our  good  thoughts,  at  all  events  should  not,  if
it  should  even  win  an  entrance,  exercise  dominion.  Accordingly
the  holy  man  in  saying,  /  made  a  covenant  with  mine  eyes,
that  I  should  not  even  think  upon  a  maid,  would  not  at  all
be  understood,  that  sin  did  not  touch  his  mind  in  thought,
but  that  it  never  mastered  him  by  the  consent.  For  he
defends  his  soul  as  the  most  entire  possession  of  God  against
the  adversary's  making  a  prey  of  it,  who  directly  subjoins.
For  what  portion  would  God  have  in  me  from  above^  or  what
inheritance  would  the  Almighty  have  from  on  high?  As
though  he  said  in  plain  words;  ^  In  my  mortal  flesh  indeed
1  am  subject  to  the  constitution  of  corruption;  but  wherein
do  I  serve  the  Maker,  if  to  Him  I  do  not  defend  my  mind
whole  and  entiie  from  the  consent  to  sin? It  goes  on;

Ver.  3.  Is  not  destruction  to  the  wicked  ?  and  estrange-
ment  to  the  workers  of  iniquity?

8.  The  speedy  comforting  of  the  good  is  the  end  of  the
wicked  had  regard  to.  For  while  by  the  destruction  of  those
they  see  the  evil  that  they  escape,  they  account  as  light
whatever  of  adversity  they  undergo  in  tliis  life.  So  then  let
the  lost  sinners  now  go,  and  satisfy  the  desires  of  their
gratifications;  in  the  sentence  of  their  end  they  are  destined
to  feel  that  in  living  badly  they  were  in  love  with  death.
But  let  the  Elect  be  chastened  with  a  temporary  infliction
of  the  rod,  that  strokes  may  reform  from  their  wickedness
those  whom  fatherly  pitifulness  keeps  for  an  inheritance.
For  now  the  righteous  man  is  scourged  and  corrected  by  the
rod  of  discipline,  because  he  is  being  prepared  iox  the  Father's


IV.

Earthly  good  aUowed  those  doomed  to  estrangement.  521

estate  of  inheritance. But  the  unjust  man  is  let  go  in  his  ^^^

own  pleasures,  because  temporal  good  things  are  supplied  to

him  in  the  same  degree  that  eternal  ones  are  denied  him.
The  unjust  man,  whilst  running  to  a  deserved  death,  enjoys
pleasures  unrestrained;  inasmuch  as  the  very  steers  too  that
are  destined  to  be  slaughtered  are  left  in  free  pastures.  But
on  the  other  hand  the  righteous  man  is  restrained  from  the
pleasantness  of  transitory  gratification,  because  doubtless  the
steer  too  which  is  assigned  to  life  for  the  purpose  of  labour,
is  held  under  the  yoke.  To  the  Elect,  earthly  good  in  this
life  is  denied;  because  sick  persons  too,  to  whom  there  is  a
hope  of  their  living,  never  have  allowed  them  by  the  physician
every  thing  they  long  for.  But  to  the  lost  sinners  the  good
things  are  granted,  which  they  long  aAer  in  this  life,  because
to  the  sick  too  who  are  despaired  of  there  is  nothing  denied
that  they  desire.  So  then  let  the  righteous  weigh  well,  what
are  the  evils  that  await  the  wicked,  and  never  Qnvy  their
happiness  which  runs  past.  For  what  is  there  that  they
should  admire  about  the  joys  of  those,  when  both  themselves
are  by  a  rough  road  making  their  way  to  the  Country  of
Salvation,  and  those  as  it  were  through  pleasant  meadows  to
the  pit?  Therefore  let  the  holy  man  say.  Is  not  destruction  to
the  wicked'^  and  estrangement  to  the  tcorkers  of  iniquity  f
Which  same  term  of  estrangement'  would  have  sounded  i « j,
harder,  if  the  interpreter  had  retained  it  in  the  parlance  ofnatio.'
his  own  tongue.  For  what  with  us  is  called  ^  estrangement*
is  among  the  Hebrews  termed  ^  anathema.'  And  so  there
will  then  be  *  estrangement'  to  the  wicked,  when  they  see  that
they  are  an  *  anathema'  to  the  inheritance  of  the  Stiict  Judge,
because  here  they  set  Him  at  nought  by  wicked  practices.
So  then  let  the  wicked  flourish,  strange  to  the  flowering  of
the  Eternal  Inheritance.  But  let  the  righteous  look  to  them-
selves witli  discreet  attention,  and  in  all  their  actions  be  in
dread  for  that  they  are  seen  by  the  Lord.  Whence  it  is  fitly
added  diiectly;

Vcr.  4.  Doth  not  He  see  my  ways,  and  count  all  my
steps  ?

0.  What  docs  he  tell  of  by  the  title  of  *  ways'  but  ways  of y.
acting? Thus  it  is hence  said  by  Jeremiah; Make  your  jer.  7,
ways  and  your  doinys  good. But  what  do  we  understand'*

622 Deyreen  0/ consent  incur  deyrees  ofjudymenL

Joasiyby  the  name  of  ^  steps/  but  either  the  motions  of  men^s
-^^^ minds  or  the  advancements  of  merits  ? By  which  ^  steps*

Mat  11,  indeed  Truth  calls  us  to  Itself,  saying,  Come  onto  Me^  all  ye
thai  labour  and  are  heavy  laden.  For  thu  Lord  bids  us
^  come  to  Ilim*  not  surely  by  the  steps  of  the  body,  but  by

John  4,  the  advances  of  the  heart.  For  lie  Himself  says,  The  hour
camelh,  when  ye  shall  neilher  in  this  mounlain  nor  yet

▼er.  33.  at  Jerusalem  worship  the  Father,  And  a  little  after,  the
true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in
truth;  for  the  Father  also  seeketh  such  to  w^jrship  Him,
Thus  he  implies  that  the  steps  are  in  the  heart,  when  He
both  bids  us  that  we  should  come,  and  yet  declares  that  it  is
not  at  all  by  the  motion  of  the  body  that  we  pass  to  other
tilings.  Now  the  Lord  so  '  views  the  ways*  of  each  •  one,
and  so  ^  counts  all  his  steps,*  that  by  His  Judgment  not
even  the  minutest  thoughts  or  the  very  slightest  words,
which have  become  insignificant  in our eyes  from use,

Mat.  5,  remain  unexamined  into.  Thus  hence  He  says.  Whosoever
is  angry  urith  his  brother  unthout  a  cause^  shall  be  in
danger  qf  the  judgment:  and  whosoever  shall  say  to  his
brother 9  Baca,  shall  be  in  clanger  qf  the  council:  but  who-
soever shall  say  Th<ju  fool^  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire,
^  Raca*  in  the  Hebrew  speech  is  a  word  of  interjection,  which
indeed  shews  the  temper  of  one  who  is  angiy,  but  does  not
give  forth  a  full  word  of  anger.  Thus  anger  without  utterance
is  first  blamed,  then  anger  with  utterance,  but  not  yet  shaped
by  a  complete  word,  and  at  last  also  when  it  is  said,  Thou
fool^  anger  is  reproved,  which,  along  with  excess  of  the  voice,
is  fulfilled  by  the  perfecting  of  speech  as  well.  And  it  is
to  be  noted  that  He  tells  that  by  anger  he  is  *  in  danger  of  the
judgment,*  by  a  voice  of  anger,  which  is  ^  llaca,' '  in  danger
of  the  council  ;*  and  by  a  word  of  the  voice,  which  is  ^  I'hou
fool,'  iu  danger  of  hell  fire.  For  by  the  steps  of  oiience,
the  order  of  the  sentence  increased,  because  in  ^  the  judg-
ment* the  case  is  still  under  examination,  but  in  the  council
the  sentence  of  the  case  is  now  determining,*  while  ^  in  the
fire  of  hell*  the  sentence,  which  proceeds  from  the  council,  is
fulfilled.  And  therefore  because  of  human  actions  ^  the
TiOrd  counts  up  the  steps*  with  exact  scrutiny,  anger  without
the  voice  is  made  over  ^  to  the  judgment,*  but  anger  in  the

God  judges  our  UHtifSy  good  and  evily  exacUy. 523

voice  *  to  Ihe  council/  and  anger  in  speech  and  voice  to  *  the  Book
fire  of  hell. This  exactness  of  His  scanning  the  Prophet  J^^^'


had beheld,  when he  said, O  most  strong ^ Great On^yier.ss,
Mighty  Lord  qf  hosts  is  Thy  Name^  Oreat  in  counsel^  and^^'  *^*
Mighty  in  work^  for  Thine  eyes  are  open  upon  ail  the  ways
qf  the  sons  of  Adam;  to  give  every  one  according  to  his
tjoaysy  and  according  to  the  fruit  qfhis  devices,

10.  Tims  the  Lord  scans  those  ways  with  exact  scrutiny,
that  in  each  one  of  us  He  should  neither  pass  over  those
good  points  that  tliere  are  for  Him  to  recompense,  nor  leave
without  rebuke  the  evil  things,  that  are  doubtless  displeasing
to  Him.  For  hence  it  is  that  the  Angel  of  the  Church  of
Pergamos  He  at  once  commends  in  some  things,  and  in  some
rebukes,  saying,  /  know  thy  works  and  where  thou  dwellest^  Aw)e,t,
even  where  Satan^s  seat  is:  and  thou  holdestfast  My  Name^  ***
and  hast  not  denied  My  faith.  And  a  little  while  after ;
But  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee^  because  thou  hast
there  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  Balaam*  Hence  it  is
said  to  the  Angel  of  the  Church  of  Thyatira,  /  know  thy  rer.  19.
works f  and  thy  charity ^  and  faithy  and  service ^  and  thy^'
patience;  and  thy  last  works  to  be  more  than  the  first.  Not-
withstanding  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee;  because
thou  sufferest  that  woman  Jezebel^  which  calleth  herself
a  prophetess,  to  teach  a)id  to  seduce  My  servants  to  commit
fornication,  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols.  Observe
how  He  records  good  things,  nor  yet  lets  go  without  penance
evil  things,  that  require  to  be  cut  off,  surely  because  He  so
views  the  ways  of  each,  and  so  takes  account  of  their  steps,
*  counting  them  up/  that  by  exact  counting  He  thoroughly
estimates  both  how  far  each  one  is  advancing  to  what  is
good,  or  how  far,  by  deviating  to  what  is  evil,he  may  contravene
his  advances.  For  the  increase  of  merits  which  is  heightened
by  the  aims  of  a  good  life,  is  very  often  held  back  by  a
mixture  of  evil,  and  the  good  which  the  mind  builds  up  by
practising  it  overthrows  by  committing  other  things.  Whence
holy  men  tie  themselves  up  with  greater  nicety  in  the  thought
of  the  heart  in  proportion  as  they  see  that  they  are  more
searchingly  scanned  by  the  Judge  Above.  For  they  sift  the
mind  through  and  through,  they  seek  to  find  if  they  have
done  wrong  in  aught,  that  they  may  be  rendered  the  more

524 Chriai  Ihe  ^  even  balance' /or  weiyhing  our  deeds.

Job  8i,unb1aineable  to  the  Judge,  in  proportion  as  daily  and  without
_?!?:- ceasing  they  blame  their  own  selves.  Not,  however,  that
"^*  they  already  derive  from  this  circumstance  the  delights  of
security,  because  they  see  that  they  are  beheld  by  Ilim,  Who
beholds  in  them  those  things  as  well,  which  they  are  not
themselves  able  to  see  in  themselves.  And  indeed  blessed
Job  among  those  of  old  time  maintained  the  life  of  perfectness,
but  because  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy  the  stretch  of  his  eye
breaks  forth  to  the  Advent  of  the  Redeemer,  in  that  Re-
deemer's precepts  he  for  himself  reflects  how  many  things
belonging  to  perfection  he  is  short  of.  Whence  he  also
adds ;

Ver.  5,  0.  //*  /  have  walked  in  vanity^  or  \f*  my  /(hU  hath
hasted  to  deceit;  let  Him  weirjh  me  in  an  even  balance^  and
let  Qod  know  mine  integrity,
vi. 11.^  God  to  know*  is  said  for  His  making  us  to  know  by  a
Myst.  customary  mode  of  our  speech,  who  speak  of*  a  happy  day,'  by
which  it  happens  that  we  are  made  happy.  For  hence  it  is  the
Gen. 29,  Lord  saith  to  Abraham,  Now  I  know  that  thou/earest  Qod,
^^' For  it  is  not  that  the  Creator  of  the  periods  of  time  learnt  any
thing  from  time,  but  His  knowing  is  His  affording  the  know-
ledge to  us  by  the  instant  of  each  particular  case  emerging.
But  who  is  there  represented  by  the  name  of  ^  balances,'
saving  the  Mediator  between  God  and  maur  ^In  Whom  all
our  merits  are  weighed  with  an  even  scale,  and  in  Whose
precepts  we  find  what  we  have  short  in  our  own  life. Now
we  are  weighed  in  these  balances  as  often  as  we  are  incited
after  the  examples  of  His  hfe. Thus  it  is  hence  that  it  is
1  Pel.  2,  written ;  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving  you  an  example,
^•^*^- that  ye  shmddfolloio  His  steps.  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  toas
guile  found  in I J  is  mouth ; IV/m  xvl^jn  He  mis  reviled,
revilednotagain,when  He  suffered,  Hethreatenedmd. Hence
Heb.i2,il  i»  said  by  Paul,  Let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is
1-3. g^i  b^'ore  us:  looking  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher
qf  our  faith,  Who  for  the  glory  set  bqfore  Him  endured  the
Cross,  despising  the  shame. Accordingly  to  this  end  the  Lord
appeared in  the  flesh,  that  the life  of  man  He  might  by
dealing  admonitions  arouse,  by  giving  examples  kindle,  by
suffering death redeem, by rising  again renew. And  so
whereas  blessed  Job  finds  in  himself  nothintr  justly  deserving

Job  denires  to  see  hinfaultn  through  His  appearwg.  526

to  be  blamed,  ho  extends  the  eyes  of  the  mind  to  the  life  of  Book

the  Redeemer,  which  surpasses  all  things,  that  he  may  leant 1

by  that  how  much  ho  comes  short,  where  he  says,  (f  I  have
walked  in  vanity ^  or  \f  my  foot  hath  hasted  to  deceit;  let
Him  ijoeigh  me  in  an  even  balance^  atid  let  Ood  know  my
simpleness.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  speech  ;  *  If  I  have
ever  done  aught  lightly,  if  ever  mischievously,  may  the
Mediator  between  Ood  and  man  appear,  that  in  His  life  1
may  read  whether  I  myself  am  really  and  truly  simple*  For
as  we  have  ^aid,  he  who  had  surpassed  the  men  of  his  own
times,  sought  for  tlie  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  that  by
being  weighed  in  Him  he  might  find  out  whether  he  truly
maintained  a  life  of  simplicity.  Therefore  let  him  say,
Let  Him  weigh  roe  in  an  even  balance^  and  lei  Ood  know  *
my  simpleness^  which  means,  *  let  Him  cause  me  to  know/
As  though  he  made  open  confession,  saying,  *  As  far  as  to  the
measure  of  man's  life,  1  see  now  no  points  in  myself  deserving
to  be  found  fault  with,  but  except  the  Mediator  between  God
and  man  appear  accompanied  with  the  precepts  of  an  exacter
life,  1  discover  not  how  much  I  am  at  variance  with  true
simplicity.'  Now  the  right  order  is  obsened  if  the  foot  be
said  first  to  have  *  liasted  on  in  vanity,'  and  afterwards  *  in
deceit.'  For  *  vanity'  bears  relation  to  levity,  but  *  deceit'  to
wickedness.  And  there  are  often  persons,  who  are  brought
afterwards  to  things  mischievous,  because  they  do  not  in  the
first  instance  avoid  what  is  light.  It  goes  on ;
Ver.  7.  (f  my  step  hath  turned  out  qf  the  way,
12.  So  many  times  does  *  the  step  go  out  of  the  way,'  as  vii.
our  thought  quits^  the  way  of  the  right,  by  the  consenting  of
wandering.  Now  we  as  it  were  set  as  many  *  steps  out  of
the  way,'  as  we  are  parted  by  bad  desires  from  the  delightful-
ness  of  the  heavenly  life.  For  as  we  have  before  stated,
being  still  borne  down  by  the  load  of  corruptible  flesh,  we
are  not  able  to  live  in  such  a  manner  as  that  not  any  enjoy-
ment of  sin  should  be  able  to  strike  us.  But  it  is  one  thing
for  the  mind  to  be  touched  against  its  will,  and  another  to
be  killed  whilst  consenting.  But  holy  men  guard  themselves
with  more  watchfiil  solicitude  in  proportion  as  they  take
shame  for  being  assaulted  by  the  misdirected  motions  even
of  passing  gratification. And  hence  it  is  yet  further  added ;

6*20  The  eye  may  mislead  the  heart ^  or  the  heart  the  eye.

Job  31,  And  if  mine  eye  hath  followed  mine  heart,
— 7^  13.  See  again  how  by  the  keeping  of  inward  vigour  he
Hist,  returns  to  the  training  of  tho  onlward  members,  that  if  the
MouAL.  heart  should  perchance  covet  aught  forbidden,  ihe  eye  being
kept  down  by  the  tutorage  of  discipline  may  refuse  to  look
at  it.  For  as  it  often  happens  that  temptation  is  derived
through  the  eyes^  so  sometimes  being  conceived  inwardly  it
forces  the  eyes  to  do  service  to  it  outwardly.  Thus  very
often  an  object  is  regarded  by  a  mind  in  a  state  of  innocence,
but  by  that  mere  look  the  mind  is  pierced  through  by  the
sword  of  concupiscence.  For  it  was  not  (as  we  have  already
remarked  for  the  sake  of  illustration)  that  David  in  this  way
looked  of  purpose  on  the  wife  of  Uriah,  because  he  had
*  entertained  the  desire  of  her ;  but  rather  he  lusted  after  her
for  this  causci,  because  he  beheld  her  without  caution.  But
it  happens  by  an  inquest  of  nght  recompensing,  that  he  who
employs  the  external  eye  carelessly,  is  not  unjustly  blinded
in  the  interior  eye.  Now  oftentimes  concupiscence  rules  in
the  interior,  and  the  mind  being  seduced,  alicr  the  manner  of
a  despotism  requires  the  senses  of  the  body  to  drudge  to  its
occasions,  and  obliges  the  eyes  to  serve  its  pleasures,  and  so
to  say  opens  the  window  of  light  to  the  dark  of  blindness.
Hence  holy  men,  when  they  feel  themselves  to  be  assailed
by  a  wrong  enjoyment,  by  the  tutorage  of  discipline  they
withhold  the  very  eyes  themselves  by  which  the  likeness  of
the  shape  is  introduced  into  the  mind,  lest  the  sight  acting
the  pander  should  do  the  bidding  of  unhallowed  thought.
Which  same  if  it  ever  be  forborne  to  be  guarded  with  nice
particularity,  uncleanness  of  thought  presently  passes  into
execution.  Hence  too  it  is  directly  added;
And  if  any  blot  hath  cleaved  to  my  hands.
ix.  14.  Thus  the  holy  man,  knowing  well  that  very  often
wrong  thought  comes  into  the  mind  through  tlie  eyes,  said
a  little  above;  /  inade  a  covenant  with  mine  eyes  that
I  would  not  even  think  on  a  maid.  Reflecting  likewise  that
sometimes  it  springs  up  in  tlie  mind,  while  on  its  springing
up  so  tlie  eyes  wickedly  do  service  to  it,  he  says,  If  mine
eye  hath  followed  mine  heart.  As  though  he  ^vAA  in  plain
speech,  ^  Neither  did  I  wish  to  see  in  general  things  I  might
long  after,  nor  in  looking  did  I  ever  follow  after  the  things

Job  niijled  nin  in  the  thought. His  hands  pure. 527

that  I  longed  for.* So  then  let  him  say,  ff  mine  eye  hath  Book

folloioed  mine  heart. Because  even  if  his  mind  as  being 1.

human  ever  did  conceiTC  aught  unlawful,  his  eyes,  bound
down  by  the  tutoring  of  higher  discipline,  it  would  not  should
follow  it  in  things  forbidden,  and  drudge  to  its  service.
Let  us  consider  our  own  consciences  with  reference  to  these
points,  and  what  height  this  man  was  of  let  us  see  from  the
sunkenness  of  our  own  breast.  See,  if  he  did  occasionally
imagine  things  unlawful,  because  he  i^edily  dispatched
them  within  the  depths  of  the  heart  with  the  s^ord  of  holy
vigour,  he  suffered  them  not  to  reach  so  far  as  to  deeds.
Hence  as  we  have  set  down  before,  he  thereupon  adds ;  And
if  any  blot  hath  cleaved  to  my  hands.  For  when  does  a
blot  cleave  to  the  hands,  i.  e.  sin  to  the  actions,  which  sin
the  censorship  of  discipline  did  not  suffer  to  make  progress
in  thouglit  ?  For  neither  is  sin  permitted  to  issue  into  act,  if
it  be  despatched  inwardly  where  it  has  its  birth,  fiut  if
there  is  not  a  speedy  resisting  of  temptation  springing  up  in
the  heart,  it  is  strengthened  by  that  very  delay  by  which  it
is  fed,  and  coming  forth  without  in  deeds,  it  is  with  difficulty
able  to  be  overcome,  because  the  very  mistress  of  the
members,  the  mind  within,  it  holds  a  captive.  Now  because
the  holy  man  had  brought  forward  all  tho  particulars  con-*
ditionally,  t/he  had  ever  been  guilty  of  these^  he  binds  him-
self with  a  sentence  of  malediction,  saying;

Ver.  8.  Then  let  me  sow,  and  let  another  eat ; let  my
offspring  he  rooted  out.

16.  After  the  manner  of  Sacred  Revelation  we  call  it  to  'sow' x.
to  preach  the  words  of  life. Thus  it  is  hence  the  Prophet  ^*'^'*''
says.  Blessed  are  ye  that  sow  upon  all  waters. For  thel«.  S8>
preachers  of  Holy  Church  he  saw  to  *  sow  upon  all  waters'
because they bestowed the words of  life, like grains of
heavenly  bread,  upon  all  peoples  far  and  wide. But  to  '  eat'
is  to  be  filled  to  the  full  with  good  works. Hence  Truth
saith  by  Itself;  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  Tftat  sent  John  4^
Me. So  then,  if  the  things  that  he  gave  forth,  he  forbore  to'**
do,  he  says ;  77ien  let  me  sowy  and  another  eat. As  though
ho  said  in  plain  words ;  *  What  my  mouth  utters  let  not  me
but  another  man  put  in  practice.' For  the  preacher  who  in
his  ways  is  at  variance with  his own  words,  sows  going

6*28  Godjud<jeH  between  teachers  (is  Solomon  between  mothers.

Job  si, hungry  what  another  may  eat;  because  he  is  not  himself  fed
r — '- —  by  His  own  seed,  when  by  wrong  conduct  he  is  made  void  of
the  rightness  of  his  word.  And  because  it  very  often  happens
that  tlic  disciples  hear  what  is  good  to  no  purpose,  when  by
the  life  of  tlie  master  it  is  destroyed  by  the  example  of
actions,  it  is  rightly  subjoined;  ye/i,  let  wij  qtf^priny  be
rooted  out.

16.  For  *  the  offspring*  of  the  teacher  is  '  rooted  out,'  when
he  who  is  born  by  the  word,  is  killed  by  the  example,  be-
cause him  whom  the  heeding  tongue  begets,  heedlessness  of
the  life kills. For  neither  should we  pass over  with an

I  Kiogt  insensible  mind,  that  in  Solomon  the  woman  killed  in  sleep-
'  '  ing  the  child,  whom  she  was  used  to  suckle  being  awake ;  in
this  way,  because  masters  awake  indeed  in  knowledge,  but
asleep  in  life,  upon  their  hearers,  whom  they  nourish  by  the
watches  of  preaching,  whilst  they  neglect  to  do  the  things
that  they  say,  ihrough  the  sleep  of  insensibility  inflict  death,
and  by  neglecting  overlay  those  whom  they  ap|)eared  to  be
feeding  with  the  milk  of  words.  Hence  generally  whilst
they  live  themselves  in  a  blameable  way,  tliey  are  at  once
unable  to  have  disciples  of  a  praiseworthy  life,  and  en-
deavour to  draw  over  the  disciples  of  others  to  them-
selves, that  so,  whilst  they  shew  themselves  to  have  good
followers,  in  the  judgments  of  men  they  may  excuse  the  evil
things  that  they  do,  and  as  it  were  by  the  life  of  those  under
them  cover  tlieir  dealhdcaling  negligence.  Whence  in  that
place  the  woman,  because  she  had  killed  her  own,  sought  for
another's  child.  Yet  the  sword  of  Solomon  discovered  the
true  mother,  because  surely  what  man's  fruit  may  live  or
what  man's  die,  the  wrath  of  the  Strict  Judge  in  the  final
Judgment  brings  to  light.  Where  this  too  is  to  be  regarded
with  a  discreet  eye,  that  the  child  is  first  bidden  to  be  divided
whilst  living,  in  order  that  afterwards  it  may  be  restored  to
the  mother  only,  because  in  this  life  the  disciples'  life  is  in  a
manner  allowed  to  be  divided,  whereas  it  is  sometimes  the
case  that  from  that  life  one  man  is  permitted  to  have  merit
with  Ood,  and  another  man  to  have  praise  with  men.

17.  But  the  feigned  mother  did  not  fear  for  him  to  be  put
to  death,  whom  she  did  not  bear;  because  masters  that  are
presumptuous  and  unacquainted  with  charity,  if  they  are  not

Bad  teachers  rather  let  souls  die  than  lose  credit. 529

able  to  win  the  fullest  character  of  praise  from  the  disciples  Book
of  others,  hnnt  down  their  life  with  cruelty. For  being  set -


on  (ire  with  the  firebrand  of  envy,  they  are  not  minded  for
those  to  live  to  others  whom  they  see  that  they  cannot
themselves  possess.  Whence  in  that  place  the  bad  woman
cries  ont,  Let  it  be  neither  mine  nor  thine.  For  as  we  said,ib.T.  ts.
those  whom  they  do  not  see  to  be  at  their  command  for
temporal  glory,  they  grudge  should  live  to  others  through
truth.  But  the  true  mother  is  at  pains  that  her  child  may
at  least  be  with  a  stranger  woman  and  live,  because  genuine
masters  yield  it  that  by  their  disciples  others  indeed  should
have  the  praise  of  preceptorship,  if,  this  notwithstanding,
those  same  disciples  do  not  lose  wholeness  of  life.  Through
which  same  bowels  of  pitifulness  this  same  true  mother  is
known,  because  all  tutorage  is  tested  in  the  trial  of  charity,
and  she  alone  has  earned  to  receive  the  whole,  who  as  it  were
gave  up  the  whole ;  because  the  faitliful  nilers,  for  this  that
they  not  only  do  not  envy  others*  praise  derived  from  their
own  good  disciples,  but  also  implore  for  them  usefulness  for
advancement,  do  themselves  receive  back  the  children  at
once  whole  and  living,  when  in  the  Last  Inquest  from  the
lives  of  those  they  obtain  the  joys  of  perfect  recompensing.
These  things  we  have  delivered  in  few  words  out  of  course,
that  we  might  point  out  in  what  way  the  offspring  of  hearers
is  through  the  negligence  of  the  teachers  made  to  be  extinct;
because  whosoever  does  not  live  according  to  that  which  he
speaks,  uproots  by  practice  from  the  stedfastness  of  righteous-
ness those  whom  he  has  begotten  by  speech.  But  blessed
Job  never  by  his  way  of  acting  put  an  end  whilst  sleeping  to
those  whom  by  his  preaching  he  had  brought  forth  whilst
awake;  and  therefore  he  says  with  confidence,  T/^en  let  me
sow  and  another  eat,  let  my  offspring  be  rooted  out;  which
same  still  examining  himself  touching  the  defilement  of  bad
practice,  adds ;

Ver.  9.  I/mine  heart  has  been  deceived  by  a  woman,  or  if
I  have  laid  wait  at  my  neighbour's  door.

18.  Though  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  sin  of  fomica- xi.
tion  is  not  at  all  different  from  the  guilt  of  adultery,  seeing
that  Truth  saith; WIioso  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  M%ti.  5,
her,  hath  already  committed  adultery  with  her  in  his  heart.  ^*

VOL.  II.  M  m

530 Job  kepi  from  impure  thought  before  the  precept.

Job  SI,  (For  whereas  an  adulterer  is  called  by  the  Greek  word,
.-J —  <  moechus/  whilst  not  another  man's  wife  but  a  woman  is  for-
'  bidden  to  be  looked  at, '  Truth'  openly  shews  that  by  the
mere  look  alone,  when  only  one  that  is  unmarried  is  vilely
lusted  after,  adultery  is  perpetrated.) Yet  generally  speak-
ing the  thing  is  diflerenccd  according  to  tlie  situation  or
order  of  the  person  lusting,  that  is  to  say  in  this  way,  that
purposed  concupiscence  in  like  sort  defiles  one  iu  sacred
orders,  as  the  sin  of  adultery  defiles  that  other. Nevertheless
in  persons  not  dissimilar,  the  same  guilt  of  lust  is  made
different,  in  whose  case  that  the  sin  of  fornication  is  dis-
tinguished from  the  guilt  of  adulter}',  the  tongue  of  the  great
Preacher  bears  witness,  who  asserts  amongst  the  rest,  saying,
^^^^^'^*  Neither  fornicator s^  nor  idolaters^  nor  adulterers — shall
inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven. For  whereas  he  subjoins
sentence  to  severally  distinguished  guilt,  he  shews  how  very
greatly  it  differs  from  itself. By  this  then  that  is  spoken.
If  my  heart  hath  been  deceived  by  a  woman,  the  holy  man
is  proved  not  even  to  have  enteilaincd  a  thought  connected
with  the defilement  of  fornication. But  by  this  that  he
adds;  Or  if  I  have  laid  wait  at  my  neighbour's  door,  he
openly  makes  known  that  he  was  clear  of  the  guilt  of  adultery.
But  perchance  a  person  may  say  to  this,  ^  What  does  the  holy
man  assert  extraordinary  about  himself,  if  he  did  preserve
himself  clear  not  only  from  the  guilt  of  adultery,  but  likewise
from  the  defilement  of  fornication  V But  we  rate  these  things
at  little,  if  we  fail  to  consider  the  times  of  his  virtuous
achievements. For  there  had  not  as  yet  gone  forth  for  tlie
restraining  of  Uie  flesh  the  stricter  monitorship  of  revealed
grace,  which  not  only  blames  wantonness  of  the  body,  but
also  of  the  heart. There  had  not  as  yet  gone  forth  the
excellencies  of  chastity  of  numbers  living  in  continence  as
patterns  for our imitation,  yet did blessed Job afford
examples  of  purity,  which  he  had  not  received. But  by
numbers  even  now  after  the prohibition  of  God there  is
impurity  of  the  flesh  committed. Accordingly  it  ought  to  be
inferred  from  hence,  seeing  that  so  great  an  offence  now  even
after  the  commandment  is  perpetrated  in  heavy  matters,  with
what  great  ])raiseworthiness  was  abstinence  kept  before  in
heavy  matters. And  if  he  ever  had done  this  thing,  he

Many  without  crimen  none  ttithout  sin.  531

prays  for  that  sin  to  be  turned  into  punishment  to  hin),  Book
saying;  -

Vcr.  10.  Vien  let  my  mfe  he  a  harlot  unto  another^  and
let  others  how  down  vpon  her.

19.  And  because  it  is  generally  the  case  tbatthat  thing xii.
which  in  the  doing  of,  we  do  not  well  consider  how  heinous
it  iSy  in  the  suffering  it  we  do  consider  this;  the  force  of  that
atrocity  which,  if  he  were  guilty,  he  declares  that  ho  Iiimself
ought  to  undergo, ho  makes  plain  by  exprcssinij;  it,  saying;

Ver.  11,  12.  For  thin  is  an  heinous  crime;  and  the  chicfesl
iniquity.  For  it  is  a  fire  that  consumeth  to  destruction^
and  that  rooteth  out  all  increase.

There  is  this  difference  between  *  sin'  and  '  crime,^  that  all
crime  is  sin,  but  not  all  sin  is  crime.  And  in  this  life  there
aro  numbers  without  crime,  but  no  one  can  bo  without  sins.
And  hence  the  holy  preacher,  when  he  was  describing  a  man
worthy  of  the  grace  of  the  priesthood,  never  said, '  if  any  be
without  sin,'  but  if  any  he  without  crime.  But  who  can  be  Tit.  1,6.
without  sin,  when  John  saith,  1/  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  i  John
we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  In  which  ^'  ®*
same  distinction  of  sins  and  crimes  it  deserves  to  be  con*^
sidered,  that  occasional  sins  pollute  the  soul,  while  crimes
slay  it ;  whence  blessed  Job  in  characterizing  the  crime  of
lust  says,  It  is  afire  that  consumeth  to  destruction ,  in  this
way,  that  the  heinottsness  of  this  atrocity  not  only  stains  td
the  length  of  defilement,  but  devours  to  the  extent  of  dc>
struction.  And  because  howsoever  many  other  good  deeds
there  may  be,  if  the  enormity  of  lust  is  not  washed  out,  they
are  overwhelmed  by  the  immensity  of  this  crime,  he  added
going  on,  and  rooting  out  all  offspHngs,  for  ^  the  offsprings*
of  the  soul  are  good  practices.  Which  soul,  noverthelcss,
if  the  right  order  being  reversed,  the  flesh  exetcises  dominion
over,  all  the  things  that  are  put  forth  well  are  consumed  by
the  fire  of  lust.  For  before  the  eyes  of  Almighty  Ood  the
works  of  righteousness  and  of  pitifulness  are  none  at  all,
which  are  shewn  to  view  unclean  by  the  infection  of  corrupt*^
ness.  For  what  does  it  profit,  if  a  man  heartily  ■  com-  > '  pie.'
passionates  the  need  of  his  neighbour,  whilst  he  heartlessly 'ximpie.'
destroys  himself,  being  the  habitation  of  God  ?  So  then  if
by  purity  of  the  heart  the  flame  of  lust  be  not  quenched,

M  m  2

532 Job  not  only  chaste^  but  humble  toward  the  meanest.

Job  31,  any  virtues  whatever  spring  up  in  Tain,  as  it  is  spoken  by
p  Moses;  For  afire  U  kindled  in  Mine  anger,  and  shall  burn
*  unto  the  lowest  hell,  and  shall  consume  the  earth  with  her
increase,  and  set  on  fire  the  foundations  of  the  mountains.
For  ^  a  fire  consumes  the  earth  and  her  increase/  when  hist
consumes  the  flesh,  and  all  things  done  well  thereby.  For
whatsoever  comes  forth  belonging  to  the  fruitage  of  righteous-
ness, this,  surely,  the  flame  of  corruption  bums  up.  So,  then,
let  him  say,  For  it  is  afire  that  consumeth  to  destruction,
and  that  rooteth  up  all  increase.  Decause  if  there  be  no
stand  made  against  the  mischief  of  corruptness,  even  those
things  assuredly  come  to  nought,  which  seemed  to  bo  good.
But  some  there  are  whom  bad  qualities  are  apt  to  bring  down
to  humility,  and  good  ones  exalt  to  pride  of  heart  So  then
it  is  necessary  for  us  to  enquire,  whether  blessed  Job  in  this
extraordinary  pureness  of  chastity  was  at  the  same  time
humble?  Now  the  holy  man,  whilst  he  held  the  highest
range  of  virtues,  plainly  discourses  what  low  thoughts  he
entertained  of  himself,  when  he  subjoins,

Ver.  13.  1/  I  despised  to  submit  to  judgment  with  my
man-servant  or  with  my  maid-servant,  when  they  contended
with  me.
xiii.  20.  For  he  who  did  not  refuse  to  be  ^judged  with  men-
servants  and  maid-servants,*  clearly  shews  that  against  no
fellow-creature  was  he  at  any  time  swoln  with  pride  in
himself.  But  herein  it  is  interesting  to  remark  with  what
circumspection  the  holy  man  preserved  his  life  in  all  respects.
Job  39,  For  not  far  above  he  said,  T/ie  young  men  saw  me,  and  hid
'  themselves :  and  the  aged  arose  and  stood  up.  Tlie  princes
refrained  talking,  and  laid  their  hand  on  their  mouth.  The
nobles  held  their  peace,  and  their  tongue  cleaved  to  their
throat.  While  now  he  says ;  If  I  have  despised  to  submit
to  judgment  uith  my  man-servant  or  with  my  maidservant,
when  they  contended  with  me.  Who  might  be  able  pro-
portionately to  view  these  high  counterpoises  of  virtues  in
this  holy  man?  In  whom  there  is  so  great  authority  of
governance  that  princes  are  bound  to  silence,  such  lowhness
of  heart,  that  ^  maid-servants'  are  permitted  to  come  to  'judg-
ment* on  an  equal  footing.  See  how  in  a  wonderful  way  he
appears  in  power  superior  to  priucesj  in  contest  on  a  level

Looking  io  God  as  Master  makes  good  masters. 583

with  serrants;  in  the  assemblage  of  princes  mindful  of  his  Book

office,  in  contest  with  domestics  mindful  of  his  creation. -

For  he  beholds  himself  a  servant  under  the  real  Lord,  and
therefore  he  does  not  in  loftiness  of  heart  lift  himself  up
abore  servants. And  hence  he  adds  directly ;

Ver.  14,  For  what  shall  I  do,  when  God  riseth  up  io
Jttdge;  and  when  He  seeketh,  what  shall  I  answer  Him?

21.  He  who  thinks  on  the  Judge  to  come,  is  unceasingly ziv.
day  by  day  preparing  the  cases  of  his  accounts  for  tho
better: he  who  views  the  Eternal Lord with  trembling

of  heart,  is  forced  to  abate  the  rights  of  temporal  lordship
over  those  under  him.  For  he  considers  well  that  it  is
nothing  that  he  is  set  above  others  in  time,  when  for  the
rendering  account  he  is  beneath  Him,  Who  exercises  do-
minion without  end.  For  oftentimes  transitory  power  hurries
away  the  soul  along  tho  steeps  of  self-exaltation.  And
because  every  one  is  lifted  up  in  the  degree  that  he  sees
that  he  is  himself  abore  any  persons,  it  is  needful  that  he
ever  have  regard  to  Him,  Who  is  above  himself,  that  by  the
fear  of  Him,  Who  is  above  all  things,  he  may  keep  down  the
growing  inflation  of  mind  within.  For  he  knows  who  they
are  beneath  himself,  but  let  him  consider  under  Whom  he
himself  is,  that  by  the  considering  of  the  true  Lord,  the
swelling  of  counterfeit  lordship  may  die  off.  Hence  blessed
Job,  because  he  feared  the  Judgment  of  Him,  Who  is  above
all  things,  here  comes  to  temporal  judgment  the  equal  of
servants,  saying,  If  I  despised  to  submit  to  judgment  with
my  man-servant  or  with  my  maid-scrvantj  when  they  con*
tended  with  me.  For  what  shall  I  do,  when  God  riseth  up
to  judge?  and  when  He  seeketh,  what  shall  I  answer  Himf
Which  same,  that  he  might  always  keep  down  the  heart  in
humility,  never  in  these  servants  sees  that  the  condition
is  unlike  to  himself,  but  that  the  nature  is  common.  Whence
also  he  adds,

Ver.  15.  Did  not  He  Wlio  made  me  in  the  womb  make
him?  And  did  not  One  make  us  in  the  womb?

22.  To  persons  possessed  of  power,  the  equality  of  creation xv.
kept  in  the  thoughts  is  great  goodness  of  humility. For  all  of

us  men  are  equal  by  nature,  but  it  has  been  added  by  a  dis-
tributive arrangement,  that  we  should  appear  as  set  over

534 Fear  of  man  is/or  bea$is,  qmifor  brutUh  men.

Job  81,  particular  persons.  8p  |bei|  if  we  keep  4own  from  the
-^~ — imagination  that  thing  which  hfts  accrued  temporarily ,  we
find  out  the  sooner  that  which  we  are  qaturally.  For  very
often  the  power  vouchsafed  presents  itself  to  the  mind,  and
deceives  it  by  high-swoln  thoughts.  And  sq  by  the  hand
of  lowliest  reflection  the  inflation  of  self-exalling  must  be
kept  under.  For  if  the  mind  in  itself  descends  from  the  top
of  the  height,  it  quickly  finds  the  level  of  the  equality  of
nature.  For  as  we  have  before  said,  nature  has  begotten  all
of  us  men  equals,  but,  the  order  of  merits  varying,  the
secret  appointment  sets  some  above  others.  But  the  very
diversity,  which  has  been  added  from  defcpty  is  rightly
ordered  by  the  judgments  of  God,  that  whereas  every  man
does  not  go  tho  way  of  life  in  a  like  way,  one  should  be
goveraed  by  another.  But  holy  men,  when  they  are  iu
authority,  do  not  look  to  the  power  pf  station  hi  themselves,
but  to  the  equality  of  crf$ation,  nor  do  they  rejoice  to  be
above,  but  to  be  of  use  to  their  fellow^creaturos.  For  tliey
know  well  that  our  old  fathers  ar^  recorded  to  have  been  not
so  much  kings  of  men,  as  shepherds  of  flocks.  And  when
Ooo.  0,  the  Lord  said  to  Noah  and  to  his  sous.  Be  fruil/ul,  atid
multiply^  an4  replenish  the  earth,  He  adds.  And  the  fear  of
you  and  the  dread  of  you  shall  be  upon  every  beast  of  the
earth*  For  He  says  not  ^  be  upon  tlie  men  who  were  to  be,*
but,  be  upon  every  beast  of  the  ^arth.

23.  Since  man  is  by  nature  set  over  the  irrational  animals,
but  not  over  tho  rest  of  mankind,  and  therefore  it  is  said  to  him
that  he  should  be  feared  by  the  beasts  and  not  by  men;
because  it  is  to  swell  with  pride  against  nature,  to  desire  to
be  feared  by  an  equal.  Though  very  often  evei^  holy  men
desire  to  be  feared  by  those  under  their  charge,  only  however
when  they  discover  that  by  these  their  subjects  God  is
not  feared,  that  by  dread  of  man  at  least  they  may  fear  to
sin,  who  do  not  dread  His  judgments.  Never  then  do  they
being  set  in  authority  swell  with  pride  from  this  fear  being
sought,  in  that  they  seek  therein  not  thqir  own  glory  but  tho
righteousness  of  those  under  their  charge.  For  in  this,  viz.
that  they  ei^act  for  themselves  fear  from  persons  living  badly,
they  as  it  were  rule  not  men  but  brute  animals;  because
surely,  in whatsoever respect those under  authority  aro

ne  great  humbled  by  thovghl  qfoun  equal  Creation.  585

bestial,  in  ibat  respect  Uiej  ougbt  also  to  be  bowed  down  Book

under  fear.  '-

24.  But  wben  there  is  wanting  evil,  ibat  may  bave  to  be
corrected,  tbey  rejoice,  not  for  the  eminency  of  power,  but
for  the  equality  of  constitution,  and  tbey  not  only  shrink  from
being  feared  by  them,  but  also  from  being  honoured  beyond
what  is  necessary.  Nor  yet  do  tbey  think  that  it  is  a  light
loss  to  humility  which  they  undergo,  if  perchance  for  their
merit  they  be  reckoned  by  them  of  too  much  rank.  It  is
hence  that  the  chief  Shepherd  of  the  Church,  when  on
Cornelius  worshipping  him,  be  saw  honour  offered  him
which  was  above  him,  quickly  refers  to  the  equality  of  his
creation,  in  the  words,  Stand  upj  I  myself  also  ^^  ^  ^'t^^-  Acta  lo,
For  who  does  not  know  that  man  should  be  bowed  down  to  *
his  Creator,  and  not  to  man  ?  Therefore  because  he  saw  that
his  fellow-creature  humbled  himself  to  him  beyond  what  he
ought,  that  the  mind  might  not  be  made  to  swell  beyond  the
boundaries  of  human  nature,  he  owned  himself  to  be  ^  a  man,*
that  he  might  dash  down  the  exaltation  of  the  honour  offered
to  him,  by  the  equality  of  his  creation  being  had  an  eye  to.
Hence  the  Angel,  on  being  worshipped  by  John,  owned  him-
self to  be  a  creature,  saying.  See  thou  do  it  not,  I  am  thyKsrAd,
/elloW'Servantf  and  of  thy  brethren.  •  Hence  the  Prophet,  ^^*
when  he  is  caught  away  to  see  sublime  things,  id  called  '  Son  tzs,  l,
of  man,*  that  being  canied  to  the  heavenly  scenes,  he  might
remember  that  he  was  roan.  As  though  the  divine  voice
admonished  him  in  plainer  words,  saying,  ^  Remember  what
thou  art,  lest  thou  be  exalted  by  those  things,  whereunto
thou  art  caught  up,  but  moderate  the  loftiness  of  the
revelation  by  the  remembrance  of  thy  creation.'  So  then
from  this  it  is  to  be  gathered,  with  what  remembrance  of
a  common  nature  the  swelling  of  earthly  power  ought  to  be
kept  under  in  the  heart,  if  by  the  name  of  man's  nature  it  is
effected  that  elevation  of  the  heart  should  not  be  engendered
by  heavenly  mysteries.  Which  same  human  nature  blessed
Job  effectually  kept  the  recollection  of  at  all  times,  in  that
he  says,  Did  not  He  that  made  me  in  the  womb,  make  himf
And  did  not  One  fashion  us  in  the  womb  f  As  though  he
said  in  plain  words,  *  Wherefore  should  not  we  be  examined
on  an  equal  footing  in  the  trial  of  any  matter,  who  are  made

536 Reasonable  ttdshes  of  the  poor  to  be  granted.

Job  SI,  with  equal  conditions  by  the  power  of  the  Creator?  Bui
whereas  we  have  made  ourselves  acquainted  with  the
achievements  of  his  chastity  and  of  his  humility,  let  us  now
acquaint  ourselves  with  the  deeds  of  his  munificence.  It
goes  on ;

Ver.  16.  1/  I  have  denied  what  they  wished  for  to  the
poor,  or  have  caused  the  eyes  of  the  widow  to  wait.
xvi.  25.  By  these  words  the  holy  man  is  shewn  not  only  to
have  ministered  to  the  need  of  the  poor,  but  also  to  their
desire  of  having.  But  what  if  the  poor  wished  those  very
things,  which  perchance  it  might  not  be  for  their  good  to
receive  ?  Is  it  that,  because  in  Sacred  Scripture  the  lowly
are  used  to  be  called  *  poor/  those  only  are  to  be  accounted
the  things  the  poor  wish  to  receive,  which  tlie  humble  seek  ?
And  surely  it  is  required,  that  every  thing  should  be  un-
hesitatingly given  that  is  asked  for  with  true  humility ;  i.  e.
whatsoever  is  begged  for  not  from  desire  but  from  necessity.
For  it  is  to  be  henccforlh  very  full  of  pride,  to  desire  any
thing  beyond  the  limits  of  want. And  hence  it  is  said  to

James  persons  asking  with  pride,  Ye  ask,  and  ye  receive  not,

^'^'  because  ye  ask  amiss.  Because  then  they  are  genuinely
poor,  who  are  not  blown  out  through  the  spirit  of  pride ;
which same  '  Truth*,  plainly  represents, when He says,

Matt.S,  Blessed  are  tlie  poor  in  spirit;  it  is  well  said  in  this  place  by
the  holy  man,  If  I  have  denied  what  they  wished  for  to  the
poor.  Because  they  that  wish  those  things,  which  same  it  is
clear  are  not  expedient  for  them,  by  this  alone,  that  they  are
overflowing  ^\i)x  a  spirit  of  pride,  are  not  henceforth  poor.
But  blessed  Job,  seeing  that  he  called  the  humble  ^  poor,'
refused  not  whatsoever  the  poor  man  was  minded  to  receive
from  him,  because  every  truly  humble  person  did  not  even
wish  to  have  what  it  could  not  be  that  ho  ought  to  have.

20.  But  whereas  he  points  out  the  bountifulness  of  his
spirit,  because  he  shews  that  he  had  met  the  poor  to  the
wish,  it  is  necessary  that  we  enquire  whether  he  had  obscured
the  light  of  mercifulness  by  backwardness  in  the  giving.
Hence  he  subjoins;  Or  caused  the  eyes  qf  the  widow  to
wait.  He  would  not  have  the  widow  that  besought  him  ^  to
wait,'  that  not  only  by  the  gift,  but  likewise  by  the  speediness
of  the  gift  he  might  increase  the  merits  of  good  deeds.

Job  ate  wiih  the  poor. His  piety ^  God^s  gift  cherisl^ed.  587

Hence  it  is  written  elsewhere; Say  not  unto  thy  friend^  Book
Go  and  come  again^  and  to-morrow  I  will  give,  tchen  thou  ^ — ^
hast  it  by  fhee. Now  there  are  some  that  are  used  to  bestow  ss.  *  *
mnch  outwardly,  but  rejecting  the  fa?our  of  a  life  in  common,
they  shrink  from  having  the  poor  their  fellows  in  domestic
intercourse. Hence  blessed  Job,  that  he  might  teach  not
only  that  he  had  given  much  without,  but  also  to  his  own
presence  had  received  all  the  needy  in  domestic  intercourse,
adds  directly;

Ver.  17.  Or  have  eaten  my  morsel  ahne^  and  the  father •
less  hath  not  eaten  thereqf.

27.  That  is  to  say,  reckoning  that  he  prejudiced  his  zvii.
pitiiulness,  if  he  ate  alone  what  the  Lord  of  all  created  in
common.  Which  same  fellowship  of  intercourse  should  be
carried  on  within  the  domestic  walls  with  those  persons,  by
whom  the  rewards  of  eternal  retribution  may  be  promoted.
Whence  the  holy  man  describes  himself  as  having  had  not

any  indifferent  person,  but,  for  eating,  the  *  fatherless'  as  his
companions.  But  these  extraordinary  bowels  of  pitifiilness
whether  he  had  derived  from  himself,  or  obtained  them  by
the  grace  of  his  Creator,  let  him  make  known.  It  proceeds ;
Ver.  18.  For  from  my  infancy  compassion  grew  up  with
me,  and  from  my  mother*s  womb  it  came  forth  wiih  the.

28.  For  though  commiseration  was  a  thing  at  his  own  xviii.
command,  that  it  should  gain  growth  with  himself^  yet  it  is
plain  that  it  was  not  a  thing  at  his  own  command  that  it
should  'come  forth  from  the  womb  along  with  himself.'
Therefore  it  is  plain  that  he  attributes  nothing  to  his  own
goodness,  in  that  surely  he  bears  witness  that  he  received  this
same  by  the  gift  of  his  creation.  The  good  then  which  he
implies  that  he  had  derived  from  his  creation,  it  is  assuredly
plain  that  he  tells  to  the  praise  of  the  Creator,  shewing  that

it  was  from  Him  and  no  other  that  he  had  obtained  that  he
should  he  pitiful,  from  Whom  he  obtained  that  he  should  be;
because  as  by  his  own  act  he  was  not  created  in  the  womb,
so  neither  by  his  own  goodness  was  he  full  of  pity  from  the
womb.  But.it  is  to  be  taken  thought  of  by  us  that  he
declares ;  it  grew  up  with  tne.  For  there  are  some  who  as
they  grow  to  years,  go  off  from  innocency.  But  whilst  to
the  Elect  the  age  of  the  body  increases  without,  within,  if  it

538  PUy  to  be  shewn  wUhoui  contempt.

Job  81,  may  be  allowed  to  say  so^  the  age  of  virtue  increases. It
-^ goes  on;

Ver.  19)  20.  ^  I  despised  any  passing  ly^  because  he
had  no  covering^  and  a  poor  man  without  clothing^  \f  his
loins  have  not  blessed  me^  and  if  he  were  not  warmed  with
thejleece  of  my  sheep.
zix.  29.  Because  he  did  not  despise  the  poor,  ho  displayed  the
virtue  of  humility ;  and  because  he  covered  him,  of  pitiful-
ness.  For  these  two  virtues  ought  to  be  so  linked  together,  as
to  be  even  supported  by  reciprocal  practice ;  that  so  neither
humility,  when  it  reverences  a  fellow-creature,  should
abandon  the  grace  of  free  giving,  nor  pity,  when  it  gives,  be
made  to  swell  high.  Thus  towards  the  need  of  a  fellow-
creature,  let  pity  sustain  humility,  humility  sustain  pity,  so
that  when  thou  seest  one  who  is  a  sharer  of  thine  own  nature
lacking  the  necessaries  of  life,  thou  shouldest  neither  through
pitilessness  cease  to  cover  him,  nor  from  pride  cease  to
reverence  him,  whom  thou  dost  cover.  For  there  are  pci'sons
who  the  moment  they  are  entreated  for  necessaries  by  their
brethren  in  need,  afterwards  intending  to  bestow  gifts  on
them,  first  let  loose  words  of  insult  against  them.  Which
persons  though  in  things  they  execute  the  office  of  pity,  yet
in  words  lose  the  grace  of  humility,  so  that  for  the  most  part
it  seems  that  they  are  now  paying  satisfaction  for  an  injury
inflicted,  when  after  abuse  they  bestow  gifts.  Nor  is  it  a
thing  of  high  practice,  that  they  give  the  Uiings  tliat  are
begged  for,  because  by  the  very  boon  of  their  giving  they
scarcely  cover  over  that  transgression  of  speech.  To  which
Ecclus.  persons  is  it  well  said  by  the  book  of  Ecclesiasticus,  To  every
le!  **'  9\f^  9^^  *^^  '*^  bitterness  of  an  evil  word.  And  again ;
Lo,  a  word  is  better  than  a  gift  ?  and  both  are  with  a  man
that  is  justified,  i.  e.  that  a  gift  should  be  exhibited  through
pitifulness,  and  a  good  word  bestowed  through  humility.
But  on  the  other  hand,  others  are  not  forward  to  support
their  needy  brethren  with  things ;  but  only  to  cherish  them
with  soft  words.  Which  persons  the  holy  preaching  of
Jam.  3,  James  strongly  rebukes,  saying,  If  a  brother  or  sister  be
^^'  ^^*  naked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food,  and  one  qf  you  say  unto
them,  Depart  in  peace,  be  ye  warmed  and  filled :  notwith-
standing  ye  give  them  not  those  things  which  arc  needful  to

Earthly  supplies  repaid  in  heavenltf  gains.  580

the  body:  what  shall  it  prqfii  yont Which  persons  John  Book
the  Apostle  also  admonishes,  saying,  My  little  children^  Let  ^  j^^^J
ns  not  love  in  tpord,  neither  in  tongue:  but  in  deed  and  ins,  is.
truth. For  our  loving  aflection  must  always  be  shewn  forth
at  once  by  respectfulness  of  speech,  and  by  the  service  of
almsgiving.

30.  But  it  has  very  great  efficacy  for  taming  down  the
pride  of  a  person  in  giving,  if  when  he  gives  earthly  things,
he  considers  with  good  heed  the  words  of  the  Heavenly
Master,  Who  says.  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  ///^Lnke
Mammon  of  unrighteousness :  that^when  ye  failytliey  may  '
receive  you  into  everlasting  habitations.  For  if  by  the
friendships  of  those  we  obtain  everlasting  habitations,  as-
suredly we  ought  to  reflect  when  we  give,  that  we  are  rather
offering  presents  to  patrons,  than  bestowing  gifts  on  the
needy.  Ilcnce  it  is  said  by  Paul,  That  now  at  this  time  ^Cor.
your  abundance  may  be  a  supply  for  their  wanty  and  their^*  ***
abundance  also  may  be  a  supply  for  your  want.  That  is,
that  we  may  heedfnlly  consider,  that  those  whom  we  now  see
in  need,  we  shall  one  day  see  in  abundance,  and  we,  who  are
beheld  abounding,  if  we  neglect  to  bestow  alms,  shall  one
day  be  in  need.  He  then  who  now  gives  temporal  support
to  the  poor  man,  hereafter  to  receive  from  him  everlasting
supports,  so  to  say,  for  fruit  as  it  were  cultivates  land,  which
pays  back  more  abundantly  what  it  has  received.  It  remains
then  that  exaltation  should  never  spring  up  by  benefaction,
since,  surely,  the  rich  by  that  which  he  bestows  on  the  poor
man,  brings  it  to  pass  that  he  should  not  be  poor  for  ever-
lasting. Accordingly,  blessed  Job,  that  he  might  carefully
show  with  what  reflection  humility  and  mercifulness  were
united  together  in  him,  says.  If  I  despised  any  passing  by,
because  that  he  had  no  covering,  and  a  poor  man  without
clothing:  if  his  loins  have  not  blessed  me,  and  if  he  were  not
wanned  with  the  fleece  of  my  sheep.  As  though  he  said  in
plain  words ;  *  In  the  love  of  a  fellow-creature,  keeping  down
by  one  and  the  same  appointments  both  the  evil  of  pride  and
of  unpitifulnoss ;  any  one  passing  by  both  humbly,  on
beholding  him,  I  despised  not,  and  mercifully  I  warmed  him.
For  whosoever  lifts  himself  above  him  that  ho  gives  any
thing  to  with  the  height  of  self-exaltation,  achieves  a  greater

040  Inward  worse  than  outward  need. Nature  bond  enough.

Job  Sly  offence  by  carrying  himself  prondly  within  than  a  recompense
-=-^ — by  giving  alms  mtbont,  and  he  himself  is  made  bare  of
*  interior  good,  when  in  clothing  the  naked  h^  despises  him,
and  so  brings  it  to  pass  that  he  is  rendered  worse  than  his
very  own  self,  in  proportion  as  he  fancies  himself  better  tlian
his  neighbour  in  need.  For  ho  is  less  in  need  who  is  with-
out a  garment,  than  he  who  is  without  humility.  Whence  it
follows,  that  when  we  see  those  who  are  sharers  of  our  own
nature  without  external  things,  we  should  reflect  how  many
good  things  of  the  interior  are  wanting  to  ourselves,  that  so
the  thought  of  our  heart  may  not  exalt  itself  above  the
needy,  in  that  it  sees  with  an  eye  of  penetration  that  we
ourselves  are  the  more  really  in  want,  in  proportion  as  it  is
more  inwardly.

81.  And  because  there  are  some  who  cannot  stretch  the
bowels  of  their  compassion  so  far  as  to  persons  unknown  to
them,  but  pity  those  only  whom  they  have  learnt  to  pity  by
constancy  of  acquaintance,  with  whom,  in  fact,  intimacy
avails  more  than  nature,  whilst  to  particular  persons  they
give  things  necessary,  not  because  they  are  men,  but  because
they  are  acquaintance,  it  is  well  said  by  blessed  Job  in  this
place ;  ^f  I  despised  any  passing  by  because  that  he  had  no
covering.  For  to  a  fellow-creature  unknown  he  shews  him-
self compassionate,  in  that  he  calls  him  '  any  passing  by,'
because,  surely,  with  a  pitiful  mind  nature  has  more  avail
than  acquaintance.  Since  even  every  individual  who  is  in
want,  by  this  mere  circumstance,  that  he  is  a  man,  is  not  any
longer  unknown  to  him. It  goes  on ;

Ver.  21.  If  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  against  the  father-

less,  even  when  I  saw  myself  uppennost  ^n  the  gate.

XX. 83.  It  was  the  custom  with  those  of  old  that  the  elders

should  sit  at  the gate  to make  out  by  judicial  trial the

quarrels  of  persons  at  strife,  in  order  that  the  city,  in  which

it  was  befitting  that  they  should  dwell  in  concord,  they

should  never  enter  at  variance. And  hence  the  Lord  saith

Amot6,by  the  Prophet,  Establish  judgment  in  the  gate. In  this

^^' place  then  what  is  set  forth  by  the  title  of  the  '  gate*  but  that

thing  which  was  used  to  be  done  in  the  gate  ? For  as  wo

talk  of  the  ^  camp  fighting'  instead  of  this,  that  there  is  fighting

from  the  camp,  so  judgment  that  used  to  be  carried  on  in

Good  men  forbear  their  rights^  leti  Oodjudgf  tirictly.  541

the  galCy  is  called  '  the  gate.* Thus  he  '  sees  himself  upper-  Book
roost  in  the  gate/  who  sees  that  bj  the  title  of  jnst  dealing  ^ -


he  is  of  the  better  side  in  judgment.  Accordinglji  blessed
Job,  because  he  did  not  even  then  put  forth  his  hand  against
the  fatherless,  when  even  bj  the  claim  of  justice  he  saw  him-
self the  better  one,  teaching  to  us  the  rule  of  fear,  says.  If  I
have  lifted  up  my  hand  against  the  fatherless,  even  when
I  saw  myself  uppermost  in  the  gate.  As  though  he  said  in
plain  words,  ^  Not  even  then  had  I  the  mind  to  enforce  bj
power  the  interests  of  my  own  advantage  against  the  fatherless,
when  I  saw  myself  even  by  justice  the  better  one  in  judg-
ment.' For  holy  men,  when  they  are  subject  to  matters  of
disputings  with  inferior  persons,  whilst  they  are  afraid  to
bear  heavily  even  in  the  least  circumstances,  never  shun
to  be  themselves  pressed  upon  contrary  to  justice.  For
they  know  that  all  human  justice  is  charged  to  be  injustice,
if  it  bo  judged  strictly  by  God.  Whence  that  thing  which
is  at  their  command,  they  guard  against  exacting  with
passionateness,  lest  it  chance  that  the  Righteousness  Above
try  their  actions  with  exactness.  But  that  they  may  be  able
to  be  found  just  in  the  Divine  Inquest,  very  often  before  the
judgments  of  men  they  suffer  themselves  to  be  borne  hard
upon  even  unjustly.  Now  in  relating  the  lofty  height  of  his
life,  they  are  many  and  wonderful  things  that  blessed  Job
delivered.  But  because  it  very  often  happens  that  the
human  mind  refuses  to  believe  the  good  things  that  it  does
not  know  how  to  put  in  practice,  he  directly  adds  the
sentence  of  a  curse  upon  himself,  if  aught  of  those  things
which  he  had  spoken  he  did  not  ful61  in  act,  saying,

Ver.  22. T7ien  let  my  shoulder  fall  from  its  Joining^
and  mine  arm  be  broken  in  pieces  along  with  its  bones*

83.  Because  bodily  action  is  carried  on  by  the  shoulder  and  3Lxi.
the  arm,  if  the  good  things  which  he  put  forth  with  the  lips  he
did  not  fulfil  in  deed,  he  wishes  to  himself  ^  the  shoulder  to  fall,*
and  '  the  arm  to  be  broken  in  pieces.'  As  though  he  said  in
plain  words, '  If  the  things  that  I  said  I  refused  to  do,  this
very  member  of  my  body,  which  was  given  to  me  for  working
withal,  may  I  lose,  that  surely  that  may  fall  from  the  body
which  I  would  not  exercise  to  advantage.'  But  if  this
sentence  of  a  curse  is  to  be  referred  to  a  spiritual  meaning,

542  Charity  (he  ihouUler-joini  io  the  sauPs  arm.

Job  81,  it  18  doubtless  plain  that  the  arm  is  joined  to  the  body  by

^' the  shoulders,  and  as  by  the  arm  good  practice,  so  by  the

^*^'"  shoulder  the  knitting  together  of  social  life,  is  denoted.

Whence  too  the  Prophet,  regarding  the  holy  peoples  of  the

Church  universal,  that  should  serve  God  in  concord,  says,

Zeph,3,And  they  shall  serve  Him  tvith  one  shoulder. Herein

^* then that  he  says,  If  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  against

the  fatherless^ when  I  saw  myself  obove  in the  gate.

He  declares  that  he  had preserved  a  wonderful  force  of

patience,  who  declined  not  the  being  borne  hard  upon  by  the

least  considerable  persons,  no  not  when  it  was  contrary  to

that  which  might  justly  be  open  to  him. Which  thing  if

he  had  not  done,  he  adds.  May  my  shoulder  fall  from  its

Joint. Because,  undoubtedly,  he  who  is  indifferent  to  observe

patience,  soon  gives  up  a  social  life  from  impatience. For

*  the  shoulder  falls  fi*om  its  joining,*  when  the  mind,  not

being  able  to  bear  aught  of  contradiction,  abandons  brotherly

concord,  and  it  is  as  if  a  member  were  severed  from the

body,  when  he  who  might  do  what  is  good  is  cut  off  irom

the  general  unity  of  all  the  good. For  never  can  concord  be

preserved  excepting  through  patience  only. For  frequently

there  arises  in  human  conduct  occasion  whereby  the  minds

of  men  are  liable  to  be  reciprocally  separated  from  tlieir

union  and  affection. And  except  the  mind  prepare  itself  for

the  undergoing  things  that  are  contrary,  surely  tlio  shoulder

does  not  hold  fast  to  the  body. Tluis  hence  it  is  that  Paul

tRal.6,  says,  Bear  ye  one  another*  s  burthens^  and  so  ye  shall  fulfil

Luke2i  '^^  ^^  ^  Christ. Hence  Truth  says  by  Itself,  In  your

19. 'patience  ye  shall  possess  your  souls.

84.  Now  upon  the  *  shoulder  falling,*  it  is  rightly  subjoined,
Let  mine  arm  be  broken  in  pieces  with  its  bones;  because
without  doubt  all  our  practice,  with  whatsoever  virtues  it
may  seem  to  be  accompanied,  is  undone,  except  that  tlirough
the  bond  of  brotherly  love  patience  be  preserved  safe.  For
he  foregoes  to  do  good  deeds  of  his  own,  who  refuses  to  bear
evil  deeds  of  others.  Since  on  being  wounded  by  the  heat
of  an  angry  spirit,  a  person  recoils  from  loving,  and  when
he  does  endure  to  be  borne  hard  upon  outwardly,  he  darkens
himself  inwardly  by  the  light  of  charity  being  lost ;  nor  does
he  now  see  where  to  stretch  out  the  foot  of  good  practice,

%/bi  eter  in  fear  of  God  at  of  might  if  wavei. 548

who  has  lost  the  eye  of  love.  But  *  the  shoulder  of  the  fioo«
holy  roan  does  not  fall  from  its  joinings*  in  this  way,  because
his  loving  affection  does  not  depart  from  the  concord  of
social  life  through  impatience.  And  his  arm  is  not  broken,
because  all  his  practice  is  preserved  in  the  joining  of  the
shoulder,  i.  e.  in  the  binding  together  of  charity.  Now  with
what  thought  present  to  him  he  did  these  good  things  of  such
great  magnitude,  and  kept  himself  from  all  bad  ones,  he  adds,
saying,

Ver.  28.  For  I  always  feared  Ood  like  waves  swelling
over  me  J  and  I  could  not  endure  the  weight  qf  Him.

85.  From  the  terror  that  belongs  to  such  a  likeness  let  us  xxii.
reflect  what  wonderful  force  of  fear  there  was  in  the  holy  ^"'''
man.  For  when  waves  suclliog  hang  over  us  from  on  high,
and  when  they  threaten  that  death,  which  they  bring  down,
there  is  then  no  concern  for  temporal  things  with  the  voyagers,
no  enjoyment  of  the  flesh  is  brought  back  to  mind.  Those
very  things  as  well  they  cast  forth  from  the  ship,  for  the  sake
of  which  they  took  long  Toyages ;  all  things  are  brought  into
contempt  to  their  mind  by  love  of  living.  Accordingly  he
*  fears  God  as  waves  swelling  over  him,'  who  whilst  he  desires
the  true  life,  despises  all  things  that  here  he  carries  possess-
ing. For  when  caught  by  a  tempest,  we  as  it  were  cast  out
the  freight  of  the  vessel,  when  from  the  soul  that  is  overborne
we  remove  earthly  desires.  And  it  comes  to  pass  that  the
vessel  being  lightened  floats,  which  by  being  loaded  was
sinking,  seeing  that  doubtless  the  cares  that  weigh  down
in  this  life,  drag  the  mind  into  the  depth.  Which  mind  is
borne  so  much  the  higher  amidst  the  billows  of  temptations^
in  proportion  as  it  is  more  hecdfully  emptied  of  thought  of
this  world.  But  there  is  another  circumstance  also  that
ought  to  be  viewed  with  a  regardful  eye  relating  to  the
tossing  of  the  sea.  For  when  a  storm  arises,  first  slight  waves,
and  afterwards  greater  billows  are  stirred  up,  finally  the
waves  lid  themselves  up  on  high,  and  by  their  very  height
overturn  all  them  that  are  at  sea.  Thus,  thus  surely  does
that  last  tempest  of  souls  hasten  that  it  may  overwhelm  the
whole  world.  For  now  it  shews  us  its  beginnings  by  wars
and  havocs  as  by  a  kind  of  waves,  and  in  proportion  as  we

044 Storm  ofJiulgmeni  howfearfuly  if  so /tared  by  Job.

Job  81,  are  daily  made  nearer  to  the  end,  we  see  heavier  billows  of
-^^~- tribulations  rushing  in  upon  us.  But  at  the  last  all  the
elements  being  in  commotion,  the  Judge  from  Above  when
He  comes  bringeth  the  end  of  all  things,  because  at  that
time  surely  the  tempest  lifts  the  waves  to  the  heavens.
Whence  too  it  is  said,  Yet  a  little  while  and  I  will  shake
not  only  the  earthy  but  heaven  also.  Which  same  tempest
because  holy  men  regard  with  lively  attention,  they  as  it
were  dread  \  the  waves  swelling  over  them*  day  by  day,  and
by  these  tribulations,  which  strike  the  world,  they  forecast
what  things  may  follow.

36.  Now  it  is  well  added ;  And  I  could  not  bear  the
weight  qf  Him^  because  he  who  views  with  mind  engrossed
the  coming  of  the  final  Judgment,  sees  doubtless  that  such
great  terror  is  impending  as  he  not  only  dreads  then  to  see,
but  even  now  dreads  that  he  foresees  beforehand.  For  by  the
beholding  of  that  great  terribleness  the  soul  quivers  with
dread,  and  turning  aside  tlie  eyes  of  its  attention,  it  refuses
to  behold  that  which  it  foresees.  Therefore  it  is  well  said.
And  the  weight  qf  Him  I  could  not  bear.  Because  the
power  of  the  Majesty  Above  when  It  comes  to  Judgment,  and
the  terribleness  of  that  great  Inquest,  when  the  mind  by
considering  endeavours  to  make  out,  directly  falling  back  to
itself,  it  is  afraid  at  its  having  found  it  out.  But  herein  it  is
to  be  considered  that  blessed  Job  says  these  things  concern-
ing himself  after  having  been  pained  and  smitten.  If  then
at  all  events  for  the  advancement  of  his  merits  he  was  so
stricken,  who  so  feared,  how  is  he  to  be  stricken,  who  de«
spises  ?  How  shall  the  judgments  of  God  weigh  down  those
who  lift  themselves  up,  if  even  those  they  weigh  down  for  a
time,  who  always  dread  these  things  in  humility  ?  How  shall
he  be  able  to  endure  the  weight  of  God,  who  contemns,  if
this  same  weight  even  he  underwent  under  the  rod,  who
foresaw  in  fear.  Whence  with  the  utmost  earnestness  we
ought  to  dread  that  inquest  of  so  great  strictness.  Now  it  is
plain  that  in  this  life,  when  he  smites,  if  amendment  follows
the  stroke,  it  is  the  discipline  of  a  Father,  not  the  wrath  of  a
Judge,  the  love  of  One  correcting,  not  the  strictness  of  One
punishing. And  so  by  that  very  present  scourge  itself  the

If  correciion  in  fearful^  much  more  is  Judgment. 645

eternal  judgments  ought  to  be weighed. For  hence  we  Book
ought  with  tlie  greatest  pains  to  reflect,  how  that  anger  may
be  borne  that  casts  away,  if  that  anger  of  His  which  purifies
may  scarcely  now  be  borne.


VOL.  II.  N  n

BOOK  XXII.

All  that  remained  of  chapter  thirty-one  of  the  Book  of  Joh  is  explained,  and
suhmissiyeneu  of  mind,  and  moderation,  patience,  charity,  and  earnest
interest  for  those  under  our  charge,  are  especially  commended.

i.  1,  That  which  has  been  often  said  by  me  already  it  is

Hut.  not  troublesome  for  me  to  repeat  many  times,  since  the
Phil.  3|  great  Preacher  too  says,  To  write  the  same  things  to  you,  to
^*  me  indeed  is  not  grievous,  but  for  you  it  is  necessary.
Blessed  Job  for  this  reason  relates  virtues  achieved,  because
whilst  caught  between  the  words  of  rebuke  and  the  wounds
of  the  rod,  he  sees  that  his  mind  is  being  loosened  from  the
assurance  of  hope.  For  he  had  heard  from  his  friends
upbraiding  him  that  he  had  done  numberless  wicked  things
even,  and  lest  his  soul  being  driven  hard  by  words  and
scourges  simultaneously  should  break  down  into  despair,  by
the  recollection  of  his  virtuous  attainments  he  resets  the  aame
to  hope,  that  it  might  never  cast  itself  down  in  woe,  in  that
if  remembered  that  in  the  season  of  its  repose  it  had  done
such  1oi\y  deeds.  And  so  whereas  we  have  told  the  reason
oflus  purpose,  it  remains  that  we  weigh  with  exactness  his
virtues  so  heard.

2.  But  this  we  are  to  have  impressed  upon  us  first  of  all,
that  he,  who  is  supposed  to  be  strong  in  any  particular  virtue
is  then  really  strong  when  he  is  not  subject  to  evil  habits  in
another  quarter.  For  if  he  be  under  the  dominion  of  evil
habits  in  another  thing,  not  even  that  is  firm  and  solid
wherein  he  was  believed  to  stand  fast.  For  each  separate
virtue  is  of  less  worth  in  proportion  as  the  others  are  want-
ing. For  very  often  it  has  happened  to  us  to  see  some
V  modest  indeed  but  not  humbrersomelsecaiiDglj^'^""^'^'^  ^iiT

^i  not  pitifuljjomc  seeming.. pitiful  but  not  Qt.All4uat«J&oma.

;C1  in  appearance  just,  but  trusting  in  themselves  rather  than  in

"-  the  liord. And  it  is  certain  that  ihcrc  Jsnoj^ycn  genuino

Each  virtue  faiU  if  not  supported  by  others.  547

chastity  in  the  heart  of  him  who  lacks  humility,  iince  by  Book

pride  corrupting  Inm  within  he  commits  fornication,  if  fiom -—

lovinp;  himself  ho  dnparts  from  the  love  of  God. Nor  Is  that  ^

true  humility  that  has  not  pitifulness  joined  to  it,  because  . |>.  ^^ '^^

that  has  no  right  to  be  called  humility  which  refuses  to  bend ^]^  T^T^
itself  to  Hympathj  with  thB  affliction  Of  ft  btdlEer! Nor  Ts ^^ V^^
jKaUrue  mefcnrnncsr'inTlcirpfoves  Xmra^^  <^ /  ,  ^f^^f  '*

^le  of  justice,  lor  thai  which  is  able  to  be  defiled  by  JT^ustifiej  ^^  AA^^U  \v^
knows  not  assuredly  how  to  have  compassion  on  its  i)wn  ^  -
self.  Neither  is  it  real  righteousness,  which  puts  its  trust
not  in  the  Creator  of  all  things,  but  in  itself  perhaps,  or  in
things  created;  since  while  one  withdraws  his  hope  from
the  Creator,  himself  overturns  to  himself  the  order  of  the
highest  justice.  And  so  one  virtue  without  another  is  either
none  at  all  or  but  imperfect^ For  that  (as  it  has  seemed


best  to  some  persons)  1  may  speak  of  the  four  first  virtues,
viz.  prudence,  temperance,  fortitude,  and  justice,  they  are
severally  so  far  perfect,  in  proportion  as  they  are  mutually
joined  to  one  another.  But  separated  they  can  never  be
perfect  For  neither  is  it  real  prudence  which  has  not
justice,  temperance,  fortitude,  nor  perfect  temperance  which
has  not  fortitude,  justice,  and  prudence,  nor  complete  fortitude
which  is  not  prudent,  temperate,  and  just,  nor  genuine  justice
which  has  not  prudence,  fortitude,  and  temperance.

3.  Accordingly  blessed  Job,  because  he  had  not  one  with-
out another,  but  the  virtues  united  together  in  himself,  going
over  them  severally  makes  them  known. For  telling  the
excellences  of  chastity,  he  says,  If  mine  heart  have  been  e.  31^9,
deceived  upon  a  woman. And  that  he  might  shew  that  to
that  chastity  the  grace  of  humility  was  in  no  degree  wanting,
he  adds  after  the  rest,  If  I  did  despise  to  undergo  judgments.  13.
with  my  man  servant. And  that  he  might  shew  that  to
his  humility,  mercy  was  joined,  he  says  a  littie  after,  ^/v  i^.
fiave  withheld  the  poor  from  their  desire. And  tiiat  he
might  shew  that  his  mercy  was  descended  from  the  root  of
justice,  he  promised  a  littie  above,  saying,  ff  I  have  walked^^^.
in  vanity  y  or  if  my  foot  hath  hasted  in  deceit. And  that  it
might  bo  shown  how  alarmed  he  was  at  all  things,  how
guarded  towards  all,  he  declares  below,  saying.  For  I  always
feared  the  Lord  as  wares  swelling  over  m4>. Which  same  if

N  n  '2

548 Job  put  no  trust  in  anyjteeiing  possession.

Job  SI,  whilst  placed  id  prosperous  circumstances,  and  buoyed  up

■  ^^'  by  the  abundance  of  good  things,  he  had  placed  hope  either
in  his  own  doings,  or  in  the  good  things  about  him  on  every
side,  assuredly  he  would  not  be  just  But  when  did  this
holy  man  place  hope  in  himself,  who  says  in  express  terms,

e.6,  IS.  Zo,  there  is  no  help  to  me  in  myself  f  What  then  now
remains  but  that  what  feeling  he  held  those  very  riches  with,
he  should  make  known. Thus  he  says,

If  I  have  made  gold  my  slretigth^  or  have  said  to  bullion^
Thou  art  my  confidence,

I  obrj- 4.  We  give  the  name  of  ^  bullion  '*  to  gold  in  the  rough.

■""•  So  then  the  holy  man  neither  supposed  *  gold*  to  be  *  his
strength,*  nor  that  to  him  the  *  bullion,*  i.  e.  the  mass  of  rude
gold,  was  ^  his  confidence,*  because  resting  his  hope  and
satisfaction  in  the  grace  of  his  Creator  alone,  he  sinned
neither  for  the  quantity  of  gold,  nor  yet  in  the  kind  thereof.
For  it  would  have  been  to  have  given  up  hope  in  the  Creator,
to  have  placed  hope  in the creature. But  in uncertain

Lukeia,  objects  that  rich  man  had  fixed  his  hope,  who  said,  Souly
thou  hast  much  good  laid  up  for  many  years;  take  thine
ease^  eat^  drink,  and  be  merry.  But  the  Voice  Above
rebukes  this  man,  saying,  Thou  fool,  this  night  do  they
require  thy  soul  of  thee ;  then  whose  shall  those  things  be,
urhich  thou  hast  provided  f  For  the  same  night  he  was  taken
off,  who  had  looked  for  long  times  in  the  abundance  of  good
things  to  him,  that  in  this  way  ho  who,  whilst  hoarding  up
means  for  himself,  was  looking  forward  a  long  way,  should
never  see  the  next  day  though  but  a  single  one.  For  it  is
in  a  manner  to  lay  a  foundation  in  running  waters,  to  wish  to
settle  an  assurance  of  hope  in  things  fleeting.  For  God  for
evermore  standing  still,  all  things  pass  away.  What  then  is
it  to  fly  from  One  standing,  but  to  attach  ourselves  to  passing
things.  Fo}*  who  ever  being  seized  by  the  swoln  eddies  of
running  waters  could  himself  remain  fixed,  the  water  racing
on  downwards  ?  Whosoever  then  shuns  to  run  to  nought,  it
remains  that  he  eschew  that,  that  docs  run  to  nought,  lest  by
that  thing  which  he  loves  he  be  driven  to  go  on  into  that  which
he  avoids.  For  he  that  attaches  himself  to  things  slipping
away,  is  surely  drawn  thither,  where  that  is  making  its  way,
which  ho  holds. And  so  it  requires  first  to  bo  looked  to  that

Longing  a/ter  God  hinders  rejoicing  in  weaWi. 649

a  man  lore  not  things  temporal,  and  next  in  those  rery  temporal  Boor

things,  which  he  reserves  to  himself  not  for  gratification,  bnt •*

for  use,  that  he  put  not  his  confidence ;  seeing  that  by  being
united  to  objects  running  off  the  soul  directly  loses  its  own
stay.  For  the  wave  of  the  present  life  draws  away  the  man
whom  it  lifts  up ;  and  he  is  wholly  out  of  his  senses,  who  is
tossed  adrift  in  the  water,  and  yet  tries  to  fix  the  sole  of  his
feet.  But  there  are  very  many  who  while  they  never  place
confidence  in  things  transitory,  yet  when  they  are  supplied
to  them  in  abundance  for  necessary  purposes,  are  full  of  joy
in  secret  feeling.  Whence  there  is  no  doubt  that  every  one
is  the  less  grieved  that  the  things  of  eternity  should  be  lack-
ing, the  more  he  is  rejoiced  that  those  of  time  are  supplied
to  him ;  and  he  who  grieves  the  less  that  temporal  things
are  wanting,  looks  the  more  surely  that  eternal  ones  should  be
his.  Accordingly  this  joy  derived  from  things  of  earth,
blessed  Job,  while  testifying  that  he  had  not,  adds,  saying,

Ver.  25.  If  I  rejoiced  ocermy  great  wealthy  and  because
mine  hand  found  much.

5.  For  holy  men  in  the  wofulness  of  this  pilgrimage,  iii-
because  that  Appearance  of  their  Creator,  which  they  long
after,  they  are  not  yet  suffei-ed  to  contemplate  at  all,  account
all  the  fulness  of  the  present  life  as  destitution,  because
nothing  out  of  God  sufiices  the  mind  which  really  seeks  after
God;  and  it  is  very  often  the  case  that  to  such  persons  their
very  abundance  itself  becomes  exceedingly  burtheusome,
because  this  thing  alone  they  bear  as  a  grievance,  that  in
hastening  to  their  country  they  carry  many  things  on  the
journey.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  these  things  they
devotedly  share  with  their  neighbours  who  are  in  want,  in
order  Uiat  while  this  one  gets  what  he  has  not,  the  other
may  lay  aside  what  he  had  too  much  of,  that  neither  the
fellow-traveller  may  walk  empty,  nor  that  man  whom  it  might
delay  on  the  way  an  overgreat  burthen  weigh  down.  And
thus  the  Elect  never  rejoice  for  their  great  abundance,  which
same  for  love  of  their  heavenly  inheritance  they  either  in
bestowing  distribute  out  of  their  hands,  or  by  contemning
forsake. It  follows ;

Ver.  26 — 28.  If  I  saw  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or  the  moon
walking  in  brightness^  and  my  heart  hath  secretly  ry'oiced^

550  Job  worshipped  not  ihe  liyhU  of  this  life.

Job  91^  and  I  have  kissed  my  hand  with  my  mouth;  which  is  an

^^' exceeding  iniquity ^  and  denial  against  the  Most  High  Qod.

l^^' 0.  There  is  no  doubt  that  both  these  two  luminaries,  which

are  commissioned  to  ministrations  for  man»  are  called  ^  the

hosts  of  heaven.* Into  the  worshipping  whereof  we  know

that  numbers  have  fallen,  as  Scripture  is  witness;  as  where  it

s  Kings  is  written,  Ajid  toorshipped  all  the  host  qf  heaven.  And
'  '  because  the  sun  and  moon  are  seen  in  one  way  for  use,  and
in  a  different  way  for  worshipping,  in  that  way  in  which  they
are  wont  to  be  worshipped  by  their  votaries  blessed  Job  tells
that  he  had  never  ^  seen  the  sun  and  moon,  neither  had  his
heart  rejoiced;  nor  had  he  kissed  his  hand  with  his  mouth/
By  which  act  of  kissing  what  else  but  the  gratefulness  of
adoration  is  set  forth  ?  which  thing  if  he  had  ever  done,  he
calls  it  ^  the  highest  iniquity  and  denial  of  God.'  But  after
that  he  had  related  of  himself  in  passages  above  such  great
heights  of  virtuous  qualities,  what  does  he  now  tell  so  sti-ange,
if  he  shews  that  he  had  not  *  adored  the  sun  and  moon  ?'
Whence  it  deserves  to  be  considered,  that  after  he  testifies
that  he  had  not  had  confidence  in  gold,  nor  had  rejoiced
in  much  riches,  he  is  further  led  on  to  things  of  a  higher
pitch,  that  he  might  instruct  so  much  the  more,  the  more
exactly  he  tells  things  touching  himself.  Thus  he  says,
Jf  I  saw  the  sun  when  it  shined^  or  the  moon  walking
in  brightness;  and  my  heart  hath  secretly  rejoiced.  What
is  called to ^  see'  in this  passage,  but to  behold  with

Pi.  efi^  desire  ? Whence  the  Psalmist  saitli.  If  I  regard  iniquity

**•  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear.  Which  iniquity,
surely,  could  never  be  set  forth  in  the  mouth,  if  it  were
not  *  regarded  in  the  heart.'  But  it  is  one  thing  to  see
in  the  way  of  judgment,  and  another  thing  to  see  in  the
way  of  desire.  Thus  then  blessed  Job  tells  that  *  the  sun
when  it  shined,  and  the  moon  walking  in  its  brightness,
he  had  never  seen,'  that  he  might  shew  that  he  had  not
sought  after  the  appearance  of  the  present  light.  As  though
after  contempt  of  his  earthly  abundance,  he  plainly  told  us ;
*  why  should  I  say,  that  I  never  at  all  rejoic^  in  gold,  who
in  the  very  corporeal  light  itself  never  took  delight?  For
holy  men  after  that  they  set  at  nought  all  the  enjoyments  of
the  present  life,  in  consideration  of  the  sweetness  of  the  light

Eyes  ofSaininJixed  inmardly. Mystical  meaning. 551

interior,  turn  away  the  mind  from  this  light  exterior  as  if  from  Book
darkness;  and  the j  strive  mach  with  themselves  within,  that
they  be  not  carried  away  by  the  delightfhlness  of  this  light
which  shines  ontwardly.  For  if  the  visible  light  be  incau-
tiously delighted  in,  the  heart  is  blinded  to  the  invisible  light,
because  in  proportion  as  the  soul  is  poured  out  in  gazing
out  of  itself,  so  much  the  more  is  it  made  to  recoil  in  the
interior  regards.  Hence  all  the  wise-hearted,  that  by  their
corporeal  senses  they  may  not  too  much  fall  away  to  things
without,  by  continual  effort  gather  themselves  up  within  the
interior  self  by  the  hidden  discipline  of  self-guarding,  that
they  may  be  found  the  more  whole  within,  in  proportion  as
they  are  the  less  poured  forth  without  Thus  by  this  vigo-
rousness  of  discipline  he  had  bound  himself  up  within  the
depths  of  his  own  heart,  who  in  fleeing  the  desire  of  the
outward  life,  said,  The  day  qf  man  I  have  not  desired^^^^'^ly
Tfiou  knowest.  The  same,  then,  that  by  the  Prophet  is
expressed,  The  day  qfman  I  have  not  desired^  Thou  knoweat^
this  blessed  Job  declares  concerning  his  own  self  in  other
words,  viz.  that  he  had  not  *  seen  the  sun  when  it  shined,
and  the  moon  walking  in  its  brightness,*  and  that  he  did  not
*  rejoice  in  these  in  tlie  secret  depths  of  his  heart/  surely
because  he  could  not  possibly  *  rejoice*  for  those  things  which
he  '  saw*  not  in  the  desire  of  delighting.

7.  But  if  these  several  particulars,  which  we  have  gone  Allbg.
through,  handling  them  according  to  the  history,  we  also
examine  into  in  respect  of  the  mysteries  of  allegory,  what
else  do  we  in  tliis  place  take  the  gold  to  be,  saving  the  wit  of
a  bright  understanding?  what  ^  fine  gold*  but  the  mind,  which
whilst  it  is  fined  clear  by  the  fire  of  love,  ever  preserves  in
itself  the  brightness  of  beauty,  by  a  daily  renewal  of  fervour?
For  tlie  mind  knows  not  to  wax  old  by  inertness,  which  is
bent  by  desire  ever  to  be  beginning. Thus  it  is  hence  that
it  is  said  by  Paul,  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind.  Eph.  4,
Hence  the  Psalmist,  who  had  already  reached  to  the  height ^^'
of  perfection,  said  as  if  beginning,  /  said^  now  I  begin ;  in  Ps.  77,
this  way,  because  that,  if  we  are  not  minded  to  flag  and  go  ^^'
off  from  good  begun,  it  is  very  requisite  that  we  should
believe  ourselves  to  be  daily  beginning. Nor  is  it  at  vaiiance
with  the  order  of  reason  that  we  say  that  by  *  gold,*  man's

552  Powers  of  the  Saints,  gold  for  setting  jewels  of  grace.

Job  81,  wit  is  denoted  ;  for  as  in  ornamenting  gold  is  laid  under,  that

Allko  ^^  order  of  the  gems  may  be  arranged  above,  so  the  bright

.  talents  of  the  Saints  are  humbly  laid  below  the  benefits  of

God,  and  receive  the  gifts  of  graces  set  out  in  order  upon

them. And  excepting  that  gold  had  a  something  of  a  like

sort  with  wisdom,  that  wise  man  would  never  have  said,

Eooloa.  Wisdom  hidden  from  sight,  and  a  treasure,  that  is  not  seen,
'  '  what  use  is  there  in  either  ?  Now  holy  men  do  not  account
'  gold'  to  be  their  ^  strength,'  because  let  them  shine  out
with  ever  so  great  ability,  they  take  thought  that  by  their
own  powers  they  are  nothing.  And  whilst  they  are  powerfully
able  to  see  into  all  things,  they  desire  first  to  understand
themselves,  that  the  light  of  their  wit,  like  the  sun,  may  first
illumine  the  place  where  it  arises,  and  aAerwards  all  the
other  things  to  which  it  is  made  to  open  out  in  going  on ;
lest  if  by  applying  themselves  to  know  others  they  know  not
their  own  selves,  the  ray  of  the  sun  should  there  be  darkened,
where  it  rises.  Accordingly,  the  goodness  of  their  natural
parts  they  apply  to  acquainting  themselves  with  their  own
infirmity,  and  by  acquaintance  with  their  own  infirmity  they
are  the  more  effectually  endued  with  power.  And  so  the
gold  is  not  taken  for  *  strength,'  if  there  is  not  confidence
had  in  the  wit  wherewith  they  are  endowed. Which  Solomon

Prov.  3,  rightly  advising  of  saith,  Put  coi\fidence  in  the  Lord  tcith
all  thine  heart,  and  lean  not  on  thine  own  understanding*
So  then  lot  him  say,  ff  I  have  made  gold  my  strength^  or
have  said  to  the  fine  gold,  Tltou  art  my  confidence.  As
though  he  avowed  in  plain  tei*ms ;  *  Neither  what  I  really
understood  did  I  ascribe  to  my  own  parts,  nor,  if  it  chanced
that  I  did  any  whit  that  was  good,  did  I  reckon  such  things
primarily  to  my  own  mind:'  who  still  more  particularly
telling  us  the  hiiuiility  of  his  heart,  addtii,  saying,

Ver.  25.  If  I  rejoiced  over  my  great  riches,  and  because
mine  hand  had  found  very  many  things.

8.  What  do  we  fancy  the  *  great  riches'  so  called  in  signi-
fication, but  the  abundant  subtleties  of  counsels,  which  same

*  the  hand'  of  him  that  seeks  ^  finds,'  in  that  the  thought  of
him  who  deals  thereunto  produces  them. For  it  was  these

*  riches'  of  wisdom  that  Solomon  having  before  his  eyes,
l/°24.  ^^^K  The  crown  of  the  wise  is  their  riches. Which  same

Wisdom^  true  Riches. Account  required  ofgifte. 559

person,  because  it  is  not  metals  of  the  eaiih  but  understand-  Book
ing  that  he  calls  by  the  name  of  *  riches/  thereupon  adds  by  ^^
way  of  a  contrary ;  But  the  foolishness  of  fools  is  imprudence.
For  if  he  called  earthly  riches  *  the  crown  of  the  wise,*  surely
he  would  own  the  senselessness  of  fools  to  be  poverty  rather
than  imprudence. But  whereas  he  added  '  the  foolishness  of
fools  imprudence,  he  made  it  plain  that  he  called  prudence
*  the  riches  of  the  wise.' Tliese  *  riches'  of  wisdom  Paul
viewing  in  himself  and  lowering  his  view  by  the  tliought  of
Immnn  infirmity,  says,  But  we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen ^CoT.i,
vessels. Accordingly  we  find  much  riches  in  ourselves,  when  '
in  searching  into  the  sacred  oracles,  we  receive  the  gifts  of
abundant  understanding,  and  therein  see  a  number  of  things,
yet  not  at  variance  with  one  another.  But  it  is  not  safe  rejoicing
to  learn  in  the  pages  of  God  things  either  forcible  or  many
in  number,  but  rather  to  keep  safe  the  things  that  we  learn.
For  he  that  understands  aright,  sees  what  by  so  understanding
he  owes  as  a  debt Since  the  more  he  is  enlarged' in  percep-
tion, the  more  heartily  he  is  tied  and  bound  to  fulfilling  deeds.
Wlience  Truth  saith  in  the  Gospel ;  For  unto  whomsoever  much  Lnkels,
is  given  f  of  him  shall  he  much  required;  and  to  whom  men^'
have  committed  much,  of  him  they  will  ask  the  more.

0.  Therefore  let  us  reckon  understanding  given  like  bor-^
rowed  money,  because  the  more  we  have  entrusted  to  us  in
lovingkindness,  the  more  we  are  held  debtors  in  practice;  and
it  very  often  happens  that  the  same  money  of  understanding
received,  when  it  is  bestowed  upon  hearers  for  usury,  is  lost
except  it  bo  given  in  a  cautious  spirit.  For  neither  should
it  be  slightly  regarded  in  the  book  of  Kings,  that  while  the
sons  of  the  prophets  were  hewing  wood  on  the  Jordan,  to  one
of  them  his  ax-head  having  slipped  off  the  handle  into  the  deep
water,  disappeared  from  sight  For  the  iron  on  the  handle  is
the  gift  of  understanding  in  the  heart:  but  to  cut  down  wood
thereby  is  to  rebuke  persons  doing  wickedly.  Which  same
sometimes  whilst  it  is  done  loosely,  whilst  the  downfall  of
vain-glory  in  that  same  knowledge  vouchsafed  us  is  not
avoided,  the  iron  is  lost  in  the  water,  because  understanding
is  made  witless  by  undone  practice,  which  same  understand-
ing assuredly  we  know  to  be  given  for  this  end,  that  before

664 Knowledge  lost  by  pride  restored  to  the  humbled.

Job  81,  the  eyes  of  the  Giver  it  may  be  rendered  back  by  good
^^^^^  conduct  Whence  it  happened  rightly  fhat  he  who  had  loat
9  Kings  the  iron  ezclaimedi  Alas,ala9y  my  mMtevy/dr  U  was  bor-
'  ^*  rowed.  For  the  ]Slect  have  this  proper  to  them,  that  if  at
any  time  a  furtive  sin  of  vain  glory  creep  upon  them  in  their
knowledge,  they  speedily  turn  back  into  their  heart,  and
whatever  they  find  in  themselves  worthy  of  condemnation
before  the  eyes  of  the  strict  Judge,  they  follow  hard  upon
with  tears.  Who  whilst  weeping,  not  only  heedfuUy  scan
the  evil  things  they  have  been  guilty  of,  but  what  good  ones
as  well  tliey  ought  to  have  paid  back  for  the  benefit  vouch-
safed them,  because  surely  they  the  more  feel  themselves
sinners,  in  proportion  as  they  are  held  debtors  in  the  neg-
lected good  that  they  ought  to  have  done.  Rightly  then  did
he  who  lost  the  iron  cry  out,  Alas^  alas,  my  masters/or  it
^as  borrowed.  As  though  he  said,  *  That  by  the  undoing  of
negligence  have  I  lost,  which  thing  in  order  that  I  should
pay  it  back  by  good  works  1  received  from  the  grace  of  the
Lender.*  But  God  never  abandons  the  soul  which  owns
itself  in  its  sins  in  a  true  way.  H^nce  too  Elisha  immediately
on  coming  sends  %he  wood  down  below,  and  raises  the  iron
uppn  the  surface ;  because  surely  our  Redeemer  regarding  us
with  pity  humbles  the  heart  of  a  sinner,  and  fashions  anew
for  him  the  understanding,  which  he  had  lost.  He  sinks  the
wood,  and  lids  up  the  iron,  because  He  chastens  the  heart,
and  restores  the  knowledge.  Wheuce  it  is  well  said  in
another  translation,  that  he  *  broke  in  pieces  the  wood'  and
cast  it  in,  and  so  raised  up  the  iron.  For  ^  to  break  the  wood
in  pieces*  is  to  break  up  the  heart  from  self-exaltation ;  to
cast  the  wood  below  is  to  abase  the  uplifted  heart  in  ac-
quaintance with  its  own  infirmity,  as  we  said.  And  there-
upon the  iron  is  brought  back  to  the  top,  because  undersunding
returns  for  the  service  of  the  former  mode  of  employment.

10.  Therefore  because  the  gift  of  understanding  that  is
obtained,  is  with  such  numberless  difficulties  hardly  kept
safe  (for  there  must  be  care  taken  that  it  be  not  deadened  by
inactivity,  there  must  be  care  that  in  the  exercising  of  practice
it  do  not  go  out  by  the  evil  of  self-elation,)  holy  men  do  not
exult,  when  they  learn  the  things  for  them  to  do,  but  when

Titey  rejoice  not  proudly^  who  think  what  they  owe. 659

they  do  the  things  they  have  learnt.  And  if  in  understanding  Book
they  congratulate  thcmselres  in  the  benefaction  of  the  Qiver,  3^1L*
yet  sorrowing  they  take  thought  of  the  debt  of  practice,  that
is  to  say,  that  they  may  discharge  by  condui^t  what  has  been
advanced  to  them  in  knowledge.  For  he  is  a  foolish  debtor,
who  receives  rejoicing  the  money  lent,  and  never  minds  the
time  when  he  must  pay  it  back.  But  the  joy  of  receiving  is
abated,  when  with  prudential  foresight  the  appointed  season
for  paying  back  is  thought  on  as  well.  Therefore  because
just  men  in  the  things  which  they  perceive  by  lively  attention
are  not  lifted  up  by  assured  rejoicing,  let  it  be  said  aright.
If  I  rejoiced  over  my  great  richesy  and  because  my  hand
found  vef^y  many  things.  As  though  it  were  put  in  plain
words ;  *  Never  did  I  account  myself  rich  by  righteousness
in  this  respect,  that  I  knew  right  things,  which  I  ought  to
do,  even  many  in  number ;  nor  did  understanding  lift  up  the
heart,  because  that  the  thought  of  the  practice  owed  in  debt
kept  down/  But  it  i^;  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  it  very
frequently  happens  that  when  a  high  pitch  of  understanding
is  received,  the  mind  being  very  full  of  anxiety  about  itself  is
kept  from  the  downfall  of  self-exaltation.  But  when  the
wonderful  things  it  understands  it  begins  to  put  in  practice
likewise,  sometimes  by  the  mere  circumstance  that  it  is  made
to  display  itself  without,  it  slips,  and  glories  that  itself
excels  in  its  doings  all  the  rest  of  the  world.  As,  then,
the  ^  gold*  of  understanding  did  not  uplift  blessed  Job,
so  neither  did  the  light  of  extraordinary  practice  either
before  the  eyes  of  men  lift  him  to  a  height  Hence  too  he
fitly  adds;

If  I  saw  the  sun  when  it  shined.

11.  Since '  the  sun  in  brightness,' is  good  practice  in  outward ^i.
manifesting. For  it  is  written.  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  ^^^^
meny  that  they  may  see  your  good  works^  and  glorify  your  t6«
Father  Winch  is  in  heaven. And  again.  Let  your  loins  ^  Labels
girded  about^  and  your  lamps  burning. For  what  in  this^-
passage  is  denoted  by  the  ^  sun  shining,'  is  in  the  Gospel  denoted
by  ^  lamps  burning.' For  when  good  practice  shines  in  the
midst  of  faithless  persons,  *  a  lamp  bums'  in  the  night,  but
when  it  shines  out  in  the  Church,  ^  the  sun  shines'  in  the
day. For  good  practice  if  it  be  as  yet  such  as  bad  men  only

55G  Job  worshipped  not  the  ^iun^  0/ his  own  bright  virtues.

Job  31,  wonder  at,  is  doubtless  a  ^  lamp*  in  the  night;  but  ir  it  so
'j^  ^  ^  makes  way  that  it  may  be  admired  by  the  good  and  more
'  perfect  kind,  then  it  is  the  sun  iu  the  day  time.  When  good
praciice  shines  by  the  actire  life  of  the  body,  it  is  as  if  after
tl)c  manner  of  a  candle  light  shineth  out  of  an  oartheuwaro
vessel.  Uut  when  by  the  excellence  of  the  mind  alone  it  is
raised  up  in  contemplation,  it  is  as  if  after  the  manner  of  the
sun  light  is  seen  coming  from  heaven.  Therefore  because
blessed  Job  had  told  of  himself  many  good  things  apper-
taining to  hospitality  and  mercifulness,  which  same  surely  he
knew  as  still  Uie  least,  in  proportion  as  done  in  the  bodily
way  of  doing;  recalling  the  eye  of  the  mind  to  the  topmost
height  of  spiritual  virtues,  he  remembered  his  own  perfect-
ness,  and  the  light  of  examples  which  he  gave  to  others  in
himself,  he  called  *  the  sun.*  But  there  are  some  persons
who  when  they  do  any  good  things,  directly  forget  their
wickednesses,  and  they  fix  the  eye  of  the  mind  in  the  con-
templation of  the  good  practices  which  tliey  exhibit;  and
henceforth  account  themselves  holy,  in  the  degree  that  amidst
the  good  things  that  they  do  they  shun  the  recollection  of
their  evil  deeds,  in  which  perchance  they  are  still  entangled.
Which  same  persons  if  with  lively  attention  they  marked  the
strictness  of  the  Judge,  would  fear  more  for  their  evil  things
than  exult  for  their  imperfect  good  ones,  would  more  look  to
it  that  for  tilings  that  aro  still  to  be  done  they  are  held
debtors,  than  that  by  practising  some  things  they  aro  already
paying  a  portion  of  the  debt.  For  neither  is  the  debtor  quit
who  pays  back  much,  but  who  pays  back  all;  nor  does  he
attain  to  the  prize  of  victory,  who  in  a  large  proportion  of  the
exhibition  runs  with  speed,  if  on  nearing  the  goal,  in  that
which  is  left  he  goes  off.  Nor  to  persons  going  to  any
destined  places  does  it  avail  when  setting  out  to  despatch  a
long  way,  if  they  are  not  at  the  same  time  able  to  achieve
the  whole  of  it.  We  then  who  are  seeking  the  Eternal  life,
what  else  are  we  about  but  performing  a  kind  of  journeys,
whereby  we  are  hastening  onward  to  our  country.  But
what  does  it  matter  that  we  despatch  so  many,  if  tlie  rest
which  remain  for  our  arriving  we  neglect?

12.  Thus  after  the  manner  of  travellers  wo  ought  not  over
to  look  how  much  way  wc  have  already  gone  through,  but

ne  Bled  look  mosi  at  their  own  d^ciencies. 5d7

how  much  there  remains  for  us  to  carry  through,  that  by  slow  Book
degrees  that  may  become  past  and  over,  which  is  unceasingly


and  fearfully  marked  as  still  to  be.  Therefore  we  ought
much  more  to  survey  what  good  things  we  have  not  yet  donej
than  those  good  things  which  we  are  glad  that  we  have
already  done.  But  human  frailty  has  this  belonging  to  it,
that  it  is  more  attractive  to  it  to  look  at  that  which  pleases  it
in  itself,  than  that  which  displeases  it  in  itself.  For  the  sick
eye  of  the  heart,  while  it  dreads  to  be  put  to  pains  in  its
contemplation,  as  it  were  asks  for  a  kind  of  bed  of  delight  in
the  mind,  where  it  may  lie  softly;  and  for  this  reason  it
makes  out  what  benefits  it  has  secured  by  the  good  things
it  has  done,  but  what  losses  it  sustains  from  those  which
it  has  left  undone  it  is  blind  to.  For  it  very  often  happens
that  even  the  lillcct  are  tried  by  this  evil,  very  often  it  is  put
to  the  hearts  of  those,  that  the  several  good  deeds  which  they
have  done  they  should  recall  to  mind,  and  exult  now  in  the
joyfulness  of  security.  But  if  they  be  really  Elect  persons,
from  that  in  which  they  are  pleasing  to  themselves  they  turn
away  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  and  force  down  in  themselves  all
joyfulness  for  the  good  things  they  have  done,  and  for  those
which  they  perceive  that  they  have  never  done  they  seek  out
sorrowfulness,  they  account  themselves  unworthy  persons,
and  are  almost  the  only  ones  that  do  not  see  the  good  things^
which  they  afford  in  themselves  to  be  seen  for  an  example  to
all  men.  It  is  hence  that  Paul,  when  he  was  putting  behind
him  the  good  things  completed  in  himself,  and  thinking  of
those  only  still  remaining,  that  had  to  be  completed,  said,
/  count  not  myBel/to  have  apprehended.  It  is  hence  that  in  JJ"* '»
order  that  he  might  abase  himself  as  to  the  good  things  he
was  doing,  he  set  himself  to  recall  to  mind  the  evil  things
that  were  past,  saying,  Who  was  h^ore  a  blasphemer^  and  a  \  ^jj^'
persecutory  and  injurious,

13.  And  even  if  he  at  any  time  said,  /  have  fought  «J^*"*
goodjighi,  I  have  finished  my  course^  I  have  kept  the  faith;
wo  ought  above  every  thing  to  turn  our  oyo  to  tho  fact,
that  he  brought  the  thing  forward  at  that  time  when  he  knew
that  he  was  now  about  to  depart  out  of  the  body.  For  he
there  premised,  sayuig.  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered^  ^*  ^'
and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand. For  then  he

558 SainUf  bright  to  others,  see  not  themselves  as  such.

Job  31,  recalled  to  his  recollection  the  perfectness  of  his  practice,
J — '—  when  he  now  foresaw  time  for  practising  no  more  to  be  his
'  as  to  a  field  of  large  extent.  For  as  whilst  we  lire  we  are
bound  to  drive  out  of  our  recollection  our  good  deeds,  that
they  may  not  lift  us  up,  so  on  our  departure  drawing  nigh,  we
very  often  bring  them  again  to  our  recollection,  that  so  they
may  afford  us  confidence,  and  keep  dowu  despairing  fear.
Who  though  in  reckoning  up  he  related  his  good  points  to  the
Corinthians,  was  bent  to  confirm  them,  and  not  to  make  a
display  of  himself.  For  that  he  paid  no  regard  to  the  same
good  points  in  himself,  he  taught  by  the  affliction  of  his
o\m  tempting  being  laid  open,  which  being  set  forth,  he
la^  w  ^^^®^>  Therefore  1  take  pleasure  in  mine  if{/innities.  So
'  '  then  that  he  might  instruct  the  disciples,  he  told  what  was
most  high  of  himself,  while  that  he  might  keep  himself  in
humbleness,  he  had  fixed  the  eye  of  his  observation  not  in
his  virtues  but  in  his  weaknesses.  Accordingly,  holy  men
have  this  proper  to  them,  that  the  good  things  they  do  they
see  indeed,  yet  when  tliey  have  done  them  they  turn  away
their  eyes  from  the  remembrance  thereof.  Whence  it  is
rightly  said  by  blessed  Job,  1/  I  saw  the  sun  when  it
shined.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  speech  ;  '  My  practice,
even  when  it  afforded  the  light  of  examples  to  others,  I
minded  not  for  the  boon  of  foreassurance ;  because  whilst  I
feared  to  be  uplifted  on  the  grounds  thereof,  I  turned  miue
eyes  away  firom  regarding  it.'  It  goes  on ;
And  the  moon  walking  in  her  brightness.
vii.  14.  After  the  sun  had  been  premised,  he  justly  likewise
added, '  the  moon  walking  in  her  brightness,'  because  after
good  practice  there  follows  the  praiseworthy  report  whereby
a  name  of  renown  is  won  in  this  night  season  of  the  present
life.  But  if  that  be  true  which  some  think,  that  the  moon
through  his  hidden  circuit  receives  illumination  from  the  ray  of
the  sun,  so  that  she  should  be  able  to  display  light  by  the  courses
of  the  night,  this  supposition  likewise  is  not  at  variance  with
the  order  of  this  representation.  For  fame  gains  its  means
from  good  practice,  and  it  spreads  the  esteem  of  applause
like  the  brightness  of  light.  There  is  also  another  thing  in  the
moon,  which  may  agree  in  likeness  with  fame  spreading  good.
For  the  light  tlicrcof  even  in  the  season  of  darkness  shews

Praise^  like  moonbeams^  relaxes  sonie  minds. 559

tlio  road  to  persons  going  afoot,  because  both  whilst  the  Book

light  of  praise  shines  out  from  another's  life,  it  lightens  others -

for  the  exercising  of  good  practice ;  and  when  th^  esteem  of
the  one  is  seen  id  a  clear  light,  to  the  other  as  it  were  going
his  waj  upon  a  journey  the  light  of  example  is  afforded.
But  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  practice  which  is  derived
from  the  esteem  of  another  man  is  framed  triih  an  aim  not
dnij  pure  in  the  mind. For  weak  ininds  when  thej  hear
good  things  of  others,  sometimes  kindle  tliemselveH  to  right
practice  hot  by  the  love  of  tirtue,  but  the  delightfulness  of
applause. And  indeed  it  is  evident  that  as  it  is  the  nature
of  the  sun  that  whatsoever  things  it  touches  it  bums  and
dries  up,  so  it  is  the  property  of  the  fire  of  the  moon  that
whatever  it  touches,  it  burns  indeed,  but  in  so  burning
renders  the  thing  moist. Thus  then  to  a  good  life,  some  an
affecting  of  good  practice  for  the  love  of  God  kindles  and
inflames,  whilst  others  the  love  of  praise. But  when  we  are
set  on  fire  with  an  affection  to  right  practice,  we  are  as  it
were  dried  up  by  the  fire  of  the  sun  from  the  humidity  of
evil  habits. While  him  whom  the  love  of  praise  prompts  to
good  practice,  fame  coveted  touches  like  the  moon,  because
his  mind  it  at  once  inflames  and  unlooses. That  is  to  say,  it
inflames  him  to  the  exercising  of  practice,  but  unlooses  him
to  the  desire  of  applause. Yet  very  often  for  the  exercising
of  good  deeds  the  examples  of  others  influence  us  to  good
effect And  when  we  adopt  the  good  of  another's  reputation
with  a  humble  mind,  we  either  advance  our  own  good  things
for  the  better,  or  change  the  bad  to  good;  and  when  the
brightness  of  fame  from  the  life  of  our  neighbour  sheds  its
rays  on  ourselves,  our  mind,  as  we  before  said,  which  is
guiding  itself  with  a  view  to  winning the  way  of  virtue,
sets  the  steps  as  it  were  in  the  light  of  the  moon. But  as
we  make  way  by  the  esteem  of  another,  so  it  very  often  occurs
that  if  we  give  heed  to  the  praises  of  our  own  fame,  we  are
emptied  of  virtue,  because  when  tlie  mind  is  made  to  take
delight  in  that  which  it  sees  to  be  held  without  concerning
it,  it  loses  sight  of  that,  which  it  was  panting  for  within.

15.  Therefore  because  the  understanding  of  knowledge  did
not  corrupt  the  holy  man,  he  held  it  beneath  him  to  rejoice
in  his  great  riches. Now  because  the  greatness  of  his  prac-,

6G0 Some  fall  by  pride  of  knowledge^  zofine  of  reputatioti.

Job  si,  tice  (lid  not  puff  bim  up>  be  ^  saw  not  the  sun  wben  it
^'  sfained ;'  and  because  neither  did  the  credit  of  applause  uplift
'him,  he  never  ^  regarded  the  moon  walking  in  its  brighlness.*
For  there  are  some  persons  who  are  brought  down  into  self-
exalting  in  ^he  degree,  that  by  a  nice  understanding  they  find
out  good  things  even  that  they  do  not  do.  These,  surely,
'  rejoice  over  great  riches,'  when  by  making  out  they  discover
any  things  of  the  highest,  and  by  those  self-same  discoveries
are  spoilt  in  self-exaltation.  But  there  are  some  persons
whom  understanding  does  not  indeed  uplift,  but  the  practice
set  forth  exalts,  who  whilst  they  regard  their  own  doings  in
iheir  own  heart  by  shewing  disdain,  set  the  rest  of  the  world
in  the  background  to  themselves.  These  same,  though  they
do  not  rejoice  in  great  riches,  yet  ^  see  the  sun  when  it
shineth,*  because  upon  the  greatness  of  good  practice  alone,
they  as  it  were  swell  themselves  out  despising  others.  And
there  are  some  whom  not  even  their  own  practice  uplifts,  but
when  they  begin  to  be  commended  by  their  fellow-creatures
for  that  same  good  practice,  being  overcome  by  the  mere
applause  of  men,  by  themselves  they  view  themselves  as
certain  great  ones  in  their  own  imagination,  and  are  unbound
from  the  safe  keeping  of  the  heart.  These,  surely,  though
they  reftised  to  ^  see  the  sun  when  it  shineth,'  yet  *  behold
the  moon  walking  in  its  brightness;*  because  amidst  the
darkness  of  this  world,  while  they  fasten  the  mind  on  the
brightness  of  their  reputation,  as  it  were  by  the  light  of  the
night  they  lose  the  grace  of  humility,  and,  whilst  beholding
the  moon,  they  see  not  themselves,  in  that  they  begin  to  be
blind  to  themselves,  while  they  fix  the  eyes  of  the  mind  on
transitory  applause.

10.  Now  so  is  the  progress  of  men,  as  wo  see  the  growths
of  trees  to  bo.  For  die  essence  of  ^le  future  tree  is  first  in
the  seed,  afterwards  in  the  springing,  and  at  last  it  is  cai-ried
out  into  boughs.  Thus  then,  surely  the  goodness  of  every
one  doing  works  grows  up.  For  it  is  sown  in  under-
standing, it  springs  up  in  practising,  and  at  last  it  is  con-
solidated to^the  full  width  of  great  advancement.  But  when
his  understanding  upUfts  any  one,  the  tree  that  might  have
spmng  up  rots  in  the  seed.  And  when  after  good  practice
he  is  spoilt  by  the  bane  of  self-exaltation,  it  is  as  if,  having

Praiid a  wind  dangerous  to  the  high  trees  metbgcatutnny.  661

already  sprung  up,  it  withered. But  when  neither  under-  Book

standing  nor  practice  corrupt,  but  its  greatness  growing  up, '-

when  the  applause  of  persons  commending  follows^  and
overturns  from  its  seat  the  mind  of  him  that  doeth  rightly,
the  tree  has  encountered  the  winds  of  the  tongues,  and  all
that  had  grown  up  strong  in  it,  the  tempest  of  fame  has
plucked  up  by  the  fools.  For  in  proportion  as  the  tree
has  risen  higher  to  the  regions  above,  forcibly  does  it  feel
the  violence  of  the  winds ;  because  the  more  a  man  is  lifted
to  a  height  in  good  practices,  with  so  much  the  greater  blast
is  he  oppressed  by  the  mouth  of  those  Ihat  praise  him.
Therefore  if  the  tree  is  still  in  the  seed,  there  is  need  to  fear
lest  it  should  be  made  rotten  by  the  mere  acquaintance  with
knowledge ;  if  it  has  now  already  issued  into  a  shoot,  we
have  to  be  on  our  guard  that  the  hand  of  self-exaltation
touch  it  not,  and  parch  it  of  the  greenness  of  its  conduct;  but
if  it  already  lifts  itself  up  on  high  with  vigorous  strength,  it  is
very  greatly  to  be  dreaded  lest  the  over  strong  wind  of  praise
that  is  applied  pluck  it  up  from  the  roots.

17.  But  herein  it  is  necessary  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that,  to
the  end  that  we  be  not  rooted  up  by  immoderate  praises,  very
often,  by  the  marvellous  regulating  of  our  Ruler,  we  are
allowed  to  be  torn  in  pieces  by  calumnies  even,  that  so  when
the  voice  of  one  commending  lifts  up  the  heart,  the  tongue
of  one  calumniating  should  abase  it,  because  the  tree  too
oftentimes,  which  is  so  driven  by  the  impulse  of  one  wind  as
to  seem  now  that  it  might  well  nigh  be  rooted  out  of  its
place,  is  set  up  again  by  a  blast  of  another  wind  from  aii
op)>08ite  quarter ;  and  the  tree  which  suffered  bending  from
this  side,  is  brought  back  from  another  to  its  standing
position.  And  hence  that  tree,  being  deeply  rooted,  had
as  it  were  stood  fixed  amidst  contending  winds,  which  said,
By  honour  and  dishonour,  by  evil  report  and  good  repor t,^  Cor,  e.
For  it  often  happens  that  praise  being  unwontedly  brought^*
home  to  the  ears  of  the  well  doer,  whilst  it  echoes  in  talkings
without,  engenders  to  the  mind  within  a  kind  of  tempest  in
silence,  and  it  comes  to  happen  that  this  thing,  that  the  soul
is  delighted  by  the  applause  of  men,  it  does  not  easily  display
outwardly,  but  yet  it  feels  the  force  of  corniption  in  no
slight  degree  inwardly. And  there  are  some  whom  praise

VOL.  II.  o  o

5Q2 Job  did  not  even  rejoice  in  ihouyhi  at  men^e  praise.

Job  Sly  so  puffs  up  that  it  forces  them  on  even  to  words  of  self-
exalting. But  some^  as  we  said  before,  are  ashamed  to  \bj


open  this  same  thing,  that  they  are  lifted  up,  and  their
encomiums  being  heard  by  them  they  are  exalted,  but  yet
do  not  come  forth  to  the  extent  of  words  of  exaltation,  and
never  shew  openly  that  they  delight  in  such  things.  Hence
blessed  Job,  because  he  knew  that  he  had  not  been  arrogant
not  only  at  all  in  words,  but  also  in  the  secret  thought  of
the  heart  as  well,  after  that  he  said.  If  I  taw  the  sun  when
it  shined,  or  the  moon  walking  in  its  brightness;  therefore
added ;

Ver.  27.  And  my  heart  rejoiced  in  secret.
Tiii.  18.  By  which  same  recording,  what  else  is  conveyed  to
us,  but  that  there  is  need  of  great  fear  and  circumspection,
lest  our  mind  at  any  time  rejoice  even  in  secret  on  the
grounds  of  its  commendations.  For  that  man  who  looks  on
the  greatness  of  his  fame  as  ^  the  brightness  of  the  moon,'
and  creates  delight  to  himself  in  the  secret  of  the  heart,  to
whom  but  to  the  Maker  did  such  a  man  prefer  himself,  by
Whose  gift  he  obtained  it  that  he  should  practise  aright,  and
yet  in  His  benefit  is  made  glad  upon  the  favour  of  his  own
praise  i  For  the  honour  of  his  Creator  being  disregarded,
he  is  convicted  of  loving  himself  more,  by  the  proclaims  of
whom  he  is  so  gladdened.  Though  sometimes  even  holy
men  rejoice  in  their  own  good  repute ;  but  when  they  reflect
that  through  this  good  repute  those  that  hear  them  advance
to  better  things,  they  now  no  longer  rejoice  in  their  own
reputation,  but  in  the  profiting  of  their  neighbours ;  because
it  is' one  thing  to  seek  marks  of  favour,  and  another  thing  to
exult  on  the  ground  of  advancement.  Wherein  it  follows,
that  when  it  does  not  advance  the  welfare  of  the  hearers,
fame  for  credit  should  not  lift  up,  but  oppress  our  mind.
For  when  we  are  commended  by  the  witnessing  of  the
human  tongue,  we  are  asked  by  a  secret  smiting  what  we
think  concerning  our  own  selves.  For  (he  uplifted  soul,  even
when  false  good  is  told  concerning  it,  exults,  because  it
makes  out  in  thought  not  how  it  lives  with  Ood,  but  how
it  makes  itself  known  with  men.  For  disregarding  the
judgment  of  Almighty  Ood  concerning  itself,  and  only
seeking  after  that  of  men,  it  is  lifted  up  amidst  the  praises

Praise  puis  good  men  in  fear  of  GoiTs  Judgment. 563

it  hears,  and  tbe  soul  which  had  looked  out  for  this  alone  is  ^ok
gladdened  as  if  by  the  prize  of  its  practice. But  on  the-


contrary  if  the  heart  be  really  humble^  the  good  things  that
it  hears  of  itself  it  either  does  not  at  all  acknowledge,  and  is
afraid  that  false  things  are  said,  or  otherwise  if  it  knows  that
they  are  realty  there  to  it,  dreads  lest  they  should  be  lost  to
the  eternal  recompensing  of  Ood,  by  this  alone  that  it  sees
them  to  be  published  abroad  to  men;  and  it  fears  very  greatly
lest  the  hope  of  the  future  reward  should  be  changed  into  the
wages  of  transitory  applause.

19.  From  which  circumstance  it  takes  place  that  the  soul
of  the  Elect  is  tortured  by  a  great  fire  of  their  own  praises,
and  by  sorrowfulness  of  thought  fined  clear  of  all  the  rust  of
its  inertness. For  by  heedful taking  thought  it  is  filled
with  fear  lest  either  for  those  things,  in  the  which  it  is
praised,  and  they  do  not  exist,  it  should  meet  with  a  worse
judgment  of  God,  or  for  those  things  wherein  it  is  praised,
and  they  do  exist,  it  lose  the  suitable  reward. Whence  it
most  commonly  takes  place  that  like  as  the  unjust  man  is
defiled  by  his  praise,  so  the  just  person  is  purified  by  his
praise  reaching  his  ear. For  when  the  good  things  he  has
done  he  finds  out  are  put  forward  by  men,  he  dreads,  as  has
been  said,  the  exact  inquest  of  the  final  Judgment  upon  him-
self, and  full  of  afiright  flees  to  the  conscience,  and  whatever
there  is  therein  worthy  of  blame,  he  corrects. For  while  he
dreads  to  have  his  good  things  made  known,  fearing  greatly
the  exactness  of  the  Inquest  to  follow,  if  there  be  any  hidden
evil  things  in  him,  he  cuts  them  away. For  he  is  alarmed  if
he  be  not  exhibited  at  least  such  to  God,  as  he  is  held  by
men,  neither  is  he  satisfied  that  in  that  state  in  which  he
may  have  been  made  known  to  men  he  should  continue  to
remain. For  already  he  reckons  compensation  as  it  were
made  to  him  for  his  good  things,  except  he  add  thereto
others  also  which  are  not  known  by  men. Whence  it  is
well  said  by  Solomon;  As  silver  is  tried  in  the  fining  potl^^f*
and  gold  in  the  furnace,  so  man  is  tried  by  the  mouth  qf '^  ^*'
him  that  praises. For  silver  and  gold  if  it  be  refuse  is  con-
sumed by  the  fire,  but  if  proof,  it  is  brought  out  by  the  fire.
Thus  surely  is  the  mind  also  of  him  that  worketh. '  For  what
sort  of  man  he  is,  is  shewn  herein  tliat  he  is  praised;  for  if  when

o  u  2

604  Praise  benefits  if  it  alatms. Sin  of  MelJ-commendalion*

Job  81,  his  praises  reach  his  ears,  he  is  upUAed,  what  else  was  such
-- — ^  an  one  but  refuse  gold  or  silver^  whom  surely  the  furnace  of
the  tongue  consumed?  But  if  on  hearing  the  marks  of
favour  towards  him>  he  returns  to  the  consideration  of  the
Judgment  Above,  and  entertaiins  fear  lest  he  should  be  heavily
charged  for  these  things  in  the  sight  of  the  secret  Arbiter,  as
it  were  by  the  fire  of  purifying  he  is  made  to  grow  to  great-
ness and  splendour,  and  from  the  same  source  whence  he
undergoes  the  burning  of  affright,  he  shines  so  much  the
brighter.  Therefore  blessed  Job,  because  he  never  preferred
himself  on  the  ground  of  practice,  says  with  confidence,
ff  I  saw  the  sun  when  it  shined.  And  because  fame  to  his
credit  never  diverted  this  man  from  the  regarding  of  the
Interior  Judgment,  he  adds,  And  the  moon  walking  in  her
brightness.  And  because  he  never  suffered,  not  even  in
secret  thought,  that  his  mind  should  be  mastered  by  the
boon  of  his  repute,  he  directly  added,  And  \f  my  heart
rejoiced  in  secret.  And  because  it  very  often  happens  tliat
the  unheeding  mind,  when  it  does  not  set  itself  against  tran-
sitory applause,  is  drawn  on  even  to  this  pass,  tliat  it  praises
itself  what  it  does,  to  the  condition  which  was  set  before  it  is
in  a  manner  fitly  annexed ;

And  have  kissed  my  hand  with  my  mouth.

XX. 20.  For  by  the  *  hand*  doing is denoted,  and by the

ProT. *  mouth'  speaking ;  as  when  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  A  slotl^l

^^>  ^^*  man  hideth  his  hand  in  his  bosom^  and  it  is  labour  to  him  to

bring  it  to  his  mouth. To  the  slothful  man  it  is  a  labour  to

stretch  his  hand  to  his  mouth,'  because  the  slothful  preacher

has  no  mind  to  practise  even  the  very  thing  that  he  says,

Since  to  stretch  the  hand  to  the  mouth,  is  to  harmonize  with

his  voice  in  practice. And  so  he  *  kisses  his  hand  with  his

mouth,'  who  praises  the  thing  that  he  does,  and  by  the

testimony  of  his  own  speech  awards  to  himself  meritorious-

ness  of  practice. In which  case  who is there  that  is

despised,  saving  He  Who  bestows  the  very  gifts  for  practising

themselves  ? Whence  it  is  well  said  by  tlic  great  Preacher ;

1  Cor. And  what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive? Now  if

*»  ^' thoti  didst  receive  it,  why  dost  thou  glory ^  as  if  thou  hadst

not  received  it? Now  holy  men know themselves  to  be

sprung  Kince  the  fall  of  our  first  parent  from  a  corruptible

Taking  glory  to  $e\f^  a  denial  of  God.  M5

stock,  and  that  not  by  their  own  goodness,  but  by  grace  Book
from  above  preventing  them  they  are  changed  to  better  .±=ill
wishes  and  works,  and  whatever  of  evil  they  find  to  be  in
them,  they  feel  is  earned  by  mortal  derivation,  but  whatever
of  good  they  espy  in  themselves,  they  acknowledge  as  the
gift  of  immortal  {^ce,  and  they  are  made  debtors  to  Him
for  the  benefit  vouchsafed.  Who  both  by  preventing
vouchsafed  to  them  to  will  the  good  that  they  willed  not,
and  by  following  after  vouchsafed  them  to  be  able  to  do  the
good  which  they  will.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  John;
And  toar shipped  Him  ThcU  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  amif  Rer.  4,
cast  their  crowns  btfore  the  throne  qf  the  Lord.  For  *  to
cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne  of  the  Lord'  is  to  attri-
bute not  to  themselves  but  to  the  Maker  the  victories  of  dieir
conflicts,  so  as  to  refer  the  glory  of  praise  to  Him,  fi^om
Whom  they  know  themselves  to  have  received  powers  for
the  conflict.  And  so  blessed  Job,  because  he  so  tells  the
good  things  that  ho  had  practised,  that,  nevertheless,  he
never  attributes  ihem  to  his  own  doing,  but  goes  back  to
the  praise  of  his  Creator,  denies  that  he  had  *  kissed  his
hand  with  his  mouth.'*  As  though  he  said  in  a  plain  way,
^  I  do  not  bring  forward  my  deeds  as  mine  own ;  because  ho
is  proved  to  disown  the  grace  of  his  Creator,  whoever  attri-
butes to  himself  the  tiling  that  he  does  in  practice.'  And
hence  he  adds  directly ;

Ver.  28.  Which  is  the  chiqfest  iniquity,  and  denial  against
the  Most  High  God.

21.  For  it  is  clear  that  he  does  deny  Him,  ^hen  setting  at  x»
nought  His  grace,  he  cldms  to  himself  the  powers  of  good
practice.  Which  too  is  rightly  called  as  well  *  the  chiefest
iniquity*  because  every  act  of  sin  which  is  from  infirmity
destroyeth  not  hope,  seeing  that  it  asks  forgiveness  from  the
Judge  Above.  But  presuming  on  our  own  goodness  is  so
much  the  worse  in  desperateness,  the  further  it  is  removed
from  humility.  And  when  it  ascribes  the  strength  of
practice  to  itself,  it  does  not  have  recourse  to  the  aid  of  the
Maker,  and  it  is  brought  to  pass  that  the  sinner  perishes  so
much  the  worse,  for  diat  oven  this  very  thing,  that  he  is  a
sinner,  he  is  ignorant  of. It  follows ;

666 Feeling  toward  friends  or  enemies  tested  by  change.

Job  81, Ver.  *Z9. If  I  rejoiced  at  the  destruction  of  him  that
' hated  me^  or  lifted  up  myself  when  evil  found  me.
j[*. ' 22.  That  we  are  disciples  of  AIniighiy  Ood,  the  keeping
of  charity  is  the  only  proof. For  it  is  hence  that  Truth  saith

Jobnis,  by  Itself,  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  Disciples^

^'  if  ye  have  love  one  toward  another.  Which  same  love,  if  it
really  fills  our  heart,  is  wont  to  be  exhibited  in  two  ways;
viz.  if  we  at  once  love  our  friends  in  God,  and  our  enemies
for  Ood.  But  it  needs  to  be  known  that  the  love  of  our
enemy  is  then  really  kept,  when  we  are  neither  given  up  to

I'addi- suffering^  upon  his  advancement,  nor  rejoiced  at  his
^'  destruction.  For  very  often  in  a  semblance  of  love  with
reference  to  an  enemy,  the  mind  is  deceived,  and  such
an  one  it  reckons  that  it  loves,  if  it  do  not  prove  a  foe
to  his  life ;  but  the  efficacy  of  love  either  the  promotion,  or
the  fall  of  an  enemy,  secretly  and  really  puts  to  the  proof.
For  on  thb  point  the  mind  of  man  knows  not  itself  to  the
full,  except  that  him  whom  he  takes  for  an  enemy  to  him,
he  finds  whether  by  advancement  or  diminution  to  have
changed  the  measure  of  his  standing.  For  if  he  is  given
over  to  suffer  by  the  prosperity,  and  rejoiced  by  the  calamity
of  him  who  hates  him,  it  is  plain  that  he  does  not  love  him,  whom
he  does  not  wish  to  be  better ;  and  him  he  persecutes,  even
when  standing,  in  wish,  about  whose  fall  he  congratulates
himself.

23.  But  herein  it  is  needful  to  know  that  it  very  often
happens  that  without  charity  being  lost,  both  the  destruction
of  an  enemy  rejoices  us,  and  again  his  glory  without  any  sin
of  envy  saddens  us,  when  both  he  falling  to  ruin,  we  believe
that  there  are  persons  rightly  set  up,  and  he  being  advanced
we  dread  very  many  being  unjustly  borne  down.  In  which
case  neither  does  his  diminution  now  Yxh  up  our  mind,
nor  his  aggrandisement  give  it  over  to  sufier,  if  the  right
thought  of  our  heart  regard  not  what  is  done  in  the  individual,
but  what  is  done  by  the  individual  towards  others.  But  for
preserving  these  things  a  scrutiny  of  the  exactest  discrimina-
tion is  absolutely  requisite,  lest  when  we  are  carrying  out
our  own  hatred,  we  be  deceived  under  the  appearance  of
the  utility  to  another. For  if  there  were  not  to  be  any

The  IUghteou9  rejoice  in  ChdC$  JudgmeHi,bui  pity  sinners.  567

rejoicing  at  all  for  the  death  of  an  enemy^  the  Psalmist  would  Book
never  saj,  The  righteous  shall  rejoice  when  he  seeth  the  ?^^^'
vengeance  on  the  ungodly.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  bear  an  lo.'  '
ungodly  man,  and  another  thing  to  bear  an  enemy.  For  there
are  a  great  many  enemies  that  are  not  ungodly,  and  there  are
some  ungodly  persons  who  seem  not  in  any  special  manner
enemies  to  us.  But  the  mind  of  man  accounts  evety  one
whom  it  bears  as  an  enemy,  to  be  ungodly  and  wicked  as
well,  because  the  faults  of  that  man  spleen  as  his  accuser
heightens  in  its  own  thinking.  But  with  whatever  wicked-
nesses he  may  be  sunk  down,  he  little  passes  for  wicked,  if
he  is  not  felt  to  be  an  adversary.  In  which  point  there  must
be  the  distinguishing,  that  it  is  one  thing  wherein  our  enemy
harms  ourselves,  and  another  thing  wherein  he  harms  himself
and  the  rest  of  the  world.  For  if  he  is  good  to  others,
perchance  it  may  be  that  it  is  not  without  our  fault  that  he
is  bad  to  us ;  nor  should  there  be  altogether  a  rejoicing  in
his  ruin  now,  whose  hostile  treatment  it  is  certain  we  alone
have  undergone.  But  when  the  enemy  of  ourselves  and  a
great  many  persons  is  destroyed,  it  must  needs  be  that  our
heart  should  be  glad  for  the  escape  of  our  neighbours,  rather
than  for  the  destruction  of  our  enemy.

24.  For  it  is  requisite  that  when  an  adversary  perishes  we
should  minutely  consider  both  what  we  owe  to  the  destruction
of  the  sinner,  and  what  to  the  justice  of  the  smiter.  For
when  Almighty  God  smites  any  bad  man,  there  must  be
sorrowing  in  unison  with  the  wretchedness  of  the  ruined^
and  rejoicing  in  unison  with  the  justice  of  the  Judge,  so  that
both  the  punishment  of  our  neighbour  dying  should  be  a
sorrow  to  us,  and  again  the  equity  exhibited  by  Ood  in
judging  should  be  an  occasion  of  joy,  that  so  we  may  neither
prove  enemies  to  a  man  in  his  perishing,  nor  be  found  un-
thankful to  God  in  His  judging.  And  so  because  he
perfectly  trod  down  all  feelings  of  hatred  in  opposition,  let
blessed  Job  say.  If  I  rejoiced  at  the  destruction  of  him  that
hatod  me^  or  lifted  up  myself  when  evil  found  him*  Who,
that  is  to  say,  in  loving  even  his  enemy,  whereas  he  sympa-
thized with  an  adversary  when  ruined,  by  that  one's  evil
things  was  himself  advanced  to  good,  that  this  one  should  go
on  growing  to  loving-kindness  by  the  same  cause  that  the

568 Jobf  wiihoui  Gospel  mslrticiion^  kepi  from  curbing.

Job  31,  evil  that  be  deserved  had  found  that  other. But  because
so
-, often  there  are  persons  who  because  they  cannot  with  power,

*  assail  with  cursing  those  whom  ihey account  enemies  to

themselves,  in  which  persons  it  appears  plain  what  evil

ihings  they  would do  if  they  could,  who  never  cease  to

imprecate  those  which  they  cannot  do,  blessed  Job  exhibiting

himself  free  from  the  sin  of  cursing  as  well,  added,  going  on,

Ver.  80.  Neiiher  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  sin  by

ivishing  a  curse  io  his  soul.

xii. 25,  For  he  would  sin,  if  he  were  to  dcsiro  that  to  be  done

by  God,  which  he  himself  either  could  not  at  all  be  able  to

do,  or  if  he  could  it  would  not  be  in  any  wise  right. For

they  who  assail  an  enemy  with  curses,  what  other  thing  do

they  wish  God  to  do  in  his  case,  but  what  they  are  either

unable  or  ashamed  to  do  themselves  ? For  they  wish  death

to  their  enemy,  which  same  even  if  they  have  the  power,

they  are  afraid  to  bring  upon  him ;  lest  they  should  either

be  bound  as  guilty  of  murder  committed,  or  shew  themselves

wicked  even  when  they  are. What  then  is  it  to  say  to  God,

*  Kill  the  man  whom  I  hate,*  but  to  cry  out  to  him  in  audible

accents ; ^  Do  Thou  that  to  mine  enemy,  which  it  is  not

proper  for  me  to  do  towards  him  even  as  a  sinner.* In

which  same  words  it  is  to  be  thought  where  had  this  person

Luke  6,  read,  Love  your  enemies  f  where  had  he  read,  Bless,  and

J' curse  noi  i and  again.  Not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  nor

12, 14.  railing  for  ratling  ? But  the  precepts  of  grace  from  above,

iP0t.8,QQ(  heard  with  the  outward  ears  he  observed,  because  the

inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  wrote  them  in  the  heart  of  that

man. To  whom  however  it  would  have  been  but  little  tliat

he  loved  those  adversaries  situated  without,  excepting  ho

had  to  bear  these  also  living  within,  and  holding  daily  converse

with him, even those of  his  household,  as  advei-saries.

Whence  he  adds,

Ver.  81.  If  the  men  of  my  tabernacle  said  not,  O  that  we

had  ofhtsflesh,  that  we  might  be  sati^dl

xiii. SO-  Which  same  sentence  may  also  be  taken  in  mystery  of

MvsT.  ^Q  ifQice  of  our  Redeemer. For  *  the  men  of  his  tabernacle*

longed  to  be  ^  satisfied  by  his  flesh,*  i.  e.  whether  the  Jews

in  persecuting  or  the  Gentiles  in  believing. For  botli  tho

one  set  themselves  as  it  were  by  consuming  it  to  put  an  end

Household  adtersarien  the  sorest  ttiat  of  patience. 509

to  His  Body,  and  the  latter  desire  to  satisfy  their  hungeridg  Book
soul  with  His  flesh,  by  the  daily  sacrifice  of  His  immolatiDg.  ^Mil
But  now  following  the  gist  of  Uie  history  alone  let  us  reflect
with  what  strenuousness  the  mind  of  the  holy  man,  full  of
concern  for  all  things,  is  divided  within  and  witliout;  who  to
those  acting  unjustly  had  he  either  submitted  in  silence,  or
not  withstood  in  righteous  living,  assuredly  he  'would  never
have  had  them  as  adversaries.  But  hereby,  that  he  kept  the
paths  of  life,  he  found  hearty  desires  of  his  death.  Adver-
saries ho  met  with,  shewing  themselves  outwardly,  lurking
inwardly.  Now  it  is  inferior  goodness  in  a  conflict  for  a  man
to  see  without  evils  that  he  has  to  get  the  better  of,  and  not
to  have  within  aught  that  he  may  have  to  bear.  But  it  is
the  praise  of  perfect  greatness  to  meet  hostile  treatment,
without  bravely,  and  within  mercifully.  For  there  are  some
things  in  the  actual  common  dealing  of  those  of  a  household,
that  cannot  be  corrected  without  sin  in  the  corrector,  and
therefore  when  they  either  defile  him  who  corrects  them,  or
do  not  weigh  heavily  on  him  who  does  them,  with  a  great
skill  of  tutoring  they  require  to  be  winked  at,  and  by  this
very  winking  to  be  borne  with,  which  same  when  put  upon
ourselves  are  the  more  quickly  dismissed  from  our  hearts,  if
we  know  our  own  misdemeanours  against  our  neighbours.
Whence  it  is  well  said  too  by  Solomon;  ToJce  no  heed  to  all^^cXm.
words  that  are  spoken;  lest  thou  hear  thy  servant  curse  '
thee:  for  oftentimes  also  thine  own  heart  knoweth  that  thou
thyself  also  hast  cursed  others.  For  whilst  we  reflect  what
we  have  been  towards  others,  we  are  the  less  concerned  that
otliers  should  have  proved  such  persons  towards  ourselves,
because  the  injustice  of  another  avenges  in  us  what  our
conscience  justly  accuses  in  self. It  proceeds ;

Ver.  S2.  The  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  street ;  but  my
door  was  open  to  the  traveller.

27.  Whereas,  Paul  being  witness,  charity  is  described  as  xiv.
patient  and  kind,  by  patience  it  bears  with  composure
the  ill  turns  of  others,  by  kindness  it  also  renders  with  mer-
cifulness its  own  good  ones.  Whence  blessed  Job  at  once
patiently  bore  those  of  his  own  household  cursing  hitn,  and
received  to  him  kindly  the  travellers  and  strangers,  to  the
first  affording  examples  of  morals,  the  other  meeting  with  the

670 Gyu  nol  accepled/rom  a  soul  dcJUed  with  sin*

Job  81^  saccour  of  ezlernal  things. For  the  holj  man  viewing  bj  the

^ Spirit  of  prophecy  the  Redeemer  of  mankind,  also  kept  his

'  pardoning  words  in  praciice,  wherebj  He  warns  us,  saying,

Luke  6,  Let  go,  and  it  shall  be  let  go  to  you  ;  give^  and  it  shall  be

^^*  given. unto  you.  For  oar  giving  relates  to  the  things  which
we  have  outwardly,  but  our  letting  gq  to  the  dismissing  the
grief,  which  we  have  inwardly  contracted  by  the  offence  of
another.  But  it  requires  to  be  known,  that  he  who  *  lets  go*
but  does  not  *  give,'  though  he  has  not  done  to  the  full,  yet
has  observed  the  better  part  of  mercifulness.  But  he  who
*  gives*  but  never  *  lets  go'  does  not  execute  mercy  at  all ;
because  by  Almighty  Ood  the  gift  is  not  accepted  from  the
hand,  which  is  proffered  by  a  heart  tied  and  bound  in  wicked-
ness.

28.  For  there  is  need  for  the  soul  that  offers  alms  first  to
be  made  clean,  because  every  thing  that  is  given  to  Ood  is
reckoned  according  to  the  feeling  of  him  who  gives  it.
Therefore  every  stain  of  evil  must  be  wiped  clean  from  our
interior  man  by  the  changing  of  the  thought,  because  the
offering  has  it  not  to  appease  the  wrath  of  the  Judge,  except
it  be  acceptable  by  the  purity  of  him  who  offers  it. Whence

6«i.  4,  it  is  written ;  And  the  Lord  had  respect  unto  Abel  and  to  his
offerings;  but  unto  Oain  and  to  his  offerings  He  had  not
respect.  For  it  is  not  that  sacred  Revelation  says  that  *  He
had  respect  to  the  offerings  of  Abel,  but  to  the  offerings  of
Cain  He  had  not  respect;*  but  he  first  says,  that  He  had
respect  to  Abel,  and  afterwards  subjoined.  And  to  his  qf-
ferings.  And  again  he  says  that  to  Cain  He  had  not
respect,  and  next  added,  nor  to  his  offerings.  For  accord-
ing to  the  heart  of  the  giver  is  the  thing  that  is  given
received.  Therefore  not  Abel  by  virtue  of  his  offerings,  but
by  virtue  of  Abel  the  gifts  offered  were  well  pleasing.  For  it
is  read  that  the  Lord  had  regard  first  to  the  person  who  gave,
before  the  things  which  he  gave.  Hence  blessed  Job  going
on  to  tell  us  his  bountifulness  in  the  boon  of  hospitality  did
rightin  bringing  forward  first  his  patience  and  kindness  towards
enemies,  how  Uiat  he  did  not  *  exult  in  the  destiiiction  of  his
enemy;*  that  he  did  not  *  assail  his  persecutors  with  words  of
cursing;*  that  those  enraged  against  him  within,  he  bore  with
equanimity ;  and  then  at  last  he  brought  forward  the  bountiful-

High  repute  iempU  men  to  conceal  their  faults. 571

ness  of  his  hospitality,  that,  namely,  by  the  order  of  his  rela-  Book

tion  being  listened  to,  we  might  learn  that  exterior  gifts  are '-

seasoned  by  the  interior  pureness  of  the  heart,  that  the  com-
bination of  his  virtues  might  teach  the  reader  what  sort  of
person  he  ought  to  be  in  himselft  when  he  administers  external
good  to  others.

29.  But  who  would  not  account  himself  to  be  a  holy  man
in  the  midst  of  such  heights  of  his  virtues  t  Who  would  not
be  in  some  measure  tempted  by  his  mere  merits  alone  being
so  many  in  number,  so  that  if  at  any  time  as  being  but  man
he  went  wrong,  he  would  not  have  his  transgression  made
known  to  men;  and  would  account  it  as  trivial  if  he  did  any
thing  wrong  in  lesser  tilings;  and  would  rather  prefer  to
cover  his  offence  by  silence  than  disclose  it  by  the  voice  of
confession  ?  For  it  often  comes  to  pass  that  the  mind  being
lifted  up  by  virtuous  attainments,  when  it  knows  that  many
good  things  are  scattered  abroad  concerning  it  in  the  esteem
of  neighbours,  does  not  wish  it  to  be  known,  if  there  is  any
thing  that  it  does  deserving  of  blame.  Which  same  darkness
of  mistaking  the  mind  is  for  this  reason  exposed  to,  because
high-swelling  clogs  the  eye  of  the  heart.  Hence  blessed  Job,
in  the  midst  of  so  many  distinguished  achievements  in
virtues,  who  became  so  lofty  in  practice,  in  order  to  shew  how
lowly  in  mind  he  was,  added  directly ;

I/I  covered  my  transgression  as  man,  and  did  hide  mine
iniquity  in  my  bosom.

80.  For  these  are  the  proofs  of  true  humility,  both  for  a
man  to  ascertain  his  own  wickedness,  and  on  being  ascertained
to  discover  it  by  the  voice  of  confession;  but  on  the  contrary
it  is  the  accustomed  evil  practice  of  man's  race,  at  once  to
commit  sin  keeping  himself  hidden  from  sight,  and  when
committed  to  hide  it  by  denying,  and  when  brought  home  to
him,  to  multiply  it  by  standing  up  for  it.  For  from  that  fall
of  the  first  man  we  draw  these  accessions  of  wickedness,
from  which  we  also  draw  the  very  original  of  sin.  For  thus
he,  when  he  had  touched  the  forbidden  tree,  hid  himself  from
the  face  of  the  Lord  amidst  the  trees  of  Paradise.  In  which
hiding,  because  surely  he  could  not  escape  the  eye  of  Ood,  it
is  not  the  effecting  of  self-concealing  that  is  related,  but  the
affecting  thereof  is  betokened. Who  when  he  was  charged

572  Adam^H  sin  made  worse  by  self-excusiuff.

Job  si,  by  the  Lord,  how  that  he  had  touched  of  the  forbidden  tree,
^*  .  thereupon  answered ;  The  woman  whom  Thou  gavest  to  be
with  me^  $he  gave  me  of  the  tree^  and  I  did  eat.  The  woman
likewise  on  being  asked,  answered,  saying,  Tlie  serpent  beguiled
me^  and  I  did  eat.  For  to  this  end  they  were  enquired  of,
that  the  sin,  which  by  transgressing  they  had  been  guilty  of,
they  might  by  confessing  wipe  out  Wlience  too  the  serpent,
that  prompter,  inasmuch  as  he  was  not  to  be  brought  back
to  pardon,  was  not  asked  concerning  the  sin.  Thus  man
was  asked  the  question  *  where  he  was,*  that  he  might  review
the  offence  committed,  and  by  confessing  it  take  knowledge
how  far  he  had  departed  from  the  face  of  his  Creator.  But
both  prefen-ed  to  take  to  themselves  the  cordials  of  defence
rather  than  of  confession.  And  whilst  the  roan  was  minded  to
palliate  tlie  sin  through  the  woman,  and  the  woman  through
the  serpent,  they  added  to  the  sin,  which  they  endeavoured
to  vindicate ;  Adam  by  indirectly  glancing  at  tlie  Lord,  how
that  lie  had  Himself  proved  the  author  of  their  sin,  in  that
lie  had  made  the  woman;  and  Eve  in  referring  the. sin  to
the  Lord,  Who  had  placed  the  seipent  in  Paradise.  For
they  who  had  heard  from  the  mouth  of  the  devil  deceiving

▼•^*  tliem.  Ye  shall  be  as  Oods;  because  they  were  not  able  to
be  like  to  God  in  Godhead,  for  the  heightening  of  their
error  endeavoured  to  make  God  Uke  to  themselves  in  trans-
gression. In  this  way  then,  whilst  they  set  themselves  to
defend  their  guilt,  they  made  the  addition  that  the  sin  should
be  rendered  more  heinous  when  examined,  than  it  had  been
when  committed.

31.  Hence  now  also  the  branches  of  the  human  race
derive  bitterness  still  from  this  root,  so  that  when  a  man  is
charged  home  for  the  evil  in  him,  he  hides  himself  under
words  of  self-defence,  as  under  a  kind  of  leaves  of  trees,  and
as  it  were  flies  the  face  of  his  Creator  to  a  kind  of  darkened
retreats  of  self-exculpation,  whereas  he  has  no  mind  to  have
that  known  that  he  has  been  guilty  of.  By  which  same  con-
cealment he  has  not  hidden  himself  from  the  Lord,  but  the
Lord  from  himself.  For  he  manages  that  he  should  not  see
Him  Who  sees  all  things,  not  that  he  himself  should  not  be
seen.  Contrarily  to  every  sinner  tlie  first  step  now  of  en-
lightenment is  the  humility  of  confessing,  in  that  he  now

Many  raUedfrom  death  in  «n,  *  come$foriK*  by  confestnon.  573

refuses  to  spare  himseir,  who  does  not  blush  to  avow  the  evil  Book
that  he  has  done,  and  he  who  by  defending  himself  might  E2Li!:
have  been  laid  open  to  be  accused,  by  accusing  himself
defends  himself  most  qnickly. And  hence  to  dead  Lazarus,
who  was  kept  down  by  a  great  weight,  it  is  not  said,  *  Bo
thou  restored  to  life ;'  but,  Cameforlhy  by  which  same  rising  Johnii,
again,  which  was  carried  on  in  the  body  of  that  man,  it  is *
signified  in  what  way  we  ourselves  rise  agun  in  the  heart,
i.  e.  when  it  is  said  to  the  dead  man,  Come  forth;  that  is  to
say,  that  man  being  dead  in  his  sin,  and  through  the  mass  of
bad  habit  already  buried,  because  he  lies  hidden  from  sight
within  his  own  conscience  by  wickedness,  should  go  forth
from  himself  without  by  confession. For  to  the  dead  man  it
is  said.  Come  forihy  that  from  the  excusing  and  concealing
of  sin  he  may  be  called  forth  to  come  ont  to  the  accusing  of
himself  with  his  own  lips. Whence  David  the  Prophet,  in
coming  to  life  from  that  death  of  his  great  guilt,  as  it  were
went  forth  at  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  when  being  rebuked  by
Nathan  he  brought  accusation  of  what  he  had  done.

82.  Therefore  because  this  sin  of  concealing  grew  to  a
dreadful  excess  in  the  human  race,  blessed  Job,  when  he
was  sayingf  If  I  covered  my  iran^giession^  rightly  inserted
the  words  as  man^  because  he  sees  that  to  be  proper  to  man,
which  descends  by  the  copying  of  our  old  parent.  Whence
it  is  fitly  subjoined;  And  did  hide  mine  iniquity  in  m^
bosom.  For  sacred  Scripture  is  very  often  used  to  put  the
*  bosom'  for  the  mind;  as  where  in  the  voice  of  Holy  Church
it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist  of  our  persecutors,  who  are  joined
to  us  indeed  in  nature,  but  disjoined  in  life.  And  render  vntoT*.  79,
our  neighbours  sevenfold  into  their  bosom.  As  though  he  '
said  in  plain  speech ;  *  Let  them  receive  that  in  their  minds,
which  in  raging  against  us  they  practise  over  our  bodies,
that  whereas  they  punish  us  outwardly  in  part,  they  may
themselves  be  punished  inwardly  to  a  complete  degree.*
And  so  because  the  *  bosom*  is  interpreted  the  privacy  of  the
mind,  to  *  conceal  iniquity  in  the  bosom*  is  to  hide  it  in  the
recesses  of  the  conscience,  nor  to  uncover  it  by  confession,
but  to  veil  it  by  defence.  Contrarily  James  says.  Confess  JtantB
your  faults  one  to  another,  and  pray  one  for  another ,  that  '
ye  may  be  eat^ed. Solomon  also  says,  He  that  covereth  AmJt**^*

*8j  13.

674  Job  confeised  faults  even  before  adversaries.

Job  Si,  sins  shall  not  prosper^  but  whoso  confesseth  andforsakelh
'H»~^  Mem  shaU  have  mercy*

83.  But  herein  it  is  necessary  to  be  known  that  men  yerj
often  both  copfess  their  sins  and  are  not  humble.  For  we
know  many  who  when  no  man  charges  them  confess  that
they  are  sinners,  but  when  perhaps  they  are  rebuked  for  their
sin,  they  seek  the  support  of  defence  that  they  may  not  seem
to  be  sinners ;  which  persons,  if,  when  they  say  the  thing  of
their  own  accord,  they  did  then  with  genuine  humility  see
themselves  to  be  sinners,  when  they  are  charged  home  by
others  would  never  deny  that  they  are  what  they  had  con-
fessed* In  which  case  the  tokens  of  true  confession  are,  if
when  a  man  calls  himself  a  sinner,  he  does  not  contradict
another  as  well  advancing  that  about  him. For  because  it

ProT.  is  written,  The  just  man  in  the  beginning  is  the  accuser  of
'  '  himself:  he  does  not  rather  aim  to  appear  a  sinner,  but  a
just  man,  when  any  one  confesses  himself  a  sinner,  no  man
charging  him.  But  when  another  inveighs  against  the  evil
that  we  have  done,  he  proves  the  truth  of  confession.  Which
same  if  we  defend  in  a  proud  spirit,  it  is  clear  that  it  is
feignedly  that  of  ourselves  we  called  ourselves  sinners.
Whence  it  is  above  every  thing  to  be  taken  care  of  that  the
evil  things  we  have  done,  we  both  confess  of  our  own  accord,
and  do  not  deny  them  when  others  charge  us  home  with
them.  For  it  is  the  evil  of  pride  that  the  thing  which  a  man
as  if  by  his  own  act  deems  it  meet  to  confess  about  himself,
this  he  should  disdain  to  have  said  to  him  by  others.

84.  Thus  blessed  Job  shewed  what  singular  humility  he
was  of,  in  that  he  both  knew  that  he  was  living  amongst
adversaries,  and  yet  was  not  afraid  to  disclose  his  offences
with  the  voice  of  confession.  But  observe  that  above  he
tells  his  virtuous  qualities,  lower  down  he  confesses  his  sin.
For  hence  he  clearly  proves  what  truth  he  had  spoken  of  the
good  in  him,  in  that  he  would  not  hold  his  tongue  concern-
ing the  evil.  One  while  he  points  out  his  virtues,  at  another
time  transgressions ;  that  he  had  both  committed  sin,  and
had  not  kept  it  silent,  he  makes  plain.  Whence  it  appears
without  all  doubt  what  extraordinary  purity  he  was  of  in  the
sight  of  Almighty  Ood,  who  both  aroided  evil  things  that  he
should  not  commit  them,  and  yet  what  things  it  did  chance

HU  humility  in  con/e$sinff  equals  hi$  very  virtues. 575

to  him  to  comniit  he  did  not  couceal  from  men ;  80  that  to  Book
him  there  should  at  once  be  the  high  credit  of  righteousnese  .^^^^'


to  have  shunned  sin»  and  the  safe  keeping  of  righteousness
to  have  brought  to  light  what  he  was  not  able  to  shun.  I^t
this  man  seem  to  any  one  great  in  his  virtues,  to  me  without
doubt  he  appears  most  grand  even  in  his  sins.  Let  those,
who  are  so  minded,  admire  in  him  the  self-control  of
chastitj,  let  them  admire  the  faithfulness  of  justice,  let
them  admire  the  bowels  of  pitifulness ;  I  do  not  less  admire
in  him  the  humblest  confession  of  sins,  than  such  lordly
achievements  of  virtue.  For  I  know  well  that  through  the
shame  of  infirmity  it  is  generally  a  worse  conflict,  to  bring
to  light  the  sins  we  have  committed,  than  it  is  to  avoid  them
not  being  committed,  and  each  instance  of  evil,  though  it
may  be  avoided  with  more  vigorousnesA,  is  yet  brought  to
view  with  greater  humility.  Thus  blessed  Job,  who  whilst
supported  by  so  many  great  practices  was  not  ashamed  to
confess  his  sin,  shewed  in  the  midst  of  his  virtues,  how
humble  he  was*  But  because  from  true  humility  there
ever  springs  secure  authority,  so  that  the  soul  should  dread
nothing  without,  in  proportion  as  by  the  longing  of  self-
elation  it  docs  not  pant  after  the  topmost  height  of  aflairs,
the  confession  of  sin  having  been  set  forth,  it  is  rightly
subjoined ;

Ver.  84.  Did  I  fear  a  great  muliitude^  or  did  the  contempt
of  neighbours  terrify  me,  and  I  did  not  rather  keep  silence,
and  went  not  out  of  the  door?

85.  It  is  great  assuredness  of  heart  to  have  nought  of  xvi.
worldly  concupiscence.  For  if  the  heart  pants  after  attain-
ing earthly  things,  it  can  never  be  secure  and  tranquil,
because  either  things  not  possessed  it  desires,  in  order  that
it  may  possess  them,  or  things  obtained  it  is  afraid  for  lest  it
should  lose  them,  and  whilst  in  adverse  circumstances  he
dreads  prosperous  ones,  so  in  prosperous  circumstances  he
dreads  such  as  are  adverse,  and  he  is  tossed  hither  and
thither  as  it  were  by  a  kind  of  waves,  and  is  hurried  about
in  various  fashions  by  the  changeableness  of  shifting  affairs.
But  if  once  Uie  mind  is  fixed  with  strong  stedfastness  in  the'
longing  after  the  Country  Above,  it  is  less  distressed  by  the
annoyance  of  earthly  things. For  from  all  outward  com-

576 A  souljixed  above  minds  not  troubles  btlouK

Job  Si,  motions  it  seeks  that  its  aim^  like  a  kind  of  most  secret

—?!:-.  retreat,  and  there  attaching  itself  to  the  Unchangeable',  and

''^'  mounting  above  all  changeable  things,  by  the  mere  calmness

of  its  repose,  while  in  the  world,  it  is  henceforth  without  tlie

world. It  goes  beyond  all  things  below  by  its  stressing  aflcr

the  highest,  and  all  the  objects  which  it  does  not  go  after  it

feels  itself  by  a  certain  liberty  to  get  above,  nor  within  is  it

subject  to  the  tempest  of  things  temporal,  which  it  views

without,  for  all  earthly  things  which being  longed  after

might  have  borne  down  the  mind,  being  looked  down  upon

Jer.  8i,lie  beneath  it Whence  it  is  well  said  by  the  Prophet,  Set

^^' a  look  out  for  thyself:  that  whilst  a  roan  views  things  above,

he  may  rise  high  above  things  beneath. Hence  likewise

Hab.  s,  Habakkuk says,  /  will  stand  upon my  watch. For  he

*  stands  upon  his  watch,'  who  by  wise  policy  of  discipline,

does  not  bow  down  beneath,  but  rises  high  above  earthly

desires,  that  while  he  aims  at  Eternity,  which  is  ever  stedfast,

he  should  have  beneath  his  feet  every  thing  that  passes  by.

36.  Yet  because  with  whatever  goodness  the  holy  man
has  advanced,  the  infirmity  of  the  flesh  still  outwardly  bears
Ps.39,6.  him  down  whilst  set  in  tliis  life,  as  it  is  written,  Though  man
walk  in  the  image  of  God,  yet  he  is  disquieted  in  vain :  it
very  often  takes  place  that  he  is  at  once  disquieted  without,
and  holds  on  not  subject  to  disquietude  within,  and  that  he
is  liable  to  be  *  disquieted  in  vain*  comes  from  the  infirmity
of  the  flesh,  though  that  he  *  walks  in  the  image  of  God'  is
from  the  excellency  of  the  mind,  in  order  that  ho  should
both  be  inwardly  strengthened  by  the  Divine  aid,  and  yet  be
still  pressed  down  without  by  the  human  burthen.  Whence
Habakkuk  again  has  well  delivered  a  single  sentence  serving
Hab. 8, for  both  particulars.  For  he  says,  Apid  trembling  enteied
*^*  into  my  bones^  and  my  power  ^  was  disqmeted  underneath
me*  As  though  he  said ;  Mt  is  not  my  power,  wherein
being  transported  above,  I  remain  free  from  liability  to
disquietude,  but  it  is  my  own  power  wherein  I  am  disquieted
below.'  And  so  the  same  is  free  from  disquietude  above
himself,  and  the  same  exposed  to  disquietude  below  himself;
because  he  had  mounted  above  hiuiself,  in  so  far  as  he  was

*  al.  *■  Unchangeably  attached/  which however  would  lie  a  hyiit^rlmlicul
xpreraiun.


virtus

Man  calm  when  above  himself^  unquiet  below, 577

caught away to things on high; and he  was  beneath  Book
himself^  in  so  far  as  he  still  dragged  a  remains  into  that


which  is  below.  The  same  above  himself  is  firee  from
liability  to  disquietude,  because  he  had  now  passed  away
into  the  contemplation  of  God:  the  same  under  himself
is  liable  to  be  disquieted,  because  beneath  himself  he  still
remained  a  fnul  human  being.  The  Prophet  David  accord-
ing with  this  sentence  saith;  /  9aid  in  the  excess  o/"myPi.ii6,
mindf  All  men  are  liars.  To  whom  the  answer  may  be^^'
made ;  ^  If  erery  man,  then  thou  too ;  and  the  sentence  will
henceforth  be  false,  which  thou  being  a  liar  hast  uttered,
because  whilst  thou  art  tme-spoken,  every  man  is  not  found
out  a  liar.'  But  observe  that  it  is  prefaced,  /  said  in  the
excess  qf  my  mind.  And  so  by  *  excess  of  the  mind'  he
transcended  himself  even,  when  he  determined  about  the
character  of  man.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  speech ;  ^  I
delivered  a  true  sentence  respecting  the  falseness  of  all  men
from  the  same  cause,  whereby  I  was  myself  above  man ;'
being  now  so  far  himself  a  *  liar'  as  far  as  he  was  himself
man,  but  so  far  altogether  not  a  *  liar,'  as  ^  by  excess  of  the
mind'  he  was  above  man.

37.  Thus,  therefore,  thus  all  the  perfect,  though  they  are
still  subject  to  something  disquieting  from  the  infirmity  of
the  flesh,  yet  already  enjoy  within  the  calmest  privacy  by  the
contemplation  of  the  mind,  so  that  whatsoever  thing  happens
without,  it  should  in  nought  disquiet  them  within.  Whence
blessed  Job,  exhibiting  the  security  of  a  holy  mind,  after  he
had  delivered  so  many  announcements  of  the  parts  of  virtue
with  reference  to  himself,  following  that  which  we  have  set
before,  added ;  If  I  feared  at  an  exceeding  great  multitude^
or  the  contempt  qf  neighbours  terrified  me^  and  I  did  not
rather  keep  silence^  and  went  not  out  qf  the  door.  As
though  he  said  in  a  plainer  manner ;  '  While  others  were
disquieted  against  me  without,  I  myself  remuned  in  mine
own  self  free  from  being  disquieted  withib.'  For  what  else
ought  we  in  this  place  to  take  *  the  door^  to  be,  but  the
mouth  ?  For  by  this  we  as  it  were  go  forth,  when  witli  what
words  we  are  able,  we  disclose  the  secrets  of  our  hearts ;  and
what  we  remain  within  in  the  conscience,  such  we  go  forlh
without  by  the  tongue.

VOL.  If.  p  p

578  Our  lA)rd  kept  silence  ioHerod^  who  woulduol  have  learned.

Job  81, 88.  Bui  there  are  some  persons  who  are  altogether  afraid
.  to  be  despised)  and  lest  thej  should  chance  to  be  judged  as


'  contemptible,  aim  to  appear  wise.  These  are  driven  to  *  go
forth  out  of  the  door/  because  when  assailed  with  insults,
how  great  in  themselves  they  lie  buried  from  sight,  tliey
give  out  telling  it.  And  when  being  overcome  by  impatience
they  put  forth  things  about  themselves,  which  were  unknown,
they  as  it  were  *  go  forth  by  the  door*  of  the  mouth.  And
so  blessed  Job  being  about  to  say,  that  he  had  never  *  gone
forth  out  of  the  door  of  the  lips,*  justly  set  before;  I  kepi
eilence;  i.  e.  because  agitated  by  impatience  he  would  have
gone  forth  out  of  the  house  of  the  conscience,  if  he  had
not  known  how  to  keep  silence.  For  holy  men,  when  they
are  under  the  trial  of  being  perturbed,  shun  wholly  and
entirely  to  exhibit  themselves  to  view,  and  when  they
cannot  benefit  those  that  hear  them,  they  are  willing  by
keeping  silence  to  be  even  despised,  lest  they  pride  them-
selves upon  the  exhibition  of  their  own  wisdom.  And  when
they  say  any  thing  with  good  understanding,  they  seek  not
their  own  glory,  but  the  life  of  their  hearers.  But  when  they
see  that  they  cannot  by  speaking  gain  the  life  of  their
hearers,  by  keeping  silence  they  hide  their  own  knowledge.
For  we  hie  to  the  imitating  the  life  of  the  Lord,  as  to  a  kind
of  mark  set  before  us.  For  He  Himself,  because  He  saw
that  Flerod  sought  not  advancement,  but  that  ho  desired  to
wonder  at  His  signs  or  His  knowledge,  on  being  asked  by
him  held  His  tongue,  and  because  He  kept  silence  with
constancy.  He  went  forth  derided  by  him. For  it  is  written ;

Lukess,  And  when  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  exceeding  glad;  /or

^'  he  was  desirous  to  see  Him  qf  a  long  season,  because  he  had
heard  many  things  qf  Him;  and  he  hoped  to  have  seen  same

▼.  9.  miracles  done  by  Him :  where  it  is  also  added ;  Then  he
questioned  with  Him  in  many  words,  but  He  answered  him
nothing.  But  how  greatly  the  Lord  in  holding  His  peaco
was  despised,  is  shewn  when  the  words  are  brought  in  there

▼.11.  directly;  And  Herod  with  his  men  qf  war  set  Him  at
nought,  and  mocked  Him.  Which  same  transaction  wo
ought  to  hear  and  learn,  in  order  that  as  often  as  our
hearers  desire  to  be  made  acquainted  with  things  of  ours,  as
things  to  be  praised,  and  not  to  alter  what  is  wrong  of  their

God^s  gift  to  he  ownedy  His  praise  only  to  he  sought, 579

own,  we  should  altogether  hold  oar  peace;  lest,  ir  we  speak  Book
the  Word  of  God  with  the  design  of  display,  both  the  fault  ^HI*
of  those  persons,  which  then  was,  should  not  cease  to  be,
and  our  own  fault,  which  was  not,  should  be  brought  to  pass.

SO.  A  person  will  perhaps  say,  *  How  do  we  know  with
what  feelings  of  the  heart  a  man  will  hear  ?*  But  there  are  a
number  of  things  that  bring  to  light  the  mind  of  him  who
hears;  first  and  foremost,  if  our  hearers  both  always
))rnisc  what  they  hear,  and  never  follow  the  thing  that  they
praise.  Tliis  vain  glory  of  speaking  the  great  Preacher  had
shunned,  when  he  said,  For  we  are  not  as  many,  which^Ow.%
corrupt  the  word  qf  Ood:  but  as  of  sincerity ^  but  as  from
Oodj  in  the  sight  qf  Ood  speak  we  in  Christ.  For  to
*  corrupt  the  Word  of  God'  is  to  think  of  Him  otherwise
than  lie  is,  or  to  seek  from  it  not  spiritual  fruits,  but  the
corrupt  offspring  of  human  praise.  But  '  to  speak  as  of
sincerity,'  is  not  to  seek  for  aught  in  Revelation  beyond
what  behoves.  Now  he  *  speaks  as  from  God,'  who  knows
that  he  himself  hath  not  from  himself,  but  that  he  hath
received  from  God  what  he  says.  And  he  speaks  *  before
God,'  who  in  all  that  he  speaks  seeks  not  human  regards,
but  minds  the  presence  of  Almighty  God,  and  who  looks  for,
not  his  own  glory,  but  the  glory  of  his  Creator.  But  he  who
indeed  knows  well  that  he  has  himself  received  from  God
the  thing  that  he  speaks,  and  yet  in  speaking  seeks  his  own
glory,  speaks  *  as  from  God,'  but  not  *  before  God,'  because
Him  he  considers  as  absent.  Whom  he  does  not  set  before  his
heart,  when  he  preaches  Him.  But  holy  men  at  once'  speak
as  from  God'  and  *  before  God,'  in  that  they  both  know  that
they  have  from  Ilim  the  thing  that  they  say,  and  ihey  see
that  He  is  Himself  present  at  their  discoursings,  their  Judge
and  their  Hearer.  Hence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  whereas
they  know  themselves  to  be  set  at  nought  by  their  neigh-
bours, and  that  tlieir  words  do  not  advantage  the  life  of  the
persons  hearing  them,  they  hide  from  sight  what  great  good-
ness they  are  of,  lest  if  the  speech  delivered  disclose  the
secret  of  the  heart  to  no  purpose,  it  should  break  forth  into
vain  glory.

40.  Therefore  blessed  Job  in  the  midst  of  stubborn  hearts
not  aiming  to  shine  forth  by  the  disclosure  of  his  virtue,

p  p  2

fiSO ChriutfoTiidiewn  an  concealing  iJin  Divinily.

JoBSi,8ay8y  And  \f  the  contempt  qf  neighbours  terrified  me,  and
-^ —  /  did  not  rather  keep  silefice,  and  went  not  out  qf  the  door.
For  be  who  being  stedfast  Uirougb  humility  never  feared  to
be  despised,  him  never  did  impatience  master,  that  the
tongue  should  cast  him  forth  out  of  doors.  When  it  is
rightly  put  first,  If  I  feared  at  an  exceeding  great  multitude:
that  it  might  be  seen  and  known  what  great  constancy  he
was  of,  in  this  respect,  because  no  number  of  men  ever  terrifies
without,  whom  no  rout  of  bad  habits  lays  waste  within.  For
in  this  life  he  who  seeks  nothing  that  has  to  do  with  pros-
perity, doubtless  dreads  nothing  that  has  to  do  with  ad-
versity.
Myst.  41.  Which  same  words  if  we  carry  on  to  a  mystical  mean-
ing, we  directly  find  therein  the  Redeemer's  mode  of  practice.
For  He  was  not '  afraid  at  an  exceeding  great  multitude,*
Who  smote  with  a  single  answer  only  His  persecutors  coming

Jobnis,  with  swords  and  staves,  saying,  /  am  He.  *  Him  the  contempt
of  His  neighbours  did  not  terrify,'  Who,  in  freeing  us  from
eternal  punishmenu,  received  strokes  on  the  face  with  a
composed  mind.  *  He  kept  silence,  and  did  not  go  forth  out
of  the  door,'  Who  in  the  very  hour  now  of  His  Passion,  when
He  was  undergoing  the  weak  conditions  of  humanity,  refused
to  call  into  action  the  power  of  Divinity.  For  to  the  Mediator
between  Ood  and  man  it  would  have  been  *  to  go  forth  out  of
the  door,'  if  when  He  was  held  as  Man  He  had  been  minded
to  display  the  power  of  His  Majesty,  and  by  the  mightiness
of  His  Divinity  to  surmount  the  weak  conditions  of  the  flesh
taken  upon  Him. For  that  He  might  die  manifest  to  man,

lCor.s,He  remained  hidden  God. For  had  they  known  it,  they

^'  would  never  have  crucified  the  Lord  qf  Qlory.  And  so  He
did  not '  go  forth  out  of  the  door,'  Who  even  when  questioned
by  Pilate  kept  silence;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  bauds  of  the
persecutors  lie  both  oflered  His  Body  to  suflcring,  which
He  had  taken  upon  Him  in  behalf  of  the  Elect,  and  would
not  display  to  those  that  were  against  Him  What  He  was.

Pf ^,8.  Whence  also  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist;  They  have  made  Me
an  abomination  unto  them,  I  was  given  up^  and  I  went  not  forth.
For  when  He  was  despised  because  He  appeared  man.  He
would  have  ^  gone  forth,'  if  He  had  been  minded  to  display
His  hidden  Majesty. But  because  lie  brought  infirmity  to

Tfie  Helper  with  God,  whom  Job.  seeks,  is  our  Lord. 581

view,  and  hid  power  from  sight,  herein,  that  He  remained  Book
unknown  to  His  persecutors,  to  those  persecutors  He  did  not^^^
*  go  forth.' Who,  howerer,  does  *  go  forth'  to  the  Elect,
because  to  those  that  seek  for  it.  He  discloses  the  sweetness
of  His  Divine  Nature. Whence  it  is  said  to  Him  by  the
Prophet,  Thou  weniest forth  for  the  salvation  qf  Thy  people,  Hab-  s,
that  Thou  mightest  save  Thine  Anointed. It  goes  on:  ^^*

Ver.  35.  Who  would  give  me  a  helper  that  the  Almighty
might  hear  my  desire.

42.  I'ho  holy  man  after  he  related  so  many  high  achieve-  xvii.
menls  of  the  virtues  in  him,  knowing  well  that  he  cannot  ^'•^'
attain  to  the  things  on  high  by  his  own  deserts,  seeks  for  a
helper. And  whom  verily  does  he  fix  his  eye  on  but  the
Only-begotten  Son  of  God,  Who  whereas  He  took  upon
Him  human  nature  travailing  in  this  mortal  state,  did  give
help  ? For  He  helped  man,  being  made  Man ;  that  because
to  mere  man  there  was  no  way  open  of  returning  to  Ood,
there  should  be  made  a  Way  of  returning  by  means  of  The
God-Man  *.  For  we  were  far  removed  from  the  Righteous  and '  Homo-
Immortal  One,  being  mortal  and  unrighteous. But  between *"*'
the  Immortal  and  Righteous  One  and  ourselves  the  mortal  and
unrighteous,  appeared  the  Mediator  of  God  and  man,  mortal
and  righteous.  Who  might  at  once  own  death  with  mortals,
and  righteousness  with  Ood; that  whereas  by  our  things
below  we  were  far  removed  from  things  above.  He  might  in
Himself  singly  unite  the  things  below  with  the  things  above,
and  that  herein  there  might  be  a  Way  made  for  us  of  return-
ing to  God,  in  the  degree  that  He  joined  ours  beneath  with  His
own  on  high. This  One  then  blessed  Job,  in  his  personating
of  the  whole  Church,  asks  for  as  Mediator,  who  wlien  he  had
said,  Who  would  give  me  a  helper,  suitably  added,  that  the
Almighty  might  hear  my  desire. For  he  knew  that  for  the  rest
of  Eternal  deliverance,  the  prayers  of  man  can  never  be  heard
excepting  through  his  Advocate. Concerning  Whom  it  is
said  by  the  Apostle  John ;  If  any  one  sin,  we  have  an  Advo- '  John
cate  with  the  Father,  even  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous;  and  '
He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,
but  for  the  sins  qf  the  whole  world. Concerning  Whom  Paul
likewise  saith; It  is  Christ  Jesus  that  died  for  us,  yea,Eom.8,
rather, that  is risen again, Who is  even  at the  right^^'

582  Inward  desire^  the  prayer  heard  by  God.

Job  81,  hand  of  Oodf  Who  aUo  maketh  iniercession/or  u$.  For,  for
a  '  the  Only-begotten  Son  to  *  intercede*  for  man,  is  to  shew
Himself  Man  in  the  presence  of  the  Coetemal  Father,  and  for
Him  to  have  besought  for  human  nature,  is  to  have  taken
upon  Him  that  same  nature  in  the  loftiness  of  the  Divine
Nature.  And  so  the  Lord  intercedes  for  us  not  with  the
voice  but  by  the  act  of  compassionating ;  because  that  which
He  would  not  should  be  condemned  in  the  Elect,  He  set
free  by  taking  upon  Himself.  And  so  a  helper  is  sought  for,
that  ^  the  desire  may  be  heard;*  because  except  that  the
intercession  of  the  Mediator  were  employed  in  our  behalf,
surely  the  accents  of  our  prayers  would  remain  silent  to  the
ear  of  God.

43.  Moreover  it  requires  to  be  noted  that  it  is  not  said,
*  my  prayers,'  but,  my  desire^  that  the  Almighty  might  hear.
For  true  beseeching  does  not  lie  in  the  accents  of  the  lips,
but  in  the  thoughts  of  the  heart.  For  the  stronger  accents
in  the  deepest  ears  of  God  it  is  not  our  words  that  make,  but
our  desires.  For  if  we  seek  eternal  lifo  with  the  mouth,  but
yet  do  not  desire  it  with  the  heart,  in  crying  out  we  keep
silence.  But  if  we  desire  in  the  heart,  even  when  we  are
silent  with  the  mouth,  in  being  silent  we  cry  out.  It  is
hence  that  in  the  wilderness  the  people  clamour  with  their
voices,  and  Moses  is  still  to  the  clamouring  of  w*ords,  and
yet  whilst  keeping  still  he  is  heard  by  the  ear  of  divine  Pity,
Exod.  whereas  it  is  said,  IVfierefore  criest  thou  unto  Me  f  Thus
14>  lA*  within  in  the  desire  is  the  secret  cry,  which  does  not  reach
to  the  ears  of  men,  and  yet  fills  the  hearing  of  the  Creator.
It  is  hence  that  Anna  going  to  the  temple  was  silent  indeed
with  the  lips,  and  yet  uttered  so  many  accents  of  her  desire.
MaU.6,  Hence  the  Lord  says  in  the  Gospel,  Enter  into  thy  chamber^
and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy  Father  IVIUch
is  in  secret,  and  thy  Father  Which  seeth  in  secret  shall
reward  thee  openly.  For  ^  the  door  being  shut  he  prays  in
his  chamber,*  who  while  his  mouth  is  silent,  pours  forth  the
affection  of  the  heart  in  the  sight  of  the  Pitifulness  Abovo.
And  the  voice  is  ^  heard  in  secret,'  when  there  is  a  ci*ying
out  in  silence  by  holy  desires.  Whence  also  it  is  rightly
Ps.  10,  said  by  the  Psalmist,  77re  Lord  hath  heard  the  desire  of  the
*'"• poor;  Thine  ear  hath'- heard  the  preparing  of  their  heart.

The  Judge  Bought j  to  write  the  Book  qf  the  new  Covenant.  583

Now  blessed  Job  in  the  subjoined  words  discloses  whom  be  Book
seeks  for  himself  as  a  helper,  in  the  ^  hearing  of  his  desire,*  XXII.
saying,
And  that  he  himself  who  judgeth  would  write  a  hook  I
44.  For  because  to  the  People  still  fearing,  the  Law  was  xviii.
committed  by  the  hands  of  a  Servant,  but  upon  the  loving
Children,  the  grace  of  the  Gospel  was  bestowed  by  the
Lord,  Who  as  coming  for  our  Redemption,  instituted  the
New  Covenant  for  us,  but  in examining  as  touching  the
precept  of  that  Covenant  one  day  cometh  as  Judge  also,  it
is  not  requisite  that  by  explaining  it  should  be  made  clear,
that  He  Who  Judges  is  the  Same  Who  writes  a  book. For
Truth  Itself  says  by  Itself,  The  Father  judgeth  no  man,  ^/ Johns,
hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son. And  so  He^^
will  then  bo  the  Enacter  of  judgment  Who  is  now  Uie
Composer  of  the  *  book;*  Uiat  He  should  then  demand  in
strictness,  what  He  now  bids  in  mildness. For  thus  we  see
every  day  that  masters  set  children  the  rudiments  of  Uicir
letters  caressing  them,  but  exact  those  of  Uiem  dealing  hardly
with  them ;  and  what  they  give  with  gentleness,  they  require
back  with  the  rod.  For  now  the  precepts  of  Divine  Revelation
sound  gentle,  but  they  shall  be  to  be  thought  harsh  in  the
exacting  of  them. Now,  there  is  a  gentle  warning  of  One
calling,  but  then  there  shall  come  the  strict  justice  of  the
Judge,  because  it  is  certain  that  no  whit  even  of  the  very
least  commandment  will  pass without  scrutinizing. By
which  same  it  is  apparent  that  He  that  'judgeth  is  the  Same
That  wrote the  Book,'  Which  same  *  Book*  of  the  New
Testament,  that  the  Redeemer  of  man  should  Himself  frame
in  His  own  Person  at  the  last,  the  Prophet  Ezekiel  rightly
tells  forth,  saying.  And  behold  six  men  came  from  the  tray  Ex.  9, 9.
of  the  higher  gate,  which  lieth  toicard  the  north,  and  every
man  a  slaughter  weapon  in  his  hand;  and  one  man  among
them  was  clothed  with  linen,  with  a  u)riter*S  inkhorn  at  his
reins. For  what  else  is  there  denoted  in  the  *  six  men
coming'  but  the  six  ages*  of  mankind? Who  '  come  from

*  St  Gregory's  dUision  of  age«,  Hom.  meant  is  probablj  that  in  St  Isidore  of

in  £t.  xiz.  $.  1.  from  Adam  to  Noah,  SeTille,  Etym.  lib.  ▼.  c.  89. De  dis-

Noah  to  Abraham,  Abraham  to  Mosen,  cretione  temporom,  where  two  more

Moses  to  Our  Lord,  and  then  to  the  'livisions  are  made,  at  David,  and  the

end,  will  not  sait  this  place. What  is  CapttTity. He  compares  these  ages  to

684  Chriii  a$  a  Writer  foretliewn  to  Ezekiel.

Job  31,  the  way  of  the  higher  gate/  because  from  the  state  of  Paradise

36.

Pbopb


-  as  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  they  are  unwound  from


the  upper  generations. Which  *  gate  looks  to  the  North'  in
this  way,  because  the  mind  of  man  lying  open  to  evil,  except
that,  abandoning  the  warmth  of  charity,  it  had  courted  the
numbness  of  the  interior,  would  never  have  gone  out  to  this
breadth  of  mortality. And  every  man  a  slaughter  weapon  in
his  hand;  because  each  particular  generation  being  evolved
by  the  several  respective  ages,  before  the  Coming  of  the
Redeemer,  had  in  its  practice  that  wherefrom  it  took  the
punishment  of  condemnation. And  one  man  among  them
was  clothed  with  linen. Because  our  Redeemer  deigned  to
have  parents  even  of  the  priestly  Tribe  ^  after  the  flesh,  He
is  described  as  coming  ^  clothed  with  linen.* Or,  surely,
because  linen  is  from  the  earth,  aud  is  not  like  wool  produced
from  the  corruptible  flesh,  seeing  that  He  derived  the  covering
of  His  Body  from  a  Virgin  mother,  and  not  by  the  corruptness
of  copulation,  therefore  He  came  to  us  ^  clotlied  with  linen.'
And  a  writer's  inkhorn  at  his  reins. In  the  ^  reins*  is  the
hind  part  of  the  body. And  because the  Lord Himself
after  that  He died  for  our  sakes,  and rose  again,  and
ascended  up into  heaven, then wrote the New Testa-
ment through tlie Apostles, this  man had  an  ^  inkhorn
at  his  reins.* For  He  Who  after  He  departed  framed  the
writing  of  the  New  Testament,  as  it  were,  carried  an  *  ink*
horn*  behind  him. Thus  this  *  inkhorn'  he  sees  to  hold
fast  to  the  man  '  clothed  with  linen,*  who  says.  And  that  the
same  who  judges  would  write  a  book. But  wherefore,  blessed
Job,  desirest  thou  that  a  book  should  be  written  by  Him,
Who  is  Judge  ? It  goes  on ;

Ver.  36.  Jliat  I  might  hear  it  upon  my  shoulder^  and  put
it  round  me  like  a  crown.
xix.  ^d*  To  *  bear  the  book  upon  the  shoulder,'  is  by  practising
to  carry  out  Holy  Scripture.  And  observe  how  orderly  it  is
described  both  first  as  being  ^  carried  on  the  shoulder,'  and
afterwards  ^  put  round'  him  ^  as  a  crown  ;*  because,  that  is

Uiedayi  of  Creation.  Th«  lame  dtfiiion  Elbabetb,  *  of  (he  daughteri  of  Aaron/

la  given  ill  the  beginning  of  hi«  Cbroni-  was a 1[tnfwomao of Uie Bleated

con.  Virgin. Lnl^e  1,  S.  and  36.
k  <  Triba/  perhape <  nation/  but

Job  seeks  his  *Book*  in  the  person  of  the  Elect. M5

to  say^  the  precepts  of  Sacred  Revelation,  if  they  be  now  Book
borne  in  practice,  afterwards  set  forth  for  as  the  crown  of  ± — -1
victory  in  the  recompensing.  But  why  does  blessed  Job
beg  for  *  the  book  to  be  written  by  the  Judge,'  who  was  not
able  to  attain  to  the  times  of  the  New  Testament  ?  But,  as
has  been  often  said  already,  he  uses  the  accents  of  the  Elect,
and  in  the  personifying  of  them  bogs  that,  which  he  foresaw
would  benefit  them  in  all  respects.  For  he  himself  by  tho
Spirit  had  for  long  had  that  book  with  him,  which  by  the
grace  of  Inspiration  he  had  obtained,  that  both  by  living  he
should  be  made  acquainted  with,  and  by  foreseeing  he  should
announce.

But  herein  it  requires  to  be  known  that  when  we  take
thought  of  the  precepts  of  Sacred  Revelation,  and  when  we
draw  off  the  mind  from  love  of  the  life  of  corruption,  we  as  it
were  hasten  on  by  a  kind  of  footsteps  of  the  heart,  to  the
interior  scene  of  things.  Now  no  man,  in  abandoning  things
below,  is  directly  made  at  the  top ;  because  for  earning  the
title  to  perfection,  whilst  the  soul  is  day  by  day  being  led
forward  on  high,  doubtless  there  is  an  attaining  thereto  as  it
were  by  a  kind  of  steps  of  ascending.  Whence  in  this  place
also  it  is  fitly  added ;

By  my  several  steps  I  will  declare  it

46.  Since  concerning  these  *  steps*  of  merits  it  is  said  by xx.
the  Psalmist, They  go  from  virtue  to  virtue. Concerning  Ps.84,7.
these,  again,  regarding  Holy  Church  he  says ;  Ood  is  distin-  T9.4SS.
guished  in  her  steps^  what  time  He  shall  receive  her. For"^***
neither  is  there  any  attaining  suddenly  to  things  above,  as
has  been  said,  but  to  (he  topmost  pitch  of  virtuous  attain-
ments the  soul  is  led  on  by  accessions. For  hence  it  is  that
the  same  Prophet  saith  again ;  I  was  exercised^  and  my  spirit  ^^'77  fi.
failed  little  by  little. What  does  he  mean,  then,  that  he
says,  my  spirit^  but  the  spirit  of  man,  i.  e.  the  spirit  of
exaltation? And  because  by  secret  grace  we  advance  to
the  love  of  God  by  a  measure  regulated  fi-om  above,  in
proportion  as  virtue  is  daily  increased  in  us  by  tho  Spirit  of
God,  our  own  spirit  proportionably  goes  off. Which  spirit
of  error,  because  it  is  not  at  once  cut  clean  away  from  us,  is
justly  recorded  to  have  *  failed  litde  by  little.* But  we  then
make  complete  advance  in  God,  when  we  have  wholly  and

586 Several  iioffes  o/advancemml  in  the  Elect.

Job  81,  entirely  £Edlen  away  from  ourselves. Thus  these  measures  of

^^^  growing  virtues  by  the  words  of  the  holy  man  are  styled

'  '  steps.' For  every  elect  person  sets  out  from  the  tenderness

of  his  embryo  in  the  first  instance,  and  aAerwards  comes  to

firmness  for  strong  and  vigorous  achievements. Which  thing

26~W '  '^^^  plainly  shews  in  the  Gospel,  saying,  So  is  the  kingdom
'  qf  heaven,  as  if  a  man  should  east  seed  into  the  ground^  and
should  sleep  and  rise  night  and  day,  and  the  seed  should
spring  and  grow  up  he  knoweth  not  how.  Which  same  seed
describing  the  growths  of  He  adds ;  For  the  earth  bringeth
forth  fruit  qf  herseff;  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  qfter  that
the  full  com  in  the  ear.  The  end  of  whose  progress  too  he
also  makes  to  succeed,  saying.  But  when  it  has  brought  forth
the  frmts  from  itself,  immediately  he  putteth  in  the  sickle,
because  the  harvest  is  come.  Observe,  by  the  voice  of  Truth
the  accessions  of  merits  are  marked  out  by  the  characters  of
firuits.  For  He  %Siy%,  first  the  blade ^  then  the  ear,  cfter  that
the  full  corn  in  the  ear.  Was  not  Peter  still  a  '  blade'  then,
when  by  the  mouth  of  a  maid  bo  was  in  a  moment  bout
down  by  the  blast  of  a  single  speech,  already  green  indeed
through  devotednessi  but  still  tender  through  infirmity.  But
he  was  found  '  full  com  in  the  ear'  when  he  withstood  the

Acta  ff,  rulers  persecuting  him,  saying,  We  ought  to  obey  Qod  rather
them  men.  For  he  was  found  ^  full  com  in  the  ear'  when,  in
the  winnowing  of  persecution,  he  underwent  such  numberless
wounds,  but  yet  he  was  never  made  small  after  the  manner
of  chafi*,  but  continued  whole  grain.  For  little  by  little  in
each  several  soul,  so  to  say,  the  moisture  of  interior  grace
abounds,  that  the  blade  may  grow  into  fruit.  So'  let  no  one
when  he  sees  any  neighbour  still  a  ^  blade'  despair  of  the
^  full  com.'  Since  from  the  leaves  of  the  blades,  which  hang
softly,  flowing  hither  and  thither,  the  rising  grains  of  fiiiitage
come  to  firmness.

47.  Now  the  Prophet  Daniel,  whereas,  when  the  Lord  was
speaking  to  him,  he  made  it  his  business  to  tell  us  the
posture  of  his  body,  did  rightly  represent  these  stages  of

Daii.  10, merits. Thus  he  says;  Yet  heard  1  the  voice  of  his  words,

^^^^'  and  when  I  heard  the  voice  qf  his  words,  then  was  I  dis-
mayed upon  my  face,  and  my  face  clave  to  the  ground.
And,  behold,  a  hand  touched  me,  which  set  me  upon  my

The  iame  shewn  hy  DaviiTs  postureM  in  his  Vision, 587

kfieeSf  and  upon  the  joints  qf  my  hands. And  he  said,  Dock

0  Danielj  a  man  greatly  beloved,  understand  the  words  that  ^^11:
/  speak  unto  thee,  and  stand  upright;  for  unto  thee  am

1  now  sent :  and  when  he  had  spoken  this  word  unto  me,
I  stood  trembling;  and  he  said  unto  me.  Fear  not.  Which
same  posture  of  his  body,  whilst  he  was  listening  to  the
words  of  one  speaking  inwardly,  he  would  never  set  forth  to
us  with  so  much  pains,  if  he  had  known  it  to  be  void  of
mysteries.  For  in  Sacred  Writ  not  only  what  holy  men  say
is  prophecy,  but  also  very  often  what  they  do.  Thus  the
holy  man,  being  pregnant  with  interior  mysteries,  by  the
posture  of  his  body,  likewise  represents  the  power  of  the
voice ;  and  by  this  that  he  first  lay  prostrate  on  the  earth,  by
this  that  he  afterwards  set  himself  up  on  the  joints  of  his
hands  and  on  his  knees,  by  this  that  at  last  he  stood  fast
erect  indeed,  yet  trembling,  he  makes  known  to  us  in  his
own  person  all  the  order  of  our  progress.  For  the  words  of
Ood  we  hear  *  lying  on  the  ground,'  when  being  settled  in
our  sins,  allied  to  earthly  pollution,  we  are  made  acquainted
with  spiritual  precepts  from  the  voice  of  the  Saints.  At
which  precepts,  we  are  as  it  were  set  up  upon  our  knees  and
the  joints  of  our  hands,  because  withdrawing  ourselves  from
earthly  defilements,  we  as  it  were  henceforth  lift  up  our  mind
from  things  below.  For  as  he  wholly  cleaves  to  the  ground,
who  lies  dismayed,  so  he  who  is  bent  down  upon  his  knees
and  the  joints  of  his  fingers,  his  advancement  commencing,  is
already  in  a  great  measure  hung  aloft  fi'om  earth.  But  at  the
last  by  the  voice  of  the  Lord  we  stand  there  erect  indeed,
yet  trembling,  in  that  being  perfectly  lifted  up  from  earthly
objects  of  desire,  the  more  fully  we  know  the  words  of  God,
the  more  we  are  afraid.  For  he  as  it  were  still  lies  prostrate
on  the  ground,  who  by  desires  after  the  earthly  cares  nothing
to  be  lifted  up  to  the  heavenly.  But  it  is  as  if  he  being  lifted
up  still  '  rested  upon  his  hands  and  knees,'  who  already
forsakes  some  defilements,  but  does  not  yet  withstand  some
earthly  practices.  But  he  now  stands  there  present  erect  at
the  words  of  Ood,  who  perfectly  lifts  up  the  mind  to  things
aloft,  and  scorns  to  be  bent  down  by  impure  desires.

48.  Now  he  rightly  shews  that  he  *  stood  trembling;'
because  the  scrutiny  of  interior  exactness  is  the  more  fear-

588  From  faith  we  learn  Jir si  fear y  then  love.

JoasiyfiiUy  dreadedj  the  more  advanced  the  progress  in  respect
^  thereto.  Where  it  is  fitly  subjoined  by  the  voice  of  God,
*  Fear  not:  because  the  more  that  we  ourselves  learn  what  we
should  have  occasion  to  fear,  the  more  we  have  infused  iu  us
from  God  by  interior  grace  what  may  call  for  love,  so  that
both  our  contempt  little  by  little  may  pass  away  into  fear,
and  fear  pass  away  into  charity ;  that  wherein  God  when  He
seeks  us,  by  contempt  we  withstand,  and  by  fear  flee  from,
both  contempt  and  fear  being  one  day  set  aside,  we  should
be  joined  to  Him  by  love  only.  For  little  by  little  we  learn
even  the  very  fear  of  Him  %  to  the  love  of  Whom  only  we
are  attached.  And  thus  as  it  were  there  being  placed  a  kind
of  steps  of  our  advance,  the  foot  of  tlio  mind  first  by  fear  we
set  below,  and  afterwards  by  charity  lift  it  to  the  heights  of
love,  that  from  that  wherewidi  a  man  is  puffed  up  he  may  be
checked,  so  that  he  fear,  and  fix)m  that,  which  he  now  dreads
he  may  be  lifted  up,  that  he  may  have  boldness.  Now  these
steps  of  virtuous  attainments  it  is  no  great  labour  to  lay  hold
of,  since  there  is  the  passing  from  one  to  another.

49.  But  the  subject  requires  the  nicest  handling,  when  the
mind  strives  to  estimate  in  the  case  of  one  and  the  same
virtue  with  what  steps  of  advancement  it  is  lifted  up.  For
to  mention  the  first  elements  of  virtue,  i.  e.  faith  and  wisdom,
they  cannot  be  severally  gained,  except  we  ascend  thereto
by  marked  and  ordered  motliods  as  by  a  kind  of  steps.
For  faith  itself  which  imbues  us  for  taking  iu  hand  iu  a
perfect  manner  what  else  there  is  good,  very  often  in  its
beginnings  both  totters  and  is  firmly  based,  and  it  is  now
held  most  surely,  and  yet  touching  the  assurance  thereof
there  is  still  trembling  under  the  effects  of  misgiving.  For
a  part  of  it  is  received  first,  that  it  may  be  afterwards  perfectly
completed  in  us.  For  if  there  were  not  an  advancing  by  a
sure  step  in  the  mind  of  one  who  believes,  the  father  of
the  child  to  be  healed  would  not  have  said  on  being  ques-

Mark  0,  tioned,  in  the  Gospel,  Lard^  I  believe^  help  Thou  mine  unbelief.

^' And  so  he  was  still  ascending  upwards  as  to  the  faith  which
he  had  already  received,  who  at  one  and  the  same  time  both

«  Tht  retdiogt  vary. Tbt B«n.  MSS.  and  others  at  Oxford.  <  Eum

Editor  teema  not  to  hayt  aetn  that  timere  dediaoimua,  eique  vi  aoliua  &o.'

notioed  in  the  Italian  reprint,  which  *  we  anleam  fearing  Him,  and  are  at-

i«  aifo  in  the  Merton  and  Trin.  Coll.  taohed  to  Him  hj  the  force  of  lore  alonr.'

EzekieVs  vision  of  waters  shews  the  steps  o/rigkteousness.  589

cried  out  that  he  already  believed  and  still  doubted  from  Book

unbelieTing. Hence  it  is  also  that  it  said  to  our  Redeemer -

by  His  disciples,  Increase  our  faith ^  that  that  which  hadj-^'^^i
been  already  received  in  beginning,  might  by  the  accessions
of  steps  arrive  at  perTection.

60.  Moreover  Wisdom  herself,  who  is  required  to  be  the
mistress  of  good  works,  is  vouchsafed  to  the  panting  soul  by
degrees  of  increase,  that  surely  the  ascending  thereto  should
be  by  the  steps  of  wonderful  regulation.  Wliich  same  the
Prophet  Ezekiel  well  describes  in  a  figurative  relation,  who
concerning  that  man  whom  he  had  seen  on  a  high  mountain
tells,  saying.  He  measured  a  thousand  cubits^  and  he  brought  Ex.  47,
me  through  the  water  up  to  the  ancles:  again  he  measured
a  thousandyand  brought  me  through  the  water  up  to  the  knees;
again  he  measured  a  thousand^  and  brought  me  through  the
water  up  to  the  reins.  Afterward  he  measured  a  thousand^
and  it  was  a  torrent  that  I  could  not  pass  over,  for  there
swelled  deep  waters  of  a  torrent,  which  could  not  be  passed
over.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  number  of  a  *  thousand,*
but  the  fulness  of  the  benefit  vouchsafed  ?  Thus  the  man
who  appeared  ^measures  a  thousand  cubits,'  and  the  Prophet
is  led  through  the  waters  *  up  to  the  ancles,'  because  our
Redeemer,  when  to  us  on  our  being  converted  to  Him  He
bestowed  the  fulness  of  a  good  beginning,  bathed  the  first
treadings  of  our  practice  by  the  gift  of  spiritual  wisdom.
For  the  water's  reaching  up  to  the  ancle  is  our  henceforth
maintaining  the  treadings  of  longed-for  righteousness  by
wisdom  being  vouchsafed  to  us.  Again,  he  *  measures  a
thousand  cubits,'  and  tho  Prophet  is  led  through  the  water
*  up  to  the  knees,'  because  when  the  fulness  of  good  practice
is  bestowed,  our  wisdom  is  increased  even  to  this  degree,
that  there  is  not  henceforth  any  bending  in  bad  deeds.
Thus  it  is  hence  said  by  Paul,  Wherefore  lift  up  the  hands  Heb.is,
that  hang  doion,  and  the  feeble  knees,  and  make  straight^^
steps  with  your  feet.  Thus  *  the  water  reaches  to  the  knees,'
when  the  wisdom  that  is  is  obtained  perfectly  braces  us  to
uprightness  of  good  practice.  And  again,  he  ^  measures  a
thousand,'  and  the  Prophet  is  '  led  through  the  water  up  to
the  reins'  in  this  way,  because  the  fulness  of  good  practice
then  grows  to  a  height  in  us,  when  the  wisdom  vouchsafed

590 Highetti  JViscbm  unsearchable. Job's  offeritig.

Joa  31,  has  kiUed  in  us  as  far  as  it  is  possible  all  the  gratification
-  J-^—  of  the  flesh  as  well.  For  except  the  gratification  of  the  flesh
was  seated  in  the  reins,  the  Psalmist  would  ne?er  have  said,
Pf.3,a6.  Burn  my  reins  and  my  heart.  Therefore  the  water  comes
up  '  to  the  reins/  when  the  sweetness  of  wisdom  destroys
the  very  incitements  of  the  flesh  too,  so  that  the  burnings
of  the  flesh  that  might  hare  scorched  up  the  soul  are  cooled
down.  And  he  still  further  *  measurad  a  thousand/  *  and  it
was  a  torrent  which  the  Prophet  could  not  pass,'  of  which  he
also  sajs.  Because  there  swelled  deep  waters  of  a  torrent^
which  could  not  be  passed  over.  For  perfectness  of  practice
having  been  received,  we  come  to  contemplation ;  in  which
same  contemplation  while  the  mind  is  carried  up  on  high,
being  uplifted  it  sees  in  Ood  that  the  thing  that  it  sees  it
cannot  fathom,  and  as  it  were  it  touches  the  water  of  the
torrent,  which  it  cannot  pass  through,  because  at  once  it
beholds  in  gazing  what  it  may  be  pleased  to  behold,  and
yet  is  not  able  perfectly  to  behold  that  very  thing  that  it
pleases.  And  so  tlie  Prophet  sooner  or  later  comes  to  the
water  *  which  he  cannot  pass  through,'  because  when  we  are
at  last  brought  to  the  contemplation  of  wisdom,  the  mere
immensity  thereof,  whiph  by  itself  lifts  man  to  itself,  denies
the  human  mind  a  full  acquaintance,  so  that  it  should  at
once  by  touching  love  this  wisdom,  and  yet  never  by  passing
through  penetrate  it.

51.  Thus  blessed  Job  called  these  incroasings  of  virtues
by  the  title  of  ^  steps,'  because  he  saw  them  to  be  in  distinct
divisions,  bestowed  on  men  by  gift  from  above ;  seeing  that
by  them  only  do  we  ascend  so  as  to  come  to  the  attaining  of
heavenly  things.  And  so  in  making  mention  of  the  Sacred
Book,  i.  e.  of  Divine  Revelation,  he  says^  By  my  several
steps  I  will  declare  iV,  in  this  way  surely,  because  ho  really
ascends  to  the  teaching  of  God,  who  has  broken  forth  to  the
attaining  thereof  by  the  steps  of  holy  practice.  And  he  as
it  were  ^  by  his  several  steps  declares  the  book'  who  proves
that  he  has  been  vouchsafed  the  knowledge  of  it  not  in
respect  of  words  only,  but  also  of ,  deeds.  Whence  it  is  yet
further  added ;
And  as  to  a  prince  I  will  offer  it.
For  every  thing  that  we  ofier,  we  hold  in  our  hands. And

Souls  entrusted  to  governors  as  land  to  till. 691

so  *  unto  the  Prince*  coming  to  Judgment  *  to  offer  the  book'  Book
18  to  have  held  the  words  of  His  precepts  in  our  behaviour.  .^HL


It  proceeds ;

Ver.  88 — 40.  If  my  land  cry  against  me,  or  that  the/ur-
rovos  likewise  thereof  complain:  if  I  have  eaten  ihefruit»
thereof  without  money,  or  have  evicted  the  soul  qf  the
tillers  thereof;  let  the  thistle  grow  for  me  instead  qf
wheaty  and  the  thorn  instead  qf  barley.

62.  For  what  is  it  for  the  *  land  to  cry,*  for  *  the  furrows  xxi.
to  weep,'  and  to  have  *  eaten  one's  own  fruits  buying  them  V  ^'•'***'-
To  whom  is  it  necessary  to  buy  what  is  his  own  ?  who  has
heard  *  the  land  crying  V  Who  has  seen  *  the  furrows  weep-
ing?'  And  whereas  the  furrows  of  the  land  are  always  of
the  land,  why  is  it  that  by  a  separate  declaration  it  is  both
said  that  the  land  did  not  cry,  and  that  the  furrows  thereof
did  not  weep  along  with  it?  For  whereas  a  furrow  of  the
earth  is  nothing  else  but  earth,  it  does  not  need  the  account-
ing of  much  difference,  that  he  adds ;  And  along  with  it  the
fnrrows  thereqfweep.  In  which  same  point  because  the  order
of  the  history  falls  to  the  ground,  the  mystical  meaning  displays
itself  to  us,  the  doors  as  it  were  being  now  set  open.  As
though  it  exclaimed  in  plain  speech;  '  Whereas  ye  know
that  the  reasonableness  of  the  letter  has  dropped  dead,
doubtless  it  remains  that  ye  should  fall  back  to  me  without
misgiving.  For  every  one  who  either  by  private  right  rules
a  domestic  household,  or  for  the  common  advantage  is  set
over  faithful  multitudes,  herein  that  he  possesses  the  rights
of  government  over  the  faithful  committed  to  him,  what  else
does  he  but  hold  the  land  to  cultivate  it  ?  Since  it  is  for  this
end  that  each  individual  is  advanced  above  the  rest,  by
Divine  distribution,  that  the  mind  of  those  under  him,  like
land  subdued,  may  be  made  fruitful  by  the  seed  of  his
preaching.  But  '  the  land  crieth  against'  its  possessor,  if  it
chance  that  against  bim^  who  is  set  at  the  head,  either  a
private  family,  or  Holy  Church  utters  any  just  murmur.
Since  for  ^  the  land  to  cry,'  is  for  those  under  charge  to
grieve  with  reason  against  the  injustice  of  him  who  rules
them;  where  it  is  rightly  subjoined,  And  along  with  it  the
furrows  thereqf  weep.  For  the  land  even  when  not  culti-
vated by  any  works  generally  produces  something  of  suste-

593  Tlie  furrowed  hearts  grieve  for  ilie  oppression  of  others.

Joa  81,  nance  for  ibe  service  of  man,  but  when  ploughed  it  bears
^^^'  fruits  to  superabundance.  And  there  are  some  persons,  who
'not  being  cleft  by  any  ploughshare  of  reading,  or  any  of
exhortation,  do  yet  of  themselves  produce  some  good  things,
though  but  the  least,  like  land  not  yet  ploughed  up.  But
there  are  some  who  for  always  hearing  and  retaining,  apply-
ing themselves  to  holy  preacliings  and  meditations,  as  it
were  cleft  with  a  kind  ol  ploughshare  of  the  tongue,  as  to  the
former  hardness  of  the  heart,  receive  the  seed  of  exhortation,
and  by  the  furrows  of  voluntary  chastening  render  the  fruits
of  good  practice.  But  it  is  very  often  the  case  that  those
who  are  set  at  the  head  do  things  unjust,  and  it  comes  to
pass  that  the  very  persons  injure  those  under  them,  who  were
bound  to  do  them  good.  Which  when  uninstructed  persons
see,  being  enraged  they  murmur  against  their  ruler,  and  yet
do  not  by  sympathy  grieve  violently  for  their  neighbours.
Hut  when  these  who  are  ^ready  broken  in  pieces  by  the
plough  of  reading,  and  dressed  for  the  fruitage  of  practice,
see  innocent  persons  borne  down  oven  in  the  least  thingv,
they  are  forthwith  turned  by  sympathy  to  tears  of  sorrow,
because  they  bewail  as  their  own  the  things  that  their
neighbours  suffer  unjustly.  For  the  perfect,  whereas  they  are
ever  affected  with  regard  to  what  is  spiritual,  are  taught  to
lament  for  the  bodily  hurts  of  others,  so  much  the  more  in
proportion  as  they  are  now  instructed  not  to  lament  for  their
own.  And  so  every  one  who  is  set  in  authority,  if  he  ex-
ecutes what  is  bad  in  the  case  of  those  under  him,  ^  the  earth
crieth  against  him  and  the  furrows  weep,'  because  against  his
injustice  the  uninstructed  peoples  indeed  break  out  in  accents
of  murmuring,  while  all  the  perfect  severally  chasten  them-
selves in  tears  for  his  wicked  practice,  and  for  what  the
inexperienced  cry  out  and  do  not  grieve,  those  under  autho-
rity of  a  more  tried  life  bewail  and  hold  their  peace.  And
so  for  ^  the  furrows  to  bewail  along  with  the  land  crying  out,*
is  by  that  thing  whereas  the  multitude  of  the  faithful  com-
plains  with  justice  against  the  ruler,  for  persons  of  a  more
fruHful  li^  to  be  brought  to  tears  of  sorrow.  Thus  the
furrow§  i&re  both  of  the  earth,  and  yet  are  distinguished  from
th^  term  of  ^  the  earth,*  because  those  in  Holy  Church,  who
cultivate  their  mind  with  the  labour  of  holy  meditation,  are

Sin  of  eating  the  Churctd  bread  without  labour. 508

as  much  better  than  the  rest  of  the  faithful,  in  proportion  as  Book

by  the  seeds  received  they  render  more  abundant  fruits  of ^

deeds.  And  there  are  some  who  being  set  over  holy  peoples
obtain  the  payments  of  livelihood  by  the  bountifulness  of  the
Churchy  but  do  not  pay  the  ministrations  of  exhortation  that
are  due.  In  opposition  to  whom  the  example  of  the  holy
man  is  yet  further  subjoined  aright,  when  it  is  directly
added  by  him ;

If  I  have  eaten  the  fruit  thereof  without  money.

53.  For  to  *  eat  the  fruit  of  the  land  without  money*  is  to  xxii.
receive  indeed  our  charges  from  the  Church,  but  not  to  yield
to  that  Church  the  price  of  preaching.  Of  which  same
preaching  it  is  s^d  by  the  voice  of  the  Creator,  Thou  oughtest  Matt.
therefore  to  have  put  my  money  to  the  exchangers,  and  then  '
at  my  coming  t  should  have  received  mine  ou)n  with  usury.
And  so  he  *  eats  the  fruits  of  the  earth  withput  money,'  who
receives  the  Church's  benefits  for  the  service  of  the  body,
but  does  not  pay  to  the  people  the  ministry  of  exhortation*
What  do  we  pastors  say  to  Uiese  things,  who  while  we  are
the  forerunners  of  the  Advent  of  the  Strict  Judge,  take  upon
us  the  function  of  a  herald  indeed,  but  devour  the  Church's
supplies  with  dumb  mouths  i  We  exact  all  that  is  owed  to
our  own  body,  but  we  do  not  pay  back  what  we  owe  to  the
soul  of  those  committed  to  our  charge.  Mark  how  the  holy
man,  tied  down  by  so  many  pledges  in  this  world,  in  the
midst  of  numberless  employments,  was  free  for  the  pursuit  of
preaching.  And  he  never  '  ate  the  fruits  of  the  earth  with-
out money,'  because  surely  he  paid  back  the  word  of  good
warning  to  those  under  his  charge,  from  whom  he  received
the  fruit  of  bodily  serving.  For  this  every  one  who  is  set
over  the  people  owes  to  Almighty  Ood,  he  who  is  set  over
many,  and  he  who  is  set  over  a  smaller  number,  that  he
should  in  such  sort  exact  the  due  ministration  from  those
subject  to  him,  thai  he  may  himself  mind  with  heedfril  regard
what  of  warning  he  at  all  times  owes.  For  all  we  who  sub-
ject to  the  appointment  of  the  Creator  are  joined  amongst
ourselves  by  a  vicarious  ministry  in  obedience  to  our  true
Lord,  what  else  are  we  but  servants  to  one  another  ?  Where-
as,  then,  he  who  is  subordinate  serves  in  obeisance,  assuredly
it  remains  that  he  who  is  set  over  him  should  serve  to  the

VOL.  II.  Q  q

59  i Ail  ytfod  spoiled  by  euvyiitg  Ihe  like  in  others.

Job  31,  word.  Whereas  he  who  is  subordinaie  yields  obedience  to
^^'  orders,  it  is  required  that  he  who  is  at  the  head  should
'bestow  the  care  and  concern  of  solicitude  and  of  pity.  And
so  it  comes  to  pass,  that  whilst  we  studiously  endeavour  to
serve  one  another  now  by  charity,  we  may  one  day  rule
together  with  the  true  Lord  in  common  rejojcing.  But  there
are  some,  who  herein,  that  they  discharge  the  office  of  preach-
ing, grudge  others  the  good  that  they  have,  and  so  do  not
any  longer  have  it  in  a  true  sense. To  whom  it  is  rightly

JameiSysaid  by  James,  But  if  ye  have  liltei'  envying  among  your--
selves^  and  strife  in  your  hearts,  this  wisdom  descendelk
not  from  above,  but  is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish.  Hence  here
also  when  it  is  said.  If  I  have  eaten  thefiuits  thereof  with-
out money,  it  is  rightly  subjoined  ;

Or  have  qfflicled  the  soul  of  the  tillers  thereqf.

xxiii.  d4.  For  they  are  the '  tillers*  of  the  land,  who,  being  placed
in  a  lower  situation,  with  what  earnestness  they  are  able,  with
the  best  practice  that  they  can,  cooperate  in  the  grace  of
preaching  to  the  instructing  of  Holy  Church.  Which  same
'  husbandmen  of  this  land*  not  to  afflict,  is  this,  viz.  not  to
envy  their  labours ;  that  the  ruler  of  the  Church,  while  he
vindicates  to  himself  alone  the  right  of  preaching,  should  not,
by  envy  gnawing  him,  gainsay  others  also  that  preach  in  a
right  way.  For  the  religious  mind  of  the  pastor,  because  it
seeks  not  its  own  glory  but  tlie  glory  of  the  Creator,  desires
to  have  all  that  it  does  aided  by  all  persons.  For  the
faithful  preacher  wishes,  if  it  might  be  brought  to  pass,  that
the  truth  which  he  is  not  able  to  give  utterance  to  alone,
the  mouths  of  all  should  sound  out  Whence  when  Joshua
would  have  withstood  the  two  who  remained  in  the  camp

Nuuik  and  prophesied,  it  is  rightly  said  by  Moses,  Enviest  thou

*  ^  ^-  for  my  sake  f  Would  Qod  that  all  t/le  Lord's  people  were
prophets,  and  that  the  Lord  would  put  His  Spirit  upon
them !  For  he  was  willing  for  all  to  prophesy,  in  that  be
envied  not  others  the  good  that  he-  had.  Thus  because
blessed  Job  introduced  all  these  things  as  under  suspension,
and  if  he  had  not  done  them^  binds  himself  with  the  sentence
of  cursing,  it  goes  on  ;

Ver.  40.  Let  the  thistle  grow  for  fne  instead  qf  wheat,  and
the  thorn  instead  qf  barley.

Job's  cUne  on  him$eytfhe  had  done  thus  and  thus. 605

55»  As  tboagh  he  said  in  plain  words ;  *  If  I  have  done  Book
aagbt  unjust  towards  those  under  me,  if  I  have  exacted  the  — ^7*
debts  due  to  me,  and  have  not  myself  paid  what  I  owed,  if
I  have  envied  others  the  executing  of  good  practice,  for  the
good  things  which  refresh  for  ever  and  ever,  may  evil  things
that  sting  be  repaid  me  in  the  Judgment' Since  '  instead  of
the  wheat  there  springs  up  the  thistle,  and  instead  of  barley
the  thorn,'  when in  the final  Retribution,  wherefrom  the
recompensing  of  our  labour  is  looked  for,  the  piercing  of  pain
is  met  with. And  observe,  that  as  barley  is  diflerent  from
wheat,  though  both  regale,  so the  thorn  differs  from  the
thistle,  though  either  be  a  thing  that  pricks,  because  the
thistle  is  softer,  and.  the thorn  always  the  harder  as to
pricking. Thus  he  says,  Let  the  thistle  grow  instead  of
wheats  and  the  thorn  instead  qf  barley. As  if  he  said  plainly
and  openly;  I  know  indeed  that  1  have  both  done  great  good
acts  and  lesser  ones ;  and  if  it  is  not  so,  may  lesser  evils
match  me  for  my  great  good  acts,  and  the  greater  evils  for
the  lesser  good  ones.' Though  this  may  also  be  understood
in  another  sense. For  in  *  wheat'  there  is  denoted  in  spiritual
action  which  regales  the  mind,  but  in  *  barley'  the  disposal  of
earthly  things. Wlierein  while  we  are  often  forced  to  serve
the  weak  and  carnal,  we  as  it  were  prepare  their  food  for
the  beasts  of  burthen,  and  the  very  practice  of  our  deeds
afler  the  manner  of  barley  has  somewhat  of  a  mixture  of
chaff. And  it  very  often  happens,  that  the  ruler  who  is  set  at
the  head,  while  he  enforces  what  is  unjust  against  those  under
his  charge,  while  he  cheers  not  the  good  with  any  sooth-
ing, whilst,  that  which is.  more  grievous,  all  those  acting
rightly  he  distresses  out  of  envy,  still  some  good  things  he
sometimes  does,  as  if  he  sowed  com,  and  mixed  in  the  dis-
posing of  earthly  things  at  times  not  in  the  passion  of  avarice,
but  for  the  use  of  the  carnal,  and  so  looks  for  the  fruit  of  that
labour  as  a  crop  of  barley. But  the  several  persons  under
his  charge,  in  consideration  of  this,  that  they  are  borne  hard
upon in the chief  things,  cannot  feel  joy in his lesser
good  things ;  because  neither  is  this  practice  well  pleasing
in  the  sight  of  God,  which  is  defiled  by  the  injustice  of  other
practice,  nor  yet  is the very disposal  of  earthly things

006  Rulers^  though  had  eaamples^  to  be  obeyed.

Job  31,  believed  to  be  undertakeu  for  the  service  of  those  under  his
^  *  .  charge,  when  he  who  is  over  them  is  seen  to  pant  with  avarice.


'Whence  it  happens  that  even  in  answer  to  the  few  good
things  themselves,  which  they  see  to  be  done  in  the  midst  of
a  multitude  of  evil  ones,  they  give  back  not  praises  but
groans,  and  that  those  that  go  weakly  murmur,  while  they
take  thought  that  that  which  they  see  is  not  a  thing  of  pure
practice.  And  so  he  says,  1/  my  land  cry  against  me,  or
that  the  furrows  likewise  thereqf  complain  i  if  I  have  eaten
the  fruits  thereqf  without  money,  or  have  evicted  the  soul
of  the  tillers  thereqf:  let  the  thistle  grow  instead  of  wheat,
and  the  thorn  instead  qf  barley.  As  if  he  said  plainly,
Mf  the  great  things  which  I  owed  I  have  not  heedfully  per-
formed, may  I  receive  the  prickings  of  murmuring  from
those  under  me,  even  with  reference  to  the  good  that  I  have
done.  If  I  have  omitted  to  set  forth  what  might  cheer,  may
their  tongue  springing  forth  into  complaint  with  justice
pierce  me/

06.  Wherein  it  requires  always  to  be  minded  with  heedful
consideration,  that  neither  they  that  are  set  at  the  head
offer  examples  of  bad  practice  to  those  under  them,  and
kill  the  life  of  those  by  the  sword  of  their  evil  doing,  nor  they
that  are  subject  to  the  control  of  another  presume  to  judge
lightly  ihe  deeds  of  their  rulers,  and  from  this,  tliat  they  utter
murmurs  touching  those  who  are  placed  over  them,  set  them-
selves not  against  a  human  appointment  but  against  that
Divine  Appointment,  which  disposes  all  things. For  to  those

£ai-  ^i  it  is  said.  And  as  for  Myjlock  they  eat  that  which  ye  have
trodden  unth  your  feet:  they  drink  that  which  ye  have  fouled
with  your  feet.  For  *  the  sheep  drink'  what  is  fouled  with
the  feet,'  when  those  under  charge  for  example  of  living  seek
after  things,  which  the  persons  over  them  severally  corrupt
by  bad  practice. But  on  the  other  hand  these  persons  he|U*

El.  iG,  from  those  in  command ;  And  what  are  we  f  Your  mur-
murings  are  not  against  us,  but  against  the  Lord.  For  he
that  mmmurs  against  power  established  over  him,  it  is  plain
reproves  Him  Who  gave  that  power  to  man.

At  length,  God  vouchsafing  it,  we  have  explored  those
sentences  of  blessed  Job,  full  of  mystical  force,  in  which  he

IVords  of  young  Elihn  next  to  be  carefully  weighed. 507

made  answer  to  the  words  of  his  frieDds* Now  it  remains  B^c

that  we  come  to  the  words  of  Elihn,  which  are  to  be  weighed -

with  so  much  the  gratrer  candon,  in  proportion  as  ihej  are
also  pnt  forward  through  the  boldness  of  youth  with  a  hotter
spirit

This  preservttion  photocopy

was  made  and  hand  bound  at  BookLab,  Inc.

in  compliance  with  copyright  law.  The  paper,

Weyerhaeuser  Cougar  Opaque  Natural,

meets  the  requirements  of  ANSI/NISO

Z89.48-1992  (Permanence  of  Paper).


(50)

Austin  1994

3  2044  022  667  034


WIDENER  LIBRARY

HarvanlCoUege.  Cambridge.  MA  02138:  (617)495-2413


If  the  Hem  b  recalled,  the  borrower  will  be  notified  of

the  need  for  an  earlier  retnm.  (Non-receipt  of  overdue

noticet  does  not  exempt  the  borrower  from  overdue  fines.)


iv-:- .^TTa  1


VVIDF.NKR


)€aiO-


2007


Thank  you  for  hewing  us  to  preserve  our  collecdon!


n


Digitized  by
